Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


^6/i


;


QABBALAH.


The  Philosophical  Writings


OF


IBN  QEBIROL,  ETC.


THE   UPPER  ADAM   WITH  AIN  SOPH    AND   THE   TEN   SEPHIROTH.


.:)


QABBALAH.

The  Philosophical  Writings

OF

Solomon  Ben  Yehudah  Ibn  Gebirol

OR

AVICEBRON

And  their  connection  with  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah  and  Sepher  ha-

Zohar,  with  remarks  upon  the  antiquity  and  content  of

the  latter,  and  translations  of  selected

passages  from  the  same.

ALSO

An  Ancient  Lodge  of  Initiates,

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ZOHAR,

And  an  abstract  of  an  Essay  upon  the  Chinese  Qabbalah,  contained  in  the  book  called

the  Yih  King;  a  translation  of  part  of  the  Mystic  Theology  of  Dionysios,

the  Areopagite ;  and  an  account  of  the  construction  of  the  an-

cient  Akkadian  and  Chaldean  Universe,  etc.    Ac-         .  <•

companied  by  Diagrams  and  Illustrations.

By  ISAAC  MYHR.  LL.  B.,

Member  of  the  Numismatic  and  Antiqiurian  Society  of  Philadelphia ;   La  Society  Koyalc  de  Numi>-

matique  de  Belgique ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the  American  Numismatic  and  Archxo-

logical  Society,  Historical  Society  of  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  etc.


350  Copies  Published  by  the  Author.


PHILADELPHIA.
—1888—


-  '■-•  /


'  V.J  ^


{     AUG  8    15'M.i''


Deposited  In
ANDOVER-h^fVARD  LIBRARY


Copyrighted    by  the    Author,

ISAAC  MYBK,
AT

>Ara8hington,  D.  C.  1888.


All  right*  rtstrved.


Printed  fdr  thk  Author

BY

MacCalla  &  Company,

Nos.  937  AND  239  Dock  St.,
Philadrlphia.


2o(o


TO

ALL  EARNEST,  UNPREJUDICED  AND

INDEPENDENT,  SEARCHERS

FOR  THE

TRUTH,

THEOLOGIANS,  PRIESTS  AND  LAYMEN

THIS  WORK

IS  RESPECTFULLY

DEDICATED

BY  THE
AUTHOR.


INTRODUCTION.


«


God  hath  spoken  once ;  two-fold  is  what  I  heard.*'


THE  following  pages  are  devoted  to  a  short  account  of  the  life  and
writings  of  the  philosopher,  Solomon  ben  Yehudah  Ibn  Gebirol
or  Avicebron ;  proofs  of  the  antiquity  of  the  Zoharic  writings
and  the  Qabbalah^  a  condensed  statement  of  some  parts  of  the  Qabba-
listic  philosophy,  quotations  from  the  Zoharic  books,  and  various  articles
pertaining  to  the  same,  in  Appendixes.

The  investigation  of  the  antiquity  and  content,  of  the  Qabbalah  and
Zoharic  writings,  has  been  neglected  by  the  learned,  and,  with  the  excep-
tion of  a  very  few  in  England,  Germany,  Russia  and  France,  has  been
almost  wholly  ignored  by  the  writers  of  this  century.  To  the  student  of
the  origin  of  religions  or  their  philosophy,  especially  of  the  origin  of  the
formulations,  dogmas  and  doctrines  of  early  Christianity ;  a  study  of  the
Hebrew  Qabbalah  and  of  the  Zohar  is  of  great  value  and  importance,  and
has  not  received  the  attention  it  justly  merits  and  demands.  It  is  appa-
rent from  the  many  similarities  in  this  Qabbalistic  philosophy,  to  the  doc-
trines in  the  New  Testament  and  early  Patristic  literature ;  that  both  of
the  latter,  most  probably,  have  had  a  common  germ  and  origin  in  the
esoteiic  teachings  of  the  Israelites,  as  well  as  in  the  more  open  and  exo-
teric teachings  of  the  Hebrew  Holy  writings.

It  was  these  striking  similarities  which  struck  my  thought  in  the  course
of  my  reading,  and  caused  an  examination  of  the  subject ;  the  more  the
investigation  proceeded  the  more  manifest  to  me  appeared  many  of  these
similarities,  and  the  more  satisfied  I  became,  that  a  common  origin
existed.  Many  learned  theologians  have  endeavored,  without  much  suc-
cess, to  find  these  origins  in  the  Talmud,  but  the  latter  treats  almost  en-
tirely of  the  Ha-la'khah  or  Common  Law,  Customs  and  Ritual,  consid-
ered essential  to  the  outward  life  of  the  Israelite  ;  however  it  sometimes,
vii


Vlll

gives  in  explanations,  short  Ha-gadic  statements,  which  most  probably,
were  taken  from  the  Secret  Learning,  the  ancient  Sod,  t\  ^.,  Mystery,  of
the  Hebrews ;  but  one  might  as  well  study  the  English  Common  Law
Reports  and  the  Digests  of  the  same,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  content  of
English  philosophy,  as  to  expect  to  find  the  full  content  of  the  inward
esoteric  metaphysics  and  philosophy  of  the  ancient  Israelites,  in  the  Tal-
mudic  writings.  It  was  through  the  spirituality  of  the  doctrines  of  the
Secret  Learning,  that  many  of  the  ideas  and  dogmas,  set  forth  by  the
Evangelists  in  the  New  Testament  as  those  of  Jesus  and  his  Apostles,
found  so  ready  an  entrance  and  acceptance,  in  the  Jewish  thought  of  their
period.

The  New  Testament  taken  in  connection  with  cotemporary  writ-
ings, especially  those  of  Philo  Judaeus,  many  of  whose  writings  have
reached  our  day ;  shows  that  the  Jewish  mind  at  the  epoch  of  its  formula-
tions, was  prepared  to  accept,  without  much  questioning,  many  of  its
doctrines  and  conclusions.  At  that  period,  many  of  the  Jews  were  daily
expecting  the  appearance  of  a  Messiah,  coming  to  them  through  the
generations  from  David ;  but  all  did  not  accept  Jesus  as  that  Anointed
One,  as  that  Messiah  who  was  daily  expected.  It  is  in  the  study  of  the
Jewish  Disciplina  Arcana^  that  we  must  hope  to  find  the  higher  spiritual
ideas  of  the  cotemporaries  of  Jesus  and  the  Apostles,  and  not  in  the  out-
ward law,  ritual  and  forms,  of  the  Pharisees ;  whose  religious  convictions
stuck  too  much  in  the  bark,  and  did  not  penetrate  very  deeply,  into  the
heart  and  core  of  the  tree  of  spiritual  religious  truth.  But  outside  of  the
importance  of  the  Qabbalistic  philosophy  to  the  theologian,  to  the  philo-
sophic mind;  *'  Any  form  of  speculation  which  has  at  any  time  powerfully
influenced  human  thought,  will  repay  the  study  which  is  spent  in  under-
standing it,  and,  sooner  or  later  claim  fresh  regard.  The  variations  of
human  nature  are  too  limited,  to  place  any  of  its  developments  wholly
beyond  the  pale  of  interest."*

At  the  present  time,  the  great  foes  to  any  rapid  advance  in  the  spiritu-
ality of  religion,  are  materialism  and  formalism.  The  first  tends  to  merge
itself  into  agnosticism,  pantheism  or  atheism ;  the  latter,  into  the  formu-
ations  in  creeds  and  dogmas,  and  in  ritualism.     Like  the  formalism  of

*  Canon  Brooke  F.  Westcott,  Contemporary  Rev.,  Vol.  v,  May-Aug.,  1867.


the  Pharisees  in  the  time  of  Jesus,  the  second  would  see  in  the  mere  per-
formance of  ritual,  the  repetition  of  creeds  or  fixed  forms,  the  letter  of
the  law ;  and  through  mere  attendance  at  the  house  of  worship,  a  com-
pliance with  the  true  inner  faith  and  requirements  of  real  spiritual  devo-
tion. Against  these  phases  of  so-called  religion,  the  free  inward  con-
sciousness and  liberty  of  the  true  spiritual  and  higher  man,  always  rebels ;
the  inner  man,  drawn  by  the  Deity,  desires  to  see,  a  worship  from  the
heart,  sentiment  and  soul,  and  not  a  mere  formal  observance  of  creeds
and  books,  a  mere  repetition  of  words  and  genuflexions  of  the  body  as  a
saving  Grace  and  a  true  road  to  Salvation.  To  such,  the  spiritualistic
philosophy  of  the  higher  phases  of  the  Qabbalistic  system,  when  truly
searched  for,  contemplated,  and  understood ;  opens  her  arms,  and  from
its  great  height  in  the  Unknown  Essence  of  the  Supreme  Deity,  the  Eter-
nal Boundless  One,  to  its  depth,  in  the  lowest  materialism  of  evil ;  gives
an  opportunity  for  the  reception,  and  acquisition  of  the  grandest  and
noblest  ideas,  to  the  highest  and  most  subtile  order  of  religious  spiritual
thought.  The  greatest  Mystics  of  the  past,  be  they  John  Tauler,  Thomas
A'Kempis  (Hamerken),  Saint  Theresa,  or  Dionysios,  the  Areopagite,  have
all  been  under  the  influence  of  ideas  which  are  fully  included  in  those  of  the
Qabbalistic  philosophy.  As  to  the  materialists  :  "  What  are  they  finding,
more  and  more  below  facts,  below  all  phenomena  which  the  scalpel  and
the  microscope  can  show  ?  A  something  nameless,  invisible,  imponder-
able, yet  seemingly  omnipresent  and  omnipotent,  retreating  before  them
deeper  and  deeper,  the  deeper  they  delve,  namely  ;  the  life  which  shapes
and  makes.  *  *  *  More  and  more  the  noblest-minded  of  them,  are
engrossed  by  the  mystery  of  that  unknown  and  truly  miraculous  element
in  nature,  which  is  always  escaping  them,  though  they  cannot  escape
it."*

It  is  my  desire  to  awaken  a  higher  spiritual  feeling  towards  the  investi-
gation of  the  Mysteries  of  Ancient  Israel,  in  which,  the  Mysteries  of  the
New  Covenant  lie  hidden  ;  Which  shall  help  to  awaken  in  Christian  Mys-
ticism its  fundamental  elements,  faith  and  belief  in  the  True ;  to  animate
it  to  study  the  metaphysics  of  the  great  Fathers  of  the  Church,  especially
the  great  Greek  Fathers,  the  most  erudite  thinkers  of  the  early  Christian

•  Kingsley.     Pref.  to  Westminster  Sermons,  pp.  xxvii-xxviii.


church ;  and  establish  the  vast  edifice  of  theology  on  deep  philosophical
principles  and  belief  in  the  True,  and  not  on  man's  alterable  creeds  and
formulations :  and  by  so  doing ;  prepare  a  common  centre  for  the  re-
union of  all  the,  at  present  divided,  religious  sects.  I  also  believe  that  such
researches  and  investigations  are  calculated  to  pave  the  way  to  an  under-
standing of  the  true  principles  in  the  primitive  history  of  mankind,  and
be  an  assisting  guide,  in  the  dark  labyrinth  of  myths,  mysteries  and
archaic  religions ;  and  that  they  will  place  much,  which  is  nbw  uncertain,
on  a  firm  foundation  and  in  a  stronger  and  clearer  light,  and  so  prepare
the  way,  for  that  which  the  Deity  never  intended  should  be  separated,
the  union  of  sound  reason  and  correct  philosophy  with  true  religion.

We  cannot  in  this  connection  forbear  quoting  the  words  of  a  great
German  thinker :  "  Whenever  in  religion,  or  polity,  or  civilization,  in
art  or  science ;  the  inner  element  is  developed  most  strenuously  in  its
outward  productions  and  tJie  spiritual  earnestly  sought  after,  be  it  with
more  or  less  modifications  of  existing  institutions,  there  is  progress  at
hand ;  for  it  is  from  within  that  life  issues  forth  into  the  external,  from
the  centre  to  the  circumference.  This  therefore  is  the  pathway  which
leads  to  life,  that  on  which  there  are  ever  opening  new  outlets  for  the
Spirit,  and  on  which  Genius,  can  unfurl  its  wings  with  god-like  self-
assurance.  '  If  this  be  true,  the  contrary  result  must  also  happen,  wher-
ever the  external  or  material  life  is  continually  exalted, — wherever  the
symbol  supersedes  and  stands  more  and  more  for  the  essence ;  a  form  of
words  or  an  external  work  for  the  mental  act  or  for  conscience ;  where
the  symmetrical  superfices  is  accepted  for  the  inner  content,  and  the  outer
uniformity  for  vital  unity,  and  appearances  for  truth.  In  every  such  hap-
pening the  luckless  future  must  be  impending  whatever  be  the  aspect  of
the  present.  *  *  *  When  such  a  path  is  once  entered  upon,  the
necessity  very  soon  becomes  apparent,  of  treating  the  dictates  of  the  com-
mon conscience  as  apostacy,  of  putting  down  conscientious  objections  as
insubordination,  and  suppressing  personal  freedom  as  sedition.  And  then
tyranny,  either  ecclesiastical  or  political,  becomes  a  necessity,  etc."*
To-day  around  us  this  latter  feeling  appears  to  be  getting  the  upper  hand,

*  Gott  in  der  Geschichie  1857-8,  by  Christ.  Karl  Josias  Baron  yon  Bunsen,  Vol.  iii,
Bk.  vi,  c.  iii,  thesis  6,


XI

there  is  too  much  desire  for  wealth  and  the  gratification  of  the  present
and  not  enough  of  the  Divine  Afflatus.  Too  much  of  the  spirit  of  Vol-
taire, Condillac  and  Descartes,  and  not  enough  thought  of  our  fut\ire
existence,  nor  of  the  feelings  which  animated  the  Qabbalists,  true  Theo-
sophists  and  Mystics,  of  the  past.  We  want  more  men  influenced  with
the  same  feelings  as  were  Savonarola,  Tauler  and  Jacob  Bohme.

In  the  Hebrew  Holy  Scripture,  the  visible  or  creation,  is  regarded  as
the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  Glory  or  She'kheen-ah.  The  attributes
of  the  Deity  are  therefore  seen  through  His  works,  so  St.  Paul  says :  "  For
the  invisible  things  of  Him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly
seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  His  eternal
power  and  glory."     (Rom.  i,  20.)

But  the  human  mind  obtaining  its  ideas  in  this  matter-world,  can
never  whilst  existing  in  it,  raise  the  veil  to  its  full  height  nor  thoroughly
understand  in  their  full  purport,  the  mysteries  concealed  behind  it.
Even  the  words  used  in  the  most  abstract  sciences  and  in  religion
and  philosophy,  to  signify  the  most  perfect  abstractness,  have  only
a  partially  definite  meaning,  and  in  most  minds,  are  vague  and  tinc-
tured by  the  grasp  of  individual  intellect,  surroundings,  modes  of
thought,  imagination,  experience;  yes,  even  by  the  prejudices,  dislikes
and  sentiments  of  thought,  in  the  minds  of  those  who  use  them;  and
so  mar  the  tendency  to  the  true,  the  abstract,  and  the  real.  There
is  an  endeavor  on  the  part  of  enlightened  abstract  thinkers  to  avoid
this  as  much  as  possible,  and  they  frequently  seize  upon  foreign  words
and  the  "mixed  modes"  of  one  tongue,  to  express  through  them  the
pure  simple  ideas  of  another  language,  for  in  their  new  position  these
words  are  clear  of  the  alloy  of  experiences  and  the  mistakes  caused  by
the  senses  of  their  old  masters.  The  naturalism  therefore  of  the  Hebrew
Old  Testament  has  been  largely  merged  into  the  Greek  language,  as  a
greater  idealization  and  abstraction ;  first  we  see  this  in  the  Septuagint
or  Greek  translation,  and  then,  more  thoroughly,  in  the  New  Testament,
a  fusion  of  Hebrew  and  Hellenic  thought.  We  can  imagine  a  language
in  its  first  beginnings,  in  which  every  act  and  operation  of  the  mind,
every  idea  and  relation,  was  expressed  by  a  matter-image  or  symbol,  a
language  at  once  based  purely  on  the  senses  and  the  material,  its  words


Xll

only  mental  pictures  like  its  written  symbols,  of  which,  the  archaic  Egyp-
tian hieroglyphics  may  be  considered  as  example ;  higher  than  this  we  can
imagine  a  language  with  the  world  of  mind  and  the  world  of  matter  dis-
tinct, but  such  cannot  in  this  matter-world,  exist.  All  language  exists
between  two  extremes  and  is  passing  continually  from  one  to  the  other,  it
is  never,  no  more  than  are  the  stars  and  the  universe  at  anytime  standing
still.

The  language  and  words  in  the  Holy  Scripture  are  intermediaries  be-
tween the  seen  and  the  unseen,  thoughts  are  the  winged  angels  which  par-
take of  both  the  visible  and  invisible  as  did  the  angels  of  the  Bible.
They  are  spirits  which  may  be  clothed  in  the  aether  of  man's  breath  and
so  become  visible,  but  not  always,  for  language  cannot  alwa3rs  define  and
formulate,  those  things  which  are  within  the  veil ;  there  are  things  we  feel
which  we  cannot  formulate  into  words,  the  sigh  of  sorrow,  the  cry  of
despair,  the  exclamation  of  anger,  the  ecstasy  of  heavenly  bliss,  of  love
and  hope  and  earthly  happiness,  are  a  few  of  the  thoughts  we  can  never
formulate  into  words.

The  nearest  approach  that  man  can  make  to  the  unseen,  is  that  inner
communion  which  works  silently  in  his  soul  but  which  cannot  be  expressed
in  absolute  language  nor  by  any  words,  which  is  beyond  all  formulations
into  word  symbolism  yet  is  on  the  confines  of  it  and  the  unknown  spirit-
ual world.  This  is  conceptualism.  We  experience  these  feelings  only  in
our  hearts  and  inner  thoughts,  that  which  strikes  our  consciences  as  right
or  wrong  comes  unbidden  to  us  and  without  any  logical  sequence,  is  like
a  dream.  The  more  intensely  man  feels  the  highest  intellectuality,  the
more  thoroughly  does  his  spirit  enter  into  this  spiritual  communion  and
the  more  difficult  is  it  to  express  to  others,  these  emotions  and  this  unde-
fined consciousness,  this  converse  with  another  world ;  formulate  them,
express  them,  in  words ;  and  we  draw  them  down  to  a  gross,  dark  and
material  plane.  Silence,  meditation,  intercommunion  with  self,  this  is
the  nearest  approach  to  the  invisible.  They  are  sublimations.  Many  of
our  ideas  are  only  negations,  the  Highest  Deity  is  clothed,  as  to  Its  essence
and  appearance,  in  darkness  to  the  finite  thought.  Yet  even  these  nega-
tions are  affirmations  and  we  only  leave  the  opposition  to  the  negation,  a
condition  to  our  thoughts,  of  vagueness  and  uncertainty.     *'  There  is  a


xm

^iritual  body  and  there  is  a  natural  body,"  but  this  does  not  take  us  out
of  the  material-world,  a  spirit  can  only  be  conceived  of  as  something
vague,  dim,  in  opposition  to  matter,  yet  the  inner  motor  of  us,  is  spirit.
The  Deity  and  Its  attributes  cannot  be  defined,  they  are  to  us  an  abso-
lute negation  of  all  our  so-called  absolute  knowledge,  for  all  our  absolute
knowledge  is  based,  raised  upon,  centred  and  carried  on,  through  our
matter-world  knowledge  and  symbolism,  e.  g..  Eternity  is  not  the  past,
present,  future,  these  are  in  Time,  Eternity  can  be  conceived  of,  only  as
an  absolute  negation  of  all  thought  of  Time,  so  only  can  spirituality  by
the  absolute  negation  of  all  matter-world  thought  and  matter- world  exist-
ence. The  Non  Ego  is  the  nearest  approach  to  the  invisible,  the  Ego  is
a  manifestation.

From  a  want  of  knowledge  of  the  Qabbalistic  philosophy,  the  transla-
tions of  many  statements  in  both  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  are  fre-
quently erroneous,  and  this  is  especially  evident  in  numerous  of  the
asserted  improvements  in  the  revised  versions,  e,  g,,  Ephesians  iii,  15,  the
older  versions  of  which  evidence  the  fact,  that  it  is  in  agreement,  with  both
the  Qabbalah  and  Talmud,  in  the  use  of  the  words  "  family  in  heaven : "
to  signify,  the  Upper  angels  and  spirits  who  are  near  the  Deity ;  also  Matt,
vi,  13,  where  the  desire  to  be  delivered  from  the  Ye'tzer  ha-rah,  t\  e,,  the
evil  inclination,  which  is  asserted  in  the  Qabbalah  to  accompany  every
human  being  through  life,  is  referred  to  the  Devil.

The  reader  may  be  sometimes  startled  by  my  statements,  which  may
be  at  times  contrary  to  his  conventional  religious  ideas,  as  to  this  I  can
only  say,  that  I  have  stated  the  subject  as  I  have  found  it,  and,  as  this  is
not  a  polemical  work,  do  not  criticize  it.

The  student  of  Assyriology  and  ancient  Babylonian  thought,  will  find
many  similarities  between  it  and  the  ancient  Hebrew  Qabbalah.  Both
are  Semitic  but  in  germ  derived,  I  think,  from  other  sources.  The  stu-
dent of  archaic  Hindu  Aryan  thought  will  also  notice  many  similarities,
especially  in  the  Upanishads  of  the  Vedas,  in  old  Hindu  Mythology,
also  in  the  Bhagavad-Gita  and  the  Vedantas.  Much  of  the  mystery  of
the  Practical  Qabbalah  will  be  undoubtedly  discovered  in  the  Tantras,
but  I  have  not  as  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  any  of  the  latter.

The  study  of  the  Qabbalah  in  the  disfigured  condition  which  the  powers


XIV

of  evil  have  succeeded  in  placing  it,  is  one  of  extreme  difficulty,  and
I  have  appreciated  the  full  force  of  the  words  of  the  German  historian
I.  M.  Jost,  when  he  says :

**  Whoever  desires  to  fathom  all  this,  must  give  up  the  entire  present
and  bring  himself  into  a  world  of  thought  which  stands  absolutely  alone.

*  *  *  As  the  work  of  an  elevated  observing  understanding  accom-
panied by  phantasy,  she  awakens  admiration,  and  this,  more  on  account
of  the  purpose,  *  *  *  for  the  purpose  declares,  that  the  Kabbalah
brings  the  soul  of  man  into  undoubted  communion  with  God,  which  en-
tirely sanctifies  his  thoughts  and  walk."  (History  of  the  Jews.  Leipsic,
1859,  p.  146.)

The  Zohar  is  a  very  difficult  book  to  translate,  as  it  is  full  of  strange
words  in  Aramaic,  Syriac,  Hebrew  and  Chaldee;  also,  many  formed
from  Greek,  Persian,  Sanskrit  and  Syriac  roots :  besides  it  has  many  dark
and  veiled  suggestions  and  hints,  which  require  explanations,  as  one  pro-
ceeds with  the  setting  forth  of  its  system.

I  also  ask  the  indulgence  of  the  critic  for  any  errors  in  this  new  expo-
sition of  a  difficult  subject.  Unable  to  find  a  publisher,  because  of  the
timidity  of  those  engaged  in  the  business  of  publishing  resulting  from
their  unfamiliarity  with  the  subject,  and  fears  for  its  financial  success ;  I
have  been  compelled  at  considerable  expense  and  extra  work,  to  take  the
risk  of  publishing  upon  myself  and  of  getting  a  return  for  my  outlay  in
printing,  etc.,  and  therefore  became  my  own  publisher.

No.  929  Clinton  Street,

Philadelphia,  Penna.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


Introduction pp.     vii-xiv

Tablb  of  Contents pp.      xv-xix

A  Short  Description  of  the  Plates pp.  xix-xxiii

Table  of  the  Diagrams,  etc p.  xxiv

I.
Ibn  Gebirol's  Life  and  Writings pp.  1-9

II.
The  Sephsr  ha-Zohar;  Writings  as  to,  its  Bibliography,

Authors  and  Antiquity ' pp.       10-54

III.

Antiquity  of  the  Zoharic  Writings,  continued.  Objec-
tions  to  their  Antiquity  by  Dr.  Hirsch  Graetz,  Dr.  Christian
D.  Ginsburg,  and  others,  considered.  Some  quotations
from  the  Zoharic  Writings,  elucidating  passages  in  the  Old
and  New  Testaments pp.     55-100

IV.

Further  excerpts  from  the  Zohar.  Parables.  Explana-
tion  of  New  Testament  passages.  The  Basic  element  in
Religions.  Herbert  Spencer  cited.  Ancient  Chinese
Taoism.  Meaning  of  Idea,  anciently.  New  Testament
and  Pagan  writers  on  the  Invisible  and  Visible.  The  Ideal
and  Real,  etc pp.  loi-i  15

V.

Pastor  of  Hermas,  etc,  on  the  Nature  of  Christ.  The
Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  on  the  Kosmic  Mystery.
The  Oppositions  and  Harmony.  Three  Conceptions  of
Jesus pp.  1 16-1 20


XVI

«

VI.

The  Secret  of  the  account  of  Creation  in  Genesis.  Ex
nihilo  nihil  fit.  Doctrine  of  the  non-annihilation  of  mat-
ter. Some  Qabbalistic  accounts  of  the  Creation.  The
Heavenly  Adam.  Creation  by  the  Word.  The  Zohar
sets  forth  the  circular  movement  of  the  Earth  many  centu-
ries before  Copernicus.  Opinions  of  the  Ancients  on  the
circular  movement  of  the  Earth pp.  121-141

VII.
An  Analysis  of  the  Me'q6r  'Hay-yIm,  of  Ibn  Gebirol . .  .pp.  142-157

VIII.
The  theory  as  to  Ecstasy.     The  writers  who  mention  Ibn
Gebirol,  or  make  use  of  his  philosophy.     The  so-called
Arabic  philosophers pp.  158-164

IX.

The  Antiquity  of  the  Qabbalah.  Books  and  writers  in
which  the  Qabbalah  is  referred  to.  Letter  of  St.  Jerome
on  the  Divine  Names.  Connexion  with  early  Christianity.
Ancient  thought,  language,  symbolism  and  tradition.
High  position  claimed  for  the  Qabbalah.  The  Ideal  Man
and  the  great  Brotherhood  of  Humanity.  Free-will,  the
Good  and  Evil.    The  Oppositions  and  Harmony pp.  165-187

X.

Similarities  in  the  writings  of  Ibn  Gebirol,  the  Zoharic

writings  and  the  Qabbalah pp.  188-218

XL

The  Hebrew  Qabbalah  and  its  origin.  Its  content  and
the  problems  it  seeks  to  solve.  From  the  Visible  ascer-
tain the  Invisible.  The  several  divisions  of  the  Qab-
balah. The  four  animals  of  the  ancient  Chaldean  and
Hindu  religions  and  those  of  the  Merkabah,  their  colors,
etc.  The  Speculative  Qabbalah.  The  Qabbalah  of  the
Roman  Catholic  Church  and  of  the  Law.     Curious  par-


•  •


xvu

allels  regarding  the  Serpent,  the  World-tree  and  the  Seven
kings  of  Edom ;  in  the  Zoharic  books  and  the  Cuneiform
Tablets pp.  219-236

XII.

Further  parallels  between  the  Cuneiform  and  the  Qab-
balah.  Account  of  the  Akkadian  and  Semitic  Babylonian
religion  and  temples  and  those  of  the  Israelites.  Of  the
Akkadian  and  Babylonian  Cosmogony.  Of  the  Demiurge.
The  Dust  Body  of  Man.  Of  Lil-ith.  The  Ancient
Zodiac pp.   237-250-

XIII.
Of  Ain  Soph  and  the  Ten  Sephiroth pp.  251-273

XIV.

The  Ain  Soph  and  the  Sephiroth  continued.  Of  the  Ayin.
Views  of  the  Ancients  as  to  Ideas.  Of  the  True  and  of
Illusion.  Sound,  color,  rhythm.  Quotations  from  the
Zohar  as  to  the  Sephiroth.  The  Prototypic  Man.  The
Sephiroth  as  between  themselves.  The  Sephirothic  Pillars.
Of  Azriel  and  his  writings.  Analysis  of  his  Commentary
on  the  Sephiroth pp.  274-288

XV.

The  Sephiroth  As  Between  the  Deity  and  Among  Them-

selves.     The  Prayer  of  Eliyah pp.  289-294

XVI.

Of  the  meaning  of  the  words  Sephirah  and  Sephiroth.
Origin  of  the  ideas  as  to  the  Sephiroth.  Decadal  division
of  the  Commandments  and  the  Lord's  Prayer pp.  295-319

XVII.

The  Four  Worlds.  Of  Prana.  Of  Pan  as  the  Makro-
kosmos.  Other  ideas  of  the  Makrokosmos.  Asserted  Ori-
gin of  the  Idea  of  the  Four  Worlds pp.  320-334


xvm

XVIII.

Excerpts  from  the  Zohar  :  as  to  the  man  with  the  heavy
burden.  Vicarious  Atonement  by  the  Messiah.  The  She-
'kheen-ah.  A  formula  of  the  Great  Names.  Original  sin.
Power  of  Satan.  Free  Will.  The  heavenly  Mediatrix
between  God  and  man.  Necessity  of  Repentance  for  Sal-
vation. Eternal  Reward  and  Punishment  in  the  Future
Life.  Resurrection  of  the  dead  in  the  body.  Judgment
of  the  souls  of  the  wicked,  etc pp.  335-358

XIX.

Excerpts  from  the  Zohar  continued.  The  Holy,  with  the
She'kheen-ah  created  the  universe.  Reason  of  the  exist-
ence of  Good  and  Evil.  Of  Metatron.  Messiah  ben
Joseph  and  Messiah  ben  David.  Description  of,  and  the
Triadic  Idea  as  to,  the  Deity.  The  Names.  Creation.
Souls,  spirits,  etc pp.  359-414

XX.

Structure  of  the  Universe.  Stability  of  the  Oppositions.
The  Lower  world  like  the  Upper.  The  Makrokosm  and
Mikrokosm.  The  Upper  Adam.  The  Makrokosm  as  the
Great  Tree,  and  as  Man.  Creation  of  Adam  and  'Havah.
Their  condition  before  and  after  their  Fall.  Four  ways  of
seeing  the  Deity.  The  permanence  of  Spoken  Words.
Love  and  Fear.  Entire  dependence  should  be  on  the
Deity  when  man  is  in  trouble.  Paradise  and  Hell.  Sama-el
and  Lil-ith,  etc.  The  Angel  of  Death,  etc.  Coming  of
the  Messiah  and  the  Kingdom  of  the  Supreme  Deity  upon

Earth,  etc pp.  415-438

Appendix  A.     An  Anqent  Lodge  of  Initiates pp.  439-443

Appendix  B.     Synopsis  of  the  Chinese  Qabbalah pp.  444-447

Appendix  C.     Construction  of  the  Akkadian,  Chaldean

and  Babylonian,  universe pp.  448-455


XIX

Appendix  D.    Mystic  Theology  of  Dionysios,  the  Areo-

pagite pp.  45^45^

Appendix  E.    The  Dogmas  in  the  Nicene  Creed  and  the

Qabbalah pp.  459-460

Appendix  F.    Antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  vowel  points,  .pp.  460-470

Index p.  471,  etc.


A  SHORT  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PLATES.


No.  I.  p.  45.     This  engraving  is  described  on  page  45  note.

No.  2.  p.  45.     This  engraving  is  described  on  page  46  note.

No.  3.  p.  116.  This  figure  is  a  copy  of  one  found  in  the  ruins  of  an
Egyptian  Temple  at  Luxor,  and  represents  the  oppositions  and  har-
mony, under  the  form  of  two  wings  with  a  circle  or  globe  between
them.  Similar  symbols  are  frequently  found  on  the  walls  and  over
the  door-ways,  of  the  ancient  Temples  of  Egypt.

No.  4.  p.  1 20.  Represents  Arddha-nari,  a  Hindu  androgenic  deity  and
is  from  a  Hindu  drawing.     See  Moor's  Hindu  Pantheon.

No.  5.  p.  121.  Is  a  representation  said  to  be  of  the  Vedic  deity  Indra
but,  I  think,  it  is  undoubtedly  a  representation  of  the  three  Upper
Sephiroth  and  the  efflux.  Notice  the  position  of  the  hands  as
'Hokhmah  and  Binah.

No.  6.  p.  141.  Is  a  Qabbalistic  portrayal  of  the  universe,  as  if  a  species
of  armillary  sphere,  sustained  by  three  hands,  and  inscribed  with
three  Hebrew  letters,  k  Aieph,  stands  for  r\DK  A'meth,  (E'meth)
/.  e,f  Truth,  i  Daleth^  for  pi  Din^  i.  ^.,  Judgment,  and  bt  Shitty
for  diSbt  Shalom,  /.  ^.,  Peace.

The  saying  in  the  Pirq6  Aboth  is :  *'  Rabban  Shim-on  ben  Gam-
(a)liel  {circa  164  A.  D.)  said  :  *  On  three  things  the  world  stands;
on  Truth,  on  Judgment  and  on  Peace.'  "  (i,  19.)  These  are  a  system
of   internal    energies    through  which  the  world  exists.      So  the


XX

heavenly  bodies  are  kept  in  their  places  by  mon  ^Hem-dah^  i.  ^.,
Desire,  and  ruiDK  Amun-^hy  i,  e, ,  Faith,  which  draw  them  to  ri'TW
Eh^yehy  t\  e.,  I  Am.  Peace  is  an  important  word  in  the  New  Testa-
ment. (Eph.  ii,  14;  Micahv,  4;  Rom.  xvi,  20.)  It  is  a  Talraudic
Name  for  God.  "Everything  is  perfected  by  Peace."  (Comp.
Eph.  iv,  3;  Col.  iii,  14;  Col.  iii,  15,  with  Zech.  viii,  16.)  With  the
Qabbalists,  Peace  =  ^Hes-ed  Love  or  Mercy ;  Judgment  =  Pa^had
Fear;  Truth  =:  Ge'dooi-ah  Greatness.  These  are  severally  made  equiv-
alent to  the  Ineffable  Name,  and  therefore  one  to  the  other.  Sepher
B^rith  Menoo^hahy  /.^.,  Book  of  the  Covenant  of  Rest.  (Amsterdam
Ed.,  1648,  fol.  3a.)

No.  7.  p.  142.  A  Hindu  androgenic  deity  termed  Arddha-nari,  From
a  Hindu  drawing.     See  Moor's  Hindu  Pantheon.

No.  8.  p.  157.  A  Representation  of  the  ancient  Mexican  Makrokosmos.
To  be  found  in  Lord  Kingsborough's  great  work  on  Ancient  Mexico,
Vol.  ii,  plate  75,  which  is  copied  from  an  Ancient  Mexican  MSS.  in
the  Library  of  the  Vatican.  In  Vol.  vi,  pp.  222-223  is  a  description
of  the  plate.  In  a  note  is  :  "  In  a  Missal  entitled  Heures  a  Vusiage
de  Ramey  14^8 y  is  the  figure  of  a  man  with  his  principal  viscera  ex-
posed,  and  from  the  heart,  liver,  etc. ,  lines  are  drawn  to  the  symbols
of  the  ruling  constellations.  In  the  XV  century  astrology  had  the
sanction  of  the  Church.*'

The  ancient  Mexicans  appear  to  have  believed  in  9  heavens,  a
Mexican  king  built  a  tower  with  9  stories  as  emblems  of  the  9
heavens,  in  which  to  worship  the  Creator  of  all  things.  Their  sol-
emn dance  also  represented  the  motion  of  the  heavens.  Ibid.  pp.
155-156.  They  also  had  a  symbolism  of  colors.  Ibid,  p.  157  note.
Consult  as  to  the  Mexican  signs  of  the  Zodiac.  Transact,  of  the
American  Ethnological  Society,  1845,  h  57-305  i  ">  S^^*  See  also
the  works  of  Captain  Dupaix,  John  L.  Stephens,  Charles  Rau,  Ed.
S.  Holden,  Cyrus  Thomas,  Leon  de  Rozny,  D6sir6  Charney,  etc.,  on
Ancient  Mexico  and  Central  America.

No.  9.  p.  158.  From  an  old  Hindu  drawing.  This  I  think  is  intended
to  represent,  the  Sephirothic  Tree  rooted  in  the  World-egg  and
floating  on  the  Chaotic  Sea.


XXI

No.  lo.  p.  164.  Is  a  representation  of  the  Egyptian  Makrokosm  and
Mikrokosm  from  an  ancient  Egyptian  picture.

No.  II.  p.  165.  This  is  an  attempt  to  show  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  in
the  Hebrew  Tabernacle  with  the  Cherubim  and  She'kheen-ah.  We
do  not  offer  this  as  the  actual.  Modem  discoveries  have  given  to  us
somewhat  different  ideas.

No.  12.  p.  187.  A  figure  of  Buddha  probably  under  the  Bo  tree  or  Tree
of  the  Sephiroth.  The  original  of  this  is  in  possession  of  a  friend
in  Philadelphia.

No.  13.  p.  188.     The  decadal  division  of  man.

No.  14  to  19.  p.  218.  Occult  Qabbalistic  representations  of  the  Triad,
No.  15  is  also  the  Jewish  priests  method  of  holding  the  hands  when
giving  the  blessing.  No.  16  is  a  Qabbalistic  method  of  holding
the  hands.

No.  20.  p.  219.     Sephirothic  Tree  from  the  ruins  of  Carthage.

No.  21.  p.  219.  Sephirothic  Tree  from  ruins  in  Scotland.  As  to  both
of  these,  see.  The  Early  Races  of  Scotland,  by  Forbes  Leslie,  Edin-
burgh, 1866,  Vol.  i,  pp.  xvii,  xix,  178,  181,  plates  iii,  iv  and  vi,  p.
46;  also.  Ancient  Faiths  embodied  in  Ancient  Names,  etc.,  by
Thomas  Inman,  London,  1868,  Vol.  i,  p.  79.

No.  22.  pp.  228-229.     The  explanation  accompanies  the  engraving.

Nos.  23  and  24.  p.  236.  Are  representations  of  the  method  of  holding
thQ  hands  used  by  the  Jewish  Kohanim  or  Priests,  in  giving  the
blessings.

No.  25.  p.  237.  Copy  of  an  intaglio  signet  of  Babylonia.  Talisman
with  the  Triad,  on  sard.     See  p.  249  note.

No.  26.  p.  249.  Copy  of  an  intaglio  signet  cylinder  of  Assyria  with  the
Triad,  on  amazon  stone.     See  pp.  249-250  note.

No.  27.  p.  251.     The  Hindu  Makrokosm  from  a  Hindu  drawing.

No.  28.  p.  273.  The  Hindu  Makrokosm  as  Krishna,  with  the  Bull,  Pea-
cock and  Crocodile.

No.  29.  p.  274.  The  Hebrew  letter  Shin,  a  symbol  of  the  Triad.  Comp.
Supra  p.  366.

No.  30.  p.  321.  The  Four  Worlds  of  the  Hindus.  The  Head,  is  the
Upper  Spiritual,  Brahman  neuter.  The  Breast,  the  creative  or  Soul
Principle,  Brahma.  The  Heart.     The  Stomach,  vitality,  Vishnu  as


XXll

Krishna.     The  Navel,  etc.  Power  of  Generation  and  Destruction.
Siva.     Comp.  figure  27  Ante  p.  251.

No.  31.  p.  322.  Prana,  the  Hindu  Makrokosmos,  description  is  on  pp.
321-323.

No.  32.  p.  325.  Pan,  the  Greek  Makrokosmos.  Description  pp.
324-326.

Nos.  33  and  34.  pp.  326-327.  The  Medieval  Makrokosmos.  We  have
engravings  similar  to  figure  33,  in  our  almanacs.

No.  35.  p.  334.  Hindu  Qabbalistic  symbol  of  the  four  worlds.  The
everlasting  arms  holding  up  the  world.  See  my  description  in,  The
Path,  Vol.  i,  p.  370  sq.

No.  36.  p.  414.  An  occult  representation  of  the  Point,  Ten  Sephiroth,
Four  Worlds,  Ineffable  Name,  etc.

No.  37.  p.  438.  Man  as  the  dwelling  of  Brahma,  the  Creating-deity,  a
form  of  the  Hindu  Makrokosm.  The  original  of  this  drawing  was
made  by  a  Brahmin  after  the  ideas  in  the  Vedas.  In  it  man  is  rep-
resented as  in  Brahma-loka,  the  city  of  the  Creator-god,  as  the
Mikrokosmos.  A,  is  a  water-fosse,  extending  around  and  between
the  walls  of  the  fortress  as  if  surrounding  a  citadel,  this  is  to  represent
the  outer  man  and  the  fluctuating  passions  of  the  soul,  Bhut-atma.
In  this  quarrel  and  surge,  lashed  by  the  storm-winds  of  evil,  the
waves  of  passion  and  the  evil  thoughts.  There  are  11  gates  and
draw-bridges ;  these  are  the  1 1  openings  of  the  senses,  they  lead  over
the  fosse,  i .  The  gate  of  the  mouth.  2  and  3.  The  gates  of  the
nose.  4  and  5.  The  gates  of  the  eyes.  6  and  7.  The  gates  of  the
ears.  8.  The  skin  with  its  many  openings.  9.  The  gate  of  the
heart.  10.  The  rectum.  11.  The  lingam  or  yoni.  B,  is  rejuvena-
tion and  immortality,  in  lake  Behra  near  by  is  C,  the  phallic  tree.
Then  comes  the  fortified  city,  Sabeh,  to  it  belongs  all  within  the
wall  line  D.  In  Sabeh  is  Apradyat,  the  impregnable  castle  E.  £,  is
inhabited,  protected  and  illuminated,  by  the  spirits  of  perception  or
Indra  and  Prajipati.  It  has  a  second  story  F.  This  is  the  Intellect
and  Light  out  of  atma,  /.^.,  soul.  Above  this  is  G,  which  resting  on
the  wreath  around  the  roof  of  the  citadel  F,  is  the  radiating  light-
throne  of  Hiranyagarbha,  1.^.,  the  golden  embryo,  which  symbolizes
the  Primary  Form.     Here  is  seated  H,  Mansi  or  Brahma-sakti,  the


XXIU

mistress  of  the  Beauty  of  the  Mind  indeed  Brahma  himself,  but  con-
sidered as  Brahma-Maya,  mistress  of  the  Imaginative-world.  I^  above
her  crown,  is  the  Brahma-sun,  the  sun  of  Truth,  illuminating  all ;  but
between  her  head  and  Truth,  the  veil  of  Maya  or  Deceptive  Illusion
intervenes  and  envelopes,  everything  Below.

No.  38.  To  face  p.  439.  This  is  an  occult  representation  of  the  Makro-
kosm  as  if  in  the  Noa'hic  Ark,  which  contained  in  itself  and  pre-
served, according  to  the  Hebrew  Sacred  Writings,  the  ancestors  of  all
existing  animal  life,  and  therefore  had  a  close  resemblance  to  the  Qab-
balistic  ideas  as  to  the  Upper  Adam.  In  this  engraving,  the  length
centre  would  answer  to  the  Ecliptic  of  the  Zodiac  with  the  Decans
upon  either  side,  together  30.  The  ten  compartments  of  the  Zodiac
are  given  excluding  Scorpio-Virgo,  which  is  androgenic,  and  con-
sidering, the  first  of  the  last  five,  as  if  the  tail  of  Scorpio ;  Scorpio
taking  up,  as  the  ancient  astronomers  inform  us,  all  that  space  from
which  the  Balance  was  afterwards  made.  When  the  androgenic  Scorpio-
Virgo  was  separated  and  the  Balance  or  Harmony  made  from  Scor-
pio, and  placed  between  Scorpio,  /.  ^.,  male,  and  Virgo,  /'.  ^.,  female,
then  appeared  the  1 2  constellations  or  signs,  as  we  now  have  them.
The  ark  is  three  stories  high  (perhaps  to  symbolize  Heaven,  Man,
Earth).  In  the  figure  of  the  Man,  notice  the  parting  of  the  hair  in
the  middle  of  the  forehead  and  the  arrangement  of  the  beard,  whisk-
ers, moustache  and  the  hair,  on  the  back  of  the  neck  and  shoulders.
See  Ante  p.  370.  Compare  this  with  the  statements  in  the  Siphrah
D'Tznioothah,  Idrah  Rabbah  and  Idrah  Zootah,  as  to  Ze'ir  An-peen,
/.  ^.,  Small  Faces.  Note  also  the  stigmata,  and  that  nj  50  +  8  =  58
Noa*h  and  |n  'Hen  8  +  50  =  58,  /.  ^.,  Grace  (Salvation  ?),  have  the
same  number.

Compare,  Antiquitaium  Judaicarum  Libri  ix,  etc. ,  auctore  Bene-
dicto  Aria  Montana^  Hispalensi.  Lugduni  Batavorum^  etc.,  1593,  pp.
74-77.  Plate  L.  The  Rosicrucians  their  Rites  and  Mysteries,  etc.,
by  Hargave  Jennings,  New  York,  1879,  pp.  35o-353i  3^8.

No.  39.  p.  447.  A  representation  of  Brahma-Maya,  Mahat-Maya  or
Brahma  Viraj,  the  Great  Androgenic  Illusion  Deity  of  the  Hindus.
See  my  Articles  in.  The  Path,  Vol.  i,  upon  Hindu  Symbolism.


XXIV


TABLE  OF  THE  DIAGRAMS,  ETC.

Frontispiece.     The  Upper  or   Celestial  Adam   with  the   Ten
Sephiroth.

•^  Sephirothic  Tree  of  Life  with  the  Columns,  etc Facing  p.  i

Diagram  I.     Table  of  the  Sephiroth,  in  Circles,  with  the  Ineffa-
ble Name p.  loo

Diagram  II.     Table  of  the  Divine  Names  and  the  Sephiroth

with  their  Channels  or  Canals p.  169

^  Diagram  III.     Table  of  the  Sephiroth  with  the  Channels,  the

Ineffable  Name  and  the  names  of  the  Planets. . .  .Facing  p.  251
Diagram  IV.    The  Universe  according  to  the  Ptolemaic  sys-
tem   p.  295

Diagram  V.     The  idea  of  the  Universe  in  the  Middle  Ages.  .p.  319

Diagram  VI.     The    Universe    according   to   the    Akkadians,

Chaldeans,  Babylonians,  etc p.  448

A  Formula  of  the  Divine  Names,  etc p.  342

The  Ineffable  Name  reversed p.  446

The  Me'norah  or  Candlestick,  and  Chinese  symbols pp.  446,  447


B'LEE  RAI-SHEETH,

Without  Beginning.


BIN-AH.

UnderatafMSfie


COLUMN  OF  THE  LEFT.


B'LEE  SAKH-LEETH.

Without  End.


AIN  SOPH.


OR


AYIN.


KETHER  EL'YON.


Upper  Crown.

9


TIPH'E-RETH

Beauty.


"TIB"

YE'SOD.

Basis  or  Foundatibn


10


•HOKH-MAR

Wiidofli.
1


SEVERITY  OR
JUDGMENT.


MAL-KHUTH.

Kingiloni.

COLUMN  OF  THE  CENTRE.

Harmony.


COLUMN  OF  THE  RIGHT.


GRACE  OR
MERCY.


The  Sephirothic  Tree  of  Life  viewed  from  the  Back.


I.

IBN   GEBIROL'S   life  AND   WRITINGS.

SOLOMON  ben  Yehudah  Ibn  Gebirol,  of  Cordova  *  called  by  the
Jews,  Solomon  the  Sephardi,  /.  ^.,  Spaniard,  the  Hymnologist,  and
by  acrostic  from  the  initials  of  his  name,  Ra  S  H  Ba  G.  ;  by  the
Arabs,  Abu  Ay}'ub  Suleiman  ben-Ya'hya  Ibn  Djebirol,  and  by  the  schol-
astics, Avicebrol,  Avicebron,  Avicembron,  etc.,  was  bom  at  Malaga  about
1 02 1,  educated  at  Saragossa,  and  died  at  Valencia,  1070.  It  is  said,  in
a  legend,  that  he  was  killed  by  a  Mohammedan  who  was  jealous  of  his
great  talents,  that  the  murderer  buried  him  under  a  fig  tree^  in  the  for-
mer's garden  ;  the  tree  bore  so  much  fruit,  of  such  extraordinary  sweet-
ness, that  the  king,  informed  of  the  phenomena,  made  the  proprietor  of
the  garden  come  before  him,  and  being  pressed  by  questions,  the  mur-
derer ended  by  avowing  his  crime,  and  expiated  it  with  his  life.  Ibn
Gebirol  may  be  considered  as  the  greatest  philosopher  of  his  century.

Towards  the  middle  of  the  Xlth  century,  Ibn  Gebirol  began  to  make
himself  known,  as  a  philosopher  and  poet,  notwithstanding  the  repugnance
towards  each  other,  which  these  two  branches  of  human  thought  gener-
ally evince;  so  as  rarely  to  be  found  united  in  the  same  individual.  How-
ever in  Ibn  Gebirol's  poetry  are  most  profound  philosophical  meditations,
and  in  his  philosophical  works  are  to  be  found  traces  of  the  rhetoric,
lively  imagination,  and  inspiration,  of  the  poet.  The  philosophical  works
he  wrote  in  Arabic,  his  poetry  in  Hebrew.  In  poetry,  he  occupied  a
first  rank  among  the  Jewish  poets  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  was,  we  think
we  are  justified  in  saying,  among  all  contemporary  poets,  the  greatest
poet  of  his  time.

The  Jewish  poetry  of  the  Middle  Ages  was  much  more  elevated  than

♦Note. — A  portion  of  this  Paper  was  read  by  me,  before  the  Numismatic  and  Anti-
quarian Society  of  Philadelphia,  at  its  Hall,  on  March  4,  1886.  A  synopsis  has  been
published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society.


the  Arabic;  it  was  founded  upon  the  magnificent  imagery  of  the  ancient
Hebrew  prophets  and  poets,  was  based  on  the  memories  of  their  wonder-
ful past,  the  sufferings  of  the  present,  and  the  hopes  of  a  more  glorious
future.  It  was  more  universal.  The  elegies  of  the  Jewish  writers  of  this
period  were  full  of  a  sombre  melancholy,  their  hymns  and  prayers  full  of  a
profound  religious  sentiment,  and  a  touching  resignation ;  and  their  lessons
of  morality  and  wisdom,  gathered  in  the  midst  of  ruins  and  tombs,  found
a  reverberation  in  the  hearts  of  all  men,  at  all  times ;  because  in  them
were  thoughts,  sentiments,  and  emotions,  for  men  of  all  countries,  and  of
all  centuries.  The  vanity  of  terrestrial  things  is  the  ruling  thought,  which
reproduces  itself  under  a  thousand  forms,  in  the  Jewish  poetry  of  this
period.  Ibn  Gebirol  especially,  always  directed  his  regards  towards
heaven,  the  earth  had  not  offered  him  many  charms,  happiness  had  flown
from  him  without  cessation,  and  a  settled  sadness,  proceeding  out  of  all
he  saw,  made  him  refuse  the  most  legitimate  and  purest  jo)rs.  This
melancholy  is  apparent  in  writings  by  him,  when  only  i6  years  of  age.
The  Kether  Malkhuth  or  Crown  of  the  Kingdom,  was  given  by  him  the
first  place  among  his  hymns,  and  he  tells  us  in  it,  that  it  was  written  in
his  declining  years.  It  is  a  hymn  celebrating  the  only  one  and  true  God,
and  the  marvels  of  His  creation.  The  veil,  which  covers  the  mysteries  of
Nature,  the  poet  seeks  to  fathom  and  unravel,  by  means  of  the  scientific
knowledge  of  his  time.  The  task  is  divided  between  the  spirit  and  the
heart,  between  intelligence  and  sentiment,  between  knowledge  and  the
imagination.  It  is  not  only  a  religious  poem,  but  a  poetical  resume  of
the  Peripatetic,  Oriental,  Alexandrine  and  Qabbalistic  cosmology  ;  and
in  it  he  endeavors,  in  magnificent  language,  to  unite  religion  and  philos-
ophy or  the  spiritual  and  physical,  in  a  perfect  harmony,  so  as  to  glorify
and  praise  the  only  True  Being.

We  here  give  a  few  lines  from  it :

"Thou  art  God,  and  all  creatures  are  Thy  servants  and  adorers;
Thy  Glory  is  not  diminished  in  any  way,  should  they  adore  others  than
Thee,  because  their  aim  is  entirely,  to  come  nearer  unto  Thee ;  but  they
are  as  the  blind,  it  is  towards  the  Royal  route  that  they  direct  themselves,
but  they  have  strayed  from  the  right  road ;  one  has  fallen  into  an  abyss  of
destruction,  the  other  fallen  into  a  pit.    They  believed  that  they  had


wholly  reached  the  desired  aim,  Lut  they  have  labored  in  vain.  But  Thy
true  servants  are  as  those  travelers  who,  marching  in  the  right  road,  turn
neither  to  the  right  nor  to  the  left,  until  they  enter  into  the  court  of  the
palace  of  the  King.

"  Thou  art  God,  who  supports,  by  Thy  Divinity,  all  the  Things  formed,
and  sustains  all  the  existences  by  Thy  unity.     Thou  art  God,  and  there
is  not  any  distinction  established,  between  Thy  Divinity,  Thy  Unity,  Thy
Eternity,  and  Thy  Existence ;  because  all  is  only  one  mystery,  and,  al-
though the  names  may  be  distinct,  all  have  only  one  meaning.     Thou  art
Wise,  Wisdom  which  is  the  fountain  of  life,  floweth  out  from  Thee,  and
compared  with  Thy  Wisdom,  all  the  knowledge  of  mankind  is  foolishness.
Thou  art  Wise,  being  from  all  eternity,  and  Wisdom  was  always  nour-
ished by  Thee.     Thou  art  Wise,  and  Thou  hast  not  acquired  Thy  Wis-
dom from  another  than  Thyself.     Thou  art  Wise,  and  from  Thy  Wisdom
Thou  hast  made  a  determining  Will,  as  the  workman  or  artist  does,  to
draw  the  Existence  from  the  No-Thing,  as  the  light  which  goes  out  of
the  eye  extends  itself.     Thou  didst  draw  from  the  Source  of  Light  with-
out the  impression  of  any  seal,  /.  ^.,  form,  and  Thou  madest  all  without
any  instrument."     This  theory  of  the  Divine  Will  limiting  the  faculty  of
the  Highest  Deity,  which,  unlimited,  produces  only  the  Infinite,  is  largely
set  forth  in  his  Me'qor  'Hayyim,  /.  e.,  The  Source  of  Life.     This  Upper
Will  is,  we  think,  in  the  Ideal  Man,  the  Adam  Qadmon  of  the  Qabbal-
ists,  and  is  in  the  Kether  of  the  Sephiroth,  /.  ^.,  the  highest  point  of  the
brain  or  head,  of  the  Ideal  Man.     In  the  Kether  Malkhuth,  Ibn  Gebirol
also  says:  "Thine  is  the  Might,  in  the  mystery  of  which  our  contempla-
tions are  too  feeble  to  stay.'*     "Thine  is  the  hidden  Name,  from  the
habitations  of  Wisdom.**     "Thine  is  the  Existence,  from  the  shadow  of
the  light  of  which  all  existence  came.*'     "Thou  art  One,  and  the  mys-
tery of  Thy  Unity  confounds  the  wise  in  heart,  for  they  do  not  know
what  it  is.**     "Thou  art  the  Living  One,  and  he  who  reaches  to  Thy
mystery,  findeth  eternal  delight,  he  eats  and  liveth  forever.**     He  illus-
trates the  work  of  creation  by  the  simile  of  "  the  extension  of  light  which
proceeds  from  the  eye  ;*  *  and  he  says :  "  The  exalted  Name  which  is  girded
with  Might,  is  one  in  all  Its  forces,  like  a  flame  of  fire  in  Its  various  ap-
pearances, like  the  light  of  the  eye,  proceeding  from  the  blackness  of  the


eye,   one  emanating  from  the  other,  like  smell  from  smell,  light  from
light."

Ibn  Gebirol  wrote  poems  and  hymns  as  early  as  the  age  of  i6  years,
and  a  Hebrew  grammar  in  verse  at  the  age  of  19.  A  writing  called
Choice  Pearls,  composed  of  moral  maxims,  is  attributed  to  him.  It  is  in
64  paragraphs.  A  Latin  edition  was  published  in  Frankfurt  on  the  Oder,
in  1630,  by  Ebert,  and  it  has  been  printed  several  times  since  in  various
languages.  Another  writing  attributed  to  him,  is,  On  the  Soul,  a  Latin
translation  was  made  of  it,  by  Archdeacon  Dominic  Gundissalimus,  or
Gundisalvi.*  Gebirol  says  he  wrote,  a  special  treatise,  **  On  the  Will  ;**
this  is  lost.  In  1045  A.  D.,  he  wrote  the  ethical-philosophic  work,  called
Tiqqun  Middoth  han-Nephesh,  /.  ^.,  The  Correction  of  the  Manners  (Fac-
ulties, Qualities),  of  the  Soul  (or  Vital  Spirit,  the  Nephesh).  In  the  latter
work  man  is  contemplated  as  the  Mikrokosm,  and  viewed  in  his  relation
to  the  Makrokosm,  the  entire  Universe,  considered  as  the  Great  Universal
Ideal  Man  or  Adam  Qadmon  of  the  Qabbalah.  In  it,  he  quotes
the  Old  Testament,  the  Talmud,  Socrates,  Plato,  Aristotle,  the
Arabian  philosophers,  and  especially  the  maxims  of  a  Jewish  phi-
losopher called  Chefez  Al-Kuti.f  In  consequence  of  some  personal
allusions  in  this  work,  the  author  was  obliged  to  leave  Saragossa  in  1046,
and  wandered  about  Spain,  until  he  obtained  recognition  and  encourage-
ment, from  Samuel  ha-Levi  ben  Josef  Ibn  Nagr^la,  also  called  Nagdilah,
and  by  the  Jews,  han-Nagid,  /.  ^.,  the  Prince;  the  celebrated  Prime  Minister
of  Moorish  Spain.  J

Before  the  voice  of  the  Jewish  prophets  had  ceased  to  guide  that  people,
the  Interpreters  of  the  Thorah ;  /.  ^.,  the  Law,  or  Pentateuch,  the  Sages,
Wise-Men,  and  Doctors  of  the  Mishnah  and  the  Talmud,  had  began  their
labors,  and  before  the  great  Oriental  Jewish  universities  and  schools  of
Mesopotamia  and  Babylonia  were  closed,  centres  of  Jewish  thought  were
flourishing  in   the  West,  in   Italy,    France,   and   especially,  in  Spain.

*  Munk,  Melanges^  Philos,  juive  ei  arabt,  pp.  170-173.

f  Steinschneider.    Jewish  Literature.     Longmans.     London,  1857,  p.  loi.

J  See  Lindo*s  History  of  the  Jews  in  Spain,  p.  50;  a'so  Publications  of  the  Society  of
Hebrew  Literature,  London,  vol.  i,  pp.  1-12.


\

«

t

s


Rabbi  Abraham  ben  David  Ha-Levi,  or  Hallevy,  of  Toledo,  Spain  (d.
1180),  in  his  Sepher  haq-Qabbalah,  written  in  11 60,*  says  :

"After  the  death  of  the  last  rector,  'Hiz*qee-yah,t  Head  of  the  Academy
and  Prince  of  the  Exile,  called  the  Rosh  Hag-golah  or  Resh-^alutha,  the
Academies  were  closed  and  no  new  Ge'onim  appointed.  But  long  before
that  time,^  a  ship  sailing  from  Bari  was  captured  by  Ibn  Romahis,  com-
mander of  the  naval  forces  of  Abd-er-rahman  al-Nasr  (A.  D.  912-961).
In  this  ship,  were  four  distinguished  rabbins  of  the  celebrated  Babylon-
ian Jewish  school  of  Sura,  these  were  R.  'Hushiel,  father  of  R.  'Hana-
nel;  R.  Moses,  father  of  R.  'Ha'noch;  R.  Shemaryahu,  son  of  R.
Erhanan,  and  a  fourth  whose  name  is  not  given.  They  were  sold  as
slaves;  R.  'Hushiel  was  carried  to  Kairuan,  (in  Africa) ;  R.  Shemaryahu
was  left  in  Alexandria;  R.  Moses  was  brought  to  Cordova;  he  was
there  ransomed  as  a  supposed  uneducated  man.  In  that  city  was  a  syna-
gogue known  by  the  name  of  Keneseth  ham-Midrash,  /.  ^.,  assembly
for  study,  and  a  certain  R.  Nathan,  renowned  for  his  great  piety,  was
the  head  (or  judge)  of  the  congregation.  The  members  held  meetings
at  which  the  Talmud  was  read  and  discussed.  One  day  when  R.  Nathan
was  expounding  a  Talmudic  passage,  he  was  not  able  to  give  a  satis-
factory explanation  of  it.  R.  Moses  spoke,  and  at  once  removed  the
difficulty,  and  answered  several  other  questions  which  were  submitted
to  him.  Whereupon  R.  Nathan  thus  addressed  the  assembly :  '  I  am  no
longer  your  leader;  that  stranger  in  sackcloth  shall  henceforth  be  my
teacher,  and  you  shall  appoint  him  your  chief.*  The  admiral  upon
hearing  of  the  high  attainments  of  his  late  prisoner,  desired  to  revoke
the  sale,  but  the  Khalif  would  not  permit  this,  being  pleased  to  learn,
that  his  Jewish  subjects  were  no  longer  dependent  for  their  religious  in-
struction on  the  schools  of  the  East."

The  knowledge  of  Ibn  Gebirol,  was  undoubtedly  fostered  by  the
patronage  and  erudition,  of  the  before-mentioned  Samuel  ha-Levi  ben
Joseph  Ibn  Nagr^la,  or  han-Nagid,  who  was  bom  about  993  A.  D.,  died
about  1055,  aged  62  years.    This  great  scholar,  usually  called  Samuel  han-

♦  Edition  of  Bisel,  1580,  p.  6ga.
t  Killed  by  orders  of  the  Khalif.
X  In  the  X  century.


N


Nagid,  /.  e,y  the  Prince,  supported  Ibn  Gebirol  after  his  banishment  from
Saragossa  in  1046.     And  our  author  has  dedicated  to  Samuel  many  of  his
verses.  Samuel  han-Nagid  was  educated  at  Cordova,  in  Spain^  in  the  Jew-
ish school  of  that  place,  by  R.  *Ha'noch,  son  of  R.  Moses  of  Babylonia,
whom  we  have  just  mentioned,  in  the  Talmud  and  the  history  of  his  peo-
ple, and  was  taught  Hebrew  by  R.  Yehuda  'Hayyug,  one  the  most  erudite
founders  of  Hebrew  grammar.  At  the  age  of  20,  owing  to  a  revolution,  he
was  obliged  to  quit  his  studies,  for  a  fearful  conflict  between  the  Berbers,
Arabs  and  Sclavonians,  who  composed  the  bodyguard  of  the  Khalif,
brought  desolation  on  Cordova  in  10 13.     Samuel  escaped  to  the  seaport-
town,  Malaga.     Here  he  continued  his  former  studies,  and  entered  into
others,  applying  himself  especially  to  philology.    He  knew  six  languages ;
besides  Hebrew,    Chaldee    or    Aramaic,    and    Arabic,    he  understood
Berber,  Latin  and  Castilian.     This  evidences  great  application,  mental
power,  and  perseverance,    for  there  was  not  at  that  time   any  method
to  facilitate  the  study  of  languages.     The  educated  Arabs  seldom  knew
Latin,  and  the  Christians  of  Spain  Seldom  acquired  much  knowledge  of
Arabic.     In  1027  Samuel  was  appointed  Grand  Vizier  and  Minister  of
State  to  the  Khalif  Habus,  the  monarch  of  Moorish  Grenada.     For  nearly
30  years  he  occupied  this  position  in  that  kingdom.     During  this  period  he
found  time,  to  write  several  books  on  the  Talmud,  a  Jewish  history,  and
books  on  proverbs,  maxims,  prayers,  poetry,  a  grammar,  etc.     He  shared
his  riches  with  every  disciple  of  Jewish  erudition,  not  only  in  Spain,  but
in  Babylonia,  Judaea,  Sicily,  and  Africa.     He  kept  up  a  thorough  corre-
spondence with  all  the  distinguished  Jews  of  Syria,  Egypt,  Irak,  and
Africa,   took  the  greatest   interest  in  their  studies,   and   was  in   close
relations  with   the  African  authorities  on  Judaism.     He  also  employed
transcribers  to  make  many  copies  of  the  Talmuds  and  Holy  Scriptures,
which  he  presented  to  poor  students.

Can  we  wonder  if  we  find,  that  Ibn  Gebirol  living  under  the  influences
and  learning  of  so  great  a  scholar,  had  at  the  basis  of  his  philosophical
knowledge,  an  acquaintance  with  the  ancient  Midrashim  treating  on
the  Sod  or  Mysteries,  the  Secret  Learning,  afterwards  termed  the  Tra-
dition or  Qabbalah,  and  which  we  believe,  were  afterwards  redacted  into
the  Zohar  and  the  Zoharic  books?   Is  it  surprising  that  we  find  him  in  his


Me'q6r  'Hayylm,  /.^.,  Source  of  Life,  and  in  the  Kether  Malkhuth,  antici-
pating many  of  the  statements  subsequently  to  be  found  in  the  Zohar  and
Zoharic  writings,  if  he  received  a  knowledge  of  these  ancient  writings  in
their  early,  disconnected,  Midrashic  form,  before  they  were  collected  and
redacted  in  Spain  ?  The  Zohar  and  the  books  bound  up  with  it,  were
accepted  by  the  Jewish  learned  men,  almost  immediately  upon  their
publication  in  MSS.,  as  a  verity,  if  not  by  the  Qabbalist,  R.  Shim-on
ben  Yo'hai,  at  least,  as  containing  an  accepted  ancient  secret  tradition,
part  likely  coming  through  him.  Everything  points  to  this,  and  denies
the  authorship  and  forgery  imputed  by  many  critics,  to  R.  Moses  ben
Shem-Tob  de  Leon  of  Spain,  who  only  claimed  in  his  writings,  to  be  a
copyist  and  redactor  of  older  Qabbalistic  works,  and  not  their  author.
These  strange,  wonderful,  weird  writings,  required  more  than  one  intel-
lect to  produce  them,  and  contain  a  mine  of  ancient  Oriental  philosophi-
cal thought.

Ibn  Gebirol's  process  of  treating  his  philosophical  system,  however,
differs  from  that  pursued  in  the  Zohar  and  the  Zoharic  books.  The
Zohar  proper,  is  a  running  commentary  on  the  Five  Books  or  Pentateuch,
touching  at  the  same  time,  upon  numerous  problems  of  philosophical
speculation  of  the  deepest  and  most  sacred  import,  and  propounding
many  ideas  and  doctrines,  with  an  acumien,  worthy  to  proceed  from  the
greatest  intellects.  It,  and  the  Zoharic  books,  support  their  statements
by  continual  references  and  quotations,  from  the  Old  Testament.  Ibn
Gebirol  in  his,  "  Source  of  Life  *'  does  not  follow  this  course,  and  differs
from  almost  all  other  Jewish  philosophical  authors  of  the  Middle  Ages,
in  not  quoting  Scripture ;  nevertheless,  from  their  similarity,  his  writings,
and  the  Zohar  and  Zoharic  books,  are  most  probably,  offshoots  from  the
same  ancient  roots.*  The  Zohar,  and  the  fragments  contained  in  it,
were  not  made  public  in  MSS.,  for  over  225  years  after  Gebirol's  death,
but  it  does  not  follow  that  its  secret  traditional  sources,  were  not  open
to  the  friend  of  that  great  Jewish  scholar  and  patron  of  learning,  upon
whose  shoulders  fell  the  traditions,  learning  and  mantle ;  of  the  Rectors  of
the  Babylonian  schools;  the  erudite  and  celebrated,  Samuel  ha-Levi
ben  Joseph  Ibn  Nagr^la,  also  called  Nagdilah,  and  han-Nagid,  the  Prince

•  Mank,  Melanges  de  Philos.  juive  el  arabey  pp.  275,  276.


8

of  the  Jews,  and  Grand  Vizier,  under  two  Mohammedan  Khalifs,  of
Moorish  Spain.

It  was  after  his  recognition  by  Samuel  han-Nagid,  and  about  1050,
that  Ibn  Gebirol  wrote,  in  Arabic,  his  great  philosophical  work,  Me*q5r
'Hayyira,  /.  ^.,  Fountain  of  Life,  called  in  Latin,  De  Materia  Universali
and  Fons  Vitce,  which  is  really  a  philosophical  Qabbalistic  work.  He  is,
however,  mostly  known  by  his  coreligionists,  from  his  Kosmic  Qabbalistic
hymn,  founded  on  Aristbtle's  De  Mundo,  and  based  on  the  Ptolemaic
astronomical  system :  the  Kether  Malkhuth,  the  Royal  Crown,  perhaps  not
incorrectly,  from  its  referring  to  the  highest  and  lowest  Sephiroth,  Crowned
Kingdom,  which  we  have  above  mentioned.  We  shall  refer  hereafter  in
this  essay,  more  especially  to  his  Me'qor  'Hayyim  and  its  connection  with
the  wonderful  Sepher  haz-Zohar,  or  Book  of  Splendour,  the  text-book  of
the  Hebrew  Qabbalists.  The  Me'qor  is  one  of  the  earliest  exposures  of
the  secrets  of  the  Speculative  Qabbalah.  It  was  first  translated  into  He-
brew by  Shem-Tob  ben  Joseph  Ibn  Falaquera.*  A  MSS.  of  this  transla-
tion was  discovered  by  the  learned  Arabic  and  Hebrew,  German  scholar,
Salomon  Munk  (b.  1802),  one  of  the  Librarians  of  the  French  Imperial
Library,  at  Paris,  in  the  ^^  Bibliothique  Impiriale^^  whilst  redacting
its  Hebrew  MSS.  This,  he  found,  was  almost  in  the  words  of  the  Latin
Fons  Vitce,  attributed  by  the  scholastics  to  Avicebron.  After  this  he
found  in  the  same  Library  a  MSS.  in  Latin  of  the  Fons  Vitce.  After-
wards in  the  ^^  Bibliothique  Mazarine ^'^  a  second  Latin  MSS.  of  the  same
work,  was  discovered  by  Dr.  Seyerlen,  of  Germany.  M.  Munk,  in  1859,
in  his  Milanges  de  Philosophie  juive  et  arabey\  published  the  Me'qor
'Hayylm,  in  French,  from  the  Hebrew  MSS.  translation  by  Falaquera,
supplementing  omissions  by  statements  from  the  Latin  MSS.  We
acknowledge  obligations  to  M.  Munk's  work,  for  assisting  us  in  this
essay,  as  to  the  contents  of  Ibn  Gebirol's  philosophical  writings.

Sometime  between  11 67  and  11 86  R.  Yehudah  Ibn  Tibbon,  called
"Father  of  the  Translators,"  in  conjunction  with  R.  Joseph  Ibn  Qimchi,
translated,  from  the  Arabic  into  Hebrew,  the  writings  of  Ibn  Gebirol

*  B.  circa  1 224-1 228.      Was  translating  in  1264,  and  subsequently.      He  died  after
1280.

t  Paris.    cAcx  A,  Franck.


for  the  Qabbalist  Asher,  son  of  Meshullam  ben  Yacob,  of  Lunel  (d.  1170
A.  D.).  The  name  of  Asher  has  been  confounded  with  that  of  the  great
Qabbalist  Azriel,  and  the  translation  may  have  been  for  the  latter,  who
has  given  us,  in  his : — "  Questions  and  Answers  as  to  the  Ten  Sephiroth*'
one  of  the  most  scientifically  philosophical  expositions  of  these  Qabbalistic
intermediaries,  between  God  and  all  the  existences,  ever  published.
Meshullam  was  teacher  of  the  celebrated  Qabbalist,  R.  Abraham  ben  David,
junior,  of  Posquieres,  France  (d.  11 98),  called  acrostically  R  A  Ba  D.
In  the  XII  century,  Joannes  Hispalensis,  or,  of  Seville,  also  called
Abendehut,  perhaps  the  same  as  Ibn  David  and  Andreas,  whom  Roger
Bacon  says,  was  the  real  Author  of  that,  which  Michael  Scot,  called  the
Wizard  (d.  circa  1290),  published  as  his  own  writing;  made  a  transla-
tion from  the  Arabic  of  some  of  Albenzubrun's  (Ibn  Gebirors)  works.
Abraham  ben  David  (called  Ibn  Daud  by  the  Arabs,  also  called  Ben
Dior)  ha- Levi,  or  Hallevy,  the  Elder ;  of  Toledo,  Spain,  who  died  ajnartyr
in  1 180;  in  11 60  A.  D.,  in  Spain,  attempted  with  bitterness,  a  refutation
of  Ibn  GebiroFs  philosophy  in  his  writing  called  The  Sublime  Faith,  in
which  Abraham  b.  David  tries  to  put  the  Jewish  religion  in  accord  with
Aristotelian  ism.  He  wrote  the  Sepher  haq-Qabbalah  above  mentioned.
In  1209  the  Fons  Vita^  of  our  author,  and  the  celebrated  book,  De
Causisy  were  interdicted  by  the  University  of  Paris,  as  Aristotelian.*
In  1502  the  Neo-Platonic  Jewish  Qabbalist,  of  the  School  of  Count  Gio-
vanni Pico  della  Mirandola,  R.  Yehudah  Abravanel,  also  known  as  Messer
Leone  Hebreo,  and  Leo  Hebrseus,  is  acquainted  with  our  author,  but
only  from  Christian  authorities,  and  calls  him,  Albenzubrun.  Ibn
Gebirol's  writings  are  of  great  importance  to  Oriental  scholars,  from
the  assistance  they  render  to  the  settlement  of  questions  as  to  the  authen-
ticity, authorship,  and  authority  of  the  Zoharic  writings,  the  antiquity  of
the  Qabbalistic  philosophy,  its  earliest  formulated  ideas,  and  its  origin.

*  Hanreau,  Fhilos.  scholastique.    I,  p.  ii,  p.  46,  ed.,  Paris.


II.

THE  SEPHER    HAZ-ZOHAR,    WRITINGS    AS  TO,    ITS   BIBLIOGRAPHY,    AUTHORS,

AND    ANTIQUITY.

AS  we  have  already  stated,  the  Zoharic  writings  were  not  published
as  MSS.  to  the  uninitiated,  until  some  225  years  after  the  death  of
Ibn  Gebirol ;  his  writings,  however,  when  compared  with  them,  tend
to  confirm  the  opinion,  that  they  have  an  older  common  source,  and  the
learned  German  Jewish  orientalist,  Salomon  Munk,  is  compelled  to  acknowl-
edge, that  after  investigation,  the  Zc^har,  and  the  fragments  bound  up  with
it,  entire,  are  neither  the  work  of  a  simple  cheat,  nor  a  pure  invention,  but
the  editor  or  compiler  used  very  ancient  documents,  among  others,  cer-
tain Midrashim,  which  we  do  not  possess  to-day,*  and  Falaqu^ra  says,
that  Ibn  GebiroFs  Me*qor  *Hayylm,  contains  an  antiquated  or  ancient
system,  going  back  to  philosophers  of  the  highest  antiquity. f  R.  Moses
Shem-Tob  de  Leon,  who  has  been  termed,  by  most  of  those  opposed  to
these  writings,  their  forger,  expressly  tells  us,  that  he  only  edited  and
compiled  them  from  the  works  of  older  writers,  among  others,  from
those  attributed  to  the  School  of  the  Tannaite,  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'haT.
A  large  room  could  be  filled  with  the  books  written  upon  the  validity  or
forgery  of  the  Zoharic  writings.  In  our  time.  Dr.  Adolph  Jellinek,  Drf
Hirsch  Graetz,  Dr.  A.  Tholuck,  Dr.  Abraham  Geiger,  Dr.  Leopold  Zunz,
S.  D.  Luzzatto,  Dr.  Christian  D.  Ginsburg,  and  earlier,  the  French  ec-
clesiastic Jean  Morin,  Lewis  Cappelus,  Jacques  Basnage  de  Beauval,
Frederick  Strunz,  Gabriel  Groddeck,  Buxtorf,  the  Elder,  Scaliger  and
Winder,  among  others,  think  they  were  written  by  R.  Moses  de  Leon.

The  learned  M.  H.  Landauer  was  just  as  positive,  that  they  were  written
by  R.  Abraham  ben  Samuel  Abulafia.  The  erudite  Samuel  Cahen,  in  his
Great  French  Bible,  is  sure  that  they  were  composed  by  a  convocation

♦  Melanges  eU phihs.  juive  et  arabe^  etc.,  par  Munk.     Paris,  1859,  pp.  275-6.
t  /Wrf.,  p.  274.


II

of  Christianized  Rabbins,  sitting  together  for  the  purpose,  in  a  monas-
tery in  Spain,  and  employing  R.  Moses  de  Leon,  to  publish  their  work.

In  favor  of  their  antiquity,  and  that  they  were  not  written  by  Moses  de
Leon,  in  modem  times,  are,  Franz  Joseph  Molitor,  Dr.  Adolphe  Franck,
Dr.  D.  H.  Joel,  Salomon  Munk,  Dr.  J.  W.  Etheridge,  David  Luria,  Dr.
J.  M.  Jost,  Dr.  John  Gill,  M.  H.  Landauer,  Ignatz  Stem,  Leopold  Low,
John  Allen,  Jacob  Frank,  Joh.  Ant.  Bemh.  Lutterbeck,  Eh'phas  Levi
(Abbe  Louis  Constant),  Moses  ben  R.  Me'na-a'hem  Mendel  Konitz,  etc.
Earlier,  Raymond  Lully,  John  Reuchlin,  Pico  della  Mirandola,  the
learned  Jesuit  Athanasius  Kircher,  Dr.  John  Lightfoot,  Giulio  Bartolocci
(de  Celano),  Augustus  Pfeiffer,  Valentine  Ernest  Loescher,  Christian
Knorr  von  Rosenroth,  Henry  Cornelius  Agrippa,  of  Nettesheim,  John
Baptist  van  Helmont,  Franz  Mercurius  van  Helmont,  Dr.  Robert  Fludd,  Dr.
Henry  More,  Buxtorff,  the  Youngeis  Rev.  John  Francis  Buddaeus,  Dr.
Johann  Friedrich  von  Meyer,  the  Cardinal  ^gidius  of  Viterbo,  Christian
Schoettgen,  Rev.  John  Christopher  Wolff,  Jacques  Matter,  and  many
others.

Uncertain  as  to  the  author,  but  opposing  the  books,  are  many  of  the
orthodox  Jewish  Talmudists,  also  the  learned  bibliographer  M.  Stein-
schneider,  although  he  acknowledges  a  deficiency  of  thorough  study  upon
the  subject.  R.  Jacob  Emden,  named  acrostically  Ya  Be  T  Z,  started  out
to  oppose  them,  using  Morin*s  arguments.  From  the  very  excellent  intro-
duction of  Dr.  Adolph  Jellinek  (or  Gellinek),  to  his  German  translation
of  Prof.  Adolphe  Franck*s  La  Kabbaie,^  we  condense  the  following  :
There  are  three  names  under  which  more  especially  the  wonderful  monu-
ment of  the  Qabbalah  appears.  I.  Midrash  of  the  Rabbi  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai.
^'This  name,'*  Jellinek  says;  "  speaks  for  the  genuineness  of  the  work.*'
IL  Midrash  va-Ye*hee  Or,  /.  e,,  "Midrash;  let  there  be  light  !  *'  So
called  because  in  some  of  the  MSS.  the  explanation  to  the  verse  in  Gen-
esis i,  3,  Yehee  or,  forms  the  beginning  of  the  work,  or  which  is  more
probable,  because  it  leads  the  reader  to  the  light  imparted  to  him
through  this  book.  IIL  Zohar,  /.  ^.,  Splendour  or' Light,  called  so  after
Daniel  xii,  3.     This  last  name  has  become  the  governing  one  since  the

*  Du  Kabbala  oder  die  Religiansphilosophu  der  Hebraer  von  French,  Aus  dem  Fran-
idsischtn  ikbersetzty  verbessert  und  vermehrt,   Mit  einer  Abbildung  :  Leipziq^  1844,  8vo.


12

compilation  called  Yu*hazin,  which  was  published  in  Constantinople  1502
A.  D.  It  is  so  called,  either  because  it  begins  with  the  theme  as  to  the  light,
or  because  the  word  Zohar  frequently  occurs  on  the  first  page.  In  the  work
itself  it  is  also  sometimes  called  by  this  name.  (Comp.  Rayah  Me'hemnah
III,  153  b.)  Mena'hem  di  Recanati  of  Italy,  circa  1 290-1320,  com-
mented upon  it  as  undoubtedly  genuine  and  calls  it :  The  Book  of  Zohar,
The  Wonderful  Book  of  the  Zohar,  Book  of  the  Great  Zohar.  R.  Isaac  Ibn
Minir  (1330)  terms  it,  the  Midrash  Haz -Zohar,  also  Midrash  of  R.  Shim-
on ben  Yo*hai.  Other  early.Qabbalists  call  it,  Book  of  the  Holy  Zohar  by
R.  Shira-on  ben  Yo*hai.  The  Zohar  is  also  quoted  by  R.  Moses  de  Leon,
the  alleged  forger,  in  his  other  writings ;  it  is  referred  to  by  name  by  Yo-
seph  ben  Abraham  Ibn  Wakkar  of  Toledo  (flour.  A.  D.  1 290-1 340),  refer-
ring as  a  Qabbalist  to  the  Ten  Sephiroth,  he  recommends  as  reliable  guides :
the  Talmudim,  Midrash  Rabboth,  Siphra,  Siphree,  Bahir,  Peraqim  of  R.
Eliezer,  the  opinions  of  Nachmanides  and  Todros  Ha  Levi  Abulafia,  also
the  Zohar,  but  says  the  latter  has  some  errors.*  The  reason  of  this  re-
mark was,  Ibn  Wakkar  desired  to  introduce  Aristotelianism  into  the  Jewish
philosophy  and  found  the  Zohar  in  his  way.f  The  Zohar  is  mentioned,
with  favor,  by  Todros  (Theodorus)  Ha-Levi  Abulafia  (b.  circa  1 204,  died
1283  A.D.,  at  Seville).  We  have  not  space  in  this  writing  to  go  fully  into
the  subject,  but  it  is  certain  that  the  Zohar  was  accepted  as  a  correct  expo-
sition of  orthodox  Hebrew  Qabbalism,  immediately  upon  its  publication,
which  universal  reception  is  strong  proof  for  the  antiquity  of  its  doctrines.
Its  opponents  were  almost  universally  Jewish  Aristotelians,  who  therefore
opposed  the  ancient  Secret  Learning  of  the  Israelites,  because  it  was  more
in  accord  with  the  Philosophy  of  Plato  and  Pythagoras,  and  indeed  most
likely  originated  from  the  "same  sources,  the  Aryan  and  Chaldean  esoteric
doctrine.

The  book  Zohar  proper,  is  a  Qabbalistic  commentary  on  the  Penta-
teuch, wherein  the  entire  system  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah  is  compiled.
It  is  written  partly  in  Hebrew  and  partly  in  Chaldee  or  Aramaic,  and  is
a  mine  of  occultism,  *giving  the  mystical  foundation  of  the  Mosaic  ordi-
nances, poetical  and  philosophical  views  on  the  Kosmogony  and  Kosmol-

*  Comp.  The  Kabbalah,  etc.,  by  Christian  D.  Ginsburg,  London,  1865^  p.  119  et  seq,
f  Compare  Steinschneider*s  Hist,  of  Liter.,  Eng.  ed.,  p.  114.


13

ogy  of  the  Universe,  soul,  redemption,  triad,  sin,  evil,  etc. ;  mystical  ex-
positions of  many  of  the  laws  and  appearances  in  nature,  e,  ^.,  light,
elements,  astronomy,  magnet,  etc. ;  explanations  of  the  symbolism  of
the  Song  of  Solomon,  of  the  construction  of  the  Tabernacle,  etc. ;  form-
ing a  complete  Qabbalistic  Theosophy.  In  its  present  form  in  the  edi-
tions as  hereinafter  set  forth,  there  are  imbedded  in  the  Zohar  proper,
the  following  independent  works.

The  books  bound  together  and  generically  termed  the  Zohar  are  : —

1.  The  Zohar  properly  so-called.     That  is  a  running  Commentary  on
the  first  Five  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  or  the  Peptateuch.

2.  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah,t  Book  of  Mystery,  Concealment  or  Modesty.

3.  Idrah  Rabbah,  The  Great  Assembly  (of  the  Threshing-floor).

4.  Idrah  Zootah,  The  Small  Assembly  (held  in  the  house  of  R.  Shim-
on ben  Yo'hai).  •

*5.  Sabah  D'Mispatim,  The  (discourse  of  the)  Aged  One  in  Mish-
patim.     (Exodus  xxi-xxiv  inclusive.)

*  6.  Midrash  Ruth,  (Fragments).

*  7.  Sepher  Hab-bahir,  Book  of  Brightness.

8.  Tosephthah,  Addendum  or  Additions.

9.  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  The  Faithful  Shepherd.

*  10.  Haikhaloth,  Mansions  or  Abodes.

11.  Sithrai  Thorah,  Mysteries  (Secrets)  of  the  Thorah.

12.  Midrash  Hanne-e'lam,  The  Hidden  Midrash.

*  13.  Raz6  D*Razin,  Secret  of  Secrets  or  Original  Secrets.

*  14.  Midrash  *Hazeeth,  A  Midrash  to  the  Song  of  Solomon.

*  15.  Ma-a*mar  To-*hazee.     Discourse  (beginning  with)  Come  and  See!

*  16.  Ye'nooqah,  The  Discourse  of  the  Youth.

*  17.  Pe*qoodah,  Explanation  of  the  Thorah  or  Law,  (the  Pentateuch).

*  18.  'Hibboorah  Qadma'a,  The  Primary  Assembly  or  Society.

19.  Mathanithan,  We  have  learned,  or  Traditionally  received,  (the
Doctrines).  J

According  to  John  Christopher  Wolf,  there  are  ap^jarenlly  two  editio
princeps  of  the  Zohar — that    of  Cremona  and   that   of  Mantua.     The

f  Pronounced,  Seeph*rah  Detz*neeoothah.

\  All  of  these  are  in  the  Sulzbach  edition.    The  Mantua  edition  contains  only  those
not  marked  with  an  asterisk.


14

Cremona  edition  is  in  folio,  and  is  called  the  Great  Zohar  (Zohar  hag-
gadol)  and  is  used  by  the  more  modern  and  Occidental  Jews.  It  was
published  155S-60  and  is  the  one  of  the  greatest  authority  among  the
Qabbalists.  It  contains  all  of  the  books  above  mentioned  and  was  cor-
rected by  'Hayim  (b.  Samuel)  Gatino,  and  Vittoris  Eliano.  Vincensio
Conti.,  pp.  400.  The  entire  introduction,  which  is  in  Hebrew,  is  only  a
page  and  a  quarter.  There  is  not  any  introduction  by  Isaac  de  Lattes  or
others,  as  stated  by  many  European  bibliographers.  The  editions  of
Cremona  and  Mantua  sometimes  differ  in  the  reading.

The  other  editio  princeps  is  in  quarto,  in  three  volumes,  and  is  called
the  Little  Zohar.  It  is  used  more  by  the  Oriental  and  ancient  Italian
Jews.  It  was  published  at  Mantua  by  R.  Meir  b.  Ephraim  Da  Padova*
and  Jacob  b.  Napthali.  I  vol.,  pp.  251;  II,  269;  III,  300.  It  has  an
important  introduction  by  Isaac  de  Lattes,  dated  1558.

A  Hebrew  MSS.  edition  of  the  Zohar  of  as  early  as  1506,  has  been  men-
tioned as  now  in  existence,  f  Bartolocci  also  mentions  a  Venetian  edition
of  about  1558,  but  it  has  not  been  found.  J  Likely  several  volumes  of  the
Zohar  appeared  about  i558.§  The  publisher  of  the  Cremona  edition,  whom
it  would  appear  from  an  acrostic  poem  attached  to  it,  may  have  been  one
Joseph  Onkel  (or  Winkel)  from  Germesheim,  in  Germany,  therefore  most
likely  a  German  or  of  German  descent,  says  in  his  preface,  that  he :  '*  Exe-
cuted this  work  under  the  most  invaluable  help  and  supervision  of  a  highly
learned  Jew,  unsurpassable  in  all  the  branches  of  knowledge  required  *  *  *
so  that  this  present  edition  should  be  the  absolutely  correct  one,  free  from
all  errors  and  corrupt  readings,  which  abound  in  the  various  other  editions
heretofore  offered  to  the  public.  And  besides,  there  are  some  on  whom  the
spirit  of  men  rests,  who  continually  soar  towards  heaven ;  these  are  the
s^r^  wise  men  of  Egypt,  and  others  again  who  are  pervaded  with  the  heavenly
light  which  gives  wisdom ;  both  are  equally  competent  in  their  sublime

*  Jellinek,  in  his  German  edition  of  Prof.  Franck's  La  Kabbale,  p.  293,  says  it
was  by  Asrayisn.

f  M.  Steinschncider's  Jewish  Literature.  London,  1857,  p.  228.  Jellinek*s  Franck,
p.  294.

X  Bibliotheca  Magna  Rabbinica  Pars.  IV,  p.  446.

2  Comp.  Steinschneider,  Jewish  Liter.,  p.  227.


15

sphere,  and  with  the  learning  of  both  we  have  associated  ourselves  *  *  *  .
We  must  also  make  mention  of  some  others  thoroughly  conversant  with
the  spirit  of  the  Zohar,  who  assisted  us  and  thus  were  co-instrumental  in
issuing  this  work  *  *  .  In  interesting  these  great  lights  in  our  enter-
prise and  by  making  their  unanimous  judgment  the  sovereign  rule,  we
have  succeeded  in  the  establishment  of  the  only  correct  version^  while
other  particular  versions  emanating  from  single  sources,  are  not  omitted,
they  are  printed  with  Spanish  Rabbinical  types,  whereas  the  usual  square
Hebrew  type  (commonly  called  Ashoorith)  is  adopted  in  general.  And  all
the  books,  joined  to  the  principal  book,  follow  in  proper  order  along  with
the  text,  so  that  they  may  easily  be  found  in  this  succession :  Tosephthah
(Addition),  Sabah  (Senior),  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah  (Book  of  Hidden
or  Secret  Things),  Ye'nooqah  (the  Youth),  Pe*qoodah  (Commandant  or
Statute),  Midrash  Hanne-e'lam  (Midrash  of  the  Hidden  Thing),  Midrash
'Hazeeth  (Midrash  on  Canticles),  Midrash  Ruth,  Bahir  (Brightness),
Ma-a'mar  To'hazee  (Treatise  beginning  with  "  Come  and  See !  **),  Rayah
Me'hemnah  (Faithful  Shepherd),  Haikhaloth  (Halls).  *  *  We  de-
termined upon  a  folio,  and  saved  neither  money,  time  or  trouble,  not
even  space,  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  work  to  perfection :  not  a  word
is  missing  of  the  various  texts  in  existence,  but  it  is  properly  marked,
etc."  Therefore  we  "need  not  fear  the  adverse  opinions  of  our  competi-
tors, who  would  fain  belittle  our  work  and  find  fault  with  the  execution
thereof,  and  thus  prevent  the  public  from  buying  it,  forgetting  at  the
same  time,  that  the  purchaser  of  such  a  book  will  be  able  to  judge  for  him-
self  by  examining  it,  and  has  certainly  not  the  intention  to  place  it  into
his  library  for  self- adulation.  Still  we  admit  that  all  of  us,  as  children  of
one  Father,  are  liable  to  make  mistakes  in  thousands  and  ten  thousands ;
but  theirs  are  the  ten  thousands  and  the  thousands  are  ours«  etc. ' '

In  1623  the  edition  of  Lublin  was  published  in  folio  after  the  Cremona
edition,  by  Levi  b.  Kalonymos,  with  a  few  notes  by  R.  Nathan  Spira.  It
follows  the  paging  of  the  Cremona.  I  vol.,  pp.  132;  II,  122;  III,  146.
Baron  Rosenroth  considers  it  most  defective  and  inaccurate.*  In  1684
the  Sulzbach  edition  was  published,  edited  by  Baron  Christian  Knorr  von
Rosenroth,  assisted  by  Dr.  Franz  Mercurius  van  Helmont,  with  types  set

*Comp.  his  Theairo,  Anon  Pltuciano,  p.  691.


i6

by  Moses  Eloch,  wherein  with  the  book  Zohar  were  intermingled,  the
Midrash  Ruth,  Extracts  from  the  book  Hab-bahir,  Tosephthah  or  an  Ad-
dition to  some  legal  sections,  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  Hibboorah  Qadma*a,  Hai-
khaloth,  Sithrai  Thorah,  Midrash  Hanne-e'lam,  Raze  D'Razin,  Sabah,
Ye*nooqah,  Midrash  'Hazeeth,  Ma-a'marTo  'hazee,  Mathanithan, Piqqoo-
din.  Here  and  there  are  seen  extracts  from  the  books  of  Adam,  *Ha*noch
(Enoch),  Abraham,  Solomon,  R.  Cruspedia,  and  R.  Akibah,  together
with  three  treatises  by  R.  Shimon  ben  Yo*haT,  viz :  SiphrahD'Tznioothah,
Idrah  Rabbah  and  Idrah  Zootah.    The  text  itself  is  in  the  square  letters,
but  the  various  readings  are  from  the  writings  of  R.  Isaac  Loriah,  R.  Moses
Cordovero,  MSS.  of  the  Wise-Men  of  the  Earth,  and  from  printed  edi-
tions, together  with  corrections  from  the  book  Derekh  E*meth,  /.  e,,  Way
of  Truth,  and  are  in  round  (Rabbinical)  characters.     Under  the  text  are
scattered  explanations  of  the  more  diflScult  words,  from  the  Commentary  of
Issachar  Ear  (b.  Petachja)  under  the  title  of  Imrai  Beenah,  /.  ^.,  Words  of
Understanding.     Within  the  open  spaces  of  the  columns,  the  pages  of  the
prior  Mantua  and  Cremona  editions  are  carefully  noted  down  :  at  the  end
there  is  subjoined  an  index  of  the  Biblical  expressions  in  the  Zohar,  ex-
plained here  and  there,  which  was  published  once  in  Cracow  separately,
1647,  4to,  under  the  title  of  Petha*h  Ainayim,  /.  ^.,  Opening  of  the  Eyes.
The  dissertations  which  in  the  former  editions  had  been  placed  in  a  less
suitable  place,  have  herein  been  restored  to  one  suitable,  as  also  others
which  were  omitted  have  been  added.     In  the  opening,  after  the  new
preface  of  R.  Moses  ben  Uri  Sheraga  Bloch,  the  old  introduction  by
Isaac  de  Lattes  is  to  be  found.     The  Amsterdam  edition  is  first  of  1714,
4to,  of  a  small  form,  in  three  volumes  and  is  after,  and  paged  as,  the
Mantua  edition.      In   the  margin  are  the   corrections  from  R.    Isaac
Loriah' s  book.  Way  of  Truth,  also  passages  from  the  Old  Testament  and
an  Index  of  places  by  Meir  Cordovero,  also  explanation  of  difficult  words
from  the  Imrai  Beenah,  /.  ^.,  Words  of  Understanding,  by  Issachar  Bar
(b.  Petachja),  which  appear  evidently  to  have  been  done  after  the  exam-
ple of  the  Sulzbach  edition.    Finally  at  the  end  of  each  volume  are  added
those  things  which  are  wanting  in  the  original  Mantua  edition,  but  are
found  in  those  of  Cremona  and  Lublin.     At  the  end  of  the  third  volume
appears  a  good  index  to  the  Zohar,  arranged  according  to  the  names  of


17

the  letters  of  the  alphabet  (I,  251  pp. ;  II,  270;  III,  299  +  10).  Other
editions  have  been  published  at  Amsterdam,  1 728,  8vo,  with  notes  by  Schal
Bosoglio,  3  vols.,  1740;  1772,  8vo;  1805,  8vo.  This  edition  has  been
reprinted  at  Constantinople,  1 736,  Yonah  b.  Yakhob ;  Krotoschin,  1844-5,
8vo,  edited  by  Bar  Monash;  ibid,^  1858,  8vo;  Brody,  Galicia,  1873,  ^  vol.
Svo;  Przemysl,  Galicia,  1880-1,  4to  ;  Wilna,  Russia,  1882.  An  edition,
with  points,  is  now  going  through  the  press  of  Signor  Elia  Benamozegh,
the  great  Qabbalist,  of  Livorno  (Leghorn),  Italy.  A  folio  edition,  with
points,  on  vellum  paper,  in  three  volumes,  with  comments  by  Massud  Alfassi
and  Moses  Salum,  also  Livorno,  1872.  Other  editions  of  the  Zohar
have  been  published  at  Salonica,  Koenigsberg,  Zolkiew  and  other  places.

Rabbi  Shim-on  ben  Yo*hai  lived  in  the  period  of  the  destruction  of  the
second  Temple,  at  Jerusalem,  from  about  95  to  about  190  A.D.  His  whole
life  was  spent  in  the  study  of  the  Hebrew  Secret  Science,  since  called  Qab-
balah,  of  which  he  has  ever  been  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  eminent
masters.     A  thorough  ascetic,  he  lived  in  a  world  of  his  own,  beyond  the
regions  of  ordinary  life,  in  the  full  flood  of  a  religious  metaphysic,  peopled
with  the  creation  of  his  imagination,  and  that  which  had  been  handed
down  to  him  by  the  preceding  masters  in  the  science.     Feared  by  his  co-
religionists from  his  asserted  connection  with  the  spiritual  world,  contem-
plative and  secluded  in  his  disposition,  evidently  of  strong  will  and  relig-
ious feelings,  and  not  understood  by  those  around  him,  he  was  not  an
affable  companion,  but   an   uncompromising  and  strong   opponent  in
carrying  out  that  which  he  thought  was  right.    In  the  reign  of  the  Roman
Emperor  Antoninus,  when  the  School  at  Jamnia  or  Jabneh  was  watched
with  the  greatest  suspicion  by  its  Roman  rulers,  so  much  so,  that  its  stu-
dents were  prohibited  by  the  Jewish  Patriarch  from  even  taking  notes
of  the  lectures,  R.  Shim-on  was  rash  enough  to  speak  against  the  op-
pressors in  public.     It  happened  one  day  while  he,  Yehudah  b.  Illay,  and
Yo-seh  b.  Haleftah  were  holding  a  rabbinical  exercise  in  the  congregation,
the  comparative  characteristics  of  the  Jews  and  the  Romans  arose ;  aware
of  the  danger  of  the  subject,  Yehudah  commenced  with  an  eulogium  of
the  Romans.    But  we  will  quote  from  the  Talmud,  (Treatise,  Shabbathy
fol.  33,  col.  2.)

"  Once  upon  a  time  R.  Yehudah,  R.  Yo-seh,  and  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo*hai
2


i


i8

were  re-united  and  sitting  together  discoursing,  and  near  by  was  found  a
certain  R.  Yehudah  ben  Gerim.     (This  name  signifies,  says  Rashi,  de-
scendant of  the  proselytes.)     During  the  discourse  R.  Yehudah,  speaking
of  the  Romans,  said :     '  This  nation  is  great  in  all  that  which  it  builds.
See  how  it  has  constructed  everywhere  bridges,  and  markets,  and  erected
public  baths  ! '     At  these  words  R.  Yo-seh  kept  silent ;  but  R.  Shim-on
responded  *  Yea,  indeed  ;  but  it  has  not  made  anything  which  has  not  for
an  aim  its  own  advantage,  it  has  constructed  the  markets  so  as  to  draw
thereto  the  lost  women,  the  baths  so  as  to  refresh  themselves,  and  the
bridges  in  order  to  gather  from  them  the  imposts.'     R.  Yehudah  ben
Gerim  went  directly  (to  the  authorities)  and  informed  against  them  that
which  he  had  heard,  and  it  reached  the  ears  of  Csesar.    The  latter  at  once
rendered  an  edict,  that,  *R.  Yehudah,  who  has  exalted  me,  be  raised
in  dignity,  R.  Yo-seh,   who  kept  silent,   be  exiled   to  Sepphoris;  R.
Shim-on,  who   has  held  me  in   contemptuousness,  must  be  seized  and
put  to  death.*     Immediately  upon  hearing  of  this  decree,  the  latter,
accompanied  by  his  son  (El'azar),  managed  to  conceal  himself  in  the
House  of  Study,  to  which  his  wife  (some  say  a  guardian)  brought  to  them
each  day,  a  loaf  (of  bread)  and  a  porringer  of  water.   But  the  proscription
which  weighed  upon  him  being  very  severe,  R.  Shim-on  said  to  his  son,
*  Women  are  of  a  feeble  character ;  it  is  then  for  us  to  fear  that,  pressed
by  questions  (probably,  the  question,  a  mode  of  punishment,)  our  guar-
dian may  finish  by  denouncing  us  !  *     Upon  these  reflections  they  quitted
that  asylum  and  secretly  stole  away  to  another  place,  and  concealed  them-
selves in  the  bottom  of  a  cave.    There  a  miracle  operated  in  their  favour,
God  created  a  carob  bean  tree  (St.  John's  bread  tree)  bearing  fruit  through
all  the  year  for  their  support,  and  a  perpetual  spring  of  water  for  their
refreshment.     To  save  their  clothes  they  stripped  themselves  and   laid
them  aside,  except  when  at  prayer,  and  at  other  times,  to  protect  their
naked  bodies  from  exposure,  sat  up  to  their  necks  in  the  sand  wholly  ab-
sorbed in  study.     After  they  had  passed  twelve  years  thus  in  the  cave,
Eliyah  was  sent  to  inform  them  that  the  Emperor  was  dead,  and  his  de-
cree powerless  to  touch  them.*

*  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'ha!  was  sentenced  about  i6i  A.  D.  by  Lucius  Aurelius  Vems,
co-regent  of  the  Emperor  Marc  Aurelius  Antoninus,  and  dwelt  in  the  cave  about  thir-


19

On  leaving  the  cave,  they  noticed  some  people  ploughing  and  sowing,
when  one  of  them  exclaimed  '  these  people  neglect  eternal  things  and
trouble  themselves  with  those  which  are  only  temporal.*  As  they  fixed
their  eyes  upon  the  place,  fire  came  and  burnt  it  up.  Then  a  Bath  Qol  was
heard,  saying :  *  What !  are  ye  come  forth  to  destroy  the  world  that  I  have
made?  Get  back  to  your  cave  and  hide  yourselves.'  They  returned  to
it,  and  after  remaining  in  it  for  twelve  months  longer,  they  remonstrated,
pleading  that  even  the  judgment  upon  the  wicked  in  Gehenna,  lasted  no
longer  than  twelve  months ;  upon  which  a  Bath  Qol  was  again  heard  from
heaven,  which  said :  *  Come  ye  forth  from  your  cave.*  Then  they  arose
and  obeyed  it.**  *

Owing  to  those  indiscreet  remarks  of  R.  Shim-on,  the  Jewish  school  at
Jamnia  was  put  under  interdict,  license  was  granted  however  to  R.  Yehu-
dah,  to  exercise  the  office  of  preacher  to  the  synagogue.  After  the  death  of
the  Emperor  Antoninus,  R.  Shim-on  re-appears  as  the  founder  of  a  school
at  Teqo*a,  now  called  TekCl'a,  a  city  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  almost  south  of
Jerusalem  and  Bethlehem ;  the  prophet  Amos  was  of  this  place,  and  Isaiah
is  said  to  be  buried  there. f  About  300  magisterial  sentences  by  R.  Shim-on
b.  Yo*hai  are  recorded  in  the  Talmud.  The  Idrah  Zootah  of  the  Zohar
gives  an  account  of  his  death  and  burial.  He  is  said  to  have  been  buried
at  Meiron  to  the  north-west  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  and  his  monument
still  exists.  At  Ain-etam,  a  few  miles  north-west  of  TekCl*a,  are  the  ruins
of  an  ancient  synagogue  attributed  to  R.  Shim-on,  who  is  said  to  have  built

teen  years,  until  after  the  death  of  Lucius  Verus  in  169  A.  D.  During  this  time  he  and
his  son  devoted  themselves  to  the  study  of  the  oral  Talmud,  Asceticism,  the  Secret
Learning  and  Mysticism.  Before  this,  R.  Shim-on  had  been  sent  as  a  delegate  to  Rome
and  found  favour  with  the  Roman  government.  Talmudic  Miscel.  by  P.  I.  Hershon,
London,  1880,  p.  64  et  seq,

*  Comp.  Talmud,  Yerush.  Treatise  She'bee-ith  ix,  i  ;  Menachoth.  fol.  72 ;  Me^ee-lah  7
and  17;  B*reshith  Kabbah  c.  Ixxix;  Midrash  Koheleth,  x,  8;  Midrash  Esther,  i,  9.

t  The  cave  in  which  R.  Shimon  hid  himself,  may  have  been  in  the  neighborhood  of
Tekii'a,  where  he  was  so  appreciated  and  known  that  he  founded  his  school.  In  its
vicinity  are  numerous  caverns  and  deep  ravines;  some  of  the  former  will  hold  hundreds
of  men,  and  can  be  defended  by  a  few  against  any  number.  One  has  numerous  intri-
cate passages,  and  Tobler  found  in  it  a  number  of  sarcophagi  and  inscriptions  in  the
Phcenician  character.    Diet,  of  the  Bible  by  Dr.  Wm.  Smith,  New  York,  p.  3189-90.


20

24  on  the  Lake  of  Tiberias ;  at  Tebarieh  is  another.  Carmoly  gives  a
drawing  of  his  tomb.*  When  the  disturbance  which  caused  the  suppres-
sion of  the  school  at  Jamnia  had  subsided,  a  new  school,  which  became  cel-
ebrated, was  founded  at  Tiberias  by  Shim-on  b.  Gamaliel  about  A.D.  165.
Among  the  published  books  favoring  the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar,  we
call  the  reader's  especial  attention  to  the  two  following  books  on  the  subject,
although  many  others  have  been  written  to  the  same  effect,  one  is  by  Konitz,
the  other  by  Luriah.  f  The  first  is  "  The  Book,  Ben  Yo*haT,  explaining  the
Hidden  Things,  in  the  sayings  of  the  divine  Than-nah  Rabbi  Shim-on
ben  Yo'hai,  his  memory  be  a  blessing,  which  are  written  in  the  entire
Babylonian  and  Yerushalemitic  Talmud,  and  in  (the  books)  Siphra,
Siphree,  and  Thosephthah,  in  the  laws,  rules  and  narratives,  in  which  oc-
cur the  words  of  this  sainted  man,  whether  spoken  of  as  R.  Shim-on  ben
Yo*hai,  or  only  as  Rabbi  Shim-on;  and  the  distinguished  position  occu-
pied by  him,  before  he  sojourned  in  the  cave  and  after  his  leaving  it  >  fur-
thermore unassailable  proofs,  that  the  books:  the  Holy  Zohar,  Rayah
Me'hemnah,  Midrash  Hanne-eMam,  and  the  Tiqqoonim,  are  the  literary
works  (of  the  school)  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo*hai;  also  refutations  of  the
objections  raised  against  that  authorship,  etc.;  finally  the  decisions  in
matters  of  casuistry  given  in  the  Zohar,  either  independently  of  or  in  ac-
cordance with,  the  Talmud;  by  Moses  ben  R.  Me'na'him  Mendel  Konitz
of  Ofen  (/.  ^.,  Buda-Pesth,  Hungary),  Vienna,  1815.'*  This  book  is  a
large  folio  of  149  pages  of  two  columns  each,  and  is  divided  into  seven
Gates  {She^arim)j  spread  over  the  first  62  pages.  As  the  book  is  in  Rab-
binical text  and  not  easily  obtained,  we  will  give  a  short  analysis  of  its
contents.  Gate  i.  Whenever  the  name  R.  Shim -on  simply,  occurs  in
the  Talmud,  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai  is  meant.     Gate  2.     R.   Shim-on

*  Itiniraires  de  la  Terre  Sainte  des  xiii,  xiv,  xvi  et  xvii  siecle^  etc.  Bruxelles,  1847,
p.  451.

f  Articles  showing  the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar  have  also  appeared  in  many  other  writ-
ings, books  and  periodicals,  too  numerous  to  mention  now,  but  we  cite  Kerem  Chemed^
Vienna  edition,  1836,  T.  ii,  ep.  25 ;  also  a  criticism  on  Dr.  H.  Graetz's  positions  in  his
History  of  the  Jews,  which  might  be  made  much  stronger,  written  by  Dr.  Leopold  L6w,
late  chief  Rabbi  of  Szegedin,  on  the  Danube,  and  published  in  the  periodical  Ben
Chananjat  M(matichrift  fUr  judische  Theologie^  vol.  vi,  pp.  725-733 ;  741-747  ;  785-795;
805-809;  821-828;  933-942.    Szegedin,  1863.


21

was  his  name  prior  to  going  into  the  cave,  after  leaving  it  he  was  called,
in  addition,  Ben  Yo'hai.  Gate  3.  The  reverence  and  sublime  distinc-
tion shown  and  assigned  to  him  throughout  his  life,  substantiated  by  quo-
tations from  the  Talmud.  Gate  4.  After  leaving  the  cave,  (/.  ^.,  his  ascetic
life),  his  decisions  were  accepted  by  the  Wise-men  of  the  Talmud  as  final.
Gate  5.  Even  the  great  Rabbenu  Haq-qadosh  bases  his  own  decisions
upon  those  of  R.  Shim-on,  speaking  in  the  latter* s  name.  So  also  does
R-  Yo-*ha*nan  (ben  Zakkai),  and  more  than  50  quotations  are  given  from
the  Talmud,  that  "  R.  Yo-*ha*nan  said,  in  the  name  of  R.  Shim-on  b.
Yo'hai."  Gate  6.  In  which  it  is  shown,  that  where  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'ha!
differs  from  the  other  Rabbins,  the  latter  always  submit  to  his  opinion
as  final.  This  gate  has  145  doors,  in  which  145  Talmudic  passages  are
cited  in  support  of  this  assertion.  Gate  7.  In  this  Konitz  speaks  of  "the
Holy  Zohar**  as  the  spiritual  fruit  of  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai,  and  refers
to  R.  Yakob  ben  Z'vee  (or  Tze'vee,  the  initials  of  YaBeTZ)  of  Emden,  as
the  assailant  of  the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar,  and  as  author  of  the  book
NRtpa^hath  se^pharim^  /.  e,.  Wrapper  of  books,*  out  of  which  Dr.  Graetz
gets  most  of  his  objections  to  the  Zohar.  f  Yabetz  has  borrowed  largely
firom  the  objections  made  by  Jean  Morin,  a  French  ecclesiastic,  b.  1591,  d.
1659  A.  D.,  in  a  book  published  by  the  latter,  first  in  1631,  and  after  his
death  with  his  Exercitationes  BibliccBi  in  1669.  J  Yabetz  gives  132  objections
to  the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar,  in  the  above-cited  book,  which  Konitz  says
he  will  refute,  in  the  second  part  of  his  book  which  is  called  Ma-a'noth
u-Afitpd' hoth,  i.  e,y  Replies  and  Precious  Wrappers.  Gate  7th  closes  at
page  149  and  bears  on  its  back§  the  **  Keys  of  the  Gates/*  /.  e.y  an  Index
of  the  books  quoted  from,  and  matters  treated  of  as  above  mentioned.

In  Gate  i  many  passages  from  the  Talmud  are  quoted,  evidencing  that
R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo*hai  before  his  entrance  into  the  cave,  the  latter  without
doubt  referring  to  his  ascetic  life,  was  called  Rabbi  Shim-on,  and  that  after

♦Written  1758-1763;  published  at  Altona,  176S,  4to,  2  vols.
^Geschi€ktedgrJuden,yo\,y\\,i^^.TZ-')\\  185,186;   193,194;  217-256;  326-328;

442-459;  487-507.

X  Morin's  anti-Massoretic  zeal,  **  was  not  according  to  knowledge,  as  later  investiga-
tions in  the  same  field  have  abundantly  proved."  Kitto*s  Cyclop.  Bib.  Liter.,  ed.  1876,
Vol.  iii,  p.  217.

J  pp.  150-2.


22

his  re-appearance  he  is  spoken  of  as  "Ben  Yo'hai/*  or  "Rabbi  Shim-on
ben  Yo*hai."  In  Gate  2,  Full  reasons  are  given  for  this  change  of  names.
Gate  3  Explains  the  difference  between  the  ordinary  Rabbi  Shim-on  prior
to  the  time  he  passed  in  the  cave,  and  the  completed  man,  Rabbi  Shim-on
ben  Yo*hai  after  leaving  it.  The  interval,  some  twelve  years,  had  served
to  endow  him  with  a  heavenly  superiority  and  sublimity,  of  which  the
two  Talmuds  and  the  Midrash  Rabbah  give  us  striking  instances.  In  the
Talmud  (Treat.  Shabbath  33^.)  we  are  told,  the  prophet  Eliyah  sent  him
word  of  the  death  of  his  persecutor,  the  Roman  Emperor  Antoninus.  He
is  also  said  to  have  annihilated  wicked  men  by  his  breath  (^Ibid,  34  d).
In  the  Talmud  Ye*rushalmi  it  is  stated,  a  man  was  bitten  by  a  serpent,
through  the  mere  prediction  of  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo*hai  (Treat.  She^bee-ifh^
ch.  9).  Upon  leaving  the  cave  he  had  an  apparition  in  the  shape  of  a
bird,  and  a  Bath-Qol  as  to  it  {Ibid.),  A  prophecy  and  miracle  in  connec-
tion with  the  cemetery  in  Tiberias,  is  given  {Ibid.),  Konitz  cites  numer-
ous other  instances  which  we  have  not  now  space  to  give.  Konitz  says:
"The  wise  men  of  the  A'mora-im  testify  to  his  standing  as  exceeding
that  of  the  Men  of  the  Great  Assembly,  and  say :  *  What  distinction  in
the  ages  of  the  world  is  there  between  the  age  of  R.  *Hiz'qee-yah  and  the
ages  of  the  Great  Assembly?  *  The  age  of  R.  'Hiz*qee-yah  closes  that  of
the  Great  Assembly  and  opens  that  of  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai.'*  {Be^  -
reshith  Rabbah,  ch.  35.  See  also  Miz-ra-hee  58,  c.  9  and  12.)  Lastly,
"  The  sages  of  the  Talmud  distinguished  the  rank  of  R.  Shim-on  ben
Yo'hai  above  all  the  heads  of  the  entire  congregation  of  Israel,  and  said  :
'  All  Israel  is  bound  to  interrupt  the  study  of  the  Thorah,  so  as  to  read  the
She*mah  and  the  Prayer  of  Eighteen  Benedictions  at  the  prescribed  time,
except  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo*hai,  the  only  one  excellent  from  world  to
world,  and  from  his  learning  (or  study)  he  shall  not  pause  for  the  reading
of  the  Shemah,  and  the  Prayer  of  Eighteen,  for  his  whole  life  is  exclusively
devoted  to  heavenly  interests,  etc.**  *

*Sec  Midrash  She'moth  Rabbah,  middle  of  Chap.  52.  Talm.  Yerushalmi,  Treat.
Be'rakhoikt  chap.  i.  Shabbath  ii  a.  M.  Schwab's  French  ed.,  vol.  I,  pp.  15-16,
51-52.  Ibid*  vol.  iv,  p.  13.  This  shows  the  divinely  sublime  study  and  teaching,  in
which  he  was  engaged,  which  was,  the  oral  tradition  as  to  the  Secret  Learning,  the  Sod
or  M3^tery,  afterwards  called  Qabbalah,  f.  e.,  that  received  (by  oral  tradition).


23

It  is  also  said  of  him  in  the  Talmud  "  He  saw  the  future  by  means  of
the  Holy  Spirit.'*  (Talm.  Ye'rushalmi:  Shabbath  89  ;  Babli :  Me'eelah
17^.)  Konitz  also  gives  many  passages  from  the  Talmudim  and  Mid-
rash  Rabbah,  containing  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai's  sayings  about  himself,
his  visions,  supernatural  powers,  etc.,  and  the  statements  of  others  to  the
same  effect,  and  as  to  the  sternness,  integrity,  and  severity  of  his  charac-
ter, so  tliat  he  even  deemed  himself  competent  to  pass  an  adverse  criticism
on  King  Solomon,  and  to  rebuke  his  own  mother  for  conversing  too
much  on  the  Sabbath  day.  This  is  continued  in  many  quotations  to  show
how,  living  on  earth,  he  was  yet  a  citizen  of  heaven,  unconcerned  about
earthly  things,  wholly  ingrossed  with  the  study  of  the  Thorah,  his  thorojugh
penetration  with  the  spiritual  life,  and  his  identification  with  the  minister-
ing angels  of  God,  who  see  His  glory  and  carry  out  His  will.  In  Gate
4,  Konitz  shows  how  the  opinions  of  this  great  man,  no  matter  how  con-
trary to  or  against  whom  pronounced,  always  prevail,  and  that  his  decisions
on  all  casuistic  discussions  and  questions  are  considered  as  final,  whenever
his  name  is  mentioned  in  full,  which  was  only  after  his  return  from  his
ascetic  life  in  the  cave.  He  overwhelmed  the  celebrated  R.  Eli-ezer  b.  R.
Yosc,  with  cutting  reproaches  for  contradicting  him,  and  is  reported  to  have
contradicted  his  Rabbi  (Master)  the  celebrated  Qabbalist  R.  Akeebah,
and  insisted  he  was  right.  He  is  quoted  as  explaining  four  things  con-
trary to  his  teacher  Akeebah.  Gate  5,  gives  many  instances  to  show,  that
even  the  great  redactor  of  the  Mishna,  Rabbenu  Haq-qadosh,  gave  his
decisions  in  the  name  of  R,  Shim-on  ben  Yo*hai,  and  that  the  great
scholar  R.  Yo-hanan  b.  Zakkai  gives  62  decisions  in  Ben  Yo'haT's  name.
Gate  6  has  145  doors,  through  each  of  which  a  Talmud ic  quotation  is
given,  in  corroboration  of,  that  wherever  a  decision  of  R.  Shim-on  b.
Yo'hai  occurs,  the  sages  of  the  Talmud  lay  down  a  binding  law  according
to  it.  In  Gate  7,  Konitz  introduces  ist.  The  book  Zohar,  a  production  of
R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo*haT,  and  his  school ;  and  2d.  A  venerable  man  named
R.  YAkob  BEn  Tz*vee,  the  anagram  of  which  is  (YABETZ),  who  raises
his  voice  132  times  in  denunciation  of  this  book,  alleging  it  to  be  spuriously
shouldered  on  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo*haT.  In  answer  to  which,  Konitz  replies
with  132  very  profound,  learned,  and  convincing  explanations  and  eluci-
dations ;  among  them  are  the  following :  The  disciples  say ; — "  All  thy


24

males  shall  appear  before  the  face  of  Adonai  Elohim.*'  * — Zohar  ii  ^Sa,
refers  to  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai  before  whom  all  men  must  appear.  The
Gaon  Yabetz  is  indignant  at  the  words  in  the  Zohar  ii  ^Sa:  **  What  is
the  meaning  oi pe' nai  ha-a-don  YHVH,  /.  ^., '  the  face  of  Adonai  YHVH'f
This  is  Rabbi  Shim-on  ben  Yo-hai/*  and  Yabetz  called  this  "Blasphemy  on
the  part  of  a  later  writer,  and  R.  Shim-on  could  not  have  been  the  author,
God  forbid  that  he  should  have  thought  to  put  himself  as  God  !  '*  Konitz
says : — "  It  seems  to  us  that  the  proper  meaning  of  the  words  quoted  is:  '  the
face  of  the  lord  of  YHVH,'  that  is,  of  the  man  whom  YHVH  has  chosen,  and
so  made  him  adon^  /.  ^.,  a  lord  of  YHVH,  as:  *the  mountain  of  YHVH;* '  the
Messiah  of  YHVH,'  etc.  Although  not  thoroughly  grammatical  accord-
ing to  the  more  modern  grammar,  in  its  position  in  the  Zohar  it  is  in  ac-
cord with : — *  R.  Akeebah  said  to  R.  Shim-on :  It  may  suffice  thee  to  know
that  I  and  thy  Creator  recognize  thy  power,'  (Talmud  Ye'rushalmi :  Treat.
Sanhedrifty  c.  i) ;  so  R.  Shim-on  himself  says,  '  I  have  seen  the  sons  of  the
Upper-room,  they  are  few,  and  if  they  are  two,  it  is  I  and  my  son.*  (Tal-
mud Babli :  Succah  45^,  Ye'rushalmi :  Be'rakhoth  c.  9.)  Midrash  B'resh-
eeth  Rabbah  (c.  35,)  completes  this  with  the  words  '  And  if  it  is  One,  it
is  I,  myself.'  See  also  Rashi's  Commentary  on  the  Talmud,  Treatise
Sanhedrin  98a — from  which  it  appears  that  Rashi  had,  through  Qabba-
lah  from  his  teachers,  many  sayings  and  sentences  of  the  Zohar,  orally
delivered  from  Rabbi  to  disciple,  from  and  after  the  existence  of  the
school  of  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'haT.  (Comp.  Konitz.  Reply  24,  which  is
on  page  73,  col.  i.)

As  to  the  Gaon's  objection  to  Zohar  ii,  132^,  Idrah  Rabbah ;  viz.:  "R.
Shim-on  said :  '  I  call  the  upper  heavens  and  the  upper  earth  as  witness,  that
I  see  at  present,  what  no  son  of  man  ever  saw  since  Mosheh  went  upon  the
mount  of  Sinai  the  second  time,  for  I  see  my  face  shining  as  brilliantly  as
the  light  of  the  sun  when  it  descends  as  a  healing  for  the  world ;  as  it  is
written : — '  To  you  who  fear  My  Name  shall  shine  the  Sun  of  Righteous-
ness with  healing  in  his  wings '  (Mai.  iii  20,  iv.  2).  Yea  more,  I  know
that  my  face  is  shining,  but  Moses  did  not  know  it  or  understand  it ;  for

*  Exod.  xxiii,  17.

fExod,  xxiii,  17.  "The  Master,  the  Eternal,"  Onkclos  says  "The  Master  of  the
world."    Cahen's  French  Bible,  Vol.  ii,  p.  105,  note.


25

it  b  written  '  Moses  wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face  shone.*  "*  (Exod.
xxxivy  29.)  and  Und,  144a,  "That  is  revealed  to  and  by  us,  which  was
never  revealed  since  Mosheh  stood  upon  the  mount  of  Sinai,  "f    For  the

*  The  idea  of  the  face  shining  is  a  metaphor  to  express  the  celestial  and  spiritual
expression  of  the  countenance.    Comp.,  however,  as  to  "face"  Kitto's  Cyclop.  Bib.

Liter.,  Ed.  1876,  v.  ii,  p.  2.

t  We  will  here  give,  from  the  Zohar,  the  whole  passage  : — "  Thus  far  go  the  words
which  are  hidden  (abstruse),  and  the  clear  and  choice  meaning  in  them  (which  is  set
forth  in  many  particulars)  ;  blessed  is  his  lot  who  knows  and  attends  to  those  things  and
errs  not  therein  I  Because  these  words  are  only  given  to  the  Masters  of  the  Masters,  and
Reapers  of  the  fields,  who  have  entered  in  and  gone  out  again  (f.  ^.,  ascended  steadily).
As  it  is  written  (Hos.  xiv,  10) :  *  For  the  ways  of  YHVH  are  right,  and  the  just  walk
in  them,  but  the  transgressors  shall  stumble  therein.'  We  have  learned,  R.  Shim-on
wept  and  raised  his  voice,  and  said  :  If  with  these  our  words,  which  are  here  disclosed,
our  companions  were  gathered  up,  to  be  within  the  assembly-room  of  the  world  to  come,
and  are  raised  up  from  this  world,  it  is  all  right  and  well;  for  they  (the  words)
were  not  revealed  to  any  one  of  the  children  of  the  world.  Again  he  said :  I
come  back  to  myself,  for  truly  I  have  revealed  in  the  presence  of  Atikah  D'Atikin,
f.  e.,  the  Ancient  of  the  Ancients,  Hidden  through  all  Concealment ;  but  /  Aavi  not
done  so  for  my  own  glorification^  nor  that  of  the  house  of  my  father^  nor  for  yours,
my  companions,  but  solely,  that  men  might  not  stray  in  His  paths,  nor  yearn  to
enter  shame-faced  into  the  gates  of  His  Palace,  nor  be  destroyed  by  their  own
errors.  Blessed  is  my  lot  with  them  in  the  world  to  come !  We  have  learned,  before
our  companions  went  forth  from  this  place,  1.  e.,  the  Great  Assembly  of  the  Threshing-
floor,  R.  Yo-seh  bar  Yakob^  R.  *Hiz'qce-yah  and  R.  Yez-zah  died;  and  the  companions
saw  that  the  holy  angels  took  them  away  by  that  expanded  veil.  R.  Shim-on  spoke  and
was  finally  prostrated.  He  cried  out  and  said :  Perhaps,  which  the  Holy  One  forbid  !
a  decree  has  been  pronounced  upon  us  to  punish  us,  because  of  something  which  has
been  disclosed  by  us,  which  had  not  been  disclosed  since  the  day  on  which  Mosheh  stood
upon  Mount  Sinai,  as  it  is  written  (Exod.  xxxiv,  28)  :  *And  he  was  there  with  the  Lord
(YHVH)  40  days  and  40  nights,  etc'  Why  then  do  I  Urry  here;  if  on  that  account
they  were  punished  ?  He  heard  a  voice  saying :  Blessed  art  thou,  R.  Shim.on,  and
blessed  is  thy  lot  and  that  of  those  companions  who  are  with  thee ;  for  that  has  been
revealed  to  (all  of)  you  which  is  not  revealed  to  the  whole  upper  army,  i,  e.,  the  angels.
Come  and  see !  It  is  written  (Josh,  vi,  26)  «And  he  shall  lay  the  foundation  thereof  in
his  first  bom,  and  with  his  youngest  son  shall  he  set  up  the  gates  of  it,'  much  more  so
here,  because  with  vehement  and  too  much  study  they  (the  three  dead  companions)
applied  their  souls  at  this  time  and  they  were  accepted.  Blessed  is  their  portion,  truly
they  have  been  taken  up  (when)  in  perfection ;  which  was  not  the  case  with  those  who


26

argument  that  it  was  not  possible  that  R.  Shim-on  would  speak  thus  of
himself,  Konitz  refers  the  reader  to  that  which  he  has  already  said  in
Gate  3d,  and  concludes,  "  Our  Rabbi's  of  both  Talmudim,  have  placed
R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo*haT,  above  all  the  learned  men,  praised  him  and  his
character,  and  wonderful  deeds  in  unbounded  terms,  revered  him  as  they
did  the  patriarchs  Mosheh  and  Ahron,  put  him  on  a  level  with  the  prophets,
and  exalted  him  above  the  men  of  the  Great  Assembly,  speaking  of  him
in  even  more  extended  terms  of  veneration,  than  the  Zohar  represents
him  as  having  spoken  of  himself;  does  not  this  certify  to  the  veracity  of
the  above  words  in  the  Zohar?'*  (Comp.  66th  Reply,  p.  87,  col.  2,  p.
SB,  col.  I.)

In  the  Tiqqooneh  Zohar  ja  we  read  :  "  The  masters  (teachers)  of  gram-
mar {diqduq,  properly,  subtilty,  or  accurate  distinction)  have  established
the  Qamets,  which  is  a  long  vowel.'*  Which  according  to  Yabetz  is  proof  of
the  comparatively  recent  period  of  the  production  of  the  Zohar,  the  phrase
''masters  of  grammar,"  belonging  to  a  much  later  period  than  that  in
which  R.  Shim-on  flourished,  even  to  that  of  the  Ge'onim,  **  the  originator
of  this  science  having  been  a  certain  R.  Yehudah  'Hiyug  of  Pas."  In
refutation  of  this,  Konitz  refers  to  what  he  has  before  said  in  Gate  3,  add-
ing: *'  Nearly  in  the  above  quoted  language  of  the  Zohar  you  will  find  it
distinctly  stated  in  the  Talmud,  that  the  vowels,  far  from  being  the  in-
vention of  R.  'Hiyug  and  those  who  lived  after  him,  area  Ha'lakha  (/*.  <r.,
rule),  given  to  Mosheh  on  Sinai.'    Thus  we  read  in.the  Talmud — Treatise

were  before  them.  Why  did  they  die?  We  have  learned:  When  as  yet  the  words
were  being  revealed,  the  upper  and  lower  of  those  of  the  chariot  f  merkabah),  were  in
movement,  and  a  voice  sounded  through  250  worlds  because  ancient  words  (matters  of
antiquity),  were  being  revealed  below.  And  before  they  could  again  gather  their
breaths  (souls)  by  these  words,  their  life  went  forth  in  a  kiss,  and  they  were  wrapped  up
in  that  expanded  veil,  and  the  angels  above  carried  them  away.  *  *  R.  Shim-on
said,  how  blessed  is  the  lot  of  those  three,  and  blessed  is  our  lot  on  their  account.  A
voice  went  out  a  second  time  and  said :  *  But  ye  who  cleave  unto  the  Lord  (YHVH),
your  Elohim  (God),  are  all  alive  to-day.*  (Deut.  iv,  4.)  They  arose  and  from  every
side  a  sweet  odour  proceeded.  R.  Shim-on  said :  Henceforth,  I  perceive,  that  the
world  will  receive  blessings  because  of  us.  And  all  their  faces  shone  so  that  men
could  not  look  on  them.  We  have  learned  :  Ten  went  in  and  seven  came  out,  etc.**
Idrah  Kabbah.    Zohar  iii,  144  a  et  seq,     Mantua  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.,  col.  271-2.


27

Ne^dareem  37^ — R.  Yits'haq  said  :  *  The  reading  of  the  scribes  {Miqrah
S(hfhe*nm,  u  e.,  the  manner  in  which  words  and  sentences  are  to  be
pronounced),  and  the  omitting  by  the  Scribes  {Jttur  So-phe'rim,  /.  e.y
the  omission  of  certain  letters  in  writing  and  speaking),  what  is  to
be  read  {Qe*ree)  though  not  thus  written  (A?  Ke'thib),  and  what  is
written  {Ke'thib)  and  not  thus  read  (ve-ioh  Qe'ree)  is  a  Ha'lakha  to
Mosheh  on  Sinai.*  '*  *  Instances  of  the  Miqrah  So-phe'rim  are  ;  Where
to  read,  ah-rets,  instead  of  eh-rets,  sha-mo-yim,  instead  of  sha-ma-ytmy
namely,  where  there  is  the  accent  (called)  Ethna' Utah ;  as  R.  Nathan^
author  of  the  book  A-rookh  states ;  or  where  to  read  Mitsreem,  Egyptians,
or  Mits-rdyim^  Egypt,  etc.,  which  early  distinctions  must  certainly  have
been  pointed  out  at  the  time  by  signs  or  marks.  The  Ittur  So-phe'rimy  chiefly
refers  to  the  use  or  omission  of  the  letter  \  (vav)  as  a  vowel  ^,  00 ;  or  i,  o,
or  as  a  consonant  with  the  meaning  of  a  conjunctive  "  and  '* ;  e.g,.  Genesis
™^>  55-  "Let  the  maiden  stay  with  you  a  year  or  ten  months,  dhar^
ue,,  then  (not  *  andthtn  ;*  a-har,  and  not  ve'  a-har,  properly:  and  SLfter-
wards)  she  may  go  !"  Another  instance  (previous  to  this).  Genesis  xviii,  5,
"  /hen  or  afterwards  {a-har^  not  ve  a-^har,  and  afterwards  or  and  then)
ye  may  pass  by.*'  Again,  Numb,  xii,  14,  '*  then  (a-'har)  she  shall  be  gath-
ered in  (as  it  is  quoted  in  the  Talmud,  though  our  version  has  ve  a-'har).
Further  a- harm  Ps.  Ixviii,  26,  and  the  omission  of  ^  and,  before  mish-pate-
kha,  thy  judgments.  Ps.  xxxvi,  y.f  Note  especially  5a«//<r//r/«  99^,  where  it
is  plainly  said  : — "  And  though  one  say,  the  whole  Thorah  is  from  heaven,
except  this  grammar  {diqduq),^^  the  laws  and  rules  of  which  are  referred  to
in  the  Talmud  as  well  as  in  the  Zohar,  as  above  quoted,  as  also  other  early
books.  J  From  the  examination  of  which  writings  the  difference  may  be
seen  between  the  Diqduqeh  Thorah  and  the  Diq-duqeh  So-phe'riniy  as  it  is
stated  in  the  Talmud,  Treat.  B^khoroth  30^.  See  also  Rashi  on  Treat.  Succah

♦Scribes  means  here,  the  authorities  on  the  correct  reading  and  writing  of  the  Holy
Scriptures.  As  to  the  Scribes  or  So-phc'rim,  see  Kitto's  Cyclop.  Bib.  Liter.,  Ed.  1876,
vol.  iii,  pp.  783-792.     Massorah.     Ibid.,  pp.  103-105.

t  Comp.  Rashi  on  Ziba-'^him  115^,  ^Ha^geegah  dh.

%  Comp.  the  book  Beth  Yoseph  ;  Toor  Ora*h  ^ Hayyim  §  142  ;  Response  of  R  Sh  B
A.  (Adereth)  {  43;  Response  of  R.  Yitz'haq  b.  Shaisheth,  disciple  of  R.  Nathan  (author
of  A-rookh)  {  284 ;  Response  of  R.  David  b.  Simrah  of  Saragossa,  part  iii,  \  594  and

J  643-


28

2Sa,  viz :  "  This  is  what  they  (the  Rabbins)  say  in  the  Talmud,  Treat.
Shabbath  37^,  R.  Nathan  was  a  master  of  the  work,*  which  means,  he
was  accurate y  /.  ^.,  me^daqdeq  =  diqduq^  in  his  work.'*  This  is  to  show
the  application  of  the  word  diqduq  to  other  things,  in  the  sense  in  which
it  is  originally  used  with  regard  to  grammar.  In  favour  of  the  antiquity
of  the  accents  is : — "  The  words  in  Nehemiah  viii,  8,  viz  :  *And  they  were
intelligent  in  the  reading  {bam- Miqrahy  *'  f  ^^e  to  be  understood  as  refer-
ring to  the  distinction  of  the  sentences  indicated  by  the  accents,  which
Rashi  on  Talmud,  Treatise  Ne'dareem  37^,  properly  explains,  as  *'  the
pointing  and  accents.**  And  we  learn  in  Massekheth,  Treat.  So-phe^rim,
c.  iii,  rule  7 :  "A  Sepher  (Thorah)J  which  is  pointed  and  accented,
must  not  be  used  for  reading;**  for,  says  the  book  Beth  Yoseph^  in  the
name  of  R.  Moses  ben  Na'hman  (Nachmanides),  a  Sepher  Thorah  must
be  written  in  the  same  way  that  it  was  given  on  Sinai ;  and  R.  Ye*ru*ham
writes :  "  For  we  have  it  by  tradition  that  there  is  an  aim  ie'miqrah,  a
mother  to  the  reading,  and  an  aim  ie*  massoreth,  i.  e.,  a  mother  to  the
tradition,  and  pointing  would  do  away  with  the  latter.**  In  this  connec-
tion the  points  over  the  letters  of  ten  words  in  the  Pentateuch  are  to  be
noted,  the  antiquity  of  these  cannot  be  disputed.  These  points  served  to
direct  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  respective  word  as  requiring  a
definition,  e,  g,,  Numb,  ix,  10,  where  the  n  of  the  word  ripnn  re*hoqah,
i,  e.y  distant,  is  so  pointed  as  to  indicate  that  the  distance  need  not  be
large,  etc.  Konitz  says :  (Reply  119,  p.  103,  col.  2,  Zohar  *Hadash  6^d)
"  It  is  necessary  to  know  that  the  Talmud  was  already  in  existence  in  the
times  of  the  The*na-im,  and  Rabbenu  Haq-qadosh — ^Yehudah  the  Holy,
redactor  of  the  Mishnah — was  himself  a  disciple  of  R.  Shim-on  ben
Yo*hai,  he,  his  companions  and  teachers,  studied  the  Ge*marah,  which
was  not  completed,  however,  until  a  long  time  after  it,  i.e,,  the  Mishnah.**
Yabetz  asserts  that  the  phrase  "  to  become  like  an  ass  of  burden  carry-
ing books,**  occurs  in  Zohar  *Hadash  77^,  and  is  not  to  be  found  in  any

*  See  quotation  before  given  from  Tiqqoonim  ya,

t  Talmud,  Treat.  Meghillah  3a.

\  A  synagogue  roll  of  the  Law  or  Pentateuch,  which  is  always  written  by  hand  with-
out points,  except  as  hereafter  mentioned,  on  skin.

2  Comp.  The  Toor  Yoreh  Dai-ah,  J  274.


29

other  book  except  the  Sepher  ^Hoboth  Halle  ^baboth^  /.  ^.,  The  Book
of  the  Duties  of  the  Heart,  in  the  section  *'  Gate  of  the  Service  of
God/*  the  author  of  which  was  the  R.  Be'hai  b.  Yosef  Ibn  Bakoda,  or
Pakoodah,  of  Saragossa — flour,  circa  A.  D.  1050 — who  was  almost  a  con-
temporary of  R  A  B  a  D,*  from  whence,  Yabetz  asserts,  R.  Moses  de  Leon
has  copied  the  original  and  given  it  a  Zoharic  dress.  Yabetz  does  not  see
its  connection  with  one  of  the  Fables  of  -^sop.  Konitz  (p.  104,  col.  i.
Reply  120)  says: — "  Rabbenu  Be'hai,  the  author  of  the  book  ^Hobotk
Halle  ^babothf  was  nearly  a  cotemporary  of  R  A  B  a  D,  the  author  of  a
commentary  on  the  Sepher  Ye'tzirah,  and  borrowed  many  things  from  the
Zohar  under  the  name  of  the  Midrash  of  Rabbi  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai,  The
author  of  "  the  Duties  of  the  Heart  **  undoubtedly  borrowed  his  expres-
sion from  the  Zohar.  There  lived  not  much  later  also  Rabbenu  Be'hai
b.  Asher,  flourished  circa  1291  A.  D.,  author  of  the  book  Be*hai  on  the
Pentateuch,  he  wrote  frequently  in  the  name  of  his  teacher,  who  had  seen
the  book  Zohar,  and  he  also  quoted  from  the  Zohar,  for  instance  on  Exod.
xxi,  xxii,  etc.,  calling  it,  the  Zohar,  the  Midrash  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai.f
This  also  is  the  name  by  which  it  was  called  by  the  first  Qabbalists,  the
authors  of  the  A'bodath  Haq-qodesh  and  of  Be'rith  Me*noo-*hah.

In  Reply  87,  and  in  125,  p.  106,  col.  i,  Konitz  gives  examples  which
show  the  existence  of  the  vowel  points  now  termed  Paiha  *h — and  Qamets
— and  Dagesh,  in  the  Talmud.  J  In  Reply  126,  p.  106,  col.  2,  he  supports
the  use  of  the  Hebrew  tongue  among  the  Aramaic  writings  of  the  Midrash
Hanne-e'lam  by  giving  analogous  instances  in  the  Talmud.  In  Reply  128,
p.  107,  col.  I,  Konitz  distinctly  says :  **  All  these  books  of  the  Zohar  (/.^.,

*  R.  Abraham  b.  David  of  Beaucaire,  in  France,  lived  circa  A.  D.  1125,  died  1199.

t  He  was  pupil  of  the  erudite  R.  Salomo  b.  Abraham  b.  Adereth,  circa  1234-13 10  A.D.,
acrostically  called  Ra  Sh  B  A.  Be'hai's  commentary  is  of  1 291  A.D.  He  quotes  also  Levit.
xxi-xxii;  comp.  Zohar  ii,  p.  114,  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  Zohar  i,  p.  46^.  Salomon  b.
Adereth  did  not  oppose  the  Theoretical  or  Speculative  Qabbalah,  like  Maimonides  he
held  it  in  great  veneration.  They  both  opposed  talisman,  amulets,  and  the  Practical
Qabbalah.     See  Joel,  Die  Religions-philosophic  des  Sohar,  Leipzig,  1849,  P*  6'»  ^'  4*

J  Sec  on  this  subject: — Genesis  with  a  Talmudical  Commentary  by  Paul  Isaac  Her-
shon.  London.  1883.  p.  92,  v.  4,  ii;  p.  16,  n.  4;  p.  17,  n.  8  ;  p.  99,  n.  13;  p.  185,
n.  6;  p.  200,  n.  28;  p.  207,  v.  8;  p.  242,  n.  3;  p.  311,  n.  2;  p.  374,  n.  133;  p.  452^
n.  7.     These  arc  only  a  few  which  may  be  given  from  the  Talmud,


30

the  Zohar  proper,  and  the  Rayah  Mehemnah,  Midrash  Hanne-e'lam,  also
the  Tiqqoonim  and  the  Zohar  *Hadash)  are  the  composition  by  either  the
Thannah  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai,  or  his  son  R.  El'azar  and  their  colleagues
and  disciples,  and  the  disciples  of  their  disciples,  the  bearers  of  the  sheaves
of  their  traditions.  He,  ben  Yo'haT,  is  the  celebrated  Than-nah  of  the
Mishnah,  two  Talmuds,  the  books  Saphra,  Siphree,  and  Tosephthah,  under
the  name  of  R.  Shim-on,  disciple  of  R.  Akeeb'ah,  and  colleague  of  R.
Yehudah  b.  Illay,  and  R.  Yo-seh  b.  'Ha'leftah.  He  is  the  author  from
their  beginning  and  no  one  else,  he  the  exalted  and  wonderfully  endowed
teacher  of  occult  science,  the  distinguished  Qabbalist  and  possessor  of
supernatural  and  miraculous  powers,  in  which  sublime  capacities  he  ap-
pears in  hundreds  of  instances  in  the  Rabbinical  literature,  as  is  shown  in
the  first  Six  Gates  of  this  book."  We  would  here  say,  R.  Shim-on  was
never  claimed  in  the  Zohar  to  be  an  author  of  any  part  of  it,  but  only
taught  the  oral  tradition  as  he  received  it,  and  it  was  written  down  after-
wards. Then  follow  over  a  hundred  parallel  passages  from  the  Talmud
compared  with  those  in  the  Zohar,  from  the  sayings  of  R.  Shim-on  b.
Yo'hai  (pp.  107-114).

In  the  Zohar  'Hadash  77^,  occurs  a  reference  to  two  kinds  of  Phylacter-
ies which  Yabetz  thinks,  proves  the  late  period  of  the  entire  book,  although
it  may  have  been  interpolated  in  that  place  only,  as  it  was  consequent
upon  a  controversy,  between  the  different  opinions  of  Rashi  (R.  Solomon
b.  Yitz*haqi,  b.  1040,  d.  1105  A.  D.),*  and  R.  Tam  (b.  circa  iioo,  d.
1 171  A.  D.)t,  concerning  the  arrangement  of  the  Scriptural  quotations
in  the  Te'phillin  or  Phylacteries,  from  which  dispute  two  kinds  came
into  use,  called,  those  of  Rashi  and  those  of  Tam.  Konitz  says,
as  early  as  the  Talmudic  period  (perhaps  before),  differences  of  opinion
existed  as  regards  the  Scriptural  passages  to  be  used  in  the  Phylac-
teries, which  resulted  in  the  Talmudic  times  in  the  use  of  two  kinds.
In  the  Talmud,  Treat.  A^bodah  Zarah  44a,  it  is  said:  *' R.  She-moo-el
b.  R.  Yitz'haq  says:  There  is  a  spot  on  the  head  fit  to  have  two
kinds  of  Te'phillin  to  be  placed  on  it.*'  Which  implies  two  kinds  of
Te'phillin    then  existed,   based   on  differences    between   the    religious

♦  As  to  this  author,  see  Kilto's  Biblical  Cycl.,  Ed.  1876,  iii,  p.  643.
t  /3»V/.,  p.  945.


31

leaders  of  Israel.  It  is  also  said  in  the  Talmud,  Treatise  Erubin
95^,  and  later  in  the  book  Toor  Ora'h  ^ Hdyyim  §  34,  that  there  is
also  such  a  place  on  the  arm.  These  prove  that  two  kinds  were  in  use
among  the  adherents  of  either  one  or  the  other  opinion,  whereupon  R;
She* moo-el  b.  Yitz-haq,  in  order  to  reconcile  both  opinions,  pointed  out
that  second  "spot  on  the  head,"  beside  that  already  described  by  the
Rabbins,  to  place  the  Phylacteries  on,  certainly  including  a  second  place
on  the  arm,  as  is  plainly  stated  in  the  before  quoted  book  Toor.  Konitz
in  this  place  (Reply  121,  p.  104,  col.  i)  also  quotes  various  other  passages
from  the  Talmud,  and  other  authorities,  even  from  Hay  Gaon,  who  lived
about  100  years  before  Rashi  and  Tam,  in  support  of  his  confutation  of
Yabetz.

If  the  book  Zohar,  the  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  the  Tiqqoonim  and  the  Mid-
rash  Hanne-e*lam,  were  really  the  work  of  R.  Moses  de  Leon,  and  he  the
originator  of  the  words  put  into  the  mouth  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo*haT,  his
son,  and  the  companions,  he  would  have  been  careful  not  to  have  men-
tioned the  names  of  A'mora-im  who  lived  at  a  later  period  ;  and  if  he  was
an  eminent  scholar  and  familiar  with  the  words  of  all  the  The*na-im  and
A'mora-im  occurring  in  the  Babylonian  and  Ye'rushalemitic  Talmud,  in  the
books  Saphra,  Siphree,  and  the  Midrashim,  so  as  to  be  able  to  quote
them  fluently  and  correctly,  how  would  the  folly  of  quoting  posterior
authorities  agree  with  his  great  learning  ?  This  naming  of  the  later  Rab-
bins testifies  to  the  originality  of  these  books,  as  being  the  original  works
of  those  very  remote  times,  whicfi  embraced  the  period  of  all  the  authori-
ties quoted  therein,  at  the  expiration  of  which  they  were  completed.

All  the  Hebrew  Sacred  Writings,  it  is  asserted  by  the  sages  of  that  peo-
ple, were  not  completely  penned  and  their  canon  fixed,  until  the  lapse  of
a  considerable  time  after  the  deaths  of  their  authors,  and  the  heroes  men-
tioned therein,  as  is  set  forth  in  the  Talmud*.  They  assert,  the  Penta-
teuch was  completed  by  Joshua,  Joshua  was  partly  by  him,  but  was  finished
by  El'azar  and  Pin* has,  after  his  death.  Samuel  was  partly  written  by
him,  but  finished  by  Gad  and  Nathan,  the  prophets.  Isaiah  was  written  by
Hezekiah  (*Hiz*qee-yah)  and  his  assistants.  Jeremiah,  Kings  and  Lamenta-
tions, in  part  by  Jeremiah  and  then  by  Barukh,  his  secretary.    Ezekiel  was

*  We  will  give  the  names,  with  the  usual  spelling  of  the  King  James'  Version.


32

written  by  the  Men  of  the  Great  Assembly,  who  also  wrote  the  Twelve  minor
prophets,  Daniel  and  Esther.  The  Psalms  were  some  by  David  and
others  by  the  Ten  Elders,  who  lived  before  and  with  him,  and  also  by
others.  Proverbs,  Canticles  and  Ecclesiastes,  were  written  by  Hezekiah's
Society;  Job  by  Moses;  Nehemiah  by  Ezra,  and  Ezra  by  Nehemiah.
Chronicles  partly  by  Ezra,  was  finished  by  Nehemiah,  Ruth  by  Samuel,
Esther  by  the  Men  -of  the  Great  Assembly.  So  also,  the  Mishnah,  the
Be'ray-tha,  Talmud  Ye'rushalmi,  Talmud  Babli,  Masse'kheth  Sophe'rim,
Me'sekhtoth  qe'tannoth  (t,  e.,  Small  Treatises),  Saphra  and  Siphree,
Tosephthah,  Midrash  Rabbah,  Pirq^  d'Rabbi  EH-ezer,  Targum  Jonathan,
in  much  of  their  content,  date  far  back  of  the  time  they  appeared  in  com-
pleteness. It  took  centuries  after  the  death  of  their  authors  or  starters,
before  they  were  finished,  and  in  them  all  were  embodied  many  oral  tra-
ditions of  a  far  more  remote  time.  So  the  Zohar  was  not  completely
written  until  about  80  years  after  the  death  of  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai,
and  its  books,  called  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  i.  e.,  The  Faithful  Shepherd,
Midrash  Hanne-e'lam,  i.  e.,  Hidden  or  Secret  Midrash,  and  the  Tiqqoo-
nira,  I.  e.,  Rules  or  Regulations,  were  the  work  of  succeeding  A'mora-im,
and  were  not  finished  for  200  years  later,  about  the  time  of  the  comple-
tion of  the  Talmud  Ye'rushalmi.  The  Zohar  'Hadash  appeared  100  years
later,  /.  e.,  300  years  after  the  Zohar  Haq-qadosh,  at  the  time  of  the  com-
pletion of  the  Babylonian  Talmud.  Besides  these  supplementary  works,
there  are  even  some  additions  in  the  body  of  the  book  from  later  disci-
ples, who  in  the  fullness  of  the  wisdom  (liey  received  by  tradition,  did  not
hesitate  to  transmit  their  knowledge  to  successive  generations,  by  giving
it  utterance  and  noting  it,  on  the  margins  of  the  pages.  As  to  the  "  In-
troduction (^HaqdamaK)  to  the  Zohar;"  the  Hebrew  term  of  which  being
a  production  of  later  times,  it  is  necessary  to  know,  that  the  Zohar  has,
as  do  even  the  Midrashim  and  other  contemporaneous  writings,  the  word
"Opening"  {Pe' thee' ha/i)  instead  oi  Haqdamak,  e.  g.,  "R.  'Hiz'qee-yah
patlia'k,"  i.  e.,  opened  or  began,  and  later  writers  substituted  the  word
haqdamah,  i.  e.,  preface  or  introduction.

The  reader  must  not  forget  that  R.  tfhim-on  b.  Yo'hai  did  not  writ&
anything  himself,  his  oral  traditions  were  written  down  by  his  school,  1
by  R.  Abbah  and  then  by  others  who  came  after  liim.


32

written  by  the  Men  of  the  Great  Assembly,  who  also  wrote  the  Twelve  minor
prophets,  Daniel  and  Esther.  The  Psalms  were  some  by  David  and
others  by  the  Ten  Elders,  who  lived  before  and  with  him,  and  also  by
others.  Proverbs,  Canticles  and  Ecclesiastes,  were  written  by  Hezekiah's
Society;  Job  by  Moses;  Nehemiah  by  Ezra,  and  Ezra  by  Nehemiah.
Chronicles  partly  by  Ezra,  was  finished  by  Nehemiah,  Ruth  by  Samuel,
Esther  by  the  Men  of  the  Great  Assembly.  So  also,  the  Mishnah,  the
Be*ray-tha,  Talmud  Ye'rushalmi,  Talmud  Babli,  Masse*kheth  Sophe*rim,
Me'sekhtoth  qe'tannoth  (/.  ^.,  Small  Treatises),  Saphra  and  Siphree,
Tosephthah,  Midrash  Rabbah,  Pirq6  d* Rabbi  Eli-ezer,  Targum  Jonathan,
in  much  of  their  content,  date  far  back  of  the  time  they  appeared  in  com-
pleteness. It  took  centuries  after  the  death  of  their  authors  or  starters,
before  they  were  finished,  and  in  them  all  were  embodied  many  oral  tra-
ditions of  a  far  more  remote  time.  So  the  Zohar  was  not  completely
written  until  about  80  years  after  the  death  of  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai,
and  its  books,  called  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  /.  ^.,  The  Faithful  Shepherd,
Midrash  Hanne-e'lam,  /.  ^.,  Hidden  or  Secret  Midrash,  and  the  Tiqqoo-
nim,  /.  e»f  Rules  or  Regulations,  were  the  work  of  succeeding  A'mora-im,
and  were  not  finished  for  200  years  later,  about  the  time  of  the  comple-

m

tion  of  the  Talmud  Ye'rushalmi.  The  Zohar  'Hadash  appeared  100  years
later,  /.  ^.,  300  years  after  the  Zohar  Haq-qadosh,  at  the  time  of  the  com-
pletion of  the  Babylonian  Talmud.  Besides  these  supplementary  works,
there  are  even  some  additions  in  the  body  of  the  book  from  later  disci-
ples, who  in  the  fullness  of  the  wisdom  fliey  received  by  tradition,  did  not
hesitate  to  transmit  their  knowledge  to  successive  generations,  by  giving
it  utterance  and  noting  it,  on  the  margins  of  the  pages.  As  to  the  "  In-
troduction {Haqdamah)  to  the  Zohar;*'  the  Hebrew  term  of  which  being
a  production  of  later  times,  it  is  necessary  to  know,  that  the  Zohar  has,
as  do  even  the  Midrashim  and  other  contemporaneous  writings,  the  word
**  Opening*'  {Fe' ihee' hah)  instead  oi Haqdamahy  e,  g.,  ''R.  *Hiz*qee-yah
patha^h^^^  /.  ^.,  opened  or  began,  and  later  writers  substituted  the  word
haqdamah,  /.  ^.,  preface  or  introduction.

The  reader  must  not  forget  that  R.  Sbim-on  b.  Yo*hai  did  not  write
anything  himself,  his  oral  traditions  were  written  down  by  his  school,  first
by  R.  Abbah  and  then  by  others  who  came  after  him.     Referring  to  the


33

book  Shalsheleth  Haqqabbalah,  i.  <?.,  Chain  of  the  Tradition,  Konitz  says,
"  We  read :  Some  say  of  the  book  Zohar,  that  R.  Moses  de  Leon  was  a
very  learned  man,  and  made  these  expositions  for  mercenary  purposes,  sus-
pending them  on  the  great  tree,  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo*hai;  which  the  book
Yu'hazin  gives  at  greater  length  in  the  Edition  of  Constantinople,  (1566^
A.  D.)*  How  utterly  unfounded  these  surmises  are,  shall  be  proved  by
draughts  from  the  wine  of  the  sainted  rabbins,  who  lived  before  the  pub-
lication of  the  Zohar  in  the  Xlllth  Century.*'     To  this  he  devotes :

Reply  130,  p.  120,  col.  2,  and  shows  that  the  Zohar  was  known  long
before  R.  Moses  de  Leon.  That  R.  Sa-adyah  Gaon — 892-942  A.  D. —
was  a  great  Qabbalist,  knowing  by  tradition  from  his  father  and  his
teacher,  the  mysteries  of  the  Pentateuch,  which  were  in  the  Midrash  of
R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo*hai,  as  they  are  now  found  in  the  Zohar,  and  the  latter
transmitted  them  to  his  disciples.  The  Zohar  was  made  public  about  300
years  after  this  Gaon,  not  as  a  new  production,  but  as  a  work  of  earlier
days.  Rab  Tsema'h  Gaon  of  Pumbeditha,  son  of  R.  PaltvT  Gaon,  was
Gaon  of  Pumbeditha,  871-876  A.  D.,  over  400  years  before  the  publica-
tion of  the  Zohar,  he  laid  down  a  rule  in  the  Codex  of  the  Jewish  Cere-
monial Law,  the  Toor  Ora^h  ^ Hayiniy  in  connection  with  the  morning
prayers,  of  which  no  trace  can  be  found  in  the  Talmud,  and  the  Masse-
kheth  Sophe'rim  has  the  very  opposite,  but  we  find  the  Zohar  §  Te' rumtnah^
is  quoted  in  the  book  Beth  Joseph  §  59,  as  his  authority.  R.  Sar  Shalom
Gaon,  an  eminent  Qabbalist  according  to  'Hayim  Vital,  decided  that  the
custom  of  not  studying  the  Law  at  the  MirChah^  i.  e.,  Vesper  time,  was
because  the  Talmudfsays: — '*A11  the  schools  are  to  be  closed  at  the
death  of  a  *Ha-kham,  /.  <f..  Wise-man,  in  the  city,"  and  that  in  that  hour
Moses  died.  This  usage  is  not  mentioned  in  any  of  the  text  books,  and
to  the  contrary  the  death  of  Moses  is  said  to  have  occurred  on  the  evening
of  the  Sabbath,  but  in  the  Zohar  §  Te*rummah  156^5,  we  find  a  statement

*  This  refers  to  the  account  said  to  have  come  from  Isaac  of  Acco,  which  has  been
left  out  all  the  editions  since,  until  replaced  by  the  Edition  of  London,  England,  by
Filipowski.  1857,  pp.  88  et  seq.  This  account  Dr.  Graetz  admits,  Isaac  of  Acco  evi-
dently either  did  not  write  or  did  not  believe,  for  the  latter  copied  Zoharlc  passages  in
his  subsequent  writings. — Geuhichte  der  JudeUf  vol.  vii,  p.  492.

t  Treatise  Afotd  Qa/on,  22b.

3


i


34

of  the  custom,  and  the  death  of  Moses  on  the  afternoon  of  the  Sabbath.
So  in  the  Targum  Ye'rushalmi,  usually  called  the  Targum  of  Yonathan
ben  Uziel,  which  is  said  to  have  been  written  by  a  disciple  of  Hillel  I.,
therefore  about  50  B.  C.  to  10  A.  D.,  are  many  statements  evidently  taken
from  the  Zohar,  or  coming  from  the  same  mystical  School,  of  which  our
author  gives  the  quotations.  So  in  the  book  Arookh  by  R.  Nathan —
b.  1030,  d.  about  1106  A.  D. — which  was  finished  iioi  A.  D.,  about  200
years  before  the  publication  of  the  Zohar,  are  statements  to  be  found  only
in  the  Midrash  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai,  which  was  one  of  the  names  of
the  Zohar  before  its  redaction.  Rashi  (1040-1 105  A.  D.),  a  giant  among
the  learned  of  his  race,  quotes  and  uses  statements,  the  same  as  are  in  the
Zohar,  of  which  Konitz  quotes  numerous  examples.  The  authors  of  the
Thosaphoth  also  received  from  the  Midrash  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo*haT,  as  we
find  it  now  redacted  in  the  Zohar.  Maimonides  even  quoted  from  the
Zohar  in  his  Ye'sodeh  Hat-thorah,  t,  e,.  Cardinal  principles  of  the  Law.
Nachmanides  or  R.  Moses  b.  Na*hman — 1 200-1 272  A.  D. — was  certainly
acquainted  with  the  Midrash  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'haT.  In  this  way  Konitz
proceeds,  quoting  from  these  authors  and  showing,  that  all  the  prominent
learned  men  among  the  Jews  of  this  period,  were  familiar  with  this  Midrash
of  Shim-on  b.  Yo'haT,  which  has  been  since  redacted  into  the  book  called
the  Zohar,  giving  among  others  the  names  of  the  celebrated  R.  Salomo  b.
Adereth  (Ra  SH  B  A),  a  disciple  of  Nachmanides;  R.  Abraham  b.  David
(R  A  Ba  D)  d.  1198;  Rabbenu  Ye'ru'ham  and  many  others;  he  brings
numerous  quotations  from  the  two  Talmuds,  to  show  that  the  Midrash  of
R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo*hai  was  known  by  the  Rabbins  of  the  Talmuds,  and
that  the  Zohar,  containing  the  identical  words  and  sentiments  of  those
quotations,  is  only  a  later  name  for  this  Midrash.  Rabbenu  Hag-gadol,
/.  e.y  the  Great  Rabbin,  shows  in  his  writings  that  he  and  his  teachers  must
have  received — qibbel — all  the  words  of  the  The*na-im  and  A'mora-im,
contained  in  the  Zohar,  in  their  purity,  and  all  of  his  disciples  were  great
Qabbalists.  The  book  Toor  Ora'h  ^Hayim  is  the  statute  book  of  orthodox
Israel,  and  it  decides  according  to  the  teachings  of  the  Zohar.  Konitz
then  quotes  numerous  laws  and  rules  from  this,  and  twenty-five  other,
thoroughly  orthodox  Jewish  books,  as  in  accord  with  the  teachings  in  the
Zohar,  and  enumerates  the  disciples  of  the  authors  of  these  books  who


35

were  all  great  Qabbalists.  On  page  130,  col.  i,  line  51,  after  a  quotation
from  Yabetz's  book  Mit-pa*hath  Se'pharim,  Part  i,  fol.  4^,  confirming
the  antiquity  and  sanctity  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  he  shows  that  in
this  very  book,  Part  i,  fol.  5a,  Yabetz  says: — "The  Zohar  is  truly  the
adorning  crown  of  the  Qabbalists,  as  R.  Yitz'haq  Luriah  has  testified
concerning  it,  who  himself  was  a  holy  and  divine  man  with  the  holy
spirit  resting  upon  him,  and  upon  it — the  Zohar — was  his  sublime  and
tremendous  wisdom  built  and  founded.  God  forbid  that  any  one  should
doubt  his  words.*'  Konitz  then  shows  the  distinctions  between  the
Zohar  and  Talmud  very  fully,  and  among  other  things  says:  "  Legislation
on  the  Mosaic  law  and  its  traditions,  pure  and  simple,  is  one  thing ;  phil-
osophical and  metaphysical  contemplation  and  discussion  with  regard  to
this  written  and  traditional  law,  is  another.  The  latter,  entering  into  the
spirit  and  hidden  meaning,  is  for  the  initiated  few,  the  former  for  the
general  masses.  This  explains  the  language  and  dress  of  each,  circum-
scribed, nay  merely  fragmentary  in  the  one ;  distinct,  clear,  elaborate,  in
the  other ;  allegorical  and  speaking  in  parables  here,  plain  and  intelligi-
ble there.  The  Qabbalah  and  the  Zohar  allow  a  great  margin  to
speculative  thought,  the  Talmud  deals  with  every-day  life,  and  humanity
under  the  Law ;  the  former — the  Qabbalah — starts  from  a  spiritual  point
of  view,  contemplating  a  spiritual  finality  as  regards  the  Law  and  its  ex-
planation, while  the  latter — the  Talmud — is  eminently  practical  in  both  its
starting  point  and  end,  and  having,  in  the  face  of  the  ignorance,  want  of
perception  and  natural  waywardness  of  the  masses,  nothing  but  the  strict
observance  of  the  Law  in  all  its  details  in  view.  This  explains  the  hesi-
tancy of  the  Qabbalistic  Rabbins,  to  impart  the  mysteries  of  the  Ma-a*seh
Be'resheeth  and  Ma-a*seh  Merkabah,  to  even  the  ordinary  learned  and
certainly  to  the  many,  who  were  obviously  unfitted  for  such  knowledge  ;
and  thus  we  must  understand  and  appreciate  their  advice  to  their  disci-
ples in  general,  not  to  give  themselves  up  to  these  studies."  In  ancient
times  when  education  was  much  less  diffused,  the  original  Qabbalistic
companions  led  an  ascetic  and  holy  life,  separated  from  the  unlearned
and  unwise,  such  a  life  being  required,  and  lest  this  mysterious  and  occult
science  might  prove  injurious  to  all  concerned  ;  admission  and  initiation
were  required  to  be  granted,  but  even  these  were  only  to  a  few  wise,  elect.


36

discreet  and  worthy  disciples^  who  had  arrived  at  full  years  of  discretion
and  were  of  known  formed  character.  This  period  of  ascertained  wisdom
and  discretion  was  fixed  at  40  years  of  age  and  over.  At  a  very  early  date
it  was  called  by  the  The*na-im  and  A*mora-im,  a  ''Science,"  as  may  be
seen  in  the  Talmuds  Babli  (^Be^rakhoth  33a)  and  Ye'rushalmi  {Be^ rakhoth
85)  and  in  other  earlier  books.  The  secrecy  of  this  oral  traditional
"  Science/'  is  evidenced  in  the  Talmud  Ye'rushalmi :  *  '*  R.  Shim-on  b.
Laqish  said  :  On  the  Jordan  the  children  of  Israel  received  and  accepted  the
'hidden  things'  or  the  nistaroth,  i.e,,  mysteries. f  Joshua  said  unto  them^
unless  ye  accept  the  nistaroth,  the  waters  shall  drown  you.  R.  Levi  said  :
In  Yabneh  this  obligation  was  rescinded  by  a  Bath-Qol  exclaiming  :  Ye
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  nistarothJ'^  Yabetz  again  contradicting  his
own  theories,  says :  "  The  words  of  the  Zohar  are  the  words  of  the  living
God,  very  profound,  who  can  find  them  ?  It  took  even,  as  we  know,  R.
Yitz'haq  Luriah  a  long  time  of  due  and  steady  preparation  until  he  reached
his  glory  in  this  science,  a  small  portion  of  which,  he  said  in  his  dying
hour,  his  disciple,  R.  'Hayim  Vital  only  possessed."  %  This  chapter  of
Konitz  closes  with  a  quotation  from  the  Midrash  Mishleh  (Proverbs)  ac-
cording to  which,  one  of  the  questions  asked  of  every  Israelite  when  his
soul  is  before  the  judgment  seat  on  high  will  be :  "  Hast  thou  contem-
plated {tsa-pheetha,  /.  <f.,  glanced  at)  the  Merkabah?  Hast  thou  looked
at  (Jsa-pheetha)  my  Shee-oor  Qo-mah — i.e..  Measure  or  Proportion  of  Stat-
ure ? ' '  Not :  Hast  thou  learned  or  occupied  thyself  with  this  Science  ?
Because  this  Science — the  Qabbalah — requires  open  eyes  and  open  intel-
lects, and  not  merely  mechanical  learning,  as  does  the  Law  and  its  execu-
tion. In  Reply  132  he  shows  that  the  teachings  of  the  Zohar  are  in  per-
fect conformity  with  passages  in  the  four  Toorim  or  four  law  books,  by
which  the  entire  life  of  the  Israelite  is  regulated  in  all  its  relations,  citing
from  the  Zohar,  90  quotations  which  are  in  the  Ora'h  'Hayim;  31  in  the
Yoreh  Daiah ;  6  in  the  'Hoshen  Ham-mishpat ;  and  8  in  the  Eben  Ha-
ezer,  in  all  135.     This  followed  by  an  index  closes  his  book.

*  Treatise  Axlo»  ne-e'marimt  from  whence  it  is  quoted  in  Those'photh  Sotah.  34a.

f  Comp.  Deut.  xxix,  29.  The  idea  of  the  Secret  Learning  belonging  to  the  Sacer-
dotal Class,  and  the  legal  precepts  which  are  revealed,  appear  in  this  verse.  See  next
page.

\  Book  Mit-pa'hath  Se*pharim,  end  of  chap.  86.


37

Dr.  Hirsch  Graetz,  although  bitterly  opposing  Konitz  and  Luriah
and  everything  showing  the  antiquity  of  the  Qabbalah  or  the  Zohar,  is
obliged  to  acknowledge,*  that  when  Mohammedanism  spread  in  the  days
of  the  Ge'onim — 657-1038  A.  D. — a,  book  became  known,  the  author  of
which,  he  says,  was  unknown,  called  :  "  Nistaroth\  a^ Rabbi  Shim-on  ben
Vo'kai,  i,  g,j  the  Mysteries  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai,  in  which  among
other  things,  R.  Shim-on  is  stated  to  have  complained  :  "  In  addition  to
our  sufferings  from  the  government  of  Edom  (Rome,  /.  <?.,  at  that  period
Byzantium),  we  shall  also  have  to  suffer  from  the  Yishmaelites  (Arabi-
ans)? To  which  Metatron,  prince  of  the  countenance,  /.  ^.,  the  Angel
of  the  Presence,  answered :  Fear  not,  son  of  man,  for  the  Holy  One,  blessed
be  He !  establishes  the  government  of  Yishmael  to  save  you  from  this
wicked  one  (Rome),  and  He  will  place  over  them  a  prophet  after  His
own  Will,  who  shall  conquer  the  land,  and  afterwards  return  it  to  Israel,
etc."  This  book  was  most  probably  in  existence  some  600  years  before
the  birth  of  R.  Moses  de  Leon,  but  we  do  not  admit  the  entire  correct-
ness of  the  quotation  given  by  Dr.  Graetz  without  seeing  the  original.
We  shall  hereafter  refer  more  fully  to  Dr.  Graetz  and  his  opposing  school.

The  learned  Doctor  disposes  of  Konitz  with  a  stroke  of  the  pen,J  yet
he  is  compelled  to  admit,  that  Yabetz's  arguments  are  of  little  force,§  for
the  latter  says,  that  the  germ  of  the  Zohar  is  very  ancient,  can  be  carried
back  to  Moses,  yea !  even  to  a  divine  revelation.  Dr.  Graetz,  although
a  man  of  great  erudition,  like  many  other  theorists,  bends  his  authorities
to  suit  his  hypothesis,  but  a  thorough  examination  of  the  authorities  cited
by  him,  will  frequently  reveal  to  the  student,  an  entire  disproval  of  his
formulations.  He  is  apparently  prejudiced,  by  a  thorough  antagonistic
feeling  toward  the  scientific  and  most  elevated  metaphysical  philosophy
of  the  Israelites,  and  has  ignored  many  of  the  great  writers  upon  the  sub-
ject, notably  Dr.  Peter  Beer,  Dr.  J.  M.  Jost,  Dr.  Leopold  Zunz,  Dr.  August
Tholuck,  Salomon  Munk,  Ignatz  Stern,  D.  H.  Joel,  N.  Krochmal,  and  in-
deed, all  those  in  any  way  favorable  to  the  Qabbalah  and  Zohar.     He  dis-

*  Geichichte  derjuden,  V.  p.  490,  n.  16.  G>mp.  Jellinek's  Bet  ha^Midraschf  Dritter
Theil,  pp.  xix,  7&-82,  and  the  Zohar,  ii,  32a,
f  Sec  ante,  p.  36.

X  Se«  his  Gischichte  der  Juden,  Vol.  vii,  p.  495.
J  Ibid,  pp.  495-^-


38

poses  of  the  antiquity  and  authorship  of  the  Zohar  with  the  pen  of  an  auto-
crat, basing  many  of  his  ideas  on  those  of  Dr.  Adolph  Jellinek,  of  Vienna,*
who  is  disposed  to  assert  that  it  was  entirely  written,  out  of  his  own  head,
by  R.  Moses  b.  Schem-Tob  de  Leon  of  Spain,  as  before  him  did  the  Roman
Catholic  Jean  Morin,t  and  as  Yabetz  started  out  to  do,  but  changed  his
views  as  they  became  more  enlightened  by  an  examination  of  the  subject.
Dr.  Graetz  cuts  away  the  bridge  of  historical  continuity  an^  separates  by  a
vast  abyss,  all  the  Qabbalists  of  the  Xlllth  century,  from  all  preceding
Israelitish  Secret  Learning,  Theosophy,  and  Mysticism.  Dr.  Jellinek
does  not  go  so  far,  but  acknowledges  a  Qabbalistic  knowledge  in  the  Xth
and  Xlth  centuries,  by  R.  She'reerah  Gaon,  Eliyah  ha-Zaken,  R.  Hay
Gaon,  R.  Yekhutiel  of  the  Babylonian  School  at  Pumbeditha.  One  of
the  first  Qabbalists  in  Spain,  was  R.  Chasdai  (or  Chisdai)  Ibn  Shaprut  ben
Yitz'haq  ben  Ezra  ha-Nazi  or  Nagid,  i,  e.y  Prince  or  temporal  head  of  the
Jews  in  Spain.  His  Arabic  name  was  Chasdai  Abu  Jusuf  Ibn  Shafruth.
His  father  was  Yitz'haq  Ibn  Shafruth,  of  Jaen.  Chasdai  lived  in  Cordova,
Spain,  in  the  time  of  the  Khalif  Abderrahman  III  who  reigned  912-961
A.  D.,  and  his  successor  Hakem — 961-976  A.  D. — and  was  Grand
Vizier  of  Moorish  Spain — 961-976  A.  D.J  We  have  not  space  in  this
writing,  to  give  his  doctrines,  but  will  say  they  are  in  agreement  with
those  we  know  of  other  early  Qabbalists,  e,  g.,  Hay  Gaon  and  Ibn  Gebirol.
Then  came  Ibn  Gebirol,  Spain,  Jacob  Nazir,  of  Lunel,  Abraham  Ab-Beth-
Din,  Abraham  ben  David,  of  Posquieres,  (Isaac)  Yitz-haq,  the  Blind,  of
Beaucaire,  Azriel  and  Ezra,  Yehudah  b.  Yakar,  Jacob  b.  Shesheth,  which
brings  the  Qabbalah,  in  Spain,  down  to  1270  A.  D.,  and  the  period  of
Todros  b.  Joseph  Hallevy  Abulafia,  Abraham  ben  Samuel  Abulafia,  the

♦Sec,  Afosfs  Ben  Schem-  Tob  de  Leon  undsein  VerhSltniss  zum  SoAar,  etc.  Von  Adolph
Jellinek.     Leipzig.     1 85 1.     And  Supra^  p.  39,  note.

t  J.  Morin's  object  was  to  prove  that  the  Jews  had  falsified  the  Hebrew  Old  Testa-
ment, and  that  the  only  correct  version  was  the  Greek  Septuagint.  Modem  scholarship
has  not  adopted  his  views.  See  Kilto's  Cyclop.  Biblical  Lit,  Ed.  1876,  Vol.  i,  p.  582.
et  seq,

JSec,  Pub.  of  the  Soc.  of  Hebrew  Liter.  London.  1872,  Vol.  i,  pp.  63-112.  Also
Carmoly's  Itinbraires  de  la  Terre  Sainte  des  xiii,  xiv,  xvi,  et  xvii  siecle  etc.  pp.  i-iii.
Jellinek's  Auswahl  KabbaliitUcher  Mystik,  second  part,  pp.  iii-v.  Also  the  book  Khu-
sari  or  Cosri,  of  R.  Yehudah  Hallevy.  David  Cassel's  ed.,  Leipzig.  1869.  Also  the
cd.  by  H.  Hirschfeld,  Leipzig,  1886,  2  Thle.


39

learned  Nachmanides,  and  other  Qabbalists  about  the  time  of  the  appear-
ance in  public  of  the  Zoharic  MSS.  Into  Germany  Dr.  Jellinek  traces  it
from  the  Jewish  Universities  of  Babylonia.  Hay  and  Ibn  Gebirol  also,
he  says,  used  the  expression  Hokhmath  haq-Qabbaiahy  t.  e,,  Wisdom  of
the  Qabbalah.  Dr.  Jellinek  also  asserts  the  great  influence  of  R.  Azriel
b.  Mena'hem  of  Valladolid,  b.  circa  1160,  d.  1238  A.  D.  The  book
Ye'tzeer'ah,  Dr;  Jellinek  admits,  was  known  in  the  Xth  century,  we
note  here,  that  St.  Agobard,  b.  circa  800,  d.  840  A.  D.,  notices  this
and  other  mystical  Jewish  books ;  *  which  takes  it  before  and  into  the
beginning  of  the  IX  century.  Jellinek  also  gives  a  short  account  of
mystical  Jewish  sects  before  Saadyah  Gaon — 892-942  A.  D. — taken
from  Shahrestani,t  who  flourished  circa  1090-1125  A.  D.  According
to  Dr.  Graetz's  hypothesis,  the  Qabbalah  sprung  up  as  a  new  thing,  from
the  school  of  R.  Abraham  b.  David,  of  Nismes,  and  Beaucaire,  called
Rabad ;  whose  teacher  was  a  certain  Jacob  Nazir,  of  the  Xllth  century.  J
And  that  this  school  sprung  up  in  opposition  to  the  newly  asserted
philosophy  of  Maimonides,  which  was  considered  as  Aristotelian.  Mai-
monides,  however,  was  very  favorable  to  the  Speculative  Qabbalah,
as  will  appear  from  his  book  Moreh  Ne*boo-kheem,  and  especially  from
his  writing  "Introduction  to  the  Talmud,"  where  **  in  the  fourth  place  *  *
speaking  of  Rab  Ashi  and  his  great  undertaking,  the  drawing  up  of  the
Babylonian  Talmud,  he  also  speaks  in  the  highest  terms  of  the  Hebrew
Secret  Learning  and  Science,  afterwards  generally  called  in  Europe,  the
Qabbalah.  In  another  writing  his  words  are  : — *'  If  I  had  acquired  this
species  of  knowledge  (the  Qabbalah)  sooner,  I  would  have  given  the
world  so  many  a  production  more."  §

*  Sec  Basnage's  Hist,  of  the  Jews,  Taylor's  English  trans,  of  1708,  pp.  598-99.

t  Sec  BeUrage  tur  Gesthichte  der  Kabbala^  von  Adolph  Jellinek,  First  and  Second
Parts.  Leipzig,  1852.  Adolph  Jellinek  und  die  JCabbala,  ein  Literatur- Bericht  von
Dr.  J.  M.  Jost,  Leipzig,  1852.  Thomas  von  Aquino  in  der  jUdischen  Literature  von
Adolph  Jellinek,  Leipzig,  1853,  ^^^  Auswahl  Kabbalistischer  Mystik,  by  Adolph  Jellinek,
Leipzig,  1853,  Erstes  Heft,  p.  27  et  seq,  and  notes.

X  Comp.  Auswahl  Kabbalistischer  Mystik,  by  Adolph  Jellinek,  Leipzig,  1853,  Part
i,  pp.  1-6  and  notes;  Karpeles,  Geschichte  der  Judischen  LUeratur,  Berlin,  1886,  Vol.
ii,  p.  669  et  seq, ;  Graetz,  Geschichte  der  Juden,  Vol.  vii,  p.  73  et  seq.

2  See  Jerusalem,  A  treatise  on  Ecclesiastical  Authority  and  Judaism,  by  Moses  Men-
delssohn.    Samuel's  English  Ed.,  London,  1838,  Vol.  ii,  p.  306.


41

twigs.    Written  by  David  Luriah  (of  Buchau).*'    Julius  Furst*  says,  it  was
published  at  Johannisburg  in  1857.

Tlie  Branches  are,  I.  Proof  that  R.  Moses  de  Leon  did  not  compile  the
Zohar.  11.  The  Ge'onim  in  Babylonia  cite  from  the  Zohar  and  Midrash
Hanne'elam,  under  the  name  of,  Midrash  Ye'rushalmi.  III.  The  Zohar
must  have  been  compiled  before  the  completion  of  the  Talmud.  IV.
Proof  that  a  great  part  of  the  Zohar,  was  written  in  the  period  of  R.
Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai  and  his  pupils.  V.  As  to  the  Aramaic  language  of
the  Zohar.  Branch  I.  This  he  divides  into  three  arguments,  i.  From
that  which  appears  in  Moses  de  Leon's  book,  Sepher  Has^shem^  i,  e.y
Book  of  the  Name,  and  from  the  book  Pardes  and  other  writings  of  R.
Moses  Cordovero,  it  is  evident  that  R,  Moses  de  Leon  did  not  write  after
the  style  of  the  Zohar,  and  in  many  places  contradicts  it.  2.  It  is  evi-
dent from  his  book  Nephesh  Hah-  hokhmah^  i,  e.y  Vital  Soul  of  Wisdom,
called  also  Sepher-Ham'tnishkal^  i.  ^.,  Book  of  the  Balance,  in  which  he
quotes  from  the  Zohar,  that  de  Leon  either  mistook  the  sense  of  the  Zohar
or  had  an  incorrect  edition  of  it.  In  but  few  places  does  he  follow  the
drift  of  the  Zohar,  and  in  his  style  and  manner,  he  follows  the  words  of  the
antecedent  and  contemporary  Qabbalists.  He  has,  however,  mixed  some
words  of  the  Zohar  with  his  own,  without  crediting  the  source,  but  he
often  contradicts  the  Zohar.  Luriah  gives  quotations  proving  this.
3.  From  the  contents  of  the  books  written  before  the  time  of  R.  Moses
de  Leon,  or  by  his  contemporaries  of  greater  age  and  standing,  who  quote
passages  from  the  Zohar,  the  greater  antiquity  of  the  latter  cannot  be
questioned.  The  earlier  Ge'onim  quote  from  the  Zohar,  as  the  Midrash
Ye^rushalmi.  David  Luriah  cites  many  proofs  from  early  books  to  sup-
port this,  his  third  proposition.  He  shows  that  there  are  in  the  book
0*tzar  hak'Kabodt  i,  e,.  Treasure  of  Glory,  by  R.  Todros  (Theodorus)  ha-
Levi  or  Hallevy  (died  1283,  nephew  of  R.  Me-ir  Hallevy),  quotations  from
books  in  the  name  of  Midrash,  which  quotations  are  to  be  met  with  only
in  the  Zohar.  In  the  time  of  R.  Moses  de  Leon,  Todros  was  an  old  man,
and  his  standing  was  such,  that  he  certainly  would  not  have  quoted  as  an
ancient  Midrash,  a  book  newly  written  by  R.  Moses  de  Leon,  his  contem-

*  Bihlioth  :  Judaica,  Vol.  iii,  p.  332.


42

porary.*  The  Zohar  was  also  cited  under  the  nzmt  Nistarve'tte-e'lamy
I.  e,y  The  Mysterious  and  Hidden  Midrash,  by  the  author  of  the  book,
Migdai  Ozy  i.  e.y  Towers  of  Strength.  Its  author  was  a  contemporary  of
R.  Moses  de  Leon.  The  celebrated  Italian  Rabbi  Recanati,  living  in  Italy,
cites  in  his  Commentaries  on  the  Pentateuch  and  in  his  other  writings,  many
passages  from  the  Zohar.  He  was  a  contemporary  of  R.  M.  de  Leon.  Tlie
last  named  frequently  quotes  passages  which  are  now  to  be  found  in  the
Zohar,  as  from  **  the  earlier  sages,"  also  as  from  the  Sithrai  hat-Thorahy
/.  e,y  Secrets  of  the  Thorah.  Recanati  writing  ii^  Italy,  cites  other  and
frequently  the  same  passages,  as  from  **the  earlier  sages,'*  and  from  the
Sithrai  hat' Thorah.  These  facts  tend  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  book  on
the  Mysteries  of  the  Thorah,  prior  to  Recanati,  Moses  de  Leon,  R.
Shalomo  ben  Adereth,  or  Ra  SH  B  A,  and  other  contemporaries,  from
which  they  quote.

Branch  II.  In  this  Luriah  asserts  and  shows  by  proof  through  quota-
tions, that  the  earlier  Ge'onim — 657-1038  A.  D. — discussed  Qabbalistic
matters  under  the  name  of  "Midrash  Ye'rushalmi,"  which  were  in  the
language  and  content  of  the  Zohar,  that  these  were  simply  quoted  as  from
the  A'mora-im — 220-540  A.D.— or  from  ancient  sources  without  any
especial  reference,  which  were  the  words  of  the  Midrash  Hanne-e'lam  of
the  Zohar,  which  though  now  in  the  Zohar  only  in  some  sections,  was
undoubtedly  written,  at  first,  on  the  whole  Pentateuch.  It  can  be  satis-
factorily shown,  that  the  Ge'onim  had  a  Midrash  Ne-e*lam,  by  tradition
in  the  Aramaic  tongue,  in  the  form  and  character  of  the  present  Zohar
and  Midrash  Hanne-e'lam.  This  Branch  is  divided  into,  i.  What  exists
of  the  explanations  of  the  Ge'onim  in  other  ancient  works,  under  the
name  of  **  Midrash  Ye'rushalmi.'*  2.  What  is  published  of  the  same  by
Luriah.  3.  What  is  discussed  in  other  ancient  writings  under  the  name
of  Ye'rushalmi,  without  mention  of  the  Ge'onim,  but  which  justify  the
supposition  of  transposition  from  the  Ge'onim,  and  that  they  have  quoted
as  Ye'rushalmi,  the  contents  of  the  Midrash  Hanne-e'lam  in  the  Zohar.
4.  What  in  the  writings  of  the  Ge'onim — 657-1038  A.  D. — is  simply
quoted  from   the  A*mora-im — 220-540  A.    D. — or  from  very  ancient

*  We  shall  find  Todros  again  referred  to  when  we  come  to  the  account  by  Isaac  of
Acco  (Acre,  Palestine).


43

sources,  etc.,  without  any  special  reference;  which  also  may  be  unhesitat-
ingly ascribed  to  the  Midrash  Hanne-e'lam.  The  early  Ge'onim  dis-
cussed Qabbalistic  matters,  under  the  name  of  a  secret  book  apparently
called  "  Ye'rushalmi,*'  referring  to,  as  named  therein,  many  of  the  com-
panions, whose  names  are  now  to  be  found  in  the  Zoharic  writings,  as  au-
thority for  what  is  therein  decided.  The  language,  content  and  sages
referred  to,  are  mostly  those  to  be  found  in  the  Midrash  Hanne-e'lam  in
the  Zoharic  writings,  and  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  Talmudim  and  other
Midrashim  outside  of  the  Zohar.  This  secret  book  was  from  the  earlier
Ge'onim,  or  other  even  earlier  sources.  Hay  Gaon,  b.  969 — d.  1038  A.  D.,
and  other  Ge'onim  often  quote  from  the  Midrash  Ye'rushalmi,  Hay
also  quotes  from  the  Noosa^h  Ye'rushalmiyt.  ^.,  copy  or  transcription  of
the  Ye'rushalmi,  and  this  quotation  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  Talmud
Ye'rushalmi  nor  in  any  of  the  Midrashim,  but  we  find  it  in  the  Zohar,
Para'shath  Te^rummah  (Exod.  xxv-xxviii),  in  the  Aramaic  language,  and
the  Gaon  Hay  translated  it  into  Hebrew ;  this  may  explain  why  he  says  :
^^ Noosa^h  Ye' rushalmiy^  /.  ^.,  a  copy  or  version,  Ye'rushalmi;  which  he
uses  to  signify,  that  it  was  translated  into  his  own  language.  Luriah  cites
other  Ge'onim,  who  quote  from  the  "  Ye'rushalmi,"  matters  which  are  now
to  be  found  only  in  the  Midrash  Ne-e'lam  of  the  Zohar.  He  then  shows  by
quotations  from  ancient  books,  that  much  was  taken  in  early  times  from
the  Midrash  Hanne-e'lam  or  Secret  Midrash,  which  is  now  among  the  Zo-
haric books.  There  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  book  Zohar,  the
contents  of  which  were  considered  more  profound  and  sublime  than  those
of  the  Hanne-e'lam,  was  not  even  mentioned  by  name,  it  being  quoted
from,  in  phrases  only  understood  by  the  initiates ;  e.g.^  **  thus  we  learned,"
or,  "in  the  name  of  the  ancient  ones  they  said,"  without  mentioning  it
as  a  book,  so  that  the  uninitiated  should  remain  in  ignorance  of  its  exist-
ence, and  only  that,  which  they  deemed  proper  to  be  known,  should  be
made  known.  The  very  meaning  of  the  name,  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah,  of
the  Zoharic  writings,  is :  that  it  is  the  book  kept  modestly  or  secretly  from
the  gaze  of  the  public.  It  was  doubtless  known  at  this  period,  not  in  writing
but  only  orally.  The  Babylonian  initiated  Jews  were  very  strict  in  keeping
secret  from  the  uninitiated,  the  theosophical  traditions  or  Secret  Learn-
ing, which  they  had  inherited  from  their  ancient  masters  and  the  sue-


44

cessors  of  those  masters.  We  will  give  an  instance:  Rab  She'reerah
Gaon*  having  been  asked  a  question  regarding  the  book  Shee-oor  Qo-mah,
/.  e,y  Proportion  of  the  Height,  a  very  mystical  book,  as  it  is  found
in  the  Bo-rai'toth  of  the  Pirkqeh  Haikhaloth,  /.  ^.,  Halls,  of  R.  Yish-
ma-el,  said:  "This  matter  cannot  possibly  be  explained  in  its  particu-
lars, but  merely  (by  hints)  in  an  abstract  way ;  for  R.  Yishma-el  has
not  originated  this  matter,  nor  does  it  come  from  any  human  mind.
Besides,  God  forbid  !  that  man  should  speak  of  the  Creator,  as  if  He  had
bodily  members  and  dimensions.  The  '  Proportion  of  the  Height '  are
matters  of  a  Qabbalah,  superior  to  the  conception  of  mankind,  of  which
not  anything  more  mystical  can  be  said,  for  not  any  likeness  can  give  a
description  of  Him,  only  the  sages,  familiar  with  this  profound  and  sub-
lime science,  can  occupy  themselves  therewith.  But  they  are  strictly  pro-
hibited from  delivering  these  secrets  and  mysteries  to  any  man,  except  he
possess  the  characteristics  and  qualifications  imparted  to  us.  Even  not  a
summary,  how  much  less  any  particulars,  shall  be  revealed  to  any  one ;
for  with  regard  to  this  matter,  and  to  what  is  below  it  of  the  Ma-d'seh
Merkabahy  i,  e,,  Chariot  Throne,  f  our  sages  have  said:  J  R.  'Heeyah
said  :  It  is  not  permitted  to  impart  the  summaries,  Rasheh  F*raqitn,  i,e,y
Headings  of  the  Chapters,  except  to  an  Ab  Beth  Din,  /.  ^.,  the  head  of  a
court  of  justice,  whose  heart  is  solicitous  (careful)  within  him,  as  regards
matters  inferior  to  all  these.  R.  Immi  said  :§  It  k  not  permitted  to  impart
the  Mysteries  of  the  Thorah,  except  to  a  '  counsellor,  cunning  artificer,
and  skillful  orator*  (Is.  iii,  3),  (properly  "skillful  orator"  nabon  l(u'hash
means  to  one  who  understands  in  ia-'hash,  i.  e,,  silence  or  secret),  to  him  it
is  permitted  to  impart  generalities,  he  will  understand  them,  and  will  be
enlightened  from  heaven  in  the  hidden  recesses  of  his  heart.  As  is  said  in
the  Midrash :  ||  Nabon  la- hash,  i.e.,  a  skillful  orator,  is  he  who  draws  his

♦  B.  930,  d.  1000  A.  D.,  was  one  of  the  last  Ge'onim  of  the  University  of  Pumbe-
ditha,  in  Babylonia.  He  was  Gaon  from  967  to  997.  His  father  was  'Hanina  Gaon
and  his  son  was  Hay  Gaon,  Co-gaon  with  him  from  987.  Hay  was  full  Gaon  from  997
to  1037  A.  D.

t  Comp.  Ezekiel  i,  10.

I  Talmud,  Treatise  'Ha'geegah  13.  J  Ibid,

II  Also  in  the  Talmud  Treatise,  ^  Ha^geegah^  which  is  here  called  Midrash  in  the
sense  of  de  ^rashah,  t\  e.,  exposition.


46

are  partly  communicated  in :  *  this  is  the  book  of  the  *  generations  of
man/  (Gen.  v,  i)  and  partly  in  the  next  verse:  *  male-female  created  he
them.'  **  This  is  the  answer  of  Rab  She*reerah  Gaon,  Head-master  of  this
great  Babylonian  Jewish  school,  which  Nachmanides  quotes  in  his  Com-
mentary on  the  Thorah,  adding  these  words :  "  We  have  not  been  able  to
reach  that  far.*'*     So  the  Babylonian  Rabbenu  Hag-gaon  Abraham, f

No  2.  Is  similar  to  the  former,  only  that  the  five  potentialities  of  Brahman,  neuter ^
are  given  in  animal  types.  Man  is  the  symbol  of  wisdom,  the  Lion  of  strength,  the
Eagle  of  ubiquity,  the  Bull  of  the  generative  potentiality  in  its  highest  idea,  and  the
Goat  as  sensual  affection.  The  animals  have  wings  to  signify  their  divine  character,  the
human  figure  as  the  symbol  of  Brahman,  is  surrounded  by  a  halo.  We  also  refer  the
student  to  the  valuable  article  in  Kitto's  Cyclop.  Biblical  Liter.,  Ed.  1876,  i,  pp.  484-
493;  Handbook  of  Christian  Symbolism,  by  W.  &  G.  Audsley,  London,  pp.  97-110;
Histoire  et  Thiorie  du  Symbolisme  Reltgieux  avant  et  depuis  le  Christianisme^  etc.,  par
M.  PAbbi  Auber^  Paris,  1870-72,  4  vol.,  8vo;  Symbols  and  Emblems  of  Early  and  Me-
diseval  Christian  Ait,  by  Louisa  Twining,  London,  1852,  4to;  Christian  Art  and  S3rm
holism,  by  R.  St.  J.  Tyrwhitt,  London,  1872;  (Euvres  de  Saint  Deny 5  l"* Artopagite
traduites  du  Grec  en  Frant^ais,  etc.,  par  VAbbi  J,  Dulac^  Paris,  1 865,  8vo,  p.  390-1,
385,  328.  St.  Dionysius  does  not  appear  to  know  of  the  creatures  we  have  named  as
symbolical  of  the  four  evangelists.  St.  Dionysius  has  done  much,  through  his  writings,
to  bring  into  early  orthodox  Christianity  the  doctrines  of  the  Hebrew  and  Jewish  Qab-
balah.  St.  Synesius — flour,  eirca  370-413  A.  D. — sumamed  the  Philosopher,  in  his
writing.  On  Dreams — 404  A.  D.^-also  shows  considerable  knowledge  of  the  Qabbalah.
Jerome  Cardan  has  written  a  long  commentary  upon  the  **  Dreams.'*  The  doctrine  of
sympathy  between  the  spiritual  man,  his  body,  etc.,  and  all  parts  of  the  universe,  as
the  affinity  between  the  Makrokosm  and  Mikrokosm,  was  taught  by  the  learned  among
the  archaic  Hindus,  Chinese,  Egyptians,  Chaldeans,  Hebrews,  Greeks,  etc.,  and  by
Moses,  Pythagoras,  Plato,  Aristotle,  the  Qabbalists,  Neo-platonists,  etc.  It  appears  in  a
number  of  places  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Paradigmatic  Celes-
tial Ideation,  or  the  Perfect  Upper  Heavenly  Man  and  the  visible  Terrestrial  realization.
The  Perfect  Kingdom  or  Place,  of  the  Deity,  the  Celestial  and  Heavenly  Government,
and  its  imperfect  shadow,  the  visible  universe  in  its  entirety.  The  Ideal  Kingdom  of
God  and  the  Kingdom  of  the  visible  matter-world.  Compare  also  the  Moreh  Ne'boo-
kheem.  Vol.  iii,  p.  I  et  seq,,  i,  c.  Ixxii.

*  These  matters  are  further  enlarged  up>on  in  the  2^har  {  Yithroh.  1.  e.,  Exod.  xviii  to
XX,  and  in  the  Zohar  'Hadash  in  the  same  place,  and  in  the  Tiqqoonim,  f.  e..  Rules
(or  Regulations)  of  the  Zohar,  Tiqqoon.  70.  The  Tiqqooneh  Zohar  was  edited  and
printed  as  early  as  Novem.  9, 1557,  4to,  Mantua,  by  Jacob  b.  Naphtali,  and  compiled
by  Imm.  di  Benevento  after  an  MSS.

f  Quoted  by  Luriah,  p.  12,  note  i.


45

inferences  and  conclusions  from  teachings  received,  in  silence,  /'.  e.,  secret,
such  a  one  is  worthy  of  receiving  Mysteries  of  the  Thorah,  given  him  tit
silence,  i.  e.,  in  secret.  Therefore  the  sages  imparted  one  to  the  other,  the
knowledge  of  physiognomy  and  the  lineaments  of  the  features,*  which

'Hie  Zobar  treats  on  physiognomy  quite  fully.  HuniaD  counlemuices  are  divided
into  fom  primordial  types  of  faces  luch  as  appeared  at  the  Chariot  Throne  oi  Sfa-a'siA
MtriadaA  of  Eiekiei's  vision,  chap,  i,  lo-the  face  oF  a  man,  lion,  ox  and  eagle,  and
ituys:  our  faces  reiemble  these  according  to  the  rank  which  the  soul  occupies  in  the
ioiellectual  or  mural  worlds.  "  Physiognomy,"  it  says,  "  does  not  consist  in  the  external
lineaments,  but  in  the  feBiures  which  ore  mysteriously  drawn  within  us.  The  features
of  Ihe  face  *«ry,  following  the  form  which  is  impressed  or.  the  inward  face  (or  pretence)
of  the  spirit.  The  spirit  only  produces  all  those  physiognomical  peculiarities,  which
the  Wise  know:  and  it  is  through  the  spirit  thai  they  (the  features)  have  any  meaning.
When  the  spirits  and  souls  go  out  of  Eden,  i.  e.,  the  Place  of  the  Supreme  Wisdom,
(bey  hftve  entirely  ■  certain  form  which  later  reflects  itself  in  the  face."  It  then  treats
of  the  different  forms  of  forehead,  face,  etc.,  and  Iheir  indications.  Comp.  on  this
Zotiar  ii,  71 J,  7511,  73^.  In  the  Neniologicat  System  of  Anthropology,  etc.,  hy  Dr.  Jos.
R.  Buchanan,  Qncinnati,  lSS4,  Part  iv,  on  Satcognomy,  a  curious  theory  is  advanced,
in  regard  to  the  sympathy  existing  between  the  different  parts  of  the  human  tiody  and
the  inner  spiritual  man,  and  that  one  may  judge  of  the  inner  man  from  the  outward
shape.  We  give  two  Hindu  symbolic  pictures,  which  are  of  interest  in  thU  connexion,
from  Kiklas  Mailer's  GiaiUen,  fViisen  and  Kunsi  der  alien  Hindus,  Enter  Band,
Maim,  iSaz.  Tab.  I,  fignrel  II3  and  113;  and
refer  the  reader  to  figures  iz  and  noon  the  same
plate,  and  Tab.  II,  figure  59.  Compare  also  Dan
vii,  and  La  CUf  dis  Grand  Myslh-cs  iuivanl,  Ht-
ntch,  Ahraham,  Htrmts  Trismfgiilus,  el  Saiemen,
par  Eliphas  Uvi  (PAMii  Alphonie  Louii  Censtant).
Paris,  1 861 ,  p.  443  it  seq.

No.  I.  Is  a  Brahma  image,  with  its  four  princi-
pies,  and  four  wings  encircled  three  times  l>y  Ananta
or  Shesha,  the  Serpent  of  Eternity.  In  this  we  find
the  prototype  of  the  symbols  of  the  Divine  pei
tion  as  in  the  symlx)ls  of  the  Merkabah,  i.  e..  Chariot  Throne,  and  of  the  four  Evangel-
ists. The  fonr  figures  represent  the  four  Vedas.  Here  we  have  the  Eagle  of  St.  John,
the  all-piercing  eje,  also  the  sablimsled  ether,  the  spirit ;  the  Bull  of  St.  Luke,  Ihe  all-
generating,  also  the  sublimated  water  or  humidity  ;  the  Lion  of  St.  Mark,  the  symbol  of
nnrettrained  strength  and  potentiality,  the  sublimated  fire;  and  the  Human  Face,  Ihe
symbol  of  St.  Matthew,  the  fruition  of  the  Intellect  of  the  Supreme  Brahman,  netiitr.


46

are  partly  communicated  in :  *  this  is  the  book  of  the  *  generations  of
man/  (Gen.  v,  i)  and  partly  in  the  next  verse:  *  male-female  created  he
them.'  '*  This  is  the  answer  of  Rab  She'reerah  Gaon,  Head-master  of  this
great  Babylonian  Jewish  school,  which  Nachmanides  quotes  in  his  Com-
mentary on  the  Thorah,  adding  these  words :  **  We  have  not  been  able  to
reach  that  far."*    So  the  Babylonian  Rabbenu  Hag-gaon  Abraham,!

No  2.  Is  similar  to  the  former,  only  that  the  five  potentialities  of  Brahman,  neuter ^
are  given  in  animal  types.  Man  is  the  symbol  of  wisdom,  the  Lion  of  strength,  the
Eagle  of  ubiquity,  the  Bull  of  the  generative  potentiality  in  its  highest  idea,  and  the
Goat  as  sensual  affection.  The  animals  have  wings  to  signify  their  divine  character,  the
human  figure  as  the  symbol  of  Brahman,  is  surrounded  by  a  halo.  We  also  refer  the
student  to  the  valuable  article  in  Kitto's  Cyclop.  Biblical  Liter.,  Ed.  1876,  i,  pp.  484-
493;  Handbook  of  Christian  Symbolism,  by  W.  &  G.  Audsley,  London,  pp.  97-1 10 ;
Hiitoire  et  Thiorie  du  Symbolisme  Rehgieux  avant  et  depuis  le  Christianismet  etc.,  par
M,  VAbbk  Auber^  Paris,  1870-72,  4  vol.,  8vo;  Symbols  and  Emblems  of  Early  and  Me-
diaeval Christian  Art,  by  Louisa  Twining,  London,  1852,  4to;  Christian  Art  and  Sym
holism,  by  R.  St.  J.  Tyrwhitt,  London,  1872;  (Euvres  de  Saint  Denys  VArtopagite
traduites  du  Grec  en  Frant^aiSf  etc.,  par  VAbbi  J,  Dulac^  Paris,  1865,  8vo,  p.  390-1,
385,  328.  St.  Dionysius  does  not  appear  to  know  of  the  creatures  we  have  named  as
symbolical  of  the  four  evangelists.  St.  Dionysius  has  done  much,  through  his  writings,
to  bring  into  early  orthodox  Christianity  the  doctrines  of  the  Hebrew  and  Jewish  Qab-
balah.  St.  Synesius — flour,  eirca  370-413  A.  D. — sumamed  the  Philosopher,  in  his
writing.  On  Dreams — 404  A.  D.— also  shows  considerable  knowledge  of  the  Qabbalah.
Jerome  Cardan  has  written  a  long  commentary  upon  the  **  Dreams. '^  The  doctrine  of
sympathy  between  the  spiritual  man,  his  body,  etc.,  and  all  parts  of  the  universe,  as
the  afHnity  between  the  Makrokosm  and  Mikrokosm,  was  taught  by  the  learned  among
the  archaic  Hindus,  Chinese,  Egyptians,  Chaldeans,  Hebrews,  Greeks,  etc.,  and  by
Moses,  Pythagoras,  Plato,  Aristotle,  the  Qabbalists,  Neo-platonists,  etc.  It  appears  in  a
number  of  places  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Paradigmatic  Celes-
tial Ideation,  or  the  Perfect  Upper  Heavenly  Man  and  the  visible  Terrestrial  realization.
The  Perfect  Kingdom  or  Place,  of  the  Deity,  the  Celestial  and  Heavenly  Government,
and  its  imperfect  shadow,  the  visible  universe  in  its  entirety.  The  Ideal  Kingdom  of
God  and  the  Kingdom  of  the  visible  matter-world.  Compare  also  the  Moreh  Ne*boo-
kheem,  Vol.  iii,  p.  i  et  seq,,  i,  c.  Ixxii.

♦  These  matters  are  further  enlarged  upon  in  the  2^har  J  Yithroh.  t.  e.,  Exod.  xviii  to
XX,  and  in  the  Zohar  *Hadash  in  the  same  place,  and  in  the  Tiqqoonim,  f.  e,.  Rules
(or  Regulations)  of  the  Zohar,  Tiqqoon.  70.  The  Tiqqooneh  Zohar  was  edited  and
printed  as  early  as  Novem.  9,  1557,  4to,  Mantua,  by  Jacob  b.  Naphtali,  and  compiled
by  Imm.  di  Benevento  after  an  MSS.

f  Quoted  by  Luriah,  p.  12,  note  i.


47

says:  "And  as  they  imparted  these  secrets,  only  to  persons  considered
worthy  by  virtue  of  the  signs  mentioned^  we  will  tell  you  that  we  deem  you
worthy  in  our  heart,  but  we  cannot  impart  them  to  you  before  you  have
lived  the  life  of  a  recluse  for  fully  three  years  ;  in  the  meanwhile  we  pray
that  heaven  may  enlighten  your  eyes,  etc.'*     The  initiated  only  imparted
Qabbalistic  matters  to  men  personally  known  to  them  as  discreet,  intelli-
gent and  worthy  of  such  a  distinction,  and  then  only  under  promise  of
secrecy.     The  same  idea  is  in  the  Zohar  §  Yithroh.,*  that  every  feature,
of  the  (man's)  face,   shows  whether  he  may  be  initiated  or  not,  into
these  sublime  divine  secrets,   and  into  matters  of  magic,t  concerning
which  the  Gaon  Rab  She'reerah,  writes:    "Under  penalty  of  excom-
munication,   it    is    forbidden   to   reveal    these    matters   except   to   re-
liable persons,   and  only  to  such  whose   physiognomy  speaks   in   their
favour."     So  as  to  the  pronunciation  of  the  Ineffable  Name  YHVH,  the
Shem  Hamme'phorash  or  Tetragrammaton,  pronounced  only  by  the  High
Priest  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  She'reerah  says  :  "  It  was  delivered  by
Qabbalah  only  to  the  Heads  of  the  College,"  not  to  all,  but  only  to  the
Heads  of  the  Ye^sheebah,     It  appears,  from  his  "Responses,"  that  Hay
Gaon  imparted  some  of  this  Secret  Science  to  a  trusted  few  of  his  contem-
poraries, who  lived  at  a  great  distance  from  Babylonia,  and  most  proba-
bly this  included  parts  of  the  Zohar  and  the  Hidden  {Hanne-e' lam)  Mid-
rash.    As  it  is  stated  in  the  beginning  of  the  Tiqqooneh  haz-Zohar  J  that  the
book  Zohar  has  existed  from  immemorial  time  at  Fez  in  Africa,  §   we
may  assume  that  it  most  likely  came  there  from  the  men  who  imbibed  a
knowledge  of  it  from  Rab  Hay,  the  Gaon  of  the  sages  of  Chirvan,  on  the
Caspian  sea,  and  from  Rab  Nissim  and  the  other  great  theosophists  of  the
Babylonian  schools,  who  obtained  their  knowledge  from  very  old  sources,
either  Semitic  or  the  archaic  Aryan  Wisdom  religion  of  Central  Asia.
This  secrecy  accounts  for  any  differences  in  the  first  published  versions

♦  Comp.  Zohar  ii,  71 3,  73^,  75a.

t  Magic  had  a  very  different  meaning  in  early  times,  from  that  which  it  has  acquired
since  the  Middle  Ages,  in  the  minds  of  most  modern  readers.  Comp.  Franz  von  Hart-
man's,  Black  and  White  Magic,  2nd  Ed.,  London,  1886.

%  Amsterdam  Ed.,  17 18,  by  Prophos.

2  Some  writers  state,  that  originally  the  complete  Zohar  was  more  than  a  camePs  load.
Most  of  it  has  been  lost  or  destroyed.


48

of  the  Zoharic  writings,  and  also  for  the  late  period  at  which  the  learned
world  had  any  knowledge  of  these  secret  and  revered  writings.     Fur-
ther, as  regards  the  name  "Ye'mshalmi,"  by  which  the  Zoharic  writings
are  called,  though  several  of  the  earlier  sages  used  to  call  the  Midrashim
thus,  the  Ge'onim  did  not,  but  called  them  by  their  respective  names  ;
they  also  did  not  call  the  actual  Talmud  Ye'rushalmi,  by  that  name,
but  "Talmud  of  the  B'nai  Ma-arbah,  /'.  ^.,  Talmud  of  the  Sons  of  the
West"  or  "Talmud  ehretz  (land  of)  Yisra-el,**  with  but  few  exceptions.
The  Talmud  Ye'rushalmi  was  edited,  by  the  pupils  of  R.  Yo'ha'nan  ben
Eliezer  (d.  279),  in  the  school  of  Tiberias,  on  Lake  Gennezareth,  45  miles
north  of  Jerusalem,  and  not  in  the  latter  city.     It  was  not  compiled
into  its  present  written  form   until  the  latter  half  of  the   IV   century
A.  D.     The  Babylonian  Talmud,  or  the  Babli,  was  composed  principally
in  the  V  century,  from  old  oral  sources,  by  Rab  Ashi  bar  Simai  (d.  427
A.  D.),  Head  Master  of  the  Academy  at  Sora.     He  did  not  complete  it.
Its  final  redaction  was  by  R.  Yosseh,  the  last  of  the  A*mora-im,  and  really
belongs  to  the  VI  century  A.  D.     The  Talmuds  are  compends  of  the
Halakha,  and  written  legal  digests  of  the  oral  common  law  or  customs  and
ritual,  of  the  Israelites ;  they  were  not  compiled  as  exponents  of  their  re-
ligious metaphysical  or  natural  philosophy.     The  Babylonian  is  four- fold
larger  than  the  Ye'rushalmi,  and  is  called  ShaS^  by  the  Jews,  who  prefer
it  to  the  Palestinian.     The  latter,  which  is  shorter,  also  more  difficult  to
understand,  has  been  preferred  by  Christian  Orientalists,  but  the  Babli  is
the  most  important.

The  The'na-im  were  altogether  from  Palestine.  In  the  time  of  R.  Yo'-
ha*nan,  Jerusalem  was  not  a  seat  of  learning  for  the  Palestinian  Jews,  but
Tiberias  was.  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai's  school  was  near  Jerusalem, f  this
would  account  for  the  productions  from  that  school  having  the  name,
"Midrash  Ye'rushalmi."  Luriah  asserts  through  quotation,  that  the
Zohar  was  known  to  R.  Ne'hunyah,  the  pious,  of  Jerusalem,  who  deliv-
ered a  great  many  Qabbalistic  discussions,  which  were  arranged  for  him
since  the  days  of  the  The*na-im,  and  these  were  the  Zohar,  and  when  he
brought  the  Zohar  and  Qabbalistic  Midrashim  along  with  him  from  Jerus-
alem, they  obtained  the  name,  "  Ye'rushalmi."     The  book  Bahir,  is  also

*  The  initials  of  5'^ishah  SeMarim,  i.  e,.  Six  arranged  books,
t  AnU,  p.  19.


49

called  **  Yerushalmi,"  in  a  commentary  written  by  the  great  Qabbalist
R.  Azriel  (or  Ezrah),  pupil  of  R.  Yehudah,  son  of  R  A  Ba  D,  on  Canti-
cles.* Recanati  quotes  sentences  as  from  "  Ye'rushalmi '*  and  at  first
thought  they  were  in  the  Talmud  Ye'rushalmi,  but  they  were  in  the  book
Bahir,  which  he  afterwards  discovered.  The  Bahir  was  called  thus  be-
cause it  came  from  Palestine  and  Jerusalem.

Branch  III.  Luriah  in  this,  shows  by  quotations  from  older  writings,
that  the  ideas  in  the  Zoharic  writings  were  in  existence  long  prior  to  the
redaction  and  publication  of  the  Talmudim.  He  gives  these  statements
with  great  care  and  exactness,  quotation  after  quotation,  but  they  are  too
extensive  to  give  in  this  writing.

In  Branch  IV,  Luriah  gives  logical  inferences  so  as  to  show,  that  the
origins  of  many  portions  of  the  Zohar  were  contemporaneous  with  the
period  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai.  He  cites  the  prediction  as  to  the  sov-
ereignty which  is  to  arise  for  the  **  Sons  of  Yishmael,**  the  Arabs,  after  400
years,  and  that  they  should  then  have  possession  of  the  holy  land.  Omar,
Khalif  of  the  Arabs,  conquered  Jerusalem  and  the  holy  land  about  637
A.  D. — 397  of  the  fifth  thousand.  This  was  569  years  after  the  destruction
of  the  second  Temple,  which  took  place  173  before  the  close  of  the  fourth
thousand  of  years,  and  Luriah  shows  this  statement  is  a  proof  of  the  an-
tiquity of  the  Zohar.  He  also  says :  in  the  Zohar  §  Shemoth  (Exod :  i
sqq)  6c,  we  read  :  **R.  Eliezer  b.  R.  Shim-on,  said :  A  Roman  king  will
conduct  to  and  lead  over  the  land  of  Egypt  a  government  of  severity,  and
appoint  armed  princes  over  it."  This  actually  occurred  in  the  days  of  R.
Eliezer  b.  R.  Shim-on,  who  was  contemporary  with  Rabbi ;  viz  :  when  An-
toninus, the  Roman  Emperor  waged  war  against  Egypt.  The  Talmud
says,t  that  one  of  Joseph's  treasuries  was  shown  to  Antoninus  ben  Asverus  J
after  the  conquest  of  Egypt,  in  the  days  of  Rabbi  and  R.  Eliezer  b.  R.
Shim-on.  §

Luriah  says,   those  who  object  to  the  antiquity  of  the   Zohar,  say,

*  P.  20i/,  Altona  Ed.     It  has  been  incorrectly  ascribed  to  Nachmanides.
f  Treatise  Pg^sa^Aim,  c.  x,  p.  119.

J  L.  Aurelios  Verus,  b.  130  A.D.,  Emperor  with  M.  Aurelius,  of  the  Roman  Empire,
161  to  169  A.  D.

J  Comp.  the  book  M^khiltha^  in  the  Para'shah  of  the  Song  on  the  Red  Sea,  87.
4


50

that  the  modern  author  went  cunningly  to  work  in  shaping  matters  of  the
past,  and  described  them  as  if  going  to  happen  in  the  future,  the  authors
of  the  Zohar  had  not  any  such  deceptions  in  view,  if  such  attempts  had
been  in  their  minds,  then,  if  modern,  they  or  he,  would  surely  have  been
more  careful  in  wording  and  quoting  that  which  subsequently  appears
in  the  Talmud.  "And  the  great  men,  says  Luriah,  who  at  and  after
Moses  de  Leon's  time,  read  and  understood  the  Zohar  with  rever-
ence, did  not  discover  the  forgery,  not  even  that  in  his  endeavors
to  strengthen  his  own  inventions,  he  (M.  d.  L.)  overdid  it  to  his  own
injury;  but  it  was  reserved  to  the  modern  quarrelers  to  discover  the
fraud  and  expose  it,  but  no  fair-minded  man  or  impartial  thinker,  will
agree  with  them.'*  He  asserts,  that  the  period  of  the  The'na-im  (200
B.  C.  to  200  A.  D.)  prior  to  the  close  of  the  Talmud,  was  the  age  of  the
birth  of  the  Zohar,  that  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  very  essence  of  the
Zoharic  writings  was  prepared  during  their  time,  and  during  and  after
that  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai,  by  his  disciple,  the  Babylonian  writer  R.
Abbah,  as  will  be  shown  hereafter.  But  there  are  also  discussions  in  the
book  Zohar,  which  took  place  in  the  school  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai*  by
his  pupils  and  the  pupils  of  his  pupils,  at  the  time  of  the  A'mora-im ;
which  are  quoted  by  the  scholars  as  the  "  Learnings  in  the  Beth-Hammid-
rash  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai,"  and  these  received  in  some  parts  slight
additions  by  subsequently  initiated  Wise-men.  Luriah  says  *'  This  occurs
in  all  the  books  of  the  The'na-im,  which  we  now  possess,  and  is  espe-
cially evident  in  the  Zoharic  book,  Midrash  Hanne-e'lam;  the  majority
of  the  authorities  therein  cited  being  of  the  A'mora-im,  it  surely  dates
from  those  times,  (which  were  prior  to  the  closing  of  the  Talmud.)"  The
Gaon  R.  Abraham,  called  by  the  Jews,  our  great  Rabbi,  says,  **  this  was
his  opinion."  Luriah  then  gives  numerous  authorities  proving  his  asser-
tions.

Branch  V.  Concerning  the  Aramaic  language  in  the  Zohar.  As  to
this,  he  says,  the  modern  quarrelers  argue,  that  in  the  times  of  the  The'-
na-im,  matters  relating  to  the  Thorah  were  written  in  the  Hebrew,  like  the
Mishnah,  Thosephthah  and  all  the  Midrashim  of  the  Thorah ;  the  Ara-
maic having  been  in  those  days  the  vernacular,  which  was  not  used  in  re-

*  Likely  that  at  Tekft'a  ;  anUy  p.  19.


51

ligious  writings,  and  especially  not,  in  writing  the  Mysteries  of  the  Thorah.
This  branch  also  treats  of  the  style,  diction  and  tenor,  of  the  Zohar  and
Zoharic  books.  He  says,  it  is  evident  from  the  Zohar,  that  the  \iTiter
who  took  down  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai's  oral  teachings,  was  Rabbi  Abbah.
The  Master  R.  Shim-on  says  in  the  Idrah  Zootah*  "R.  Abbah  shall
write;"  and  at  the  close  of  the  Idrah  Zootah  is:  "  R.  Abbah  said  :  I
wrote,  believing  to  have  to  write  much,  etc.,'*  and  also  in  the  Zohar, t  "  ^
wrote  from  the  sacred  lamp  (/.  ^.,  R.  S.  b.  Y.),  etc.'*  J  This  R.  Abbah
was  a  Babylonian,  and  as  such,  thoroughly  conversant  with  the  Chaldee
or  Aramaic  language,  as  all  the  Babylonians  were  ;  consequently  he  wrote
the  Zohar  in  his  own  language,  which  was  also  that  used  by  the  Wise-
men  of  Babylonia,  who  occupied  themselves  in  these  matters,  and  who
much  more  than  those  of  Palestine  gave  attention  to  mysticism.  The
Babylonian  Jews  also  gave  considerable  attention  to  the  Practical  Qabba-
lah.§     He  was  the  same  R.  Abbah,  who  is  mentioned  in  the  Zohar  as  a

*  Zohar  §  Na-a^uenu,  i.  e.,  Deut.  xxxii,  p.  287^.

f  Para'shath,  Mishpatim,  i.  g.,  Exod.  xxi-xxv,  p.  123^.

J  The  Idrah  2^otah,  says:  (Zohar,  Mantua  Ed.,  §  Ha-a^zeenu^  Vol.  iii,  287^;
Cremona  Ed.,  part  iii,  fol.  140,  col.  557  et  seq.) ;  when  the  companions  were  gathered
together  in  the  house  of  R.  Shim-on,  and  he  arranged  his  words  of  departure,  he,  R.
Shim-on,  said : — "  Now  this  is  my  arrangement  concerning  you,  R.  Abbah  shall  be  the
scribe^  and  my  son  EPasar  shall  set  forth  my  vieivSy  but  the  others  shall  meditate  in  their
hearts.  R.  Abbah  arose  from  the  place  behind  him,  and  R.  El'azar  his  son  sat  down  in
front  of  him.  He  said  to  him  :  Arise,  my  son,  for  some  one  else  shall  sit  in  that  place,
and  R.  El'azar  arose.  R.  Shim-on  having  veiled  his  head,  sat  down,  began  and  said."
Further,  "  R.  Abbah,  said :  Scarcely  had  the  sacred  lamp  finished  the  word  *life,'  when
his  words  ceased.  But  I  was  writings  and  thinking  I  was  to  write  more,  heard  noth-
ing. I  did  not  however  raise  my  head,  because  the  light  was  too  much,  and  up  to  this
time  I  had  not  been  able  to  look  in  that  direction.  I  trembled  therefore,  when  I  heard
a  voice,"  etc.     (/<5/V.,  Mantua  Ed.,  fol.  296.     Cremona  Ed.,  col.  599.)

\  Comp.  Layard's  Discoveries  in  the  Ruins  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  etc.  New
York.  1853,  pp.  509-526.  Bowls  similar  to  those  mentioned,  may  be  seen  in  the
Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  New  York  City.  Essai  sur  la  propagation  de  P Alphabet
Phinici^n  dans  Vancien  monde,  par  Franc^ois  Lenormant,  Paris.  1 875,  Vol.  i,  pp.  271
et  seq.f  and  Wcssely  in  The  Expositor,  No.  XXI,  Sept.,  1886,  3d  series,  pp.  194-204.
On  the  Spread  of  Jewish-Christian  Ideas  among  the  Egyptians,  which  shows  the  early
Ebionites  gave  attention  to  the  Practical  Qabbalah.


52

Babylonian,  and  as  superior  to  R.  'Heeyah,  but  he  is  of  course  not  the
R.  Abbah  of  the  Babylonian  Talmud.  R.  Abbah  was  especially  selected
by  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai  to  write  down  his  words,  because  of  his  attain-
ments as  a  student  and  a  master,  both  in  the  Qabbalah  and  the  Chaldaic
language,  a  language  spoken  and  understood  by  all  the  students  of  the
occult  science,  the  Divine  Qabbalah.  Abbah* s  father-in-law  appears  to
have  been  a  resident  of  the  Babylonian  city  called  Tarsha,  which  was
also  called  Sora,  in  which  was  a  celebrated  Jewish  Academy  of  Science
and  seat  of  Theosophical  Secret  Learning.  It  was  the  residence  of  many
of  the  friends  and  companions  of  R.  Shim-on  and  his  colleagues.  The
colleagues  or  companions  in  Babylonia,  were,  as  is  stated  in  the  Zohar,
very  careful  to  conceal  the  mysteries  of  the  Secret  Knowledge,  the  Qab-
balah, under  a  peculiarity  of  language,  terms  and  phraseology,  and  by
symbols,  so  that  they  could  study  and  converse  on  the  mysteries  in  even
a  public  assembly,  in  a  language  and  by  methods  understood  by  the
initiates,  and  adapted  to  conceal  the  precious  mystical  doctrines,  from
the  mental  grasp  of  the  uninitiated,  the  ignorant  and  foolish  masses
around  them,  and  so  keep  their  pearls  from  the  swine,  who  would  have
trampled  them  under  their  feet,  and  then  perhaps,  have  turned  and
destroyed  the  masters  in  the  Secret  Science.*  This  is  frequently  set  forth
in  the  Zohar,  and  its  justice  and  wisdom  must  be  appreciated  even  to  this
day,  by  the  learned.  The  open  revelation  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo*haT*s
wisdom  was  too  sublime  for  the/ general  public,  to  be  given  in  an  open
language  intelligible  to  everybody;  this  appears  in  the  Talmud. f  R.
A'keebah,  the  master  of  R.  Shim-on,  said  to  the  latter:  "  It  may  suffice
that  I  and  thy  creator  know  thy  power,**  which  means,  it  is  not  advisable
to  reveal  thy  doctrine  and  great  wisdom  to  the  public.  Hence  R.
Shim-on  chose  R.  Abbah  to  do  the  writing,  and  as  to  whom  in  another
place  in  the  Zohar  he  says ;  J  "  Abbah !  Abbah  !  loosen  the  knot  and  con-
sign this  to  thy  bag.  *  *  Loosen  the  knot  wherewith  thou  hast  already  tied
fast  the  mysteries  received,  and  receive  also  this  additional  mystery,  to

*  Comp.  Matt,  vii,  6;  Acts  xiii,  45-52;  John  xvi,  12,  25,  29;  Mark  iv,  2,  ii,  12,  33,
34;  Luke  viii,  lO;  Matt,  xiii,  34,  35.
t  Treatise  Sanhedrin,   c.  i.
X  Comp.  Para*shath  Pe'qudeh,  Exod.  xxxviii  sqq.


53

hide  it  among  the  rest,  in  thy  collection.  This  systematic  secrecy  be-
came a  line  of  guidance  to  the  companions  in  Babylonia,  and  they  trans-
mitted it  to  the  generations  of  Ge'onim  who  came  after  them,  binding
them  to  strictly  observe  it  in  all  the  times  to  come.  The  Zohar  is  writ-
ten in  the  Aramaic,  the  Targumatic  language,  and  the  Targums  them-
selves are  mystical;  to  intimate  that  it  is  not  delivered  for  a  revelation
of  its  contents  to  mankind  in  general,  but  is  covered  in  its  appearance,
as  it  really  is,  and  is  in  the  dress  of  the  lower  degrees,  that  of  the  "  a'hora-
yim,  i.e.,  the  hinder  or  back  part,  as  distinguished  from  the  face  or  front,
the  Sacred  or  Hebrew  tongue ;  in  other  words,  the  doctrine  contained  in
the  Zohar  is  the  manifestation  of  God  by  the  exterior  or  visible  word,  but
the  divinely  mystical  and  concealed,  is  to  be  ascertained  and  read  between
the  lines  of  the  same.*  As  the  Gaon  R.  Abraham,  called  the  Great
Rabbi,  states  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah,  at
the  end,  "  Even  in  our  age  we  have  only  been  able  to  reach  to  the  heel  of
the  World  of  'A*see-yah,  /.  e.,  the  World  of  Action  or  Making,  the
lowest ;  hence  the  great  number  of  skeptical  adversaries,  etc. ,  and  what-
ever we  speak  in  regard,  to  Adam  Qadmon,  /.  e.,  the  Primordial  Ideation
Adam,  and  of  A'tzeelah,  /.  e.y  World  of  Emanation,  of  Bree-ah,  /.  e.,
World  of  Creation,  of  Ye'tzee-rah,  /.  e.y  World  of  Formation,  and  of
A'see-yah,  continually  takes  place  in  all  the  Worlds  of  the  universe ;  and
so  all  the  investigations  are  in  conformity  therewith  and  merely  investi-
gations of  the  extreme  a^ hora-yim,  i,  e.,  back,  and  not  clearly  defined;
hence  the  parabolical  and  allegorical  language,  which  the  opponents
(the  uninitiated)  do  not  in  any  way  understand. ' '  The  same  is  in
Daniel.  Its  beginning  is  in  Hebrew,  like  all  the  writings  of  the
Prophets,  till  chapter  ii,  4,  where  "  the  Chaldeans  spoke  to  the  king  in
Aramaic,**  for  that  which  follows  are  the  words  spoken  in  the  presence
of  the  king,  the  words  of  the  kings  and  the  dreams  are  written  in  Ara-
maic, in  the  tongue  in  which  they  were  spoken.  So  in  Ezra  iv,  v  and
vi,  the  words  of  the  kings  being  there  literally  quoted,  all  matters  con-
nected therewith  are  in  Aramaic.  In  Daniel,  the  words  of  the  Prophet
are  in  Hebrew,  as  was  usual  with  the  words  of  all  the  Prophets,  except

*  Comp.  Exod.    xxxiii,  23.     A  similar  word  in  Latin,  is    Tergum^  the  back,  that
opposite  to  the  face  or  front.


54

in  the  vii  chapter,  where  Daniel's  dream  is  related  in  Aramaic,
the  recital  of  the  dream  over,  the  language  again  is  in  Hebrew.  This
Luriah  explains,  as  in  full  accord  with  that  which  he  has  before  stated.
Another  reason  for  the  Aramaic  may  be,  the  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah  and
the  Idroth  Rabbah  and  Zootah,  contain  the  fundamental  principles  of  the
entire  Qabbalah,  being,  as  it  were,  the  Mishnah  of  the  Zohar,  and  their
very  starting  point  is  in  Daniel,  and  in  the  verse  "  The  Ancient  of  Days
did  sit,  and  his  garment  was  like  white  snow,  and  the  whiteness  of  the
hair  of  his  head  like  pure  wool."  These  words  being  the  basis  of  these
three  books  are,  so  to  speak,  the  text  of  the  whole,  and  as  they  are  in
Aramaic,  the  whole  structure,  in  conformity  with  this  basis,  is  in  Aramaic
also,  hence  the  Aramaic  language  of  the  Zohar.  The  Qabbalistic  matters
are  discyssed  in  other  books  in  Aramaic,  as  in  the  Sepher  Ham-maggidi.e.^
the  Reporter  to  the  Beth  Yoseph,  and  in  the  book  B' rith  Me' nu"' hah,  i.e..
Covenant  of  Rest,  so  in  many  other  books.  Much  more  is  said  by  David
Luriah  which  space  prevents  our  giving,  but  until  the  writings  of  Luriah
and  Konitz  are  fully  disproved,  most  of  the  contents  of  the  Zohar  and
Zoharic  books  may  be  considered,  as  indeed  is  evident  from  a  comparison
of  their  style  and  content,  with  the  Sacred  Books  of  other  Oriental  peo-
ples, to  be  very  ancient.

The  language  of  the  Zoharic  writings  sometimes  elevates  itself  to  much
grandeur  of  thought,  but  in  other  places  it  descends  to  sentiments  and
ideas'which  reveal  puerility,  and  alongside  of  ideas  which  by  their  simpli-
city and  enthusiasm,  take  rank  with  the  highest  period  of  Hebrew  intel-
lectuality as  we  find  it  in  the  Old  Testament,  is  a  knowledge  which  ap-
proaches the  ignorance  of  its  lowest  period.  In  its  contents  we  will  how-
ever, discover  much  in  accord  with  the  Archaic  Oriental  thought-world,
especially  that  of  Mesopotamia,  Persia,  India,  Egypt  and  China,  as  we
now  have  their  ancient  literature  in  fragments.  The  two  Talmuds  do  not
mention  the  Zoharic  writings  by  name,  but  frequently  refer  to  the  Secret
Learning  and  to  ideas,  which  we  find  in  them ;  so  also  many  of  the
formulations  to  be  found  in  the  Talmudim  are  to  be  found  in  the  Zoharic
writings.


III.


ANTIQUITY  OF  THE  ZOHARIC  WRITINGS,  CONTINUED.  OBJECTIONS  TO
THEIR  ANTIQUITY  BY  DR.  HIRSCH  GRAETZ,  DR.  CHRISTIAN  D.  GINS-
BURG  AND  OTHERS,  CONSIDERED.  SOME  QUOTATIONS  FROM  THE
ZOHARIC  WRITINGS,  ELUCIDATING  PASSAGES  IN  THE  NEW  AND  OLD
TESTAMENTS.

WE  will  now  cite  from  some  additional  authors  upon  the  subject :
"The  Zohar  of  which  the  rays  enlighten  the  world,  which  con-
tains the  most  profound  mysteries  of  the  Thorah  and  Qabbalah,
is  not  the  work  of  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'haT,  although  it  has  been  published
under  his  name ;  but  it  is  from  his  words  that  it  has  been  redacted  by
his  disciples,  who  themselves  intrusted  to  other  (subsequent)  disciples  the
care  of  continuing  their  task.  The  words  of  the  Zohar,  from  them,  are
most  conformable  to  the  truth,  written  as  they  are  by  men  who  have  lived
sufficiently  late  to  know  the  Mishnah,  and  all  the  decisions,  and  precepts
of  the  Oral  Law.  This  book  was  not  divulged  until  after  the  death  of  R.
Moses  ben  Na'hman,  or  Nachmanides,*  and  R.  Asher,  who  have  not
known  it.*'  f

A  dispute  has  arisen  as  to  the  versions  of  the  Yu'hasin.  Franck  J  used
the  version  of  Cracow.  A  version  was  printed  in  1566  at  Constantinople.

♦Flourished  circa  1200-circa  1272.

fSepher  Yu'hasin,  i.  c,  Book  of  the  Genealogies,  pp.  42-43,  translated  from  the
French,  as  given  by  Franck,  La  Kabbahy  p.  92.  The  author  of  this  book  was  R.  Moses
Abraham  b.  Samuel  Zakut  or  Sacuto.  He  was  living  at  Saragossa  in  1492.  Compare
Jerusalem  and  Tiberias,  by  J.  W.  Etheridge.  London.  1856.  pp.  451-2.  Lehr-
buck  der  j&dischen  Geschichte  und  Liter atur  von  David  Cassel,  Leipzig.  1879.  PP*
330,  397,  449.  Geschichte  der  judischen  LiUratur  von  Gustav  KarpeUs.  Berlin.  1886.
p.  863,  sqq,     John  Christ.  Wolf,  Bibliotheca  Hebroca^  Vol.  i,  p.  104  et  seq.

X  La  KabbaUf  p.  92,  etc.


56

E.  Carraoly*  takes  Franck  to  task  for  not  using  the  edition  of  1566,
and  gives  an  alleged  version  of  that  edition  in  French,  f  Dr.  Hirsch
Graetz  J  gives  a  version  in  Hebrew,  from  the  reprint  of  the  Constantino-
ple edition,  by  Filipowski,  London,  1857,  of  this  Dr.  Christian  D.  Gins-
burg,  §  gives  a  very  one-sided  and  mutilated  translation.  Dr.  Graetz' s
quotation  in  Hebrew,  is  much  more  extensive  and  favorable  to  the  antiquity
of  the  Zohar,  than  Carmoly's  French  translation.  Since  then,  Heinrich
Ellenberger  has  taken  Dr.  Graetz  to  task  for  his  unfair  arguments  against
the  Qabbalah  and  the  Zohar,  ||  and  among  other  things,  says :  **  The  appeal
by  Dr.  Graetz  to  the  Sepher  Yu'hasin,  where  it  says :  p.  42  :  *  He  (Shim-on
b.  Yo*hai)  has  not  made  the  Zohar,'  is  not  tenable,  for  in  the  following
sentence  it,  the  Sepher  Yu'hasin,  says:  *  But  his  disciples,  his  son,  and
the  disciples  of  his  disciples,  were  the  authors  according  to  the  tradition
descended  to  them !'  *'  The  whole  passage  quoted  by  Dr.  Graetz  from
the  book  Yu'hasin,  ed.  1857,  London,  is  one  of  the  main  points
against  the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar,  yet  Dr.  Graetz  is  compelled  in  his
history  to  say  :^  *'  How  the  credibility  of  Isaac  of  Acco  has  contented
itself  with  these  evidences,  cannot  be  decided,  as  the  end  is  missing.
Apparently  he  was  in  the  end  convinced  of  the  genuineness  of  the  Zohar ^
as  he  wove  into  his  (book)  Me*-irath  Enayim,  i.  e,,  Enlightenment  of  the
EyeSf  many  Zoharistic  ideas, *^  In  the  statement  above  cited  Isaac  of
Acco  is  alleged  to  have  said :  that  R.  Moses  de  Leon  told  him  at  Val-
ladolid  in  Spain,  under  oath,  that  he,  de  Leon,  had  the  book  Zohar
in  MSS.  at  his  home  in  Avila,  and  would  show  it  to  him  there.  R.  Moses
de  Leon  started  for  his  home,  but  on  the  way,  died  at  Arevolo.  Then
Isaac  goes  to  Avila,  where  he  meets  a  relative  of  de  Leon,  but  evidently
an  enemy,  named  R.  David  Rafon  of  Corfu,  who  says:  "  R.  M.  de  Leon
is  a  spendthrift,  who  earns  a  great  deal  of  money  from  his  writings,  but

*  Itiniraires  de  la  Terre  Sainte  des  xiii,  xiv,  etc.  Hide,     Bruxelles.     1847.     p.  272

et  seq,

t  Ibid,

X  Geschichte  der  fuden,  vii,  p.  490  et  seq,

I  The  Kabbalah,  etc.     London.     1865.     pp.  90-91.

I  Offenbarung^    Kabbalah^  Magnetismus  und  Spiritumus^  etc,   Euda-Pesth,    1880,
p.  19.

\  Work  cited,  vii,  p.  492.


57

makes  up  the  Zohar  out  of  his  head,  and  he  treats  his  wife  and  daughter
badly."  Finding  de  Leon  had  died,  Isaac,  with  the  assistance  of  a
wealthy  man,  R.  Joseph  di  Avila  and  his  wife,  tries  to  surreptitiously  get
the  MSS.  of  the  Zohar,  from  the  widow  and  daughter  of  de  Leon,  but  is  not
successful.  He  then  leaves  Avila  and  goes  to  Talavera,  and  at  that  place
meets  "R.  Joseph  Hallevy,  son  of  Todros,  the  Qabbalist,"  and  asks
him  about  the  Zohar.  The  latter  says:  "  Know  thou  and  believe,  that
the  Zohar  by  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai  was  in  the  hands  of  R.  Moses,  who
copied  from  it  for  whomsoever  he  liked,"  and  tells  Isaac,  how  he,  Joseph^
had  conclusively  proved  this  fact.  Isaac  then  goes  to  Toletola  (Toledo)
where  he  **  learned  from  some  of  the  scholars,  that  they  had  seen  an  old
man  and  prominent  disciple  of  R.  Moses  de  Leon,  of  the  name  of  R.  Jacob,
who  testified  by  heaven  and  earth,  that  the  book  Zohar y  of  which  R.
Shim-on  b,  Yo'hat  is  the  author — "  This  ends  the  statement.  It  must  be
noted  that  it  commences  '*  R.  Isaac  of  (the  city  of)  Acco  (in  which  the
Jews  were  massacred  1291  A.D.)  was  in  Novara,  in  Italy,  after  the  capture
of  Acco,  from  which  he  escaped,  where  he  heard  that  there  was  in  Spain
a  Rabbin  in  possession  of  the  book  Zohar ;  and  having  written  a  Qab-
balistic  book  himself,  he  was  anxious  to  see  the  Zohar  written  by  R^
Shim-on  b.  Yo'hat,  and  R.  EVazar,  his  son,  in  a  cavern,^

^^  If  it  is  written  in  the  Ye" rushalmetic  idiom ^  he  says,  it  is  genuine ^  but
if  in  Hebrew  not."  Then  he,  Isaac,  went  to  Spain.  "  At  last  I  learned
that  Moses  Nachmanides  had  sent  the  book  (Zohar)  from  Palestine  to
Catalonia  to  his  son,  but  the  wind  carried  it  (the  ship)  to  Aragonia  (some
say  to  Alicante)  where  the  book  fell  into  the  hands  of  R.  Moses  de
Leon."  We  must  not  forget,  Moses  de  Leon,  born  1250,  died  1305.
Carmoly  says:  "  Here  is  what  we  find  in  the  edition  of  Constantinople,
year  5053  A.  M.,  1293  A.  D.  I  do  not  cite  the  page  because  the  first
edition  is  not  paged,  the  spoken  of  R.  Moses  de  Leon  was  living  at  the
time  (1293)."  t  The  statement  in  Yu'hasin  also  refers  to  a  period  after  de

*This  statement  of  itself  is  curious,  there  is  nothing  in  the  Zohar  to  show  that  it  was
written  in  a  cavern.  The  cavern  was  only  the  place  in  which  they  studied  and  hid
themselves  during  the  Roman  proscription.  The  next  statement  is  equally  strange ;.
indeed,  the  whole  passage  in  Yu'hasin  bears  the  appearance  of  untruth.

t  Carmoly  says  M.  d.  Leon  died  1293.     Itintraires^  etc.,  p.  278.


58

Leon's  death,  1305-1293=12  years.  How  does  this  accord  with  the
account  ?

Isaac  of  Acco  was  a  disciple  of  Nachmanides,  and  wrote  little  treatises
on  the  miracles  he  performed  as  a  Practical  Qabbalist,  by  means  of  the
transposition  and  combination  of  the  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet,
which  system  he  alleged  he  had  learned  from  angels,  who  came  to  him
with  revelations  of  mysteries.  He  has  had  much  to  do  with  that  part  of
the  Practical  Qabbalah,  which  asserts  that  wondrous  results  will  follow
from  the  use,  by  the  adepts,  of  the  Hebrew  holy  Names  of  the  Deity.*

Of  the  book  "  Yu'hasin,"  edition  of  Constantinople,  1566,  Jost  saysrf
''It  is  more  complete  than  the  Cracow  and  Amsterdam  editions,  but  in-
correct j  and  to  be  used  only  with  the  greatest  circumspection,^^  Concerning
the  reproduction  of  Acco's  story  in  the  Mitpa'hath  Se'pharim,  by  Yabetz,
which  we  have  before  mentioned,  R.  Azulai  in  his  Ma-a' rekheth  Se'pha-
rinty  2nd  part  of  the  book,  of  which  the  ist  is  called  Ma-aWekheth
ge^doliniy  and  above  cited;  p.  zoa^  heading  Zohar,  says:  "In  looking
over  the  contents  of  the  Mitpa-hath  Se'pharim,  which  I  recently
received,  I  was  astonished  to  find,  that  the  Than-nah  (R.  S.  b.  Yo*hai)
should  be  asserted  as  not  the  author  of  any  part  of  the  Zohar,  whereas
our  *  lions  of  the  Thorah,*  R.  Moses  d.  Cordovero  and  R.  Yitz'haq  Luriah,
most  strenuously  contradict  this,  and  are  followed  by  many  exalted
saints.  Therefore  it  seems  to  me,  that  also  the  Rabbi  (Yabetz)  himself
was  aware  of  the  contents  of  the  Zohar  to  be  truth  and  perfection,  but  in
his  zeal  against  that  accursed  set  of  transgressors  of  the  statutes  of  the  Beth
Din,  which  '  clings  to  the  various  expressions  of  the  Zohar  in  a  false  and
lying  way,  he  chose  to  oppose  it,  in  order  to  crush  them,  for  God's  sake  !"
which  view  seems  indeed  very  plausible.  As  regards  the  re-publication  of
Isaac  of  Acco's  story  by  a  R.  Elikom  of  Se'mila,  in  his  book  Rabiyah,  at
Ofen  (Buda  Pesth),  1837,  we  may  remark  that  it  contains  alterations
which  suffice  to  show  little  dependence  can  be  placed  upon  it.  If  we
take  the  account  from  Yu'hasin,  we  have  the  following  results  :

I.  R.  Isaac  of  Acco,  believes  in  the  antiquity  and  authenticity  of  that
part  of  the  Zohar  written  in  Aramaic,  and  that  it  comes  from  R.  S.  b.
Yo'haT,  and  his  school.  '

*  See  Ma-a'rekheth  g^  doiim,  by  Azulai,  47^.

\  Allgem,  Geschichte  d,  Judischen  Volkes^  Vol.  ii,  p.  420.


59

2.  He  was  familiar  with  the  existence  of  the  book  whilst  in  Novara,
about  1 291  A.  D.,  during  the  life-time  of  M.  d.  Leon,  and  from  the
statement  just  formulated,  appears  to  have  had  knowledge  of  the  Zohar
in  Syria.

3.  He  goes  to  Spain,  to  inquire  how  this  book  by  R.  S.  b.  Yo'hai  has
become  known  in  his  time.

4.  Among  the  conflicting  statements  was  also  that  of  the  alleged  spu-
riousness  of  the  book.

5.  He  meets  R.  M.  d.  Leon  in  Valadolid,  who^  on  his  oath,  assures
him  that  he,  M.  de  L.,  possesses  the  original  book  of  the  Zohar,  and  was
perfectly  willing  to  show  it  to  hiniy  when  he  would  visit  Avila.  This  was
shortly  before  M.  d.  LeoiTs  death  (1305  A.  D.),  at  which  time  the  2k)har
was  so  well  known,  and  so  thoroughly  studied  in  countries  foreign  to
Spain,  that  the  belief  in  M.  d.  Leon's  authorship  stands  on  a  par  with  the
statement  in  Yu'hasin,  that  he  wrote  it  under  the  guidance  of  the  Shem
ko'thedy  i.  e. ,  the  Writing  Name,  or  the  angel  superintending  writing.

6.  The  old  man,  R.  David  Raphon  Ke'robo  or  Daphon  Korpo,  or
Rafon  of  Corfu,  who  knew  so  much  as  to  be  able  to  say,  *'  that  the  book
Zohar  does  not  anywhere  exist,"  is  an  imaginary  figure  in  the  story.

7.  The  trick  that  Isaac  endeavored  to  play  on  the  widow  and  orphan,
with  the  aid  of  R.  Joseph  the  rich  man  of  Avila  and  his  wife,  is  weak,
and  seems  to  have  too  many  women  mixed  up  >vith  it.

8.  Is  it  possible  that  the  very  M.  d.  Leon,  who,  according  to  this
account,  neglected  his  wife  and  daughter,  should  have  taken  them  into
the  secret  of  the  fraud  he  was  daily  committing,  to  get  money  to  spend
and  throw  away  upon  himself  without  giving  them  any  support?

9.  If  the  wife  and  daughter  did  disclose  this  secret,  why  did  they  not
show  the  MSS.  written  by  M.  d,  Leon  himself?  Why  did  the  astute  rich
man  and  the  deceitful  Rabbi  not  ask  for  it,  so  that  they  might  be  sure  of
the  forgeries  and  expose  them  ?

10.  Who  has  ever  seen  this  large  MSS.  ?    Where  is  it?

11.  The  ending  of  the  account  in  Yu'hasin  is  very  strange,  very  sus-
picious. The  whole  story  is  only  hearsay,  weak,  and  crumbles  into
nothing,  like  the  other  futile  objections  made  against  the  antiquity  of  the
Zohar.


6o

It  is  alleged  by  those  who  say  that  Moses  de  Leon  forged  the  Zohar,
that  the  five  books  undoubtedly  written  by  M.  d.  L.,  do  not  show  any
literary  merit,  that  he  does  not  in  any  of  them  enter  into  the  depth  or
spirit  of  the  Qabbalah,  that  he  was  even  deficient  in  a  knowledge  of  the
Talmudim.  That  M.  d.  L.  traveled  very  much  in  his  life,  having  lived
in  Guadalah,  Vevira,  Valladolid  and  lastly  in  Avila ;  that  he  was  a  great
spendthrift,  and  very  fond  of  worldly  enjoyments,  and  he  was  so  poor
that  he  was  continually  compelled  to  write  for  his  daily  bread.  M.  d.  L.
first  wrote  the  Shushan  Ha-edooth^  i.  e.,  Lily  of  the  Testimony,  1285  ;
then  the  Sepher  Ha-rimmon,  /.  ^.,  The  Book  of  the  Pomegranate,  1287  ;
three  years  later,  1290,  the  Nephesh  Hah-  hokhmah,  i,  e.,  The  Soul  of
Wisdom,  also  called,  Sepher  Hamrtnishqal^  i.  e.,  The  Book  of  the  Balance,
which  has  been  published  in  Basle,  1608.  Sepher  Sheqel  Haq-qodesh^
t,  e,y  Book  of  the  Sacred  Shekel,  1292.  Sepher  Has-sodoth,  />.,  Book  of
the  Secrets,  Mishkan  Ha-edoothy  /.  ^.,  Tabernacle  of  the  Testimony,
1293.  He  appears  to  have  also  written  a  Sepher  has-Shem.^  These  were
written  in  Hebrew,  but  the  Zohar  and  Zoharic  books  are  mostly  in
the  Aramaic.  Here  we  have  numerous  books  written  by  this  alleged
superficially  learned  man,  and  this  ignoramus  has  also,  it  is  said,  the
ability  to  write  the  immense  and  very  learned  book  on  the  Secret
Learning,  the  Zohar,  and  the  other  books  bound  up  with  it.  The  books
we  have  quoted  as  by  M.  d.  L.  were  written  by  him,  between  1 285  and
1 293,  the  period  when  the  opponents  of  the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar  say,
the  author  was  living  a  reckless  life,  traveling  from  place  to  place.  Let  us
admit  he  was  one  year  preparing  the  first  book,  it  then  took  nine  years
for  him  to  write  these  works  in  Hebrew,  the  language  in  which  the
Jewish  learned  men  of  this  period  usually  wrote,  the  exception  being
the  Arabic.  They  never  wrote  books  at  this  time  in  Aramaic,  but
understood  it  as  the  language  of  the  Talmudim.  The  Zohar  is  a  volumi-
nous work,  larger  than  all  the  books  admitted  to  be  by  M.  de  Leon  put
together,  and  they  took  nine  years  for  their  composition,  and  it  would
have  taken,  had  he  the  ability  to  have  written  it,  twelve  to  fifteen  years

♦  Comp.  Pardes  Rimmonun  by  R.  Moses  Cordovero,  fol.  i  loa ,  col.  I ,  in  Sha-ar  has-
Shemothf  1.  ^.,  Gate  of  the  Names,  and  Sha-ar  hat-Tsinnoroth,  i.  e..  Gate  of  the  Chan-
nels or  canals.


6i

to  have  written  the  Zohar.  M.  d.  L.  died  1305,  and  he  would  have  to
have  begun  it  about  1290.  Then  he  did  not  only  write  it  in  this  time,
but  according  to  Drs.  Graetz,  Jellinek,  and  Ginsburg,  he  '^copied  and
sold  it,  to  rich  and  learned  men  at  a  high  price.*'  Now  the  art  of  print-
ing was  not  yet  invented,  yet  a  book  written  in  Avila,  in  Spain,  and
then  secretly  copied  only  by  the  author,  for  sale,  occupies  a  prominent
place  in  the  libraries  of  the  rich  and  learned  of  other  cities  of  Spain,
Italy  and  even  Germany,  at  almost  the  same  time.  The  rich  were  all
ready  to  pay  M.  d.  L.  money  for  his  uncertain  forged  wares,  the  learned
were  too  credulous  and  too  ignorant  to  discover  his  fraud,  and  expose
the  forger.  What  a  slur  upon  the  learning  of  the  Rabbins  of  the  Xlllth
and  XlVth  centuries,  who  were  led  astray  by  this  prodigal,  this  unlearned
and  inferior  writer,  who  was  of  such  bad  reputation  and  of  such  an
equivocal  standing  in  the  learned  world  around  him  !  The  opposers  also
strangely  assert,  that  all  passages  where  the  name  of  **  Moses*'  is
-expressed  or  mysteriously  indicated,  are  evidence  that  M.  d.  L.  wanted
ihe  intelligent  reader  to  understand ^  that  he,  M.  d,  Z.,  was  the  author  of
Zohar,  and  yet  wanted  to  pass  it  off  as  the  genuine  work  of  R.  Shim-on
b.  Yo'hai.  The  learned  historian.  Dr.  J.  M.  Jost  says:*  ''The  passion
for  systems  aroused  by  the  school  of  Aristotle,  and  the  production  of
many  works  on  the  philosophy  of  ethics  and  theosophy  by  the  Rabbis  in
general,  seized  the  minds  of  the  adherents  of  Occult  Science  very  vividly,
especially  during  the  Crusades.  The  Kabbalah  began  to  be  written  down,
and  the  book  Zohar,  in  its  present  form,  a  production  of  the  XII  century,
represented  the  Kabbalah  more  extensively  in  the  usual  way.  The  diffi-
culty in  the  understanding  of  the  symbols  and  the  terms  therein,  excited
the  activity  of  many  Rabbins,  especially  of  Spain  and  France. ' '  He  also
saysif  *'AVhether  the  books,  referred  to  in  the  Zohar,  be  merely  ficti-
tious is  not  decided  ;  the  work  contains  the  most  sublime  symbolism  and
develops  in  a  very  inferior  language,  and  through  an  excessive  amount  of
symbol ization  of  the  Jewish  Laws,  as  well  as  of  visible  nature,  an  uncom-
monly profound  religious  doctrine,  which  it  was  the  intention  to  protect  by
that  thick  veiiy

Another  writer,  Gedalyah  ibn  Yachia  ben  Don  Yosef,  of  Imola  {circa

♦  Geschichte  d,  Jftdischen  Volkes,  ii,  p.  293.
'\  Ibid,  p.  123.


62

1 5 23-1 5 88),  in  his  ShahheUth  haq-Qabdalah,  i,  e,,  Chain  of  Tradition,
begun  at  Ravenna,  1549,  says:*  ''Towards  the  end  of  the  year  5050  of
the  Creation  (1290  A.D,),  several  persons  existed,  who  asserted  that  all
the  parts  of  the  Zohar,  written  in  the  dialect  of  Yerusalem  (the  Talmudi-
cal  dialect),  were  the  composition  of  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo*haT,  but  that  all
which  are  in  the  sacred  language  (pure  Hebrew)  ought  not  to  be  attrib-
uted to  him.  Others  affirmed  that  R.  Moses  ben  Na*h-man  (Nachman-
ides),  having  made  the  discovery  of  this  book  (the  Zohar)  in  the  holy
land,  sent  it  to  Catalonia  (in  Spain),  from  which  it  passed  into  Arragon
and  fell  into  the  hands  of  R.  Moses  de  Leon.  Finally  several  others  have
thought  that  this  Moses  de  Leon  was  a  learned  man,  who  found  all  these
commentaries  in  his  own  imagination,  and  that  in  order  to  draw  by  it
great  sums  from  the  learned,  he  published  it  under  the  name  of  R.
Shim-on  ben  Yo'haT  and  his  companions.  They  add  that  he  acted  thus,
because  he  was  poor  and  weighed  down  with  expenses.*'  t

"As  for  me,'*  says  the  author,  Gedalyah,  "  I  think  that  all  these  opin-
ions have  not  any  foundation,  but  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai  and  his  sacred
society  have  really  said  all  these  things  and  besides  many  others ;  only
they  were  not  able  to  have  the  same  conveniently  written  down  at  that
time,  but  after  having  been  disseminated  a  long  time  in  several  copies,
they  were  finally  collected  and  put  in  order  (redacted).'*

'*  This  is  not  a  matter  to  be  surprised  at ;  because  it  was  in  this  man-
ner that  our  master,  Ye'hudah,  the  Holy,  has  redacted  the  Mishnah,  from
different  manuscripts  which  had  been  before  this,  scattered  to  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth.  It  was  also  in  this  manner  that  R.  Ashi  has  com-
posed the  Gemarah.**

♦  Ed.  of  Amsterdam,  fol.  23  a  and  b,

f  This  may  have  been  partly  taken  from  the  account  said  to  have  been  given  by
Isaac  of  Acco  and  published  in  Yu'hasin,  originally  to  be  found  only  in  the  ancient  edi-
tion of  Constantinople,  which  is  exceedingly  rare.  It  had  been  left  out  of  all  subsequent
editions,  until  Filipowski  reintroduced  it  in  1857,  in  his  London  edition,  pp.  85-95.
Comp.  Landauer*s  objection  to  this  record.  Literaturblatt  des  Orients^  1 845,  Vol.  vi,  col.
Til  et  seq.  Dr.  Graetz  is  compelled  to  acknowledge  that  Isaac  of  Acco :  "  Was  in  the
end  convinced  of  the  genuineness  of  the  Zohar  as  he  wove  into  his  Me'-irath  Enayim,  />.,
Enlightenment  of  the  Eyes,  manifold  Zoharist  ideas.  His  writings  in  which  the  above
record  was  originally  imparted,  appear  to  have  been  lost.'*     The  whole  account  by


63

The  learned  Dr.  S.  M.  Schiller-Szinessy,  Reader  in  Rabbinic  and  Tal-
mudic,  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  in  his  late  able  essay  on  the
Midrashim,*  which  we  have  only  at  this  moment  seen,  says  :  '*  The  nu-
cleus of  the  book  (Zohar)  is  of  Mishnic  times,  R.  Shim* eon  b.  Yohai  was
the  author  of  the  Zohar  in  the  same  sense  that  R.  Yohanan  was  the  author
of  the  Palestinian  Talmud,  /.  ^.,  he  gave  the  first  impulse  to  the  composi-
tion of  the  book.  But  R.  Mosheh  of  Leon,  on  the  other  hand,  was  the
first  not  only  to  copy  and  disseminate  the  Zohar  in  Europe,  but  also  to
disfigure  it  by  sundry  explanatory  interpolations.*'  "The  Zohar  was
begun  in  Palestine  late  in  the  lid  or  early  in  the  Hid  century  A.  D.  and
finished  at  the  latest  in  the  Vlth  or  the  Vllth  century.  //  is  iftipossibU
that  it  should  have  been  composed  after  that  time  and  before  the  Renais-
sance, as  both  language  and  contents  clearly  show.  *  *  This  view  is  also
indorsed  in  The  Speaker's  Commentary.  It  says,t  among  other  things,
the  language  shows  that  the  Zoharic  writings  were  composed  in  Palestine,
but  in  the  Jerusalem  Talmud  §  Synhedrim  iii,  9,  Ed,  princeps  iii,  10,  it
is  forbidden  to  carry  books  belonging  to  Palestine  unto  places  "  without
the  land.**  The  Zoharic  writings  were  without  doubt  sent  by  Nachman-
ides — flour.  1267 — to  his  son  and  to  his  disciples  in  Spain.  On  one  of
Moses  de  Leon's  MSS.  now  in  the  Cambridge  University  Library,  he,  M.
de  L.,  endorses  "And  I  adjure  every  one  who  should  deeply  study  this
book,  or  who  should  copy  it,  or  read  it,  that  he  do  not  blot  out  my  name
from  my  property  (inheritance),  iox  I  have  composed  it."  Is  it  likely,
says  Dr.  Szinessy,  after  such  vanity  he  would  have  written  the  Zohar  and
ascribed  it  to  any  one  else?  The  Doctor  also  terms  him,  an  "inferior
cabbalist."

In  the  Zoharic  writings  it  is  rarely  R.  Shim-on  who  speaks,  the  Qabba-
listic  doctrines  come  from  the  mouth  of  the  companions,  who  after  his

Isaac  of  Acco  has  the  appearance  of  a  forgery,  but  Dr.  Graetz  slaps  at  the  Qabbalists  by
saying:  "  Possibly  the  Kabbalists  destroyed  them."  (Dr.  Graetz,  GeschichU dir  Jtiden,
Vol.  vii,  p.  492.)

♦Encyclop.  Britannica,  9  Ed.  Edinburgh,  1883,  Vol.  xvi,  p.  286  H  seq.

fThe  Holy  Bible  according  to  the  authorized  version  (A.  D.  161 1),  with  an  Explan-
atory and  Critical  Commentary,  and  a  Revision  of  the  Translation  by  Bishops  and  other
clergy  of  the  Anglican  Church.  Edited  by  F.  C.  Cook,  M.A.,  Canon  of  Exeter,  Chap-
lain in  ordinary  10  the  Queen,  etc.     New  Testament,  Vol.  iv,  p.  388.


64

death,  again  reunite  themselves,  to  communicate  to  each  other  their  recol-
lections, and  to  instruct  themselves  reciprocally  in  the  Qabbalistic  Secret
Science.  To  themselves  they  apply  the  Scripture  verse  "  How  beautiful
it  is  to  see  the  brothers  remain  united.*'*

The  companions  always  have  before  them  the  Holy  Writings  of  the
Thorah,  when  either  rising  up  or  lying  down,  f

The  great  critic  R.  Azzaryah  Min  Ha-adomim  dei  Rossi  ox  Rubeisy  *'  of
the  red  ones,*'  of  Ferrara — flourished  1513-1577  A.  D. — author  oi Me'or
Ainayinty  i.e.y  The  Light  of  the  Eyes,  J  followed  the  teachings  of  the  Zohar
as  regards  the  antiquity  of  the  vowel  points.  He  knew  the  book  Yu*hasin,
for  in  his  book  Me'tsareph  rkesephy  /.  e.y  The  Refiner  of  Silver,  §  i,  ch.
2,  he  says :  '*  The  book  Shalsheleth  Jfaq-Qabalah,  /.  e,y  Chain  of  the  Tra-
dition, /.  e,,  Qabbalah,  was  published  at  the  time  of  the  Sepher  Yu^hasin,
which  came  from  the  great  city  Constantina.**  Dei  Rossi  saw  the  un-
truthfulness apparent  in  the  statement  in  the  book  Yu*hasin,  as  to  the
modern  composition  of  the  Zohar,  and  therefore  did  not  follow  it.

The  erudite  Rev.  Dr.  Peter  Allix,§  and  the  Rev.  Thomas  Maurice, ||
also  favour  the  Zohar  as  an  early  book.  We  refer  the  reader  to
the  writings  cited  or  which  will  be  hereafter  cited,  also  to  the
work  of  Joel,  Die  Religionsphilosophie  des  Sohar,   Leipzig,  1849  >   ^^^

*Ps.  cxxxiii,  I.     Zohar  iii,  59^.

f  Zohar,  Part  I,  fol.  115^.  The  following  additional  writers  favour  the  antiq-
uity of  the  Zohar :  J.  Satanow,  in  his,  Kontros  Sepher  haz-Zohar^  i.  e.,  Folio  of  the
Book  Zohar.  Berlin.  1783.  J.  Hamburger.  Real- Encyclopadie  fur  Bibel  und  Talmud^
etc.  Part  i.  1870  Strelitz  in  Mecklenburg,  ii.  1883  in  same,  Supplement,  Leipzig,
1886.  Be'hai  ben  Asher,  pupil  of  R.  Solomon  b.  Abraham  ben  Adereth  (1234-13 10
A.  D.),  acrostically  RaShBA,  who  in  his  Pentateuch  Commentary  of  129 1  A.  D.  quotes
many  passages  under  the  name  of  Midrash  of  Rabbi  Shim -on  b.  Yo'haT,  which  may
be  found  in  the  Zohar.  Comp.  Lev.  xxi,  22,  and  Zohar  iii,  p.  1 14.  Rayah  Me'hem-
nab.  In  the  beginning  of  his  Commentary,  he  says :  "  And  in  the  Midrash  of  R.
Shim-on  ben  Yo-hal  I  have  seen  « And  a  bird  *  this  is  Michael,  *  upon  the  earth  *  this
is  Raphael.     Compare  Zohar  i,  p.  46^,  and  many  other  places.

X  Mantua,  1574-75.     See  Kitto's  Cyclop.  Biblical  Liter.,  Ed.  1876,  iii,  pp.  702-3.

2  The  Judgment  of  the  Ancient  Jewish  Church  against  the  Unitarians  in  the  contro-
versy, etc.     2nd  ed.    Oxford,  1821.

Indian  Antiquities,  etc.    London,  1800,  Vol.  iv.


65

learned  Jesuit  Athanasius  Kircher's  (Edipi  j^gyptiaci.  JRomce,  1653 ;
Tomus  SecunduSy  Partis  Prima ^  pp.  209-400 ;  Dr.  I.  M.  Jest's  Geschichte
des  Judenthums  und  seiner  Secten^  Leipzig,  1859,  Vol.  iii;  and  especially
to  the  greatest  work  on  the  Qabbalah  of  this  cenfhry,  the  Philosophie  der
Geschichte  oder  iiber  die  Tradition^  in  four  volumes,  Vol.  i,  ist  ed.  1827,
2nd  ed.  1857  ;  Vol.  ii,  1834;  Vol.  iii,  1839;  Vol.  iv,  Part  i,  1853,  8vo.
Miinster,  by  the  learned  Roman  Catholic  Franz  Joseph  Molitor.  The
fault  of  Molitor  is,  that  he  follows  too  closely  the  school  of  the  Modern
Qabbalah,  that  of  Yitz*haq  Luriah,  Cordovero,  etc.,  and  not  that  of  the
school  of  the  early  Qabbalah  and  the  Zohar,  which  is  that  in  the  greatest
accord  with  the  New  Testament,  and  writings  of  the  Fathers  of  the
Christian  Church.  Baron  Christian  Knorr  von  Rosenroth*s  great  work,
the  Kabbala  Denudata,  167 7-1 684,  is  of  value  to  the  student,  who  has
mastered  the  rudiments  of  this  philosophy.  He  also  follows  too  closely
the  Modern  Qabbalah.  There  are  a  great  many  other  works  we  can
refer  to,  but  will,  not  weary  the  reader  by  a  list.

Dr.  Christian  D.  Ginsburg*  has  attacked  the  age  and  authenticity  of
the  Zohar,  in  thirteen  objections,  in  which  are  condensed  those  of
Graetz,  Beer,  Jellinek,  Steinschneider,  Geiger,  M.  Sachs,  Yabetz,  Morin,
etc.,  etc.    We  will  take  up  his  objections  seriatim.

I.  The  first  has  been  partly  answered  by  Konitz  and  our  note  to  page
25  ante.'f  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai'  did  not  write  the  Zohar,  it  was  the  produc-
tion of  his  school,  and  because  the  disciples  termed  him  in  one  or  two
places  BoO'tseenah  Ke^doshah,  i,  e.,  the  sacred  light,  that  is  not  evidence
against  the  general  authenticity  of  the  Zoharic  writings.  Similar  phrases
are  very  usual  in  Oriental  imagery  and  are  frequent  in  both  the  O.  T.  and
N.  T.  Compare  Works  of  Rev.  John  Gregorie.  4th  ed.  London,  1684,
p.  109  et  seq.^  and  Kitto's  Cyclop.  Biblical  Liter.,  ii,  832  et  seq.

IL  That  the  Zoharic  writings  mention  the  Hebrew  vowel  points.
If  the  Zohar  was  not  completely  finished  until  about  the  Vlth  or  the
Vllth  century,  by  the  school  of  R.    Shim-on  b.  Yo'haT,   ample   time

•  The  Kabbalah,  its  Doctrines,  Development  and  Literature.  An  Essay,  by  Christian
D.  Ginsburg,  LL.D.  Read  October  19th,  1863;  reprinted,  London,  1865.  Also  Kitto's
Cyclop.  Biblical  Liter.  II,  pp.  699-703.     Encyclop.  Britannica  and  other  works.

I  See  our  synopsis,  ante  pp.  23-26.

5


66

existed  to  put  into  it  the  results  of  the  centuries  previous.  The  subject  of
the  origin  of  the  symbolism  of  the  Hebrew  vowel  points,  in  the  form  we
now  have  them,  is  one  of  much  difficulty,  has  caused  great  disputes  among
the  learned  for  centuries,  and  is  not  yet  settled.  The  result  we  think  may
be  summed  up:  i.  All  Hebrew  writing  must  have  been  in  some  way
vowelized  from  its  commencement  in  the  very  earliest  period.  It  is,  as
are  all  the  Semitic  languages,  written  in  consonantal  form,  and  the  vowels,
which  are  the  life  and  soul  of  it,  are  necessary  to  every  language.  The
difficulty  has  been,  that  so  far  very  ancient  examples  of  pointed  Hebrew
have  not  been  found  in  any  old  MSS.  dating  before  916  A.  D.  nor  any
*  monuments  of  it  before  the  Vlth  century.  It  is  asserted  by  Dr.  Ginsburg,
that  the  Rabbins  of  the  school  of  Tiberias  invented  the  vowel  points,  and
that  they  were  introduced  for  the  first  time  by  the  Karaite  R.  Mocha,  of
Palestine,  whom,  he  says,  flourished  circa  A.  D.  570,*  to  facilitate  the
reading  of  the  Scriptures  for  the  use  of  his  students.  We  think  that
they  only  applied  and  propagated,  but  did  not  invent  the  points. f  The
subject  is  one  of  so  much  difficulty  and  of  such  a  length,  that  we  will  put
it  in  an  Appendix.     See  however,  ante  pp.  26-30.

III.  The  Zohar  in  the  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  /.  e,,  Faithful  Shepherd ;
§  Qe^doshinij  Part  iii,  82^,  has  nearly  the  same  words,  as  are  in  the  Kether
Malkhuth  of  Ibn  Gebirol,  which  forms  part  of  the  Polish  Jewish
Service  for  the  evening  preceding  the  day  of  Atonement,  J  as  follows  :
'*  And  moon  and  sun  remained  like  a  body  without  a  soul,  the  master
over  them  having  darkened  their  lights."  Zohar.  The  Kether  Malkhuth
merely  says,  '*  But  there  is  a  master  over  them  darkening  their  lights. *'§
Dr.  Ginsburg  quotes  Michael  Sachs  ||  to  show  this,  but  he  might  also  have
stated  that  the  context  of  the  Zohar  is  complete  without  these  words,  indeed
they  appear  as  an  addition  out  of  place.     If  appropriate  here,  and  Moses

♦Others  say,  780-800  A.  D.

f  Com  p.  Des  points-voyelles  dans  les  langues  Simitiques  par  Mohe  Schiifab,  in  Ac  Us  de
la  SocicU  philologique^  torn,  viii^  fasicuU  ^,  annie  1877.  Paris,  1879,  §  v,  p.  201-2.
Also  Pinsker  in  Liqqute  Kadmoniyoth.     Vienna,  i860,  pp.  42-43  and  Appendix.

X  See  ante  p.  2  et  seq,

\  See  Dr.  D.  H.  Joel.  Die  Religions-philosophie  des  Sohar^  etc.  Leipzig,  1 849.    p.  63.

II  Die  Relij^ose  Poesie  der  Juden  in  Spanien,  Berlin,     1 845,  p.  229,  Note  2.


67

de  Leon  was  the  author  of  the  Zoharic  writings,  with  intent  to  deceive^
would  he  not  have  turned  these  words  into  the  Aramaic  and  made  them
part  of  the  original  ?

The  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  only  a  fragment  bound  up  with  the  Zohar
proper,  has  been  considered  as  one  of  the  later  books,  and  to  have  been
originally  written  in  Hebrew  and  then  translated  into  the  Aramaic.  We
have  shown  Ibn  Gebirol  lived  1020-1070  A.  D.,  and  had  means  of  access
to  the  original  Qabbalistic  authorities,  and  we  shall  hereafter  show,  that
much  in  his  philosophical  writings  is  in  accord  with  that  set  forth  in  the
Zoharic  books.  Admitting  however,  that  the  redactor  of  the  Zoharic
manuscripts  published  with  the  Rayah  a  marginal  note,  it  is  evident  that
it  was  not  intended  to  deceive,  for  it- was  given  in  the  Hebrew  and  the
rest  of  the  Rayah  is  in  Chaldaic,  nor  is  a  mere  interpolation,  ad-
mitting that  this  is  one,  any  evidence  of  modern  authorship.  Gebirol
lived  over  225  years  before  the  giving  out  to  the  uninitiated  of  the
Zoharic  writings.  Ibn  Gebirol  even  alludes  to  the  Qabbalah  E' eyooneth^
/.  ^.,  the  Speculative  or  Theoretical  Qabbalah  in  his  Tiqqoon  Middoth

han-Nephesh,  A.  D.  1045,  and  Hay  Gaon — 987-1038  A.  D alludes  to

the  Qabbalah  Ma-a'seeth,  /.  e.,  the  Practical  Qabbalah.*

IV.  The  Zoharf  quotes  and  explains  the  in  terchange,  on  the  outside
of  the  Me'zuzzah,J  of  the  letters  ^m  TDD1D3  ITD  KhVZV  Be'MVKhSZ
KhVZV  instead  of  hct  irnSx  mn^  YHVH  ELoHENU  YHVH
introduced  into  Spain  from  France,  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  Thousand
circa  1240.  This  is  an  instance  of  the  permutation  or  transmutation  of
letters  according  to  the  old  system  of  Hebrew  exegesis  called  Ab-bag'gad,%
which  was  known  even  in  the  time  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  hence  was

♦  Landauer  in  the  Literaturblatt  des  Orients.     1845.     No.  13.

t  Part  i,  18^/  23«.

X  The  Me'zuzzah  is  a  piece  of  parchment  upon  which  is  written  ;  Deut.  vi,  4-9;  xi,
13-21,  it  is  then  put  into  a  hollow  cylinder  or  reed,  which  is  affixed  to  the  right  hand
door-post  of  every  door,  in  the  dwelling-houses  of  the  Jews.  Comp.  Kitto's  Cyclop.
Biblical  Liter.  Ed.  1876.     s.  v.  Mezuza,  pp.  152-3.

I  Comp.  Ginsburg,.work  cited,  p.  50  note, and  p.  54-55.  Kitto*s  Cyclop.  Biblical  Liter.,
Ed.  1876,  Vol.  i,  p.  258.  Bibliotheca  Magna  Rabbinica^  Pars,  iv,  p.  230^/  seq.  Historical
and  Critical  Comment,  on  Eccle»iastes  by  C.  D.  Ginsburg,  1 861,  p.  30  et  seq,  Molitor.
Philos.  der  Geschickte  oder  uber  die  Tradition^  Milnster,  Ed.  1 857.   Vol.  i,  p.  55  et  seq.


68

not  any  innovation  by  the  French  Rabbins,  who  were  in  the  Xlllth  cen-
tury, antagonized  by  the  Spanish  Rabbins,  and  not  likely  to  influence  the
latter's  religious  teachings.  In  the  cited  places  in  the  Zohar*  where  these
letters  occur,  the  Me'zuzzah  is  not  spoken  of  at  all ;  and  where  the
Me'zuzzah  as  a  Biblical  commandment  is  spoken  of  in  the  Zohar,f  there
is  not  any  allusion  to  these  letters.  How  the  above  statement  came  into
the  learned  Doctor's  mind  we  do  not  see,  however  he  has  cited  an  author-
ity which  we  have  not  at  hand.

V.  Another  objection  is  that  the  Zohar  J  says :  "  The  She*  kheen-ah  is
light  and  light  belongs  to  fire,  whence  it  is  that  the  house  of  meeting  is  called
Esh  Nogahy  />. ,  a  shining  fire,  or,  brilliant  light. ' '  In  the  original  there  is  a
transposition  of  letters,  and  without  kn  understanding  of  this,  the  logical
**  whence*'  cannot  be  understood,  it  may  be  explained  as  follows  :  She'
kheen-ah,  in  Hebrew  r^yyo  reads  in  the  Zohar  KnjOB^  She"  khintahy  and
the  **  house  of  meeting"  is  in  Hebrew  nDJDH  n'3  Beth  hak  k'nesethy  and
reads  in  the  Zohar  KnB^'JD  '3  Bai  k' nishiah ;  hence  the  transmutation  of
She'kintah  and  K'nishtah,  /.  ^.,  KnrDBr  and  xna^^JD,  from  which  Esh
nogah,  L  e,,  shining  light,  as  a  name  for  the  latter  in  consequence  of  its
being  of  the  nature  of  the  former.  So  it  says  in  the  Tiqqooneh  haz-Zohar  6a :
**  The  *  house  of  prayer  *  of  above  is  *  Esh  nogah  *  and  *  My  house '  below,
is,  a  meeting  house."  Compare  Isaiah  Ivi,  7,  **  Mine  house,"  ^n^a  Bcu'thee
shall  be  called  a  ''house  of  prayer,"  in  Hebrew  nSan  rr2  Beth  Te'-
phillahy  and  in  the  Zohar  KnB^'JD  "D  Bat  k'nishtah.  We  must  take  note
of  the  former  explanation  here.  Compare  also  Jerem.  xxiii,  29.  Dr.
Ginsburg  has  not  followed  this  out.  The  objection  is  based  on  the  idea
that  the  word  Esh  nogah  {Esnogd)  is  a  Portuguese  word,  a  corruption  of
the  word  Synagogue,  and  therefore  a  mistake  in  the  Zohar,  coming
from  Moses  de  Leon,  as  a  Spaniard  and  the  author  of  the  Zohar ;  but
the  Portuguese  word  for  synagogue  is  not  Estioga  but  Synagogay  and  in
Italian  Sinagoga.  The  word  Esnoga,  however,  is  a  Portuguese  Jewish
term  for  the  Jewish  **  house  of  prayer,"  and  as  such,  it  passed  over  to  and
is  used  also  by  the  Portuguese   Christians,      In  the  same  manner  the

♦  Part  i,  p.  18^  and  23a.

f  Part  iii,  263^  and  269^.     Deut.  vi,  9;  xi,  20,

X  Part  iii,  282a.    The  Rayah  Me*hemnah


69

German  Jewish  Schule,  and  the  Italian  scuola^  i.  e.y  school  for  syna-
gogue (the  synagogue  being  really  a  school  for  the  adult,  the  Beth^
hammidrashy  i,  e,y  House  of  Learning  or  School  for  Learning,
anciently,  so  Schule  and  scuold)  passed  over  to  and  is  used  by,  the  Chris-
tians of  Germany  and  Italy,  to  designate  a  synagogue.  But  in  correct
German,  synagogue  is  SynagogCy  in  Portugal  and  Spain  synagoga,  and  in
Italy  we  have  sinagoga,

VI.  "The  Zohar,  Part  ii,  32a,  mentions  the  Crusades,  the  momentary
taking  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Crusaders  from  the  Infidels,  and  the  retaking
of  it  by  the  Saracens.***

In* the  rVth  Branch  of  Luriah's  book  cited, f  he  shows  from  statements
in  the  Zohar,  J  '*  after  four  hundred  years  shall  exist  (or  rise)  a  sovereign
of  the  sons  of  Yishmael  (the  Arabs),  etc,  and  it  shall  be  given  to  him  as
his  portion  (or,  he  shall  have  possession  of)  the  holy  land.  * '  Omar,  king
of  the  Arabs,  conquered  Jerusalem  and  the  holy  land  in  397  of  the  fifth
thousand  (4397  A.  M.  equals  637  A.  D.),  this  happened  569  years  after
the  destruction  of  the  second  Temple,  which  occurred  1 73  years  before
the  close  of  the  fourth  thousand  of  years,  hence  there  is  569  years  be-
tween the  destruction  and  that  conquest,  why  did  the  Zohar  say  400

♦  The  Crusades  were  : — i.  1096:  Jerusalem  taken  by  assault,  July  15.  1099:  God-
frey de  Bouillon,  King  of  Jerusalem.

2.  St.  Bernard's,  1 146,  headed  by  Conrad  II  and  Louis  VII.  Jerusalem  lost  to  the
Crusaders,  1 187.

3.  Frederick  Barbarossa.  Philip  II,  France;  Richard  I,  England,  1 188- 1 190.
Ifruitless.

4.  Henry  VI.     Successful  1195101197.

5.  That  of  Pope  Innocent  III,  1 198.  Baldwin  of  Flanders,  attacks  the  Greeks  and
takei:  Constantinople  (Byzantium),  120J.

6.  1 216:  Frederick  II  obtains  Jerusalem  on  a  truce  of  10  years.

7.  St.  Louis  (the  IX  of  France),  1248,  defeated  and  taken  prisoner  at  Mansourah,
April  8th ;  1250,  ransomed;  truce  10  years.

8.  1270,  by  the  same,  who  died  at  Carthage,  Aug.  2,  1270.  Pnnce  Edward  (after
Edward  I),  of  England,  at  Acre,  1 271.  In  1291  the  Sultan  takes  Acre  and  the  Christ-
ians are  driven  out  of  Syria.

t  Comp.  ante  p.  49.

X  Part  ii,  end  of  \  Vayera,  32a,  and  compare  what  we  have  said  anti  p.  49.


70

years?  Moses  de  Leon,  if  he  wrote  the  Zohar,  could  have  placed  a
correct  prediction  in  it,  as  the  time  of  conquest,  637  A.  D.,  was  well
known  in  his  day.  Luriah  says :  The  fact  is,  the  passage  in  the  Zohar
dates  from  the  time  of  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai  and  his  companions.  At
that  time  about  100  years  had  elapsed  since  the  destruction  of  the  second
Temple,  hence  there  remained  up  to  the  Arab  conquest  469  years,  which
was  taken  at  the  round  number  400  years.  Those  who  endeavor  to  prove
the  late  writing  of  the  Zohar  from  these  facts,  Luriah  calls  upon  to  explain
the  other  prediction  in  the  same  passage,  *'  the  holy  land  shall  not  be
delivered  (or,  remain)  to  the  children  of  Edom,'*  /.  ^.,  the  Christians.*
Would  it  have  been  difficult  during  the  last  centuries  for  the  Christian
powers  to  have  combined  and  conquered  the  holy  land  from  the  Turks,
had  it  not  been  intended  by  God  that  they  should  not  have  it  ?  We  can
also  say,  would  it  not  have  been  in  accord  with  a  writing  by  De  Leon,  to
have,  from  the  evident  to  him  growing  power  of  the  Christian  sovereigns,
predicted  such  in  the  future  ?  Luriah  says,  it  is  evidently  providential
that  the  sons  of  Yishmael  (the  son  of  Abraham)  reign  over  Palestine,  and
that  the  Christian  powers  of  Europe  should  fail  in  reconquering  and  hold-
ing the  holy  land.  Luriah  says,  the  rest  of  the  Yishmaelitic  empire,  and
the  conquest  from  them  by  the  branch  of  the  Son  of  David,  is  mentioned
in  the  Firqeh  (T  Rabbi  Eliezer^  which  was  written  before  the  compilation
of  either  of  the  Talmudim.

The  same  idea  is  in  the  Mysteries  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai.f  In
La  KabbalCfX  Prof.  Franck,  alluding  to  the  adverse  criticisms  as  to
the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar  and  its  authorship,  says:§  ''Several
critics  have  thought  that  they  observed,  under  the  name  Ishmaelites,

*  Eklom  at  one  time  meant  pagan  Rome,  then  Byzantium,  the  capital  taken  for  the
whole  of  the  Eastern  Roman  Empire,  then  the  Christians  and  modern  Catholic  Rome.
To  this  day,  the  people  of  Central  Asia  call  the  Sultan  at  Constantinople,  the  Sultan  of
Rome.

t  See  Jellinek*s  Bet  ha-Midrasch.     Dritter  Theil^  p.  xix  et  seq.

X  La  Kahbale  ou  la  philosophie  religietise  des  h^breux,  par  Ad,  Franc k ^  prof esseur-
agtige  a  lafaailti  des  lettres  de  Paris ^  prof esseur  de  philosophie  au  colUge  royal  de  Char-
lemagne,    Paris,  Libraire  de  P  Hachette,     Rue  Pierre-sarratin,  12,  184.J.

{  P.  98  el  seq.


71

a  reference  to  the  Mohammedan  Arabs,  whom  all  the  writings  pub-
lished by  modern  Jews  designate  under  the  same  name  *  *  *.
Here  is  that  which  a  disciple  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai  claims  to
have  heard  from  the  mouth  of  his  Master :  *  Woe  upon  the  moment  in
which  Yishmael  saw  the  world,  and  received  the  sign  of  circumcision  !
For  what  did  the  Holy  One,  whose  Name  he  blessed  !  do  ?  He  excluded
the  children  of  Yishmael  {Be^nai  Yishmael),  from  the  heavenly  union,
and  gave  them  a  portion  below  in  the  holy  land  on  account  of  their  cir-
cumcision ;  thus  the  children  of  Yishmael  are  destined  (or  appointed,
ze^  mee-nin)  to  rule  over  the  holy  land,  when  it  is  vacated  (or  empty,
raiqua-yah)  by  all  Israel,  a  long  time,  inasmuch  (or,  in  proportion)  as
their  circumcision  is  also  empty  {raiqita-yahy  i,  ^.,  empty,  imperfect)  ;
and  they  will  prevent  the  children  of  Israel  {Be'nai  Yisradl)  from
returning  to  their  place,  until  the  merit  of  the  children  of  Yishmael
(v.  s.)  shall  be  exhausted.  And  the  children  of  Yishmael  are  destined
(ze^  mee-nin  v,  s.)  to  arouse  terrible  wars  in  the  world,  and  to  have  the
children  of  Edom  {Be'nai  Edom^  gathered  together  against  them,  waging
war  against  them,  one  part  at  sea,  another  on  land,  and  another  near
Yerusalem ;  and  they  will  prevail  one  over  the  other,  and  the  holy  land
shall  not  be  delivered  to  the  children  of  Edom  '*  (Zohar  ii,  32^?).

In  order  to  understand  the  meaning  of  these  lines,  continues  Franck,
it  suffices  to  know,  that  the  Jewish  authors,  /.  e.,  those  who  wrote  in
Hebrew,  originally  indicated  by  the  name  of  Edom,  pagan  Rome,  after-
wards Christian  Rome  and  all  Christian  nations.  As  this  passage  cannot
refer  to  heathen  Rome,  the  idea  was  to  speak  of  the  war  of  the  Saracens
against  the  Christians,  and  even  of  the  Crusades  prior  to  the  capture  of
Yerusalem.'*  So  far  Franck.*  Franck  is  evidently  inclined  to  ascribe
this  to  the  interpolation  of  a  later  writer,  for  he  finds  R.  Shim-on  ben
Yo*hai*s  teachings  to  be  in  the  Zohar.

In  the  commentary  by  Abravanel,  on  Isaiah  Ixiii,  6,  is :  '*  Rabbi  Yish-
maelf  says :  The  children  of  Yishmael  will  wage  three  awful  wars  in  the
latter  days,  as  is  said  in  Isaiah  xxi,    15,  *  They  flee  from  the  sword.'

♦  Ibid.  99-1  cx).

f  Who  was  a  contemporary  of  R.  Akecbah,  the  master  of  R,  Shim-on  ben  Yo'hal.


72

The  first  war  will  be  on  land,  as  is  said*  '  from  the  drawn  sword  ';  the
second  will  be  at  sea,  according  tof  *And  from  the  bent  bow;'  and  the
third  will  be  in  the  Ke^  rakh  gadol  Shebba-Romi,  /.  ^.,  in  the  great  city  of
the  Roman  Empire,  as  it  issaidj  'and  from  the  grievousness  of  war.'  "
That  the  Zoharic  version,  substituting  Jerusalem  for  Rome,  is  very  similar
to  this  early  prediction  of  R.  Yishmael  is  quite  apparent  to  the  mind,  but
in  the  latter,  the  reference  also  is  apparently  to  Catholic  Rome,  or  at
least  Byzantium,  for  it  is  *'in  the  latter  days;"  /.  e.^  it  is  at  the  time  of
the  redemption  of  Israel  and  her  restoration  to  the  holy  land,  that  these
three  wars  are  to  occur.     The  Zohar  may  refer  to  pagan  Rome  or  to
Byzantium,  the  Holy  City  of  the  Greek  Church,  but  not  necessarily  to
the  Mohammedans,  for  in  the  days  of  R.  Yishmael  the  Mohammedans
did  not  exist.     The  ''children  of  Yishmael  "  were  the  asserted  descend-
ants of  Abraham  through  the  son  of  Hagar ;  the  "  children  of  Israel"  the
descendants  of  Abraham  through  Isaac.  The  Mohammedans  as  "  children
of  Yishmael"  do  not  app)ear  in  history  until  centuries,  some  500  years,
after  R.  Yishmael's  prediction,  why  apply  the  Zoharic  prediction  neces-
sarily to  the  Crusades  ?    The  empire  of  Yishmael  is  mentioned  in  the
Talmud,  which  was  redacted  long  before  Mohammedanism  ;  it  says :   "It
is  good  to  live  under  the  government  of  Yishmael.  "§    The   name  has
been  applied  to  the  Turks  in  Europe  since  742  A.  D.,  but  long  before
Mohammed,  the  Yishmael ite,  the  name  "children  of  Yishmael  "  desig-
nated all  the  asserted  descendants  of  Yishmael,   son  of  Abraham.     This
fact  must  be  kept  in  view  by  the  student,  for  a  proper  understanding  of
the  Zoharic  passage.     Dr.    Ginsburg  makes   this  error,    he  quotes  the
Zohar  as  saying,  "descendants  of  Ishmael,  /.  ^.,  the  Mohammedans,"
assuming  the  Zoharic  reference  to  be  to  the  followers  of  that  religion,  call-
ing them  by  the  latter  name  no  less  than  three  times  ;||  also  always  saying :
"  the  descendants  of  Ishmael  "  instead  of  "children  of  Yishmael  "  as  it
"is  written  in  the  Zohar,  his  object  apparently  being,  to  convey  the  idea  of
a  more  recent  period  in  the  history  of  this  branch  of  Abraham's  children.

*Ibid.       \Ibid.       Xlbid.

\  Treatise  Shabbaih,  lia»

II  The  Kabbalah,  its  Doctrines,  etc.,  p.  87  et  seq.


73

He  also  translates  "  the  children  of  Edom  "  as  *'  the  Christians."  But
this  does  not  necessarily  follow,  '*  Be'nai  Edoni  *'  now  means  Christians,
it  was  originally  a  Jewish  designation  of  the  Pagan  Romans,  for  we  may
read  in  Abravanel's  book,  Ma-ye^ nai ye' shoo-ah^  i.e.,  Fountains  of  Salva-
tion, and  R.  Liva's  Ne-tza'h  Yisrael,  i.  e.,  Victory  of  Israel,  that  the
words  of  Rab  in  the  Talmud*  refer  to  the  kingdom  of  Edom,  i.e.,  Rome.
In  the  Midrash  Vay-yiqrah  Rabbah,\  "  Edom  *'  is  mentioned  in  connec-
tion with  the  vision  of  Daniel  (vii,  7),  on  which  the  commentary  Math-
noth  Ke'hunnahy  i.  <?.,  Gifts  of  Priesthood,  says:  "He  (Daniel)  saw  the
dominion   of  Edom  exceeding  the  other  three.'* J     Ibn   Ezra,    says:

*'  There  were  few  people  believing  in  that  man  (Jesus)  who  was  taken  for
a  deity ;  but  when  Rome,  at  the  time  of  Constantine,§  who  renewed  the
whole  religion  and  put  the  image  of  that  man  on  his  banner,  believed  in
him,  there  was  nobody  in  the  world  keeping  the  new  law  except  a  few
Edomites,  therefore  Rome  is  called,  the  kingdom  of  Edom."  These
quotations  show  the  antiquity  of  the  names  '*  children  of  Yishmael*'
and  **  children  of  Edom,"  and  that  the  first  was  applied  to  the  Arabs
long  before  their  becoming  followers  of  Mohammed,  and  the  latter  was
first  applied  to  the  pagan  Romans.  Further,  the  passage  quoted  by  Dr.
Ginsburg,  is  only  a  fragment  selected  to  attack  the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar.
The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  whole  passage  :||

"  Rabbi  Yoseh  and  Rabbi  *Heeyah  were  walking  together,  said  R.
Yoseh  to  R.  'Heeyah:  Why  art  thou  silent?  a  road  can  only  appear
straight  by  (a  conversation  on  or  an  explanation  of)  matters  of  the
Thorah.  R.  'Heeyah  aroused  himself  and  wept.  He  began  and  said :
We  read  in  Genesis  (xi,  30),  'And  Sarah  was  barren,  she  had  no  child.*

*  Treatise  Sanhedrin,  98^.

fCh.  13,  p.  2,  col.  2.

%  Comp.  Exposition  of  the  Thorah  by  R.  Be'hal,  Gen.,  36^/  BeWaisheeth  Rabbah^  15^,
and  \  16;  fol.  40</,  41^,  J  43,  fol.  59a,  and  \  65.    She' moth  Rabbah  (Exodus)  fol.  124^,

?35-

\  This  is  evidently  a  reference  to  Byzantium,  as  Rome,  it  was  then  in  the  Eastern
Empire,  and  is  to  the  Greek  Church.

II  Zohar  ii,  32a.     Brody  and  Amsterdam  editions,  which   follow  the   Constantinople
and  Mantua  editions.


74

Woe  on  account  of  this ;  woe  upon  the  time  when  Hagar  gave  birth  to
Yishmael !  Whereupon  R.  Yoseh  said  to  him :  Wherefore,  did  not  she
(Sarah),  herself  afterwards  bear  a  son,  a  holy  branch?  Said  R.  *Hee-
yah  to  him :  Thou  shalt  see  it  as  I  see  it,  and  so  I  have  heard  it  from
the  mouth  of  Rabbi  Shim-on  (b.  Yo*hai),  and  I  cried — ^Woe  upon  that
time  !  For  since  Sarah  was  childless,  '  she  said  to  Abraham :  Go  in,  I
pray  thee,  unto  my  maid,'  (Gen.  xvi,  2),  in  consequence  of  which,  Hagar
succeeded  in  replacing  Sarah,  her  mistress,  and  having  a  son  from
Abraham.  And  Abraham  said  (to  God) :  '  O  that  Yishmael  may  live
before  thee!'  (Gen.  xvii,  18.)  And  though  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be
He  !  had  given  him  assurance  about  Yitz'haq,  Abraham  clung  to  Yish-
mael, until  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  He !  answered  him,*  *  As  for  Yish-
mael,  I  have  heard  thee  !'  Afterwards  he  (Yishmael)  was  circumcised  and
admitted  into  the  holy  covenant,  until  Yitz'haq  went  forth  into  the  world.
Now,  Come  and  see  !  400  years  had  the  guardian -angel  of  the  *  children  of
Yishmael '  thus  existed,  when  he  (the  angel  of  Yishmael)  asked  the  Holy
One,  blessed  be  He !  saying :  Has  he,  who  is  circumcised,  a  share  in  thy
Name  ?  He  answered  him :  Yes.  He  then  said  to  Him :  Yishmael  is
circumcised  (and  at  his  thirteenth  year),  why  has  he  no  part  in  Thee  like
Yitz'haq?  Said  He  to  him:  Because  the  latter  has  been  given  the  sign
of  the  covenant  according  to  the  rules,  and  the  other  one  is  not  so.  And
not  only  this,  but  the  sons  of  Yitz'haq  are  joined  to  Me  at  the  proper  age
of  eight  days,  while  the  sons  of  Yishmael  remain  distant  from  Me  a  long
time  (13  years).  Said  he  to  Him:  Though  this  be  so,  should  he,  be-
cause of  his  having  been  circumcised,  remain  without  a  good  reward  ?
Woe  upon  the  time,  when  Yishmael  was  born  in  the  world  and  was  cir-
cumcised !"  With  this  '*  Woe  "  begins  the  portion  we  have  before  quoted ;
read  in  this  connection,  the  **Woe"  has  quite  a  different  meaning  and
bearing,  from  that  of  a  first  sentence  of  an  exclamation  and  peroration,
uttered  by  the  writer  of  the  Zoharic  passage,  as  those  opposed  to  the
antiquity  of  the  Zohar  desire  it  to  appear.  Further  the  paragraph  does
not  end  where  the  fragment  quoted  by  Dr.  Ginsburg  apparently  ends
*'and  the  holy  land  shall  not  be  delivered  to  the  children  of  Edom,"  it
goes  on  :  "At  that  time,  a  people  from  the  extremes  of  the  world  shall
♦  Ibid,,  20.


75

arise  against  the  guilty  Rome,  and  prosecute  a  war  against  her  for  three
months,  and  many  peoples  shall  be  gathered  together  there  and  fall  into
its  hands,  until  all  the  children  of  Edom  shall  be  gathered  against  it  from
all  the  ends  of  the  world,^  and  then  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  He  !  will
arise  over  them,  according  to,  and  in  fulfillment  of,  Isaiah  (xxxiv,  6)
*  For  YHVH  has  a  slaughter  in  Bots-rah.'  '*

What  has  such  a  war  to  do  with  the  crusades?  Bots-rah  means  Rome.f
**  The  great  city  in  the  Roman  Empire  '*  is  to  be  visited  by  Tohoo  vab-Bo-
hco,  in  the  Messianic  time.  This  ''great  city"  is  Bots-rah,  so  says
Abravanel  in  his  Mash-mee-ah  ye' shoo^h,  /.  e,,  Herald  of  Salvation,  fol.
17^.  All  the  best  Hebrew  commentators  agree  upon  this,  that  Bots-rah
means  Rome,  and  it  is  against  Rome  that  the  Zohar  says,  a  destructive
war  is  to  be  waged  simultaneously  with  that  predicted  war  **  in  the  holy
land,  both  on  land  and  at  sea,  and  near  Yerusalem,  as  a  great  slaughter
(or  Ze-bahy  i.e.,  sacrifice),  to  YHVH,  etc.,  to  seize  the  corners  of  the  earth,
etc."  The  Zohar  terminates  this  prophecy  with  '*  And  He  will  destroy
the  children  of  Yishmael  from  it  (the  holy  land),  and  break  every
superior  army  (or  strength),  and  there  shall  not  remain  a  superior
army  (or  strength)  over  a  people  in  the  world,  except  the  army  {or
strength)  of  Israel  alone.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  Psalm  (cxxi,  5)
'YHVH  is  thy  keeper,  YHVH  is  thy  shade  upon  thy  right  hand.'  "
This  ends  the  quotation  of  which  the  adverse  critics  Ginsburg,  Graetz,
etc.,  have  only  used  a  small  portion,  applying  the  mutilated  fragment  to
an  event  in  history  with  which,  when  the  whole  passage  is  read  in  full,  the
paragraph  quoted  by  them  has  not  any  connection,  or  is  it  a  fact,  that
after  the  Crusades,  the  armies  of  the  contending  nations  were  annihilated
and  those  of  Israel  alone  preserved  ?  How  about  the  great  slaughter  at
Rome  at  the  time  of  the  war  of  the  Crusades  in  the  holy  land,  previous  to
the  victorious  preservation  of  Israel?  But  our  critics  have  apparently  not
seen  and  have  not  given  any  attention,  to  these  questions  which  may  be
founded  on  the  final  portion  of  the  prediction.     Further,  the  Zohar  has

*  Evidently  not  the  Crusades.

f  Comp.  Ibn  Ezra  on  Is :  xxxiv,  6,  and  Amos  i,  12;  R.  D.  Qim'qee  on  Is  :  Ixiii,  i.
Abravanel  on  the  same,  and  on  Is:  xxxiv,  6,  and  Jer.  xlix,  13.  Targum  Jonathan  on
the  latter  verse.    In  the  Talmud,  Treatise, /V*w-*^«/w,  118^.


76

not  exhausted  this  subject  in  the  place  before  quoted  ;  if  we  consult  the
III  Part*  we  will  find  the  relative  position  of  Israel  and  Yishmael,  in  the
symbolical  Sarah  and  Hagar,  as  mistress  and  maid,  is  there  discussed,
and  the  conclusion  reached,  that  though  the  position  of  the  mistress
(Israel)  may,  under  the  temporary  prominence  of  the  maid  (Yishmael),
be  pitiable,  in  the  future  the  mistress  will  be  restored  to  her  former  emi-
nence. The  essential  parts  of  this  last  reference  are :  *'  We  have  learned
elsewhere :  Once,  during  a  walk  with  his  disciples,  R.  Shim-on  said  to  the
latter :  I  see  all  the  nations  above,  and  Israel  beneath  all  of  them,  what
is  the  reason  ?  It  is  because  the  King  has  dismissed  the  Matronitha,  and
given  her  place  to  her  maid.  Therefore  it  is  said :  '*  For  these  things
the  earth  is  disquieted,  etc.,t  *  for  *  *  an  handmaid  that  is  heir  to  her
mistress. '  What  does  *  handmaid  *  mean  ?  It  is  the  alien  crown,  the  first-
bom  of  which  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  He,  killed  in  Egypt,  as  it  is
written :  *  Even  unto  the  first-bom  of  the  maid-servant  that  is  behind  the
mill.*  (Exod.  xi,  5.)  Formerly  she  sat  behind  the  mill,  and  now  that
maid-servant  is  heir  to  her  mistress.  R.  Shim-on  wept  and  said':  The
King  without  the  Matronitha  cannot  be  called  *King;'  the  king  who
joins  the  hand-maid  of  the  Matronitha — where  is  his  dignity  ?  There  is,
however,'  a  mystery  in  the  matter,  explained  by  the  fact,  that  a  voice  is
appointed  to  announce  to  the  Matronitha  and  to  tell  her ;  '  Rejoice
greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion  !  Shout  O  daughter  of  Yerusalem,  behold,
thy  king  cometh  unto  thee,  he  is  just  and  having  salvation,  lowly  and
riding  upon  an  ass.'  "J  (Zechar.  ix,  9.)  *  *  **  And  again,  we  have
learned  elsewhere :  That  maid-servant  is  appointed  to  rule  over  the  holy
land  below,  as  the  Matronitha  used  to  do  formerly,  and  now  it  is  the
maid-servant  who  has  become  heir  to  her  mistress  over  all;  but  the
Holy  One,  blessed  be  He !  has  resolved  to  return  the  Matronitha
to  her  place  as  heretofore.  The  king  rejoices  on  account  of  his  return  to
her  and  his  separation  from  the  maid-servant,  and  the  Matronitha  is

*  p.  69a  of  the  Brody  or  the  Amsterdam  Ed.*  Paroshath  A-ha^raiMoth^  fol.  31,  col.
3-4  of  the  Cremona  Ed,

f  Comp,  Prov.  xxx,  21-23.

X  Interpreted  by  most  Hebrew  commentators  as  referring  to  the  Messiah,  who,  from
a  Hebrew,  and  consequently  Zoharic,  point  of  view,  still  is  to  come.


n

overjoyed  at  her  reunion  with  the  king;  hence:  Rejoice  greatly,  O
daughter  of  Zion,  etc.,"  as  above.  This  portion,  from  the  Zohar  iii,  69a,
explains  and  completes  the  other  portion  from  ii,  32^?.  The  Mysterien
des  R,  Simon  ben  Jochai^  undoubtedly  written  long  before  the  Crusades,
appears  to  refer  to  the  same  subject,  f  We  think  these  remarks  dispose
of  the  adverse  criticism.

VII.  Dr.  Ginsburg  has  made  use  of  writings  by  Drs.  Adolph  Jel-
linek,  B.  Beer,  and  Zuckerman,  formulated  by  them  in  their  futile  en-
deavors to  show  the  modern  time  of  the  authorship  and  content  of  the
Zoharic  books.  We  will  hereafter  give  these,  and  it  will  be  seen  that
they  all  differ  among  themselves,  and  that  history  does  not  support  their
statements  as  applied  to  their  theme.     Dr.  Ginsburg  says  :  J

**  7.  The  Sohar  records  events  which  transpired  A.D.  1264.  Thus  on
Numb,  xxiv,  1 7,  which  the  Sohar  explains  as  referring  to  the  time  pre-
ceding the  advent  of  Messiah,  it  remarks,  *  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be
He,  is  prepared  to  rebuild  Jerusalem.  Previous  to  the  rebuilding  thereof
He  will  cause  to  appear,  a  wonderful  and  splendid  star,  which  will  shine
seventy  days.  It  will  first  be  seen  on  Friday,  Elul  ^  July  25  th,  and
disappear  on  Saturday  or  Friday  evening  at  the  end  of  seventy  days.
On  the  day  preceding  [its  disappearance,  /.  ^.,  October  2nd]  when
it  will  still  be  seen  in  the  city  of  Rome,  on  that  self-same  day  three
high  walls  of  that  city  of  Rome  and  the  great  palace  will  fall,  and  the
pontiff  ruler  of  the  city  will  die.'  {Sohar  iii,  212^.)  Now  the  comet
here  spoken  of  appeared  in  Rome,  July  25th,  1264,  and  was  visible  till
October  2nd,  which  are  literally  the  seventy  days  mentioned  in  the  Sohar,
Moreover,  July  25th,  when  the  comet  first  appeared,  actually  happened
on  a  Friday ;  on  the  day  of  its  disappearance,  October  2nd,  the  sovereign
pontiff  of  Rome,  Urban  IV,  died  at  Perugia,  when  it  was  believed  that
the  appearance  of  the  comet  was  the  omen  of  his  death,  and  the  great
and  strong  palace  (kdidi  k^th)  Vincimento,  fell  on  the  self-same  day,
October  2nd,  into  the  hands  of  the  insurrectionists.'*

♦  Jellinek's  Bet  ha-Midrasch,  etc.,  Dritter  TheiL     Leipzig.     1855.

f  Sec  ante,  p.  37.

X  The  Kabbalah,  etc.,  before  cited,  p.  88.


78

The  portion  referred  to  is  Numbers  xxiv,  17,  and  reads  in  full  as  fol-
lows :*

**I  see  him,  but  not  now.  These  words  were  partly  fulfilled  in  that
time,  and  partly  afterwards,  and  partly  (they  will  be  fulfilled)  in  the  time
of  King  Messiah.  We  have  learned,  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  He  1
resolved  upon  rebuilding  Yerusalem,  and  will  cause  to  appear  a  fixed  star
scintillating  in  70  flaming  channels,  and  70  shining  beams,  in  the  centre
of  the  firmament ;  and  70  other  stars  will  borrow  their  light  from  it.
And  it  is  to  shine  and  flame  seventy  days ;  on  the  sixth  day  it  will  be
seen  on  the  25th  day  of  the  6th  month,  and  on  the  7th  day,  it  will  dis-
appear at  the  expiration  of  70  days.  On  the  first  day  it  will  be  seen  in
the  (or,  one)  city  (of  the  Empire)  of  Rome ;  f  ^.nd  on  that  day  the  three
prmcipal  walls  of  Rome  and  the  great  temple  (or,  hall),  will  fall,  and
the  ruler  of  that  city  will  die,  thus  that  star  will  be  extended  to  be  seen
in  the  world.  And  at  that  time,  mighty  wars  will  be  waged  in  all  the
four  sides  of  the  world,  and  no  faith  (faithfulness)  will  be  found  among
them,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  world.  When  that  star  shines  in  the
middle  of  the  firmament,  a  great  king  will  arise  and  rule  in  the  world,
and  proudly  look  down  upon  all  the  kings,  and  make  war  in  two  direc-
tions and  be  victorious  over  them.  But  on  the  day  of  the  disappearance
of  the  star,  the  entire  holy  land  will  quake  in  45  miles  circumference
round  about  the  spot  where  the  Temple  stood.  And  a  cave  from  beneath
the  earth  will  be  opened^  and  a  fire  will  burst  forth  from  it,  with  a  bright
conflagration  (or  general  burning).  And  from  that  cave  a  large  and
powerful  birdj  will  grow  supreme  and  rule  over  the  world,  and  to
him  the  government  shall  be  given,  and  the  exalted  saints  will  disappear
as  naught  before  him.  And  thus  King  Messiah  will  be  revealed  in  all
the  world,  and  to  him  the  government  will  be  given ;  and  on  his  appear-
ance, the  children  of  the  world  will  meet  with  trouble  after  trouble,  and
Israel's  adversaries  will  grow  strong ;  thus  the  spirit  of  the  Messiah  will

*In  the  Brody  and  Amsterdam  editions,  iii,  J  Balak,  p.  212^/  in  the  Cremona  ed.
J  Balak,  fol.  98,  col.  3.

f  In  the  Cremona  Edition,  "  Rome  "  is  omitted.

\  One  version  says  *]1^  oph^  i.  ^.,  bird,  doubtless  meaning  a  great  angel^  another
says    ^yj^    anaph^  i,  e,,  branch.


79

be  aroused  against  them,  and  he  will  make  an  end  of  the  guilty  Edom,
and  all  the  land  of  Edom  he  will  burn  in  fire.  Thus  it  is  written :  '  And
Israel  shall  do  valiantly.*  ■**  (Numb,  xxiv,  i8.)  Or  as  this  passage  says
in  full,  •  And  Edom  shall  be  a  possession  and  Seir  also  a  possession  as  his
enemies  (the  enemies  of  Israel),  and  thus  Israel  will  do  valiantly.*  And
at  that  time  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  He !  will  resurrect  the  dead  of  his
people,  and  make  death  forgotten  among  them,  and  thus  *  the  right  hand
of  YHVH  does  valiantly ;  I  shall  not  die  but  I  shall  live  *  (Ps.  cxviii,  15).
*And  Saviours  shall  come  upon  Mount  Zion,*  etc.  (Obadiah  i,  21.)
'  And  YHVH  shall  be  king  over  all  the  earth,  etc.*  **  (Zechar.  xiv,  9.)

Now  from  this  quotation  in  full  from  the  Zohar,  it  is  evident  that  the
prophesying  writer  had  in  view  a  very  distant  future,  in  which  all  these
particulars  were  to  be  fulfilled^  and  that  all  of  them  had  to  come  to  pass  for
the  verification  of  the  prediction ;  so  that  the  occurrence  of  one  or  two  of
the  events  indicated,  could  not  be  looked  upon  as  satisfying  the  require-
ments of  the  whole.  The  number  70  is  prominent  therein,  and  is  in  the
manner  of  Daniel  (ix,  24)  and  other  places  in  the  Old  Testament,  in
which  70  is  a  prominent  figure  ;  the  6th  and  7th  day,  /.  ^.,  the  Sabbath
eve  and  Sabbath  day,  terminate  the  Hebrew  week  and  complete  in  them-
selves the  end,  content,  and  object,  of  all  the  days  of  the  week ;  and  so
they  do  as  regards  the  ten  weeks  :=  70  days ;  the  6th  month  ends  the
civil  year,  and  the  25th  of  that  month  is  not  a  more  definite  number
than  70  is,  but  as  all  these  events  are  to  happen  in  \\it  future ^  the  date  as
to  month  and  day,  may  be  considered  as  gratuitously  admitted  and
made  use  of,  in  the  same  sense,  as  if  the  25  th  of  the  6th  month,
/.  ^.,  Elul,  of  the  year.  The  Zohar  does  not  fix  it.  But  some  of  the
critics  adverse  to  the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar  assume  to  find  in  the  above
quoted  Zoharic  passage,  or  a  garbled  statement  of  part  of  it,  a  reference
to  incidents  which  have  occurred  in  past  history,  if  not  in  one  century,
then  in  another,  from  one  or  two  minor  items  therein,  admitting  of  a
forced  interpretation,  on  the  ground  of  similarity.  They  point  to  three
or  four  different  events,  in  as  many  different  periods,  in  which  these
things  are  said  to  have  happened ;  and  although  each  differs  from  the
other  in  his  surmises,  their  followers  accept  their  various  distorted  and
differing  statements  instead   of  rejecting  them,    and  indeed  the  entire


8o

criticism  founded  thereon ;  on  the  ground  of  its  uncertainty,  apparent
bias  and  forced  construction.  Instead  of  this,  among  others  Dr.  Gins-
burg,  seizes  on  the  various  statements  and  endeavors  to  formulate  from
them  a  most  plausible  one  against  the  Zoharic  writings,  and  exclaims,
Here  is  the  unassailable  evidence,  "that  this  Thesaurus  of  the  Kabbalah
is  the  production  of  the  thirteenth  century.*'*  He  states  as  if  an  uncon-
troverted  fact,  that  '*  the  Sohar  (Zohar  sic)  records  events  which  tran-
spired in  1264  A.D.,'*  and  then  endeavors  to  support  this  by  a  mutilated
fragment  of  the  above  quotation,  intermixed  within  the  quotation  marks,
with  statements  not  in  the  original.  This  writer  in  this  and  in  other
places  in  his  work  on  the  Qabbalah,  seems  to  speculate  upon  the  credu-
lity and  want  of  expert  knowledge  of  the  subject,  in  the  reader,  using
.  garbled  and  detached  fragments  from  the  Zohar,  to  evidence  its  being  a
modern  book  of  the  Xlllth  century,  and  everywhere  showing  an  evident
bias  against  it.  We  call  attention,  among  others,  to  the  mistranslation  of
yomah  qadma-ahy  i.  e.,  **  on  the  first  day  "  by  **  On  the  day  preceding  [its
disappearance,  /.  ^.,  October  2nd],*'  the  verse  concluding  **thus  that  star
will  be  extended  to  be  seen  in  the  world  "  for  70  consecutive  days.

Dr.  Adolph  Jellinek's  statement  is  :  '*  As  many  scholars  still  ascribe  to
this  book  (the  Zohar),  a  great  antiquity,  I  will  show  there  is  mentioned
in  it  the  date  of  August  22nd,  1280.  We  read  Zohar  iii,  212^  as  follows:
'  God  is  prepared  to  rebuild  Jerusalem,  and  shall  let  a  wondrously  bright
star  be  visible — which  shall  be  seen  for  seventy  days.  It  shall  be  visi-
ble on  Friday,  the  25  of  Elul,  and  disappear  on  Saturday,  at  the  end  of
seventy  days.  On  the  first  day  (/.  e,,  25th  of  Elul),  it  shall  be  visible  in
Romef — and  on  that  day  three  high  walls  and  a  great  temple  shall  fall  and
the  Regent  shall  die.*  This  passage  is  made  plain  from  the  following
calculation:  In  the  year  1280,  Rosh  'Hodesh  Elul  (the  new  moon  of
Elul)  happened  on  Sunday  and  Monday — on  the  29th  of  July— conse-
quently the  25th  of  Elul  =  22nd  day  of  August  fell  on  Thursday,  on  the
evening  of  which  the  star  became  visible — the  seventy  days  of  which

*Dr.  Ginsburg,  work  cited,  p.  85.

f  In  the  Cremona  Edition  of  the  Zohar,  Rome  is  omitted,  probably  from  regard  to
the  Censorship.  This  reference  in  the  MSS.  was  probably  to  Pagan  Rome,  the  Zohar
has  however,  been  printed  in  the  time  of  Catholic  Rome.


8i

-ended  Friday  evening — which  evening  is  counted  in  the  day  following,
/.  ^.,  Saturday,  and  on  Thursday,  the  25th  of  Elul,  1040  (?504o)  A.M.,
or  the  22nd  August,  1280,  Pope  Nicholas,  III,  died  in  Rome.  His
successor  was  Martin  IV,  whom  Abraham  Abulafia  endeavored  to  con-
vert the  following  year.***

In  January,  1856,  Dr.  B.  Zuckermann,t  referring  to  this  statement  by
Dr.  Jellinek,  says :  "  On  the  one  side  are  those  who  ascribe  great  age  to
the  Zohar,  on  the  other  those  who  claim  for  it  a  late  origin.  The  proofs
are  taken  by  the  respective  sides,  either  from  external  marks  or  the  dates
alluded  to  in  the  Zohar  itself,  as  to  the  latter,  they  are  not  anywhere
given  in  such  an  unequivocal  manner  as  not  to  admit  of  various  construc-
tions. They  have  therefore  to  be  confirmed  by  other  well-known  histori-
cal facts,  and  without  a  full  confirmation  of  them,  the  door  is  open  to
hypothesis,  and  even  the  latter  is  subject  to  limitation.  From  such
statements  we  must  be  able  to  deduce  the  facts  under  investigation  in  a
plain  manner,  if  not  with  mathematical  certainty,  at  least  with  some
probability.  If  an  historical  mark  is  given,  at  the  very  least  the  most
important  indicia  must  find  an  explanation,  if  they  are  to  lead  to  a  result.
If  we  only  take  one  solitary  instance  out  of  it,  without  considering  the
rest,  then  the  hypothetical  construction  is  founded  on  a  very  feeble  basis
and  soon  crumbles.*'  Dr.  Zuckermann  then  cites  the  Zoharic  passage
given  by  Dr.  Jellinek,  and  continues  :  ''Several  facts  are  asserted  :  ist.
The  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem.  2nd.  The  appearance  and  disappearance
of  certain  natural  phenomena.  3rd.  The  falling  of  three  high  walls  and
a  great  temple.  4th.  The  death  of  a  ruler.  The  explanation  of  Dr.
Jellinek  does  not  mention  in  what  relation  the  year  1280  stands  to  the  re-
building of  Jerusalem  ;  and  it  further  omits  the  phenomena  of  Nature."
Dr.  Zuckermann  then  advances  a  new  hypothesis,  and  says  :  ''In  the
year  4127  A.M.,  367  A.D.,  the  25th  Elul,  fell  on  Thursday.  In  this
year  mention  is  made  by  three  authors,  Hevel,  Lubinczki  and  Casius,  of
the  appearance  of  a  comet   (in  splendour)  like  the  light  of  the  planet

*  Bet  ha-Midrash.     Leipzig.     1855.     Vol.  iii.     Introduction  pp.  xxxvii-xxxviii.

f  Frank  el's  Afonatschri/t  filr  Geschichie  und  Wissenschaft  des  Judenthums.     Vol.  v.
Leipzig.     1856.     p.  27.

6


82

Venus,  which  was  visible  in  the  daylight.*  About  this  time  the  Roman
Emperor  Julian,  the  Apostate,  issued  a  commandment  for  the  rebuilding
of  the  Temple  in  Jerusalem,  and  as  history  tells  us,  many  labourers  went
there,  and  when  the  construction  was  commenced,  it  was  prevented  by
the  sudden  falling  of  several  walls.  Further  commands  of  the  Emperor
were  now  looked  for,  but  he  fell  in  battle  against  the  Persians.  Here
upon  comparison  the  date  corresponds,  as  the  25th  Elul  fell  on  Thursday,
and  the  most  important  event,  the  natural  phenomena,  is  without  doubt
that  in  relation  to  Jerusalem,  it  and  the  death  of  the  Roman  emperor
about  this  time  are  ascertained,  the  objection  is,  historians  give  the  date
of  the  death  of  Julian  as  in  the  year  363  A.  D.  This  could  be  met,  in
that  in  the  (book)  Zemach  David  by  David  Gans,  it  gives  367  as  the  year,
and  the  author  of  the  Zohar,  whoever  he  may  be,  might  have  taken  the
same  date,  therefore  with  greater  justice  the  year  4127  A.M.  or  367  A.D.
could  be  used  for  the  explanation  of  this  passage.  * '

In  the  same  year  Dr.  B.  Beer,  noticed  thesef  statements  of  Dr.  Jellinek
and  Dr.  Zuckermann,  and  says  of  the  latter,  that  he  admits  Julian  was
dead  when  the  comet  mentioned  appeared — Julian  died  far  from  Rome,
June  26,  363  A.D.,  the  comet  appeared  367  A.D. — so  that  we  have  to  go
to  the  very  uncertain  source  of  David  Gans,  to  suppose  that  both  events
occurred  at  the  same  time,  and  that  such  an  exact  designation  of  the
days,  as  it  has  been  assumed  we  find  in  the  Zohar,  is  not  likely  to  refer
to  the  time  of  Julian.  Either  the  Zohar  is  older  than  the  IVth  century
or  it  is,  as  some  critics  suppose,  a  great  deal  later,  and  therefore  this
allusion  to  an  occurrence  a  long  time  past  is  not  to  be  thought  of.
The  walls  of  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem  did  not,  according  to  the  ac-
counts, fall,  but  flames  broke  out  of  the  ground  and  prevented  the
prosecution  of  rebuilding.  The  passage  in  the  Zohar  must  be  taken  in
its  true  spirit,  it  is  not  expressed  that  *  just  at  that  time  *  Jerusalem
shall  be  rebuilt,  in  the  introduction  it  is  said,  that  some  (of  that  which
is  narrated)  will  occur  in  this  time,  some  later  and  some,  only  in
the  days  of  the  Messiah.     Dr.  Beer,  seeing   that  the  old  are  without

*  As  Venus  sometimes  is.    Myer.

t  Comp.  Frankel's  Monatschrift  f&r  Geschichte  und  Wissenschaft  des  fttdenthums.
Vol.  V.     Leipzig,  1856,  pp.  158-160.


83

support,  now  advances  a  new  theory,  saying :  "  According  to  my  view
the  passage  refers  neither  to  1280  or  367,  but  to  1264.  In  the  last  men-
tioned year,  the  great  comet  became  visible  from  the  end  of  July  to  the
2nd  of  October,  especially  in  Rome,  which  comet  is  again  expected  in
our  days.  It  showed  itself  magnificently  with  a  sabre-like  tail  100°  long,
and  appeared  on  the  same  day  on  which  Pope  Urban  IV  died — Compare
scientific  appendix  to  the  Official  Leipzig  Gazette,  of  17th  January,  1856,
p.  19. — It  was  believed  that  this  large  comet  was  a  precursor  of  his  death.
At  the  time,  there  occurred  several  insurrections  and  fights  in  and  about
Rome,  the  insurgents  looked  for  the  flying  Pope  in  Orvieto,  and  the
large  and  firm  castle  of  Vincemento  fell  finally  into  their  hands,  the  Pope
had  to  be  carried  away  in  a  sedan  chair  to  save  his  life,  became  sick  on
the  road  and  died  on  the  2nd  day  of  October.*  After  his  (the  Pope's)
death,  a  relaxation  in  the  Roman  Catholic  belief  took  place,  even  the
festival  of  Corpus  Christi,  introduced  by  him,  fell  into  oblivion.  The
cardinals  were  a  long  time  choosing  a  successor,  the  Ghibellines  seriously
thought  of  wresting  from  the  Papacy  the  temporal  power.  The  Latin
Empire  a  short  time  before  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Greeks,  in
Germany  no  Emperor  existed,  and  great  confusion  reigned ;  not  long
afterwards  Jerusalem  was  wrested  from  the  Christian  crusaders.  The
comet  disappeared  October  2nd,  if  we  count  back  seventy  days,  then  it
first  became  visible  the  25th  of  July.  This  day  in  1264  fell  on  Friday.
The  2nd  of  October,  1264,  when  the  comet  was  seen  for  the  last  time,  fell
on  Thursday,  therefore  it  had  disappeared  on  Friday  evening.  On  the
2nd  of  October,  when  it  was  yet  visible,  the  strong  castle  fell  into
the  hands  of  the  insurgents,  whereby  possibly  some  walls  might  have
fallen  yet  this  is  not  mentioned,  and  Pope  Urban  IV  died.'*  So  Dr.
Beer.

Now  we  say,  against  this  statement,  the  great  comet  of  1264  was  dis-
covered July  14th,  some  say  July  ist,  1264.!    The  duration  of  visibility

*  Muratori,  Hist,  of  Italy.  Part  viii,  p.  72.  Hist,  of  the  Popes,  iii,  235.  De  la
Gournerie,  Rome  ckretienne  tome  i,  p.  425,  and  other  authentic  sources,  especially
Raomer.     Hist,  of  the  HohenstaufTen's.     Part  iv,  p.  491.     Ed.  1824.

f  See  Cometographte,  4to,  Paris.


84

was  three  months.  Some  say  fo\ir  months.  Its  tail  was  ioo°  long.*  It
was  seen  in  China  on  the  26th  July,  and  was  visible  four  months,  f
Watson  says  the  comet  of  1264  was  first  seen  about  July  ist,  and  attained
its  greatest  brilliancy,  in  the  latter  part  of  August  and  beginning  of  Sep-
tember, and  that  it  was  last  seen  the  evening  of  the  3rd  (2nd  ?)  of  Octo-
ber, the  date  of  the  death  of  Urban  IV.

Urban  IV  had  declared  a  holy  war  against  Manfred,  king  of  Sicily.
The  papal  army  at  first  was  successful,  but  finally  Manfred  was  victorious
and  laid  siege  to  Rome.  His  army  was  composed  almost  entirely  of
Saracens.  The  Pope  retired  to  Orvieto,  fifty  miles  from  Rome.  This
was  in  1261.  He  was  afterwards  driven  from  that  city  by  the  citizens,
and  although  sick,  was  transported  in  a  litter  as  far  as  Perugia,  where  he
died  October  2nd,  1264.  J

We  have  now  seen  that  three  attempts,  all  differing,  made  by  Drs.
Jellinek,  Zuckermann,  and  Beer,  to  prove  a  modern  date  for  the  Zohar,
from  the  passage  cited,  are  not  warranted  by  historical  data.  The  comet
appears  to  have  been  visible  according  to  some  astronomers  as  early  as
July  ist,  the  latest  say  July  17.  Chinese  and  European  observers  noted
it.  The  duration  was  either  ninety  or  one  hundred  and  twenty  days.
Pingre  says  the  latter.  The  day  of  the  death  of  Urban  IV  appears  to
be  fixed,  but  not  the  exact  day  of  the  appearance  and  disappearance  of
the  comet,  all  astronomers  agree  it  was  visible  not  only  during  the  seventy
days  mentioned  in  the  Zohar,  but  for  a  longer  time.  If  the  Zohar  was
written  after  these  facts,  why  did  it  not  state  the  facts  as  they  had  actually
occurred  ?  Does  anything  given,  support  an  hypothesis  as  to  any  of  the
dates  given  by  the  three  writers  mentioned  ?    What  as  to  the  rebuilding  of

*  Chamber's  Astronomy.  Bk.  iv.  c.  6.  p.  338.  c.  3.  p.  308.  Cometic  Orbits,  etc.,
by  Edward  J.  Cooper.  Dublin.  1852.  pp.  14-15,  37,  68,  173.  Memoires  de  rAcademUy
by  Pingre.     Paris.     1760.     pp.  179-203.     Delambre.     Vol.  3,  p.  418.

f  Cooper,  work  cited,  68.  Zach's  Correspondence,  Vol.  5,  p.  342.  Philos.  Trans.
Vol.  10,  p.  209-210.  Also  Treatise  on  Comets,  by  James  C.  Watson,  Philadelphia.
1 86 1,    pp.  86-88,  90-^4,  95,  96.

t  Life  and  Times  of  the  Roman  Pontiffs  by  Artaud  de  Montor.  Eng.  Trans.  New
York.  1867.  pp.  435-438.  Bower's  Hist,  of  the  Popes.  Dublin.  1768.  pp.  353-
361.  Complete  Hist,  of  the  Popes  of  Rome,  &c.,  by  Louis  Marie  de  Cormenin.  Eng.
trans.     Philadelphia.     1851.     Vol.  ii.    p.  6-8.


85

Jerusalem,  the  advent  of  the  Messiah,  the  appearance  of  the  star  for
seventy  days,  the  disappearance  on  Thursday,  October  2nd,  1264,  not
Friday  or  Saturday,  at  the  end  of  seventy  days,  the  falling  of  the  three
high  walls  of  Rome,  and  of  the  great  palace,  (of  Rome)  ?  Is  it  not  likely
that  the  prophecy  is  a  false  one  or  is  yet  to  be  fulfilled  ?

It  may  be  interesting  to  the  reader  to  know  that  the  idea  of  a  new  star
to  appear  in  the  heavens,  to  precede  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  is  very
ancient;  the  Aggadoth  Meshiach,  t.e.y  Messiah  Haggadoth,  commences : —
"  'A  star  shall  come  out  of  Jacob.'  There  is  a  Ba*rai-thah  in  the  name
of  the  Rabbis :  As  to  the  heptad  (seven)  in  which  the  Son  of  David
Cometh: — in  the  first  year,  there  will  not  be  sufficient  nourishment ;  and
in  the  second  year  the  arrows  of  famine  will  be  launched ;  in  the  third
great  famine ;  in  the  fourth,  neither  famine  nor  plenty ;  in  the  fifth,  great
abundance,  and  the  star  shall  shine  forth  from  the  East,  and  this  is  the
Star  of  the  Messiah.  And  it  will  shine  from  the  East  for  fifteen  days,
and  if  it  be  prolonged,  it  will  be  for  the  good  of  Israel ;  in  the  sixth,  will
be  sayings  (voices)  and  announcements  (hearings) ;  in  the  seventh,  wars,
and  at  the  close  of  the  seventh,  the  Messiah  is  to  be  expected.*'*  A  simi-
lar statement  is  in  the  Apocalypse  of  Elijah. f  Also  the  Chapters  about
the  Messiah ;  J  and,  The  Mysteries  of  Shim-on  ben  YochaT,  §  where  we
read  of  a  Star  in  the  East,  to  appear  two  years  before  the  birth  of  the
Messiah.

So  also  the  Zohar  says,  concerning  the  appearance  of  the  Messiah,  R.
Shim-on  (b.  Yo'hai)  lifted  up  his  hands,  wept,  and  said  :  "Woe  to  him
who  shall  live  to  see  the  time  (of  the  Messiah)  !  salvation  to  him  who
shall  live  to  see  it !  For  when  the  Holy  Blessed  One  shall  come,  to  con-
sider the  Unfruitful  One,  He  will  see,  who  has  remained  true  to  her,  who
is  still  found  by  her,  and  what  have  been  the  individual  deeds  of  each
one :  but  He  will  not  find  any  just  one,  as  it  says : — '  And  I  looked,
and  no  helper  was   there.*    (Is.    Ixiii,    5.)     And   then   affliction   upon

*  From  the  Aggadoth  Meshiachy  i.  e.,  Messiah  Haggadoth ;  cited    in   Dr.    Adolph
]^\\\nt\i*s  Bft  ha-AfiJrash.     Leipzig.     1855.     Part  iii,  p.  xxviii,  141-143.
t  Ibid,,  pp.  65-68.
X  IbU.,  pp.  68-78.
{  Ibid.,  pp.  78-82.


86

affliction  will  come  upon  Israel.  '  Happy  lot  to  him  who  shall  live  to
see  that  time !'  Because  he  who  is  persistent  in  the  faith  shall  attain  to
the  joy  of  the  King.  Of  that  time  it  says :  '  I  will  refine  them  as  silver
is  refined,  and  try  them  as  gold  is  tried.'  (Zech.  xiii,  9.)  After  those
tribulations  have  been  poured  out  over  Israel,  and  after  the  nations,
together  with  their  kings,  shall  have  taken  common  counsel  over  the  same,
and  have  devised  many  pernicious  precepts,  in  which  all  will  coincide,  so
that  such  distress  shall  follow,  that  the  last  (distress,  on  account  of  its
severity),  shall  cause  the  first  to  be  forgotten ;  then  a  pillar  of  fire  shall
appear,  which  shall,  for  forty  days,  reach  from  heaven  to  earth,  and  be
visible  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  On  this  day  will  the  King,  the
Messiah,  come  forth  from  the  Garden  of  Eden,  from  the  place  called
iifly  jp,  qan  tzippor^  i,  ^.,  the  Bird's  Nest,  and  will  appear  in  Galilee.
And  on  the  day  of  his  arrival  there,  the  whole  world  shall  tremble,  and
all  the  children  of  the  world  shall  hide  themselves  in  the  holes  and  caves,
because  they  cannot  any  more  think  of  salvation.  As  to  this  it  says :
'  And  they  shall  go  into  the  holes  of  the  rocks,  and  into  the  caves  of  the
earth,  for  fear  of  YHVH,  and  before  the  Glory  *  of  His  Majesty,  when
He  arriveth  to  terrify  the  earth '  (Is.  ii,  19).  *  For  the  fear  of  YHVH,'
that  is  the  trembling  of  the  whole  world,  '  Before  the  Glory  of  His
Majesty y  that  is,  the  Messiah;  '  WJien  He  ariseth,  to  terrify  the  earth,'
that  is,  when  he  (the  Messiah)  shall  arise  and  appear  in  Galilee.  For  the
reason,  that  Galilee  was  the  first  destroyed  of  the  provinces  of  the  holy
land,  he  will  therefore  first  reveal  himself  in  it.  From  thence  he  will
stir  up  war  against  the  whole  world.  After  the  expiration  of  the  forty
days,  in  which  will  be  visible  before  tl^  eyes  of  the  world  the  pillar  of
fire,  reaching  from  earth  to  heaven,  and  the  Messiah  shall  have  revealed
himself,  there  shall  become  visible  a  star  from  the  East,  shining  in  all
colours  t  beside  seven  other  stars  surrounding  it.  From  all  sides  they
will  carry  on  war  with  it,  three  times  a  day  for  seventy  days,  which  all
the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  see.     But  the  Star  (in  the  East)  will

*TheShe'kheen-ah.

f  The  Old  Testament,  Bileam,  son  of  Beor,  says :  "  I  shall  see  him,  but  not  now ;  I
shall  look  upon  him,  but  not  nigh.  There  will  come  a  Star  out  of  Jacob,  And  a  Scep-
tre will  rise  out  of  Israel,  etc."


87

fight  against  the  others,  with  beaming  sparks  of  fire,  flaming  and  spark-
ling, and  will  force  itself  against  them  so  violently  upon  all  sides,  that  it
will  swallow  them  every  night,  but  eject  them  again  every  morning,  so  as
to  renew  the  war  before  the  eyes  of  the  entire  world.  This  shall  continue
for  seventy  days.  After  these  seventy  days  shall  expire,  the  star  with  the
Messiah  shall  become  invisible  for  twelve  months.  Then  shall  the  pillar
return  as  before,  and  the  Messiah  will  hide  himself  in  it,  but  (the  pillar)
itself  shall  be  invisible.  After  twelve  months  the  Messiah,  hidden  in  the
pillar  of  fire,  shall  be  taken  into  heaven,  where  he  will  receive  power  and
the  Crown  (Kether)  of  the  Kingdom  (Malkhuth).  But  when  he  again
descends,  then  that  pillar  of  fire  will  again  become  visible  before  the  eyes
of  the  world.  Then  the  Messiah  will  reveal  himself,  and  many  nations
will  gather  themselves  to  him,  and  he  will  cause  war  on  the  whole  world.
About  this  time  that  the  Holy  Blessed  One  shall  stir  up  His  power  against
the  nations  of  the  world ;  the  King,  the  Messias,  will  become  known  in
the  world,  and  all  the  kings  of  the  world  will  mutually  band  together,  to
fight  against  him.  But  also  many  nations,  descended  from  the  rejected
Jews,  shall  come  up  united  with  them  (the  nations)  to  carry  on  war
against  the  Messiah,  the  King.  Then  for  fifteen  days  the  world  shall  be
in  darkness,  in  which  a  great  many  of  Israel  shall  die.***

This  refers  to  ''the  latter  days.**  The  reference  has  therefore  been
applied  to  the  coming  of  the  Messiah.  The  celebrated  astronomer  Kepler
formed  a  theory,  that  Jupiter  and  Saturn  were  in  conjunction  in  the
Zodiacal  Constellation  of  Pisces,  the  Fishes,  and  the  fish  is  the  astrologi-
cal symbol  of  Judea,  in  the  latter  half  of  the  year  of  Rome  747,  and  were
joined  to  Mars  in  748.  This  would  be  about  six  years  before  the  com-
mencement of  our  common  era.  Wieselerf  has  applied  the  theory  of
Kepler,  in  conjunction  with  a  discovery  that  he  has  made  from  Chinese
astronomical  tables,  which  show  that  in  the  year  of  Rome  750,  a  comet
appeared  in  heavens,  and  was  visible  for  seventy  days.  J

*  Zohar  ii,  fol.  7,  col.  2,  Amsterdam  Ed. ;  idid.  ii,  fol.  53,  Sulzbach  Ed.

f  Chronolog,  Synopse  der  4.  Evangelien.     Hamburg.     1843.

X  Compare  Kitto's  Biblical  Cyclop.,  Ed.  1876.  Vol.  iii,  pp.  890-891.  Rev.  Wm.
Hale's  Chronology.  I^nd.,  1830.  Vols,  i,  74;  ii,  199-209.  Cahen's  Great  French
Bible.  Vol.  4,  p.  122,  Note    17.    Our  Christian  era  was  introduced  by  Dionysius


88

"  The  King,  the  Messiah,  shall  appear  in  the  land  of  Galilee.  A  star
in  the  eastern  heaven,  shall  swallow  (or  absorb)  seven  stars  in  the  north,
and  a  flame  of  black  fire*  shall  hang  in  the  heavens  for  sixty  days,  and
there  shall  be  wars  towards  the  north  carried  on  in  the  world,  two  kings

perishing  in  the  north  in  these  wars.     Then  all  the  nations  shall  combine

•

together  against  the  dominion  (palaces)  of  Jacob,  in  order  to  expel  it

from  the  world.  **t

VIII.  In  this  objection  Dr.  Ginsburg  says:  "The  Sohar,  in  assigning
a  reason  why  its  contents  were  not  revealed  before,  says  that  the  '  time  in
which  R.  Simon  ben  Jochai  lived  was  peculiarly  worthy  and  glorious,  and
that  it  is  near  the  advent  of  the  Messiah,*  for  which  cause  this  revelation
was  reserved  till  the  days  of  R.  Simon,  to  be  communicated  through  him.
Yet,  speaking  elsewhere  of  the  advent  of  the  Messiah,  the  Sohar,  instead
of  placing  it  in  the  second  century  when  this  Rabbi  lived,  forgets  itself y
and  says — *  When  the  6oth  or  the  66th  year  shall  have  passed  over  the
threshold  of  the  sixth  millennium  (A.  M.  5060-66  =  A.  D.  1 300-1 306)  the
Messiah  will  appear*  {Sohar  x,  ii6a,  iiy^j  comp.  also  iii,  252a)  ;  thus
showing  that  the  author  lived  in  the  XIII  century  of  the  Christian  era.'*

The  numbers  6  and  7  were  favored  by  the  ancient  Rabbis  as  alluding
to  the  sacredness  of  the  Sabbath  eve  and  the  Sabbath  day.  If  Dr.  Gins-
burg had  looked  a  little  further  in  the  paragraph,  from  which  he  takes
the  quotation  just  given,  he  would  have  found  :  "  In  every  six  J  of  the  sixth

Exiguus,  a  Roman  abbot  in  the  Vlth  century  (525  A.D.),  and  came  into  general  use
two  centuries  later,  during  the  reign  of  Charlemagne.  This  put  the  nativity  of  Jesus  as
happening  upon  December  25,  754  Anno  C/rHs,  1.  f. ,  after  the  founding  the  City  of
Rome.  The  early  patristic  writings  distinguish  between  the  Conception  or  Annuncia-
tion, with  which  they  identify  the  Incarnation,  and  the  Nativity  (Matt,  i,  18).  Since
the  time  of  Charlemagne,  the  two  appear  to  have  been  used  synonymously.  Comp.
Ideler.  Chronology,  ii,  381  ff  seq,  Gieseler.  Church  History.  New  York.  1857.
Vol.  I,  ^^et  seq.  This  date  is  wrong  by  at  least  four  years.  Jesus  can <  therefore  be
considered  as  having  been  bom  A.  U.  750  or  B.  C.  4,  and  likely  earlier.  See  Hist.
of  the  Christian  Church  by  Philip  Schaff.  New  York.  1882.  pp.  111-127,  and
Gieseler.  Church  History  last  above  cited.

♦  Black  fire  is  visible  light,  as  distinct  from  "  white  fire,"  diaphanous  light.

f  Zohar  i,  fol.  119,  Amsterdam  Ed. ;  ibid,  i,  fol.  74,  Sulzbach  Ed.

X 1  Vau  (V)  =  6,  separated  from  the  H  Heh  (H)  of  nm^  1.  ^.,  YHVH  during  Israel's
dispersion.


89

thousand  (year)  the  n  increases  in  strength  until  it  recovers  its  former
degrees,  and  then  in  the  six  hundredth  year  of  the  sixth  (thousand)  the
gates  of  Supreme  Wisdom  will  be  opened,  and  so  shall  the  fountains  of
the  lower  wisdom  (/.  ^.,  Malkhuth,  /.  ^.,  the  Kingdom),  and  the  world
will  be  suitably  fitted  to  enter  into,  the  seventh  (thousand),  like  a  man
who  prepares  himself  on  the  sixth  day  at  sunset,  to  enter  into  the  Sab-
bath. So  also  here,  and  thy  token*  is  to  be  found  in  Genesis  vii,  ii,  viz  :
*  In  the  six  hundredth  year  of  Noah's  life,  etc.,  were  all  the  fountains  of
the  great  deep  broken  up,  and  the  flood-gates  of  heaven  were  opened.'  **

A  little  further  on  R.  Yo-seh  approving  of  the  interpretation  above
given  by  R.  Yehudah,  **  as  a  very  ingenious  observation  on  the  two  let-
ters n  (H  =  5)  and  i  (V  =  6  of  nin'  /.^.,  YHVH),"  reminds  his  hearers
of  the  well-known  fact,  '*  that  the  time  of  Israel' s  redemption  is  known  only
to  Gody  and  is  entirely  dependent  on  Him  and  also  dependent  on  their  good
or  bad  conduct,  according  to  Isaiah  Ix,  22.  *  I  YHVH  will  hasten  it  in  its
time.'  If  they  are  worthy  '  I  will  hasten  it !  *  If  they  are  not  worthy ,  *  In
its  time.*  "

This  conclusively  shows,  that  the  Rabbins  of  the  Zoharic  writings  did  not
attempt  to  determine  the  time  of  the  advent  of  the  Messiah,  and  that  the
remarks  upon  the  letter  T=  6,  in  connection  with  the  time  of  the  re-
demption of  Israel,  are  to  be  considered  only  as  complete  at  the  close  of
the  six  thousand  of  the  years  fixed,  but  not  at  a  definite  period.  This
shows  that  the  remark  that  "  the  Sohar,  instead  of  placing  it  in  the  second
century  when  this  Rabbi  (S.  b.  Y.)  lived,  forgets  itself,  etc."  is  incorrect.
The  Talmud,  Treatise  Sanhedrin  97^,  supports  our  view:  **  The  disciples
of  the  house  {or  school^  of  Eli  yah  teach,  the  world  is  to  exist  six  thousand
years,  two  thousand  ytzxs  of  which  are  to  be  desolate,t  two  thousand  ytzxs
blessed  with  the  Thorah,  and  two  thousand  years  of  the  time  of  the  Mes-
siah ;  but  on  account  of  the  multitude  of  our  sins,  there  have  passed  away
from  them  that  many  that  have  passed  : — "  on  which  Rashi  comments:
"172  years  before  the  completion  of  the  4000  years  the  Temple  was
destroyed,  and  at  the  termination  of  these  172  years,  the  2000  years  ot
the  Thorah  (/.  e,,  4000  years  of  the  world)  were  completed,  etc.     But  as

*  Which  may  be  used  by  thee  to  rely  on,  because  of  its  being  a  Biblical  verse,
t  To-hoo,  I.  e.y  without  the  Thorah,  says  Rashi,  in  his  Commentary.


90

regards  the  2000  years  of  the  Messiah,  these  last  ought  to  have  come  im-
mediately after  the  expiration  of  the  2000  years  of  the  Thorah,  and  the
Kingdom  of  Wickedness  ought  to  have  ceased,  and  with  it,  also  the  servi-
tude of  Israel.  Our  manifold  sins,  however,  have  caused  the  Messiah  not
to  appear  at  the  end  of  4000  years,  and  of  the  third  2000  years  there
have  already  passed  away  those  which  belong  to  the  past,  and  he  is  still
prevented  from  coming.**  The  same  passage  is  in  the  Talmud,  Treatise
Abodah  Zarah  9^,  Rashi  on  it,  says :  "  The  world  is  destined  to  stand
six  thousand  years  according  to  the  number  of  the  days  of  the  week,  but
the  seventh  day  is  the  Sabbath,  and  in  the  7000th  year,  the  world  shall
rest.  The  first  2000,  etc  ;*'  as  above.  The  Zohar  says  the  period  of  R.
Shim-on  was  "near  the  advent  of  the  Messiah,*'*  and  the  Talmud
describes  the  2000  years  following  the  period  of  the  Thorah,  as  the  Mes-
sianic period ;  consequently  "  the  Zohar  does — not — forget  itself,'*  when
speaking  of  the  emancipation  of  Israel  as  to  happen  at  a  favourable
moment,  prior  to  the  expiration  of  the  2000  years  of  the  Messianic  period,
which  period  is  still  in  existence,  nor  is  the  Zohar  mistaken  in  mention,
ing  the  Messianic  period  as  that  near  which  R.  Shim-on  lived.  The
Temple  was  destroyed  A.  D.  70  +  172  =  242  A.D.  as  the  completion  of
the  4000  years  according  to  Rashi.  R.  Shim-cTn  lived  circa  190  A.  D.,
therefore  near  242  A.D.,  the  beginning  of  the  Messianic  period  of  2000
years,  the  last  third  of  the  6000  years  of  the  world's  standing  at  any
period  of  six,  or  sixty  or  six  humlred  days  or  years,  which  the  Zohar
terms  an  ''outpouring  of  heavenly  wisdom  upon  the  world,"  and  which
the  Talmud  calls  :  "the  emancipation  of  Israel."  St.  Paul  and  the  early
Christians  were  also  daily  expecting  such  a  second  advent,  and  the  whole
orthodox  Christian  and  Jewish  world  are  still  expecting  every  day  an
advent,  the  last  of  a  Messiah,  the  first  of  a  second  coming  of  Christ.
How  this  Zoharic  statement  shows  that  the  Zohar  was  written  in  the
Xlllih  century  we  do  not  comprehend.

IX.  This  includes  several  objections  which  will  be  answered  more  fully
in  the  body  of  this  writing.  The  doctrine  of  transmigration  of  souls  is
undoubtedly  very  old  among  the  Jews,  we  note  especially  the  Levirate

*  We  adopt  the  reading  "  of  the  Messiah  "  although  this  word  does  not  occur  in  the
passage  quoted.


91

Marriage,  and  it  is  mentioned,  either  positively  or  inferentially,  in  a
number  of  places  in  the  New  Testament  as  if  an  undoubted  tenet.  We
also  refer  the  reader  to  Dr.  Ginsburg's  own  note,  on  his  work  cited,
page  43.  The  Midrashim  and  Talmud  are  not  altogether  silent  about  it.
St.  Jerome  says :  '*  H<zc  impia  and  scelerata  doctrina  olitn  in  yEgypto  ana
Orientis  partibus  versabatur,  and  nunc  absconditty  quasi  in  foveis  viper-
arum  apud  pUrosque  versatury  illarumq  partium  polluit  puritateniy  ana
quasi  lusreditario  maio,  serpit  in  paucis,  ut  perueniat  ad  plurimosy  etcV^
Showing  us  that  it  was  an  esoteric  doctrine  among  the  early  Christians^  but
was  considered  as  traditional  and  intrusted  only  to  the  select  few,  Origen
believed  in  it.  See  his  writings  which  are  full  of  it.  It  existed  for  cen-
turies before  the  time  of  Jesus  among  many  of  the  Oriental  peoples,  and
is  notably  to-day  to  be  found  among  the  followers  of  the  Buddhistic  and
Brahminical  religions.

X.  Objection  is  answered  in  the  general  statements  in  this  book.

XI  and  XII.  These  objections  have  been  and  will  be  further  answered,
in  this  book.f

XIII.  ^the  Zohar  contains  passages  which  are  similar  to  those  which
M.  d.  Leon  has  in  his  own  writings,  it  is  only  evidence  that  he  copied
them  from  the  original  Zoharic  MSS.,  which  he  then  had  in  his  posses-
sion. The  passage  quoted  from  Ps.  xlvi,  8,  by  M.  d.  Leon,  is  correctly
quoted,  and  is  also  to  be  found  in  the  MSS.  cited  in  Dr.  Kennicott's
large  work:  Vet,  Test,  Jfebr.,  Cum,  variis  Lectionibus,  Oxford,  1776-
80.  2  vols.,  folio,  in  a  number  of  MSS.  cited  by  him,  and  in  Rossi's  Varia
Lectiones  to  the  Hebrew  Bible,  J  also  in  the  edition  of  the  Psalms,  in
Hebrew,  published  by  Elia  Benamozegh  in  Livorno,  in  these  Elohim  is  in
both  Ps.  xlvi,  8,  and  Ps.  xlxvi,  5.

In  the  Commentaries  on  the  Pentateuch,  by  the  great  Qabbalist  Elia

♦  Epistol,  Hieronymaus  ad  Demetriadem,  de  seruanda  virginiiate.  Hieronymi  Stri-
donensUy  Opera  omnia  qua:  extant ^  etc,     Paris,     1^46,     Tom,  1,  /.  22 ^  E.

f  Ante,  pp.  56  et  seq.  and  in  other  places.

X  See  Biblia  Hebraica  a  Benj,  Kennicotto  ;  andy.  B,  de-Rossiy  by  Christopher  Doeder-
lein.     Halle.     1818.


92

Benamozegh  of  Leghorn,*  are  statements  favorable  to  the  antiquity  of
the  Zohar,  we  here  give  some  of  them  in  a  condensed  form,  adding  some
comments  of  our  own.

Genesis  xxxvii,  36,  is :  Joseph  was  sold  by  the  Yishmaelites  to  Potiphar
se^ris  Far-oh,  i,  ^.,  a  se*ns  of  Pharao/'  /.  ^.,  a  prominent  officer  of  the
household,  who  by  the  ancient  custom  of  archaic  Oriental  countries,  was
a  sa-ras,  /.  e.,  eunuch  ;t  in  the  Syriac,  sa-ri-so.  So  the  Talmud  ists  use
the  verb  oiOD  me'sa-res,  to  geld,  emasculate,  eradicate,  in  the  meaning
of  the  kindred  verb  ^'VO  sha-raish,  to  pull  up  by  the  roots,  to  extirpate.
Jj  ri  ^  Onkelos — flourished  r/r^tf  50  B.C. — 10  A^D. — says,  in  his  Targum  as

to  this :  rabba  d*  Phar-oh,  a  prince  of  Pharaoh,  leaving  undecided  the
question,  whether  he  was  an  eunuch  or  not.  However,  in  the  East,  a
sense  of  importance,  dignity  and  eminence,  was  connected  with  being  an
eunuch,  and  the  Zohar  looking  upon  celibacy  as  a  meritorious  things  if  its
motive  be  a  spiritual  one y  calls  the  Talmidai  ^ Hakhameemy  /.  ^.,  Disciples
of  the  Wise,  those  who  occupy  themselves  with  the  study  of  the  Word  of
God,  sd-ri-sim,  i.  e.,  eunuchs.  This  designation  is  never  found  in  the
Talmud,  but  we  find  it  in  the  New  Testament,  Matt,  xix,  11-12,  spoken
of  as  if  an  esoteric  thing.  This  passage  in  the  New  Testament,  can  only
be  thoroughly  understood  from  a  Zoharic  point  of  view.  J  It  is  quite  evi-
dent, that  the  Zoharic  passage  which  uses  the  term  under  discussion,  in
the  same  secret  sense  which  underlies  it  in  the  words  of  Jesus,  must  have
been  in  existence  in  his  time  if  not  before,  and  the  Zohar  cannot  be
assumed  to  have  copied  it  from  Matthew.  Most  likely  Jesus  of  Nazareth
and  Shim-on  b.  Yo*hai  received  many  of  their  teachings  from  the  same
school,  that  of  the  Secret  Learning,  which  accounts  for  the  fact  that  the
Zoharic  writings  have  so  many  points  in  common  with  the  New  Testa-
ment, Philo  and  the  early  Patristic  literature.

^  Le  Pentateuque  avec  comment,  aim  le^miqrah^i.e.^  mother  to  the  reading,  et  aim
le*massoretht  t\  ^.,  mother  to  the  tradition;  iiiusir,  et  recherches  philol.,  critiques,
archiol.  et  scientif.  par  Elia  Benamozegh,     5  vol.     Livorno,     1862.

t  Comp.  Is.  Ivi,  3,  4,  5  ;  Dan.  i,  3,  4,  7,  1 1,  18  ;  II  Kings  xx,  18 ;  I  Kings  xxii,  9  ;
II  Kings  viii,  6;  Ibid,  xxv,  19,  etc.  Kitto's  Cyclop.  Bib.  Liter.,  Ed.  1876,  iii,  358;
i,  848-9.

X  Comp.  Josephus.     Antiq.  iv,  c.  8,  {  40.


93

The  Church  Father  Origen  followed  this  text  literally.*     Indeed  this
Father  adopted  many  of  the  opinions  of  the  older  Qabbalists.

Exodus  ii,  6,  lo.  The  Hebrew  periodical  Bikku-reh  Ha-ittiniy  i.  e,y
The  First  Fruits  of  the  Times,  Ed.  Vienna.  1829.  p.  18,  says:  **As
to  the  opinion  that  Moses  occurs  in  the  ancient  history  of  Egypt  under
the  name  of  Typhon,  we  are  unable  for  the  present  to  examine  into  the
correctness  of;  we  will  however  say,  that  Typhon  was  said  to  be  red
hatred  (ArtaLpanus,  Eusebius  Prep,  Ev.  Ed.  Paris,  Vol.  ii,  p.  35),  but
we  do  not  know  from  what  source  it  has  been  taken,  that  Moses  was  red."
If  the  writer  had  consulted  the  Zohar,  he  would  have  found.  Vol.  i,  p.  28,
B^sar  d^ Mosheh  soomaq^  /.  ^.,  the  flesh  of  Moses  was  deep  red,  and  to  it
refers  the  saying :  The  face  of  Moses  was  like  the  face  of  the  sun.  No-
where else  in  Hebrew  literature  does  this  or  a  similar  statement  occur.
The  statement  is  a  proof  in  favour  of  the  asserted  fact,  that  the  Egyptians
embodied  the  life  of  Moses  in  the  history  of  their  Typhon,  and  also
shows  the  remote  age  from  which  the  Zohar  obtained  its  ideas.

Leviticus  xxiv,  15.  "  Whosoever  curseth  his  God,  shall  bear  his  sin.**
Josephus,t  Philo  Judaeus  and  the  Essenians,  who  were  all  under  the  in-
fluence of  the  Secret  Learning,  agree  in  this,  that  this  law  also  prohibits
men  reviling  the  gods  of  the  heathens.  Strange  to  say,  the  Zohar,  and
no  other  Hebrew  writing,  explains  this  passage  in  the  same  way,  J  it  dis-
tinctly states  that  whosoever  curses  strange  gods,  which  **  God  has  im-
parted to  all  nations,**  §  shall  bear  his  sin.  The  same  idea  is  in  Ecclesi-
asticus  xxi,  30,  not  to  curse  Satan  *Mest  one  would  forfeit  his  own  life.**
So  in  Jude,  verses  8-10.  Michael  dared  *'  not  bring  against  him  (Satan)
a  railing  accusation,  but  said:  the  Lord  rebuke  thee.*'||  Here  is  an
instance  of  similar  interpretations  by  these  authorities  and  the  Zohar,

* Mosheim  Institutes  of  Eccles.  History,  etc.,  by  James  Murdock,  D.D.,  nth  Ed.
Tendon.  1880.  Illd  century,  ch.  ii,  p.  93,  N.  3.  Smith's  Diet.  Greek  and  Roman
Biog.  iii,  pp.  46-55.     Kitto,  work  cited,  i,  849.

f  Antiq.  Bk.  iv,  c.  viii,  §  10,  and  contra,  Apion  Bk.  ii,  \  34.

X  Zohar  iii,  p.  106^.

\  Deut.  iv,  19.

ji  Comp.  Zech.  iii,  2.  II  Peter  ii,  10-12.  Comp.  The  Speaker's  Commentary,  before
cited,  N.  T.  iv,  pp.  251-2  and  notes ;  also  Jude.  9.


94

from  which  we  conclude,  that  the  Zoharic  ideas  were  in  existence  at  the
time  of  these  authorities,  most  likely  all  being  part  of  the  Secret  Tradi-
tion. Even  the  Talmud  has  been  influenced,  for  we  read:*  "Satan
appeared  one  day  to  a  man  who  used  to  curse  him  daily,  and  said  to  him :
Why  dost  thou  this  ?  Consider  that  God  himself  would  not  curse  me,
but  merely  said :  '  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  Satan  ! '  ' '

We  know  that  many  parts  of  the  Qur'an,  especially  that  regarding  the
Pentateuch  and  its  interpretations,  were  delivered  by  the  Jews  to  Moham-
med, who  likewise  prohibits  the  cursing  of  strange  gods  in  the  Qur*an.
Is  it  reasonable  to  suppose,  that  the  Zohar  borrowed  from  the  New  Testa-
ment and  the  Qur'an,  for  the  benefit  of  the  most  secret  and  philosophical,
and  in  some  cases,  the  most  pious  and  bigoted,  of  the  Church  of  Israel,
which  is  distinguished  in  the  Zohar  as,  the  very  beloved  daughter  of
YHVHy  His  only  beloved  one  ?  The  New  Testament  borrowed  from  the
Traditional  Secret  Learning,  the  Metaphysical  side  of  Judaism,  and  the
Qur'an  borrowed  from  the  Jewish  Secret  Tradition  and  the  Old  and  New
Testaments.

Numbers  xii,  i.  '*  He  (Moses)  had  married  an  Ethiopian  woman.'*
The  very  rare  and  ancient  \)od)L  Dtbreh  hayyamtm  I' Mosheh,  /.  ^.,  The
Chronicles  of  Moses,  and  Josephus  in  his  Antiquities,!  from  whom  Irenaeus
cites  in  his  Fragments,  relate  in  the  History  of  Moses,  that  he  was  a  gene-
ral of  the  Egyptians  against  the  Ethiopians,  J  whom  he  conquered,  and
that  he  married  the  king's  daughter,  none  of  which  is  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment. Nor  does  the  latter  make  mention  of  the  father  of  Moses,  called
Amram,  as  having  been  a  judge  in  Israel,  a  prophet,  and  a  seer  of  visions ;
as  Josephus  does  in  his  first  chapter  of  the  Antiquities.  Neither  do  we
find  this  in  the  Talmud  or  the  Midrashim,  but  it  is  in  Maimonides,  who
lived  in  Egypt,  and  it  is  in  the  Zohar.  The  Zohar  never  copied  it  from
Maimonides,  and  it  is  doubtful  from  Josephus,  whose  writings  were  not
known  among  the  Jews  for  many  centuries  after,  and  when  known,  in
comparatively  recent  times,  were  not  considered  as  an  authority  of  much
weight.    We  must  look  for  the  Zoharic  statement  as  belonging  to  the  age,

♦Treat.  Kiddmhceniy  p.  8i.

f  Bk.  ii,  c.  X.

\  Comp.  Acts  vii,  22.


95

when  such  traditions  were  in  the  custody  of  the  initiated  in  the  Sacred
Secret  Learning,  the  source  of  which  was  undoubtedly  ancient.  They
were  among  .•  **  The  secret  things  belonging  unto  YHVH  our  Elohim."
(Deut.  xxix,  29.     Numb,  xi,  16-17,  24-30.     Exod.  xxxv,  31,32.)

Deuteronomy  vi,  8.  "And  thou  shalt  bind  them  for  a  sign  upon  thine
handy  and  they  shall  be  as  frontlets  between  thine  eyes,  *  *  This  law  was
considered  by  the  ancient  Israelites  as  literally  to  be  followed,  hence  was
the  custom  of  wearing  of  the  phylacteries  or  tephillin.  Choirilos  of  Samos,
(lived  about  468-405  B.C.),  in  his  Epos  "  Persica,**  in  which  he  immortal-
izes the  victory  of  the  Athenians  over  Xerxes,  writes  of  the  Jews  in  the
Persian  army  *' And  behind  them  came  a  numerous  host  of  people,  dis-
tinct from  all  other  people  in  their  bearing  and  wearing  apparel.  Their
language  is  like  that  of  the  Phoenicians,  and  they  inhabit  the  mountains
of  Jerusalem. "  This  "  wearing  apparel ' '  by  which  they  were  distinguished,
undoubtedly  refers  to  the  phylacteries,  "the  sign  upon  the  hand'*  and
the  "  frontlets  between  the  eyes,"  and  "the  fringes  on  the  borders  of
the  garments.'*  *  These  were  constantly  worn  by  the  males  of  the
Israelites  prior  to  the  destruction  of  their  Temple  by  the  Romans.  Sub-
sequently the  Rabbins  limited  the  wearing  of  these  external  symbols  of
distinction,  to  the  time  and  service  of  the  morning  prayer,  and  the  former
literal  application  of  the  Law  was  soon  entirely  forgotten.  The  Zohar,
however,  corroborates  the  statement  by  Choirilos,  mentioning,t  that
"  R  'Heeyah  and  R.  Yo-seh  met  a  man  in  the  garments  prescribed  by
the  Thorah,  and  carrying  arms  (weapons)  below  them.**  This  is  also  a
proof  of  the  antiquity  of  the  book ;  for  unless  this  R.  *Heeyah  and  R.
Yo-seh  lived  in  the  very  remote  times,  they  hardly  would  have  mentioned
this  incident  which  was  lost  and  unknown,  shortly  after  the  destruction  of
the  Temple,  and  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Talmud.

II  Timothy  iii,  8.  "Now  as  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood  Moses  ^
so  do  these,  etc."  Comp.  Exod.  vii,  11,  12.  The  Talmud  speaks  of
two  Egyptian  magicians  :  "  Yo-haneh  and  Mareh  ;**  and  in  the  Zohar  we
have  them  as  :  "  Yonos  and  Yombros.'*  Champollion-Figeac  in  Egypte
Ancienne,  p.  100  et  seq.y  mentions  two  magicians  by  the  name  of :  Necepso

♦  Numb.  XV,  38,  39.
t  Zohar  i,  204^.


96

and  Fetosiris,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Sesostris  (i.e.,  Rhameses  II),  from
which  two  names  the  above  two  Talmudic  names  are  perhaps  a  transla-
tion: *^  Fgt-Osiri^'  means  sacred  to  Osiris,  as  ^^  Poti-phera  or  Fete-
phe^re^^  means,  sacred  to  Phe'ri ;  so  Yo-haneh  means,  the  favorite  of  God
("jnv  Yohaneh  =  pnv  Yo-hannan  or  Joannes,  Greek),  and  Nicepso  has
been  considered  the  same  name  as  Ne*kho*  (Pharao  Necho)  which  occurs
in  Jeremiah.

We  see  the  Zohar  differs  from  the  Talmud  in  the  names.  The  two
magicians  who  rose  against  Moses  existed,  and  what  the  Talmudf  says  of
them  is  also  true. J  The  Zohar  mentions  them  twice;  first  as  two  magi-
cians §  and  then  as  Bala-am*s  sons.||  A  marginal  note  to  the  first  quota-
tion, suggests  them  to  be  the  same  as  the  Yo-haneh  and  Mamreh  of  the
Midrash  She^moth  Rabbahy  ch.  ix,  73^ — and  so  they  are.  From  all  which
we  deduce.

1.  That  the  authorities  of  the  Midrash,  Talmud  and  Zohar,  gathered
from  ancient  trustworthy  sources,  that  which  was  also  gathered  from  such
sources  and  not  rejected,  by  such  men  as  Paul,  Pliny  and  Eusebius.  The
latter  two  of  whom  had  not  any  dealings  with  the  Rabbins.

2.  Placing  the  two  names  according  to  the  Midrash  and  Talmud,  /*.  ^.,
Yo-haneh  and  Mamreh^  on  one  side,  and  the  other  two  of  the  Zohar,
Yonos  and  Yombros,  with  the  readings  of  Paul,  Pliny  and  Eusebius,  on
the  other,  the  comparison  will  result  in  showing  the  correctness  of  the
Zoharic  version  in  opposition  to  that  of  the  Midrash  and  Talmud.

3.  The  Zohar  not  agreeing  with  the  Midrash  and  Talmud  regarding
these  two  names,  had  either  not  seen  or  known  them  from  these  as  its
sources,  or  it  would  not  have  deviated  from  such  great  authorities  in  Juda-
ism (first,  because  the  matter  does  not  involve  any  question  of  such
moment  as  to  add  any  importance  to  it  as  a  difference  of  opinion  ;  and
second,  because  in  agreeing  with  the  Talmud,  the  Zohar  would  have  had

*  IbU.t  102.

f  Treat.  Sanhedrin,

X  Comp.  Eusebius  Prep,  evangel^  Hvre  viii,  ch.  ix,  liv,  ix,  ch.  xxvii ;  Pastoret,  Ilistoin
de  la  legislation  Egypte^  ch.  xix;  Pliny,  the  elder,  in  Ilistoria  naturalis^  lib,  xxx,  c.  i.
He  calls  thcm,yi2wif^  2Xi^  Jotape,

\  Zohar  ii,  191.

II  Zohar  iii,  194,  also  fol.  90,  col.  2.


97

the  benefit  of  the  undisputed  authority  of  the  former).  Consequently  the
Zoharic  statement  is  of  greater  antiquity  than  the  Talmud  and  Midrashi
The  Zohar  in  the  main,  agrees  with  the  other  statements,  but  it  is  not
probable  that  the  writers  of  it  knew  of  them,  or  even  if  they  did,  they
would  not  have  copied  from  them  as  their  sources.  It,  the  Zohar,  re-
ceived the  tradition  from  the  more  ancient  sources,  at  the  time  when  the
names  had  not  yet  been  corrupted,  and  were  as  yet  even  without  the
Talmudic  adjustment  of  Yo-haneh  and  Mamreh.  The  Zohar  does  not
endeavor  to  give  them  a  Hebrew  or  Aramaic  appearance,  //  leaves  them
in  the  original  Egyptian  garb  and  shape,  because  it  had  them  from  an  orig-
inal source,  prior  to  the  Talmud,  So  says  Benamozegh.  This  appa-
rently insignificant  item,  is  a  strong  piece  of  evidence  for  the  antiquity
of  the  Zohar.

These  names  occur  in  other  ancient  Rabbinical  literature  as  Yo-hanna
and  Mamreh,  and  as  Yanes  and  Yambres,  even  as  Yoannes  (J.e,,  Yohn  =
John)  and  Ambrosius.  The  latter  in  the  Shalsheleth  Haq-qabbalah,  fol.
13^.  The  Targum  known  as  that  of  Yonathan  ben  Uzziel  from  a  pre-Tal-
mudic  time,*  invariably  has,  Yannes  and  Yambres,t  the  Zohar,  also  pre-
Talmudic,  always,  Yonos  and  Yombros ;  the  Midrash  Vay-yosah^  like  the
Talmud,  Yohaneh  and  Mamreh.  The  latter  are  evidently  Hebraized,  from
the  original  Egyptian  Yanes  and  Yambres  or  Jannes  and  Jambres,  as
Yonathan  and  St.  Paul  have  it,  whereas  the  Zoharic  version  may  be
ascribed  to  the  predilection  of  the  Syriac  language  for  the  vowel  0  instead
of  a.  As  to  Champollion-Figeac's  Nicepso  and  Petosiris,  they  designate
the  position  of  the  two  magicians  rather  than  signify  the  names  of  the
bearers.  Pliny's yb///«^  and  Jotape  are  undoubtedly  a  Latinized  corrup-
tion ;  compare  Jamnes  of  the  Vulgate.  As  to  their  having  been  Bala-am's
two  sons,  see  the  Targum  of  Yonathan  in  Numbers  xxii,  22,  where  **  his
two  boys,**  {ne'arav)  is  taken  in  the  sense  of  **  his  two  sons.**  This  also
accounts  for  the  statement  in  Ambrosius :  ^^  Jamnes  et  Jambres  fraires
erant  Magi.  *  *

The  names  of  the  magicians  who  opposed  Moses,  are  also  mentioned  in

*  Mo^t  probably  of  the  time  of  Jesus.     Kitto*s  Cyclop.  Biblical  Liter.,  ii,  304.     See
however,  ibid.f  iii,  954  et  seq.

t  Comp.  Exod.  vii,  11,  i,  15,  and  Talmud,  treatise,  Sanhedrin,  c.  9.

7


98

the  Gospel  of  Nicodemus,  formerly  called,  the  Acts  of  Pontius  Pilate,
(c.  V,  5)  as  Jannes  and  Jambres.

Apulius  makes  mention  of  Joannes,  a  great  magician  mistaken  by  Pius
for  St.  John.  In  the  book  Dibreh  hay-yamim  V Moshehy  Chronicles  of
Moses,  fol.  56,  they  are  called  Yanne  and  Mamre,  and  are  said  to  have
been  the  two  sons  of  Bala-am.

Numenius  Apamensis,  a  Greek  philosopher  of  the  Platonic-Pythagorean
school,  lived  in  the  Ilnd  century  of  our  era.  He  preceded  Ammonius
Saccas,  and  belonged  probably  to  the  age  of  the  Antonines.  He  is  men-
tioned by  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Origen,  Theoderet  and  Eusebius.  In
his  book  on  the  Good,  Numenius  relates  the  history  of  Moses  and  men-
tions by  name,  Jannes  and  Jambres  as  the  magicians,  which  is  also  stated
by  Aristobulus  in  his  book  dedicated  to  Ptolemy  Philometer.*

Gen.  V,  24.  '*  And  Enoch  walked  with  God,  and  he  was  noty  for  God
took  himy  The  ancient  Rabbins  of  the  Talmud  and  Midrashim  disagree
in  their  descriptions  of  ^ Ha-nokh  (Enoch)  the  son  of  Ye-red ;  some  even
place  him  among  the  wicked,  whilst  others  rank  him  with  the  pious,  and
a  third  class  place  him  as  intermediate  between  both.  The  Pe^siqthah  pro-
nounces him  a  "Saint  who  entered  Paradise  alive,"  so  does  Ben  Sirach,
and  in  the  Targum  Onkelos  are  two  versions  of  the  passage  we  have  above
quoted,  apparently  contradicting  each  other  and  yet  both  confirmatory  of
the  opinion  of  Enoch's  transportation  into  eternal  life.  One  reads;
'*  And  he  was,  for  the  Lord  did  not  let  him  die,"  and  the  other  **  And  he
was  noty  for  the  Lord  did  not  let  him  die."  Josephus  says:  **And
indeed  as  to  Eliyah,  and  as  to  Enoch,  who  was  before  the  Deluge,  it  is
written  in  the  Sacred  Books  that  they  disappeared,  but  so  that  nobody
knew  that  they  died."  f

In  the  M.\dxa&\i  Firqeh  R,  Eliezery  ch.  8,  it  says:   ** 'Ha-nokh  trans-

*  See  Talmud,  Treatise  Menachoth^  fol.  85a,  Origen  contra.  Celsus.  Bk.  iv,  c.  xi.
Eng.  Ed.,  vol.  ii,  p.  218.  Eusebius  Pamphilus  Prap.  Evattg,,  Book  ix,  8;  especially
upon  this  subject.  Kitto*s  Biblical  Cyclop.  Ed.  1876,  ii,  p.  464,  and  the  authorities  there
cited.  Apocryphal  New  Testament.  Rev.  Dr.  Peter  Allix,  in  his :  Judgment  of  the
Jewish  Church  against  the  Unitarians,  also  the  valuable  article  by  the  Rev.  John  Greg-
orie,  in  his  works  before  cited.     London.     1684.    pp.  61-63.

t  Antiq.  ix,  2.


99

mitted  the  knowledge  of  computing  the  seasons  to  Noah/*  and  the  Book
of  'Ha-nokh  is  referred  to,  as  that  of  which  it  is  said,  Gen.  v,  i ;  *'  This  is
the  book  of  the  generation  of  Adam.  * '  The  Zohar  (Part  I,  36^)  says :
**  'Ha-nokh  had  a  book  which  was  identical  with  the  'book  of  the  gene-
ration of  Adam  ;*  this  is  the  mystery  of  wisdom."  It  is  frequently  and
elaborately  quoted  in  the  Zohar.  In  the  14th  and  isth  verses  of  Jude,  is
a  reference  which  is  in  the  Book  of  Enoch  we  now  have.  Enoch  was
quoted  by  the  Fathers  of  the  Christian  Church,  but  from  the  Vlllth  to
the  XVIth  century  it  was  lost  sight  of.  Jellinek*  gives  several  ^Ha-nokh
pieces.  The  book  was  in  existence  at  the  time  of  Jude  and  up  to  300
A.D.;  it  disappeared  about  the  Vlllth  century  and  re-appeared  about  the
XVIth.  These  facts  tend  to  show,  as  the  Zohar  frequently  quotes,  'Ha-
nokh,  that  it,  the  Zohar,  most  probably  was  not  written  between  the
Vlllth  and  XVIth  centuries,  it  is  therefore,  from  this  evidence  highly
probable,  that  the  Zohar  was  written  before  the  Vlllth  century  A.  D.f

Exodus  iii,  i.  "The  mountain  of  God,  Horeb,"  Moses  and  Eliyah
alone,  says  the  Zohar,  came  down  together  to  learn  and  teach  the  Mys-
teries of  the  Thorah.  This  Qabbalistic  sentiment,  says  Benamozegh,
found  its  application  in  Mark  ix,  4,  5  ;  Matt,  xvii,  3,  4.

Exodus  xiv,  30.  "And  Israel  saw  the  Egyptians  dead  upon  the  sea-
shore." In  that  hour,  says  the  Zohar,  the  patron-prince  (jar)  of  Egypt
was  reduced  from  his  prominence  and  made  prince  of  the  Gai-hinnom
{sar  she! gai-hinnom).  Not  stated  anywhere  else  in  Hebrew  literature,
but  verified  by  modern  Egyptologists,  who  tell  us  that  Egypt  gradually
lost  her  pre-eminence  after  the  downfall  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  under
which  the  Exodus  took  place.  It  is  known  that  Osiris  was  the  patron-
prince  of  Egypt,  and  became  the  prince  of  the  Gai-hinnom,  i.  e.,  the
abode  of  the  dead,  by  the  name  of  Serapis.  It  would  appear  that  the
Zohar  had  knowledge  of  this  part  of  ancient  Egyptian  mythology,  by  tra-
dition.

Exodus  XX,  18.  **And  a/t  the  people  saw  the  voices  (ox  sounds,  qo-
loih^y     In  the  Zohar  ii,  81^,  **  voices"  are  interpreted  as  the  "  Sephi-

*  In  his  Bet  ha-Midrasch,

f  As  to  the  Book  of  Enoch  see  :  The  Book  of  Enoch  translated  from  the  Ethiopia
vith  Introd.  and  notes,  by  Rev.  Dr.  Geo.  H.  Schodde.     Andover.     1882.


lOO

roth,"  hence  they  "saw"  them,  and  did  mt  "hear"  them.  Note
R.  El-azar's  words  there.  Philo  says :  "  Likewise  when  the  Thorah  was
promulgated  on  the  Mount  Sinat,  it  is  not  said,  that  the  voice  had  been
'  heard,'  but  according  to  the  text,  it  had  been  '  seen '  by  all  the  assem-
bled people,"  in  a  spiritual  way,*


(^U^ofyu,SEPHIROTH,  m^du.


Diagram  1.

The  above  diagram  will  give  the  reader,  some  idea  of  the  arrangement

and  names,  of  the  intermediaries  between  the  Upper  and  Lower  worlds,

termed  by  the  Qabbalists,  Sephiroth,     We  shall  explain  them  more  futly

hereafter.

♦Comp.  Philo.   Of  the  Migration  of  Abraham,  Bobn's  Ed.,  Vol,  ii,  p.  53  ttuq.;
Fnnck,  La  Kabbatt,  p.  314,  315.


IV.


FURTHER  EXCERPTS  FROM  THE  ZOHAR.  PARABLES.  EXPLANATION  OF
NEW  TESTAMENT  PASSAGES.  THE  BASIC  ELEMENT  IN  RELIGIONS.
HERBERT  SPENCER  CITED.  ANCIENT  CHINESE  TAOISM.  MEANING  OF
IDEA,  ANCIENTLY.  NEW  TESTAMENT  AND  PAGAN  WRITERS  ON  THE
INVISIBLE  AND  VISIBLE.      THE   IDEAL  AND   REAL,  ETC.

AS  an  introduction  to  the  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah  is  the  following
parable :  "  What  is  the  Book  of  Mysteries?  It  consists,  said  R.
Shim-on  ben  Yo'hai,  of  Five  Chapters,  contained  in  a  grand  pal-
ace and  filling  the  whole  universe.  If,  replied  Rabbi  Yehudah,  they  con-
tain the  fundamental  ideas,  they  would  be  the  most  excellent  of  all
things  !  And  so  they  are,  replied  R.  Shim-on,  for  the  initiated ;  but  he
who  is  unacquainted  with  that  book,  is  in  this  respect  like  a  mountaineer
who  has  always  dwelt  in  the  wilds  of  the  mountains,  and  who  is  a
stranger  to  the  usages  of  civilized  life.  He  sows  wheat,  but  is  accu^
toraed  to  partake  of  the  same,  only  in  its  natural  condition.  One  day
this  barbarian  came  into  a  city,  and  whilst  there,  good  bread,  a  food
until  then  unknown  to  him,  was  placed  before  him.  He  asked :  What
does  one  do  with  this?  He  was  told  that  it  was  bread  to  eat.  He  took
it  and  tasted  it  with  pleasure.  He  then  inquired,  of  what  material  is  it
made  ?  It  was  answered  that  it  was  made  of  wheat.  Afterwards  a  per-
son offered  to  him  a  fine  cake  kneaded  in  oil.  He  partook  of  it,  and
again  asked :  And  this,  of  what  is  it  made  ?  He  was  told  of  wheat.
Finally  one  placed  before  him,  the  royal  pastry,  kneaded  with  oil  and
honey.  He  again  addressed  the  same  question  as  at  first  and  obtained
the  same  reply.  Then  he  said :  At  my  home  I  am  in  possession  of  all
these  things,  I  partake  daily  of  them  in  their  root,  and  cultivate  the
wheat  from  which  they  are  made.  In  this  crudeness  he  remained  a
stranger  to  the  delights  which  one  draws  from  the  wheat,  and  the
Cderived)  pleasures  are  lost  to  him.     It  is  the  same  with  those  who  stop


I02

at  the  general  principles  of  knowledge,  because  they  are  ignorant  of  the
delights  which  one  may  draw  from  the  further  investigation  and  applica-
tion of  those  principles."*

The  Qabbalah  holds,  that  there  is  a  hidden,  secret  meaning,  concealed
imder  the  words  of  the  Hebrew  Holy  Writings,  and  the  Zohar  supports
this  idea :t  **Woe,  it  says:  to  the  man  who  sees  in  the  Thorah,  /.  e.y
Law,  only  simple  recitals  and  ordinary  words !  Because,  if  in  truth  it
only  contained  these,  we  would  even  to-day  be  able  to  compose  a  Thorah
much  more  worthy  of  admiration.  For  if  we  find  only  the  simple  words,
and  we  would  only  have  to  address  ourselves  to  the  legislators  of  the
earth,  to  those  in  whom  we  most  frequently  meet  with  the  most  grandeur.
It  would  be  sufficient  to  imitate  them,  and  make  a  Thorah  after  their
words  and  example.  But  it  is  not  so ;  each  word  of  the  Thorah  contains
an  elevated  meaning  and  a  sublime  mystery.  *  *  The  recitals  of  the
Thorah  are  the  vestments  of  the  Thorah.  Woe  to  him  who  takes  this
garment  for  the  Thorah  itself !  It  is  with  this  meaning  that  David  has
said :  *  O  YHVH  !  open  my  eyes,  to  the  end  that  I  may  contemplate  the
marvels  of  Thy  Thorah  *  (Ps.  cxix,  i8).  David  wished  to  speak  of  that
which  is  concealed  under  the  vestment  of  the  Thorah.  There  are  some
foolish  people,  who  seeing  a  man  covered  with  a  beautiful  garment,
carry  their  regard  no  further,  and  take  the  garment  for  the  body,  whilst
there  exists  a  still  more  precious  thing,  which  is  the  soul.  The  Thorah
also  has  its  body.  There  are  some  of  the  commandments  that  one  can
call  the  body  of  the  Thorah.  The  ordinary  recitals  therein  mingled,  are
the  vestments  by  which  the  body  is  covered.  The  simple  take  notice
only  of  the  garments  or  recitals  of  the  Thorah,  they  know  no  other
thing,  they  see  not  that  which  is  concealed  under  the  vestment.  The
more  instructed  men  do  not  pay  attention  to  the  vestment,  but  to  the
body  which  it  envelops.  Finally,  the  Wise,  the  servitors  of  the  Su-
preme King,  those  who  inhabit  the  heights  of  Sinai,J  are  occupied
only  with  the  soul,  which  is  the  basis  of  all  the  rest,  which  is  the
Thorah  itself;  and  in  the  future  time  they  will  be  prepared   to  con-

*  Zohar  ii,  1 76^7,  Mantua  Ed.

t  III,  fol.  152^,  J  Beha-alotheha,

fNum.  xi,  24  ei  seq,;  Exod.  xxiii,  9-1 1.


I03

template  the  Soul  of  that  Soul  (/.  e.,  the  Deity,)  which  breathes  in  the
Thorah.**  It  also  says :  "If  the  Thorah  was  composed  only  of  ordinary
words  and  recitals,  as  the  words  of  Esau,  Hagar,  and  Laban,  as  those  which
were  pronounced  by  the  ass  of  Bala-am,  and  by  Bala-am  himself,  where-
fore would  it  be  called,  the  Thorah  of  Truth,  the  Perfect  Thorah,  the  Faith-
ful Witness  of  God  ?  Wherefore  would  the  Wise  esteem  it  more  precious
than  gold  or  pearls  ?  But  no ;  in  each  word  (of  the  Thorah)  is  concealed
a  more  elevated  meaning ;  each  recites  to  our  understanding,  other  things
than  the  events  which  it  appears  to  contain.  And  that  superior  and  most
holy  Thorah  is  the  True  Thorah.  *  '*  Origen  uses  almost  the  same  language,
saying :  "If  we  take  our  stand  on  the  literature  (according  to  that  which
seems  good  to  the  Jews  or  to  the  crowd  generally),  let  us  receive  what  has
been  written  in  the  Law,  and  if  we  do  this,  I  blush  to  say  and  confess  that
God  has  given  us  such  laws ;  for  the  laws  of  man  will  appear  to  be  more
elegant  and  reasonable.     Compare  for  example  the  laws  of  the  Romans,

Athenians  or  Lacedemonians.  *'t

He  also  says :  "  What  man  who  has  any  understanding  will  suppose
that  the  first,  second  and  third  day  (of  Creation),  and  the  evening  and
the  morning,  had  been  able  to  exist  without  a  sun,  and  moon,  and  stars?
And  that  the  first  day  was  as  it  were,  also  without  a  sky  ?  Where  can  we
find  a  mind  so  foolish  as  to  suppose  that  God  acted  like  a  common  hus-
bandman, and  planted  a  paradise  in  (the  Garden  of)  Eden,  towards  the
East ;  and  placed  in  it  a  Tree  of  Life  visible  and  palpable,  so  that  one
tasting  of  the  fruit  by  the  bodily  teeth  obtained  life?  And  again  that  one
was  a  partaker  of  good  and  evil  by  masticating  what  was  taken  from  the
tree  ?  And  if  God  is  said  to  walk  in  the  paradise  in  the  evening,  and
Adam  to  hide  himself  under  a  tree ;  I  do  not  suppose  that  any  one  doubts
that  these  things  figuratively  indicate  certain  mysteries,  the  history  having
taken  place  in  appearance,  and  not  literally.  Cain  also,  when  going
forth  from  the  presence  of  God,  certainly  appears  to  thoughtful  men  as

*  Zohar  iii,  fol.  149^.

t  Homil.  vii,  in  Levit.  See  also  to  the  same  effect :  The  Writings  of  Origen.  Clark's
Edinburgh  Ed.,  1869,  Vol.  l.  pp.  315,  316.  Huet.  Origmiana,  p.  167.  Philo,  BohnVs
Ed.,  i,  p.  422.     Davidson,  Sacred  Hermeneutics,  Edinburgh,  1843,  p.  99.


I04

likely  to  lead  the  reader  to  inquire,  what  is  the  presence  of  God,  and
what  is  the  meaning  of  going  out  from  Him,"  etc.,  etc.*

A  charming  allegory  in  the  Zohar  also  sets  forth  the  same  ideas.  "  Like
unto  a  beautiful  woman  hidden  in  the  interior  of  a  palace,  who  when  her
friend  and  beloved  passes  by,  opens  for  a  moment,  a  secret  window,  and
is  only  seen  by  him ;  then  again  retires  and  disappears  for  a  long  time :
so  the  doctrine  shows  herself  only  to  the  elect  (that  is,  to  those  devoted
to  her  with  soul  and  body),  but  also  not  even  to  these  always  in  the
same  manner.  In  the  beginning,  deeply  veiled,  she  only  beckons  to  the
one  passing,  with  her  hand ;  it  simply  depends  (on  himself)  if  in  his  un-
derstanding he  perceives  this  gentle  hint.f  Later  she  approaches  him
somewhat  nearer,  and  whispers  to  him  a  few  words,  but  her  countenance  is
still  hidden  in  the  thick  veil,  which  his  glances  can  hardly  penetrate.  J
Still  later  she  converses  with  him,  her  countenance  covered  with  a  thinner
veil.§  After  he  has  accustomed  himself  to  her  society,  she  finally  shows
.  herself  to  him,  face  to  face,  and  intrusts  him  with  the  innermost  secrets
of  her  heart.  II  He  who  is  thus  far  initiated  into  the  Mysteries  of  the
Thorah,  easily  comprehends,  that  all  those  profound  secrets,  are  already
based  upon  the  simple  sense  of  the  word  and  are  in  harmony  with  it,  from
which  (the  literal  sense  of  the  word)  not  a  single  yod  is  to  be  taken
or  added.'*  ^

Origen  in  his  writings,  also  admits  of  the  three  meanings,  an  historical,

♦Origen's  works,  Clark's  Ed.  cited,  i,  315  et  seq.y  Bk.  iv,  c.  2.  Huet  Origeniana^  p.
167.  The  Talmud  al  o  holds  to  a  spiritual  or  hidden  meaning  in  the  Hebrew  Holy
writings,  under  ihcir  letter.  Treatise  Sanhedrin  99^.  In  the  Christian  Church  at  pres-
ent this  idea  is  carried  to  a  great  length.  See,  among  others,  the  curious  statements  in
the  writings  of  Dr.  Christopher  Wordsworth,  Canon  of  Westminster,  especially  his
Comment,  on  Genesis  and  Exodus.     London,  1864,  p.  52.

f  This  is  the  species  of  interpretation  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  called  :  Remez,  1.  ^.,  in
dication,  hint,  known  meaning.

X  The  species  called :  D'rash,  i,  ^.,  allegorical  exposition.

2  This  is  the  Haggadah,  which  is  written  in  enigmatical  language.

II  This  is  the  species  called.  Sod  or  Mystery,  1.  ^.,  the  Secret  of  the  Thorah  or  Law ;
the  'Hokhmah,  1.  ^.,  Wisdom  par  excellence,  the  Secret  Learning  or  Qabbalah.  The
ordinary  and  usual  intelligence  of  the  words,  etc.,  was  called  Pashut.  The  whole  to-
gether forms  the  word  PaRDeS,  i.  e,.  Paradise,  the  Intellect.

^  Zohar  ii,  fol.  99,  {  MishpcUim,    Comp.  Matt,  v,  18 ;  Luke  xvi,  14.


I05

a  legislative  or  ethical,  and  the  mystical  sense.  The  first  he  compares  to
somatikos,  /.  ^.,  the  body,  the  second  to  psychikos,  i.  e,,  the  soul,  the
third  Xopneumatikos,  /.  ^.,  the  spirit.  These  corresponding  to  the  Pla-
tonic notion  of  the  component  parts  of  the  man,  somay  body ;  psyche^
soul ;  pneuma,  air  or  spirit.  Origen*  speaks  of  these  in  almost  the  very
words  of  the  Qabbalah.f  The  learned  Franciscan,  Nicolas  de  Lyra,  b.
^irca  1270,  d.  1340  A.  D.,  forerunner  of  the  Reformation,  and  an  erudite
commentator  on  the  Bible,!  adopts  the  four  Jewish  modes  of  interpreta-
tion OTIS  PaRDeS  =-  niD  Sod,  secret,  mystical ;  Vrash,  allegorical,  Re-
mezy  spiritual  or  moral,  and  DM  Pashut  literal.  In  his  first  prologue,  he
says :  "  The  letter  teaches  the  things  which  are  done,  the  allegory  those
which  you  believe,  the  moral  the  things  which  you  are  to  do,  the  anagog-
ical  (the  mystical  interpretation),  that  to  which  you  tend.'*  §  The  word
PaRDeS,  /.  ^.,  Paradise  or  the  Intellect,  covered  the  same  ground  in  the
mind  of  the  Jewish  exegetists.||

Matt.  V,  22,  "  Whosoever  shall  say.  Thou  fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of
hell  fire.''

The  Zohar  says  :^  "  R.  'Hiz'qee-yah,  said:  He  who  calls  his  fellow-
man  wickedy  him  they  will  bring  down  to  the  Gai-hinnomy  t\e,y  hell  fire,
and  they  bring  him  down  'i;rS;rS  Wil-oyy  literally  *  to  his  ribs,*  /.  ^.,  by
scourging  him  on  his  bare  skin,  or  by  subjecting  him  to  want  and  starva-
tion, until  he  is  nothing  but  a  skeleton.  The  above  quoted  verse  from
St.  Matthew,  comprises  the  Talmudical  meanings.  The  Talmud  says  :**
''He  who  calls  his  fellow-man  wicked yored  immo  le^hdyyavy^  i,  e,,  he
goes  with  him  to  his  life,  or,  he  may,  or  will,  punish  him  to  his  very
life,  even  injuring  him  in  his  means  of  earning  a  living.  On  these  words
Rashi  commenting,  says  :  **  It  seems  hard  to  me,  that  the  'Hakhameem,

*  Clark's  Ed.  cited,  Vol.  i,  p.  294-315.     Homil.  v,  in  Lcvit.

f  Compare  Davidson,  Sacred.  Hermeneutics,  p.  97.

X  Postilits  perpetua  in  universa  Biblia;  first  printed  at  Rome  1471-5  in  5  vols.

I  Compare  Kitto*s  Cyclop.  Bib.  Lit.,  Ed.  1876,  iii,  pp.  869-70.

II  Comp.  Talmud  Ye'nishalmi,  French  Edition,  by  M.  Schwab,  Paris,  Vol.  i,  Introd.
Talmudic  Miscel.  by  Hershon,  p.  75,  §  33.

li"  \  Miskpatim,  Part  ii,  p.  1 22a.

**  Treatises,  Baba  Me'tzeeah  71^,  Kiddushin  2Sa,  Ke^tubboth  90^,  Yomah  75^.


io6

/.  ^.,  Wise-men,  should  have  permitted  Israel  to  take  revenge  and  retali-
ate." The  termination  'i  oy  of  'i;rS;rS  ie'tl-oy,  /.^.,  to  his  ribs^  answers  to
the  Hebrew  v  av  of  v^nS  le^hdy-ydv,  /.<?.,  to  his  life,  both  meaning  his  with
the  noun  in  the  plural ;  the  first  S  in  both  words  means  to;  hence  there
remains  in  the  word  of  the  Zohar  yhv  ill'(^i  which  is  the  same  as  the  He-
brew j;S3f  tzelah,  /.<?.,  rib.  This  has  been  asserted  as  an  error  of  Moses  de
Leon,  who  did  not  understand  the  Talmudic  sentence  and  the  word  le^hay-
yav,  but  thought  it  was  derived  from  ^nS  le*hee,  i.e.,  the  cheek  or  Jaw-bone.
The  Zoharic  critic,  however,  did  not  himself  apparently  know  that  Wil-oyy
i.  e,,  to  his  ribs,  is  not  derived  from  j;iS  io-ah,  /.  e.,  jaw  or  cheek.

n  Peter  ii,  4.  "  For  if  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned,  but  cast
them  down  to  hell,  and  delivered  them  into  chains  of  darkness,  to  be  re-
served \mto  Judgment.^*  It  has  been  generally  held  that  this  statement
applies  to  Genesis  vi,  4,  and  that  the  angels  referred  to  are  those  called
D'hSkh  '•ja  B*nai  ha-Elohim,  i.  e..  Sons  of  Elohim,  but  no  account  is  to
be  found  in  Genesis  of  any  punishment  of  the  offenders,  and  it  is  the
punishment  that  is  especially  dwelt  on  in  the  Epistle  of  Peter.  Reference
is  made  to  them  in  the  Book  of  Enoch.*  The  parallel  passage  is  Jude  vi.
"And  (the)  angels  which  kept  not  their  own  dignity  (principality,  do-
minion), but  forsook  their  proper  habitation,  he  hath  kept  in  everlasting
bonds  under  darkness,  unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  day.'*t  From  such
passages  as  Ephesians  i,  21,  we  can  see,  that  the  celestial  world  was  con-
ceived and  spoken  of  by  the  Apostles,  as  arranged  according  to  the  dig-
nity of  its  inhabitants,  t

The  Zohar  states :  *'  R.  Yitz*haq  began  and  said  :  *  What  is  man  that
thou  rememberest  him '  (Ps.  viii,  4).  This  was  said  at  the  time  when  it
came  into  the  Will  of  the  Holy  One  to  create  man.  He  called  before  Him-
self many  hosts  of  the  upper  angels  and  said  unto  them :  *  I  wish  to  create
man.  *  Then  they  replied :  '  Man  will  not  continue  one  night  in  his  glory  *
(Ps.  xlix,  12).  Then  the  Holy  One  stretched  forth  his  finger  and  burned
them.  After  that  he  called  other  hosts  before  him,  and  said  unto  them :
'  I  wish  to  create  man.'     And  they  said  before  Him  '  What  is  man,  that

♦vii,  I,  2;  X,  6,  15;  xxi,  6;  cc.  1-36,

f  Comp.  Gen.  vi,  2;  I  Pet.  iii,  19;  Tobit  vi,  14.

t  Comp.  Col.  ii,  18.


I07

Thou  rememberest  him  ? '    '  What  is  the  good  of  this  son  of  man  ?  *    And
He  said  unto  them :  '  This  man  shall  be  in  our  image  so  that  his  wisdom
shall  be  superior  to  your  wisdom.'     When  Elohim  had  created  man,  and
man  had  committed  a  sin,  and  gone  forth  as  a  culprit,  there  came  Uzza
and  Azael  and  said  to  the  Holy  One,  *  We  have  cause  of  complaint  (liter-
ally an  opening  of  the  mouth,  accusation)  against  Thee.     Here  is  the
son  of  man  whom  thou  hast  made;  he  has  sinned  before  Thee.'     And
He  said  unto  them  :  '  If  you  had  been  among  them,  you  would  have  done
worse  than  they.*    What  then  did  the  Holy  One?    He  threw  them  down
from  the  holy  position  that  was  theirs,  even  from  heaven.      *      *      *
After  YHVH  had  thrown  them  down  from  their  holy  place,  even  from
heaven,  they  erred  after  the  women  of  the  world,  and  caused  the  world
to  err.     Here  is  a  subject  worthy  of  our  meditation.     Surely  it  is  written
*  He  maketh  His  angels  spirits,'  (Ps..civ,  4)  and  surely  these  were  not  the
angels  ?    How  could  they  exist  upon  the  earth  ?    Come  and  see !     All
these  angels  above  do  not  exist  and  cannot  exist,  except  in  the  Upper
Light  that  shines  unto  them  and  preserves  them,  and  if  this  Upper  Light
is  cut  off  from  them  they  cannot  exist.  How  much  less  can  those  whom  the
Holy  One  has  thrown  down,  and  from  whom  that  Light  of  Above  has
ceased  ?    For  their  glory  was  altered,  and  when  they  came  down  and  the
air  of  this  world  obtained  rule  over  them,  they  were  changed  into  another
(lower)  degree.    Here  is  an  explanation.    The  manna  that  came  down  to
Israel  in  the  wilderness  sprang  originally  from  the  dew  above,*  which
comes  down  from  the  Ancient  One,  the  Hidden  of  all  the  Hidden  Ones.
And  when  it  comes  down  its  Light  shines  through  all  the  (created)  uni-
verse, and  from  it  is  fed  the  field  of  the  apples,  and  the  upper  angels.
But  when  it  came  down  here  below  and  the  air  of  this  world  had  rule
over  it,  it  became  congealed  and  its  splendor  was  changed,  becoming  only
like  coriander  seedfand  nothing  more.  How  much  more  so  with  the  angels.
When  they  came  down  the  air  had  power  over  them,  they  were  changed  from
their  former  degree  in  which  they  had  been.     What  did  the  Holy  One  then
do?    He  saw  that  they  were  misleading  the  world,  so  He  bound  thera^in
iron  chains  in  the  mountain  of  darkness.    In  what  place  do  they  sit  ?    In

*  Song  of  Songs  v,  2.

fNum.  xi,  7.  .


io8

the  depths  of  the  mountains  He  placed  Uzza,  and  cast  darkness  into  his
face,  because  at  that  time  when  the  Holy  One  bound  them,  Uzza  har-
dened himself  and  rebelled  against  the  Highest.  So  the  Holy  One  threw
him  down  into  the  abyss  up  to  his  very  neck  and  cast  darkness  into  his
face.  Now  Azael,  who  did  not  harden  himself,  the  Holy  One  placed
near  his  fellow,  but  let  the  darkness  be  light  to  him."*  Again,  the  Zohar
says :  "  They,  the  spirits  of  Light  and  Darkness,  dive  into  the  great  sea,  and
when  they  have  arrived  at  the  chain  of  Uzza  and  Azael,  they  rouse  them,
and  these  spring  into  the  mountains  of  darkness  and  think  that  the  Holy
One  is  going  to  cite  them  to  judgment.**  f

In  Luke  viii,  31,  we  have  the  devils  saying:  "They  besought  Him
that  He  would  not  command  them  to  go  out  into  the  deep,'*  (the
abyss).

The  basic  element  of  most  of  the  ancient,  and  to  this  day,  of  many  of
the  modem  religions  of  the  world  is,  the  idea  of  a  perfect  invisible  uni-
verse above,  which  is  the  real  and  true  paradigm  or  ideal  model,  of  the
visible  universe  below,  the  latter  being,  the  reflection,  simulacrum  or
shadow,  of  the  invisible  perfect  ideal  above.  This  idea  was  fully  under-
stood by  the  Ancient  Egyptians,  as  was  shown  in  their  deities  Nut  or
Neith,  the  Upper  World,  Shu  or  Ma,  the  Intermediary,  and  Seb,  the
Earth.  In  India,  the  same  idea  is  fully  set  forth  in  the  esoteric  books  of
the  Vedas,  called  the  Upanishads.  It  is  The  Supreme  Ideal  Brahm  which
is  the  only  True.  It  manifests  Itself  first  in  Brama,  Vishnu  and  Siva,
past,  present  and  future,  time,  and  through  these  in  the  visible,  the  last
being  Maya  or  Illusion.  The  temples  of  most  of  the  archaic  peoples
of  Asia  and  of  Egypt,  were  intended  to  be  visible  copies  of  the  heavenly
Temple,  the  starry  firmament  called  Templum^  and  the  same  idea  is
visible  in  those  of  the  Hebrews.  Philo  and  Josephus,  represent  the
Temples  of  the  Israelites,  as  typical  of  the  visible  universe,  and  this
was  based  on  an  invisible  universe.  The  archaic  heathen  free-masons
had  for  their  special  deity,  Jupiter  Megalistor,  or,  the  Jupiter  of  the
Universe.

*  Zohar,  Ed.  of  Zolkiew,  iii,  20&z.    The  Splhrah  DTznioothah  and  the  Idroth  have
much  upon  the  angels  called  B'nai  ha-Elohim.

f  Zohar,  i,  9^.  ^


I09

**  And  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven,  and  there  was  seen  in
his  temple  the  ark  of  his  testament.  *  *  *

The  idea  of  the  Upper  ideal  but  real  and  true,  and  the  Lower  appa-
rently real,  but  in  truth  changeable  and  untrue,  goes  through  the  entire
Apocalypse  of  St.  John,  is  in  St.  Paul,  and  in  the  Epistle  to  the  He-
brews.

The  Zohar  also  says :  "  All  that  which  is  found  (or  exists)  upon  the
Earth,  has  its  spiritual  counterpart  also  to  be  found  on  High,  and  there
does  not  exist  the  smallest  thing  in  this  world,  which  is  not  itself  attached
to  something  on  High,  and  is  not  found  in  dependence  upon  it.  When
the  inferior  part  is  influenced,  that  which  is  set  over  it  in  the  Superior
world  is  equally  (influenced),  because  all  are  perfectly  united  together,  "f
We  can  compare  this  with  the  doctrine  to  be  found  m  the  New  Testa-
ment. J  And  an  old  Jewish  Commentator  has  said :  "  Know  that  we
have  to  make  a  separation  between  those  that  are  hidden  from  us,  and
those  (things)  that  are  manifest  to  us.**  §  The  Talmudic  maxim  is :  *'  If
thou  wilt  know  the  invisible  have  an  open  eye  for  the  visible.  * '

"  All  that  which  is  contained  in  the  Lower  World  is  also  found  in  the
Upper  (in  prototype).  The  Lower  and  Upper  reciprocally  act  upon  each
other.*'  II

**  All  that  which  is  on  the  earth,  is  also  found  above  (in  perfect  proto-
type), and  there  is  not  any  thing  so  insignificant  in  the  world,  that  does
not  depend  upon  another  above;  in  such  a  manner,  that  if  the  lower
moves  itself  the  higher  corresponding  to  it  moves  towards  it.  As  to  the
number  therefore  of  the  different  species  of  creatures,  which  are  enumer-
ated below,  the  same  number  is  to  be  found  in  the  upper  roots.  ^

♦Rev.  xi,  19.  Comp.  ibid,  1-2.  Exod.  xxv,  8,  9,  40;  especially  Heb.  viii,  5,  ix,  i.
Acts  vii,  44;  I  Chron.  xxviii,  12,  13;  Ezek.  xi.  Compare  The  Speaker's  Commen-
tary, on  these  verses.

t  Zohar,  i,  \  Vaya'hee,  Ibl.  156,  col.  6,  158^,  205^.

J  Matt.  X,  29-31  ;  Luke  xii,  6-7.

J  Recanati  in  his  Taamey  ham-Mitz'voih,  i,  e,,  Meaning  of  the  Commandments  ad
init.

II  Zohar,  J  Vayd'hee^  fol.  156,  col.  2.

\  Sepher  Shephaihal,  fol.  1 1,  col.  2.  Comp.  Matt,  x,  29,  30,  31 ;  Luke  xii,  6,  7 ;
Matt,  xviii,  10.


no

This  is  also  the  view  of  R.  Yitz'haq  Luria.  "  All  the  creatures  in  the
world  have  each  a  superior  above.  This  superior,  whose  inner  pleasure  it
is  to  emanate  into  them,  cannot  impart  efflux  until  they  have  adored.**  *

According  to  the  Qabbalah,  the  emanated  in  its  inner  being,  does  not
in  reality  proceed  from  the  emanating  one ;  that  which  is  produced  is
only  an  appearance,t  and  the  real  (or  true)  nature  remains  in  the  inner
upper  one.

"  From  the  Great  Light  of  the  being  of  Ain  Soph  and  its  A*tzeeluth,
after  It  had  emanated  the  A'tzeeluth  from  Itself,  nothing  was  withdrawn :
Its  powers  which  expand  and  reveal  themselves,  are  affixed  and  inter-
woven in  It,  and  in  Its  being.*' J

A  curious  idea  of  the  Qabbalists  is,  that  as  to  emanation  stated  in  the
book,  Nobeleth  'Hokhmah:

'*  The  Qabbalists  say,  that  the  entering  into  existence  of  the  worlds,
happened  through  delight,  in  that  Ain  Soph,  rejoiced  in  Itself,  and  flashed
and  beamed  from  Itself  to  Itself;  and  from  these  intelligent  movements,
and  spiritual  and  divine  scintillations,  from  the  parts  of  Its  being  to  Its
being,  which  are  called  delight,  Its  sources  have  spread  themselves  toward
the  outside,  as  seeds  for  the  world,  etc.*'  These  movements  are  called
the  Upper  Ziwug.g

The  soul  has  its  origin  in  the  Supreme  Intelligence,  in  which  it  is  as-
serted, the  forms  of  the  coming  existences  already  can  be  distinguished
from  each  other,  and  this  Supreme  Intelligence  can  be  termed  the  Uni-
versal Soul.  From  thence,  if  it  is  a  masculine  soul,  it  passes  through  the
principle  of  Grace,  the  Expansion  (Right  side) ;  if  a  female,  it  impreg-
nates itself  from  the  principle  of  Justice,  the  Concentration  (Left  side),
finally  it  is  born  into  this  world  in  which  we  live,  through  the  union  of
the  King  and  Queen  who  are,  as  regards  the  generation  of  the  soul,  like
the  human  species  in  the  generation  of  the  body.||     So  the  soul  is  as-

*  Sepher  AVbo  Sha-arim^  near  the  end.

f  Similar  to  the  idea  of  Maya  or  Illusion  of  the  Hindu  philosophy.
X  Sepher  Shephathal^  fol.  2$.

§  Comp.  The  Eme*h  ha-MeWh^  f.  ^.,  Valley  of  the  King,  fol.  i,  in  Shaar  Shashuah
(the  Delight).    Sheber  Joseph yio\.  6l.
II  Zohar  iii,  fol.  7.


Ill

serted  to  descend  here  below,  and  so,  it  is  asserted,  it  is  restored  to  the
bosom  of  the  Deity  when  it  has  fulfilled  its  mission,  and  adorned  by  its
virtues,  is  prepared  for  heaven  ;  and  raising  itself  by  its  own  action  and
the  assistance  of  the  Divine  Love,  which  it  incites  by  that  which  it  feels,
to  the  highest  degree  of  emanation,  to  the  real  existence^  thus  places
itself  in  harmony  and  affinity  with  the  ideal  form.  This  is  what  the
Qabbalah  undertakes  to  support,  with  what  basis  we  do  not  know.*  "In
that  manner,  says  the  Zohar,t  life  is  drawn  at  the  same  time  from  on
High  and  from  Below,  the  source  renews  itself,  and  the  sea  always  full,
distributes  its  waters  in  all  places."

This  idea  of  the  perfect  invisible  and  the  reflection  or  imperfect  visi-
ble, Herbert  Spencer  places  among  the  primitive  ideas  of  mankind.  J
We  find  these  ideas  in  the  archaic  literature  of  China.  Dr.  De  Groot
saj's:

"  The  Tao-teh-King,  /.  ^.,  The  Book  of  the  Perfection  of  Nature,  at-
tributed to  Laou  Tsz*,  contains  the  following  principles:  There  was  a
time  when  Heaven  and  Earth  did  not  exist,  but  only  an  unlimited  Space
in  which  reigned  absolute  immobility.  All  the  visible  things  and  all  that
which  possesses  existence,  were  born  in  that  Space  from  a  powerful  prin-
ciple, which  existed  by  Itself,  and  from  Itself  developed  Itself,§  and  which
made  the  heavens  revolve  and  preserved  the  universal  life ;  a  principle  as
to  which  philosophy  declares  we  know  not  the  name,  and  which  for  that
reason,  it  designates  by  the  simple  appellation  Tao,  which  we  may  nearly
describe  as  the  universal  soul  of  nature,  the  universal  energy  of  nature,
or  simply,  as  nature.  Tao  manifested  itself  in  Heaven  and  Earth,
with  which  it  is,  so  to  say.  One.     If  man  reaches  to  purity  and  rest,  he

*  See  the  Pardes  Rimonim,  fol.  60-64.

1 1,  fol.  60-70.

J  The  Principles  of  Sociology,  3d  Ed.  New  York.  1886.  Vol.  i,  c.  viii,  \  53,  p.
105  et  seq,

§  Compare  :  "  The  Holy  One,  Blessed  be  He  !  created  and  destroyed  several  worlds
before  the  present  one  was  made,  and  when  this  His  last  work  was  nigh  completed,  all
the  things  of  this  worlds  all  the  creatures  of  the  universe^  in  whatever  age  they  were  to
exist t  before  even  they  entered  into  this  worlds  were  present  before  the  Deity  in  their  true
form.  Thus  are  the  words  of  Ecclesiastes  to  be  understood  *  What  was,  shall  be,  and
what  has  been  done,  shall  be  done.'  " — Zohar  iii,  dib,  Comp.  the  Sayings  of  the  Jew-
bh  Fathers,  by  Charles  Taylor,  p.  70,  note  36,  end.


112

will  be  not  only  one  with  the  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  former  being  the
ideal  of  purity  and  the  latter  of  passivity  or  rest,  but  his  entire  existence
even,  may  be  absorbed  into  the  great  principle  Tao.  Purity  and  rest
or  peace,  imply  the  return  into  the  maternal  breast,  into  that  principle
which  is  the  source  and  foundation  of  all  felicity.  We  have  to  attain  pu-
rity, through  the  exercise  of  virtue,  and  repose,  by  freeing  ourselves
from  the  anxieties  of  the  world  and  the  inquietude  of  the  human  spirit.
These  principles  will  be  able  to  conduct,  following  the  manner  of  their
application,  perhaps  to  a  moral  epicurianism  or  a  moral  asceticism,  and
at  the  same  time  to  the  belief  in  the  possibility  of  acquiring  immortality.
This  is  the  superior  part  upon  which  has  been  constructed  the  entire  sys-
tem of  Taoism."  *  Of  the  writings  of  Laou  Tsz*  the  celebrated  French
Sinalogue  Pauthier,  has  said :  '*  Human  wisdom  cannot  ever  use  language
more  holy  and  profound."  f

The  Asiatic  Journal  says :  **  By  the  Chinese,  man  is  considered  as  a  mi-
krokosm ;  the  universe  is  man,  on  a  large  scale :  this  is  all  we  find  posi-
tively stated  upon  the  subject.  Human  reason  is  the  reason  of  the  uni-
verse. The  holy-man,  or  sage  by  eminence,  is  like  the  great  pinnacle,
and  spirit.  He  is  the  first  of  all  beings.  His  spirit  is  one  with  the
heSivens,  the  master  work  of  the  Supreme  Reason,  being  perfectly  unique."
(Asiatic  Journal,  No.  xxxvi,  New  Series,  Dec,  1832,  p.  306.)

Dr.  Medhurst  quotes  from  one  of  the  disciples  of  Laou  Tsz*  :  "  What
is  there  superior  to  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  from  which  Earth  and  Heaven
sprung  ?  Nay,  what  is  there  superior  to  Space  and  which  moves  in  Space  ?
The  great  Tao  is  the  parent  of  Space,  and  Space  is  the  parent  of  Heaven
and  Earth,  and  Heaven  and  Earth  produced  men  and  things  *  *  *
The  venerable  Prince  (Reason)  arose  prior  to  the  Great  Original,  standing
at  the  commencement  of  the  Mighty  Wonderful,  and  floating  in  the  ocean
of  Deep  Obscurity.  He  is  spontaneous  and  self-existing,  produced  before
the  beginning  of  the  void,  commencing  prior  to  uncaused  existences,  per-

*  Annales  du  MusSe  Guimet.  Tome  OttzUme  et  Douzihne.  Les  F^tes  annuelUment
ciUbries  d  Emoui  (Amoy)  Etude  concernant  la  religion  populaire  des  Chinois^  P^^^  J'  J*
M,  De  Groot^  etc,  Traduite  du  Hollandaist  etc.,  Paris,  Ernest  Leroux,  iditeur  iSSb^
a  vol. ;  Vol.  ii,  p.  692  et  seq,

\Ibid.,  p.  695.


113

vading  all  Heaven  and  Earth,  whose  beginning  and  end  no  year  can  cir-
cumscribe." *

Laou  Tsz*  (b.  circa  604  B.  C.)  in  his  Tao-teh-King,  by  Dr.  Williams
translated,  Canons  of  Reason  and  Virtue,  ch.  xlii,  says :  "  Tao  produced
one,  one  produced  two,  two  produced  three,  and  three  produced  all
things."  t  An  examination  of  the  writings  of  this  ancient  Chinese  phi-
losopher and  their  comparison  with  the  Qabbalah,  will  show  many  points
of  similarity.  J

The  Chinese  believe,  as  do  many  other  peoples,  that  each  created  being
or  thing  has  a  double.  §

The  ^^  ideas  ^^  of  these  early  thinkers,  especially  Plato,  were  not  intel-
lectual **  ideas  "  or  conceptions,  as  we,  in  our  day,  usually  understand  the
word,  idea,  they  were  more  properly  specific  essences  or  the  absolute  reali-
ties of  things;  this  the  Pythagoreans  meant  by  their  Real-forms,  of  which
the  material  forms  are  only  the  illusions,  and  are  nothing  but  fleeting,
changeable  images.  This  was  the  view  taken  by  Aristotle  and  Plato.  The
latter  sought  to  consider  them  as  entities^  noumcna,  of  which  all  individu-
alities were  only  t\it  phenomena,  Philo  also  says:  "God,  intending  to
make  a  visible  world,  first  formed  an  intelligible  one ;  that  so  having  an
incorporeal  and  most  god-like  pattern  before  him,  he  might  make  the
corporeal  world  agreeable  to  it."

Still  Plato  has  some  thoughts  which  evince  that  they  are  like  our  ordi-
nary ideas,  as,  e,  g,,  goodness,  justice,  beauty.

The  idea  of  the  visible  declaring  the  invisible,  is  very  old,  and  in  the
Psalms  we  find  it  beautifully  described  :  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of
Elohim  ;  and  the  firmament  showeth  His  handiwork."


*  Cited  in  The  Middle  Kingdom,  etc.,  by  Prof.  S.  Wells  Williams,  LL.D.  New
York.     1883.     Vol.  ii,  p.  214.

t  Ibid,^  210.

J  Comp.  Dr.  Williams'  work  cited,  pp.  206-217,  246.

\  Herbert  Spencer,  The  Principles  of  Sociology,  Vol.  i,  c.  viii,  \\  53,  57,  58;  c.  xiii,
\  96.     Musie  Guimet.      Tome  Douzu^me,  p.  621  et  seq.^  pp.  648-49.

II  Ps.  xix,  I  ;  see  also  ibtd.^  viii,  i ;  c.  xiii,  4;  xxxiii,  6;  Ixviii,  4;  Ixxxix,  II  ;  Prov.
iii,  19.

8


114

Xenophon  says,  "  The  Supreme  God  holds  himself  invisible^  and  it  is
only  in  his  works  that  we  are  capable  of  admiring  him."  *

Plato  tells  us,  God  the  eternal,  the  Chief  Ruler  of  the  universe  and  its
creator,  the  mind  alone  beholds ;  but  that  which  is  produced  we  behold
by  sight,  t  So  Cicero,  "Though  you  see  not  the  Deity,  yet  by  the
contemplation  of  his  works,  you  are  led  to  acknowledge  a  God."  X

And  St.  Paul,  speaking  of  Christ,  saj-s :  "  For  M^  inrisibU  things  of
him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood  by
the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead."  §  "  For
in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being;  as  certain  of  your  own
poets  have  said.  For  we  are  also  his  offspring^     (Acts  xvii,  28.)

The  type  and  anti-type  of  the  first  and  second  Adam  is  to  be  found  in  the
Rabbinical  writings.  In  reading  the  first  and  second  chapters  of  Genesis,
a  distinction  was  made  by  the  learned  of  the  Israelites,  between  the  higher
Adam,  /.  e.,  the  Adam  Qadmon,  or  first  Paradigmic  Ideal  Man, — who
was  the  Light  of  the  World,  and  had  created  and  hcul  control  over,  all  the
things,  spiritual  or  material,  and  who  was  mystically  referred  to  where  it
b  said,  they  two  shall  bp  one  flesh;  and  the  inferior  (the  terrestrial)
Adam,  who  was  lord  only  of  the  visible  creation,  who  had  only  **  the
breath  of  life  "  but  not  "  the  living  soul."  ||

The  Zohar  says:  "Man,  /.  e.,  the  Spiritual  Man,  is  both  the  import
and  the  highest  degree  of  creation,  for  which  reason  he  was  formed  on  the
sixth  day.  As  soon  as  the  Man  was  created,  everything  was  complete,  in-
cluding the  Upper  and  Lower  worlds,  for  everything  is  comprised  in  the
Man.  He  unites  in  Himself  all  the  forms ^  \  This  is  a  reference  to  the
Primordial  Celestial  Ideation  Man,  the  Adam  Illa-ah  or  Adam  Qadmon,

*  Memorabilia,  Bk.  iv,  c.  3.

f  Timaeus.

J  DUp.  Tusc,  Bk.  i,  c.  28.

2  Rom.  i,  20.     Comp.  Origen's  works,  English  Ed.,  Vol.  ii,  129.

II  Christian  Schoettgen,  Ilora  Hebraica  et  Talmudica  in  Universum  Novum  Testa-
mentum,  etc.  Dresden  and  Leipzig.  1733.  Vol.  i,  512-514,  670-673.  Schoettgen
gives  this  in  explanation  of  I  Cor.  xv,  45,  and  Rom.  v,  12.

^  Zohar  iii,  48a.


i»5

not  to  the  terrestrial  Adam  made  of  dust.  The  first  is  called  the  Bolt  or
that  which  unites  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Invisible  and  Visible.  It  is  He :

"  Who  is  the  Image  of  the  Invisible  God  (Elohim),  the  first-bom  of
every  creature.  For  by  him  were  all  things  created,  that  are  in  heaven,
and  that  are  in  earth,  visible  and  invisible,  whether  they  be  thrones,  or  do-
minions, or  principalities,  or  powers,  (/.  e,,  the  Sephiroth)  :  all  things
were  created  by  him,  and  for  him,  *  And  he  is  before  all  things,  and  by
him  all  things  consist  {exist).  And  he  is  the  head  of  the  body,  the  Church  :
who  is  the  beginning,  the  first-born  from  the  dead ;  that  in  all  {things)  he
might  have  the  pre-eminence.  For  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should
all  fullness  {the  pleroma)  dwell,*  ^  f  "Are  not  five  sparrows  sold  for  two
farthings,  and  not  one  of  them  is  forgotten  before  God.  But  even  the
very  hairs  'of  your  head  are  numbered.  Fear  not  therefore ;  ye  are  of
more  value  than  many  sparrows. ' '  J

"  Now  unto  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  the  only  Wise  God
(Elohim),  be  honor  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen."§

The  Mohammedans  say,  the  first  thing  God  created  was  a  pen.  *'  In-
deed the  whole  Creation  is  but  a  Transcript,  and  God  when  He  made  the
World,  did  but  write  it  out  of  that  Copy  which  He  had  of  it  in  His  Divine
understanding  from  all  Eternity.  The  Lesser  Worlds  (Mikrokosmos)  or
Men,  are  but  transcripts  of  the  Greater  (the  Makrokosmos),  as  Children
and  Books  are  the  copies  of  themselves. "  ||

*Comp.  Schoettgen,  work  cited,  i,  pp.  662,  807-8;  also  Plato's  Timseus.

fl  Col.  15-19.     Comp.  Schoettgen,  work  cited,  i,  807  et  seq.,  812.

X  Luke  xii,  6-7.     Malt,  x,  29-31.     Comp.  Schcaettgen,  work  cited,  i,  p.  103  et  seq.

\  I  Tim.  i,  17.  See  also  Heb.  i,  3,  xi,  27.  I  Cor.  xii,  12.  To  the  student  who  may
wish  to  be  learnedly  informed  on  the  origin  of  Christianity ^  we  especially  recommend,
in  connection  with  a  study  of  the  Qabbalah,  ihe  learned  work  of  Christian  Schoettgen,
Horn  Hebraicee  et  Talmudicce  in  Universum  Novum  Testa mentuntt  etc,

II  The  works  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Gregorie,  etc.,  4th  Ed.  London.  1684.  To  the
Reader.  Compare  for  further  knowledge  upon  the  content  of  chapters  iv,  v,  The  Jewish
and  Christian  Messiah.  A  study,  etc.,  by  Prof.  Vincent  Henry  Stanton,  Edinburgh
1886,  and  the  writings  cited  by  him,  pp.  xi-xii ;  also,  A  Hist,  of  the  Jewish  People  in
the  time  of  Christ,  by  Dr.  Emil  Schiirer,  Edinburgh,  1885,  and  the  works  cited  by  him  ;
also,  St.  Synesius,  on  Dreams.


Figure  3.


V.

PASTOR  OF  HERMAS,  ETC.,  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  CHRIST.  THE  TEACHING
OF  THE  TWELVE  APOSTLES  ON  THE  KOSMIC  MYSTERY.  THE  OPPOSI-
TIONS  AND   HARMONY.      THREE   CONCEPTIONS   OF  JESUS.

IN  the  Pastor  of  Hennas  {circa  138  A.  D.)  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Jewish
She*kheen-ah,  which  came  to  live  in  Christ,  that  is,  the  Divine  Nature
of  the  Christ,  is  at  once  the  Holy  Spirit  above  ail  and  the  true  Son  of
Goti  before  the  Creation  of  the  Universe,  and  the  author  of  the  Universe.
He  is  identified  in  Hermas  with  the  arch-angel  Michael,  who  is  the  Great
Angel  of  Israel,  and  is  Metatron,  the  Presence  Angel  of  the  Covenant.
Above  all  and  infinitely  superior  to  all  other  angels.  The  writers  of  the
New  Testament  call  Christ  i^e  first-born  of  Creation.*  Justin  Martyr,
says,  the  Son  of  God  is  an  angel ;  f  as  also  do  Clement  of  Alexandria,
(Pedag.  Bk.  i,  c.  7)  and  Origen  contra  Celsus,  (Bk.  v,  53,  ibid,  viii,  27).
Lactantius  {Inst,  div,  Bk.  ii,  c.  viii)  makes  the  Word,  the  first-born  brother
0/ Satan,  and  the  first  0/  all  creatures.  According  to  Hermas,  the  Son  of
God  is  the  Thorah.  J

The  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  chap,  xi,  has  this  curious  expres-
sion. **  And  every  approved  tn4e  prophet  doing  {what  he  doetJi)  with  ref-
erence to  the  Kosmic  mystery  of  the  Church,^'*  What  is  the  meaning  of
"  the  Kosmic  mystery  of  the  Church  ?  '*  Clement  of  Alexandria  uses  the
same  expression  of  Christ,  "  being  not  Kosmic,  he  came  to  men  as  Kos-
mic.*' (Strom,  vi,  15).  There  is  an  archetypal  Church  and  its  "  Kosmic  "

♦Colos.  i,  15;  Ileb.  i,  6;  Apocal.  iii,  14.

1 1  Apol.  6  and  63  ;  Tryph.  93,  34,  56,  60-61.

J  Le  Pasteur  a^ Hermas,     Paris,  1880,  pp.  88-93.


117

manifestation ;  (Heb.  ix,  i)  so  the  Qabbalists  say,  to  ever}'  "  Upper  Mys-
tery'* corresponds  a  mystery  in  our,  the  "Lower"  world,  which  is  the
Kostnos,

By  the  Hebrews  the  Church  of  Israel  was  called  the  mystic  Bride,  but
among  the  early  Christians  the  Church  of  Christ  being  considered  as  the
true  Israel ;  the  ancient  prophets  may  be  said  to  have  acted  and  spoken  with
reference  to  the  "  Kosmic  Mystery,*'  which  in  our  "  Lower  "  world,  is  the
counterpart  of  the  celestial  mystery  of  Christ  and  the  Christian  Church  in
the  "Upper."  As  the  Kosmic  sanctuary  or  temple,  was  a  pattern  of  the
Heavenly  or  Upper,  so  a  "  Kosmic  Mystery  "  is,  a  spiritual  idea  symbol-
ized in  the  matter-world.  The  Zohar  says  hkS;;  KoSj,n  kt*i  rd-za  de'alma
illa-ah,  /.  ^.,  a  Mystery  of  the  Upper  fVorlrl  (Exod, ,  fol.  90^,  end).  So
a  few  lines  further  it  says,  "On  this  o^K  a-noMee,  i.  e.,  I,  depend  mys-
teries of  Above  and  Below  j'Knm  ynh);  pn  rdzin  illa-in  u-te' tha-in,^

The  pseudo- Clement  of  Rome,  writes:  "God  made  man  male  and  fe-
male. The  male  is  Christ:  the  female,  the  Church."  The  Qabbalists
called  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  mother ;  and  the  Church  of  Israel,  the
Daughter.  Solomon  engraved  on  the  walls  of  his  Temple,  likenesses  of
the  male  and  female  principles,  to  adumbrate  this  mystery;  such,  it
is  said,  were  the  figures  of  the  cherubim. f  This  was,  however,  not
in  obedience  to  the  words  of  the  Thorah.  They  were  symbolical  of
the  Upper,  the  spiritual,  the  former  or  maker,  positive  or  male,  and
the  Lower,  the  passive,  the  negative  or  female,  formed  or  made  by
the  first.  J  The  oppositions,  the  positive  and  negative,  conditioned  by
the  harmony,  govern,  as  far  as  man  can  ascertain,  throughout  the  entire
universe.  In  it  everything  is  in  motion,  in  opposition,  yet  held  in  combi-
nation.  This  applies  to  the  mental  as  well  as  the  physical  world,  and  from

*  The  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  with  illustrations  from  the  Talmud.  Two
lectures  *  *  given  at  the  Royal  Institution  of  Great  Britain,  by  C.  Taylor,  D.D.,
Master  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.  Cambridge,  1886.  See  pp.  82-91,  104,  133
and  notes.  This  book  is  also  termed,  the  Didach6  or  Teaching.  See  also  The  Oldest
Church  Manual  called,  the  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  etc.,  by  Philip  Schafi.
New  York.     1885.     201-202  and  notes.

t  I  Kings,  vi.     See  Talmud  Babli.  Yomah,  54^  ;  Exod.  xxxvii,  9.

J  Comp.  Taylor's  Didach^,  cited,  84  ei  seq.


ii8

these  oppositions,  controlled  by  the  peace  or  harmony,  proceeds  the  new
productions.  The  ancients  knew  this  and  placed  it  among  the  zodiacal
signs.  Scorpio,  the  male  or  positive,  is  in  opposition,  to  Virgo,  the  virgin,
the  negative,  but  between  is  Libra,  the  scales  or  balance,  the  harmony.
The  idea  is  set  forth  throughout  the  ancient  Qabbalistic  book  Ye*tzeer'ah.
It  is  especially  noticeable  in  our  own  earth,  through  the  difference  of  sex
and  the  tendency  to  unification,  by  which  the  existence  itself  is  preserved.
Among  the  Qabbalists,  this  necessity  to  continued  creation  and  existence,
is  called  the  Balance,  and  the  oldest  book  of  the  Zoharic  writings,  the
Siphrah  D'Tznioothah,  treats  especially  upon  this  subject,  but  its  explan-
ation  is  continued  in  the  Idroth.  The  D'Tznioothah  begins:  '*  We  have
learned  (by  oral  tradition) :  that  the  Book  of  Mystery,  is  the  book  which
describes  the  equilibrium  of  the  Balance.  Before  the  Balance  existed.
Face  could  not  view  Face,*  and  the  primordial  kings  died,  (comp.  Gen.
xxxvi,  31  ^/  seg.)  and  their  sustenance  was  not  found,  and  the  earth  was
desolate  until  the  Head,  the  Delight  of  all  Delights,  prepared,  perfected
and  imparted  the  garments  of  costliness.  This  Balance  hangs  in  the
Place  (^Maqom)  which  is  No-Thing  {Ay in).  In  the  same  were  brought
into  equilibrium  those  who  did  not  yet  exist.  The  Balance  exists  through
the  At-tee'qah,  /.  e,.  Ancient  One.  Is  not  held  anywhere  and  is  in-
visible. In  it,  ascended,  and  in  it,  do  ascend,  things  which  were  not,
which  are,  and  which  will  be.  In  the  Concealed  of  the  Concealed,  there
is  formed  and  prepared,  the  representation  of  a  cranium  f  full  of  crystal-
line dew,  a  membrane  of  air.  Transparent  and  hidden  filaments  of  pure
wool  are  hanging  in  the  Balance.  J  And  they  manifest  the  Good  Will
of  Good  Wills  through  the  prayers  of  the  lower  ones,  by  a  look  of  the
open  eye  which  never  sleeps  and  is  always  watching.  The  Providence
below  by  the  light  (or  eye)  of  the  Providence  above,"  etc.

*  The  Parzuphim,  Intellectual,  Moral  and  Material  Worlds,  of  which  more  hereafter.

t  The  immense  cranium  is  the  representation  of  the  Makrokosm,  the  arched  firmament
above  and  surrounding  us,  called  Heaven.  The  Makrokosm  is  usually  represented  as
an  immense  man,  but  sometimes  as  an  immense  head,  the  head  of  man  containing  the
intellectual  part  of  man.

X  Hanging  threads  of  pure  wool,  are  a  symbol  among  some  of  the  Orientals  for  the
efflux  of  wisdom  and  vitality.


119

There  seem  to  be  three  conceptions  of  Jesus  in  the  N.  T.

I.  As  a  prophet  favoured  with  a  full  flow  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  we
find  in  the  Synoptics  and  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  We  mxist,  however,  dis-
tinguish passages,  where  the  name  Son  of  God,  is  given  metaphysically,
they  are  Mark  xiii,  32  ;  Matt,  xi,  27,  with  Luke  x,  22 ;  and  Matt,  xxviii,
19.  The  recitals  of  the  miraculous  conception  also  tend  to  put  the  son  of
Mary  outside  of  humanity.

II.  As  a  Great  angel,  the  instrument  of  the  Creation  of  all  the  Things,*
abased  momentarily  in  the  position  taken  by  him  as  Redeemer,  then
raised  to  the  Throne  of  God  in  recompense  for  this  sacrifice,  f

III.  The  Johannic  theology,  the  most  metaphysical  and  mystical  of  all,
which  makes  Jesus  a  being  positively  participating  in  the  Divine  Nature, %
who  descends  upon  our  earth  without  any  loss  of  glory,§  but  full  of  grief,
and  this  glory  is  again  found  in  him  after  his  death,  which  is  for  his  glori-
fication, ||  as  that  which  it  was  before,  his  death.^  St.  John  makes  no  allu-
sion to  the  eternity  of  the  Son,  but  solely  to  his  pre-existence  through  af-
finity with  the  world,  and  he  aflBirms  frequently  the  inferiority  and  subordin-
ation of  the  Son  to  the  Father.  The  first  Christians  believed  in  their  time,
in  an  impending  return  of  Jesus  in  a  second  advent,  as  the  Christ,  and
the  hope  of  a  reign  of  1000  years  for  the  elect.  This  has  not  a  little  con-
tributed to  the  success  of  early  Christianity  and  the  enthusiasm  of  the
then  faithful.  It  is  to  be  found  in  the  N.  T.  in  many  places.**  The  idea  of
the  immediate  second  advent  of  Jesus  as  the  Christ  and  as  the  Messiah
coming  in  the  glory  of  Malkhuth,  /.  ^.,  his  Kingdom,  is  therein  fully  set
forth,  ft     The  same  idea   runs  through  all  the  Apocalypse,  which  was

*  I  Cor.  viii,  6 ;  Col.  i,  16;  Heb.  i,  2,  xi,  3.

fll  Cor.  viii,  9;  Phil,  ii,  5-1 1 ;  Heb.  ii,  6-1 1,  17,  iii,  3;  Apocal.  v,  9.

J  Gospel  i,  I .

\  Ibid,  i,  14.

II  Ibid,  xii,  23-28  ;  xiii,  31,  32.

\  Ibid,  xvii,  4,  5.

**  Comp.  Matt,  xvi,  27-28;  Mark  viii,  38,  ix,  I ;  Luke  ix,  26-27.

ft  See  Matt,  xxv,  64 ;  Mark  xiv,  62 ;  Matt,  xxiv,  3-36 ;  compare  Mark  xiii,  1-32 ;
Luke  xxi,  5-33;  I  Cor.  xv,  51-53 ;  I  Thess.  iii,  13,  iv,  13-18;  II  Thcss.  ii,  6;  Act»  ii,
15  et  seq,;  Rom.  xvi,  20;  I  Cor.  vii,  26,  29,  x,  II ;  Philip,  iv,  5;  Heb.  i,  2,  ix,  26,  x
25,  27;  James  v,  4,  8,  9;  I  Pet.  i,  5,  20,  iv,  7,  17;  I  Epist.  John  ii,  18,  28,  especially
Apocal.  xi,  15.


written  about  68  or  the  beginning  of  69  A.  D.     In  it  are  references  as  to-
the  1000  years*,  and  the  vanquishing  of  Anti-Christ.f


■  4-S-


\nid.  xii,  11,  II.  See  in  Ihis  connection  I  Cor.  iv,  23-18;  and  The  Hidden  Wis-
dom of  Christ  and  the  Key  of  Knowledge  or  the  History  of  the  Apocrypha,  by  Emest
De  BoDsen.  London.  1865.  a  vols.  The  Angel-Meiniah  of  the  Buddhists,  Essenes,
and  Qirislians,  by  Emest  De  Bunsen,  London.  1880.  Compare  also  tbe  Keys  of  St.
Feter,  by  tbe  same  author;  Hamack  on,  The  Puloi  of  Hennas,  Vis.  Ji,  4,  i ;  Exod.
ixv,  g,  40;  xivi,  30;  XKvir,  S;  Numb,  viii,  4.


^'f'^T'-h..


VI.

THE  SECRET  OF  THE  ACCOUNT  OF  CREATION  IN  GENESIS.  EX  NIHILO  NIHIL
FIT.  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NON-ANNIHILATIOM  OF  MATTER.  SOME
QABBALISTIC  ACCOUNTS  OF  THE  CREATION.  THE  HEAVENLY  ADAM.
CREATION  BY  THE  WORD.  THE  ZOHAR  SETS  FORTH  THE  QRCULAR
UOVEHENT  OF  THE  EARTH  MANY  CENTURIES  BEFORE  COPERNICUS.
OPINIONS  OP  THE  ANCIENTS  ON  THE  CIRCULAR  MOVEMENT  OF  THE
EARTH.

WE  have  referred  to  the  ancient  Asiatic  idea,  that  above  the  earth,
in  the  heavens,  existed  a  true  and  perfect  ideation  of  everything
created  in  the  universe,  visible  or  invisible.  That  this  perfect
ideal,  true  and  real  paradigm,  was  in  opposition  to  yet  in  harmony  with,
its  imperfect  shadow,  the  changeable — by  man  considered,  real — universe,
but  the  really,  untrue  and  unreal.  The  unseen  universe  was  a  Makro-
kosm,  to  the  visible,  and  the  latter  was,  in  comparison  with  the  former,  a
Mikrokosm,  the  latter  was  also  as  to  the  inferior  copies  of  it  in  the  de-
scending scale,  a  Makrokosm,  and  yet  when  compared  with  the  higher
beings  of  which  it  was  a  copy,  it  was  a.  Mikrokosm,  and  this  was  so  in
the  ascending  or  descending  scale  depending  on  position.  This  view
is  shown  in  both  the  New  and  Old  Testaments,  which  are  Semitic  and
Oriental  books.     The  Qabbalah  holds  fully  to  this  idea.     It  also  claims.


122

that  the  first  account  of  the  Creation  in  Genesis,  referred  exclusively  to
this  ideal  world  and  to  an  ideal  man.  The  ten  "  saids  "*  or  desires,  under
the  Will  of  the  Deity,  made  this  perfect  ideal  paradigm  of  the  universe.
In  the  first  account  in  Genesis,  there  is  not  any  Garden  of  Eden,  not  any
Eve,  and  the  Ideal  Man  is  created  as  an  Androgene  but  in  the  similitude
of  Elohim.  The  ten  "saids'*  are  divided,  seven  are  given  to  the  lower
creation,  three  to  the  upper,  the  male-female.  The  account  begins  with
the  lowest  and  goes  up  to  the  highest,  the  invariable  procedure  of  the
Qabbalists.  The  vitality  of  this  Man  is  to  be  supported  on  strictly  vege-
tarian principles,  animal  death  is  not  contemplated.  We  have  not  space
at  this  time,  to  go  into  an  extended  analysis  of  this  first  account,  we  have
many  new  views  of  it  in  writing,  and  an  analytical  examination  of  it  which
is  very  curious.

We  now  advance  for  the  consideration  of  the  reader  some  thoughts  we
have  worked  out,  as  to  the  account  in  Genesis,  in  connection  with  modern
scientific  physics.  It  will  be  noticed  in  reading  the  first  account  of  the
Creation,  that  in  the  first  place  it  is  Elohim,  which  creates  the  duality,
/.  ^.,  heaven  and  earth,  the  active  and  passive,  positive  and  negative.
The  action  of  the  positive  or  active,  upon  the  negative  or  plastic,  pro-
duced, by  the  Deity's  wish.  Light ;  but  this  was  not  fire  or  even  daylight,  it
was  the  white,  hidden  fire,  which  permeates  all  things  and  becomes  visi-
ble through  friction,  the  result  being  black  fire  or  visible  light.  We  may
call  this  white  fire  the  energy  of  attraction,  electricity,  etc.  Its  compre-
hensive name  we  do  not  know.  It  exists  as  the  affinity,  vitalization
and  bond,  of  all  the  atoms.  The  key  of  this  chapter  of  Genesis  is  the
number  four.  This  is  the  number  of  the  letters  of  the  Tetragrammaton
or  Ineffable  Name.     Arranging  the  numbers  of  the  days  in  this  form :


I  V


•         •


V


3  - ^  6

*As  to  the  ten  "saids"  see:  The  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  etc.,  by  Charles
Taylor.     London,  1877.     p.  92,  and  notes.


123

and  reading  the  account  of  the  Creation  in  the  first  and  second  chapters
of  Genesis,  we  have  the  following  result :

I.  I.  The  creation  of  Light,  the  hidden  principle  of  attraction.  Force
or  vital  energy,  the  bond  of  all  the  atoms.

II.  4.  The  creation  of  the  sun,  moon,  planets  and  stars,  in  the  firma-
ment of  heaven.

III.  2.  The  division  of  the  firmament  in  the  midst  of  the  waters,  the
crystalline  sea  of  the  sky.  The  crystalline  sea  under  the  firmament,  was
divided  from  the  waters,  the  crystalline  sea  above  the  firmament.

IV.  5.  The  waters  still  cover  the  earth.  The  lower  have  their  crystal-
line sea  and  its  fish,  the  birds  which  float  in  it ;  the  fish  are  also  created
to  inhabit  the  lower  waters.

V.  3.  The  dry  land  now  appears  and  vegetation  sprouts  forth.

VI.  6.  The  animals  appear  and  finally,  the  androgenic  Man,  created  in
the  similitude,  image  and  likeness  of  Elohim,  which  is  to  reproduce,
through  a  copy  of  itself,  its  own  species.*  On  the  seventh  day  appears
the  rest  point  in  the  centre.  **  Elohim  ended  His  work.'*  Then  comes
the  account  of  "the  generations,'*  by  YHVH  Elohim  to  be  created
materially.  The  earth  was  covered  with  a  mist  or  nebulous  matter.
In  the  second  account  of  the  Creation,  the  terrestrial  man  is  "formed  of
the  dust  of  the  ground,  and  has  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  Nephesh,
/.  e.^  breath  of  life,  and  becomes  a  living  soul."  The  Garden  of  Eden,
the  Neshamah  or  intellect  is  then  planted,  and  the  man  is  put  into  it;  man
has  however,  as  yet  no  knowledge  of  good  or  evil,  the  Rua*h  or  ethical
spirit  was  not  yet  in  the  man,  and  the  power  of  judgment  of  the  good  and
evil  did  not  yet  exist  in  Adam.  The  terrestrial  Adam,  like  its  predeces-
sor, the  perfect  paradigm  or  Celestial  Man,  was  yet  an  androgene,  and
whilst  in  this  condition  all  the  creatures  are  brought  before  man  and
named,  but  "for  Adam  there  was  not  found  an  help-meet.*'  Then
YHVH  Elohim  creates,  from  Adam's  side,  woman.  The  latter  however
existed  in  Adam,  in  potentiality,  from  the  first.  The  serpent,  which  "  was
more  subtile  than  any  beast  of  the  field  which  YHVH  Elohim  had  made,"
now  appears  and  a  dialogue  ensues,  it  will  be  noticed  that  neither  the  woman

*  The  Androgenic  being,  as  the  first  human  existence,  appears  in  nearly  all  the  ancient
religions.


124

or  the  serpent  use  the  Ineffable  Name  YHVH.  After  eating  of  the  fruit  of
the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  having  made  conscience  and
the  ethical,  part  of  themselves,  the  still  small  voice  of  YHVH  Elohim
appears  to  them  in  the  intellect,  to  accuse  them.  We  cannot  for  want  of
space  continue  this  subject,  but  it  will  be  noticed,  that  the  creation  fol-
lows a  philosophical  sequence.*

Not  only  does  the  Qabbalah  repudiate  the  adage  ex  nihilo  nihil  fit.  ^  i.  e,,
"From  nothing  nothing  is  madef*'  that  is,  nothing  can  come  from
nothing,  but  it  does  not  believe  in  the  absolute  annihilation  of  anything
which  has  ever  existed.  "  There  is  not  any  thing  new  under  the  sun.'* J
*' Not  any  Thing,*' says  the  Zohar:  "is  lost  in  the  universe,  not  even
the  vapour  which  goes  out  our  mouths,  as  all  things,  it  has  its  place  and
its  destination,  and  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  It !  makes  it  concur  to
Its  works;  not  anything  falls  into  the  void",  not  even  the  words  and  the
voice  of  man,  but  all  has  its  place  and  its  destination. **§  This  is  one  of
the  most  mysterious  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Qabbalah,  and  the  Zohar
makes  it  proceed,  from  the  lips  of  an  unknown  aged  man,  who  is  imme-
diately interrupted,  by  several  of  the  companions  exclaiming  :  "  Old  man  !
what  hast  thou  done  ?  Would  it  not  have  been  of  greater  value  to  have
kept  silence  ?  Because  now  thou  art  carried  away,  without  any  sail  and
without  any  mast,  upon  an  immense  sea.  If  thou  desirest  to  mount  thou
wouldst  not  be  able,  and  in  descending,  thou  wilt  meet  an  abyss  without

*  As  to  the  Celestial  Adam  compare  :  The  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  by  Charles
Taylor.     London,  1877.    pp.  70,  n.  36;  72,  n.  37.

t  See  Lucretius  De  Rerum  Natura^  Bk.  i,  151-265.  The  ancient  Hindu  philosophi-
cal system,  termed  Sankhya,  holds  to  the  same  idea;  Indian  Wisdom,  etc.,  by  Prof.
Monier  Williams.     London,  1875.     P*  ^9  ^^  ^'9'

X  Comp.  Eccles.  i.  9,  10.

2  Zohar,  Part  ii,  fol.  loo^,  {  Mishpatim,  Comp.  As  to  the  ancient  Hindu  idea  of
non-annihilation;  Indian  Wisdom,  before  cited,  pp.  62-63.  As  to  the  Eternity  of
Sound;  Ibid,^  pp.  no,  III.  For  the  curious  theory  in  regard  to  the  latter,  see;
Christianity  contrasted  with  Hindu  Philosophy,  etc.,  by  Prof.  James  R.  Ballantyne.
London.  1859.  pp.  177-195.  The  statement  of  this  author  as  to  America,  on  page
193,  exhibits  so  much  prejudice  and  ignorance,  that  we  have  great  doubts  as  to  his
truthfulness,  in  many  of  his  statements.


125

any  bottom.**  *  The  companions  then  cite  to  him,  the  example  of  their
Master — R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo*hai— who,  reserved  in  his  expressions,  would
not  venture  upon  that  sea,  without  being  careful  to  have  a  means  to
return,  that  is,  R.  Shim-on  would  conceal  his  thoughts  under  the  veil  of
parable  or  allegory.  Shortly  after,  however,  the  same  principle  is  set
forth  plainly :  "  All  things  of  which  this  world  is  composed,  spirit  as  well
as  body,  will  again  enter  into  the  Principle,  and  into  the  root  from  which
they  went  out.*'t  "The  Holy  One,  blessed  be  It  I  is  the  commence-
ment and  end  of  all  the  degrees  (Sephiroth  ?)  of  creation ;  all  these
degrees  (Sephiroth  ?)  are  marked  with  Its  seal,  and  we  cannot  denomi-
nate It  except  through  the  unity ;  It  is  the  sole  Being  in  spite  of  the
innumerable  forms  with  which  It  is  clothed.**  J

The  Qabbalist  Abram  ben  Dior,  says:  "  When  they  (the  Qabbalists)
affirm,  that  All  Things  have  been  drawn  from  No-Thing,  they  do  not  wish
to  speak  of  nothing  properly  to  say,  for  never  can  being  come  from  Non-
being,  but  they  understand  by  Non-being,  that,  which  one  can  conceive
of,  neither  by  its  cause  or  its  essence  ;  it  (the  No-Thing)  is  in  a  word,  the
Cause  of  Causes;  it  is  It  whom  we  call  the  Primordial  Non-being,
because  It  is  anterior  to  the  entire  universe ;  and  we  understand  (by
the  Adam  Qadmon  or  Celestial  Man  or  Adam)  not  only  the  material
objects,  but  also  Wisdom,  (/.  ^.,  the  Word)  by  which  the  Universe  has
been  founded.  If  now  it  is  demanded :  What  is  the  essence  of  Wisdom^
and  pursuant  to  what  mode  is  it  contained  in  the  Non-being,  or  in  the
Supreme  Kether  (Crown),  nobody  will  be  able  to  respond  to  that  question,
for,  in  the  Non-being ,  there  is  not  any  distinction,  not  any  mode  of  existence,^
They  also  will  not  be  able  to  comprehend  how  Wisdom  is  found  united  to
Vitality  (or  Life).'* II

*  Zohar,  Ibid.

t  Zohar,  Part  ii,  fol.  218^.

X  Zohar  i,  fol.  2ia,

§  We  shall  frequently  apply  in  our  translations,  the  neuter^  It,  to  the  Supreme  Deity,
instead  of  using  He,  which  indicates  the  masculine  gender.  The  Deity  not  having  any
sex.  If  we  depart  from  this  in  any  place,  it  is  in  deference  to  usual  and  familiar  Bible
quotations,  which  use  the  masculine  gender,  or  where  such  a  distinction  is  important
for  the  more  complete  understanding  of  the  subject  matten

•I  Comment  on  Sepher  Ye'tzeer'ah,  see  Rittangel's  Edition,  p.  65  et  seq.


126

Notwithstanding  the  idea  of  the  non-annihilation  (and  absolute  non-
destruction  of  matter)  except  by  the  decree  of  the  Deity,  who  is  the
Principle  of  the  oppositions  and  of  the  harmony,  the  tendency  in  nature,
to  dissolution,  death  and  change,  as  well  as  to  vitality,  life,  and  the
building  up  into  new  forms,  is  apparent  throughout  the  Qabbalah.  This
is  shown  in  the  ideas  of  the  angels  and  of  the  demons  or  shells.

If  we  look  at  the  principles  of  this  metaphysical  religious  philosophy
in  one  of  its  simplest  forms,  we  shall  see  that  in  each  of  all  the  objects
of  nature,  the  Qabbalists  recognize  two  distinct  elements ;  one  is  the
interior,  incorruptible  and  life-giving  principle,  which  reveals  itself  in
the  spiritual,  e.  ^.,  in  vital  energy  or  the  Form;  the  other,  is  the  purely
exterior,  plastic  and  material,  which  is  considered  as  inert  and  without
life  or  vitality,  always  tending  to  dissolution  and  a  return  to  its  original
atoms.  These  two  are  considered  as  existing,  in  all  the  created,  in  a
greater  or  less  degree.  The  first  as  a  symbol  of  Blessing  and  life,  the
latter  as  a  symbol  of  Curse  and  death.  The  first,  is  the  Qabbalistic
hierarchy  of  the  angelic  host  and  good  spirits,  the  latter,  that  of  the
demons  or  Klippoth^  /.  ^.,  shells  and  evil  spirits.  The  Deity  has  created
both  the  good  and  the  evil,  and  one  is  absolutely  necessary  to  the  exist-
ence of  the  other  (Isa.  xlv,  7).  It  considers  that  each  human  being  is
accompanied  throughout  its  life  on  earth  and  is  influenced  spiritually,  by
two  spirits,  the  good  and  the  evil.*  These  are  the  oppositions,  but  the
Free  Will  of  the  individual  is  the  harmony,  by  which  he  exercises  the
Divine  Power  of  Judgment^  and  accepts  the  one  or  the  other  as  his
master.  This  idea  is  in  the  Talmud  and  especially  in  the  Zohar,  also  in
the  celebrated  Qabbalistic  book,  called  the  Sepher  Ye'tzeer'ah  or  Book
of  Creation.  The  latter  says  (Mishnah,  ii,  §  i):  "Twenty-two  letters:
three  mothers,  seven  double  and  twelve  simple  ones.  The  three  moth-
ers, BTDK  (/.  <f.,  K  Aleph,  air,  d  Mem,  water,  ly  Shin,  fire)  their  basis,  the
vessel  {i.  e.y  the  scale-pan  or  receptacle  of  a  balance  or  scales  for  weigh-
ing) of  purity,  and  the  vessel  (scale-pan)  of  guilt,  and  vibrating  between
each,  is  the  tongue  of  the  Law.'*  That  is,  the  index  hand  of  the  Balance.

♦See;  The  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  by  Charles  Taylor,  pp.  142-145;  51 ;
76-78;  96,  n.  II ;  99, n.  21  ;  ill,  112.  Comp.  Ephes.  iv,  22,  23;  Luke  xi,  21-26;  Ps.
xxxvii;  Deut.  iv,  9.


127

The  Zohar  also  says:  "Until  Elohim  created  the  universe,  It  was
alone,  and  then  it  went  forth  from  Its  Will  to  create  the  universe.**  *  *'  At
the  time  that  the  Holy  One :  Praised  be  Its  Name  !  desired  to  create  the
universe,  it  (the  universe)  was  present  before  It  in  the  Idea.  **t  "  Before
the  At-tee'kah  D*At-tee*keen,  /.  <f.,  the  Ancient  of  all  the  Ancients,  had
prepared  the  Royal  Form,  the  Crown  of  Crowns,  there  could  be  neither
beginning  nor  ending.  Then  It  first  spread  out  a  carpet  (veil,  or  tapestry)
before  Itself,  and  in  this  inscribed  the  Crowns  (/.  ^.,  the  Worlds).** J

"When  the  Unknown  of  the  Unknown  wished  to  manifest  Itself,  It
began  by  producing  a  point ;  as  long  as  that  luminous  point  had  not
gone  out  of  Its  bosom,  the  Infinite  was  still  completely  unknown  and
diffused  no  light. **§

This  emanated  point  is  the  Kether  or  Crown,  the  first  Sephirah,  which
crowns  the  Ego  or  I,  abstract  thought,  simple  thought,  the  innate  conscious-
ness of  being  or  existence.  "It  is  the  Principle  of  all  the  Principles,  the
Mysterious  Wisdom,  the  Crown  of  all  that  which  there  is  of  the  Most  High,
the  Diadem  of  the  Diadems.**  ||  The  point  represents  the  Infinite  distin-
guished from  the  finite,  and  its  name  in  the  Scripture  signifies,  "I  am,*'
i.e.,,  n'HK,  Eh'yeh,  because  it  is  the  existence  in  Itself,  the  existence  con-
sidered in  the  point  of  view,  that  analysis  cannot  penetrate  it,  and  to
which  not  any  qualification  is  permitted  and  which  absolutely  does  not
admit  of  any.  Above  Kether  is  the  Ayin  or  Ens  (]'K  )  /.^.,  Am,  the  No-
Thing.  "  It  is  so  named  because  we  do  not  know,  and  it  is  impossible  to
know,  that  which  there  is  in  this  Principle,  because  it  never  descends  as
far  as  our  ignorance  and  because  it  is  above  Wisdom  itself.**^  This  view
was  held  by  many  of  the  early  Church  Fathers.**  It  is  fully  set  forth  in
the  writings  of  the  pseudo-Dionysius,  the  Areopagite,  especially  in  his

♦  Zohar,  i  Part,  29^7.
f  Zohar,  ii,  fol.  96^.

X  Zohar,  iii  Part,  128a.     For  a  representation  of  this  veil  in  Hindu  symbolism,  see
my  essays  upon  that  subject  in  The  Path,  New  York,  1886.
2  Zohar,  i,  fol.  2a,
II  Zohar,  iii,  fol.  288^.
■f  Zohar,  iii,  fol.  288^.
♦*  History  of  Christian  Doctrine,  by  Prof.  Henry  C.  Sheldon.   New  York,  1886,  Vol.

i.  pp.  53-63;  187-194.


128

Mystic  Theology,  and  in  his  Divine  Names.  This  writer  is  an  acknowl-
edged authority  in  the  Roman  Church,  and  is  in  many  of  his  statements,
fully  in  accord  with  many  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Qabbalah.  With  this
description  of  the  Deity,  among  the  great  metaphysicians,  the  philosopher
Hegel  coincides.  The  Zohar  alluding  to  the  Ego,  also  says :  "  This  was
the  Light  which  Elohim  created  before  everything."  *

The  Deity  may  be  considered  from  four  points  of  view,  following  each
other:  i.  As  the  Ain  Soph,  the  Without  End,  the  Eternal  which  is
neuter,  is  above  man's  comprehension  and  to  man's  thought  is  as  the  No-
Thing.  2.  Eh'yeh,  the  I  or,  I  Am,  abstract  thought.  3.  YHVH,  It,
who  was,  and  is,  and  will  be,  therefore  in  Time.  4.  Elohim,  the  Deity
in  Nature,  therefore  used  in  connection  with  the  Qabbalistic  ideas  as  to
the  She'kheen-ah,  the  Matroneetha,  Metatron,  Adonai,  Malkhuth,  etc.

"  Before  Elohim  manifested  Itself  (in  the  Universe),  w^hen  all  Things
were  yet  concealed  in  It,  It  was  the  least  known  among  all  the  Unknown.
In  that  condition  the  Supreme  Deity  has  not  any  other  Name  than  that
which  expresses  interrogation  (/.  ^.,  Who?).  It  began  (the  Creation)  by
forming  an  imperceptible  point ;  f  this  was  Its  own  Thought ;  then  It
turned  Itself  to  construct  with  Its  own  thought,  a  mysterious  and  holy
Form  \\  finally  It  covered  this  (Ideal)  Form,  with  a  rich  and  shining
(visible)  garment ;  that  is,  the  entire  universe,  of  which,  the  name  neces-
sarily enters  into  the  Name  of  Elohim. '*§  The  Divine  Name  in  Kether
is  Eh'yeh,  /*.  ^.,  I  Am.  The  grandest  and  most  elevated  designation  of
the  manifestation  of  the  Supreme  Unknown  to  man's  mind.  Deity ;  the

♦Zohar  i,  31^,  32^.

t  The  first  Sephirah  Kether  or  the  Crown,  represented  by  the  letter  Yod '  =  10.
This  Sephirah  represents  the  entire  content  of  abstract  simple  thought  or  idea,  i.  e.^
Ma^hshabah^  i.  ^.,  imagination  or  idea,  which  being  in  It,  is  called,  the  crowned
Thought.  Kether  is  the  Ego  or  I,  that  is  consciousness  of  existence,  and  contains  in
germ,  all  things.

J  The  totality  of  all  the  Sephiroth,  the  Mikrokosm  to  the  Deity,  the  Makrokosm  to
mankind  and  creation,  the  Adam  Illa-ah  or  Heavenly  Adam,  the  Celestial  Adam  or
Upper  Man,  also  called  Adam  Qadmon,  the  Archetypal  Primordial  Ideation  Man  in
whom  were  the  perfect  models  of  all  forms,

§  Zohar  i,  fol.  i  and  2;  ii,  fol.  105^.  Comp.  Franck,  La  KabbaU,  p.  177,  note  I  ;
Ginsburg's  Kabbalah,  p.  12;  also  Joel,  AV/^j-.  Philos.  Sohar.


129

ego  coming  from  the  Non-ego ^  from  the  No-Thing  because  it  is  impossible
for  man's  intellect  to  know  the  Supreme  God  in  Its  essence.  Above  all
manifestations  of  the  Supreme  Deity,  man  can  only  express  himself  as  to
the  unknown,  by,  Who  ?  To  which  question  no  clear,  formulated  reply
ever  comes.

As  this  subject  is  quite  difficult,  and  is  also  tersely  stated  in  the  philos-
ophy of  Ibn  Gebirol,  we  will  endeavor  to  explain  it  to  the  reader.  In  the
introduction  to  the  Brody  edition  of  the  Zohar,  at  the  beginning,  is  an
explanation  of  this  Qabbalistic  theory  of  the  formation  of  the  word  Elo-
him,  which  word  is  translated  in  the  English  version  of  the  Bible,  God,
although  in  the  Hebrew  Sacred  Writings,  our  Old  Testament,  the  word
holds  an  inferior  position  to  rtsrVj  YHVH,  which  is  translated  into  English
from  Adonai,  /.  e,y  Lord,  its  Hebrew  equivalent.  This  introduction
says:  R.  EFazar  quotes  from  Isaiah  xl,  26,  "Lift  up  your  eyes  on  high,
and  behold,  who  has  created  these  things."  If  you  "  lift  up  your  eyes  on
high,"  R.  El'azar  continues,  "you  will  behold  (that  it  is)  who^  (that)
has  created  all  these  things,"  (that)  it  is  our  pronoun  Who?  which  is  an
interrogative,  and  thus  alludes  to  something  hidden  and  unknown,  which
thus  symbolizes  and  represents,  the  original  Creator  of  all  things  in  the
upper  world,  as  Who  ?  But  as  to  the  things  below,  from  which  a  superior
and  higher  knowledge  cannot  be  derived,  the  exclamation  '*  What,  no
Maah,  doest  thou  know  !"t  is  to  be  applied  to  them.  '*  What  doest  thou
know,  O  son  of  man  ?  What  canst  thou  see  ?  What  hast  thou  been
able  to  search  ?    Everything  is  hidden  from  thee,  as  //  was  before  /'  *

And  with  reference  to  this  mystery  it  is  said  :  "  What  is  my  witness  for
thee,  what  shall  I  liken  unto  thee  ?"  J  Which  means  when  the  (first)  Tem-
ple was  destroyed,  a  voice  (or,  Bath  Qol)  exclaimed  :  **  What,  no  Maah
— is  my  witness  for  thee  ?'  *  it  (What)  testifies  with  reference  to  thee  daily
from  the  earliest  days  (when  heaven  and  earth  were  created) ;  as  it  is
said:  "I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness  against  you  this  day."§
"  Whaty  HD  Maah,  I  shall  liken  unto  thee?"  says  the  Holy  One,  blessed

*  According  to  the  original  'D  Mi,  pronounced  Mee,  1.  ^.,  Who.
t  Job  XV,  9.
J  Lament,  ii,  13.
2  Dent,  iv,  26.

9


I30

be  It!  By  all  that  is  comprised  in  "  JVhaf,**  I  have  crowned  thee,  O
daughter  of  Jerusalem,  with  sacred  diadems  and  made  thee  ruler  over  the
world,  as  it  is  said :  "  This  is  the  city,  of  which  they  say ;  it  is  the  crown
of  beauty.***  They  called  thee  "Jerusalem  built  as  a  city  to  be  associ-
ated with.*'t  "  IVAaf  I  shall  equal  unto  thee,**J  in  the  way  thou  art  sit-
uated, not  visited  by  multitudes  as  formerly,  when  the  holy  people  came
in  sacred  sections,  hence  "  thy  breach  is  great  like  the  sea.**§  And  if
thou  wilt  say  that  thou  art  without  help  and  health,  I  assure  thee,  that,
"  Who  ?  ('D  Mee)  can  heal  thee  ;**||  surely,  the  Supreme  Degree,  hidden
from  thee,  whereby  everything  exists,  shall  heal  thee  and  lift  thee  up.

*^Who?^*  Oo  Mee)  points  *'to  the  end  of  heavens,*'  Above,  and
W?iat?  (no  MaaK)  "to  the  endoi  heavens,**  Below;  and  this  is  the  in-
heritance of  Jacob,  which  represents  the  axis  around  which  the  entire
spheres  of  the  universe  revolve  from  end  to  end  ;^  from  the  first,  upper,
or  original  end  'd  Mee,  /.  e,,  Who  ?  to  the  lower  or  latter  end  no  Maah,
I.  e,y  What?  because  it  is  in  the  midst.**

"And  with  regard  to  "^r^  Mee,  /.  e,,  Who?  created  these, ^^  said  R.
Shim-on:  "Erazar,  my  son,  stop  thy  words,  and  the  hidden  mysteries
unknown  to  men  shall  be  revealed.  * '  Whereupon  El'azar  was  silent.  Then
R.  Shim-on,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  said:  "Erazar,  what  is  the  mean-
ing of  '  these  /*  If  thou  shalt  say,  the  stars  and  planets,  truly,  they  are
constantly  visible,  and  they  were  created  by  no  Maah,  What?  (not  by
Mee,  Who  ?  see  ante)  :  As  it  is  said :  *  By  the  Word,  (/.  e,,  the  Targumic
Memrah,)  of  YHVH  were  the  heavens  made. 'ft  ^^t  as  regards  hidden
things,  the  reference  *  these*  is  not  applicable,  for  '  these,*  i.  e.,  the  stars
and  planets,  are  open  to  the  sight  of  man,  and  consequently  are  not  in'

*  Lament,  ii,  15.
f  Ps.  cxxii,  3.
X  Lament,  ii,  13.

I  Ibid,

II  Ibid.

^  This  is  taken  from  Exod.  xxvi,  28,  where  the  **bar"  nn3  (Bar^ia^A)  is  spoken  of
as  *<  reaching  from  end  to  end/'  and  it  is  applied  here  as  just  stated,  Bar-id h,  meaning
in  the  rabbinical  language  axis,

**  Comp.  Exod.  xxvi,  28,  begitming.

ff  Ps.  xxxiii,  6.


131

eluded  in  the  hidden  tilings  Above.  This  mystery  was  however  not  revealed
until  on  a  certain  day,  when  I  was  at  the  shore  of  the  sea,  and  the  prophet
Eliyah  came  to  me  and  said:  'Rabbi,  doest  thou  know  the  (hidden)
meaning  of,  Who  ('d  Mee^ — created  these  ?*  I  replied  to  him :  *  These  are
the  heavens  and  their  hosts,'  /.  e,,  the  angels,  the  work  of  the  Holy  One,
blessed  be  It !  for  it  becomes  the  son  of  man  to  behold  them,  and  bless
It,  according  to  '  For  if  I  see  thy  heavens  the  work  of  thy  fingers,  moon,
stars,  etc.**  '  O  YHVH  our  YHVH  !  how  excellent  is  thy  Name  in  all
the  earth.'t  Said  he  to  me :  '  It  was  a  mysitxy  with  the  Holy  One  and
revealed  in  the  supreme  place  of  learning,  and  here  it  is :  At  the  time
when  the  '  Mystery  of  all  Mysteries/  willed  to  reveal  Itself,  It  made  in
Its  head  a  little  point  which  became  a  thought  (idea),  wherewith  It  de-
signed all  the  Forms,  carved  out  all  the  Engravings,  and  in  that  way
shaped  a  mysterious  and  sacred  Lamp  (Light)  of  every  Form,  which  mys-
terious Light  among  the  holy  ones,  is  a  profound  construction  going  forth
from  the  (abstract)  thought,  and  is  called,  'D  Mee,  i,  e,,  Who  9%  The
very  beginning  of  the  construction  whether  visible  or  invisible,  is  pro-
found and  m)rsterious,  by  its  name  ('D  Mee,)  Who  ?

Now  intending  to  reveal  Itself  and  assume  a  Name,  It  encompassed
Itself  with  dazzling  Light  and  'created  these '%  which  is  £/e*h,  the  begin-
ning of  the  word  tJ'f^*^}^  ELOHim,  /.  e,,  God,  and  thus  was  created  the
Name,  Elohim,  by  the  previous  creation  of  n^K  Ele'h,  /.  e,,  these.  And
those  who  trespassed  by  the  worship  of  the  Golden  Calf,  exclaimed  on
the  ground  of  this  mystery,  hSk  £/e*h,  i.  <f.,  TTiese  thy  Elohim  !  O  Israel  !||
(Exod.  xxxii,  4.)   And  as  ^O  Mee,  i.  e,.  Who,  is  here  combined  with  n^K

Ele'h,  i,  e,y  these,  we  have  thus  the  Name  Q^H^K  Elohim  (made  of  the
letters  of  these  two  words)  resulting  and  established  forever,  and  on  the
basis  of  this  mystery  the  world  exists ! '  Whereupon  Eliyah  disappeared,  and

*  Ps.  viii,  3  et  seq,
t  Ibid.,  9.

X  The  two  consonants  " ' "  and  "D  "  are  the  initials  of  n>  n^l^nlD*  '•^•»  *^®  thought
of  God.

J  \Vhich  is  in  Hebrew  hSk  EUh,

II  By  this  play  of  words  the  sin  of  that  idolatry  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  merely  a  mis-
taken view  of  Elohim,  God.


132

I  did  not  see  him  any  more ;  from  him^  however,  I  have  communicated  to
you  the  revelation  of  the  great  mystery."  When  R.  Shim-on  finished,  R.
El'azar  and  his  friends  bowed  down  before  him  visibly  affected  and  said :
"  If  we  had  come  into  the  world  merely  to  hear  this,  it  would  have  been
sufficient !"  Said  R.  Shim-on  :  "  The  heavens  and  their  hosts  were  created
by  no  JIfaah,**  t\  e.,  Whaif  which  is  evident,  from  *'For  if  I  see  thy
heavens,  etc.,  how  (no)  excellent  is  thy  Name,  etc.,  who  givest  thy  glory
upon  (or,  above)  the  heavens*  which  are  above  the  earth  by  that  Name,
since  It  created  Light  to  Its  Light,  enveloped  one  in  the  other,  and  made
it  ascend  by  the  Supreme  Name.  And  as,  *  In  the  Beginning  created
Elohim,'  that  is  the  Supreme  Elohim,  for  no  Maah,  i.  ^.,  What?  was  not
yet  in  existence,  nor  was  it  until  the  letters  of  n^K  Ele*h  were  changed  from
above  to  below ;  I  now  ask :  When  did  It  adorn  her  thus?  At  the  time
when  all  the  males  appeared  before  It,t  then  the  n  (Ji)  of  no  Maah,  What  ?
disappeared,  and  the  ^  yod,  came  into  the  place  of  n  (^)  and  was  ("d  Mee)
Who  ?  and  it  adorned  itself  with  garments  of  the  males  for  the  reception
of  every  male  in  Israel.

^ These  hSk,  /.^.,  Ele^h^  I  remember !  *  J  I  remember  or  mention  with
my  mouth  and  'shed*  my  tears.  'As  my  soul  wills  it,*  in  order  to
move  those  letters  and  'guide  them*  from  above  to  the  house  of
Elohim,  to  be  like  Elohim  himself,  '  by  the  voice  of  joy  and  praise,  a
feasting  multitude!**'  R.  El'azar  said,  referring  to  the  foregoing:
"  Without  any  sound  or  voice,  /.  ^.,  in  silence.  It  built  the  celestial  and
terrestrial  temple,  hence  the  truth  of  the  adage  (Talmud  Babli,  Me'ghillah
i8) :  '  If  a  word  costs  one  Sela,  silence  is  worth  two  (Selas).*  '  A  word  costs
one  Sela,*  when  we  have  aroused  ourselves  and  have  said  it :  '  Silence  is
worth  two,*  in  that  which  we  do  quietly ;  thus  the  two  worlds  (the  Upper
and  Lower),  were  created  at  the  same  time.**     In  accordance  with  which

*In  Hebrew  D'OB^n   7i^     plH  H^n,  the  final  letters  of  which  four  words, to  wit:

Q^^^n  ^^^'^cd  constitute  the  word  HDtD,  Queen,  an  allusion  to  the  Supreme  Wis-
dom, as :  Queen  of  the  heavens.

t  "Before  the  face  of  the  Lord,"  i.  ^.,  jTWH  ha-adon,  YHVH,  who  is  called  {HK,
Adon,  f.  ^.,  Lord,  according  to  Joshua  iii:  "  Behold  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  of  the
Lord  piK  Adon,  t.  ^.,  Lord,  of  all  the  earth.

X  Ps.  xlii,  4*


133

R.  Shim-on  said :  "  This  completes  the  meaning  of  Isaiah  xl,  26 ;  *  Who  ?
bringeth  forth  in  numbers  their  hosts, ^  The  two  divisions  of  the  Above
and  the  Below,  one  of  which  (the  Upper)  arises  under  ^d  Mee,  i.  e,,
W%^  /  and  the  other  (the  Lower)  under  no  Maah,  i.e.,  What?  And
they  needed  corresponding  designations;  the  first  is  designated  by
*  Who?  bringeth  forth  (in  numbers  their  hosts), ^  being  known  as  such  and
none  other  like,  It,  and  the  latter,  the  lower  degree  or  created  universe,
is  indicated  by  '  Who  ?  bringeth  forth,  bread  from  the  earth  ;*  both  {pi  the
^Who?  bringeth  forth,  etc.)'  are  however  only,  One.  'In  numbers'
of  two  myriads,  which  exist  together  and  support  the  innumerable  muUi-
tudes,^  'AH  of  them,'  whether  numbered  or  not,  'He  (It)  calls  by
name  *  not  by  their  names,  but  by  Jlis  (Its)  own  Name  ;  '  through  the  full-
ness of  Power'  (potentiality  or  potency),  /.  e,,  the  Highest  Degree,
from  which,  all  powers  and  mysteries  emanate  the  '  greatness  of  might  *
peculiar  to  the  Upper  world.  '  Not  one  man  faileth '  of  all  the  number
(neither  Above  or  Below),  they  all  proceed  from  one  source  a,nd  exist  after
one  image, '^^  So  R.  Shim-on  interpreted  "Lift  up  your  eyes  on  high,  and
behold  Who  created  these  things.  Who  bringeth  forth  their  host  in  num-
ber !  he  called  them  all  by  their  name,  through  the  greatness  of  his  might
and  fullness  of  power,  not  one  (man)  faileth."

The  Zohar  says:  "It  has  been  handed  down:  When  Resha  hivrah,
/.  e,,  the  White  Head,  proposed  to  Itself  to  superadd  an  ornament  to  Its
ornament  (or,  willed  to,  manifest  Its  excellency)  ;  It  appointed,  prepared
and  produced,  a  spark  (scintillation)  from  the  splendour  of  intense  Light
(or,  the  Cardinal  Lamp).  It  breathed  on  it  and  it  cooled  down  (or,  was
reduced  to  form)  ;  and  Resha  hivrah's,  i.e.,  the  White  Head's,  Will  went
on,  and  the  spark  (scintilla)  was  extended  into  370  currents  (or,  sides).
And  the  spark  existed  and  remained  (intact),  and  a  pure  air  (azoth)  came
forth  rolling  forward  on  every  side,  and  there  was  extended  and  going
forth,  a  firm  (or  hard)  cranium  (the  firmament)  on  four  sides  (the  four  car-
dinal points  of  the  compass).  And  in  that  pure  air  (of  the  appearance  as
it  were  of  a  skull)  the  spark  (of  vitality)  was  absorbed  and  taken  up  and
included  " in  it''\  (or  " by  it  ").      "  By  it "  do  you  think?     No,  but  it

*Ps.  xlii,  4.

f  n^3  baih,  which  ia  Egypt  meant,  soul  or  spirit.


134

was  hidden  **in  it"  (the  cranium,  the  luminiferous  aether,  the  hard
skull).  And  therefore  that  cranium  was  expanded  on  its  sides,  and  that
air  (azoth)  is  the  most  hidden  thing  of  the  At-tee*kah  Yo-men,  /.  ^.,
Ancient  of  Da)rs.  In  the  Spirit,  which  is  laid  up  in  that  cranium,  are  ex-
panded fire  on  one  part  (or,  side),  and  air  (aether)  on  the  other  (part  or
side).  And  the  subtile  air  (azoth)  exists  above  it  on  this,  and  the  subtile
fire  (the  white  hidden  fire)  on  that,  side.*  What  is  the  fire  in  this  place?
But  indeed  it  is  not  fire,  but  that  splendour  which  is  included  in  the  sub-
tile air,  it  (the  Luminiferous  iEther?)  shines  into  270  worlds  *  *.  In
that  cranium  distills  dew  from  Resha  hivrah,  /.  ^.,  the  White  Head,
from  which  it  is  always  full,  and  by  that  dew  the  dead  will  be  brought  to
life.  And  that  dew  has  in  itself  two  colours  from  the  side  of  the  Resha
hivrah ;  there  is  whiteness  (absolute  transparency)  within  it,  /.  e.,  the  dew,
which  comprises  every  whiteness  and  it  is  entirely  white.  But  when  they,
the  two  colours,  abide  in  the  head  of  Ze'ir  Anpen  (/.  ^.,  the  short  Face^
the  Mikrokosm)  redness  appears  in  it,  just  as  in  a  cr3rstal  {bdellium)^  which
is  white  (or  transparent),  a  red  colour  flashes  in  the  white  colour,  etc.'*t
The  Zohar  says :  It  is  handed  down ;  Before  At-tee'kah  D* At-tee'keen,
1.^.,  the  Ancient  of  all  the  Ancients,  the  Concealed  of  all  the  Concealed,
had  prepared  the  institutions  (or,  royal  forms)  of  the  King,  /.  ^.,  the  Ze'ir
Anpen  (or,  Short  Face)  J  under  certain  members,  limbs  and  degrees,  (or,
Sephiroth);  and  the  Diadem  of  Diadems  (/.  ^.,  the  various  wrappers— or,
folds — by  which  the  redundance  of  Light  might  be  enveloped),  there  was
not  as  yet  any  Beginning  nor  Ending,  /.  e, ,  there  was  no  imparting  and
reception.  Time  had  not  yet  begun  to  exist.  It,  the  At-tee'kah,  therefore
engraved,  /.  ^.,  made  empty  a  space  (void  or  vacuum),  into  which  It
might  impart  Its  efflux,  and  institute  proportions  in  Itself  (in  as
many  modes  as  the  Light  of  Its  wisdom  could  be  received,  whence
arose  the  gradation  of  the  worlds),  and  It  expanded  over  Itself  a
certain  veil,  /.  ^.,  produced  a  certain  nature,  through  which  Its  Infinite
Light  might  be  modified  and  imparted,  which  was  the  first  Adam,  /.  e,y

*  This  hidden  or  white  fire,  shines  night  and  day  and  yet  is  not  ever  seen,  answering
to  vital  force,  energy,  electricity,  etc.,  of  which  we  have  as  yet  but  little  knowledge.

f  Idrah  Kabbah,  Zohar,  Cremona  Ed.,  col.  256 ;  Mantua  Ed.,  col.  135.
X  The  Heavenly  Adam,  Adam  Illa-ah  or  Adam  Qadmon.


135

the  Celestial  Adam,  Adam  Illa-ah  or  Qadmon ;  and  It,  the  At-tee'kah
D'At-tee'keen  engraved  in  it,  and  by  a  certain  proportion  distributed
Kings  and  their  forms,  /.  e,,  all  creatures  under  the  condition  of  their
own  especial  activity ;  by  which  they  might  be  known  and  loved,  but
they  did  not  remain.*  This  is  that  which  is  said :  *'And  those  were  the
Kings  such  as  reigned  in  the  land  of  Edom,  before  a  King  reigned  over
the  sons  of  Israel,  f

The  primary  Kings  preceding  the  primary  children  of  Israel.  (By
the  children  of  Israel  are  here  meant,  the  Sephiroth  of  the  restored
world.)  And  all  those  which  were  engraved  and  did  not  stand  firm,  are
called  by  their  names,  /.  ^.,  were  divided  into  fixed  classes.  "Nor  yet
did  they  remain  fixed,  until  It  modified  them  (so  that  the  Lights  from
the  vessels,  /.  ^.,  the  Sephiroth,  went  upward  and  the  vases  were  left
empty  and  became  shells,  and  It  set  them  down  in  rest  from  before  them)
with  a  diminished  Light.  :|:  All  those  loose  formations  were  certainly
called  by  certain  names,  but  they  were  not  able  to  exist  (keep  themselves
up),  hence  It  put  them  out  of  sight,  and  caused  them  to  completely  dis-
appear.

After  some  time  It,  At-tee'kah,  looked  contemplatively  upon  that
minute  sketch  (or  veil)  and  formed  on  it  according  to  Its  own  Forms.
And  thus  it  is  handed  down  :  It  proposed  to  Itself  (or,  it  was  Its  Will)  to
create  a  Thorah  (Law)  (/.  e,,  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  from  the  trans-
positions of  which  thenceforth,  the  Thorah  was  written,  perhaps  meaning
a  plan  or  sketch)  ;  a  Thorah  hidden  for  2000  years,  and  when  It  had  pro-
duced it,  the  Thorah  immediately  addressed  it  (saying)  :   "It  who  wishes

*  Here  is  hinted  at  the  Fall  of  the  creatures,  partly  in  a  condition  of  quietude  as
(inert)  matter  is,  partly  into  a  state  of  inordinate  motion,  such  as  that  of  the  evil  spirits,
etc.     Matter  is  now  considered  by  physicists  as  always  in  motion.

f  Gen.  xxxvi,  29.  A  strange  statement  in  Genesis,  Saul  was  first  king  of  the  Israelites.

X  Another  translation  is  :  *'  It  caused  sketches  and  outlines  to  appear  in  Its  imagina-
tion (own  substance  ?)  and  then  spread  a  veil  (tapestry,  carpet  or  cloth)  before  Itself,  in
which  It  engraved  (hewed  or  incised)  and  marked,  the  kings  and  their  limits  and
(royal)  forms,  but  they  did  not  have  any  duration; "  to  this  alludes  the  mention  of, "  the
kings  who  ruled  prior  to  the  kings  of  Israel,"  Gen.  xxxvi,  31  ^/  seq,  (f.  ^.,  the  primitive
kings  and  the  primitive  Israel).


136

to  arrange  and  appoint  other  things  should  be  first  arranged  Itself  in  Its
proper  Forms."

It  is  handed  down  in  the  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah,  that  At-tee*kah
D'At-tee'keen,  the  Ancient  of  all  the  Ancients,  the  Concealed  of  all  the
Concealed,  arranged  Itself  into  members  and  prepared  Itself  (for  future
recognition).  And  it  might  as  it  were,  be  said.  It  is  to  be  found  (/.  e.,
as  far  as  It  could  be  known),  and  yet  is  not  found,  for  It  could  not  be
clearly  known,  but  It  was  arranged  nor  yet  was  It  known  to  any  one,  since
It  is  the  At-tee*kah  D'At-tee'keen,  /.  e,y  the  Ancient  of  all  the  Ancients.
But  It  became  known  through  Its  conformations  (or,  revealed)  as  a  cer-
tain Old  Man  of  Old  Men,  the  Ancient  of  the  Ancient,  a  Concealed  One
of  the  Concealed,  and  by  Its  symbols  (manifestations)  It  became  known
and  yet  It  did  not  become  known.*

The  Zohar  also  says:  "  The  indivisible  point  (/.  e.,  the  Absolute)  not
having  any  limits  and  not  being  able  to  be  known,  on  account  of  Its  energy
and  Its  purity,  spread  Itself  outwardly,  and  has  formed  a  canopy  (or,  veil)
which  serves  to  veil  this  indivisible  point.  This  canopy,  although  of  a
Light  less  pure  than  the  point,  was  still  too  bright  to  be  regarded ;  and  it  in
its  turn  spread  outwardly,  and  that  extension  served  It  for  Its  vestment;
it  is  thus  that  all  is  made  through  a  movement  which  always  descends^  it
was  thus,  in  a  word,  the  universe  was  formed,  "f

Another  passage  teaches,  of  the  voice  which  goes  out  of  the  Spirit  and
identifies  itself  with  it  in  the  Supreme  Thought,  that  this  Voice  is,  at  the

*\^t  have  not  any  knowledge  of  Its  Absolute  Essence,  and  as  far  as  this  Essence  is
concerned,  the  Supreme  Deity  does  not  exist  in  Its  Elssence  for  man's  thoughts  because
beyond  them.  To  human  inteUect  It  is  as  \i  Ayin^  u  e.,  No-Thing,  and  It  can  be  de-
scribed only  negatively.  To  manifest  Itself  to  us  to  a  certain  extent,  the  Supreme  Deity
made  the  alphabet,  numbers  and  other  forms,  it  is  only  through  these  that  the  materially
and  fleshy  enveloped,  spiritual  man,  can  have  any  knowledge  of  God.  Man  can  only
conceive  of  the  invisible,  through  the  openings  in  his  flesh  called  senses,  by  means  of
the  visible.  The  2U)har  says :  It  is  the  Lord  whose  dress  is  white  (transparent),  and  so
also  is  the  appearance  of  the  veil  of  Its  face.  It  sits  upon  a  Throne  of  sparks  (scintilla-
tions of  Light  or  Flames)  that  it  may  subdue  them,  etc.  Zohar,  Cremona  Ed.,  fol.  61,
col.  243.  Mantua  Ed.,  fol.  128,  et  seg.  The  reader  will  especially  note  the  distinction
between  "  the  Ancient  of  all  the  Ancients  "  and  "  the  Ancient  of  the  Ancient."

t  Zohar.    Part  I,  fol.  20a.


137

foundation^  no  other  thing  than  the  water,  air  and  fire,  the  North,  South,
East  and  West,  and  all  the  Energies  of  nature,*  but  that  all  these  ele-
ments and  forces  are  blended  in  one  sole  thing,  that  is,  in  the  Voice
which  goes  out  of  the  Spirit.  By  this  the  Qabbalists  intended  to  inforce
the  idea  that  the  universe  was  created  by  the  Will,  Memrahy  Logos  or
Wordy  Wisdom,  of  the  Invisible  Absolute  Unknown  Supreme  Being.

The  Zohar  also  says:  **We  have  learned:  Before  the  Forms  of  the
Holy  King,  the  At-teek,  were  prepared,  It  built  worlds  and  made
Forms  for  their  preservation,  but  the  female  principle  was  not  joined  yet
with  the  male  principle,  called  *  Grace,'  therefore  they  could  not  exist
until  that  was  doije."  This  is  the  hidden  meaning  of  (Gen.  xxxvi,  31  et
seq,^  "And  these  are  the  kings  which  ruled  in  the  land  of  Edom,"  the
place,  where  all  Judgment  is  found,  and  which  was  fit  for  existence  only
upon  the  appearance  of  "  Grace.**  Up  to  that  time  we  read  repeatedly
in  that  chapter  "  and  he  died,'*  until  we  read :  "  And  in  his  place  ruled
Saul  from  Re^hoboth  han-nahary^  i,  e,,  Understanding  with  its  fifty  gates,
which  shine  and  illumine  the  six  sides  (pillars)  of  the  world. f  We  have
learned  :  Judgment  was  on  all  except  one,  who  continued  after  them  to
exist;  and  this  "Saul  from  Re'hoboth  han-nahar^^  is  one  side  (pillar)
which  extends  and  came  forth  from  Re^hoboth  han-nahar.  Proper  dura-
tion  only  came  with  the  last,  "  Hadad,"  /.  e.,  Supreme  Grace,  which
resides  in  the  excellency  of  productive  man,  who  is  worthy  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  We  read  further.  J  "  And  the  name  of  his  wife  was  Meheta-
bel,"  the  mentioning  of  the  name  of  the  wife  points  to  the  degree  of  per-
fection above  explained,§  the  daughter  of  Matred,  /./.,  the  assiduous
worker  under  the  influence  of  "Strength,"  the  daughter  of  Mezahab,
/*.  e,y  the  female  principle  together  with  the  male,  Mercy  or  Grace,  and
Judgment  or  Strength.


♦Zohar,  Part  I,  fol.  246^.

f  That  is,  the  positive  and  negative  poles  of  the  three  dimensions,  Length,  Breadth
and  Depth.  J  3id.

2  The  positive  and  negative  principles,  Grace  and  Punishment,  good  and  evil,  male
and  female.   The  productive  Man.   The  Balance.    Compare  in  the  Zodiac,  Scorpio  and
Virgo,  and  between  them  Libra,  the  Harmony.
Zohar  iii,  142a.    The  Idrah  Rabbah.


138

We  also  read  in  it :  Because  of  the  constitution  of  Man  in  Its  Elohim's
likeness,  the  Man,  /.  e.y  the  Perfect  Primordial  Ideation  Man  or  Adam,
comprises  (in  itself  as  the  similitude  of  Elohim)  All  Things  and  admits
All  Things  to  settle  (be  contained  or  arranged)  in  it.  And  because  that
constitution  of  (the  Perfect  Man)  Adam  was  not  at  that  early  time  found,
they  (the  Primitive  Kings  of  Edom.  Gen.  xxxvi,  31  et  seq.),  could
not  exist  nor  settle  down :  and  they  were  made  an  end  of.  What  were
they  made  an  end  of,  notwithstanding  that  they  were  included  in  the
Man?  They  were  made  an  end  of  so  far  as  they  were  taken  away  from
that  previous  formation,  until  the  complete  formation  of  Adam  came
forward.  *  But  when  that  likeness  (of  the  Perfect  Adam)  came,  All
Things  were  reduced  to  shape  (were  combined)  and  turned  in  another
condition,  etc.'*t

Man  gives,  in  his  own  spiritual  action,  an  example  of  the  existence  of
the  potentiality  and  energy  of  the  Deity  throughout  the  imiverse.  A
painter,  say  Raphael,  makes  a  picture,  or  a  sculptor,  say  Michael  Angelo,
carves  a  figure,  these  artistic  creations  or  works,  contain  a  part  of  the
potential  spiritual  energy  or  force  of  the  spiritual  man,  the  real  man,  who
within  the  matter  body,  does  the  work.  We  call  this  genius  or  artistic
power.  That  is,  by  the  vital,  energetic  arrangement  of  the  particular  atoms
which  produce  the  shape,  colour  or  effect,  a  part  of  the  spirit  of  the  artist
goes  into  his  work,  and  is,  so  to  say,  crystallized  or  embodied  with  the
atoms  which  he  combines  or  arranges  in  the  picture  or  figure  produced  by
him.  This  work  is  not  the  result  of  the  matter-man  but  of  the  spiritual
man,  acting  by  means  of  the  material  man's  hands,  eyes,  etc.,  as  his  tools
or  instruments.  It  is  entirely  by  the  action  of  the  spirit  that  man  origi-
nates and  stamps  his  work,  and  enables  other  men,  who  have  knowledge,  at
sight,  of  this  spiritual  stamp  of  the  artist,  upon  looking  at  the  latter*s  result-

*This  refers  to  the  Ideal  Adam,  the  Adam  Illaah  or  Qadmon,  who  is  also  Zc*ir
Anpen,  t.  e,,  the  Small  Countenance,  the  Celestial  Man  as  the  producing  male  and
female,  no  longer  an  androgene.  These  kings  of  Edom  were  the  pre- Adamite  andro-
genic kings.

t  The  primitive  kings  were  now  carved  out  anew,  from  the  likeness  of  the  Perfect
Ideation  Adam,  who  was  at  first  an  Androgene,  but  who  had  been  separated  into  the
two  sexes,  and  returned  to  a  new  existence.  Zohar,  Cremona  Ed.,  col.  256.  Mantua
Ed.,  fol.  135.


139

ing  work,  to  say^  thousands  of  years  after  the  dissolution  of  the  artistes
material  form^  that  such  a  picture,  figure,  etc.,  was  by  this  or  that,  man.
This  applies  to  all  the  works  of  man,  even  to  his  handwriting,  so  with  the
Creator,  It  has  stamped  into  the  entire  universe  a  part  of  Its  spiritual
potentiality  and  energy,  and  as  to  that  much  exists  in  it,  but  the  universe
is  not  the  Deity,  any  more  than  the  picture,  statue  or  handwriting,  are
the  man  himself.

The  Zohar,  iii,  gd,  refers  to  the  different  races  of  men,  which,  it  says,
do  not  all  descend  from  Adam,  and  we  especially  call  attention  to  the
fact,  that  many  centuries  before  Copernicus  wrote  his  work  on  the
''Revolution  of  the  Heavenly  Bodies,"  which  was  about  1542  A.  D.,
the  Zohar  stated,  as  to  the  cosmography  of  the  Universe,  that :  "  In  the
book  of  Hammannunah,  the  Old  (or,  the  Ancient),  we  learn  through
some  extended  explanations,  that  the  earth  turns  upon  itself  in  the  form
of  a  circle ;  that  some  are  on  top,  the  others  below ;  that  all  creatiures
change  in  aspect,  following  the  manner  of  each  place,  keeping  however
in  the  same  position,  but  there  are  some  countries  of  the  earth  which  are
lightened,  whilst  others  are  in  darkness ;  these  have  the  day  when  for  the
former  it  is  night ;  and  there  are  countries  in  which  it  is  constantly  day,
or  in  which  at  least  the  night  continues  only  some  instants."*  It  also
sa)rs,  race  differences  are  to  be  ascribed  to  climate.  Very  singular  is  the
close :  "  These  secrets  were  made  known  to  the  men  of  the  secret  science
but  not  to  the  geographers.  **t  Where  the  first  knowledge  of  this  came
from  it  is  difficult  to  say.  The  Church  Father  Lactantius — circa  290-325
A.  D. — writes:  "It  is  an  absurdity  to  believe,  that  there  are  men
who  have  their  feet  above  their  heads,  and  countries,  in  which  all
is  inverted,  in  which  the  trees  and  plants  grow  from  the  top  to  the
bottom.  We  find  the  germ  of  that  error  among  the  philosophers,  who
have  claimed  that  the  earth  is  round. "J  St.  Augustine  holds  to  the  same
view.g  Aristotle  says  that :  "  Almost  all  those,  who  affirm  that  they
have  studied  heaven  in  its  uniformity,  claim  that  the  earth  is  in  the  cen-

*  Zohar  iii,  fol.  loa.

I  Works,  Bk.  iii,  c.  24*

{  Dg  Civiiat  Dei,  Bk.  xvi,  c.  9.


140

tre,  but  the  philosophers  of  the  Italian  School,  otherwise  called  the  Pjrth-
agoreans,  teach  entirely  the  contrary.  In  their  opinion,  the  centre  is
occupied  by  the  fire,  and  the  earth  is  only  a  star,  which  by  a  circular
movement  around  this  same  centre,  produces  night  and  day."*  Aristotle
opposed  the  Pythagorean  idea  and  the  Greeks,  Romans,  and  Arabs  fol-
lowed him.  The  Italic  sect  founded  by  Pythagoras,  and  the  Ionic  by
Thales,  brought  from  either  India  or  Egypt,  the  idea  of  the  movement
of  the  earth  about  600  B.  C.

The  following  Greek  philosophers  believed  in  the  rotundity  of  the
earth :  Pythagoras  of  Samos,  Anaximander,  Nicetas  of  Syracuse,  Hera-
clides  of  Pontus,  Aristarchus  of  Samos,  Seleneus  and  Ecphantus.  Hera-
clides  and  Ecphantus  only  admitted  the  movement  of  the  earth  upon
its  own  axis,  or  the  diurnal  movement.  The  Pythagoreans  held,  that
each  star  was  a  world  having  its  own  atmosphere  with  an  immense  extent
surrounding  it,  of  aether,  f

Their  ideas  were  considered  visionary  and  not  accepted  as  correct,
by  the  learned  of  their  time.  In  India  at  a  very  early  period  the  astrono-
mer, Arya-bhata  (said  to  have  lived,  A.  D.  476),  held  to  the  opinion
that  the  earth  revolved  upon  its  own  axis,  but  all  the  later  Hindu  astron-
omers opposed  his  views.  It  is  not  yet  known  whether  any  Hindu  held
to  the  theory  of  the  earth's  revolution  around  the  sun.  The  Egyptians
and  Chinese  may  have  arrived  at  that  truth,  and  we  know  at  a  very  an-
cient period,  the  Chaldeans  calculated  with  certainty  eclipses  of  the
moon,  and  very  closely  approximated  the  time  of  eclipses  of  the  sun.
MaimonidesJ — 11 90  A.  D. — holds  that  the  earth  has  the  form  of  a  globe,
that  it  is  inhabited  at  both  extremities  of  a  certain  diameter,  that  the  in-
habitants have  their  heads  towards  heaven,  and  their  legs  toward  each
other,  yet  they  do  not  fall  off.  §

*Z>^  Ccslo,  Bk.  ii,  c.  13.

fComp.  Aristotle  de  Cctlot  Bk.  ii,  c.  13.  Seneca,  Qi^x/.  natur,,  lib.  viii.  Freret,
Academ.  des  Inscript,y  torn,  xviii,  p.  108.

J  Moreh  Ne*boo-kheem.     Eng.  Trans.    Vol.  i,  p.  336.

2  Dr.  Schlegel,  Uranographie  chinois,  pp.  55,  196,  494  et  seq.y  gives  the  great
antiquity  of  18,000  years,  to  the  Chinese  astronomical  sphere.  Comp.  Annales  du
Musie  Guimet,  Tome  DouzUnte,  by  J.  J.  M.  De  Groot.  Paris,  1886.  p.  436  et  seq.
Ibid,,  Tonie  Ontiime,  p.  368  et  seq.


141

Pythagoras  held,  everything  is  the  universe  has  been  made,  not  through
the  virtue  of  numbers,  but  following  the  proportions  of  numbers.  The
Book  of  Wisdom  holds  to  the  same  as  regards  our  Universe.*

In  the  theory  of  the  Mystic  numbers,  the  unity  is  called  the  monad.
It  is  the  first  ring  in  the  chain  of  existences,  and  one  of  the  qualifications
which  the  ancient  philosophers  have  given  the  Divinity.  Its  symbol  is
the  mathematical  point.  From  this  simple  being  emanates  the  duad)
represented  by  2  and  also  by  the  line  of  geometry.  This  is  the  emblem  of
matter  or  the  passive  principle  and  is  the  image  of  the  contrasts,  because
the  line,  which  is  its  type,  extends  itself  indifferently  towards  the  right  or  '
left.  3  is  the  mysterious  number  figured  as  the  triad,  by  the  equilateral
triangle.  It  is  the  emblem  of  the  attributes  of  God,  and  reunites  the
properties  of  the  first  two  numbers.t

•  Wisdom,  xi,  20.  "  Thou  hut  ordered  all  tbinga  in  mttuure  md  nmmier  and
vreig^;"  and  "mide  Ihe  world,  of  maaer  with  form."  Itid.  17.  "For  in  tbegreal-
nesi  and  beauty  of  the  crcatuies  profotiitnalefy,  the  maker  of  them  is  seen."  Ibid.
xiii.S.

f  Comp.  Mart.  Capella  in  Jt  Nt^tOt  PAehlegiiE  tt  Merairii,  also  the  30th  chapter  of
Anachanis.


1271&


AN  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  «E  QOR  B


tr-VtU,  OF  IBN  GKBIROL.


THE  system  set  forth  by  Ibn  Gebirol,  in  the  Me'qfir  'Hay-jIm  or
Fountain  of  Life,  although  Aristotelian  in  its  form,  is  yet  con-
trary to  the  doctrines  of  the  Stagirite.  The  object  of  the  writing
is  to  set  forth  ideas  of  form  and  matter,  in  connection  with  the  Deity;
and  singular  to  say,  in  many  of  its  propositions  it  is  in  accord  with  the
writings  of  the  early  Christian  Theosopher,  the  pseudo-Dionysius,  the
Areopagite,  (who  is  not  later,  and  most  probably  much  earlier,  than  S3i
A.  D.)  as  well  as  with  the  Zohar  and  Zoharic  books.  Four  influences  are
shown  in  the  Me'q6r :  i.  Gebirol's  theological  belief.  2.  Arabian  peri-
pateticism.  3.  Oriental  philosophy,  more  especially  that  of  the  so-called
school  of  Alexandria.  4.  The  Hebrew  Qabbalistic  philosophy,  which
had  been  brought  into  Spain  from  the  Jewish  Babylonian  schools,  being.


H3

however,  not  thoroughly  Semitic  in  origin,  but  having  an  Aryan  germ.
The  following  is  a  resunU  of  the  Me'qor.

It  conducts  us  to  the  ideas  of  a  Universal  Form  and  a  Universal
Matter,  embracing  all  things,  except  the  Supreme  Deity.  Soul  and
other  created  things  are  equally  only  one  matter.  The  work  is  divided
into  five  books.  In  Book  I,  he  says :  Man's  desire  is  towards  knowledge,
its  final  attainment  should  be,  to  obtain  wisdom  as  to  the  final  cause
of  all  that  which  is,  viz :  God.  Doing  this  to  the  end,  that  man  obtain  the
Supreme  Good,  and  that  everything  be  in  subjection  to  the  Will  of  the  Sole
Supreme  Being.  Psychology  ought  to  be  taken  for  the  point  of  departure
from  all  philosophical  studies.  From  the  Supreme  Will  movement  has
emanated,  through  movement  all  things  are  generated,  and  the  work
of  the  human  soul  ought  to  be,  to  lead  itself  to  affinity  with  the  superior
world,  from  which  it  draws  its  origin.  That  knowledge  man  attains
through  meditation  and  contemplation,  and  by  practising  pious  exercises.
The  proof  of  this  is,  that  all  in  potentiality  is  destined  to  pass  into  action*
Man,  however,  as  the  finite,  cannot  know  the  Infinite,  in  Its  essence.

Metaphysical  science  should  have  for  its  aim :  i.  Abstract  knowledge  of
matter  and  form.  2.  Abstract  knowledge  of  the  Divine  Will  or  Creative
Word.  3.  Abstract  information  of  the  first  substance,  or  God.  The  last,
man  can  only  know  imperfectly.  He  cannot  reach  to  it  by  philosophical
speculation.  The  Will  of  the  Deity  is  the  highest  knowledge  to  which  man
can  reach,  it  is  the  First  Efficient  Cause,  it  has  in  its  essence,  the  Form
of  All  Things,  and  is  the  harmony  between  God  and  the  universe.  The
latter  emanates  from  it.  Creation  is  not  a  necessity,  but  a  free  act  of
the  Supreme.  He  gave  to  it  the  perfection  He  desired  to  give  it.  Matter
manifests  itself  in  different  hypostases  proceeding  from  the  simple  to  the
composite.  We  can  begin  with  the  Will,  Desire,  Wisdom  or  Word,
{Logos),  of  the  Unknown.

The  essence  of  the  universe,  in  general,  is  passive,  but  it  conducts  us  to
some  knowledge  of  that  Will,  which  emanates,  embraces  and  sustains,  all
the  existing.  This  passivity  embraces  an  Universal  Form  and  an  Univer-
sal Matter.  These  are,  however,  to  be  considered  as  purely  ideal.  They
are  that  which  carries  and  that  which  is  carried ;  from  these,  we  proceed


1


144

upward  to  the  third,  the  Will,  and  downward  to  the  material  universe.
The  destruction  of  form  results  in  chaos.

He  then  defines  matter  and  form,  and  endeavors  to  prove  the  existence
of  an  Universal  Matter  and  an  Universal  Form.  The  former  has  but  one
existence,  that  through  itself;  has  only  one  essence,  in  that  it  bears  (sup-
ports or  carries)  the  diversity,  and  gives  to  all  its  essence  and  name.
The  knowledge  of  this  we  obtain  through  reflection,  and  by  sublimating  the
forms,  one  after  the  other,  and  in  passing  from  the  visible  to  the  invisible,
until  we  reach  one  last  form,  in  which  we  are  not  able  to  recognize  any
other,  and  it  is  by  this  means  we  shall  find  the  absolute  idea  of  the  Uni-
versal Matter,  e.  g,,  beginning  with  the  celestial  sphere,  we  can  sublimate
the  ideas  until  we  come  to  the  last,  which  is  one  that  exists  by  itself
and  carries  all  these  forms.  That  is  the  Universal  Matter ;  above  this  we
find  only  the  First  Efficient  Cause,  the  Will  which  is  intermediary  and
from  the  Supreme  Deity.  The  diversity  in  the  beings,  whether  spiritual
or  corporeal,  resides  only  in  the  form.  The  Universal  Matter  embraces
all  the  spiritual  and  corporeal  worlds.  The  potentiality  or  faculty,  to
become^  exists  in  all  that  which  is,  outside  of  the  Highest  Deity,  who  is
the  Absolute  Being,  always  in  action.  That  Matter  receives  from  the
Will,  that  existence,  unity,  and  substantiality,  which  constitute  the  Uni-
versal Form.  The  Universal  Intellect  is  a  direct  emanation  from  the
Will,  and  contains  all  form  and  universality.  The  second  hypostate  is
the  Universal  Soul.  It  manifests  itself  in  the  Makrokosm  (/.^.,  the  whole
Universe),  also  in  the  Mikrokosm  (/>.,  Mankind),  under  different  forms.

The  Universal  Form  is  founded  in  the  Universal  Intellect.  It  has
properties  by  which  we  recognize  it  in  all  that  which  exists  :  i.  That  of
the  quality  of  to  be,  reached  through  its  action  on  other  things,  and  sub-
sisting in  them,  because  if  the  form  were  not  carried  by  them,  they  would
be  chaotic  matter.  2.  That  of  perfecting  the  essence  of  the  thing  which
bears  it,  and  giving  to  that  thing  its  existence,  because  it  is  only  through
its  form  that  the  thing  is.  Matter  is  only  to  be,  in  potentiality,  the  Form
of  All  Things  is,  to  be,  in  action.  Having  in  a  general  way  established  the
Universal  Matter  and  Form,  he  seeks  to  base  it  on  analysis.  He  calls  this
the  particular  method,  it  consists  in  the  consideration  of  things  evident
to  our  senses,  and  individual  things;  going  up,  through  them,  to  the  spir-


145

itual  and  general.  Animal  existence  and  that  of  plants  and  minerals,  are
composed  of  matter  and  form,  the  same  as  the  artificial  things,  e,  g,y  a
statue.  The  last  are  composed  of  a  particular  matter  and  an  artificial
form.  The  four  elements  have  each  a  particular  form,  but  also  have  a  com-
mon form,  that  of  element  in  general,  for  the  particular  forms  of  the  ele-
ments do  not  exist  of  themselves,  they  are  only  accidents  j  they  are  to  the
elements,  that  which  the  particular  form  is  to  the  substance.  All  nature
resolves  into  the  four  elements,  ^nd  these  resolve  themselves  into  some-
thing, which  is  the  substratum  of  their  general  form.  They  are  qualities,
and  a  substratum  is  necessary  to  unite  thfese  qualities,  e.  g.,  generation,  is
the  result  of  the  mixture  of  positive  and  negative  or  opposing  elements ;
if  a  subtile  substratum  did  not  precede  substance,  the  latter  would  pro-
ceed from  non-substance.  Beyond  all  usually  called  matter  is  the  most
sublimated  general  substratum,  this  is  the  Universal  Matter.  Above  the
elements  are  the  heavens,  but  they  also  possess  quantity  and  corporeality,
and  from  thence  we  may  conclude,  that  they  have  form  and  matter.  They
have  not  the  qualities  of  the  elements,  and  have  not  generation  or  de-
struction. The  form  of  the  heavens  is,  therefore,  different  from  the  ele-
mental form.  There  are  four  species  of  matter:  i.  Particular  or  artifi-
cial, e.  g,,  bronze.  2.  Particular  or  natural  matter,  e,  g,,  that  coming  from
the  mixture  of  the  elements.  3.  General  natural  matter,  e,  g.,  that  which
is  the  element  of  the  elements.  4.  Matter  of  the  heavenly  spheres  or  or-
bits.*

The  II  Book  treats  of  the  place  in  the  universe,  of  the  Universal  Mat-
ter which  is  the  substratum  of  its  corporeality.  We  reach  this  by  subli-
mating from  ordinary  corporeality,  color,  etc.  In  sensible  bodies  that
which  is  visible  and  gross,  serves  to  carry  that  which  is  more  subtile ;  sub-
limating this,  we  arrive  at  the  sole  substratum,  the  Universal  Matter.
Above  all  the  forms  of  the  existences  is  that  of  the  Intellect,  which  em-
braces everything  by  its  knowledge,  because  its  substance  is  the  most
subtile  and  penetrating  of  all  things.  In  the  bond  of  the  forms  we  pass
insensibly  from  the  visible  to  the  invisible,  from  the  matter-world  to  the
spiritual  world.  The  forms  evident  to  the  senses  can  be  considered  as  the
images  of  the  intelligible  intellectual  forms,  the  spiritual  existences,  and

♦  This  may  mean  of  the  Sephiroth.
10


146

through  the  visible  world  one  can  form  some  judgment  of  the  spiritual  and
invisible  world.  The  sensible  forms  are  the  symbols,  which  retrace  in  the
soul  the  intelligible  forms;  as  the  letters  in  a  book  bring  back  to  the
reader  the  thoughts  of  the  writer,  which  they  carry  and  conceal.     It  is
through  the  substance  which  bears  the  nine  categories,  which  he  afterwards
more  fully  describes,  that  we  ought  to  begin  our  researches  for  that  which  is
not  evident  to  the  senses.    Our  author  then  endeavors  to  establish  a  perfect
parallel  between  the  superior  and  inferior  world.       The  Will  (j^a-tzon)  of
the  Supreme  Deity  emanates  all  forms,  and  makes  them  penetrate  to  the
lowest  extremity  of  matter,  and   it   draws  together  all    the   existences
d^endent  upon  it,  and  puts  them  in  harmony  and  equilibrium,  by  a
wise  distribution   of  the  forms.     The  substance  upon  which  this  Will
acts,  is  Space  thought  of  in  its  most  sublimated  abstractness.     The  other
simple  substances  are  solely  and  only,  in  their  causes,  and  are  not  in  any
corporeal  place ;  together,  they  reside  successively  one  in  the  other,  and
together,  in  the  Divine  knowledge.     The  lower  the  existences  descend
from  the  abstract  or  simple  to  the  composite,  the  less  sublimated  and
grosser  they  become,  and  the  higher  they  are,  the  more  clear  and  subtile.
There  are  two  Spaces,  a  corporeal  and  a  spiritual;  the  first  is  a  shadow
or  image  of  the  latter,  as  the  inferior  world  is  only  an  image  of  the  supe-
rior world.     He  says  much  as  to  the  divine  Will,  and  that  everything
comes  from,  lives  and  moves,  in  it.     After  having  spoken  of  the  Abso-
lute Unity  above  all  number,  and  its  passage  into  the  lower  Unity,  that
of  number,  and  thence  into  multiplicity,  our  author  gives  examples  of
his  views,    by  approximation.     In   his  system  he  formulates  four  uni-
versal matters,  placed  in,  yet  above,  each  other,  sublimating  the  more,
the  higher  they  ascend,     i.  The  absolute  Universal  Matter,  or  that  em-
bracing at  the  same  time,   the  spiritual  and  corporeal  worlds,    in  the
most  abstract  sublimation.     It  is  the  substratum  of  all  existing  outside
of  the   Unity's.     2.    The   corporeal  Universal  Matter,    the  sublimated
element   of  all   the  elements,  or  that  which  serves  as  the  substratum
to  the   forms  of  corporeity  and  quantity,  and  which  permeates  at  the
same  time  the  celestial  spheres  and  the  sublunary  world.     3.  The  Uni-
versal   Matter  common  to  all  the  corporeal   celestial  spheres.     4.  The
Universal  Matter  of  the  sublunary  world,  that  of  the  elements,  and  seat


H7

of  the  contingencies,  and  which  he  calls  the  general  natural  matter.  To
each  of  these  corresponds  an  Universal  Form,  and  the  Forms  as  the  Mat-
ters, particularize  and  corporify  themselves,  in  the  measure  that  they
descend  in  the  scale  of  existences.  Forms  in  general,  are  of  two  kinds —
one,  constituting  the  essence  of  all  things,  is  common  to  all  which  has
directly  issued  from  the  Divine  Will,  the  other,  limited  more  and  more,
varies  in  each  degree  in  the  ladder  of  the  existences.

In  the  III  Book,  he  undertakes  to  prove  the  existence  of  intelligible  sim-
ple substances,  which  are  intermediaries  between  the  First  Efficient  Cause,
the  Will,  and  the  substance  of  the  corporeal.  The  system  of  Gebirol  is  based
on  the  unity  of  form  and  substance,  and  the  latter,  is  matter  qualified  to
receive  all  forms,  qualities  and  accidents.     He  asserts  two  species  of
proof  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  such  substances.     The  first  is
founded  on  the  absolute  contrast  or  opposition,  existing  between  the
abstract  Deity  and  the  corporeal  universe.     One  is  the  First  Efficient
Cause,  most  subtile  and  most  noble,  the  other  gross  and  vile ;  one  is
eternal,  nay,  above  eternity,  the  other  falls  within  the  limits  of  time.
The   Supreme   Deity  is   Absolute   Unity,  the  physical  world,  absolute
plurality.     The  universe,  however,  draws  its  existence   from  Absolute
Unity  in  spite  of  the  abyss  which  separates  it.     It   is  necessary  that
»this   abyss  be  bridged  by  something    intermediary,   which  resembles
on   the   one  side,  the   one  existence,  the  Supreme  Deity,  and  on  the
other,  the  two  existences.  Matter  and  Form,  and  which  shall  serve  to
bind   all   together.     Man    as   the  Mikrokosm   (Jia-olam  haq-qatati)^   is
an  image  of  the  Universe,  and  the  whole  Universe  forms  one  sole  indi-
vidual (the  Makrokosm),  which  is  the  prototype  of  the  inferior;  as  in  man,
the  Mikrokosm,  /.  ^.,  the  little  world,  the  Intellect,  Spirit  or  Neshamahy
which  is  the  most  simple,  subtile,  and  sublime,  of  all  the  substances,  is
not  attached  to  the  corporeal  body,  but  the  animal  soul,  Nepheshy  and  the
ethical  spirit,    Ru-a'h,   are  intermediaries  between  them,  through   the
inferior    faculties  of   the  animal    soul :    so   in   the    Makrokosinos,    the
Great  World,  ;.  e.,  the  whole  Universe;  the  Great  Paradigmatic  Perfect
Man ;  there  are  the  divine  Will,  and  nine  intermediaries  or  categories,*

♦  This  is  evidently  a  reference  to  the  Ten  Sephiroth  which  form  in  their  totality,  the
Adam  Qadmon.     Comp.  the  Me'q6r,  Bk.  Ill,  JJ  5,  8,  30,  44.


148

through  which  the  Absolutely  Existing  who  is  above  number,  is
attached  to  Its  corporeal  universe.  The  activity  of  the  First  Efficient
Cause  is  to  make  proceed,  or  create,  out  of  the  No-Thing,  Some-Thing ;
but  the  substance  which  contains  the  categories  being  composed  of  the
most  simple,  abstract,  sublimated,  elements,  has  not  gone  out  or  sepa-
rated, from  the  No-Thing,  but  its  energies  or  rays  extend.  The  latter  are
under  a  dependence  which  comes  through  the  divine  Will.  It  is
then  necessary,  that  there  be  an  intermediary  creation  going  out  of
the  Absolute  No-Thing.  Our  author,  however,  admits,  that  it  is  an
absolute  impossibility  to  demonstrate  by  metaphysics,  the  connexion  of
the  matter-world,  with  the  Absolute  Being  of  the  Supreme  Deity.  The
simple  substances  communicate  their  essence,  without  any  kind  ot
diminution,  and  the  Absolute  Unity  emanates  through  yet  is  immanent
in  them.  Their  action  consists  in  the  gradual  and  successive  commu-
nication of  form,  which  has  its  primitive  source  in  the  Will.  This  is
by  the  Will's  rays  and  faculties,  but  not  by  any  diminution  of  its  es-
sence. As  evidences  of  such  an  emanation  without  diminution,  he
refers,  to  sight,  through  the  eye,  and  to  the  rays  which  proceed  from
the  sun.  Its  first  cause  can  be  sought  for,  only  in  the  Superior  Faculty
and  First  Agent,  who  made  All  Things,  put  all  in  movement,  and  acts
upon  all  that,  which  is  susceptible  of  receiving  Its  action.  All  the  simple
substances  obey  Its  action,  and  act  by  and  through  It,  whenever  they  find
matter  which  has  been  deposited  to  receive  Its  action.  All  the  impressions
come  from  the  simple  substances.  The  First  Efficient  Cause,  however,  is
the  first  emanation,  which  renders  necessary  the  effusion  of  all  the  sub-
stances one  into  the  other.  The  more  the  substance  is  simple,  subtile,  and
abstract,  the  more  it  possesses  the  power  of  penetrating.  The  rays  of  the
sun  become  perceptible  to  our  vision,  only  when  they  touch  a  corporeal
substance,  and  the  thickening  of  the  same  causes  the  shadow.  The  im-
pressions which  the  composite  substance  receives,  become  evident  only,
because  the  matter  which  receives  them,  is  essentially  in  contact  with  the
corporeal.  The  emanations  of  the  simple  substances  only  become  evi-
dent, when  in  contact  with  the  corporeal  substance.  We  can  recognize
that  all  the  forms  exist  in  the  Will,  in  germ,  in  a  more  simple  sublimated
manner  than  in  the  Universal  Matter.     The  simple  substances  on  the  one


149

•side  are  receptive  and  passive,  on  the  other  side  active ;  they  receive  the
forms  from  the  higher  and  communicate  them  to  the  lower.  The  sub-
stance which  carries  the  categories  is  purely  corporeal  and  receptive  and
not  any  action  emanates  from  it.  The  forms,  evident  in  themselves,
such  as  quantity^  shape,  color,  etc.,  are  in  the  essence  of  the  simple  sub-
stances, and  Ibn  Gebirol  tries  to  show,  that  all  the  categories,  which  are
solely  applicable  to  the  corporeal,  have  their  analogues  in  the  world  of
the  spiritual  substances.  In  it,  he  asserts,  are  the  prototypes  of  all  the
categories,  which  come  to  corporify  themselves  in  the  corporeal  universe.
From  this  alliance  between  the  spiritual  and  corporeal  substance  is  bom  a
form,  which  in  its  entirety,  is  neither  one  nor  the  other,  because  in  gen-
eral, when  two  opposites  are  united,  a  third  is  born,  which  is  neither  of
the  two  opposites,  thus  results  a  triad.  Gebirol  says:  "  If  thou  comparest
the  spiritual  form  to  the  light  which  exists  in  the  substance  of  the  sun ;
the  form,  spread  upon  matter,  to  the  light  which  exists  upon  the  surface
of  a  body;  and  the  color  to  the  corporeal  form,  which  is  found,  in
potentiality,  in  the  corporeal  matter  (because  color  is  found  in  a  body,
in  potentiality),  thou  wilt  find,  by  the  comparison  of  these  different
forms,  that  the  corporeal  form,  which  exists  in  potentiality  in  the  body,
manifests  itself  to  our  senses,  when  the  form,  emanating  from  the
spiritual  form,  comes  to  join  itself  to  it,  the  same  as  color,  which  exists
in  potentiality  in  a  body,  manifests  itself  for  the  senses,  when  the  light
emanating  from  the  light  of  the  sun,  comes  to  join  itself  to  it.  So  then,
thou  wilt  find,  that  the  form  which  emanates  from  the  spiritual  form,  com-
ing to  spread  itself  over  matter,  manifests  itself  to  the  senses,  when  it
joins  itself  to  the  corporeal  form,  which  exists  in  potentiality  in  matter,
because  the  two  (forms)  become  one,  the  same  as  the  light  spread  upon
the  surface  of  a  body,  manifests  itself  in  the  senses,  when  it  joins  itself  to
the  surface  of  the  body  and  which  itself  identifies  with  the  color.  * '  Besides
the  Will  and  the  nine  categories,  he  makes  the  simple  substances  or  inter-
mediaries, three,  i.  The  Universal  Intellect.  2.  The  Universal  Soul.
3.  Nature  or  energy,  which  is  more  directly  in  affinity  with  the  cor-
poreal world,  which  it  more  immediately  produces  and  governs.  This
is  based  on  the  idea  of  the  triadic  incorporeal  in  man.  The  intellec-
tual or  rational,  the  vital,  and  the  vegetative  spirits,  in  the  human  being.


the  rational  being  the  highest,  the  vegetative,  the  lowest.  The  inferior
substances  cloth  the  light  of  the  superior  to  them,  and  all  cloth  the  Light
of  the  First  Agent.

The  Universal  Soul  being  considere4  as  like  the  particular  soul,  is
viewed  as  vegetative,  vital,  and  intellectual  or  rational.  The  impression
of  the  superior  is  shown  in  the  inferior,  e,g,y  nature,  the  lowest  of  all  sub-
stances, produces  by  the  movement  of  attraction,  transformation,  reten-
tion, and  expulsion.  In  the  vegetative  soul  originates  generation  and
growth,  the  vital  produces  sensibility  and  locomotion  of  body,  and  in  the
intellectual  soul  {nephesh  hatn-me' dabberetK)  thought  is  produced.  The
Intellect  above  it,  produces  the  perception  of  intelligible  things  (Form),
without  time,  space,  or  proof  of  anything,  because  being  in  perfect  com-
pletion, it  perceives  all  in  the  true  essence.  A  substance  both  moving
and  being  moved,  like  the  Kosmic  mind,  souls,  and  nature,  must  be
ph)rsico-spiritual  {pichni  gashmee).  The  substance  of  the  nine  catego-
ries, is  rather  physico-passive,  and  not  at  the  same  time  intirely  active-
passive.  As  they  descend  they  thicken,  are  enfeebled  and  in  shadow,
and  the  density  hinders  them  from  rapid  motion  and  penetrating  into
other  things.  Whether  the  categories  {sugheem)  can  be  inferred  as  from
the  spiritual,  is  answered  by  the  axiom, — "  You  can  conclude  from  the
visible  as  to  the  invisible,  from  the  compound  as  to  the  simple."
The  body  of  man,  as  the  Mikrokosm,  resembles  that  of  the  Malcro-
kosm,  or  Great  World,  the  Universe,  both  in  its  course  and  construc-
tion. The  forms  of  the  purely  spiritual  substances  become  visible,
through  the  resistance  of  matter  against  the  intrusion  of  that  which  is
more  subtile,  the  latter  therefore,  is  retained  on  the  exterior  and  assumes
a  kind  of  density.  By  the  union  of  the  spiritual  and  physical  substances  a
new  form,  neither  totally  spiritual  or  totally  physical  arises.  The  Divine
faculty  is  an  extreme  perfectipn,  that  cannot  be  enfeebled  ;  but  the  grad-
ual enfeeblement  of  the  forms  in  the  substances  results  from  the  fact,  that
the  light  of  the  Divine  faculty, nvhen  concentrated  in  itself  leaves  these
substances  more  or.  less  in  shadow  (or  image).  Like  sunlight  penetrating
different  media,  the  change  is  not  to  be  attributed  to  its  essence,  but  to  that
of  the  thing  which  receives  its  action,  and  which  cannot  be  manifested  ex-
cept by  partaking  of  its  qualities ;  but  it  partakes  of  these  in  different  gra-


151

dations ;  because  the  further  that  the  thing  is  from  the  source  of  the  Di-
vine faculty,  the  less  it  receives  the  former's  action.  The  higher  existences
yearn  after  the  Divine  potentiality  {b'hishtokek  hak-kokhoth  aiiav),  the
lower  are  in  the  shadow  {v^  hay  ah  hash-shafal  tzail).  The  Divine  power
never  decreases.  The  mediative  substances  also  never  decrease  in
power.  They  impart  without  any  loss,  like  the  sun,  etc.  The
inferior  world  is  an  image  of  the  superior,  and  an  analogy  exists  be-
tween the  different  parts  of  the  two  worlds.  To  arrive  at  a  true  knowl-
edge of  the  simple  substances,  man  must  throw  off  the  bond  of  matter,
and  by  meditation  transport  himself  into  the  intelligible  world,  and  so
seek  to  identify  his  essence  with  that  of  the  higher  substances ;  when  in
that  condition,  man  does  not  recognize  anything  of  the  world  of  the
senses.  In  that  condition,  man  will  find  the  evident  bodies  in
comparison  with  the  intelligible  substances,  extremely  insignificant,
and  see,  that  the  corporeal  world  is  borne  by  the  intelligible  world,
as  if  it  were  a  ship  on  the  sea,  or  a  bird  in  the  air.  Ibn  Gebirol  thought
he  resolved  the  connection  between  the  Infinite  and  the  finite,  by  estab-
lishing, that  the  simple  substances  and  the  Will,  are  neither  wholly
the  one  or  the  other,  that  the  Will  or  Desire  of  the  Supreme  Deity,
is  infinite  in  its  essence,  but  through  its  action,  is  in  affinity  with  the  finite,
and  that  this  action  began  at  the  instant  of  the  creation,  or  rather  emana-
tion, of  the  Universe.  The  intellect  has  had  a  commencement,  has  been
emanated  or  created,  whilst  its  action,  falls  not  in  time  but  is  eternal  and
infinite.  He  then,  to  show  the  bonds  existing  between  them,  sets  forth
the  meaning  we  can  infer,  in  his  saying,  that  the  simple  substances,  are
from  and  in  the  orbits  or  spheres  which  environ  each  other,  and  which
themselves  wholly  surround  the  composite  substances,  and  these  are  evi-
dently those  which  the  Qabbalists  term  the  Sephiroth,  and  which,  he  calls,
spheres  or  circles.  Properly  they  should  be  called,  orbits.  The  essence
of  the  Will,  he  admits,  is  however  impenetrable  to  man's  intelligence,
and  we  arrive  at  a  knowledge  of  it  only  through  ecstasy,  which  puts  us
into  the  world  of  the  Divinity.  We  know  the  essence  of  the  Will,  only
through  the  actions  which  emanate  through  the  intermediary  of  the  Will.
The  IV  Book. — This  book  treats  of  a  subject  of  much  importance,  that
is,  that  all  the  simple  substances  are  composed  of  form  and  matter.     St.


152

Thomas  Aquinas,  Albert  the  Great,  and  other  celebrated  scholastics,  con-
sider Avicebron,  as  the  first,  who  has  attributed  matter  to  the  soul  and  all
other  simple  substances,  and  that  doctrine  has  been  regarded  by  them  as
the  principal  point  of  Gebirol's  system.  Gebirol  goes  back  to  the  idea  of
the  bonds,  existing  between  the  superior  and  inferior  worlds,  the  superior
being  a  prototype  of  the  latter.  The  simple  substances  have  an  affinity  and
all  form  one  sole  unity ;  they  are  distinguished  only  through  the  matter
they  carry,  which  is  more  or  less  subtile  ;  as  it  approaches  or  recedes  from
the  first  source  of  all  perfection.  Simple  when  in  affinity  with  the  corpo-
reity which  is  underneath  them,  composite  relatively  to  that  which  is
above  them,  /.  ^.,  the  Will  or  first  agent,  which  is  Absolute  Simplicity.
An  effect  is  weaker  than  a  cause,  and  junction  is  possible  only  through  a
similarity.  The  simple  substances,  as  between  themselves,  are  different ;
this  is  the  result  of  form,  form  is  the  realization  of  their  existence,  to
the  latter,  matter  is  indispensable.  Matter  has  not  any  real  existence
and  is  without  form.*  Most  of  this  book  is  composed  of  demonstra-
tions, too  numerous  to  be  given  in  this  writing,  but  he  asserts  that  all  the
Universe,  which  is  outside  of  the  Supreme  Deity,  from  its  superior  ex-
tren^ity  to  its  inferior,  is  yet  in  one  continued  unity,  in  which  the  Deity
is  immanent  yet  transcendental.  The  Highest  above  All  Things  is  an
Absolute  Unknown  Unity,  the  emanator  of  the  created  is  a  different  Cre-
ator getting  all  potentiality  from  the  former.  The  latter  is  the  One  in
number.  There  is  therefore  a  two-fold  Ens,  Matter,  in  its  greatest  ab-
straction, is  only  being  in  potentiality,  or,  the  simple  power,  to  be.  The
word  designates  at  once  that  simple  faculty  in  all  its  abstractness,  that
ideal  potentiality,  which  has  not  yet  passed  into  action,  and  which  is  not
yet  clothed  with  any  form,  either  spiritual  or  corporeal.  Matter  is  also
the  composite  matter,  which  may  be  spiritual  or  corporeal,  and  lastly,
it  is  that  which  holds  the  medium  between  them,  that  is,  the  elementary
matter  and  that  of  the  spheres.     This  is  the  abstract  matter  of  the  corpo-

*  "  The  powers  (potentialities)  of  matter  we  know  and  recognize  in  every  phenomenon
of  creation;  the  absolute  matter  in  none."  Prof.  Faraday,  London  and  Edinburgh,
Philos.  Journ.,  1844.  See  also,  "Curious  Things  of  the  Outside  World,"  etc.,  by  Har-
grave  Jenniilgs,  London,  1861,  Vol.  ii,  32,  33.  "  Solar  Light  and  Heat,"  by  Z.  Allen.
New  York,  1879,  p.  166.


153

reity,  that  of  the  latter  in  potentiality.  In  the  higher  world  there  is  a
two-fold  Ensy  quality  and  that  which  bears  it.  Substratum  is  matter,
quality  is  form.  Our  author  has  some  remarks  as  to  the  affinity  which
exists  between  the  to  be^  and  numbers,  and  shows  the  number  3  is  the
root  of  all  things,  because  Form  represents  the  Unity,  and  Matter  the
Duad,  and  together  with  the  Will,  the  bond,  results  a  Triad;  and
his  reasoning  recalls  that  of  the  Pythagoreans,  especially  the  state-
ments of  the  Arabian  authors,  upon  the  numbers  of  Pythagoras.
In  the  idea  of  to  be,  are  the  necessary,  possible,  and  impossible,
or.  Creator,  created,  and  non-being.  Intellect,  Neshamah,  represents
the  monad,  the  ethical  soul,  Ru-a'h,  the  duad,  the  vital  soul,  Nephesh,
the  triad,  and  Nature,  the  tetrad.  All  the  existing  are  constituted  after
the  nature  of  numbers,  which  are  considered  as  entities,  and  all  are
dominated  by  the  intellect,  the  same  as  all  the  numbers  are  comprised  in
the  unity.  The  Highest  Abstract  God  is  the  indivisible,  metaphysical
unity.  The  Will  is  a  production,  a  secondary  and  divisible  unity,  the  One,
the  unity  of  number,  which  is  in  direct  affinity  with  multiplicity.  This
secondary  unity,  the  One  of  number,  is  an  immediate  emanation  of  the
unity  above  all  number,  the  Absolute  Divinity.  The  Universal  Form  in
itself  is  a  Perfect  Light,  which  weakens  in  the  measure  it  penetrates  into
matter,  just  as  physical  light  terminates  after  passing  through  several,
more  or  less,  transparent  bodies.  The  first  Light  is  the  creative  Will,
the  efficient  faculty,  which  passes  into  the  Universal  Form,  the  poten-
tiality to  act.  Matter  is  the  principle  of  unity,  Form,  of  multiplicity.
There  is  Universal  Matter  and  Form ;  the  former  corresponds  with  unity,
the  latter  with  two-foldness,  hence  not  unity,  but  the  Triad  is  at  the  root
of  All.  The  Light  in  the  Universal  Matter,  or  in  the  Universal  Form,  is
insignificant  when  compared  with  the  Light  in  the  Will.  There  are  three
forms.  I.  That  which  exists  in  the  essence  of  the  Will;  this  however
in  reality  is  not  form.  2.  Form  which  is  in  action  or  reality  and  is  at-
tached to  matter,  ;.  ^.,  the  Form  of  the  Universal  Intellect.  3.  The
Ideal  Form,  the  abstract  of  all  matter  and  which  is  virtually  attached  to
matter.  The  other  forms  are  contained  in  the  Universal  Form.  If  the
Will  is  an  efficient  cause,  it  has  in  its  essence,  the  form  of  all  the  things,
because  it  is  certain  that  the  form  of  every  effect  exists  in  its  cause,  or


154

better,  the  effect  (itself)  exists  in  its  cause  through  the  form  which  it  has.
ITiingH  therefore  exist  in  the  essence  of  the  Will  only  for  so  much  as  they
are  itH  effects.  The  effects  of  all  of  these  may  be  included  under  the
term  movement.  The  principle  of  this,  not  even  the  most  subtile  bodies
bears  within  itself.  All  motion  comes  therefore  from  above  and  is  beyond
all  comjAOsltc  things.

Creation  with  Gebirol  is  only  the  impression  of  Form  in  Matter,  an  im_
pression  emanating  from  the  Will.  Creation  keeps  within  bounds  the
Universal  Matter  and  Universal  Form.  All  the  rest  emanate  from  these.
Creation  does  not  happen  in  time,  but  precedes  it  and  is  in  eternity.

The  V  Hook. — In  this  the  theme  is,  the  Universal  Matter  and  Universal
Form  considered  in  themselves.  These  are  the  culminating  points  of  the
whole  work,  and  should  serve  as  the  ladder  to  rise  to  a  knowledge  of  the
Will.  Of  the  Will  our  author  says,  he  would  treat  in  another  writing;
but  this  is  now  lost.  In  this  Book,  Gebirol  sets  forth  the  Will  or  Divine
Word,  OS  the  intermediary  and  bond  of  the  Universal  Matter  and
Form.  Yet  they  also  are  bound  together  and  exist  in  the  Divine,  for
they  were  born  simultaneously.  The  Will  is  one,  the  Matter  and  Form
two,  together  the  triad,  but  they  have  never  been  separated,  and  different
from  the  knowledge  in  man,  knowledge  in  God  passes  from  potentiality
to  action,  without  the  intervention  of  any  time,  all  in  the  action  of  the
Deity  is  instantaneous.  The  knowledge  of  these  things,  he  says,  is  the
most  clrvatcil,  man  as  a  finite  being,  can  attain.  The  Form  and  Matter  are
08  an  open  book,  they  are  the  pages  upon  which  are  traced  the  lines  of
letters.  Those  who  know  how  to  read  that  book,  acquire  the  highest
knowlrilf^'e.  The  highest  Intellect  is  without  form,  and  therefore  is  en-
abled to  ronreive  all  the  other  forms,  which  are  contained  in  the  Uni-
ver«ttl  Koruj.  The  Matter  peculiar  to  the  Form  of  the  Intellect  {Se'khef)^
rereivrs  its  form  from  the  Will.  Matter  is  a  spiritual  power,  existing
witiu)ut  l''orm  by  itself,  and  the  Form  is  a  light  which  gives  everything  its
chttrttt'trristii's  and  stamp.  The  Form,  is  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Supreme,
yet  nrprtmto.  from  whence  it  gets  united  with  Matter.  The  Will  (Memrah  or
LogtM*),  in  a  Divine  faculty  which  emanates  from  the  Deity  and  penetrates
the  whole  universe ;  it  has  been  called,  the  Creating  Speech  or  the  Divine
Wortl ;  it  is  the  first  source  of  the  movement  which  has  created  and  vivi-


155

tied  all,  and  communicates  itself  successively  to  all  parts  of  the  spiritual
and  corporeal  world  as  a  vitalizing  energy.  From  it,  the  Universal  Form
emanates.  The  movement  through  the  Will  is  not  the  movement  of
physics,  that  is,  the  movement  in  inferior  substances.  The  movement
through  the  Will  is  an  energy  and  faculty  which  determines  itself,  freely
in  itself,  and  communicates  itself  to  the  spiritual  world,  to  which  it  gives
knowledge  and  life.  From  this  Will  the  Universal  Form  emanates.  We
call  to  the  attention  of  the  reader,  that  this  Will  or  Word  was  most  likely
in  the  mind  of  our  author,  the  speech  ("said  ")  of  the  creation,  repeated
ten  times  in  Genesis,  Chapter  i,  which  indicates  the  Will  and  Desire  of
God,  the  Divine  Potentiality,  and  manifests  itself  freely  in  the  work  of
our  Creation.

We  say  God  is  in  everything,  because  through  and  by  Its  Will,  Desire,
or  Word,  Creation  came  into  being  and  still  exists.  God's  Will  is  always
in  everything  in  potentiality  and  action.  This  Will  or  Word  is  the  action
of  the  Absolute  manifested.  Creation  is  like  the  word  spoken  by  man,
as  far  as  it  enters  the  ear  of  the  hearer ;  it  creates  spiritual  forms  in  the
latter.  So  the  Creator  ha:i  spoken  the  Word,  the  intent  and  meaning,  of
which  became  manifest  in  matter.  Saadya  Gaon  (927-942  A.  D.)  had
already  written,  that  the  "He  said"  pf  Genesis,  meant  "  He  Willed"  or
"Desired. '  *  To  know,  and  to  will,  are  the  two  sides  of  the  Deity,  one  latent,
the  other  active.  The  Absolute  Supreme  is  the  thinker,  thought,  and  object
of  thought ;  with  the  Deity  all  of  these  are  instantaneous.  The  Will  acts  be-
yond time,  produces  motion  without  being  itself  moved  3  Universal  Matter
is  like  non-existence.  Form  is  existence.  Every  existence  tends  towards  the
higher,  the  first  Unity,  to  obtain  perfection.  Reward  is  for  the  pious  soul
in  after  life,  punishment  for  the  wicked;  this  refers  only  to  the  thinking,
intellectual  soul,  Neshamah,  but  not  to  the  Nephesh,  or  animal  soul.
In  the  Kether  Malkhulh  the  pre-existence  of  the  soul  is  referred  to.
The  whole  universe  is  one  complex,  the  lower  emanates  from  the  higher,
and  is  its  image,  but  the  Divine  potentiality  is  active  in  each.  Love
and  yearning  for  the  original  source  of  being,  and  the  desire  of  Divine
perfection,  are  the  principles  of  motion,  common  to  all  the  created.
The  extent  of  attainment  is  various  and  depends  on  their  capacities.
The  emanations  take  place  dynamically ;  forces,  scintillations  and  rays


156

issue  from  the  categories,  but  the  essence  of  the  Supreme  Unity,  which  is
transcendental  to  yet  immaneht  in  them,  never  decreases.  These  are  the
intermediaries  which  are  neither  absolutely  limited,  nor  absolutely  end-
less, but  like  the  Will  they  partake  of  each,  yet  are  still,  in  their  kind,
different.  They  are  evidently  the  Sephiroth  of  the  Qabbalah.  The  same
view  is  in  Philo,  iii,  p.  185  et  seq.  The  Will  is  infinite  in  its  essence,  but
in  its  action,  beginning  with  Time,  it  is  finite.  The  spiritus  mundi  is,  on
its  created  side,  finite,  but  its  actions  also  being  beyond  Time,  it  is  in-
finite.

That  Will,  Memrah  or  Logos,  has  been  considered  by  the  Jewish  theo-
logians, as  a  first  hypostasis  of  the  divinity,  putting  in  direct  affinity  and
bond,  the  first  and  absolute  substance,  the  Supreme  Unity,  with  the  uni-
verse; but  really,  at  the  foundation,  the  Will,  Desire  or  Word,  as  a  Divine
attribute,  is  inseparable  from  the  Divinity,  and  is,  as  far  as  we  can  in  this
world  know,  the  Divine  Essence.*  Ibn  Gebirors  distinction  is  purely
ideal.  This  book  may  be  summed  up  in  three  propositions:  i*  All
emanated  or  created  things,  that  is,  all  beings  outside  of  the  Supreme,
have  matter  and  form.  2.  All  movement  and  vital  energy  in  the  uni-
verse emanates  from  the  Divine  Will.  3.  This  Will  is  a  Divine  faculty,
which  as  the  Divine  Word  or  Speech,  emanated,  or  immanently  created,
and  since  has  always  penetrated  and  kept  in  existence,  the  whole  universe.
Gebirol  holds  that  the  simple,  abstract,  highest  unknown  Being,  corres-
ponds to  Who?  What  ?  to  2,  How  ?  to  3,  Why  ?  to  4.  The  Universal  Perfect
Soul  is  the  Makrokosm,  Humanity  is  the  Mikrokosm.  The  energy  of  the
universe  begins  at  the  highest  celestial  sphere,  called  by  Gebirol,  the  envi-
roning sphere,  but  does  not  begin,  as  with  Giordani  Brimo  and  Spinoza,
in  the  Absolute  Deity  as  a  first  substance.  Our  author's  idea  of  the  Su-
preme Deity  is  similar  to  that  of  Ain  Soph  in  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  and
he  takes  refuge  in  the  idea  of  the  Will  as  the  first  expression,  of  the  un-
numbered, unknown,  primal  Supreme  Deity  above  all  number ;  the  Will
being  the  unit  of  number,  and  the  simple  abstract  idea ;  and  the  Supreme

*  Note. — See  John  i,  1-15,  Prov.  viii,  Ps.  xxxiii,  and  the  writings  of  Philo  Judaeus.
The  Targums  of  Onkelos  and  Jonathan  ben  Uzziel,  etc.,  by  J.  W.  Etheridge,  London,
1865,  as  to  the  Memrah  or  Word,  the  Logos.  Also  writings  of  Rev.  Peter  Allix  before
cited,  and  Jacob  Bryant  on  Philo.     Cambridge,  1797.


157

Deity  being  unknowable  and  above  all  finite  number  and  idea.  He  holds
that  one  can  only  reach  to  the  unknown  Supreme  Deity  through  the
ecstatic  condition.     Such  is  a  short  resume  of  the  Me'q6r  Hay-ylm.


Figure  t.— The  ancient  Mciican  undtogci
Zodiac,  ffcrm  an  ^chaic,  aboiigioal,  Kfexicai


Figiire  9.— Hindu  Tree  of  the  Sephiroth.


VIII.


THE  THEORY  AS  TO  ECSTASY.     THE  WRITERS  WHO  MENTION  IBN  GEBIROL,  OR
MAKE  USE  OF  HIS  PHILOSOPHY.      THE  SO-CALLED  ARABIC  PHILOSOPHERS.

THE  doctrine  of  ecstasy  as  understood  by  the  ancients  was :  The  soul
was  regarded  as  an  emanation  from  the  Divine  Intelligence,  but
being  in  a  finite  body,  as  if  in  a  prison,  it  could  only  have
a  knowledge  of  finite  things ;  for  instance  Plotinus  held  knowledge  and
existence  are  identical,  therefore  human  intelligence  to  comprehend
and  know  the  Divine  Intelligence,  must  become  as  if  the  Divine
Intelligence,  arriving  at  that,  the  same  plane,  it  is  no  longer  an  emana-
tion from  it,  but  is  an  identification  with  it.  In  a  word,  the  human
soul  must  lose  its  personality,  and  this  is  reached  only  through  ecstasy.
When  in  this  condition,  the  human  soul  is  assumed  to  be  separated  from  in-
dividual consciousness,  freed  from  its  fleshly  prison,  and  absorbed  into  the
Divine  Intelligence  from  which  it  emanated.  The  captive  soul  goes  back
to  its  parent,  the  Supreme  Deity.  Among  the  Mohammedans  this  is  the
effort  of  the  Sufi ;  the  Hindus,  the  Yogin ;  the  Buddhists,  tlfe  S9raman.  It
was  the  doctrine  of  the  Neo-platonists,  and  probably  of  many  of  the  He-
brew prophets.  The  early  Qabbalists  held  this  view,  as  also  did  Philo
Judaeus,  also  the  Apostle  Paul,  who  was  frequently  in  trances.  The  same
idea  is  apparently  in  the  Didach^  or  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,
and  is  fully  set  forth  in  the  pseudo-Dionysius,  the  Areopagite.  Many  of
the  Early  Fathers  of  the  Christian  Church,  believed  in  it,  and  a  thorough
examination  by  the  student,  of  the  real  meaning  of  the  "  Gift  of  tongues  *'
of  the  New  Testament,  may  reveal  to  him  that  it  contemplated  a  similar


159

idea.*  Gebirol  was  obliged  to  admit  an  emanating  or  creating  Deity,  a
manifestation  of  the  Unknowable  Supreme  Unity,  but,  with  him,  this  is
the  impression  of  the  Universal  Form  on  Universal  Matter,  both  of
which  emanate  from  the  Will.  This  preceded  Time,  is  Eternal.  With
the  Qabbalah,  he  also  insists  upon  a  superior  ideal  paradigm,  after  which
the  universe  has  been  formed,  and  which  is  in  affinity  with  the  latter,
through  the  orbits  or  spheres.  This  is  the  Qabbalistic  doctrine  of  the
Adam  Qadmon  or  Adam  lUa-ah,  the  Makrokosm,  and  the  totality  of
the  ten  Sephiroth.  The  doctrine  of  numbers  and  letters  as  entities,
enters  into  his  system,  and  considered  as  sounds,  we  must  admit,  they
stand  on  the  border  land  of  the  spiritual  and  physical  worlds ;  from  the
spirit  they  resolve  into  a  physical  element,  the  breath,  and  are  the  symbols
indispensable  to  the  communication  of  thought,  and,  indeed,  are  to  us,
the  best  possible  outward  and  also  receptive,  form  of  the  spirit.

Gebirol  must  have  known  the  celebrated  Qabbalistic  SepherYe'tzeerah,
I.  e.,  Book  of  Creation,  rather  Formation,  as  he  evidently  quotes  from.it
(Bk.  II,  §  27)  :  *'  It  is  wherefore  it  has  been  said  that  the  construction
of  the  world  was  made  through  the  inscription  of  numbers  and  letters  in
the  air.**  The  Ye'tzeerah  reads:  Edition  of  Mantua,  c.  i,  §  10;  c.
ii,  §§  2  and  3 — "  Two,  it  is  the  breath  (air  or  azoth)  which  comes  from
the  spirit,  in  which  It  has  engraved  and  sculptured  the  22  letters.  *  *
The  22  letters  It  has  graved,  sculptured,  weighed,  transposed  and  com-
bined them,  and  It  created  through  them,  the  soul  of  all  that  which  is  cre-
ated and  all  that  which  has  been  created.  *  ^rc  *  The  22  letters,  which
are  the  foundation,  are  engraved  in  the  voice,  sculptured  in  the  air,  and
fixed  in  the  mouth,  in  five  places  (organs  of  speech),  etc."  R.  Saadyah
Gaon  in  his  writing — Bodleian  Library,  MSS.  cod.  Poc.  No.  256 — upon
this  Qabbalistic  book,  essays  to  make  this  its  fundamental  doctrine.  Ibn
GebiroFs  quotation  is  important  for  the  completion  of  his  system.  Comp.
an/^f  p.  141,  note.  The  method  of  the  Ye*tzeerah  is  analytical,  that  of  the
Zohar  is  based  on  the  analytical-synthetical  process.  The  former  uses  the
letters  and  numbers  as  the  principles  of  all  the  things,  the  latter  uses  the
inner  forms  of  thinking,  the  ideas.     The  Ye'tzeerah  is  very  old.     See

*Comp.  Dr.  Schaafs  Hist,  of  the  Christian  Church.     New  York,  1882,  pp.  224  to
245-


i6o

antey   page   39.      It   was  doubtless  the  book   mentioned  in   the   Tal-
mud. *

Among  the  Jewish  writers,  whose  writings  we  now  have,  the  first  who
mentions  Ibn  Gebirol,  is  Moses  Ibn  Jacob  ben  Ezra,  of  Granada,  who
lived  in  the  first  half  of  the  twelfth  century  (d.  1138);  he  eulogizes  our
author. t  In  his  Arugath  hab-Bosem,  /.  <f..  Garden  of  Aromatics,  he
borrows  much,  either  from  Ibn  Gebirol,  or  from  the  same  sources.  '*  The
Active  Intellect,**  he  says,  *'  is  the  first  among  the  creatures  of  the  Most
High  ;  it  is  a  faculty  emanating  from  the  Will,  a  simple,  pure  and  scin-
tillating substance,  which  bears  in  itself  the  forms  of  all  the  existences.
The  human  intellect  is  a  composite  faculty,  in  affinity  with  it  (the  Active
Intellect).  *  *  *  Man  is  called  the  Little  World  (Mikrokosm),  and  the
universe,  the  Great  World  (Makrokosm),  because  the  Mikrokosm  greatly
resembles  by  its  composition,  derivation,  and  creation,  the  Makrokosm,**
Also,  "  The  rational  soul  only  subsists  in  the  body,  through  the  inter-
mediary of  the  spirits,  which  are  placed  between  the  two ;  because  the
one  being  subtile  and  the  other  gross,  the  soul  can  exist  in  the  body  only
through  an  intermediary  bond.  It  is  the  same  with  the  universe,  I  desire
to  say,  that  the  simple  and  sublime  substance,  cannot  (directly)  unite
with  the  body  of  the  world ;  this  last  is  the  substance  which  carries  the
ten  categories.  *  *  These  ten  categories  may  refer  to  those  mentioned  by
Aristotle,  but  most  probably,  to  the  ten  orbits  or  spheres  of  the  universe,
as  the  ten  Sephiroth.  Hay.  Gaon  (died  1038  A.D.)  knows  the  Sephiroth,
and  Gebirol  wrote  an  elegy  upon  Hay.  Gebirol  in  his  writings  evidently
intends  the  Sephiroth,  although  he  speaks  of  them,  as  the  First  Agent  and
the  nine  categories,  but  he  also  refers  to  the  circles,  orbits,  or  spheres  as
Intermediaries,  t     The  celebrated  Abraham  Ibn  Ezra,  in  his  Bible  Com-

*  Comp.  Hershon*s  Talmudic  Miscellany,  before  cited,  pp.  57,  234,  329.  Treasures
of  the  Talmud,  p.  42.  Genesis  with  Talmudic  Comment.,  p.  287,  before  cited.  Ad.
Franck,  La  KabbaU^  p.  74  et  seq.  The  Talmud  Babli,  treat.  Berakhoih,  folio  55.
Schawb's  French  Ed.,  i,  p.  453-4,  says  of  Be'tzaleel  (Ex.  xxxi,  2,  etc.),  "  R.  Yudah
said  in  the  name  of  Rab.  That  man  knew  the  mysterious  combination  of  the  letters,  by
which  heaven  and  earth  were  created,  etc."

f  See  Gsschichte  tier  yiidischen  LiUraturvon  Gustav  KarpeUs.  Berlin,  1 886,  p.  504
et  seq,     Munk,  Melanges  des  Philos.  juive  et  arabe,  p.  263,  etc.

X  Book  II.  2  I,  ?  2,  ?  12,  I  23,  I  27.  III.  II  1-2,  4,  7,  8.  9,  etseq.,  J  41.  IV,  J  I,
2  8.     Saadyah  Gaon,  in  his  Comment  on  the  Sepher  Yetzirah — MSS.  of  the  Bodleian


i6i

mentaries  on  Isaiah,  also  eulogizes  Gebirol,  cites  some  of  his  allegorical
explanations,  and  apparently  knew  the  Me'qdr  *Hay-yim.  He  speaks  of
the  creating  Will  and  identifies  it  with  the  Divine  Wisdom,  and  the  Divine
Word.*  It  abo  appears,  from  some  passages  of  the  book  Khozari  of
Yehudah  ha-Levi,  that  he  knew  of  similar  ideas  to  those  in  the  Me*q6r,
and  most  likely  obtained  them  from  the  Qabbalistic  philosophy.  He
does  not  however,  mention  Gebirol  or  his  writings.f

In  1 1 60  A.  D.  Abraham  ben  David  ha-Levi,  attacked  Gebirol  bitterly
in  his  book,  called : — The  Sublime  Faith,  which  is  Aristotelian  in  its  ten-
dency. This  writing  apparently  discredited  our  author  with  his  co-relig-
ionists, and  the  popularity  of  peripateticism,  through  the  writings  of  Ibn
Sina  (Avicenna),  and  perhaps,  the  revelations  in,  and  the  mysticism  of,
the  Me'qor  'Hay.yim,  may  have  contributed  to  their  forgetfulness  of  his
philosophy.  The  Me*q6r  did  not  suit,  the  positiveness  of  Maimonides
(i  135-1204  A.D.)  and  his  school,  and  the  rapid  advance  of  the  Maimonic
tendency  and  Aristotelianism,  soon  caused  the  philosophical  writings  of
this  great  Jewish  philosopher  to  be  forgotten  by  his  race.  Only  one  Jewish
philosopher  of  the  thirteenth  century,  the  erudite  Shem  Tob  Ibn-Falaquera
{circa  1264  A.  D.),  in  his  Commentary  upon  the  Moreh  Ne-boo*kheem  of
Maimonides,  cites  from  Gebirol  frequently,  and  has  appreciated  his  phi-
losophical work,  which  Falaquera  says :  **  Contains  an  antiquated  system,
going  back  to  philosophers  of  the  highest  antiquity.*'  We  find  however,
although  not  mentioned  by  the  Qabbalists,  from  the  similarity  of  their
,  statements,  that  either  they  drew  from  him,  or  that  both  drew,  which  we
think  our  writing  shows  to  be  more  probable,  from  a  common  ancient
source,  the  Secret  Learning.  The  Speculative  Hebrew  Qabbalah  is  an
abstract  science,  based  undoubtedly  upon  the  Secret  Learning,  as  we
shall  hereafter  mention.     It  assumes  the  unveiling  of  the  secrets  of  crea-

Library,  Cod.  Poc,  No.  256,  refers  to  the  ten  Sephiroth.  He  lived  circa  927-942
A.  D.  Philo  appears  to  have  had  an  idea  of  them.  See  his  treatise,  On  Monarchy;
especially  pp.  185-6.

*  For  Commentaries  in  English,  see  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Hebrew  Litera-
ture.    London.     See,  same  series,  Essays  on  Writings  of  Ibn  Ezra.

fFor  the  Khozari,  comp.  D.  Cassel's  Ed.     Leipzig.     1853.     Also,  Warsau  Ed.  of
1880,  with  two  commentaries;  and  H.  Hirschfeld's,  Breslaa,  1885.
II


1 62

tion  and  physics  termed  by  it,  Ma-a*seh  Be*resheeth,  and  of  the  essence
of  the  Deity  and  God's  connection  with  the  universe,  or  religious  meta-
physics, which  it  calls  Ma-a*seh  Merkabah,  /.  e.,  the  Chariot-Throne.

Under  the  name  of  Avicebron,  Avicembron,  Avicebrol,  and  Albenzu-
brun,  Ibn  Gebirol  held,  in  Christian  Europe,  a  position  as  one  of  the
greatest  philosophers  of  the  Middle  Ages ;  and  his  philosophical  writings
were  largely  used  by  the  scholastics.  He  was  thought  by  many,  to  be  an
Arab  or  Saracene.  The  learned  orientalist,  Jourdain,  in  his  Critical  Re-
searches as  to  the  age  and  origin  of  the  Latin  Translations  of  Aristotle  j*
tells  us,  one  can  surely  know  the  philosophy  of  the  thirteenth  century,
if  he  will  analyze  the  Fons  Vitce  of  Avicebron,  and  the  book  De  Causis,
which  does  not  appear  to  have  been  known  to  Gebirol.  The  ideas  in  the
Fons  Vitce  caused  great  disputes  in  the  Christian  schools.  As  early  as
the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century.  Archdeacon  Dominic  Gunsalvi,  with
the  aid  of  a  converted  Jew,  named  Jean  Avendoth,  translated  into  Latin,
the  Me*q6r  'Hay-yim.  It  has  been  asserted,  that  from  this,  and  the  book
De  Causis ;  Araaury  de  Chartres  and  David  de  Dimant,  drew  doc-
trines, afterwards  condemned  by  the  Roman  Church  as  heretical.  The
De  CausiSy  was  probably  a  production  of  the  twelfth  century.  Its  con-
tents are  aphorisms  borrowed  from  Proclus,  but  it  was  incorrectly
ascribed  to  Aristotle. f  Adelard  of  Bath,  Bernard  of  Chartres,  Alain  of
Lille  and  others,  professed  doctrines  very  similar  to  those  of  Gebirol,  and
in  both  church  and  synagogue,  learned  men  of  this  period,  became  theo-
sophists  and  mystics.  J  GebiroVs  philosophical  work,  was  used  by  Guil-
laume  de  Auvergne,  Bishop  of  Paris  in  1228  (d.  1249),  Albert,  the  Great
(b.  1200,  d.  1280),  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  (b.  1225,  d.  1274),  Duns  Scotus
(b.  1265,  d.  1308).  Later,  the  unfortunate  philosopher  Giordano  Bruno
(b.  1550,  burned  1600  on  account  of  his  philosophy),  and  the  Neo-
platonicians  of  Italy  as  late  as  the  sixteenth  century,  cited  from  Avice-
bron's  philosophical  writings.     The  schoolmen,  no  more  than  the  Jews

♦Paris,  2d  ed.,  p.  197.

f  See  B.  Ilaureau's  De  la  Philosophie  Scholastique^  Paris,  1880,  Bk.  I,  part  2,  p.  46.
The  doctrine  attributed  to  Amaury,  may  be  condensed  in  the  formula :  Omnia  unum,
quiOf  quicquid  esty  est  Deus,  Ibid.  Vol.  I,  p.  403  et  seq.

%  Vacherot,  Histvire  Critique  de  Ficole  d'Alexandrie,  Bk.  Ill,  p.  iiy  et  seq.


163

of  the  thirteenth  century,  appear  to  have  had  much  knowledge  of  the
author  whose  works  they  used.  Most  of  the  scholastics  thought  him  to
be  an  Arabian  Mussulman,  Guillaume  de  Auvergne  believed  him  to  be  an
Arab,  but  as  he  had  written  a  book  De  Verbo  Dei  Agente  Omnia^  believed
that  he  professed  Christianity.*  Without  doubt  his  Qabbalistic  ideas  largely
influenced  the  Mediaeval  mystics.  The  Dominican  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,
as  a  Nominalist,  opposed  our  author's  philosophy.  The  fiery  Franciscan
Duns  Scotus,  the  Realist,  who  recommended  the  most  revolting  violence,
so  as  to  force  the  Jews  into  the  bosom  of  the  Roman  Church,  without
knowing  our  author  was  a  Jew,  embraced  his  doctrines.f

A  few  words  as  to  the  philosophers,  who  wrote  in  Arabic,  that  which
has  been  incorrectly  called,  the  Arabian  philosophy,  and  who  preceded
Ibn  Gebirol.  These  men  lived  in  the  Orient,  some  in  Central  Asia,  their
systems  were  based  on  Greek  thought,  expressed  in  Semitic  language,  mod-
ified and  influenced  by  the  so-called  Oriental  philosophy.  With  the  excep-
tion of  Al  Kendi,  its  originators  were  not  Arabs,  nor  did  they  come  from
the  seat  of  the  khalifate  in  the  East.  They  were  Persians  or  Turks,  but
they  were  fostered  however,  under  Saracenic  or  Arabian  dynasties.  They
were  influenced  by  Aristotelianism  viewed  through  an  orientalized  Pla-
tonism,  and  by  Hindu,  Persian,  and  Chaldean  philosophy,  and  their  off"-
shoot  Neo-platonism  and  Neo-pythagorianism.  Al  Kendi  (b.  circa  812,
d.  after  861  A.  D.)  was  surnamed  by  the  Arabs,  the  philosopher  ^«r  ^;c-
celience.  His  place  of  birth  is  unknown,  his  father  was  Governor  of
Koufa,  under  the  Khalifs,  Al-Mahdi,  Al-Hadi,  and  Haroun  al-Rashid.
He  studied  at  Bassora  and  Baghdad,  and  became  celebrated  under  the
Khalifs  Al-Mamoun  (813-833  A.  D.)  and  Al-Mo'tacem  (833-842  A.  D.)
by  his  writings  on  philosophy,  medicine,  mathematics,  astronomy,  politics,
music,  etc.     In  861  he  was  yet  living.

Abu-Na^r  al-Farabi,  called  in  Latin,  Alpharabius  (d.  950  A.  D.),  was
a  Persian.  Guillaume  de  Auvergne,  Albert,  the  Great,  and  Vincent  de
Beauvois,  made  much  use  of  his  commentary  upon  the  Logic  of  Aristotle.
Abu-Ali  al-Hosein   ben-* Abd- Allah  Ibn  Sina,  called   by  the  scholastics

*  Jourdain,  work  above  cited,  2d  ed.,  p.  299,  Note  2.

f  Comp.  Haureau,  work  above  cited,  Bk.  II,  p.  327  et  seq.  Duns  Scotus,  Opera,  de
rerum  principio,  qusest  VIII,  No.  I  and  art.  4,  No.  24,  30,  31,  32,  art.  5,  38.


1 64

Avicenna,  was  of  Persian  origin,  and  bom  980,  died  A.D.  1037.  The
Me'qfir  Hay-ylm,  appeared  shortly  after  the  publication  of  his  Al-Shefa,
i.  e..  Cure  or  Healing,  a  vast  Encyclopedia  of  the  Philosophic  sciences,
in  18  volumes;  composed  about  1000  A.  D.  There  is  not  anything  to
show  that  Ibn  Gebirol  had  knowledge  of  it.  Al  Ghazali,  was  a  native  of
Khorasan  (b.  1058,  d.  iiii  A.  D.).  The  first  so-called  Arabian  philos-
opher in  Europe  was  Ibn  Gebirol  (1011-1070  A.  D.).  The  first  Moham-
medan Arabic  philosopher,  was  Abn  Beer  Mo'hammed  ben  Ya'hya,  sur-
named  Ibn^al-^ayeg,  commonly  called  Ibn  Badja,  known  to  the  scholas-
tics as  Aven-Pace  or  Avempace  (b.  1100  at  Saragossa,  d.  at  Fez  1138
A.  DO'  He  was  Aristotelian,  and  followed  the  writings  of  Ibn  Sina.
After  him  were  the  Spanish  Moors,  Ibn  Tofail,  (b.  circa  iioo,  d.  1185
A,  D.)  and  Ibn  Roschd,  called  by  the  scholastics  Averroes  (b.  iia6,
d.  1198  A.  D.).  These  were  as  ignorant  of  the  writings  of  Gebirol,  as
the  Jews  appear  to  have  been.  Gebirol  is  not  even  mentioned  by  the
learned  Moses  Maimonides,  (from  the  acrostics  of  his  name  frequently
called  Rambam — 1135-1204,)  but  Maimonides  from  his  own  writings,
appears  to  have  been  in  agreement  with  much  of  the  tone  of  Gebirol's
philosophy.  The  Mohammedans  of  this  period  did  not  read  works  written
by  Jews.


mnmmmmm


■dibcahc'kKii-ah.

IX.

THE  ANTIQUITY  OF  THE  QABBALAH.  BOOKS  AND  WRITERS  IN  WHICH  THE
QABSALAH  IS  REFERRED  TO.  LETTER  OF  ST.  JEROME  dN  THE  DIVINE
NAMES.  CONNEXION  WITH  EARLY  CHRISTIANITY,  ANCIENT  THOUGHT,
LANGUAGE,  SYMBOLISM  AND  TRADITION.  HIGH  POSITION  CLAIMED
FOR  THE  QABBALAH.  THE  IDEAL  MAN  AND  THE  GREAT  BROTHER-
HOOD OF  HUMANITY.  FREE-WILL,  THE  GOOD  AND  THE  EVIL.  THE
OPPOSITIONS  AND   HARMONY.

THE  origin  and  antiquity  of  the  Qabbalah  have  been  enigmas  to  the
most  erudite  orientalists,  for  centuries.  The  Qabbalists  claim,  that
their  most  important  doctrines  are  of  most  remote  antiquity,  in  which  we
think  they  are  right ;  but  we  do  not  go  as  far  as  some,  who  say,  they  were
first  taught  by  the  Deity  to  a  select  company  of  angels,  and  that  after  the
Fall,  by  the  direction  of  the  Deity,  they  were  taught  by  these  angels  to
Adam  and  Eve,  to  give  the  protoplasts  the  means  of  exercising  their  Free
Will,  and  by  it  to  return  to  their  first  nobility  and  felicity.

These  say,  from  Adam,  the  Secret  Oral  Doctrine  passed  to  Seth,  and
from  Seth  to  Noah.  Josephus  perhaps  refers  to  this  learning  in  his  book
on  the  Antiquities  of  the  Jews.*     From  Noah  it  passed  to  Abraham,  the

*C.  ii,  j  3,  Whislon's  Edition.


1 66

friend  of  God ;  he  emigrated,  after  having  a  knowledge  of  it,  to  Egypt,
there  he  taught  part  of  it  to  the  learned  of  the  Egyptians.  And  thus
the  Egyptians  obtained  some  knowledge  of  it,  and  the  Eastern  nations
were  enabled  to  introduce  it  into  their  philosophical  systems.  Moses,
who  was  learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians  (Exod.  ii,  lo.  Acts
vii,  22),  obtained  knowledge  of  it  in  the  land  of  his  birth,  he  studied
the  Qabbalah  and  devoted  all  his  leisure  hours  to  it,  during  the  forty
years*  wanderings  in  the  Desert,  and  during  that  lime  received  further
instructions  as  to  it,  from  the  angels.  By  the  aid  of  this  mysterious
science  he  was  enabled  to  solve  the  difficulties,  which  arose  during  his
management  of  the  Israelites.  In  the  first  four  books  of  the  Pentateuch,
he  has  esoterically  laid  down  the  principles  of  the  Secret  Doctrine,  from
the  fifth,  Deuteronomy,  they  were  withheld,  therefore  the  Qabbalists  call
the  first  four,  the  man,-  .the  fifth,  fhe  woman.  He  initiated  the  Seventy
Elders  into  the  mysteries,  (Numb.  xi,*24  et  seq.;  Exod.  xxiii,  i-ii),  and
they  transmitted  them  from  mouth  to  ear,  by  the  Thorah  Shebbe^al  Fehy
i,  ^.,  **the  law  which  is  by  the  mouth.'*  The  reader  will  note,  seventy
is  the  number  of  the  Hebrew  word,  Sod,  /.  ^.,  Mystery,  also  of  Wine,  and
the  expression,  wine  of  the  Thorah,  means  secrets  of  the  'i'horah.  It
is  also  to  be  noted  that  seventy-two,  six  for  each  of  the  twelve  tribes,
were  not  initiated.  In  the  chain  of  the  initiated  were  David  and  Solo-
mon, who  had  an  extensive  knowledge  of  the  Qabbalah,  and  many  of  its
doctrines  may  be  discovered  by  the  initiates,  in  their  writings.  Isaiah,
circa  763-713  B.  C,  Daniel,  167-165  B.C.,  and  Ezekiel,  circa  594  B.C.,
also  had  considerable  knowledge  of  the  Qabbalah.  Until  the  time  of  R.
Shim-on  ben  Yo'haT,  not  any  one  had  dared  to  impart  the  Secret  Teach-
ing by  writing.  He  lived  about.  95-190  A.  D.,  near  ihe  time  of  the
destruction  of  the  Second  Temple,  and  fearing  from  the  dispersion  of
the  initiates,  that  the  Secrets  of  the  Qabbalah  might  be  lost,  he  in-
structed certain  of  his  disciples  to  write  part  of  it.  This  has  been  done,
largely  through  hints,  symbols  and  aphorisms.  Many  of  the  doctrines
of  the  Qabbalah,  more  or  less  veiled,  may  be  found  in  the  Hebrew  Old
Testament,  and  especially  its  Greek  version  called,  the  Septuagint,  in
the  writings  of  Aristobulus,  c  70-150  B.  C,  the  Apocrypha,  especially  in
Jesus,  the  son  of  Sirakh,  circa  290-280  B.  C,  some  say ;  190-170  B.  C,


1 6;

the  New  Testament,  the  Targums,  the  oldest  of  the  Sibylline  Oracles
which  are  Jewish,  these  appeared  circa  140  B.  C. ;  The  Psalter  of  Solo-
mon, circa  63-48  B.  C;  the  Assumption  of  Moses,  circa  A.  D.  ;  the
Ascension  and  Vision  of  Isaiah;  the  Book  of  Jubilees,  circa  100  B.  C.
to  70  A.D. ;  Testaments  of  the  Twelve  Patriarchs,  circa  70  A.D. ;  Apoca-
lypses of  Barukh  and  IV  Esdras,  circa  81-96  A.D.  (Ezra,  the  II.  Esdras
of  the  English  Apocrypha.  The  Vulgate  differs.)  And  in  the  books  at-
tributed to  Hermes  Trismegistus  and  'Hanoch  (Enoch)  ;  and  especially
in  the  writings  of  Philo  Judaeus,  and  Josephus,  and  in  the  most  archaic  of
the  Midrashim,  that  have  survived  their  general  destruction  ;  also  in  the
Apocryphal  New  Testament,  especially  the  Epistle  attributed  to  St.
Barnabas,  the  scholar  of  St.  Paul,  which  if  not  by  him  is  very  old,  and
is  quoted  by  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Origen,  St.  Jerome  and  Eusebius.*
They  are  in  the  Pastor  of  Hermas,f  which  was  highly  esteemed
by  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Origen,  Irenaeus,  TertuUian  and  Eusebius,
and  was  at  one  time  ranked  as  canonical ;  and  also  in  the  early  Patristic
literature,  especially  in  the  writings  of  Justin  Martyr,  Clement  of
Alexandria,  Origen,  St.  Synesius,  and  the  pseudo-St.  Dionysius,  whose
hierarchy  of  angels  is  triadic,  and  in  accord  with  the  Ten  Sephiroth.J

♦Comp.  Kitto's  Cyclop,  of  Bib.  Liter.,  Ed.  1876,  Vol.  I,  p.  y>o  et  stq.  and  Apoc-
ryphal New  Testament.  Philadelphia,  p.  145,  et  seq,

f  Kitto,  Ibid.f  II,  p.  283  €t  S€q,  Apoc.  New  Test.  Ibid,,  p.  197  et  seq.;  also  Le  Pas-
teur d"  Hernias.     Paris,  1880.

J  The  arrangement  according  to  Dionysius  is —

1.  Seraphim.  4.  Dominations.  7.  Principalities.

2.  Cherubim.  5.  Virtues.  8.  Archangels.

3.  Thrones.  6.  Powers.  9.  Angels.

In  a  writing  of  the  Syriac  Church,  called ;  the  Testament  of  Adam,  which  is  not  later
than  300  A.  D.  and  probably  much  earlier,  and  which  lies  outside  of  Greek  and  Latin
Christianity  and  is  *'  an  interesting  monument  of  an  almost  unknown  world  of  ancient
creeds."  Diet,  of  Christian  Biog.,  by  Smith  and  Wace,  i,  p.  38.  Which  has  a  con-
nection with  the  bojk,  the  Conflict  of  Adam,  which  may  be  much  older  than  the  N.
T.  Ibid,  34  et  seq. ; — we  have  a  celestial  hierarchy  like  that  of  Dionysius,  beginning
with  the  9.  Angels,  8.  Archangels,  7.  Principalities,  6.  Sovereignties,  5.  Virtues,  4.  Dom-
inations, 3.  Thrones,  2.  Cherubim,  i.  Seraphim.  See  Fragments  du  Livre  Gnostique
intituU  Apocal.  d'Adam  ou  Penitence  ou  Testament  d*Adam,  public  d*apres  deux  ver.


1 68

The  works  of*  Dionysius  have  had  great  influence  in  the  Roman
Church,  especially  with  the  Mystics.  St.  Jerome — circa  331-420  A.  D. —
mentions  the  ten  Divine  Names,  in  almost  the  same  order  given  in  the
Qabbalistic  writings,*  and  follows  many  Qabbalistic  explanations.

siom  Syriaque par  Mons.  Ernest  Renan,  youm,  Asiatique^  Paris,  1 853.  5th  Sir.  torn,  ii,
pp.  427-471  ;  also  his  Veglise  chritien^  1879,  p.  529  sq.  Also  Bulletin  de  PAthinie
Oriental  4^  Paris ^  1 88 1,  p.  191,  and  note.  Ibid,  1882,  p.  50  et  ieq.

In  the  hierarchy  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  we  have  three  divisions,  the  Princes
of  the  Church,  the  Bishops  and  Priests,  arranged  into  nine  orders,  viz :

1.  Cardinal  Bishops.  4.  Archbishops.  7.   Rector  Priests.

2.  Cardinal  Priests.  5,  Bishops.  8.  Ordinary  Priests.

3.  Cardinal  Deacons.  6.  Co-adjutor  Bishops.      9.  Deacons.

We  find  nearly  all  the  divisions  mentioned  in  Dionysius  in  St.  Paul;  see  Col.  i,  16 ;
Rom.  i,  38,  39;  Ephes.  i,  21,  iii,  10,  15 ;  I  Peter  iii,  22,  and  other  places,  the  balance
in  the  Old  Testament.  The  angelus  bell  in  the  Roman  Church  rings  every  day  3  times,
and  each  time  3  times  3  =  9,  for  the  celestial  hierarchies,  and  then  a  number  of  times
for  the  spirits  on  earth.

*  His  epistle  to  M&rcella,  is  as  to  the  ten  Mystic  Names  {decern  nomina  mysiica)  by
which  the  Hebrews  designate  God.  We  here  note  that  this  fragment  resembles  the  ten
Names  of  the  Deity — applied  to  the  Ten  Sephiroth  by  the  Qabbalists.  The  following
is. a  translation:

"St.  Jerome  to  Marcella : — Thou  mayest  read  in  the  xc  (xci)  Psalm,  'Whoabideth  in  the
help  of  the  Highest,  shall  dwell  under  the  shelter  of  the  God  of  Heaven,*  I  would  say
that  (in  this  quotation)  with  the  Hebrews,  forthe'God  of  Heaven'  is  placed  (substituted)
^IB^,  J.  ^.,  Shaddai  (the  Almighty);  this  (word)  Aquila  interprets  as  ikanon  (j.  ^.,  the
warlike,  brave,  powerful  or  strong),  and  we  may  accept  its  meaning  for  our  purposes  as
robust  or  all-sufficient,  and  that  this  (Name)  is  one  of  the  ten  Names  by  which  God  is  known
(or  called)  among  the  Hebrews.  Therefore  as  thou  hast  asked  most  earnestly  that  I  should
demonstrate  to  thee,  these  many  Names  with  their  interpretation,  I  will  do  what  thou
askest.  The  ist  Name  of  God  is  /K  El^  which  is  in  the  Septuaginla  (translated)  Theon^
I.  e,,  God.  Aquila  explaining  the  etymology  of  it,  ischuron  (/'.  e..,  interprets  it),  as  the
'strong.*  Then  (2d)  is  D'hSk  Elohim,  and  (the  3rd)  "hSk  Elohai,  which  he  translates
as  meaning  the  word,  God.  4th,  mK3]f  Tzabaoth  which  the  Septuaginta  (translates)  *0f
the  Forces  (or  Powers,  virtutum)^  but  Aquila,  would  translate  it,  of  Hosts  (the  Energies
or  Forces  were  considered  by  the  Hebrews,  as  the  Hosts  of  heaven,  the  angels,  doing  the
Deity's  Will.)  5th.  jrS;;  EVyon,  which  we  call,  the  High.  6ih.  H^HK  1W  Ener  Eh'yeh
(1.  ^.,  *I  shall  be  who  I  shall  be'),  of  which  we  read  in  Exodus  (iii)  thus: — « Who
is,  sent  me.*  7th.  ''J1K  Adonai  (or  Adanoi)  which  we  always  term.  Lord.  8th.  H'
(  YaH)  Vhich  is  placed  only  as  to  God  (in  the  expression  of  the  tetragrammaton


169


Ain  Soph.
THE  WITHOUT  END.


Diagram  II.    The  Divine  Names  and  the  Sephiroth.


170

Many  similar  ideas  were  borrowed  by  the  School  of  Alexandria  and
the  Neo-platonicians ;  probably  coming  through  the  Aryan  branch,  the
Hindus,  at  least  the  profound  Norwegian  scholar,  Christian  Lassen,  pre-
sents a  strong  argument  for  the  Neo-platonic  doctrine  having  originated  in
India.*

The  Gnostics,  Manichaeans  and  other,  so-called  heretical,  sects  of  their
time,  have  also  borrowed  from  the  Qabbalah.  Earlier  we  find  many  of
the  Hebrew  Qabbalistic  ideas  in  the  Aryan  writings,  in  the  Vedas,  espe-
cially their  Upanishads,  in  the  Bhagavadglta,  the  Tantras,  etc.  Among
the  Chinese,  in  the  Yih-King,  the  writings  attributed  to  Laou  Tze*,  and
other  secret  philosophical  books.  We  may  also  find  many  of  them
in  the  Zend  and  other  early  Persian  writings,t  in  the  cuneiform  texts
of  the  early  inhabitants  of  Mesopotamia,  Chaldea,  Babylonia,  and  Assy-
ria ;  on  the  monuments  and  papyrus  of  Egypt,  and  among  the  remains  of
the  archaic  Buddhists  and  Dravidian  races,  of  India,  among  others  in  the
cave  temples  of  EUora,  Elephanta,  and  the  Sanchi  and  Amravati  topes.

Name  of  the  Deity  usually  mn'  YHVH),  and  which  in  (the  word)  a/Mu-  YaH  is
sounded  as  the  final  syllable,  pthly.  The  Tetragrammaton,  which  they  thought
anekphonhfton^  1.  ^.,  the  Ineffable  (Name,  not  to  be  spoken,)  and  it  is  written  with
these  letters  TWTV  Yod^  Heh^  Vav,  Heh^  as  lo  which  indeed  those  not  learned
upon  this  (subject)  on  account  of  the  similitude  of  the  elements  (letters),  are  accus-
tomed when  they  find  ihem  in  Greek  books,  to  read  (as  if  Greek  letters  and  pro-
nounce them)  PIPI.  loth.  That  which  above  is  called  "117  Shaddai  (Almighty)  and  is
not  interpreted  in  Ezekiel.  But  we  ought  to  know  that  Elohim\%  of  the  common  number,
(t.^.y  singular  and  plural)  and  that  one  God  may  be  thus  called,  and  many;  by  a  similar
way  *  heaven '  is  also  designated,  and  also  *  the  heavens,*  i.  e.,  D^D17  Shc^mayeem.
From  whence  and  often  interpreters  vary,  for  an  example  of  which,  we  have  in  our
language  Athenas,  Thcbas,  and  Salonica."  Epistol.  Hieronymoust  cxxxvi,  ad  Mar-
cellam.  Opera  omnia^  gtc.y  Paris^  ^S4^-  Tom,  tit,  p.  ji.  A,  and  B,  Benedictine
Edition,  xxv,  Tom.  1,  /.  iji.  Comp.  Hist,  of  the  Jews,  by  Basnage,  trans,  by  Taylor
London,  1708,  p.  198  and  diagram.  Kircher's  CEdipus  JEgyptiacus^  Tom.  ii^  P»  213
iq.  Jerome  in  several  of  his  writings  speaks  of  certain  Hebrew  traditions  upon  Genesis,
which  make  Paradise  or,  as  the  Jews  call  it,  Eden,  more  ancient  than  the  world.
Compare  the  little  work  Quastiones  sive  traditiones  kebralca,  in  Getiesim,  Ekiition
of  Paris,  Tom.  ut\  p.  65",  A.  B.  C,  etc.  That  in  parenihesis  is  not  in  the  original,  but
inserted  by  me  for  the  more  correct  understanding  of  St.  Jerome.

*  See  his,  Indisc/ie  Alterthumskunde.     Leipzig.     1858.     Vol.  iii,  pp.  353-441.

\  La  Kabbale,  p.  353  sq.


171

It  is  extremely  probable  that  many  reminiscences  of  them  are  in  Thibet,
in  the  possession  of  the  Buddhists.

Among  the  Medieval  Christian  scholars  who  have  agreed  with  the
Hebrew  Qabbalists,  that  their  doctrines  came  from  the  Patriarchs,  and
especially  from  Moses,  are,  Raymond  Lully,  Archangelus  Burgonovensis,
the  Prince  Giovanna  Pico  della  Mirandola,  William  of  Postel,  John
Reuchlin,  John  Stephen  Rittangel,  Paul  Ricci,  Julius  Conrad  Otto,
Henry  Cornelius  Agrippa  von  Nettesheim,  Rev.  John  Francis  Buddaeus,
Dr.  Henry  More,  Rev.  John  Lightfoot,  the  learned  Jesuit,  Athanasius
Kircher,  Claudius  Duretus,  Christian  Knorr,  the  Baron  von  Rosenroth,
Franz  Mercurius  van  Helmont,  Peter  Galatinus,  Johann  Rhenferdius,
Augustus  Pfeiffer,  etc.,  etc.  It  largely  influenced  the  Medieval  Mystics,
especially  Paracelsus,  Jacob  Bohmen,  Henry  Kuhnrath,  Oswald  Crollius,
Dr.  Robert  Fludd  and  the  Rosicrucian  Society,  also  the  two  Van  Helmonts,
Henry  Cornelius  Agrippa,  the  Abbot  Johannes  Tritheim,  Valentine  Wei-
gel,  Dr.  Jerome  Cardan,  and  Franc  Giorgio  Zorzi  (Franciscus  Georgius,
sumamed  Venetus) ;  and  it  has  also  influenced.  Cardinal  Nicolas  Cusanus
(Cusani),  Cardinal  -^gidius  of  Viterbo,  Pope  Sixtus  IV,  Marsilius  Fici-
nus,  Theophilus  Gale,  Ralph  Cud  worth.  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  Baron  Leib-
nitz and  Barukh  (Benedict)  Spinosa ,  later,  Schopenhauer,  Hegel,  Shel-
ling and  other  German  philosophers.  Sir  Francis  Bacon  studied  the
writings  of  Dr.  Fludd  the  Qabbalist,  and  Sir  Isaac  Newton  those  of  Jacob
Bohmen ;  and  the  great  Leibnitz  became  much  interested  in  its  study,
through  Baron  von  Rosenroth.  Upon  the  Practical  Qabbalah,  Abbe  de
Villars  (nephew  of  De  Montfaucon)  in  1670,  published  his  celebrated
satirical  novel,  The  Count  de  Gabalis,  upon  which  Pope  based  his  Rape
of  the  Lock.*  Qabbalism  runs  through  the  Medieval  poem,  the  Ro-
mance of  the  Rose,  and  permeates  the  writings  of  Dante.

Among  those  who  ascribe  it  to  the  Egyptian  metaphysics  and  philosophy,
are,  Jacques  Basnage  de  Beauval,  who  has  written  upon  it,  in  his  History
of  the  Jews,  chiefly  basing  his  assertions  on  the  learned,  but  frequently
erroneous,  writings  as  to  the  Qabbalah,  of  the  erudite  Jesuit,  the  Rev.
Athanasius  Kircher  in  his,  (Edipi  jEgyptiaci,  Tom.  Secund,  Romce,  1653.

Of  those  who  say  it  came  from  Chaldean  sources,  from  which  they

♦  The  Count  de  Gabalis,  in  English,  was  reprinted  in  England  in  1886,  at  Bath.


172

claimed  Plato  and  Pythagoras  obtained  their  systems,  are  Richard  Simon
and  Paul  Berger.  Among  those  who  claim  it  came  from  Gentile  philosophy,
are  John  George  Wachter,  Joachim  Lange,  and  the  Rev.  John  Christo-
pher Wolff,  who  also  claims  a  great  antiquity  for  it.  The  Rev.  Jean
Morin,  as  we  have  before  shown,  and  Lewis  Cappellus  opposed  it,  especi-
ally the  antiquity  and  doctrines  of  the  Zohar.  The  learned  German  his-
torian of  philosophy,  Johann  Jakob  Brucker,  has  written  much  to  prove
that  it  was  brought  from  Egypt  to  Palestine,  by  R.  Simeon  ben  Shetach,
about  100  years  before  the  Christian  era,  but  really  appears  to  know  very
little  about  it.*

John  Frederick  Kleuker,  in  his  prize  essay  on  the  Qabbalistic  philosophy, .
says  it  is  akin  to  the  Secret  Teaching  of  Orpheus  and  Thales,  and  cer-
tainly came  from  Pythagoras.  He  also,  with  Reuchlin,  thought  that  the
Secret  Science  was  derived  from  the  Patriarchs,  and  much  cultivated  in
ancient  times  in  Chaldea,  in  which  latter  idea  he  is  probably  correct.
Osiander  agrees  with  Kleuker;  C.  G.  Bretschneider,  Adolphe  Franck,*  and
some  others,  think  it  is  to  be  fotind  in  the  ancient  doctrines  of  the  Per-
sians, and  Jacques  Matter,  seems  to  agree  with  them.  Wilhelm  G.  Tenne-
mann,  the  German  historian  of  philosophy,  sides  with  Brucker.  Steiger
confesses  in  his  works  its  great  importance,  but  does  not  investigate
it.  Roth,  in  his  writing  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  says  he  will  write
a  special  treatise  upon  it,  but  has  not  done  so.  Augustus  Tholuck  favors
the  ideas  of  Jean  Morin.  Among  the  modern  Jews,  Munk,  Jost,  Stem,
Leopold  Low,  David  Luriah,  Dr.  Schiller-Szinessy,  and  Konitz,  among
many  others,  favor  its  antiquity.  Dr.  Hirsch  Graetz,  Dr.  Leopold  Zunz,
Dr.  Michael  Sachs,  Dr.  Abraham  Geiger,  we  think  as  Talmudists  and  for
sectarian  reasons,  oppose  it.  The  great  German  Hebrew  bibliographer,
Dr.  Moritz  Steinschneider,  says,  its  history  has  not  yet  been  written  by
any  one.  Dr.  Adolph  Jellinek  started  out  in  opposition,  but  a  thorough
examination  of  his  quotations^  tends  to  show  its  antiquity.  Dr.  Jellinek
deserves  much  praise  for  his  labour  upon  the  subject.  Elia  Bena-
mozegh  of  Livorno  [Leghorn],  Italy,  whom  we  have  previously  men-

♦  Franck  in  his  La  Kabbale^  shows  a  similajily  to  the  Qabbalistic  philosophy  in  the
writings  of  Philo.  The  latter  certainly  has  in  his  writings  much  of  the  Qabbalistic
philosophy,  and  in  many  places  is  in  accord  with  the  Zohoric  writings.


173

tioned,  one  of  the  greatest  Qabbalists  now  living,  also  a  learned  Talmud-
ist,  favors  its  antiquity.  The  above  are  only  a  very  few  of  those  who
have  given  the  subject  attention.

The  subject  has  much  importance  both  from  its  content,  and  in  the  his-
tory of  human  thought ;  in  the  words  of  a  learned  writer  on  the  Hebrew
Qabbalah,  "A  doctrine,  which  has  more  than  one  point  of  resemblance
to  the  doctrines  of  Plato  arid  Spinoza;  which,  by  its  form,  elevates  itself
sometimes,  as  far  as  the  majestic  tone  of  religious  poetry ;  which  has  taken
birth  upon  the  same  land  *  *  as  Christianity  ;  which,  during  a  period
of  more  than  a  dozen  centuries,  without  other  proof  than  the  hypothesis
of  an  antique  tradition,  without  other  apparent  motive  than  the  desire,  to
penetrate  more  intimately  into  the  meaning  of  the  Holy  Books,  has  been
developed  and  propagated  in  the  shadow  of  a  most  profound  mystery,***
certainly  has  some  claims  upon  our  attention.

In  the  words  of  the  distinguished  German  philosopher,  Frederich  Wil-
helm  Joseph  von  Schelling,t  the  Qabbalah  ''contains  ruins  and  frag-
ments, if  you  will  much  distorted,  but  nevertheless  remnants,  of  that
primitive  system  which  is  the  key  to  all  religious  systems,  and  those  do  not
speak  falsely,  who  say :  that  the  Kabbala  is  the  transmission  of  a  dcSbtrine
which  existed  alongside,  but  outside,  of  the  original  (Holy)  Writings,  and
which  was  revealed,  and  therefore  was  also  revealing,  as  a  more  compre-
hensive, but  secret  and  not  universally  communicated,  system.  Very
gratifying  to  the  scholar,  must  be  the  announcement  just  made  (1815)  in
Vienna,  of  a  Jewish-Rabbinical  work  that  is  to  appear,  which  promises  to
collect  the  didactic  opinions  of  Ben  Yo'haT,  the  author  of  the  Zohar,  a
work  as  important  as  it  is  famed,  from  the  original  sources.  Would  that
a  Jewish,  or  some  other  scholar,  find  enough  support,  to  be  able  to  edite
the  whole  Zohar  and  open  up  other  sources !  It  is  almost  sad  to  see
how  scholars  have  turned  wholly  in  their  essays  from  the  real  sources.  In
Egypt's  very  dark  and  insoluble  hieroglyphics,  the  keys  to  the  archaic
religions  have  been  sought,  now  nothing  is  spoken  of  save  India's  lan-
guage and  wisdom,  but  the  Hebrew  language  and  writings,  especially
those  of  the  Old  Testament,  in  which  the  roots  of  the  doctrines  and  even

♦  Preface  by  Prof.  Franck  in  La  KabbaU,     Paris,  1843.

f  beher  die  GoUheiten  von  Samothrace^  etc.     Stuttgart  und  TUbingen,  1 81 5,  p.  108.


174

of  the  languages,  of  all  the  ancient  religious  systems,  even  to  details,  are
clearly  recognizable,  lie  uninvestigated.  Very  much  is  it  to  be  wished
that  these  most  reverend  of  monuments,  should  soon  pass  from  the  hands
of  the  mere  Theologians  into  those  of  the  purely  historical  investigator,
when  we  may  dare  hope,  that  they  will  obtain  the  same  unstinted  rev-
erence, and  also  be  considered  as  sources  of  at  least  as  much  importance,
as  the  Homeric  poems  and  the  accounts  by  Herodotus.  * '

With  the  appearance  of  Jesus,  the  Jewish  thought-world  became  di-
vided. The  Secret  Doctrines  were  mostly  under  the  guidance  of  a  spirit-
ual faith  of  a  high  intellectual  order ;  the  Pharisees,  had  made  the  Jewish
religious  life,  one  of  form  and  ritual,  and  had  destroyed  most  of  the  in-
ward spiritual  life  of  the  Hebrew  religion.  Many  of  the  higher  spiritual
teachings  of  the  Secret  Doctrine  were  at  this  time,  absorbed  into  the
formulations  which  resulted  in  the  firm  establishment  of  Christianity.  In
the  words  of  an  erudite  scholar  of  the  Anglican  Church  :

**  The  germ  indeed  of  the  Cabbalistic  doctrine  regarding  Shechinah,
and  so  forth  (/'.  ^.,  Metatron),  may  probably  have  existed  in  the  time  of
St.  Paul  and  St.  John,  and  the  inspired  writers  may  have  been  aided  by
these  forms  of  thought^  in  setting  forth  the  Christian  Revelation^  just  as
St.  John  was  by  the  Jewish-Alexandrian  doctrine  of  the  Logos."*  Which
latter  is  also  found  in  the  Qabbalah,  and  Philo  is  one  of  the  early  expo-
nents of  both.

The  connection  and  relation  of  the  invisible  to  the  visible,  must  in  the
most  archaic  times,  have  attracted  the  attention  of  human  beings.  To
the  advanced  thinkers,  it  must  have  appeared  that  in  the  treatment  of
the  Primal  Cause,  two  things  must  be  considered,  the  Primal  Cause  per
se,  and  the  relation  and  connection  of  the  Primal  Cause,  with  the  visible
and  unseen  universe.  Both  are  still  to  us,  as  creatures  sure  to  die,  of
more  profound  importance  than  anything  else,  and  both  are  to  our  in-
tellectual comprehension  in  this  matter-body,  of  the  most  intricate  and
difficult  nature.  The  Arabian  peripateticians,  in  order  to  give  an  explan-
ation of  this  most  abstruse  subject,  were  obliged  to  step  into  the  mazes
of  the   Chaldean,    Persian,   Hindu,  and  the  generally  called,   Oriental

♦The  Jewish  and  the  Christian  Messiah,  etc.,  by  Vincent   Henry  Stanton.     Edin-
burgh, 1886,  p.  130.


175

philosophy.  The  Hebrews,  at  an  early  day  did  the  same,  and  most  proba-
bly designated  the  Primal  Cause,  at  first  by  the  triadic  nisr  Shaddai,  the
Almighty,  subsequently  by  the  Tetragrammaton,  nin'  YHVH,  symbol  of
the  Past,  Present  and  Future,  and  also  the  equivalent  for  the  really  high-
est name  of  the  Deity  riTiK  Eh*yeh,  i.e.,  I  Am.  Against  the  unnecessary
pronunciation  of  mn^  the  Third  Commandment  was  made,  and  an  Israelite
always  uses  '3T«  A  Do  Na  Y,  (Adonai)  Lord,  in  place  of  it,  hence  the
rendering  "Lord  "  in  the  English  version,  whilst  the  lowest  designation,
or  the  Deity  in  Nature,  the  more  general  term  Elohim,  is  translated,
God.  In  the  Qabbalah  the  Name  mrr  YHVH,  expresses  a  He  and  a
She,  two  persons  in  one  Deity,  /.  <?.,  the  Unity  of  the  Holy  One,  blessed
be  Hfl,  /.  ^.,  He,  and  His  She*keen-ah.  See  also  the  Jewish  Liturgy,  for
Pentecost,  also  the  daily  **  In  the  Name  of  Unity,  of  the  Holy  and  Blessed
Hfl  and  His  She*keen-ah,  the  Hidden  and  Concealed  Hft,  blessed  be
YHVH  forever.*'  HCt  is  said  to  be  masculine  and  YaH  feminine,  together
they  make  the  TtlK  mn'  /.  ^.,  One  YHVH.  One  but  of  a  male-female
nature.  The  She'keen-ah  is  always  considered  in  the  Qabbalah  as  femi-
nine.

In  what  men  now  term  the  ancient,  but  which  in  reality  was  the
younger  world,  man  stood  in  a  far  simpler  position  and  one  more  conso-
nant to  nature,  than  he  does  at  present  in  civilized  life.  Then  the  natural
accord  and  affinity  of  the  written  to  the  oral,  of  theory  to  practice,  was
more  correctly  observed.  Then  the  intent  of  the  written  or  symbolical
compilation  was,  to  present  to  the  mind  of  the  reader  only  the  most  fun-
damental points  of  the  object  in  hints.  Sentences  were  simple,  terse  and
didactic.  Some  of  the  early  languages  as  written,  commencing  in  ideo-
grams, never  went  beyond  the  syllabic;  e.  g,,  the  Akkadian,  Assyrian,
Babylonian,  Egyptian,  Chinese.  Others  advanced  to  the  consonantal
but  never  have  reached  the  vowel  or  true  alphabet.  These  were  the  Phoe-
nician, Hebrew,  Syriac  and  Arabic.  No  Semitic  tongue  has  been  written
with  alphabetic  vowels.  The  Aryan  race  have  always  introduced  vowels
into  their  written  language  and  are  a  true  alphabetic  race.  The  early
writing  comprised  more  especially  the  essence,  and  fundamental  indicia
of  knowledge,  and  its  symbols  were  incomprehensible  to  the  uninitiated.
Tradition  preceded  the  use  of  symbolic  writing,  and  was  after  its  introduc-


176

•

tion  necessary  to  explain  it.  And  tradition,  both  before  and  after  the  intro-
duction of  ideograms  and  other  symbols,  e,  g,^  letters  of  the  alphabet,  was
made  part  of  all  subsequent  writing.  Written  tradition  gives  us  a  lasting
efflux  and  influx  within  comprehended  time,  and  presents  to  the  eye,  in  fixed,
understood  symbols,  the  imperishable  tints  of  the  transiently  passing  and
everflowing  word  and  language,  as  a  constant,  fixed  presence ;  it  is  there*
fore  the  most  certain  means  for  preserving  in  a  permanent  form,  the  ever
tending  to  be  lost,  oral  tradition,  through  a  more  fixed  symbolism  than  the
sound  of  the  spoken  word,  by  also  giving  the  sense  of  the  eye,  an  oppor-
tunity to  fix  the  hieroglyphic  symbol,  in  the  sensorium  of  the  human
brain.  Yet  even  the  written  compilation  is,  like  everything  in  the  matter-
world,  constantly  changing  in  its  spiritual  content,  in  its  inner  and  spir-
itual shades  of  meaning,  and  even  in  its  method  of  spelling,  etc.,  with
the  progress  of  human  thought.  It  is  at  its  best  but  a  deduced  picture,
made  by  the  writer  of  a  reality,  as  human  life  gives  it  to  him  in  his  mind,
and  it  is  wholly  deficient  in  all  absolute  concrete  precision  and  individual
specification.  Human  thought,  therefore,  when  written,  even  in  its  most
perfect  form,  is  always  to  a  great  extent  ambiguous,  and  subject  to  every
species  of  explanation,  misrepresentation  and  change,  from  the  original
spiritual  meaning  and  intent  of  the  writer  and  his  time,  and  besides,  is  seen
in  the  mirror  of  different  receptive  minds,  under  different  meanings,  appre-
hensions and  reflections.  It  is  therefore  an  absolute  necessity  of  writing
and  of  human  life  and  intelligence,  that  a  vitalizing  oral  or  spoken  word,
be  the  constant  companion  and  interpreter  of  the  otherwise  dead  written
symbols,  the  original  meanings  of  which,  are  ever  subject  to  be  changed
by  the  slightest  inflections  and  emphasis  of  the  human  voice  and  by  pro-
gressive thought.  The  written  symbol  itself,  is  absolutely  dead,  and  without
such  a  constant  living  oral  tradition,  to  infuse  into  it,  energy,  vitality  and
life,  and  give  it  concrete  value,  would  not  be  of  any  use  to  mankind.
This  energetic  vitality  exists  not  only  in  the  pronunciation  but  also  in  the
emphasis,  intonation,  inflection,  etc.,  which  thought  naturally  takes  in
our  minds  even  when  mentally  reading  to  ourselves.  In  the  archaic  pe-
riods of  the  world's  history,  knowledge  was  more  attached  to  practical  life,
and  abstract  theoretical  knowledge  did  not  exist,  then  it  was  the  ability
to  do,  and  that  educated  the  whole  character  and  individuality  of  the


177

•

man.  Teacher  and  pupil,  stood  more  in  the  relation  of  father  and  son,
and  master  and  servant,  as  is  the  case  in  India  to-day  between  the  Guru
or  Brahminical  master  and  his  scholar.  The  pupil  remained  long  in  his
position  of  pupil,  and  was  obliged  to  tame  the  natural,  uncultivated  ani-
mal man,  before  he  could  be  advanced  to  and  before  he  could  mentally
grasp,  the  true  sublime  earnestness  for  intellectual  contemplation,  the
pure  inner  love  for  study  for  its  own  sake,  the  thorough  impregnation  of
the  whole  spirit  of  the  disciple  with  the  genius  of  the  subject,  without
which  permanent  success,  intellectual  or  otherwise,  is  not  ever  possible
or  assured.  The  earnest  apprentice,  became  gradually  assistant,  and
finally  master,  and  only  then  had  the  right  to  instruct  others.  If
of  sound  discretion,  good  judgment,  and  intellectually  receptive,  as  a
reward,  the  disciple  was  at  last  made  an  initiate,  one  of  the  innermost,
a  companion  or  mysta^  and  then  was  taught  something  of  the  esoteric
as  well  as  the  exoteric  teachings  and  traditions  of  his  predecessors,
and  continued  them  to  those  who  followed  him  who  were  deemed
worthy.  Thus  the  orally  traditional  in  religion,  philosophy,  science  and
art,  the  real,  inner,  intelligible  to  the  intellect,  spirituality  of  the  whole ;
was  taught  and  faithfully  handed  down  and  preserved,  among  the  initi-
ates and  intellectual  workers ;  and  to  all  the  ignorant  and  uncultivated,
that  higher  spirituality  remained  inaccessible  and  closed.  Each  religion,
philosophy,  science,  art,  had  its  disciplina  arcana^  which  in  fact  largely
exists  to-day,  in  the  technical  methods  and  language  of  the  religious,
scientific  and  art  worlds.*  This  was  the  real  meaning  of  mystery :  the  mys-
tery, the  inner  spirit,  was  not  an  unrevealed  knowledge ;  it  was  revealed,
but  only  unto  the  man,  who  showed  sufficient  intellect  and  discretion  to  enti-

*  The  learned  of  the  ancients,  especially  the  Orientals,  concealed  their  philosophy
and  religious  metaphysics,  to  an  extreme  scarcely  comprehended  by  the  learned  of  our
day.  A  similar  method  of  secrecy  has  been  used  by  some  scientists  to  a  very  late  pe-
riod, e,  g.f  Leibnitz  published  in  the  Acta  Eruditorum  of  Leipzig,  his  scheme  of  Differ-
ential Calculus,  in  such  a  way  as  to  hide  both  the  method  and  object  from  the  unin-
itiated, but  was  subsequently  detected  by  the  great  mathematicians  James  and  John  Ber-
nouilli ;  Newton  hid  his  invention  of  Infinite  Series,  by  a  transposition  of  the  letters
which  make  up  the  two  fundamental  propositions  into  an  alphabetical  order.  Algebra,  as
far  as  it  was  understood  by  the  Arabian  school,  extending  to  quadratic  equations,  was
known  to  and  hidden  by  some  Italians  for  300  years  as  a  secret.

12


178

tie  him  to  it,  and  who  consecrated  himself  to  it,  with  his  whole  soul,  heart,
and  undivided  love.  The  more  intelligent  men  of  antiquity  drew  a  veil
of  secresy  over  its  more  profound  metaphysical  ideas,  granting  access  only
to  those  found  worthy  and  capable  of  appreciating  and  comprehending,
the  boon  granted  them  by  such  consecration  and  initiation.  This  is  fully
exemplified  in  the  remarks  of  Jesus  :  *'  Give  not  that  which  is  holy  unto
the  dogs,  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine,  lest  haply  they  trample
them  under  their  feet,  and  turn  and  rend  you"  (Matt,  vii,  6).  Jesus
spoke  to  the  people  (the  uninitiated)  in  parables,  which  he  explained  in
private  to  his  disciples  (Comp.  Matt.  xiii).  For  this  cause,  and  the  inter-
ruptions from  wars,  revolutions,  and  persecutions,  most  of  the  ancient
thought  has  perished.  In  our  time,  reflection  threatens  to  absorb  amongst  the
learned,  the  actual  life  and  vitality  of  intellection,  and  to  lead  everything
back  to  a  dead,  dry,  abstract  knowledge  of  idea  only,  and  believes  it  can
educate  man  by  theory  alone.  The  practical  is  merged  in  the  theoreti-
cal, the  connection  between  the  writing  and  the  oral  word  has  been  de-
ranged, and  but  little  is  left  to  the  vitality  of  oral  repetition  and  instruc-
tion. In  ancient  times  the  written  word  was  only  the  symbol,  the  oral
practical  instruction,  transmitted  by  word  of  mouth  through  the  master
to  his  pupil,  was  the  true  secret  treasure.  If  human  intellectual  culture  as
an  entirety  rested  more  upon  oral  tradition,  we  would  find,  that  that
which  is  of  the  highest  and  greatest  import  to  mankind,  namely:
religion,  beside  the  plain  symbolism  of  the  written  letter,  has  and  must
have,  to  be  of  any  value,  a  living,  vitalizing  oral  teaching,  which  is  ex-
planatory and  makes  it  a  living  thing;  and  must  have  an  esoteric
higher  disclosure,  of  which  the  written  word,  is  only  the  bark  or  rind.
The  sacred  oral  primitive  teaching,  oral  long  before  it  was  placed  in  sym-
bolic writing,  has  left  its  traces  among  all  the  races  of  the  Orient.  It  has
come  more  especially  to  us,  through  the  Oriental  books,  which  we  have
adopted  as  our  religious  mentors,  termed  by  us  the  Old  and  New  Testa-
ments. The  first,  the  Sacred  Writings  of  the  Hebrews ;  the  second,  writ-
ten by  Jews,  but  based  on  a  fusion  of  Israelitish  and  Hellenic  thought.  It
is  therefore  of  the  greatest  importance  for  those  interested  in  Christianity,
which  was  largely  formulated  and  kept  alive  by  the  writings  of  St.  Paul,  those
by  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  those  usually  attributed  to


179

St.  John,  and  some  of  those  by  St.  Peter ;  to  investigate  the  Secret  Doc-
trine of  the  Hebrews,  termed  at  first  Sod  or  Mystery,  subsequently  Secret
Learning,  and  afterwards  the  Qabbalah,  especially  the  speculative  branch,
as  in  it  will  be  found,  that  an  intimate  connection  exists  between  the
New  Testament  ideas  and  the  Israelitish  secret  philosophy.     The  system
of  the  Speculative   Qabbalah,    appears  to   Occidental   thought,   which
has  been  largely  formulated  and  built  up,  on  Greek  philosophical  modes
and  methods  of  thinking,  and  is  unused  to  the  Oriental  systems ;  which
are  frequently  based  on  parables,   allegories  and   other  figurative  lan-
guage; and  which  is  also  written,  in  a  veiled  form  and  given  in  hints,
to  preserve  it  from  the  uninitiates ;  frequently  bizarre,  strange,  perhaps
at  times,  absurd.     It  is  therefore  quite  difficult  to  reach  the  Aristotelian
formulations,  and  those  in  accord  with  Western  methods  of  expression,
in   setting  forth   the  Oriental  Secret   Philosophy.     It  also  requires  an
unbiased  mind  in  the  student,  which  can  proceed  without  bigotry  and
with  discrimination,  delicacy,  and  especially  impartiality,  both  analytically
and  synthetically,  and  see  similarities,  make  comparisons,  and  give  a  per-
fectly fair  opinion  as  to  the  merit  or  demerit,  of  the  content  of  the  Orien-
tal secret  traditions :    which  are  not  only  of  great  abstriiseness,  but  have
been  most  frequently  misrepresented,  misunderstood,  or  misjudged,  by
even  their  most  ardent  votaries.     We  claim,  that  a  thorough  study  of  the
Hebrew  Speculative  Qabbalah  in  its  connection  with  the  Oriental  books
of  our  own  religions,  and  the  systems  of  other  Oriental  peoples;  will  give
it  a  much  more  elevated  position,  show  that  a  much  greater  value  is  in  it
and  a  much  greater  antiquity,   than  has  been   heretofore  accorded  it,
and  consider  all  investigations  made  by  unprejudiced,  acute,  and  un-
biased minds,  of  a  sound  logical  tendency ;  as  a  great  advance  towards
a  more  thorough  and  correct  knowledge   of  the  origin  and  germs  of
many   ideas  now  existing   in  religion  and  philosophy.     To   deny  this
fact,    without  a   more   thorough   and    unprejudiced    examination    than
the   Qabbalah  has  heretofore   received,  would  be  to  display  an  igno-
rance of  the   past  intellectual   nature  and   progress  of  mankind,  and
of  ideas,  upon  which,  we  have  based  some  of  the  most  advanced  knowl-
edge in  modern  thought  and  religion ;  and  indeed  of  the  whole  history  of
the  antique  intellectual  world  and  its  subsequent  development.     The  ele-


i8o

ments  of  this  Secret  Tradition  in  religion  and  philosophy,  are  only  to  be
found  in  a  fragmentary  form,  in  all  the  writings,  which  we  now  have  of
the  ancient  Eastern  thought- world.    The  Qabbalah  asserts,  that  intellect-
ual culture,  as  the  educational  institution  of  the  fallen  protoplasts,  began
with  a  Divine  Revelation,  and  consists  of  a  continued  from  this,  series
of  traditions.     These  have  been,  through  the  influence  of  the  Kingdom
of  Obscuration  and  Evil,  acting  on  the  Free  Will  of  mankind,  more  or  less
shattered  and  disfigured.     The  traditions  passing  through  the  prior  gen-
erations,  have  been  the  educators  of  the  succeeding,  and  largely  depend-
ent on  the  organic  development  etc.  of  the  preceding,  the  subsequent
have  advanced  or  retarded,  the  transmitted  results  of  the  past ;  the  total-
ity being,  great  thought  waves  passing  through  the  spirituality   of  all   •
humanity  from  its  beginning.     From  time   to  time,  the  great  love  and
mercy  of  God  has  exerted  a  more  immediate  influence,  upon  this  great
energetic  vitalized  organic  process,  this  great  stream  of  life  coming  down
from  the  first  living  beings ;  giving   it  a  new  and  fresh  advancement,  a
new  flight,  through  a  new  revelation,  by  which,  the  totality  of  the  inspired
knowledge  upon  our  earth  has  been  increased  and  extended.     More  fre-
quently individual  minds,   influenced   from  the  Above,  announce   and
make  plain,  the  till  then  only  obscurely  recognized  truths,  or  invent
some  useful  and  beneficent  contrivance,  whereby  humanity  is  advanced,
benefitted  and  its  general  condition  ameliorated ;  on  the  other  side,  for
the  fulfillment  of  the  unknown,  but  wise,  purposes  of  God,  the  opposi-
tion, the  spirits  of  Darkness  and  Evil,  are  permitted  to  try  and  to  retard,
the  liberty  of  advance  in  the  stream  of  humanity,  to  attempt  the  destruc-
tion of  the  Divine  Tradition,    disfigure  the  Truth,  shatter  Goodness,
Peace  and  Harmony,  and  have  a  scope  given  them  to  exercise  deception
and  evil,  and  to  destroy  or  retard  the  beneficial  inventions,  arts  and
sciences,  useful  and  salutary  to  mankind,  and  so  keep  back  progress  and
advancement.

Man,  although  considered  by  it  to  be  of  divine  origin,  is  not  looked  upon
by  the  Qabbalah,  as  an  absolutely  independent  being,  who  from  his  own  ab-
solute innate  volition  and  autonomy  of  being  and  intellect,  can  indepen-
dently originate  by  and  through  himself.  All  his  knowledge,  it  holds,  he
receives  only  by  the  permission  and  through  the  efilux  from  the  spiritual.


i8i

outside  of  himself.     Unconditioned,  objective,  within  produced,  and  au-
tonomatic  existence  and  knowledge ;  exist  solely  in  the  Supreme  Deity,
who  is  the  only  Real,  True  and  Absolute,  and  the  originator,  and  preserver
of  All  Things ;  who  through  the  Absolute  Idea  or  Perfect  Paradigmatic
Form,  produces  the  same,  and  who  is  immanent  in,  yet  transcendental  to,
All  the  created  Things,  spiritual  or  material.  The  entire  universe  is  not  the
Place  or  Abode  of  the  Supreme  Deity,  nor  Its  Glory  or  Content.     The
Qabbalah  looks  upon  mankind  as  one  great  totality  of  human  existence,
whose  beginning  was  the  celestial  androgenic  protoplast  called  the  Heav-
enly Adam.     Humanity  is  considered  by  it,  as  one  great  universal  broth-
erhood, as  a  great  spiritual  energetic  vitality,  called  the  Mikrokosm,  and
in   this  slumbers  the  idea  of  the  higher  Makrokosm,  the  Heavenly  or
Celestial  Man  or  Adam,  the  Primordial  Perfect  Paradigm,  or  Adam  Qad-
raon,  the  Perfect  Model  of  all  Form  and  of  the  first  terrestrial  Adam,
who  was  as  to  it,  the  Mikrokosm.     In  this  Great  Paradigm  the  Qabbalah
asserts,  are  all  the  forms,  the  perfect  ideals  of  the  emanated  or  created
existences,  it  might  therefore  be  termed  the  Idealized  Form,  or,  the
Form  which  contains  all  the  perfect  ideas  in  their  origination.     Yet  the
Makrokosm  no  more  than  the  Mikrokosm,  could  have  come  into  exist-
ence, nor  its  existence  be  preserved,  without  having  been  made  by  and
receiving  without  cessation,  the  continued  efflux  of  the  Eternal  Absolute,
the  Unknown  Ain  Soph  or  Endless,  the  Ayin  or  No-Thing.     It  holds
that  the  bond  and  limit  of  a  necessary  material  symbolism,  developed  in
letters,  numbers  and  proportions,  binds  and  keeps  man's  thoughts,  within
the  limits  of  the  matter-world  expression  of  them,  and  prevents  his  ever
absolutely  raising,  whilst  in  that  matter-world,  the  veil,  or  obtaining  a  per-
fect knowledge  of  the  created   spiritual   world.     This  is  set   forth  in
Oriental  Metaphor,  with  great  precision  in  Exodus  (xxxiii,  12-23).     ^^^
in  his  matter-form  cannot  elevate  himself  to  a  full  comprehension  of  the
Eternal  Absolute  and  see  the  Supreme  Deity,  face  to  face.   To  man  in  this
world  the  back  of  the  Deity,  the  visible  universe  is  shown.     The  Deity  is
always  enshrouded  in  Its  Glory,  Its  She'keen-ah,  and  man  cannot  penetrate
unaided,  the  obscurity  and  thick  darkness  in  which  God  dwells  (Ex.  xix,
9;  II  Sam.  xxii,  10-12;  IKingsviii,  12;  II  Chr.  vi,  i ;  Ps.  xviii,  14),  nor  find
the  true  method  of  reconciliation  with  God  and  re-attain  his  lost  felicity,


l82

through  his  own  unaided  efforts  and  powers.  Man  has  not  a  perfect
autonomy ;  and  the  oppositions  in  his  spiritual  nature  are  too  strongly
opposed,  to  permit  the  balance  or  harmony  between  them,  to  become
evident  to  his  senses  without  Divine  assistance.  A  Divine  Mediator
therefore  becomes,  according  to  the  Qabbalah,  a  necessity;  a  some-
thing must  exist  which  shall  continually  draw  man  from  his  animal  nature
toward  his  spiritual,  and  enable  him  to  comprehend  within  himself,  an
intellectual  and  spiritual  consciousness  of  himself,  without  which,  he
would  not  be  able  to  raise  his  ideas  above  the  mere  animal  or  matter-
world  existence  in  which  he  lives,  and  would  be  like  an  ordinary  animal
(Ec.  iii,  18-22).

This  Divine  Mediator  is  symbolized  in  the  Qabbalah  by  the  Sephirah
'Hokhmah,  Wisdom,  the  Son  of  Abbah,  the  Father,  who  is  symbolized  by
the  Sephirah,  Kether,  Absolute  Idea,  the  Crown  of  all.  'Hokhmah  is  the
Word,  Memrah,  or  Logos,  the  third  hypostasis  of  the  Triad,  yet  the  Qab-
balah considers  it,  in  a  mysterious  way,  in  the  Sephirah  Binah,  the  Holy
Spirit  or  Immah,  the  Mother ;  and  in  Kether,  the  Father,  and  they  in  it.
The  Triad  is  One.  This  is  also  expressed  in  the  Qabbalah  in  another
way  ;  Kether,  the  Crown  or  Father,  the  harmony  of  the  first  three  Sephi-
roth  j  Tiphereth,  Beauty,  the  harmony  of  the  second  three ;  and  Malk-
huth,  the  harmony  of  the  remainder  and  indeed  of  all  the  Sephirothic
decade,  are  considered,  as  forming  a  triad  which  represents  the  whole
decade,  and  in  this  triad  is  the  full  content  of  all  the  Sephiroth  and  the
Heavenly  Adam.  Sometimes  the  Qabbalah  expresses  this,  in  the  idea  of
Ayin,  No-Thing,  the  A'reekh  An'peen,  /.  ^.,  the  Long  in  Visage  or
Countenance,  and  the  Ze*ir  An'peen,  /.  ^.,  the  Short  in  Countenance,
the  latter  two  also  respectively  termed,  the  Makroprosopos  and  the
Mikroprosopos.  The  reader  will  observe  on  the  II  Diagram,  the  Holy  Name
of  Kether  is,  AiH'YeH  (Eh'yeh),  i.e.,  I  Am;  of  Binah,  YaH;  of 'Hokh-
mah,  the  Tetragrammaton  YHVH,  called  Adonai,  i.e.,  the  Lord.  In  the
Zohar,  where  the  question  is  the  meaning  of  the  verse :  *'  Let  us  make  Man
in  our  image,  after  our  likeness  (similitude).*'  Gen.  i,  26,  it  says :  **  There
are  two  persons  of  the  Deity,  one  in  heaven,  and  one  which  descended
upon  earth  in  the  form  of  Man  (/.  e.y  the  Adam  Qadmon),  and  the  Holy
One,  praised  be  It !  unites  them.     There  are  three  Lights  in  the  Upper


i83

Holy  Divine  united  in  One,  and  this  is  the  foundation  of  the  doctrine  of
Every -Thing,  this  is  the  beginning  of  the  Faith,  and  Every-Thing  is  con-
centrated therein."  (Zohar  iii,  Beginning  of  §  She^ meneeh^  fol.  36^).
In  another  place  the  Zohar  says :   '*  Two  persons  are  in  the  Divinity,  and
a  third,  emanating  mutually  from  them,  is  associated  with  them,  and  so
now  there  are  three,  but  if  three,  yet  It  is  only  One ;  this  is  the  mystery  of
the  Scriptures,  where  it  says :     Hear  O  Israel  YHVH,  our  Elohim,  is  one
YHVH  "  (Deut.  vi,  4)  *    In  this  verse  YHVH  stands  twice  and  Elohenu
(Elohim)  once.     Twice  YHVH  are  the  two  persons  in  the  Divinity,  and
Elohenu,  is  the  third  person  which  mutually  flows  from  them.f    The  Man
after  the  Fall,  was  not  any  longer  the  same  being  as^when  firet  created  in
the  spiritual  similitude  of  Elohim,  the  fault  of  the  terrestrial  Adam,  had
even  affected  the   Celestial.     His  copy,  the  terrestrial  Adam,  was  con-
trolled  by  the   Deity,   yet   was  permitted   a  certain   liberty,   or  Free
Will,  through  which  he  yet  had  sufficient  power  to  conduct  himself  so  as
work  out  his  future  redemption,  or  continue  in  his  degradation.     To
help  him,  he  was  granted   divine  assistance  if  he  would   call   for  it,
to  prevent  the  absolute  dominion  of  the  evil   powers.     Man   to-day,
as  an  individual,  is  only  a  concatenation  of  the  being-hood  of  all  prece-
dent human  life,   his  thought  is  the  result  of  internal,  as  well  as  ex-
ternal agencies,    acting  upon  his  spirit,  and  his  so-called  wisdom,   is
the  result  of  example,  inherent  qualities  and  revelation.     His  capacity  is
doubtless  influenced,  to  an  extent,  by  the  precedent  spirituality  of  his
race;   and   its    power   of  receptivity,    retention,    merger   and   expres-
sion ;  he  is  tinctured  by  the  precedent  chain  of  existences,  and  is  sub-
ject to  laws  not  yet  comprehended  by  humanity.     Empty  and  helpless,
he  is  yet  endowed  with  a  feeling  full  of  presentiment,  and  with  a  long-
ing for  a  more  perfect  realization.     Endowed  by  the  Deity  with  the
power  to  reproduce  a  copying  ideality,  man  can  follow  actively,   that

*  "  And  Jesus  answered  him,  The^rj/  of  all  the  commandments  i>,  Hear  O  Israel ;
The  Lord  (YHVH)  ;  our  God  (Elohim)  is  One  Lord  (YHVH)."  Mark  xii,  29.  This
is  the  famous  Jewish  Declaration  of  Faith,  still  used  every  day,  called  the  Shemah.

f  Zohar  iii,  {  Shilakh  Lekha^  fol.  idia.  We  have  numerous  extracts  in  MSS.  from
the  Zohar  to  the  same  effect,  but  have  not  space  for  them  in  this  writing.  The  same
idea  is  in  Ibn  Gebirol.     See  supra ^  and  in  Philo.,  Vol.  i,  pp.  61  jf.,  219  if.


1 84

which  the  Deity  produces  originally,  creatively,  and  by  an  efflux,
from  and  out  of  Its  own  autonomy,  from  Its  fullness  of  mercy,  grace  and
love  for  Its  creatures.  The  real  man,  the  inner  spiritual  man,  is  simply
a  receptacle  for  the  impregnation  and  birth  of  ideas,  an  activity  only
acting  through  a  conditioned  receptivity,  yet  with  certain  amount  of
liberty,  but  not  a  perfect  autonomy.  His  spirituality  contains  the  sus-
ceptibility, content  and  living  ability,  to  produce  spiritual  and  material
births,  but  to  be  able  to  produce,  requires  an  outside  spiritual  im-
pregnation and  permission  from  the  Deity.  Each  human  being  for  its
formation  and  development,  presumes  others  preceding  it,  who  have
been  to  a  certain  extent  developed  and  educated,  so  the  first  human  pair
had  a  spiritual,  developed  educator,  the  Deity,  and  from  this  educator,
has  proceeded  in  the  chain  of  existences,  all  subsequent  education.  The
Qabbalah  does  not  recognize  in  the  Good  and  Evil,  two  independent,
autonomatic,  opposing  powers,  but  both  are,  according  to  it,  under  the
power  of  the  Supreme  Absolute  Deity.  It  asserts  that  the  Evil  springs
out  of  the  Good,  and  only  originated  from  a  diversion  of  the  latter.  Evil
exists,  for  God's  own  wise  purposes,  by  the  sufferance  of  the  Absolute
One,  who  gives  us  the  blighting  cold,  frost,  and  night,  and  also,  the
beneficent  and  blessed  day-light,  warmth,  and  sunshine.  Man  therefore
partakes  of  two  regions,  that  of  the  external,  visible,  matter  world,  that
of  Evil  and  Darkness,  and  that  of  the  internal  spiritual  higher  world,  that
of  Goodness  and  Light  (Comp.  Is.  xlv,  6,  7).

The  German  philosopher  Hegel,  holds  that  a  thing  can  only  exist
through  its  opposite,  that  the  thing  and  its  opposite  must  arise  together,  and
that  eternally y  as  the  complements  of  a  unity ;  white  is  not  without  black,
nor  black  without  white,  good  is  not  without  evil,  nor  is  evil  without
good.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah  and  the
Sepher  Ye'tzeer-ah.  At  the  very  beginning  of  the  life  germ,  dissolu-
tion and  death  oppose  its  vitality  and  endeavor  to  destroy  it,  and  the
whole  existence  of  man  in  this  world,  is  a  continual  struggle  to  pre-
serve his  vitality.  Isaiah  says,  in  his  magnificent  language:  **I  am
YHVH,  and  there  is  none  else,  there  is  not  any  Elohim  beside  Me.  I
girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  Me ;  that  they  may  know  from
the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  from  the  west,  that  there  is  none  beside  Me.    I


i85

am  YHVH,  and  there  is  none  else.  I  form  light  and  create  darkness ;  I
make  safety  and  I  create  misfortune ;  I  YHVH  do  all  these  things  **  (xlv,
5-8).  The  widow's  son,  Hiram  Abiff  of  Tyre,  cast  for  the  Qabbalistic
Temple  of  King  Solomon,  two  high  pillars  or  pylons  of  bronze,  their
capitals  were  of  pomegranites  and  lily  work.  The  lily,  most  likely  the
lotus,  an  emblem  of  life,  white  or  male,  on  the  right  side,  the  pomegran-
ite,  emblem  of  fecundity  and  plasticity,  red  or  female,  on  the  left  side.
The  first  was  called  Ya-kheen,  the  latter  Bo-az.  These  columns  repre-
sented, Understanding,  Binah,  n,  and  Wisdom,  'Hokhmah,  i,  and  between
them  was  the  Temple  of  Kether,  %  the  Father.  Here  we  see  symbols  of
the  Former,  the  Harmony,  and  the  to  be  Formed.  All  energy  must  have
resistance,  all  light  must  have  darkness,  all  projecture  or  emanation,  a  hol-
low or  excavation  to  receive  efflux,  affirmation  supposes  a  negation ;  if  the
first  androgene  had  not  been  separated  into  male  and  female,  the  result
would  have  been  entire  sterility,  as  was  the  result  as  to  the  Seven  Kings  of
Edom  described  in  Genesis  and  the  Qabbalah ;  and  the  Balance  not  exist-
ing, the  forms  did  not  and  could  not,  exist,  and  the  emanation  of  the  ex-
istences could  not  proceed  and  be  manifest.  The  dogma  of  the  Balance
being  recognized  and  the  application  of  its  consequences  having  been  made
universal ;  by  the  law  of  analogies,  there  becom  eevident  to  us  the  great
secrets  of  affinity  and  aversion,  of  natural  sympathy  and  antipathy,  as
discoverable  in  animal  magnetism,  homeopathy,  love,  moral  or  political
influence,  etc.  This  law  of  analogy,  carried  out  to  its  utmost  extent  in
the  harmony  of  the  equilibrium  which  springs  out  of  the  opposites,  is  that
which  governs  under  the  Deity,  the  entire  physical,  spiritual  and  moral
universe.  This  agent,  is  the  universal  alkahest,  the  universal  law  of  vitality
and  life,  by  which  the  animated  beings,  and  the  atoms  of  which  the  uni-
verse is  composed,  become  magnetized,  polarized  and  held  together,  and
is  the  foundation  of  Free  Will.  It  is  the  Temple  standing  between  Ya-
kheen  and  Bo-az  which  together  with  them,  forms  the  Sacred  Triad  and
the  Sacred  Triangle.  In  the  Hebrew  alphabet  k  Aleph  =  i,  the  leader
of  the  letters,  is  the  male,  it  is  the  letter  of  the  Sephirah  Kether,  it  is  the
Alpha  of  the  Greek  alphabet.  3  Beth  =  2,  and  is  that  of  the  Sephirah
Binah,  the  female;  and  from  these  result  ^  Vau  =  3,  the  Sephirah  'Hokh-
mah  or  Wisdom,  the  Word  or  Son,  yet  the  three  are  an  unit.    They  form


i86

YH  V  of  the  Ineffable  Name.    In  the  Cubical  Holy  of  Holies  were  the  right
and  left  Cherubim  and  above  them  the  She'keen-ah,  a  Holy  Triad.     The
female  is  taken  from  Adam  but  not  produced  by  him,  she  existed  in  the
androgenic  man  from  the  beginning,  so  all  the  human  organs  are  disposed
of  in  twos,  and  the  anatomy  of  the  female  life  organs  shows,  that  they
are  those  of  the  male,  reversed.     The  Zodiachas  Scorpio,  the  male,  and
Virgo,  the  female,  but  between  these  oppositions,  is  Libra,  the  Balance
or  Harmony.     The  Divinity  has  two  essential  bases  for  Its  existence.
Necessity  and  Liberty,  but  above  all  is  Its  independent  autonomy,  Its
Harmony.     To  manifest  truth  we  must  have  doubt,  destruction  is  regen-
eration, Evil  is  essential  for  the  ascertainment  of  and  existence  of,  the
Good.     Error  is  necessary  for  the  manifestation  of  Truth,  the  decay  of
death  gives  us  immortality.     We  prop  ourselves  on  that  which  resists.
The  shield  of  Satan  stopped  the  progress  of  the  spear  of  Michael  and
prevented  his  destruction,  Satan  is  necessary  to  bring  out  in  the  contrasts,
the  goodness  of  the  former,  and  is  as  necessary,  as  a  base  is  essential
to  the  standing  of  a  column.     The  Satan  of  Genesis  and  Job  is  not  a
fallacy.     The  entire  universe  is  balanced  upon  two  opposing  forces  which
produce  the  equilibrium  and  harmony  of  All  and  so  maintain  it.     The
opposing  centripetal  and  centrifugal  forces  make  that  harmonious  move-
ment, which  is  the  path  of  all  the  stars  and  the  life  of  all  the  universe.
These  opposing  energies  are  in  all  physics,  all  religion,  all  philosophy,  all
intellect  and  are  everywhere,  except  in  the  Deity,  who  is  entire  and  per-
fect harmony.     The  ancient  Greek  represented  these  forces,  by  Eros,
Desire  or  Love,  and  its  opposition  by  Anteros  or  Aversion.     In  science
we  have  the  phenomena  of  polarity,  in  the  heart,  arterial  and  veinous
motion,  and  also  the  spiritual  law  of  sympathies  and  antipathies.     Even
the  disciples  of  Zara-thrustra,  although  supposed  to  have  only  the  Light
or  Good  and  the  Darkness  or  Evil  for  their  deities,  had  yet  a  higher,  a
harmony  in  which  both  merged  and  rested,  known  as  Zervane  Akerane
or  Endless  Time.     The  harmony  is  represented  by  the  circle,  by  the  ser-
pent, an  emblem  of  both  Satan  and  Wisdom,  with  its  tail  in  its  mouth.
In  the  physical  universe  it  is  the  luminiferous  aether,  the  vital  caloric,  the
electro-magnetic  azoth.     It  is  the  ambient  fluid  which  penetrates,  per-
meates, vitalizes  all  Things,  the  ray  detached  from  the  glory  of  the  sun,


1 87

fixed  by  the  weight  of  the  atmosphere  and  crystallized  by  the  central
attraction,  to  our  earth.  In  the  words  of  the  erudite  Yehudah  ha>Levi
(A.  D.  1140)  :  "  There  is  not  any  life  without  motion,  nor  motion  with-
out inspiration,  no  inspiration  without  struggle,  no  struggle  without  oppo*
ation,  oppositions  are  everywhere  essential,  but  the  Divine  power  con-
ciliates every  opposition  "  (Sepher  Khozari,  Part  iv,  §  25).


if  Buddh*  ind  ihe  Tncof  the  SepU-


— -

'

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

»

10

b

-i^

^

^

u

«<•

i^

«<i4HM

%<4tM

^

SIMILARITIES   IN   THE  WRITINGS   OF   IB^   GEBEROL,    THE   ZOHARIC  WRITINGS
AND   THE  QABBALAH.

WE  will  now  give  some  quotations  and  references,  to  prove  simi-
larities exist  between  the  Zohar,  the  Qabbalah  and  those
writings  of  Ibn  Gebirol,  which  have  come  to  our  day,  similarities,  we
think,  more  frequent,  close  and  precise;  than  any  heretofore  given  ixQTa
the  writings  of  Moses  de  Leon,  by  those  who  assert  the  Zoharic  books
were  forged  by  him,  and  we  claim  these  are  strong  evidence  of  a  knowl-
edge in  Gebirol,  as  early  as  1050  A.  D.,  of  much  that  is  in  the  Zoharic
writings.  This  would  be  about  250  years  before  the  time,  it  has  been
alleged,  De  Leon  forged  the  Zoharic  books.  The  student  is  also  referred
to  our  resumd  of  the  Me'qdr  'Hay-ytm.

Ibn  Gebirol  teaches  that  all  the  Forms,  reunited  in  the  Will,  compose
an  Unity  of  number,  the  One ;  above  which,  is  the  Supreme  Unknown
Absolute  Unity,  without  number.  The  Will,  the  One,  subsequently
emanated,  multiplied  and  particularized  Itself,  gradually  however,  and
thus  emanated  and  produced  the  Intelligible  World,  and  ultimately,  the
World  of  Action,  that  of  the  Senses.  The  Zoharic  writings  contain  this
idea  and  also,  as  we  have  shown,  that  an  analogy  exists,  between  the


i89

Ideal  prototypic  and  the  Sensible,  Worlds.  This  is  archaic  Qabbalistic
doctrine  as  we  have  already  shown.  The  Superior  World  in  several
places  in  the  Zoharic  writings,  is  asserted  to  be,  the  positive  or  male,  the
higher  spiritual,  the  former ;  and  the  Inferior  World,  to  be,  the  negative,
plastic,  matter  or  formed.  (Comp.  Zohar  ii,  144^,  i,  iS9^'  ^^^  same
idea  is  in  the  Book  of  Enoch.)

The  different  manifestations  of  existence  from  the  Ayin  or  No-Thing,
follow  each  other  without  interruption,  surrounding  themselves  and
mutually  using,  form  and  matter,  for  their  development.  The  Zohar
says  :  "  When  Elohim  wished  to  make  the  world,  It  made  go  out  a  con-
cealed Light,  from  which  afterwards,  went  out  and  rayed  all  the  mani-
fested Lights,  from  that  first  Light,  formed  and  spread  themselves,  the
other  Lights  which  formed  the  Superior  World  (A*tzeel-ah).  Afterwards,
the  Superior  Light  in  it,  spread  itself,  and  gave  birth  to  light  without
brightness,  and  thus  formed  the  Inferior  World.  *  *  *  That  light
without  brightness,  by  its  bonds  with  the  Superior  (World)  produced  all
the  celestial  armies  (Hosts  of  Angels),  according  to  their  numerous  spe-
cies, as  it  is  written :  '  How  numerous  are  thy  works  O  YHVH  ! '  (Ps.
civ,  24).  All  that  which  is  found  on  earth  can  also  be  found  (has  its
spiritual  counterpart)  on  high,  and  there  does  not  exist  the  smallest  thing
in  this  world  which  is  not  also  itself  attached  to  something  on  high,  and
does  not  find  itself  under  its  (the  higher)  dependence.  When  the  infe-
rior is  influenced,  that  which  is  set  over  it  in  the  superior  world  is  equally
(influenced),  for  all  are  perfectly  united  together.*'*  Everywhere  Ibn
Gebirol  insists  upon  this  doctrine,  and  that  such  a  connection,  exists  be-
tween the  Intelligible  world  and  the  Sensible  world,  or,  Idea  and  Matter.
(Comp.  the  Me'qor  iii,  §  21,  et  seq,^  and  many  other  places.)  A  doc-
trine of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  is,  that  there  is  a  heavenly  ideal  or
prototype  of  all  existing  in  the  visible  universe.  This  is  also  in  Philo
and  the  Talmud  (see  ante,  p.  108  et  seq,),  and  from  it  results  the  idea,
that  we  must  arrive  at  our  knowledge  of  the  invisible  through  a  contem-
plation of  the  visible.     These  doctrines  are  also  in  Gebirol  (Me'qdr

♦Zohar,  i,  J  Vaya'hee,  156^.  Comp.  i,  158^,  159a,  162^,  205^/  ii,  144^.  Comp.
Matt.  X,  29;  Luke  xii,  7,  6 ;  Acts  xvii,  28 ;  I  Cor.  xii,  12;  Matt,  xviii,  10;  ante,  p.  109,
seq.


'Hay-yim,  i,  §  i  et  seq. ;  ii,  §  lo,  §  25,  §  30  ]  iii,  §  21 ;  iv,  §  8,  §  23).
The  Zohar  (i,  fol.  158^)  says:  ''The  words  YHVH!  YHVH  (Exod.
xxxiv,  6)  indicate  (by  repetition)  two  worlds,  the  one  manifest,  the  other
occult,  it  is  wherefore  there  is  between  the  two  words  the  disjunctive  sign.
These  two  worlds  however  are  together  and .  form  one  unity  "  (Comp.
Zohar,  i,  159^,  162^/  ii,  144^).  The  intermediary  between  the  two
Worlds,  the  bolt  which  unites  them  is  the  decade,  which  is  always  looked
upon,  as  in  one  totality  and  unity,  and  as  forming  in  that  unity,  the
Great  Ideal  or  Heavenly  Adam,  also  termed,  the  Adam  Qadmon,  the
'  Man  from  the  East ;  in  whom  is  contained  the  Tetragrammaton  mn*
YHVH,  the  Ineffable  Name.

Gebirol,  the  Qabbalah  and  the  Zohar,  assert,  that  "  the  lower  world  is
made  after  the  higher  world  (its  prototype),  and  that  of  everything  in  the
former  there  is,  as  it  were,  an  image  in  the  latter,  still  all  are  one ' '
(Zohar,  ii,  fol.  20a).

Gebirol  also  says:  the  higher  soul  is  the  prototype  from  which  all
human  souls  emanate,  they  having  thus  been  in  their  real  form  already  in
the  divine  idea.  The  Zohar  (ii,  fol.  96)  says:  "Also  all  human  souls,
before  coming  down  on  earth,  were  present  in  the  divine  idea  in  the  same
form,  which  they  afterwards  had  in  the  world."*

The  Zohar  (i,  fol.  19^20^)  comparing  the  universe  to  a  nut,  the  ker-
nel or  almond  of  which  is  enveloped  in  several  rinds  or  shells,  says :  "It
is  even  thus  with  the  entire  universe,  superior  and  inferior;  from  the  mys-
terious superior  point,  as  far  as  the  extremity  of  all  the  Degrees  (Sephi-
roth),  all  form  one  whole ;  of  which  the  parts  are  formed,  one  in  the
other,  insomuch  that  they  serve  as  shells,  the  one  to  the  other.  The  first
point  (the  Sephirah  Kether,  the  Ego  or  Will)  was  an  interior  and  incom-
mensurable Light,  so  that  we  are  not  able  to  know  its  splendour,  subtility
and  purity,  until  (we  reach)  that  which  has  developed  itself  by  expansion.

*Comp.  Franck,  La  Kabbah^  p.  228  sq. ;  Zohar,  i,  91^,  96^  /  ii,  96;  i,  245^  /  iii,  61^,
104^  and  b  ;  ii,  73^.  The  doctrine  of  the  pre-existence  of  souls  is  in  the  Buck  of  Wisdom,
viii,  20.  Josephus  tells  us  the  Essenes  believed  in  it;  Wars,  Bk.  ii,  c.  viii,  §  li,  Whis-
ton's  ed.  Philo  holds  to  the  same  idea;  On  the  Giants,  i,  pp.  330-331  :  On  Dreams,  ii,
pp.  321-322.  So  does  the  Talmud,  treat.  ^Ha^geegah  12b;  Yevamoth^  62;  Avodah
Zarahf  5  ;  Niddah^  13;  and  the  B'resheeth  Rabbah,  §  viii.


191

That  expansion  of  the  point,  becomes  a  temi)le  or  palace,*  enveloping
this  same  point,  that  is,  the  Light  which  we  cannot  know  because  of  its
great  splendour.  But  that  palace  (Sephirah)  which  serves  as  the  envelope
of  that  occult  point,  is  itself  an  incommensurable  Light,  without  con-
taining equally  the  same  sjabtility  and  splendour,  as  the  first  concealed
and  occult  point.  That  sphere  is  again  extended  through  a  new  expan-
sion (forming)  a  first  Light,  an  expansion  which  serves  as  an  envelope  of
that  subtile  sphere  (which  is)  clear  and  altogether  interior.  The  portions
of  existence  continued  thus  to  develope,  the  one  from  the'other,  and  to
envelope  themselves  the  one  in  the  other.  So  that  they  each  and  in
totality,  served  as  mutual  envelopes,  and  that  they  (relatively  the  one  to
each  and  to  all  the  others),  are  as  the  kernel  and  the  shell,  but  yet  all  are
one  in  totality,  because  that  which  is  one  envelope,  is  at  the  same  time,  a
kernel  for  another  degree.  All  absolutely  occurs  the  same  in  these  infe-
rior regions ;  and  man  in  this  world  is  made  after  that  resemblance,
being  (composed)  of  a  kernel  and  a  shell,  which  are  the  spirit  and  the
body.  Such  is  in  general  the  order  of  the  universe."  Ibn  Gebirol  has
the  same  idea  (see,  the  Me'qor  Hay-yim,  Bk.  ii,  §  i ;  iii,  §  41,  etc.).
With  the  Zohar  the  "  superior  point,"  as  the  germ  emanating  from  the
Supreme  Unknown  Deity,  contains,  as  does  the  Universal  Form  and  Mat-
ter of  Gebirol,  both  the  spiritual  and  the  corporeal  worlds  intact.  Gebi-
rol attributed  a  species  of  matter  to  everything  beside  the  Supreme  Deity,
so  many  of  the  Qabbalists  consider  the  Supreme  Deity  as  alone  the  pure,
simple,  and  absolute  spirit,  without  any  tincture  of  even  spiritual  matter ;
and  that  all  other  existing,  even  tlie  highest  spiritual  existences,  which  were
the  Supreme  Deity's  energies,  forces  or  angels,  doing  Its  Will,  had  a  sub-
stance of  some  species.  Philo  Judaeus  holds  the  same  view.  Gebirol
thus  defines  the  Will  or  Desire :  **  The  Desire  is  the  executor  (worker)  of
everything  and  mover  of  everything,  and  the  simile  is  the  creation  by  the
creator,  blessed  be  He !  of  the  Things  (/*.  ^.,  the  formation  of  form)  for
the  Primal  Source,  is  the  Desire.     And  the  Desire  is  the  Divine  force  (or

♦  The  word  Palace  is  used  to  indicate  the  different  Degrees  of  Existence  or  the  Ex-
pansion of  the  Sephiroth,  from  the  highest  world  A'tzeel-ah,  to  the  lowest,  A'seey-ah,
which  have* been  presented  as  the  spheres  or  orbits  continued  and  contained,  one  in  the
other,  as  it  asserts  the  Sephiroth  are.     Comp.  the  Me'qdr,  iii,  J  41.


192

energy)  working  in  the  elements  and  formations,  and  lying  together,  in
them."  The  great  Qabbalist  Azriel  has  the  same  view,  he  says:  "  The
Thought,  which  comes  from  Ain  Soph,  is  both  the  essence  and  the  reality,
within  the  limitation  which  includes  everything  connected  with  thought
or  contemplation  on  earth ;  which  can  come  into  existence  by  speech,
and  be  known  through  any  creation ;  whatever  comes  within  limits  has
dimension  and  is  physical,  for  whatever  can  be  taken  hold  of  (compre-
hended) by  the  thought  of  the  heart,  is  called,  a  body.  The  metaphy-
sicians say,  every  man  has  a  limit,  and  we  daily  see,  that  everything,
even  the  air,  has  limit,  space  and  measure."

The  Kether  Malkhuth  says  of  the  angels  :  "  Some  of  them  sheets  of
flames,  and  some  of  them  breathing  winds,  some  of  them  composed  of
fire  and  water,  some  Seraphim  and  some  Cherubim."  So  the  Zohar
(§  Va-yeek' rehy  p.  9),  of  the  angels,  says:  "Some  of  them  flaming  fire,
some  of  them  water,  some  of  them  wind."  The  B'resheeth  Rabbah
(300  A.  D.)  says :  **  The  flame  of  the  turning  sword,  according  to  which
He  makes  His  messengers,  /.  ^.,  angels,  of  winds,  His  servants  of  flaming
fire  turning,  since  they  turn  sometimes  into  men,  sometimes  into  women,
sometimes  into  winds,  sometimes  into  angels."

The  Zohar  also  says  :  "  Come  and  see  !  Thought  is  the  principle  (or
beginning)  of  all  that  which  is,  but  it  is  at  first  unknown  and  contained
in  itself.  When  thought  begins  to  spread  itself,  it  arrives  at  that  degree
in  which  it  becomes  spirit  (or,  where  the  spirit  rests  or  lives),  reaching  to
this  point,  it  takes  the  name  of  intelligence  (Binah,  understanding),  and
is  no  more,  as  before,  contained  in  itself.  The  spirit  in  its  turn  devel-
opes  itself,  in  the  bosom  of  the  mysteries  by  which  it  is  yet  surrounded,
and  from  it  goes  out  a  voice,  which  is  the  reunion  of  all  the  celestial
choirs  j  a  voice  (word)  which  spreads  itself  in  distinct  speech  and  articu-
late words,  because  it  conies  from  the  spirit.  (This  refers  to  'Hokhmah,
Wisdom,  or,  the  Word.)  But  in  reflecting  on  all  these  degrees,  we  see
that  the  thought,  intellect,  that  voice  and  that  word,  are  only  one  thing,
that  thought  is  the  beginning  (principle)  of  all  that  which  is,  and  that  not
any  interruption  can  exist  in  it.  The  thought  itself  is  bound  to  the  Non-
Being  and  it  is  not  ever  separated  from  It.  Such  is  the  meaning  of  these
words:  YHVH  is  One  and  His  Name  is  One."  (Zohar  i,  246^).  This  is
a  most  important  passage  of  the  Zohar.


193

From  the  bosom  of  this  Unity,  the  Thought,  Consciousness,  or  Ego ;
two  parallel  principles  proceed  in  apparent  opposition,  but  which  in
reality  are  inseparable ;  one  is  female,  passive,  negative,  called  Binah,
Understanding;  the  other  male,  active,  positive,  called  'Hokhmah,  /.  ^.,
Wisdom.  *'  All  that  which  exists,  all  that  which  has  been  formed  by  the
Ancient,  whose  Name  is  holy,  can  only  exist  through  a  male  and  female
(principle).'*  (Zohar  iii,  290^.)  That  is  the  subjective  and  objective,
coming  into  the  matter  world  and  comprehensible  in  it.

The  Zohar  (ii,  179)  says:  **  Upon  the  one  side,  the  sublimity  of  the
Divine  Existence,  the  contrast  between  Creator  and  creature,  does  not
seem  to  admit  of  the  idea  of  a  special  supervision  on  the  part  of  the
Supreme  Holy  One,  May  It  be  blessed  !  especially  as  the  possessor  of
infinite  knowledge  and  felicity,  cannot  stand  in  any  relation  to  unclean-
matter;  but  on  the  other  side,  the  admirable  order  and  regularity
throughout  nature,  presume  a  reasonable  intention;  which  manifestly
purposes,  through  every  single  member,  to  advance  the  plan  of  the  whole,
and  points  to  an  uninterrupted  Providence  and  Government  of  the  Uni-
verse." This  idea  runs  through  the  Me'qdr  Hay-yim.  The  Zoharic  idea
is ;  that  the  Deity  has  given  definite  laws  to  nature,  and  the  immediate
and  direct  causes,  are  effective  according  to  these  laws ;  but  this  efficacy
is  not  ever  independent  of  the  Divine  Will,  which  extends  to  the  smallest
change  and  action  in  the  realm  of  nature ;  and  each  natural  effect,  coin-
cides with  just  so  much  of  the  Divine  intention,  as  flows  from  the  Omnipo-
tence and  Will  of  the  Deity.  The  Qabbalah  calls  this,  the  coalescing  of  the
Deity  with  the  Universe,  or  the  spiritual  elements  of  the  worlds  {Ru^ha
ye^sod  ha-  OlamaJi)^  by  means  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  ;  the  Deity  acting  upon
the  whole  content  of  the  Universe,  as  it  were,  by  an  efflux  through  channels
or  canals,  and  thus  remitting  Its  Will  to  all  natural  energies  and  forces.
The  Zohar  teaches,  an  unceasing,  in  the  Will  of  the  Deity,  conditioned,
and  through  Its  co-operation  never  dispensed  with ;  potential  activity  in
nature,  by  means  of  and  through  the  Sephiroth ;  in  which,  though  on  the
one  side  distinct  from  the  Primitive  Supreme  Being,  the  Deity  is  always
present ;  this  is  also  in  the  Modern  Qabbalah  as  taught  by  Luriah  and
Cordovero.  A  miracle  or  change  in  the  regulated  course  of  nature,  takes
pla^e,  only  when  the  Deity  undertakes  a  change  in  these  high  organs,  the
13


194

Sephiroth,  the  Kaileem^  /.^.,  Vessels;  by  decreasing  their  number,  weak-
ing  their  potentiality  or,  vice  versa,  increasing  it.  It  is  understood  how-
ever at  the  same  time,  that  this  Divine  co-operation,  as  it  is  only  a  norm
of  the  activity  of  nature,  is  as  it  were,  a  natural  law,  which  we  do  not
understand.  It  also  holds,  that  the  Divine  Will  does  not  in  any  way
abolish  human  Freedom  of  Will.  The  Zohar  says  that  the  Deity  is  com-
pletely separated  from  Every-Thing,  and  is  transcendental ;  yet  is  not  sepa-
rated, for  the  Deity  is  also  immanent  in  Every-Thing.  The  Deity  ema-
nates the  Universe,  has  a  form,  and  yet  has  not  any  form;  by  Its  form  It
is  manifest  and  potential,  yet  It  has  none  as  It  does  not  in  any  way
inhere  in  the  Universe.-  *'  The  Holy  One,  praised  be  It !  gave  heaven
and  earth,  definite  laws,  as  is  written :  '  He  hath  made  a  decree,  which
they  shall  not  pass  away '  (Ps.  cxlviii,  6),  but  still  It  has  not  given  them
real  freedom ;  as  a  master  who  has  fully  liberated  his  servant,  and  left  him,
'  to  his  own  free  will ;  but  It  gave  them  laws,  which  always  depend  upon  Its
concealed  Will.  And  the  Holy  One,  praised  be  It !  rules  them  according
to  the  might  of  Its  own  Sacred  Will,  which  makes  itself  known  through
the  Holy  One's  sacred  Vessels."

In  the  Qabbalah,  the  original  principle,  symbolized  by  Kether,  is
called,  Abbah  or  Father,  and  that  which  flowed  out,  the  Son.*  This
original  principle,  is  also  called,  Ra-tzon,  t\  e.,  Absolute  Will,  or  Ra-tzon
al  col  Rtzoneem,  i.  e,,  the  Will  above  All  Wills.t  The  Father  is  also
called,  Baal ha-Ra-tzonim,  i.e.,  Master  of  the  Will,  when  considered  as  the
originator,  and  as  on  the  side  towards  the  Ain  Soph.  But  in  so  far  as  by
Baal,  can  be  understood,  the  possessor  who  is  held  by  a  matter,  e,  g.,
Baal  chay,  a  living  being,  possessor  of  life  :  the  Son,  is  called  Baal  ha-
Ra-tzonim,  In  the  Tiqqooneh  Zohar  (V.  Beginning,  p.  15^/  xviii,  36^)
we  find  :  **  In  the  beginning  was  the  Will  of  the  King,  in  the  light  of  the
Quadrant  (probably  meaning;  the  four  points  of  the  compass,  as  the
four  quarters  of  the  universe).  When  the  Messiah  measured  therein,
there  went  forth  a  mysterious  line,  which  is  referred  to  by  the  nebulous
spark  of  matter,  etc."

Further  the  Zohar  says  :   **  In  the  beginning,  was  the  Will  of  the  King,

^  Sepher  Shephathal^  fol.  9.     Comp.  Mark  xiv,  36.     Rom.  viii,  15.     Gal.  iv,  6.
\Sepher  Shephathal^  fol.  51.     Comp.  Exod.  iii,  14.  %


195

prior  to  any  existence  which  came  into  being,  through  emanation  from
this  Will.  It  sketched  and  engraved  the  forms  of  all  Things,  that  were
to  be  manifested  from  concealment  into  view ;  in  the  supreme  and
dazzling  light  o(  the  Quadrant.  And  there  went  forth,  as  a  sealed  secret,
from  the  head  of  Ain  Soph ;  a  nebulous  spark  of  matter  without  shape  or
form,  a  centre  of  a  circle,  neither  white  nor  black,  neither  red  nor  green,
in  fact  without  any  colour ;  but  when  It  took  the  measure  of  the  struc-
ture to  be  erected.  It  made  the  colours  to  give  light  therein  (Above),  and
one  beam  of  the  Supreme  Light  went  forth  for  the  production  of  colors
Below — and  thus  the  sealed  secrets  of  the  Ain  Soph,  It  partly  opened,etc.*'*

The  Zohar  holds ;  that  no  Thing  can  exist  in  which  the  Deity  is  not
immanent  to  a  certain  extent,  yet  all  together  (all-Things)  do  not  in  any
way,  include  the  Deity ;  who  is  transcendental  to  and  above  all,  of  the
spiritually  and  materially  emanated  or  created. f  Gebirol  has  the  same
idea.  He  also  says :  "  The  emanation  which  produced  the  creation  of
the  universe,  is  like  water  gushing  out  from  its  source  and  spreading  over
everything  near."  (Me'qor  ii,  §  27;  v,  §§  64,  71.)  The  Zohar  often
uses  this  simile,  e,  g.,  "  Thus  life  is  drawn  from  Below  and  from  Above,
thus  the  source  renews  itself,  and  the  sea  always  full,  spreads  its  water
everywhere.*'  (Zohar  iii,  290^,  Idrah  Zootah,  and  in  many  other  places.)
The  first  source  with  Gebirol  is  the  Will  or  Wisdom,  which  the  Zohar
calls,  "  the  Source  of  Life.'*  Gebirol,  says:  **  Thou  art  wise.  Thy  Wis-
dom is  the  Source  of  Life  which  springs  from  Thee,  etc."  (Kether  Mal-
khuth.     Comp.  Zohar  ii,  261a,)

The  Zohar  often  uses  this  simile  (Comp.  Zohar  iii,  fol.  7).  In  the
Kether  Malkhuth  is:  *' Wisdom,  is  the  fountain  of  life."  The  Zohar
says :  **  The  seventh  palace,  the  fountain  of  life,  is  the  fii^t  in  the  order
from  above,  etc."  (ii,  261a.)

♦Zohar,  Cremona  ed.,  i,  fol.  56.     Comp.  Joel,  K^ii^.  Philos.  Sohar^  p.  312,  etc.

f  The  doctrine  of  emanation  has  been  asserted  to  be  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  it  is
claimed  by  some  writers  to  be  set  forth  among  other  places,  in  the  following  verse;
*•  And  he  said.  The  Lord  is  come  from  Sinai,  and  has  appeared  from  Seir  to  us,  and
has  hasted  out  of  the  mount  of  Pharan,  with  the  ten  thousands  of  Kades  (in  the  He-
brew, satn/s);  on  his  right  hand  were  his  angels  with  him."  Deul.  xxxiii,  2.  See  the
Septungint.  Brenton's  English  Trans.,  London,  1S44.  Comp.  Cahen's  Great  French
Bible,  Vol.  5,  p.  153  and  note.


196

The  Kether  also  says :  "It  (the  Will)  draws  from  the  source  of  Light
without  a  pail  (bucket)  and  effects  everything  without  a  vessel."  (Comp.
Me'qor  iii,  §  15).  The  Will  or  Divine  Word,  holds  a  high  position  in
the  Zohar:  (see  ante  and  Zohar  iii,  17^/  i,  65a/  ii,  268^).

Both  have  the  doctrine  of  the  pre-existence  and  reminiscence  of  the
soul,  which  we  also  find  in  Plato.  The  Zohar  says  (iii,  61^)  :  **  The  souls
knew  everything  they  learned  on  earth  prior  to  their  coming  into  this
world.'*  Yxdiiick's  La  Kabbale,  p.  242.  Gebirol  says:  "Thou  askest.
Wherefore  the  soul  becomes  deprived  of  the  impressions  of  knowledge,
so  that  she  has  need  to  be  instructed  in  order  to  remember  ?  Know  then,
the  soul  was  created  with  the  True  knowledge,  from  which  it  follows,  that
she  possessed  in  herself  the  knowledge  which  is  proper  to  her.  But  when
the  soul  unites  with  substance  (matter)  and  confuses  herself  with  it,  by
the  mixture  and  union,  she  is  removed  from  the  perception  of  these  im-
pressions ;  they  remain  concealed  in  her,  because  the  darkness  of  the  sub-
stance covers  her  in  such  a  way,  as  to  obscure  its  light,  and  the  substance
dulls  her :  she  then  becomes  as  if  a  transparent  mirror  to  which  has  been
applied,  a  muddy  and  thick  substance,  etc.**  (Meqor,  v,  §  65.)

The  "  higher  soul,**  according  to  Gebirol,  is  the  prototype,  from  the
treasury  of  which  all  human  souls  proceed ;  they  all  having  previously
been  there  in  their  Real  and  True  Form  in  the  Divine  Idea.  (Comp.  the
Kether  Malkhuth  and  the  Me*q6r  in  many  places,)  The  same  idea  is  set
forth  with  great  distinctness  in  the  Zohar  (ii,  fol.  96^) :  "  All  human
souls  before  coming  down  on  earth,  were  present  in  the  Divine  Idea  in
the  same  form,  that  they  were  to  have  in  this  world  :  **  (comp.  Franck,
La  Kabbale^  p.  228  j^.).  So  the  human  soul  was  divided,  by  the  Zohar
and  Gebirol,  into  three  divisions,  as  we  have  above  mentioned,  these
were  the  Neshamah,  Intellect;  Rua'h,  Mind  or  Reason;  and  the
Nephesh,  Animal  life.  (See  Meqor  Hay-yim  iii,  §§  27-30;  Comp.
Franck's  La  Kabbale,  p.  232.)  Gebirol  holds  that  the  temporal  union
of  the  two  superior  principles  of  spirit,  Neshamah,  and  soul,  Rita^h,  with
the  senses;  that  is,  life  itself,  the  Nephesh;  must  not  be  considered  an
evil,  he  did  not  see  in  life  a  lowering  down,  but  a  means  adopted  by  the
Deity  for  the  education  of  the  soul,  a  salutary  trial.  The  task  of  the
soul  is  to  elevate  matter,   "to  teach  the  body,  the  right  path  for  the  pre-


197

vention  of  evil."  (Kether  Malkhuth).  He  sees  in  life,  an  opportunity
for  the  exercise  of  the  man's  Free  Will  to  work  out  his  salvation.  "  Who
can  repay/'  he  says,  '* Thy  love,  in  giving  the  body  a  soul  to  vivify  it;
that  her  light  might  guide  and  instruct  it,  and  deliver  man  from  evil.
*  *  *  Thou  hast  tried  me  in  the  pit  of  captivity ;  Thou  hast  purified
me  from  my  abundant  wickedness ;  but  hast  not  consumed  me.  I  am
also  conscious  that  it  is  for  my  benefit  that  Thou  hast  tried  me,  and  in
faithfulness  Thou  hast  afflicted  me;  and  in  order  that  it  may  be  well
with  me  in  my  latter  days,  hast  Thou  brought  me  into  this  trial  of
troubles  :  "  (see,  the  Kether  Malkhuth).  The  Qabbalists  have  the  same
idea,  they  **  consider  it  a  necessity  for  the  soul,  a  necessity  inherent  in
its  finite  nature,  to  play  a  role  in  the  universe ;  to  contemplate  the  specta-
cle which  the  creation  presents  to  it,  so  as  to  have  the  consciousness  of  it-
self and  its  origin  ;  in  order  to  re-enter,  without  absolutely  confusing  itself
with  it,  into  that  inexhaustible  source  of  Light  and  Life,  which  they  term
the  Divine  Thought.''  (Franck,  La  Kabbaky  p.  236.)  The  Zohar  says
(i,  fol.  62^)  :  "  The  breath,  Nephesh,  and  the  spirit  Neshamah,  are
united  together;  whilst  the  soul,  Rua'h,  depends  upon  the  conduct  of  the
man.  *  *  *  if  the  man  purifies  himself,  he  will  receive  the  assistance
of  the  holy  soul  which  purifies  and  sanctifies  it ;  if  he  does  not  purify
himself,  he  possesses  the  breath  and  the  spirit,  but  not  the  holy  soul."
This  union  is  to  be  obtained,  it  says,  on  the  man's  side  by  his  piety  and
study  of  the  Holy  Scriptures ;  on  the  other  side,  by  assistance  from  on
high.  The  three  souls  united,  it  frequently  terms ;  the  three  faculties.
(Zohar  iii,  24^/  46^/  70^)-  The  Qabbalists  do  not  see  in  life  a  lower-
ing down  from  a  higher  degree  to  an  exile,  as  did  the  Gnostics,  and  as  the
Talmudists  do  in  the  Pirkey  Avoth  (Conip.  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,
before  cited,  pp.  56-57),  but  consider  its  abode  on  earth  as  a  means  of
trial  and  education.  If  the  soul  remains  pure  during  this  trial,  "She
obtains,"  says  Gebirol,  **  God's  pleasure,  and  may  anticipate  the  joys  of
the  last  day ;  for  then  endless  happiness  will  be  her  portion,  then  she
will  enter  into  the  palace  of  the  King,  etc."  The  same  idea  is  in  the
Zohar,  and  is  (i,  fol.  245^.  Franck,  La  Kabbah,  p.  236  seq,^  given  in
a  most  beautiful  parable  which  we  have  not  space  to  repeat.  The  doc-
trine of  metempsychosis  or  transmigration  of  souls,  is  in  both.     The


198

Kether  Malkhuth  reads:  "If  she  (the  soul)  be  pure,  then  shall  she
obtain  favour,  and  rejoice  in  the  latter  day  ;  but  if  she  hath  been  defiled,
then  shall  she  wander  for  a  time  in  pain  and  despair  {tanood  b'she-tzeph
ke-tzepK)^  and  in  all  the  days  of  her  uncleanliness  she  shall  dwell  alone,  an
exile,  banished ;  she  shall  not  touch  any  hallowed  thing,  nor  come  into
the  sanctuary,  until  the  days  of  her  purification  have  expired."  The
Zohar  (ii,  i993)says:  "All  souls  are  subject  to  revolution  (metempsy-
chosis aUeen  b'gilgoolah)  but  men  do  not  know  the  ways  of  the  Holy
One  ;  blessed  be  It !  they  are  ignorant  of  the  way  they  have  been  judged
in  all  time,  and  before  they  came  into  this  world  and  when  they  have
quitted  it,  etc.'*  (Zohar  ii,  fol.  ()()b  sq,  Franck,  La  KabbaU,  p.  245  et
seq.     See  an^^pp,  90-91.)

The  Kether  Malkhuth,  speaking  of  the  eclipse  of  the  sun,  says :  "And
when  in  conjunction  with  the  sun  at  the  end  of  the  month ;  if  the  dragon
be  between  them,  and  they  are  both  in  one  line ;  the  moon  appeareth
before  the  sun  as  a  black  cloud,  and  intercepteth  its  light  from  every
eye.  That  those  who  view  her  may  know,  that  the  Kingdom  doth  not
belong  to  the  host  of  heaven  and  their  armies  (/.  ^.,  the  angels),  but  that
there  is  a  Lord  above  them,  who  darkeneth  their  light."  The  Zohar
says  :  "  And  the  moon  and  sun  remained  like  a  body  without  a  soul,  the
master  over  them  having  darkened  their  lights."  (Zohar,  Rayah  Me'hem-
nah,  iii,  S2b,  §  Qado-sheem.^

The  Qabbalah  in  presenting  the  earthly  man,  as  the  Mikrokosm  or  in-
ferior copy  of  the  prototypic  Heavenly  Adam,  asserts  the  existence  of
four  divisions  or  worlds ;  which  are  to  be  found  in  a  greater  or  less  degree
in  each;  basing  this  assertion  on  Isaiah  (xliii,  7).  "  For  I  bWee-ahy  /.  ^.,
created  him  for  ATy  Glory ^  I  ye" tzar ^  i.  e.y  formed  him,  yea  I  a^seey-ahy
i.  e.,  made  him."  On  these  words  of  Isaiah,  Ibn  Ezra  (b.  1088-89,  d.  1 1 76)
in  his  Commentary  on  this  passage,  tells  us,  with  disapproval,  that  Ibn
Gebirol  saw  the  Mystery  of  the  Universe,  that  with  him;  "My
Glory"  stood  for  the  Kosmic  dynamos,  which  dwelt  with  God,  and  in
the  verse  were  intended  the  three  Worlds  called:  B'ree-atic,  Ye' tzeer-atic
and  A'seey-atic,  which  follow  the  A'tzeel-atic  world;  (see  Trans,  of  the
Soc.  of  Hebrew  Literature.  Comment  of  Ibn  Ezra  on  Is.  xliii,  7.  Comp.
Philo,  On  Dreams,  ii,  pp.  292-343,  especially  §§  iii  and  viii.)     We  hope


199

to  have  space  further  on,  to  give  further  information  on  the  Four  Condi-
tions or  Worlds.

Gebirol's  Supreme  Unity  above  all  number,  who  is  unknowable  to  the
mind  of  mankind,  is  evidently  the  Ain  Soph  of  the  Qabbalah  and  the
Zoharic  writings,  termed  also  in  them  Ayin  or  No-Thing.  Its  first  ema-
nation is  called,  Abbah  or  the  Father,  and  is  the  Will  of  the  Zohar  and
Gebirol.  It  is  the  Unity  of  number,  and  among  the  Sephiroth  it  is  the
first,  and  as  we  said  before,  is  called,  Kether  or  the  Crown.  It  is  consid-
ered as  the  One  or  the  Harmony,  Consciousness  or  Abstract  Thought,  the
Ego,  the  Content  of  all  the  subsequent  Sephiroth.  The  first  emanation
from  Kether y  the  Will  or  Father,  is  the  Sephirah  Binah  (Bee'nah),  the
Universal  Intellect  or  Understanding,  which  is  Gebirol's  first  emanation.
Universal  Matter.  It  is  also  termed  by  the  Qabbalah  Immahy  the
Mother,  and  is  considered  as  receptive,  negative,  feminine,  plastic,  and
to  receive  form.  The  Universal  Matter  is  with  him  the  feminine  or  re-
ceptive principle.  "  Everything  existing,*'  says  the  Zohar  (iii,  290a),
**can  only  be  the  work  of  the  male  and  female  (principles).*'  The  Zo-
har and  Gebirol  both  hold,  that  everything  must  be  of  Form  (male)  and
Matter  (female).

The  second  emanation  from  Kether,  is  the  Sephirah  (this  word  is  pro-
nounced Seph*ee-rah)  ^ Hokhmah,  Wisdom,  the  Word,  also  called,  the  Son ;
the  united  complex  of  all  forms.  It  is  the  male  principle  and  that  which
gives  existence  to  Every-Thing,  by  giving  Form  to  the  Universal  Spiritual
or  other  Matter.  (Me'qor,  v,  §§  11-12.)  The  Zohar  says:  "For  it
(^Jfokhmah)  generates  all  Things  ;'*  also;  **  By  means  of  the  Thirty-two
paths  by  which  ^ Hokhmah  is  spread  throughout  the  universe,  it  {^Ifokh-
mah)  gives  Every-Thing  existing,  shape  (/.  ^.,  form)  and  size.*'  (Zohar,
iii,  290a.)  It  is  the  Universal  Form  of  Gebirol,  **  giving  existence  to
Every-Thing  by  emanating  and  producing  (the  Form  of)  Every-Thing."
(Me'qor,  v,  §  12.)  For  **  Everything  existing  can  only  be  the  work  of  the
male  and  female  (principles)  :  "  (Zohar,  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah.  Begin-
ning). Form  corresponds  to  the  male  or  positive,  Matter  to  the  negative
or  female.  Kether  being  called  in  the  Qabbalah,  Father,  and  Binah^
Mother,  ^ Hokhmah  is  termed,  the  Son,  sometimes,  "  the  Son  of  Elohim
(God)."     This  Sephirah  is  the  sptn'tus  mundt.     From  'Hokhmah,  Wis-


200

dom,  proceed  all  the  balance  of  the  Sephiroth,  the  first  six  of  which  are
called,  the  Sephiroth  of  Construction  or  Building,  and  refer  to  dimension,
/.  ^.,  to  Length,  Breadth  and  Depth,  and  their  positive  and  negative  poles,
and  so  to  the  six  days  of  Genesis  i.  The  last  Sephirah  Malkhuth,  i.  e.y
Kingdom,  the  7th  and  loth,  is  the  Harmony  of  all,  the  seventh  day,  the
Sabbath  or  day  of  rest.

These  first  three  Sephiroth  are  called  by  the  Qabbalists,  Oiam  ha-
Moos' kal;  the  Intelligible  or  Intellectual  World.  Gebirol  places  the  Will,
Universal  Matter  and  Universal  Form  together,  as  a  triad  above  all  other
emanations  and  this  would  be  their  abode.  He  tells  us  "  the  Triad  is  the
root  of  Every-Thing."

'*  Descended  two  Ancient  ones ;  the  Supreme  Ancient  One  came  be-
tween them,  saying :  We  were  three,  now  in  our  connection  we  are  One ;"
(Tiqqooneh  haz-Zohar,  Tiqqoon^  No.  xxi,  beg.)

**  And  they  make  known,  that  in  the  vision  of  the  closed  eye,  three  are
one ;  so  also  :  YHVH,  our  Elohim,  YHVH,  are  one ;  three  variations
of  forms  which  are  one.*'  (Comp.  Zohar,  ii,  43^.)

**  And  since  the  Holy  Ancient  is  expressed  and  impressed  by  three,  so
also  all  the  lamps  that  receive  their  light  from  the  Holy  Ancient  are  tri-
adic."  (Zohar,  iii,  188^.)

The  second  triad  of  the  Sephiroth,  is  called,  Olam  ha-Moorgash^  the
Moral  or  Sensuous  World.  It  is  represented  by  Gebirol' s,  Soul  of  the
World  or  Universal  Soul,  emanating  from  the  spiritits  mundi,  and  which
he  divides  into  the  Intellectual  or  Rational,  the  Vital  and  the  Vegetative.
(Me'qor,  iii,  §  24  sq.)  They  are  the  male  or  positive  principle,  ^He-sed,
i.e.,  Grace  or  Mercy,  also  called  Ge\ioo/ah,  Magnificence,  and  the  nega-
tive or  female  principle;  Fa^hady  i.  e.y  Punishment,  also  called  Din
(^Deeti)y  i.  e.,  Judgment,  and  Ge' boorah,  i.  e.y  Rigour  or  Severity.  These
two,  unite  in  TiplC e-rethy  i.  e.y  Beauty.  According  to  our  Gebirol,  all
human  souls  proceed  from  this  Qabbalistic  World,  and  each  human  being
has,  spiritually,  the  same  Triadic  division,  as  we  have  mentioned,  termed
Nesharnahy  Rua^h  and  NeJ>hesh.*

*  The  word  Nephesh  is  to  be  found  in  Genesis  ii,  7,  ha-adam  Pne'phesh  hay.yahy  i.  e,,
to  man  the  breath  of  life.  Neschamah  and  Nephesch  are  not  the  correct  English  spell-
ing.


20I

Tiph'r-reth,  says  the  Idrah  Zootah,  is,  **  the  highest  manifestation  of
ethical  life  and  perfections,  the  sum  of  all  goodness,  in  short,  the  Ideal."
This  Triad  is  Gebirol's  Universal  Soul,  from  which  the  human  souls  pro-
ceed. (Comp.  Franck,  La  Kabbale,  p.  228  et  seq.^

The  next,  third.  Triad  of  the  Sephiroth  is  called  Olam  ha-Moota'bo,  or
the  Material  World,  it  apparently  accords  with  Gebirol's,  Spirit  of  Na-
ture ;  with  him  it  occupies  the  last  degree  of  the  simple  substances,  and
is  the  intermediary  of  the  Material  World  ;  through  the  energies  or  forces
of  the  Deity,  and  the  contraction  and  expansion  everywhere  evident.  It
is  the  Qabbalistic  TzitrCtzum^  and  the  multiplication.  These  Sephiroth
are  called,  Ne-tza'h^  i.  ^.,  Triumph,  the  male  or  positive,  sometimes
termed  Victory;  and  the  female  or  negative,  called,  Hod^  i.  e..  Glory  or
Splendour ;  by  which  two,  sometimes  termed  by  the  Qabbalists,  the  arms
of  God ;  the  Zohar  intends  the  centripetal  and  centrifugal  energies  and
potentialities,  in  the  entire  universe.

The  Zohar  says:  "All  the  energies,  forces  and  increase  in  the  uni-
verse, proceed  through  them.''  (Zohar,  iii,  296a.)  These  two  opposite
Sephiroth  unite  in  one  harmonious  principle,  symbol  of  the  principle  of
all  generation.  Ye' sod,  /.^.,  Foundation  or  Basis.  Together  they  represent
the  Deity  as  the  universal  power,  creator  and  generator  of  all  the  exist-
ences. Ibn  Gebirol  calls  it  te-bang^  i.  e.y  nature,  the  Qabbalists,  Olam
Ha-mool-bang,  i.  <?.,  the  Natural  World.  It  is  the  natura  naturans  in
contrast  to  the  natura  nafuraia,  the  Material  World.  (Comp.  as  to  Geb-
irol's  views  on  the  above,  the  Me'qor,  v,  §§  38-40 ;  iii,  §§  32,  33 ;  iv,

§  31 ;  V,  §  180

The  last  Sephirah,  Malkhuth  (Mal-khooth)  or  Kingdom,  the  Abode  of
the  She*keen-ah,  does  not  in  the  Zohar  and  Qabbalah,  represent  any  new
attribute,  but  symbolizes  the  harmony  of  all  the  others,  and  the  kingdom
of  that  harmony,  over  the  entire  universe.  Its  name  is  also,  She'kheen-ah,
the  Divine  Presence  or  Glory  of  the  Deity,  which  sometimes  visibly
manifests  itself  in  the  universe.  *'  It  is  the  sum  total  of  the  permanent
emanating  yet  immanent  activity,  of  the  totality  of  the  entire  Sephiroth,
and  is  Elohim's  (God's)  presence  in  Its  creation."  As.  such  it  is  appa-
rently the  same  as  Gebirol's  Divine  potentiality,  which  he  says:  **Is
dominant  in  all  the  existing,"  penetrating  all  by  virtue  of  the  Deity's


202

everywhere-acting  Will-power,  and  not  leaving  any  vacuum  within,  but
establishing  harmony  everywhere  and  in  all  the  existences.  Here  is  the
idea  of  an  Ideal  Perfect  Kingdom,  which  is  in  perfect  prototype  in  the
highest  world  and  which  is  to  come  on  earth  in  the  future,  in  perfection ;
and  in  which,  the  Messiah  or  Christ,  is  to  govern  over  all  the  just  or
pious ;  which  idea  is  to  be  found  running  through  the  entire  Old  and
New  Testaments.

This  Sephirah  symbolizes  the  feet  of  the  Heavenly  Adam  which  rest
upon  the  world  (comp.  Ezek.  xliii,  7).  The  head  of  this  Adam  reaches
up  to  heaven.  The  Name  of  the  Deity  in  this  Sephirah  is  Adonai,  1.  ^.,
Lord,  the  equivalent  for  the  ineffable  Name  YHVH.  It  may  be,  to  the
ideas  clustering  around  this  Sephirah,  that  St.  John  alludes,  when  he  says
in  the  Apocalypse ;  that  when  the  7th  angel  sounded  his  trumpet,  there
followed  great  voices  in  heaven,  and  they  said :  '*  The  Kingdom  {Mai-
khutK)  of  this  world  is  become  the  Kingdom  (^Malkhuth)  of  our  Lord
{Adonai)  and  his  Christ  (anointed  One)  :  and  He  shall  reigti  forever  and
ever,^  And  the  four  and  twenty  elders  which  sit  before  God,  on  their
thrones,  fell  upon  their  faces,  etc."  (Apoc.  xi,  15-16.  Comp.  Ibid,  i,
1-8;  X,  7.)  This  grand,  sacred  and  most  mysterious,  text,  which  we
have  italicized,  the  foundation  of  Bible  teachings,  is  said  to  have  been  ;
on  account  of  its  mystery  and  holiness ;  omitted  from  some  of  the,  printed,
Douay  editions  of  the  N.  T.  We  here  note  that  the  Ineffable  Name
YHVH,  is  frequently  written  by  the  Qabbalists  crowned  with  24  taggin,
i.  e.,  crowns,  each  crown  having  three  indentations  equaling  together
72,  the  number  of  the  Elders  of  Israel,  and  of  the  Name  of  72. f

*  Note  here,  the  Qabbalistic  verse  of  the  PaUr  NosUr,  "  For  thine  is  the  Kingdom
(^Malkhuth)  and  the  Power  {Giboorah)  and  ihe  Glory  {:she' keen-ah)  for  ever.  Amen."
Matt,  vi,  13.  Which  is  left  out  of  the  new  authorized  version  of  the  English  Church.
In  the  Teaching  of  the  XII  Apostles  (90-100  A.  D.)  it- is:  "For  thine  is  the  Power
and  the  Glory  for  ever."  C.  viii,  2.  See  The  Oldest  Church  Manual  called  the  Teach-
ing of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  etc.,  by  Dr.  Philip  Schaff.  New  York,  1885,  pp.  84,  189.
The  Teaching  the  Twelve  Apostles  with  illustrations  from  the  Talmud,  etc.,  by  Dr.  C.
Taylor.  London,  1886,  p.  64  sq.  The  Mysteries  of  Magic,  etc.,  by  Arthur  Edward
Waite.     London,  1886,  pp.  283-4.

t  See,  Kircher's  CEdipi  ^gyptiaci,  Tom,  Secundus,  p.  267  ei  seq.  One  of  the  Qab-
balistic formula  of  the  Name  of  72,  is  the  Ineffable  Name  mH"  arranged  in  the  form


203

Malkhuth  is  also  called  the  Queen,  the  Matroneethah  and  the  Matron.
It  represents  the  World  of  Matter.  Its  symbolic  sphere  is  that  of  the
moon,  its  symbolic  color,  blue,  its  ancient  metal,  silver.  It  was  also  called,
the  Church  or  Congregation  of  Israel,  the  Daughter,  the  Bride  of  the
Spouse,  the  She'keen-ah,  /.  <?.,  the  Glory  or  Real  Presence  of  the  Deity,
the  Sabbath  or  Rest  day,  the  Harmony.  It  is  considered  by  the  Qabba-
lah,  as  the  executive  energy  or  power  of  the  Sephirah  Binah,  the  Holy
Spirit  or  Upper  Mother.  Its  color  is  also,  blue.  Blue  is  a  symbolic
colour  of  the  Virgin  in  the  Roman  Church,  who  is  usually  covered
with  a  blue  robe,  as  a  red  or  yellowish-red  robe  is  usually  portrayed
around  Christ.  The  Sephirah  Tiph'e-reth  is  called,  the  King,  and  all
the  existences  proceed  from  the  Union  of  the  King  and  Queen.  The
potencies  of  the  Sephiroth  are  represented  by  the  harmonies,  /.  e,y
Kether,  the  Crown,  Tiph' e-rethy  the  King,  and  Malkhuth,  the  Queen.
The  first  affects  the  Neshamah,  /.  ^.,  the  Spirit,  the  head,  the  second,  the
Rua'h,  the  Soul,  the  heart,  the  Nephesh,  the  animal  life  or  materiality,
is  in  the  third  triad.*

We  have  shown,  ante,  p.  159,  that  Gebirol  evidently  knew  the  ancient
Qabbalistic,  Sepher  Ye'tzeerah,  and  the  Zoharic  writings  have  much  the
same  thoughts  as    those    contained    therein,    although  set  forth   in  a

of  the  Tetrad  of  Pythagoras,  which  latter  is  very  ancient  and  signifies  the  decade.     It
is  arranged  thus :

1  '  =  10

2  The  Ineffable  H"  =z=  15

3  Name,  thus  IH^  =  21

4  nin^         =         26


•      •


•      •


•      •


10  72

The  sacred  Tetrad  of  the  Pythagoreans  appears  to  have  been  known  to  the  ancient
Chinese.  (Comp.  Etnleilung  in  das  Berstandnik  der  Wdtgeschichte^  von,  Aug.  Gla-
disch,  etc.  Die  alien  Schincsen  und  die  Fyl/iagorees,  Posen,  1841,  p.  82,  el  seq.  See
also  upon  the  Tetrad,  the  valuable  writing,  Pylhagore  el  la  Philosophie  Fythagoricienne,
etc.,  by  A.  Ed.  Chaignet,  Paris,  1873,  Vol.  ii,  pp.  96-128  and  other  places.)

*Comp.  in  this  connection,  the  writings  of  Candlish,  Davidson,  Stanton,  Drummond,
Schiirer,  Edersheim,  Ilausrath  and  others,  who  have  written  on  the  Messiah  and  the
coming  Kingdom  of  Heaven  upon  our  Earth,  with  the  teachings  of  the  Zohar  and
Qabbalah  upon  this  Sephirah.


204

different  manner.  With  the  Qabbalists,  the  Deity  is  above  but  not
4  completely  outside  of  the  numerals  and  letters ;  as  entities,  they  con-
stitute the  32  paths  of  that  Wisdom,  which  is  almost  synonymous  with
the  Will,  Word  and  Holy  Spirit,  which  are  with  them  a  Triad  yet  a  Unit.
With  them,  the  vitalizing  efflux  of  Elohim  is  in  Every-Thing  (see  ante^
p.  141,  note).

We  do  not  know  that  Ibn  Gebirol  wrote  any  Commentaries  upon  the
Old  Testament,  at  least  not  any  have  come  to  our  day  \  but  his  explana-
tions of  certain  texts,  as  cited  by  other  authors,  prove  that  he  was  fond
of  allegorical  interpretations.  Ibn  Ezra  (b.  circa  1088,  d.  11 76  A.  D.)
cites  him,  in  his  Commentary  upon  Genesis  (xxviii,  12).  He  states,  that
following  Ibn  Gebirol ;  the  ladder  which  Jacob  saw  in  his  dream,  signified
the  Superior  (or  rational)  soul;  **  the  angels  of  Elohim  "  which  mount
and  descend  thereon,  are  "  the  abstract  thoughts  of  Wisdom,"  which
attach  themselves  at  the  same  time,  both  to  a  spiritual  or  superior  subject,
and  also  to  the  corporeal  and  inferior.  Gebirol  defended  the  opinion  of
Saadyah  Gaon,  that  it  was  not  intended  in  Genesis,  to  attribute  in  reality
the  faculty  of  speech  to  the  serpent ;  and  Ibn  Ezra,  in  the  Commentary
above  cited,  also  quotes  the  following  mystical  and  allegorical  meaning
of  the  facts  set  forth  in  Genesis  ii  and  iii,  as  by  Gebirol:  **  'Paradise*  is
the  superior  world,  the  word  '  Garden  '  designates  the  inferior  world,  it  is
full  of  a  crowd  of  creatures  (men),  who  are  the  plants;  the  River  of  Para-
dise, is  the  first  matter,  mother  of  all  the  corporeal ;  *  the  four  heads  *  or
branches,  of  the  River,  designate  the  four  roots,  or  elements;  '  the  man  '
(/.  e.,  Adam)  who  names  all  the  animals,  is  Wisdom.  Havvah  or  Eve,  is
the  spirit  of  the  living  (the  power  of  vitalization),  which  gives  move-
ment, and  all  that  follows  from  it.  'The  Serpent,'  in  the  meaning  of
divination,  is  desire  (comp.  Gen.  xliv,  5,  to  tempt,  to  incite).  *  The
Tree  of  Knowledge,'  is  carnal  gratification,  the  power  of  which  comes
from  *  the  Garden  '  (desire  or  lust,  comes  from  vegetation,  or  the  products
of  the  dust  in  the  Garden,  therefore  the  serpent  of  desire  is  to  eat  dust  *'  all
the  days  of  (its)  life").  The  growth  in  the  dust,  is  the  seed  of  the
woman,  which  causes  the  end  (destruction)  of  that  which  comes  from
*  the  dust;'  and  the  end  of  the  living  (creature),  is  where  the  vegetation
begins  (/.  e.y  the  final  end  of  the  earthly  man,  is  his  return  to  the  ground  or


205

dust ;  from  which  vegetation,  the  life  of  the  animal,  proceeds).  *  The
clothes  of  skin,'  is  the  body,*  driven  away  from  *  the  Garden,'  to  culti-
vate the  soil,  from  whence  the  terrestrial  man  was  taken.  '  The  Tree  of
Life,*  is  the  higher  knowledge,  which  is  :  '  A  Tree  of  Life,  to  them  that
lay  hold  upon  it.*  (Prov.  iii,  i8.)  *The  Cherubim '  are  the  angels.  'The
flame  of  the  sword,'  refers  to  the  sun.  From  this  mystery  it  appears,
that  the  higher  intellectual  soul,  has  its  place  at  the  Throne  of  Glory
(She'keen-ah),  where  it  delights  in  the  glorious  and  tremendous  Name  of
Elohim."  (Comp.  Kether  Malkhuth.)  This  passage  evidently  considers
Wisdom,  doubtless  the  Higher  Wisdom,  as  a  separate  potency ;  and  the
human  body  is  a  later  condensation  of  the  original  body,  which  was  first
composed  of  Light.  Gebirol  therefore  places  the  corporeal  body  as  a
minimum  when  comparing  it  with  the  spiritual  body.

The  Zohar  calls  Wisdom,  the  Divine  Word,  which  announced  and  fin-
ished creation,  and  says;  that  it  is  the  foundation  of  all  spiritual  and
physical  life.  It  calls  Wisdom,  the  Upper  Paradise  or  Eden  illa-ah.^
This  Superior  Eden,  the  Wisdom  or  the  Ancient,  is  in  the  Zohar  **  a
Form  comprising  all  forms."  (Zohar,  Ibid,^  288^.)  The  idea  of  Wisdom
as  the  creating  power,  is  in  Proverbs,  Psalms,  St.  Paul,  St.  John,  Sirakh,
Wisdom,  and  other  places  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  The  Qab-
balists  and  many  of  the  Talmudists  make  B^ raisheeih,  i,  e.f  of  Gen.  i,  i,
Be* Raisheethy  i.  e.,  through  Wisdom,  Elohim  barah^  /.  ^.,  God  created.

The  Sephirah  'Hokhmah  or  Wisdom,  as  the  Word  ;  the  Logos  of  Philo
and  St.  John,  and  the  Chaldaic,  Memrah;  has  similar  ideas  clustering
around  it,  as  do  the  Vach,  i.e.j  Word,  of  the  Hindu,  Rig  Veda;  Hoftover,
/.  e.,  Word,  of  the  Persian,  Zend  Avesta ;  JV/sdom,  of  the  Proverbs  of
Solomon  and  of  the  later  Book  of  Wisdom ;  and  the  Avalokites'varay  or

*  "  The  flesh  of  man  is  a  garment,"  etc.  (Zohar  i,  20^.)  "  When  man  is  taken  away,
he  rids  himself  of  those  garments  in  which  he  was  dressed  ;  the  (garments  of)  skin  in
the  which  the  Son  of  Man  was  dressed,"  {^Ibid.  76a.)  The  learned  Qabbalist  Yehudah
b.  Salomo  Charisi,  or,  al-Charisi  (i  170-1230),  of  Toledo,  Spain ;  also  compares  the  body
of  man  lo  a  garment,  which  the  soul  takes  off  at  death  ;  and  to  a  prison,  from  which,  at
that  time,  the  soul  is  liberated.  He  says  :  "On  the  day  it  takes  off  the  body,  it  puts  off
its  ornaments,  and  rids  itself  of  the  ganncnts  of  its  captivity."

t  Comp,  Zohar,  iii,  Idrah  Zootah,  "  The  higher  Wisdom  is  also  called,  the  higher
Eden."


2o6

Kwan-Ytn,  the  Sakti  of  Amitdbha,  i.  g,,  boundless  light,  of  the  later
Buddhists.

Ne'bo,  the  god  of  Wisdom  of  ancient  Mesopotamia  and  Babylonia,
was  originally  the  deity  of  the  visible  universe,  who  was  the  bolt  or  binder^
of  its  several  parts  together.  (See  ante,  pp.  1 15 ;  190.)  He  was  "  the  bond  of
the  universe,'*  the  **  overseer  of  the  angel-hosts  of  heaven  and  earth."
The  ziggurrat  or  planet  tower  of  his  Temple  at  Borsippa,  was  called ;
**the  house  of  the  seven  bonds  (planets)  of  heaven  and  earth."  The
tower  of  the  seven  planets,  or  stations,  attached  to  his  house ;  was  in
seven  stages,  each  of  the  astrological  colour  of  the  planet  to  which  it  was
devoted.  Ne*bo  was  therefore  at  one  time  evidently  a  god  of  all  the
heavenly  bodies.  His  special  planet  in  Babylonia  was  Mercury ;  that  of
Merodach,  his  father,  who  anciently  was  the  Sun-god,  was  Jupiter ;  his
mother  was  Zarpanitu.  the  Moon-god.  Ne'bo  is  the  Semitic  Nabiu  or
I^d'boOf  a  prophet  or  proclaimer,  the  K'^J  of  Exod.  iv,  1-17.  Ne'bo  was
in  Borsippa,  considered  the  supreme  god,  the  creator  of  the  universe.

Moses,  the  Great  Prophet,  died  and  was  buried,  on  mount  Ne*bo.
Ne'bo  was  also  adored  as  the  god  of  wisdom  and  prophecy,  by  the  Canaan-
ites,  Moabites,  and  Assyrians,  and  in  Palestine  in  general.  Bo,  Bod,
Boden,  or  Buddha,  in  China,. Fo  ;  is  the  ancient  Buddhistic  god  of  En-
lightenment and  Wisdom ;  his  early  worshippers,  the  aboriginal  or  Dra-
vidian  races  of  India,  erected  the  Great  Topes  of  Amravati  and  Sanchi,
in  Hindustan,  to  him.  His  especial  day  among  the  Buddhists  and  Brah-
mins was  our  Wednesday,  which  among  the  ancient  Akkadians  was,  the
day  of  Ne'bo,  and  it  is  to  this  day,  in  India,  the  day  of  Buddha.  His
name  is  in  Wo,  Wod,  Wo*den,  of  the  Scandinavians,  from  whom  our
name  Wednesday  comes.  He  is  the  Thoth  of  the  Egyptians,  the  Hermes
of  the  Greeks,  and  the  Mercury  of  the  Romans,  who  named  our  Wednes-
day, after  him  ;  and  it  is  on  the  fourth  day,  Wednesday,  that  Genesis
tells  us;  the  planets,  etc.,  were  created  as  signs,  for  the  wise.  The  Word
or  Wisdom,  represents,  the  Creator  of  the  Universe  and  the  Mediator  be-
tween the  Holy  One  and  Its  creation.  In  the  Qabbalah  it  is  called,  the
Upper  Wisdom ;  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Sephirah  Malkhuth,  Kingdom,
the  Lower  Wisdom,  the  manifested  She'keen-ah  or  Glory  of  the  Deity.
It  is  the  Son  of  the  Sephirah  Kether,  the  Abstract  Thouglit,  the  Ego  or


207

Consciousness  of  existence ;  and  is  the  representative  of  the  Association
of  the  Abstract  Ideas  which  constitute  Wisdom,  and  is  looked  upon  as
the  Former  and  Maker,  of  the  existing  content  of  the  Universe.     With-
out such  Association  of  Ideas,    the   human   mind   could   not  compre-
hend.    It   is   used    almost    synonymously,    in   many  places,   by  Philo
and   St.  John ;  by   the  first  of  the  Messiah,   by   the   latter  of  Christ ;
and  by  the  Targum  of  Onkelos,  as  Wisdom,  the  Creator  of  all.     In
the  Targum  Ye'rushalmi  on  Genesis  i,  i,  it  is  said  :   "In  (By)  be-  Hohk^
mahy  Wisdom,  the  Lord  created.''     This  view  also  supported  by  Mai-
monides   in   his   Moreh   Ne'boo-kheem   {circa  1190  A.  D.     Comp.   S.
Munk*s  French  trans.,  ii,  pp.  232,  236  ;  English  Ed.,  ii,  p.  143  sq.^    The
Targum  above  cited,  also  says:   **  And  the  Mcmrah  (Word)  of  the  Lord
created  man  in  Its  likeness,  etc.*'    The  first  word  of  Genesis  B^raisheeth,
usually  translated  *'In  the  beginning;'*  has  had  various  meanings  as-
signed to  it.  Maimonides,  says  ;  it  should  be  read  as:  Be-Ralsheeih^  i.e.,
by  the  Principle ,  and  that  the  verse  should  be  translated :  "  /«  (or.  By)  the
Principle,  Elohim  {God)  created  the  height  and  the  depth  of  the  universe.
Principle  meaning  the  Upper  Wisdom,    **a  beginning  not  temporal.
The  learned  Beausobre  says :  *  '*  There  is  yet  a  reflection  to  be  made
upon  that  matter.     It  resolves  itself  upon  the  explanation  of  the  word
Raisheethy  which  is  at  the  commencement  of  Genesis,  and  which  ;  if  we
believe  the  ancient  Jewish  interpreters ;  does  not  signify,  the  Beginning,
but  the  active  and  immediate  Principle  of  all  Things.     Thus  instead  of
translating  :   •  At  the  beginning,  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth  :'
they  translate  :    *  God   made  the   heaven   and   earth   by  the  Principle,^
that  is;  according  to  the  Targum  of  Jonathan,  ^By  Wisdom,''     Maimon-
ides supports  the  view ;  that  only  this  explanation,  is  the  literal  and  true
one.     It  at  first  passed  among  the  Christians.     We  find  it  not  only  in
Chalcidius ;  who  remarks  that  it  came  from  the  Hebrews ;  but  also  in
Methodius,  Origen,  and  in  Clement  of  Alexandria ;  who  is  more  ancient
than  either.      *     H^     *      ^pj^e  latter  says,  there  is  only  one  God,  who  has
made  the  Principle  of  all  things ;  signifying  in  that  way,  his  first-born
Son.    St.  Peter  (II  Pet.  iii,  5-6),  who  has  very  well  understood,  that  word

*  Histoire  critique  de  Manic  hie  et  du  Manicheivne  par  M,  De  Beausobre,  A.  Amster-
dam, 1734,     Vol.  ii,  Bk.  vi,  ch,  i,  p.  290-1.     Comp.  Bk.  iv,  c.  vi,  p.  89.


208

(/.  ^.,  Wisdom),  says :  *  God  has  made  the  heaven  and  earth  by  the  Prin-
ciple.' That  principle  is  that  which  is  called,  Wisdom,  by  all  the  prophets.
The  Christian  philosophers  adopted  this  explanation  for  two  reasons.
I.  They  found  the  Trinity  of  the  divine  persons  at  the  head  of  the
(Hebrew)  scriptures.  God,  the  Father,  created  the  universe,  but  he  cre-
ated by  the  Principle  (Logos,  Wisdom),  which  is  His  Son,  and  the  Holy
Spirit  inflamed  and  animated  nature.  It  (the  Holy  Spirit)  was  borne
upon  the  waters,  says  Moses:  'That  explanation,*  St.  Augustine  says:
'  gives  me  so  much  the  more  pleasure,  as  in  that  way,  I  find  the  Trinity
established  at  the  head  of  the  Holy  Book  of  Genesis.*  II.  The  aforesaid
explanation  favored  the  sentiment  of  the  Christian  philosophers,  who  be-
lieved in  the  pre-existence  of  the  Intelligible  world,  because,  if  by  Rat-
sheeih  is  understood  the  Active  Principle  of  Creation,  and  not,  the  Begin-
ning ;  then  it  has  no  more  than  said ;  the  Heaven  and  Earth  were  the
first  works  of  God.  And  Moses  has  only  said,  that  '  God  created  the
Heaven  and  Earth  by  ih^  Principle ^^  which  is  His  Son.  It  is  not  the
epoch,  it  is  the  immediate  Author  of  Creation,  which  it  teaches.  St.
Augustine  has  also  said  :  *  The  angels  have  been  made  before  the  Firma-
ment, and  even  before  that  which  is  reported  by  Moses ;  God  made  the
Heaven  and  the  Earth  by  the  Principle ;  because  by  this  word  Principle
is  desired  ;  not  to  express  that  the  Heaven  and  Earth,  were  made  before
all  things,  since  God  had  already  made  the  angels  precedently;  it  means
to  say :  that  God  has  made  all  things  by  Wisdom,  which  is  His  Word,  and
which  the  scripture  has  called,  the  Principle.'  '*  St.  Paul  (I  Cor.  ii,  7,  8)
says :  "But  we  speak  the  Wisdom  of  God,  in  a  mystery,  even  the  Hidden
ivisdom,  which  God  ordained  before  the  worlds  unto  our  glory.  Which
none  of  the  rulers  of  this  world  knew :  for  had  they  known  it,  they  would
not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory.'*  T\\\^  Hidden  Wisdom  is  Christ
(I  Cor.  i,  21-24;  Col.  ii,  3),  *'who  of  God,  is  made  unto  us  Wisdom,
and  Righteousness,  and  Sanctification  (Holiness)  and  Redemption.*'
(^Ibid,  30-31.)  ''Wherein  He  hath  abounded  towards  us  in  all  Wisdom
and  Prudence,' '  (One  of  the  names  of  Binah,  Understanding,  the  Rua'h
ha-Qadosh,  i.  e.,  the  Holy  Spirit.)  (Eph.  i,  8).  "I  Wisdom  dwell  with
Prudence;  and  the  Knowledge  of  discreet  Thoughts  do  I  discover."
(Prov.  viii,  12.)     "Christ  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  Wisdom


209

^n^  Knowledge  *^  (Col.  ii,  3.)  ''Now  ye  are  the  body  of  Christ,  and
members  in  particular.**  (I  Cor.  xii,  27  ;  compare  the  whole  chapter  with
I  Cor.  XV.)  St.  Paul  referring  to  Christ  as  the  Son,  says  :  '*  Who  is  the
image  of  the  invisible  God,  the  first  born  of  all  creation ;  for  in  him  were
all  things  created^  in  the  heavens  and  upon  earthy  things  visible  and  things
invisible,  whether  thrones ^  or  dominions ^  or  principalities y  or  powers ;  all
things  have  been  created  through  him  and  unto  him,  and  he  is  before  all
things  y  and  in  him  all  things  consist,  (exist?)  And  he  is  the  head  of  the  body^
the  Church,  *  *  that  in  all  things  he  might  have  pre-eminence.  For
it  was  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  the  fullness
dwell,  etc.*'  (Col.  i,  15-20.)  Compare  with  this,  there  is  a  Heavenly
Adam  and  an  Earthly  Adam.  (I  Cor.  xv,  45-49,  22-28  and  I  Cor.  xii.)
"His  Son  *  *  by  whom  also  he  made  the  worlds.'*  (Heb.  i,  2.)
''We  understand  that  the  worlds  were  formed  by  the  Word  of  God,  so
that  things  which  are  seen,  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear."
{Ibid,  xi,  3.)  "  For  thy  Almighty  hand,  that  made  the  world  of  matter ^
unthout  form,**  (Wisdom,  xi,  17.)  "  And  by  his  Memrah  was  the  world
created."  Targum  of  Onkelos  to  Deut.  xxxiii,  27.  "The  world  was
made  by  him,"  /.  e,y  the  Word.    (St.  John  i,  10.)*

Ibn  Gebirol,  says,  in  his  Kether  Malkhuth:  "Wisdom  is  the  fountain
of  life."  The  Zohar  says :  "  The  seventh  palace,  the  fountain  of  life,  is
the  first  in  the  order  from  above,  etc.*'  (Zohar,  ii,  261a.)

To  account  for  the  construction  of  the  world,  Gebirol  introduced  simple

♦Compare  with  these :  Eph.  i,  18,  21 ;  iii,  9,  10;  Col.  ii,  3 ;  Rom.  xvi,  25-27;  Jude
25;  James  iii,  17;  Prov.  viii,  ix ;  Hebrews,  St.  John  and,  Philo :  iii,  95,  iv,  391-2;
Book  of  Wisdom,  xviii,  14-15  ;  i,  4,  5;  and  Sirakh  xxiv,  3-9;  Targum  of  Onkelos  to
Deuter.  xxxiii,  27;  Book  of  Enoch,  Schodde*s  English  trans.,  p.  208,  c.  84;  p.  137 ;  c.
48,  50;  c.  49  and  other  places;  Apocryphal  New  Test.,  p.  174;  Epist.  of  Barnabas
(Ibid.)  iv,  7 ;  v,  12.  The  Conciliator  of  R.  Menasseh  ben  Israel,  etc.,  London,  1842,  p.
6.  Basnage,  Hist,  of  the  Jews,  Bk.  iv,  c.  v,  \  vii,  English  trans.,  p.  288,  col.  2.  Kircher*s
(Ed,  yEgypti,  Vol.  ii,  c.  ix,  g  iv,  p.  309.  Anacalypsis  of  Godfrey  Higgins,  Vol.  i,  pp.
73»  75-Si,  122,  235,  250,  264-5,  3o8»  338,  348,  469,  5"»  5^41  769*  803,  806-7,  etc.,  as
cited  in  index  Vol.  i,  p.  862.  Hidden  Wisdom  of  Christ,  by  De  Bunsen,  i,  p.  430.  Tar-
gums  by  J.  W.  Elheridge,  London,  1862,  i,  pp.  157,  160,  162.  Bertholdt's  Chrisiology,
p.  131.  As  to  the  Talmud,  Hershon's  Genesis,  etc.,  p.  79;  Hershon's  Talmudic  Mis.,
p.  104.  Heb.  Mis.  Society,  Hebrew  Liter.,  London,  i,  p.  40,  note.
14


2IO

substances  between  the  Godhead  and  the  physical  world ,  he  does  not
actually  use  the  term  Sephiroth,  but  his  idea  of  the  highest  and  simple
substances,  evidently  refers  to  them  ;  he  also  speaks  of  the  spheres  in  the
same  way  as  Philo  (Philo,  iii,  185-6)  and  the  Qabbalists.  The  spheres,
or  properly  the  orbits,  of  the  planetary  and  astronomical  universe,  were
doubtless  those  which  entered  into  the  idea  of  the  Sephiroth.  This  was
an  ancient  idea.  And  we  think  we  may  assert ;  that  the  simple  sub-
stances of  Gebirol  refer  to  tie  orbits,  called  in  his  time,  the  spheres  of
the  planets,  and  to  other  ancient  astronomical  divisions  of  the  heavens.
He  speaks  of  the  sensible  spheres  which  emanate  from  the  intelligible
spheres.  (Me*q6r,  iv,  §  8.)  Of  the  corporeal  spheres  emanating  from  the
spiritual  spheres.  {Ibid.,  §1.)  That  the  simple  substances  are  called
spheres  or  circles.  (Ibid,,  iii,  §41  ;  ii,  §  i,  §§  3,  4.)  His  nine  categories
evidently  refer  to  these  spheres.  {Ibid.,  §§  11,  12,  23 ;  iii,  §§  i,  2,  8,  17,
36,  41  ;  iv,  §§  I,  8 ;  v,  67,  and  other  places.)  The  potential  energy  of
the  Deity ;  penetrates  all,  surrounds  all,  and  acts  in  all,  through  all  eternity.
{Ibid.,  iii,  §  14;  iv,  §  23,  §  29.)  With  Gebirol,  the  body  of  man  as
the  Mikrokbsm,  corresponds  to  the  concrete  body  of  the  perfect  ideal
vitality  of  the  universe,  the  Great  Ideal  or  Forming  Man,  the  Makro-
kosm  {Ibid,,  iii,  §  44,  §  6).

The  connection  between  the  Highest  and  the  Lowest ;  through  the  sur-
rounding orbits,  spheres  or  coatings,  supposed  to  surround  our  earth ;  was
a  very  ancient  idea,  and  is  a  reminiscence  of  the  archaic  astronomical
religious  philosophy;  of  the  Akkadians,  Chaldeans,  Assyrians,  Babylo-
nians, Hebrews  and  Hindus,  with  some  of  these  peoples,  going  back
thousands  of  years  before  the  Christian  era.  Philo  evidently  has  this
in  his  mind.  (See  his  works,  iii,  pp.  177,  184-186,  190,  196;  ii,  138,
208.  Comp.  his  treat.  On  Fugitives,  ii,  320-326,  136-139,  and  other
places.)

The  Qabbalah  frequently  uses  instead  of  the  word  Sephiroth,  the  word
kaileem,  i.  e.,  vessels,  for  the  intermediaries,  and  thus  indicates  the
indirectness  of  their  activity.  Gebirol  in  his  Kether  Malkhuth  says  of
the  Will,  the  emanation  proceeding  immediately  from  the  Absolute :
**  He  (It)  draws  from  the  Source  of  Light  without  a  pail  (or  bucket)  and
effects  everything  without  a  vessel.*'  (Comp.  the  Me'qdr,  iii,  §  15.)     In-


21  I

Stead  of  Sephiroth,  he  often  uses,  orbits  or  spheres,  but  generally,  "  cate-
gories.*' He  tells  us,  the  potentiality  of  the  Holy  One,  is  more  visible
in  some  of  the  simple  substances  than  in  others.  (73///.,  iii,§§  32,  33.)
The  same  idea  is  in  the  Zohar  and  other  Qabbalistic  books,  where  this
greater  or  less  potentiality;  is  sometimes  called,  Parzupheem,  /.  ^.,  Faces
(Visages  or  Aspects).

Referring  to  the  idea  of  the  divine  power  being  weaker  in  some  of  the
simple  substances  than  in  others,  depending  on  the  distance  from  the
source.  "  How  is  it  possible,'*  he  asks,  *'that  the  divine  power  should
weaken,  alter,  or  materialize  itself;  and  that  the  action  of  the  First
Agent  show  itself,  more  in  certain  substances  than  in  others,  seeing  that
it  is  the  perfect  completeness  of  all  power,  perfection  and  faculty?"  and
he  evades  this  by  answering  :  **  It  does  not  depend  on  the  giver  but  on
the  recipient ;  for  at  a  great  distance  from  the  source,  the  receiving  mat-
ter, is  less  apt  to  receive  the  abundance,  from  the  Forms  of  Light  stream-
ing into  it."  (Comp.  Me'qor,  iii,  §§  13,  32.)

In  the  Kether  Malkhuth,  he  says  :  '*  Thyself,  thou  art  the  Being,  who
from  the  shadow  of  thy  Light  hast  made  the  generation  of  all  that  which
is."  We  may  sum  up  Gebirol's  propositions  to  be;  that  the  Infinite
Light,  which  at  first  filled  all,  retired  itself  into  itself,  that  is,  the  Infinite
rays  retired  into  a  centre  or  point,  and  left  Space,  the  Abyss,  which  is  a
species  of  shadow  or  vacuum ;  afterward,  the  Divine  Light  gradually  com-
municated it^elf  with  more  or  less  energy,  into  the  Space  or  Abyss;  ac-
cording to  the  receptibility  of  matter,  and  to  the  proportion  of  vitalizing
energy,  which  the  Divine  Will  wished  to  impart  to  it.  This  is  also  a  con-
densed statement  of  the  Zoharic  cosmogony,  and  the  Qabbalistic  theory
of  Tzim-tzum,  /.  ^.,  expansion  and  contraction,  or  the  symbolism  used  by
it,  to  set  forth  philosophically,  the  centrifugal  and  centripetal  motion  or
energy ;  which,  under  the  direction  of  God,  made  and  maintains,  the
universe.  According  to  the  Qabbalah  the  Light  of  the  Infinite  Being,
the  Ain  Soph,  /,  e,,  the  Endless  One,  the  nevertheless  to  man's  finite
thought  No-Thing  or  Non-Ego,  originally  filled  All ;  and  in  order  to
manifest  Itself,  this  Unknowable  in  its  Essence  Deity,  made  Space,  and
in  Space  It  developed  or  created  gradually,  through  an  emanation  in
which  It  was  immanent  yet  transcendental.    At  first  It  concentrated  Itself


212

in  Its  own  Essence,  and  that  caused  Space  or  a  place  for  ihe  universe  to  be
constructed  in,  this  was  the  Abyss;  It  afterwards  filled  this  Space  success-
ively and  in  different  gradations  or  degrees,  with  Its  vitalizing  Light.*

The  Great  Qabbalist^  Moses  Cordovera   (1522-1570  A.  D.)  in  his
Pardes  Rim-monim,  /.  ^.,  Paradise,  or  Garden,  of  Pomegranites,  fol.  55^^
says  :  **  Elohim  (God)  is  the  prototype  of  all  being,  and  all  things  are  in
Him,  in  their  purest  and  most  complete  Form ;  so  that  the  perfection  of
the  created,  consists  exactly  in  the  existence,  in  which  they  find  them-
selves (in  affinity)  with  the  original  source  of  their  being;  and  in  propor-
tion to  the  distance  of  their  departing  from  the  Deity,  they  will  sink
down    from    that    perfect    and    sublime  condition.'*      The   Qabbalists
hold,  like  Gebirol,  the  Supreme  Deity  alone,  is  absolutely  simple ;  and  that
all    the   other   simple,  intelligible    substances   are   composed  of  Form
and  Matter.     Joseph  Chiquitilla,  an  erudite  Qabbalist,  says :  "  Know
that  in  all  created  things,  superior  and  inferior,  there  is  not  anything
absolutely  simple.     The  Supreme  Deity  alone  is  pure  simplicity,  and  a
Unit  without  any  multiplication  ;  but,  among  all  the  other  beings,  com-
prising therein  even  the  separate  and  superior  intelligences  which  we  call
angels,  there  is  not  one  who  is  simple  and  without  multiplicity.    *    ^    ^
They  bear  an  occult  matter,  simple  and  superior,  which  does  not  resem-
ble our  matter,  etc/'  (see  his  Sepher  ha-Nik-kood^  fol.  3^.)

In  the  system  of  Gebirol,  as  in  that  of  the  Zohar,  and  of  almost  all  the
most  archaic  Eastern  religious  philosophy,  the  Triad  holds  a  most  important
position  as  the  principle  of  the  universe.  Our  author  says  :  '*  The  Triad
is  the  root  of  everything  *'  (Me*q6r,  v,  §  56,  §  30;  iv,  §  32,  §§  17-20,
8).  The  Qabbalah  and  Zohar  develope  the  Sephiroth  in  the  Triadic
form,  and  the  antient  Akkadians,  Chaldeans,  Babylonians,  Hindus,
Chinese,  and  Persians,  arranged  their  heavens  and  deities  in  Triads.  In
the  Qabbalah  each  of  the  opposites,  together  a  dualty,  are  united  by  a
harmony  and  make  a  triad,  and  together,  they  constitute  but  one  unity.
The  Idrah  Zootah  (Zohar,  iii,  fol.  288^)  says:  **The  Ancient,  whose
Name  be  Blessed  !  has  Three  Heads  which  are  yet  One  Head.  And  as
the  Ancient  is  designated  by  the  number  three,  so  also,  all  the  other

♦Franck,   La  Kabbale,   p.   186.     Zohar,  Idrah  Rabbah.     See  Joel,  Relig,  Philos.
Sohar,


213

lights  (Sephiroth)  with  their  scintillations,  are  comprised  in  the  number
three."

The  idea  that  the  Triad  is  the  root  of  everything,  is  in  a  great  number
of  places  in  the  Zohar,  we  have  the  quotations  but  not  space  to  now
insert  them.  The  Triadic  idea  of  the  Deity  is  also  in  Philo,  but  he  says,
it  is  a  great  mystery  not  to  be  given  to  the  uninitiated.

As  to  the  creation  out  of  nothing  {creaiio  ex  nihilo)  Gebirol  appears  to
agree  with  the  Qabbalists.  He  compares  creation  to  the  water  going  out
of  its  source  (Maqor,  v,  §  64)  and  to  the  impression  of  a  form  in  a  mir-
ror (73///.,  §  71 ;  ii,  §  27)  God  *'  has  produced  existence  out  of  the  No-
Thing.'*  ''Thou  drawest  forth,"  he  says,  "the  Light  from  its  source,
but  not  by  any  human  means ;  and  hast  produced  all,  without  the  means
used  by  man.  Thou  hast  arranged  and  fixed,  and  purified  and  cleansed  ;
and  called  unto  the  nonentity  (?  No-Thing)  and  it  was  dis-placed,  etc."
(Kether  Malkhuth).  The  Qabbalists  admit  the  objection  to  ex  nihilo
nihil fit^  and  declare  the  universe  emanated  from  No-Thing,  by  the  poten-
tiality of  the  Divine  Will,  and  the  Desire  or  Word.  They  however  say :
*'  If  the  world  came  into  existence,  the  nothing  is  meant  as  the  No-
Thing,  /.  ^.,  it  came  from  a  spiritual  source,  which  was  not  a  Thing  in
any  sense  which  we  can  apply  to  a  Thing.**  This  No-Thing  is  the  '  Cause
of  Causes,*  the  Ain  Soph,  the  Endless,  or  the  Ayin,  /.  /.,  the  No-Thing.

The  optical  metaphor  of  the  light,  visible  or  invisible  to  the  eye ;  plays
a  most  important  part  in  the  Zohar  and  in  Ibn  Gebirol's  philosophy.
The  former  says :  "  Come  and  see.  There  are  four  lights  !  Three  of
them  are  concealed  and  one  is  revealed,  etc.  In  the  eye  there  are  three
colors,  which  are  revealed  and  marked  therein,  and  none  of  them  are
guarded ;  for  they  exist  (stand),  in  the  light  that  does  not  shine,  etc.
And  regarding  this  secret,  close  thine  eyes  and  turn  thine  eye-balls ;  and
those  colors  that  are  in  that  light  and  that  are  not  guarded,  will  be  re-
vealed, etc."  (Zohar,  ii,  23^.  Comp.  Talmud,  treatise  Vevamolh,  49^).
Ibn  Gebirol  says :  "  Thou  art  wise ;  and  being  the  architect  of  unbounded
might,  hast  from  Thy  own  Wisdom  imparted  an  immediate  Desire
{Chephefz)  to  draw  the  emanation  of  existence  from  non-existence;  *  *
*  as  the  ray  of  light  which  comes  forth  from  the  fountain  of  vision  (the
eye),  illumines  obscurity,  etc.     *     *     *     Thou  drawest  forth  the  light,


214

which  comes  forth  from  the  eye,  and  attracts  from  the  source  of  light  but
not  by  human  means.

And  Thou  hast  hewn  out  and  engraved,

And  spoken  to  the  non-entity  (the  No-Thing)  and  it  unfolded  (was
opened  or  displaced) ;

And  to  the  existence,  and  it  was  fixed ;

To  the  universe,  and  it  was  expanded."  (Kether  Malkhuth.)  Ibn
Gebirol  says  :  ''How  wonderful  are  the  words  of  the  philosophers  about
sense  of  the  eye-sight  when  they  say ;  that  the  soul  {nephesK)  has  spiritual
colours  which  appear  in  the  motions  of  the  eye-lids."  (Comp.  his  Tiq-
qooneh  Middoth  han-nephesh^  \a,)  "The  Deity  made  formations  in  the
light  of  above,  etc. ;  When  he  measured  out  the  Messiah,  It  made  colors
to  shine  inside,  etc.  It  opened  and  did  not  burst  (or  split)  its  air  (the
azoth).  It  did  not  make  Itself  in  anyway  known,  until  by  emana-
tion from  this  opening,  a  point  was  lighted,  etc."  (Zohar,  i,  15^.)
**Thou  art  the  Light  which  is  hidden  in  this  world,  but  which  shall
be  revealed  in  the  Celestial  World ;  for  on  the  mount  of  the  Lord,  shall
it  be  seen."  (Kether  Malkhuth.)  Human  vision  is  also  mentioned  a
number  of  times  with  like  purpose  in  the  Me'qor.  (Comp.  v,  §  62  and
other  places.)  Moses  Cordovero  uses  the  same  simile:  "The  Holy
'  One  may  he  be  Praised  !  Who  is  the  girdle  of  energy,  who  is  One,
and  in  whom  all  the  faculties  form  only  One  Unity :  similar  to  the  fiame
of  the  fire,  which  contains  different  colors,  and  of  the  light  of  the  eye,
which  goes  out  of  the  pupil ;  these  faculties  emanate  one  from  the  other,
as  the  odor  emanates  from  odor,  and  light  from  light,"  (Fardes  J^im-
monm,  §  4).  Hay  Gaon  (969-1038  A.  D.)  and  Ibn  Ezra  (b.  circa
1088,  d.  1 1 76  A.  D.),  use  the  same  imagery  from  the  human  power  of
sight.  In  the  Hindu  mythology  the  eye  of  a  deity  never  winks.  (Indian
Wisdom,  by  Monier  Williams,  p.  16,  n.  2.)  The  Zohar  in  the  Idrah
Rabbah  says ;  the  eye  of  Providence,  like  those  of  a  fish,  has  not  any  lids,
but  is  always  open  :  (see  in  this  connection.  The  Path,  New  York,  March,
1887).  The  Zohar  uses  the  Light  as  an  illustration  of  the  Mediator  be-
tween the  Ideal  and  the  Real.  "  Let  Light  Be  !  all  that  came  forth,  is
so  by  this  mystery,  etc. "  (Zohar  i,  i6<^.)  The  eye  is  also  used  in  the
Zohar  to  explain  the  Divine  illumination  of  man.     (J^did.  ii,  23^  and  ^.)


2»5

In  the  Tiqqooneh  haz-Zohar  (Tiqqoon,  70),  is  this  beautiful  allegory  of
the  soul  as  it  manifests  itself  through  the  light  of  the  eyes :  "  '  In  the
beginning  Elohira  (God)  created  :  '  This  is  the  soul  when  it  emerges
from  the  bosom  of  its  mother,  and  it  is  taught  of  it ;  *  And  the  earth  was
void  and  in  confusion  and  darkness  was  upon  the  surface  of  the  abyss ; '
for  its  eyes  were  closed.  Has  it  opened  its  eyes  ?  '  And  Elohim  said :
Let  light  be  !'  After  this  man  is  gathered  in  from  this  world,  and  what  is
written  about  the  soul ;  '  And  Elohim  said :  Let  the  water  be  gathered
from  beneath  the  heaven  to  one  place,  and  let  the  dryland  appear  1'
When  the  soul  is  taken  from  the  man,  the  body  remains  *  dry  land.'  "

Ibn  Ezra  in  his  short  Commentary  to  Genesis,  says:  "I  will  now
explain  to  you  the  mystery  of  the  venerated  and  awful  Name,  and  the
mystery  of  the  angels;  and  I  will  make  a  simile  for  you,  from  the  light  of
the  soul  which  comes  forth  from  the  eye.  Know  then  that  the  eye  con-
sists of  seven  degrees,  and  that  the  inside  one,  is  the  white  point.  And
behold  the  light  is  not  a  body  (substance),  and  the  light  of  the  soul,
requires  another  light  from  the  outside,  etc.'*  It  was  held  by  the  ancient
anatomists  and  philosophers,  that  in  seeing ;  an  intellectual  force  streamed
out  of  the  eye,  which  came  in  contact  with  the  objects  observed,  and
returned  them  to  the  eye.  This  was  *'the  light  of  the  soul  which
comes  forth  from  the  eye."  In  Gerson  ben  Salomo's  writing,  Sha-arek
has'shamayeemy  /.  <?.,  Gates  of  Heaven:  the  coatings  of  the  eye  are
called  chutanoth,  /.^.,  shirts  or  epidermis  (in  optics,  tunica)  or  me^hiizoth^
/.  <f.,  separations.  Gerson  and  Samuel  ^arga,  quote  the  component  parts
under  different  names.     Three  are  fluid,  seven,  solid,  together  ten  :  viz :

1.  The  crystal,  /.  <?.,  the  vitreous  humor.     This  includes  the  lens.

2.  The  sapphire,  /'.  <?.,  the  aqueous  humor,    ^ar^a  calls  it,   "  the  icy  "

from  kerd'h,  ice.

3.  The  tasteless  fluid,  /.  e.,  the  albugineous  humor.     Qarga  calls  its,

"  ^Z^  white  "  from  be'tzah,  an  tgg.
The  seven  solid  parts  (separations,  shirts  or  degrees)  are :

1.  The  net,  /.  <?.,  the  retina,     Qarga  calls  it,  the  "cobweb."

2.  The    epidermis,  i,  e,,   the    tunica    vasculosa,     (^ar^a    says,   "epi-

dermic."

3.  The  hard  one,  /.  e, ,  the  tunica  sclerotica.


2l6

4.  The  dish-like  separated  web,  /.  ^.,  the  iris.     Qatqa,  sajrs,   **  the

bread-like."

5.  The  grape-like,  /.  e,,  the  tunica  uvea,

6.  The  horney,  /.  e, ,  tunica  cornea,

7.  The  conjoining,  /.  ^.,  the  ligamentum  ciliare,  Qar^a  says,  "the
net-like."

The  arrangement  of  the  points  of  the  compass,  elements  and  metals,  in
the  Zohar  (ii,  2^  and  b),  are :

North  East  South  West

*      Fire  Air  Water  Earth

Gold  Bronze  (or  Copper)    Silver  Iron

After  this  the  internal  connection  between  the  twelve  is  shown.  It
then  says,  ''  Come  and  see !  Fire,  air,  water,  and  earth,  are  all  united
with  each  other,  and  conjoined,  one  with  the  other,  and  there  is  not  any
void  (vacuum)  between  them,  etc. ;  as  it  is  taught  in  the  Holy  Writings;
'  And  from  thence  it  separates  and  becomes  four  heads.'  "  That  is  the
four  principal  streams  of  Eden.  Gebirol  has  a  similar  idea  in  the  Kether
Malkhuth,  and  says:  ''Thou  didst  form  the  globe  of  the  earth,  divided
into  two  parts,  one  half  dry  land,  and  one  half,  water.  Thou  didst
encompass  the  water  with  the  elementary  sphere  of  air.  *  *  *  Thou
didst  also  encompass  the  air  with  the  element  of  fire.*  These  four
elements  have  but  one  foundation  (element,)  and  their  source  is  one,  from
which  they  emanate  and  are  ever  renewed  ;  and  from  which  they  are
separated  and  become  four  branches  or  heads. ''f  The  Great  Man  seen  by
Nebuchadnezzar  in  his  dream  (Daniel  ii)  was  composed  of  these  metals,
but  his  feet  were  part  iron,  and  part  pottery  (clay  or  earth).  It  was  most
likely  intended  as  a  symbol  of  the  Makrokosm,  the  Great  Universal
Heavenly  Man,  composed  of  the  Four  Worlds  of  the  Qabbalah,  through
which  it,  as  the  intermediary,  extends.

♦  This  refers  to  the  hidden,  elementary  fire  or  vitalizing  energy,  which  permeates
everything  and  holds  the  universes  together.  The  elementary  air,  is  the  azoth,  perhaps
the  same  as  the  akasi  of  the  Hindu  philosophy,  or,  the  luminiferous  aether,  of  modem
physics.

I  Comp.  Dr.  Jellinek,  Beitr&ge  zur  Geschichte  der  Kabbala,  2  Vol.,  Leipzig,  1852,
p.  38.


217

In  his  Commentary  on  Daniel  (xi,  20)  Ibn  Ezra,  says :  Ibn  Gebirol
was  among  those  who  had  calculated  the  epoch  of  the  coming  of  the
Messiah,  and  founded  it  upon  astrological  theories.  Ibn  Ezra  is  himself,
at  this  place,  referring  to  a  great  conjunction  of  the  superior  planets  Ju-
piter and  Saturn.  Ideas  upon  the  time  of  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  are
in  the  Zohar.     (Comp.  ante,  TT  sq.)

Our  author  also  makes  use  of  the  poetical  figure :  "  He  supports  the
world  like  a  bunch  of  grapes,"  which  is  in  the  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah  of
the  Zohar  (ii,  179^?) :  "  They  hang  on  It  like  grapes  in  a  bunch."  He  re-
fers to  the  elementary,  hidden  invisible  fire,  so  does  the  Zohar.  In  his
poem  called  "  Forget  thy  Sadness,"  he  says :

"  That  day  He  wills  thy  flight
Like  a  bird  to  her  nest."

Bird  is  a  Hebrew  term  for  angel,  the  Bird's  nest,  is  heaven.  This  idea
of  bird  and  angel,  is  in  the  book  of  Ecclesiastes  (x,  20)  and  the  Talmud.
In  the  Zohar  the  Bosom  of  God  is  called,  **  the  Bird's  Nest."  "  When
the  Messiah  shall  be  made  perfect,  through  the  instrumentality  of  the
righteous ;  he  will  enter  the  Garden  of  Eden,  into  that  place  which  is
called  the  Bird's  Nest."  (Zohar,  ii,  8^,  comp.  antey  p.  86.)  "  And  that
is  what  the  (biblical)  passage  says :  *  Like  a  bird  that  is  flying  from  its
nest,'  and  that  is  the  soul  from  which  the  She'kheen-ah  does  not  move
away."  (Rayah  Me'hemnah,  Zohar,  iii,  278^.)  "About  the  Holy  One,
Blessed  be  It !  And  his  She'kheen-ah,  the  verse  says  :  'Like  a  bird  that
is  flying  from  its  nest,  etc'  This  is  also  that  which  is  written,  *  Also  the
bird  found  a  house,  and  the  sparrow  a  nest  for  herself.'  "  (Tiqqooneem
to  Zohar  Chadash,  72//,  Amsterdam  edition.)  Gebirol  also  says,  in  the
Kether  Malkhuth  :  '*  Thine  is  the  Might,  in  the  Mystery  of  which  our  con-
templations are  too  feeble  to  stay."  Only  if  "  Might  "  is  used  as  a  tech-
nical term  for  Mysticism  does  the  mentioning  of  '*  Mystery  "  get  a  proper
sense.  R.  Yekhutiel  says :  ''All  thoughts  rise  in  vain  to  reach  it,"  /.  ^.,
this  Mysticism.  "  Thine  is  the  hidden  Name  from  the  habitations  of
Wisdom."  (Kether  Malkhuth.)  Knowledge  or  Wisdom,  the  Gnosis,  is  used
in  the  same  way  by  Hay  Gaon.  "  Thine  is  the  existence,  from  the
shadow  of  the  Light  of  which,  all  existence  came."  {IbidS)  The  sym-
bolism of  Light  in  the  theory  of  the  Creation  is  also  in  Hay.


2X8


Ibn  Gebirol's  poem  on  "  The  Thirty-two  Paths ;  **  shows  the  extent  to
which  he  occupied  himself  with  the  Qabbalistic  Sepher  Ye*tzeer-ah.  Hay
also  took  the  Ye*tzeer-ah  as  the  basis  of  his  Gnosis.  Comp.  as  to  these
last  statements,  Dr.  Jellinek*s,  Beitrdge  zur  Geschichte  der  Kabbala,  Vol.
ii,  p.  26  et  seq.

In  looking  at  the  writings  of  Philo,  Ibn  Shaprut,  R.  Hay  Gaon,  R.
Yekhutiel,  Ibn  Gebirol,  Azriel  and  the  Zoharic  books,  and  many  state-
ments in  Maimonides ;  we  can  see  such  an  affinity  between  their  writings,
that  it  evidences  the  antiquity  of  the  Qabbalistic  philosophy ;  and  that  they
all  drew  from  a  common  and  much  more  remote  source.  Our  essay  is
only  an  attempt,  to  show  the  similarity  of  the  philosophy  of  Ibn  Gebirol
with  that  of  the  Qabbalists  preceding  and  succeeding  him ;  and  with  that
in  the  Zohar  and  Zoharic  books ;  all  drawing  their  ideas  from  the  ancient
Sod,  Mysteries  or  Secret  Learning,  which  was  delivered  orally  in  its  full-
ness ;  and  as  to  which,  only  hints  were  noted  in  the  old  secret  manuscripts
as  aids  to  the  memory.  These  are  a  few  of  the  points  of  resemblance
between  the  ideas  of  Ibn  Gebirol  and  the  Zohar  and  Qabbalah,  many
others  exist,  which  we  have  not  had  the  time  and  place,  to  insert  in  this
writing ;  the  student  can  follow  up  our  ideas.

Numerous  similarities  exist  between  the  content  of  the  Zoharic  and
other  early  Qabbalistic  writings ;  and  the  translations  from  the  cuneiform
terra  cotta  tablets  found  in  the  ruins  of  Assyria  and  Babylonia.  Showing
that  the  ancient  Babylonian  religion  influenced  the  Qabbalistic  philoso-
phy, and  that  much  of  the  Zoharic  writings  came  through  the  Babylonian
Jews.


Fig.  14.


Fig.  15.


Fig.  x6.


©


Fig.  17.


Fig.  x8.


Fig.  19.


Figure  20.


Figure  ax.


XL


THE  HEBREW  QABBALAH  AND  ITS  ORIGIN.  ITS  CONTENT  AND  THE  PROB-
LEMS IT  SEEKS  TO  SOLVE.  FROM  THE  VISIBLE  ASCERTAIN  THE  INVISI-
BLE. THE  SEVERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  THE  QABBALAH.  THE  FOUR  ANIMALS
OF  THE  ANCIENT  CHALDEAN  AND  HINDU  RELIGIONS  AND  THOSE  OF  THE
MERKABAH,  THEIR  COLOURS,  ETC.  THE  SPECULATIVE  QABBALAH.  THE
QABBALAH  OF  THE  ROMAN  CATHOLIC  CHURCH  AND  OF  THE  LAW.
CURIOUS  PARALLELS  REGARDING  THE  SERPENT,  THE  WORLD — TREE,
AND  THE  SEVEN  KINGS  OF  EDOM  ;  IN  THE  ZOHARIC  BOOKS  AND  THE
CUNEIFORM   TABLETS.


The  predominating  influence  shown  in  the  writings  of  Ibn  Gebirol,  is
that  of  the  ancient  Qabbalistic  philosophy ;  as  far  as  it  had  been  received,
developed  and  not  lost,  up  to  his  time,  in  Judaism.  Long  before  his
time,  indeed  we  believe  many  centuries  before  the  Christian  era,  there
was  in  Central  Asia,  a  "  Wisdom  Religion;  **  fragments  of  which  subse-
quently existed  among  the  learned  men  of  the  archaic  Egyptians,  the  an-
cient Chinese,  Hindus,  Israelites  and  other  Asiatic  nations ;  as  a  secret
metaphysical  philosophy,  and  also  as  a  secret  physical  philosophy.  These
together,  were  ultimately  formulated  among  the  Hebrews  and  Jews,  under
the  designation;  Secret  Learning  or  Sithrai  Thorah,  /.  e,,  Secrets  of  the


220

Thorah,  also,  Ras6  Thorah;  Sodoth  Thorah,  and  simply,  Sod,  /.^.,  Mys-
tery. Sometimes  this  was  called ;  'Hokhmah,  i.^.,  Theosophy  or  Wisdom,
par  excellence f  also,  PaRDeS,  /.  e,y  Paradise,  Gan  Eden,  the  Garden  of
Eden,  or  Bliss,  the  Place  of  departed  souls,  the  Place  in  which  was  the
pure  intellectual  perception  of  the  Deity.  Therefore  we  have  its  derived
form  as  a  term  for,  intuitive  intellectual  and  metaphysical  speculation,
and  an  inner  true  perception  of  God.  The  idea  is  in  Philo  Judaeus.*  It
was  divided,  as  we  have  mentioned,  into  two  main  branches.  I.  Physics,
or  the  philosophy  as  to  Creation,  termed  Ma-a*seh  Be'resheeth ;  the  prin-
cipal occult  book  of  which,  is  Genesis.  II.  Religious  metaphysical
philosophy,  termed,  Ma-a*seh  Merkabah  (or  the  work  of  the  chariot-
throne),  f  Its  theophany  is  to  be  found  running  through  the  Hebrew
Sacred  Writings,  especially  those  of  the  prophets  Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  Daniel,
and  in  Proverbs  and  Psalms,  and  is  older  than  Chronicles.  (The  begin-
ning of  Chronicles  is  circa  535  B.  C.)  It  is  mentioned  as  secret,  in
Sirakh,  which  was  written  about  290-280  B.  C.J

'Hokhmah  as  Theosophy,  was  distinguished  from  'Hokhmath  Yavonith,
/.  ^.,  Grecian  Wisdom,  and  Lashon  'Hokhmah,  Secret  Technical  lan-
guage. Based  upon  the  content  of  the  above-mentioned  Secret  Learning,
we  have,  Qabbalah,  /.  ^.,  an  esoteric  doctrine  received  by  oral  tradition,
which  is  also  called  ninoj  nSDH  'Hokhmah  Nistharah,  /.^.,  Secret  Wisdom,
because  it  was  only  handed  down,  through  esoteric  oral  tradition  :  by

*  Bohn's  English  Edition  of  Philo,  iv,  p.  286,  et  seq.  We  shall  always  cite  this  edi-
tion unless  we  specify  Mangey's  Greek  Edition,  or  some  other ;  as  it  is  more  accessible
to  most  readers.  The  Zohar  speaks  of  a  heavenly  Paradise,  of  Light;  and  an  earthly
Paradise,  of  Darkness.  (Schoettgen,  Ilor.  Heb.,  i,  p.  1096.)    Both  refer  to  the  Intellect,

t  The  pattern  of  the  chariot-throne  to  be  put  in  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  is  given  by
YHVH  to  David  (i  Chron.  xxviii,  18-19);  and  earlier  to  Moses  (Exod.  xxv,  18-22).
Philo  refers  to  this  as  existing  in  heaven.  Comp.  also  I  Sam.  iv,  4 ;  i  Kings  vi,  23
et  seq. ;  Rev.  xi,  19.

t  See  Sirakh  xxxix,  8,  and  other  places ;  M.  Steinschneider's  Hist,  of  Jewish  Lit.,
London,  1857,  p.  51.  Philo,  ii,  p.  324  et  seq,  ;  iii,  p.  177  et  seq, ;  ii,  215  et  seq.  He
also  refers  to  the  spiritual  world  as  the  chariot,  the  driver  of  which  was  the  Logos,
Word  or  Will,  of  the  Deity.  Ibid.,  i,  167,  393.  Compare  Maimonide*s  Moreh  Ne*boo-
kheem,  Arabic  and  French  Ed.  by  S.  Munk,  English  Ed.  by  Dr.  Friedlander,  on  these
subjects.


221

the  initiated  to  new  initiates,  and  is  indicated  to  them,  in  the  Holy  Writ-
ings ;  by  signs,  hints,  and  symbols,'  hidden  and  unintelligible  to  the  unin-
stnicted  in  the  mysteries.  From  the  Hebrew  initial  letters  of  the  latter
name  |'n,  it  was  also  designated  as,  Grace.  Qabbalah  expresses  recep-
tion, or  receiving  per  se^  differing  from  Massorah,  in  that  the  latter,
implies  receiving  and  transmitting,  without  esotery.  The  School  of
Alexandria,  had  much  knowledge  of  the  archaic  Qabbalah  in  its  fullness,
that  intellectual  centre  of  the  ancient  learned  world ;  having  adepts  in  its
population,  who  still  had  knowledge  of  the  archaic  "Wisdom  Religion,'*
of  the  Orient.  This  great  Greco-Egyptian  city  received  influences  from
learned  Chaldeans,  Jews,  Hindus,  Chinese,  and  Egyptians,  as  well  as
Greeks  and  Persians.  We  therefore  find  the  writings  of  Philo  Judaeus  of
Alexandria,  full  of  the  same  philosophy  which  is  in  the  Zohar  and  the
other  early  writings  that  have  come  to  us ;  which  set  forth  the  archaic
metaphysical  doctrines  of  the  Qabbalah  especially  as  to  ideas:  (see  e,  g,,
Phil^.,  iii,  184  et  seq,).

The  Qabbalah  most  likely,  originally  came  from  Aryan  sources,  through
Central  Asia,  Persia,  India  and  Mesopotamia,  for  from  Ur  and  Haran
came  Abraham  and  many  others,  into  Palestine.  We  know  that  the  He-
brew Genesis  and  many  parts  of  the  Old  Testament,  are  tinctured  with
Aryan,  Akkadian,  Chaldean  and  Babylonian  thought,  and  that  Isaiah,
Daniel,  Ezra,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel  and  other  learned  Israelites ;  were  under
the  influence  of  Persian  and  Chaldean  learning.  We  find  several  ref-
erences to  the  wisdom  of  '*  the  Sons  of  the  E^t,'*  in  the  Hebrew  Sacred
Writings.  (Comp.  Kitto's  Bib.  Cyclop.,  Ed.  1876,  Vol.  i,  p.  336  sq,)
Communication  between  the  ancient  nations  of  Asia,  was  much  more
general  than  has  been  usually  thought  by  the  learned  of  our  day.

Before  the  time  of  Moses,  the  priests  or  prophets  of  the  Hebrews,  were
not  a  distinct  and  exclusive  class  of  men.  The  patriarchs  occupied  both
positions  and  offered  their  own  prayers  and  sacrifices.  Moses  changed
this,  confining  the  gift  of  prophecy  to  an  initiated  chosen  few,  the  Seventy
Elders  (Num.  xi,  16  et  seq,  ;  xii,  1-16)  ;  as  he  also  did  the  priesthood  to
the  Sons  of  Levi,  but  with  Moses  himself,  YHVH  spoke  "  mouth  to
mouth  *  *  *  and  not  in  dark  speeches.**  The  prophets  come
prominently  forward  in  the  time  of  Samuel,  but  up  to  800  B.  C.  they  do


222

not  appear  to  have  left  any  written  prophecies.  About  loo  years  after  the
return  from  the  last  Babylonian  Exile,  the  prophets  as  a  profession,  appear
to  have  entirely  ceased  in  Judaism.  Tradition  is,  that  Haggai,  Zekha-
riah  and  Malakhi  were  the  last.  The  later  prophets  read  and  studied  the
writings  of  those  who  preceded  them,  and  also  undoubtedly  obtained
oral  traditional  knowledge  from  their  predecessors.

In  the  ancient  Secret  Learning  were  teachings  as  to  the  Deity,  Its
essence  and  Nature,  Names,  attributes,  revelation,  and  the  spiritual  world ;
also  teachings  as  to  magical  arts,  the  exorcism  of  evil  spirits,  healing  by
the  use  of  the  Names  of  the  Deity,  by  laying  on  of  hands,  talisman,  etc.,
such  i>erhaps  as  existed  among  the  Chaldean  priests  ;*  black  magic  or
necromancy  and  the  Practical  Qabbalah.  It  also  contained  secret  doc-
trines, as  to  the  creation  and  governance  of  the  world  by  the  Deity  and
the  spiritual  energies,  the  angels ;  and  their  relation  to  it,  to  man  and  to
nations;  the  interpretation  of  the  Hebrew  Sacred  Writings,  original  sin,
sacrifice,  atonement,  forgiveness,  redemption,  retribution,  the  Md^iah
and  his  Kingdom  on  our  earth;  accounts  of  the  Heavenly  Jerusalem  and
its  Temple ;  doctrines  as  to  the  soul,  hell,  death,  heaven,  the  resurrection
from  the  dead,  the  judgment  day,  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  the  future
world,  etc.,  etc.  These  doctrines  were  kept  secret  to  prevent  any  miscon-
ception and  misuse  of  them,  by  the  unlearned  and  unmetaphysical  minds ;
who  would,  perhaps,  have  been  led  away  by  them  from  the  truth  ;  and  in
uneducated  minds,  they  certainly  would  have  tended  to  produce  heterodoxy
from  the  formal  Hebrew  religion.  From  such  incapacity  and  heterodoxy,
and  from  the  Jewish  mind  becoming  influenced  by  Persian  and  Hellenis-
tic thought ;  after  the  conquests  by  Alexander  the  Great  and  his  succes-
sors ;  and  the  arising  of  the  School  of  Alexandria,  orthodox  Judaism  had
much  to  fear.

This  apprehension  finally  became  formulated  into :  '*  Do  not  discuss
the  Ma-a*seh  Merkabah  even  in  the  presence  of  one  pupil,  except  he  be
a  wise  and  intelligent  man,  and  then,  only  the  headings  of  the  chapters

*  Comp.  F.  Lenormant's  Chaldean  Magic,  London.  Lectures  on  the  Origin  and
Growth  of  Religion,  etc.,  of  the  Ancient  Babylonians,  by  Dr.  A.  H.  Sayce,  London,
1887.    The  Ilibbert  Lectures.


223

are  to  be  given  him.''*  Such  a  student  also  had  to  be  not  under  forty
years  of  age.  Also  ''  Do  not  discuss  the  Ma-a'seh  Be'resheeth  in  the
presence  of  two.^'f

The  problems  which  the  Qabbalah  seeks  to  solve  are  those  which  pre-
sent themselves  to  all  thinkers.     How  are  we  to  grasp  and  represent  to
ourselves,  the  transition  and  connection  of  the  Infinite  with  the  finite,
the  Invisible  with  the  visible,  and  spirit  with  matter?     How  proceeded
from  Unity,   the  multiplicity.     From  a  pure  Intelligence  a  so  different,
varied  and  material  many?     In  what  position  does  the  Creator  stand  to
the  created,  so  that  we  can  rightly  speak  of  the  Providence  and  world-
government  by  the  Deity,  notwithstanding  the  infinite  abyss  between
them?   How,  correctly,  can  any  name  be  imputed,  any  attribute  ascribed
to,  or  any  imagination  portray  any  idea  of,  the  Deity?    How  is  the  idea,
that  man  has  been  made  in  the  similitude  of  Elohim  (God),  consistent
with  man's  weaknesses  and  faults  ?     How,  with  the  conception  of  a  per-
fect, just  and  merciful  Deity,  can  be  reconciled  the  existence  of  the  im-
perfect and  the   evil?     What   was  the  Divine    intention  through    the
manifestation  of  the  creation  ?     It  asks :  Is  the  universe  made  of  nothing,
or  out  of  an  eternally  original  existing  subtile  matter,  which  may  be
thought  of  as  the  no-thing  ?     Was  the  Deity  before  the  universe,  and
eternal  ?     Has  the  Deity,  as  a  complete  Being,  through  an  inclination  of
Its  Will,  created  the  universe  ?     If  so,  can  the  Deity  be  considered  per-
fect, for  has  not  something  new  arisen  out  of  It  ?     If  the  Will  of  the
Deity  did  not  emanate  or  create  the  universe,  then  we  come  to  chance,
which  is  contradictory  to  the  wisdom  shown  in  and  throughout,  all  the
works  of  nature?     Is  the  Deity  All-Knowing?     Does  the    Holy  One
know  before  the  birth  of  men  who  are  to  be  virtuous,  and  who  will  sin  ?
Why  docs  the  Deity  permit  sin  and  evil  ?     If  the  Holy  One  is  the  All-
good,  why  is  there  evil  ?     Why  the  sufferings  of  the  innocent  and  the
escape  of  the  guilty?     Is  the  universe  eternal?    These  are  some  of  the
questions  which  arise  in*the  thoughts  of  man  and  which  the  Holy  Scrip-
tures do  not  answer.

♦Talmud    Babli,    treatise   ^ Ha^gcegah,    \\b,    Comp.   Maimonide*s   Moreh  Nc'boo-
khcem,  Englbh  Ed.,  i,  7,  and  note  pp.  8,  68,  1 16, 124  et  seq.     Sec  ante^  p.  40,  note,

f  Talmud  Babli,  ^Ila^geegah  Ii3,  Maimonide's  Moreh,  i,  p.  68,  and  in  other  places.


224

The  Hebrew  Qabbalah  bases  itself  upon  the  Hebrew  Holy  Writings  as  the
foundation  of  all  the  revealed  Will  of  God,  as  the  source  of  all  wiscTom
and  knowledge,  and  asserts,  that  the  Deity's  Will  is  above  all  philosophy.
The  Qabbalah  offers,  to  explain  the  Holy  Writings  so  as  to  clear  away  all
obscurity  and  difficulties  in  the  way  of  understanding  them,  and  endeavors
to  do  this,  by  trying  to  ascertain  the  hidden  and  subtile  meanings  contained
under  the  visible  symbolic  letter  and  word.  In  the  Hebrew  Practical  Qab-
balah, she  endeavors  to  find  this  in  the  order  of  the  chapters,  the  manifold
Names  and  attributes  of  the  Deity,  in  the  composition  of  the  Holy  Writ,
its  letters,  words,  their  numerical  value,  larger  and  smaller  size,  uneven
forms,  sound  signs,  signs  of  accentuation,  etc.  This  brings  into  play,
deep  investigations  in  regard  to  the  doctrines  delivered  therein  as  to  the
creation,  of  the  relation  of  the  unseen  Deity  to  the  visible  manifestations
of  Its  potency,  as  also  to  the  invisible,  and  as  to  the  government  of  the
universe  and  this  earth ;  also,  regarding  the  revelations  by  the  prophets
and  their  workings  upon  man's  thoughts,  as  a  means  for  his  sanctification
and  higher  destiny.  So  in  the  reading  of  the  Hebrew  Holy  Writings ;  in
every  letter,  word,  and  form  of  the  same,  in  every  period  and  stroke  thereof,
in  the  practice  of  every  observance,  in  every  view  therein  of  the  Deity  and
of  nature,  etc. ;  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah  teaches  the  whole  is  as  a  symbolic
picture,  and  from  this  arises  in  the  mind  an  infinitely  extended  view,  pro-
ducing and  extending,  a  greater  and  more  exalted  ideality.  She  acknowl-
edges the  obligation  of  a  moral  law ;  the  doctrine  that  through  the  sin  of
Adam,  entire  humanity  descending  from  him,  has  degenerated ;  and  that
man  must  continually,  through  his  individual  work,  and  in  himself,  with
Divine  assistance ;  atone  for  his  transgressions  and  sins,  and  endeavor  to
better  himself.  Must  repent  and  humiliate  himself  by  continual  penances
and  chastisements ;  but  she  also  teaches  the  dignity  of  human  nature  and
admits  Free  Will.  Out  of  the  retirement  of  the  Highest,  in  the  mani-
fested central  point,  the  monad ;  she  developes  the  Will,  and  from  the
Highest  emanates  the  Holy  Spirit  and  also  Wisdom,  or  the  Word ;  the
first-born  Son,  the  Hea,venly  Primordial  Man,  the  Celestial  Adam,  the
executor  of  the  creation,  the  totality  of  the  ten  celestial  spheres  (orbits);
in  which,  the  Highest  is  immanent,  yet  as  to  which,  the  Highest  is  also
transcendental.     The  whole  of  the  created  from  its  very  beginning,  is


225

formed  by  the  Qabbalistic  philosophy;  into  one  Great  Ideal  Man,  a
Mkkrokosmos,  a  Great  World,  of  which  the  terrestrial  Adam  was  a  copy ;
and  who,  with  his  descendants,  are  as  a  Mikrokosmos  or  Little  World.
Man  she  teaches,  is  in  continual  danger  from  unclean  spirits  which
surround  him,  and  who  are  ever  seeking  to  seduce  him  to  sin  and  fasten
themselves  to  his  soul ;  but  by  a  perpetual  struggle  and  conflict,  he  can,
with  the  Deity's  assistance,  banish  them  or  render  them  harmless ;  oppos-
ing them  through  an  incessant  remembrance  of  the  behests  of  the  Holy
One ;  and  she  asserts,  that  by  God's  assistance,  the  regenerated  man  will
appear  before  the  Deity  at  last,  clean  and  spotless.

Among  the  cardinal  doctrines  of  this  theosophy  are,  those  intended  to
solve  the  grand  problems,  relating  to:  i.  The  Nature  of  the  Supreme
Being,  as  the  unity  or  trinity.  2.  The  Cosmogony  of  the  universe  and
its  connection  with  the  Deity.  3.  The  creation  of  angels  and  man.  4.
The  destiny  of  man  and  the  universe.  5.  The  investigation  of  the
meaning  and  import  of  the  Revealed.  6.  The  unity  of  the  Holy  One.
(Ex.  XX,  3 ;  Deut.  iv,  35,  39 ;  vi,  4  ;  xxxii,  39.)  7.  The  incorporeality
of  the  Deity.  (Ex.  xx,  4;  Deut.  iv,  15  ;  Ps.  xiv,  18.)  8.  The  eternity  of
God.  (Ex.  iii,  14;  Deut.  xxxii,  40;  Is.  xli,  4;  xliii,  10,  11;  xliv,  6;
xlviii,  12.)  9.  The  immutability  of  the  Highest.  (Mai.  iii,  6.)  10.  The
perfection  of  the  Deity.  (Deut.  xxxii,  4;  2  Sam.  xxii,  31;  Job  xxxvii ;
xxxviii;  Ps.  xviii,  31.)  11.  The  infinite  goodness  of  the  Holy  One.  (Ex.
xxxiv,  6  ;  Ps.  xxv,  10  ;  xxxiii,  5  ;  c,  5  ;  cxlv,  9.)  12.  The  creation  of  the
universe  and  this  earth,  in  time,  according  to  God's  free  will.  (Gen.  i,
I.)  13.  God's  moral  government  of  the  universe,  special  providence,
and  creation  of  man  in  God's  similitude  (Gen.  i,  27),  and  the  doctrine  of
Rewards  and  Punishments ;  as  set  forth  in  all  parts  of  the  Holy  Writings.
14.  The  emanation  and  nature  of  the  soul.  15.  The  nature  of  angels,
demons  and  the  elementary  spirits.  16.  The  transcendental  meaning
and  symbolism  of  numbers,  colours,  letters,  etc.  17.  The  balancing  or
equilibrium  of  the  oppositions,  etc.,  etc.

The  theories  of  the  Qabbalah  usually  proceed  from  the  lowest  to  the

highest  and  it  reasons  largely  by  analogy.     Its  fundamental  principle  is,

to  go  from  the  visible  to  the  invisible.     Its  maxim  is : — *'  If  thou  wilt

know  the  invisible,  have  an  open  eye  for  the  visible,"  or  in  the  words  of

15


226

Mena'hem  Reccanati,  in  his  Taamey  ham-Mitzvoth^  /.  ^.,  Meaning  of  the
Commandments  adinit.^  "Know  that  we  have  to  divide,  between  those
that  are  hidden  from  us,  and  those  things  that  are  manifest  to  us.  * '  In  the
words  of  the  same  writer : — "  The  perfection  of  the  work  points  to  the  per-
fection of  the  master.**  {Ibid,)  All  things  of  which  we  have  knowledge
appear  to  make  a  gradual  transition  from  the  lower  to  the  higher,  and  vice
versa.  The  idea  is  set  forth  in  the  Hebrew  Holy  Writings,  and  in  Exodus,
(xxxiii,  i8  to  end.)  Moses  said  to  the  Deity: — "  Let  me  see,  I  beseech
thee,  thy  Glory.**  To  which  the  Deity  is  said  to  have  replied : — '  I  will
make  all  My  Goodness  pass  before  thy  face,  and  I  will  proclaim  My
Name,  YHVH,  before  thee ;  and  I  will  be  gracious  to  whom  I  will  be
gracious,  and  I  will  show  mercy  on  whom  I  will  show  mercy.*  But  also,
said  : — ** '  Thou  canst  not  see  My  face ;  for  no  man  can  see  me,  and  live.*
4nd  YHVH  said :  '  Behold,  there  is  a  place  by  Me,  and  thou  shalt  stand
upon  a  rock.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  while  My  Glory  passeth  by,  that
I  will  put  thee  in  a  cleft  of  the  rock  and  I  will  cover  thee  with  My  hand
while  I  pass  by.  And  then  I  will  take  away  Mine  hand,  and  thou  shalt
see  My  a'hoor,  /.  ^.,  My  back;  but  My  face  shall  not  be  seen.*  **  That
is,  I  will  show  you  "My  back,**  /.  ^.,  My  visible  universe,  My  lower
manifestations,  but  as  a  man  still  in  the  flesh,  thou  canst  not  see  My  in-
visible nature.     So  proceeds  the  Qabbalah.

The  Qabbalists  divide  their  system  into  two  main  divisions,  included  in
the  Work  of  the  Creation  and  that  of  the  Chariot  Throne.  The  first  is
the  Theoretic  (^ly-yooneih)  \  the  second,  the  Practical  (J/a*d:j^M).  The
first  named  may  also  be  divided  into  three  branches.  I.  Symbolical.
II.  Dogmatic  or  Positive.  III.  Speculative  or  Metaphysical.  The  first
has  a  peculiar  and  very  ancient  system  of  exegesis  coming  under  the  heads
of  Temoorah,  Gematria,  Notarikon,  Atbash,  Albam,  etc.,  which  in  this
writing  we  have  not  space  to  explain.  The  second  comprises  all  those
beliefs  and  mystic  dogmas  engrafted  on  Judaism  during  and  after  its  con-
nection with  Babylonia,  Chaldea,  Assyria,  India  and  Persia.  It  was
adopted  in  substance  by  the  Pharisees,  Essenes,  Nazarites,  etc.,  and  ex-
isted probably  before  the  formulations  of  the  Speculative.  It  treats  of
angels  and  demons  and  their  hierarchies  and  divisions,  of  the  depart-
ments in  Paradise  and  Hell,  the  transmigration  of  souls,  etc.    Many  of  its


227

ideas  have  come  from  Aryan  and  Chaldean  sources.  Exodus  (xxiv,  lo)
gives  a  partial  description  of,  and  the  visions  of  Isaiah,  Daniel  and  Ezekiel,
further  portray,  the  Deity  as  seated  on  a  throne  surrounded  by  angelic
creatures  and  winged  animals ;  and  those  given  by  the  latter,  have  a  close
analogy  with  those  shown  in  the  art  of  Mesopotamia,  Persia  and  India.
Ezekiel's  vision  ;  which  is  also  further  carried  out  in  the  Apocalypse,  and
of  which  traces  may  be  found  in  the  vii  chapter  of  Daniel  and  earlier  in
Isaiah;  is  more  especially  called  by  the  Qabbalists  the  Merkabah  or
vision  of  the  Chariot-Throne,  and  is  considered  by  them,  as  a  representa-
tion of  the  Court  of  the  Deity,  in  which,  God  is  surrounded  by  the  angelic
ministering  hosts.  The  statements  in  the  cited  Hebrew  Bible  authorities,
are  at  the  foundation  of  the  religious  metaphysics  of  the  Ma-a'seh  Merkabah.

The  ancient  followers  of  the  Ma-a'seh  Merkabah,  may  have  been  the
Rekhabites,  Rekhab  means  a  chariot,  and  this  Israelitish  sect  was  held  in
high  estimation  by  YHVH.  (See  Jerem.  xxxv;  II  Kings,  x,  15,  23;  I
Chron.  ii,  55  ;  II  Sam.  iv,  2 ;  v,  6  ;  Neh.  iii,  14.)  They  were  of  the  fam-
ily of  the  father  of  Moses,  and  adopted  the  latter' s  religion.  *  There
were  undoubtedly  certain  saintly  sects  at  a  very  early  period  among  the
Hebrews,  at  the  time  of  if  not  before  Moses,  and  later  they  came  more  es-
pecially into  notice  in  the  times  of  Judas  Maccabaeus.  They  were  asserted
to  have  power  to  perform  miracles,  exorcise  evil  spirits,  etc.,  and  it  was
through  these  most  likely,  that  the  fragments  of  the  Sod  and  the  Secret
Learning  have,  as  Qabbalah,  come  to  our  day.  (Comp.  Kitto's  Bib.
Cyclop,  i,  p.  475  et  seq.^

In  archaic  Chaldea  we  find  the  protecting  genii,  which  were  those  ap-
parently in  the  mind  of  Isaiah,  and  the  same  symbolical  animals  support
the  Merkabah  or  Chariot-Throne  of  YHVH  in  Ezekiel :  we  also  find  a
somewhat  similar  statement  in  Daniel  vii.  Among  the  Chaldeans,  were
the  Kirub  (Cherub  ?),  the  Sed  or  Aiaph,  which  was  sacred  to  Nebo,  a
bull  with  a  man's  face;  Nergal  or  Lamas y  a  lion  with  a  man's  face;  Ustur,
after  the  human  likeness,  and  the  Nattig,  with  the  head  of  an  eagle.
Above  these  were  the  heavenly  angels,  the  Igigiy  and  the  earthly  good

♦Judges  i,  16;  Exod.  xviii,  9  <f/ Jif^. ;  Numb,  x,  29-32;  Judges  iv,  11,  17;  Ibid,  if
16 ;  I  Sam.  xv,  6.  Comp.  The  Angel  Messiah,  by  Ernest  dc  Bunsen,  London,  1880,  pp.
II,  12,  86-87,  300-3;  also  Smith's  Diet,  of  the  Bible,  Title,  Rediabites.


228

spirits,  the  Anunaki.  The  Hebrews  were  frequently  in  captivity  in
Chaldea.  Among  these  were  those  circa  732,  599,  588  B,  C.  Rcturni
were  made  in  536  and  458  B.  C.  The  Assyrian,  the  language  of  Baby-
lonia, is  naore  closely  related  to  the  Hebrew  than  to  any  other  Semitic
Tongue.  The  Jews  derived  much  of  their  knowledge  from  the  libraries,
learned  men,  and  literature  of  ancient  Chaldea ;  and  they  pointed  to  the
valley  of  the  Euphrates  as  the  primaeval  cradle  of  their  race  and  of  hu-
manity. Like  the  Fhc^niciansj  they  held,  that  their  ancestors  came  from
the  great  alluvial  plain  of  Babylonia.  (Hibbert  Lectures  1887,  40  sg.)
There  were  two  periods  when  the  Jews  came  under  the  influence  of  the
Akkadian  and  Chaldean  thought ;  one  before  the  conquests  and  the
other,  during  and  after.  (See  also  the  erudite  essay  on  the  Cherubim,
in  Kitto's  Cyclop,  of  Biblical  Lit.,  Ed.  1876,  i,  p.  484^4'.)

In  the  Zodiacal  signs,  we  have  Taurus,  the  Bull;  Leo,  the  Lion ;  Scorpio
which  as  a  good  emblem  was  symbolized  by  the  Eagle,  and  as  an  evil
emblem,  by  the  Scorpion  or  by  the  Goat,  or  as  a  winged  snake  partaking  of
the  nature  of  each.  There  is  also  portrayed  Aquarius,  the  water-man.  In
the  Qabbalah  we  have  the  four  worlds  of  Ezekiel's  vision  ;  A'tzeel-ah,  the
Deific  form,  the  abode  of  Adam  Qadmon,  the  World  Spirit ;  B'ree-ah,
the  Throne,  the  abode  of  the  great  angel  Metatron;  Ye'tzeer-ah,  the
Firmament,  the  abode  of  the  Spiritual  Hosts ;  A'seey-ah,  the  place  of  the
Ker-u'beem  and  the  abode  of  the  spirits  united  with  the  corporeity,


The  accompanying  engraving  is  from   Niklas  Milller's  work  on  the


229

Old  Hindus,  cited  ante,  p.  45,  note ;  and  represents  Yotma  or  Yotna
nephew  of  Maya,  Illusion,  father  of  Prakita  (feminine)  the  Passive  Prin-
ciple, Primary  Creation  or  Nature.  This  figure  typifies,  the  metaphysi-
cal ideas  of  the  Veda's  and  the  philosophic  systems  of  the  Hindus.  It
portrays  a  lion's  head  with  the  horns  of  a  bull,  as  the  head  of  the  Serpent
Ananda.  In  its  mouth  is  Ananda's  tail.  The  latter  is  represented  as  the
Time-serpent  who  is  eagle-winged.  From  the  open  mouth  proceeds  vach,
the  cow,  image  of  Prakita  the  great  motherly  preserver  through  the
Deity,  she  is  also  speech  and  the  mother  of  the  Vedas.  Bees,  the  car-
riers of  the  honey  of  the  goodness  of  the  Deity,  rapidly  detach  them-
selves from  the  breast  of  the  cow.  Here  we  also  have,  as  in  the  symbols
mentioned  ante,  p.  45,  note ;  the  lion,  for  fire ;  the  bull,  for  water;  and  the
«agle,  for  air ;  united  as  the  usual  Oriental  symbol  of  the  divine  potential-
ity. To  be  noted  is  the  emanation  of  the  sweetness  from  the  mouth  of
the  lion  or  strength,  which  calls  to  mind  Samson's  riddle,  and  also  causes
us  to  think  of  the  mystic  bees  and  honey  of  the  ancients ;  of  their  Me-
lissa's, Aristaeus's,  etc.  Bees  appear  to  have  been  considered  by  the
Greeks  as  emblems  of  purity,  and  as  the  symbol  of  nymphs,  who  are
sometimes  called  Mellissae,  as  were  also  priestesses  in  general,  especially
those  of  Demeter,  Persephone  and  she  of  the  Delphic  Apollo.

We  may  gather  from  Josephus,  that  four  of  the  mystical  colours  of  the
Jewish  Church,  were  typical  of  the  four  elements.  These  colors  were
Blue,  Purple,  Scarlet  and  White,  the  fifth  mystical  color  Gold,  he  says  ;
was  typical  of  "the  splendor  by  which  all  things  are  enlightened."
Jerome  {Epistola  ad  Fabiolam,  written  at  Bethlehem  396  or  397  A.  D.),
also  speaks  of  this  ancient  Jewish  Tradition.  They  can  be  arranged,  we
think,  according  to  the  following  table  :

1.  Gold,  Splendor,

2.  Blue,  -^ther,

3.  Purple,  The  Great  Crystalline  Sea

surrounding  the  Earth.

4.  Scarlet,  The  Hidden  Fire,

5.  White  (Linen),  The  Earth,  Atomic  Matter,  The  Goat.

Comp.  ante,  p.  45,  note.     The  Bull  is  a  symbol  of  the  Sephirah  'Hesed,
/.  ^.,  Grace  or  Mercy;  the  spiritual  Water  or  humidity.    Hence  Baptism.


Sun,

The  Man.

Air,

The  Eagle.

Humidity,

The  Bull.

Warmth,

The  Lion.

230

The  Lion  symbol  of  force,  energy,  justice,  wrath,  fire ;  is  a  symbol  of
the  Sephirah  G*bur-ah,  the  spiritual  fire.  Hence  lights,  coals  of  fire
and  incense.  The  Eagle  is  a  symbol  of  the  Sephirah  Tiph'e-reth,  the
spiritual  -^ther  or  Air.  Hence  the  use  of  the  voice  and  sound  in  hymns
and  prayer.  The  Angelic  Man  is  a  symbol  of  the  Sephirah  Malkhuth,
the  Kingdom,  Government  and  Harmony ;  the  spiritual  Earth.  Hence
the  products  of  the  earth,  the  wine  and  bread,  of  both  the  Israelites  and
Christians.

The  four  animals  are  also  in  the  Apocalypse,  c.  iv,  and  the  five  colors
appear  to  be  referred  to  therein.  **  God  doeth  all  things  in  number^  and
measure  and  weight :^^  says  the  Book  of  Wisdom,  xi,  20.  (Comp.  H
Chron.  iii,  10-14,  and  Josephus,  Whiston's  Edition,  v,  p.  387.)  "The
Religion  of  Jesus  is  the  flower,  of  Which  the  Jewish  Church  is  the  bud,
and  the  Patriarchal  the  stem.'**  With  the  first  Christians  the  celebration
of  the  Mysteries  of  the  Faith  was  accompanied  by  the  burning  of  7  lights^
(symbols  of  the  Sephiroth  ?)  with  incense,  the  Trisagion,  and  the  reading
of  the  book  of  the  Gospels ;  upon  which  was  wrought,  both  on  covers  and
pages,  the  winged  man,  lion,  bull  and  eagle.  The  animals  of  the  Merka-
bah  of  Ezekiel.

The  third,  the  Speculative  or  Metaphysical  Qabbalah  is  the  one  to-
which  we  will  now  give  attention.  It  is  a  system  of  oriental  philosophy  ex-
plaining the  connection  between  the  Deity  and  the  created,  and  tending
to  harmonize  monotheism  and  the  Hebrew  account  of  the  creation  of  all
things,  spiritual  or  material ;  with  the  fundamental  principle  of  ancient
philosophy  ex  nihilo  nihil  fit ^  i.  <f.,  From  nothing,  nothing  can  come.  It
explains  the  existence  of  moral  and  physical  evil  by  ascribing  it  to  the
grossness  of  matter,  asserting  that  in  the  assertion  of  only  one  absolutely
perfect  principle  the  existence  of  evil  would  be  incomprehensible.  The
doctrine  of  emanation,  which  existed  in  the  archaic  Aryan  religious  phi-
losophy, was  based  upon  the  idea  that  all  the  created  were  effluxes  from
the  Divine  Light,  and  that  the  further  away  they  were  from  the  source,
the  nearer  they  approached  the  evil,  matter  and  darkness,  in  that  the  latter
two  were  the  abode  of  evil.  This  is  a  doctrine  not  only  of  the  Persians,
the  Hindus,  the  Qabbalah,  and  the  School  of  Alexandria,  but  of  Ibn
Gebirol.     Commencing  with  the  indivisible,  perfect,  infinite  unity,  the

*  Hutching's  Lect.  On  the  Person  and  Work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  p.  53.


231

Absolute  Unknown  Cause  of  All  Causes,  the  Ain  Soph,  the  Eternal  All
above  All,  a  manifestation  thereof  comes  freely  through  Its  Will,  which
thus  becomes  the  First  Cause,  the  Cause  of  Causes.    In  this  the  Unknown
Absolute,  above  all  number,  manifested  Itself  through  an  emanation  in
which  it  was  immanent  yet  as  to  which  it  was  transcendental.     It  first
withdrew  Itself  into  Itself,  to  form  an  infinite  Space,  the  Abyss ;  which  It
then  filled  with  a  modified  and  gradually  diminishing  Light  or  Vitaliza-
tion,  first  appearing  in  the  Abyss,  as  the  centre  of  a  mathematical  point
which  gradually  spread  Its  Life-giving  energy  or  force   throughout  all
Space.     This  concentration  or  contraction  and  its  expansion,  being  the
centripetal  and  centrifugal  energies  of  creation  and  existence,  the  Qabbal-
ists  call  Tzimtzum,     The  Will  of  Ain  Soph  then  manifests  Itself  through
the  Ideal  Perfect  Model  or  Vitalizing  Form,  first  principle  and  perfect
prototype  in  idea,  of  all  the  to  be  created,  whether  spiritual  or  material.
This  is  the  Mikrokosm  to  the  Ain  Soph,  the  Makrokosm  as  to  all  the  cre-
ated.    It  is  called  the  Son  of  Elohim,  /.  ^.,  God,  and  the  Adam  Illa-ah
or  Adam  Qadmon,  the  Man  of  the  East  or  Heavenly  Adam.     A  similar
figure  is  in  Daniel  (vii,  13,  14),  but  there  it  is  a  totality  of  "  the  people
of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High.*'  *    Such  a  figure  is  also  in  the  first  chap-
ter of  Genesis  and  is  in  Ezekiel,  and  most  likely  is  referred  to  in  the
vision  in  Daniel,  of  the  Great  Man  (Dan.  ii,  31  et  seq,)  made  of  metals,
etc.,  symbolical  of  the  Four  worlds  of  the  Qabbalists,  of  which  more
hereafter.     The  Adam  Qadmon  or  Heavenly  Adam  is  composed  of  a
decade  of  potentialities  or  energies,  termed  the  Ten  Sephiroth,  always
considered  as  together  they  are  a  unit  and  the  entire  content  of  the  Adam
Qadmon,  whose  head  is  in  the  highest  created  heaven  and  whose  feet  rest
on  the  lowest  created  matter,  and  who  is  the  content  of  the  Ineffable
Name  YHVH.     From  these  came  most  likely  the   Intermediaries  and
Powers  of  Philo  which  are  like  the  Sephiroth,  f  and  the  -^ons  of  the  Gnos-
tics. J    The  earthly  man,  a  spirit  covered  with  matter,  lives  in  the  lowest

*  Ibid.  27.  Comp.  The  Jewish  and  the  Christian  Messiah,  etc.,  by  Vincent  H.  Stanton,
Edinburgh,  1880,  pp.  109,  etc.,  240.

f  See  Philo  iii,  184,  etc.

{  Comp.  on  this  the  works  of  Matter,  King,  Mansel,  Burton,  etc.,  on  the  Gnostics,
also  Beausobre  on  the  Manicbeans  and  the  writings  of  Rev.  John  Francis  Buddeus.


232

of  the  Four  worlds,  and  is  the  Olam  Qatan  or  Mikrokosm,  for  whatever
the  Heavenly  Adam  contains,  is  also  in  the  earthly  man,  but  in  an  imper-
fect degree.  The  earthly  man  has  the  Nephesh,  the  living  soul  or  vital
principle,  the  animo;  also  the  Rua'h,  his  conscience,  the  power  of  judg-
ment or  mind,  the  spiritus ;  and  an  intellectual  spirit,  the  Neshamah  or
animus.  The  last  is  considered  a  part  of  the  Deity  and  as  pre-existent  and
immortal.  According  to  the  Qabbalah,  man  is  also  composed  of  a  good
and  an  evil  principle,  and  a  harmony,  his  liberty  or  Free  Will,  and  it  de-
pends on  the  latter,  as  to  which  shall  b^  his  master.  After  death  comes
judgment  and  retribution  on  his  spirit  according  to  man's  works,  the
Neshamah  being  immortal.

The  Roman  Catholic  Church  claims  to  be  the  possessor  of  a  Secret
Tradition  or  Qabbalah,  which  is  asserted  as  coming  down  orally  through
the  Church,  from  Christ  and  the  Apostles ;  and  from  this  it  formulates
many  of  the  dogmas  and  mysteries  of  its  faith.  The  science  of  the  Law
as  administered  in  our  Courts  of  Justice  is  divided  into  two  branches ;  the
Written  and  the  Oral.  The  first  is  termed  Statute  Law,  the  latter,  the
Common  Law.  The  Common  Law  is  deix>sited  in  the  breasts  of  the
Judges  and  by  a  legal  fiction,  is  assumed  to  be  of  great  antiquity,  and  is
delivered  orally,  or,  only  for  convenience,  is  put  in  writing  in  the  opin-
ions; it  also  is  based  on  precedent  traditions  presumably  oral,  which  are
however  generally  to  be  found  in  the  written  or  printed  lx)oks  of  Law
Reports :  when  a  new  subject  arises,  e.  g. ,  telephones,  telegraphs,  steam
engines,  etc.,  which  are  not  provided  for  in  the  written  Statutes  or  prece-
dents in  the  Reports :  the  Judges  apply  the  Oral  Law  to  them  out  of  their
skilled  legal  reason,  based  on  an  approach  to  precedents.  This  is  a  spe-
cies of  Qabbalah.  The  Common  Law,  as  administered  to-day,  is  paral-
leled in  Judaism,  by  the  Talmudic  Law  in  contrast  to  the  written  Penta-
teuch usually  termed,  the  Thorah  or  Law.

We  call  the  attention  of  the  reader  in  this  place  to  a  coincidence  of
agreement  in  the  Zoharic  writings,  with  the  most  ancient  terra  cotta  tab-
lets of  Babylonia.  In  the  Siphrah  D'Tnioothah,  (c.  i,  §  i6  sq.^  referring
to  the  creation  and  primeval  chaos,  we  read :

^^  B'raisheeth  barah  elohim  ath  hashshama'yem  v'ath  haaWdZy  /.  ^.,
*  In  the  beginning  the  God(s)  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth '  >  (the


233

meaning  of  which  is ;)  the  six  (Sephiroth  of  Construction,)  over  which
E'raisheeth  stands,  all  belong  Below.  It  created  six,  (and)  on  these
stand  (exist)  all  Things.  And  those  depend  upon  the  seven  forms  of  the
Cranium  up  to  the  Dignity  of  all  Dignities.  And  the  second  "Earth  '*
does  not  come  into  calculation,  therefore  it  has  been  said :  *  And  from  it,
(that  E^rth)  which  underwent  the  curse;  came  it  forth,*  as  is  written
(Gen.  V,  29)  :  '  From  the  Earth  which  YHVH  cursed.'  '  It  (the  Earth)
was  without  form  and  void ;  and  darkness  was  over  the  face  of  the  Abyss,
and  the  spirit  of  elohim  (or,  spirit  of  the  God(s)  )  was  breathing,  {me'-
racha^phethy  i.  e,,  hovering,  brooding  over,  moving.  Comp.  Deut.  xxxii,
2)  over  the  waters.*  Thirteen  depend  on  thirteen  (forms)  of  the  most
worthy  Dignity.  Six  thousand  years  hang  (are  referred  to)  in  the  first
six  words.  The  seventh  (thousand,  the  millennium,)  above  it  (the  cursed
Earth),  is  that  which  is  strong  by  Itself.  And  it  was  rendered  entirely
desolate  during  twelve  hours  (one  entire  day,  one  whole  period  of  va-
rious  periods,  of  time:)  as  is  written;  *  It  was  without  form  and  void,
etc.*  In  the  Thirteenth,  It  (the  Deity)  shall  restore  them  (as  from  the
'  beginning  * ;)  through  '  Mercy  *  (or,  Grace),  and  everything  shall  be
renewed  as  before  ;  and  all  those  six  shall  continue,  because  it  is  written  :
barahy  i.  e.,  create d^  and  then  it  is  written:  hayethah,  i.  e.,  it  was ^  for
truly,  '  It  was '  ;  at  the  end  of  the  *  shapelessness  and  void  and  dark-
ness.'    And  YHVH  alone  will  be  exalted  in  that  day.*

**  The  engravings  of  the  engravings,t  under  the  form  of  a  long  serpent,
extended  hither  and  thither,  the  tail  (of  the  serpent)  is  in  its  head,  the
head,  backwards  of  the  shoulders,  it  twists,  it  is  wrathful  (or,  trespassing)
and  it  is  angry  (mutters,  hisses).  It  watches  and  hides  itself.  Once,  in
a  thousand  short  days,  (?  years  or  periods  of  time)  ;  it  is  manifested.  It
has  a  protuberance  on  its  scales.  A  sapphire  in  ^  *  *  *  *  it  has.
Its  head  (however)  is  broken  in  the  waters  of  the  Great  Sea,  as  it  is  writ-

*  For  terseness  and  want  of  space  we  are  obliged  to  leave  out  our  many  explanations
and  long  notes  to  these  passages,  so  that  as  they  appear  in  print,  they  are  somewhat  un-
intelligible.

t  The  engraved  or  excavated,  which  always  leaves  a  hollow  place,  are  the  inferior
or  plastic,  in  contradistinction  to  the  superior  things  which  fill  the  emptiness  of  the  ex-
cavated;-with  the  form.


234

ten  :  '  Thou  hast  broken  into  pieces  the  heads  of  the  Dragons  in  the
Waters/  (Ps.  Ixxiv,  13.)  There  were  two  (male  and  female,  positive  and
negative,  whence  the  text  of  the  Psalm  says  **  Dragons'*).  They  were
reduced  to  one,  for  the  word  thanneenim  (in  the  Psalm)  is  defectively
written :  {tiim  sing.,  not  neem  plural).  It  is  also  said  (in  the  Psalm)
heads,  as  it  is  written  ;  (Ezekiel  i,  22)  :  *  And  a  similitude  over  the  heads
of  the  animal,  the  firmament.*  **  (Where  "  animal  *'  is  in  the  singular,  and
the  heads,  in  the  plural.  The  first  to  denote  the  race  of  the  angels ;  the
latter,  to  signify  the  species  or  numerous  individuals.)  Another  read-
ing is :  '*  He  made  sketches  and  outlines  of  His  creation  in  the  shape  of
a  serpent,  long  and  darting  in  all  directions;  and  the  tail  was  in  its
head,  and  the  head  was  seizing  its  hinder  parts.  It  is  twined  backwards,
and  is  full  of  fury  and  anger.  Once  in  a  thousand  years,  a  revolution  in
its  joints  takes  place,  a  violent  commotion  by  the  exertion  of  its  fins,  and

•

its  head  is  broken  in  the  waters  of  the  ocean.  As  it  is  said :  (Ps.  Ixxiv,
13)  *  Thou  breakest  the  heads  of  the  dragons  in  the  waters.'  There  were
two  dragons  (serpents,) ///dr««<?^«/>// DTjn,  spelled  in  full  with  two'»''j^.
den,  they  were  turned  into  one,  in  Ibid,  14,  where  there  is  spoken  of:

*  the  heads  o{ Leinathan,  i.e.,  one.*  **  "And  elohim  said:  Ye'hee  or  i.e..
Be  Light !  and  Light  was.     This  is  the  meaning  of  that  which  is  written  :

*  For  JIoo  (or,  Hu),  i.e.,  He,  said,  and  vay-ye-hee,  i.e.,  it  was.'  (Ps.  xxxiii,
9.)  He  {Hoo  ox  Hu)  is  by  himself  (alone).**  The  Siphrah  D*Tznioothah
(c.  V,  §  33  sq.)  also  says:  **The  Serpent  which  runs  with  370  leaps.  It
'  leaps  over  mountains  and  hastily  runs  up  over  hills  *  as  it  is  written.  (Song
of  Songs,  ii,  8.)  The  serpent  holds  its  tail  in  its  mouth  with  its  teeth.  It
is  perforated  on  both  sides.  When  the  Perfect  One  {ox,  the  Arch-Angel
Metatron?)  is  raised  up,  the  serpent  is  changed  into  three  spirits,  etc."

These  passages  are  important  in  the  Qabbalistic  hieroglyphics,  we  have
(Zohar  ii,  34^)  also:  **  R.  Shim-on  (b.  Yo'hai)  said:  The  (account  of
the")  work  of  the  beginning,  the  companions  study  and  understand  it ;
but  the  little  ones  (the  perfect  initiates)  are  those  who  understand  the
allusion  to  the  work  of  the  beginning,  by  the  mystery  of  the  serpent  of  the
Great  Sea.'''  (/.  e.,  Thanneen,  Leviathan.)  As  to  this  Leviathan  as  the
symbol  of  the  visible  creation,  comp.  Zohar  i,  35^,  Talmud,  treatise,
Bava  Bathra.     In  India,  Vishnu  as  Krishna,  steps  upon  and  crushes  the


235

head  of  the  Kolinagha,  i.  e,,  the  serpent  of  the  Kali  2igty  and  thus  illus-
trate the  victory  of  Eternity  over  perishable  Time.  Perhaps  Gen.  iii,  15^
has  some  reference  to  this.  This  reference  to  the  "serpent  of  the  Great
Sea"  is  also  explained  by  the  ancient  cuneiform  tablets.  Ea  or  Cannes,
was  the  ancient  Akkadian  god  of  the  abyss  or  deep  ;  the  Great  Crystalline
Sea  of  chaos,  oi  Bohu,  i.  e.y  emptiness  or  primeval  Space.  He  was  also
the  deity  of  Wisdom,  the  culture  god  of  primitive  Babylonia.  His  sym-
bols were  the  fish,  the  serpent  of  the  Great  Sea,  the  antelope  and  the  ga-
zelle. This  gives  us  some  insight  into  the  passage  quoted,  and  also  into
Gen.  iii,  i,  which  gives  to  the  serpent,  the  possession  oi  greater  subtility
than  any  wild  beast  created  by  YHVH  Elohim.  (See  especially  in  this  con-
nection :  The  Hibbert  Lectures,  1887,  by  Dr.  A.  H.  Sayce,  London,  1887,
pp.  279-283;  116-118;  133-139;  262;  200;  374  sq,;  391  sq,^  The
Akkadians  and  Chaldeans,  believed  the  world  to  be  encircled,  by  this
great  serpent  of  the  sapphire  crystalline  heaven  sea,  with  seven  heads,
perhaps  the  seven  stars  of  the  Great  Bear,  perhaps  the  seven  planets.
(J[bid,j  pp.  282-3.)  It  ^^^  ^^  **bond*'  or  *'rope  of  the  universe"
which  held  together  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  the  ''golden  cord"  of
Homer.  (Iliad  viii,  19  j^.)  It  was  also  called  the  bar  or  bolt  holding
heaven  and  earth,  together.  (Comp.  ante,  p.  115).  Note  in  this  con-
nection, the  Great  Azure  Dragon  of  the  Chinese.

Another  similarity  to  statements  in  the  same  Zoharic  book  is  the  sacred
tree  of  the  Akkadians  and  Chaldeans,  which  suggests  to  our  thoughts,  the
Tree  of  the  Sephiroth ;  which  was  freijuently  portrayed  by  the  Qabbalists,
as  an  ordinarily  formed  tree.  It  also  suggests  the  Ygg-drasil  of  Norse
mythology,  the  world- tree,  whose  roots  were  in  the  death-world  and
whose  branches  rise  into  Asgard,  the  heaven  of  the  gods.  With  the
Babylonians,  the  sacred-tree  was  the  '*  tree  of  life,"  the  world-tree;  the
roots  were  in  the  abyssmal  deep,  its  seat  was  the  earth,  which  stood  mid-
way  between  the  deep  and  Zikum,  /.  ^.,  the  primordial  heavens  above.
Zikum  rested  upon  its  overspreading  branches.  Within  it  was  the  holy
house  of  Davkina,  /.  e.,  the  Great  Mother,  and  of  Tammuz,  the  Sun-
god,  her  son.     The  fragment  of  a  very  old  bilingual  hymn  reads : —

I.  *'(In)  Eridu  (the  garden  of  Eden?)  a  stalk  grew  over-shadowing;
in  a  holy  place  did  it  become  green  ;


236

2.  its  root  was  of  white  crystal  which  stretched  towards  the  deep ;

3.  before  Ea  (the  deity  of  Wisdom)  was  ite  course  in  Eridu,  teeming

with  fertility ;

4.  its  scat  was  the  (central)  place  of  the  earth ;

5.  its  foliage  (?)  was  the  couch  of  Zilcum  (the  primeval)  mother.

6.  Into  the  heart  of  its  holy  house  which  spread  its  shade  like  a  forest,

hath  no  man  entered.

7.  (There  is  the  home)  of  the  mighty  mother  who  passes  across  the  sky.

8.  In  the  midst  of  it  was  Tamrauz,  i.  e.,  the  Sun-god.
10.  (There  is  the  shrine?)  of  the  two."

<Hibbert  Lectures,  1887 ;  tiy  Dr.  A.  H.  Sayce,  p.  238,  etc.)  The  Siphrah
D'Tznioothah  (c.  v,  §  31  jy.)  also  says;  "The  Tree  which  has  been  ren-
dered mild,  remains  in  the  interior.  In  its  branches  dwell  birds,  1.  e.,
angels,  and  therein  they  make  their  nests.  Under  it,  animals  having  power
(men  ?)  seek  shelter.  This  is  the  tree  which  has  two  narrow  paths  for  go-
ing upon.  And  it  has  seven  columns  around  it,  and  four  splendors  are
rolled  (revolve)  around  it  on  the /car  sides."

Important  explanations  of  the  curious  passage,  (Gen.  xxxvi,  31-39  :)
as  to  the  seven  Kings  of  Edom ;  to  which  is  attached,  as  early  as  Genesis,
the  statement  of  kings  having  reigned  over  the  children  of  Israel ;  are  in
both  the  Zoharic  writings  and  the  cuneiform.  (Comp.  The  Hibbert
Lect.,  1887,  by  Dr.  A.  H.  Sayce,  pp.  53  sq.,  181  sq.,  373  J?-,  54  sq-,  209,
203  sq. :  with  the  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah  and  the  Idroth.)


*  Kttkir  kihuttaath  malkhuth,  i.  e,.  Crown  of  Priestliood  and  RoyBltf.

t  Me'remam,  i.  t..  Exalted.


Figure  25.

XII.

FURTHER  PARALLELS  BETWEEN  THE  CUNEIFORM  AND  THE  QABBALAH.
ACCOUNT  OF  THE  AKKADIAN  AND  SEMITIC  BABYLONIAN  RELIGION
AND  TEMPLES  AND  THOSE  OF  THE  ISRAELITES.  OF  THE  AKKADIAN
AND  BABYLONIAN  COSMOGONY.  OF  THE  DEMIURGE.  THE  DUST  BODY
OF  MAN.       OF  LILLITH.       THE   ANCIENT   ZODIAC.

WE  gather  from  the  various  writings  upon  the  religions  of  the
ancient  peoples  of  Mesopotamia,  especially  from  the  Hibbert
Lectures  for  1887,  by  Dr.  A.  H.  Sayce  the  well-known  reader
of  the  cuneiform,  the  following  facts.  The  priests  of  ancient  Babylonia
delivered  the  philosophy  of  their  religion  esoterically.  (Hibbert  Lect.,
pp.  4,  16,  141,  142.)  The  true  pronunciation  of  the  Divine  Names  was
kept  carefully  concealed  from  the  uninitiated.*  Names  and  their  true
pronunciation  were  considered  of  great  value.  (Hibbert  Lect.,  pp.  113
note,  305-6,  385.  See  further  as  to  the  value  of  the  Ineffable  Names
among  these  nations,  also  the  Egyptians,  Journ.  of  the  Royal  Society  of
Literature,  1865,  p.  274  j^.)  As  in  the  Practical  Qabbalah,  numbers  pos-
sessed great  value  with  the  ancient  people  of  Babylonia. f     The  angels

*  Ibid.f  pp.  4,  141-2,  113,  302  sq.f  353-4,  405.  Comp.  Chaldean  Magic,  by  F.  Lc-
normant,  Eng.  Ed.,  pp.  19,  29,  41-44,  104-5,  'O^-

f  Chaldean  Magic,  F.  Lenormant,  Eng.  Ed.,  pp.  41-42,  25-6,  113,  117.  The  ancient
civilization  of  Mesopotamia  was  likely  I,  Kushite;  II,  Turanian;  III,  Semitic.  Essai
sur  un  monumint  mathimatique  chald^en^  etc.,  by  F.  Lenormant.  Paris,  1868,  p.  160  sq.
See  also  as  to  the  wonderful  discoveries  at  Tel-Ioh,  the  beautiful  work :  Dicouvertes  en


238

were  termed  Igigi,  /.  <?.,  ''spirits  of  heaven.*'  This  name  was  expressed
ideographically  by  the  determinative  of  divinity  followed  by  ''twice  five  "
=  lo.  Jensen  in  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyriologie  I,  i,  has  endeavored  to
show  the  Anunaki  "spirits  of  earth  *'  or  gnomes,  were  denoted  by  the
numeral  8,  the  Igigi  by  the  numeral  9.  He  would  connect  them  with  the
ribu  or  "  the  great  divine  princes.**  It  is  said  in  an  old  hymn,  that  E^,
the  demiurge,  the  reflection  of  the  Upper  Ea,  Wisdom ;  gave  the  names
to  the  angels.  (Hibbert  Lect.,  p.  141.)  The  number  appropriate  to  each
of  the  gods  is  on  a  tablet  (K.  170)  in  the  British  Museum,  viz:  I.  Assur
"  Kings  of  the  gods  **  is  without  number.  In  Babylonia  this  deity  was  Ilu
(El).  II.  Oannes  (Ea  or  Hea)  the  wisdom  deity  was  60  =  i.  III.  Bel
=  50.  IV.  Bel  Dagon  =  40.  V.  Sin  (moon-god)  =  30.  VI.  Samas
(sun-god)  =  20.  VII.  Bin  or  Ao  =  6.  VIII.  Merodach  (effaced).  IX.
Istar  (deity  of  Venus)  =15.  X.  Samdan  =  50.  XI.  Nergal  =12.  XII.
Nebo  (Wisdom)  =zz  10.  (^Essai  sur  un  document mathhnatique  chaldien  eta
cette  occasion  sur  ie  system  des  poids  et  mesures  de  Babyione,  by  Francois
Lenormant,  etc.,  Paris,  1868,  pp.  6,  118,  notes  p.  2  sq,,  115.  As  to  Ilu,
Text,  p.  10,  and  note  16,  notes  pp.  90  sq.y  98-99.  Trans.  Soc.  Biblical
Archaeol.  1880-82,  p.  370  sq,^  The  beginnings  of  Semitic  Chaldean
culture  arose  with  prior  Turanian,  probably  black  skinned,  races;  termed
by  Assyriologists  for  convenience,  Akkadian  and  Sumerian.  Monu-
ments, terra-cotta  tablets  and  engraved  signets  of  these  peoples,  con-
taining  symbols   and   statements,  some   said  to   be   from   before   4000


ChaldUy  par  Ernest  de  Sarzec^  etc.  Ouvrage  accompagnt  de  planches ^  etc.,  2  Vol.  Paris,
1884  j^.  Glyptique  Orientale,  par  ].  Menant,  Paris,  1883,  Vol.  i,  211  sq.  La  Stile  des
VautourSy  ttude  d'arMologie  chaldtenne,  by  L6on  lleuzey,  Paris,  1884.  Les  rois  de
Tello  et  la  ptriode  archalque  de  Tart  eAald^en^  Fa.riSy  1882.  C/n  nouveau  rot  de  Telle,
Paris,  1884.  Les  fotiilles  de  Chaldce,  etc.,  Paris,  1882.  All  by  M.  Heuzey,  to  be  found
in  Revue  Arclihlogiquey  Paris,  for  1882,  p.  271  sq.,  1S84,  p.  109  sq,,  1881,  p.  2$y  sq.
The  Kushitc  population  inhabited  the  lowlands  and  alluvial  plains  in  the  Southern  part.
They  came  from  Bactriana,  the  country  of  Kush.  Ancient  Hist,  of  the  East,  by  F.
Lenormant,  etc.,  1871,  Vol.  i,  p.  57  sq.  They  have  been  termed  Sumerians.  The  Ak-
kadians occupied  the  Northern  and  mountainous  part.  We  can  only  rank  them  among
the  Turanian  races.  The  Semites  subsequently  overrun  the  whole  country,  which  they
appear  to  have  obtained  by  conquest.  These  different  people  effected  different  phases
in  the  religion  of  the  entire  region.


239

B.  C,  have  reached  our  day.  The  earliest  yet  found  were  excavated  at
Tel-loh  in  1876  to  1881,  by  M.  de  Sarzec,  and  are  in  the  Louvre
at  .Paris.  At  Tel-loh  has  been  found  the  cubit  of  20.63  which  is
that  of  the  Egyptian  pyramid  builders  of  the  IV  and  following  two
dynasties.*  The  writing  of  the  early  Turanian  inhabitants  of  Tel-loh
the  ancient  Zirgula,  as  found  by  M.  Sarzec,  had  scarcely  emerged
from  the  ideographic  into  the  cuneiform  and  has  a  vertical  direction
like- the  Chinese  method.  There  is  not  anything  to  show  that  the
Semite  had  come  into  the  land.  Magnificent  figures  have  been  found  at
Tel-loh,  sculptured  in  green  diorite,  one  of  the  hardest  stones,  which  they
brought  from  the  quarries  of  Sinai.  Upon  these  are  most  beautifully  en-
graved inscriptions.  Some  of  the  figures  are  in  a  seated  position  in
the  archaic  Egyptian  style.  They  have  the  neck,  right  shoulder,  side  and
arm  bare,  like  the  archaic  representations  of  Buddha,  /.^.,  the  enlightened
or  wise  (one).  (Compare  the  Hindu  Pantheon  by  Edward  Moor,  Lon-
don, 1 8 10,  PI.  70.)  Buddha  is  frequently  represented  in  these  with
wooly  hair  and  thick  Ethiopian  lips  {ibid,,  pp.  231-2,  243,  249-255),
and  is  so  sculptured  in  the  archaic  cave  temples  of  Elephanta,  Ellora,
etc.;  (Jbid.,  pp.  242-246,)  supporting  our  view  that  the  early  people  of
Southern  Mesopotamia  were  the  race  now  called  Dravidian  in  India ;  the
race  which  built  the  great  Buddhist  topes  of  Sanchi,  Amravati,  etc. ;  mil-
lenniums before  the  appearance  of  Sakhya  MQni.  One  of  the  most  won-
derful  ancient  statues  now  in  existence,  is  that  of  King  Khepr^n  of  the  IV
Egyptian  dynasty,  who  built  the  second  great  pyramid  of  Gizeh :  it  is
now  in  the  Museum  of  Bulaq.  This  statue  is  carved  out  of  green  diorite
and  represents  the  monarch  seated  in  almost  the  same  position  as  those
found  at  Tel-loh.  This  shows  that  the  Egyptians  worked  the  quarries  of
diorite  at  Sinai,  and  sculptured  in  it,  as  early  as  4000  B.  C.  It  is  to  be
noted  that  the  bronzes  found  at  Tel-loh  do  not  contain  tin,  which  is  to
be  found  in  those  of  the  Chaldeans.  The  early  Chaldeans  carried  on
commerce  with  many  places,  notably  with  India.  Dr.  Sayce  shows
that  the  name  of  Mosheh  (Moses)  has  a  connection  with  the  name
of  the  Babylonian  sun -god,  as  the  *'hero**  or  "leader.**  (Comp.  that
said  by  us  antCy  p.  93.)     The  name  was  especially,  that  of  the  Assyrian

♦The  Assyro-Babylonian  cubit  was  21.6.     Hibbert  I.ect.,  p.  33  x^.,  p.  137.


240

god  Adar,  the  deity  of  the  scorching  sun  of  mid -day  (Hibbert  Lect.,  p.
46  sg.).  The  Akkadians,  as  we  have  stated  as  to  other  ancient  peoples,
considered  the  heaven  or  sky  as  the  counterpart  of  the  land  upon  which
they  lived.  Their  first  astronomical  observations  were  about  the  time
that  the  vernal  equinox  first  came  into  the  Zodiacal  sign  of  Taurus,  the
Bull.  This  would  be  ci'rca  4312  B.  C.  The  eagle  symbolized  the  meri-
dian sun.  The  orders  of  priests  were  divided  into  high  priests,  those  at-
tached or  bound  to  certain  deities  like  the  Hebrew  Levites ;  anointc?ft  or
cleaners;  the  /:a/i  **  illustrious  **  or  "  elders; "  the  soothsayers,  and  the
makhkhu  or  **  great  one,**  in  which  Prof.  Delitzsch  sees  the  Rab-/«a^  of
the  Old  Testament.  The  temples  were  provided  with  ''abysses"  or
**  deeps,*'  large  basins  filled  with  water,  like  "  the  sea  "  made  by  Jedidiah
or  Solomon,  for  his  great  temple  at  Jerusalem.  The  temples  had  a  great
court  and  an  inner  court,  which  was  walled  as  a  square ;  in  the  latter  was
built  the  ziggurrat  or  high  sacred  tower.*  The  temples  were  mostly  con-
structed with  the  points  of  the  angles  facing  the  four  points  of  the  com-
pass, but  the  Great  Temple  of  Bel-Merodach  at  Babylon,  differed  from
the  others,  its  sides  facing  the  four  cardinal  points.  In  the  extreme  end
of  the  temple  was  the  *'  holy  of  holies,**  concealed  by  a  veil  or  curtain
from  the  eyes  of  the  profane ;  here  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  "  the  di-
vine King  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  lord  of  the  heavens,  seats  himself,
etc.** ;  here  Herodotus  says,  was  the  golden  image  of  the  god,  with  a
golden  table  in  front,  like  the  Hebrew  table  for  the  shew  bread,  and  upon
this  food  appears  to  have  been  placed.  There  also  appears  to  have  been
in  some  of  the  temples,  a  little  coffer  or  ark  with  two  engraved  stone  tab-
lets in  it.  The  Akkadians  and  Chaldeans  kept  a  Sabbath  day  of  rest  every
seven  days,  they  also  had  thanksgiving  days  and  days  for  humiliation  and
prayer.  There  were  sacrifices  of  vegetables  and  animals,  of  meal  and
wine,  there  were  even  vicarious  sacrifices  of  human  beings  for  sin,  by  the
Akkadians  (pp.  78,  365-6).  The  number  seven  was  especially  sacred  (p.
82).  There  were  sacred  trees  with  seven  branches  and  some  of  ten,  like
the  decadic  tree  of  the  Sephiroth.f    They  had  clean  and  unclean  animals

*  As  to  these,  see  Proc.  Soc.  Bib.  Archxol.,  Feb'y  2,  1886,  Vol.  viii,  p.  83.
f  The  Cuneiform  Inscrip,  and  the  Old  Testament,  by  Dr.  Eberhard  Schzader,  Lon-
don, 1885,  p.  18  sq.     See  engraving  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.


241

and  pigs  and  reptiles  were  unclean.  In  the  temple  of  Baal,  the  Babylo-
nians had  two  altars,  Solomon  also  had  two  in  his  temple,  one  for  larger
the  other  for  smaller  offerings.  (I  Kings,  viii,  64.)  The  great  temple
of  Babylon  had  a  great  tower  in  eight  stages,  called  ;  '*  the  house  of  the
seven  spheres  of  heaven  and  earth,"  and  also ;  "  the  house  of  the  founda-
tion stone  of  heaven  and  earth."  The  temple  of  Solomon  also  appears
to  have  had  such  a  tower.  Arias  Montanus,  writing  before  A.  D.  1593,
portrays  such  a  tower  as  part  of  Solomon's  temple.*

The  great  temple  of  Babylon  existed  from,  probably  long  before,  2250
B.  C.  t  Its  '*  holy  of  holies  **  was  within  the  shrine  of  Nebo,  the  prophet
god  of  wisdom.  The  ancient  Babylonians  had  an  intercessor  between
men  and  the  gods,  this  was  the  benevolent  deity  called,  originally  by  the
Akkadians,  Silik-mulu-dug  or  Silik-mulu-khi,  the  "God  amongst  the
gods,"  the  one  who  watches  over  mankind.
**  The  merciful  one  amongst  the  gods

Generator  who  bringest  back  the  dead

to  life,

Silik-mulu-khi,  king  of  heaven  and  earth."  J
Subsequently  known  in  Assyria  as  Marduk,  and  in  Babylonia  as
the  god  Merodach  *' the  merciful."  He  was  the  only  son  and  inter-
preter of  the  will  of  Ea  (Hea),  the  Akkadian  great  deity  of  wisdom.
"Thou  art  Merodach,  the  merciful  lord  who  loves  to  raise  the  dead  to
life,"  says  an  old  hymn  on  one  of  the  tablets  :  the  same  idea  is  applied
to  Samas,  the  sun-god.  §  Nebo,  in  the  Semitic  Babylonian  Nabiu
ox  Nabu^  was  the  "proclaimer"   or  "prophet,"  he  made  known  the

*  Antiquitatum  Judaicarunty  etc.,  by  Benedicto  Aria  Montana,  Ilispalensi^  Lugduni
Batavorum,  1593,  p.  93  and  plate  P,  see  also  Kitto's  Cycl.  of  Bibl.  Liter.,  Ed.  1876,  iii,
p.  975.  For  depicted  restorations  of  the  ancient  Temples  and  Palaces  of  Mesopotamia,
see  the  magnificent  folios  of  M.  Victor  Place  and  Sir  Austen  Heniy  Layard.  The  five
great  folios  of  Paolo  Emilio  Botta  should  also  be  consulted.

f  For  a  description  of  it  and  its  tower,  by  George  Smith,  see  Hibbert  Lect.,  1887,  p.
437  sq.     Prof.  Rawlinson  has  written  a  description  of  the  Tower  of  Borsippa.

X  Chaldean  Magic,  by  F.  Lenormant,  p.  190  sq.,  and  other  places.

J  Hibbert  Lect.,  pp.  98-99,  loo-i,  106-7.     For  the  idea  of  the  immortality  of  the
soul   among  the  archaic  Turanian  and  Semitic  peoples,   see:    Revue  Arckiologique,
Paris,  1882,  p.  45  sq,
16


242

desire  of  Merodach.  Nebo  was  the  deity  of  literature  and  science^  his
especial  day  was  our  Wednesday,  and  he  was  the  god  of  the  planet  Mer-
cury, the  Wisdom-planet.*  He  was  probably  originally  the  deity  of  the
entire  universe,  a  creator-god.  (/^/V/.,  pp.  11 6-1 19  note,  120,  209  notes.)
The  ancient  divine  powers  of  Babylonia  were  at  the  same  time  beneficent
and  malevolent.  Good  and  evil,  as  in  the  Qabbalah,  were  not  in  abso-
lute opposition,  the  latter  was  the  complement  and  minister  of  the  good
{Ibid,,  p.  205-6),  and  where  the  Semitic  faith  existed  in  all  its  purity,
Satan  was  the  accuser  or  adversary  but  yet  an  angel  of  the  Deity,  who
was  creator  of  both  the  good  and  evil,  light  and  darkness. f  Dr.  Sayce
also  gives  an  account  of  the  winged  bulls,  lions,  eagle-headed  cherubs,
scorpion  men,  etc.,  J  and  thinks  they  were  totem  survivals  from  an
immense  antiquity. §  The  Akkadians  considered  the  heavens  and  earth
as  primordial  powers  or  Z/,  maintaining  an  eternal  struggle  with  chaos.
All  things  were  made  and  their  highest  divinity  was  a  creator;  but
with  the  Semite,  the  heavens  and  earth  were  carved  out  of  a  pre-
existent  chaos,  and  were  begotten.  The  Semitic  Baal  was  a  father.
With  the  first,  the  Zi  spirit  of  the  earth  and  the  Zi  spirit  of  the  heavens
were  the  first  creators,  the  first  gods.  The  spirit  of  the  moon  for  instance
was  a  deity  separated  from  the  visible  moon,  it  was  identified  with  the
creative  energy  of  the  moon  which  manifested  itself  in  the  motion  of  the
moon  and  even  the  motion  was  spiritualized  still  higher.  The  creative
deities  together,  represented  the  order  and  law  of  the  universe  embodied
in  sabba  fate^t  to  which  all  submit.  This  may  have  been  represented  by
Ilu  or  El  the  supreme  deity.  ||

The  Chaldean  historian  BSrossos,  whom  we  only  have  through  Greek

*  Sec  ante^  p.  206.     Hibbert  Lect,  1887,  pp.  113-115.

f  Ibid.t  pp.  346,  347.  As  to  Satan  and  Ahriman  (Angra-Mainyus  of  Ancient  Persia)
see  Proc.  Soc.  Biblical  Archaeol.,  Vol.  ix,  p.  365  sq.)

X  Hibbert  Lect.,  pp.  279,  289-291.

J  Ibid.,  pp.  278-9,  290-1,  393,  401.

II  The  Cuneiform  Inscrip.  and  the  Old  Testament,  By  Dr.  Eberhard  Schrader,  I,  p.
II  sq.j  23-5.  Chaldean  Magic,  by  F.  Lenormant,  Eng.  Ed.,  pp.  11 3-1 14.  Recherehes
sur  la  Glyptique  OrientaU,  par  M,  Joachim  Menant,  Paris ,  1886,  seconde  partie^p,  77
sq,  Menant  gives  numerous  representations  of  this  deity.  See  also  M.  F61ix  Lajard's
Culte  de  Mithra.    Also  ante  p.  238.


243

sources,  says :  that  he  obtained  his  knowledge  from  a  document  said  to
have  been  written  by  the  deity  Ea  or  Wisdom ;  that  there  was  a  time  when
all  was  darkness  and  an  abyss  of  waters,  in  this  lived  hideous  strange  be-
ings, which  were  the  product  of  an  androgenous  principle  and  which  were
androgenic.  There  were  men  with  two  heads,  one  that  of  a  man,  the
other  that  of  a  woman.  They  were  androgenic  in  their  organs,  etc.  A
woman  named  Omoroka,  Chald.  Thalatth  (read,  Thavatth)  in  Greek,
Thalassa  (the  sea)  but  equivalent  to  the  Moon  ;  presided  over  them,  etc.  *
This  account  of  the  ancient  universe  being  peopled  with  strange  creatures
can  be  carried  back  to  terra-cotta  tablets  of  at  least  600  B.  C.  (Hibbert
Lect.,  p.  372)  and  such  creatures  are  portrayed  on  the  very  ancient  sig-
nets.    (See  the  works  of  Lajard,  Smith,  Sayce,  Menant,  etc.)

In  the  Babylonian  cosmogony  as  in  the  Hebrew,  the  watery  abyss,
termed  by  the  former  the  Great  Sea-serpent  or  dragon  Tiamat,  is  the  first
source  of  all  things.  The  latter  is  also  named  Tiavat,  and  is  the  Thavatth
of  BSrossos,  and  the  f'hom  or  foAoo  **  deep,**  of  Genesis.  In  Assyrian  its
contracted  form  is  /amfu,  t\  e,,  the  deep  sea.  The  word  is  Semitic  but  of
Akkadian  descent.  The  old  Akkadian  deity  of  Wisdom,  Ea  or  Hea,
was  a  sea  or  water-god  who  lived  in  the  Great  Crystalline  Sea  of  which
he  was  the  lord,  and  who  was  called :  "  mighty  bond  of  heaven  and
earth."  The  Great  deep  or  abyss,  with  the  Sumerians  was  the  mother  of
Ea  or  wisdom,  and  of  all  the  gods.  This  "  deep  **  rolled  not  only  around
the  world,  but  above  the  firmament  of  heaven,  consequently  the  mother
of  Ea  was  not  only  known  as  Apzu,  the  deep,  but  also  as  Zikum  or
Zigarum,  the  upper  heaven,  which  is  described  in  one  tablet,  as :  "  the
mother  that  has  begotten  heaven  and  earth."  But  it  was  not  the  existing
heaven  that  is  referred  to  j  Zikum  was  the  primordial  prototypic  abyss
out  of  which  both  the  heaven  and  earth  were  produced.  Possibly  an
old  myth  may  have  related  that  she  was  torn  asunder  when  the  present
world  was  made,  the  upper  half  of  her  becoming  the  sky,  the  lower
half  the  earth.  This  at  least  is  what  we  may  gather  from  the  story
of  BSrossos.f    It  is  said  that  among  the  priest-kings  of  Tel-loh,  from

*  See  Cory's  Ancient  Fragments,  Ed.  1876,  p.  4.  Hibbert  Lect.  1887,  pp.  369-70.
For  an  account  and  engravings  of  the  ancient  androgene  of  the  Akkadians,  Chaldeans
and  Babylonians,  see  Menant's  GlypHque  Orientali  before  cited.  Vol.  i,  p.  1 1 1  sq,

t  See  Dr.  Sayce,  Hibbert  Lect.,  p.  375  sq.


244

which  place  the  earliest  cuneiform  tablets  we  now  have  come  to  us,  she
was  honored  as  Bahu.  The  Hebrew  Genesis  says  that  before  **  Elohim
carved  out  the  heavens  and  the  earth  *  *  *  *  darkness  was  upon
they^^  of  the  deep,'  also  **  the  earth  had  been  Tohoo  (waste)  and  Bohao
(emptiness,  void)."  This  was  Bau  or  Bahu  of  the  Babylonians,  and  the
Baau  of  the  Phoenician  historian  Sankhuniathon  (Cory's  Ancient  Frag-
ments, etc.,  London,  1876,  p.  4).  The  Phoenician  cosmology  also  began
in  an  abyss  of  waters  in  which  the  germs  of  all  Things  were  begotten
and  the  ancient  Hindu  does  the  same.  With  the  ancient  inhabitants  of
Babylonia,  Davkina,  the  earth,  lay  upon  the  watery  abyss  as  the  wife  of  Ea,
the  Wisdom  or  the  Word.*  In  the  Hebrew  Genesis  we  have  a  reference  to
the  watery  abyss  above  the  visible  sky,  to  the  "  Waters  above  the  firma-
ment." The  sky  was  thought  of  as  a  created  thing  which  floated  on  the
surface  of  the  Great  Ocean  stream,  as  did  the  earth.  The  visible  sky  was
but  another  form  of  Davkina,  "  the  lady  of  heaven,  whence  the  oracular
voice  (the  thunder)  is  created;"  she  was  "the  queen  of  the  oracular
voice  of  the  deep,"  who  was  in  Assyria,  symbolized  by  the  falcon,  per-
haps the  eagle,  and  from  this  may  have  been  derived  the  symbolism  of
the  eagle  as  the  upper  air.  (Comp.  ante,  p.  229  sq.')  Zi-kum  was  the  pri-
mordial abyss  "the  spirit  of  the  lower  firmament,"  then  we  have  the
visible  heaven  and  after  this  the  earth.  Zi-kum  parallels  likely,  Bahu  the
Great  Mother,  the  Void  of  the  Old  Testament.  Tohu,  or  t'hom  being
chaos.  It  may  perhaps  be  admissible  to  assert,  Zi  or  Zi-kum  was  the
spirit  of  the  Deep,  Tohu  active  energy,  Bohu  resisting  energy,  Khosee
inertia  or  rest,  the  result  of  the  last  preceding  two  when  combined.

In  the  later  or  Semitic  period,  a  new  idea  appears,  Merodach  the  sun-
god  of  light,  has  a  struggle  with  Tiamat  considered  as  the  evil  dragon  of
darkness,  which  ends  in  the  defeat  of  the  latter;  but  with  the  early
Akkadian  philosophers  of  Eridu,  there  was  not  anything  unholy  in  the
watery  abyss,  the  home  and  mother  of  Ea  or  Wisdom,  the  primal  source  of
this  deity's  wisdom  and  of  his  goodness  to  mankind ;  for  them  from  the
Great  Sea,  Oannes  or  Ea  brought  knowledge  and  art  to  man.  But  in  the
Semitic  account,  the  abyss  is  the  chaotic  opposition  to  the  present  order

*Sce  Chaldean  Magic,  by  F.  Lcnormant,  pp.  114,  44,  104.     Comp,  Hibbcrt  Lcct


245

of  nature  and  is  evil.  One  of  the  tablets  graphically  describes  the  fight
between  Bel  and  the  Dragon.*

Of  the  Assyrian  idea,  we  have  a  cosmological  poem,  but  only  the  frag-
ments, part  of  these  say :

"  (Bel)  prepared  the  (seven)  mansions  of  the  great  gods ;

he  fixed  the  stars,  even  the  twin-stars  to  correspond  to  them ;

he  ordained  the  year ^  appointing  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  over  it;  f

for  each  of  the  twelve  months  he  fixed  three  stars,  J

from  the  day  when  the  year  issues  forth  to  the  close.

He  founded  the  mansion  of  the  god  of  the  ferry-boat  (the  sun -god) ;

that  they  might  know  their  bonds,

that  they  might  not  err,  that  they  might  not  go  astray  in  any  way.

He  established  the  mansion  of  Mul-lil  and  £a  along  with  himself.

He  opened  also  the  great  gates  on  either  side,

the  bolts  he  strengthened  on  the  left  hand  and  on  the  right,

and  in  their  midst  he  made  a  staircase.  %

*  For  a  translation  of  it,  see  Hibbert  Lect.,  1887,  p.  379  s^.  The  figures  on  a  cylin-
der seal,  which  most  probably  [)ortrays  this  fight,  may  be  found  in  Sabaean  Researches,
etc. ;  by  John  Landseer,  London,  1823,  p.  87.  This  book  has  engravings  of  a  number
of  important  signet  seals,  some  showing  the  sacred  tree  and  balance,  pp.  263,  260,  288,
361,  41.  For  other  representations :  see,  Z«  pierres  gravies  de  la  hatUe^Asii.  Reck'
erches  sur  la  Glyptique  Oritntale^  par  M.  Joachim  Menant,  Paris,  2  vols.,  1 883,  1886.
Also  Collection  M.  de  Clcrcq.  Catalogue  mithodique  et  raisonni.  Antiquitis  Assyriennes.
Cylindres  Orientaux^  etc.t  Paris.  Ernest  Leroux,  iditeur,  1885  sq.  The  Chaldean
Account  of  Genesis,  etc. :  by  George  Smith,  new  edition,  by  Dr.  A.  H.  Sayce,  New
York,  1 88 1 .  Introduction  a  Vittide  du  culte  public  et  des  my  stores  de  Mitkra  en  orient  et  en
Occident^  par  M.  F61ix  Lajard,  etc.  Paris,  1 847.  Text  and  Plates:  especially  Plates
xxxii,  fig.  2,  xxxiii,  fig.  4,  xxv,  5.  Recherches  sur  le  culte ^  les  symboles^  les  attributs  et  les
monuments Jiguris  de  Venus  en  orient  et  en  Occident,  par  M.  F61ix  Lajard,  etc.  Paris,
1849.  Text  and  Plates.  Also  the  folio  works  of  Botta,  Victor  Place  and  Layard,  and
the  Photographs  of  Assyrian  Antiquities  in  the  British  Museum,  by  Stephen  Thompson,
London,  1872.

f  Schrader  and  Oppert  translate :  "  He  ordained  the  year,  established  decades  far  the
same.^^  Cuneiform  Inscrip.  and  the  Old  Test,  by  Dr.  Eberhard  Schrader,  before  cited,
p.  15-16.

JComp.  Gen.  i,  14-19.

2  Gen.  xxviii,  12.


246

He  illuminated  the  Moon-god  that  he  might  watch  over  the  night,
and  he  ordained  for  him  the  ending  of  the  night  that  the  day  may  be
known,  etc."  *

In  the  Qabbalah  reference  is  made  to  the  seven  androgenic  kings  who
were  first  made^  who  were  imperfect  and  were  destroyed. f

In  the  ancient  Library  of  Nineveh  a  tablet  was  found,  which  gives  an
account  of  the  chaotic  universe  which  in  the  main  agrees  with  the  state-
ments of  Bdrdssos,  as  we  now  have  them,  as  to  the  then  existing  chaotic
creatures,  it  also  says :  "In  the  midst  of  the  mountains  they  grew  up  and
became  heroes  and  increased  in  number.  Seven  kings,  brethreny  appeared
and  begat  children.  6000  in  number  were  their  peoples,  etc."  (Hibbert
Lect.,  pp.  372-373.)  The  god  Ner  or  Nergal,  the  deity  of  death,  was
deputed  to  destroy  these  (/^/V/.,  also  p.  313).  This  tablet  may  date  from
about  2250  B.  C.     (^3id.,  pp.  374,  23  and  note,  390.)

The  cosmological  tablets  also  state  that  the  present  creation  was  pre-
ceded by  another.     {IMd,,  p.  390.)     The  Zohar  also  says  the  same.  J

Among  the  earliest  of  the  highest  triadic  deities  of  the  Akkadians  are
Ana,  Mul-lil,  and  Hea  or  Ea,  these  became  later  Anu,  Bel  and  Hea  or
Ea,  under  them  Samas,  the  sun-god ;  Sin,  the  moon-god ;  and  Istar,  the
god  of  the  planet  Venus.  These  were  followed  by  the  spirits  or  deities
of  the  other,  then  known,  planets.  With  the  Akkadians  each  object  and
power  of  nature  had  its  Zi  or  spirit.  The  Akkadians  formed  their  deities
into  triads,  usually  of  males,  the  Semites  also  had  triadic  deities  but  intro-
duced sex.  At  the  head  of  the  Semitic  Babylonian  deities  was  Bel,  the  Father
of  all.  With  them,  all  the  upper  deities  together  composed  a  heavenly
family,  outside  of  this  were  the  hosts  of  heaven,  ministering  spirits  and
servants  of  the  heavenly  family.  All  the  rest  of  the  universe  belonged  to
the  adversary  and  his  legions,  to  evil.  The  primitive  Semitic  Chaldeans
appear  also  to  have  believed  in  a  resurrection  and  an  existence  after
death.    See  ante,  p.  241  note.    Compare  writings  on  the  Izdubar  legend.

Dr.  Sayce  has  shown  that  the  general  tendency  of  the  Semitic  Babylo-

*  Hibbert  Lect.,  p.  389.

t  Zohar:  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah,  beg.  Idrah  Rabbah,  I28«,  135^.  Idrah  Zootah,  292^.
La  Kabbaliy  p.  205  j^,
X  Franck*s  La  Kabbale,  p.  205  j^


247

nian  mind  was  towards  attaching  a  weaker  or  feminine  reflection,  paneem^
/>.,  face,  to  a  masculine  deity,  the  two  however  being  thought  of  together
as  one  in  content.  The  Israelites  do  not  appear  to  have  been  an  excep-
tion to  this  early  Semitic  tendency*  and  the  Qabbalists  trace  this  femin-
ine reflection  in  Elohim  or  the  She*keen-ah,  the  visible  glory  of  the
Supreme  Deity  upon  the  earth.  The  Akkadians  appear  to  have  made
their  triads  of  deities,  of  both  males  and  females,  but  the  Semites  appear
to  have  always  made  their  feminine  deities  mere  reflections  of  the  male.
(Hibbert  Lect.,  1887,  pp.  iio-iii,  176-177,  112,  194,  346.)

Dr.  Sayce  gives  (Hibbert  Lect.,  1887,  pp.  104  j^.,  304-5),  a  transla-
tion of  a  cuneiform  terra-cotta  tablet  which  shows  that  the  ancient
Akkadians  believed  in  an  upper  Ea,  deity  of  wisdom,  and  a  lower  Ea,  a
creating  demiurge,  which  was  a  reflection  of  the  upper  Ea  or  Wisdom,
this  idea  has  a  similarity  to  the  accounts  in  the  Qabbalah  of  Ze'ir  Anpeen
and  of  the  Adam  Qadmon  or  Adam  Illa-ah.  In  the  great  work  of  M.
F6lix  Lajardf  are  copies  from  signets,  etc.,  showing  Ea,  the  upper  wisdom
and  Ea,  the  demiurge.  The  tablet  we  have  just  before  mentioned  also
refers  to  the  fifty  sacred  names  of  Ea.  The  Qabbalah  also  refers  to  "  the
fifty  gates  of  understanding,"  as  to  which  it  says,  even  Moses,  the  highest
prophet  only  reached  to  the  forty-ninth.

Indeed  the  conception  of  a  creating  deity  is  a  distinguishing  feature  of
the  very  early  Akkadian  religion  of  Babylonia.  (^Ibid,^  pp.  142-144.)
In  a  hymn  of  the  time  of  Sargon  of  Akkad,  likely  3750  B.  C.  :  we  read ;
"  The  divine  man  on  behalf  of  his  son  attends  thee  :*'  (p.  172).  "  The
man,  the  son  of  his  god,  has  committed  sin,  etc."  St.  Luke  iii,  38,
says,  Adam  was  •'  the  son  of  God."  (Comp.  the  Zend  Avesta  as  to  the
first  divine  man,  Yima-Ksha8ta.)

The  Akkadian  Mul-lil  means  "  the  lord  of  the  ghost-world,"  and  has  a
connection  with  a  "dust-storm"  or  a  *' cloud  of  dust,"  which  was
applied  to  ghosts,  whose  appearance  was  thought  of  as  similar  to  a  dust-
cloud,  and  whose  food  was  supposed  to  be  dust.     The  Qabbalists  hold

*  See  that  said  by  us,  ante^  pp.  128,  175.  Note  what  is  said  by  S.  F.  Dunlap  in  ;
Sod,  the  Son  of  Man.     Ix>ndon,  1 861,  ii,  p.  xix.

•\  Introduction  a  Vtttide  du  cu/te  public  et  des  my  stores  de  Mithra  en  orient  et  en  Occident
par  M.  F6lix  Lajard,  etc.     Paris,  1847.     Atlas  of  Plates.     PI.  xxxi.     PI.  xxxii.


248

that  Adam  was  first  created  with  a  spiritual  body,  which  is  described  in
the  O.  T.  as  "  of  dust,"  and  that  our  present  body  was  the  coats  of  skin
given  after  the  Fall.  We  read  in  ii  Genesis :  "  YHVH  Eloheem,"  vay-
ye^tzar^T''}.  (with  two  yods)  eth  ha-adam  aphar  meen^  etc.,  ^^ formed  the
man  (of)  dust  from  the  ground.*'  Which  may  be  explained  by  the  dust
meaning  the  spirit  body.

We  also  have  in  the  archaic  cuneiform  tablets,  the  Lilatu  or  Lilith,  the
female  night  demon  of  the  Practical  Qabbalah  (Zohar  ii,  255-9,  i,  35^)
originally  "  the  handmaid  of  the  ghost ;  Lil  was  in  Akkadian  "  a  cloud  of
dust,"  and  the  form  of  the  incubus  or  Vampire  ghost  was  like  "  a  dust-
cloudy  It  was  thought  of  as  male-female.  The  Semites  made  from  this,
Ullum  male  and  lilatu  female.  As  lilatu  represented  kel-lillay  "  the  hand-
maid of  the  ghost,"  it  subsequently  became  confounded  with  lildtu  ''the
night"  and  became  the  female  night-demon,  the  vampire  who  sucked  the
blood  of  her  sleeping  victims.  It  is  in  the  Old  Testament.  (Is.  xxxiv,  14.
See  Hibbert  Lect.,  1887,  pp.  103,  145-146.  Chaldean  Magic,  by  F.  Le-
normant,  Eng.  ed.,*pp.  31,  38.)

Lillith  in  the  demonology  of  the  Israelites  was  called  Agrath  bcUh
Machlath,  i,  e,,  female  leader  of  demons.  Myth  makes  her  the  wife  of
Adam  by  whom  she  had  Ka-yin  and  Hurmin  (Ahriman  ?).  She  was  consid-
ered the  mother  of  many  demons  and  the  Practical  Qabbalah  has  much
to  say  about  her.  She  is  described  in  the  Talmud  as  a  beautiful  and  se-
ductive woman,  having  long  wavy  hair.  Bath  Machlath  is  said  to  mean,
"a  dancing"  woman,  a  dancing  movement  being  ascribed  to  demons.
See  Proc.  Soc.  Bib.  Archaeol.  1887,  p.  226.

We  think  that  the  Zodiacal  constellations  were  at  first  ten  and  repre-
sented an  immense  androgenic  man  or  deity,  subsequently  this  was
changed,  resulting  in  Scorpio  and  Virgo  and  making  eleven,  after  this
from  Scorpio,  Libra,  the  Balance  was  taken,  making  the  present  twelve.*
The  old  boundary  stones  of  Babylonia  circa  1120  B.  C.  have  symbols  of
Virgo  and  Scorpio  but  none  of  Libra.     They  also  have  the  Bull,  a  large

*  Comp.  Seyffarth,  Trans.  Acad.  Science  of  St.  Louis,  Vol.  i,  No.  3,  p.  ix.  Sod,  by
S.  F.  Dunlap,  i,  p.  153  sq,;  ii,  xvii  sq.  The  Rosicrucians,  their  Rites  and  Mysteries,
etc.:  by  Hargrave  Jennings,  Ed.  1879,  pp.  47,  50,  62,  171,  297-309,  350  sq.


249

dog  for  the  Lion,  a  dipper  for  Aquarius,  etc.  ;  also  the  houses  of  the
planets,  with  their  symbols.

The  early  inhabitants  of  Babylonia  appear  to  have  had  three  degrees  of
leligious  initiation,*  the  Qabbalists  apparcndy  had  the  same  number  as
did  also  the  early  Christiau  church  in  its  esoterism.  The  foregoing  par-
allels are  but  a  few  of  those  which  exist  and  are  open,  to  the  student  who
especially  devotes  himself  to  the  investigation.

We  also  call  attention  to  the  fact,  that  the  Jewish  names  of  the  months
and  many  of  the  names  of  the  angels  and  evil  spiiits,  in  the  Qabbalah,
the  Apocrypha  and  the  Talmud,  are  based  on  the  ancient  Chaldean  lan-
guage. In  the  Practical  Qabbalah  this  also  appears  in  many  of  the  names
of  the  demons,  e.  g.,  the  Maskim.  Comp.  Chaldean  Magic,  pp.  8  ;  17
sg.;  191.  t


•Mon.  J.  Menant,  Rt^hertha  mr  la  GlypHqut  Orientalr,  Paris,  1883,  1,  pp.
"9-143-

f  The  engraving  (Figure  Z5)  ax  the  head  of  this  chapter  is  important,  it  is  taken
from  an  impression  of  an  old  cornelian  or  sard  signet,  having  a  Phcenician  inscriptioa.
The  original  signet  is  conoidic  in  shape  with  an  elliptical  seml-convei  base.  It  is
pierced  near  the  apex  for  the  purpose  of  inserting  a  string  or  wire.  The  cagravinK  's
on  the  base,  and  upon  the  two  sides,  which  are  slightly  convex.  On  one  side  is  a  wor-
shipper, probably  a  priest,  standing  before  three  differing  upright  athirai  or  columns,
likely  representing  (he  androgenic  moon  deity  Sin  and  the  separate  male  and  female
pnnciples.  On  the  other  side  is  a  man  drcsseil  in  the  military  costume  usual  with  (he
Assyrians,  also  a  crescent  moon,  to  which  he  points.  Behind  him  is  a  human  lion  or
demon-headed  figure  such  as  we  often  see  depicted  on  the  Assyrian  monuments,  his
arm  uplifled,  the  band  holding  a  weapon,  as  if  about  to  strike.    It  nay  be  Ne^al.    See


250

Layard's  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  ist  Series,  PI.  82,  for  a  similar  figaxe.  On  the  base
of  the  signet  is  a  representation  of  the  divine  Triad,  perhaps  the  supreme  deity  Ilu  of
the  Babylonians,  or  Assur  of  the  Assyrians,  and  the  Upper  Triad  contained  in  it.
Beneath  this  is  a  kneeling  figure  with  both  hands  raised  similar  to  the  Egyptian  picture
we  have  given  ante^  p.  164.  There  are  also  two  asheras,  the  male  and  female  princi-
ples. The  engraved  letters  are  very  primitive.  It  is  from  the  collection  of  Rev.  Dr.  W.
Hayes  Ward.  Comp.  the  American  Joum.  of  Archaeology,  ii,  p.  156.  In  Lajard*s
Culte  de  Afithra,  PI.  xxxii,  fig.  3,  is  another  representation  of  the  Triadic  deity  from  a
red  jasper  veined  with  green,  signet.  It  is  engraved  with  old  Phoenician  letters,  and
from  a  collection  of  J.  Robert  Steuart.  Cylinder  signet,  Figure  26,  is  portrayed  in.
Discoveries  in  the  Ruins  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  etc. ;  by  Sir  Austen  H.  Layard,  New
York,  1853,  p.  153.  It  was  found  at  the  foot  of  one  of  the  colossal  human-headed  bulls
at  the  entrance  to  the  Assyrian  palace  of  Kouyunjik.  It  is  of  that  translucent  green
feldspar  termed,  amazon  stone.  Mr.  Layard  thinks  it  is  the  signet  seal  of  Sennacherib,
which  would  fix  it  as  of  circa  705  B.  C,  but  this  is  far  from  certain.  It  also  contains,
a  representation  of  the  triune  deity.  The  engraving  on  this  hard  stone  is  very  graceful,
minute  and  beautiful.  Compare  upon  this  triadic  representation  of  the  deity:  The
Babylonian  and  Assjrrian  cylinder  seals  of  the  British  Museum,  by  Theo.  G.  Pinches,
in  the  Journal  of  the  British  Archaeological  Association.  Read  June  3,  1885.  PI.  Nos.
3  and  4.  No.  4  is  another  signet  representing  the  triadic  deity  and  also  has  an  archaic
Phoenician  Inscription.  Comp.  C.  W.  King  on.  Antique  Gems.  London,  1872,  pp.  44,
52.  Empreintes  de  cylindres Assyro-ChaidienSt  etc.:  by  J.  Menant.  Paris,  1880,  pp.
49-50.  Symboles  Antiques  employes  eti  Assyne,  et  conserves  dafis  les  livres  supposis  a
tort  propres  a  la  Chines  exprimant  le  nom  du  Dieu  Supreme ^  Dieu  du  Ciel^  et  celui  des
trois  personnes  de  la  triniti  Chriiienne,  by  M.  le  Cher  de  Paravey.  In  Annates  de
philosophie  Chrktienne^  Tomes  vii  et  viii^  ^8jj,  Comp.  Les  Achfmenides  et  les  Inscrip-
tions de  la  Perse,  by  Joachim  M6nant.  Paris,  1872,  p.  84  sq.  and  Ilibbert  Lect.,  1887,
pp.  192-3.


Aln  Soph.
THE  WITHOUT  END.


Diagram  III.— The  Sephirothic  Tree  of  Life,  the  Ineffable  Name,  and  the  Orbits  of  the  Planets.


■■  -■»


XIII.


OF  AIN  SOPH  AND   THE  TEN  SEPHIROTH.

THE  Ten  Sephiroth  or  Intermediaries,  between  the  unknowable  and
invisible  Deity  and  the,  to  man's  mind,  knowable,  visible  and
material ;  were  portrayed,  to  assist  the  comprehension  and  mem-
ory of  the  disciple,  in  different  diagrams.

We  shall  not  have  in  this  writing,  space  to  devote  to  a  full  exposition
of  the  ancient  origin,  meanings,  colours  and  symbols,  of  the  Ten  Sephi-
roth. Compare  with  this  the  Diagrams  showing  their  arrangement.  The
following  is  cited  as  of  interest.  R.  Isaac  of  Akko,  says :  "  Illustrations
delivered  orally,  served  to  explain  the  mystery  of  the  Unity  of  the  Ten
Sephiroth  in  themselves,  which  is  always  concentrated  in  Ain  Soph,  from
Ain  Soph  to  the  Ain  Soph.  **¥**,  Remember  that  some
of  the  Qabbalists  compare  it  (the  Unity)  to  a  chain  forming  an  uninter-
nipted  unity  by  its  joined  links;  others,  to  various  wafers  issuing  from
one  source,  and  separating  into  many  rivers,  which  become  (again)  united
in  the  ocean ;  from  whence  they  return  again,  from  beneath  the  earth,  to
their  former  divisions ;  and  so  on  in  an  uninterrupted  unity ;  others  com-


252

pare  the  matter  of  the  union  of  Mercy  and  Severity ;  to  di  precious  stone^
which  unites  in  itself,  the  various  peculiarities  of  other  precious  stones  of
different  qualities  (colours  ?)  and  still  remains  a  perfect  unity ;  others,
take  as  an  illustration,  the  unity  of  the  different  colors  in  the  flame  pro-
ceeding from  a  burning  coal,  in  which,  both  flame  and  coal,  constitute  a
unity  ;  and  then  again,  there  is  the  simile  of  a  bunch  of  grape5^\  in  which
both  bunch  and  grapes  are  one.  I  have  furthermore  heard  from  the
mouth  of  the  most  prominent  of  our  learned  men,  the  metaphor  of  the
tree  with  its  roots  (the  Ten  Sephiroth)  in  the  earth  and  its  numerous
branches,  twigs,  leaves,  veins,  fruits,  and  their  rinds  and  kernels,  which
all  are  derived  from  each  other,  and  yet  all  draw  from  the  marrow  of  the
tree,  and  thus  all  collectively  form  a  complete  and  unbroken  unity,  from
the  roots  to  the  very  top  of  the  tree,  because  they  all  are  of,  and  point  to,
one  and  the  same  essential  source. "J

These  illustrations  of  the  relations  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  to  the  Ain
Soph,  many  of  which  are  very  old,  may  be  found  in  the  Zohar.  The  figure
of  the  bunch  of  grapes  is  in  the  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah  at  the  end  and  is
also  in  the  writings  of  Ibn  Gebirol.  Another  illustration  is  through  the
sparks  produced  by  steel  from  the  flint,  which  are  always  hidden  in
the  latter  as  a  potency  and  unity,  and  brought  into  visibility  only  by
friction.  §  Sometimes  they  were  shown  as  a  series  of  circular  lines  or  con-
centric circles,  one  inclosing  the  other,  as  we  have  given  in  Diagram  I,
antCy  p.  I  GO.  Sometimes  they  were  arranged  in  columns  and  triads,  as
given  by  us  in  Diagrams  II  and  III.  In  the  latter  two  they  are  pre-
sented as  if  one  was  looking  at  the  back,  the  a'hoor,  as  opposed  to
paneem   the   face.     The   perpendicular  line   on   the   Right,  is   termed,

♦Sapphir,  a  pearl,  or  bdellium,  a  crystal;  in  both  of  which,  play  the  colours  of  the
rainbow,  especially  the  white  and  red.  One  is  transparent  white,  the  other  the  ordinaxy
white,  but  in  each,  like  in  the  opal,  colours  play.

t  A  golden  vine  and  grapes  were  over  the  doorway  of  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  built
by  Herod.

X  From  The  Sepher  AFerath  Ainayeem^  i.  ^.,  Enlightenment  of  the  Eyes,  on  Deuter-
onomy vi.

\  Comp.  Beitrd^e  zur  Geschichte  der  Kabbala^  von  Adolph  Jellinek.  Leipzig,  1852,
p.  81.


253

Active,  Male,  Positive  and  the  column  of  Grace  or  Mercy ;  that  on  the
Left,  is  called,  Passive,  Female,  Negative,  and  the  column  of  Rigor,  Jus-
tice or  Punishment ;  the  Centre  line  is  termed,  the  column  of  Harmony
or  the  column  of  the  Centre.  The  Right  was  the  column  called  Ya-
kheen ;  the  Left,  that  called  Bo-az ;  the  Centre,  the  Harmony;  that  of  the
Holy  Temple.  King  Solomon  placed  the  first  two  pylons  before  his
Temple  to  symbolize  the  opposing  principles  through  which,  with  the
Harmony,  the  universe  exists.  The  Sephiroth  are  also  arranged  as  in  the
Diagram  given  in  the  Frontispiece ;  in  which  they  are  applied  to  the  dif-
ferent members  of  the  Adam  Qadmon,  of  this  we  give  a  face-view :  they
were  also  arranged  as  a  tree  having  its  roots  in  heaven,  the  trunk  and
branches  being  the  several  Sephiroth,  and  in  several  other  symbolic  forms.
The  arrangement  as  in  the  Ilnd  and  Illrd  Diagrams,  was  called  Etz
^Hay-yiniy  i.  e. ,  the  Tree  of  Life  or  simply  Eiieeriy  the  Tree.  In  the  form
as  given  of  the  Adam  Illa-ah  in  the  Frontispiece,  they  were  called  An-
peen,  Parzu-pheem  or  Ano-pheem,  /.  ^.,  the  Faces.  These  are  all  refer-
red to  in  the  Zoharic  writings.  The  Modern  Qabbalists  have  added  to
the  circles  given  in  the  Diagrams  I,  II  and  III,  channels  or  canals,  to  in-
dicate all  the  affinities  and  effluxes  between  and  in  them,  as  a  unit  or  to-
tality.    We  have  shown  these  connecting  channels  in  II  and  III.

It  must  be  especially  kept  in  mind,  that  in  the  Qabbalah  the  Ten  Seph-
iroth are  always  thought  of  as  a  totality,  a  second  divine  unity,  that  of
number,  yet  as  inherent  in  the  Supreme  Absolute  Ain  Soph  in  which
number  does  not  exist ;  and  that  they  are  always  considered  in  this  one
totality,  as  forming  the  Adam  Illa-ah,  the  Heavenly  Adam  or  Adam
Qadmon,  the  World  of  Perfect  ideas.  Philo  evidently  refers  to  this,  iii,
pp.  184-6,  178  et  seq.

Of  sjiD  |'«  AiN  Soph  or  |!W  or  Ayin  (A'y-een).  The  Endless,  Bound-
less, or  No-Thing ;  made  Its  existence  manifest  through  the  efflux,  emana-
tion and  development,  of  the  entire  universe  spiritual  and  material ;  this
was  by  and  through  the  medium  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  or  Upper  Intelli-
gences. Ain  Soph  is  called,  At-tee*kah  D*At-tee'keen,  /.  ^.,  the  Ancient
of  All  the  Ancient,  also  At-tee*kah  Ka'doosha,  /.  e,,  the  Sacred  Ancient,
and  is  considered  as  sexless  and  as  the  Non-Ego  or  Not  I.  A  symbol  of
Ain  Soph  is  the  human  eye  closed.     Ain  Soph  manifested  Itself  by  the


254

efflux  of  Its  vitalizing  energy  or  force,  which  the  Qabbalists  call  Light.
Comp.  Gen.  i,  2.  This  being  a  product  is  not  equal  to  the  Ain  Soph.
This  Light  is  boundless  on  the  side  which  produces  it  and  is  then  called
Ain  Soph  Or,  but  it  is  bounded  on  that  side  by  which  it  emanates  or  pro-
duces, it  is  then  simply  the  Light.  ^'  It  (Ain  Soph)  is  so  named  (Ayin,
/.  ^.,  No-Thing)  because  we  do  not  know,  and  also  it  cannot  be  known,
what  was  in  this  principle  (the  beginning  of  all  Existence)  as  this,  to  our
understanding,  yea,  even  by  our  Wisdom!  is  unattainable.**  (Idrah
Zootah,  Zohar  iii,  288^.)  "  Therefore  the  Sacred  Ancient  is  called  No-
Thing,  since  the  No-Thing  hangs  on  It.*'*  The  French  Qabbalist
r  Abbe  Alphonse  Louis  Constant,  writing  under  the  name  of,  Eliphaz  Levi
Zahed,t  correctly  says :  "  The  Kabbalists  have  a  horror  of  all  that  which
resembles  idolatry;  they  give  however  to  God  a  human  form,  but  it  is  as
a  purely  hieroglyphic  figure.  They  consider  God  as  the  intelligent,  loving
and  living  Infinite.  He  is  for  them  neither  the  totality  of  the  existences,
nor  the  abstraction  of  Existence,  nor  a  Being  philosophically  definable.
The  Deity,  with  them,  is  in  All,  yet  is  distinct  from  All  and  is  greater
than  All.  Even  Its  Name  is  ineffable :  and  yet  this  Name  only  expresses
the  human  idea  of  the  Deity's  Divinity.  That  which  God  is  in  Itself  is
not  given  to  the  comprehension  of  man.  God  is  the  Absolute  of  faith
but  the  Absolute  of  reason  is  the  Existing.  The  Existing  is  through  itself
and  because  it  is  that  which  is.  The  reason  of  the  being-hood  of  the
Existence  is  because,  it  is  the  Existence.  We  can  ask :  Wherefore  does
something  exist,  that  is  to  say :  Why  does  such  or  such  a  thing,  exist  ?
But  we  cannot,  without  being  absurd,  demand :  Wherefore  is  Existence
itself?  That  would  be  to  assert  Existence  before  Existence.**  In  another
placej  he  says :  "  We  do  not  discuss  an  article  of  faith,  we  believe  it  or
do  not ;  but  it  is  faith  because  it  escapes  the  examination  of  our  knowl-
edge. *  *  *  I  will  believe  when  the  truth  of  the  dogma  has  been  sci-
entifically proved  to  me.  That  is  to  say ;  I  will  believe  when  I  shall  have
^     nothing  more  to  believe,  and  when  the  dogma  shall  be  destroyed  as  a

*  Zohar  iii,  288^,  Comp.  Graetz,  Geschichie  der  Juden^  Vol.  vii,  p.  240.     Philo.  i,
134;  iii,  184-186,  467  ;  iv,  260.     See  ante^  p.  118.
t  Histoire  de  la  Magie^  Paris,  i860,  p.  105  sq,
X  Ibid.,  p.  183  sq.


255

dogma,  by  becoming  a  scientific  theorem.  That  is  to  say  in  other  words:
I  will  believe  in  the  Infinite  only  when  it  shall  be  explained,  determined,
circumscribed,  defined ;  in  a  word,  when  it  is  finite.  I  will  believe  then
in  the  Infinite  when  I  shall  be  sure  the  Infinite  does  not  exist.  I  shall
believe  in  the  immensity  of  the  Ocean  when  I  shall  have  seen  it  put  into
bottles.  But,  my  good  friends,  as  to  that  which  we  have  clearly  proved  and
made  you  comprehend,  you  no  longer  believe  it,  but  know  it.  *  *  *
The  truth  of  science  proves  itself  by  exact  demonstrations ;  the  truth  of
religion  proves  itself  by  unanimity  of  the  faith  and  the  sanctity  of  its
works.     *     *    *     The  proof  of  the  faith  is  in  the  works."

The  celebrated  German  philosopher  Hegel,  uses  almost  the  same  words,
saying:  "All  begins  through  Pure  Existence,  inasmuch  as  it  is,  as  well
as  Pure  Thought,  that  undetermined  simple  immediate  Existence ;  for  the
first  beginning  cannot  be  another  thing  *  *  *  .  But  that  Pure
Existence  is  only  the  purest  abstraction;  it  is  an  absolutely  Negative
term,  which  can  also,  if  we  would  conceive  of  it  in  an  immediate  man-
ner, be  called,  Non-Being."  *

From  Ain  Soph,  flow  out  or  emanate,  she'phahy  the  Ten  Sephiroth  as  a
totality.  The  decade  by  the  Qabbalah  is  considered  as  a  perfect  number,
the  total  essence  of  all  numbers,  o-i  ends  with  i-o.  "The  number  ten
is  an  all-embracing  number,  outside  of  it  none  other  exists,  for  what  is
beyond  ten,  returns  again  to  the  units."  f

Ain  Soph  is  considered  in  the  Qabbalah  as  an  Absolute  Indivisible
Unity,  above  all  unity  of  number.  "  Thou  art  One  but  not  in  the  num-
bers, thought  cannot  comprehend  anything  of  Thee.  In  Thee  no-Thing
exists  which  can  be  imagined  neither  shape  nor  form."  J  In  Ain  Soph,
says  the  Zohar;  "there  is  neither  white  nor  black  nor  red,  etc.  There
is  absolutely  not  any  colour,  /.  ^.,  divisibility.  (Zohar,  §  BWesheeih^  fol.
15.)    The  immanent  diversity  is  not  denied.     "  Before  the  universe  was

*  Comp.  Encyclopidie  des  sciences philosophiques^  \\  86-87.

t  Scpher  Pardes  Rimonim,  ».  ^.,  Paradise  of  Pomegranites,  by  Moses  Cordovero,  fol.
II,  col.  3;  comp.  Philo.  i,  pp.  440-444,  12  sq, ;  ii,  175  sq,,  pp.  231-2 ;  iii,  pp.  92,  140,
270.

I  Prayer  of  Eliyah  in  the  Tiqqooneh  haz-Zohar.  Comp.  Philo.  iii,  184-186,  95,  467
and  many  other  places.


256

made,  the  Most  Blessed  One  and  Its  Name  were  One."  "Before  the
Most  Blessed  One  made  its  world,  It  was,  and  Its  Name  was  hidden  in
It."  (Zohar,  Midrash  HarNeelam,  §  Acharay  Moth,  fol.  40;  Zohar
Chadash,  fol.  11;  comp.  Zech.  x,  12.)

As  It  measured  the  dimensions,  It  made  colours  (/.  e.,  divisibilities,  in
order  to  shine  and  be  manifest)  in  the  interior  light  of  the  Candlestick.
From  thence  proceeded  a  stream,  from  which  the  colours  (diversities)
colour  themselves  Below,  which  are  concealed  in  the  concealments  of  Ain
Soph."     (Zohar,  §  B'resheeth.)

Creation  is  termed  by  the  Qabbalah,  the  Shadow  or  Reflection  of  the
Upper  World,  in  the  latter,  is  everything  Below,  in  perfect  Zure,  /.  e,,
prototype.  The  Sepher  Ye*tzeer-ah  says :  "It  formed  from  the  void,  the
perceptible  (essential)  and  made  the  No-Thing,  Some-Thing."  (c.  ii
Mishna,  5.)  Further:  "It  (the  Deity)  made  a  reality  out  of  No-Thing,
called  the  Non-entity  into  existence,  and  hewed  as  it  were,  colossal  pillars  •
from  intangible  air  (i.e.,  azoth  or  aether)."  "The  point  in  the  creation,
is  called;  the  Shadow."  {Sepher  Emek  ha- Melekh,  i,  e,,  Valley  of  the
King,  fol.  12.)  "In  like  manner,  the  creation  is  also  called,  the  wife
(passivity,  the  plastic  principle)  of  the  A*tzeel-oothic  World,  /.  e,,  that
of  the  Deity.  {Sepher ' Hadreth  Melekh,  fol.  ZZ,  col.  2.)  "This  (the
Upper)  is  the  male,  the  other,  is  the  female,  world."  (Zohar,  §  Ther-
oomahy  fol.  127,  col.  2.)  "When  the  Unknown  of  all  the  Unknown,
wished  to  manifest  Itself,  It  began  by  producing  a  point,  as  long  as  that
Light  point  did  not  appear  through  its  energy,  the  Infinite  was  still  com-
pletely unknown  and  did  not  spread  any  Light."     (Zohar  i,  2a,  15/7.)

•iro  Kether,  the  Crown.  The  first  efflux  or  emanation  of  Ain  Soph,
the  Non-Ego,  was  the  Light,  usually  termed  by  the  Qabbalah,  Kether,  i,e,,
the  Crown.  This  symbolizes  Abstract  Thought,  individual  Consciousness
of  being,  the  Ego  or  I.  Within  this  Sephirah,  the  manifested  Light  of  Ain
Soph  in  the  germ  as  a  first  manifestation,  the  unit ;  is  asserted  to  be  con-
tained in  full  content  and  perfect  Harmony,  all  that  has  been  emanated,
all  that  is,  and  all  that  man  can  possibly  know  upon  this  earth.  Kether  is
considered  as  sexless  yet  as  androgenic  and  containing  the  sexes,  as  the
entire  content  of  the  positive  and  negative  and  their  harmony.  It  is
called  Abbah,  /.  e..  Father,  and  is  "the  living  (manifested?)  God  the


257

pillar  and  ground  of  Truth:'  (I  Tim.  iii,  15.)  Its  letter  is  Yod  '  =
10,  but  it  contains  in  its  full  content  the  Ineffable  Name  YHVH,
which  is  the  content  of  the  principles  of  Mercy  or  Grace  as  well  as
of  Punishment  and  Rigor,  and  also  signifies  the  past,  the  present
and  the  future,  and  is  we  think  referred  to  in  the  Apocalypse  in  this
last  connection.  (Apoc:  i,  8,  11;  xxi,  6;  xxii,  13.)  But  the  special
Name  of  the  Deity  considered  by  the  Qabbalah  as  most  applicable  to
Kether,  is  the  Great  Name,  Eh*yeh,  /.  ^.,  I  Am.  (Exod.  iii,  4.)  Kether
represents  the  Desire  and  Will  of  the  Deity.  '*  Kether  is  the  prin-
ciple  of  all  the  principles,  the  Secret  Wisdom,  the  Most  Exalted
Crown,  with  which  all  crowns  and  diadems  are  adorned."  (Zohar  iii,
fol.  288^.)  It  is  even  held  as  the  Absolute  Existence  itself  by  some  of
the  Qabbalists,  but  we  think  as  the  Ego,  it  is  in  contrast  with  the  Non-
Ego,  which  is  Above,  and  is  therefore  to  be  accounted  Below.  Qualifi-
cations of  Kether  are  not  possible  in  man's  intellect,  yet  it  is  perceptible
to  his  thought  in  that  it  represents  consciousness  of  being-hood.  It  is
wholly  united  as  the  one  in  number,  in  an  indivisible  point  the  circum-
ference of  which  is  every-where  and  the  centre  of  which  is  no-where.  It
is  therefore  termed  in  the  Qabbalah,  not  only  I.  Kether,  but  also  II.  Ne'-
qood-ah  RaVshan-ah^  i,  <f.,  the  Primordial  Point;  III.  Ne' qood-ah  Fe* -
shoot-ahy  L  e,y  the  Smooth  Point,  because  when  Ain  Soph  desired  to  man-
ifest Itself,  It  first  made  a  point,  {ante,  p.  127.)

This  is  explained  as  follows ;  the  Ain  Soph  at  first  was  filling  All  and
then  made  an  absolute  concentration  into  Itself  which  produced  the
Abyss,  Deep,  or  Space,  the  Aveer  Qadmon  or  Primitive  Air,  the  Azoth;
but  this  is  not  considered  in  the  Qabbalah  as  a  perfect  void  or  vacuum,  a
perfectly  empty  Space,  but,  is  thought  of  as  the  Waters  or  Crystalline
Chaotic  Sea,  in  which  was  a  certain  degree  of  Light  inferior  to  that  by
which  all  the  created  were  made.

This  idea  of  Kether  as  the  representative  of  Existence,  the  Being  or  the
Absolute  manifested,  if  we  consider  it  from  the  point  of  view  just  taken,
constitutes  a  Perfect  Form  and  Individuality,  and  this  the  Qabbalah  calls
IV.  At-teek,  /.  <f.,  the  Ancient  of  the  Ancients,  the  Ancient,  the  Aged,
and  V.  the  At-teek  Yo-meen,  /.  ^.,  Ancient  of  Days.  (Dan.  vii,  9  sq.)
This  name  must  not  however  be  confounded  with  At*teek-ah  D'At'teck-

17


258

een,  the  Ancient  o(  A//the  Ancients,  who  is  Concealed.  Kether  is  called
the  At-teek,  because  it  is  the  oldest  and  first  emanation  from  Ain  Soph
compared  with  whose  splendid  Light,  Kether  as  manifested,  is  only  as  the
Darkness  and  but  a  Shadow  and  a  Reflection.     This  Sephirah  is  also
termed  VI.  Resha  Hiv'rah,  t.  g.,  the  White  Head,  because  it  is  the  Light
in  which  are  all  colours,  /.  ^.,  the  diversities,  conceptions,  and  definite
models,  of  all  the  existences  in  germ  or  absolute  totality.     As  the  Head
of  the  column  of  Harmony,  or,  of  the  Centre,  of  the  Sephirothic  Tree ;  it
is  called  VII.  A*reekh  An-peen  or  Appayeem,  the  Great  Aspect,  the  Long
in  Visage  or  Face,  also  called,  the  Long  Suff*ering,  and  VIIL  the  Makro-
prosopon,  which  has  the  same  meaning,  because  it  contains  all  the  quali-
fications, intellectual  and  moral  attributes;  and  because  the  totality  of  all
the  Ten  Sephiroth,  in  germ,  are  contained  in  harmony  in  it,  and  so  it
represents,  IX.  the  Adam  Qadmon  and  X.  the  Adam  Illa-ah,  the  Primor-
dial and  Heavenly  Adam.     We  note  however  of  A'reekh  An-peen  as  in
Kether,  that  the  Qabbalah  says  of  the  A'reekh,  in  it  is  all  Right  side,  the
side  of  Mercy  and  not  of  Punishment.     The  remaining  nine  Sephiroth
are  known  as  Ze'ir  An-peen,  the  Short  in  Visage,  the  Young  One,  the
Son  of  A'reekh  An-peen.     In  it  is  Right  and  Left  side.     "The  first,
says  the  Zohar,  is  the  Ancient,  beheld  Face  to  Face,  it  is  the  Supreme
Head,  the  Source  of  all  Light,  the  Principle  of  all  Wisdom,  whose  defini-
tion is,  the  Unity.*'  (Zohar,  iii,  fol.  292^,  289^.)  The  A'reekh  is  then  the
One  (i),  the  unity  of  number,  and  the  second  unity  of  Ibn  GebiroFs  phil-
osophy.   The  symbol  of  Ain  Soph  is  the  O  or  circle  beyond  and  above  all
number,  which  is  also  of  as  much  importance  in  all  numerical  calculations,
as  the  nine  digits.  Kether  is  also  called  XL  jRum  Ma-alehy  i.e..  Inscruta-
ble Height,  because  it  is  the  highest  of  all  the  Sephiroth  and  proceeds,  by
emanation,  immediately  from  the  Unknowable  Ain  Soph.     The  Zohar
therefore,  commenting  upon :  **  Go  forth,  O  ye  daughters  of  Zion,  and  be-
hold the  King  of  Peace  with  Kether,  />.,  the  Crown.**  (Song  of  Solomon
iii,  11)  says:   "But  who  can  behold  the  King  of  Peace,  seeing  that  It  is
incomprehensible,  even  to  the  heavenly  hosts  ?     But  he  who  sees  Kether^
the  Crown,  sees  the  She'keen-ah,  /.  ^.,  the  Glory  of  the  King  of  Peace.*'
(Zohar  ii,  100^.)  Kether  is  also  called  XII.  ^Hokhmah  illa-ah^  Heavenly
Wisdom,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Sephirah  *Hokhmah,  which  is  simply
called,  Wisdom.


/


259

In  the  angelic  order,  Kether  is  represented  by  the  celestial  beasts  of  the
vision  o^Ezekiel  the  'Hay-yoth  haq-Qadosh,  ue.y  the  Holy  living  creatures,
of  the  Merkabah  or  Chariot-Throne.  The  Kerubim  of  Ezekiel  and  St.
John.  These  are  in  the  Zodiac  as  Taurus  the  Bull,  Leo  the  Lion,  Scorpio
and  the  Eagle,  and  Aquarius  the  Man.  Scorpio  as  a  good  emblem  is  sym-
bolized by  the  Eagle,  as  an  evil  by  the  Scorpion,  as  a  good  or  evil  by  the
Eagle  winged  Serpent.  (See  antty  p.  228.)  Philosophically,  Kether  repre-
sents, the  content  of  the  simple  abstract  idea  of  individual  consciousness
or  being-hood,  and  therefore  contains  the  entire  emanated  spiritual  or
material,  existing  outside  of  the  Unknowable  Ain  Soph  yet  in  which,  the
Ain  Soph  is  both  immanent  and  transcendental,  in  germ.  Its  symbol  is
the  human  eye,  open.  Ibn  Gebirol  calls  it :  *'  The  Form  of  all  forms  in
the  Highest  Potency."  Kether  is  likely,  the  One  Head  in  which  are
Three  Heads.  "  The  Ancient,  says,  the  Zohar ;  Its  Name  be  praised  !  Has
Three  Heads  which  are  yet  One  Head.  And  as  the  Ancient  is  described
by  the  number  Three,  so  also  the  other  Lights,  i,e,,  Sephiroth,  with  their
illuminations  (Lights,  the  other  Sephiroth),  are  comprised  in  the  number
Three."  (Zohar,  Idrah  Zootah  iii,  288^.)  Kether  represents  the  stage
of  developing  existence,  termed,  the  Universal,  and  is  to  be  referred  to
the  dimension  of  Length.  In  the  three-fold  division  of  the  spiritual  in
the  corporeal  body  of  man,  Kether  represents  the  Neshamah,  the  immor-
tal spirit  in  man.  The  symbolic  colour  of  Kether,  says  the  great  Qabba-
list  R.  Azriel ;  "is  like  the  concealed  Light."  The  Light  that  is  wrap-
ped in  Darkness.

From  Kether,  the  one,  the  germ  and  harmony,  the  I,  Ego,  individual
consciousness  and  knowledge  of  being-hood  and  existence,  therefore
in  Time ;  emanates  the  two  oppositions,  the  female  and  male,  the
negative  and  positive  principles.  We  think  that  the  first  emanation  from
the  Ego  or  Abstract  Thought,  was  that  of  Mind,  the  Sephirah  Binah,  to
which  the  Abstract  Thought  became  wedded,  the  result  being  the  Word
or  Wisdom,  the  Son,  or  the  Association  of  Ideas  in  the  Mind,  without
which.  Wisdom  or  the  Word,  would  not  be  manifest  to  mankind.  The
letter  of  the  Ineffable  Name  mrr  in  Binah,  is  the  second  n,  the  special
Name  applied  by  the  Qabbalah  to  Binah,  is  rx"  YaH,  a  feminine  Name,
and  it  is  on  the  Left  Column,  to  the  Sephiroth  of  which,  the  feminine


26o

Name  Elohim  is  applied.  It  is  placed  by  many  writers  on  the  Qabbalah
as  the  Third  emanation  of  Ain  Soph,  but  we  are  inclined  to  the  view  that
it  is  the  Second.     Comp.  Philo  i,  p.  3,  §  iii.

The  old  Qabbalists  in  writing  down  the  Secret  Learning  frequently
misplaced  letters,  words,  statements,  etc.,  the  proper  position,  meaning,
etc.,  of  the  same  being  taught  orally  to  the  initiate.  This  is  evident  in
many  places  in  the  written  books  of  Judaism  outside  of  the  Mystical  wri-
tings, and  is  especially  evident  in  the  Synagogue  Rolls.  Compare  in  this
connection  what  we  quote  from  the  Zohar,  antCy  p.  192,  which  sup|X)rts
our  opinion.  With  Philo,  the  Logos  or  Word  proceeds  directly  from  the
Deity,  so  in  the  doctrines  of  Gentile  Christianity  coming  as  it  does
through  Jewish  thought  and  Jewish  Christianity ;  the  Son  proceeds  di-
rectly from  the  Father,  yet  in  the  account  of  the  Incarnation  of  the
Word,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  placed  as  the  medium.

As  THE  Second  Sephirah  we  place  Binah  (pron.  Been-ah)  nr3.
Binah  is  the  abstract  idea  of  the  Intellect,  nous  the  Mind  or  Understand-
ing, emanating  from  Kether  or  Consciousness  of  existence.  It  is  considered
as  feminine,  negative  and  passive ;  and  receives  and  absorbs,  the  impression
of  the  simple  abstract  ideas  from  the  androgenic  Kether  into  itself.  It  is
called  the  Upper  She*keen-ah  or  Glory,  and  Immah  illa-ahy  /.  ^.,  the
Heavenly  Mother;  Immah,  the  Mother;  Rua^h  haq-Qadoshay  i,  ^.,  the
Holy  Spirit,  etc.  It  is  written  "  Thou  shalt  call  Binah  by  the  name  of
Mother.*'  Prov.  vii,  4.  (Zohar  iii,  290a.)  Malkhuth,  the  tenth  (or  seventh)
Sephirah,  is  sometimes  called,  the  Lower  Mother,  Lower  Wisdom  and  sim-
ply, the  She*keen-ah.  The  letter  of  the  Tetragrammaton  in  Binah,  is  the
second,  the  n  (Heh)  =  5.  *'  Binah,  in  it  are  engraven,  the  ways  of  the
letters ;  in  the  original  image  of  all  details  and  species,  etc.  The  (im-
printed) forms  of  all  species  and  their  details ;  the  (imprinted)  form  of
every  herb,  etc. ;  and  so  also  of  the  minerals,  etc.  And  the  ways  of  these
images  are  contained  in  the  three  letters  of  the  Holy  Name."  *  The  latter
part  doubtless  refers  to  \%\*  the  three  letters  of  the  Tetragrammaton  which
are  the  symbolical  letters  of  Kether,  Binah  and  *Hokhmah.  In  the  Mod-
ern Qabbalah,  that  of  Yitz'haq  Luriah,  Moses  Cordovero,  etc.,  to  escape

♦Comment,  to  the  Sepher  Ye*tzeer-ah  ii  and  iii  chapters,  by  R.  Abraham  b.  David
(RaBaD)  of  Beaucaire  (d.  1 198)  fol.  8,  9.


26l

the  consequence  of  the  Christian  Trinity  in  the  Sephiroth,  they  make
proceed  from  'Hokhmah  as  the  Father,  assuming  Kether  to  be  the  Ain
Soph,  and  Binah,  the  Mother;  a  Son  whom  they  call  Da-ath, /.  ^.,
Knowledge  or  Science.  The  most  Ancient  Qabbalah  does  not  know  such
an  emanation,  and  it  is  not  one  of  the  Sephiroth.  The  Triad  of  the  An-
cient Qabbalah  is  Kether,  the  Father;  Binah,  the  Holy  Spirit  or  Mother;
and  'Hokhmah,  the  Word  or  Son ;  which  three  are  distinguished  from  all
the  other  Sephiroth  and  are  called  the  Upper  Three  or  the  Holy  Sephi-
roth and  together  form  the  Intellectual  World,  and  govern  the  head.
They  are  the  Three  Heads  which  are  One  Head,  and  are  reunited  in  Ain
Soph.  Sometimes  they  compare  the  Three  Heads  to  the  brain  which,
without  losing  its  unity,  is  divided  into  three  lobes;  and  by  means  of  the
32  pairs  of  nerves  springing  from  them,  spreads  itself  through  the  whole
human  body.  **  Every-Thing,  that  existeth,  says  the  Zohar  (iii,  290a/)
every-thing  which  At-teek :  Blessed  be  Its  Name !  has  formed,  can  endure
only  through  the  male  and  female  (principles.)**  The  Modern  Qabbal-
list  Yitz-haq  Luriah,  says  of  this,  that  it  means  in  the  intellectual,  the
subject  and  object,  of  the  understanding.  Binah  is  the  Greek  naus^  /.  ^.,
mind,  and  as  the  feminine  or  passive  principle  is  placed  on  the  Left  side
of  the  Sephirothic  Tree.  Its  symbol  is  the  brooding  dove.  It  represents
the  dimension  of  Depth.  The  Universal  spiritual  passive  matter  of  Ibn
Gebirol  is  paralleled  by  Binah.  In  the  Qabbalah  matter  always  corre-
sponds with  the  female  passive  principle,  fo  be  influenced  by  the  active  or
male,  the  forming.  The  symbolic  colour  of  Binah  according  to  R.  Azriel,
is  sky-blue. ''^  From  its  union  with  Kether,  out  which  it  is  emanated  and
to  which  it  returns,  proceeds  'Hokhmah,  /.^.,  Wisdom,  the  Word  or  Son,
the  Logos,  called  the  '*  First-born,"  which  is  also  looked  upon  as  ema-
nated from  and  as  returning  to,  the  androgenic  Kether,  the  Father  or
Harmony.

'HoKHMAH  HDDn,  /.  €,,  WiSDOM :    we  place  as  the  Third  Sephirah,

♦  The  colour  of  the  Great  Crystalline  Sea,  the  Sky,  is  blue ;  the  color  of  the  robe  of
the  Virgin  Mary  in  the  Roman  Church  is  blue,  and  she  stands,  as  depicted  in  its  S3rm-
bolism,  above  the  Sphere  of  the  Active  Intellect  which  was  that  of  the  moon,  crowned
with  the  stars  of  heaven.  As  to  this  Sphere  compare  the  notes  of  Solomon  Munk  to  his
great  Arabic  and  French  edition  of  Maimonides,  the  Moreh  ;  before  dted.


262

but  it  is  generally  termed  by  the  Qabbalists,  the  Second.  The  Modem
or  Lurian  School  calls  it,  the  Father,  but  Abbah  the  Father,  by  the  an-
cient Qabbalah,  is  Kether  and  'Hokhmah  is  the  Son.  This  Sephirah,  we
assert,  proceeds  from  Kether  the  Father  and  Binah  the  Mother,  for  myste-
riously, each  is  in  the  other.  It  is  the  representative  of  the  Association
of  Abstract  Ideas  in  the  Intellect,  its  result  being  Wisdom  or  ICnowledge.
It  is  also  called  by  the  Qabbalah,  *'  the  Only  begotten  Son,'*  "the  first
bom  Son  of  Elohim,*'  etc.  'Hokhraah  is  the  Word,  the  Greek  Logos y  and
the  Memrah  of  the  Targums.  By  it,  says  St.  John,  all  things  were  made  that
were  made.  According  to  a  Talmudic  explanation  of  Genesis  i,  i,  B^res-
heethy  i,  e,y  beginning,  should  be  read  Be-Raisheethy  i.  e,.  Through  Wis-
dom, the  universe  was  emanated.*  The  letter  of  the  Tetragrammaton  in
'Hokhmah  is  the  third,  that  is  i  (Vav)  ^6.  "By  means  of  the  32  paths,
Wisdom  is  spread  throughout  the  universe,  it  gives  to  every-thing  form  and
measure."  (Zohar  iii,  290^.)  The  32  ways  are  generally  assumed  by  the
Qabbalists  to  consist  of  the  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  which  are  22,
and  the  ten  numbers  or  decade,  together  equaling  3Z.  'Hokhmah  is  the
positive  or  male  principle  and  is  at  the  head  of  the  Column  of  Benignity,
Mercy  or  Grace,  in  the  Sephirothic  Tree.  It  parallels  the  Universal
Form  of  Ibn  Gebirol.  "Wisdom  generates  all  Things,'*  says  the  Zohar.
(Comp.  St.  John  i,  1-15.)  It  is  the  Greek  Sophia,  From  it  emanate  the
seven  other  Sephiroth,  the  first  six  of  which  are  called  those  of  Construction
or  Building.  R.  Azriel  says :  the  symbolic  colour  of  'Hokhmah  is  yellow^
perhaps  a  yellowish  red  would  be  more  correct.  This  is  the  symbolic
color  in  the  Roman  Church  of  the  robe  of  Christ.

The  first  Sephirah  Kether,  as  we  have  stated,  is  the  unit  in  number  and
is  the  harmony  of  all  and  the  content  of  all,  the  created.  It  emanates  the
potentiality  and  energy  it  has  received  by  immediate  efflux  from  Ain
Soph,  to  the  separated  passive  and  feminine  Sephirah,  Binah  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  from  the  union  is  produced  'Hokhmah,  the  Word  or  Son,

*Comp.  Prov:  viii ;  St.  John  i,  1-13;  Ps.  xxxiii,  6,  9,  and  other  places;  Sentiments
of  Philo  Judeus  concerning  the  Logos  or  Word,  etc. :  by  Jacob  Bryant,  Cambridge,
1797.  Christology  of  the  Targums,  by  R.  Young,  London,  1853.  The  Targums  by
Etheridge,  London,  1865,  Vol.  i.  The  Moreh  Ne'book-eem  of  Maimonides,  and  what
we  have  said  antet  p.  206  sq.


263

which  is  on  the  active  or  male  side ;  or  it  may  be  assumed,  that  both  were
emanated  at  the  same  instant  and  that  each  exists  in  the  other.  The
letter  of  Kether  is  ^  (Yod),  of  Binah  n  (Heh),  together  YaH,  the  femi-
nine Name.  (Comp.  antey  p.  175),  the  third  letter,  that  of  'Hokhmah,
is  \  (Vav),  making  together,  in^  YHV  of  mn"  YHVH,  the  Tetragramma-
ton,  and  really  the  complete  symbols  of  its  efficaciousness.  The  last  n
(Heh)  of  this  Ineffable  Name  being  always  applied  to  the  Six  Lower  and
the  last,  together  the  seven  remaining  Sephiroth ;  and  finding  its  resting
place  in  the  last,  Malkhuth  or  Kingdom,  the  loth  Sephirah;  the  Har-
mony of  all  the  Sephiroth.  The  first  three  Sephiroth  as  we  have  above
mentioned,  are  called ;  the  Holy  Upper  Sephiroth,  and  together  form  a
Triad  which  is  a  Unit  and  which  is  considered  in  the  Qabbalah,  in  its
content,  as  the  most  sacred  of  all  the  Sephiroth,  as  including  all  the
balance — and  is  termed,  the  Upper  Holy  Triad,  also  Olam  ha-Moos^kal^
the  Intellectual  World  or  Condition.

The  Zohar  says:  "  The  At-teek-ah  Qadosha,  /.  ^.,  the  Holy  Ancient,
Its  Name  be  Blessed  I  exists  with  Three  Heads,  which  together  form  only
One  (Head)  and  that  Head  is  Itself,  which  is  the  most  elevated  among
the  highest  things.  And  because  the  At-teek-ah  Qadosha,  Its  Name  be
Blessed !  is  represented  by  the  Three,  all  the  other  Lights  (Sephiroth)
which  enlighten  us  by  their  rays,  are  equally  comprised  in  the  number
Three.*'  (Zohar,  IdrahZootah,  iii,  288^.)  Another  statement  is  :  "There
are  Three  Heads  engraved  one  within  the  other,  and  one  above  the  other.
In  this  number,  first  count  the  mysterious  Wisdom*,  that  concealed  Wisdom
which  is  not  ever  seen  without  a  veil.  The  Mysterious  Wisdom,  is  the  su-
preme principle  of  all  other  Wisdom.  Above  that  first  Head  is  the  Ancient,
whose  Name  be  Sanctified !  that  which  is  the  most  mysterious  among  the
mysteries.  Finally  comes  the  Head  which  dominates  all  others  ;  a  Head
which  is  not  a  Head.  What  it  contains  none  know  nor  can  know ;  be-
cause it  escapes  our  knowledge  and  our  ignorance.  It  is  for  that  reason
that  the  Ancient,  whose  Name  be  Blessed  !  is  called  Ayin,  /.  e.y  the  No-
ITiing.**  **Each  point  of  matter  has  three  directions,  viz:  Length,  Breadth
and  Depth;  there  does  not  exist  any-Thing  Below,  whose  root,  /.  ^.,  per-
fect prototype,  is  not  above.  Therefore  it  is  necessary,  that  these  three
have  a  spiritual  root  in  the  first  point  Above,  they  are  therefore  called  in


264

their  spiritual  nature  in  the  primitive  Upper  Point;  Kether,  'Hokhmah
and  Binah."  {Sepher  Shepathal,  fol.  49,  col.  3.)  The  Four-lettered
Ineffable  Name  is  considered  as  triad ic  and  signifies  the  past,  present  and
future.  Before  the  revelation  of  this  Name,  the  Deity  was  known  as  njr
Shaddai,  /.^.,  the  Almighty,  the  Powerful  One,  the  principle  of  Wrath  and
Punishment  and  not  of  Mercy,  and  therefore  the  Deity  not  to  be  loved
but  feared.  In  this  Name,  Br  the  symbol  of  fire,  and  also  of  the  triad,  is
the  first  letter.  In  the  word  Messiah,  Br  is  in  the  middle,  but  in  the  word
Jesus,  the  letter  of  fire  and  punishment  is  reversed  and  placed  last.  In
Jesus  as  in  mn"  the  yod,  comes  first.  Ibn  Gebirol  says:  *'The  Triad  is
the  root  of  every-Thing."  It  is  in  germ  in  Kether,  the  Will  of  Gebirol.
Philo  holds  it  to  be  a  great  mystery  *  and  even  Maimonides  hints  at  it.
In  early  Christianity  the  Trinity  was  likely  an  esoteric  doctrine,  it  is  not
in  the  Pastor  of  Hermas  and  the  African,  Tertullian,  appears  to  have  been
one  of  the  first  of  the  Fathers  who  refers  to  it  by  name,  and  then  as  if  not
generally  accepted.  It  however  appears  in  Matt,  xxviii,  19  and  the
Teaching  of  the  XII  Apostles.  .The  subject  requires  a  thorough  separate
treatment  for  which  we  have  not  space  in  this  writing.  The  Triadic  idea,
we  think  undoubtedly  existed  in  the  Secret  Learning,  Philo  who  lived  in
beginning  of  our  present  era  {circa  20  B.C.-40  A.D.),  holding  to  the  same
view;  but  as  a  matter  of  course  it  was  not  the  Trinity  as  it  has  been  form-
ulated in  Christianity  by  Athanasius  and  the  Greek  fathers.  Some  of  the
theologians  of  the  Middle  Ages  appear  to  have  desired  to  prove  that  the
Greek  religious  metaphysical  definition  was  in  the  Jewish  thought.  "  If  thou
art  attentive  to  that  most  excellent  Name  of  the  Deity  :  (That  is  the  Te-
tragrammaton  or  four-lettered  Name  mn'  YHVH),  as  found  explained  in
the  Mystery  of  Mysteries,  thou  beholdest,  a  Name  of  three  letters,  though
of  four  symbols,  one  of  them  a  twin,  being  written  twice,  (that  is,  the  n,
Heh.)  If  anybody  examines  them,  he  can  see  that  the  very  same  Name,
represents  both  one  and  three,  truly  each  pointing  to  a  oneness  of  the
substance,  so  that  it  shows  certainly  the  Trinity  of  persons. '  *  f  And  the
writer  goes  on  to  say,  that  the  first  and  second  letters  n''  form  YH  (YaH),
the  second  and  third  in  (HV),  and  the  third  and  fourth  m  (VH)  ;  joined
they  form  the  one  Name  YHVH.

*  Philo  i,  pp.  219  sq.i  61.

f  Pugio  Fidei,     Leipzig,  p.  707,  by  Petrus  Alphonsus,  b.  1062  A.  D.


265

"And  this  is  the  mystery  of  the  three  sacred  Names  which  teach  the
Unity  of  three  and  the  Trinity  of  One,  by  the  allusion  of  Wisdom,  Reason,
and  Knowledge,  and  that  all  three  are  One.  This  is  also  alluded  to  in
the  mystery  of  time,  which  is  past,  present  and  future,  just  the  same ;
whence  thou  seest  that  the  three  souls  or  lives  are  one-threefold.**  (Abra-
ham Abulafia.)  "  It  is  said,  Elohim  created  Man  in  His  image  and  like-
ness and  perfected  him  in  the  Supreme  Form,  as  it  is  stated  *  And  Elohim
created  man  (Adam)  in  His  image.*  Much  has  been  sought  and  defined
on  this  subject  of  the  mystery  of  man*s  creation  in  the  image  of  Elohim,
and  we  find  in  the  Mysteries  of  the  Thorah  (Sithrai  Thorah),  that  the  in-
tellectual form  of  man  is  called  Adam,  /.  ^.,  Man,  for  the  skin,  flesh,  and
bones  are  merely  the  garment  of  the  man  ;  and  for  this  reason  it  is  writ-
ten, (Job  X,  ii) :  'Thou  hast  clothed  me  with  skin  and  flesh  and  inter,
woven  me  with  bones  and  sinews.'  If  skin  and  flesh  are  the  clothing,
look  for  man  within  the  clothing  !  Observe,  his  completion  is  the  result
of  three  arrangements  united  ;  with  reference  to  which  I  am  going  to  re-
veal thee  a  most  profound  and  sublime  secret,  according  to  that  which  is
said  in  the  Sithrai  Thorah.  In  Ezekiel  i,  26,  we  read;  *And  upon  the
likeness  of  the  throne,  was  the  likeness,  as  the  appearance  of  a  man  upon
it,  above.*  What  means  the  likeness  of  a  man?  Three  degrees  united
in  one,  and  they  are  the  Mystery  of  the  Supreme  Truth.  Thus  man  here
on  earth,  is  man,  only  by  the  union  of  three  things  which  together  con-
stitute man,  viz :  spirit  (Neshamah)  soul  (Rua*h)  and  the  breath  of  life
(Nephesh),  and  they  really  make  the  perfect  man  in  the  likeness  of  above,
by  the  mystery  of  the  three  degrees  united  as  one,  for  they  are  the  like-
ness of  man  (Adam).  Such  is  man  during  his  life  on  earth ;  and  when
he  dieth,  the  man  is  not  dead,  he  is  only  stripped  of  his  clothing.**  *

At  the  end,  the  same  says :  the  trinity  of  Wisdom,  Reason  and  Knowl-
edge, correspond  to  the  three  Names;  YHVH,  our  Elohim,  YHVH:  in
the  passage.  Hear  O  Israel,  etc.  :  called  by  the  Israelites  the  She^mah,
citing  for  this  the  book  of  Rab  Ham-m'noonah  Saba,  which  is  also  men-
tioned in  some  of  the  oldest  books  bound  up  with  Zohar.    R.  Moses  de

*  Sepher  Shekel  haq-Qadosh^  i.  e,,  the  Holy  Balance,  by  R.  Moses  de  Leon,  said  to
have  been  written  in  1292.  Third  gate  of  the  Basis  of  the  Parts,  sha-ar  ye^sod  ha-
JChaUoieem,


266

Leon  also  says :  "  These  three  lying  at  the  well  ;'*  again  :  "  The  mystery  of
their  order  is,  three  in  the  mystery  of  three,  each  within  and  above  the
other,  according  to  the  order  of  the  tree  on  its  roots  and  in  its  order,
which  are  also  the  mystery  of  three.*'*

Abraham  Ibn  Ezra  in  his  book  Zakooth,  allegorized  the  three  funda-
mental vowels  ;  ^Holeniy  ^Heerek^  and  Fatha'h  gadoi,  as  a  trinity  of  the
modes  of  motion,  upwards,  downwards,  and  in  a  circle.  Joseph  Chiqui-
tilla,  or  Gikitilla,  has  also  developed  the  application  of  this  vowel-allegory
to  mystical  objects.f  The  great  Qabbalist  R.  Azriel  said,  that  the  bene-
dictions in  which  mention  is  made  of  the  Deity's  government,  are  thus
formulated :  "  Blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord  our  !Elohimy  King  (Ruler)  of  the
world.''!

This  shows  that  the  Qabbalists  have  not  based  their  system  only  upon
the  principle  oi  shepha,  i.  e,y  emanation,  nor  upon  the  unity  of  substance
only,  but  that  they  have  assumed  an  identity  of  thought  and  of  existence,
of  the  ideal  and  the  real.  The  world  was  to  them  only  the  expression  of
the  Ideas  or  Absolute  Forms  of  the  Intellect.

Moses  of  Cordova,  although  of  the  modern  Qabbalistic  school  under-
stood the  Ancient  Qabbalah  when  he  said ;  "The  first  three  Sephiroth,  viz  :
Crown,  Wisdom  and  Intellect,  ought  to  be  considered  as  the  sole  and
same  thing.  The  first  represents.  Knowledge  (the  Gnosis)  or  Science,
the  second  that  which  Knows,  and  the  third,  that  by  which  it  is  Known.  In
order  to  explain  that  identity,  it  is  necessary  to  know  that  the  knowledge
of  the  creator  is  not  that  of  the  creatures ;  for  with  the  latter.  Knowl-
edge is  distinct  from  the  subject  of  the  Knowledge  and  leans  upon  the
objects  which,  in  their  turn,  are  distinguished  from  the  subject.  It  is
that  which  we  describe  by  the  three  terms :  thought,  that  which  thinks,
and  that  which  is  thought  of.  On  the  contrary  the  creator  is  Itself  wholly
at  the  same  time.  Knowledge,  that  which  Knows,  and  that  which  is
Known.     In  effect.  Its  manner  of  knowing  does  not  consist  in  the  appli-

*  Compare  De  Leon's  Sepker  ka-Rimmon^  i,  ^.,  Book  of  the  Pomegranite,  and  his
Avodath  kaq-Qadosh  123a.  Cracow  ed,  Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  der  Kabbala,  von
Adolph  Jellinek.     Leipzig,  1852,  2d  part,  pp.  53-56  and  69,  etc.

t  Sec  Jellinck*s  work,  last  cited.
J  Ibid.,  p.  xvii.


26;

cation  of  Its  thought  to  the  things  which  are  outside  of  Itself;  It  is  in
Itself  Knowledge,  and  in  Itself  Knowing,  and  in  Itself  that  It  Knows
and  perceives  all  that  which  is.  Not  anything  exists  which  is  not  united
in  It  and  that  It  does  not  find  in  Its  own  substance.  It  is  the  type
(dist  typus)  of  all  being,  and  all  things  exist  in  It  under  their  purest  and
most  perfect  form ;  in  such  a  manner,  that  even  the  perfection  of  the
creatures  is  iR  that  existence,  through  which,  they  find  themselves  united
to  the  source  of  their  being ;  and  in  the  measure  (or  proportion)  that
they  are  removed  from  It,  they  fall  from  that  condition  which  is  so  per-
fect and  sublime.  It  is  thus  that  all  the  existences  of  this  world  have
their  form  in  the  Sephiroth  and  the  Sephiroth  in  the  source  from  which
they  emanate."     (Pardes  Rimonim,  Paradise  of  Pomegranites,  fol.  55<i.)

Aristotle,  Averrhoes  and  Maimonides,  had  preceded  Cordovero  in  this
idea,  the  latter  says  :  "  The  Holy  One,  Praised  be  It !  knows  exactly  and
recognizes  Its  true  real  being ;  but  it  does  not  know  a  way  of  knowledge
separated  from  Itself,  as  we  conceive  a  thing ;  for  we  are  not  identical
with  our  knowledge,  on  the  other  hand  the  creator,  whose  Name  be
Praised  !  is  with  Its  knowledge,  as  with  Its  life,  absolutely  one  and  the
same.  Were  we  to  think  otherwise,  and  desire  to  distinguish  the  divine
substance  from  its  knowledge  or  life ;  we  should  affirm  several  Godheads,
to  wit :  God,  God's  life,  and  God*s  knowledge ;  and  thereby  fall  into
polytheism.  Thou  mayest  say  therefore :  God  is  the  Knowing  One,  the
Known,  and  also  Knowledge  itself,  God  is  all  in  One,  etc.***

The  three  Sephirothic  hypostases  contain  and  unite  in  themselves,
every-Thing  that  is,  and  are  themselves  united  in  the  Ain  Soph,  the  At-
tee*kah  D*At-tee*keen,  the  Ancient  of  all  the  Ancients;  for  It  is  in  every-
Thing  and  every-Thing  is  in  It,  and  yet  to  the  finite  comprehension  of
man,  the  Ain  Soph  is  Ayin,  /.  ^.,  No-Thing.  They  are  also  united  and
merged  in  the  White  Head,  the  At-teek  or  Ancient,  which  is  the  first  unit
of  number,  the  One,  so  that  although  described  by  the  triad  they  are
nevertheless  the  unit.     The  unity  of  the  first  manifestation,  that  of  exist-

♦  See  Maimonides,  Yad  ha-chazakah^  i,  e.j  The  Mighty  Hand,  also  called  Mishna
Thorah.  The  first  name  is  in  allusion  to  Deut.  xxxiv,  12,  and  because  the  work  con-
sists of  14  books.  T  YaD=i4.  Comp.  Yesod  ha- Thorah ^  C.  ii.  Halak.  10.  Joel.
Rilig,  Philos,  Sohar^  p.  8,  and  notes.


268

ence  and  being -hood,  and  the  triad  of  the  intellectual  manifestations,  the
ideas  in  it ;  are  the  resume  of  All  that  which  is,  to  man's  comprehension.
Symbolically  they  are  applied  entirely  to  the  head  of  the  Makrokosmos,
and  may  also  refer  to  the  three  lobes  of  the  human  brain,  the  seat  of
thought,  which  together  make  one  brain.

The  Upper  Sephiroth  are  called  by  the  Qabbalists,  Olam  ha-Moos^ kal^
I.  ^.,  the  Intellectual  World.  They  together  are  the  highesf,  most  subtle
and  refined  of  all  the  Sephiroth.  We  can  parallel  them  to  Ibn  Gebirors
Will,  Universal  Matter  and  Universal  Form.  (Comp.  also  the  Moreh
Ne'boo-kheem  of  Maimonides,  i,  228  sq.  Munk's  edit,  and  notes.)

From  the  third  Sephirah  'Hokhmah,  Wisdom  or  the  Word,  whose  let-
ter \  equals  6,  emanate  the  six  following  Sephiroth.  These  are  consid-
ered as  the  efflux  of  the  potentiality,  energy  and  executive  power,  of
Ain  Soph  and  the  Upper  Sephiroth,  through  the  Son  or  Word.  The
Qabbalah  therefore  calls  the  six  sides  of  the  entire  universe,  the  six  days
of  building.  They  are  the  representative  of  the  Special  as  the  Upper  are
of  the  Universal.

IV.  Of  the  Sephirah  ion  'Hesed,  Grace  or  Love.  We  will  now
refer  to  the  second  three  Sephiroth,  which  answer  to  the  triad  of  Ibn
Gebirol's  soul  of  the  world,  which  according  to  him  emanated  from  the
spiritus  mundi.  According  to  the  Zohar,  from  the  breast  of  *  Hokhmah,
the  Word,  the  Divine  Son;  emanated  six  principles  or  Sephiroth,  called:
Sepheeroth  hab'Been-yany  i.  e.,  Sephiroth  of  Construction.*  They  sym-
bolize the  dimensions  of  matter,  be  it  an  atom  or  an  universe,  viz  :
Length,  Breadth,  Depth,  and  the  positive  and  negative  poles  of  each  of

*  **  This  (our)  universe  consists  of  six  dimensions:  Above,  Below,  and  the  four  sides,
in  the  mystery  of  Ze'ir  An-peen,  which  contains  six  sides,  etc."  See  Sepher  EH  ha-
^Hay-ytmy  i,  e,,  the  Tree  of  Life  by  Hay-y!m  Vital  of  the  Lurian  School,  fol.  26.  **  There-
fore there  are  six  working  days,  for  the  six  sides  of  Ze'ir  clothe  themselves  in  them.
But  the  Sabbath  is  Malkhuth,  the  wife  "  (passivity  or  rest).  (Sepher  P'res  Eiz  ha-Hay-
yintf  fol.  3,  col.  3.)  **  As  the  Upper  Mother  has  brought  forth  six  (an  allusion  to  the  1
=  6  of  'Hokhmah,  Wisdom,  the  Son),  so  the  Lower  Mother,  brought  forth  six  vessels
of  both,  Genesis,  says  :  *  For  in  six  days  YHVH  made  heaven  and  earth.'  "  Tiqqooneh
ha-Zohar,  fol.  22.  At  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  the  Israelites  waved  branches  of  trees
before,  to  each  side,  behind,  above  the  head  and  towards  the  feet ;  to  signify  the  three

dimensions.  Length,  Breadth  and  Depth,  and  their  negatives  and  positives,  together  six.

I


269

these.  The  dimensions  are  only  known  through  their  extensions,  the
positives  and  negatives,  and  the  six-sided  cube  symbolizes  them.  The
upper  three  are  as  follows :  on  the  Right  or  male  side,  is  'Hesed,  /.  ^.,
Grace.  It  is  also  called  Love,  Mercy,  or  Compassion.  This  is  the  side
of  the  active  principle  and  that  of  Life  and  Vitality.

This  Sephirah  is  sometimes  termed  Ge*dool-ah  or  Greatness,  also  Mag-
nificence. It  is  considered  as  the  Right  Arm  of  the  Makrokosmos  and
as  giving  life.  As  Mercy  it  would  be  proper  to  have  the  color  white  as
its  symbol.  R.  Azriel  holds  to  this.  It  is  questionable  as  to  its  symbolic
planet,  if  the  androgenic  Venus,  its  color  should  be  green,  its  metal  cop-
per, according  to  the  ancient  Chaldaic  and  astrological  ideas.

V.  Of  the  Sephirah  in3  Pa* had.  On  the  Left  or  female  side,  that
of  Rigor,  Punishment,  Fear  and  Severity  ;  is  the  Sephirah  termed  Pa*  had,
/.  e,.  Fear;  Deen,  /.  ^.,  Judgment  or  Justice;  Ge'boor-ah,  /.  ^.,  Judicial
Strength  or  Power.

This  is  the  side  of  the  Passive  principle,  that  of  Death  and  Corruption.
It  represents  the  Left  Arm  of  the  Makrokosmos  which  symbolizes  Death.
Its  planet  is  Jupiter.  Its  metal,  according  to  the  archaic  Chaldaic  and
astrological  idea  would  be  tin.  R.  Azriel,  says :  its  color  is  red.  The
general  opinion  of  the  Qabbalists  is,  that  it  represents  Punishment.
Jupiter  however  generally  appears  among  the  Jews,  as  Gad,  and  to  have
been  considered  a  lucky  planet.*  The  Chaldean  astrological  color  was
orange.  The  usual  astrological  color  was,  sometimes  reddish-purple,  or
a  violet,  also  a  reddish-green  and  a  dark  blue.

If  the  latter  two  Sephiroth,  which  are  called  ;  "  the  two  arms  of  God,**
remained  separated,  some  of  the  Qabbalists  assert,  the  world  could  not
exist,  indeed  they  do  not  act  separately  for  Judgment  is  not  without
Mercy.  (Zohar  iii,  143^.)  They  may  perhaps  be  considered  as  the  rep-
resentatives of  the  expansion  and  contraction,  the  centripetal  and  centrif-
ugal energies  between  the  poles  of  the  dimensions,  acting  under  the  Will
of  the  Deity.  From  the  first  are  considered  to  go  out  the  virile  and  male
souls,  from  the  second,  the  female  souls.

*  Comp.  Unheard  of  Curiosities  concerning  the  Talisman ical  Sculpture  of  the  Per-
sians, etc.,  by  James  GafTarel,  trans,  into  English.     London,  1650,  pp.  323-6,  292.


270

VI.  Of  the  Sephirah  n'^Kfln  Tiph*e-reth.  The  two  Sephiroth,  last
mentioned,  unite  or  merge  in  a  harmony  or  common  centre,  Tiph'e-reth,
/.  ^.,  Beauty.  It  symbolizes  the  heart  and  is  therefore  looked  upon  as  a
great  centre,  and  next  to  Kether,  the  head.  Its  symbol  in  nature  is  the
sun,  which  was  considered  by  the  ancient  oriental  thinkers,  as  the  heart
of  the  universe ;  the  Qabbalah  considers  Tiph'e-reth  as  the  heart  of  the
Heavenly  Adam,  and  asserts  that  it  rules  over  the  heart  of  the  earthly
Adam  or  man.  Tiph'e-reth  is  the  seat  of  sentiment  and  affection  and  is
considered  as  the  expression  and  result  of,  all  the  ethical  qualities  and
affections  and  the  sum  of  all  Goodness.  These  three  Sephiroth  are  the
representatives  of  all  ethical  life  and  perfections.  They  apparently  coin-
cide with  the  Universal  soul  of  Gebirol,  with  its  separation  into  the
Neshamah,  Rua'h  and  Nephesh.  In  the  Sephirothic  Adam,  the  first  three
correspond  to  the  Neshamah,  the  Spirit ;  so  the  three  we  have  just  men-
tioned correspond  to  Rua'h,  the  Conscience  or  Ethical,  called  the
Soul.  R.  Azriel  says,  the  color  of  Tiph*e-reth  is  white-red  or  pink,
perhaps  a  yellow-red.  The  white  and  red,  may  refer  to  its  different
aspects.  According  to  the  ancient  Chaldaic  astrological  system,  its  metal
would  be  gold,  its  color  yellow  or  yellow-red,  that  of  gold.  The  second
triad  is  called ;  Olam  ha-Moor^ gash,  i,  ^.,  the  Moral,  Ethical  or  Sensuous,
World.

The  three  Sephiroth  next  following,  are  of  a  dynamic  nature;  they
represent  the  Deity  as  the  Foundation,  Basis  or  General  Potentiality  of
all  Things,  the  Energy  and  producing  Principle  of  all  existence.

Of  Ne-tza'h  nvj  Triumph.  The  first,  which  is  on  the  Right  side,  is
called:  Ne-tza*h,  /'.  ^.,  Firmness  or  Victory,  sometimes  Eternity.  It
represents  the  Right  leg  and  thigh  of  the  Makrokosmos.  Its  symbolical
planet  is  probably  Mars.  Its  color  would  therefore,  according  to  the
ancient  Chaldaic  astrology  be  red.  ,  Its  metal,  iron.  R.  Azriel  says  its
color  is,  whitish-red.

Of  Hod  (pron.  Hoo'd,)  nn  Splendor.  The  second  is  termed.  Hod,
/.^.,  Splendor  or  Glory.  It  represents  the  Left  leg  and  thigh  of  the  Ma-
krokosmos. It  is  probable  that  its  symbolic  planet  was  Mercury ;  if  so,
astrologically  according  to  the  ancient  Chaldaic  system,  its  color  should
be  blue ;  its  metal,  quicksilver  or  mercury.     R.  Azriel  says  its  color  is


271

reddish-white.  "  By  Triumph  and  Glory,  we  comprehend  extension,
multiplication  and  force ;  because  all  the  forces  which  were  born  into  the
universe  went  out  of  their  bosom,  and  it  is  for  this  reason,  that  these  two
Sephiroth  are  called;  the  armies  (hosts)  of  YHVH."  (Zohar,  iii,  2g6a.)
The  two  unite,  merge,  centre  in  and  go  out  of,  a  harmony  or  common
principle,  called  Ye* sod.

Of  Ye'sod  (pron.  Ye'soo'd,)  "no'*  Basis  or  the  Foundation.  This
Sephirah  is  sometimes  termed  by  the  Qabbalists  the  Hidden  or  Mysterious
Sephirah.  It  signifies  th^  androgenic  generative  principle.  It  is  the  root
of  continuing  existence,  the  link  in  the  chain  of  the  existences.  "  Every-
Thing  shall  return  to  its  Foundation,  from  which  it  has  proceeded.  All
marrow,  seed  and  energy  are  gathered  in  this  place.  Hence  all  the  poten-
tialities which  exist  go  out  through  this."  (Zohar,  iii,  296^.)  These  three
attributes  together,  constitute  only  one  side  of  the  Divine  Nature,  namely :
that  which  the  Holy  Scriptures,  calls :  '*  YHVH  Tze'ba-oth."  All  vitality
and  life  the  Qabbalah  considers  as  based  on  Ye'sod,  the  source  of  all
emanated  and  existing  Things.  Its  planet  probably  was  Saturn,  the  color  of
which  according  to  the  ancient  Chaldean  astrology,  i§  black,  R.  Azriel,
says :  white — red — whitish — red — reddish — white.  Its  metal  by  the  ancient
Chaldean  system,  would  be  lead.  This  people  and  the  Hebrews,  consid-
ered it  as  the  oldest  of  the  planets.  Its  spirit  was  feared  by  both  nations,
and  it  was  considered  by  both,  as  a  star  of  ill-omen.  The  Assyrians
called  it,  **  the  slow  moving  one.*'*

The  three  last  mentioned  Sephiroth,  answer  to  Ibn  GebiroFs  triad,
called;  Nature.  Ne-tza*h  and  Hod,  are  understood  by  the  Zoharic
writings,  to  be  expansion,  multiplication  and  potential  energy,  and  that
all  the  energies,  forces  and  increase,  which  have  at  any  time  emanated
into  the  universe  proceed  through  these ;  "  Theftfore  these  two  Sephi-
roth are  called  :  the  armies  of  YHVH.**  (Zohar,  iii,  296^.)  The  Qab-
balists call  them,  when  united  with  their  harmony  Ye'sod ;  0/am  ha-
mutbangy  i,  <?.,  the  Natural  World;  also,  Olam  ha-Moota'do,  i,  ^.,  the
Material  World.  *'  It  can  be  designated  in  a  modern  formula  natura
naturam  contrary   to   natura   naturata,    the   material   world.**

*Comp.  in  this  connection;  Unheard  of  Curiosities,  before  cited,  pp.  292,  315,  319,
330-


272

Of  Malkhuth  (pron.  Markhooth,)  nuSo  Kingdom  or  Dominion.

This  is  the  7  th  or  loth  Sephirah.     It  represents  the  harmony  at   the
end,  as  did   Kether  at   the  commencement,   of  the  entire   Heavenly

Archetypal  Adam.  It  symbolizes  the  feet  upon  which  the  Adam  Illa-ah
rests  and  stands,  in  connection  with  and  upon  our  world,  the  soles
resting  upon  our  earth,  the  head  reaching  into  heaven.  (Comp.  Ezek.
xliii,  7.)  The  Divine  Name  attached  to  this  Sephirah  is  Adonai,  /.  ^.,
Lord,  the  equivalent  of  the  Ineffable  Name  YHVH.  Its  letter  is  n
which  completes  the  name  YHV.  It  is  also  termed  the  Queen  for
it  is  the  She*keen-ah.  (See  ante  p.  201  sq,)  It  is  also  called  ^Hav-tihy
t.  ^.,  Eve.  "It  is  the  mother  of  all  the  living  and  of  all  Things,
and  all  Things  which  exist  here  Below,  went  from  her  bosom  and
are  blessed  by  her."  (Zohar,  Idrah  Zootah,  near  the  end.)  This  Se-
phirah represents  the  Concrete,  and  is  the  energy  and  executive  power
of  the  Upper  Mother  Binah,  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Abstract  Intellect.
Malkhuth  is  the  She'keen-ah,  the  Real  Presence  of  the  Deity  in  the
Church  of  Israel,  the  Glory  which  hovered  over  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,
the  female  or  reflection  of  Ze'ir  An-peen,  and  is  the  creating  spirit.  It
is  also  called,  the  Bride  of  the  Spouse.  It  represents  the  Sabbath  or  7th
day,  the  close  of  the  Construction  or  Building  of  the  Universe,  the  Rest
Day  or  Harmony  of  All.  Its  angel  is  Metatron,  the  Great  Angel  of  the
Covenant.  The  sum  total  of  all  the  angelic  forces  or  ministering  ener-
gies. The  angel  as  to  whom  the  Deity  said  to  Moses  **  My  Name  is  in
him,"  beware  of  offending  him.  The  letters  of  the  name  Metatron  =
314,  and  those  of  Shaddai,  the  Almighty  =  314,  having  the  same  num-
ber value,  by  the  Talmudic  and  Qabbalistic  rule  called  Gematria,  they
are  considered  as  equal.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  Shaddai  was  the  deity  to
be  worshipped  in  Fear,  and  YHVH  in  Love.  The  latter  was  the  Merci-
ful One.  Metatron  is  also  the  one  to  be  feared.  Ex.  xxiii,  20-23;  ^>
10;  xxxiii,  2.

Malkhuth  does  not  represent  any  distinct  attribute  but  is  the  sum  total
of  all  the  Scphiroth,  and  the  Divine  Government  over  the  universe,  the
absolute  Kingdom,  the  totality  therefore  unity,  of  all  the  Sephiroth  over
the  entire  universe.  It  is  similar  to  Ibn  Gebirol's  Divine  Power,  which
he  says ;  is  predominant  in  all  the  existences,  penetrating  them  by  virtue
of  the  potentiality  of  the  Will  and  not  leaving  any  vacuum,  but  establish-


J73

ing  perfect  harmony  among  them.  It  is  also  considered  as  the  sphere  or
orbit  of  the  Moon,  that  is  of  the  Active  Intellect.'*'  Its  colar  is  like  the
light  reflecting  all  colors.  The  transparent  light  of  the  universe  around
us  in  which  are  all  the  prismatic  colors.

Many  of  the  Qabbalists  claim,  that  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  applies
only  to  the  Prototypic  or  Upper  Adam,  who  was  androgenic  and  made
in  the  image  and  likeness  of  Elohim.  That  the  repetition  of  the  expres-
sion "  said  "  or  desired,  three  times  therein  applied  to  the  Man,  refers  to
the  three  spiritual  natures  of  the  Upper  Adam  which  his  copy,  the
earthly  Adam  had  from  his  creation.  The  last  male-female  creation,  they
say,  referred  to  the  world-nature  necessary  for  the  mundane  existence  of
man  and  its  continuance.  The  Upper  Adam  is  not  made  of  "the
dust,"  and  indeed  the  second  account  expressly  says,  the  plants,  i.  e.,
man,  were  not  yet  on  the  eanh  and  the  terrestrial  man  did  not  yet  exist.
The  entire  earth  was  enveloped  in  a  thick  mist.  Afterwards  the  earthly
man  was  made  of  "  the  dust  of  the  ground  "  and  "  the  breath  o(  life,"
the  Nephesh,  was  "breathed  into  his  nostrils,"  or /off,  by  YHVH  Elo-
him, only  then  the  dust-man  "became  a  living  souV  A  Garden  of
Eden,  according  to  the  first  account,  did  not  exist  for  the  Upper
Man.  The  Qabbalists  say,  the  Garden  or  Paradise  was  pure  'abstract
human  thought  in  which  was  planted,  the  tree  of  the  Good  and  Evil  and
also  therein  was  the  tree  of  vitality,  of  life.

*  As  lo  the  diHerent  spheret,  conmll  ihe  vtluable  NMes  of  Sotomon  Monk,  to  kit
nufnificent  edition  of  MumoDide's  Horeh  in  Arabic  twd  FreDch.


^^/


Figure  99.


XIV.


THE  AIN  SOPH  AND  THE  SEPHIROTH  CONTINyED.  OF  THE  AYIN.  VIEW
OF  THE  ANCIENTS  AS  TO  IDEAS.  OF  THE  TRUE  AND  OF  ILLUSION.
SOUND,  RHYTHM,  COLOR.  QUOTATIONS  FROM  THE  ZOHAR  AS  TO  THE
SEPHIROTH.  THE  PROTOTYPIC  MAN.  THE  SEPHIROTH  AS  BETWEEN
THEMSELVES.  THE  SEPHIROTHIC  PILLARS.  OF  AZRIEL  AND  HIS  WRI-
TINGS.     ANALYSIS  OF  HIS   COMMENTARY  ON  THE  SEPHIROTH.

THE  Zohar(Idrah  Zootah  iii,  288^)  says:  "The  Ancient  of  the
Ancients,  the  Unknown  of  the  Unknown,  has  a  form  yet  also
has  not  any  form.  It  has  a  form  through  which  the  Universe  is
maintained.  It  also  has  not  any  form  as  It  cannot  be  comprehended.
When  It  first  took  this  form  *  It  permitted  to  proceed  from  it  (Kether)
nine  brilliant  Lights,  which  illuminating  through  it  (Kether)  spread  upon
all  sides  a  brilliant  light.  Let  us  think  of  a  light  which  is  elevated  and
which  spreads  its  rays  in  all  directions :  if  we  desire  to  grasp  these  rays,
it  will  be  impossible,  as  we  will  perceive  they  all  proceed  from  the  one
light.  Just  so  the  Holy  Ancient  is  an  elevated  (Absolute)  Light,  but
completely  hidden  and  incomprehensible  in  Itself,  and  we  can  conceive  It
only  through  Its  manifestation  in  these  diffusing  Lights  (the  Sephiroth)
which  are  however  on  the  one  side,  only  partly  visible,  and  yet  on  the
other  side,  are  partly  concealed.  These  {in  their  totality)  constitute^  the
Holy  Name  YHVHy  *'It  is  the  Ancient  of  the  Ancients,t  the  Mystery
of  the  Mysteries,  the  Unknown  of  the  Unknown.     It  has  a  form  which

♦  Kether,  the  Crown.    The  Will  in  Ibn  Gebirol.

t  Not  "  the  Ancient  of  all  the  Ancients,"  who  is  the  Ain  Soph.


275

appertains  to  It,  since  It  appears  (through  it)  to  us,  as  the  Ancient  Man
Above  All,  as  the  Ancient  of  the  Ancients,  and  as  that  which  there  is  the
Most  Unknown  among  the  Unknown.  But  under  that  form  by  which  It
makes  Itself  known.  It  however  still  remains  the  Unknown.  Its  vestment
appears  white  and  Its  aspect  is  that  of  a  veiled  face.  It  is  seated  upon  a
throne  of  fiery  sparks  which  submit  to  Its  Will.  *  *  *  .  From
Its  head  It  shakes  a  dew,  which  awakens  the  dead  and  makes  them  re-bom
into  a  new  life.  It  is  because  of  this  that  it  is  written :  *  Thy  dew  is  a
dew  of  the  light.*  It  is  that  dew,  which  is  the  nourishment  of  the  Holy
Ones  of  the  Highest  Order.  It  is  the  manna,  prepared  for  the  Just  (Pious)
in  the  life  to  come.  This  dew  descends  imto  the  field  of  the  sacred  fruits
(the  saints).  The  aspect  of  this  dew  is  white  as  (the  whiteness  of)  a  crys-
tal, the  color  of  which  contains  all  colors  *  *  *  ,  The  length
of  the  Face,  from  the  top  of  the  head  is  that  of  three  hundred  and  seventy
times,  ten  thousand  worlds.  It  is  called  the  Long  in  Aspect  (the  Makro-
prosopos,  or,  A'reekh  An-peen)  for  such  is  the  Name  of  the  Ancient  of
the  Ancients.  *  *  *

The  name  Ayin,  (A'y-een)  No-Thing  is  said  to  come  from  Job  (xxviii,
12)  "And  Wisdom,  where  (|;kd  mai-a^ y-een,  literally:  from  no- thing)
shall  it  be  found?  and  where  is  the  place,  of  Understanding ?^^\  The  pas-
sage was  only  used  by  the  Qabbalists  to  help  the  retention,  by  the  mem-
ory, of  the  doctrine  as  to  Ayin.  The  same  system  was  used  by  the  Rab-
bins in  the  Talmudic  teachings.  Beyond  man's  comprehension  is  the
no-thing  because  man's  mind  only  comprehends  the  things,  Ayin  does  not
mean,  nothing  in  the  sense  of  the  absolute  negation  of  everything,  if  it  did
maid'y-een  could  not  be  translated  where  ?  This  interrogative  where  ?  to
the  mind  of  the  questioner  at  once  implies  a  negation  of  there,  and  con-
veys the  idea  of  a  not-knowing  and  the  prompting  of  a  question,  which
may  admit  of  an  explanatory  answer ;  thereby  proving  that  the  Where  f
points  to  an  idea  which  on  account  of  its  apparent  unreachableness,  un-
knowable essence  and  real  invisibleness ;  is  to  the  questioner  immediately
as  if  a  no-thing,  but  to  the  questioner  only,  for  in  reality  an  absolute  noth-
ing or  negation  within  the  reach  of  man's  comprehension  is  impossible

*  Zohar  iii,  fol.  1 2%a.

t  See,  Cahen's  Great  French  Bible,  note  to  this  verse.


276

and  is  entirely  beyond  his  (limited)  thought.  The  idea  altogether  excludes
the  idea  of  a  some-thing  (otherwise  it  would  be  within  his  reach)  and  re-
fers to  the  absolute  no-thing,  in  abstract  and  absolute  endlessness  and  in-
comprehensibility, which  exists  and  rules  as  the  Supreme  Deity ;  therefore
the  Qabbalists  claim,  that  **  the  highest  degree  *  *  of  the  Godhead  is  to  man
as  Ayin  that  is,  not  even  an  idea.  This  word  Ayin  is  more  properly  a  defi-
nition than  name,  and  comes  within  the  sphere  of  theosophical  science^
intimately  connected  with  the  spirit  of  Divine  wisdom,  and  breathes  in
the  Mosaic  writings  even  above  Eh'yeh  and  YHVH  and  God's  attributes  ;
yet  comes  within  the  sphere  of  the  Old  Testament.  Ayin  is  non  ens  but
not  absolutely  nan  est^  and  far  from  asserting  a  description  of  the  Deity
as  non-being,  is  abstractly  to  say,  the  Supreme  is  not  a  being  {ens)  among
known  existing  beings,  but  is  a  no-  Thing  among  the  world  of  Things ;  the
Supreme  is  the  uncreated  as  far  as  man  in  the  matter-body  can  know,  is
a  non-something,  opposed  to  and  far  above,  the  created  some-thing,  which
is  physically  and  spiritually  the  Hebrew  j'df/jA,  Chaldaic  eeth.  The  phrase
yaish  maia^y-een^  /.  e,,  Some-thing  out  of  No-thing,  is  the  meaning  of
creation  ex  nihilo.

Thought  in  the  ancient  world  was  realistic.  Ideas  must  have  a  real  ex.
istence,  they  were  not  mere  form  and  opinions  which  might  be  changed,
this  thought  is  especially  evident  in  archaic  Greek  philosophy  and  it  was
this  that  Parmenides  and  Plato  sought  to  change.  With  Plato,  in  the
Parmenides,  came  the  new  thought  that  every  subjective  must  have  an  ob-
jective. See  anie^  p.  113.  Ideas  are  only  a  material  symbolism  acting  in
our  minds.  Realism  is  not  the  true,  nor  is  nominalism  the  true,  the  near-
est approach  to  what  is  pure  ideality  is  conceptualism.  But  even  concep-
tualism  is  inferior  to  the  infinite  subtilety  of  language  and  thought,  for
unformed  ideas  float  in  our  minds  which  are  too  subtile  even  for  concep)-
tion,  which  are  only  intuitions,  and  which  cannot  find  any  mental  sym-
bolism nor  absolute  formulations,  nor  any  means  of  visible  expression.

The  matter- world  is  perpetually  changing  and  is  therefore  neither  the
True  nor  the  Real ;  it  presents  to  us  nothing  but  uncertainty  and  mere
appearance,  is  the  Hindu  Maya  or  Illusion.  But  the  prototypic  ideals  are
the  True  and  the  Real  and  are  like  the  motionless  shadows  cast  upon  run-
ning water,  they  resist  the  force  of  change  and  motion,  and  aff'ord  a  true


277

basis  for  the  understanding  of  the  things.  This  conception  is  Oriental  but
also  that  of  Pythagpras  and  Plato.  (Corap.  Aristotle's  Metaphysics  i,  6.)
This  highest  ideal  world  was  called  by  the  Jews,  the  Heaven  of  Heavens.
How  are  we  to  bridge  this  chasm  between  the  Real  divine  and  the
Un-Real  human,  the  absolute  ideas  and  the  ideas  in  us?  This  is  the
stumbling  block  of  Kant,  Hamilton  and  Plato,  as  it  is  of  all  philosophy.
The  Theosophists  and  Mystics  have  endeavored  to  solve  it  through  the
ecstatic  condition,  but  how  successfully  is  for  the  reader  to  judge.

**  A  hair,  perhaps,  divides  the  False  and  True,
Yes :  a  single  Alif  were  the  clue —
Could  you  but  find  it— to  the  Treasure-house
And  peradventure,  to  the  Master  too."

The  Hebrew  Qabbalah  teaches,  that  sound  is  the  inner  soul  of  color,
and  that  the  rhythmus  is  the  inner  spirit  of  all  life,  and  for  this  reason,
the  lower  life  by  its  conformity  with  the  rhythmic  motion  of  the  upper
heavenly  life,  is  drawn  towards  it  and  is  merged  in  its  prototype ;  be-
cause similar  affect  similar,  in  a  peculiar,  unknown  or  magical  manner.
For  this  reason  not  only  among  the  Israelites  but  in  the  culte  of  all  the
Pagan  nations,  the  play  of  colors  and  the  sounds  of  music  act  in  accord ;
this  is  clearly  set  forth  in  the  ancient  books  of  the  Chinese.  So  we  have
the  7  colors,  7  in  the  musical  scale,  also  7  vowels,  all  apparently  in  affinity.

The  Zohar  also  says  :  *' '  To  whom  then  will  ye  compare  Me,  or  to
whom  shall  I  be  equal  ?  Says  the  Holy  One '  (Is.  xl,  25).  Among  all  the
creatures,  although  created  in  my  similitude,  there  is  not  one  like  Me.  I
can  even  destroy  the  form,  in  which  I  may  show  Myself  to  the  world,
and  reproduce  the  manifestation  of  Myself,  repeatedly  in  many  different
(forms).  No  other  Deity  is  above  Me,  who  can  destroy  My  form.
Therefore  it  is  said  in  the  Scripture  ;  *  Our  Rock  (Deity)  is  not  like  their
rock  (deity),  our  enemies  may  judge  for  themselves.*  (Deut.  xxxii,  31.)
But  should  some  one  say :  It  is  said  :  *  Ye  have  seen  no  manner  of  simili-
tude,* (Deut.  iv,  15  ;)  to  him  can  be  answered  :  In  this  one  form,  we  have
seen  YHVH,  of  which  it  is  said  of  Moses,  *  the  likeness  of  YHVH  shall
he  behold '  (Num.  xii,  8),  but  not  under  any  other  similitude ;  with
justice  the  prophet,  says  :  '  To  whom  will  ye  compare  Me  ?  *  To  whom
will  ye  compare   YHVH?     What  form  shall  represent  the  Supreme?


278

(Is.  xl,  i8.)    Because  form  is  not  an  attribute  of  the  Supreme  in  Its  Place
(Ma-gom,  t,  ^.,  Abode  or  Reality),  but  the  Holy  One  has  condescended  to
govern  the  universe  and  to  spread  Its  Glory  (She'kheen-ah)  over  all  the
created  (therein),  It  therefore  appears  (through  the  She'kheen-ah)  to  each
one,  according  to  his  (that  man's),  comprehension,  insight,  and  imagina-
tion.    This  is  the  meaning  of  the  verse :  '  Through  prophetic  images  and
representations  *  (Hosea  xii,  lo).     Elohim  (God)  therefore  speaks  in  the
above  text,  as  if  saying :  Although  I  represent  Myself  to  you,   in  your
own  form,  yet  you  cannot  compare  me  to  any  Thing.     Before  the  Deity
had  created  any  form  in  this  (our)  universe,  before  the  Holy  One  had
brought  forth  any  image.  It  was  alone,  without  form,  and  without  any
similitude  whatever,  who  can  conceive  of  the  Supreme  Deity  as  It  was
before  the  creation,  for  It  then  was  formless  ?     It  is  therefore  prohibited
to  represent  the  Supreme  Holy  One  under  any  kind  of  image  or  under
species  of  form,  yea  even  by  Its  Holy  Name,  by  a  letter  or  by  a  point.
To  this  refer  the  following  words  :  *  Ye  saw  no  manner  of  similitude  on
the  day  that  YHVH  spake  with  you  '  (Deut.  iv,  5).     That  is,  ye  saw  not
anything,  that  ye  could  represent  under  any  kind  of  form,  or  species  of
image.      But  after  the   Deity  had   emanated   the  form  of  the   Upper
Man  (Adam  Illa-ah),  It  used  the  same,  as  a  chariot  (Merkd)ah),  so  as  to
descend  (through  it) ;  It  desired  to  be  named  after  this  fornix  which  is  the
Sacred  Name  YHVH,     It  desired  that  it  be  known,  according  to   Its
attributes,  according  to  each  attribute  separately,  and  It  permitted  Itself
to  be  called:   'Elohim  of  Mercy;'  'Elohim  of  Justice  (or  Righteous-
ness)*; 'Almighty  One';  'Elohim  of  Tze'ba-oth ' ;  and  the  '  Existing
One.'*     The  Deity  intended  thereby,  that  Its  attributes  (qualifications)
be  recognized  by  its  creatures  and  that  it  be  known,  how  Its  Mercy  and
Compassion  extended  throughout  the  entire  universe,  as  well  as  Its  poten-
tiality (energy  and  power).     For  if  It  had  not  diffused  Its  Light  upon  all
Its  creatures  how  could  we  know  the  Deity  ?     How  could  be  accom-
plished, that  which  is  written  (Is.  vi,  3)  :  *  The  world  is  full  of  Its  Glory  ?  '
Woe  to  the  man  who  even  compares  the  Holy  One  with  Its  own  attri-
butes, much  less  with  those  of  man  himself,  who  came  from  the  earth  and
who  falls  into  corruption.     We  must  consider  the  Deity  as  exalted  above
*Comp.  with  this  the  13  Middoth.  Exod.  xxxiv,  5-8.


279

all  creatures  and  all  attributes,  but  beyond  that  which  the  attribute  ex-
presses we  cannot  conceive  of  the  Supreme.  If  we  divest  the  Deity  of  all
these  things,  if  we  leave  (to  It),  neither  an  attribute,  nor  an  image,  nor  a
form,  the  remainder  is  like  a  far  stretching  ocean  ;  for  the  waters  of  the
ocean  in  and  for  themselves,  are  boundless  and  formless,  and  it  is  only
when  they  spread  themselves  upon  the  earth,  that  they  assume  an  image
or  a  form  {Ditnyon),  We  can  now  make  the  following  calculation :  the
source  of  the  water  of  the  ocean  and  the  flume  or  stream  of  water  proceed-
ing from  the  source,  so  to  spread  itself  further,  are  two,  A  great  reser-
voir is  then  formed,  just  as  if  a  huge  hollow  or  excavation  had  been
dug ;  this  reservoir  is  called,  ocean,  and  is  the  third.  This  unfathomable
depth,  ocean,  then  divides  into  seven  streams,  resembling  seven  long
Kailem,  /.  ^.,  Vessels  (or  Vases).  The  source,  the  flume  or  stream,  the
ocean,  and  the  seven  streams  {Kailetn)  together  make  ten.  And  if  the
Master  breaks  these  vessels  which  he  has  made,  the  waters  return  to  the
source,  and  then  remain  only  the  fragments  of  these  vessels,  dried  up  and
without  any  water.  It  is  in  this  way,  the  Cause  of  All  Causes,  emanated
the  Ten  Sephiroth.  Kether,  the  Crown,  is  the  source  from  which  streams
forth  an  unceasing  infinite  Light :  hence  the  name  Ain  Soph  (the  End-
less, or  Infinite)  by  which  the  Highest  Cause  is  designated  :  for  It  (in  its
Supreme  Absoluteness)  has  neither  form  nor  formation  and  there  is  not
any  means  whereby  to  comprehend  it  or  in  any  way  know  it.  Hence  it
is  written  *  Seek  not  out  the  things  that  are  too  hard  for  thee,  neither
search  the  things  that  are  above  thy  strength.'  (Ecclus.  iii,  21.)  The
Deity  then  emanated  a  vessel,  as  small  as  a  (mathematical)  point,  like  the
letter  '  (Yod)  which  is  filled  from  this  source  (/.  ^.,  the  Ain  Soph)  by  the
Divine  Light.  This  is  the  source  of  Wisdom,  nay  it  is  Wisdom  itself !
This  was  the  Sephirah  'Hokhmah,  after  which  the  Supreme  Cause,  allowed
Itself  to  be  called :  *  Wise  God.'  After  this  It  made  a  great  vessel  resem-
bling the  ocean,  this  is  called  (Binah)  Intelligence  (or  Understanding) :
hence  comes  the  name  '  Intelligent  God.'  But  it  must,  however,  be  un-
derstood in  this  connection,  that  the  Deity  is  Wise  and  Intelligent
through  Itself  alone,  for  Wisdom  does  not  of  itself  deserve  its  name
through  itself,  but  only  through  the  Wise  One,  who  has  filled  it  with  the
Light  which  flows  from  Itself;  just  so  Intelligence  is  not  comprehended


28o

through  itself,  but  through  the  Being  who  is  intelligent,  and  fills  it  with
Its  own  substance.  The  Deity  needs  only  to  withdraw  Itself  and  Intelli-
gence would  be  dried  up  and  useless.  This  is  also  the  meaning  of  the
words  *  As  the  waters  run  out  from  the  sea,  (perhaps,  lake)  and  the  bed
of  a  river  becomes  dry  and  parched  up. '  (Job  xiv,  1 1 .  Comp.  Is.  xix,
5.)  The  ocean  is  finally,  divided  as  if  into  seven  streams,  and  the  seven
costly  Vessels  (^Kailem  or  the  Sephiroth)  are  produced,  which  are  called  :
^Hesed  Mercy  or  Grace,  and  Ge'dool-ah,  /.^.,  Grandeur;  Ge^boar-ah  (Judi-
cial Strength);  TipKe-reth  (Beauty);  Ne-iza'k  (Triumph  or  Victory);
Hod  (Glory) ;  Ye' sod  (Foundation  or  Basis) ;  and  Malkhutk  (Kingdom).
Therefore  (answering  to  these  attributes  or  Sephiroth)  the  Deity  is  called  :
the  Great  or  Merciful;  the  Mighty;  the  Glorious;  the  God  of  Victory;
the  Creator,  to  whom  all  Glory  appertains  and  Space  belongs,  and  the
Foundation  of  all  Things.  Upon  the  last  attribute  all  the  others  are  based,
as  well  as  the  totality  of  the  worlds.  Finally, .  the  Deity  is  also  King  of
the  Universe,  for  everything  is  in  Its  power ;  It  can  diminish  the  number
of  the  Vessels,  and  increase  in  them  the  Light  which  streams  from  them,
or  reduce  it,  just  as  it  pleases  the  Holy  One.  For  these  Vessels,  It  made
subordinate  to  them  and  for  their  use,  a  Throne,  which  has  four  feet  and
six  steps,  together  ten.  (Note.  This  is  the  second  world,  Beriah,  or
B'ree-ah,  see  hereafter.)  Subordinate  to  this  Throne  for  its  use,  the  Holy
One  created,  ten  Hosts  of  Angels,  finally  It  created  Samael  and  his  hosts,
which  are  used  by  the  Angels  as  clouds,  upon  which  they  descend  to
earth,  or,  as  if  horses,  upon  which  they  ride.  So  it  is  said  in  the  Scrip-
ture :  *  Behold  YHVH  rides  upon  swift  clouds,  coming  to  Egypt,  and
the  gods  (elohim)  of  Egypt  tremble  before  Him.'  *'*

The  Zohar  calls  the  First  World  D'yook-nahy  i.  e.,  form  or
image.  It  is  that  of  Adam  Illa-ah,  the  Celestial  Prototypic  Adam  or
Man.  The  Second  World  Kur^sey-ah,  t\  e.,  the  Throne.  The  Third
World  Mala'hay-ah,  i,  e.,  the  Angels,  and  the  Fourth,  our  Matter- World,
Galgooleeniy  /.<?.,  the  Planetary  World  also  that  of  the  Q'lippoth  or  Shells.

The  Universe  as  an  entirety,  is  looked  upon  by  the  Qabbalah  as  the
vestment  or  "  garment  of  God.*'  The  Zohar  tells  us  ;  "  When  the  Hid-
den of  all  the  Hidden,  willed  to  manifest  Itself,  It  first  made  a  point

*  Is.  xix,  I.    Zohar  ii,  42^3^  2  Bo.


28l

(Kether,  the  first  Sephirah  also  called  A'reekh  An-peen),  shaped  it  into  a
Sacred  Form  (/.  e.,  the  totality  of  all  the  Sephiroth,  the  Adam  lUa-ah,  or
Adam  Qadmon)  and  covered  it  with  a  rich  and  splendid  garment,  that  is
the  universe."  Ibid,,  i,  2«.)  Ibn  Gebirol  starts  out  with  this  idea  in  the
commencement  of  his  Me'qdr  'Hay-ylm.

The  idea  of  a  first  ideal  or  prototypic  androgenic  Man  is  of  great  an-
tiquity in  the  metaphysical  religions  of  the  Orient,  and  we  think,  may
be  found  in  the  oldest  writings  of  the  Akkadians,  Babylonians,  Chalde-
ans, Hindus,  Chinese  and  Egyptians:  even  in  the  Greek  philosophy,
especially  in  Plato,  and  in  Philo  Judaeus  and  St.  Paul,  and  there  are
images  of  the  Great  Man  in  Daniel  and  Ezekiel.  (In  Plato  see  the  Sym-
posium. Prof.  Jowett's  Plato,  i,  pp.  506-9.  Geo.  Burges*  Plato,  iii,
pp.  508-14.)  It  appears  also  among  the  aborigines  of  America.  (Comp.
Plates  a/i/^,  pp.  120,  142,  157,  164.)

It  must  also  be  noted  that  each  Sephirah  of  this  trinity  of  triads  is  also
considered  as  containing  within  itself  a  triad,  viz  :

I.  It  has  its  own  absolute  characteristics; — ^Therefore  is  the  Special.
II.  Is  passive  and  receiving  that  from  above ; — ^Therefore  is  the  Concrete.
III.  It  is  active  and  emanating  to  that  which  is  below ; — ^Therefore  is  the
Universal.

The  Zohar  (iii,  288^)  says :  "  Just  as  the  Holy  Ancient  is  represented
by  the  number  three,  so  all  the  other  lights  (Sephiroth)  are  of  a  threefold
nature."  However  within  this  triad  in  each  Sephiroth  is  a  unit,  and  in
this  trinity  of  triads,  there  is  also  a  trinity  of  units  in  the  totality  of  all
the  Ten  Sephiroth.  Three  of  the  Sephiroth  ;  Kether,  Tiph'e-reth  and
Malkhuth,  constitute,  as  we  have  seen,  the  uniting  links  or  harmony  be-
tween the  three  pairs  of  the  oppositions,  the  male  and  the  female,  or  the
positive  and  negative ;  and  thereby  are  produced,  the  Intellectual,  Ethi-
cal, and  Material  worlds  in  unison  as  a  triad  ;  and  these  three  Sephiroth
together,  form  the  Middle  Pillar  of  the  Sephirothic  Tree  or  Diagram.
From  the  important  positions  they  occupy,  each  of  these  Sephiroth  is
considered,  as  representing  the  World  or  condition  of  which  it  is  the
harmony.     The  division  is  perpendicular  in  three  Columns  or  Pillars.

I.  That  on  the  Right,  known  as  the  Active,  Positive  Male  side,  or  Pil-
lar of  Mercy  {Sithrai  Yemeen-ah  amoodah  D' Hesod)  \  is  composed  of  the


282

three  Sephiroth  on  that  side  which  are  usually  called,  Wisdom,  Mercy,
Firmness.

II.  That  on  the  Left,  is  the  Passive,  Negative,  Female  side,  or  Pillar  of
Judgment  {Sithrai  D'samaiah  amoodah  D* DeenaK)^  representing  the
principle  of  Rigor  or  Punishment.  It  is  composed  of  the  three  Sephi-
roth on  that  side,  usually  called ;  Intellect,  Judgment  (also  Fear)  and
Splendor.

III.  The  four  Sephiroth  in  the  Centre  of  the  Tree  or  Diagram,  repre-
senting Mildness  {Ra^ ha-mayoon),  composed  of  the  harmonies  of  the
triads,  is  called  the  Middle  Pillar  {Amoodah  D' amzoothah),

I.  Kether,  the  Crown,  the  Brain ;  is  used  to  designate  the  Intellectual

World,  and  represents,  the  Neshamah,  the  Spirit.

II.  Tiph*e-reth,  Beauty,  the  Heart ;  is  used  to  designate  the  Ethical  world.

It  is  called  the  King  or  Holy  King  and  represents  Rua'h,  the  Soul.

III.  Malkhuth,  Kingdom,  which  unites  and  merges  in  itself  all  the  Sephi-
roth, is  used  to  represent  the  Material  World,  instead  of  Ye'sod,
Foundation,  which  is  termed,  the  Hidden  or  Suppressed  Sephirah.
Malkhuth  in  this  capacity  is  called,  the  Queen  {MaikhooihaK)  or  the
Matron  {Matro' neethaK).  It  represents  Nephesh,  the  Animal  Vitality
or  Body.  The  energy,  potency,  and  power  of  all  the  Sephiroth,  are
therefore  considered  to  be,  in  Kether,  Tiph*e-reth,  and  Malkhuth ;
but  Malkhuth,  the  Queen,  theShe'kheen-ah,  contains  all  in  harmony.

Kether,  the  Crown,  is  the  representative  of  the  manifested  spiritual
substance  of  the  Absolute.  Is  the  Unity  in  number,  the  Supreme  One.
Tiph'e-reth,  Beauty,  the  highest  perfection  of  life  and  ethics,  has  its  rep-
resentative in  the  planetary  world  in  the  spirit  or  energy  of  the  Sun,
whose  light  gives  vitality  and  preservation  to  all  the  created  on  this  earth.
It  is  the  representative  of  the  Ideal  Beauty  or  Goodness.

Malkhuth,  Kingdom,  is  the  re-united  action  of  all  the  Sephiroth,  the
Real  Presence  of  the  Deity  in  the  midst  of  Its  creation  ;  the  She'kheen-ah
or  Glory  of  YHVH  Elohim,  of  Adonai,  the  Lord,  and  is  the  immanent
energy  of  all  the  emanated  Things.  Its  representative  in  the  planetary
world  is  the  Moon.  These  three  constitute  the  column  of  the  Middle,  a
Triad.


283

The  Crown  is  always  A'reekh  An-peen,  the  Great  Face  or  Long  in
Aspect.

Beauty,  is  the  Holy  King,  or,  the  King.

Malkhuth,  Kingdom,  is  the  She*kheen-ah,  the  Queen,  the  Matro'nee-
thah,  the  Divine  Presence.  Its  representative  is  the  spirit  or  energy  of
the  Moon,  of  the  planet  which  obtains  all  its  light  from  the  Sun;  the  ruler
of  the  lowest  planetary  sphere  in  connection  with  the  earth.  The
existence  on  this  earth  the  Qabbalah  holds,  is  only  a  reflection  or  image,
of  the  great  Ideal  Beauty  or  Goodness  in  the  Above.

As  to  the  active  energies  of  the  King  and  Queen,  whom  the  Qabbalists
frequently  term,  the  T\uo  Faces.  (Zohar,  iii,  fol.  lo^.)  These  form  an
androgenic  principle  whose  constant  endeavor  is  to  shed  upon  the  world
new  life  and  kindnesses  and  preserve  and  perpetuate,  under  the  Will  of
the  Supreme  Deity,  the  work  of  the  original  creation.  The  reciprocal  af-
finity of  the  Two  Faces,  operates  in  two  ways,  sometimes  it  is  from  Above
to  Below,  then  the  existence  and  life  go  out  of  the  Highest  World  affect-
ing the  objects  of  nature ;  sometimes  on  the  contrary,  it  goes  from  the
Below  to  the  Above,  that  is  from  this,  our  world  of  illusion,  change  and
unreality,  to  the  real  and  true  and  Absolute,  Above ;  and  takes  back  to
the  Highest,  the  existences  entitled  to  such  a  return.

One  of  the  earliest  writings  after  the  period  of  Ibn  Gebirol,  which  sets
forth  the  system  of  the  Qabbalah  philosophically ;  that  has  escaped  the
general  destruction  of  the  Hebrew  writings  in  the  Middle  Ages,  is  the
Commentary  on  the  Ten  Sephiroth,  by  R.  Azariel  br  Azriel  ben  Mena-
'hem,  perhaps,  ben  Solomon ;  also  called  by  some  of  the  Jewish  authors  of
the  XIII  century,  Ezra.  He  was  bom  in  Valladolid,  Spain,  circa  1160
A.  D.  and  is  said  to  have  died  in  1238,  aged  78.  He  was  distinguished  as
a  Philosopher,  Talmudist,  Qabbalist,  and  Commentator  on  the  Hebrew
Holy  Writings,  and  he  tells  us,  that  he  travelled  much  in  search  after  the
Secret  Wisdom.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  pupil  of  the  celebrated  Qab-
balist R.  Yitz-haq  the  Blind,  and  master  of  the  erudite  Qabbalist  R.  Moses
ben  Na'hman  (Nachmanides)  called  by  the  Jewish  authors,  acrostically,
RaMBaN.  Azriel  wrote  a  number  of  works,  some  of  which  have  reached
our  day  in  MSS. ,  others,  which  were  printed  at  an  early  date.  The  one
we  are  most  interested  in  is  his  :  Sha-aloth  u-ih^ shooboth  al  eser  Sefhiroth,


284

/.  ^.,  Explanation  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  in  Questions  and  Answers.  In
the  edition  of  Warsaw  of  1798,  at  the  end,  is  :  **  He  who  wishes  to  be-
come wise  must  turn  towards  the  South,"  1.  ^.,  towards  the  Sephirah
Tiph'e-reth,  Beauty;  symbolized  by  the  spirit  of  the  Sun,  the  potency  of
the  South.  "  He  who  desires  to  become  rich  must  turn  towards  the
Sephirah  Tzad-dek,  Righteousness ;  which  is  the  potency  of  the  North,
and  a  memorial  sign  for  thee  is :  The  Table  is  in  the  North,  the  Candlestick
in  the  South.  *  And  to  my  maker  I  will  ascribe  (give)  righteousness/
(Job  xxxvi,  3,)  refers  to  the  saying  :  '  The  She*kheen-ah  is  in  the  West,'
which  means  that  the  West  is  awer-YaH^  /.^.,  the  gether  (azoth)  of  Adonai
(the  Lord),  and  Or  YaHy  /.  ^.,  the  *  Light  of  the  Lord,'  and  that  is  the
She*kheen-ah.  As  to  the  question  whether  (in  this  wisdom)  there  is  a  giver
and  a  receiver,  the  (position  and  work  of  the)  Cherubim  may  answer,  for
they  appear  like  man  and  wife  and  such  is  the  love  for  you  which  comes
from  the  Holy  One,  Blessed  be  His  Name  !  We  read  (Job  xxiii,  13)  *And
his  soul  desireth  her  and  he  acts  *  and  in  Isaiah  vi,  3,  '  And  one  calleth
to  the  other '  which  the  Targum  translates :  *  And  they  receive  one  from

another.'     At  times  each  doeth  for  himself,  at  times  they  do  alike,  at

•

times  one  doeth  the  work  of  the  other,  and  at  times  they  reverse  their
work.  (Job,  xxiii,  8-10.)  With  reference  to  which  the  Rabbins  say  :  Great
is  the  power  of  the  righteous  (j^^t)  for  they  turn  the  quality  of  Severity
(Fear  or  Rigor)  into  the  quality  of  Mercy  (Grace),  but  the  wicked  do  the
contrary  and  where  there  is  a  lacking  the  work  is  cut  off,  and  such  an  one
is  called  Tumtum,  /.  ^.,  stopped  up.  Concerning  such  an  one  it  is  said  :
(Job  xxvi,  9,)  *  He  closed  the  Face  of  the  Throne,  He  spread  His  cloud
over  it ' ;  and  it  is  also  written  :  (Prov.  xxv,  2,)  '  The  honor  of  Elohim
(God)  is  to  conceal  a  thing. '  And  these  things  are  proceeded  with  in
the  fourth  wake  of  the  night  and  in  the  fourth  wake  of  the  day  of  their
festival.  So  far  the  words  of  R.  Azriel  which  he  received  from  Moses  ben
Na'hman."  Azriel  tells  us  when  he  first  expounded  in  Spain,  the  Secret
Wisdom  which  had  been  taught  to  him  through  Tradition,  he  was  derided
by  the  philosophers  under  the  influence  of  Aristotelianism,  who  only  held
that  to  be  true  which  could  be  expounded  and  proved,  logically.  For
their  instruction,  he  therefore  endeavored  to  give  the  Secret  Wisdom  a


285

logical  dress.     Azriel  belonged  to  that  Qabbalistic  system  which  was  ex-
pounded by  the  School  of  Gerona.*

The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  condensed  analysis  of  the,  Com-
mentary on  the  Sephiroth,  as  made  by  Dr.  Jellinek  according  to  Spinoza's
form  of  Ethics,  t

Definition  I.  By  the  Being  who  is  the  originator  and  governor  of  all
Things,  I  understand  the  Ain  Soph,  /.  ^.,  an  infinite  Being,  unlimited
and  with  Itself  absolutely  identical,  united  in  Itself;  without  attributes,
will,  intention,  desire,  thought  (idea),  word  or  action.  Answers  2
and  12.

Definition  II.  By  Sephiroth,  I  understand  the  potencies  emanating  from
the  Absolute  Ain  Soph,  emanating  as  the  by  quantity  limited  entities,
which  like  the  will,  which  without  changing  its  nature,  wills  the  different
objects  that  are  the  possibilities  of  the  multifarious  Things.  (Ans.  3
and  9.)

Proposition  I.  The  primary  cause  and  governor  of  the  world  is  Ain
Soph,  who  is  as  well  immanent  as  transcendental.     (Ans.  i.)

Proof  (a).  Each  effect  is  the  result  of  a  cause,  and  every  thing  that
has  order  and  is  according  to  a  design  (plan)  has  a  governor.     (Ans.  i.)

Proof  (b).  Everything  visible  is  limited,  whatever  is  limited  is  finite,
whatever  is  finite  is  not  absolutely  identical ;  the  primary  cause  of  the

♦  He  is  known  to  us  principally  by  "The  Commentary  on  the  Ten  Sephiroth  by  way
of  Questions  and  Answers  "  which  first  was  made  known  in  the  Derekh  Emoonah,  f .  ^.,
Path  of  Holiness,  by  Meier  Ibn  Gubbai,  Padua,  I563,and  the  Avodoth  haq-Qadosli,  f.  g.,
the  Service  of  Holiness,  called  also.  The  Vision  of  the  Lord,  Mantua,  1545;  subse-
quently it  is  to  be  found  in  "  A  Collection  of  Qabbalistic  Treatises,*'  by  Gabriel  War-
schawer,  Warsaw,  1798.  It  was  republished,  Berlin,  1850.  Comp.  also  Dr.  Hirsch
Graetz,  Ceschichie  der  Juden^  vii,  p.  448  sq,  and  Dr.  A.  Jellinek's  Beitrage  lur  Ge-
schichteder  Kabbala.     Leipzig,  1852,  Vol.  i,  pp.  62-66,  ii,  32  sq.

t  See  Beitrage,  etc. ;  just  cited.  Vol.  i,  p.  61  zq.  The  statement  in.  The  Kabbalah  Un-
veiled, etc.;  by  S.  L.  Mac-Gregor  Mather,  London,  1887,  p.  38,  as  far  as  it  implies  the
origin  of  the  subject  matter  as  by  Dr.  Jellinek  is  not  correct,  Mr.  Mather  is  also  incorrect
(p.  15)  in  his  statement  as  to  the  books  contained  in  the  Zohar ;  ^  and  e,  26  and  27,  are
not  in  it.  Nes^hamah  and  Nepesrh  used  by  Mr.  Mather  are  German,  in  English,  the
extra  c  is  not  necessary.


286

world  is  invisible,  consequently  is  unlimited,  infinite,  absolutely  identical,
/.  e,y  it  is  the  Ain  Soph.     (Ans.  2.)

Proof  (c).  As  the  primary  cause  of  the  world  is  infinite,  so  nothing
can  exist  outside  (without,  or  extra)  to  It ;  consequently  It  is  immanent.
(Ans.  2.)  ^

Scholion.  As  the  Ain  Soph  is  invisible  and  exalted,  so  also  is  it  the
root  of  both  faith  (belief)  and  of  unbelief.     (Ans.  2.)

Proposition  II.  The  mediaries  between  the  absolute  Ain  Soph  and  the
material  world,  are  the  Sephiroth.

Proof.  As  the  material  world  is  limited  and  not  perfect,  therefore  it
cannot  proceed  directly  from  the  Ain  Soph ;  still  the  Ain  Soph  must
exert  Its  influence  over  it,  for  in  the  opposite  case  Its  perfection  would
cease.  Consequently  the  medium  must  be  the  Sephiroth,  for  they  in
their  intimate  connection  with  the  Ain  Soph  are  perfect,  and  in  their  sev-
erance, imperfect.     (Ans.  3.)

Scholion.  As  all  that  exists  originated  by  means  of  the  Sephiroth,  so
there  is  an  upper,  a  central  (higher),  and  a  lower,  degree  of  the  material
world.     (See  below.  Proposition  VI.)

Proposition  III.  The  mediating  Sephiroth  are  ten.

Proof.  Each  body  has  three  dimensions  (length,  breadth  and  depth),
each  one  of  which  repeats  the  other  (3X3  =  9);  and  if  we  add  thereto
the  relation  of  Space  in  general,  the  result  will  be  the  number  ten.  As
the  Sephiroth  are  the  potencies  of  all  that  is  limited,  there  must  be  ten.
(Ans.  4.)

Scholion  (a).  The  number  ten  does  not  stand  as  a  contradiction  of  the
absolute  unity  of  the  Ain  Soph,  as  one  is  the  basis  of  all  numbers,  plu-
rality proceeds  from  unity,  the  germ  includes  the  development,  just  as
fire,  flame,  sparks  and  the  color,  have  one  basis,  although  each  is  different
from  the  other.     (Ans.  6.)

Scholion  (b).  Just  as  all  cogitation  or  thought  and  even  the  mind  as  a
cogitated  object,  is  limited,  becomes  concrete  and  has  a  measure ;
although  thought  abstractly  proceeds  from  Ain  Soph ;  so  the  attributes
of  the  Sephiroth  are,  limit,  measure  and  concretion.    (Ans.  7.)

Proposition  IV.  The  Sephiroth  are  emanated  and  not  created.

Proof  I.  As  the  absolute  Ain  Soph  is  perfect  so  also  must  the  Sephiroth


28;

proceeding    therefrom   be   perfect;    therefore    they    are    not    created.
(Ans.  5.)

Proof  II.  All  that  is  created  decreases  through  abstraction ;  the  Sephi-
roth  do  not  decrease,  for  their  activity  never  ceases ;  consequently  they
cannot  be  created.     (Ans.  5.)

Scholion.  The  first  Sephiroth  was  in  the  Ain  Soph  as  a  dynamis  (power)
before  it  became  a  reality;  then  the  second  Sephirah  emanated  as  a
potency  for  the  Intellectual  World ;  later  the  other  Sephiroth  emanated
for  the  Moral  World  and  the  World  evident  to  our  senses,  /.  ^.,  the  Mate-
rial and  Natural  World.  But  this  does  not  imply  a  prius  and  postertuSy  or
a  gradation  in  the  Ain  Soph,  but  just  as  an  ordinary  light  contains,  as  in
an  unity  in  itself,  the  lights  kindled  from  it  which  also  give  light  sooner
or  later  and  differently,  so  the  Ain  Soph  embraces  all  in  a  unity.
(Ans.  8.)

Proposition  V.  The  Sephiroth  are  both  active  and  passive  {maqabel
v^meth-qabaf)  emanating  and  receiving  in  themselves.

Proof.  As  the  Sephiroth  do  not  abolish  the  unity  of  the  Ain  Soph,  so
each  one  of  the  preceding  receives  from  its  predecessor  and  imparts  to
its  successor,  /.  ^.,  is  at  the  same  time  both  active  (imparting)  and
passive  (receptive).     (Ans.  iii)

Proposition  VI.  The  first  Sephirah  is  termed  Rflm  Ma'a-leh,  /.  ^.,
Inscrutable  Height;  the  second  'Hokhmah,  /.  ^.,  Wisdom;  the  third
Binah,  /.  ^.,  Understanding;  the  fourth  'Hesed,  /.  ^.,  Love;  the  fiflh
Pa* had,  /.  <r.,  Fear;  the  sixth  Tiph*e-reth,  /.  ^.,  Beauty;  the  seventh
Ne-tza'h,  /.  ^.,  Firmness;  the  eighth  Hod,/.  ^.,  Splendor;  the  ninth
Tzad-dek  Ye'sod  01am,  /.  ^.,  the  Righteous  are  the  Foundation  of  the
World ;  the  tenth  Tzad-dek,  /.  ^.,  Righteousness.

Scholion  (a).  The  first  three  Sephiroth  form  the  World  of  Thought
(Idea) ;  the  next  three,  the  World  of  Soul ;  the  last  four,  the  World  of
Corporeity ;  they  therefore  [correspond  to  the  Intellectual,  Ethical  and
Material,  Worlds.     (Ans.  10.)

Scholion  (b).  The  first  Sephirah  stands  in  relation  to  the  Soul  in  so  far
as  the  latter  is  termed  Ye*hedah,  /.  ^.,  Unity;  the  second,  in  so  far  as  it
is  named  *Hay-yah,  /.  e,y  the  Living;  the  third  in  so  far  as  it  is  named
Rua'h,  /.  ^.,  Spirit;  the  fourth  in  so  far  as  it  is  named  Nephesh,  /.  e,.


288

Vital  Principle;  the  fifth  in  so  far  as  it  is  named  Neshamah,  /.  e.^  Soul ;
the  sixth  acts  upon  the  blood  ;  the  seventh  upon  the  bones ;  the  eighth
upon  arteries  and  veins ;  the  ninth  upon  the  flesh ;  and  the  tenth  upon
the  skin.     (Ans.  lo.)

Scholion  (c).  The  first  Sephirah  is  like  the  hidden  (concealed)  light ;
the  second  like  the  blue  of  the  firmament;  the  third  like  the  yellow ;  the
fourth  like  the  white ;  the  fiflh  like  the  red  ;  the  sixth  like  the  white-red ;
the  seventh  like  the  whitish-red ;  the  eighth  like  the  reddish-white  ;  the
ninth  like  the  white-red-whitish-red-reddish-white;  the  tenth  like  the
light  reflecting  all  the  colors  which  display  light.     (Ans.  9.)*

Scholion  (d).  The  gradation  of  the  Sephiroth  is  as  follows  :

Left.  Rftm  Ma'a-leh  Right.

Inscrutable  Height.


Binah,
Understanding.


Pa' had,  Fear.


Hod,  Splendor.


Tiph'e-reth,  Beauty.


'Hokhmah,
Wisdom.


'Hesed,  Love.


Ye'sod  Olam,  Foundation       Ne-tza'h,  Firmness,
of  the  World  (Universe).


Tzad-dek,  Righteousness.

This  s)rstem  of  the  Speculative  Qabbalah,  R.  Azriel  argues  to  prove,
was  contained  in  the  Old  Testament.
The  noticeable  features  of  this  early  catechism  of  the  Qabbalah,  are  :
I.  The  different  names  and  arrangement  of  some  of  the  Sephiroth.
IL  That  Sephirah  is  the  metaphysical   category  of  number.     III.  The
decade  of  the  Sephiroth  is  based  upon  the  idea  of  Space  with  its  three
dimensions.  Length,  Breadth  and  Depth.     IV.  The  metaphysical  idea  of
limit  he  uses   in    explanation  of  the    concretion  of  the  potencies  of
numbers.

*  This  may  refer  to  the  colors  of  Ze*ir  An-peen  of  the  Idroth.


XV.


THE  SEPHIROTH  AS   BETWEEN  THE  DEITY  AND  AMONG  THEBCSELVES.     THE

PRAYER  OF   ELIYAH.

VITAL  questions  early  arose  among  the  Qabbalists  as  to  the  Sephi-
roth,  among  these  were :  What  is  their  affinity  as  between  them-
selves?    What  is  their  affinity  with   the    Deity?     The   Zohar
strongly  implies  that  they  are  the  Names  of  the  Deity ;  for  the  Names  of
the  Deity  are  the  only  content  in  our  minds  of  our  ideas  as  to  the  Deity,
and  if  the  Deity  could  not  be  named,  the  Deity  could  not  be  known  to

r

or  grasped  by  man's  mind  for  the  entirety  of  the  Divine  Names  are  only
symbols  of  the  Deity  in  the  matter-world.  If  intelligent  it  must  be
assumed  that  the  Deity  has  intellect ;  if  wise,  Wisdom ;  if  active.  Energy
or  Power,  etc.  The  second  question  has  caused  more  dispute.  Some
considering  the  Deity  as  immutable  saw  in  the  Ten  Sephiroth  only  kailem
vessels,  organs  or  instruments ;  of  the  Divine  potentiality,  energy  and
action  ;  creatures  of  a  superior  nature  but  wholly  distinct  from  the  Holy
One.

R.  Azriel,  before  mentioned,  holds  they  were  not  created  but  emanated,
and  although  mediums,  when  separated,  were  not  of  value  and  were  con-
tained in  Ain  Soph.  In  his  third  Introduction  to  Canticles,  he  says :
"  And  He  made  them  (the  Sephiroth)  measures  (qualities)  and  organs,
subjecting  them  to  limits;"  in  his  Commentary,  p.  27^,  he  says;  "The
measures  were  completed  and  became  organs."  His  idea  was,  that  the
power  of  the  Sephiroth  came  by  emanation  and  existed,  by  it  and  imma-
nation,  through  the  potency  of  the  Ain  Soph  in  each  and  all ;  when  that
was  withdrawn  they  all  became  as  empty  shells  or  vases.  In  other  words
they  were  not  essential  attributes  and  did  not  destroy,  the  unity  of  Ain
Soph.

The  learned  MenaMiem  Reccanati  of  Italy,  is  also  a  representative  of
19


290

this  School.     Many  others  completely  identified  the  Ten  Sephiroth  with
the  Divine  Substance,  considered   them  as  mDVj»  essences;  and    held,
not  anything  comes  from  nothing.     The   Ain  Soph,  with  them,  is  the
total  assemblage  of  all  the  Sephiroth.     The  author  of  the  writing ;  The
Shield  of  David  is  a  representative  of  this  school.     Between  the  two  is  a
third,  those  who  without  considering  the  Sephiroth  as  only  instruments
or  tools,  do  not  wish  to  identify  them  with  the  essence  of  the  Deity.    The
Absolute  One,  they  say ;  is  immanent  in  all  the  Sephiroth  and  reveals
Itself  through  them,  but  does  not  entirely  dwell  in  them,  they  can  never
include  the  Infinite.     Each  Sephirah  has  a  well-known  name,  but  the
Supreme  Holy  One  has  not  any  definite  Name  which  expresses  all  the
Deity  really  is.     By  this  they  endeavor  to  escape  any  reflection  upon  any
asserted  forgetfulness  on  their  part,  of  the  immutability  of  God.     We
must  admit,  the  Sephiroth  have  not  any  positive  reality,  nor  have  they
any  existence  peculiar  to  themselves,  they  only  represent,  symbolically,,
the  limits  within  which  as  ideality  and  spiritual  potentiality  and  energy^
the  unknowable  to  man's  mind  Supreme  Essence,  chooses  to  manifest
Itself  to  man's  intellect;    they  are  only  the  different   gradations  and
degrees  of  obscurity,  in  which,  the  Divine  Light,  has  been  willing  to  veil
its  dazzling,  supreme  and  infinite  splendor ;  so  as  to  manifest  Itself  partly
to  Its  creatures  and  permit  man  to  meditate  upon  and  contemplate  his
Deity  in  his  thought.     We  have  therefore  to  recognize  in  each  Sephirah
two  aspects;  one,  the  exterior,  the  negative,  the  body  or  vessel  itself;
the  other,  the  interior,  the  positive,  which  is  assumed  to  be  in  perfect
union  or  affinity  with  the  interior  Unknown  Essence  or  Divine  Light.
The  "  broken  vases'*  which  have  let  the  Divine  Light  escape,  are  there-
fore spoken  of.     This  is  a  view  taken  by  both  the  Ancient  and  Modern
Qabbalists.*

The  writing  called,  the  Prayer  of  Eliyahf  throws  much  light  upon  the
subject  we  have  just  discussed,  it  says :  **  Lord  of  the  Universe,  Thou

•  Comp.  Yits-haq  Luriah's  Sepher  D^rushiniy  Introduction.  This  writing  may  be  found
in  the  Kabbala  Denudata  of  Baron  Christian  Knorr  von  Rosenroth ;  see  also  Moses  Cor-
dovero's  Pardes  Rimonimt  1.  ^.,  Garden  of  Pomegranites,  fol.  21-23.  Cordovero  is  the
most  logical  and  profound  philosopher  of  the  Modem  Qabbalistic  School.

f  In  the  Tiqqooneh  haz-Zohar,  Pref.  ii,  ad  init.


291

art  One  only,  but  not  according  to  number.*  *  Thou  art  the  most  Exalted
of  all  the  Exalted,  the  most  Hidden  of  all  the  Concealed :  not  any  con-
ception grasps  Thee ;  Thou  hast  brought  forth  ten  forms  {Jiq-qooneeni)
which  we  call  Sephiroth ;  in  order  to  guide  by  means  of  them,  as  well
the  unknown  and  invisible,  as  also,  the  visible  worlds ;  Thou  dost  Veil
Thyself  in  them,  and  whilst  Thou  dost  tarry  in  them,  their  harmony
remains  undisturbed ;  and  whoever  shall  represent  them  to  himself,  as
divided,  to  him  it  shall  be  accounted,  as  if  he  separated  Thy  unity,  f
These  ten  Sephiroth,  gradually  develope  themselves  in  degrees  (or  grada-
tions), one  is  long,  the  second,  short,  the  third,  between  them, J  but
Thou  art  He  who  guideth  them  whilst  Thou  Thyself,  be  it  from  Above
or  Below,  art  not  guided  by  any  one.§  For  these  Sephiroth  Thou  hast
prepared  garments, ||  which  serve  the  human  souls  as  points  of  transition.^
Thou  hast  also  enshrouded  them  (the  Sephiroth),  in  bodies  so-called  in

*This  refers  to  Ain  Soph:  the  idea  is  also  in  Gebirol's  Me*qdr  Hay-ytm.  Comp.  iv
Bk.    The  Supreme  Deity  has  not  any  number,  unity  of  substance  or  inherence.

f  The  Sephiroth  are  considered  only  as  spiritual  elements  of  the  worlds,  by  means  of
which,  the  Deity  came  in  connection  with  the  entire  universe.  The  Sephiroth  later
form  one  potential  connected  whole,  the  Makrokosm,  Adam  Illa-ah  or  Adam  Qadmon,
the  Heavenly  or  Ideal  Man;  through  the  potentiality  of  the  Deity  pervading  it.  It  is
the  same  wisdom,  which  we  admire  in  the  construction  of  a  worm,  gaze  at  in  the  revo-
lution of  the  planets,  and  find  in  the  highest  Seraph ;  so  it  must,  like  the  essential  parts
of  an  organism,  reciprocally  penetrate  and  complete  itself  in  the  Sephiroth  as  a  totality.
The  Qabbalah  teaches  that  each  Sephirah  contains,  the  principles  of  all  the  others,  only
in  each  separate  Sephirah,  a  certain  peculiar  principle  apparently  preponderates,  yoel^
Relig,  Philos,  Sohar^  p.  287.

{The  Commentators  explain  this,  as  the  principle  of  Mercy  i^Hesect)^  the  Long  Suffer-
ing Divinity  is  the  Long  in  Aspect ;  that  of  Fear  {Pa* had)  or  Strength  (G^boor-ah)  the
opposition  to  the  Divine  Long  Suffering,  is  the  Anger,  Judgment,  and  Punishment,  and
is  the  Short  in  Visage,  between  these  is  the  Harmony,  the  Temperate,  Judgment  tem-
pered with  Mercy.

§The  Deity  although  immanent  in  is  yet  independent  and  distinct  from,  all  the
Sephiroth.

II  The  Lower  worlds  considered  as  shells,  covers  or  crusts,  of  the  Upper.

\  The  soul  before  it  descends  into  the  matter  body,  passes  through  these  different
steps  of  development  in  the  Sephiroth.  Comp.  Joel.  Relig.  Philos,  Sohar^  p.  301.
Comp.  our  Appendix.     Supra.


292

comparison  with  the  vestments  surroimding  them  ;*  but  in  the  whole  to-
tality corresponding  to  the  members  of  the  human  shape,  etc.f

Kether^  the  Exalted  Crown,  is  the  Kingly  Crown,  of  which,  it  is  said  :
(Is.  xlvi,  lo)  '  Knowing  the  end  from  the  beginning.'  It  contains,  the
Mystery  of  the  Tephillin,  /.  ^.,  Phylacteries,  J  which  obtains  its  true  solu-
tion in  YHVH,  which  describes  the  manner  of  development  (the  A'tzeel-
oothic).     It  is  the  source  which  fructifies  the  (Sephirothic)  Tree§  and

*  As  in  the  human  organism,  the  Neshamah  the  thinking  mind,  which  has  its  seat  in
the  brain ;  is  sarrounded  by  the  Rua'h,  a  spirit  which  dwells  in  the  heart ;  and  this  by
the  Nephesh,  the  life  spirit  permeating  the  entire  body ;  and  finally  all  of  these  are  cov-
ered with  flesh,  skin,  bones,  and  then  clothing,  so  in  the  construction  of  the  universe,
the  Makrokosmos,  in  the  highest  Sephirothic  world,  the  A'tzeel-oothic,  is  surrounded  by
the  B*ree-atic  world,  that  of  Creation  or  Emanation,  the  Soul  and  expressed  Will  of  the
Deity ;  this  by  that  of  Ye'tzeer^h  or  world  of  Formation,  i,  e.,  the  Life  Force,  and  this
finally  by  the  world  of  Action,  A'seey-ah,  the  world  of  Corporiety,  which  is  the  shell  or
cover.    Joel,  work  cited,  p.  273,  note  3.     Zohar  i,  20a.

f  In  the  text  follows  the  connection  of  the  Seven  Lower  Sephiroth,  viz  :  the  Six,  called
the  Sephiroth  of  Construction  with  the  parts  of  the  human  body,  these  Sephiroth  being
really,  the  representatives  of  the  dimensions  of  all  matter,  the  content  of  the  positive  and
negative  poles  or  extensions  of  the  dimensions.  Length,  Breadth  and  Depth,  together  six ;
and  the  seventh  as  Malkhuth,  t.^.,  the  Kingdom,  the  rest  point  or  harmony  of  all,  which
makes  the  last  and  the  complement  of  the  decade  of  the  Sephiroth.  Kether  is  applied
to  the  highest  point  of  the  head  or  brain,  ^Hokhmak^  to  the  brain,  in  general ;  the  heart
as  its  Sephirah  has  Binah,  Understanding ;  the  back  and  breast,  Tiph*e-reth ;  the  arms
^Hesed  and  Pa' had,  etc.  Upon  these  references  the  greatest  part  of  the  Practical  Qab-
balah  is  founded,  and  asserts  magical  eflfects,  from  the  use  of  the  Names  of  the  Deity,
as  applied  to  the  different  Sephiroth.  Joel.  Ibid,,  p.  303,  note.  Franck  La  KabbaU,
p.  203.  Zohar,  iii,  296.  Idrah  Zootah.  This  idea  runs  through  esoteric  Hinduism.
The  works  of  Lenormant,  Sayce  and  other  Assyriologists,  show  that  great  similarities
existed  in  the  thought  of  the  inhabitants  of  ancient  Mesopotamia  with  the  ideas  in  the
Practical  Qabbalah,  and  with  the  magic,  angelology,  demonology,  etc.,  of  the  Israelites,
especially  of  the  Jews.  The  great  colleges  of  this  people  in  Babylonia  probably  served
to  perpetuate  this.

\  In  the  Kether,  z.  e,,  the  Primordial  substance,  is  contained  the  germ  of  all  that  which
has  been  or  will  be  in  the  created,  whether  it  be  spiritual  or  gross.  Comp.  Joel.  Ibid.,
pp.  217  and  notes.  The  knots,  etc.,  of  the  phylacteries  partake  of  Chaldean  Magic,  see
Lenormant's  Chaldean  Magic.

\  Joel,  ibid.,  pp.  225,  216;  Zohar,  ii,  42^.


293

forces  the  sap  through  all  of  its  branches  and  twigs.  For  Thou  art  the
Lord  of  the  Worlds.  Thou  art  the  Foundation  of  all  Foundations,  the
Cause  of  all  Causes,  Thou  waterest  the  Tree  from  that  Source  which,  like
the  soul  in  the  body,  spreads  life  everywhere.  Thou  Thyself  hast  neither
Image  nor  Form  in  all  that  is  within  or  without.  Thou  didst  emanate
Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Upper  and  the  Lower,  the  Celestial  and  the  Ter-
restrial hosts  (angels  and  spirits.)  Thou  didst  do  all  this,  that  the  Worlds
might  know  Thee,  etc.  But  no  one  can  conceive  Thee  in  Thy  Reality,
we  only  know,  that  without  Thee  there  is  not  any  unity,  neither  Above
or  Below,  and  we  know,  that  Thou  art  Lord  of  All.  But  beyond  this  we
do  not  know  anything  of  Thee.  Each  Sephirah  has  a  destined  name,
after  which  also  the  angels  are  named,  but  Thou  hast  not  any  certain
Name,  for  Thou  art  the  One  filling  all  Names  and  giving  to  them  all
value  as  Realities.  If  Thou  shouldst  draw  back,  they  all  would  remain
like  bodies  without  souls.  Thou  art  Wise,  but  not  with  positive  Wisdom ;
Thou  art  Intellectual  but  not  with  a  fixed  Intellect ;  Thy  Place  (Ma-^am  />.,
Abode)  is  not  circumscribed,  but  all  these  things  are  (said  of  Thee)  to
make  known  to  man,  Thy  Power  and  Thy  Omnipotence ;  to  manifest  to
him,  how  the  Universe  is  guided  by  means  of  Punishment  (Judgment)
and  Mercy  (Grace.)  If  therefore  (as  to  Thy  attributes)  a  Right  or  Left
or  Centre  is  mentioned,  this  is  only  done  to  show  Thy  government  of  the
entire  Universe  in  opposition  to  ordinary  human  actions,  but  not  that  to
Thee  could  be  imputed  in  Reality  any  attribute,  one  of  which  would  be
Rigor,  and  another,  Mercy !  Arise  Rabbi  (ben  Yo'hai)  see  that  these
doctrines  are  unveiled  through  you,  for  to  you  and  not  to  any  one  else
has  permission  been  given  to  reveal  deep  mysteries."

That  the  totality  of  the  Sephiroth  is  not  the  Deity,  is  set  forth  in
another  place  in  the  Tiqqooneh  haz-Zohar.  (Tiqqoon  21.)  "Woe  to
those  whose  hearts  are  so  obdurate  and  eyes  so  blinded,  as  to  consider
the  Deity  as  the  totality  of  Its  attributes.  Verily  !  Verily  !  they  are  like
the  insane  one,  who  describes  a  king  as  the  totality  of  his  insignia.  For
behold  a  king  wears  his  insignia,  only  so,  that  through  them  he  may  be
known ;  Verily,  so  also,  the  King  of  Kings,  the  Concealed  of  all  the
Hidden,  and  the  Cause  of  all  Causes,  disguises  Itself  in  a  splendid  gar-
ment (/.  e,y  the  entire  universe),  only  that  It  may  be  recognizable  thereby.


294

so  as  to  thereby,  impart  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  a  conception  of
Its  sacred  nature. ' '

We  may  therefore  formulate  as  to  the  Sephiroth  :

I.  They  were  not  created  by  but  only  emanated  from  Ain  Soph ;  for
by  a  creation,  there  would  be  a  diminution  of  the  creator,  but  by  emana-
tion there  is  not  any  such  diminution.

II.  They  form  together  with  the  Ain  Soph  an  absolute  unity,  and  only
represent  different  appearances  of  one  and  the  same  Being ;  just  as  the
different  rays  which  proceed  from  the  sun  appear  different  to  the  human
eye,  yet  are  only  different  manifestations  of  one  and  the  same  light.

III.  All  of  the  Sephiroth  alike,  partake  of  the  perfections  of  the  Ain
Soph,  and  the  latter  is  immanent  in  all  of  them ;  and  whilst  It,  through
them,  emanates  all  the  spiritually  and  materially  made ;  yet  the  Ain
Soph  is  transcendental  to  and  above  the  totality  of  all  of  the  Sephiroth  and
all  the  emanated.  On  the  one  side  they  partake  of  the  No-Thing-ness  of
the  Ain  Soph,  but  on  the  other  side,  they  emulate  and  keep  in  vitality,  all
the  existing.

IV.  As  emanations  from  the  Infinite  and  Perfect  Ain  Soph,  the  Sephi-
roth are  on  the  one  side  infinite  and  perfect  like  the  Emanator,  yet  on
the  other  side,  they  are  finite  and  through  Ain  Soph  alone,  the  constitu-
tors and  preservers  of  all  the  finite,  spiritual  and  material,  Things.  They
are  in  the  first  condition  when  the  Ain  Soph  imparts  a  portion  of  its  ful-
ness to  them ;  in  the  second,  when  they  impart  the  fulness  Ain  Soph  has
given  to  them  or  as  broken  vases,  when  it  is  withdrawn.  They  appear  to
have  something  like  the  double  nature  which  the  theologians  ascribe  to
Christ,  who  is  thought  of  as  having  an  Infinite  and  Perfect  Divine  Nature
on  the  one  side ;  and  yet  on  the  other  side,  at  the  same  time,  is  considered
as  having  a  finite  and  imperfect,  human  spiritual  and  fleshly  nature.

V.  Together  the  Ten  Sephiroth  in  their  manifestation,  constitute  and
merge  in  an  unit,  and  form  in  their  totality  the  Celestial  Adam,  the
Mediator;  who  is  the  content  of  the  Name  YHVH  or  Adonai,  /.  e,,  the
Lord.


Diagram  IV.    The  Ui


OK  THE  MEANING  OK  THE  WORDS  SEPHIRAH  AND  SEPHIROTH.  ORIGIN  OF
THE  IDEAS  AS  TO  THE  SEPHIROTH.  DECADAL  DIVISION  OF  THE  COM-
MANDMENTS  AND   THE   lord's   PRAVER,

THE  derivation  and  meaning  of  the  word  Sephiroth ;  (pronounced,
S'ph-e'rah,  sing.,  S'ph-e'roth,  plur.)  arc  disputed.  R.  Azriel  de-
rives it  from  13D  Sapheir,  to  enumerate,  to  number  ;*  whilst  the
later  Qabbalists  say  it  comes  from  tad  Saphtr  brightness;  (Ps,  xix,  i)
"The  heavens  declare  the  glory  {brightneis)  of  Elohim,"  Others  derive
ii  from  the  Greek  sphairai,  i.  e.,  spheres,  and  are  not  sure  whether  to
consider  the  Sephiroth  as  principles,  drckai,  i.  e.,  beginnings;  or  as  sub-
•  The  Stfher  Yt'iod  Ha-' Hethmelh,  p.  2$,  also  says  ;  "Sephtiro!  arrives  from  Saphiir
to  cnnmerale."


296

stances,  hypost&seis ;  or  as  potencies,  dun&metSy  /.  e.y  powers;  or  as  intel-
ligent worlds  {kbsmoi  noStikai)  ;  as  attributes ;  as  A^tzamoth  entities,  or
essences ;  or  as  KaiUm,  vessels  or  organs,  of  the  Deity.

The  Sepher  Avodoth  haq-Qadosh,  /.  e.y  Holy  Worship,  by  R.  Meier  ben
Gubbai,  fol.  16,  col.  2,  says:  "And  the  author  of  the  Book  of  Heaven,
Whose  memory  be  blessed  !  writes ;  From  Ain  Soph  are  derived  all  the
Ten  Sephiroth,  so  as  to  bring  abundant  influence  upon  the  Lower  World
and  that  portion  to  which  we  can  attain  by  our  understanding.  The  sin-
gular is  called  ni'flD  Sephirah  or  Narratiotiy  from  mflD  Siphoor  which
means,  //  is  permitted  to  Narrate  as  to  it.  For  as  to  Ain  Soph  it  is  not,
as  we  have  said,  permitted  to  speak  {narrate^.  Or  we  may  interpret  Sephi-
rah as  something  '  dazzling  pure '  according  to  Exodus  xxiv,  10;  'And
under  His  feet  like  a  work  of  the  whiteness  of  Sappir  (Sapphir).**  Or  we
may  say  Sephirah  means  the  end  of  a  thing  or  its  limit,  as  our  Wise^men,
whose  memory  be  blessed  !  say :  *  The  city  which  stands  on  the  border,
Sephar.*  To  which  (meaning)  our  father  Abraham,  peace  be  on  him  !
points  in  the  Sepher  Ye'tzeer-ah,  when  he  says:  'Sephir,  Sephar  and

Siphur.'"  t
The  Sepher  Ye'tzeer-ah  considers  a  Sephirah  is  a  number,  /.  e,y  one  of

the  ten  numbers  or  figures  (Sephiroth)  instrumental  in  the  creation  of  the
world.  These  must  not  however  be  considered  as  identical  with  the  Deity.
It  treats  the  ten  numbers,  as  does  the  Zohar,  as  a  complete  totality,  as  to-
gether constituting  a  complete  system  designating  the  sum  of  all,  a  totality
in  their  individual  quantitative  distinction  forming,  in  comparison  with  the
Supreme,  the  Mikrokosm  or  Adam  Qadmon,the  Primordial  Man,  the  shadow
or  manifestation,  of  the  invisible  Makrokosm,  Ain  Soph,  who  is  above  all
manifestation  and  all  number  to  human  thought ;  the  Adam  Qadmon  in
comparison  with  the  terrestrial  man  or  Adam,  being  the  Makrokosm.  The
number  ten,  from  one  downwards,  together  constitutes  the  whole  numerical

*  The  word  Sapphir  does  not  mean  according  to  the  Hebrew  Wise-men,  blue  ;  but
the  color  of  the  pearly  which  is  white  and  yet  in  which  plays  all  the  colors.  It  is  iri-
descent.  Jellinek,  BeitrSge,  before  cited,  ii,  pp.  25-26.  It  is  like  a  fine  opal  or  a
crystal  in  the  sun-light,  in  which  all  colors  blend.

f  Comp.  BuxtorfTs  Works  on  the  term  Sephirah,  and  the  *  Rabbinical  Abbreviations  *
under  D"^  f.  ^.,  Ten  Sephiroth.  D"^  equal  T1D  Sod,  i.  e..  Secret  =  70.  See  also  John
Reuchlin's  and  Baron  von  Rosenroth's  Qabbalistic  Writings.


297

system  or  the  entities,  from  which  a]l  other  numbers  are  derived  ad  inJU
niium.  This  according  to  the  Ye'tzeer-ah  is  a  whole  and  as  a  whole  is  a
mathematical  instrument,  as  it  were,  in  the  hands  of  the  Deity  in  Its
great  work  of  the  Creation.  The  Ye'tzeer-ah  does  not  speak  of  one  or  a
first  Sephirah^  etc.,  but  always  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth,  thus  not  admitting
of  any  equivocation  as  to  its  proper  meaning,  application  and  intention.
In  the  Old  Testament  the  only  place  where  it  occurs  is  Psalm  Ixxi,  15  ;
and  there  it  is  in  the  plural  Sephoroth :  the  biblical  Hebrew  for  the  singu-
lar, would  be  Sephorahy  i.  e.,  number  as  the  unit  or  one  of  number.  The
author  of  the  Ye'tzeer-ah  uses  the  post-biblical  Hebrew  Sephiroth,  derived
from  Sephirahy  numbering,  numeration ;  which  does  not  occur  in  this
sense  anywhere  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  is  used  in  this  meaning  in  the
Talmudic  literature.  Number^  as  a  designation  of  a  quantity  which  is
more  than  one,  in  the  Hebrew  is  mispar,  and  in  the  Mishnah  and  Ge-
mara,  minyan.  In  the  Talmud  treatise  Kil-ayimy  beginning,  and  in  sev-
eral other  places,  we  find  Sephir  iflo  also  written  TflD,  as  the  singular  ot
"  number,"  but  ni'flD  Sephirah  we  do  not  find.  This  explains  the  nn'flO
Sephirothy  of  the  book  Ye*tzeer-ah,  but  has  not  any  bearing  on  the  Qab-
balistic  Divine  Sephirothy  which  the  Qabbalist  R.  Joseph  Chiquitilla  (or,
Gikatilla)  b.  Abraham  in  the  preface  to  his  book  Sha-aWeh  orahy  /.  e.y
Gates  of  Light,  interprets  as  being  called  so ;  "On  account  of  the  purity
and  brightness  of  the  Sapphire  I'flD,  from  which  this  word  is  derived."
In  his  preface  to  the  Ta-amey  ham-Mitz^ vothy  i,  e,y  Meaning  of  the  Com-
mandments, R.  Mena'hem  Reccanati,  speaks  of  the  Sephiroth  as;  **  The
attributes  of  the  Holy  One,  being  His  own,  as  the  flame  is  part  of  a  glow-
ing coal,  and  emanating  from  Him  and  thus  constituting  the  medium,
whereby  he  created  the  world  (universe)."  R.  Isaac  Euchel,  (1756-1804
A.  D.)  rejects  the  Hebrew  origin  of  the  word  Sephirah,  and  gives  in  its
place  the  Greek  a<paipai  Sphairaiy  i,  e,y  sphere  ;  tjiis  seems  to  us  to  be  the
most  correct,  for  the  system  of  the  Sephiroth  is  delineated  in  the  most
ancient  Qabbalistic  literature  like  the  delineation  of  the  Ptolemaic  plane-
tary system,  that  is  in  ten  circles  or  orbits  each  one  surrounding  the
other,*  of  which  the  first  or  outer,  as  the  next  to  the  Ain  Soph  the  End-
less to  man's  mind  No-Thing,  represents  the  ma^ hashab-ah,  i,  e,y  Idea  or

*  See  ante,  pp.  100,  210,  and  the  engravings  to  this  chapter.


296

iiaxices,  hyposl&seis ;  01  as  potencies,  duiUimtis,  t.  e.,  powere;  orwe— •
ligent  worids  {iismoi  noitikoi);  as  attributes;  a&  A'tzamoAtsal^  -'^
essences;  or  as  KaiUm,  vessels  or  organs,  of  the  Deity.

The  Sepher  Avodoth  haq-Qadosh,  i.  e..  Holy  Worship,  by  R.  Mei.
Gubbai,  fol.  16,  col.  2,  says :  "  And  the  author  of  the  Book  of  Hi
Whose  memory  be  blessed !  writes ;  From  Aln  Soph  are  di;rived  a
Ten  Sephiroth,  so  as  to  bring  abundant  influence  upon  the  Lower  ^
and  that  portion  to  which  we  can  attain  by  our  understanding.    Th
gular   is  called  m"DD  Sephirah  or  Narration,  from  TWO  Siphoor*
means,  it  is  permitted  to  Narrate  as  to  it.     For  as  to  Ain  Soph  it  i,
as  we  have  said,  permitted  to  speak  (narrate).  Or  we  may  interpret  &
rah  as  something 'dazzling  pure' according  to  Exodus  ^.\iv,   to;  '
under  His  feet  like  a  work  of  the  whiteness  oi  Sappir  (Sapphir).'*    O
may  say  Sephirah  means  the  end  of  a  thing  or  its  limit,  a-^  our  Wise-n
whose  memory  be  blessed  !  say :  '  The  city  which  stands  on  the  bon
Sephar.'     To  which  (meaning)  our  father  Abraham,  peace  be  on  hi
points  in  the  Sepher  Yc'tzeer^h,  when  he  says:  'Sephir,  Sephar  j
Siphur.'"  t

The  Sepher  Ye'tzeer-ah  considers  a  Sephirah  is  a  number,  1.  e.,  one
the  ten  numbers  or  figures  (Sephiroth)  instrumental  in  the  creation  oft
world.  These  must  not  however  be  considered  as  identical  witli  the  Deit
It  treats  the  ten  numbers,  as  does  the  Zohar,  as  a  complete  lolality,  as  i
gether  constituting  a  complete  system  designating  the  sum  of  all,  a  totaUl
in  their  individual  quantitative  distinction  forming,  in  comparison  with  lit
Supreme,  theMikrokosm  or  Adam  Qadmon,  the  Primordial  M.m,  theshadrfT
or  manifestation,  of  the  invisible  Makrokosm,  Ain  Soph,  who  is  abovt  A
manifestation  and  all  number  to  human  thought ;  the  Adam  Qadmon  i0
comparison  with  the  terrestrial  man  or  Adam,  being  the  Makrokosm.    Tha
number  ten,  from  one  downwards,  together  constitutes  the  wliole  numerical

"  The  word  Sapphir  does  not  mean  according  lo  (he  Hebrew  Wise-tiien,  blae  j  btf
the  color  of  (he  pearl,  whicli  U  white  and  ^el  in  which  plays  all  the  colurs,     II  it  iif
descent.    Jelljnek,  BeilrSge,  before  cited,  ii,  pp.  25-36.     It  is  like  a  fine  op«l  or
crystal  in  the  sDn-!ight,  in  which  all  coloia  blend.

f  Comp.  BuitorfTs  Works  on  the  leini  Sephirah,  and  the  '  Rabbinical  AbbreTiitim
under  C""  1. 1.,  Ten  Sephiroth.  0"^  equal  US  Sod,  i.  e..  Secret  =  70.  See  rIso  Jo
ReucUin's  and  Baion  von  Rosenrolh's  Qabbalistic  Writings.


298

I,  the  Ego,  and  the  last,  /.^.,  the  inmost  circle,  encloses  Malkhuth,  King-
dom. The  Hebraization  of  a^aXpat  in  the  word  nn^flO  Sphairoth  or  as  we
read  it,  Sephiroth,  designating  the  plural ;  far  from  being  an  isolated  ex-
ample of  philological  license,  in  the  Hebrew,  is  legalized  by  common
usage  among  the  ancient  Rabbins,  and  cannot  be  considered  as  objection-
able from  that  point  of  view.*

The  ^^ Ehser  Sephiroth  b'iee-mah**  of  the  Sepher  Ye'tzeer-ah  properly
means:  "  the  ten  numbers  (i  to  10)  without  anything,"  physical,  palpa-
ble or  visible,  in  their  nature ;  "  number**  as  an  entity  and  abstract  idea,
being  formless  and  therefore  absolutely  endless,  as  far  as  man  knows,  as
Space  J  which,  viewed  by  mortal  eye,  is  endless  and  as  the  real  *'  without
any-thing,"  the  real  "no-thing."  Thus  Job  says:  (xxvi,  7,)  "He
hangeth  (suspendeth)  the  earth  upon  b' leemah'' :  that  is,  upon  the  abso-
lute form,  which  is  equal  to  endlessness,  f  In  the  Qabbalah  for  the  Eh-ser
Sephiros  b*iee-mah,  as  applying  to  the  "ten  Sephiroth"  (Spheres  or
Orbits,  Brilliancies,  Attributes)  of  the  Infinite,  we  find  Ain  Soph,  /.  ^.,
the  Endless,  substituted  for -57^^-wtf A  /  but  both  designations  represent
the  Endless,  Eternal,  and  therefore  the  Ineffable,  as  the  Ayin  or  No-Thing.
Job  says  (xxvi,  7)  the  Supreme  Holy  One  "suspendeth  the  earth  upon
b^lee-mahf  /.  e.,  nothing  or  nothingness"  equal  to,  No-Thing  and  No-
Thingness.  Ain  Soph  is  the  Eternal  but  is  also  according  to  the  Qabbalah,
Ayin  or  No-Thing,  therefore  the  Eternal  No-Thing.  For  over  seven  centu-
ries disputes  have  been  maintained  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  word,  and
the  antiquity  and  origin  of  the  Qabbalistic  ideas  as  to  the  Sephiroth.

We  are  of  the  opinion  that  Sephirah  and  Sephiroth  refer  to  the  maz-zoi,
i.  ^.,  influences,  effluxes  or  the  energies,  emanating  from  and  through  the
Spirits  and  Intelligences  of  the  orbits  or  courses  of  the  planets  through
space,  and  to  those  effluxes  proceeding  from  the  highest  heavens  surround-
ing our  earth,  as  they  were  understood  to  exist  by  the  Akkadians,  Chal-
deans, Ancient  Hebrews,  etc.,  and  most  of  the  Medieval  astronomers  be-
fore Copernicus.  J    R.  Yekuthiel,  Hay  Gaon's  brother-in-law,  as  to  whom

*  See  many  such  instances  given  by  M.  Schawb  in  a  list  attached  to  his  French  edi-
tion of  the  Talmud  Ye'rushalmi  now  passing  through  the  Paris  press.

f  Comp.  notes  on  Job  xxvi,  in  Cahen's  French  translation  from  the  original  Hebrew.

%  See  Appendix  as  to  the  Chaldean  Universe,  and  engravings  to  this  chapter.


299

Ibn  Gebirol  wrote  an  elegy,  has  left  some  traces  of  his  Qabbalistic
knowledge  which  gives  us  some  of  the  ideas  of  the  Qabbalists  of  the  time
of  Ibn  Gebirol.  He  says :  "  The  seven  nuptials  of  the  righteous  are
seven  pearls,  called  by  the  mystics,  Sephiroth,  in  the  meaning  of  Sapphir,
/.  ^.,  pearl,  'Then  went  up  Moses  and  Aaron,  Nadab  and  Abihu,  and
Seventy  elders  of  Israel ;  and  they  saw  the  Elohim  of  Israel.  And  there
was  under  His  feet,  as  it  were,  a  paved  work  of  sapphir  stone,  and  as  it
were  the  body  of  the  heaven  in  its  clearness.'  (Exod.  xxiv,  9-10.)  It
is  also  found  in  the  version  of  Rabbin  Qesheeshi,  in  the  punctuation  of
the  book  Ye'tzeer-ah,  that  the  word  Sephirah,  has  not  anything  in  com-
mon with  'Sapheir,'  /.  e,y  to  number,  and  if  thou  thinkest  there  are  ten
Sephiroth  out  of  nothing,  there  would  not  be  any  end  of  their  number.
As  to  the  three  (Upper),  go  back,  be  dumb,  search  not,  for  thy  thoughts
cannot  reach  them.  And  let  the  opening  of  thy  mouth  not  be  led  astray
by  any  Sephirah,  for  each  Sephirah  is  a  new  world  in  itself  and  closely
connected  with  the  other  one  like  the  flame  of  a  fiery  coal.  Seven
pearls,  with  the  seven  mysteries  of  prophecies  in  the  mirrors  of  the  be-
holders, are  in  them ;  full  of  brightness  and  receiving  splendor  from  the
illuminating  mirror  (/.  ^.,  the  Godhead).  Six  Sephiroth  are  full  of  light,
they  are  all  turned  towards  each  other,  and  occupy  the  same  throne,  ex-
cept the  three  Supreme  Ones.  One  Sephirah  (Kether)  is  the  Holy  Inner
Palace  of  YHVH.  And  the  three  together  with  the  six  make  nine  and
constitute  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  with  the  one  in  the  middle  (Kether)
constitute  the  entire  Ten."*  Hay  Gaon  also  says,  the  word  Sephiroth
does  not  come  from  number,  but  is  "analogous  to  the  mystery  of  the
Ten  Worlds,  created  by  them."  f

Some  Qabbalists  therefore  prefer  to  read :  the  Doctrine  of  the  Sapphire
or,  of  the  Precious  Gem ;  or  from  Exod.  xxiv,  10 ;  the  Doctrine  of
Purity  or  Splendor.  The  derivation  of  the  name  from  "  Spheres,"  is  the
opinion  of  Yitz-haq  Luriah,  according  to  Dr.  Henry  More  in  his  letter  on
the  Sepher  D'rusheem,  by  Luriah.  Dr.  More  says,  "  He  almost  seems  to
replace  for  the  mysteries  of  the  ancient  Kabbala  the  Aristotelic  worlds
(circles  or  spheres)  with  their  Intelligences."

♦Jcllinek's  Beitrdge  zur  Geschichte  der  Kabbala,     Part  ii,  p.  24.
t  Jbid.y  p.  12  et  seq.


300

Thomas  Maurice''^  refers  to  the  name  Sephiroth  and  the  offices  of  the
Sephiroth  and  says ;  that  they  are  called  Splendors  by  the  Qabbalists,
because  they  issue  from  Ain  Soph  as  the  blinding  brilliancy  of  light  issues
from  the  sun.     In  this  connection  we  will  say,  that  the  Or  Ain  Soph  or
Infinite  Light,  is  the  idealized  blood  of  the  universe,  in  which  there  is  the
Nephesh,  the  Vital  Soul  or  Life,  of  the  entire  universe.     (Gen.  ix,  4;
Levit.  xvii,  11,  13,  14;  Deut.  xii,  23-25.)     This  Light  is  considered  as
the  Divine  Life  or  Energy  which  at  the  creation  and  since,  has  always
permeated  by  emanation,  the  entirety  of  Space ;  and  which  was  thought
of  as  an  immeasurable  immovable  Ocean  without  limits.   Space  is  termed
by  the  Qabbalah  Maqom,  i.  ^.,  the  Place,  and  is  a  symbol  of  the  Supreme
Deity.     It  was  in  use  in  Philo's  tirae.f     It  was  thought  of  as  the  result
of  a  contraction  or  centripetal  movement.    At  that  instant  the  Universal
Prototypic  Life  Adam  did  not  yet  exist.     To  symbolize  the  beginning  of
the  existence  of  this  Life  Adam  or  energizing  Light,  a  germ  is  created,  a
vitalized  mathematical  point,  the  centre  of  which  the  human  mind  cannot
grasp,  a  resemblance  to  the  germ  life  which  is  the  beginning  of  all  human
existence  and  of  all  vitality  upon  our  earth.     The  womb  of  all  vitality,
life  and  existence  in  the  Universal  or  the  Special,  is  Space.     By  a  cen-
trifugal movement,   the  opposition    to  the  centripetal,  the    energizing
Light,  the  Divine  Life,  was  projected  into  and  filled  the  Void,  the  Space ;
under  new  conditions  and  under  the  form  of  an  immense  stream,  analo-
gou#to  "  the  waters  of  life  which  gush  forth  from  the  Throne  of  the
Eternal.''!    This  great  source  or  fountain  of  the  waters  of  life,  becomes
the  beginning  of  a  number  of  vases,  the  Kailem^  i,  ^.,  Vessels,  which  are
the  Ten  Sephiroth  or  Splendors, §  through  which,  it  was  asserted,  all  the
energies,  forms  and  exterior  diversities,   obtain  manifestation ;  in  their
totality  and    perfection    constituting  the   Adam    lUa-ah,    the   Celestial
or  Upper  Adam.

•Indian  Antiquities,  etc.  London,  1800.     Vol.  iv,  p.  180  sq.

t  See  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  by  Charles  Taylor.  London,  1877,  pp.  53  and
59  and  notes.

JJer.  ii,  13;  xvii,  13;  Ezek.  xlvii,  1,5,9;  Ps.  xxxvi,  8,  9.  See  Cahen's  French
Edit,  note  to  this  Psalm,  verse  10.     Rev.  vii,  17;  xxii,  I.

J  These  among  the  Israelites,  were  later  thought  of  as  attached  by  Twenty-two  canals,
the  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  making  together  the  32  Paths.


30I

m

We  must  note  in  this  connection  the  three  worlds  existing  in  Space.
I.  The  terrestrial  world  in  which  the  material  man  has  his  power  of  ac-
tion. II.  The  known  or  unknown  astronomical  world,  beyond  our  field
of  action  yet  within  our  power  of  thought  and  observation.  III.  The  un-
defined world  in  which  we  have  power  to  penetrate  only  in^ur  imagina-
tion, in  idea,  and  which  is  beyond  our  direct  action  and  our  power  of
observation.  The  last  may  be  ranked  as  the  Neshamah,  the  second  as  the
Rua'h,  and  the  first  as  the  Nephesh,  of  the  Great  Ideal  Man,  of  all  coming
within  the  intellectual  conception  of  the  human  spirit.  The  three  were
held  by  the  Hebrew  mystics  as  bound  together.  The  Ladder  of  Jacob  is
an  emblem  of  this  i^^^-

Especially  was  this  idea  in  the  Primordial  Adam,  the  content  of  the  in-
visible and  visible  universe,  the  representative  of  the  spiritual  and  mate-
rial content  of  all  the  brotherhood  of  spiritual  humanity ;  the  Universal,
or  Upper  Wisdom  or  Word  which  created'  all  Things,  the  Logos  of  St.
John  which  created  all  Things  and  without  whom  was  not  any  Thing
made  that  was  made.  (John  i,  1-3.)  The  same  idea  is  given  by  this
Apostle,  in  the  words  of  Jesus,  in  the  parable  of  the  vine.  (Ibid,  xv,  i  sq.)

Philo  Judseus  holds  to  the  doctrine  of  Ayin,  and  that  the  Infinite  Per-
fect Supreme  Deity  is  as  No-Thing,  and  that  on  the  opposite  side,  appa-
rently far  removed,  is  the  visible  universe  which  is  imperfect  and  finite.
Yet  that  the  first  named  fills  and  comprises  every-Thing.  He  therefore,  like
the  Qabbalists,  sets  forth  the  intervention  of  intermediate  causes  or  ener-
gies which  are  assumed  to  bridge  the  hiatus.  Philosophy  had,  before  his
time,  endeavored  to  do  the  same  and  there  existed  in  his  period,  the  Pla-
tonic theory  of  Ideas ;  the  Stoic,  of  Active  Causes ;  the  Jewish,  of  Angels ;
and  the  general  Greek,  of  Daimons.  Philo  in  his  formulations  used  ele-
ments from  all  of  these.  He  teaches,  as  does  the  Qabbalah,  that  before
the  creation  of  the  world  of  the  senses  the  Deity  created  perfect  spiritual
types,  or  ideas,  of  all  Things ;  these  were  also  thought  of  as  active  causes
which  brought  disorganized  matter  into  order.  Through  these  spiritual
powers  the  Deity  was  asserted  to  act  in  the  universe.  They  were  his  min-
isters, the  iogoi;  by  Moses  termed  angels,  by  the  Greeks,  daimons;  but  these
energies  of  Philo,  like  the  idea  as  to  the  Sephiroth,  exist  only  in  the  Divine
Thought,  are  the  infinite  powers  or  potentialities  of  the  Infinite  God  and


302

are  an  inseparable  part  of  the  Divine  Existence.  Yet  we  cannot  deny
that  Philo  also  gave  a  personality  to  the  Xdj'ot  Ibgoiox  ffuvdfistq  dunameis ;
he  conceived  them,  both  as  independent  hypostases  and  also  at  the  same
time,  as  immanent  determinations  of  the  Divine  Existence.  They  are
therefore  considered  by  him  on  the  one  side  as  identical  with  the  Supreme,
so  as  to  make  the  efflux  from  the  Infinite  to  the  finite,  and  yet  on  the
other  side  as  different  from  the  Supreme ;  so  that  the  Deity,  notwithstand-
ing this  participation,  might  remain  transcendental  to  the  world.  Philo
does  not  absolutely  limit  the  number  of  these  powers  although  he  places
the  idea  of  the  decade  in  a  very  high  position.  In  his  treatise,  Concern-
ing the  Ten  Commandments,  he  speaks  of;  "  the  perfect  number  of  the
decade,  which  contains  every  variety  of  number,  both  those  which  are
even  and  those  which  are  odd,  and  those  which  are  even-odd,  etc. ' '  *  He
also  appears  to  have  an  idea  of  the  Sephiroth.f

Philo  appears  to  especially  distinguish  two  powers.  Goodness  and
Might,  which  go  out  of  and  merge  in,  the  Divine  Logos ;  which  is  the
root  from  which  all  proceed.  (Philo.,  Bohn's  Ed.  iii,  95.)  The
Logos  is  with  Philo,  the  potentiality  of  the  Supreme  and  Its  vice-gerent,
angel  or  arch-angel,  which  delivers  the  Deity's  Will,  the  instrument  by
which  the  Supreme  made  the  world  and  it  is  the  Creative  Word.  The
Logos  is  not  only  mediator  from  the  Deity  to  the  universe,  but  it  is  also
from  the  world  to  the  Deity.  It  is  the  High  Priest  who  makes  interces-
sion for  the  world  to  God,  but  although  seemingly  personal,  with  Philo
the  Logos  is  also  impersonal  and  neither  one  nor  the  other  exclusively.
The  subject  of  the  doctrines  of  Philo  is  extensive  and  important,  both  to
the  Qabbalah  and  Greek  and  Latin  Christianity,  but  we  have  not  space
to  go  into  it  in  this  writing  and  we  refer  the  student  to  the  admirable
work,  A  History  of  the  Jewish  people  in  the  Time  of  Jesus  Christ,  by  Dr.
Emil  Schiirer,  English  Ed.,  before  cited,  2nd  Division,  Vol.  iii,  p.  320
sq,y  and  the  authorities  therein  cited ;  also  to  Prof.  Adolphe  Franck's  La
KabbaUy  p.  293  sq,<,  for  further  investigations.

Solomon  says :  "  Wisdom  hath  builded  her  house.

She  hath  hewn  out  her  seven  pillars.''^    (Prov.  ix,  i.)

*Coinp.  Bohn's  Ed.  iii,  p.  140  sq.^  pp.  92,  97,  i,  p.  12.

^Ibid,  ii,  p.  136  iq,y  p.  159,  p.  320  j^.,  iii,  95  sq.^  77-8,  185  sq,^  i,  p.  180  j^.,  p.  426,
ii,  p.  213  sq.


303

St.  John  sees,  *'sevtn  golden  candlesticks,  and  in  the  midst  one  like  unto
a  son  of  man  *  *  *  his  head  and  his  hairs  white  like  wool,  and  as
white  as  snow.  *  *  *  In  his  right  hand  seven  stars,"  which  are  the
angels  of  the  seven  churches  and  the  candlesticks  are  seven  churches.
(Apoc.  i,  12  sq.)  There  are  also  ^^  seven  lamps  of  fire  burning  before
the  Throne"  of  the  Supreme  "which  are  the  seven  Spirits  (powers  or
ministers)  of  God."  Ibid,  iv,  S>  ^O  Most  likely,  symbols  of  the  seven
elementary  and  divine  energies  which  control  the  movement  in  all
Things,  the  seven  Lower  Sephiroth,  the  seven  cords  of  the  lyre  of  the  uni-
verse and  the  seven  energies  of  the  planets.

Before  the  Throne  is  the  Great  Crystal  Sea,  and  in  the  Throne,  but  un-
der the  Deity,  the  four  animals ;  the  first  like  a  Lion,  the  second  like  a
Calf  (Bull  ?),  the  third  like  a  Man,  the  fourth  like  a  flying  Eagle,  similar
to  the  account  in  Ezekiel,  {Ibid,  iv,  S""^>)  ^^^  ^^^  saints  sing  worthy  is
the  Lamb  to  receive  Power,  Riches,  Wisdom,  Might,  Honor,  Glory,
Blessing,  the  seven  virtues.  {Ibid,  v,  12  sq,)  The  one  on  the  Throne
has  a  book  sealed  with  seven  seals,  which  are  successively  broken  by  the
Lamb,  and  when  the  seventh  seal  was  broken,  it  was  followed  by  seven
trumpet  sounds  made  by  seven  angels,  and  the  seventh  angets  sounding,
produced  the  Eternal  Kingdom  (Malkhuth)  of  "  our  Lord  and  his  Christ "
upon  the  earth.  Apoc.  xi,  15,  which  may  be  termed  the  most  wonderfiil
and  sacred  text  in  the  New  Testament.

The  idea  of  the  Sephiroth  of  the  Qabbalah,  may  also  be  found  in  the
word,  Be'resheeth,  of  Gen.  i,  which  instead  of  "  beginning  ,"  can  be
read  Be-raisheeth,  the  (Upper)  Wisdom,  the  Word  or  Will.  (See  ante,
p.  205^17.)  In  the  Ten  "  Saids  "  of  the  same  chapter.  Seven  of  which
are  applied  to  the  Lower  creation,  and  three  to  the  Spiritual  man,  the
Heavenly  Prototypic  or  first  Adam.  The  same  idea  as  to  the  Word,
Will,  or  Wisdom,  is  in  Proverbs  (viii).  Psalms  (xxxiii,  6),  St.  John  i,
1-15  ;  in  the  Targums  of  Onkelos  and  Jonathan  ben  Uzziel  on  the  Pen-
tateuch, and  in  the  Targum  Ye'rushalmi.*

It  is  to  be  noted  that  Abraham  did  not  go  below  10  when  interceding
for  the  righteous  in  Sodom.     (Gen.   xviii,   32-33.)     We  have  already

*  Compare  notes  and  glossary  to  edition  of  the  Targum,  by  J.  W.  Etheridge.  London,
1865.     See  anie^  p.  205  sq.


304

referred  {ante^  p.  167  and  notes)  to  the  10  angelic  divisions  in  the  Tes-
tament of  Adam,  which  is  not  later  probably  much  earlier,  than  300
A.  D.,  and  to  the  10  angelic  divisions  in  the  writings  of  Dionysius,  the
Areopagite;  not  later  likely  earlier  than  532  A.  D.  To  the  10  mys-
tical Names  in  Jerome  {circa  331-420).*

The  Talmud  saysrf  "With  the  utterance  of  ten  words  was  the  world
created;"  also  translated:  "By  ten  sayings  the  world  was  created. "J
This  refers  to  the  statement  in  Genesis  that  the  acts  of  creation  are  in-
troduced by  ;  "and  Elohim  (God)  said,"  ten  times.  (Comp.  Ps.  xxxiii,
6,  9.)  In  the  Yalkut,  which  begins  with,  the  above  quotation  from  the
Avoth,  nine  occurrences,  are  reckoned,  the  tenth,  it  says ;  is  implied  in
Be-resheeth,  because  it,  says;  "By  the  ^f^r// (Wisdom)  of  YHVH,  were
the  heavens  made."  Ibid,  In  the  Pirkey  Rabba  Eliezer  iii,  the  ten  va-
yomer's,  i.e.,  "He  said ;"  are  reckoned  as  follows :  Gen.  i,  3,  6,  9, 11,14,20,
24,  29 ;  ii,  18.  In  the  Be'resheeth  Rabbah,  the  first  "  saying,"  is  implied
in  the  word  Be-resheeth  of  Genesis  i,  i ;  the  second,  in  Gen.  i,  2 ;  then  fol-
low the  eight  above  specified  up  to  Gen.  i,  26,  ending  with  the  creation  of
man.  In  the  Talmud  Babli,  X.x^z.\Ssjt'^ Hd! geegah^  12a,  it  is  said :  "  Rabbi
Zutrah,  son  of  Tobiyah,  said  in  the  name  of  Rab  (Rabbi  Areka)  :  The
universe  was  created  by  means  of  ten  words  (jybarim)^  viz  :  'Hokhmah
(Wisdom),  Binah  (Understanding),  Daath  (Knowledge),  Koah  (Power  or
Might),  G'arah  (Rebuke,  Admonition  or  authority),  Ge'boor-ah
(Strength),  Tzad-dek  (Justice),  Mishpat  (Righteousness),  'Hesed  (Grace
or  Charity,  Love  or  Compassion),  and  Ra'h-mim  (Mercy).  By  Wisdom
and  Understanding,  as  it  says:  (Prov.  iii,  19),  "YHVH  by  Wisdom
founded  the  Earth;  by  Understanding  He  (Hu)  established  the  heavens."
By  Daath,  as  it  says:  {Ibid,  20),  "By  His  Knowledge  the  Depths  do
burst  forth,  and  the  Skies  drop  down  the  dew."  By  Koa'h  and  Ge'boor-
ah,  as  it  says:  (Ps.  Ixv,  7),  "Who  setteth  firmly  the  mountains  by  His

♦  See  also  D.  H.  Joel,  Die  Religions-philosophie  des  Sohar,  p.  70.  M.  H.  Landauer.
Liieraturblatt  des  Orients,  1845.  No  22  ;  holds  that  the  Zohar  speaks  less  of  the  Sephi-
roth  than  other  Qabbalistic  writings  of  the  time.  The  ten  mystical  Names  speak  for
the  antiquity  of  the  Qabbalah.

t  PHrkey  Avoth,  c.  5.  Mish.  i.     Hershon's  Talmudic  Miscel.    London,  1880,  p.  144.

t  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  etc.,  by  Charles  Taylor.     Cambridge,  1877,  p.  92  sq.


3°5     .

Power,  who  is  girded  by  Might."  By  Ge'oroh,  as  it  says :  (Jobxxvi,  ii),
"  The  pillars  of  heaven  tremble,  and  are  astonished  at  his  Reproof."
By  Tzad-dek  and  Mishpat,  as  it  says:  (Ps.  Ixxix,  15),  ''Righteousness
and  Justice  are  the  prop  of  Thy  throne,  Kindness  and  Truth,  precede
Thy  presence."  By  'Hesed  and  Ra*h-mim,  as  it  says:  (Jbid,  xxv,  6),
"  Remember,  O  YHVH  !  thy  tender  Mercies;  and  thy  Kindnesses;  for
they  are  from  (^Olam)  everlasting."*  Hay  Gaon  (997-1037  A.  D.)  knew
of  the  Sephirothic  symbolism  of  the  Light  and  mention  is  made  by  him
of 'Hokhmah,  Wisdom;  Ge'boor-ah,  Strength;  Ye'sod,  Foimdation;
Ma'h-shab-ah,  Thought,  etc.f  Elsewhere  it  is  said :  He  created  by  the
letter  n  (Heh)  the  symbol  of  Binah,  the  Holy  Spirit,  />.,  "  By  the  breath
of  His  mouth."  (Ps.  xxxiii,  6.)  Sometimes  n^iwi  '3  Be-Raisheeth,  /.  ^.,
By  Wisdom,  is  read;  instead  of  Be'resheeth,  Beginning  (Gen.  i,  i).J

The  Babylonian  Talmud,  treatise  Be'ra-khoth,  fol.  7^,  has  the  follow-
ing :  "  Rabbi  Yo-'ha-nan  said  in  the  name  of  Rabbi  Yo-seh :  How  can  it
be  demonstrated  that  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  {Haq-qadosh  bfi-mkh
hu)y  prays  ?  From  the  passage  in  Isaiah  Ivi,  7 :  *  Even  these  will  I
bring  to  My  holy  moimtain,  and  make  them  joyful  in  the  house  of  My
prayer^  (^be'  baith  Je'pheel-lathee,  properly:  My  house  of  prayer ^  but  used

*  R.  Samuel  Edels  in  his  Kheddusha  Haggadoth,  at  this  passage,  identifies  these  with
the  Ten  Sephiroth.  Comp.  D.  H.  Joel,  Die  Religiom-philosophU  des  Sohar^  etc.  Leip-
zig, 1849,  p.  86.  Lutterbeck,  DU  Neutestanuntlichen  Lehrbegriffe,  etc.  Mainz,  1852,
p.  238,  note  4.

fSce  Moses  ben  Schem-Tob  de  Leon,  etc.,  by  Adolph  Jellinek.  Leipzig,  1851,  p.  13,
note  5.     S.  Munk's  Melanges  de philos.  juive  et  arabe,  p.  276,  note  I.

%  See  antet  p.  205  sq.  The  Wise-men  ('Hakhamem)  of  Israel  have  divided  this  word
so  as  to  read  Barah  Y6sh,  t.  ^.,  (Thou)  hast  created  the  Y£sh,  the  primordial  essence  of
the  existence.  It  is  from  this  YSsh,  Elohim  created  from  No-Thing,  Being.  M6-aIn
be-yesh.  Existence  comes  from  No- Thing.  The  Sepher  Ye*tzeer-ah,  says :  "  It  made
the  No-Thing,  Some-Thing  "  and  then  ;  "  It  made  from  the  Void  that  which  is  evident
to  our  senses,"  1.  e.y  It  formed  from  To-hoc,  regJl-ded  as  the  primitive  substance,  the
Mammash,  < .  e.y  the  derived  substance.  Yalkut  2.  Comp.  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,
before  cited,  p.  92,  note.  Wisdom  is  sometimes  identified  with  the  Thorah  and  provides
sustenance  in  a  spiritual  sense ;  thus  in  Proverbs  (ix,  5)  «  Come  eat  of  my  bread,  and
drink  of  the  wine  (1.  ^.,  Mystery,  for  Wine  =  70  and  Sod,  Mystery  =  70)  ;  which  I
have  mingled."  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  by  Taylor,  p.  75  n.,  43 ;  p.  89  and  notes.
20


3o6

here,  and  not  less  correctly,  in  the  above  rendering) ;  not  '  in  the  house
of  their  prayer y  as  might  be  expected,  but  *  of  My  prayer ^^  says  God;
which  proves  that  God  prayeth.

What  are  the  words  of  His  prayer?  Rabbi  Zutrah,  son  of  Tobiyah,
said  in  the  name  of  Rab :  (The  words  are :)  *  Be  it  My  Will  that  My
mercy  overcome  My  anger,  and  that  My  mercy  manifest  (itself  above)
My  attributes,  in  order  that  I  deal  with  My  children  by  means  of  the
attribute  of  mercy,  and  let  them  enter  within  the  province  of  justice :
(grant  them  indulgence  above  their  merits).'  "*

Touching  the  same  subject  the  Bo-rahtha  (a  series  of  books  written  by
the  ancient  Jewish  Doctors,  after  the  completion  of  the  Mishnah  but  proba-
bly of  the  same  age),  has  the  following :  R.  Yishma-el,  son  of  Elisha^
said :  "  Once  I  went  into  the  innermost  of  the  sanctuary  (in  his  capacity
as  Highpriest.  Comp.  Lev.  xvi)  to  burn  incense,  and  I  saw  A-Ka  THa-
Ri-EL  (composed  of  KeTHeR,  /.  ^.,  Crown,  and  EL  or  AiL,  /.  ^.,  God  ;
the  Aleph  prefixed  points  to  the  Unity  of  the  Eternal),  YaH,  YeHoVaH,
TZe'Ba-OTH,  sitting  on  a  high  and  exalted  throne  (copied  from  Isaiah
vi,  i),  and  He  said  to  me :  Yishma-el,  My  son,  give  Me  a  blessing.
Aiid  I  answered  Him  (thus)  :  *  Be  it  Thy  Will  that  Thy  mercy  vanquish
Thy  wrath,  and  that  Thy  mercy  manifest  (itself  above)  Thy  attributes  in
order  that  Thou  deal  with  Thy  children  mercifully,  and  grant  them  a
position  within  the  boundary  of  justice  (/.  ^.,  beyond  their  merits)  !*
Hereupon  He  inclined  (assentingly)  His  head  (see  Canticles  v,  ii).*'t

*  The  Talmud  represents  the  Beth  Dinn  or  Tribunal  of  Heaven,  as  a  circle,  in  the  cen-
tre  of  which,  God  is  seated ;  the  first  places,  those  nearest  to  Him,  are  reserved  to  Divine
Mercy,  the  second  to  Divine  Justice.

f  The  Qabbalah,  says  Meharchah  (Comp.  Ein  Jacob)  explains ;  YHVH,  YaH,  A-
KaTHRi-El,  as;  the  Aleph  of  A-KaTHRi  signifying  Ain  Soph;  KaTHaR  as  Ke-
ther,  1.^.,  the  Crown,  the  first  Sephirah,  and  the  words  YHVH — £1 — ^YaH;  as  the
three  Ineffable  Names,  the  three  Divine  Persons,  the  three  Judges  of  the  Celestial
Beth  Dinn.*  See  the  following  page.  The  Beth  Dinn  which  R.  Yishma-£l  sees  in  the
Holy  of  Holies,  was  a  representation  of  the  Heavenly  Beth  Dinn,  because  the  Deity
was  looked  upon  as  Himself  holding  it,  seated  and  judging  upon  the  propitiatory,  as
He  is  asserted  to  be  seated  and  judging  in  Heaven.


307

Samuel  Edels  (1565-1631  A.  D.,)  explains  the  names  in  this  passage
and  the  prayer  itself,  thus  :

A-KaTHaRi-EL,  YaH.     The  A  (Aleph)  points  to  the  Ain  Soph  ;  (of  the

Sephirothic  Tree)
KaTHaR  (kS-ther),  the  Crown,  the  first  of

the  Ten  Sephiroth ;
EL,  or  AiL,  Mighty  God,  Omnipotence  =:

Justice  and
YaH  (those  letters  of  YHVH  which  signify
Mercy  to  prevail  in  the  midst  of  the  other
attributes).
Why  are  these  Divine  Names  distinctly  mentioned  ?    A  little  reflection
will  explain.     In  these  Names,  the  prayer  of  the  (heavenly)  High-Priest
is  still  given :

1.  A  (Aleph)  :=  Ain  Soph ;  KaTHaRi  :=  Crown,  /.  e,,  Thou,  oh  Ain
Soph,  who  art  still  the  concealed  love,  Thy  mercy  overcome  (^yikh-b^shu
ra-^ ha* 'tnS'kha)  Thy  wrath  (eth  kchd*  si-kha),  on  account  of  the  offended
majesty  in  Thy  Kether.

2.  And  Thou  EL,  or  AiL,  (God)  omnipotent,  Thy  Mercy  reveal  itself
(jiggO'lu  ra^* ha* -nU-khd)  in  its  entirety  over  Thy  wrath,  whilst  thou  art  as
Ail  (God),  also  the  Judge.

3.  And  Thou  YaH  TZeBa-OTH,  deal  with  Thy  Children  {tith-na-hSg
im  ba-fu-khd)  in  the  attribute  of  Mercy  {be*  middath  ha-ra- ha-mim)  to
demonstrate  Thy  love  in  its  fullness  in  the  perfect  Name  of  YHVH.

So  long  as  we  adore  the  Deity  only  in  our  thoughts,  without  the  par-
ticipation of  the  whole  heart  and  the  verification  of  the  adoration  in  our
deeds,  our  adoration  is  merely  half  (incomplete),  and  the  Name  of  God
is  also  incomplete  for  such  worshippers.  (Comp.  Rashi  on  Exodus  xvii,
16,  and  Ps.  ix,  8.)  But  this  Name  (YHVH)  shall  become  a  complete
one  through  the  history  of  Israel  and  God's  guidance  of  that  history.
Therefore  A^KaTHaRi-AiL  YaH  YHVH  TZe^Ba-OTHis  implored
thus :  Thou  who  art  sitting  on  the  throne  {qur' saiy-yafi)  high  and  exalted,
grant  Thy  children  a  standing  within  the  lines  of  Justice,  deal  leniently  with
them,  not  according  to  their  deserts,  but  according  to  Thy  Mercy,  which
is  demonstrated  by  Thy  complete  Name.


3o8

"God  prayeth"  is  explained  by:  "Yishma-el,  My  son,  bless  me,"
(both  of  them  figures  of  speech)  thus :

Almighty  love  is  through  Its  essence  bound  to  manifest  Its  Mercy.  It
feels  Itself  blessed,  as  it  were,  at  Its  effective  exercise  of  Mercy ;  when
man  by  his  piety  prepares  himself  to  receive  the  Love  of  God,  and  thus
4ictuaUy  blesses  God,  Therefore  God  prays,  /.  ^.,  Wills  and  Desires,  that
man  fit  himself  to  receive  directly  His  bounties,  whereby  God  feels  Him-
self blessed.*

The  Talmud  also  says,  "  Seven  attributes  avail  before  the  Throne  of
Glory  and  these  are :  Wisdom,  Righteousness,  Judgment,  Grace,  Mercy,
Truth  and  Peace."     (Talmudic  Miscel.,  by  P.  I.  Hershon,  p.  117.)

St.  John  in  the  Apocalypse  also  says;  "  From  him  which  is,  and  which
was,  and  which  is  to  come."  That  is  the  YHV  in  the  three  Upper
Sephiroth  **  and  from  the  Seven  Spirits  which  are  before  his  Throne  "  (i,
4).     These  are  most  probably  the  seven  Lower  Sephiroth.

The  idea  of  the  Sephirothic  Tree  or  Scale,  appears  to  be  in  Jacob's
Dream  of  the  Ladder  which  is  set  up  on  earth,  the  top  of  which  reached
to  heaven;  YHVH  stood  above  it,  (The  Vulgate:  "And  the  Lord
(YHVH)  leaning  upon  the  ladder ^^  and  the  angels  of  Elohim  ascended
and  descended  on  its  rounds.     (Gen.  xxviii,  11  sq,     John  i,  51.)

Mauricef  connects  this  with  the  idea  of  metempsychosis  and  the
Mithraic  rites  referred  to  by  Origen.

We  find  many  Qabbalistic  doctrines  in  early  patristic  literature,  espe-
cially in  such  of  the  writings  of  Origen  which  have  reached  our  day.
This  Father  of  the  Church  lived  185-254  A.  D.  He  was  Praefect  of  the
School  of  Alexandria.  His  principal  disciple  was  Gregory,  Bishop  of
Neo-c3esarea,  called  Thaumaturgus  because  of  his  Miracles.  The  Hebrew
teacher  of  Origen  was  Yehudah  II  ben  Simon  III  known  as  "Rabbi."
Yehudah  was  the  first  president  of  the  Palestinian  A'mora-im.  Origen's
teachers  in  philosophy  were  Clement  of  Alexandria  and  the  asserted
founder  of  Neo-platonism,  Ammonius  Sakkas.  Origen  held  to  the  doc-
trine of  emanation,  that  many  other  worlds  existed  prior  to  ours,  that  these
had  perished,  that  ours  would  also,  and  that  after  it  many  others  would

*  Comp.  as  to  R.  Yishma-el  ben  Elisha,  the  High  Priest,  Yehudah  Ha-Levi*s  Sepher
Khozari.     Cassell's  Edition.    Leipzig,  1869,  p.  286  et  seq,  and  notes,
t  Indian  Antiquities,  etc.,  iv,  p.  189  sq.


309

come  into  existence  and  be  destroyed.  That  all  souls  emanated  from  the
Divine  Nature  long  before  the  foundations  of  the  world.  God  was  the
only  existence  free  from  any  species  of  matter.  Souls  had  freedom  of
will  as  to  good  and  evil  and  this  was  exercised  by  them  before  the  crea-
tion of  the  universe ;  some  abused  this  freedom  and  were  placed  in  this
world,  some  were  placed  as  spirits  of  the  sun,  others  of  the  moon,  etc.,
for  he  held  that  all  the  heavenly  bodies  had  spirits ;  other  souls  migrated
into  human  bodies  or  into  daimons.  This  was  an  imprisonment.  All
the  souls  were  of  an  equal  nature.  The  residence  of  the  souls  in  this
world  was  for  trial  and  in  order  that  the  souls,  by  the  exercise  of  their
individual  free  will,  might  raise  themselves  to  their  original  abode,  heaven,
and  remain  there.  Those  that  did  not  emancipate  themselves  were  trans-
ferred into  new  bodies  or  were  punished.  When  all  the  souls  had  regained
their  original  goodness  the  end  of  this  world  would  take  place  and  a  new
world  be  created.  The  world  was  apportioned  into  districts  each  of
which  was  governed  by  a  special  angel,  there  were  also  ministering  spirits
of  different  grades  who  watched  over  general  and  special  interests.  Christ
was  begotten  before  all  creatures  and  ministered  in  the  creation.  (Comp.
St.  Paul,  Col.  i,  1 6-1 8.  Origen,  De  PrincipiiSy  Bk.  i,  c.  vii.)  There
was  an  evil  daimon  surrounded  by  his  own  angels,  whose  constant  aim
was  to  lead  men  to  sin.  That  the  Holy  Scriptures  have  an  open  and
obvious  meaning  and  also  a  hidden  secret  and  recondite  sense  difficult
to  discover,  which  he  terms,  the  Soui  of  the  same.  He  holds  that  the
Sacred  Names  of  the  Deity  among  the  Hebrews,  "  belong  to  a  secret  the-
ology which  refers  to  the  Framer  of  all  Things."  (Works,  Vol.  i,  pp.
421  sq,  ;  ii,  315  sq,')  These  doctrines  are  in  the  Qabbalah  and  the  Zo-
haric  books.  There  are  numerous  other  doctrines  of  Origen  which  are
in  accord  with  the  Zoharic  philosophy.  He  holds  Philo  as  his  model  as
did  also  Clement  of  Alexandria.  Origen  and  St.  Paul  are  in  many  things
in  unison  especially  as  to  the  statements  of  the  latter  in  i  Cor.  xii,  8-1 1.
Origen  also  says,  that  the  dress  of  Adam  and  Eve  after  the  Fall  are  our
fleshly  bodies,  and  that  the  word  Adam  is  a  generic  name  for  the  whole
of  the  human  race  as  if  One  Man.*

*  Adv.  Celsus.     English  Ed.  Works,  1869-72.      Bk.  iv,  c.  xl.     Comp.  i  Cor,  xii,
12-28.    See  also  Mosheim's  Comment,  on  the  affairs  of  the  Christians,  etc.,  iii,  {  26  sq.


3IO

Origen  in  answer  to  Celsus  asserts:  "  The  Scriptures  which  are  current
in  the  churches  of  God  do  not  speak  of  '  seven '  heavens,  or  of  any  defi-
nite number,  but  they  do  appear  to  teach  the  existence  of  ^  heavens,'
whether  that  means  the  '  spheres  '  of  those  bodies  which  the  Greeks  call
'  planets,*  or  something  more  mysterious.  Celsus,  agreeably  to  the  opin-
ion of  Plato  (in  the  Tiraseus),  asserts  that  souls  can  make  their  way  to  and
from  the  earth  through  the  planets;  while  Moses,  our  most  ancient
prophet,  says  that  a  divine  vision  was  presented  to  the  view  of  our
prophet  Jacob — a  ladder  stretching  to  heaven,  the  angels  of  God  ascend-
ing and  descending  upon  it,  and  the  Lord  (/.^.,  YHVH)  supported  upon
its  top ;  obscurely  pointing,  by  this  matter  of  the  ladder,  either  to  the
same  truths  which  Plato  had  in  view  or  to  something  greater  than  these.
On  this  subject  Philo  has  composed  a  treatise  which  deserves  the  thought-
ful and  intelligent  investigation  of  all  lovers  of  truth.*'*

In  adv  Celsusf  the  latter,  says  Origen,  quotes  certain  Persian  mjrsteries
as  follows  :  "  '  These  things  are  obscurely  hinted  at  in  the  accounts  of
the  Persians,  and  especially  in  the  mysteries  of  Mithras  which  are  cele-
brated amongst  them.  For  in  the  latter  there  is  a  representation  of  the
two  heavenly  revolutions, — of  the  movement,  viz.,  of  the  fixed  stars,  and
of  that  which  takes  place  among  the  planets,  and  of  the  passage  of  the
soul  through  these.  The  representation  is :  There  is  a  ladder  with  lofty
gates,  and  on  the  top  of  it  an  eighth  gate.  The  first  gate  consists  of  lead,
the  second  of  tin,  the  third  of  copper,  the  fourth  of  iron,  the  fifth  of  a
mixture  of  metals,  the  sixth  of  silver  and  the  seventh  of  gold.  The  first
gate  they  assign  to  Saturn,  indicating  by  the  '  lead  *  the  slowness  of  this
star ;  the  second  to  Venus,  comparing  her  to  the  splendor  and  softness  of
tin; J  the  third  to  Jupiter,  being  firm  and  solid;  the  fourth  to  Mercury;
for  both  Mercury  and  iron  are  fit  to  endure  all  things,  and  are  money-

Alger : — Doctrine  of  a  Future  Life,  p.  396.  Kitto  Bib.  Cyclop.  Title,  Origen.  Origen's
works  in  Ante-Nicene  Library.  Smith  and  Wace's  Biographical  Diet.,  etc.  We  have
not  space  in  this  writing  to  go  further  into  the  subject.

*  Adv,  Celsus.    Works,  Ante-Nicene  Christ.  Liby.,  1872,  Vol.  ii,  p.  359  sq.

t  Ibid.,  360  sq,

X  We  think  a  mistake  exists  here,  the  metal  of  Venus  always  being  copper,  that  of
Jupiter,  tin.


311

making  and  laborious ;  and  the  fifth  to  Mars,  because,  being  composed
of  a  mixture  of  metals,  it  is  varied  and  unequal  ;*  the  sixth  of  silver  to
the  Moon  ;  the  seventh  of  gold  to  the  Sun — thus  imitating  the  different
colours  of  the  latter  two.'  He  (Celsus)  next  proceeds  to  examine  the
reason  of  the  stars  being  arranged  in  this  order,  which  is  symbolized  by
the  names  of  the  rest  of  matter.  Musical  reasons,  moreover^  are  added
or  quoted  by  the  Persian  theology  ;  and  to  these,  again,  he  strives  to  add
a  second  explanation,  connected  also  with  musical  considerations."  The
arrangement  given  of  the  planets  is  not  their  natural  arrangement,  but
the  artificial  arrangement  by  which  they  follow  as  the  lards  of  the  days  of
the  week  as  we  now  have  them,  which  requires  that  Venus  and  not  Mer-
cury should  be  placed  next  to  the  Sun.  We  think  this  is  from  the  ancient
Chaldaic  system.

If  one  wishes  to  obtain  means,  says  Origen,  "  for  a  profounder  con-
templation of  the  entrance  of  souls  into  divine  things  *  *  let  him
peruse  at  the  end  of  Ezekiel's  prophecies,  the  visions  beheld  by  the
prophet,  in  which  gates  of  different  kinds  are  enumerated  (Ezek.  xlviii),
which  obscurely  refer  to  the  different  modes  in  which  divine  souls  enter
into  a  better  world :  also  let  him  peruse,  in  the  Apocalypse  of  St.  John,
what  is  related  of  the  city  of  God."

Referring  to  certain  diagrams,  Origen  says:  "In  this  diagram  were
described  ten  circles^  distinct  from  each  other,  but  united  by  one  circle,
which  was  said  to  be  the  soul  of  all  things  (the  Universe)  and  was  called
*  Leviathan. '  This  Leviathan,  the  Jewish  Scriptures  say,  whatever  they  mean
by  the  expression,  was  created  by  God  for  a  plaything ;  for  we  find  in  the
Psalms :  *  In  wisdom  hast  Thou  made  all  things :  the  earth  is  full  of  Thy
creatures ;  so  is  this  great  and  wide  sea.  There  go  the  ships ;  small  animals
with  great ;  there  is  this  dragon,  which  thou  hast  formed  to  play  therein  ! '
(Ps.  civ,  24-26.)  Instead  of  the  word  'dragon*  the  word  'Leviathan*
is  in  the  Hebrew.  This  impious  diagram,  then,  said  of  this  Leviathan,
which  is  so  clearly  depreciated  by  the  psalmist,  that  it  was  the  Soul,
which  had  travelled  through  all  things  (the  Universe)!"     In  the  dia-

*  We  think  an  error  is  here,  the  usual  metal  of  Mercury  being  quicksilver,  that  of
Mars,  iron.  This  has  been  supported  by  the  discoveries  in  the  planetary  tower  of  Bor-
sippa  in  ancient  Babylonia  by  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson.


312

gram  nnder  the  lowest  circle  is  the  word  "  Behemoth."  The  word  Levia-
than is  inscribed  on  the  diagram  at  its  circumference  and  at  its  centre,  thus
placing  the  name  in  two  separate  places.  The  diagram  was  **  divided  by  a
thick  black  line,  and  this  line  he  Celsus,  asserted,  was  called  ''  Gehenna,
which  is  Tartarus."  Gehenna,  says  Origen,  is  mentioned  in  the  Gospel
as  a  place  of  punishment  and  the  Jews  considered  it,  the  name  of  the  place
"intended  for  the  purification  of  such  souls  as  are  to  be  purified  by
torments."  (Kitto  Bib.  Cyclop.,  ii,  p.  307.  Origen's  Works,  ii,
362  sg.)

Celsus  says  that  of  seven  ruling  daimons  (angels?)  "  *  the  goat  was  shaped
like  a  lion '  whereas  we  discovered  that  he  who  is  honored  in  the  Holy
Scripture  as  the  angel  of  the  Creator  is  called  by  this  accursed  diagram,
Michael,  the  Lion-like.  Again  Celsus  says  that  the  '  second  in  order  is
a  Bull.'  "  That  is  in  the  order  of  the  seven  ruling  daimons,  the  word
daimon  among  the  Greeks  being  synonymous  to  our  angel.  We  must  not
forget  that  the  universe  was  supposed  to  have  been  created  in  the  Zodiacal
sign  of  Capricorn  or  of  the  Goat,  the  winter  solstice  sign.  This  second,
the  Bull,  is  called  on  the  diagram  "  Suriel,  the  Bull-like."  The  third
according  to  Celsus  was  ''  an  amphibious  sort  of  animal,  and  one  that  hissed
frightfully."  On  the  diagram  it  is  "  Raphael,  the  Serpent-like."  Celsus  said
the  "  fourth  had  the  form  of  an  Eagle,"  on  the  diagram  it  is  **  Gabriel,  the
Eagle-like."  The  "  fifth  "  according  to  him  **  had  the  countenance  of  a
Bear,"  on  the  diagram  it  is  "  Thauthabaoth,  the  Bear-like."  The  sixth  he
says,  "  has  the  face  of  a  Dog,"  and  the  diagram  calls  him  '*  Erataoth."
The  seventh  he  says  "  had  the  countenance  of  an  Ass,  and  was  named
Thaphabaoth  or  Onoel,"  but  on  "the  diagram  it  is  called  Onoel  or
Thartharaoth,  being  somewhat  asinine  in  appearance."*

*  Origen's  Works,  Vol.  ii,  pp.  362-369.  Compare  what  is  said  upon  this  diagram,
in  Histoire  critique  de  ManicJUe  et  du  Manicheisme^  par  M.  de  Beausobre.  Vol.  ii,
pp.  63-66;  also  M.  Jacques  Matter's  Histoire  critique  du  Gnosticism e^  etc.  Vol.  ii,
pp.  221-237,  236-237,  242  ;  iii,  p.  9  and  Plates  I  and  D.  The  following  book  is
valuable  in  connection  with  the  antiquity  of  the  Sephiroth  :  Codex  Nasareus^  Liber
Adami  appellatus^  syriace  transscriptus,  loco  vocaiiunif  ubi  vicem  literarum  guttura^-^
Hum  prcBstiterintf  his  substitutus^  laiineque  reddiius^  d  Matth.  Norberg,  etc.  Hafnia  ;
torn,  i,  181 5,  330  pp.  ;  torn,  ii,  1816,  320  pp.;  tow.  iii,  18 16,  320  pp.,  4to.  Lexidion
Codicis   Nasaraif   cui  Liber  Adami ,   etc.    Matth.     Norberg.     Ilafniie.   181 6,  274  pp.


3^3

"  Now  in  the  diagram  referred  to,  we  found  the  greater  and  the  lesser
circle,  upon  the  diameter  of  which  was  inscribed  '  Father  and  Son ;'
and  between  the  greater  circle  (in  which  the  lesser  was  contained)  and
another  composed  of  two  circles, — the  outer  one  of  which  was  yellow,
and  the  inner  one,  blue, — an  inscribed  barrier  (was  placed)  in  the  shape
of  a  hatchet.  And  above  it,  a  short  circle,  close  to  the  greater  of  the
two  former,  having  the  inscription  'Love  '  (Charity  or  Grace?)  and  lower
down,  one  touching  the  same  circle  with  the  word  '  Life.'  And  on  the
second  circle,  which  was  composed  of  interlaced  lines  and  which  in-
cluded two  other  circles,  with  a  figure  like  a  rhomboid  (entitled) ;  *  The
foresight  of  Wisdom.'  And  within  their  point  of  common  section,  was:
•The  nature  of  Wisdom.'  And  above  their  point  of  common  section
was  a  circle,  on  which  was  inscribed  'Knowledge;'  and  lower  down
another,  on  which  was  the  inscription,  'Understanding.'  "  Celsus  says
"  there  are  between  the  upper  circles — that  are  above  the  heavens — certain
inscriptions,  etc.,  '  a  Greater  and  a  Less '  which  they  refer  to  the  *  Father
and  Son.'"  Origen  attributes  the  formation  of  the  diagram  to  the
Ophites  or  Serpent  worshippers,  we  have  not  been  able,  after  search,  to
establish  a  connection  between  their  doctrines  and  these  delineations  on
the  diagram.  We  are  therefore  inclined  to  agree  with  Beausobre  (Jlis,
des  Manichians^  ii,  p.  54)  that  it  has  the  appearance  of  an  ancient  Jew-
ish diagram  of  the  Practical  Qabbalah,  representing  some  of  the  Ten
Sephiroth,  angels,  etc.  It  certainly  has  the  names  of  some  of  the  Sephi-
roth  such  as  Love  or  Grace,  Wisdom,  Understanding,  and  also  has
Knowledge  and  Life."     (^Origen,  Works  cited,  Vol.  ii,  p.  376  sq.)

The  Tree  of  the  Sephiroth  1  esembles,  says  Calraet,  that  diagram  which
they  call  in  the  Schools,  Porphyry's  Tree  ;  to  show  the  different  catego-
ries of  the  EnSy  1.  ^.,  Being-hood.

The  Sephirothic  canals  are  usually  portrayed  as  22  which  added  to  the

4to.  Onomasticon  Codicis  Nasarai,  cut  Liber  Adami  nomeUf  edidit,  Matth.  Nor-
bcrg,  etc.  Londini  Gothorum^  181 7,  164  pp.,  4to;  and  M.  Silvestre  De  Sacy,  in
Journal  des  Savans,  a  Fart's,  1819,  fom.  iii,  pp.  343-364,  646-665,  for  a  Criti-
cism on  same;  also  Sod,  the  Mysteries  of  Adonai,  by  S.  F.  Dunlap.  London,  1861;
and  notes  to  The  Book  of  Adam  and  Eve,  etc.  Translated  from  the  Ethiopic,  by
Rev.  Dr.  S.  C.  Malan.  London,  1882,  for  quotations  from  the  Book  of  Adam.


314

10  Sephiroth  equal  32.  The  Qabbalah  also  mentions  50  Gates  of  Under-
standing, as  to  which  Moses  only  reached  and  passed  the  49th.  These
50  Qabbalistic  Gates  are  said  to  have  been  arranged  as  follows :

The  50  Gates  of  Understanding  were  asserted  to  have  5  Chief  Gates,
each  of  which  comprehended  ten.  The  first  three,  included  the  knowledge
of  the  first  principles  of  the  Things.  At  the  Fourth  Gate  was  the  planetary
world  and  all  the  wonders  of  astronomy,  as  far  as  they  were  then  known.
There  we  find  the  name  of  each  of  the  seven  planets  and  of  the  angel
whom  it  was  asserted  directed  its  course.     These  are  allotted  to  each  of
the  seven  Inferior  or  Lower  Sephiroth.     In  Genesis  it  is  upon  the  fourth
day  (our  Wednesday  ?)  that  the  planets  are  created  for  signs  and  seasons,
so  we  must  note  that  this  day  is  among  most  of  the  civilized  Eastern
peoples,  the  day  of  their  week  ruled  by  Wisdom.     The  whole  Sephirothic
Tree  is  most  likely  an  astronomical  chart  or  symbol,  the  oldest  now  in  the
world,  and  has  some  connection  with  the  Seven  Gates  erected  in  the  Caves,
used  as  Celsus  mentions,  for  initiation  into  the  Mysteries  of  Mithra,  and
also  with  the  Sacred  Tree  referred  to  in  the  cuneiform  texts  and  shown  on
the  ancient  signet  cylinders  of  the  early  inhabitants  of  Mesopotamia,
Assyria  and  Babylonia.   The  Fourth  Gate  was  called :  Mundus  Sphtrarum^
t,e.f  World  of  the  Spheres,  i.e.,  the  Sephiroth.  Athanasius  Kircher*  gives
the  different  Gates.  That  in  which  is  the  first  Sphere  is  called  by  him  Ccsbtm
Empyreum;  the  second,  Primum  mobile;  the  third,  Coslum  firma$runt$.
These  are  the  three  Upper  Heavens  and  parallel  the  three  Upper  Sephi-
roth of  the  Fourth  World.  The  next  seven  of  the  decade,  he  states,  are  the
Spirits  of  the  seven  planets  and  have  their  names.  The  scheme  is,  according
to  the  system  of  Ptolemy  and  is  Babylonian  and  Chaldean,  as  in  also  that
set  forth  in  the  Sepher  Ye'tzeer-ah,  for  it  will  be  especially  noted  by  the
scholar,  that  Venus  is  placed  next  to  the  Sun  instead  of  Mercury.     Ibn
Gebirol  does  the  same  in  his  Kether  Malkhuth.    This  arrangement  is  also
necessary  to  make  the  names  of  the  days  of  the  week  follow  each  other,
according  to  the  artificial  system  in  use  among  us,  and  among  most  of
the  civilized  Asiatic  peoples.     This  artificial  arrangement,  we  think,  was
Akkadian  and  Chaldean.     Each  of  the  planets  had  a  presiding  angel,
according  to  the  Practical  Qabbalah,  whose  name  also  is  apparently  of

*CEdipi  iEgyptiaci.     Tom,  ii,  p.  319  sq.


315

Chaldean  origin ;  and  these  probably  have  something  in  common  with
the  ministering  angels  of  the  Apocalypse.

Besides  Ibn  Gebirol's  Kether  Malkhuth,  two  other  prayers  exist  in  the
service  of  the  Sephardi  Jews  which  are  Qabbalistic.  One  is  in  the  Daily
Service,  beginning  with  pnS  tkdh  "He  lights  the  earth,  etc.***  The
other  beginning  p-m  Sk  El  (Ail),  Adon,  /.  ^.,  "  God,  Lord."  f

Both  of  these  tend  to  show,  that  the  Sephiroth  apply  to  the  angels  of
the  heavenly  Spheres,  the  orbits  of  the  planets,  and  to  the  Spheres  above
them ;  to  the  number  of  ten.  The  second,  says :  "  The  luminaries  which
our  God  created  are  good  :  for  He  formed  them  with  knowledge^  under-
standing and  wisdom  :  he  hath  endued  them  with  power  ^xid  mighty  to  bear
rule  in  the  world.  They  are  filled  with  splendor  and  radiate  brightness  :
their  splendor  is  graceful  throughout  the  world.  They  rejoice  when  going
forth,  and  are  glad  at  their  return :  and  with  reverential  awe  perform  the
Will  of  their  Creator.  They  ascribe  glory  and  majesty  to  His  Name,  joy
and  song  to  the  commemoration  of  His  Kingdom^  etc."  These  two  prayers
or  songs  of  praise,  are  very  ancient  and  have  special  reference  to  the
creation  and  nature  of  the  sun  among  all  the  other  works  of  the  universe.
They  probably  have  come  down  from  the  Essenes  or  the  'Hasidim,  who
read  the  She'mah  and  sung  songs  of  praise  at  the  rising  of  the  sun.
(Comp.  what  is  said  by  Josephusand  Philo  upon  these  sects.)  The  Zohar
appears  to  have  knowledge  of  the  song  El^  Adon  (Zohar,  ii,  132a),  which
we  think  was  in  use  in  the  Synagogue  long  before  the  time  of  R.  Moses
de  Leon.  J

One  of  the  oldest  references,  beside  those  we  have  mentioned  in  Gen-
esis, which  is  likely  applicable  to  the  Ten  Sephiroth,  is  to  be  found  in
Isaiah  (xi,  i).  We  do  not  say  that  this  is  absolute  evidence  of  the  idea  of  the
Sephiroth  having  been  in  existence  under  their  subsequent  names,  in  the
time  of  Isaiah,  nor  do  we  assert  that  the  Qabbalists  based  their  subse-

*Sce  David  Levi's  Form  of  Prayers.  London  (5549)  1789,  Vol  i.  Daily  Prayers,
pp.  30  sq,

\Ibid,f  pp.  140  sq^

X  The  Talmud  in  B^rakhoth  says  :  the  song  Ail  Adon  has  been  made  by  the  angel
Michael  and  that  the  angels  sing  it  every  Sabbath  day  morning  before  the  Lord.


3i6

quent  arrangement  of  the  Sephiroth  upon  it — ^we  offer  it  as  it  stands  for
the  opinion  of  the  student.

Dividing  the  statements  in  Isaiah  according  to  our  idea  upon  the  sab>
ject,  we  have  the  following  result :

"  But  there  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse,  and  a
Branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots,'*  (Comp.  Zech.  iii,  8,  9;  vi,  12.)  The
rod  or  branch  is  the  Sephirothic  Tree,  the  roots  of  Jesse,  are  Malkhuth,
Kingdom,  the  She'kheen-ah,  the  Presence  or  Glory  of  God,  which  was
asserted  to  remain  with  the  Congregation  of  Israel  in  the  Holy  of
Holies.

" And /A^ ^/>/V ^  y^r^  shall  rest  upon  him*'  (or  it).  This  is,
Kether  or  the  Crown,  the  ist  Sephirah.     (Comp.  Is.  xxviii,  5.)

"The  Spirit  of  Wisdom,'*  'Hokhmah,  the  2d  Sephirah.  (Comp.  Wis.
vii,  24-26,  Heb.  i,  2,  3.)

The  Spirit  of  ^^  Understandings' *  Binah,  the  3d  Sephirah.

'' The  Spirit  of  Counsel,"  nvj?  Eitz-ah.  Tzad-dek,  Justice,  the  5th  Se-
phirah.

The  Spirit  of  ''  Might,"  Ge*dool-ah,  Greatness,  the  4th  Sephirah,

The  Spirit  of  "  Knowledge,"  Daath  (?  Hod,  Splendor),  the  8th  Sephi-
rah.

The  Spint of  "  Fear"  of  YHVH,  Ne-tza'h,  Firmness  also  called  Vic-
tory,* the  7th  Sephirah.

The  root  as  we  have  said  is  Malkhuth,  Kingdom,  Government  ]  the  loth
Sephirah.  The  stem  of  Jesse,  may  apply  to  the  9th  Sephirah,  Ye* sod.
Basis  or  Foundation. f

The  Talmud,  treatise  Sanhedrin,  fol.  93  a  and  b,  applies  this  quotation
to  the  Messiah.

In  the  Apocryphal  Gospel  of  the  Birth  of  Mary,  almost  the  same  is
repeated  (c.  v,  14-15).     We  will  divide  as  before,  viz :

*  The  Branch  will  answer  to  the  Sixth  Sephirah  Tiph-eVeth,  Beauty,  that  of  the  heart,
ethics  and  conscience.  This  is  the  Sephirah  of  both  the  heart  and  of  the  Sun  as  the  cen-
tre of  the  Makrokosm.  It  is  put  in  place  of  the  one  who  will  judge  with  Righteousness.
The  Messiah  (compare  Is.  xi,  3-16)  is  evidently  referred  to.   He  is  the  "  Sun  of  Right-


eousness.''


t  See  Cahen's  French  Bible,  Vol.  ix,  p.  x,  3  note.


317

"  For  Isaiah  saith,  there  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse."
This  is  the  Sephirothic  diagram  called :  The  Tree.  "  And  a  flower  shall
spring  out  of  its  root ^^^  the  root  is  Malkhuth,  Kingdom.  The  flower /\%
Kether,  the  Crown,  which  like  a  lily  blooms  on  the  top  of  the  stem.

"And  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  etc."  That  is,  the  Ain  Soph.  "The^W/
of  Wisdom,''  'Hokhmah,  and  the  Spirit  ^^  of  Understanding,''  Binah.

^^TYit  Spirit  of  Counsel,"  Ge*boor-ah,  Judgment.

The  Spirit  of  "  Might,"  Ge'dool-ah,  Greatness.

"  The  Spirit  of  Knowledge,"     Perhaps  Hod,  /.  e,.  Splendor.

The  Spirit  of '' Piety."  Perhaps  Tiph-e'reth,  Beauty  or  Righteous-
ness, which  is  with  the  Hebrews,  a  synonym  of  Piety.

The  Spirit  '' of  Fear  of  the  Lord."  Ne-tza'h,  Firmness.  Perhaps
Victory,  the  same  Sephirah.

The  stem  of  Jesse.  Ye'sod,  Foundation  or  Basis,  the  Support  of  the
vitality  of  the  Matter- World.

Here,  if  we  are  correct,  are  all  the  Ten  Sephiroth  and  also  the  Ain
Soph.*

**  And  one  of  the  elders  saith  unto  me :  Weep  not :  behold  the  lion  of
the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  root  of  Davidf  hath  prevailed  to  open  the  book,
and  loose  the  seven  seals  thereof.  And  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  in  the  midst  of
the  throne  and  of  the  four  beasts,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  elders,  stood  a
Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,  having  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes,  which  are
the  seven  spirits  oi  God  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth."     (Revelation  v,

5-6.)

The  following  Diagram  shows  a  parallel  decadal  division  of  the  Com-
mandments and  the  Paternoster.


•See  The  Apocryphal  New  Testament,  etc.  Gebbie  &  Co.,  Philadelphia,  pp.  21.
Compare  also  verse  17.  Hone's  Ed.  London,  1820,  p.  21.  Comp.  Kitto*s  Biblical
Cycl.,  Ed.  1876,  Vol.  ii,  161 ;  i,  169.

fThe  root  of  David,  is  taken  from  Isaiah  xi,  i.  "  There  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out
of  the  stem  of  Jesse,  and  a  branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots.**


3i8


I.
2.


4.

5.

6.

7.


8.

9.
10.


TEN  COMMANDMENTS  OF  THE  THORAH.

Thou  shalt  have  no  other  Elohim  but  Me.

Thou  shalt  not  make  any  graven  image

(of  Me).
Thou  shalt  not  take  the  Name  YH  VH  in

vain.
Thou  shalt  sanctify  the  Sabbath  day.
Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother.
Thou  shalt  not  kill.
Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery.


Thou  shalt  not  steal.

Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness.

Thou  shalt  not  covet.


TEN  DIVISIONS  OF  THE   LORD*S
PRAYER.

Our  Father,

Which  art  in  Heaven,

Hallowed  be  Thy  Name.

Thy  Kingdom  Come;

Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,

As  it  is  done  in  heaven ;

Forgive   us   our  trespasses  and    we

forgive     those     who     trespass

against  us  ;
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread  ;
Lead  us  not  into  temptation,
But  deliver  us  from  evil.*


It  will  be  observed  that  the  first  three  apply  more  especially  to  the
Deity,  the  fourth  to  God  and  man,  and  the  last  six,  to  mankind  alone.
The  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  Commandments  relate  to  the  affections —
filial,  fraternal  and  conjugal.  The  infraction  of  which  was  punished
by  the  Hebrews  with  death.  The  love  of  man  and  the  sacredness  of
human  life,  is  the  harmony  between  filial  piety  and  conjugal  fidelity.
The  Decalogue,  if  we  consider  the  eighth  and  ninths  inculcates  honesty
in  thought  as  well  as  in  action.  As  applying  to  man's  actions  in  this
matter-world,  we  therefore  have  a  symbolical  diagram  in  this  form :

1234
5        6        7
8        9
10

The  reverse  of  the  equilateral  triangle  of  the  sacred  Tetrad  of  Pytha-


goras


o      o

000
0000


which  added  any  way  makes  the  holy  decadic  number.


*  As  to  the  Lord's  Prayer  and  the  Rabbinic  writings,  see  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fath-
ers, etc.,  by  Charles  Taylor,  p.  138  sq.


(Comp.  ante,  203,  note.)  i,  4  and  10  are  the  outposts.*  The  6th,  the
order  not  to  kill  but  to  love  man  ;  is  in  the  centre ;  it  is  for  the  protec-
tion of  human  life  and  without  life  the  earth  would  be  a  sterile  desert.


*  The  nnmben  i,  4  and  10  =  i;  the  T»lne  of  the  letters  of  TV  YaH  =  15.  With
thit  word  it  is  laid;  "  Elohim  formed  tbe  worlds."  See  Ya'lknt  ha-Zobar  on ;  ■•  Fonn-
ing  the  Worlds."


Rgun  JO.— Hindn  tjahai  of  the  Pour  Woildi.


THE  FOUR  WORLDS.  OF  PRANA.  OF  PAN  AS  THE  MAKROKOSMOS.  OTHER
IDEAS  OF  THE  MAKROKOSUOS.  ASSERTED  ORIGIN  OF  THE  IDEA  OF
THE   FOUR   WORLDS.

IN  the  Speculative  Qabbalah,  four  Conditions  or  Worlds  are  enumer-
ated. The  first  of  these  is  termed,  0/am  A'tzeel-ooth*  or  the  A'tzeel-
atic  World,  the  World  of  Emanation  par  excellence.  This  is  the
most  exalted  of  all  the  Conditions  and  is  considered  as  containing  only
the  Holy  Upper  Ten  Sephiroth ;  the  highest  round  of  the  ladder  of  In-
termediaries, which  are  nevertheless  only  an  Unit,  and  are  between  Ain
Soph,  the  Primal  Cause  of  All,  and  the  inferior  emanations  which  develope
the  existences.  As  a  totality  in  this  Upper  Condition,  the  Ten  Sephiroth
represent  the  operative  qualities  of  the  Divine  Will,  considered  as  the
most  abstract  and  spiritual  of  alt  the  emanations  of  the  Ain  Soph.  This
"  It  is  to  be  noted  tbat  the  names  of  the  Four  Worlds,  have  Sanskrit  roots.


321

Upper  World  is  the  abode  solely  of  D'yooq-nah^  i.  e.y  the  Image,  Upper
Adam,  or  Adam  Illa^h,  the  Archetypal  Man;  the  totality  of  all  the
Sephiroth,  the  Protogonos,  Le,,  first  bom.  This  condition  is  also  known
as  Olam  ha-Sephiroih,  i,  ^.,  World  of  the  Sephiroth,  it  is  considered  firom
its  nearness  to  and  as  the  direct  emanation  of  Ain  Soph,  as  perfect  and
immutable,  an  emanation  in  which  Ain  Soph  is  more  immediately  imma-
nent yet  transcendental.  It  is  not  ever  looked  upon  as  in  any  way  per-
fectly equal  to  the  Eternal  Boundless,  which  is  concealed  and  hidden  in
Its  essence  from  the  comprehension  of  man.

^^  A' tzeel-ooth  is  the  Great  Sacred  Seal,  by  means  ^of  which  all  the
Worlds  are  copied  which  have  impressed  on  themselves,  the  image  on  the
Seal ;  and  as  this  Great  Seal  comprehends  three  stages,  which  are  three
zures  (prototypes)  of  Nephesh  (the  Vital  Spirit  or  Soul),  Rua'h  (the  Ethi-
cal and  Reasoning  spirit)  and  the  Neshamah  (the  Highest  soul  of  man)
so  the  Sealed,  have  also  received  three  zures  (prototypes)  namely,  B^ree-
ahy  Ye^tzeer-ahy  and  Aseey-ah^  and  these  three  zures  are  only  One  in  the
Seal.'*

In  this  connection  we  present  a  Hindu  figure.  No.  31,  which  represents
Prana,  the  Hindu  Spiritual  or  Ideal  Androgenic  Man,  who  is  the  Life
and  Breath  of  all  the  existences,  and  evidently  the  Makrokosmos  of  the
created.  It  is  portrayed  as  crowned  by  a  sun,  which  is  to  represent  the
subtile  azothic  life  fire,  and  by  two  storks  reaching  upward  for  the  higher
breath.  The  stork  is  in  India  a  dweller  on  roofs  and  tree  tops  and  the
tops  of  pillars,  yet  is  also  a  water  bird.  It  flies  high  and  is  considered  to
bring  good  fortune.  Storks  are  considered  attributes  of  Vayu,  the  wind-
spirit.  The  remainder  of  the  head-dress  appears  as  if  a  crown  with  lapels
falling  at  the  sides  but  not  covering  the  ears,  which  have  ornaments  like
those  of  the  Egyptian  Sphinxes,  and  is  something  like  the  cap  of  the  Phry-
gian Paris.  The  content  of  this  crown,  as  an  entirety,  gives  Prana  a
majestic  appearance.  It  has  also  a  curious  necklace  and  neck  pendant
resembling  an  air  tube  tied  at  intervals.  Prana  supports,  by  its  everlasting
arms,  the  veil  of  Maya  or  Illusion ;  the  mysterious  veil  of  life  embroi-
dered with  stars.  Upon  the  centre  of  its  breast  is  the  crescent  moon  in
the  midst  of  the  sun.  In  its  right  hand  is  a  sceptre  with  6  balls,  which
appear  flying  around  as  if  repelled  by  an  electrical  force,  probably  to  rep-
21


323

resent  the  six  poles  of  dimension.  The  fingers  of  its  left  hand  are  held
in  the  position  frequently  assumed  by  religionists  in  blessing.  The  arms
and  legs  are  winged,  and  the  former  raised  as  if  about  lo  fly.  Around
its  loins  is  a  rich  tegument  composed  of  rhomboids,  egg-like  ellipses  and
united  circles.     Its  dress  has  four  curious  projections  on  each  side  over


the  hips.  There  is  a  kilt  having  three  symbolical  birds  and  lines  of  stars,
above  and  below  them,  portrayed  upon  it.  The  lingam  is  also  shown
with  the  life-spirit  as  a  flame  united  with  the  crescent  moon,  the  symbol
of  purity  and  chastity.  Over  its  head  comes  down  the  streaming  efflux
of  the  Upper  Life,     It  has  not  visible  eye-pupils,  its  eyes  appear  as  cor-


323

ruscations  of  light ;  and  streams  of  light  and  life  proceed  from  the  eyes,
ears,  nostrils  and  mouth,  in  all  8.*  Around  its  navel,  the  seat  of  embry-
onic life,  is  a  circular  cloud  united  with  the  necklace  above  and  the  lin-
gam  life-spirit.  "As  the  bee  follows  its  queen  so  all  the  senses  follow
Prana,**  says  a  Hindu  sacred  book.  So  here  we  have  the  flying  bees.t
The  King  of  the  Breath  of  Life,  stands  upon  the  world-egg,  which  is  sur-
rounded by  the  Time  serpent  Ananta,  and  the  Hindu  Zodiac ;  from  it
burst  five  openings  like  the  five  senses  of  man,  and  from  the  Makrokosm,
the  five  senses  spring  out  as  the  Mikrokosm  or  terrestrial  earth  spirit  or
man.

Prana  or  the  Life-spirit  stands  above  all  the  creation  inferior  to  it.  It
is  the  soul  of  the  Universe.  The  Atharva-veda  says :  **  Reverence  to
Prana,  to  whom  this  universe  is  subject,  who  has  become  lord  of  all,  on
whom  all  is  supported. ";[  Prana  is  also  Purusha  or  AU  M,§and  therefore
the  totality  of  Brahma,  Vishna  and  Siva,  past,  present  and  future.  The
similarity  of  this  symbol  of  the  Makrokosm  when  compared  to  the  2^'ir
Anpeen  or  Appayim  and  the  Archetjrpal  Man,  of  the  Zoharic  writings,  is
striking.  II

Prana  was  to  the  Hindu  the  iEolomorphos  or  Plastic  Form,  the
Great  Spirit  of  all  Kosmic  life,  the  hidden  growth  power,  the  content  of

^Coinp.  Indian  Wisdom,  by  Monier  Williams,  notes  to  pp.  94,  126  and  190,  as  to
the  9  gated  city  of  Brahma.

t  Bees  were  a  sacied  symbol  among  some  of  the  ancient  Asiatic  peoples  and  also
with  the  Greeks ;  with  the  latter,  new  bom  souls  were  called,  bees.  Bees  were  con-
nected with  the  spirit  of  generation  and  from  this  the  name  of  the  great  nature  deity
Pri-Apis^  Father  Bee,  may  come.  With  the  Egyptians,  the  sacred  Bull  was  called  Apis^
f.  ^.,  Bee.  Isaiah  says :  "  Behold,  the  young  woman  shall  conceive,  and  bear  a  son,  and
shall  call  his  name  Immanuel  (God  with  us).  Butter  and  honey  shall  he  eat,  thcU  he
may  know  to  refuse  the  evil  and  choose  the  good,  etcP  (Is.  vii,  15 ;  comp.  ibid,  18.)
To  those  who  wish  to  know  more  of  the  curious  religious  symbolism  of,  the  bee ;  we
refer  to  the  learned  statements  in.  The  Book  of  God,  hereafter  cited.  Vol.  ii  and  iii ;
also  to  The  Platonist,  Vol.  iv,  (March,  1888,)  p.  160  sq.     See  also  ante,  p.  228  sq,

X  See  Indian  Wisdom,  by  Prof.  Monier  Williams.     London,  1875,  ?•  4^  ^'^^  note.

{  Ibid,,  103,  Barth's  Religions  of  India.     English  trans.,  1882,  p.  71  et  seq,

II  For  a  representation  of  the  Qabbalistic  Prototypic  Man,  the  Image,  see  Frontis-
piece.


324

the  concealed  plastic  and  the  all-pervading  vital  energy  of  the  growth  and
existence  of  the  created.  The  cause  of  destruction  and  change  yet  of
re-creation  and  life,  of  color,  light,  form,  texture,  substance,  etc.,  which
has  been  going  on  from  the  beginning  and  will  ever  go  on  to  the  end.*

The  Greeks  crystallized  this  idea  into  the  attributes  of  the  deity  whom
they  called  Pan,  who  was  with  them  the  same  as  rd  izav  the  universe,  or
we  may  say,  Pan  was  the  god  of  the  uni verse. f  They  also  identified  this
deity  with  the  Egyptian  god,  Khem.  {Religions  de  l^aniiquiti  considMes
principaletnent  dans  leurs  formes  symboliques^  etc.,  by  Dr.  Fred.  Creuzer,
French  ed.  by  J.  D.  Guigniaut,  Paris,  1825,  Vol.  i,  part  ii,  pp.  829  sq^
Ibid,  part  i,  p.  451  note,  495  sq.  510  sq,  Le  Panthion,  Bgyptien^  by  M.
Paul  Pierret,  Paris,  1881,  pp.  39,  46.)

Orpheus  in  one  of  his  poems  says:  All  things  are  full  of  Zeus,  and  in
him,  sees  the  earth,  water,  fire,  and  day  and  night.  Does  he  not  by  this
intend  to  describe  the  entire  universe,  its  head  sparkling  with  a  golden
crown  ?  Does  he  not  describe  heaven  glittering  with  the  rays  of  the  stars  ?
Do  not  the  beaming  eyes  represent  the  sun  and  moon  and  the  broad  chest,
the  air  ?  And  the  shoulders,  prominent  by  the  wide  extent  of  the  wings,
do  they  not  describe  the  velocity  of  winds  and  the  rapidity  shown  by
God  in  acting.  This  image,  thus  set  forth  by  Orpheus,  is  almost  the  same
as  that  by  which  in  ancient  times  the  Greeks  described  Pan  and  the  2ieus
who  was  called,  the  Pan  Trav,  /.  ^.,  the  whole,  only  because  he  represents
the  universe^  a  fact  proved  by  the  symbols.  The  horns,  as  Boccaccio
says,  were  given  to  him  to  signify  the  rays  of  the  sun,  moon  and  stars ;
the  ruddy  face  means  the  setherial  fire,  the  long  beard  the  masculine  ele-
ments, the  skin  covered  with  spots,  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  the  staff
with  its  crutch  turned  towards  the  rear,  the  power  over  things  he  owns
and  the  years  that  ever  return  to  him.     The  heptaulus,  or  syrinx  with

*  The  scholar  will  find  many  similarities  to  the  Speculative  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  espe-
cially as  to  the  four  worlds  and  ten  emanations  from  the  Deity,  in  the  Upanishads  of
the  Hindu  Veda's,  we  refer  him  as  to  this,  to  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  edited  by
Prof.  Max  Muller,  Vol.  i,  236  sq,  among  the  many  places.

f  The  student  will  find  a  number  of  references,  etc.,  upon  this  subject  in  the  work,
entitled  The  Book  of  God,  etc.,  by  Dr.  Keneally.  London.  We  refer  to  Vol.  i,  pp.
88,  98,  294;  ii,  pp.  23,  104  j^.,  348  J^.,  540;  iii,  pp.  188,  210,  324,  734.


325

seven  pipes,  in  his  left  hand,  expresses  the  celestial  harmony  of  the  planets
which  is  shown  by  their  motion  more  than  by  anything  else.  The  lower
limbs,  rough  and  hairy  and  with  ram's  feet,  mean  only  the  hard,  rough,
rugged  earth ;  covered  with  all  kinds  of  trees,  herbs  and  plants.  The
ram's  feet,  etc.,  signify  the  fecundity  by  which  life  in  the  universe  is  con-
tinued and  preserved,  in  a  mystical  way.  Both  the  Egyptians  and  Greeks
sometimes  represented  Pan  or  the  Lyksean  Zeus,  under  the  form  of  a
male  goat  as  the  representative  of  continued  creation  and  its  preserver.

We  give,  Figure  32,  from
the  learned  Jesuit,  Kircher,
a  representation  of  Pan  or
Zeus  Lykjeus,  as  the  Makro-
kosmos.  A.  A  ruddy  face.
The  power  of  astherial  fire
or  heat,  in  the  universe.  B.
The  power  of  the  celestial
rays  on  those  things  which
are  under  the  moon.  C.  Masculine  elements.
D.  Power  of  the  year  and  its  return  and  of  all
revolutions.  £.  All  things  are  maintained  by
its  virility.  F.  Power  of  the  Firmament,  the
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  G.  The  earth  (the
feminine  element)  teeming  with  plants,  seeds
and  trees.  H.  Fountain  of  water  and  liquids
(of  the  feminine  element)  by  irrigation  fertilizing
the  earth.  1.  The  fields,  crops  and  Other  vege-
Fipm  ^  A  Ua(«iyph[c  rep-  table  matters.  K,  Harmony  of  the  seven  planets.
nMMuias  or  zeiu  and  Pin.  ]___  Uncqual  and  rough  mountains  of  different
heights.  M.  Power  of  fecundity.  N.  The  cubical,  or  six-sided  solid
foundation.  0.  Power,  energy  and  velocity  of  the  winds  and  their  rapid-
ity of  action.

The  ancients  asserted  that  Pan  dwelt  in  deserted  places,  so  as  to  indi-
cate his  loneness  or  unity,  for  the  universe  is  one  and  created  by  One.
He  is  also  clothed  in  the  skin  of  a  male  spotted  leopard  or  a  fallow  deer,
to  signify  the  beautiful  variety  of  things  and  colors,  seen  in  the  world.


326

These  doubtless  have  an  Asiatic  origin,*  The  Roman  Church  has  changed
the  luptrcalia,  one  of  the  festivals  to  Pan  on  February  isth,  to  the  Pro-
cession of  Lighted  Candles.

In  the  Middle  Ages  the  Makrokosmos  was  thought  of  as  the  Greek  and
Roman,  Atlas ;  which  was  asserted,  by  these  peoples,  to  support  the  uni-


-^^■"S*'^s^'

^^^

^&

^^kl

J_W^^^vT

%

^^^^^

».--*3  i

^^^P^

vcise.  See  Diagram  V,  ante,  p.  319.  It  was  also  portrayed  as  in  the  fore-
going plate.  Figure  33,  an  exact  copy  of  one  made  in  A.  D.  1503.  The
fonn  and  arrangement  set  forth  in  this  drawing  are  of  great  antiquity.
This  arrangement  and  form  have  been  brought  down  to  our  own  day  and
are  yet  shown  in  the  almanacs.

*  Comp.  (Edipi  jEgyptiaci,  Tomut  Sttundia,  c  /■>,  claiiii  vi,  {  v,  p.  43J  sq.     Ed.
RoiHti  i6s3t


32?

We  also  give  Figure  34,  an  exact  copy  of  another  engraving  of  the
same  date.*  It  is  most  important  to  all  occultists  as  containing  an  import-
ant occult  meaning.     We  may  explain  this  in  a  subsequent  work  and  will


only  say  here,  that  it  has  much  in  common  with  the  secret  religious  sys-
tems of  the  oldest  peoples  of  the  entire  world,  both  the  New  and  Old.

*  Diagram  V  and  Figures  33  and  34,  are  taken  from  the  etrliett  Encjclopntlia  pnb-
lisbed  ID  the  Middle  Ages,  viz:  MargaHta  phUstephita,  totitu  pkiletephia  ratitmaSt
et  maralit  printipia  duedteim  liMt  dialegict  tempUelem.  Friitirgi,  Jeannts  Sthttia,
'JOS,  it  ^0-

The  author  was  Prior  of  a  Carthusian  nunnery  neat  Pribnrg.  Subsequent  editjom
were  Stnuburg,  Grilninger,  1504,  1508,  1512,  1515  in  4I0;  Basle,  1535,  t;83,  and  an
Italian  Ed.,  Venice,  1599.  Panzer  and  Hain  refer  to  an  imprestion  as  early  as  1496.
We  also  have  a  copy  of  an  Anglo-Saxon  almanac,  said  to  be  1386  A.  D.,  which  faat  a
Tciy  similar  figure  to  No.  33.


328

From  the  A'tzeel-oothic  World,  through  the  conjunction  of  the  King
and  Queen,  proceeds  the  World  of  Creation,  called,  the  B'ree-atic  or
Olam  E^ree-ah  also  Qur-saiy-ahy  t\  e.,  the  Throne.  In  this  Condition,
creation  as  we  understand  the  word,  begun.  It  is  considered  as  the  abode
of  only  pure  spirits.  It  also  contains  a  continuation  of  the  emanating
rays  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  of  A'tzeel-ah,  as  a  matter  of  course  still  further
removed  from  Ain  Soph  and  the  first  Ten,  but  a  continuation  and  not  in
any  way  absolutely  separate  and  distinct  from  them,  but  nevertheless  of  a
more  limited  and  circumscribed  potency.  The  purely  spiritual  substances
which  it  contains  have  not  any  admixture  of  matter,  as  we  understand
matter ;  but  they  are  inferior  to  the  First  World  and  superior  to  the  follow-
ing j  that  of  the  Powers,  Intelligences  or  Angels,  of  the  planets  and  celes-
tial spheres.  As  Uyooq-nah  the  Prototype,  occupies  the  First  World  so  the
great  Presence  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  Metatron ;  occupies  the  Second
World.  He  alone  constituting  the  entire  World  of  Spirits  or  Angels.  Me-
tatron is  "  the  garment,"  or  visible  manifestation  of  the  Ain  Soph,  and  his
name  =  314,  is  equal  to  Shaddai,  /.  ^.,  Almighty.  (Zohar,  iii,  231a.)
Metatron  governs  the  visible  world,  preserves  the  unity,  harmony  and  rev-
olutions of  the  spheres,  planets  and  all  the  heavenly  bodies ;  and  is  the
Commander,  under  the  Will  of  the  Deity,  of  all  the  myriads  of  the  angelic
hosts,  of  the  next  or  Ye'tzeer-atic  World.  These  are  divided  into  ten
ranks  answering  to  the  number  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth.

Following,  and  also  proceeding  from  Olam  E^ree-ah  by  emanation,  is
Olam  Ye^tzeer-ahf  i.  e.y  the  World  of  Formation.  It  is  the  abode  of  the
Angels,  the  Intelligences  of  the  Celestial  planets  and  stars,  and  is  also  called
Mala^ hay-ahy  /.  ^.,  of  the  Angels.  It  has  also  Ten  Sephiroth,  which  pro-
ceed from  and  are  only  continuations  of,  the  Ten  of  the  A'tzeel-atic  World
through  the  Ten  of  the  B'ree-atic,  being  only  extensions  of  the  first  man-
ifestations of  Ain  Soph  through  the  preceding  Ten  Sephiroth,  but  further
removed.  The  Zohar  (ii,  43^)  says :  "  For  the  servants  (Sephiroth)  that
serve  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  It  made  the  Throne  (the  B'ree-atic  World)
with  four  supports  (pedestals)  and  six  steps  (platforms,  dias)  to  the
Throne,  together  ten.  The  whole  is  like  a  cup  of  blessing.  That  which
is  in  it  is  ten  words,  like  the  Thorah  which  is  given  in  ten  words ;  and  as
the  universe,  which  is  the  Ma'a-seh  Be'resheeth,  which  has  been  created


329

by  ten  sayings.  The  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  affixed  to  the  Throne  legions
to  serve  it,  (the  Ten  Angelic  Hosts,  the  Ye'tzeer-atic  World.)  These  are ;
Malakheem,  Areleem,  'Hay-y6th,  Ophaneem,  Hash-maleem,  E'leem,  Elo-
heem,  Benai  Eloheem,  Isheem  and  Serapheem.  And  for  the  service  of
these,  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  made  Sama-el  and  his  legions,  who  are
as  it  were,  the  clouds  to  be  used  to  come  down  upon  the  earth.  And  they
are  their  horses :  and  above  the  clouds  is  the  Merkabah,  /.  ^.,  the  Chariot
Throne,  therefore  it  is  said :  (Is.  xix,  i)  '  Behold  YHVH  rideth  upon  a
swift  cloud  and  shall  come  into  Misraim  (Egypt).'  And  so  the  Holy,
Blessed  be  He  !  rules  Mitzraim."  The  Ten  Sephiroth  of  this  Condition
or  World,  are  still  contemplated  as  without  taint  of  earthly  matter,  or
matter  as  man  understands  the  word.  In  this  World  reside  those  intelli-
gent and  incorporeal  beings,  each  wrapped  in  a  luminous  vestment,  which
are  sexless  and  capable,  by  the  Divine  permission,  of  assuming  a  form
sensible  to  mankind  when  they  appear  to  him.  They  are  also  ministering
spirits,  energies  or  forces,  which  do  the  Will  of  the  Deity.

The  Zohar  (iii,  6Sa)  says :  "  The  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  animated  every
part  of  the  firmament  with  a  separate  spirit,  and  forthwith  all  the  Heavenly
Hosts  were  standing  and  remained  so  before  Him.  This  is  meant  by  the
Psalmist  (xxxiii,  6),  '  By  the  breath  of  His  mouth  were  made  all  their
hosts.* "  The  angels  are  of  two  kinds — good  and  bad;  and  they  have
their  respective  princes.

Among  the  angelic  hosts  which  people  the  Ye'tzeer-atic  World,  one
angel  has  control  over  one  sphere,  another  of  another  sphere,  one  has
charge  of  the  sun,  another  of  the  moon,  another  of  the  earth,  another  of
the  ocean,  another  of  fire,  another  of  the  wind,  another  of  the  light,
another  of  the  changes  of  the  seasons,  etc.  These  angels  are  only  repre-
sentatives of  forces  or  energies,  they  are  named  after  the  heavenly  bodies,
etc.,  which  they  are  supposed  to  rule,  one  is  called  Nogah^  t.  ^.,  Venus,
one  Ma-^ameem  {dam^  /.  ^.,  blood)  Mars,  one  is  Eizem  hd-Sha^  mayeem^
i.  f,,  of  the  clearness  (or,  bone),  of  the  heavens,  (Ex.  xxiv,  lo,  Ezek.  x)
one  is  C/nW,  t.  ^.,  of  light,  another  Nooriel^  /.^.,  of  fire,  etc.  (See  Zohar,
i,  42a,  b;  43a  et  seq^)

The  fourth  and  last  Condition  is  termed ;  the  World  of  Action  or  Olam
A'  seey-ahy  the   A'seey-atic  World,    also  called  Oiam    Q'Uppothy  /.  e,.


330

World  of  the  Shells  or  Rinds,  the  Demons.  It  contains  the  actual  mat-
ter of  the  planets  or  spheres  {^gill-gooleem)  and  what  man  terms  matter.
It  is  the  residence  of  Sama-el,  the  Prince  of  Darkness  and  his  legions.  In
it  is  our  sublunary  world,  which  is  subject  to  matter  re-birth  and  the  dis-
solution of  the  matter  forms  but  not  the  destruction  of  the  essential  atoms.
It  has  the  operative  qualities  of  all  the  preceding  Ten  Sephiroth,  but  much
diminished  because  further  removed  from  the  original  source,  and  is
merely  an  extension  of  their  rays  or  energies  to  their  last  degree  or  point
of  cessation.  The  Zohar  (ii,  43^^),  says :  For  the  service  of  the  Angelic
World  "the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  made  Sama-el  and  his  legions,  /.  e.^
the  World  of  Action,  who  are  as  it  were,  the  clouds  to  be  used  (by  the
Upper  Spirits)  to  ride  upon  in  their  descent  to  the  Earth,  and  serve,  as  it
were,  for  their  horses.  Hence  it  is  written  :  '  Behold  YHVH  rideth  upon
a  swift  cloud,  and  shall  come  into  Egypt,'  etc."     (Is.  xix,  i.)

The  substances  of  this  Condition  or  World,  are  considered  to  be  of
matter,  limited  by  the  dimensions  and  perceptible  to  the  senses,  by  means
of  the  multiplicity  of  forms.  It  is  subject  to  change,  birth,  death,  cor-
ruption and  re-birth,  yet  not  anything  in  it  is  considered  as  ever  totally
annihilated  or  destroyed  in  essence  or  atom.  It  is  the  abode  of  the  Evil
Spirit  and  his  demoniacal  forces.

It  is  a  singular  thing  that  in  Genesis  (i,  3-5),  the  production  of  light
is  mentioned  five  times,  the  first  and  second  times  the  Qabbalists  refer  to
the  same  light.  This  mention  of  light,  four  times,  has  been  referred  to
the  Qabbalistic  idea  of  the  four  Worlds.  (Conciliator  of  R.  Manasseh
ben  Israel,  etc.     English  Ed.  by  Lindo.     Vol.  i,  p.  7.)

The  expression  "  Be  Light !  and  Light  was,"  is  referred  to  the  A'tzeel*
atic  World.  "  Elohim  saw  the  light ^  that  it  was  good;'*  applies  to  the
B'ree^tic  World,  *'  Elohim  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness;"  applies
to  the  Ye'tzeer-atic  World,  that  of  good  and  bad  angels,  those  of  light
and  darkness.  "  Elohim  called  the  lighiy  Day,  and  the  darkness  he
called.  Night;"  refers  to  the  A'seey-atic  or  Matter-world,  in  which,  is
Day  and  Night.

The  demons,  or  bad  angels,  are  considered  as,  the  grossest  and  most
deficient  of  all  forms,  are  called  the  Qlippothy  or  mere  Shells  or  Rinds  of
existence.     They  are  thought  of  as  energies  or  forces  which  are  destruc-


33^

tive  and  injurious  to  man.  They  too  form  Ten  Degrees  answering  to  the
lowest  extremity  of  the  Ten  Sephirothic  emanative  rays,  and  in  these
Ten  lower  degrees,  darkness  and  impurity  increase  the  further  they  are
removed  from  the  primordial  source.  Thus  the  first  two  demoniacal  de-
grees are  considered,  as  only  the  absence  of  visible  form  and  organiza-
tion, which  in  Genesis  is  termed  ;  ^^Tohoo  W'bohoo^^^  which  preceded  the
creation  of  the  order  of  the  Universe.  The  third  degree  is  looked  upon
as  the  abode  of  darkness,  which  Genesis  says  at  first  covered  the  face  of
the  earth.  After  this  come  the  seven  infernal  halls  {Sevwah  HaikhalotK)
or  hells,  (^Gai-hinam,)  the  abode  of  the  demons  and  their  princes.  Here
are  tortured,  the  existences  which  were  led  astray  on  earth.  These  seven
halls  or  hells,  are  divided  into  numerous  compartments,  for  the  different
kinds  of  punishment  apportioned  for  the  different  species  of  earthly  sin.
The  Prince  of  the  whole  region  is  Sama-el,  /.  ^.,  the  Angel  of  Venom,  Poi-
son, or  Death.*  He  is  thought  of  as  the  Satan  of  the  Old  Testament,  who
therein  plays  more  the  part  of  deceiver  and  accuser  than  that  of  a  pun-
isher.  The  Qabbalah  however  considers  Sama-el  as  the  Satan  who  seduced
Eve.  The  Talmud  holds  to  the  same  view,  it  says ;  "The  evil  spirit  Satan
and  the  Angel  of  Death,  are  the  same."  (Treatise  Bavah  Bathra,  i6a.)
He  has  a  female  companion,  called  Esheth  Zenooneemy  i.  ^.,  the  Harlot.
They  are  usually  represented  as  united  under  the  name  of  'Ha-yoh,  /.^.,  the
Beast.  (Comp.  Zohar,  ii,  255-259;  i,  35^.)  Which  therefore  is  an  asser-
tion that  the  Great  Power  of  Evil  is  androgenic.  A  dark  shadow  of  the
manifestation  of  the  Great  Androgene  of  Good.

"  The  Ten  Sephiroth  of  A'tzeel-ooth  have  scintillated  and  brought
forth  the  Ten  Sephiroth  of  B*ree-ah,  and  from  the  energy  of  these  Ten  of
B'ree-ah,  sparkled  forth  the  scintillations  of  the  World  Ye'tzeer-ah,  and
through  these,  the  Ten  Sephiroth  of  the  World  A*seey-ah  were  sealed,,
and  all  the  Sephiroth  of  all  the  Worlds,  divide  themselves  into  fives."
(^Etz  ha-Jfay-yenij  /.  <?.,  Tree  of  Life,  fol.  253,  col.  2.)

Not  any  of  the  Sephiroth  of  the  Lower  Worlds  are  considered  as  of  an
equally  divine  nature  as  those  of  A'tzeel-ooth.  "  The  KaiUmy  i.  e.y
Vessels,  Vases,  Sephiroth,  of  A'tzeel-ooth,  htcomt  Neshamah  for  B'ree-ah,.

♦  Sam,  I.  e..  Poison  or  Venom,  and  Ail  or  El,  1.  ^.,  Angel,  therefore  the  Angel  of
Poison.


332

Ye'tzeer-ah  and  A'seey-ah,  and  these  latter  are  not  called  truly  divine ;
because  even  their  Neshamah  are  Kailem  and  are  not  Lights  from  A'tzeel-
ooth."  These  four  Worlds  form  together  an  Unit,  a  single  Great  Man,
the  Makrokosm  or  Adam  Illa-ah.  {Tiqqooneem  haz-Zohar,  TYqgaon,
70,  also  Sepher  Kesai  Malekh^  fol.  52.)

In  the  philosophy  of  Ibn  Gebirol,  these  Worlds  can  be  distinguished,
viz: — That  of  the  Perfect  Form  or  Will ;  that  of  the  Simple  Substances
by  which  our  creation  begun ;  that  of  the  Heavenly  Orbits  or  Spheres
and  their  Intelligences;  and  that  of  the  Celestial  Matter  Spheres  or
Planets  and  the  Elements  of  our  Matter-world  or  Universe.  Ibn  Gebi-
rol says ;  it  is  necessary  to  consider  matter  as  having  two  extremities,  one
going  upwards  to  the  highest  limit  of  creation,  and  as  far  as  the  limit  of
conjunction  of  matter  with  form  ;  the  other  extending  downwards  to  the
point  of  cessation;  that  is  the  extreme  inferior  limit  in  which  all  form
«nds.  The  highest  ascends  to  the  Spiritual,  the  Will ;  which  is  above
the  celestial  spheres  or  orbits,  and  which  descends  as  the  Unity  and  Sim-
plicity, to  the  limit,  the  commencement  of  creation ;  and  then,  below
the  celestial  spheres,  takes  a  corporeal  form,  and  as  it  descends,  becomes
more  and  more  corporeal,  until  it  reaches  the  limit  of  cessation.

The  doctrine  of  the  Makrokosm  and  the  Mikrokosm,  is  both  in  Ibn
Gebirol  and  the  Zohar.  Our  author  says :  (Bk.  iv,  §  6  and  §  44)
**  The  Little  World  (man,  the  Mikrokosm)  bears  a  resemblance  to  the
Great  World  (the  universe),  through  its  order  and  construction.  The
substance  of  the  intellect,  which  is  the  most  subtile,  simple  and  sublime
of  all  the  substances  of  the  Little  World,  (Gebirol  is  referring  here  to  the
Neshamah  or  Higher  Soul)  is  not  (directly)  attached  to  the  body ;  because
the  Spirit  (/.  ^.,  Rua'h)  and  the  Soul  (1.  ^.,  the  Vital  Spirit,  the  NephesK) ;
are  intermediaries  between  the  two."  He  then  shows  a  similar  order  in
the  construction  of  the  entire  universe,  and  afterwards  says;  if  one
should  wish  to  imagine  the  construction  of  the  universe  and  the  uni-
versal body,  and  the  universal  body  and  the  spiritual  substances  which
surrotmd  it,  let  him  contemplate  the  construction  of  man,  "in  whom
thou  wilt  find  an  analogy."  The  body  of  man  corresponds  to  the  uni-
versal body ;  the  spiritual  substances  which  put  it  in  movement,  to  the  uni-
versal substances  which  put  in  movement  the  universal  body  ;  among  these


333

(spiritual)  substances,  those  which  are  inferior  obey  the  superior  and
(successively)  submit  to  them,  until  that  which  is  movement  goes  back  to
the  substance  of  the  intellect.  The  intellect  governs  and  rules  (these
substances),  and  all  the  substances  in  man's  body,  follow  and  submit  to
his  intellect ;  and  he  says  :  this  is  their  master  and  judge.  All  is  disposed
in  the  particular  spirit,  that  of  the  man,  as  in  the  World  of  the  universe,
and  man  is  a  Mikrokosm.  Maimonides  holds  to  the  same  idea,  and  has
said  a  great  deal  upon  the  subject.  (Moreh  Ne'boo-kheem,  French  Ed.
by  S.  Munk,  I.  c.  Ixxii  and  notes.  English  Ed.  I.  Ixxii,  p.  258,  276
and  notes.)  The  theory,  that  the  universe  was  one  finite  system  regu-
lated by  one  and  the  same  idea,  was  that  of  Aristotle,  Plato  and  most  of
the  philosophers  of  the  Middle  Ages.

In  Isaiah  the  Qabbalists  find  a  reference  to  the  Qabbalistic  philosophy
as  to  the  Four  Worlds.  *'  Fear  not  for  I  am  with  thee.  I  will  bring  thy
seed  from  the  East,  and  gather  thee  from  the  west ;  I  will  say  to  the

«

North  'give  up'  and  to  the  south  'Keep  not  back.'  'Bring  My  sons
from  far,  and  My  daughters  from  the  ends  of  the  earth ;  even  every  one
that  is  called  by  My  Name  I  For  I  created  {E* ree-oK)  him  for  My  Ghryy
\ formed {YeUzar)  him;  yea  I  made  {A^seey-aK)  him.*  "*

A'tzeel-ah  (said  to  be  "^V^  from  ^9  Atzal,  to  flow  outf),  is  the  World
of  Emanation.  B'ree-ah  (said  to  be  from  barah^  to  create  or  shape,
more  likely  from  the  Sanskrit  Brih^  to  expand),  contains  the  World  of
pure  forms  or  simple  substances  (/.  e,y  ideas).  These  are  thought  of  and
considered  in  the  Qabbalah  as  spiritual,  intelligent  beings.  Ye'tzeer-ah
(said  to  be  from  Ye*  tzar,  to  form),  the  world  of  the  Celestial  Spheres,  of
the  Souls  or  Angels.  A'seey-ah  (said  to  be  from  A^sahy  to  make)  the
World  of  Matter,  of  objects  perceptible  to  the  senses,  which  come  into
^ii^gj  grow,  die  and  decay.     (See  ante,  pp.  53,  198.)

They  are  also  paralleled  by  the  four  divisions  of  Plotinus,  viz :  the

*  Is.  xliii,  5-7.  Comp.  Is.  xlv,  6-7,  12.  Philo  Judseus  in  De  Somnis,  Bk.  i  (Bohn's
Ed.,  Vol.  ii,  pp.  292-343)  especially  {{  iii,  vii,  xi,  appears  to  refer  to  the  Four  worlds
of  the  Qabbalah.

f  See  what  Joel  says  against  this  in  his,  Religions-phiiosophie  des  Sokar,  p.  203  sq.
More  likely  it  is  from  a  Sanskrit  root.


334

One,  the  Nous  and  its  ideas,  the  Soul,  and  the  Matter-kingdom.  Neo-
platonism  according  to  Lassen  {ante,  p.  1 70)  came  from  India.  *

The  subtile  distinctions  between  the  Neshamah,  Upper  Soul  or  Spirit,
Rua'b,  the  Moral  and  Reasoning  power,  and  Nephesh,  the  Vital  or
merely  Animal  Life,  of  man's  Spiritual  existence,  as  contained  in  the
Qabbatah,  has  been  quite  ably  set  forth  by  C.  De  Leiningen  in  an  Essay
delivcrcd,March  5,  1887;  before  the  Psychological  Society  of  Munich,
Germany.  \

*  For  a  docription  of  FigUK  35,  Me  The  Psih,  New  York,  for  Mftrch,  1887.

t.See  DU  Spkyiu:,  Ldprig,  188? ;  Li  Lcha,  Pwi*.  Juiuaiy,  1888,  p.  231  iq.


—Hindu  Qibballilic  lymbol  of  Itie  Fout  WoKdi.


XVIII.

EXCERPTS  FROM  THE  ZOHAR  :  AS  TO  THE  MAN  WITH  THE  HEAVY  BURDEN.
VICARIOUS  ATONEMENT  BY  THE  MESSIAH.  THE  SHE'kHEEN-AH.  A
FORMULA  OF  THE  GREAT  NAMES.  ORIGINAL  SIN.  POWER  OP  SATAN.
FREE  WILL.  THE  HEAVENLY  MEDIATRIX  BETWEEN  GOD  AND  MAN.
NECESSITY  OF  REPENTANCE  FOR  SALVATION.  ETERNAL  REWARD  AND
PUNISHMENT  IN  THE  FUTURE  LIFE.  RESURRECTION  OF  THE  DEAD  IN
THE    BODY.      JUDGMENT   OF   THE   SOX^^    OF   THE   WICKED,    ETC.

IN  the  introduction  written  by  R.  'Hiz*qee-yah,  which  is  very  old,
and  which  forms  part  of  the  Brody  edition  of  the  Zohar  (i,  5^  sq,)^
is  an  account  of  a  journey  taken  by  R.  El'azar,  son  of  R.  Shim-on
b.  Yo'hai,  and  R.  Abbah ;  to  visit  the  father-in-law  of  the  former.  Whilst
on  the  way,  they  meet  with  a  man  bearing  a  heavy  burden.  They  con-
versed together  upon  the  Ma-a'seh  Be'resheeth  and  the  origin  of  the  Sab^
bath :  the  explanations  of  the  Thorah,  by  the  man  with  the  burden,  were
so  wonderful,  that  they  asked  him  for  his  name ;  he  replied :  ''Do  not
ask  me  who  I  am ;  but  we  will  all  proceed  with  the  explanation  of  the
Thorah.**  They  asked,  "Who  caused  thee  thus  to  walk  and  carry  such
a  heavy  load?**  He  answered:  "The  letter  ^  (Yod,  which  :=  10,  and
is  the  symbolical  letter  of  Kether,  and  the  essence  and  germ  of  the  Holy
Name  mn^  YHVH)  made  war,  etc."  "Ride  on  one  of  our  mules,  they
said,  we  will  carry  thy  burden,"  but  he  replied:  "  Have  I  not  told  you,
that  it  is  an  order  of  the  King,  until,  etc.*'  "  Tell  us  thy  place  of  habi-
tation ?  **  finally  they  said  to  him;  he  replied  :  "  The  place  of  my  abode
is  good  and  sublime  to  me,  and  it  is  a  tower,  which  hovers  in  the  air,
grand  and  mighty,  and  the  inhabitants  of  that  tower  are  the  Holy,
Blessed  be  He  !  and  a  '  poor.  *  (This  may  refer  to  the  Messiah,  who  is
called  '  lowly,  and  rideth  on  an  ass.*  Zekh.  ix,  9.)  That  place  is  my
residence,  and  we  moved  from  there,  and  I  carry  that  which  is  heavy
*    *     *     They  said  to  him  :  '  If  thou  wilt  tell  us  the  name  of  thy  father,


336

we  will  kiss  the  dust  of  thy  feet.*  He  replied  :  'And  why?  I  am  not
used  to  becoming  haughty  through  the  Thorah ;  but  as  to  my  father ^  he
had  his  dwelling  in  the  Great  Sea^  and  was  a  fish  therein;  which  de-
stroyed the  Great  Sea  from  one  end  to  the  other,  and  he  was  great  and
mighty  and  'Ancient  of  Days,'  until  he  swallowed  all  the  other  fishes
in  the  (Great)  Sea ;  and  after  that,  he  produced  for  us,  the  living  and
existing  beings,  from  all  the  best  in  the  world ;  and  in  his  might  he  swims
through  the  (^Great)  Sea  in  one  moment.  And  then,  he  brought  me
forth  like  an  arrow  in  the  hand  of  a  powerful  man,  and  hid  me  in  that
place,  of  which  I  told  you ;  and  then  returned  to  his  place  and  hid  him-
self in  theSea,^  R.  El'azar  listened  to  his  words  and  said  to  him:  *  Thou
art  the  son  of  the  Holy  Flame,  thou  art  the  son  of  Rab  Ham-'«»/r-ah
Sabah,  (the  Old,)*  thou  art  the  son  of  the  Light  of  the  Thorah  and  thou
goest  burdened  behind  us ! '  "  On  page  9^  ibid,^  may  be  found  other  ref-
erences to  the  Great  Sea  and  its  inhabitants,  f  The  feminine  Sephirah,
Binah,  is  sometimes  termed  by  the  Qabbalists,  the  Great  Sea.  Among
her  divine  Names  are  YaH  and  Elohim.  She  is  called  the  Great  Mother,
the  Upper  Mother,  the  supernal  n  (Heh)  of  mrr.  She  is  the  Holy  Spirit
and  the  Upper  She*kheen-ah.  Her  symbol  is  the  brooding  dove,  she
brooded  over  the  face  of  the  waters  at  the  creation.  The  Great  Fish  is
in  the  mythology  of  the  Akkadians  and  Babylonians  and  is  likely  the  Le-
viathan in  the  Qabbalah.  {Kab,  Denud,  Idrah  Rabbah,  §  ^^Z-)  Note
also  the  invocation  by  the  Roman  Church  of  the  Virgin  and  her  Son,  of
'Hokhmah,  Wisdom  or  the  Ligos,  i,  ^.,  Word ;  and  Binah,  the  Upper
Mediating  Mother,  Universal  Intellect,  the  Great  Sea  or  Holy  Spirit.
Mary  likely  equals  the  Latin  Mare^  i.  ^.,  Sea.  According  to  a  hymn
of  the  Xth  century  sung  at  the  Annunciation,  she  is ;

"  Star  of  the  Sea,
Gracious  Mother  of  God
And  always  Virgo,
Happy  Gate  of  Heaven."  %

*  The  Jlsh  in  Aramaic  or  Chaldee  is  |U  nuttf  pron.  noon,

f  See  ante,  p.  243  sq.  as  to  the  Great  Sea  among  the  Akkadians  and  Chaldeans,  also
the  Fish.god.     Comp.  Dr.  J.  P.  Lundy's  Monumental  Christianity,  pp.  130  sq,,  368  sq,
X  Rambach's  Collection,  i,  219.


337

The  Atonement.  "When  the  righteous  are  afflicted  by  ilUiess  or
sufferings  in  order  to  atone  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  it  is  that  all  the
sinners  of  their  generation  (period)  may  receive  redemption.  How  is  this
proven  ?  By  all  the  members  of  the  animal  (human)  body.  At  the  time
when  all  the  members  (of  the  animal,  human  body),  suffer  through  an
evil  illness,  then  one  member  must  be  beaten  (operated  upon,)  so  that  all
the  remaining  (members)  may  recover.  Which  member?  The  arm.  It
is  beaten  (operated  upon)  and  the  blood  is  drawn  from  it,  and  from  this
results  the  convalescence  of  all  the  other  members  of  the  body.  So  it  is
with  the  children  of  the  world,  its  members  stand  towards  each  other
equally,  like  members  (of  the  human  body)  each  to  the  other.*  At  the
time  that  the  Holy,  blessed  be  He !  desires  to  give  health  (sanctification)
to  the  world.  He  afflicts  a  just  (pious)  one  from  the  midst  (of  the  world)
with  sickness  and  pain,  and  through  him  He  gives  health  to  all  the  world.
How  is  this  proven  ?  It  is  written :  (Is.  liii,  5)  '  And  he  was  woimded  for
our  transgression,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities  *  *  *  and  by  his
stripes  (wounds)  are  we  healed,  etc'  '  By  his  stripes  (wounds) '  like  the
bruises  (operations)  made  by  the  bleeding  of  the  arm,  are  we  healed ;
that  is  there  is  brought  to  us,  as  members  of  the  whole  body,  conva-
lescence." t

*  All  mankind  as  the  descendants  of  Adam,  are  looked  upon  in  the  Qabbalah,  as  one
great  totality  and  brotherhood,  one  great  imited  stream  of  life.  As  the  great  universal
spiritual  celestial  man,  the  Upper  Man,  the  Makrokosm,  borne  or  carried  in  the  ter-
restrial universal  Adam,  the  Mikrokosra,  in  germ,  and  spiritually  and  still  living  in  the
flesh;  by,  through  and  from  the  life-giving  efflux  of  the  Makrokosm,  the  Adam  Illa-ah,
etc.,  as  we  before  set  forth.  The  Qabbalistic  doctrine  as  to  A'reekh  An-peen  and  2^'ir
An-peen,  is  also  here  to  be  noted.

f  Zohar  iii,  fol.  21&7,  {  Pin^has.  (Rayah  Me'hemnah)  Amsterdam  Ed.  iii,  fol.
88,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Edition.  Zohar,  Cremona  Edition  iii,  fol.  loitf,  col.  402.  Among
the  ancient  Hindus,  an  atonement  was  asserted  to  be  through  the  sacrifice  of  Purusha,
the  Great  Hindu  Universal  Ideal  Man.  (Indian  Wisdom  by  Monier  Williams.  Lon-
don, 1875,  P*  ^*  Hinduism,  by  the  same  author,  pp.  36,  90.)  Buddha  is  also  reported
as  saying :  <<  Let  all  the  evils  (sins)  flowing  from  the  corruption  of  the  fourth  or  degen-
erate age  (the  Kali)  fall  upon  me,  but  let  the  world  be  redeemed.*'  (Indian  Wisdom,
above  cited,  p.  55  note  i.)  As  to  the  idea  among  the  ancient  people  of  Babylonia,  etc.,
see  ante^  p.  240.

22


33«

Atonement  by  the  Messiah.  ''Those  souls  (Neshmostn),  which  are
in  the  lowest  Paradise  (i.  e.,  Gan  Eden),  hover  about  and  look  around
through  the  world  *  *  *  and  when  they  behold  suffering,  ill,  or
patient  martyrs,  and  those  who  suffer  for  the  unity  of  their  Master,  they
return  and  inform  the  Messiah.  At  the  time  when  they  inform  him  (the
Messiah)  of  the  afflictions  of  Israel  in  Exile,  and  that  the  sinners  among
them  do  not  reflect  in  order  to  know  their  Lord,  he  lifts  up  his  voice  and
weeps  because  of  those  sinners,  as  it  is  written  :  *  And  he  is  wounded  for
our  misdeeds,  etc.*  (Is.  liii,  5.)  Whereupon  the  souls  return  and  remain
in  their  places.  In  the  Garden  of  Eden  is  a  palace,  which  is  called :  the
Palace  of  the  Wicked  Children.  The  Messiah  goes  up  into  this  Palace  and
calls  all  the  sufferings,  pains  and  tribulations  of  Israel  to  come  upon  him-
self. And  they  all  come  upon  him.  If  he  had  not  thus  taken  upon  him-
self the  punishment  of  Israel  for  the  transgressions  of  the  Law,  not  any
man  would  be  able  to  endure  the  sufferings  (due  for  such  transgressions),
as  it  is  written:  "In  truth  he  took  upon  himself  oiu:  sickness,  etc.  *
*  *  :fj  Whilst  the  children  of  Israel  lived  in  the  Holy  Land,  they  kept
from  the  world,  all  pain  and  suffering  by  their  prayers,  worship  and  sacri-
fice ;  but  now  the  Messiah  does  it,  and  removes  them  (the  sufferings,
etc.)  from  the  world  until  the  child  of  man  departs  from  this  world  and
receives  his  punishment." f

"The  man  pure  of  sin  is  himself  a  real  sacrifice,  which  may  serve  as
an  atonement ;  therefore  the  righteous  are  the  sacrifice  and  the  atonement
of  the  world.'*     (Zohar  i,  65a.)

The  Messiah  as  the  Shepherd.  The  Rayah  Me*hemnah,  /.  ^.,  Faith-
ful Shepherd  (Zohar  iii,  fol.*2i8a,  %  Pin-' has.  Amsterdam  edition;  Cre-
mona Ed.  ii,  100^,)  also  says  :  **  This  is  also  exemplified  by  the  account
of  Job :  for  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  Seeing  that  the  whole  generation
was  a  sinful  one,  and  Satan  coming  to  accuse  them.  The  Holy,  Blessed
be  He  !  said  to  him  (Job  i,  8)  :  *  Hast  thou  considered  My  servant  Job  ?
For  there  are  none  like  him  upon  the  whole  earth,*  to  save  through  him,
(his)  generation.     This  can  be  illustrated  by  the  parable  of  the  Shep-

*  Is.  liii,  4.    Comp.  Rom.  xii,  3,  4.

f  Zohar  ii,  fol.  212a  and  d,  Amsterdam  Ed.  ii,  fol.  85,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Ed«
Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  95^.    Comp.  2  Cor.  v,  21 ;  I  Ep.  John  ii,  2  ;  iv,  10.


339

herd,  who  saw  a  wolf  approaching  to  tear  in  pieces  his  sheep  and  destroy
them.  What  did  the  shepherd  do  ?  He  was  wise,  so  he  gave  to  him
(the  wolf)  the  strongest  and  fattest  bell-wether  from  all,  which  the
flock  was  in  the  habit  of  following.  What  then  did  the  shepherd  do?
Whilst  the  wolf  was  carrying  this  bell-wether  off,  the  shepherd  run  with
his  sheep  and  put  them  into  a  safe  place  and  then  (Jbid.y  218^)  re-
turned and  saved  him  (the  bell-wether)  from  the  wolf.  In  the  same  way
does  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  deal  with  a  generation ;  He  delivers  a
righteous  man  into  the  power  of  (Satan,  the  Wolf)  the  'accuser,'
for  the  salvation  of  the  generation  through  him.  But  when  he  is  as
strong  as  Jacob,  it  is  said  by  him ;  '  the  man  wrestled  with  him.'  (Gen.
xxxii,  24.)  'But  he  will  not  be  able  to  prevail,  on  the  contrary  he
will  beg  the  righteous  man  to  let  him  go*  {Ibid,,  26)  for  the  righteous
one,  chosen  by  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  is  too  strong  for  the  adversary,
and  he  (the  righteous  one)  willingly  bears  the  bitterest  afflictions  for  the
salvation  of  his  generation,  and  is  considered,  as  the  saviour  of  them,
and  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  appoints  him  shepherd  over  all  the  flock,  to
feed  them  in  this  world,  and  to  rule  over  them  in  the  world  to  come."

The  Atonement  by  the  Messiah.  "  The  ancient  pillars  of  the  world
(the  learned  of  Israel)  differ  as  to  the  nationality  of  Job.  One  says,
that  he  was  a  pious  Gentile,  while  another  takes  him  for  a  pious  Israelite,
who  was  smitten  in  atonement  for  all  the  world.  Once  R.  Hamm'nun-
nah  met  the  (prophet)  Eliyah  and  said  unto  him :  *  How  is  it  to  be  ex-
plained, that  the  righteous  suffer  while  the  wicked  enjoys  life?*  He
answered  him  saying :  '  The  pious  whose  sins  are  few  gets  his  pimish-
ment  for  them  in  this  world,  therefore  it  is  that  the  pious  suffers  here,  but
he  whose  sins  are  many,  and  whose  good  actions  are  but  few,  receives  re-
ward for  the  latter  in  this  world,  this  explains  why  '  the  wicked  enjoys
life.'  Said  he  to  him  the  Judgments  of  the  Lord  of  the  universe  are
deep,  but  at  the  time  when  the  Lord  desires  to  forgive  the  sins  of  the
world,  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  strikes  one  of  their  arms,  and  so  re-
stores spiritual  health  to  all.  As  a  physician  does,  who  strikes  the  arm  of
a  sick  man,  and  thus  relieves  all  the  members  of  the  body,  accordingly
it  is  written ;  (Isaiah  liii)  *  And  he  was  smitten  for  our  transgressions.*  *'  *

*Zohar  2  Pin* has,  iii,  2310,  Amsterdam  Ed.;   Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.   106^.    This


340

The  Messiah  washed  in  Wine.  " '  He  washed  His  garment  in  wine/
(the  Mystery?)  (Gen.  xlix,  ii).  He  is  '  Washing '  would  be  more  correct.
But  '  He  washed '  since  the  day  of  the  creation  of  the  world.  And  who  is
He?  That  is  the  King  Messiah,  Below.  'In  wine'  that  is  the  Left
side;  '  In  the  blood  of  the  grape/  that  is  the  Left  side,  Below.  But  the
King  Messias  is  prepared  to  govern,  (fol.  240^,)  Above;  over  all  the
idolatrous  nations,  and  break  their  power  from  Above  and  Below.

Another  meaning  of  '  He  washed  his  garment  in  wine,*  is  that  wine
gladdens  externally,  while  in  its  nature  it  is  ascerb,  so  also  is  the  King  Mes-
siah gladdening  for  Israel,  and  is  all  judgment  on  the  idolatrous  nations.
It  is  written:  'The  Spirit  {Rua'K)  of  Elohim  hovered  over  the  waters/
(Gen.  i,  2 ;)  that  is  the  Spirit  of  the  King  Messiah.  And  from  the  day  of
the  creation  of  the  world.  He  washed  His  garment  in  the  Upper  wine.
Behold,  what  follows  (on  the  first  quoted  verse ;)  '  The  eyes  become  red
from  wine,  and  the  teeth  white  from  milk,  (Gen.  xlix,  12,  Comp.  Vul-
gate,) this  is  the  Upper  wine  of  which  the  lords  of  the  Thorah,  drink."  *

The  Relation  of  The  She'kheen-ah  to  The  Holy  Blessed.
"  The  She*kheen-ah  although  she  stands  to  the  other  Lights  of  the  Crea-
tion like  the  soul  to  the  body,  yet  she  still  stands  to  the  Holy,  Blessed  be
He !  like  the  body  to  the  soul,  but  all  are  one ;  therefore  here,  which  is
not  the  case  with  man,  body  an4  soul  are  one :  for  the  body  (of  man)
is  earth  (imn  'homer,  /.  ^.,  clay  or  earth)  and  the  soul  is  called  hyd  se-
khel,  (1.^.,  reason.)    The  latter,  is  life;  the  former,  death;  but  the  Holy,

Blessed  be  He !  is  Life  and  the  She'kheen-ah  is  Life.     Therefore  it  is

<

section  or  parashath,  of  the  Zoharic  writings;  comprises  Volume  iii  from  fol.  213a  to
fol.  259^,  t.  ^.,  46  folios  =  92  pages,  and  contains  many  more  paragraphs  of  the  same
tenor  as  those  before  cited.  Therein  may  be  the  great  Secret  of  Vicarious  Atonement
for  the  wicked.  Christianity  nor  Aristotelianism  are  not  referred  to  in  the  Zohar.  This
is  a  proof  of  its  antiquity  and  that  it  is  an  ancient  Asiatic  book.

*  Zohar  i,  fol.  239^  and  240a  ;  Amsterdam  Ed.  i,  fol.  128^,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cre-
mona Ed.  i,  fol.  127^.  The  Hebrew  word  IID  4  -f-  6  +  60  =  70  («*.  ^.,  Sod,  u  e,.  Mys-
tery). So  also  docs  j"  50  -j-  10  -j-  10  ya-yin,  Wine  =  70.  The  expression  "Wine
of  the  Thorah"  would  mean  the  Secret  Mysteries  of  the  Thorah  (or  Law).  So  the
above  expression  may  mean :  *  He  washed  His  garment  (covering)  in  the  Mysteries  of
Wisdom  ^Hokhmah  Nistarah,


341

written :  '  She  is  a  Tree  of  Life  to  those  who  lay  hold  upon  her,  etc."*
(Prov.  iii,  i8.)t

Of  the  She'kheen-ah. — "Because  of  (the  attributes  of)  the  Holy,
Blessed  be  He !  being  concealed  in  the  Mysteries  of  the  Thorah  (Penta-
teuch). By  what  is  He  known  ?  By  the  Commandments  which  are  His
She'kheen-ah  which  is  His  {Uyooq-naK)  image.  As  He  is  humble
so  is  the  She'kheen-ah,  humility;  as  He  is  benevolent  so  is  she  benevo-
lence ;  as  He  is  strong,  so  she  is  the  strength  of  all  the  nations  of  the
world ;  as  He  is  the  truth,  so  is  she  the  truth ;  as  He  is  the  prophet  so  is
she  the  proplietess ;  as  He  is  righteous  (just)  so  is  she  righteousness  (just-
ness); as  He  is  King,  so  she  is  Queen ;  as  He  is  wise,  so  is  she  wisdom ;
as  He  is  intelligent,  so  is  she  His  intelligence ;  as  He  is  the  crown,  so  she
is  His  diadem,  the  diadem  of  Glory.  Therefore  the  Rabbins  have  decided,
that  all  whose  inner  is  not  like  the  external,  shall  not  have  admittance  to
the  Beth  ha-Midrash,  i,  e,,  House  of  learning.  As  the  image  of  the  Holy,
Blessed  be  He !  whose  interior  He  is,  and  whose  external  is  the  She'kheen-
ah ;  He,  His  interior  internally,  she.  His  exterior,  externally,  so  that  there
is  not  any  difference  between  she,  the  external,  and  He,  the  internal,  as
she  (the  She'kheen-ah)  is  an  outflow  from  Him;  and  therefore  every  differ-
ence of  the  external  and  internal  is  obviated,  and  as  further  the  inner
nature  of  YHVH  is  hidden ;  therefore  He  (YH VH)  is  only  named  with
the  Name  of  the  She'kheen-ah  ^jik  Adonai  i.  e,y  Lord:  J  therefore  the
Rabbins  say  (of  the  name  YHVH)  ;  Not  as  I  Am  written  (/.  ^.,  YHVH)
Am  I  read.  In  this  world  My  Name  is  written  YHVH  and  read  Adonoi,
but  in  the  world  to  come,  the  same  will  be  read  as  it  is  written,  so  that
Mercy  (represented  by  YHVH)  shall  be  from  all  sides.  §

*This  shows  that  the  body  and  soul  are  not  one,  but  that  Hu,  i.^.,  He,  and  His  She'-
kheen-ah  together,  are  One.

t  Zohar  ii,  fol.  1 18^,  Rayah  Me'hemnah.  Amsterdam  Ed.    ii,  fol.  49,  col.  I.  Sulzbach
Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  53a.

X  The  two  names  are  united,  merge  in  and  form,  the  Unit,  in  the  Perfect  Name  Ado-
noi or  Adonai.

2  Zohar  iii,  fol.  230a,  Amsterdam  Ed.     iii,  fol.  93,  col.  I.  Sulzbach  Ed.    Cremona
Ed.  ii,  fol.  io6a,  Rayah  Me'hemnah.


342

The  She'kheen-ah  is  the  Highest  Angel.  The  Image  of  Elohim
AND  One  with  Elohim.  **  Come,  See  !  When  Hillel,  the  elder,  was
rejoicing  at  that  celebration  (Festival  of  the  House  of  Water-drawing)
he  said  *  When  ^jk  a^nee,  i.  e.y  I  am,  is  here  all  are  here,  but  if  ^jk  a*  nee
lam,  is  not  here,  who  is  here?'  By  this  he  signified  and  said  :  If  the
She*kheen-ah,  which  is  called  'JK  a*  nee  *  I  am'  rests  here.  All  are  here.
The  place  is  called  S"D  Koil,  All*  for  those  who  will  unite  themselves  to
her  (the  She*kheen-ah).  But  if  ^jk  a*  nee  '  I  am  '  is  not  here  who  is  here  ?
Because  happiness  is  not  perfect,  so  long  as  the  She*kheen-ah  does  not
rest  in  the  Holy  Land.  But  when  the  number  of  steers  shall  be  completed
then  will  come  to  pass,  that  which  is  written  :  '  Ye  shall  draw  water  with
joy  from  the  well-springs  of  salvation.'  (Is.  xii,  13.)  What  are  they  ?  These
are  the  six  wells,  which  flow  in  this  salvation.  And  so  the  whole  world
shall  rejoice,  because  the  She'kheen-ah  shall  be  liberated  from  the  midst
of  the  nations  living  in  wickedness,  and  therefore  it  is  written ;  ^  The
eighth  day  shall  be  a  festival  to  you.*  (Numb,  xxix,  35)."  t

A  QABBALISTIC  FORMULA  OF  THB  GREAT  NAMES,  UNITY,  ETC.

ft/AALL  VNITY  MAI^


(//uj.  •  ni


Shaddai,

AWIGHTY


■=1^3 -yi^^l?,?/-.  THE  CROWN.

n*  -  Yj/.fyaW.

h'^'AiL(£lJ.

NO  BEGINNING.  j


NO  END.  ^^,^  ^g^,  ^^.^

THE  GREAT  UNUTTERABLE  NAME.

The  above  Diagram  shows  the  idea  of  the  positive  (male)  and  negative
(female)  merged  in  the  unity  or  harmony.  The  Ineffable  name  mrr^
YHVH,  divided  in  the  Sephirothic  Tree,  at  first  makes  m^  YHV  of  the
Upper  Three,  the  last  n  (Heh),  being  the  symbol  of  the  seven  Lower

*  V'3  =  50,  that  is  the  50  gates  of  Binah,  UndersUnding.

t  Zohar  i,  Hashmutas,  fol.  11^,  Amsterdam  Ed.  i,  fol.  16,  coL  2,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cre-
mona Ed.  i,  fol.  1 8/7.


343

Sephiroth  and  more  especially  of  Malkhuth,  the  Harmony  of  all.  ^  (Yod)
is  the  letter  of  Kether,  n  (Heh)  of  Binah,  i  (Vav)  of  'Hokhmah,  together,
the  Upper  Three.  Dividing  the  Tetragrammaton  in  half  we  have  the
above  division  n^  YH  and  m  VH ;  still  further  sublimated  it  is  n'  YH,
this  divided,  is  ^  (Yod)  the  letter  of  Kether,  the  Father  :=  lo,  and  the
first  n  (Heh)  the  letter  of  Binah,  the  Holy  Spirit  or  Upper  She'kheen-ah,
finally  all  take  rise  in  the  point,  or  '  (Yod)  of  Kether,  which  emanates
immediately  from  Ain  Soph.  Under  the  Great  Unutterable  Name  we
have  placed  on  the  Diagram,  the  Great  Name,  the  Shem-Hammephorash,
which  the  Qabbalists  assert,  was  that  pronounced  in  the  past  by  the
High  Priest  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  on  the  Great  Day  of  Atonement,  the
pronunciation  of  which,  it  has  been  claimed,  has  been  lost.  Those  of  the
initiates  who  can  read  the  above  formula  knowingly,  will  understand  it.

The  Talmud,  Rashi  its  first  commentator,  and  the  orthodox  Jewish
Liturgy,  hold  that  Hu^  /.  ^.,  He,  is  a  name  of  the  Deity.  The  Qabbalists
hold  that  the  Ineffable  Name,  mrr  YHVH,  expresses  a  Duality  in  the
Godhead,  a  He  and  a  she,  two  persons  in  one  God,  the  Holy,  Blessed  be
His  Name  !  and  His  She'kheen-ah.  The  Daily  Prayers  of  the  Orthodox
in  Jewish  Liturgy,  before  putting  on  the  Tephillin  and  the  Tallith,  are :

La^  shem  ye' hood  qoodshah  banik  hoo  ushe^ kheent-ah  bed^heeloo  ut^heemoo
r yd! had  shem  xv  YH  to  m  VH  b'y'hooda  shlim,  L  e.,  ''To  the  One
Name,  the  Holy,  blessed  be  He !  (Hu)  and  His  She'kheen-ah,  with  Fear
and  Mercy,  to  unite  the  Name  YH  to  VH,  so  that  it  shall  be  in  a
perfect  Unity.***

The  two,  HU  and  YaH,  form  iriK  mrr,  /.  ^.,  One  YHVH,  accord-
ing to  the  Qabbalists,  One  but  of  a  Bisexual  nature.  The  Karaites  in-
stead of  mrr  write  in  their  Litany  ,  v«    Th^  Orthodox  Israelites  generally

T

\\,  The  former  cannot  be  pronounced  and  is  not  communicable  and  is
quite  Ineffable. t

*  Comp.  the  'Tzee'nah  Uree'nah.     A  Rabbinical  Comment,  on  Genesis,  English  Ed.,
by  P.  I.  Hershon.     London,  1885,  p.  138,  note  2.

\  Ibid.^  p.  302  note.


344

iriK  E'had,  i.  ^.,  the,  One.  k  =  i,  n  =  8,  1  =  4.  The  k  means
the  One  Deity,  n  means  the  seven  heavens  and  the  one  earth,  equal
eight.  1  signifies  the  four  corners  of  the  world.  The  Qabbalists  think
of  this  when  repeating  the  She-mah,  and  pronounce  the  word  E'hcui,
One,  in  it,  very  slowly  dwelling  in  their  thoughts  upon  the  above  signifi-
cation of  its  letters.

The  Creation  of  Man,  and  His  Purity  and  Sinning.  "  *  And  He
blew  into  his  nostrils  (Philo  says,  face),  a  breath  of  Life,'  Vnepesh  'hay-yah
(Gen.  ii,  7).  That  is  the  holy  soul,  which  has  its  origin  from  that
Divine  (Upper)  Life.  *  And  thus  man  (Adam)  became  an  animated  rvry
^hdy-yah  livings  creature !'  That  is  man  became  endowed  with  a  holy  Life
(M3  NephesK)  from  that  heavenly  creature  n'n  'Iiay-yah.^  Which  the
earth  brought  forth,  as  it  is  written ;  '  The  earth  shall  bring  forth,  th^
living  creature f  rvxy  Brfl3  Nephesh  'hdy-yah  1.  e.,  living  souL  (Gen.  i,  24.)
A  soul-life  which  is  in  the  Divine  Upper  Life.  Come,  See !  All  the  time
that  that  holy  soul  connects  itself  with  the  son  of  man,  he  is  the  beloved
of  his  master.  How  many  keepers  watch  and  protect  him  from  all  sides !
He  is  the  symbol  for  good.  Above  and  Below,  and  the  Holy  She'kheen-ah
rests  upon  him;  and  at  the  time  man  deviates  from  this  way,  the  She'-
kheen-ah  departs  from  him,  and  the  holy  soul  has  not  any  longer  a  con-
nection with  him,  and  from  the  side  of  the  mighty  evil  serpent  f  a  spirit
is  stirred  up,  which  (spirit)  roams  about  in  the  world  J  and  can  only  find
rest  in  the  places  from  which  divine  holiness  has  departed, §  and  thus  the
child  of  man  becomes  polluted  and  declines  in  flesh  as  well  as  in  the  whole
countenance.  ||

♦  Comp.  Ezek.  i,  5-27 ;  x,  27.

t  The  left  side  the  negative,  destroying,  female  and  evil  side ;  that  of  Sama-el.

J  **  Be  sober,  be  watchful,  your  adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about
seeking  whom  he  may  devour;  whom  withstand."  I  Pet.  v,  8.  See  Kilto's  Cyclop.
Biblical  Lit.,  iii,  p.  773.  sq.  ibid.,  ii,  p.  857.

2  Is.  xxiv,  14,  xiii,  21,  Kitto's  work  just  cited,  iii,  p.  804.  Ibid,,  ii,  p.  834.  Lillith,
see  ante  pp.  248,  331.

II  2k>har  iii,  fol.  46^,  Amsterdam  Ed.  iii,  fol.  19,  col.  i,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cremona
Ed.  ii,  fol.  2ia,


345

Through  Sin  Man  Lost  the  Image  of  Elohim.  "*And  your  fear
and  terror  shall  be  over  all  the  animals  upon  the  earth.'  (Gen.  ix,  2.)
That  is,  the  sublime  image  of  (the)  man  until  now  wanting,  you  shall  now
bear.  Come,  See  !  At  first  it  is  written :  '  In  the  image  oSva  b^tzalem,
of  Elohim,  has  He  made  (the)  man,"  (Gen.  ix,  6;)  and  then  again  it  is
written ;  in  the  similitude  niDia  bid-moothy  of  Elohim,  He  made  him.  Be-
cause the  image  of  man,  in  consequence  of  the  sins  committed,  had
changed  from  the  Upper  one  so  that  its  condition  became  such,  that  man
feared  before  the  beasts.  In  the  first,  all  the  creatures  of  the  world  trem-
bled and  quaked  at  the  sight  of  marCs  sublime  Upper  Holy  Image,  but
after  he  had  committed  sin,  his  image  disappeared  and  was  changed  into
another  similitude,  and  a  reverse  condition,  so  that  the  child  of  man
feared  and  trembled  before  other  creatures.  Come,  See  1  The  features
of  all  those  children  of  men,  who  do  not  sin  before  their  Master  and  do
not  transgress  His  law,  have  not  changed  in  their  (original)  Upper  Divine
Image,  and  all  the  creatures  of  the  wdrld  quake  and  tremble  before  them ;
but  in  time  the  child  of  man  has  transgressed  the  words  of  the  Thorah
and  their  image  is  changed,  and  all  quake  and  tremble  before  other  crea-
tures, because  this  Divine  Image  has  changed  and  disappeared  from  them.
And  so  the  wild  beasts  govern  over  them,  because  they  do  not  see  the
Divine  Upper  Image  *  as  it  had  been  before,  f

The  Serpent  (Sama-el)  Brought  Death  into  the  World.  "  *  And
the  serpent  was  cunning.*  (Gen.  iii,  i.)  It  is  the  evil  spirit,  it  is  the
Angel  of  Death  (Sama-el).  And  because  the  serpent  is  the  Angel  of
Death,  it  caused  death  to  the  whole  world.  This  is  the  mystery  of  what
is  written  *  The  end  of  all  flesh  has  come  before  Me.*  This  is  the  end
of  all  flesh,  the  serpent  takes  away  the  souls  {NeshamotK)  of  all  flesh.  J

*  The  power  of  Daniel  over  the  lions  the  Qabbalists  say  resulted  from  his  having  the
Divine  Image.

f  Zohar  i,  fol.  71a,  Amsterdam  Ed.  Zohar  i,  fol.  22,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cremona
Ed.  i,  fol.  53a.

X  Zohar  i,  fol.  35a,  Amsterdam  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  7&a.  This  meant,  that  the
serpent,  as  the  Yetur-ha-rah,  evil  spirit  or  evil  angel  of  man,  causes  man  to  sin,  and

«

causes  death  to  their  (Neshamoih)  heavenly  souls.


346

Death  Came  Through  the  Serpent.  "  R.  Shim-on  (ben  Yo'hai)
began  and  said :  '  And  they  transgressed  the  covenant  like  Adam,  therein
they  despise  Me.'  (Hos.  vi,  7.)  Who  can  wipe  the  dust  out  of  thine
eyes,  O  !  first  man  ?  The  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  gave  thee  one  command-
ment only,  still  thou  couldst  not  follow  it,  because  thou  didst  suffer  thy-
self to  be  seduced  through  the  slanderous  words  of  that  wicked  serpent,
of  which  it  is  written :  *  And  the  serpent  was  cunning;*  therefore  thou
hast  caused  death  to  thyself  and  to  all  descendants  who  come  out  from
thee.  Come,  See !  who  suffers  himself  to  be  seduced  by  it  (the  serpent)
and  follows  it  even  for  an  instant  will  perish  through  it. '  '*

"  R.  Yitz-haq  began  and  said  :  *  And  He  drove  Adam  out  and  placed
him  east  of  Gan-Eden,  (Paradise.)*  (Gen.  iii,  24.)  Come,  See !  The
mystery  of  the  word  Adam  !  The  letters  of  which  signify  that  the  object
of  his  (Adam*s)  sin  was  at  the  same  time  also  his  punishment,  f  And
caused  death  to  himself  and  the  entire  world.  And  caused  the  Tree
through  which  he  sinned  to  be  banished  from  Paradise.  But  Adam
himself  was  the  cause  of  the  eternal  banishment  of  his  descendants.*  '*J

Man  is  Born  in  Original  Sin  which  Remains  with  Him  until
Death.  "  R.  Yehudah  began  and  said  :  *  His  angels  He  commanded  that
they  guard  thee  in  all  thy  ways.'  (Ps.  cxi,  11.  Comp.  Matt,  iv,  6.)  This
verse,  the  companionsg  explain  thus :  At  the  time  when  man  comes  into
the  world,  at  that  instant  appears  in  him  the  evil  spirit  (angel)||  which

*  Zohar  ii,  fol.  106,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Ed.  ii,  fol.  262^7,  Amsterdam  Ed.  Cremona
Ed.  ii,  fol.  115a.

o  00

f  DflJlK  Ktom  nD3,  be'Mah  D'hata  Athpas,  1.^.,  through  that  by  which  he  sinrud^  he

was  punished.    The  initials  backwards  DIK,  Adam,  and  properly  read  KID,  middah,

measure,  according  to  the  proverb:  HID  HJJD  HID,   middah  k'neged  middah,  1.  e,,

measure  for  measure,

t  Zohar  i,  fol.  2yja,  Amsterdam  Ed.  ii,  fol.  120,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cremona
Ed.  i,  fol.  126^.

§The  "  Companions"  were  those  who  had  been  initiated  into  the  Sod  or  Secret  Doc-
trine later  termed  Qabbalah.

II  Known  to  the  Israelites  as  Ye'tzer  ha-rah,  the  Evil  inclination  or  angel.  It  is  this
Evil  Inclination  which  is  referred  to  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  not  Satan.  It  is  looked  upon
as  an  angel  which  accompanies  man  during  his  journey  through  this  life.  Comp.  Say-
ings of  the  Jewish  Fathers  {Pirqi  Avoth),  etc.,  by  Charles  Taylor,  before  cited,  pp.
$if  76-78,  96,  III,  112,  142-144  and  notes.


347

always  accuses  him,  as  it  is  written :  '  Sin  lieth  at  the  door,  etc'  (Gen.
iv,  7.)  What  is  'sin  lieth'?  It  means  *  the  evil  spirit '  {ye^tter  ha-
raH),  David  also  calls  it,  (the  evil  spirit)  sitiy  as  it  is  written  'And
my  sin  is  always  before  me ;  (Ps.  li,  6)  because  he  daily  seduces  man  to
sin  against  his  Lord.  This  evil  spirit  never  leaves  man  from  the  day  he
is  born  into  the  world.  And  the  good  spirit  {Ye^tzer  ha-tob)  comes  to
the  man  from  the  day  he  becomes  clean.  And  when  does  man  become
clean  ?  As  soon  as  he  is  thirteen  years  (of  age).  Then  man  connects
himself  with  both,  one  on  the  right  and  the  other  on  the  left.  The  good
spirit  to  the  right  and  the  evil  spirit  to  the  left.  And  these  are  the  two
angels  which  are  destined  to  always  remain  by  man.  If  man  strives  after
sanctification  the  evil  spirit  is  suppressed  and  the  right  governs  the  left,
and  then  both  unite  to  guard  man  in  all  his  ways  and  doings,  as  it  is
written  :  *  His  angels  shall  He  command,  etc'  "  *

Free  Will.  "  *  And  dtiSk,  i.  e,,  Elohim  created  the  Man  in  His  (Elo-
him's)  image,*  (Gen.  i,  27)  that  is  in  the  image  of  Metatron :  Who  is  the
Elohim,  that  created  him  ?  He  is  the  living  Elohim  and  King  of  the
World.  In  the  imagef  of  Elohim  he  created  him,  that  is,  Sama-el,  from
whom  are  descended  other  elohim,  of  which  it  is  written  :  '  Thou  shalt
have  no  other  elohim  beside  Me.'  (Exod.  xx,  3.)  If  a  man  is  worthy,
Elohim  creates  him  in  the  image  of  Metatron,  the  servant  under  his  mas-
ter, that  is  the  meaning  of,  '  And  Elohim  created  the  Man  in  His  im-
age :  *  namely ;  in  the  similitude  of  Metatron ;  but  if  man  is  unworthy,
he  is  created  in  the  image  of  SamS-el,  the  Angel  of  Death,  J  who  executes

*  Zohar  i,  fol.  165^,  Amsterdam,  i,  fol.  96,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  E^d.  Cremona  £d.  i,
fol.  95^.

f  DtY^  be-tzeUm,  which  in  the  later  Hebraic,  the  Chaldaic  and  Talmud,  is  DtY  HeUm^
a  simulacrum  or  shadow  and  signifies  an  idol,  (Comp.  Daniel)  that  is,  in  the  image  (of
SamS-el).  The  Rabbins  sought  to  find  in  Gen.  i,  27,  a  deeper  meaning  from  the  repe-
tition therein,  asserting  that  the  first  part  showed  the  inclination  of  man  for  good  or  his
good  spirit  and  the  repetition,  that  for  evil,  the  evil  spirit.

\  Thus  is  the  second  word  to  be  read.  SamS,-el  has  a  female  reflection  called  Lillith,
as  we  have  said  before.  Comp.  ante^  pp.  248,  331.  United  together  they  are  called
'Hayoh,  the  Beast  and  ^Hayoh  Bishah,  the  Evil  or  Wicked  Beast.  Comp.  Zohar  ii,
255-59.     Sama*€l  is  considered  the  same  as  the  Satan  of  the  Old  Testament,  also  the


348

under  the  command  of  his  Lord,  "  the  Judgment  upon  man  in  gdi-hinnom
(hell)  if  man  has  not  been  righteous.  And  therefore  the  word  12m  vay-
ye'tzer,  u  e,,  and  he  formed,  is  (written  in  Genesis  with  two  '%  yodeen.
See  ante  p.  248)  to  show  (the  two-fold  nature  in  man  and)  that  the  man
created  with  the  faculty  for  good  (belongs)  to  Metatron,  who  also  aids
him  by  inspirations  {be^ phikkoodeen  '  in  the  K:ommandments,')  in  the
study  of  the  Thorah,  (that  is,  *  to  be  a  help  from  the  Thorah,  concern-
ing the  obedience  to  the  commandments:')  therefore  it  is  written;  *I
will  make  him  a  help-mate.'  (Gen.  ii,  18.)  But  if  unworthy,  then
Ye*tzeer-ah,  (/.  e.,  the  formation,)  is  that  of  the  wicked  Sama-el,  who  is
as  to  man  k^negdo,  1.  e,,  against  him,  and  seduces  man  to  sin,  so  as  to
condemn  him  into  gdi-hinnom  (hell).  But  both  (Metatron  and  Sama-el)
accompany  the  son  of  man  (through  life)  in  a  double  image."  *

Nachmanides  and  R.  Be'hai  hold,  the  first  word  Elohim  of  the  first
verse  of  Genesis  is  really  e^lohim  and  only  meant,  energies  or  angels,  and
not  the  Deity.  That  B'resheeth  meant  Be-raisheeth,  /.  ^.,  with  Wisdom,
one  of  the  Sephiroth,  and  that  through  it  was  emanated,  that,  the  essence
of  which  is  unknown,  in  three  degrees  or  worlds :  e^lohim  (ailo-heem)  re-
presenting the  angelic  world,  and  often  so  termed  in  the  Divine  words ;
Sha-mayeem,  i,e.,  the  heavens,  the  celestial  world  of  the  stars  and  planets ;
ha-AhHretz,  i.e.,  the  earth,  the  elemental  world,  and  that  this  is  the  order
mentioned  in  Genesis.  Maimonides  translates  the  second  as  "angels"
not  '*  heavens,"  and  where  Job  says :  "  the  heavens  are  not  pure  in  Thy
sight,  etc.,"  (xv,  15  ;)  he  says;  *'  the  angels,  etc."  This  is  likely  from
the  word  Sha-mayeem.  The  real  meaning  of  Sha-mayeem  is,  that  the
heavens  are  made  of  d''D1  IW,  /.  e,,  esh  fire,  mayeem  water;  also  soo  ma-
yeem,  the  heaven  carries  the  waters.     See  Rashi  (Gen.  i,  7-8),  also  Tal-

Angel  of  Death,  or  Poison  of  Death.  Comp.  Talmud,  treat.  Bava  Bathra^  i6tf.  As  to
Lillith :  See,  Traditions  of  the  Jews,  etc.,  by  Rev.  John  Peter  Stehclin,  London,  1742,
ii,  p.  iiosq.     Of  Sama-el,  see  ibid,  i,  p.  187  sq.;  Allen's  Modern  Judaism,  p.  167  sq,

*  Zohar  i,  fol.  26a,  J  B^resheeth.  Cremona  Ed.  Rayah  Me'hcmnah.  Livorno  Ed.  i,
39^.  i,  fol.  25,  col.  I,  Sulzbach  Ed.  That  is  as  the  evil  inclination,  called  the  YeUzer
ha-rahf  and  the  good  inclination,  termed  the  Ye'tzer  ha-iob.  Both  are  Considered  as
always  present  with  each  human  being  who  is  capable  of  witnessing  between  right  and
wrong.     Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  antty  p.  346,  note.


349

mud  Babli^  treatise  'HuHn,  Sha-mayeem  being  taken  as  a  compound
formed  from  iw  esh  fire,  a  symbol  of  the  angels  whose  ministry  is  Sever-
ity, and  D'D  mayeenty  water,  equally  proper  for  the  angels  charged  with
Mercy.

Metatron  is  the  First  of  the  Creatures  and  the  Reflection  of
Elohim.  "  When  it  is  said  :  (Gen.  xxiv,  2)  *  His  najr  av^doh,  1.  e.,  ser-
vant,^ That  is  the  servant  of  Ma-qam^  *  The  oldest  of  His  house,'  to
serve  Him.  And  who  is  he  ?  That  is  Metatron,  who,  as  it  has  been  said,
is  destined  to  glorify  the  body  in  the  graves.  This  is  as  it  is  written ;
'And  Abraham  said  to  his  servant,'  namely;  to  Metatron,  the  servant
oi  Ma-qom,  '  The  oldest  of  His  house,'  because  he  (Metatron)  is  i^t  first
of  the  creatures  of  Ma-qom,  who  governs  (rules)  over  all  that  belongs  to
Him !  For  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  has  given  him  dominion  over  all
His  hosts,  t  And  we  have  learned,  said  Rabbi  Shim-on ;  that  R.  Yo-seh
said ;  that  Rab  said ;  that  all  the  Hosts  of  the  Servant  take  delight  and
enjoyment  from  the  pureness  of  the  soul,  and  we  have  learned,  that  the
Light  of  the  soul  in  the  coming  world,  is  greater  than  the  Light  of  the
Throne,  and  the  soul  took  the  Light  from  the  Throne."

The  Matroneethah  is  The  Mediatrix  between  The  Deity  and
Man.  **  *  And  the  Lord  drove  Adam  out  and  placed  *  *  *  the  Cheru-
bee'm  *  *  *  to  guard  the  way  to  the  Tree  of  Life.'  (Gen.  iii,  24)
Where  is  the  way  to  the  Tree  of  Life  ?  This  is  the  great  Matroneethah,"
she  is  the  way  to  that  Great  Tree,  the  Mighty  Tree  of  Life.     It  is  written :

*  The  word  Ma-qom^  i,  e.^  Place,  is  here  ttsed  as  a  Name  of  Elohim.

t  Zohar  i,  fol.  126^,  (Midrash  Hanne-e'lam)  Amsterdam  Ed.  i,  fol.  77,  coL  I.
Sulzbach  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  76^.  In  the  recent  find  at  Constantinople  called
the  Didach6  or  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  ante,^  p.  116  j^.,  Jesus  is  called,
"  the  servant  of  YeHoVaH.''  David  is  also  called  the  same.  St.  Luke,  alone  of  the
Apostles,  uses  the  word  7ra?c  =  son  or  servant,  of  both  Jesus  and  David.  Acts  iii,  13-
26,  iv,  25,  27,  30.  Is.  xlii,  I.  Matt,  xii,  18.  See  Dr.  Philip  Schaffs  edition  of  the
Didach6,  New  York,  18S5,  P*  '9'*  ^^^  early  writing  called.  The  Pastor  of  Hennas,
represents  Christ  under  the  figure  of  a  servant^  whom  God  has  chosen  and  given  the
Holy  Spirit,  because  of  his  fidelity,  to  inhabit  the  flesh ;  the  moment  of  that  union,  he
appears  to  have  considered,  to  have  been  at  the  baptism  of  Jesus  by  John,  l^  Ptuteur
ePHermas^  Paris^  j880t  p.  I02.


350

*  Behold,  the  bed  of  Solomon  is  surrounded  by  sixty  valiant  men  from
the  strongest  of  Israel.'  (Song  of  Songs  iii,   7.)  The  Celestial  Israel:

*  They  all  hold  swords.'  If  the  Matroneethah  takes  them  up,  then  they
all  take  them  up  with  her.  This  is  that  which  is  written  ;  '  The  Angel  of
Elohim  which  went  before  the  host  of  Israel  and  passed  behind  them.'
(Exod.  xiv,  19.)  Dost  thou  call  her  the  'Angel  of  Elohim?'  Yea  !  Said
Rabbi  Abbah ;  '*  Come,  See  !  so  says :  Rabbi  Shim-on ;  '  The  Holy,  Blessed
be  He  1  has  erected  before  Him  a  Holy  Palace,  a  Celestial  Holy  Palace,  a
Holy  City,  the  Upper  (Heavenly)  City!  Jerusalem  is  called  the  Holy
City,  who  enters  to  the  King,  can  enter  only  from  the  Holy  City,  from
whence  alone  the  road  leads  to  the  King,  from  here  the  way  is  prepared.
It  is  written ;  '  This  is  the  Gate  to  YHVH,  the  righteous  shall  enter
therein.'  (Ps.  cxviii,  20.)  All  the  services  that  the  King  desires  are
attended  to  by  the  Matroneethah,  and  all  services  from  here  below  go
first  to  the  Matronethah,  and  from  there  to  the  King.  And  by  her  is
everything  sent  forth.  This  is  what  is  written :  *  And  the  Angel  of  Elo-
him which  went  before  the  hosts  of  Israel,'  (Israel  from  Above.)
(Exod.  xiv,  19.)     He  is  the  Angel  of  Elohim  to  where  it  is  written:

*  And  YHVH  went  before  them  !  etc., '  (Ex.  xiii,  21.)  as  it  is  explained.
But  is  it  then  becoming  to  the  honor  of  the  King,  that  the  Matronee-
thah shall  carry  on  war  and  be  used  as  a  Mediatrix?  Represent  to
thyself  a  King,  who  was  espoused  to  an  exalted  Matroneethah.  The
King  recognizing  her  dignity  as  high,  above  everything,  thus  spoke :  '  All
others  appear  like  beasts  in  comparison  with  my  Matroneethah,  she  shines
above  all.  What  distinction  shall  I  confer  on  her  ?  My  whole  house
shall  be  in  her  hands.*  And  the  King  had  it  proclaimed :  '  Henceforth  all
the  affairs  of  the  King  are  entrusted  to  the  hands  of  the  Matronethah.'
What  did  he  (further)  do  ?  He  entrusted  into  her  hands  all  his  weapons,
all  the  lords  of  war,  all  the  precious  stones  of  the  King,  all  treasures  of
the  King,  saying :  '  Whoever  henceforth  needs  to  speak  to  me,  cannot
speak  to  me  until  it  is  first  made  known  to  the  Matroneethah.'  Thus
it  is  with  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  and  this  on  account  of  the  great
friendship  and  love,  which  He  cherishes  for  the  Superior  Congregation  of
Israel.  He  delivered  everything  to  the  Matroneethah.  Behold  the  idol
worshipping  nations  do  not  find  any  respect  from  her,  who  is  mine  only


351

one,  my  pious  one,  my  dove ;  what  shall  I  do  for  her  ?    But  this :  I  will
deliver  my  whole  house  into  her  hands."*

Repentance  Necessary  so  that  Man  may  be  Forgiven  His  Sins.
"  When  does  man  cleanse  himself  from  his  sins?  When  he  does  repent-
ance as  it  should  be  done.  R.  Yitz'haq  said :  *  It  is  when  he  repents
before  his  King,  Above ;  and  prays  (fol.  70a)  lo  Him  from  the  depths  of
the  heart ;  as  it  is  written ;  '  Out  of  the  depths  have  I  called  to  the,  YHVH.  *
(Ps.  cxxx  I.)  R.  Abbah  said:  ^Out  of  the  depths,  etc.,'  that  is  a  place
hidden  Above,  which  has  the  depth  of  a  well,  and  out  of  which  flows,
brooks  and  streams  for  every  passer  by,  and  this  depth  of  the  deepest  is
called  Repentance,  and  whoever  desires  to  repent  and  cleanse  himself
from  his  sins  must  call  upon  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  Therefore  it  is
written  '  Out  of  the  depths  have  I  called  unto  Thee,  YHVH.'  We  have
learned,  that  if  at  the  time  man  sins  before  his  Lord,  he  offers  a  sacri-
fice upon  the  altar  and  the  priest  atones  it,  and  he  prays  for  forgiveness,
through  these  the  Mercy  in  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  is  stirred  up ;  and
the  judgments  become  modified  and  Repentance,  full  of  blessing,  flows
forth  like  gushing  springs  and  bestows  blessing  upon  all  the  Lights,  and
thus  man  is  cleansed  from  his  sins."  f

On  Repentance  and  Conversion.  "  R.  Yehudah  began  and  said  :
*  YHVH  trieth  the  righteous,  but  His  soul  hateth  the  wicked  and  he  who
loveth  violence  (robbery).'  (Ps.  xi,  5.)  How  well  ordered  are  the  works
of  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  And  all  that  He  has  done,  is  entirely
founded  on  Truth  and  Justice  !     As  it  is  written :  '  He  is  the  Rock,  His

*  Zohar  ii,  fol.  51a,  Amsterdam  Ed.  ii,  fol.  21,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.
ii,  fol.  22^.  The  Matroneethah  is  the  She*kheen-ah,  the  Real  Presence  or  Gloiy
of  the  Deity,  which  visibly  rested,  according  to  the  O.  T.,  over  the  Hebrew  Ark  of  the
Covenant  in  the  Holy  of  Holies.  It  is  in  Malkhuth,  according  to  the  Qabbalah,  which
Sephirah  is  the  Kingdom  or  Government  of  the  Deity  upon  our  earth.  Its  angel  is
the  Great  Presence  Angel  called,  Metatron,  its  Divine  Name  is  the  full  Name  Adonai.
In  this  Sephirah  is  the  harmony  and  content  of  all  the  preceding  Sephiroth.  Its  special
influence  is  over  the  Church  or  Congregation  of  Israel.

f  2^har  iii,  fol.  29a,  Sulzbach  Ed.  iii,  fol.  69,  col.  2,  fol.  70,  col.  I.  Amsterdam  Ed.
Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  32^.  As  to  Repentance,  see.  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  p.  84
note.


352

work  is  perfect ;  for  all  His  ways  are  with  Judgment ;  an  Ail  (El)  of
Truth  and  without  injustice,  just  and  right  is  He !'  (Deut.  xxxii,  4.)  Come,
See !  The  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  did  not  judge  the  first  man*  until  after
He  had  first  exhorted  him,  that  his  heart  and  will  might  not  depart  into
other  ways  and  he  become  unclean.  But  he  (Adam)  did  not  fear  but
transgressed  the  commands  of  his  Liord.  But  afterwards  He  made  known
to  him  His  judgment ;  yet  did  not  judge  him  as  he  deserved,  but  re-
strained His  anger  for  a  long  time,  and  suffered  him  to  live  one  day,
that  is  1000  years  less  yof  which  he  gave  to  David,  which  really  did  not
belong  to  him  (David).  Likewise  He  does  not  judge  the  child  of  man
according  to  his  evil  doings,  which  he  continually  commits.  If  He  did,
the  world  could  not  exist,  but  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  restrains  His
anger  for  a  long  time*  with  the  just  and  the  wicked,  and  waits  as  to
the  wicked  a  longer  time  than  with  the  just,  that  they  may  do  full  re-
pentance and  be  able  to  exist  both  in  this  world  and  in  the  fiiture  world  ;
as  it  is  written:  *Say  to  them:  as  true  as  'jk  a^nee^  /.  ^.,  I,  live,  says
YHVH,  etc.,  I  have  not  any  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked,  but
rather  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his  evil  ways  and  live. '  (Ezek.  xxxiii,
II.)  That  he  may  live  in  this  world  and  in  the  world  to  come.  Therefore
He  restrains  His  anger  to  them  for  a  long  time  or  also  that  there  may  shoot
from  them  a  good  scion  in  the  world,  like  Abraham  who  descended  from
Tarah.  He  was  a  good  scion,  a  root  and  a  good  pearl  to  the  world.  But
the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  is  always  very  strict  with  the  just  (pious)  in  all
their  doings,  so  that  they  may  deviate  neither  to  the  right  or  to  the  left.
Therefore  He  tries  them,  not  for  His,  but  their  own  sakes,  because  He
knows  their  thoughts  and  power  of  faith  and  will  raise  up  their  heads,  as
it  is  written  :  *  And  Elohim  put  Abraham  to  the  test,  etc.  (Gen.  xxii,  i.)
What  does  the  word  (no3  nis-saH)  test,  signify.  Raising  the  banner  ( OJ
nes  standard)  as  it  is  written  :  *  Raise  the  banner '  (Is.  Ixii,  10),  *  Set  up
the  standard.'  (Jer.  iv,  10.)  And  this  is  meant,  that  the  Holy,  Blessed  be
He  !  raised  up  Abraham's  banner  in  the  eyes  of  the  whole  world,  which
is  hinted  at  in  the  word  (nD3  nis-sah)  test,  (signifying,  raised  the  standard.)

*  That  is  the  terrestrial  or  earthly  Adam,
f  Adam  is  said  to  have  lived  930  years.


353

Thus  also  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  tests  the  pious  ones  so  as  to  raise
their  standards,  that  is  their  heads,  in  the  whole  world."  *

The  Bringing  Forth  of  Man  and  of  Repentance.  "  It  has  been
taught  us.  At  the  time  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  created  the  world.  He
also  desired  to  create  a  man.  He  took  counsel  with  the  Thorah.  She  said
before  him  :  '  Thou  desirest  to  create  a  man,  he  will  certainly  sin  before
Thee,  he  will  certainly  provoke  Thee  if  Thou  dealest  with  him  accord-
ing to  his  doings ;  the  world  cannot  stand  before  Thee  still  less  the  man  !
Said  He  to  her :  Am  I  then  in  vain  called ;  *  Ail,  merciful,  gracious  and
long-suffering?'  (Exod.  xxxiv,  6.)  Before  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  cre-
ated the  world.  He  had  already  created  Repentance,t  to  whom  he  said :
'  I  desire  to  create  man  in  the  world,  but  in  such  a  way  that  thou  art  pre-
pared to  forgive  and  reconcile  him,  when  he  turns  from  his  sins  to  thee.'
Therefore  Repentance  is  all  the  time  prepared  for  men  and  when  men
turn  from  their  sins,  she  (Repentance)  returns  to  the  Holy,  Blessed  be
He  !  and  reconciles  them  all.  And  the  judgments  are  all  wiped  out  and
man  is  cleansed  from  his  sins."  J

The  Change  Necessary  for  Sinners.  "Those  burdened  with  sin  need
a  change  of  place,  a  change  of  name,  and  a  change  of  their  doings ;  like
it  was  said  to  Abraham ;  *  Go  forth  from  thy  country  and  thy  place  of
birth.*  (Gen.  xii,  i.)  Here  is  a  change  of  place.  And  '  Thy  name  shall
no  more  be  called  Abram,  but  Abraham  shall  be  thy  name.'  (^Ibid,  xvii,
5.)  This  is  a  change  of  name.  A  change  of  doings;  he  changed  from
his  former  evil  acts  to  good  actions. "§

*

The  Deity  Casts  into  Eternal  Condemnation  those  who  Do  Not
Repent  in  Time.  "  R.  Yo-seh  said :  Woe  to  the  wicked,  who  will  not
do  penance  before  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  for  their  sins,  while  they  are
still  in  this  world,  for  when  man  repents  and  regrets  for  the  sins  he  has
committed,  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  pardons  him ;  and  all  those  who

*  Zohar  i,  fol.  83a,  Cremona  Ed.     i,  fol.  139^,  Amsterdam  Ed.

t  This  may  be  a  reference  to  the  She'kheen*ah.

I  Zohar  iii,  fol.  59,  col.  I.  Sulzbach  E^d.  iii,  fol.  69^,  Amsterdam  E^d.  Cremona
Ed.  ii,  fol.  31^.

J  2k>har  iii,  fol.  217^,  Amsterdam  Ed.  iii,  fol.  88,  col.  I.  Sulzbach  Ed.  Rayah
Me'hemnah.     Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  98^.

23


354

tarry  in  their  sins,  and  will  not  repent  before  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  for
their  sins.  He  will  hereafter  be  cast  into  gat-hinnom  (hell)  and  they  can
never  come  forth  from  there  again."  *

On  Reward  and  Punishment  in  the  Future  Life.  "  R.  Yehudah
said :  The  time  when  man  departs  from  this  life,  is  the  day  of  the  Great
Judgment,  then  the  soul  {NeshamaK)  separates  from  the  body.  And
man  does  not  depart  from  this  world,  until  he  has  seen  the  She'kheen-ah ;
therefore  it  is  written ;  *  No  man  can  see  Me  and  live.*  (Ex.  xxxiii,  20.)
With  the  She'kheen-ah  comes  three  angels,  to  receive  the  soul  {Nesha-
ffuth)  of  the  Righteous :  as  it  is  written ;  *  And  YHVH  appeared  to  him,
etc.:*  as  the  day  was  hot.  (Gen.  xviii,  i.)  That  is  the  Day  of  Judgment,
which  bums  like  an  oven,  to  separate  the  soul  {Neshamah)  from  the  body.
*  And  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  saw  three  men,'  who  investigate  the  deeds
he  has  done  and  through  whom,  by  an  oral  statement,  he  acknowledges
(confesses).  And  when  the  soul  {NeshamaK)  sees  this,  it  parts  from  the
body  as  far  as  the  opening  of  the  gullet  and  there  waits,  imtil  it  has  con-
fessed all  that  which  the  body  in  this  world  has  committed  with  her.  Then
the  soul  {NeshamaK)  of  the  Righteous  b  glad  over  her  deeds  and  rejoices
that  she  was  so  faithfully  preserved.  We  have  learned,  said  R.  Yitz-haq :
The  soul  of  the  just  (pious)  longs  for  the  time,  when  it  shall  leave  this
vain  world,  so  as  to  rejoice  in  the  future  world,  "f

The  Rising  of  the  Soul  of  the  Dead.  "  Said  R.  Yitz-haq :  At  the
time  the  soul  {NeshatnaK)  deserves  it,  and  rises  to  her  Upper  place,  the
body  lies  peacefully  and  rests  in  its  bed,  as  it  is  written  ;  '  He  shall  enter
into  peace,  where  they  shall  rest  on  their  beds ;  who  walks  in  straightness. '
(Is.  Ivii,  2.)  'What  does  this  mean ;  *  Walks  in  straightness?*  Said  R.
Yitz-haq :  The  soul  {NeshatnaK)  goes  straight  to  the  place  reserved  for
her  in  Paradise."  J  §

*  Zohar  i,  fol.  66a,  Amsterdam  Ed.  i,  fol.  49,  col.  4.  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  i,
fol.  51a.

f  Zohar  i,  fol.  9&Z,  Amsterdam  Ed.  i,  fol  65,  col.  I,  Sulzbach  Ed.  The  Midrash
ha^Ne.eMam,  i.  e.^  the  Hidden  Midrash.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  65^.

1  Zohar  i,  fol.  122^,  Amsterdam  Ed.  i,  fol.  76,  col.  i,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Midrash  ha.
Ne-e'lam.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  75a.

2  When  the  body  is  deprived  of  all  life,  the  vital  soul  (^Nepheih)^  it  is  called  *]U  Guff^
I.  ^.,  body  or  corpse.  The  t/eshamah  is  frequently  called  by  the  Rabbins :  the  precious
soul,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  animal  or  vital  soul.


355

The  Resxjrrection  of  the  Dead.  "  R.  Yitz-haq  began :  *  The  Du-
daim  (Mandrin  or  Mandrakes)  gives  an  exhalation  of  odor,  etc.*  (Song  of
Sol.  vii,  13) ;  Our  Rabbis  have  learned :  In  the  future  to  come,  the  Holy,
Blessed  be  He !  will  quicken  the  dead  and  awaken  them  from  the  dust,
that  they  be  no  more  an  earthly  building.  For  formerly  they  were  cre-
ated of  real  dust  of  matter,  which  is  not  lasting,  as  it  is  written :  *  And
YHVH  Elohim  formed  the  man  (Adam)  from  the  dustoi  the  earth.'
(Gen.  ii,  2.)  In  the  same  time  (that  of  the  resurrection)  they  shall  be
shaken  out  of  the  dust  from  that  building  and  stand  into  a  firm  build-
ing, that  it  shall  be  to  them  lasting.  Thus  it  is  written  :  *  Shake  thy-
self from  the  dust  arise  captive  of  Jerusalem.'  (Is.  lii,  2.)  They  shall
stand  firm  (lastingly)  and  rise  from  under  the  earth  and  receive  their  souls
{Neshamoth)  in  the  land  of  Israel.  For  at  that  time  the  Holy,  Blessed
be  He !  will  spread  over  them  all  kinds  of  odors  from  the  Garden  of
Eden;  as  it  is  written :  'The  Dudaim  gives  exhalation  of  odor.'  Said
R.  Yitz-haq:  *  Do  not  call  it  *  Dudaim'  but  Dodim^  (/.  ^.,  friendship.)'
This  means  body  and  soul  {Neshamah)  which  are  friends  and  companions
one  to  the  other.  R.  Na'hman  says :  '  This  word  means  real  Dudaim  as
the  Dudaim  bring  forth  love  in  the  world.'*

So  they  bring  forth  love  in  the  world  !  And  what  does  this  mean  ?
*They  give  a  well-pleasing  (nn  rMK)  odor?'  That  is  a  description
of  the  integrity  of  their  deeds,  through  which  their  Creator,  becomes
known  and  comprehended  to  their  generation.  *  And  at  *  our  doors '  are
all  the  precious  fruits  old  with  new.'  (Ibid.)  *  Our  doors '  that  is  the  doors
of  heaven  \  they  are  open,  where  from,  the  souls  (Neshamoth)  shall  de-
scend into  the  corpses.  *  All  the  precious  fruits.'  Those  are  the  souls
{NeshatnotK).  *  New  and  old,'  are  those,  whose  souls  {NeshamoiK)  had
parted  from  them  many  years,  as  also  those,  whose  souls  {NeshamotK)  left
them  but  a  few  days  past,  and  deserve  through  the  honesty  of  their  actions
to  enter  the  world  to  come.  All  (these  souls,  NeshamotK)  shall  descend
simultaneously  to  enter  the  bodies  destined  for  them."  f

*  The  Hebrew  D^KHI,  Duda-im  (Gen.  zxx,  14)  is  held  by  many,  to  be  the  love-
apple  or  mandragora.     Comp.  Kitto*s  Bib.  Cyclop.    Ed.  1876,  i,  707  sq,

fZohar  i,  fol.  154^7,  Amsterdam  Ed.    i,  fol.  81,  ool.  I,  Sulzbach  Ed.     Midrash
Hanne-e'lam.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  80,  col.  320.


356

The  Resurrection  in  The  Body.  The  Zohar  holds  to  the  Resurrec-
tion in  the  Body,  as  well  as  that  nothing  in  the  universe  is  lost.  Joel*
quotes;  " If  the  naked  soul  is  worthy  to  return  to  its  former  condition  it
will  newly  arise  in  the  body,  *  *  *  from  Him  it  is  written ;  *  These
to  Eternal  Life'  *  *  *  and  these  are  the  Supreme  Forces  of  the
Holy  King,  and  nothing  is  lost."

"  While  the  soul  {NeshatnaK)  has  its  sustenance  from  the  splendor  of
the  Above,  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  says  to  that  angel  called,  Dumahf
*  Go  and  announce  to  that  body,  that  I  am  prepared  to  make  it  alive
(quicken  it)  at  the  time  when  I  shall  make  alive  the  just  (pious)  in  the
future  time  to  come.  But  it,  the  body,  answers :  *  Shall  I  have  pleasure
after  my  being  decayed?'  (Gen.  xviii,  12.)  After  my  being  decayed  in
the  dust  and  dwelling  in  the  earth  where  worms  and  moles  have  eaten  my
flesh,  shall  it  be  able  for  me  to  be  renewed?  The  Holy,  Blessed  be  He!
says  to  the  soul  {Neshamah) :  It  is  therefore  written :  *  And  YHVH  said
unto  Abraham,  etc.,'  'Is  anything  difficult  to  YHVH?'  At  a  time
which  is  known  to  Me  to  revive  the  dead,  I  shall  bring  back  to  thee  that
body,  which  is  entirely  renewed  and  as  it  was  previously,  that  it  may
be  like  the  holy  angels ;  and  that  day  is  destined  for  Me  to  rejoice  with
them ;  as  it  is  written :  '  The  Glory  of  YHVH  is  eternal !  YHVH  shall
rejoice  in  His  works. "J  (Ps.  civ,  31.)

The  Future  Happiness  of  the  Righteous.  *' At  that  time,  the  just
(pious)  shall  attain  full  knowledge ;  said  R.  Yo-seh;  '  On  the  day  on  which
the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  shall  rejoice  over  His  works,  the  just  will  know
Him  in  their  hearts,  and  their  understanding  shall  be  as  great  as  if  they
had  seen  Him  with  the  eyes ;  as  it  is  written,  (Is.  xxv,  9) ;  *  And  he  will
say  on  that  day  :  Behold  !  this  is  our  Elohim,  etc'  And  the  joy  of  the
soul  when  dwelling  in  the  body  does  surpass  all,  because  they  are  both
constant  and  know  and  comprehend  their  Creator  and  rejoice  in  the
splendor  of  the  She'kheen-ah.  And  this  is  what  is  meant  by  the  Good
which  is  preserved  for  the  just  in  the  future  to  come.    Thus  it  is  written :

*  ReligionS'philosophie  des  Sohar,  p.  148  note.

t  Silence,  the  angel  which  has  charge  of  the  disembodied  spirits.  Comp.  Genesis
with  a  Talmudical  Commentary,  by  Paul  I.  Hershon.     London,  1883,  p.  94,  sq.

%  2^har  i,  fol.  102a,  Amsterdam  Ed.  i,  fol.  66,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Midrash  Hanne-
e*lam.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  66,  col.  264,  and  67,  col.  265.


357

'  AiUh  tho*l'doth  Yitz-haq  ben  Abraham  these  are  the  generations  oi  Isaac
son  oi  Abraham,^  (Gen.  xxxv,  19.)  That  is,  these  are  the  generations  of
rejoicing  and  cheetfulness,  which  at  that  time  shall  be  in  the  world,  orriaK
p  ben  Abraham  son  of  Abraham. '  That  is  the  soul  (^Neshamah)  which
deserves  such  joy  and  is  perfect  in  her  elevation,  pnv'  riK  tSih  DTTiaK
Abraham  hoHd  eth  Yiiz-haq  Abraham  begat  Isaac !  That  is  the  soul
brought  forth  this  rejoicing  and  cheerfulness  in  the  world.'  Said  R.  Yehu-
dah  to  R.  *He-yah:  'This  we  have  learned:  a  feast  which  the  Holy,
Blessed  be  He !  will  prepare  for  the  righteous  in  time  to  come.  What  is
it  ?'  Said  he  to  him ;  *  When  I  came  before  those  holy  angels,  the  lords
of  learning,  I  had  only  heard  this  which  you  have  heard,  afterwards  I
heard  the  explanation  of  it  by  R.  El'azar.  This  said  R.  El'azar  :  '  The
feast  for  the  righteous  in  the  future  to  come,  will  be  like  this,  as  it  is  writ-
ten; *  They  saw  the  Elohim  and  ate  and  drunk.*  (Ex.  xxiv,  11.)  And
these  are  the  foods,  we  have  been  taught.  And  R.  El'azar  said :  '  In  one
place  we  have  learned :  *  We  have  rejoiced,'  in  another  place  *  We  have
been  fed. '     How  do  these  two  expressions  differ  ?

But  thus  said  my  father  (R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai)  'The  just  (pious)
who  do  not  deserve  so  much  shall  only  rejoice^  in  the  rejlection^  because
they  cannot  comprehend  all,  but  the  truly  righteous  shall  be  satiated  until
they  attain  the  fullest  comprehension.'*  This  therefore  is  to  be  under-
stood by  eating  and  drinking,  and  this  is  (also  the  meaning  of)  the  feast
and  the  eating.  And  from  where  have  we  this?  From  Moses,  as  it  is  writ-
ten :  '  He  was  with  YHVH  forty  days  and  forty  nights,  bread  he  ate  not
and  water  he  drunk  not.*  (Ex.  xxxiv,  28.)  What  was  the  cause,  that
bread  he  ate  not  and  water  he  drunk  not  ?  It  was  '  he  was  fed  by  another
feast,  by  that  celestial  splendor  from  above.  And  such  shall  be  the
feast  of  the  just  (pious)  in  the  future  to  come.'  Said  R.  Yehudah ;
'  The  feast  of  the  just  (pious)  in  the  future  to  come  shall  consist  of  re-
joicing in  His  joy,  as  it  is  written  :  '  The  humble  shall  hear  and  rejoice.'
(Ps.  xxxiv,  14.)  R.  Hunnah  said,  from  this:  'All  shall  rejoice  who
trust  in  Thee,  eternally  shall  they  sing.'  Said  R.  Yitz-haq  :  '  This  and
that  shall  come  true  in  the  future  to  come.'     And  we  have  learned,  said

*  This  probably  refers  to  a  comprehension  of  the  highest  ideality  of  the  Deity  sind  its
attributes.


358

R.  Yo-seh:  ^Wine*  which  is  guarded  and  kept  in  the  grapes  from  the
first  six  days,  means,  the  ancient  mighty  words  that  have  not  been  re-
vealed to  man  (Adam)  since  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  they  will  be
revealed  to  the  righteous  in  the  future  to  come.  And  thus  it  is  drinking
and  eating,  surely  it  is  so.'  "  f

The  Souls  of  The  Wicked.  "  Said  R.  Shemuel  for  R.  Ya-kob ;  '  The
souls  of  the  wicked  are  given  in  the  hand  of  this  angel,  named  DumahJ  to
be  led  to  gai-hinnam  (hell)  and  there  judged.  After  they  have  been
delivered  to  him  they  are  not  released  until  they  are  taken  into  gcU-
hinnom:  "  §  »

Judgment  of  the  Wicked  and  their  Punishment.  ''Thus  it  has
been  taught  us  and  thus  we  have  heard  it ;  that  man  surely  departs  from
this  world  through  judgment.  But  before  he  obtains  entrance  into  the
dwellings  of  the  just  (righteous)  he  has  to  present  himself  before  the  tri-
bunal and  there  he  is  judged  by  that  Heavenly  Council.  And  there  stands
the  official  of  gdi-hinnom  (hell)  to  accuse  him.  Happy  is  he  who  leaves
the  tribunal  acquitted  !  If  not,  then  the  official  who  has  charge  of  the
gSi'hinnom  seizes  him,  and  casts  him  from  there.  Above ;  to  down.  Below;
as  a  stone  is  cast  from  a  sling,  as  it  is  written ;  '  And  the  souls  {NephesK)
of  their  enemies,  them  He  shall  cast,  as  out  of  a  sling.*  (I  Sam.  xxv,  29.)
And  he  throws  him  into  gdi-hinnom,  and  according  to  the  judgment  passed
upon  him  he  receives  his  punishment. "||

♦  "  Wine  "  is  the  mysterious  vitality  and  spiritual  energy  of  (Wine  ^  70  =  Sod  or
Secret)  created  Things.  See  ante^  p.  340  note.  The  "  grapes  "  are  the  created  Things
produced  by  the  Deity  who  is  likened  to  a  vine.

f  Zohar  i,  fol.  135a  and  b  (Midrash  Hanne-e*lam),  Amsterdam  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  i,
fol.  80,  col.  320.

J  The  Angel  of  Silence,  who  has  charge  of  the  disembodied  spirits.  Talmud  treatise
Sanhedriftf  fol.  94,  col.  I,  Ps.  cxv,  17.

2  Zohar  i,  fol.  124a,  Amsterdam  Ed.  i,  fol.  ^6,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Eki.  Midrash
Hann-e*lam.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  75,  col.  300.

II  Zohar  iii,  fol.  185^  and  fol.  186a,  Amsterdam  Ed.  iii,  fol.  75,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Ed.
Cremona  Ed.  Vol.  iii,  fol.  89,  col.  353.


XIX.


EXCERPTS  FROM  THE  ZOHAR  CONTINUED.  THE  HOLY,  WITH  THE  SHE-
'kHEEN-AH  created  the  universe.  REASON  OF  THE  EXISTENCE  OF
GOOD  AND  EVIL.  OF  METATRON.  MESSIAH  BEN  JOSEPH  AND  MES-
SIAH  BEN  DAVID.  DESCRIPTION  OF,  AND  THE  TRIADIC  IDEA  AS  TO,
THE  DEITY.      THE  NAMES%      CREATION.      SOULS,   SPIRITS,    ETC.

THE  Holy  Blessed  with  the  She'kheen-ah  has  Created  the
Universe.    The  Reason  of  the  Good  and  Evil.     **  *  And
Elohim  said :  Let  us  make  a  man.'    (Gen.  i,  26.)     (The  Qabba-
lists  say,  that  the  creation  of  the  universe  was  suggested  by  the  manifesta-
tion of  the  Supreme  Deity,  Elohim.)

'  The  secret  of  YHVH  is  with  those  who  fear  Him.'  (Ps.  xxv,  14.)
Began  that  Sabah  {TSabin^  L  e.,  old  of  the  oldest,  and  said  :  '  Shim-on  t
Shim-on  !  who  is  he  that  said  :  '  And  Elohim  said :  Let  us  make  a  man  ?  *
Who  is  this  Elohim?'  Then  the  old  of  the  oldest,  disappeared  and
nobody  saw  him.  When  Rabbi  Shim-on  heard,  that  he  called  him.
'  Shim-on ! '  and  not  Rabbi  Shim-on,  he  said  to  the  companions :  *  It
surely  was  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  of  whom  it  says — '  The  Ancient  of
Days  did  sit.'  (Dan.  vii,  9.)  It  is  now  the  time  to  begin  with  this  mys-
tery, for  here  there  is  certainly  a  mystery  and  its  revelation  until  now  has
not  been  permitted,  but  now  it  appears,  permission  has  been  given  to  un-
veil the  same. '  He  began  and  said  :  *  Like  a  King  who  has  many  buildings
to  build,  he  had  a  builder  and  this  builder  did  not  undertake  an3rthing  but
only  with  the  permission  of  the  King,  as  it  is  written  :  *  I  was  to  him  an
architect.'  (Prov.  viii,  30.)  The  *King'  is  surely  the  Celestial  Wis-
dom, Above,  and  the  Pillar  of  the  Centre  is  King,  Below.  *  Elohim '  is
the  architect,  Above,  and  this  is  the  Mother,  Above.  *  Elohim '  is  the
architect,  Below,  and  this  is  the  She'kheen-ah,  Below.     It  is  not  permis-


36o

sible  for  a  wife  to  do  anything  without  the  consent  of  her  husband.  And
all  the  works  could  only  be  in  the  way  of  efflux.  The  Father  spoke
through  His  Amirah^  u  ^.,  Word,  to  the  Mother  :  *  Let  this  or  that  be,'
and  instantly  it  existed ;  as  it  says :  *  And  Elohim  said  :  Let  light  be  \
and  it  was  light.'  (Gen.  i,  3.)  '  He  said  '  to  Elohim :  '  Let  light  be  !'
The  Lord  of  the  Building,  He  said  it,  and  the  builder  did  it  at  once.
And  so  all  the  buildings  arose  by  the  way  of  the  efflux.  He  said :
'Let  be  a  firmament.'  'Let  be  lights.'  And  all  has  been  done  at
once.  As  He  appeared  in  the  Intellectual  World,  the  architect  (Elohim
said  to  the  Master-builder,  '  Let  us  make  a  man  in  our  image,  accord-
ing to  our  similitude.^  Said  the  Master-builder,  'It  is  certainly  well
to  make  him,  but  he  is  prepared  to  sin  before  Thee  because  he  is
a  fool ;  as  it  is  written :  '  A  wise  son  rejoices  the  father,  and  a  foolish
son  is  his  mother's  sorrow,^  (Prov.  x,  i.)  She  replied;  'If  he  desires
to  sin,  let  him  fall  on  his  Mother  and  not  on  his  Father,  and  I  will  create
him  in  my  image.  Therefore  it  is  written :  '  And  Elohim  created  the
man  in  his  image. '  The  Father  did  not  desire  to  participate.  In  the
time  he  (the  man)  sins  it  is  written  of  him  ;  '  For  your  transgression  your
mother  has  been  sent  away.'  (Is.  1,  i.)  Then  the  King  said  to  the
Mother ;  '  Did  I  not  tell  you  that  he  would  sin  ?'  At  that  time  He  drove
him  out  and  drove  his  Mother  with  him,  therefore  it  is  written ;  '  A  wise
son  rejoices  the  father,  and  a  foolish  son  is  the  sorrow  of  his  mother.'
'  A  wise  son'  that  is  the  Man  (Adam)  as  the  A'tzeel-atic  Man,  and  'A
foolish  son,'  that  is  the  B'ree-atic  Adam,  /.  e,,  the  man  of  creation.
Then  the  companions  arose  and  said  :  '  Rabbi  !  Rabbi !  Is  there  a  dif-
ference between  the  '  Father'  and  '  Mother,'  that  man  should  belong  on
the  part  of  the  '  Father '  to  the  efflux,  and  on  the  part  of  the  *  Mother  '
to  the  creation  ?  He  said  to  them  :  '  Companions  !  Companions  !  This  is
not  so  ;  for  this  A'tzeel-atic  Man,  male-female,  was  from  both,  the  side  of
the  '  Father '  and  from  the  side  of  the  *  Mother,'  and  this  is  the  meaning
of  the  words ;  '  And  Elohim  said ;  Let  light  be  !  and  it  was  light. '  '  Let
light  be,'  on  the  part  of  the  '  Father,'  and  '  it  was  light,'  on  the  part  of
the  '  Mother.'     And  this  is  the  double-face  formed  Adam.*     But  this

*  The  first  Adam,  the  Man,  was  an  androgene  and  is  the  Primordial  Ideation  Adam
or  protoplast.    Gen.  i,  2  ;  ii,  i  and  2.


36i

(Man)  had  neither  an  image  nor  similitude,  but  the  Celestial  Mother

had  a  Name  (^'loo  20  +  50  +  6  +  lo  =  S&)  whose  numerical  value

(S6)  is  equal  to  that  of  Elohim  (d'hSk,  i  +30  +  5  +  10  +  40  =  S6).

Light  and  Darkness  are  contained  in  this  Name  at  the  same  time,  and

on  account  of  the  Darkness  contained  in  its  Name,  said  the  Father,

it  would  seduce    into  sin,   the    Man    (Upper    Adam)  of   the  efflux,

who  is  the  '  light '  of  the  Upper  Garment,'  and  this  is  the  *  light'  which

the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  created    on    the  first  day.     And  this  Jirsf

created  ^  lights    He  hid  for  the  righteous,  and  the  ^  darkness ^^    which

he  created  on  the  first  day,  He  has  destined   for  the  wicked,  as  it  is

written:   'And  the  wicked  shall  be  silent  in  darkness.^    (i  Sam.  ii,  9.)

And  on  account  of  this  *  darkness '  which  will  in  the  future  sin  to  the

'  light,'  the  Father  would  not  grant  her  any  part  in  Him,  Therefore  Elohim

said :  '  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image ^   that  is  in  the  '  Light,'  '  After  our

similitude  ^^  that  is  the  Darkness,  which  is  the  garment  of  the  '  Light,'  as

the  body  is  the  garmei^t  of  the  soul,  as  it  is  written  :  *  Thou  hast  clothed

me  in  11;;  Or^  skin\  and  flesh.'    (Job  x,  11.)   Thereupon  all  rejoiced  and

said  :  '  Happy  is  our  lot,  that  it  was  granted  to  us,  to  hear  words,  which

until  now,  had  not  been  heard.'     Began  R.  Shim-on  fiirther  and  said:

^  Behold  now,  that  '3K  a^nee  I,  a^nee,  I  am,  Kin  Hu,  i,e,y  He,  and  there  is

no  elohim  with  Me,  etc'    (Deut.  xxxii,  39,  comp.  37,  comp.  Ex.  xxxiv,  9.)

Said  he  :  'Companions  the  mighty  words,  which  permission  from  Above

has  been  given  to  me  to  unveil,  I  shall  reveal  to  you,  who  is  it  who  says  :

'  Behold  now  I,  I  am  He !  etc'     What  is  He?    The  Above  of  All  the

Above,  who  is  called  '  the  Above  the  Above,'  Above  to  those  Above,

who  not  one  of  them  can  do  anything  till  they^ake  permission  from  this

Exaltation,  as  we  have  explained  previously  the  words  *  Let  us  make  a

man.'     *  Let  US  make,'  surely  it  refers  to  two.     He  said  to  him  above

him,  *  Let  US  make '  and  nothing  is  done  without  permission  and  saying,

from  Him  who  is  above  him,  and  He,  the  Highest,  has  not  done  anything

till  He  took  counsel  from  His  companion.     But  the  '  He  '  is  called;  the

Highest  of  all  the  highest,  nothing  is  above  Him,  and  not  anything  Below,

*  Simulacrum  or  shadow  ?

t  'y^V  or,  f.  e,,  skin.    The  y  and  K  are  sometimes  interchangeable,  therefore  read  IIK
ohr^  t.  ^.,  light,  instead  of  "11  j^  or,  skin.     Both  K  and  ^  are  Tocal  sounds.


362

resembles  Him,  as  it  says :  '  To  whom  then  will  ye  liken  Me,  that  I  shall
be  equal  to  him?  says  the  Holy.'  (Is.  xl,  25.)  He  said :  *  Behold  now
that  I,  I  am  He  and  no  elohim  is  with  Me/  whose  advice  I  shall  take^
like  of  whom  it  says :  '  And  Elohim  said,  Let  us  make  man.*  Arose  all
the  companions  and  said  :  '  Rabbi !  Give  us  permission  to  say  something
at  this  place.*  Said  they:  *  Hast  thou  not  before  explained,  that  the
Most  High,  said  to  Kether  (the  Crown).  *Let  us  make  man?'  He
said  to  them;  'Have  your  ears  heard  what  is  now  spoken  by  your
mouths  ?  Have  I  not  just  told  you  /ha/  He^  is  that  which  is  called,  the
Cause  of  Causes,  but  not  Hey  which  is  called,  the  Cause  of  ALL  Causes?
For  the  Cause  of  ALL  Causes  has  not  any  second  Below  from  whom  He
shall  take  advice,  because  He  is  One,  is  before  ALL  things^  and  has  not
any  partner.  And  therefore  He  said  ;  '  Behold  now  that  I,  I  am  He  and
no  elohim  with  Me '  whose  counsel  He  shall  take,  for  He  has  not  a
second  and  no  partner  and  not  anything  by  which  He  can  be  counted,
for  instance  a  male  and  female,  and  of  which  it  is  said  :  '  But  one  I  called
Him.'  (Is.  li,  2.)  But  He  is  One,  without  numerical  relation,  (and)  with-
out a  partner,  and  therefore  it  is  said;  'And  no  elohim  is  with  Me.'  All
arose  and  salamed  before  him  and  said :  '  Happy  is  the  child  of  man,  to
whom  the  Lord,  has  given  consent  to  reveal  such  great  hidden  secrets,
which  were  not  revealed  even  to  the  holy  angels!'  He  (R.  Shim-on)
said  to  them :  '  Companions !  It  is  yet  to  us  to  explain  the  continuation
of  the  verse  quoted;  for  there  are  hidden  secrets  in  that  verse;  *I
kill  and  I  make  alive,  etc'  (Deut.  xxxii,  39.)  By  the  Sephiroth
*I  make  alive.'  From  the  Right  side  is  Life,  and  from  the  Left  side
is  Death.  If  these  two  do  not  agree  with  the  Middle  Pillar,  Judgment
cannot  be  executed ;  for  also  upon  these  the  usual  legal  formula  has  its
application,  which  reads :  *  We  three  in  this  session  have  imanimously
concluded,  etc'  Often  all  three  agree  to  do  the  judgment.  But  the
Right  hand  appears,  which  is  always  open  to  receive  the  repentant,  which
is  Ye-dudy  i.  e.,  (mnO  ^^^  KH  vav  1K1  heh  vtnyodiy.  And  this  is  the  She-
*kheen-ah  which  is  called  the  Right  hand,  from  the  side  of  Benevolence
QHesed\^    The  Left  hand,  from  the  side  of  Strength  {Ge' boor-ah) ;

*  'Hesed  IDH  8  -f-  60  -f  4  =  72.    This  word  contains  the  72  Qabbalistic  Names
which  issue  ont  of  YHVH.


363

the  hand  of  Ite-dud^  from  the  side  of  the  Middle  Pillar,  (the  Pillar
of  Harmony).  If  man  repents,  this  hand  releases  him  from  the  judg-
ment. But  when  the  Cause  of  ALL  Causes  has  passed  judgment,  of
it  is  said:  'And  none  delivers  from  My  hand.*  The  three- fold  men-
tion in  that  verse;  '^^iJ  a' nee  I,  ?jk  (i'nee  I,  ^jk  <Jf'«^^  1/  there  ap-
pear in  it,  three  kkk  {Alephs)  and  three  '"  ( Yodeen)^  which  point  to  the
four-lettered  Name  (/.  ^.,  the  Tetragrammaton)  ftp  ifti  KH  '^^^  and  there
also  appears  in  it,  three  wy  (  Favin),  in  the  words,  and  none  J^en  y^  and
I  Va^a^nee  'jk?  And  I  make  alive  Va-a^hayeh  n^nKi>  which  are  compre-
hended in  this  Name.  And  with  all  this,  that  verse,  which  said ;  '  by
other  elohim  (gods),'  have  the  companions,  explained,  as  it  is  says;
'  Behold  now  that  I,  I  am.  He,'  that  is  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  and  His
She'kheen-ah,  whereby  it  is  said:  VTii  ^'3«  a' nee  v'ku  (J.  e.,  I  and  He);
*  And  no  elohim  with  Me,'  this  is  cmji  S"KDD  Sama-el  and  serpent.

*I  kill  and  make  alive,'  *I  kill'  by  means  of  My  She'kheen-ah,  he
who  is  guilty,  and  I  '  make  alive '  by  her,  he  who  is  pure.*  'And  none  can
save  from  My  hand,'  that  is  from  the  hand  of  Y'IT  Ye-dud  which  is  YHVH
Yod,  Heh,  Vav,  Heh,  whose  Name  is  complete,  and  this  is  YXO  T"DD1D3
vnD .     And  all  is  E^meth  Truth.

But  what  is  said  above  of  the  Causes  of  Causes,  as  the  Cause  of  All
Causes,  is  a  Mystery,  that  has  not  been  transmitted  to  all  the  prophets
and  wise-men.  Come,  See !  How  many  secret  causes  exist,  which  are
hidden,  disguised  and  interwoven  in  the  Sephiroth,  and  the  Sephiroth  of
the  Merkabah,  which  in  them  are  hidden  to  the  conceptions  of  the  chil-
dren of  man  !  Of  them  it  is  said ;  '  For  a  High  One  from  above  the  High,
is  keeper,  etc'  (Eccles.  v,  8.)  There  are  Lights  of  which  some  shine
brighter  than  others,  those  receiving  the  Light  from  the  others  are  darker
than  those  above  them  from  which  they  receive.  But  before,  the  Cause
of  All  Causes,  not  any  Light  standeth,  for  all  Lights  darken  before  Him.
Another  exposition  of  the  words :  '  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image  after
our  similitude,^  This  the  companions  have  applied  to  the  serving  angels,
they  (the  angels),  said  this  verse.  Said  He  to  them ;  as  they  know  what
has  been  and  will  be,  and  they  know  that  man  will  sin  ;  Why  did  they
desire  to  create  him,  and  besides  Aza  and  Azael  have  slandered  him  at
the  time  when  the  She'kheen-ah  said  to  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  '  Let


364

us  make  man  ;'  said  they  (Aza  and  Azael,  see  ante,  p.  io6  sq.")  :  ♦  What  is

«

man  that  thou  takest  knowledge  of  him  ?'  (?s,  cxliv,  3.  Vulgate  cxliii.)
Why  desirest  thou  to  create  man  as  thou  knowest  he  will  sin  before  thee,
through  the  woman  which  is  darkness  ?  For  the  Light  is  the  male,  and
the  Darkness,  the  female,  from  this  (the  female)  is  the  darkness  of  crea-
tion.    (See  ante,  p.  242  j^.)

At  that  time  the  She'kheen-ah  said  to  them  :  The  object  of  your  accusa-
tion is  the  same  which  will  cause  you,  in  the  future,  to  fall,  as  it  is  written ;
'And  the  children  of  Elohim  (Be'nai  Elohim)  saw  that  daughters  of  man
were  fair,  etc'  (Gen.  vi,  2.)  They  lusted  after  them,  confused  themselves
through  them,  and  the  She'kheen-ah  cast  them  from  their  holiness !  Said
the  companions :  '  Rabbi,  Rabbi !  If  so,  Aza  and  Azael  have  not  lied  in
their  words,  for  man  was  surely  destined  to  sin  through  woman.'  Said
he  to  them :  *  Thus  said  the  She'kheen-ah ;  you,  who  are  more  prepared
to  bring  complaints  before  me  than  the  entire  celestial  host,  it  would  be
more  seeming,  if  you  were  better  than  man  in  your  own  deeds ;  but  if  it
is  destined  that  he  (man)  shall  sin  through  one  woman,  you  will  sin
through  many  women  more  than  the  children  of  man,  as  it  is  written  :
'The  sons  of  Elohim  saw  that  the  daughters  of  man,  etc'  It  does  not
say,  the  daughter,  etc.,  but  the  daughters  of  man.  Besides  if  man  is
guilty,  repentance  is  ordained  which  is  to  lead  him  back  to  his  Lord,  to
make  amends  for  his  fault.'  Said  the  companions  to  him ;  *  If  this  is  so,
why  all  this  ?'  said  Rabbi  Shim-on  ;  *  Companions,  if  it  had  not  been  so,
if  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  I  had  not  created  good  and  evil  spirits,
{Ye^tzer  ha-iob  and  the  Ye^tzer  ha-raK)  which  are  Light  and  Darkness,
neither  purity  nor  guilt  would  have  been  for  the  B'ree-aiic  man,  but  created
from  both,  (the  good  and  evil)  therefore ;  *  See,  I  have  set  before  thee,
this  day  life  and  good,  and  death  and  evil.'  (Deut.  xxx,  15.)*  Said
they  to  him  :  '  Why  is  all  this  ?  Would  it  not  have  been  better,  if  they
had  not  been  created,  so  as  not  to  sin  and  cause  all  this  which  he  has
caused  Above,  and  so  that  there  need  not  have  been  punishment  or  re-
ward ? '  Said  he  to  them  ;  *  He  could  have  so  created  them,  but  as  the
Thorah  is  created  for  his  sake,  as  it  is  written  in  her  (the  Thorah)  :  Pun-
ishment to  the  evil  and  reward  for  the  just,  there  would  have  been  neither

*  That  is,  the  opportunity  to  exercise  Free  Will.


365

reward  to  the  just  (righteous)  nor  punishment  to  the  wicked,  but  for  the
sake  of  the  BWee-aiic  man,  '  He  did  not  create  the  world  in  vain.'  (Is.
xlv,  1 8.)  Said  they,  '  We  surely  have  heard  that  we  have  never  heard
before,  then  surely  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  has  not  created  anything  for
which  He  has  no  need.'  *  Besides  the  Thorah  (Law)  of  the  Creation  is
the  Garment  to  the  She'kheen-ah.  If  man,  had  not  been  created  to  sin,
the  She'kheen-ah  would  be  without  a  Garment  like  a  poor,  therefore
every  one  who  sins  is  like  one  who  would  disrobe  the  She'kheen-ah  of
her  Garment,  and  this  is  the  punishment  of  man  ;  but  whoever  fulfills
the  commands  of  the  Thorah,  is  like  he  who  would  clothe  the  She'kheen-ah
in  her  Garment."*

Metatron  the  Angel  of  the  Presence.  **  The  Middle  Pillarf  is
Metatron,  who  places  peace.  Above,  according  to  the  way  of  Tiph'e-reth.  J
His  name  is  like  the  Name  of  his  Master,  §  he  was  created  in  His  image ^
and  after  His  similitude^  for  he  embraces  all  the  degrees  from  Above  to
Below  and  from  Below  to  Above.  He  is  the  uniting  one  in  the  Centre,  as
is  written  :  '  And  the  middle  bolt,  in  the  middle  of  the  boards  bolts  from
one  end  to  the  other."  (Ex.  xxvi,  28.)  And  this  comprises  four  faces
and  four  wings  to  each  hay-yah  and  hdy^yah  (living  ones  and  living  ones)
from  Above,  which  are  n3Tn«\||

*  Zohar  i»  fol.  22a, s^.,  Amsterdam,  i,  fol.  26,  col.  I,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.,
i,  fol.  26a  sq.  As  to  the  Master-builder  and  the  architect  of  the  world ;  compare,  Say-
ings of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  etc.,  by  Charles  Taylor,  p.  26,  note.  As  to  the  Upper  and
Lower  Adam,  Ilfid»  pp.  64,  70,  72  and  notes,  also  Sol.  Munk's,  Moreh,  before  cited,  ii,
P*  253;  Also  English  Ed.,  ii,  p.  154.  Woman  regarded  as  the  mediam  of  temptation  ;
Sayings,  etc.,  by  Taylor,  p.  45,  note.  As  to  the  She'kheen-ah  and  Elohim,  see  the
Semitic  idea  of  the  feminine  reflection,  ante,  pp.  246-7,  and  Sayings,  etc.,  p.  57  note  ;
also  as  to  consultation  with  the  Upper  Family,  ante,  p.  246;  Maimonide's,  Moreh,  English
Ed.,  ii,  p.  39  sq, ;  and  Sayings,  etc.,  pp.  43,  64  and  notes.  As  to  Sam&-el,  Maimonide's,
Moreh,  English  Ed.,  ii,  p.  155  sq,  and  notes.

f  The  Middle  Pillar  or  Column  of  the  Centre,  in  the  Sephirothic  Tree  represents  the
Harmonies  and  blending  of  all  Oppositions.

X  The  Yalkut  sa3rs,  the  highest  angels  must  also  have  peace,  it  is  written :  **  He  makes
peace  in  His  highest  regions.''  If  peace  is  needed  in  a  place  where  there  is  neither
hatred  nor  enmity  nor  quarreler,  how  much  more  so  here  where  all  these  passions  exist.

§  Comp.  Ex.  xxiii,  20-31,  22-23,  ^i">  21-22,  xi,  19.

11  2^har  iii,  fol.  227^1,  Amsterdam  Ed.  iii,  fol.  91,  col.  i,  Sulzbach  EA.  Cremona
Ed.,  iii,  fol.  104^,  col.  416.  '  «


366

Metatron.  Of  the  Great  Presence  Angel,  Metatron,  who  alone  occu-
pies the  B'ree-atic  World,  the  Zohar  says:  "  The  letter  t8^  SMtn,  in  n»^
Shad'daly  (J.  ^.,  the  Almighty,  Gen.  xvii,  i,)  has  three  branches,  which
hint  at  the  three  Names  mrr  wtiSk  mn%  /.  <?.,  YHVH  Elohainu  YHVH,
which  are  14  letters  in  number.  These  signify  the  three  branches  of  our
forefathers,  and  in  it  is  14  letters  which  correspond  to  the  numerical  value
of  n  dal,  4  +  10  =  14,  from  the  word  Shad-//a?.  {Dal  signifies,  suffi-
ciency.) And  all  the  letters  of  ^tbt  (300  -f  4  +  10  =  314O  which  is  equal
to  the  content  of  |no"00  Metatron*  (40  +  9  +  9  +  200  +  6  -H  50  =  314)
which  last  is  the  Garment  of  Shad-dai."  f

The  Messiah  Ben  Joseph  and  the  Messiah  Ben  David,  "  At  the
time  to  come,  when  the  King  Messiah  comes  to  take  possession  of  the
highest  eminences,!  and  penetrate  into  their  wingsg  so  as  to  strengthen
and  transpose  himself  into  the  Upper  Life.  From  it  the  Messiah  of  David
will  come  out  on  that  day,  and  this  is  the  secret  meaning  of  the  words ;
*  I  will  declare  the  decree :  YHVH  hath  said  imto  me ;  Thou  art  My  son,
this  day  I  have  begotten  thee.'  (Ps.  ii,  7.)  I  am  prepared  to  say  to  that
place  which  is  called :  pn  hoq^  law,  and  bring  him  the  joyful  tidings,  that
'  He  hath  said  to  me ;  Thou  art  My  son,  this  day  I  have  begotten  thee.'

*  As  to  the  Great  Angel,  Metatron,  see  Genesis  with  a  Talmudical  Comment.,  by  Paul
I.  Hershon,  etc.,  London,  1883,  pp.  23  sq.^  35  sq.  The  Angel,  Messiah,  etc.,  by  Ernest
de  Bunsen,  London,  i88o,  pp.  91  sq.^  loi  j^.,  174-5,  303.  The  Life  of  Jesus,  by  Ernest
Renan.  English  Ed.,  1870,  p.  223.  VEglUt  Chritunne,  by  Ernest  Kenan,  Vol.  iv,
c.  ix,  p.  212  j^.,  period  64  A.  D.;  Vol.  vi,  p.  66  sq.,  period  126  A.D.  Beausobre,  Hts-
toire  Critique  de  Manichitt  etc.,  ii,  p.  269  j<^.,  period  45  A.  D.  Yalkut  to  Zechariah,
by  Edward  G.  King,  p.  94  sq.  Also,  Traditions  of  the  Jews,  etc.,  by  Rev.  John  Peter
Stehelin,  before  cited,  i,  p.  213  sq,,  p.  272;  ii,  p.  92  sq.  Modem  Judaism,  etc.,  by  John
Allen.   London,  1830,  p.  160  sq,,  169.

f  Zohar  iii,  fol.  231a,  \  Pin-* has,  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  Amsterdam  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.
ill,  fol.  106^,  coL  423.

X  To  judge  the  living  and  the  dead,  the  seat  of  the  Divine  Court  of  Justice,  is  con>
sidered  as  situated  on  the  highest  eminence,  as  it  reads,  in  few  lines  before  T\y21  gib^oth^
heights,  written  defectively  without  1  (vav)  which  would  read  with  1,  r»lj?3JJ ;  it  means,
the  superior  height  of  the  universe  in  the  place  of  the  firmaments.

2  Wings  are  an  ancient  emblem  of  the  spiritual.  See,  Mythology  among  the  He-
brews, etc.,  by  Goldziher.     English  Ed.     London,  1877,  p«  115  sq.


367

On  the  same  day  He  will  "bring  forth  that  hog  from  under  the  wings,  in
many  lives,  in  many  crowns,  in  many  blessings*  as  it  ought  to  be.  But
that  hog,  shall  not  remain  alone.  Another  Messiah,  the  Son  of  Joseph^
shall  join  himself  to  it  and  there  will  he  grow  strong  and  not  in  another
place,  and  while  it  is  the  lower  eminence  which  has  no  life  in  it,  so  this
Messiah  shall  be  killed  and  remain  dead,  until  this  eminence  shall  gather
life  from  the  Upper  eminence,  and  rise  again."  f  J

Of  the  Deity.  "We  have  learned,  in  the  Siphrah  D' Tzniaoihah^
i.e.,  Book  of  Concealment,  or.  Modesty ;  that  At-tee^kah  D" At-tee^ keen,%
/.  e.y  the  Ancient  of  the  Ancients,  Hidden  of  the  Hidden,  Concealed  of
the  Concealed,  prepared  and  arranged  Himself.  It  may  as  it  were  be
said :  He  is  to  be  found  and  not  to  be  found.  He  is  not  to  be  found,  in
reality,  but  is  arranged,  and  He  is  not  known  because  He  is  the  At-tee^k
D* At-iee^ keen.  He  is  known  through  His  arrangements  as  a  certain
SabaJi  nSabin  Oldest  of  the  Oldest,  AUtee'k  H At-tee' keen,  Ancient
of  the  Ancients,  Hidden  of  the  Hidden.  And  by  His  arrangements
He  became  known  and  (yet)  is  not  known.

The  Lord  whose  dress  is  white  and  so  also  the  appearance  of  the  Light  of
His  Face.  He  sits  upon  a  throne  of  scintillations  of  Light  that  He  may
give  Light  to  us.  The  whiteness  of  the  Cranium  of  His  Head  is  spread
over  400,000  worlds,  and  from  the  Light  of  this  whiteness,  the  just  (pious)
shall  inherit  in  the  world  to  come  400  worlds.    Thus  it  is  written :  *  Four

•  See  II  Col.  ii,  3,  9.

f  Zohar  iii,  foL  203^,  Amsterdam  Ed.  iii,  fol.  82,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cremona
Ed.  ii,  fol.  94^,  2  Baloq,

X  As  to  Messiah  ben  David  and  Messiah  ben  Joseph,  see,  The  Yalkut  on  Zechariah,
by  Edward  G.  King,  London,  1882,  Aj^ndix  A.  Genesis  with  a  Talmudical  Com-
ment, by  Paul  I.  Hershon,  etc.  London,  1883.  The  N.  T.  especially  in  the  Pauline
writings,  refers  to  two  Messiahs,  one  who  had  come  and  been  executed,  the  other  who
was  yet  to  come,  in  glory  and  full  life.  Justin  Martyr,  also  speaks  of  the  two  comings  of
Jesus,  one,  to  suffer,  the  other,  to  be  glorious.  Judgment  of  the  Ancient  Jewish  Church,
etc.,  by  Dr.  Peter  Allix,  p.  256  sq.  Also  The  Jewish  Repository,  London,  February,
18 14,  pp.  72,  107.  Trans.  Society  of  Hebrew  Lit. ;  Essays  on  Writings  of  Ibn  Ezra,
c.  ii  and  notes,  p.  98.

2  In  the  words  At-te^k,  At-te^kah,  At-tt^keen,  because  of  the  difficulty  of  pronounc-
ing the  D  Q>  in  these  words,  the  English  language,  we  have  spelled  them  with  k«


368

hundred  shekels  of  silver,  current  money  with  the  merchant.'  (Gen.  xxiii,
i6 :)  In  the  cranium  dwell  every  day  13,000  m3rriads  of  worlds,  which  rest
upon  It,  and  lean  upon  It.     And  from  that  Cranium  drips  a  dew  towards
him  who  is  outside  {ZeUr  An-peen)  and  fills  his  head  daily,  as  it  is  writ-
ten :  *  My  head  is  filled  with  dew.*  (Song  of  Songs,  v,  2).  And  from  that
dew,  which  He  shakes  from  this  Head  upon  that  of  him  who  is  outside,
will  the  dead  awake  to  the  future  world.     As  it  is  written :  *  My  head  is
filled  with  dew.'    It  is  not  written :  milUthi  *  I  have  filled,'  but  nimlah  *  is
filled.'     It  is  written :  (Is.  xxvi,  19.)  *  The  dew  of  lights  (herbs?)  is  Thy
dew.'     The  *  Lights'  flow  from  the  whiteness  of  the  Ai'tee^kah,  and  from
this  *dew '  are  sustained  the  holy.  Above.   And  this  is  the  Manna  prepared
for  the  just  in  the  world  to  come.  And  that  *  dew '  drips  down  to  the  Field
of  the  Holy  Apples,  (or,  Sacred  Fruits.)     This  is  that  which  is  written  :
*  And  when  the  dew  that  lay  went  up,  behold  on  the  face  of  the  wilder-
ness lay  a  small  round  thing,'  (Ex.  xvi,  14).    And  the  appearance  of  this
dew  is  white  like  the  color  b^dola'h^  i.  ^.,  crystal  stone,  in  which  can  be
seen  all  colors,  as  it  is  written :  '  And  the  color  thereof  as  the  color  of
b'dolcCh  (bdellium).'  The  whiteness  of  this  Cranium  shines  upon  thirteen
different  sides  (surfaces)  to  four  sides  (surfaces)  on  one  side  and  to  four
sides  (surfaces)  on  the  side  of  the  Face,  and  to  four  sides  on  the  side  of  the
a^hoor  hinder  side  (the  back),  and  in  one  above  the  Cranium  (/.  ^.,  to  the
side.  Above.)*    And  from  this  the  length  of  His  Face  is  spread  to  370
myriads  of  worlds,  and  this  is  called  D''£3K  i^K  A' reek  Apa-yeem,  i.  e,,  Long
Faces.  And  this  At-tee^kah  UAt-tee^keen  Ancient  of  the  Ancients,  is  called
A^reek-ah  D* An-peetiy  and  he  who  is  outside  is  called  Ze* ir  An-peen^  i.e,.
Small  Faces,  in  contradistinction  to  the  At-iee^kah  Sabah  Qad-doshy  i.e.j
the  Ancient  Old  Holy,  the  Holiest  of  the  Holiest,  and  when  ZeUr  An-peen
looks  to  this,  all  things,  Below,  becomes  arranged,  and  his  Face  spreads  out
and  becomes  longer  at  that  time,  but  not  all  the  time  like  that  of  At-tee-
^kah.     And  from  that  Cranium  comes  forth  a  certain  white  side  (ray,
efflux)  towards  the  Cpanium  of  the  Ze*tr  An-peen  for  the  forming  of  his
head,  and  from  there  to  other  craniums.  Below ;  which  are  innumerable.
And  all  the  craniums  reflect  the  whiteness  to  At-tee^ k  Yo-men  the  Ancient

*  The  Qabbalistic  Figure  No.  36,  based  on  one  in  the  Cremona  Edition;  iii,  fol.  116^,
may  give  the  reader  some  idea  of  the  above  description.


'   369

of  Days,  when  they  are  numbered  under  the  sceptre,  and  opposite  this  is
an  opening  towards  the  craniums.  Below ;  when  they  proceed  to  the  count.
In  the  cavity  of  the  Cranium  there  is  an  aetherial  membrane  of  the  Hid-
den Wisdom,  Above ;  and  this  is  not  found  and  not  opened.  That  mem-
brane covers  over  the  Brain  which  is  the  Hidden  Wisdom  and  because  it
is  covered  by  that  membrane,  this  Wisdom  is  not  opened  and  therefore  it
is  called,  the  Hidden  Wisdom.  And  this  Brain,  which  is  the  Hidden  Wis-
dom, is  silent  and  remaineth  tranquil  in  its  place  like  good  wine  upon  its
lees.  And  this  is  what  is  said :  An  Old  One,  His  Knowledge  is  Hidden
and  His  Brain  is  Hidden  and  Tranquil.  And  that  membrane  hath  an  out-
let from  Ze^ir  An-peen  and  therefore  this  brain  is  spread  and  goes  out  to
32  ways.*  This  is  that  which  is  written :  *  And  a  river  went  forth  from
Eden.'"     (Gen.  ii,  yOt  X

"The  Cranium  of  Resha  ^ HivWahy  i,  e,.  White  Head,  has  no  begin-
ning nor  end ;  it  extends  and  shines  as  a  cohesive  reservoir  which  spreads
out  and  illuminates.  And  from  it  the  just  inherit  400  worlds  of  delights
in  the  world  to  come.  From  this  cohesive  reservoir  which  is  the  White
Cranium,  dew  drips  daily  to  the  Ze^ir  An-peen  Small  Faces,  to  a  place
which  is  called,  Sha-mayeem  (Heavens),  and  where,  in  time  to  come,  the
dead  shall  be  summoned  to  life.  It  is  written :  *  Elohim  shall  give  thee
of  the  dew  of  heaven,  etc'  (Gen.  xxvii,  28.)  And  the  head  shall  be
filled,  and  from  that  Ze' ir  An-peen,  it  drips  to  the  Field  of  Apples  and  the
whole  Field  of  Apples  (Sacred  Fruits)  flows  from  that  dew.  This  At-tee-
^kah  Qad'doshay  i.  e,,  Holy  Ancient,  is  Hidden  and  Concealed,  and  the
Wisdom  from  Above,  is  hidden  in  that  Cranium,  (is  found  and  not
found.  Cremona  Ed.)  Surely  in  that  At-iee^kah  nothing  is  revealed  ex-
cept the  Head  alone,  because  He  is  the  Head  of  all  Heads.  The  Wisdom
Above,  which  is  the  Head,  is  hidden  in  it,  and  is  called  the  Upper  Brain,,
the  Hidden  Brain,  the  Brain  which  is  Tranquil  and  Quiet,  and  none  know

*  That  is,  the  means  of  knowledge  and  intelligence  to  man,  looked  upon  as  the  22
letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet  and  the  decade  united,  as  the  32  symbols  by  which,  man
has  any  wisdom  or  any  power  of  uniting  with  his  fellows.

f  Eden  or  Paradise  was  considered  by  the  learned  of  the  ancient  Israelites  as  the
place  of  Understanding  and  Wisdom,  the  Intellect.

X  Zohar  iii,  Idrah  Rabbah.     Brody,  Amsterdam,  and  Mantua  Ed.,  12&1  and  b»    Cre-
mona Ed.  iii,  fol.  61,  coL  243.
24


370

it  but  Himself.  Three  Heads  are  carved  out,  each  within  the  other,  and
each  above,  from  the  other.  One  Head  is  the  Hidden  Wisdom  which  is
covered  up  and  not  opened.  And  this  Hidden  Wisdom  is  the  Head  of
All  the  Heads  of  the  other  Wisdoms.  The  Upper  Head  is  the  At-tee'kah
Qad'dosha  the  Holy  Ancient,  the  Concealed  of  all  Concealed,*  the  Head
of  All  Heads,  a  Head  which  is  not  a  Head^  nor  does  any  one  know  nor
is  it  ever  known,  what  is  in  that  Head  which  Wisdom  or  Reason  cannot
comprehend;  and  on  this  we  read :  *  Flee  Thou  to  Thy  Ma-qom  (/.  ^.,
Place).'  (Num.  xxiv,  ii.)  'And  the  'Hay-yoth,  /.  e.y  living  creatures,
run  and  return.'  (Ezek.  i,  14.)  And  therefore  At-iee^kah  Qad-dosha  the
Holy  Ancient,  is  called  Ayiuy  (/.  ^.,  No-Thing,  or,  Non  ens)  because  in
Him  depends  Ayin  {Non  ens).  And  all  these  locks  and  all  these  hairs
come  out  from  the  Hidden  Brain,  f  And  all  are  even  and  smooth  and  in
equilibrium  and  hanging  over  the  back  of  the  neck  which  is  not  seen  in
any  way.  Because  the  At-tee^kah  Qad-dosha  the  Holy  Ancient,  is  in  one,
entire  in  happiness,  and  does  not  change  from  Mercy  forever.  In  Thir-
teen  channels  of  Mercies  is  He  found  J  because  that  Hidden  Wisdom  in
Him  is  divided  three  times  into  four-fourths  (/.  ^.,  a  quartenary,  comp.
Figure  36,  supra),  and  He,  the  At-tee^kah  Ancient,  comprises  them  and
rules  over  All.  One  way  is  illuminated  in  the  middle  (the  parting)  of  the
Hair  coming  out  from  the  Brain,  this  is  the  way  by  whose  light  the  just
are  led  into  the  world  to  come.  It  is  written  :  *  And  the  way  of  the  just
is  like  a  shining  light,  etc.  (Prov.  iv,  18.)  And  of  this  it  is  written:
^Then  thou  shalt  delight  in  YHVH.'  (Is.  Iviii,  14.)  And  from  that  way
all  the  other  ways  which  depend  on  Ze'ir  An-peen  are  illuminated.  That
At'tee^kah  the  Ancient,  Oldest  of  the  Oldest,  is  Kether  El-yon  the  High-
est Crown,  Above,  by  which  are  crowned  all  Diadems  and  Coronets.
And  from  Him  the  Lamps  are  Illuminated  and  Lighted  and  they  send

•  Comp.  Zohar  i,  fol.  147,  Amsterdam  Ed.  The  Tosephthah.

f  The  locks  and  hairs  are  those  which  cover  the  back  of  the  head  and  nap  of  the
neck,  and  in  this  is  doubtless  the  hidden  mystery  of  Ex.  xxxiii,  20  sq.  The  Sphinx  has
lapels  covering  the  back  of  the  head,  neck  and  shoulders ;  the  priests  of  the  Greek  and
Russian  Church  are  obliged  to  have  the  back  of  the  head,  neck  and  shoulders,  covered
with  their  long  flowing  hair,  and  a  similar  arrangement  is  portrayed,  in  the  ancient  pic-
tures of  Christ  and  of  the  Father.     Note  the  same  on  the  Hindu  Prana,  ante^  p.  322.

X  Comp.  Ex.  xxxiv,  5-8,  known  to  the  Israelites  as  the  Thirteen  Middoth.


371

forth  fiames  and  scintillate.  And  this  is  He,  the  Supreme  Hidden  Spark
which  is  not  known,  and  all  other  Lamps  are  Lighted  and  Illuminated  from
Him.  This  At-tee^kah  the  Ancient,  is  found  in  Three  Heads  and  they
are  contained  in  One  Head.  (Comp.  Zohar  iii,  291^.)  And  He  is  the
Upper  Head,  Above  Above.  And  because  At-tee'kah  Qad^dosha  the  Holy
Ancient,  is  designated  by  Three,  so  here  all  the  other  Lamps  which  are
Illuminated  from  Him  are  included  in  Three.  Furthermore,  the  At-tee-
^kah  is  designated  by  Two ;  the  complex  of  the  At-tee^kah  which  is  in
Two,  is  the  Upper  Crown  of  all  the  Upper  Heads  of  all  the  Above,  the
Head  of  all  the  Heads.  And  that  which  is  above  from  this,  is  not  known,
so  all  the  other  Lamps  are  hidden  in  Two.  Further  the  At-tee'kah  Qad-
dosha  the  Holy  Ancient,  is  designated  and  hidden  in  One  and  is  One
and  everything  is  One,  so  all  the  other  Lamps  become  sanctified  and  are
joined  and  knotted  in  One,  are  One  and  are  All."  *

**  He  (Ain  Soph)  is  beginning  and  end  of  all  degrees  (in  the  creation).
All  these  degrees  are  stamped  with  His  image,  and  He  can  be  called  only
One,  notwithstanding  the  innumerable  images  He  is  still  only  One,  surely
He  is  so :  the  Above  and  the  Below,  depend  on  Him."  f

The  She-mah,  Triad  and  Unity.  **  Whoever  (in  the  j^dbt  She-mah
*  Hear  O  Israel,  etc.  Deut.  vi,  4,)  J  says,  inK  E'hady  One  §  should  pro-
nounce the  K  Aleph  quickly,  somewhat  shorten  its  sound  and  not
pause  on  it.  Whoso  doeth  this,  his  life  shall  be  prolonged.  Said
they  to  him  (R.  Ilai) :  He  (R.  Shim-on)  has  said  :  '  There  are  Two  (m)
in  conjunction  with  One  (  k)  and  hence  they  are  Three,  and  if  they  are
Three  then  they  are  One.'  (inK  E'had,  One.)  Said  he  to  them  :  *  Those
two  Names  of  the  She-mah  which  are  YHVHy  YHVH^  Eiohainu  connects

*  Zohar  iii,  fol.  28&1  and  b,  Mantua  Ed.  Idrah  Zootah.  Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  140a,  col.
558.

f  Zohar  i,  21^7,  Biody  Ed.     Livomo  E^.  i,  36^  and  37a.

X "  Jesus  answered  him,  Tike  first  of  all  the  commandments  is.  Hear,  O  Israel ;  the
Lord  our  God,  the  Lord  is  One."  Mark  xii,  29,  New  Version.  This  is  the  great  Jew-
ish Declaration  of  Faith  used  in  the  time  of  Jesus,  and  used  by  him,  and  now  used  by
the  pious  Jews,  every  day,  and  is  most  probably  that  referred  to  in  Daniel  vi,  10,  13,
and  Peter,  Acts  iii,  i,  x,  3,  30.

{  The  numerical  value  of  in«  i  ^8-|-4^i3.


372

with  them,  and  this  is  the  seal  of  the  (divine)  inscription.     It  is  Truth.*
But  when  these  are  connected  together  as  one  then  they  are  One  in

a  Unity.' ''t

"  We  have  learned :  In  thirteen  ways  the  knot  of  Truth  is  tied,  for  the

production  of  blessing  to  all,  and  all  the  E^methy  /.^.,  Truth,  of  the  Holy,

Blessed  be  He !  is  hidden  in  Three ;  therefore  the  Thorah  is  crowned  in

thirteen  ways."  J

We  must  not  assume,  from  the  preceding  and  following  quotations,
that  the  ancient  Israelites  believed  in  a  Trinity  as  understood  in  the
Christian  Church ;  the  doctrines  of  the  latter,  upon  this  dogma,  re-
quired a  long  time  for  their  formulation,  and  the  controversies  between
Arrian  and  Athanasius,  the  theologians  who  preceded  them,  and  those  du-
ring the  Middle  Ages,  will  evidence  this  to  the  student.  The  Hebrews
in  common  with  many  other  of  the  ancient  Oriental  peoples,  believed  in
a  Triadic  manifestation  of  the  Supreme  Deity,  who  nevertheless  was  a
Unit.  The  existence  of  the  Triadic  idea  in  the  Zpharic  writings,  tends
to  prove  their  antiquity  as  productions  of  the  ancient  Jewish  Babylonian
Schools.  It  is  not  probable  that  a  persecuted  Jew  of  the  Middle  Ages,
one  of  the  grounds  of  which,  was  his  Unitarian  belief,  would  have  forged
and  placed  in  these  writings,  any  thing  calculated  to  prove  the  antiquity
and  correctness  of  the  dogmas  of  the  Greek  Church  or  the  Roman  Cath-
olic Trinitarian  ideas,  or  assist  the  Inquisition  and  the  Christian  Church,
in  the  punishment  of  his  people.

**  R.  Yehudah  said  :  *  There  are  two  beings,  one  in  heaven  and  one  on

•  This  means,  that  the  repeating  of  the  She-mah  should  conclude  as  if  with  a  seal  to
bind  it,  with  the  riDK  E*meth  Truth.  When  the  She-mah  is  repeated,  always  before  the
repetition  must  be  said  in  a  low  voice  p^j  -t^q  ^^ :  *'  El  Me'lekh  ne'^mon."  The
first  letters  of  the  three  words  °m|J  Amcfty  have  the  same  meaning  as  riDK  E*fMth
Truth.  The  sentence  should  be  repeated  without  a  pause :  I  Am  YHVH  your  Elo-
hainu  in  Truth.

f  Zohar  iii,  fol.  1 62a,  Amsterdam  Ed.  iii,  fol.  67,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  iii,
fol.  lib,

{Zohar  iii,  fol.  28,  col.  no,  \  A'ha-rai  Moth.  Cremona  Ed.     iii,  62a,  Amsterdam
Ed.     In  the   1 3   Middoth,  attributes  of  Mercy,  Ex.  xxxiv,  5-7,  the  first  three  are  :
*YHVH^    YHVH,  Ail  (God),'  and  the  ten  following  are  attributes  pointing  to  the  first
'  of  TWsV  (YHVH).     The  just  pray  every  day  the  thirteen  stems.


373

earth,  and  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  unites  them. '  R.  El'azar  said :  *  Three
Lights  are  in  the  Holy  Upper  which  unite  as  One ;  and  they  are  the
basis  of  the  Thorah  and  this  opens  the  door  to  All.  They  open  the  door
to  Truth  and  this  is  the  house  to  All,  and  therefore  is  it  called,  n^a  ba-is
house,  because  this  is  their  house.'  "  *

" '  Behold  a  people  dwelling  alone.'  (Num.  xxiii,  9.)  That  is,  in  unity
without  (other)  mixture.  All  the  perfect  unity  is  so,  (and  is  expressed  in) :
'  YHVH  Elohainu  YHVH.'  This  is  the  mystery  in  it,  that  Hu,  u  <?.,
He,  was  before  the  beginning  of  all  creation, f  and  unites  Itself  at  the
head,  at  the  stem,  and  on  the  way  (place  where  it  stands);  *  YHVH  *  that
is  the  Upper  Head,  in  the  in-itself  concentrated  aether.  J  *  Elohainu,'  1.^.,
our  God,  is  the  stem  which  is  called,  the  '  Stem  of  Yishat  (Jesse),'  (Is.
xi,  i);  and  'YHVH'  is  the  way,  from  Below.  Whoever  in  this  manner
comprehends  the  mystery  of  the  Unity,  conceives  it  as  it  is  proper.  "§

"The  daily  unity  is  the  unity  in  this  verse:  '  Hear  O  Israel  YHVH
Elohainu  YHVH, '  They  are  all  One  :  therefore  it  is  called  nnK  E'had
One.  Here  are  three  Names,  how  are  they  One  ?  Artd  although  we
read  E'had  One,  how  are  they  One  ?  Only  by  the  vision  of  RucCh  Qad-
dosha,  /.  ^.,  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  this  apparent  and  only  then,  with  closed
eyes,  1 1  can  we  know  how  Three  are  One.  And  this  is  the  mystery  of  the
voice  which  has  been  heard.  The  voice  is  only  one  yet  it  consists  of
three  elements,  fire,  air  and  water,  and  all  are  one  in  the  mystery  of  the
voice  (and  this  can  only  be  considered  as  one).^  And  so  here,  YHVH
Elohainu  YHVH  are  One,  three  forms  and  they  are  One,  and  this  is  in-

*  Zobar  iii,  fol.  3617  J  Shim-inee.    Cremona  Ed.,  ii,  foL  i6<7,  col.  61.

f  The  words  of  the. text,  the  author  takes  with  the  meaning  of  chief  or  head  (prop-
erly, rosh  tzoorim^  ue,,  top  or  head  of  rocks,  representing  the  deity;)  of  creations,  before
the  beginning  of  all  creations,  so  that  to  Him  was  created  ttoor  or  yeUnoor  a  created
thing,  corresponding  to  tioor.    The  creature  is  form.     (Ps.  xlix,  (14)  15.)

XAveer-ah  cTsalkah  the  absolute  aether,  appears  here  the  same  as  aveer-ah  tTtnm'
tzum  concentrated  aether,  or,  perhaps  IttiitXt  ye*sod  ha^tzim-tMum  concentrated  foundation.

2  Zohar  iii,  fol.  203^,  Amsterdam  Ed.  iii,  fol.  82,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cremona
Ed.,  iii,  fol.  94^,  2  Baloq.

II  It  is  customary  among  the  Israelites  to  put  the  hands  over  the  eyes  when  repeating
the  first  verse  of  the  She-mah,  see  the  Ora*h  ^Hay-yem,  c  61,  {  4.

\  Ibid.  \  3.    The  reason  for  speaking  the  name  aloud  is  to  awaken  devotion.


374

dicated  by  the  voice  which  man  must  use  in  the  expression  of  the  piayer
of  unity,  and  put  his  will  in  unity,  which  is  all  from  Ain  Soph  to  the  end,
since  they  are  all  in  this  voice  which  he  makes  in  this  Three,  which  are
One.  And  this  is  the  daily  (confession)  of  the  Divine  Unity  which  is
revealed  in  the  mystery  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  in  many  ways  the  Unity
has  been  explained  and  all  are  true,  who  has  done  it  in  this  way  has  done
right,  and  who  has  done  it  in  another  way  is  also  right.  But  this  unity
which  we  form,  Below,  in  the  mystery  of  the  voice,  which  is  one,  explains
the  Word*  in  general,  f

"  '  Hear  O  Israel  YHVH  Elohainu  YHVH  is  One.'  (Deut.  vi,  4.)
This  is  the  One  Unity  and  His  Name  is  One.  '  Praised  be  the  Name  of
the  Glory  (She'kheen-ah)  of  His  Kingdom  (Malkhuth)  for  ever  and  ever.*
This  is  the  other  Unity  (see  ante,  p.  342  j^.)  that  His  Name  shall  be  One.
And  this  is  the  secret  of  YHVH  Hu  Eloheem,  L  <?.,  YHVH  He,  is  God.
And  this  mystery  of  the  Unity  is  contained  in  the  verse  :  *  YHVH  is
Elohim,*  as  it  is  above  written,  when  they  are  conceived  of  in  their
Absolute  Unity.  But  if  it  is  objected :  Does  it  not  contradict  the  verse :
*YHVH  shall  be  one  and  His  Name  shall  be  One?'  (Zech.  xiv,  9.)
This  is  not  so,  but  *  YHVH  is  Elohim.'  For  if  there  was  written;
YHVH  is  One  and  His  Name,  He,  is  One,  we  could  agree  with  thee,  but
it  k  not  so  written,  only:  *  YHVH  One,  and  his  Name,  One,'  ought  to
be  said  like  this,  viz :  YHVH  Hu  (He)  Hu  (He)  Eiohim :  and  so  it
would  seem  to  be,  YHVH  is  One,  and  His  Name  is  One.  But  all  is  One
when  these  two  Names  are  (in  an  abstract  manner)  united,  the  One,  in
the  one  Unity,  the  other,  in  the  one  Unity,  and  the  two  Unities  can  be
comprehended  in  an  Absolute  Unity,  so  that  together,  they  express  the
complete  conception  of  the  Name  in  one  Unity.  And  only  in  this  way
*is  YHVH  Hu  Elohim,'  because  each  is  connected  with  the  other  so  to
be  Oiie.  But  before  the  Unity  is  united  they  are  each  One  considered
absolutely  by  Itself,  and  the  comprehension  of  the  connection  as  an  Ab-

•  hSd  MiUah  Word,  because  according  to  an  explanation  in  another  place  (Genesis
sidrah,  Vay-^tze)  the  "  Word "  itself  comprises  a  triad,  that  is  will,  voice  and  ar-
ticulated word.

f  Zohar  ii,  fol.  43^,  Amsterdam  Ed.  ii,  fol.  iS,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.^
ii,  fol.  19^,  col.  75.


375

solute  Unity,  is  not  complete.  This  (comprehension  of  the  Unity)  is
the  essence  of  the  whole  Thorah.  For  the  Thorah  embraces  both  the
written  and  oral :  the  written  Thorah  is  this  which  is  written  YHVH,  the
oral  Thorah  is  that  which  is  written  Elohim :  and  because  the  Thorah  is
the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Name,  therefore  they  are  called  the  written
Thorah  and  the  oral  Thorah.  This  (the  written)  is  the  general,  the
other  (the  oral)  is  the  special.  The  general  needs  the  special  and  the
special  needs  the  general,  thus  one  unites  itself  with  the  other,  that  all
may  be  One.  And  therefore  the  entire  content  of  the  Thorah  is  the
whole  content  of  the  Above  and  Below,  because  this  Name  (YHVH)
describes,  the  Above,  and  the  other  Name  (Elohim),  the  Below.  This  one,
is  the  mystery  of  the  Higher  World  ;  the  other,  the  mystery  of  the  Lower
World,  and  as  to  this  is  written  :  '  To  thee  it  has  been  shown  that  thou
mayest  know,  that  YHVH  is  Elohim  !'  This  is  the  essence  of  the  AUL,
and  this  must  the  son  of  man  know  in  this  world."*

"  Come,  See !  The  mystery  of  the  word.  There  are  Three  degrees  and
each  exists  by  Itself,  and  yet  all  are  One,  and  are  knotted  in  One,  nor  are
they  separated  one  from  another,  "f

"  '  The  Ail  (pi,  El,  /.  if.,  God)  Eloheem  YHVH^diber,  /.  ^.,  The  God,
God  YHVH  spoke  and  called  (the)  earth,  etc'  (Ps.  1,  i.)  Ail\^  the
Light  of  Wisdom  and  is  called  ^Hesed  (Benevolence,  Mildness)  Elo-
hecm  is  Ge^boor-ah  (Strength  or  Severity)  and  YHVH  is  the  complete-
ness of  all  Mercy.  Hence  (the  words)  diber  vafiq-rah  eWetz,  /.  ^.,  He
*  spoke  and  calUd  (the)  earth,  etc.*  "  (is  in  the  singular.)     (^Ibid,)

*'  And  these  are  the  Three  degrees  which  are  called  by  the  name  of
Din,  /.  e,y  Judgment,  and  all  are  knotted  in  One  without  separation."
(^Ibid,)

** '  And  the  righteous  are  the  foundation  of  the  world,'  (Prov.  x,  25)
is  written.  Three  come  out  from  One,  One  exists  in  Three,  it  is  the
force  between  Two,  Two  nourish  One,  One  nourishes  many  sides,  thus

*Zoharii,  fol.  i6i3,  16x0,  Amsterdam  Ed.   ii,  fol.  iii,  SnLzbach  Ed.   Cremona  Ed.
ii,  fol.  72/7,  col.  285.

f  Zohar  ill,  fol.  29^,  col.  116,  letter  3,  Cremona  Ekl.    iii,  fol.  650,  Amsterdam  Ed.
2  A^ha-rai  Moth,


Z76

All  is  One,  therefore  it  is  written  '  It  was  evening  and  morning  one  day/
the  day  of  evening  and  morning  joined,  were  one."  *

The  Mystery  of  the  Three  Parts  of  Fire  Which  Are  One.
"  Began  R.  Shim-on  and  said :  Two  verses  are  written ;  '  That  YHVH
thy  Elohim  is  a  devouring  fire,  a  zealous  Ail  (El);'t  (Deut.  iv,  24)  again
it  is  written ;  '  But  you  that  cleave  unto  YHVH  your  Elohim,  are  alive,
every  one  of  you,  this  day.'  (Deut.  iv,  4.)  On  this  verse  *  That  YHVH
thy  Elohim  is  a  consuming  fire.'  This  we  said  to  the  Companions;  That
it  is  a  fire  which  devours  fire,  and  it  is  a  fire  which  devours  itself  and  con-
sumes itself,  because  it  is  a  fire  which  is  more  mighty  than  a  fire,  and  it
has  been  so  confirmed.  But,  Come,  See  !  Whoever  desires  to  know  the
wisdom  of  the  Holy  Unity  should  look  in  that  flame  arising  from  a  burn-
ing coal  or  a  lighted  lamp.  This  flame  comes  out  only  when  united  with
another  thing.  Come,  See !  In  the  flame  which  goes  up  are  two  lights :
one  light  is  a  bright  white  and  one  light  is  united  with  a  dark  or  blue,
the  white  light  is  that  which  is  above  and  ascends  in  a  straight  path,  and
that  below  is  that  dark  or  blue  light,  and  this  light  below,  is  the  throne  to
the  white  light  and  that  white  light  rests  upon  it,  and  they  unite  one
to  the  other  so  that  they  are  one.  And  this  dark  light  or  blue  color,
which  is  below,  is  the  precious  throne  to  the  white.  And  this  is  the  mys-
tery of  the  blue.  J  And  this  blue  dark  throne  unites  itself  with  another
thing  to  light  that  from  below,  and  this  awakes  it  to  unite  with  the  upper
white  light,  and  this  blue  or  dark,  sometimes  changes  its  color  but  that
white  above  never  changes  its  color,  it  is  always  white ;  but  that  blue
changes  to  these  diff*erent  colors,  sometimes  to  blue  or  black  and  some-
times to  a  red  color,  and  this  unites  itself  to  two  sides.'  It  unites  to
the  above,  to  that  upper  white  light,  and  unites  itself  below  to  the  thing
which  is  under  it,  which  is  the  burning  matter,  and  this  burns  and  con-
sumes always  from  the  matter  below.  And  this  devours  that  matter
below,  which  connects  with  it  and  upon  which  the  blue  light  rests,  there-
fore this  eats  up  all  which  connects  with  it  from  below,  because  it  is  the
nature  of  it,  that  it  devour  and  consume  everything  which  depends  on  it

♦Zohar  i,  fol.  22b,  col.  87,  Cremona  Ed.     i,  fol.  32^,  Amsterdam  Ed.

f  See  Herder's  G^st  der  Hebrdischen  Poesitt  Vol.  ii.

X  The  blue  color  of  Heaven  and  the  th^keiUth,  i,  e.,  blue,  of  the  Tallith.


377

and  is  dead^matter,  and  therefore  it  eats  up  everything  which  connects
with  it  below,  and  this  white  light  which  rests  upon  it  never  consumes
itself  and  never  changes  its  light,  and  therefore  said  Moses :  '  That
YHVH  thy  Elohim  is  a  consuming  fire.'*  Surely  He  consumes.  It  de-
vours  and  consumes  everything  which  rests  under  it ;  and  on  this  he  said :
'YHVH  is  thy  Elohim  '  not  '  our  Elohim,'  because  Moses  has  been  in
that  white  light,  Above,  which  neither  devours  nor  consumes.  Come,
See  !  it  is  not  His  Will  to  light  that  blue  light  that  should  unite  with  that
white  light,  only  for  Israel ;  because  they  cleave  or  connect  under  Him.
And,  Come,  See !  Although  the  nature  of  that  dark  or  blue  light  is,  that
it  shall  consume  everything  which  joins  with  it  below,  still  Israel  cleaves
on  Him,  Below,  5|c  *  *  and  although  you  cleave  in  Him  nevertheless
you  exist,  because  it  is  written  :  '  You  are  all  alive  this  day.'  And  on  this
white  light  rests  above  a  Hidden  Light  which  is  stronger.  Here  is  the
above  mystery  of  that  flame  which  comes  out  from  it,  and  in  it  is  the
Wisdom  of  the  Above."  f     See,  Philo.,  Bohn's  Ed.  iv,  p.  44.

Thought  and  the  Word.  "  Come,  See !  Ma'hshabah  Thought,  is
the  first  (principle)  of  all,J  because  Thought  is,  in  itself  hidden  and  not
known.  When  this  Thought  began  to  diffuse  itself,  it  came  to  the  place
where  the  Spirit  rests,  and  when  it  has  reached  that  place  it  is  called  ;
Binah  Understanding,  and  is  no  more  hidden  like  before,  and  although
it  is  hidden,  that  Spirit  spreads  itself  and  brings  out  a  Voice§  embracing
fire,  water  and  air,  which  are  South,  North  and  East,  and  this  Voice  com-
prises all  the  other  For€es)\  (hosts,  angels)  and  this  Voice,  speaks  to  the
Word.^     This  Voice  gives  existence  to  the  Word  because,  this  Voice  b

*  Deut.  iv,  24.     Comp.  Zohar  ii,  226^.     Hebrews  xii,  29.

f  Zohar  i,  50^,  Amsterdam  and  Brody  Editions.  Cremona  Ed.,  i,  36/1,  col.  141.  See
Exod.  iii,  2,  3 ;  Acts  vii,  30.  Dr.  Christian  D.  Ginsburg  in :  The  Kabbalah,  etc.
London,  1865,  pp.  25,  26,  applies  the  above  to  the  Triadic  idea  of  the  Deity.  His
translation  of  it  and  most  of  the  other  quotations  from  the  Zohar,  have  been  copied  from
Prof.  Adolphe  Franck,  and  cannot  be  depended  upon.  Franck  has  been  severely  criti-
cised for  his  translations,  by  Dr.  D.  H.  Joel  in  his  Religions-phUosophie  des  Sohar,  etc.

J  Thought,  is  Kether  Crown.

2  'Hokhmah  Wisdom,  or  the  Word.

II  The  Cremona  edition  does  not  have  this  word.

\  Comp.  Is.  vi,  3.  The  repetition  is  emphatic  and  expresses  energy  or  force ;  see
also  II  Sam.  xviii,  33.


378

sent  from  the  place  of  the  Spirit  and  comes  to  speak  a  Word,  to  bring
out  joyous  words.  And  when  they  look  in  the  degrees,  this  is  the
Thought ;  this  is  the  Understanding ;  'this  is  Voice ;  this  is  Speech ;  and
all  are  One.  And  this  is  the  first  Thought  of  All  and  not  separated,  but
all  are  One  and  in  One  bond.  This  is  that  which  is  the  real  Thought
bound  in  the  Ayin  and  never  separated,  and  this  is  *  YHVH  is  One  and
His  Name  One.'  "     (Zech.  xiv,  9.)*

The  Names  of  the  Deity.  ''The  secret  of  this  word  rrmt  Eh'yeh
I  Am,  comprises  everything,  when  the  ways  are  hidden  and  not  separated
and  together  in  one  place,  then  it  is  called  EKyeh  I  am,  all  hidden  and
not  revealed ;  but  after  it  goes  out  from  its  defined  line  and  that
river  bears  in  its  bosom  all  things,  then  He  is  called  riTTK  "ibtk  Asher
ElCyeh,  i.  <f.,  That  I  Am,  that  means ;  I  Am,  prepared  to  bring  forth  all,
and  after  He  revealed  and  brought  forth  all  He  is  called  by  the  above  Name.
And  after  this  when  Moses  desired  to  know  what  is  the  speciality  of  the
word.  He  said  to  him,  YHVH  and  not  Asher  Eh'yeh  That  I  Am.  *  *  *
But  after  he  brought  everything  out  and  put  everything  in  its  place,
He  said  YHVH,  and  at  this  time  Moses  knew  the  secret  of  the  Holy
Hidden  Name  and  there  was  revealed  to  him  and  he  comprehended,  that
which  could  not  be  comprehended  by  any  other  of  the  children  of  the

world."  t
The  Names  of  the  Deity  are  only  abstract  symbols  and  ideas  necessary

to  man's  mind  in  our  matter-world  so  as  to  grasp  in  his  thought  that  a
Deity  exists.  They  do  not  describe  God's  essence  or  content.  The
Qabbalists  found  it  necessary,  in  their  subtile  and  abstract  metaphysical
investigations,  to  invent  a  Name  which  would  describe  the  Deity  before  It
created  the  universe,  this  they  did  by  the  term  Ain  Soph  without  end,
called  also  Ayin,  i.  e.,  No-Thing,  which  is  nevertheless  not  an  absolute
negative  or  void  but  an  unknown  to  man,  Some-Thing.  Not  that  in  these
Names  any  greater  knowledge  is  contained  but  they  point  to  a  greater  in-
comprehensibility of  the  Deity.  Equaling  these  is  the  subtile  and  abstract
Qabbalistic  Name  -a  Mee  Who  ?  Without  beginning  or  end.  (See,  ante^  p.
129  sq.  and  Zohar  ii,  fol.  105/1/  i,  2<z.)    The  Zohar  holds  that  while  Ain

♦Zohar  i,  246^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.,  i,  fol.  I3i<7,  col.  519.
f  Zohar  iii,  65^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.,  iii,  fol.  29^,  col.  116.


379

Sophy  Ayin  and  Who  ?  describe  the  Deity,  considered  in  Its  greatest  ab-
stractness,  yet  the  latter  is  united  with  hSk  Eif'h  These,  and  in  this  matter-
world  constitutes  the  Name  d^-hSk  Eloh-im,  and  therefore  in  the  statement
in  Genesis  of  the  First  Emanation  or  Creation,  the  Name  Elohim  is  exclu-
sively used  and  not  YHVH  Elohim,  as  in  the  Second ;  and  that  this  union
still  continues  and  Mee  and  Eie'h  are  still  merged:  (Zohar  i,  2a)',  but
should  they  ever  be  separated,  the  universe  could  no  longer  exist  as  after
their  connection.  (Zohar  ii,  fol.  io$a,)  The  Ain  Soph  received  its  full  sig-
nificance as  the.  No  End,  through  Its  emanation  of  the  Sephiroth.  (Zohar
ii,  42^.)  Springing  out  of  Ain  Soph  is  Keiher,  whose  Divine  Name  is
Eh^yeh  I  am,  the  Ego.  Further  considered,  this  is  developed  into
Asher  Eh^yeh  that  I  will  be,  (Comp.  Rashi  in  this  place) ;  finally  it  passes
into  reality  for  man,  nin'  YHVH,  the  symbol  of  the  Past,  Present  and
Future.  The  Existence  which  is  Creator  and  Preserver,  yet  nevertheless,
for  Its  own  wise  purposes,  the  Destroyer  of  the  matter-forms,  but  not  of
their  atoms  or  essence.  YHVH  is  contained  in  the  manifestation  called
the  Sephirothic  Tree  of  Life.     YHVH  is  ^:jy\  mjl  TVJ}  Hoyoh  Hoveh

m

V^ye'hyeh  He  was,  is,  and  shall  be.  (Rev.  i,  4,  8 ;  xxi,  6.)  •Tl.n  Hoveh
the  present,  may  be  added  to  ^jy^^  u^m-haveh  causing  to  exist,  the  cre-
ating and  maintaining.

Before  the  emanation  of  the  universe  the  Qabbalists  say ;  **  He  and  His
Name  were  One."  Which  may  be  paralleled  in  the  time  to  come  by
God's  KingdonA  upon  Earth  :  "  In  that  day  shall  there  be  one  YHVH  and
rom^  usKmah  His  Name,  shall  be  One."  (Zach.  xiv,  10.)  Many  of  the
Qabbalists  hold  ri'in  DB^  Shem  Hava-yah  the  Existing  Name  (a«/<?,  p.
342)  as  that  embracing  all  the  other  Divine  Names.  Elohim  is  the  prin-
ciple emanating  the  universe,  but  is  that  of  Rigor.  YHVH  is  that
maintaining  it,  and  is  the  principle  of  Mercy  and  Harmony.  In  El  Shad-
dai  Almighty,  the  Sk  El  is  the  principle  of  Grace  and  Mercy  and  is  par-
alleled with  *Hesed;  "?^  Shad-aaiy  is  that  of  Strength,  and  is  paralleled
with  Ge*boor-ah ;  but  YHVH  unites  both  conceptions  in  a  Harmony.
Elohim  is  more  immediately  identified  with  Nature,  and  the  numerical
value  of  D^n^K  Elohim  (86)  and  nj^atD  Tebah  Nature  (86)  are  the  same.
YHVH  is  Elohim  and  the  content  of  both  Mercy  and  Rigor.

Kether  Crown,  is  A^reekh  An-peen  or  Appa-yem  Long  Faces.     The


38o

eight  Sephiroth  following  are  Ze'ir  An-peen  Short  Faces.      In  Kether  is
the  germ  and  content,  in  harmony,  of  the  Sacred  Form,  the  other  Sephi-
roth surround  it  as  if  a  rich  and  shining  garment.     In  its  narrowest  sense
Kether  EVyon  Crown  of  the  Highest,  is  this  garment.    Note  however  that
the  word  Kether  Crown,  is  only  used  as  a  mere  symbol  of  the  King  of  All.
(Zohar  iii,  fol.  288^.)  It  is  the  representative  of  the  coalescing  of  the  High-
est with  His  creation  and  its  preservation,  through  the  efflux,  to  the  utter-
most limits  of  entire  nature  and  All.     A  clear  knowledge  of  the  essence
of  Kether  cannot  be  obtained  by  man  in  this  world,  it  is  to   him  even
as  if  Ayin  No-Thing.     (Zohar  iii,  288^.)     The  Tiqqooneem  haz-Zohar
says:  *'That  degree  which  is  called  Ayin  comprises  Kether,  Binah  and
'Hokhmah."     The  entire  content  of  the  Names  of  the  Deity  applied  to
the  respective  Sephiroth  are  only  symbols  of  Ain  Soph,

The  idea  of  the  Sephiroth  is  like  that  of  a  builder  who  desires  to  build
a  great  Palace,  i.  He  grasps  in  his  mind  the  plan  of  the  whole  building.
This  is  Kether,  'Hokhmah,  Binah.  2.  Then  he  considers  the  way  accord-
ing to  which  the  work  shall  be  done,  that  it  shall  correspond  to  the  plan.
This  is  'Hesed,  Tiph'e-reth  and  Ge'boor-ah.  3.  He  considers  the  means
of  carrying  it  out,  this  is  Ne-tza'h,  Ye'sod  and  Hod.  The  entire  building
is  the  Divine  government  of  the  whole  world  represented  by  Malkhuth.

Mercy  Tempers  Rigor.     "  R.  El'azar  sat  before  R.  Shim-on  his  father
and  said  to  him  :     '  This  we  have  learned :    that  Elohim  dtiSk  in  every
place  is  judgment,  that  this  word  is :  Yod,  Heh,  Vav,  Heh  (T(\ry  YHVH),
and  it  is  a  place  which  is  called,  Elohim ;  like  it  is  written  (Gen.  xv,  8),
^Adonoi  YHVH';    (Which  not  read  YHVH  but  Elohim.)     Why  is  it
called  Elohim,  when  it  (YHVH)  means  Mercy  in  every  place?*     Said  he
to  him  :   *  So  it  is  written :  (Deut.  iv,  39.)  *  And  thou  shalt  know  to-day
and  consider  it  in  thine  heart,  that  YHVH  is  Elohim.'     And  it  is  writ-
ten :  (Deut.  iv,  31,  35,  39.)    'YHVH  is  Elohim.'     Said  he  to  him:    ^
*  These  words  we  know,  that  in  the  place  of  Mercy,  may  be  sometimes,
Judgment,  and  that  sometimes  Judgment  is  tempered  with  Mercy  ! '    Said
he  (R.  Shim-on)  to  him :  '  Come,  See  !  This  is  so,  Yedud  (/.  e,y  YHVH)
is  in  all  places  Mercy  but  at  the  time  when  through  sin,  Mercy  is  changed
to  Judgment,  then  it  is  written  YHVH  but  read  Elohim.     But :  Come,
See !  the  secret  of  the  woi^  (YHVH).     There  are  Three  degrees  and


381

each  degree  exists  in  itself,  although  all  are  One,  connected  in  One  and
not  separated  One  from  the  other."*

Emanation  of  the  Universe.  "  'In  the  Beginning'  In  Wisdom  the
King  engraved  forms  in  the  clearness  Above.  Botzeen-ah  D'  Qardinuthahy
1.^.,  the  brilliant  inner  Light,  came  out  from  the  Hidden  of  Hidden,  from
the  Head  of  the  Ain  Soph.  A  nebulous  spark  of  matter  flashed  out  which
was  not  white  nor  black  nor  red  nor  green  and  not  of  any  color  what-
ever ;  but  when  He  took  the  measure  of  the  structure  He  made  colors  to
light  in  the  inner.  From  that  Botzeen-ah  came  forth  a  Supreme  Light
from  which  reflected  different  colors  Below.  He  stopped  up  its  hidden
point  from  the  Mystery  of  Ain  Soph.  He  opened  and  not  opened  it  so
its  aveer-ah  air  (aether),  has  not  been  known  until  it  came  out  from  the
power  of  that  opening.  Then  he  lighted  a  point  (light)  the  Hidden  of
the  Above,  after  that  first  point  (light)  which  had  not  been  known,  and
therefore  that  point  (first  point)  is  called  Raisheeth  Beginning,  meaning
the  first  Word  of  AlV  f

**The  neqood-ah  qadmo-ah^  u  ^.,  first  point,  was  an  inner  light  which
had  no  limit  so  that  could  be  known,  its  pureness,  thinness  (subtility)
and  clearness,  until  it  expanded  itself  through  itself;  and  the  expansion  of
this  point  made  a  palace  to  envelope  that  point.  Its  (the  palace's)  light
cannot  be  comprehended  because  of  its  immense  pureness  and  yet  it  is  not
so  thin  (subtile)  and  clear  as  that  first  point,  which  is  hidden  and  con-
cealed. The  palace  which  is  the  garment  to  that  hidden  point,  its  light
(is  also)  unlimited,  although  it  is  not  so  pure  and  clear  as  that  first
point  which  is  hidden  and  concealed.  That  palace  expands  itself  out-
wardly from  its  first  light,  and  that  expansion  is  the  garment  to  that  pal-
ace, of  which  its  inner  is  subtile  and  clear ;  and  from  here,  (each)  farther
spreads  itself  one  in  another,  and  envelopes  itself,  one  in  another,  until  it
is  found,  (that)  one  is  a  garment  to  the  other,  and  the  other  still  to
another;  but  this  is,  the  brain  (the  very  inner);  and  that,  the  shell,"
(/.  ^.,  the  skull,  the  cover  of  the  brain,  or,  inner.) J

•  Zohar  iii,  fol.  65a,  Amsterdam  Ed.    ui,  fol.  27,  col.  2,  Sulzbach  Ed.     Cremona
Ed.  iii,  fol.  29^,  col.  116.
t  Zohar,  Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  3,  col.  I.     Brody  Ed.  i,  15^.     Livomo,  i,  25^.
X  Zohar  i,  2o3,  Brody  Ed.     Livomo  Ed.  i,  34a.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  24^,  col.  96.


382

"  Before  the  world  was  created  (the  An-peen  Faces,)  did  not  look  at-
tentively, Faces  to  Faces,  and  the  primitive  worlds  were  made  without  per-
fect formations,  and  therefore  the  primitive  worlds  were  destroyed.  And
those  which  were  not  in  perfect  formation  are  called  flaming  sparks,  like
the  worker  in  copper  or  iron  when  he  strikes  on  it  with  his  iron  hammer,
makes  sparks  dash  out  on  every  direction.  And  these  sparks  which  leap
forth,  flame  and  glitter,  but  are  at  once  extinguished.  And  such  are
called :  'The  First  Worlds.'  And  therefore  they  were  destroyed  and  did
not  remain,  until  At-tee'kah  Qad-dosha  the  Holy  Ancient,  restored  them
and  the  Work-master  went  to  His  work.  And  on  this  we  have  learned  in
our  Mathnithah;  that  that  Ray  (of  Light)  sent  out  sparks  in  320  direc-
tions. And  those  sparks  are  called,  *  The  First  Worlds ;'  and  they  at
once  perished.  Then  the  Artist  went  to  His  work  and  He  formed  in
male  and  female,  and  these  sparks  which  were  extinct  and  died  at  once,
all  remained  now.  From  a  Botzeenah  Shining  Light,  of  most  intense  bril-
liancy, came  out  a  radiant  strong  flame  as  from  a  hammer,  and  brought
forth  sparks  of  the  first  worlds,  and  these  were  mixed  with  the  most  sub-
tile air,*  and  like  the  abbah  father,  and  immah  mother,  were  mutually
tempered  by  each  other  when  they  were  merged.  And  this  father  is  from
the  Spirit  which  is  hidden  in  At-teek  Yo-men  the  Ancient  of  Days,  in  him
is  hidden  that  (subtile)  air,  and  he  coalesced  to  that  spark  which  came
forth  out  of  that  Shining  Light  which  has  been  hidden  in  the  inner  of  the
mother.f  But  when  both  joined  together  and  merged  one  in  another,  was
produced  a  large  strong  Cranium  (the  Firmament)  and  it  expanded  on  its
side,  this  on  this  side  and  that  on  that  side.  Like  the  At-tee^kah  Qad-dosha
Holy  Ancients,  in  Three  Heads  which  are  found  in  One  :  (Comp.  Zohar
iii,  288^  .•)  So  All  has  been  prepared  under  the  form  of  Three  Heads,  as
we  have  said.  J  In  this  Cranium  drips  a  dew  from  Resba  ' Hiv'rah  the
White  Head,  and  this  dew  is  seen  in  two  different  colors,  and  from  it
(this  dew)  is  fed  the  Field  of  the  Holy  Apples  (Sacred  Fruits).  And  from
that  dew  of  the  Cranium  is  prepared  the  manna  for  the  just  in  the  world

*  The  setheric  medium  or  Fourth  State  of  Matter?
f  The  hidden  vital  energy  or  force,  by  means  of  which  all  Things  exist.
J  These  are  the  spiritually  positive  or  male,  and  the  negative  or  female,  joined  to-
gether and  merged  through  the  action  of  the  harmony.


383

to  come,  and  by  it  the  dead  will  be  aroused  to  life.  *  *  *  And  that
subtile  air  contains  itself  in  All  because  it  is  comprised  from  All,  and  All
is  comprised  in  it.  Its  Face  expands  to  two  sides  in  two  lights  which  are
comprised  from  All.  And  when  the  Faces  look  towards  each  other,
all  the  At-tee^kah  Qad- dosha  is  called  A'reekh  Appa-yem,  /.  ^.,  Long
Faces."  *

At'tee'kah  Qad-dosha  the  Holy  Ancient.  The  Hidden  of  All  the  Hid-
den is  separated.  It  b  separated  from  All  and  not  separated,  because
All  is  merged  in  Him  and  He  is  merged  in  All.  He  is  the  At-tee^kah
D'Kol  AMee^keen  the  Ancient  of  All  the  Ancients,  the  Hidden  of  All
the  Hidden.  He  is  formed  and  yet  is  not  formed.  He  is  formed  to  sus-
tain All  and  not  formed  because  He  is  not  found.  When  He  is  formed
ninef  flaming  Lights  go  out  from  Him,  from  His  Form ;  and  from  these
Lights  are  emitted  flames  and  they  expand  themselves  out  to  all  directions,
like  a  lamp  which  spreads  light  to  all  sides.  And  these  lights  which
expand  themselves  from  it,  when  any  (one)  draweth  near  to  know  them  are
not  found  but  only  the  lamp,  alone.  So  is  He,  the  At-tee^kah  Qad-dosha
the  Holy  Ancient :  He  is  the  Upper  Lamp,  the  Hidden  of  All  the  Hidden
and  is  not  found,  except  those  rays  which  are  expanded  which  yet  are
revealed  and  hidden.  And  they  are  called,  the  Holy  Name,  and  therefore
all  are  One.  J

The  Emanation  of  the  Angels.  **  At  the  time  when  the  Holy,
Blessed  be  He !  breathed  the  spirit  into  each  of  the  heavenly  host,  all
the  hosts  were  formed  and  stood  before  Him,  therefore  it  is  written ;
^With  the  breath  of  His  mouth  He  made  all  the  host.'"  (Ps.
xxxiii,  6.)§

The  Souls  of  the  Righteous  Higher  than  the  Angels.  "  We
have  found  in  the  First  Book  of  Adam,  that  all  the  Holy  Spirits  from
Above,  are  performing  messages  (they  have  been  sent  to  do)  and  all  come
from  one  place.     The  souls  of  the  just  (pious)  from  two  degrees  which

*  Zohar  iii,  2924  and  3,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  142^1  and  b,  col.  566-67.
t  Franck  La  KabbaU,  p.  78,  incorrectly  says  "  ten."    Comp.  Joel  Reiigions-pkiUsO'
phie^  etc.,  p.  85.

{Zohar  iii,  288^,  Brody  Ed.,  Idrah  Zootah.   Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  140a,  col.  558.
2  Zohar  iii,  6&1,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  31a,  coL  122.


384

are  comprised  in  one,  and  therefore  they  go  higher  and  their  degrees  are
higher  and  so  it  is.  And  those  who  are  hidden  there  come  down  and  go
in  their  life  like  Enoch,  of  whom  Death  is  not  mentioned."*

The  Qabbalists  hold  that  the  Neshatnah  soul,  dwelling  in  us,  is  only  a
shadow  or  reflection  of  a  higher  and  celestial,  spiritual,  perfect  prototype,
or  Zure^  which  never  leaves  its  exalted  abode  in  the  A'tzeel-atic  World  or
World  of  the  Sephiroth.  It  is  thought  of,  as  connected  with  the  Nesh-
amah  of  man,  by  an  invisible  thread,  a  Qav  AnUzaith-ah  middle  cord,  and
is  affected  from  Below.  (Comp.  Matt,  x,  29-31  ;  Luke  xii,  6,  7  ;  Matt,
xviii,  10.)  By  inspired  devotion,  they  say,  the  will  of  man  directs  his
Neshatnah  to  its  Zure^  Above ;  and  the  Neshamah  endeavors  to  leave  the
body  and  again  unite  itself  with  its  Zure^  Above ;  then  the  higher  pro-
totypic  soul  becomes  stirred  up  and,  by  a  mystic  influence,  they  are
chained  to  each  other.  This  idea  falls  within  the  higher  mysticism  of  the
Qabbalah,  in  which,  the  doctrine  of  ecstasy  plays  its  part,  and  it  is  be-
yond the  metaphysical  speculation.  In  this  is  centred  the  idea  of  the
union  of  the  King  and  Queen ;  from  the  former,  the  efflux  descends  from
the  Above  to  the  Below.

Forming  of  Souls.  **At  the  time  that  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He!
desired  to  create  the  world,  it  came  in  His  Will  before  Him :  and  He
formed  all  the  souls  which  are  prepared  to  be  given  to  the  children  of
man  afterwards ;  and  all  were  formed  before  Him  in  the  same  real  form
which  has  been  prepared  to  be  in  the  children  of  man  afterwards,  and  He
saw  everyone  of  them :  and  that  some  of  them  would  corrupt  their  ways
in  the  world.  When  the  time  has  arrived  for  it  (to  come  into  this  world)
the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  calls  to  that  Neshamah  soul,  He  says  to  her :
'Go  thou  to  that  place  and  into  that  body.'  She  answers  before  the
Lord  of  the  world ;  *  This  world  in  which  I  dwell  is  sufficient  for  me,
and  I  do  not  care  to  be  in  another  world  in  which  I  shall  be  a  servant
and  exposed  to  its  uncleanness. '  Said  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  to  her :
*  From  the  day  thou  wast  created,  thou  wert  only  created  for  that  purpose,
to  have  thy  destination  in  that  world.'  When  the  soul  sees  that  it  is
necessary  to  obey,  it  with  grief  comes  down,  and  goes  in  there  (this
body).     The  Thorah,  which  gives  advice  to  the  whole  world,  when  she

*Zohar  iii,  683,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  31^1,  col.  122.


385

saw  this,  warned  the  children  of  the  world,  and  said :  *  See  how  much
pity,  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  has  on  you,  a  good  pearl  which  He  had
He  gives  it  to  you  for  nothing,  that  you  shall  work  her  in  this  world.'*

Ebianation  of  the  Universe.  "  Come,  See  !  At  the  time  it  came  up
in  the  Will  of  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  to  create  the  world.  He  brought
forth  from  the  Botzeen-ah  Qardinuthah,  /.  ^.,  the  very  inner  light  (of  the
heart)  a  knot  (or,  chain)  and  lighted  (emanated)  the  darkness  from  it
and  let  it  down  Below.  The  darkness  lighted  in  a  hundred  different
ways  and  paths,  small  and  great,  and  made  the  House  (Tabernacle  or
Temple,  Below.  Rev.  xi,  19;  xv,  S,  6,  8;  xvi,  i.)  of  the  world.  (The
A^seey-atic  world.)  This  HouSe  is  the  centre  of  all ;  around  it  are  many
doors,  surrounding  it  are  the  holy  upper  places.  (The  Ye^tzeer-oHc
world.)  There  are  the  nests  of  the  heavenly  birds  (angels)  each  in  its
kind.  In  it  goes  forth  a  Great  Tree  with  strong  branches  which  bear
plenty  of  food  for  all.  This  Tree  goes  up  to  the  heavenly  clouds  and  it
is  hidden  between  three  mountains.  From  under  the  three  mountains,  the
Tree  goes  out  and  ascends  to  the  Above  and  comes  down  to  the  Below.
This  House  is  supplied  by  it  with  drink,  and  there  is  hidden  in  it  (that
House)  many  hidden  things  Above,  which  are  not  known.  This  Tree  is  re-
vealed in  the  daytime  and  covered  (hidden)  in  the  night.  And  this  House
rules  in  the  night  time  and  is  hidden  during  the  day.  At  the  time  when
darkness  goes  up  and  all  doors  are  concealed  from  all  sides,  then  many
spirits  are  flying  in  the  air  which  desire  to  know  and  go  into  it,  and  they
go  up  between  these  birds  and  they  take  witness  and  see  what  they  see,
until  that  darkness  awakes  and  brings  out  a  certain  flame  and  hammers  it
with  many  strong  hammers  and  opens  the  doors.  Large  stones  go  forth
from  that  flame  and  come  down  out  of  it,  and  make  noises  in  the  world  and
awake  the  voices  Above  and  Below.  And  then  a  (fol.  172^)  herald  comes
forth  from  it  and  connects  himself  in  the  air  and  calls  out.  That  asther
comes  out  from  the  pillar  of  the  inner  cloud,  and  when  it  comes  out
spreads  itself  on  the  four  sides  of  the  world ;  thousands  of  thousands
exist  from  the  side  which  is  the  Left,  and  myriad  of  myriads  exist  from
the  side  which  is  the  Right,  and  the  herald  remains  in  his  place,  etc."  f

*  Zohar  ii,  96^  and  97^1,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  43^,  col.  17^3.

f  Zohar  i,  I'jia  and  ^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  98^,  col.  393.
25


386

Connection  of  the  Above  and  the  Below.     "  Come,  See  1  When
the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  desired  to  create  worlds  He  brought  out  a  Hid-
den Light,  from  that  Light  came  out  and  illuminated  all  the  lights  which
are  revealed,  and  from  that  Light  came  out  and  expanded  itself  and  were
made,  other  lights;  and  this  is  the  Upper  World.     That  Upper  Light
spread  itself  out  and  made  again  a  light  which  does  not  illuminate,  and  it
made  the  Lower  World.     And  because  that  light  which  does  not  illumi-
nate desires  to  connect  itself  Above  and  desires  to  connect  itself  Below,
with  that  Lower  knot  it  connects  itself  to  illuminate  in  the  Upper  knot,
and  that  light  which  does  not  illuminate  in  the  Upper  knot  brought
out  all  the  hosts  and  servants  of  many  sorts,  this  is  what  is  written  :  *  How
great  are  Thy  works  YHVH,  etc'    (Ps.  xcii,  5.)    And  everything  which
is  Below  so  it  is  Above,  and  there  is  not  the  smallest  thing  in  this  world
which  does  not  depend  on  another  thing  Above,  and  which  is  not  taken
account  of  Above,  and  all  are  united  one  in  the  other."*

The  Pre-Adamite  Kings.  "We  have  learned  in  the  Siphrah
D'Tznioothah  :  That  the  AMee'kah  D'At-tee^keen  Ancient  of  Ancients,
before  He  prepared  His  Form,  built  kings  and  engraved  kings,  and
sketched  out  kings,  and  they  could  not  exist :  till  He  overthrew  them  and
hid  them  until  after  a  time,  therefore  it  is  written ;  '  And  these  are  the
kings  which  reigned  in  the  land  of  Edom.  *  That  is  in  a  place  in  which
all  judgments  exist.  And  they  could  not  exist  until  Resha  *Hiv*rah  the
White  Head,  the  At-tee'kah  D' At-tee* keen  Ancient  of  the  Ancients,  ar-
ranged Himself.  When  He  arranged  Himself  He  formed  all  forms  Above
and  Below.  From  here  we  learn  that  the  head  of  a  nation,  who  has  not
been  arranged  and  formed  at  the  beginning :  its  people  is  not  from
this  Form.  *  *  *  Before  He  arranged  Himself  in  His  Form,
had  not  been  formed  all  those  whom  He  desired  to  form,  and  all  worlds
have  been  destroyed ;  therefore  is  written  :  '  And  Bela  the  son  of  Beor
reigned  in  Edom.'     (Gen.  xxxvi,  32. )t

"He  began  and  said :  It  is  written :  'And  these  are  the  Kings  that  reigned
in  the  land  of  Edom.'  (Gen.  xxxvi,  31.)    And  it  is  written  :  *  For  lo,

*  Zohar  i,  1560  and  b,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  910,  col.  362.    See  Mat.  x,
29,  31 ;  Luke  xii,  6,  7 ;  Rev.  xi,  19.
t  Zohar  iii,  1350,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  foL  64^,  col.  255.


387

the  kings  were  assembled,  ihty passed hy  together.*  (Ps.  xlviii,  4.)  They
^  assembled '  in  that  place  which  is  called  the  land  of  Edom,  the  place
where  all  judgments  are  together.  *  They  passed  by  together '  as  it  is
written :  *  And  he  died '  and  another  '  reigned  in  his  stead.'  (Gen.  xxvi,
31  sq.)  '  They  saw,  they  marveled,  were  troubled,'  (Ps.  xlviii,  5)  that
they  did  not  remain  in  their  places,  because  the  forms  of  the  kings  had
not  been  formed  as  it  ought  to  be,  and  the  Holy  City  had  not  been  pre-
pared."*

"  At'tee^kah  D*  At-tee' keen  the  Ancient  of  the  Ancients,  built  worlds,
and  formed  Its  Forms  to  exist,  but  they  did  not  exist  until  the  Supreme
Grace  came  down  and  then  they  remained.  And  this  b  what  is  written  :
*  And  these  are  the  kings  who  reigned  in  the  land  of  Edom.' "  f

The  Emanation  of  the  Male  and  Female  Principles.  *'We
have  learned:  At  the  time  when  the  At-tee'kah  Qad-dosha,  the
Holy  Ancient,  the  Hidden  of  All  the  Hidden,  desired  to  arrange
everything.  He  formed  all  things  like  male  and  female  in  the  place
which  comprises  male  and  female.  For  they  could  not  exist  save  in
another  existence  of  male  and  female.  This  Wisdom  comprises  All,  when
it  goeth  forth  and  is  illuminated  from  the  Holy  Ancient  it  does  not
shine  except  in  male  and  female.  This  ^Hokkmah^  Wisdom,  diffused  itself
and  from  it  came  out  Binah  Understanding,  and  it  is  found  male  and  fe-
male. Wisdom  is  the  Father  and  Understanding  is  the  Mother,  Wisdom
and  Understanding  in  one  balance  and  male  and  female  (in  the  other),
weigh  the  same,  and  through  them  everything  exists  in  male  and  female.
If  it  were  not  for  this  they  (things)  could  not  exist.  This  beginning  is  the
Father  to  all  the  Fathers,  connects  one  in  another  and  lights  one  in  an-
other (^Hokhmah  Wisdom,  is  the  Father,  and  Binah  Understanding,  is  the
Mother).  It  is  written:  '  If  thou  callest  Binah  mother;'  (Prov.  ii,  3:)
and  when  they  connect  one  with  the  other  they  bring  forth  and  diffuse
and  emanate.  Truth.  In  the  sayings  of  R.  Ye-yeva,  Sabah,  /.  ^.,  the  Old,
we  learned  this ;  What  is  Binah  Understanding  ?  But  when  they  connect
in  one  another,  the '  (Yod)  in  the  n  (Heh),  they  become  impregnated  and
produce  a  Son.     And  therefore  it  is  called  Binahy  Understanding.     It

*  Zohar  iii,  292^1.  Idrah  Zootah.     Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  foL  142^,  coL  566.
f  Zohar  iii,  142^,  Brody  Ed.,  Cremona  Ed.  iii,  67^,  col.  268.


388

means  BeN  YaH  /.  ^.,  Son  of  YaH.     This  is  the  completeness  of  the
Whole.  "^

"'And  Elohim  said;  Let  the  waters  gather,  etc'  (Gen.  i,  7.)  In  a
straight  line  that  shall  be  in  a  straight  way,  that  is,  from  the  secret  of  that
first  point  came  out  all  in  its  concealment  imtil  it  reached  and  gathered  to
that  Upper  Palace,  and  from  there  it  came  out  in  a  straight  line  to  other
degrees,  till  it  reached  that  only  place  where  all  gathered  in  the  compris-
ing of  male  and  female,  f

The  Emanated  Souls  and  Their  Knowledge.  "Began  R.  'He-
yah  and  said  :  '  That  which  hath  been  is  now,  and  that  which  is  to  be  hath
already  been,  etc.*  (Eccl.  iii,  15.)  This  we  have  learned;  Before  the
Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  created  this  world,  He  had  created  worlds  and
destroyed  them,  till  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  I  desired  in  n^nijri  R^ooth-ek
I.  ^.,  His  Will,  to  create  this  world  and  He  took  counsel  in  the  Thorah.
And  then  arranged  Himself  in  His  conformations  and  crowned  Himself
with  His  Crown  and  created  this  world.  And  everything  which  is  found
in  this  world  has  been  before,  and  passed  before  Him,  and  been  arranged
before  Him.  And  we  have  learned ;  all  the  creatures  of  the  world  which
have  existed  in  each  generation,  before  they  came  to  this  world,  have
existed  before  Him  in  their  true  Uyooq-nah  i.  e.,  simulacrum  or  phantom  of
a  shadow  image.  And  so  we  have  learned ;  Even  all  the  souls  of  the  chil-
dren of  man  before  they  come  down  to  the  world  have  all  been  sculptured
before  Him  in  heaven,  in  that  real  Uyooq-nah  that  they  have  in  this
world.  And  all  that  they  learn  in  this  world  they  already  knew  before
they  came  into  the  world.  And  we  have  learned ;  They  who  are  pure,
are  true,  (/.  ^.,  have  the  true  D'yooq-nah.)  And  they  who  are  not  found
pure  in  this  world,  even  there,  are  thrust  away  from  before  the  Holy,
Blessed  be  He  !  And  they  ascend  into  that  great  deep  abyss,  (Gen.  i,  2.)
and  they  come  down  into  this  world.  And  their  souls  know  the  part  they
will  play  in  this  world  before  they  come  down  to  it,  and  this  holy  part
which  has  been  given  to  them  is  thrown  into  that  deep  abyss  and  they
take  their  part  from  there.  And  if  they  deserve  it  and  repent  before  their
Lord,  they  take  that  (holy)  part  from  there."  J

*Zohar  iii,  290a,  Brody  Ed.  Idrah  Zootah.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  141a,  coL  562.

t  Zohar  i,  1 8a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  24^1,  col.  93.

%  Zohar  iii,  6ia  and  ^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremuna  Ed.  iii,  fol.  2&2,  col.  109.


389

The  Souls  in  Paradise.  "  At  the  time  when  the  Holy,  Blessed  be
He  !  descends  to  the  Garden  of  Eden,  all  its  Neshamoth  souls,  of  the  just,
which  are  crowned  there,  all  give  a  pleasant  odor,  as  is  said ;  '  And  the
odor  of  thine  ointment  is  from  all  spices,*  (Song  of  Songs  iv,  lo.)
These  (the  spices)  are  the  souls  of  the  just,  then  R.  Yitzhaq,  said  ;  '  All
the  souls  of  the  just  which  have  been  in  this  world,  and  all  the  souls
which  are  prepared  to  descend  into  this  world,  all  are  in  the  Garden
which  is  on  the  earth,  all  remain  in  the  d^yooq-nah^  shadow  of  the  tzelem^
and  tziyor-ah  form,  in  which  they  existed  in  this  world.  And  this  secret
has  been  delivered  to  the  wise.  The  Rua^h  spirit,  which  descends  to  the
children  of  man,  which  is  from  the  female  side,  engraves  itself  steadily  in
the  engraving,  like  a  seal.  The  bodily  tziyor-ah  form,  of  the  man  in  this
world  is  (Comp.  Zohar  i,  73^)  shaped  on  the  outside  and  the  Rua'h  is
engraved  in  the  inner.  When  the  Rua^h  is  separated  from  the  body,  that
Rua^h  is  shaped  in  the  Garden  on  the  earth,  in  the  same  tziyor-ah  form
and  same  dfyooq-nah  shadow  of  the  tzeleniy  of  the  body  which  it  had  in
this  world,  because  it  (the  Rua'h)  has  been  always  like  the  impression  of
a  seal,  and  on  this  is  said :  '  Set  me  like  a  seal,  etc'  (Song  of  Songs  viii^
6.)  As  a  seal  is  engraved  in  its  engraving  on  the  inside  and  brings  out
the  tziyor-ah  form,  of  its  shape  (in  relief)  on  the  outside,  so  here  to,  the
Rua'h  spirit,  which  has  been  from  her  (the  bodily)  side  in  this  world,  is
engraved  in  its  engraving  on  the  inside,  but  when  it  separates  from  the
body  and  goes  up  in  the  air  of  Gan  Eden  Garden  of  Eden,  then  that
engraving  becomes  shaped  on  the  outside,  in  the  same  tziyor-ah  form,
like  the  gtdff  body,  in  this  world.  The  Neshamah  Soul,  which  is  from  the
Tree  of  Life,  is  in  there  (Above)  formed  in  the  Bundle  of  Life,  to  delight
in  the  beauty  of  YHVH,  as  it  is  written ;  '  To  behold  the  beauty  of
YHVH  and  to  enquire  in  His  Temple.'  "     (Ps.  xxvii,  4.)*

The  Crowning  of  the  Soul  of  the  Pious,  "  It  is  written :  *Thus
said  Ail  YHVH;  He  that  created  the  heavens  and  stretched  them  out;
He  that  spread  forth  the  earth,  and  that  which  cometh  out  of  it ;  He  that
giveth  neshamah  soul,  to  the  people  upon  it,  and  rua^h  spirit,  to  them
that  walk  therein.'  (Is.  xlii,  5.)  That  is  what  is  said :  '  The  earth,'  He
'  giveth  the  neshamah  '  to  her.    Said  R.  Yitzhaq ;  '  Everything  is  Above :

*ZohAr  ii,  iia,  Brody  Ed.    liyorno  Ed.  ii,  17a.    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  foL  5a,  ooL  18.


390

from  there  goes  forth  the  Soul  of  Life  to  this  earth  *  *  *  Come,
See  !  When  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  created  the  man,  he  gathered  the
dust  from  all  the  four  sides  of  the  world  and  made  a  mark  in  the  place
where  the  Holy  Temple  stands,  Below ;  and  spread  upon  her  a  Soul  of
Life  from  the  holiness  Above.  And  this  Neshamah  Soul,  is  comprised  in
three  degrees,  and  therefore  she  has  three  names,  like  the  m)rstery  Above:
that  is,  Nepheshy  RucCh^  Neshamah,  Nephesh  is  as  we  have  stated,  she
is  the  lowest  from  all,  Rua'h  spirit,  he  is  appointed  to  rule  over  Nephesh^
and  he  is  a  higher  degree  upon  her,  to  remain  upon  her  and  stand  upon
her,  as  it  ought  to  be.  Neshamah  soul,  she  is  the  highest  of  all  and  rules
over  all,  she  is  the  holy  upper  degree  over  all.  And  these  three  degrees
are  comprised  in  man,  to  those  who  deserve  to  the  work  of  the  Master.
Then  before  had  only  been  Nephesh  in  man,  which  is  the  holy  form  in
which  man  shall  prepare  himself,  but  when  man  comes  to  cleanse  himself
in  that  degree,  he  is  prepared  to  crown  himself,  in  the  Ruc^h  spirit,  which
is  the  holy  degree  which  rests  upon  the  Nephesh;  that  the  man  who
deserves  shall  crown  himself  in  it  (the  Rua^h).  When  the  Nephesh  and
Rua^h  exist  in  him,  and  he  does  the  work  of  the  Lord  as  he  ought  to,
then  rests  upon  him,  the  Neshamah  soul,  the  upper  holy  degree  ;  which
rules  over  all.  And  then  he  is  perfectness,  perfect  in  all  sides  to  deserve
in  the  world  to  come,  and  that  is  the  Love  of  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  \
as  it  is  written ;  *  That  I  may  cause  those  who  love  me  to  inherit  sub-
stance.' (Prov.  viii,  21.)  Who  are  'those  who  love  me?'  They  are
those  who  have  the  nishmathah  qad-disha  holy  soul,  in  them."*

The  Neshamah  or  upper  precious  or  intellectual  Soul,  corresponding  to
the  Spirit  in  the  New  Testament,  in  the  Qabbalah  corresponds  to  the
BWee-atic  l^orld  that  of  Creation,  and  according  to  it  inhabits  the  Brain.
She  is  the  last  of  the  spiritual  components  to  enter  the  man,  in  her  fullness
and  perfection,  at  man's  maturity.  When  death  is  coming  she  leaves  her
Merkabah  before  the  appearance  of  death  in  man's  face,  and  then  remains
only  a  resemblance  of  the  real  Neshamah ^  for  the  personality  of  man  can
exist  with  only  the  resemblance  of  the  true  Neshamah.  It  is  here  to  be
noted,  that  the  Tzelem  Shadow  of  the  Image,  acts  in  a  magical  way,  from

*  Zohar  i,  205^,  206a,  Brody  Ed.    Livomo  Ed.  i,  346^,  347a.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  foi.
1133,0)1.460.


391

the  first  moment  of  conception,  on  the  germ  of  human  life,  and  gives  to  it
a  R^shoo-mah  t.  e,y  designation  or  personality,  and  also  imparts  to  it  a
B^heen-ah  /.  e,,  essential  faculty  for  the  reception  of  efHux  (light).  In  the
measure  that  this  B^heen-ah  becomes  gradually  developed,  the  Neshamah
appears  more  effectively  in  the  man  and  his  so-called,  nature.  At  the  in-
stant of  death,  the  Rua^h  Spirit,  which  corresponds  according  to  the  Qab-
balah,  to  the  Ye* tzeer-atic  Worlds  and  to  the  Soul  in  the  New  Testament,  and
which  lives  according  to  the  Qabbalah,  in  the  Heart,  departs.  The  Rua^h
forms,  with  the  Nepheshy  the  actual  personality  of  the  man,  which  is  called
if  he  deserves,  Ye'hee-dah,  The  Nephesh  is  the  last  of  all  the  great  Qabba-
listic  divisions  of  th^  incorporeal  in  man,  which  it  says,  is  the  living  man  in
this  world.  It  says,  the  Nephesh  inhabits  more  especially  the  Liver;  she  is
really  the  entire  plastic  system  and  corresponds  to  the  Body,  in  the  New
Testament.  In  the  Qabbalah  it  corresponds  to  the -^'j^^-a/rV  ^J^A/.  She  is
the  nearest  to,  and  united  in  its  lowest  degree  with,  the  actual  nerve  forces
and  energies  of  the  bodily  life  of  man.  Her  B*heen-ah  tends  to  the  mate-
rial and  sinks  itself  into  the  animal  or  bodily  life,  forming  the  higher
spirituality  of  the  concrete  bodily  and  elementary  existence.  Even  in  the
gross  bodily  existence  stands  the  spiritual  in  the  relation  of  the  External
to  the  Inner,  and  has  in  its  way,  a  life  and  soul  in  itself,  for  there  does
not  exist  anything  in  nature  without  a  certain  spirituality  and  life.  This
elementary  lower  soul  in  man,  is  also  called  by  the  Qabbalists,  Nephesh,
and  is  the  Merkabah  of  the  spiritual  Nephesh  which  controls  it.  As  in
nature  there  are  different  individual  grades  distinct  from  each  other,  so
the  nature-souls  are  distinguished  in  themselves  and  none  are  transformed
into  the  other,  but  each  is  kept  by  the  Deity,  distinct.  The  spiritual
Nephesh  is  the  last  to  leave  the  body  of  man,  and  only  fully  separates
from  it  with  difficulty.  The  Qabbalah  holds,  that  even  after  death,  the
spiritual  Nephesh  leaves  the  body  only  step  by  step  and  only  as  the  body
becomes  decomposed.  Even  the  dissolution  and  separation  of,  the  differ-
ent parts  of  the  body  is  not  considered  an  absolute  separation,  for  that
which  has  been  one,  it  holds,  can  never  be  absolutely  separated  in  its
parts,  one  from  another,  but  they  alwa3rs  remain  constantly  in  afiinity
with  each  other,  as  an  entirety;  therefore  even  after  decomposition  of  the
material  body-form,  as  nothing  is  ever  lost,  it  holds  that  a  communication


392

exists  between  all  the  several  parts  until  the  judgment  of  the  Last  Day.
The  innermost  fundamental  spiritual  principle  or  type  of  the  individual,
it  asserts,  remains  as  a  some-thing  indestructible  and  as  a  tzelem  shadow
of  an  image,  or  d'mooth  likeness  or  similitude,  of  the  previous  upon  earth
living  man.  This  is  the  body  of  the  resurrection,  called  by  the  Qabbalah
Habal  D'  Garmin  the  elementary  Nephesh^  it  can  be  termed,  to  a  certain
extent,  the  elementary  man  which  is  in  the  external  tzelem  shadow  image,
the  true  representative  of  the  inner  spiritual  man.  The  elementary  man  the
Qabbalah  says ;  contains  the  three  lower  natural  Nephesh  i.^.,  the  mineral,
vegetative  and  animal  natures,  and  also  the  higher  elementary  Nephesh
which  as  a  simulacrum^  includes  the  exact  shape  of  the  man  as  he  was  when
existing  in  the  body  on  earth.  The  elementary  man  contains  four  differ-
ent parts,  in  the  lowest  is  the  mineral,  then  comes,  the  spirit  of  the  bones,

which  are  considered  as  the  vegetative  and  as  the  frame-work  or  support

•
of  the  man,  and  give  growth  to  the  whole  and  enables  him  to  walk  erect;

this  is  followed  by  the  etzbon-ah  (Tbissr-ahy  the  living  atomic  flesh-forming
power:  this  with  its  atoms,  nerves,  arteries,  veins,  etc.,  etc.,  is  the  basis
of  the  animal-feeling.  And  lastly,  is  the  nature-feeling  soul,  etc.  The
Qabbalah  contains  much  upon  this  subject  and  also  upon  the  spiritual
beginnings  of  life,  which  would  surprise  some  of  our  best  physiologists,
but  we  have  no  space  to  go  into  the  subject  any  further  in  this  writing.
It  is  to  be  noted,  that  these  divisions  are  not  considered  as  standing  out
separate  and  distinct,  but  they  are  considered  as  inextricably  in  affinity
and  connected  with  each  other  in  their  proper  proportions,  which  however
vary.  It  is  also  to  be  noted,  that  the  Neshamah  has  three  divisions,  the
highest  is  the  Ye  ^hee-dahy  the  middle  is  Hay.yahy  the  last  and  third,  the
Neshamahy  properly  to  say.  They  manifest  themselves  in  the  Ma^hshabah
Thought,  Tzelem  Phantom  of  the  Image,  and  Zurath  Prototypes,  and  the
D'yooq-nah  Shadow  of  the  phantom  Image.  The  D'mooth  Likeness  or
Similitude,  is  a  lower  manifestation.

The  Divisions  of  the  Incorporeal  in  Man.  **  The  Neshamah  of
the  child  of  man  is  called  three  different  names,  Nephesh^  Rua'hy  Nesha*
mahy  and  all  are  merged  one  in  another,  and  in  three  places  are  found
their  dwellings.  Nephesh  is  found  in  the  grave  until  the  body  is  decom-
posed in  the  earth,  and  then  it  revolves  around  in  this  world  to  find  its


393

life  and  to  know  her  trouble.  The  Rua^k  ascends  into  the  Garden  which
is  on  earth  and  there  forms  himself  in  the  d'yooq-nah  of  the  body  in  this
world,  in  such  a  garment  as  they  clothe  there.  The  Neshamah^  she
ascends  at  once  to  that  same  place  she  came  out  from  and  for  her  sake  has
been  lighted  that  lamp.  Above ;  these  {Neshamoth  souls)  do  not  descend
to  the  Lower  World.  But  before  the  Neshamah  soul,  ascends  to  connect
herself  in  the  Throne  (in  her  place),  the  Rua^h  cannot  be  crowned  in  the
Garden  (/.  ^.,  into  another  body),  which  is  on  earth,  and  the  Nephesk
cannot  remain  in  its  place,  but  when  she  {Neshamah)  goes  up  so  all  have
rest,  but  when  the  children  of  the  world  are  in  trouble,  and  they  go  out
to  the  graves  (to  pray);  that  Nephesh  awakes  and  goes  out  and  flies  to  and
fro,  and  awakes  that  Rua^h,  and  that  Rua^h  ascends  and  awakes  that
Neshamahy  then  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  1  has  pity  over  the  world.  When
the  Neshamah  tarries  in  ascending  to  her  place,  the  Rua^h  goes  and  stays
at  the  door  of  the  Garden  of  Eden,  and  the  door  is  not  opened  to  him ;
and  he  (the  Rua^K)  flies  to  and  fro  and  no  one  notices  him.  Then  the
Nephesh  flies  to  and  fro  in  the  world.  She  sees  that  guff  body,  has  worms
in  it,  and  she  mourns  over  it  (the  body)  as  it  written :  *  Only  his  flesh
upon  him  shall  have  pain,  and  his  Nephesh  soul,  upon  it  (the  guff  body)
shall  mourn:'  (Job  xiv,  22.)  and  all  are  in  punishment.  Until  the  Ne*
shamah  connects  herself  in  her  place  Above,  and  then  all  connect  them-
selves in  their  places.*

Because  all  these  three  are  one  knot  like  the  Above,  in  the  mystery
of  Nepheshy  Rua*h  and  Neshamah^  they  are  all  one  and  bound  in  one.
(Cremona,  Ibid.y  col.  252.)  Nephesh  has  no  light  from  her  own  sub-
stance ;  it  is  for  this  reason  that  she  is  associated  with  the  mystery  of
^^the  body,  to  procure  enjoyment  and  food  and  everything  which  she
needs ;  as  it  is  written  :  '  She  giveth  food  to  her  house(hold)  and  a  por-
tion to  her  maidens.'  (Prov.  xxxi,  15.)  Her  house(hold)  that  is  the
body  which  she  nourishes,  and  the  *  maidens '  are  the  members  of  that
body.  Ru'ah  (the  Spirit)  is  that  which  rides  on  that  Nepheshiikit  Lo¥^er
Soul)  and  rules  over  her  and  lights  (supplies)  her  with  everything  she
needs,  and  the  Nephesh  is  the  throne  to  that  Rua'h.  Neshamah  (Divine
Soul),   goes  over  to  that  Rua'hy  and  she  rules  over  that  Rua'h  and

*  Zohar  ii,  141^,  Brody  Ed«    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  foL  63^,  col.  251.


394

lights  to  him  with  that  Light  of  Life,  and  that  Rua^h  depends  on  the
Neshamahy  and  receives  light  from  her  which  illuminates  him.     That
Nephesh  depends  on  that  Rua*h  and  receives  light  from  him  and  is
sustained  by  him,  and  all  are  one  bond.     When  the  upper  JN'eshamah
ascends  she  goes  to  her  repose  to  where  is  the  At-tee^kah  JD^At-tee*-
keen  the  Ancient  of  the  Ancients,  the  Hidden  of  All  the  Hidden,  so  as
to  receive  from  Him,  Eternity.     This  Rua'h  does  not  go  to  Gan  JSden
Garden  of  Eden,  because  he  is  Nephesh^  and  each  has  its  own  place.
The  Neshamah  Soul,  goes  up  direct  to  the  very  inner,  and  the  Rua^h
Spirit  goes  up  to  Eden,  but  not  so  high  as  the  Soul,  and  Nephesh  (the
animal  principle.  Lower  Soul)  remains  in  the  grave  Below.  *  **

"This  is  what  is  written  :  ^ Ail  Elo-hdi  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh.'
(Numb,  xvi,  22.)  It  is  a  place  where  all  the  Neshamoth  souls,  of  the
world  are  together,  and  all  the  souls  ascend  and  descend  from  there. ' '  f

The  Merkabah  and  the  Cleansing  of  the  Soul.  *'And  that
Garden,  which  is  from  the  fiqood-ah  point,  is  called  Ekien.  (This
point,  is  what  has  been  taken  from  the  Mother,  Above,  who  is  hidden ;
from  it,  the  point,  is  the  Gan  Eden  on  earth.)  These  heads  of  the
^Hdy-yah  are  the  four  faces.  One  of  them  is  that  of  a  Lion,  as  it  is
written;  'And  the  face  of  the  lion  to  the  right  side.'  (Ezek.  i,  10.)
And  one  is  (that  of)  an  Ox,  as  it  is  written  :  '  And  the  face  of  the  ox  to
the  left  side.'  (Jbid,)  And  one  is  (that  of)  an  Eagle,  as  it  is  written;
'And  the  face  of  the  eagle  to  the  four  sides.*  {Ibid,)  Man  comprises
all,  as  it  is  written  :  *  And  the  d'mooth  similitude,  of  their  faces  was  the
face  of  man.*  {Ibid,')  And  these  are  the  four  heads  of  the  river  which
reaches  to  the  Qur-sdi-yah  Qad-dosha  Holy  Throne,  and  from  its  strength
and  hammering  (as  in  a  forge),  it  moves ;  and  from  that  moving  is  made
that  river  iian  U  e-noor^  as  it  is  written  :  *  The  river  D^e-noor  issued  and
came  forth  from  before  Him,  thousand  thousands  ministered  unto  him.*
(Dan.  vii,  10.)  And  the  Neshamoth  souls,  when  they  ascend,  cleanse
themselves  in  that  river  D*  e-noor  and  do  not  burn,  they  only  cleanse
themselves.    Come,  See  !  From  a  Salamander  they  make  a  garment, J  and

*  Zohar  ii,  142a,  Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  63^,  col.  252.

f  Zohar  iii,  176^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  iii,  84^,  col.  336.

X  This  doubtless  refers  to  a  species  of  asbestos.


395

because  it  is  from  fire,  that  garment  can  only  be  washed  and  cleansed,  in
fire.  Fire  eats  up  the  filth  in  it  and  cleanses  that  garment,  so  here  also-
the  Neshamah  soul,  which  is  (of  the)  light  (fire)  which  it  takes  from  the
Holy  Throne,  of  which  it  is  written;  'His  Throne,  the  fiery  flame.*
(Dan.  vii,  9.)  At  the  time  when  they  want  to  cleanse  (the  soul)  from
that  defilement  in  her,  it  (the  soul)  is  put  through  fire  and  becomes
cleansed ;  and  the  fire  eats  up  all  the  defilement  which  is  in  the  Nesha-
mah and  the  Neshamah  is  cleansed  and  becomes  white.'*  *

"  It  is  written  :  '  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  rr'n  BfflJ  Nephesh  ^  Hay-
yah  Living  Creature.  (Gen.  i,  24.)  That  vatzxi^  Nephesh  which  is  the-
Upper  Hdy-yah  Life,  and  because  that  this  Nephesh  Hdy-yah  is  holiness
from  Above,  so  when  the  holy  earth  draws  up  through  her  and  is  com-
prised in  her,  then  she  is  called  Neshamah  soul.  And  Come,  See  !  At
all  times  when  the  child  of  man  goes  in  the  true  way  and  his  mouth  and
tongue  speaks  holy  words,  this  Neshamah  soul,  cleaves  to  him  and  he  is
the  friend  of  his  Lord,  and  he  has  many  watchers  (angels)  protecting
him  from  all  sides.  He  is  designated  for  good.  Above  and  Below,  and
the  Holy  She*kheen-ah  rests  upon  him."f

The  Treasury  of  Souls.  "  Before  the  world  was  created  all  the-
Ru'ht'n  Spirits,  of  the  just  (pious)  had  been  hidden  before  Him  in  the
Mdhshabah  Thought,  each  one  in  his  dyooq-nah.  But  after  He  formed
the  world  all  have  been  revealed  and  remained  in  their  d^yooq-nah  before
Him,  the  Supreme  Above.  Afterwards  He  put  them  (the  souls)  in  a
Treasury  in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  Above ;  and  that  Treasury  never  gets
filled  (/.  e,,  the  Treasury  in  the  Garden  of  Eden)  (and)  it  always  cries
out :  '  Behold  the  first  things  are  come  to  pass,  and  new  things  do  I
declare  (say).*  (Is.  xlii,  9.)  What  does  this  mean?  It  means  '  I  say
(declare)'  all  by  their  Name,  and  that  Treasury  has  not  any  desire  and
not  any  lust  only  to  always  accumulate  the  Neshamoth  souls,  there :  like
the  Gdi'hinnom  which  has,  no  desire  or  lust,  except  to  take  the  Neshamoth
souls,  to  purify  them,  and  every  day  it  (the  Gdi-hinnam)  calls :  '  Give  !
Give  !*J    What  means  'Give!    Give!'    it  means.  Burn!  Bum!     And

*  Zohar  ii,  21 13,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  95a  and  b^  col.  378,  379.

f  Zohar  iii,  301a  and  3,  Tosephthah,  Brody  Ed.

\  Prov.  XXX,  15.   This  is  Lillith.   Comp.  Cahen*s  French  Bible,  VoL  xiv,  p.  156  note.


396

that  Treasury  takes  all  the  souls  till  the  time  they  are  clothed  and  come
down  to  this  world,  and  through  the  sin  of  AdamQad'mo-ah,  (the  B^ree-
-otic  Adam)  which  brought  on  the  evil  side  to  the  world ;  the  Nesha$ncA
has  to  be  clothed  in  these  kinds  of  garments,  which  are  the  other  gar-
ments.'**

The  Entrance  of  the  SOul  into  the  Body.   "  R.  Abbah,  Sabah,  /.^.,
the  old,  stood  up  on  his  feet  and  said :  '  Rest  in  peace  shall  be  to  thee  R.
Shim-on  ben  Yo'hal,  that  thou  didst  bring,  back  the  crown,  i.  ^.,  the  Tho-
rah,  we  have  learned  in  the  Mathneethah  Qad'tno-ah  ;  Because  the  JN'esha-
mah  Soul ;  is  in  its  perfectness  in  the  Upper  Place,  she  has  not  any  desire
to  the  guff  hody,  (but)  only  to  create  from  it  other  Neshamoth  souls,  which
come  out  from  her,  and  she  remains  in  her  Place.    Until  R.  Shim-on  ben
Yo'ha!  canie  and  explained ;  If  in  this  world  which  is  vanity  and  the  body  a
stinking  drop,  and  yet  the  Neshamah  goes  into  it ;  surely  in  the  time  to  come
when  all  are  purified,  and  the  body  will  be  in  its  fullness  and  perfectness,
•certainly  the  Neshamah  soul,  will  go  into  it  with  all  its  perfectness.
Above. '  Said  R.  A'ha ;  '  This  very  soul  and  this  very  guff  hodjy  the  Holy,
Blessed  be  He  1  is  prepared  in  the  time  to  come,  to  put  in  their  eternal
continuance,  but  both  will  be  perfect  in  the  perfectness  of  knowledge  (so
as)  to  reach  that  which  they  could  not  reach  in  this  world,*  "f

Of  that  Division  of  the  Incorporeal  in  Man  called,  Ye'hee-dah.
*'  It  is  written :  '  The  silver  is  mine,  and  the  gold  is  mine,  saith  the
YHVH  TZe'Ba-OTH,  /.  ^.,  of  the  hosts.'  What  means  'the  silver  is
mine  and  the  gold  is  mine '  ?  It  is  like  to  a  king  who  has  two  treasures,
one  of  silver  and  one  of  gold,  that  of  silver  he  put  to  his  right  and  that
of  gold  to  his  left,  and  said ;  This  is  prepared  so  that  it  is  easy  to  spend
it,  and  he  has  done  everything  in  an  easy  way,  this  is  what  is  said ;  '  Thy
hand  YHVH  is  become  glorious  in  power.*  (Ex.  xv,  6.)  If  man  rejoices
in  his  portion  {is  contented  with  his  lot  in  this  life),  it  is  good,  and  if
not,  it  is  said;  'Thy  right  hand  YHVH  hath  dashed  in  pieces  the
enemy.'  {Ibid,)  What  does  this  mean  ?  Said  he  to  him  ;  '  That  is  the  gold,
it  is  written;  The  silver  is  mine,  the  gold  is  mine.'  Why  do  they  call  it
J'TIT  Zahav  gold?    'It  is  called  Zahav  gold,  because  included  in  it  are

♦  Zohar  iii,  303^,  Brody  Ed.,  Tosephthah.

f  Zohar  i,  126a,  Midrash  Ha-Ne*elam.  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  76a,  col.  30X.


397

three  tributes  {middoth  measures) ;  the  i  (Zayin  =  7)  of  the  Zahav  are-
seven  tributes,  and  the  n  (Heh  =  5)  is  mmK  A'hdoth  Unity,  the  1  {Beth
=  2)  means  'Hokhmah  and  Binah,  /.  ^.,  Wisdom  and  Understanding,  and
they  are  called  Neskamah  souls  because  of  the  last  five  Sephiroth.  And
five  names  has  the  Neshamah.*  That  is  Nephesh^  Rua^h^  Neshamahy
'Hdy^yahy  Ye'hee-dahr'\

Ye^hee-dah  the  only  one,  is  iht  personality  of  man ;  Hay* yah  is  the  life
in  man ;  Neshamah  the  soul  or  intellect ;  Rua^h  the  spirit ;  Nephesh  the
animal  soul  or  vital  dynatneis^  the  anima,

"  In  the  Book  of  King  Solomon  is  to  be  found :  That  at  the  time  of
the  accomplishment  of  the  union,  Below ;  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !
Sends  a  D^yooq-nah  Phantom  of  a  Shadow  image,  like  the  face  of  a  man.
It  is  designed  and  sculptured  in  the  Divine  Dteiem  i.  e,^  Shadow  Image,
and  exists  over  this  pair,  and  if  permission  was  given  to  the  eye  to  see,  the
child  of  man,  could  see  above  his  head  a  tzeiem,  resembling  the  face  of
the  child  of  man,  and  in  that  tzelem  shadow  image,  the  child  of  man  is
created.  And  so  long  as  that  tzeiem  which  is  sent  by  the  Master,  is  not
found  there  above  his  head,  man  is  not  created ;  therefore  it  is  written :
*Elohim  created  man  in  His  tzeiem  (shadow  image).*  (Gen.  i,  27.)  It
is  this  tzeiem,  which  is  prepared  to  be  received  (by  the  infant)  on  his  first
entrance  into  this  world ;  (and)  when  man  enters  this  world  it  is  in  this
tzelemj  in  this  tzeiem  he  developes,  as  he  grows,  and  it  is  with  this  tzeiem^
again,  he  departs  from  this  life,  as  it  is  written:  'Surely  in  a  tzeiem
walketh  man.*  (Ps.  xxxix,  60.)  And  this  tzeiem  is  from.  Above.  At  the
time  when  the  Ruthin  Spirits,  go  out  from  their  place,  each  spirit
separately  appears  before  the  Holy  King,  invested  in  a  sublime  form,
with  the  features  in  which  it  will  exist  in  this  world.  It  is  from  that
D'yooq-nah,  t\  e,,  sublime  Shadow  of  a  Tkelem,  that  the  Tzeiem,  comes
out,  and  this  is  the  third  after  the  Rua*h  Spirit,  and  precedes  it  to  this
world  and  is  present  at  the  time  of  conception,  and  there  is  not  any  con-
ception in  this  world  in  which  the  tzeiem,  is  not  present."  {

*  Which  arc  ^"H  ]"!?  and  these  arc  called;  the  Lights  of  Life.

f  Zohar  \,  16a  and  b,  Sepher  ha-Bahir,  {  Hashmuias,  Amsterdam  Ed.  Also  Brody
Ed.    It  belongs  to  Zohar  i,  foL  217a.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  116^,  i  I7<3e>  col.  462-^63.

X  Zohar  iii,  104a  and  b,  Brody  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  50^,  col.  199.  Comp.
Zohar  ii,  \^oa  sq.


398

That  Image  is  called  by  the  Qabbalists,  \e'hee-dah^  i.e.^  the  indivisible
.principle,  the  personality  or  individuality  of  the  man.

"  Come,  Sec  !  When  the  child  of  man  is  born  there  is  given  to  him
diNepheshy  i,  e,,  animated  life,  from  the  side  of  the  animals,  the  clean
side,  from  the  side  of  those  which  are  called  Auphaneh  ha-Qcui-dosh  the
Holy  Wheels.    If  he  deserves  more,  there  is  given  to  him  a  Rua*h  Spirit,
from  the  side  of  the  Hdy-yoth  ha-Qad-dosh  Holy  Lives.     If   he  still
deserves  more  (there)  is  given  to  him,  a  Neshamah  Soul,  from  the  side  of
the  Kuf'saiy-ah  Throne.*    And  these  three,  are  the  mother,  the  man-
servant, and  the  maid-servant,  the  Daughter  of  the  King.    If  he  still  de-
serves more  (there)  is  given  to  him  a  Nephesh  in  the  way  of  A*t%eel-c^
Efflux,  from  the  side  of  the  daughter  Ye^hee-dah  the  only  one,  and  she  is
called,  the  Daughter  of  the  King.     If  he  still  deserves  more  (there)  is
given  to  him  the  Rua^h  of  A'tzeel-oth  the  Efflux,  from  the  side  of  the
Middle  Pillar,  and  he  is  called  Son  to  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !    There-
fore that  is  what  is  written  ;  'Ye  are  the  children  of  YHVH  your  Elohim.'
(Deut.  xiv,  I.)     If  he  still  deserves  more  (there)  is  given  to  him  a  A^xA-
amah  Soul,  from  the  side  of  Abba  Father,  and  Immah  Mother ;  that  is
what  is  written  :   **  And  He  blew  into  his  nostrils  Neshmoth  ^ Hay-yeem
Souls  of  Life.*     (Gen.  ii,  7.)     What  is  '  Hay.yeem  Life?  That  is  n"^  YH.
On  this  we  have  said  :  '  All  the  Neshamoth  Souls,  shall  praise  n"^  YaH.'
(Ps.  cl,  6.)    And  in  it  is  perfected  TIT   Yedud  (that  means  YHVH).
If  he  still  deserves  more,  is  given  to  him  TIT  Yedud^  in  its  very  com-
pleteness, the  letters  of  which  are  Yod,  Heh,  Vav,  Heh :  Heh  K"n  Vav
VKl  Heh  «'n  Yod  -yy  which  is  (Adam)  Man  in  the  way  of  A'tzeel-
oth  Efflux,  Above,  and  is  called  in  the  Uyooq-nah  of  his  Lord,  and  on
it  is  said;  'And  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  etc.*     (Gen.
i,   28.)    And  that   is,    he  shall   rule  over  all  the  Heavens  and  in  all
the  Auphaneeniy  t,  e. ,  Wheels,  and  the  Serapheem^  and  over  all  the  Hosts
and  Mights,  from  Above  and  Below.     And  therefore  when  the  child  of
man  deserves  the  Nephesh  from  the  side  of  the  ryrxv  x>:i  Bath  Ye^hee-dah^
i.  e,f  Daughter  Ye^hee-dah^  is  said  by  it,  that  '  She  shall  not  go  out  as  the
men-servants.'  '*     (Exod.  xxi,  7.)t

♦This  is  the  Lower  Throne.     The  Upper  Throne  is  Qur-saiy-ah,

f  Zohar  ii,  94^,  Sabah  D'Mishpatim,  Brody  Ed.     Livomo  Ed.  ii,  fol.  i6oa  and  b.


399

The  Male  and  Female  Souls  in  the  Pre-Existent  Condition
United,  of  their  Reuniting  in  this  World.  "  Come,  See  1  All  the
souls  of  the  world  paired  themselves  (as  male  and  female)  before  Him,
but  after  they  came  into  this  world,  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  pairs  them.
Said  R.  Yitz-haq ;  '  The  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  I  says,  that  daughter  to
that  one.  *  Said  R.  Yo-seh,  *  What  does  that  mean ;  it  is  written :
'  There  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun.*  (Eccl.  i,  9.)  Said  R.  Yehudah:
'  It  is  written  ;  '  Under  the  sun,'  which  I  am  above.*  Said  R.  Yo-seh ;
'  What  decree  is  here?*  R.  *He-yah  then  said ;  '  At  the  very  time  that
the  son  of  man  goes  out  into  the  world,  a  female  partner  is  prepared  for
him.*  Said  R.  Abbah;  'Happy  are  the  just  that  their  souls  crown
themselves  before  the  Holy  King  before  they  come  down  into  this  world,
then,  so  we  have  learned ;  that  at  the  time  when  the  Holy,  Blessed  be
He !  sends  out  the  souls  to  the  world  all  the  spirits  and  souls  collect
themselves,  male  and  female,  and  associate  themselves  like  one,  and  they
are  given  in  the  hand  of  one  who  is  the  official  who  is  set  over  the  con-
ception of  the  children  of  man,  and  his  name  is  Night,  and  at  the  time
when  they  come  down,  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  who  knows  the  spirits
and  souls,  cormects  them  together  as  they  have  been  before  and  decrees
on  them,  and  when  they  connect  themselves  they  become  one  body  and
one  soul.  Right  and  Left,  as  it  ought  to  be,  and  therefore  means  that
which  is  written ;  'There  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun.*  This  union
depends  on  his  (man's)  deeds  and  ways  in  this  world.  If  he  deserves
and  his  deeds  are  right,  he  is  united  with  that  prepared  for  him  like  they
were  before  they  came  out  from  the  world  Above,  to  this  world.  *  *  *  *

The  Light  with  which  the  Soul  is  Clothed.  ''Come,  See  !  When
the  soul  reaches  that  place  which  is  ^^m  Kiilif  Tz'ruroh  (Phay-ah,  t\  ^.,
Bundle  of  Life  (see  I  Sam.  xxv,  29)  they  there  enjoy  from  that  Kinjl
KnSpflDK  aspaqUar-yah  dinhar-ah  luminous  mirror, f  from  that  Light  which
comes  out  of  the  place  which  is  above  All,  but  if  the  soul  was  not  clothed
with  the  splendor  of  another  garment  she  could  not  come  near  to  see
that  Light.  And  the  mystery  of  the  word  is  this;  such  a  garment  as
it  is  given  to  the  soul  to  clothe  itself  in  it  so  as  to  exist  in  this  world,  so

*Zohar  i,  91^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  62^,  col.  247-8.
f  See  Philo.  Bohn*8  English  Ed«  Vol.  i,  pp.  134,  337.


400

here  too  (Above)  He  gives  her  a  garment  of  the  splendor  Above,  so  that
it  may  exist  in   that  world  and  be  able  to  look  into  that  aspaq^koT'
yah  dinhar-ah  which  proceeds  from   the  Land  of  Life.      Come,   See!
Moses  could  not  come  near  to  contemplate,  in  that  (Light)  which  he
looked  at  only  when  he  clothed  himself  in  another  garment,  as  it  is  said:
.  *  And  Moses  came  into  the  midst  of  the  cloud  and  went  up  to  the  moan-
tain.'    (Ex.  xxiv,  1 8.)    Which  is  translated  '  in  the  midst  of  the  cloud ' ;
and  wrapped  himself  in  her  (cloud)  like  one  would  wrap   himself  in  a
garment.     And  therefore  it  is  written  (afterwards)  :  '  And  Moses  drew
near  into  the  thick  cloud  where  Elohim  was.'     (Ex.  xx,  21.)     And  it  is
written  :  *  And  Moses  came  in  the  midst  of  the  cloud,  etc.     (Ex.  xxiv,
18.)     *  Moses  was  on  the  mountain  forty  days  and  forty  nights :'     (Ex.
xxiv,  18.)  And  could  contemplate  in  that  which  he  looked  in.  Likewise;
the  souls  of  the  just  in  that  world  clothe  themselves  in  such  a  garment  (as
Moses  did),  because  it  is  only  there  such  garments  are  used,  and  therefore
they  are  able  to  look  into  the  light  which  shines  in  the  Land  of  Life."*

*'  For  now  we  see  in  a  mirror,  darkly ;  but  then  face  to  face  2  now  I
know  in  part ;  but  then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  have  been  known.'*
(I  Cor.  xiii,  12.)  ''  But  we  all  with  open  face  beholding,  as  in  a  glass,
the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed  from  the  same  image  from  glory  to
glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."     (II  Cor.  iii,  18.)

The  to  be  divisible  are  at  their  beginning  contained  as  a  unity  in  the
Will  of  the  Deity.  When  emanated  and  separated,  they  are  first  in  the
point,  the  Ma'hshabah  Thought ;  they  are  then  the  highest  sublime  princi-
ples, the  Upper  D'yooqnahy  but  are  not  yet  real  beings  but  are  only  the
eternal  Tzurath  or  Prototypic  and  basic  beginnings  of  the  same.  The  prin-
ciples are  first,  D^yooq-mny  i.  e.,  Shadows  of  the' Tz^/em,  the  Phantom
Image,  more  manifest,  they  are  Tzelem  the  Phantom  Image,  D'mooth  Like-
ness or  Similitude,  Tzurah  Prototype.  These  are  considered  as  the  pure
prototypes  of  the  Upper  Neshamoth  or  Primordial  Souls  of  all  existences.
The  Qabbalah  considers  them,  as  eternal  principles  without  any  concrete-
ness  in  themselves  and  as  only  purely,  unconsciously  acting,  potentialities ;
because,  the  self-acting  portion  of  life  proceeds,  according  to  it,  by  incite-
ment from  Below.    The  Qabbalah  also  speaks  of  B^d'mooth  in  the  Simili-

«Zohar  i,  fol.  65^,  66a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  50^,  col.  200.


40I

tude  or  Appearance :  and  Tab'nooth  Form.  The  Tzurah  is  the  higher
principle,  which  remains  Above;  the  higher  eternal  principle  of  the
continued  life  of  the  individual.  The  externality  of  all  the  indivisible  is
the  Great  Androgene,  the  Adam  Illa-^h  or  Adam  Qadmon,  which  includes
in  itself  all  the  ideas  and  all  the  content  of  all  the  prototypes  of  the
existences,  and  contains  the  Ye'hee-dah,  *Hay-yah,  Neshamah,  Rua'h  and
Nephesh,  in  their  highest  potentiality.  This  Adam  is  considered  as  the
first  distinctive  beginning  in  the  finite  and  therefore  is  the  sole  occupant
of  the  A^tzeel-atic  Worlds  that  of  the  Sephiroth/ar  excellence.

The  Soul  in  the  Parable  of  the  King  and  His  Son.  "The  souls
of  the  just  are  above  all  His  hosts  and  His  forces.  Above.  And  if  thou
askest  wherefore  from  so  elevated  a  place  they  come  down  to  this  world,
and  why  did  they  leave  that  place  ?  This  is  like  the  example  of  a  king
who  has  a  son  bom  to  him,  he  sends  him  into  a  village  to  be  nursed  and
brought  up  until  he  is  grown  up  and  learns  the  usages  of  the  king's
palace.  When  it  is  announced  to  the  king  that  the  education  of  his  son
is  finished,  what  does  he  do  in  his  love  for  him  ?  He  sends  the  Matron-
eethah,  his  mother,  after  him  and  brings  him  into  his  palace  and  rejoices
with  him  all  day.  So  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  has  a  son  bom  to  Him
by  the  Matroneethah.  Who  is  he?  The  holy  soul  Above,  He  sends  him
to  the  village,  that  is  this  world  to  grow  up  and  leam  the  usages  and
customs  of  the  King's  palace.  When  the  King  knows  that  his  son  is  grown
up  in  that  village,  (that  is  this  world)  and  that  it  is  time  to  bring  him  to
this  palace  :  What  does  He  do  for  the  love  of  His  son  ?  He  sends  the
Matroneethah  after  him  and  she  brings  him  up  to  His  palace.  The  soul  does
not  leave  this  world  until  the  Matroneethah  comes  after  her  (him)  and  she
brings  her  up  to  the  King's  palace  and  there  she  (the  soul)  remains  forever.
And  nevertheless  it  is  the  custom  of  the  world,  the  people  of  the  village,
to  weep  because  the  son  of  the  King  is  separated  from  them.  A  wise
(man)  who  was  there,  said  to  them :  '  Why  are  you  crying,  is  he  not  the
son  of  the  King  and  it  would  not  be  just  that  he  should  alwa3rs  live  with
you  and  not  be  in  his  Father's  palace?  So  it  was  with  Moses,  he  was  wise,
he  has  seen  that  the  people  of  the  village  wept.  On  this  said  he :  '  Ye  are
the  children  of  YHVH  your  Elohim,  ye  shall  not  cut  yourselves  for  the
dead.'  (Deut.  xiv,  i.)  Come,  See  I  If  all  the  just  knew  this  they  would
26


402

rejoice  on  the  day  when  it  is  their  time  to  leave  this  world.  And  is  it  not
the  height  of  glory,  that  the  Matroneethah  descends  in  the  midst  of  us,
that  she  may  bring  us  up  into  the  palace  of  the  King,  that  the  King  may
rejoice  with  them  a  whole  day,  because  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  Does
not  delight  only  with  the  souls  of  the  just."*

The  World  Exists  Through  Judgment  and  Mercy.     **  Come,  Seel
When  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  created  the  world  He  made  it  on  Judg-
ment, and  on  Judgment  it  exists,  and  all  the  actions  in  the  world  exist
through  Judgment,  except  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !     That   the  world
may  exist  and  not  be  lost,  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  spread  out  upon  it
Mercy,  and  this  Mercy  tempers  Judgment  so  that. the  world  should  not
be  destroyed,  and  through  Mercy  the  world  is  led  and  it  exists  through
it.     *    *    *    When  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  in  His  Love,  has  pity  on
the  man  so  that  He  may  bring  him  near  to  Him,  He  weakens  the  guffah^
t\  e.f  body,  so  that  the  Neshamahy  may  rule  over  it,  and  the  ^eshamah
rules  and  the  guff  body,  is  weakened,  and  when  the  guff  weakens  the
Nephesh  animal  life  soul,  gets  stronger,  and  this  is  the  Love  of  the  Holy,
Blessed  be  He !  as  the  Companions  have  said :  The  Holy,  Blessed  be
He !  gave  to  the  just  (pious  man)  pain  in  this  world,  so  that  he  shall  be  re-
warded in  the  world  to  come.  But  when  the  Neshamah  soul,  weakens  and
the  body  is  strengthened,  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  hates  him,  and  He,
does  not  trouble  him  in  this  world,  so  that  he  shall  get  all  his  reward  in
this  world  and  shall  not  have  any  part  in  the  future  world.  (Zohar  i,  i8o^.)
*      *      *      R.  El'azar  said  :  *  All  that  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  does
through  Judgment,  He  only  does  it  to  purify  that  Nephesh  f  soul,  to  bring
her  into  the  world  to  come,  and  therefore  He  breaks  that  guff  in  this
world,  and  through  that  purifies  that  Nephesh  and  therefore  the  Holy,
Blessed  be  He !  lets  the^w^suffer  pain  in  this  world,  so  that  it  may  be  clean
of  everything  and  deserve  the  world  of  life  in  the  world  to  come.  *  "  J

The  Neshamah  Leaves  the  Body  of  Man  During  Sleep.  **And
Come,  See  !  Thus  we  have  said  :  Even  in  this  world  when  man  slumbers
in  his  bed  and  the  Neshamoth  souls,  find  it  necessary  to  hover  around  the

*  Zohar  i,  245^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  130a  and  ^,  col.  516-7.

t  The  word  Nephesh  used  in  this  quotation  really  means  Neshamah,

X  Zohar  i,  i2k>^,  i8ia,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  102a,  col.  407,  408.


403

world,  and  to  go  out  of  the  guff  body,  not  every  Neshamah  soul,  ascends
to  see  the  face  of  AUteek  Yo-tnen  the  Ancient  of  Days,  only  according  to
man's  deeds  the  Neshamah  ascends,  if  he  has  not  done  the  right  he  (man)
sleeps  and  the  Neshamafi  soul,  goes  out,  and  all  the  unclean  spirits  in  the
lower  degrees  which  are  flying  around  the  world,  connect  themselves  with
her,  but  when  the  man  is  worthy,  when  he  sleeps  and  the  Neshamah  soul,
goes  out  of  him,  she  goes  out  and  flies  up  and  makes  herself  a  way  between
these  unclean  spirits  and  all  the  latter  cry  out :  '  Make  way  !  Make  way !
for  her,  she  is  not  from  our  side  :'  and  she  goes  up  between  the  holies  and
they  make  known  to  her,  a  word  of  truth ;  and  when  she  comes  down
these  evil  spirits  want  to  go  near  her  to  know  that  word,  and  they  make
known  to  her  other  words.  (Zohar  i,  130a.)  *  *  *  When  the  Nesha-
moth  souls,  go  forth  from  the  body,  of  this  world,  they  desire  to  ascend
and  many  kinds  of  evil  spirits  are  there,  and  if  the  Neshamahoth  souls,
are  from  their  side  all  gather  around  them  and  transfer  them  to  the  hand
of  Dumah  to  bring  them  to  Gdi-hinnom.  Then  they  go  up  in  there  also,
and  imite  with  them,  and  they  take  them  and  they  cry  out :  *  These  are
they  which  transgressed  the  biddings  of  the  law  of  the  Lord.*  And  so
they  fly  around  the  whole  world,  and  afterwards  they  are  brought  back  to
Gdi-hinnomy  and  so  it  is  twelve  months.  After  twelve  months  they  are
found  in  that  place  which  is  shown  to  them,  but  those  souls  which  are
worthy,  go  straight  up  and  remain  in  their  places."     (i,  130^.)*

*'  Come,  See  !  When  man  sleeps  on  his  bed,  his  Neshamah  soul,  goes
forth  from  him,  and  each  (^Neshamah)  goes  up  according  to  its  way  and
so  it  comes  down,  as  we  have  said  :  When  man  lies  on  his  bed  sleeping
and  the  Neshamah  goes  forth  from  him,  it  is  written ;  '  In  slumbering
upon  the  bed,  then  He  openeth  the  ears  of  men.'  (Job  xxxiii,  15,  16.)
Then  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  i  makes  known  to  that  Neshamah  in  that
degree  which  exists  in  the  dream,  those  things  which  He  is  prepared  to
bring  on  the  world,  or  those  things  according  to  what  he  thinks  in  his
heart,  because  man  thinks  of  what  is  going  on  the  world  (during  his
waking  hours),  because  they  do  not  make  known  to  man  when  he  is  strong
in  the  guff  body,  as  we  have  said ;  but  the  angels  make  known  to  the

*  Zohar  i,  130a  and  b,  Biody  Ed.  Livorno  Ed.  i,  220^,  22i<i.  Cremona  Ed.  i,  foL  ^Za,
col.  310.


404

Neshamahy  and  the  Neshamah  makes  known  to  man.  And  that  dream  is
from  Above,  when  the  Neshamah  goes  forth  from  the  body  and  each
ascends  according  to  its  way."*

The  Return  of  the  Soul  to  Paradise.  "  Said  R.  Yehudah ;  '  Happy
are  the  just !  When  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  desired  to  return  the
Rua^h  spirit,  to  them  and  to  attract  (draw)  that  Rua^h  into  them ;  We

•

have  learned :  At  the  time  when  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  desires  to
retxum  a  RucCh  to  Him,  if  that  Rua^h  is  worthy,  what  is  written  ;   *  And
the  Rua^h  spirit,  shall  return  unto  Elohim  who  gave  it.*     (Eccl.  xii,  7.)
If  it  is  not  found  worthy,  Woe !  to  that  Rua^h,  he  must  cleanse  him-
self in  the  fire  that  burns,  and  purify  himself,  so  that  he  be  prepared  to
go  back  to  the  guff  hody,  of  the  King,  and  if  he  has  not  been  prepared
there.  Woe !  to  that  Rua'h  spirit,  it  has  to  revolve  like  a  stone  thrown  out
from  a  sling.     It  is  written ;  '  And  the  Nephesh  of  thine  enemies,  her
shall  He  sling  out,  as  out  of  the  middle  of  a  sling.'     (I  Sam.  xxv^  29.}
We  have  learned :    When  that  Rua'h  spirit,  deserv^,  how  many  good
things  are  hidden  in  the  other  world  for  him,  as  it  is  written  ;  *  The  eye
hath  not  seen  Elohim,  beside  Thee,  what  He  hath  prepared  for  him/
(Is.  Ixiv.  4.)     Said  R.  Yo-seh :  '  When  man  nears  the  end  of  his  days^
three  days  (before),  the  decree  comes  out  upon  him  in  the  world,  even  the
birds  (angels)  from  heaven  cry  out  upon  him,  and  if  he  is  worthy,  these
three  days  they  cry  out  before  the  just  which  are  in  the  Gan  JEden  Gar-
den of  Eden.     We  have  learned :  All  these  three  days  the  Neskamdk
soul,  goes  forth  from  him  every  night  and  ascends  and  sees  her  place  in
that  world :  and  the  man  does  not  know,  does  not  give  heed,  and  does
not  rule,  over  his  Neshamah  all  these  three  days,  as  he  did  before.     It  is
written :  *  There  is  no  man  that  hath  power  in  the  Rua^h  to  retain  the
Rua^hj  etc'     (Eccl.  viii,  8.)     Said  R.  Yehudah;  From  the  time  these
three  days  begins,  the  izelem  shadow  image,  of  the  man  becomes  dark  and

^Zohari,  183^7,  Brody  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  lo^a  and  b,  col.  412.  Compare
my  translation  of:  On  Dreams,  by  Synesios,  in  The  Platonist,  Vol.  iv,  April,  1888,  p.
212  sq.  Then  follows  Zohar  i,  on  pages  i%^a  and  b^  remarks  on  the  dreams  of  Joseph*
and  of  those  by  the  Hebrew  prophets,  and  of  the  interpretation  of  dreams.  Also  see
Jbid.  pp.  I99<x  and  b^  200a.


405

the  d^yooq-nah  shadow  of  the  tzelem^  which  has  been  seen  on  him  on  the
earth,  is  kept  back  from  him.*'*

The  Zohar  further  says ;  that  the  Neshamah,  on  the  last  seven  days
of  man's  life,  goes  up  every  night  from  the  man,  and  the  tzool-mah
shadow,  is  no  more  shown  on  the  man,  and  when  the  tzool-tnah  shadow,
goes  away  the  Rua'h  goes  with  it.  (i,  218a,  Brody  Ed.  Cremona  i,  fol.
117J,  col.  466.)

"  We  have  learned  ;  When  the  man  comes  near  his  time  to  go  away
from  this  world,  the  four  sides  of  the  world  exist  in  strong  Judgment,  and
there  awakes  Judgment  from  the  four  sides  of  the  world,  and  the  four  sides
are  quarreling  between  themselvesf  and  they  desire  to  separate  each  to  its
side.  And  a  herald  goes  out  and  cries  in  that  world  (J,e, ,  the  world  to  come)
and  he  is  heard  in  270  worlds.  If  the  man  is  worthy  all  the  worlds  joy
before  him  and  if  not.  Woe !  to  that  man  and  his  lot.  We  have  learned
in  that  time  when  the  herald  calls  out  (the  decree),  at  once,  a  flame  comes
forth  from  the  North  side  and  goes  in  and  ignites  the  xivti  Dtnur,  (i.e.,
the  river  of  fire,  comp.  Dan.  vii,  10.)  and  spreads  itself  out  to  four  sides
of  the  world  and  bums  the  souls  of  the  guilty,  and  that  flame  goes  forth
and  comes  down  on  the  world,  etc. "J

In  the  above  pages  is  an  account  of  the  cock  crowing  thrice  at  the
approach  of  death,  which  is  evidently  an  explanation  of  Mark  xiv,  30,
6Sf  72.     Matt,  xxvi,  74,  75.     John  xiii,  38.

*'  We  have  learned ;  At  the  time  when  the  Neshamah  soul,  goes  forth
from  man,  all  his  relations  and  friends  of  that  world,  go  with  the  Neshamah
and  show  him  the  Place  of  Delight  (Eden),  and  also  the  Place  of  Pun-
ishment. If  he  has  been  pure  he  sees  his  place  and  ascends  and  enjoys  in
the  upper  happiness  of  that  world,  and  if  he  has  not  been  pure  the  Nesha*
mah  soul,  remains  in  this  world  until  the  body  is  hidden  in  the  earth,  when
it  is  hidden,  many  guardians,  (angels)  of  Judgment  unite  to  him  till  they
reach  Dumah,  i.  e.,  the  angel  of  Death,  and  then  they  bring  him  into  the
dwelling  of  Gdi-hinnom.^*  §

*  2U>har  i,  217^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  117^*  col.  465.
f  Because  the^M^,  f.  e.^  body,  comes  out  of  the  four  sides  or  elements,  fire,  water,  air
and  earth,  and  when  they  are  to  be  separated  they  quarrel  between  themselves.
{  Zohar  i,  218^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  117^,  col.  465.
{  Zohar  i,  218^,  219a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  117^,  col.  465.


4o6

The  above  cited  pages,  also  give  a  reason  for  the  burning  of  lights  and
candles  around  the  body  of  the  dead,  in  houses  and  churches.

The  Ascent  of  the  Soul.  "  Come,  See !  The  Neshantah  soul,  goes
forth  and  ascends  between  separated  mountains  and  there  the  Ruc^h  spirit,
associates  with  the  Neshamah  soul,  then  he  (the  Rua^K)  comes  down,  and
the  Nephesh  life  soul,  associates  with  the  RucCh;  And  all  come  down
and  one  connects  with  the  other.  Said  R.  Yehudah :  The  I^eph^sh  and
the  Ruc^h  are  merged  one  in  the  other,  and  the  Neshamah  rests  in  the  way
of  the  man,  and  she  is  in  a  hidden  dwelling  and  her  place  is  not  known.
When  man  comes  to  cleanse  himself  he  is  influenced  by  the  NishmaihAk
Qad'disha  Holy  Soul,  and  this  cleanses  him  and  sanctifies  him  ajid  he  is
called  holy."*

From  the  Zohar:  "When  the  Neshamah  soul,  goes  forth  from  this
world,  she  does  not  know  which  way  she  shall  go  up,  then  there  is  a  way
to  ascend  Above,  to  a  place  where  the  Upper  Neshamoth  souls,  illuminate
which  is  not  given  to  all  Neshamothy^

From  the  Midrash  Ha-Ne*elam.  "  Said  R.  Yehudah  at  the  time  when
the  soul  of  the  just  is  willing  to  go  out  she  rejoices,  and  the  just  is  sure  in
his  death  so  that  he  shall  receive  his  reward."  \

The  Taking  of  the  Soul  of  the  Pious,  by  the  Holy  Kiss.  **  R.
El'azar  said ;  '  Whoever  studies  in  the  Thorah  in  earnest  does  not  die  by
the  hands  of  the  Ye^tzer  ha-rah  evil  spirit,  because  he  (the  latter)  is  the
Serpent  and  he  is  the  Angel  of  Death,  but  his  (the  former's)  death  is  by  a
Kiss,  as  it  is  written :  '  Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  mouth.'
(Song  of  Songs  i,  2.)  This  means  by  the  mouth  of  YHVH ;  and  this  is
the  Kiss  which  is  the  connection  of  the  Nephesh  soul,  to  the  trunk.  And
he  who  studies  in  the  Thorah  is  strengthened  in  the  Tree  of  Life  and  she
does  not  leave  him."  §

The  Reception,  Above,  of  the  Soul  by  the  Holy  Kiss.  **  Said  that
Sabah :     *    *    *     In  the  most  mysterious  and  elevated  part  of  Heaven,

*  2U>har  i,  62a,  Brody  Ed.     Livomo  Ed.  i,  i  loa,    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  49^,  col.  193.
f  Zohar  i,  99a  and  b^  Brody  Ed.     Livomo  Ed.  i,  176^.    Cremona  Ed.   i,  foL  66^^
col.  363.
}To  be  found,  Zohar  i,  99^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  66<2,  col.  261.
{  Zohar  i,  1 68a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.,  i,  fol.  96^,  col.  383.


407

there  is  a  certain  palace  which  is  called  Haikhal  Ahabahy  /.  ^.,  Palace  of
Love,  and  therein  are  hidden  profound  mysteries,  and  the  Nasheeqin
Dir'humoOj  i,  e.,  Kisses  of  the  King's  Love,  are  there;  and  there  go  all
the  souls  of  the  friends  of  the  King.  When  the  King  ascends  into  that
Palace:  it  is  written:  'And  Jacob  kissed  Rachel.'  (Gen.  xxix,  ii.)
And  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  meets  there  the  holy  soul.  He  advances
and  at  once  kisses  her  and  embraces  her,  and  caresses  her*  and  that  is
what  it  means  when  it  is  written :  '  He  shall  deal  with  her  after  the  man-
ner of  daughters.  *  (Ex.  xxi,  9.)  Like  the  custom  of  a  father  to  his
beloved  daughter,  he  kisses  her,  embraces  her  and  gives  her  presents.  So
the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  does  to  the  pure  soul  daily,  as  it  is  written  :
'  He  shall  deal,  etc^f

The  Positions  of  the  Spirit  and  Soul.  **  The  Rua'h  is  that  which
stands  upon  the  Nephesh  and  the  Nephesh  has  not  any  existence  except  in
the  Rua^h,  and  this  very  Rua^h  rests  between  fire  and  water,  and  from
here  is  fed  that  Nephesh.'*  %

"  Come,  See  !  There  are  three  degrees  and  they  are  connected  as
one,  Nephesh,  Rua'h  and  Neshamah,  and  the  highest  of  them  is  Neshatn-
ah,  R.  Yo-seh  said ;  '  In  every  man  is  a  Nephesh,  and  there  is  a  higher
Nephesh  upon  a  Nephesh :  and  if  man  is  worthy  of  that  Nephesh,  they
pour  upon  him  a  crown  which  is  called,  RucCh :  that  is  what  is  written  ;
*  Until  the  Rua'h  spirit,  he  poured  upon  us  from  on  high.'  (Is.  xxii,  15.)
At  once  man  awakes  in  the  sublimity  to  look  in  the  Law  of  the  Holy
King ;  if  man  deserves  in  that  Rua'h  spirit,  they  crown  him  with  the
holy  upper  crown  which  comprises  all  (three)  which  is  called  Neshamah
soul ;  and  it  is  called ;  the  Neshamah  Elo-hai,  /.  e..  Soul  of  God.§

The  following  passage  shows  that  the  Nephesh  must  associate  with  the
Rua'h.  "And  when  the  Rua'h  does  not  rest  upon  her  (the  NephesK),
she  has  no  association  with  anything  from  Above  and  she  does  not  know
anything  whatsoever  from  that  world ;  and  she  is  like  the  Nephesh  of  an

*Comp.  Luke  xv,  7,  10 ;  Matt,  xv,  21 ;  Luke  vi,  23;  Rom.  xiv,  17;  Gal.  v,  22;
Heb.  xii,  2;  Jude  25.
f  Zohar  ii,  97a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  E^.,  ii,  fol.  44a,  col.  173-174.
\  Zohar  i,  2o6<2.     Livomo  Ed.  i,  347^1.    Cremona,  Ed.  i,  fol.  113^,  col.  460.
2  Zohar  iii,  70^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  32a,  coL  126.


4o8

animal.     She  is   a  Nephesh  which  has   no   rest,   so  she  goes  and  flies
around  and  awakes  that  official  d"j;'D1T  Y^dumiam  (who  has  charge  of  the
entrance  to  Heaven)  and  his  servants,  and  they  take  her  (that  Is/^ephesh)
and  bring  her  up  to  all  the  doors  of  Gan  Eden  (Garden  of  Eklen,  Para-
dise) and  they  show  her  the  Glory  of  the  just,  and  they  call  to  her,  her
Rua^h  spirit,  and  she  (the  Nephesh)  connects  herself  in  him  (the  Ru^k)
and  he  goes  in  that  garment  (iht  Nephesh)]  and  then  she  knows  the  things
of  that  world.     And  when  that  Rua^h  spirit,  goes  up  to  crown  himself  in
that  Upper  Neshatnah  Above,  that  Nephesh  connects  herself  in  that  Rua^h
spirit,  and  illuminates  from  him,  like  the  moon  illuminates  from  the  sun,
and  the  Rua^h  binds  himself  in  that  Neshatnah;  and  that  Neshantnh  con-
nects herself  into  the  utmost  termination  of  Ma'hshadah  Thought  (naemD
mo  pK  /.  e.f  the  inner  utmost  of  the  Thought)  which  is  the  mystery  of
the  Nepheshy  Above.     And  that  Nephesh  connects  itself  in  that  Upper
Rua^h  and  that  Rua^h  connects  itself  in  that  Upper  Neshamah,  and  that
Neshatnah  connects  herself  in  Ain  Soph :  And  then  this  is  rest  of  every-
thing and  the  unity  of  everything.  Above  and  Below,  all  is  in  one  Toys-
tery  and  one  kind,  and  that  is  the  rest  of  the  Nepheshy  Below.     And  on
that  is  written ;  '  The  Nephesh  soul,  of  my  lord  shall  be  bound  in  the
bundle  of  life  with  YHVH  thy  Air  (I  Sam.  xv,  29.)''*

Absence  of    the   Neshamah,   Creates  Uncleanness.    **We   have
learned  when  the  Neshatnah  soul,  goes  out  of  the  children  of  man,  it  leaves
only  the  soiled  body  and  this  body  soils  the  house,  and  it  (the  body)  makes
unclean  everything  which  comes  near  to  it,  therefore  is  written  :  *  He  who
toucheth  the  dead,  etc.*  (Num.  xix,  11.)  And  therefore  when  He  takes
away  the  Neshattiah  soul,  and  leaves  only  the  unclean  guff  body,  at  once
He  gives  permission  to  all  the  unclean  sides  (spirits)  to  rest  upon  it.
*     *    *    And  Come,  See  !  All  the  children  of  the  world  when  they  sleep
on  their  beds  in  the  night,  and  Night  spreads  out  her  wings  over  all  the
children  of  the  world,  feel  the  taste  of  death.     From  that  taste  of  death
the  unclean  Rua^h  Spirit,  hovers  over  the  world  and  makes  it  unclean,
and  rests  on  the  hands  of  the  children  of  man,  and  makes  them  un-
clean.'' t

*  Zohar  ii,  142^,  Brody  E^.     Cremona  Ed.  ii,  64^7,  col.  253.

t  Zohar  i,  53^,  Brody  Ed.     Livorno  Ed.  i,  94^.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  yjb,  col.  147.


409

•

Sleep  the  Taste  of  Death.  "  Come,  See !  At  the  time  the  child  of
man  goes  in  the  night  on  his  bed^  he  must  take  upon  himself  the  Yoke  of
the  Upper  Kingdom  with  a  perfect  heart,  and  before  he  (sleeps),  must
commit  to  Him  the  custody  of  his  Nephesh  soul ;  because  the  whole  world
(then)  tastes  the  taste  of  death.  Then  the  Tree  of  Death  rests  on  the
world.  And  all  the  Ru'hin  spirits,  of  the  children  of  man  go  out  and
are  given  under  it  (/.  e,,  the  rule  of  the  Tree  of  Death)  but  because  they
have  committed  the  soul  to  Him,  they  all  return  to  their  places.***

Man  can  only  Approach  the  Deity  through  the  Intention  of  his
Heart.  "Because  of  things  from  Above,  as  well  from  holiness  as  the
other  (the  evil)  side,  the  child  of  man  cannot  attract  the  Rua^h  from
Above  to  Below,  and  can  approach  only  with  fear  and  through  the  inten-
tion of  his  heart  and  (with)  a  contrite  heart.  And  then  he  attracts  Below
the  Rua^h  spirit,  from  the  Above,  and  the  will  which  is  needed  for  it.
And  if  he  does  not  put  his  heart  and  will,  in  fear,  to  that  (the  Upper)
side,  then  he  cannot  connect  his  will  to  it.**t

"There  are  lords  of  the  hidden  Thorah,  lords  of  attributes,  which  in-
herit the  Neshamoth  from  the  side  of  the  Holy  Malkhutha  (Kingdom)
which  is  comprised  from  the  Ten  Sephiroth.  Who  possess  it  and  deserve
it,  he  deserves  the  Ten  Sephiroth  without  separation.  Ten  and  not  nine,
because  if  they  were  separated  they  would  only  be  nine,  and  because  there
is  no  separation  in  it,  says  the  author  of  the  Sepher  Ye*tzeer-ah:  'It  is
ten  and  not  nine.*  '*J  The  ten  Sephiroth  are  looked  upon  as  one  and  are
the  content  of  the  Ineffable  Name  YHVH.

The  Reward  of  the  Pious.  "When  man  sanctifies  his  substance
(body)  from  evil,  he  becomes  sanctified  from  Above,  and  when  man  sanc-
tifies himself  in  the  Holiness  of  his  Lord,  he  is  clothed  in  the  Holy  Ne-
shamah  which  is  the  inheritance  from  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  and  the
Congregation  of  Israel :  then  he  inherits  everything.  And  they  are  called
children  of  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  As  it  is  written  '  Ye  are  the
children  of  YHVH  your  Ail  !  (Deut.  xiv,  i.)§

*  Zohar  iii,  260a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  124^,  col.  496.

f  Zohar  ii,  69a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  31a,  col.  121.

{  Zohar  iii,  277^,  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  134^,  col.  536.

2  Zohar  iii,  24^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  iii,  iia,  col.  42.


4IO

The  Eating  of  the  Forbidden  Fruit.  "It  is  written  :  *  She  (Eve)
took  from  the  fruit.'  (Gen.  iii,  6.)  This  we  have  learned  :  She  squeezed
grapes  and  gave  it  to  him  (Adam)  and  caused  death  to  the  whole  world.
Then  this  Tree,  the  dead  rest  in  it,  and  that  Tree  rules  in  the  night,  and
when  it  rules,  all  the  children  of  the  world  taste  the  taste  of  death."*

The  Power  of  the  Flesh.  "The  building  of  the  body  of  the  child
of  man  is  thus,  the  Rua'h  spirit,  comes  from  the  Rua'h  IXqudsha  Holy
Spirit,  the  Neshamah  soul,  from  that  Tree  of  Life,  and  the  other  (the
evil)  side  gives  the  flesh,  and  only  the  flesh  comes  from  its  side,  and  not
another  thing.**  f

"  Come,  See !  The  end  of  the  flesh,  means ;  his  (the  evil  one's)  whole
will  is  only  on  the  flesh  *  *  *  and  when  he  rules  he  rules  on  the
guff  body,  and  not  on  the  Neshamah  soul.  The  soul  goes  to  her  place
and  the  flesh  is  given  to  that  (the  evil)  place.'* J

"  Over  the  body  of  the  just  who  do  not  care  for  the  pleasures  of  this
world,  the  impure  side  cannot  govern.  Because  they  (the  just)  do  not
ever  associate  with  them  (the  bad  spirits)  in  this  world,  they  have  not  the
least  power  over  them."  §

Of  the  Incorporeal  of  Man  after  Death.  "As  soon  as  the  body
is  cast  off"  by  that  Rua'h  spirit,  through  the  hand  of  Malak  ^Hamavetk
the  Angel  of  Death,  he  (the  Rua'K)  goes  and  clothes  in  that  other  body
in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  (which  he  has  cast  off"  when  he  came  to  the  world.
This  is  not  in  the  Cremona;)  and  the  Rua'h  has  not  any  enjoyment
except  in  that  body  there,  and  rejoices  that  he  has  divested  himself  from
the  body  of  this  world,  and  clothes  himself  in  another  perfect  garment
which  is  in  that  world,  and  (he)  sits  in  it  and  goes  and  views  so  as  to
know  the  Secrets  Above,  which  he  could  not  know  and  see  in  this  worldly
body ;  and  when  the  Neshamah  clothes  herself  in  that  dress  from  the
other  world,  how  much  pleasure  and  joy  is  to  her  there.  *  *  *  g^^
the  guilty  in  the  world  who  did  not  fully  repent  to  their  Lord,  come  naked
to  this  world  and  naked  they  go  back  there,  and  the  Neshamah  goes  in

♦  Zohar  i,  36/1  and  3,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  28^,  col.  112.

f  Zohar  iii,  170a,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  %ia,  col.  322.

X  Zohar  i,  65a,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  50^,  col.  199.

2  Zohar  ii,  141a,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  63a  and  3,  col.  250-1.


411

shame  to  those  others  who  do  not  have  any  garments,  and  are  judged  in
that  Gai'hinnom^  which  is  on  the  earth,  from  that  fire  Above."*

The  Departure  OF  THE  Holy  Soul.  **R.  'Hiz'qee-yah  begun  and
said :  '  And  when  the  sun  was  going  down,  a  deep  sleep  fell  upon  Abram^
etc'  (Gen.  xv,  12.)  Come,  See!  That  day  is  the  day  of  the  heavy
judgments,  which  take  man  away  from  this  world.  Thus  we  have  learned  v
That  day  that  man  goes  forth  from  this  world,  is  the  day  of  the  great
judgment,  which  obscures  the  sun  from  the  moon,  as  it  is  written  :  '  Be-
fore the  sun  *  *  *  be  darkened.'  (Eccl.  xii,  2.)  ITiis  is  the  Holy
Neshamah  soul,  which  is  withheld  from  man  30  days  before  he  goes  out
from  this  world,  and  that  is  the  tzelem  shadow  form,  which  is  withheld
from  him  and  is  not  seen.  Why  is  it  (the  tzelem)  withheld  from  him  ?
Because  the  Holy  soul,  ascends  and  departs  from  man  and  is  not  seen.
Thou  shouldst  not  say,  that  when  man  dies  and  that  Neshamah  soul,  be-
comes weak,  she  goes  away  from  him.  No !  but  when  he  is  in  his  life
and  in  his  strength,  she  {Neshamah)  goes  away  from  him  (man)  and  she
does  not  illuminate  any  more  to  that  Rua^hy  and  the  Rua*h  does  not  illu-
minate any  more  to  that  Nephesh ;  then  the  tzelem  shadow  form,  goes
away  from  him,  and  does  not  illuminate  (the  man).  From  that  day  all
cry  out  upon  him,  even  jthe  birds  of  heaven  (angels),  because  the  Nesh-
amah ascends  from  him  ;  and  the  Rua^h  does  not  light  any  more  to  the
Nepheshy  so  that  i\ie  Nephesh  weakens,  and  all  the  desires  of  the  guff^  i,e.f
l>ody,  go  and  pass  away  from  him."  f

"  Come,  See  !  That  holy  tzelem^  i,  e,^  phantom  image,  in  him  (man),
in  it  man  goes,  and  in  it  man  grows  up,  and  it  is  from  i\i2X  parttuphay  i.e.f
plastic  likeness,  and  (fyooq-nah  t\  e,,  phantom  or  shadow  of  a  tzelem,  of
him  is  made  another  tzelem,  i,  e,,  phantom  image,  and  they  are  connected
as  one.  At  the  time  that  the  two  tzulmiriy  i.  e.,  merged  phantom  images,
are  found  in  him  (man)  they  watch  over  him  and  his^^  i,e,y  body,  and
the  Rua'h  spirit,  rests  in  it.  At  the  time  when  his  end  of  days  comes
near  they  depart  from  him  (man)  and  man  is  left  without  a  protector,  as
it  is  written  ;  '  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  (plural)  flee  away.'
(Song  of  Songs  ii,  i7.)"t

*  Zobar  ii,  150^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  67^,  col.  267.

f  Zobar  i,  227^1,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.,  i,  120^,  col.  477.

\  Zohar  i,  220a,  Brody  Ed.    It  belongs  to  iii,  104a.    Cremona  Ed.,  iii»  fol.  50^,  col.
199,  200.     Livomo  Ed.  i,  370^,  371a.


412

The  Garments  of  the  Incorporeal  in  Man.  "  We  have  learned :  a
thousand  and  five  hundred  odors  go  up  every  day  from  Gan  Mden^  which
perfume  the  precious  garments  of  that  world  which  are  crowned  from  the
day  of  the  man  (time  he  is  bom).  Said  R.  Yehudah  :  *  How  many  gar-
ments are  these  which  are  crowned  (from  the  day  he  was  created)  ?*  Said
R.  EFazar  :  *  The  mountains  of  the  world  (the  great  men  of  the  genera-
tion) are  in  discussion  upon  it,  but  there  are  three :  one  to  clothe  in  that
garment  the  Rua^h  spirit,  which  is  in  the  Garden  (of  Eden)  on  earth  :  one
which  is  more  precious  than  all,  in  which  the  Neshamah  is  clothed  in  that
Bundle  of  Life,  between  the  angels  of  the  King  in  the  purpeer-ah,  t\  e.,
purple,  of  the  King:'*'  and  one  outside  garment,  which  exists  and  does
not  exist,  is  seen  and  not  seen.  In  that  garment,  the  Nephesh  is  clothed
and  she  goes  and  flies  in  it,  to  and  fro  in  the  world."  f

The  Incorporeal  Compared  to  a  Lighted  Lamp.     "  The  Nephesh  is
the  awakening  from  Below  and  she  is  the  support  to  the  guff^  /.  ^.,  body,
and  she  feeds  him  and  the  guff  unites  to  her  and  she  is  united  to  the  guff^
afterwards  it  (this  NephesJi)  forms  and  is  made  a  throne  for  the  Rua^h  to
rest  upon,  afterwards  both  are  formed  and  prepared  to  receive  the  I^esha-
tnah  and  the  Rua^h  is  made  a  throne  for  the  Neshamah  to  rest  upon  him,
and  this  Neshamah  is  the  Above,  Hidden  of  AlU  the  Concealed  of  All  the
Concealed.  Come,  See  !    The  Nephesh  is  in  its  awakening  Below,  to  con-
nect herself  in  the  body,  like  the  light  of  a  lamp;  the  lower  light,  which  is
black,  cleaves  to  the  wick  and  does  not  separate  from  it,  but  cleaves  on  it
and  does  not  exist  except  through  the  wick ;  and  when  she  is  connected
with  the  wick,  she  makes  a  throne  to  the  upper  light,  which  is  white,  which
rests  on  the  black  light ;  when  both  are  formed  together,  that  white  light
is  made  a  throne  to  the  hidden  light  which  is  not  seen,  and  it  is  not
known  what  rests  on  that  white  light  and  so  that  light  is  perfect.     So  is
the  man   when  he   is  perfect   in   everything,    and    then   he   is   called

holy.^'t

*  Purpeer-ah  is  also  an  angel  who  is  clothed  in  this  color  because  it  is  the  color  of  a
spark  from  the  She'kheen-ah.

f  Zohar  i,  1 19^,  col.  475,  Cremona  Ed.  Livorno  Ed.  i,  378^..  379a,  i,  224^,  Brody  Ed.

{  Zohar  i,  83^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremoiia  Ed.  i,  fol.  59^,  col.  234.     Livorno  Ed.  i,  149a.


413

The  Souls  of  the  Pious  Descend  into  Sheol  to  bring  up  some  of
THE  Souls  Therein.  Even  those  that  do  not  go  into  Gdi-hinnom  go
down  to  Sheoiy  then  all  men :  "  Even  the  truly  just  go  down  there,  but
they  come  up  at  once,  as  it  is  written ;  '  He  goeth  down  to  Sheol  and
bringeth  up  again,'  (I  Sam.  ii,  6.  Comp.  Vulgate  I  Kings  ii,  6)  except
those  guilty  who  never  have  repented.  They  go  down  and  do  not  come
up.  Why  do  the  just  (pious)  go  down  there  ?  Because  they  shall  take
many  guilty  from  there  and  bring  them  up  Above,  and  those  are  they
who  desired  to  do  repentance,  but  who  died  before  they  could,  so  the
just  go  down  purposely  to  bring  them  out  from  there."*

Of  the  Gil*gool-em,  or  Revolution  of  Souls.  '*  All  the  souls  go  up
into  i\\t  gii-gooi-ah,  /.  ^.,  revolutions  or  turnings,  and  the  children  of  man
do  not  know  the  ways  of  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  and  how  He  judges
the  children  of  man  every  day  and  in  all  time,  and  how  the  Neshamoth
souls,  go  up  to  be  judged  before  they  come  down  into  this  world,  and
how  they  go  up  to  judgment  after  they  go  out  from  this  world  ?  How  many
Gifgool-em  and  how  many  hidden  doings,  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  docs
with  them  ?  How  many  naked  souls  and  how  many  naked  spirits,  go  in  that
world  (the  other)  which  do  not  enter  through  the  King's  pargoda^  t,  ^.,
curtain  ?  And  how  many  worlds  turn  around  with  them,  and  how  the  world
turns  around  in  so  many  hidden  wonders  ?  And  the  children  of  man  do
not  know  and  do  not  comprehend,  how  the  souls  revolve  like  a  stone
which  is  thrown  from  a  sling,  as  it  is  written :  '  And  the  souls  of  thine  ene-
mies, them  shall  He  sling  out,  as  out  of  a  sling.  (I  Sam.  xxv,  29.)  But
while  it  is  permitted  to  reveal,  now  is  the  time  to  reveal  it,  that  all  the
Neshamoth  souls,  go  out  from  that  great  Tree  and  from  that  mighty  River
which  flows  out  from  Eden,  and  all  the  Ruthin  spirits  come  out  from  that
other  small  tree.  The  Neshamah  soul,  comes  from  Above,  the  Rua^h
spirit,  from  Below,t  and  unite  in  one  like  that  of  male  and  female  *
*    *    and  nothing  is  ever  lost."  J

*  Zohar  iii,  220^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  102a,  col.  405.

j-  The  Rua*h  spirit,  goes  up  to  Paradise,  the  Nephesh  is  originated  here,  exists  and
remains  here,  and  the  Neshamah  soul,  goes  up  to  the  Supreme  Place.

{Zohar  ii,  99^,  Sab-ah  D'Mishpatim,  Brody  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  454,  ooL
177-178.


414

The  Body  of  the  Resurrection.  "Said  R.  Pin'has;  'The  H0I7,
Blessed  be  He !  is  prepared  to  beautify  the  body  of  the  just  in  the  time
to  come,  like  the  beauty  of  Adam  Rishaun^  i,  e,,  the  first  Adam,  at  the
time  he  went  into  Gan  Eden,  as  it  is  written :  '  And  YHVH  will  give
thee  rest  continually,  and  will  fill  thy  soul  with  brightness.  *  (Is,  Iviii,
X I  Vulgate.)  Said  R.  Levi :  '  The  Neshamah  when  she  is  in  her  highest
degree  Above,  she  is  fed  from  that  Light  from  Above  and  is  clothed  in
it,  and  when  she  goes  into  the  guff,  u  ^.,  body,  in  time  to  come,  in  the
very  same  light  she  will  go  in,  and  then  the^^  body,  will  shine  like  the
splendor  of  the  firmament,  as  it  is  written :  '  And  they  that  be  wise  shall
shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament.*  "     (Dan.  xii,  3.)  *

"  The  just  who  deserve  to  go  up  to  that  splendor  Above ;  his  d'yooq-
nah  is  carved  out  in  that  precious  Throne,  and  so  is  it  with  all  the  just,
that  his  d'yooq-nah,  Above,  is  like  it  has  been,  Below ;  to  assure  that
Holy  Neshamah  soul.  And  the  splendor  of  the  guff  body,  and  the
Neshamah  soul,  in  that  Upper  Place  is  like  the  d'yooq-nah,  they  have  had
on  earth,  and  that  d^yooq-nah  is  fed  from  the  enjoyment  of  the  Neshamah
and  she  is  prepared  in  the  future,  to  clothe  herself  in  that  substance  which
is  left  on  the  earth,  "f

*  Zohar,  Livorno  Ed.,  i,  197a  and  b,  Midrash  Ha-Ne'elam.  Cremona  Ed.  i,  690,  coL
273-274.     Brody  Ed.  i,  113^.

t  Zohar  i,  fol.  70a,  col.  277,  Cremona  Ed.  Midrash  Ha-Ne'elam.  Livomo  Ed.,  i,
199a.     Brody  Ed.  i,  114^.


>f


\r- — = — '


%


Figiire  36.— An  occult  representation  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth,  Four  Worlds,  Tetragramaton,  etc.


XX.


STRUCTURE  OF  THE  UNIVERSE.  STABILITY  OF  THE  OPPOSITIONS.  THE
LOWER  WORLD  LIKE  THE  UPPER.  THE  MAKROKOSM  AND  MIKROKOSM.
THE  UPPER  ADAM.  THE  MAKROKOSM  AS  THE  GREAT  TREE,  AND  AS  MAN.
CREATION  OF  ADAM  AND  'hAVAH.  THEIR  CONDITION  BEFORE  AND
AFTER  THEIR  FALL.  FOUR  WAYS  OF  SEEING  THE  DEITY.  THE  PERMA-
NENCE OF  SPOKEN  WORDS.  LOVE  AND  FEAR.  ENTIRE  DEPENDENCE
SHOULD  BE  ON  THE  DEITY  WHEN  MAN  IS  IN  TROUBLE.  PARADISE  AND
HELL.  SAMA-EL  AND  LILITH,  ETC.  THE  ANGEL  OF  DEATH,  ETC.
COMING  OF  THE  MESSIAH  AND  THE  KINGDOM  OF  THE  SUPREME  DEITY
UPON   EARTH,    ETC.

STRUCTURE  OF  the  Universe.  "  R.  Yehudah  began,  it  is  writ-
ten :  '  Elohim  said :  Let  there  be  a  firmament  in  the  midst  of
the  waters.*  (Gen.  i,  6.)  Come,  See!  At  the  time  that  the
Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  created  the  world  He  created  7  heavens  Above.  He
created  7  earths  Below,  7  seas,  7  days,  7  rivers,  7  weeks,  7  years,  7  times,
and  7000  years  that  the  world  has  been.  The  Hoi/,  Blessed  be  He  !  is  in
the  seventh  of  all  (the  milleniura).  He  created  7  heavens  Above,  and  in
each  one  created  stars,  planets,  suns,  to  serve  in  each  heaven,  and  in  all
of  these  heavens  are  chariots  differing  one  from  another  and  one  upon
another,  to  take  upon  them  the  yoke  of  Malkhutha  Kingdom,  of  their
Lord.  Some  of  them  have  six  wings  and  some  of  them  four  wings,  some
of  them  with  four  faces  and  some  with  two,  and  some  with  one  face,  some
of  them  are  a  flaming  fire,  and  some  of  them  are  water,  and  some  of  them
ru^ha  air.  This  is  what  is  written  :  '  He  maketh  his  angels,  spirits ;  his
ministers,  a  flaming  fire.*  (Ps.  civ,  4.)  And  all  the  heavens  are  one
above  the  other,  like  the  layers  of  an  onion,  and  some  Below  and  some
Above,  and  each  heaven  trembles  for  the  fear  of  their  Lord :  through


4o6

The  above  cited  pages,  also  give  a  reason  for  the  burning  of  lights  and
candles  around  the  body  of  the  dead,  in  houses  and  churches.

The  Ascent  of  the  Soul.  "  Come,  See !  The  Neshamah  soul,  goes
forth  and  ascends  between  separated  mountains  and  there  the^i^a'A  spirit,
associates  with  the  Neshamah  soul,  then  he  (the  Rud'h)  comes  down,  and
the  Nephesh  life  soul,  associates  with  the  Rua^h;  And  all  come  down
and  one  connects  with  the  other.  Said  R.  Yehudah :  The  Nephesh  and
the  Rua'h  are  merged  one  in  the  other,  and  the  Neshamah  rests  in  the  way
of  the  man,  and  she  is  in  a  hidden  dwelling  and  her  place  is  not  known.
When  man  comes  to  cleanse  himself  he  is  influenced  by  the  Nishmathak
Qad'disha  Holy  Soul,  and  this  cleanses  him  and  sanctifies  him  and  he  is
caUedholy."*

From  the  Zohar:  "When  the  Neshamah  soul,  goes  forth  from  this
world,  she  does  not  know  which  way  she  shall  go  up,  then  there  is  a  way
to  ascend  Above,  to  a  place  where  the  Upper  Neshamoth  souls,  illuminate
which  is  not  given  to  all  Neshamoth,^ *'\

From  the  Midrash  Ha-Ne*elam.  '*  Said  R.  Yehudah  at  the  time  when
the  soul  of  the  just  is  willing  to  go  out  she  rejoices,  and  the  just  is  sure  in
his  death  so  that  he  shall  receive  his  reward."  %

The  Taking  of  the  Soul  of  the  Pious,  by  the  Holy  Kiss.  '*  R.
El'azar  said ;  '  Whoever  studies  in  the  Thorah  in  earnest  does  not  die  by
the  hands  of  the  Ye^tzer  ha-rah  evil  spirit,  because  he  (the  latter)  is  the
Serpent  and  he  is  the  Angel  of  Death,  but  his  (the  former's)  death  is  by  a
Kiss,  as  it  is  written:  '  Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  mouth.'
(Song  of  Songs  i,  2.)  This  means  by  the  mouth  of  YHVH ;  and  this  is
the  Kiss  which  is  the  connection  of  the  Nephesh  soul,  to  the  trunk.  And
he  who  studies  in  the  Thorah  is  strengthened  in  the  Tree  of  Life  and  she
does  not  leave  him."  §

The  Reception,  Above,  of  the  Soul  by  the  Holy  Kiss.  "  Said  that
Sabah :     *    *    *    In  the  most  mysterious  and  elevated  part  of  Heaven,

*  Zohar  i,  62a,  Brody  Ed.    Livomo  Ed.  i,  iioa.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  49^,  col.  193.
f  Zohar  i,  99a  and  3,  Brody  Ed.    Livomo  Ed.  i,  176^.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  66^^
col.  363.
{  To  be  found,  Zohar  i,  99^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  66a,  col.  261.
2  Zohar  i,  i68a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.,  i,  fol.  96^,  col.  383.


407

there  is  a  certain  palace  which  is  called  Haikhal  Ahabahy  /.  ^.,  Palace  of
Love,  and  therein  are  hidden  profound  mysteries,  and  the  Nasheeqin
Dir^humoo,  /.  ^.,  Kisses  of  the  King's  Love,  are  there;  and  there  go  all
the  souls  of  the  friends  of  the  King.  When  the  King  ascends  into  that
Palace:  it  is  written:  'And  Jacob  kissed  Rachel.'  (Gen.  xxix,  ii.)
And  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  meets  there  the  holy  soul.  He  advances
and  at  once  kisses  her  and  embraces  her,  and  caresses  her*  and  that  is
what  it  means  when  it  is  written  :  '  He  shall  deal  with  her  after  the  man-
ner of  daughters.  *  (Ex.  xxi,  9.)  Like  the  custom  of  a  father  to  his
beloved  daughter,  he  kisses  her,  embraces  her  and  gives  her  presents.  So
the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  does  to  the  pure  soul  daily,  as  it  is  written  :
'  He  shall  deal,  etc.^f

The  Positions  of  the  Spirit  and  Soul.  "  The  Rua'h  is  that  which
stands  upon  the  Nephesh  and  the  Nephesh  has  not  any  existence  except  in
the  Rua^hy  and  this  very  Rua^h  rests  between  fire  and  water,  and  from
here  is  fed  that  Nephesh,'^  J

"Come,  See!  There  are  three  degrees  and  they  are  connected  as
one,  Nepheshy  Rua'h  and  Neshamahy  and  the  highest  of  them  is  Nesham-
ah,  R.  Yo-seh  said ;  '  In  every  man  is  a  Nephesh,  and  there  is  a  higher
Nephesh  upon  a  Nephesh :  and  if  man  is  worthy  of  that  Nephesh,  they
pour  upon  him  a  crown  which  is  called,  Rua^h :  that  is  what  is  written  ;
*  Until  the  Rua^h  spirit,  he  poured  upon  us  from  on  high.'  (Is.  xxii,  15.)
At  once  man  awakes  in  the  sublimity  to  look  in  the  Law  of  the  Holy
King ;  if  man  deserves  in  that  Rua^h  spirit,  they  crown  him  with  the
holy  upper  crown  which  comprises  all  (three)  which  is  called  Neshamah
soul ;  and  it  is  called ;  the  Neshamah  Elo-hai,  /.  e.,  Soul  of  God.§

The  following  passage  shows  that  the  Nephesh  must  associate  with  the
Rua'h.  "And  when  the  Rua^h  does  not  rest  upon  her  (the  Nephesh),
she  has  no  association  with  anything  from  Above  and  she  does  not  know
anything  whatsoever  from  that  world ;  and  she  is  like  the  Nephesh  of  an

*Comp.  Luke  xv,  7,  10;  Matt,  xv,  21 ;  Luke  vi,  23;  Rom.  xiv,  17;  Gal.  v,  22;
Heb.  xii,  2;  Jude  25.
f  Zohar  ii,  97a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  E^.,  ii,  fol.  44a,  col.  173-174.
\  Zohar  i,  2o6<2.    Livomo  E^.  i,  347<i.    Cremona,  Ed.  i,  fol.  113^,  col.  460.
2  Zohar  iii,  ^ob^  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  32a,  col.  126.


4o6

The  above  cited  pages,  also  give  a  reason  for  the  burning  of  lights  and
candles  around  the  body  of  the  dead,  in  houses  and  churches.

The  Ascent  of  the  Soul.  "  Come,  See  I  The  Neshamah  soul,  goes
forth  and  ascends  between  separated  mountains  and  there  the7?»a'^  spirit,
associates  with  the  Neshamah  soul,  then  he  (the  Rua'h)  comes  down,  and
the  Nephesh  life  soul,  associates  with  the  Rua^h;  And  all  come  down
and  one  connects  with  the  other.  Said  R.  Yehudah :  The  Nephesh  and
the  RiMCh  are  merged  one  in  the  other,  and  the  Neshamah  rests  in  the  way
of  the  man,  and  she  is  in  a  hidden  dwelling  and  her  place  is  not  known.
When  man  comes  to  cleanse  himself  he  is  influenced  by  the  Nishmathak
Qad'disha  Holy  Soul,  and  this  cleanses  him  and  sanctifies  him  and  he  is
called  holy."*

From  the  Zohar:  "When  the  Neshamah  soul,  goes  forth  from  this
world,  she  does  not  know  which  way  she  shall  go  up,  then  there  is  a  way
to  ascend  Above,  to  a  place  where  the  Upper  Neshamoth  souls,  illuminate
which  is  not  given  to  all  Neshamoih.^^\

From  the  Midrash  Ha-Ne*elam.  *'  Said  R.  Yehudah  at  the  time  when
the  soul  of  the  just  is  willing  to  go  out  she  rejoices,  and  the  just  is  sure  in
his  death  so  that  he  shall  receive  his  reward."  %

The  Taking  of  the  Soul  of  the  Pious,  by  the  Holy  Kiss.  "  R.
El'azar  said ;  '  Whoever  studies  in  the  Thorah  in  earnest  does  not  die  by
the  hands  of  the  Ye^tzer  ha-rah  evil  spirit,  because  he  (the  latter)  is  the
Serpent  and  he  is  the  Angel  of  Death,  but  his  (the  former's)  death  is  by  a
Kiss,  as  it  is  written :  '  Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  mouth.'
(Song  of  Songs  i,  2.)  This  means  by  the  mouth  of  YHVH ;  and  this  is
the  Kiss  which  is  the  connection  of  the  Nephesh  soul,  to  the  trunk.  And
he  who  studies  in  the  Thorah  is  strengthened  in  the  Tree  of  Life  and  she
does  not  leave  him."  §

The  Reception,  Above,  of  the  Soul  by  the  Holy  Kjss.  "  Said  that
Sabah :    *    *    *    in  the  most  mysterious  and  elevated  part  of  Heaven,

*  Zohar  i,  62/7,  Brody  Ed.     Livomo  Ed.  i,  iioa.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  foL  490,  col.  193.
f  2^har  i,  99a  and  b^  Brody  Ed.     Livomo  Ed.  i,  x^ta,    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  66^,
col.  363.
^To  be  found,  Zohar  i,  99^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  66a,  col.  261.
\  Zohar  i,  i68a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.,  i,  fol.  96^,  col.  383.


407

there  is  a  certain  palace  which  is  called  Haikhal  Ahabahy  i.  e,y  Palace  of
Love,  and  therein  are  hidden  profound  mysteries,  and  the  Nasheeqin
Dtr^humoOf  /.  ^.,  Kisses  of  the  King's  Love,  are  there;  and  there  go  all
the  souls  of  the  friends  of  the  King.  When  the  King  ascends  into  that
Palace:  it  is  written:  *And  Jacob  kissed  Rachel.*  (Gen.  xxix,  ii.)
And  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  meets  there  the  holy  soul.  He  advances
and  at  once  kisses  her  and  embrace  her,  and  caresses  her^  and  that  is
what  it  means  when  it  is  written :  '  He  shall  deal  with  her  after  the  man-
ner of  daughters. '  (Ex.  xxi,  9.)  Like  the  custom  of  a  father  to  his
beloved  daughter,  he  kisses  her,  embraces  her  and  gives  her  presents.  So
the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  does  to  the  pure  soul  daily,  as  it  is  written  :
'  He  shall  deal,  etc.'^f

The  Positions  of  the  Spirit  and  Soul.  "  The  Rua^h  is  that  which
stands  upon  the  Nephesh  and  the  Nephesh  has  not  any  existence  except  in
the  Rua^h^  and  this  very  Rua^h  rests  between  fire  and  water,  and  from
here  is  fed  that  Nephesh^  \

"  Come,  See  !  There  are  three  degrees  and  they  are  connected  as
one,  Nephesh^  Rua'h  and  Neshamah,  and  the  highest  of  them  is  Nesham-
ah,  R.  Yo-seh  said ;  '  In  every  man  is  a  Nephesh^  and  there  is  a  higher
Nephesh  upon  a  Nephesh :  and  if  man  is  worthy  of  that  Nephesh^  they
pour  upon  him  a  crown  which  is  called,  Rua^h :  that  is  what  is  written  ;
'  Until  the  Rua'h  spirit,  he  poured  upon  us  from  on  high.*  (Is.  xxii,  15.)
At  once  man  awakes  in  the  sublimity  to  look  in  the  Law  of  the  Holy
King ;  if  man  deserves  in  that  Rua^h  spirit,  they  crown  him  with  the
holy  upper  crown  which  comprises  all  (three)  which  is  called  Neshamah
soul ;  and  it  is  called ;  the  Neshamah  EUhhai^  i,  e.,  Soul  of  God.§

The  following  passage  shows  that  the  Nephesh  must  associate  with  the
Rua^h,  "And  when  the  Rua*h  does  not  rest  upon  her  (the  NephesK)^
she  has  no  association  with  anything  from  Above  and  she  does  not  know
anything  whatsoever  from  that  world ;  and  she  is  like  the  Nephesh  of  an

*Comp.  Luke  xv,  7,  10 ;  Matt,  xv,  21 ;  Luke  vi,  23;  Rom.  xiv,  17 ;  Gal.  ▼,  22;
Heb.  xii,  2;  Jude  25.
f  Zohar  ii,  97a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  EDd.,  ii,  fol.  44/1,  col.  173-174.
\  Zohar  i,  2o6<i.     Livomo  Ed.  i,  347a.    Cremona,  Ed.  i,  fol.  113^,  col.  460.
2  Zohar  iii,  70^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  32^,  coL  126.


420

l^arld)^  which  is  connected  with  that  Above ;  this  is  that  (the  World)
which  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  makes  Himself  known  from,  as  it  is  writ-
ten ;  *  Open  to  me  the  gates  of  righteousness.'   (Ps.  cxviii,  19.)    '  This  is
the  gate  of  YHVH.'  {Ibid.  20.)  And  this  is  the  second  World.   The  third
World  (the  Ye*  tzeer-atic  World)  that  is  the  lower  World  from  the  other,
there  is  found  in  it  separation,  and  this  is  the  World  in  which  the  angels
from  Above,  rest  in,  and  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  is  found  in  and  not
found  (in  that  World).    He  is  found,  but  when  they  desire  to  comprehend
and  to  know  Him,  He  ascends  from  them  and  is  not  seen  till  all  enquire
and  ask ;  '  Where  is  the  Ma-gonty  /.  ^.,  Place,  of  His  Glory  ? '     (And  the
others  answer) :  '  Blessed  be  the  Glory  of  YHVH  from  His  Md-qom^  /l^..
Place.'  (Ezek.  iii,  12.)  And  this  is  the  World  which  is  not  always  in  con-
tinuance. (Zohar,  Cremona  £d.  iii,  76a/  Brody  Ed.  iii,  159a.)  Like  this
it  is  said :  '  In  the  Tzelem  shadow  image,  of  Elohim,  He  made  Adam
(man).*  (Gen.  i,  27.)  Adam  (man)  has  also  three  worlds :  The  First  World,
is  that  World  which  is  called  :  imnun  Ko^jr  almoh  d^prudah^  /.^.,  the  world
of  separation,  and  man  is  found  in  it  and  is  not  found,  and  when  they  de-
sire to  look  on  him  he  vanishes  from  them  and  is  not  seen.     The  Second
World  is  the  World  which  is  connected  in  that  World  Above,  and  this  is
the  Garden  of  Eden  on  the  earth,  which  is  connected  in  another  Upper
World ;  and  from  here  is  known  and  comprehended  that  other  World.
The  Third  World  is  an  Upper  Hidden  World  concealed  and  not  revealed
and  no  one  can  know  that  World ;  as  it  is  written ;  '  No  eye  hath  seen
O  !  Elohim,  beside  Thee,  what  He  hath  prepared  for  him  that  waiteth
for  Him.'     (Is.  Ixiv,  4.)''*

The  Makrokosm.  And  this  is  what  is  written  ;  ^  And  YHVH  said ;  I
will  wipe  out  the  Man  whom  I  have  created,  from  the  face  of  the  earth.'
(G^n.  vi,  7.)  There  ought  to  be  a  distinction  between  the  Adam  JD'Tlla-ah
the  Man  Above,  and  Adam  U Lthath-ah  the  Man  Below ;  and  if  it  were
not  for  the  Man,  the  world  could  not  exist,  because  one  could  not  exist
without  the  other.  If  it  were  not  for  the  form  (Cremona  Ed.  has  not,
'  form  ')  of  the  Man  (Adam)  the  world  could  not  exist.  This  is  whatas
written  :  *  YHVH  by  Wisdom  hath  founded  the  earth.'  (Prov.  iii,  18.)
And  it  is  written :  'And  Noah  (numerically  =  58)  found  Grace  (numer-

*  Zohar  iii,  76a  and  b,  col.  302,  303,  Cremona  Ed.    Brody  Ed.  iii,  159a  and  b.


421

ically  =  58)  in  the  eyes  of  YHVH.'  And  we  have  learned  ;  that  all
the  brains  depend  on  that  Brain  (Wisdom)  and  the  Wisdom  comprises
All.  And  this  Hidden  Wisdom  in  her  has  strength  of  itself,  and  has
established  the  form  of  the  Man  to  put  All  on  its  arrangement.  Each  one
in  its  place :  this  is  what  is  written :  '  Wisdom  strengtheneth  the  wise  more
than  ten  rulers.  (Eccl.  vii,  29.)*  Which  are  the  perfect  form  of  the  Man.
And  in  that  fonn  of  Man  rests  the  perfection  of  the  faith  in  all  things ;
all  rests  upon  the  Throne,  as  it  is  written  :  '  And  its  d^mooth  similitude,
was  like  the  appearance  of  the  Man  upon  him  from  above.'  (Ezek.  i,
26.)  And  it  is  written :  'And  I  saw  that  he  came  with  the  clouds  of
heaven  like  a  son  of  man  and  he  reached  unto  the  At-tee'k  Iro-men,  /.  e.,
Ancient  of  Days,  and  (he)  drew  near  before  Him.*  (Dan.  vii,  13.)  Until
here  the  words  are  hidden.**  f

'*  Because  the  D^yooq-nah^  u  e.y  Phantom  of  the  Tzeiem^  i,  e.,  shadow
Image,  of  the  Man  (said  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo*hai),  is  the  Above  and  Below,
which  are  contained  in  him,  and  because  that  D^yooq-nah  contains  the
Above  and  Below,  He  (the  Holy  One)  established  the  At-tee^kah  Qa4-
dusha  Holy  Ancient,  as  His  form,  and  the  form  of  Ze'ir  An-peen  in  that
D^yooq-nah  and  form.'* J

Of  the  B'ree-atic  Adam.  *'  It  is  written  :  '  What  is  His  name,  and
what  is  the  name  of  His  Son  ?*  When  thou  desirest  to  know  :  *  YHVH
TzE*BA-OTH  is  His  Name.  §  'The  name  of  His  Son?'  Israel  is  his
name,  as  it  is  written  :  *  My  first-born  Son,  Israel.*  (Ex.  iv,  22.)  And
that  Israel,  all  the  keys  of  Truth  (Faith)  hang  on  him,  and  he  praises
himself  and  says:  *YHVH  said  to  me  thou  art  My  Son.*  (Ps.  ii,  7.)
And  surely  so  it  is.  For  Abba  and  Immah  crown  him  and  bless  him  with
many  blessings,  and  said,  and  commended  to  all:  'Kiss  the  son.'  (Ps.
ii,  12.)  Kiss  the  hand  to  that  Son.  It  is  like  as  if  the  Holy,  Blessed
be  He  !  would  give  him  power  over  all,  that  all  shall  serve  him.  '  Lest
he  be  angry.'  {Ibid,  Comp.  Ex.  xxiii,  21.)  Because  they  crowned  him
with  Judgment  and  Mercy.     Who  deserves  Judgment  to  him  is  Judg-

♦  The  Ten  Scphiroth.

fZohar  iii,  144/1,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  68^,  col.  272.

X  Zohar  iii,  fol.  141a,  Idrah  Rabbah,  Biody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  67^,  col.  367.

2  Jer.  X,  16,


422

ment;  and  who  deserves  Mercy,  he  shows  him  Mercy.  All  the  blessings
from  Above  and  Below  go  up  to  that  Son  and  (they)  crown  themselves,
and  who  prevents  the  blessings  from  that  Son,  spreads  out  sin  before  the
Holy  King  (or  Holy  Mother).  *

The  Makrokosm  as  the  Great  Tree.  "The  Male  is  extended  to
the  Right  and  Left,  by  the  inheritance  which  he  received.  But  whenso-
ever they  are  joined,  it  is  called  TipJCe-reth  Beauty,  and  the  whole  body
is  formed  and  made  the  Great  Tree,  strong,  fair,  and  beautiful.  '  The
beasts  of  the  field  (men)  had  shadow  under  it,  and  the  fowls  of  the
heaven  (angels)  dwelt  in  its  wings,  and  all  were  fed  by  it. '  \  His  arms  are
Right  and  Left.  In  the  Right  is  Life  and  ^Hesed  (Grace),  in  the  Left,
Death  and  Ge^boor-ah  (Judgment),  etc."  J

**  Also  now  was  perfected  in  the  earth  the  Eloo-nah  Qad-disha^  /.  ^.,
the  Holy  Tree,  like  that,  Above ;  in  twelve  limitations  (stems)  and  seventy
branches  (nations)  which  were  not  before;  and  therefore  the  latter  is
complete  and  the  first  is  not  complete ;  whence  the  accent  falleth  between
them,  etc.*'§

According  to  the  Qabbalah  the  soul  sparks  contained  in  Adam,  went
into  three  principal  classes  corresponding  to  his  three  sons,  viz  .•  ^Jfesed,
Habel,  Ge^boor^h  Qai-yin  and  Ra^h-mim  Seth.  These  three  were  divided
into  1 2  and  the  twelve  into  70  species,  called ;  the  principal  roots  of  the
human  race.

Man  as  the  Makrokosm  and  the  Mikrokosm.      "With   skin   and

•

flesh  thou  hast  clothed  me,  etc'  (Job  x,  11.)  If  this  is  so,  what  is  the
man  ?  Is  he  only  skin,  flesh,  bones,  nerves  ?  It  is  not  so  1  The  real
man  is  not  that,  but  Neshamah  soul,  and  that  which  is  said ;  skin,  flesh,
bones  and  nerves,  together ;  are  only  the  garments  of  the  man  but  not  the
man.  When  the  man  departs  (from  this  life),  he  takes  off  the  garment
which  has  clothed  him.  Yet  all  these  bones  and  sinews  together  are  in  the
mystery  of  the  Wisdom,  Above.    Like  the  Above.   The  '  skin  '  represents

♦  Zohar  iii,  191^,  Brody  Ed.

f  Dan.  iv,  12.  Comp.  ibid,^  10  sq,^  which  seems  also  to  be  a  description  of  the  Sephi-
rothic  Tree  of  Life.

X  Zohar  iii,  fol.  296a,  Idrah  Zootah.  Brody  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  I44£i,  col.  574.
\  Zohar  iii,  fol.  isSa,  Mantua  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  65^,  col.  260.


423

the  firmament,  like  we  have  learned  :  '  Who  stretchest  out  the  heavens  like
a  curtain.'  (Ps.  civ,  2.)  *  Ram  skins  dyed  red,  and  a  covering  above  of
badgers  skins.'  (Ex.  xxvi,  14.)  These  are  the  garments,  from  Above,
which  cover  the  garments.  When  *  the  heavens  are  stretched  out,*  these
are  the  outer  garments.  The  '  curtain  *  is  the  inner  garment  and  this
is  the  clothing  which  covers  up  the  flesh.  The  '  bones  and  nerves,*  they
are  the  Celestial  Chariot,  and  all  its  forces  which  exist  in  the  interior,
^Heilin  D*  Qdimin  VgoUy  u  ^.,  the  heavenly  servants.  And  all  these  gar-
ments inside,  is  the  mystery  of  the  Adam  Illa-ah  Upper  Adam,  which  is
its  inner.  So  here  is  a  mystery.  Below.  The  *  man,*  he  is  the  inner  to
the  inner.  His  'garment,*  like  the  Above.  His  *  bones  and  nerves,*  as
we  have  said,  the  Celestial  Chariot  and  its  hosts ;  the  *  flesh  *  is  that
which  covers  the  hosts  and  the  Chariots,  and  that  remains  outside.  All
the  mystery  Below,  is  like  the  Above,  therefore ;  *  Elohim  created  the
Man  (Adam)  in  His  Tzeiem,  t.  ^.,  shadow  Image.*  '  In  the  Tzeletity  i.  e.,
shadow  Image,  of  Elohim.*  (Gen.  i,  27.)  Two  Elohims  are  here,  one  fpr
the  male,  and  one,  for  the  female  ;  and  the  mystery  of  the  man.  Below,
is  like  the  mystery  (of  the  Man),  Above.  In  that  firmament  Above,  that
covers  everything,  we  see  different  figures  formed  by  the  stars  and  planets
which  contain  secret  things  and  deep  secrets,  and  these  are  the  signs  of
the  stars  and  planets,  which  are  in  the  firmament,  which  is  covered  on  the
outside;  so  here,  the  *skin*  which  is  the  cover  outside  of  the  man,
which  is  the  firmament  which  covers  everything  up ;  has  in  it  signs  and
lines,  and  they  are  like  the  stars  and  planets  of  the  (heavenly)  skin.
All  these  signs  have  a  concealed  meaning,  and  are  the  object  of  atten-
tion for  the  wise  who  know  how  to  read  in  the  face  of  man.**  *  (See  Is.
xlvii,  13.)

"  Come,  See!  When  the  Holy,  Blessed  he  He  created  Adam  (man).
He  took  dust  from  the  Holy  Place  and  built  his  body  from  the  four  sides
(elements)  of  the  world,  that  all  (the  sides)  should  give  him  power.  After
that  He  poured  on  him  a  Spirit  of  life,  as  it  is  written :  '  He  blew  into
his  nostrils  (face,  Vulgate,)  a  Nishmath  ^Hdy-yeem  Soul  of  Life.  After-
wards he  existed  and  he  knew  that  he  was  from  Above  and  Below,  then

*  Zohar  ii,  75^,  76^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  32a,  col.  126.     Comp.  ii,  33a,
col.  129.


424

he  knew  the  Upper  Wisdom.     Like  this,  all  the  men  in  the  world  are
comprised  from  Above  and  Below."*

Creation  of  the  Man.  "  And  YHVH  Elohim  formed  Adam,  i.  ^.,
Man,  therefore  is  written ;  '  YHVH  Elohim,  created  Adam,*  with  the  full
Name,  like  we  have  stated,  that  he  is  perfect  and  comprises  all.  We
have  learned ;  On  the  sixth  day  Man  was  created  at  the  time  when  the
Kisehy  Le,y  Throne,  was  perfected,  and  is  called  Kiseh  Throne;  it  is  writ-
ten :  '  The  Throne  had  six  steps,*  (I  Kings  x,  19),  and  therefore  Man  was
created  on  the  sixth  (day)  because  he  is  worthy  to  sit  on  this  Throne.
And  we  have  learned :  When  Man  was  created  everything  was  established,
everything  which  is  Above  and  Below,  and  all  is  comprised  in  Man."  f

"  After  He  made  generations,  at  once  He  called  him  Adam  (man),  it
is  written ;  *  These  are  the  generations  of  Adam  (man). '  After  He
revealed  the  words  to  that  upper  hidden.  Above;  He  created  man.
Below ;  it  is  written  ;  '  In  the  day  that  Elohim  created  Adam,  J^ifmaoth,
I.  e,f  in  the  similitude ^  of  Elohim,  He  made  him.'  "     (Gen.  v,  i.)  t

Creation  of  Adam  and  'Havah.     "  Said  R.  Shim-on ;  It  is  written  ;
*  And  every  plant  of  the  field  before  it  was  in  the  earth,  and  every  herb
of  the  field  before  it  sprouted  :  YHVH  Elohim  had  not  allowed  it  to
rain  upon  the  earth,  etc'     (Gen.  ii,  5.)     *  And  every  plant  of  the  field,'
these  are  the  large  trees  which  had  been  small  and  were  planted  after-
wards.     Come,  See!     Adam  and  Eve  have  been  created  one  side  in
the  other  side  (means  side  by  side).     Why  were  they  not  created  face  to
face  ?  Because  it  is  written :  That  YHVH  '  had  not  allowed  it  to  rain  upK>n
the  earth,*  and  the  pair  have  not  been  found  in  its  arrangement  as  ought
to  be,  but  when  they  had  been  formed  Below  and  became  face  to  face,
then  they  were  so  found  Above.    From  whence  do  we  know  this  ?    From
the  Mishkan,  i.  e. ,  Tabernacle ;  It  is  written  :  *  And  Moses  erected  the
Mishkan  Tabernacle ; '  (Ex.  xl,  18  ;)  because  another  Tabernacle  has  been
erected  with  it,  and  before  the  Below  had  been  erected  the  Above  could
not  exist,  so  is  here  (as  to  the  man,  Adam)  before  the  Below  (the  Lower

*  Zobar  i,  130^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  ^%a  and  b^  col.  310-11.     Livorno
Ed.  i,  121^.
f  Zohar  iii,  48a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  2\b  and  22^7,  col.  84-5.
X  Zohar  ii,  70^,  Brody  Ed.     Comp.  ii,  55^,  Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  31^,  col.  123.


425

Adam)  had  been  erected,  the  Above  (the  Upper  Adam)  could  not  exist,
and  therefore  till  now  has  not  been  formed  the  Above.  They  had  not  been
created  face  to  face,  and  this  verse  shows  this,  for  it  is  written :  '  That
YHVH  Elohkn  had  not  allowed  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth.*  And  there-
fore what  is  said  :  '  There  was  not  a  man,'  means  that  he  (man)  has  not
been  arranged  in  his  form ;  but  when  ^ Havah  (Eve)  had  been  perfected
then  Adam  was  perfected,  but  before  he  was  not  perfect.  (See  Ante  p.  387)

*  *  *  (And  no  work  has  been  done  upon  the  earth,  because  YHVH
did  not  let  it  rain  upon  the  earth.)     But  what  is  written  afterwards:

*  But  there  went  up  a  mist  from  the  earth.'  That  means  the  desire  of  the
female  towards  the  male.  (The  impulse  from  Below  to  the  Above.)  An-
other explanation  of  why  He  did  not  cause  it  to  rain  ?  Because  the  per-
fect form  was  not  found  to  go  up  from  the  earth  (after  the  man  had  been
perfected  on  the  earth  Below)  so  from  this  earth  Below  awakened  the  work
Above.  *  *  *  Come,  See !  we  have  learned ;  went  up  from  the  earth
first  and  a  cloud  awakened  and  all  connected  itself  the  one  in  other."*

"  R.  Yitz-haq  says ;  Adam  was  created  with  two  faces.  *  He  took  (out)
one  of  his  ribs,*  (Gen.  ii,  21)  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  parted  him  (it)
and  made  two  from  the  East  and  the  West.  (Cremona  Ed.  says :  From
the  East  to  the  West.)  *  Thou  hast  formed  me  before  and  behind.*  (Ps.
cxxxix,  5.)  Behind,  that  is  the  West;  and  before,  that  is  the  East.  R^
*He-yah  said:  What  has  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  done?  He  formed
that  female  and  poured  beauty  all  over  her,  and  brought  her  into  Adam

*  *    *    and  it  is  written  :  '  He  took  one  from  his  ribs,'  that  is  (from)

his  side."  t

Condition  of  Adam  and  Eve  before  and  after  Sinning.  '*  Come,
See  !  Before  Adam  sinned  he  went  up  into  and  remained  in  the  illumi-
nated wisdom.  Above,  and  was  not  separated  from  the  Tree  of  Life.
But  when  he  acceded  to  the  desire  to  know  and  to  descend  Below,  then
he  followed  after  them  (Below)  until  he  separated  himself  from  the  Tree
of  Life,  and  knew  only  the  bad  and  left  the  good  alone,  and  on  this  is
written ;  '  Thou  art  not  an  Ail  (El)  that  hath  pleasure  in  wickedness
neither  shall  evil  dwell  with  Thee.'    (Ps.  v,  4  (5).    Comp.  Vulgate  5,  6.)

*  Zohar  i,  34^,  35a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  26^,  col.  102.
f  Zohar  ii,  55a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  25a,  col.  97.


426

Who  follows  the  bad  has  no  dwelling  with  the  Tree  of  Life.  And  before
they  had  sinned  they  heard  a  Voice  from  Above,  and  knew  the  wisdom
from  Above,  (and  preserved  their  Upper  Splendor.  This  is  not  in  the  Cre-
mona), and  did  not  tremble,  but  after  they  sinned  they  ccmld  not  stand
even  before  the  voice  from  Below."*

"And  Come,  See!     When  Adam  Rishoun,  i.  e.y  the  First  Adam,  was
in  Gan  Eden,  i,e.,  Garden  of  Eden,  he  was  clothed  in  a  garment  like  that
Above,  and  it  is  the  garment  of  the  Upper  Splendor.     But  when  he  was
driven  out  of  the  Garden  of  Eden,  and  he  needed  the  garment  necessary
to  such  as  are  in  this  world :  What  is  written  ?     '  And  YHVH  Elohim
made  for  Adam  and  his  wife  mjro  koth-nouih^  u  e,,  inner  garments,  of
y\y  a&r,  /.  ^.,  skin,  and  clothed  them.'  (Gen.  iii,  21.)     At  the  first  had
been  garments  of  "iiK  Ohr,  i.  e,,  Light.     Light,  that  is  the  Upper  Light
which  served  them  in  Gan  Eden  Garden  of  Eden,  because  in  this  Garden
of  Eden,  the  Upper  Supreme  Light  which  illuminates  there  is  served  by
it.     Therefore  when  the  Adam  Qad'mo-ah  went  into  the  Garden,   the
Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  clothed  him  in  that  garment  of  Light  and  brought
him  in  there,  and  if  he  had  not  been  at  first  clothed  in  that  Light  he  could
not  have  got  in  there.    But  when  he  was  driven  away  from  there  he  needed
another  garment,  therefore :  *  YHVH  Elohim  made  to  Adam  and  his  wife
an  inner  garment  ofskin.^    So  it  has  been  manifested  that  the  good  deeds
which  the  son  of  man  does  in  this  world,  these  deeds  attract  from  that  Light
of  Splendor,  Above,  for  a  garment  to  prepare  himself  to  enter  into  that
world  to  appear  before  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !     And  in  that  dress  in
which  he  is  clothed  he  enjoys  and  sees  the  aspaqUar-yah  dinhar-ah,  /.  ^.,
light  of  the  luminous  mirror,t  as  it  is  written :   *  To  behold  the  beauty,
of  YHVH  and  to  enquire  in  His  palace.'     (Ps.   xxvii,  4.)     Thus  the
Nishmathah,  i.  e.,  souls  is  clothed  in  both  worlds,  so  she  shall  be  perfect
in  all  things,  in  this  world  Below,  and  the  world,  Above."  J

♦Zobar  i,  ^la  and  d,  Brody  Ed.  Compare  Zobar  ii,  191^.  Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  36^,
col.  144.

f  The  idea  of  the  Luminous  and  Non-Luminous  Mirror  is  Philo,  Vol.  i,  pp.  134,  337.
See  An/e  399  sq.,  also  in  the  Talmud.  §  Yebamoth^  49^/  Yerushalmi  J  B'rakhoth,  44;
Babli  I  Sotah,  22a,

J  Zoharii,  229^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  103^,  col.  411-12.


427

The  Four  Ways  of  Seeing  the  Deity.  *'The  Will  (Harmony,
Houram-nuiha  D^tnalkaK)  of  the  King  is  seen  in  three  colors ;  the  first
color  is  seen  Above  from  afar  off,  and  no  eye  can  perceive  it  in  its  pure-
ness,  because  it  is  from  afar  off;  only  when  he  (the  man)  makes  his  eyes
see  little  through  closing  the  lids  by  their  blinking.*  And  on  that  is
written;  'From  far  off  YHVH  has  appeared  to  me.'  (Jer.  xxxi,  3;  see
the  Vulgate.)  The  second  color  is  seen  with  one  eye  shut,  and  this  color
could  not  be  seen  by  the  other  eye  except  when  that  eye  is  shut  to  see  little
and  blinking,  and  he  could  not  stand  otherwise  its  (the  light's)  clearness,  so
he  shut  the  eye  and  opened  it  a  little,  blinking,  so  he  could  see  this  color,
and  this  color  could  only  be  perceived  through  that  blinking  of  the  eye ;
and  of  that  is  written ;  '  What  seest  thou.'  (Jer.  i,  12.)  The  third  color ;
that  is  that  zohar  aspaq^ lar-yah  bright  luminous  mirror,  which  could  not
be  looked  into  at  all,  except  with  the  rolling  of  the  eyes  (eye-balls),  when
they  (the  lids)  are  altogether  closed,  and  they  roll  in  their  sockets,  and
there  could  be  seen  in  that  rolling  the  aspaq^  lar-yah  dirChar-ah  the  light
of  the  luminous  mirror,  and  that  color  could  not  be  comprehended  ex-
cept by  him,  who  sees  the  shining  of  that  light  with  the  eyes  shut,t  and
therefore  is  written :  'The  hand  of  YHVH  was  upon  me.'  (Ezek.  xxxvii,
I :)  also  '  The  hand  of  YHVH  was  upon  me  strong.'  (Ezek.  xxxiii,  22.)
*  *  *  And  all  these  things  could  not  be  seen  by  the  true  prophets
except  by  Moses,  because  Moses  could  see  that  which  could  not  be  seen
by  others."  J

These  four  correspond,  to  contemplation,  vision,  ecstacy,  and  illumina-
tion, which  four  we  find  with  all  the  Mystics.  The  ancients  also  believed
in  four  kinds  of  '  l*uror '  as  they  called  it.  The  Qabbalists  considered
the  prophet  Moses,  who  talked  to  God  "mouth  to  mouth,"  (Num.  xii,
6-8)  as  above  all  other  prophets.

The  Three  Angels  who  Appeared  to  Abraham.  "  It  is  written :  *And
three  men,  etc'  (Gen.  xviii,  2.)  These  are  the  three  angels  (messengers)
which  have  been  clothed  in  aether  and  came  down  to  this  world,  and  they

*  As  if  looking  at  the  son  on  a  clear  day.

f  That  is  in  the  Ma^hskabah,  i,  e,^  Thought,  because  when  the  eyes  are  shut  the  con-
templation becomes  more  intense.
X  Zohar  i,  97a,  Sithrai  Thorah.  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  66tf,  col.  262.


428

have  been  seen  in  appearance  as  (if)  a  child  of  man.     (Comp.  Zohar  i,
S4a.)    And  they  have  been  three  like  the  Above,  because  the  rainbow  is
only  seen  in  three  colors :  white,  red  and  green.     And  surely  it  is  so !
And  these  are  the  three  men ;  three  colors,  that  is,  a  white  color,  red  color,
and  green  color.    The  white  color,  that  is,  Mikha-el,  because  he  is  the  Right
side :  red  color,  that  is,  Gabri-el,  because  he  is  the  Left  side,  and  green  color
is,  Rapha-el ;  and  these  three  colors  are  those  of  the  rainbow,  because  it  is
never  seen  except  with  them:    therefore  it  is  written:  'And  YHVH
appeared  unto,  etc.*  (Gen.  xviii,  i.)     That  is  the  She*kheen-ah  revealed
itself  in  these  three  colors.     *     *      '  And  they  that  be  wise  (intelligent,
the  teachers,)  shall  shine  like  "I'TIT  Zohar ,  i,  ^.,  the  splendor,  of  the  firma-
ment.' (Dan.  xii,  3.)  They  shall  shine  a  shining  which  shines  by  lighting
a  splendor,  etc.,  etc.     That  brilliant  Light  which  is  hidden,  the  Spark  of
all  the  Sparks,  and  of  All  Lights,  is  in  it  invisible  and  hidden,  hidden
and  revealed ;  seen  and  not  seen.    This  shining  Light  came  out  from  the
Supreme  Lighted  Well,  came  out  in  the  day  and  was  hidden  at  night,
*     *     *    and  this  is  the  only  thing  seen,  and  all  colors  are  concealed  in
it  and  it  is  called  by  the  Name  YHVH.     From  the  three  colors  Above,
have  been  seen  three  colors  Below."*

The  Continuance  and  Ascent  Above,  of  all  Words  Spoken  by  Man.
"  Come,  See  !  At  the  time  when  the  good  deeds  are  done  Below,  /.  ^.,
in  this  world,  and  man  contemplates,  in  the  service  of  the  Holy  King,
that  word  which  he  makes  here.  Below ;  there  is  made  from  it  a  breath
Above ;  and  there  is  not  a  breath,  which  has  not  a  voice  which  does  not
ascend  and  crown  itself,  Above,t  and  there  is  made  from  it  an  intercessor
before  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  And  all  the  deeds  which  a  man  does
which  are  not  to  the  service  of  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  1  that  word  which
he  makes ;  a  breath  is  created  from  it  and  goes  away  and  flies  around
the  world,  and  when  the  Neshamah  soul,  goes  forth  from  that  (the  latter)
man,  that  breath  revolves  in  the  world  like  a  stone  which  is  thrown  out
from  a  sling;  As  it  is  written,  etc.''  See  I  Sam.  xxv,  29. J

*  Zobar  i,  98^,  99<z,  looa,  Sitbrai  Tborab,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  i,  fol.  89^,  col.  355.

f  Comp.  ante^  p.  124  and  note.

X  Zohar  ii,  59a,  Brody  Ed.   Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  265,  col.  104.    Livomo  E^.  ii,  100^.


429

Worship  from  Love  or  Fear.  "He  (R.  Shim-on)  began  and  said:
It  is  written  :  '  YH VH  thy  Ail  thou  shalt  fear,  Him  thou  shalt  serve :  *
(Deut.  X,  20.)  and  again  it  is  written;  'Thou  shalt  fear  for  thy  Ail.'
(Lev.  xix,  14.)  Thus  ought  these  verses  to  be  said:  Thou  shalt  fear  thy
Ail ;  because  it  is  written ;  *  YHVH  thy  Ail  thou  shalt  fear.'  But  what
means ;  '  Fear  for  thy  Ail.'  ?  The  mystery  is  from  the  word  nC Eloha-hu^
i,  e.yfor  thy  Ail.  *  *  *  Fear  conducts  to  Love,  who  serves  through
Love  connects  himself  in  the  Upper  place,  Above,  and  in  the  holiness  of
the  world  to  come,  but  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  to  serve  Him  from
the  side  of  Fear  is  not  to  serve  Him.  Such  a  service  from  Fear  is  very
precious,  but  he  (such  a  man)  cannot  ascend  to  connect  himself  to  the
Above ;  but  when  he  serves  from  Love,  he  goes  up  and  crowns  himself,
Above,  and  connects  himself  in  the  world  to  come.  In  Love  is  the  mys-
tery of  the  Right  {^Hesed  Grace  or  Benevolence)  and  the  mystery  of  the
Unity,  which  is  needful  to  them  in  the  world  to  come,  so  as  to  unite  the
Name  of  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  and  unite  all  different  degrees  from
Above  and  Below ;  and  to  bring  them  all  in  the  place  of  Unity,  and  this
is  the  mystery  which  is  written :  '  Hear,  Israel  YHVH  Elohainu  YHVH
is  One.'"*

Dependence  on  the  Deity  when  in  Trouble.  "  It  is  written :  '  If
thou  faint  (lose  hope)  in  the  day  of  adversity  thy  stretch  becomes  small.'
(Prov.  xxiv,  10.)  roHD  ko^ha-khuy  i,  e,,  thy  strength;  that  means  if  he
lets  up  (weakens)  his  hand  from  the  Thorahy  (The  Cremona  Ed.  says,
'  The  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !)  '  In  the  day  of  adversity,'  this  means,  when  he
'  weakens,'  so  his  *  strength  becomes  small.'  What  is  'Thy  strength  be-
comes small?'  It  means;  n"D  HD  Ko-a^hy^  then  the  evil  is  thrust  outside
so  that  it  cannot  come  near  man  and  cannot  accuse  him.  But  when
man  deviates  from  the  Thorah  and  weakens  from  it,  then  the  strength
HD  HD  "^y  tzar  ko-d'h  kaihoo^  1.^.,  is  the  strength  of  the  left  hand,  because
that  evil  which  is  the  Left  side  rules  over  man,  and  thrusts  that  other
ko-a^hy  (that  is)  the  throne  of  Glory,  away. "J

*  Zohar  ii,  216a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  EUl.  ii,  97^,  col.  387.

t  The  initials  of  "nODn  KOD  Kueh  ha^Kabod,  i .  e..  Throne  of  Glory.  The  Throne
of  Glory  is  always  to  His  Right.

X  Zohar  i,  152^,  Brody  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  89a,  col.  354.  Compare,  Ibid,^  ggS,
col.  395.


430

The  Deity  brings  Salvation  to  the  Wicked.     "  *  He  goes  wildly
after  the  way  of  his  heart.*     (Is.  Ivii,  17.)     Because  the  Ye^tzer  ha-rah  is
strong  in  him  and  therefore  he  goes  wild  and  does  not   desire  to  repent.
The  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  sees  the  way  that  he  goes  in,  the  evil  way,
He  says;  'I  must  strengthen  him  under  his  arms.'     That   is  what  is
written  ;  '  I  have  seen  his  ways,*  (^Ibid.  18)  that  they  go  in  the  darkness,
I  need  to  give  him  a  physician.     Therefore  it  is  written  :  '  I   will  heal
him.'     (/^/V/.)    That  is  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He!  puts  in  his  (man's)
heart  the  way  of  Repentance  and  with  it  He  heals,  the  Neshatnah  soul,  as
it  is  written;  'Go  and  lead  the  people.'     (Ex.  xxxii,  34.)     The  Holy,
Blessed  be  He  !  conducts  him  in  a  straight  way  like  when  one  takes  hold
of  another  man's  hand  and  conducts  him  out  of  the  darkness.     *     *     *
And  it  is  further  written  :  '  I  will  lead  him,  and  I  will  restore   comforts
unto  him  and  to  his  mourners.'     (Is.  Ivii,  18.)     That  means  that  the
Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  does  good  to  the  people.     From  13  years  of  age
he  places  him  under  the  charge  of  two  angels  to  watch  him,  one  to  the
Right  and  the  other  to  the  Left,  when  man  goes   in    the    right  way
(straight  path)  they  joy  in  him  and  are  happy  and  cry  out  and  say  :  *  Give
honor  to  the  D'yooq-nah  of  the  King,'  but  if  man  goes  in  the  wrong  way
(crooked  path)  they  mourn  over  him   when   they  go  away  from   him.
(Cremona  Ed.  says :  Then  they  go  away  from  him.)     But  after,  when
the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  strengthens  him  and  leads  him  back  to  the
right  way  (straight  path),  then  he  does  Repentance ;  and  these  angels  who
have  mourned  over  him,  and  left  him,  now  come  back  to  him  and  they
joy  in  him  and  then  he  is  surely  alive ;  he  is  alive  on  all  sides  and  united
in  the  Tree  of  Life,  and  when  he  is  united  in  the  Tree  of  Life,  he  is
called;  Ba-al  Th'shubah,  /.  <?.,  a  Repentant  Man."*

Sama-el  and  the  First  Sin.  From  the  Zohar  i,  35^,  Brody  Ed. ;
Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  28dr,  col.  no,  Sepher  ha-Bahir.  "It  is  written:
'  And  the  Serpent  was  more  subtile  than  any  beast  of  the  field.'  (Gen.
iii,  I.)  *And  the  Serpent.'  R.  Yitz-haq  said:  'That  is  the  Ye^tzer  ha-
rah.*  R.  Yehudah  said  :  '  It  is  a  real  serpent.'  When  they  came  before
R.  Shim-on  (b.  Yohai),  said  he  to  them ;  *  Surely  it  is  all  one,  and  it  has

*  Zohar  ii,  106^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  48a,  col.  189,  190.     Comp.  Matt,
▼ii,  13,  14.    Luke  xiii,  24.   See  Taylor's;  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  pp.  77,  note  2.


431

been  Sama-el  and  he  has  been  seen  on  a  Serpent,  and  his  tzelefn,  i.  e.p
shadow  image,  and  the  Serpent,  are  Satan,  and  all  are  one.*  We  have
learned ;  At  that  time  when  Sama-el  descended  from  heaven  riding  on
this  Serpent  and  his  tzelem  was  seen,  all  creatures  saw  his  tzelem  and  they
fled  from  him,  and  he  reached  to  that  woman  with  sweet  words  and  be
caused  death  to  the  whole  world,  surely  with  wisdom  (subtility)  he  brought
curses  upon  the  world  and  ruined  the  First  Tree  (Adam)  which  the
Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  created  in  the  world."

From  the  Sepher'ha-Bahir  §  Hashtnutas  Zohar  i,  \2b  in  the  Brody  Ed.
In  the  Cremona  Edition  in  continuation  of  the  above-cited  page.  '*  The
Neshamah  soul,  of  the  male  comes  from  Male,  and  the  Neshamah  of  the
female  is  from  Female,  and  that  is  why  the  Serpent  went  after  ^Havak
(Eve)  he  said  (to  himself),  *  Because  her  soul  is  from  the  North,  (the  Left
or  Evil  side)*  I  can  persuade  her  quickly.*  And  the  persuading  has  been
because  he  came  on  her.  The  disciples  asked ;  How  did  he  that  ?  Said
he  to  them ;  *  Sama-el  the  Wicked.  He  conspired  with  all  the  hosts
Above  against  his  Master,  because  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  said  (to
Adam)  You  shall ;  *  Have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over
the  birds  of  heaven,  etc.'f  Said  he  (Sama-el)  how  can  I  make  him
(Adam)  sin  before  Him;  so  that  he  shall  be  driven  away  from  be-
fore Him;  so  he  descended  with  all  his  hosts,  and  he  sought  upon
the  earth  a  companion  like  himself  and  he  found  the  Serpent  and  it
had  a  {fmooth,  t\  e,,  appearance,  like  a  camel;  so  he  rode  upon  it
and  came  to  that  woman :  Said  he  to  her,  '  Did  not  Elohim  say :  You
should  not  eat  from  all  the  trees  of  the  Gan,  i.  e..  Garden.*  Said  she;
'  We  have  not  been  forbidden  only  from  the  Eiz  ha-Da-ath,  i.  e,.  Tree  of
Knowledge,  which  is  in  the  Garden,  and  of  that  only,  Elohim  said ;  You
shall  not  eat  from  it  and  not  touch  it  or  thou  mayest  die.*  *  *  *  What
did  Sama-el  the  Wicked,  then  do,  he  touched  the  Tree  and  the  Tree
tzuva^h,  /.^.,  cried  out :   *  *  *  Sama-el  said  to  her;  *  Behold  !  I  touched

the  Tree,  yet  I  did  not  die,  if  you  touch  it  you  will  not  die.*    The  woman

♦

*  The  ancient  Hebrews  alwajrs  faced  the  East  in  worship,  thb  brought  the  left  side
to  the  North.  It  will  be  noticed  that,  in  the  ancient  Asiatic  tepresentations  of  the  an-
drogene,  the  woman's  side  is  the  left  side.    See  also  Anii,  p.  120  and  142,  and  Fig.  36.

f  The  «  fish ''  are  the  evil  spiriU,  the  «  birds''  are  the  angels.


432

touched  the  Tree  and  she  saw  that  the  Afalak  ffamavefh,  /.  ^.,  Angel  of
Death,  came  near  to  her,  and  she  said ;  '  Surely  I  will  die  now,  and  the
Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  will  make  another  won^n  and  give  her  to  Adam,
but  I  will  do  thus :  '  I  will  cause  him  to  eat  with  me,  so  if  we  die  we
shall  both  die  together,  and  if  we  shall  live  we  shall  both  live  together.'
So  she  took  from  its  fruit  and  gave  it  to  her  husband.  *  *  *  So  the
Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  said  to  her ;  ^  It  is  not  enough  to  thee  that  thou
hast  sinned  but  thou  hast  brought  sin  to  Adam  too,'  said  she  before  Him;
'  Lord  of  the  World,  the  Serpent  induced  me  that  I  should  sin  before
Thee.'  So  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  brought  all  Three  before  Him  and
sentenced  them  with  nine  curses  and  death,  and  threw  Sama-el  and  his
followers  down  from  the  Place  of  their  Holiness  in  Heaven,  and  cut  the
feet  off  the  Serpent  and  cursed  him,  more  than  all  the  beasts  and  animals,
and  commanded  that  he  should  lose  his  skin  after  (every)  seven  jrears.*'  *

The  Sin  of  Adam  causeth  the  Taste  of  Death.     **  Come,  See !     If
Adam  had  not  sinned  none  would  have  tasted  the  taste  of  death  hefare  they
ascended  to  the  Upper  World,  but  because  he  sinned  so  he  tasted  the  taste
of  death  before  he  ascended  to  the  other  world,  and  the  Rua^h  spirit,  (of
Adam)  was  separated  from  the  guff^  /.^.,  body,  and  remained  in   this
world ;  and  the  Rua'h  spirit,  has  to  cleanse  itself  in  the  river  IXnur
{Dan.  vii,  lo)  to  receive  punishment,  and  afterwards  he  (the  Rua'K)gpies
up  to  the  Gan  Edetiy  i,  ^.,  Garden  of  Eden,  on  the  Earth,  and  there  are
prepared  for  him  other  garments  of  light,  like  the  partzuph^  t,  e.,  appear-
ance, of  the  ^^,  i.e.,  body,  in  this  world,  and  he  (the  Rua^h)  is  clothed
in  it  and  there  is  always  his  habitation/'  f

Of  Paradise  and  Hell.  *'Said  R.  Yitz-haq;  the  Holy,  Blessed  be
He !  as  well  as  He  created  a  Gan  Eden  (Paradise)  on  earth  so  He  also
created  a  Gdi-hinnom  upon  earth,  as  well  as  He  created  a  Gan  Eden,  Le.,
Garden  of  Eden,  Above,  so  He  created  a  Gdi-htnnom  Above.  He  created
a  Gan  Eden  Below,  on  the  earth :  as  it  is  written ;  'And  YHVH  Elohim
planted  a  Garden  in  Eden.  (Gen.  ii,  8.)  He  created  a  Gdi-hinnom  in
the  earth  :  as  it  is  written ;  *  A  land  of  darkness,  as  darkness  itself. '  (Job

"i^Zohar  i,  35^,  and  \  HashmutaSj  12b,  Sepher  ha-Bahir,  Brody  Ed.  Cremona  £d.  i,
fol.  2&2  and  b,  col.  no,  ill.     Sepher  ha-Bahir.

f  Zohar  iii,  159^,  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  iii,  foL  76^,  col.  303.


433

X,  22.)  He  created  Gan  Eden  Above:  as  it  is  written;  '  But  the  Nep-
hesh  animal  soul,  of  my  lord  shall  be  bound  in  the  bundle  of  life  with
YHVH  thy  El<hhai:  (I  Sam.  xxv,  29.)  And  it  is  written ;  '  The  Rua'h
spirit,  shall  return  to  Elohim.'  (Eccl.  xii,  7.)  He  also  created  the  GcU-
hinnam  Above :  as  it  is  written  :  '  And  the  Nephesh  animal  soul,  of  thine
enemies  (enemy)  them  shall  he  sling  out  as  out  of  the  middle  of  a  sling

Compare  on  this  subject  Kitto's  Cyclopedia  of  Biblical  Literature,  Ed.
1876.  Art.  Hell,  Paradise.  On  the  Tree  of  Life  in  Paradise,  etc.,  by
Dr.  Benjamin  Kennicott.

Of  Sama-el  or  Satan  and  Lil-ith.  "The  female (Lil-ith)  of  Sama-el
was  a  maid-servant  to  the  Matroneethah.  And  Sama-el,  the  other  ail  (el
=  god),  was  a  servant  to  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  afterwards  the  causes
(people)  Below,  made  them  to  be  an  elohim,  and  the  Holy,  Blessed  be
He !  is  prepared  to  put  them  away  from  the  world  and  entirely  destroy

them.''t

Lil-ith  and  Sama-el.  "When  man  connects  himself  in  the  Truth,
that  is  in  the  Thorah ;  he  needs  to  be  tested  on  the  same  place  where  his
father  has  been  tested,  so  he  shall  go  up  perfect  and  come  back  perfect.
Adam  ascended  but  did  not  watch  himself,  but  was  seduced  by  her  and
sinned  with,  that  Esheih  Z'nooneemy  i,e,,  the  Harlot,  (Lil-ith)  which  is  the
First  Serpent,  /.  ^.,  Na'hash  Qad^mo-ah,  It  is  written;  '  And  Ya^kob
went  from  Beer-sheba,  and  went  toward  Haran.'  (Gen.  xxviii,  10.)
*  And  went  towards  Haran.'  That  is  the  side  of  the  Esheth  Z^nooneem^
that  is  a  harlot,  which  is  a  mystery.  '  From  the  strength  of  Yitz-haq,*  that
is  from  the  strength  of  judgment  (Din),  from  the  lees  of  old  wine  went
out  a  spark  which  comprised  male  and  female,  and  it  spread  itself  out  to
many  sides  and  paths ;  the  male  is  called  Sama-el  and  the  female  is  always
comprised  in  him,  as  it  is  on  the  Holy  side  so  is  it  in  the  Evil  side,  male
and  female  are  merged  in  each  other.     The  female  of  Sama-el  which  is

*  Zohar  i,  67^,  col.  268,  Midrash  ha-Ne*elam.  Cremona  Ed.    Brody  Ed.  i,  106^.

f  Zohar  iii,  fol.  277^,  Brody  Ed.  Rayah  Me'hemnah.     Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  134^,
ool.  536.  Comp.  as  to  Lil-ith,  Kitto's  Cyclop.  Bib.  Liter,  ii,  p.  834-5.  Also  ante^  p.  248.

28


434

Nd'hashf  t\  e.,  the  Serpent,  is  called  Esheth  Z'nooneem.^**     Compare  on
this  subject  the  Apocalypse  as  to  the  female  companion  of  the  Beast.

"  Sama-el  was  clothed  in  the  (Tyooq-nah  of  an  Ox,  (whence  the  cloven
hoofs),  and  Lil-ith  in  the  d^yooq-nah  of  a  Mule  (which  is  sterile).  But
both  are  united  as  one."  f

"  The  evil  angry-maid,  (which  is  Lil-ith)  is  the  devastation  of  the  world
and  she  is  the  lash  in  the  hands  of  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  to  strike
(punish)  the  guilty. "J

^^  Lil-ith  is  the  mother  of  the  Shedim  and  the  Maziqimy  i.e.y  the  en-
snarers.''§

Na-amoh  (Pleasure,  Delight)  ||  is  the  mother  of  Shedin,  She  is  con-
sidered as  a  very  beautiful  woman  who  drew  down  from  heaven,  the  two
great  angels  Uzza  and  Azael,  the  principal  of  the  E*nai  Elohim.  She  has
the  power  of  assuming  the  form  of  a  very  beautiful  woman.  (Zohar  i,  9^,
55^1,  Brody  Ed.)  Aigroth  is  also  a  great  female  demon.  She  is  the
daughter  of  Ma^hlath  the  female  demon  who  causes  sickness.

The  Four  Lower  Oppositions  to  the  Four  Worlds,  are  I.  The  inclina-
tion of  the  heart  towards  Evil,  the  opposition  to  A^tzeel-ah.  II.  The
actual  thought  of  Evil  in  thei?«j*/i,  the  opposition  to  BWee-ah.  III.  Use
of  Evil  words,  the  opposition  to  Ye'tzeer-ah,  IV.  External  Evil  Action
answering  to  the  opposition  to  A^seey-ah,

If  man  turns  his  heart  from  the  Deity,  the  latter  turns  His  higher  Sub-
lime Face  away,  the  She-kheen-ah  leaves,  and  the  D'yooq-nah  withdraws
from  his  Neshamah,  If  man's  sin  continues  and  he  becomes  hardened,
Satan  obtains  complete  control  over  the  Divine  Tzelem  in  him,  and  dark-
ness and  spiritual  death  rule  over  him  and  he  has  Gdi-hinnom  in  this  life.

The  Great  and  Smaller  Demons.  "  What  is  said:  'Let  not  Elohim
speak  with  us,  lest  we  die.'  (Ex.  xx,  19.)  Those  have  been  the  ignorant
(the  mixed  people)  who  have  been  with  them  (the  Israelites)  and  because
they  have  been  from  the  side  of  that  Evil  Serpent,  of  which  is  said  by

*  Zohar  i,  147^,  148^2,  Sithrai  Thorah,  Brody  Ed.     i,  248a,  Livomo  Ed.     Cremona
Ed.  i,  fol.  86<z,  col.  342.     AnUy  p.  331.
t  Zohar  ii,  192^,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  84^,  col.  336-337.
X  Zohar  ii,  190^,  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  Brody  Ed.     See  also  i,  190a  and  b,
\  Zohar  ii,  268<7,  Brody  Ed.
See  Dan.  xi,  37,  and  Kitto's  Cyclop.  Bib.  Liter,  iii,  Title,  Nanea.


435

Him ;  '  That  you  shall  be  cursed  of  all  the  animals.  *  And  there  are
many  mixtures,  but  there  are  mixtures  from  the  side  of  the  Serpent  *  *  *
and  also  mixtures  from  the  side  of  the  Maztqim^  i,  e,,  the  strong  hurtful
demons,  the  souls  of  the  guilty,  they  are  the  real  Maziqim  of  the  world.
And  there  is  also  a  mixture  of  the  Shedim,  i.  e,,  external  destroying
demons,  and  of  the  jRu^hin,  i,  e,,  also  hurtful  spirits,  and  the  Zi/tn,  /.  e.,
children  of  Lil-ith,  and  they  are  all  mixed  in  Israel,  and  none  of  them
are  so  evil  as  Amaleqh  which  is  the  very  Evil  Serpent,  the  'inK  S«  i  +  30
+  I  +  8  +  200  =  240  ail  a^hor,  /.^.,  the  other  god.*  He  has  been  the
revealer  of  all  shame  and  evil  things  in  the  world,  he  is  a  murderer,  and
his  other  half  is  Sam  Moveth  Az,  /.^.,t  The  Strong  Poison  of  Death,  and
all  are  Sama-el,  but  it  is  Sama-el  and  Sama-el  and  not  all  are  equal,  but
this  side  of  the  Serpent  (the  First  Serpent)  is  the  curse  and  worst  of  all."  J

"  Come,  See !  To  that  place  which  is  the  Unclean  Spirit  (Sama-el),  the
Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  gave  him  dominion  to  rule  in  the  world  in  many
sides,  and  he  can  injure,  and  we  have  no  permission  to  mock  him,  we
must  rather  beware  of  him,  that  he  shall  not  accuse  us  in  our  holiness. "§

"  Never  shall  man  open  his  mouth  to  the  Satan,  because  he  is  always
present  with  man,  so  he  will  take  those  words  and  accuse  us  with  them
Above  and  Below."  ||

"  Come,  See !  In  those  evil  species  are  three  degrees,  one  above  the
other.  The  upper  degree  of  these  three  hang  in  the  air,  the  lowest  degree
of  them,  are  these  which  laugh  at  people  and  trouble  them  in  their  dreams,
because  they  are  impudent  like  dogs.  And  there  is  a  higher  degree  upon
them  which  are  from  the  Above  and  the  Below,  which  make  known  to  man
things  which  are  sometimes  true  and  sometimes  not  true,  and  those  things
which  are  true  they  happen  in  the  future."  %

*  p/OJ^  Amaleqh  70  -f-  40  -j-  30  -f-  loo  =  240,  the  same  number  by  Gematria  as
ail  a^hor  also  the  same  as  y'T^  200  4.  40  =  240  Mar^  i.  e.^  bitter.  The  initials  are
those  of  Malak  Rah,  i .  e..  Evil  Angel.

f  This  is  the  real  Lil-ith,  the  mother  of  all  the  evil  spirits.

X  Zohar  i,  28^,  29a,  Brody  Ed.     Livomo  Ed.  i,  51a.

2  Zohar  ii,  237^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  li6a,  col.  461.

II  Zohar  i,  175a,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  99^,  col.  396.

f  Zohar  iii,  25a,  Brody  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  iii,  fol.  ii^,  col.  43.  The  Cremona  Edition
has  not  the  words  in  italics.


436

The  Angel  of  Death,  etc.    *'  The  Malak  Hamaveth^  /.^.,  the  Angel  of
Death,  is  at  the  same  time  the  Deceiver,  Satan  and  Accuser,  what  he  does
is  the  Will  of  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  I     Although  he  ought  not  to  de-
ceive but  he  does  this  because  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  orders  it  through
love  to  His  children.     This  is  like  to  a  king  who  has  an  only  son,  and  he
loves  him  very  much,  and  because  of  his  love  tells  him  not  to  go  near
evil  women,  because  one  who  associates  with  such  is  not  worthy  to  enter
the  king's  palace,  and  his  son  promises  him  he  would  do  his  biddings.
There  was  a  beautiful  but  evil  woman  outside  (of  the  palace).     The  king
desired  to  test  the  will  of  his  son,  so  he  sent  for  this  woman  and  said  to
her  :  '  Go  and  seduce  my  son  !'     She  tempted  the  son  of  the  king  and
caressed  him  and  spoke  to  him  sweetly  with  many  words.     If  that  son
had  been  good  and  obeyed  his  father's  words  he  would  have  repelled  her,
and  his  father,  the  king,  would  have  been  very  happy  and  have  taken  hiro
into  the  palace  and  rewarded  him  and  given  him  great  honor.     But  who
would  now  have  caused  all  this  honor  ?    This  evil  woman  would  have
caused  all  this  honor,  and  so  she  would  be  praised  for  it  also  because  of
the  rewards  to  the  son  ;  so  it  is  with  the  Angel  of  Death,  because  through
him  the  just,  if  they  do  not  follow  the  Malak  Hamaveth^  inherit  all  the
hidden  things  Above ;  and  if  it  were  not  for  him,  they  would  not  (have
been  able  to  exercise  their  will  for  the  good,  and)  have  all  this  honor."  *

*' Above  in  the  Tree  of  Life  exist  no  strange  Qlippoths  for  it  is  said  :
'  With  Thee  dwelleth  no  Evil '  (Ps.  v,  5)  but  in  the  Tree,  Below,  exist
the  strange  Qlippoths,^^  (Zohar  i,  27^,  Brody  Ed.)  "Above  are  not  any
QHppoth  for  no  one  can  enter  in  the  Gate  of  the  King  in  a  rough
(strange)  garment,  but  the  Qlippoih  are  Below."  f

Blessings  and  the  Evil  Eye.  '*  That  place  is  hidden  from  which  all
the  blessings  come,  and  therefore  everything  of  man  which  is  hidden,  the
blessings  rest  upon  it ;  and  all  the  things  which  are  revealed  that  place
is  where  judgment  rests,  and  he  who  rests  upon  that  place  is  called  Rah
Ei-een,  t,  e,,  Evil  Eye. "J

*  Zohar  ii,  163a  and  d,  Brody  Ed.     Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  72^,  col.  287-8.

f  Zobar,  Rayah  Me'hemnah,  Brody  Ed.  Joel,  Religions-philosophu  des  Sohar,  p.  291,
note  I.

X  Zohar  i,  64^,  Brody  Ed.  Cremona  Ed.  i,  fol.  $oa,  col.  198.  That  in  italics  is  not
in  the  Cremona  Edition.


437

''  That  we  have  said  :  In  every  place  where  the  side  of  holiness  rests,
when  the  counting  comes  from  the  holy  side,  the  blessing  always  rests
upon  it  and  never  leaves  it.  From  where  do  we  know  that  ?  From
iB^jTD  Maaser  Tithes,  because  this  is  the  count  to  holiness  so  the  blessing
is  found  upon  it ;  but  all  other  things  in  the  world  which  do  not  come
from  the  holy  side  no  blessing  can  rest  upon  it  when  it  is  counted,  be-
cause the  Sith-rah  a^h-rah  other  side,  which  is  the  Rah  Ei-een  Evil  Eye,
can  rule  over  it.  *  *  *  And  when  the  enumeration  is  revealed
although  it  is  holy,  also  from  it,  purqonah^  i,  ^.,  remission,  has  to  be
given."  *

"  The  Holy,  Blessed  be  He !  is  prepared  to  expel  the  unclean  Rua^h
spirit,  from  the  world.'*     (Zohar  i,  70^,  Brody  Ed.)

"  The  Righteous  will  be  prepared  to  look  upon  the  Ye'tzer  ha-rah  like
an  immense  mountain  and  will  wonder  and  say ;  '  How  could  we  cross  such
a  large  mountain?  *  and  the  Evil  (souls)  will  look  upon  him  as  if  thin  like
a  hair  and  they  will  wonder  and  say :  '  How  can  we  not  cross  over  ?'
And  both  will  weep.  And  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  will  burn  that  Evil
Spirit  from  the  world  so  that  he  rule  no  more.^f

The  Coming  of  the  Messiah,  Death  of  All  the  then  Living,  and
OF  the  New  Kingdom.  *'  It  is  written :  *  I  kill  and  I  make  alive.'  (Deut.
xxxii,  39.)  That  means :  Till  now  death  has  been  from  Sith-rah  c^h-rah
the  other  side,  but  from  now  on  '  I  kill  and  I  make  alive,'  that  is,  in  that
time  (when  the  Messiah  comes)  all  those  who  have  not  tasted  the  taste  of
death  will  die  through  Him,  and  He  will  revivify  them  at  once.  Why
is  this  ?  Because  nothing  whatever  of  that  pollution  (the  pollution  of
sin)  shall  remain  in  the  world,  and  there  will  be  a  new  world  made  by
the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !"  J

"  The  Q'lippoth,  L  e.,  Shells  and  Evil  Spirits,  will  not  depart  till  the
time  of  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  when  the  dead  revive  from  the  grave,
then  shall  the  QUppoth  be  broken  and  from  the  Brain  inside,  the  light
shall  shine  into  the  world. "§

*  Zohar  ii,  225a,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  119^,  col.  403.
t  Zohar  i,  190^,  Brody  Ed.

%  Zohar  ii,  108^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  49a,  col.  193.    livomo  Ed.  ii,
193^.    Comp.  Rev.  xxi,  i ;  I  Cor.  xv,  51  sq,
{Zohar  ii,  69^,  Brody  Ed.    Cremona  Ed.  ii,  fol.  31a,  col.  122.


.     438

We  will  now  close,  we  have  given  but  a  very  few  of  the  many  mtcrest-
ing  passages  of  the  Zohar  for  want  of  space.  If  a  desire  on  the  pait  of
the  public,  justifies  us  in  the  attempt,  we  will,  in  the  future,  give  many
more  which  are  of  still  greater  value  to  the  htstory  of  religion,  theosophj
.and  philosophy.


PiguR37,.*A  Hlodu  reprocDUtioD  of  tbc  idea  of  the  Malcrokaim  u


Appendix  A,


{First  published  in  **Tki  Keystone ^^  Freemason  Newspaper^  Philadelphia^  Deeember

25,  1886,)

AN  ANCIENT  LODGE  OF  INITIATES.


FROM    THE    QABBALAH.


THE  Qabbalah  of  the  Hebrews  is  undoubtedly  of  great  antiquity^
a  reminiscence  of  an  ancient  "  Wisdom  Religion**  of  Asia,  for
we  find  its  doctrines,  in  germ,  in  the  ancient  Buddhist,  Sanskrit,
Zend,  and  Chinese  books,  also  examples  of  its  peculiar  exegesis  in  the  oc-
cult book.  Genesis,  and  in  Jeremiah.  The  present  text-book  of  the  Qabbal-
ists  is  the  Sepher  ha-Zohar,  Book  of  Illumination,  or  Splendor.  This  is  a
mystical,  running  commentary,  on  the  Pentateuch  or  Thorah  (Law),  based
on  the  Sod,  i,  ^.,  Secret  Doctrine,  and  contains  imbedded  in  it,  as  it
were,  a  number  of  other  very  old  writings,  as  is  evident  from  their  style
and  contents.  Among  these  are  some,  asserted  to  have  proceeded  from  an
initiate,  the  Thanaite  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo-*hai,  who  flourished,  circa  no-
203  A.  D.  He  was  a  pupil  of  the  great  Qabbalist  R.  Akeeba,  who  was
executed  by  the  Emperor  Hadrian,  for  participation  in  the  Bar*ko-khab
rebellion.  These  books  are  the  Siphra  D*  Tznioothah,  Book  of  Secrecy
(Mystery,  Retirement  or  Modesty),  the  Idrah  Rabbah,  or  Great  Assem-
bly (of  the  Threshing-floor).  This  assumes  the  presence  of  the  full
and  perfect  number,  ten  initiates;  and  the  continuation  of  the  pre-
ceding two,  the  Idrah  Zootah  or  Small  Assembly,  composed  of  the
remaining  seven,  three  having  died  during  the  giving  the  Idrah  Rab-
bah.  There  is  no  doubt,  from  the  Talmud,  that  this  Thanaite  had
much  of  his  time  engrossed  in  teaching  a  school  for  the  more  elect,  and
for  that  reason,  it  is  stated,  was  excused  from  the  necessity  of  being
present  at  all  the  prayers  of  the  Synagogue,     The  Zohar  and  Zoharic


440

writings  were  first  made  known  as  a  totality,  outside  of  the  initiates,  but
written  in  a  concealed  manner,  about  the  latter  part  of  the  thirteenth
century,  but  many  of  the  Qabbalistic  doctrines  therein  are  archaic,  and
can  be  traced  to  a  very  much  earlier  time.    We  find  more  or  less  of  them
in  the  Old  Testament,  Apocrypha,  Book  of  'Hanokh,  New  Testament,  the
Mishna,  the  early  Patristic  literature,  in  Philo,  Josephus  and  the  Hermetic
books,  later  in  the  Neo-platonic  school  and  that  of  Alexandria,  and  traces
in  the  two  Talmuds  and  in  Gnosticism,  especially  the  systems  of  Valentinus
and  Marcus.  Also  in  the  Dreams  of  St.  Synesios ;  the  writings  of  the  pseudo-
St.  Dionysios,  the  Areopagite ;  the  works  of  Saad-yah  ha-Gaon,  (892-942
A.D.) ;  Sherira  ha-Gaon  (930-1000  A.D.) ;  his  son-in-law,  R.  £li3rah  ha-
Zaken ;  his  brother,  R.  Yekuthiel ;  and  of  Hay  Gaon,  son  of  Sherira  Gaon,
(969-1038  A.D.)      The  latter  is  said  to  have  been  the  first,  who  used  the
expression  ^Hokhmoth  ha-Qabbalahy  i.  e,y  Wisdom  of  the  Qabbalah;  and
from  him,  it  has  been  said,  it  was  borrowed  by  Ibn  Gebirol,  in  the  lat-
ter* s  Tiqqoon  Middoth  ha-Nepheshy  /.  ^.,  Adjustment  of  the  Attributes  of
the  (Life)  Soul.     Hay  also  speaks  of  the  Sephiroth,*  as  do  R.  Azariel  b.
Mena'hem,  Ibn  Gebirol  (Avicebron),  and  many  others.

We  give  from  the  beginning  of  the  Idrah  Rabbahy  the  opening  of  an
ancient  Lodge  of  Qabbalists,  which  the  learned  initiates  of  to-day  will  ap-
preciate, as  its  form  goes  back  to  circa  150  A.D. ,  and  existed  likely  long
before,  in  ancient  Chaldea.  For  the  prophet  who  wrote  on  the  banks  of
the  Ke'bar,  Ezekiel,  is  one  of  the  greatest  ancient  Qabbalists,  as  appears
from  his  asserted  vision,  which  is  really  a  Qabbalistic  statement,  and  is  a
further  development  of  Isaiah  (vi,  1-8)  and  I  Chronicles  (xviii,  18  et  seq,
II  Chron.  iii,  8-13).  The  raising  of  the  hands,  appears  on  many  of  the
Chaldean  signet  seals  from  2600  B.  C.  down,  as  does  also  the  idea  of  the
Triad.  This  is  especially  evident  in  the  stone  Tablet  found  in  the  Tem-
ple of  the  Sun -god  at  Sipara,  now  called  Abu  Habba,  and  the  cylinder
seal  of  Dungi,  King  of  Babylon,  son  of  king  Urukh.

The  Idrah  Rabbah  Qad'dushct\  says:  "It  has  been  learned  :  Said  R.

*  His  language  is  quoted  by  the  erudite  Qabbalist,  R.  Moses  Cordovero  in  his  Pardes
Rimmonim,  Chapter  on  Splendor,  J  i.

t  Holy  Assembly  of  the  Threshing  Floor.  Cremona  Edition.  Vol.  iii,  fol.  61  a,  coL
242  sq.


441

Shim-on  (ben  Yo-*hai)  to  the  Companions :  '  How  long  shall  we  sit  in
the  condition  of  a  convivial  company  ?  It  is  written ;  *  It  is  time  to  work
for  YHVH,  for  they  have  destroyed  Thy  Thorah  !*  The  days  are  short
and  the  Creditor  presses,  the  herald  cries  out  daily,*  and  the  mowers  of
the  field  are  few  in  number,  and  those  who  are  on  the  grounds  of  the  vine-
yard (/.  ^.,  humanity)  do  not  care,  and  know  not  to  what  place  to  go  as
they  ought  to.  Assemble  Companions  to  the  Threshing-floor  in  your
breast-plates  and  (with)  spears  in  your  hands,  be  immediate  in  your
preparation,  in  counsel,  in  wisdom^  in  understanding,  in  knowledge,  in
attention,  in  hands  and  in  feet,  make  rule  over  you  the  King,  in  whose
power  is  life  and  death,  in  order  to  determine  sentences  of  Truth,  words
to  which  the  Holy  ones,  Above,  give  heed,  and  delight  to  hear  them  and
know  them.'

R.  Shim-on  sat  and  wept,  and  then  said :  '  Woe  if  I  reveal !  Woe  if  I
do  not  reveal !  *  The  Companions  who  were  there  kept  silent.  R.  Abbah
arose  and  said  to  him ;  '  With  the  permission  of  the  Master  to  reveal  ?  '  The
secret  of  YHVH  i$  with  those  who  fear  Him,*  and  truly,  these  Compan-
ions here  assembled  are  fearing  the  Holy,  Blessed  be  He  !  They  have  just
entered  into  the  assembly  of  the  House  of  the  Tabernacle,  some  have
entered  and  some  have  gone  out.*  It  has  been  learned,  that  the  Compan-
ions were  numbered  in  the  presence  of  R.  Shim-on  and  there  were  found
to  be  present,  R.  El'azar,  his  son;  and  R.  Abbah,  R.  Yehudah,  R.  Yo-
seh  son  of  Ya-kob,  R.  Yitz-haq,  R.  *Hiz*qee-yah  son  of  Rab,  R.  *He-yah,
R.  Yo-seh,  R.  Ye-sah.  They  gave  their  hands  to  R.  Shim-on  and  raised  their
fingers  upwards,!  and  they  entered  into  the  field  and  sat  down  between
the  trees.     R.  Shim-on  arose  and  offered  a  prayer  and  then  sat  down  in

*  Similar  ideas  are  in  Ibn  Gebirors  Kether  MaikhtUh,  Almost  the  same  words  are  in
the  Pirqi  Aboth,  See  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  etc.,  by  Charles  Taylor,  Cam-
bridge, 1877,  pp.  54,  55.

f  See  Ante  pp.  218,  236.  The  initiates  in  the  Qabbalah  will  understand  the  correct
form.  In  this  connection  note  the  peculiar  way  of  holding  the  fingers  and  hands  by  the
figures,  on  the  Akkadian,  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  cylinder  signets,  in  the  GlypHpu
Oruntale,  by  J.  Menant,  Paris,  1883-1886.  Coliectian  de  Oercq,  Paris,  1885  sg,  F.
Lajard,  CuUe  Mithra,  also  his  Cultt  de  Venus;  Scribner*s  Monthly,  January,  1887 ;  and
the  American  Joum.  of  Archaeology,  Vol.  ii.  No.  3.


.


■  I

I
I.


M


•»


their  midst,  and  said ;  '  Let  each  one  place  his  hands  in  my  lap.'*   They
placed  their  hands  and  he  took  hold  of  them.     He  then  began  and  said ;
'  Cursed  be  the  man  who  shall  make  an  idol  or  a  molten  image,  the  work
of  the  hands  of  the  craftsman,  and  putteth  it  in  a  secret  place  ;  and  all
the  people  answered  and  said,  Amen,*^    R.  Shim-on  began  and  said;
*  It  is  time  to  work  for  YHVH.'     What   means  'Time   to  work  for
YHVH?*     Because  they  have  destroyed  Thy  Thorah  (the  Pentateuch,
which  is  the  Sacred   Writing  or   Bible,  par  excellence^   to  the  Israel-
ite).    What  means  '  They  have  destroyed  Thy  Thorah  ?'     The  Thorah
from.  Above,  which  will  be  made  void,  if  it  is  not  performed  accord-
ing   to    its    requirements.      Wherefore    is    this?     To  the  Ai-ieek   Yo-
men  J  /.  ^.,  Ancient  of  Days :  (also  called  A^reekh  An-peen^   the  Long
Faces),  for  it  is  written :    '  Happy  art  thou,   Israel,  who  is  like  unto
thee!*     And  it  is  written:  'Who  is  like  unto  Thee  YHVH  among  the
Eliniy  t\  e,,  Mighty  ones  !*  '*     He  called  R.  El-azar  his  son,  and  ordered
him  to  sit  down  before  him  (/.  e. ,  in  front  of  him)  and  R.  Abbah  on  the
other  side  (/.  e.,  beside  him  R.  Shim-on,  the  master)^  and  (R.  Shim-on)
said :  "  We  are  typical  of  All ;  J  thus  far  the  columns  have  been  estab-
lished.    They  kept  silence,  they  heard  voices,  and  their  knees  knocked
together.      What  voices?     They  were  the  voices  of  the  Congregation
Above,  which  gathered  together.     (The  spirits  of  the  just  (pious)  and
the    She*kheen-ah    or    Divine    Presence.)      R.   Shim-on    rejoiced    and
said:  ***YHVH  I  have  heard  Thy  speech,  I  was  afraid!*     He  said:
*  There,  this  fear  was  becoming,  but  as  to  us,  all  depends  on  love,  as  is
written  :  *  Thou  shalt  love  YHVH  Eloh*e-hu,*  /.  e.,  thy  Ail,  and  is  writ-
ten :  *  While  YHVH  loves  you,'  and  is  written  :  *  I  have  loved  you,  says
YHVH.*§     R.  Shim-on  began  and  said  :  *  He  who  walketh  as  a  tale-

*  An  ancient  Hebrew  method  of  taking  an  oath.   Gen.  xxiv,  2;  xlvii,  29.  See  Kitto's
Biblical  Cycl.,  Ed.  1876,  iii,  p.  348.

fThe  numerical  value  of  JDK  Amen,  =  91,  the  same  as  the  total  value  of,  T\)7V  =■
26  (YHVH)  and  ^J1«  =  65  (ADoNaY).

J  That  is,  now  we  represent  the  three  columns  of  the  Universe,  the  Right,  Centre
and  Left  columns  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  the  Ten  Sephiroth,  or  the  whole  universe.

J  The  doctrine  of  Love  to  God  is  the  keystone  of  all  the  true  Mystics  and  Theoso-
phers  who  have  ever  lived,  but  not  goodness  resulting  from  fear.     See  An/e,  p.  429.


443

bearer  revealeth  a  secret/  but  the  '  faithful  in  spirit  concealeth  at  matter/
(Prov.  xi,  13.)  *He  who  walketh  a  tale-bearer/  since  is  said;  'tale-
bearer '  why  is  said,  '  he  walketh  ?*  A  man  *  a  tale-bearer  *  ought  to  be
said.  '  Who  walketh?*  He  who  is  neither  sedate  in  his  spirit  nor  true,
the  word  which  he  has  heard,  is  moved  hither  and  thither  as  bran  on  the
water,  until  the  water  drives  it  away.  For  what  reason  ?  Because  his
spirit  is  not  a  lasting  spirit,  but  whose  spirit  is  a  lasting  spirit,  of  him  it
is  written  :  'And  the  spirit  concealeth  the  word.'  The  phrase  '  faithful
in  spirit,'  denotes  firmness  of  spirit,  as  is  said  :  '  And  I  will  fasten  him  as
a  nail  in  a  firm  place.'  The  matter  depends  on  secresy.  And  it  is  writ-
ten :  'Suffer  not  thy  mouth  to  cause  thy  flesh  to  sin.'  And  the  world
could  not  exist,  but  through  that  which  is  secret,  and  if  with  regard  ta
earthly  affairs  there  is  need  of  mystery,  how  much  more  in  matters  the
most  secret  of  secrets  in  the  At-Uek  Yo-men  which  are  not  even  transmitted
to  the  highest  angels."  (The  just  or  righteous  are  considered  by  the
Qabbalists  as  having  more  knowledge  and  as  higher,  than  the  angels.)
Said  R.  Shim-on;  '*I  will  not  tell  the  heavens  to  listen,  I  will  not  tell
the  earth  to  hear,  for  truly  we  now  compose  the  columns  of  the  world,
/.  ^.,  the  ten  Sephiroth."*

♦The  first  Sephirah  Kether  the  Crown,  represents  the  Master;  the  sixth  TiphU-retk
Beauty,  the  sun  ;  the  last,  Malkhuth  the  Kingdom,  the  moon.  The  first  applies  to  the
highest  point  of  the  head  of  the  Makrokosm,  the  second  to  the  heart,  the  third  to  the
powers  of  continuing  Ufe,  or  perhaps  soles  of  the  feet  In  this  connection  note  :  "  The
place  of  the  soles  of  my  feef^  (Ezek.  xliii,  7).  Also  the  veneration  among  the  Buddhists
for  the  impression  of  the  soles  of  Sakhya  M(ini's  feet.  The  Ten  Upper  Sephiroth  as  a
totality,  are  the  Qabbalistic  Tree  of  Life,  and  the  Adam  Qadmon,  or  Great  Man  of  the
East,  the  Ideal  or  Celestial  Adam,  the  Upper  Makrokosm,  the  A'tzeel-atic  Adam.  Me-
tatron  is  the  BVee-atic  Adam,  the  Mediator  between  the  Deity  and  His  creatures.
(Comp.  I  Cor.  xv,  44-49.  Ibid,  xii,  12-27.)  And  in  this  Makrokosm,  the  Name  YHVH,
is  contained ;  and  when  the  Kingdom  of  YHVH  (1.  e,  the  Lord),  is  established  upon
this,  our  earth  (see  the  great  verse  Rev.  xi,  15),  then ;  "  YHVH  shall  be  the  king  over
all  the  earth;  (and)  on  that  day  YHVH  will  be  One,  and  His  Name,  One."  (Zach.
xiv,  9.)


444


Appendix  B.


SYNOPSIS    OF    THE   Chinese   Qabbalah.     At  a   meeting   of  the
Numismatic  and  Antiquarian  Society  of  Philadelphia,  held  at  its
Hall,  December  2d,  1886,  I  read  a  paper  entitled :  "  The  Chinese
Qabbalah,  or  the  Book  called  the  Yih-King,"  of  which  the  following  is
an  abstract :

The  esoteric  religious  metaph}rsics,  now  called  Kabbalah  or  Qabbalah,
are  a  reminiscence  of  an  ancient"  Wisdom  Rdigian,^^  which  appears  to
have  existed,  at  a  most  archaic  period,  in  the  Asiatic  learned  world.     It
is  therefore  not  surprising,  that  its  germs  may  be  found  in  the  ancient
books  of  China.     The  oldest  book  of  the  Chinese  which  has  reached  our
day  is,  most  likely,  the  Yih  King,  /.^.,  Book  of  Changes,  said  to  have  been
first  written  2850  B.  C,  in  the  dialect  of  the  Akkadian  or  Black  race,  of
Mesopotamia.     The  earliest  historical  antiquity  of  the  Chinese,  is  with
Fu-hsi,  circa  3400  B.C.,  the  lowest,  with  K'ung-Foo-Tse,  1.^.,  the  Master
Kung  (Confucius  b.  551,  B.  C),  about  the  time  of 'the  last  Jewish  return
from  Babylonia,  a  few  years  before  the  death  of  Sakhya  Mdni.     In  the
Yih,  the  Great  Extreme  is  O,  the  two  elementary  forms  are,  male,  active,
,  female,  passive, .     The  Yih  has  a  system  of  num-
bers  which   recall   the  tetrad  and   decade  of  Pythagoras.     Early  Chi-
nese scholars  say:   '*  In  the  Yih  is  the  Great  Extreme.     When  we  speak
of  Yin  (male),  and  Yang  (female),  we  mean,  the  aether  collected  in  the
Great  Void.     When  of  Hard  and  Soft,  the  aether  collected  and  formed
into   substance.      The  trigrams  of  the  Yih   contain  the  three  powers,
*        *        *        the   three   powers  unite  and   are   one.'*  *    The    pro-
cess  of  change   is  production   and  reproduction.     Kwei,    the   animal
soul,  is  similar  to  the  Hebrew,  Nephesh ;  Shan,  the  intellectual  soul,  to
the  Neshamah;   Khien,  (the  symbol   of)  heaven,   is  father;    Khwan,
(the  symbol   of)   earth,   is  mother;    ICan   (manifests)   the   first   appli-
cation (of  Khien  to  Khwan),  resulting  in  the  begetting  of  (the  first)  male
(or  undivided  line),  hence  ICan  (?  Qua-in)  is  called  the  oldest  son.    *'  God

*  I^ou  Tsz'  had  somewhat  similar  ideas.    See  Ante^  pp.  112,  113.


445

comes  forth  in  Kan  (to  his  producing  work).**  This  is  apparently  the
B'ree-atic  Adam  or  Metatron,  the  Makrokosm.  The  male  numbers  are,
light  circles  and  odd,  i,  3,  5,  7,  9;  the  female,  dark  and  even  numbers^
are,  2,  4,  6,  8,  10.  The  light  circles  are  Yang,  vivifying  energy,  Thai
Yang,  the  Great  Brightness,  the  sun,  male ;  the  dark  circles  are  Yin,  the
moon,  female,   plastic,  called  Thai   Yin,  the  Great  Obscurity.      The

Spiritual  Light  is  represented  by ,  the  darkness  by .

The  numbers  belonging  to  Heaven  are  5,  to  earth  5.  The  triad  or  three
powers  are,  Heaven,  Man,  Earth.  The  Man  is  the  Great  Man,  paralleling
the  Makrokosm  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah.  But  it  differs,  in  that  the
Great  Universal  Man  of  the  ancient  Chinese  religion,  is  perfect,  all  ac-
tive, nature.     The  perfect  number  is  10.     The  numbers  for  heaven,  the

,  or  male,  are  2,  i,  6  =  9;  for  earth,  the ,  or  female,

1,4,  4  =  9;  216+  144^  360,  (12x30  ^  360.)  Heaven  is  as  the  circum-
ference of  a  circle,  it  is  three  times  its  diameter.  Its  number  is  3.
The  earth  is  square,  the  circumference  of  a  square,  is  four  times  its
length  or  breadth,  or  is  of  two  pair  of  equal  sides.  The  number  of  the
earth  is  2.  Heaven  gives  Form,  the  Eiarth  is  vitalized,  receives  Form.
Life  is  the  keeping  of  Form,  death  is  the  going  back  to  Non-Form.
In  these,  as  in  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  is  the  harmony  between  the  spir-
itual and  material.  It  says,  we  can  comprehend  the  invisible  only
through  the  visible.  The  Chinese  say  '*God  (Himself)  cannot  be  seen,
we  see  Him  in  the  things  which  He  produces.**  (Comp.  Exod.  xxxiii,
18-23.)  The  Yih  says :  **  When  we  speak  of  spirit,  we  mean  the  subtile
presence  (and  operation  of  God),  within  all  things.**  The  Chinese  con-
ception of  the  earth  is  that  of  a  cube,  and  a  cube  has  6  sides,  is  a  symbol
of  the  content  of  all  dimension,  /.^.,  length,  breadth  and  depth;  these  are
only  grasped  by  the  human  mind  through  their  positive  and  negative  poles,
which  make  6,  and  with  the  energies  of  these  poles,  going  out  of  and  re-
turning to  the  rest  point,  we  have  in  the  centre,  the  rest  point,  the
cessation  of  motion  or  7th  day  of  Genesis.  Khan  is  the  lineal  symbol
of  water,  as  a  character,  its  meaning  is  "a  pit,  a  defile;*'  so  in  the  Qab-
balah, the  Deity  cut  into  or  excavated  in  the  abyss,  the  face  of  the
deep,  the  forms  of  the  things.  *'The  Superior  Man,**  says  the  Yih,
"  in  accordance  with  his  large  (nature)  virtue  (energy  ?),  supports  (men


446

and)  things.''     Khang-ze  says  of  him:    ''  Dwelling  on  high,  and  taking
nothing  from  those  below  him,   but  on  the  contrary  giving  more  to
them,  the  Superior  Man  accomplishes  his  aim  on  a  grand  scale."     This
aim  is  to  increase  what  others  have,  he  is  the  life  giving.      ''In  his
single  person,''  says  Lin  Hsiyuan,  ''he  sustains  the  burden  of  all  under
the  sky      ♦     *      ♦      birds,  beasts  and  creeping  things,  etc. ,  dep>end  on
him  for  the   fulfillment  of  their  destined  being."     (Comp.   Fs.  viii.)
The  universe   is  a  Makrokosm,  humanity  a  Mikrokosm.     (See  the  Yo
Ki  of  the  Li  Ki  §  iii,  3.)     Human  reason  is  that  of  the  Universe.     The
sage,  the  Yih  says,  knows  the  characteristics  of  the  anima  and  the  ant-
mus.     The  latter,  shan,  expands  and  ascends,  in  it  the  breath  of  life
predominates  in   the  essence  of  the  animal  soul,   but  the   anima  or
hwei  contracts,  shrivels,  goes  back  to  earth  and  to  non-entity.     The
Yih   holds ;   everything  is  always  in  motion,   expanding  and  contract-  .
ing,  similar  to  the  Tzimtzum  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah.     The  Yang  origi-
nates a  shadowy  outline,  the  Yin  fills  this  outline  with  substance.     Here  is
the  Qabbalistic  doctrine  of  the  Balance  as  set  forth  in  the  Siphrah  D'Tzni-
oothah  or  Book  of  Secrecy,  and  the  philosophical  system  of  Ibn  Gebirol,
with  which  the  much  earlier  writer,  the  pseudo-Dionysios,  the  Areopagite,
is  often  in  accord.  The  Hebrew  Qabbalistic  idea  of  the  Ain  Soph^  the  With-
out End,  is  stated  by  Wang  Pi  (A.D  226-249)  ^^  ^^^  Commentary  on  the
Yih.     The  original  of  All  appears  to  be  the  Supreme  Desire,  Wisdom,
Reason  or  Word.     The  Hebrew  Qabbalistic  idea,  of  the  first  emanation
or  creation,  being  that  of  a  point,  N'qoodah^  is  the  shang  with  Ti-Shang-
Tiy  the  male-female,  Chinese  creating  Deity.      The  point  representing
the  Yonij  the  inert  plastic  matter,  is  placed  on  the  foreheads  of  Hindus
and  Japanese.     With  the  Chinese,  the  creating  Deity  active,  is  expressed
by  T,  when  inactive  J.,*  and  we  know  that,  mathematically,  the  centre  of
a  geometrical  point  is  infinitesimal.    The  Upper  World  is  signified  by  the


(.UlU


*  So  in  the  Zohar,  iii,  124^,  Brody  Edition,  1873;  we  have  the  following  Figure:
In  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah  these  are  the  symbols  of  the  Active  and  Pass-
ive, and  they  are  called  Treisin,  i.  e.j  Searching,  that  is  that  either  Name

^^  ^  ^*  %  cannot  be  found  alone,  because  one  is  always  Mercy  and  the  other  always
Judgment,  but  Judgment  always  tempers  Mercy  and  Mercy  always  tempers

Judgment.    The  Zohar  asserts  the  world  could  not  exist  on  either  one,  by  itself.


447

firet  symbol.  The  dot  denotes  the  descending  heavenly  scintillation.
The  second  symbol  is  of  the  Lower  World,  and  the  ascending  and  return-
ing heavenly  scintillation  is  shown.  The  Chinese  imagine  three  heavens
or  spheres,  corresponding  to  those  termed  by  the  Hindus  vhii,  vhUvar
and  svar.  The  Chinese  symbolize  these  three  heavens  by  =,  when  they
wbh  to  symbolize  the  Lord  of  these,  they  cross  them,  with  a  perpendicu-
lar line  S.  Above  this  they  put  a  dot,  for  the  highest  Deity.*  We  have
in  this  the  idea  of  the  Me'norah  or  seven  branched  candlestick  of  the
Hebrews.  The  three  points  in  the  heavens  formed  the  holy  j
triangle,  symbolized  by  the  Holy  Balance  of  the  Ark  of  the  Cov-
enant ;  the  She' kheen-ah  in  the  midst  and  above,  the  two  Che-
rubim ;  one  on  the  right,  the  other  on  the  left,  below.  This  represented
the  Divine  Triad.

*  NoTB. — Compare,  the  Angel-Messiah  of  Buddhists,  Essenes  and  Chiistiaiu,  by
Ernest  De  Bunien.  London,  iSSo,  p.  57  et  leg.  Theolog.  of  the  Chinese,  W.  H.
Hedhuist,  Sen.     Shanghx,  1847,  p.  ic)S  tt  seq.


Pigurejg.— Bnbma  Vlni,  the  Hindu  udrofcdc  Gnl  nwiifeiutUw,  of  Brahman  Intmttr).^
t  S«  my  Article  in.  The  Pilh,  Neir  Vorii,  iM«,  p.  ■]!  tj.


448
Appendix  C.


COMSntL'CnoK  of  the  axkadian,  auiiJ>EAS  Am)  Babylonian,  UNtvERSB.


Jl^y^


DUfnis  Vt.— Repmnu  a  half  kciIod,  dmded  perptndiculutji,  of  the  icnrtnl  bovl-ilupcd  univmc,
which  wn*  the  ilupe  in  which  our  univcnc  wat  thought  lo  uiat.by  theubdoil  Altkadiuu,  Chal-
deciu,  Babjrloniitiii,  AujtiMat,  Hindu),  Hebrcwi,  ud  waa  at  Ihc  ytrf  ucinl  peoples,  ud  by
man;?  ctcn  in  Medieval  lime*  Id  Europe,  before  Ihe  time  of  Copeniicui;  there  being  ejrceptiom  as


A.


REPRESENTS  the  Zodiac.  It  was  in  Space  and  the  Great
Celestial  Ocean.  This  Great  Ocean  or  Sea  was  called  the
Deep  and  the  Abyss.  T'hom,  the  Great  Dragon  of  this  Great
Sea  was  also  called  Tiamat  or  Tiavat.  In  Akkadian  it  was  termed  ap~su
or  ab-zu,  i.  e.,  the  dwelling  place  of  knowledge.  It  was  also  termed  Zi-kum
or  Zi-garetm  the  Heaven  or  Deep,  which  was  considered  as  extending
above  the  firmament  of  heaven  :  it  was  really  the  primordial  Abyss  out  of
which  both  heaven  and  earlh  proceeded.  Subsequently  it  was  called
Baku,  "the  Great  Mother,"  and  earlier,  "the  pure  wild  heifer."  This
was  the  Bohu  of  ihe  Hebrew  Genesis,  and  the  Baau  of  the  Phcenicians.
Baku  was  the  plastic  existing  subtile  chaotic  matter,  the  azoth  or  sether
mass,  out  of  which,  barah,  i.  e.,  was  scooped,  the  universe.  Thohu,  was
the  active  energy,  Bohu  resisting  energy.     Zi  or  Zi-kum,  i,  e.,  the  spirit


449


of  the  deep,  (see  Ante^  P-243  sq,)  The  Upper  firmament  was  between  A
and  C,  from  C  to  E  was  the  Lower  firmament.  £  represents  the  convex
hollow  earth  shell.  F  F,  the  hollow  concave  under-world  with  its  seven
Zones,  answering,  as  shadows,  to  the  orbits  of  the  seven  planets.  G  was
that  part  of  the  underworld  called  the  Nadir  (or  Root)  a  word  which  has
been  anglicized.  In  it  were  '*  the  waters  of  life.**  Below  it  were  the  21
hells,  the  abode  of  demons.  Extending  beyond  these  upwards  and
around  to  an  unknown  distance,  was  the  Great  Crystal  Sea,  from  or  in
which,  the  universe  visible  to  man,  was  formed.  B  in  Akkadian  was
jE*zara,  the  zone  of  the  fixed  stars.  A  to  B  was  the  zone  of  Ana  or  Z/-
ana  the  spirit  of  the  heavens,  called  by  the  Semites  Anu,  also  Baa/
Sha^mayeetn,  Anu  means  in  Sanskrit  an  atom,  and  from  this  word  prob-
ably comes  our  annual^  and  the  Latin  anus  a  circle.  B  to  C  was  ul-gana^
the  lower  part  of  the  upper  firmament.  This  was  the  zone  of  the  planets,
/.  ^.,  lubatox  lu-^ady  also  called,  ''the  seven  bell-wethers."  They  were
"  sheep,**  *'  wanderers,*'  *'  watchers."  It  was  the  zone  of  lightning  and
thunders,  and  was  ruled  by  Bel  ox  Baal:  the  lower  part  was  said  to  be
ruled  by  him  in  common  with  Ea  or  Hea  Wisdom.

The  planets,  in  the  Assyrian  bibbuy  were  arranged  by  the  Chaldean
astrologers,  as  follows :

Metal  Color  Symbols  on  the  Boundary  Stones,

Lead  Black.  Tortoise  or  Camel's  head  and

neck.


Planet
I.  a.    Saturn


2.  d,    Jupiter       Tin


White,  sometimes  orange,  Bent  horns  arranged  in  a  py-


3.  ^.

4.  d

5.  e.


Mars

Sun
Venus


Iron

Gold

Copper


or  purple.
Red.

Yellow  or  gold  color.
Green  or  Yellow  Green.


6.  /.     Mercury    Quicksilver     Blue.


7.  g.     Moon        Silver


ramidical  shape.

Spear  head.

Pointed  star.

Wedged  shaped  symbol.
(  Yoni  r)

Erect  serpent  alongside  of
bent  horns  arranged  in  a
pyramidical  shape.

Crescent


Silver  or  silvery  white.

Venus  is  placed  next  to  the  sun.     This  arrangement  is  required  to

produce  the  artificial  sequence  of  the  planetary  names  of  the  days  of  the

week,  as  we  now  have  them.     It  is  one  of  the  proofs  that  these  came  to

us  from  the  people  of  Archaic  Babylonia.     C  to  £  was  the  zone  or  firma-

29


450

ment  of  the  atmosphere^  of  winds,  storms  and  clouds.    In  it  poured  forth
the  rain  through  ganu/,  i,  e.,  gutters.     This  zone  rested  upon  the  convex
Earth-shell  E.  The  Earth-shell  was  called,  '*  the  countries."  Its  spirit  was
zi-ki-a,    F,  F,  was  under  E,  the  Earth-shell.    It  was  the  realm  of  the  king
of  the  ghost- world,  the  king  of  the  dead,  MuUlil  or  Mui-ge.    It  was  also  at
one  time  thought  to  be  especially  ruled  by  Ea  or  Hea^  the  deity  of  Wis-
dom.   It  was  thought  to  contain  seven  zones.  {Ante,  p.  415  sq,  /  Is.  xiv,
15.)    The  dead  were  said  to  be  awarded  positions  in  the  different  zones
dependent  on  their  sins  when  alive,  but  this  point  is  not  settled  among
Assyriologists.    The  good  who  died  may  have  gone  at  once  to  the  **  land
of  the  Silver  Sky.**    F,  F,  was  called  Ge,  note  the  Gdioi  Gdi-hinmrni,  also
the  place  of  El-im,  and  of  Mul-ge  or  Mul-Hiy  its  king.     It  was  the  realm
oiNifi'kt'gai  or  Aliaty  queen  oiHea  or  of  Mul-ge,  She  was  queen  of  "  the
Great  Country;**  "the  country  from  whence  none  return;**  "the  land
of  no-re  tiurn;**  "the  tomb;**  "temple;**  zn^  oi  ekur-bat,  "the  temple
of  the  dead.'*  In  some  respects  it  was  like  the  Hebrew  Sheo/ (Is,  xiv.)  G,
was  the  Nadir,  the  opposite  of  this,  was  (nuz-kd)  perhaps  the  Zenith.     It
was  also  "  the  foundation  of  the  whole  universe,'*  and  in  it,  was  the  throne
of  Baku  or  Chaos,  near  which  were  "  the  waters  of  life.**  I,  was  Kharzak-
kurra,  the  mountain  of  the  East  or,  of  the  world.     The  ark  was  said  to  have
rested  upon  it.    The  gods  lived  upon  it  like  the  Hindu  deities  did  on  Mt.
Meru,  and  the  Greek  deities  on  Mt.  Olympus  and  Mt.  Atlas.     It  sup-
ported the  firmament,  and  by  some  of  the  texts,  it  may  be  thought  of  as
rooted  in  the  Nadir.    (Comp.  Is.  xiv,  13-14.)    The  Old  Testament  sev-
eral times  speaks  of  a  Holy  Mountain  of  God.  The  cuneiform  texts  imply
it  was  used  by  the  gods,  like  Jacob's  Ladder,  to  go  up  and  down  on.  (See
Ante,  p.  245.)     It  widened  at  the  top  and  upon  that  they  lived.     It  may
have  some  reference  to  the  polar  star  and  the  apparent  revolutions  of  the
heavens  around  it.     II,  is  the  Great  chaotic  Cr}'stalline  Sea,  abzu-arra ;
or  arra  the  river,  surrounding  the  Earth-shell,  and  extending  an  indefi-
nite distance.     Ill,  Nuz-ka  was  on  the  top  of  the  World-mountain.     It
was  the  pivot  of  the  starry  vault.     IV,  are  the  gates  or  entrances  con-
trolled by  porters,  to  the  underworld,  the  abode  of  AUat.     A  place  for
the  ghosts  of  the  dead,  also  for  punishment.    In  it  were  held  the  "  waters
of  life  **  a  parallel  perhaps  to  the  Tree  of  Life.


451

An  idea  of  the  Egyptians  and  Hebrews,  was,  that  the  universe  was
depicted  by  the  layers  of  an  onion ;  (see  Ante^  P-  4^5  sq.  The  former  con-
sidered in  early  times,  that  vegetable,  as  too  sacred  to  be  eaten.)  The
Mohammedans  and  Russians,  from  the  onion-shaped  domes  of  their  sacred
buildings,  seem  to  have  a  similar  idea  as  to  this  vegetable.  Through  the
gloomy  regions  of  the  underworld  the  ancient  peoples  of  Babylonia  and
Chaldea,  thought  the  nocturnal  journey  of  the  sun  took  place.  All  the  stars,
planets,  etc.,  revolved  around  Kharzak4airra^  the  Mountain  of  the  World,
as  to  which  the  idea  is  pre-historic.  It  was  the  central  shaft  around  which
the  heavens  and  earth  were  built,  perhaps  was  referred  to  the  North  star,
around  which  the  Dipper  appears  to  float.  This  pivotal  point,  the  top  of
the  world-mountain,  was  not  thought  of  as  the  zenith  for  that  was  imme-
diately above  the  land  of  Akkad,  but  the  mountain  which  was  the  pivot
upon  which  the  firmament  revolved,  was  to  the  North  East  of  the  land  of
the  Akkadians  and  Babylonians.  Beyond  this  mountain  was  the  land  of
Aralli,  rich  in  gold  *  and  inhabited  by  the  blessed  spirits  and  the  gods.
It  was  from  the  under-world  F,  F,  that  the  demons  of  death  and  disease
came,  but  they  were  subject  to  the  control  of  the  heavenly  gods,  and  as
we  have  said,  it  is  not  certain  that  the  Akkadians  and  archaic  Babylonians
considered  F,  F,  as  the  place  inhabited  by  the  dead  of  mankind,  they
may  have  been  placed  in  the  yet  lower  abodes,  and  F  F  have  been  con-
sidered the  place  occupied  by  the  Evil  Spirits,  Gnomes,  etc.

The  Mazkim^  /.  ^.,  ensnarers,  who  are  also  mentioned  in  the  Zohar,  (As
Maziqtm,  See  Ante  p.  434  sq,)  obey  the  command  "  which  comes  from
the  midst  of  Heaven,  the  evil  destiny  which  issues  from  the  depths  of  the
Abyss."     One  of  the  cuneiform  tablets  says :

"  They  are  the  productions  of  the  infernal  regions,
On  high  they  bring  trouble,  and  below  they  bring  confusion."
They  penetrate  everywhere :

*<  Doors  do  not  stop  them,
Bolts  do  not  stop  them,  they  glide  in  at  the  doors  like  serpents."

Each  part  of  the  body  had  a  demon  to  affect  it,  Idpa  was  the  fever,  '
Namtar  the  plague,  Utug  held  the  forehead,  Alal  the  chest,  Gigim  the
bowels,  and  Telal  the  hand.

*G>mp.  Zohar  i,  fol.  132a,  col.  526.    Brody  Ed.  i,  249^,  250a.


452

The  people  had  great  fear  of  darkness^  as  did  the  ancient  Hebrews,  and
the  old  and  modem  Hindus.

The  images  of  the  spirits  were  amulets  and  talisman,  and  were  cut  on
stone  and  worn  suspended  from  the  neck ;  magic  knots  and  bands,  en-
chanted waters,  magic  numbers,  especially  seven,  and  the  supreme  ineffa-
ble name,  known  only  to  Ea  ;*  were  especially  sacred.     The  figures  of
the  winged  bulls  with  human  heads,  Sed,  Alap  or  Kirub  (cherub),  placed
at  the  portals  of  palaces,  were  talisman  which  were  supposed  to  contain
invisible  genii  which  were  bound  to  the  door  posts  as  long  as  their  images
remained  there  \  the  Jews  to  this  day,  place  amulets,  Me^tunah  {Ante  p.
67),  in  the  door  posts  of  their  houses  and  use  the  Phylacteries.     Some  of
the  genii,  e.g.^  Nergaly  had  a  lion's  body  with  a  man's  head,  sometimes  a
man's  body  and  a  lion's  head,  Nattig  an  eagle's  head,  Ustar  a  human
likeness. t    On  the  cylinder  signets  are  representations  of,  the  good  and
evil,  light  and  darkness,  a  solar  myth  and  the  spirit  of  chaos  and  disorder,
fighting.^    These  signets  were  not  only  talismans,  but  the  impression  of
the  intaglio  was  supposed  to  preserve  the  objects  impressed,  from  the  in-
fluence of  evil  spirits.    In  the  poem  of  the  Descent  of  Ishtar^  the  infernal
regions  are  divided  into  zones  like  those  in  the  Zohar  and  parallel  the
poem  of  Dante,  and  the  magic  tablets  mention,  '''seven  doors  and  seven
fastenings  of  the  world  "  controlled  by  porters.§

The  main  entrance  to  the  Underworld  was  in  the  West,  near  the
Mountain  of  the  West  (or.  South- West).  The  ''great  porter"  of  this
gate  was  Negab,  the  "  porter  of  the  world,"  this  gate  would  be  in  oppo-
sition to  the  Mountain  of  the  East  or  North-East,  the  abode  of  the  gods
and  the  blessed.  ||  In  the  west  the  sun  disappeared  beyond  the  waters  of
the  Great  Ocean.  This  gate  was  asserted  to  be  guarded  by  two  human-
headed  bulls  or  genii,  one  on  each  side,  inside  were  twelve  gods  of  bronze
sustaining  the  bronze  inclosure.     In  the  Underworld  were,  "  seven  gods

*  See,  Descent  of  Ishtar  to  Hades,  as  to  the  word  given  by  Ea  to  the  Phantom.
t  Corop.  Ezek.  i,  10-14.    Records  of  the  Past  iii,  121.    F.  Lenormant's  Chal.  Magic,
PP-39»47»  121.

X  Smith's  Chald.  Genesis,  pp.  62,  95-96,  102,  174,  239.     Ante  p.  237  s^,

{  See,  The  HakhaUoth^  1.  ^.,  Palaces  and  Dwellings.     Zohar  i,  -fia  to  45^,  Brody  Ed.
II  Trans.  Soc.  Bib.  Arch,  ii,  p.  188.    Chald.  Magic,  p.  167.


453

sons  of  the  lord  of  the  infernal  regions,  Eni-mesari  or  Nin-a-yu^  Dark-
ness (Assyr.  Dis.,  Smith,  199),  who  dwell  in  flame."  Inside  of  the
bronze  inclosure  another  genii  was  invoked.  The  demons  of  disease
"came  forth  from  Hell'*  and  were  "the  productions  of  the  tomb."
The  plague,  Namtar^  was  the  favorite  son  of  Mul-lil  or  Mul-ge  the  king
of  the  demons,  by  his  queen  Nin-ki-gaL  Mul-ge  was  the  father  of  seven
evil  spirits  who  warred  against  Heaven  and  the  Moon.  The  nocturnal
Sun,  Nin-dara^  was  his  child,  it  fought  against  the  demons  and  plagues,
and  when  hidden  from  the  Chaldeans  it  was  thought  to  be  combatting  the
Darkness,  the  demon  Tiamat;  as  it  also  was  said  to  have  done  on  the
first  day  of  the  creation.  It  triumphed  by  its  rising.  The  demons  were
especially  inhabitants  of  the  desert,*  but  they  also  entered  into  and  took
possession  of  man  and  diseased  him.f  Then  there  were  frightful  ghosts,
the  Innifty  the  Uruku  a  hobgoblin,  and  larva,  the  worm  that  dieth  not.J
Alaly  Gtgim,  Telaly  Afazkim  (Maziqim  ?)  the  Phantom,  Spectre,  and  the
Vampire  and  Lil-ith.  The  latter  two  attacked  man,  the  two  named  pre-
viously to  these,  only  frightened  him.  Then  there  were  the  Incubus,
Succubus  and  the  Nightmare.  These  were  a  few  of  the  frightful  produc-
tions of  the  fearful  mythology  of  the  early  Semitic  inhabitants  of  Mesopo-
tamia, Chaldea  and  Babylonia,  which  they  had  received  from  the  Black
race,  the  Turanian  Akkadians.

The  sorcery  of  the  Chaldeans  was  of  two  kinds ;  one,  came  from  the
power  of  the  gods  constraining  the  action  of  the  demons,  which  partakes
of  the  characteristics  of  a  religion,  and  may  be  termed  White  Magic :  the
other  sought  to  propitiate  the  demons.  The  latter  is  witchcraft  and  devil
worship,  it  is  necromancy  or  negromancy,  Black  Magic.  §  Along  with
the  priests  of  the  gods,  witches  and  wizards  legally  flourished  to  an  enor-
mous extent.  They  were  both  feared  and  hated.  (Chald.  Magic,  p.  60.)
Their  great  enemy  was  the  light,  the  sun  ;  their  sorceries  were  therefore

*  Chald.  Magic  31.    Isa.  xxxiv,  13-14.

t  Chald.   Magic  20-21,  32-33.    Trans.  Soc.  Bib.  Arch,  ii,  56.    The  Thrones  and
Palaces  of  Babylon,  Newman,  116.
X  Isa.  Ixvi,  24.     Mark  ix,  44-46,  48.

{  Comp.  Tylor's,  Primitive  Culture,  also  his,  Researches  into  the  Early  Hist  of  Man-
kind.


454

prepared  in  the  darkness  of  night.   The  spell  or  charm  was,  **  that  which
acts,  that  which  is  bad,  that  which  is  violent."     The  formula  of  the  wiz-
ard  was  called  "  the  Work  ;*'  the  incantation  was,  "  the  Word  ;'*  the  Phil-
ter; "the  Mortal  Thing."     The  sorcerer  caused  "the  Evil  Eye;"  the
"  Unlucky  word;"  and  the  demons  became  subject  to  him,  and  he  sent
them  against  persons  and  countries.     He  could  even  kill  if  he  wished,
and  do  this  by  making  images  of  wax,  etc.,  such  as  were  afterwards  used
by  the  Medieval  sorcerers  of  Europe.*     The  most  potent  form  with  the
sorcerer  was  "  the  Imprecation,"  by  this  he  was  supposed  to  gain  power
over  the  protecting  spirit  of  the  individual. f    Above  these  and  above  the
world-shell,  were  the  angels,  the  Ideds  and  Igigiy  the  celestial ;  and  within
it,  the  Anunaki  the  gnomes,  and  the  terrestrial,  spirits.  J     The  archangel
of  the  Abyss  was  Anunna-ge^^

When  we  come  to  investigate  the  kosmos  of  the  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah,
Idrah  Rabbah  and  Idrah  Zootah,  of  the  Book  Zohar ;  we  find  a  remark-
able similarity,  which  tends  to  show  the  Chaldean  kosmos  in  these  oldest
books  of  the  compilation  called  the  Zohar.  In  A  B,  B  C,  C  E,  and  E  G
we  have  similarities  to  the  Four  Worlds.  The  three  great  heavens  answer
to  the  Upper  Three  Sephiroth.  I.  That  of  the  Father,  Abba,  or  KethtTy
the  Crown,  \.o  Anu  afterwards  Ana;  the  place  of  the  aether  or  highest
sublimated  air  or  atmosphere.  II.  The  Son,  Bel,  El  or  Baal,  the  subli-
mated fire,  answering  to  ^Hokhmahy  Wisdom.  III.  The  Mother,  Immah,
to  Ea  the  sublimated  water,  to  Binahy  the  comprehending  Intellect.
Above  all  of  these  is  Aoy  Ilu  or  Ely  the  unknown  ideal  deity ;  which  par-
allels the  Ain  Sophy  Endless  to  man's  comprehension  No-Thing.  This
unknown  ideal  deity,  held  the  highest  place  in  the  Chaldean  Mythology.
Under  these  were  the  seven  planets  in  their  seven  orbits,  or  spheres;
the  probable  germ  of  the  idea  of  the  Sephiroth,  or  media  between  the
Highest  and  Lowest  worlds.  The  Tower  of  Borsippa  (Babel  ?)  parallels
the  Mt.  Meru  of  the  Hindus ;  each  of  its  seven  stories  was  devoted  to  a

♦  Chald.  Magic,  pp.  5,  43,  61-63.
t  Ibid.  pp.  68,  64.

}  Chald.  Magic,  pp.  138,  148,  122.     See,  Book  of  Enoch,  c.  68-77.

{Chald.  Magic,  p.  164.    Comp.  on  the  subject  of  Magic;  Rydberg*s,  Magic    in  the
Middle  Ages.


455

planet,  a  metal,  and  a  color,  as  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  discovered  and  has
written  upon.

The  connection  between  the  Ten  Sephiroth  and  the  orbits  of  the  plan-
ets, may  be  a  solution  of  the  puzzle  of  the  learned  for  over  800  years,  and
may  show  that  the  seven-storied  Tower  of  Solomon's  Temple,  Mt.  Meru,
the  Tower  of  Borsippa,  Jacob's  Ladder  and  the  Holy  Mountain,  (Ezek.
xxviii,  14,  XX,  40;  Ps.  Ixxxvii,  i ;  Is.  xi,  9,  Ivii,  13,  Ixv,  11)  have  a  great
similarity  between  themselves  and  refer  to  seven  storied  planet  towers,
and  so  have  a  connection  with  the  Seven  Lower  Sephiroth.  The  curious
heretofore  unexplained  craniums  or  skulls,  etc.,  of  AWeekh  An-peen^  the
Long  Faces,  and  of  Ze^ir  An-peen^  the  Small  Faces,  would  be  similar  to
the  skull  shape  of  the  divisions  of  the  Chaldean  universe.  The  eyes  of
the  latter,  white,  red  and  black,  may  be  the  sun  in  its  different  phases;
these  eyes  are  like  those  of  fishes,  not  having  lids  \  they  are  in  the  Great
Crystalline  Sea:"^  the  hairs  of  the  head  and  beard  are  the  efHuxes  or
emanations  flowing  from  the  Highest,  and  bringing  down  the  ''  Dew  of
Life  "  which  "  supports  the  existing  and  resurrects  the  dead."  The  uni-
verse as  this  Great  Head,  has  ears  tc^hear,  witness,  sound ;  eyes  to  see,
note  the  rays  of  the  sun ;  and  its  mouth  throws  out  the  breath  of  vitality
upon  all.  In  the  Book  of  Enoch  (^Han'okK)  we  have  descriptions  which
appear  to  have  as  a  foundation,  the  plan  we  have  shown. f  In  the  Chaldean
Universe  is ;  the  Mountain  whose  point  reaches  to  heaven,  the  Water  of
Life,  the  Great  Sea,  into  which  the  sun  sinks  in  the  West  and  from  the
East  side  of  which  it  rises;  there  is  the  place  of  the  departed  spirits,  **  the
Great  Darkness,"  SheoL  The  Nadir  is  also  mentioned,  as  "the  great
comer  stone  of  the  earth,"  the  "four  pillars  of  heaven,"  etc.  The
watchers,  in  Enoch,  are  the  planets.  (Compare  Enoch  93-104-105,  c.
xviii,  24;  c.  xxii,  9 ;  also  c.  vii,  §  2  and  viii;  and  Tobit  vi,  13.)

*  Ea  the  Deity  of  Wisdom,  is  **  the  great  fish  of  the  ocean ''  or  ^  the  sublime  fish."
Chald.  Magic,  p.  156  et  seq.     He  is  Oanms,  the  Chaldean  Fish  god.
f  Schodde's  Enoch,  Andover,  1882,  p.  89.


456


Appendix  D.


THE  MYSTIC  THEOLOGY  OF  DIONYSIOS,   THE   AREOPAGITE.


CHAPTER  I.

A  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  UNKNOWN   DEITY  WHO  IS   IK   THE    DARKNESS.

To  Timothy:

SECTION  I .  Triad  above  all  substance,  super-divine  and  above  the
Good,  guide  of  the  Christians  into  the  Divine  Wisdom,*  conduct-
ing us  to  that  above  agnosy,  /.  ^.,  the  unknowable,  to  the  highest
clearness  and  the  super-eminent  height ;  in  which  the  simple,  absolute,  and
immutable  mysteries  of  theology,  are  to  be  discovered  in  the  bosom  of  the
super-luminous  obscurity,  f  by  a  silence,  which  is  initiator  to  the  arcana : —
obscurity  which,  in  the  thickest  darkness,  shines  forth  with  the  greatest
splendor,  and,  under  a  perfect  intangibility  and  invisibility,  overfills  with
charms  above  beauty,  the  eye  of  the  intellect.

Behold  this  my  prayer : —

Do  thou,  my  friend  Timothy,  exercise  thyself  without  relaxation  in  the
mystical  pageant,  departing  from  the  side  of  the  senses  and  intellectual
operations,  the  wholly  sensual  and  intelligible,  the  entire  being  and  non-
being;  and  by  means  of  the  agnosy  (/'.  ^.,  knowledge  not  obtained  from
the  material)  elevate  thyself,  as  far  as  possible,  to  a  union  with  that  which
is  above  all  substance  and  gnosis,  (/.  ^.,  materialistic  knowledge.)

Because  it  is  through  that  free,  sincere  and  pure  ecstasy,  outside  of
thyself  and  of  all  (the  material ;)  that,  renouncing  the  same  and  disen-

*  "  For  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  Intelligence,  study  not  the  existences  through  the
existing,  for  It  is  in  Itself  and  through  Itself,  Its  own  quality  and  cause.  ♦  •  ♦
The  Gnosis  of  all,  in  place  of  considering  each  thing  in  its  idea,  perceives  and  con-
ceives all  under  its  embrace  as  one  cause,  *  *  *  the  Divine  Wisdom,  in  Itself  know-
ing, comprehends  All.'*  Dionysios  on,  the  Divine  Names,  c.  vii,  {  2.  "  He  made
darkness  His  Secret  Place^  His  pavilion  around  about  Him  were  dark  waters  in  cloudy
skies.*'  Fs.  xviii,  ii,  Comp.  Ex.  xix,  9;  II  Sam.  xxii,  10, 12;  I  Kings  viii,  12;  II  Chron.
vi,  I.

f  Faith  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for^  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,  Heb.  xi,  i.


457

gaging  thyself  from  all,  thou  wilt  elevate  thyself  to  the  super-substantial
splendor  of  the  Divine  obscurity.

Section  2.  Preserve  as  to  all  of  this,  that  which  should  not  be  under-
stood by  the  profane  (multitude),  that  is,  (keep  it)  from  the  men  who,
plunged  into  the  material,  imagine  that  above  it  there  is  not  anything
super-substantial ;  and  believe  they  understand  by  their  own  knowledge,
that  which  has  taken  the  darkness  for  Its  retreat.

But  if  the  divine  mystagogy  goes  beyond  their  capacity,  what  shall  we
say  of  those  men  still  more  profane,  who,  representing  the  super-eminent
Cause  of  All  by  the  last  of  the  existences ;  pretend  that  the  Deity  docs
not  excel  anything  above  the  atheistic  and  multiform  phantoms  of  their
own  fabrication.*

Whilst  we  ought  to  bestow  on  the  Deity,  by  affirming  as  in  It,  all  the
compositions  of  the  existences,  since  of  All,  the  Deity  is  the  Cause  (Acts
xvii,  28),  or,  better  still,  by  denying  them  all ;  because  the  Deity  is  ruler
above  All;  and  having  in  our  thought  that  these  negations  do  not  con-
tradict those  affirmations,  but  that,  so  much  as  it  is,  through  the  excess
of  priority  above  the  privations,  the  Deity  is  above  all  division  and  all
composition.f

Section  3.  It  is  then  with  this  meaning  in  his  mind  that  the  divine
Bartholomew  says :  That  theology  is  at  the  same  time  ample  and  brief,
and  that  the  Gospel,  though  vast  and  developed,  is  nevertheless  con-
cise.

It  has  seemed  to  me  supernaturally  understood,  that  the  good  Cause  of
All  expresses  Itself  in  many  words,  in  a  few  words,  and  also  without
words,  there  not  being  for  It  either  speech  or  intellection,  because,  It  is
super-substantially  superior  to  all  (words  and  intellectuality ;)  and  that  the
Deity  manifests  Itself,  in  openness  and  in  truth,  only  to  those  who,  tra-
versing all  impurity  and  purity,  leaping  over  the  height  of  the  most  sub-
lime sanctity,  and  putting  aside  henceforth  all  the  divine  lights,  all  sounds,
and  all  celestial  words ;  to  by  so  doing  swallow  themselves  up,  as  it  were,

♦  Rom.  i,  23.

f  The  Deity  is  pure  action,  essentially  existent,  containing  essentially  all  the  perfec-
tions in  their  greatest  absoluteness  and  simplicity,  yet  we  cannot  bind  or  limit  It  by
asserting  any  of  Its  qualities.    Comp.  also  Aristotle,  Metaphysics,  Bk.  iv,  c.  xxii.


458

in  the  darkness,  in  which  in  reality,  as  the  oracles  (/.  ^.^  the  Scriptures)
teach,  is  the  Deity  which  is  above  All  (the  created.)

So  it  was  not  without  a  motive  that  the  divine  Moses  received  the  order
to  at  first  purify  himself,''^  and  then  separate  himself  from  the  impuref
that,  the  purification  accomplished,  he  (might)  understand  the  various
sounds  of  the  trumpets,  and  might  see  the  multiplied  fire  which  threw  out
numerous  and  limpid  rays ;  and  who,  in  short,  departing  from  the  multi-
tude, ascended  with  his  chosen  priests^  as  far  as  the  summit  of  the  Divine
ascensions.  At  the  same  time  Moses  had  not  any  conversation  with  God,
no  more  than  he  could  perceive  God,  because  God  is  unperceivabU ;  he
saw  only  the  Place  (Ma^am)  in  which  the  Deity  was.  This  signifies,  in
my  view,  that  the  most  divine  and  sublime  objects  in  the  visions  or  intel-
lections, are  in  some  way,  only  the  insinuative  expressions  of  the  attri-
butes of  the  Deity,  who  exceeds  all :  expressions  which  indicate  Its  pres-
ence, above  all  intellection ;  passing  over  the  intellectual  summits  of  the
most  holy  places.  (Comp.  Prov.  iv,  i8,  19.)

And  then  (the  man,)  delivered  as  much  from  that  which  is  seen  as  from
that  which  sees,  penetrates  into  the  true  mystic  obscurity  and  darkness  of
the  agnosy ;  in  which,  he  lays  aside  all  the  conceptions  of  knowledge  (the
gnosis),  so  as  to  find  himself  in  the  intangible  and  invisible  under  all  its
afl&nities,  entirely  the  object  above  all,  no  longer  in  himself  or  others;
united,  in  a  most  excellent  manner,  to  the  absolute  agnosy  through  the
inaction  of  the  gnosis,  and,  through  that  he  understands  No-thing,  know-
ing all  that  is  above  intelligence.  (Exod.  xx,  21.)

*  Exod.  xix,  10.     Ibid.f  iii,  5.
t  Exod.  xix,  12.
X  Exod.  xix,  24.


459

Appendix  E.


THE  DOGMAS  IN  THE  NICENE  CREED  AND  THE  QABBALAH.

IT  will  be  observed  in  three  of  the  Diagrams  or  Qabbalistic  Trees  of
the  Sephiroth  which  we  have  given,  that  ^Hokhmah  Wisdom,  or  the
Son,  the  Greek,  Logos  or  Word ;  proceeds  as  No.  2  directly  from
Kether,  Crown,  the  Abba  or  Father,  and  that  Binah  Understanding,  the
Upper  Mother  or  Holy  Spirit  is  placed  No.  3.  Those  who  are  interested
in  the  subject  of  the  relation  of  the  Logos  to  the  Father,  should  compare
the  doctrines  of  the  New  Testament  with  those  of  Philo,  and  the  Early
Fathers  of  the  Church,  prior  to  the  Council  of  Nicaea,  of  which  the
Roman  Catholic  theologian,  Hefele,*  has  given  a  resume. f  There  is
warrant  in  the  Zohar  for  asserting  that  No.  2  should  be  Binah  and  No.  3,
*Hokhmah^  but  most  of  the  Diagrams  make  the  Son  proceed  directly  from
Abba.  The  Creed  adopted  by  the  Council  of  Nicaea  (325  A.  D.)  as
given  in  the  English  edition  of  Hefele  (the  Italics  are  by  us),  is :

"  We  believe  in  one  God,  the  Father  Almighty,  Creator  of  all  things
visible  and  invisible ;  and  in  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,
only-begotten  of  the  Father,  that  is,  of  the  substance  of  the  Father,  God
of  God,  light  of  light,  very  God  of  very  God,  begotten^  not  made,  being
of  the  same  substance  with  the  Father ,  by  whom  all  things  were  made  in
heaven  and  in  earth,  who  for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation  came  down
from  heaven,  was  incarnate,  was  made  man,  suffered,  rose  again  the  third
day,  ascended  into  the  heavens,  and  He  will  come  to  judge  the  living
and  the  dead.  And  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  Those  who  say  \  There  was  a
time  when  He  was  not,  and  He  was  not  before  He  was  begotten,  and  He
was  made  of  nothing  (He  was  created),  or  who  say  that  He  is  of  another
hypostasis,  or  of  another  substance  (than  the  Father),  br  that  the  Son  of
God  is  created,  that  He  is  mutable,  or  subject  to  change,  the  Catholic

*  A  History  of  the  Christian  Councils,  from  the  original  documents,  to  the  close  of
the  Council  of  Nicsea,  A.  D.  325,  by  Charles  Joseph  Hefele,  D.D.,  etc.  English
Trans.  Edinburgh,  1881.     Book  ii,  c.  i,  {  18,  p.  231  sq,

f  See  also  History  of  Christian  Doctrine,  by  Prof.  Henry  C.  Sheldon.  New  York,
1886,  Vol.  i,  p.  53  $q.  Especially  p.  63  j^.,  p.  194  $q^  Scha£Ps  Creeds  of  Christendom,
etc.,  hereafter  cited.  Vol.  i,  p.  24  tq.


46o

Church  anathematizes.*'  ♦  The  student  will  find  very  interesting  thought
in  comparing  ante-Nicene  Patristic  Literature  and  the  Nicene  Creed,  widi
the  early  religious  philosophy  contained  in  the  Zohar.


Appendix  F.

THE  ANTIQUITY  OF  THE  HEBREW  VOWEL   POINTS.

WE  will  not  be  able,  for  want  of  space,  to  give  our  views  in  Ml
upon  the  antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  vowel  points.  We  have
examined  the  Zohar  thoroughly  upon  the  subject  and  in  several
places  some  of  them  may  be  found  named,  but  there  are  not  as  many  as  are
now  found  in  the  Hebrew  grammars.  The  Phoenician  and  early  Hebrew
alphabets  are  quite  similar,  and  most  likely  both  are  from  a  common
source.  The  Arabic  probably  came  through  them,  and  although  the
Greek  and  Latin  alphabets  are  Aryan  and  have  a  Sanskrit  basis,  yet  there
are  certain  similarities  in  them  to  the  Phoenician  and  the  Hebrew.  The
reader  should  consult  the  writings  of  Isaac  Taylor  and  Francois  Lenor-
mant  on  the  Alphabet  in  this  connection.  In  the  Greek,  the  letters  A
a/p/ia,  E  ep^siloriy  H  eUa^  I  iota,  0  onCikron  and  IC  u^psilon,  were  used  as
vowels.  In  Hebrew  the  nearest  approach  to  vowel  sounding  letters  are
K  a^leph,  n  hehf  "  yod,  and  y  ay  in.

The  Pentateuch  Rolls  used  in  the  Synagogues  by  the  Jews  are  never
vowelized.  The  Gaon  Natrunai  ii,  b.  Hilai,  of  Sora  (859-869  A.  D.);
says;  **  And  you  enquire  of  me  whether  it  is  permissible  to  punctuate
the  Pentateuch.     We  have  not  any  punctuation  in  the  Pentateuch  and

*  Hefele's,  History  of  the  Christian  Councils,  etc.,  pp.  293-5.  ^^^  original  Greek
is  also  given.  Sheldon,  History  of  Christian  Doctrine,  etc.,  before  cited,  gives  a  differ-
ent reading,  see  his  Vol.  i,  p.  201.  John  Fulton,  D.D.,  Index  Canonum,  etc.  New
York,  1872,  pp.  1 1 8-1 19,  gives  the  original  Greek  and  an  English  reading,  differing
from  that  of  the  above  cited  writers.  Compare  also  :  The  Creeds  of  Christendom  with
a  History  and  Critical  notes,  by  Philip  Schaff,  D.D.,  LL.D.  New  York,  1877,  Vol.  ii,
pp.  57~6o;  Vol.  i,  pp.  28,  29.  Dr.  Schaff  gives  the  Greek,  also  a  Latin  and  an  English
translation.


46 1

the  punctuation  was  not  given  on  Sinai,  only  the  wise-men  ordered  it  for
a  sign."

We  would  here  say  that  there  are  two  forms  of  Hebrew  vowel  pointing.

I.  That  of  Babylonia  now  termed  the  Assyrian,  in  which  it  is  above  the
letters.  II.  That  of  Palestine  or  that  from  the  School  of  Tiberias,  in  which
it  is  below  the  letters.  The  general  opinion  of  the  Jewish  learned  men  of
the  Middle  Ages  was,  that  the  pointing  went  back  to  the  epoch  of  the
writing  by  Ezra  although  many  Jews  held  that  it  went  back  to  Moses*
The  former,  was  the  opinion  of  Ibn  Ezra,  Yehudah  ha-Levi,  and  also  of
the  Buxtorfs,  Raimundi  Martin,  Perez  de  Valentia,  Nicholas  de  Lyra,
John  Calvin  and  Martin  Luther,  indeed  one  of  the  Synods  of  the  Swiss
Protestant  Church,  declared  the  inspiration  of  the  vowel  points  of  the
Hebrew  Old  Testament  an  Article  of  Faith.  In  the  XVI  century,  based
on  the  writings  of  Elias  Levita,  b.  1469,  d.  1549  ;  called  by  the  Jews  the
Grammarian,  a  contrary  opinion  arose.  Levita  was  the  teacher  of  Hebrew
to  Cardinal  -^gidio  de  Viterbo,  Sebastian  Munster,  Paul  Fagius  and  other
illustrious  Christian  Hebraists  of  the  Renaissance.  Louis  Cappel  (Cap-
pelus)  of  Saumar  (1585-1658)  in  1624;  Jean  Morin  in  1669,  and  Fran-
cois Masclef  in  1716,  adopted  similar  opinions.  Indeed  the  opposition
went  so  far,  that  in  1732-3,  C.  F.  Houbigant  and  his  followers,  asserted
that  not  only  was  the  vowel  notation  very  recent  but  that  the  Tradition
to  the  Reader,  upon  which  it  is  based,  had  not  any  foundation.  A  third
view  was  intermediate,  it  held,  that  the  present  written  designation  of  the
vowel  points  was  not  very  old  but  that  it  represented  an  ancient  oral  tra-
dition, sufficiently  exact,  of  the  ancient  pronunciation,  and  had  taken  the
place  of  a  still  more  ancient  and  rudimentary  system.  This  is  the  view
now  generally  accepted.  It  was  first  proposed  by  J.  H.  Hottinger
(1620-1667)  and  he  has  been  followed,  with  some  modifications,  by  John
Prideaux  in  1648,  A.  Schultens  (1686-1750)  also  by  Michaelis  and  Eic-
horn.  Francois  Lenormant  holds,  that  Ezra  wrote  the  Old  Testament  in  the
ancient  Aramaic  alphabet,  which  approaches  the  writing  termed  Rabbinic,
and  not  in  the  present  square  character,  which  he  says  was  not  in  use
until  about  100  B.  C,  and  that  Ezra  did  not  use  diacritical  signs  for  the
vowels.  Isaac  Taylor  agrees  with  him  as  regards  the  square  character.
In  the  Targums  we  see  the  first  traces  of  the  vowel  notation.     The  age  of


462

the  Targumim  is  in  dispute.  The  Zohar  says,  that  of  Ounqelos,  was  from
the  disciple  of  Hillel  the  Babylonian,  circa  60  B.  C*  It  was  undoubt-
edly known  in  the  II  century.  The  other  that  of  Yonathan  ben  Uzid,  is
apparently  after  that  of  Ounqelos.  It  is  said  earlier  examples  than  those
in  the  Targumim  exist.f  The  Talmudim  also  mention  certain  signs.  When
the  Jewish  nationality  and  undoubtedly  also  books,  were  destroyed  by  the
Romans,  the  learned  priests  feared  that  the  ancient  oral  tradition  of  read-
ing the  Holy  Writings  would  be  lost,  and  this  would  also  have  caused  a
loss  of  the  true  meaning  of  the  Thorah,  therefore  they  sought  to  fix  and
preserve  the  traditional  pronunciation  as  it  had  come  down  to  them,  in*
tact  and  as  it  were  in  an  inflexible  matrix.  This  they  did  by  revealing
the  secret  oral  system  through  a  written  symbolism  and  so  established  a
notation  of  pronunciation,  but  it  must  be  said,  the  pronunciation  fixed
at  Tiberias  was  that  used  by  that  School.  This  object  is  indicated  by  the
precept  in  the  Pirqt  A  both  c.  i,  §  i.J  "  Make  a  fence  to  the  Thorah."
So  we  also  have  in  the  Talmudg  "  The  children  of  Yudah  have  carefiilly
cultivated  their  language,  and  have  placed  below,  the  signs  of  pronuncia-
tion, so  they  have  preserved  their  Thorah  in  their  hands.  The  children
of  Gallilee  have  not  carefully  cultivated  their  language,  and  have  not
placed  below  (the  letters)  the  signs  of  pronunciation ;  so  they  have  not
guarded  their  Thorah  between  their  hands."  That  is,  the  Talmud  attrib-
utes to  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  Gallileans  to  the  Mosaic  law,  the  corrup-
tion of  their  language  and  forgetfulness  of  the  true  pronunciation  of  the
Thorah,  because  of  the  absence  of  the  proper  vowel  signs.  The  Mas-
soretic  doctors  of  Tiberias  directed  their  attention  more  to  a  criticism  of
the  text  than  to  a  study  of  grammar,  and  the  invention  of  the  vowel  points
did  not  naturally  or  necessarily  enter  into  their  work.  The  view  of  Ye-
hudah  ha-Levi||  was,  that  the  Massorites  only  put  into  writing  and  gave  a

*  Comp.  McClintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop,  of  Biblical  Liter,  x,  p.  123.  This  evi-
dences the  antiquity  as  stated  in  the  Zohar.  It  holds  Ounkelos  was  about  the  time  of
Jesus.

f  See,  On  Mankind,  their  Origin  and  Destiny.     London,  1872,  chap.  ii.

J  Comp.  Chas.  Taylor's,  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers.  London,  1877,  pp.  25,  68
and  notes.     Renan  Hist,  des  langtus  skmitiquiSy  1st  Ed.,  p.  160.

J  Treatise  Nedarim^  fol.  53.

II  Khuzari.     Part  ii,  {  80 ;  iii,  {{  28,  31,  35.


463

form  to,  the  Secret  Oral  Tradition  given  at  Sinai,  which  Ezra  had  not
dared  to  transcribe.  We  assert  that  it  was  not  by  one  man  nor  in  a  short
time,  that  the  symbolic  signs  of  the  traditional  pointing  and  accenting
were  formulated,  it  took  a  long  period  and  many  learned  men  of  differ-
ent epochs.*  The  Zohar,  On  the  Song  of  Solomon,  says :  "  The  vowel
points  proceeded  from  the  same  Holy  Spirit  which  indited  the  Holy
Scriptures,  and  that  far  be  the  thought  to  say ;  the  Scribes  made  the  points,
since  even  if  all  the  prophets  had  been  as  great  as  Moses,  who  received
the  Thorah  direct  from  Sinai ;  they  could  not  have  had  authority  to  alter
the  smallest  point  in  a  single  letter,  though  it  be  the  most  insignificant  in
the  whole  Bible."  f  The  Massorites  applied,  wrote  and  propagated,  the
vowel  points  in  existence  at  their  time,  according  to  the  pronunciation  in
the  School  of  Tiberias,  they  did  not  invent  them.  J

In  the  Middle  Ages  some  of  the  learned  men,  as  we  have  said,  made
the  institution  of  the  vowel  points  we  now  have,  go  back  to  Adam,  to
Moses,  or  at  least  to  Ezra.

In  a  writing  attributed  to  the  Greek,  Demetrius  of  Phalereus  (b.  circa
345,  d.  284  B.C.)  §  bcxi,  it  is  said :  "  In  Egypt,  the  priests  celebrate  the
praises  of  the  gods  through  the  seven  vowels,  which  they  repeat  one  after
the  other."  The  first  Hebrew  Grammarians,  among  whom  is  Ibn-Ezra,
equally  adopted  the  seven  vowels.  These,  grouped  in  a  certain  way,
offered  some  resemblance  to  the  7  letters  of  the  word  YeHoVaH,  but  it  is
not  improbable  that  they  signified  7  methods  of  chanting  or  7  liturgical
formulas.  However  we  must  here  note  that  Josephus  says  of  the  Name
YHVH  that  it  was  written  in  vowels.  §

Eusebius||  cites  some  verses  to  the  Name  of  the  Deity,  from  a  Grecian

*The  accents  were  undoubtedly  in  existence  and  revealed,  before  the  time  of  St.
Jerome  and  the  Talmud.    See  in  the  Talmud,  Treatise  Be'rakhoth,

fSee,  The  Massoreth  ha-Massoreth,  of  Ellas  Levita,  being  an  exposition  of  the  mas-
soretic  notes  of  the  Hebrew  Bible,  etc.,  by  Christian  D.  Ginsburg,  LL.D.,  London,
1867.

X  Pinsker,  Sepher  LicptU  Qadmoniyoth   i.  e,.  The  First  Gatherings,  Vienna,  i860.

{  Whiston's  Ed.  Wars,  Bk.  v,  c.  v,  {  7.

II  Preparat,  evangel,^  ▼,  C,  xiv,  xi,  c.  vi.


464

sage  :  "  The  seven  vowels  celebrate  Me,  Myself  that  am  the  imperishable
God,  the  indefatigable  Father  of  all  the  Beings."*

The  Karaites  believe  the  vowel  signs  make  such  an  integral  part  of  the
sacred  text,  and  Yehudah  Hadessi  (of  Odessa?  circa  1x48  A.  D.)  consid-
ered them,  without  doubt  in  the  name  of  his  predecessors,  as  a  Siniatic
revelation,  of  that,  which  had  existed  from  the  time  of  Adam,  "f*

All  languages  written  solely  in  consonants,  such  as  the  Hebrew,  Syriac,
Aramaic,  and  Arabic,  require  to  be  vivified  by  the  addition  of  vowels,
otherwise  the  consonants  are  dead  symbols.     The  earliest  historical  evi-
dences of  the  existence  of  written  vowel  points,  are  to  be  found  in  the  Sjrriac.
The  Syrians  sought  to  adapt  to  their  written  language,  the  Greek  vowels  J,
E,  H,  0,  T,  and  abridged  and  slightly  changed  them  into  vowel  signs.  These
first  signs  they  called  by  almost  the  same  names  we  now  find  in  the  Hebrew
and  Arabic,  but  they  changed  them  to  accord  with  the  Syriac  pronuncia-
tion, and  they  were  the  equivalents  of  the  Hebrew  letters  p  Qoph,  2  Beth,
1  Vav,  and  y  Tza'dhe.     It  is  well  to  add  that  these  letters  became  long
before  k  Aleph,  1  Vav,  and  ^  Yod,  which  are  known  among  the  ancient
Hebrew  grammarians,  as  the  *  *  Mother  vowels.  *  *    The  Arabs  appear  to  have
obtained  their  written  vowel  system  from  the  Syrians,  therefore  the  names
of  the  vowels  in  Arabic,  Hebrew  and  Syrian,  are  very  similar.     Buxtorf
held  that  the  Hebrew  vowel  points,  as  we  now  have  them,  were  anterior
to  the  Massoritic  doctors  and  as  old  as  the  Hebrew  language,  and  although
his  views  were  vigorously  opposed  by  Cappelus,  yet  Buxtorf  has  had  fol-
lowers, among  whom  we  mention,  the  Rev.  John  Gill,  an  English  Bap-
tist divine,  who  wrote  a  book  upon  the  subject.  J     The  Massorites  noted
peculiarities  in  the  use  of  the  vowel  points,  of  the  dagesh  and  the  mappiky
and  the  accents,  which  Buxtorf  claims,  is  evidence  that  they  did  not
invent  the  diacritical  marks  which  indicate  the  vowels  and  accents,  for
had  they  been  the  inventors  of  them,  they  would  not  have  noted  anom-
alies and  errors  but  would  have  corrected  or  removed  them.    At  the  most

*  See,  Mankind  their  Origin  and  Destiny,  by  an  M.  A.  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford.
London,  1872,  p.  36  sq.

fComp.  Steinschneider^s  Hist,  of  Jewish  Liter.,  p.  323  n.  23.  Also,  Actes  de  la
Sociiti  PhiloIogiquCt  TomCy  vii,  p.  797.

X  A  Dissertation  concerning  the  Antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  Language,  letters,  vowel
points  and  accents,  London,  1767,  to  which  we  refer  the  reader.


465

they  only  gave  the  pronunciation  of  the  School  of  Tiberias,  as  it  existed
therein  in  the  VI  century.  This  differed  from  that  of  the  time  of  the
Septuagint  translation  made  in  Alexandria,  and  most  probably  from  that
in  use  in  the  Babylonian  Schools,  now  called  the  Assyrian,  and  perhaps
still  more  from  that  of  the  ancient  Hebrews^  which  is  now  most  likely
entirely  lost.

Other  scholars  following  Schultens,  although  believing  in  the  modem
institution  of  the  points  now  used,  held  nevertheless,  that  the  Hebrews
had  at  all  times,  certain  signs  distinguishing  the  vowels,  but  that  these
marks  were  different  from  those  we  now  have,  and  that  the  Massoritic
doctors  substituted  the  latter  for  the  more  ancient.  This  they  held
because  of  the  indispensable  necessity  of  vowels,  to  fix  in  the  reading,
a  sure  pronunciation  and  meaning  of  words  or  expressions,  in  a  tongue,
which  like  all  language  had  a  tendency  to  continual  change,  written
wholly  in  consonants.

Perhaps  those  who  think  the  points  arose  in  the  VI  century  A.  D.  may
be  able  to  explain  Hebrew  xi,  21,  where  the  author  of  that  Epistle  has
interpreted  the  text  he  quotes  from  Gen.  xlvii,  31,  very  differently  from
that  to  be  found  in  the  Tiberian  pointed  and  accented  Hebrew  text.
With  the  points  it  reads:  ''And  Israel  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed's
head,"  but  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  reads:  Jacob
^'  worshipped  leaning  on  the  top  of  his  staff,"  reading  npo  matet  instead
of  nop  mitay  a  difference  wholly  resulting  from  the  use  of  a  vowel  point.
Jacob's  death  is  not  spoken  of  till  the  ne^ct  chapter,  consequently  the  ver-
sion in  the  Epistle  is  by  far  the  most  probable.  Matt,  v,  18,  has  also
been  cited  to  show  that  the  Thorah  in  the  time  of  Jesus  was  written  in
the  square  character,  as  the  ^  Yod  of  the  ancient  Hebrew  alphabet  is  as
large  a  letter  as  k  Aleph.  The  tittle  probably  refers  to  the  tag-ifiy  /.  ^.,
crowns,  which  the  final  letters  were  provided  with.  St.  Jerome  and  the
Talmud  both  speak  of  these.

In  the  Syriac  as  early  as  the  III  century  A.  D.  are  to  be  found  traces
of  a  Massorah  upon  the  version  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  The  Abbe  Martin
in  his  erudite  writing  upon  the  Syriac  Massorah  and  pointing,*  treats

*  Histoire  de  la  PonchioHon  ou  de  la  Massore  chez  les  Syn'ens,  in  the  JimrruU  Asia*
Hque,     Paris,  1875.    Tome  v,  p.  82  sq,

30


466

of  the  early  phonetic  points  in  the  Syrian  literature  during  the  epoch  of
St.  Ephraim  (d.  circa  378)  and  traces  them  down  to  the  VI  century  A.  D^
H.  A.  Ewald,  the  great  German  biblical  scholar,  has  written  up)on  the
same  subject.*    He  is  of  the  opinion  that  both  the  Syriac  and  Hebrew-
systems  of  pointing,  were  derived  from  a  common  but  also  sole  and
unique  source,  that  we  can  consider  both  as  different  and  independent
developments  of  one  system,  and   that  the  least  complicated  features
of  this  are  to  be  found  in  the  Syriac  writing.     It  would  seem  that  a  dis-
tinction must  be  made  between  the  first  Punctuators  and  the  Massorites»
The  Jewish  doctors  who  gave  to  Hebrew  philology  the  written  points,
took  for  their  model  the  Syriac  pointing  or  at  the  very  least  a  common
source,  they  rather  inhabited  Babylonia  than  Palestine,  and  appear  ta
have  been  those  called  Saboraim  and  not  those  called  Massorites-f     If
we  admit,  as  indeed  we  must,  that  a  system  of  vowel  points  existed  among
the  learned  of  the  Syrians  in  the  time  of  St.  Ephraim  (d.  378)  they
preceded  the  Massorites.     M.  de  Vogue  J   has   shown  that  points  to  1
Resh  and  T  Daleth  were  used  in  the  II  century  A.  D.,  in  the  writing  of
Palmyra.     Points  were  also  used  in  the  Pehlevi  on  coins.

Before  the  period  in  which  James,  Bishop  of  Edessa,  invented  or  per-
haps only  wrote  down,  the  first  Syriac  method  of  marking  the  vowels  in
a  complete  and  perfect  manner;  his  compatriots  already  used  a  method  of
vowel  notation,  which  consisted  in  placing  a  point  above  the  consonants,
so  as  to  reader  the  vowels  a,  o  and  u,  short ;  and  below  them,  to  render
e,  i  and  u  long.  •

When  the  Hebrew  was  a  language  generally  spoken  and  written,  by  the
people  of  Palestine;  it  is  extremely  probable  that  it  was  only  necessary  to
present  the  articulations,  that  is  the  consonants,  and  sight  was  sufficient
to  indicate  the  suitable  vowels  to  each  word;  but  when  the  Hebrew  tended
to  become  an  extinct  spoken  language,  the  learned  thought  was  necessary
to  make  symbols  which  should  if  possible,  indelibly  fix  the  sounds  or
vowels  and  the  signs  which  should  mark  the  pauses,  and  prevent  that

*  Zeitschrift  flir  die  Kunde  des  Aforgenlandes,  Vol.  i,  206  sq.^  and  Abhandlungen  zur
orientalischtn  und  biblischett  Literatur,     GSttingcn,  1832.

f  See  also  as  to  Luzzatto*s  opinion,  M.  Stcinschneidcr's  Hist.  Jewish  Liter.,  p.  325.
X  Revue  archiologique,  April,  1865,  p.  3.


467

change  which  all  language  is  continually  undergoing.    So  it  is  said  chant-
ing and  singing  were  also  precedent  to  musical  notation.     The  books  of
the  old  Hebrews,  as  indeed  are  many  to-day,  were  issued  without  point-
ing :  as  this  also  to  this  time  is  maintained  in  the  Rolls  written  on  skin  for
use  in  the  synagogue.  As  to  them  they  claim  to  have  preserved  through  the
oral  tradition  the  ancient  custom  of  reading  without  the  points.  The  method
of  reading  is :  the  person  to  read  studies  at  home  carefully,  the  portion  to
be  subsequently  read  in  the  Synagogue  ;  the  portion  to  be  read  is  then
read  in  the  Synagogue  under  the  supervision  of  two  men,  one  on  each
side  of  the  reader,  and  the  latter  marks  his  progress  by  means  of  a  small
rod  terminated  by  a  small  hand  with  the  index  finger  extended.     The
Rolls  do  not  contain  any  orthographic  signs,  except  certain  mysterious
superior  points,  which  appear  to  have  been  intended  to  fix  the  attention
of  the  reader  and  answer  to  our  italics.     A  tradition,  which  goes  back  to
the  time  of  the  redaction  of  the  first  Midrashim  in  the  I  century  A.  D.,
attributes  to  Ezra,  the  Massoretic  points  placed  above  certain  letters  of
the  Rolls  which  were  considered  as  doubtful.    In  the  Midrash  Bamidbar
Rabbah,  c.  iii,  are  these  singular  words  attributed  to  Ezra ;  ''If  the
prophet  Elias  (Eliyahu)  should  come  to  me  and  say :  'Wherefore  hast
thou  written  these  letters  ?'     I  would  respond  to  him  that  I  had  already
noted  them  by  the  points ;  and  if  he  should  say ;  '  Thou  hast  well  made
the  writing,*  I  would  only  efface  the  points.**     These  were  only  used  to
denote  to  the  reader  a  hesitation  or  partial  stop  when  he  pronounced
these  letters.

The  points  according  to  the  views  of  many  were  taken  from  ordinary
books;  the  ancient  grammarians,  says  Derenbourg,*  first  "applied  their
system  of  pointing  to  the  Targumim,  before  borrowing  that  profane  usage
so  as  to  apply  it  the  sacred  text.**  The  Talmudim  show  an  ancient
and  complete  system  of  vowel  accents  or  D'o;;o  Ta'amim  fully  in  use.
Philoponos  aWa  6io  A.  D.  cites  in  transcribing  into  Greek,  a  verse  of
Genesis  (i,  26)  exactly  reproducing  the  present  pronunciation.  In  the
VIII  century,  differences  of  pointing  may  be  noticed,  giving  a  different  pro-
nunciation between  the  Jews  of  the  Schools  of  Babylonia  and  those  of
Palestine.  In  the  X  century  the  version  of  Saad-yah  ha-Gaon  of  Fayum  and

*  Journal  Asiatique^  6th  series,  Tom.  xvi,  469  and  note.


468

the  Greek  translations,  other  than  the  Septuagint,  which  are  in  the  Libraij
of  St.  Marco  in  Venice ;  are  made  from  a  text  the  pronunciation  of  which
is  nearly  similar,  this  is  also  the  case  with  the  most  ancient  pointed  H^
brew  MSS.  of  the  Holy  Writings  which  has  come  to  our  day.  This
was  formerly  at  Odessa  but  is  now  in  St.  Petersburg^  and  bears  a  date
corresponding  to  916  A.  D.*  The  points  are  no  longer  placed  above,
as  was  usual  in  the  Babylonian  pointing,  but  below,  the  letters.

The  Zohar  containing  the  content  of  an  ancient  Secret  Tradition,  it  is
not  wonderful  that  it  should  have  had  in  it,  the  early  knowledge  of  the  Se-
cret Tradition  on  pointing.     It  is  very  singular  that  Elias  Levita,  the  great
exponent,  in  Judaism,  of  the  modem  invention  of  the  vowel  jx>ints,  should
use  these  strange  words.     **  If  any  one  shall  prove  to  me,  by  clear  evi-
dence, that  my  opinion  is  opposed  to  that  of  our  Rabbins  of  blessed
memory  or  is  contrary  to  the  genuine  Qabbalah  of  the  Zohar ^  I  tinll  rea£ij
give  in  to  him  and  declare  my  opinion  void^     This  was  first  noticed  by
Azzariah  Min  ha-Adomin,  or  dei  Rossi,  of  Mantua  (b.  15 13,  d.  1577)  in
his  Sepher  M'ohr  Enayim,  i.e..  Enlightenment  of  the  Eyes.t     Dei  Rossi
holds  that  the  vowel  points  are  indicated  in  the  Babylonian  Talmud,  Trea-
tise Nedarim  37,  g,  the  corresponding  passage  in  the  Ye'rushalmi  Gem-
arah,  Midrash  Be'resheeth  Rabbah  and  the  books  Bahir  and  Zohar.    The
cognate  tongues  Syriac,  Chaldaic,  Arabic,  Persian,  all  have  vowel  signs,
and  the  genius  and  spirit  of  the  Hebrew  tongue  absolutely  presupposes
the  ancient  existence  of  points  in  books  intended  for  general  circulation.
Those  who  believe  in  the  modern  invention  refer  to  St.  Jerome's  letter  to
Evagrius,  in  which  speaking  of  Enon  near  Salim,  Jerome  says;   '*  It  mat-
ters not  whether  it  be  called  Salem  or  Salim,  since  the  Hebrews  seldom
use  the  vowel  letters  in  the  middle ;  and  the  same  w^ords  are  pronounced
with  different  sounds  and  accents,  according  to  the  pleasure  of  the  readers
and  variety  of  country.'*  J     This  only  tends  to  show  that  St.  Jerome's

*  Pinner  in  1845,  published  ^facsimile  of  this  MSS.  at  Odessa.

f  Vienna,  1829,  p.  286^-292^,  especially  287.    Comp.  Kitto's  Cyclop.  Bib.  Litem,  s.
V.  Rossi.

X  Hieronymous,    Ed.  of  Paris ^  VoL  i,p,  1062,  Ad,  Evagrium.  EpUt,  cxxvi.  EpistoU
ad  Evangelium  Monachi  Ed,  Afartianay,  torn.  «,  /.  J74.


469

Rabbinical  Master  did  not  reveal  to  him  the  secret  method  of  punctu-
ating, which  was  likely  noted  on  the  Hebrew  Secret  Rolls  in  the  posses-
sion of  the  Jewish  sacerdotal  caste.  The  Buxtorfs  used  Levita's  remark
against  him.'*'  Another  thing  is  to  be  noted,  the  names  of  the  vowel  points
and  especially  the  tonic  accents,  are  not  Hebrew  but  Chaldaic,  and  if
their  origin  is  Hebraic  their  exterior  form  is  at  least  Chaldean  or  Syro-
Chaldean.  These  names  have  then  been  composed  by  men  to  whom  the
Hebrew  tongue  in  its  purity  was  not  familiar,  and  who  possessed  of  it
only  a  mixture  of  barbarous  words,  similar  to  the  language  of  the  Tal-
mud and  the  period  succeeding  it.

The  Zohar  says  if  "  It  is  written  ;  *  The  wise  shall  shine.*  (Dan.  xii,
*3.)  That  is  the  letters  and  points ;  *  Like  the  brightness.*  That  is  the
modulations  of  the  accents.  '  The  wise  shall  shine  *  like  the  moving  of
the  accents  (in  the  tone  of  the  modulations  of  the  accents)  and  in  their
tone  athvaufij  t\  ^.,  the  letters,  and  tCqood-ahs^  /.  ^.,  points,  move  after
them,  like  an  army  after  their  king.  (See,  Tiqqoanim  24.)  The  letters  are
the  body,  and  the  points  are  the  ru^hin^  /.^.,  spirits.  All  (the  letters  and
points)  move  after  them  (through  that  tone)  but  when  they  stop  they  do
not  move  but  remain  standing.  And  *  The  wise  shall  shine  *  (guide)
the  letters  and  points,  like  the  light  of  the  singing  of  the  tones  of  the
accents.  *  And  they  who  bring  many  to  righteousness.  *  That  means
the  stopping  of  the  accent,  that  is,  they  stop  in  their  words,  (pause)  so
that  their  words  shall  be  understood.**  See  also,  the  Vulgate,  Deuter.
xxxi,  19;  Nehem.  (ii,  Esdras)  viii,  8,  9;  Ibid,  xiii,  24.  King  James  ver-
sion. Ibid.  It  was  the  institution  of  the  written  vowel  points  which  pre-
vented the  absolute  death  of  an  idiom,  then  nearly  dead,  even  for  the
learned ;  and  they  were  the  means  not  only  of  its  resuscitation  but  were
the  efi&cacious  means  of  the  subsequent  intellectual  and  moral  develop-
ment of  Judaism.     The  following  are  a  very  few  of  the  words  which  can

*  Commentarius  MassoreticuSy  e.  ix^p.  74  ed,  Basel.  1620.     Not  in  the  Sulzbach  Ed.
fVol.  i,  fol.  3,  col.  2,  Cremona  Ed.     Brody  Ed.  i,  15a.


470

be  given,  the  consonants  of  which  are  exactly  alike,  and  the  pointing  of
which  is  necessary  to  give  the  true  meaning :


OJ^    people
DJ^    with


tlitff    year

T  T

rtilff    sleep


T    "•


♦JB^    crimson

•    T

♦Jgf    second


Ogf    there
Qgf    name

pT    only
p*l    spitde

Y^    fragment

n


runner


njn  evil

T     T

nj^    friend


T

TOT    throwing


T     T


rnp  bald

T»p.    ice

^p    swift
*7i5    voice


FINIS.


INDB^X.


Abba,  Father,  194,  256.  262,  382,  387,  398  ;
the  Father,  and  the  Will,  in  Ibn  Gebirol,
199.

Abbah.  Babbi,  of  the  Zohar,  a  Babylon-
ian Jew,  52;  to  write  the  teachings  of  R.
Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai,  51  note,  52.  See
also  441-2.

Abd-er-Bahman  al-Nasr,  5.

Abendehut,  9.

Abn  Beer  Mo'hammed  Ibn  Ya'hya,
usually  called,  Ibn  Badja.  See.  Ibn
Badja.

Above  and  Below.  Connection  between
a  very  ancient  idea,  210 ;  resemblances
in,  386,  417.

Abraham.  The  three  angels  who  appeared
to.  427.

Abraham  Ha-craon,  46, 53 ;  his  commen-
tary on  the  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah,  53.

Abravanel.  B.  Yehudah,  also  called,
Abarbanel,  9.

Abu-' All  al-'Hoa«in  ben-'Abd-AUah
Ibn  Sina.    See,  Ibn  Sina.

Abulafla.  B.  Abraham  b.  Samuel,  10,

38.

Abulafla.  Todroa  b.  Joseph  ha-Levl
(or  Hallevy),  12,  38.

Abu-Na<;r  al-Far&bl.    See  Al-Farabi.

Abyss.  The,  according  to  the  Akkadians,
etc.,  243,  448 ;  See,  Great  Sea,  235.

Adam.  See  also,  Man ;  346  note ;  418,  419.
420  sq,  ;  all  the  people  of  the  world  do
not  descend  from  the  First,  139,  416 ;  an
androgyne,  122, 360  x^./  the  A'tzeel-atic,
360  sq.,  418  sg.;  the  B'rec-atic,  360  sq.,
396,  418,  419;  the  Celestial,  224,  280,
300 ;  the  Celestial,  affected  by  the  Fall  of
the  Terrestrial,  183;  clothed  in  skin,
265 ;  Conflict  of,  167  note ;  creation  of.


360  sq.;  creation  of,  and  covering  with
skin,  etc.,  423 ;  creation  of  the  dust  body
of,  423  sq.;  of  dust,  273 ;  D'llla-ah,  420 ;
D'  Lthath-ah,  420 ;  and  Eve.  Creation  of,
424  sq.;  the  First,  414 ;  the  First,  clothed
in  Light,  423, 426  sq.;  the  First  and  Sec-
ond,  114;  the  head  of  the  Heavenly,
reaches  to  Heaven,  202 ;  the  Heavenly
or    Upper,    128    note;    the    Highest,
the   Sole  occupant  of   the  World  A-
'tzeel-ah,  401 ;  Illa-ah,   138  note,   419 ;
length    of    years,    352    note ;     male-
female,  417;  men  do  not  all  descend
from,  139, 416 ;  the  Nephesh  in,  273 ;  the
Primordial,  138,  301,  415  sq. ;  Qad'mo-
ah, 396, 415  sq.;  Qadmon,  114,  125,  128
note,  138  note.  280,  281,  415  sq.,  419;
Qadmon,  the  Bolt  which  unites  the  visible
and  invisible,  1 14 ;  Qadmon,  the  Celestial
Man,   181 ;   Qadmon.    The  Sephiroth
applied  to,  292  note.  See,  Frontispiece ;
Rishoun,  414 ;  the  son  of  God,  247 ;  the
Terrestrial,    114;    Testament    of,    167
note;    the  Universal   Prototypic    Life,
300;  the  Upper,  273,  278.  337  note,  419,
421 ;  the  Upper,  in  the  World  A'tzeel-
00th,  321 ;  Upper  and  Lower,  365  note.

Adams.  The  Four,  418  sq,

Adam's  knowledge  of  the  Qabbalah,  165 ;
body  at  first  a  Light  Body,  205.  See,
Eden.

Adelard  of  Bath,  162.

Adonai  or  Adonoi,  t.  e.,  YHVH,  ia8.
129,  175,  272,  341.  342.

JSffidius  of  Viterbo.  Cardinal,  largely
influenced  by  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,
171.

JEIons  of  the  Gnostics,  231.

JSther.  Absolute,  373  note ;  Concentrated,
373;  Luminiferous.  186.


472


A^rrippa.  Henry  Cornelius,  flavors  the
Antiquity   of   the    Hebrew  Qabbalah,

II,  171-
Aiirroth,  434.

Aln,  127.

Aln  Soph,  no,  127, 128, 181, 195. 251, 253,
398,  371,  378 ;  Chinese  idea  as  10^446  ;
the  Creation  by,  211,  212 ;  emanation  of
the  created,  from,  231 ;  in  Ibn  Gebii#l,
199 ;  Light  of,  the  idealized  blood  of  the
universe,  300.

Akkmltan  idea  of  creation.  242,  448  sq,

Akkadians  and  Chaldeans,  235,  236
sq.,  448  sq.  See,  Chaldeans,  and,  He>
brews.

A'keebah.  Babbi,  The  Master  of  R.
Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai,  439.

Alain  of  Lille,  162.

Albensubrun  or  Ibn  Oebirol,  9, 162.

Albert  the  Great,  162, 163.

Al-Farabl  called  Alpharabius,  163.

AlfiTObra,  hidden  for  300  years,  177  note.

Al-Ghazali,  164.

Al-Kendi,  163.

Al-Kuti.    Chefez,  5.

Allen.    John,  11.

Allix.  Rev.  Dr.  Peter.  Favors  the  An-
tiquity of  the  Zohar,  64.

Almifirhty.  See,  Bhaddal.

Alphabet.  Arabic,  460;  the  Celestial,
422,  423 ;  the  Hebrew,  origin  of,  460 ;
Phoenician,  460.

AlpharabitiB.    See,  Al-Farabi.

Al-Shefa.    The,  of  Ibn  Sina,  164.

Altars  in  the  Ancient  Temples,  241.

Amaleqh.     The  Great  Demon,  435.

Amen,  meaning  of,  442  and  note.

Ancient  of  the  Ancients,  to  be  distin-
guished from  the  Ancient  of  All  the
Ancients,  136  note.  See,  At-tee'k-ah
D"  At-tee'keen  and  At-teekah  D'Kol
At-tee'keen.

Ancient  World.  Knowledge  in  the,  177  ;
methods  of  the.  175.

Androgrene.    The,  122  sq.,  417  sq.

Androgrenes,  138  and  notes.

Androgrenic  Man,  123.     See,  Adam.

Angrels  with  the  Babylonians  equal,  10,
237,  238;  called  Birds,  217;  Chaldean,
454  ;  emanation  of  the,  329,  383  ;  Good,
the  building  up,  forces  or  energies,  126  ;


names  of  the,  S49,  339 ;  difierent  Spe-
cies in  the  Kether  Malkhuth.  192 ;  com-
posed of  a  Species  of  Matter,  191 ;  and
Evil  Spirits.  The  names  of  the  angels
from  Babylonia,  249;  world  of  the,
280,  328,  348.  349 ;  oppose  the  creation
of  Adam,  106  x^.,  363  sg.  Below  the
Pious,  383,  401,  409.

Anflrelus  bell,  167  note.

Animals.    Fear  of  man.  345.

An-pen  or  An-peen.  Ze'ir.  See  Ze'ir
An-peen.

Arabian  philosopby.  The  authors  of.
not  Arabs,  163  sq,

Arabs  in  the  Zohar,  69,  70.  71 ;  did  not
believe  in  the  Revolution  of  the  Earth
on  its  axis,  140.

Arajnaic  in  the  Zohar,  53.  54  ;  Aramaic  re-
quires vowel  points,  464  sg.

Architect  of  the  World,  365  note.

Archetypal  Church,  116;   Man.  45  note.

Appayeem,  i.  e..  Faces.  333.

Aquinas.    Thomas,  163,  163.

A'reekh  An-peen,  i.  r..  Lon^  Faces,  182,
258,  368  sq.,  379.

A'reekh  Appayeem,  i.  r.,  Long  Faces,
323.  368,  379  ^9'

Areopafirite.  Dionsrslos,  th».  His
Ideas  in  accordance  with  much  in  the
Qabbalah,  127,  128,  167  note,  440,  456.
See,  St.  Dionysios,  also,  Dionysios.

Aristotle's  De  Mundo,  8 ;  opposes  the
idea  of  the   Revolution  of  the  Earth,

139.  140-
Ark.     In  the  Babylonian  Temples,  240.

Asbestos  or  Salamander,  394.

A'seeyah.    Olam  ha-,  228.  321,  329  sq.

A'seey-atic  World,  198,  330  sq,

Asher  b.  Meshullim  b.  Yacob,  9.

Asher.    B.  Be'hai  b.  Asher.      Favors

the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar,  64  note.
Assyrian  language  and  Hebrew  language.

228 ;    methods  of  vowel  pointing.  461,

465.
Astronomy.      First,  by  the  Akkadians,

240  sq.,  448  sq.
Atonement.    The,  337  sq.
At-tee'k,  1.  e.,  the  Ancient,  257,  367  sq.
At-tee'kah  D'At-tee*keen,    127,    134,

135.  136.  253.  367  sq.
At-teekah  D'Kol  At-tee'keen,  383.


473


At-tee'kah  Qa'doaha,  253.

At-tee'kah  Sabah  Qad-doahah,  368  sq.

At-tee'k  Yo-men,  i.  e.,  the  Ancient  of
Days,  257,  368  sq.

A'tzeel-ah,  228.

A'tzeel-atic  World,  198.

A'tzeel-ooth.    Olam  ha-,  no,  320  sq,

Aupha-nem,  329,  419.

Avicebrol,  is  Ibn  Gebirol,  162.

Avioebron,  is  Ibn  Gebirol.  i,  8,  162.

Avioembron  or  Ibn  Gebirol,  162.

Avicenna.    See,  Ibn  Sina.

AvempcMse.    See,  Ibn  Badja.

Avendoth.    Jean,  162.

Aven-Pace.    See,  Ibn  Badja.

Averroes.    See.  Ibn  Roschd.

Ayin.  n8,  127,  136  note,  181,  253  sq„  275
^9'*  378  sq- ;  in  Philo,  301.  See,  Ain
Soph.

Asa  and  Azael,  107  sq.,  363  sq.,  434.

Azael,  107  sq.,  363  sq.

Azariel  or  Azriel,  ben  Mena'hem,  283,
284  sq.;  his  Explanation  of  the  Ten
Sephiroth,  284  sq. ;  quoted,  284.

Azriel,  9.  See  Azariel;  and  Ezra,  38;
Commentary  on  Canticles,  49 ;  opinion
on  Thought  as  the  first  emanation  of  Ain
Soph,  192  ;  on  the  power  of  the  Sephi-
roth, 289.  Colors  in  the  Sephiroth,  259,
261,  262,  269,  270,  271,  288.


Babylonian  Jews.  The  Qabbalah  with
the,  46  sq.,  51.  52;  philosophy,  esoteric,
237 ;  Rabbins  captured  by  the  Moors,
5  ;  Talmud.  See,  Talmud  and  Tal-
mudim  ;  Temple  Towers.  240,  241.

BcMsk.     Of  the,  of  the  Deity,  53,  226>  419.

Bacon.  81r  Francis,  studied  the  writings
of  Dr.  Robert  Fludd  the  Rosicrucian
and  Qabbalist,  171.

Balance.  Doctrine  of  the,  118,  126,  137
note,  185.

Baptism,  229.

Barnabas.    Epistle  of,  167.

Bartolocci  (de  Celano)  Qiulio,  11.

Barukh.    Apocalypse  of,  167.

Basic  element  of  most  of  the  Ancient  Re-
ligions, 108  sq.

Basnafire  de  Beauval.  Jacques,  as-
cribes the  doctrines  of  the  Hebrew
Qabbalah,  to  the  Egyptians,  10,  171.


Bdellium,  134.

Beast.  The,  Sama-el  and  Ul-ith,  331  ^
347  note.    See,  Sama-el,  Lil-ith.

Beauval.  Jacques  Basnasre.  See,.
Basnage.

Beer.  Dr.  B.,  On  the  comet  in  the  Zohar,
B2sq.

Bees.    Symbolism  of,  229,  323  and  note.

Be'hai's  B.  Exposition  of  the  Thorah.
73  note.

Bell.    The  Angelus,  167  note.

Below  and  the  Above,  connection  be-
tween, 108  sq.,  386.

Below  a  weak  copy  of  the  Above,  108  sq.,
386,  417.

Be'nai  Edom,  means  Christians,  73.  See,.
Edom,  Rome,  Children  of  Yishmael.

Be'nai  Elohim,  106  sq.,  364,  434.

Benamozesrh.  Elia,  one  of  the  greatest
Qabbalists  now  living,  favors  the  anti-
quity of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah  and  the
Zohar,  173.

Be'resheeth.  Ma-a'seh.  See,  Ma-a'seb»
Be'resheeth.

BerfiTsr.  Paul,  ascribes  the  origin  of  the
Hebrew  Qabbalah  to  the  Chaldeans,
172.

Bemcurd  of  CThartres,  162.

Bdr6ssos,  Views  of  the  ancient  Chaldean
historian,  242,  243.

Be'tza  leel,  said  to  have  known  the  com-
bination of  letters  by  which  heaven  and
earth  were  made,  160  note.

Bhag«vad-8rlt4.  Qabbalistic  ideas  in,
170.

Binah.     Holy  Spirit,  182;    Sephirah,  192,
193,  199,  260  sq.,  292  note;    produces
a  Son.  387  sq. ;    sometimes  called,  the-
Great  Sea,  336.

Black  Races  of  Mesopotamia,  238,  239.

Blue  of  the  Heaven  and  blue  of  the  Tallith,
376  note.

Bo-az.    See.  Ya-kheen.

Body  called  Gujjr,  Guph  or  Gupka,  354  note.

Body  of  Man  only  a  Garment,  205  and
note.

Body  of  the  Resurrection,  355  sq.,  410
sq.,  414.  437.

Biihmen,  Bohme  or  Behmen.  Jacob,,
was  largely  influenced  by  the  Hebrew
Qabbalah,  171.


474


Bohu  or  Primeval  Space,  235.  243.  244.
448/^.

Bolt.  Adam  Qadmon  the,  between  the  two
Worlds,  190,  Nebo,  the,  ao6,  235.  242
sq.

Borsippa.  The  Planet  Tower  of,  206,
Colors  of,  449.

Botz-rah  means  Rome,  75.

Brahma,  etc.,  45  note.  See,  Description
of  Plates.

Brahman  ntuUr,  45  note.  See,  Descrip-
tion of  Plates.

Brain.    The,  Upper,  369  sq.

Bread.     Reason  of  the  use  of,  230.

B'ree-ah.    Olamha-,  228.  321,  328.

B'ree-atic  world,  198.

B'ree-atic  Adam,  360.  396,  421.  See.
Adam ;  also.  Man.

Bretflchneider.  C.  Q.,  thought  the  He-
brew Qabbalah  originated  with  the  Per-
sians, 172.

Bride.     The  Mystic.  117.    Sec,  Malkhuth.

Brucker.  Johann  Jakob,  his  writings
on  the  antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  Qab-
balah exhibit  but  little  knowledge  of  the
subject,  172.

BuddsDUS.  Rev.  John  Francis,  favors
the  antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,
II,  171.

Buddha,  Bo,  Po,  etc.,  206,  337 note;  and
the  Tree  of  the  Sephiroth,  187 ;  repre-
sentations of.  with  woolly  hair,  etc.,  239.
See,  Sakhya  Mfini.

Bull.  The.  228.  259,  394;  of  St.  Luke.  45
note;  symbol  of  the  Sephirah  'Hes-ed,
Grace,  Spiritual  water,  hence  Baptism,
229 ;  symbol  for  water,  229 ;  Zodiacal
sign  of,  228,  240,  452.     See,  Ox.

Bruno.  Oiordano,  162.

Bunsen.  Baron  von,  quoted.  Introd.  x.

Burgronovensis.  Archangrelus,  favored
the  antiquity  of  the  Qabbalah.  171.

Buxtorf.    The  Elder,  10  ;  the  Younger,  11.

Buztorfs.  The,  on  the  Hebrew  vowel
pointing,  469.

Byzantium  in  the  Zohar,  72.

o

Cahen.  Samuel,  10.

Candlestick.     The  seven-branched,  447.

Canopy.     Supreme,  136.

Capnio.     See  John  Reuchlin.


Cappelue.  Iiewis,  10. 172.  461.

Cardan.  Jerome,  45  note.  46  note.  171.

Cardinal  .Sgidiue  of  Viterbo,  11.

Carmoly  B'liacin,  on  the  antiquity  of  the
Zohar.  56  sq.

Categories.    Ten,  of  Ibn  Gebirol.  160.

Cauee  of  all  Causes.  362  sq.  N.B. — In
the  Zohar,  this  phrase  generally  trans-
lates. Destiny  of  all  Destinies;  First
Efficient,  144  sq. ;  the  Primal  Cause,  in
archaic  times,  174.

Celestial  Adam,  125.  See.  Adam;
also,  Man.  Adam  in  the  N.  T.,  115;
Hierarchy  like  the  Ten  Sephiroth,  167
and  note.

Chaldea.  Different  Captivities  of  the
Hebrews  in,  228;    protecting  Genii  in,

227,  237  sq.,  448  sq.

Chaldean  Cylinders,  Signets,  etc. ,  Method
of  holding  the  hands  shown  on,  440;
Thought,  its  influence  upon  the  Jew^,
228;  Universe.  Description  of  the,
448,  sq.

Chaldeans  and   Hebrews.  221.  226,  227,

228.  234  sq.    See,  Hebrew,  also,  Akkad-
ians.

Chariot.     Spiritual  World,  a.  220  note.

Chariot  Throne,  220  note.  See  Ma-a'seh
Merkabah,  227.

Chartres.    Amaury  de,  162.

Chasm.  The,  between  the  Real  and  Un-
Real,  277.

Cherub  or  Kirub.  227,  237  sq.,  448  sq.

China.  Principles  of  the  Tao-teh-King.
Ill  sq.

Chinese  believe,  that  each  created  being  or
thing  has  a  double.  113;  the  Great
Azure  Dragon  of,  235;  Makrokosm.
112 ;  Qabbalah,  444  sq. ;  Spiritual  ideas
of  the,  444,  446 ;  symbolism,  445  sq.  ;
knew  of  the  Tetrad  of  Pythagoras,  203
note;  Writings  and  the  Qabbalah,  112

sq.,  444  J^-
Christ  the  male  ;  the  female,  the  Bride,  the

Church,    117;    Symbolic   color  of   the

robe  of,  262.
Christian  Qabbalah,  claims  of  the  Roman

Catholic  Church  to  the  possession  of  a,

232.
Christianity.     By  whom  Formulated  and

kept  alive,  178,  179;    and  the  Hebrew

Qabbalah,  174,  230;  Hebrew  and  Jew-


475


ish,  Secret  Doctrine  in,  174;  value  of
the  Secret  Doctrine  to,  179.  See,  In-
troduction.

ChristlanB.  Celebration  of  the  Mysteries
of  the  Faith,  by  the  first,  accompani>
ments  of,  330.

Church  Fathers'  idea  as  to  the  Ayin  or
No-Thing,  127.

Cicero's  idea  of  the  invisible  God,  114.

Clean  and  Unclean  animals  in  ancient
Babylonia,  240,  241.

Cock.  The  crowing  of  the,  three  times,  a
secret,  405.

Color  of  Binah,  blue,  203,  261 ;  Blue,  261
and  note;  of  Christ's  robe,  203;  of
the  Virgin  Mary's  robe,  203 ;  of  'Hes-
ed,  269;  of  Hod,  270;  of  'Hokh-
mah,  262 ;  of  Kether,  259 ;  of  Malk-
huth,  203;  of  Ne-tza'h,  270;  of  Pa'had,
269;  and  Sound,  277;  of  Tiph'e-reth.
270;  of  Ye'sod,  271.

Colors.  The  ancient  Babylonian  astrologi-
cal, in  the  Tower  of  Borsippa,  206,  449  ;
emanation  of  the,  195;  the  mystical,
229;  the  seven,  277;  the  white,  red
and  green,  427  sg.

Comet  in  the  Zohar  77  sq. ;  statements  as
to  the,  in  the  Zohar,  incorrect,  83  sq.

Commandments.  The  Ten  Command-
ments and  the  Lord's  Prayer,  318.

Companions,  the  name  given  by  the  Qab-
balistic  initiates  to  each  other,  346  note ;
names  of  the,  of  R.  Shim-on  ben  Yo*-
hai,  441.

Compass.  The  points  of,  in  Azriel,  284  ,*
Four,  points  of,  in  the  Zohar.  216.

Composite  animals,  452  sq.

Conceptualism,  Introd.  xii,  xiii.

Conflict  of  Adam,  167.

Connection  of  the  visible  and  invisible,
115,  386,  417.

Contemplation.     Inner,  Introd.  xii.

Cranium.  The  Great.  133,  134,  367,  368,
382  sq. :  of  the  Makrokosm,  the  Firma-
ment, 118  note.

Creatin^r  Deity  with  the  Akkadians,  342,
247.

Creation.  Account  of  the,  122 ;  of  Adam
and  Eve,  421  sq.  ;  Assyrian  account  of,
245 ;  the  present  preceded  by  another,
in  the  Assyrian  account   of,  346;    the


same  statement  in  the  Zohar,  137,  386 ;
according  to  the  Chaldean  historian
B^r6ssos,  343;  only  a  Copy  of  the
Eternal  Idea,  115  ;  or  Emanation  of  the
Universe,  135,  359  sq. ;  Quotation  from
the  Siphrah  D'Tznioothah,  232,  333,
234;  with  the  Semitic  peoples,  243;
termed  by  the  Qabbalists,  the  Shadow
of  the  Upper  World,  256.

Creed.    Nicene,  459  sq.

Crollius.  Oswald,  largely  influenced  by
the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

Crown.  The,  Highest,  370  sq.;  or
Kether,  256  sq.

Crusades,  said  to  be  mentioned  in  the
Zohar,  but  this  is  doubtful,  69,  70  ;  time
of,  69  note.

Crystal,  134.

Cube.     Chinese  conception  of  the  earth  as

a.  445.

Cuneiform  Tablets,  content  of.  and  the
Hebrew  Qabbalah,  234  sq.,  448  sq.

Cusanus  (Cusani).  Cardinal  Nicolas,
largely  influenced  by  the  Hebrew  Qab-
balah, 171.


Da'ath,  t.  e..  Knowledge,  360,  361.
Dante.     Hebrew  Qabbalism  in  the  writings

of,  171.
Darkness.     Fear  of.  452 ;    Kingdom  of.

See.  Kingdom  of  Darkness.
Daud  Ibn,  9.
Daughter.    The,  with  the  Qabbalists,  the

Church  or  Congregation  of  Israel,  117.
David.    B.  Abraham  b.  (of  Posquieres)

or  Babad,  9,  38.
David  Luriah's  Sepher  Kadmooth   ha-

Zohar,  40-54.
David  and  Solomon  had  great  knowledge

of  the  Qabbalah,  166.
Death.    The  Angel  of,  347,  348,  433,  436;

and  Life.  362  sq. ;    Malakh  Hamoveth.

the  Angel  of,  410,  432,  436 ;    what  hap-

l>ens  at,  354 ;  an  advantage  to  the  Pious,

436 ;  results  from  the  Sin  of  Adam,  433.
De  Causis.    The  Book,  9.  162.
De  Leon.  B.  Moses  Shem-Tob,  claimed

to  be  the  author  of  the  Zohar,  56  sq. ;

writings    by,    60   sq.;    Ibn    Gebirol's

knowledge  of  the  Zoharic  philosophy,

250  years  before  the  time  of,  188.


476


Dei  Rossi's  opinion  on  the  antiquity  of  the
vowel  points.  468.

Deity  can  only  be  Approached  through  the
Intention  of  man's  heart.  409 ;  to  whom
can  you  Compare  the.  277 ;  cannot  be
Defined,  Introd.  xiii ;  dependence  upon,
when  in  trouble.  429 ;  has  a  Form  and
yet  not  a  Form .  274  sq, ;  may  be  con-
sidered in  Four  points  of  view,  128;
Existence  of  the,  254 ;  the  Four  ways  of
seeing  the,  427 ;  creates  Good  and  Evil,
126  ;  cannot  in  Its  Highest  essence  be
described,  127,  136  and  note;  perfect
Ideas  as  to,  cannot  be  grasped  in  the
human  intellect,  456  sq. ;  Immanent
in  everything.  195 ;  incomprehensi-
bility of.  274  sq.:  Hebrew,  male-
female.  175,  342  sq.;  our  Knowledge
of,  136  and  note.  See  Appendix,  Mys-
tic Theology  of  Dionysios;  leaves
man  when  he  sms.  434;  cannot  be
seen  by  man,  whilst  he  is  in  the  flesh«
181.  See  Introduction.  Views  of  Moses
of  Cordova  and  Maimonides  on  the
Essence  of.  266,  267 ;  without  Matter,
191 ;  Names  of.  378  sq. ;  according  to
the  Qabbalistic  Symbolism,  the  Deity
manifests  Itself  through  a  N'qood-ah,
127 ;  the  Deity  ruuter,  125  note  ;  of  the
Conformations  of,  367  sq.  ;  brings  Sal-
vation to  the  wicked,  430;  distinct  from
the  Sephiroth,  291 ;  the  totality  of  the
Sephiroth,  not  the  Deity,  290  sq. ;  is
always  enshrouded  in  Its  She'kheen-ah
or  Glory,  181 ;  alone  is  pure  Simplicity,
212 ;  Supreme,  produces  through  the
Absolute  Idea,  Thought,  or  Perfect
Paradigmatic  Form,  181 ;  Supreme,  the
only  Real  and  True,  181 ;  Supreme.  The
entire  Universe  not  the  Content  of  the,
181 :  according  to  Qabbalistic  Symbol-
ism, manifests  Creation  as  if  on  a  Veil.
127.     See,  Maya,  Name,  Names.

Demons.  The,  433  sq.  ;  of  the  Akkadians,
Chaldeans,  etc.,  452,  453  sq.;  the  de-
stroying forces,  126;  Great  and  Small,
434.  435-  ^6C,  Sama-el,  Lil-ith,  Q'lip-
poth.

D'i-noor  or  Dinur.  The  Fire  river,  394
sq.,  405.

Description  of  Plates,  xix.


Desire  or  Will.     The  creator,  191,  194-

Diacrrams.  Qabbalistic.  mentioned  by
Origen,  311,  31a,  313.     See,  p.  xxiv.

Dimant.    David  de,  162.

Dimension,  900.

Dimensions.  The.  137  note.  268  note,
292  note.

Din.    Abrahaoi  Ab-Beth-,  38.

Din.    The  Sephirah,  aoo.  269.

Dinur  or  D'i-noor,  the  Fire-river,  405.

Dionysios,  the  Areopa^te  (St.  Denis),
46  note,  127,  128.  167  note.  440;
Mystic  Theology  of,  456  sg.  Sec.  St
Dionysios.

Dior.    Ben,  9.

Disciplina  Arcana.  The  Ancient,  177
and  note.     Introd.  viii.

Divine  Assistance  granted  Man  if  he  wiD
call  for  it.  183:  Love.  11 1  ;  Mediator
most  likely  symbolired  in  the  Qabbalah.
by  the  Sephirah  'Hohlcmah,  Word  or
Wisdom,  182;  Names  in  St.  Jerome,
168  and  note,  169.  See  aiso ;  Name.  In-
effable Name,  etc.;  Power.  How  it
weakens, 211 ;  Qab*)ali5tic  Nanae,  Who?
128  sq.

Doctrine.  Secret.    See,  Secret  Doctrine.

Dove.    The  brooding,  336.

Dragon.  The,  233-235,  243-245  ;  Great
Sea,  448  sq. ;  Tiamat  of  the  Chaldeans,
etc.,  243.  448  sq.  See.  Great  Sea,  also.
Harmony.

Dravidian  races  of  India.  239.

Dreams,  403,  404  and  note  ;  Demons  act
on  man  in  his,  435.

D'Tznioothah.  Siphrab,  quotations
from,  232.  233,  234.

Duality.     The,  in  the  Deity,  175,  34a.  343.

373  ^1-
Dudaim.    The,  355.

Dumah.     The  Angel  of  Silence,  403,  405,

406.
Duns  Scotus,  162,  163.
Duretus.     Claude,  favors  the   antiquity

of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah.  171.
Dust  and  Ohost  forms,  247,  248.
D'yooq-nah,  388  sq.,  411,  414,  417,  and

many  other  places.


Ea  or  Cannes,  235.    See,  Fish-god,  also.
Hea  and  Cannes.


477


liable,  45  note.  244,  394;  the  meridian
stin,  240;  and  Scorpion,  359;  of  St.
John,  45  note ;  Symbol  for  air,  perhaps
aether,  239, 244 ;  Symbol  of  the  Sephirah
Tiph'e-reth,  the  spiritual  aether  or  air,
hence  voice  and  sound  in  worship,  230 ;
eagle-headed  deity,  453.

Barth,  Qabbalistic,  Chaldean,  Chinese  and
Egyptian  ideas  as  to  its  Revolution,  139,
140  and  notes ;  One,  419 ;  its  Revolu-
tion on  its  axis,  believed  in  by  some  of
the  Greek  philosophers,  140;  ideas  as
to  its  Revolution  by  Arya-bhata,  an  an-
cient Hindu,  140 ;  the  Revolution  of,  in
the  Zohar,  139  sq.

Bcstasy  in  the  Mystic  Theology  of  Diony-
sios,  456  sq. ;  Theory  as  to,  158,  427.

Bden,  45  note,  404.  405,  408,  416;  the
Garden  of,  273,  412;  or  Paradise,  369
note.  See,  Garden  of,  and.  First  Sin.
Ibn  Gebirol  upon,  205 ;  the  Upper,  205.

Bdom.  Children  of  the  Christians,  70-73  ;
Christian  Rome,  71,  72  ;  kings  of,  118,
13s t  137.  See,  Pre- Adamite  kings  and,
Kings  of  Edom ;    Pagan  Rome,  71  sq.

BffO,  I.  127,  259;  and  Non-Ego,  256  ;  the
Zohar  says,  this  was  the  Light  which
created  everything,  128.

BgyptlanB.  Views  of  the  Ancient,  239;
Ineffable  Names  used  by,  237.  See,  De-
scription of  Plates.

B'had,  One,  344.

Eh'yeh  or  AlH'YeH,  f.  e.,  I  Am,  197  sq.,
182,  378.

Blders.    The  Seventy,  231.

Eleh,  f.  e..  These,  129  sq.

Blements.     Four,  in  the  Zohar,  316,  339.

El'hanan.    Babbi,  5.

Ellyah.     Prayer  of,  390  sq,

Bllenbergrer.  Heinrich,  on  the  Anti-
quity of  the  Zohar.  56.

Blobim,  the  Hebrew  for  God.  138, 175.  379  ;
the  Deity  in  Nature,  175  ;  Be'nai,  364
sq. ;  according  to  some  Hebrew  writers,
means  e'iohim,  i.  e.,  energies  or  angels,
348:  translated  in  the  English  Bible.
God,  139.    See.  She*kheen-ah.

El  Shaddai,  i.  e.,  the  Almighty,  379.

Emanation  of  the  Universe,  135.  195,

363  sq.,  381  sq.,  385  sq.


Emden.  Jacob  (Yabetz),  11.  See,  Ya-
betz.

Enoch  or  'Ha-nokh,  mention  of,  in  the
Zohar.  98,  99;  Book  of,  167.

Ens.    A  two-fold,  153,  153.

Esdras.     Books  of,  167.

Esh  Nofirah,  68.

Etherid^e.    J.  W.,  11.

Eunuch.  Explanation,  from  the  Zohar,  of
the  word.  Eunuch ;  as  used  in  the  New
Testament,  93  sq.

Evmuchs.  Disciples  of  the  Wise,  called,
Eunuchs,  in  the  Zohar,  93.

Evanflreliste.    Symbols  of  the,  45  note.

Eyil  angels  in  New  Testament  and  in  the
Zohar.  106  sq.    See,  Demons.

Evil  Eye.    The,  436  sq.^  454.

Evil  exists  for  the  wise  purposes  of  God,
184 ;  and  Good,  created  by  the  Deity,
126;  Inclination,  f.  e.,  the  Ye'ittr  km-
rah,  346  and  note ;  Necessary  to  the
Good,  184.  185;  Spirits  or  Q'lippoth,
126.

ESx  nihilo.    Creation.  124.  276.

Expansion  and  Concentration,  zzo.
See.  Tzimtxum.

Eye,  the  closed.  200 ;  degrees  and  coatings
of.  Ancient  ideas  as  to,  215, 216 ;  the  Evil,
436  sq. ,  454 ;  metaphor  of  Sight  through
the,  213,  214;  of  Providence,  always
open,  118.

Ezekiel  or  Ezeqiel ;  the  Four  Faces  of  the
Chariot  Throne  of,  45  note,  229,  394.
See,  Merkabah.  The  Visions  of,  and
those  of  Isaiah,  Daniel.  237;  a  great
Qabbalist.  166 ;  Vision  of.  45  note.  242.
See  Vision;  Vision  of  and  the  Apoca-
lypse of  St.  John,  303.

Ezra  and  Azriel,  38.     See,  Azariel.

Ezra  re-wrote  the  Old  Testament  in  the
Aramaic  alphabet,  461.

Ezra  Ibn.  On  Ibn  Gebirol.  See,  Ibn
Ezra.

Ezra.    Moses  Ibn  Jacob  ben,  160.

Ezra  the  Qabbalist.  See,  Azariel  and
Azriel.


Faces.  The  Partzupheem  or  Faces,  211,
283, 3821^..  394  sq.  See,  Partzupha;  also,
A'reekh  An-peen  and  Zc'ir  An-peen.


478


Falaqu^ra.  8hem-Tob  b.  Joseph
Ibn,  8,  lo.    See,  Ibn  Falaqudra.

Father.  The.  Symbolized  in  the  Qabba*
lah  by  Kcther,  182.    See,  Abba.

Fear  and  Love.    Worship  through,  429.

Female  and  male  principles,  118, 137, 185,
387  J^M  399.  417-    Sec,  Adam.

Feminine  deity  among  the  Semites,  a  re-
flection of  the  male,  246,  247,  342,  373
s^. ;  reflection  of  the  Supreme  Deity,
with  the  Qabbalists,  247.

Fioinus.  Marsilua,  largely  influenced
by  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

Fifty   Oates  of  Understandinff,  247,

314.  342.
Fire  and  Incense,  230 ;   the  mystery  of  the

three  parts  which  are  one,  376  sg. ;  river,

394  sg.    See  D'i-noor  and  Dinur ;  and

Water,  348.  349.
First  Sin.    The,  410, 425  j^.,  430  sg.    See,

Adam.  Grapes.
Fish.     The,  336.    See,  Fish-god.
Pish-firod,  234  sg.,  243  sg.,  336  note,  448

sg.    See,  Oannes.  also  Ea,  and  Hea.
Flesh.    The,  from  the  Evil  side,  410;   of

Moses  was  red,  according  to  the  Zohar,

93.     See,  Moses.     Power  of  the,  410.
Fludd.    Dr.  Robert,  11,  171.
Fons  Vlt8B,  8,  9,  162.
Forbidden  Fruit.     Eating  of  the,  410,

425,    430.       See,    Grapes;    also.    First

Sin.
Form.     Chinese  idea  as  to  Non-form  and,

445;  the  Idealized,  181;  Universal,  143

Four  animals  in  early  Christianity,  230;
animals  of  the  Merkabah  in  the  Apoca-
lypse, 230;  figures  in  the  Vision  of
Ezeqiel,  45  note,  229,  394  sg.  See
Ezeqiel ;  Worlds,  198.  See,  Worlds,
Eagle,  Ox,  Man,  Lion.

Franck.  Prof.  Adolphe,  thought  the
Hebrew  Qabbalah  originated  with  the
Persians,  11.  172,  173  ;  errors  in  his
translations  from  the  Zohar,  377  note.

Franck.    Jacob,  11.

Free  Will,  347,  348;  Ibn  Gebirol's  views
on,  197;   in  Man,  126,  183,  194.

From  nothingr,  nothingr  comes.  The
Qabbalah  opposes  this  maxim,  124.


Fruit.     The  Forbidden,   what  it   wis^

410.    See  Grapes.
Fu-hsi,  444.
Furor.    Ancient  ideas  as  to,  427.


Qabalas.  Count  de.  Poem  of  the  Rape
of  the  Lock,  by  Alex.  Pope,  based  on

171.

Oai-hinnom,  358,  395  sg.,  403,  405,  411 ;
who  calls  his  fellow-man  Wicked  brings
him  to,  105  sf. ;  the  Wicked  cast  into,
353.  354;   in  ^e  Zohar,  99.     See  HcU.

Galatinus.  Peter,  favors  the  antiquity  ol
the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

Qale.  Theophilus,  largely  influenced  by
the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

Gan  Eden.  See  Paradise,  Eden,  Garden,
of  Eden.

Garden  of  Aromatics,  by  Ben  Ezra,  160.

Garden  of  Eden,  204.  205.  See.  Eden
and  Paradise.

Gebirol.  Ibn.  Attributed  a  Species  of
matter  to  all  the  created,  191 ;  held  that
the  Deity  was  immanent  in  everything.
195;  on  the  Neshamah,  i.  e..  Soul,  etc^
196  ;  opinions  upon  Ibn  Gebirol  and  his
writings,  161 ;  on  the  influences  between
the  Superior  and  Inferior  Worlds,  189 ;
his  philosophical  system  resembles  diat
of  the  Zohar,  but  it  differs  in  its  method
of  treatment,  7.  See,  Ibn  Gebirol,  and
Me'q6r  'Hay-ylm.

Ge'boor-ah.    The  Sephirah,  200,  269, 375.

Gedal-yah  Ibn  Yachia  b.  Don  Yosef,
on  the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar,  61.  62.

Ge'dool*ah.    The  Sephirah,  200.  269.

Qeiger,  Dr.  Abraham,  opposes  the  an-
tiquity  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  espe-
cially the  Zohar,  10.  172.

Genesis.  Key  to  the  first  chapter  of,  122^
123.

Genius.    What  is,  138.

Ghost- world.    Mul-lil,  Lord  of  the,  247.

Gill.    John,  II,  464.

Gil'sroorem.  The  revolving  of  the  Incor-
poreal, but  not  Metempsychosis,  198^
330.     See  Revolution.

Ginsburgr.  Dr.  Christian  D.,  10;  op-
poses the  Antiquity  of  the  Zohar.  His
objections,  65  sg. ;   on  the  statement  in


479


the  Sephcr  Yu'hasin,  $6 ;  his  objections
answered.  65  s^.

Gnomes,  238 ;  Chaldean.  454.

Gnostics  and  the  Qabbalah,  170 ;  i£ons  of,
231  and  note.

God,  the  Hebrew  Name  of  is  Elohim,  129;
His  love  and  mercy  acts  in  the  Advance-
ment of  humanity,  180;  seeing  God,
226,  427.

Gods.  Babylonian;  The  sacred  num-
ber of  many  of  the,  238 ;  of  the
Heathen  not  to  be  reviled,  according  to
the  Zohar.     See  also,  Qur  an,  93.

Gk>od  and  Bvil,  in  Chaldea,  242 ;  and  Evil,
created  by  the  Deity,  126 ;  and  Evil,  not
considered  by  the  Qabbalah  as  two  in-
dependent powers,  but  both  under  the
Supreme  Deity,  184;  inclination  or
Yeixerha-toi,  348  note.

Grace  or  Love.  The  Sephirah  of.  See
•Hes-ed.

Graetz.  Dr.  Hirsch,  opposes  the  anti-
quity of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah  and  es-
pecially the  Zohar,  10.  37,  56,  172 ;  his
hypothesis  against  the  antiquity  of  the
Qabbalah,  39.

Grapes,  358,  410,  430  sq. ;  simile  of  the
Bunch  of,  217.

Great  Sea.  The,  233-235,  243,  244.  See,
Bohu ;  Serpent  of  the  Great  Crystalline
Sea  is  Leviathan,  233-235.

Greek  idea  of  the  Oppositions,  186 ;  vowel
letters,  460,  464.

Groddeck.    Gabriel,  10.

Gulllaume  de  Auversrne,  162,  163.

Gunsalvi.  Dominic,  translated  into
Latin  the  Me*q6r  'Hay-yim,  162.


Habal  D'Garmin,  i.  e.,  the  Body  of  the

Resurrection,  392.    See,  Resurrection.
Habel  and  'Hes-ed,  422.
Hambursrer.     J.     Favors   the  antiquity

of  the  Zohar,  64  note.
'Hannanel.  Rabbi,  5.
Hands.     Qabbalistic  methods  of  holding

the,  440, 441  note.    See,  the  Description

of  the  Plates.
'Ha'nokh.    Babbi,  5.
Harmony  is  represented  Symbolically,  by

the  Serpent  with  its  tail  in  its  mouth,


186.    N.B. — This  is  likely  Leviathan..

In   Hindu  Symbolism  it  surrounds  the

Universe;      and    Oppositions    in    the

Zodiac,  186.
Harmonies  in  the  Sephiroth,  203.
Hay  Gaon,  47;   knows  of  the  Sephiroth,.

160.
Ha-Levi.      Abraham  b.,    attacks   the

writings  of  Ibn  Gebirol,  161.
Ha-Levi.    Yehudah,  has  ideas  similar  to

those  Ibn  Gebirol,  161.
'Hay-yah.    The,  392.
'Hay-yim.    The  Me'q6r,  3,  142  sq.,  188^

sq.    See  Ibn  Gebirol.
'Hay-yoth  ha-Qadosh,  t.  e.,  the  Holy

Living  Creatures,  259.

He  or  Hu,  175.  342.  373  ^9-

Hea  or  Ea,  a  Babylonian  deity,  241  sq.,
448  sq.    See,  Ea,  also,  Oannes.

Head  of  all  Heads,  369  sq.

Head.  White,  369,  382,  386.    See,  Resha
'Hiv'rah,  also,  Cranium.

Heads.    The  Three,  which  are  One  Head,.
369  sq.,  382  sq.

Heaven.    The  coming  Kingdom  of,  202,.
203  and  notes.

Heaven  of  Heavens,  the  Highest  Ideal
World,  277.

Heavenly  Adam,  202.    See,  Adam.

Heavenly  Family.  The,  with  early
Semites,  246.  See  Introduction  xiii ;
Ideal  of  the  Visible,  in  the  Old  and  New
Testaments,  189.

Heavens.  Two,  419 ;  Like  the  layers  of
an  onion,  415  sq.,  451.

Hebrew  Alphabet,  origin  of,  460;  Ancient,
pronunciation  of,  likely  lost,  465 ;  Old
Testament.  The  naturalism  of,  is  merged
in  the  Greek  idealization  of  the  New
Testament.  Introd.,xi;  Square  Char-
acter. Antiquity  of.  461 ;  Square  Char-
acter, not  used  by  Erra  in  rewriting
the  O.  T.,  461 ;  Square  Alphabetic
Characters  used  in  the  time  of  Jesus,
465 ;  and  Syriac  vowel  pointing,  from
the  same  source,  466;  vowel  letters,
460;  vowel  points,  66,  460.  See,
Vowels,  also.  Vowel  Points.

Hebrews,  Origin  of  in  Chaldea.  228.

Hegel.  GeorfiT  Wilhelm  Friederich,
influenced  by  the  doctrines  of  the  He-


48o


brew  Qabbalah,  171;  views  as  to  the
Deity,  355 ;  his  Opinion  on  the  exis-
tence of  Good  and  Evil,  184.

Hell  or  Gal-hinnom,  348.

Hell  and  Paradise,  432  sq.  See  Gai-
hinnom  and  Eden.

Hell  or  the  Underworld.  The  Chal-
dean, etc..  450.

Helmont.  Frans  Mercuriuavan,  Civors
the  antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,

171.

Hermas  Pastor.    See  Pastor  of  Hermas.

Hermes  Trismeiristus,  167.

'Hes-ed.  The  Sephirah,  300,  368  sq.,  393
note.  375.    See,  Sephirah,  Sephiroth.

Hindu  deity  never  Winks,  314 ;  heavens,
447 ;  Idea  as  to  Non-annihilation,  124
note ;  representations  of  the  Figures  of
the  Chariot  Throne,  45  note ;  beUef  in
the  Revolution  of  the  Earth,  140 ;  Sym-
bols of  the  Four  Worlds,  330,  334.
See,  Description  of  Plates;  Symbolism,
137  note ;  Veda's  and  the  Qabbalah,
Introd.,  xiii,  334  sq. ;  representation  of
the  Four  Figures  in  the  Vision  of
Ezeqiel,  45  note.

Hierarchies.  Spiritual,  of  the  Akkadians,
2461^.,  448  sq.;  Angelic,  167  note;  of
the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  167  note.

Hiram  Abiff,  of  Tyre,  185.

HispalenslB.  Joannes,  9;  Aria  Mon-
tano,  241.  xxiii.

Hod.     The  Sephirah.  201,  270,  371.

'Hoklimah  Illa-ah.  t.  e..  Heavenly  Wis-
dom, 258;  Lashon.220;  Nistharah,220,
221 ;  The  Sephirah,  192,  193,  261,  292
note;  the  Son  or  Logos.  182;  Theoso-
phy.  220;  the  Sephirah,  is  Wisdom,  the
Logos  or  Word.  199;  the  Word,  called
by  the  Qabbalists,  the  Son  of  God,  199 ;
Yavonith,  i.  e.,  Grecian  Wisdom.  220.
See,  Logos,  Word,  Wisdom,  Sephi-
roth.

Holy  of  Holies.  In  the  ancient  Temples
of  Babylonia,  240,  241.

Holy  Kiss.  Reception  of  the  Soul  by  the,
406,  407.

Holy  Spirit.  The,  260.  336;  with  the
Qabbalists,  is  the  Mother,  the  Church  is
the  Daughter.  117.

House  of  the  World,  385.     Comp.  245.


Hn,  f.  e..  He,  175,  343  sq..  373,  374-
Human  Face,  the  symbol  of  St.  Matthev,

45  note.
Human  Bace.     Roots  of  the.  432.
H\m:ianity  considered  in  the  Qabbalah,  as

a  Great  Universal  Brotherhood,  181.
Humiliation  and  Prayer.     Days  for.  in

ancient  Babylonia,  240.
'Huahiel.  Babbi,  5.


Ibn-al-Qayegr.    See.  Ibn  Badja.

Ibn  Ba4jft>  164.

Ibn  Ezra.  Abraham,  on  Ibn  Gebirol's
writings.  160.  161 ;  on  the  Four  Worlds
of  Ibn  Gebirol,  198.

Ibn  Falaqu^ra.  Shem  Tob,  says,  the
Me'qdr  Hay-ytm,  of  Ibn  Gebirol.  con-
tains Ancient  Learning.  161;  Shem
Tob  appreciated  the  writings  of  Ibn
Gebirol,  161.

Ibn  Oebirol.  Solomon  b.   Yehudah,

Life  and  Writings,  i  s^.  ;  on  the  Soul,
by,  4 ;  on  the  Will,  by,  4  ;  on  the  Mak-
rokosm  and  Mikrokosm.  4 ;  Poems  oC
4 ;  Grammar,  by,  4 ;  Choice  Pearls,  by,
4;  Tiqoon  Middoth  ha-Nephesh.  by,
4;  cause  of  the  forgetfulness  of  his
philosophical  works,  161 ;  considered  an
Arab  in  the  Middle  Ages,  163 ;  consid-
ered a  Christian.  163;  influence  of  his
writings  on  the  scholastic  philosophy.
162 ;  the  first  so-called,  Arabian  philoso-
pher, in  Europe,  164 ;  ideas  influenced
the  Mediaeval  Mystics,  163  ;  Moses  Mai-
monides  does  not  mention  him.  164 ;  the
Qabbalistic  philosophy  the  predominat-
ing influence  shown  in.  219;  poem  on
the  32  Paths,  218:  similarities  between
his  writings  and  the  Zohar.  188 ;  writings
have  similarities  to  the  Zoharic,  188.  his
Me'qor  'Hay-yim,  142  sq.

Ibn  Roschd  or,  Averroes,  164.

Ibn  Sina,  called  by  the  Scholastics,  Avi-
cenna,  161,  163.  164.

Ibn  Tofail.  Abu-Beer-,  164.

Ideal  Man.  See,  Adam  Qadmon,  and
Adam  Illa-ah.

Ideas,  of  the  cariy  thinkers,  113;  in  the
ancient  worid  of  thought.  276  jq.


48 1


Idrah  Rabbah.    Translation  from  the  be-
ginning of,  440  sq.
Hu.     Babylonian  Supreme  Deity,  238,  24a,

454-

Imasre*     Divine.     Man  in  the,  345.

Imznah,  i.  e..  Mother,  398.    See,  Abba.

Imznah  nia-ah,  1.  e..  Upper  Mother,  199,
260.     See,  She*kheen-ah.

Importance  of  the  investigation  of  the  re-
lations of  man  to  the  Primal  Cause,  174.

IncenBe  and  Fire,  230.

Incorporeal  compared  to  a  lighted  lamp,

376,  412 ;  divisions  of  the,  392  sq. ;  in

man  after  Death,  410  sq.    See,  Nesh-

^  amah,     Rua'h,     Nephesh,     'Hay.yah,

Ye'hee-dah.

Incubus,  Succubus,  etc.,  453.

Ineffable  Name,  175.341.342.343;  not
used  by  Eve  or  Satan,  124.  See  Name,
also,  Tetragrammaton  and  YHVH.

Initiates.    An  Ancient  Lodge  of,  439  sq.

Intellect.     Universal,  144.

Invisible  to  be  comprehended  only  through
the  visible,  Introd.  xi ;  the  idea  of  a
Perfect  Invisible  and  an  Imperfect
Visible,  among  the  Primitive  ideas  of
mankind,  iii ;  reached  through  the
visible,  114,  174,  189.

Isaac  or  Yltz-'haq  of  Acco,  a  Practi-
cal Qabbalist,  58;  quotations  from  his
Sepher  Yu'hasin,  claimed,  by  Dr.
Graetz  et  al.,  as  proof  that  R.  Moses  de
Leon  wrote  the  Zohar,  56, 57,  58, 59  sq.,
60.

Isaiah.     Book  of  the  Ascension  and  Vision

of,  167.
Isaiah  had  knowledge  of  the  Qabbalah,

166,  198,  315  sq.

Ishmaelites  or  Yishmaelites,  named  in  the
Zohar,  49,  69-73.


Jacob's  Ladder.  Explanation  of,  by  Ibn
Gebirol,  204.

Jannes  and  Jambres.  An  account  of,
95  to  98.

Jelllnek.  Rev.  Dr.  Adolph,  10;  Intro-
duction to  German  edition  of  Prof.
Adolphe  Franck's  La  KabhaU,  11;  his
favorable  remarks  as  to  the  antiquity  of
the  Qabbalah,  39 ;   statement  as  to  the

31


Comet,  in  the  Zohar.  80  sq.;  began
in  opposition  to  the  antiquity  of  the
Hebrew  Qabbalah  and  the  Zohar.  his
quotations  however,  favor  their  antiq-
uity. 172 ;  his  opposition  to  the  Zohar,  38.

Jerome.  St.  His  letter  to  Marcella  men-
tioning the  Ten  Divine  Names,  trans-
lated, 168  note.    See,  St.  Jerome.

Jesus.  Time  of  thd  birth  of,  87  and  note,
88 ;  Three  conceptions  of,  in  the  N.  T.,
119;  the  religion  of,  230;  uses  the
She-mah,  371  note.

Jewish  Church  called,  the  Daughter  of
YHVH,  in  the  Zohar,  94;  Deity,  male-
female,  175,  247,  342  sq.;  Disciplina
Arcana.  Value  of  the,  Introd.viii ;  knowl-
edge from  Chaldea,  228.  See,  Thought,
and,  Secret  Doctrine,  174.

Joel.  Rev.  Dr.  D.  H.,  11 ;  favors  the
antiquity  of  the  Zohar,  64.

Johannic.    The.  theology,  119.

Josephiis,  167,  463.

Jost.  Dr.  I.  M.,  favors  the  antiquity  of
the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  172;  on  the
Qabbalah  and  Zohar,  11,  61,  65,  Introd.
xiv.

Jourdain^  cited,  162.

Jubilees.    Book  of.  167.

Jud^rment.  Divine  Power  of,  126;  and*
Mercy.  The  World  exists  through,.
402,  446  note ;  the  Pillar  or  Column  of,
282;  the  Place  of,  of  the  Living  and
Dead,  366  and  note ;  of  the  Wicked
and  their  punishment,  358.

Just.    The.    See,  Pious.


Kallem.    See,  Vessels,  and,  Sephiroth,  279
^^•.  300.  331-

Kan  (Qa-3rln  or  Cain),  248,  444.

Kepler  upon  the  Constellations  at  the  com-
ing of  Jesus,  87.

Kether.  Sephirah,  127,  128  note,  190, 199,
256  sq.,  283,  292  note;  is  A'reekh  An-
pecn,  283 ;  clear  Knowledge  of,  cannot
be  obtained  by  man  in  this  world,  380
iq-:  represenu  the  Brain  and  the
Neshamah,  1.  #.,  Soul,  282 ;  called,  the
Father.  182;  is  the  Unity  in  Number.
282.


482


Kether  El-yon,  t.  e..  Highest  or,  Upper,
Crown,  370  sq.

Kether  Malkhuth,  cited,  a  sq.,  66,  195-
198.

Kernel  and  Shell.  Description  of  the
Universe  as,  191.

Khosari,  Kueari  or  Cosrl.  Ideas  in  this
writing,  similar  to  those  in  the  Me'q6r
*Hay-yim.  161.

Khtinrath.  Henry,  largely  influenced  by
the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

ElinfiT  and  Queen.  The  union  of,  no,
203,  283.

Klnsr-  The.  and  his  son.  The  Parables  of,
401,  436.

Klnfirdom.  The  great  text  as  to  the  com-
ing Kingdom  of  the  Righteous  on  earth,
202.  Compare  437 ;  of  Darkness,  has
injured  the  Ancient  tradition,  180 ;  the
Ideal  Perfect,  201,  202.

King's  of  Bdom.  The  Pre-Adamitic,  118,
135,  137, 138  and  notes,  185, 236, 386  sq.

Kircher.  Rev.  Athanasius,  11,  65;
ascribes  many  of  the  doctrines  of  the
Hebrew  Qabbalah  to  the  Egyptians,  6$,
171 ;  favors  the  Antiquity  of  the  He-
brew Qabbalah,  171 ;  a  figure  of  Pan
or    Zeus    Lykaeus,    from    his    works,

325-
Kiseh  ha-Kabod,  t.  ^.,  Throne  of  Glory,

418.     See,  Throne  of  Glory.

Kiss.  The  Holy,  taking  of  the  Soul  of  the
Pious  by,  406,  407.

Kleuker.  John  Frederick,  on  the  He-
brew Qabbalistic  philosophy,  172.

Knowledere,  in  Hebrew,  Da-ath,  260,  261 ;
in  the  ancient  World,  177.

Ko-a'h  Kis-eh,  i.  e.,  The  Throne  of
Glory,  418,  429.     See,  Throne  of  Glory.

Konitz.  Moses  b.  Me'na-a'hem  Men-
del, 20  sq. ;  has  written  in  favor  of  the
antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  20,
172  sq.

Kosmic  Mystery,  in  the  book.  Teaching  of
the  Twelve  Apostles,  116  sq.

Kosmoerony  of  the  Zohar,  139,  415  sq.

Kosmos.  The.  with  the  Qabbalists,  117 ;
of  the  Zohar  and  that  of  Chaldea,  139
sq.,  454  sq.  See,  Universe,  also,  Makro-
kosm.

K'ungr-Foo-Tze,  or,  Confucius,  444.


LactantitiB  on  the  Revolution  of  the  Earth,

139-
Ijadder  of  Jacob,  301,  308.

Landauer.  M.  H.,  10.  11.

Lanflre.  Joachim,  ascribes  the  origin  of
the  Hebrew  Qabbalah  to  Gentile  phi-
losophy, 172.

Lanfirnafire,  Introd.,  xi,  xii ;  Ancient,  175  •^•

Ijaou  Tez*.  Philosophy  of.  izi  sq. ;  his
Tao-teh-King.  1x3  ;  a  Qabbalah  in  his
asserted  writings,  170.

Lassen.  Christian,  believes  Neo-pla-
tonism  came  from  India,  170.

Law.    The.    See  Thorah.

Law.  The  Common,  a  species  of  Qabbal-
ah, 232.

LeaminfiT*  Secret.  See,  Secret  Learn-
ing.

Leibnitz.  Baron,  interested  in  the  study
of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah  through  Baron
Knorr  von  Rosenroth,  171 ;  concealed
his  scheme  of  Differential  Calculus.  177
note.

LenfiTth,  Breadth,  Deptli,  137  note,  200.
292  note.  See  also.  Dimension  and,  Di-
mensions.

Leo  HebrsBUB,  9.

Leon  B.  Moses  b.  Shezn-Tob  de,  7.
10 ;  not  the  author  of  the  Zohar,  41  sq.
See,  Moses  de  Leon.

Letters,  numbers  and  proportions,
bind  man's  thoughts  in  matter  symbol-
ism, 181,  Introd.  xi.

Levi.  Abraham  b.  David  ha-,  5.

Levi.  Abraham  b.  ha-  (the  Elder).  9.

Levi.  Eliphas  (Abbe  Alphonse  Louis
Constant),  11;  on  the  Qabbalistic  idea
of  the  Deity,  254,  255.

Leviathan,  234,  235.    See,  Serpent.
Levita.  Elias,  on    the    antiquity   of   the
Hebrew  vowel  points,  468.     See,  Vowel
points.
Lig'ht.     The  Zoharic,  428 ;  body  of  Adam,
Ibn  Gebirol's  writings  upon  the,  205;
in  which  the  Soul  is  clothed,  399.
Liffhtfoot.  John,  11.
Lil-in.     The.  435.

Lil-ith,  248,  347  note ;  the  wife  of  Adam,
248  ;  and  her  companion,  Sama-el,  433
sq.


483


Xiion,  45  note  ;  symbol  for  fire,  229 ;  sym-
bol of  Force,  Enerj^,  Fire,  also  of
Ge'boor-ah,  Spiritual  Fire,  229;  of  St.
Mark,  45  note.  See.  Ezeqiel,  Vision  of
Ezekiel,  Four  Animals.

lilfe  and  Death,  362  sq.

lilfe.  Entrance  into,  of  the  Soul,  396  sq.;
Source  of.  See,  Me*q6r  Hay-y!m;
Tree  of,  204,  235,  236.    See,  Tree.

LivlnflT.  All,  to  die  and  be  at  once  revivi-
fied, at  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  437.

LiOdfire.  A  Qabbalistic,  and  the  arrange-
ment of,  442,  443  note.

lioescher.  Valentine  Ernest,  11.

liOfiTOS.  The,  301.  302.  336,  459:  the  Cre-
ative, 137.  See,  Word,  also,  'Hokhmah.

Lord.  The,  is  given  in  the  English  Bible
as  the  equivalent  for  YHVH,  129;  or
Adonai,  175.

Lord's.  The,  Prayer,  end  of.  Qabbalistic,
202  note ;  Divisions  of,  and  the  Ten
Commandments,  318.

Lost.     Nothing  ever,  124,  125.

Low.  Dr.  Leopold,  favored  the  antiquity
of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  11,  172.

Lower  man  or  Adam,  114 ;  World,  a  copy
of  the  Upper,  108  sq.  See,  Adam,  also,
Man.

Love.  The  Divine,  iii ;  and  Fear.
Worship  through,  429;  to  God,  442
note.

Lully.  Raymond,  agreed  with  the  He-
brew Qabbalists,  11,  171.

Lupercalia.    The,  326.

Luria  or  Luriab.  David.  Analysis  of
his  book  in  favor  of  the  antiquity  of  the
Zohar.  11,401^.;  wrote  in  support  of
the  Antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,
40-54,  172  sq.

Lutterbeck.  Job.  Ant.  Bemb.,  11.

Luzzatto.  S.  D.,  10.

Ljrra.  Nicbolas  de,  adopted  the  four
Jewish  methods  of  interpretation  of  the
Old  Testament,  105.

1^

Ma-a'seb  Be'resbeetb,  162,  220.

Ma-a'seb  Merkabab  or  Chariot  Throne.
44  sq.,  162,  220,  227 ;  Interdictions  as
to  teaching,  222,  223.  See,  Ezekiel  or
Ezeqiel;  Vision  of ;  Four  Animals.


Mafiric.  Black  and  White,  47  note.  453
sq. ;  different  meaning  of.  in  Ancient
times,  from  that  in  the  Middle  ages,  47
note.

Ma'bsbabab,  i.  e,,  Thought,  128  and
note,  377,  395,  400,  408.

Maimonides  an  Aristotelian,  161 ;  holds
that  the  Earth  is  round  and  revolves,
140 ;  does  not  mention  the  Name  of  Ibn
Gebirol,  164 ;  favorable  to  the  Specula-
tive Qabbalah,  39  sq.;  not  favorable  to
the  philosophical  ideas  in  the  Writings
of  Ibn  Gebirol,  161,

Makrokosm,  4,  46,  118  note,  121,  128
note,  144,  147,  150,  156,  157,  160,  181,
231,  316  note.  332,  333,  337  note,  420,
443  note ;  The  Chinese,  112  sq.,  445  sq.;
the  Great  Man  seen  by  Nebuchadnezzar,
216;  as  the  Great  Tree.  422;  usually
represented  as  an  Immense  Man,  some-
times as  an  Immense  Head,  118  note;
Maimonides  on,  333  ;  and  Mikrokosm,
296,  422 ;  Termed  by  the  Qabbalah,  son
of  Elohim,  i.  e.,  God,  231.

Makrokosmos,  115.  225,  292  note;  as
Atlas,  319,  326 ;  Engraving  of,  as  por-
trayed in  the  Middle  Ages,  326,  327 ;
the  Greek,  324  sq. ;  the   Hindu,  321  sq,

Makroprosopos,  182.

Malakb  Hamovetb,  t.  e.,  the  Angel  of
Death,  432,  436 ;  Rah,  i.  e..  Evil  Angel,
435  note.

Male  and  Female  principles,  387  sq.;  All
exists  through,  193.  199;  principles  on
Solomon's  Temple.  117;  Souls  in  the
Pre-existent  condition,  399.  See,  Pre-
existence.

Malkbutb.  Deity  in,  128  ;  Kether  Malk-
huth,  2  sq.,f)\  represents  the  Nephesh,
282 ;  called,  the  Queen,  Daughter,  Ma^
troneethah.  Matron,  the  She'kheen-ah,
etc.,  203.  283;  the  Scphirah,  201,  202,
203,  272;  Symbolized  by  the  Moon,
282.  See,  Colors,  Sephirah,  Sephiroth,
Kingdom.

Man.  The  Androgenic;  281 ;  the  Angelic,
symbol  of  the  Sephirah  Malkhuth.  the
Kingdom,  the  Spiritual  Earth,  hence
the  Products  of  the  Earth,  Wine  and
Bread.  230;  as  the  Zodiacal  Aquarius,
259;  in  the  Body,  cannot  raise  the  Veil


484


absolutely,  i8i,  Introd.  xi;  the  bringing
forth  of,  353.  See,  Adam.  The  Man
with  the  Burden,  335;  the  Celestial,
419.  See,  Adam.  Not  considered  in
the  Qabbalah  as  Autonomic,  180;  Cre-
ation of,  106  sq,,  417 ;  Creation  of,  his
purity  and  his  sinning,  344,  345,  424;
his  Creative  power,  183,  184;  Danger
to,  from  the  Unclean  Spirits  which  sur-
round him,  225 ;  can  only  approach  the
Deity  through  the  Intention  of  the
Heart,  409 ;  in  the  flesh,  is  always  sub-
ject to  Dissolution  and  Death,  184 ;  the
Earthly.  231,  232  ;  Feared  at  first  by  all
the  Animals,  345 ;  cannot  attain  his  lost
Felicity  through  his  unaided  powers,
181,  182  ;  whilst  in  the  Flesh  cannot  See
the  Deity,  Face  to  Face,  181;  in  the
Flesh  can  only  See  the  Back  of  the
Deity,  f.  e.,  the  Visible  Universe,  181 ;
the  Form  of  the,  400  sq.,  415  sq.,  420,
421 ;  Garments  of  the  Incorporeal  in,
412;  the  Great  Man,  147.  See,  Makro-
kosm.  Incorporeal  in  Man  after  death,
410  sq.,  412 ;  the  Inner,  desires  a  Wor-
ship from  the  Heart,  Introd.  ix ;  the
Mystery  of,  414  sq.,  422,  423 ;  of  the
present,  his  hopes  and  fears,  183 ;  The
Real,  is  the  Inner  Spiritual  not  the  out-
side, 184. 422 ;  partakes  of  two  opposing
Regions,  that  of  Goodness  and  that  of
Evil,  184 ;  gives  a  portion  of  his  Spiritu-
ality to  his  Works,  138 ;  of  to-day,  only
a  Concatenation  of  the  Being-hood  of
all  precedent  human  life.  183 ;  Upper,
Everything  in  the.  114;  in  the  vision  of
Ezekiel  (Ezeqiel),  45  sq.  and  note;
Words,  all  spoken  by,  Continue  in  the
future,  428.  See,  Adam.  Makrokosm,
Mikrokosm.

Man's  Works,  a  part  of  himself,  138,  139.

Manicheeans  and  the  Qabbalah,  170.

Ma-qom,  i.  c.  Place,  300,  420.

Mars.     The  planet,  329,  449.

Mazklm.  The,  249,  451,  453.  See  also,
Mazikim  and  Maziqim.

Massorah.  The  Syriac  in  the  III  century
A.D..465  j^.

Massoritic  Doctors  only  substituted  for
the  more  ancient  symbolism  of  the
Vowels,  a  more  modern,  465 ;  points  in


the  Synagogue  Rolls,  467,;  Doctors;
their  duties,  46a  sq.  See,  Vowels,  Vowel
pointing.

Materialism  and  ForznaliBzn.  The  dan-
gers of,  Introd.  viii,  ix,  x.

Matroneethah,  76,  128,  203,  401 ;  The,
the  Mediatrix  betH'een  the  Deity  and
naan,  349,  350,  351  and  note.  401.

Matter,  llie  Deity  without,  191  ;  Differ-
ent kinds  of,  145.  Ibn  Gebirol  on,  \\2sq.

Matter.  Jacques,  11 ;  thought  the  He-
brew Qabbalah  originated  with  the  Per-
sians, 172.

Matter,  always  in  Motion,  135  note;
no  Absolute  Matter,  15a  note  ;  Univer-
sal, 143  sq.

Maurice.  Bev.  Thomas.  Favors  the
antiquity  of  the  2^har.  64.

Maya  or  Illusion,  276  sq.,  321,  See,  De-
scription of  Plates.

Mazlqlxn,  434,  435,  451,  453.  See,  Maz-
kirn.

Maa-zol,  the  Influences.  298.

Mediator.  Among  the  ancient  Babylo-
nians, 241;  a  Divine,  a  necessity  to
man,  181.  182.

Men.  Zohar  speaks  of,  as  not  all  descend-
ing from  Adam,  139,  416,

Me-q6r  *Hay-7lm,  by  Ibn  Gebirol.
Analysis  of,  142  ;  Influences  in  the  For-
mation of  the,  142,  143 ;  a  Resiun6  of.
143  sq.;  contains  an  Ancient  System,
10.

Mercy  and  Judgment,  446  note.

Mercy.  The  Pillar  of,  281 ;  tempers  Rigor
or  Severity,  380  sq.;  the  Sephirah  "Hes-
ed,  sometimes  called,  269.

Merkabah,  45  note,  227,  419 ;  in  early
Christianity,  230.  See,  Ma-a'seh  Mer-
kabah. The,  and  the  cleansing  of  the
Neshamoth,  394.

Merodach  or  Marduk,  241,  244.

Mesopotamia  ancient.  Civilization  of,  its
progression,  237;  the  Population  of
Ancient.  237  note.

Messer  Leone  Hebreo,  9.

Messiah.  The,  335 ;  Atonement  by  the,.
337.  338  sq. ;  the  Coming  of  the,  85  sq.,
437;  Ibn  Gebirol  on  the  time  of  the
coming  of  the.  217 ;  ben  Joseph  and  the
Messiah  ben  David,  366,  367  and  note ;


485


as  the  Shepherd,  338,  339  ;  Star  of  the,
88 ;  Time  of  His  coming,  Kepler  upon,
87;  Time  of  the  coming  of,  in  the
Zohar,  88  sq. ;  Washed  in  wine,  340 ;
in  the  Zohar,  77  sg.,  85  sg.

Metals.     Four,  in  the  Zohar,  216.

Metatron,  116,  128.  174,  228,  272,  347.
350,  366  and  note ;  the  B'ree-atic
Adam,  418,  419 ;  the  first  of  all  Crea-
tures and  the  reflection  of  Elohim,
349  and  note,  351  note ;  the  Presence
Angel,  365,  366 ;  in  the  Second  World,
328 ;  the  Servant  of  Ma-qom,  349 ;  his
name  equals  that  of  Shaddai,  the  Al-
mighty, 328,  366.

Metempsychosis,  197, 308.  See,  Revolu-
tion.

Mexican  Androgene.  157.

Meyer.  JohaxmFriederich  von,  11.

Me'ztizzah.    The,  67,  452.

Michael  Archanflrel  identified  in  the  Pas-
tor of  Hermas,  with  Christ,  116.

Middle  PUlar»  281  sq.

Middoth.     The  Thirteen,  372  note.

Midrash  Va-yiqrah  Rabbah,  73;  Ye'-
rushalmi,  48.

Midrashim.    Ancient,  167.

Mig'ht  and  Mysticism,  217.

Mikrokosm,  4.  46,  121,  128  note,  134,  144,
147,  150,  156,  157,  160.  181. 198,  231,
232,  265,  332  sq.,  333,  337  note;  and
Makrokosm,  422.  See,  Makrokosm,
Adam,  Man.

Mikrokosmos,  225.

Mikroprosopos,  182.

Millennium,  233.

Minir.  Isaac  Ibn,  12.

Miracles,  193,  194.

Mirandola.  Prince  Giovanni  Pico
della.  9.  II.

Mithras.  Quotation  from  Origen  on,  as
to  the  metals,  etc.,  310,  311.

Mohammedans  say  the  First  thing  created
by  God  was  a  pen,  115 ;  not  necessarily
mentioned  in  the  Zohar,  72  sq.

Molitor.  Franz  Joseph.  tFavors  the  an-
tiquity of  the  Zohar,  11,  65.

Month.  Names  of  the  Jewish,  from  Baby
Ionia,  249.

Moon.    The  Spirit  of.  242.

More.  Dr.  Henry,  favors  the  antiquity  of
the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  11,  171.


Morin.  Jean,  10.  172;  on  the  Hebrew
vowel  pointing,  461.

Moses.  Book  of  the  Assumption  of.
167;  an  Egyptian  General,  94:  and
Eliyahu.  in  the  Zohar,  99:  Face  red
like  the  face  of  the  sun,  93  ;  his  Father
was  Amram,  94;  asks  to  see  the  Glory
of  the  Deity,  226;  knowledge  of  the
Qabbalah,  166 ;  name  of  has  a  connec-
tion with  that  of  the  Babylonian  sun-
god,  239,  240 ;  buried  on  the  Wisdom
Mountain,  Mt.  Ne'bo,  206.

Moses  of  Cordova,  cited,  266,  267.

Moses.  Rabbi,  5.

Munk.  Salomon,  8,  11 ;  favored  the  an-
tiquity of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah.  172.

Musical  notes.  The  seven.  277.  Com-
pare, 325,  463.

Mystee,  177.

Mystery  or  Sod,  166,  305,  340  note.

Mystical  colors,  229.

Mystics.  The  greatest,  influenced  by
ideas  similar  to  those  in  the  Qabbalah.
Introd.  ix.

Mysticism.  The  H  igher,  of  the  Qabbalah ,
384 ;  termed  Might,  217.

Na-amoh,  the  beautiful  Demon,  434,
Nachmanides  or  Ben  Na'hman,  39.
Nagrid.  Josef  ha-,  4  sq.
Nasrr61a.  Samuel  ha-Levi  b.  Josef,  4,

5.6.

Name.    Hidden,  3,  237  sq.,  342.

Name.  The  Ineffable,  202,  203  and  note.
263,  274,  341 ;  the  reversed.  Ineffable,
446  note.  See,  Ineffable  Name,  Tetra-
grammaton,  YHVH.

Name  of,  72,  202  and  note.  See,  Tetra-
grammaton ;  also,  Ineflbble  Name.

Names  of  the  Deity,  378  sq. ;  Divine,  Se-
cret, 237;  Divine,  in  St.  Jerome,  168
and  note;  Great,  Qabbalistic  formula
of  the,  342 ;  Ineffable,  with  the  Baby-
lonians, Egyptians,  etc.,  237,  247.  Con-
struction of  the  Chaldean  Universe.
See  Appendix,  also  Name.

Nazir.  Jacob,  (of  Lunel),  38.

Ne'bo,  241.  242;  the  Wisdom  deity  of  an-
cient Babylonia,  his  pUnet  Mercury,
241 .  242 ;  the  bond  of  heaven  and  earth,
206.


486


NesTAtloziB,  Introd.  xii,  xiii.    See,  Ayin.

Ne'hunyab,  the  Pious,  knew  of  the
ZohAT,  48.

Neo-platonlcians  in  Italy  cite  from  Ibn
Gebirol's  philosophical  works,  i6a.

Neo-platonism  probably  from  Hindustan,
170.

Nephesh,  i.  t.,  animal  soul,  147.  153,  155,
196,  200,  203,  233,  282,  392  note,  321,
332i  354.  390  59  >  40a,  411,  412,  4x8.
419.  433  -^^M  444 ;  »n  Adam,  273;  of  the
Great  Ideal  Man,  301.

Ne'qood-ah  Pe'shoot-ah,  i.  e..  Smooth
Point,  257;  Rishoun-ah,  1.  e.,  Primor-
dial Point,  257.

Neshamab,  Intellectual  Soul,  147,  153,
155.  160,  196,  200,  203,  232,  282,  292
note,  321,  331,  332,  354  sq.,  384  sq.,  390
sq.,  402,  410.  411,  412,  413.  414,  418,
419, 422. 423, 428, 429  J^. ,  444 :  Absence
of  the,  Creates  Uncleanness,  408 ;
leaves  the  Body  of  man  during  sleep,
403  sq.;  of  the  Great  Ideal  Man,  301 ;
return  of,  to  Paradise,  404;  Rua'h,
Nephesh,  Zohar  on,  197 ;  the  Upper,  I90«

Ne-tza'h.    The  Sephirah,  201,  270.

Newton.  Sir  Isaac,  studied  the  writings
of  Jacob  Bbhmen,  171 ;  influenced  by
the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171 ;  hid  his  in-
vention of  Infinite  Series,  177  note.

New  Testament.  The  Apocryphal,  167 ;
and  the  Secret  Doctrine,  Introd.  viii,
440 ;  a  fusion  of  Hebrew  and  Hellenic
thought,  Introd.  xi.

Nicene  Creed.  Dogmas  of  and  the  Qab-
balah, 459  sq.

Nistaroth,  1.  e..  Mysteries,  36.

Noa'h  and  'Hen,  i.  e.,  Grace,  420,  421.
See,  Description  of  Plates.

Non-form.     Chinese  idea  as  to,  445.

Nothing:.  Creation  from,  213;  is  ever  lost
according  to  the  Zohar,  124 ;  from  noth-
ing nothing  can  come,  230.

No-Tbingr.  The  Absolute,  148 ;  the  No-
Thing,  275  sq.  See,  also,  Ayin  and,  Ain
Soph.  Ideas  of  the  Great  Church
Fathers  as  to,  127;  Qabbalistic  idea  as
to,  125 ;  the  Universe  created  from,  305
note.

Number,  etc.  God  doeth  all  things  in,
230.


Numbers.  Chinese,  of  Heaven  and  Earth,
445  ;  Male  and  Female,  445  ;  views  as
to,  in  connection  with  the  Universe,  141
and  note.

Numerals  and  letters.  The  33  Paths  of
Wisdom,  204.

Nut.  Comparison  of  the  Universe  to  a,
190.

o

Oannes,  244.  See,  Fish-god.
Odor  of  the  Blflrbteous,  355.
Olam  Gal'gal-im,  419;  Gil-gooleem,  a8o;

Mala'khay-ah.  280.
Olam  ha-Moor'flrasb,  i.  /..  the  Moral  or

Sensuous  World,  200,  270.
Olam  ha-Moos'lcal,  i.  e.,  the  Intellectual

World,  200,  263.
Olam   ha-Mut-bab,    t.  e.,  the    Natural

World,  201,  271 ;    ha-Sephiroth  ;  Q'lip-

potb;  A'treel-ah;    B'ree-ah ;    Ye'tzcer-

ah  and  A'seey-yah.    See,  those  Titles.
One  or   E'had,  344 ;    composed  of  Three,

372  sq.
Onion.     Sacredness   of  the,    451 ;     roofe

shaped  like  an  onion,  451 ;    Universe  in

layers  like  an,  415.
Open  Bye,  118.
Oppositions  and  the  Harmony,  117, 118^

185.
Oppositions,  the  stability  of,  in  msCL^  and

female,  417 ;    to  the  Four  Worlds,  434.
Oral  instruction  in  ancient  times,  178  sq.
Oral  teacbinfir*    The  value  of.  178.
Orifiren,   on    the  Secret    meanings   to    be

found    under    the    words   of   the   Old

Testament,   103,  104  sq.;    Qabbalistic

ideas  in  the  writings  of,  308  sq.
Orifirinal  Sin.     Man  bom  in,  346, 347.  432.
Osiander.  Andreas,  agrees  with   Kleu-

ker  as  to  the  antiquity  of  the  Hebrew

Qabbalah,  172.
Otto.  Julius  Conrad,  favors  the  antiquity

of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.
Ounqelos.  98,  207.
Ox.     The,  45  note,  259.


Pa'had.  The  Sephirah,  signifying.  Fear,
200,  269  sq.^  292  note.

Palace  used  to  indicate  the  different  de-
grees of  expansion  of  the  Sephiroth,


487,


Z9i;    used   to    signify,   the    Supreme
Canopy  or  Veil,  136.

Pan.  The  Greek,  324  sq.;  represented  as
clothed  in  a  spotted  skin.  325  sq.

Paracelsus.  PbilippusAureolusThe-
ophrastus,  Bombast  of  Hohen-
heixn, -usually  known  as,  was  largely  in-
fluenced by  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

Paradise  or  Eden»  273,  369  note ;  Para-
dise and  the  Garden  of  Eden.  The  dis-
tinction between,  204,  220;  Ibn  Gebi-
rol's  explanation  of,  204;  and  Hell,  432
sq.;  return  of  the  Soul  to,  404;  the
Souls  in,  388  sq.  See,  Eden.  Garden  of
Eden,  Souls,  Spirits,  Gai'-hinom.

Partzupha,  411.

Partzupbeem,  211.  253.

Partzupbin  or  Faces,  118.

Pastor  of  Hermas  cited,  116,  167.

Patristic  Literature  and  Ideas  as  to  the
No-Thing,  127  note;  Literature  and
the  Qabbalah,  167.

Pentateucb  Rolls  not  pointed  with  the
Vowel  Symbols,  460  sq.

Persian  idea  of  the  Oppositions,  186.

Pfeiffer.  Augustus.  Favored  the  antiq-
uity of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  11,  171.

Pharisees,  destroyed  the  Inner  Spirituality
of  the  Hebrew  Sacred  Writings,  174,
Introd.  viii,  ix.

Philo  Judaus,  167 ;  his  ideas  as  to  the  in-
termediaries, 301,  302.

Philosophical  systems  as  to  intermediate
causes,  301.

Philosophy  and  Beli^rion  ought  not  to  be
separated,  Introd.  x.

Phoenician  alphabet,  460.

Phylacteries  or  Th'pheelin.  Antiquity
of  95.  452 ;  worn  constantly  in  ancient
times  by  the  Jews,  95.

Physiofirnomy,  45  note ;  47.

Piety  of  the  Qabbalists,  63,  64.

Pi^  and  Reptiles,  Unclean  in  ancient
Babylonia,  241.

Pillar  of  the  Centre,  282 ;  of  the  Right,
that  of  Mercy,  282 ;  the  Left,  that  of
Judgment,  282.    See,  Diagrams.

Pious.  Atonement  by  the,  337.  338,
339;  the  Deity,  very  strict  with  the,
35a.  353 ;  future  happiness  of,  356,  357,
358,  389  J^'t  406,  409.  See,  Righteous ;
also,  Just.


Place,  i.  e.,  Ma-qom,  118,  278,  349.

Planetary  World  called  Girgoolcem  or
Gal'gal-im,  280,  419.

Planets  created  on  Wednesday,  ao6 ;  each
was  thought  to  have  a  presiding  angel,
314 ;  their  colors,  metals,  and  symbols,
in  Chaldea  and  Babylonia,  449  sq.;
World  of  the,  330.

Plato.  His  doctrine  as  to  Ideas,  113,  276
sq,;  his  idea  of  the  invisible  God,  114.

Poetry  Jewish,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  i,  2.

Point.  The,  280,  281 ;  the  Chinese,  446
sq.;  the  first,  is  the  Sephirah  Kether,
i.  €.,  Crown,  127;  the  first,  called,
neqood-ah  qadmo-ah.  Emanation  of  the
Universe  from,  136,  381  sq.

Points  on  the  Pehlevi  coins,  466;  to  the
Resh  and  Daleth,  in  the  II  century
A.D.,  466.

Poison.  The  Angel  of,  435.  See,  Sama-el
Lil-ith.

Pope  Nicholas  m,  81  sq.

Pope  Sixtus  rv.  Largely  influenced  by
the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

Porphyry's  Tree,  like  the  Tree  of  the
Sephiroth,  313.

Postel.  William  of.  Favored  the  antiq-
uity of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

Power  of  Judgment,  126.

Powers  of  Philo,  231.    See,  Philo.

Practical  Qabbalah  among  the  Baby-
lonian Jews,  51  and  note.  See,  Qab-
balah.

Prana.    The  Hindu,  321,  322,  323,  324.

Prayer  of  Eliyah,  290  sq.
Prayer.    The  Lord's.    End  of  the,  202
and  note ;  and  the  Ten  commandments,

318.

Prayer  at  Night  before  going  to  bed,  409.

Prayers.  Two  Qabbalistic,  in  the  daily
service  of  the  Sephardi  Jews,  315.

Pre-Adamite  Kings,  118,  137.  386  J/.
See,  Kings  of  Edom.

Pre-ezistence  of  Souls,  196.    See,  Souls.

Priests  and  Prophets.  Ancient,  of  the
Hebrews,  221.

Priests  originally  not  a  distinct  class,
Moses  confined  them  to  the  Sons  of
Levi,  221 ;  orders  of,  among  the  Akka-
dians, etc.,  240.

Primal  Cause,  174.

Primordial  Point,  257.    See,  Point


488


Principles.  Malu  and  Female,  387  sq.  See,
Male  and  Female  Principles,  Adam,
Man,  Kings  of  Edom.

Procession  of  Lighted  Candles,  326.

Proclus,  i6a.

Pronunciation  of  the  ancient  Hebrew
probably  lost,  465.

Prophets  called,*  Nahiu,  or  Na'bee,  206;
The  last,  aaa ;  originally  not  a  distinct
class,  Moses  changed  this  to  the  initi-
ates. 221 ;  come  prominently  forward  in
the  time  of  Samuel,  aai ;  as  a  profes-
sion. Time  of  the  cessation  of  the.
a22.

Prototype.  Elohim  the,  R.  Moses  Cor-
dovero  on,  212.  See  Tzure,  Trurath.
The,  in  the  First  World,  328.  See.  Adam
also,  Makrokosm.

Prototypes  Above,  109  sg.:  418,  Lower
World,  190.

Providence.  An  uninterrupted,  in  gov-
ernment of  the  universe,  193.

Punishment  of  Sinners  who  do  not  repent,

353-

Purpeer-ah,  an  angel,  412  and  note.

Purusha,  323, 337  note.

Pythagroras,  444;  Tetrad  of,  aoa  note,
318;  believed  the  Universe  has  been
made  through  the  proportions  of  Num-
bers, 141.

Pythaeroreans.  Opinions  of  as  to  Ideas,
113;  favor  the  idea  of  the  Revolution
and  Rotundity,  of  the  Earth,  140.

Qabbalah.  Ancient  doctrines  of.  The
Books  which  contain  them,  166,  167 ;
Antiquity  of  the,  165,  180,  218 ;  in  the
Apocrypha.  New  Testament,  etc.,  166,
167,  440;  and  Assyriology,  235  sq.,
Introd.  xiii ;  among  the  Buddhists,  and
the  Dravidian  races  of  Indi^,  170 ;
Christian,  232 ;  in  the  Common  Law,
232;  in  the  Cuneiform  Writings,  218;
Difficulty  of  studying.  Introd.  xiii,  xiv,
179  sq.;  the  Dogmatic  or  Positive,  226 ;
called  'Nen,  i.e.,  Grace.  221;  the  Hebrew,
its  origin.  219 ;  Hebrew,  the  problems  it
seeks  to  solve,  223 ;  Hebrew  Specula-
tive, 161 ;  Hebrew,  bases  itself  on  the
Hebrew  Sacred  Writings,  224 ;  Hebrew
Practical,  224 ;    Hebrew,  cardinal  doc-


trines   of,     225 ;     and     Hindu    Aryan
thought,  438,  Introd.  xiii ;  Investigation
of,  almost  wholly  ignored  by  the  wi iter's
of  this    Century,  Introd.  vii ;    how   a
Knowledge  of  it  was  obtained  by  the
Egyptians,  according  to  the  Qabbalists,
166 ;  considers  Humanity  as  an  Univer-
sal Brotherhood,  181 ;    and  Massorah,
221 ;  the  Modem  views  of  Lriiriah  and
Cordovero,  on  the  potential  activity  of
the  Deity  in  Nature,  193  ;  in  Old  Writ-
ings, 440;  Origin  of.  231 ;  the  Practical.
226, 227 ;  Practical,  in  ancient  Babylonia,
237;  m  India,  Introd.  xiii  ;    Qabbalah
early  called  a  Science,  36 ;  a  continua-
tion of  the  Secret  Doctrine.  179 ;  in  the
Septuagint  Translation  of  the  Hebrew
Sacred  Writings,  166 ;   the  Speculative
or  Metaphysical,  179,  226,  236;  nothing
of  it  written,  until  the  time  of  Shim-on
b.   Yo'hai,  166 ;    the  Symbolical,   226 ;
the  Theoretical,  226 ;  Theories  of,  pro-
ceed from  the  lowest  to  the  highest.  225,
226 ;   traced  to  the  Jewish  Universities
in  Babylonia,  39 ;  Value  of  the  study  of.
Introd.  vii ;  Value  of  to  the  truly  spirit-
ual and  inner  man,  Introd.  ix ;    in  the
Vedas,  especially  their  Upanishads,  170;
Introd.  xiii,  324  note,  439 ;  the  Wisdom
of,  mentioned  by  Hay  Gaon  and  Gebi-
rol,  440;  in  the  Zend  writings,  170.

Qabbalistic  Formula  of  the  Names,  etc.,
342,  343 ;  Tree  of  Life  of  the  Sephiroth.
with  the  Divine  Names  attached,  169.
See,  the  Diagrams.

Qabbalists  and  Ibn  Gebirol,  drew  from
the  same  source,  161 ;  the  names  of  An-
cient, 440.

Qadmon.  Adam,  3.  4,  181.  190,  231.  281.
See,  Adam  Qadmon.

Qa-ylnand  Ge'boor-ah,  422.

Qiznchi.  B.  Joseph  Ibn,  8.

Q'lippoth,  126,  436  sg.;  Olam  ha-,  i.  e..
World  of  the  Shells,  329,  330.

Queen.  Malkhuth  called,  203;  the  She'-
kheen-ah  called,  the,  341,  401.

Qur'&n,  prohibits  cursing  strange  gods,  94.

Rabbins.     Capture  of  the   Babylonian,  5.
Becanati.    B.  Mena'hem  di,    12,  226.

289.


489


Bekhabites.    The,  227.
Repentance  necessary  before  man  is  for-
given his  sins,  351,  352  :    created  before
the  World,  353.
Beshs  'Hlv'rali,  1.  e..  White  Head,  133,

258,  369  sq.    See,  Head.
Besxirrection.    The,  354 ;   of  man  in  the
body,  354.  355.  356.  414;  and  existence
after  death,  believed  in,  by  the  Semitic
Chaldeans,    246.     See,    Body    of   the
Resurrection.
Beuchlin.  John  (or  Capnio),  11.  171.
Revised  versions  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,

Introd.  xiii.
Revolution  of  the  Earth,  in  the  Zohar,
139  sq.  \  of  the  Earth,  a  fallacy  according
to  the  Church  Fathers,  Lactantius  and
Augustine,  139.    See,  also.  Earth;    of
Souls,  413.    See,  Gal-gal-im.
Rhenford   or   Rhenferdlus.    Johann,
favors  the  antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  Qab-
balah,  171.
Ricci.   Paul,   favors  the  antiquity  of  the

Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.
Righteous.     The  souls  of  the,  higher  than
the  angels,  383  sq.    See,  Pious;   also,
Just.
Risiner  of  the  Soul  of   the  dead,  354  sq.

See,  Resurrection.
Rittangrel.  John  Stephen,  favors  the  an-
tiquity of  the  Qabbalah,  171.
River  of  Fire.     See,  Dinur.
Rivers.    The  Four,  of  Paradise,  216.
Rolls  of  the  SynafiTOfiTue.     The  method
of  Reading  the,  467.     See,  Vowel  Points.
Roman  Catholic  Church  and  its  hier-
archy, 167  note  ;    claims  to  be  the  pos-
sessor of  a  Christian  Qabbalah,  232.
Rome,  in  the  Zohar,  71  sq.
Rose.    Romance  of  the,  Hebrew  Qabbal-

ism  runs  through  the  poem  of,  171.
Rosenroth.    Baron   Christian  Knorr
von.  Favors  the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar,
11,65.  171.
Rosicrucian  Society,  largely  influenced

by  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.
Rossi,  R.  Azzaryah  Min  Ha-adomim
dei.     Believed  in  the  antiquity  of  the
Zohar,  64.
Rua'h,  J.  ^..  Spirit,  147.  153.  160,  196,  200,
203,  232.  282,  292  note,  321,  332,  390  sq..


404,  410,  411,  412,  413,  418,419.  43a.

433 ;  of  the  Great  Ideal  Man,  301.
Rua'h ha-Qadosha,  i.  ^..the  Holy  Spirit,

260.
Rum  Ma-aleh,  i.  e.,  Inscrutable  Height,

258.

s

Saadyah  Gaon  mentions  the  Ten  Scphi-
roth,  160  note ;  on  the  Sepher  Ye'treer-
ah,  159.

Sabah's  (the  Old  Man's)  words,  124.

Sabah  D'Sabin,  367.

Sachs.  Dr.  Michael,  opposes  the  anti-
quity of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  espe-
cially the  Zohar,  172.

Sacrifices  in  ancient  Babylonia,  240.

Sakhya  Muni  or  Buddha,  187,  239,
443  note,  444.

Salcunander,  394  sq.

Salvation  to  the  Wicked,  from  the  Deity,

430-
Scun  Moveth  Az,  the  Demon,  434.

Samii-el,  330,  344.  3^5  note ;  The  Angel
of  Death,  347, 348 ;  and  his  Companion,
Esheth  Zenooneem,  330,  331 ;  brought
Death  into  the  Worid,  345 ;  Dangerous
to  mock,  435;  the  Evil  Serpent,  344,
345  and  note,  346 ;  and  the  First-Sin,
430  sq.;  and  Lil-ith,  433  sq.  See,
Lil-ith.

Samson's  riddle,  229.  ^

Saracens,  71  J^-

Sarcofirnomy,  45  note.

Satan,  the  Accuser,  but  an  angel  of  the
Deity,  242;  not  to  be  Cursed,  93,  94;
a  Necessity,  186.      See,  Talmud.

Satanow.  J.,  Favors  the  antiquity  of  the
Zohar,  64  note.

Sabbath,  perhaps  our  Sunday,  kept  by  the
ancient  Akkadians,  etc.,  240.

Scalierer,  10.

Schellinff.  P.  W.  J.  von,  quoted  as  to
the  importance  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah
and  the  Zohar,  173.  '74 :  influenced  by
the  doctrines  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,

171.
Schiller-Szinessy.  D.,  favors  the  Anti-
quity of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  172;
favorable  to  the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar,
63;  translation  of  a  passage  of  the
Zohar  bv,  106  to  108.


490


SchOBttfiren.   Christlsn,  ii.  cited,   114;
Works  of,  recommended,  115  note.

Schopenhauer.  Arthur,  influenced  by
the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

Sohultens.  Albert,  on  the  Hebrew  vowel
|x>inting,  461  sq.

Sea,  the  Great  Crystalline,  233,  234,  235,
257,  336,  448  sg.

Sea.  The  Great  Crystal  in  the  Apocal-
ypse, 303  ;  Symbolism  of  the,  in  the  for-
mation of  the  Sephiroth,  279.

Secrecy  by  the  ancient  wise  men,  178.

Secret  Doctrine,  166,  179 ;  in  the  time  of
Jesus,  174 ;  or  Learning,  not  to  be  foimd
in  the  Talmuds,  Introd.  vii,  viii;  called ;
Sithrai  Thorah,  Sodoth  ha-Thorah,
'Hokhmah,  Pardes,  i.  e.,  Paradise,  etc.,
220 ;  Reason  of  the  Secrecy,  as  to,  222 ;
of  Genesis,  123 ;  Learning,  i6i ;  Learn-
ing in  the  New  Testament,  Introd.  viii ;
Learning,  mentioned  in  the  Talmudim,
54,  Learning.  The  Teachings  in  the,
222  ;  meanings  contained  in  the  words
of  the  Thorah  and  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment, 102  sq.,  105;  Science,  52;  Sci-
ence or  Qabbalah  among  the  Jews  in
Babylonia.  53 ;  Wisdom,  284.

Sepher  Arugalh  ha-Bosem,  160;  Bahir,
called  Ye'rushalmi,  48  ;  Bikku-reh  Ha-
eettim,93;  B'rith  Me'nu-'hah,  54 ;  Dib-
reh  Hayoumim  L'Mosheh,  94,  98;
Emeq  ha-Melekh,  no  note;  Ha-
maggid,  54;  Ha-mishqal,  60;  ha-
Qabbalah,  5;  ha-Rimmon,  60;  ha-
Shem,  60;  ha-Sodoth,  60;  Mash-mee-
ah  ye'shoo-ah,  75;  Mathnoth  Ke-hun-
hah,  73;  Ma-ye'nai  ye'shoo-ah,  73;
M'bo  Sh^-arim,  no  note;  Matzreph
I'keseph,  64 ;  Migdal  Oz,  favorable  to
the  antiquity  of  the  Zohar,  42 ;  Quota-
tions from  Maimonides,  favorable  to
the  antiquity  of  the  Qabbalah,  40;
Mishkan  Ha-edooth,  60;  Nephesh  Ha-
'hokhmah,  60;  Ne-tza'h  Yisrael,  73;
Qadmooth  ha-Zohar,  in  favor  of  the
antiquity  of  the  Zohar,  40 ;  Sha-ar  ha-
Shemoth,  60  note ;  Sha-ar  ha-Tzinor-
oth,  60  note ;  Shalsheleth  ha-Qab-
balah  62;  Shee-oor  Qo-mah,  44;  She-
qel  Ha-Qodesh,  60;  Shepathal,  no
note;  Shushan  Ha-edooth, 60;  Sublime


Faith.  Abraham  b.  David    Ha- Levi  in
this   book,  attacks    Ibn    Gebirol.    z6i;
'Tzee'nah  Uree'nah,  343  note  ;  Ye'txccr-
ah,  218;  Ye'tzeer-ah.  Antiquity  of,  39;
Ye'tzeer-ah  on  Ayin,  256 ;  Ye'tzeer-ah,
cited,   126;  Yc'tzcer-ah,   Known  to  be
Ibn    Gebirol,    159,    203 ;     Ye'tzeer-ah.
quoted,  305;  Ye'trecr-ah,  on  the  mean-
ing of  Sephirah,  etc.,   396,    297,    298 ;
Yu'hasin.  Disputes  as  to   the  correct-
ness of  the  versions  of,  55,  56,  62.

Sephirah,  Sephiroth.     Meaning  of  the
words.  295  sq.;  Triad  in  each,  281.

Sephiroth.  The,  156;  of  Construction,
200 ;  as  to  the  Deity  and  between  them-
selves, 289;  Delineations  of  like  those
of  the  Ptolemaic  planetary  system,  297,
see,  Plate,  p.  295 ;  Form  the  Adam  Qad-
mon,  182 ;  Formulations  as  to,  294 ;  Ibn
Gebirol's  idea,  as  to  the,  209,  210;
known  to  Hay  Gaon,  160;  Heavenly
spheres,  314  sq. ;  Idea  of,  in  the  Apoc-
ryphal Gospel  of  the  Birth  of  Mary,
316  sq. ;  Idea  of  in  Isaiah,  315  sq.;  the
Maz-zol,  298 ;  names  of.  in  the  Zohar,
280 ;  Clam  ha-,  321 ;  Origin  of  the  Idea
of  the,  302  sq. ;  Idea  of.  like  that  of  one
who  desires  to  build  a  palace,  380 ;  in
Philo,  160  note ;  see,  Philo.  Quotations
from  the  Talmud,  as  to,  304, 305 ;  known
to  Saadyah  Gaon,  160  note ;  The  Seven
Lower,  292  note;  Spheres  or  orbits,
191  note ;  Symbolical  description  of  the
forming  of  the,  277  sq. ;  The  Ten,  251
sq.,  409,  421  note.  442  and  note,  443
note;  The  Ten,  action  of,  193;  Ten,
in  Ibn  Gebirol,  160 ;  The  Ten.  together,
compose  the  Adam  Qadmon,  and  arc
the  content  of  the  Ineffable  Name,  231 ;
the  Ten,  perhaps  in  the  hierarchies  of
Dionysios,  the  Areopagite,  (St.  Denis)
and,  The  Testament  of  Adam,  167  and
note ;  The  Ten,  tnadic,  281 ;  The  Tree
of.  with  the  Akkadians  and  Chaldeans,
235  ;  The  Voices  Seen,  not  heard,  100.

Sephirothic  Diagram  in  circles,  100;
Tree,  like  Porphyry's  Tree,  313.  See,
Diagrams.

Serpent,  204;  brought  death  into  the
World,  346;  of  Eternity,  45  note;  The
Evil,  435 ;  The  Evil.    See  Sama-el.  The


491


Great,  has  Seven  heads,  235 ;  the  Great ;
the  bond  which  was  thought  to  hold  to-
gether, the  Heavens  and  the  Earth,
235;  the,  of  the  Great  Sea,  233,  234,
335.  243 ;  the  great  Subtility  of,  and  the
reason  of  this,  235.  See,  Leviathan,
also,  Sama-el.

Beth  and  Ra'h-mim,  422.

Seth's  knowledge  of  the  Qabbalah,  165.

Seven  kings  of  Exiom,  118,  246,  386.  See,
Pre-Adamitic  kings;  also.  Kings  of
Edom.  Lights  in  early  Christianity,
230 ;  a  number  sacred  to  the  Ancient  peo-
ple of  Babylonia,  240,  448  sq. ;  Planets,
235;  Seven-headed  Serpent  of  the
Great  Sea,  Leviathan,  233-235 ;  Spirits
before  the  Throne,  308  ;  Stars  of  the
Great  Bear,  235 ;  Value  of  the  number
in  ancient  times,  277,  302,  303,  317 ;  Di-
visions in  the  Universe,  415.

Seventh  Thousand  year  of  the  World,  233.

Sex  in  the  deities  of  the  Semites,  246.
Comp.  Hu :  also,  Feminine.

ShaddaX,  i.  e.,  the  Almighty,  272.  See,
Metatron.

Shaddsi.  El.    At    first   probably  triadic,

175.
Shadow.    The   created   made  from    the

D'yooq-nah,  i.  e..  Shadow,  of  the  Light

of  the  Deity,  211.
Shafruth.  Yitz-'haq  Ibn,  38.
Shalsheleth  Ha-Qabbalah,  64.
Sha-xnayeem,   i.  e.,  Heavens,  348   sq.,

369-

Shaprut.  R.  Chasdai  ('Hasdai  or  Chis-
dai),  Ibn  Shaprut  ben  Yitz-'haq  b.  Ezra
ha-Nasi,  38.

Shedlm,  434  sq.

Shedhi,  434.

She'kheen-ah,  116,  128.  175.  340,  341
342,  349-351  note.  401 ;  part  in  the  Cre-
ation of  the  Universe,  359  sq. ;  and  Elo-
him,  365  note.    See,  Queen  ;  also,  Ma-
troneetha.

She-mah.    The,  371  sq,

ShemaryJEUiu.  Rabbi,  5.

Shem  Ha-me'phorash.  See  Ineffable
name;  Hava-yah,  1.  r..  the  Existing
Name,  342,  379  sq.

She'reerah  (Gaon).  R.,  38;  on  Physiog-
nomy, 45,  46,  47.


Shesheth.  Jacob  b.,  38.

Shim-on  b.  Yo'ha'i'e  School,  48.  Sec,.
Yo'hai.  Shim-on  b.

Sibylline  Oracles,  167.

Side.     The  other,  or  Evil,  437.

Silence  or  Death.  The  Angel  of,  403,  405.
See.  Death.

Simon.  Richard,  ascribes  the  origin  of
the  Hebrew  Qabbalah  to  the  Chaldeans,
172.

Sin.  The  First,  430  sq. ;  Original.  Man
bom  in,  346,  347,  43a.  See,  Adam^
Man,  First  Sin.

Sinners.     The  necessary  change  for,  353.

Siphra  D'Tznioothah.  Beginning  of,
cited.  118 ;  a  Zoharic  book,  13.

Six  thousand  years  of  the  World,  233.

Sixtus  rV.  Pope,  influenced  by  the  Qab-
balah. 171.

Sleep,  the  taste  of  Death.  409;  the  soul
leaves  the  body  during  sleep,  402  sq.;
dreams.  403.

Smooth  Point,  257.  See,  Ne'qood-ah,
also,  Point.

Sod  or  Mystery.  6,  220,  340  note.  See,
Mystery.  Wine,  Secret,  358,  346  note.

Solomon  Engraved  on  the  walls  of  his
Temple,  likenesses  of  the  male  and
female  principles,  117;  The  Psalter,  of,
167 ;  the  Temple  of,  185 ;  Book  of.  397.

Son.  The,  of  God,  194,  199;  The  Only
Begotten,  262;  Production  of  the,  387
sq. ;  The  Upper  Adam,  the,  421 ;  The,
or  Word,  459.  See,  Logos,  Word,
Messiah,  Metatron,  Mediator.

Son  of  God,  an  angel,  116;  Ideas  as  to
in  ancient  Babylonia,  247 ;  the  Thorah,
116.

Sorcery  among  the  Chaldeans,  453  sq.

Soul.  Abode  on  earth  a  means  of  educa-
tion and  trial,  197;  Animal.  See,
Nephesh.  Ascent  to  the  bosom  of  the
Deity,  11 1,  406;  a  Chariot.  220  note;
entrance  of,  into  the  body,  396  sq. ;
effect  as  to  purity  or  uncleanness,  accord-
ing to  Ibn  Gebirol,  198;  the  Light  in
which  it  is  clothed,  399  sq. ;  departure
of  the  holy,  411 ;  manifestation  of
through  the  light  of  the  eyes,  215.  See,
Neshamah  for  the  Upper  Soul,  Nephesh
for  the  Animal  or  Vital  Soul.  Soul  of  the


492


Pious.  The  crowning  of,  389  sq. ;  Pre-
existence  of,  196 ;  the  Prototypic  Higher
Soul,  190;  Reminiscence  in  the,  196;
Return  of  to  Paradise,  404;  passes
through  the  Sephiroth,  391  note ;  and
Spirit.  The  positions  of,  407  sq. ;  Writ-
ings upon  the  Divisions  of,  334.

Souls.  The  souls  above,  388  sq. :  Descent
of,  388  sq. ;  Descent  of  the  souls  of  the
pious  into  Sheol  to  bring  up  souls  which
are  therein,  413 ;  all  existed  at  first,  in
the  Divine  Idea,  196;  Divisions  of  the,
196,  390  sq.;  Emanated  and  their  prior
knowledge,  388  sq.;  Emanation  of,
through  the  Right  and  the  Left,  side,
no;  Form  ing  of  the,  384  J^.  See,  Nesha-
mah,  Rua'h,  Nephesh  and.  Soul.  In  Para-
dise, 389  sq.  ;  Doctrine  of  the  Pre-exist-
enceof,  190  and  note ;  in  the  Pre-existent
condition,  399;  The  Revolution  of.
See,  Gil-goolem.  Revolution  or  Revolv-
ing of  the,  413 ;  of  the  Righteous,  higher
than  the  angels,  383  sq.;  The  Three,
200 ;  Treasury  of  the,  395  sq. ;  of  the
Wicked,  358;  The  Coming  down  to
this  World  of  the,  384  sq.

Sound  and  Color,  277 ;  Eternity  of  Sound.
134  note,  428 ;   sound  in  Worship,  230.

Space.  Infinite,  231 ;  Qabbalistic  ideas
upon,  300,  301 ;  Three  Worlds  in,  301.

Spaces.    The  Two,  146.

Spark.  The  emanation  of  the  Nebulous,
195.    See,  Point;  also,  Ne'qood-ah.

Speculative  Qabbalah,  230.

Spencer.    Herbert,  cited,  113.

Spinoza.  Barukh  or  Benedict,  influ-
enced by  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

Spirit.  The  Evil,  346  and  note,  347.  See,
Kf'/a^rAa-raA,  and  Sama-el.  The  Holy,
considered  by  the  Qabbalah  as  in  the
Sephirah  Binah.  182.    See,  Rua'h.

Spiritual  Elements  of  the  worlds,  or,
Ruhoth  ye  sod  ha-Olam,  193  ;  in  Man
or  Adam,  114.     See,  Adam.

St.  Augrustine  did  not  believe  in  the
Revolution  of  the  EUirth  on  its  axis,  139.

St.  Dionysios,  the  Areopagite,  45  note,
167  note,  440,  456;  Mystic  Theology
of,  456.    See,  Dionysios.

St.  Ephraim  used  vowel  pointing  in  the
Syriac,  466.


St.  Jerome,  on  the  Ten  Divine  Names,
168,  note.

St.  Jerome's  knowledge  of  the  Hebrew
vowel  points,  468,  469.

St.  Paul  refers  to  the  Celestial  Adam,  114.
Z15;  says,  we  live  and  move  in  God,
114;  holds  that  the  Visible  declares  the
Invisible,  Z14.     See,  Introduction  xL

St.  Synesios,  on  Dreams,  46.  115  note.
440.

Stelfiror»  confesses  the  importance  of  an  in-
vestigation of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,
172.

Steinschneider.  Dr.  Morltz,  11 ;  says,
the  true  history  of  the  Hebrew  Qab-
balah, has  not  been  written,  172.

Stem.  Ifirnatz,  £avors  the  Antiquity  of  the
Hebrew  Qabbalah,  11,  172.

Stork.    The,  321.

Strunz.  Fred,  10.

Sun.  Ex:lipse  of,  in  the  Zohar  and  the
Kether  Malkhuth,  198  ;  the  Nocturnal,
453 ;  Parallel  of  the  light  of  the  Sun,  by
Ibn  Gebirol,  149.

Subjective  and  objective,  193.

Superior  and  Inferior.  As  Male  and
Female,  189.

Symbolism.  Hindu,  127  note;  of  Lan-
guage, 175  sq.  See,  also.  Introduction
xi  sq.;  of  writing,  178.    See,  Colors.

Synesios  of  Cyrene  shows  a  knowledge
of  the  Qabbalah,  46  note.  See,  St.
Synesios.

Syriac  and  Hebrew  vowel  pointing  from
the  same  source,  466;  Massorah  in  the
III  century  A.D.,  465  sq.  ;  Vowel  point-
ing, 465    sq.


Tab'nooth.     The  Form,  called,  401.
Taer-in.     The,  24,  202 ;  mentioned  by  St.

Jerome  and  the  Talmud,  465.
Talisman  and  amulets,  452.
Talmud.     Early  name  of,  48  ;  opposes  the

cursing  of  Satan,  94  ;  when  and  where

edited,  and  the  content  of.  48.
Talmidai  'Hakhameen  or   Disciples  of

the  Wise.  92.
Tantras.     Hindu.    Qabbalistic   ideas    in,

Introd.  xiii,  170.


493


Tao.     Principles  of  the,  iii  sq.

Tao-teh-Kiner,  by  Laou  Tsz",  113.

TarfiTums.  Age  of,  461,  462;  are  Mysti-
cal, 53.

Teacher  and  Pupil.  In  the  ancient  world
and  to-day  in  India,  177.

TeaohinfiT  of  the  Twelve  Apostles
cited,  116  sq.;  curious  statement  as  to
the  Kosmic  Mystery,  116  sq.

'Te-bah,  i.  #.,  Nature,  and  Elobim,  379.

Tel-loh.  Wonderful  discoveries  at,  237
note,  238  note,  239.

Temple  of  Solomon,  185;  Solomon's  and
the  Babylonian,  240,  241 ;  Towers,  240,
241.    See,  Solomon.

Temples.  Angles  of  the  ancient  Baby-
Ionian,  240.

Temptation  through  woman,  365  note.
See,  First  Sin.

■  Ten  Angelic  Hosts,  167  and  note,  329;  Of
the  number  Ten,  302  sq.;  the  number,
in  ancient  Babylonia,  240 ;  ten  '  Saids*.
The,  122 ;  The  Ten  Words,  328,  329.

Tennemann.  Wilbelm  G.,  agrees  with
Bruckcr,  172.

Terrestrial  Man,  123  sq.  Sec,  Man;
also,  Adam.

Testament  of  Adam,  167  note;  of  the
Twelve  Patriarchs,  167.

Tetrad  of  Pythagoras,  202  note,  318.

Tetragrrammaton,  263.  See,  Inefiable
Name.

Thanksgrivinfir  days,  existed  with  the  an-
cient people  of  Babylonia,  240.

Theivhel.    Of,  416.

The'na-im.    The.  48.

Tbeosophy.  Jewish,  at  Sora  in  Babylonia,
52.    See,  Babylonian  Jews.

These,  /.  r.,  Eleh,  130  j^.

Thirty-two  ways  of  Wisdom,  199,  204,
369  note.

Thohu,  243,  244,  305  note,  448  sq.  See,
Bohu.

Tholuck.  Aufirustus,  opposes  the  anti-
quity of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  espe-
cially the  Zohar,  10,  172.

Thorah.  Creation  of,  135  ;  Secret  mean-
ings in  the  words  of,  102,  103.

Thorah's.    The  two,  375.

Thoiiffht,  f.  e.,  Mahshabah,  128  and  note,
297,  298,  377  sq.,  408  ;  Most  of  the  An-


cient has  perished,  178 ;  Waves  of,  pass
through  Humanity,  180 ;  and  the  Word,
377  sq.    See,  Ma'hshabah.

Three  Degrrees  of  initiation  in  Ancient
Babylonia,  249;  of  Initiation  in  the
early  Christian  Church,  249  ;  the  three
Dimensions,  137  note.  See,  Dimen-
sions. Are  One,  371  sq.;  Parts  of  Fire
which  are  one,  376 ;  Upper  Sephiroth
form  YHV,  186.

Throne.  The,  280, 424;  Kiseh  ha-Kabod,.
f.  e.,  Throne  of  Glory,  429  note ;  Kur-
sai-yah,  the,  328,  394.

Tiberias.  The  School,  and  the  vowel
points,  465.

Tiph'e-reth.  The  Sephirah.  200,  201,
203,  270,  282,  283,  292  note.  See,
Sephiroth ;  also.  Colors.

Towers.    Sacred,  240,  241.

Tradition.  Antiquity  of,  175,  176;  Oral
and  Written,  176.    See,  Introduction.

Transmigrration  of  Souls.  90  sq.;  St.
Jerome  upon,  91.  See,  Revolution,
Gil-goolem,  Metempsychosis.  Origen
upon, 91.

Tree  of  Death,  409,  410.

Tree.  The  Great,  349  sq,,  385,422;  The
Holy,  422;  of  Knowledge,  204,  431
sq.;  of  Life,  205,  252,  253,  349,  406,
436;  of  the  Sephiroth.  235,  25a  sq.^
314 ;  The  Worid,  235.

Triad,  259,  281;  very  Ancient,  212,  213;
with  the  Chinese,  444  sq.;  with  the
Israelites,  372  ;  in  Ibn  Gebirol,  212  ;  in
the  Holy  of  Holies,  186;  in  each
Human  being,  200;  She-mah  and  the
Unity  in  the,  371  sq.;  in  each  Sephirah,
281.

Triadic  deities  of  the  Akkadians,  246,
247  ;  Idea,  263,  264,  265,  266,  267,  268,
372  sq.;  Idea  in  the  Zohar,  i8a,  183,
200;  Representations  on  Signets  and
Amulets,  249,  250;  symbolism  in  the
Qabbalah,  182.

Trinity,  208 ;  in  Judaism,  372.

Trisagrion,  in  early  Christianity,  230.

Trismegristus  Hermes.  See,  Hermes
Trismegistus.

Tritheim.  The  Abbot  Johannes,
largely  influenced  by  the  Hebrew  Qab-
balah, 171.


494


Trouble.  When  in.  man  should  depend
on  the  Deity,  429.

Tnith,  the  Seal,  372  note,  one  of  the  foun-
dations of  the  Universe,  xix  s^.

Tzelem,  347  note,  390  s^.,  404  s^.,  411  sg.

Tzim'tzuzn.  The  Qabbalistic  theory  of.
20I,  211.  231,446.

Tzool-mah.    The,  405.

Tzurah.    The,  401.

Tzure,  1.  e.,  Prototjrpc,  384  s^.

Tzursth,  Prototypes,  392,  400.

TJ

Understandingr.    See,    Binah,   Sephirah

and  Sephiroth.
Underworld.     The  Chaldean,  etc.,  450

Unity,  Triad  and  She-mah,  371  sg.

Universal  Form  of  Ibn  Gebirol,  199;
and  Matter,  143  Sf.;  Intellect,  144.

Universali.    The,  De  Materia,  8.

Universe.  Construction  of  the  Akkadian,
Chaldean  and  Babylonian,  448;  Ema-
nation of,  13s,  195,  381  sg.,  385  J/.,
called  the  Garment  of  God,  280 ;  in  the
Middle  Ages.  Diagrams  of,  295,  319,
448  ;  formed  from  an  Indivisible  Point,
136;  Qabbalistic  ideas  as  to  the  con-
struction of,  415  J/.;  Present,  before  its
Creation,  to  the  Holy  One,  in  Idea,  127 ;
created  by  the  Deity  and  HisShe'kheen-
ah,  359  j^./  went  forth  from  the  Will,
127.

Upper  and  Lower,  connection  between
the,  386 ;  Deity  and  Lower  Deity  in  the
religious  system  of  the  Akkadians.  247 ;
Familv.  As  to  consultation  with  the.
246,  365  note,  Introduction  xiii ;  and
Lower  Deity  of  the  Qabbalah,  247;  and
Lower  Worlds,  256;  Man  or  Adam,
114;  Universe  of  which  the  Lower,  is  a
copy,  108  sg.

Us.    Let,  make  Adam,  360  jj^.

•V

Van  Helmont.  John  Baptist,  11 ;  Franz
Mercurius,  11.

Van  Helmonts.  The  two,  largely  influ-
enced by  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

Veil.  The.  cannot  be  raised  in  the  matter
world,  Introd.  xi;   on  which   Creation


was  Portrayed,  127,  135  and  note,  136.

See.  Maya  or.  Illusion,  and.  Description

of  Plates.
Venus.    The  Planet,  329 ;   placed  next  to

the  Sun  instead  of  Mercury,  314.
Vessels.     The,  the  Sephiroth,   210.   3Zi>

279  sg.    See,  Sephiroth,  also,  Kailem.
Vicarious  Sacrifices,  in  Ancient  Baby-
lonia, 240.
Villars.  Abbe  de,  author  of  the  Count

deGabalis,  171.
Visible.     Through  it  we  obtain  knowledge

of  the  invisible,  109,  113,  174.    See,  St.

Paul,  and  the  Introduction.
Vision  of  Bzeqiel.    Animals  of,  in  Chal-

dea.  45  note,  227.  228.
Visions.      The.    of   Bzeqiel,    Daniel,

Isaiah.  45  note.  227.
Voice.    The.    136,    137 ;    and   Sound    in

Worship,  230;    The,    and    the  Word,

377  sg.

Voices,  seen  not  heard.  99,  100.

Vincent  de  Beauvois,  163.

Virgin  Mary.  Hymn  to  the,  336;  Sym-
bolic color  of.  261  note.

Vowel  Accents  in  the  Talmud,  467.

Vowel  Pointing'.  Antiquity  claimed  for
it,  461  sg.\  An  Example  to  show  anti-
quity of  Vowel  pointing.  465 ;  was  not
Invented  at  one  time,  463  sg.;  Syriac
and  Hebrew  from  the  same  source.  466.

Vowel  Points  in  610  A.D.,  467  ;  Assyrian
and  Palestinian.  461 ;  from  the  Baby-
lonian Saboraim  and  not  the  Massorites,
466  ;  Buxtorf  believed  them  to  be  an-
cient. 464  sg.;  in  the  VIII  Century
A.D..  467  ;  in  the  X  Century,  467  sg.;
Dr.  John  Gill  on  the  antiquity  of,  464;
The  Great  value  to  Judaism,  of  the  es-
tabhshment  and  making  known  with
certainty,  of  the,  469 ;  Hebrew,  460  sg.
See,  Hebrew  vowel  points.  In  the  He-
brew, first  applied  only  in  ordinary
books,  467;  names  of,  not  Hebrew,
469 ;  Opinion  of  the  Karaite  Jews  upon
the,  464  sg.;  only  give  the  Pronuncia-
tion as  it  existed  in  the  VI  Century  in
the  School  of  Tiberias ;  Reason  of  their
having  been  made  known,  462  sg. ;  not
on  the  Hebrew  Synagogue  Rolls.  467 ;
St.  Jerome's  knowledge  of.  468,  469;


495


pointing  in  the  Syriac,  465  sq.;  Syriac
gives  the  earliest  historical  knowledge
of,  464  sq.;  in  Syriac,  Chaldaic,  Arabic
and  Persian,  468 ;  points  in  the  Syriac
quite  perfect  in  the  time  of  James,
Bishop  of  Edessa,  466;  System  of,
among  the  Syrians  in  350  A.D.,  466;
Reasons  for  the  introduction  of  a  more
permanent  and  known  System  of  vowel
points,  466  sq.;  Words  showing  the
value  of,  469,470;  in  the  Zohar,  468,
469.
Vowels.  In  the  Aryan  languages,  175  ;
the  Hebrews  asserted  to  have  always
had,  465 ;  Necessity  of  vowel  points  in
the  Hebrew  writings,  465  ;  The  Seven ,
277 ;  Seven  in  Egypt,  463 ;  Seven,  among
the  Greeks,  463  sq.;  Seven,  among  the
Hebrews,  463  sq.;  Written,  not  in  the
Semitic  languages,  175.

"W

Wachter.  John  Georfire,  ascribes  the
origin  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah  to  Gen-
tile philosophy,  172.

Wakkar.  Yoseph  b.  Abraham  Ibn,
12.

Water-Basins.     In  ancient  temples,  240.

Ways.  The  Thirty-two,  300,  313,  314,  369
note.

Wednesday.  The  day  of  Ne'bo,  also
the  day  of  Buddha  and  the  day  of  Mer-
cury, 206.

Week.     Names  of  the  days  of  the,  449.

Weifirel.  Valentine,  Largely  influenced
by  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  171.

Weifirht,  Measure,  Nximber.  God
doeth  all  things,  in,  230.

What?  and,  Who?  128,  129  sq.,  378.  See,
Eleh.

Wheat.  The  Parable  as  to,  from  the  Zo-
har, lOI.

Where  ?    Meaning  of,  275.

White  Head.  The,  133.  See.  Resha
'Hiv'rah.

Wicked.  The  Deity,  restrains  His  anger
as  to  the,  352,  353 ;  The  Souls  of  the,
358 ;  the  Judgment  and  Punishment  of
the,  358,  Salvation  of  the,  430.

Wieseler  upon  the  Comet  at  the  time  of
the  Birth  of  Jesus,  87.


Will  of  Ain  Soph,  231 ;  Creation  by  the,
135.  137;  Creative,  Logos  or  Word,
137 ;  The  Divine,  X43  sq.,  193,  194 ;
Divine,  does  not  abolish  Free  Will,  194 ;
the  Sephirah  Kether,  190;  as  the
Source  of  Life,  196 ;  a  Triad  yet  a  unit,
204 ;  the  Will  as  an  active  agent  in  the
Creation  of  the  Universe,  3,  191 ;  Uni-
verse Engraved  in  the,  195.

Williams.  Dr.  S.  Wells.  His  Middle
Kingdom,  cited,  113.

Winder,  10.

Wine.  Reason  of  the  use  of,  330;  and
Sod,  358.    See,  Sod.

Winers,  an  ancient  emblem  of  the  spirit-
ual, 366  and  note,  xix.

Wisdom,  125, 262  sq.;  the  Wisdom,  Above,
368,  369  sq.;  The  Akkadian  Deity  of,
243-244;  Deity  of,  among  the  ancient
Chaldeans.  241,  242.  See,  'Hokhmah.
Creating  Power.  Views  of  Proverbs,  St.
Paul,  etc.,  upon.  205;  Religion,  221;
St.  Paul  on,  208,  209;  Upper  and
I^wer,  206,  207 ;  the  Upper  Paradise,
205  and  note ;  or  the  Word,  created
the  Universe,  205-209.  See,  Logos,  and
Word.

Wolff.  Rev.  John  Christopher,  ascribes
the  origin  of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah  to
Gentile  Philosophy,  11,  172.

Woman.  Regarded  as  the  Medium  of
temptation,  365  note ;  Looking  out  of
the  Window,  a  Parable  from  the  Zohar,
104,  the  Evil,  436.  See,  Lil-ith  'Havah
or  Eve,  Na-amoh,  First  Sin.

Wool.  White  and  Pure,  an  Oriental  sym-
bol for  the  efflux  of  Wisdom  and  Vital-
ity, 118  note.

Word.  The,  125,  262  sq.,  336,  377  sq,;
The  Creative,  137.  301 ;  Doctrine  as  to
the,  in  Different  Nations,  205 ;  The,  the
First-bom  brother  of  Satan,  116  ;  The,
First  Word  of  All,  381 ;  and  Logos,
262.  See,  Logos.  'Hokhmah,  Wisdom.
Words.  All  spoken  by  man  continue  and
ascend,  428 ;  in  the  Abstract  Sciences
only  have  a  partially  definite  meaning,
Introd.  xi ;  Creation  by  Ten  Sayings  or,
Words,  304;  The  Ten,  328,  329.  Sec,
Logos,  Wisdom,  Word,  Ten.
World.    The   Ancient,  and  its  Methods,


496


it


175 ;  Angelic,  348 ;  Exists  through
Judgment  and  Mercy,  40a;  the  Inferior
is  the  Female.  189;  The  Intellectual,
aoo,  262 ;  The  House  of  the,  385 ;
Lower  like  the  Upper.  417 ;  the  Mate-
rial, aoi ;  the  Moral  or  Sensuous,  200 ;
the  Mountain  of  the,  450  sq.;  The
Natural  or  Matter- World,  201 ;  The
Planetary.  280.  419;  of  Separation,
420;  the  Superior,  Male,  189.
Worlds.  Derivation  of  the  names  of  the,
320.  333 ;  the  Four.  198,  216.  280,  292
note.  320,  418  sq.;  the  Four,  in  Isaiah,
333 ;  Four  Oppositions  to  the,  434 ;  the
Four,  paralleled  by  the  four  divisions  in
Plotinus,  333,  334 ;  Prior,  to  ours,  386,
387 :  the  Four  Worlds,  with  Ibn  Gebi-
rol,  332;  Superior  and  Inferior,  influ-
ences between,  189;  The  Two,  190;
the  Three  Worlds  in  the  Sephiroth,
28  z  sq.


Xenophon's  idea  of   the   invisible  God,
114.


Ya-betz,  21  sq.    See.  Yaqob  b.  Z'vee  and,

Zohar
YaH.      The    world    said    to   have   been

formed  through  that  Name,  319  note.
Yakar.  Yehudah  b.,  38.
Ya-kheen  and  Bo-az,  185.
Yanflr,  Yin,  Yih,  444  sq.
Ye'dud,  I.  if..YHVH,  398.
Ye'hee-dah  or  Personalityi  391  sq.,  396

j^.,401.
Yekuthiel.  B.,  on  the  Sephiroth,  quoted,

38.  298,  299.
Yesh.    The,  305  note.
Ye'tzer  ha-rah,  1.  e.,  the  Evil  Inclination,

126,  346  and  note,  364.  430.  437 ;    not

the  Devil.     Introd.  xiii ;  is  the  Serp>ent

and  the  Angel  of  Death,  406.    See,  Evil

Spirit.
Ye'tzer   ha-tob,  the    Good    Inclination.

126.  348,  364.
Ye'tzeer-ah.  Olam  ha,  1.  /.,  World  of

Fomiation,  228,  321,  328  sq.
Ye'tzeer-ah.  Sepher,  very  old.  159,  160 ;

in  the  Talmud,  159,    160;   and  Zohar.

Differences  between  the,  159.


Ye'tseer-atio  World,  198.

Ye'ruBhalzni  Talmud.     See.  Talmudim.

Ye'aod.  The  Sephirah,  201,  a/i.  See,
Sephirah.  also,  Sephiroth.

YfiTfiT-draeil  of  the  Norse  Mythology,  235.

YHVH  in  English  Bible  translated  Lord.
129;  YHVH,  128,  379  sg.  See.  Ineffii-
ble  Name,  Tetragrammaton.  Name,  etc.

Yih  Khi^.    The,  170,  444.

Yih,  Yin,  Yanff,  444  sq.

YiBhznaeliteB,  the  Bedawee  Arabs,  69  sq.:
Children  of,  not  necessarily  the  Mo-
hammedans. 69-73.

Yitr.-'haq,  the  Blind  (of  Beaucaire).  38.
283.

Yo'hai.   B.  Shim-on  ben,  7,  10.  17  sq.,

166.  439  sq.
Yotma  or  Yotna,  an  Engraving  of,  228,
229.


Zaqen.  Bliyah  ha-,  38.

Ze'ir  An-i>een,  134,  138  note,  zSa.  258,.
368  i^.,380.

2Si-kum,  242-244.

Zodiac,  137  note ;  Ancient  Mexican  Signs
of,  157 ;  Assyrian  Account  of  the  crea-
tion of,  245 ;  The  Chaldean,  etc.,  448
sq.;  has  the  Symbols  of  the  male,
female  and  harmony.  186.

ZodieMSal  Constellations,  Ancient,  248,  249.
259 ;  Constellations  at  first,  Ten,  248.
See,  Description  of  Plates.  Signs  and
.the  Animals  of  the  vision  of  Elzeqicl,
228 ;  Signs,  Scorpio,  Virgo,  and  Libra,
118.     See,  Description  of  Plates.

Zohar,  7,  8,  10;  R.  Abraham  Gaon  on,  53:
Account  of  the  Zoharic  writings.  439 ;
The  Ancient,  in  Fez,  47 ;  On  the  -A.ngels
in  the,  192 ;  Antiquity  of.  12,  41  sq.,  55  ;
Antiquity  of  from  its  definition  of  Eu-
nuch, 92;  the  Aramaic  language  in,  In-
trod., 50,  51 ;  Claimed  to  have  been
forged  by  R.  Moses  de  Leon,  56  j^.;
Content  of.  12,  13 ;  and  the  cuneiform
terra-cotta  tablets.  232,  233  sq.;  the  Di-
rections of  R.  Shim-on  as  to  writing  down
the,  51  note;  the  Divinely  mystical  in,  is
concealed,  and  to  be  only  learned  orally.
53  ;  the,  Early  acceptance  of,  7 ;  Edi-
tions of,  13  sq.;  Excerpts  from,  335  sq.;


497


Dr.  Ginsburg,  opposes  the  Antiquity  of,
65  sq,;  Dr.  Graetz  opposes  the  Anti-
quity of,  but  admits  the  early  existence
of,  The  Mysteries  of  R.  Shim-on  b.
Yo'hai,  37  ;  Ideas  in,  prior  to  the  re-
daction of  the  Talmuds,  49;  Illiunina-
tion  by  the,  438 ;  Introduction  to  the
Cremona  edition,  14  sq.;  Jellinek's  In-
troduction, iz ;  Analysis  of  Konitz's
book  in  support  of  its  Antiquity,  30  sq.;
on  the  Messiah,  77  sq.;  Morin's  oppo-
sition to,  31 ;  names  of,  zz  ;  not  by  R.
Mosheh  (Moses)  de  Leon,  50  sq.,  58
sq.;  opposed  by  Dr.  Jellinek,  38  ;  origi-
nally a  Camel's  load,  47 ;  Predictions  in,
49 ;  Quoted,  35  note,  and  in  many  other
places ;  Refutation  of  Yabetx's  opposi-
tion to,  3Z  ;  on  the  Repetition  of,  YH  VH
YHVH,  evidencing  two  Worlds,  190;
sets  forth  the  Revolution  of  the  Earth
on  its  axis,  Z39 ;  on  the  Superior  and  In-
ferior Worlds,  189 ;  on  Thought  as  the
First  Principle,  193 ;  Time  of  the  Com-
position of,  according  to  David  Luriah,
50 ;  contained  the  Ancient  Secret  Tra-
dition therefore  that  as  to  the  Vowel
Points,  469  sq.;  Comparison  of  the  Uni-


verse to  a  Nut,  190 ;  on  the  Universe  as
the  Kernel  and  Shell,  Z90,  Z9Z ;  Quota-
tion from,  as  to  the  Vowel  Points,  etc,
469 ;  Ya-betz  speaks  highly  of  the '
Zohar,  35,  36;  R.  Yaqob  b.  Z'vee,  of
Emden  (Ya-betx),  his  opposition  to,  sz,
35,  36;  called  Ye'rushalmi,  48 ;  Quoted,
as  to  the  Children  of  ^^shmael,  73-75.
See,  Yishmael,  Edom,  Rome,  Ma'hsha-
bah,  De  Leon,  etc.

Zoharic  Idea,  that  the  Deity  has  given
definite  laws  to  Nature  and  it  follows
these,  Z93 ;  Parables,  zoz,  Z04,  436 ;
Philosophy  and  the  Chaldean  systems,
454,  455 ;  Writings,  sometimes  grand  in
thought,  at  others,  puerile.  54.

Zorzl  Frazio  Qlorgrio  (Frazioiscus
OeorgrluB)  sumamed  Venetus,  largely
influenced  by  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,
Z71.

Zuokerznaiizi  on  the  Comet  in  the  Zohar,
77  sq.,  81  sq,

Zunz.  Dr.  Leopold,  opposes  the  antiquity
of  the  Hebrew  Qabbalah,  especially  the
Zohar,  zo,  Z73.

Z'vee.  Yaqob  b.  (of  Emden).  See
also,  Ya-betz  and,  Zohar,  az  if.


32


498


Unimportant  and  easily  to  be  reoognited  errors,  are  left  to  be  corrected  by  the  intelfigent  reader.
For  Hay-ylm  or  'Hayyim  always  read,  *Hay-ylm;  for  Hesed  read,  'Hes-ed';  for  Pirkeh  or  Pirkey
Avoth  read,  Pirqi  Aboth  ;  for  She'keen-ah  read,  She'kheen-ah ;  for  K'Uppoth  read,  Q'lippotb  ;  for
Yits-'haq  or  Yitz-haq  read,  Yitz-'haq ;  for  Esekiel  read,  Ezeqiel;  for  Ya>kob  or  Jacob  read,  Ya-qob  ;
for  Akeebah  read,  A'qee-bah.


Pftge  5, 1.  9,  r.,  'Hanannel.
13, 1. 15,  r.,  Mishpatim.
14, 1.  13,  r.,  Naphthali.
16,  1.  15  and  31,  r.,  ftka'h-yak;  1.  so,  r.,

ftha'h  'Ettdytm.
19,  note  *  1. 1,  r.,  Mt'na'h^k:  L  a.  r.,  Qohe-
leth.

37,  1.  8,  r.,  Mitzrttm:  1.  xz,  r.  Mit»-rayim,
99,  1.  I,  and  9,  r.,  Hal  for  HtUl;  1.  at,  r.,

Qametz.

38,  L  XI,  r.,  ha-Zaqen;  L  14,  r.,  ha-Nas6
for,  ha-Nazi.

39, 1.  4,  r.,  'Hokhmah.

41,  1.  14,  r.,  Ha-*hokkmak;  1.  15,  r.,  Hd-

Mukqal.
48, 1,  7,  r. ,  Aft-arohet,
60,  1.  II,  r..  Ha-* hokhmah,  also  in  note  r.,

Tziitoreth.
6a,  1.  33,  r.,  Yehudah.

64,  1.  zz,  r.,  Matzreph:  1.  9.  r.,  *£nayim.

65,  1.  34,  r.,  Bo-iseenah  Qadoshah.

66,  note,  r.,  Licqute  Qadmoniyoth.

75,  i.  6  and  7,  r.,  Botz-rah  ;  L  15,  r.,  Zt-ha'h.

8a,  1.  13,  r.,  Tzema'h.

85,  1.  8,  r.,  Agoodoth  Me'sh*t-a'h.

88,  1.  5,  dele  "perishing  in  the  north,"  in-
sert, will  fall ;  1.6,  dele  **  dominion  (pal-
aces)" insert,  daughter.

93.  '•  3i  '^•.  Bigoa-reh  Ha-eetim.

94, 1.  19,  r.,  Ha-youmim  :  in  note,  r.,  Qe'dU'

sheen.
95, 1.  3,  from  bot.  for  *'  Mareh  "  r.,  Mamreh.
98, 1.  4,  r.,  Ha-yaumim;  1.  ao,r.,  Ounqehs,
99, 1.  z,  r.,  Noa'h.

99-100,  for   "Sephiroth"  r.,  letters  of  the
Thorah.
'•     105,  note,  r.,  Qe'dusheen  28a,  Ke'thuhboth,
*'    107, 1.  4,  r.,  Azza.

"    108,1.  3,   r.,  Azza;    in  note,   r.,   Siphrah;
notcsf  and|,  r.,  Vipyet-zeh^  /jM.
no,  1.  3o,  r.,  Zee- vug;  in  note,  r.,  Emeq  ha-

Melekh.
Z17, 1.  14,  r.,  xf-ihiiha-in.


tt
tt

tt

tt
tt

tt

tt
tt

tt
tt

It
tt
It
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt


tt
tt

tt
tt
tt
tt


tt
tt
tt
tt
tt

tt


tt

tt
tt
tt


tt
tt
tt


tt


Page  Z35,  note  f,  add  :  Comp.  Franck's  Lm  Kah-

iale,  p.  3x6.
ia6, 1.  x8,  r.,  QTUppoth,

X31  and  139,  wherever  it  is  ••  ^U^h  "  r.,  £Uh.
133  and  134,  for  •*  hivrah  "  r.,  'Hiv'rah.
Z35,  note,  r.,  Mantoa  Ed.  iii,  135^.
Z37, 1.  31,  r.,  Hadar;  1.  33,  for  "  Ghost"  r..

Spirit.
138,  note  after  •'  Ed."  r.,  iii.
Z47, 1.  a4,  r.,  ha-qeUcM  :  1. 37,  for  "  spirit "  r.,

soul.
150, 1.  xo,  r..  ham-da66ereiJk ;  1.   19,  r.,  ttt-

getfit,
x68,  note,  1.  4  fr.  bot.,  for  *'  Ezcr  "  r.,  Asher.
171, 1.  30,  r.,  Spinoza.
183, 1.  13,  r..  Abba.
"    183,  note  tr.,5**'&'A.
189,  note,  r.,  Va-yet-zeh.
193,1.  14,  r.,  Va^eeg'rah.
Z93,  L  35,  36,  r.,  Ru' hcth ye^ xod  ha-Olam.
194, 1.  ao,  r.,  Abba;   1.  36,    for    ** chay"   r.,

•Hal.
X95,  note,  after  "fol.,"  r.,  3,  col  x.
196,1.  5,  fr.  bot.,  r.,  for  "spirit,"  soul;  for

'*  soul,"  spirit.
197, 1. 17,  for  *'  Neshaxnah  "  r.,  Rua'h ;  1.  x8,

for  Rua'h  r. ,  Nishmatha.
198, 1.  4,  r.,  qe-tzeph;  1.  7,  r.,  99^.
X99,  1.  6,  r.,  Abba,
aoo,  1.  19,  for  z88,  r.,  388;  in  note,  1.  3,  r.,

*  hay -yah.
30X,  1.  5,  for  "  Moota'bo  "  r.,  Moot-bah  ;  1.  si,

for  te-hamg  r. ,  te-bah  ;  1.  az ,  for  '*  Maol-

bang"  r.,  Moot-hak.
303,1.  15,  for  "Spirit"  r..  Soul;  I.  16,  for

"  Soul  "  r..  Spirit.
304, 1. 35,  for  "  Hawah  "  r.,  'Havah.
907, 1.  7,  for  "  Onkelos"  r.,  Ounqelos
3X1,1.  5,  r.,  Partzupheem.
3X9, 1.  3x,  r.,  Niqpod.
3x3, 1.  3,  fr.  bot.  r.,  'Hephetz.
315, 1.  93,  r.,  ICthoneth,
9x7, 1.  96,  r.,  'Hadash.


tt


tt


It


tt


tt


tt

tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt


r.,  Qa-fin.
,.,  -Emtftm.
r.,  SA™,  the  Tree

Qa-diiha.


499

Pwej.*.

.  3.  r.,  Kur*ii.7.h.

.  1,  for.  '•  Opiuiiean  "  r..  AupluKni ;

for  Huh  r.,  -Hull ;  1. 9,  r.,  Mlunlm.

.  J.  r.,  Kluk  MiUkk.

"    334.

.  6,  for  -liu''  r.,  h«Tei  in  tuxe.r..

Worid..

.»,fcr,Tn'r..-nn'

"    34*.

.  8,  for,    "tttkah  •kart^k"    f.,

L

r.,  ritiipkiik    llay-yak.

"     •65,1.

"  •«.  I.


He,  I.  i,


:.  Din,


I.  3,fc.  bol.,fbr">>iii/iBHr"  r

HOC  line r.,  A^MwIiaJk.
1.  B,  fr.  bol.  r.,  tyyas^-ntk:   1.  6,  r.,

Kur-Moi-yaA:  I.  s,  r.,  MaUUUy-ai.

1.  4,  r,,  Gii-goaUm,

oil.    r.,  Silrai    lV>n««4i  amimUk


t..QhrAin&>fh.
r,  Pirq*:  1.  II,  t.,  I


•.,airdtk(v"t</iak.


'    379>  1-  >9'  '•'  Skad-dtU.


••  EliAa-kkm.


■    tyi  I


id  436,  t


h  Ha-


'  437,1,  ii,r.,5il-n>i:  1.  jfr,  bol.  for  "jimw"

'  44a,1,>4,r.,'M<UM>X«.- )(A.r.,Qul.diilia.

'  449,1.  i^r.,Elolie-khu.

'  M4.  ■'V.  Qi-rin.


/


\


3  2044  023  278  419


^


-^k-


MYEE,  Isaac.  206

Qabbalah-The  I  13,9

philosophical  writings    M996q
of  Solomon  Ben  Yehudah
Ibn  Gebir»l.
