CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


BEQUEST

OF

STEWART  HENRY  BURNHAM
1943


Cornell  University  Library
BS2555.T65  A2


Gospel  In  brief.


olin


3   1924  029  339  078


Cornell  University
Library


The  original  of  tliis  book  is  in
tine  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924029339078


th  €ospd  in  (grief


COUNT  TOLSTOI'S  WORKS.


ANNA  KAEENINA

CHILDHOOD,  BOYHOOD,  YOUTH  "

WHAT  TO  DO  ...

IVAN  ILYITCH       .        \

FAMILY   HAPPINESS/

MY  CONFESSION  '

MY  RELIGION

LIFE

NAPOLEON'S  RUSSIAN  CAMPAIGN  )

POWER  AND  LIBERTY

THE  LONG  EXILE

THE  INVADERS    .

A  RUSSIAN  PROPRIETOR .

SEVASTOPOL

THE  COSSACKS  J

WAR  AND  PEACE.    2  vols.

The  Complete  Set  in  a  Box :

9  vols.,  i2mo,  cloth

9     "        "      half-calf .


»I.2S

1.50


1.50
1.50


1.50


1.50


1.50
3.00


13.00
25.00


Tolstoi  Booklets.

WHERE  LOVE  IS 35

THE  TWO  PILGRIMS 35

WHAT  MEN  LIVE  BY 35

MASTER  AND  MAN 35


THOMAS  Y.  CROWELL  &  CO.

46  EAST  FOURTEENTH  STREET,  NEW  YORK.
100  PURCHASE  STREET,  BOSTON,


The  Gospel  in  Brief


COUNT  LYOF  N.  TOLSTOI


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  RUSSIAN  ORIGINAL

EMBODYING

THE  AUTHOR'S  LAST  ALTERATIONS  AND  REVISIONS


NEW  YORK:   46  East  14TK  Street

THOMAS  Y.  CROWELL  &  COMPANY

BOSTON:  loo  Purchase  Street


Copyright,  1896,
By  Thomas  Y.  Crowell  &  Company.


J.    PETERS   &   SON,    typographers,
BOSTON,    MASS.


NOTE


This  translation  is  one  of  a  series  from  Count
Tolstoi's  religious  and  philosophic  writings,  un-
dertaken with  his  consent  and  approval.  Made
and  revised  directly  from  the  Russian  manuscript
containing  the  Author's  latest  revisions  and  alter-
ations, it  somewhat  differs  in  form,  not  only  from
the  German  and  French  translations,  but  from  the
Russian  edition.  Great  care  has  been  taken,  by
several  persons  whose  labours  are  here  gratefully
acknowledged,  to  ensure  the  correspondence  of  the
translation  Avith  the  Author's  meaning  and  pur-
pose.

The  reader  will  be  usefully  informed  that  the
four  works  referred  to  by  the  Author  in  the  open-
ing of  his  preface  to  this  book  are  as  follows,
namely  :  —

1.  An  Introduction  to  a   Criticism  of  Dogmatic
Theology.     A  work  known  in  English  as  My  Con-
fession}

2.  A  Criticism  of  Dogmatic  Theology.  In  three
parts;  the  first  of  which  only  is  published  in  Rus-
sian, at  Geneva  —  no  part  being  as  yet  translated.

1  Published  liy  T.  Y.  Cro-n-ell  &  Co.
y


vi  NOTE

3.  The  Four  Grospels  Harmonised  and  Translated.
Also  in  three  parts  ;  two  of  which  have  been  re-
cently published  ^  in  English.

4.  My  Faith.  Known  in  English  as  My  Confes-
sion and  My  Religion.^

The  world  that  reads  has  everywhere  heard  of
Tolsto'i  as  the  exponent  of  certain  strange-seeming
and  revolutionary  doctrines,  which  he  identifies
with  the  teaching  of  Jesus.  Numbers  of  people
everywhere  have  read  one  or  another  of  the  works
in  which  those  doctrines  are  presented.  But  there
are  very  few  people  indeed,  anywhere,  who  are
aware  that  now,  for  fifteen  years  or  more,  Tolstoi'
has  carried  forward  a  wide,  systematic  and  thor-
ough scheme  of  work,  explaining  and  reinforcing
his  position  on  all  points  and  sides ;  some  results
of  which  are  evidenced  in  the  foregoing  enumera-
tion. Those  who  seek  to  learn  from  him,  alike
with  those  who  would  oppose  him,  must,  if  earnest
and  honest,  remember  that  in  Tolstoi's  writings
they  have  to  reckon  with  a  system  of  thought,  of
principles,  of  life.  It  is  not  enough  lightly  to
accept,  or  cast  aside,  some  idea  or  statement  taken
in  detachment  from  its  context.  We  have  to  deal
with  a  system  the  parts  of  which  stand  or  fall  to-
gether. And  anyone  who  realises  this,  may  know
also  that  there  has  nowhere  risen  one  single  com-
petent critic  of  Tolstoi'.  He  has  said  what  he  has
to  say  without  a  shadow  of  real  opposition.  Is  it
that  no  one  can  oppose  ?

1  By  The  Brotherhood  Publishing  Co.,  London.

2  Published  by  T.  Y.  Crowell  &  Co.


NOTE  vii

This  present  book,  then,  may  be  taken  as  the
Author's  deliberate  and  careful  endeavour  to  sim-
plify, summarise,  and  emphasise  all  that  he  has
before  said  as  to  Jesus  and  his  teaching.  No  dis-
cussion of  points  or  conclusions  is  attempted ;  and
readers  who  may  be  startled  by,  and  who  may  dis-
credit, the  new  and  subversiTe  readings  of  the
Gospel  story  they  will  here  discover,  must  turn
to  The  Four  Gospels  Harmonised  and  Translated  to
find  the  discussion  and  justification  of  them.

A  word  as  to  what  may  be  the  value  of  this
book.  We  have  in  Tolstoi'  one  who  for  nearly
seventy  years  has  taken  his  part  in  life.  He  has
known  and  shared  the  life  of  the  rich  and  great,
and  of  the  poor  and  humble ;  traivel,  learning,  war,
all  have  come  in  his  way ;  if  the  world  be  known
to  any  man,  it  surely  is  known  to  him.  And  for
nearly  a  lifetime  he  has  ranked,  not  in  his  own
country  merely,  but  through  Europe,  as  a  supreme
observer  and  revealer  of  life.  In  War  and  Peace
and  Anna  Karenina  he  has  reproduced,  as  is  com-
monly said,  "life  itself."  In  all  those  writings  of
his  first  period,  which  made  his  fame,  there  shines
the  one  large,  profound,  and  simple  spirit  of  truth
and  good  purpose.

Into  his  life,  when  past  its  mid-period,  there
comes  a  sudden  illumination,  and  there  transpires
a  spiritual  change  such  as  marks  the  creation  of
every  prophet  the  world  has  had.  He  feels  the  un-
reasonableness, the  nothingness,  of  the  life  of  the
world  as  he  lives  it  and  sees  it  lived  around  him.
In  his  mind,  man's  problems  of  death,  of  his  rela-


viii  NOTE

tion  to  the  universe,  of  his  relation  to  his  fellows,
arise  in  one  great  demand  for  a  reasonable  solu-
tion. And  the  solution  is  found  —  found  in  the
Gospel  of  Jesus.

But  not  in  the  Gospel  according  to  the  Churches.
Here,  in  this  book,  is  the  man  Jesus,  as  men  may
with  a  true  faith  and  without  superstition  under-
stand him.  Here,  resurrected  for  modern  times  by
the  belief  of  one  greatly  learned  in  human  nature
and  life,  moves  and  breathes  and  teaches  the  su-
preme Man  of  Nazareth  ;  such  a  one  as  you  and  I
may  reasonably  accept.  It  is  to  be  believed  that
many,  reading  this  book,  even  though  feeling  that
all  their  doubts  are  not  solved,  all  their  demands
not  satisfied,  may  come  to  say,  "  Whereas  I  was
blind,  now  I  see."

In  this  work  the  Author  has  written  the  lan-
guage of  the  Russian  people,  simple  and  idiomatic,
and  therefore  peculiarly  difficult  in  some  points  of
translation.  And  he  has  replaced  allusions  not
clear  to  the  people  in  Russia  by  such  as  are  clear
to  them :  thus  the  "  mustard  seed  "  of  Matthew
xiii.  31  here  becomes  a  "birch  seed."  The  es-
sential meaning  of  the  Gospel  is  followed,  rather
than  the  strict  letter,  "  which  killeth."

October,  1896.


CONTENTS


Note v

Author's  Prefaoj;     ...  ....        1

THE   GOSPEL   IX   BRIEF

CHAP.

I.  THE  SON  OF  GOD.

Man,  the  son  of  God,  is  powerless  in  the  flesh,  mid
free  in  the  spirit.

("®ut  ffatber") 23

II.  LIFE  IK  THE  SPIRIT.

Therefore  inan  must  %cork,  not  for  the  flesh,  bat  for
the  spirit.

("TObicb  avt  in  beaven") 30

III.  THE  SOURCE  OF  LIFE.

The  life  of  all  men  has  proceeded  from  llie  spirit  of
the  Father.

("TbaUowcS  be  Ubs  maine")  ...       40

IV.  GOD'S  KINGDOM.

Therefore  the   will  of  the   Father   is   the   life   and
welfare  of  all  men.

("Ubs  MngSom  come")       .....       49

V.  THE  TRUE  LIFE.

The  fulfilment  of  the  personal  will  leads  to  death;  the
fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will  gives  true  life.

("■ttb?  will  be  »onc") 61

ix


X  CONTENTS

OHAP.  FAOE

VI.  THE  FALSE  LIFE.

Therefore,  in  order  to  receive  the  true  life,  man  must
on  earth  resign  the  false  life  of  the  flesh,  and  live  by
the  spirit.
("®n  cartb,  as  in  bcavcn")  ....       76

VII.  I  AND  THE  FATHEK  ARE  OKE.

The  true  food  of  everlasting  life  is  the  fulfilment  of
the  Father's  will.

("(Bivc  U3  tbia  tas  ouv  bailg  brcaS")   ...       90

VIII.  LIFE  IS  NOT  TEMPORAL.

Therefore  true  life  is  to  he  lived  in  the  present.

("UblB^a^") 102

IX.  TEMPTATIONS.

The  illusions  of  temporal  life  conceal  from  men  the
true  life  in  the  present.

("Jforglvc  us  our  Scbts  as  we  forgive  our^ebtor8")     313

X.  THE  "WARFARE  WITH  TEMPTATION.

Therefore,  not  to  fall  by  temptation,  we  must,  at  every
moment  of  life,  he  at  one  with  the  Father.

("leas  us  not  into  temptation")  .         .         ,126

XI.  THE  FAREWELL  DISCOURSE.

The  self-life  is  an  illusion  which  comes  through  the
flesh,  an  evil.  The  true  life  is  the  life  common  to
all  men.

("Selivet  us  from  evil") 137

XII.  THE  VICTORY  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OVER  THE
FLESH.
Therefore,  for  him  who  lives,  not  the  self  life,  but  a
common  life  in  the  will  of  the  Father,  there  is  no
death.  Bodily  death  is  for  him  union  with  the
Father.

("Ubine  is  tbe  ftinflSom,  power,  an!)  fltor^")         .     146


CONTENTS        ■  XI

A  PROLOGUE—

PAGH

The  Undekstandings  of  Life  :  being  an  Explanation

AND  a   new  EeNDEKING  OF  CHAPTER  I.  1-18  OF

John's  Gospel 157

A  SUMMARY—

The  Understanding  of  Life  is  to  do  Good  :  being
AN  Explanation  and  a  new  Rendering  of  John's
First  Epistle 160

A  recapitulation-
Summarising  THE  Teaching  contained  in  Chapters
I.-XIL

CHAP.

1 167

II 170

III 173

IV 176

V 180

VI 184

VII 190

VIII 196

IX -200

X 206

XI 212

XII 216

index-
To  Passages  from  the  Four   Gospels  embodied  in
"The  Gospel  in  Brief"    ,  ....     223


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


AUTHOR'S  PEEFACE

This  present  book  is  extracted  from  a  larger  work,
which  exists  in  manuscript,  and  cannot  be  published
in  Eussia.

That  work  consists  of  four  parts,  namely : —

1.  An  account  of  that  course  of  my  personal  life,
and  of  my  thoughts,  which  led  me  to  the  con-
viction that  in  the  Christian  teaching  lies  the  truth.

2.  An  investigation  of  the  Christian  teaching —
first,  according  to  the  interpretation  of  tlie  Greek
Church  solely ;  then,  according  to  the  interpreta-
tion of  the  Churches  generally,  and  the  interpreta-
tion of  the  apostles,  councils,  and  so-called  "  fathers."
Also,  an  exposition  of  the  falsity  in  these  interpre-
tations.

3.  An  investigation  of  the  Christian  teaching,
based,  not  upon  the  above  interpretations,  but  solely
upon  the  words  and  deeds  ascribed  to  Christ  by  the
four  Gospels.

4.  An  exposition  of  the  real  meaning  of  the
Christian    teaching,    of    the   motives    for    its    per-


2  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

versions,   and    of    the    consequences    to    which    it
should  lead.

From  the  third  of  these  parts  this  present  vol-
ume is  condensed.  I  have  there  effected  the  fusion
of  the  four  Gospels  into  one,  according  to  the  real
sense  of  the  teaching.  I  had  no  need  to  digress  from
the  order  in  which  each  Gospel  is  written,  so  that  in
my  harmonisation  the  transposition  of  verses,  rather
than  being  more,  are  less  numerous  than  in  the  greater
part  of  those  known  to  me,  and  in  our  Grechoulevitch's
version  of  the  four  Gospels.  In  my  treatment  of
the  Gospel  of  John  there  is  no  transposition,  but
all  stands  in  tlie  same  order  as  in  the  original.

My  division  of  the  Gospel  into  twelve  chapters
(or  six,  since  each  pair  of  the  twelve  may  be  taken
as  one)  came  about  spontaneously  from  the  nature
of  the  teaching.  The  following  is  the  purport  of
the  chapters: —

1.  Man  is  the  son  of  the  Infinite  Source  of  Being  ;
he  is  the  son  of  this  Father,  not  by  the  flesh  but
by  the  spirit.

2.  And  therefore,  man  must  serve  the  Source  of
his  being,  in  the  spirit.

3.  The  life  of  all  men  has  a  divine  Origin.  This
Origin  only  is  sacred.

4.  And  therefore,  man  must  serve  this  Source  of
all  human  life.     This  is  the  will  of  the  Father.

5.  Service  of  the  Will  of  the  Father  of  Life  is  hfe-
giving.

6.  And  therefore,  it  is  not  necessary  to  life  that
each  man  should  satisfy  his  own  will.


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  3

7.  This  present  life  in  time  is  the  food  of  the
true  life.

8.  And  therefore,  the  true  life  is  outside  time ;
it  is  in  the  present.

9.  Time  is  an  illusion  in  life ;  the  life  of  the
past  and  the  future  clouds  men  from  the  true  life
of  the  present.

10.  And  therefore,  one  must  aim  to  destroy  the
deception  arising  from  the  past  and  future,  the  life
in  time.

11.  The  true  life  is  that  now  present  to  us,
common  to  all,  and  manifesting  itself  in  love.

12.  And  therefore,  he  who  lives  by  love  now,  in
this  present,  becomes,  through  the  common  life  of
all  men,  at  one  with  the  Father,  the  source,  the
foundation  of  life.

So  that  the  chapters,  in  pairs,  are  related  as
cause  and  effect.

Besides  these  twelve  chapters,  this  exposition
includes — («)  The  introduction  of  the  first  chapter
of  the  Gospel  of  John,  where  the  writer  of  the  Gospel
speaks,  in  his  own  name,  as  to  the  purport  of  the
whole  tea.ching :  and  (&)  a  portion  of  the  same  writer's
Epistle  (written  probably  before  the  Gospel) ;  this
containing  the  general  sense  to  be  derived  from
the  preceding  exposition.

These  two  parts  are  not  essential  to  the  teaching.
Although  the  former,  as  well  as  the  latter  of  them,
might  be  omitted  without  loss  (the  more  so  as  they
come  in  the  name  of  John,  and  not  of  Christ),  I
have,  nevertheless,  kept  them,  because,  to  a  straight-
forward understanding  of  the  whole  teaching,  these


4  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

parts,"  confirming  each  other  and  the  whole,  as
against  the  strange  commentaries  of  the  Churches,
yield  the  plainest  evidence  of  the  meaning  to  be
put  upon  the  teaching.

At  the  beginning  of  each  chapter,  besides  a  brief
indication  of  the  subject,  I  had  put  words  from  the
prayer  taught  by  Jesus  to  his  disciples,  such  as
corresponded  with  the  contents  of  the  chapter.

At  the  conclusion  of  my  work  I  found,  to  my
astonishment  and  joy,  that  the  Lord's  Prayer  is
noticing  less  than  Christ's  whole  teaching,  stated  in
most  concise  form,  and  in  that  same  order  in  which
I  had  already  arranged  the  chapters,  each  phrase
of  the  prayer  corresponding  to  the  purport  and
sequence  of  the  chapters,  as  follows : —

1.  Our  Father,  Man  is  the  son  of  the  Father.

2.  Which  art  in  heaven,  God  is  the  infinite  spiritual  source

of  life.

3.  Hallowed  be  Thy  name,  May  the  Source  of  Life  be  held

holy.

4.  Thy  kingdom  come.  May  His   power   be  established

over  all  men.

5.  Thy   will    be    done,    as    in   May  His  will  be  fulfilled,  as  it

heaven,  is  in  Hiinself,

6.  So  also  on  earth.  So  also  in  tiie  bodily  life.

7.  Give  us  our  daily  bread  The  temporal  life  is  the  food  of

the  true  life.

8.  This  day.  The  true  life  is  in  the  present.

9.  And  forgive  us  our  debts  as   May  the  faults  and  errors  of  the

we  forgive  our  debtors,  past  not  hide  this  true  life  from

us,

10.  And  lead  us  not  into  tempta-   And  may  they  not  lead  us  into

tion,  delusion,

11.  But  deliver  us  from  evil,  So  that  no  evil  may  come  to  us,

12.  For  Thine  is  the  kingdom.    And  there  shall  be  order,  and

the  power,  and  the  glory.         strength,  and  reason.


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  5

In  that  large  third  part  from  which  this  work
is  condensed,  the  Gospel  according  to  the  four
Evangelists  is  presented  in  full.  But  in  the
rendering  now  given,  all  passages  are  omitted  which
treat  of  the  following  matters,  namely, — John  the
Baptist's  conception  and  birth,  his  imprisonment
and  death ;  Christ's  birth,  and  his  genealogy ;  his
mother's  flight  with  him  into  Egypt ;  his  miracles
at  Cana  and  Capernaum ;  the  casting  out  of  devils ;
the  walking  on  the  sea ;  the  cursing  of  the  fig-tree ;
the  healing  of  sick,  and  the  raising  of  dead  people ;
the  resurrection  of  Christ  himself ;  and  finally,  the
reference  to  prophecies  fulfilled  in  his  life.

These  passages  are  omitted  in  this  abridgment,
because,  containing  nothhig  of  the  teaching,  and
describing  only  events  which  passed  before,  during,
or  after  the  period  in  which  Jesus  taught,  they
complicate  the  exposition.  However  one  takes
them,  under  any  circumstance,  they  bring  to  the
teaching  of  Jesus  neither  contradiction  nor  con-
firmation of  its  truth.  Their  sole  significance  for
Christianity  was  that  they  proved  the  divinity  cf
Jesus  Christ  for  him  who  was  not  persuaded  of  this
divinity  beforehand.  But  they  are  useless  to  one
whom  stories  of  miracles  are  powerless  to  convince,
and  who,  besides,  doubts  the  divinity  of  Jesus  as
evidenced  in  his  teaching.

In  the  large  work,  every  departure  from  the
ordinary  version,  as  well  as  every  comment  added
to  the  text,  and  every  omission,  is  made  clear,  and
proved  by  the  comparison  of  the  various  versions  of
the  Gospels,  from  the  examination  of  contexts,  and


6  THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF

finally,  by  considerations,  philological  and  other.
But  in  the  present  abridged  rendering,  all  these
arguments,  and  refutations  of  the  false  understand-
ing of  the  Churches,  as  well  as  the  minute  notes
and  quotations,  are  omitted ;  because,  however  true
and  exact  they  may  be  in  their  places,  they  cannot
carry  conviction  as  to  the  true  understanding  of  the
teaching.  The  justness  of  a  conception  of  this  kind
is  better  proved,  not  by  arguing  particular  points,
but  by  its  own  unity,  clearness,  simplicity,  fulness,
as  well  as  by  its  harmony  with  the  inner  feelings  of
all  who  seek  ti'uth.  Speaking  generally,  in  regard
to  what  divergence  there  is  between  my  rendering
and  the  Church's  authorised  text,  the  reader  must
not  forget  that  it  is  a  gross  error  to  represent  the
four  Gospels,  as  is  often  done,  to  be  books  sacred
in  every  verse  and  in  every  syllable.  The  reader
must  not  forget  that  Jesus  never  himself  wrote  a
book,  as  did,  for  instance,  Plato,  Philo,  or  Marcus
Aurelius ;  that  he,  moreover,  did  not,  as  Socrates
did,  transmit  his  teaching  to  informed  and  literate
men,  but  spoke  to  a  crowd  of  illiterate  men ;  and
that  only  a  long  time  after  his  death  men  began  to
write  down  what  they  had  heard  from  him.

The  reader  must  not  forget  that  a  great  number
of  such  accounts  have  been  written,  from  which,  at
first,  the  Churches  selected  three,  and  then  another.
Moreover,  in  selecting  those  which  seemed  to  them
the  best,  according  to  the  proverb,  "  No  stick  with-
out knots,"  the  Churches,  out  of  the  enormous  heap
of  the  Christian  literature,  have  been  forced  to  talvc
in  with  their  bargain  a  great  many  knots ;  so  that


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  7

the  canonical  Gospels  contain  nearly  as  many  faulty
passages  as  those  Gospels  rejected  as  apocryphal.

The  reader  must  not  forget  that  it  is  the  teaching
of  Christ  which  may  be  sacred,  but  iii  no  \Aay  can
a  certain  measure  of  verses  and  syllables  be  so  ;  and
that  certain  verses,  from  here  to  here,  say,  cannot
be  sacred  merely  because  men  say  they  are  so.

Moreover,  the  reader  must  not  forget  that  these
selected  Gospels  are,  at  anyrate,  the  work  of
thousands  of  various  brains  and  hands  of  men ;  that
during  centuries  the  Gospels  have  been  selected,
enlarged,  and  commented  upon ;  that  the  most
ancient  copies  which  have  come  down  to  us,  from
the  fourth  century,  are  written  straight  on  without
punctuation,  so  that,  even  after  the  fourth  and  fifth
centuries,  they  have  been  the  subject  of  the  most
diverse  readings ;  and  that  such  variations  in  the
Gospels  may  be  counted  up  to  fifty  thousand.  The
reader  must  have  all  this  present  in  mind  in  order
to  disengage  himself  from  the  opinion,  so  common
among  us,  that  the  Gospels,  in  their  present  shape,
have  come  to  us  directly  from  the  Holy  Spirit.
The  reader  must  not  forget  that,  far  f/om  it  being
blamable  to  disencumber  the  Gospels  of  useless
passages,  and  to  illuminate  passages  the  one  by  the
other,  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  unreasonable  not  to  do
this,  and  to  hold  a  certain  number  of  verses  and
syllables  as  sacred.

On  the  other  hand,  I  pray  my  readers  to  I'emem-
ber  that,  if  I  do  not  hold  the  Gospels  to  be  sacred
books  emanating  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  I  yet  less
regard  the  Gospels  as  mere  historical  monuments  of


8  THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF

religious  literature.  I  understand  the  theological
as  well  as  the  historical  standpoint  on  the  Gospels,
but  regard  the  books  myself  from  quite  another.  I
pray  the  readers  of  my  rendering  not  to  be  misled,
either  by  the  theological  view,  or  by  that  other,  so
usual  in  our  day  among  educated  men,  the  historical
view,  neither  of  which  I  hold  with.  I  consider
Christianity  to  be  neither  a  pure  revelation  nor  a
phase  of  history,  but  I  consider  it  as  the  only
doctrine  which  gives  a  meaning  to  life.

And  it  is  neither  theology  nor  history  which  has
won  me  to  Christianity ;  but  just  this,  that,  when
fifty  years  old,  having  questioned  myself,  and  having
questioned  the  reputed  philosophers  whom  I  knew,
as  to  what  I  am,  and  as  to  the  purport  of  my  life,
and  after  getting  the  reply  that  I  was  a  fortuitous
concatenation  of  atoms,  and  that  my  life  was  void
of  purport,  and  that  life  itself  is  evil,  I  became
desperate,  and  wished  to  put  an  end  to  my  life.
But  after  recalling  to  myself  how  formerly,  in
childhood,  while  I  still  had  religious  faith,  life
possessed  meaning  for  me ;  and  that  the  great  mass
of  men  about  me,  who  hold  to  faith  and  are  un-
corrupted  by  wealth,  possess  the  meaning  of  life :
after  all  this,  I  was  brought  into  doubt  as  to  the
justness  of  the  reply  given  to  me  by  the  wisdom  of
men  of  my  own  station,  and  I  tried  once  more  to
understand  what  answer  it  is  that  Christianity  gives
to  those  men  who  live  a  life  with  meaning.  And  I
embarked  upon  tlie  study  of  Christianity,  as  to
what  in  this  teaching  guides  the  lives  of  men.  I
began   to    study    that    Christianity    which    I    saw


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  9

applied  in  Kfe,  and  to  make  the  comparison  of  this
applied  Christianity  with  the  sources  whence  it
percolates.  The  source  of  the  Christian  teaching  is
the  Gospels,  and  there  I  found  the  explanation  of
the  spirit  which  animates  the  life  of  all  who  really
hve.  But  along  with  the  flow  of  that  pure,  life-
giving  water  I  perceived  much  mire  and  slime
unrightfully  mingled  therewith  ;  and  this  had  pre-
vented me,  so  far,  from  seeing  the  real,  pure  water.
I  found  that,  along  with  the  lofty  Christian  teaching,
are  bound  up  the  teachings  of  Hebraism  and  the
Church,  both  of  which  are  repugnant  and  foreign  to
the  former.  I  thus  felt  myself  in  the  position  of
a  man  to  whom  is  given  a  sack  of  refuse,  who,  after
long  struggle  and  wearisome  labour,  discovers
among  the  refuse  a  number  of  infinitely  precious
pearls.  This  man  then  knows  tluit  he  is  not
blameworthy  in  his  distaste  for  the  dirt,  and  also
that  those  who  have  gathered  these  pearls  at  the
same  time  with  the  rest  of  the  sackful,  and  who
have  preserved  them,  are  no  more  to  blame  than
himself,  but,  on  the  contrary,  deserve  love  and
respect.

I  knew  not  the  light,  and  I  thought  there  was
no  sure  truth  in  life  ;  but  when  I  perceived  that
only  light  enables  men  to  live,  I  sought  to  find  the
sources  of  the  light.  And  I  found  them  in  the
Gospels,  despite  the  false  commentaries  of  the
Churches.  And  when  I  reached  tliis  source  of
light  I  was  dazzled  with  its  splendour,  and  I  found
there  full  answers  to  my  questions  as  to  the  purport
of  the  lives  of  myself  and  others, — answers  which  I


10  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

recognised  as  wholly  harmonious  with  all  the  known
answers  gained  among  other  nations,  and,  to  my
mind,  surpassing  all  other  answers.

I  sought  a  solution  of  the  problem  of  life,  and
not  of  a  theological  or  historical  question ;  and  that
is  why  I  was  indifferent  to  know  whether  Jesus
Christ  is  or  is  not  God,  and  from  whom  proceeds
the  Holy  Spirit,  etc.  And  it  is  just  as  unimportant
and  unnecessary  to  know  when  and  by  whom  such
and  such  a  Gospel  was  written,  and  whether  such
and  such  a  parable  came  from  Jesus  himself  or
not.  For  me,  the  only  important  concern  was  this
light,  which,  for  eighteen  hundred  years,  has  shone
upon  mankind  ;  which  has  shone  upon  me  likewise,
and  which  shines  upon  me  still.  But  to  know,
more  than  this,  how  I  ought  to  name  the  source  of
this  light,  what  elements  compose  it,  and  what
kindled  it,  I  in  no  way  concerned  myself.

I  might  end  this  preface  here,  if  the  Gospels
were  newly-discovered  books,  and  if  the  teaching  of
Jesus  had  not  been,  these  eighteen  hundred  years,
the  subject  of  a  continuous  series  of  false  interpre-
tations. But  to-day,  to  rightly  understand  the
teaching  of  Jesus  as  he  must  needs  have  under-
stood it  himself,  it  is  indispensable  to  know  the
chief  causes  of  these  false  interpretations.  The
prime  cause  of  such  false  interpretations,  which
make  it  now  so  difficult  for  us  to  recover  the  true
teaching  of  Jesus,  is  the  fact  that,  under  the  cover
of  the  Christian  teaching,  have  been  preached  the
teachings  of  the  Church,  which  are  made  up  from
explanations    of    most    contradictory    writings,    in


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  II

which  only  a  small  part  of  the  true  teaching
enters ;  even  that  being  distorted  and  adapted  to
the  commentaries.  The  teaching  of  Christ,  accord-
ing to  this  misinterpretation,  is  simply  one  link  in
the  great  chain  of  revelation  which  began  with  the
world's  beginning  and  stretches  into  the  Church  of
our  own  time.

These  misinterpreters  call  Jesus,  God ;  but  the
recognition  of  his  divinity  does  not  make  them
recognise  a  greater  importance  in  his  words  and
teaching  than  in  the  words  of  the  Pentateuch,
the  Psalms,  the  Acts,  the  Epistles,  the  Apocalypse,
or  even  the  decisions  of  the  Councils  and  the
writings  of  the  Fathers.

And  this  false  understanding  allows  no  present-
ment of  the  teaching  of  Jesus  which  does  not
accord  with  the  revelations  which  have  preceded
and  followed  him  ;  doing  this  with  the  purpose,
not  to  make  clear  the  meaning  of  the  teaching  of
Jesus,  but  to  harmonise,  as  far  as  possible,  various
writings  which  contradict  each  other ;  such  as  the
Pentateuch,  the  Psalms,  the  Gospels,  Epistles,  Acts,
and,  generally,  all  those  which  pass  for  sacred.

It  is  possible,  indeed,  to  make  a  limitless  number
of  such  interpretations,  having  for  object,  not  truth,
but  the  reconcilement  of  those  two  irreconcilables,
the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments.  And,  in  fact,
the  number  of  these  is  unlimited.  This  is  the
case  with  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  and  with  the
decisions  of  the  Councils  (which  last  begin  with
the  formula :  "  It  is  the  will  of  us  and  the  Holy
Spirit ") ;    and    such,    also,    is    the   case    with  the


12  THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF

decrees  of  popes  and  synods,  with  the  teachings  of
the  Khlysty,^  and  with  all  false  interpreters  of  the
thought  of  Jesus.  All  recur  to  the  same  gross
sanctions  of  the  truth  of  their  reconcilements,
affirming  that  these  reconcilements  are  not  the
result  of  their  personal  thought,  but  a  direct
witness  from  the  Holy  Spirit.

Without  entering  upon  an  analysis  of  these
different  dogmatic  systems,  each  of  which  pretends
to  be  the  only  true  one,  we  may,  nevertheless,  well
see  that  all  of  them,  beginning  by  holding  sacred
the  multitude  of  writings  which  make  up  the  Old
and  New  Testaments,  thereby  impose  upon  them-
selves an  insurmountable  barrier  to  the  under-
standing of  the  real  teaching  of  Jesus ;  and  out  of
this  confusion  necessarily  results  the  possibility,
and  even  the  necessity,  of  an  infinite  variety  of
opposed  sects.

The  reconcilement  of  all  the  revelations  can  be
infinitely  varied,  but  the  explanation  of  the  teaching
of  one  person,  and  one  looked  upon  as  a  God,
should,  on  the  contrary,  not  give  rise  to  any
difference  of  sect.  It  is  impossible  there  should
be  conflicting  ways  of  interpreting  the  teaching  of
a  God  come  down  to  earth.  If  God  had  so  come
down  to  reveal  unfailing  truth  to  men,  at  least  Ho
would  have  revealed  it  in  such  a  way  that  all  might
understand  ;  if,  then,  this  has  not  been  done,  that  is
because  it  was  not  God  who  came ;  or  if,  indeed,  the
truths  of  God  are  such  that  God  Himself  cannot
make  them  plain  to  mankind,  how  can  men  do  so  ?
^  A  Eussian  sect.


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  13

If,  on  the  other  hand,  Jesus  was  not  God,  but
only  a  great  man,  his  teaching  can  still  less
engender  sects.  For  the  teaching  of  a  great  man
is  only  great  because  it  explains  in  a  clear,  under-
standable way  that  which  others  have  set  out
obscurely,  incomprehensibly.  That  which  is  in-
comprehensible in  the  teaching  of  a  great  man  is
not  great.  The  teachiug  of  a  great  man  can,
therefore,  engender  no  sects.  Only,  then,  this
interpretation,  which  pretends  to  be  a  revelation
from  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  to  contain  the  sole
truth,  raises  up  antagonisms  and  gives  birth  to
sects.  However  much  the  sects  of  various  religions
may  assure  us  that  they  do  not  condemn  those  of
other  sects,  that  they  pray  for  union  with  them,
and  have  no  hate  to  them,  it  is  not  true.  Never,
since  the  time  of  Arius,  has  a  single  dogma  arisen
from  other  cause  than  the  desire  to  contradict  an
opposing  dogma.

To  maintain  that  a  particular  dogma  is  a  divine
revelation,  inspired  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  in  the
highest  degree  presumption  and  folly.  The  highest
presumption,  because  there  is  nothing  more  arrogant
than  for  a  man  to  say,  "  What  I  tell  you,  God  Him-
self says  through  my  mouth."  And  the  highest  folly,
because  there  is  nothing  more  stupid  than  to  reply
to  one  who  says  that  God  speaks  by  his  mouth,  "God
says  quite  the  opposite,  and  by  mine  own  mouth."
But  in  this  way  reason  all  the  Churches  ;  and  hence
have  been  born,  and  are  now  being  born,  all  the
sects  and  all  the  evil  brought,  and  being  brought,
into  the  world  in  the  name  of  religion.


14  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

And  yet  deeper  than  this  surface  evil,  all  the
sects  cherish  a  second  internal  vice,  which  destroys
in  them  any  character  of  clearness,  certainty,
and  honesty.  It  is  this.  While  these  sects  pre-
sent us  with  their  false  interpretations,  as  the  last
revelation  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  are  careful
never  to  precisely  and  decisively  determine  what  is
the  very  essence  and  purport  of  this  revelation,
which  they  profess  is  continued  through  them,  and
which  they  call  "  the  Christian  teaching."

All  the  sectarians  who  accept  the  revelation
from  the  Holy  Spirit,  along  with  the  Mahome-
tans, recognise  Moses,  Jesus,  and  Mahomet.  The
Churchmen  accept  Moses,  Jesus,  and  the  Holy
Spirit.  But  to  Mahometanism,  Mahomet  is  the  last
prophet,  who  alone  has  given  the  definite  explana-
tion of  the  two  preceding  revelations,' — this  is  the
last  revelation,  which  explains  all  the  preceding ;
and  this  one  every  true  believer  has  before  him.
With  the  religion  of  the  Churches  it  is  quite
otherwise.  That  also,  like  the  Mahometan,  ac-
cepts three  revelations,  but  in  place  of  calling
their  religion  by  the  name  of  their  last  revealer,
that  is,  the  "  religion  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  they
maintain  their  religion  to  be  that  of  Jesus,  and
refer  themselves  to  his  teaching.  So  that,  in
giving  to  us  what  are  really  their  own  doctrines,
they  pretend  to  rest  them  upon  the  authority  of
Jesus.

Those  religions  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  offer  to
us  the  last  and  most  decisive  of  revelations,  whether
it  be  in  the  writings  of  the  Apostle  Paul  or  the


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  15

decisions  of  such-and-such  Councils,  or  the  decrees
of  popes  or  patriarchs,  ought  to  say  so,  and  call
their  faith  by  the  name  of  him  who  had  the  last
revelation.  And  if  the  last  revelation  is  by  the
fathers  of  the  Church,  or  a  decree  of  the  Patriarch
of  the  East,  or  a  papal  encyclical,  or  the  syllabus
or  the  catechism  of  Luther  or  Philaretus,  people
should  say  so,  and  call  their  faith  by  this  name ;
because  the  last  revelation,  which  explains  all  the
preceding,  is  always  the  most  important  one.  But
they  decline  to  adorn  their  dogmatic  systems  with
the  names  of  these  authorities,  and,  continuing  to
preach  quite  against  Christ's  own  teaching,  they
persist  in  maintaining  that  Jesus  has  revealed  their
doctrine  to  them.  So  that,  according  to  their
teaching,  Jesus  declared  that  he,  by  his  blood,
redeemed  our  humanity,  ruined  through  Adam's
sin  ;  that  there  are  three  Persons  in  God  ;  that  the
Holy  Spirit  came  down  upon  the  apostles,  and  was
transmitted  to  the  priesthood  by  the  laying  on  of
hands ;  that  seven  saci'aments  are  necessary  to
salvation ;  that  communion  must  be  in  two  kinds ;
and  so  on.  They  would  have  us  believe  that  all
this  is  part  of  the  teaching  of  Jesus  ;  whereas  we
shall  there  seek  in  vain  even  the  least  allusion  to
any  such  matters.  The  Churches  which  so  pretend
would  do  well  in  concluding  to  give  all  this  to  us
at  once  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  not  of
Jesus  ;  for,  in  short,  only  those  are  Christians  who
hold  the  revelation  of  Jesus  himself  as  the  decisive
one,  in  virtue  of  his  own  saying,  that  his  followers
must  own  no  other  master  than  himself.


l6  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

It  would  seem  that  the  matter  is  so  plain  that
it  is  not  worth  thinking  about ;  but  however
strange  it  seems  to  say  so,  it  is  none  the  less  true
that  up  till  now  the  teaching  of  Jesus  is  not
separated,  on  the  one  hand,  from  artificial  and
unwarrantable  connection  with  the  Old  Testament,
and,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  superadded
fantastic  notions  which  have  been  imposed  upon
it  under  cover  of  the  name  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Up
to  now,  there  are  some  who,  in  calling  Jesus  the
second  Person  of  the  Trinity,  will  not  conceive  of
his  teaching  otherwise  than  as  in  accordance  with
the  so-called  revelations  of  the  third  Person,  as
these  are  found  in  the  Old  Testament,  the  decrees
of  Councils,  and  the  conclusions  of  the  Fathers  of
the  Church  ;  and  in  preaching  the  most  extravagant
things,  they  affirm  these  extravagancies  to  be  the
religion  of  Christ.  Others  there  are  who,  in
refusing  to  regard  Jesus  as  a  God,  similarly  con-
ceive of  his  teaching,  not  at  all  as  he  himself
declared  it,  but  as  what  Paul  and  the  other  inter-
preters have  made  of  it.  Whilst  considering  Jesus
as  a  man,  and  not  as  a  God,  these  learned  men
deprive  him  of  a  common  natural  right :  the  right
of  being  held  responsible  for  his  own  words  only,
and  not  for  the  words  of  his  misinterpreters.  In
their  endeavours  to  elucidate  the  teaching  of  Jesus,
they  attribute  to  him  ideas  which  he  never  thought
of  uttering.  The  representatives  of  this  school,  to
begin  with  Eenan,  the  most  popular  of  them,  do
not  see  it  their  duty  to  take  the  trouble  of  distin-
guishing between   that  which  bears   the  stamp  of


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  17

Jesus  himself  and  that  which  his  interpreters
have  wrongly  ascribed  to  him.  And,  instead  of
thus  troubling  to  search  out  the  teaching  of  Jesus
himself  a  little  more  deeply  than  the  Churches
have  done,  they  have  been  led  to  seek  in  the  events
of  his  life,  and  in  the  facts  of  history  contemporary
with  him,  the  explanation  of  his  influence  and
of  the  diffusion  of  his  ideas.

The  problem  they  are  called  upon  to  solve  is,  in
effect,  this —

Eighteen  hundred  years  ago  a  poor  wanderer
appeared  on  earth  who  taught  certain  things.  He
was  flogged  and  executed.  And  since  then,  although
many  and  many  just  men  have  suffered  for  the
belief,  millions  of  people,  wise  and  foolish,  learned
and  ignorant,  cannot  shake  off  the  conviction  that
this  man,  alone  among  men,  was  God.  Here  is  a
strange  phenomenon ;  how  is  it  to  be  explained  ?
The  Churches  explain  it  by  sayuag  that  this  man,
Jesus,  was  really  God,  by  which  everything  is  ex-
plained. But  if  this  man  was  not  God,  how  are  we
to  explain  why  this  mere  man,  in  particular,  has
been  acknowledged  as  God  ?

On  this  point  the  learned  people  of  our  schools
of  history  gather  with  extreme  care  every  detail  of
the  life  of  this  man,  without  noticing  that,  even
though  they  should  succeed  in  gathering  a  great
number  of  these  details  (in  truth,  they  have  gathered
none) ;  and  even  though  they  should  succeed  in
entirely  reconstructing  the  life  of  Jesus  in  the
smallest  details,  the  supreme  question  remains  un-
answered,— the  question  as  to  why  Jesus,  and  no


1 8  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

one  else,  exercised  such  an  influence  over  men.
The  answer  to  this  is  not  found  in  knowledge  of
the  society  in  which  Jesus  was  born,  brought  up,
and  so  on  ;  still  less  is  it  found  in  knowledge  of
the  happenings  in  the  Eoman  world  at  about  this
time,  or  in  the  fact  that  the  people  were  inclined
to  superstitious  beliefs.  To  gain  this  answer,  it  is
only  needful  to  find  what  precisely  was  the  especial
mark  of  Jesus  which  has  led  so  many  people  to
raise  him  above  the  rest  of  men,  and,  for  eighteen
hundred  years,  to  hold  him  as  a  God.

He  wdio  would  solve  this  problem,  it  would  seem,
must,  before  all,  bring  himself  to  understand  the
teachuig  of  Jesus ;  his  true  teaching,  clearly  seen,
and  not  the  crude  interpretations  which  have  been
put  upon  it.  But  this  is  just  what  is  neglected.
The  learned  historians  of  Christianity  are  so
satisfied  to  think  that  Jesus  was  no  God,  they
are  so  keen  to  prove  that  his  teaching  holds
nothing  divine,  and  is,  therefore,  not  binding,  that
they  are  not  alive  to  a  very  plain  fact :  they  do
not  see  that,  the  more  they  prove  Jesus  to  have
been  simply  a  man,  and  in  nothing  divine,  the
darker  and  more  insoluble  they  make  the  problem
they  have  in  hand.  They  are  making  their  full
efforts  to  prove  that  he  was  simply  a  man,  that,
therefore,  his  teaching  is  not  obligatory.  To  see
clearly  this  astonishing  error,  one  has  only  to
remember  the  last  writings  of  Eenan's  follower,
M.  Havet,  who  remarks,  with  much  simplicity,
"  Christ  was  never,  in  anything,  a  Christian."  And
M.  Soury,  for  his  part,  is  altogether  ravished  with


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  19

the  idea  that  Jesus  was  a  cultureless  man,  a  simple
soul.

The  essential  thing  is :  not  to  prove  that  Jesus
was  no  God,  and  his  doctrine  not  divine,  any  more
than  to  prove  he  was  not  a  Catholic :  but  to  know
what  his  teaching  essentially  is ;  that  teaching  which
has  seemed  to  men  so  lofty  and  so  precious,  that
they  have  again  and  again  owned  him  for  God  who
gave  it  to  them.

If  the  reader  belongs  to  that  vast  body  of  edu-
cated men  who  have  been  brought  up  in  the  beliefs
of  a  Church,  and  who  have  not  renounced  its  absur-
dities ;  if  he  be  a  man  of  reason  and  conscience
(whether  retaining  love  and  respect  for  the  Christian
teaching,  or  whether,  following  the  proverb,  "  Burn
the  coat  now  the  vermin  have  got  in,"  he  thinks  the
whole  of  Christianity  a  pernicious  superstition),  I
pray  him  to  reflect  that  that  which  shocks  him,  and
seems  to  him  a  superstition,  is  not  the  real  teaching
of  Jesus ;  and  that  it  were  unjust  to  make  Jesus
responsible  for  the  follies  which  have,  since  his
time,  encrusted  his  teaching.  It  is  only  necessary
to  study  the  teaching  of  Jesus  in  its  proper  form,
as  it  has  come  down  to  us  in  the  words  and  deeds
which  are  recorded  as  his  own.  With  readers  of  the
kind  I  have  addressed,  my  book  will  go  to  show  that
Christianity  is  not  only  a  mixture  of  things  sublime
and  things  base ;  that  it  is  not  only  not  a  super-
stition, but  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  most
convincing  presentment  of  metaphysics  and  morals,
the  purest  and  most  complete  doctrine  of  life,  and
the  highest  light  which  the  human  mind  has  ever


20  ,  THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

reached ;  a  doctrine  from  which  all  the  noblest
activities  of  humanity  in  politics,  science,  poetry,
and  philosophy  instinctively  derive  themselves.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  my  reader  belongs  to
that  small  minority  of  educated  men  who  remain
attached  to  Church  doctrines,  and  who  accept  re-
ligion, not  for  an  outward  end,  but  to  gain  inward
quietude,  then  I  ask  such  a  reader  to  remember
that  the  teaching  of  Christ,  as  set  forth  herein,  is
quite  other  than  that  teaching  as  he  has  been  given
to  understand  it ;  and  that,  therefore,  the  question
for  him  is,  not  as  to  whether  the  doctrine  here  put
before  him  agrees  with  his  beliefs,  but,  as  to  which
is  more  in  harmony  with  his  reason  and  his  heart
• — the  teaching  of  his  Church  composed  of  recon-
cilements of  many  scriptures,  or  the  pure  teaching
of  Jesus.  It  concerns  him  only  to  decide
whether  he  will  accept  the  new  teaching,  or
whether  he  prefers  to  retain  the  teaching  of  his
Church.

If,  finally,  my  reader  belongs  to  the  category  of
men  who  value  and  accept  outwardly  the  belief  of
some  Church,  not  at  all  for  truth's  sake,  but  for
the  outward  consideration  of  gains  that  come  there-
from, such  an  one  should  inform  himself  that,  what-
ever be  the  number  of  his  co-religionists,  whatever
their  power,  whatever  their  station,  even  though
monarchs,  and  whatever  lofty  personages  they
can  reckon  among  them,  he  himself  forms  one  of
a  party,  not  of  the  accusers,  but  of  the  accused.
Such  readers  should  inform  themselves  that  they
are  not  asked  to  furnish  arguments  for  their  case,


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  21

because,  this  long  while,  all  such  arguments  have
been  given  which  can  be  given ;  and  even  should
they  cite  their  proofs,  they  would  only  prove  that
which  every  one  of  the  hundreds  of  opposing  sects
proves  in  its  own  case.

And,  in  truth,  such  people  need  not  to  prove
anything,  but  to  clear  themselves,  first,  of  the  sac-
rilege they  commit  in  putting  the  teaching  of  Jesus,
whom  they  hold  to  be  God,  upon  the  same  footing
as  the  teachings  of  Ezra,  of  the  Councils,  of  Theo-
phylact ;  and  in  allowing  themselves  to  distort  the
sayings  of  God  into  agreement  with  the  sayings  of
men.  Again,  they  must  clear  themselves  of  blas-
phemy in  ascribing  to  God-Jesus  all  the  zealotry
which  abides  in  their  own  hearts,  and  declaring  it
to  be  teaching  of  Christ.  And  finally,  they  must
clear  themselves  of  the  treason  they  commit  in
hiding  from  men  the  teaching  of  God,  who  has
come  down  to  earth  to  bring  us  salvation ;  and  by
sliding  in,  to  displace  this  teaching,  the  tradition  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  thus  depriving  thousands  of  millions
of  that  salvation  which  Jesus  brought  for  men ;
and  thus,  instead  of  peace  and  love,  bringing  in
all  the  diversity  of  sects,  and  all  the  recrimina-
tions, murders,  and  all  sorts  of  misdeeds  which
follow.

For  these  readers  there  are  only  two  issues :
either  to  make  humble  submission,  and  renounce
their  deceits ;  or,  to  persecute  those  who  arise  to
accuse  them  of  the  evil  they  have  done  and  are
doing.

If  they  will  not  renounce  their  deceits,  it  remains


22  THE    GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

for  them  to  take  the  only  other  part,  that  is,  to
persecute  me.  For  which,  in  now  completing  my
writing,  I  am  prepared,  with  joy,  and  with  fear  for
my  own  human  weakness.

Leo  Tolstoy.


CHAPTEE  I


THE    SON    OF    GOD


Mt.       i.  18.


24.
25.

Lk.        ii.  40.

41.
42.
43.
44.


46.


Man,  the  son  of  God,  is  powerless  in  the  flesh,  and
free  in  the  spirit

("®ur  jfatbcc")

The  birth  of  Jesus  Christ  was  thus :

His  mother  Mary  was  betrothed  to  Joseph.
But,  before  they  began  to  hve  as  man  and  wife,
Mary  proved  with  child.  But  Joseph  was  a  good
man,  and  did  not  wish  to  disgrace  her ;  he  took
her  as  his  wife,  and  had  nothing  to  do  with  her
until  she  had  borne  her  first  son,  and  called  him
Jesus.

And  the  boy  grew  and  matured,  and  was  intel-
ligent beyond  his  years.

Jesus  was  twelve  years  old ;  and  it  happened
that  Mary  and  Joseph  went  to  the  feast  at
Jerusalem,  and  took  the  boy  with  them.  The
feast  was  over,  and  they  went  homeward,  and
forgot  about  the  boy.  Afterwards  they  recollected,
and  thought  that  he  had  gone  off  with  the  children,
and  they  inquired  about  him  along  the  road.  He
was  nowhere  to  be  found,  and  they  went  back  to
Jerusalem  after  him.     And  it  was  the  third  day


24


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


before  they  found  the  boy  in  the  temple,  sitting
with  the  teachers,  questioning  them  and  listenmg.
And  everyone  wondered  at  his  intelligence.  His
mother  caught  sight  of  him,  and  said  :  "  Why  have
you  done  this  way  with  us  ?  Your  father  and  I
have  been  grieving,  and  looking  for  you."  And
he  said  to  them :  "  But  where  did  you  look  for
me?  Surely  you  know  that  the  son  must  be
looked  for  in  his  Father's  house  ? "  And  they
did  not  understand  his  words ;  they  did  not
understand  whom  it  was  he  called  his  Father

And  after  this,  Jesus  lived  at  his  mother's,  and
obeyed  her  in  everything.  And  he  advanced  in
age  and  intelligence.  And  everyone  thought  that
Jesus  was  the  son  of  Joseph ;  and  so  he  lived  to
the  age  of  thirty.

At  that  time  the  prophet  John  appeared  in  Judaea.
He  lived  in  the  desert  of  Judaea,  on  the  Jordan.
John's  clothes  were  of  camel's  hair,  girt  round  the
waist  with  a  strap ;  and  he  fed  on  bark  and  herbs.

He  summoned  the  people  to  a  change  of  life,
in  order  to  get  rid  of  wickedness ;  and,  as  a  sign  of
the  change  of  life,  he  bathed  people  in  the  Jordan.
He  said :  "  A  voice  calls  to  you :  Open  a  way  for
God  through  the  wild  places,  clear  the  way  for
Him.  Make  it  so  that  all  may  be  level,  that  there
may  be  neither  hollows  nor  hills,  neither  high  nor
low.  Then  God  will  be  among  you,  and  all  will
find  their  salvation."

And  the  people  asked  him :  "  What  are  we  to
do  ?  "  He  answered :  "  Let  him  v«-ho  has  two  suits
of  clothes,  give  one  to  him  who  has  none.     Let  him


Lk.       ii.  47.
48.


Jit.      iii.    1.
Mk.       i.    4.


Mt.     iii.    4.


Mk.       i.


Lk.      iii.    4.


THE  SON  OF  GOD


25


Lk.     iii.  12.


13.


Mt.      iii.    6.


13.


iv.    1.

2.


who  has  food,  give  to  him  who  has  none."  And
tax-collectors  came  to  him,  and  asked  :  "  What  are
we  to  do  ?  "  He  said  to  them  :  "  Extort  nothing
beyond  what  is  ordered."  And  soldiers  asked:
"  How  are  we  to  live  ? "  He  said :  "  Do  no  one  any
harm,  do  not  deal  falsely ;  be  content  with  what  is
served  out  to  you."

And  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  came  to  him,  and
all  the  Jews  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Jordan.
And  they  acknowledged  their  wickedness  to  him;
and,  in  sign  of  the  change  of  life,  he  bathed  them
in  the  Jordan.

And  many  of  the  orthodox  and  conventional
religionists  also  came  to  John,  but  secretly.  He
recognised  them,  and  said :  "  You  race  of  vipers !
Have  you,  also,  got  wind  of  it,  that  you  cannot
escape  the  will  of  God  ?  Then  bethink  yourselves,
and  change  your  faith  !  And  if  you  wish  to  change
your  faith,  let  it  be  seen  by  your  fruits  that  you
have  bethought  youi'selves.  The  axe  is  already
laid  to  the  tree.  If  the  tree  produces  bad  fruit,  it
will  be  cut  down  and  cast  into  the  fire.  In  sign  of
your  change,  I  cleanse  you  in  water ;  but,  along
with  this  bathing,  you  must  be  cleansed  with  the
spirit.  The  spirit  will  cleanse  you,  as  a  master
cleanses  his  threshing-floor ;  when  he  gathers  the
wheat,  but  burns  the  chaff."

Jesus  came  from  Galilee  to  the  Jordan  to  be  bathed
by  John  ;  and  he  bathed,  and  heard  John's  preaching.

And  from  the  Jordan  he  went  into  the  wild  places,
and  there  he  strove  in  the  spirit.  Jesus  passed  forty
days  and  nights  in  the  desert,  without  food  or  drink.


26


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


And  the  voice  of  his  flesh  said  to  him :  "  If  you
were  Son  of  the  Almighty  God,  you  might  of  your  own
will  makeloaves  out  of  stones ;  but  you  cannot  do  this,
therefore  you  are  not  Son  of  God."  But  Jesus  said
to  himself :  "  If  T  cannot  make  bread  out  of  stones,
this  means  that  I  am  not  Son  of  a  God  of  the  flesh,
but  Son  of  the  God  of  the  spirit.  I  am  alive,  not
by  bread,  but  by  the  spirit.  And  my  spirit  is  able
to  disregard  the  flesh."

But  hunger,  nevertheless,  tormented  him ;  and
jhe  voice  of  the  flesh  again  said  to  him :  "  If  you
live  only  by  the  spirit,  and  can  disregard  the  flesh,
then  you  can  throw  off  the  flesh,  and  your  spirit
will  remain  alive."  And  it  seemed  to  him  that
he  was  standing  on  the  roof  of  the  temple,  and
the  voice  of  the  flesh  said  to  him  :  "  If  you  are  Son
of  the  God  of  the  spirit,  throw  yourself  off  the
temple.  You  will  not  be  killed.  But  an  unfoie-
seen  force  will  keep  you,  support  you,  and  save  you
from  aU  harm."  But  Jesus  said  to  himself :  "  I
can  disregard  the  flesh,  but  may  not  throw  it  off,
because  I  was  born  by  the  spirit  into  the  flesh.
This  was  the  will  of  the  Father  of  my  spirit,  and  I
cannot  oppose  Him."

Then  the  voice  of  the  flesh  said  to  him :  "  If  you
cannot  oppose  your  Father  by  throwing  yourself
off  the  temple  and  discarding  life,  then  you  also
cannot  oppose  your  Father  by  hungering  when  you
need  to  eat.  You  must  not  make  light  of  the
desires  of  the  flesh ;  they  were  placed  in  you,  and
you  must  serve  them."  Then  Jesus  seemed  to  see
all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  and  all  mankind,  just


Lk.      iv.    3.


THE  SON  OF  GOD


27


Lk.      iv.    6.


13.


14.
Jn.        i.  35.


42.


as  they  live  and  labour  for  the  flesh,  expecting  gain
therefrom.  And  the  voice  of  the  flesh  said  to  him :
"  Well,  you  see,  these  work  for  me,  and  I  give  them
all  they  wish  for.  If  you  will  work  for  me,  you
will  have  the  same."  But  Jesus  said  to  himself:
"  My  Father  is  not  flesh,  but  spirit.  I  live  by  Him  ;
I  always  know  that  He  is  in  me.  Him  alone  I
honour,  and  for  Him  alone  I  work,  expecting  reward
from  Him  alone."

Then  the  temptation  ceased,  and  Jesus  knew  the
power  of  the  spirit.

And  when  he  had  known  the  power  of  the  spirit,
Jesus  went  out  of  the  wild  places,  and  went  again
to  John,  and  stayed  with  him.

And  when  Jesus  was  leaving  John,  John  said  of
him :  "  This  is  the  saviour  of  men."

On  account  of  these  words  of  John,  two  of  John's
disciples  left  their  former  teacher  and  went  after
Jesus.  Jesus,  seeing  them  following  him,  stopped
and  said  :  "  What  do  you  want  ?  "  They  said  to
him :  "  Teacher !  we  wish  to  be  with  you,  and  to
know  your  teaching."  He  said  :  "  Come  with  me,
and  I  will  tell  you  everything."  They  went  with
him,  and  stayed  with  him,  listening  to  him  until
the  tenth  hour.

One  of  these  disciples  was  called  Andrew.
Andrew  had  a  brother  Simon.  Having  heard  Jesus,
Andrew  went  to  his  brother  Simon,  and  said  to
him :  "  We  have  found  him  of  whom  the  prophets
wrote,  the  Messiah ;  we  have  found  him  who  has
announced  to  us  our  salvation."  Andrew  took
Simon  with  him,  and  brought  him  also  to  Jesus.


28


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


Jesus  called  this  brother  of  Andrew,  Peter,  which
means  a  stone.  And  both  these  brothers  became
disciples  of  Jesus.

Afterwards,  before  entering  Galilee,  Jesus  met
PhUip,  and  called  him  to  go  with  him.  Philip
was  from  Bethsaida,  and  a  fellow-villager  of  Peter
and  Andrew.  "When  Philip  knew  Jesus,  he  went
and  found  his  brother  Nathanael,  and  said  to  him :
"  We  have  found  the  chosen  of  God,  of  whom  the
prophets  and  Moses  wrote.  This  is  Jesus,  the
son  of  Joseph,  from  Nazareth."  Nathanael  was
astonished  that  he  of  whom  the  prophets  wrote
should  be  from  the  neighbouring  village,  and  said  :
"  It  is  most  unlikely  that  the  messenger  of  God
should  be  from  Nazareth."  Philip  said :  "  Come
with  me,  you  shall  see  and  hear  for  yourself."
Nathanael  agreed,  and  went  with  his  brother,  and
met  Jesus ;  and,  when  he  had  heard  him,  he  said
to  Jesus :  "  Yes,  now  I  see  that  this  is  true,  that
you  are  the  Son  of  God  and  the  king  of  Israel."
Jesus  said  to  him  :  "  Learn  something  more  im-
portant than  that.  Henceforth  heaven  is  opened,
and  people  may  be  in  communion  with  the  forces
of  heaven.  Henceforth  God  will  be  no  longer
separate  from  men."

And  Jesus  came  home  to  Nazareth  ;  and  on  the
Sabbath  he  went  as  usual  into  the  synagogue,  and
began  to  read.  They  gave  him  the  book  of  the
prophet  Isaiah,  and,  unrolling  it,  he  began  to  read.
In  the  book  was  written  :

"  The  spirit  of  the  Lord  is  in  me.  He  has  chosen
me  to  announce  happiness  to  the  unfortunate  and


Jn.        i.  43.

14.


Lk.      iv.  16.


THE  SON  OF  GOD


29


Lk.      iv ,  19.


20.


the  broken-hearted,  to  announce  freedom  to  those
who  are  bound,  light  to  the  blind,  and  salvation  and
rest  to  the  weary.  To  announce  to  all  men  the
time  of  Gdd's  mercy."

He  folded  the  book,  gave  it  to  the  attendant,  and
sat  down.  And  all  waited  to  hear  what  he  should
say.  And  he  said :  "  This  writing  has  now  been
fulfilled  before  your  eyes."


CHAPTEE  II


LIFE    IN    THE    SPIRIT


Therefore  man  must  work,  not  for  the  flesh,  but  for
the  spirit

("Mblcb  art  in  beaven")


It  happened  once  that  Jesus,  with  his  disciples,
went  through  a  field  on  the  Sabbath.  His  disciples
were  hungry,  and  on  the  way  plucked  ears  of  corn,
bruised  them  in  their  hands,  and  ate  the  grain.  But,
according  to  the  teaching  of  the  orthodox,  God  had
made  an  agreement  with  Moses,  that  all  should
observe  the  Sabbath,  and  do  nothing  on  that  day.
According  to  this  teaching  of  the  orthodox,  God  com-
manded that  he  who  worked  on  the  Sabbath  should
be  stoned  to  death.  The  orthodox  saw  that  the
disciples  were  bruising  ears  of  corn  on  the  Sabbath,
and  said :  "  It  is  not  right  to  do  so  on  the  Sabbath.
One  must  not  work  on  the  Sabbath,  and  you  are
bruising  ears  of  corn.  God  ordained  the  Sabbath,
and  commanded  the  breaking  of  it  should  be
punished  with  death."  Jesus  heard  this,  and  said  :
"  If  you  understand  what  is  the  meaning  of  God's
words,  '  I  desire  love,  and  not  sacrifice,'  you  would
not  attach  blame  to  that  which  is  not  blameworthy.
Man  is  more  important  than  the  Sabbath."


Mt.  xii.  1.
Mk.  ii,  23.
Lk.      vi.    1.


Mt.     xii.    2.


LIFE   IN   THE   SPIRIT


Lk.

xiii.  10.

11.

12-14.

xiv.    3.

6.

6.

Lk.

xiii.  15.

iMt.

xii.  11.

12.

Mk.

iii.    4.

Mt.

ix.    9.

It  happened  another  time,  on  a  Sabbath,  that,
when  Jesus  was  teaching  in  the  synagogue,  a  sick
woman  came  up  to  him  and  asked  him  to  help  her.
And  Jesus  began  to  cure  her.  Then  the  orthodox
church-ekler  was  angry  with  Jesus  for  this,  and  said
to  the  people  :  "  It  is  said  in  the  law  of  God :  There
are  six  days  in  the  week  on  which  to  work."  But
Jesus,  in  reply,  asked  the  orthodox  professors  of  the
law :  "  "Well,  then,  in  your  opinion,  may  not  one
help  a  man  on  the  Sabbath  ? "  And  they  did  not
know  what  to  answer.  Then  Jesus  said :  "  De-
ceivers !  Does  not  each  of  you  untie  his  beast  from
the  manger  and  lead  him  to  water  on  the  Sabbath  ?
And  if  his  sheep  falls  into  a  well,  anyone  will  run
and  drag  it  out,  although  even  on  the  Sabbath.
And  a  man  is  much  better  than  a  sheep.  But
you  say  that  one  must  not  help  a  man.  What,
then,  iu  your  opinion,  must  one  do  on  the  Sabbath,
good  or  evil :  Save  a  soul  or  destroy  it  ?  Good
must  be  done  always,  on  the  Sabbath  too."

Jesus  once  saw  a  tax-gatherer  recei\'irig  taxes.
The  tax-gathei-er  was  called  ]\Iatthew.  Jesus  began
to  speak  with  him,  and  Matthew  understood  him,
liked  his  teaching,  and  invited  him  to  his  house,
and  showed  him  hospitality.  When  Jesus  came  to
Matthew,  there  came  also  Matthew's  friends,  tax-
gatherers  and  unbelievers,  and  Jesus  did  not  disdain
them,  and  sat  down,  he  and  his  disciples.  And
the  orthodox  saw  this,  and  said  to  Jesus'  disciples :
"  How  is  it  that  your  teacher  eats  with  tax-gatherers
and  unbelievers  ? "  According  to  the  teaching  of
the   orthodox.  God    forbade   communion  witli   un-


32


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


believers.  Jesus  heard,  and  said :  "  He  who  is
satisfied  with  his  health  does  not  need  a  doctor,
but  he  who  is  ill,  does.  Understand  what  is  the
meaning  of  God's  words :  '  I  desire  love  and  not
sacrifice.'  I  cannot  teach  a  change  of  faith  to  those
who  consider  themselves  orthodox,  but  I  teach  those
who  consider  themselves  unbelievers."

There  came  to  Jesus  orthodox  professors  of  the
law  fiom  Jerusalem.  And  they  saw  that  his
disciples  and  Jesus  himself  ate  bread  with  un-
washed hands ;  and  these  orthodox  began  to  con-
demn him  for  this,  because  they  themselves  strictly
observed,  according  to  church  tradition,  how  plates
and  dishes  should  be  washed,  and  would  not  eat
unless  they  had  been  so  washed.  Also,  they  would
eat  nothing  from  the  market  unless  they  had
washed  it.

And  the  orthodox  professors  of  the  law  asked
him :  "  Why  do  you  live  not  according  to  church
tradition,  but  take  and  eat  bread  with  unwashed
hands  ? "  And  he  answered  them  :  "  But  in  what
way  do  you  break  God's  commandment,  following
your  church  tradition  ?  God  said  to  you :  '  Honour
your  father  and  mother.'  But  you  have  twisted  it
so  that  everyone  can  say :  '  I  give  to  God  what  I
used  to  give  my  parents.'  And  he  who  so  says
need  not  support  his  father  and  mother.  Thus,  then,
you  break  God's  commandment  by  church  tradition.
Deceivers !  The  prophet  Isaiah  spoke  the  truth
about  you :  '  Because  this  people  only  fall  down
before  me  in  words,  and  honour  me  with  their
tongue,  while  their  heart  is  far  from  me ;  and  be-


nt,    ix.  12.


13.


Mk.
Mt.
Mk.


XV.  1.

vii.  1.

XV.  2.

vii.  2.


Mt.     XV.    3.


Mk.


vii.  10,
11,


12.
13.


Mt.     XV.    7.


LIFE   IN   THE  SPIRIT


Mk.    vii.


20.


Jn.       ii.  13.


cause  their  fear  of  me  is  only  a  human  law  which
they  have  learnt  by  heart ;  therefore  I  will  per-
form a  wonderful,  an  extraordinary  thing  upon
this  people :  The  wisdom  of  its  wise  men  shall  be
lost,  and  the  reason  of  its  thinkers  shall  be  dimmed.
Woe  to  them  who  take  thought  to  hide  their  desires
from  the  Eternal,  and  who  do  their  deeds  in  dark-
ness.' And  so  it  is  with  you  :  You  leave  that  which
is  important  in  the  law,  that  which  is  God's  com-
mandment, and  observe  your  human  tradition  as  to
the  washing  of  cups  !  "

And  Jesus  called  the  people  to  him,  and  said :
"  Hearken  all,  and  understand  :  There  is  nothing  in
the  world  that,  entering  a  man,  could  defile  him  ;
but  that  which  goes  forth  from  him,  this  defiles  a
man.  Let  love  and  mercy  be  in  your  soul,  and
then  all  will  be  clean.      Try  to  understand  this."

And  when  he  returned  home,  his  disciples  asked
him  :  "  What  do  these  words  mean  ?  "  And  he
said :  "  Do  you  also  not  understand  this  ?  Do  you
not  understand  that  everything  external,  that  which
is  of  the  flesh,  cannot  defile  a  man  ?  The  reason
is,  it  enters  not  his  soul,  but  his  body.  It  enters
the  body,  and  afterwards  goes  out  from  it.  Only
that  can  defile  a  man  which  goes  out  from  the  man
himself,  from  his  souL  Because  from  the  soul  of
man  proceed  evil,  fornication,  impurity,  murder,
theft,  covetousness,  wrath,  deceit,  insolence,  envy,
calumny,  pride,  and  every  kind  of  folly.  All  this
evil  is  out  of  the  soul  of  man  and  it  alone  can
defile  a  man."

After  this,  the  Passover  came,  and  Jesus  went  to
3


34


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


Jerusalem,  and  entered  the  temple.  In  the  en-
closure of  the  temple  stood  cattle,  cows,  bulls,  rams ;
and  there  were  cots  full  of  pigeons,  and  money-
changers behind  their  counters.  All  this  was
necessary  in  order  to  make  oii'erings  to  God.  The
animals  were  slaughtered  and  offered  in  the  temple.
This  was  the  method  of  prayer  among  the  Jews,  as
taught  by  the  orthodox  professors  of  the  law.  Jesus
went  into  the  temple,  twisted  a  whip,  drove  all  the
cattle  oxit  of  the  enclosure,  and  set  free  all  the  doves.
And  he  scattered  all  the  money,  and  bade  that
none  of  this  should  be  brought  into  the  temple.
He  said :  "  The  prophet  Isaiah  said  to  you  :  The
horise  of  God  is  not  the  temple  in  Jerusalem,  but
the  whole  world  of  God's  people.  And  the  prophet
Jeremiah  also  told  you :  Do  not  believe  the  false-
hoods that  here  is  the  house  of  the  Eternal.  Do
not  believe  this,  but  change  your  life;  do  not  judge
falsely  ;  do  not  oppress  the  stranger,  the  widow  and
the  orphan  ;  do  not  shed  innocent  blood,  and  do  not
come  into  the  house  of  God,  and  say  :  Now  we
may  quietly  do  foul  deeds.  Do  not  make  my
house  a  den  of  robbers."

And  the  Jews  began  to  dispute,  and  said  to  him :
"  You  say  that  our  piety  is  wrong.  By  what  proofs
will  you  show  this  ?  "  And,  turning  to  them,  Jesus
said  :  "  Destroy  this  temple  and  I  will  in  three  days
awaken  a  new,  living  temple."  And  the  Jews  said :
"  But  how  will  you  at  once  make  a  new  temple,
when  this  was  forty-six  years  in  building  ?  "  And
Jesus  said  to  them :  "  I  speak  to  you  of  that  which
is  more  important  than  the  temple.     You  would


Jn.      ii.  14.


15.


16.


Mt.    xxi.  13.

Mk.     xi.  17.

(Is.a.   Ivi.    7.

Jer.    vii.    4,

11).


20.


Mt.     xii.    6.


LIFE  IN  THE   SPIRIT


35


Jn.        ii.  23.
24.


25.


iv.    4.

6.


10.


20.


not  say  this  if  you  understood  the  meaning  of  the
words  of  the  prophet :  I,  God,  do  not  rejoice  at
your  offerings,  but  rejoice  at  your  love  to  each
other.  The  Uving  temple  is  the  whole  world  of
men,  when  they  love  each  other."

And  then  in  Jerusalem  many  people  believed  in
what  he  said.  But  he  himself  believed  in  nothing
external,  because  he  knew  that  everything  is  within
man.  He  had  no  need  that  anyone  should  give
witness  of  man,  because  he  knew  that  in  man  is
the  spirit.

And  Jesus  happened  once  to  be  passing  through
Samaria.  He  passed  by  the  Samaritan  village  of
Sychar,  near  the  place  which  Jacob  gave  to  his  son
Joseph.  There  was  Jacob's  well.  Jesus  was  tired,
and  sat  beside  the  well.  His  disciples  \\'ent  into
the  town  to  fetch  bread.  And  a  woman  came  from
Sychar  to  draw  water,  and  Jesus  asked  her  to  give
him  to  drink.  And  she  said  to  him  :  "  How  is  it
that  you  ask  me  to  gi\-e  you  to  drink  ?  For  you
Jews  have  no  intercourse  with  us  Samaritans.''

But  he  said  to  her :  "  If  you  knew  me,  and
knew  what  I  teach,  you  would  not  say  this,  and
you  would  give  me  to  drink,  and  I  would  give  you
the  water  of  life.  Whoever  drinks  of  the  water
you  have  will  thirst  again.  But  whoever  shall  drink
of  the  water  I  have  shall  always  be  satisfied,  and
this  water  shall  bring  hun  everlasting  life."  The
woman  understood  that  he  was  speaking  of  things
divine,  and  said  to  him :  "  I  see  that  you  are  a
prophet,  and  wish  to  teach  me.  But  how  are  you
to  teach  me  divine  things,  when  you  are  a  Jew  and


36


THE    GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


I  a  Samaritan  ?  Our  people  worship  God  upon  this
hill,  but  you  Jews  say  that  the  house  of  God  is  only
in  Jerusalem.  You  cannot  teach  me  divine  things,
because  you  have  one  belief,  and  we  another."  And
Jesus  said  to  her :  "  Believe  me,  woman,  the  time
is  already  here,  when  people,  to  pray  to  the  Father,
will  come  neither  to  this  hUl  nor  to  Jerusalem.
The  time  has  come  when  the  real  worshippers  of
God  will  worship  the  Heavenly  Father  in  spirit  and
with  works.  Such  are  the  worshippers  the  Father
needs.  God  is  a  spirit,  and  He  must  be  worshipped
in  the  spirit  and  with  works."  The  woman  did  not
understand  what  he  told  her,  and  said :  "  I  have
heard  that  the  messenger  of  God  will  come,  he
whom  they  call  the  anointed.  He  will  then  declare
everything."  And  Jesus  said  to  her :  "  It  is  I,  the
same  who  has  spoken  with  you.  Expect  nothing
more."

After  this,  Jesus  came  into  the  land  of  Judtea,
and  there  lived  with  his  disciples,  and  taught.  At
that  time  John  taught  the  people  near  Salim,  and
bathed  them  in  the  river  .^Enon.  For  John  was
not  yet  put  in  prison.

And  a  dispute  arose  between  the  disciples  of
John  and  the  hearers  of  Jesus,  as  to  which  was
better,  John's  cleansing  in  water  or  Jesus'  teach-
ing. And  they  came  to  John,  and  said  to  him :
"  You  cleanse  with  water,  but  Jesus  only  teaches,
and  all  go  to  him.  What  have  you  to  say  of
him  ? "  John  said :  "  A  man  of  himself  can  teach
nothing,  unless  God  teach  him.  Who  speaks  of  the
earth,  is  of  the  earth  ;  but  whosoever  speaks  of  God,


Jn.      iv.  21.


LIFE    m   THE   SPIRIT


37


Jn.  iii.  32-34.


35.


Lk.      xi.  37,


39-41.


is  from  God.  It  is  nowise  possible  to  prove  whether
the  words  that  are  spoken  are  from  God  or  not
from  God.  God  is  a  spirit ;  He  cannot  be  measured,
and  He  cannot  be  proved.  He  who  .shall  under-
stand the  word  of  the  spirit,  by  this  very  thing  proves
that  he  is  of  the  spirit.  The  Father,  loving  His
Son,  has  entrusted  all  to  him.  Whoever  believes  in
the  Son  has  life,  and  whoever  does  not  believe  in
the  Son  has  not  life.      God  is  the  spirit  in  man."

After  this  there  came  to  Jesus  one  of  the  ortho-
dox, and  invited  him  to  dinner.  Jesus  went  in
and  sat  down  at  table.  The  host  noticed  that  he
did  not  wash  before  dianer,  and  wondered  thereat.
And  Jesus  said  to  him  :  "  You  orthodox  wash  every-
thing outside  ;  but  are  you  clean  inside  ?  Be  well-
disposed  to  men,  and  all  will  be  clean."

And  while  he  sat  in  the  house  of  the  orthodox,
there  came  a  woman  of  the  town,  who  was  an  un-
believer. She  had  learnt  that  Jesus  was  ia  the
house  of  the  orthodox  man,  and  she  came  there  too,
bringing  a  bottle  of  scent.  And  she  knelt  at  his
feet,  wept,  and  washed  his  feet  with  her  tears,
wiped  them  with  her  hair,  and  poured  scent  over
them.  The  orthodox  man  saw  this,  and  thought  to
himself :  "  He  is  hardly  a  prophet.  If  he  were
really  a  prophet,  he  would  know  what  kind  of  a
woman  it  is  that  is  washing  his  feet.  He  would
know  that  this  is  a  wrong-doer,  and  would  not
allow  her  to  touch  him."  Jesus  guessed  his
thought,  and,  turning  to  him,  said :  "  Shall  I  tell
you  what  I  think  ? "  The  host  assented.  And
Jesus  said ;  "  Well,  it  is  this.     Two  men  held  them-


38


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


selves  debtors  to  a  certain  man  of  property,  one  for
five  hundred  pence,  the  other  for  fifty.  And  neither
the  one  nor  the  other  had  anything  to  pay  with.
The  creditor  pardoned  both.  Now,  in  your  opinion,
which  will  love  the  creditor  more,  and  shew  him
greater  attention  ? "  And  he  said  :  "  Of  course,  he
that  owed  more."  Jesus  pointed  to  the  woman,  and
said :  "  So  it  is  with  you  and  this  woman.  You
consider  yourself  orthodox,  and  therefore  a  small
debtor ;  she  considers  herself  an  unbeliever,  and
therefore  a  great  debtor.  I  came  to  your  house ;
you  did  not  give  me  water  to  wash  my  feet.  She
washed  my  feet  with  her  tears,  and  wiped  them
with  her  hair.  You  did  not  kiss  me,  but  she
kissed  my  feet.  You  did  not  give  me  oil  to  anoint
my  head,  but  she  anoints  my  feet  with  precious
scent.  He  who  rests  in  orthodoxy  will  not  do  works
of  love,  but  he  who  considers  himself  an  un-
believer will  do  works  of  love.  And  for  works  of
love,  all  is  forgiven."  And  he  said  to  her :  "  All
your  wickedness  is  forgiven  you."  And  Jesus  said :
"  All  depends  upon  what  each  man  considers  him-
self. Whoever  considers  himself  good  will  not  be
good ;  but  whoever  considers  himself  bad  will  be-
come good."

And  Jesus  said  further :  "  Two  men  once  came
into  a  temple  to  pray ;  one  orthodox,  and  the
other  a  tax-gatherer.  The  orthodox  man  prayed
tlms :  '  I  thank  Thee,  God,  that  I  am  not  as  other
men,  I  am  not  a  miser,  nor  a  libertine ;  I  am  not
a  rogue,  not  such  a  worthless  fellow  as  that  tax-
gatherer.      I   fast    twice    weekly,    and    give    away


Lk.     vii.  42.


LIFE   IN   THE   SPIRIT


39


Lk.  xviii.  13.


14.


37.


a  tithe  of  my  property.'  But  the  tax-gatherer
stood  afar  off,  and  dared  not  look  up  at  the  sky,
but  merely  beat  his  breast,  and  said :  '  Lord,  look
down  upon  me,  worthless  as  I  am.'  Well,  and  this
man  was  better  than  the  orthodox,  for  the  reason
that  whoever  exalts  himself  shall  be  humbled,  and
whoever  humbles  himself  shall  be  exalted."

After  this,  disciples  of  John  came  to  Jesus,  and
said :  "  Why  do  we  and  the  orthodox  fast  much,
while  your  disciples  do  not  fast  ?  Por,  according
to  the  law,  God  commanded  people  to  fast."  And
Jesus  said  to  them :  "  While  the  bridegroom  is  at
the  wedding,  no  one  grieves.  Only  when  the  bride-
groom is  away,  do  people  grieve.  Having  life,  one
must  not  grieve.  The  external  worship  of  God
cannot  be  combined  with  works  of  love.  The  old
teaching  of  the  external  worship  of  God  cannot  be
combined  with  my  teaching  of  works  of  love  to  one's
neighbour.  To  combine  my  teaching  with  the  old,
is  the  Same  as  to  tear  off  a  shred  from  a  new  gar-
ment and  sew  it  on  an  old  one.  You  will  tear  the
new  and  not  mend  the  old.  Either  all  my  teaching
must  be  accepted,  or  all  the  old.  And  having  once
accepted  my  teaching,  it  is  impossible  to  keep  the
old  teaching,  of  purification,  fasting,  and  the  Sabbath.
Just  as  new  wine  cannot  be  poured  into  old  skins,
or  the  old  skins  will  burst  and  the  wine  run  out.
But  new  wine  must  be  poured  into  new  skins,  and
both  the  one  and  the  other  will  remain  whole."


CHAPTER    III


THE    SOURCE    OF   LIFE
The  life  of  all  men  has  proceeded  from  the  spirit  of  the  Father

("IballowcD  be  a:bB  iRamc")

After  this,  John's  disciples  came  to  ask  Jesus
whether  it  was  he  of  whom  John  spoke  ;  whether
he  was  revealing  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  renewing
men  by  the  spirit  ?  Jesus  answered  and  said :
"  Look,  listen, — and  tell  John,  whether  the  kingdom
of  God  has  begun,  and  whether  people  are  being
renewed  by  tlie  spirit.  Tell  him  of  what  kingdom
of  God  I  am  preaching.  It  is  said  in  the  prophecies
that,  when  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  come,  all  men
will  be  blessed.  Well,  tell  him  that  my  kingdom
of  God  is  such  that  the  poor  are  IJessed,  and
that  every  one  who  understands  me  becomes
blessed."

And,  having  dismissed  John's  disciples,  Jesus
began  to  speak  to  the  people  as  to  the  kingdom
of  God  John  announced.  He  said  :  "  When  you
went  to  John  in  the  wilderness  to  be  baptized,  what
did  you  go  to  see  ?  The  orthodox  teachers  of  the
law  also  went,  but  did  not  understand  that  which
John  announced.     And  they  thought  him  nothing


Mt.      xi.    2,
3.


16.


THE   SOURCE    OF  LIFE


41


Mt.     xi.  18.


19.


Lk.    xvi.  16.


xra.  £0.


worth.  This  breed  of  orthodox  teachers  of  the  law
only  consider  that  as  truth  which  they  themselves
invent  and  hear  from  each  other,  and  that  as  law
which  they  themselves  have  devised.  But  that
which  John  said,  that  which  I  say,  they  do  not
hearken  to,  and  do  not  understand.  Of  that  which
John  says,  they  have  understood  only  that  he
fasts  in  the  wild  places,  and  they  say  :  '  In  him
is  an  evil  spirit.'  Of  that  which  I  say,  they  have
understood  only  that  I  do  not  fast,  and  they  say  :
'  He  eats  and  drinks  with  tax-gatherers  and  sinners
— he  is  a  friend  of  theus.'  They  chatter  with  each
other  like  children  in  the  street,  and  wonder  that
no  one  listens  to  them.  And  their  wisdom  is  seen
by  their  works.  If  you  went  to  John  to  look  at  a
man  attired  in  rich  clothes,  why,  such  dwell  here
in  palaces.  Then,  what  did  you  go  to  seek  in  the
desert  ?  Did  you  go  because  you  think  John  was
the  same  as  other  prophets  ?  Do  not  think  this.
John  was  not  a  prophet  like  others.  He  was
greater  than  all  prophets.  They  foretold  that
which  might  be.  He  has  announced  to  men  that
which  is,  namely,  that  the  kingdom  of  God  was,
and  is,  on  earth.  Verily,  I  tell  you,  a  man  has  not
been  born  greater  than  John.  He  has  declared
the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  and  therefore  he  is
higher  than  all.  The  law  and  the  prophets, — all
this  was  needful  before  John.  But,  from  John  and
to  the  present  time,  it  is  announced  that  the
kingdom  of  God  is  on  earth,  and  that  he  who
makes  an  effort  enters  into  it.''

And   the  orthodox   came   to   Jesus,   and    began


42


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


asking  him :  "  How,  then,  and  when,  will  the
kingdom  of  God  come  ?  "  And  he  answered  them :
"  The  kingdom  of  God  which  I  preach  is  not  such
as  former  prophets  preached.  They  said  that  God
would  come  with  divers  visible  signs,  but  I  speak
of  a  kingdom  of  God,  the  coming  of  which  may  not
be  seen  with  the  eyes.  And  if  anyone  shall  say
to  you,  '  See,  it  is  come,  or  it  shall  come,'  or,  '  See,
it  is  here  or  there,'  do  not  believe  them.  The
kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  time,  or  in  place,  of  any
kind.  It  is  like  lightning,  seen  here,  there,  and
everywhere.  And  it  has  neither  time  nor  place,
because  the  kingdom  of  God,  the  one  which  I
preach,  is  within  you."

After  this,  an  orthodox  believer,  one  of  the
Jewish  authorities,  named  Nicodemus,  came  to  Jesus
at  night,  and  said  :  "  You  do  not  bid  us  keep  the
Sabbath,  do  not  bid  us  observe  cleanliness,  do  not  bid
us  make  offerings,  nor  fast ;  you  would  destroy  the
temple.  You  say  of  God,  He  is  a  spirit,  and  you
say  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  that  it  is  within  us.
Then,  what  kind  of  a  kingdom  of  God  is  this  ? "

And  Jesus  answered  him  :  "  Understand  that,  if
man  is  conceived  from  heaven,  then  in  him  there
must  be  that  which  is  of  heaven."

Nicodemus  did  not  understand  this,  and  said :
"  How  can  a  man,  if  he  is  conceived  of  the  flesh  of
his  father,  and  has  grown  old,  again  enter  the  womb
of  his  mother  and  be  conceived  anew  ?  "

And  Jesus  answered  him :  "  Understand  what  I
say.  I  say  that  man,  beside  the  flesh,  is  also  con-
ceived  of   the   spirit,  and   therefore   every  man  is


Lk.


Jn.


THE  SOURCE    OF  LIFE


43


Jn.      iii.    6.


13.


17.


conceived  of  flesh  and  spirit,  and  therefore  may  the
kingdom  of  heaven  be  in  him.  From  flesh  comes
flesh.  From  flesh,  spirit  cannot  be  born ;  spirit
can  come  only  from  spirit.  The  spirit  is  that
which  lives  in  you,  and  lives  in  freedom  and
reason ;  it  is  that  of  which  you  know  neither  the
beginning  nor  the  end,  and  which  every  man  feels
in  him.  And,  therefore,  why  do  you  ^vonder  that
I  told  you  we  must  be  conceived  from  heaven  ? "

Nicodemus  said  :  "  Still,  I  do  not  believe  that
this  can  be  so."

Then  Jesus  said  to  him :  "  What  kind  of  a
teacher  are  you,  if  you  do  not  comprehend  this  ?
Understand  that  I  am  not  interpreting  some  learned
points  ,  I  am  interpreting  that  which  we  all  know,
I  am  averring  that  which  we  all  see.  How  will
you  believe  in  that  which  is  in  heaven  if  you  do
not  believe  in  that  which  is  on  earth,  which  is  in
you  yourself  ?

"  For,  no  man  has  ever  gone  up  to  heaven,  but
there  is  only  man  on  earth,  come  down  from
heaven,  and  himself  of  heaven.  Now,  this  same
heavenly  son  in  man  it  is  that  must  be  lifted  up,
that  everyone  may  believe  in  him  and  not  perish,
but  may  have  heavenly  life.  For  God  gave  His
Son,  of  the  same  essence  as  Himself,  not  for  men's
destruction,  but  for  then-  happiness.  He  gave  him
in  order  that  everyone  might  believe  in  him,  and
might  not  perish,  but  have  life  without  end.  For
He  did  not  bring  forth  His  Son,  this  life,  into  the
world  of  men  in  order  to  destroy  the  world  of  men ;
but  He  brought  forth  His   Son,  this  life,  in   order


44


THE    GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


that  the  world  of  men  might  be  made  alive  through
him.

"  Whoever  commits  his  life  to  him  does  not
die  ;  but  he  who  does  not  commit  his  life  to  him
destroys  himself  thereby,  in  that  he  has  not  trusted
to  that  wliich  is  life.  Death  consists  in  this,  that
life  is  come  into  the  world,  but  men  themselves  go
away  from  life.

"  Light  is  the  life  of  men  ;  light  came  into  the
world,  but  men  prefer  the  darkness  to  light,  and  do
not  go  to  the  light.  He  who  does  wrong  does  not
go  to  the  light,  so  that  his  deeds  may  not  be  seen,
and  such  a  one  bereaves  himself  of  life.  Whereas
he  who  lives  in  truth  goes  to  the  light,  so  that  his
deeds  are  seen  ;  and  he  has  life,  and  is  united  with
God.

"  The  kingdom  of  God  must  be  understood,  not,
as  you  think,  in  the  sense  that  it  will  come  for  all
men  at  some  time  or  other,  and  in  some  place  or
other,  but  thus, — In  the  whole  world  always,  some
people,  those  who  trust  in  the  heavenly  Son  of
man,  become  sons  of  the  kingdom,  but  others  who
do  not  trust  in  him  are  destroyed.  The  Father  of
that  spirit  which  is  in  man  is  the  Father  of  those
only  who  acknowledge  themselves  to  be  His  sons.
And,  therefore,  only  those  exist  to  Him  who  have
kept  in  themselves  that  which  He  gave  them."

And,  after  this,  Jesus  began  to  explain  to  the
people  what  the  kingdom  of  God  is,  and  he  made
this  clear  by  means  of  parables.

He  said:  The  Father, — who  is  spirit, — sows  in  the
world  the  life  of  understanding,  as  the  husbandman


Jn.      iii.  18.


Mt.    xili.    3.


THE   SOURCE    OF  LIFE


45


Mt.   xiii.    4.


Mk.      iv.  26.


27.


Mt.    xiii.  33.


SOWS  seed  in  his  field.  He  sows  over  the  whole
field,  without  remarking  where  any  particular  seed
falls.  Some  seeds  fall  upon  the  road,  and  the  birds
fly  down  and  peck  them  up.  And  others  fall
among  stones ;  and  although  among  these  stones
they  come  up,  they  wither,  because  there  is  no
room  for  the  roots.  And  others,  again,  fall  among
wormwood,  so  that  the  wormwood  chokes  the  corn,
and  the  ear  springs  up,  but  does  not  fill.  And
others  fall  on  good  soil ;  they  spring  up,  and  make
return  for  the  lost  corn,  and  bear  ears,  and  fill,  and
one  ear  will  give  a  hundredfold,  another  sixtyfold,
and  another  thirtyfold.  Thus,  then,  God  also  sowed
broadcast  the  spirit  in  men  ;  in  some  it  is  lost,  but
in  others  it  yields  a  hundredfold :  these  last  are  they
who  form  the  kingdom  of  God.  Thus  the  kingdom
is  not  such  as  you  think,  that  God  will  come  to
reign  over  you.  God  has  only  sown  the  spirit,  and
the  kingdom  of  God  will  be  in  those  who  pre-
serve it.

God  does  not  force  men.  It  is  as  when  the  sower
casts  the  seeds  in  the  earth,  and  himself  thinks  no
more  of  them ;  but  the  seeds  of  themselves  swell,
sprout  up,  put  forth  leaf,  sheath,  and  ear,  and  fill
with  grain.  Only  when  it  is  ripened,  the  master
sends  sickles  to  reap  the  cornfield.  So  also  God
gave  His  Son,  the  spirit,  to  the  world ;  and  the
spirit  of  itself  grows  in  the  world,  and  the  sons  of
the  spirit  make  up  the  kingdom  of  God.

A  woman  puts  yeast  in  the  kneading  trough  and
mixes  it  with  the  fiour ;  she  then  stirs  it  no  more,
but  lets  it  ferment  and  rise.     As  long  as  men  live,


46


THE    GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


G-od  does  not  interpose  in  their  life.  He  gave  the
spirit  to  the  world,  and  the  spu'it  itself  lives  in
men,  and  men  who  live  by  the  spirit  make  up  the
kingdom  of  God.  For  the  spirit  there  is  neither
death  nor  evil.  Death  and  evil  are  for  the  flesh,
bnt  not  for  the  spirit.

The  kingdom  of  G-od  comes  in  this  way.  A
farmer  sowed  good  seed  in  his  field.  The  farmer  is
the  Spirit,  the  Father  ;  the  field  is  the  world  ;  the
good  seeds  are  the  sons  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
And  the  farmer  lay  down  to  sleep,  and  an  enemy
came  and  sowed  darnel  in  the  field.  The  enemy  is
temptation  ;  the  darnel  is  the  sons  of  temptation.
And  his  labourers  came  to  the  farmer  and  said  :
"  Can  you  have  sown  bad  seed  ?  Much  darnel  has
come  up  in  your  field.  Send  us,  we  will  weed  it
out."  And  the  farmer  said  :  "  You  must  not  do
that,  for  in  weeding  the  darnel  you  will  trample
the  wheat.  Let  them  grow  together.  The  harvest
will  come,  when  I  shall  bid  the  reapers  take  away
the  darnel  and  burn  it ;  and  the  wheat  I  shall
store  in  the  barn."

Now,  the  harvest  is  the  end  of  man's  life,  and
the  harvesters  are  the  power  of  heaven.  And  the
darnel  shall  be  burnt,  but  the  wheat  shall  be
cleaned  and  gathered.  Thus  also,  at  life's  end,  all
shall  vanish  which  was  a  guUe  of  time,  and  the
true  life  in  the  spirit  shall  alone  be  left.  For  the
Spirit,  the  Father,  there  is  no  evil.  The  spirit
keeps  that  which  it  needs,  and  that  which  is  not
of  it  does  not  exist  for  it.

The  kingdom  of  God  is  like  a  net.      The  net  will


THE   SOURCE    OF  LIFE


47


Mt.  xiii.    48.


be  spread  in  the  sea,  and  will  catch  all  kinds  of
fish.  And  afterwai'ds,  when  it  is  drawn  out,  the
worthless  will  be  set  aside  and  thrown  into  the  sea.
So  will  it  be  at  the  end  of  the  age  ;  the  powers  of
heaven  will  take  the  good,  and  the  evil  will  be  cast
away.

And  when  he  finished  speaking,  the  disciples
asked  him  how  to  understand  these  parables  ?
And  he  said  to  them :  "  These  parables  must  be
understood  in  two  ways.  I  speak  all  these  parables
because  there  are  some  like  you,  my  disciples,  who
understand  wherein  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  who
understand  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  witliin
every  man,  who  understand  how  to  go  into  it ;  while
others  do  not  understand  this.  Others  look,  but
see  not ;  they  hearken,  and  do  not  understand,
because  their  heart  has  become  gross.  Therefore  I
speak  these  parables  with  two  meanings,  for  both
classes  of  hearers.  To  the  others  I  speak  of  God,
of  what  God's  kingdom  is  to  them,  and  they  may
understand  this  ;  while  to  you  I  speak  of  what  the
kingdom  of  God  is  for  you — that  kingdom  which  is
within  you.

And  see  that  you  understand  as  you  ought  the
parable  of  the  sower.  For  you  the  parable  is  this :
Everyone  who  has  understood  the  meaning  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  but  has  not  accepted  it  in  his
heart,  to  him  temptation  comes  and  robs  him  of
that  which  has  been  sown  :  this  is  the  seed  on  the
wayside.  That  which  was  sown  on  stones,  is  he
who  at  once  accepts  with  joy.  But  there  is  no
root  in  him,  and  he  only  accepts  for  a  time ;  but  let


48


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


straits  and  persecution  befall  him,  because  of  the
meaning  of  the  kingdom,  and  he  straightaway
denies  it.  That  which  was  sown  among  the  worm-
wood is  he  who  understood  the  meaning  of  the
kingdom,  but  worldly  cares  and  the  seductions  of
wealth  strangle  the  meaning  in  him,  and  he  yields
no  fruit.  But  that  wliich  was  sown  on  good  soil
is  he  who  understood  the  meaning  of  the  kingdom,
and  accepted  it  into  his  heart ;  such  yield  fruit,
one  a  hundredfold,  another  sixtyfold,  another  thirty-
fold.  For  he  who  retains,  to  him  much  is  given ;
while  from  him  who  does  not  retain,  the  whole  will
be  taken.

And,  therefore,  take  care  how  you  understand
these  parables.  Understand  them  so  as  not  to  give
way  to  deceit,  wrong,  and  care  ;  but  so  as  to  yield
thirtyfold,  or  sixtyfold,  or  a  hundredfold.

The  kingdom  of  heaven  giows  and  spreads  in
the  soul  out  of  nothing,  providing  e\erything.  It
is  like  a  birch  seed,  the  very  smallest  of  seeds,
which,  when  it  grows  up,  becomes  greater  than  all
other  trees,  and  the  birds  of  heaven  build  their
nests  in  it.


Alt    xiii.


23.


12.


Lk.    viii.  18.


Mt.    xiii.  31.


CHAPTEE  IV


GODS    KINGDOM


Therefore  the  will  of  the  Father  is  the  life  and
welfare  of  all  men

("Ibg  hing&om  come")


Mt.

ix.  35.

30.

V.     1.

2.

Lk.

vi.  20,
21.

22.

23.

And  Jesus  went  camong  the  towns  and  villages,  and
taught  all  men  the  happiness  of  fulfilling  the
Father's  will.  Jesus  was  sorry  for  men,  that  they
perish  without  knowing  wherein  is  the  true  life,
and  are  driven  about  and  suffer,  without  knowing
why,  like  sheep  left  without  a  shepherd.

Once  a  crowd  of  people  gathered  to  Jesus,  to
hear  his  teaching ;  and  he  went  up  on  a  hdl  and
sat  down.     His  disciples  surrounded  him.

And  Jesus  began  to  teach  the  people  as  to  what
is  the  Father's  will.     He  said : —

Blessed  are  the  poor  and  homeless,  for  they  are
in  the  will  of  the  Father.  Even  if  they  hunger  for
a  time,  they  shall  be  satisfied ;  and  if  they  grieve
and  weep,  they  shall  be  comforted.  If  people  look
down  upon  them,  and  thrust  them  aside  and  every-
where drive  them  away,  let  them  be  glad  at  this ;
for  the  people  of  God  have  ever  been  persecuted
thus,  and  they  receive  a  heavenly  reward.
4


5°


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


But  woe  to  the  rich,  for  they  have  already  got
everything  they  wish,  and  will  get  nothing  more.
They  are  now  satisfied  ;  but  they  shall  be  hungry.
Now  they  are  merry ;  but  they  shall  be  sad.  If  all
praise  them,  woe  to  them,  because  only  deceivers
get  everybody's  praise.

Blessed  are  the  poor  and  homeless,  but  blessed
only  then,  when  they  are  poor,  not  merely  exter-
nally, but  in  spirit ;  as  salt  is  good  only  when  it  is
true  salt ;  not  externally  only,  but  when  it  has  the
savour  of  salt.

So,  you  also,  the  poor  and  homeless,  are  the
teachers  of  the  world  ;  you  are  blessed,  if  you  know
that  true  happiness  is  in  being  homeless  and  poor.
But  if  you  are  poor  only  externally,  then  you,  like
salt  without  savour,  are  good  for  nothing  You
must  be  a  light  to  the  world  ;  therefore  do  not  hide
your  light,  but  shew  it  to  men.  For  when  one
lights  a  candle,  one  does  not  put  it  under  a  bench,
but  upon  the  table,  that  it  may  light  all  in  the
room.  So,  you  also,  do  not  hide  your  light,  but
shew  it  by  your  works,  so  that  men  may  see  that
you  know  the  truth,  and,  looking  at  j'our  good
works,  may  understand  j'our  Heavenly  Father.

And  do  not  think  tliat  I  free  you  from  the  law.
I  teach  not  release  from  the  law,  but  I  teach  the
fulfilment  of  tlie  eternal  law.  As  long  as  there  are
men  un<ler  heaven,  there  is  an  everlasting  law.
There  will  be  no  law,  only  when  men  shall  of  them-
selves act  wholly  according  to  the  eternal  law.
And  now  I  am  giving  you  the  commandments  of
the  eternal  law.     And  if  anyone  shall  release  him-


Lk.      vi.  24.


Mt.      V.   13.


GOD'S  KINGDOM


V.  20.


22,


24.


self,  if  only  from  one  of  these  short  commandments,
and  shall  teach  others  that  they  may  so  release
themselves,  he  shall  be  least  in  the  kingdom  of
heaven ;  while  he  who  shall  fulfil  them,  and  shall
thereby  teach  others,  shall  be  the  greatest  in  the
kingdom  of  heaven.  Because  if  your  virtue  be  not
greater  than  the  virtue  of  the  orthodox  leaders,  you
will  in  no  way  be  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

These  are,  the  connnandments :


In  the  former  law  it  was  said :  "  Do  not  kill."
But  if  anyone  shall  kill  another,  he  must  be
judged.

But  I  tell  you,  that  everyone  is  worthy  of
judgment  who  gets  angry  with  his  brother.  And
still  more  to  blame  is  he  who  abuses  his  brother.

So  that,  if  you  wish  to  pray  to  God,  remember,
first,  whether  there  is  no  man  who  may  have  some-
thing against  you.  If  you  remember  that  but  one
man  considers  you  have  offended  him,  leave  your
prayer,  and  go  first  and  make  peace  with  your
brother ;  and  then  you  may  pray.  Know  that  God
wants  neither  sacrifice  nor  prayer,  but  peace,  con-
cord, and  love  among  you.  And  you  may  neither
pray,  nor  think  of  God,  if  there  is  but  one  man  to
whom  you  do  not  bear  love.

And  so  this  is  the  first  commandment :  Do  not
be  angry,  do  not  abuse ;  but  having  quarrelled,
make  peace  in  such  a  way  that  no  one  may  have
cause  for  offence  against  you.


52


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


II.

In  the  former  law  it  was  said :  "  Do  not  commit
adultery ;  and  if  you  wish  to  put  away  your  wife,
give  her  a  bill  of  divorce."

But  I  tell  you,  if  you  are  drawn  by  the  beauty
of  a  woman,  you  are  already  committing  adultery.
All  sensuality  destroys  the  soul,  and  therefore  it  is
better  for  you  to  renounce  the  pleasure  of  the  flesh
than  to  destroy  your  life.

And  if  you  put  away  your  wife,  then,  besides
being  vicious  yourself,  you  drive  her  also  into  vice,
and  him  who  shall  have  to  do  with  her.

And  therefore,  this  is  the  second  commandment :
Do  not  think  that  love  towards  woman  is  good;  do
not  admire  the  beauty  of  women,  but  live  with  the
one  to  whom  you  have  become  united,  and  do  not
leave  her.

III.

In  the  former  law  it  was  said :  "  Do  not  utter
the  name  of  the  Lord  your  God  in  vain,  do  not  call
upon  your  God  when  lying,  and  do  not  dishonour
the  name  of  your  God.  Do  not  swear  by  Me  in
untruth,  so  as  to  profane  your  God."  But  I  tell
you  that  every  oath  is  a  profanation  of  God.

Therefore,  swear  not  at  all.  Man  cannot  pro-
mise anything,  because  he  is  wholly  in  the  power
of  the  Father.  A  man  cannot  turn  one  hair  from
grey  to  black  ;  how  then  shall  he  swear  beforehand,
that  he  will  do  this  and  that,  and  swear  by  God  ?
Every  oath  is  a  profanation  of  God,  for,  if  a  man


Mt.       V.  31.


Mt.       V.  33.


GOD'S  KINGDOM


S3


,  37.


41.
vi.  80.


37.


shall  have  to  fulfil  an  oath  which  is  against  the  will
of  God,  it  must  follow  that  he  has  sworn  to  go
against  God's  will ;  so  that  every  oath  is  evil.  But
when  men  question  you  about  anything,  say  :  "  Yes,''
if  yes, — "  No,"  if  no.  Everything  added  to  this  is
evil.

Therefore,  the  third  commandment  is :  Swear
nothing,  to  anyone  ;  say  "  Yes,"  when  it  is  yes, —
"  No,"  when  it  is  no ;  and  understand  that  every
oath  is  evil.

IV.

In  the  former  law  it  was  said  :  "  He  who  destroys
life,  shall  give  a  life  for  a  life ;  an  eye  for  an  eye,  a
tooth  for  a  tooth,  a  hand  for  a  hand,  an  ox  for  an
ox,  a  slave  for  a  slave,"  and  so  on.

But  I  tell  you :  Do  not  wrestle  with  evil  by  evil.
Not  only  do  not  take  by  law  an  ox  for  an  ox,  a
slave  for  a  slave,  a  life  for  a  life,  but  do  not  resist
evil  at  all.  If  anyone  wishes  to  take  an  ox  from
you  by  law,  give  him  another ;  if  anyone  wishes  to
get  your  coat  by  law,  give  him  your  shirt  also ;  if
anyone  strikes  out  your  tooth  on  one  side,  turn  to
him  the  other  side.  If  you  are  made  to  do  one
piece  of  work,  do  two.  If  men  msh  to  take  your
property,  give  it  to  them.  If  they  do  not  return
your  money,  do  not  ask  for  it.

And  therefore :  Do  not  judge,  do  not  go  to  law,
do  not  punish,  and  you  yourself  shall  not  be  judged,
nor  punished.  Forgive  all,  and  you  shall  be  for-
given, because  if  you  shall  judge  people,  they  will
judge  you  also.


54


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


You  cannot  judge,  because  you,  all  men,  are
blind,  aud  do  not  see  the  truth.  How,  with  ob-
structed eyes,  will  you  discern  the  mote  in  your
brother's  eye  ?  You  must  first  clear  your  own  eye.
But  whose  eyes  are  clear  ?  Can  a  blind  man  lead
a  blind  man  ?  Both  will  fall  into  the  pit.  Thus,
also,  they  who  judge  and  punish,  like  the  blind,  are
leading  the  blind.

They  who  judge  and  condemn  people  to  violent
treatment,  wounds,  maiming,  death,  wish  to  teach
people.  But  what  else  can  come  from  their
teaching,  than  that  the  pupil  will  learn  his  lesson,
and  will  become  quite  like  the  teacher  ?  What,
then,  will  he  do,  when  he  has  learnt  his  lesson  ?
The  same  that  the  teacher  does :  violence,  murder.

And  do  not  think  to  find  justice  in  the  courts.
To  seek  legal  justice,  to  hand  matters  over  to
human  courts,  is  the  same  as  to  cast  precious  pearls
before  swine ;  they  will  trample  upon  it,  and  tear
you  to  pieces.

And,  therefore,  the  fourth  commandment  is :
However  men  may  wrong  you,  do  not  resist  evil,
do  not  judge  and  do  not  go  to  law,  do  not  com-
plain and  do  not  punish.


In  the  former  law  it  was  said :  "  Do  good  to  men
of  your  own  nation,  and  do  evil  to  strangers."

But  I  tell  you,  love  not  only  your  own  country-
men, but  people  of  other  nations.  Let  strangers
hate  you,  let  them  fall  upon  you,  wrong  you ;  but


Mt.     vii.    1.
3.


Lk.      vi.  39.


Mt.     vii.    6.


GOD'S  KINGDOM


55


vii.  12.


vi.    1.


you  speak  well  of  them,  and  do  them  good.  If  you
are  only  attached  to  your  countrymen,  why,  all  men
are  thus  attached  to  their  own  countrymen,  and
hence  wars  arise.  Behave  equally  well  towards
men  of  all  nations,  and  you  will  be  the  sons  of  the
Father.  All  men  are  His  children,  and  therefore  all
are  brothers  to  you.

And,  therefore,  this  is  the  fifth  commandment :
Behave  equally  well  towards  foreigners,  as  I  told
you  to  behave  among  yourselves.  Before  the
Father  of  all  men  there  are  neither  different  nations
nor  different  kingdoms  :  all  are  brothers,  all  sons  of
one  Father.  Make  no  distinction  among  people  as
to  nations  and  kingdoms.

And  so : — I.  Do  not  be  angry,  but  be  at  peace
with  all  men.  II.  Do  not  seek  delight  in  sexual
gratification.  III.  Do  not  swear  anything  to  any-
one. IV.  Do  not  oppose  evil,  do  not  judge  and  do
not  go  to  law.  V.  Do  not  make  any  distinction
among  men  as  to  nationality,  and  love  strangers
like  your  own  people.

All  these  commandments  are  contained  in  this
one :  All  that  you  wish  people  should  do  for  you,
do  you  even  so  to  them.

Fulfil  my  teaching,  not  for  men's  praise.  If  you
do  it  for  men,  then  from  men  you  have  your  reward.
But  if  not  for  men,  then  your  reward  is  from  the
Heavenly  Father.  So  that,  if  you  do  good  to  men,
do  not  boast  about  it  before  men.  Thus  hypocrites
do,  that  men  may  speak  well  of  them.  And  they
get  what  they  wish.  But  if  you  do  good  to  men,
do  it  so  that  no  one  may  see  it,  so  that  your  left


56


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


hand  may  not  know  what  your  right  hand  is  doing.
And  your  Father  will  see  this,  and  will  give  you
what  you  need.

And,  if  you  wish  to  pray,  do  not  pray  like  the
hypocrites.  Hypocrites  love  to  pray  m  churches,
in  the  sight  of  men.  They  do  this  for  men's  sake,
and  get  in  return  from  men  that  which  they  wish.

But,  if  you  wish  to  pray,  go  where  no  one  may
see  yiiu,  and  pray  to  your  Father,  the  Spirit,  and
the  Father  will  see  what  is  in  your  soul,  and  will
give  you  that  which  you  wish  in  the  spirit.

When  you  pray,  do  not  chatter  with  your  tongue
like  the  hypocrites.  Your  Father  knows  what  you
want  liefore  you  open  your  lips.

Pray  only  thus  :

Oar  Father,  without  heginniiig  and  without  end,
like  heaven  !

May  Thy  teing  only  he  holy.

May  power  be  only  Thine,  so  that  Thy  will  be  done,
without  begivniny  and  without  end,  on  earth.

Give  me  food  of  Ufe  in  the  present .

Smooth  out  my  former  mistales,  and  wijK  them
away ;  even  as  I  so  do  with  edl  the  mistakes  of  my
brothers,  that  I  may  not  fcdl  into  temptation,  and  may
be  saved  from  evil.

Beeause  Thine  is  the  power  and  might,  and  Thine
the  judgment.

If  you  pray,  above  all,  bear  no  one  any  malice.
For  if  you  do  not  forgive  men  their  wrong-doing,
the  Father  also  will  not  forgive  you  yours.

If  you  fast,  and  go  hungry,  do  not  show  it  to


Mt.


Mk.     xi.  25.
26.


Mt.      vi.  16.


GOD'S  KINGDOM


57


Mt.      vi.  17,
IS.


21,


26.


27.


28.


men ;  thus  do  the  hypocrites,  that  people  may  see,
and  speak  well  of  them.  And  people  speak  well  of
them,  and  they  get  what  they  wish.  But  do  not
you  do  so ;  if  you  suffer  want,  go  about  with  a
cheerful  face,  that  people  may  not  see.  But  your
Father  will  see,  and  will  give  you  what  you  need.

Do  not  lay  up  store  on  earth.  On  earth,  the
worm  consumes,  and  rust  eats,  and  thieves  steal.
But  lay  up  heavenly  wealth  for  yourself.  Heavenly
wealth  the  worm  does  not  gnaw,  nor  rust  eat,  nor
thieves  steal.  Where  your  wealth  is^  there  will
your  heart  also  be.

The  light  of  the  body  is  the  eye,  and  the  light  of
the  soul  is  the  heart.  If  your  eye  is  dim,  then  all
your  body  will  be  in  darkness.  And  if  the  light
of  your  heart  is  dim,  then  all  your  soul  will  be  in
darkness.  You  cannot  serve  at  one  time  two
masters.  You  will  please  one,  and  offend  the  other.
You  cannot  serve  God  and  the  flesh.  You  will
either  work  for  the  earthly  life  or  for  God.  There-
fore, do  not  be  anxious  for  what  you  shall  eat  and
drink,  and  wherewith  you  shall  be  clothed.  Life  is
more  wonderful  than  food  and  clothing,  and  God
gave  it  you.

Look  at  God's  creatures,  the  birds.  They  do  not
sow,  reap  or  harvest,  but  God  feeds  them.  In
God's  sight,  man  is  not  worse  than  the  bird.  If
God  gave  man  life.  He  will  be  able  to  feed  him  too.
But  you  yourselves  know  that,  however  much  you
strive,  you  can  do  nothing  for  yourselves.  You
cannot  lengthen  your  life  by  an  hour.  And  why
should  you  care  about  clothing  ?      The  flowers  of


58


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


the  field  do  not  work  and  do  not  spin,  but  are
dressed  as  Solomon  in  all  his  -glory  never  was.
Well  then,  if  God  has  so  adorned  the  grass,  which
to-day  grows  and  to-morrow  is  mown,  will  he  not
clothe  you  ?

Do  not  troulDle  and  worry  yourselves  ;  do  not  say
that  you  must  think  of  what  you  will  eat  and  how
you  will  be  clothed.  This  everyone  needs,  and  God
knows  this  need  of  yours.  And  so,  do  not  care
about  the  future.  Live  in  the  present  day.  Take
care  to  he  in  the  will  of  the  Father.  Wish  for
that  which  alone  is  important,  and  the  rest  will  all
come  of  itself.  Strive  only  to  be  in  the  will  of  the
Father.  And  so,  do  not  trouble  about  the  future.
When  the  future  comes,  then  it  will  be  time  to  do
so.      There  is  enough  evil  in  the  present.

Ask  and  it  shall  be  given  you,  seek  and  you  shall
find,  knock  and  it  shall  be  opened  to  you.  Is  there
a  father  who  would  give  his  son  a  stone  instead  of
bread,  or  a  snake  instead  of  a  fish  ?  Then,  how  is
it  that  we,  wicked  men,  are  able  to  give  our
children  that  which  they  need,  while  your  Father
in  heaven  shall  not  give  you  that  which  you  truly
need,  if  you  ask  Him  ?  Ask,  and  the  Heavenly  Father
will  give  the  life  of  the  spirit  to  them  who  ask  Him.

The  way  to  life  is  narrow,  but  enter  by  the
narrow  way.  The  way  into  life  is  one  only.  It  is
narrow  and  strait.  About  it  the  plain  lies  great
and  wide,  but  it  is  the  way  of  destruction.  The
narrow  way  alone  leads  to  life ;  and  few  find  it.
But  do  not  quail,  little  flock !  The  Father  has
promised  you  the  kingdom.


lit.       vi.  29,


31.


32.
33.


Lk.

Mt.


Vll.


xi.    9.

9,
10.

11.


13.


Lk.     xii.  32.


GOD'S   KINGDOM


59


lit.     vii.  16.


18.


20.
Lk.      vi.  45.


Mt.     vii.  21.


27.


Only,  beware  of  false  prophets  and  teachers  ;  they
approach  you  in  sheepskins,  but  within  they  are
ravening  wolves.

By  their  fruits  will  you  know  them  ;  by  that  which
they  yield.  Figs  are  not  gathered  from  thistles,
nor  grapes  from  thorns.  But  a  good  tree  brings
forth  good  fruit.  And  a  bad  tree  brings  forth  bad
fruit.  And  so  you  will  know  them  by  the  fruits  of
their  teaching.  A  good  man,  from  his  good  heart,
brings  forth  everything  that  is  good  ;  but  a  wicked
man,  from  his  evil  heart,  brings  forth  everything
evil ;  for  the  lips  speak  from  the  overflow  of  the  heart.
And  therefore,  if  teachers  teach  you  to  do  to  others
that  which  is  bad  for  yourselves, — teach  violence,  exe-
cutions, wars, — know  that  they  are  false  teachers.

For  it  is  not  he  that  says  :  Lord,  Lord  !  who  shall
enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  he  who  fulfils  the
word  of  the  Heavenly  Father.  The  false  teachers
will  say :  "  Lord,  Lord  !  we  have  taught  your  teach-
ing, and  we  have  driven  away  evil  according  to
your  teaching."  But  I  will  disown  them,  and  say
to  them :  No,  I  never  acknowledged  you,  and  do
not  acknowledge  you.  Go  out  of  my  sight,  you  are
doing  that  which  is  unlawful.

And  so,  everyone  who  has  heard  these  words  of
mine,  and  fulfils  them,  he,  like  a  reasonable  man,
builds  his  house  upon  a  rock.  And  his  house  will
stand  against  all  storms.  But  he  who  hears  these
words  of  mine,  and  does  not  fulfil  them,  he,  like  a
foolish  man,  builds  his  house  upon  sand.  When
the  storm  comes,  it  will  overthrow  the  house,  and
all  will  perish.


6o


THE    GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


And  all  the  people  wondered  at  such  teaching ;
because  the  teaching  of  Jesus  was  quite  other  than
that  of  the  orthodox  teachers  of  the  law.  These
taught  a  law  which  must  be  obeyed,  but  Jesus
taught  that  all  men  are  free.  And  in  Jesus  Christ
were  fulfilled  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah :  "  The  people
living  in  darkness,  in  the  shadow  of  death,  saw  the
light  of  life,  and  he  who  furnished  this  light  of
truth  does  no  violence  nor  harm  to  men,  but  he  is
meek  and  gentle.  He,  in  order  to  bring  truth  into
the  world,  neither  disputes  nor  shouts ;  his  voice  is
never  heard  raised.  He  will  not  break  a  straw,  and
will  not  blow  out  the  smallest  light.  And  all  the
hope  of  men  is  in  his  teaching."


Lk.      iv.  32.


Mt.      iv.  14.
16.


xii.  10.


20.
21.


CHAPTEE  V


THE     TKUE     LIFE


ML      xi.  25.


The  fulfilment  of  the  personal  will  leads  to  death ;  the
fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will  gives  true  life

{"Zh'5  Will  be  Done")

And  Jesus  rejoiced  at  the  strength  of  the  spu^it,
and  said :

"  I  acknowledge  the  spirit  of  the  Father,  the
source  of  everytliing  in  heaven  and  earth,  Who  has
revealed  that  which  was  hidden  from  the  mse  and
learned,  to  the  simple,  solely  through  their  acknow-
ledging themselves  Sons  of  the  Father.

"  All  take  care  for  fleshly  happiness,  and  have
put  themselves  to  a  load  which  they  cannot  draw  ;
they  have  put  a  yoke  upon  themselves  which  was
not  made  for  them.

"  Understand  my  teaching  and  follow  it ;  and  you
shall  know  rest  and  joy  in  life.  I  give  you  another
yoke,  and  another  load ;  namely,  the  spiritual  life.
Put  yourseh'es  to  that,  and  you  shall  learn  from  me
peace  and  happiness.  Be  calm  and  meek  in  heart,  and
you  will  find  blessedness  in  your  life.  Because  my
teaching  is  a  yoke  made  for  you,  and  the  fulfilment  of
my  teaching  is  a  light  load, with  a  yoke  made  for  you."

61


62


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


The  disciples  of  Jesus  once  asked  him  whether
he  wished  to  eat.  He  said :  "  I  have  food  of  which
you  do  not  know."  They  thought  that  someone
had  brought  him  something  to  eat.     But  he  said :

"  My  food  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  who  gave  me
life,  and  to  fulfil  that  which  He  entrusted  to  me.
Do  not  say,  '  There  is  still  time,'  as  the  ploughman
said,  waiting  for  the  harvest.  He  who  fulfils  the
will  of  the  Father  is  always  satisfied,  and  knows
neither  hunger  nor  thirst.  The  fulfilment  of  the
will  of  God  always  satisfies,  bearing  its  reward
within  itself.  You  must  not  say,  '  I  will  after-
wards fulfil  the  will  of  the  Father.'  While  there
is  life,  you  always  can,  and  must,  fulfil  the  will  of
the  Father.  Our  life  is  the  field  which  God  has
sown,  and  our  business  is  to  gather  its  fruits.  And
if  we  gather  the  fruits,  we  get  the  reward,  life  be-
yond time.  True  it  is,  that  we  do  not  give  ourselves
life;  someone  else  does.  And  if  we  labour  to  gather-
in  life,  then  we,  like  reapers,  get  our  reward.  I
teach  you  to  gather-in  this  life,  which  the  Father
has  given  you."

Once,  Jesus  came  to  Jerusalem.  And  there  was
then  a  bathing-place  there.  And  men  said  of  this
bathing-place,  that  an  angel  came  down  into  it,
and  through  this  the  water  in  the  bath  would
begin  to  move,  and  he  who  first  plunged  into  the
water  after  it  was  moved,  got  well  from  what-
ever he  was  ailing.  And  sheds  were  made  around
the  bath,  and  under  these  sheds  sick  men  lay,  wait-
ing for  the  water  in  the  bath  to  be  moved,  in  order
to  plunge  into  it.


Jn.  iv.  3L
32.
33.
34.


Jn.


THE    TRUE  LIFE


63


Jii.        V.    6.


16.


17.
19.


20.


21.


And  a  man  was  there  who  had  been  infirm  thirty-
eight  years.     Jesus  asked  who  he  was.

And  the  man  told  how  he  had  been  ailing  so  long,
and  v/as  still  waiting  to  get  into  the  bath  first,  upon
the  water  being  moved,  in  order  to  be  healed  ;  but
for  these  thirty-eight  years  he  had  been  unable  to
get  in  first,  others  always  getting  into  the  bath
before  him.

And  Jesus  saw  that  he  was  old,  and  said  to
him :  "  Do  you  wish  to  get  well  ? "

He  said :  "  I  wish  to,  but  I  have  no  one  to  carry
me  into  the  water  in  time.  Someone  always  will
get  in  before  me."

And  Jesus  said  to  him :  "  Awake,  take  up  your
bed  and  walk."

And  the  sick  man  took  up  his  bed  and  walked.

And  it  was  the  Sabbath.  And  the  orthodox
said :  "  You  must  not  take  up  the  bed,  for  to-day
is  the  Sabbath."  He  said :  "  He  who  raised  me,
bade  me  also  take  up  the  bed."  And  the  infirm
man  said  to  the  orthodox,  that  it  was  Jesus  who
had  healed  him.  And  they  became  angry,  and
accused  Jesus,  because  he  did  such  things  on  the
Sabbath.

And  Jesus  said  :  "  That  which  the  Father  always
does,  I  also  do.  In  truth,  I  say  to  you,  the  Son
of  himself  can  do  nothing.  He  does  only  that
which  he  has  understood  from  the  Father.  What
the  Father  does,  he  also  does.  The  Father  loves
the  Son,  and  by  this  very  fact  has  taught  him
everything  which  the  Son  should  know.

"  The  Father  gives  life  to  the  dead,  and  thus  the


64


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


Son  gives  life  to  him  who  desires  it;  because,  as
the  business  of  the  Father  is  life,  so  the  business  of
the  Son  must  be  life.  The  Father  has  not  con-
demned men  to  death,  but  has  given  men  power,  at
will,  to  die  or  live.  And  they  will  live,  if  they
shall  honour  the  Son  as  the  Father.

"  I  tell  you  truly,  that  he  who  has  understood
the  meaning  of  my  teaching,  and  has  believed  in  the
common  Father  of  all  men,  already  has  life,  and  is
delivered  from  death.  They  who  have  understood
the  meaning  of  human  life,  have  already  escaped
from  death  and  shall  live  for  ever.  Because,  as  the
Father  lives  of  Himself,  so  also  has  He  given  the
Son  life  within  himself.  And  He  has  given  him
freedom.      It  is  by  this,  that  he  is  the  Son  of  Man.

"  Henceforth  all  mortals  shall  be  divided  into
two  kinds.  They  alone,  who  do  good,  shall  find
life ;  but  they  who  do  evil  shall  be  destroyed.
And  this  is  not  my  decision,  but  it  is  what  I  have
understood  from  the  Father.  And  my  decision  is
true,  because  I  thus  decide,  not  in  oi'der  to  do  that
which  I  wish,  but  in  order  that  all  may  do  that
which  the  Father  of  all  wishes.

"  If  I  were  to  assure  all  that  my  teaching  is  true,
this  would  not  establish  my  teaching.  But  there  is
that  which  establishes  my  teaching;  namely,  the  con-
duct which  I  teach.  That  shews  that  I  do  not  teach
of  myself,  but  iu  the  name  of  the  Father  of  all  men.
And  my  Father,  He  who  has  taught  me,  confirms
the  truth  of  my  commandments  in  the  souls  of  all.

"  But  you  do  not  wish  to  understand  and  to  know
His  voice.      And  you  do  not  accept  the


Jn.


THE    TRUE  LIFE


65


Jn.


.39.


40.


you,  IS
do    not


Lk.    xix.  11.


this  voice  speaks.     That  that  which  is  in
spirit  descended   from   heaven, — this,  you
beheve.

"  Enter  into  the  meaning  of  your  writings.  You
will  find  in  them  the  same  as  in  my  teaching,  com-
mandments to  live,  not  for  yourself  alone,  but  for
the  good  of  men.  Why,  then,  do  you  not  wish  to
believe  in  my  commandments,  which  are  those  that
give  life  to  all  men  ?  I  teach  you  in  the  name  of
the  commoa  Father  of  all  men,  and  yoa  do  not
accept  my  teaching ;  but  if  anyone  shall  teach  yoti
in  his  own  name,  him  will  you  believe.

"  One  cannot  believe  that  which  people  say  to
each  other,  but  one  can  only  believe  that  in  every
man  there  is  a  Son  like  the  Father."

And  that  men  may  not  think  that  the  kingdom  of
heaven  is  established  by  anything  visible ;  but  that
they  may  understand  that  the  kingdom  of  God
consists  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will ;  and
understand  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will
depends  on  each  man's  efibrt  and  striving  to  make
people  see  that  life  is  given,  not  for  oneself  per-
sonally, but  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will,
which  alone  saves  from  death  and  gives  life, — Jesus
told  a  parable.     He  said :

"  There  was  a  rich  man,  who  had  to  go  away  from
his  home.  Before  he  went,  he  called  his  slaves,
and  gave  among  them  ten  talents,  one  to  each,  and
said :  '  While  I  am  away,  labour  each  of  you  upon
what  I  have  given.'  But  it  happened  that,  when
he  was  gone,  certain  inhabitants  of  that  town  said :
'  We  do  not  wish  to  serve  him  any  more.'     When


66


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


the  rich  man  came  back,  he  called  the  slaves  to
whom  he  had  given  the  money,  and  bade  each  say
what  he  had  done  with  his  money.  The  first  came,
and  said :  '  See,  master,  for  your  one  I  have  earned
ten.'  And  the  master  said  to  him :  '  Well  done,
good  servant ;  you  have  been  trustworthy  in  a
little,  I  will  place  you  over  much ;  be  one  with  me
in  all  my  wealth.'  Another  slave  came,  and  said :
'  See,  master,  for  your  talent  I  have  earned  five.'
And  the  master  said  to  him :  '  Well  done,  good
slave,  be  one  with  me  in  all  my  estate.'  And  yet
another  came,  and  said :  '  Here  is  your  talent,  I  hid
it  in  a  cloth  and  buried  it ;  because  I  was  afraid  of
you.  You  are  a  hard  man,  you  take  where  you  did
not  store,  and  gather  where  you  did  not  sow.'  And
the  master  said  to  him :  '  Foolish  slave  !  I  will  judge
you  by  your  own  words.  You  say  that,  from  fear
of  me,  you  hid  your  talent  in  the  earth,  and  did
not  work  upon  it.  If  you  knew  that  I  was  severe,
and  take  where  I  did  not  give,  then  why  did  you
not  do  that  which  I  bade  you  do  ?  If  you  had
worked  upon  my  talent,  the  estate  would  have  been
added  to,  and  you  would  have  fulfilled  that  which
I  bade  you.  But  you  have  not  done  that  for  which
the  talent  was  given  you,  and,  therefore,  you  must
not  own  it.'  And  the  master  bade  the  talent  be
taken  from  him  who  had  not  worked  upon  it,  and
given  to  him  who  had  worked  most.  And  then  the
servants  said  to  him :  '  Sir,  he  already  has  much.'
But  the  master  said :  '  Give  to  them  who  have  worked
much,  because  he  who  looks  after  that  which  he  has,
shall  receive  an  increase.     As  to  them  who  did  not


Lk.    xix.  10.


18.


19.
20.


21.

22.


Mt.  XXV.  26,

27.

Lk,    xix.  23.


Mt.  XXV.  30.


THE   TRUE  LIFE  67

wish  to  be  in  my  power,  drive  them  forth,  so  that
they  may  be  here  no  more.' "

Now  this  master  is  the  source  of  life,  the  spirit,
the  Father.  His  slaves  are  men.  The  talents  are
the  life  of  the  spirit.  As  the  master  does  not  him-
self work  upon  his  estate,  but  bids  the  slaves  to
work,  each  by  himself,  so  the  spirit  of  life  in  men
has  given  them  the  command  to  work  for  the  life
of  men,  and  then  left  them  alone.  They  who  sent
to  say  that  they  did  not  acknowledge  the  authority
of  the  master,  are  they  who  do  not  acknowledge
the  spirit  of  life.  The  return  of  the  master,  and
the  demand  for  an  account,  is  the  destruction  of
fleshly  life,  and  the  decision  of  the  fate  of  men  as
to  whether  they  have  yet  life  beyond  that  which
was  given  them.  Some,  the  slaves  who  fulfil  the
will  of  the  master,  work  upon  that  which  was  given
them,  and  make  gain  on  gain  ;  they  are  those  men
who,  having  received  life,  understand  that  life  is
the  will  of  the  Father,  and  is  given  to  serve  the
life  of  others.  The  foolish  and  wicked  slave,  who
hid  his  talent  and  did  not  work  upon  it,  represents
those  men  who  fulfil  only  their  own  will,  and  not
the  will  of  the  Father ;  who  do  not  serve  the  life
of  others.  The  slaves  who  have  fulfilled  the  master's
will,  and  worked  for  the  increase  of  his  estate,  be-
come sharers  of  the  whole  estate  of  the  master,
while  the  slaves  who  have  not  fulfilled  the  master's
will,  and  have  not  worked  for  him,  are  bereft  of
that  which  was  given  them.  People  who  have
fulfilled  the  will  of  the  Father,  and  have  served  life,
become  sharers  in  the  Ufe  of  the  Father,  and  receive


68


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


life,  notwithstanding  the  destruction  of  the  fleshly-
life.  They  who  have  not  fulfilled  the  will,  and
have  not  served  life,  are  bereft  of  that  life  which
they  had,  and  are  destroyed.  They  who  did  not
wish  to  acknowledge  the  authority  of  the  master,
such  do  not  exist  for  the  master ;  he  drives  them
forth.  People  who  do  not  acknowledge  within
themselves  the  life  of  the  spirit,  the  life  of  the  Son
of  Man,  such  do  not  exist  for  the  Father.

After  this,  Jesus  went  into  a  desert  place.  And
many  people  followed  him.  And  he  climbed  a
mountain,  and  sat  there  with  his  followers.  And
he  saw  that  there  was  a  great  throng,  and  said :
"Whence  shall  we  get  bread  to  feed  all  these  people  ? "
Philip  said :  "  Even  two  hundred  pence  will  not
suffice,  if  to  each  be  given  but  a  little.  We  have
only  a  little  bread  and  fish."  And  another  disciple
said :  "  They  have  bread  ;  I  have  seen  it.  There  is  a
boy  who  has  five  loaves  and  two  small  fishes."  And
Jesus  said :  "  Bid  them  all  lie  down  on  the  grass."

And  Jesus  took  the  loaves  which  he  had,  and
gave  them  to  his  disciples,  and  bade  them  give
them  to  others ;  and  so  all  began  to  hand  from
one  to  another  what  there  was,  and  all  were
satisfied,  yet  much  was  left  over.

The  next  day,  the  people  came  again  to  Jesus.
And  he  said  to  them :  "  See,  you  come  to  me,  not
because  you  have  seen  wonders,  but  because  you
have  eaten  bread  and  were  satisfied."  And  he  said
to  them :  "  Work  not  for  perishable  food,  but  for
everlasting  food,  such  as  only  the  spirit  of  the  Sou
of  Man  gives,  sealed  by  God."


7.
Mt.  xiv.  17.
Jn.       vi.    9.


THE   TRUE  LIFE


69


vi.  28.


29.


30.


35.


37.


a..


The  Jews  said :  "  But  what  must  we  do,  in  order
to  do  the  works  of  God  ? "

And  Jesus  said :  "  The  work  of  God  is  in  this,  to
believe  in  that  hfe  which  He  has  given  you."

They  said :  "  Give  us  a  sign  that  we  may  beheve.
What  are  your  deeds  which  can  serve  as  a  proof  ?
Our  fathers  ate  manna  in  the  wilderness.  God
gave  them  bread  from  heaven  to  eat ;  and  so  it  is
written."

Jesus  answered  them :  "  The  true  heavenly  bread
is  the  spirit  of  the  Son  of  Man,  that  which  the
Father  gives.  Because  the  nourishment  of  man  is
the  spirit  descended  from  heaven.  This  it  is  which
gives  life  to  the  world.  My  teaching  gives  true
nourishment  to  man.  He  who  follows  me  shall  not
hunger,  and  he  who  believes  in  my  teaching  will
never  know  thirst.

"  But  I  have  already  told  you  that  you  have  seen
this,  yet  do  not  believe.

"All  that  life  which  the  Father  gave  the  Son
will  be  realised  through  my  teaching ;  and  everyone
who  believes  will  be  a  sharer  in  it.  I  came  down
from  heaven,  not  to  do  that  which  I  wish,  but  to  do
the  will  of  the  Father,  of  Him  who  gave  me  life.
But  the  will  of  the  Father  who  sent  me  is  this,
that  I  should  keep  all  that  life  which  he  gave,  and
should  not  destroy  anything  of  it.  And  therefore,
herein  is  the  will  of  the  Father  who  sent  me,  that
everyone  who  sees  the  Son,  and  believes  in  him,
should  have  everlasting  life.  And  my  teaching
gives  life  at  the  last  day  of  the  body."

The  Jews  were  shocked  at  his  saying  that  hig


70


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


teaching  was  come  down  from  heaven.  They  said :
"  Why,  this  is  Jesus,  the  son  of  Joseph ;  we  know
his  father  and  mother.  How,  then,  can  he  say
that  his  teaching  has  descended  from  heaven  ?  "

"  Do  not  debate  as  to  who  I  am,  and  whence  I
am  come,"  said  Jesus.  "  My  teaching  is  true,  not
because  I  declare,  like  Moses,  that  God  spoke  with
me  on  Sinai ;  but  it  is  true  because  it  is  in  you
also.  Everyone  who  believes  my  conimandments,
believes,  not  because  it  is  I  who  speak,  but  because
our  common  Father  draws  him  to  Himself ;  and  my
teaching  will  give  him  life  at  the  last  day.  And  it
is  written  in  the  prophets,  that  all  shall  be  taught
by  God.  Everyone  who  shall  understand  the
Father,  and  shall  learn  to  understand  His  will,
thereby  yields  himself  to  my  teaching.

"  That  any  man  has  seen  the  Father,  this  has
never  been,  except  he  who  is  from  God ;  he  has
seen,  and  sees,  the  Father.

"  He  who  believes  in  me  (in  my  teaching)  has
everlasting  life.

"  My  teaching  is  the  nourishment  of  life.  Your
fathers  ate  manna,  food  straight  from  heaven,  and
yet  they  died.  But  the  true  nourishment  of  life,
which  descends  from  heaven,  is  such,  that  he  who
is  fed  with  it  will  not  die.  My  teaching  is  this
nourishment  of  life  descended  from  heaven.  He
who  is  fed  with  it  lives  for  ever.  And  this
nourishment  which  I  teach  is  my  flesh,  which  I
give  for  the  life  of  all  men."

The  Jews  did  not  understand  what  he  said,  and
began  to  dispute  as  to  how    it    was    possible    to


Jn.       vi.  42.


THE    TRUE  LIFE


71


Jn.      vi.  63.


66.


67.


63.


Lk.       *.    1.


give  one's  flesh  for  the  nourishment  of  men,  and
why.

And  Jesus  said  to  them :  "  If  you  shall  not  give
up  your  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  spirit,  there  will  be
no  life  in  you.  He  who  does  not  give  up  his  flesh
for  the  life  of  the  spirit,  has  not  real  life.  That  in
me  which  gives  up  the  flesh  for  the  spirit,  that
alone  lives.

"  And  therefore,  our  flesh  is  the  true  food  for  the
real  life.  That  only  which  in  me  consumes  my
body,  that  which  gives  up  the  fleshly  life  for  the
true  life,  that  only  is  I.  It  is  in  me,  and  I  am  in
it..  And  as  I  live  in  the  flesh  by  the  will  of  the
Father,  similarly,  that  which  lives  in  me  lives  by
my  will."

And  some  of  his  disciples,  when  they  heard  this,
said :  "  These  are  hard  words,  and  it  is  difficult  to
understand  them."

And  Jesus  said  to  them :  "  Your  ideas  are  so
confused,  that  my  sayings  as  to  what  man  was,  is,
and  always  wUl  be,  seem  difficult  to  you.  Man  is
the  spirit  in  the  flesh,  and  the  spirit  alone  gives
life,  but  the  flesh  does  not  give  life.  In  the  words
which  seem  so  difficult  to  you,  I  have  really  said
nothing  more  than  that  the  spirit  is  life."

Afterwards,  Jesus  chose  seventy  men  out  of  Ms
near  friends,  and  sent  them  into  those  places  where
he  himself  wished  to  go.     He  said  to  them :

"  Many  people  do  not  know  the  blessing  of  real
life.  I  am  sorry  for  all ;  and  wish  to  teach  all.
But  as  the  master  is  not  enough  for  the  reaping  of
his  field,  so  also  I  shall  not  sufiice.     Go  you,  then,


72


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


through  the  various  cities,  and  everywhere  proclaiiii
the  fulfilment  of  the  will  of  the  Father.

"  Say,  The  will  of  the  Father  is  in  this  :  Not  to
be  angered,  not  to  be  sensual,  not  to  swear,  not
to  resist  evil,  and  not  to  make  any  distinction  be-
tween people.  And  accordingly,  do  ye  in  every-
thing fulfil  these  commandments.

"  I  send  you  like  sheep  among  wolves.  Be  wise
as  snakes,  and  pure  as  doves.

"  Before  everything,  have  nothing  of  your  own  ;
take  nothing  with  you,  neither  wallet,  nor  bread,
nor  money  ;  only  clothes  upon  your  body,  and  shoes.
Further,  make  no  distinction  between  people ;  do
not  choose  your  hosts,  where  you  shall  put  up.
But  in  whichever  house  you  shall  come  first,  stay
there.  When  you  come  into  the  house,  greet  the
master.  If  he  welcome  you,  stay ;  if  not,  go  into
another  house.

"  For  that  which  you  shall  say,  they  will  hate  you,
and  fall  upon,  and  persecute  you.  And  when  they
shall  drive  you  out,  go  into  another  village  ;  and  if
they  all  drive  you  out  of  that,  go  yet  into  another.
They  will  persecute  you  as  wolves  hunt  sheep ;  but
do  not  quail,  suffer  to  the  last  hour.  And  they
will  take  you  into  the  courts,  and  will  try  you,
and  will  flog  you,  and  will  take  you  before  the
authorities,  that  you  may  justify  yourselves  before
them.  And  when  you  shall  be  taken  into  the
courts,  be  not  afraid  ;  and  do  not  bethink  yourselves
what  you  shall  say.  The  spirit  of  the  Father  will
speak  through  you,  what  is  needful  to  be  said.

"  You  will  not  have  passed  through  all  the  towns,


Mt.       X.  16


Lk.       A.    4.


THE   TRUE  LIFE


73


Mt.

X.  27.

26.

28.

29.

30.

31.

34.

Lk.

xii.  49.

51.

62,
63.

xiv.  26.

Mk.

iii.  22.

20.

before  people  will  have  understood  your  teachiug,
and  •will  turn  to  it.

"  And  so,  be  not  afraid.  That  which  is  hidden  in
the  souls  of  men  will  come  forth.  That  which  you
shall  say  to  two  or  three  will  spread  among
thousands.  But  chiefly,  be  not  afraid  of  those  who
may  kill  your  body.  To  your  souls,  they  can  do
nothing.  And  so,  do  not  fear  them.  But  be  afraid
lest  both  your  bodies  and  souls  be  destroyed,  by
your  abstaining  from  the  fulfilment  of  the  will  of
the  Father.  That  is  what  you  have  to  fear.  Five
sparrows  are  sold  for  a  farthing,  but  even  they
shall  not  die  without  the  Father's  will.  And  a  hair
shall  not  fall  from  the  head  without  the  Father's
will.  So  then,  what  need  you  be  afraid  of,  seeing
you  are  in  the  Father's  will  ?

"  Not  all  will  believe  in  my  teaching.  And  they
who  will  not  believe,  will  hate  it ;  because  it
bereaves  them  of  that  which  they  love,  and  strife
will  come  of  it.  My  teaching,  like  fire,  will  kindle
the  world.  And  from  it  strife  must  arise  in  the
world.  Strife  will  arise  in  every  house.  Father
against  son,  mother  against  daughter ;  and  their
kin  will  become  haters  of  them  who  understand  my
teaching,  and  they  will  be  killed.  Because,  for  him
who  shall  understand  my  teaching,  neither  his
father,  nor  his  mother,  nor  wife,  nor  children,  nor
all  his  property,  will  have  any  weight."

Then  the  learned  orthodox  gathered  at  Jerusalem,
and  went  to  Jesus.  Jesus  was  in  a  village,  and  a
crowd  of  people  thronged  into  the  place,  and  stood
around.


74


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


The  orthodox  began  to  speak  to  the  people,  in
order  that  they  might  not  believe  in  the  teaching  of
Jesus.  They  said  that  Jesus  was  possessed ;  that
if  they  should  live  by  his  commandments,  there
would  then  be  yet  more  evil  among  the  people  than
now.      They  said,  that  he  drove  out  evil  with  evil.

Jesus  called  them  to  him,  and  said :  "  You  say
that  I  drive  out  evil  with  evil.  But  no  power
destroys  itself.  If  it  destroys  itself,  then  it  would
not  be.  You  would  drive  out  evil  with  threats,
executions,  murders ;  but  evil,  nevertheless,  is  not
destroyed,  precisely  because  evil  cannot  make  head
against  itself.  But  I  drive  out  evil  by  other  means
than  you  do ;  that  is  to  say,  not  with  evil.

"  I  drive  out  evil  by  summoning  people  to  fulfil
the  will  of  the  Spirit,  the  Father,  who  gives  life  to
all.  Five  commandments  express  the  will  of  the
Spirit  which  gives  happiness  and  life.  And  these
commandments  destroy  evil.  By  their  doing  so,
you  have  a  proof  that  they  are  true.

"  If  men  were  not  sons  of  one  spirit,  it  would  not
be  possible  to  overcome  evil ;  as  it  is  not  possible
to  go  into  the  house  of  a  strong  man,  and  rob  it.
In  order  to  rob  the  house  of  a  strong  man,  it  is
necessary  first  to  bind  the  strong  man.  And  men
are  bound  thus  in  the  unity  of  the  spirit  of  life.

"  And  therefore  I  tell  you,  that  every  mistake  of
men,  and  every  wrong  interpretation,  shall  escape
punishment ;  but  false  representation  about  the
Holy  Spirit,  which  gives  life  to  all,  shall  not  be
forgiven  to  men.  Should  anyone  say  a  word  against
man,  that  is  not  important ;   but  should  anyone  say


Mt.    xii.  24.


THE    TRUE  LIFE


75


a  word  against  that  which  is  holy  in  man,  against
the  spirit,  this  cannot  pass  unpunished.  Gird  at
me  as  much  as  you  like,  but  do  not  call  evil  the
commandments  of  life  which  I  have  disclosed  to
you.  It  cannot  pass  unpunished,  if  a  man  shall
call  that  good  which  is  evil.

"  It  is  necessary  to  be  at  one  with  the  spirit  of
life.  He  who  is  not  at  one  with  it,  is  against  it.
It  is  necessary  to  serve  the  spirit  of  life  and  of  good
in  all  men,  and  not  in  oneself  alone.  You  must
either  hold  that  life  and  happiness  is  good  for  the
whole  world,  then  love  life  and  happiness  for  all
men,  or  else  hold  life  and  happiness  an  evil,  and
then  not  love  life  and  happiness  for  yourself.  You
must  either  hold  a  tree  good,  and  its  fruit  good,  or
else  hold  a  tree  bad,  and  its  fruit  bad.  Because  a
tree  is  valued  by  its  fruit."


CHAPTER  VI


THE   FALSE   LIFE


Therefore,  in  order  to  receive  the  true  life,  man  must  on  earth
resign  the  false  life  of  the  flesh,  and  live  by  the  spirit


{'


cartb,  as  in  beaven")


And  there  came  once  to  Jesus  his  mother  and
brothers,  who  could  in  no  way  get  to  see  him,
because  there  was  a  great  crowd  around  him.  And
a  man  saw  them,  and  went  up  to  Jesus,  and  said :
"  Your  family,  your  mother  and  brothers,  are  stand-
ing without,  and  wish  to  see  you."

And  Jesus  said :  "  My  mother  and  my  brothers
are  they  who  have  understood  the  will  of  the  Father,
and  fulfil  it."

And  a  woman  said :  "  Blessed  is  the  womb  that
has  brought  you  forth,  and  the  breasts  that  you
have  sucked."

Jesus  said  to  this :  "  Blessea  only  are  they  who
have  understood  the  spirit  of  the  Father,  and  keep
it."

And  a  man  said  to  Jesus :  "  I  will  follow  you
whithersoever  you  may  go."

And  Jesus  said  to  him,  in  answer :  "  You  cannot

follow  me ;  I  have  neither  house  nor  place  to  live

7e


Lk.    viii.  19.

Mt.    xii.  46.

47.


Lk.    viii.  21.


xi.  27.


28.


ix.  67.


S8.


THE  FALSE  LIFE


77


Ilk.     iv.  35.


40.


Lk.      ix.  69.


60.


in.  Wild  beasts  have  their  lairs  and  burrows,  but
man  is  everywhere  at  home,  if  he  lives  by  the
spirit."

And  it  happened  once  that  Jesus  was,  with  his
followers,  sailing  in  a  boat.  He  said :  "  Let  us
pass  over  to  the  other  side."  A  storm  arose  upon
the  lake,  and  the  boat  began  to  fill,  so  that  it
nearly  sank.  And  Jesus  lay  in  the  stern,  and  slept.
They  woke  him,  and  said :  "  Teacher,  is  it  really
all  the  same  to  you  that  we  are  perishing  ? "  And,
when  the  storm  had  fallen,  he  said :  "  Why  are  you
so  timid  ?  You  do  not  believe  in  the  life  of  the
spirit.''

Jesus  said  to  a  man :  "  Follow  me."

And  the  man  said :  "  I  have  an  aged  father,  let
me  first  bury  him,  and  then  I  will  follow  you."

And  Jesus  said  to  him :  "  Let  the  dead  bury  the
dead,  but  do  you,  if  you  wish  to  truly  live,  fulfil
the  will  of  the  Father,  and  make  that  will  known
everywhere."

And  again,  another  man  said :  "  I  wish  to  be
your  disciple,  and  will  fulfil  the  will  of  the  Father,
as  you  command,  but  let  me  first  settle  my  family."

And  Jesus  said  to  him  :  "  If  the  ploughman  looks
behind,  he  cannot  plough.  However  strong  the
reasons  you  have  to  look  behind,  so  long  as  you  look
behind,  you  cannot  plough.  You  must  forget  every-
thing except  the  furrow  you  are  driving ;  then  only
can  you  plough.  If  you  consider  as  to  what  will  be
the  outcome  for  the  life  of  the  body,  then  you  have
not  understood  the  real  life,  and  cannot  live  by  it."

After   this,  it  happened   once   that   Jesus  went


78


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


with  his  disciples  into  a  village.  And  a  woman
named  Martha  invited  him  into  her  house.  Martha
had  a  sister  named  Mary,  who  sat  at  the  feet  of
Jesus,  and  listened  to  his  teaching.  But  Martha
was  busy  getting  ready  the  meal.

And  Martha  went  up  to  Jesus,  and  said :  "  Do
you  not  see  that  my  sister  has  left  me  alone  to
serve  ?      Tell  her  to  help  me  in  the  work."

And  Jesus  said  to  her  in  answer :  "  Martha,
Martha !  you  trouble  and  busy  yourself  with  many
things,  but  only  one  thing  is  needful.  And  Mary
has  chosen  that  one  thing  which  is  needful,  and
which  none  shall  take  from  her.  For  true  life  the
food  of  the  spirit  alone  is  needful."

And  Jesus  said  to  all :  "  Whoever  wishes  to  fol-
low me,  let  him  forsake  his  own  will,  and  let  him
be  ready  for  all  hardships  and  sufferings  of  the  flesh
at  every  hour ;  then  only  can  he  follow  me.  Be-
cause he  who  wishes  to  take  heed  for  his  fleshly
life  will  destroy  the  true  life.  And  he  who  fulfils
the  will  of  the  Father,  even  if  he  destroy  the  fleshly
life,  shall  save  the  true  life.  For,  what  advantage
is  it  to  a  man  if  he  should  gain  the  whole  world,  but
destroy  or  harm  his  own  life  ? "

And  Jesus  said :  "  Beware  of  wealth,  because
your  life  does  not  depend  upon  your  having  more
than  others.

"  There  was  a  rich  man,  who  had  a  great  har-
vest of  corn.  And  he  thought  to  himself :  Let  me
rebuild  my  barns.  I  will  erect  larger  ones,  and
gather  there  all  my  wealth.  And  I  will  say  to
my  soul :    '  There,  my  soul,   you   have   everything


Lk.       X.  39.


THE  FALSE  LIFE


79


Lk.    xii.  20.


xUi.    2.


after  your  desire ;  rest,  eat,  drink,  and  live  for  your
pleasure.'  But  God  said  to  him  :  '  Fool,  this  very
night  your  soul  shall  be  taken ;  and  all  that  you
have  stored  up  shall  go  to  others.' "

"  And  thus  it  happens  with  everyone  who  pro-
vides for  the  bodily  life,  and  does  not  live  in  God."

And  Jesus  said  to  them :  "  Now,  you  say  that
Pilate  killed  the  Galileans.  But  were  these  Gali-
leans any  worse  than  other  people,  that  this  hap-
pened to  them  ?  In  no  way.  We  are  all  such,
and  we  shall  all  perish  likewise,  unless  we  find
salvation  from  death.

"  Or  of  those  eighteen  men,  whom  the  tower
crushed  in  falling,  were  they  particularly  worse
than  all  the  other  dwellers  in  Jerusalem  ?  In  no
wise.  If  v/e  do  not  find  salvation,  sooner  or  later
we  shall  perish  in  the  same  way.  If  we  have  not
yet  perished  as  they,  we  must  think  of  our  position,
thus :

"  A  man  had  an  apple-tree  growing  in  his  garden.
The  master  came  into  the  garden,  and  saw  there
was  no  fruit  on  the  tree.  And  the  master  said  to
his  gardener :  '  It  is  now  three  years  since  I  have
watched  this  apple-tree,  and  it  is  still  barren.  It
must  be  cut  down,  for  as  it  is,  it  only  spoils  the
place.  And  the  gardener  answered  :  '  Let  us  wait
yet  a  little,  master ;  let  me  dig  it  round.  I  will
dung  it,  and  let  us  see  what  it  will  be  next  summer.
Maybe  it  wiU  yield  fruit.  But  if  it  yields  nothing
by  the  summer,  well  then,  we  will  cut  it  down.'

"  Likewise  we,  as  long  as  we  Kve  by  the  flesh,
and  yield  no  fruit  to  the  life  of  the  spirit,  are  barren


8o


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


apple-trees.  Only  by  the  mercy  of  some  power  are
we  yet  left  for  a  summer.  And  if  we  do  not  yield
fruit,  we  shall  also  perish,  even  like  him  who  built
the  barn,  like  the  Galileans,  like  the  eighteen  men
crushed  by  the  tower,  and  like  all  who  yield  no
fruit ;  perishing,  dying  for  ever,  by  death.

"  In  order  to  miderstand  this,  there  is  no  need
of  special  wisdom ;  each  one  sees  this  for  himself.
For  not  only  in  domestic  affairs,  but  in  that  also
which  happens  in  the  whole  world,  are  we  able  to
reason  and  to  foresee.  If  the  wind  is  in  the  west,
we  say  there  will  be  rain,  and  so  it  happens.  But
if  the  wind  is  from  the  south,  we  say  there  will  be
fair  weather,  and  so  it  is.  How,  then,  is  it  that
we  are  able  to  foresee  the  weather,  and  yet  we
cannot  foresee  that  we  shall  all  die  and  perish,  and
that  the  only  salvation  for  us  is  in  the  life  of  the
spirit,  in  the  fulfilment  of  its  will  ?  "

And  a  great  multitude  went  with  Jesus,  and  he
once  more  said  to  all :

"  He  who  wishes  to  be  my  disciple,  let  him  count
for  nothing  father  and  mother,  and  wife  and  chil-
dren, and  brothers  and  sisters,  and  all  his  goods,
and  let  him  at  every  hour  be  ready  for  anything.
And  only  he  who  does  as  I  do,  only  he  follows  my
teaching,  and  only  he  is  saved  from  death.

"  Because  everyone,  before  beginning  anything,
will  reckon  whether  that  which  he  does  is  profitable,
and  if  it  is  profitable,  will  do  it,  but  if  unprofitable,
will  abandon  it.  Everyone  who  builds  a  house
will  first  sit  down  and  reckon  how  much  money  is
wanted,  how  much  he  has,  and  whether  that  will


THE  FALSE  LIFE


8i


Lk.    xiv.  29.


30.


32.


33.


suffice  to  finish  it.  He  will  do  this,  so  that  it  may
not  happen  that  he  should  begin  to  build,  and  not
finish,  for  people  to  laugh  at  him.

"  Likewise  also,  he  who  wishes  to  live  the  fleshly
life  must  first  reckon  whether  he  can  finish  that
with  which  he  is  busy.

"  Every  king,  if  he  wishes  to  make  war,  will  first
think  whether  he  can  go  to  war  with  ten  thousand
against  twenty  thousand.  If  he  concludes  that  he
cannot,  then  he  will  send  ambassadors,  and  make
peace,  and  will  not  make  war.  So  also,  let  every
man,  before  giving  himself  over  to  the  fleshly  life,
bethink  him  whether  he  can  wage  war  against
death,  or  whether  death  is  stronger  than  he ;  and
whether  it  is  not  then  better  for  him  to  make  peace
beforehand.

"  And  so,  each  of  you  should  first  examine  what
he  considers  his  own  family,  money,  or  estate.  And,
when  he  has  reckoned  what  all  this  avails  him,  and
understands  that  it  avails  him  nothing,  then  only
can  he  be  my  disciple."

And  upon  hearing  this,  a  man  said :  "  That  is
veiy  well,  if  there  be  indeed  a  life  of  the  spirit.
But  what  if  one  abandons  all,  and  there  be  no  such
life  ?  "

To  this  Jesus  said :  "  Not  so ;  everyone  knows
the  life  of  the  spirit.  You  all  know  it ;  but  you
do  not  do  that  which  you  know.  Not  because
you  doubt,  but  because  you  are  drawn  away  from
the  true  life  by  false  cares,  and  excuse  yourselves
from  it.

"  This  is  like  your  conduct,  like  your  deeds  :  A


82


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


master  got  ready  a  dinner,  and  sent  to  invite  guests,
but  the  guests  began  to  decline.  One  said :  '  I
have  bought  land,  and  I  must  go  and  look  after  it.'
Another  said :  '  I  have  bought  oxen,  and  I  must
try  them.'  A  third  said :  '  I  have  taken  a  wife,
and  am  going  to  celebrate  the  wedding.'  And  the
messengers  came  and  told  the  master  that  no  one
was  coming.  The  master  then  sent  the  messengers
to  invite  the  beggars.  The  beggars  did  not  refuse,
but  came.  And  when  they  were  come,  there  was
still  room  left.  And  the  master  sent  to  call  in  still
more,  and  said :  '  Go  and  persuade  all  to  come  to
my  dinner,  in  order  that  I  may  have  more  people.'
And  they  who  had  refused,  from  want  of  leisure,
found  no  place  at  the  dinner.

"  All  know  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  will  of  the
Father  gives  life,  but  do  not  go  because  the  guile
of  wealth  draws  them  away.

"  He  who  resigns  false  temporary  wealth  for  the
true  life  in  the  will  of  the  Father,  does  as  did  a
certain  clever  steward.  There  was  a  man  who  was
steward  to  a  rich  master.  This  steward  saw  that,
sooner  or  later,  the  master  would  drive  him  away,
and  that  he  would  remain  without  food,  and  without
shelter.  And  the  steward  thought  to  himself :
'  This  is  what  I  will  do :  I  will  privately  distribute
the  master's  goods  to  the  labourers ;  I  will  reduce
their  debts,  and  then,  if  the  master  drives  me  out,
the  labourers  will  remember  my  kindness,  and  will
not  abandon  me.'  And  so  the  steward  did.  He
called  the  labourers,  his  master's  debtors,  and
re-wrote  their  documents.     For  him  who  owed  a


Lk.    xiv.  18.


THE  FALSE  LIFE


83


Lk.    x^T,    R.


16.


16.


17.


hundred  he  wrote  fifty ;  for  him  who  owed  sixty,
he  wrote  twenty,  and  similarly  for  the  rest.  And
the  master  learned  this,  and  said  to  himself :  '  Well,
he  has  done  wisely ;  otherwise  he  would  have  had
to  beg  his  bread.  To  me  he  has  caused  a  loss,  but
his  own  reckoning  was  wise.'

"  For,  in  the  fleshly  life,  we  all  understand
wherein  is  the  true  reckoning,  but  in  the  life  of
the  spirit,  we  do  not  wish  to  understand.  Thus
must  we  do  with  unjust,  false  wealth, — give  it
up,  in  order  to  receive  the  life  of  the  spirit.  And
if  we  regret  to  give  up  such  trifles  as  wealth  for
the  life  of  the  spirit,  then  this  life  will  not  be
given  us.  If  we  do  not  give  up  false  wealth,  then
our  own  true  life  will  not  be  given  us.

"  It  is  impossible  to  serve  two  masters  at  one
time ;  to  serve  God  and  Wealth,  the  will  of  the
Father,  and  one's  own  will.  Either  one  or  the
other."

And  the  orthodox  heard  this.  But  loving  wealth,
they  jeered  at  him.

And  he  said  to  them :  "  You  think  that,  because
men  honour  you  on  account  of  wealth,  you  are
really  honourable.  It  is  not  so.  God  does  not
look  at  the  exterior,  but  looks  at  the  heart.  That
which  stands  high  among  men,  is  abomination  in
the  eyes  of  God.  Now  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is
attainable  on  earth,  and  great  are  they  who  enter
it.  But  there  enter  it,  not  the  rich,  but  those  who
have  nothing.  And  this  has  always  been  so,  both
according  to  your  law,  and  according  to  Moses,  and
according    to    the    prophets    also.     Listen.      How


84


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


does  it  stand  with  rich  and  poor  in  your  way  of
thinking  ?

"  There  was  a  rich  man.  He  dressed  well,  led
an  idle  and  amusing  life  every  day.  And  there
was  a  vagrant,  Lazarus,  covered  with  sores.  And
Lazarus  came  to  the  yard  of  the  rich  man,  and
thought  there  would  be  leavings  from  the  rich
man's  table,  but  Lazarus  did  not  get  even  the
leavings,  the  rich  man's  dogs  ate  up  everything,
and  even  licked  Lazarus'  sores.  And  both  these
died,  Lazarus  and  the  rich  man.  And  in  Hades,
the  rich  man  saw,  far  off,  Abraham ;  and  behold,
Lazarus,  the  beggar,  was  sitting  with  him.  And
the  rich  man  said :  '  Father  Abraham,  see,  Lazarus
the  beggar  is  sitting  with  you.  He  used  to  wallow
under  my  fence,  I  dare  not  trouble  you,  but  send
Lazarus  the  beggar  to  me  ;  let  him  but  wet  his
finger  in  water,  to  cool  my  throat,  because  I  am
burning  in  the  fire.'  But  Abraham  said :  '  But
why  should  I  send  Lazarus  into  the  fire  to  you  ?
You,  in  that  other  world,  had  what  you  wished,
but  Lazarus  only  saw  grief ;  so  that  he  ought  now
to  be  happy.  Yes,  and  though  I  should  like  to
help  you,  I  cannot,  because  between  us  and  you
there  is  a  great  pit,  and  it  is  impossible  to  cross  it.
We  are  living,  but  you  are  dead.'  Then  the  rich
man  said :  '  Well,  Father  Abraham,  send  Lazarus
the  beggar  to  my  home.  I  have  five  brothers ;  I
am  sorry  for  them.  Let  him  tell  everything  to
them,  and  show  how  harmful  wealth  is ;  so  that
they  may  not  fall  into  this  torture.'  But  Abraham
said :  '  As  it  is,  they  know  the  harm.     They  were


Lk.  xvi.  19.
20.
21.


THE  FALSE  LIFE


85


Lk.    xvi.  \


Mk.      *.  17.


18.


21.


told  of  it  by  Moses,  and  by  all  the  prophets.'  But
the  rich  man  said :  '  Still,  it  would  be  better  if
someone  should  rise  from  the  dead,  and  go  to
them ;  they  would  the  sooner  bethink  themselves.'
But  Abraham  said :  '  But  if  they  do  not  listen  to
Moses  and  the  prophets,  then,  even  if  a  dead  man
came  to  life,  they  would  not  listen,  even  to  him.' "

"  That  one  should  share  all  with  one's  brother,
and  do  good  to  everybody ;  this  all  men  know.
And  the  whole  law  of  Moses,  and  all  the  prophets,
said  only  this :  '  You  know  this  truth,  but  cannot
do  it,  because  you  love  wealth.' "

And  a  rich  oflicial  among  the  orthodox  went  up
to  Jesus,  and  said  to  him :  "  You  are  a  good
teacher,  what  shall  I  do  to  receive  everlasting
life  ? "

Jesus  said  :  "  Why  do  you  call  me  good  ?  Only
the  Father  is  good.  But,  if  you  wish  to  have  life
fulfil  the  commandments."

The  official  said :  "  There  are  many  command-
ments ;  which  do  you  mean  ?  "

And  Jesus  said  :  "  Do  not  kill,
adultery,  Do  not  lie.  Do  not  steal,
your   Father,  and   fulfil  His  will ;
neighbour  as  yourself."

But  the  orthodox  official  said :  '
mandments  I  have  fulfilled    from
but  I  ask,  what  else  must   one  do,
your  teaching  ? "

Jesus  looked  at  him,  at  his  rich  dress,  and
smiled,  and  said :  "  One  small  thing  you  have  left
undone.     You  have   not  fulfilled  that  which  you


Do  not  commit

Further,  honour

and  love  your

'  All  these  com-
my  childhood ;
according   to


86


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


say.  If  you  wish  to  fulfil  these  commandments :
Do  not  kill,  Do  not  commit  adultery,  Do  not  steal.
Do  not  lie,  and,  above  all,  the  commandment :  Love
your  neighbour  as  yourself, — then,  at  once  sell  all
your  goods,  and  give  them  to  the  poor.  Then  you
will  have  fulfilled  the  Father's  will."

Having  heard  this,  the  official  frowned,  and
went  away,  because  he  was  loth  to  part  with  his
estates.

And  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples :  "  As  you  see,  it
is  in  no  wise  possible  to  be  rich,  and  to  fulfil  the
Father's  will."

The  disciples  were  horrified  at  these  words,  so
Jesus  once  more  repeated  them,  and  said :  "  Yes,
children,  he  who  has  his  own  property,  cannot  be
in  the  will  of  the  Father.  Sooner  may  a  camel
pass  through  a  needle's  eye  than  he  who  trusts  in
wealth  fulfil  the  will  of  the  Father."  And  they
were  still  more  horrified,  and  said :  "  "But,  in  that
case,  is  it  at  all  possible  to  keep  one's  life  ? "

He  said :  "  To  man  it  seems  impossible  to
support  one's  life  without  property ;  but  God,  even
without  property,  can  support  a  man's  life."

Once,  Jesus  was  going  through  the  town  of
Jericho.  And  in  this  town  was  the  chief  of  the
tax-gatherers,  a  rich  man  named  Zacchteus.  This
Zacchffius  had  heard  of  the  teaching  of  Jesus,  and
believed  in  it.  And  when  he  knew  that  Jesus  was
in  Jericho,  he  wished  to  see  him.  But  there  were
80  many  people  around,  that  it  was  impossible  to
push  through  to  him.  Zacchjeus  was  short  of
stature.      So  he  ran  ahead  and  cHmbed  a  tree,  in


X.  22.


24.
25.


Lk.  xviii.  25.


27.


THE  FALSE  LIFE


87


Lk.    xix.    5.


10.


Mk.  xii.  41.


order  to  see  Jesus  as  he  was  going  past.  And
thus,  in  passing  by,  Jesus  saw  him,  and  having
learnt  that  he  believed  his  teaching,  said :  "  Come
down  from  the  tree,  and  go  home ;  I  will  come  to
youi-  house."  Zacchseus  cKmbed  down,  ran  home,
made  ready  to  meet  Jesus,  and  joyfully  welcomed
him.

The  people  began  to  criticise,  and  to  say  of
Jesus :  "  See,  he  has  gone  into  the  tax-gatherer's
house, — the  house  of  a  rogue."

Meanwhile,  Zacchtuus  said  to  Jesus :  "  See,  sir,
this  is  what  I  will  do.  I  will  give  away  half  of
my  goods  to  the  poor,  and  out  of  what  is  left  I
will  repay  fourfold  those  whom  I  have  wronged."

And  Jesus  said :  "  Now  you  have  saved  yourself.
You  were  dead,  and  are  alive ;  you  were  lost,  and
are  found ;  because  you  have  done  as  Abraham  did,
when  he  wished  to  slay  his  son ;  you  have  shewn
your  faith.  Therein  is  the  whole  business  of  man's
life ;  to  seek  out  and  save  in  his  soul  that  which  is
perishing.  But  such  sacrifice  as  yours  must  not  be
measured  by  its  amount."

It  happened  once  that  Jesus  and  his  disciples
were  sitting  opposite  a  collecting  -  box.  People
were  placing  their  contributions  in  the  box,  for
God's  service.  Eich  people  went  up  to  the  box,
and  put  in  much.  And  a  poor  woman,  a  widow,
came  and  put  in  two  farthings.

And  Jesus  pointed  her  out,  and  said  :  "  See,  now,
this  poor  widow  has  put  two  farthings  in  the  box.
She  has  put  in  more  than  all.  Because  they  put
in  that  which   they  did  not  need   for   their   own


88


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


livelihood,  while  this  woman  has  put  all  that  she
had ;  she  has  put  in  her  whole  life."

It  happened  that  Jesus  was  in  the  house  of
Simon  the  leper.  And  a  woman  came  into  the
house.  And  the  woman  had  a  vase  of  precious  oil,
worth  fifteen  pounds.  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples,
that  his  death  was  near.  The  woman  heard  this,
and  pitied  Jesus,  and,  to  show  him  her  love,  wished
to  anoint  his  head  with  the  oil.  And  she  forgot
everything,  and  broke  the  vase,  and  anointed  his
head  and  feet,  and  poured  out  all  the  oil.

And  the  disciples  began  to  discuss  among  them-
selves, thinking  that  she  had  done  wrong.  And
Judas,  he  who  afterwards  betrayed  Jesus,  said :
"  See  how  much  good  stuff  has  gone  for  nothing.
This  oil  might  have  been  sold  for  fifteen  pounds,
with  which,  how  many  poor  might  have  been
helped !  "  And  the  disciples  began  blaming  the
woman ;  who  was  troubled,  and  did  not  know
whether  she  had  done  well  or  ilk

Then  Jesus  said  :  "  You  are  troubling  the  woman
without  cause.  She  has,  indeed,  done  a  good  work,
and  you  mistakenly  think  of  the  poor.  If  you
wish  to  do  good  to  the  poor,  do  so ;  they  are
always  with  you.  But  why  caU  them  to  mind
now  ?  If  you  pity  the  poor,  go  with  your  pity,
do  them  good.  But  she  has  pitied  me,  and  done
real  good,  because  she  has  given  away  all  that  she
had.  Who  of  you  can  know  what  is  useful,  and
what  is  not  necessary  ?  How  do  you  know  that
there  was  no  need  to  pour  the  oil  over  me  ?  She
has  thus  anointed  me  with  oil,  and  if  it  were  but


Mt.  xxvi   C.


THE  FALSE  LIFE


Mt.  xxvL  13.


to  get  ready  my  body  for  burial,  this  was  needful.
She  truly  fulfilled  the  will  of  the  Father,  in
forgetting  herself  and  pitying  another.  She  forgot
the  reckonings  of  the  flesh  and  gave  away  all  that
she  had."

And  Jesus  said  :  "  My  teaching  is  the  fulfilment
of  the  Father's  will ;  and  the  Father's  will  can  be
fulfilled  by  deeds  only ;  not  by  mere  words.  If  a
man's  son,  in  answer  to  his  father's  bidding,  keeps
saying,  '  I  obey,  I  obey,'  but  does  nothing  which
his  father  bids,  he  then  does  not  fulfil  the  will  of
his  father.  But  if  another  son  keeps  saying,  '  I  do
not  wish  to  obey,'  and  then  goes  and  does  his
father's  bidding,  he  indeed  fulfils  the  father's  will.
And  so  with  men :  Not  he  is  in  the  Father's  will
who  says :  '  I  am  in  the  Father's  will, — -but  he  who
does  that  which  the  Father  wishes."


CHAPTER  VII


I   AND   THE    FATHER    ARE   ONE


The  true  food  of  everlasting  life  is  the  fulfilment  of  the
Father's  will

("©(ve  US  tbts  Ciag  our  &ailg  breaD")

After  this  the  Jews  tried  to  condemn  Jesus  to
death,  and  Jesus  went  away  into  Galilee,  and  lived
with  his  relations.

The  Jewish  feast  of  tabernacles  was  come.  And
the  brothers  of  Jesus  got  ready  to  go  to  the  feast,
and  invited  him  to  go  with  them.  They  did  not
believe  in  his  teaching,  and  said  to  him  :

"  Now,  you  say  that  the  Jewish  service  of  God  is
wrong,  that  you  know  the  real  service  of  God  by
deeds.  If  you  really  think  that  no  one  but  your-
self knows  the  true  service  of  God,  then  come  with
us  to  the  feast.  Many  people  will  be  there,  and
you  can  declare  before  them  all  that  the  teaching
of  Moses  is  wrong.  If  all  believe  yon,  then  it  will
be  clear  to  your  disciples  also,  that  you  are  right.
Why  make  a  secret  of  it  ?  You  say  that  our  ser-
vice is  wrong,  that  you  know  the  true  service  of
God ;  well  then,  show  it  to  all."

And  Jesus  said :  "  For  you,  there  is  a  special  time

90


Jn.     vii.    1.


5.
3.


/  AND   THE  FATHER  ARE   ONE


91


Jn.     Yii.


18.


21.


and  place  m  which  to  serve  God ;  but  for  me,  there
is  none.  I  always  and  everywhere  work  for  God.
This  is  just  what  I  show  to  people.  I  show  to
them  that  their  service  of  God  is  wrong,  and  there-
fore do  they  hate  me.  Go  you  to  the  feast,  and  I
will  go  when  I  think  fit."

And  the  brothers  went,  but  he  remained  behind,
and  only  came  up  at  the  middle  of  the  feast.  And
the  Jews  were  shocked  at  his  not  honouring  their
feast,  and  delaying  to  come.  And  they  discussed
his  teaching  much.  Some  said  that  he  spoke  the
truth,  while  others  said  that  he  only  disturbed  the
people.

At  the  middle  of  the  feast,  Jesus  entered  the
temple,  and  began  to  teach  the  people  that  their
service  of  God  was  wrong;  that  God  should  be
served  not  in  the  temple  and  by  sacrifices,  but  in
the  spirit,  and  by  deeds.  All  listened  to  him,  and
wondered  that  he  knew  the  whole  of  wisdom  with-
out having  learnt.  And  Jesus,  having  heard  that
all  wondered  at  his  wisdom,  said  to  them :

"  My  teaching  is  not  my  own,  but  His  who  sent
me.  If  anyone  wishes  to  fulfil  the  will  of  the
Spitit  which  sent  us  into  life,  he  will  know  that  I
have  not  invented  this  teaching,  but  that  it  is  of
God.  Because  he  who  invents  from  himself,  follows
his  own  mere  imaginations ;  but  he  who  seeks  the
mind  of  Him  who  sent  him,  he  is  right,  and  there  is
no  wrong  in  him.

"  Your  law  of  Moses  is  not  the  Father's  law,
and,  therefore,  they  who  follow  it  do  not  fulfil  the
Father's  law,  but  work  evil  and  falsehood.     I  teach


92


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


you  the  fulfilment  of  the  will  of  the  Father  alone,
and  in  my  teaching  there  cannot  be  contradiction.
But  your  written  law  of  Moses  is  all  full  of  contra-
dictions. Do  not  judge  by  outside  appearance,  but
judge  by  the  spirit."

And  some  said :  "  While  he  has  been  called  a
false  prophet,  see,  he  condemns  the  law,  and  no
one  makes  a  charge  against  him.  Maybe  in  very
deed  he  is  a  true  prophet ;  maybe  even  the  author-
ities have  acknowledged  him.  Only  one  reason  makes
it  impossible  to  believe  him,  namely,  that  it  is  said,
when  he  who  is  sent  from  God  shall  come,  no  one
will  know  whence  he  is  come;  but  we  know  this
man's  birth,  and  all  his  family."

The  people  still  did  not  understand  his  teaching,
and  still  sought  proofs.

Then  Jesus  said  to  them :  "  You  know  me,  and
whence  I  am,  after  the  flesh.  But  you  do  not  know
whence  I  am,  after  the  spirit.  You  do  not  know
Him,  from  whom  I  am  according  to  the  spirit ;  and
that  is  the  only  needful  knowledge.  If  I  had  said
that  I  am  Christ,  you  would  have  believed  me,  the
Man,  but  you  would  not  have  believed  the  Father
who  is  in  me,  and  in  you.  But  it  is  necessary  to
believe  the  Father  only.

"  I  am  here  among  you  for  the  short  space  of
my  life.  I  point  out  to  you  the  way  to  that  source
of  life,  from  which  I  have  come  forth.  And  you
ask  of  me  proofs,  and  wish  to  condemn  me.  If
you  do  not  know  the  way,  then,  when  I  shall  be  no
more,  you  will  in  nowise  find  it.  You  must  not
discuss  me,  but  must  follow  me.      Whoever   shall


Jn.     vii.  2a

23.


/  AND    THE  FATHER  ARE   ONE


93


Jn.      vii.  37.
38.


47.


48.
49.


60.
61.


do  that  which  I  say,  he  shall  know  whether  what
I  say  is  true.  He  for  whom  the  fleshly  life  has
not  become  the  food  of  the  spirit,  he  who  follows
not  the  truth,  thirsting  for  it  as  for  water,  can-
not understand  me.  But  he  who  thirsts  for  the
truth,  let  him  come  to  me  to  drink.  And  he
who  shall  believe  in  my  teaching  shall  receive
the  true  life.  He  shall  receive  the  life  of  the
spirit."

And  many  believed  in  his  teaching,  and  said :
"  That  which  he  says  is  the  truth  and  is  of  God."
Others  did  not  understand  him,  and  still  sought  in
prophecies  for  proofs  that  he  was  sent  from  God.
And  many  disputed  with  him,  but  none  could
controvert  him.  The  learned  orthodox  sent  their
assistants  to  contend  with  him,  but  their  assistants
returned  to  the  orthodox  priests,  and  said  :  "  We  can
do  nothing  with  him."

And  the  high  priests  said  to  them :  "  But  why
have  you  not  convicted  him?"  And  they  answered  :
"  Never  did  any  man  speak  as  he."

Then  the  orthodox  said  :  "  It  signifies  nothing  that
it  is  impossible  to  controvert  him,  and  that  the
people  believe  in  his  teaching.  We  do  not  believe,
and  none  of  the  authorities  believe.  But  the  people
is  cursed,  they  were  always  stupid  and  unlearned ;
they  believe  everyone."

And  Nicodemus,  the  man  to  whom  Jesus  ex-
plained his  teaching,  said  to  the  high  priests  :  "  It  is
impossible  to  condemn  a  man  without  having  heard
him  to  the  end,  without  understanding  whither  he
is  leading."     But  they  said  to  him :  "  It  is  useless


94


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


to  discuss,  or  pay  any  attention  to  this  affair.     We
know  that  a  prophet  cannot  come  from  Galilee."

At  another  time,  Jesus  was  speaking  with  the
orthodox,  and  said  to  them :  "  There  can  be  no
proofs  of  the  truth  of  my  teaching,  as  there  cannot
be  of  the  illumination  of  light.  My  teaching  is  the
real  light,  by  which  people  tell  what  is  good  and
what  is  bad,  and  therefore  it  is  impossible  to  prove
my  teaching ;  which  itself  proves  everything.  Who-
ever shall  follow  me  shall  not  be  in  darkness,  but
shall  have  life.  Life  and  enlightenment,  which  are
one  and  the  same."

But  the  orthodox  said  :  "  You  alone  say  this."
And  he  answered  them,  and  said :  "  And  if  I
alone  say  this,  yet  I  am  right ;  because  I  know
whence  I  came,  and  whither  I  go.  According  to
my  teaching,  there  is  reason  in  life ;  whereas,
according  to  yours,  there  is  none.  Besides  this,
not  I  alone  teach,  but  my  Father,  the  Spirit,  teaches
the  same."

They  said :  "  Where  is  your  Father  ? "
He  said  :  "  You  do  not  understand  my  teaching,
and  therefore  you  do  not  know  my  Father.  You
do  not  know  whence  you  are  and  whither  you  go.
I  lead  you,  but  you,  instead  of  following  me,  dis-
cuss who  I  am.  Therefore  you.  cannot  come  to  that
salvation  of  life  to  which  I  lead  you.  And  you
will  periish,  if  you  remain  in  this  error,  and  do  not
follow  me."

And  the  Jews  asked :  "  Who  are  you  ? "
He  said:  "From  the  very  beginning,  I   tell  you,
I  am  the  Son  of  Man,  acknowledging  the  Spirit  as


Jn.    viii.  12,


/  AND    THE  FATHER  ARE   ONE


95


Jn.    viii.  26.
28.


23.


a.


34.


36.


37.


my  Father.  That  which  I  have  understood  of  the
Father,  the  same  I  tell  to  the  world.  And  when
you  shall  exalt  in  yourselves  the  Son  of  Man,  then
you  shall  know  what  I  am  ;  Lecause  I  do  and  speak,
not  of  myself,  as  a  man,  but  I  do  and  speak  that
which  the  Father  has  taught  me.  This  I  say,  this  I
teach.

"  And  he  who  sent  me  is  always  with  me ;  and
the  Father  has  not  left  me,  because  I  do  His  will.
Whoever  will  keep  to  my  understanding  of  life,
whoever  will  fulfil  the  will  of  the  Father,  he  will  be
truly  taught  by  me.  In  order  to  know  the  truth,  it  is
necessary  to  do  good  to  men.  He  who  does  evil  to
men,  loves  darkness,  and  goes  into  it ;  he  who  does
good  to  men,  goes  to  the  light ;  so  that,  in  order  to
understand  my  teaching,  it  is  necessary  to  d(j  good
deeds.  He  who  shall  do  good,  shall  know  the
truth;  he  shall  be  free  from  evil  and  death.  Be-
cause everyone  who  errs  becomes  the  slave  of  his
error.

"  And  as  the  slave  does  not  always  live  in  the
house  of  the  master,  while  the  sou  of  the  master  is
always  in  the  house,  so  also  a  man,  if  he  errs  in  his
life  and  becomes  a  slave  through  his  errors,  does  not
live  always,  but  dies.  Only  he  who  is  in  the  truth
remains  always  living.  The  truth  is  in  this,  to  be
not  a  slave,  but  a  son.  So  that,  if  you  err,  you  will
be  slaves  and  die.  But  if  you  are  in  the  truth,
then  you  shall  be  free  sons,  and  shall  be  living.

"  You  say  of  yourselves  that  you  are  sons  of
Abraham,  that  you  know  the  truth.  But  see,  you
wish  to  kill  me,  because  you  do  not  understand  my


96


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


teaching.  It  comes  to  this,  tliat  I  speak  that  which
I  have  understood  from  my  Father,  and  you  wish
to  do  that  which  you  have  understood  from  your
father."

They  said :  "  Our  father  is  Abraham."

Jesus  said  to  them :  "  If  you  were  the  sons  of
Abraham  you  would  do  his  deeds.  But  see,  you
wish  to  kill  me  because  I  told  you  that  which  I
had  learnt  from  God.  Abraham  did  not  do  in  that
way;  therefore  you  do  not  serve  God,  but  serve
your  father,  another  one."

They  said  to  him :  "  We  are  not  bastards,  but  we
are  all  children  of  our  Father,  all  sons  of  God."

And  Jesus  said  to  them  :  "  If  your  father  were
one  with  me,  you  would  love  me,  because  I  came
forth  from  that  Father.  For  I  was  not  born  of
myself.  You  are  not  children  of  the  one  Father
with  me,  therefore  you  do  not  understand  my
word ;  my  understanding  of  life  does  not  find  place
in  you.  If  I  am  of  the  Father,  and  you  of  the
same  Father,  then  you  cannot  wish  to  kill  me.
But  if  you  wish  to  kill  me,  then  we  are  not  of  one
Father.

I  am  from  the  Father  of  good,  from  God ;  but
you  are  from  the  devil,  from  the  father  of  evil.
You  wish  to  do  the  lusts  of  your  father  the  devil,
who  is  always  a  murderer,  and  a  liar,  with  no  truth
in  him.  If  he,  the  devil,  says  anything,  he  says
what  is  of  himself,  and  not  common  to  all,  and  he
is  the  father  of  lying.  Therefore  you  are  the  ser-
vants of  the  devil  and  his  children.  Now  you  see
how  plainly  you  are  convicted  of  error.      If  I  err,


Jn.    viii.  3a


/  AND    THE  FATHER  ARE   ONE


97


Jn.    viii.  48.


then  convict  nie ;  but  if  there  is  no  error  in  me,
then  why  do  you  not  believe  in  me  ? "

And  the  Jewa  began  to  revile  him,  and  to  say
he  was  possessed.

He  said  :  "  I  am  not  possessed  ;  but  I  honour  the
Father,  and  you  wish  to  kill  me ;  therefore  you
are  not  brothers  of  mine,  but  children  of  another
father.  It  is  not  I  that  affirm  that  I  am  right,
but  the  truth  speaks  for  me.  Therefore  I  repeat
to  you :  he  who  shall  comprehend  my  teaching  and
perform  it,  shall  not  see  death."

And  the  Jews  said :  "  Well,  do  not  we  speak  the
truth  in  saying  that  you  are  a  Samaritan  possessed,
and  that  you  convict  yourself?  The  prophets  died,
Abraham  died ;  but  you  say  that  he  who  performs
your  teiching  shall  not  see  death.  Abraham  died,
and  shall  you  not  die  ?  Or  are  you  greater  than
Abraham  ? "

The  Jews  were  still  discussing  as  to  whether  he,
Jesus  of  Galilee,  was  an  important  prophet,  or  un-
important, and  forgot  that  he  had  told  them,  that
he  said  nothing  of  himself  as  a  man,  but  spoke  of
the  spirit  that  was  within  him.

And  Jesus  said :  "  I  do  not  make  myself  to  be
anything.  If  I  spoke  of  myself,  of  that  which  only
seems  to  me,  then  all  that  I  should  say  would  mean
nothing.  But  there  is  that  source  of  everything
which  you  call  God ;  well,  it  is  of  Him  that  I  speak.
But  you  have  not  known,  and  do  not  know  the  true
God.  But  I  know  Him,  and  I  cannot  say  that  I  do
not  know  Him ;  I  should  be  a  liar  like  you,  if  I  said
that  I  do  not  know  Him.     I  know  Him,  and  know


98


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


His  will,  and  fulfil  it.  Abraham,  your  father,  saw
and  rejoiced  over  my  understanding."

The  Jews  said :  "  You  are  only  thirty  years  old,
how  were  you  living  at  the  same  time  as  Abraham  ?  "

He  said :  "  Before  Abraham  was,  there  was  the
understanding  of  good,  there  was  that  which  I  tell
you."

Then  the  Jews  picked  up  stones  in  order  to  kill
him,  but  he  went  away  from  them.

Jesus  said :  "  My  teaching  is  the  awakening  of
life.  He  who  believes  in  my  teaching,  notwith-
standing that  he  dies  in  the  flesh,  remains  living,
and  everyone  who  lives  and  believes  in  me  shall
not  die."

And  yet  a  third  time,  Jesus  taught  the  people;
he  said :  "  Men  surrender  themselves  to  my  teach-
ing, not  because  I  myself  prove  it.  It  is  impossible
to  prove  the  truth.  The  truth  itself  proves  all  the
rest.  But  men  surrender  to  my  teaching,  because
there  is  no  other  than  it ;  it  is  known  to  men,  and
promises  life.

"  My  teachiag  is  to  men  as  the  shepherd's  familiar
voice  is  to  the  sheep,  when  he  comes  among  them
through  the  door,  and  gathers  them,  to  lead  them  to
the  pasture.  But  your  teaching,  no  one  believes  ;  be-
cause it  is  foreign  to  them,  and  because  they  see  in
it  your  own  lusts.  It  is  with  men  as  with  sheep,  at
the  sight  of  a  man  who  does  not  enter  by  the  door,
but  climbs  over  the  fence.  The  sheep  do  not  know
him,  but  feel  that  he  is  a  robber.  My  teaching  is
the  only  true  teaching;  like  the  one  door  for  the
sheep.     All  your  teachings  of  the  law  of  Moses  are


Jn.    viii.  56.


/  AND    THE  FATHER  ARE   ONE


99


Jn.       X.    9.


12.


lies,  they  are  all  like  thieves  and  robbers  to  the
sheep.  He  who  shall  give  himself  up  to  my  teach-
ing shall  find  true  life  ;  just  as  the  sheep  go  forth
and  find  food,  if  they  follow  the  shepherd.

"  A  thief  only  comes  to  steal,  rob,  and  destroy,
but  the  shepherd  comes  to  give  life.  And  my
teaching  alone  promises,  and  gives  the  true  hfe.

'  There  are  shepherds  to  whom  the  sheep  are
the  chief  interest  in  life,  and  who  give  up  their
lives  for  the  sheep.  These  are  true  shepherds.  And
there  are  hirelings  who  do  not  care  about  the  sheep,
because  they  are  hirelings,  and  the  sheep  are  not
theirs ;  so  that  if  a  wolf  comes  they  abandon  their
charge  and  flee  from  them,  and  the  wolf  devours
the  sheep.  These  are  false  shepherds.  And  so
there  are  false  teachers,  such  as  have  no  concern
with  the  life  of  people ;  while  true  teachers  give
up  their  lives  for  the  life  of  men.

"  I  am  such  a  teacher.  My  teaching  is  this, —
to  give  up  one's  life  for  the  life  of  men.  No  one
shall  take  my  life  from  me,  but  I  myself  freely  give
it  up  for  men,  in  order  to  receive  true  life.  The
connnandment  to  do  tliis  I  received  from  my  Father.
And  as  my  Father  knows  me,  so  I  also  know  Him ;
and  therefore  I  lay  down  my  life  for  men.  There-
fore the  Father  loves  me,  because  I  fulfil  His  com-
mandments.

"  And  all  men,  not  only  those  here  now,  but  all
men,  shall  understand  my  voice  ;  and  all  sliall  come
together  into  one,  and  all  men  shall  be  one,  and
their  teaching  one."

And  the  Jews  surrounded  him,  and  said :  "  All


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


that  you  Scay  is  difficult  to  understand,  and  does  not
agree  with  oiir  writings.  Do  not  torment  us,  but
simply  and  straightforwardly  tell  us,  whether  you
are  that  Messiah  who,  according  to  our  writings,
should  come  into  the  world."

And  Jesus  answered  them  :  "  I  have  already  told
you  who  I  am,  but  you  do  not  believe.  If  you  do
not  believe  my  word,  then  believe  my  works ;  by
them  understand  who  I  am,  and  wherefore  I  am  come.

"  But  you  do  not  believe  me,  because  you  do  not
follow  me.  He  who  follows  me,  and  does  that
which  I  say,  he  understands  me.  And  he  who
understands  my  teaching  and  fulfils  it,  receives
the  true  life.  My  Father  has  united  them  with
me,  and  no  one  can  disunite  us.  I  and  the  Father
are  one."

And  the  Jews  were  offended  at  this,  and  took
up  stones  to  kill  him.

But  he  said  to  them :  "  I  have  shown  you  many
good  works,  and  have  disclosed  the  teaching  of  my
Father.  For  which,  then,  of  these  good  works  do  you
wish  to  stone  me  ? "

They  said  :  "  Not  for  the  good  do  we  wish  to  stone
you ;  but  because  you,  a  man,  make  yourself  God."

And  Jesus  answered  them:  "Why,  this  is  just
what  is  written  in  your  writings,  where  it  says  that
God  Himself  said  to  the  wicked  rulers :  '  You  are
gods.'  If  He  called  even  vicious  men  gods,  then
why  do  you  consider  it  sacrilege  to  call  that  the
son  of  God,  which  God  in  His  love  sent  into  the
world  ?  Every  man  in  the  spirit  is  the  son  of
God.      If  I  do  not  live  in  God's  way,  then  do  not


Jn.


/  AND    THE  FATHER   ARE    ONE


X.  38.


xvi.  13.


17.


believe  that  I  am  a  son  of  God.  But  if  I  live
after  God's  way,  then  believe  from  my  life  that  I
am  in  the  Father,  and  then  you  will  understand
that  the  Father  is  in  me  and  I  in  Him."

And  the  Jews  began  to  dispute.  Some  said  that
he  was  possessed,  and  others  said :  "  A  man  who  is
possessed  cannot  enlighten  men."  And  they  did
not  know  what  to  do  with  him,  and  could  not  con-
demn him.  And  he  went  again  across  the  Jordan,
and  remained  there.  And  many  believed  in  his
teaching,  and  said  that  it  was  true,  as  the  teaching
of  John  was.     Therefore  many  believed  in  it.

And  Jesus  once  said  to  his  disciples :  "  Tell  me
how  the  people  understand  my  teaching  about  the
son  of  God  and  the  son  of  man."

They  said :  "  Some  understand  it  like  the  teaching
of  John,  others  like  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  ;  others,
again,  say  that  it  is  like  the  teaching  of  Jeremiah.
They  understand  that  you  are  a  prophet."

"  And  how  do  you  understand  my  teaching  ? "

And  Simon  Peter  said  to  him  :  "  In  my  opinion,
your  teaching  consists  in  this,  that  you  are  the
chosen  Son  of  the  God  of  Life.  You  teach  that
God  is  the  life  in  man."

And  Jesus  said  to  him  :  "  Happy  are  you,  Simon,
that  you  have  understood  this.  No  man  could  dis-
close this  to  you;  but  you  have  understood  this,
because  God  in  you  has  disclosed  it  to  you.  Not
fleshly  understanding,  and  not  I,  my  words,  have
disclosed  this  to  you;  but  God  my  Father  has
directly  disclosed  it.  And  upon  this  is  founded
that  society  of  men  for  whom  there  is  no  death."


CHAPTER  VIII


LIFE    IS    NOT    TEMPORAL
Therefore  true  life  is  to  be  liued  in  the  present

rzbis  &aB")

Jesus  said :  "  He  who  is  not  ready  for  all  fleshly
sufferings  and  bereavements,  has  not  understood
me.  He  who  shall  obtain  all  that  is  best  for  the
fleshly  life,  shall  destroy  the  true  life  ;  he  who  shall
destroy  his  fleshly  life  in  fulfilling  my  teaching,
shall  receive  the  true  life."

And  in  answer  to  these  words,  Peter  said  to
him :  "  See,  we  have  listened  to  you,  have  thrown
off  all  cares  and  property,  and  have  followed  you.
What  reward  shall  we  have  for  this  ? "

And  Jesus  said  to  him :  "  Everyone  who  has
abandoned  home,  sisters,  brothers,  father,  mother,
wife,  children,  and  his  fields,  for  my  teaching,  shall
receive  a  hundredfold  more  than  sisters  and  brothers
and  fields,  and  all  that  is  needful  in  this  life;  and
besides  this,  he  receives  life  beyond  the  power  of
time.  There  are  no  rewards  in  the  kingdom  of
heaven,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  its  own  aim  and
reward.  In  the  kingdom  of  God  all  are  equal,
there  is  neither  first  nor  last.

102


Mt.       X.  38.


xix.  27.


Mk.      X.  29,
30.


LIFE  IS  NOT  TEMPORAL


103


Mt.    XX.    1.


14.


20.
Mk.       A.  36.


Mt.     XX.  21.


22.


"  Because  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  this.
The  master  of  a  house  went  in  the  early  morning
to  hire  labourers  for  his  grounds.  He  hired  labourers
at  a  penny  a  day,  and  set  them  to  work  in  the
garden.  And  he  again  went  at  mid-day  and  hired
more,  and  sent  them  into  the  garden  to  work ;  and
at  evening  he  hired  still  more,  and  sent  them  to
work.  And  with  them  all  he  agreed  at  a  penny.
The  time  came  for  the  reckoning.  And  the  master
ordered  all  to  be  paid  alike.  First,  those  who  came
last ;  and  afterwards,  the  first.  And  the  first  saw
that  the  last  received  each  a  penny.  And  they
thought  that  they  would  receive  more ;  but  the
first  were  also  given  each  a  penny.  They  took  it
and  said :  '  But  how  is  this  ?  They  only  worked
one  shift,  and  we  all  four ;  why,  then,  do  we  receive
alike  ?  This  is  unjust.'  But  the  master  came  up,
and  said  :  '  "What  are  you  complaining  about  ?  Have
I  offended  you  ?  The  amount  I  hired  you  for,  I
have  given  you.  Our  agreement  was  for  a  penny,
take  it  and  go.  If  I  wish  to  give  to  the  last  the
same  as  to  you,  am  I  not  master  of  my  own  will  ?
Or  because  you  see  that  I  am  good,  is  that  the
cause  of  your  grudging  ? ' "

In  the  kingdom  of  God  there  is  neither  first  nor
last,  for  all  there  are  as  one.

There  came  to  Jesus  two  of  his  disciples,  James
and  John,  and  said :  "  Promise  us  that  you  will  do
that  for  us  which  we  shall  ask  of  you."

He  said :  "What  do  you  wish  ? "

They  said :  "  That  we  may  be  equal  with  you."

Jesus   said  to   them :   "  You   yourselves  do   not


104


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


know  what  you  ask.  You  may  live  just  as  I  do,  and
be  cleansed  from  fleshly  life  like  me,  but  to  make
you  like  myself  is  not  in  my  power.  Every  man
may,  by  his  own  effort,  enter  the  kingdom  of  his
Father,  having  submitted  to  His  power,  and  fulfil-
ling His  will."

When  they  heard  of  this,  the  other  disciples  grew
angry  with  the  two  brothers,  because  these  wished
to  be  equal  to  their  teacher,  and  the  first  among
his  disciples.

But  Jesus  called  them,  and  said  :  "  If  you  brothers,
James  and  John,  asked  me  to  make  you  such  as  I
am  in  order  to  be  first  among  my  disciples,  then
you  were  mistaken ;  but  if  you,  my  other  disciples,
are  angry  with  them  because  they  wish  to  be  your
elders,  then  you  also  are  mistaken.  Only  in  the
world  are  kings  and  officials  reckoned  by  seniority
for  governing  the  people.  But  among  you,  there
cannot  be  either  elder  or  younger.  Among  you,  for
one  to  be  greater  than  another,  it  is  necessary  to
be  the  servant  of  all.  Among  you,  let  him  who
wishes  to  be  first,  consider  himself  last.  Because
therein  is  the  will  of  the  Father  as  to  the  Son  of
Man ;  who  does  not  live  to  be  served,  but  to  him-
self serve  all,  and  to  give  up  his  fleshly  life  as  a
ransom  for  the  life  of  the  spirit."

And  Jesus  said  to  the  people :  "  The  Father
seeks  to  save  that  which  perishes.  He  rejoices
over  it,  as  a  shepherd  rejoices  when  he  has  found
one  sheep  that  was  lost.  When  one  is  lost,  he
leaves  the  ninety-nine,  and  goes  to  save  the  lost
one.      And  if  a  woman  lose    a  farthing,  she  will


Mt.    XX.  2a


Lk.     XV.


LIFE  IS  NOT  TEMPORAL


los


Lk.     XV.  10.


xiv.    8.


XV.  11.

12.
13.

15.
10.
17.


sweep  out  the  whole  hut  and  seek  until  she  find  it.
The  Father  loves  the  Son,  and  calls  him  to  -Him-
self."

And  he  told  them  yet  another  parable,  to  the
effect  that  they  who  live  in  the  will  of  God  ought
not  to  exalt  themselves.  He  said :  "  If  you  are
invited  to  dinner,  do  not  seat  yourself  in  the  front
comer ;  someone  will  come  of  more  consideration
than  yourself,  and  the  master  will  say  :  '  Leave  your
place,  and  allow  him  who  is  better  than  you  to  be
seated.'  Then  you  will  be  put  to  shame.  But  do
better,  take  your  seat  in  the  very  last  place,  then
the  master  will  find  you,  and  call  you  to  a  place
of  honour,  and  you  will  be  honoured.

"  So  also  in  the  kingdom  of  God  there  is  no  room
for  pride.  He  who  exalts  himself,  by  so  doing
lowers  himself ;  but  he  who  humbles  himself,  and
considers  himself  unworthy,  by  this  same  means
raises  himself  in  the  kingdom  of  God.

"  A  man  had  two  sons.  And  the  younger  said
to  his  father :  '  Father,  give  me  my  property.'  And
the  father  gave  him  his  share.  The  younger  son
took  his  share,  went  abroad,  squandered  all  his
property,  and  began  to  suffer  want.  And  abroad,
he  became  a  swineherd.  And  he  so  hungered,  that
he  ate  acorns  with  the  swine.     And  he  bethought

O

himself  of  his  life,  and  said :  '  Why  did  I  take  my
share  and  leave  my  father  ?  My  father  had  plenty
of  everything;  at  my  father's,  even  labourers  ate
their  fill.  But  I  here  arn  eating  the  same  food  as
the  swine.  I  will  go  to  my  father,  fall  at  his  feet,
and  say :  I  am  to  blame,  father,  before  you,  and  am


io6


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


not  worthy  to  be  yonr  son.


a  labourei-.'      So  he  thought


Take  me  back  even  as
,  and  he  went  to  his
father.  And  when  he  was  still  far  off,  his  father
at  once  recognised  him,  and  himself  ran  to  meet
him,  embraced  him,  and  began  to  kiss  him.  And
the  son  said :  '  Father,  I  am  to  blame  before  you,  I
am  not  worthy  to  be  your  son.'  But  the  father
would  not  even  listen,  and  said  to  the  labourers :
'  Bring  quickly  the  best  clothes  and  the  best  boots,
to  clothe  him  and  shoe  him.  And  go  and  bring  a
fatted  calf  and  kill  it,  and  we  will  rejoice  that  this
my  son  was  dead  and  is  now  alive,  was  lost  and  is
now  found.'  And  the  elder  brother  came  from  the
field,  and  as  he  approached  he  heard  the  sounds  of
music  in  the  house.  He  called  a  servant  to  him,
and  said  :  '  Why  is  there  this  merry-making  here  ? '
And  the  boy  said  :  '  Have  you  not  heard  that  your
brother  is  returned,  and  your  father  is  full  of  joy,
and  has  ordered  a  fatted  calf  to  be  killed,  for  joy
that  his  son  has  returned  ? '  The  elder  brother  was
offended,  and  did  not  go  into  the  house.  And  the
father  came  out  and  called  him.  And  he  said  to
his  father :  '  See,  father,  how  many  years  I  have
worked  for  you,  and  have  not  disobeyed  your  com-
mand, while  you  never  killed  a  fatted  calf  for
me.  But  my  younger  brother  left  the  house  and
squandered  all  his  property  with  drunkards,  and
you  have  now  killed  the  calf  for  him.'  And  the
father  said  :  '  You  are  always  with  me,  and  all  mine
is  yours ;  and  you  should  not  be  offended,  but
should  be  glad  that  your  brother  was  dead  and  has
become  alive,  was  lost  and  is  found.'


Lk.     XV.  20.


LIFE  IS  NOT  TEMPORAL


107


Mk.    xii.    1.


"A  master  planted  a  garden,  cultivated  it,  arranged
it,  did  everything  so  that  the  garden  might  yield  as
much  fruit  as  possible.  And  he  sent  labourers  into
the  garden,  that  they  might  work  there,  and  gather
the  fruit,  and  pay  him-according  to  the  agreement  for
the  garden.  (The  master  is  the  Father;  the  garden;
the  world ;  the  labourers,  men.  The  Father  does  no
more  than  send  His  Son,  the  Son  of  Man,  into  the
world,  that  men  may  yield  fruit  to  the  Father  from
the  understanding  of  life  which  He  placed  in  them.)
The  time  came  when  the  master  sent  a  servant  for
the  rents.  (The  Father,  without  ceasing,  tells  men
that  they  must  fulfil  His  will.)  The  labourers  drove
away  the  messenger  of  the  master  with  nothing,  and
continued  to  live,  imagining  that  the  garden  was
their  own,  and  that  they,  themselves  of  their  own
will,  were  settled  on  it.  (Men  drive  away  from  them-
selves the  declaration  of  the  will  of  the  Father,  and
continue  to  live,  each  one  for  himself,  imagining  that
they  live  for  the  joys  of  the  flesbly  life.)  Then  the
master  sent  one  after  another  his  chosen  ones,  then
his  son,  to  remind  the  labourers  of  their  debt.  But
the  labourers  quite  lost  their  reason,  and  imagined
that  if  they  killed  tliis  son  of  the  master,  who  re-
minded them  that  the  garden  was  not  theirs,  they
would  be  left  quite  in  peace.      So  they  killed  him.

"  Thus  men  do  not  love  even  a  reminder  of  the
spirit  which  lives  in  them,  and  declares  to  them  that
it  is  eternal  and  they  are  not  eternal;  and  they
have  killed,  as  far  as  they  could,  the  consciousness  of
the  spirit ;  they  have  wrapped  in  a  cloth  and
buried  in  the  ground  the  talent  that  was  given  them.


io8


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


"  What,  then,  is  the  master  to  do  ?  ISTothing  else
than  drive  forth  those  labourers,  and  send  others.

"  "What  is  the  Father  to  do  ?  Sow  until  there
shall  be  fruit.     And  this  He  does.

"  People  have  not  understood  and  do  not  under-
stand that  the  consciousness  of  the  spirit  which  is
in  them,  and  which  they  hide  because  it  troubles
them,  brings  life  to  them  through  understanding
it.  They  reject  that  stone  upon  which  everything
rests.  And  they  who  do  not  take  as  foundation  the
life  of  the  spirit,  do  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
heaven,  and  do  not  receive  life.  In  order  to  have
faith,  and  to  receive  life,  it  is  necessary  to  under-
stand one's  position,  and  not  to  expect  rewards."

Then  the  disciples  said  to  Jesus :  "  Increase  in
us  our  faith.  Tell  us  that  which  will  make  us  more
strongly  believe  in  the  life  of  the  spirit,  that  we
may  not  regret  the  life  of  the  flesh,  which  must  be
given  up  wholly  for  the  life  of  the  spirit.  For
reward,  you  yourself  say  there  is  none."

And  in  answer  to  this,  Jesus  said  to  them  :  "  If
you  had  such  a  faith  as  the  faith  that  from  a  birch
seed  there  springs  up  a  great  tree ;  if,  also,  you  be-
lieved that  in  you  there  is  the  germ,  the  only  germ,
of  the  spirit  whence  springs  up  the  true  life,  you
would  not  ask  me  to  increase  in  you  your  faith.

"  Faith  does  not  consist  in  believing  something
wonderful,  but  faith  consists  in  understanding  one's
position,  and  wherein  lies  salvation.  If  you  under-
stand your  position,  you  will  not  expect  rewards,  but
will  believe  in  that  which  is  entrusted  to  you.

"When  the  master  returns  with  the  labourers


Mt.   xxi.  40,
41.


Lk.  xvii.   5.


LIFE  IS  NOT  TEMPORAL


109


Lk.  xviL    8.


10.


xii.  35,
36.


from  the  field,  he  does  not  seat  the  labourer  at  Ms
table.  But  he  bids  him  see  to  the  cattle,  and
prepare  his  supper,  and  after  this  only  says  to  the
labourer :  '  Sit  down,  drink  and  eat.'  The  master
will  not  thank  the  labourer  for  having  done  what
he  ought  to  do.  And  the  labourer,  if  he  under-
stands that  he  is  a  labourer,  is  not  offended,  but
works,  believing  that  he  will  receive  his  due.

"  And  so  you,  also,  must  fulfil  the  will  of  the
Father,  and  think  that  we  are  worthless  labourers,
having  only  done  what  we  ought  to  do,  and  not
expect  a  reward,  but  be  content  with  receiving  that
which  is  due  to  you.

"  There  is  no  need  to  take  care  to  believe  that
there  will  be  a  reward,  and  life ;  this  cannot  be
otherwise ;  but  there  is  need  to  take  care  not  to
destroy  this  life,  not  to  forget  that  it  is  given  us
that  we  may  bring  forth  its  fruits,  and  fulfil  the
will  of  the  Father.

"And  therefore  always  be  ready,  like  servants
awaiting  a  master,  to  answer  him  immediately  when
he  comes.  The  servants  do  not  know  when  he  will
return,  either  early  or  late,  and  they  must  always
be  ready.  And  when  they  meet  the  master,  they
have  fulfilled  his  will,  and  it  is  well  for  them.

"  So  in  life  also.  Always,  every  minute  of  the
present,  you  must  live  the  life  of  the  spirit,  not
thinking  of  the  past  or  the  future,  and  not
saying  to  yourself :  then  or  there  I  will  do  this
or  that.

"  If  the  master  knew  when  the  thief  would  come,
he   would   not   sleep ;   and   so   do   you   also   never


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


sleep ;  because,  to  the  life  of  the  son  of  man  time
is  nothing ;  ne  lives  only  in  the  present,  and
does  not  know  when  is  the  beginning  or  end  of
life.

"  Our  life  is  the  same  as  that  of  a  slave  whom
the  master  has  left  as  chief  in  his  household.  And
well  it  is  for  that  slave  if  he  does  the  will  of  the
master  always  !  But  if  he  shall  say,  '  The  master
will  not  soon  return,'  and  shall  forget  the  master's
business,  then  the  master  will  return  unexpectedly,
and  will  drive  him  out.

"  And  so,  be  not  downcast,  but  always  live  in  the
present  by  the  spirit.  For  the  life  of  the  spirit
there  is  no  time.

"  Look  to  yourselves,  so  as  not  to  weigh  your-
selves down,  and  not  to  blind  yourselves  with
drvmkenness,  gluttony,  and  cares ;  so  as  not  to  let
the  time  of  salvation  pass.  The  time  of  salvation,
like  a  web,  is  cast  over  all ;  it  is  there  always.
And  therefore  always  live  the  life  of  the  Son  of
Man.

"  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  this.  Ten
maidens  went  with  lamps  to  meet  the  bridegroom.
Five  were  wise  and  five  foolish.  The  foolish  ones
took  lamps  but  did  not  take  oil ;  but  the  wise  took
lamps  and  a  store  of  oil.  "While  they  waited  for
the  bridegroom,  they  went  to  sleep.  When  the
bridegroom  was  approaching,  the  foolish  maidens  saw
that  they  had  httle  oil,  and  went  to  buy  some ;  and
while  they  were  gone,  the  bridegroom  came.  And
the  wise  maidens  who  had  oil  went  in  with  him,  and
the  doors  were  shut.      Their  business  was  only  this,


Mt.  xxiv.  45,
46.


48.


60.

61.

Mk.

xiii

33.

Lk.

xxi

34

Mt.  XXV.    1.


7.
10.


LIFE  IS  NOT  TEMPORAL


Lk.    xiii.  24.

25.


Mt.    xvi.  27.


Mt.  XXV.  32.


to  meet  the  bridegroom  with  lights ;  and  the  five
foolish  ones  forgot  that  it  was  important,  not  only
that  the  lights  should  burn,  but  that  they  should
burn  in  time.  And  in  order  that  they  might  be
burning  when  the  bridegroom  came,  they  must  burn
without  stopping.

"  Life  is  only  for  this,  to  exalt  the  Son  of  Man,
and  the  Son  of  Man  exists  always.  He  is  not  in
time  ;  and  therefore,  in  serving  him,  one  must  live
without  time,  in  the  present  alone.

"  Therefore  make  efforts  in  the  present  to  enter
into  the  life  of  the  spirit.  If  you  do  not  make
these  efforts  you  shall  not  enter.  You  will  say :
'  We  said  so  and  so.'  But  there  will  be  no  good
works  to  show,  and  there  will  not  be  life.  Because
the  Son  of  Man,  the  one  true  spirit  of  life,  will
appear  in  each  man,  as  such  man  has  acted  for  the
Son  of  Man.

"  Mankind  is  divided  according  to  the  way  in
which  men  serve  the  Son  of  Man.  And  by  their
works  men  shall  be  divided  into  two  classes,  as  sheep
are  divided  from  goats  in  the  flock  The  one  shall
live,  the  other  perish.

"  They  who  have  served  the  Son  of  Man,  they
shall  receive  that  which  belonged  to  them  from  the
beginning  of  the  world,  that  life  which  they  have
kept.  They  have  kept  hfe  by  the  fact  that  they
have  served  the  Son  of  Man.  They  have  fed  tlie
hungry,  clothed  the  naked,  welcomed  the  stranger,
visited  the  prisoner.  They  have  lived  in  the  Son
of  Man,  felt  that  he  only  is  in  all  men,  and  there-
fore they  have  loved  their  neighbours.


U2  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

"  Whereas  they  who  have  not  lived  in  the  Son  of
Man,  they  have  not  served  him,  have  not  under-
stood that  he  alone  is  in  all,  and  therefore  have  not
joined  in  him  and  have  lost  life  in  him,  and  have
perished."


CHAPTEE   IX


TEMPTATIONS


Mt.    xix.  13.
14.


Lk.  xviii.  17.


Mt.  xviii.    3.


The  illusions  of  temporal  life  conceal  from  men
t/ie  true  life  in  the  present

("aforgivc  us  our  Debts  as  \vc  forgive  our  Debtors")

Once,  children  were  brought  to  Jesus.  His  disciples
began  to  drive  the  children  away.  Jesus  saw  this
being  done,  and  was  grieved,  and  said :

"  You  drive  the  children  away  without  reason.
They  are  better  than  any,  because  children  all  live
after  the  Father's  will.  They  are,  indeed,  already
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  You  should  not  drive
them  away,  but  learn  from  them ;  because,  in  order
to  live  in  the  Father's  will,  you  must  live  as
children  live.  Children  do  not  abuse  one  another,
do  not  bear  ill-will  to  people,  do  not  commit
adultery,  do  not  swear  by  anything,  do  not  resist
evil,  do  not  go  to  law  with  anyone,  acknowledge  no
difference  between  their  own  people  and  foreigners.
Therefore  are  they  better  than  grown  people,  and
are  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  If  you  do  not  re-
frain from  all  the  temptations  of  the  flesh,  and
become  as  children,  you  will  not  be  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven.
s


114


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


"  Only  he  who  understands  that  children  are
better  than  we,  because  they  do  not  break  the
Father's  will,  only  he  understands  my  teaching.
And  he  who  understands  my  teaching,  he  alone
understands  the  Father's  will.  We  cannot  despise
children,  because  they  are  better  than  we,  and  their
hearts  are  pure  in  the  sight  of  the  Father,  and  are
always  \'sith  Him.

"  And  not  one  child  perishes  by  the  Father's
will.  They  perish  only  as  men  entice  them  from
the  truth.  And  therefore  it  behoves  us  to  take
care  of  them,  and  not  to  entice  them  from  the
Father,  and  from  true  life.

"  That  man  does  ill  who  entices  them  from
purity.  To  entice  a  child  from  good,  to  lead  it
into  temptation,  is  as  bad  as  to  hang  a  millstone
on  its  neck  and  throw  it  into  the  water.  It  is
hard  for  it  to  swim  to  the  surface;  it  is  more  likely
to  drown.  It  is  as  hard  for  a  child  to  get  out  of
temptation  into  which  a  grown-up  man  leads  it.

"  The  world  of  men  is  unhappy  only  on  account
of  temptations.  Temptations  are  everywhere  in
the  world,  they  always  were  and  always  will  be ;
and  man  perishes  from  temptations.

"  Therefore  give  up  everything,  sacrifice  every-
thing, if  only  you  may  not  fall  into  temptation.
A  fox,  if  it  fall  into  a  trap,  will  wrench  off  its  paw
and  go  away,  and  the  paw  will  heal  and  it  will
remain  alive.  Do  you  likewise.  Give  up  every-
thing, if  only  not  to  sink  into  temptation.

"  Beware  of  temptation  under  that  first  com-
mandment ;  do  not  bear  ill-wiU  against  men,  when


Mt.  xviii.    5,


Lk.     ix.  48,
Mt.  xviii.  10.


Lk.  xvii.   3.


TEMPTATIONS


"5


Mt-  xviii.  15.


Lk.  xvii.    4.


Mt.  xviii.  17.


26.
27.


28.


29.


30.


people  offend  you,  and  you  would  wish  to  be
avenged  on  them.

"  If  a  man  offend  you,  remember  that  he  is  the
son  of  the  same  Father,  and  your  brother.  If  he
has  offended  you,  go  and  persuade  him  of  it  face
to  face.  If  he  listen  to  you,  then  you  have  the
advantage,  you  will  have  found  a  new  brother.  If
he  do  not  listen  to  you,  then  call  to  your  aid  two
or  three  others  who  may  persuade  him.  And  if  he
repent,  forgive  him.  And  if  he  offend  you  seven
times,  and  seven  times  says,  '  Forgive  me,'  then
forgive  him.  But  if  he  does  not  listen,  then  tell
the  society  of  believers  in  my  teaching,  and  if  he
listens  not  to  them,  then  forgive  him,  and  have
nothing  to  do  with  him.

"  Because  the  kingdom  of  God  is  like  this.  A
king  began  to  settle  with  his  tenants.  And  there
was  a  man  brought  to  him  who  owed  him  a  million,
and  had  nothing  to  pay  him  with.  Then  the  king
commanded  to  sell  the  man's  estate,  his  wife,  his
children,  and  the  man  himself.  But  the  tenant
began  to  beg  mercy  of  the  king.  And  the  king
was  gracious  to  him,  and  pardoned  all  his  debt.
And  now,  this  same  tenant  went  home,  and  saw  a
peasant.  This  peasant  owed  him  fifty  shillings.
The  king's  tenant  seized  him,  began  to  strangle
him,  and  said :  '  Give  me  what  you  owe  me.'  And
the  peasant  fell  at  his  feet,  and  said:  'Have  patience
with  me,  I  will  pay  you  all.'  But  the  tenant
showed  him  no  mercy,  and  put  the  peasant  into
prison,  to  stay  there  until  he  paid  everything.
Other  peasants   saw   this,  and   went   to  the   king,


Il6


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


and  told  what  the  tenant  had  done.  Then  the
king  called  the  tenant,  and  said  to  him :  '  Wicked
creature,  I  pardoned  you  all  your  debt,  because  you
prayed  me.  And  you,  also,  should  have  shown  mercy
to  your  debtor,  because  I  showed  mercy  to  you.'
And  the  king  became  angry,  and  gave  the  tenant  to
be  made  to  suffer,  until  he  should  pay  all  his  rent.

"  Just  so,  the  Father  will  do  with  you,  if  you  do
not  forgive,  from  the  bottom  of  your  heart,  all  those
who  are  to  blame  in  your  sight.

"  You  know  that  if  a  quarrel  arise  with  a  man,
it  is  better  to  make  it  up  with  him  without  going
to  the  court.  You  know  this,  and  you  act  so
because  you  know,  should  it  go  to  the  court,  you
will  lose  more.  Now,  it  is  the  same  with  all
malice.  If  you  know  that  malice  is  a  bad  thing,
and  removes  you  from  the  Father,  then  get  clear  of
malice  as  soon  as  possible,  and  make  your  peace.

"  You  yourselves  know  that  as  you  become
bound  on  earth,  so  you  will  be  before  the  Father.
And  as  you  free  yourselves  on  earth,  so  you  will  be
also  free  before  the  Father.  Understand  that  if
two  or  three  on  earth  are  united  in  my  teaching,
everything  they  may  desire  they  already  have  from
my  Father.  Because  where  two  or  three  are  joined
in  the  name  of  the  spirit  in  man,  the  spirit  of  man
is  living  in  them.

"  Beware  also  of  temptation  under  the  second
commandment ;  the  temptation  for  men  to  change
their  wives."

There  once  came  to  Jesus  orthodox  teachers,  who,
trying  him,  said :  "  May  a  man  leave  his  wife  ? "


Mt.  xviii.  32.


Mk.      X.    2.


Mt.    xix.    3.


TEMPTATIONS


"7


Lit.   xix.    4.


10.


26.


He  said  to  them :  "  From  the  very  beginning
man  was  created  male  and  female.  This  was  the
will  of  the  Father.  And  therefore  a  man  leaves
father  and  mother  and  cleaves  to  his  wife.  And
husband  and  wife  unite  in  one  body  So  that  the
wife  is  the  same  for  a  man  as  his  own  flesh.
Therefore  man  must  not  break  the  natural  law  of
God,  and  separate  that  which  is  united.  According
to  your  law  of  Moses,  it  is  said  that  you  may
abandon  a  wife  and  take  another ;  but  this  is
untrue.  According  to  the  Father's  will,  this  is
not  so,  and  I  tell  you  that  he  who  casts  off  his
wife  drives  into  immorality  both  her  and  him  who
shall  have  to  do  with  her.  And  casting  off  his
wife,  a  man  breeds  immorality  in  the  world."

And  the  disciples  said  to  Jesus :  "  It  is  too  hard
to  be  tied  for  life,  whatever  happens,  to  one  wife.
If  that  must  be,  it  were  better  not  to  marry.''

He  said  to  them :  "  You  may  refrain  from
marriage,  but  you  must  understand  what  you  are
about.  If  anyone  wishes  to  live  without  wife,  let
him  be  quite  pure,  and  not  approach  women  ;  but
he  who  loves  women,  let  him  unite  with  one
wife  and  not  cast  her  off,  and  not  gaze  upon
others.

"  Beware  of  temptation  against  the  third  com-
mandment ;  the  temptation  to  force  neople  to  fulfil
obligations  and  to  take  oaths."

Once,  tax-gatherers  came  to  Peter,  and  asked
him :  "  How  about  your  teacher,  does  he  pay
taxes  ?  "     Peter  said  :    "  No,  he  does  not."  ^     And

1  See  Note,  p.  222.


ii8


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


he  went  and  told  Jesus  that  he  had  been  stopped,
and  told  that  all  were  bound  to  pay  taxes.

Then  Jesus  said  to  him :  "  The  king  does  not
take  taxes  of  his  sons ;  and  moreover,  men  are  not
bound  to  pay  anyone  but  the  king.  Is  this  not  so?
Well,  so  it  is  with  us.  If  we  are  sons  of  God,
then  we  are  bound  to  no  one  but  God,  and  free
from  all  obligations.  And  if  they  demand  taxes
of  you,  then  pay.  But  do  so,  not  because  it  is
your  duty,  but  because  you  may  not  resist  evil.
Otherwise  resistance  to  evil  will  cause  a  greater
evil."

Another  time,  the  orthodox  joined  with  Csesar's
officials,  and  went  to  Jesus,  to  entrap  him  in  his
words.  They  said  to  him :  "  You  teach  everyone
according  to  the  truth.  Tell  us,  are  we  bound  to
pay  taxes  to  Csesar  or  not  ?  "  Jesus  understood
that  they  wished  to  convict  him  of  not  acknow-
ledging duty  to  Cfesar.  And  he  said  to  them :
"  Show  me  that  with  which  you  pay  taxes  to
Caesar."  They  handed  him  a  coin.  lie  looked  at
the  coin,  and  said :  "  What  is  this  here  ?  Whose
effigy  and  whose  signature  are  these  ? "  They
said  :  "  Ctesar's."  And  he  said  :  "  Well  then,  pay
Cresar  that  which  is  Caesar's,  but  that  which  is
God's,  your  soul,  give  to  no  one  but  to  God."
Money,  goods,  your  labour,  give  everything  to  him
who  shall  ask  it  of  you.  But  your  soul,  give  to
none  but  God.

"  Your  orthodox  teachers  go  about  everywhere,
and  compel  people  to  swear  and  vow  that  they
will  fulfil  the  law.      But  by  this  they  only  pervert


Mt.  xvii  27.


xxii.  16.


17.
18.


19.


20.


21.


ii.  15.


TEMPT  A  TIONS


119


Mt.  xxiii.  16-
22.


Lk.      ix.  52.

63.
64.
65.
66.

xii.  13.


Jn.    viii.    3.

4.
6.


people,  and  make  them  worse  than  before.  It  is
impossible  to  promise  with  one's  body  for  one's
soul.  In  your  soul,  God  is  ;  therefore  peoDle  cannot
promise  for  God  to  men.

"  Beware.  Temptation  under  the  fourth  com-
mandment is  the  temptation  for  men  to  judge  and
execute  people,  and  call  upon  others  to  take  part
in  these  judgments  and  executions."

The  disciples  of  Jesus  once  went  into  a  village,
and  asked  for  a  night's  lodging ;  but  they  were  not
admitted.  Then  the  disciples  went  to  Jesus  to
complain,  and  said  :  "  Let  these  people  be  Struck
with  lightning."  Jesus  said :  "  You  still  do  not
understand  of  what  spirit  you  are.  I  am  teaching,
not  how  to  destroy  but  how  to  save  people."

Once  a  man  came  to  Jesus,  and  said  :  "  Bid  my
brother  give  me  my  inheritance."  Jesus  said  to
him :  "  No  one  has  made  me  judge  over  you,  and
I  judge  no  one.  And  neither  may  you  judge  any
one.''

The  orthodox  once  brought  a  woman  to  Jesus,
and  said :  "  See,  this  woman  was  taken  in  adultery.
Now,  by  the  law  she  should  be  stoned  to  death.
What  do  you  say  ? "

Jesus  answered  nothing,  and  waited  for  them  to
bethink  themselves.  But  they  pressed  him,  and
asked  what  he  would  adjudge  to  this  woman.
Then  he  said :  "  He  among  you  who  is  without
fault,  let  him  be  the  first  to  cast  a  stone  at  her."
He  said  nothing  more.

Then  the  orthodox  looked  within  themselves,  and
their  consciences  smote  them ;  and  they  who  were


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


in  front  sought  to  get  behind  the  others,  and  all
went  away.  And  Jesus  remained  alone  with  the
woman.  He  looked  round,  and  saw  that  there
was  none  else.  "  Well,"  said  he  to  the  woman,
"  has  no  one  condemned  you  ?  "  She  said  :  "  No
one."  Then  he  said :  "  And  I  do  not  condemn
you.      Go,  and  henceforth  sin  no  more."

Beware.  Temptation  against  the  fifth  com-
mandment is  the  temptation  for  men  to  consider
themselves  bound  to  do  good  only  to  their  country-
men, and  to  consider  foreigners  as  enemies.

A  teacher  of  the  law  wished  to  try.  Jesus,  and
said :  "  What  am  I  to  do  in  order  to  receive  the
true  life  ? "  Jesus  said  :  "  You  know, — love  your
Father,  God,  and  him  who  is  your  brother  through
your  Father,  God ;  of  whatever  country  he  may
be."  And  the  teacher  of  the  law  said :  "  This
would  be  well,  if  there  were  not  different  nations ;
but  as  it  is,  how  am  I  to  love  the  enemies  of  my
own  people  ? "

And  Jesus  said :  "  There  was  a  Jew  who  fell
into  misfortune.  He  was  beaten,  robbed,  and
abandoned  on  the  road.  A  Jewish  priest  went  by,
glanced  at  the  wounded  man,  and  went  on.  A
Jewish  Levite  passed,  looked  at  the  wounded  man,
and  also  went  by.  But  there  came  a  man  of  a
foreign,  hostile  nation,  a  Samaritan.  This  Samaritan
saw  the  Jew,  and  did  not  think  of  the  fact  that
Jews  have  no  esteem  for  the  Samaritans,  but  pitied
the  poor  Jew.  He  washed  and  bound  his  wounds,
and  carried  him  on  his  ass  to  an  inn,  paid  money
for  him   to  the  innkeeper,  and  promised  to  come


Jn.    viii.  10.


Lk.       X.  25.


TEMPTATIONS


Mt.    xvi.  21.


Mk.  viii.  33.


Mt.  xxii.  23.


again  to  pay  for  him.  Thus  shall  you  also  behave
towards  foreign  nations,  towards  those  who  hold
you  of  no  account  and  ruin  you.  Then  yon  will
receive  true  life."

Jesus  said :  "  The  world  loves  its  own,  and  hates
God's  people.  Therefore  men  of  the  world — ■
priests,  preachers,  officials — will  harass  those  who
shall  fulfil  the  will  of  the  Fatlier.  And  I  am
going  to  Jerusalem,  and  shall  be  persecuted  and
killed.  But  my  spirit  cannot  bo  killed,  but  will
remain  alive."

Having  -heard  that  Jesus  would  be  torturea  and
killed  in  Jerusalem,  Peter  was  sad,  and  took  Jesus
by  the  hand,  and  said  to  him :  "  If  so,  then  you
had  better  not  go  to  Jerusalem."  Then  Jesus  said
to  Peter :  "  Do  not  say  this.  "What  you  say  is
temptation.  If  you  fear  tortures  and  death  for  me,
this  means  that  you  are  not  thinking  of  that  which
is  godly,  of  the  spirit,  but  are  thinking  of  what  is
worldly."

And  having  called  the  people  and  his  disciples,
Jesus  said :  "  He  who  wishes  to  live  according  to
my  teaching,  let  him  forsake  his  fleshly  life,  and
let  him  be  ready  for  all  fleshly  suffering ;  because
he  who  fears  for  his  fleshly  life,  shall  destroy  the
true  life ;  he  who  despises  the  fleshly  life,  shall
save  the  true  life.''

And  they  did  not  understand  this,  and  certain
materialists  coming,  he  explained  to  all  what  is  the
meaning  of  the  true  life  and  the  awakening  from
death.

The  materialists  said  that  after  the  fleshly  death


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


there  is  no  longer  any  life.  They  asked:  "How
can  all  rise  from  the  dead  ?  If  all  were  to  rise,
then  in  rising  they  could  in  no  way  have  life
together.  For  instance,  there  were  seven  brothers
among  ns.  The  first  married  and  died.  The  wife
was  taken  by  the  second  brother  and  he  died,  and
she  was  taken  by  the  third,  who  also  died,  and  so
on  unto  the  seventh.  Well  now,  how  shall  these
seven  brothers  live  with  one  wife  if  all  arise  from
the  dead  ?  "

Jesus  said  to  them :  "  You  either  purposely
confuse  things,  or  you  do  not  understand  what  the
awakening  to  life  is.  Men  in  this  present  life
marry.  But  they  who  shall  earn  everlasting  life,
and  the  awakening  from  death,  do  not  marry.
And  that  because  they  can  no  longer  die,  but  are
united  with  the  Father.  In  your  writings,  it  is
said  that  God  said :  '  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,
Isaac,  and  Jacob.'  And  this  was  said  when
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  had  died  from  among
men.  It  follows,  that  they  who  have  died  from
among  men  are  alive  to  God.  If  God  is,  and  God
does  not  die,  then  they  who  are  with  God  are
always  alive.  The  awakening  from  death  is,  to
live  in  the  will  of  the  Father.  For  the  Father,
tliere  is  no  time ;  therefore  in  fulfilling  the  will  of
the  Father,  in  joining  Him,  man  departs  from  time
and  death."

When  they  heard  this,  the  orthodox  no  longer
knew  what  to  devise  to  compel  Jesus  to  hold  his
tongue;  and  together  they  began  to  question  Jesus.
And  one  of  the  orthodox  said  :  "  Teacher,  what,  in


Mt.  xxii.  21


25.


Lk.     XX.  34.


Mt.  xxii.  31.
32.


34.


36.
36.


TEMPTATIONS


123


Mt.  xxii.  37.


Lk.     xii.    1.


XX.  45.
46.


Mt.  xxiii.    2.


your   opinion,   is    the   chief   commandment   in  the
whole  law  ? "

The  orthodox  thought  that  Jesus  would  get
confused  in  the  answer  about  the  law.  But  Jesus
said :  "  It  is,  to  love  the  Lord  with  all  one's  soul,
in  whose  power  we  are.  From  it  the  second
commandment  follows,  which  is,  to  love  one's
neighbour.  Because  the  same  Lord  is  in  him.
And  this  is  the  substance  of  all  that  is  written  in
all  your  books."

And  Jesus  said  further  :  "  In  your  opinion,  what
is  Christ  ?  Is  he  someone's  son  ?  "  They  said  :
"  In  our  opinion,  Christ  is  the  son  of  David."
Then  he  said  to  them :  "  How,  then,  does  David
call  Christ  his  Lord  ?  Christ  is  neither  son  of
David,  nor  anyone's  son  after  the  flesh ;  but  Christ
is  that  same  Lord,  our  Euler,  whom  we  know  in
ourselves  as  our  life.  Christ  is  that  understanding
which  is  in  us."

And  Jesus  said :  "  See,  beware  of  the  leaven  of
orthodox  teachers.  And  beware  of  the  leaven  of
the  materialists  and  of  the  leaven  of  the  govern-
ment. But  most  of  all,  beware  of  the  leaven  of
the  self-styled  '  orthodox,'  because  in  them  is  the
chief  stumbling-block."

And  when  the  people  understood  of  what  he  was
speaking,  he  repeated :  "  Most  of  all,  beware  of
the  teaching  of  the  scholars,  of  the  self-called
'  orthodox.'  Beware  of  them,  because  they  have
taken  the  place  of  the  prophets  who  declared  the
will  of  God  to  the  people.  They  have  perversely
assumed  authority  to  preach  to  the  people  the  will


124


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


of  God.  They  preach  words,  and  do  nothing.  And
the  result  is  that  they  no  more  than  say :  '  Do
this  and  that.'  And  there  is  no  further  result,
because  they  do  nothing  good,  but  only  talk.  And
they  tell  people  to  do  what  is  impossible  to  be
done,  and  they  themselves  do  nothing.  They  only
labour  to  keep  the  teaching  in  their  own  hands ;
and  with  this  ahn  they  strive  to  appear  imposing;
they  dress  themselves  up  and  exalt  themselves.
Know,  therefore,  that  no  one  should  call  himself
teacher  and  leader.  But  the  self-styled  orthodox
are  called  teachers,  and  by  this  very  thing  they
hinder  you  from  entering  into  the  kingdom  of
heaven,  where  they  themselves  do  not  enter.  These
orthodox  think  that  people  may  be  brought  to  God
by  exterior  rites  and  pledges.  Like  blind  men,
they  do  not  see  that  the  outside  show  means
nothing ;  that  all  depends  upon  the  soul  of  man.
They  do  the  easiest  thing,  the  external  thing;  that
which  is  needful  and  difficult, — love,  compassion,
truth, — they  leave  undone.  It  suffices  them  to  be
only  outwardly  in  the  law,  and  to  bring  others
outwardly  to  the  law.  And  therefore  they,  like
painted  coffins,  outwardly  look  clean,  but  are  an
abomination  within.  They  outwardly  honour  the
holy  martyrs.  But  in  very  deed  they  are  the
same  as  those  who  torture  and  kill  the  saints.
They  were  before,  and  are  now,  the  enemies  of  all
good.  From  them  comes  all  the  evil  in  tlie  world ;
because  they  hide  the  good,  and  instead  of  it
uphold  evil.  Most  of  all  to  be  feared,  therefore,
are  self-called  teachers.       Because  you  yourselves


Mt.  xxiii.    3.


Mk.     iii.  5


TEMPTATIONS


I2S


Mk.     iii.  29.


Mt.  xxiii.  37.


39.
xxiv.    1.


12.


know,  every  mistake  may  be  made  good.  But  if
people  are  mistaken  as  to  what  good  is,  this
mistake  can  never  be  set  right.  And  this  is
precisely  the  condition  of  self-called  leaders."

And  Jesus  said :  "  I  wished,  here  in  Jerusalem,
to  join  all  men  in  one  understanding  of  true
happiness  ;  but  the  people  here  are  only  capable
of  putting  to  death  the  teachers  of  good.  And
therefore  they  will  remain  the  same  godless  people
as  they  were,  and  will  not  know  the  true  God  ;
until  they  shall  lovingly  welcome  the  understanding
of  God."     And  Jesus  went  away  from  the  temple.

Then  his  disciples  said  to  him  :  "  But  what  will
happen  to  this  temple  of  God,  with  all  its  embel-
lisliments  which  people  have  brought  into  it,  to
give  to  God."  And  Jesus  said :  "  I  tell  you  truly,
the  whole  of  this  temple,  with  all  its  embellish-
ments, shall  be  destroyed,  and  nothing  shall  remain
of  it.  There  is  one  temple  of  God ;  that  is,  the
hearts  of  men  when  they  love  each  other."

And  they  asked  him :  "  When  shall  there  be
such  a  temple  ?  "  And  Jesus  said  to  them  :  "That
will  not  be  soon.  People  will  yet  long  be  deceived
in  the  name  of  my  teaching,  and  wars  and  rebellions
will  be  the  result.  And  there  will  be  great  law-
lessness, and  little  love.  But  when  the  true  teaching
shall  spread  among  all  men,  then  wiU  be  the  end
of  evil  and  temptations."


CHAPTER  X

THE  WAEFAEE  WITH  TEMPTATION

Therefore,  not  to  fall  by  temptation,  we  must,  at  every
moment  of  life,  be  at  one  with  the  Father

("XeaO  U6  not  into  temptation")


After  this,  the  orthodox  chief  priests  began  to  do
all  they  could  to  lay  traps  for  Jesus,  in  some  way
or  other  to  destroy  him.  They  gathered  in  council,
and  began  to  consider.  They  said :  "  This  man
must  somehow  or  other  be  put  an  end  to.  He
so  proves  his  teaching  that,  if  he  be  left  alone,  all
will  believe  in  him,  and  cast  off  our  belief.  Already
half  of  the  people  believe  in  him.  But  if  the  Jews
believe  in  his  teaching,  that  all  men  are  sons  of
one  Father,  and  brothers,  and  that  there  is  nothing
in  our  Hebrew  people  different  from  other  peoples,
then  the  Eomans  will  completely  overwhelm  us,
and  the  Hebrew  kingdom  will  be  no  more."

And  the  orthodox  high  priest  and  learned  men
for  long  counselled  together,  and  could  not  think
what  to  do  with  Jesus.  They  could  not  make  up
their  minds  to  kill  him.

Then  one  of  them,  Caiaphas,  the  chief  priest  of
that  year,   thought  of   the   following   device.     He


Lk      xi.  63.


Jn.      xi.  47.


Lk.   xix.  4V.


Jn.      xi.  49.
60.


128


THE    WARFARE    WITH    TEMPTATION         127


66.


67.


said  to  the  others :  "  You  must  remember  this :  it
is  expedient  to  Icill  one  man,  that  the  whole  people
may  not  perish.  If  we  leave  this  man  alone,  the
people  will  perish ;  this  I  declare  to  you.  There-
fore it  is  better  to  kill  Jesus.  Even  if  the  people
do  not  perish,  they  will  nevertheless  go  astray,
departing  from  the  one  belief,  if  we  do  not  kill
Jesus.     Therefore  it  is  better  to  kill  Jesus."

And  when  Caiaphas  said  this,  they  resolved  that
there  was  no  need  to  discuss,  but  that  Jesus  must
be  kUled  without  fail.

They  would  have  taken  Jesus  at  once  and  killed
him,  but  he  withdrew  from  them  into  the  desert.
But  at  this  time  the  feast  of  the  Passover  was  ap-
proaching, when  a  great  multitude  always  gathered
in  Jerusalem.  And  the  orthodox  high  priests
reckoned  upon  Jesus  coming  with  the  people  to  the
feast.  And  they  made  known  to  the  people  that
if  anyone  should  see  Jesus  he  should  bring  him  to
them.

And  it  so  happened  that,  six  days  before  the
Passover,  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples :  "  Let  us  go  to
Jerusalem."     And  he  went  with  them.

And  the  disciples  said  to  him :  "  Do  not  go  into
Jerusalem.  The  high  priests  have  resolved  now  to
stone  you  to  death.  If  you  come  they  will  kill
you."

Jesus  said  to  them :  "  I  can  fear  nothing,  because
I  live  in  the  light  of  understanding.  And  as  every
man,  that  he  may  not  stumble,  walks  by  day  and
not  by  night,  so  every  man,  that  he  may  doubt
nothing  and  fear  nothing,  must  live  by  this  under-


128


THE    GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


standing.  Only  he  doubts  and  fears  who  lives  by
the  flesh ;  hut  he  who  lives  by  understanding,  for
him  there  is  nothing  doubtful  or  fearful."

And  Jesus  came  to  the  village  of  Bethany,  near
Jerusalem,  and  to  the  house  of  Martha  and  Mary
which  was  there.

Early  in  tlie  morning  Jesus  went  into  Jerusalem.
There  was  a  great  crowd  for  the  feast.  And  when
they  recognised  Jesus,  they  surrounded  him,  tore
branches  from  the  trees,  and  threw  their  clothes
before  him  on  the  road,  and  all  shouted  :  "  Here  is
our  true  king,  he  who  has  taught  us  the  true  God."

Jesus  sat  upon  an  ass's  foal,  riding,  and  the
people  ran  before  him  and  shouted ;  thus  he  rode
into  Jerusalem.  And  when  he  had  thus  ridden
into  the  town,  the  whole  people  were  excited,  and
asked :  "  Who  is  he  ? "  They  who  knew  him
answered :  "  Jesus,  the  prophet  of  Nazareth,  in
Gahlee."

And  Jesus  went  into  the  temple,  and  again  drove
out  thence  all  the  buyers  and  sellers.

And  the  orthodox  high  priests  saw  all  this,  and
said  to  each  other :  "  See  what  this  man  is  doing.
The  whole  people  are  following  him."

But  they  did  not  dase  to  take  him  straight  from
among  the  people,  because  they  saw  that  the  people
were  gathering  round  Idm,  and  they  bethought  them
how  to  take  him  by  cunning.

Meanwhile  Jesus  was  in  the  temple,  and  taught
the  people.  Among  the  people,  besides  Jews,  there
were  Greeks  and  heathen.  Tlie  Greeks  heard  of  the
teaching  of  Jesus,  and  understood  his  teaching  in


Jn.      xi.  10.


xii.    1.


12.
13.


Mt.    xxi.  10.


Mk.     xi.  15.


Jn.     xii.  19.


Mlc.     xi.  18.


Jn.     xii.  20.


THE    WARFARE    WITH  TEMPTATION         129


this  way,  namely,  that  he  taught  the  truth,  not
only  to  Hebrews  but  to  all  men.  Therefore
they  wished  to  be  also  his  disciples,  and  spoke
about  this  to  Phihp.  And  Philip  told  this  to
Andrew.

These  two  disciples  feared  to  bring  Jesus  together
with  the  Greeks.  They  were  afraid  lest  the  people
should  be  angry  with  Jesus,  because  he  did  not
recognise  any  difference  between  Hebrews  and  other
nations,  and  they  long  wavered  about  telling  this
to  Jesus ;  but  afterwards  both  together  told  him,  and
hearing  that  the  Greeks  wished  to  be  his  followers,
Jesus  was  troubled.  He  knew  that  the  people
hated  him  because  he  made  no  difference  between
the  Hebrews  and  the  heathen,  but  acknowledged
himself  to  be  the  same  as  the  heathen.

He  said :  "  The  hour  is  come  to  expiain  what  I
understand  by  the  Son  of  ]\Ian,  though  I  perish
because,  in  explaining  this,  I  destroy  distinction
between  Jews  and  heathen.  I  must  speak  the  truth.
A  grain  of  wheat  will  only  bring  forth  fruit  when  it
itself  perishes.  He  who  loves  his  fleshly  life  loses
the  true  life,  and  he  who  despises  the  fleshly  life
keeps  it  for  the  everlasting  life.  He  who  wishes
to  follow  my  teaching,  let  him  do  as  I  do.  And  he
who  does  as  I  do  shall  be  rewarded  by  my  Father.
My  soul  is  now  wrestling.  ShaU  I  surrender  my-
self to  the  compromises  of  temporary  life,  or  fulfil
the  will  of  the  Father,  now,  at  this  hour  ?  And
what  then  ?  Surely  now,  when  this  hour  is  come
in  which  I  am  Living,  I  shall  not  say :  '  Father,
save  me  from  that  which  I  should  do.'  I  cannot
9


130


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


say  this  for  the  sake  of  my  life.  And  therefore  I
say  :  '  Father,  show  yourself  in  me.' "

And  Jesus  said :  "  Henceforth  the  present  society
of  men  is  condemned  to  destruction.  From  now
that  which  rules  this  world  shall  be  destroyed.
And  when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  be  exalted  above
the  earthly  life,  then  shall  he  unite  all  in  one.

Then  the  Jews  said  to  him :  "  We  understand
from  the  law  what  the  everlasting  Christ  is ;  but
why  do  you  say  that  the  Son  of  Man  shall  be
exalted  ?  What  is  the  meaning  of  exalting  the
Son  of  Man  ?  "

To  this  Jesus  answered  :  "  To  exalt  the  Son  of
Man,  means  to  live  by  the  life  of  understanding
that  is  in  you.  To  exalt  the  Son  of  Man  above
that  which  is  earthly,  means  to  believe  in  the  light
while  there  is  light,  in  order  to  be  a  son  of  under-
standing.''

"  He  who  believes  in  my  teaching  believes  not
in  me,  but  in  that  spirit  which  gave  life  to  the
world.  And  he  who  understands  my  teaching,  under-
stands that  spirit  which  gave  life  to  the  world.
But  if  anyone  hears  my  words  and  does  not  fulfil
them,  it  is  not  I  who  blame  him,  seeing  that  I  came,
not  to  accuse  but  to  save.  He  who  does  not  accept
my  words  is  accused,  not  by  my  teaching  but  by
the  understanding  which  is  in  himself.  This  it  is
which  accuses  him.  I  did  not  speak  of  myself,  but
said  what  my  Father,  the  living  spirit  in  me,  sug-
gested to  me.  That  which  I  say,  the  spirit  of
understanding  has  told  me,  and  that  which  I  teach
is  the  true  life.''


Jn.     xii.  28.


THE    WARFARE    WITH  TEMPTATION


131


Jn.     xii.  36.


43.

Mt.  xxvi,    3.

4.

5.
14.
15.


And  having  said  this,  Jesus  went  away,  and
again  hid  from  the  chief  priests.

And  of  those  who  heard  these  words  of  Jesus,
many  of  the  powerful  and  wealthy  people  believed,
but  were  afraid  to  acknowledge  it  to  the  chief
priests,  because  not  one  of  these  priests  believed
and  acknowledged  it.  They  were  accustomed  to
judge  according  to  man,  and  not  according  to
God.

After  Jesus  had  hidden,  the  high  priests  and  the
elders  again  met  in  the  court  of  Caiaphas.  And
they  began  to  plan  how  to  take  Jesus  unknown  to
the  people,  for  they  were  afraid  to  seize  him  openly.
And  there  came  to  their  council  one  of  the  first
twelve  disciples  of  Jesus,  Judas  Iscariot,  who  said :
"  If  you  wish  to  take  Jesus  secretly,  so  that  the
people  may  not  see,  I  will  find  a  time  when  there
will  be  few  people  with  him,  and  will  show  you
where  he  is ;  and  then  take  him.  But  what  will
you  give  me  for  this  ? "  They  promised  him  for
this  thirty  silver  coins.  He  agreed  ;  and  from  that
time  began  to  seek  an  opportunity  to  bring  the
chief  priests  upon  Jesus,  in  order  to  take  him.

Meanwhile  Jesus  withdrew  from  the  people,  and
with  him  were  only  his  disciples.  "When  the  first
feast  of  unleavened  bread  approached,  the  disciples
said  to  Jesus  :  "  Where,  then,  shall  we  keep  the  Pass-
over ? "  And  Jesus  said :  "  Go  into  some  village,
and  enter  someone's  house,  and  say  that  we  have
not  time  to  prepare  the  feast,  and  ask  him  to  admit
us  to  celebrate  the  Passover."  And  the  disciples
did  so ;  they  asked  a  man  in  the  village,  and  he


132


THE   GOSPEL   TN  BRIEF


And  they  came  and  sat  down  to
and   the   twelve   disciples,  Judas


invited  them  in.
the  table,  Jesus
among  them.

Jesus  knew  that  Judas  Iscariot  had  already  pro-
mised to  betray  him  to  death,  but  he  did  not  accuse
Judas  for  this,  or  show  him  ill-wdl,  but  as  in  all
his  life  he  taught  his  disciples  love,  so  even  now
he  only  reproached  Judas  lovingly.  When  they
all  twelve  were  seated  at  table,  he  looked  at  them,
and  said :  "  Among  you  sits  he  who  has  betrayed
me.  Yes,  he  who  eats  and  drinks  with  me  shall  also
destroy  me."  And  he  said  nothing  more,  so  that
they  did  not  know  of  whom  he  spoke,  and  they  began
to  sup.

When  they  began  to  eat,  Jesus  took  a  loaf  and
broke  it  into  twelve  parts,  and  gave  each  of  the
disciples  a  piece,  and  said :  "  Take  and  eat,  this  is
my  body."  And  he  then  filled  a  cup  with  wine,
handed  it  to  the  disciples,  and  said  :  "  Drink,  all  of
you,  of  this  cup."  And  when  they  had  all  drunk,
he  said :  "  This  is  my  blood.  I  shed  it  that  people
may  know  my  will,  to  forgive  others  their  sins.
For  I  shall  soon  die,  and  be  no  more  with  you  in
this  world,  but  shall  join  you  only  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven.

After  this,  Jesus  got  up  from  the  table,  girt  himself
with  a  towel,  took  a  ewer  of  water,  and  began  to
wash  the  feet  of  all  the  disciples.  And  he  came  to
Peter ;  and  Peter  said :  "  But  why  will  you  wash
my  feet  ?  "  Jesus  said  to  him  :  "  It  seems  strange
to  you  that  I  should  wash  your  feet ;  but  you  will
know  soon  why  I  do  this.      Though  you  are  clean.


Mt.  xxvL  20.


Jn.    xiii.  11.


XXVI.  21,
xiv,  J  8


Mt.  xxii.  23.


27.


Lk.  xxii.  13.


Jn.


xiii.    4.
6.


10.


THE    WARFARE    WITH   TEMPTATION


133


Jn,    xiii.  12.


21.


yet  not  all  of  you  are  so,  but  among  you  is  my
betrayer,  to  whom  I  gave,  with  my  own  hand,  bread
and  wine,  and  whose  feet  I  wish  to  wash."

When  Jesus  had  washed  all  their  feet,  he  again
sat  down,  and  said :  "  Do  you  understand  why  I  did
this  ?  It  was  so  that  you  always  may  do  the  same
for  each  other.  I,  your  teacher,  do  this,  that  you
may  know  how  to  behave  towards  those  who  do  you
evil  If  you  have  understood  this,  and  will  do  it,
then  you  will  be  happy.  When  I  said  that  one  of  you
will  betray  me,  I  did  not  speak  of  all  of  you,  because
only  a  single  one  of  you,  whose  feet  I  washed,  and
who  ate  bread  with  me,  will  betray  me."

And  haviug  said  this,  Jesus  was  troubled  in
spirit,  and  yet  again  said :  "  Yes,  yes,  one  of  you
will  betray  me."

And  again  the  disciples  began  to  look  round  at
each  other,  not  knowing  of  whom  he  spoke.  One
disciiile  sat  near  to  Jesus,  and  Simon  Peter  signed
to  him  iu  a  way  to  ask  who  the  betrayer  was.  The
disciple  asked.  And  Jesus  said :  "  I  will  soak  a
piece  of  bread,  and  give  it  to  him ;  and  he  to  whom
I  shall  give  it  is  my  betrayer."  And  he  gave  the
bread  to  Judas  Iscariot,  and  said  to  him :  "  What
you  wish  to  do,  do  quickly."  Then  Judas  under-
stood that  he  must  go  out,  and  as  soon  as  he  had
taken  tlie  bread  he  forthwith  went  out.  And  it
was  impossible  to  follow  him,  as  it  was  night.

And  when  Judas  was  gone  out,  Jesus  said  :  "  It
is  now  clear  to  you  what  the  Son  of  Man  is.  It  is
now  clear  to  you  that  in  him  God  is,  to  make  him
as  blessed  as  God  Himself.


134


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


"  Children  !  I  have  not  long  now  to  be  with  you.
Do  not  equivocate  over  my  teaching,  as  I  said  to
the  orthodox,  but  do  that  which  I  do.  I  give  you
this,  a  new  commandment.  As  I  always,  and  to
the  end,  have  loved  you  all,  do  you  always,  and  to
the  end,  love  each  other.  By  this  only  will  you
be  distinguished.  Seek  to  be  only  thus  distinguished
from  other  people.      Love  one  another."

And  after  this,  they  went  to  the  Mount  of  Olives.

And  on  the  way  Jesus  said  to  them :  "  See,  the
time  is  coming  when  that  shall  happen  which  is
written,  the  shepherd  shall  be  killed,  and  all  the
sheep  shall  be  scattered.  And  to-night  this  shall
happen.  I  shall  be  taken,  and  you  will  all  abandon
me,  and  scatter."

Peter  said  to  him  in  answer  :  "  Even  if  all  shall
be  frightened,  and  scatter,  I  will  not  deny  you.  I
am  ready  for  prison  and  for  death  with  you."

And  Jesus  said  to  him :  "  But  I  tell  you  that
this  very  night,  before  cock-crow,  after  I  have  been
taken,  you  will  deny  me,  not  once,  but  thrice."

But  Peter  said  that  he  would  not  deny  him  ;  and
the  other  disciples  averred  the  same.

Then  Jesus  said  to  the  disciples :  "  Before,  neither
I  nor  you  had  need  of  anything.  You  went  with-
out wallet  and  without  change  of  shoes,  and  I  so
bade  you  do.  But  now,  if  I  am  accounted  an  out-
law, we  can  no  longer  do  so,  but  we  must  be  fur-
nished with  everything,  and  with  swords,  that  we
may  not  perish  in  vain."

And  the  disciples  said :  "  See,  we  have  two
swords."


Jn.    xiiL  i


Mt,  xxvi.


33.


34.


35,


Lk.  xxii.  35.


36.


38.


THE    WARFARE    WITH   TEMPTATION


135


Mt.  XX^T.

Jn.  xviiL


Mt.  xxvi,  37.


38.


Jesus  said :  "  It  is  well."

And  having  said  this,  Jesus  went  with  the  fol-
lowers into  the  garden  of  Gethsemane.  Coming
into  the  garden,  he  said :  "  Wait  you  here,  but  I
wish  to  pray."

And  while  near  to  Peter  and  the  two  brothers,
sons  of  Zebedee,  he  began  to  feel  weary  and  sad,
and  he  said  to  them :  "  I  feel  very  sad,  and  my
soul  is  full  of  the  anguish  before  death.  Wait  here,
and  be  not  cast  down  as  I  am."

And  he  went  off  a  little  way,  lay  on  the  ground
on  his  face,  and  began  to  pray,  and  said  :  "  My
Father,  the  Spirit !  Let  it  be  not  as  I  will,
which  is  that  I  should  not  die,  but  let  it  be  as
Thou  wilt.  Let  me  die,  but  for  Thee,  as  a  spirit,
all  is  possible ;  let  it  be  that  I  may  not  fear
death,  that  I  may  escape  the  temptation  of  the
flesh."

And  then  he  arose,  went  up  to  the  disciples,  and
saw  that  they  were  cast  down.  And  he  said  to
them :  "  How  is  it  you  have  not  strength  for  one
hour  to  keep  up  your  spirit,  even  as  I  ?  Keep  up
your  spirit,  so  as  not  to  fall  into  the  temptation
of  the  flesh.  The  spirit  is  strong,  the  flesh  is
weak."

And  again  Jesus  went  away  from  them,  and
again  began  to  pray,  and  said :  "  Father,  if  I  must
suffer,  must  die,  and  am  about  to  die,  then  so  let  it
be.  Let  Thy  will  be  done."  And  having  said  this,
he  again  went  up  to  the  disciples,  and  saw  that
they  were  still  more  cast  down,  and  ready  to
weep.


136


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


And  he  again  went  away  from  them,  and  the
third  time  said  :  "  Father,  let  Thy  will  be  done."

Then  he  returned  to  the  disciples,  and  said  to
them :  "  Now  be  easy,  and  be  calm,  because  it  is
now  decided  that  I  shall  give  myself  into  the  hands
of  worldly  men."


Mt.  xxvi.  44,


CHAPTEE  XI


THE   FAREWELL   DISCOURSE


Jn.    xiii.


xiv.    1.


The  self-life  is  an  illusion  which  comes  through  the  flesh,  an
evil.      The  true  life  is  the  life  common  to  all  men

("Deliver  us  from  evil")

And  Peter  said  to  Jesus :  "  Whither  are  you
going  ? "

Jesus  answered :  "  You  will  not  have  the
strength  now  to  go  whither  I  am  going ;  but  after-
wards you  will  go  the  same  way."

And  Peter  said :  "  Why  do  joxi  think  that  I
have  not  the  strength  now  to  follow  whither  you
go  ?     I  will  give  up  my  life  for  you."

And  Jesus  said :  "  You  say  that  you  will  give  up
your  life  for  me,  and  yet  even  before  cock-crow  you
shall  deny  me  thrice."  And  Jesus  said  to  the  dis-
ciples :  "  Be  not  troubled  and  be  not  afraid,  but
believe  in  the  true  God  of  life,  and  in  my
teaching."

The  life  of  the  Father  is  not  only  that  which  is
on  earth,  but  there  is  another  life  also,  If  there
were  only  such  a  life  as  the  life  here,  I  would
say  to  you,  that  when  I  die  I  shall  go  into
Abraham's   bosom,  and  make  ready  a  place  there

1S7


138


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


for  you,  and  I  shall  come  and  take  you,  and  we
shall  together  live  happily  in  Abraham's  bosom.
But  I  point  out  to  you  only  the  direction  to  life.

Thomas  said  :  "  But  we  do  not  know  whither  you
go,  and  therefore  we  cannot  know  the  way.  We
want  to  know  what  there  will  be  after  death."

Jesus  said :  "  I  cannot  show  you  what  will  be
there  ;  my  teaching  is  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and
the  life.  And  it  is  impossible  to  be  joined  with  the
Father  of  life  otherwise  than  through  my  teaching.
If  you  fulfil  my  teaching,  you  shall  know  the
Father."

Philip  said :  "  But  who  is  the  Father  ? "

And  Jesus  said :  "  The  Father  is  He  who  gives
life.  I  have  fulfilled  the  will  of  the  Father,  and
therefore  by  my  life  you  may  know  wherein  is  the
will  of  the  Father.  I  live  by  the  Father,  and  the
Father  lives  in  me.  All  that  I  say  and  do,  I  do  by
the  will  of  the  Father.  My  teaching  is,  that  I  am
in  the  Father  and  the  Father  is  in  me.  If  you  do
not  understand  my  teaching,  yet  you  see  me  and
my  works.  And  therefore  you  may  understand
what  the  Father  is.  And  you  know  that  he  who
shall  follow  my  teaching  may  do  the  same  as  I ;  and
yet  more,  because  I  shall  die,  but  he  will  still  live.
He  who  shall  live  according  to  my  teaching,  shall
have  all  that  he  wishes,  because  then  the  Son  will  be
one  with  the  Father.  Whatever  you  may  wish  that
accords  with  my  teaching,  all  that  you  shall  have.
But  for  this  you  must  love  my  teaching.  My
teaching  will  give  you,  in  my  place,  an  intercessor
and  comforter.       This  comforter  will  be  the  con-


Jn.    X  iv.    4,
5.


THE  FAREWELL   DISCOURSE


139


Jn.    xiv.  18.
19.


20.


22.


23.


sciousness  of  truth,  which  worldly  men  do  not
understand ;  but  you  will  know  it  in  yourselves.
You  never  will  be  alone,  if  the  spirit  of  my  teaching
is  with  you.  I  shall  die,  and  worldly  men  will  not
see  me ;  but  you  will  see  me,  because  my  teaching
lives  and  you  will  live  by  it.  And  then,  if  my
teaching  shall  be  in  you,  you  will  understand  that
I  am  in  the  Father  and  the  Father  in  me.  He  who
shall  fulfil  my  teaching,  shall  feel  in  himself  the
Father ;  and  in  him  my  spirit  shall  live."

And  Judas,  not  Iscariot,  but  another,  said  to
him :  But  why,  then,  may  not  all  live  by  the  spirit
of  truth  ? "

Jesus  said  in  answer :  "  Only  he  who  fulfils  my
teaching,  only  him  the  Father  loves,  and  in  him
only  can  my  spirit  abide.  He  who  does  not  fulfil
my  teaching,  him  my  Father  cannot  love,  because
this  teaching  is  not  mine,  but  the  Father's.  This  is
all  that  I  can  tell  you  now.  But  my  spirit,  the
spirit  of  truth,  which  shall  take  up  its  abode  in  you
after  I  am  gone,  shall  reveal  to  you  all,  and  you
shall  recall  and  understand  much  of  that  which  I
have  told  you.  So  that  you  may  always  be  calm
in  spirit,  not  with  that  worldly  calm  which  men  of
the  world  seek,  but  with  that  calm  of  spirit  in  which
we  no  longer  fear  anything.  On  this  account,  if
you  fulfil  my  teaching,  you  have  no  reason  to  grieve
over  my  death.  I,  as  the  spirit  of  truth,  will  come
to  you,  and,  together  with  the  knowledge  of  the
Father,  will  take  up  my  abode  in  your  heart.  If
you  fulfil  my  teaching,  then  you  must  rejoice,
because  instead  of  me   you  will  have  the  Father


I40


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


with   you   in   your   heart,  and    this   is   better    for
you.

"  My  teaching  is  the  tree  of  life.  The  Father  is
He  who  tends  the  tree.  He  prunes  and  cherishes
those  branches  upon  which  there  is  fruit,  that  they
may  yield  more.  Keep  my  teaching  of  life,  and
life  will  be  in  you.  And  as  a  shoot  lives  not  of
itself,  but  out  of  the  tree,  so  do  you  live  by  my
teaching.  My  teaching  is  the  tree,  you  are  the
shoots.  He  who  lives  by  my  teaching  of  life  yields
much  fruit ;  and  without  my  teaching  there  is  no
life.  He  who  does  not  live  by  my  teaching  withers
and  dies ;  and  the  dry  branches  are  cut  off  and
burnt.

"  If  you  will  live  by  my  teaching,  and  fulfil  it,
then  you  shall  have  all  that  you  desire.  Because
the  will  of  the  Father  is,  that  you  may  live  the  true
life  and  have  that  which  yoa  desire.  As  the  Father
gave  me  happiness,  so  I  give  you  happiness.  Hold
to  this  happiness.  I  am  living,  because  the  Father
loves  me  and  I  love  the  Father ;  do  you  also  live
by  the  same  love.  If  you  will  live  by  this,  you
shall  be  blessed.

"My  commandment  is,  that  you  love  one
another  as  I  have  loved  you.  There  is  no  greater
love  than  to  sacrifice  one's  life  for  the  love  of  one's
own,  as  I  have  done.

"  You  are  my  equals,  if  you  do  that  which  I
have  taught  you.  I  do  not  hold  you  as  slaves,  to
whom  orders  are  given,  but  as  equals ;  because  I
have  made  clear  to  you  all  that  I  have  known  of
the  Father.     You  do  not,  of  your  own  will,  choose


in.     XV,


THE  FAREWELL   DLSCOURSE


141


Jn.     XV.  17.


27.
xvi.    1.


my  teaching;  but  because  I  have  pointed  out  to
you  that  only  truth  by  which  you  will  live,  and
from  which  you  will  have  all  that  you  wish.

"The  teaching  is  summed  up  in  this — Love  one
another.

"  If  the  world  should  hate  you,  then  do  not
wonder ;  it  hates  my  teaching.  If  you  were  at  one
with  the  world,  it  would  love  you.  But  I  have
severed  you  from  the  world,  and  for  that  it  will
hate  you.  If  they  persecuted  me,  they  will  perse-
cute you  also.  They  will  do  all  this,  because  they
do  not  know  the  true  God.  I  explained  to  them,
but  they  did  not  wish  to  hear  me.  They  did  not
understand  my  teaching,  because  they  did  not
understand  the  Father.  They  saw  my  life,  and
my  life  showed  them  their  error.  And  for  this
they  stQI  more  hated  me.  The  spirit  of  truth
which  shall  come  to  you,  will  confirm  this  to  you.
And  you  will  accept  it.  I  tell  you  this  beforehand,
so  that  you  may  not  be  deceived  when  persecutions
shall  be  upon  you.  You  shall  be  made  outcasts;
men  shall  think  that  in  killing  you  they  do  God's
pleasure.  All  this  they  cannot  help  doing,  because
they  understand  neither  my  teaching  nor  the  true
God.  All  this  I  tell  you  beforehand,  so  that  you
may  not  wonder  when  it  comes  about.

"  Well  then,  I  now  go  away  to  that  Spirit  which  '
sent  me ;  and  now  you  understand,  you  need  not
ask  me  whither  I  go.     But  before,  you  were  grieved
that  I  did  not  tell  you  whither,  to  what  place,  1
depart.

"  But  I  tell  you  truly  that  it  is  well  for  you  that


I4Z


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


I  am  going.  If  I  do  not  die,  the  spirit  of  truth
will  not  appear  to  you,  but  if  I  die,  it  will  take  up
its  abode  in  you.  It  will  take  up  its  abode  in  you,
and  it  will  be  clear  to  you  where  untruth  is,
where  truth  is,  and  how  to  make  decision.  Untruth,
in  that  people  do  not  believe  in  the  life  of  the
spirit.  Truth,  in  that  I  am  one  with  the  Father.
Decision,  in  that  the  power  of  the  fleshly  life  is  at
an  end.

"  I  would  say  yet  much  more  to  you,  but  it  is
difficult  for  you  to  understand.  But  when  the
spirit  of  truth  dwells  in  you,  it  will  show  you  the
whole  truth,  because  it  will  tell  you,  not  a  new
thing  of  its  own,  but  that  which  is  of  God;  and  it
will  show  you  the  way  in  all  concerns  of  life.  It
also  will  be  from  the  Father,  as  I  am  from  the
Father ;  therefore  it  also  will  tell  you  the  same  as  I
tell  you.

"  But  when  I,  the  spirit  of  truth,  shall  be  in  you,
you  will  not  always  see  me.  Sometimes  you  will,
and  sometimes  you  will  not,  hear  me.''

And  the  disciples  said  one  to  another:  "What
does  he  mean  when  he  says :  '  Sometimes  you  will
see  nie,  sometimes  you  will  not  see  me.'  What
means  this,  '  Sometimes  you  will,  sometimes  you
will  not '  ?  "

Jesus  said  to  them :  "  Do  you  not  understand
what  this  means  :  '  Sometimes  you  will,  sometimes
you  will  not,  see  me  '  ?  You  know  how  it  always
is  in  the  world,  that  some  are  sad  and  grieved,
while  others  rejoice.  And  you  will  grieve,  but  your
grief  will  pass  into  joy.     A  woman,  when  she  bears.


Jn.    xvi.    8.


THE  FAREWELL   DISCOURSE


143


Jn     xvi.  22.


27.


xvii.    1,


grieves  while  she  is  in  the  pangs  of  childbirth ;  but
when  that  is  ended,  she  does  not  remember  the
pangs,  for  joy  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world.
And  so  you  will  grieve ;  anon  you  will  see  me,  the
spirit  of  truth  will  enter  into  you,  and  your  grief
will  be  turned  into  joy.  Then  you  will  no  longer
ask  anything  of  me,  because  you  will  have  all  that
you  wish.  Then  all  which  one  of  you  desires  in  the
spirit,  all  that  he  will  have  from  his  Father.

"  You  formerly  asked  for  nothing  for  the  spirit ;
but  now  ask  what  you  wUl  for  the  spirit,  and  you
will  have  all ;  so  that  your  bliss  will  be  full.  Now
I,  as  a  man,  cannot  tell  you  this  clearly  in  words,
but  when  I,  as  the  spirit  of  truth,  shall  live  in  you,
I  will  proclaim  to  you  clearly  about  the  Father.
Then  it  will  not  be  I  who  will  give  you  all  you  ask
of  the  Father  in  the  name  of  the  spirit.  But  the
Father  will  Himself  give,  because  He  loves  j'ou  for
having  received  my  teaching.  You  have  understood
that  understanding  proceeds  from  the  Father  into
the  world  and  returns  from  the  world  to  the
Father  "

Then  the  disciples  said  to  Jesus :  "  Now  we  have
understood  everything,  and  have  nothing  more  to
ask,  we  believe  that  you  are  from  God."

And  Jesus  said :  "  All  that  I  have  said  to  you  is
in  order  that  you  may  have  confidence  and  rest  in
my  teaching.  Whatever  ills  may  befall  you  in  the
world,  fear  nothing :  my  teaching  will  conquer  the
world."

After  this,  Jesus  raised  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and
said:


144


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


"My   Father!
freedom  of  life
true  life.      Life  is


Thou    hast   given   Thy    Son    the
in  order  that  he  may  receive  the


the  knowledge  of  the  true  God


of  the  understanding,  Who  is  discovered  to  me.  I
have  discovered  Thee  to  men  on  earth ;  I  have  done
that  work  which  Thou  has  bidden  me  do.  I  have
rhown  Thy  being  to  men  on  earth.  They  were
Thine  before,  but  by  Thy  will  I  have  discovered  to
them  the  truth,  and  they  know  Thee.  They  have
understood  that  all  they  have,  their  life,  is  from
Thee  only,  and  that  I  have  taught  them,  not  of
myself,  but  as  proceeding,  I  with  them,  from  Thee.
But  I  pray  to  Thee  for  those  who  acknowledge
Thee.  They  have  understood  that  all  I  have  is
Thine,  and  all  that  is  Thine  is  mine.  I  am  no
longer  in  the  world,  for  I  return  to  Thee ;  but  they
are  in  the  world,  and  therefore  I  pray  Thee,  Father,
to  preserve  in  them  Thy  undr-rstanding.  I  do  not
pray  Thee  to  remove  them  I'rom  the  world,  but  to
free  them  from  evil ;  to  confirm  them  in  Thy  truth.
Thy  understanding  is  the  truth.  My  Father !  I
wish  them  to  be  as  I  am ;  to  understand  as  I  do,
that  the  true  life  began  before  the  beginning  of  the
world.  That  they  should  all  be  one ;  as  Thou,
Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  Thee,  so  they  may  also
be  one  in  me.  I  in  them,  Thou  in  me,  so  that  all
may  be  one  ;  so  that  all  men  may  understand  they
are  not  self-created,  but  that  Thou,  in  love,  hast
sent  them  into  the  world  as  Thou  didst  send  me.
Father  of  truth  !  the  world  did  not  know  Thee,  but
I  knew  Thee,  and  they  have  known  Thee  through
me.      And  I  have  made  plain  to  them  what  Thou


Jn.


THE  FAREWELL  DISCOURSE  145

art.  Thou  art  in  me,  that  the  love  with  which
Thou  hast  loved  me  may  be  in  them  also.  Thou
gavest  them  life,  and  therefore  didst  love  them.  I
have  taught  them  to  know  this,  and  to  love  Thee ;
so  that  Thy  love  might  be  returned  from  them  to
Thee."


CHAPTEE  XII


THE   VICTORY   OF   THE   SPIRIT    OVER   THE   FLESH

Therefore,  for  him  who  Hues,  not  the  self-life,  but  a  common
life  in  the  will  of  the  Father,  there  is  no  death.  Bodily
death  is  for  him  union  with  the  Father

("ttbtne  is  tbe  hlng&om,  power,  an&  glorg")

After  this,  Jesus  said  :  "  Now  arise,  and  let  us  go ;
already  he  is  coming  who  will  betray  me."

And  he  had  hardly  said  this,  when  suddenly
Judas,  one  of  the  twelve  disciples,  appeared,  and
with  him  a  great  throng  of  people  with  sticks  and
swords.  Judas  said  to  them :  "  I  will  bring  you
where  he  and  his  followers  are,  and  so  that  you
may  know  him  among  them  all,  he  whom  I  shall
first  kiss,  that  is  he."  And  he  straightway  went
up  to  Jesus,  and  said  :  "  Hail,  teacher  ! "  and  kissed
him.

And  Jesus  said  to  him :  "  Friend,  why  are  you
here  ? "

Then  the  guard  surrounded  Jesus,  and  wished  to
take  him.

And  Peter  snatched  the  sword  from  the  high
priest's  servant,  and  slashed  the  man's  ear.

But   Jesus   said :   "  You   must   not   oppose   evil


47.


48.


62.


VICTORY  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OVER   THE  FLESH      147


Mt.  xxvi.  55.


Lk    xxii.  53.


Mt  xxvi.  56.


Jn  xviii.  12.


Mk.  xiv.  63.


Mt.  xxvi.  58.


Cease."  And  he  said  to  Peter :  "  Eeturn  the  sword
to  him  from  whom  you  took  it ;  he  who  shall  draw
the  sword,  shall  perish  with  the  sword."

And  after  this,  Jesus  turned  to  the  crowd,  and
said :  "  Why  have  you  come  out  against  me,  as
against  a  robber,  with  arms  ?  I  was  every  day
among  you  in  the  temple,  and  taught  you,  and  you
did  not  take  me.  But  now  is  your  hour,  and
the  power  of  darkness."

Then,  having  seen  that  he  was  taken,  all  the
disciples  ran  away.

And  the  officer  ordered  the  soldiers  to  take
Jesus,  and  bind  him.  The  soldiers  bound  him,
and  took  liun  first  to  Annas.  This  was  the  father-
in-law  of  Caiaphas,  and  Caiaphas  was  the  high
priest  for  that  year,  and  lived  in  the  same  house
with  Annas.  This  was  the  same  Caiaphas  who
planned  how  to  destroy  Jesus.  He  held  that  it
was  good  for  the  sake  of  the  people  to  destroy
Jesus,  because,  if  that  were  not  done,  it  would  be
worse  for  the  whole  people.  And  they  took  Jesus
to  the  house  where  this  high  priest  lived.

When  they  had  brought  Jesus  thither,  one  of
Iiis  disciples,  Peter,  followed  him  from  afar,  and
watched  where  they  were  taking  him.  When  they
brought  Jesus  into  the  court  of  the  high  priest,
Peter  went  in  also,  to  see  how  all  would  end.
And  a  girl  in  the  yard  saw  Peter,  and  said  to
him :  "  You,  also,  were  with  Jesus  of  Galilee."
Then  Peter  was  afraid  that  they  would  accuse
him  also,  and  he  said  aloud  before  all  the  people :
"  I   do   not   know    what    you  are   talking    about."


148


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


Afterwards,  when  they  had  taken  Jesus  into  the
house,  Peter  also  entered  the  hall,  with  the  people.
In  the  hall,  a  woman  was  warming  herself  at  the
fire,  and  Peter  approached.  The  woman  looked  at
Peter,  and  said  to  the  people :  "  See,  this  man  is
likely  to  have  been  with  Jesus  of  Kazareth."  Peter
was  stdl  more  frightened,  and  swore  that  he  never
was  with  liim,  and  did  not  even  know  what  kind
of  a  man  Jesus  was.  A  little  while  after,  the
people  came  up  to  Peter,  and  said :  "  It  is  quite
clear  that  you  also  were  among  the  disturbers.
By  your  speech  one  may  know  that  you  are  from
Galilee."  Then  Peter  began  to  swear,  and  aver
that  he  had  never  known  or  seen  Jesus.

And  he  had  hardly  said  this,  when  the  cock
crew.  And  Peter  remembered  those  words  which
Jesus  had  said  to  him,  when  Peter  swore  that  if
all  denied  Jesus,  he  would  not  deny  him :  "  Before
the  cock  crow  this  night,  you  will  deny  me  thrice."
And  Peter  went  out,  and  cried  bitterly.  Jesus  had
prayed  that  he  might  not  thus  fall  into  temptation.
He  had  fallen  into  one  temptation,  that  of  strife,
when  he  began  to  defend  Jesus ;  and  into  another
temptation,  the  fear  of  death,  when  he  denied  Jesus.

And  there  gathered  to  the  high  priest,  the
orthodox  chief  priests,  assistants  and  officials.  And
when  all  were  assembled,  they  brought  in  Jesus ;
and  the  chief  priests  asked  him,  what  was  his
teachiug,  and  who  were  his  followers.

And  Jesus  answered :  "  I  always  said  all  I  had
to  say  before  everybody  openly,  and  so  I  speak
now;  I  concealed  nothing  from  anyone,  and  I  conceal


Mt.  xxvi.  71.


73.


74.


75.


Mk.  xiv.  63.
Jn.  xviii.  10.


20.


VICTORY  OF   THE   SPIRIT  OVER    THE   FLESH       149


Ji].  xviii.  2i.


nothing  now.  But  about  what  do  you  question
me  ?  Question  those  who  heard  and  understood
my  teaching.     They  will   tell  you."

When  Jesus  had  said  this,  one  of  the  high
priest's  servants  struck  him  in  the  face,  and  said :
"  To  whom  are  you  speaking  ?  Is  this  the  way  to
answer  the  high  priest  ? "

Jesus  said :  "  If  I  spoke  ill,  say  what  I  spoke  ill.
But  if  I  said  nothing  ill,  then  there  is  no  cause  to
beat  me."

The  orthodox  chief  priests  strove  to  accuse
Jesus,  and  at  first  did  not  find  any  proofs  against
him  for  which  it  was  possible  to  condemn  him.
Afterwards  they  found  two  witnesses.  These  said
about  Jesus :  "  We  ourselves  heard  how  this  man
said :  '  I  will  destroy  this  temple  of  yours  made
with  hands,  and  in  three  days  will  build  up
another  temple  to  God,  not  made  with  hands.' "
But  this  evidence,  also,  was  not  enough  to  con-
demn him.  And  therefore  the  high  priest  called
up  Jesus,  and  said  :  "  Why  do  you  not  answer  their
evidence  ? "

Jesus  held  his  tongue,  saying  nothing.  Then
the  high  priest  said  to  him :  "  Well,  say  then,  Are
you  the  Christ,  and  of  God  \  "

Jesus  answered  him,  and  said :  "  Yes,  I  am  the
Christ,  and  of  God.  You  yourselves  will  now  see
that  the  Son  of  Man  is  made  like  God."

Then  the  high  priest  cried  out:  "You  blaspheme!
Now  we  do  not  want  any  evidence.  We  all  hear,
now,  that  you  are  a  blasphemer."  And  the  high
priest   turned   to   the   assembly,  and    said :    "  You


ISO


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


have  yourselves  heard  that  he  blasphemes  God.
To  what  do  you  sentence  him  for  this  ? "

And  all  said :  "  We  sentence  him  to  death."

Then  all  the  people,  and  the  guards,  fell  upon
Jesus,  and  began  to  spit  in  his  face,  to  strike  him
on  the  cheeks,  and  to  tear  at  him.  They  covered
his  eyes,  hit  him  in  the  face,  and  asked:  "Now,
prophet,  guess  who  it  was  that  hit  you  ? "

But  Jesus  held  his  peace.

Having  abused  him,  they  took  him,  bound,  to
Pontius  Pilate.  And  they  brought  him  into  the
court.

Pilate,  the  governor,  came  out  to  them  and
asked  :  "  Of  what  do  you  accuse  this  man  ? "

They  said :  "  This  man  is  doing  wrong ;  so  we
have  brought  him  to  you."

And  Pilate  said  to  them :  "  But  if  he  does
wrong,  then  judge  him  yourselves  according  to
your  law."

And  they  said :  "  We  have  brought  him  to  you
that  you  might  execute  him,  for  we  are  not  allowed
to  kill  anyone."

And  so  that  happened  which  Jesus  expected.
He  said  that  one  must  be  ready  to  die  on  the  cross
at  the  hands  of  the  Eomans,  more  likely  than  at
the  hands  of  the  Jews.

And  when  Pilate  asked,  whereof  they  accused
him,  they  said,  that  he  was  guilty  of  stining  up  the
people,  and  that  he  forbade  the  payment  of  taxes
to  Caesar,  and  that  he  set  up  himself  as  Christ  and
king.

Pilate    hstened    to    them,    and    bade    Jesus    be


Mt.  xxvi,  67,


xxvii.    2.
Jn.  xviii,  28,


Lk.  xxiii.    2.


Jn.  xviii.  33.


VICTORY  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OVER    THE  FLESH      151


Jn.  xviii.  34.


36.


87.


33.


Mk.    XV.


brought  to  him  in  the  court.  When  Jesus  came
in,  Pilate  said  to  him :  "  So  you  are  king  of  the
Jews  ? "

Jesus  said  to  him  :  "  Do  you  really  suppose  that
I  am  a  king,  or  are  you  repeating  only  that  which
others  have  told  you  ? "

Pilate  said :  "  I  am  not  a  Jew,  therefore  you
cannot  be  my  king,  but  your  people  have  brought
you  to  me.     What  kind  of  a  man  are  you  ? "

Jesus  answered  :  "  I  am  a  king  ;  but  my  kingdom
is  not  an  earthly  one.  If  I  were  an  earthly  king,
my  subjects  would  fight  for  me,  and  would  not
yield  to  the  high  priests.  But  as  it  is,  you  see
that  my  kingdom  is  not  an  earthly  one."

Pdate  said  to  this :  "  But  yet,  do  you  not  con-
sider yourself  a  king  ? "  Jesus  said  :  "  Not  only  I,
but  you  also,  cannot  but  consider  me  a  king.  For
I  only  teach,  in  order  to  discover  to  all  the  truth
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  everyone  who
lives  by  the  truth,  is  a  king."

Pilate  said :  "  You  spoke  of  truth.  What  is
truth  ? "

And  having  said  this,  he  turned,  and  went  to
the  chief  priests.  He  went  out  and  said  to  them :
"  In  my  opinion,  this  man  has  done  no  wrong."

But  the  chief  priests  insisted  upon  their  opinion,
and  said  that  he  was  doing  much  evil,  and  stirring
up  the  people,  and  had  raised  the  whole  of  Judtea
right  from  Galilee.

Then  Pilate,  in  the  presence  of  the  chief  priests,
began  to  question  Jesus.  But.  Jesus  did  not
answer.     Pilate  then  said  to  him :  "  Do  you  hear


152


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


of  wnat  they  accuse  you  ?  Why  do  you  not  justify
yourself  ? "

But  Jesus  still  held  his  tongue,  and  said  not
another  word,  so  that  Pilate  wondered  at  him.

Pilate  remembered  that  Galilee  was  in  the
power  of  King  Herod,  and  aslced :  "  Ah !  he  is
from  Galilee  ?  "     They  answered  :  "  Yes."

Then  he  said :  "  If  he  is  from  Galilee,  then  he
is  under  the  authority  of  Herod,  and  I  will  send
him  to  him."  Herod  was  then  in  Jerusalem,  and
Pilate,  in  order  to  rid  himself,  sent  Jesus  to  Herod.

When  they  brought  Jesus  to  Herod,  Herod  was
very  glad  to  see  him.  He  had  heard  much  of
him,  and  wished  to  know  what  kind  of  man  he
was.  So  he  called  Jesus  to  him,  and  began  to
question  him  about  all  he  wished  to  know.  But
Jesus  answered  him  nothing.  And  the  chief  priests
and  teachers,  just  as  with  Pilate,  so  before  Herod,
vehemently  accused  Jesus,  and  said  that  he  was  a
rioter.  And  Herod  deemed  Jesus  an  empty  fellow,
and  to  mock  him,  bade  them  clothe  him  in  red,
and  send  him  back  to  Pilate.  Herod  was  pleased
at  Pilate's  showing  respect  to  him,  by  sending
Jesus  for  his  judgment,  and  on  this  account  they
became  friends,  whereas  formerly  they  Iiad  been  at
variance.

Now,  when  they  brought  Jesus  again  to  Pilate,
Pilate  called  back  the  chief  priests  and  Jewish
authorities,  and  said  to  them :  "  You  brought  this
man  to  me  for  stirring  up  the  people,  and  I  have
examined  him  before  you,  and  do  not  see  that  he
is  a  lioter.      I  sent  him  with  you  to  Herod,  and


Mk.     \v.    5.


Lk  xxiii.    0.


VICTORY  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OVER    THE  FLESH      153


Mt.xxvii.  23.


Jn.    xix.    4.


now,  see, — nothing  wrong  is  found  in  liim.  And,
in  my  opinion,  there  is  no  cause  to  punish  him  with
death.  Had  vou  not  better  punish  hun  and  let
him  go  ? "

But  when  the  chief  priests  heard  this,  all  cried
out :  "  No,  punish  him  in  the  Roman  fashion !
Stretch  him  on  the  cross ! "  Pilate  heard  them
out,  and  said  to  the  chief  priests :  "  Well,  as  you
will !  But  you  have  a  custom  at  the  feast  of  the
Passover  to  pardon  one  condemned  malefactor.
Well,  I  have  lying  in  prison,  Barabbas,  a  murderer
and  rioter.  Which  one  of  the  two  must  be  let
free :  Jesus  or  Barabbas  ?  "

Pilate  thus  wished  to  save  Jesus ;  but  the  chief
priests  had  so  worked  upon  the  people,  that  all
cried  out :  "  Barabbas,  Barabbas  !  "

And  Pilate  said :  "  And  what  shall  be  done  with
Jesus  ? "

They  again  cried  out :  "  Eoman  fashion, — to  the
cross,  to  the  cross  with  him."

And  Pilate  tried  to  talk  them  over.  He  said :
"  Why  do  you  press  so  hardly  on  him  ?  He  has
done  nothing  that  he  should  be  punished  with
death,  and  he  has  done  you  no  harm.  I  will  set
him  free,  because  I  find  no  fault  in  him."

The  chief  priests  and  their  servants  cried  out :
"  Crucify,  crucify  him  !  "

And  Pdate  said  to  them :  "  If  so,  then  take  him
and  crucify  him  yourselves.  But  I  see  no  fault  in
him."

The  chief  priests  answered :  "  We  ask  only  that
which  our  law  demands.      By  our  law,  he  must  be


154


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


executed  for  having  made  himself  out  to  be  Son  of
God."

When  Pilate  heard  this  word,  he  was  troubled,
because  he  did  not  know  what  this  term  "  Son  of
God  "  meant.  And  having  returned  into  the  court,
Pilate  called  up  Jesus  again,  and  asked  him  :  "  Who
are  you,  and  whence  are  you  ?  "

But  Jesus  did  not  answer.

Then  Pilate  said :  "  But  why  do  you  not  answer
me  ?  You  surely  see  that  you  are  in  my  power,
and  that  I  can  crucify  you,  or  set  you  free."

Jesus  answered  him :  "  You  have  no  power.
There  is  power  only  from  above."

Pilate,  nevertheless,  wished  to  set  Jesus  free,
and  he  said  to  them :  "  How  is  it  you  wish  to
crucify  your  king  ?  "

But  the  Jews  said  to  him :  "  If  you  set  Jesus
free,  you  will  thereby  show  that  you  are  a  disloyal
servant  to  Ctesar,  because  he  who  sets  himself  up  as
king  is  an  enemy  to  Caesar.  Our  king  is  Caesar ;
but  crucify  this  man."

And  when  Pilate  heard  these  words,  he  under-
stood that  he  could  now  no  longer  refuse  to  execute
Jesus.

Then  Pilate  went  out  before  the  Jews,  took  some
water,  washed  his  hands,  and  said :  "  I  am  not
guilty  of  the  blood  of  this  just  man."  And  the
whole  people  cried  out :  "  Let  his  blood  be  upon  us
and  all  our  children."

So  that  the  chief  priests  gained  the  upper  hand.
And  Pilate  sat  in  his  place  of  judgment,  and
ordered  Jesus  to  be  first  flogged.


Jn.    xix.    S.


10.


12.
15.


12.


13.


Mt.  xxvii.  24.


Lk,  xxiii.  23.
Jn.  xix.  13.
Mt.  xxvii.  26.


VICTORY  OF   THE  SPIRIT  OVER    THE   FLESH       155


Mt.xxvii.  28,
29.


Jn.    xix.  15.


16.
Mt,  xxvii.  31.


Jn.    xix.  18.


Lk.  xxiii.  34.


Mk.    XV.  29.


When  they  had  flogged  him,  the  soldiers,  who
had  done  this,  put  a  crown  upon  his  head,  and  a
rod  in  his  hand,  and  threw  a  red  cloak  over  his
back,  and  fell  to  reviling  him  ;  in  mockery,  they
bowed  down  to  his  feet,  and  said :  "  Hail,  king  of
the  Jews  ! "  And  others  struck  him  on  the  cheeks,
over  the  face,  and  spat  in  his  face.

But  the  chief  priests  cried :  "  Crucify  him  !  Our
king  is  Caesar  !     Crucify  him  ! "

And  Pilate  bade  him  be  crucified.

Then  they  stripped  Jesus  of  the  red  dress,  put
on  him  his  own  clothing,  and  bade  him  bear  the
cross  to  a  place  called  Golgotha,  there  to  be  cruci-
fied at  once.  And  he  carried  his  cross,  and  so
came  to  Golgotha.  And  there  they  stretched
Jesus  on  the  cross,  beside  two  other  men.  These
two  were  at  the  sides,  and  Jesus  was  in  the
middle.

When  they  had  crucified  Jesus,  he  said :  "  Father !
forgive  them ;  they  do  not  know  what  they  are
doing."

And  when  Jesus  was  hung  on  the  cross,  the
people  thronged  round  him  and  railed  at  him.
They  came  up,  wagged  their  heads  at  him,  and
said :  "  So,  you  wished  to  destroy  the  temple  of
Jerusalem,  and  to  build  it  up  again  in  three  days.
Well  now,  save  your.self,  come  down  from  the
cross ! "  And  the  chief  priests  and  leaders  stood
there  also,  and  mocked  at  him,  and  said :  "  He
thought  to  save  others,  but  cannot  save  himself.
Now  show  that  you  are  Christ;  come  down  from
the  cross,  and  then  we  will  believe  you.     He  said


iS6


THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


that  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  God  would
not  forsake  him.  But  how  is  it  that  God  has  now
forsaken  him?"  And  the  people,  and  the  chief
priests,  and  the  soldiers,  railed  at  him,  and  even
one  of  the  robbers  crucified  with  him,  he  too  railed
at  him.

One  of  the  robbers,  reviling  him,  said :  "  If  you
are  Christ,  save  yourself  and  us."

But  the  other  robber  heard  this,  and  said :  "  Do
you  not  fear  God  ?  You  who  are  yourself  on  the
cross,  do  you  even  rail  at  the  innocent  ?  You  and
I  are  executed  for  our  deserts,  but  this  man  has
done  no  harm."

"  And,  turning  to  Jesus,  this  robber  said  to  him  :
"  Lord,  remember  me  in  your  kingdom."

And  Jesus  said  to  hiui :  "  Even  now  you  are
blessed  with  me  !  "

But  at  the  ninth  hour,  Jesus,  worn  out,  cried
aloud  :  "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabachthani !  "  This
means :  "  My  God,  my  God !  Why  hast  thou
forsaken  me  ? "

And  when  the  people  heard  this,  they  began  to
say  jeeringly :  "  He  is  calling  the  prophet  Elias  !
Let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come ! "

Afterwards,  Jesus  cried  out :  "  Let  me  drink  !"

And  a  man  took  a  sponge,  soaked  it  in  vinegar,
that  stood  by,  and  gave  it  to  Jesus  on  a  reed.

Jesus  sucked  the  sponge,  and  cried  out  in  a  loud
voice :  "  It  is  finished !  Father,  I  give  up  my
spirit  into  your  hands !  "  And,  letting  his  head
fall,  he  gave  up  the  ghost.


Lk.  xxiii.  39>


Mt.xx\ii.46.


Lk.  xxiii.  4t>,


A  PROLOGUE


THE  UNDERSTANDING  OF  LIFE

The  proclamation  of  Christ  has  replaced  the  belief  in  an
external  God  by  the  understanding  of  life

The  Gospel  is  the  revelation  of  this  truth,  that  the
first  source  of  everything  is  the  understanding  of
life  itself.  This  being  so,  the  Gospel  puts  in  the
place  of  what  men  call  "  God  "  a  right  understand-
ing of  life.  Without  this  understanding  there  is
no  life ;  men  only  live  in  so  far  as  they  understand
life.

Those  who  do  not  grasp  this,  and  who  deem  that
the  body  is  the  source  of  life,  shut  themselves  out
from  true  life ;  but  those  who  comprehend  that
they  live,  not  through  the  body,  but  through  the
spirit,  possess  true  life.  This  is  that  true  life  which
Jesus  Christ  came  to  teach  to  men.  Having  con-
ceived that  man's  life  flows  from  the  understanding,
he  gave  to  men  the  teaching  and  example  of  a  life
of  the  understanding  in  the  body.

Earlier  religions  were  the  announcements  of  law
as  to  what  men  ought  to  do,  and  not  to  do,  for  the

157


iS8


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


service  of  God.  The  teaching  of  Jesus,  on  the
other  hand,  deals  only  with  the  understanding  of
life.  No  man  has  ever  seen,  and  no  man  can  see
or  know,  an  external  God  ;  therefore  our  life  cannot
take  for  its  aim  the  service  of  such  a  God.  Only
by  adopting  for  his  supreme  principle  the  inner
understanding  of  life,  havmg  for  its  source  the
acknowledgment  of  God,  can  man  surely  travel  the
way  of  life.  '


The  announcement  of  salvation  of  Jesus  Christ,
the  Son  of  God.  This  is  the  announcement  of
salvation ;  all  men  who  come  to  know  they  are
sons  of  God  receive  true  life.  The  foundation  and
beginning  of  all  things  is  the  understanding  of  life.
Understanding  of  life  is  God.  This  the  announce-
ment of  Jesus  Christ  reveals  as  the  foundation  and
beginning  of  everything.  All  is  built  upon  the
understanding  of  life,  without  which  there  can  be
no  living.     In  this  is  true  life.

This  understanding  is  the  light  of  truth.  But
this  light  shines  amid  the  darkness,  and  the  dark-
ness is  not  able  to  overcome  it.  The  true  light
has  always  been  in  the  world,  and  shines  upon  all
men  who  come  into  the  world.  It  has  been  in  the
world,  and  the  world  existed  only  because  it  con-
tained this  light ;  but  the  world  has  not  adhered
to  it.  This  light  has  appeared  in  its  place,  but  its
place  has  not  retained  it.

All  those  who  have  grasped  the  understanding
of  life  have  received  the  opportunity  of  becoming


Mk.        i.    1,
Jn       XX.  31.


A   PROLOGUE


159


Jn.


like  it  through  belief  in  it.  Those  who  have  be-
lieved that  life  is  in  the  understanding  have  become
the  sons,  not  of  the  flesh,  but  of  the  understanding.

And  the  understanding  of  life  was  united  with
the  flesh  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  so  we
were  given  to  know  that  the  offspring  of  under-
standing, man  in  the  flesh,  is  of  the  same  nature  as
his  Father,  the  original  source  of  life.

The  teaching  of  Jesus  is  the  perfect  and  true
faith.  In  fulfdling  the  teaching  of  Jesus,  we  have
understood  the  new  faith  which  replaces  the  old.
It  was  law  that  Moses  gave,  but  we  come  to  under-
stand tlie  true  faith  through  Jesus  Christ.

No  man  has  ever  seen  God ;  the  Son  only,  who
is  in  the  Father,  has  shown  us  the  way  of  life.


A  SUMMARY


THE  UNDEESTANDING  OF  LIFE  IS  TO
DO  GOOD

The  announcement  of  blessedness  made  by  Jesus  Christ  is
an  announcement  of  understanding  of  life

The  understanding  of  life  is  this :  The  source  of
life  is  perfect  goodness,  and  therefore  human  life
is  perfectly  good  in  its  nature.  To  understand
the  source  of  life,  it  is  necessary  to  believe  that
our  spirit,  the  life  in  man,  came  from  this  source.
The  man,  formerly  not  living,  is  summoned  into
life  by  this,  his  origin.  This  source  of  life  appoints
blessedness  for  man,  because  its  own  being  is
blessedness.

To  keep  in  harmony  with  the  source  of  his  life,
a  man  must  fix  himself  upon  the  one  characteristic
of  this  source  which  is  comprehensible  to  him,  and
which  finds  blessedness  in  doing  good.  Therefore
man's  life  must  be  devoted  to  this  blessedness ;  that
is,  to  doing  good  from  love.  But  we  can  find  no
objects  of  goodness  other  than  men.  All  our  own
bodily  desires  are  out  of  harmony  with   this  prin-


A   SUMMARY


i6i


ciple  of  blessedness ;  and  therefore  they,  with  all
the  life  of  the  body,  must  be  surrendered  to  the
principle  of  blessedness,  to  active  love  to  mankind.
Love  to  our  fellow-men  follows  from  the  under-
standing of  life  revealed  by  Jesus  Christ.  The
confirmations  of  this  understanding  of  life  are  two-
fold. One  is,  that  when  not  accepted,  the  source
of  life  seems  to  be  an  impostor,  who  gives  to  men
an  unsatisfied  craving  for  life  and  blessedness.  The
other  is,  that  man  feels  in  his  soul  that  love  and
goodness  towards  his  fellow-men  is  the  only  true,
free,  eternal  life.

Tlie  First  Epistle  of  John  the  Divine.

This  is  the  announcement  of  the  understanding
of  life  through  which  men  have  fellowship  with  the
Father  of  life,  and  therefore  have  eternal  life.

This  is  an  announcement  of  blessedness.

The  understanding  of  life  is,  that  God  is  life  and
blessedness,  and  that  in  life  and  blessedness,  death
and  evil  do  not  exist.

If  we  say  that  we  are  at  one  with  God,  while  we
feel  we  are  living  in  evil  and  death,  then  either  we
are  imposing  upon  ourselves,  or  we  are  not  doing
what  we  ought  to  do.

Only  by  living  the  same  life  as  His,  do  we  be-
come at  one  with  Him.

As  a  teacher  of  this  life,  we  have  Jesus  Christ,
the  right-living.  He  freed  us  and  all  who  will,
from  wrong-living.

The  proof  that  we  know  the  teaching  of  Jesus


l62


THE  GOSPEL  TN  BRIEF


Christ  is,  that  we  cany  out  his  commaudments.
Anyone  who  says  he  knows  the  teaching  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  does  not  keep  his  connnandnients,  is  a
liar,  and  there  is  no  truth  in  him.  But  the  man
who  carries  out  his  commandments  has  the  love  of
God  in  him.  Only  through  love  can  we  know  that
we  are  at  one  with  God.

He  who  says  he  is  at  one  with  Jesus  Christ,  must
also  live  as  Jesus  lived.

He  who  says  of  himself  that  he  is  in  life  and
blessedness,  but  hates  his  living  brother-man,  is  not
in  life  and  blessedness,  but  in  death  and  evil ;  and
he  does  not  know  what  he  is  doing;  he  is  blind,
hating  the  life  which  is  in  himself  also.

To  escape  this  blindness,  a  man  must  remember
that  everything  in  the  world,  in  the  earthly  life,  is
the  desire  of  the  flesh,  or  vanity,  and  that  all  this
is  not  from  God.  And  that  all  this  passes  away,
perishes.  And  that  only  he  who  does  the  will  of
God,  which  is  love,  endures  for  ever.

Only  he  who  recognises  that  his  spirit  is  the
offspring  of  the  Father,  is  united  with  the  Father.
Therefore  remain  in  the  knowledge  that  you  are,
in  the  spirit,  sons  of  the  Father,  God,  and  you  will
have  eternal  life.

God  gives  us  the  opportunity  of  being  His  sons,
and  like  Himself.  So  that,  in  this  present  life,  we
become  His  sons.  "We  do  not  know  what  we  are
to  be,  but  we  know  that  we  are  like  Him,  and  that
we  are  united  with  Him.

Confidence  in  this  eternal  life  rids  us  of  our
mistakes,  and  purifies   us   to   the   Father's  purity.


1  Jn.      ii.  4.


A   SUMMARY


■63


1  Jn.     iii.  4.


For  whoever  commits  sin,  violates  the  will  of
God.

Jesus  Christ  came  to  teach  us  the  way  to  deliver-
ance from  sin  and  unity  with  God.  Therefore
those  who  become  united  with  Him  can  no  longer
sin.  Only  that  man  will  sin  who  does  not  know
Him.  But  he  who  lives  in  God,  acts  righteously  ;
and  only  he  who  is  not  united  with  God,  does
unrighteously.  He  who  owns  his  origin  from  God,
cannot  do  any  falsehood.

Therefore  men  are  of  two  classes — men  of  God,
and  men  who  are  not  of  God  ;  men  who  know  the
right  and  love  the  brethren,  and  men  who  do  not
know  the  right  and  do  not  love  the  brethren.

For,  following  the  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ,  we
cannot  refrain  from  loving  one  another.  Through
the  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  know  that  we  have
passed  from  death  to  life,  because  we  love  the
brethren,  and  that  he  who  does  not  love  his  brother
is  in  death.  AVe  know  that  one  who  does  not  love
his  living  brother  does  not  love  life.  And  he  who
does  not  love  life  cannot  himself  possess  life.

By  this  teaching  we  recognise  love,  in  the  fact
that  life  is  given  to  us  ;  and  we  know,  therefore,  that
we  also  must  give  up  our  life  for  our  brother.  So
that  he  who,  himself  having  the  means  of  life,  sees
his  brother  in  need,  and  does  not  yield  his  own  life
for  his  brother's  sake, — in  him  there  is  no  divine
love.

We  must  love,  not  by  words,  but  by  deeds,  in
truth.  And  he  who  so  loves  has  a  quiet  heart,
because  he  is  at  one  with  God.


164


THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF


If  our  heart  is  at  strife  in  us,  we  subdue  it  to
God.  For  God  is  higher  than  the  wishes  of  our
hearts.  But  if  there  is  no  strife  in  our  hearts,
then  we  are  blessed,  and  that  because  we  do  all
we  can,  the  best  deeds,  and  fulfil  all  that  is  ordained
for  us.

And  this  is  ordained  for  us — to  believe  that  man
is  the  son  of  God,  and  to  love  our  brother.  Those
who  do  this  are  united  with  God,  and  are  risen
above  the  world,  because  that  which  is  in  us  is
greater,  of  more  consequence,  than  all  the  world.

Therefore  let  us  love  one  another.  Love  is  from
God,  and  everyone  who  loves  is  the  son  of  God,  and
knows  God.  And  he  who  does  not  love,  does  not
know  God.      Because  God  is  love.

That  God  is  love,  we  know  because  He  sent  into
the  world  this  Spirit,  such  as  He  Himself  is,  and
thereby  gave  us  life.  We  did  not  exist,  and  God
was  under  no  compulsion,  but  He  gave  us  life
and  blessedness ;  therefore  He  must  love  us.

No  man  can  perfectly  know  God.  All  we  can
know  of  Him  is,  that  He  had  love  towards  us,  and
because  of  this  love  gave  us  life.  And  to  be  in
fellowship  with  God,  we  must  be  like  Him,  and  do
as  He  dues;  we  must  love  one  another.  If  we  love
one  another,  God  dwells  in  us,  and  we  dwell  in  Him.

Having  understood  the  love  of  God  towards  us,  we
believe  that  God  is  love,  and  that  he  who  loves  is
united  with  God.  And  having  understood  this,  we
do  not  fear  death,  because  in  this  world  we  become
such  as  God  Himself  is.  Our  Hfe  becomes  love,  and
is  thus  freed  from  fear  and  all  sufferings.


1  Jn.   iii.  20.
21.


A   SUMMARY


165


1  Jn.  iv.  19.


20.


21.


V.    3.


14.


18.


We  love,  because  He  loves.  And  we  love  not  a
God  whom  no  one  can  love,  because  no  one  sees  Him,
but  our  brother-man,  whom  it  is  possible  to  love.
He  who  says  he  loves  God,  and  yet  hates  his
brother,  is  deceiving  himself.  Because,  if  he  does
not  love  the  brother  whom  he  sees,  how,  then,  can
he  love  God  whom  he  does  not  see  ?  For  it  is
ordained  to  us  to  love  God  in  our  brother.

To  love  God,  is  to  fulfil  His  commandments.
And  these  commandments  are  not  hard  for  him
who,  recognising  that  his  origin  is  from  God,  rises
above  the  world.  Oiu:  faith  lifts  us  above  the
world.  And  our  faith  in  that  which  Jesus,  the
Son  of  God,  taught  us,  is  true.  He  has  taught  us
that  he  lived  in  the  world,  not  merely  in  the  way
of  truth,  but  by  the  power  of  the  spirit.  And  that
spirit  is  in  us,  and  makes  us  strong  in  truth,  fol-
lowing out  the  teaching.

If  we  believe  in  what  men  affirm,  why,  then,
should  we  not  believe  in  the  spirit  that  is  in  our-
selves ?  He  who  believes  in  that  spirit  of  life
which  is  in  us,  has  assurance  within  himself.  And
he  who  does  not  believe  that  there  is  a  spirit  from
above  us,  from  the  Father,  makes  God  a  deceiver.

The  spirit  in  us  affirms  that  our  life  is  eternal
He  who  knows  that  this  spirit  is  the  offspring  of
the  Infinite  Spirit,  and  becomes  like  Him,  has  eternal
life.  And  for  him  who  so  believes,  there  is  no  diffi-
culty left  in  his  life,  but  everything  he  desires  in
the  will  of  the  Father  will  come  to  him.

Therefore  he  who  believes  himself  to  be  a  son  of
God,  will  not  live  in  any  deception,  but  is  free  from


1 66


THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF


evil.  Because  he  knows  that  this  material  world
is  an  illusion,  and  that  in  man  himself  there  is  the
capacity  to  know  that  which  has  real  existence.
And  -only  the  Spirit,  the  Son,  the  offspring  of  the
rather,  really  exists.


IJn.


.  19.
20.


A   RECAPITULATION


CHAPTER  I

THE    SON    OF    GOD

Man,  the  son  of  God,  is  powerless  in  the  flesh,  and
free  in  the  spirit

("®ur  iFatbcr")

Jesus  in  his  childhood  called  God  his  Father.
There  arose  in  Juda?a,  at  this  time,  a  prophet  named
John.  John  preached  the  coming  of  God  upon
earth.  He  said  that  when  men  should  change
their  lives,  when  they  should  treat  one  another  as
equals,  when  tlipy  should  cease  to  injure  one
another,  and,  instead  of  so  doing,  serve  one  another,
then  God  would  appear  upon  earth,  and  His  king-
dom would  be  established  on  earth.  Jesus,  having
heard  this  declaration,  withdrew  from  among  men
and  went  into  the  wild  places,  to  meditate  upon
the  meaning  of  human  life,  and  upon  his  relations
to  that  infinite  source  of  all  being,  called  God.
And  Jesus  accepted  as  his  Father,  that  iufinite
source  of  being  whom  John  had  called  God.

167


l68  THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF

After  passing  days  in  the  wild  places  without
taking  food,  Jesus  began  to  suffer  hunger.  Then  he
thought  to  himself,  "  I  am  the  Son  of  God  the
Almighty ;  I  ought,  then,  to  be  as  He  is.  But  now,
I  wish  to  eat,  and  no  bread  comes  for  my  need ;  I
am  not,  then,  all-powerful."  Then  he  said  to  him-
self, "  It  is  true,  I  cannot  make  for  myself  bread
out  of  stones ;  but  I  can  overcome  the  want  of
bread.  So  that,  though  not  all-powerful  in  the
body,  I  am  all-powerful  in  the  spirit,  and  I  can
quell  the  body ;  and  thus  I  am  the  Son  of  God,
not  through  the  flesh,  but  through  the  spirit."

Then  he  said,  "  But  if  I  am  the  Son  of  the
Spirit,  I  can  free  myself  of  the  body,  and  do  away
with  it."  But  to  that  he  answered,  "  I  am  born
as  spirit,  embodied  in  flesh.  Such  is  the  will  of
my  Father,  and  I  cannot  set  myself  against  His
will."

"  But  if  you  cannot  satisfy  the  wants  of  your
Dody,  and  if  you  are  no  better  able  to  free  yourself
from  your  body,"  he  went  on  to  himself,  "  you
ought,  then,  to  labour  for  the  body,  and  to  enjoy  all
the  pleasures  it  gives  you."

But  to  that  he  answered,  "  I  cannot  satisfy  the
wants  of  my  body  any  better  than  I  can  rid  myself
of  it ;  but  my  life  is  all-powerful,  in  that  it  is  the
spirit  of  my  Father ;  and  it  follows  that  in  my
body  I  must  serve  the  spirit,  my  Father,  and  labour
for  Him  only !  And  becoming  convinced  that
man's  life  is  only  in  the  spirij;  of  the  Father,  Jesus
left  the  wild  places,  and  began  to  declare  his  teach-
ing to  men.      He  said  that  the  spirit  dwelt  in  him,


A  RECAPITULATION  169

that  henceforth  heaven  was  opened,  that  the
powers  of  heaven  were  brought  to  men,  that  for
men  a  free  and  boundless  life  was  begun,  and  that
all  men,  however  unfortunate  in  the  body,  may
be  happy.


CHAPTEE  II

LIFE    IN    THE    SPIRIT

Therefore  man  must  work,  not  for  the  flesh,  but  for
the  spirit

("Mbicb  art  in  beavcn")

The  Jews,  holding  themselves  orthodox,  worshipped
an  external  God,  whom  they  regarded  as  Creator
and  Lord  of  the  Universe.  According  to  their
teaching,  this  external  God  had  made  an  agree-
ment with  them.  According  to  this  agreement,  he
had  promised  the  Jews  to  help  them,  and  they  had
promised  to  worship  him ;  and  the  chief  condition
of  the  alliance  was  the  keeping  of  the  Sabbath.

But  Jesus  said :  "  The  Sabbath  is  a  human  in-
stitution. That  man  shall  live  in  the  spirit,  is  more
important  than  all  reUgious  ceremonies.  Like  all
external  forms  of  reUgion,  the  keeping  of  the
Sabbath  includes  in  itself  a  delusion.  It  is  im-
possible to  do  nothing  on  the  Sabbath.  Good
actions  must  be  done  at  any  time ;  and  if  keeping
the  Sabbath  prevents  good  action,  then  the  Sabbath
is  an  error."

Another  condition  in  this  agreement  with  God,
was  the  avoidance  of  the  society  of  infidels.      As

170


A   RECAPITULATION  171

to  this,  Jesus  said :  "  God  asks  for  no  sacrifice  to
Himself,  but  only  that  men  should  love  one
another."

Still  another  condition  related  to  the  following
of  rules  about  washing  and  cleansing ;  as  to  which,
Jesus  said  :  "  God  demands,  not  outside  cleanliness,
but  only,  pity  and  love  towards  men."  He  taught
that  all  such  external  ceremonies  were  harmful,
and  that  the  church  tradition  itself  was  an  evil.
The  church  tradition  causes  men  to  neglect  the
most  important  acts  of  love,  as  for  instance,  love
to  father  and  mother.  Of  all  external  ceremonies,
of  all  the  ritual  of  the  old  law,  which  had  for
object,  as  was  held,  the  purification  of  men,  Jesus
said  :  "  Kuow  all  of  you,  that  nothing  from  outside
can  defile  a  man ;  only  what  he  thinks,  and  what
he  does,  defiles  him."

After  this,  Jesus  went  to  Jerusalem,  a  town  con-
sidered holy,  entered  the  temple,  where  the  orthodox
believed  that  God  dwelt,  and  there  taught :  "  It  is
useless  to  offer  God  sacrifices ;  man  is  of  more  con-
sequence than  a  temple ;  and  the  only  duty  is,  to
love  one's  neighbour,  and  help  him."

And  he  taught,  further  :  "  Men  need  not  worship
God  in  any  particular  place,  but  they  must  worship
Him  in  spirit  and  in  act.  The  spirit  cannot  be
seen  or  shown.  The  spirit  is  man's  consciousness
of  his  sonship  to  the  Infinite  Spirit.  No  temple  is
needed.  The  true  temple  is  the  society  of  men
united  in  love."  He  said :  "  All  external  worship
of  the  divine  is  not  only  false  and  injurious,  as
with  the  Jews,  among  whom  it  caused  murder  and


172  THE   GOSPEL    IN  BRIEF

admitted  neglect  of  parents,  but  harmful,  because
one  who  goes  through  external  ceremonials,  thinks
himself  made  righteous,  and  free  from  the  need  of
doing  what  love  demands."  He  said  :  "  Only  that
man  aims  at  good,  and  does  good,  who  feels  his
own  imperfection.  To  do  good  deeds,  a  man  must
think  of  himself  as  imperfect.  But  external  acts
of  worship  lead  men  into  the  delusion  of  self-con-
ceit. All  external  ceremonies  are  unnecessary,
and  must  be  thrown  aside.  Deeds  of  love  are
incompatible  with  ceremonial  performances,  and  it
is  impossible  to  do  good  in  that  form.  Man  is  the
son  of  God  by  the  spirit,  and  therefore  must  serve
the  Father  in  the  spirit."


CHAPTER  III

THE    SOURCE    OF    LIFE
The  life  of  all  men  has  proceeded  from  the  spirit  of  the  Father

("1ballowc&  be  Zh^  IRame")

John's  disciples  asked  Jesus  what  was  meant  by
bis  "  Kingdom  of  God."  He  said  that  the  Kingdom
of  God  as  preached  by  him  was  also  that  preached
by  John ;  and  that  therein  every  man,  however
poor,  might  be  blessed.

And  Jesus  said  to  the  people :  "  John  was  the
first  who  preached  to  men  a  Kingdom  of  God  which
is  not  of  the  external  world,  but  is  in  the  soul  of
man.  The  orthodox  went  to  hear  John,  but  under-
stood nothing,  because  they  know  only  those  fictions
of  their  own  about  an  external  God,  which  they
preach ;  and  they  are  astonished  when  no  one  pays
heed  to  them.  But  John  preached  the  truth  of
the  Kingdom  of  God  within  men,  and  therefore  he
did  more  than  them  all.  He  did  so  much  that,
since  his  time,  the  law  and  the  prophets,  and  all
external  forms  of  divine  worship,  are  superseded.
Since  he  taught,  it  is  made  clear  that  the  Kingdom
of  God  is  in  the  soul  of  man.

"  The  beginning  and  the  end  of  all  things  is  in

173


174  THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

the  soul  of  man.  Every  man,  in  addition  to  his
bodily  life,  to  the  fact  which  he  knows  as  to  his
conception  from  a  bodily  father  through  a  bodily
mother,  recognises  in  himself  a  free  spirit,  intelli-
gent, and  independent  of  the  body.  This  very
Spirit,  infinite,  and  proceeding  from  the  infinite,  is
the  origin  of  all,  and  is  what  we  call  God.  We
know  Him  only  as  we  recognise  Him  within  us.
This  Spirit  is  the  source  of  our  life,  and  must  be
ranked  above  everything  ;  and  to  Him  we  must  live.
By  making  Him  the  foundation  of  our  Hfe,  we  gain
the  true  and  infinite  life.

"  The  Father-Spirit,  who  sends  this  Spirit  into
men,  cannot  have  sent  Him  to  deceive  men,  so  that,
while  conscious  of  Him,  they  might  come  to  lose
Him.  This  infinite  Spirit  being  in  man,  He  must
have  been  given  to  the  end  that  men,  through  Him,
might  have  infinite  hfe.  Therefore  the  man  who
conceives  of  this  Spirit  as  his  hfe,  has  infinite  life.
The  man  who  does  not  so  conceive,  has  no  true  life.
Men  can  of  themselves  choose  life  or  death.  Life, —
in  the  Spirit ;  death, — in  the  flesh.  The  life  of  the
Spirit  is  goodness,  Ught.  The  life  of  the  flesh  is
evil,  darkness.  To  believe  in  the  Spirit  means  to
do  good  deeds ;  to  disbelieve,  means  to  do  evil  deeds.
Goodness  is  life ;  evil  is  death.

"  God,  the  Creator,  external  to  us,  the  beginning
of  all  beginnings,  we  do  not  know.  Our  conception
of  Him  can  only  be  this,  that  He  sowed  in  men
the  Spirit ;  sowing,  as  a  sower  does,  everywhere,  not
discriminating,  over  the  field ;  and  the  seed,  falling  on
good  ground,  grows,  falling  on  sterile  ground,  perishes.


A   RECAPITULATION  175

"  The  Spirit  alone  gives  life,  and  men  are  respon-
sible for  keeping  or  losing  it.  To  the  Spirit,  no  evil
exists.  Evil  is  but  an  illusion  of  life.  There  are
only  the  two  conditions,  of  living  and  not-living.
Thus  the  world  presents  itself  to  every  man  ;  and
for  every  man  there  is  in  his  soul  a  consciousness
of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  Each  one  can,  by  his
own  free  will,  entei',  or  not  enter,  that  Kingdom.
To  enter,  belief  in  the  life  of  the  Spirit  is  necessary.
He  who  believes  in  that  life  of  the  Spirit,  has
infinite  life."


CHAPTEE  IV


GODS    KINGDOM


Therefore  the  will  of  the  Father  is  the  life  and
welfare  of  all  men

("ttbB  ftingaom  come")

Jesus  pitied  men  because  they  did  not  know  true
blessedness  ;  therefore  he  taught  them.  He  said :
"  Blessed  ai  e  those  who  have  no  property,  no
position,  and  who  do  not  care  for  these  ;  and  un-
happy are  they  who  seek  riches  and  position.
Because  such  poor  and  oppressed  people  are  in  the
Father's  will ;  but  the  rich  and  acknowledged  people
seek  only  to  make  gain  from  men  for  this  temporary
life.  To  carry  out  God's  will,  one  must  not  fear  to
be  poor  and  despised,  but  must  rejoice  in  this,  while
showing  men  what  true  happiness  is.

"  To  carry  out  the  will  of  the  Father,  which
gives  life  and  welfare,  mankind  must  fulfil  five
commandments,  namely :

The  First   Covimanclment.

To  do  no  ill  to  anyone,  and  to  so  act  as  to  rouse
evil  in  no  one ;  because  from  evil  comes  evil.

176


A   RECAPITULATION  177

The  Second   Commandment.

Not  to  follow  after  women,  and  not  to  desert  the
woman  with  whom  a  union  has  once  been  formed ;
because  desertion  and  change  of  wives  causes  all
the  world's  dissoluteness.


The   Third  Commandm-ent.

To  take  no  oath  of  any  kind  ;  because  nothing
can  be  promised,  since  man  is  in  the  Father's
power ;  and  oaths,  when  taken,  are  for  bad  ends.

The  Fourth  Commandment.

Not  to  fight  against  evil,  but  to  suffer  wrong,  and
to  give  even  more  than  men  would  exact  from  us ;
not  to  condemn,  and  not  to  use  the  law  ;  because
every  man  is  himself  full  of  errors,  and  cannot  guide
others.  By  taking  revenge,  we  only  teach  others
to  revenge.

The  Fifth  Commandment.

To  make  no  difference  between  a  fellow-
countryman  and  a  foreigner ;  because  all  men  are
children  of  one  father.

"  The  observance  of  these  five  commandments  is
necessary,  not  to  win  praise  from  men,  but  for
oneself,  for  one's  own  welfare ;  therefore  there  is
no  propriety  in  praying  and  fasting  in  sight  of  men.

"  The  Father  knows  all  that  men  need,  and  there
is  no  necessity  to  pray  for  particular  things ;  it  is


178  THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

simply  needful  to  seek  to  be  in  the  Father's  will.
And  this  is  the  will  of  the  Father,  that  a  man  shall
have  no  anger  towards  any  other.  To  keep  fasts  is
not  essential,  for  men  may  fast  merely  to  win  praise
from  men,  aud  such  praise  ought  to  be  avoided.
It  is  only  necessary  carefully  to  conform  to  the
will  of  God,  and  the  rest  will  follow  of  itself.
While  caring  for  the  body,  care  cannot  be  given  to
the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  Even  though  a  man  does
not  trouble  about  food  and  clothing,  he  will  live  on.
The  Father  will  give  life.  The  needful  thing  is,  at
this  present  moment,  to  be  in  the  will  of  the
Father.  The  Father  gives  to  his  children  what
they  need.  We  must  desire  only  the  power  of  the
Spirit,  which  the  Father  gives.

"  The  five  commandments  mark  out  the  road  to
the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  This  narrow  path  alone
leads  to  eternal  life.  False  teachers — wolves  in
the  skins  of  sheep — always  try  to  turn  men  astray
from  this  road ;  they  must  be  guarded  against.
False  teachers  can  always  be  detected,  because  they
teach  evil  in  the  name  of  good.  If  they  teach
violence  and  executions,  they  are  false  teachers.
By  the  deeds  they  teach  they  may  be  known.

"  Not  that  man  does  the  Father's  will,  who  calls
on  tlie  name  of  God ;  but  he  who  does  good  deeds.
And  he  who  fulfils  these  five  commandments  will
have  secure  aud  true  life,  of  which  nothing  can
deprive  him.  But  he  who  does  not  fulfil  them  will
have  an  insecure  life  ;  one  soon  to  be  taken  from
him,  leaving  him  nothing."

The  teaching    of  Jesus    filled   the   people   with


A    RECAPITULATION  179

admiration  and  joy,  because  it  offered  freedom  to
everyone.

The  teaching  of  Christ  was  the  fulfilment  of
John's  prophecy  that  God's  chosen  one  should  bring
light  to  men,  overcome  evil,  and  restore  truth,  by
kindness,  meekness,  and  goodness,  but  not  by
violence.


CHAPTER  V

THE    TRUE    LIFE

The  fulfilment  of  the  personal  will  leads  to  death;  the
fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will  giues  the  true  life

("ZM  will  be  Oone")

The  wisdom  of  life  is,  the  recognition  of  one's  own
life  as  the  offspring  of  the  Father's  Spirit.  Men
set  before  themselves  the  aims  of  the  bodily  life,
and  in  pursuing  these  aims,  they  harass  themselves
and  others.

In  receiving  the  doctrine  of  the  spiritual  life,
and  in  subjecting  and  making  less  of  the  body,  men
will  find  a  full  satisfaction  in  the  life  of  the  Spirit,
in  that  life  which  is  appointed  for  them.

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples  :  "  The  true  food  of
man  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  will  of  the  Father-
Spirit.  This  fulfilment  is  always  possible.  Our
whole  life  is  a  gathering  of  the  fruits  of  the  life
sown  within  us  by  the  Father.  Those  fruits  are
the  good  we  are  doing  among  men.

"  We  ought  not  to  look  forward  with  anxiety  for
anything.  We  ought,  without  ceasing  our  interest
in  life,  to  do  good  among  men."

After  this,  Jesus  happened  to  be  in  Jerusalem,


A   RECAPITULATION  i8i

where  was  a  bath,  beside  which  lay  a  sick  man,
doing  nothing  but  waiting  a  miracle  to  cure  him.
Jesus  came,  and  said  to  him :  "  Do  not  expect  a
cure  by  a  miracle,  but  live  your  life  according  to
your  strength,  and  do  not  be  deluded  as  to  the
purpose  of  life."  The  invalid  obeyed  Jesus,  got  up,
and  went  away.

The  orthodox,  seeing  this,  began  to  reproach
Jesus  for  what  he  said,  and  because  he  had,  on  the
Sabbath,  raised  an  invalid.  Jesus  said  to  them :
"  I  did  nothing  new.  I  have  only  the  power  to
act  of  our  common  Father,  the  Spirit.  He  lives,
and  gives  life  to  men,  and  I  have  done  likewise.
And  to  do  this  is  every  man's  business.  Everyone
is  free,  and  can  live,  or  not  live.  To  live,  is  to
fulfil  the  will  of  the  Father,  which  is  to  do  good  to
others.  Not  to  live,  is  to  fulfil  one's  own  will,  not  to
do  good  to  others.  It  is  in  everyone's  power  to  do
this,  or  that ;   to  gain  life,  or  to  destroy  it.

"  The  true  life  of  man  is  like  this.  A  master
apportioned  to  his  slaves  some  valuable  property,
and  told  each  one  to  work  upon  what  was  given  to
him.  Some  worked ;  some  did  not  work,  but  put
out  of  sight  what  was  given  to  them.  The  master
demanded  an  account :  and  to  those  who  worked,
he  gave  yet  more  than  they  had ;  but  from  those
who  did   not  work,  he  took   away  everything."

The  portion  of  valuable  property  of  the  master
is  the  Spirit  of  life  in  man,  who  is  the  son  of  the
Father-Spirit.  He  who  in  his  Life  works  for  the  sake
of  the  spirit-life,  receives  infinite  life ;  he  who  does
not  work,  is  deprived  of  what  was  given  to  him.


1 82  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

The  true  life  is  the  common  life  of  humanity,
and  not  the  life  of  the  individual.  Each  one  must
work  for  the  life  of  others.

After  this,  Jesus  went  to  a  desert  place,  and  many
people  followed  him.  At  evening,  the  disciples
came,  and  said :  "  How  shall  we  feed  all  these
people  ?  "  Among  the  gathering  were  some  who
had  nothing,  and  some  who  had  bread  and  fish.
And  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples  :  "  Give  me  all  the
bread  you  have."  He  took  the  loaves,  and  gave
bread  to  his  disciples,  who  gave  to  others,  who  did
likewise.  So  all  ate  of  others'  bread,  not  consuming
all  there  was,  and  all  were  satisfied.  And  Jesus
said :  "  Act  just  in  this  way.  It  is  not  necessary
that  each  one  should  get  food  for  himself,  but  it  is
needful  to  do  that  which  the  Spii'it  in  man  demands,
namely,  that  each  shall  share  to  others  what  supply
there  is.  The  true  food  of  man  is  the  Spirit  of  the
Father.  Man  lives  by  the  Spirit  only.  Everything
in  life  must  be  made  subservient  to  this ;  for  life
consists  in  doing,  not  one's  own  will,  but  the  will  of
the  Father  of  life.  And  that  will  is,  that  the  per-
fect life  of  the  Spirit  which  is  given  to  men,  shall
remain  in  them,  and  that  all  shall  cherish  the  life
of  the  Spirit  within  them  until  the  hour  of  death.
The  Father,  the  source  of  life,  is  Spirit.  Life  con-
sists only  in  carrying  out  the  will  of  the  Father ;
and  to  carry  out  that  will  of  the  Spirit,  one  must
surrender  the  body.  The  body  is  the  food,  the
material  for  the  life  of  the  Spirit.  Only  in  giving
up  the  body  does  the  Spirit  hve."

After  this,  Jesus  chose  certain  disciples,  and  sent


A   RECAPITULATION  1S3

them  everywhere  to  preach  the  doctrine  of  the  life
of  the  Spirit.  In  sending  them,  he  said  :  "  Preach
the  hfe  of  the  Spiiit,  and,  consistently  therewith,
renounce  beforehand  all  ileshly  desires,  and  have
nothing  of  your  own.  Be  ready  for  persecution,
privation,  suffering.  Those  who  love  the  life  of  the
body  will  hate  you,  harass  and  murder  you ;  but
do  not  fear.  If  you  fulfil  the  will  of  the  Father,
then  you  possess  the  life  of  the  Spirit,  of  which  no
one  can  deprive  you."

The  disciples  went  away,  and  when  they  returned,
declared  that  everywhere  the  teachiugs  of  evU  were
conquered  by  them.

Then  the  orthodox  told  Jesus  that  his  teaching,
even  if  it  conquered  evU,  was  in  itself  an  evil,
because  those  who  carry  it  out  must  of  necessity
suffer.  To  this,  Jesus  answered  :  "  Evil  cannot  con-
quer evil.  If  evil  is  conquered,  it  can  only  be  by
good.  Goodness  is  the  will  of  the  Father-Spirit
common  to  all  men.  Every  man  has  a  knowledge
of  what  benefits  himself.  If  he  does  similar  benefits
to  others,  if  he  does  that  which  is  the  will  of  the
Father,  then  he  wUl  do  good.  Therefore  the  carrying
out  of  the  will  of  the  Father-Spirit  results  well,
even  though  it  be  followed  with  sufferings  and
deaths  of  those  who  fulfil  that  will"


CHAPTEE  VI

THE    FA     SE    LIFE

Therefore,  in  order  to  receive  the  true  life,  man  must  on  earth
resign  the  false  life  of  the  flesh,  and  Hue  by  the  Spirit

{"  ®n  eartb,  ag  in  beaven  ")

To  the  spiritual  life  there  can  be  no  difference
between  members  of  one  family  and  strangers.
Jesus  said  that  his  mother  and  his  brethren,  as
such,  had  no  superior  claims  upon  him ;  only  those
were  near  to  him  who  fulfilled  the  will  of  the  com-
mon Father.  A  man's  life  and  welfare  depend,  not
on  family  relations,  but  on  the  life  of  the  Spirit.

Jesus  said :  "  Blessed  are  those  who  retain  their
understanding  of  the  Father.  The  man  who  lives
by  the  Spirit  has  no  home,  for,  being  by  the  Spirit,
he  cannot  own  any  special  house."  And  he  said
that  he  himself  had  no  fixed  abode ;  that  not  being
needed  to  enable  a  man  to  carry  out  the  will  of
the  Father,  which  can  be  done  at  all  times,  in  all
places.

The  death  of  the  body  cannot  be  dreadful  to  a
man  who  gives  himself  up  to  the  will  of  the  Father,
because  the  life  of  the  Spirit  goes  on  despite
the  death  of  the  body.      Jesus  said  that  he  who

184


A   RECAPITULATION  185

believes  in  the  life  of  the  Spirit,  has  nothing  to
fear.

No  cares  make  it  impossible  for  a  man  to  live
in  his  Spirit.  When  a  man  said  that  he  would
obey  the  teaching  of  Christ  presently,  but  that  he
must  first  bury  his  father,  Jesus  answered  :  "  Only
the  dead  trouble  about  burial  of  the  dead ;  but
the  living  Uve  always  in  fulfilhng  the  will  of  the
Father."  Cares  about  relations  and  family  affairs
must  not  hinder  the  life  of  the  Spirit.  He  who
troubles  about  the  results  to  his  bodily  life  from
the  fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will,  does  as  the
ploughman  does,  who  ploughs,  looking  not  in  front,
but  behind.

Cares  for  the  pleasures  of  the  bodily  life,  which
seem  so  important  to  men,  are  delusions.  The
only,  the  real  business  of  life,  is  the  making  plain
of  the  Father's  will,  attention  to  it,  and  fulfilment
of  it.  To  Martha's  reproach,  that  she  alone  troubled
about  the  supper,  and  that  her  sister  Mary  did  not
help,  but  listened  to  his  teaching,  Jesus  said :  "  You
blame  her  unjustly.  Take  some  trouble,  yourself,
if  you  need  what  comes  of  it,  but  let  those  who  do
not  need  pleasures  for  the  body,  attend  to  the  one
essential  business  of  life."

And  Jesus  said :  "  He  who  desires  the  true  life,
which  comes  of  fuMlluig  the  Father's  will,  must
first  of  all  give  up  his  own  personal  desires."  He
must  not  only  cease  to  plan  out  his  life  to  his  own
wishes,  but  he  must  be  ready  at  any  moment  to
bear  any  privations  and  sufferings.  One  who  seeks
to  arrange  his  bodily  life  to  his  own  desires,  will


i86  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

wreck  the  true  life  of   fulfilment  of  the  Father's
will.

Most  ruiuous  to  the  life  of  the  Spirit  is  the  love
of  gain,  of  getting  rich.  Men  forget  that,  however
much  they  acquire  riches  and  goods,  they  may  die
at  any  moment,  and  their  property  is  not  an  essen-
tial of  life.  Death  broods  over  every  one  of  us.
Sickness,  kilhng  by  men,  fatal  accidents,  may  at  any
minute  end  life.  Bodily  death  is  the  unescapable
condition  of  every  second  of  life.  While  one  lives,
one  must  regard  every  hour  of  life  as  a  delay,
granted  by  the  kindness  of  some  power.  This  we
must  remember,  and  not  say  that  we  do  not  know
it.  We  know  and  foresee  in  regard  to  all  events
of  earth  and  sky,  but  death,  which  we  know  waits
on  us  every  moment,  we  forget.  But  unless
we  forget  death,  we  cannot  yield  ourselves  to  the
life  of  the  body,  we  cannot  build  upon  it.  To
follow  the  teaching  of  Christ,  one  has  to  count  up
the  advantages  of  serving  the  bodily  life,  of  serving
one's  own  will,  and  the  advantages  of  fulfilling  the
Father's  will.  Only  one  who  clearly  takes  account
of  this  can  be  a  disciple  of  Christ.  And  he  who
makes  the  calculation,  will  not  prefer  a  visionary
benefit  and  a  visionary  life  to  the  true  good  and  the
true  life.  The  true  life  has  been  given  to  men,
and  men  know  it,  they  hear  its  summons,  but,  always
swept  on  by  the  cares  of  the  moment,  they  are  with-
held from  it.  The  true  life  is  as  though  a  rich  man
gave  a  feast,  and  summoned  the  guests.  His  call  to
them  is  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Father  inviting
all  men  to  Himself.     But  of  those  invited  some  are


A  RECAPITULATION  187

busy  in  commerce,  some  in  the  household,  some  in
family  affairs,  none  come  to  the  feast.  Only  the
poor,  such  as  have  no  cares  of  the  body,  come  to  the
feast,  and  gain  happiness.  So  men,  distracting
themselves  with  cares  for  the  bodily  life,  are  losing
the  true  life.  He  who  cannot,  and  that  altogether,
decline  the  cares  and  gains  of  the  bodily  life,  cannot
fulfil  the  Father's  will,  because  one  cannot  serve  one-
self a  little,  and  the  Father  a  httle.

A  man  must  calculate,  whether  it  is  better  to
serve  the  body,  whether  it  is  possible  to  arrange
his  life  according  to  his  own  will.  He  must  do  as
one  does  who  would  build  a  house,  or  who  contem-
plates war.  Such  an  one  will  reckon  whether  he
has  means  to  finish  building,  whether  he  has  means
to  conquer.  And  upon  seeing  that  he  has  not,  he
will  not  spend  for  nothing  either  labour  or  armies.
Otherwise,  he  fruitlessly  wastes,  and  will  be  a
laughing-stock  to  men.  If  one  could  arrange  the
bodily  life  to  one's  own  will,  then  it  might  be
well  to  serve  the  body ;  but  as  that  is  impossible,
then  better  sacrifice  the  body,  and  serve  the  Spirit.
Otherwise,  one  will  gain  neither  one  thing  nor
another  ;  the  bodily  life  will  not  be  gained,  and  the
spiritual  life  will  be  lost.  So  that,  to  fulfil  the
Father's  will,  the  bodily  life  must  be  quite  resigned.

The  bodUy  Hfe  is  involved  in  the  world's  false
riches,  which  we  are  commissioned  to  manage  in
such  a  way  as  to  gain  the  true  and  perfect  riches.

If  a  rich  man  has  a  manager  who  knows  that,
however  he  may  serve  his  master,  the  latter  will
dismiss  him,  leaving  him  with  nothing,  this  manager


l88  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

will  do  well  if,  during  his  management  of  the  other's
riches,  he  treats  people  well.  Then,  even  though
his  master  dismiss  him,  those  whom  he  has  bene-
fited will  receive  hiui  and  sustain  him.  So  also
must  men  act  as  to  the  bodily  life.  The  bodily
life  is  that  wealth,  not  one's  own,  which  is  given
to  one  to  manage  for  a  time.  If  men  will  rightly
use  this  wealth,  which  is  not  their  own,  then  they
will  gain  true  wealth,  really  their  own.

If  we  do  not  give  up  our  falsely-held  riches,  then
the  true  life  will  not  be  given  to  us.  The  illusory
life  of  the  body,  and  the  life  of  the  spirit,  cannot
both  be  served.  One  cannot  serve  property  and
God.  What  is  honourable  with  men,  is  abomination
before  God.  Eiches  are  evil  before  God.  A  rich
man  is  continually  guilty,  in  that  he  eats  abimdantly
and  luxuriously,  while  at  his  door  the  poor  starve.
And  everyone  knows  that  the  property  which  one
will  not  share  to  others,  is  held  in  non-fulfilment  of
the  Father's  will.

Once  Jesus  was  approached  by  an  orthodox  and
rich  ruler,  who  began  to  boast  that  he  had  fulfilled
all  the  commandments  of  the  law.  Jesus  reminded
him  that  there  is  a  commandment  to  love  others  as
oneself,  and  that  this  is  the  Father's  will.  The
ruler  said  he  kept  this  also.  Then  Jesus  said  to
him  :  "  That  is  not  true ;  if  you  desire  to  fulfil  the
Father's  will,  you  would  not  have  property.  A
man  cannot  fulfil  the  will  of  the  Father,  if  he  has  a
fortune  of  his  own,  which  he  does  not  give  away  to
others."

And  Jesus  said  to  the  disciples :  "  Men  think  it


A   RECAPITULATION  189

impossible  to  live  without  property,  but  I  tell  you,
true  life  is  in  the  giving  up  of  one's  own  to  others."

A  man,  Zacchseus  by  name,  heard  the  teaching
of  Jesus,  and  believed  it,  and  having  invited  Jesus
to  his  house,  he  said  to  him :  "  I  am  giving  half  my
fortune  to  the  poor,  and  I  will  restore  four  times
over  to  those  whom  I  may  have  wronged."  And
Jesus  said :  "  Here  is  a  man  who  fulfils  the  Father's
will ;  for  the  fulfilment  of  that  will  is  not  a  matter
of  finding  an  opportunity,  but  the  whole  life  must
go  in  fulfilment."

Goodness  cannot  be  measured  in  any  way.  It  is
impossible  to  say  who  has  done  more  good,  and  who
less.  A  widow  who  gives  away  her  last  farthing
gives  more  than  a  rich  man  who  gives  thousands.
It  is  also  impossible  to  measure  goodness  by  utility
or  inutility.

As  an  instance  of  how  goodness  must  be  shown,
take  the  woman  who  pitied  Jesus,  and  in  her  emotion
poured  upon  him  many  pounds'  worth  of  costly  oil.
Judas  said  she  had  done  foolishly,  because  many
people  might  have  been  fed  on  the  price.  But
Judas  was  a  thief ;  he  spoke  untruth,  and  in  talking
of  the  worldly  value  of  the  oil,  he  did  not  consider
the  poor.  Not  utility,  not  value,  comes  into  the
question,  but  the  necessity  of  always,  every  minute,
loving  others,  and  giving  up  to  them  one's  own.


CHAPTER  VII

I    AND    THE    FATHEE    ARE    ONE

The  true  food  of  everlasting  life  is  the  fulfilment  of  the
Father's  will

("0ive  us  tbls  Dag  our  Sails  breaJ)")

Answeeing  the  Jews'  demands  for  proofs  of  the
truth  of  his  teaching,  Jesus  said :  "  The  truth  of  my
teaching  is  proved  in  the  fact  that  I  teach,  not  in
my  own  name,  but  in  the  name  of  the  common
Father  of  all  men.  I  teach  that  which  is  good  in
the  sight  of  the  Father  of  all  men,  and  is  therefore
good  for  all  men.

"  Do  as  I  say  ;  fulfil  the  five  commandments,  and
you  will  see  that  the  truth  is  as  I  say.  Fulfilment
of  these  five  commandments  will  drive  away  all
the  world's  evil;  therefore  it  must  be  that  they
are  true  and  right.  Clearly,  he  who  teaches,  not
his  own  personal  will,  but  the  will  of  Him  who
sent  him,  will  teach  the  truth.  The  Mosaic  law
teaches  the  fulfilment  of  men's  own  wills,  and  is
therefore  full  of  contradictions ;  but  my  teaching
is  to  fulfil  the  will  of  the  Father,  and  therefore  in
it  all  is  harmonious."

The  Jews  did  not  understand  him,  and  looked


A    RECAPITULATION  191

for  external  proofs  as  to  whether  he  himself  were
the  Christ  written  of  in  the  prophecies.  On  this
he  said  to  them  :  "  Do  not  inquire  who  I  am,
whether  it  is  of  me  your  prophecies  speak,  but
attend  to  my  teaching,  to  what  I  say  of  our  com-
mon Father.  It  is  not  necessary  to  inquire  about
outside  matters,  as  to  whence  I  come ;  but  my
teaching  must  be  followed.  He  who  will  follow
my  teaching  will  obtain  true  life.  There  can  be
no  proofs  of  my  teaching.  It  is  the  light  itself,
and  as  you  cannot  illuminate  light,  so  you  cannot
prove  the  truth  of  truth.  My  teaching  is  light ;
he  who  sees  it  has  light  and  life,  and  has  no  need
of  proofs.  But  he  who  is  in  darkness,  must  come
to  the  light."

But  again  the  Jews  asked  him  who  he  was,  as
to  his  bodily  personality.  He  said  to  them :  "  I
am,  as  I  told  you  from  the  first,  a  man,  the  Son  of
the  Father  of  life.  Only  he  who  will  so  regard
himself  (this  is  the  truth  I  teach),  and  will  fulfil
the  will  of  the  common  Father,  only  he  will  cease
to  be  a  slave,  and  become  a  free  man.  Because
we  are  slaves  only  through  the  error  which  con-
siders the  bodUy  Life  as  the  real  life.  He  who  will
understand  the  truth,  that  life  consists  only  in  the
fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will,  only  he  will  become
free  and  immortal.  Just  as  a  bond-servant  in  a
master's  house  is  not  there  for  ever,  but  the  son
does  remain,  so  the  man  v»'ho  lives  the  life  of  a  slave
of  the  flesh  does  not  remain  in  life  for  ever  ;  but  he
who  in  spirit  fulfils  the  Father's  wiU,  remains  in  life
for  ever.     To  understand  me,  you  must  understand


192  THE    GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF

that  my  Father  is  not  that  which  is  your  Father,
what  you  call  God.  Your  Father  is  a  God  of  the
flesh ;  but  my  Father  is  the  Spirit  of  life.  Your
Father,  your  God,  is  a  God  of  revenge,  a  murderer,
one  who  executes  men ;  but  my  Father  gives  life.
Therefore  we  are  children  of  diflerent  Fathers."

"  I  am  following  the  truth,  and  you  wish  to  kill
me  for  that,  to  please  your  God.  Your  God  is  the
devil,  the  souice  of  evil ;  and  in  serving  him,  you
serve  the  devil.  But  my  teaching  is,  that  we  are
the  sons  of  the  Father  of  life,  and  that  he  who
believes  in  my  teaching  shall  not  see  death."

The  Jews  asked :  "  How  can  a  man  not  die,
when  all  the  most  God-pleasing  men,  even  Abraham,
are  dead  ?  How,  then,  can  you  say  that  you,  and
those  that  believe  your  teaching,  will  not  die  ? "
To  this,  Jesus  answered  :  "  I  speak  not  by  my  own
authority.  I  speak  of  the  one  source  of  life.  Whom
you  call  God,  and  Who  is  in  men.  This  source  I
know,  I  cannot  help  knowing,  and  I  know  His  will,
and  I  fulfij  it ;  and  of  this  source  of  life  I  say,  that
it  was,  and  is,  and  shall  be,  being  deathless.''

The  demand  for  proof  of  Jesus'  teaching  is  like
a  demand  made  upon  a  once-blind  man,  to  give
proofs  of  how  and  why  he  sees  light.  The  blind
man  whose  sight  was  restored,  still  the  same  man
he  was  before,  can  only  say,  he  was  blind,  but  now
sees.  Just  this,  and  nothing  else,  can  one  answer
who  formerly  did  not  understand  the  meaning  of
life,  but  now  does  understand.  Such  a  man  will
say  that  he  did  not,  before,  know  the  true  good  in
life,   but   now   he    knows.       The   once-blind    man,


A   RECAPITULATION  193

when  told  he  is  cured  not  according  to  rule,  and
that  he  who  cured  hina  is  the  evil-doer,  and  that
he  must  be  cured  in  another  way,  can  only  reply,
that  he  knows  nothing  as  to  the  correctness  of  the
manner  of  cure,  or  as  to  the  faultiness  of  his  healer,
or  as  to  there  being  a  better  way  of  cure,  but  that
he  knows  only,  he  was  blind,  and  now  sees.  And
just  so,  he  who  grasps  the  meaning  of  this  doc-
trine, that  the  true  good  is  to  fulfil  the  Father's
will,  can  say  nothing  as  to  the  regularity  of  the
teaching,  or  as  to  the  possibility  of  gaining  some-
thing better.  He  will  say :  "  Formerly  I  did  not
see  the  meaning  of  life;  now  I  see.  I  know  no
more."

And  Jesus  said  :  "  My  teaching  is  the  awakening
of  the  life  which  has  so  far  slept ;  he  who  will
believe  my  teaching,  shall  awaken  to  eternal  life,
and  continue  to  live  after  death.  My  teaching  is
not  proved  in  any  way,  except  that  men  give  them-
selves up  to  it,  because  it  alone  has  the  promise  of
life  for  men.

"  Sheep  follow  the  shepherd,  who  gives  them
food  and  life ;  and  in  the  same  way,  men  accept  my
teaching  because  it  gives  life  to  all.  And  as  the
sheep  do  not  follow  the  thief  who  climbs  over  into
the  fold,  but  throw  themselves  aside  from  him,  so
men,  also,  cannot  accept  the  doctrines  which  teach
violence  and  putting-to-death.

"  My   teaching  is  a  door  to  the  sheep,  and  all

who  will  follow  me  shall  find  true  life.     As  those

only  are  good  shepherds  who  own  and  like  the  sheep,

and   devote  their  lives  to  them,  while   the   mere

13


194  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

hirelings,  who  have  no  liking  for  sheep,  are  bad
shepherds ;  so,  also,  only  that  teacher  is  true  who
does  not  look  after  himself,  and  he  is  bad  who
cares  only  about  himself.  My  teaching  is,  that  a
man  shall  not  look  after  himself,  but  shall  yield  up
the  life  of  the  body  for  the  life  of  the  spirit.  This
I  teach  and  fulfil."

Still  the  Jews  did  not  understand,  and  persisted
in  looking  for  proofs  as  to  whether  or  not  Jesus
was  the  Christ,  to  determine  whether  they  should
believe  in  him  or  not.  They  said  :  "  Do  not  torment
us,  but  tell  us  frankly,  are  you  the  Christ,  or  not  ? "
Then  Jesus  answered  them  :  "  Belief  must  be  given,
not  to  words,  but  to  deeds.  By  the  deeds  I  teach
you  may  know  whether  I  teach  truth  or  not.  Do
as  I  do,  and  do  not  trifle  over  words.  Fulfil  the
will  of  the  Father,  and  then  you  will  all  join  with
me  and  with  the  Father,  because  I  am  a  Son  of
Man,  and  at  one  with  the  Father.  And  I  am  that
which  you  call  God,  and  I  call  Father.  God  and  I
are  one.  Even  in  your  own  writings  it  is  said,  that
God  said  to  men,  '  You  are  Gods.'  Everyone,  by
his  spirit,  is  son  of  this  Father.  And  if  a  man
lives  fulfilling  the  will  of  the  Father,  then  he
becomes  at  one  with  the  Father.  If  I  fulfil  the
will,  the  Father  is  in  me,  and  I  am  in  the
Father."

After  this,  Jesus  asked  the  disciples  how  they
understood  his  teaching  as  to  the  Son  of  Man.
Simon  Peter  answered  him :  "  Your  teaching  is
that  you  are  the  Son  of  the  God  of  life ;  that  God
is  the  life  of  the  spirit  in  man."     And  Jesus  said


A   RECAPITULATION  155

to  him :  "  Not  only  I  am  a  son,  but  all  men  are ;
and  this  is  revealed  to  men,  not  by  me,  but  by  the
common  Father  of  men.  Upon  this  knowledge  is
based  the  true  life  of  man.  To  this  life  there  is
no  death."


CHAPTER  VIII

LIFE    IS    NOT    TEMPOKAL
Therefore  true  life  is  to  be  lived  in  the  present

{"a:bl0  J)aB")

Dealing  with  the  disciples'  question  as  to  the
recompense  for  surrendering  the  life  of  the  body,
Jesus  said :  "  To  him  who  enters  into  the  reality  of
this  teaching,  no  further  recompense  can  be  given ;
because,  first,  when  a  man  yields  up  friends  and
goods  for  the  sake  of  this  teaching,  he  gains  a
hundred  times  more  friends  and  goods ;  and  second,
a  man  who  seeks  such  recompense  wants  to  have
something  over  and  above  others,  which  is  entirely
contrary  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will."
In  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  there  is  neither  great
nor  small ;  all  are  equal.  Those  who  look  for
something  extra  as  reward  for  their  goodness,  are
like  the  labourers  who  claimed  a  greater  payment
than  that  for  which  they  had  agreed  with  their
employer ;  merely  because,  in  their  opinion,  they
were  more  deserving  tlian  other  labourers.  There
are  no  rewards,  punishments,  degradations,  or  exalta-
tions, for  him  who  understands  this  teaching.  No
one    can    be    higher    or    lower,  more    or  less  im-

196


A   RECAPITULATION  197

pf-rtant,  than  another,  according  to  the  teaching  of
Jesus.

All  can  equally  fulfil  the  Father's  will.  There-
fore, in  so  doing,  no  one  becomes  superior,  truer-
or  better,  than  another.

Kings  and  those  who  serve  them,  they  only  are
measured  by  such  standards.  By  my  teaching,
said  Jesus,  there  can  be  no  superior  rank,  because
he  who  would  e.Mcel,  must  serve  everybody ;  for  the
teaching  is,  that  life  is  given  to  man,  not  that
others  may  serve  him,  but  that  he  may  give  his
whole  life  to  serve  others,  but  he  who  will  not  do
this,  but  seeks  to  exalt  himself,  shall  fall  lower
than  he  was.

To  get  rid  of  all  ideas  of  rewards  and  of  one's
elevation,  the  meaning,  purpose,  of  life  must  be
understood.  That  lies  in  fulfilling  the  will  of  the
Father;  and  the  will  of  the  Father  is,  that  that
which  He  gave  shall  be  returned  to  Him.  As  a
shepherd  leaves  his  flock,  and  goes  to  look  for  the
lost  sheep,  as  a  woman  will  search  everywhere  to
find  a  lost  penny,  so  also  the  Father's  continual
work  is  manifested  to  us  in  His  drawing  to  Himself
that  which  pertains  to  Him.

We  must  understand  the  true  life,  what  it  is.
The  true  hfe  is  brought  to  light  always  in  the
lost  being  brought  back  to  where  they  belong ;  in
the  awakening  of  those  who  slept.  People  who
have  the  true  life,  who  are  restored  to  the  source
of  their  being,  cannot,  like  worldly  men,  take
account  of  others  as  better  or  worse ;  but,  being
sharers  of  the  Father's  life,  they   can   take  delight


igS  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

only  in  the  return  of  the  lost  to  their  Father.
If  a  son,  who  has  gone  astray  and  left  his  father,
should  repent,  and  return,  how  then  could  the
other  sons  of  the  same  father  grudge  at  the  father's
joy,  or  themselves  not  rejoice  at  the  brother's
return  ?

To  lead  us  to  believe  the  teaching,  and  to  alter
one's  way  of  living,  and  fulfil  the  teaching,  we  need,
not  external  proofs,  not  promises  of  reward,  but  a
clear  understanding  of  what  the  true  life  is.  If
men  think  they  are  complete  masters  of  their  own
lives,  and  that  life  is  given  them  for  bodily  enjoy-
ment, then  clearly,  any  sacrifice  made  for  another
will  seem  to  them  an  act  worthy  of  reward,  and
without  such  payment  they  will  yield  nothing.
A  man  demands  rents  from  tenants  who  have
forgotten  that  their  ground  is  theirs  on  condition
that  they  give  up  the  fruits  to  the  owner ;  and
when  he  demands  the  rent  again  and  again,  they
seek  to  kill  him.  So  with  the  men  who  think
themselves  masters  of  their  own  lives,  not  discern-
ing that  life  is  given  by  true  understanding ;  men
who  demand  the  fulfilment  of  their  own  wills.

Both  belief  and  action  are  necessary,  to  learn
that  a  man  can  do  nothing  of  himself,  and  if  he
give  up  his  bodily  life  to  serve  goodness,  he
deserves  neither  thanks  nor  reward.  We  must
understand  that,  in  doing  good,  a  man  only  does
his  duty,  does  what  he  must  necessarily  do.  Only
by  so  understanding  his  life,  can  a  man  have  faith
to  enable  him  to  do  deeds  of  true  goodness.

Precisely  in  such  an  understanding  of  life,  the


A   RECAPITULATION  199

Kingdom  of  Heaven  consists.  This  Kingdom  is
invisible ;  it  cannot  be  pointed  out  as  identified  with
this  or  that  place.  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  in
the  human  understanding.  The  whole  society  of
the  world  goes  on  living  as  of  old ;  men  eat,  drink,
marry,  trade,  die,  and  along  with  this,  in  the  souls
of  men,  lives  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  It  is  the
understanding  of  life,  growing  from  itself,  like  a
tree  in  the  spring.

The  true  life  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  Father's
will  is  not  in  the  life  of  the  past,  or  of  the  future,
but  it  is  the  life  of  now,  the  life  which  all
must  live  at  this  instant  of  time.  Therefore  one
must  never  relax  the  true  life  in  them.  Men  are
set  to  watch  over  life,  not  of  the  past  or  the  future,
but  the  life  now  being  lived;  and  in  that,  to  fulfil
the  will  of  the  Father  of  all  men.  If  they  let  this
life  escape  them,  by  not  fulfilling  the  Father's  will,
then  they  will  not  receive  it  back  again ;  just  as  a
watchman,  set  upon  a  night-long  watch,  does  not
perform  his  duty  if  he  fall  asleep  even  for  a
moment ;  for  in  this  moment  a  thief  may  come.

Therefore  a  man  must  concentrate  his  strength
in  the  present  hour,  for  in  this  hour  only  can  he
fulfil  the  Father's  will.  And  that  will  is  life  and
blessing  for  all  men.  Only  those  live  who  are
doing  good.  Good  done  to  men,  now,  in  this  hour,
is  life,  life  which  unites  us  with  the  common  Father.


CHAPTEE    IX


TEMPTATIONS


The  illusions  of  temporal  life  conceal  from  men
the  true  life  in  the  present

("jporgfve  U0  our  Debts  as  we  forgive  our  debtors")

Man  is  born  with  knowledge  of  the  true  life  of
fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will.  Children  live  by
that  knowledge ;  through  them  we  may  see  what
the  Father's  will  is.  To  understand  the  teachmg
of  Jesus,  one  must  understand  the  life  of  children,
and  be  like  them.

Children  always  live  in  the  Father's  will,  not
breaking  the  five  commandments.  They  would  not
come  to  break  them  if  their  elders  did  not  mislead
them.  In  misleading  children  to  break  those  com-
mandments, men  ruin  the  children.  In  misleading
them,  men  are  doing  as  they  would  do  by  fastening
a  millstone  to  a  man's  neck  and  throwing  him  into
the  water.

If  there  were  no  temptations,  the  world  woiild
be  happy.  The  world  is  unhappy  by  them  only.
These  temptations  are  wrong-doing  which  men
enact  for  imaginary  gain  to  the  life  in  time.
Temptations   ruin   men ;   therefore  it   is   necessary

200


A   RECAPITULATION  201

to  give  up  everything  rather  tlian  fall  into
temptation.

Temptation  against  the  first  commandment  leads
men  to  consider  themselves  in  the  right  against
others,  and  others  as  ia  the  wrong,  debtors  to  them.
To  avoid  this  temptation,  men  must  remember  that
all  men  are  always  infinitely  in  debt  to  the  Father,
and  they  can  only  clear  themselves  of  this  debt  by
forgiving  their  brother-men.

Therefore  men  must  overlook  injuries,  and  not
be  deterred  though  the  offender  again  and  again
injure  them.  However  many  times  a  man  may  be
injured,  he  must  forgive,  and  still  forgive,  not
remembering  the  wrong.  For  the  Kingdom  of
Heaven  is  forgiveness.

If  we  do  not  forgive,  we  are  doing  as  the  debtor
did.  This  debtor,  greatly  owing,  came  to  him  in
whose  power  he  was,  and  began  to  ask  for  mercy.
The  other  forgave  him  all.  The  debtor  went  away,
and  began  himself  to  squeeze  a  debtor,  who  owed
him  but  a  little.  Now,  to  gain  life,  we  must  fulfil
the  Father's  will.  And  we  pray  the  Father  to  for-
give us,  that  we  have  not  duly  fulfilled  his  will,
and  we  hope  to  be  forgiven.  What,  then,  are  we
doing,  if  we  do  not  ourselves  forgive  ?  We  are
doing  to  others  what  we  dread  for  ourselves.

The  will  of  the  Father  is  well-being,  and  evil  is
that  which  separates  us  from  the  Father.  Why,
then,  should  we  not  strive  to  quench  evil  right-
away,  when  evil  ruins  us,  and  takes  our  life  ?

Temptation  against  the  second  commandment  is,
to  think  that  woman  is  created  for  bodily  pleasure,


202  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

and  that  in  leaving  one  wonian  and  taking  another,
heightened  pleasure  is  gained.  To  avoid  this
temptation,  v^e  must  remember  that  the  Father's
wUl  is,  not  that  man  should  amuse  himself  with
woman's  charms,  but  that  everj'  man,  with  his  wife,
should  be  one  body.  The  Father's  will  is,  for  every
man,  one  wife ;  for  every  wife,  one  husband.  If  one
man  keep  to  one  wife,  then  there  is  wife  or  husband
for  each  one  who  needs.  Therefore  he  who  changes
the  woman  he  lives  with,  deprives  her  of  a  husband,
and  tempts  some  other  man  to  leave  his  wife  and
take  the  deserted  one.  A  man  may  do  without  a
wife,  but  he  must  not  have  more  than  one,  because
if  he  does,  he  goes  against  the  will  of  the  Father,
which  is,  that  one  man  unite  with  one  woman.

Temptation  against  the  third  conmiandment  is,
for  men  to  create,  for  the  protection  of  the  temporal
life,  authoritative  powers,  and  to  demand  from  each
other  oaths,  pledges,  to  do  the  deeds  those  powers
demand.  To  avoid  this  temptation,  men  must
remember  that  they  are  not  indebted  for  their  life
to  any  power  but  God.  The  claims  of  authority
must  be  regarded  as  violence ;  and,  following  the
commandment  regarding  the  non-resistance  of  evil,
men  must  yield  what  the  authorities  demand,
namely,  their  goods  and  labour ;  but  they  cannot,
either  by  oaths  or  promises,  pledge  their  conduct.
Oaths,  being  imposed,  make  men  bad.  He  who
recognises  life  in  the  will  of  the  Father  cannot  bind
his  actions  by  pledges ;  because  for  such  a  man
there  is  nothing  more  sacred  than  his  own  life.

Temptation  against  the  fourth   commandment  is.


A  RECAPITULATION  203

for  men  to  hold  that,  by  giving  themselves  up  to
animosity  and  revenge,  they  can  exterminate  evil
from  among  themselves.  If  a  man  injure  another,
men  think  he  should  be  punished,  and  that  justice
lies  in  human  judgments.  To  be  free  from  this
temptation,  we  must  remember  that  men  are  called,
not  to  judge,  but  to  save  each  other.  To  judge  of
another's  injustice  is  impossible  for  men,  as  they
themselves  are  full  of  wickedness.  The  only  thing
open  to  them  is  to  teach  others  by  e.xample  of
goodness,  forgiveness,  and  purity.

Temptation  agahist  the  fifth  commandment  is,
for  man  to  think  there  is  a  difference  between  one's
own  countrymen  and  men  of  other  nations ;  and
that  it  is  therefore  necessary  to  make  defence
against  other  nations,  and  to  injure  them.  To
avoid  this  temptation,  it  is  necessary  to  know  that
all  the  commandments  are  summed  up  in  this  one,
of  fulfilling  the  will  of  the  Father  who  gives  hfe
and  well-being  to  all  men ;  and  therefore  it  is
necessary  to  do  good  to  all  men,  without  distinction.
Even  though  others  still  make  such  distinctions,
and  though  nations  who  look  on  each  other  as
aliens  are  at  war,  nevertheless,  everybody  who
would  fulfil  the  Father's  will  must  do  good  to  all
men,  even  to  those  who  belong  to  another  nation
which  is  at  war.

To  avoid  falling  into  any  delusions  of  men,  we
must  not  think  about  bodily  affairs,  but  about
spiritual.  To  him  who  has  understood  that  life
consists  in  being,  at  this  moment,  in  the  Father's
will,  neither  deprivations,  nor  suffering,  nor  death,


204  THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF

can  be  dreadful.  Only  he  obtains  true  life  who  is,
at  every  moment,  ready  to  give  up  his  bodily  life
in  order  to  fulfil  the  Father's  will.

And  that  all  may  understand  the  true  life  to  be
one  in  which  there  is  no  death,  Jesus  said  :  "  Eternal
life  must  not  be  understood  to  be  like  this  present
life.  Por  the  true  life  in  the  Father's  will,  there  is
neither  space  nor  time.  Those  who  are  awakened
to  the  true  life,  live  in  the  will  of  the  Fatlier,  for
which  there  is  no  space  nor  time ;  and  they  live
with  the  Father.  Though  they  die  to  us,  they  live
to  God.  Therefore  one  commandment  includes  in
itself  all  others ;  the  commandment,  namely,  to  love,
with  all  our  strength,  the  source  of  life  ;  and  conse-
quently to  love  all  men,  each  of  whom  bears  in
himself  this  same  original."

And  Jesus  said  :  "  This  source  of  life  is  that  very
Christ  which  you  await.  The  comprehension  of
this  source  of  life,  which  knows  no  distinction  of
persons,  no  time,  no  place,  is  the  Son  of  Man  which
I  teach.  Anything  which  hides  this  source  of  life
from  men  is  temptation.  There  is  the  temptation
of  the  scribes,  bookmen,  and  of  the  materialists  ;  do
not  yield  thereto.  There  are  the  temptations  of
authority ;  do  not  yield  thereto.  And  there  is  the
most  terrible  temptation,  from  the  teachers  of
religion  who  call  themselves  orthodox.  Beware  of
this  last  more  than  of  all  others  ;  because  just
they,  these  self-ordained  teachers,  by  inventing  the
worship  of  a  false  God,  decoy  you  from  the  true
God.  They,  instead  of  serving  the  Father  of  life
by  deeds,  substitute  words,  and  they  teach  words,


A   RECAPITULATION  205

■while  tliey  themselves  do  nothing.  Therefore  you
can  learn  notliing  from  them  but  words  But  the
Father  requires  deeds,  not  words.  And  they  have
nothing  to  teach,  because  they  themselves  know
nothing  ;  but  for  their  own  gain  they  must  parade
as  teachers.  But  you  know  that  no  man  can  be
the  teacher  of  another.  There  is  one  teacher  for
all — the  Lord  of  life — understanding.  And  these
self-assuming  teachers,  thinking  to  teach  others,  de-
prive themselves  of  true  life,  and  prevent  others
from  the  understanding  of  it.  They  teach  that
their  God  will  be  pleased  with  external  ceremonies ;
and  they  think  they  can  bring  men  to  serve  religion
by  vows.  They  are  concerned  with  appearances
only.  An  outward  assumption  of  religion  suffices
them,  but  they  do  not  care  what  is  in  the  hearts  of
men.  Therefore  they  are  like  elaborate  coffins,  very
nice  outside,  but  within  full  of  repulsiveness  They
give  honour,  in  words,  to  saints  and  martyrs,  but
they  are  themselves  just  the  very  men  who  have
murdered  and  tortured  in  the  past,  and  who
murder  and  torture  the  saints  of  to-day  By  them
come  all  the  world's  temptations ;  because,  luider
the  guise  of  good,  they  teach  evil.  The  temptation
they  create  is  the  root  of  all  others,  because  they
defile  that  which  is  most  sacred.  For  a  long  time
yet  they  will  not  be  changed,  but  will  continue
their  deceptions,  and  increase  evil  in  the  world.
But  there  shall  come  a  time  when  all  the  temples
will  be  ruined,  with  all  the  external  God-worship  ;
when  all  men  will  understand,  and  unite  in  love,  to
serve  the  one  Father  of  life,  by  fulfilling  His  will."


CHAPTEE  X

THE    WARFAKE    "WITH    TEMPTATION

Therefore,  not  to  fall  by  temptation,  we  must,  at  every
moment  of  life,  be  at  one  with  ttie  Father

("XeaO  US  not  tnto  tcmptatton")

The  Jews  saw  that  the  teaching  of  Jesus  would
destroy  their  State,  religion,  and  nationality,  and  at
the  same  time  they  saw  they  could  not  controvert
him;  so  they  decided  to  kill  him.  His  innocence
and  justness  stood  in  their  way,  but  the  high  priest
Caiaphas  discovered  a  reason  for  killing  Jesus,
though  innocent.  Caiaphas  said :  "  We  need  not
consider  whether  this  man  is  just  or  unjust ;  we
have  to  determine  whether  our  Jewish  people  shall
remain  a  separate  nation,  or  whether  we  shall  be
broken  up  and  dispersed :  the  nation  will  perish,
and  the  people  be  scattered,  if  we  leave  this  man
alone,  and  do  not  put  him  to  death."  This  argu-
ment settled  the  matter,  and  the  orthodox  sentenced
Jesus  to  death.  They  instructed  the  people  to  seize
upon  him  as  soon  as  he  might  appear  in  Jerusalem.
Jesus,  although  he  knew  about  this,  nevertheless,
on  the  feast  of  the  Passover,  came  to  Jerusalem.
His  disciples  entreated  him  not  to  do  so ;  but  he

208


A    RECAPITULATION  207

said :  "  What  these  orthodox  can  do  to  me,  and  all
that  other  men  can  do,  cannot  alter  the  truth  for
me.  If  I  have  the  light,  I  know  where  I  am,  and
which  way  I  am  going.  Only  he  who  does  not
know  the  truth  can  fear  anything,  or  can  doubt
anything.  Only  he  who  cannot  see,  stumbles.''
And  he  went  to  Jerusalem  stopping  on  the  way  at
Bethany.

When  he  left  Bethany,  and  went  to  Jerusalem,
crowds  of  people  met  and  followed  him.  This  still
more  convinced  the  orthodox  of  the  need  to  kill
him.  They  only  wanted  an  opportunity  to  seize
him.  He  knew  also  that  the  lightest  incautious
word  from  him  at  that  time,  spoken  against  the  law,
would  be  a  reason  for  his  execution ;  but  notwith-
standing this,  he  entered  the  temple,  and  declared
again  that  the  worship  of  the  Jews,  with  their
sacrifices  and  libations,  was  false,  and  he  declared
his  teaching.  But  his  teaching,  based  on  the  pro-
phets., was  such  that  the  orthodox  could  not  yet
find  a  palpable  breach  of  the  law  which  would
justify  them  in  putting  him  to  death ;  the  more  so
that  the  greater  part  of  the  lower  class  was  with
Jesus.

At  the  feast  were  certain  heathen,  who,  havincr
heard  of  the  teaching  of  Jesus,  wished  to  talk  with
him  about  it.  The  disciples,  hearing  of  this,  were
afraid,  fearing  lest  Jesus,  in  talking  with  them,
should  betray  himself,  and  excite  the  people.  At
first  they  would  not  bring  Jesus  and  these  heathen
together ;  but  afterwards  they  resolved  to  tell  him
these  men  v»-anted  to  see  him.     Hearing  this,  Jesus


208  THE   GOSPEL   IN  BRIEF

was  disturbed.  He  well  knew  that  his  speech  to
the  heathen  would  clearly  show  his  antagonism  to
the  whole  Jewish  law,  would  turn  the  crowd  from
him,  and  would  give  the  orthodox  a  reason  to  accuse
him  of  being  in  league  with  the  hated  heathen.
Jesus  became  disturbed,  knowing  this ;  but  he  also
knew  that  his  mission  was  to  make  clear  to  men,
the  children  of  one  Father,  their  real  unity,  despite
differences  of  religion.  He  knew  that  the  step  he
was  about  to  take  would  end  his  bodily  life,  for  the
sake  of  giving  birth  to  spiritual  results.  He  said :
"  He  who  holds  fast  to  the  bodily  life  is  deprived
of  the  true  one  ;  and  he  who  is  not  careful  for  the
bodily  life  obtains  the  true  life.  I  am  troubled  by
what  is  before  me,  but  I  have  only  lived  that  I
might  reach  this  hour;  how,  then,  can  I  fail  to
now  do  what  I  must  do  ?  So  let  the  Father's  will
be  shown  through  me  now."

And  turning  to  the  people,  heathen  and  Jews,
Jesus  declared  openly  what  he  had  only  privately
told  to  Nicodemus.  He  said :  "  Men's  lives,  with
all  their  various  religions  and  organised  powers,
must  be  wholly  changed.  All  power  and  authority
must  disappear.  It  is  only  necessary  to  under-
stand the  nature  of  man  as  the  son  of  the  Father
of  life,  and  this  understanding  al)olishes  all  division
among  men,  and  all  ruling  power,  and  makes  men
one."

The  Jews  said  :  "  You  wliolly  destroy  our  reli-
gion. Our  law  looks  to  the  Christ,  but  you  speak
only  of  the  Son  of  Man,  and  say  that  he  must  be
set   up.      What   do   you   mean  ? "      He   answered


A   RECAriTULATION  209

them :  "  To  set  up  the  Son  of  Man  means  to  live
by  the  light  of  the  understanding  which  is  in  men,
to  follow  this  light  into  more  light.  I  teach  no
new  faith,  only  that  which  everyone  may  know
within  himself.  Every  man  knows  he  has  life,
given  to  him  and  to  all  men  by  the  Father  of  life.
My  teaching  is  only  this,  that  man  must  live  the
life  given  by  the  Father  to  all."

Many  of  the  humbler  kind  of  people  believed
Jesus.  But  the  notable  and  official  classes  disbe-
lieved ;  because  they  did  not  want  to  consider  the
universal  basis  of  what  he  said,  but  only  its  imme-
diate and  temporary  bearings.  They  saw  that  he
turned  the  people  from  themselves,  and  they  wished
to  kill  him ;  but  they  were  afraid  to  seize  him
openly,  and  did  not  seek  to  do  so  in  Jerusalem  and
in  the  daytime,  but  secretly  elsewhere."

And  one  of  the  twelve  disciples,  Judas  Iscariot,
approached  the  authorities,  and  him  they  bribed  to
take  their  emissaries  to  Jesus  when  he  should  be
away  from  the  people.  Judas  promised  this,  and
went  again  to  Jesus,  awaiting  a  suitable  opportunity
to  betray  him.

On  the  first  day  of  the  feast,  Jesus  and  his  dis-
ciples kept  the  Passover.  And  Judas,  thinking
Jesus  was  not  aware  of  his  treachery,  was  with  them.
But  Jesus  knew  Judas  had  sold  him.  And  as  they
all  sat  at  table,  Jesus  took  bread,  broke  it  in  twelve
pieces,  and  gave  a  piece  to  each  disciple,  including
Judas  with  the  rest.  And  not  mentioning  any
name,  he  said :  "  Take,  eat  my  body."  Then  he
took  the  cup  with  the  wine,  passed  it  to  them,  for
14


2IO  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

them  all,  including  Judas,  to  drink  from,  and  said :
"  One  of  you  will  shed  my  blood.     Drink  my  blood."

Afterwards  Jesus  got  up,  and  began  to  wash  the
feet  of  all  his  disciples,  including  Judas.  And
having  finished,  he  said :  "  I  know  that  one  of  you
will  betray  me  to  my  death,  and  shed  my  blood ;
but  him  I  have  fed,  and  given  to  drink,  and  washed
his  feet.  I  have  done  this  to  show  you  how  you
must  act  towards  those  who  do  you  harm.  If  you
will  act  in  this  way,  you  shall  be  blessed."  And
the  disciples  went  on  to  ask  who  the  betrayer  was.
But  Jesus  did  not  give  his  name,  so  that  they
might  not  turn  on  him.  And  when  it  had  grown
dark,  Jesus  showed  that  it  was  Judas,  and  at  the
same  time  told  him  to  go  away.  Judas  got  up  from
the  table  and  went  off,  no  one  hindering  him.

Tlien  Jesus  said  :  "  This  is  the  meaning  of  setting
up  the  Son  of  Man.  To  set  up  the  Son  of  Man  is
to  be  like  the  Father,  good ;  and  that,  not  only  to
those  who  love  us,  but  to  all  men,  even  to  those
who  do  us  harm.  And  therefore  do  not  argue  over
my  teaching,  do  not  pick  it  to  pieces  as  the  orthodox
did,  but  do  as  I  have  done ;  do  as  I  have  done
under  your  eyes.  This  one  commandment  I  give
you :  Love  men.  My  whole  teaching  is,  to  love
men  always,  and  to  the  last."

After  this,  fear  came  over  Jesus,  and  he  went  in
the  dark  with  his  disciples  to  a  garden,  to  be  out  of
the  way.  While  walking,  he  said  to  them  :  "  You
are  all  wavering  and  timid ;  if  they  move  to  take  me,
you  will  all  run  away."  To  this,  Peter  said  :  "  No,
I  will  never  leave  you  ;  I  will  defend  you  even  to


A    RECAPITULATION  211

death."  And  all  the  disciples  said  so.  Then  Jesus
said :  "  If  that  be  the  case,  then  get  ready  for  de-
fence ;  take  provision,  because  we  must  hide,  take
weapons,  to  fight  for  ourselves."  The  disciples  said
they  had  two  swords.

When  Jesus  heard  this  about  the  swords,  anguish
came  over  him.  And  going  to  a  vacant  place,  he
began  to  pray,  and  entreated  his  disciples  to  do  the
same.  Bat  the  disciples  did  not  imderstand  his
state  of  mind.  Jesus  said  :  "  My  Father,  the  Spirit,
end  in  me  this  struggle  with  temptation.  Strengthen
me  to  the  fulfilment  of  Thy  will.  I  do  not  want
my  own  way.  I  do  not  want  to  defend  my  bodily
life.      I  want  to  do  Thy  will,  in  not  resisting  evil."

The  disciples  still  did  not  understand.  And  he
said  to  them  :  "  Do  not  consider  the  concerns  of  the
body,  but  try  to  rise  into  the  spirit ;  strength  is  in
the  spirit,  but  the  flesh  is  powerless."  And  a
second  time  he  said  :  "  My  Pather,  if  suffering  Biust
be,  then  let  it  come.  But  even  in  suffering,  I
want  one  thing  only:  that  not  my  will  shall  be
fulfilled,  but  thine."  The  disciples  did  not  under-
stand. And  again  he  struggled  with  the  tempta-
tion ;  and  at  last  conquered  it.  Coming  to  the
disciples,  he  said :  "  It  is  settled  now  ;  you  can  be
at  rest.  I  shall  not  fight,  but  shall  surrender
myself  into  the  hands  of  the  men  of  this  world."


CHAPTEE  XI

THE    FAEEWELL    DISCOURSE

The  self-life  is  an  illusion  which  comes  through  the  flesh,  an
euil.     The  true  life  is  the  life  common  to  all  men

("Deliver  us  trom  evil")

Jesus,  finding  himself  prepared  for  death,  went  to
give  himself  up.  Peter  stopped  him,  and  asked :
"  "Where  ave  you  going  ? "  Jesus  answered  :  "  I  am
going  where  you  cannot  go.  I  am  2-eady  for  death,
and  you  are  not  yet  ready."  Peter  said :  "  No,  I
am  even  now  ready  to  sacrifice  my  life  for  thee."
Jesus  said  to  him :  "  A  man  cannot  promise  any-
thing."

And  he  said  to  all  his  disciples :  "  I  know  death
is  before  me,  but  I  believe  in  the  life  of  the  Father,
and  therefore  am  not  afraid  of  it.  Do  not  be  dis-
tressed over  my  death,  but  believe  in  the  real  God,
in  the  Father  of  life,  and  then  my  death  will  not
seem  dreadful  to  you.  If  I  am  united  with  the
Father  of  life,  then  I  cannot  be  deprived  of  life.
It  is  true,  I  do  not  tell  you  what  and  where  my  life
will  be,  after  death,  but  I  point  out  to  you  the  way
to  true  life.  My  teaching  does  not  reveal  what
that  life  is  to  be,  but  it  reveals  the  only  true  way


A   RECAPITULATION  213

of  life.  That  is,  to  be  in  unity  with  the  Father.
The  Father  is  the  source  of  life.  My  teaching  is,
that  man  shall  live  in  the  will  of  the  Father,  and
fulfil  His  will  for  the  life  and  well-being  of  all  men.

"  Your  teacher,  when  I  am  gone,  will  be  your
knowledge  of  the  truth.  In  fulfilling  my  teaching,
you  will  always  feel  that  you  are  in  the  truth,  that
the  Father  is  in  you,  and  you  are  in  the  Father.
And  knowing  in  yourselves  the  Father  of  life,  you
will  experience  a  peace  of  which  nothing  will
deprive  you.  And  thei'efore,  if  you  know  the  truth
and  live  in  it,  neither  my  death  nor  your  own  can
trouble  you.

"  Men  think  of  themselves  as  sejjarate  beings,
each  with  his  own  power  of  will  in  life ;  but  this  is
only  an  illusion.  The  only  true  life  is  that  which
recognises  the  Father's  will  as  the  source  of  life.
My  teaching  reveals  this  oneness  of  life,  and  repre-
sents life,  not  as  separate  shoots,  but  as  one  tree,
on  wliich  all  the  shoots  grow.  Only  he  who  lives
in  the  Father's  will,  like  a  shoot  of  a  tree,  only  he
lives ;  and  he  who  wishes  to  live  by  his  own  will,
dies  away  like  a  torn-off  shoot.

"  The  Father  gave  me  life  to  do  good,  and  I  have
taught  you  to  live  to  do  good.  If  you  will  fulfil
my  commandment,  you  will  be  blessed.  The  com-
mandment which  sums  up  my  whole  teaching  is  no
more  than  this,  that  all  men  shall  love  one  another.
And  love  is  to  sacrifice  one's  own  bodily  life  for
another's  salce.  Love  has  no  other  definition.  In
fulfilling  my  commandment  of  love,  you  will  not
fulfil  it   like   slaves,  who  follow   the   orders   of   a


214  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

master  without  understanding  them;  but  you  will
live  as  free  men,  as  I  am,  because  I  have  made
clear  to  you  the  purpose  of  life,  which  follows  from
the  knowledge  of  the  Father  of  life.  You  have
adopted  my  teaching,  not  from  accidental  choice,
but  because  it  is  the  only  truth  by  which  men  are
made  free.

"  The  teaching  of  the  world  is  to  do  evil  to  men ;
but  I  teach  that  men  love  each  other.  Therefore  the
world  will  despise  you,  as  it  has  despised  me.  The
world  does  not  understand  my  teaching,  and  there-
fore will  persecute  you,  and  do  you  evil,  thinking
thereby  to  serve  God.  Do  not  be  astonished  at
this ;  you  must  understand  that  it  is  necessarily  so.
The  world,  not  understanding  the  true  God,  must
persecute  you ;  but  you  must  affirm  the  truth.

"  You  grieve  because  they  will  kill  me ;  but  they
kill  me  for  declaring  the  truth.  And  therefore  my
death  is  necessary  for  the  declai-ation  of  the  truth.
My  death,  in  facing  which  I  do  not  go  back  from
the  truth,  will  strengthen  you,  and  you  will  under-
stand the  nature  of  imtruth  and  of  truth.  You
will  understand  that  untruth  lies  in  men's  belief  in
the  bodily  life,  and  their  disbelief  in  the  hfe  of  the
spirit ;  that  truth  consists  in  unity  with  the  Father,
from  which  results  the  victory  of  the  spirit  over  the
flesh.

"  Even  when  I  shall  not  be  with  you  in  the  bodily
life,  my  spirit  will  be  with  you.  But  you,  like  all
men,  will  not  always  feel  within  you  the  power  of
the  spirit.  Sometimes  you  will  relax  and  lose
strength  of  spirit ;  and  you  will  fall  into  tempta-


A  RECAPITULATION  215

tion  ;  and  at  times  you  will  again  awaken  to  the
true  life.  Hours  of  bondage  to  the  body  will  come
upon  you,  but  for  a  time  only ;  you  will  suffer,  and
again  be  restored  to  the  spirit,  like  a  woman  who
suffers  birth-pangs,  and  then  has  joy  because  she
has  brought  a  human  being  into  the  world.  So
will  your  experience  be,  when,  after  falling  under
the  power  of  the  body,  you  rise  again  by  the  spirit
You  will  then  feel  such  joy,  that  nothing  will  be
left  for  you  to  desire.  Know  this,  then,  before-
hand ;  and  in  spite  of  persecution,  in  spite  of  internal
struggle  and  casting  down  of  spirit,  know  that  the
spirit  lives  in  you,  and  that  the  only  true  God  is
the  knowledge  of  the  Father's  will,  as  I  have  re-
vealed it."

And  addressing  the  Father,  the  Spirit,  Jesus  said :
"  I  have  done  that  which  Thou  hast  commanded  me  ;
I  have  revealed  to  men  that  Thou  art  the  source  of
everything.  And  they  have  understood  me.  I  have
taught  them  that  they  all  come  from  the  source  of
infinite  life,  and  therefore  they  are  all  one  ;  and  that
as  the  Father  is  in  me,  and  I  am  in  the  Father,  so
they,  too,  are  one  with  me  and  the  Father.  I  have
revealed  to  them  also,  that,  like  Thee,  who  in  love
hast  sent  them  into  the  world,  they,  too,  shall  with
love  live  in  the  world."


CHAPTEE  XII

THE    VICTORY    OF    THE    SPIRIT    OVER    THE    FLESH

Therefore,  for  him  who  lives,  not  the  self-life,  but  a  common
life  in  the  will  of  the  Father,  there  is  no  death.  Bodily
death  is  for  him  union  with  the  Father

("tiblne  16  tbc  fttngDom,  power,  ant>  glors")

When  Jesus  had  ended  his  discourse  to  the  disciples,
he  rose,  and,  instead  of  running  away  or  defending
himself,  he  went  on  the  way  to  meet  Judas,  who
was  bringing  soldiers  to  take  him.  Jesus  came  to
Judas,  and  asked  him,  why  he  had  come.  But
Judas  did  not  answer,  and  a  crowd  of  soldiers  came
round  Jesus.  Peter  threw  himself  forward  to
defend  his  teacher,  and,  drawing  his  sword,  began
to  fight.  But  Jesus  stopped  him,  and  said  to  him,
that  he  who  fights  with  a  sword  must  himself
perish  with  the  sword,  and  ordered  him  to  put  up
the  sword.  Then  Jesus  said  to  those  who  had
come  to  take  him  :  "  I  have  up  to  now  gone  about
among  you  alone,  without  fear,  and  I  do  not  fear
now.      Do  as  you  choose."

And  while  all  the  disciples  ran  away,  Jesus  was
left  alone.  The  officer  of  the  soldiers  ordered
Jesus  to  be  bound,  and  led  before  Annas.      This


A   RECAPITULATION  217

Annas  was  a  former  high  priest,  and  lived  in  the
same  house  with  Caiaphas,  who  was  then  high
priest.  Caiaphas  it  was  who  provided  the  reason
upon  which  they  decided  to  kill  Jesus ;  namely,
that  if  he  were  not  killed  the  nation  would  dis-
appear.

Jesus,  feeling  himself  to  be  in  the  will  of  the
Father,  was  ready  for  death,  and  did  not  resist
when  they  took  him,  and  was  not  afraid  when  they
led  him  away.  But  the  very  Peter  who  had  just
promised  Jesus  that  he  would  not  renounce  him,
but  would  die  for  him,  this  same  Peter  who  wished
to  protect  him, — now,  when  he  saw  that  they  were
taking  Jesus  for  execution,  and  being  met  with  the
door-keeper's  question.  Whether  he  was  not  with
Jesus  ?  gave  up,  and  deserted  him.  It  was  only
afterwards  that,  hearing  the  coc'c  crow,  Peter
brought  to  mind  all  that  Jesus  had  said.  Then  he
understood  that  there  are  two  temptations  of  the
flesh,  fear  and  fighting ;  and  that  it  was  with  these
that  Jesus  struggled  when  he  prayed  in  the  garden,
and  asked  the  disciples  to  pray.  And  now  he,
Peter,  had  fallen  before  both  these  temptations  of
the  flesh,  of  which  Jesus  had  forewarned  him ;  he
had  wished  to  fight  against  evil,  and  to  defend  the
truth,  he  had  been  about  to  strike  and  to  do  evil
himself ;  and  now  he  could  not  endure  the  fear  of
bodily  suffering,  and  had  renounced  his  teacher.
Jesus  had  yielded  neither  to  the  temptation  to
fight,  when  the  disciples  got  ready  two  swords  for
his  defence,  nor  to  the  temptation  to  fear  before  the
men  of  Jerusalem,  first,  in  the  case  of  the  heaven,


2l8  THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

and  now  before  the  soldiers,  who  had  bound  him
and  led  him  to  trial.

Jesus  was  taken  before  Caiaphas.  Caiaphas
began  to  question  him  about  his  teaching.  But
knowing  that  Caiapha.s  was  examining  him,  not  to
find  out  what  his  teaching  was,  but  only  to  convict
him,  Jesus  did  not  answer,  but  said :  "  I  have  con-
cealed nothing,  and  now  conceal  nothing.  If  you
wish  to  know  what  my  teaching  is,  ask  those  who
heard  and  understood  it."  For  saying  this,  the
high  priest's  servant  struck  Jesus  in  the  face,  and
Jesus  asked  him  why  he  so  beat  him.  But  the
man  did  not  answer  him,  and  the  high  priest  con-
tinued the  trial.  Witnesses  were  brought,  who
deposed  tliat  Jesus  had  boasted  that  he  made  an
end  of  the  Jewish  religion.  And  the  high  priest
interrogated  Jesus ;  who,  seeing  they  did  not
examine  him  to  learn  anything,  but  only  to  make  a
show  of  a  judicial  trial,  answered  nothing.

Then  a  priest  asked  him :  "  Tell  me,  are  you  the
Christ,  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  Jesus  said :  "  Yes,  I  am
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  ;  and  now,  in  torturing
me,  you  will  see  how  a  Son  of  Man  is  like  to  God."
And  the  priest  was  glad  to  hear  these  words,  and
said  to  the  other  judges  :  "  Are  not  these  words
enough  to  condemn  him  ? "  And  the  judges  said:
"  That  is  enough  ;  we  sentence  him  to  death."  And
when  they  said  that,  the  people  threw  themselves
upon  Jesus,  and  began  to  beat  him,  to  spit  in  his
face,  and  insult  him.     He  was  silent.

The  Jews  had  no  power  to  punish  men  with
death,  and  for  that   needed    permission   from    the


A  RECAPITULATION  219

Eoman  governor.  Therefore,  having  condemned
Jesus  in  their  court,  and  having  subjected  him  to
ignominy,  they  took  him  to  the  Eoman  governor,
Pilate,  that  he  might  execute  him.  Pilate  asked
why  they  wished  to  kill  Jesus.  They  said,  because
he  was  a  criminal.  Pilate  said  that  if  he  was  so,
they  must  judge  him  by  their  own  law.  They  said :
"  We  want  you  to  put  him  to  death,  because  he  is
guilty  before  the  Eoman  Ctesar ;  he  is  a  rebel,  he
agitates  the  people,  he  forbids  payment  of  taxes  to
Cossar,  and  calls  himself  the  Jewish  king."

Pilate  summoned  Jesus  before  him,  and  said :
"  What  is  the  meaning  of  this ;  are  you  the  Jewish
king  ? "

Jesus  said :  "  Do  you  really  wish  to  know  what
my  kingdom  means,  or  are  you  only  asking  for
form's  sake  ? "

Pilate  answered :  "  I  am  not  a  Jew,  and  it  is  the
same  to  me  whether  you  are  the  Jewish  king  or
not ;  but  I  ask  you,  who  are  you,  and  why  do  they
call  you  king  ? "

Jesus  said :  "  They  say  truly,  that  I  call  myself
a  king.  I  am  indeed  a  king,  but  my  kingdom  is
not  of  earth,  but  of  heaven.  The  kings  of  the
earth  war  and  fight,  and  have  armies ;  but  as  for
me, — you  see  they  have  bound  and  beaten  me,  and
I  did  not  resist.  I  am  king  from  heaven :  my
power  is  of  the  spirit."

Pilate  said :  "  Then  it  is  indeed  true  that  you
think  yourself  a  king  ?  "

Jesus  answered :  "  You  know  this  yourself.
Everyone  who  lives  by  the  spirit  is  free.      I  live


220  THE   GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF

by  this  only,  and  I  only  teach  by  shewing  men  the
truth,  that  they  are  free  by  the  spirit."

Pilate  said :  "  You  teach  the  truth,  but  nobody
knows  what  truth  is,  and  everyone  has  his  own
truth."

And  having  said  this,  he  turned  his  back  on
Jesus,  and  went  again  to  the  Jews.  Coining  out  to
them,  he  said :  "  I  find  nothing  criminal  in  this
man.     Why,  then,  put  him  to  death  ? "

The  priests  answered :  "  He  ought  to  be  put  to
death,  because  he  incites  the  people."

Then  Pilate  began  to  examine  Jesus  before  the
priests ;  but  Jesus,  seeing  it  was  only  a  mock
inquiry,  answered  nothing.  Then  Pilate  said :  "  I
alone  cannot  condemn  him  ;  take  him  to  Herod."

At  Herod's  tribunal,  Jesus  again  answered
nothing  to  the  accusations  of  the  priests ;  and
Herod,  thinking  Jesus  to  be  a  common  fellow,
ordered  him,  for  mockery,  to  be  dressed  in  red
clothes,  and  sent  back  to  Pilate.

Pilate  pitied  Jesus,  and  began  to  entreat  the
priests  to  forgive  him,  if  only  on  account  of  the
feast.  But  the  priests  did  not  consent,  and  all
— the  people  with  them — cried  out  to  crucify
Christ.  Pilate  tried  a  second  time  to  persuade
them  to  let  Jesus  go ;  but  priests  and  people  cried
out  that  he  must  be  executed.  They  said :  "  He
is  guilty  of  calling  himself  the  Son  of  God."  Pilate
again  summoned  Jesus,  and  asked  him  what  he
meant  by  calHng  himself  the  Son  of  God.  Jesus
answered  nothing.

Then  Pilate  said :  "  Why  do  you  not  answer  me,


A   RECAPITULATION  221

seeing  that  I  have  power  to  execute  you  or  to  set
you  fiee  ? "

Jesus  answered :  "  You  have  no  authority  over
nie  ;  authority  only  comes  from  on  high."

And  Pilate  a  third  time  began  to  persuade  the
Jews  to  set  Jesus  free.  But  they  said  to  him  :  "  If
you  will  not  execute  this  man,  whom  we  have  ex-
posed as  an  enemy  to  Ccesar,  then  you  yourself  are
not  a  friend,  but  an  enemy  to  Ceesar."

And  hearing  these  words,  Pilate  gave  way,  and
ordered  the  execution  of  Jesus.  They  first  stripped
him  and  flogged  him ;  then  they  dressed  him  again
in  a  ridiculous  way.  And  they  beat  him,  mocked
him,  and  insulted  him.  Then  they  caused  him  to
carry  the  cross,  and  led  him  to  the  place  of  execu-
tion, where  they  crucified  him.

And  as  Jesus  hung  on  the  cross,  the  whole
populace  mocked  him.  But  to  this  mockery  Jesus
answered :  "  Father  !  do  not  call  them  to  account ;
they  do  not  know  what  they  are  doing."  And
then,  as  he  was  now  drawing  near  death,  he  said :
"  Father  !  I  yield  my  spirit  into  Thy  care."

And  bowing  his  bead,  he  breathed  his  last.


THE    END


Note  upon  Matt.  xvii.  24-25,  as  to  Payment  of
Taxes  (see  page  117).


In  the  third  part  (now  preparing  for  press)  of  Tlie  Four
Gospels  Harmonised  and  Translated,  the  Author  renders  the
above  passage  thus  :

"  When  they  were  come  to  Capernaum,  the  collectors  of
the  double-drachm  came  to  Peter,  and  said  :  Thy  master
does  not  pay  the  double-drachm.    And  he  said  :  Yes."

This  rendering,  the  Author  accompanies  with  the  remark  :

"  I  have  substituted  a  full-stop  for  the  note  of  interroga-
tion generally  placed  at  the  end  of  verse  24.  The  construction
of  the  sentence  is  not  interrogative,  and  the  verb  is  in  the
present  tense.  The  tax-collectors  ask  no  question,  but  posi-
tively say,  '  Your  master  does  not  pay  the  tax.' "

So  that  Peter  simply  confirms  the  statement,  that  Jesus
does  not  pay  taxes.

This  explanation  of  a  novel  reading  of  the  Gospel  text
may  serve  as  an  example  of  numerous  other  explanations,  to
be  found  in  the  larger  work,  The  Four  Gospels  Harmonised  and
Translated.


222


INDEX

TO  THE  PORTIONS  OF  THE  FOUR  GOSPELS
EMBODIED  IX  "THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRIEF"


The  figures  in  "  Italics  "  signify  the  page

Matt.  1.  18,  19,  24,  25,  23.
iii.  1,  4,  ^4  ;  5-8,  10-13,  SS.
iv.  1,  2,  35;  14,  16,  60.
V.  1,  2,  49;  13-19,  50;  20-24,  SI;  25,  ii(5  ;  28,  29,  SS ;

31-34,  52  ;  36,  53  ;  37-41,  53  ;  43,  44,  54  ;  45,  46,  B5.
vi.  1-3,  55  ;  4-9,  56  ;  16,  56  ;  17-28,  57  ;  29-34,  58.
vii.  1,  3,  6,  54;  9-11,  5S ;  12,  55;  13,  14,  55;  15-17,  59;

20-27,  59.
ix.  9-11,  31  ;  12,  13,  3S ;  35,  36,  ^9.
X.  12,72;  16,  72;  19,  72;  22,  23,  72;  26-31,  73;  34,  7.?;

38,  39,  102.
xi.  2-7,  ^0 ;  8-10,  41  ;  16,  4^ ;  17-19,  41  ;  25,  61  ;  28-30,

6i.
xii.  1,  2,  50 ;  6,  34  ;  7,  30,  S^  ;  8,  30 ;  11,  12,  31  ;  15,  73  ;

19-21,  60  ;  24,  7^ ;  25-29,  74  ;  30,  75 ;  31,  32,  74 ;  33,

75 ;  46,  47,  76.
xiii.  3,  44 :  4,  5,  4S ;  7,  8,45;  10,  11,  .^7 ;  12,  4S  ;  14,  15,

.J7;    18-21,  47;    22,  23,  .4^ ;    24,   25,  46;    27-30,   .46;

31,  48;  33,  4S;  47,  .46  ;  48,  47.
xiv.  17,  68.
XV.  2,  3,  3^  ;  7-9,  32.
xvi.  13-18,  101 ;  21,  i2i  ;  27,  111.
xvii.  24,  25,  ii7  ;  27,  118.

223


224  INDEX

Matt,  xviii.  3,  iiS;  5-8,  ii//.;  10,  ii4 ;  11,12,^0^;  14,  JJ^  ;

15-17,  ii5;  18-20,  ;i6;  23-31,  ii5  ;  32-35,  ii 6.
xix.  3,  116 ;  4-6,  ii7 ;  8-12,  117  ;  13,  14,  113  ;  27,  i02.
XX.  1-3,  i03  ;  8-16,  103 ;  20-22,  103  ;  23-28,  iO^
xxi.  10-11,  128  ;  13,  .;,',  ;  28,  29,  &9  ;  40-43,  lOS.
xxii.  16-21,  iig;  23,  i.'Ji  ;  24,  25,  122^  28,  i'?;2;  31,  32,

122 ;  34-36,  i3;3  ;  37,  123  ;  39,  40,  123  ;  42,  43,  i.?5.
xxiii.  2,  i;?3;  3-5,  i^/^ ;  8,  12k\   13,  i^4;    15,  118,  12J,  ;

16,  i^^ ;  16-22,  119  :  23,  i^^ ;  27,  28,  124  ;  30,  31,  124. ;

37-39,  123.
xxiv.  1-5,  i55;  12,  l.:'o  ;  14,  i^5 ;  45,  56,  110;  48,  iiO;

50,  51,  110.-
XXV.  1-7,  iiO ;  10,  110  ;  26,  27,  66  ;  32,  iii  ;  34,  111.
xxvi.  3-5,  i5i  ;  6-11,  88  ;   13,  89  ;   14-19,  iSi  ;  20,  21,  l.}2  ;

23,  132  ;  26-28,  iS^  ;  30,  31,  IS4  ;  33-35,  134  i   36-43,

i55  ;  44,  45,  136  ;  46-52,  146  ;   55,  56,  i^7  ;  58,  147  ;

59-66,  149  ;   67,  68,  i50  ;  69,  70,  147  ;   71-75,  I4S.
xxvii.  2,  i50  ;  21-23,  153  :  24-26,  I64  ;  28,  29,  i55 ;  31,

1S5 ;   46,  47,  156.
Mark  i.  1,  158  ;   4,  n.
ii.  23,  SO.

iii.  4,  5i  ;  1,73;   22,  73 ;  28,  I24 ;   29,  i^5.
iv.  26-29,  45  ;  35,  77  ;  37,  38,  77  ;  40,  77.
vii.  1-5,  32  ;   8,  33  ;   10-13,  32  ;  14-21,  S3  ;   23,  33.
viii.  32-34,  121.

X.  2,  iiS  ;  17-21,  85  ;  22-25,  S6  ;  29-31,  102  ;  35,  103.
xi.  15,  i„'5  ;  17,  34  ;   18,  i^S  ;  25,  26,  56.
xii.  1-8,  i07 ;  41-44,  87.
xiii.  33,  iiO.

xiv.  18,  132 ;   53,  147,  US.
XV.  3,  4,  i5i  ;  5,  i5;3  ;  29-32,  i55.
Luke  ii.  40-46,  23  ;   47-52,  24.

iii.  4-6,  ^4  ;  10,  11,  ^^ ;  12-14,  25  ;   23,  S4.

iv.  3-5,  26;   6-8,  ;27  ;  9-12,  26;  13,  14,  27;    16-18,  ^5;

19-21,  SO  ;   32,  60.
v.  33-38,  39.
vi  1,  30  ;  20-23,  49  ;   24-26,  50 ;  30,  53 ;   37,  53 ;   39,  40,

5i ;  45,  59.
vii.  37-41,  57  ;  42-50,  3S.


INDEX  22S

Luke  viii.  18,  ^ ;  19,  76  ;  21,  76.

ix.  23-25,  78  ;  48,  Uk ;  52-56, 119  ;  57,  58,  76  ;  59-62,  77.
X.  1-3,   71  ;    4,   5,  7^ ;    25,   IZQ ;    27,    120 ;    29-35,    J20 ;

38,  77  ;  39-42,  7S.
xi.  9,  58  ;  27,  28,  76  ;  37-41,  57  ;  53,  126.
xii.  ],  123;  5,  iS3  ;  13,  14,  119;  15-19,  7S ;  20,  21,  79;

32,  5S  ;  35-39,  109  ;  49,  75;  51-53,  73  ;  54-56,  SO.
xiii.  2-8,  79  ;  10-15,  3i  ;  24,  25,  111.
xiv.  3,  SI  ;   5,  6,  31  ;  8-11,  i05 ;  15,  16,  8Jt;   18-23,  S^ ;

25-28,  SO  ;  26,  73  ;  29-33,  81.
XV.  8,  iO^  ;  10-13,  105  ;  15-18,  105  ;   20-32,  i06.
xvi.  1,  82  ;  3,8S;   5,  6,  82 ;  8-12,  SS ;  14-17,  83 ;   16,  41  ;

19-29,  S4  ;  30,  31,  85.
xvii.  3,  lU  ;   4,  ii5  ;  5-7,  108  ;   8-10,  i09  ;  20,  41  ;  21,42;

23,  24,  4~'.

xviii.  10-12,  38  ;   13,  14,  3.9  ;  17,  113 ;  25-27,  86.

xix.  1-4,  S6  ;  5-10,  87  ;   11-15,  65  ;  16-27,  66  ;   47,  48,  126.

XX.  34-36,  i;?:?  ;  45,  46,  123.

xxi.  34,  110.

xxii.  18,  i5^^ ;  35,  36,  134  ;   38,  134 ;   53,  i.^/.

xxiii.  2,  i50  ;  6-15, 162  ;   23,  ^5^  ;  34,  35, 155  ;  39-43, 156  ;

46,  J56.
John  i.  1-5,  158  ;   9-12,  158  ;   13-18,  i59  ;  35-12,  27 ;   43-49,

gS ;  51,  28.
ii.  13,  33  ;  14-16,  3^  ;  23-25,  35.
iii.  1-5,  4^;  6-17,  43;    18-21,  .f^ ;  22-27,  36;    31,  36;

32-36,  37.
iv.  4-10,  35  ;   13,  14,  35 ;   19,  20,  35 ;   21,  36 ;  23-26,  36 ;

31-38,  6^.
V.  1-4,  62;    5-11,  63;  15-21,  63;    22,  6.^;  24-31,  64;

36-38,  64  ;  39,  40,  65  ;   43,  44,  65.
vi.  1-3,  63;  5,  68;    7,  63;  9-11,  63;  26,  27,  68;   28-33,

69 ;  35-41,  69  ;    42-52,  70 ;    53-57,  7.Z  ;  60,  61,  71  ;

63,  71.
vii.  1-6,  90;  7-12,  91;    14-19,  9i  ;  21,  9i  ;  22-29,  92;

32,  34,  9;?  ;  37-40,  93  ;   42-52,  93.
viii.  3-9,  j;9  ;  10,  11,  120  ;   12-14,  94  ;   18,  19,  94  ;  21,  94  ;

24,  25,  94 ;   26,  95  ;  28,  29,  95  ;   31,  32,  95 ;   34-37,  95  ;
3«-t4,  96  ;  46,  96  ;   48-55,  97 ;  56-59,  98.

IS


226  INDEX

John  X.  1-3,  98 ;  6,  95 ;  7,  8,  95 ;  9-18,  99 ;  20,  21, 101 ;  24,  99 ;

25-37,  100;  38^2,101.
xi.  7-9,  m ;    10,  128 ;    25,   26,  98  ;    47-50,  1^6 ;    52-57,

127.
xii.  1,  1^5  ;^,1Z7;  12-14,  l^S  ;  19,  20,  128  ;  21-27,  1^9  ;

28,  130 ;  31,  32,  130  ;  34-36,  iSO ;  36,  131  ;  42,  43,  131  ;

44,  45, 130  ;  47-50, 130.
xiii.  4-7,  132  ;  10,  11, 132  ;  12,  135  ;  14,  133  \  17,  18,  133  ;

21-27, 135  ;  30,  31, 133  ;  33-35,  ISJf ;  36-38,  137.
xiv.  1-3,  137  ;  4-17,  138  ;  18-28, 139.
XV.  1,  2, 140  ;  4-16,  140  ;  17-27,  141.
xvi.  1-7,  141  ;    8-13,  1^:2 ;    15-21,  I42 ;    22-30,  1.^3  ;    33,

143.
xvii.  1,  14s;  3,  4,  1.44;  6-11,  144;  15,  1.^4;  17,  18,  I44  ;

21,  1.4.4  ;  23,  144  ;  25,  26,  1.4-4.
xviii.  1, 135;  12-14,  l..f7  ;  19,  20,  I48  ;  21-23, 1.49  ;  28-33,

160  ;  34-38, 151.
xix.  4,  153;  6,  7,  153;  8-13,  154;  16,  15^  155;  16,  155;

18,  155  ;  28,  166 ;  30,  156.
XX.  31,  158.


if'tM^'t'XS^


m


y/M').


■wMM


'3>jim


y?/,'i


yyyX


wWk«*>»mww
