Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2016


https  ://arch  i ve . o rg/detai  Is/b24926747


Francis  Barrett,  F.R.S.

Student  in  Chemistry,  Metaphysicks,  Natural  and  Occult
Philosophy,  &c.


XL  be  Book  of  tbe  fiftagt.


mnatmogeD  TReprlnt  of — —
JSarrett’s  fHbagus,  XonOon,  1801.


B Complete  System  of  ©ccult  (philosophy  consisting  of  IRatural,
Celestial,  Cabalistic,  an&  Ceremonial  flbagfc ; Invocations ; Conjura*
tions  of  Spirits,  &c.,  &c._  , s,  Biographical  Sfcetcb  of  Seventeen
©reat  philosophers  an&  BSepts.


•f


price,  jflve  Dollars.


•fr


1896.

TOH.  TOH.  Ibarmon,  printer  an&  publisher,
Boston,  flDass.,  TO.  S.  B.


soTascow  \

VA1IVERC1TY

LIBRARY:


publisher's  IRotice.

That  there  is  a certain  kind  of  energy,  based  on  the  existence  of  a mixed  world,
placed  without,  not  within  us,  and  into  communication  with  which  we  can  enter  by
the  use  of  certain  arts  and  practices,  has  long  ago  been  demonstrated  as  a fact.  That
these  forces  can  get  hold  of  a person  and  break  him  down,  as  easily  as  the  fearful
hurricane  sweeps  all  before  it,  striking  him  in  a thousand  places  at  the  same  time,
without  his  being  able  to  perceive  the  invisible  foe,  or  being  able  to  protect  himself,
is  also  proven.  But  that  these  forces  may  be  dominated,  so  that  they  will  obey
the  thoughts,  answer  to  the  voice  and  understand  the  meaning  of  traced  signs,  is
what  many  cannot  realize,  and  what  their  reason  rejects ; yet,  this  also  is  capable  of
being  demonstrated  and  proven.

The  reader  and  student  should  always  bear  in  mind  that  in  trying  to  demonstrate
these  things  for  himself,  he  is  working  w'ith  unseen  and  powerful  agents,  which,  if
he  is  not  equally  powerful— pure  and  high  minded,  loving  his  fellow  men,  and  seek-
ing to  benefit  mankind,  rather  than  seeking  or  desiring  powers  and  benefits  for
himself,  he  had  much  better  be  dead  than  to  try  any  of  these  things  for  the  gratifica-
tion of  his  personal  nature;  for  in  seeking  to  harm  another  — curses  like  chickens
soon  come  home  to  roost,  with  a much  greater  force  than  the  original  impulse.
Thus  again  we  should  look  within  rather  than  without,  as  the  exercise  of  True  Magic
does  not  require  any  ceremonies  or  conjurations,  or  the  making  of  circles  and
signs ; it  only  requires  a strong  faith,  gained  through  a knowledge  of  nature’s  laws,
which  can  accomplish  anything,  if  it  acts  through  a human  mind  which  is  in  harmony
with  these  laws,  without  which  nothing  useful  can  be  done.  True  Magic  also
consists  in  true  faith,  but  true  faith  rests  in  spiritual  knowledge,  and  without  that
kind  of  knowledge  there  can  be  no  faith:  this  is  only  obtained  by  developing
one’s  own  inner  and  most  lofty  nature.

The  conjuration  of  the  evil  spirits  of  the  astral  plane  means  practically  a full
realization  of  “Faust  and  the  Demon.”  There  are  many  strange  things  set  forth  in
the  following  pages,  almost  too  strange  to  believe,  yet  because  one  is  ignorant  of  their
existence,  it  does  not  follow  that  they  are  not  real,  as  the  sad  records  of  Sorcery  and
Witchcraft,  of  Yoodooism  and  Black  Magic  abundantly  testify.  Man  does  not  know
himself,  therefore  he  does  not  understand  the  things  of  the  inner  world.  Each  man
has  the  essence  of  the  Divine  within  himself ; he  possesses  one  kind  of  knowledge  as
much  as  another,  and  he  who  does  not  find  that  which  is  in  him,  cannot  truly  say
he  dees  not  possess  it,  only  he  was  not  capable  of  successfully  seeking  for  it.
Therefore,  in  seeking,  always  bear  in  mind  — true  growth  rests  in  the  capacity  of  the
human  mind  and  the  human  will  to  comprehend  spiritual  truths,  and  not  by  basing
its  conclusions  upon  external  appearances  caused  by  the  illusion  of  the  senses,  or
of  selfish  purposes.  In  launching  once  again  this  work  before  the  people  of  this
generation,  the  publisher  merely  seeks  to  meet  the  growing  demand  for  books  of  a
mystical  character.  Feeling  assured  that  the  reader  will  find  enough  herein  to
ponder  over  and  perhaps  awaken  some  responsive  chord  in  his  nature,  which  will  lead
him  to  seek  for  the  Divine  within  himself  rather  than  trying  to  awaken  external
forces  which  will  prove  themselves  the  stronger.  All  this  is  plainly  set  forth  by
the  writer  of  the  book,  yet  an  additional  warning  seems  to  be  essential.  Any  further
information  concerning  the  above  will  be  cheerfully  given.


This  book  is  reproduced  from  an  almost  extinct  print  of  1801,  A.  D.  The  general  style  of  the  text
being  followed  throughout,  including  spelling  and  punctuation,  which  may  seem  peculiar  to  the
reader  at  first  glance ; the  publisher  desiring  to  keep  intact  the  quaint  style  of  the  author.


{Table  of  Contents.


Preface.

Introduction 1

The  Use  and  Abuse  of  Astrology,  &c  2

A Prayer  to  God 6

Of  Natural  Magic  in  general  ...  6


The  First  Principles  of  Natural  Magic  9


BOOK  I.

NATUKAL  MAGIC.

Natural  Magic  defined;  of  Man;
his  Creation,  Divine  Image,  and
Fall;  and  of  the  spiritual  and
magical  Virtue  of  the  Soul  ...  9

Of  the  Wonders  of  Natural  Magic,
displayed  in  a Variety  of  sym-


pathetic and  occult  Operations,
in  Animals,  Minerals,  and  Vege-
tables, treated  of  miscellaneously

Of  the  Serpent 17

Of  Amulets,  Charms,  and  Enchant-
ments; an  Amulet  for  the  Flux

of  Blood 21

Of  Unctions,  Philters,  Potions,  &c.

Their  magical  Virtue 23

Of  Magical  Suspensions  and  Alliga-
tions ; shewing  by  what  power
they  are  efficacious  in  Natural

Magic 24

Of  Antipathies 25

Of  the  occult  Virtues  of  Things
which  are  inherent  in  them  only
in  their  Lives,  and  such  as  remain

in  them  after  Death 27

Of  the  wonderful  Virtures  of  some
Kinds  of  precious  Stones  ....  28

Of  the  Mixtures  of  Natural  Things
one  with  another,  and  the  Pro-
duction of  Monsters 29


Of  the  Art  of  Fascination,  Bind-
ing, Sorceries,  Magical  Confec-
tions, Lights,  Candles,  Lamps,  &c.
being  the  conclusion  of  Natural
Magic 30


ALCHYMY.

Epistle  to  Museus 37

Of  Alchymy,  and  its  Divine  Origin  . 39

Discovered  to  man  by  Uriel  ....  39

Zoroaster  made  Gold  from  the  Seven

Metals 39

Zoroaster  was  the  Father  of  Alchy-

mists 39

The  Authors  who  have  wrote  upon

it 39

The  comparison  of  Alchymists  . . 40

What  an  Adept  is 40

Van  H elmont’ s Account  of  Alchym  y 40
Kircher’s  Account  of  Alchymists.  . 41

The  Description  of  the  Philoso-
phers’ Stone 41

Account  of  a real  Transmutation  . 41

Account  of  Flammel,  the  Alchymist  41
History  of  Butler’s  Universal  Medi-
cine   42

What  is  not  universally  understood
generally  referred  to  the  Black

Art 44

Of  the  Preparation  necessary  to
qualify  a Man  for  the  Search  of

the  Philosophers’  Stone 44

Of  the  Prima  Materia 44

Ten  lessons,  teaching  the  Transmu-
tation of  base  Metals  into  Gold  44
Lesson  XI.  XII.  XIII.  XIV.  teach-
ing the  Manner  of  extracting  the


liable  of  Contents.


Prima  Materia  of  the  Lapis  Phil-
osophorum;  and  the  Use  it  is  of  in
purifying  imperfect  Metals,  to
Change  them  into  good  Gold  . . 48

BOOK  II.

TALISMANIC  MAGIC


Of  the  Four  Elements,  and  their

Natural  Qualities • . . 51

Of  the  Properties  and  wonderful
Nature  of  Fire  and  Earth  ....  53

Of  the  Water  and  Air 54

Of  compound  or  mixed  Bodies ; in
what  Manner  they  relate  to  the
Elements ; and  how  the  Elements
correspond  to  the  Souls,  Senses,
and  Dispositions  of  Men  ....  57

That  the  Elements  are  in  Stars,
Devils,  Angels,  Intelligences,  and

in  God  himself 58

That  the  wisdom  of  God  works  by
second  Causes  is  proved  beyond

Dispute  in  this  Chapter 60

Of  the  Spirit  of  the  World  ....  61

Of  the  Seals  and  Characters  im-
pressed by  Celestials  uponNatural

Things 61

Of  the  Virtue  and  Efficacy  of  Per-
fumes ; and  to  what  Planets  they

are  attributed 62

Of  the  Composition  of  Perfumes  at-
tributed to  the  Planets 64

General  Fumes  of  the  Planets  ...  65

Of  the  magical  Virtue  of  Rings  . . 66

That  the  Passions  of  the  Mind  are
assisted  by  Celestials;  and  how
necessary  the  constancy  of  the
Mind  is  in  every  Work 67


How  a Man’s  Mind  may  be  joined
with  the  Celestial  Spirits  and  In-
telligences, and  with  them  im-
press wonderful  Virtues  upon  in-
ferior Things 68

Shewing  the  Necessity  of  Mathe-
matical Knowledge ; and  of  the
great  Power  and  Efficacy  of  Num-
bers in  the  Construction  of  Talis-
mans, &c 69

The  great  Virtues  of  Numbers,  as
well  in  natural  as  in  Super-natural
Things


Of  the  Scales  of  Numbers ; the  Scale

of  Unity 71

Of  the  Number  Two,  and  the
Scale  . . • 73

Of  the  Number  Three,  and  the
Scale  74

Of  the  Number  Four,  and  the  Scale  75


Of  the  Number  Five,  and  the  Scale  79
Of  the  Number  Six,  and  the  Scale  80
Of  the  Number  Seven,  and  the  Scale  81
Of  the  Number  Eight,  and  the  Scale  89
Of  the  Number  Nine,  and  the  Scale  89
Of  the  Number  Ten,  and  the  two


Scales  90

Of  the  Numbers  Eleven  and  Twelve,
with  the  Scale  of  Number  Twelve  92
Of  the  Notes  of  the  Hebrews  and
Chaldeans,  and  other  Characters
used  by  Magicians • 96

The  magical  Tables  of  the  Planets,
their  Form  and  Virtue ; with  the
Divine  Names,  Intelligences,  and
Spirits  that  are  set  over  them  . . 97

Of  the  Observation  of  the  Celestials
necessary  in  all  magical  Works  . 106
When  the  Planets  are  most  power-
ful   107

Observations  on  the  fixed  Stars,
with  their  Names  and  Nature  . . 107
Of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  and  their

magical  Considerations 108

Of  the  Twenty-eight  Mansions  of
the  Moon,  and  their  Virtues  . . . 109
That  some  artificial  Things,  as  Im-
ages, Seals,  and  the  like,  may  de-
rive Virtue  from  the  Celestial

Bodies 113

Of  the  Images  of  the  Zodiac ; what
Virtues,  being  engraven,  they  re-
ceive from  the  Stars 113

Of  the  Images  of  the  Seven  Planets,  114

Of  the  Images  of  Jupiter 115

Images  of  Mars 115

Images  of  the  Sun 116

Images  of  Venus 116

Images  of  Mercury 117

Images  of  the  Moon 117


XTable  of  Contents.


Images  of  the  Dragon’s  Head  and
Dragon’sTail 117

Images  of  the  Twenty-eight  Man-
sions of  the  Moon 118

Magic  Seals ; that  human  Impreca-
tions naturally  impress  their
Powers  upon  external  Things;
and  how  Man’s  Mind,  through  a
Degree  of  Dependencies,  ascends
into  the  Intelligible  World,  and
becomes  like  the  more  sublime
Spirits  and  Intelligences  ....  120

The  Conclusion  of  Talismanic
Magic ; in  which  is  included  the
Key  of  all  that  has  been  written
upon  the  Subject;  shewing  the
Practice  of  Images,  and  the  Com-
position of  Talismans,  by  way  of
Example;  and,  likewise,  the
necessary  Observations  of  the
Celestials  requisite  for  the  Per-
fection of  all  Talismanic  Opera-


tions   124

MAGNETISM.

Magnetism 129

Of  the  Magnetic  or  Attrattive
Faculty 131

Of  Sympathetic  Medicines  ....  132


Of  the  Magnetic  or  Sympathetic
Unguent ; the  Power  of  Sympathy,
Armary,  Unguent;  and  curing
of  Wounds,  Ectasies,  Witchcraft,


Mummies,  &c 134

Of  the  Weapon  Salve 134


Of  the  Imaginative  Power,  and  the
Magnetism  of  the  Natural  Spirits,
Mummial  Attraction,  Sympathies
of  Astral  Spirits,  and  their  Bodies,
upon  which  is  founded  the  whole


Art  of  Necromancy 136

Of  Witchcraft  in  particular  ....  139

Of  the  Yital  Spirit 141

Of  the  Magical  Power,  &c  ...  . 142

Of  exciting  or  stirring  up  the  Magi-
cal Virtue 143

Of  the  Magical  Virtue  of  the  Soul,
and  the  Medium  it  Acts  by  . . . 144
The  End  of  the  Magnetism  . . . 145


BOOK  III.

CABALISTICAL  MAGIC.


Of  the  Cabala,  &c 147

What  Dignity  and  preparation  is
necessary  to  Him  who  would  be-
come a true  Magician 148


That  the  Knowledge  of  the  true
God  is  necessary  for  a Magician  148
Of  Divine  Emanations,  and  Ten  Se-
phiroths,  and  Ten  most  sacred
Names  of  God  which  rule  them,


and  their  Interpretation  ....  148
Of  the  Power  and  Virtue  of  the
Divine  Names 150


Of  Intelligences  and  Spirits ; and  of
the  threefold  Kinds  of  them,  and
their  different  names ; and  of  In-
fernal and  Subterraneous  Spirits  154
Of  the  Order  of  Evil  Spirits;  their


Fall,  and  different  Natures  . . . 161
The  Annoyance  of  Evil  Spirits,  and
the  Perservation  we  have  from

Good  Spirits 167

That  there  is  a threefold  Keeper
of  Man;  and  from  whence  each

proceeds 169

Of  the  Speech  of  Angels,  and  their
speaking  amongst  themselves,

and  with  us 170

Of  the  Names  of  Spirits,  and  their
various  Imposition;  and  of  the
Spirits  that  are  set  over  the  Stars,
Signs,  Corners  of  the  Heavens,
and  the  Elements 174


How  the  Cabalists  draw  forth  the
Names  of  Angels  from  Sacred
Writ ; and  of  the  Seventy-two
Angels  that  bear  the  Names  of


God ; with  the  Tables  of  Ziruph,
and  the  Commutations  of  Names

and  Numbers 174

Of  finding  out  the  Names  of  Spirits
and  Genii,  from  the  Disposition

of  the  Celestial  Bodies 175

Of  the  calculating  Art  of  such
Names,  by  the  Tradition  of  the

Cabalists 178

Of  the  Characters  and  Seals  of

Spirits 182

Another  Way  of  making  Charac-
ters, according  to  the  Tradition
of  Cabalists 183


XTable  of  Contents.


PAGE


There  is  another  Sort  of  Characters.

of  Spirits  received  by  Revelation  186
Of  the  Bonds  of  Spirits,  and  their
Adjurations  and  casting  out . . 186

By  what  Methods  Magicians  and
Necromancers  call  up.  the  Souls

of  the  Dead 187

Of  Prophetic  Dreams 188

The  Perfection  and  Key  of  the
Cabala,  or  Ceremonial  Magic  . . 190

The  Calculations  of  the  Names  of

Good  and  Evil  Spirits 192

Of  Magic  Pentacles,  the  Manner  of

Constructing  them 196

A Pentacle  for  Victory  over
Enemies,.  . . . against  Serpents,

Poisons,  &c 197

Deprecations  ...  • 198

The  Consecration  of  all  Magical
Instruments  and  Materials  used

in  this  Art 199

Consecration  of  Water 200

Consecration  of  Fire 201

Consecration  of  Oil 201

Consecration  and  Benediction  of

Lights 201

Lamps,  Wax,  &c • . 201

Consecration  of  Ground,  Circle,

Place,  &c 201

Of  the  Invocation  of  Spirits;  the
binding  of,  and  constraining

them  to  appear 203

Description  and  Use  of  a Book  of
Virgin  Parchment,  or  abortive
Vellum,  in  which  the  Names  of

Spirits  are  registered 203

Consecration  of  the  aforesaid  Book  204

Invocation  of  good  Spirits  in  par-
ticular   206

The  Invocation  Prayer 206

The  particular  Form  of  Lamens  . . 206

Of  receiving  Oracles  in  Dreams  . . 208

Of  the  Methods  of  raising  Evil
Spirits,  or  Familiars,  or  the  Souls

of  the  Dead,  by  a Circle 210

The  Suffumigations  used  in  raising
Ghosts,  Shadows,  and  departed
Spirits;  and  what  Places  are
appropriate  to  this  • 211


The  particular  Composition  of  the
Magic  Circle;  and  of  the  Forms
of  the  Exorcisms,  Benedictions,
and  Conjurations  for  every  Day
and  Hour  in  the  Week ; and  the
Manner  of  working  fully  described  216
A Table  of  the  Magical  Names  of


the  Hours,  by  Day  or  Night  . . . 219

Angels  of  the  Seasons,  &c 219

Exorcism  of  Fire • . . 220

The  Habit  of  the  Exorcist .....  220
The  Pentacles  of  Solomon  ....  221
An  Exorcism  of  the  Spirits  of  the

Air 222

A Prayer  to  be  said  in  the  Four
Parts  of  the  Circle  . . • ....  223

An  Oration 223

Of  the  Appearance  of  the  Spirits  . 224
Considerations  and  Conjurations  for

every  Day  in  the  Week 225

The  Consideration  and  Conjuration
for  Sunday 225


The  Conjuration,  &c.,  of  Monday  . 226
The  Conjuration,  &c.,  of  Tuesday  . 227
The  Conjuration,  &c.,  of  Wednesday  228
The  Conjuration,  &c,,  of  Thursday  230
The  Conjuration,  &c.,of  Friday  . . 231
The  Conjuration,  &c.,  of  Saturday  232

TRITHEMIUS  BOOK  OF  SECRETS.


Translation  of  Trithemius;  the

Translator’s  Letter 235

The  Conjurations  of  Spirits  into  a
Crystal;  the  description  of  this
Instrument;  and  the  Form  and

Ceremony  of  a Vision 237

Table  for  the  Inspection  of  Names  .
of  Spirits  governing  the  Planetary
Hours  by  Day  and  Night ....  242
The  End  of  the  Magus,  or  Celestial
Intelligencer 242

THE  BIOGRAPHY.

Zoroaster,  the  Son  of  Oramasus  . . 245
Hermes,  surnamed  Trismegistus  . 250
Apollonius,  of  Tyana  ....  • . . 251


'Sable  of  Contents.


PAGE

Peter  De  Abano 253

Apuleius,  the  Platonic 255

Aristotle 258

Artimedorus,  of  Ephesus  . . • . . 261

The  Babylonians 262

Henry  Corneilus  Agrippa 264

Albertus  Magnus  . . • 271

Roger  ( alias  Friar)  Bacon 272

Raymond  Lully 275

George  Ripley 276

John  and  Isaac  Holland 276

Theophrastus  Paracelsus 277

John  Rudolph  Gluber 282

Doctor  Dee,  and  Sir  Edward  Kelly  282
The  Conclusion 284


PLATES.

The  Author’s  Portrait  to  front  the


Title

Scale  of  Unity 72

Scale  of  Two 73

Scale  of  Three 75

Double  Scale  of  Four 76-77

Scale  of  Five 79

Scale  of  Six 81

Double  Scale  of  Seven 84-85

Scale  of  Eight 88

Scale  of  Nine 89


Double  Scale  of  Ten 90-91-92

Double  Scale  of  Twelve 94-95

Mystic  Characters 97

Magic  Tables,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars
Sun,  Venus,  Mercury,  Moon  . 98-103

Geomantic  Characters Ill

Magic  Seals,  or  Talismans  . . 122-123
The  Cabala,  Holy  Sigils  of  the

Names  of  God 151

Fallen  Angels 155

Vessels  of  Wrath 157

Ophis  and  Spirit  of  Antichrist  . . . 163

Evil  Daemons 165

Tables  of  the  Cabala 173

Tables  of  the  Commutations  . . 176-177
Table  of  the  Combinations  of  Ziruph  180
Calculations  of  the  Names  of  Spirits
under  the  Seven  Planets  and

Twelve  Signs  . . . • 181

The  Mysterious  Characters  of  Let-
ters   184

The  Cabala 185

Characters  of  Good  and  Evil  Spirits,  191
The  angels  governing  the  seven

days  of  the  week,  &c 212

The  Magic  Book  213

The  Magical  Circle,  &c 217

Form  of  the  Crystal  Lights,  Magic
Wand,  the  Tripod,  &c 238


preface,


*||N  this  Work,  which  we  have  written  chiefly  for  the  information  of
||  those  who  are  curious  and  indefatigable  in  their  enquiries  into  occult
knowledge,  we  have,  at  a vast  labour  and  expence,  both  of  time  and
charges,  collected  whatsoever  can  he  deemed  curious  and  rare,  in  regard  to
the  subject  of  our  speculations  in  Natural  Magic  — the  Cabala  — Celestial  and
Ceremonial  Magic — Alchymy — and  Magnetism;  and  have  divided  it  into  two
Books,  sub-divided  into  parts:  to  which  we  have  added  a third  Book,  contain-
ing a biographical  account  of  those  great  men  who  were  famous  and  renowned
for  their  knowledge;  shewing  upon  whose  authority  this  Science  of  Magic  is
founded,  and  upon  what  principles.  To  which  we  have  annexed  a great
variety  of  notes,  wherein  we  have  impartially  examined  the  probability  of
the  existence  of  Magic , both  of  the  good  and  bad  species,  in  the  earliest,  as
well  as  in  the  latter,  ages  of  the  world.  We  have  exhibited  a vast  number  of
rare  experiments  in  the  course  of  this  Treatise,  many  of  which,  delivered  in
the  beginning,  are  founded  upon  the  simple  application  of  actives  to  passives ;
the  others  are  of  a higher  speculation.

In  our  history  of  the  lives  of  Philosophers,  &c.  we  have  omitted  nothing
that  can  be  called  interesting  or  satisfactory.  We  have  taken  our  historical
characters  from  those  authors  most  deserving  of  credit ; we  have  given  an
outline  of  the  various  reports  tradition  gives  of  them  ; to  which  are  annexed
notes,  drawn  from  the  most  probable  appearance  of  truth,  impartially  describ-
ing their  characters  and  actions ; leaning  neither  to  the  side  of  those  who
doubt  every  thing,  nor  to  them  whose  credulity  takes  in  every  report  to  be
circumstantially  true.

At  this  time,  the  abstruse  sciences  of  Nature  begin  to  be  more  investigated
than  for  a century  past,  during  which  space  they  have  been  almost  totally
neglected ; but  men  becoming  more  enlightened,  they  begin  to  consider  the
extraordinary  effects  that  were  wrought  by  ancient  philosophers,  in  ages  that
were  called  dark.  Many,  therefore,  have  thought  that  time,  nature,  causes,
and  effects,  being  the  same,  with  the  additional  improvements  of  mechanical
and  liberal  arts,  we  may,  with  their  knowledge  of  Nature,  surpass  them  in  the
producing  of  wonderful  effects ; for  which  cause  many  men  are  naturally  im-


preface-


pelled,  without  education  or  other  advantage,  to  dive  into  the  contemplation
of  Nature;  hut  the  study  thereof  being  at  first  difficult,  they  have  recourse
to  lay  out  a great  deal  of  money  in  collecting  various  books:  to  remedy
which  inconvenience  and  expense,  the  Author  undertook  to  compose  The
Magus,  presuming  that  his  labours  herein  will  meet  with  the  general  appro-
bation of  either  the  novitiate  or  adept : for  whose  use  and  instruction  it  is
now  published.

But  to  return  to  the  subject  of  our  Book ; we  have,  in  the  First  Part,  fully
explained  what  Natural  Magic  is;  and  have  shewn  that,  by  the  application  of
actives  to  passives,  many  wonderful  effects  are  produced  that  are  merely
natural,  and  done  by  manual  operations.  We  have  procured  every  thing  that
was  valuable  and  scarce  respecting  this  department  of  our  work,  which  we
have  introduced  under  the  title  of  Natural  Magic ; and  a variety  of  our  own
experiments  likewise.  In  the  possession  of  this  work,  the  laborious  and
diligent  student  will  find  a complete  and  delectable  companion ; so  that  he
who  has  been  searching  for  years,  for  this  author  and  the  other,  will  in  this
book  find  the  marrow  of  them  all.

But  I would  advise,  that  we  do  not  depend  too  much  upon  our  own  wisdom
in  the  understanding  of  these  mysteries ; for  all  earthly  wisdom  is  foolishness
in  the  esteem  of  God — I mean  all  the  wisdom  of  man,  which  he  pretends  to
draw  from  any  other  source  than  God  alone.

We  come  next  to  the  Second  Part  of  our  First  Book,  treating  of  the  art
called  the  Constellatory  Practice , or  Talismanic  Magic ; in  which  we  fully
demonstrate  the  power  and  efficacy  of  Talismans,  so  much  talked  of,  and  so
little  understood  by  most  men  : we  therefore  explain,  in  the  clearest  and  most
intelligible  manner,  how  Talismans  may  be  made  for  the  execution  of  various
purposes,  and  by  what  means,  and  from  what  source  they  become  vivified,  and
are  visible  instruments  of  great  and  wonderful  effects.  We  likewise  shew
the  proper  and  convenient  times ; under  what  constellations  and  aspects  of
the  planets  they  are  to  be  formed,  and  the  times  when  they  are  most  power-
ful to  act ; and,  in  the  next  place,  we  have  taught  that  our  own  spirit  is  the
vehicle  of  celestial  attraction,  transferring  celestial  aud  spiritual  virtue  into
Seals , Images , Amulets , Rings , Papers,  Glasses,  <&c.  Also,  we  have  not
forgot  to  give  the  most  clear  and  rational  illustration  of  sympathy  and  an-
tipathy— attraction  and  repulsion.  We  have  likewise  proved  how  cures  are
performed  by  virtue  of  sympathetic  powers  and  medicines  — by  seals,  rings,
and  amulets,  even  at  unlimited  distances,  which  we  have  been  witnesses  of
and  are  daily  confirmed  in  the  true  and  certain  belief  of.  We  know  how  to
communicate  with  any  person,  and  to  give  him  intimation  of  our  purpose,  at
a hundred  or  a thousand  miles  distance  ; but  then  a preparation  is  necessary,
and  the  parties  should  have  their  appointed  seasons  and  hours  for  that  pur-


preface.


pose ; likewise,  both  should  be  of  the  same  firm  constancy  of  mind,  and  a
disciple  or  brother  in  art.  And  we  have  given  methods  whereby  a man  may
receive  true  and  certain  intimation  of  future  things  (by  dreams),  of  whatso-
ever his  mind  has  before  meditated  upon,  himself  being  properly  disposed.
Likewise,  we  have  recited  the  various  methods  used  by  the  antients  for  the
invocation  of  astral  spirits,  by  circles,  crystals,  Sc. ; their  forms  of  exorcism,
incantations,  orations,  bonds,  conjurations;  and  have  given  a general  display
of  the  instruments  of  their  art ; all  of  which  we  have  collected  out  of  the
works  of  the  most  famous  magicians,  such  as  Zoroaster,  Hermes,  Apollonius,
Simon  of  the  Temple,  Trithemius,  Agrippa,  Porta  (the  Neapolitan),  Dee,
Paracelsus,  Roger  Bacon,  and  a great  many  others;  to  which  we  have  sub-
joined our  own  notes,  endeavouring  to  point  out  the  difference  of  these  arts,
so  as  to  free  the  name  of  Magic  from  any  scandalous  imputation  ; seeing  it  is
a word  originally  significative  not  of  any  evil,  but  of  every  good  and  laudable
science,  such  as  a man  might  profit  by,  and  become  both  wise  and  happy ;
and  the  practice  so  far  from  being  offensive  to  God  or  man,  that  the  very
root  or  ground  of  all  magic  takes  its  rise  from  the  Holy  Scriptures,  viz.  —
“ The  fear  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  all  wisdom ;” — and  charity  is  the  end :
which  fear  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  Magic ; for  Magic  is  wisdom,  and  on
this  account  the  wise  men  were  called  Magi.  The  magicians  were  the  first
Christians ; for,  by  their  high  and  excellent  knowledge,  they  knew  that  that
Saviour  which  was  promised,  was  now  born  man  — that  Christ  was  our
Redeemer,  Advocate,  and  Mediator ; they  were  the  first  to  acknowledge  his
glory  and  majesty ; therefore  let  no  one  be  offended  at  the  venerable  and
sacred  title  of  Magician  — a title  which  every  wise  man  merits  while  he
pursues  that  path  which  Christ  himself  trod,  viz.  humility,  charity,  mercy,
fasting,  praying,  &c. ; for  the  true  magician  is  the  truest  Christian,  and
nearest  disciple  of  our  blessed  Lord,  who  set  the  example  we  ought  to  follow;
for  he  says — “ If  ye  have  faith  &c. ; ” and  “This  comes  not  by  fasting  and
and  prayer,  <fcc. ; ” and  “Ye  shall  tread  upon  scorpions,  &c.;”  and  again
“ Be  wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves.” — Such  instructions  as  these
are  frequently  named,  and  given  in  many  places  of  the  Holy  Scripture.
Likewise,  all  the  Apostles  confess  the  power  of  working  miracles  through
faith  in  the  name  of  Christ  Jesus,  and  that  all  wisdom  is  to  be  attained
through  him  ; for  he  says,  “ I am  the  light  of  the  world ! ”

We  have  thought  it  advisable,  likewise,  to  investigate  the  power  of  num-
bers, their  sympathy  with  the  divine  names  of  God ; and,  seeing  the  whole
universe  was  created  by  number,  weight,  and  measure,  there  is  no  small
efficacy  in  numbers,  because  nothing  more  clearly  represents  the  Divine
Essence  to  human  understanding  than  numbers;  seeing  that  in  all  the  Divine
holy  names  there  is  still  a conformity  of  numbers,  so  that  the  conclusion  of


preface.


this  our  First  Book  forms  a complete  system  of  mathematical  magic;  in
which  I have  collected  a vast  number  of  curious  seals  from  that  famous
magician  Agrippa,  and  likewise  from  Paracelsus,  noting  them  particularly,  as
I have  found  them  correspondent  with  true  science  on  experiment.

The  Second  Book  forms  a complete  treatise  on  the  mysteries  of  the  Cabala
and  Ceremonial  Magic ; by  the  study  of  which,  a man  ( who  can  separate
himself  from  material  objects,  by  the  mortification  of  the  sensual  appetite  —
abstinence  from  drunkenness,  gluttony,  and  other  bestial  passions,  and  who
lives  pure  and  temperate,  free  from  those  actions  which  degenerate  a man  to
a brute)  may  become  a recipient  of  Divine  light  and  knowledge  ; by  which
they  may  forsee  things  to  come,  whether  to  private  families,  or  kingdoms,  or
states,  empires,  battles,  victories,  &c. ; and  likewise  be  capable  of  doing  much
good  to  their  fellow-creatures : such  as  the  healing  of  all  disorders,  and
assisting  with  the  comforts  of  life  the  unfortunate  and  distressed.

We  have  spoken  largely  of  prophetic  dreams  and  visions  in  our  Cabalistic
Magic,  and  have  given  the  tables  of  the  Cabala,  fully  set  down  for  the  infor-
mation of  the  wise ; some  few  most  secret  things  being  reserved  by  the
Author  for  his  pupils  only,  not  to  be  taught  by  publication.

The  Third  Book  forms  a complete  Magical  Biography,  being  collected
from  most  antient  authors,  and  some  scarce  and  valuable  manuscripts;  and
which  has  been  the  result  of  much  labour  in  acquiring.  Therefore,  those
who  wish  to  benefit  in  those  studies,  must  shake  off  the  drowsiness  of  wordly
vanity,  all  idle  levity,  sloth,  intemperance,  and  lust ; so  that  they  may  be
quite,  clean,  pure,  and  free  from  every  distraction  and  perturbation  of  mind,
and  worthily  use  the  knowledge  he  obtains  from  his  labours.

Therefore,  my  good  friend,  whosoever  thou  art,  that  desirest  to  accomplish
these  things,  be  but  persuaded  first  to  apply  thyself  to  the  Eternal  Wisdom,
entreating  him  to  grant  thee  understanding,  then  seeking  knowledge  with
diligence,  and  thou  shalt  never  repent  thy  having  taken  so  laudable  a resolu-
tion, but  thou  shalt  enjoy  a secret  happiness  and  serenity  of  mind,  which  the
world  can  never  rob  thee  of.

Wishing  thee  every  success  imaginable  in  thy  studies  and  experiments,
hoping  that  thou  wilt  use  the  benefits  that  thou  mayest  receive  to  the  honour
of  our  Creator  and  for  the  benefit  of  thy  neighbour,  in  which  exercise  thou
shalt  ever  experience  the  satisfaction  of  doing  thy  duty ; remember  our  in-
structions— to  be  silent:  talk  only  with  those  worthy  of  thy  communica-
tion— do  not  give  pearls  to  swine;  be  friendly  to  all,  but  not  familiar  with
all;  for  many  are,  as  the  Scriptures  mention  — wolves  in  sheep  clothing.

FRANCIS  BARRETT.


Untrobuctfon,


♦|W" T has  been  a subject  of  ancient  dispute  whether  or  not  the  stars,  as
||  second  causes,  do  so  rule  and  influence  man  as  to  ingraft  in  his
nature  certain  passions,  virtues,  propensities,  &c.,  and  this  to  take
root  in  him  at  the  very  critical  moment  of  his  being  born  into  this  vale  of
misery  and  wretchedness;  likewise,  if  their  site  and  configuration  at  this
time  do  shew  forth  his  future  passions  and  pursuits ; and  by  their  revolutions,
transits,  and  directed  aspects,  they  point  out  the  particular  accidents  of  the
body,  marriage,  sickness,  preferments,  and  such  like ; the  which  I have  often
revolved  in  my  mind  for  many  years  past,  having  been  at  all  times  in  all
places  a warm  advocate  for  stellary  divination  or  astrology  : therefore  in  this
place  it  is  highly  necessary  that  we  examine  how  far  this  influence  extends  to
man,  seeing  that  I fully  admit  that  man  is  endowed  with  a free-will  from
God,  which  the  stars  in  no  way  can  counteract.  And  as  there  is  in  man  the
power  and  apprehension  of  all  divination,  and  wonderful  things,  seeing  that
we  have  a complete  system  in  ourselves,  therefore  are  we  called  the  micro-
cosm, or  little  world ; for  we  carry  a heaven  in  ourselves  from  our  beginning,
for  God  hath  sealed  in  us  the  image  of  himself  ; and  of  all  created  beings  we
are  the  epitome,  therefore  we  must  be  careful,  lest  we  confound  and  mix  one
thing  with  another.  Nevertheless,  man,  as  a pattern  of  the  great  world,  sym-
pathizes with  it  according  to  the  stars,  which,  agreeably  to  the  Holy  Scriptures,
are  set  for  times  and  seasons,  and  not  as  causes  of  this  or  that  evil,  which  may
pervade  kingdoms  or  private  families,  although  they  do  in  some  measure  for-
shew  them,  yet  they  are  in  no  wise  the  cause ; therefore  I conceive  in  a wide
different  sense  to  what  is  generally  understood  that  “Stars  rule  men,  but  a
wise  man  rules  the  stars : ” to  which  I answer  that  the  stars  do  not  rule  men,
according  to  the  vulgar  and  received  opinion ; as  if  the  stars  should  stir  up
men  to  murders,  seditions,  broils,  lusts,  fornications,  adulteries,  drunkenness,
&c.,  which  the  common  astrologers  hold  forth  as  sound  and  true  doctrine;
because,  they  say,  Mars  and  Saturn,  being  conjunct,  do  this  and  much  more,
and  many  other  configurations  and  afflictions  of  the  two  great  infortunes
(as  they  are  termed ),  when  the  benevolent  Planets  Jupiter,  Venus,  and  Sol,
happen  to  be  detrimen  ted  or  afflicted;  therefore,  then,  they  say  men  influenced


Untrofructton.


by  them  are  most  surely  excited  to  the  commission  of  the  vices  before
named  ; yet  a wise  man  may,  by  the  liberty  of  his  own  free-will,  make  those
affections  and  inclinations  void,  and  this  they  call  “To  rule  the  stars  ; but  let
them  know,  according  so  the  sense  here  understood,  first,  it  is  not  in  a wise
man  to  resist  evil  inclinations,  but  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  we  call  none
wise  but  such  as  are  endued  with  grace ; for,  as  we  have  said  before,
all  natural  wisdom  from  the  hands  of  man  is  foolishness  in  the  sight
of  God;  which  was  not  before  understood  to  be  a wise  man  fenced  with
grace  ; for  why  should  he  rule  the  stars,  who  has  not  any  occasion  to  fear
conquered  inclinations? — therefore  a natural  wise  man  is  a subject  to  the
slavery  of  sin  as  others  more  ignorant  than  himself,  yet  the  stars  do  not  in-
cline him  to  sin.  God  created  the  heavens  without  spot,  and  pronounced
them  good,  therefore  it  is  the  greatest  absurdity  to  suppose  the  stars,  by  a
continual  inclining  of  us  to  this  or  that  misdeed,  should  be  our  tempters,
which  we  eventually  make  them,  if  we  admit  they  cause  inclinations ; but
know  that  it  is  not  from  without,  but  within,  by  sin,  that  evil  inclinations  do
arise;  according  to  the  Scriptures,  “Out  of  the  heart  of  man  proceed  evil
cogitations,  murmurs,  adulteries,  thefts,  murders,  &c.”  Because  as  the
heavens  and  apprehension  of  all  celestial  virtues  are  sealed  by  God  in  the
soul  and  spirit  of  man  ; so  when  man  becomes  depraved  by  sin  and  the  in-
dulgence of  his  gross  and  carnal  appetite,  he  then  becomes  the  seat  of  the
Infernal  Powers,  which  may  be  justly  deemed  a hell ; for  then  the  bodily  and
fleshly  sense  obscures  the  bright  purity  and  thinness  of  the  spirit,  and  he
becomes  the  instrument  of  our  spiritual  enemy  in  the  exercise  of  all  infernal
lusts  and  passions.

Therefore  it  is  most  necessary  for  us  to  know  that  we  are  to  beware  of
granting  or  believing  any  effects  from  the  influences  of  the  stars  more  than
they  have  naturally;  because  there  are  many  whom  I have  lately  conversed
with,  and  great  men,  too,  in  this  nation,  who  readily  affirm  that  the  stars  are
the  causes  of  any  kinds  of  diseases,  inclinations,  and  fortunes ; likewise  that
they  blame  the  stars  for  all  their  misconduct  and  misfortunes.

Nevertheless,  we  do  not  by  these  discourses  prohibit  or  deny  all  influence
to  the  stars ; on  the  contrary,  we  affirm  there  is  a natural  sympathy  and  anti-
pathy amongst  all  things,  throughout  the  whole  universe,  and  this  we  shall
shew  to  be  displayed  through  a variety  of  effects ; and  likewise  that  the  stars}
as  signs,  do  forshew  great  mutations,  revolutions,  deaths  of  great  men,
governors  of  provinces,  kings  and  emperors  ; likewise  the  weather,  tempests,
earthquakes,  deluges,  &c. ; and  this  according  to  the  law  of  Providence.  The
lots  of  all  men  do  stand  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  for  he  is  the  end  and
beginning  of  all  things ; he  can  remove  crowns  and  sceptres,  and  displace  the
most  cautious  arrangements  and  councils  of  man,  who,  when  he  thinks  him-


IFntro&uctton.  3

self  most  secure,  tumbles  headlong  from  the  seat  of  power,  and  lies  grovelling
in  the  dust.

Therefore  our  astrologers  in  most  of  their  speculations  seek  without  a light,
for  they  conceive  every  thing  may  he  known  or  read  in  the  stars ; if  an  odd
silver  spoon  is  hut  lost,  the  innocent  stars  are  obliged  to  give  an  account  of
it ; if  an  old  maiden  loses  a favourite  puppy,  away  she  goes  to  an  oracle  of
divination  for  information  of  the  whelp.  Oh ! vile  credulity,  to  think  that
those  celestial  bodies  take  cognizance  of,  and  give  in  their  configurations  and
aspects,  continual  information  of  the  lowest  and  vilest  transactions  of  dotards
the  most  trival  and  frivolous  questions  that  are  pretended  to  be  resolved  by
an  inspection  into  the  figure  of  the  heavens.  Well  does  our  legislature  justly
condemn  as  juggling  impostors  all  those  idle  vagabonds  who  infest  various
parts  of  this  metropolis,  and  impose  upon  the  simple  and  unsuspecting,  by
answering,  for  a shilling  or  half-crown  fee,  whatever  thing  or  circumstance
may  be  proposed  to  them,  as  if  they  were  God’s  vicegerents  on  earth,  and  his
deputed  privy  counsellors.

They  do  not  even  scruple  ever  to  persuade  poor  mortals  of  the  lower  class,
that  they  shew  images  in  glasses,  as  if  they  actually  confederated  with  evil
spirits  : a notable  instance  I will  here  recite,  that  happened  very  lately  in
this  city.  Two  penurious  Frenchmen,  taking  advantage  of  the  credulity  of
the  common  people,  who  are  continually  gaping  after  such  toys,  had  so  con-
trived a telescope  or  optic  glass  as  that  various  letters  and  figures  should  be
reflected  in  an  obscure  manner,  shewing  the  images  of  men  and  women,  &c. ;
so  that  when  any  one  came  to  consult  these  jugglers,  after  paying  the  usual
fee,  they,  according  to  the  urgency  of  the  query,  produced  answers  by  those
figures  or  letters ; the  which  affrights  the  inspector  into  the  glass  so  much,
that  he  or  she  supposes  that  they  have  got  some  devilish  thing  or  other  in
hand,  by  which  they  remain  under  the  full  conviction  of  having  actually  be-
held the  parties  they  wished  to  see,  though  perhaps  they  may  at  the  same
time  be  residing  many  hundreds  of  miles  distant  therefrom ; they,  having  re-
ceived this  impression  from  a pre-conceived  idea  of  seeing  the  image  of
their  friend  in  this  optical  machine,  go  away,  and  anon  report,  with  an  addi-
tion of  ten  hundred  lies,  that  they  have  been  witness  of  a miracle.  I say  this
kind  of  deception  is  only  to  be  acted  with  the  vulgar,  who,  rather  than  have
their  imaginations  balked,  would  swallow  the  most  abominable  lies  and  con-
ceits. For  instance,  who  would  suppose  that  any  rational  being  could  be
persuaded  that  a fellow-creature  of  proper  size  and  stature  should  be  able  by
any  means  to  thrust  his  body  into  a quart  bottle?  — the  which  thing  was
advertised  to  the  public  by  a merry  knave  (not  thinking  there  was  such  fools
in  existence),  to  be  done  by  him  in  a public  theatre.  Upwards  of  600  per-
sons were  assembled  to  behold  the  transaction,  never  doubting  but  the  fellow


Untro&uction.


meant  to  keep  his  word,  when  to  the  great  mortification  and  disgrace  of  this
long-headed  audience,  the  conjuror  came  forth  amidst  a general  stir  and  buz
of  “Ay,  now  ! see ! now ! see ! he  is  just  going  to  jump  in.”  — “Indeed,”  says
the  conjuror,  “ ladies  and  gentlemen,  I am  not ; for  if  you  were  such  fools  as
to  believe  such  an  absurdity,  I am  not  wise  enough  to  do  it : ” — therefore,
making  his  bow,  he  disappeared,  to  the  great  discomfort  of  these  wiseheads,
who  straightway  withdrew  in  the  best  manner  they  could.

As  for  the  telescope  magicians,  they  were  taken  into  custody  by  the  gentle-
men of  the  police  office,  in  Bow  Street;  nor  would  their  familiar  do  them  the
kindness  to  attempt  their  rescue.

But  to  have  done  with  these  things  that  are  unworthy  our  notice  as  philoso-
phers, and  to  proceed  to  matters  of  a higher  nature  : it  is  to  be  noted  what
we  have  before  said,  in  respect  of  the  influences  of  the  stars ; that  Ptolemy,
in  his  quadrapartite,  in  speaking  of  generals , comes  pretty  near  our  ideas  on
the  subject  of  planetary  influence,  of  which  we  did  not  at  any  time  doubt,
but  do  not  admit  (nay,  it  is  not  necessary,  seeing  there  is  an  astrology  in
Nature),  — that  each  action  of  our  life,  our  afflictions,  fortunes,  accidents,
are  deducible  to  the  influential  effects  of  the  planets : they  proceed  from  our-
selves ; but  I admit  that  our  thoughts,  actions,  cogitations,  sympathize  with
the  stars  upon  the  principle  of  general  sympathy.  Again,  there  is  a much
stronger  sympathy  between  persons  of  like  constitutions  and  temperament,
for  each  mortal  creature  possesses  a Sun  and  system  within  himself ; there-
fore, according  to  Universal  sympathy,  we  are  affected  by  the  general
influence  or  universal  spirit  of  the  world,  as  the  vital  principle  throughout
the  universe;  therefore  we  are  not  to  look  into  the  configurations  of  the
stars  for  the  cause  or  incitement  of  man’s  bestial  inclinations,  for  brutes  have
their  specifical  inclinations,  from  the  propagation  of  their  principle  by  seed,
not  by  the  sign  of  the  horoscope ; therefore  as  man  is  oftentimes  capable  of
the  actions  and  excesses  of  brutes,  they  cannot  happen  to  a man  naturally
from  any  other  source  than  the  seminal  being  infused  in  his  composition ; for,
seeing  likewise  that  the  soul  is  immortal,  and  endued  with  free-will,  which
acts  upon  the  body,  the  soul  cannot  be  inclined  by  any  configuration  of  the
stars  either  to  good  or  evil : but  from  its  own  immortal  power  of  willingly
being  seduced  by  sin,  it  prompts  to  evil ; but  enlightened  by  God,  it  springs
to  good,  on  either  principle,  according  to  its  tendency,  the  soul  feeds  while  in
this  frail  body  ; but  what  further  concerns  the  soul  of  man  in  this,  and  after
this,  we  shall  fully  investigate  the  natural  magic  of  the  soul,  in  which  we
have  fully  treated . every  point  of  enquiry  that  has  been  suggested  to  us  by
our  own  imagination,  and  by  scientific  experiments  have  proved  its  divine
virtue  originally  sealed  therein  by  the  Author  of  its  being.


flrttro&nctfon.


Sufficient  it  is  to  return  to  our  subject  relative  to  astrology,  especially  to
know  what  part  of  it  is  necessary  for  our  use,  of  which  we  will  select  that
which  is  pure  and  to  our  purpose,  for  the  understanding  and  effecting  of
various  experiments  in  the  course  of  our  works,  leaving  the  tedious  calcula-
tions of  nativities,  the  never-ceasing  controversies  and  cavillations  of  its  pro-
fessors, the  dissensions  which  arise  from  the  various  modes  of  practice ; all
which  we  leave  to  the  figure-casting  plodder,  telling  him,  by  the  by,  that
whatever  he  thinks  he  can  forshew  by  inspecting  the  horoscope  of  a nativity,
by  long,  tedious,  and  night-wearied  studies  and  contemplations;  I say,  what-
ever he  can  shew  representing  personal  or  natural  mutations,  changes,  acci-
dents, &c.  &c.,  all  this  we  know  by  a much  easier  and  readier  method;  and  can
more  comprehensively,  clearly,  and  intelligibly,  shew  and  point  out,  to
the  very  letter,  by  our  Cabal,  which  we  know  to  be  true,  without  diviation,
juggling,  fallacy,  or  collusion,  or  any  kind  of  deceit  or  imposture  whatso-
ever: which  Cabal  or  spiritual  astrology  we  draw  from  the  Fountain  of
Knowledge,  in  all  simplicity,  humility,  and  truth ; and  we  boast  not  of  our-
selves, but  of  Him  who  teaches  us  through  his  divine  mercy,  by  the  light  of
whose  favour  we  see  into  things  spiritual  and  divine : in  the  possession  of
which  we  are  secure  amidst  the  severest  storms  of  hatred,  malice,  pride,  envy,
hypocrisy,  levity,  bonds,  poverty,  imprisonment,  or  any  other  outward  cir-
cumstance ; we  should  still  be  rich,  want  nothing,  be  fed  with  delicious
meats,  and  enjoy  plentifully  all  good  things  necessary  for  our  support : all
this  we  do  not  vainly  boast  of,  as  figurative,  ideal,  or  chimerical ; but  real,
solid, and  everlasting,  in  the  which  we  exult  and  delight,  and  praise  his  name
for  ever  and  ever : Amen.

All  which  we  publicly  declare  to  the  world  for  the  honour  of  our  God,
being  at  all  times  ready  to  do  every  kindness  we  can  to  our  poor  neighbour,
and,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  to  comfort  him,  sick  or  afflicted  ; in  doing  which  we
ask  no  reward ; it  is  sufficient  to  us  that  we  can  do  it,  and  that  we  may  be
acceptable  to  Him  who  says  — “I  am  the  light  of  the  world  ; to  whom  with
the  Father  and  Holy  Spirit,  be  ascribed  all  power,  might,  majesty,  and
dominion : Amen.”


To  the  faithful  and  discreet  Student  of  Wisdom.

Greeting :

Take  our  instructions;  in  all  things  ask  counsel  of  God,  and  he  will  give
it;  offer  up  the  following  prayer  daily  for  the  illumination  of  thy  under-
standing : depend  for  all  things  on  God,  the  first  cause ; with  whom,  by
whom,  and  in  whom,  are  all  things ; see  thy  first  care  be  to  know  thyself ;
and  then  in  humility  direct  thy  prayer  as  follows.


Untrotmctlon.


H pta^Ct  tO  (30&.  Almighty  and  most  merciful  God,  we  thy  ser-
vants approach  with  fear  and  trembling  before  thee,  and  in  all  humility
do  most  heartily  beseech  thee  to  pardon  our  manifold  and  blind  transgres-
sions, by  us  committed  at  any  time ; and  grant,  O,  most  merciful  Father,  for
his  sake  who  died  upon  the  cross,  that  our  minds  may  be  enlightened  with
the  divine  radiance  of  thy  holy  wisdom ; for  seeing,  O,  Lord  of  might,  power,
majesty,  and  dominion,  that,  by  reason  of  our  gross  and  material  bodies,  we
are  scare  apt  to  receive  those  spiritual  instructions  that  we  so  earnestly  and
heartily  desire.  Open,  O,  blessed  Spirit,  the  spiritual  eye  of  our  soul,  that
we  may  be  released  from  this  darkness  overspreading  us  by  the  delusions  of
the  outward  senses,  and  may  perceive  and  understand  those  things  which  are
spiritual.  We  pray  thee,  oh,  Lord,  above  all  to  strengthen  our  souls  and
bodies  against  our  spiritual  enemies,  by  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  our
blessed  Redeemer,  thy  Son,  Jesus  Christ;  and  through  him,  and  in  his  name,
we  beseech  thee  to  illuminate  the  faculties  of  our  souls,  so  that  we  may
clearly  and  comprehensively  hear  with  our  ears,  and  understand  with  our
hearts ; and  remove  far  from  us  all  hypocrisy,  deceitful  dealing,  profaneness,
inconstancy,  and  levity ; so  that  we  may,  in  word  and  act,  become  thy  faith-
ful servants,  and  stand  firm  and  unshaken  against  all  the  attacks  of  our  bodily
enemies,  and  likewise  be  proof  against  all  illusions  of  evil  spirits,  with  whom
we  desire  no  communication  or  interest ; but  that  we  may  be  instructed  in
the  knowledge  of  things,  natural  and  celestial : and  as  it  pleased  thee  to  be-
stow on  Solomon,  all  wisdom,  both  human  and  divine ; in  the  desire  of  which
knowledge  he  did  so  please  thy  divine  majesty,  that  in  a- dream  of  one  night,
thou  didst  inspire  him  with  all  wisdom  and  knowledge,  which  he  did  wisely
prefer  before  the  riches  of  this  life ; so  may  our  desire  and  prayer  be
graciously  accepted  by  thee;  so  that,  by  a firm  dependence  on  thy  word,  we
may  not  be  led  away  by  the  vain  and  ridiculous  pursuits  of  worldly  pleasures
and  delights,  they  not  being  durable,  nor  of  any  account  to  our  immortal
happiness.  Grant  us,  Lord,  power  and  strength  of  intellect  to  carry  on  this
work,  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  thy  holy  name,  and  to  the  comfort  of  our
neighbour : and  without  design  of  hurt  or  detriment  to  any,  we  may  proceed
in  our  labours,  through  Jesus  Christ,  our  Redeemer  : Amen.

©f  Natural  /IDaQtC.  Before  we  proceed  to  particulars,  it  will  not  be
amiss  to  speak  of  generals;  therefore,  as  an  elucidation,  we  shall  briefly  show
what  sciences  we  comprehend  under  the  title  of  Natural  Magic;  and  to
hasten  to  the  point,  we  shall  regularly  proceed  from  theory  to  practice ;
therefore,  Natural  Magic  undoubtedly  comprehends  a knowledge  of  all
Nature,  which  we  by  no  means  can  arrive  at  but  by  searching  deeply  into
her  treasury,  which  is  inexhaustible ; we  therefore  by  long  study,  labour,


Tlntrotmctton.


and  practice,  have  found  out  many  valuable  secrets  and  experiments,  which
are  either  unknown,  or  are  buried  in  the  ignorant  knowledge  of  the  present
age.  The  wise  ancients  knew  that  in  Nature  the  greatest  secrets  lay  hid,  and
wonderful  active  powers  were  dormant,  unless  excited  by  the  vigorous  faculty
of  the  mind  of  man  ; but  as,  in  these  latter  days,  men  give  themselves  almost
wholly  up  to  vice  and  luxury,  so  their  understandings  have  become  more  and
more  depraved ; ’till,  being  swallowed  up  in  the  gross  senses,  they  become
totally  unfit  for  divine  contemplations  and  deep  speculations  in  Nature;  their
intellectual  faculty  being  drowned  in  obscurity  and  dulness,  by  reason  of  their
sloth,  intemperance,  or  sensual  appetites.  The  followers  of  Pythagoras  en-
joined silence,  and  forbade  the  eating  of  the  flesh  of  animals ; the  first,  be-
cause they  were  cautious,  and  aware  of  the  vanity  of  vain  babbling  and  fruit-
less cavillations : they  studied  the  power  of  numbers  to  the  highest  extent ;
they  forbade  the  eating  of  flesh  not  so  much  on  the  score  of  transmigration,
as  to  keep  the  body  in  a healthful  and  temperate  state,  free  from  gross
humours ; by  these  means  they  qualified  themselves  for  spiritual  matters,  and
attained  unto  great  and  excellent  mysteries,  and  continued  in  the  exercise  of
charitable  arts,  and  the  practice  of  all  moral  virtues:  yet,  seeing  they  were
heathens,  they  attained  not  unto  the  high  and  inspired  lights  of  wisdom  and
knowledge  that  were  bestowed  on  the  Apostles,  and  others,  after  the  coming
of  Christ;  but  they  mortified  their  lusts,  lived  temperately,  chaste,  honest
and  virtuous ; which  government  is  so  contrary  to  the  practice  of  modern
Christians,  that  they  live  as  if  the  blessed  word  had  come  upon  the  earth  to
grant  them  privilege  to  sin.  However,  we  will  leave  Pythagoras  and  his
followers,  to  hasten  to  our  own  work ; whereof  we  will  first  explain  the
foundation  of  Natural  Magic,  in  as  clear  and  intelligible  a manner  as  the
same  can  be  done.


Book  tbe  fftrst.

ATURAL  MAGIC  is,  as  we  have  said,  a comprehensive  knowledge  of
■1*1  all  Nature,  by  which  we  search  out  her  secret  and  occult  opera-
tions throughout  her  vast  and  spacious  elaborate ry ; whereby  we  come
to  a knowledge  of  the  component  parts,  qualities,  virtues,  and  secrets  of  metals
stones,  plants,  and  animals ; but  seeing,  in  the  regular  order  of  the  creation
man  was  the  work  of  the  sixth  day,  everthing  being  prepared  for  his  vice-
gerency  here  on  earth,  and  that  it  pleased  the  omnipotent  God,  after  he  had
formed  the  great  world,  or  macrocosm,  and  pronounced  it  good,  so  he  created
man  the  express  image  of  himself ; and  in  man,  likewise,  an  exact  model  of
the  great  world.  We  shall  describe  the  wonderful  properties  of  man,  in
which  we  may  trace  in  miniature  the  exact  resemblance  or  copy  of  the  uni-
verse ; by  which  means  we  shall  come  to  the  more  easy  understanding  of
whatever  we  may  have  to  declare  concerning  the  knowledge  of  the  inferior
nature,  such  as  animals,  plants,  metals,  and  stones  ; for,  by  our  first  declaring
the  occult  qualities  and  properties  that  are  hid  in  the  little  world,  it  will  serve
as  a key  to  the  opening  of  all  the  treasures  and  secrets  of  the  macrocosm,  or
great  world ; therefore,  we  shall  hasten  to  speak  of  the  creation  of  man,  and
his  divine  image ; likewise  of  his  fall,  in  consequence  of  his  disobedience  ; by
which  all  the  train  of  evils,  plagues,  diseases,  and  miseries,  were  entailed
upon  his  posterity,  through  the  curse  of  our  Creator,  but  deprecated  by  the
mediation  of  our  blessed  Lord,  Christ.

XTbC  jfdll  Of  flRan.  According  to  the  word  of  God,  which  we  take  in  all
things  for  our  guide,  in  the  1st  chapter  of  Genesis,  and  the  26th  verse,  it  is
said  — “ God  said,  let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness ; and  let
them  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and
over  the  cattle,  and  over  all  the  earth,  and  over  every  creeping  thing  that
creepeth  upon  the  earth.” — Here  is  the  origin  and  beginning  of  our  frail
human  nature ; hence  every  soul  was  created  by  the  very  light  itself,
and  Fountain  of  Life,  after  his  own  express  image,  likewise  immortal,  in  a
beautiful  and  well-formed  body,  endued  with  a most  excellent  mind,  and
dominion  or  unlimited  monarchy  over  all  Nature,  every  thing  being  subjected


10


^natural  flftaatc.


to  his  rule,  or  command ; one  creature  only  being  excepted,  which  was  to  re-
main untouched  and  consecrated,  as  it  were,  to  the  divine  mandate  : “ Of
every  tree  of  the  garden  thou  mayest  freely  eat ; ” “ But  of  the  tree  of  the
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it ; for  in  the  day  thou
eatest  of  it,  thou  shalt  surely  die.”  Gen.  ii.  ver.  16.  Therefore  Adam  was
formed  by  the  finger  of  God,  which  is  the  Holy  Spirit ; whose  figure  or  out-
ward form  was  beautiful  and  proportionate  as  an  angel ; in  whose  voice,
(before  he  sinned)  every  sound  was  the  sweetness  of  harmony  and  music:
had  he  remained  in  the  state  of  innocency  in  which  he  was  formed,  the  weak-
ness of  mortal  man,  in  his  depraved  state,  would  not  have  been  able  to  bear
the  virtue  and  celestial  shrillness  of  his  voice.  But  when  the  deceiver  found
that  man,  from  the  inspiration  of  God,  had  began  to  sing  so  shrilly,  and  to
repeat  the  celestial  harmony  of  the  heavenly  country,  he  counterfeited  the
engines  of  craft:  seeing  his  wrath  against  him  was  in  vain,  he  was  much
tormented  thereby,  and  began  to  think  how  he  might  entangle  him  into  dis-
obedience of  the  command  of  his  Creator,  whereby  he  might,  as  it  were,  laugh
him  to  scorn,  in  derision  of  his  new  creature,  man.

Yan  Helmont,  in  his  Oriatrike,  chap,  xcii.,  speaking  of  the  entrance  of
death  into  human  nature,  &c.,  finely  touches  the  subject  of  the  creation,  and
man’s  disobedience  ; indeed,  his  ideas  so  perfectly  coincide  with  my  own,  that
I have  thought  fit  here  to  transcribe  his  philosophy,  which  so  clearly  explains
the  text  of  Scripture,  with  so  much  of  the  light  of  truth  on  his  side,  that  it
carries  along  with  it  the  surest  and  most  positive  conviction.

“ Man  being  essentially  created  after  the  image  of  God,  after  that,  he  rashly
presumed  to  generate  the  image  of  God  out  of  himself ; not,  indeed,  by  a
certain  monster,  but  by  something  which  was  shadowly  like  himself.  With
the  ravishment  of  Eve,  he,  indeed,  generated  not  the  image  of  God  like  unto
that  which  God  would  have  inimitable,  as  being  divine  ; but  in  the  vital  air
of  the  seed  he  generated  dispositions ; careful  at  some  time  to  receive  a sensi-
tive, discursive,  and  motive  soul  from  the  Father  of  Light,  yet  mortal , and  to
perish ; yet,  nevertheless,  he  ordinarily  inspires,  and  of  his  own  goodness,  the
substantial  spirit  of  a mind  showing  forth  his  own  image ; so  that  man,  in
this  respect,  endeavoured  to  generate  his  own  image ; not  after  the  manner
of  brute  beasts,  but  by  the  copulation  of  seeds,  which  at  length  should  obtain,
by  request,  a soulified  light  from  the  Creator ; and  the  which  they  call  a
sensitive  soul.

“For,  from  thence  hath  proceeded  another  generation,  conceived  after  a
beast-like  manner,  mortal,  and  uncapable  of  eternal  life,  after  the  manner  of
beasts;  and  bringing  forth  with  pains,  and  subject  to  diseases,  and  death;
and  so  much  the  mox-e  sorrowful,  and  full  of  misery,  by  how  much  that  very
propagation  in  our  first  parents  dared  to  invert  the  intent  of  God.


Natural  flOagtc,


“Therefore  the  unutterable  goodness  forewarned  them  that  they  should
not  taste  of  that  tree ; and  otherwise  he  foretold,  that  the  same  day  they
should  die  the  death,  and  should  feel  all  the  root  of  calamities  which  accom-
panies death.”

Deservedly,  therefore,  hath  the  Lord  deprived  both  our  parents  of  the
benefit  of  immortality ; namely,  death  succeeded  from  a conjugal  and  brutal
copulation ; neither  remained  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  with  man,  after  that  he
began  to  be  flesh.

Further ; because  that  defilement  of  Eve  shall  thenceforth  be  continued  in
the  propagation  of  posterity,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world,  from  hence  the
sin  of  the  despised  fatherly  admonition,  and  natural  deviation  from  the  right
way,  is  now  among  other  sins  for  an  impurity,  from  an  inverted,  carnal,  and
well  nigh  brutish  generation,  and  is  truly  called  original  sin  ; that  is,  man
being  sowed  in  the  pleasure  of  the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh,  shall  therefore
always  reap  a necessary  death  in  the  flesh  of  sin ; but  the  knowledge  of  good
and  evil,  which  God  placed  in  the  dissuaded  apple,  did  contain  in  it  a semi-
nary virtue  of  the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh,  that  is,  an  occult  forbidden  con-
junction, diametrically  opposite  to  the  state  of  innocence,  which  state  was  not
a state  of  stupidity ; because  He  was  he  unto  whom,  before  the  corruption  of
Nature,  the  essences  of  all  living  creatures  whatsoever  were  made  known,  ac-
cording to  which  they  were  to  be  named  from  their  property,  and  at  their
first  sight  to  be  essentially  distinguished : man , therefore,  through  eating  of
the  apple,  attained  a knowledge  that  he  had  lost  his  radical  innocency ; for,
neither  before  the  eating  of  the  apple  was  he  so  dull  or  stupified  that  he  knew
not,  or  did  not  perceive  himself  naked;  but,  with  the  effect  of  shame  and
brutal  concupiscence,  he  then  first  declared  he  was  naked.

For  that  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  signifies  nothing  but  the  concu-
piscence of  the  flesh,  the  Apostle  testifies ; calling  it  the  law,  and  desire  of
sin.  For  it  pleased  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  to  insert  in  the  apple  an
incentive  to  concupiscence ; by  which  he  was  able  safely  to  abstain,  by  not
eating  of  the  apple,  therefore  dissuaded  therefrom ; for  otherwise  he  had
never  at  any  time  been  tempted,  or  stirred  up  by  his  gential  members.
Therefore  the  apple  being  eaten,  man,  from  an  occult  and  natural  property
ingrafted  in  the  fruit,  conceived  a lust,  and  sin  became  luxurious  to  him,  and
from  thence  was  made  an  animal  seed,  which,  hastening  into  the  previous
or  foregoing  dispositions  of  a sensitive  soul , and  undergoing  the  law  of  other
causes,  reflected  itself  into  the  vital  spirit  of  Adam  ; and,  like  an  ignis-fatuus,
presently  received  an  archeus  or  ruling  spirit,  and  animal  idea,  it  presently
conceived  a power  of  propagating  an  animal  and  mortal  seed,  ending  into  life.

Furthermore,  the  sacred  text  hath  in  many  places  compelled  me  unto  a per-
fect position,  it  making  Eve  an  helper  like  unto  Adam ; not,  indeed,  that  she


12


Hlatural  /Iftaptc.


should  supply  the  name , and  room  of  a wife , even  as  she  is  called,  straight-
way after  sin,  for  she  was  a virgin  in  the  intent  of  the  Creator,  and  afterwards
filled  with  misery : but  not,  as  long  as  the  state  of  purity  presided  over
innocency,  did  the  will  of  man  overcome  her ; for  the  translation  of  man  into
Paradise  did  forshew  another  condition  of  living  than  that  of  a beast;  and
therefore  the  eating  of  the  apple  doth  by  a most  chaste  name  cover  the  con-
cupiscence of  the  flesh , while  it  contains  “ the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  ” in
this  name,  and  calls  the  ignorance  thereof  the  state  of  innocence : for,  surely,
the  attainment  of  that  aforesaid  knowledge  did  nourish  a most  hurtful  death,
and  an  irrevocable  deprivation  of  eternal  life : for  if  man  had  not  tasted  the
apple,  he  had  lived  void  of  concupiscence,  and  offsprings  had  appeared  out
of  Eve  (a  virgin)  from  the  Holy  Spirit.

But  the  apple  being  eaten,  “presently  their  eyes  were  opened,”  and  Adam
began  lustfully  to  covet  copulation  with  the  naked  virgin,  and  defiled  her,  the
which  God  had  appointed  for  a naked  help  unto  him.  But  man  prevented
the  intention  of  God  by  a strange  generation  in  the  flesh  of  sin ; whereupon
there  followed  the  corruption  of  the  former  nature,  or  the  flesh  of  sin,  ac-
companied by  concupiscence  : neither  doth  the  text  insinuate  any  other  mark
of  “ the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,”  than  that  they  '•'■knew  themselves  to  be
naked,”  or,  speaking  properly,  of  their  virginity  being  corrupted,  polluted
with  bestial  lust,  and  defiled.  Indeed,  their  whole  “ knowledge  of  good  and
evil”  is  included  in  their  shame  within  their  privy  parts  alone;  and  there-
fore in  the  8th  of  Leviticus,  and  many  places  else  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  the
privy  parts  themselves  are  called  by  no  other  etymology  than  that  of  shame ;
for  from  the  copulation  of  the  flesh  their  eyes  were  opened,  because  they  then
knew  that  the  good  being  lost,  had  brought  on  them  a degenerate  nature,
shamefulness,  an  intestine  and  inevitable  obligation  of  death  ; sent  also  into
their  posterity.

Alas!  too  late,  indeed  they  understood,  by  the  unwonted  novelty  and
shamefulness  of  their  concupiscence,  why  God  had  so  lovingly  forbade  the
eating  of  the  apple.  Indeed,  the  truth  being  agreeable  unto  itself,  doth  attest
the  filthiness  of  impure  Adamical  generation;  for  the  impurity  which  had
received  a contagion  from  any  natural  issues  whatsoever  of  menstrues  or  seed,
and  that  by  its  touching  alone  is  reckoned  equal  to  that  which  should  by  de-
grees creep  on  a person  from  a co-touching  of  dead  carcases,  and  to  be
expiated  by  the  same  ceremonious  rite  that  the  text  might  agreeably  denote,
that  death  began  by  the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh  lying  hid  in  the  fruit  for-
bidden ; therefore,  also,  the  one  only  healing  medicine,  of  so  great  an  impurity
contracted  by  touching,  consisted  in  washing:  under  the  similitude  or
likeness  thereof,  faith  and  hope,  which  in  Baptism  are  poured  on  us,  are
strengthened.


TTCatural  /magic.


13


For  as  soon  as  Adam  knew  that  by  fratricide  the  first  born  of  mortals,
whom  he  had  begotten  in  the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh,  had  killed  his
brother,  guiltless  and  righteous  as  he  was;  and  forseeing  the  wicked  errors  of
mortals  that  would  come  from  thence,  he  likewise  perceived  his  own  miseries
in  himself;  certainly  knowing  that  all  these  calamities  had  happened  unto
him  from  the  sin  of  concupiscence  drawn  from  the  apple,  which  were  un-
avoidably issuing  on  his  posterity,  he  thought  within  himself  that  the  most  dis-
creet thing  he  could  do,  was  hereafter  wholly  to  abstain  from  his  wife,  whom
he  had  violated;  and  therefore  he  mourned  in  chastity  and  sorrow,  a full
hundred  years;  hoping  that  by  the  merit  of  that  abstinence,  and  by  an  oppo-
sition to  the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh,  he  should  not  only  appease  the  wrath
of  the  incensed  Diety,  but  that  he  should  again  return  into  the  former
splendour  and  majesty  of  his  primitive  innocence  and  purity.  But  the  re-
pentance of  one  age  being  finished,  it  is  most  probable  the  mystery  of  Christ’s
incarnation  was  revealed  unto  him  ; neither  that  man  ever  could  hope  to  re-
turn to  the  brightness  of  his  ancient  purity  by  his  own  strength,  and  much
less  that  himself  could  reprieve  his  posterity  from  death ; and  that,  there-
fore, marriage  was  well  pleasing,  and  was  after  the  fall  indulged  unto  him  by
God  because  he  had  determined  thus  to  satisfy  his  justice  at  the  fulness  of
times,  which  should,  to  the  glory  of  his  own  name,  and  the  confusion  of
Satan,  elevate  mankind  to  a more  sublime  and  eminent  state  of  blessedness.

From  that  time  Adam  began  to  know  his  wife,  ins.  after  he  was  an  hundred
years  old,  and  to  fill  the  earth,  by  multiplying  according  to  the  blessing  once
given  him,  and  the  law  enjoined  him  — “ Be  fruitful  and  multiply.” — Yet  so,
nevertheless,  that  although  matrimony,  by  reason  of  the  great  want  of  propa-
gation, and  otherwise  impossible  coursary  succession  of  the  primitive  divine
generation,  be  admitted  as  a sacrament  of  the  faithful.

If,  therefore,  both  our  first  parents,  after  the  eating  of  the  apple,  were
ashamed,  they  covered  only  their  privy  parts;  therefore  that  shame  doth  pre-
suppose, and  accuse  of  something  committed  against  justice  — against  the
intent  of  the  Creator  — and  against  their  own  proper  nature : by  conse-
quence, therefore,  that  Adamical  generation  was  not  of  the  primitive  consti-
tution of  their  nature,  as  neither  of  the  original  intent  of  the  Creator;
therefore,  when  God  foretels  that  the  earth  shall  bring  forth  thistles  and
thorns,  and  that  man  shall  gain  his  bread  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  they  were
not  execrations,  but  admonitions,  that  those  sort  of  things  should  be  obvious
in  the  earth:  and,  because  that  beasts  should  bring  forth  in  pain — should
plow  in  sweat — should  eat  their  food  with  labour  and  fear,  that  the  earth
should  likewise  bring  forth  very  many  things  besides  the  intention  of  the
husbandman;  therefore,  also,  that  they  ought  to  be  nourished  like  unto
brute  beasts,  who  had  begun  to  generate  after  the  manner  of  brute  beasts.


14


Natural  flftaflfc.


It  is  likewise  told  Eve,  after  her  transgression,  that  she  should  bring  forth
in  pain.  Therefore,  what  hath  the  pain  of  bringing  forth  common  with  the
eating  of  the  apple,  unless  the  apple  had  operated  about  the  concupiscence
of  the  flesh,  and  by  consequence  stirred  up  copulation ; and  the  Creator  had
intended  to  dissuade  it,  by  dehorting  from  the  eating  of  the  apple.  For,  why
are  the  genital  members  of  women  punished  with  pains  at  child-birth,  if  the
eye  in  seeing  the  apple,  the  hands  in  cropping  it,  and  the  mouth  in  eating  of
it,  have  offended  ? for  was  it  not  sufficient  to  have  chastised  the  life  with
death,  and  the  health  with  very  many  diseases? — Moreover, why  is  the  womb
afflicted,  as  in  brutes,  with  the  manner  of  bringing  forth,  if  the  conception
granted  to  beasts  were  not  forbidden  to  man  ?

After  their  fall,  therefore,  their  eyes  were  opened,  and  they  were  ashamed:
it  denotes  and  signifies  that,  from  the  filthiness  of  concupiscence,  they  knew
that  the  copulation  of  the  flesh  was  forbidden  in  the  most  pure  innocent
chastity  of  nature,  and  that  they  were  overspread  with  shame,  when,  their
eyes  being  opened,  their  understandings  saw  that  they  had  committed  filthi-
ness most  detestable.

But  on  the  serpent  and  evil  spirit  alone  was  the  top  and  summit  of  the
whole  curse,  even  as  the  privilege  of  the  woman,  and  the  mysterious  peroga-
tive  of  the  blessing  upon  the  earth  viz.,  That  the  woman’s  seed  should  bruise
the  head  of  the  serpent.  So  that  it  is  not  possible  that  to  bring  forth  in  pain
should  be  a curse ; for  truly  with  the  same  voice  of  the  Lord  is  pronounced
the  blessing  of  the  woman,  and  victory  over  the  infernal  spirit.

Therefore  Adam  was  created  in  the  possession  of  immortality.  God  in-
tended not  that  man  should  be  an  animal  or  sensitive  creature,  nor  be  born,
conceived,  or  live  as  an  animal ; for  of  truth  he  was  created  unto  a living
soul,  and  that  after  the  true  image  of  God ; therefore  he  as  far  differed  from
the  nature  of  an  animal,  as  an  immortal  being  from  a mortal,  and  as  a
God-like  creature  from  a brute.

I am  sorry  that  our  school-men,  many  of  them,  wish,  by  their  arguments  of
noise  and  pride,  to  draw  man  into  a total  animal  nature  (nothing  more),
drawing  (by  their  logic)  the  essence  of  a man  essentially  from  an  animal
nature:  because,  although  man  afterwards  procured  death  to  himself  and
posterity,  and  therefore  may  seem  to  be  made  nearer  the  nature  of  animal
creatures,  yet  it  stood  not  in  his  power  to  be  able  to  pervert  the  species  of
the  divine  image : even  so  as  neither  was  the  evil  spirit,  of  a spirit,  made  an
animal,  although  he  became  nearer  unto  the  nature  of  an  animal,  by  hatred
and  brutal  vices.  Therefore  man  remained  in  his  own  species  wherein  he
was  created;  for  as  often  as  man  is  called  an  animal,  or  sensitive  living
creature,  and  is  in  earnest  thought  to  be  such,  so  many  times  the  text  is  falsi-
fied which  says,  “ But  the  serpent  was  more  crafty  than  all  the  living  creatures


Natural  flftagtc.


15


of  the  earth,  which  the  Lord  God  had  made;”  because  he  speaks  of  the
natural  craft  and  subtilty  of  that  living  and  creeping  animal.  Again,  if  the
position  be  true,  man  was  not  directed  into  the  propagation  of  seed  or  flesh ,
neither  did  he  aspire  unto  a sensitive  soul;  and  therefore  the  sensible  soul  of
Adamical  generation  is  not  of  a brutal  species,  because  it  was  raised  up  by  a
seed  which  wanted  the  original  ordination  and  limitation  of  any  species;  and
so  that,  as  the  sensitive  soul  in  man  arose,  besides  the  intent  of  the  Creator
and  Nature ; so  it  is  of  no  brutal  species,  neither  can  it  subsist,  unless  it  be
continually  tied  to  the  mind , from  wjience  it  is  supported  in  its  life.

Wherefore,  while  man  is  of  no  brutal  species,  he  cannot  be  an  animal  in
respect  to  his  mind,  and  much  less  in  respect  to  his  soul,  which  is  of  no
species.

Therefore  know,  that  neither  evil  spirit,  nor  whole  nature  also,  can,  by  any
means  or  any  way  whatever,  change  the  essence  given  unto  man  from  his
Creator,  and  by  his  foreknowledge  determined  that  he  should  remain  con-
tinually such  as  he  was  created,  although  he,  in  the  mean  time,  hath  clothed
himself  with  strange  properties,  as  natural  unto  him  from  the  vice  of  his  own
will;  for  as  it  is  an  absurdity  to  reckon  man  glorified  among  animals,  because
he  is  not  without  sense  or  feeling,  so  to  be  sensitive  does  not  shew  the  in-
separable essence  of  an  animal.

Seeing,  therefore,  our  first  parents  had  both  of  them  now  felt  the  effect
throughout  their  whole  bodies  of  the  eating  of  the  apple,  or  concupiscence
of  the  flesh  in  their  members  in  Paradise,  it  shamed  them;  because  their
members,  which,  before,  they  could  rule  at  their  pleasure,  were  afterwards
moved  by  a proper  incentive  to  lust.

Therefore,  on  the  same  day,  not  only  mortality  entered  through  concu-
piscence, but  it  presently  after  entered  into  a conceived  generation  ; for
which  they  were,  the  same  day,  also  driven  out  of  Paradise:  hence  followed
an  adulterous,  lascivious,  beast-like,  devilish  generation,  and  plainly  incapa-
able  of  entering  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  diametrically  opposite  to  God’s
ordination ; by  which  means  death,  and  the  threatened  punishment,  corrup-
tion, became  inseparable  to  man  and  his  posterity.

Therefore,  original  sin  was  effectively  bred  from  the  concupiscence  of  the
flesh,  but  occasioned  only  by  the  apple  being  eaten,  and  the  admonition
despised : but  the  stimulative  to  concupiscence  was  placed  in  the  dissuaded
tree,  and  that  occult  lustful  property  radically  inserted  and  implanted  in  it.
But  when  Satan  (besides  his  hope , and  the  deflowering  of  the  virgin,  nothing
hindering  of  it)  saw  that  man  was  not  taken  out  of  the  way,  according  to  the
forewarning  (for  he  knew  not  that  the  Son  of  God  had  constituted  himself  a
surety,  before  the  Father,  for  man)  he,  indeed,  looked  at  the  vile,  corrupted,
and  degenerated  nature  of  man,  and  saw  that  a power  was  withdrawn  from


t6  Natural  /IDagtc.

him  of  uniting  himself  to  the  God  of  infinite  majesty,  and  began  greatly  to
rejoice.  That  joy  was  of  short  duration,  for,  by  and  by,  he  likewise  knew
that  marriage  was  ratified  by  Heaven — that  the  divine  goodness  yet  inclined
to  man  — and  that  Satan’s  own  fallacies  and  deceits  were  thus  deceived :
hence  conjecturing  that  the  Son  of  God  was  to  restore  every  defect  of  con-
tagion, and,  therefore,  perhaps,  to  be  incarnated.  He  then  put  himself  to
work  how,  or  in  what  manner,  he  should  defile  the  stock  that  was  to  be  raised
up  by  matrimony  with  a mortal  soul,  so  that  he  might  render  every  concep-
tion of  God  in  vain : therefore  he  stirred  up  not  only  his  fratricides,  and
notoriously  wicked  persons,  that  there  might  be  evil  abounding  at  all  times ;
but  he  procured  that  Atheism  might  arise,  and  that,  together  with  Heathenism,
it  might  daily  increase,  whereby  indeed,  if  he  could  not  hinder  the  co-knit-
ting  of  the  immortal  mind  with  the  sensitive  soul,  he  might,  at  least,  by  de-
destroying  the  law  of  Nature,  bring  man  unto  a level  with  himself  under
infernal  punishment : but  his  special  care  and  design  was  to  expunge  totally
the  immortal  mind  out  of  the  stock  of  posterity.

Therefore  he  ( the  Devil ) stirs  up,  to  this  day,  detestable  copulations  in
Atheistical  libertines  : but  he  saw  from  thence,  that  nothing  but  brutish  or
savage  monsters  proceeded,  to  be  abhorred  by  the  very  parents  themselves ;
and  that  the  copulation  with  women  was  far  more  plausible  to  men ; and  that
by  this  method  the  generation  of  men  should  constantly  continue;  for  he
endeavoured  to  prevent  the  hope  of  restoring  a remnant,  that  is,  to  hinder  the
incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God ; therefore  he  attempted,  by  an  application  of
active  things,  to  frame  the  seed  of  man  according  to  his  own  accursed  desire;
which,  when  he  had  found  vain  and  impossible  for  him  to  do,  he  tried  again
whether  an  imp  or  witch  might  not  be  fructified  by  sodomy ; and  when  this
did  not  fully  answer  his  intentions  every  way,  and  he  saw  that  of  an  ass  and
a horse  a mule  was  bred,  which  was  nearer  a-kin  to  his  mother  than  his
father ; likewise  that  of  a coney  and  dormouse  being  the  father,  a true  coney
was  bred,  being  distinct  from  his  mother,  only  having  a tail  like  the  dor-
mouse ; he  declined  these  feats,  and  betook  himself  to  others  worthy,  indeed,
only  of  the  subtile  craft  of  the  Prince  of  Darkness.

Therefore  Satan  instituted  a connexion  of  the  seed  of  man  with  the  seed
and  in  the  womb  of  a junior  witch,  or  sorceresss,  that  he  might  exclude  the
dispositions  unto  an  immortal  mind  from  such  a new,  polished  conception :
and  afterwards  came  forth  an  adulterous  and  lascivious  generation  of  Faunii,
Satyrs,  Gnomes,  Nymphs,  Sylphs,  Driades,  Hamodriades,  Neriads,  Mermaids
Syrens,  Sphynxes,  Monsters,  &c.,  using  the  constellations,  and  disposing  the
seed  of  man  for  such  like  monstrous  prodigious  generations.

And,  seeing  the  Faunii  and  Nymphs  of  the  woods  were  preferred  before
the  others  in  beauty,  they  afterwards  generated  their  offspring  amongst  them-


THatural  flDagic.


n


selves,  and  at  length  began  wedlocks  with  men,  feigning  that,  by  these  copu-
lations, they  should  obtain  an  immortal  soul  for  them  and  their  offspring ;
but  this  happened  through  the  persuasions  and  delusions  of  Satan  to  admit
these  monsters  to  carnal  copulation,  which  the  ignorant  were  easily  per-
suaded to  ; and  therefore  these  Nymphs  are  called  Succubii : although  Satan
afterwards  committed  worse,  frequently  transchanging  himself,  by  assuming
the  persons  of  both  Incubii  and  Succubii,  in  both  sexes;  but  they  conceived
not  a true  young  by  the  males,  except  the  Nymphs  alone.  The  which,  indeed,
seeing  the  sons  of  God  (that  is,  men)  had  now,  without  distinction,  and  in
many  places,  taken  to  be  their  wives,  God  was  determined  to  blot  out  the
whole  race  begotten  by  these  infernal  and  detestable  marriages,  through  a
deluge  of  waters,  that  the  intent  of  the  evil  spirit  might  be  rendered  frustrate.

Of  which  monsters  before  mentioned,  I will  here  give  a striking  example
from  Helmont:  for  he  says,  a merchant  of  iEgina,  a countryman  of  his,
sailing  various  times  unto  the  Canaries,  was  asked  by  Helmont  for  his  serious
judgment  about  certain  creatures,  which  the  mariners  frequently  brought
home  from  the  mountains,  as  often  as  they  went,  and  called  them  Tude-
squils ; * for  they  were  dried  dead  carcasses,  almost  three  footed,  and  so  small
that  a boy  might  easily  carry  one  of  them  upon  the  palm  of  his  hand,  and
they  were  of  an  exact  human  shape ; but  their  whole  dead  carcass  was  clear
or  transparent  as  any  parchment,  and  their  bones  flexible  like  gristles;
against  the  sun,  also,  their  bowels  and  intestine  were  plainly  to  be  seen;
which  thing  I,  by  Spaniards  there  born,  knew  to  be  true.  I considered  that,
to  this  day,  the  destroyed  race  of  Pygmies  were  there ; for  the  Almighty
would  render  the  expectations  of  the  evil  spirit,  supported  by  the  abominable
actions  of  mankind,  void  and  vain  ; and  he  has,  therefore,  manifoldly  saved  us
from  the  craft  and  subtilty  of  the  Devil,  unto  whom  eternal  punishments  are
due,  to  his  extreme  and  perpetual  confusion,  unto  the  everlasting  sanctifying
of  the  Divine  Name.

©f  5)0lTipatb)?.  The  wonders  of  Animal  Magic  we  mean  fully  to  display
under  the  title  of  Magnetism.  But  here  we  hasten  to  investigate  by  what
means,  instruments,  and  effects,  we  must  apply  actives  to  passives,  to  the
producing  of  rare  and  uncommon  effects;  whether  by  actions , amulets , alliga-
tions and  suspensions — or  rings , papers , unctions , suffumigations,  allure-
ments, sorceries , enchantments , images , lights , sounds , or  the  like.  Therefore,
to  begin  with  things  more  simple: — If  any  one  shall,  with  an  entire  new
knife,  cut  asunder  a lemon,  using  words  expressive  of  hatred,  contumely,  or
dislike,  against  any  individual,  the  absent  party,  though  at  an  unlimited  dis-
tance, feels  a certain  inexpressible  and  cutting  anguish  of  the  heart,  together

*Stude-quill9,  or  stew’d  quills.


Natural  flDagic.


18

with  a cold  chilliness  and  failure  throughout  the  body: — likewise  of  living
animals,  if  a live  pigeon  be  cut  through  the  heart,  it  causes  the  heart  of  the
party  intended  to  affect  with  a sudden  failure;  likewise  fear  is  induced  by
suspending  the  magical  image  of  a man  by  a single  thread;  — also,  death  and
destruction  by  means  similar  to  these ; and  all  these  from  a fatal  and  magical
sympathy.

Likewise  of  the  virtues  of  simple  animals,  as  well  as  manual  operations,
of  which  we  shall  speak  more  anon:  — The  application  of  hare’s  fat  pulls  out
a thorn ; — likewise  any  one  may  cure  the  tooth-ache  with  the  stone  that  is  in
the  head  of  the  toad  ; also,  if  any  one  shall  catch  a living  frog  before  sun-rise,
and  he  or  she  spits  in  the  mouth  of  the  frog,  will  be  cured  of  an  asthmatic
consumption; — likewise  the  right  or  left  eye  of  the  same  animal  cures  blind-
ness; and  the  fat  of  a viper  cures  a bite  of  the  same.  Black  hellebore  easeth
the  head-ache,  being  applied  to  the  head,  or  the  powder  snuffed  up  the
nose  in  a moderate  quantity.  Coral  is  a well-known  preservative  against
witchcraft  and  poisions,  which  if  worn  now,  in  this  time,  as  much  round
children’s  necks  as  usual,  would  enable  them  to  combat  many  diseases  which
their  tender  years  are  subjected  to,  and  to  which,  with  fascinations,  they
often  fall  a victim.  I know  how  to  compose  coral  amulets,  or  talismans,
which,  if  suspended  even  by  a thread,  shall  (God  assisting)  prevent  all  harms
and  accidents  of  violence  from  fire,  or  water,  or  witchcraft,  and  help  them  to
withstand  all  their  diseases.

Paracelsus  and  Helmont  both  agree,  that  in  the  toad,  although  so  irrever-
ent to  the  sight  of  man,  and  so  noxious  to  the  touch,  and  of  such  strong
violent  antipathy  to  the  blood  of  man,  I say,  out  of  this  hatred  Divine
Providence  hath  prepared  us  a remedy  against  manifold  diseases  most
inimical  to  man’s  nature.  The  toad  hath  a natural  aversion  to  man  ; and  this
sealed  image,  or  idea  of  hatred,  he  carries  in  his  head,  eyes,  and  most  power-
fully throughout  his  whole  body  : now  that  the  toad  may  be  highly  prepared
for  a sympathetic  remedy  against  the  plague  or  other  disorders,  such  as  the
ague,  falling  sicknesses,  and  various  others ; and  that  the  terror  of  us,  and
natural  inbred  hatred  may  the  more  strongly  be  imprinted  and  higher
ascend  in  the  toad,  we  must  hang  him  up  aloft  in  a chimney,  by  the  legs,  and
set  under  him  a dish  of  yellow  wax,  to  receive  whatsoever  may  come  down,
or  fall  from  his  mouth ; let  him  hang  in  this  position,  in  our  sight,  for  three
or  four  days,  at  least  till  he  is  dead  ; now  we  must  not  omit  frequently  to  be
present  in  sight  of  the  animal,  so  that  his  fears  and  imbred  terror  of  us,  with
the  ideas  of  strong  hatred,  may  encrease  even  unto  death.

So  you  have  a most  powerful  remedy  in  this  one  toad,  for  the  curing  of
forty  thousand  persons  infected  with  the  pest  or  plague.


^natural  /Iftaptc.  l9

Van  Helmont’s  process  for  making  a preservative  amulet  against  the  plague
is  as  follows  : —

“ In  the  month  of  July,  in  the  decrease  of  the  moon,  I took  old  toads,  whose
eyes  abounded  with  white  worms  hanging  forth  into  black  heads,  so  that  both
his  eyes  were  totally  formed  with  worms,  perhaps  fifty  in  number,  thickly
compacted  together,  their  heads  hanging  out;  and  as  oft  as  any  one  of  them
attempted  to  get  out,  the  toad,  by  applying  his  fore-foot,  forbade  its  utter-
ance. These  toads  being  hung  up,  and  made  to  vomit  in  the  manner  before
mentioned,  I reduced  the  insects  and  other  matters  ejected  from  the  toad,
with  the  waxen  dish  being  added  thereto;  and  the  dried  carcass  of  the  toad
being  reduced  into  powder  I formed  the  whole  into  troches,  with  gum-
dragon  ; which,  being  borne  above  the  left  breast,  drove  speedily  away  all
contagion  ; and  being  fast  bound  to  the  place  affected,  thoroughly  drew  out
the  poison  : and  these  troches  were  more  potent  after  they  had  returned  into
use  divers  times  than  when  new.  I found  them  to  be  a most  powerful  amulet
against  the  plague;  for  if  the  serpent  eateth  dust  all  the  days  of  his  life,
because  he  was  the  instrument  of  sinning;  so  the  toad  eats  earth,  (which  he
vomits  up)  all  the  days  of  his  life  ; and,  according  to  the  Adeptical  philoso-
phy, the  toad  bears  an  hatred  to  man,  so  that  he  infects  some  herbs  that  are
useful  to  man  with  his  poison,  in  order  for  his  death.  But  this  difference
note  between  the  toad  and  the  serpent : the  toad,  at  the  sight  of  man,  from  a
natural  quality  sealed  in  him,  called  antipathy,  conceives  a great  terror  or
astonishment;  which  terror  from  man  imprints  on  this  animal  a natural
efficacy  against  the  images  of  the  affrighted  archeus  in  man.  For,  truly  the
terror  of  the  toad  kills  and  annihilates  the  ideas  of  the  affrighted  archeus  in
man,  because  the  terror  in  the  toad  is  natural,  therefore  radical.”

For  the  poison  of  the  plague  is  subdued  by  the  poison  of  the  toad,  not  by
an  action  primarily  destructive,  but  by  a secondary  action ; as  the  pestilent
idea  of  hatred  or  terror  extinguishes  the  ferment,  by  whose  mediation  the
poison  of  the  plague  subsists,  and  proceeds  to  infect : for  seeing  the  poison  of
the  plague  is  the  product  of  the  image  of  the  terrified  archeus  established  in
a fermental,  putrified  odour,  and  mumial  air,  this  coupling  ferments  the
appropriate  mean,  and  immediately  the  subject  of  the  poison  is  taken  away.

Therefore  the  opposition  of  the  amulet  formed  from  the  body,  &c.,  of  the
toad,  takes  away  and  prevents  the  baneful  and  most  horrible  effects  of  the
pestilential  poison  and  ferment  of  the  plague.

Hence  it  is  conjectured  that  he  is  an  animal  ordained  by  God,  that  the
idea  of  his  terror  being  poisonous  indeed  to  himself,  should  be  to  us,  and  to
our  plague,  a poison  in  terror.  Since,  therefore,  the  toad  is  most  fearful  at
the  beholding  of  man,  which  in  himself,  notwithstanding,  forms  the  terror
conceived  from  man,  and  also  the  hatred  against  man,  into  an  image  and


20  Natural  /ifiaaic.

active  real  being,  and  not  consisting  only  in  a confused  apprehension ; hence
it  happens  that  a poison  ariseth  in  the  toad,  which  kills  the  pestilent  poison
of  terror  in  man ; to  wit,  from  whence  the  archeus  waxeth  strong,  he  not
only  perceiving  the  pestilent  idea  to  be  extinguished  in  himself ; but,  more-
over, because  he  knoweth  that  something  inferior  to  himself  is  terrified,  dis-
mayed, and  doth  fly.  Again,  so  great  is  the  fear  of  the  toad,  that  if  he  is
placed  directly  before  thee,  and  thou  dost  behold  with  an  intentive  furious
look,  so  that  he  cannot  avoid  thee,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  he  dies,*  being
fascinated  with  terror  and  astonishment.

©f  tbe  SCCpCUt.  Hippocrates,  by  the  use  of  some  parts  of  this  animal,
attained  to  himself  divine  honours ; for  therewith  he  cured  pestilence  and
contagion,  consumptions,  and  very  many  other  diseases ; for  he  cleansed  the
flesh  of  a viper.  The  utmost  part  of  the  tail  and  head  being  cut  off,  he
stripped  off  the  skin,  casting  away  the  bowels  and  gall ; he  reserved  of  the
intestines  only  the  heart  and  liver ; he  drew  out  all  the  blood,  with  the  vein
running  down  the  back-bone ; he  bruised  the  flesh  and  the  aforesaid  bowels
with  the  bones,  and  dried  them  in  a warm  oven  until  they  could  be  powdered,
which  powder  he  sprinkled  on  honey;  being  clarified  and  boiled,  until  he
knew  that  the  fleshes  in  boiling  had  cast  aside  their  virtue,  as  well  in  the
broth  as  in  the  vapours  ; he  then  added  unto  this  electuary  the  spices  of  his
country  to  cloak  the  secret.  But  this  cure  of  diseases  by  the  serpent  con-
tains a great  mystery,  viz.  that  as  death  crept  in  by  the  serpent  of  old,  itself
ought  to  be  mitigated  by  the  death  of  the  serpent ; for  Adam  being  skilful  in
the  properties  of  all  beasts,  was  not  ignorant  also  that  the  serpent  was  more
crafty  than  other  living  creatures,  and  that  the  aforesaid  balsam,  the  remedy
of  death,  lay  hid  in  the  serpent;  wherefore  the  spirit  of  darkness  could  not
more  falsely  deceive  our  first  parents  than  under  the  guileful  serpent’s  form ;
for  they  foolishily  imagined  they  should  escape  the  death,  so  sorely  threatened
by  God,  by  the  serpent’s  aid.

Amber  is  an  amulet : — a piece  of  red  amber  worn  about  is  a preservative
against  poisons  and  the  pestilence.

Likewise,  a sapphire  stone  is  as  effectual.  Oil  of  amber,  or  amber  dis-
solved in  pure  spirit  of  wine,  comforts  the  womb  being  disordered : if  a
suffumigation  of  it  be  made  with  the  warts  of  the  shank  of  a horse,  it  will
cure  many  disorders  of  that  region.

The  liver  and  gall  of  an  eel,  likewise,  being  gradually  dried  and  reduced  to
powder,  and  taken  in  the  quantity  of  a filbert-nut  in  a glass  of  warm  wine,
causes  a speedy  and  safe  delivery  to  women  in  labour.  The  liver  of  a ser-
pent likewise  effects  the  same.

*1  have  tried  this  experiment  upon  the  toad,  and  other  reptiles  of  his  nature,  and  was  satisfied
of  the  truth  of  this  affirmation.


Natural  flPagtc.


21


Rhubarb,  on  account  of  its  violent  antipathy  to  choler,  wonderfully  purges
the  same.  Music  is  a well-known  specific  for  curing  the  bite  of  a tarantula,  or
any  venomous  spider ; likewise,  water  cures  the  hydrophobia.  Warts  are  cured
by  paring  off  the  same ; or  by  burying  as  many  pebbles,  secretly,  as  the  party
has  warts.  The  king’s  evil  may  be  cured  by  the  heart  of  a toad  worn  about
the  neck,  first  being  dried.  — Hippomanes  excites  lust  by  the  bare  touch,  or
being  suspended  on  the  party.  If  any  one  shall  spit  in  the  hand  with  which
Jie  struck,  or  hurt,  another,  so  shall  the  wound  be  cured; — likewise,  if  any
one  shall  draw  the  halter  wherewith  a malefactor  was  slain  across  the  throat
of  one  who  hath  the  quinsey,  it  certainly  cures  him  in  three  days  ; also,  the
herb  cinque-foil  being  gathered  before  sun-rise,  one  leaf  thereof  cures  the
ague  of  one  day ; three  leaves,  cures  the  tertian  ; and  four,  the  quartan  ague.
Rape  seeds,  sown  with  cursings  and  imprecations,  grows  the  fairer,  and
thrives;  but  if  with  praises,  the  reverse.  The  juice  of  deadly  nightshade,
distilled,  and  given  in  a proportionate  quantity,  makes  the  party  imagine  al-
most whatever  you  chuse.  The  herb  nip,  being  heated  in  the  hand,  and
afterwards  you  hold  in  your  hand  the  hand  of  any  other  party,  they  shall
never  quit  you,  so  long  as  you  retain  that  herb.  The  herbs  arsemart,  com-
frey,  flaxweed,  dragon-wart,  adder’s-tongue,  being  steeped  in  cold  water,  and
if  for  some  time  being  applied  on  a wound,  or  ulcer,  they  grow  warm,  and
are  buried  in  a muddy  place,  cureth  the  wound,  or  sore,  to  which  they  were
applied.  Again,  if  any  one  pluck  the  leaves  of  asarabacca,  drawing  them
upwards,  they  will  purge  another,  who  is  ignorant  of  the  drawing,  by
vomit  only ; but  if  they  are  wrested  downward  to  the  earth,  they  purge  by
stool.  A sapphire,  or  a stone  that  is  of  a deep  blue  colour,  if  it  be  rubbed  on
a tumour,  wherein  the  plague  discovers  itself,  (before  the  party  is  too  far
gone)  and  by  and  by  it  be  removed  from  the  sick,  the  absent  jewel  attracts
all  the  poison  or  contagion  therefrom.  And  thus  much  is  sufficient  to  be  said
concerning  natural  occult  virtues,  whereof  we  speak  in  a mixed  and  mis-
cellaneous manner  coming  to  more  distinct  heads  anon.

CbamtS.  The  instrument  of  enchanters  is  a pure,  living,  breathing  spirit
of  the  blood,  whereby  we  bind,  or  attract,  those  things  which  we  desire
or  delight  in ; so  that,  by  an  earnest  intention  of  the  mind,  we  take  posses-
sion of  the  faculties  in  a no  less  potent  manner  than  strong  wines  beguile
the  reason  and  senses  of  those  who  drink  them ; therefore,  to  charm,  is  either
to  bind  with  words,  in  which  there  is  great  virtue,  as  the  poet  sings  —

“ Words  thrice  she  spake,  which  caus’d,  at  will,  sweet  sleep ;

“ Appeas’d  the  troubled  waves,  and  roaring  deep.”

Indeed,  the  virtue  of  man’s  words  are  so  great,  that,  when  pronounced
with  a fervent  Constance  of  the  mind,  they  are  able  to  subvert  Nature,  to


22


Natural  /n>agtc.


cause  earthquakes,  storms,  and  tempests.  I have,  in  the  country,  by  only
speaking  a few  words,  and  used  some  other  things,  caused  terrible  rains  and
claps  of  thunder.  Almost  all  charms  are  impotent  without  words,  because
words  are  the  speech  of  the  speaker,  and  the  image  of  the  thing  signified  or
spoken  of;  therefore,  whatever  wonderful  effect  is  intended,  let  the  same  be
performed  with  the  addition  of  words  significative  of  the  will  or  desire  of  the
operator ; for  words  are  a kind  of  occult  vehicle  of  the  image  conceived  or
begotten,  and  sent  out  of  the  body  by  the  soul;  therefore,  all  the  forcible
power  of  the  spirit  ought  to  be  breathed  out  with  vehemency,  and  an  arduous
and  intent  desire ; and  I know  how  to  speak,  and  convey  words  together,  so
as  they  may  be  carried  onward  to  the  hearer  at  a vast  distance,  no  other  body
intervening,  which  thing  I have  done  often.  Words  are  also  oftentimes  de-
livered to  us,  seemingly  by  others,  in  our  sleep,  whereby  we  seem  to  talk  and
converse  ; but  then  no  vocal  conversations  are  of  any  effect,  except  they  pro-
ceed from  spiritual  and  occult  causes : such  spirits  have  often  manifested
singular  things  to  me,  while  in  sleep,  the  which,  in  waking,  I have  thought
nought  of,  until  conviction  of  the  truth  taught  me  credulity  in  such  like
matters.  In  the  late  change  of  Administration,  I knew,  at  least  five  days
before  it  actually  terminated,  that  it  would  be  as  I described  to  a few  of  my
friends.  These  things  are  not  alike  manifested  to  every  one  ; only,  I believe,
to  those  who  have  long  seriously  attended  to  contemplations  of  this  abstruse
nature;  but  there  are  those  who  will  say  it  is  not  so,  merely  because  they
themselves  cannot  comprehend  such  things.

However,  not  to  lose  time,  we  proceed.  There  are  various  enchantments,
which  I have  proved,  relative  to  common  occurrences  of  life,  viz.  a kind  of
binding  to  that  effect  which  we  desire ; as  to  love,  or  hatred ; or  to  those
things  we  love,  or  against  those  things  we  hate,  in  all  which  there  is  a magical
sympathy  above  the  power  of  reasoning ; therefore  those  abstruse  matters  we
feel,  are  convinced  of,  and  reflect  upon,  and  draw  them  into  our  use.  I will
here  set  down,  while  speaking  of  these  things,  a very  powerful  amulet  for
the  stopping,  immediately,  a bloody-flux ; for  the  which  (with  a faith)  I dare
lay  down  my  life  for  the  success,  and  entire  cure.

An  Amulet  for  Flux  of  Blood.

“In  the  blood  of  Adam  arose  death — in  the  blood  of  Christ  death  is  ex-
“ tinguished  — in  the  same  blood  of  Christ  I command  thee,  O,  blood,  that
“thou  stop  fluxing!”*

In  this  one  godly  superstition  there  will  be  found  a ready , cheap,  easy
remedy  for  that  dreadful  disorder  the  bloody-flux,  whereby  a poor  miserable
wretch  will  reap  more  real  benefit  than  in  a whole  shop  of  an  apothecary’s
•Let  the  party  who  pronounces  these  words  hold  the  other’s  hand.


Natural  flDaqtc.


23


drugs.  These  four  letters  niff  are  a powerful  charm,  or  amulet,  against  the
common  ague ; likewise,  let  them  be  written  upon  a piece  of  clean  and  new
vellum,  at  any  time  of  the  day  or  night,  and  they  will  be  found  a speedy  and
certain  cure,  and  much  more  efficacious  than  the  word  Abracadabra : how-
ever, as  that  ancient  charm  is  still  (amongst  some  who  pretend  to  cure  agues,
&c.)  in  some  repute,  I will  here  set  down  the  form  and  manner  of  its  being
written  ;*  likewise  it  must  be  pronounced,  or  spoken,  in  the  same  order  as  it
is  written,  with  the  intent  or  will  of  the  operator  declared  at  the  same  time
of  making  it.


©t  TUnCtiOttS.  Unguents,  or  unctions,  collyries,  philters,  &c.,  conveying
the  virtues  of  things  natural  to  our  spirits,  do  multiply,  transform,  transfigure,
and  transmute  it  accordingly;  they  also  transpose  those  virtues,  which  are  in
them , into  it,  so  that  it  not  only  acts  upon  its  own  body , but  also  upon  that
which  is  near  it,  and  affects  that  (by  visible  rays,  charms,  and  by  touching
it)  with  some  agreeable  quality  like  to  itself.  For,  because  our  spirit  is
the  pure , subtil , lucid,  airy,  and  unctuous  vapour  of  the  blood,  nothing,
therefore,  is  better  adapted  for  collyriums  than  the  like  vapour,  which  are
more  suitable  to  our  spirit  in  substance ; for  then,  by  reason  of  their  likeness,
they  do  more  stir  up,  attract,  and  transform  the  spirit.  The  same  virtue
have  other  ointments,  and  confections.  Hence,  by  the  touch,  often  plague,
sickness,  faintings,  poisoning,  and  love,  is  induced,  either  by  the  hands  or
clothes  being  anointed  ; and  often  by  kissing,  things  being  held  in  the  mouth,
love  is  likewise  excited.

Now  the  sight,  as  it  perceives  more  purely  and  clearer  than  the  other
senses,  seals  in  us  the  marks  of  things  more  acutely,  and  does,  most  of  all,
and  before  all  others,  agree  with  our  fantastic  spirit ; as  is  apparent  in
dreams,  when  things  seen  do  more  often  present  themselves  to  us  than  things
heard,  or  anything  coming  under  the  other  senses.  Therefore,  when  colly-
riums transform  the  visual  spirits,  that  spirit  easily  affects  the  imagination,
which,  being  affected  with  divers  species  and  forms,  transmits  the  same,  by
the  same  spirit,  unto  the  outward  sense  of  sight,  by  which  there  is  formed  in
it  a perception  of  such  species  and  forms,  in  that  manner,  as  if  it  were
moved  by  external  objects,  that  there  appear  to  be  seen  terrible  images,  spirits,
and  the  like.  There  are  some  collyriums  which  make  us  see  the  images  of

•It  is  here  to  be  particularly  noticed  by  us,  that,  in  forming  of  a charm,  or  amulet,  ^bRACADABRA
it  will  be  of  no  effect  except  the  very  soul  of  the  operator  is  strongly  and  intensely
exerted  and  impressed,  as  it  were,  and  the  image  of  the  idea  sealed  on  the  charm,
or  amulet;  for,  without  this,  in  vain  will  be  all  the  observation  of  times,  hours  and
constellations;  therefore,  this  I have  thought  fit  to  mention,  once  for  all,  that  it
may  be  almost  always  uppermost  in  the  mind  of  the  operator,  for,  without  this  one
thing  being  observed  and  noticed,  many  who  form  seals,  &c.,  do  fall  short  of  the
wished-for  effect.  A


RACADABRA

ACADABRA

CADABRA

ADABRA

DABRA

ABRA

BRA

RA


24


Natural  /Iftagtc.


spirits  in  the  air , or  elsewhere ; which  I can  make  of  the  gall  of  a man ,
and  the  eyes  of  a black  cat,  and  some  other  things.  The  same  is  made,  like-
wise, of  the  blood  of  a lapwing,  bat,  and  a goat ; and  if  a smooth  shining
piece  of  steel  be  smeared  over  with  the  juice  of  mugwort,  and  be  made  to
fume,  it  causes  invocated  spirits  to  appear.  There  are  some  perfumes,  or
suffumigations  and  unctions,  which  make  men  speak  in  their  sleep,  walk,  and
do  those  things  that  are  done  by  men  that  are  awake,  and  often  what,  when
awake,  they  cannot,  or  dare  not  do  ; others,  again,  make  men  hear  horrid  or
delightful  sounds,  noises,  and  the  like.

And,  in  some  measure,  this  is  the  cause  why  mad  and  melancholy  men
believe  they  hear  and  see  things  equally  false  and  improbable,  falling  into
most  gross  and  pitiful  delusions,  fearing  where  no  fear  is,  and  angry  where
there  is  none  to  contend.  Such  passions  as  these  we  can  induce  by  magical
vapours , confections,  perfumes , collyries,  unguents , potions,  poisons,  lamps ,
lights,  &c. ; likewise  by  mirrors,  images,  enchantments,  charms,  sounds,  and
music;  also  by  divers  rites,  observations,  ceremonies,  religion , &c.

firlacfcal  Suspensions.  When  the  soul  of  the  world,  by  its  virtue,  doth
make  all  things  (that  are  naturally  generated,  or  artificially  made)  fruitful,
by  sealing  and  impressing  on  them  celestial  virtues  for  the  working  of  some
wonderful  effect,  then  things  themselves  not  only  applied  by  collyry,  or  suf-
fume,  or  ointment,  or  any  other  such  like  way ; but  when  they  are  conven-
iently bound  to,  or  wrapped  up,  or  suspended  about  the  neck,  or  any  other
way  applied,  although  by  ever  so  easy  a contact,  they  do  impress  their  virtue
upon  us  ; by  these  allegations,  &c.,  therefore,  the  accidents  of  the  body  and
mind  are  changed  into  sickness  or  health,  valour,  fear,  sadness  or  joy,  and
the  like  ; they  render  those  that  carry  them,  gracious,  terrible,  acceptable,
rejected,  honoured,  beloved,  or  hateful  and  abominable.

Now  these  kind  of  passions  are  conceived  to  be  infused  no  otherwise  than
is  manifest  in  the  grafting  of  trees,  where  the  vital  life  and  virtue  is  com-
municated from  the  trunk  to  the  twig,  engrafted  into  it,  by  way  of  contact
and  alligation ; so  in  the  female  palm-tree,  when  she  comes  near  to  the  male,
her  boughs  bend  to  the  male,  which  the  gardener  seeing,  he  binds  them
together  by  ropes  across,  but  soon  becomes  straight,  as  if  by  the  continuation
of  the  rope  she  had  received  a propagating  virtue  from  the  male.  And  it  is
said,  if  a woman  takes  a needle,  and  bewray  it  with  dung,  and  put  it  up  in
earth  in  which  the  carcass  of  a man  has  been  buried,  and  carry  it  about  her
in  a piece  of  cloth  used  at  a funeral,  no  man  can  defile  her  as  long  as  she
carries  that.

Now,  by  these  examples  we  see  how,  by  certain  alligations  of  certain
things,  also  suspensions,  or  by  the  most  simple  contact  or  continuation  of  any


Natural  flDagtc-


25


thread,  we  may  be  able  to  receive  some  virtues  thereby  ; but  it  is  necessary
to  know  the  certain  rule  of  magical  alligation  and  suspension ; and  the  man-
ner that  the  art  requires  is  this,  viz.  that  they  must  be  done  under  a certain
and  suitable  constellation;  and  they  must  be  done  with  wire,  or  silken
threads,  or  sinews  of  certain  animals;  and  those  things  that  are  to  be
wrapped  up,  are  to  be  done  in  the  leaves  of  herbs,  or  skins  of  animals,  or
membraneous  parchments,  &c.  For,  if  you  would  procure  the  solary  virtue
of  anything,  this  is  to  be  wrapped  up  in  bay  leaves,  or  the  skin  of  a lion,
hung  round  the  neck  with  gold,  silk,  or  purple  or  yellow  thread ; while  the
sun  reigns  in  the  heavens,  so  shalt  thou  be  endured  with  the  virtues  of  that
thing.  So  if  a saturnine  quality  or  thing  be  de'sired,  thou  shalt  in  like  man-
ner take  that  thing,  while  Saturn  reigns,  and  wrap  it  up  in  the  skin  of  an
ass,  or  in  a cloth  used  at  a funeral,  especially  if  melancholy  or  sadness  is  to
be  induced,  and  with  a sad,  or  ash,  or  leaden,  or  black  silk  or  thread,  hang  it
about  thy  neck  ; and  so  in  the  same  manner  we  must  proceed  with  the  rest.

©f  Hnttpatbies.  It  is  necessary,  in  this  place,  to  speak  of  the  antipathies
of  natural  things , seeing  it  is  requisite,  as  we  go  on,  to  have  a thorough  knowl-
edge of  that  obstinate  contrariety  of  Nature,  where  anything  shuns  its  con-
trary, and  drives  it,  as  it  were,  out  of  its  presence.  Such  antipathy  as  this
has  the  root  rhubarb  against  choler;  treacle  against  poison  ; the  sapphire  stone
against  hot  biles,  feverish  heats,  and  diseases  of  the  eyes ; the  amethyst
against  drunkenness;  the  jasper  against  the  bloody-flux  and  offensive  imagi-
nations ; the  emerald,  and  agnus  castus  against  lust ; achates  or  ayates  against
poison ; piony  against  the  falling  sickness ; coral  against  the  ebullition  of
black  choler,  and  pains  of  the  stomach ; the  topaz  against  spiritual  heats,  such
as  are  covetousness,  lust,  and  all  manner  of  love  excesses.  The  same  anti-
pathy is  there,  also,  of  pismires  against  the  herb  organ,  and  the  wing  of  a
bat,  and  the  heart  of  a lapwing,  from  the  presence  of  which  they  fly.  Also,
the  organ  is  contrary  to  a certain  poisonous  fly  which  cannot  resist  the  sun,
and  resists  salamanders,  and  loaths  cabbage  with  such  a deadly  hatred  that
they  cannot  endure  each  other.  So  they  say  cucumbers  hate  oil.  And  the
gall  of  a crow  makes  even  men  fearful,  and  drives  them  from  the  place
wherein  it  is  placed.  A diamond  disagrees  with  a loadstone ; that  being
present,  it  suffers  no  iron  to  be  drawn  to  it.  Sheep  avoid  frog-parsley  as  a
deadly  thing  ; and,  what  is  more  wonderful,  Nature  hath  depictured  the  sign
of  this  antipathy  upon  the  livers  of  sheep,  in  which  the  very  figure  of  frog-
parsley  doth  naturally  appear.  Again,  goats  hate  garden-basil,  as  if  there
was  nothing  more  pernicious.  And,  amongst  animals,  mice  and  weasels  dis-
agree ; so  a lizard  is  of  a contrary  nature  to  a scorpion,  and  induces  great
terror  to  the  scorpion  with  its  very  sight,  and  they  are  therefore  killed  with


26  Natural  flDagtc.

the  oil  of  them  ; which  oil  will  likewise  cure  the  wounds  made  by  scorpions.
There  is  a great  enmity  between  scorpions  and  mice  ; therefore  if  a mouse  be
applied  to  the  bite  of  a scorpion,  he  cures  it.  Nothing  is  so  much  an  enemy
to  snakes  as  crabs ; and  if  swine  be  hurt  by  them,  they  are  cured  by  crabs ;
the  sun,  also  being  in  Cancer,  serpents  are  tormented.  Also,  the  scorpion
and  crocodile  kill  one  another ; and  if  the  bird  ibis  does  but  touch  a crocodile
with  one  of  his  feathers,  he  makes  him  unmoveable.  The  bird  called  a
bustard  flies  away  at  the  sight  of  a horse ; and  a hart  at  the  sight  of  a ram,  or
a viper.  An  elephant  trembles  at  the  hearing  of  the  grunting  of  a hog;  so
doth  a lion  at  the  crowing  of  a cock;  and  a panther  will  not  touch  them  that
are  anointed  with  the  fat  of  a hen,  especially  if  garlick  has  been  put  into  it.
There  is  also  an  enmity  between  foxes  and  swans ; bulls  and  jackdaws.  And
some  birds  are  at  a perpetual  variance,  as  daws  and  owls ; kites  and  crows ;
turtle  and  ring-tail;  egepis  and  eagles;  also,  harts  and  dragons.  Amongst
water  animals,  there  is  a great  antipathy  between  dolphins  and  whirlpools;
the  mullet  and  pike  ; lamprey  and  conger ; pourcontrel  and  lobster,  which
latter,  but  seeing  the  former,  is  nearly  struck  dead  with  fear ; but  the  lobster
tears  the  conger.  The  civet-cat  cannot  resist  the  panther  ; and  if  the  skins
of  both  be  hung  up  against  each  other,  the  skin  or  hairs  of  the  panther  will
fall  off.  Apollo  says,  in  his  hieroglyphics,  if  any  one  be  girt  about  with  the
skin  of  a civet-cat,  he  may  pass  safe  through  his  enemies.  The  lamb  flies
from  the  wolf ; and  if  the  tail,  skin,  or  head  of  lupus  be  hung  up  in  the
sheep’s  cot,  they  cannot  eat  their  meat  for  very  fear.  And  Pliny  mentions
the  bird  called  the  marlin,  that  breaks  the  eggs  of  the  crow,  whose  young  are
annoyed  by  the  fox ; that  she  also  will  pinch  the  whelps  of  the  fox,  and  the
fox  likewise,  which,  when  the  crow  sees,  they  help  the  fox  against  her  as
against  a common  enemy.  The  linnet  lives  in,  and  eats  thistles ; yet  she
hates  the  ass,  because  he  eats  the  thistles  and  flowers  of  them.  There  is  so
great  an  enmity  between  the  little  bird  called  esalon  and  the  ass,  that  their
blood  will  not  mix ; and  that,  at  the  simple  braying  of  the  ass,  both  the
esalon’s  eggs  and  young  perish  together.  There  is,  also,  a total  antipathy  of
the  olive-tree  to  the  harlot ; that,  if  she  plant  it,  it  will  neither  thrive  nor  pros-
per, but  wither.  A lion  fears  lighted  torches,  and  is  tamed  by  nothing
sooner.  The  wolf  fears  not  sword  or  spear,  but  a stone ; by  the  throwing  of
which  a wound  being  made,  worms  breed  in  the  wolf.  A horse  fears  a camel
so  much  that  he  cannot  endure  the  picture  of  that  beast.  An  elephant,  when
he  rages,  is  quieted  by  seeing  a cock.  A snake  is  afraid  of  a naked  man,  but
pursues  one  clothed.  A mad  bull  is  tamed  by  being  tied  to  a fig-tree.  Amber
attracts  all  things  to  it  but  garden-basil,  and  things  smeared  with  oil,  between
which  there  is  a natural  antipathy.


Natural  ZlPagtc.


27

©ccult  Virtues  Of  Ublncjs.  It  is  expedient  for  us  to  know  that  there
are  some  things  whieh  retain  virtue  only  while  they  are  living,  others  even
after  death.  So  in  the  cholic,  if  a live  duck  be  applied  to  the  belly,  it  takes
away  the  pain,  and  the  duck  dies.  If  you  take  the  heart  out  of  any  animal,
and,  while  it  is  warm,  bind  it  to  one  that  has  a quartan  fever,  it  drives  it
away.  So  if  any  one  shall  swallow  the  heart  of  a lapwing,  swallow,  weasel,
or  a mole,  while  it  is  yet  living  and  warm  with  natural  heat,  it  improves  his
intellect,  and  helps  him  to  remember,  understand,  and  foretell  things  to  come.
Hence  this  general  rule, — that  whatever  things  are  taken  for  magical  uses  from
animals,  whether  they  are  stones,  members,  hair,  excrements,  nails,  or  any
thing  else,  they  must  be  taken  from  those  animals  while  they  are  yet  alive,  and,
if  it  is  possible,  that  they  may  live  afterwards.  If  you  take  the  tongue  of  a
frog,  you  put  the  frog  into  water  again  ; — and  Democritus  writes,  that  if  any
one  shall  take  out  the  tongue  of  a water-frog,  no  other  part  of  the  animal  stick-
ing to  it,  and  lay  it  upon  the  place  where  the  heart  beats  of  a woman,  she  is
compelled,  against  her_will,  to  answer  whatsoever  you  shall  ask  of  her.  Also,
take  the  eyes  of  a frog,  which  must  be  extracted  before  sun-rise,  and  bound
to  the  sick  party,  and  the  frog  to  be  let  go  again  blind  into  the  water,  the
party  shall  be  cured  of  a tertian  ague ; also,  the  same  will,  being  bound  with
the  flesh  of  a nightingale,  in  the  skin  of  a hart,  keep  a person  always  wakeful
without  sleeping.  Also,  the  roe  of  the  fork  fish  being  bound  to  the  navel,  is
said  to  cause  women  an  easy  child-birth,  if  it  be  taken  from  it  alive,  and
the  fish  put  into  the  sea  again.  So  the  right  eye  of  a serpent  being
applied  to  the  soreness  of  the  eyes,  cures  the  same,  if  the  serpent  be  let  go
alive.  So,  likewise,  the  tooth  of  a mole,  being  taken  out  alive,  and  afterwards
let  go,  cures  the  tooth-ache ; and  dogs  will  never  bark  at  those  who  have  the
tail  of  a weasel  that  has  escaped.  Democritus  says,  that  if  the  tongue  of  the
cameleon  be  taken  alive,  it  conduces  to  good  success  in  trials,  and  likewise  to
women  in  labour;  but  it  must  be  hung  up  on  some  part  of  the  out-
side of  the  house;  otherwise,  if  brought  into  the  house,  it  might  be  most
dangerous.

There  are  very  many  properties  that  remain  after  death ; and  these  are
things  in  which  the  idea  of  the  matter  is  less  swallowed  up,  according  to
Plato , in  them:  even  after  death,  that  which  is  immortal  in  them  will  work
some  wonderful  things  : — as  in  the  skins  we  have  mentioned  of  several  wild
beasts,  which  will  corrode  and  eat  one  another  after  death ; also,  a drum
made  of  the  rocket-fish  drives  away  all  creeping  things  at  what  distance
soever  the  sound  of  it  is  heard ; and  the  strings  of  an  instrument  made  of  the
guts  of  a wolf,  and  being  strained  upon  a harp  or  lute,  with  strings  made  of
sheep-guts,  will  make  no  harmony.


28  Natural  /Iftagfc

precious  Stones.  It  is  a common  opinion  of  magicians,  that  stones  in-
herit great  virtues,  which  they  receive  through  the  spheres  and  activity  of
the  celestial  influences,  by  the  medium  of  the  soul  or  spirit  of  the  world.
Authors  very  much  disagree  in  respect  of  the  probability  of  their  actually
having  such  virtues  in  potentia,  some  debating  warmly  against  any  occult  or
secret  virtue  lying  hid  in  them ; others,  as  warmly,  shewing  the  causes  and
effects  of  these  sympathetic  properties.  However,  to  leave  these  trifling
arguments  to  those  who  love  cavil  and  contentions  better  than  I do,  and,  as  I
have  neither  leisure  nor  inclination  to  enter  the  lists  with  sophists,  and
tongue-philosophers ; I say,  that  these  occult  virtues  are  disposed  throughout
the  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral  kingdoms,  by  seeds,  or  ideas  originally
emanating  from  the  Divine  mind,  and  through  supercelestial  spirits  and  intel-
ligence always  operating,  according  to  their  proper  offices  and  governments
alotted  them ; which  virtues  are  infused,  as  we  before  said,  through  the  medium
of  the  Universal  Spirit,  as  by  a general  and  manifest  sympathy  and  antipathy
established  in  the  law  of  Nature.  Amongst  a variety  of  examples,  the  load-
stone is  one  most  remarkable  proof  of  the  sympathy  and  antipathy  we  speak
of.  However  to  hasten  to  the  point.  Amongst  stones,  those  which  resem-
ble the  rays  of  the  sun  by  their  golden  sparklings,  (as  does  the  glittering  stone
aetites)  prevent  the  falling-sickness  and  poisons,  if  worn  on  the  finger;  so  the
stone  which  is  called  oculis  solis,  or  eye  of  the  sun,  being  in  figure  like  to  the
apple  of  the  eye,  from  which  shines  forth  a ray,  comforts  the  brain,  and
strengthens  sight;  the  carbuncle,  which  shines  by  night,  hath  a virtue  against
all  airy  and  vaporous  poisons ; the  chrysolite  stone,  of  a light  green  colour,
when  held  against  the  sun,  there  shines  in  it  a ray  like  a star  of  gold;  this  is
singularly  good  for  the  lungs,  and  cures  asthmatical  complaints;  and  if  it  be
bored  through,  and  the  hollow  filled  with  the  mane  of  an  ass,  and  bound  to
the  left  arm,  it  chases  away  all  foolish  and  idle  imaginations  and  melancholy
fears,  and  drives  away  folly.  The  stone  called  iris,  which  is  like  crystal  in
colour,  being  found  with  six  corners,  when  held  in  the  shade,  and  the  sun
suffered  to  shine  through  it,  represents  a natural  rainbow  in  the  air.  The
stone  heliotropium,  green  like  a jasper  or  emerald,  beset  with  red  specks,
makes  the  wearer  constant,  renowned,  and  famous,  and  conduces  to  long  life ;
there  is,  likewise,  another  wonderful  property  in  this  stone,  and  that  is,  that  it
so  dazzles  the  eyes  of  men,  that  it  causes  the  bearer  to  be  invisible ; but  then
there  must  be  applied  to  it  the  herb  bearing  the  same  name,  viz.  heliotropium,
or  the  sun-flower ; and  these  kind  of  virtues  Albertus  Magnus,  and  William
of  Paris,  mention  in  their  writings.  The  jacinth  also  possesses  virtue  from
the  sun  against  poisons,  pestilences,  and  pestiferous  vapours ; likewise  it  ren-
ders the  bearer  pleasant  and  acceptable;  conduces,  also,  to  gain  money;  being
simply  held  in  the  mouth,  it  wonderfully  cheers  the  heart,  and  strengthens


Natural  /IDapte.


29


the  mind.  Then  there  is  the  pyrophilus,  of  a red  mixture,  which  Albertus
Magnus  reports  that  ^Esculapius  makes  mention  of  in  one  of  his  epistles  to
Octavius  Caesar,  saying,  “ There  is  a certain  poison,  so  intensely  cold,  which
preserves  the  heart  of  man,  being  taken  out,  from  burning ; so  that  if  it  be
put  into  the  fire  for  any  time,  it  is  turned  into  a stone,  which  stone  is  called
pyrophilus it  possesses  a wonderful  virtue  against  poison;  and  it  infallibly
renders  the  wearer  thereof  renowned  and  dreadful  to  his  enemies.  Apol-
lonius is  reported  to  have  found  a stone  called  pantaura,  (which  will  attract
other  stones,  as  the  loadstone  does  iron)  most  powerful  against  all  poisons : it
is  spotted  like  the  panther,  and  therefore  some  naturalists  have  given  this
stone  the  name  of  pantherus:  Aaron  calls  it  evanthum;  and  some,  on  account
of  its  variety,  call  it  pantochras.

iprofcmdng  monstrous  BnimalS.  Magicians,  students,  and  observers
of  the  operations  of  Nature,  know  how,  by  the  application  of  active  forms  to
a matter  fitly  disposed,  and  made,  as  it  were,  a proper  recipient,  to  effect
many  wonderful  and  uncommon  things  that  seem  strange,  and  above  Nature,
by  gathering  this  and  that  thing  beneficial  and  conducive  to  that  effect  which
we  desire ; however,  it  is  evident  that  all  the  powers  and  virtues  of  the  in-
ferior bodies  are  not  found  comprehended  in  any  one  single  thing,  but  are
dispersed  amongst  many  of  the  compounds  here  amongst  us ; wherefore  it  is
necessary,  if  there  be  a hundred  virtues  of  the  sun  dispersed  through  so  many
animals,  plants,  metals,  or  stones,  we  should  gather  all  these  together,  and
bring  them  all  into  one  form,  in  which  we  shall  see  all  the  said  virtues,  being
united,  contained.  Now  there  is  a double  virtue  in  commixing:  one,  viz.
which  was  once  planted  in  its  parts,  and  is  celestial ; the  other  is  obtained  by
a certain  artificial  mixture  of  things,  mixed  among  themselves,  according  to  a
due  proportion,  such  as  agree  with  the  heavens  under  a certain  constellation ;
and  this  virtue  descends  by  a certain  similitude  or  likeness  that  is  in  things
amongst  themselves,  by  which  they  are  drawn  or  attracted  towards  their
superiors,  and  as  much  as  the  following  do  by  degrees  correspond  with  them
that  go  before,  where  the  patient  is  fitly  applied  to  its  agent.  So  from  a
certain  composition  of  herbs , vapours , and  such  like,  made  according  to  the
rules  of  Natural  and  Celestial  Magic,  there  results  a certain  common  form ; of
which  we  shall  deliver  the  true  and  infallible  rules  and  experiments  in  our
Second  Book,  where  we  have  written  expressly  on  the  same.

We  ought,  likewise,  to  understand  that  by  how  much  more  noble  and  ex-
cellent the  form  of  any  thing  is,  by  so  much  the  more  it  is  prone,  and  apt  to
receive,  and  powerful  to  act.  Then  the  virtue  of  things  do  indeed  become
wonderful;  viz.  when  they  are  applied  to  matters,  mixed  and  prepared  in  fit
seasons  to  give  them  life,  by  procuring  life  for  them  from  the  stars,  our  own


30


Natural  /IDagic.


spirit  powerfully  co-operating  therewith;  for  there  is  so  a great  a power  in
prepared  matters,  which  we  see  do  then  receive  life,  when  a perfect  mixture
of  qualities  do  break  the  former  contrariety;  for  so  much  the  more  perfect
life  things  receive,  by  as  much  the  temper  and  composition  is  free  from  con-
trariety. Now  the  heavens,  as  a prevailing  cause,  do,  from  the  beginning  of
every  thing,  (to  be  generated  by  the  concoction  and  perfect  digestion  of  the
matter)  together  with  life,  bestow  celestial  influences  and  wonderful  gifts,
according  to  the  capacity  that  is  in  that  life  and  sensible  soul  to  receive  more
noble  and  sublime  virtues.  For  the  celestial  virtue  otherwise  lies  asleep,  as
sulphur  kept  from  flame  ; but  in  living  bodies  it  doth  always  burn,  as  kindled
sulphur,  which,  by  its  vapour,  fills  all  the  places  that  are  near.

There  is  a book  called,  “ A Book  of  the  Laws  of  Pluto,”  which  speaks  of
monstrous  generations,  which  are  not  produced  according  to  the  laws  of
Nature.  Of  these  things  which  follow  we  know  to  be  true ; viz.  of  worms
are  generated  gnats;  of  a horse,  wasps;  of  a calf  and  ox,  bees.  Take  a living
crab,  his  legs  being  broken  off,  and  he  buried  under  the  earth,  a scorpion  is
produced.  If  a duck  be  dried  into  powder,  and  put  into  water,  frogs  are
soon  generated;  but  if  he  be  baked  in  a pie,  and  cut  into  pieces,  and  be  put
in  a moist  place  under  ground,  toads  are  generated.  Of  the  herb  garden-
basil,  bruised,  and  put  between  two  stones,  are  generated  scorpions.  Of  the
hairs  of  a menstruous  woman,  put  under  dung,  are  bred  serpents ; and  the
hair  , of  a horse’s  tail,  put  into  water,  receives  life,  and  is  turned  into  a most
pernicious  worm.  And  there  is  an  art  wherewith  a hen,  sitting  upon  eggs,
may  be  generated  the  form  of  a man,  which  I myself  know  how  to  do,  and
which  magicians  call  the  mandrake,  and  it  hath  in  it  wonderful  virtues.

You  must,  therefore,  know  which  and  what  kind  of  matters  are  either  of
art  or  nature,  begun  or  perfected,  or  compounded  of  more  things,  and  what
celestial  influences  they  are  able  to  receive.  For  a congruity  of  natural
things  is  sufficient  for  the  receiving  of  influence  from  celestial ; because,
nothing  hindering,  the  celestials  send  forth  their  light  upon  inferiors ; they
suffer  no  matter  to  be  destitute  of  their  virtue.  Wherefore  as  much  matter
as  is  perfect  and  pure  is,  as  we  before  said,  fitted  to  receive  celestial  in-
fluences; for  that  is  the  binding  and  continuing  of  the  matter  of  the  soul  to
the  world,  which  doth  daily  flow  in  upon  things  natural,  and  all  things  which
Nature  hath  prepared , that  it  is  impossible  that  a prepared  matter  should  not
receive  life,  or  a more  noble  form.

©f  3Blnt)in0.  We  have  so  far  spoken  concerning  the  great  virtues,  and
wonderful  efficacy,  of  natural  things;  it  remains  now  that  we  speak  of  a
wonderful  power  and  faculty  of  fascination;  or,  more  properly,  a magical  and
occult  binding  of  men  into  love  or  hatred,  sickness  or  health; — also  the  bind-


Natural  /IDaQtc.


31


ing  of  thieves,  that  they  cannot  steal  in  any  place ; or  to  bind  them  that  they
cannot  remove,  from  whence  they  may  be  detected ; — the  binding  of  mer-
chants that  they  cannot  buy  nor  sell;  the  binding  of  an  army,  that  they  cannot
pass  over  any  bounds ; the  binding  of  ships,  so  that  no  wind,  though  ever  so
strong,  shall  be  able  to  carry  them  out  of  that  harbour; — the  binding  of  a
mill,  that  it  cannot,  by  any  means  whatsoever,  be  turned  to  work; — the  bind-
ing of  a cistern,  or  fountain,  that  the  water  cannot  be  drawn  up  out  of  them ;
— the  binding  of  the  ground,  so  that  nothing  will  bring  forth  fruit,  or  flourish
in  it;  also,  that  nothing  can  be  built  upon  it; — the  binding  of  fire,  that,
though  it  be  ever  so  strong,  it  shall  burn  no  combustible  thing  that  is  put  to
it; — also,  the  binding  of  lightnings  and  tempests,  that  they  shall  do  no  hurt;
— the  binding  of  dogs  that  they  cannot  bark ; — also,  the  binding  of  birds  and
wild  beasts,  that  they  shall  not  be  able  to  run  or  fly  away;  and  things  familiar
to  these,  which  are  hardly  creditable,  yet  known  by  experience.  Now  how
it  is  that  these  kind  of  bindings  are  made  and  brought  to  pass,  we  must  know.
They  are  thus  done : by  sorceries,  collyries,  unguents,  potions,  binding  to  and
hanging  up  of  talismans,  by  charms,  incantations,  strong  imaginations,  affec-
tions, passion,  images,  characters,  enchantments,  imprecations,  lights,  and  by
sounds,  numbers,  words,  names,  invocations,  swearings,  conjurations,  consec-
rations, and  the  like.

SOrCCrtCS.  The  force  of  sorceries  are,  no  doubt,  very  powerful;  indeed,
they  are  able  to  confound,  subvert,  consume,  and  change  all  inferior  things;
likewise  there  are  sorceries  by  which  we  can  suspend  the  faculties  of  men
and  beasts.  Now,  as  we  have  promised,  we  will  shew  what  some  of  these
kind  of  sorceries  are,  that,  by  the  example  of  these,  there  may  be  a way
opened  for  the  whole  subject  of  them.  Of  these,  the  first  is  menstruous  blood,
which,  how  much  power  it  has  in  sorcery,  we  will  now  consider: — -First,  if  it
comes  over  new  wine,  it  will  turn  it  sour ; and  if  it  does  but  touch  a vine,  it
will  spoil  it  for  ever;  and,  by  its  very  touch,  it  renders  all  plants  and  trees
barren,  and  those  newly  set,  die;  it  burns  up  all  the  herbs  in  the  garden,  and
makes  fruit  fall  from  trees ; it  makes  dim  the  brightness  of  a looking-glass,
dulls  the  edges  of  knives  and  razors,  dims  the  beauty  of  polished  ivory,  and
makes  iron  rusty ; it  likewise  makes  brass  rusty,  and  to  smell  very  strong ; by
the  taste,  it  makes  dogs  run  mad,  and,  being  thus  mad,  if  they  once  bite  any
one,  that  wound  is  incurable;  it  destroys  whole  hives  of  bees,  and  drives
them  away,  if  it  does  but  touch  them ; it  makes  linen  black  that  is  boiled
with  it;  it  makes  mares  cast  their  foals  by  touching  them  with  it,  and  women
miscarry ; it  makes  asses  barren  if  they  eat  of  the  corn  touched  by  it.  The
ashes  of  menstruous  clothes  cast  upon  purple  garments,  that  are  to  be  washed,
change  their  colour,  and  likewise  take  away  the  colour  of  flowers.  It  also


32


Natural  fl&agtc.


drives  away  tertian  and  quartan  agues,  if  it  be  put  into  the  wool  of  a black
ram,  and  tied  up  in  a silver  bracelet;  as  also  if  the  soles  of  the  patient’s  feet
be  anointed  therewith,  and  especially  if  it  be  done  by  the  woman  herself,  the
patient  not  knowing  what  she  uses.  It  likewise  cures  the  falling  sickness;
but  most  especially  it  cures  them  that  are  afraid  of  water  or  drink  after  they
are  bitten  by  a mad  dog,  if  only  a menstruous  cloth  be  put  under  the  cup.
Likewise,  if  a menstruous  woman  shall  walk  naked,  before  sun-rise,  in  a field
of  standing  corn,  all  hurtful  things  perish ; but  if  after  sun-rise,  the  corn
withers;  also,  they  are  able  to  expel  hail,  rain,  thunders  and  lightnings;
more  of  which  Pliny  mentions.  Know  this,  that  if  they  happen  at  the  de-
crease of  the  moon,  they  are  a much  greater  poison  than  in  the  increase,  and
yet  much  greater  if  they  happen  between  the  decrease  and  change ; but  if
they  happen  in  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  moon,  they  are  a most  incurable
and  violent  poison.  But  they  are  of  the  greatest  force,  when  they  happen  in
the  first  years  of  the  virginity,  for  then  if  they  but  touch  the  door-posts  of  a
house,  no  mischief  can  take  effect  in  it.  And  some  say  that  the  threads  of
any  garment  touched  therewith  cannot  be  burnt,  and  if  they  are  cast  into  a
fire,  it  will  spread  no  farther.  Also  it  is  noted,  that  the  root  of  piony  being
given  with  castor,  and  smeared  over  with  a menstruous  cloth,  it  certainly
cureth  the  falling  sickness.

Again,  let  the  stomach  of  a hart  be  roasted,  and  to  it  be  put  a perfume
made  with  a menstruous  cloth;  it  will  make  cross-bows  useless  for  the  killing
of  any  game.  The  hairs  of  a menstruous  woman,  put  under  dung,  breeds
serpents  ; and  if  they  are  burnt,  will  drive  away  serpents  with  the  fume.  So
great  and  powerful  a poison  is  in  them,  that  they  are  a poison  to  poisonous
creatures.

We  next  come  to  speak  of  hippomanes,  which,  amongst  sorceries,  are  not
accounted  the  least:  and  this  is  a little  venemous  piece  of  flesh,  the  size  of  a
fig,  and  black,  which  is  in  the  forehead  of  a colt  newly  foaled,  which,  unless
the  mare  herself  doth  presently  eat,  she  will  hardly  ever  love  her  foies,  or  let
them  suck ; and  this  is  a most  powerful  philter  to  cause  love,  if  it  be  pow-
dered, and  drank  in  a cup  with  the  blood  of  him  that  is  in  love : such  a
potion  was  given  to  Medea  by  Jason.

There  is  another  sorcery  which  is  called  hippomanes,  viz.  a venomous
liquor  issuing  out  of  the  share  of  a mare  at  the  time  she  lusts  after  the  horse.
The  civet-cat,  also,  abounds  with  sorceries ; for  the  posts  of  a door  being
touched  with  her  blood,  the  arts  of  jugglers  and  sorcerers  are  so  invalid  that
evil  spirits  can  by  no  means  be  called  up,  or  compelled  to  talk  with  them:  —
This  is  Pliny’s  report.  Also,  those  that  are  anointed  with  the  oil  of  her  left
foot,  being  boiled  with  the  ashes  of  the  ancle  bone  of  the  same  and  the  blood
of  a weasel,  shall  become  odious  to  all.  The  same,  also,  is  to  be  done  with


Natural  /Iftapic.


33


the  eye  being  decocted.  If  any  one  hath  a little  of  the  strait-gut  of  this
animal  about  him,  and  it  is  bound  to  the  left  arm,  it  is  a charm ; that  if  he
does  but  look  upon  a woman,  it  will  cause  her  to  follow  him  at  all  oppor-
tunities ; and  the  skin  of  this  animal’s  forehead  withstands  witchcraft.

We  next  come  to  speak  of  the  blood  of  a basilisk,  which  magicians  call  the
blood  of  Saturn. — This  procures  (by  its  virtue)  for  him  that  carries  it  about
him,  good  success  of  petitions  from  great  men ; likewise  makes  him  amazingly
successful  in  the  cure  of  diseases,  and  the  grant  of  any  privilege.  They  say,
also,  that  a tike,  if  it  be  taken  out  of  the  left  ear  of  a dog,  and  it  be  altogether
black,  if  the  sick  person  shall  answer  him  that  brought  it  in,  and  who,  stand-
ing at  his  feet,  shall  ask  him  concerning  his  disease,  there  is  certain  hope  of
life;  and  that  he  shall  die  if  he  make  him  no  answer.  They  say,  also,  that
a stone  bitten  by  a mad  dog  causes  discord,  if  it  be  put  into  drinks;  and  if
any  one  shall  put  the  tongue  of  a dog,  dried,  into  his  shoe,  or  some  of  the
powder,  no  dog  is  able  to  bark  at  him  who  hath  it;  and  more  powerful  this,  if
the  herb  hound’s-tongue  be  put  with  it.  And  the  membrane  of  the  secundine
of  a bitch  does  the  same;  likewise,  dogs  will  not  bark  at  him  who  hath  the
heart  of  a dog  in  his  pocket.

The  red  toad  (Pliny  says)  living  in  briers  and  brambles,  is  full  of  sorceries,
and  is  capable  of  wonderful  things:  there  is  a little  bone  in  his  left  side,
which  being  cast  into  cold  water,  makes  it  presently  hot ; by  which,  also,  the
rage  of  dogs  are  restrained,  and  their  love  procured,  if  it  be  put  in  their
drink,  making  them  faithful  and  serviceable ; if  it  be  bound  to  a woman,  it
stirs  up  lust.  On  the  contrary,  the  bone  which  is  on  the  right  side  makes  hot
water  cold,  and  it  binds  it  so  that  no  heat  can  make  it  hot  while  it  there  re-
mains. It  is  a certain  cure  for  quartans,  if  it  be  bound  to  the  sick  in  a
snake’s  skin ; and  like- wise  cures  all  fevers,  the  St.  Anthony’s  fire,  and  re-
strains love  and  lust.  And  the  spleen  and  heart  are  effectual  antidotes
against  the  poisons  of  the  said  toad.  Thus  much  Pliny  writes.

Also,  it  is  said,  that  a sword  with  which  a man  is  slain  hath  wonderful
power;  for  if  the  snaffle  of  a bridle,  or  bit,  or  spurs,  be  made  of  it,  with  these
a horse  ever  so  wild  is  tamed,  and  made  gentle  and  obedient.  They  say,  if  we
dip  a sword,  with  which  any  one  was  beheaded,  in  wine,  that  it  cures  the
quartan,  the  sick  being  given  to  drink  of  it.  There  is  a liquor  made,  by
which  men  are  made  as  raging  and  furious  as  a bear,  imaging  themselves  in
every  respect  to  be  changed  into  one  ; and  this  is  done  by  dissolving  or  boil-
ing the  brains  and  heart  of  that  animal  in  new  wine,  and  giving  any  one  to
drink  out  of  a skull,  and,  while  the  force  of  the  draught  operates,  he  will
fancy  every  living  creature  to  be  a bear  like  to  himself ; neither  can  any
thing  divert  or  cure  him  till  the  fumes  and  virtue  of  the  liquor  are  entirely
expended,  no  other  distemper  being  perceivable  in  him.


34


Natural  Magic.


The  most  certain  cure  of  a violent  head-ache,  is  to  take  any  herb  growing
upon  the  top  of  the  head  of  an  image;  the  same  being  bound,  or  hung
about  one  with  a red  thread,  it  will  soon  allay  the  violent  pain  thereof.

flnagfcal  3Li(jbtS.  There  are  made,  artificially,  some  kinds  of  lamps,
torches,  candles,  and  the  like,  of  some  certain  and  appropriate  materials  and
liquors  opportunely  gathered  and  collected  for  this  purpose,  which,  when
they  are  lighted  and  shine  alone,  produce  some  wonderful  effects.  There  is
a poison  from  mares,  after  copulation,  which,  being  lighted  in  torches  com-
posed of  their  fat  and  marrow,  doth  represent  on  the  walls  a monstrous  de-
formity of  horses’  heads,  which  thing  is  both  easy  and  pleasant  to  do : the
like  may  be  done  of  asses  and  flies.  And  the  skin  of  a serpent  or  snake,
lighted  in  a green  lamp,  makes  the  images  pf  the  same  to  appear;  and  grapes
produce  the  same  effect,  if,  when  they  are  in  their  flowers,  you  shall  take  a
phial,  and  bind  it  to  them,  filled  with  oil,  and  shall  let  them  remain  so  till
they  are  ripe,  and  then  the  oil  be  lighted  in  a lamp,  you  shall  see  a prodi-
gious quantity  of  grapes ; and  the  same  in  other  fruits.  If  centaury  be  mixed
with  honey  and  the  blood  of  a lapwing,  and  be  put  in  a lamp,  they  that  stand
about  will  be  of  a gigantic  stature ; and  if  it  be  lighted  in  a clear  evening,
the  stars  will  seem  scattered  about.

The  ink  of  the  cuttle-fish  being  put  into  a lamp,  makes  Blackamores  appear.
So,  also,  a candle  made  of  some  saturnine  things,  such  as  man’s  fat  and  mar-
row, the  fat  of  a black  cat,  with  the  brains  of  a crow  or  raven,  which  being
extinguished  in  the  mouth  of  a man  lately  dead,  will  afterwards,  as  often  as
it  shines  alone,  bring  great  horror  and  fear  upon  the  spectators  about  it.

Of  such  like  torches,  candles,  lamps,  &c.,  (of  which  we  shall  speak  further
in  our  Book  of  Magnetism  and  Mummies)  Hermes  speaks  largely  of;  also
Plato  and  Chyrannides ; and,  of  later  writers,  Albertus  Magnus  makes  parti-
cular mention  of  the  truth  and  efficacy  of  these,  in  a treatise  on  these  particu-
lar things,  relative  to  lights,  &c.

©f  tbe  Htt  of  ^fascination.  We  call  fascination  a binding,  because  it
is  effected  by  a look,  glance,  or  observation,  in  which  we  take  possession  of
the  spirit,  and  overpower  the  same,  of  those  we  mean  to  fascinate  or  suspend;
for  it  comes  through  the  eyes,  and  the  instrument  by  which  we  fascinate  or
bind  is  a certain,  pure,  lucid,  subtil  spirit,  generated  out  of  the  ferment  of  the
purer  blood  by  the  heat  of  the  heart,  and  the  firm,  determined,  and  ardent
will  of  the  soul  which  directs  it  to  the  object  previously  disposed  to  be  fasci-
nated. This  doth  always  send  forth  by  the  eyes,  rays  or  beams,  carrying  with
them  a pure  subtil  spirit  or  vapour  into  the  eye  or  blood  of  him  or  her  that  is
opposite.  So  the  eye,  being  opened  and  intent  upon  any  one  with  a strong


fllatural  flDagtc.


35

imagination,  doth  dart  its  beams,  which  are  the  vehicle  of  the  spirit,  into
whatever  we  will  affect  or  bind,  which  spirit  striking  the  eye  of  them  who
are  fascinated,  being  stirred  up  in  the  heart  and  soul  of  him  that  sends  them
forth,  and  possessing  the  breast  of  them  who  are  struck,  wounds  their  hearts,
infects  their  spirits,  and  overpowers  them.

Know,  likewise,  that  in  witches,  those  are  most  bewitched,  who,  with  often
looking,  direct  the  edge  of  their  sight  to  the  edge  of  the  sight  of  those  who
bewitch  or  fascinate  them;  whence  arose  the  saying  of  “Evil  eyes,  &c.”
For  when  their  eyes  are  reciprocally  bent  one  upon  the  other,  and  are  joined
beams  to  beams,  and  lights  to  lights,  then  the  spirit  of  the  one  is  joined  to  the
spirit  of  the  other,  and  then  are  strong  ligations  made ; and  most  violent  love
is  stirred  up,  only  with  a sudden  looking  on,  as  it  were,  with  the  darting  a
look,  or  piercing  into  the  very  inmost  of  the  heart,  whence  the  spirit  and
amorous  blood,  being  thus  wounded,  are  carried  forth  upon  the  lover,  and
enchanter;  no  otherwise  than  the  spirit  and  the  blood  of  him  that  is  murdered
is  upon  the  murderer,  who,  if  standing  near  the  body  killed,  the  blood  flows
afresh,  which  thing  has  been  tried  by  repeated  experiments.

So  great  power  is  there  in  fascination  that  many  uncommon  and  wonderful
things  are  thereby  effected,  especially  when  the  vapors  of  the  eyes  are  sub-
servient to  the  affection;  therefore  collyries,  ointments,  alligations,  &c.,  are  used
to  affect  and  corroborate  the  spirit  in  this  or  that  manner:  to  induce  love,
they  use  venereal  collyriums,  as  hippomanes,  blood  of  doves,  &c.  To  induce
fear,  they  use  martial  collyriums,  or  the  eyes  of  wolves,  bear’s  fat,  and  the
civet-cat.  To  procure  misery,  or  sickness,  they  use  saturnine,  and  so  on.

Thus  much  we  have  thought  proper  to  speak  concerning  Natural  Magic,
in  which  we  have,  as  it  may  be  said,  only  opened  the  first  chamber  of  Nature’s
storehouse;  indeed  we  should  have  inserted  many  more  things  here , but  as
they  fall  more  properly  under  the  heads  of  Magnetism , Mummy , &c.,  to
which  we  refer  the  reader,  we  shall  take  our  leave  of  the  reader  for  the
present,  that  we  may  give  him  time  to  breathe,  likewise  to  digest  what  he  has
here  feasted  upon;  and,  while  he  is  preparing  to  enter  the  unlocked  chambers
of  Magic  and  Nature,  we  will  procure  him  a rich  service  of  most  delicious
meats,  fit  for  the  hungry  and  thirsty  traveller  through  the  vast  labyrinths  of
wisdom  and  true  science.

END  OF  THE  NATURAL  MAGIC.

NOTE.  It  seems  unnecessary  to  add  that  all  these  things  are  not  to  be  taken  in  their  external  and
literal  sense.  The  old  philosophers  always  clothed  their  writings  with  metaphor  and  allegory,  in
which  Mr.  Barrett  himself  seems  to  have  indulged  to  the  fullest  extent.  They  never  gave  detailed
descriptions  of  processes  that  could  be  followed  out  by  any  one  not  possessing  the  necessary  Magic
(Magnetic)  Power  and  those  who  possess  this  power  will  hardly  require  such  descriptons  wherein  alle-
gories are  so  strangely  mixed  with  truths.  The  literal  interpretation  and  practice  of  the  filthy  things  in
the  preceeding  pages,  will  be  productive  of  no  results  without  the  Key — one  should  always  bear  in  mind
that  we  are  dealing  with  finer  essences  and  forces,  not  with  such  gross  and  vile  materials.  W.W.H.


JEpfstle  to  flfmseus.

“Thou,  O,  Museus!  whose  mind  is  high,

“ Observe  my  words,  and  read  them  with  thine  eye ;
“These  secrets  in  thy  sacred  breast  repone,

“ And  in  thy  journey  think  of  God  alone ;

“ The  Author  of  all  things,  that  cannot  die ;

“ Of  whom  we  now  shall  speak ”


fTELL  thee  here,  Museus,  to  observe  our  words,  and  read  them  with
thine  eye,  that  is,  the  eye  of  thine  understanding;  for,  know,  there  are
many  that  hear  us  speak,  that  read  not  the  meaning  of  our  words.
Wherefore  shouldst  thou  contemplate  these  mysteries  with  so  much  constancy
of  mind,  if  thou  didst  not  perceive  in  them  some  great  good  most  desirable  ?
— Listen,  then,  O,  young  man,  and  hear  our  words!  We  will  shew  thee  the
dangerous  precipice  of  vanity  and  head-long  desire  — we  will  describe  to  thee
the  stubborn  and  fatal  will  of  our  passions,  even  with  tears  of  contrition,  and
heartfelt  compassion  for  thy  inexperience  — we  will  lead  thee,  as  it  were,  by
the  hand,  through  those  labyrinths  of  vice,  wherewith  thou  art  daily  sur-
rounded ; and,  however  prejudiced  thou  mightest  be  against  the  receiving  of
our  doctrine,  yet,  be  assured,  we  have  in  our  possession  the  magical  virtue
and  power  of  binding  thee  to  our  principles,  and  making  thee  happy,  in  spite
of  thyself.  Here  is  a great  secret!  thou  shalt  say  — every  man  wishes  to  be
happy  — which  I grant;  but  my  answer  is  — most  men  prevent  their  own
happiness;  they  destroy  it,  by  suffering  themselves  to  be  governed  by  the
outward  principle  of  the  flesh,  thinking  the  greatest  good  to  be  in  the  satisfy-
ing of  their  carnal  appetites,  or  in  the  amassing  together  heaps  of  wealth,
whereby  they  thrust  down  the  meek  and  poor,  raising  up  the  standards  of
Pride,  Envy,  and  Oppression.  These  things  every  day’s  experience  confirms;
nay,  there  are  some  so  blind,  that,  in  the  possession  of  much  wealth,  they  think
there  is  nothing  beyond  it ; insomuch,  that  they  triumph  in  lust , oppression ,
revenge , and  contumely.  But  how  is  it,  thou  wilt  say,  that,  seeing  man  is  a
reasonable  being,  he  can  possibly  give  up  his  government  so  easily  ? — I say,
when  man  suffers  the  unreasonable  and  bestial  part  to  deprave  him,  then  he
immediately  becomes  a slave,  (and  the  vilest  of  slavery  is  that  which  deprives


Bptstle  to  fTOuseus.


38

man  of  his  social  virtues;)  for  then,  although  in  the  possession  of  great  world-
ly things,  such  as  houses,  estates,  and  all  other  temporal  gifts,  yet  he  becomes
an  immediate  instrument  to  the  Prince  of  this  World  and  the  Powers  of  Dark-
ness, seeing  that  those  riches  he  inherits  are  merely  given  him  in  this  life,  to
bestow  upon  others  those  necessaries  and  comforts  which  he  himself  does  not
feel  the  want  of,  and  by  which  he  might,  if  not  blinded  by  his  passions  and
lusts,  secure  himself  an  eternal  and  incorruptible  treasure.  But  he  who  pos-
sesses treasures  without  mercy,  liberality,  bounty,  charity,  &c.,  robs  the  Eternal
Author  of  all  good,  of  the  honour  due  unto  him,  and,  in  short,  is  working
destruction  to  his  own  soul;  his  riches,  instead  of  benefitting  himself  and  oth-
ers, eventually  and  finally  terminates  as  a curse  : while  he  lives  here  he  is  a
scourge  to  society;  and,  after  he  leaves  this,  it  is  plain  enough  pointed  out  in
the  New  Testament  what  will  be  his  situation  and  condition.

Therefore,  thou  young  man,  that  hast  but  a few  years  to  live,  study  how  to
attain  the  stone  we  teach  of;  it  will  protract  the  beauty  of  thy  youth,  though
thou  shouldst  live  for  centuries — it  will  ever  supply  thee  with  the  means  of
comforting  the  afflicted ; insomuch,  that  when  thou  hast  attained  this  truly
desirable  and  most  perfect  talisman,  thy  life  will  become  soft  and  pleasant;
no  cares,  nor  corroding  pangs  — no  self-torment  will  ever  invade  thy  mind;
neither  shalt  thou  want  the  means  to  be  happy,  in  respect  of  the  possession  of
the  goods  of  this  life,  but  shalt  have  abundantly.  But  how,  and  from  what
source,  all  this  is  to  proceed  — out  of  what  thing,  or  matter  thou  shalt  attain
thy  wished-for  end — the  studying  of  the  ensuing  Treatise  will  sufficiently
shew.

Thy  Friend,

F.  B.


2Ucbymt\\

fT  is  not  necessary  here  to  enter  into  a long  detail  of  the  merits  of
Alchymical  Authors  and  Philosophers;  suffice  it  to  say,  that  Alchymy,
the  grand  touch-stone  of  natural  wisdom  is  of  Divine  origin  : it  was
brought  down  from  Heaven  by  the  Angel  Uriel.  Zoroaster,  the  first  philoso-
pher by  fire,  made  pure  gold  from  all  the  seven  metals;  he  brought  the  sun
ten  times  brighter  from  the  bed  of  Saturn,  and  fixed  it  with  the  moon,  who
thereby  copulating,  begot  a numerous  offspring  of  an  immortal  nature,  a pure
living  spiritual  sun,  burning  in  the  refulgency  of  its  own  divine  light,  a seed
of  a sublime  and  fiery  nature,  a vigorous  progenitor.  This  Zoroaster  was  the
father  of  alchymy,  illumined  divinely  from  above ; he  knew  every  thing,  yet
seemed  to  know  nothing ; his  precepts  of  art  were  left  in  hieroglyphics,  yet  in
such  sort  that  none  but  the  favourites  of  Heaven  ever  reaped  benefit  thereby.
He  was  the  first  who  engraved  the  pure  Cabala  in  most  pure  gold,  and,  when
he  died,  resigned  it  to  his  Father,  who  liveth  eternally,  yet  begot  him  not:
that  Father  gives  it  to  his  sons,  who  follow  the  precepts  of  Wisdom  with
vigilance,  ingenuity,  and  industry,  and  with  a pure,  chaste,  and  free  mind.

Hermes,  Trismegistus,  Geber,  Artephius,  Bacon,  Helmont,  Lully,  and  Basil
Valentine,  have  written  most  profoundly,  yet  abstrusely,  and  all  declare  not.
the  thing  sought  for.  Some  say  they  were  forbid ; others  that  they  declared
it  obviously  and  intelligibly,  yet  some  few  little  points  they  kept  to  them-
selves. However  far  off  the  main  point  they  lead  us,  of  this  be  sure, — that
something  valuable  is  to  be  drained,  as  it  were,  out  of  each.

Geber  is  good — Artephius  is  better  — but  Flammel  is  best  of  all;  — and
better  still  than  these  is  the  instructions  we  give ; for  with  them  a man
(following  our  directions)  shall  never  want  gold;  therefore  to  be  an  adept
is  possible,  but  first  “ seek  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  all  these  things  shall  be
added  unto  you.”  This  is  truth  incontrovertible,  and  herein  lies  a vast
secret  — “ seek  and  ye  shall  find ; ” — but  remember,  whatsoever  ye  ask,  that
shall  ye  receive.

The  cabala,  in  its  utmost  purity,  is  contained  in  the  many  precepts  given
in  this  book.  The  cabala  enables  us  to  understand  — to  bring  our  under-
standings to  act,  and,  by  that  means,  to  attain  knowledge; — knowledge


Blcbsmg.


40

makes  us  the  children  of  God  — God  makes  whom  he  pleases  adepts  in  wis-
dom. To  be  an  adept,  according  to  God’s  will,  is  no  contemptible  calling.

The  noble  and  virtuous  Brethren  of  the  Rosy  Cross  holds  this  truth
sacred  — that  “ Virtue  flies  from  no  man ; ” therefore  how  desirable  a thing  is
Virtue.  She  teaches  us,  first,  wisdom,  then  charity,  love,  mercy,  faith,  and
constancy;  all  these  appertain  to  Virtue;  therefore  it  is  physically  possible
for  any  well-inclined  man  to  become  an  adept,  provided  he  lays  aside  his
pride  of  reasoning,  all  obstinacy,  blindness,  hypocrisy,  incredulity,  supersti-
tion, deceit,  &c.

An  adept,  therefore,  is  one  who  not  only  studies  to  do  God’s  will  upon
earth,  in  respect  of  his  moral  and  religious  duties;  but  who  studies,  and
ardently  prays  to  his  benevolent  Creator  to  bestow  on  him  wisdom  and
knowledge  from  the  fulness  of  his  treasury ; and  he  meditates,  day  and  night,
how  he  may  attain  the  true  aqua  vita  — how  he  may  be  filled  with  the  grace
of  God;  which,  when  he  is  made  so  happy,  his  spiritual  and  internal  eye  is
open  to  a glorious  prospect  of  mortal  and  immortal  riches : — he  wants  not
food,  raiment , joy,  or  any  other  thing  — he  is  filled  with  the  celestial
spiritual  manna  — he  enjoys  the  marrow  and  fat  things  of  the  earth  — he
treads  the  wine-press,  not  of  the  wrath , but  of  the  mercy  of  God  — he  lives
to  the  glory  of  God,  and  dies  saying  “ Holy,  holy,  holy  Lord  of  Sabaoth !
blessed  is  thy  name,  now  and  for  evermore ! Amen.”

Therefore,  to  be  an  adept,  as  we  have  before  hinted,  is  to  know  thyself,
fear  God,  and  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself;  and  by  this  thou  shalt  come  to
the  fulfilment  of  thy  desires,  O,  man;  but  by  no  other  means  under  the  scope
of  Heaven.

When  thy  soul  shall  be  made  drunk  by  the  divine  ambrosial  nectar,  then
shall  thy  understanding  be  more  clear  than  the  noontide  sun ; — then,  by  thy
strong  and  spiritualized  intellectual  eye,  shalt  thou  see  into  the  great  treasury
of  Nature,  and  thou  shalt  praise  God  with  thy  whole  heart;  — then  wilt  thou
see  the  folly  of  the  world;  and  thou  shalt  unerringly  accomplish  thy  desire,
and  shalt  possess  the  true  Philosophers’  stone,  to  the  profit  of  thy  neighbour.
I say,  thou  shalt,  visibly  and  sensibly,  according  to  thy  corporal  faculties;
not  imaginary,  not  delusively,  but  real.

Helmont,  an  author  of  no  mean  repute,  avouches  that  he  has  actually  seen
the  stone  which  converts  base  metals  into  gold  ; that  he  has  seen  it  with  his
eyes,  and  handled  it  with  his  fingers : taken  from  his  own  relation  of  the  fact;
notwithstanding  Kircher’s  declamation  against  the  possibility  of  obtaining  it,
noting  them  all  who  professed  alchymy  to  be  a set  of  impostors  and  jugglers,
giving  no  better  an  exposition  of  their  process  of  transmutation  than  this  —
“ An  Alchymist,”  says  Kircher,  “ procures  or  desires  a crucible  to  be  brought,
wherein  is  put  lead  or  any  other  base  metal,  which,  while  in  fusion,  he  (the


Blcbgmg.


4t


Alchymist)  stirs  about  with  an  iron  rod,  and  then,”  he  says,  “ he  drops  in,
from  between  his  fingers,  a bit  of  gold;  and  after  stirring  up  for  some  time,
and  essay  being  made,  gold  is  found.”  This  is,  indeed,  a very  lame  method
of  exploding  alchymy;  but,  however,  to  leave  Kircher  as  much  in  the  dark  as
he  was,  we  shall  give  you  Van  Helmont’s  declaration,  a philosopher  of  much
greater  note  than  this  pseudo-chemist  Kircher.  Van  Helmont  says  — “I
have  divers  times  handled  that  stone  with  my  hands,  and  have  seen  a real
transmutation  of  saleable  quicksilver  with  mine  eyes,  which,  in  proportion,
did  exceed  the  powder  which  made  the  gold  in  some  thousand  degrees.

“It  was  of  the  colour  that  is  in  saffron,  being  weighty  in  its  powder,  and
shining  like  bruised  glass,  when  it  should  be  the  less  exactly  beaten.  But
there  was  once  given  unto  me  the  fourth  part  of  one  grain,  (I  call,  also,  a
grain  the  sixth  hundredth  part  of  an  ounce).  This  powder  I involved  in  wax,
scraped  off  a certain  letter,  lest,  in  casting  it  into  the  crucible,  it  should  be
dispersed,  through  the  smoak  of  the  coals  ; which  pellet  of  wax  I afterwards
cast  into  the  three-cornered  vessel  of  a crucible  upon  a pound  of  quicksilver,
hot  and  newly  bought;  and  presently  the  whole  quicksilver,  with  some  little
noise,  stood  still  from  flowing,  and  resided  like  a lump ; but  the  heat  of  that
argent  vive  was  as  much  as  might  forbid  melted  lead  from  recoagulating.
The  fire  being  straightway  after  increased  under  the  bellows,  the  metal  was
melted;  the  which,  the  vessel  of  fusion  being  broken,  I found  to  weigh  eight
ounces  of  the  most  pure  gold.

“Therefore,  a computation  being  made,  a grain  of  that  powder  doth  con-
vert nineteen  thousand  two  hundred  grains  of  impure  and  volatile  metal,
which  is  obliterable  by  the  fire,  into  true  gold.

“For  that  powder,  by  uniting  the  aforesaid  quicksilver  unto  itself,  pre-
served the  same,  at  one  instant,  from  an  eternal  rust,  putrefaction,  death,  and
torture,  of  the  fire,  howsoever  most  violent  it  was,  and  made  it  as  an  im-
mortal thing,  against  any  vigour  or  industry  of  art  and  fire,  and  transchanged
it  into  the  virgin  purity  of  gold;  at  leastwise  one  only  fire  of  coals  is  required
herein.”

By  which  we  see  that  so  learned  and  profound  a philosopher  as  Van
Helmont  could  not  so  easily  have  been  made  to  believe  that  there  existed  a
possibility  of  transmutation  of  base  metals  into  pure  gold,  without  he  had
actually  proved  the  same  by  experiment.

Again,  let  the  standing  monuments  of  Flammel’s  liberal  bounty  to  the  poor,
through  this  means,  to  be  seen  at  Paris  every  day,  stand  as  a testimony  to  the
truth  of  the  existing  possibility  of  transmutation.  Likewise,  Helmont  men-
tions a stone  that  he  saw,  and  had  in  his  possession,  which  cured  all  disorders,
the  plague  not  excepted.  I shall  relate  the  circumstance  in  his  own  words,
which  are  as  follow : —


42


Hlcbgm#-


“ There  was  a certain  Irishman,  whose  name  was  Butler,  being  some  time
great  with  James,  King  of  England,  he  being  detained  in  the  prison  of  the
Castle  of  Yilvord;  and  taking  pity  on  one  Baillius,  a certain  Franciscan
Monk,  a most  famous  preacher  of  Gallo-Britain,  who  was  also  imprisoned,
having  an  erisipelas  in  his  arm ; on  a certain  evening,  when  the  Monk  did
almost  despair,  he  swiftly  tinged  a certain  little  stone  in  a spoonful  of  almond-
milk,  and  presently  withdrew  it  thence.  So  he  says  to  the  keeper  — ‘Reach
this  supping  to  that  Monk ; and  how  much  soever  he  shall  take  thereupon,  he
shall  be  whole,  at  least  within  a short  hour’s  space.’  — Which  thing  even  so
came  to  pass,  to  the  great  admiration  of  the  keeper  and  the  sick  man,  not
knowing  from  whence  so  sudden  health  shone  upon  him,  seeing  that  he  was
ignorant  that  he  had  taken  any  thing  : for  his  left  arm,  being  before  hugely
swollen,  fell  down  as  that  it  could  scarcely  be  discerned  from  the  other.  On
the  morning  following,  I,  being  entreated  by  some  great  men,  came  to
Yilvord,  as  a witness  of  his  deeds;  therefore  I contracted  a friendship  with
Butler.

“ Soon  afterwards,  I saw  a poor  old  woman,  a laundress,  who,  from  the  age
of  sixteen  years,  had  laboured  with  an  intolerable  megrim,  cured  in  my  pres-
ence. Indeed  he,  by  the  way,  lightly  dipped  the  same  little  stone  in  a spoon-
ful of  oil  of  olives,  and  presently  cleansed  the  same  stone  by  licking  it  with  his
tongue,  and  laid  it  up  into  his  snuff-box  ; but  that  spoonful  of  oil  he  poured
into  a small  bottle  of  oil,  whereof  one  only  drop  he  commanded  to  be  anointed
on  the  head  of  the  aforesaid  old  woman,  who  was  thereby  straightway  cured,
and  remained  whole ; which  I attest  I was  amazed,  as  if  he  was  become  another
Midas;  but  he,  smiling,  said: —

‘ My  most  dear  friend,  unless  thou  come  hitherto,  so  as  to  be  able,  by  one
only  remedy,  to  cure  every  disease,  thou  shalt  remain  in  thy  young  beginnings ,
however  old  thou  shalt  become.’ — I easily  assented  to  this,  because  I had
learned  that  from  the  secrets  of  Paracelsus ; and  being  now  more  confirmed
by  sight  and  hope.  But  I willingly  confess,  that  that  new  mode  of  curing  was
unaccustomed  and  unknown  to  me:  I therefore  said,  that  a young  Prince  of
our  Court,  Viscount  of  Gaunt,  brother  to  the  Prince  of  Episuoy,  of  a very
great  House,  was  so  wholly  prostrated  by  the  gout,  that  he  henceforth  lay
only  on  one  side,  being  wretched,  and  deformed  with  many  knots:  he,
therefore,  taking  hold  of  my  right  hand,  said  — ‘Wilt  thou  that  I cure  the
young  man  ? I will  cure  him  for  thy  sake.’ — ‘ But,’  I replied,  ‘ he  is  of  that
obstinacy,  that  he  had  rather  die,  than  drink  one  only  medicinal  potion.’

‘Be  it  so,’  said  Butler;  ‘for  neither  do  I require  any  other  thing,  than  that
he  do,  every  morning,  touch  this  little  stone,  thou  seest,  with  the  top  of  his
tongue ; for  after  three  weeks  from  thence,  let  him  wash  the  painful  and  un-
painful knots  with  his  own  urine,  and  thou  shalt  soon  afterwards  see  him


BIcbgmg.  43

cured,  and  soundly  walking.  Go  thy  ways,  and  tell  him,  with  joy,  what  I
have  said.’

“ I therefore,  being  glad,  returned  to  Brussels,  and  told  him  what  Butler
had  said.

“ But  the  Potentate  answered  — « Go,  tell  Butler  that  if  he  shall  restore  me
as  thou  hast  said,  I will  give  him  as  much  as  he  shall  require ; — demand  the
price,  and  I will  willingly  sequester  that  which  is  deposited  for  his  security.

— And  when  I declared  the  thing  to  Butler,  on  the  day  following,  he  was
very  wrath,  and  said  — ‘That  Prince  is  mad,  or  witless  and  miserable,  and
therefore  will  I never  help  him : for  neither  do  I stand  in  need  of  his  money

— neither  do  I yield  — nor  am  I inferior  to  him.’  — Nor  could  I ever  induce
him,  afterwards,  to  perform  what  before  he  had  promised ; wherefore  I began
to  doubt  whether  the  things  I had  before  seen  were  dreams.

“ It  happened,  in  the  mean  time,  that  a friend,  overseer  and  master  of  the
glass-furnace  at  Antwerp,  being  exceedingly  fat,  most  earnestly  requested  of
Butler  that  he  might  be  freed  from  his  fatness;  unto  whom  Butler  offered  a
small  piece  of  that  little  stone,  that  he  might  once  every  morning  lick,  or
speedily  touch  it  with  the  top  of  his  tongue : and,  within  three  weeks,  I saw
his  breast  made  more  straight,  or  narrow,  by  one  span,  and  him  to  have  lived
no  less  whole  afterwards.  Wherefore  I began  again  to  believe  that  the  afore-
said gouty  Prince  might  have  been  cured,  according  to  the  manner  Butler  had
promised.

“ In  the  mean  time,  I sent  to  Yilvord,  to  Butler,  for  a remedy,  in  the  case
of  poison  given  me  by  a secret  enemy;  for  I miserably  languished  — all  my
joints  were  pained;  and  my  pulse,  vehement,  being  at  length  become  an  in-
termitting one,  did  accompany  the  faintings  of  my  mind,  and  extinguishment
of  my  strength.

“ Butler,  being  still  detained  in  prison,  commanded  my  house-hold  servant,
whom  I had  sent,  that  forthwith  he  should  bring  unto  him  a small  bottle  of
oil  of  olives;  and  his  little  stone,  aforesaid,  being  tinged  therein,  as  at  other
times,  he  sent  that  oil  unto  me ; and  told  the  servant,  that  with  one  only
small  drop  of  the  oil,  I should  anoint  only  one  place  of  the  pain,  or  all  the
places,  if  I would ; the  which  I did,  and  yet  felt  no  help  thereby.  In  the
mean  time,  my  enemy,  according  to  his  lot,  being  about  to  die,  bade  that
pardon  should  be  craved  of  me  for  his  sin ; so  I knew  that  I had  taken
poison,  the  which  I suspected ; and  therefore,  also,  I procured  with  all  care  to
extinguish  the  slow  venom,  which,  through  the  grace  of  God  favouring  me,  I
escaped.

“ Seeing,  that,  afterwards,  many  other  cures  were  performed  upon  certain
gentlewomen,  I asked  Butler  why  so  many  women  should  be  cured,  but  that
I (while  that  I sharply  conflicted  with  death  itself,  being  also  environed  with


44


Blcbgmg.


pains  of  all  my  joints  and  organs)  should  not  feel  any  ease  ? — But  he  asked
with  what  disease  I had  laboured?  — And  when  he  understood  that  poison
had  given  a beginning  to  the  disease,  he  said, — that,  as  the  cause  had  come
from  within  to  without,  the  oil  ought  to  be  taken  into  the  body,  or  the  stone
to  be  touched  with  the  tongue ; because  the  grief  being  cherished  within,
it  was  not  local  or  external;  and  also  observed,  that  the  oil  did,  by  degrees,
uncloath  itself  with  the  efficacy  of  healing,  because  the  little  stone  being
lightly  tinged  in  it,  it  had  not  pithily  charged  the  oil  throughout  its  whole
body,  but  had  only  ennobled  it  with  a delible  or  obliterable  besprinkling  of
its  odour ; for  truly  that  stone  did  present,  in  the  eyes  and  tongue,  sea-salt
spread  abroad,  or  rarified  ; and  it  is  sufficiently  known  that  salt  is  not  to  be
very  intimately  mixed  with  oil.

“ This  same  man,  also,  cured  an  Abbess,  who,  for  eighteen  years,  had  had
her  right  arm  swelled,  with  an  entire  deprivation  of  motion,  and  the  fingers
thereof  stiff  and  unmoveable,  only  by  the  touching  of  her  tongue  with  this
admirable  stone.

“ But  very  many  being  present  witnesses  of  these  same  wonders,  did  sus-
pect some  hidden  sorcery,  or  diabolical  craft;  for  the  common  people  have  it
for  an  ancient  custom,  that  whatsoever  honest  thing  their  ignorance  has  de-
termined not  to  comprehend,  they  do,  for  a privy  shift  of  their  ignorance,
refer  the  same  to  be  the  juggling  of  an  evil  spirit.  But  I could  never  decline
so  far,  because  the  remedy  was  supposed  to  be  natural ; for  neither  words,
ceremonies,  nor  any  other  suspected  thing,  was  required.  For  neither  is  it
lawful,  according  to  man’s  power  of  understanding,  to  refer  the  glory  of  God,
shewn  forth  in  Nature,  unto  the  devil.  For  none  of  those  people  had  re-
quired aid  of  Butler,  as  from  necromancy  any  way  suspected;  yea,  the  thing
was  at  first  made  trial  of  with  smiling,  and  without  faith  and  confidence;  yet
this  easy  method  of  curing  shall  long  remain  suspected  by  many ; for  the  wit
of  the  vulgar  being  inconstant  and  idle,  they  do  more  readily  consecrate  so
great  a bounty  of  restitution  unto  diabolical  contrivance,  than  to  Divine
goodness,  the  framer,  lover,  saviour,  refresher  of  human  nature,  and  the
father  of  the  poor.  And  these  vile  prejudices  are  not  only  inherent  in  the
common  people,  but  also  in  those  that  are  learned,  who  rashly  search  into
the  beginning  of  healing,  being  not  yet  instructed,  or  observing  the  common
and  blockish  rules ; because  they  are  always  wise  as  children,  who  have
never  gone  over  their  mother’s  threshold,  being  afraid  of  every  fable.  For
they  who  have  not  hitherto  known  the  whole  circuit  of  diseases  to  be  in-
cluded within  the  spirit  of  life,  which  maketh  the  assault ; or  if  they  here-
after, reading  my  studies  by  the  way,  shall  imprint  on  themselves  this
moment  or  concernment  of  healing ; nevertheless,  because  they  have  been  al-
ready before  accustomed  from  the  very  beginnings  of  their  studies,  to  the


HIcbgmfl.


45


precepts  of  the  humorists,  they  will  easily,  at  length,  depart  from  me,  and
leap  back  to  the  favourite  bigotry  and  ancient  opinions  of  the  schools.”

But  now  we  will  hasten  to  the  manner  of  preparation  necessary  to  qualify
a man  for  the  attainment  of  these  sublime  gifts.

Of  the  Preparation  of  a Man  to  qualify  him  for  the  Search  of  this  Treasure:
and  of  the  first  Matter  ( prima  materia)  of  the  Stone.

Lesson  I.  The  preparation  for  this  work  is  simply  this : — Learn  to  cast
away  from  thee  all  vile  affections — all  levity  and  inconstancy  of  mind;  let
all  thy  dealings  be  free  from  deceit  and  hypocrisy ; avoid  the  company  of
vain  young  men  ; hate  all  profligacy,  and  profane  speaking.

Lesson  II.  Keep  thy  own,  and  thy  neighbours’  secrets;  court  not  the
favours  of  the  rich;  despise  not  the  poor,  for  he  who  does  will  be  poorer
than  the  poorest.

Lesson  III.  Give  to  the  needy  and  unfortunate  what  little  thou  canst
spare ; for  he  that  has  but  little,  whatever  he  spares  to  the  miserable,  God
shall  amply  reward  him.

Lesson  IV.  Be  merciful  to  those  who  offend  thee,  or  who  have  injured
thee ; for  what  must  that  man’s  heart  be,  who  would  take  heavy  vengeance
on  a slight  offence?  Thou  shalt  forgive  thy  brother  until  seventy  times
seven.

Lesson  V.  Be  not  hasty  to  condemn  the  actions  of  others,  lest  thou
shouldst,  the  next  hour,  fall  into  the  very  same  error ; despise  scandal  and
tattling;  let  thy  words  be  few.

Lesson  VI.  Study  day  and  night,  and  supplicate  thy  Creator  that  he
would  be  pleased  to  grant  thee  knowledge  and  understanding;  and  that  the
pure  spirits  may  have  communication  with,  and  influence,  in  thee.

Lesson  VII.  Be  not  overcome  with  drunkenness;  for,  be  assured,  that
half  the  evils  that  befall  mankind  originate  in  drunkenness:  for  too  great  a
quantity  of  strong  liquors,  deprive  men  of  their  reason  ; then,  having  lost  the
use  of  the  faculty  of  their  judgment,  they  immediately  become  the  recipient  of
all  evil  influences,  and  are  justly  compared  to  weathercocks,  that  are  driven
hither  and  thither  by  every  gust  of  wind ; so  those  who  drown  the  reasonable
power,  are  easily  persuaded  to  the  lightest  and  most  frivolous  pursuits,  and,
from  these,  to  vices  more  gross  and  reprobate ; for  the  ministers  of  darkness
have  never  so  favourable  an  opportunity  of  insinuating  themselves  into  the
minds  and  hearts  of  men,  as  when  they  are  lost  in  intoxication.  I pray  you
to  avoid  this  dreadful  vice.

Lesson  VIII.  Avoid  gluttony,  and  all  excess  — it  is  very  pernicious,  and
from  the  Devil:  these  are  the  things  that  constantly  tempt  man,  and  by
which  he  falls  a prey  to  his  spiritual  adversary ; for  he  is  rendered  incapable


Hlcbflmg.


46

of  receiving  any  good  or  divine  gift.  Besides,  the  divine  and  angelic  powers
or  essences  delight  not  to  be  conversant  about  a man  who  is  defiled,  and
stinking  with  debauchery  and  excess.

Lesson  IX.  Covet  not  much  gold,  but  learn  to  be  satisfied  with  enough  ;
for  to  desire  more  than  enough,  is  to  offend  the  Deity.

Lesson  X.  Read  often  these  ten  preparatory  Lessons  to  fit  thee  for  the
great  work,  and  for  the  receiving  of  higher  things ; for  the  more  pure  thou
art  in  heart  and  mind,  by  so  much  quicker  shall  you  perceive  those  high
secrets  we  teach,  and  which  are  entirely  hid  from  the  discernment  of  the  vicious
and  depraved,  because  it  never  can  happen  that  such  a source  of  treasure
can  be  attained  merely  to  satisfy  our  more  gross,  earthly,  and  vain  desires  and
inclinations,  because  here  nothing  must  be  thought  to  be  grasped,  or  wrested
out  of  this  book,  but  to  the  fulfilling  of  a good  end  and  purpose.  When  thou
shalt  have  so  far  purified  thy  heart,  as  we  have  spoken  is  indispensably  neces-
sary for  the  receiving  of  every  good  thing,  thou  shalt  then  see  with  other
eyes  than  thou  dost  at  present — thy  spiritual  eye  will  be  opened,  and  thou
shalt  read  man  as  plain  as  thou  wilt  our  books;  but,  for  all  this,  depend  not  on
the  strength  of  thy  own  wisdom,  for  even  then,  when  we  think  our  hearts
secure,  if  we  do  not  watch  them  that  they  sleep  not,  the  Devil,  or  his  minis-
ters, immediately  take  us  at  this  unguarded  moment,  and  tempts  us  into  the
actual  commission  of  some  sin  or  other : either  he  excites  our  appetite  for
lust  and  concupiscence,  or  any  other  deadly  sin ; therefore,  using  our  blessed
Redeemer’s  words — “What  I say  unto  you,  I say  unto  you  all  — watch!”

Perhaps,  I do  not  doubt  but,  there  are  some  that  will  say,  when  they  look
at  our  works,  this  fellow  is  all  rant,  all  preaching  — he  tells  us  what  we  knew
before  as  well  as  himself.  To  such  I say,  let  them  read  our  book  but  twice ;
if  they  do  not  gather  something  that  they  will  acknowledge  precious,  (nay,
be  convinced  that  it  is  precious,  to  their  own  satisfaction)  I will  burn  these
writings,  and  they  shall  be  no  more  remembered  by  me.

To  conclude  this  Part:  we  say  that  the  First  Matter  ( Prima  Materia)
Adam  brought  with  him  out  of  Paradise,  and  left  it,  as  an  inheritance,  to  us
his  successors ; had  he  remained  in  his  original  purity,  he  would  have  been
permitted  to  have  used  it  himself;  but  the  eternal  fiat  was  passed,  that  he  was
to  “ earn  his  bread  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow ;”  therefore  he  could  not  effect
what  was  afterwards  performed  by  some  of  his  offspring.

Hermes  Trismegistus,  that  ancient  philosopher,  wrote  touching  the  attain-
ment of  this  stone,  which  he  pronounced  to  be  of  all  benefit  to  man,  and  one
of  the  greatest  blessings  he  could  possess;  and  although  his  writings  contain
much  of  the  excellency  of  truth,  being  wrapped  up  in  such  symbolical  figures,  it
renders  them  exceedingly  difficult  to  be  understood,  yet,  if  comprehended,  they,
no  doubt,  contain  some  very  great  secrets  by  which  mortal  man  may  profit.


Hlcbgmg.


47

Now  it  belongs  to  our  purpose  to  know  what  it  is  from  which  we  must  ex-
tract the  first  matter  of  this  stone,  to  go  on  with  our  process,  because  we  must
have  materials  to  work  upon;  for  all  philosophers  agree  that,  the  first  matter
being  found,  we  may  proceed  without  much  difficulty.  For  the  first  matter ,
(I  shall  speak  as  plainly  as  possible)  first,  the  grand  question  in  debate  is  —
Where  is  it  to  be  found?  — I say  it  is  to  be  found  in  ourselves.  We  all
possess  this  first  matter,  from  the  beggar  to  the  king;  every  mothers’  son
carries  it  about  him;  and,  could  our  ingenious  chemists  but  find  a process  for
the  extracting,  how  well  would  all  their  labours  be  repaid.  The  next  ques-
tion naturally  comes  to  us  — How  are  we  to  draw,  or  attract  the  secret  matter
of  the  stone  out  of  ourselves?  — Not  by  any  common  means;  and  yet  it  is  to
be  drawn  into  very  action,  and  that  by  the  most  simple  means,  and  in  a man-
ner that  the  attaining  of  the  philosophers’  stone  would  very  soon  follow  it.
I pray  you,  my  friend,  look  into  thyself,  and  endeavour  to  find  out  in  what
part  of  thy  composition  is  the  prima  materia  of  the  lapis  philosophorum , or
out  of  what  part  of  thy  substance  can  the  first  matter  of  our  stone  be  drawn
out.  Thou  sayest,  it  must  either  be  in  the  hair , sweat , or  excrement.  I say
in  none  of  these  thou  shalt  ever  be  able  to  find  it,  and  yet  thou  shalt  find  it  in
thyself.

Many  great  philosophers  and  chemists,  whom  I have  the  pleasure  to  know,
affirm  that,  admitting  of  the  possibility  of  transmutation,  it  ( i . e.  the  first
matter)  must  be  taken  from  the  purest  gold.  To  this  I say  it  must  not;
neither  has  it  anything  at  all  to  do  with  extrinsical  gold.  They  will  say  then
that  the  pure  ens  of  gold  may  be  drawn  from  gold  itself.  True,  it  may  be  so;
but  then  I would  ask  if  they  could  ever  produce  more  gold  than  that  out  of
which  the  soul  or  essence  was  extracted;  if  they  have,  they  have  indeed
found  out  a secret  beyond  the  powers  of  our  comprehension ; because  it  is
against  reason  to  suppose  that  if  a pound  of  gold  yields  a drachm  of  the  soul
or  essence,  that  that  only  will  tinge  any  more  than  a pound  of  purified  lead,
or  5 ; because  we  have  tried  various  experiments,  and  I have,  in  some  of  my
first  essays,  turned  both  lead  and  mercury  into  good  gold ; but  no  more  than
that  out  of  which  the  soul  was  extracted.  But,  however,  not  to  lose  our  time
in  vain  and  ridiculous  disputation,  know  that  whatever  prodigious  things  or
experiments  have  been  tried  with  respect  to  the  first  matter,  by  external  sub-
jects, either  in  the  mineral,  animal,  or  vegetable  kingdoms,  as  they  are  called,
I say  in  us  is  the  power  of  all  wonderful  things,  which  the  supreme  Creator
has,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  implanted  in  our  souls ; out  of  her  is  to  be  extracted
the  first  matter,  the  true  argent  vive , the  5 of  the  philosophers,  the  true  ens
of  O,  viz.  a spiritual  living  gold,  or  waterish  mercury,  or  first  matter,  which,
by  being  matured,  is  capable  of  transmuting  a thousand  pts.  of  impure  metal
into  good  and  perfect  gold,  which  endure  fire,  test,  or  cupel.


48  aicbgmp.

Of  the  manner  of  extracting  the  first  matter  of  the  philosophers'  stone,  and  the
use  it  is  put  to  in  purifying  the  imperfect  metals  and  transmuting  them
into  good  gold.

Lesson  XI.  Take  the  foregoing  instructions  as  thy  principal  instrument,
and  know  that  our  soul  has  the  power,  when  the  body  is  free,  as  we  before
said,  of  any  pollution,  the  heart  void  of  malice  and  offence;  I say  the  soul  is
then  a free  agent,  and  has  the  power,  spiritually  and  magically,  to  act  upon
any  matter  whatsoever;  therefore  I said  the  first  matter  is  in  the  soul;  and
the  extracting  of  it,  is  to  bring  the  dormant  power  of  the  pure,  living,  breath-
ing spirit  and  eternal  soul  into  act.  Note  well  that  every  agent  has  its  power
of  acting  upon  its  patient.  Every  essence  that  is  distilled  forth  is  received
into  a recipient,  but  that  recipient  must  first  be  made  clean.  Even  so  must  the
soul  and  heart  of  man : the  vile  affections  must  be  thrown  away,  and  trampled
under  foot;  then  shalt  thou  be  able  to  proceed  in  thy  work,  which  do  in  the
manner  following.

Lesson  XII.  The  expence  thou  must  be  at  will  be  but  a trifle:  all  the  in-
struments necessary  are  but  three,  viz.  a crucible,  an  egg  philosophical,  and  a
retort  with  its  receiver.  Put  your  fine  gold,  in  weight  about  5 dwts.,  file  it
up,  put  it  into  your  philosophic  egg,  pour  upon  it  the  twice  of  its  weight  of
the  best  Hungarian  5 , close  up  the  egg  with  an  Hermetic  seal,  put  it  for  three
months  in  horse-dung,  take  it  out  at  the  end  of  that  time,  and  see  what  kind
of  form  thy  gold  and  5 has  assumed;  take  it  out,  pour  on  it  half  its  weight
of  good  spirit  of  sal  ammon.,  set  them  in  a pot  full  of  sand  over  the  fire  in  the
retort,  let  them  distil  into  a pure  essence,  add  to  one  pt.  of  this  5 two  pts.  of
thy  water  of  life,  or  prima  materia , put  them  into  thy  philosophical  egg,  and
Lesson  XIII.

set  them  into  horse-dung  for  another  three  months;  then  take  them  out,  and
see  what  thou  hast — a pure  etherial  essence,  which  is  the  living  gold;  pour
this  pure  spiritual  liquor  upon  a drachm  of  molten  fine  gold,  and  you  will
find  that  which  will  satisfy  thy  hunger  and  thirsting  after  this  secret ; for  the
increase  of  thy  gold  will  seem  to  thee  miraculous,  as  indeed  it  is.  Take  it
to  a jeweller’s  or  goldsmith’s;  let  him  try  it  in  thy  presence,  and  thou  wilt
have  reason  to  bless  God  for  his  mercy  to  thee.  Do  thy  duty  as  he  has  com-
manded thee,  and  use  all  the  benefit  thou  shalt  receive,  in  actions  worthy  of
thy  nature.

Lesson  XIV.  When  thy  spiritual  eye  is  opened,  and  thou  shalt  begin  to
see  what  end  thou  wert  created,  thou  shalt  want  no  necessary  thing  either  for
thy  comfort  or  support;  only  keep  in  the  rules  we  have  prescribed  in  the  be-
ginning of  this  little  treatise  — Fear  God,  and  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself;
be  not  hasty  to  reveal  any  secrets  thou  mayest  learn,  for  the  good  spirits,  both


Hlcbgmg.  49

day  and  night,  will  be  thy  instructors,  and  will  continually  reveal  thee  many
secrets.  Think  not  that  thou  canst  either  profit  or  benefit  so  much  by  the  in-
struction of  those  who  profess  great  advantages  in  classical  education  and
high  schooling;  be  assured  they  are,  in  spiritual  knowledge,  much  in  the  dark:
for  he  who  desires  not  spiritual  knowledge  cannot  attain  it  by  any  means,  but
by,  first,  coming  to  God;  secondly,  by  purifying  his  own  heart;  thirdly,  by
submitting  himself  to  the  will  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  guide  and  direct  him  in
all  truth,  to  the  attaining  of  all  knowledge,  both  human  and  divine;  and  by
arrogating  nothing  to  our  own  power  or  strength,  but  by  referring  all  to  the
mercy  and  goodness  of  God. — Amen.


Book  tbe  Second


IT  is  necessary  that  we  should  know  and  understand  the  nature  and
quality  of  the  four  elements,  in  order  to  our  being  perfect  in  the
principles  and  ground-work  of  our  studies  in  the  Talismanic,  or
Magical  Art.

Therefore,  there  are  four  elements,  the  original  grounds  of  all  corporeal
things,  viz.  fire,  earth,  water,  and  air,  of  which  elements  all  inferior  bodies
are  compounded ; not  by  way  of  being  heaped  up  together,  but  by  transmuta-
tion and  union ; and  when  they  are  destroyed,  they  are  resolved  into  elements.
But  there  are  none  of  the  sensible  elements  that  are  pure ; but  they  are,  more
or  less,  mixed,  and  apt  to  be  changed  the  one  into  the  other ; even  as  earth,
being  moistened  and  dissolved,  becomes  water , but  the  same  being  made  thick
and  hard,  becomes  earth  again ; and  being  evaporated  through  heat  it  passes
into  air,  and  that  being  kindled  into  fire,  and  this  being  extinguished,  into  air
again,  but  being  cooled  after  burning,  becomes  earth  again,  or  else  stone,  or
sulphur;  and  this  is  clearly  demonstrated  by  lightning.  Now  every  one  of
these  elements  have  two  specifical  properties:  the  former  whereof  it  retains
as  proper  to  itself ; in  the  other,  as  a mean,  it  agrees  with  that  which  comes
directly  after  it.  For  fire  is  hot  and  dry  — earth,  cold  and  dry; — water,  cold
and  moist  — and  air,  hot  and  moist.  And  so  in  this  manner  the  elements,
according  to  two  contrary  qualities,  are  opposite  one  to  the  other : as  fire  to
water,  and  earth  to  air.  Likewise,  the  elements  are  contrary  one  to  the  other
on  another  account : two  are  heavy,  as  earth  and  water  — and  the  others  are
light,  as  fire  and  air;  therefore  the  Stoics  called  the  former,  passives  — but
the  latter,  actives.  And  Plato  distinguishes  them  after  another  manner,  and
assigns  to  each  of  them  three  qualities,  viz.  to  the  fire,  brightness,  thinness,
and  motion  — to  the  earth,  darkness,  thickness,  and  quietness;  and,  according
to  these  qualities,  the  elements  of  fire  and  earth  are  contrary.  Now  the  other
elements  borrow  their  qualities  from  these,  so  that  the  air  receives  two  quali-
ties from  4he  fire, — thinness  and  motion;  and  the  earth  one,  viz.  darkness.
In  like  manner  water  receives  two  qualities  of  the  earth, — darkness  and
thickness;  and  the  fire  one,  viz.  motion.  But  fire  is  twice  as  thin  as  air,  thrice
more  moveable,  and  four  times  brighter;  the  air  is  twice  more  bright,  thrice


52


XTallsmantc  fiHagtc«


more  thin,  and  four  times  more  moveable.  Therefore,  as  fire  is  to  air,  so  is
air  to  water,  and  water  to  the  earth ; and  again,  as  the  earth  is  to  the  water,
so  is  water  to  air,  and  air  to  fire.  And  this  is  the  root  and  foundation  of  all
bodies,  natures,  and  wonderful  works;  and  he  who  can  know,  and  thoroughly
understand  these  qualities  of  the  elements,  and  their  mixtures,  shall  bring  to
pass  wonderful  and  astonishing  things  in  magic.

Now  each  of  these  elements  have  a threefold  consideration,  so  that  the
number  of  four  may  make  up  the  number  of  twelve;  and,  by  passing  by  the
number  of  seven  into  ten,  there  may  be  a progress  to  the  supreme  unity  upon
which  all  virtue  and  wonderful  things  do  depend.  Of  the  first  order  are  the
pure  elements,  which  are  neither  compounded,  changed,  or  mixed,  but  are  in-
corruptible ; and  not  of  which,  but  through  which,  the  virtues  of  all  natural
things  are  brought  forth  to  act.  No  man  is  able  fully  to  declare  their  virtues,
because  they  can  do  all  things  upon  all  things.  He  who  remains  ignorant  of
these,  shall  never  be  able  to  bring  to  pass  any  wonderful  matter.

Of  the  second  order  are  elements  that  are  compounded,  changeable,  and
impure;  yet  such  as  may,  by  art,  be  reduced  to  their  pure  simplicity;  whose
virtue,  when  they  are  thus  reduced,  doth,  above  all  things,  perfect  all  occult
and  common  operations  of  Nature;  and  these  are  the  foundation  of  the  whole
of  Natural  Magic.

Of  the  third  order,  are  those  elements  which  originally  and  of  themselves
are  not  elements,  but  are  twice  compounded,  various  and  changeable  into
another.  These  are  the  infallible  medium , and  are  called  the  middle  nature ,
or  soul  of  the  middle  nature ; very  few  there  are  that  understand  the  deep
mysteries  thereof.  In  them  is,  by  means  of  certain  numbers,  degrees,  and
orders,  the  perfection  of  every  effect  in  what  thing  soever,  whether  natural ,
celestial,  or  super  celestial : they  are  full  of  wonders  and  mysteries,  and  are
operative  as  in  Magic  natural,  so  divine.  For  from  these,  through  them,  pro-
ceeds the  binding,  loosing,  and  transmutation  of  all  things — the  knowledge
and  foretelling  of  things  to  come  — also,  the  expelling  of  evil,  and  the  gain-
ing of  good  spirits.  Let  no  one,  therefore,  without  these  three  sorts  of  ele-
ments, and  the  true  knowledge  thereof,  be  confident  that  he  can  work  any
thing  in  the  Occult  Science  of  Magic  and  Nature.

But  whosoever  shall  know  how  to  reduce  those  of  one  order  into  another,
impure  into  pure,  compounded  into  single,  and  shall  understand  distinctly  the
nature,  virtue,  and  power  of  them,  in  number,  degrees,  and  order,  without
dividing  the  substance,  he  shall  easily  attain  to  the  knowledge  and  perfect
operation  of  all  natural  things,  and  celestial  secrets  likewise;  and  ‘this  is  the
perfection  of  the  Cabala,  which  teaches  all  these  before  mentioned ; and,  by  a
perfect  knowledge  thereof,  we  perform  many  rare  and  wonderful  experiments.


TEaltemanic  fiOafltc.


53


©f  tbe  ^Elements.  There  are  two  things,  (says  Hermes)  viz.  fire  and
earth,  which  are  sufficient  for  the  operation  of  all  wonderful  things:  the
former  is  active,  and  the  latter  passive.  Fire,  in  all  things,  and  through  all
things,  comes  and  goes  away  bright;  it  is  in  all  things  bright,  and  at  the  same
time  occult  and  unknown.  When  it  is  by  itself  (no  other  matter  coming  to
it,  in  which  it  should  manifest  its  proper  action)  it  is  boundless  and  invisible;
of  itself  sufficient  for  every  action  that  is  proper  to  it;  — itself  is  one,  and
penetrates  through  all  things ; also  spread  abroad  in  the  heavens,  and  shining.
But  in  the  infernal  place,  straitened,  dark,  and  tormenting;  and  in  the  mid-
way it  partakes  of  both.  It  is  in  stones,  and  is  drawn  out  by  the  stroke  of
the  steel;  it  is  in  earth,  and  causes  it,  after  digging  up,  to  smoke;  it  is  in
water,  and  heats  springs  and  wells ; it  is  in  the  depths  of  the  sea,  and  causes
it,  being  tossed  with  the  winds,  to  be  hot;  it  is  in  the  air,  and  makes  it  (as
we  often  see)  to  burn.  And  all  animals,  and  all  living  things  whatsoever,  as
also  vegetables  are  preserved  by  heat;  — and  every  thing  that  lives,  lives  by
reason  of  the  inclosed  heat.  The  properties  of  the  fire  that  is  above,  are
heat,  making  all  things  fruitful ; and  a celestial  light,  giving  life  to  all  things.
The  properties  of  the  infernal  fire  are  a parching  heat,  consuming  all  things ;
and  darkness;  making  all  things  barren.  The  celestial  and  bright  fire  drives
away  spirits  of  darkness;  — also,  this  our  fire,  made  with  wood,  drives  away
the  same,  in  as  much  as  it  hath  an  analogy  with,  and  is  the  vehiculum  of,  that
superior  light;  as  also  of  him  who  saith,  “ I am  the  light  of  the  world,”  which
is  true  fire  — the  Father  of  lights,  from  whom  every  good  thing  that  is  given
comes;  — sending  forth  the  light  of  his  fire,  and  communicating  it  first  to  the
sun  and  the  rest  of  the  celestial  bodies,  and  by  these,  as  by  mediating  instru-
ments, conveying  that  light  into  our  fire.  As,  therefore,  the  spirits  of  dark-
ness are  stronger  in  the  dark — so  good  spirits,  which  are  angels  of  lights,  are
augmented  not  only  by  that  light  (which  is  divine,  of  the  sun,  and  celestial),
but  also  by  the  light  of  our  common  fire.  Hence  it  was  that  the  first  and
most  wise  institutors  of  religions  and  ceremonies,  ordained  that  prayers,  sing-
ings, and  all  manner  of  divine  worships  whatsoever,  should  not  be  performed
without  lighted  candles  or  torches:  hence,  also,  was  that  significant  saying  of
Pythagoras  — “Do  not  speak  of  God  without  a light!”  — And  they  com-
manded that,  for  the  driving  away  of  wicked  spirits,  lights  and  fires  should
be  kindled  by  the  carcasses  of  the  dead,  and  that  they  should  not  be  removed
until  the  expiations  were,  after  a holy  manner,  performed,  and  then  buried.
And  the  great  Jehovah  himself,  in  the  old  law,  commanded  that  all  his
sacrifices  should  be  offered  with  fire  and  that  fire  should  always  be  burning
upon  the  altar,  which  custom  the  Priests  of  the  Altar  did  always  observe  and
keep  amongst  the  Romans.  Now  the  basis  and  foundation  of  all  the  ele-
ments is  the  earth;  for  that  is  the  object,  subject,  and  receptacle  of  all  celes-


54  Ualtsmamc  fiQaglc.

tial  rays  and  influences : in  it  are  contained  the  seeds,  and  seminal  virtues  of
all  things:  and  therefore,  it  is  said  to  be  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral.
It,  being  made  fruitful  by  the  other  elements  and  the  heavens,  brings  forth
all  things  of  itself.  It  receives  the  abundance  of  all  things,  and  is,  as  it  were,
the  first  fountain  from  whence  all  things  spring;  — it  is  the  centre,  founda-
tion, and  mother  of  all  things.  Take  as  much  of  it  as  you  please,  separated,
washed,  depurated,  and  subtilized,  and  if  you  let  it  lie  in  the  open  air  a little
while,  it  will,  being  full  and  abounding  with  heavenly  virtues,  of  itself  bring
forth  plants,  worms,  and  other  living  things;  also  stones,  and  bright  sparks
of  metals.  In  it  are  great  secrets : if,  at  any  time  it  shall  be  purified,  by  the
help  of  fire,*  and  reduced  into  its  simple  nature  by  a convenient  washing,  it
is  the  first  matter  of  our  creation,  and  the  truest  medicine  that  can  restore
and  preserve  us.

The  other  two  elements,  viz.  water  and  air,  are  not  less  efficacious  than
the  former;  neither  is  Nature  wanting  to  work  wonderful  things  in  them.
There  is  so  great  a necessity  of  water,  that  without  it  nothing  can  live — no
herb  no  plant  whatsoever  without  the  moistening  of  water,  can  bring  forth;
in  it  is  the  seminary  virtue  of  all  things,  especially  of  animals,  whose  seed  is
manifestly  waterish.  The  seeds,  also,  of  trees  and  plants,  although  they  are
earthy,  must,  notwithstanding,  of  necessity  be  rotted  in  water  before  they  can
be  fruitful;  whether  they  be  imbibed  with  the  moisture  of  the  earth,  or  with
dew,  or  rain,  or  any  other  water  that  is  on  purpose  put  to  them.  — For
Moses  writes,  that  only  earth  and  water  can  bring  forth  a living  soul ; but  he
ascribes  a two-fold  production  of  things  to  water,  viz.  of  things  swimming  in
the  water,  and  of  things  flying  in  the  air  above  the  earth;  and  that  those  pro-
ductions that  are  made  in  and  upon  the  earth  are  partly  attributed  to  the
very  water  the  same  scripture  testifies,  where  it  saith,  that  the  plants  and  the
herbs  did  not  grow,  because  God  had  not  caused  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth.
Such  is  the  efficacy  of  this  element  of  water,  that  spiritual  regeneration  can-
not be  done  without  it,  as  Christ  himself  testified  to  Nicodemus.  Very  great,
also,  is  the  virtue  of  it  in  the  religious  worship  of  God,  in  expiations  and
purifications ; indeed  the  necessity  of  it  is  no  less  than  that  of  fire.  Infinite
are  the  benefits,  and  divers  are  the  uses,  thereof  as  being  that,  by  virtue  of
which  all  things  subsist,  are  generated,  nourished,  and  increased.  Hence  it
was  that  Thales  of  Miletus,  and  Hesiod,  concluded  that  water  was  the  begin-
ning of  all  things;  and  said  it  was  the  first  of  all  the  elements,  and  the  most
potent;  and  that,  because  it  hath  the  mastery  over  all  the  rest.  For,  as  Pliny
saith,  — “Waters  swallow  up  the  earth  — extinguish  flames  — ascend  on

•Agrippa  here,  speaking  of  the  element  of  earth  being  reduced  to  its  utmost  simplicity,  by
being  purified  by  fire  and  a convenient  washing,  means,  that  it  is  the  first  and  principal  ingredient
necessary  to  the  production  of  the  Philosopher’s  stone,  either  of  animals  or  metals.


ZTalismante  fniagic.


55

high  — and,  by  the  stretching  forth  of  the  clouds,  challenge  the  heavens  for
their  own ; the  same,  falling  down,  becomes  the  cause  of  all  things  that  grow
in  the  earth.”  Very  many  are  the  wonders  that  are  done  by  waters,  accord-
ing to  the  writings  of  Pliny,  Solinus,  and  many  other  historians.

Josephus  also  makes  relation  of  the  wonderful  nature  of  a certain  river
betwixt  Arcea  and  Raphanea,  cities  of  Syria,  which  runs  with  a full  channel
all  the  Sabbath-day,  and  then  on  a sudden  stops,  as  if  the  springs  were
stopped,  and  all  the  six  days  you  may  pass  over  it  dry-shod;  but  again,  on
the  seventh  day,  no  man  knowing  the  reason  of  it,  the  waters  return  again,
in  abundance  as  before!  wherefore  the  inhabitants  thereabout  called  it  the
Sabbath-day  River,  because  of  the  seventh  day,  which  was  holy  to  the  Jews. —
The  Gospel,  also,  testifies  of  a sheep-pool,  into  which  whosoever  stepped  first
after  the  water  was  troubled  by  the  Angel,  was  made  whole  of  whatsoever
disease  he  had.  The  same  virtue  and  efficacy,  we  read,  was  in  a spring  of
the  Ionian  Nymphs,  which  was  in  the  territories  belonging  to  the  town  of
Elis,  at  a village  called  Heradea,  near  the  river  Citheron,  which  whosoever
stepped  into,  being  diseased,  came  forth  whole,  and  cured  of  all  his  diseases.
Pausanias  also  reports,  that  in  Lyceus,  a mountain,  of  Arcadia,  there  was  a
spring  called  Agria,  to  which,  as  often  as  the  dryness  of  the  region  threatened
the  destruction  of  fruits,  Jupiter,  Priest  of  Lyceus,  went;  and,  after  the  offer-
ing of  sacrifices,  devoutly  praying  to  the  waters  of  the  spring,  holding  a
bough  of  an  oak  in  his  hand,  put  it  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  hallowed
spring;  then,  the  waters  being  troubled,  a vapour  ascending  from  thence  into
the  air,  was  blown  into  clouds,  which  being  joined  together,  the  whole
heaven  was  overspread : which  being,  a little  after,  dissolved  into  rain,
watered  all  the  country  most  wholesomely. — Moreover,  Ruffus,  a physician
of  Ephesus,  besides  many  other  authors,  wrote  strange  things  concerning  the
wonders  of  waters,  which,  for  aught  I know,  are  found  in  no  other  author.

It  remains,  that  I speak  of  the  air.  — This  is  a vital  spirit  passing  through
all  beings  — giving  life  and  subsistence  to  all  things  — moving  and  filling  all
things.  Hence  it  is  that  the  Hebrew  doctors  reckon  it  not  amongst  the  ele-
ments; but  count  it  as  a medium,  or  glue,  joining  things  together,  and  as  the
resounding  spirit  of  the  world’s  instrument.  It  immediately  receives  into
itself  the  influence  of  all  celestial  bodies,  and  then  communicates  them  to  the
other  elements,  as  also  to  all  mixed  bodies.  Also,  it  receives  into  itself,  as  if
it  were  a divine  looking-glass,  the  species  of  all  things,  as  well  natural  as
artificial;  as  also  of  all  manner  of  speeches,  and  retains  them;  and  carrying
them  with  it,  and  entering  into  the  bodies  of  men,  and  other  animals,  through
their  pores,  makes  an  impression  upon  them,  as  well  when  they  are  asleep  as
when  they  are  awake,  and  affords  matter  for  divers  strange  dreams  and  divi-
nations. — Hence,  they  say,  it  is  that  a man,  passing  by  a place  where  a man


56  TTalismanic  flnapic.

was  slain,  or  the  carcass  newly  hid,  is  moved  with  fear  and  dread;  because  the
air,  in  that  place,  being  full  of  the  dreadful  species  of  man- slaughter,  doth,
being  breathed  in,  move  and  trouble  the  spirit  of  the  man  with  the  like
species;  whence  it  is  that  he  becomes  afraid.  For  everything  that  makes  a
sudden  impression  astonishes  Nature.  Whence  it  is  that  many  philosophers
were  of  opinion,  that  air  is  the  cause  of  dreams,  and  of  many  other  impres-
sions of  the  mind,  through  the  prolonging  of  images,  or  similitudes,  or  species
( which  proceed  from  things  and  speeches,  multiplied  in  the  very  air),  until
they  come  to  the  senses,  and  then  to  the  phantasy  and  soul  of  him  that  receives
them;  which,  being  freed  from  cares,  and  no  way  hindered,  expecting  to  meet
such  kind  of  species,  is  informed  by  them.  For  the  species  of  things,  although
of  their  own  proper  nature  they  are  carried  to  the  senses  of  men,  and  other
animals  in  general,  may,  notwithstanding,  get  some  impression  from  the
heavens  whilst  they  are  in  the  air;  by  reason  of  which,  together  with  the  apt-
ness and  disposition  of  him  that  receives  them,  they  may  be  carried  to  the
sense  of  one,  rather  than  of  another.  And  hence  it  is  possible,  naturally,  and
far  from  all  manner  of  superstition  (no  other  spirit  coming  between),  that  a
man  should  be  able,  in  a very  small  time,  to  signify  his  mind  unto  another
man,  abiding  at  a very  long  and  unknown  distance  from  him  — although
he  cannot  precisely  give  an  estimate  of  the  time,  when  it  is,  yet,  of  necessity,
it  must  be  within  twenty-four  hours;  — and  I,  myself,  know  how  to  do  it,  and
have  often  done  it.  The  same  also,  in  time  past,  did  the  Abbot  Tritemius
both  know  and  do.  — Also,  when  certain  appearances  (not  only  spiritual,  but
also  natural)  do  flow  forth  from  things,  that  is  to  say,  by  a certain  kind  of
flowings  forth  of  bodies  from  bodies,  and  do  gather  strength  in  the  air,  they
shew  themselves  to  us  as  well  through  light  as  motion  — as  well  to  the  sight
as  to  other  senses  — and  sometimes  work  wonderful  things  upon  us,  as  Pla-
tonius  proves  and  teacheth.  And  we  see  how,  by  the  south- wind,  the  air  is
condensed  into  thin  clouds,  in  which,  as  in  a looking-glass,  are  reflected
representations  at  a great  distance,  of  castles,  mountains,  horses,  men,  and
other  things,  which  when  the  clouds  are  gone,  presently  vanish.  — And  Aris-
totle, in  his  Meteors  shews  that  a rainbow  is  conceived  in  a cloud  of  the  air,
as  in  a looking-glass.  — And  Albertus  says,  that  the  effigies  of  bodies  may,  by
the  strength  of  Nature,  in  a moist  air,  be  easily  represented;  in  the  same  man-
ner as  the  representations  of  things  are  in  things.  — And  Aristotle  tells  of  a
man,  to  whom  it  happened,  by  reason  of  the  weakness  of  his  sight,  that  the
air  that  was  near  to  him  became,  as  it  were,  a looking-glass  to  him,  and  the
optic-beam  did  reflect  back  upon  himself,  and  could  not  penetrate  the  air,  so
that,  whithersoever  he  went,  he  thought  he  saw  his  own  image,  with  his  face
towards  him,  go  before  him.  — In  like  manner,  by  the  artificialness  of  some
certain  looking-glasses,  may  be  produced  at  a distance,  in  the  air,  besides  the


Ualismantc  Hflagtc.


57


looking-glasses,  what  images  we  please,  which,  when  ignorant  men  see,  they
think  they  see  the  appearances  of  spirits  or  souls  — when,  indeed,  they  are
nothing  else  but  semblances  a-kin  to  themselves,  and  without  life.  And  it  is
well-known,  if  in  a dark  place,  where  there  is  no  light  but  by  the  coming  in
of  a beam  of  the  sun  somewhere  through  a little  hole,  a white  paper  or  plain
looking-glass  be  set  up  against  the  light,  that  there  may  be  seen  upon  them
whatsoever  things  are  done  without,  being  shined  upon  by  the  sun.  And
there  is  another  slight  or  trick  yet  more  wonderful:  — if  any  one  shall  take
images,  artificially  painted,  or  written  letters,  and,  in  a clear  night,  set  them
against  the  beams  of  the  full  moon,  those  resemblances  being  multipled  in  the
air,  and  caught  upward,  and  reflected  back  together  with  the  beams  of  the
moon,  another  man,  that  is  privy  to  the  thing,  at  a long  distance,  sees,  reads,
and  knows  them  in  the  very  compass  and  circle  of  the  moon;  which  art  of
declaring  secrets  is,  indeed,  very  profitable  for  towns  and  cities  that  are  be-
seiged,  being  a thing  which  Pythagoras  long  since  did,  and  which  is  not  un-
known to  some  in  these  days;  I will  not  except  myself.  And  all  these  things
and  many  more,  and  much  greater  than  these,  are  grounded  in  the  very  nature
of  the  air,  and  have  their  reasons  and  causes  declared  in  njathematics  and
optics.  And  as  these  resemblances  are  reflected  back  to  the  sight,  so  also
are  they,  sometimes,  to  the  hearing,  as  is  manifest  in  echo.  But  there  are
many  more  secret  arts  than  these,  and  such  whereby  any  one  may,  at  a re-
markable distance,  hear,  and  understand  distincly,  what  another  speaks
or  whispers.

The  next  in  order,  after  the  four  simple  elements,  are  the  four  kinds  of  per-
fect bodies  compounded  of  them,  viz.  metals,  stones,  plants,  and  animals;  and
although  in  the  generation  of  each  of  these,  all  the  elements  combine  together
in  the  composition,  yet  every  one  of  them  follows  and  resembles  one  of  the
elements  which  is  most  predominant;  for  all  stones,  being  earthy,  are  natur-
ally heavy,  and  are  so  hardened  with  dryness  that  they  cannot  be  melted;  —
but  metals  are  watery,  and  may  be  melted,  which  naturalists  and  chemists
find  to  be  true,  viz.  that  they  are  composed  or  generated  of  a viscous  water,  or
watery  argent  vive.  Plants  have  such  an  affinity  with  the  air,  that  unless
they  are  out  in  it,  and  receive  its  benefit,  they  neither  flourish  nor  increase.
So  also  animals,  as  the  Poet  finally  expresses  it  —

“ Have,  in  their  natures,  a most  fiery  force,

“ And  also  spring  from  a celestial  source
and  fire  is  so  natural  to  them  that,  being  extinguished,  they  soon  die.

Now,  amongst  stones,  those  that  are  dark  and  heavy,  are  called  earthy  —
those  which  are  transparent,  of  the  watery  element , as  crystal,  beryl,  and
pearls  — those  which  swim  upon  the  water  and  are  spongious,  as  the  pumice-
stone,  sponge,  and  sophus,  are  called  airy  — and  those  are  attributed  to  the


58  Ualtsmantc  finagle.

element  of  fire,  out  of  which  fire  is  extracted,  or  which  are  resolved  into  fire;
as  thunder-stones,  fire-stones,  asbestos.  Also,  amongst  metals;  lead  and  silver
are  earthy;  quicksilver  is  watery;  copper  and  tin,  airy;  gold  and  iron,  fiery.
In  plants,  also,  the  roots  resemble  earth  — the  leaves,  water  — flowers,  the  air

— and  seed,  the  fire,  by  reason  of  their  multiplying  spirit.  Besides,  some
are  hot,  some  cold,  some  moist,  others  dry,  borrowing  their  names  from  the
qualities  of  the  elements.  Amongst  animals,  also,  some  are,  in  comparison
of  others,  earthy,  because  they  live  in  the  very  bowels  of  the  earth,  as
worms,  moles,  and  many  other  reptiles;  others  watery,  as  fish;  others  which
always  abide  in  the  air,  therefore  airy;  others,  again,  fiery,  as  salamanders,
crickets;  and  such  as  are  of  a fiery  heat,  as  pigeons,  ostriches,  eagles,  lions,
panthers,  &c.  &c.

Now,  in  animals,  the  bones  resemble  earth  — vital  spirit,  the  fire  — flesh,
the  air  — and  humours,  the  water;  and  these  humours  also  resemble  the  ele-
ments, viz.  yellow  choler,  the  fire  — the  blood,  the  air — phlegm,  the  water

— and  black  choler,  or  melancholy,  the  earth.  And,  lastly,  in  the  soul  itself,
the  understanding  resembles  the  fire  — reason,  the  air  — imagination,  the
water  — and  the  senses  the  earth.  And  these  senses  again  are  divided
amongst  themselves,  according  to  the  elements:  for  the  sight  is  fiery,  because
it  cannot  perceive  without  the  help  of  fire  and  light — the  hearing  is  airy,  for  a
sound  is  made  by  the  striking  of  the  air  — the  smell  and  taste  resemble  water,
without  the  moisture  of  which  there  is  neither  smell  nor  taste  — and,  lastly,
the  feeling  is  wholly  earthly,  because  it  takes  gross  bodies  for  its  object.  The
actions,  also,  and  operations  of  man  are  governed  by  the  elements : for  the
earth  signifies  a slow  and  firm  motion;  the  water,  fearfulness,  sluggishness,
and  remissness  in  working;  air  signifies  cheerfulness,  and  an  amiable  disposi-
tion; but  fire,  a fierce,  working,  quick,  susceptible  disposition.  The  elements
are,  therefore,  the  first  and  original  matter  of  all  things;  and  all  things  are  of
and  according  to  them;  and  they  in  and  through  all  things  diffuse  their  virtues.

In  the  original  and  exemplary  world,  all  things  are  all  in  all;  so  also  in
this  corporeal  world.  And  the  elements  are  not  only  in  these  inferior
things ; but  are  in  the  heavens,  in  stars,  in  devils,  in  angels,  and  likewise  in
God  himself,  the  maker  and  original  example  of  all  things.

Now  it  must  be  understood  that  in  these  inferior  bodies  the  elements  are
gross  and  corruptible;  but  in  the  heavens  they  are,  with  their  natures  and  vir-
tues, after  a celestial  and  more  excellent  manner  than  in  sublunary  things :
for  the  firmness  of  the  celestial  earth  is  there  without  the  grossness  of  water ;
and  the  agility  of  air  without  exceeding  its  bounds;  the  heat  of  fire  without
burning,  only  shining,  giving  light  and  life  to  all  things  by  its  celestial  heat.
— -Now  amongst  the  stars,  or  planets,  some  are  fiery,  as  Mars,  and  the  Sun  —
airy,  as  Jupiter,  and  Yenus  — watery,  as  Saturn,  and  Mercury  — and  earthy,


Ualismanic  finagle.


59


such  as  inhabit  the  eighth  orb,  and  the  Moon  (which  by  many  is  accounted
watery),  seeing  that,  as  if  it  were  earth,  it  attracts  to  itself  the  celestial  waters,
with  which  being  imbibed  it  does,  on  account  of  its  proximity  to  us,  pour
forth  and  communicate  to  our  globe.

There  are,  likewise,  among  the  signs,  some  fiery,  some  airy,  some  watery,
and  some  earthy.  The  elements  rule  them , also,  in  the  heavens,  distributing
to  them  these  four  threefold  considerations  of  every  element,  according  to
their  triplicities,  viz.  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end.

Likewise,  devils  are  distinguished  according  to  the  elements : for  some  are
called  earthy  devils,  others  fiery,  some  airy,  and  others  watery.  Hence,  also,
those  four  infernal  rivers  : fiery  Phlegethon,  airy  Cocytus,  watery  Styx,  earthy
Acheron.  Also,  in  the  Gospel,  we  read  of  comparisons  of  the  elements:  as
hell  fire,  and  eternal  fire,  into  which  the  cursed  shall  be  commanded  to  go;  —
and  in  Revelations,  of  a lake  of  fire: — and  Isaiah,  speaking  of  the  damned,
says  that  the  Lord  will  smite  them  with  corrupt  air;  — and  in  Job,  they  shall
skip  from  the  waters  of  the  snow  to  the  extremity  of  heat;  and,  in  the  same,
we  read,  that  the  earth  is  dark,  and  covered  with  the  darkness  of  death,  and
miserable  darkness.

And  these  elements  are  placed  in  the  angels  of  heaven,  and  the  blessed  in-
telligences: there  is  in  them  a stability  of  their  essence,  which  is  an  earthy
virtue,  in  which  is  the  stedfast  seat  of  God.  By  the  Psalmist  they  are  called
waters,  where  he  says  — “ Who  rulest  the  waters  that  are  higher  than  the
heavens;”  — also,  in  them  their  subtile  breath  is  air,  and  their  love  is  shining
fire;  hence  they  are  called  in  Scripture,  the  wings  of  the  wind;  and,  in  an-
other place,  the  Psalmist  speaks  of  them  thus  — “ Who  makest  angels  thy
spirits,  and  thy  ministers,  a flaming  fire  ! ” — Also,  according  to  the  different
orders  of  spirits  or  angels,  some  are  fiery,  as  seraphims,  authorities,  and
powers  — earthy,  as  cherubim  — watery,  as  thrones  and  archangels  — airy,
as  dominions  and  principalities.

And  do  we  not  read  of  the  original  Maker  of  all  things,  that  the  earth  shall
be  opened  and  bring  forth  a Saviour  ? — Likewise  it  is  spoken  of  the  same,
that  he  shall  be  a fountain  of  living  water,  cleansing  and  regenerating;  and
the  same  spirit  breathing  the  breath  of  life;  and  the  same,  according  to  Moses’
and  Paul’s  testimony  — a consuming  fire.

That  the  elements  are,  therefore,  to  be  found  everywhere,  and  in  all  things,
after  their  manner,  no  man  will  dare  to  deny : first,  in  these  inferior  bodies,
feculent  and  gross ; and  in  celestials,  more  pure  and  clear ; but  in  super-
celestials, living  and  in  all  respects  blessed.  Elements,  therefore,  in  the
exemplary  world,  are  ideas  of  things  to  be  produced;  in  intelligences  they
are  distributed  powers;  in  the  heavens,  they  are  virtues;  and  in  inferior
bodies,  are  gross  forms.


Ualtsmantc  flnagtc.


60

It  is  to  be  noted,  that  God,  in  the  first  place,  is  the  end  and  beginning  of
all  virtue;  he  gives  the  seal  of  the  ideas  to  his  servants,  the  intelligences,  who,
as  faithful  officers,  sign  all  things  entrusted  to  them  with  an  ideal  virtue ; the
heavens  and  stars,  as  instruments,  disposing  the  matter,  in  the  mean  while,
for  the  receiving  of  those  forms  which  reside  in  Divine  Majesty,  and  to  be
conveyed  by  stars.  And  the  Giver  of  forms  distributes  them  by  the  ministry
of  his  intelligences,  which  he  has  ordained  as  rulers  and  comptrollers  over  his
works;  to  whom  such  a power  is  entrusted,  in  things  committed  to  them,  that
so  all  virtue  in  stones,  herbs,  metals,  and  all  other  things,  may  come  from  the
intelligences,  the  governors.  Therefore  the  form  and  virtue  of  things  come
first  from  the  ideas  — then  from  the  ruling  and  governing  intelligences  — then
from  the  aspects  of  the  heavens  disposing — and,  lastly,  from  the  tempers  of
the  elements  disposed,  answering  the  influences  of  the  heavens,  by  which  the
elements  themselves  are  ordered  or  disposed.  These  kinds  of  operations,
therefore,  are  performed  in  these  inferior  things  by  express  forms;  and  in  the
heavens,  by  disposing  virtues;  in  intelligences,  by  mediating  rules;  in  the  ori-
ginal cause,  by  ideas  and  exemplary  forms;  all  which  must  of  necessity
agree  in  the  execution  of  the  effect  and  virtue  of  everything.

There  is,  therefore,  a wonderful  virtue  and  operation  in  every  herb  and
stone,  hut  greater  in  a star;  beyond  which,  even  from  the  governing  intelli-
gences, everything  receives  and  obtains  many  things  for  itself,  especially  from
the  Supreme  Cause,  with  whom  all  things  mutually  and  exactly  correspond,
agreeing  in  a harmonious  consent.

Therefore  there  is  no  other  cause  of  the  necessity  of  effects,  than  the  con-
nection of  all  things  with  the  First  Cause,  and  their  correspondency  with  those
divine  patterns  and  eternal  ideas,  whence  everything  hath  its  determinate  and
particular  place  in  the  exemplary  world,  from  whence  it  lives  and  receives  its
original  being;  and  every  virtue  of  herbs,  stones,  metals,  animals,  words,
speeches,  and  all  things  that  are  of  God,  are  placed  there.

Now  the  First  Cause  (which  is  God),  although  he  doth,  by  intelligences
and  the  heavens,  work  upon  these  inferior  things,  does  sometimes  (these
mediums  being  laid  aside,  or  their  officiating  being  suspended)  work  those
things  immediately  by  himself  — which  works  are  then  called  miracles.  But
whereas  secondary  causes  do,  by  the  command  and  appointment  of  the  First
Cause,  necessarily  act,  and  are  necessitated  to  produce  their  effects;  if  God
shall,  notwithstanding,  according  to  his  pleasure,  so  discharge  and  suspend
them  that  they  shall  wholly  desist  from  the  necessity  of  that  command,  then
they  are  called  the  greatest  miracles  of  God.  For  instance : the  fire  of  the
Chaldean  furnace  did  not  burn  the  children ; the  sun  stood  still  at  the  com-
mand of  Joshua,  and  became  retrograde  one  whole  day;  also,  at  the  prayer


ZEalismantc  magic.


61

of  Hezekiah,  it  went  back  ten  degrees;  and  when  our  Saviour  Christ  was
crucified,  it  became  darkened,  though  at  full  moon.

And  the  reason  of  these  operations  can  by  no  rational  discourse,  no  magic
or  science,  occult  or  profound  soever,  be  found  out  or  understood;  but  are  to
be  learned  by  Divine  oracles  only.*

Now  seeing  that  the  soul  is  the  essential  form,  intelligible  and  incorrupti-
ble, and  is  the  first  mover  of  the  body,  and  is  moved  of  itself;  but  that  the
body,  or  matter,  is  of  itself  unable  and  unfit  for  motion,  and  does  very  much
degenerate  from  the  soul,  it  appears  that  there  is  need  of  a more  excellent
medium : now  such  a medium  is  conceived  to  be  the  spirit  of  the  world,  or
that  which  some  call  a quintessence;  because  it  is  not  from  the  four  elements,
but  a certain  first  thing , having  its  being  above  and  beside  them.  There  is,
therefore,  such  a kind  of  medium  required  to  be,  by  which  celestial  souls  may
be  joined  to  gross  bodies,  and  bestow  upon  them  wonderful  gifts.  This  spirit
is,  in  the  same  manner,  in  the  body  of  the  world,  as  our  spirit  is  in  our
bodies;  for  as  the  powers  of  our  soul  are  communicated  to  the  members  of
the  body  by  the  medium  of  the  spirit,  so  also  the  virtue  of  the  soul  of  the
world  is  diffused,  throughout  all  things,  by  the  medium  of  the  universal  spirit;
for  there  is  nothing  to  be  found  in  the  whole  woi-ld  that  hath  not  a spark  of
the  virtue  thereof.  Now  this  spirit  is  received  into  things,  more  or  less,  by
the  rays  of  the  stars,  so  far  as  things  are  disposed,  or  made  fit  recipients  of  it.
By  this  spirit,  therefore,  every  occult  property  is  conveyed  into  herbs,  stones,
metals,  and  animals,  through  the  sun,  moon,  planets,  and  through  stars  higher
than  the  planets.  Now  this  spirit  may  be  more  advantageous  to  us  if  we  knew
how  to  separate  it  from  the  elements ; or,  at  least,  to  use  those  things  chiefly
which  are  most  abounding  with  this  spirit.  For  those  things  in  which  the
spirit  is  less  drowned  in  a body,  and  less  checked  by  matter,  do  much  more
powerfully  and  perfectly  act,  and  also  more  readily  generate  their  like;  for
in  it  are  all  generative  and  seminal  virtues.  For  which  cause  the  alchymist
endeavours  to  separate  this  spirit  from  gold  and  silver,  which,  being  rightly
separated  and  extracted,  if  it  shall  be  afterwards  projected  upon  any  metal,
turns  it  into  gold  or  silver;  which  is  no  way  impossible  or  improbable,  when
we  consider  that  by  art  that  may  be  done  in  a short  time,  what  Nature,  in
the  bowels  of  the  earth  (as  in  a matrix),  perfects  in  a very  long  space  of  time.

All  stars  have  their  peculiar  natures,  properties,  and  conditions,  the  seals
and  characters  whereof  they  produce  through  their  rays  even  in  these  inferior
things,  viz.  in  elements,  in  stones,  in  plants,  in  animals,  and  their  members;
whence  every  thing  receives  from  an  harmonious  disposition,  and  from  its

•The  foregoing  Chapter,  if  well  considered,  will  open  the  intellect  to  a more  easy  comprehension
of  the  Magical  Science  of  Nature,  &c.;  and  will  facilitate,  in  a wonderful  degree,  our  studies  in  these
sublime  mysteries.


62


traltsmanic  finagle.


star  shining  upon  it,  some  particular  seal  or  character  stamped  upon  it,
which  is  the  significator  of  that  star  or  harmony,  containing  in  it  a peculiar
virtue,  different  from  other  virtues  of  the  same  matter,  both  generically,
specifically,  and  numerically.  Every  thing,  therefore,  hath  its  character  im-
pressed upon  it  by  its  star  for  some  peculiar  effect,  especially  by  that  star
which  doth  principally  govern  it;  and  these  characters  contain  in  them  the
particular  natures,  virtues,  and  roots  of  their  stars,  and  produce  the  like
operations  upon  other  things  on  which  they  are  reflected;  and  stir  up  and
help  the  influences  of  their  stars,  whether  they  be  planets,  or  fixed  stars  and
figures,  or  celestial  constellations,  viz.  as  often  as  they  shall  be  made  in  a fit
matter,  and  in  their  due  and  accustomed  times;  which  the  ancient  wise  men
(considering  such  as  laboured  much  in  finding  out  occult  properties  of
things)  did  set  down,  in  writing,  the  images  of  the  stars,  their  figures,  seals,
marks,  characters,  such  as  Nature  herself  did  describe  by  the  rays  of  the  stars
in  these  inferior  bodies : some  in  stones,  some  in  plants,  some  in  joints  and
knots  of  trees  and  their  boughs,  and  some  in  various  members  of  animals.  For
the  bay-tree,  lote-tree,  and  marigold,  are  solary  herbs,  and  their  roots  and
knots  being  cut,  they  show  the  characters  of  the  sun;  and  in  stones  the  charac-
ter and  images  of  celestial  things  are  often  found.  But  there  being  so  great
a diversity  of  things,  there  is  only  a traditional  knowledge  of  a few  things
which  human  understanding  is  able  to  reach;  therefore  very  few  of  those
things  are  known  to  us,  which  the  ancient  philosophers  and  chiromancers
attained  to,  partly  by  reason  and  partly  by  experience;  and  there  yet  lie  hid
many  things  in  the  treasury  of  Nature,  which  the  diligent  student  and  wise
searcher  shall  contemplate  and  discover.

JEfRcacy  Of  IPCtfUlTICS.  It  is  necessary,  before  we  come  to  the  opera-
tive or  practical  part  of  Talismanic  Magic,  to  show  the  compositions  of  fumes
or  vapours,  that  are  proper  to  the  stars,  and  are  of  great  force  for  the  oppor-
tunely receiving  of  celestial  gifts,  under  the  rays  of  the  stars  — inasmuch  as
they  strongly  woi'k  upon  the  air  and  breath ; for  our  breath  is  very  much
changed  by  such  kind  of  vapours,  if  both  vapours  be  of  the  other  like.  The
air  being  also,  through  the  said  vapours,  easily  moved,  or  infected  with  the
qualities  of  inferiors,  or  celestial  (daily  quickly  penetrating  our  breast  and
vitals),  does  wonderfully  reduce  us  to  the  like  qualities.  Let  no  man  wonder
how  great  things  suff umigations  can  do  in  the  air ; especially  when  they  shall,
with  Porphyry,  consider  that,  by  certain  vapours  exhaled  from  proper
suffumigations,  serial  spirits  are  raised ; also  thunder  and  lightnings,  and  the
like:  as  the  liver  of  a cameleon  being  burnt  on  the  house  top,  will  raise
showers  and  lightnings ; the  same  effect  has  the  head  and  throat,  if  they  are
burnt  with  oaken  wood.  There  are  some  suffumigations  under  the  influences


XTaltsmantc  flUapic  63

of  the  stars,  that  cause  images  of  spirits  to  appear  in  the  air,  or  elsewhere : for
if  coriander,  smallage,  henbane,  and  hemlock  be  made  to  fume,  by  invocations
spirits  will  soon  come  together,  being  attracted  by  the  vapours  which  are
most  congruous  to  their  own  natures ; hence  they  are  called  the  herbs  of  the
spirits.  Also  it  is  said,  that  if  a fume  be  made  of  the  root  of  the  reedy  herb
sagapen,  with  the  juice  of  hemlock  and  henbane,  and  the  herb  tapsus  barbatus,
red  sanders,  and  black  poppy,  it  will  likewise  make  strange  shapes  appear;
but  if  a suffume  be  made  of  smallage,  it  chases  them  away,  and  destroys
their  visions.  Again,  if  a perfume  is  made  of  calamint,  piony,  mint,  and
palma  christi,  it  drives  away  all  evil  spirits  and  vain  imaginations.  Like-
wise, by  certain  fumes,  animals  are  gathered  together,  and  put  to  flight.
Pliny  mentions  concerning  the  stone  liparis,  that,  with  the  fume  thereof,  all
beasts  are  attracted  together.  The  bones  in  the  upper  part  of  the  throat  of  a
hart,  being  burnt,  bring  serpents  together;  but  the  horn  of  the  hart,  being
burnt,  chases  away  the  same ; likewise,  a fume  of  peacock’s  feathers  does  the
same.  Also,  the  lungs  of  an  ass,  being  burnt,  puts  all  poisonous  things  to
flight ; and  the  fume  of  the  burnt  hoof  of  a horse  drives  away  mice ; the  same
does  the  hoof  of  a mule ; and  with  the  hoof  of  the  left-foot  flies  are  driven
away.  And  if  a house,  or  any  place,  be  smoaked  with  the  gall  of  a cuttle-fish
made  into  a confection  with  red  storax,  roses,  and  lignum  aloes,  and  then
there  be  some  sea-water  or  blood  cast  into  that  place,  the  whole  house  will
seem  to  be  full  of  water  or  blood.

Now  such  kind  of  vapours  as  these,  we  must  conceive,  do  infect  a body,
and  infuse  a virtue  into  it  which  continues  long,  even  as  the  poisonous
vapour  of  the  pestilence,  being  kept  for  two  years  in  the  walls  of  a house,
infects  the  inhabitants ; and  as  the  contagion  of  pest  or  leprosy  lying  hid  in
a garment,  will,  long  after,  infect  him  that  wears  it.

Now  there  are  certain  suffumigations  used  to  almost  all  our  instruments
of  Magic  (of  which  hereafter),  such  as  images,  rings,  &c.  For  some  of  the
magicians  say,  that  if  any  one  shall  hide  gold,  or  silver,  or  any  other  such
like  precious  thing  (the  moon  being  in  conjunction  with  the  sun),  and  shall
perfume  the  place  with  coriander , saffron , henbane , smallage,  and  black  poppy,
of  each  the  same  quantity  and  bruised  together,  and  tempered  with  the  juice
of  hemlock,  that  thing  which  is  so  hid  shall  never  be  taken  away  therefrom,
but  that  spirit  shall  continually  keep  it ; and  if  any  one  shall  endeavour  to
take  it  away  by  force,  they  shall  be  hurt,  or  struck  with  a frenzy.  And
Hermes  says,  there  is  nothing  like  fume  of  spermaceti  for  the  raising  up  of
spirits ; therefore  if  a fume  be  made  of  that,  lignum  aloes,  pepperwort,  musk,
saffron,  and  red  storax,  tempered  together  with  the  blood  of  a lapwing  or  bat,
it  will  quickly  gather  airy  spirits  to  the  place  where  it  is  used;  and  if  it  be
used  above  the  graves  of  the  dead,  it  will  attract  spirits  and  ghosts  thither.


64  XTaligmanic  flilaptc.

Now  the  use  of  suffumigations  is  this  : that  whenever  we  set  about  making
any  talisman,  image,  or  the  like,  under  the  rule  or  dominion  of  any  star  or
planet,  we  should  by  no  means  omit  the  making  of  a suffumigation  appropri-
ate to  that  planet  or  constellation  under  which  we  desire  to  work  any  effect
or  wonderful  operation  ; as  for  instance : — when  we  direct  any  work  to  the
sun,  we  must  suffume  with  solary  things;  if  to  the  moon,  with  lunary  things;
and  so  of  the  rest.  And  we  must  be  careful  to  observe  that  as  there  is  a con-
trariety, or  antipathy,  in  the  natures  of  the  stars  and  planets  and  their  spirits,
so  there  is  also  in  suffumigations : for  there  is  an  antipathy  between  lignum
aloes  and  sulphur  frankincense  and  quicksilver ; and  spirits  that  are  raised
by  the  fume  of  lignum  aloes,  are  laid  by  the  burning  of  sulphur.  For  the
learned  Proclus  gives  an  example  of  a spirit  that  appeared  in  the  form  of  a
lion,  furious  and  raging : by  setting  a white  cock  before  the  apparition  it  soon
vanished  away;  because  there  is  so  great  a contrariety  between  a cock  and  a
lion; — and  let  this  suffice  for  a general  observation  in  these  kind  of  things.
We  shall  proceed  with  showing  distinctly  the  composition  of  the  several
fumes  appropriated  to  the  seven  planets.

Of  the  Composition  of  some  Perfumes  Appropriated  to  the  Seven  Planets.

the  sun.  O

We  make  a suffumigation  for  the  sun  in  this  manner  : —

Take  of  saffron,  ambergris,  musk,  lignum  aloes,  lignum  balsam,  the  fruit
of  the  laurel,  cloves,  myrrh,  and  frankincense ; of  each  a like  quantity ; all  of
which  being  bruised  and  mixed  together,  so  as  to  make  a sweet  odour,  must
be  incorporated  with  the  brain  of  an  eagle,  or  the  blood  of  a white  cock,  after
the  manner  of  pills,  or  troches.

the  moon.  D

For  the  moon,  we  make  a suffume  of  the  head  of  a frog  dried,  and  the  eyes
of  a bull,  the  seed  of  white  poppies,  frankincense,  and  camphire,  which  must
be  incorporated  with  menstruous  blood,  or  the  blood  of  a goose.

SATURN.  h

For  saturn  take  the  seed  of  black  poppies,  henbane,  mandrake  root,  load-
stone, and  myrrh,  and  mix  them  up  with  the  brain  of  a cat  and  the  blood  of  a bat.

JUPITER,  y.

Take  the  seed  of  ash,  lignum  aloes,  storax,  the  gum  Benjamin,  the  lapis
lazuli,  the  tops  of  peacocks’  feathers,  and  incorporate  with  the  blood  of  a
stork,  or  swallow,  or  the  brain  of  a hart.

mars.  $

Take  uphorbium,  bdellium,  gum  armoniac,  the  roots  of  both  hellebores,  the
loadstone,  and  a little  sulphur,  and  incorporate  them  altogether  with  the
brain  of  a hart,  the  blood  of  a man,  and  the  blood  of  a black  cat.


TTaltsmamc  nftaptc.


65


VENUS.  ?

Take  musk,  ambergris,  lignum  aloes,  red  roses,  and  red  coral,  and  make
them  up  with  sparrow’s  brains  and  pigeon’s  blood.

mercury.  $

Take  mastieh,  frankincense,  cloves,  and  the  herb  cinquefoil,  and  the  agate
stone,  and  incorporate  them  all  with  the  brain  of  a fox,  or  weasel,  and  the
blood  of  a magpie.

General  Fumes  of  the  Planets.

To  Saturn  are  appropriated  for  fumes,  odoriferous  roots : as  pepper-wort
root,  &c.,  and  the  frankincense  tree.  To  Jupiter,  all  odoriferous  fruits : as
nutmegs,  cloves,  &c.  To  Mars , all  odoriferous  woods:  as  sanders,  Cyprus,
lignum  balsam,  and  lignum  aloes.  To  the  Sun,  all  gums:  as  frankincense,
mastieh  benjamin,  storax,  laudanum,  ambergris,  and  musk.  To  Venus,
flowers:  as  roses,  violets,  saffron,  and  the  like.  To  Mercury,  all  the  parings
of  wood  or  fruit:  as  cinnamon,  lignum  cassia,  mace,  citron  peel,  and  bay-
berries,  and  whatever  seeds  are  odoriferous.  To  the  Moon,  the  leaves  of  all
vegetables  : as  the  leaf  indum,  the  leaf  of  the  myrtle,  and  bay  tree.  Know,
also,  that  according  to  the  opinion  of  all  magicians,  in  every  good  matter
(as  love,  good-will,  &c.),  there  must  be  a good  perfume,  odoriferous  and
precious;  — and  in  evil  matters  (as  hatred,  anger,  misery,  and  the  like),
there  must  be  a stinking  fume  that  is  of  no  worth.

The  twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  also  have  their  proper  suffumigations,  viz.
Aries,  myrrh;  Taurus,  pepper-wort;  Gemini,  mastieh;  Cancer,  samphire;
Leo,  frankincense;  Virgo,  sanders;  Libra,  galbanum;  Scorpio,  oppoponax;
Sagittarius,  ignum  aloes;  Capricorn,  benjamin;  Aquarius,  euphorbium;  Pisces
red  storax.  But  Hermes  describes  the  most  powerful  fume  to  be,  that
which  is  compounded  of  the  seven  aromatics,  according  to  the  powers  of  the
seven  planets:  for  it  receives  from  Saturn , pepper-wort;  from  Jupiter , nut-
meg; from  Mars,  lignum-aloes ; from  the  Sun,  mastieh;  from  Venus,  saffron;
from  Mercury,  cinnamon ; and  from  the  Moon,  myrtle.

By  a close  observation  of  the  above  order  of  suffumigations,  conjoined  with
other  things  of  which  we  shall  speak  hereafter  (necessary  to  the  full  ac-
complishment of  Talismanic  Magic),  many  wonderful  effects  may  be  caused
especially  if  we  keep  in  eye  what  was  delivered  in  the  first  part  of  our  Magic,
viz.  that  the  soul  of  the  operator  must  go  along  with  this : otherwise,  in  vain
is  sujfumigation , seal,  ring,  image , picture,  glass,  or  any  other  instrument  of
magic:  seeing  that  it  is  not  merely  the  disposition,  but  the  act  of  the  disposi-
tion, and  firm  and  powerful  intent  or  imagination  that  gives  the  effect. — We
shall  now  hasten  to  speak,  generally,  of  the  construction  of  rings  magical,
and  their  wonderful  and  potent  virtues  and  operations.


66


Ualtsmanic  fTOaptc.


/IDaOiC  IRinOS.  Rings,  when  they  are  opportunely  made,  impress  their
virtues  upon  us  insomuch  that  they  affect  the  spirit  of  him  that  carries  them
with  gladness  or  sadness;  and  render  him  bold  or  fearful,  courteous  or
terrible,  amiable  or  hateful;  inasmuch,  also  as  they  fortify  us  against*  sick-
ness, poisons,  enemies,  evil  spirits,  and  all  manner  of  hurtful  things ; and
often,  where  the  law  has  no  effect,  these  little  trifles  greatly  assist  aud  cor-
roborate the  troubled  spirit  of  the  wearer,  and  help  him,  in  a wonderful
manner,  to  overcome  his  adversaries,  while  they  do  wonder  how  it  is  that
they  cannot  effect  any  hurtful  undertaking  against  him.  These  things,  I say,
are  great  helps  against  wrathful,  vicious,  worldly-minded  men,  inasmuch  as
they  do  terrify,  hurt,  and  render  invalid  the  machinations  of  those  who  would
otherwise  work  our  misery  or  destruction.  All  which  we  are  neither  afraid
nor  ashamed  to  declare,  well  knowing  that  these  things  will  be  hid  from  the
wicked  and  profane,  so  as  that  they  cannot  draw  the  same  into  any  abuse,  or
privy  mischief  toward  their  neighbour;  we  having  reserved  some  few  things
in  this  art  to  ourselves  — not  willing  to  throw  pearls  before  swine.  And
however  simple  and  plain  we  may  describe  some  certain  experiments  and
operations  (so  as  that  the  great-mouthed  school  philosophers  may  mutter  or
scoff  thereat),  yet  there  is  nothing  delivered  in  this  book  but  what  may  be,
by  an  understanding  thereof,  brought  into  effect,  and,  likewise,  out  of  which
some  good  may  be  derived.  But  to  proceed.

The  manner  of  making  of  these  rings  is  thus : — when  any  star  ascends  in
the  horoscope  (fortunately),  with  a fortunate  aspect  or  conjunction  of  the
moon,  we  proceed  to  take  a stone  and  herb,  that  is  under  that  star,  and  like-
wise make  a ring  of  the  metal  that  is  corresponding  to  the  star;  and  in  the
ring,  under  the  stone,  put  the  herb  or  root,  not  forgetting  to  inscribe  the
effect,  image , name , and  character , as  also  the  proper  suffume.  But  I shall
speak  more  of  these  in  another  place,  where  I speak  of  images  and  characters.
Therefore,  in  making  of  rings  magical,  these  things  are  unerringly  to  be
observed  as  we  have  ordered;  — if  any  one  is  willing  to  work  any  effect  or  ex-
periment in  magic,  he  must  by  no  means  neglect  the  necessary  circumstances
which  we  have  so  uniformly  delivered.  I have  read,  in  Philostratus  Jarchus,
that  a Prince  of  the  Indians  bestowed  seven  rings,  marked  with  the  virtues
and  names  of  the  seven  planets,  to  Appollonius,  of  which  he  wore  one  every
day,  distinguishing  according  to  the  names  of  the  days;  by  the  benefit  of
which  he  lived  above  one  hundred  and  thirty  years,  as  also  always  retained
the  beauty  of  his  youth.  In  like  manner,  Moses,  the  Lawgiver  and  Ruler  of
the  Hebrews,  being  skilled  in  the  Egyptian  Magic,  is  said,  by  Josephus,  to

•The  Author  will  engage  to  teach  any  that  are  curious  in  those  studies,  the  particular  composi-
tion of  Talismanic  Rings;  whereby  they  may  be  enabled  to  judge  themselves  of  the  effects  that  are  to
be  produced  by  them.


XTalismante  HHagtc.


67


have  made  rings  of  love  and  oblivion.  There  was  also,  as  saith  Aristotle,
among  the  Cireneans,  a ring  of  Battas,  which  could  procure  love  and  honour.
We  read,  also,  that  Eudamus,  a certain  philosopher,  made  rings  against  the
bites  of  serpents,  bewitchings,  and  evil  spirits.  The  same  doth  Josephus  re-
late of  Solomon.  Also  we  read,  in  Plato,  that  Gygus,  King  of  Lydia,  had  a
ring  of  wonderful  and  strange  virtues;  the  seal  of  which,  when  he  turned  it
toward  the  palm  of  his  hand,  no  body  could  see  him,  but  he  could  see  all
things;  by  the  opportunity  of  which  ring  he  ravished  the  Queen  and  slew  the
King  his  master,  and  killed  whomsoever  he  thought  stood  in  his  way;  and  in
these  villanies  nobody  could  see  him;  and  at  length,  by  the  benefit  of  this
ring,  he  became  King  of  Lydia.*

jfflMnfc.  The  passions  of  the  mind  are  much  helped,  and  are  helpful,  and
become  most  powerful,  by  virtue  of  the  heaven,  as  they  agree  with  the
heaven  — either  by  any  natural  agreement,  or  voluntary  election;  for,  as
Ptolemy  says,  he  who  chuseth  that  which  is  the  better,  seems  to  differ  nothing
from  him  who  hath  this  of  Nature.  It  conduceth,  therefore,  very  much  for
the  receiving  the  benefit  of  the  heavens,  in  any  work,  if  we  shall,  by  the
heaven,  make  ourselves  suitable  to  it  in  our  thoughts,  affections,  imaginations,
elections,  deliberations,  contemplations,  and  the  like.  For  such  like
passions  vehemently  stir  up  our  spirit  to  their  likeness,  and  suddenly
expose  us,  and  our’s,  to  the  superior  significators  of  such  like  passions;  and
also,  by  reason  of  their  dignity  and  nearness  to  the  superiors,  do  partake
more  of  the  celestials  than  any  material  things ; for  our  mind  can,  through
imaginations  or  reason  by  a kind  of  imitation,  be  so  conformed  to  any  star,
as  suddenly  to  be  filled  with  the  virtues  of  that  star,  as  if  we  were  a proper
receptacle  of  the  influence  thereof.  Now  the  contemplating  mind,  as  it  with-
draws itself  from  all  sense,  imagination , nature , and  deliberation , and  calls
itself  back  to  things  separated,  effects  divers  things  by  faith,  which  is  a firm
adhesion,  a fixed  intention,  and  vehement  application  of  the  worker  or  re-
ceiver to  him  that  co-operates  in  any  thing,  and  gives  power  to  the  work
which  we  intend  to  do.  So  that  there  is  made,  as  it  were,  in  us  the  image  of
the  virtue  to  be  received,  and  the  thing  to  be  done  in  us,  or  by  us.  We
must,  therefore,  in  every  work  and  application  of  things,  affect  vehemently ,
imagine,  hope,  and  believe  strongly,  for  that  will  be  a great  help.  And  it  is
verified  amongst  physicians,  that  a strong  belief,  and  an  undoubted  hope,  and
love  towards  the  physician,  conduce  much  to  health,  yea  more  sometimes
than  the  medicine  itself;  for  the  same  that  the  efficacy  and  virtue  of  the

•We  have  above  shewn  the  power  and  virtue  of  magical  rings;  but  the  particular  characters,
inscriptions,  and  images  to  be  made  in,  or  upon  them,  we  refer  the  student  to  that  chapter  treating  of
“The  Composition  of  various  Talismans;”  in  which  we  have  described  exactly  the  express  methods
of  perfecting  them.


68  ZLaligmantc  fniagtc.

medicine  works,  the  same  doth  the  strong  imagination  of  the  physician  work,
being  able  to  change  the  qualities  of  the  body  of  the  sick,  especially  when
the  patient  places  much  confidence  in  the  physician,  by  that  means  disposing
himself  for  the  receiving  the  virtue  of  the  physician,  and  physic.  Therefore,
he  that  works  in  magic  must  be  of  a constant  belief,  be  credulous,  and  not  at  all
doubt  of  the  obtaining  of  the  effect,  for  as  a firm  and  strong  belief  doth  work
wonderful  things,  although  it  be  in  false  works  — so  distrust  and  doubting
doth  dissipate  and  break  the  virtue  of  the  mind  of  the  worker,  which  is  the
medium  betwixt  both  extremes;  whence  it  happens  that  he  is  frustrated  of
the  desired  influence  of  the  superiors,  which  could  not  be  enjoined  and
united  to  our  labours  without  a firm  and  solid  virtue  of  our  mind.

The  philosophers,  especially  the  Arabians,  say,  that  man’s  mind,  when  it
is  most  intent  upon  any  work,  through  its  passion  and  effects,  is  joined  with
the  mind  of  the  stars  and  intelligences,  and,  being  so  joined,  is  the  cause  that
some  wonderful  virtue  be  infused  into  our  works  and  things ; and  this,  as
because  there  is  in  it  an  apprehension  and  power  of  all  things,  so  because  all
things  have  a natural  obedience  to  it,  and  of  necessity  an  efficacy,  and  more
to  that  which  desired  them  with  a strong  desire.  And  according  to  this  is
verified  the  art  of  characters,  images,  enchantments,  and  some  speeches,  and
many  other  wonderful  experiments,  to  every  thing  which  the  mind  affects.
By  this  means,  whatsoever  the  mind  of  him  that  is  in  vehement  love  effects,
hath  an  efficacy  to  cause  love;  and  whatsoever  the  mind  of  him  that  strongly
hates,  dictates,  hath  an  efficacy  to  hurt  and  destroy.  The  like  is  in  other
things  which  the  mind  affects  with  a strong  desire ; for  all  those  things  which
the  mind  acts,  and  dictates  by  characters , figures , words , speeches , gestures,
and  the  like,  help  the  appetite  of  the  soul,  and  acquire  certain  wonderful
virtues,  from  the  soul  of  the  operator,  in  that  hour  when  such  a like  appetite
doth  invade  it;  so  from  the  opportunity  and  celestial  influence,  moving  the
mind  in  this  or  that  manner : for  our  mind,  when  it  is  carried  upon  the  great
excess  of  any  passion  or  virtue,  oftentimes  takes  to  itself  a strong,  better,  and
more  convenient  hour  or  opportunity ; which  Thomas  Aquinas,  in  his  third
book  against  the  Gentiles,  allows.  So,  many  wonderful  virtues  both  cause
and  follow  certain  admirable  operations  by  great  affections,  in  those  things
which  the  soul  doth  dictate  in  that  hour  to  them.  But  know,  that  such  kind
of  things  confer  nothing,  or  very  little,  but  to  the  author  of  them,  and  to
him  who  is  inclined  to  them,  as  if  he  were  the  author  of  them;  and  this  is
the  manner  by  which  their  efficacy  is  found  out.  And  it  is  a general  rule  in
them,  that  every  mind,  that  is  more  excellent  in  its  desire  and  affection,  makes
such  like  things  more  fit  for  itself,  as  also  efficacious  to  that  which  it  desires.
Every  one,  therefore,  that  is  willing  to  work  in  magic,  must  know  the  virtue ,
measure,  order,  and  degree  of  his  own  soul  in  the  power  of  the  universe.


^Taltsmantc  finagle.


Efficacy  Of  lumbers.  The  doctrines  of  mathematics  are  so  necessary
to  and  have  such  an  affinity  with  magic,  that  they  who  profess  it  without
them  are  quite  out  of  the  way,  and  labour  in  vain,  and  shall  in  no  wise  obtain
their  desired  effect.  For  whatsoever  things  are,  and  are  done  in  these  inferior
natural  virtues,  are  all  done  and  governed  by  number , weight , measure ,
harmony,  motion  and  light:  and  all  things  which  we  see  in  these  inferiors
have  root  and  foundation  in  them ; yet,  nevertheless,  without  natural  virtues
of  mathematical  doctrines,  only  works  like  to  naturals  can  be  produced:  as
Plato  saith  — a thing  not  partaking  of  truth  or  divinity,  but  certain  images
akin  to  them  (as  bodies  going,  or  speaking,  which  yet  want  the  animal
faculty),  such  as  were  those  which,  amongst  the  ancients,  were  called
Dedalus’s  images,  and  avro/mra,  of  which  Aristotle  makes  mention,  viz.  the
three-footed  images  of  Vulcan  and  Dedalus  moving  themselves;  which,  Homer
saith,  came  out  of  their  own  accord  to  the  exercise;  and  which,  we  read,  moved
themselves  at  the  feast  of  Hiarba,  the  philosophical  exerciser.  So  there  are
made  glasses  (some  concave,  others  of  the  form  of  a column)  making  the
representation  of  things  in  the  air  seem  like  shadows  at  a distance;  of  which
sort  Apollonius  and  Vitellius,  in  their  books,  “De  Prospectiva,”  and
“Speculis,”  taught  the  making  and  the  use.  And  we  read  that  Magnus
Pompeius  brought  a certain  glass,  amongst  the  spoils  from  the  East,  to  Rome,
in  which  were  seen  armies  of  armed  men.  And  there  are  made  certain
transparent  glasses,  which  (being  dipped  in  some  certain  juices  of  herbs,  and
irradiated  with  an  artificial  light)  fill  the  whole  air  round  about  with  visions.
And  we  know  how  to  make  reciprocal  glasses,  in  which  the  sun  shining,  all
things  which  were  illustrated  by  the  rays  thereof  are  apparently  seen  many
miles  off.  Hence  a magician  (expert  in  natural  philosophy  and  mathematics,
and  knowing  the  middle  sciences,  consisting  of  both  these,  viz.  arithmetic,
music,  geometry,  optics,  astronomy,  and  such  sciences  that  are  of  weights,
measures,  proportions,  articles  and  joints;  knowing,  also,  mechanical  arts
resulting  from  these)  may,  without  any  wonder,  if  he  excel  other  men  in  the
art  and  wit,  do  many  wonderful  things,  which  men  may  much  admire.  There
are  some  relics  now  extant  of  the  antients,  viz.  Hercules  and  Alexander’s
pillars;  the  gate  of  Caspia,  made  of  brass,  and  shut  with  iron  beams,  that  it
could  by  no  art  be  broken;  and  the  pyramids  of  Julius  Caesar,  erected  at
Rome,  near  the  hill  Vaticanus;  and  mountains  built  by  art  in  the  middle  of
the  sea;  and  towers,  and  heaps  of  stones,  such  as  I have  seen  in  England,  put
together  by  incredible  art.  But  the  vulgar  seeing  any  wonderful  sight,  impute
it  to  the  Devil  as  his  work;  or  think  that  a miracle  which,  indeed,  is  a work
of  natural  or  mathematical  philosophy.  But  here  it  is  convenient  that  you
know,  that,  as  by  natural  virtues  we  collect  natural  virtues,  so  by  abstracted,
mathematical,  and  celestial,  we  receive  celestial  virtues;  as  motion,  sense,  life,


70  galtgmanlc  finagtc.

speech,  soothsaying,  and  divination  even  in  matter  less  disposed,  as  that
which  is  not  made  by  nature,  hut  only  by  art.  And  so  images  that  speak,  and
foretell  things  to  come,  are  said  to  be  made:  as  William  of  Paris  relates  of  a
brazen-head,  made  under  the  rising  of  Saturn,  which,  they  say,  spake  with  a
man’s  voice.  But  he  that  will  chuse  a disposed  matter,  and  most  fit  to  receive,
and  a most  powerful  agent,  shall  undoubtedly  produce  more  powerful  effects.
For  it  is  a general  opinion  of  the  Pythagoreans,  that,  as  mathematical  are
more  formal  than  natural,  so  also  they  are  more  efficacious;  as  they  have  less
dependence  in  their  being,  so  also  in  their  operation.  But  amongst  all  mathe-
matical things,  numbers , as  they  have  more  of  form  in  them,  so  also  are  more
efficacious,  as  well  to  affect  what  is  good  as  what  is  bad.  All  things,  which
were  first  made  by  the  nature  of  things  in  its  first  age,  seem  to  be  formed  by
the  proportion  of  numbers ; for  this  was  the  principle  pattern  in  the  mind  of
the  Creator.  Hence  is  borrowed  the  number  of  the  elements  — hence  the
courses  of  times  — hence  the  motion  of  the  stars,  and  the  revolution  of
the  heavens,  and  the  state  of  all  things  subsist  by  the  uniting  together  of
numbers.  Numbers,  therefore,  are  endowed  with  great  and  sublime  virtues.
For  it  is  no  wonder,  seeing  there  are  so  many  occult  virtues  in  natural  things,
although  of  manifest  operations,  that  there  should  be  in  numbers  much  greater
and  more  occult,  and  also  more  wonderful  and  efficacious;  for  as  much  as  they
are  more  formal,  more  perfect,  and  naturally  in  the  celestials,  not  mixed  with
separate  substances;  and,  lastly,  having  the  greatest  and  most  simple  com-
mixion  with  the  ideas  in  the  mind  of  God,  from  which  they  receive  their
proper  and  most  efficacious  virtues;  wherefore  they  also  are  of  most  force,  and
conduce  most  to  the  obtaining  of  spiritual  and  divine  gifts  — as,  in  natural
things,  elementary  qualities  are  powerful  in  the  transmuting  of  any  ele-
mentary thing.  Again,  all  things  that  are,  and  are  made,  subsist  by  and
receive  their  virtue  from  numbers:  — for  time  consists  of  numbers  — and  all
motion  and  action,  and  all  things  which  are  subject  to  time  and  motion.
Harmony,  also,  and  voices  have  their  power  by  and  consist  of  numbers  and
their  proportions;  and  the  proportion  arising  from  numbers  do,  by  lines  and
points,  make  characters  and  figures;  and  these  are  proper  to  magical  opera-
tions— the  middle,  which  is  betwixt  both,  being  appropriated  by  declining  to
the  extremes,  as  in  the  use  of  letters.  And  lastly,  all  species  of  natural  things,
and  of  those  which  are  above  Nature,  are  joined  together  by  certain  numbers;
which  Pythagoras  seeing,  says,  that  number  is  that  by  which  all  things  sub-
sist, and  distributes  each  virtue  to  each  number.  And  Proclus  says,  number
hath  always  a being : yet  there  is  one  in  voice  — another  in  proportion  of
them  — another  in  the  soul  and  reason  — and  another  in  divine  things.  But
Themistius,  Boetius,  and  Averrois  (the  Babylonian),  together  with  Plato,  do
so  extol  numbers,  that  they  think  no  man  can  be  a true  philosopher  without


'ftaltsmanfc  fiRagtc.


71


them.  By  them  there  is  a way  made  for  the  searching  out  and  understanding
of  all  things  knowable;  — by  them  the  next  access  to  natural  prophecying  is
had  — and  the  Abbot  Joachim  proceeded  no  other  way  in  his  prophecies,  but
by  formal  numbers.

That  there  lies  wonderful  efficacy  and  virtue  in  numbers,  as  well  to  good
as  to  bad,  the  most  eminent  philosophers  unanimously  teach;  especially
Hierom,  Austin,  Origen,  Ambrose,  Gregory  of  Nazianzen,  Athanasius,  Basilius,
Hilarius,  Rubanas,  Bede,  and  many  more  conform.  Hence  Hilarius,  in  his
commentaries  upon  the  Psalms,  testifies  that  the  seventy  elders,  according  to
the  efficacy  of  numbers,  brought  the  Psalms  into  order.  The  natural  number
is  not  here  considered  ; but  the  formal  consideration  that  is  in  the  number;
— and  let  that  which  we  spoke  before  always  be  kept  in  mind,  viz.  that  these
powers  are  not  in  vocal  numbers  of  merchants  buying  and  selling;  but  in
rational,  formal  and  natural; — -these  are  the  distinct  mysteries  of  God  and
Nature.  But  he  who  knows  how  to  join  together  the  vocal  numbers  and
natural  with  divine,  and  order  them  into  the  same  harmony,  shall  be  able  to
work  and  know  wonderful  things  by  numbers;  in  which,  unless  there  was  a
great  mystery,  John  had  not  said,  in  the  Revelation  — “He  that  hath  under-
standing, let  him  compute  the  number  of  the  name  of  the  beast,  which  is  the
number  of  a man ; ” — and  this  is  the  most  famous  manner  of  computing
amongst  the  Hebrews  and  Cabalists,  as  we  shall  shew  afterwards.  But  this
you  must  know,  that  simple  numbers  signify  divine  things,  numbers  of  ten;
celestial  numbers  of  an  hundred ; terrestrial  numbers  of  a thousand  — those
things  that  shall  be  in  a future  age.  Besides,  seeing  the  parts  of  the  mind  are
according  to  an  arithmetical  mediocrity,  by  reason  of  the  identity,  or  equality
of  excess,  coupled  together;  but  the  body,  whose  parts  differ  in  their  great-
ness, is,  according  to  a geometrical  mediocrity,  compounded ; but  an  animal
consists  of  both,  viz.  soul  and  body,  according  to  that  mediocrity  which  is
suitable  to  harmony.  Hence  it  is  that  numbers  work  very  much  upon  the
soul,  figures  upon  the  body , and  harmony  upon  the  whole  animal.

Scale  Of  “mults.  Now  let  us  treat  particularly  of  numbers  themselves;
and,  because  number  is  nothing  else  but  a repetition  of  unity,  let  us  first  con-
sider unity  itself;  for  unity  doth  most  simply  go  through  every  number,  and
is  the  common  measure,  fountain,  and  original  of  all  numbers;  contains  every
number  joined  together  in  itself  entirely;  the  beginner  of  every  multitude,
always  the  same,  and  unchangeable;  whence,  also,  being  multiplied  into  it-
self, produceth  nothing  but  itself:  it  is  indivisible,  void  of  all  parts.  Nothing
is  before  one,  nothing  is  after  one,  and  beyond  it  is  nothing;  and  all  things
which  are,  desire  that  one,  because  all  things  proceed  from  one:  and  that  all
things  may  be  the  same,  it  is  necessary  that  they  partake  of  that  one:  and  as


72  XEaltsmantc  fiHagtc.

all  things  proceed  of  one  into  many  things,  so  all  things  endeavour  to  return
to  that  one,  from  which  they  proceeded;  it  is  necessary  that  they  should  put
off  multitude.  One,  therefore,  is  referred  to  the  most  high  God,  who,  seeing
he  is  one  and  innumerable,  yet  creates  innumerable  things  of  himself,  and
contains  them  within  himself.  There  is,  therefore,  one  God  — one  world  of
the  one  God  — one  sun  of  the  one  world  — also  one  phoenix  in  the  world  —
one  king  amongst  bees  — one  leader  amongst  flocks  of  cattle  — one  ruler
amongst  herds  of  beasts  — and  cranes  follow  one,  and  many  other  animals
honour  unity.  Amongst  the  members  of  the  body  there  is  one  principal,  by
which  all  the  rest  are  guided;  whether  it  be  the  head,  or  (as  some  will)  the
heart.  There  is  one  element,  overcoming  and  penetrating  all  things,  viz.
fire.  There  is  one  thing  created  of  God,  the  subject  of  all  wondering  which


Gbe  Scale  of  Tflnttg.


4

Jod.

1

IntelleetualW  orld,

Soul  of  the  World.

CelesUal  World,

— -

One  King  of  Stars,  the  fountain  of  life.

Elemental1  World,

One  subject,  and  instrument  of  all  virtues,  natural

The  Heart.

Infernafworld,

One  Prince  of  Rebellion,  of  Angels,  and  Darkness.

is  in  earth  or  in  heaven  — it  is  actually  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral;  every
where  found,  known  by  few,  called  by  none  by  its  proper  name,  but  covered
with  figures  and  riddles,  without  which  neither  Alchymy,  nor  Natural  Magic
can  attain  to  their  complete  end  or  perfection.  From  one  man,  Adam,  all
men  proceeded  — from  that  one,  all  became  mortal  — from  that  one,  Jesus
Christ,  they  are  regenerated;  and,  as  saith  St.  Paul,  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one
baptism,  one  God  and  Father  of  all,  one  Mediator  betwixt  God  and  man,  one
most  higher  Creator,  who  is  over  all,  by  all,  and  in  us  all.  For  there  is  one
Father,  God,  from  whence  all,  and  we  in  him;  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by
whom  all,  and  we  by  him;  one  God  Holy  Ghost,  into  whom  all,  and
we  unto  him.


ZEalismanlc  flUagic.


73


Wlumber  XTWO  artb  Scale.  The  first  number  is  two,  because  it  is  the
first  multitude;  it  can  be  measured  by  no  number  besides  unity  alone,  the
common  measure  of  all  numbers;  it  is  not  compounded  of  numbers,  but  of  one
unity  only;  neither  is  it  called  a number  uncompounded,  but  more  properly
not  compounded.  The  number  three,  is  called  the  first  number  uncom-
pounded. But  the  number  two  is  the  first  branch  of  unity,  and  the  first  pro-
creation; and  it  is  called  the  number  of  science,  and  memory,  and  of  light,
and  the  number  of  man,  who  is  called  another,  and  the  lesser  world;  it  is  also,
called  the  number  of  charity,  and  of  mutual  love;  of  marriage,  and  society:
as  it  is  said  by  the  Lord  — “Two  shall  be  one  flesh.”  — And  Solomon  saith,
“ It  is  better  that  two  be  together  than  one,  for  they  have  a benefit  by  their
mutual  society:  if  one  shall  fall,  he  shall  be  supported  by  the  other.  Woe  to


Gbe  Scale  of  tbe  IRumber  fTwo.


In  the

Exemplary  World,

B1  Jah
El

The  names  of  God,  expressed
with  two  Letters.

In  the

Intellectual  World,

An  Angel,

The  Soul;

Two  Intelligible  Substances.

In  the

Celestial  World,

The  Sun,

The  Moon ;

Two  great  Lights.

In  the

Elementary  World,

The  Earth,

The  Water;

Two  Elements  producing  a
living  Soul.

In  the

Lesser  World,

The  Heart,

The  Brain;

Two  principal  Seats  of  the  Soul.

In  the

Infernal  World,

Beemoth,

weeping,

Leviathan,
gnashing  of  teeth ;

Two  Chiefs  of  the  Devils.
Two  things  Christ  threatens  to
the  damned.

him  that  is  alone;  because,  when  he  falls,  he  hath  not  another  to  help  him.
And  if  two  sleep  together,  they  shall  warm  one  another;  how  shall  one  be  hot
alone?  — And  if  any  prevail  against  him,  two  resist  him.”  And  it  is  called
the  number  of  wedlock,  and  sex;  for  there  are  two  sexes  — masculine  and
feminine.  And  two  doves  bring  forth  two  eggs;  out  of  the  first  of  which  is
hatched  the  male,  out  of  the  second,  the  female.  It  is  also  called  the  middle,
that  is  capable,  that  is  good  and  bad,  partaking;  and  the  beginning  of  division,
of  multitude,  and  distinction ; and  signifies  matter.  This  is  also,  sometimes,
the  number  of  discord,  of  confusion,  of  misfortune  and  uncleanness;  whence
St.  Hierom,  against  Jovianus,  saith  — “ that  therefore  it  was  not  spoken  in
the  second  day  of  the  creation  of  the  world.”  — “And  God  said,  that  it  was
good;”  — because  the  number  of  two  is  evil.  Hence  also,  it  was,  that  God


Ualismantc  finagle


74

commanded  that  all  unclean  animals  should  go  into  the  ark  by  couples;  be-
cause, as  I said,  the  number  of  two  is  a number  of  uncleanness.  Pythagoras,
as  Eusebius  reports,  said,  that  unity  was  God,  and  a good  intellect;  hut  that
duality  was  a devil,  and  an  evil  intellect,  in  which  is  a material  multitude:
wherefore  the  Pythagorians  say,  that  two  is  not  a number,  but  a certain
confusion  of  unities.  And  Plutarch  writes,  that  the  Pythagorians  called
unity,  Apollo;  and  two,  strife  and  boldness;  and  three,  justice,  which  is  the
highest  perfection,  and  is  not  without  many  mysteries.  Hence  there  were
two  tables  of  the  law  in  Sinai  — two  cherubims  looking  to  the  propitiatory
in  Moses  — two  olives  dropping  oil,  in  Zachariah  — two  natures  in  Christ,
divine  and  human:  hence  Moses  saw  two  appearances  of  God,  viz.  his  face
and  back  parts;  — also  two  Testaments  — two  commands  of  love  — two  first
dignities  — two  first  people  — two  kinds  of  spirits,  good  and  had  — two  intel-
lectual creatures,  an  angel  and  soul  — two  great  lights  — two  solstitia  — two
equinoctials  — two  poles  — two  elements,  producing  a living  soul,  viz.  earth
and  water.

IRumber  Tlbrcc  anb  SCftlC.  The  number  Three,  is  an  uncompounded
number,  a holy  number,  a number  of  perfection,  a most  powerful  number:  —
for  there  are  three  persons  in  God;  there  are  three  theological  virtues  in
religion.  Hence  it  is  that  this  number  conduceth  to  the  ceremonies  of  God
and  religion,  that  by  the  solemnity  of  which,  prayers  and  sacrifices  are  thrice
repeated;  for  corporeal  and  spiritual  things  consist  of  three  things,  viz.
beginning,  middle,  and  end.  By  three,  as  Trismegistus  saith,  the  world  is
perfected  — harmony,  necessity,  and  order,  i.  e.  concurrence  of  causes  (which
many  call  fate),  and  the  execution  of  them  to  the  fruit,  or  increase,  or  a due
distribution  of  the  increase.  The  whole  measure  of  time  is  concluded  in  three,
viz.  past,  present,  and  to  come;  all  magnitude  is  contained  in  three  — line,
superfices,  and  body;  — every  body  consists  of  three  intervals, — length,
breadth,  and  thickness.  Harmony  contains  three  consents  in  time  — diapason,
hemiolion,  diatesseron.  There  are  also  three  kinds  of  souls  — vegetative,
sensitive,  and  intellectual.  And  as  such,  saith  the  Prophet,  God  orders  the
world  by  number,  weight,  and  measure ; and  the  number  three  is  deputed  to
the  ideal  forms  thereof,  as  the  number  two  is  the  procreating  matter,  and
unity  to  God  the  maker  of  it.  — Magicians  do  constitute  three  Princes  of  the
world  — Oromasis,  Mithris,  Araminis;  i.  e.  God,  the  mind,  and  the  spirit.  By
the  three-square  or  solid,  the  three  numbers  of  nine,  of  things  produced,  are
distributed,  viz.  of  the  supercelestial  into  nine  orders  of  intelligences;  of
celestial,  into  nine  orbs;  of  inferiors,  into  nine  kinds  of  generable  and
corruptible  things.  Lastly,  into  this  eternal  orb,  viz.  twenty-seven,  all
musical  proportions  are  included,  as  Plato  and  Proclus  do  at  large  discourse;


Tlalismamc  flUaptc.


75


and  the  number  three  hath,  in  a harmony  of  five,  the  grace  of  the  first  voice.
Also,  in  intelligences,  there  are  three  hierarchies  of  angelical  spirits.  There
are  three  powers  of  intellectual  creatures  — memory,  mind,  and  will.  There
are  three  orders  of  the  blessed,  viz.  martyrs,  confessors,  and  innocents.
There  are  three  quaternions  of  celestial  signs,  viz.  of  fixed,  movable  and
common ; as  also  of  houses,  viz.  centres,  succeeding,  and  falling.  There  are,
also,  three  faces  and  heads  in  every  sign,  and  three  Lords  of  each  triplicity.
There  are  three  fortunes  amongst  the  planets.  In  the  infernal  crew,  three
judges,  three  furies,  three-headed  Cerberus:  we  read,  also,  of  a thrice-double


XLh e Scale  of  tbe  mumber  Gbree.


In  the
Original
World,

The  Father,

Adai,
The  Son,

The  Holy  Ghost;

The  name  of  God  with
three  Letters.

In  the
Intellectual
World,

^Supreme

Middle

Martyrs,

Lowest

of  all  Confessors;

Three  hierarchies  of  Angels.
Three  degrees  of  the  Blessed.

In  the
Celestial
World,

Moveable
Corners,
Of  the  Day,

Succeeding,

Nocturnal,

Common;

Falling;

Partaking;

Three  quaternions  of  Signs.
Three  quaternions  of  houses.
Three  Lords  of  triplicities.

In  the
Elementary
World,

Simple,

Compounded,

Thrice

compounded;

Three  degrees  of  elements.

In  the
Lesser
World,

The  head,  in  which
the  intellect
grows,  answering
to  the  intellectual
world,

The  breast,  where
is  the  heart,  the
seat  of  life,  ans-
wering to  the  cel-
estial world,

The  belly,  where
the  faculty  of  gen-
eration is,  and  the
genital  members,

anmentalgworeid;e’

Three  parts,  answering  to
the  threefold  world.

In  the
Infernal
World,

Alecto,

Minos,

Wicked,

Meg-era,

Apostates,

Ctesiphone ;
Rbadamantus;
Infidels;

Three  infernal  Furies.
Three  infernal  Judges.
Three  degrees  of  the  damned

Hecate.  Three  months  of  the  Virgin  Diana.  Three  persons  in  the  super-
substantial  Divinity.  Three  times  — of  nature,  law,  and  grace.  Three
theological  virtues — faith,  hope,  and  charity.  Jonah  was  three  days  in  the
whale’s  belly;  and  so  many  was  Christ  in  the  grave.


dumber  jfour  anb  Scale.  The  Pythagorians  call  the  number  Four,
Tectractis,  and  prefer  it  before  all  the  virtues  of  numbers,  because  it  is  the
foundation  and  root  of  all  other  numbers;  whence,  also,  all  foundations,  as
well  in  artificial  things,  as  natural  and  divine,  are  four  square,  as  we  shall
shew  afterwards;  and  it  signifies  solidity,  which  also  is  demonstrated  by  a


Xlaltsmanic  fTOaptc.


76

four-square  figure;  for  the  number  four,  is  the  first  four-square  plane,  which
consists  of  two  proportions,  whereof  the  first  is  of  one  to  two,  the  latter  of
two  to  four;  and  it  proceeds  by  a double  procession  and  proportion,  viz.  of
one  to  one,  and  of  two  to  two — beginning  at  a unity,  and  ending  at  a

Gbe  Scale  of


%55SiS££f

mm

HF—

&

S=5

-as:

SSSr

tea

c2,

■SC

ter

F0Ura=red

The  Lion,

The  Eagle,

Man,

aaa:

SB:

"assar

Matthias,
Jacob  ttmelder

Younger,

1SS'

Four  Evangelists,

Mark,

Luke,

Four  trjplicities  of

JSL,

3:.

cJsL.

Hi £?“

ju^r

»aS

F°  the  Q celestial

Light,

Di^hanous-

AgUity,

Solidity.

Four  elements,

ffi.

m

Air,

££,

3.

S3"-

Four  qualities,

Heat,

Moisture,

Cold,

Four  seasons,

Summer,

Spring,

Winter,

Autumn.

FTh^r

East,

West,

North,

South.

Animals,

Plants,

Metals,

Stones.

’TSBS-

Flying,

Swimming,

quaternity:  which  proportions  differ  in  this,  that,  according  to  Arithmetic,
they  are  unequal  to  one  another,  but  according  to  Geometry,  are  equal.
Therefore  a four-square  is  ascribed  to  God  the  Father;  and  also  contains  the
mystery  of  the  whole  Trinity : for  by  its  single  proportion,  viz.  by  the  first  of
one  to  one,  the  unity  of  the  paternal  substance  is  signified,  from  which


ZTaltsmanic  ftnapic.


77


proceeds  one  Son,  equal  to  Him;  — by  the  next  procession,  also  simple,  viz.
of  two  to  two,  is  signified  (by  the  second  procession)  the  Holy  Ghost;  from
both  — that  the  Son  be  equal  to  the  Father,  by  the  first  procession ; and  the
Holy  Ghost  be  equal  to  both,  by  the  second  procession.  Hence  that  super-

tbe  IFUimber  Jfour.


What  answers  the
elements  in  plants,

Seeds,

Flowers,

Leaves,

Roots,

What  in  metals,

Gold  and  iron,

Copper  and

Quicksilver,

Lead  and
silver.

What  in  stones,

might  and

Light  and
transparent,

Clear  and  con-
gealed,

Heavy  and
dark.

Four  elements  of

The  Mind,

Spirit,

Soul,

Body.

In  the  lesser
world,  viz.  man,
from  whom  is  the
law  of  prudence.

Four  powers  of  the

The  Intellect,

Reason,

Phantasy,

Sense.

Four  judiciary
powers,

Faith,

Science,

Opinion,

Experience.

Four  moral  virtues

Justice,

Temperance,

Prudence,

Fortitude.

The  senses  answer-
ing to  the  elements,

Sight,

Hearing,

Taste  and
smell,

Touch.

Four  elements  of
man’s  body,

Spirit,

Flesh,

Humours,

Bones.

A fourfold  spirit,

Animal,

Vital,

Generative,

Natural.

Four  humours,

Choler,

Blood,

Phlegm,

Melancholy.

Four  manners  of
complexion,

Violence,

Nimbleness,

Dulness,

Slowness.

Four  princes  of
devils,  offensive  in
the  elements,

Samael,

If

Azael,

Mahazael.

In  the  infernal
world,  where  is
the  law  of  wrath
and  punishment.

Four  infernal

Phlegethon,

Coeytus,

Styx,

Acheron.

Four  princes  of
spirits,  upon  the
four  angels  of  the
world,

Oriens,

Paymon,

Egyn,

Amaymon.

excellent  and  great  name  of  the  Divine  Trinity  in  God  is  written  with  four
letters,  viz.  Jod,  He,  and  Vau.  He,  where  it  is  the  aspiration  He,  signifies
the  proceeding  of  the  Spirit  from  both;  for  He,  being  duplicated,  terminates
both  syllables,  and  the  whole  name,  but  is  pronounced  Jova,  as  some  will
whence  that  Jove  of  the  heathen,  which  the  antients  did  picture  with  four


78


UaUsmantc  fTOapic.


ears;  whence  the  number  four,  is  the  fountain  and  head  of  the  whole,
Divinity.  And  the  Pythagorians  call  it  the  perpetual  fountain  of  Nature:
for  there  are  four  degrees  in  the  scale  of  Nature,  viz.  to  be , to  live , to  be
sensible , to  understand.  There  are  four  motions  in  Nature,  viz.  ascendant,
descendant,  going  forward,  circular.  There  are  four  corners  in  Heaven,  viz.
rising,  falling,  the  middle  of  the  Heaven,  the  bottom  of  it.  There  are  four
elements  under  Heaven,  viz.  fire,  air,  water,  and  earth;  according  to  these
there  are  four  triplicities  in  Heaven.  There  are  four  first  qualities  under
Heaven,  viz.  cold,  heat,  dryness  and  moisture;  from  these  are  the  four
humours  — blood,  phlegm,  choler,  melancholy.  Also,  the  year  is  divided  into
four  parts,  which  are  the  spring,  summer,  autumn,  and  winter : — also  the
wind  is  divided  into  eastern,  western,  northern  and  southern.  There  are,  also,
four  rivers  in  Paradise ; and  so  many  infernal.  Also,  the  number  four  makes
up  all  knowledge : first,  it  fills  up  every  simple  progress  of  numbers  with  four
terms,  viz.  with  one,  two,  three,  and  four,  constituting  the  number  ten.  It
fills  up  every  difference  of  numbers:  the  first  even,  and  containing  the  first
odd  in  it.  It  hath  in  music,  diatesseron  — the  grace  of  the  fourth  voice;  also
it  contains  the  instrument  of  four  strings;  and  a Pythagorian  diagram,
whereby  are  found  out  first  of  all  musical  tunes,  and  all  harmony  of  music:
for  double,  treble,  four  times  double,  one  and  a half,  one  and  a third  part,  a
concord  of  all,  a double  concoi’d  of  all,  of  five,  of  four,  and  all  consonancy
is  limited  within  the  bounds  of  the  number  four.  It  doth  also  contain  the
whole  of  Mathematics  in  four  terms,  viz.  'point , line , super/ices,  and
profundity.  It  comprehends  all  Nature  in  four  terms,  viz.  substance,  quality,
quantity,  and  motion ; also  all  natural  philosophy,  in  which  are  the  seminary
virtues  of  Nature,  the  natural  spi’inging  the  gi-owing  form,  and  the
compositum.  Also  metaphysics  is  comprehended  in  four  bounds,  viz.  being ,
essence,  virtue , and  action.  Moral  philosophy  is  compi-ehended  with  four
virtues,  viz.  prudence , justice , fortitude , and  temperance.  It  hath  also  the
power  of  justice : hence  a foui-f  old  law  — of  providence,  from  God ; fatal,
from  the  soul  of  the  world;  of  Nature,  from  Heaven;  of  prudence,  from  man.
There  are  also  four  judiciai-y  powers  in  all  things  being,  viz.  the  intellect,
discipline,  opinion,  and  sense.  Also,  there  are  four  l-ivers  of  Paradise.  Four
Gospels,  received  from  four  Evangelists,  throughout  the  whole  Church.  The
Hebrews  received  the  chiefest  name  of  God  written  with  four  letters.  Also
the  Egyptians,  Arabians,  Persians,  Magicians,  Mohametans,  Grecians,
Tuscans,  and  Latins,  write  the  name  of  God  with  four  letters,  viz.  thus  —
Thet,  Alla,  Sire,  Orsi,  Abdi,  0eos,  Esar,  Deus.  Hence  the  Lacedemonians
were  wont  to  paint  Jupiter  with  four  wings.  Hence,  also,  in  Orpheus’s
Divinity,  it  is  said  that  Neptune’s  chariots  are  drawn  with  four  horses.
There  ai-e  also  four  kinds  of  divine  furies  proceeding  from  several  deities,  viz.


TEaltemantc  fTOapic.


79

from  the  Muses,  Dionysius,  Apollo,  and  Venus.  Also,  the  Prophet  Ezekiel
saw  four  beasts  by  the  river  Chobar,  and  four  cherubims  in  four  wheels.
Also,  in  Daniel,  four  great  beasts  did  ascend  from  the  sea;  and  four  winds
did  fight.  And  in  the  Revelations,  four  beasts  were  full  of  eyes,  before  and
behind,  standing  round  about  the  throne  of  God;  and  for  angels,  to  whom
was  given  power  to  hurt  the  earth  and  the  sea,  did  stand  upon  the  four
corners  of  the  earth,  holding  the  four  winds,  that  they  should  not  blow  upon
the  earth,  nor  upon  the  sea,  nor  upon  any  tree.


Gbe  Scale  of  tbe  IFtumber  ffive.


The  Names  of
God  with  five
letters.  The
Name  of  Christ
with  five  let-

DVlte

nwrp

Eloim,

Elohi,

Jhesu,

“S'

Five  intelligi-
ble substan-

Spiiits  of  the
first  hierarchy,!
called  Gods,  or!
the  ^sons  of

Spirits  of  the
second  hierar-
chy, called  In-
telligences,

Spirits  of  the
the  third  hier-
archy, called
Angels  which

Souls  of
celestial
bodies,

Heroes  and

iutHluai

Five  wander-
ing stars,  lords
of  the  terms,

Saturn,

Jupiter,

Mars,

Venus,

S'

Five  kinds  of
corruptible
things,

W'ater,

Air,

Fire,

Earth,

A^d

Sr

Five  kinds  of
mixed  bodies,

Animal,

Plant,

Metal,

Stone,

SSL

Five  senses,

Taste,

Hearing,

Seeing,

Touching,

—

s

Five  corporeal
torments,

Deadly  bitter-

Horrible  howl-
ing.

Terrible  dark-

Unquench-
able heat,

A Itfnk!“g

‘S'

IRumber  3ft\?C  anb  Scale.  The  number  Five  is  of  no  small  force ; for  it
consists  of  the  first  even  and  the  first  odd  ; as  of  a female  and  male : for  an
odd  number  is  the  male,  and  the  even  the  female;  whence  arithmeticians  call
that  the  father,  and  this  the  mother.  Therefore  the  number  five  is  of  no
small  perfection  or  virtue,  which  proceeds  from  the  mixtion  of  these  num-
bers ; it  is,  also,  the  just  middle  of  the  universal  number,  viz.  ten : for  if  you
divide  the  number  ten,  there  will  be  nine  and  one,  or  eight  and  two,  and
seven  and  three,  or  six  and  four,  and  evey  collection  makes  the  number  ten,
and  the  exact  middle  is  always  the  number  five,  and  its  equa-distant ; and
therefore  it  is  called,  by  the  Pythagorians,  the  number  of  wedlock,  as  also  of


80


TEaltemantc  fTOaptc.


justice,  because  it  divides  the  number  ten  in  an  even  scale.  There  are  five
senses  in  man  — sight,  hearing,  smelling,  tasting,  and  feeling;  five  powers  in
the  soul  — vegetative,  sensitive,  concupiscible,  irascible,  and  rational;  five
fingers  on  the  hand;  five  wandering  planets  in  the  heavens,  according  to
which  there  are  fivefold  terms  in  every  sign.  In  elements  there  are  five
kinds  of  mixed  bodies,  viz.  stones,  metals,  plants,  plant-animals,  animals;
and  so  many  kinds  of  animals  — as  men,  four-footed  beasts,  creeping,  swim-
ming, and  flying.  And  there  are  five  kinds  by  which  all  things  are  made  of
God,  viz.  essence,  the  same,  another,  sense,  and  motion.  The  swallow  brings
forth  but  five  young,  which  she  feeds  with  equity,  beginning  with  the  eldest,
and  so  the  rest  according  to  their  age.  For  in  this  number  the  father  Noah
found  favour  with  God,  and  was  preserved  in  the  flood  of  waters.  In  the  virtue
of  this  number,  Abraham,  being  an  hundred  years  old,  begat  a son  of  Sarah
(Sarah  being  ninety  years  old,  and  a barren  woman,  and  past  child-bearing),
and  grew  up  to  be  a great  people.  Hence,  in  time  of  grace,  the  name  of
Divine  Omnipotency  is  called  upon  in  five  letters;  in  time  of  nature,  the
name  of  God  was  called  upon  with  three  letters  Sadai ; in  time  of  the
law,  the  ineffable  name  of  God  was  expressed  with  four  letters  nin\  instead
of  which  the  Hebrews  express  Adonai;  in  time  of  grace,  the  ineffable
name  of  God  was  written  with  five  letter  Jehsu  which  is  called  upon

with  no  less  mystery  than  that  of  three  letters  "jtyi.

dumber  Six  ant)  Scale.  Six  is  a number  of  perfection,  because  it  is
the  most  perfect  in  nature,  in  the  whole  course  of  numbers,  from  one  to  ten ;
and  it  alone  is  so  perfect  that  in  the  collection  of  its  parts,  it  results  the  same,
neither  wanting  nor  abounding;  for  if  the  parts  thereof,  viz.  the  middle,  third,
and  sixth  part,  which  are  three,  two,  one,  be  gathered  together,  they  perfectly
fill  up  the  whole  body  of  six,  which  perfection  all  the  other  numbers  want.
Henoe,  by  the  Pythagorians,  it  is  said  to  be  altogether  to  be  applied  to
generation  and  marriage,  and  is  called  the  scale  of  the  world;  for  the  world
is  made  of  the  number  six  — neither  doth  it  abound,  nor  is  defective ; hence
that  is,  because  the  world  was  finished  by  God  the  sixth  day;  for  the  sixth
day  God  saw  all  things  which  he  had  made,  and  they  were*  very  good ; there-
fore the  heaven,  and  the  earth,  and  all  the  host  thereof,  were  finished.  It
is  also  called  the  number  of  man,  because  the  sixth  day  f man  was  created.
And  it  is  also  the  number  of  our  redemption;  for  on  the  sixth  day  Christ
suffered  for  our  redemption;  whence  there  is  a great  affinity  between  the
number  six  and  the  cross,  labour,  and  servitude.  Hence  it  is  commanded  in

*The  sixth  day,  the  Eternal  Wisdom  pronounced  all  things  created  by  his  divine  hand  to  be  “ very
good.”

t Hence  arose  the  mystery  of  the  number  of  the  beast,  six  hundred  three  score  and  six,  being  the
number  of  a man— DCLXVI.


TTaltsmamc  flflagic.


81


the  law,  that  in  six  days  the  manna  is  to  be  gathered,  and  work  to  be  done.
Six  years  the  ground  was  to  be  sown  ; and  that  the  Hebrew  servant  was  to
serve  his  master  six  years.  Six  days  the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  upon
Mount  Sinai,  covering  it  with  a cloud.  The  Cherubims  had  six  wings.  Six
circles  in  the  firmament:  Artie,  An tartic,  two  Tropics,  Equinoctial  and  Eclip-
tical.  Six  wandering  planets:  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Yenus,  Mercury,  the
Moon,  running  through  the  latitude  of  the  Zodiac  on  both  sides  the  Ecliptic.
There  are  six  substantial  qualities  in  the  elements,  viz.  sharpness,  thinness,
motion;  and  the  contrary  to  these  — dulness,  thickness,  and  rest.  There  are
six  differences  of  position  : upwards,  downwards,  before,  behind,  on  the  right


Gbe  Scale  of  tbe  inumber  Sli.


In  the
Exemplary
World,

D'mton’Da

Names  of  six

In  the
Intelligible
World,

Seraphim,

Cherubim,

Thrones,

Domina-

Power*,

Virtues;

Six  orders  of
Angels,  which

inferiors,  j

In  the
Celestial
World,

Saturn,

Jupiter,

Mars,

Venus,

Mercury,

The  Moon;

^nj“

through  the
latitude  of  the
Zodiac  from
the  Ecliptic.

In  the
Elemental
World,

Rest,

Thinness,

Sharpness,

Dulness,

Thickness,

Motion;

Six  substantial
qualities  of  the
elements.

In  the
Lesser
World,

The

Intellect,

Memory,

Sense,

Motion,

Life,

Essence ;

Six^degrees  of

In  the
Infernal
World,

Acteus,

Megalesius

Ormenus,

Lyons,

Nicon,

Mimon;

Six  Devils,  the
authors  of  all
calamities.

side,  and  on  the  left  side.  There  are  six  natural  offices,  without  which
nothing  can  be,  viz.  magnitude,  colour,  figure,  interval,  standing,  motion.
Also,  a solid  figure  of  any  four-square  thing  hath  six  superfices.  There  are
six  tones  of  all  harmony,  viz.  five  tones,  and  two  half  tones  which  make  one
tone,  which  is  the  sixth.

IRumber  Seven  anb  Scale.  The  number  Seven  is  of  various  and  mani-
fold power;  for  it  consists  of  one  and  six,  or  of  two  and  five,  or  of  three  and
four;  and  it  hath  a unity,  as  it  were  the  coupling  together  of  two  threes:
whence  if  we  consider  the  several  parts  thereof,  and  the  joining  together  of
them,  without  doubt  we  shall  confess  that  it  is,  as  well  by  the  joining  together
of  the  parts  thereof  as  by  its  fulness  apart,  most  full  of  all  majesty.  And  the


82


Ualtamanic  fTOacnc


Pythagorians  call  it  the  vehiculum  of  man’s  life,  which  it  doth  not  receive
from  its  parts  so,  as  it  perfects  by  its  proper  right  of  its  whole  — for  it  con-
tains body  and  soul;  for  the  body  consists  of  four  elements,  and  is  endowed
with  four  qualities:  also,  the  number  three  respects  the  soul,  by  reason  of  its
threefold  power,  viz.  rational,  irascible,  and  concupiscible.  The  number
seven,  therefore,  because  it  consists  of  three  and  four,  joins  the  soul  to  the
body ; and  the  virtue  of  this  number  relates  to  the  generation  of  men,  and  it
causes  man  to  be  received,  formed,  brought  forth,  nourished,  live,  and  indeed
altogether  to  subsist:  for  when  the  genital  seed  is  received  in  the  womb  of
the  woman,  if  it  remains  there  seven  hours  after  the  effusion  of  it,  it  is  certain
that  it  will  abide  there  for  good;  then  the  first  seven  days  it  is  coagulated,
and  is  fit  to  receive  the  shape  of  a man ; then  it  produces  mature  infants,
which  are  called  infants  of  the  seventh  month,  i.  e.  because  they  are  born  the
seventh  month;  after  the  birth,  the  seventh  hour  tries  whether  it  will  live  or
no  — for  that  which  will  bear  the  breath  of  the  air  after  that  hour,  is  con-
ceived will  live;  after  seven  days,  it  casts  off  the  relics  of  the  navel;  after
twice  seven  days,  its  sight  begins  to  move  after  the  light;  in  the  third
seventh,  it  turns  its  eyes  and  whole  face  freely;  after  seven  months,  it  breeds
teeth;  after  the  second  seventh  month,  it  sits  without  fear  of  falling;  after  the
third  seventh  month,  it  begins  to  speak;  after  the  fourth  seventh  month,  it
stands  strongly  and  walks;  after  the  fifth  seventh  month,  it  begins  to  refrain
sucking  its  nurse;  after  seven  years,  its  first  teeth  fall,  and  new  are  bred,
fitter  for  harder  meat,  and  its  speech  is  perfected;  after  the  second  seventh
year,  boys  wax  ripe,  and  then  it  is  a beginning  of  generation  at  the  third
seventh  year,  they  grow  to  men  in  stature,  and  begin  to  be  hairy,  and  become
able  and  strong  for  generation;  at  the  fourth  seventh  year,  they  cease  to  grow
taller;  in  the  fifth  seventh  year,  they  attain  to  the  perfection  of  their  strength;
the  sixth  seventh  year,  they  keep  their  strength;  the  seventh  seventh  year,
they  attain  to  their  utmost  discretion  and  wisdom,  and  the  perfect  age  of
men;  but  when  they  come  to  the  tenth  seventh  year,  where  the  number  seven
is  taken  for  a complete  number,  then  they  come  to  the  common  term  of  life —
the  Prophet  saying,  our  age  is  seventy  years.  The  utmost  height  of  a man’s
body  is  seven  feet.  There  are,  also,  seven  degrees  in  the  body,  which  com-
plete the  dimension  of  its  altitude  from  the  bottom  to  the  top,  viz.  marrow,
bone,  nerve,  vein,  artery,  flesh  and  skin.  There  are  seven,  which,  by  the
Greeks,  are  called  black  members : the  tongue,  heart,  lungs,  liver,  spleen,  and
the  two  kidnies.  There  are,  also,  seven  principal  parts,  of  the  body:  the
head,  breast,  hands,  feet  and  the  privy  members.  It  is  manifest,  concerning
breath  and  meat,  that,  without  drawing  of  the  breath,  the  life  doth  not  remain
above  seven  hours;  and  they  that  are  starved  with  famine,  live  not  above


Haltsmante  finagle.


83


seven  days.*  The  veins,  also,  and  arteries,  as  physicians  say,  are  moved  by
the  seventh  number.  Also,  judgments  in  diseases  are  made  with  greater  mani-
festation upon  the  seventh  day,  which  physicians  call  critical,  i.  e.  judicial.
Also,  of  seven  portions  God  creates  the  soul; — the  soul,  also,  receives  the
body  by  seven  degrees.  All  difference  of  voices  proceeds  to  the  seventh
degree,  after  which  there  is  the  same  revolution.  Again,  there  are  seven
modulations  of  the  voices:  ditonus,  semiditonus,  diatesseron,  diapente  with  a
tone,  diapente  with  a half  tone,  and  diapason.  There  are  also,  in  celestials,  a
most  potent  power  of  the  number  seven ; for  seeing  there  are  four  corners  of
the  Heaven  diametrically  looking  one  towards  the  other,  which  indeed  is
accounted  a most  full  and  powerful  aspect,  and  consists  of  the  number  seven;
for  it  is  made  with  the  seventh  sign,  and  makes  a cross,  the  most  powerful
figure  of  all,  of  which  we  shall  speak  in  its  due  place — but  this  you  must  not
be  ignorant  of,  that  the  number  seven  hath  a great  communion  with  the
cross.  By  the  same  radiation  and  number  the  solstice  is  distant  from  winter,
and  the  winter  equinoctium  from  the  summer,  all  which  are  done  by  seven
signs.  There  are  also  seven  circles  in  the  Heavens,  according  to  the  longi-
tudes of  the  axle-tree.  There  are  seven  stars  about  the  Arctic  Pole,  greater
and  lesser,  called  Charles  Wain;  also  seven  stars  called  the  Pleiades;  and
seven  planets,  according  to  those  seven  days,  constituting  a week.  The  Moon
is  the  seventh  of  the  planets,  and  next  to  us,  observing  this  number  more  than
the  rest,  this  number  dispensing  the  motion  and  light  thei'eof;  for  in  twenty-
eight  days,  it  runs  round  the  compass  of  the  whole  Zodiac;  which  number  of
days,  the  number  seven  with  its  seven  terms,  viz.  from  one  to  seven,  doth
make  and  fill  up  as  much  as  the  several  numbers,  by  adding  to  the  antece-
dents, and  makes  four  times  seven  days,  in  which  the  Moon  runs  through  and
about  all  the  longitude  and  latitude  of  the  Zodiac,  by  measuring  and  measur-
ing again : with  the  like  seven  days  it  dispenses  its  light,  by  changing  it;  for  the
first  seven  days,  unto  the  middle  as  it  were  of  the  divided  world,  it  increases;
the  second  seven  days  it  fills  its  whole  orb  with  light;  the  third,  by  decreas-
ing, is  again  contracted  into  a divided  orb;  but,  after  the  fourth  seven  days,
it  is  renewed  with  the  last  diminution  of  its  light;  and  by  the  same  seven
days,  it  disposes  the  increase  and  decrease  of  the  sea:  for  in  the  first  seven  of
the  increase  of  the  moon,  it  is  by  little  and  little  lessoned;  in  the  second,  by
degrees  increased;  but  the  third  is  like  the  first,  and  the  fourth  does  the  same
as  the  second.  It  is  also  applied  to  Saturn,  which  ascending  from  the  lower,
is  the  seventh  planet,  which  betokens  rest;  to  which  the  seventh  day  is
ascribed,  which  signifies  the  seven  thousandth,  wherein,  as  St.  John  says,  the

•There  have  been  some  exceptions  to  this  affirmation,  one  of  which  fell  under  my  notice  of  late
years:  Doctor  Edward  Spry,  of  Plymouth  Dock,  Philosopher,  Cabalist,  and  Physician,  lived  upwards
of  two  years  upon  a gooseberry  a day  in  summer,  and  an  oat  cake  and  three  glasses  of  white  wine  the
rest  of  the  season,  per  day : this  gentleman  was  particularly  abstemious  in  his  diet.


84


XTaltsmanic  magic.


dragon  (which  is  the  Devil)  and  satan  being  bound,  men  shall  be  quiet  and
lead  a peaceable  life.  And  the  leprous  person  that  was  to  be  cleansed,  was
sprinkled  seven  times  with  the  blood  of  a sparrow ; and  Elisha  the  Prophet,  as
it  is  written  in  the  second  book  of  Kings,  saith  unto  the  leprous  person  —
“Go,  and  wash  thyself  seven  times  in  Jordan,  and  thy  flesh  shall  be  made
whole,  and  thou  shalt  be  cleansed.”  — Also,  it  is  a number  of  repentance  and
remission.  And  Christ,  with  seven  petitions,  finished  his  speech  of  our  satis-
faction. It  is  called  the  number  of  liberty,  because  the  seventh  year,  the
Hebrew  servant  did  challenge  liberty  for  himself.  It  is  also  more  suitable
to  divine  praises;  whence  the  Prophet  saith  — “ Seven  times  a day  do  I praise


Gbe  Scale  of


In  the
Original
World,

Ararita,

NiTHKTK

In  the  In-
telligible
World,

Zaphiel,

torenx

Zadkiel,

Camael,

Raphael,

In  the
Celestial
World.

•waff

Saturn,

P™

Jupiter,

D'hkb

wm

The  Sun,

In  the  Ele-
mentary
World,

The  lapwing,
The  cuttle  fish,
The  mole,
Lead,

The  onyx,

The  eagle,
The  dolphin,
The  hart,
Tin

The  Saphire,

The  vulture,
The  pike,
The  wolf,
Iron,

The  diamond,

The  swan,
The  sea  calf
The  lion,
Gold,

The  carbuncle,

In  the
Lesser
World,

The  right  foot,
The  right  ear,

The  head,
The  left  ear,

The  right  hand,
The  right  nostril,

The  heart,
The  right  eye,

In  the
Infernal
World,

Hell,

asm

The  gates  of  death,

The  shadow  of  death,

Dinw

The  pit  of
destruction.

nntJHKa

thee,  because  of  thy  righteous  judgments.”  — It  is  moreover  called  the  num-
ber of  revenge,  as  says  the  Scripture  — “ And  Cain  shall  be  revenged  seven-
fold.” And  the  Psalmist  says  — “ Render  unto  our  neighbours  sevenfold
into  their  bosom  their  reproach.”  Hence  there  are  seven  wickednesses,  as  saith
Solomon;  and  seven  wickeder  spirits  taken,  are  read  of  in  the  Gospel.  It
signifies,  also,  the  time  of  the  present  circle,  because  it  is  finished  in  the  space
of  seven  days.  Also  it  is  consecrated  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  the  Prophet
Isaiah  describes  to  be  sevenfold,  according  to  his  gift,  viz.  the  spirit  of  wis-
dom and  understanding,  the  spirit  of  counsel  and  strength,  the  spirit  of
knowledge  and  holiness,  the  spirit  of  fear  of  the  Lord,  which  we  read  in
Zachariah  to  be  the  seven  eyes  of  God.  There  are  also  seven  angels,  spirits


Ualtsmantc  fillagtc.  85

standing  in  the  presence  of  God,  as  is  read  in  Tobias,  and  in  the  Revelation:
seven  lamps  did  burn  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  seven  golden  candlesticks,
and  in  the  middle  thereof  was  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  Man,  and  he  had  in
his  right  hand  seven  stars.  Also,  there  were  seven  spirits  before  the  throne
of  God,  and  seven  angels  stood  before  the  throne,  and  there  were  given  to
them  seven  trumpets.  And  he  saw  a Lamb,  having  seven  horns  and  seven
eyes;  and  he  saw  the  book  sealed  with  seven  seals;  and  when  the  seventh
seal  was  opened,  there  was  made  silence  in  Heaven.

Now,  by  all  that  has  been  said,  it  is  apparent  that  the  number  seven,
amongst  the  other  numbers,  may  be  deservedly  said  to  be  most  full  of


tbe  IRumbet  Seven.


nvix  new

Mia

roa1?

The  Moon;

—

S

The  owl;

nr

illllS'

pE;:

The  left  eye;

S.TO,  hole.  Oja.  heM  41.«b«t.d

[1™

ro«

Theaepl.ofthe

$1K»

r.  Moreover,  the  number  seven  hath  great  conformity  with  the  num-


which  are  the  numbers  of  the  celestial  planets  and  signs  resulting  from  the
same  root;  and  by  the  number  three  partaking  of  the  Divinity,  and  by  the
number  four  of  the  nature  of  inferior  things.  There  is  in  sacred  writ  a very
great  observance  of  this  number  before  all  others,  and  many,  and  very  great


ing  them  out  of  holy  writ,  by  which  it  will  easily  appear  that  the  number
seven  doth  signify  a certain  fulness  of  sacred  mysteries;  for  we  read,  in
Genesis,  that  the  seventh  was  the  day  of  rest  of  the  Lord;  that  Enoch,  a pious
holy  man,  was  the  seventh  from  Adam;  and  that  there  was  another  seventh


86


TEaltsmantc  fniagtc.


man  from  Adam,  a wicked  man,  by  name  Lamecb,  that  had  two  wives ; and
that  the  sin  of  Cain  should  be  abolished  the  seventh  generation,  as  it  is
written  — Cain  shall  be  punished  sevenfold ; and  that  he  who  shall  slay  Cain,
shall  be  revenged  sevenfold ; to  which  the  master  of  the  history  collects  that
there  were  seven  sins  of  Cain.  Also,  of  all  clean  beasts  seven,  and  seven
were  brought  into  the  ark,  as  also  of  fowls;  and  after  seven  days  the  Lord
rained  upon  the  earth;  and  upon  the  seventh  day  the  fountains  of  the  deep
were  broken  up,  and  the  waters  covered  the  earth.  Also,  Abraham  gave  to
Abimelech  seven  ewe  lambs;  and  Jacob  served  seven  years  for  Leah,  and
seven  more  for  Rachel ; and  seven  days  the  people  of  Israel  bewailed  the
death  of  Jacob.  Moreover  we  read,  in  the  same  place,  of  seven  kine;  and
seven  years  of  corn;  seven  years  of  plenty,  and  seven  years  of  scarcity.  And
in  Exodus,  the  Sabbath  of  Sabbaths,  the  holy  rest  to  the  Lord,  is  commanded
to  be  on  the  seventh  day;  also,  on  the  seventh  day  Moses  ceased  to  pray.  On
the  seventh  day  there  shall  be  a solemnity  of  the  Lord ; the  seventh  year  the
servant  shall  go  out  free ; seven  days  let  the  calf  and  the  lamb  be  with  its
dam;  the  seventh  year,  let  the  ground  that  hath  been  sown  six  years  be  at
rest ; the  seventh  day  shall  be  a holy  Sabbath,  and  a rest ; the  seventh  day,
because  it  is  the  Sabbath,  shall  be  called  holy.  In  Leviticus,  the  seventh  day
also  shall  be  more  observed,  and  be  more  holy ; and  the  first  day  of  the
seventh  month  shall  be  a Sabbath  of  memorial ; seven  days  shall  the  sacrifices
be  offered  to  the  Lord;  seven  days  shall  the  holy  days  of  the  Lord  be
celebrated ; seven  days  in  a year  everlastingly  in  the  generations.  In  the
seventh  month  you  shall  celebrate  feasts,  and  shall  dwell  in  tabernacles  seven
days ; seven  times  he  shall  sprinkle  himself  before  the  Lord  that  hath  dipped
his  finger  in  blood;  he  that  is  cleansed  from  the  leprosy,  shall  dip  seven  times
in  the  blood  of  a sparrow;  seven  days  shall  she  be  washed  with  running  water
that  is  menstruous;  seven  times  he  shall  dip  his  finger  in  the  blood  of  a bul-
lock; seven  times  I will  smite  you  for  your  sins.  In  Deuteronomy,  seven
people  possessed  the  Land  of  Promise.  There  is  also  read,  a seventh  year  of
remission ; and  seven  candles  set  up  on  the  south  side  of  the  candlesticks.
And  in  Numbers  it  is  read,  that  the  sons  of  Israel  offered  up  seven  ewe  lambs
without  spot ; and  that  seven  days  they  did  eat  unleavened  bread ; and  that
sin  was  expiated  with  seven  lambs  and  a goat ; and  that  the  seventh  day  was
celebrated,  and  holy ; and  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month  was  observed,
and  kept  holy ; and  the  seventh  month  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles ; and
seven  calves  were  offered  on  the  seventh  day ; and  Baalam  erected  seven
altars ; seven  days  Mary,  the  sister  of  Aaron,  went  forth  leprous  out  of  the
camp;  seven  days  he  that  touched  a dead  carcass  was  unclean.  And  in
Joshua,  seven  priests  carried  the  ark  of  the  covenant  before  the  host;  and
seven  days  they  went  round  the  cities;  and  seven  trumpets  were  carried  by


ZTaltsmantc  fniagic.


87


the  seven  priests ; and  on  the  seventh  day,  the  seven  priests  sounded  the
trumpets.  And  in  the  book  of  Judges,  Abessa  reigned  in  Israel  seven  years;
Sampson  kept  his  nuptials  seven  days,  and  the  seventh  day  he  put  forth  a
riddle  to  his  wife ; he  was  bound  with  seven  green  withes;  seven  locks  of  his
head  were  shaved  off;  seven  years  were  the  children  of  Israel  oppressed  by
the  King  of  Maden.  And  in  the  books  of  the  Kings,  Elias  prayed  seven
times,  and  at  the  seventh  time  beheld  a little  cloud;  seven  days  the  children
of  Israel  pitched  over  against  the  Syrians,  and  in  the  seventh  day  of  the
battle  were  joined:  seven  years’  famine  was  threatened  to  David,  for  the
people’s  murmuring ; and  seven  times  the  child  sneezed  that  was  raised  by
Elisha ; and  seven  men  were  crucified  together,  in  the  days  of  the  first  harvest;
Naaman  was  made  clean  with  seven  washings,  by  Elisha ; the  seventh  month
Goliah  was  slain.  And  in  Hester  we  read  that  the  King  of  Persia  had  seven
eunuchs.  And  in  Tobias,  seven  men  were  coupled  with  Sarah,  the  daughter
of  Raguel.  And,  in  Daniel,  Nebuchadnezzar’s  furnace  was  heated  seven
times  hotter  than  it  was  used  to  be ; and  seven  lions  were  in  the  den,  and  the
seventh  day  came  Nebuchadnezzar.  In  the  book  of  Job  there  is  mention  of
seven  sons  of  Job;  and  seven  days  and  nights  Job’s  friends  sat  with  him  on
the  earth;  and,  in  the  same  place  — “In  seven  troubles  no  evil  shall  come
near  thee.”  In  Ezra,  we  read  of  Artaxerxes’s  seven  counsellors;  and  in  the
same  place,  the  trumpet  sounded;  the  seventh  month  of  the  Feast  of
Tabernacles  was,  in  Ezra’s  time,  whilst  the  children  of  Israel  were  in  the
cities ; and  on  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month,  Esdras  read  the  law  to  the
people.  And  in  the  Psalms,  David  praised  the  Lord  seven  times  in  the  day;
silver  is  tried  seven  times ; and  he  renders  to  his  neighbours  sevenfold  into
their  bosoms.  And  Solomon  saith,  that  Wisdom  hath  hewn  herself  seven
pillars;  seven  men  that  can  render  a reason;  seven  abominations  which  the
Lord  abhors;  seven  abominations  in  the  heart  of  an  enemy;  seven  overseers;
seven  eyes  beholding.  Isaiah  numbers  up  seven  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost;
and  seven  women  shall  take  hold  on  a man.  And  in  Jeremiah,  if  she  that
hath  borne  seven,  languishes,  she  has  given  up  the  ghost.  In  Ezekiel,  the
Prophet  continued  sad  for  seven  days.  In  Zachariah,  seven  lamps,  and  seven
pipes  to  those  seven  lamps ; and  seven  eyes  running  to  and  fro  through  the
whole  earth ; and  seven  eyes  on  one  stone ; and  the  fast  of  the  seventh  day  is
turned  into  joy.  And  in  Micah,  seven  sheperds  are  raised  against  the
Assyrians.  Also,  in  the  Gospel,  we  read  of  seven  blessings;  and  seven
virtues,  to  which  seven  vices  are  opposed;  seven  petitions  of  the  Lord’s
Prayers;  seven  words  of  Christ  upon  the  cross;  seven  words  of  the  blessed
Virgin  Mary;  seven  loaves  distributed  by  the  Lord;  seven  baskets  of
fragments ; seven  brothers  having  one  wife  ; seven  disciples  of  the  Lord  who
were  fishers ; seven  water  pots  in  Cana  of  Galilee ; seven  woes  which  the


Ualtsmantc  fTOaptc.


Lord  threatens  to  hypocrites;  seven  devils  cast  out  of  the  unclean  woman,
and  seven  wickeder  devils  taken  in  after  that  which  was  cast  out;  also,
seven  years  Christ  was  fled  into  Egypt;  and  the  seventh  hour  the  fever  left
the  governor’s  son.  And  in  the  canonical  epistles,  James  describes  seven
degrees  of  wisdom ; and  Peter,  seven  degrees  of  virtues.  And  in  the  Acts,
we  reckon  seven  deacons,  and  seven  disciples  chosen  by  the  Apostles.  Also,
in  the  Revelations,  there  are  many  mysteries  relating  to  this  number ; for
there  we  read  of  seven  candlesticks,  seven  stars,  seven  crowns,  seven  churches,
seven  spirits  before  the  throne,  seven  rivers  of  Egypt,  seven  seals,  seven
marks,  seven  horns,  seven  eyes,  seven  spirits  of  God,  seven  angels  with  seven
trumpets,  seven  horns  of  the  dragon,  seven  heads  of  the  dragon  which  had


£be  Scale  of  tbe  IHumber  fElflbt.


The  name
of  God
with  eight
letters.

Eloa  Vadaath  (Tl^K  Jehova  Vedaath  nj?!T|  mri'

In  the
original

Eight  re-
wards of
the

blessed.

Inherit-

Incor-

ruption,

Power,

Victory,

The
vision
of  God,

Grace,

A king-
dom,

Joy;

In  the  in-
telligible
world.

Eight

visible

heavens*

The

heaven,

The  hea-
ven of
Saturn,

The  hea-
ven of
Jupiter,

The  hea-
ven of
Mars,

The  hea-
ven of
the  Sun,

The  hea-
ven of
Venus,

The  hea-
ven of
Mercury,

The  hea-
ven of
the
Moon;

In  the  ce-
lestial
world.

Eight  par-

The  dry-
ness of
the
earth,

The  cold-
ness of

The

moisture
of  air,

The  heat
of  fire,

The  heat
of  air,

The

moisture
of  water,

The  dry-
fire,

The  cold-
ness of
earth;

In  the
element-
ary world

Eight
kinds  of
blessed

The

peace

makers,

They  that
hunger
and
thirst
after
right-
eousness

The

meek,

They
which
are  per-
secuted
for  right-
eousness
sake,

Pure  in
heart,

Merciful,

Poor  in
spirit,

Mourn-

lesser

world.

Eight  pun-
ishments
of  the
damned.

Prison,

Death,

Judg-

ment,

The

wrath  of
God,

Dark-

lDtion"a

Tribula-

| In  the
Anguish;  infernal
| world.

seven  diadems,  also  seven  plagues,  and  seven  vials  which  were  given  to  every
one  of  the  seven  angels,  seven  heads  of  the  scarlet  beast,  seven  mountains
and  seven  kings  sitting  upon  them,  and  seven  thunders  uttered  their  voices.

Moreover,  this  number  hath  much  power;  as  in  natural  so  in  sacred
ceremonial,  and  also  in  other  things;  therefore  the  seven  days  are  related
hither;  also  the  seven  planets,  the  seven  stars  called  Pleiades,  the  seven  ages
of  the  world,  the  seven  changes  of  man,  the  seven  liberal  arts,  and  as  many
mechanic,  and  so  many  forbidden;  seven  colours,  seven  metals,  seven  holes
in  the  head  of  a man,  seven  pairs  of  nerves,  seven  mountains  in  the  city  of
Rome,  seven  Roman  kings,  seven  civil  wars,  seven  wise  men  in  the  time  of
Jeremiah,  seven  wise  men  of  Greece;  also  Rome  did  burn  seven  days  by
Nero;  by  seven  kings  were  slain  ten  thousand  martyrs:  there  were  seven
sleepers;  and  seven  principle  churches  of  Rome.


XEalismantc  nilagtc.


89

IRumber  JElgbt  anb  Scale.  The  Pythagorians  call  Eight  the  number
of  justice,  and  fulness : first,  because  it  is  first  of  all  divided  into  numbers
equally  even,  viz.  into  four ; and  that  division  is,  by  the  same  reason,  made
into  twice  two,  viz.  twice  two  twice ; and  by  reason  of  this  equality  of
division  it  took  to  itself  the  name  of  justice.  But  the  other  received  the
name  of  fulness,  by  reason  of  the  contexture  of  the  corporeal  solidity,  since
the  first  makes  a solid  body.  Hence  that  custom  of  Orpheus  swearing  by  the
eight  deities,  if  at  any  time  he  would  beseech  Divine  justice,  whose  names
are  these:  — Fire,  Water,  Earth,  the  Heaven,  Moon,  Sun,  Phanes,  and  the
Night.  There  are  only  eight  visible  spheres  of  the  heavens.  Also,  by  it  the
property  of  corporeal  nature  is  signified,  which  Orpheus  comprehends  in


Gbe  Scale  of  tbe  IBumber  Wine.


The  name
of  God
with  nine
letters,

Jehovah  Sabboath,

mKM  mrv»

Jehovah  Zidkenu,

■np-vsmrp

Elohim  Gibor,

mSM  DVT^K

In  the
Original
world.

Nine  quires  of
angels,
Nine  angels
ruling  the

Sera-

phim,

Merat-

Che-

rubim

( >plia-

Thrones

Zaph-

kiel,

Domin-

ations,

Zad-

kiel,

Powers

Camael

Virtues

Ra-

Princi-

palities

Haniel,

Arch-

angels,

Michael

Angels

Gabriel

In  the  in-
telligible
world.

The

£

£

£

#

&

Venus,

#

H

S

K

Car-

Beryl,

Onyx,

Cff-

—

elements

ire,

S3S

Mo“‘

r

sr

i Jlf

*S£

S£

3S

si

&

Powers

Sifters

sj

eight  of  his  sea  songs : this  is  also  called  the  covenant  of  circumcision,  which
was  commanded  to  be  done  by  the  Jews  the  eighth  day.

There  were  also,  in  the  old  law,  eight  ornaments  of  the  priest,  viz.  a breast-
plate, a coat,  a girdle,  a mitre,  a robe,  an  ephod,  a girdle  of  the  ephod,  and  a
golden  plate.  Hither  belongs  the  number  to  eternity,  and  the  end  of  the
world,  because  it  follows  the  number  seven,  which  is  the  mystery  of  time.
Hence,  also,  the  number  of  blessedness,  as  you  may  see  in  Matthew.  It  is
also  called  the  number  of  safety,  and  conservation;  for  there  were  so  many
souls  of  the  sons  of  Jesse,  from  which  David  was  the  eighth.

^lumber  TRlllC  atlb  Scale.  There  are  nine  orders  of  blessed  angels,  viz.
Seraphim,  Cherubim,  Thrones,  Dominations,  Powers,  Virtues,  Principalities,


90


TTaltsmamc  finagle.


Archangels,  and  Angels,  which  Ezekiel  figures  out  by  nine  stones,  which  are
the  sapphire,  emerald,  carbuncle,  beryl,  onyx,  chrysolite,  jasper,  topaz,  and
sardis.  This  number  hath  also  a great  and  occult  mystery  of  the  cross;  for
the  ninth  hour  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  breathed  out  his  spirit.  The  astrologers
also  take  notice  of  the  number  nine  in  the  ages  of  men,  no  otherwise  than
they  do  of  seven,  which  they  call  climacterical  years,  which  are  eminent  for
some  remarkable  change.  Yet  sometimes  it  signifies  imperfectness  and  in-
completeness, because  it  does  not  attain  to  the  perfection  of  the  number  ten,
but  is  less  by  one,  without  which  it  is  deficient,  as  Austin  interprets  it  of  the


ZTbe  Scale  of


In  the  original,

'nMn'nin'1

ll

£2

Kether,

mrvn  ^

J22,

*

s.

In  the  intelligible

Jophiel,

Thrones,

—

Camael,

SI

■"Sr

s^erefof  i Saturn

-Hr

sp»Cs,

““•sssr1

A dove,

A lizard.

-

An  eagle,

A horse,

sp„.

sp„„

Liver,

Intworid!mal

'■'

Lying  spirits,

Revengers  of

ten  lepers.  Neither  is  the  longitude  of  nine  cubits  of  Og,  King  of  Basan,
who  is  a type  of  the  devil  without  a mystery.

Hdumber  'JTCU  attb  Scale.  The  number  Ten  is  called  every  number,  or
an  universal  number,  complete,  signifying  the  full  course  of  life;  for  beyond
that  we  cannot  number  but  by  replication ; and  it  either  implies  all  numbers
within  itself,  or  explains  them  by  itself,  and  its  own,  by  multiplying  them;
wherefore  it  is  accounted  to  be  of  manifold  religion  and  power,  and  is  applied
to  the  purging  of  souls.  Hence  the  antients  called  ceremonies  Denary,
because  they  were  to  be  expiated  and  to  offer  sacrifices,  and  were  to  abstain
from  some  certain  things  for  ten  days.


XTalismanic  finagle.


91


There  are  ten  sanguine  parts  of  man : the  menstrues,  the  sperm,  the  plaso-
natic  spirit,  the  mass,  the  humours,  the  organical  body,  the  vegetative  part,
the  sensitive  part,  reason,  and  the  mind.  There  are,  also,  ten  simple  integral
parts  constituting  man:  the  bone,  cartilage,  nerve,  fibre,  ligament,  artery,
vein,  membrane,  flesh,  and  skin.  There  are,  also,  ten  parts  of  which  a man
consists  intrinsically:  the  spirit,  the  brain,  the  lungs,  the  heart,  the  liver,
the  gall,  the  spleen,  the  kidnies,  the  testicles,  and  the  matrix.  There  are
ten  curtains  in  the  temple,  ten  strings  in  the  psaltery,  ten  musical  instru-
ments with  which  the  psalms  were  sung,  the  names  whereof  were  — neza , on


tbe  THumber  Hen.


«n  tv

Extended,

The  name  Elohim  Sabaoth ;

The  name  of  God
with  ten  letters.

rvv>K

Eloha,

mssn

Tiphereth,

mxavmrv

JehovahSaboath

Nezah,

mKMDVi^K

Elohim  Saboath,

Tin

Hod,

'W

Sadai,

“T1D**

Jeson,

ms

Adonaitnelech

rvote

Malchuth;

Ten  names  of  God.
Ten  Sephiroth.

Virtues,

Malachim,

Raphael,

Principalities,

Elohim,

Haniel,

Archangels,

Ben  Elohim,
Michael,

Angels,

Cherubim,

Gabriel,

Blessed  souls;

The  soul  of
Messiah ;

Ten  orders  of  the
blessed,  according
to  Dionysius.
Ten  orders  of  the
blessed,  according
to  the  traditions  of

Ten  angels  ruling.

Schemes,  the
sphere  of  the
Sun,

Noga,  the  sphere
of  Venus,

Cochab,  the
sphere  of
Mercury,

Levanah, the
sphere  of  the

Holom  Jeso-
doth,  the
sphere  of  the
elements;

Ten  Spheres  of  the
world.

Lion,

Man,

The  fox,

Bull,

Lamb;

Ten  animals  conse-
crated to  the  gods.

Heart,

Kidnies,

Lungs,

Genitals,

Matrix ;

Ten  parts  intrin-
sical  of  man.

Airy  Powers,

Furies,  the  semi-

Sifters,  or  triers,

Tempters,  or

Wicked  souls
hearing  rule;

Ten  orders  of  the
damned.

which  their  odes  were  sung;  nablutn,  the  same  as  organs;  mizmor,  on  which
the  Psalms;  sir,  on  which  the  Canticles;  tehila,  on  which  orations;  beracha,
on  which  benedictions;  halel,  on  which  praises;  hodaia,  on  which  thanks;
asre , on  which  the  felicity  of  any  one ; hallelujah,  on  which  the  praises  of
God  only,  and  contemplations.  There  were  also  ten  singers  of  psalms,  viz.
Adam , Abraham,  MelchisedecJc,  Moses,  Asaph,  David,  Solomon,  and  the  three
sons  of  Chora.  There  are,  also,  ten  commandments.  And  then  tenth  day
after  the  ascension  of  Christ,  the  Holy  Ghost  came  down.  Lastly,  this  is  the
number,  in  which  Jacob,  wrestling  with  the  Angel  all  night,  overcame,  and,
at  the  rising  of  the  sun,  was  blessed,  and  called  by  the  name  of  Israel.  In
this  number,  Joshua  overcame  thirty-one  kings;  and  David  overcame  Goliah


92


zraltsmantc  fniactic.


and  the  Philistines;  and  Daniel  escaped  the  danger  of  the  lions.  This  num-
ber is  also  circular,  as  unity;  because,  being  heaped  together,  returns  into  a
unity,  from  whence  it  had  its  beginning;  and  it  is  the  end  and  perfection  of
all  numbers,  and  the  beginning  of  tens.  As  the  number  ten  flows  back  into
a unity,  from  whence  it  proceeded,  so  every  thing  that  is  flowing  is  returned
back  to  that  from  which  it  had  the  beginning  of  its  flux:  so  water  returns  to
the  sea,  from  whence  it  had  its  beginning;  the  body  returns  to  the  earth,
from  whence  it  was  taken;  time  returns  into  eternity,  from  whence  it  flowed;
the  spirit  shall  return  to  God,  who  gave  it;  and,  lastly,  every  creature  returns
to  nothing,  from  whence  it  was  created.*  Neither  is  it  supported  but  by  the
word  of  God,  in  whom  all  things  are  hid,  and  all  things  with  the  number  ten,
and  by  the  number  ten,  make  a round,  as  Proclus  says,  taking  their  beginning
from  God,  and  ending  in  him.  God,  therefore  (that  first  unity,  or  one  thing),
before  he  communicated  himself  to  inferiors,  diffused  himself  first  into  the


Scale  of  IRumber  Gen.


first  of  numbers,  viz.  the  number  three ; then  into  the  number  ten,  as  into  ten
ideas  and  measures  of  making  all  numbers  and  all  things,  which  the  Hebrews
call  ten  attributes,  and  account  ten  divine  names;  from  which  cause  there
cannot  be  a further  number.  Hence  all  tens  have  some  divine  thing  in  them,
and  in  the  law  are  required  as  his  own,  together  with  the  first  fruits,  as  the
original  of  all  things  and  beginning  of  numbers,  and  every  tenth  is  as  the  end
given  to  him,  who  is  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  things.

IRumber  ]£lev>en  anb  Uwelue.  The  number  Eleven,  as  it  exceeds
number  ten,  which  is  the  number  of  the  commandments,  so  it  falls  short  of
the  number  Twelve,  which  is  of  grace  and  perfection ; therefore  it  is  called
the  number  of  sins,  and  the  penitent.  Now  the  number  twelve  is  divine,  and

* At  the  last,  the  elements  gave  up  what  they  have  ever  received ; the  sea  gives  up  her  dead,  the
fire  gives  up  its  fuel ; the  earth  gives  up  the  seminal  virtue,  &c. ; and  the  air  gives  up  whatever  voice,
sound  or  impression  it  has  received,  so  that  not  an  oath,  lie,  or  secret  blasphemy,  but  what  will  appear
as  clear  as  noonday  light  at  the  great  day  of  God.


^alismaitic  fTOaptc.  93

that  whereby  the  celestials  are  measured;*  It  is,  also,  the  number  of  signs
in  the  Zodiac  over  which  there  are  twelve  angels  as  chief,  supported  by  the
irrigation  of  the  great  name  of  God.  In  twelve  years,  also,  Jupiter  perfects
his  course;  and  the  Moon  daily  runs  through  twelve  degrees.  There  are,
also,  twelve  chief  joints  in  the  body  of  man,  viz.  in  hands,  elbows,  shoulders,
thighs,  knees,  and  veterbrse  of  the  feet.  There  is,  also,  a great  power  of  the
number  twelve  in  divine  mysteries.  God  chose  twelve  families  of  Israel,
and  set  over  them  twelve  princes;  so  many  stones  were  placed  in  the  midst
of  Jordan;  and  God  commanded  that  so  many  should  be  set  on  the  breast  of
the  priest.  Twelve  lions  did  bear  the  brazen  sea  that  was  made  by  Solomon;
there  was  so  many  fountains  in  Helim;  and  so  many  Apostles  of  Christ  set
over  the  twelve  tribes;  and  twelve  thousand  people  were  set  apart  and  chosen.

•The  use  of  these  Scales,  in  the  composition  of  Talismans,  Seals,  Rings,  &c.,  must  be  obvious  to
every  student  upon  inspection,  and  are  indispensibly  necessary  to  the  producing  of  any  effect  what-
ever that  the  artist  may  propose  to  himself ; for,  as  we  have  before  observed,  all  things  were  formed
according  to  the  proportion  of  numbers,  this  seeming  to  be  the  principal  pattern  in  the  mind  of  the
Creator;  therefore,  when  at  any  time  we  set  about  any  work  or  experiment  in  Celestial  Magic,  we  are
to  have  especial  regard  to  the  rule  of  numbers  and  proportions.  For  example,  if  we  would  obtain  the
celestial  influence  of  any  star,  we  are,  first  of  all,  to  observe  at  what  time  that  star  is  powerful  in  the
heavens,  I mean  in  good  aspect  with  the  benefices,  and  ruling  in  the  day  and  hour  appropriated  to  the
planet,  and  in  fortunate  places  of  the  figure ; then  we  are  to  observe  what  divine  names  are  ruling  the
intelligences,  or  spirits,  to  which  the  said  planets  are  subject  with  their  characters  (which  you  may
see  at  large  in  the  Magical  Tables  of  Numbers);  then,  by  referring  to  the  above  Tables  of  the  Scales,
we  may  see,  by  inspection,  to  what  numbers  are  attributed  divine  names,  and,  under  them,  the  orders
of  the  intelligences— the  heavenly  spheres  — elements  and  their  properties— animals,  metals,  and
stones — powers  of  the  soul — senses  of  man  — virtues — the  princes  of  the  evil  spirits — places  of
punishments — degrees  of  the  damned  souls — degrees  of  torments  hereafter  — and  everything  that  is
either  in  heaven,  or  earth,  or  hell;— all  our  senses,  motions,  qualities,  virtues,  words,  or  works,  are
submitted  to  the  proportions  of  numbers,  as  you  may  see  fully  exemplified  in  the  different  Scales  of
the  Numbers ; and  all  things  that  are  knowable  are  demonstrable  by  them,  and  are  attributed  to  them ;
therefore  great  is  the  knowledge  and  wisdom  to  be  derived  from  numbers.  Therefore  the  artist  must
be  well  acquainted  with  their  virtues  and  properties  — by  them  there  is  a way  open  for  the  knowing
and  understanding  of  all  things;  therefore  let  him  diligently  contemplate  these  Scales  and  like-
wise what  we  have  set  down  on  pages  69,  70  and  71,  preceding  the  Scales,  where  we  have  upon  good
authority,  explained  sufficiently  the  extent  and  force  of  formal  numbers,  which  ought  to  be  well
understood  and  attentively  considered,  as  the  ground  and  foundation  of  all  our  operations  in  this
science,  without  which  we  are  defrauded  of  the  desired  effect:  therefore  whenever  we  intend  to
Bet  about  any  experiment,  whether  it  be  an  image,  or  ring,  or  tablet,  or  mirror,  or  amulet,  or  any
other  instrument,  we  are  to  note  first  the  site,  order,  number,  and  government  of  the  intelligence  and
his  planet,  his  measure  of  time,  revolution  in  the  heavens,  &c.;  likewise  we  are  to  engrave  or  write
upon  it  its  number,  intelligence,  or  spirit,  either  for  a good  or  bad  effect,  with  the  suitable  characters
and  tables;  likewise  the  effect  desired,  with  the  divine  names  congruent  thereto;  so  that  our  opera-
tions may  be  strong,  powerful,  and  suitable  to  the  constellation  and  star,  both  in  time,  number,  and
proportion;  with  a due  and  attentive  observation  of  all  that  we  have  written  concerning  this,  without
which  all  our  operations  could  never  be  brought  to  have  the  effect  desired;  and  we  are  to  mind  that
whenever  such  an  instrument  is  perfected,  that  it  is  the  more  powerful  when  the  planet  or  constellation
(under  which  it  was  constructed)  is  ruling  and  potent  in  the  Heavens ; for  at  that  time,  whatever  we
desire  to  bring  to  perfection  by  the  said  Talisman,  as  a medium  and  instrument,  shall  by  no  means  be
prevented  or  hindered.  Therefore  take  this  as>  general  rule,  that  all  magical  instruments  whatsoever
have  no  power  in  themselves,  further  than  as  they  are  formed  under  the  influences,  and  according  to
the  times  and  numbers  of  their  proper  stars  and  constellations;  hence  is  derived  the  title  we  give
this  Book,  viz.  the*  Constellatory  Art,  or  Talismanic  Magic.  Those  who  would  further  consider  the
power,  virtue,  extent,  and  harmony  of  numbers,  let  them  read,  Pythagoras,  Plato,  Averroena,  Averroes,
&c.,  who  all  agree  in  the  virtues  lying  hid  in  numbers;  and  without  the  knowledge  of  which,  no  man
can  be  a true  philosopher.


04


TEaltsmanlc  fiftagtc.


Gbe  Scale  of


XTaltsmantc  flilagtc.


95


tbe  IRumber  twelve.


BnpnrrnipnK

Father,  Son,  Holy  Ghost,

In  the  original

•nm

nnr’

rpm

irpn

nvn

'inn

Principal  i-

Archangels,

Angels,

Innocents,

Martyrs,

Confessors.

In  the  intel-
ligible world.

Zuriel,

Barbiel,

Adnachiel,

Hanael,

Gabriel,

Barchiel.

Issachar,

Benjamin,

Napthalin,

Gad,

Zabulon,

Ephraim.

Jonah,

Obadiah,

Zephaniah,

Nahum,

Habakkuk,

Joel.

Bartholo-

Philip,

James  the

Thomas,

Matthew,

James  the
younger.

Libra,

Scorpius,

Sagittarius,

Capricorn,

Aquarius,

Pisces.

In  the  celestial
world.

September,

October,

November

December,

February.

In  the  elemental
world.

Scorpion

grass,

Mugwort,

Pimpernel,

Dock,

Dragon-

Aristolo-

chy.

Beryl,

Amethyst,

Hyacinth,

Chryso-

phrasus,

Chrystal.

Sapphire.

Kidnies,

Genitals,

Hams,

Knees,

Legs,

Feet.

In  the
elementary
world.

Furies,
the  sowers
of  evil,

Sifters,
or  triers,

Tempters,

Witches,

Apostates,

Infidels.

In  the  infernal
world.

TTaltsmantc  finagle.


96

Characters  anh  ^lumbers.  The  Hebrew  characters  have  marks  of
numbers  attributed  to  them  far  more  excellent  than  any  other  language,  since
the  greatest  mysteries  lie  in  the  Hebrew  letters,  as  is  handled  concerning
these  in  that  part  of  Cabala  which  we  call  Notariacon.  Now  the  principal
Hebrew  letters  are  in  number  twenty-two,  whereof  five  have  various  other
certain  figures  in  the  end  of  a word,  which,  therefore,  they  call  the  five
ending  letters,  which  being  added  to  them  aforesaid,  make  twenty-seven;
which  being  then  divided  into  three  degrees,  signify  units,  which  are  in  the
first  degree  — tens,  which  are  in  the  second  — and  hundreds,  which  are  in  the
third  degree.  Now  every  one,  if  they  are  mai’ked  with  a great  character,
signifies  so  many  thousands,  as  here  —

3000  2000  1000

a n k

The  classes  of  the  Hebrew  numbers  are  these  which  follow: —


9

13

90


80  70  60  50  40  30  20


900  800  700  600  500  400  300  200  100


i


1


P


Sometimes  the  final  letters  are  not  used,  but  we  write  thus:


1000  900  800  700  600  500

k nnp  nn  m m np

And  by  those  simple  figures,  and  by  the  joining  them  together,  they
describe  all  other  compound  numbers : as  eleven,  twelve,  an  hundred  and  ten,
an  hundred  and  eleven,  by  adding  to  the  number  ten  those  which  are  units;
and  in  the  like  manner  to  the  rest,  after  their  manner;  yet  we  describe  the
fifteenth  number  not  by  ten  and  five,  but  by  nine  and  six,  viz.  t31 5 and  that
out  of  honour  to  the  Divine  name  rtS  which  signifies  fifteen,  lest  that  sacred
name  should  be  abused  to  profane  things.  Likewise  the  Egyptians,
^Ethiopians,  Chaldeans,  and  Arabians,  have  their  marks  of  numbers,  which
serve  for  the  making  of  magical  characters ; but  the  Chaldeans  mark  their
numbers  with  the  letters  of  their  alphabet,  after  the  manner  of  the  Hebrews.
I found,  in  a very  antient  book  of  Magic,  some  very  elegant  characters,  which
I have  figured  in  the  following  manner:  —

1 2 3 4 5 6 78  9

r r t r r r r r p


ZEaltsmantc  flnagtc.  97

Now  of  these  characters,  turned  towards  the  left  hand,  are  made  tens.

10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90

nninn

And  those  marks  being  downwards,  to  the  right  hand,  make  hundreds;  to
the  left,  thousands,  viz.


100  200

300  400

500  600

700

800  900

L 1.

k k

1,  1 ,

L

h b

1000  2000

3000  4000

5000  6000

7000

8000  9000

J -1

\ \

■1  ,1

J

iJ  J

And  by  the  composition  and  mixture  of  these  characters,  other  compound
numbers  are  most  elegantly  made,  as  you  may  perceive  by  these  few : —

1510

1511

1471

1486

2421

J

T

1

1801

X

*

I

/IDagfC  tables  Of  planets,  etc.  There  are  certain  magic  tables  of
numbers  distributed  to  the  seven  planets,  which  they  call  the  sacred  tables  of
the  planets ; because,  being  rightly  formed,  they  are  endued  with  many  great
virtues  of  the  heavens,  insomuch  that  they  represent  the  divine  order  of  the
celestial  numbers,  impressed  upon  them  by  the  ideas  of  the  divine  mind,  by
means  of  the  soul  of  the  world,  and  the  sweet  harmony  of  those  celestial
rays;  signifying,  according  to  proportion,  supercelestial  intelligences,  which
can  no  other  way  be  expressed  than  by  the  marks  of  numbers,  letters,  and
characters;  for  material  numbers  and  figures  can  do  nothing  in  the  mysteries
of  hidden  things,  but  representatively  by  formal  numbers  and  figures,  as  they
are  governed  and  informed  by  intelligences  and  divine  enumerations,  which
unite  the  extremes  of  the  matter  and  spirit  to  the  will  of  the  elevated  soul,
receiving  (through  great  affection,  by  the  celestial  power  of  the  operator)  a


Gbe  /llbaglc  tables,  Seals  anb  Characters  of  tbe  planets,  tbelr  “(Intelligence
anb  Spirits.


“Cable  of  tbe  Sun  In  bis  Compass.  Cbc  same  in  Iftcbrew.


Cable  of  Denus  In  ber  Compass


“tin  Iftebrew.


33

T*4

v

XV

"tI'T

-i

na

V

vS

r ■

.13

_k_

O'

rS

T

3^

V

O

ns

P,

nS

n

IV

3

ns

IS

n'

s

o

i

np

100


TEaltsmanic  fTOacitc.


virtue  and  power  from  God,  applied  through  the  soul  of  the  universe;  and
the  observation  of  celestial  constellations  to  a matter  fit  for  a form,  the
mediums  being  disposed  by  the  skill  and  industry  of  the  magician.

But  now  we  will  hasten  to  explain  each  particular  table.*  The  first  table
is  assigned  to  the  planet  Saturn,  and  consists  of  a square  of  three,  containing
the  particular  numbers  of  nine,  and  in  every  line  three  every  way,  and
through  each  diameter  making  fifteen  — the  whole  sum  of  numbers  forty-five;
over  this  are  set  such  divine  names  as  fill  up  the  numbers  with  an  intelligence,
to  what  is  good,  and  a spirit  to  bad;  and  out  of  the  same  numbers  are  drawn
the  seal  and  character  of  Saturn,  and  of  the  spirits  thereof,  such  as  is  beneath
ascribed  to  the  table.

Now  this  table  being  with  a fortunate  Saturn,  engraven  on  a plate  of  lead,
helps  child-birth;  and  to  make  any  man  safe  or  powerful;  and  to  cause
success  of  petitions  with  princes  and  powers;  but  if  it  be  done,  Saturn  being
unfortunate,  it  hinders  buildings,  planting,  and  the  like,  and  casts  a man  from
honours  and  dignities,  causes  discord,  quarrelling,  and  disperses  an  army.

The  second  is  the  table  of  Jupiter,  which  consists  of  a square  drawn  into
itself;  it  contains  sixteen  particular  numbers,  and  in  every  line  and  diameter
four,  making  thirty-four;  the  sum  of  all  is  one  hundred  and  thirty-six.  There
are  over  it  divine  names,  with  an  intelligence  to  that  which  is  good,  and  a
spirit  to  bad;  and  out  of  it  is  drawn  the  character  of  Jupiter  and  the  spirits
thereof ; if  this  is  engraven  on  a plate  of  silver,  with  Jupiter  being  powerful
and  ruling  in  the  heavens,  it  conduces  to  gain  riches  and  favour,  love,  peace,
and  concord,  and  to  appease  enemies,  and  to  confirm  honours,  dignities,  and
counsels;  and  dissolves  enchantments  if  engraven  on  a coral.

The  third  table  belongs  to  Mars,  which  is  made  of  a square  of  five,
containing  twenty-five  numbers,  and  of  these,  in  every  side  and  diameter,  five,
which  makes  sixty-five,  and  the  sum  of  all  is  three  hundred  and  twenty-five;
and  there  are  over  it  divine  names  with  an  intelligence  to  good,  and  a spirit
to  evil,  and  out  of  it  is  drawn  the  characters  of  Mars  and  of  his  spirits.  These,
with  Mars  fortunate,  being  engraven  on  an  iron  plate,  or  sword,  makes  a man
potent  in  war  and  judgment,  and  petitions,  and  terrible  to  his  enemies;  and
victorious  over  them;  and  if  engraven  upon  the  stone  correola,  it  stops  blood,
and  the  menstrues;  but  if  it  be  engraven,  with  Mars  being  unfortunate,  on  a
plate  of  red  brass,  it  prevents  and  hinders  buildings  — it  casts  down  the
powerful  from  dignities,  honours,  and  riches  — causes  discord  and  hatred
amongst  men  and  beasts  — drives  away  bees,  pigeons,  and  fish  — and  hinders
mills  from  working,  i.  e.  binds  them;  — it  likewise  renders  hunters  and  fighters
unfortunate  — causes  barrenness  in  men  and  women  — and  strikes  a terror
into  our  enemies,  and  compels  them  to  submit.

* For  the  figure  of  the  Tables,  Seals,  Characters,  &c.  of  the  seven  Planets,  see  the  Plates.


TTalismantc  HUapte.


101


The  fourth  table  is  of  the  Sun,  and  is  made  of  a square  of  six,  and  contains
thirty-six  particular  numbers,  whereof  six  in  every  side  and  diameter  produce
one  hundred  and  eleven,  and  the  sum  of  all  is  six  hundred  and  sixty-six;
there  are  over  it  divine  names,  with  an  intelligence  to  what  is  good,  and  a
spirit  to  what  is  evil,  and  out  of  it  is  drawn  the  character  of  the  Sun  and  of
his  spirits.  This  being  engraven  on  a plate  of  pure  gold,  Sol  being  fortunate,
renders  him  that  wears  it  renowned,  amiable,  acceptable,  potent  in  all  his
works,  and  equals  him  to  a king,  elevating  his  fortunes,  and  enabling  him  to
do  whatever  he  will.  But  with  an  unfortunate  Sun,  it  makes  one  a tyrant,
proud,  ambitious,  insatiable,  and  finally  to  come  to  an  ill  ending.

The  fifth  table  is  of  Yenus;  consisting  of  a square  of  seven,  drawn  into
itself,  viz.  of  forty-nine  numbers,  whereof  seven  on  each  side  and  diameter
make  one  hundred  and  seventy-five,  and  the  sum  of  all  is  one  thousand  two
hundred  and  twenty-five;  there  are,  likewise,  over  it  divine  names,  with  an
intelligence  to  good,  and  a spirit  to  evil;  and  there  is  drawn  out  of  it  the
character  of  Venus,  and  her  spirits.  This  being  engraven  on  a plate  of  silver,
Yenus  being  fortunate,  promotes  concord,  ends  strife,  procures  the  love  of
women,  helps  conception,  is  good  against  barrenness,  gives  ability  for  genera-
tion, dissolves  enchantments,  causes  peace  between  man  and  woman,  and
makes  all  kinds  of  animals  fruitful,  and  likewise  cattle;  and  being  put  into  a
dove  or  pigeon  house,  causes  an  increase;  it  likewise  drives  away  melancholy
distempers,  and  causes  joyfulness;  and  this  being  carried  about  travellers,
makes  them  fortunate.  But  if  it  be  found  upon  brass,  Venus  being  unfor-
tunate, it  acts  contrary  to  all  that  has  been  said.

The  sixth  table  is  of  Mercury,  resulting  from  a square  of  eight  drawn  into
itself,  containing  sixty-four  numbers,  whereof  eight  on  every  side  and  by  both
diameters  make  two  hundred  and  sixty,  and  the  sum  of  all  is  two  thousand  and
eighty  ; and  over  it  are  set  divine  names,  with  an  intelligence  to  good,  with  a
spirit  to  bad,  and  from  it  is  drawn  a character  of  Mercury,  and  the  spirits
thereof;  and  if,  with  Mercury  being  fortunate,  you  engrave  it  upon  silver,  tin,
or  yellow  brass,  or  write  it  upon  virgin  parchment,  it  renders  the  bearer
thereof  grateful,  acceptable,  and  fortunate  to  do  what  he  pleases : it  brings  gain,
and  prevents  poverty ; helps  the  memory,  understanding,  and  divination,  and
to  the  understanding  of  occult  things  by  dreams ; but  with  an  unfortunate
Mercury  does  every  thing  contrary  to  this.

The  seventh  and  last  table  is  of  the  Moon  : it  consists  of  a square  of  nine,
having  eighty-one  numbers  in  every  side,  and  diameter  nine,  producing  three
hundred  and  sixty-nine ; and  the  sum  of  all  is  three  thousand  three  hundred
and  twenty-one.  There  are  over  it  divine  names,  with  an  intelligence  to  what
is  good,  and  a spirit  to  evil ; and  from  it  are  drawn  the  characters  of  the  Moon
and  the  spirits  thereof.  This,  the  Moon  being  fortunate,  engraven  on  silver,


Cbe  flfcaflic  tables,  Seals  anb  Characters  of  tbe  planets,  tbelr  Untelltgence
anb  Spirits.


•Cable  of  flbercurt  in  bfs  Compass.


Cbe  same  fn  Ibebrew.


9

S3

J9

J

4

62

63

/

49

IS

/4

J2

S3

//

7 O

36

23

72

44

4#

>9

IS

43

32

34

S3

'29

2S

JS

69

29

40

26'

37

36

30

3/

33

n

47

46

20

2/

43

42

24

9

JJ

S4

n

13

St

SO

16

64

2

J

ffi

<60

6

2-

Seal  or  Character  of  /Ibcrcut?.


Character  of  tbe  UntcIUgence  of  flbercurs.  Character  of  tbe  Sptrtt  of  flBercun;.

5 $


tlbe  flbaflfc  tables,  Seals  anb  Characters  of  tbe  planets,  tbelr  UntelUflence
anb  Spirits.


'Cable  of  tbe  /Boon  <n  bet  Compass.


“Cbe  same  fn  Ibcbrew.


37

7 8

29

7 0

<11

62

13

6u

5

6

38

79

30

71

22

63

14

46

47

7

39

80

31

72

23

65

15

16

18

8

40

81

32

64

24

66

67

17

49

9

U

73

33

65

26

<16

68

18

60

1

42

74

34

66

67

27

69

10

61

£

43

76

1 36

36

68

19

66

//

62

3

44

76

77

28

69

20

6)

12

63

4

46

nv

EO

V

XO

Ot)

r

n

1

nn

av

s

XV

35

;d

T

W

ro

r

ah

D

th

oy

23

T1J

rr

V

710

n

B

X9I

01

10

“O

7)

n

V

w

55

XS

Jv

2h

no

to

ID

n, j

n’

2

S

30

iy

n4?

70

ro

ID

E3J

1

M

3

M

ny

77"?

no

b'

D

X’

3]

21

no

TV

ro

33

D

XD

3s

a

i

no

Zlatisinante  fTOaptc.


104

makes  the  bearer  amiable,  pleasant,  cheerful,  and  honoured,  removing  all
malice  and  ill-will ; it  causes  security  in  the  journey,  increase  of  riches,  and
health  of  body,  drives  away  enemies,  and  other  evil  things  from  what  place
soever  thou  shalt  wish  them  to  be  expelled.  But  if  the  Moon  be  unfortunate,
and  it  be  engraven  on  a plate  of  lead,  wherever  it  shall  be  buried  it  makes  that
place  unfortunate,  and  the  inhabitants  thereabouts,  as  also  ships,  rivers,  foun-
tains, and  mills ; and  it  makes  every  man  unfortunate  against  whom  it  shall
be  directly  done,  making  him  fly  his  place  of  abode  (and  even  his  country)
where  it  shall  be  buried  ; and  it  hinders  physicians  and  orators,  and  all  men
whatsoever  in  their  office,  against  whom  it  shall  be  made.

Now  how  the  seals  and  characters  of  the  planets  are  drawn  from  these  tables,
the  wise  searcher,  and  he  who  shall  understand  the  verifying  of  these  tables,
shall  easily  find  out.

Here  follow  the  divine  names  corresponding  with  the  numbers  of  the  planets,
with  the  names  of  the  intelligences  and  daemons,  or  spirits,  subject  to  those
names.

It  is  to  be  understood  that  the  intelligences  are  the  presiding  good  angels
that  are  set  over  the  planets ; but  that  the  spirits  or  daemons,  with  their  names
seals,  or  characters,  are  never  inscribed  upon  any  Talisman,  except  to  execute
any  evil  effect,  and  that  they  are  subject  to  the  intelligences,  or  good  spirits;
and  again,  when  the  spirits  and  their  characters  are  used,  it  will  be  more  con-
ducive to  the  effect  to  add  some  divine  name  appropriate  to  that  effect  which
we  desire.


Names  answering  to  the  Numbers  of  Saturn.

h

Numbers.  Divine  Names.  Divine

3 Ab
9 Hod
15  Jah
15  Hod

45  Jehovah  extended

45  Agiel,  the  Intelligence  of  Saturn

45  Zazel,  the  Spirit  of  Saturn


Names  in  Hebrew.


rp

Tin

xmxixnnr

tow#

VWT


Names  answering  to  the  Numbers  of  Jupiter.


%

4 Aba  X3X

16  mn

16  VIK

34  El  Ab

136  Johphiel,  the  Intelligence  of  Jupiter
136  Hismael,  the  Spirit  of  Jupiter


XTaltsmantc  nnagtc>

Names  answering  to  the  Numbers  of  Mars.


105


S

Numbers.  Divine  Names.

5  He,  the  letter  of  the  holy  name
25

65  Adonai

325  Grapliiel,  the  Intelligence  of  Mars
825  Barzabel,  the  Spirit  of  Mars


Divine  Names  in  Hebrew.


n

w


Names  answering  to  the  Numbers  of  the  Sun.

G

6  Vau,  the  letter  of  the  holy  name

6 He  extended,  the  letter  of  the  holy  name

36  Eloh  n^S‘

111  Nachiel,  the  Intelligence  of  the  Sun  ^*03

666  Sorath,  the  Spirit  of  the  Sun  miD

Names  answering  to  the  Numbers  of  Venus.

9

7 Aha

49  Hagiel,  the  Intelligence  of  Venus  *?NVJn

175  Kedemel,  the  Spirit  of  Venus

1225  Bne  Seraphim,  the  Intelligence  of  Venus  'Ja

Names  answering  to  the  Numbers  of  Mercury.

$

8 Asboga,  eight  extended  itlQTS

64  Din  pi

64  Doni  \31

260  Tiriel,  the  Intelligence  of  Mercury
2080  Tapthartharath,  the  Spirit  of  Mercury  mmfiSn

Names  answering  to  the  Numbers  of  the  Moon.

3

9 Hod  in

81  Elim

369  Hasmodai,  the  Spirit  of  the  Moon  ‘WlOt^n

3321  Schedbarschemoth  Schartathan,  the  Spirit
of  the  Spirits  of  the  Moon
3321  Malcha  betharsisim  hed  beruah  schehalim,
the  Intelligence  of  the  Intelligences  of


the  Moon  D'pntrniiaiyD^trrrOK^p


106


zraltsmantc  fTOagfc.


Every  natural  virtue  works  things  far  more  wonderful  when  it  is  not  only
compounded  of  a natural  proportion,  but  also  is  informed  by  a choice  observa-
tion of  the  celestials  opportune  to  this  (viz.  when  the  celestial  power  is  most
strong  to  that  effect  which  we  desire,  and  also  helped  by  many  celestials),  by
subjecting  inferiors  to  the  celestials,  as  proper  females,  to  be  made  fruitful  by
their  males.  Also,  in  every  work  there  are  to  be  observed  the  situation,  mo-
tion, and  aspect  of  the  stars  and  planets,  in  signs  and  degrees,  and  how  all
these  stand  in  reference  to  the  length  and  latitude  of  the  climate;  for  by  this
are  varied  the  qualities  of  the  angles,  which  the  rays  of  the  celestial  bodies
upon  the  figure  of  the  thing  describe,  according  to  which  celestial  virtues  are
infused.  So  when  you  are  working  anything  which  belongs  to  any  planet,
you  must  place  it  in  its  dignities  fortunate,  and  powerful,  and  ruling  in  the
day  hour,  and  in  the  figure  of  the  heavens.  Neither  must  you  expect  the
signification  of  the  work  to  be  powerful,  but  you  must  observe  the  Moon  op-
portunely directed  to  this ; for  you  shall  do  nothing  without  the  assistance  of
the  Moon.  And  if  you  have  more  patterns  of  your  work,  observe  them  all,
being  most  powerful,  and  looking  upon  one  another  with  a friendly  aspect;
and  if  you  cannot  have  such  aspects,  it  will  be  convenient  at  least  that  you
take  them  angular.  But  you  shall  take  the  Moon  either  when  she  looks  upon
both,  or  is  joined  to  one,  and  looks  upon  the  other,  or  when  she  passes  from
the  conjunction  or  aspect  of  one,  to  the  conjunction  or  aspect  of  the  other;
for  that,  I conceive,  must  in  no  wise  be  omitted.  Also,  you  shall  in  every
work  observe  Mercury,  for  he  is  a messenger  between  the  higher  gods  and  the
infernal  gods : when  he  goes  to  the  good,  he  increases  their  goodness — when
to  the  bad,  he  hath  influence  on  their  wickedness.  We  call  it  an  unfortunate
sign  or  planet,  when  it  is,  by  the  aspect  of  Saturn  or  Mars  especially,  opposite
or  quadrant,  for  these  are  the  aspects  of  enmity ; but  a conjunction,  a trine,
and  a sextile  aspect,  are  of  friendship;  between  these  there  is  a greater  con-
junction ; but  yet  if  you  do  already  behold  it  through  a trine,  and  the  planet  be
received,  it  is  accounted  as  already  conjoined.  Now  all  planets  are  afraid  of
the  conjunction  of  the  Sun,  rejoicing  in  the  trine,  and  sextile  aspect  thereof.

Now  we  shall  have  the  planets  powerful  when  they  are  ruling  in  a house,  or
in  exultation,  or  triplicity,  or  term,  or  face,  without  combustion  of  what  is
direct  in  the  figure  of  the  heavens,  viz.  when  they  are  in  angles,  especially  of
the  rising,  or  tenth,  or  in  houses  presently  succeeding,  or  in  their  delights ;
but  we  must  take  heed  that  they  are  not  in  the  bounds  or  under  the  dominion
of  Saturn  or  Mars,  lest  they  be  in  dark  degrees,  in  pits,  or  vacuities.  You
shall  observe  that  the  angles  of  the  ascendant,  and  tenth,  and  seventh  be  for-
tunate ; as  also  the  lord  of  the  ascendant,  and  place  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,
and  place  of  the  part  of  fortune,  and  the  lord  thereof,  the  lord  of  the  foregoing
conjunction  and  prevention.  But  that  they  of  the  malignant  planet  fall  un-


TEaltgmantc  finagle.


107

fortunate ; unless  happily  they  be  significators  of  thy  work,  or  can  he  of  any
advantage  to  thee,  or  in  thy  revolution  or  birth  they  had  the  predominance,
for  then  they  are  not  at  all  to  be  depressed.  Now  we  shall  have  the  Moon
powerful  if  she  be  in  her  house,  or  exaltation,  or  triplicity,  or  face,  or  in  de-
gree convenient  for  the  desired  work;  and  if  it  had  a mansion  of  these  twenty-
eight,  suitable  to  itself  and  the  work,  let  her  not  in  the  way  be  burnt  up,*  nor
slow  in  course — let  her  not  be  in  the  eclipse,  or  burnt  by  the  Sun,  unless  she
be  in  unity  with  the  Sun — let  her  not  descend  in  the  southern  latitude,  when
she  goeth  out  of  the  burning — neither  let  her  be  opposite  to  the  Sun,  nor  de-
prived of  light — let  her  not  be  hindered  by  Mars  or  Saturn.

There  is  the  like  consideration  to  be  had  in  all  things  concerning  the  fixed
stars.  Know  this,  that  all  the  fixed  stars,  are  of  the  signification  and  nature
of  the  seven  planets ; but  some  are  of  the  nature  of  one  planet,  and  some  of
two.  Hence,  as  often  as  any  planet  is  joined  with  any  of  the  fixed  stars  of  its
own  nature,  the  signification  of  that  star  is  made  more  powerful,  and  the  na-
ture of  the  planet  augmented;  but  if  it  be  a star  of  two  natures,  the  nature  of
that  which  shall  be  the  stronger  with  it,  shall  overcome  in  signification : as  for
example,  if  it  be  of  the  nature  of  Mars  and  Yenus,  if  Mars  shall  be  the  stronger
with  it,  the  nature  of  Mars  shall  overcome  ; but  if  Venus,  the  nature  of  Yenus
shall  overcome.  Now  the  natures  of  fixed  stars  are  discovered  by  their  colours,
as  they  agree  with  certain  planets,  and  are  ascribed  to  them.  Now  the  colours
of  the  planets  are  these  : — of  Saturn,  blue,  and  leaden,  and  shining  with  this;
of  Jupiter,  citrine,  near  to  a paleness,  and  clear  with  this;  of  Mars,  red  and
fiery;  of  the  Sun,  yellow,  and  when  it  rises  red,  afterwards  glittering;  of
Venus,  white  and  shining — white  in  the  morning,  and  reddish  in  the  evening;
of  Mercury,  glittering ; of  the  Moon,  fair.  Know,  also,  that  of  the  fixed  stars,
by  how  much  the  greater,  and  brighter,  and  apparent  they  are,  so  much  the
greater  and  stronger  is  the  signification  : such  are  those  stars  called  by  the
astrologers  of  the  first  and  second  magnitude.  I will  tell  thee  some  of  these
which  are  more  potent  to  this  faculty,  viz.  the  navel  of  Andromeda,  in  the
twenty-second  degree  of  Aries,  of  the  nature  of  Venus  and  Mercury  — some
call  it  jovial  and  saturnine ; the  head  of  Algol,  in  the  eighteenth  degree  of
Taurus,  of  the  nature  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter;  the  Pleiades  are  also  in  the
twenty-second  degree,  a lunary  star  by  nature,  and  complexion  martial ; also
Aldeboram,  in  the  third  degree  of  Gemini,  is  of  the  nature  of  Mars,  and  com-
plexion of  Venus  — but  Hermes  places  this  in  the  twenty-fifth  degree  of  Aries ;
the  Goat  star,  in  the  thirteenth  degree  of  Gemini,  is  of  the  nature  of  Jupiter
and  Saturn;  the  Great  Dog  star  is  in  the  seventh  degree  of  Cancer  and  Vene-
real ; the  Little  Dog  star  is  in  the  seventeenth  degree  of  the  same,  and  is  of
the  nature  of  Mercury,  and  complexion  of  Mars;  the  King  star,  which  is  called


Via  Combusta.


galtsmanic  fTOagic.


108

the  Heart  of  the  Lion,  is  in  the  twenty-first  degree  of  Leo,  and  of  the  nature
of  Jupiter  and  Mars;  the  tail  of  the  Great  Bear  is  in  the  nineteenth  degree  of
Virgo,  and  is  venereal  and  lunary.  The  star  which  is  called  the  Right  Wing
of  the  Crow,  is  in  the  seventh  degree  of  Libra;  and  in  the  thirteenth  degree
of  the  same,  is  the  left  wing  of  the  same,  and  both  of  the  nature  of  Saturn  and
Mars.  The  star  called  Spica,  is  in  the  sixteenth  degree  of  the  same,  and  is
venereal  and  mercurial.  In  the  seventeenth  degree  of  the  same  is  Alcameth,
of  the  nature  of  Mars  and  Jupiter;  hut  of  this,  when  the  Sun’s  aspect  is  full
towards  it — of  that,  when  on  the  contrary.  Elepheia,  in  the  fourth  degree
of  Scorpio,  of  the  nature  of  Venus  and  Mars.  The  heart  of  the  Scorpion  is  in
the  third  degree  of  Sagittarius,  of  the  nature  of  Mars  and  Jupiter.  The  fall-
ing Vulture  is  in  the  seventh  degree  of  Capricorn,  temperate,  mercurial,  and
venereal.  The  tail  of  Capricorn  is  in  the  sixteenth  degree  of  Aquarius,  of  the
nature  of  Saturn  and  Mercury.  The  star  called  the  Shoulder  of  the  Horse,  is
in  the  third  degree  of  Pisces,  of  the  nature  of  Jupiter  and  Mars. — And  it
shall  be  a general  rule  for  you  to  expect  the  proper  gifts  of  the  stars,  whilst
they  rule  — to  be  prevented  of  them,  they  being  unfortunate,  as  is  above
shewed ; for  celestial  bodies,  inasmuch  as  they  are  affected  fortunately  or  un-
fortunately, so  much  do  they  affect  us,  our  works,  and  those  things  which  we
use,  fortunately  or  unhappily.  And  although  many  effects  proceed  from  the
fixed  stars,  yet  they  are  attributed  to  the  planets ; as  because  being  more  near
to  us,  and  more  distinct  and  known,  so  because  they  execute  whatever  the
superior  stars  communicate  to  them.

©f  tbe  Sun  anb  /Hioon.  The  Sun  and  Moon  have  obtained  the  admi-
nistration of  ruling  the  heavens,  and  all  bodies  under  the  heavens.  The  Sun
is  the  lord  of  all  elementary  virtues ; and  the  Moon,  by  virtue  of  the  Sun,  is
mistress  of  generation,  increase  or  decrease.  Albumsar  says,  that  by  the  Sun
and  Moon,  life  is  infused  into  all  things ; which  Orpheus  calls  the  enlivening
eyes  of  Heaven.  The  Sun  giveth  light  to  all  things  of  itself,  and  gives  it  plen-
tifully, not  only  to  all  things  in  heaven  and  air,  but  earth  and  deep.  What-
ever good  we  have,  Jamblicus  says,  we  have  it  from  the  Sun  alone;  or  from  it
through  other  things.  Heraclitus  calls  the  Sun,  the  fountain  of  celestial  light;
and  many  of  the  Platonists  placed  the  soul  of  the  world  chiefly  in  the  Sun,  as
that  which,  filling  the  whole  globe  of  the  Sun,  doth  send  forth  its  rays  on  all
sides,  as  it  were  a spirit  through  all  things,  distributing  life,  sense,  and  mo-
tion to  the  universe.  Hence  the  antient  naturalists  called  the  Sun  the  very
heart  of  Heaven ; and  the  Chaldeans  put  it  as  the  middle  of  the  Planets.  The
Egyptians  also  placed  it  in  the  middle  of  the  world,  viz.  between  the  two  fives
of  the  world;  i.  e.  above  the  Sun  they  place  five  planets,  and  under  him,  the
Moon  and  four  elements.  For  it  is,  amongst  the  other  stars,  the  image  and


Ualtsmantc  flftagtc


109


statue  of  the  great  Prince  of  both  worlds,  viz.  terrestial  and  celestial;  the  true
light,  and  the  most  exact  image  of  God  himself : whose  essence  resembles  the
Father  — light,  the  Son — heat,  the  Holy  Ghost.  So  that  the  Platonists  have
nothing  to  hold  forth  the  divine  essence  more  manifestly  by  than  this.  The
Sun  disposes  even  the  very  spirit  and  mind  of  man,  which  Homer  says,  and  is
approved  by  Aristotle,  that  there  are  in  the  mind  such  like  motions  as  the  Sun,
the  prince  and  moderator  of  the  planets,  brings  to  us  everyday;  but  the  Moon,
the  nearest  to  the  earth,  the  receptacle  of  all  the  heavenly  influences,  by  the
swiftness  of  her  course,  is  joined  to  the  Sun,  and  the  other  planets  and  stars,
every  month;  and  receiving  the  beams  and  influences  of  all  the  other  planets
and  stars,  as  a conception,  bringing  them  forth  to  the  inferior  world,  as  being
next  to  itself ; for  all  the  stars  have  influence  on  it,  being  the  last  receiver,
which  afterwards  communicates  the  influence  of  all  the  superiors  to  these  in-
feriors, and  pours  them  forth  on  the  earth ; and  it  more  manifestly  disposes
these  inferiors  than  others.  Therefore  her  motion  is  to  be  observed  before
the  others,  as  the  parent  of  all  conceptions,  which  it  diversely  issues  forth  in
these  inferiors,  according  to  the  diverse  complexion,  motion,  situation,  and
different  aspects  to  the  planets  and  other  stars;  and  though  it  receives  powers
from  all  the  stars,  yet  especially  from  the  Sun,  as  oft  as  it  is  in  conjunction
with  the  same,  it  is  replenished  with  vivifying  virtue ; and,  according  to
the  aspect  thereof,  it  borrows  its  complexion.  From  it  the  heavenly  bodies
begin  that  series  of  things  which  Plato  calls  the  golden  chain ; by  which
every  thing  and  cause,  being  linked  one  to  another,  do  depend  on  the  superior
even  until  it  may  be  brought  unto  the  supreme  cause  of  all,  from  which  all
things  depend;  hence  it  is,  that,  without  the  Moon  intermediating,  we  cannot
at  any  time  attract  the  power  of  the  superiors ; therefore,  to  obtain  the  virtue
of  any  star,  take  the  stone  and  herb  of  that  planet,  when  the  Moon  fortunately
comes  under,  or  has  a good  aspect  on,  that  star.

And  seeing  the  Moon  measures  the  whole  space  of  the  Zodiac  in  the  time
of  twenty-eight  days,  hence  it  is  that  the  wise  men  of  the  Indians,  and  most
of  the  antient  astrologers  have  granted  twenty-eight  mansions  to  the  Moon,
which,  being  fixed  in  the  eighth  sphere,  do  enjoy  (as  Alpharus  says)  divers
names  and  properties,  from  the  various  signs  and  stars  which  are  contained  in
them;  through  which,  while  the  Moon  wanders,  it  obtains  many  other  powers
and  virtues;  but  every  one  of  these  mansions,  according  to  the  opinion  of
Abraham , contained  twelve  degrees,  and  fifty-one  minutes,  and  almost  twenty-
six  seconds,  whose  names,  and  also  their  beginnings  in  the  Zodiac,  of  the
eighth  sphere,  are  these : — The  first  is  called  Alnath;  that  is,  the  horns  of
Aries : his  beginning  is  from  the  head  of  Aries,  of  the  eighth  sphere : it  causes
discords  and  journies.  The  second  is  called  Allothaim , or  Albochan ; that
is,  the  belly  of  Aries;  and  his  beginning  is  from  the  twelfth  degree  of  the


no


TTalismaitic  finagle.


same  sign,  fifty-one  minutes,  twenty-two  seconds  complete  : it  conduces  to
the  finding  of  treasures,  and  to  the  retaining  captives.  The  third  is  called
Achaomazon , or  Athoray / that  is,  showing,  or  Pleiades:  his  beginning  is  from
the  twenty-fifth  degree  of  Aries  complete,  forty-two  minutes,  and  fifty-one
seconds;  it  is  profitable  to  sailors,  huntsmen  and  alchymists.  The  fourth
mansion  is  called  Aldebaram , or  Aldelamen ; that  is,  the  eye  or  head  of  Taurus:
his  beginning  is  from  the  eighth  degree  of  Taurus,  thirty-four  minutes  and
seventeen  seconds  of  the  same,  Taurus  being  excluded : it  causes  the  destruc-
tion and  hindrances  of  buildings,  fountains,  wells,  gold  mines,  the  flight  of
creeping  things,  and  begets  discord.  The  fifth  is  called  Alchatay,  or  Albachay;
the  beginning  of  it  is  after  the  twenty-first  degree  of  Taurus,  twenty-five
minutes,  forty  seconds:  it  helps  to  the  return  from  a journey,  to  the  instruc-
tion of  scholars ; it  confirms  edifices,  it  gives  health  and  good-will.  The  Bixth
is  called  Athanna , or  Alchaya;  that  is,  the  little  star  of  great  light:  his
beginning  is  after  the  fourth  degree  of  Gemini,  seventeen  minutes,  and  nine
seconds;  it  conduces  to  hunting  and  besieging  towns,  and  revenge  of  princes:
it  destroys  harvest  and  fruits,  and  hinders  the  operation  of  the  physican.  The
seventh  is  called  Aldimiach , or  Alarzach;  that  is,  the  arm  of  Gemini,  and
begins  from  the  seventeenth  degree  of  Gemini,  eight  minutes,  and  thirty-four
seconds,  and  lasts  even  to  the  end  of  the  sign;  it  confirms  gain  and  friendship;
it  is  profitable  to  lovers,  and  destroys  magistracies : and  so  is  one  quarter  of
the  heaven  completed  in  these  seven  mansions,  and  in  the  like  order  and  num-
ber of  degrees,  minutes,  and  seconds;  the  remaining  mansions,  in  every
quarter,  have  their  several  beginnings;  namely,  so  that  in  the  first  sign  of
this  quarter  three  mansions  take  their  beginnings;  in  the  other  two  signs,  two
mansions  in  each;  therefore  the  seven  following  mansions  begin  with  Cancer,
whose  names  are  Alnaza  Anatrachya  ; that  is,  misty  or  cloudy,  viz.  the  eighth
mansion;  it  causes  love,  friendship,  and  society  of  fellow  travellers:  it  drives
away  mice,  and  afflicts  captives,  confirming  their  imprisonment.  After  this
is  the  ninth,  called  Archaam , or  Arcaph ; that  is  the  eye  of  the  Lion:  it
hinders  harvest  and  travellers,  and  puts  discord  between  men.  The  tenth  is
called  Algelioche,  or  Albgebh ; that  is  the  neck  or  forehead  of  Leo : it  strength-
ens buildings,  promotes  love,  benevolence,  and  help  against  enemies.  The
eleventh  is  called  Azobra , or  Ardaf;  that  is,  the  hair  of  the  lion’s  head:  it  is
good  for  voyages,  and  gain  by  merchandise,  and  for  redemption  of  captives.
The  twelfth  is  called  Alzarpha,  or  Azarpha ; that  is  the  tail  of  Leo : it  gives
prosperity  to  harvest  and  plantations,  but  hinders  seamen;  and  is  good  for  the
bettering  of  servants,  captives,  and  companions.  The  thirteenth  is  named
Alhaire ; that  is,  Dog  stars,  or  the  wings  of  Virgo:  it  is  prevalent  for  benevo-
lence, gain,  voyages,  harvests,  and  freedom  of  captives.  The  fourteenth  is
called  Achureth , or  Arimet ; by  others,  Azimeth,  or  Athumech,  or  Alcheymech /


'Romantic  Character#*

/w

•

•

•

•

| i * gy@8^

* *
* *
* *
* *

3>

0BIIXm®(DXAS

Cen/'untio

-®~  E5^S2,!£

* *
* *
* * *

?

*

V
+ *

flClXg^lilXK^A^)

rr

* *
#

#

¥

* . »
•

5"?YVV2^S£AAASA

,%
* #

©

* «
• •

sEsss  **$*$*

*; »

C*

* * *
%*

WX^^XMVW

It

*■**
* *

• * ♦

$ 0 $ S'SAA

* *
* #
*#*

>

°ssr

^ mv#

* **
*

0.

^zr

.AAA

*

*

*

* #

0

W2  TTaltsmanlc  finagle.

that  is,  the  spike  of  Virgo,  or  flying  spike : it  causes  the  love  of  married  folks;
it  cures  the  sick,  is  profitable  to  sailors,  hut  hinders  journies  hy  land;  and  in
these  the  second  quarter  of  the  heaven  is  completed.  The  other  seven  follow :
the  first  of  which  begins  in  the  head  of  Libra,  viz.  the  fifteenth  mansion,  and
its  name  is  Agrapha,  or  Algrapha;  that  is,  covered,  or  covered  flying:  it  is
profitable  for  extracting  treasures,  for  digging  of  pits,  it  assists  divorce,  dis-
cord, and  destruction  of  houses  and  enemies,  and  hinders  travellers.  The
sixteenth  is  called  Azubene,  or  Ahubene ; that  is,  the  horns  of  Scorpio:  it  hinders
journies  and  wedlock,  harvest  and  merchandise:  it  prevails  for  redemp-
tion of  captives.  The  seventeenth  is  called  Alchil;  that  is,  the  crown  of
Scorpio : it  betters  a bad  fortune,  makes  love  durable,  strengthens  buildings,
and  helps  seamen.  The  eighteenth  is  called  Alohas , or  Altob;  that  is,  the
heart  of  Scorpio  : it  causes,  discord,  sedition,  conspiracy  against  princes  and'
mighty  ones,  and  revenge  from  enemies;  but  it  frees  captives,  and  helps'
edifices.  The  nineteenth  is  called  Allatha , or  Achala ; by  others,  Hycula , or
Axala / that  is,  the  tail  of  Scorpio:  it  helps  in  besieging  of  cities,  and  taking'
of  towns,  and  in  the  driving  of  men  from  their  places,  and  for  the  destruction
of  seamen  and  perdition  of  captives.  The  twentieth  is  called  Abnahayap
that  is,  a beam : it  helps  for  the  taming  of  wild  beasts,  for  strengthening  of
prisons;  it  destroys  the  wealth  of  societies;  it  compels  a man  to  come  to  a
certain  place.  The  twenty-first  is  called  Abeda , or  Albeldach , which  is  a de-
sert: it  is  good  for  harvest,  gain,  buildings,  and  travellers,  and  causes  divorce;
and  in  this  is  the  third  quarter  of  heaven  completed.  There  remains  the
seven  last  mansions  completing  the  last  quarter  of  Heaven:  the  first  of  which,
being  in  order  to  the  twenty-second,  beginning  from  the  head  of  Capricorn^
called  Sadahacha,  or  Zodeboluch , or  Zandeldena / that  is,  a pastor:  it  pro-
motes the  flight  of  servants  and  captives,  that  they  may  escape;  and  helps  the
curing  of  diseases.  The  twenty-third  is  called  Zababola , or  Zobrach;  that  is,
swallowing:  it  is  for  divorce,  liberty  of  captives  and  health  to  the  sick.  The
twenty-fourth  is  called  Sadabath , or  Chadezoad ' ; that  is,  the  star  of  fortune:
it  is  prevalent  for  the  benevolence  of  married  people,  for  the  victory  of
soldiers;  it  hurts  the  execution  of  government,  and  prevents  its  being  exercised...
The  twenty-fifth  is  called  Sadalabra,  or  Sadalachia;  that  is,  a butterfly,
or  a spreading  forth : it  favours  besieging  and  revenge ; it  destroys  enemies,
and  causes  divoxxe;  confirms  prisons  and  buildings,  hastens  messengers;  it
conduces  to  spells  against  copulation,  and  so  binds  every  member  of  man
that  it  cannot  perform  its  duty.  The  twenty-sixth  is  called  Alpharg,  or
Phragal  Mocaden;  that  is,  the  first  drawing : it  causes  union,  health  of  cap-
tives, destroys  buildings  and  prisons.  The  twenty-seventh  is  called  Alchara ,
Alyhalgalmoad , or  the  second  drawing:  it  increases  harvests,  revenues,  gain,
and  heals  infirmities,  but  hinders  buildings,  prolongs  prisons,  causes  danger


ITaltsmamc  finagle.  113

to  seamen,  and  helps  to  infer  mischiefs  on  whom  you  shall  please.  The
twenty-eight  and  last  is  called  Albotham , or  Alchalcy;  that  is,  Pisces;  it  in-
creases harvest  and  merchandise ; it  secures  travellers  through  dangerous
places;  it  makes  for  the  joy  of  married  people;  hut  it  strengthens  prisons,
and  causes  loss  of  treasures.  And  in  these  twenty-eight  mansions  lie  hid
many  secrets  of  the  wisdom  of  the  antients,  by  which  they  wrought  wonders
on  all  things  which  are  under  the  circle  of  the  Moon ; and  they  attributed  to
every  mansion  his  resemblances,  images,  and  seals,  and  his  president  intelli-
gences, and  worked  by  the  virtue  of  them  after  different  manners.

So  great  is  the  extent,  power,  and  efficacy  of  the  celestial  bodies,  that  not
only  natural  things,  but  also  artificial,  when  they  are  rightly  exposed  to  those
above,  do  presently  suffer  by  that  most  potent  agent,  and  obtain  a wonderful
life.  The  magicians  affirm,  that  not  only  by  the  mixture  and  application  of
natural  things,  but  also  in  images,  seals,  rings,  glasses,  and  some  other  in-
struments, being  opportunely  framed  under  a certain  constellation,  some
celestial  illustrations  may  be  taken,  and  some  wonderful  thing  may  be  re-
ceived; for  the  beams  of  the  celestial  bodies  being  animated,  living,  sensual,
and  bringing  along  with  them  admirable  gifts,  and  a most  violent  power,  do,
even  in  a moment,  and  at  the  first  touch,  imprint  wonderful  powers  in  the
images,  though  their  matter  be  less  capable.  Yet  they  bestow  more  powerful
virtues  on  the  images  if  they  be  framed  not  of  any,  but  of  a certain  matter,
namely,  whose  natural,  but  also  specifical  virtue  is  agreeable  with  the  work,
and  the  figure  of  the  image  is  like  to  the  celestial;  for  such  an  image,  both  in
regard  to  the  matter  naturally  congruous  to  the  operation  and  celestial  in-
fluence, and  also  for  its  figure  being  like  to  the  heavenly  one,  is  best  prepared
to  receive  the  opei’ations  and  powers  of  the  celestial  bodies  and  figures,  and
instantly  receives  the  heavenly  gift  into  itself;  though  it  constantly  worketh
on  another  thing,  and  other  things  yield  obedience  to  it.

IFlliadeS  Of  tbe  2£0biac.  But  the  celestial  images,  according  to  whose
likeness  images  of  this  kind  are  framed,  are  many  in  the  heavens;  some  visible
and  conspicuous,  others  only  imaginary,  conceived  and  set  down  by  the
Egyptians,  Indians , and  Chaldeans;  and  their  parts  are  so  ordered,  that  even
the  figures  of  some  of  them  are  distinguished  from  others;  for  this  reason
they  place  in  the  circle  of  the  Zodiac  twelve  general  images,  according  to  the
number  of  the  signs;  of  these,  they  constituting  Aries,  Leo,  and  Sagittarius,
for  the  fiery  and  oriental  triplicity,  report  that  it  is  profitable  against  fevers,
palsy,  dropsy,  gout,  and  all  cold  and  phlegmatic  infirmities;  and  that  it  makes
him  who  carries  it  to  be  acceptable,  eloquent,  ingenious  and  honourable;
because  they  are  the  houses  of  Mars,  Sol,  and  Jupiter.  They  made,  also,  the
image  of  a lion  against  melancholy  phantasies,  di’opsy,  plague  and  fevers,  and


114


TEaltsmantc  finagle.


to  expel  diseases;  at  the  hour  of  the  Sun,  the  first  degree  of  the  sign  Leo
ascending,  which  is  the  face  and  decanate  of  Jupiter;  but  against  the  stone,  and
diseases  of  the  reins,  and  against  hurts  of  beasts,  they  made  the  same  image
when  Sol,  in  the  heart  of  the  lion,  obtained  the  midst  of  heaven.  And  again,
because  Gemini,  Libra,  and  Aquarius,  do  constitute  the  serial  and  occidental
triplicity,  and  are  the  houses  of  Mercury,  Venus,  and  Saturn,  they  are  said  to
put  to  flight  diseases,  to  conduce  to  friendship  and  concord,  to  prevail  against
melancholy,  and  to  cause  health;  and  they  report  that  Aquarius  especially
frees  from  the  quartan.  Also,  that  Cancer,  Scorpio,  and  Pisces,  because
they  constitute  the  watery  and  northern  triplicity,  do  prevail  against  hot  and
dry  fevers,  also  against  the  hectic,  and  all  choleric  passions;  but  Scorpio,
because  among  the  members  it  respects  the  privy  parts,  doth  provoke  to  lust;
but  these  did  frame  it  for  this  purpose,  his  third  face  ascending,  which  belongs
to  Venus;  and  they  made  the  same,  against  serpents  and  scorpions,  poisons
and  evil  spirits,  his  second  face  ascending,  which  is  the  face  of  the  Sun,  and
decanate  of  Jupiter;  and  they  report  that  it  maketh  him  who  carries  it  wise,
of  a good  colour;  and  they  say  that  the  image  of  Cancer  is  most  efficacious
against  serpents  and  poison,  when  Sol  and  Luna  are  in  conjunction  in  it,  and
ascend  in  the  first  and  third  face;  for  this  is  the  face  of  Venus,  and  the
decanate  of  Luna;  but  the  second  face  of  Luna  the  decanate  of  Jupiter.
They  report,  also,  that  serpents  are  tormented  when  the  Sun  is  in  Cancer;
also,  that  Taurus,  Virgo,  and  Capricorn,  because  they  constitute  the  earthly
and  southern  triplicity,  do  cure  hot  infirmities,  and  prevail  against  the
synocal  fever;  it  makes  those  who  carry  it  grateful,  acceptable,  eloquent,
devout  and  religious;  because  they  are  the  houses  of  Venus,  Mars,  and  Saturn.
Capricon  also  is  reported  to  keep  men  in  safety,  and  also  places  in  security,
because  it  is  the  exaltation  of  Mars.

Images  Ot  tbe  {planets.  But  now  what  images  they  did  attribute  to
the  planets.  Although  of  these  things  very  large  volumes  have  been  written
by  the  antient  wise  men,  so  that  there  is  no  need  to  declare  them  here,  not-
withstanding I will  recite  a few  of  them ; for  they  made,  from  the  operations
of  Saturn,  Saturn  ascending  in  a stone,  which  is  called  the  load-stone,  the
image  of  a man,  having  the  countenance  of  a hart,  and  camel’s  feet,  and  sitting
upon  a chair  or  else  a dragon,  holding  in  his  right  hand  a scythe,  in  his  left  a
dart,  which  image  they  hoped  would  be  profitable  for  prolongation  of  life;
for  Albumasar,  in  his  book  Sadar,  proves  that  Saturn  conduces  to  the  pro-
longation of  life;  where,  also,  he  says  that  certain  regions  of  India  being
subject  to  Saturn,  there  men  are  of  a very  long  life,  and  die  not  unless  by
extreme  old  age.  They  made,  also,  an  image  of  Saturn,  for  length  of  days,  in
a sapphire,  at  the  hour  of  Saturn,  Saturn  ascending  or  fortunately  constituted:


ZTalismanic  flnagtc-  U5

whose  figure  was  an  old  man  sitting  upon  a high  chair,  having  his  hands
lifted  above  his  head,  and  in  them  holding  a fish  or  sickle,  and  under  his  feet
a bunch  of  grapes,  his  head  covered  with  a black  or  dusky  coloured  cloth,
and  all  his  garments  black  or  dark.  They  also  made  this  same  image  against
the  stone,  and  diseases  of  the  kidnies,  viz.  in  the  hour  of  Saturn,  Saturn
ascending  with  the  third  face  of  Aquarius.  They  made  also,  from  the  opera-
tions of  Saturn,  an  image  for  the  increasing  of  power,  Saturn  ascending  in
Capricon;  the  form  of  which  was  an  old  man  leaning  on  a staff,  having  in
his  hand  a crooked  sickle,  and  clothed  in  black.  They  also  made  an  image  of
melted  copper,  Saturn  ascending  in  his  rising,  viz.  in  the  first  degree  of  Aries,
or  the  first  degree  of  Capricorn;  which  image  they  affirm  to  speak  with  a
man’s  voice.  They  made  also,  from  the  operations  of  Saturn,  and  also  Mer-
cury, an  image  of  cast  metal,  like  a beautiful  man,  which,  they  said,  would
foretel  things  to  come ; and  made  it  on  the  day  of  Mercury,  on  the  third  hour
of  Saturn,  the  sign  of  Gemini  ascending,  being  the  house  of  Mercury,  signify-
ing prophets;  Saturn  and  Mercury  being  in  conjunction  in  Aquarius,  in  the
ninth  house  of  heaven,  which  is  also  called  God.  Moreover,  let  Saturn  have
a trine  aspect  on  the  ascendant,  and  the  Moon  in  like  manner,  and  the  Sun
have  an  aspect  on  the  place  of  conjunction;  Yenus,  obtaining  some  angle,
may  be  powerful  and  occidental;  let  Mars  be  combust  by  the  Sun,  but  let  it
not  have  an  aspect  on  Saturn  and  Mercury;  for  they  said  that  the  splendour
of  the  powers  of  these  stars  was  diffused  upon  this  image,  and  it  did  speak
with  men,  and  declare  those  things  which  are  profitable  for  them.

From  the  operations  of  Jupiter  they  made,  for  prolongation  of  life,  an
image  in  the  hour  of  Jupiter,  Jupiter  being  in  his  exaltation  fortunately
ascending,  in  a clear  and  white  stone;  whose  figure  was  a man  crowned
clothed  with  garments  of  a saffron  colour,  riding  upon  an  eagle  or  dragon,
having  in  his  right  hand  a dart,  about,  as  it  were,  to  strike  it  into  the  head  of
the  same  eagle  or  dragon.  They  made,  also,  another  image  of  Jupiter,  at  the
same  convenient  season,  in  a white  and  clear  stone,  especially  in  crystal ; and
it  was  a naked  man  crowned,  having  both  his  hands  joined  together  and  lifted
up,  as  it  were,  depreciating  something  sitting  in  a four-footed  chair,  which  is
carried  by  four  winged  boys ; and  they  affirm  that  this  image  increases  felicity,
riches,  honours,  and  confers  benevolence  and  prosperity,  and  frees  from
enemies.  They  made,  also,  another  image  of  Jupiter,  for  a religious  and
glorious  life,  and  advancement  of  fortune ; whose  figure  was  a man  having
the  head  of  a lion  or  a ram,  and  eagle’s  feet,  and  clothed  in  saffron
coloured  clothes.

From  the  operations  of  Mars,  they  made  an  image  in  the  hour  of  Mars
(Mars  ascending  in  the  second  face  of  Aries),  in  a martial  stone,  especially  in
a diamond;  the  form  of  which  was  a man  armed,  riding  upon  a lion,  hav-


ZEaltsmanic  fTOaQtc.


110

ing  in  his  right  hand  a naked  sword  erect,  carrying  in  his  left  hand  the  head
of  a man.  They  report  that  an  image  of  this  kind  renders  a man  powerful  in
good  and  evil,  so  that  he  shall  be  feared  by  all ; and  whoever  carries  it,  they
give  him  the  power  of  enchantment,  so  that  he  shall  terrify  men  by  his  looks
when  he  is  angry,  and  stupify  them.  They  made  another  image  of  Mars,  for
obtaining  boldness,  courage,  and  good  fortune,  in  wars  and  contentions;  the
form  of  which  was  a soldier,  armed  and  crowned,  girt  with  a sword,  carrying
in  his  right  hand  a long  lance ; and  they  made  this  at  the  hour  of  Mars,  the
first  face  of  Scorpio  ascending  with  it.

From  the  operations  of  the  Sun  they  made  an  image  at  the  hour  of  the  Sun,
the  first  face  of  Leo  ascending  with  the  Sun ; the  form  of  which  was  a king
crowned,  sitting  in  a chair,  having  a raven  in  his  bosom,  and  under  his  feet  a
globe : he  is  clothed  in  saffron  coloured  clothes.  They  say  that  this  image
renders  men  invincible  and  honourable,  and  helps  to  bring  their  business  to  a
good  end,  and  to  drive  away  vain  dreams;  also  to  be  prevalent  against  fevers,
and  the  plague;  and  they  made  it  in  abalanite  stone,  or  a ruby,  at  the  hour  of
the  Sun,  when  he  in  his  exaltation,  fortunately  ascends.  They  made  another
image  of  the  Sun  in  a diamond,  at  the  hour  of  the  Sun  ascending  in  his
exaltation;  the  figure  of  which  was  a woman  crowned,  with  the  gesture  of  one,
dancing  and  laughing,  standing  in  a chariot  drawn  by  four  horses,  having,
in  her  right  hand  a looking-glass  or  buckler,  in  the  left  a staff,  leaning  on
her  breast,  carrying  a flame  of  fire  on  her  head.  They  say  that  this  image
renders  a man  fortunate,  and  rich,  and  beloved  of  all;  and  they  made  this
image  on  a cornelian  stone,  at  the  hour  of  the  Sun  ascending  in  the  first  face
of  Leo,  against  lunatic  passions,  which  proceed  from  the  combustion  of  the
Moon.

From  the  operations  of  Venus  they  made  an  image,  which  was  available
for  favour  and  benevolence,  at  the  very  hour  it  ascended  into  Pisces;  the  form
of  which  was  the  image  of  a woman,  having  the  head  of  a bird,  the  feet  of  an
eagle,  and  holding  a dart  in  her  hand.  They  made  another  image  of  Venus,
to  obtain  the  love  of  women,  in  the  lapis  lazuli,  at  the  hour  of  Venus,  Venus
ascending  in  Taurus',  the  figure  of  which  was  a naked  maid,  with  her  hair
spread  abroad,  having  a looking-glass  in  her  hand,  and  a chain  tied  about  her
neck  — and  near  her  a handsome  young  man,  holding  her  with  his  left  hand
by  the  chain,  but  with  his  right  hand  doing  up  her  hair,  and  both  looking
lovingly  on  one  another — and  about  them  is  a little  winged  boy,  holding  a
sword  or  dart.  They  made  another  image  of  Venus,  the  first  face  of  Taurus ,
Libra,  or  Pisces , ascending  with  Venus;  the  figure  of  which  was  a little  maid,
with  her  hair  spread  abroad,  clothed  in  long  and  white  garments,  holding  a
laurel  apple,  or  flowers,  in  her  right  hand,  in  her  left  a comb : it  is  said  to
make  men  pleasant,  jocund,  strong,  cheerful,  and  to  give  beauty.


Ualtstnantc  fiHaptc.


U7

From  the  operations  of  Mercury  they  made  an  image  of  Mercury,  Mercury
ascending  in  Gemini;  the  form  of  which  was  a handsome  young  man,  bearded,
having  in  his  left  hand  a rod,  round  which  a serpent  was  entwined  — in  the
right  he  carried  a dart;  having  his  feet  winged.  They  say  that  this  image
confers  knowledge,  eloquence,  diligence  in  merchandise,  and  gain ; moreover,
to  obtain  peace  and  concord,  and  cure  fevers.  They  made  another  image  of
Mercury,  ascending  in  Virgo,  for  good  will,  wit,  and  memory ; the  form  of
which  was  a man  sitting  upon  a chair,  or  riding  on  a peacock,  having  eagle’s
feet,  and  on  his  head  a crest,  and  in  his  left  hand  holding  a cock  of  fire.

From  the  operations  of  the  Moon  they  made  an  image  for  travellers  against
weariness,  at  the  hour  of  the  Moon,  the  Moon  ascending  in  its  exaltation ; the
figure  of  which  was  a man  leaning  on  a staff,  having  a bird  on  his  head,  and
a flourishing  tree  before  him.  They  made  another  image  of  the  Moon  for  the
increase  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  and  against  poisons,  and  infirmities  of  child-
ren, at  the  hour  of  the  Moon,  it  ascending  in  the  first  face  of  Cancer,  the
figure  of  which  was  a woman  cornuted,  riding  on  a bull,  or  a dragon  with
seven  heads  or  a crab,  and  she  hath  in  her  right  hand  a dart,  in  her  left  a
looking-glass,  clothed  with  white  or  green,  and  having  on  her  head  two  ser-
pents with  horns  twined  together,  and  to  each  arm  a serpent  twined  about,
and  to  each  foot  one  in  like  manner.  And  thus  much  spoken  concerning  the
figures  of  the  planets,  may  suffice.

They  made,  also,  the  image  of  the  head  and  tail  of  the  Dragon  of  the  Moon,
namely,  between  an  aerial  and  fiery  circle,  the  likeness  of  a serpent,  with  the
head  of  a hawk,  tied  about  them  after  the  manner  of  the  great  letter  Theta;
they  made  it  when  Jupiter,  with  the  head,  obtained  the  mid  heaven;  which
image  they  affirm  to  avail  much  for  the  success  of  petitions,  and  would  signify
by  this  image  a good  and  fortunate  genius,  which  they  would  represent  by
this  image  of  the  serpent;  for  the  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians  do  extol  this
creature  above  all  others,  and  say  it  is  a divine  creature,  and  hath  a divine
nature;  for  in  this  is  a more  acute  spirit,  and  a greater  fire  than  in  any  other,
which  thing  is  manifest  both  by  his  swift  motion  without  feet,  hands,  or  any
other  instruments;  and  also  that  it  often  renews  its  age  with  his  skin,  and
becomes  young  again ; but  they  made  the  image  of  the  tail  like  as  when  the
Moon  was  eclipsed  in  the  tail,  or  ill  affected  by  Saturn  or  Mars,  and  they
made  it  to  introduce  anguish,  infirmity,  and  Misforune : we  call  it  an  evil
genius.

They  made,  also,  images  for  every  mansion  of  the  Moon  as  follows ; —

In  the  first,  for  the  destruction  of  some  one,  they  made,  in  an  iron  ring,  the
image  of  a black  man,  in  a garment  of  hair,  and  girdled  round,  casting  a
small  lance  with  his  right  hand : they  sealed  this  in  black  wax,  and  perfumed,
it  with  liquid  storax,  and  wished  some  evil  to  come.


113


TEaltsmantc  nnaptc.


In  the  second,  against  the  wrath  of  the  prince,  and  for  reconciliation
with  him,  they  sealed,  in  white  wax  and  mastich,  the  image  of  a king  crowned,
and  perfumed  it  with  lignum  aloes.

In  the  third,  they  made  an  image  in  a silver  ring,  whose  table  was  square ;
the  figure  of  which  was  a woman,  well  clothed,  sitting  in  a chair,  her  right
hand  being  lifted  up  on  her  head;  they  sealed  it,  and  perfumed  it  with  musk,
camphire,  and  calamus  aromaticus.  They  affirmed  that  this  gives  happy  for-
tune, and  every  good  thing.

In  the  fourth,  for  revenge,  separation,  enmity,  and  ill-will,  they  sealed,  in
red  wax,  the  image  of  a soldier  sitting  on  a horse,  holding  a serpent  in  his
right  hand:  they  perfumed  it  with  red  myrrh  and  storax.

In  the  fifth,  for  the  favour  of  kings  and  officers,  and  good  entertainment,
they  sealed,  in  silver,  the  head  of  a man,  and  perfumed  it  with  red  sanders.

In  the  sixth,  to  procure  love  between  two,  they  sealed,  in  white  wax,  two
images,  embracing  one  another,  and  perfumed  them  with  lignum  aloes  and
amber.

In  the  seventh,  to  obtain  every  good  thing,  they  sealed,  in  silver,  the  image
of  a man,  well  clothed,  holding  up  his  hands  to  Heaven,  as  it  were,  praying
and  supplicating,  and  perfumed  it  with  good  odours.

In  the  eighth,  for  victory  in  war,  they  made  a seal  in  tin,  being  an  image  of
an  eagle,  having  the  face  of  a man,  and  perfumed  it  wifh  brimstone.

In  the  ninth,  to  cause  infirmities,  they  made  a seal  of  lead,  being  the  image
of  a man  wanting  his  privy  parts,  covering  his  eyes  with  his  hands;  and  they
perfumed  it  with  rosin  of  the  pine.

In  the  tenth,  to  facilitate  child  bearing,  and  to  cure  the  sick,  they  made  a
seal  of  gold,  being  the  head  of  a lion,  and  perfumed  it  with  amber.

In  the  eleventh,  for  fear,  reverence,  and  worship,  they  made  a seal  of  a
plate  of  gold,  being  the  image  of  a man  riding  on  a lion,  holding  the  ear
thereof  in  his  left  hand,  and  in  his  right  holding  forth  a bracelet  of  gold ; and
they  perfumed  it  with  good  odours  and  saffron.

In  the  twelfth,  for  the  separation  of  lovers,  they  made  a seal  of  black  lead,
being  the  image  of  a dragon  fighting  with  a man ; and  they  perfumed  it  with
the  hairs  of  a lion,  and  assafcetida.

In  the  thirteenth,  for  the  agreement  of  married  people,  and  for  dissolving
of  all  the  charms  against  copulation,  they  made  a seal  of  the  images  of  both
(of  the  man  in  red  wax,  and  the  woman  in  white),  and  caused  them  to
embrace  one  another;  perfuming  it  with  lignum  aloes  and  amber.

In  the  fourteenth,  for  divorce  and  separation  of  the  man  from  the  woman,
they  made  a seal  of  red  copper,  being  the  image  of  a dog  biting  his  tail;  and
they  perfumed  it  with  the  hair  of  a black  dog  and  a black  cat.


TEaUgmantc  fmagtc>  u9

In  the  fifteenth,  to  obtain  friendship  and  good  will,  they  made  the  image  of
a man  sitting,  and  inditing  letters,  and  perfumed  it  with  frankincense  and
nutmegs.

In  the  sixteenth,  for  gaining  much  merchandising,  they  made  a seal  of  silver,
being  the  image  of  a man,  sitting  on  a chair,  holding  a balance  in  his  hand;  and
they  perfumed  it  with  well  smelling  spices.

In  the  seventeenth,  against  thieves  and  robbers,  they  sealed  with  an  iron
seal  the  image  of  an  ape,  and  perfumed  it  with  the  air  of  an  ape.

In  the  eighteenth,  against  fevers  and  pains  of  the  belly,  they  made  a seal  of
copper,  being  the  image  of  a snake  with  his  tail  above  his  head ; and  they  per-
fumed it  with  hartshorn ; and  said  this  same  seal  put  to  flight  serpents,  and  all
venemous  creatures,  from  the  place  where  it  is  buried.

In  the  nineteenth,  for  facilitating  birth,  and  provoking  the  menstrues,  they
made  a seal  of  copper,  being  the  image  of  a woman  holding  her  hands  upon
her  face;  and  they  perfumed  it  with  liquid  storax.

In  the  twentieth,  for  hunting,  they  made  a seal  of  tin,  being  the  image  of
Sagittary,  half  a man  and  half  a horse;  and  they  perfumed  it  with  the  head
of  a wolf.

In  the  twenty-first,  for  the  destruction  of  some  body,  they  made  the  image
of  a man,  with  a double  countenance  before  and  behind;  and  they  perfumed
it  with  brimstone  and  jet,  and  put  it  in  a box  of  brass,  and  with  it  brimstone
and  jet,  and  the  hair  of  him  whom  they  would  hurt.

In  the  twenty-second,  for  the  security  of  runaways,  they  made  a seal  of
iron,  being  the  image  of  a man,  with  wings  on  his  feet,  bearing  a helmet  on
his  head;  and  they  perfumed  it  with  argent  vive.

In  the  twenty-third,  for  destruction  and  wasting,  they  made  a seal  of  iron,
being  the  image  of  a cat,  having  a dog’s  head;  and  they  perfumed  it  with
dog’s  hair  taken  from  the  head,  and  buried  it  in  the  place  where  they  intended
the  hurt.

In  the  twenty-fourth,  for  multiplying  herds  of  cattle,  they  took  the  horn  of
a ram,  bull,  or  goat,  or  of  that  sort  of  cattle  they  would  increase,  and  sealed
in  it,  burning,  with  an  iron  seal,  the  image  of  a woman  giving  suck  to  her
son;  and  they  hanged  it  on  the  neck  of  that  cattle  who  was  the  leader  of  the
flock,  or  they  sealed  it  in  his  horn.

In  the  twenty-fifth,  for  the  preservation  of  trees  and  harvest,  they  sealed  in
the  wood  of  a fig  tree,  the  image  of  a man  planting;  and  they  perfumed  it
with  the  flowers  of  the  fig  tree,  and  hung  it  on  the  tree.

In  the  twenty-sixth,  for  love  and  favour,  they  sealed,  in  white  wax  and
mastich,  the  figure  of  a woman  washing  and  combing  her  hair;  and  they  per-
fumed it  with  good  odours.


120


Ualtsmantc  finagle.


In  the  twenty-seventh,  to  destroy  fountains,  pits,  medicinal  waters,  and
baths,  they  made,  of  red  earth,  the  image  of  a man  winged,  holding  in  his
hand  an  empty  vessel,  and  perforated;  and  the  image  being  burnt,  they  put
in  the  vessel  assafeetida  and  liquid  storax,  and  they  buried  it  in  the  pond  or
fountain  which  they  would  destroy.

In  the  twenty-eighth,  for  getting  fish  together,  they  made  a seal  of  copper,
being  the  image  of  a fish;  and  they  perfumed  it  with  the  skin  of  a sea  fish,
and  cast  it  into  the  water  where  they  would  have  the  fish  gathered.

Moreover,  together  with  the  aforesaid  images,  they  wrote  down  also  the
names  of  the  spirits,  and  their  characters,  and  invoked  and  prayed  for  those
things  which  they  pretended  to  obtain.

/IftffgtC  Seals.  The  celestial  souls  send  forth  their  virtues  to  the  celestial
bodies,  which  transmit  them  to  this  sensible  world ; for  the  virtues  of  the  ter-
rene orb  proceed  from  no  other  cause  than  celestial.  Hence  the  magician,  that
will  work  by  them,  uses  a cunning  invocation  of  the  superiors,  with  mysterious
words  and  a certain  kind  of  ingenious  speech,  drawing  the  one  to  the  other;
yet  by  a natural  force,  through  a certain  mutual  agreement  between  them,
whereby  things  follow  of  their  own  accord,  or  sometimes  are  drawn  unwill-
ingly. Hence  says  Aristotle,  in  his  sixth  book  of  his  Mystical  Philosophy,
“that  when  any  one,  by  binding  or  bewitching,  calls  upon  the  Sun  or  other
stars,  praying  them  to  assist  the  work  desired,  the  Sun  and  other  stars  do  not
hear  his  words ; but  are  moved,  after  a certain  manner,  by  a certain  conjunc-
tion and  mutual  series,  whereby  the  parts  of  the  world  are  mutually  subor-
dinate the  one  to  the  other,  and  have  a mutual  consent,  by  reason  of  their
great  union : as  in  a man’s  body,  one  member  is  moved  by  perceiving  the
motion  of  another;  and  in  a harp,  one  string  is  moved  by  the  motion  of
another.  So  when  any  one  moves  any  part  of  the  world,  other  parts  are
moved  by  the  perceiving  of  that  motion.” — The  knowledge,  therefore,  of  the
dependency  of  things  following  one  the  other,  is  the  foundation  of  all  won-
derful operation,  which  is  necessarily  required  to  the  exercising  the  power  of
attracting  superior  virtues.  Now  the  words  of  men  are  certain  natural
things;  and  because  the  parts  of  the  world  mutually  draw  one  the  other;
therefore  a magician  invocating  bywords,  works  by  powers  fitted  to  Nature,
by  leading  some  by  love  of  the  one  to  the  other;  or  drawing  others,  by  reason  of
the  one  following  after  the  other;  or  by  repelling,  by  reason  of  the  enmity  of
one  to  the  other,  from  the  contrariety  and  difference  of  things,  and  multi-:
tude  of  virtues;  which,  although  they  are  contrary  and  different,  yet  perfect
one  part.  Sometimes,  also,  he  compels  things  by  way  of  authority,  by  the
celestial  virtue,  because  he  is  not  a stranger  to  the  heavens.  A man,  there-
fore, if  he  receives  the  impression  of  a ligation,  or  fascination,  doth  hot


Ualtsmantc  fiHagtc.


121


receive  it  according  to  the  rational  soul,  hut  sensual;  and  if  he  suffers  in  any
part,  he  suffers  according  to  the  animal  part;  for  they  cannot  draw  a know-
ing and  intelligent  man  by  reason,  but  by  receiving  that  impression  and  force
by  sense;  inasmuch  as  the  animal  spirit  of  man  is,  by  the  influence  of  the
celestials,  and  co-operation  of  the  things  of  the  world,  affected  beyond  his
former  and  natural  disposition.  As  the  son  moves  the  father  to  labour,
although  unwilling,  to  keep  and  maintain  him,  although  he  be  wearied;  and
the  desire  to  rule,  is  moved  by  anger  and  other  labours  to  get  the  dominion ;
and  the  indigency  of  nature,  and  fear  of  poverty,  moves  a man  to  desire
riches;  and  the  ornaments  and  beauty  of  women,  is  an  incitement  to  con-
cupiscence; and  the  harmony  of  a wise  musician  moves  his  hearers  with
various  passions,  whereof  some  do  voluntary  follow  the  consonancy  of  art,
others  conform  themselves  by  gesture,  although  unwilling,  because  their  sense
is  captivated,  their  reason  not  being  intent  to  these  things.  Hence  they  fall
into  errors,  who  think  those  things  to  be  above  nature,  or  contrary  to  nature
— which  indeed  are  by  nature,  and  according  to  nature.  We  must  know,
therefore,  that  every  superior  moves  its  next  inferior,  in  its  degree  and  order,
not  only  in  bodies,  but  also  in  spirits:  so  the  universal  soul  moves  the  parti-
cular soul;  the  rational  acts  upon  the  sensual,  and  that  upon  the  vegetable;
and  every  part  of  the  world  acts  upon  another,  and  every  part  is  apt  to  be
moved  by  another.  And  every  part  of  this  inferior  world  suffers  from  the
heavens,  according  to  their  nature  and  aptitude,  as  one  part  of  the  animal
body  suffers  for  another.  And  the  superior  intellectual  world  moves  all
things  below  itself;  and,  after  a manner,  contains  all  the  same  beings,  from
the  first  to  the  last,  which  are  in  the  inferior  world.  Celestial  bodies,  there-
fore, move  the  bodies  of  the  elementary  world,  compounded,  generable,  sensi-
ble (from  the  circumference  to  the  centre),  by  superior,  perpetual,  and
spiritual  essences,  depending  on  the  primary  intellect,  which  is  the  acting
intellect;  but  upon  the  virtue  put  in  by  the  word  of  God;  which  word  the
wise  Chaldeans  of  Babylon  call,  the  Cause  of  Causes;  because  from  it  are
produced  all  beings:  the  acting  intellect,  which  is  the  second,  from  it  depends;
and  that  by  reason  of  the  union  of  the  word  with  the  First  Author,  from  whom
all  things  being  are  truly  produced:  the  word,  therefore,  is  the  image  of
God — the  acting  intellect,  the  image  of  the  word — the  soul  is  the  image  of
this  intellect — and  our  word  is  the  image  of  the  soul,  by  which  it  acts  upon
natural  things  naturally,  because  nature  is  the  work  thereof.  And  every  one
of  those  perfects  his  subsequent:  as  a father  his  son;  and  none  of  the  latter
exists  without  the  former;  for  they  are  depending  among  themselves  by  a
kind  of  ordinate  dependency — so  that  when  the  latter  is  corrupted,  it  is
returned  into  that  which  was  next  before  it,  until  it  comes  to  the  heavens;
then  to  the  universal  soul;  and,  lastly,  into  the  acting  intellect,  by  which  all


l24  Ualismanic  ffllagtc.

other  creatures  exist;  and  itself  exists  in  the  principal  author,  which  is  the
creating  word  of  God,  to  which,  at  length,  all  things  are  returned.  Our  soul,
therefore,  if  it  will  work  any  wonderful  thing  in  these  inferiors,  must  have
respect  to  their  beginning,  that  it  may  be  strengthened  and  illustrated  by
that,  and  receive  power  of  acting  through  each  degree,  from  the  very  first
Author.  Therefore  we  must  be  more  diligent  in  contemplating  the  souls  of
the  stars — then  their  bodies,  and  the  super-celestial  and  intellectual  world —
then  the  celestial,  corporeal,  because  that  is  more  noble;  although,  also,  this
be  excellent,  and  the  way  to  that,  and  without  which  medium  the  influence
of  the  superior  cannot  be  attained  to.  As  for  example : the  Sun  is  the  king
of  stars,  most  full  of  light;  but  receives  it  from  the  intelligible  world,  above
all  other  stars,  because  the  soul  thereof  is  more  capable  of  intelligible  splen-
dour. Wherefore  he  that  desires  to  attract  the  influence  of  the  Sun,  must
contemplate  upon  the  Sun;  not  only  by  the  speculation  of  the  exterior  light,
but  also  of  the  interior.  And  no  man  can  do  this,  unless  he  return  to  the
soul  of  the  Sun,  and  become  like  to  it,  and  comprehend  the  intelligible  light
thereof  with  an  intellectual  sight,  as  the  sensible  light  with  the  corporeal  eye;
for  this  man  shall  be  filled  with  the  light  thereof,  and  the  light  whereof,  which
is  an  under  type  impressed  by  the  supernal  orb,  it  receives  into  itself;  with
the  illustration  whereof  his  intellect  being  endowed,  and  truly  like  to  it,  and
being  assisted  by  it,  shall  at  length  attain  to  that  supreme  brightness,  and  to
all  forms  that  partake  thereof;  and  when  he  hath  received  the  light  of  the
supreme  degree,  then  his  soul  shall  come  to  perfection,  and  be  made  like  to
spirits  of  the  Sun,  and  shall  attain  to  the  virtues  and  illustrations  of  the  super-
natural virtue,  and  shall  enjoy  the  power  of  them,  if  he  has  obtained  faith  in
the  First  Author.  In  the  first  place,  therefore,  we  must  implore  assistance
from  the  First  Author;  and  praying,  not  only  with  mouth,  but  a religious
gesture  and  supplicant  soul,  also  abundantly,  incessantly,  and  sincerely,  that
he  would  enlighten  our  mind,  and  remove  darkness,  growing  upon  our  souls
by  reason  of  our  bodies.

IRep  to  tlallsmanic  /IDaQtC.  We  will  now  shew  thee  the  observations
of  celestial  bodies,  which  are  required  for  the  practice  of  these  things,  which
are  briefly  as  follow: —

To  make  any  one  fortunate,  we  make  an  image  at  that  time  in  which  the
signijicator  of  life , the  giver  of  life , or  Hylech  the  signs  and  planets , are  for-
tunate: let  the  ascendant  and  mid-heaven,  and  the  lords  thereof  be  for-
tunate; and  also,  the  place  of  the  Sun  and  Moon ; part  of  fortune  and  lord  of
conjunction  or  prevention,  make  before  their  nativity,  by  depressing  the
malignant  planets,  i.  e.  taking  the  times  when  they  are  depressed.  But  if  we
would  make  an  image  to  procure  misery,  we  must  do  contrary  to  this;  and


ZEaltsmantc  flUagic,


125


those  which  we  before  placed  fortunate,  we  must  now  make  unfortunate,  by
taking  the  malignant  stars  when  they  rule.  And  the  same  means  we  must  take
to  make  any  place,  region,  city,  or  house  unfortunate.  But  if  you  would
make  any  one  unfortunate  who  hath  injured  you,  let  there  be  an  image  made
under  the  ascension  of  that  man  whom  thou  wouldst  make  unfortuntate ; and
thou  shalt  take,  when  unfortunate,  the  lord  of  the  house  of  his  life,  the  lord
of  the  ascendant  and  the  Moon,  the  lord  of  the  house  of  the  Moon,  the  lord  of
the  house  of  the  lord  ascending,  and  the  tenth  house  and  the  lord  thereof.
Now,  for  the  building,  success,  or  fitting  of  any  place,  place  fortunes  in  the
ascendant  thereof ; and  in  the  first  and  tenth,  the  second  and  eighth  house,
thou  shalt  make  the  lord  of  the  ascendant,  and  the  lord  of  the  house  of  the
Moon,  fortunate.  But  to  chase  away  certain  animals  (from  any  place)  that
are  noxious  to  thee,  that  they  may  not  generate  or  abide  there,  make  an
image  under  the  ascension  of  that  animal  which  thou  wouldst  chase  away  or
destroy,  and  after  the  likeness  thereof;  for  instance,  now,  suppose  thou
wouldst  wish  to  chase  away  scorpions  from  any  place;  let  an  image  of  a
scorpion  be  made,  the  sign  Scorpio  ascending  with  the  Moon;  then  thou  shalt
make  unfortunate  the  ascendant,  and  the  lord  thereof,  and  the  lord  of  the
house  of  Mars;  and  thou  shalt  make  unfortunate  the  lord  of  the  ascendant  in
the  eighth  house;  and  let  them  be  joined  with  an  aspect  malignant,  as  opposite
or  square,  and  write  upon  the  image  the  name  of  the  ascendant,  and  of  the
lord  thereof,  and  the  Moon,  the  lord  of  the  day  and  hour;  and  let  there  be  a
pit  made  in  the  middle  of  the  place  from  which  thou  wouldst  drive  them,  and
put  into  it  some  earth  taken  out  of  the  four  corners  of  the  same  place,  then
bury  the  image  there,  with  the  head  downwards,  saying — “This  is  the  bury-
ing of  the  Scorpions , that  they  may  be  forced  to  leave,  and  come  no  more
into  this  place.”  — And  so  do  by  the  rest.

Now  for  gain,  make  an  image  under  the  ascendant  of  that  man  to  whom
thou  wouldst  appoint  the  gain ; and  thou  shalt  make  the  lord  of  the  second
house,  which  is  the  house  of  substance,  to  be  joined  with  the  lord  of  the
ascendant,  in  a trine  or  sextile  aspect,  and  let  there  be  a reception  amongst
them;  thou  shalt  make  fortunate  the  eleventh,  and  the  lord  thereof,  and  the
eighth;  and,  if  thou  canst,  put  part  of  fortune  in  the  ascendant  or  second;
and  let  the  image  be  buried  in  that  place,  or  from  that  place,  to  which  thou
wouldst  appoint  the  gain  or  fortune.  Likewise,  for  agreement  or  love,  let  be
made  an  image  in  the  day  of  Jupiter,  under  the  ascendant  of  the  nativity  of
him  whom  you  would  wish  to  be  beloved;  make  fortunate  the  ascendant  and
the  tenth,  and  hide  the  evil  from  the  ascendant;  and  you  must  have  the  lords
of  the  tenth,  and  planets  of  the  eleventh,  fortunate,  joined  in  the  lord  of  the
ascendant,  from  the  trine  or  sextile,  with  reception;  then  proceed  to  make
another  image,  for  him  whom  thou  wouldst  stir  up  to  love;  whether  it  be  a


126


TTaltemantc  flUagtc.


friend,  or  female,  or  brother,  or  relation,  or  companion  of  him  whom  thou
wouldst  have  favoured  or  beloved,  if  so,  make  an  image  under  the  ascension
of  the  eleventh  house  from  the  ascendant  of  the  first  image;  but  if  the  party
be  a wife,  or  a husband,  let  it  be  made  under  the  ascension  of  the  seventh;
if  a brother,  sister,  or  cousin,  under  the  ascension  of  the  third  house;
if  a mother,  of  a tenth,  and  so  on:  — now  let  the  significator  of  the  ascendant
of  the  second  image  be  joined  to  the  significator  of  the  ascendant  of  the  first,
and  let  there  be  between  them  a reception,  and  let  the  rest  be  fortunate,  as
in  the  first  image;  afterwards  join  both  the  images  together  in  a mutual
embrace,  or  put  the  face  of  the  second  to  the  back  of  the  first,  and  let  them
be  wrapped  up  in  silk,  and  cast  away  or  spoiled.

Also,  for  the  success  of  petitions,  and  obtaining  of  a thing  denied,  or  taken,
or  possessed  by  another,  make  an  image  under  the  ascendant  of  him  who  peti-
tions for  the  thing;  and  cause  the  lord  of  the  second  house  to  be  joined  with
the  lord  of  the  ascendant,  from  a trine  or  sextile  aspect,  and  let  there  be  a
reception  betwixt  them;  and,  if  it  can  be  so,  let  the  lord  of  the  second  be  in
the  obeying  signs,  and  the  lord  of  ascendant  in  the  ruling;  make  fortunate
the  ascendant  and  the  lord  thereof;  and  beware  that  the  lord  of  the  ascendant
be  not  retrograde,  or  combust,  or  cadent,  or  in  the  house  of  opposition,  i.  e.
in  the  seventh  from  his  own  house;  let  him  not  be  hindered  by  the  malignant
planets,  but  let  him  be  strong  and  in  an  angle;  thou  shalt  make  fortunate  the
ascendant,  and  the  lord  of  the  second,  and  the  Moon:  and  make  another
image  for  him  that  is  petitioned  to,  and  begin  it  under  the  ascendant  belong-
ing to  him:  as  if  he  is  a king,  or  prince,  &c.  begin  it  under  the  ascendant  of
the  tenth  house  from  the  ascendant  of  the  first  image;  if  a father,  under  the
fourth;  if  a son,  under  the  fifth,  and  so  of  the  like;  then  put  the  significator
of  the  second  image,  joined  with  the  lord  of  the  ascendant  of  the  first  image
from  a trine  or  sextile,  and  let  him  receive  it;  and  put  them  both  strong  and
fortunate,  without  any  hindrance;  make  all  evil  fall  from  them;  thou  shalt
make  fortunate  the  tenth  and  the  fourth,  if  thou  canst,  or  any  of  them;  and
when  the  second  image  shall  be  perfect,  join  it  with  the  first,  face  to  face,
and  wrap  them  in  clean  linen,  and  bury  them  in  the  middle  of  his  house  who
is  the  petitioner,  under  a fortunate  significator,  the  fortune  being  strong;  and
let  the  face  of  the  first  image  be  towards  the  north,  or  rather  towards  that
place  where  the  thing  petitioned  for  doth  remain;  or,  if  it  happens  that  the
petitioner  goes  forward  to  obtain  the  thing  desired  or  petitioned  for,  let  him
carry  the  said  images  with  him.  Thus  we  have  given,  in  a few  examples,  the
key  of  all  Talisman ical  operations  whatsoever,  by  which  wonderful  effects
may  be  wrought  either  by  images,  by  rings,  by  glasses,  by  seals,  by  tables,  or
any  other  magical  instruments  whatsoever;  but  as  these  have  their  chief
grounds  in  the  true  knowledge  of  the  effects  of  the  planets,  and  the  rising  of


ZEaltemantc  finagle.


127


the  constellations,  we  recommend  an  earnest  attention  to  that  part  of  Astro-
logy* which  teaches  of  the  power,  influences  and  effects  of  the  celestial  bodies
amongst  themselves  generally;  likewise,  we  would  recommend  the  artist  to  be
expert  in  the  aspect,  motions,  declinations;  risings,  &c.  &c.  of  the  seven
planets,  and  perfectly  to  understand  their  natures,  either  mixed  or  simple;
also,  to  be  ready  and  correct  in  the  erecting  of  a figure,  at  any  time,  to  shew
the  true  position  of  the  heavens;  there  being  so  great  a sympathy  between
the  celestials  and  ourselves;  and  to  observe  all  the  other  rules  which  we  have
plentifully  recited  : and,  without  doubt,  the  industrious  student  shall  receive
the  satisfaction  of  bringing  his  operations  and  experiments  to  effect  that
which  he  ardently  desires.  With  which,  wishing  all  success  to  the  contem-
plator  of  the  creature  and  the  Creator,  we  will  here  close  up  this  Second  Part
of  our  Work,  and  the  conclusion  of  our  Book  of  Talismanical  Magic.

* Thoie  who  would  be  perfect  in  the  necessary  knowledge  of  Astrology,  ought  to  study  from  Coley,
his  book  called  Clavis  Astrologiae  Elimata,  or  his  Key  new  filed  — Salmon’s  Soul  of  Astrology—
Lilley’s,  or  Partridge’s,  Vade  Mecum  —or  Middleton’s  Astrology.


l’HE  END  OF  TALISMANIC  MAGIC.


Magnetism.


fN  our  following  Treatise  of  Magnetism  we  have  collected  and  arranged
in  order  some  valuable  and  secret  things  out  of  the  writings  of  that
most  learned  chemist  and  philosopher  Paracelsus,  who  was  the  orna-
ment of  Germany  and  the  age  he  lived  in.  Likewise  we  have  extracted  the
very  marrow  of  the  science  of  Magnetism  out  of  the  copious  and  elaborate
works  of  that  most  celebrated  philosopher  (by  fire)  Van  Helmont,  who,
together  with  Paracelsus,  industriously  promulgated  all  kinds  of  magnetic
and  sympathetic  cures,  which,  through  the  drowsiness,  ignorance,  unbelief,  an
obstinacy  of  the  present  age,  have  been  so  much  and  so  totally  neglected
and  condemned;  yet,  however  impudent  in  their  assertions,  and  bigotted  to
their  own  false  opinions,  some  of  our  modern  philosophers  may  be,  yet  we
have  seen  two  or  three  individuals,  who,  by  dint  of  perseverence,  have  proved
the  truth  and  possibility  of  Magnetism,  by  repeated  and  public  experiments.
Indeed  the  ingenious  invention  of  the  Magnetic  Tractors  prove  at  once  that
science  should  never  be  impeded  by  public  slander  or  misrepresentation  of
facts  that  have  proved  to  be  of  general  utility.  And  we  do  not  doubt  but
that  we  shall  be  able  to  shew,  by  the  theory  and  practice  delivered  in  the
sequel,  that  many  excellent  cures  may  be  performed  by  a due  consideration
and  attentive  observance  of  the  principles  upon  which  sympathy,  antipathy,
magnetic  attraction,  &c.  are  founded;  and  which  will  be  fully  illustrated  in
the  following  compendium:

We  shall  hasten  to  explain  the  first  principles  of  Magnetism,  by  examining
the  magnetic  or  attractive  power.

As  concerning  an  action  locally  at  a distance,  wines  do  suggest  a demon-
stration unto  us:  for,  every  kind  of  wine,  although  it  be  bred  out  of
co-bordering  provinces,  and  likewise  more  timely  blossoming  elsewhere,  yet
it  is  troubled  while  our  country  vine  flowereth ; neither  doth  such  a disturb-
ance cease  as  long  as  the  flower  shall  not  fall  off  from  our  vine;  which  thing
surely  happens,  either  from  a common  motive-cause  of  the  vine  and  wine,  or
from  a particular  disposition  of  the  vine,  the  which  indeed  troubles  the  wine,
and  doth  shake  it  up  and  down  with  a confused  tempest:  or  likewise,  because
the  wine  itself  doth  thus  trouble  itself  of  its  own  free  accord,  by  reason  of  the


130


fniacmettgm.


flowers  of  the  vine:  of  both  the  which  latter,  if  there  be  a fore-touched  confor-
mity, consent,  co-grieving,  or  congratulation;  at  least,  that  cannot  but  be  done
by  an  action  at  a distance : to  wit,  if  the  wine  be  troubled  in  a cellar  under
ground,  whereunto  no  vine  perhaps  is  near  for  some  miles,  neither  is  there
any  discourse  of  the  air  under  the  earth,  with  the  flower  of  the  absent  vine;
but,  if  they  will  accuse  a common  cause  for  such  an  effect,  they  must  either
run  back  to  the  stars,  which  cannot  be  controuled  by  our  pleasures  and
liberties  of  boldness;  or,  I say,  we  return  to  a confession  of  an  action  at  a
distance:  to  wit,  that  some  one  and  the  same,  and  as  yet  unknown  spirit,  the
mover,  doth  govern  the  absent  wine,  and  the  vine  which  is  at  a far  distance,
and  makes  them  to  talk  and  suffer  together.  But,  as  to  what  concerns  the
power  of  the  stars,  I am  unwilling,  as  neither  dare  I,  according  to  my  own
liberty,  to  extend  the  forces,  powers,  or  bounds  of  the  stars  beyond  or  besides
the  authority  of  the  sacred  text,  which  faith  (it  being  pronounced  from  a
divine  testimony)  that  the  stars  shall  be  unto  us  for  signs,  seasons,  days,  and
years:  by  which  rule,  a power  is  never  attributed  to  the  stars,  that  wine  bred
in  a foreign  soil,  and  brought  unto  us  from  far,  doth  disturb,  move,  or  render
itself  confused:  for,  the  vine  had  at  some  time  received  a power  of  encreasing
and  multiplying  itself  before  the  stars  were  born : and  vegetables  were  before
the  stars,  and  the  imagined  influx  of  these:  wherefore  also,  they  cannot  be
things  conjoined  in  essence,  one  whereof  could  consist  without  the  other.
Yea,  the  vine  in  some  places  flowereth  more  timely;  and,  in  rainy,  or  the  more
cold  years,  our  vine  flowereth  more  slowly,  whose  flower  and  stages  of  flourish-
ing the  wine  doth,  notwithstanding,  imitate;  and  so  neither  doth  it  respect
the  stars,  that  it  should  disturb  itself  at  their  beck.

In  the  next  place,  neither  doth  the  wine  hearken  unto  the  flourishing  or
blossoming  of  any  kind  of  capers,  but  of  the  wine  alone : and  therefore  we
must  not  flee  unto  an  universal  cause,  the  general  or  universal  ruling  air  of
worldly  successive  change ; to  wit,  we  may  rather  run  back  unto  impossibili-
ties and  absurdities,  than  unto  the  most  near  commerces  of  resemblance  and
unity,  although  hitherto  unpassable  by  the  schools.

Moreover,  that  thing  doth  as  yet  far  more  manifestly  appear  in  ale  or  beer:
when,  in  times  past,  our  ancestors  had  seen  that  of  barley,  after  whatsoever
manner  it  was  boiled,  nothing  but  an  empty  ptisan  a or  barley-broth,  or  also  a
pulp,  was  cooked;  they  mediated,  that  the  barley  first  ought  to  bud  (which
then  they  called  malt)  and  next,  they  nakedly  boiled  their  ales,  imitating
wines:  wherein,  first  of  all,  some  remarkable  things  do  meet  in  one;  to  wit,
there  is  stirred  up  in  barley,  a vegetable  bud,  the  which  when  the  barley  is
dried,  doth  afterwards  die,  and  loseth  the  hope  of  growing,  and  so  much  the
more  by  its  changing  into  meal,  and  afterwards  by  an  after-boiling,  it  despairs


noagnettgm.  l3l

of  a growing  virtue;  yet  these  things  nothing  hindering,  it  retains  the  winey
and  intoxicating  spirit  of  aqua  vitae,  the  which  notwithstanding  it  doth  not
yet  actually  possess:  but  at  length,  in  a number  of  days,  it  attaineth  it  by  virtue
of  a ferment:  to  wit,  in  the  one  only  bosom  of  one  grain  one  only  spirit  is
made  famous  with  diverse  powers,  and  one  power  is  gelded,  another  being
left:  which  thing  indeed,  doth  as  yet  more  wonderfully  shine  forth;  when  as
the  ale  or  beer  of  malt  disturbs  itself  while  the  barley  flowereth,  no  otherwise
than  as  wine  is  elsewhere  wont  to  do : and  so  a power  at  a far  absent  distance
is  from  hence  plain  to  be  seen : for  truly  there  are  cities  from  whom  pleasant
meadows  do  expel  the  growing  of  barley  for  many  miles,  and  by  so  much  the
more  powerfully  do  ales  prove  their  agreement  with  the  absent  flowering
barley;  in  as  much  as  the  gelding  of  their  power  hath  withdrawn  the  hopes
of  budding  and  increasing : and  at  length  the  aqua  vitas  being  detained  and
shut  up  within  the  ale,  hogshead,  and  prison  of  the  cellar,  cannot  with  the
safety  of  the  ale  or  beer  wandering  for  some  leagues  unto  the  flowering  ear
of  barley,  that  thereby,  as  a stormy  retainer,  it  may  trouble  the  remaining
ale  with  much  confusion.  Certainly  there  is  a far  more  quiet  passage  for  a
magnetical  or  attractive  agreement  among  some  agents  at  a far  distance  from
each  other,  than  there  is  to  dream  an  aqua  vitae  wandering  out  of  the  ale  of  a
cellar,  unto  the  flowering  barley,  and  from  thence  to  return  unto  the  former
receptacles  of  its  pen-case,  and  ale : But  the  sign  imprinted  by  the  appetite
of  a woman  great  with  child,  on  her  young,  doth  fitly,  and  alike  clearly  con-
firm a magnetism  or  attractive  faculty  and  its  operation  at  a distance:  to  wit,
let  there  be  a woman  great  with  child,  which  desires  another  cherry,  let  her
but  touch  her  forehead  or  any  other  place  with  her  finger;  without  doubt  the
young  is  signed  in  its  forehead  with  the  image  of  a cherry,  which  afterwards
doth  every  year  wax  green,  white,  yellow,  and  at  length  looks  red,  according
to  the  tenor  of  the  trees:  and  it  much  more  wonderfully  expresses  the  same
successive  alteration  of  maturities  in  Spain  than  in  Germany:  and  so  hereby
an  action  at  a distance  is  not  only  confirmed,  but  also  a conformity  or  agree-
ment of  the  essences  of  the  cherry  tree,  in  its  wooden  and  fleshy  trunk;  a
consanguinity  or  near  affinity  of  a being  impressed  upon  the  part  by  on  in-
stantaneous imagination,  and  by  a successive  course  of  the  years  of  its  kernel:
surely  the  more  learned  ought  not  to  impute  those  things  unto  evil  spirits,
which,  through  their  own  weakness,  they  are  ignorant  of;  for  these  things
do  on  all  sides  occur  in  nature,  the  which,  through  our  slenderness,  we  are
not  able  to  unfold;  for  to  refer  whatsoever  gifts  of  God  are  in  nature  (because
our  dull  capacity  does  not  comprehend  the  same  rightly)  to  the  devil,  shews
both  ignorance  and  rashness,  especially  when,  as  all  demonstration  of  causes
from  a former  thing  or  cause  is  banished  from  us,  and  especially  from  Aris-


132


Magnetism.


totle,  who  was  ignorant  of  all  nature,  and  deprived  of  the  good  gifts
which  descends  from  the  Father  of  Lights;  unto  whom  be  all  honour
and  glory.

NOTE.  We  may,  by  the  aforesaid  chapter,  see  the  wonderful  working  power  of  the  attractive  or
universal  spirit,  which  can  by  no  other  means  be  so  clearly  demonstrated  as  by  the  sympathies  in
natural  things,  which  are  inherent  throughout  all  nature;  and,  upon  this  principle  of  sympathy  and
antipathy,  we  say  is  founded  that  spiritual  power  which  tends  to  things  and  objects  remote  one  from
the  other,  i.  e.  a magnetic  attraction,  which  does  actually  exist,  as  we  shall  clearly  prove  by  experi-
ment, where  we  fully  shew  the  action  and  passion  that  is  between  natural  spirits,  by  which  means
wonderful  effects  are  produced  which  have  ignorantly  been  attributed  to  divers  superstitions,  as
Sorcery , Inchantment,  Nigromancy,  or  the  Black  Art , &c.

Sympathetic  /IDefclClneS.  In  the  year  1639,  a little  book  came  forth,
whose  title  was,  ‘ The  Sympathetical  Powder  of  Edricius  Mohynus,  of  Eburo,’
whereby  wounds  are  cured  without  application  of  the  medicine  unto  the  part
afflicted,  and  without  superstition ; it  being  sifted  by  the  sieve  of  the  reasons
of  Galen  and  Aristotle;  wherein  it  is  Aristotetically,  sufficiently,  proved,
whatsoever  the  title  of  it  promises;  but  it  hath  negelected  the  directive
faculty , or  virtue , which  may  bring  the  virtues  of  the  sympathetical  powder,
received  in  the  bloody  towel  or  napkin,  unto  the  distant  wound.

Truly,  from  a wound,  the  venal  blood,  or  corrupt  pus,  or  sanies,  from  an
ulcer,  being  received  in  the  towel,  do  receive,  indeed,  a balsam  from  a sana-
tive or  healing  being ; I say,  from  the  power  of  the  vitriol,  a medicinal
power  connected  and  limited  in  the  aforesaid  mean ; but  the  virtues  of  the
balsam  received  are  directed  unto  the  wounded  object,  not  indeed  by  an  influ-
ential virtue  of  the  stars,  and  much  less  do  they  fly  forth  of  their  own  accord
unto  the  object  at  a distance:  therefore  the  ideas  of  him  that  applieth  the
sympathetical  remedy  are  connected  in  the  mean,  and  are  made  directresses
of  the  balsam  unto  the  object  of  his  desire : even  as  we  have  above  also
minded  by  injections  concerning  ideas  of  the  desire.  Mohyns  supposed  that
the  power  of  sympathy  depends  upon  the  stars,  because  it  is  an  imitator
of  influences:  but  I draw  it  out  of  a much  nearer  subject:  to  wit,  out  of
directing  ideas,  begotten  by  their  mother  Charity,  or  a desire  of  good-will:
for,  from  hence  does  that  sympathetic  powder  operate  more  successfully,
being  applied  by  the  hand  of  one  than  another:  therefore  I have  always
observed  the  best  process  where  the  remedy  is  instituted  by  a desire  of
charity;  but,  that  it  doth  succeed,  with  small  success,  if  the  operator  be  a
careless  or  drunken  person;  and,  from  hence,  I have  more  esteemed  the  stars
of  the  mind,  in  sympathetical  remedies,  than  the  stars  of  heaven : but  that
images,  being  conceived,  are  brought  unto  an  object  at  a distance,  a pregnant
woman  is  an  example  of,  because  she  is  she  who  presently  transfers  all  the
ideas  of  her  conception  on  her  young,  which  dependeth  no  otherwise  on  the
mother  than  from  a communion  of  universal  nourishment.  Truly,  seeing


naagnettgm.


133


such  a direction  of  desire  is  plainly  natural,  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  evil
spirit  doth  require  the  ideas  of  the  desires  of  his  imps  to  be  annexed  unto  a
mean  offered  by  him.  Indeed,  the  ideas  of  the  desire  are  after  the  manner  of
the  influences  of  heaven  cast  into  a proper  object  how  locally  remote  soever;
that  is,  they  are  directed  by  the  desire,  especially  pointing  out  an  object  for
itself,  even  as  the  sight  of  the  basilisk,  or  touch  of  the  torpedo,  is  reflected  on
their  willed  object;  for  I have  already  shewn  in  its  place,  that  the  devil  doth
not  attribute  so  much  as  any  thing  in  the  directions  of  things  injected;  but
that  he  hath  need  of  a free,  directing,  and  operative  power  or  faculty.  But  I
will  not  disgrace  sympathetical  remedies  because  the  devil  operates  some-
thing about  things  injected  into  the  body:  for  what  have  sympathetical
remedies  in  common  ? Although  Satan  doth  co-operate  in  injections  by
wicked  natural  means  required  from  his  bond  slaves;  for  everything  shall  be
judged  guilty,  or  good,  from  its  ends  and  intents : and  it  is  sufficient  that
sympathetical  remedies  do  agree  with  things  injected  in  natural  means  or
medicines.

We  shall  now  show  some  remarkable  operations  that  are  effected  by
magnetism,  and  founded  upon  natural  sympathy  and  antipathy,  likewise  how
by  these  means  some  extraordinary  cures  may  be  performed.

The  goodness  of  the  Creator  every  where  extended,  created  every  thing
for  the  use  of  ungrateful  man;  neither  did  he  admit  any  of  the  theologists,
or  divines,  as  assistants  in  council,  how  many  or  how  great  virtues  he  should
infuse  into  things  natural.  But  there  are  those  who  venture  to  measure  the
wonderful  works  of  God  by  their  own  sharpened  and  refined  wit,  whereby
they  deny  God  to  have  given  such  virtue  to  things;  as  though  man  (a  worm)
was  able,  by  his  narrow  and  limited  capacity,  to  comprehend  Omniscience;
he  therefore  measures  the  minds  of  all  men  by  his  own,  who  think  that  can-
not be  done,  which  they  cannot  understand.  They  therefore  can  only  develope
the  mysteries  of  nature,  who  being  versed  in  the  art  of  Cabala,  Fire,  and
Magic,  examined  the  properties  of  things,  and  draw,  from  darkness  into
light,  the  lurking  powers  of  Man,  Animals , Vegetables , Minerals , and  Stones;
and,  separating  the  crudities,  dregs,  poisons,  heterogen ities,  that  are  the
thorns  implanted  in  virgin  nature  from  the  curse.  For  an  observer  of  nature
sees  daily  she  doth  distil , sublime , calcine,  ferment,  dissolve,  coagulate,  fix,  &c.
therefore  we  who  are  the  ministers  of  nature  do  separate,  &c.  finding  out  the
causes  and  effects  of  every  phaenomena  she  produces.

Now,  as  magnetism  is  ordained  for  the  use  of  man,  and  for  the  curing  of
the  various  disorders  incident  to  human  nature,  we  shall  first  touch  upon  the
grand  subject  of  magnetism,  known  to  possess  wonderful  properties,  and
which  are  not  only  evident  to  every  eye,  but  shew  us  sufficient  grounds  for
our  admitting  the  possibility  and  reality  of  magnetism  in  general.


l34  flflaqnettem.

The  loadstone  possesses  an  eminent  medicinal  faculty  against  many  violent
and  implacable  disorders.  Helmont  says,  that  the  back  of  the  loadstone,  as  it
repulses  iron,  so  also  it  removes  gout,  swellings,  rheum,  &c.  that  is  of  the
nature  or  quality  of  iron.  The  iron  attracting  faculty,  if  it  be  joined  to  the
mummy  of  a woman,  and  the  back  of  the  loadstone  be  put  within  her  thigh,
and  the  belly  of  the  loadstone  on  her  loins,  it  safely  prevents  a miscarriage,
already  threatened;  but  the  belly  of  the  loadstone  applied  within  the  thigh
and  the  back  to  her  loins,  it  doth  wonderfully  facilitate  her  delivery.

Likewise  the  wearing  the  loadstone  eases  and  prevents  the  cramp,  and  such
like  disorders  and  pains.

Uldericus  Balk,  a dominican  friar,  published  a book  at  Frankfort  in  the
year  1611,  concerning  the  lamp  of  life;  in  which  we  shall  find  (taken  from
Paracelsus)  the  true  magnetical  cure  of  many  diseases,  viz.  the  dropsy,  gout,
jaundice,  &c.  For  if  thou  shalt  enclose  the  warm  blood  of  the  sick  in  the
shell  and  white  of  an  egg,  which  is  exposed  to  a nourishing  warmth,  and  this
blood,  being  mixed  with  a piece  of  flesh,  thou  shalt  give  to  a hungry  dog,  the
disorder  departs  from  thee  into  the  dog;  no  otherwise  than  the  leprosy  of
Naaman  passed  over  into  Gehazi  through  the  execration  of  the  prophet.

If  women,  weaning  their  infants,  shall  milk  out  their  milk  upon  hot  burn-
ing coals,  the  breast  soon  dries.

If  any  one  happens  to  commit  a nuisance  at  thy  door,  and  thou  will  prevent
that  beastly  trick  in  future,  take  the  poker  red-hot,  and  put  it  into  the
excrement,  and,  by  magnetism,  his  posteriors  shall  become  much  scorched
and  inflamed.

Make  a small  table  of  the  lightest,  whitest,  and  basest  kind  of  lead;  and  at
one  end  put  a piece  of  amber,  and,  three  spans  from  it,  lay  a piece  of  green
vitriol;  this  vitriol  will  soon  lose  its  colour  and  acid:  both  which  effects  are
found  in  the  preparation  of  amber.  The  root  of  the  Caroline  thistle  being
plucked  up  when  full  of  juice  and  virtue,  and  tempered  with  the  mummy  of
a man,  will  exhaust  the  powers  and  natural  strength  out  of  a man,  on  whose
shadow  thou  shalt  stand,  into  thyself.

©f  tbe  Brmar£  mnguent  SC,  The  principal  ingredient  in  this  con-
fection, is  the  moss  of  a dead  man’s  skull,  which  Yan  Helmont  calls  the
excrescencies  or  superfluities  of  the  stars.  Now  the  moss  growing  on  the
skull  of  a dead  man,  seeing  it  has  received  its  seed  from  the  heavens,  but  its
increase  from  the  mummial  marrow  of  the  skull  of  man,  or  tower  of  the
microcosm,  has  obtained  excellent  astral  and  magnetic  powers  beyond  the
common  condition  of  vegetables,  although  herbs,  as  they  are  herbs,  want  not
their  own  magnetism.


fTOagnettsm.


135


Now,  the  magnetism  of  this  unguent  draws  out  that  strange  disposition
from  the  wound  (which  otherwise,  by  a disunion  of  the  parts  that  held
together,  and  by  which,  I say,  strange  disposition  and  foreign  quality  is  pro-
duced) from  whence  it  slips,  not  being  over-burdened  or  oppressed  by  any
accident,  suddenly  grow  together;  and  this  is  effected  by  the  armary  unguent,
or  weapon  salve.  From  this  it  appears  that  the  unguent,  or  weapon  salve,  its
property  is  to  heal  suddenly  and  perfectly  without  pain,  costs,  perils,  or  loss
of  strength;  hence  it  is  manifest  that  the  magnetical  virtue  is  from  God.

It  is  now  seasonable  to  discover  the  immediate  cause  of  magnetism  in  the
unguent.

First  of  all,  by  the  consent  of  mystical  divines,  we  divide  man  into  the  exter-
nal and  internal  man,  assigning  to  both  the  powers  of  a certain  mind  or  intel-
ligence: for  so  there  doth  a will  belong  to  flesh  and  blood,  which  may  not  be
either  the  will  of  man  or  the  will  of  God;  and  the  heavenly  Father  also
reveals  some  things  unto  the  more  inward  man,  and  some  things  flesh  and
blood  reveals,  that  is,  the  outward  and  sensitive  or  animal  man.  For,  how
could  the  service  of  idols,  envy,  &c.  be  rightly  numbered  among  the  works  of
the  flesh,  seeing  they  consist  only  in  the  imagination,  if  the  flesh  had  not  also
its  own  imagination  and  elective  will?

Furthermore,  that  there  are  miraculous  ecstasies  belonging  to  the  more
inward  man,  is  beyond  dispute.  That  there  are  also  ecstasies  in  the  animal
man,  by  reason  of  an  intense,  or  heightened  imagination,  is,  without  doubt.
Martin  del  Ris,  an  elder  of  the  society  of  Jesus,  in  his  Magical  Disquisitions
or  Enquiries,  makes  mention  of  a certain  young  man  in  the  city  Insulis  that
was  transported  with  so  violent  a desire  of  seeing  his  mother,  that  through
the  same  intense  desire,  as  if  being  wrapped  up  by  an  ecstasy,  he  saw  her
perfectly,  although  many  miles  absent  from  thence;  and,  returning  again  to
himself,  being  mindful  of  all  that  he  had  seen,  gave  many  true  signs  of  his
true  presence  with  his  mother.

Now  that  desire  arose  from  the  more  outward  man,  viz.  from  blood  and
sense,  or  flesh,  is  certain;  for,  otherwise,  the  soul  being  once  dislodged,  or
loosened  from  the  bonds  of  the  body,  cannot,  except  by  miracle,  be  reunited
to  it;  there  is  therefore  in  the  blood  a certain  ecstatical  or  transporting  power,
which,  if  at  any  time  shall  be  excited  or  stirred  up  by  an  ardent  desire  and
most  strong  imagination,  it  is  able  to  conduct  the  spirit  of  the  more  outward
man  even  to  some  absent  and  far  distant  object,  but  then  that  power  lies  hid
in  the  more  outward  man,  as  it  were,  in  potentia , or  by  way  of  possibility;
neither  is  it  brought  into  act,  unless  it  be  roused  up  by  the  imagination,
inflamed  and  agitated  by  a most  fervent  and  violent  desire.


136


fTOagnetism.


flDaejnetiC  Httractiou  Of  Spirit.  Moreover,  when  as  the  blood  is  after
some  sort  corrupted,  then  indeed  all  the  powers  thereof  which,  without  a fore-
going excitation  of  the  imagination,  were  before  in  possibility,  are  of  their
own  accord,  drawn  forth  into  action;  for,  through  corruption  of  the  grain,
the  seminal  virtue,  otherwise  drowsy,  and  barren,  breaks  forth  into  act;  be-
cause, that  seeing  the  essences  of  things,  and  their  vital  spirits,  know  not  how
to  putrify  by  the  dissolution  of  the  inferior  harmony,  they  sprung  up  as  sur-
viving afresh.  For,  from  thence  it  is  that  every  occult  property,  the  compact
of  their  bodies  being  by  foregoing  digestion,  (which  we  call  putrifaction)
now  dissolved,  comes  forth  free  to  hand,  dispatched,  and  manifest  to  action.

Therefore  when  a wound,  through  the  entrance  of  air,  hath  admitted  of  an
adverse  quality,  from  whence  the  blood  forthwith  swells  with  heat  or  rage  in
its  lips,  and  otherwise  becomes  mattery,  it  happens,  that  the  blood  in  the
wound  just  made,  by  reason  of  the  said  foreign  quality,  doth  now  enter  into
the  beginning  of  some  kind  of  corruption  (which  blood  being  also  then
received  on  the  weapon  or  splinter  thereof,  is  besmeared  with  the  magnetic
unguent)  the  which  entrance  of  corruption,  mediating  the  ecstatical  power
lurking  potentially  in  the  blood,  is  brought  forth  into  action;  which  power,
because  it  is  an  exiled  returner  unto  its  own  body,  by  reason  of  the  hidden
ecstasy;  hence  that  blood  bears  an  individual  respect  unto  the  blood  of  its
whole  body.  Then  indeed  the  magnetic  or  attractive  faculty  is  busied  in
operating  in  the  unguent,  and  through  the  mediation  of  the  ecstatical  power
(for  so  I call  it  for  want  of  an  etymology)  sucks  out  the  hurtful  quality  from
the  lips  of  the  wound,  and  at  length,  through  the  mummial,  balsamical,  and
attractive  virtue,  attained  in  the  unguent,  the  magnetism  is  perfected.

So  thou  hast  now  the  positive  reason  of  the  natural  magnetism  in  the
unguent,  drawn  from  natural  magic,  whereunto  the  light  of  truth  assents;
saying,  “where  the  treasure  is  there  is  the  heart  also.”

For  if  the  treasure  be  in  heaven,  then  the  heart,  that  is,  the  spirit  of  the
internal  man,  is  in  God,  who  is  the  paradise,  who  alone  is  eternal  life.

But  if  the  treasure  be  fixed  or  laid  up  in  frail  and  mortal  things,  then  also
the  heart  and  spirit  of  the  external  man  is  in  fading  things;  neither  is  there
any  cause  of  bringing  in  a mystical  sense,  by  taking  not  the  spirit,  but  the
cogitation  and  naked  desire,  for  the  heart;  for  that  would  contain  a frivolous
thing,  that  wheresoever  a man  should  place  his  treasure  in  his  thought  or
cogitation,  there  his  cogitation  would  be.

Also  truth  itself  doth  not  interpret  the  present  text  mystically,  and  also  by
an  example  adjoined,  shews  a local  and  real  presence  of  the  eagles  with  the
dead  carcass,  so  also  that  the  spirit  of  the  inward  man  is  locally  in  the  king-
dom of  God  in  us,  which  is  God  himself;  and  that  the  heart  or  spirit  of  the
animal  or  outward  sensitive  man  is  locally  about  its  treasure.


fTOagnettsm.


137


What  wonder  is  it,  that  the  astral  spirits  of  carnal  or  animal  men  should,
as  yet,  after  their  funerals,  shew  themselves  as  in  a bravery,  wandering  about
their  buried  treasure,  whereunto  the  whole  of  Necromancy  (or  art  of  divina-
tion by  the  calling  of  spirits)  of  the  antients  hath  enslaved  itself?

I say,  therefore,  that  the  internal  man  is  an  animal  or  living  creature,
making  use  of  the  reason  and  will  of  blood : but,  in  the  mean  time,  not  barely
an  animal,  but  moreover  the  image  of  God.

Logicians  therefore  may  see  how  defectively  they  define  a man  from  the
power  of  rational  discourse.  But  of  these  things  more  elsewhere.

I will  therefore  adjoin  the  magnetism  of  eagles  to  carcasses;  for  neither  are
flying  fowls  endowed  with  such  an  acute  smelling,  that  they  can,  with  a
mutual  consent,  go  from  Italy  into  Africa  unto  carcasses.

For  neither  is  an  odour  so  largely  and  widely  spread;  for  the  ample  lati-
tude of  the  interposed  sea  hinders  it,  and  also  a certain  elementary  property
of  consuming  it;  nor  is  there  any  ground  that  thou  shouldst  think  these  birds
do  perceive  the  dead  carcasses  at  so  far  a distance,  with  their  sight,  especially
if  those  birds  shall  lie  southwards  behind  a mountain.

But  what  need  is  there  to  enforce  the  magnetism  of  fowls  by  many  argu-
ments, since  God  himself,  who  is  the  beginning  and  end  of  philosophy,  doth
expressly  determine  the  same  process  to  be  of  the  heart  and  treasure,  with
these  birds  and  the  carcass,  and  so  interchangeably  between  these  and  them?

For  if  the  eagles  were  led  to  their  food,  the  carcasses,  with  the  same  appe-
tite whereby  four-footed  beasts  are  brought  on  to  their  pastures,  certainly  he
had  said,  in  one  word,  that  living  creatures  flock  to  their  food  even  as  the
heart  of  man  to  his  treasure;  which  would  contain  a falsehood:  for  neither
doth  the  heart  of  man  proceed  unto  its  treasure,  that  he  may  be  filled  there-
with as  living  creatures  do  to  their  meat;  and  therefore  the  comparison  of
the  heart  of  man  and  of  the  eagle  lies  not  in  the  end  for  which  they  tend  or
incline  to  a desire,  but  in  the  manner  of  tendency;  namely  that  they  are
allured  and  carried  on  by  magnetism,  really  and  locally.

Therefore  the  spirit  and  will  of  the  blood  fetched  out  of  the  wound,  having
intruded  itself  into  the  ointment  by  the  weapon  being  anointed  therewith,  do
tend  towards  their  treasure,  that  is,  the  rest  of  the  blood  as  yet  enjoying  the
life  of  the  more  inward  man : but  he  saith  by  a peculiar  testimony,  that  the
eagle  is  drawn  to  the  carcass,  because  she  is  called  thereunto  by  an  implanted
and  mummial  spirit  of  the  carcass,  but  not  by  the  odour  of  the  putrifying
body:  for  indeed  that  animal,  in  assimilating,  appropriates  to  himself  only
this  mummial  spirit:  for  from  thence  it  is  said  of  the  eagle,  in  a peculiar
manner,  “my  youth  shall  be  renewed  as  the  eagle’s.”

For  truly  the  renewing  of  her  youth  proceeds  from  an  essential  extraction
of  the  mummial  spirit  being  well  refined  by  a certain  singular  digestion


138


fTOagnettsm.


proper  to  that  fowl,  and  not  from  a bare  eating  of  the  flesh  of  the  carcass;
otherwise  dogs  also  and  pies'would  be  renewed,  which  is  false.

Thou  wilt  say,  that  it  is  a reason  far-fetched  in  behalf  of  magnetism ; but
what  wilt  thou  then  infer  hereupon?  If  that  which  thou  confesseth  to  be  far
remote  for  thy  capacity  of  understanding,  that  shall  also  with  thee  be  ac-
counted to  be  fetched  from  far.  Truly  the  book  of  Genesis  avoucheth,  that
in  the  blood  of  all  living  creatures  doth  their  soul  exist.

For  there  are  in  the  blood  certain  vital  powers,*  the  which,  as  if  they  were
soulified  or  enlivened,  do  demand  revenge  from  Heaven,  yea,  and  judicial
punishment  from  earthly  judges  on  the  murderer;  which  powers,  seeing  they
cannot  be  denied  to  inhabit  naturally  in  the  blood,  I see  not  why  they  can
reject  the  magnetism  of  the  blood,  as  accounting  it  among  the  ridiculous
works  of  Satan.

This  I will  say  more,  to  wit,  that  those  who  walk  in  their  sleep,  do,  by
no  other  guide  than  the  spirit  of  the  blood,  that  is,  of  the  outward  man,  walk
up  and  down,  perform  business,  climb  walls,  and  imagine  things  that  are
otherwise  impossible  to  those  that  are  awake.  I say,  by  a magical  virtue,
natural  to  the  more  outward  man ; that  Saint  Ambrose,  although  he  was  far
distant  in  his  body,  yet  was  visibly  present  at  the  funeral  solemnities  of
Saint  Martin;  yet  was  he  spiritually  present  at  those  solemnities,  in  the  visible
spirit  of  the  external  man,  and  no  otherwise:  for  inasmuch  as  in  that
ecstasy  which  is  of  the  more  internal  man,  many  of  the  saints  have  seen  many
and  absent  things.  This  is  done  without  time  and  place,  through  the  superior
powers  of  the  soul  being  collected  in  unity,  and  by  an  intellectual  vision,  but
not  by  a visible  presence;  otherwise  the  soul  is  not  separated  from  the  body,
but  in  good  earnest,  or  for  altogether;  neither  is  it  re-connected  thereunto,
which  reconnexion,  notwithstanding,  is  otherwise  natural  or  familiar  to  the
spirit  of  the  more  outward  man.

It  is  not  sufficient  in  so  great  a paradox,  to  have  once,  or  by  one  single
reason,  touched  at  the  matter;  it  is  to  be  further  propagated,  and  we  must
explain  how  a magnetical  attraction  happens  also  between  inanimate  things,

‘This  singular  property  of  the  blood,  which  Helmont  calls  Vital  Powers,  is  no  less  wonderful  than
true,  having  been  myself  a witness  of  this  experiment  while  in  South  Wales.  It  was  tried  upon  a body
that  was  maliciously  murdered,  through  occasion  of  a quarrel  over-night  at  an  alehouse.  The  fellow
who  was  suspected  of  the  murder  appeared  the  next  day  in  public  seemingly  unconcerned.  The
Coroner’s  Jury  sat  upon  the  body  within  twenty-four  hours  after  this  notable  murder  was  committed;
when  the  suspected  was  suddenly  taken  into  custody,  and  conveyed  away  to  the  same  public-house
where  the  inquisition  was  taken.  After  some  debate,  one  Dr.  Jones  desired  the  suspected  to  be
brought  into  the  room ; which  done,  he  desired  the  villain  to  lay  his  left  hand  under  the  wound,  which
was  a deep  gash  on  the  neck,  and  another  on  the  breast;  the  villain  plainly  confessed  his  guilt  by  his
trepidation ; but  as  soon  as  he  lightly  laid  his  finger  on  the  body,  the  blood  immediately  ran,  about  six
or  seven  drops,  to  the  admiration  of  all  present.  If  any  one  doubts  the  truth  of  this  narrative,  how-
ever learned  and  profound  he  may  think  himself,  let  him  call  personally  upon  me,  and  I will  giv6  him
such  reference,  and  that  truly  respectable  and  fair,  as  shall  convince  him  of  the  fact.  Francis
Barret.


flflagnettsm.  139

by  a certain  perceivance  or  feeling;  not  indeed  animal  or  sensitive,  but
natural.

Which  thing,  that  it  may  be  the  more  seriously  done,  it  behoves  us  first  to
shew  what  Satan  can,  of  his  own  power,  contribute  to,  and  after  what  manner
he  can  co-operate  in  the  merely  wicked  and  impious  actions  of  witches:  for
from  thence  it  will  appear  unto  what  cause  every  effect  may  be  attributed.

In  the  next  place,  what  the  spiritual  power  may  be  which  tends  to  a far
remote  object;  or  what  may  be  the  action,  passion,  and  skirmishing  between
natural  spirits,  or  what  may  be  the  superiority  of  man  as  to  other  inferior
creatures ; and,  by  consequence,  why  indeed  our  unguent,  being  compounded
of  human  mummies,  do  thoroughly  cure  horses  also.  We  will  explain  the
matter  in  the  following  chapter.

Mitcbcraft.  Let  a witch  therefore  be  granted,  who  can  strongly
torment  an  absent  man  by  an  image  of  wax,  by  imprecation  or  cursing,  by
enchantment,  or  also  by  a foregoing  touch  alone,  (for  here  we  speak  nothing
of  Sorceries,  because  they  are  those  which  kill  only  by  poison,  inasmuch  as
every  common  apothecary  can  imitate  those  things)  that  this  act  is  diabolical,
no  man  doubts : however,  it  is  profitable  to  discern  how  much  Satan  and  how
much  the  witch  can  contribute  hereunto.

The  First  Supposition.

First  of  all,  thou  shalt  take  notice,  that  Satan  is  the  sworn  and  irrecon-
cileable  enemy  of  man,  and  to  be  so  accounted  by  all,  unless  any  one  had
rather  have  him  be  his  friend;  and  therefore  he  most  readily  procures  what-
soever mischief  he  is  able  to  cause  or  wish  unto  us,  and  that  without  doubt
and  neglect.

The  Second  Supposition.

And  then  although  he  be  an  enemy  to  witches  themselves,  forasmuch  as  he
is  also  a most  malicious  enemy  to  all  mankind  in  general;  yet,  in  regard  they
are  his  bond-slaves,  and  those  of  his  kingdom,  he  never,  unless  against  his
will  betrays  them,  or  discovers  them  to  judges,  &c.

From  the  former  supposition  I conclude,  that  if  Satan  were  able  of  himself
to  kill  a man  who  is  guilty  of  deadly  sin  he  would  never  delay  it;  but  he
doth  not  kill  him,  therefore  he  cannot.

Notwithstanding,  the  witch  doth  oftentimes  kill;  hence  also  she  can  kill
the  same  man,  no  otherwise  than  as  a privy  murderer  at  the  liberty  of  his
own  will  slays  any  one  with  a sword.

There  is  therefore  a certain  power  of  the  witch  in  this  action,  which
belongs  not  to  Satan,  and  consequently  Satan  is  not  the  principal  efficient  and
executor  of  that  murder;  for  otherwise  if  he  were  the  executioner  thereof,  he


140


ffllaanetism.


would  in  nowise  stand  in  need  of  the  witch  as  his  assistant;  but  he  alone  had
soon  taken  the  greatest  part  of  men  out  of  the  way.

Surely  most  miserable  were  the  conditions  of  mortals  who  should  be  sub-
ject to  such  a tyrant,  and  stand  liable  to  his  commands;  we  have  too  faithful
a God,  than  that  he  should  subject  the  work  of  his  own  hands  to  the  arbitrary
dominion  of  Satan.

Therefore  in  this  act,  there  is  a certain  power  plainly  proper  and  natural
to  the  witch  which  belongs  not  to  Satan.

Moreover,  of  what  nature,  extent,  and  quality  that  power  may  be,  we  must
more  exactly  sift  out.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  manifest  that  it  is  no  corporeal  strength  of  the  male
sex;  for  neither  doth  there  concur  any  strong  touching  of  the  extreme  parts
of  the  body,  and  witches  are  for  the  most  part  feeble,  impotent,  and  malicious
old  women,  therefore  there  must  needs  be  some  other  power,  far  superior  to
a corporeal  attempt,  yet  natural  to  man.

This  power  therefore  was  to  be  seated  in  that  part  wherein  we  most  nearly
resemble  the  image  of  God;  and  although  all  things  do  also,  after  some  sort
represent  that  venerable  image,  yet  because  man  doth  most  elegantly,  properly,
and  nearly  do  that,  therefore  the  image  of  God  in  man  doth  far  outshine,  bear
rule  over,  and  command  the  images  of  God  in  all  other  creatures;  for,
peradventure,  by  this  prerogative,  all  things  are  put  under  his  feet.

Wherefore  if  God  act,  per  nuturn , or  by  a beck,  namely  by  his  word,  so
ought  man  to  act  some  things  only  by  his  beck  or  will,  if  he  ought  to  be  called
his  true  image:  for  neither  is  that  new,  is  that  troublesome,  is  that  proper  to
God  alone:  for  Satan,  the  most  vile  abject  of  creatures,  doth  also  locally  move
bodies  per  nutum , or  by  his  beck  alone,  seeing  he  hath  not  extremities  or  cor-
poreal organs,  whereby  to  touch,  move,  or  also  to  snatch  a new  body  to  himself.

That  privilege  therefore,  ought  no  less  to  belong  to  the  inward  man,  as  he
is  a spirit,  if  he  ought  to  represent  the  image  of  God,  and  that  indeed  not  an
idle  one;  if  we  call  this  faculty  magical,  and  thou  being  badly  instructed,  art
terrified  at  this  word,  thou  mayest,  for  me,  call  it  a spiritual  strength  or  effi-
cacy: for,  truly,  we  are  nothing  solicitous  about  names.  I always,  as  im-
mediately as  I can,  cast  an  eye  upon  the  thing  itself.

That  magical  power,  therefore,  is  in  the  inward  man,  whether  thou,  by  this
etymology,  or  true  word,  understandest  the  soul  or  the  vital  spirit  thereof,  it
is  now  indifferent  to  us;  since  there  is  a certain  proportion  of  the  internal
man  towards  the  external  in  all  things,  glowing  or  growing  after  its  own
manner,  which  is  an  appropriated  disposition,  and  proportioned  property.

Wherefore  the  power  or  faculty  must  needs  be  dispersed  throughout  the
whole  man ; in  the  soul,  indeed,  more  vigorous,  but  in  the  flesh  and  blood  far
more  remiss.


nftagnettsm.  t4i

IDital  Spirit  ait&  power.  The  vital  spirit  in  the  flesh  and  blood  per-
forms the  office  of  the  soul;  that  is,  it  is  the  same  spirit  in  the  outward  man,
which,  in  the  seed,  forms  the  whole  figure,  that  magnificent  structure  and
perfect  delineation  of  man,  and  which  hath  known  the  ends  of  things  to  be
done,  because  it  contains  them;  and  the  which  as  president  accompanies  the
new  framed  young,  even  unto  the  period  of  its  life;  and  the  which,  although
it  depart  therewith,  some  smacks  or  small  quantity,  at  least,  thereof  remains
in  a carcass  slain  by  violence,  being  as  it  were  most  exactly  co-fermented
with  the  same.  But,  from  a dead  carcass  that  was  extinct  of  its  own  accord,
and  from  nature  failing,  as  well  the  implanted  as  inflowing  spirit  passed
forth  at  once.

For  which  reason,  physicians  divide  this  spirit  into  the  implanted  or
mummial,  and  inflowing  or  acquired  spirit,  which  departs;  to  wit,  with  the
former  life  and  this  influxing  spirit  they  afterwards  subdivide  into  the  natural,
vital,  and  animal  spirit;  but,  we  likewise,  do  here  comprehend  them  all  at
once  in  one  single  word.

The  soul  therefore  being  wholly  a spirit  could  never  move  or  stir  up  the
vital  spirit,  (being  indeed  corporeal),  much  less  flesh  and  bones,  unless  a cer-
tain natural  power,  yet  magical  and  spiritual,  did  descend  from  the  soul  into
the  spirit  and  body.

After  what  sort,  I pray,  could  the  corporeal  spirit  obey  the  commands  of
the  soul,  unless  there  should  be  a command  from  her  for  moving  of  the  spirit,
and  afterwards  the  body?

But  against  this  magical  motive  faculty  thou  wilt  forthwith  object,  that  that
power  is  limited  within  her  composed  body,  and  her  own  natural  inn : there-
fore although  we  call  this  soul  a magicianness,  yet  it  shall  be  only  a wresting
and  abuse  of  the  name ; for  truly  the  true  and  superstitious  magic  draws  not
its  foundation  from  the  soul;  seeing  this  same  soul  is  not  able  to  move,  alter,
or  excite  any  thing  out  of  its  own  body.

I answer,  that  this  power,  and  that  natural  magic  of  the  soul  which  she
exerciseth  not  of  herself,  by  virtue  of  the  image  of  God,  doth  now  lie  hid  as
obscure  in  man,  and  as  it  were  lie  asleep  since  the  fall  or  corruption  of  Adam,
and  stands  in  need  or  stirring  up ; all  which  particulars  we  shall  anon  in  their
proper  place  prove;  which  same  power,  how  drowsy  and  as  it  were  drunk,
soever,  it  otherwise  remains  daily  in  us,  yet  it  is  sufficient  to  perform  its
offices  in  its  own  body.

Therefore  the  knowledge  and  power  magical,  and  that  faculty  in  man  which
acteth  only  per  nutum,  sleeps  since  the  knowledge  of  the  apple  was  eaten;
and  as  long  as  this  knowledge  (which  is  of  the  flesh  and  blood,  gross  and
material,  belonging  to  the  external  man  and  darkness)  flourishes,  the  more
noble  magical  power  is  lying  dormant.


142


flHagnettsm.


But  because  in  sleep  this  outward  or  sensual  knowledge  is  sometimes  dor-
mant, hence  it  is  that  our  dreams  are  sometimes  prophetical,  and  God  him-
self is  therefore  nearer  unto  man  in  dreams,  through  that  effect,  viz.  when  the
more  inward  magic  of  the  soul  being  uninterrupted  by  the  flesh,  diffuses  itself
on  every  side  into  the  understanding;  even  as  when  it  sinks  itself  into  the
inferior  powers  thereof  it  safely  leads  those  who  walk  in  their  sleep  by  moving
or  conducting  them,  whither  those  that  were  awake  could  not  surmount
or  climb.

Therefore  we  establish  this  point,  viz.  that  there  is  inherent  in  the  soul  a
certain  magical  virtue  given  her  by  God,  naturally  proper  and  belonging  to
her,  inasmuch  as  we  are  his  image  and  engravement;  and  in  this  respect
she  acts  also  in  a peculiar  manner,  i.  e.  spiritually  on  an  object  at  a distance,
and  that  more  powerfully  than  by  any  corporeal  assistance;  for  seeing  the
soul  is  the  principal  part  of  the  body,  therefore  all  action  belonging  to  her  is
spiritual,  magical,  and  of  the  greatest  validity.

Which  power  man  is  able,  by  the  Art  of  the  Cabala,  to  excite  in  himself  at
his  own  pleasure,  and  these,  as  we  have  before  said,  are  called  Adepts;  who
are  governed  by  the  Spirit  of  God.

Thus  we  have  endeavoured  to  shew  that  man  predominates  over  all  other
creatures  that  are  corporeal,  and  by  his  magical  faculty  he  is  able  to  subdue
the  magical  virtues  of  all  other  things;  which  predominance  of  man  or  the
soul’s  natural  magic,  some  have  ignorantly  attributed  solely  to  verses , charms ,
signs,  characters , &c.  by  which  hierarchy  or  holy  dominion  inherent  in  man,
those  effects,  whatever  they  may  be,  are  wrought,  which  some  (who  but  too
corporeally  philosophize)  have  attributed  to  the  dominion  of  Satan.

High  and  sacred  is  the  force  of  the  microcosmical  spirit,  which,  as  is  evi-
dent in  pregnant  women,  stamps  upon  the  young  the  image  and  properties  of
a thing  desired,  as  we  have  before  instanced  in  a cherry,  which,  without  the
trunk  of  a tree,  brings  forth  a true  cherry,  that  is  flesh  and  blood,  enobled
with  the  properties  and  power  of  the  more  inward  or  real  cherry,  by  the
conception  of  the  imagination  alone;  from  whence  are  two  necessary
consequences.

First,  that  all  the  spirits,  and  as  it  were  the  essences  of  all  things,  lie  hid
in  us,  and  are  born  and  brought  forth  only  by  the  working,  power,  and
phantasy  of  the  microcosm.

The  second  is,  that  the  soul,  in  conceiving,  generates  a certain  idea  of  the
thing  conceived ; the  which,  as  it  before  lay  hid  unknown,  like  fire  in  a flint,
so  by  the  stirring  up  of  the  phantasy  there  is  produced  a certain  real  idea,
which  is  not  a naked  quality,  but  something  like  a substance,  hanging  in  sus-
pense between  a body  and  a spirit,  that  is  the  soul.


(magnetism.  143

That  middle  being  is  so  spiritual,  that  it  is  not  plainly  exempted  from  a
corporeal  condition,  since  the  actions  of  the  soul  are  limited  on  the  body,  and
the  inferior  orders  of  faculties  depending  upon  it,  nor  yet  so  corporeal  that  it
may  be  inclosed  by  dimensions,  the  which  we  have  also  related  to  be  only
proper  to  a seminal  being.  This  ideal  entity,  therefore,  when  it  falls  out  of
the  invisible  and  intellectual  world  of  the  microcosm,  it  puts  on  a body,  and
then  it  is  first  inclosed  by  the  limitation  of  place  and  numbers.

The  object  of  the  understanding  is  in  itself  a naked  and  pure  essence,  not
an  accident,  by  the  consent  of  practical,  that  is,  mystical  divines;  therefore
this  Proteus  or  transferable  essence,  the  understanding  doth,  as  it  were,  put
on  and  clothe  itself,  with  this  conceived  essence.

But  because  every  body,  whether  external  or  internal,  hath  its  making  in
its  own  proper  image,  the  understanding  knows  or  discerns  not,  the  will  loves
and  wills  not,  the  memory  recollects  not,  but  by  images  or  likenesses:  the
understanding  therefore  puts  on  this  same  image  of  its  object;  and  because
the  soul  is  the  pure  simple  form  of  the  body,  which  turns  itself  about  to  every
member,  therefore  the  acting  understanding  cannot  have  two  images  at  once,
but  first  one  and  then  the  other.  He,  who  is  wholly  the  life,  created  all
things  and  hath  said,  nothing  is  to  be  expected  as  dead  out  of  his  hand.
Likewise  nothing  can  come  to  our  view  wherein  himself  is  not  clearly  apparent
or  present;  for  it  is  said,  “the  spirit  of  the  Lord  hath  filled  the  whole  globe
of  the  earth:  ” and,  again,  “that  he  containeth  or  comprehendeth  all  things,”
therefore  there  is  nothing  in  being,  no  creature  but  what  possesses  a certain
degree  of  divine  fire  and  life,  yet  lying  dormant  or  unexcited,  till  stirred  up
by  the  art,  power,  and  operation  of  man.

Every  magical  virtue  therefore  stands  in  need  of  an  excitement,  by  which
a certain  spiritual  vapour  is  stirred  up,  by  reason  whereof  the  phantasy  which
profoundly  sleeps  is  awakened,  and  there  begins  an  action  of  the  corporeal
spirit,  as  a medium,  which  is  that  of  Magnetism,  and  is  excited  by  a fore-
going touch.

There  is  a magical  virtue,  being  as  it  were  abstracted  from  the  body,  which
is  wrought  by  the  stirring  up  of  the  power  of  the  soul,  from  whence  there  are
made  most  potent  procreations,  and  most  famous  impressions,  and  strong
effects,  so  that  nature  is  on  every  side  a magicianness,  and  acts  by  her  own
phantasy;  and  by  how  much  the  more  spiritual  her  phantasy  is,  so  much  the
more  powerful  it  is,  therefore  the  denomination  of  magic  is  truly  proportion-
able  or  concordant.

Now  the  highest  sort  of  magic  is  that  which  is  stirred  up  from  an  intellec-
tual conception,  and  indeed  that  of  the  inward  man  is  only  to  be  excited  by
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  by  his  gift  the  Cabala;  but  that  of  the  external  man  is


m fniacmettsm.

stirred  up  by  a strong  imagination,  by  a daily  and  heightened  speculation,
and,  in  witches,  by  the  devil.

But  the  magical  virtue  of  the  exhaled  spirituous  vapour,  or  subtil  spirits
sent  from  the  body,  which  before  lay  in  potentia , or  by  way  of  possibility
only,  is  either  excited  by  a more  strong  imagination,  the  magician  making
use  of  the  blood  as  a medium,  and  establishing  his  kindled  entity  thereon,  or
by  the  ascending  phantasy  of  the  weapon  salve,  the  exciteress  of  the  property
lying  in  the  blood;  else  by  a foregoing  appointment  or  disposition  of  the
blood  unto  corruption,  viz.  whereby  the  elements  are  disposed  unto  a separa-
tion, and  the  essences  (which  cannot  putrify)  and  the  essential  phantasies,
which  lay  hid  in  the  properties  come  forth  into  action.

The  phantasy  therefore,  of  any  subject  whatsoever  has  obtained  a strong
appetite  to  the  spirit  of  another  thing,  for  the  moving  of  some  certain  thing
in  place,  for  the  attracting,  repelling,  or  expulsion  thereof;  and  there  and  not
elsewhere  we  acknowledge  magnetism  as  the  natural  magical  endowment  of
that  thing  firmly  planted  in  it  by  God.

There  is  therefore  a certain  formal  property  separated  from  sympathetical
and  abstruse  qualities;  because  the  motive  phantasy  of  these  qualities  do  not
directly  fly  unto  a local  motion,  but  only  to  an  alternative  motion  of  the
object.  Now  it  is  sufficient  that  (if  a man  happens  to  receive  many  wounds
in  his  body)  blood  be  had  only  from  one  of  these  wounds,  and  from  this  one
the  rest  are  cured  also,  because  that  blood  keeps  a concordant  harmony  with
the  spirit  of  the  whole,  and  draws  forth  from  the  same  the  offensive  quality
communicated,  not  only  to  the  lips  of  the  wound,  but  to  the  whole  man,  for
from  one  wound  only  the  whole  man  is  liable  to  grow  feverish.

Therefore  the  outchased  blood  being  received  on  the  weapon  is  introduced
into  the  magnetic  unguent.

For  then  the  phantasy  of  the  blood,  being  otherwise  as  yet  drowsy  and  slow
to  action,  being  stirred  up  by  the  virtue  of  the  magnetic  unguent,  and  there
finding  the  balsamic  virtue  of  it,  desires  the  quality  induced  into  it,  to  be
bestowed  on  itself  throughout,  and  from  thence  by  a spiritual  magnetism  to
draw  out  all  the  strange  tincture  of  the  wound,  which,  seeing  it  cannot  fitly
enough  effect  by  itself,  it  implores  the  aid  of  the  moss , blood,  fat,  and
mummy , which  are  coinjoined  together  into  such  a balsalm,  which  not  but  by
its  own  phantasy  becomes  also  medicinal,  magnetical,  and  is  also  a tractor  of
all  the  strange  qualities  out  of  the  body,  whose  fresh  blood,  abounding  with
spirit,  is  carried  unto  it,  whether  it  shall  be  that  of  a man  or  any  other  living
creature.  The  phantasy  therefore  is  a returner,  or  reducible  and  ecstatical,
from  part  of  the  blood  that  is  fresh  and  newly  brought  unto  the  unguent;  but
the  magnetic  attraction  began  in  the  blood  is  perfected  by  the  medicinal
virtue  of  the  unguent;  not  that  the  unguent  draws  the  infirmity  of  the  wound


rniagnettsm.


145


unto  itself,  but  it  alters  the  blood  newly  brought  unto  it,  in  its  spirit,  and
makes  it  medicinal,  and  stirs  up  the  power  thereof:  from  thence  it  contracts
a certain  medicinal  virtue,  which  returns  unto  its  whole  body  to  correct  the
spirit  of  the  blood  throughout  the  whole  man.  Now,  to  manifest  a great
mystery,  viz.  to  shew  that  in  man  there  is  placed  a great  efficacy  whereby  he
may  be  able  only  by  his  beck,  (as  we  before  mentioned)  nod  or  phantasy,  to
act  out  of  himself,  and  to  imprint  a virtue,  a certain  influence  which  after-
wards perseveres,  or  constantly  subsists  by  itself,  and  acts  upon  objects  at  a
very  great  distance;  by  which  only  mystery,  those  things  which  we  have
spoken  (relative  to  ideal  entity  conveyed  in  a spiritual  fewel,  and  departing
far  from  home  to  execute  its  offices,  concerning  the  magnetism  of  all  things
begotten  in  the  imagination  of  man,  as  in  that  which  is  proper  to  every  thing,
and  also  concerning  the  magical  superiority  of  men  over  all  other  bodies,)
will  plainly  and  conspicuously  appear.

Something  more  we  will  add,  before  we  dismiss  the  present  subject,  which
is  that  if  a nail,  dart,  knife,  or  sword,  or  any  other  iron  instrument  be  thrust
into  the  heart  of  a horse,  it  will  bind  and  withhold  the  spirit  of  a witch,  and
conjoin  it  with  the  mummial  spirit  of  the  horse,  whereby  they  may  be  burnt
in  the  fire  together,  and  by  that  the  witch  is  tormented,  as  by  a sting  or
burning,  by  which  means  she  may  be  known  so  that  she  who  is  offensive  to
God,  and  destructive  to  mortal  men,  may  be  taken  away  from  society  accord-
ing to  the  law  of  God  “thou  shalt  not  suffer  a witch  to  live;”  for  if  the  work
be  limited  to  any  outward  object,  that  work  the  magical  soul  never  attempts
without  a medium  or  mean : therefore  it  makes  use  of  the  nail,  or  sword,  or
knife,  or  any  other  thing  as  aforesaid.

Now  this  being  proved,  that  man  hath  a power  of  acting,  per  nutum,  or
by  his  nod,  or  of  moving  any  object  remotely  placed;  it  has  also  been
sufficiently  confirmed  by  the  same  natural  example,  that  this  efficacy  was  also
given  unto  man  by  God.

And  as  every  magical  faculty  lies  dormant,  and  has  need  of  excitement,  or
stirring  up;  which  is  always  true,  if  the  object  whereon  it  is  to  act  is  not
nearly  disposed,  if  its  internal  phantasy  doth  not  wholly  confirm  to  the  im-
pression of  the  agent,  or  also  if  the  patient  be  equal  in  strength,  or  superior
to  the  agent  therein.

But,  on  the  contrary,  where  the  object  is  plainly  and  nearly  disposed,  as
steel  is,  for  the  receiving  of  magnetism,  then  the  patient  without  much  stirr-
ing up,  the  alone  phantasy  of  the  more  outward  man  being  drawn  out  to  the
work  and  bound  up  to  any  suitable  mean,  yields  to  the  magnetism.

Therefore  we  repeat,  the  magician  must  always  make  use  of  a medium;
for  then  the  words  or  forms  of  sacraments  do  always  operate,  because  from
the  work  performed.  But  the  reason  why  exorcisms,  conjurations,  charms,


fTOagnettsm.


146

incantations,  &c.  do  sometimes  fail  of  their  desired  effect,  is  because  the
unexcited  mind,  or  spirit  of  the  exorcist,  renders  the  words  dull  or  in-
effectual.

Therefore  no  man  can  be  a happy  or  successful  magician,  hut  him  who
knows  how  to  stir  up  the  magical  virtue  of  his  soul,  or  can  do  it  practically
without  science.

And  there  can  he  no  nearer  medium  of  magnetism,  than  human  blood  with
human  blood.

And  no  sympathetic  remedies,  magnetical  or  attractive,  but  from  the  idea
or  phantasy  of  the  operator  impressing  upon  it  a virtue  and  efficacy  from  the
excited  power  in  his  own  soul.

And  now  to  bring  our  Magnetic  Treatise  to  a total  conclusion,  we  have  to
say,  that  whoever,  through  ignorance  or  obstinancy,  will  say  there  is  no
validity  or  reason,  or  reality  in  the  science  of  magnetism,  proves  himself
unworthy  the  sacred  name  of  philosopher,  because  he  condemns  what  he
knows  nothing  at  all  about.

For  those  who  will  give  themselves  the  leisure  to  examine  the  truth  of
those  things  which  we  have  taught,  will  not  find  their  expectation  deceived,
therefore  will  not  condemn.

But  whoever  should  be  so  superstitious  as  to  attribute  a natural  effect  so
created  by  God,  and  bestowed  on  the  creature,  unto  the  power  and  craft  of
the  devil,  he  filches  the  honour  due  to  the  Omnipotent  Creator,  and  reproach-
fully applies  the  same  unto  Satan;  the  which  (under  favour)  will  be  found  to
be  express  idolatry  and  blasphemy.

“There  are  three”  (as  says  the  Scripture)  “who  bear  record  in  heaven;
the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  these  three  are  only  one.”

There  are  three  that  bear  record  on  earth;  the  blood , the  spirit,  and  the
water ; and  these  three  are  only  one.

We  therefore,  who  have  the  like  humanity,  contain  blood  and  spirit  of  a
co-like  unity;  and  the  action  of  the  blood  is  merely  spiritual.  Therefore,  in
Genesis , it  is  not  called  by  the  etymology  of  blood,  but  is  made  remarkable
by  the  name  of  a red  spirit.

Therefore,  let  those  who  would  attain  knowledge  in  these  things,  and  be
perfect  in  what  we  have  set  before  them,  constantly  meditate  and  desire  that
the  First  Cause  and  Archetype  of  all  things  would  graciously  and  mercifully
illuminate  their  minds;  without  which,  they  grope  but  in  darkness  and  uncer-
tainty, and  are  subject  to  the  delusions  of  impure  spirits  and  devils,  who  are
only  to  be  put  to  flight  by  putting  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,  in  whom  we
all  live,  move,  breathe  and  have  our  being.


THE  END  OE  MAGNETISM.


Cabalfstlcal  flDagtc.


® shall  now  turn  our  pen  to  the  explaining  of  the  high  and
mysterious  secrets  of  the  Cabala,  by  which  only  we  can  know
the  truth;  and  likewise  how  to  prepare  our  mind  and  spirit  for
the  contemplation  of  the  greatest  and  best  part  of  magic,  which  we  call  in-
tellectual and  divine,  because  it  chiefly  takes  God  and  the  good  spirits  for  its
objects;  and  as  the  cabalistic  art  opens  many  and  the  chiefest  mysteries  and
secrets  of  ceremonial  magic.

But  in  respect  of  explaining  or  publishing  those  few  secrets  in  the  Cabala,
which  are  amongst  a few  wise  men,  and  communicated  by  word  of  mouth
only,  I hope  the  student  will  pardon  me  if  I pass  over  these  in  silence,  because
we  are  not  permitted  to  divulge  some  certain  things;  but  this  we  shall  do;
we  will  open  all  those  secrets  which  are  necessary  to  be  known;  and  by  the
close  reading  of  which,  you  shall  find  out,  of  your  own  head,  to  be  both
profitable  and  delightful.

Therefore,  all  we  solicit  is,  that  those  who  perceive  those  secrets  should
keep  them  together  as  secrets,  and  not  expose  or  babble  them  to  the  unworthy;
but  reveal  them  only  to  faithful,  discreet,  and  chosen  friends.  And  we  would
caution  you  in  this  beginning,  that  every  magical  experiment  flies  from  the
public,  seeking  to  be  hid,  is  strengthened  and  confirmed  by  silence,  but  is
destroyed  by  publication ; never  does  any  complete  effect  follow  after;  like-
wise all  the  virtue  of  thy  works  will  suffer  detriment  when  poured  into  weak,
prating,  and  incredulous  minds;  therefore,  if  thou  would  be  a magician,  and
gain  fruit  from  this  art,  to  be  secret,  and  to  manifest  to  none,  either  thy
work,  or  place,  or  time,  nor  thy  desire,  or  will,  except  it  be  to  a master  or
partner,  or  companion,  who  should  likewise  be  faithful,  discreet,  silent,  and
dignified  by  nature  and  education;  seeing  that  even  the  prating  of  a com-
panion, his  unbelief,  doubting,  questioning,  and,  lastly,  unworthiness,  hinders
and  disturbs  the  effect  in  every  operation.

It  is  fit  that  we  who  endeavour  to  attain  so  great  a height  should  first  study
two  things : viz.  First,  how  we  should  leave  vain  and  carnal  affections,  frail
sense  and  material  passions;  Secondly,  by  what  ways  and  means  we  may
ascend  to  an  intellect  pure,  and  joined  with  the  powers  of  the  celestials,


Ube  Cabala;  or,


148

without  which  we  shall  never  happily  ascend  to  the  scrutiny  of  secret  things,
and  to  the  power  of  working  wonderful  effects,  &c.  Now,  if  thou  art  a man
perfect  in  thy  understanding,  and  constantly  meditating  upon  what  we  have
in  this  hook  written,  and  without  doubting,  believeth,  thou  shalt  be  able,  by
praying,  consecrating,  deprecating,  invocating,  cfec.  to  attract  spiritual  and
celestial  gifts,  and  to  imprint  them  on  whatever  things  thou  shalt  please;  and
by  it  to  vivify  every  magical  work.

Seeing  that  the  being  and  operation  of  all  things  depend  on  the  Most  High
God,  Creator  of  all  things,  and  from  thence  on  the  other  divine  powers,  to
whom  also  is  granted  a power  of  fashioning  and  creating,  not  principally
indeed,  but  instrumentally,  by  virtue  of  the  First  Great  Creator,  (for  the
beginning  of  every  thing  is  the  first  cause;  but  what  is  produced  by  the
second  cause,  is  much  more  produced  by  the  first,  which  is  the  producer  of  the
second  cause,  which  therefore  we  call  secondaries.)  It  is  necessary,  therefore,
that  every  magician  should  know  that  very  God,  which  is  the  first  cause  and
creator  of  all  things,  and  likewise  the  other  divine  powers,  (which  we  call
the  second  causes,)  and  not  to  be  ignorant  of  them,  and  likewise  what  holy
rites,  ceremonies,  &c.  are  comformable  to  them;  but,  above  all,  we  are  to
worship  in  spirit  and  truth,  and  place  our  firm  dependence  upon  that  one
only  God  who  is  the  author  and  promoter  of  all  good  things,  the  Father  of
all,  most  bountiful  and  wise;  the  sacred  light  of  justice,  and  the  absolute  and
sole  perfection  of  all  nature,  and  the  contriver  and  wisdom  thereof.

God  himself,  although  he  is  trinity  in  persons,  yet  he  is  but  one  only  simple
essence;  yet  we  doubt  not  but  that  there  are  in  him  many  divine  powers,
which  emanate  or  flow  from  him.

The  Cabalists  most  learned  in  divine  things  have  received  the  ten  principal
names  of  God,  as  certain  divine  powers,  or,  as  it  were,  members  of  God;
which,  by  ten  numerations,  which  we  call  Sephiroth,  as  it  were  vestiments,
instruments,  or  exemplars  of  the  Archetype,  have  an  influence  upon  all
created  things,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest;  yet  by  a certain  order:  for
first  and  immediately  they  have  influence  upon  the  nine  orders  of  angels  and
quire  of  blessed  souls,  and  by  them  into  the  celestial  spheres,  planets  and
men;  by  the  which  Sephiroth  every  thing  receiveth  power  and  virtue.

The  first  of  these  is  the  name  Eheia , the  name  of  the  divine  essence;  his
numeration  is  called  Cether,  which  is  interpreted  a crown  or  diadem,  and
signifies  the  most  simple  essence  of  the  divinity;  and  it  is  called  that  which  the
eye  seeth  not;  and  is  attributed  to  God  the  Father,  and  hath  its  influence  by
the  order  of  seraphims,  or  Hajoth  Hakados,  that  is,  creatures  of  holiness;  and
then  by  the  primum  mobile , it  bestows  the  gift  of  being  upon  all  things,  and
filleth  the  whole  universe,  both  through  the  circumference  and  center;  whose
particular  intelligence  is  called  Merattron,  that  is  the  prince  of  faces,  whose


Ceremonial  finagle.  U9

duty  it  is  to  bring  others  to  the  face  of  the  Prince;  and  by  him  the  Lord
spake  to  Moses.

The  second  name  is  Jod,  or  Tetragrammaton  joined  with  Jod;  his  numera-
tion is  Hochma,  that  is,  wisdom,  and  signifies  the  divinity  full  of  ideas,  and
the  First  Begotten;  and  is  attributed  to  the  Son,  and  has  its  influence  by  the
order  of  cherubins,  or  that  the  Hebrews  call  Orphanim,  i.  e.  forms  or  wheels;
and  from  thence  into  the  starry  heavens,  where  he  frames  so  many  figures  as
he  hath  ideas  in  himself,  and  distinguishes  the  very  chaos  of  the  creatures,  by
a particular  intelligence  called  Raziel,  who  was  the  ruler  of  Adam.

The  third  name  is  called  Tetragrammaton  Elohim;  his  numeration  is
called  jPrina,  viz.  providence  and  understanding;  and  signifies  remissness,
quietness,  the  jubilee,  penitential  conversion,  a great  trumpet,  redemption  of
the  world,  and  the  life  of  the  world  to  come : it  is  attributed  to  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  hath  his  influence  by  the  order  of  thrones,  or  which  the  Hebrews
called  Abalim , that  is  great  angels,  mighty  and  strong;  and  from  thence,  by
the  sphere  of  Saturn , administers  form  to  the  unsettled  matter,  whose  parti-
cular intelligence  is  Zaphkiel,  the  ruler  of  Noah,  and  another  intelligence
named  Jophiel,  the  ruler  of  Sem;  and  these  are  the  three  supreme  and  highest
numerations,  as  it  were,  seats  of  the  divine  persons,  by  whose  command  all
things  are  made ; but  are  executed  by  the  other  seven,  which  are  therefore
called  numerations  framing.

The  fourth  name  is  El,  whose  numeration  is  Hesed , which  signifies  cle-
mency or  goodness;  likewise  grace,  mercy,  piety,  magnificence,  the  scepter,
and  right-hand;  and  hath  its  influx  by  the  order  of  dominations,  which  the
Hebrews  call  Hasmalim;  and  so  through  the  sphere  of  Jupiter  fashions  the
images  of  bodies,  bestowing  clemency  and  pacifying  justice  on  all:  his  parti-
cular intelligence  is  ZadJciel , the  ruler  of  Abraham.

The  fifth  name  is  Elohim  Gibor,  that  is,  the  mighty  God,  punishing  the  sins
of  the  wicked ; and  his  numeration  is  called  Gebusach,  which  is  to  say,  power,
gravity,  fortitude,  security,  judgment,  punishing  by  slaughter  and  war;  and
it  is  applied  to  the  tribunal  of  God,  the  girdle,  the  sword,  the  left  hand  of
God;  it  is  also  called  Pachad,  which  is  fear;  and  hath  his  influence  through
the  order  of  powers,  which  the  Hebrews  call  Seraphim,  and  from  thence
through  the  sphere  of  Mars,  to  whom  belongs  fortitude,  war  and  affliction.
It  draweth  forth  the  elements;  and  his  particular  intelligence  is  Camael , the
ruler  of  Samson.

The  sixth  name  is  Eloha , or  a name  of  four  letters  joined  with  Vaudahat;
his  numeration  is  Tiphereth,  that  is,  apparel,  beauty,  glory,  pleasure,  and
signifies  the  tree  of  life,  and  hath  his  influence  through  the  order  of  virtues,
which  the  Hebrews  call  JHalachim , that  is,  angels,  into  the  sphere  of  the  sun,
giving  brightness  and  life  to  it,  and  from  thence  producing  metals;  his  par-


flbe  Cabala;  or.


150

ticular  intelligence  is  Raphael , who  was  the  ruler  of  Isaac  and  Toby  the
younger,  and  the  angel  Peliel , the  Ruler  of  Jacob.

The  seventh  name  is  Tetragrammaton  Sabaoth , or  Adonai  Sabaoth , that  is,
the  God  of  Hosts;  and  his  numeration  is  JVezah,  that  is  triumph  and  victory:
the  right  column  is  applied  to  it,  and  it  signifies  the  justice  and  eternity  of  a
revenging  God;  it  hath  its  influence  through  the  orders  of  principalities,
whom  the  Hebrews  call  Elohim,  i.  e.  Gods,  into  the  sphere  of  Venus , gives
zeal  and  love  of  righteousness,  and  produces  vegetables;  his  intelligence  is
Haniel , and  the  angel  Cerviel,  the  ruler  of  David.

The  eighth  is  called  also  Elohim  Sabaoth,  which  is  likewise  the  God  of
Hosts,  not  of  war  and  justice,  but  of  piety  and  agreement,  for  this  name
signifies  both,  and  precedeth  his  army;  the  numeration  of  this  is  called  Hod,
which  is,  praise,  confession,  honour  and  fame;  the  left  column  is  attributed
to  it;  it  hath  his  influence  through  the  order  of  the  archangels,  which  the
Hebrews  call  Ren  Elohim,  that  is,  the  sons  of  God,  into  the  sphere  of  Mer-
cury; and  gives  elegancy,  and  consonancy  of  speech,  and  produces  living
creatures;  his  intelligence  is  Michael,  who  was  the  ruler  of  Solomon.

The  ninth  name  is  called  Sadai,  that  is,  Omnipotent,  satisfying  all,  and
JElhai,  which  is  the  Living  God;  his  numeration  is  Jesod,  that  is,  foundation,
and  signifies  a good  understanding,  a covenant,  redemption  and  rest;  and
hath  his  influence  through  the  order  of  angels,  whom  the  Hebrews  named
Cherubim,  into  the  sphere  of  the  moon  causing  the  increase  and  decrease  of
all  things,  and  provideth  for  the  genii  and  keepers  of  men,  and  distributeth
them;  his  intelligence  is  Gabriel , who  was  the  keeper  of  Joseph , Joshua ,
and  Daniel.

The  tenth  name  is  Adonai  Melech,  that  is,  lord  and  king;  his  numeration  is
Malchuth , that  is,  kingdom  and  empire,  and  signifies  a church,  the  temple  of
God,  and  a gate;  and  hath  his  influence  through  the  order  of  Animastic,  viz.
of  blessed  souls,  which,  by  the  Hebrews,  is  called  Issim,  that  is,  nobles,  lords,
and  princes;  they  are  inferior  to  the  hierarchies,  and  have  their  influences  on
the  sons  of  men,  and  give  knowledge  and  the  wonderful  understanding  of
things,  also  industry  and  prophecy;  and  the  soul  of  the  Messiah  is  president
amongst  them,  or  the  intelligence  Merattron,  which  is  called  the  first  creature,
or  the  soul  of  the  world,  who  was  the  ruler  of  Moses.

power  Of  H>b?ine  Blames.  God  himself,  though  he  be  one  only  essence,
yet  hath  divers  names,  which  expound  not  his  divers  essences  or  deities ;
but  certain  properties  flowing  from  him ; by  which  names  he  pours  down
upon  us,  and  all  his  creatures,  many  benefits;  ten  of  those  names  we
have  above  described.  The  Cabalists,  from  a certain  text  of  Exodus,  derive
seventy-two  names,  both  of  the  angels  and  of  God,  which  they  call  the  name


152


trt)e  Cabala;  ort


of  seventy-two  letters  and  Schemhamphores,  that  is,  the  expository.  From
these  therefore,  besides  those  which  we  have  reckoned  up  before,  is  the
name  of  the  divine  essence,  Eheia,  JTTIK,  which  Plato  translates  0>v,  from
hence  they  call  God  toov,  others  otov,  that  is,  the  Being.  JLu,  xirt)  is  another
name  revealed  to  Esay,  signifying  the  abyss  of  the  godhead,  which  the
Greeks  translate  rawov,  the  Latins,  himself  the  same.  Esch,  is  another
name  received  from  Moses,  which  soundeth  fire,  and  is  the  name  of  God ;
Ha,  KJ,  is  to  he  invocated  in  perturbations  and  troubles.  There  is  also  the
name  Ja, and  the  name  Elion,  and  the  name  Macom,  DplQ,  the  name

Caphu,  £££,  the  name  Innon,  py>,  and  the  name  Emeth , HDXj  which  is  inter-
preted truth,  and  is  the  seal  of  God ; and  there  are  two  other  names,  Zur,
and  Aben , px,  both  of  these  signify  a solid  work,  and  one  of  them  expres-
sed the  Father  with  the  Son ; and  many  names  we  have  placed  in  the  scale
of  numbers ; and  many  names  of  God  and  the  angels,  are  extracted  out  of
the  Holy  Scriptures  by  our  Cabala,  and  the  Notarian  and  Gimetrian  arts,
where  many  words  retracted  by  certain  of  their  letters,  make  up  one  name;
or  one  name  dispersed  by  each  of  its  letters,  signifies  or  renders  more.
Sometimes  they  are  gathered  from  the  heads  of  words,  as  the  name  Agla,
X^3X>  from  this  verse  of  the  Holy  Scripture,  viz.  *0*iXDViJ^  that  is,

the  Mighty  God  for  ever.  In  like  manner  the  name  laia,  X'X'S  from  this
verse,  viz.  ‘lnXmit*  U'n^XiTin,  that  is,  God  our  God  is  one  God ; in  like  man-
ner the  name  Java,  XIX1,  from  this  verse,  “iTiOrPT  TlX  \T',  that  is,  let  there
be  light  and  there  was  light:  in  like  manner  the  name  Ararita , XfP“lX*\Xj
from  this  verse,  nnKlTmiOn  t^XI  TJ1 TIPIX  t?Xn  nnx,  that  is,  one  prin-

cipal of  his  unity,  one  beginning  of  his  individuality,  his  vicissitude  is  one
thing;  and  this  name  Hacaba,  is  extracted  from  this  verse,

KimaaBmpn',  the  holy  and  blessed  One;  in  like  manner  this  name  Jesu ,
is  found  in  the  heads  of  these  two  verses,  viz.,  that  is  until  the

Messiah  shall  come ; and  the  other  verse,  fliTlDtP  that  is,  his  name  abides
till  the  end.  Thus  also  is  the  name  Amen,  J0X>  extracted  from  this  verse,
pXJ  '"6d,,J*1X>  that  is,  the  Lord  is  the  faithful  King.  Sometimes  these  names
are  extracted  from  the  ends  of  words,  as  the  same  Amen  from  this  verse,
tyymm  3X^>,  that  is,  the  wicked  not  so;  but  the  letters  are  transposed : so,
by  the  final  letters  of  this  verse,  niSTOty  that  is,  to  me  what  f or  what  is

his  name?  is  found  the  name  Tetragrammaton : in  all  these  a letter  is  put  for
a word,  and  a letter  extracted  from  a word,  either  from  the  beginning,  end
or  where  you  please;  and  sometimes  these  names  are  extracted  from  all  the
letters,  one  by  one,  as  those  seventy-two  names  of  God  are  extracted  from
those  three  verses  of  Exodus,  beginning  from  these  three  words,  tD1'  IXT  IJJDVS
the  first  and  the  last  verses  being  written  from  the  right  to  the  left;  but  the
middle  contrariwise,  from  the  left  to  the  right,  as  we  shall  shew  hereafter;


Ceremonial  fiflaptc.


153

and  so  sometimes  a word  is  extracted  from  a word,  or  a name  from  a name,
by  the  transposition  of  letters,  as  Messia,  rWO)  from  Ismah,  nDE”,  and
Michael  from  Malachi , hut  sometimes  by  changing  the  alphabet,

which  the  Cabalists  call  Ziruph,  rpTif;  so  from  the  name  Tetragrammaton,
nwi,  are  drawn  forth  Maz-Paz , iffi,  Kuzu.  Sometimes,  by  reason  of

the  equality  of  the  numbers,  names  are  changed,  as  Merattron , jniatSD,  pro
Sadai,  "Hty,  for  both  of  them  make  three  hundred  and  fourteen;  so  Jiai,  sk*",
and  El,  are  equal  in  number,  for  both  make  thirty-one;  and  these  are
the  hidden  secrets,  concerning  which  it  is  most  difficult  to  judge,  or  to  deliver
a perfect  science;  neither  can  they  be  understood  or  taught  in  any  other
language  but  the  Hebrew.  Therefore,  these  sacred  words  have  not  their
power  in  magical  operations  from  themselves,  as  they  are  words,  but  from
the  occult  divine  powers  working  by  them  in  the  mind  of  those  who  by
faith  adhere  to  them.

We  will  here  deliver  unto  thee  a sacred  seal,  efficacious  against  any  disease
of  man,  or  any  griefs  whatsoever,  in  whose  fore-side  are  the  four-squared
names  of  God,  so  subordinate  to  one  another  in  a square,  that,  from  the
highest  to  the  lowest,  those  most  holy  names  or  seals  of  the  godhead  do  arise,
whose  intention  is  inscribed  in  the  circumference;  but  on  the  backside  is
inscribed  the  seven-lettered  name  Araritha , and  his  interpretation  is  written
about,  viz.  the  verse  from  which  it  is  extracted,  even  as  you  may  see  in  the
annexed  plate,  where  A represents  the  former  part,  B the  hinder;  but  all
this  must  be  done  in  most  pure  gold,  or  virgin  parchment,  pure,  clean,  and
unspotted;  also  with  ink  made  of  the  smoke  of  consecrated  wax-lights,  or
incense  and  holy  water.  The  operator  must  be  purified  and  cleansed,  and
have  an  infallible  hope,  a constant  faith,  and  have  his  mind  lifted  up  to  the
Most  High  God,  if  he  would  surely  obtain  this  divine  power.

Now,  against  the  depredations  of  evil  spirits  and  men,  and  what  dangers
soever,  either  of  journies,  water,  enemies,  arms,  <&c.  in  the  same  manner
as  is  above  said,  these  characters  on  the  one  side  VIYD,  and  these  on  the
other  n3£y,  which  are  the  beginnings  and  ends  of  the  five  first  verses  of
Genesis , and  representation  of  the  creation  of  the  world ; and,  by  this  liga-
ture, they  say  that  a man  shall  be  free  from  all  mischiefs,  if  that  he  firmly
believes  in  God,  the  Creator  of  all  things.

Now  these  being  done  on  a small  plate  of  gold,  as  before  described,
(will  be  found  to  have  the  effect  above  mentioned) ; the  figure  of  which  you
may  likewise  see  in  the  annexed  plate,  fig.  C and  D,  where  C shows  the  for-
mer part,  and  B the  hinder.

Now  let  no  one  distrust  or  wonder,  that  sacred  words  and  divine  names
applied  outwardly,  can  effect  wonderful  things,  seeing,  by  them,  the  Al-
mighty created  the  heavens  and  the  earth;  for  there  is  no  name  of  God


154


Ube  Cabala;  or,


amongst  us  (according  to  Moses  the  Egyptian)  which  is  not  taken  from  his
works,  besides  the  name  Tetragrammaton,  which  is  holy,  signifying  the
substance  of  the  Creator  in  a pure  signification.

©f  Untelliaences  anb  Spitits-  Now,  consequently,  we  must  discourse
of  intelligences,  spirits,  and  angels.  An  intelligence  is  an  intelligible  sub-
stance, free  from  all  gross  and  putrifying  mass  of  a body,  immortal,  insensible,
assisting  all,  having  influence  over  all ; and  the  nature  of  all  intelligences,
spirits,  and  angels  is  the  same.  But  I call  angels  here,  not  those  whom  we
usually  call  devils,  but  spirits  so  called  from  the  propriety  of  the  word,  as  it
were,  knowing,  understanding,  and  wise.  But  of  these,  according  to  the
tradition  of  magicians,  there  are  three  kinds ; the  first  of  which  we  call
super-celestial,  and  minds  altogether  separated  from  a body,  and,  as  it  were
intellectual  spheres  worshipping  one  only  God,  as  it  were,  their  most  firm
and  stable  unity  or  centre.  Wherefore  they  even  call  them  Gods,  by  reason
of  a certain  participation  of  the  Divinity,  for  they  are  always  full  of  God.
These  are  only  about  God,  and  rule  not  the  bodies  of  the  world,  neither  are
they  fitted  for  the  government  of  inferior  things,  but  infuse  the  light  received
from  God  unto  the  inferior  orders,  and  distribute  every  one’s  duty  to  all  of
them.  The  celestial  intelligences  do  next  follow  these  in  the  second  order,
which  they  call  worldly  angels,  viz.  being  appointed,  besides  the  divine  wor-
ship for  the  spheres  of  the  world,  and  for  the  government  of  every  heaven
and  star;  whence  they  are  divided  into  so  many  orders  as  there  are  heavens
in  the  world,  and  as  there  are  stars  in  the  heavens.  And  they  called  these
Saturnine , who  rule  the  heaven  of  Saturn , and  Saturn  himself ; others
Jovial , who  rule  the  heaven  of  Jupiter,  and  Jupiter  himself;  and  in  like
manner  they  name  different  angels,  as  well  for  the  name  as  the  virtue  of  the
other  stars;  and  because  the  old  astrologers  maintained  fifty-five  motions,
therefore  they  invented  so  many  intelligences  or  angels.  They  placed  also  in
the  starry  heaven  angels  who  might  rule  the  signs,  triplicities,  decans,  quin-
aries,  degrees  and  stars ; for  although  the  school  of  Peripatetics  assign  one
only  intelligence  to  each  of  the  orbs  of  the  stars,  yet  seeing  every  star  and
small  part  of  the  heaven  hath  its  proper  and  different  power  and  influence,
it  is  necessary  also  that  it  have  its  ruling  intelligence  which  may  confer
power  and  operate;  therefore  they  have  established  twelve  princes  of  the
angels,  who  rule  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac,  and  thirty-six  who  may  rule
so  many  decans,  and  seventy-two  who  may  rule  so  many  quinaries  of  heaven,
and  the  tongues  of  men  and  nations,  and  four  who  may  rule  the  triplicities
and  elements,  and  seven  governors  of  the  whole  world,  according  to  the
seven  planets;  and  they  have  given  to  all  of  them  names  and  seals,  which
they  call  characters , and  used  them  in  their  invocations,  incantations  and


FALLEN  ANGELS.


A DECEIVER.


Vessels  of  Iniquity.


Belial.


VESSELS  OF  WRATH.


Ceremonial  fiflaptc.


159


carvings,  describing  them  in  the  instruments  of  their  operations,  images ,
“plates,  glasses , rings , papers , wax-lights , and  such  like.  And  if  at  any  time
they  operated  for  the  sun  they  invocated  by  the  name  of  the  sun  and  by  the
names  of  solar  angels,  and  so  of  the  rest.  Thirdly,  they  establish  angels
as  ministers  for  the  disposing  of  those  things  which  are  below,  which  Origen
called  certain  invisible  powers,  to  which  those  things  which  are  on  earth  are
committed  to  be  disposed  of.  For  sometimes,  they  being  visible  to  none  do
direct  our  journies  and  all  our  business,  are  often  present  at  battles,  and,  by
secret  helps,  do  give  the  desired  success  to  their  friends;  for,  at  their  plea-
sure, they  can  procure  prosperity,  and  inflict  adversity.  In  like  manner  they
distribute  these  into  more  orders,  so  as  some  are  fiery,  some  watery,  some
aerial,  some  terrestial ; which  four  species  of  angels  are  computed  according
to  the  four  powers  of  the  celestial  souls,  viz.  the  mind,  reason,  imagination,
and  vivifying  and  moving  nature ; hence  the  fiery  follow  the  mind  of  the
celestial  souls,  whence  they  concur  to  the  contemplation  of  more  sublime
things ; but  the  aerial  follow  reason,  and  favour  the  rational  faculty,  and,
after  a cetrain  manner  separate  it  from  the  sensitive  andvegetative ; therefore
it  serves  for  an  active  life,  as  the  fiery  the  contemplative ; but  the  watery
follow  the  imagination,  serve  for  a voluptuous  life ; the  earthly  following
nature,  favours  vegetable  nature.  Moreover,  they  distinguish  also  this  kind
of  angels  into  saturnine  and  jovial,  according  to  the  names  of  the  stars  and
the  heavens;  farther,  some  are  oriental,  some  occidental,  some  meridional,
some  septentrional.  Moreover,  there  is  no  part  of  the  world  destitute  of  the
proper  assistance  of  these  angels,  not  because  they  are  alone,  but  because  they
reign  there  especially ; for  they  are  every  where,  although  some  especially
operate,  and  have  their  influence  in  this  place,  some  elsewhere ; neither
truly  are  these  things  to  be  understood  as  though  they  were  subject  to  the
influence  of  the  stars,  but  as  they  have  correspondence  with  the  heaven
above  the  world,  from  whence  especially  all  things  are  directed,  and  to
which  all  things  ought  to  be  conformable ; whence,  as  these  angels  are
appointed  for  diverse  stars,  so  also  for  diverse  places  and  times;  not  that
they  are  limited  to  any  place  or  time,  neither  by  the  bodies  which  they  are
appointed  to  govern,  but  because  the  Divine  Wisdom  hath  so  decreed ; there-
fore they  favour  more,  and  patronize  those  bodies,  places,  times,  stars:  so
they  have  called  some  diurnal,  some  nocturnal,  others  meridional.  In  like
manner  some  are  called  woodmen,  some  mountaineers,  some  fieldmen,  some
domestics:  hence  the  gods  of  the  woods,  country  gods,  satyrs,  familiars,
fairies  of  the  fountains,  fairies  of  the  woods,  nymphs  of  the  sea,  the  Naiades,
Nereides,  Dryades,  Pierides,  Hamadryades,  Patumides,  Hinnides  Agapte,
Pales,  Parcades,  Dodonae,  Fanilae,  Levernae,  Parcae,  Muses,  Aonides,  Casta-
lides,  Heliconides,  Pegasides,  Meonides,  Phebiades,  Camenae,  the  graces,


160


Ube  Cabala;  or,


the  genii,  hodgobblins,  and  such  like;  whence  the  vulgar  call  them  supe-
riors, some  the  demi-gods  and  goddesses  : some  of  these  are  so  familiar  and
acquainted  with  men,  that  they  are  even  affected  with  human  perturbations ;
by  whose  instructions  Plato  thinks  that  men  do  oftentimes  wonderful  things,
even  as  by  the  instruction  of  men;  some  beasts  which  are  most  nigh  to  us,
apes,  dogs,  elephants,  do  often  strange  things  above  their  species ; and  they
who  have  written  the  chronicles  of  the  Danes  and  Norwegians,  do  testify
that  spirits  of  several  kinds  in  those  regions  are  subject  to  men’s  commands;
moreover,  some  of  these  appear  corporeal  and  mortal,  whose  bodies  are  be-
gotten and  die ; yet  to  he  long-lived  is  the  opinion  of  the  Egyptians  and  Pla-
tonists  and  especially  approved  by  Proclus,  Plutarch  also,  and  Demetrius  the
philospher  and  AHmilianus  the  rhetorician,  affirm  the  same;  therefore  of
these  spirits  of  the  third  kind,  as  the  opinion  of  the  Platonists  is,  they  report
that  there  are  so  many  legions  as  there  are  stars  in  the  heaven,  and  so  many
spirits  in  every  legion  as  in  heaven  itself  stars : hut  there  are,  (as  Athanasius
delivers,)  who  think,  that  the  true  number  of  good  spirits  is  according  to
the  number  of  men,  ninety-nine  parts,  according  to  the  parable  of  the  hun-
dred sheep;  others  think  only  nine  parts,  according  to  the  parable  of  the  ten
goats;  others  suppose  the  number  of  the  angels  equal  with  men,  because  it
is  written,  he  that  hath  appointed  the  bounds  of  the  people  according  to  the
number  of  the  angels  of  God  ; and  concerning  their  number  may  have  written
many  things;  but  the  latter  theologians,  follow  the  masters  of  the  sentences,
Austin  and  Gregory , easily  resolve  themselves,  saying,  that  the  number  of  the
good  angels  transcendeth human  capacity;  to  the  which,  on  the  contrary,  innu-
merable unclean  spirits  do  correspond,  there  being  so  many  in  the  inferior
world  as  pure  spirits  in  the  superior ; and  some  divines  affirm  that  they  have
received  this  by  revelation.  Under  these  they  place  a kind  of  spirits  subter-
raneous or  obscure,  which  the  Platonists  call  angels  that  failed,  revengers  of
wickedness  and  ungodliness,  according  to  the  decree  of  the  divine  justice;
and  they  call  them  evil  angels  and  wicked  spirits,  because  they  often  annoy
and  hurt,  even  of  their  own  accord.  Of  these  also  they  reckon  more  legions;
and,  in  like  manner,  distinguishing  them  according  to  the  names  of  the  stars  and
elements,  and  parts  of  the  world,  they  place  over  them  kings,  princes,  and
rulers ; and  the  names  of  them : of  these,  four  most  mischievous  kings  rule
over  the  other,  according  to  the  four  parts  of  the  world.  Under  these  many
more  princes  of  legions  govern,  and  many  private  offices;  hence  the  Gor-
gones , Statenocte,  the  Furies;  hence  Tisiphone , Alecto,  Megcera,  Cerberus.
They  of  this  kind  of  spirits,  Porphyry  says,  inhabit  a place  nigh  the  earth,
yea  within  the  earth  itself;  there  is  no  mischief  which  they  dare  not  commit;
they  have  altogether  a violent  and  hurtful  nature,  therefore  they  plot,  and
endeavour  violent  and  sudden  mischiefs;  and  when  they  make  incursions,


Ceremonial  finagle.


161


sometimes  they  lie  hid,  and  sometimes  offer  open  violence,  and  are  very
much  delighted  in  all  such  things  done  wickedly  and  mischievously.

lEVil  Spirits.  There  are  some  of  the  school  of  theologians,  who  distribute
the  evil  spirits  into  nine  degrees,  as  contrary  to  the  nine  orders  of  angels.
Therefore,  the  first  of  these,  which  are  called  false  gods,  who,  usurping  the
name  of  God,  would  he  worshipped  for  gods,  and  require  sacrifices  and  adora-
tions; as  that  devil  who  said  to  Christ,  “If  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship
me,  I will  give  thee  all  these  things,”  shewing  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the
world;  and  the  prince  of  these  is  he  who  said,  I will  ascend  above  the  height
of  the  clouds,  and  will  be  like  to  the  Most  High,  who  is  called  Beelzebub,
that  is,  an  old  god.  In  the  second  place,  follow  the  spirits  of  lies,  of  which
sort  was  he  who  went  forth,  and  was  a lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  the  pro-
phet of  Ahab ; and  the  prince  of  these  is  the  serpent  Pytho,  from  whence
Apollo  is  called  Pythius,  and  that  woman  a Pythoness,  or  witch,  in  Samuel,
and  the  other  in  the  gospel,  who  had  Pytho  in  her  belly.  Therefore,  these
kind  of  devils  join  themselves  to  the  oracles,  and  delude  men  by  divinations
and  predictions,  so  that  they  may  he  deceived.  In  the  third  order,  are  the
vessels  of  iniquity,  which  are  called  vessels  of  wrath : these  are  the  inventors
of  evil  things,  and  all  wicked  arts;  as  in  Plato,  that  devil  Theutus,  who
taught  cards  and  dice;  for  all  wickedness,  malice,  and  deformity,  proceeds
from  these,  of  which  in  Genesis , in  the  benedictions  of  Simeon  and  Levi,
Jacob  said,  “vessels  of  iniquity  are  in  their  habitations,  into  their  counsel  let
not  my  soul  come;”  which  the  Psalmist  calls  vessels  of  death,  Isaiah , vessels
of  fury;  and  Jeremiah,  vessels  of  wrath;  Ezekiel , vessels  of  destroying  and
slaying;  and  their  prince  is  Belial,  which  signifies,  without  a yoke,  and  dis-
obedient, a prevaricator,  and  an  apostate;  of  whom  Paul  to  the  Corinthians
says,  “what  agreement  has  Christ  with  Belial?”  Fourthly,  follow  the  re-
vengers of  evil,  and  their  prince  is  Asmodeus,  viz.  causing  judgment.  After
these,  in  the  fifth  place,  come  the  deluders,  who  imitate  miracles,  and  serve
conjurers  and  witches,  and  seduce  the  people  by  their  miracles,  as  the  serpent
seduced  Eve,  and  their  prince  is  Satan,  of  whom  it  is  written  in  the  Revela-
tion, “that  he  seduces  the  whole  world,  doing  great  signs,  and  causing  fire  to
descend  from  heaven  in  the  sight  of  men ; seducing  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  by  these  signs,  which  are  given  him  to  do.”  Sixthly,  the  aerial  powers
offer  themselves  and  join  themselves  to  thunder  and  lightning,  corrupting  the
air,  causing  pestilences,  and  other  evils;  in  the  number  of  which  are  the  four
angels  of  whom  the  Revelations  speak,  to  whom  it  is  given  to  hurt  the  earth
and  the  sea,  holding  the  four  winds  from  the  four  corners  of  the  earth;  and
their  prince  is  called  Meririm : he  is  the  meridian  devil,  a boiling  spirit,  a
devil  raging  in  the  south,  whom  Paul , to  the  Ephesians , calls  “ the  prince  of


162  {Ebe  Cabala;  or,

the  power  of  the  air,  and  the  spirit  which  works  in  the  children  of  dis-
obedience.” The  seventh  mansion  the  furies  possess,  who  the  powers  of  evil,
discords,  war,  and  devastation;  whose  name  in  the  Revelation  is  called  in
Greek,  Apollyon;  in  the  Hebrew,  Abaddon , that  is,  destroying  and  wasting.
In  the  eighth  place  are  the  accusers  or  inquisitors,  whose  prince  is  Astaroth,
that  is,  a searcher  out;  in  the  Greek  language  he  is  called  Diabolus,  that  is,
an  accuser  or  caluminator;  which  in  the  Revelation  is  called  the  “accuser  of
the  brethren,  accusing  them  night  and  day  before  the  face  of  God.”  More-
over, the  tempters  and  ensnares  have  the  last  place;  one  of  which  is  present
with  every  man,  which  we  call  the  evil  genius,  and  their  prince  is  Mammon ,
which  is  interpreted  covetousness.  But  we  of  the  Cabala  unanimously  main-
tain that  evil  spirits  do  wander  up  and  down  this  inferior  world,  enraged
against  all  whom  we  call  devils;  of  whom  Austin , in  his  first  book  of  the
Incarnation  of  the  Word,  to  Januarius , says,  concerning  the  devils  and  his
angels  contrary  to  virtues,  the  ecclesiastical  preachers  have  taught  that  there
are  such  things,  but  what  they  are,  and  who  they  are,  he  has  not  clear  enough
expounded:  yet  there  is  this  opinion  among  them,  that  this  devil  was  an
angel,  and  being  made  an  apostate,  persuaded  many  of  the  angels  to  fall  with
him,  who  to  this  day  are  called  his  angels.  Greece,  nothwithstanding,  thinks
not  that  these  are  damned,  nor  that  they  are  all  purposely  evil;  but  that  from
the  creation  of  the  world  the  dispensation  of  things  is  ordained  by  this
means,  that  the  tormenting  of  sinful  souls  is  made  over  to  them.  The  other
theologians  say,  that  no  devil  was  created  evil,  but  that  they  were  driven  and
cast  out  of  heaven  from  the  orders  of  good  angels,  for  their  pride;  whose  fall
not  only  our  and  the  Hebrew  theologians,  but  also  the  Assyrians,  Arabians,
Egyptians,  and  Greeks,  do  confirm  by  their  tenets.  Pherycies , the  Assyrian,
describes  the  fall  of  the  devils;  and  Ophis,  that  is,  the  develish  serpent,  was
the  head  of  that  rebelling  army;  Trismegistus  sings  the  same  fall,  in  his
Pimander;  and  Homer,  under  the  name  of  Ararus,  in  his  verses;  and  Plut-
arch, in  his  Discourse  on  Usury,  signifies  that  Empedocles  knew  that  the  fall
of  the  devils  was  in  this  manner;  the  devils  themselves  often  confess  their
fall.  They  being  cast  out  into  this  valley  of  misery,  some  that  are  near  to  us
wander  up  and  down  in  this  obscure  air;  others  inhabit  lakes,  rivers,  and
seas;  others  the  earth,  and  terrify  earthly  things,  and  invade  those  who  dig
wells  and  metals,  cause  the  gaping  of  the  earth,  to  strike  together  the  foun-
dations of  the  mountains,  and  vex  not  only  men  but  also  other  creatures;
some  being  content  with  laughter  and  delusion  only,  do  contrive  rather  to
weary  men  than  to  hurt  them;  some  heightening  themselves  to  the  length  of
a giant’s  body,  and  again  shrinking  themselves  down  to  the  smallest  of
pigmies,  and  changing  themselves  into  different  forms,  to  disturb  men  with
vain  fears;  others  study  lies  and  blasphemies,  as  we  read  of  one  in  third  book


Ceremonial  fnlaolc.


167


of  Kings,  saying,  “I  will  go  forth  and  be  a lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all  the
prophets  of  Ahab.”  But  the  worst  sort  of  devils  are  those  who  lie  in  wait,
and  overthrow  passengers  in  their  journie3,  and  rejoice  in  wars  and  effusion
of  blood,  and  afflict  men  with  most  cruel  stripes : we  read  of  such  in  Matthew ,
“for  fear  of  whom  no  man  dare  pass  that  way.”  Moreover,  the  Scripture
reckons  up  nocturnal , diurnal , and  meridional  devils;  and  describes  other
spirits  of  wickedness  by  different  names,  as  we  read  in  Isaiah  of  satyrs,
screech-owls,  sirens,  storks,  owls;  and  in  the  Psalms , of  asps,  basilisks,  lions,
dragons;  and  in  the  Gospel,  we  read  of  scorpions,  and  Mammon,  and  the
prince  of  this  world,  and  rulers  of  darkness,  of  all  whom  Beelzebub  is  the
prince,  whom  the  Scripture  calls  the  prince  of  wickedness.

It  is  the  opinion  of  divines,  that  all  evil  spirits  are  of  that  nature,  that  they
hate  God  as  well  as  men ; therefore  Divine  Providence  has  set  over  us  more
pure  spirits,  with  whom  he  hath  entrusteth  us,  as  with  shepherds  and  govern-
ors, that  they  should  daily  help  us,  and  drive  away  evil  spirits  from  us,  and
curb  and  restrain  them,  that  they  should  not  hurt  us,  as  they  would  other-
wise; as  is  read  in  Tobias , that  Raphael  did  apprehend  the  demon  called
Asmodeus,  and  bound  him  in  the  wilderness  of  the  Upper  Egypt.  Of  these,
Hesiod  says,  there  are  30,000  of  Jupiter’s  immortal  spirits  living  on  the  earth,
who  are  the  keepers  of  mortal  men,  who,  that  they  might  observe  justice  and
merciful  deeds,  having  clothed  themselves  with  air,  go  to  and  fro  every
where  on  the  earth.  For  there  is  no  potentate  could  be  safe,  nor  any  woman
continue  uncorrupted,  no  man  in  this  vale  of  ignorance  could  come  to  the
end  appointed  to  him  by  God,  if  good  spirits  did  not  secure  us,  or  if  evil
spirits  should  be  permitted  to  satisfy  the  wills  of  men;  as  therefore  among
the  good  there  is  a proper  keeper  or  protector  deputed  to  every  one,  corro-
borating the  spirit  of  the  man  to  good;  so  of  evil  spirits,  there  is  sent  forth
an  enemy  ruling  over  the  flesh  and  desire  thereof;  and  the  good  spirit  fights
for  us  as  a preserver  against  the  enemy  and  flesh.  Now  man,  between  these
contenders  is  in  the  middle,  and  left  in  the  hand  of  his  own  counsel,  to
whom  he  will  give  victory:  we  cannot  therefore  accuse  angels,  or  deny
free-will,  if  they  do  not  bring  the  nations  entrusted  to  them  to  the  knowledge
of  the  true  God  and  true  piety,  but  suffer  them  to  fall  into  errors  and  perverse
worship;  it  is  to  be  imputed  to  themselves,  who  have  of  their  own  accord,
declined  from  the  right  path,  adhering  to  the  spirits  of  error,  giving
victory  to  the  devil : for  it  is  in  the  hand  of  man  to  adhere  to  whom  he
pleases,  and  overcome  whom  he  will;  by  whom  if  once  the  devil  be  over-
come, he  is  made  his  servant,  and  being  overcome,  cannot  fight  any  more
with  another,  as  a wasp  that  has  lost  his  sting.  To  which  opinion  Origen
assents,  in  his  book  Periarchon,  concluding  that  the  saints  fight  against  evil
spirits,  and  overcoming,  do  lessen  their  army ; neither  can  he  that  is  over-


168


Xlbe  Cabala;  or,


come  by  any  molest  any  more.  As  therefore  there  is  given  to  every  man  a
good  spirit,  so  there  is  given  to  every  man  an  evil  diabolical  spirit,  whereof
each  seeks  an  union  with  our  spirit,  and  endeavours  to  attract  it  to  itself,
and  to  be  mixed  with  it,  as  wine  with  water;  the  good  indeed,  through  all
good  works  comformable  to  itself,  change  us  into  angels  by  uniting  us ; as  it  is
written  of  John  the  Baptist  in  Malachi,  “behold  I send  my  angel  before
thy  face;  ” of  which  transmutation  and  union  it  is  written  elsewhere,  he  that
adheres  to  God  is  made  one  spirit  with  him.  An  evil  spirit  also,  by  evil
works,  studies  to  make  us  conformable  to  itself,  and  unite  us,  as  Christ  says
of  Judas,  “Have  not  I chosen  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a devil?”  And
this  is  that  which  Hermes  says,  when  a spirit  hath  influence  on  the  soul  of
man,  he  scatters  the  seed  of  his  own  notion,  whence  such  a soul,  being  sown
with  seeds,  and  full  of  fury,  brings  forth  thence  wonderful  things,  and
whatsoever  are  the  offices  of  spirits : for  when  a good  spirit  hath  influence  on
a holy  soul,  it  does  exalt  it  to  the  light  of  wisdom;  but  an  evil  spirit  being
transfused  into  a wicked  soul,  doth  stir  it  up  to  theft,  to  man -slaughter,  to
lust,  and  whatsoever  are  the  offices  of  evil  spirits.  Good  spirits,  as  Jamblicus
says,  purge  the  souls  most  perfectly,  and  some  bestow  upon  us  other  good
things ; they  being  present,  do  give  health  to  the  body,  virtue  to  the  soul,  and
security;  what  is  mortal  in  us  they  take  away,  cherish  heat,  and  make  it
more  efficacious  to  life ; and,  by  an  harmony,  do  always  infuse  light  into  an
intelligible  mind.  But  whether  there  be  many  keepers  of  a man,  or  one
alone,  theologians  differ  among  themselves : we  think  there  are  more,  the
prophet  saying,  “he  hath  given  his  angels  a charge  concerning  thee,  that
they  should  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways,”  which,  as  Hierome  says,  is  to  be
understood  of  any  man,  as  well  as  of  Christ.  All  men,  therefore,  are
governed  by  the  ministry  of  different  angels,  and  are  brought  to  any  degree
of  virtue,  deserts,  and  dignity,  who  behave  themselves  worthy  of  them;
but  they  who  carry  themselves  unworthy  of  them,  are  deposed  and  thrust
down,  as  well  by  evil  spirits  as  good  spirits,  unto  the  lowest  degree  of  misery,
as  their  evil  merits  shall  require;  but  they  that  are  attributed  to  the  sublimer
angels  are  preferred  before  other  men;  for  angels  having  the  care  of  them,
exalt  them,  and  subject  others  to  them  by  a certain  occult  power,  which,
although  neither  of  them  perceive,  yet  he  that  is  subjected  feels  a certain
yoke  of  presidency,  of  which  he  cannot  easily  quit  himself;  yea,  he  fears
and  reverences  that  power,  which  the  superior  angels  make  to  flow  upon
inferiors,  and  with  a certain  terror  bring  the  inferiors  into  a fear  of  presi-
dency. This  did  Homer  seem  to  be  sensible  of,  when  he  says,  that  the
Muses  begot  of  Jupiter,  did  always,  as  inseparable  companions,  assist  the
kings  begot  of  Jupiter,  speaking  figuratively  who  by  them  were  made  vene-
rable and  magnificent : so  we  read  that  M.  Antoninus  being  formerly  joined


Ceremonial  fTOapfc.


169


in  singular  friendship  with  Octavius  Augustus,  were  accustomed  always  to
play  together;  but  when,  as  always,  Augustus  always  went  away  conqueror,  a
certain  magician  counselled  M.  Antoninus  thus : “ O Anthony,  what  dost
thou  do  with  that  young  man  ? Shun  and  avoid  him,  for  although  thou  art
older  than  he,  and  art  more  skilful  than  he,  and  art  better  descended  than  he,
and  hath  endured  the  wars  of  more  emperors,  yet  thy  Genius  doth  much
dread  the  Genius  of  this  young  man,  and  thy  fortune  flatters  his  fortune;
unless  thou  shalt  shun  him,  it  seems  wholly  to  decline  to  him.”  Is  not  the
prince  like  other  men  ? how  should  other  men  fear  and  reverence  him,  unless
a divine  terror  should  exalt  him,  and  striking  a fear  into  others,  depress
them,  that  they  should  reverence  him  as  a prince?  Wherefore  we  must
endeavour,  that,  being  purified  by  doing  well,  and  following  sublime  things,
and  choosing  opportune  times  and  seasons,  we  be  entrusted  or  committed  to
a degree  of  sublimer  and  more  potent  angels,  who  taking  care  of  us,  we  may
deservedly  be  preferred  before  others.

Every  man  hath  a threefold  good  demon  as  a proper  keeper  or  preserver,
the  one  whereof  is  holy,  another  of  the  nativity,  and  the  other  of  profession.
The  holy  demon  is  one,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Egyptians , assigned
to  the  rational  soul,  not  from  the  stars  or  planets,  but  from  a supernatural
cause — from  God  himself,  the  president  of  demons,  being  universal  and
above  nature.  This  directs  the  life  of  the  soul,  and  does  always  put  good
thoughts  into  the  mind,  being  always  active  in  illuminating  us,  although  we
do  not  always  take  notice  of  it;  but  when  we  are  purified  and  live  peaceably,
then  it  is  perceived  by  us,  then  it  does,  as  it  were,  speak  with  us,  and  com-
municates its  voice  to  us,  being  before  silent,  and  studies  daily  to  bring  us
to  a sacred  perfection.  So  it  falls  out  that  some  profit  more  in  any  science,
or  art,  or  office,  in  a less  time  and  with  little  pains,  when  another  takes  much
pains  and  studies  hard,  and  all  in  vain;  and  although  no  science,  art  or  virtue,
is  to  be  contemned,  yet  that  you  may  live  prosperously,  carry  on  thy  affairs
happily,  in  the  first  place,  know  thy  good  genius , and  his  nature,  and  what
good  the  celestial  disposition  promises  thee,  and  God  the  distributer  of  all
these,  who  distributes  to  each  as  he  pleases,  and  follow  the  beginnings  of  these,
profess  these,  be  conversant  in  that  virtue  to  which  the  most  high  distributer
doth  elevate  and  lead  thee;  who  made  Abraham  excel  in  justice  and  clemency,
Isaac  with  fear,  Jacob  with  strength,  Moses  with  meekness  and  miracles,
Joshua  in  war,  Phineas  in  zeal,  David  in  religion  and  victory,  Solomon  in
knowledge  and  fame,  Peter  in  faith,  John  in  charity,  Jacob  in  devotion,
Thomas  in  prudence,  Magdalen  in  contemplation,  Martha  in  officiousness.
Therefore  in  what  virtue  you  think  you  can  most  easily  be  a proficient  in,  use
diligence  to  attain  to  the  height  thereof,  that  you  may  excel  in  one,  when
in  many  you  cannot,  but  in  the  rest  endeavour  to  be  as  great  a proficient  as


170


XTbc  Cabala;  or,


you  can ; but  if  thou  shalt  have  the  overseers  of  nature  and  religion  agree-
able, thou  shalt  find  a double  progress  of  thy  nature  and  profession ; but  if
they  shall  be  disagreeing,  follow  the  better,  for  thou  shalt  better  perceive  at
some  time  a preserver  of  an  excellent  profession  than  of  nativity.

©f  tbe  Speech  Ot  Hncjels.  We  might  doubt  whether  angels  or
demons,  since  they  are  pure  spirits,  use  any  vocal  speech  or  tongue  among
themselves  or  to  us;  but  that  Paul,  in  some  places  says,  “if  I speak  with  the
tongue  of  men  or  angels;” — but  what  their  speech  or  tongue  is,  is  much
doubted  by  many.  For  many  think  that  if  they  use  any  idiom,  it  is  Hebrew,
because  that  was  first  of  all,  and  came  from  heaven,  and  was  before  the  con-
fusion of  languages  in  Babylon,  in  which  the  law  was  given  by  God  the
Father,  and  the  gospel  was  preached  by  Christ  the  Son,  and  so  many  oracles
were  given  to  the  prophets  by  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  seeing  all  tongues  have
and  do  undergo  various  mutations  and  corruptions,  this  alone  does  always
continue  inviolated.  Moreover,  an  evident  sign  of  this  opinion  is,  that
though  this  demon  and  intelligence  do  use  the  speech  of  those  nations  with
whom  they  do  inhabit,  yet,  to  them  who  understand  it,  they  never  speak  in
any  idiom  but  in  this  alone,  viz.  Hebrew.  But  now,  how  angels  speak,  it  is
hid  from  us,  as  they  themselves  are.  Now  to  us,  that  we  may  speak,  a tongue
is  necessary  with  other  instruments;  as  the  jaws,  palate,  lips,  teeth,  throat,
lungs,  the  aspera  arteria , and  muscles  of  the  breast,  which  have  the  beginning
of  motion  from  the  soul.  But  if  I speak  at  a distance  to  another,  he  must
use  a louder  voice;  but,  if  near,  he  whispers  in  my  ear,  as  if  he  should  be
coupled  to  the  hearer,  without  any  noise,  as  an  image  in  the  eye  or  glass.
So  souls  going  out  of  the  body,  so  angels,  so  demons  speak;  and  what  man
doeswith  a sensible  voice,  they  do  by  impressing  the  conception  of  the  speech
in  those  to  whom  they  speak  after  a better  manner  than  if  they  should
express  it  in  an  audible  voice.  So  the  Platonist  says,  that  Socraters  perceived
his  demon  by  sense,  indeed,  but  not  of  this  body,  but  by  the  sense  of  the
etherial  body  concealed  in  this;  after  which  manner  Avicen  believes  the
angels  were  wont  to  be  seen  and  heard  by  the  prophets.  That  instrument,
whatsoever  the  virtue  be,  by  which  one  spirit  makes  known  to  another  spirit
what  things  are  in  his  mind,  is  called  by  the  apostle  Paul,  the  tongue  of
angels.  Yet  oftentimes  they  send  forth  an  audible  voice,  as  they  that  cried
at  the  ascension  of  the  Lord,  Ye  men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  here  gazing
unto  the  heavens?  And  in  the  old  law  they  spake  with  divers  of  the  fathers
with  a sensible  voice ; but  this  never  but  when  they  assumed  bodies.  But
with  what  senses  these  spirits  and  demons  hear  our  invocations  and  prayers,
and  see  our  ceremonies,  we  are  altogether  ignorant.


Ceremonial  finagle.


171


For  there  is  a spiritual  body  of  demons  every  where  sensible  by  nature,  so
that  it  touches,  sees,  hears  without  any  medium,  and  nothing  can  be  an
impediment  to  it;  yet  they  do  not  perceive  after  the  same  manner  as  we  do,
with  different  organs,  but  haply  as  sponges  drink  in  water,  so  do  they  all
sensible  things  with  their  body  or  some  way  unknown  to  us  ; neither  are  all
animals  endowed  with  these  organs,  for  we  know  that  many  want  ears,  yet
we  know  they  perceive  a sound,  but  after  what  manner  we  know  not.

IFlameS  Of  Spirits.  Many  and  different  are  the  names  of  good  and  bad
spirits;  but  their  proper  and  true  names,  as  those  of  the  stars,  are  known  to
God  alone,  who  only  numbers  the  multitude  of  stars,  and  calls  them  by  their
names,  whereof  none  can  be  known  to  us  but  by  divine  revelation;  very  few
are  expressed  to  us  in  sacred  writ.  But  the  masters  of  the  Hebrews  think,
that  the  names  of  angels  are  imposed  on  them  by  Adam,  according  to  that
which  is  written,  “ the  Lord  brought  all  things  which  he  made  unto  Adam,
that  he  should  name  them,  and  as  he  called  any  thing,  so  the  name  of  it  was.”
Hence  the  Hebrew  Mecubals  think,  together  with  Magicians  and  Cabalists,
that  it  is  in  the  power  of  man  to  impose  names  upon  spirits,  but  of  such  a
man  only  who  is  dignified  and  elevated  to  this  virtue  by  some  divine  gift  or
sacred  authority:  but  because  a name  that  may  express  the  nature  of  divinity,
or  the  whole  virtue  of  angelical  essences,  cannot  be  made  by  any  human
voice,  therefore  names  for  the  most  part  are  put  upon  them  from  their  works,
signifying  some  certain  office  or  effect  which  is  required  by  the  quire  of
spirits ; which  name  then,  and  not  otherwise,  obtains  efficacy  and  virtue  to
draw  any  spiritual  substance  from  above,  or  beneath,  to  make  any  desired
effect.

I have  seen  and  known  some  writing  on  virgin  parchment  the  name  and
seal  of  some  spirit  in  the  hour  of  the  moon,  which  afterwards  he  gave  to
be  devoured  by  a water-frog,  and  had  muttered  over  some  verse ; the  frog
being  let  go  into  the  water,  rains  and  showers  presently  followed.  I saw  also
the  same  man  inscribing  the  name  of  another  spirit  with  the  seal  thereof  in
the  hour  of  Mars,  which  was  given  to  a crow,  who,  being  let  go,  after  a verse
muttered  over,  there  followed  from  that  part  of  the  heaven  whither  it  flew,
lightnings,  shaking,  and  horrible  thunders,  with  thick  clouds;  neither  were
those  names  of  spirits  of  an  unknown  tongue,  neither  did  they  signify  any
thing  else  but  their  offices;  of  this  kind  are  the  names  of  those  angels,  Raziel ,
Gabriel , Michael , Raphael , JSaniel,  which  is  as  much  as  to  say  the  vision
of  God,  the  virtue  of  God,  the  strength  of  God,  the  medicine  of  God,  the
glory  of  God.  In  like  manner,  in  the  offices  of  evil  demons  are  read  their
names,  viz.  a player,  a deceiver , a dreamer , a fornicator,  and  many  suchlike.
So  we  receive  from  many  of  the  ancient  fathers  of  the  Hebrews  the  names


Zhc  Cabala;  or.


172

of  angels  set  over  the  planets  and  signs;  over  /Saturn,  Zaphiel;  over  Jupiter,
Zadkiel ; over  Mars , Camael;  over  the  Sun,  Raphael;  over  Venus,  Haniel;
over  Mercury,  Michael;  over  the  Moon,  Gabriel.  These  are  those  seven
spirits  which  always  stand  before  the  face  of  God,  to  whom  is  entrusted  the
disposing  the  whole  celestial  and  terrene  kingdoms  which  are  under  the  moon :
for  these  (as  the  more  curious  theologians  say)  govern  all  things  by  a cer-
tain vicissitude  of  hours,  days,  and  years;  as  the  astrologers  teach  concerning
the  planets  which  they  are  set  over,  which  Mercurius  Trismegistus  calls  the
seven  governors  of  the  world,  who  by  the  heavens  as  by  instruments,  dis-
tribute the  influences  of  all  the  stars  and  signs  upon  their  inferiors.  There
are  some  who  ascribe  them  to  the  stars  by  names  somewhat  differing,  saying,
that  over  Saturn  is  set  an  intelligence  called  Oriphael,  over  Jupiter  Zachariel,
over  Mars  Zamael,  over  the  Sun  Michael , over  Yenus  Anael,  over  Mercury
Raphael,  over  the  Moon  Gabriel.  And  every  one  of  these  governs  the  world
354  years  and  four  months;  and  the  government  begins  from  the  intelligence
of  Saturn;  afterwards,  in  order,  the  intelligences  of  Venus,  Jupiter,  Mercury,
Mars,  the  Moon,  and  the  Sun  reign,  and  the  government  returns  to  the  spirit
of  Saturn.

Tritemius  writ  to  Maximilian  Caesar  a special  treatise  concerning  these,
which  he  that  will  thoroughly  examine  may  from  thence  draw  great  know-
ledge of  future  times.  *Over  the  twelve  signs  are  set  these,  viz.  over  Aries,
Malahidael;  over  Taurus , Asmodel;  over  Gemini,  Ambriel;  over  Cancer ,
Muriel;  over  Leo,  Verchiel;  over  Virgo,  Hamaliel;  over  Libra,  Zuriel;
over  Scorpio,  Barchiel;  over  Sagittarius,  Advachiel;  over  Capricorn ,
Hanael;  over  Aquarius,  Cambiel;  over  Pisces,  Barchiel.  Of  these  spirits
set  over  the  planets  and  signs,  John  made  mention  of  in  the  Revelation,
speaking  of  the  former  in  the  beginning;  and  the  seven  spirits  which  are  in
the  presence  of  the  throne  of  God,  which  I find  are  set  over  the  seven
planets,  in  the  end  of  the  book,  where  he  describes  the  platform  of  the
heavenly  city,  saying,  that  on  the  twelve  gates  thereof  are  twelve  angels.
There  are  again  twenty-eight  angels,  who  rule  in  the  twenty-eight  mansions
of  the  moon,  whose  names  are  these;  Geniel,  Enediel , Anixiel,  Azariel,
Gabriel,  Dirachiel , Scheliel,  Amnediel,  Barbiel,  Ardefiel,  Neciel,  Abdizuel,
Jazeriel,  Ergediel , Atliel , Azeruel,  Adriel,  Egibiel,  Amutiel,  Kyriel,  Bethnael ,
Geliel , Requiel,  Abrinael,  Aziel,  Tagriel,  Atheniel,  Amnixiel.  There  are  also
four  princes  of  the  angels,  which  are  set  over  the  four  winds,  and  over  the
four  parts  of  the  world.  Michael  is  placed  over  the  east-wind,  Raphael  over
the  west,  Gabriel  over  the  north,  Nariel,  who  by  some  is  called  Ariel,  is  over
the  south.  There  are  also  assigned  to  the  elements  these,  viz.  to  the  air
Cherub , to  the  water  Thar  sis,  to  the  earth  Ariel,  to  the  fire  Seraph.  Now


•Tritemids  on  Spirits.


<£7fie,  <&tc/Lct^czs-


ft

S n

n

£>

S

n

S

X

n

ft

X

'I

a

y

□

1

7

\ r

n

71

X

s>

r

ft

T\

V>

n

’

S

71

1

V 1

■>

71

S>

V

7

7

•>

n

X

7

ur

12

ft

i

7

SX

t»  n

sx

Sx

SX

tv

Tli

s,\

2>

n1

Sx

7>

71

SX

SX

ft'

&

>

bs  |

a |
* !

S

3

N.

&

Is

R'

1

3*

£

K

|s

k

R'*

is

^N,

1

?N,

1

£

k

fr

K

b

1

IN.

L

&

jp

s.

b

£

1

ft

3 ■*>

1

'*?

s

ft

IU

1

77

:

n

a

J

ft

s

:

7 r

n

w

71

)

7

s

7

X

n

n

<1

S>

71

i

*P  "

i

7

2

ft

1

71

n

X

71

i

n

■ l

n

S>

7

Vs

n1  7)

r rr

tv

SX

SX

sx

m

Sx

rr

’7

rr

Vx

sx

Sx

n'

71

1

a $
| 1

•<  <,
S r

E t

§

t

h

1

§

•Jl

i-

S:

1

^s

1

i

3-

!;

«:

•j,

».

r

&•

i:

h

8

■ l

j

3 5

r n

1.

1

a

V

V

ft

1

i

a

ft

7

•n

X

) t

3 n

2

71

1

w

7

X

7

)

'

ft

■\

ft

V

:

n

X £

L U/

’

1

n

s

i

S>

7

~Y

n

7

V

D

'

vx

sx  n

1 rr

2K

SX

Sx

TV

SX

7'

TV

7X

SX

sx

Sx

7i

SX

£

R

*s

$ 1
S j
3 •
R :
&,  \

r i

3 8

L £

b

R

1

s

,3s

R

*n

£

R

Rs

k

i

k

k

n.

1

*

*N

1*

fr

R'

3s

§

-Sn

£

Is

R

Nv

1

R

3s

N,

r5

R‘

8

'N.

b

3s

R

r

1

R:

3s

k

§

fcs

"ft

*\

' n

71

X

ft

7

V

1

1

ID

ft

)

2

ft

y

1 |

2 X

n

i

J

0

n

j

n

ID

Z

7

1

ft

V

2

ft

' 1

0 ft

•i

V

'

2

?

V

71

2

ft

n

ft

T

7

7’

VKT

r sx

■ TT

Sx

S>

J 71'

Sx

Sx

sx

VX

SX

sx

Sx

n-i

SX

7'

s

3

1:

gj

| ^

1

: 1

N

■ 1;

£

s-

N.

b

R

t

1

£

k

3

fc

1

i.

&

C

£

a

b

1

3

R

3

L

Sd

N

£

r

3-

174


Xlbe  Cabala;  or,


every  one  of  these  spirits  is  a great  prince,  and  has  much  power  and  freedom
in  the  dominion  of  his  own  planets  and  signs,  and  in  their  times,  years,
months,  days  and  hours;  and  in  their  elements,  and  parts  of  the  world,  and
winds.  And  every  one  of  them  rules  over  many  legions ; and  after  the  same
manner,  among  evil  spirits,  there  are  four,  who,  as  most  potent  kings,  are
set  over  the  rest,  according  to  the  four  parts  of  the  world,  whose  names  are
these,  viz.  TTrieus,  king  of  the  east;  Amaymon,  king  of  the  south;  Paymon ,
king  of  the  west;  Egin , king  of  the  north;  which  the  Hebrew  doctors  perhaps
call  more  rightly  thus,  Samuel,  Azazel,  Azael , and  Mahazuel,  under  whom
many  others  rule  as  princes  of  legions  and  rulers.  Likewise  there  are  innum-
erable demons  of  private  offices.  Moreover,  the  ancient  theologians  of  the
Greeks  reckon  up  six  demons,  which  they  call  Telchines,  Alastores ; which
bearing  ill-will  to  men,  take  up  water  out  of  the  river  Styx  with  their  hands,
sprinkle  it  upon  the  earth,  whence  follow  calamities,  plagues,  and  famines;
and  these  are  said  to  be  Acteus,  Megalezius,  Ormenus , Lycus,  Eicon,  Mimon.
But  he  that  desires  to  know  exactly  the  distinct  names,  offices,  places,  and
times  of  angels,  and  evil  demons,  let  him  inquire  into  the  book  of  Rabbi
Simon  of  the  Temples,  and  in  his  book  of  Lights,  and  in  his  treatise  of  the
Greatness  of  Stat  ure,  and  in  the  treatise  of  the  Temples  of  Rabbi  Ishmael,  and
in  almost  all  the  commentaries  of  his  book  of  Formation,  and  he  shall  find  it
written  at  large  concerning  them.

There  are  also  other  sacred  names  of  good  and  evil  spirits  deputed  to  each
office  of  much  greater  efficacy  than  the  former,  which  the  Cabalists  draw  from
sacred  writ,  according  to  that  art  which  we  teach  concerning  them;  as  also
certain  names  of  God  are  drawn  forth  out  of  certain  places:  the  general  rule
of  these  is,  that  wheresoever  any  thing  of  divine  essence  is  expressed  in  the
Scripture,  from  that  place  the  name  of  God  may  be  gathered;  but  in  what
place  soever  in  the  Scripture  the  name  of  God  is  found  expressed,  then  mark
what  office  lies  under  that  name;  wheresoever  therefore  the  Scripture  speaks
of  the  office  or  work  of  any  spirit,  good  or  bad,  from  thence  the  name  of  that
spirit,  whether  good  or  bad,  may  be  gathered;  this  unalterable  rule  being
observed,  that  of  good  spirits  we  receive  the  names  of  good  spirits,  of  evil  the
names  of  evil:  and  let  us  not  confound  black  with  white,  nor  day  with  night,
nor  light  with  darkness,  which,  by  these  verses  as  by  an  example  is  manifest:

“Let  them  be  as  dust  before  the  face  of  the  wind;  and  let  the  angel  of  the
Lord  scatter  them : let  their  ways  be  darkness  and  slippery  and  let  the  angel
of  the  Lord  pursue  them.”

nmmrp  m pea  ttp
dbtt  mrp  rnp2?  p^m  cjtan  nanw

in  the  xxxvth  Psalm  with  the  Hebrews,  but  with  us,  the  xxxivth;  of  which
the  names  of  those  angels  are  drawn,  Midael , and  Miriael,  of  the


Ceremonial  finable.


175

order  of  warriors;  so  of  that  verse,  “ thou  shalt  set  over  him  the  wicked , and
Satan  shall  stand  at  his  right-hand ,”  out  of  the  Psalm  cix.  with  the  Hebrews,
but  with  the  Latins,  cviii.

u'D'  ;tan  ytsn  vby  npsn

is  extracted  the  name  of  the  evil  spirit  Schii,  ijTty,  which  signifies  a spirit
that  is  a worker  of  engines.  There  is  a certain  text  in  Exodus  contained  in
three  verses,  whereof  every  one  is  written  with  seventy-two  letters,  beginning
thus;  the  first  Vajisa,  the  second  Vajabo,  the  third  Vajot,  Qv;;

which  are  extended  into  one  line,  viz.  the  first  and  the  third  from  the  left-hand
to  the  right,  but  the  middle  in  a contrary  order,  beginning  from  the  right  to
the  left,  is  terminated  on  the  left-hand;  then  each  of  the  three  letters  being
subordinate  the  one  to  the  other,  make  one  name,  which  are  seventy-two
names,  which  the  Hebrews  call  Schemhamphorce^  to  which  if  the  divine  name
El  or  Jah  nrp  be  added,  they  produce  seventy-two  trisyllable  names  of
angels,  whereof  every  one  carries  the  great  name  of  God,  as  it  is  written,  “ my
angel  shall  go  before  thee;  observe  him  for  my  name  is  in  him.”  And  these
are  those  that  are  set  over  the  seventy-two  celestial  quinaries,  and  so  many
nations  and  tongues,  and  joints  of  man’s  body,  and  co-operate  with  the
seventy-two  seniors  of  the  synagogue,  and  so  many  disciples  of  Christ:  and
their  names,  according  to  the  extraction  which  the  Cabalists  make,  are  mani-
fest in  the  table,  according  to  the  manner  which  we  have  mentioned.

Now  there  are  many  other  ways  of  making  Schemhamphorce  out  of  those
verses;  as  when  all  three  are  written  in  a right  order,  one  after  the  other,
from  the  right  to  the  left,  besides  those  which  are  extracted  by  the  tables  of
Ziruph,  and  the  tables  of  commutations,  of  which  we  made  mention  of  before.
Because  these  tables  serve  for  all  names,  as  divine,  so  angelical,  we  shall
therefore  subjoin  them  to  this  chapter.

There  are  the  seventy-two  angels,  bearing  the  name  of  God,  Schem-
hamphorce.

For  the  tables  &c.  see  the  annexed  Plates.

The  ancient  magicians  taught  an  art  of  finding  out  the  name  of  a spirit  to
any  desired  effect,  drawing  it  from  the  disposition  of  the  heavens;  as,  for
example,  any  celestial  harmony  being  proposed  to  thee,  to  make  an  image  or
a ring,  or  any  other  work  to  be  done  under  any  constellation,  if  thou  wilt  find
out  the  spirit  that  is  the  ruler  of  that  work,  the  figure  of  the  heaven  being
erected,  cast  forth  letters  in  their  number  and  order,  from  the  degree  of  the
ascendant,  according  to  the  succession  of  signs  through  each  degree,  by  filling
the  whole  circle  of  the  heavens;  then  those  letters  which  fall  into  the  places
of  the  stars,  the  aid  of  which  you  would  use,  being  according  to  the  number
and  power  of  those  stars  marked  without  into  number  and  order,  make  the
name  of  a good  spirit.  But  if  thou  wilt  do  so  from  the  beginning  of  a degree


SaJk  2 *


n

&

p

2

2

y

D

3

a

h

2

2

n

T

7

P

7

3

3

N

x

p

7

P

3

2

y

□

3

a

P

3

-

2

7

?

1

P

7

3

3

3

s

p

u?

“i

p

2

2

y

□'

3

0

s

3

•i

2

P

T

1

P

7

3

l

3

x

n

"i

P

2f

2

y

D

3

0

s

3

7

3

n

T

7

P

7

n

i

3

n

ro

p

p

y

2

y

□

3

0

s

3

2

P

I

7

P'

p

-i

3

X

n

a?.

*1

?

7£

2

y

0

J

0

P

3

•i

2

n

r

?

i

n

i

2

3

X

n

u?

”7

P

y

2

y

3

J

3

*•>

3

2

p

r

r

i

p

7

1

3

X

n

n

P

y

2

y

D

3

D

P

3

2

n

n

T

n

7

1

3

K‘

n

W

7

p

2

2

y

□

3

0

P

3

2

2

n

r

7

n

']

3

X

,71

W

7

P

s

2

y

□

3

2

P

3

;.\

’

a

n

r

i

71

"i

3

3

X

n

S2?

7

p

y

2

y

s

3

2

P

3

?

2

n

T

7

71

“i

3

3

X

n

2

7

P

y

2

y

2

3

2

S.

T|

3

'

0

n

r

1

7

7

3

3

X

n

37

7

P

2t

3

y

a

3

2

a

P

3

<

3

n

T

7

77

7

3

3

X

77

3?

7

?

Sc

2

y

D

3

j

3

S

?

2

n

T

7

77

7

1

3

X

77

&

7

P

2

s

y

D

D

3

2

s

3

'

n

T

7

77

7

3

3

X

P

W

7

P

2

2

y

V

D

l

a

s

3

"

2

7i

T

7

71

7

3

3

X

P

227

i

p

y

?

2

V

D

]

2

*?

3

'

2

n

r

7

n

7

3

3

X

P

W

7

P

3f

7S

2

y

D

3

0

s

3

,

13

n

f

7

7

7

I

3

X

P

7

P

?

X

2

V

0

3

3

*?

3

i

b

n

r

7

n

7

3

3

X

P

V

7

1

?

y

3

V

D

J

S

3

2

n

T

7

7

7

2

3

X

n

U>

n

P

2

>7

D

3

3

P

3

?

2

n

r

7

P

7

3

3

N

P

178


Ube  Cabala;  or.


falling  against  the  progress  of  the  signs,  the  resulting  spirit  shall  be  evil.  By
this  art  some  of  the  Hebrews  and  Chaldean  masters  teach  that  the  nature  and
name  of  any  genius  may  be  found  out;  as  for  example,  the  degree  of  the
ascendant  of  any  one’s  nativity  being  known,  and  the  other  corners  of  the
heaven  being  co-equated,  then  let  that  which  has  the  most  dignities  of  planets
in  those  four  corners,  which  the  Arabians  call  Almutez , be  first  observed
among  the  rest;  and  according  to  that  in  the  second  place,  that  which  shall
be  next  to  it  in  the  number  of  dignities,  and  so  in  order  the  rest  of  them,
which  obtain  any  dignity  in  the  aforesaid  corners.

This  order  being  used,  you  may  know  the  true  place  and  degree  of  them  in
the  heavens,  beginning  from  the  degree  of  the  ascendant  through  each  degree,
according  to  the  order  of  signs,  to  cast  twenty- two  of  the  letters  of  the
Hebrews;  then  what  letters  shall  fall  into  the  places  of  the  aforesaid  stars,
being  marked  and  disposed  according  to  the  order  found  out  above  in  the
stars,  and  rightly  joined  together  according  to  the  rules  of  the  Hebrew  tongue,
make  the  name  of  a genius ; to  which,  according  to  the  custom,  some  mono-
syllable name  of  Divine  Omnipotence,  viz.  El  or  Jah,  is  subjoined.  But  if
the  casting  of  the  letters  be  made  from  an  angle  of  the  falling,  and  against  the
succession  of  the  signs,  and  the  letters  which  shall  fall  in  the  Nadir  (that  is
the  opposite  point)  of  the  aforesaid  stars  be  after  that  order,  as  are  said,  joined
together,  shall  make  the  name  of  an  evil  genius.

But  the  Chaldeans  proceed  another  way,  for  they  take  not  the  Almutez  of
the  angles  but  the  Almutez  of  the  eleventh  house,  and  do  all  things  as  has
been  said.  Now  they  find  out  an  evil  genius  from  the  Almutez  of  the  angle
of  the  twelfth  house,  which  they  call  an  evil  spirit,  casting  from  the  degree  of
the  falling  against  the  progress  of  the  signs.

There  is  yet  another  art  of  these  kinds  of  names,  which  they  call  calcula-
tory;  and  it  is  made  by  the  following  tables,  by  entering  with  some  sacred,
divine,  or  angelical  name,  in  the  column  of  letters  descending,  by  taking  those
letters  which  thou  shalt  find  in  the  commou  angles  under  their  stars  and
signs,  which  being  reduced  into  order,  the  name  of  a good  spirit  is  made  of
the  nature  of  that  star  or  sign  under  which  thou  didst  enter;  but  if  thou  shalt
enter  in  the  column  ascending,  by  taking  the  common  angles  above  the  stars
and  signs  marked  in  the  lowest  line,  the  name  of  an  evil  spirit  is  made.  And
these  are  the  names  of  spirits  of  any  order  of  heaven  ministering,  as  of  good,
so  of  bad,  which  you  may  after  this  manner  multiply  into  nine  names  of  so
many  orders;  inasmuch  as  you  may,  by  entering  with  one  name,  draw  forth
another  of  a spirit  of  a superior  order  out  of  the  same,  as  well  of  a good  as  a
bad  one;  yet  the  beginning  of  this  calculation  depends  upon  the  names  of
God ; for  every  word  hath  a virtue  in  magic , inasmuch  as  it  depends  on  the
word  of  God,  and  is  thence  framed.  Therefore  we  must  know  that  every


Ceremonial  finagle.


179


angelical  name  must  proceed  from  some  primary  name  of  God.  Therefore
angels  are  said  to  bear  the  name  of  God,  according  to  that  which  is  written,
“because  my  name  is  in  him;”  therefore  that  the  names  of  good  angels  may
be  discerned  from  the  names  of  bad,  that  is  wont  oftentimes  to  he  added  some
name  of  Divine  Omnipotence,  as  El , or  On , or  Jah , or  Jod,  and  to  be  pro-
nounced together  with  it;  and  because  Jah  is  a name  of  beneficence,  and  Jod
the  name  of  a deity,  therefore  these  two  names  are  put  only  to  the  names  of
angels;  but  the  name  El , because  it  imports  power  and  virtue,  is  therefore
added,  not  only  to  good  but  bad  spirits;  for  neither  can  evil  spirits  either
subsist  or  do  any  thing  without  the  virtue  of  El,  God.  But  we  must  know
that  common  angles  of  the  same  star  and  sign  are  to  be  taken,  unless  entrance
be  made  with  a mixt  name,  as  are  the  names  of  genii,  and  those  of  which  it
hath  been  spoken  in  the  preceding  chapter,  which  are  made  of  the  disposi-
tions of  the  heavens,  according  to  the  harmony  of  divers  stars.  For  as  often
as  the  table  is  to  be  entered  with  these,  the  common  angle  is  to  be  taken
under  the  star  or  sign  of  him  that  enters.

There  are  moreover  some  that  do  so  extend  those  tables  that  they  think
also  if  there  be  an  entrance  made  with  the  name  of  a star,  or  office,  or  any
desired  effect,  a demon,  whether  good  or  bad,  serving  to  that  office  or  effect
may  be  drawn  out;  upon  the  same  account  they  that  enter  with  the  proper
name  of  any  person  can  extract  the  names  of  the  genii  under  that  star  which
shall  appear  to  be  over  such  a person  as  they  shall,  by  his  physiognomy,
or  by  the  passions  and  inclinations  of  his  mind,  and  by  his  profession  and
fortune,  know  him  to  be  either  martial , or  saturnine , or  solary,  or  of  the
nature  of  any  other  star.

And  although  such  kind  of  primary  names  have  none  or  little  power  by
their  signification,  yet  such  kind  of  extracted  names,  and  such  as  are  derived
from  them,  are  of  very  great  efficacy ; as  the  rays  of  the  sun  collected  in  a
hollow  glass  do  most  intensely  burn,  the  sun  itself  being  scarce  warm.

Now  there  is  an  order  of  letters  in  those  tables  under  the  stars  and  signs,
almost  like  that  which  is  with  the  astrologers,  of  tens,  elevens,  twelves.  Of
this  calculatory  art  Alphonsus  Cyprius  once  wrote,  and  also  fitted  it  to  Latin
characters;  but  because  the  letters  of  every  tongue  as  we  shewed  in  the  first
book,  have,  in  their  number,  order  and  figure,  a celestial  and  divine  original,
I shall  easily  grant  this  calculation  concerning  the  names  of  spirits  to  be
made  not  only  by  Hebrew  letters,  but  also  Chaldean , Arabick,  Egyptian ,
Greek  and  Latin,  and  many  others,  the  tables  being  rightly  made  after  the
imitation  of  the  presidents.

But  here  it.  is  objected  by  many,  that  it  falls  out  that  in  these  tables  men  of
a differing  nature  and  fortune  do  oftentimes,  by  reason  of  the  sameness  of
name,  obtain  the  same  genius  of  the  same  name.  We  must  know  therefore


’^aJsa/a/


_00_

r

3D

yn

2!

51

pn

-h

02

no

PN

ni

3D

O’*

J>D

sn

sr

Pi

nn

on

T13

PN

_»2

4i

□P

y1

SO

sn

?r

o ’

~wrr

nn

IN

ja

Dp

ya

2'

“g^

pn

nr

~TfTT

TO-

~n>r

u

□a

yY

S3

— ^r-

?t9

In

o?

TV*

ns

tin

D3

ya

2")

so

TV

no

5?n

-nr

n2

nd

IN

on

yj

Ha

-li

PD

~n

O0

nn

rnr

13

in

7°

23

Ph

no

to’

no

m

i:

ID

nx

sn

s?

2D

Lu_

P2

pa

n1

&3

rr

in

no

ON
7 x

31

,sy

,/»□

*12

“W5~

m

?n

nn

03

’3

ON

2£3

py

no

102

na

n

nrt

on

'3

PP

^?N

sr

pa

'iy

£70

*U

m

on

’n

32

P3

ON

PX

n§

~W

TTO“

nr

01

■>n

sn

Pa

DP

3N

i?n

ns

IDS

~W

tar

n

sn

pn

as

33

DN

-ip

~WW

nd

^5TT

T"

31

pn

an

_jj_

03

-is

on

~mr

n?

~rns~

’77

"Off

or

P]

~ar

On

“TtT

an

on

02

P3

yp

SN

gN

ff*

“nr

30

“TfT

ar

31

on

yn

32

S3

PN

he?

D41

PO

no

jr

SI

yn

an

3tt

|jj

nN

ns

n;

ESY

“TH"

or

TT

an

ST

pl

np

m

_aa

353

on

yr

HI

sn

pn

m

133

nx

CTfC~l^UjlAj2


-33_

3 P

0’

yo

an

sr

P’

nn

©n

m*

3N

07

-gp--

-S’

£a

pn

nr

nn

3*1

TS“

-03-

^3

_a5_

S3

?’

no

E?n

m

~Tr~

in

nx

-SO-

_21_

53

PP

np

El’

no

on

It

m

nx

-flJL

SO

PJ

no

OP

H3

P’

3J3

nn

n?

l«

SS)

P5

no

03

nd

3P

IP

n’

ne

in

IX

_M_

— n^_

tyy

no

_32_

33

np

np

r

ra

nx

nn

PS

ns.

_py_

30

13

no

m

"T3"

n»

ox

cn

np

_is_

_2£_

ny

no

13

to

nn

pp

7N

nu

pn

IP

ns

ns

iy

ro

n ]

ap

’Tl

PX

on

lip

nn

TIP

IS

rs

ny

so

D

pa

^1N

ID

-in

mz;

H

ip

ns

up

y

30

p)

Px

m

713

in

1«7

m

WP

’3>

PS

py

nn

3X

nn

73

TP

nn

n

PP

Pit

Da

IV

DX

in

n

on

#

n©

H

#

~5fT

Pa

np

_P2

_D3_

’71

-fr

~pn~

“52“

-*-

“or

~~n~

yo

=#

=£

*

“SV

yn

“y?

nn

nerer

~jrr

-s-

OP

~rr-

~w~

z^;

■inr

3S

sn

in

4=

sV

~w~

3X

IN

“■pX

nx

TT

Cbe  Cabala.


Ube  Uablcs  for  tbe  calculations  of  tbe  names  of  Spirits  goob  anb  bab  unbet  tbe  presfbenpg  of  tbe
7 flMancts  anb  12  militant  Signs.


r

3

4

4

o

<?

n

1

1

n

i

1

0

a

N

iB

J

/C

h

2

i

D

n

3

n

It)

=1

P

2

s

?

□

3

V

7

n

i

0

:N

n

7

i

0

i

CO

n

i

n

s

V

£

fi

y

D

a

i y

n

i

i

7

N

n

w

i

o

**!

2

*

E

n

?

n

\2

P

%

£

?

0

3

D

o

0

1

&

n

U

7

s

3

s

10

n

?

n

3

3

K

£)

V

D

a

a

3

3

1

2

N

n

UJ

“i

P

a

i

10

D

?

i

rr

7

j

n

£

V

D

3

0

3

a

?

2

N

n

n

p

y

0

n

f

1

n

i

■i

£

n

3

D

a

fl

2

~

X

N

n

n

S

£

7

1

n

r

1 '

rr

i

j;

0

7

□

a-

n

7 '

D

’ i

[3

V_\

N

n

0

n

p

X

D,

V

n |

/■/<£*

v

f'

S'

3)

?;

?

K

«x

w

71

Tip

-a

®i

n

8

r

n

7

i

a

n

r

1

n

7

3

3

K

N

«

1 &

n

4

7

7

i

r

n

0

'

3

7

3

7

2

K

7

0

7

P

X

£>

y

D

3

0

J

P

• d

]

D

y

3

X

p

7

2

n

S

3

7

X

a

8

7

3

’

23

n

?

V

7

7

:

7

3

a

7

7

1

?

n

D

1

0

7

c

:

1

y

7

a

3

N

n

0

7

P

X

S

V

D

r

c

ID

y

5>

X

P

7

0

n

N

3

3

7

n

a

?

D

3

D

3

3

0

n

1

1

7

3

0

n

1

r-

n

CO

3

7

0

3

to

V

y

7

7

1

3

N

n

0

7

T

X

2

3

1 7

£

X

P

7

z

n

N

□

3

7

7

1

7

IS

2

V

D

a

C

3

*

D

n

3

0

I

n

13

3

7

D

3

D

V

S)

X

]

n

n

1

7

7

:

3

N

r

W

7

3

□

t

P

7

V

n

N

fa

a

7

n

V

F

n

y

i

7

P

X

3

y

D

3

D

7

3

t

15

2

in

0

■>

3

3

Q

3

□

y

£

P

7

X

l*!

i

D

n

?

7

7

7

i

3

N

n

0

P

b

0?

n

N

j

1

7

7

i

j

n

D

i

7

|j

n

0

7

P

X

3

y

D

:

0

7

3

U

In

*3

3

7

D

0

3

0

D

n

I

D
3 1

X

7

2

7

7 to

M

n

N

nl

XTbe  Cabala;  or.


182

that  it  must  not  be  thought  absurd,  that  the  same  daemon  may  be  separated
from  any  one  soul,  and  the  same  be  set  over  more.  Besides,  as  many  men
have  the  same  name,  so  also  spirits  of  divers  offices  or  natures  may  be  noted
or  marked  by  one  name,  and  by  one  and  the  same  seal  or  character,  yet  in  a
different  respect;  for  as  the  serpent  does  sometimes  typify  Christ,  and  some-
times the  devil,  so  the  same  names  and  the  same  seals  may  be  applied  some-
times to  the  order  of  a good  demon,  sometimes  of  a bad  one.  Lastly,  the
very  ardent  intention  of  the  invocator,  by  which  our  intellect  is  joined  to  the
separated  intelligences,  is  the  cause  that  we  have  sometimes  one  spirit,
sometimes  another,  (although  called  upon  under  the  same  name,)  made  obse-
quious to  us.

See  Plates  for  the  tables  of  the  calculation  of  the  names  of  spirits,  good
and  bad,  under  the  presidency  of  the  seven  planets,  and  under  the  order
of  the  twelve  militant  signs.

Seals  Of  tbe  Spirits-  We  must  now  speak  of  the  characters  and  seals
of  spirits.  Characters  are  nothing  else  than  cei’tain  unknown  letters  and  writ-
ings, preserving  the  secrets  of  spirits  and  their  names  from  the  use  and
reading  of  prophane  men,  which  the  ancient  called  hieroglyphical,  or  sacred
letters,  because  devoted  to  the  secrets  of  God  only.  They  accounted  it
unlawful  to  write  the  mysteries  of  God  with  those  characters  which  prophane
and  vulgar  things  were  wrote.  Whence  Porphyry  says,  “ that  the  ancients
were  willing  to  conceal  God  and  divine  virtues,  by  sensible  figures  and  by
those  things  which  are  visible,  yet  signifying  invisible  things;”  as  being
willing  to  deliver  great  mysteries  in  sacred  letters,  and  explain  them  in  cer-
tain symbolical  figures;  as  when  they  dedicated  all  round  things  to  the
world,  the  sun  and  the  moon,  hope  and  fortune ; a circle  to  the  heavens,  and
parts  of  a circle  to  the  moon ; pyramids  and  obelisks  to  the  fire,  a cylinder
to  the  sun  and  earth. — See  the  plate.

Among  the  Hebrews  I find  more  fashions  of  characters,  whereof  one  is
most  ancient,  viz.  an  ancient  writing  which  Moses  and  the  prophets  used,  the
form  of  which  is  not  rashly  to  be  discovered  to  any ; for  those  letters  which
they  use  at  this  day  were  instituted  by  Esdras.  There  is  among  them  a writ-
ing which  they  call  celestial,  because  they  shew  it  placed  and  figured  anong  the
stars.  There  is  also  a writing  which  they  call  Malachim  or  Melachim , i.  e.  of
angels,  or  regal;  there  is  also  another,  which  they  call  the  passing  through  the
river,  and  the  characters  and  figures  of  all  which  you  may  see  in  the  following
Plates.

There  is  another  manner  among  the  Cabalists,  formerly  held  in  great
esteem,  but  now  it  is  so  common  that  it  is  placed  among  prophane  things,
viz.  the  twenty-seven  characters  of  the  Hebrews  may  be  divided  into  three


Ceremonial  finagle.


183


classes,  whereof  every  one  contains  nine  letters.  The  first,  viz.  tSfiTimJQfct
which  are  the  seals  or  marks  of  simple  numbers  and  of  intellectual  things
distributed  into  nine  orders  of  angels.  The  second  hath  the

marks  of  tens  and  celestial  things  in  the  nine  orbs  of  the  heavens.  The  third
hath  the  other  four  letters,  with  the  five  final,  viz.  pJjprritSHp,  which  are
marks  of  hundreds,  and  inferior  things,  viz.  four  simple  elements,  and  five
kinds  of  perfect  compounds.  They  do  now  and  then  distribute  these  three
classes  into  nine  chambers,  the  first  is  of  units,  viz.  intellectual,  celestial  and
elemental.  The  second  is  of  two’s,  the  third  of  three’s,  and  so  of  the  rest;
these  chambers  are  framed  by  the  intersection  of  four  parallel  lines  inter-
secting themselves  into  right  angles,  as  is  expressed  in  the  following  Plate,
fig.  A.

Out  of  which,  being  dissected  into  parts,  proceed  nine  particular  figures
(See  Plate,  fig.  B.)  which  are  of  the  nine  chambers,  characterizing  their
letters  by  that  Notariacon,  which,  if  it  be  of  one  point,  shews  the  first  letter
of  that  chamber;  if  of  two,  the  second;  if  of  three,  the  third  letter;  as  if  you
would  frame  the  character,  Michael,  that  comes  forth  extended  with

five  figures  (for  which  see  the  Plate  C.)  which  are  contracted  to  three  figures,
which  then  are  contracted  into  one,  yet  the  points  Notariacon  are  usually
omitted,  and  then  there  comes  forth  such  a character  of  Michael.  See
fig.  D.

There  is  yet  another  fashion  of  characters  common  to  almost  all  letters
and  tongues,  and  very  easy,  which  is  by  gathering  together  of  letters;  as  if  the
name  of  the  angel  Michael  be  given,  the  characters  thereof  shall  be  framed
according  to  the  fig.  E.

And  this  fashion  among  the  Arabians  is  most  received;  neither  is  there
any  writing  which  is  so  readily  and  elegantly  joined  to  itself  as  the  Arabick.
You  must  know  that  angelic  spirits,  seeing  they  are  of  a pure  intellect,  and
altogether  incorporeal,  are  not  marked  with  any  marks  or  characters,  or  any
other  human  signs;  but  we,  not  otherwise  knowing  their  essence  or  quality,
do,  from  their  names , or  works , or  otherwise,  devote  and  consecrate  to  them
figures  and  marks,  by  which  we  cannot  any  way  compel  them  to  us,  but  by
which  we  rise  up  to  them,  as  not  to  be  known  by  such  characters  and  figures,
and,  first  of  all,  we  do  set  our  senses,  both  inward  and  outward,  upon  them ;
then,  by  a certain  admiration  of  our  reason,  we  are  induced  to  a religious
veneration  of  them;  and  then  are  wrapt  with  our  whole  mind  into  an  ecstati-
cal  adoration;  and  then  with  a wonderful  belief,  an  undoubted  hope,  and
quickening  love,  calling  upon  them  in  spirit  and  truth  by  true  names  and
characters,  do  obtain  from  them  that  virtue  or  power  which  we  desire.

There  is  another  kind  of  character  received  by  revelation  only,  which
can  be  found  out  no  other  way ; the  virtue  of  which  characters  is  from  the


n.2  m I'X'vyvcm

A TB  CDB  F <}  H I KIM
2*  O P Q P S T V X -J-  rr  ^


Zam&i  Ca/ih.  Jed  Theth,  Cheth  Zorn - ^ Daletk  Gimd  Beth  Jle/ih


J'a*  Shirt  Bet  Kuff


Jin  Someth  Van  Mem


7i  urymAOAx

iS/ie-  ca//ds \Sb/ac/uN/t-.

Caflk  Jod  Theth  Cheth.  Zain.  Van  He.  Daleth  Gimil  Beth  Jle/ih


Beth  r\  Z<^  ^ “**■  damedl  Samech  Scfon  Tan  Han  //'em.  tamed


SJu,  f/tn&riy  ca//ef  ^eS^ena.  tk&wvr

- " ’ Jed  77"'^  'Cheth  Tain.  * Vau  He  Daletfi  Gimd  Beth  Hh/ih

TT"W1<-E:UX

Tan  y^j?  _ -Rel't  tfo/f  Zadt  n in  SameeA  Nun  Mem.

Eyj  AFKlUn


186


flbe  Gabala;  or,


Deity  revealing;  of  whom  there  are  some  secret  works  breathing  out  a har-
mony of  some  divinity,  or  they  are,  as  it  were,  some  certain  agreements  or
compacts  of  a league  between  us  and  them.  Of  this  kind  there  was  a sign
shewed  to  Constantine , which  was  this,  in  hoe  vince ; there  was  another
revealed  to  Antiochus  in  the  figure  of  a Pentangle,  which  signifies  health ; for,
being  resolved  into  letters,  it  speaks  the  word  vylaa,  i.  e.  health:  in  the  faith
and  virtue  of  which  signs,  both  kings  obtained  a great  victory  against  their
enemies.  So  Judas,  who  by  reason  of  that,  was  afterwards  surnamed  Macha-
beus,  being  to  fight  with  the  Jews  against  Antiochus  Eupator , received  from  an
angel  a notable  sign,  1330,  in  the  virtue  of  which  they  slew  first  11,000,  with
an  infinite  number  of  elephants,  then  again  35,000  of  their  enemies:  for  that
sign  did  represent  the  name  of  Jehovah , and  was  a memorable  emblem  of
the  name  of  seventy-two  letters  by  the  equality  of  number ; and  the  exposition
thereof  is  jyjT'D  TQ2  'D,  1.  e.  who  is  there  among  thee  strong  as

Jehovah  ? See  Plate,  fig.  F.

©f  tbe  3B0UbS  Of  Spirits.  The  bond  by  which  spirits  are  bound,

besought,  or  cast  out,  are  three;  some  of  them  are  taken  from  the  elemental
world,  as  when  we  adjure  a spirit  by  an  inferior  and  natural  thing  of  aflinity
with  or  adverse  to  them;  inasmuch  as  we  would  call  up  or  cast  them  out,  as
by  fumigations  of  flowers , herbs , animals , snow,  ice,  or  by  hell,  fire,  and  such
liJce ; and  these  also  are  often  mixt  with  divine  praises,  and  blessings,  and
consecrations,  as  appears  in  the  song  of  the  Three  Children,  and  in  the  psalm,
Praise  ye  the  Lord  from  the  heavens,  and  in  the  consecration  and  blessing  of
the  paschal  taper.  This  bond  works  upon  the  spirits  by  an  apprehensive  virtue,
under  the  account  of  love  or  hatred,  inasmuch  as  the  spirits  are  present  with,
or  favour,  or  abhor  any  thing  that  is  natural  or  against  nature,  as  these  things
themselves  love  or  hate  one  another.  The  second  bond  is  taken  from  the
celestial  world,  viz.  when  we  adjure  them  by  their  heaven,  by  the  stars,  by
their  motions,  rays,  light,  beauty,  clearness,  excellency,  fortitude,  influence
and  wonders,  and  such  like;  and  this  bond  works  upon  spirits  by  way  of
admonition  and  example.  It  hath  also  some  command,  especially  upon  the
ministering  spirits,  and  those  who  are  of  the  lowest  orders.  The  third  bond
is  from  the  intellectual  and  divine  world,  which  is  perfected  by  religion;
that  is  to  say,  when  we  swear  by  the  sacraments,  miracles,  divine  names,
sacred  seals,  and  other  mysteries  of  religion;  wherefore  this  bond  is  the
highest  of  all  and  the  strongest,  working  upon  the  spirits  by  command  and
power;  but  this  is  to  be  observed,  that  as  after  the  universal  Providence
there  is  a particular  one,  and  after  the  universal  soul,  particular  souls ; so,  in
the  first  place,  we  invocate  by  the  superior  bonds,  and  by  the  names  and
powers  which  rule  the  things,  then  by  the  inferior  and  the  things  themselves.


Ceremonial  maple*


187

We  must  know  further,  that  by  these  bonds,  not  only  spirits,  but  also  all
creatures  are  bound,  as  tempests,  burnings,  floods,  plagues,  diseases,  force  of
arms,  and  every  animal,  by  assuming  them,  either  by  adjuration  or  depreca-
tion, or  benediction,  as  in  the  charming  of  serpents ; besides  the  natural  and
celestial,  by  rehearsing  out  of  the  mysteries  and  religion,  the  cure  of  the
serpent  in  terrestrial  paradise,  the  lifting  up  of  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness;
likewise  by  assuming  that  verse  of  the  91st  Psalm,  thou  shalt  walk  upon
the  asp  and  the  basilisk , and  shalt  tread  upon  the  lion  and  the  dragon.

Co  call  tbe  Souls  Of  tbc  H)cab.  By  the  things  which  have  been
already  spoken  it  is  manifest,  that  souls  after  death  do  as  yet  love  their  body
which  they  left,  as  those  souls  do  whose  bodies  want  due  burial  or  have  left
their  bodies  by  violent  death,  and  as  yet  wander  about  their  carcasses  in  a
troubled  and  moist  spirit,  being,  as  it  were,  allured  by  something  that  hath
an  affinity  with  them,  the  means  being  known,  by  which  in  times  past,  they
were  joined  to  their  bodies,  they  may  be  easily  called  forth  and  allured  by
the  like  vapours,  liquors  and  savours,  certain  artificial  lights  being  also  used,
songs,  sounds,  and  such  like,  which  moves  the  imaginative  and  spiritual
harmony  of  the  soul;  and  sacred  invocations,  and  such  like,  as  belong  to
religion,  ought  not  to  be  neglected  by  reason  of  the  portion  of  the  rational
soul  which  is  above  nature.

Necromancy  has  its  name  because  it  works  on  the  bodies  of  the  dead,
and  gives  answers  by  the  ghosts  and  apparitions  of  the  dead,  and  sub-
terraneous spirits,  alluring  them  into  the  carcasses  of  the  dead  by  certain
hellish  charms,  and  infernal  invocations,  and  by  deadly  sacrifices  and  wicked
oblations.

There  are  two  kinds  of  necromancy:  raising  the  carcass,  which  is  not
done  without  blood ; the  other  sciomancy,  in  which  the  calling  up  of  the
shadow  only  suffices.  To  conclude,  it  works  all  its  experiments  by  the
carcasses  of  the  slain  and  their  bones  and  members,  and  what  is  from  them;
for  there  is  in  these  things  a spiritual  power  friendly  to  them:  therefore
they  easily  allure  the  flowing  down  of  wicked  spirits,  by  reason  of  the  simi-
litude and  property  of  every  familiar,  by  whom  the  necromancer,  strengthened
by  their  help,  can  do  much  in  human  and  terrestrial  things,  and  kindle
unlawful  lusts,  cause  dreams,  diseases,  hatred,  and  such  like  passions;  to
which  also  they  can  confer  the  powers  of  the  soul,  which  as  yet  being
involved  in  a moist  and  turbid  spirit,  wandering  about  their  cast  bodies,  can
do  the  same  things  that  the  wicked  spirits  commit,  seeing  therefore  they
experimentally  find,  that  the  wicked  and  impure  souls  violently  plucked  from
their  bodies,  and  of  men  not  expiated,  and  wanting  burial,  do  stray  about
carcasses,  and  are  drawn  to  them  by  affinity.  The  witches  easily  abuse  them


188


XTbe  Cabala;  or,


for  effecting  witchcraft,  alluring  these  unhappy  souls,  by  the  opposition  of
their  body,  or  by  the  taking  of  some  parts  thereof,  and  compelling  them  by
their  devilish  charms,  by  entreating  them  by  the  deformed  carcasses  dispersed
through  the  wide  fields,  and  the  wandering  shadows  of  those  who  want
burials,  and  by  the  ghosts  sent  back  from  Acheron , and  the  guests  of  hell,
whom  untimely  death  has  percipitated  into  hell,  and  by  the  horrible  desires
of  the  damned  and  proud  devils,  revengers  of  wickedness.  But  he  who
could  restore  the  souls  truly  to  their  bodies,  must  first  know  what  is  the
proper  nature  of  the  souls  from  whence  it  went  forth,  with  how  many  and
how  great  degrees  of  perfection  it  is  replenished,  with  what  intelligence  it  is
strengthened,  by  what  means  diffused  into  the  body,  by  what  harmony  it
shall  be  compacted  with  it,  what  affinity  it  hath  with  God,  with  the  intelli-
gences, with  the  heavens,  elements,  and  all  other  things,  whose  image  and
resemblance  it  holds.  To  conclude,  by  what  influences  the  body  may  be
knit  together  again  for  the  raising  of  the  dead,  requires  all  these  things
which  belong  not  to  men,  but  to  God  only,  and  to  whom  he  will  communi-
cate them.

prophetic  2DtC£Ufl8.  I call  that  a dream  which  proceeds  either  from
the  spirit  of  the  phantasy  and  intellect  united  together,  or  by  the  illustration
of  the  agent  intellect  above  our  souls,  or  by  the  true  revelation  of  some
divine  power  in  a quiet  and  purified  mind;  for  by  this  our  souls  receive  true
oracles,  and  abundantly  yields  prophecies  to  us ; for  in  dreams  we  seem  both
to  ask  questions,  and  learn  to  find  them  out;  also  many  doubtful  things,  many
policies,  many  things  unknown,  unwished  for,  and  never  attempted  by  our
minds,  are  manifested  to  us  in  dreams:  also  the  representation  of  things
unknown,  and  unknown  places  appear  to  us;  and  the  images  of  men,  both
alive  and  dead,  and  of  things  to  come,  are  foretold;  and  also  things  which  at
any  time  have  happened  are  revealed,  which  we  know  not  by  any  report.
And  these  dreams  need  not  any  art  of  interpretation,  as  those  of  which  we
have  before  spoken,  which  belong  to  divination,  not  to  foreknowledge;  and
it  comes  to  pass  that  they  who  see  dreams,  for  the  most  part,  understand  them
not:  for  as  to  see  dreams  is  from  the  strength  of  imagination , so  to  under-
stand them  is  from  the  strength  of  the  understanding.  They,  therefore,
whose  intellect  being  overwhelmed  by  too  much  commerce  of  the  flesh  is  in
a dead  sleep,  or  its  imaginative  or  phantastic  power  or  spirit  is  too  dull  and
unpolished,  that  it  cannot  receive  the  species  and  representation  which  flow
from  the  superior  intellect;  this  man,  I say,  is  altogether  unfit  for  the  receiv-
ing of  dreams  and  prophesying  by  them.

Therefore  it  is  necessary  that  he  who  would  receive  true  dreams  should
keep  a pure,  undisturbed,  and  an  undisquieted  imaginative  spirit,  and  so  com-


Ceremonial  finagle.


180


pose  it  that  it  may  be  made  worthy  of  the  knowledge  and  government  by
the  mind  and  understanding;  for  such  a spirit  is  most  fit  for  prophesying,  and
is  a most  clear  glass  of  all  the  images  which  flow  (every  where)  from  all
things.  When  therefore  we  are  sound  in  body,  not  disturbed  in  mind,  our
intellect  not  dulled  by  meats  and  drinks,  not  sad  through  poverty,  not  pro-
voked through  lust,  not  incited  by  any  vice,  not  stirred  up  by  wrath  or
anger,  not  being  irreligiously  and  prophanely  inclined,  not  given  to  levity,
not  lost  in  drunkenness,  but  chastely  going  to  bed,  fall  asleep ; then  our
pure  and  divine  soul,  bing  free  from  all  the  evils  above  recited,  and  separated
from  all  hurtful  thoughts,  and  now  freed  by  dreaming,  is  endowed  with
this  divine  spirit  as  an  instrument,  and  doth  receive  those  beams  and
representations  which  are  darted  down,  as  it  were,  and  shine  forth  from  the
Divine  Mind  into  itself;  and,  as  it  were  in  a deifying  glass,  it  does  more
certain,  more  clear  and  efficaciously  behold  all  things  than  by  the  vulgar
inquiry  of  the  intellect,  and  by  the  discourse  of  reason.  The  divine  powers
instructing  the  soul,  being  invited  to  their  society  by  the  opportunity  of  the
nocturnal  solitariness,  neither  will  that  genius  be  wanting  to  him  when  he  is
awake,  which  rules  all  his  actions.

Whosoever  therefore,  by  quiet  and  religious  meditation,  and  by  a diet
temperate  and  moderate  according  to  nature,  preserves  his  spirit  pure  shall
very  much  prepare  himself,  and  by  this  means  become  (in  a degree)  divine
and  knowing  all  things,  justly  merits  the  same.  But  whosoever,  on  the
contrary,  languishes  with  a fantastic  spirit,  he  receives  not  perspicuous  and
distinct  visions;  but  even  as  the  divine  sight,  by  reason  of  its  vision,  being
weakened  and  impared,  judges  confusedly  and  indistinctly,  so  also  when  we
are  overcome  with  wine  and  drunkenness,  then  our  spirit,  being  oppressed
with  noxious  vapours  (as  a troubled  water  is  apt  to  appear  in  various  forms)
is  deceived,  and  waxes  dull;  therefore  those  who  would  receive  oracles  by
dreams,  and  those  oracles  true  and  certain,  I would  advise  him  to  abstain
one  whole  day  from  meat,  and  three  days  from  wine  or  any  strong  liquors,
and  drink  nothing  but  pure  water;  for,  to  sober  and  religious  minds,  the
pure  spirits  are  adherent,  but  fly  those  who  are  drowned  in  drunkenness  and
surfeiting.  Although  impure  spirits  do  very  often  administer  notable  secrets
to  those  who  are  apparently  besotted  with  wine  or  liquors;  yet  all  such  com-
munications are  to  be  contemned  and  avoided.

But  there  are  four  kinds  of  true  dreams,  viz.  the  first,  matutine , i.  e.
between  sleeping  and  waking;  the  second  that  which  one  sees  concerning
another;  the  third,  that  whose  interpretation  is  shewn  to  the  same  dreamer
in  the  nocturnal  vision;  and,  lastly,  the  fourth,  that  which  is  repeated  to  the
same  dreamer  in  the  nocturnal  vision.


TLhc  Cabala;  or,


190

Ube  1ke£  Ot  Ceretltonial  flQaotC.  In  this,  the  Perfection  and  Key
of  all  that  has  been  written,  we  will  give  to  thee  the  whole  and  entire
practice  of  Ceremonial  Magic,  shewing  what  is  to  be  done  every  hour  of  the
day ; so  that  as  by  reading  what  we  have  heretofore  written,  thou  shalt  con-
template in  theory,  here  thou  shalt  be  made  perfect  by  experiment  and
practice:  for  in  this  Key  you  may  behold,  as  in  a mirror,  the  distinct  func-
tions of  the  spirits,  and  how  they  are  to  be  drawn  into  communication  in  all
places,  seasons,  and  times.

This  then  is  to  be  known,  that  the  names  of  the  intelligent  presidents
of  every  one  of  the  planets  are  constituted  after  this  manner;  that  it  to  say,
by  collecting  together  the  letters  out  of  the  figures  of  the  world  from  the
rising  of  the  body  of  the  planets,  according  to  the  succession  of  the  signs
through  the  several  degrees,  and  out  of  the  several  degrees,  from  the  aspects
of  the  planet  himself,  the  calculation  being  made  from  the  degree  of  the
ascendant.

In  like  manner  are  constituted  the  names  of  the  princes  of  the  evil  spirits;
they  are  taken  under  all  the  planets  of  the  presidents  in  a retrograde  order,
the  projection  being  made  contrary  to  the  succession  of  the  signs,  from  the
beginning  of  the  seventh  house.  Now  the  name  of  the  supreme  and  highest
intelligence,  which  many  suppose  to  be  the  soul  of  the  world,  is  collected  out
of  the  four  cardinal  points  of  the  figure  of  the  world,  after  the  manner
already  delivered;  and  by  the  opposite  and  contrary  way  is  known  the  name
of  the  great  demon  or  evil  spirit,  upon  the  four  cadent  angles.

In  like  manner  you  shall  understand  the  names  of  the  great  presidential
spirits  ruling  in  the  air,  from  the  four  angles  of  the  succedent  houses,  so  as
to  obtain  the  names  of  the  good  spirits : the  calculation  is  to  be  made  accord-
ing to  the  succession  of  the  signs,  beginning  from  the  degree  of  the  ascend-
ant, and  to  obtain  the  names  of  the  evil  spirits  by  working  the  contrary
way.

You  must  also  observe,  that  the  names  of  the  evil  spirits  are  extracted  as
well  from  the  names  of  the  good  spirits  as  of  the  evil:  so,  notwithstanding,
that  if  we  enter  the  table  with  the  name  of  a good  spirit  of  the  second  order,
the  name  of  the  evil  shall  be  extracted  from  the  order  of  princes  and
governors;  but  if  we  enter  the  table  with  the  name  of  a good  spirit  of  the
third  order,  or  with  the  name  of  an  evil  spirit,  a governor,  after  what  manner
soever  they  are  extracted,  whether  by  this  table  or  from  a celestial  figure,  the
names  which  do  proceed  from  hence  shall  be  the  names  of  the  evil  spirits,  the
ministers  of  the  inferior  order.

It  is  further  to  be  noted,  that  as  often  as  we  enter  this  table  with  the  good
spirits  of  the  second  order,  the  names  extracted  are  of  the  second  order;  and
if  under  them  we  extract  the  name  of  an  evil  spirit,  he  is  of  the  superior


192


XTbe  Cabala;  ort


order  of  the  governors.  The  same  order  is,  if  we  enter  with  the  name  of  an
evil  spirit  of  the  superior.  If  therefore  we  enter  this  table  with  the  names
of  the  spirits  of  the  third  order,  or  with  the  names  of  the  ministering  spirits,
as  well  of  the  good  spirits  as  of  the  evil,  the  names  extracted  shall  be  the
names  of  the  ministering  spirits  of  the  inferior  order.

But  many  magicians,  men  of  no  small  authority,  will  have  the  tables  of
this  kind  to  be  extended  with  Latin  letters;  so  that  by  the  same  tables  also,
out  of  the  name  of  any  office  or  effect,  might  be  found  out  the  name  of  any
spirit,  as  well  good  as  evil,  by  the  same  manner  which  is  above  delivered,  by
taking  the  name  of  the  office  or  of  the  effect  in  the  column  of  letters,  in  their
own  line,  under  their  own  star.  And  of  this  practice  Trismegistus  is  a great
author,  who  delivered  this  kind  of  calculation  in  Egyptian  letters:  not  im-
properly also  may  they  be  referred  to  the  letters  of  other  tongues,  for  the
reason  assigned  to  the  signs;  for  truly  he  only  is  extant  of  all  man  who  have
treated  concerning  the  attaining  to  the  names  of  spirits.

Therefore  the  force , secrecy , and  power,  in  what  manner  the  sacred  names
of  spirits  are  truely  and  rightly  found  out,  consisteth  in  the  disposing  of
vowels,  which  make  the  name  of  a spirit,  and  wherewith  is  constituted  the
true  name  and  right  word.  Now  this  art  is  thus  perfected  and  brought  to
pass.  First,  we  are  to  take  heed  to  placing  the  vowels  of  the  letters,  which
are  found  by  the  calculation  of  the  celestial  figure,  to  find  the  names  of  the
spirits  of  the  second  order,  presidents  and  governors:  and  this,  in  the  good
spirits,  is  thus  brought  to  effect,  by  considering  the  stars  which  do  constitute
and  make  the  letters,  and  by  placing  them  according  to  their  order.  First,
let  the  degree  of  the  eleventh  house  be  subtracted  from  the  degree  of  that
star  which  is  first  in  order,  and  that  which  remains  thereof,  let  it  be  projected
from  the  degree  of  the  ascendant;  and  where  the  number  ends,  there  is  part
of  the  vowel  of  the  first  letter.

Begin  therefore  to  calculate  the  vowels  of  these  letters  according  to  their
number  and  order,  and  the  vowel  which  falls  in  the  place  of  the  star,  which
is  the  first  in  order,  the  same  vowel  is  attributed  to  the  first  letter;  then
afterwards  thou  shalt  find  the  part  of  the  second  letter,  by  subtracting  the
degree  of  a star,  which  is  the  second  in  order  from  the  first  star;  and  that
which  remains  cast  from  the  ascendant.  And  this  is  the  part  from  which
you  shall  begin  the  calculation  of  vowels;  and  that  vowel  which  falls  upon
the  second  star  the  same  is  the  vowel  of  the  second  letter:  and  so  conse-
quently thou  mayest  search  out  the  vowels  of  the  following  letters  by  always
subtracting  the  degree  of  the  following  star  from  the  degree  of  the  star  next
preceding  and  going  before.  And,  likewise,  all  calculations  and  numerations
in  the  names  of  the  good  spirit  sought  to  be  made  according  to  the  succession
of  the  signs.  And  whereas  in  calculating  the  names  of  the  evil  spirits,  the


Ceremonial  finagle.


193


names  of  the  good  spirits  are  taken  from  the  degree  of  the  eleventh  house;  in
these  ought  to  be  taken  the  degree  of  the  twelfth  house.  And  all  numera-
tions and  calculations  may  be  made  with  the  succession  of  the  signs,  by
taking  the  beginning  from  the  degree  of  the  tenth  house.

But  in  all  extractions  by  tables,  the  vowels  are  placed  after  another  manner.
In  the  first  place,  is  taken  the  certain  number  of  letters,  making  the  name
itself,  and  is  thus  numbered  from  the  beginning  of  the  column  of  the  first
letter,  or  whereupon  the  name  is  extracted;  and  the  letter  on  which  this
number  falleth  is  referred  to  the  first  letter  of  the  name  extracted,  by  taking
the  distance  of  the  one  from  the  other,  according  to  the  order  of  the  alphabet.
But  the  number  of  that  distance  is  projected  from  the  beginning  of  that
column,  and  where  it  ends  there  is  part  of  the  first  vowel;  from  thence  thou
shalt  calculate  the  vowels  themselves,  in  their  own  number  and  order  in  the
same  column ; and  the  vowel  which  shall  fall  upon  the  first  letter  of  a name,
the  same  shall  be  attributed  to  that  name.

Now  thou  shalt  find  the  following  vowels,  by  taking  the  distance  from  the
preceding  vowel  to  the  following,  and  so  consequently  according  to  the
succession  of  the  alphabet;  and  the  number  of  that  distance  is  to  be  numbered
from  the  beginning  of  his  own  column,  and  where  he  shall  cease,  there  is  part
of  the  vowel  sought  after.  From  thence  therefore  must  you  calculate  the
vowels,  as  we  have  above  said,  and  those  vowels  which  shall  fall  upon  your
own  letters,  are  to  be  attributed  to  them.  If  therefore  any  vowel  shall  hap-
pen to  fall  upon  a vowel,  the  former  must  give  place  to  the  latter:  and  this
you  are  to  understand  only  of  the  good  spirits.  In  the  evil  spirits  likewise
you  may  proceed  in  the  same  way;  except  only  that  you  make  the  numera-
tions after  a contrary  and  backward  order,  contrary  to  the  succession  of  the
alphabet,  and  contrary  to  the  order  of  the  columns  (that  is  to  say)
ascending.

The  name  of  good  angels,  and  of  every  man,  which  we  have  before  taught
how  to  find  out,  according  to  that  manner,  is  of  no  little  authority,  nor  of  a
mean  foundation.  But  now  we  will  give  thee  some  other  ways  illustrated
with  no  vain  reasons.  One  whereof  is  by  taking  in  the  nativity  the  five  places
of  Hylech;  which  being  noted,  the  characters  of  the  letters  are  projected  in
their  order  and  number,  beginning  from  Aries , and  those  letters  which  fall
upon  the  degrees  of  the  said  places,  according  to  their  order  and  dignity
disposed  and  aspected,  make  the  name  of  an  angel.

There  is  also  another  way  wherein  they  take  Almutel,  which  is  the  ruling
and  governing  star  over  the  aforesaid  five  places,  and  the  projection  is  to  be
made  from  the  degree  of  the  ascendant;  which  is  done  by  gathering  together
the  letters  falling  upon  Almutel,  which  being  placed  in  order,  according  to
their  dignity,  make  the  name  of  an  angel.  There  is  likewise  another  way


194


XEbe  Cabala;  or,


used,  and  very  much  had  in  observation  from  the  Egyptians,  by  making  cal-
culations from  the  degree  of  the  ascendant,  and  by  gathering  together  the
letters  according  to  the  Almutel  of  the  eleventh  house;  which  house  they  call
a good  demon;  which  being  placed  according  to  their  dignities,  the  names  of
the  angels  are  constituted.

Now  the  names  of  the  evil  angels  are  known  after  the  like  manner,  except
only  that  the  projections  must  be  performed  contrary  to  the  course  and  order
of  the  succession  of  the  signs;  so  that  in  seeking  the  names  of  good  spirits,
we  are  to  calculate  from  the  beginning  of  Aries / contrariwise,  in  attaining
the  names  of  evil,  we  ought  to  account  from  the  beginning  of  Libra.  And
whereas,  in  the  good  spirits,  we  number  from  the  degree  of  the  ascendant;
contrariety,  in  the  evil,  we  must  calculate  from  the  degree  of  the  seventh
house.

But  according  to  the  Egyptians,  the  name  of  this  angel  is  collected  accord-
ing to  the  Almutel  of  the  twelfth  house,  which  they  call  an  evil  spirit.  Now
all  those  rites,  which  are  elsewhere  already  by  us  delivered  in  this  Book,  may
be  made  by  the  characters  of  any  language.  In  all  which  (as  we  have  said
before)  there  is  a mystical  and  divine  number,  order  and  figure,  from  whence
it  comes  to  pass,  that  the  same  spirit  may  be  called  by  divers  names;  but
others  are  discovered  from  the  name  of  the  spirit  himself,  of  the  good  or  evil,
by  tables  formed  to  this  purpose.

Now  these  celestial  characters  do  consist  of  lines  and  heads.  The  heads
are  six,  according  to  the  six  magnitudes  of  the  stars,  whereunto  the  planets
likewise  are  reduced.  The  first  magnitude  holds  a star  with  the  sun  or  a
cross;  the  second,  with  Jupiter,  a circular  point;  the  third,  with  Saturn,  a
semicircle,  a triangle,  either  crooked,  round,  or  acute;  the  fourth,  with  a
Mars,  a little  stroke  penetrating  the  line,  either  square,  straight  or  oblique;
the  fifth,  with  Venus  and  Mercury,  a little  stroke  or  point  with  a tail  ascend-
ing or  descending;  the  sixth,  with  the  moon,  a point  made  black,  all  which
you  may  see  in  the  annexed  plate.  The  heads  then  being  posited  according
to  the  site  of  the  stars  of  the  figure  of  heaven,  then  the  lines  are  to  be  drawn
out  according  to  the  congruency  or  agreement  of  their  natures.  And  this
you  are  to  understand  of  the  fixed  stars.  But  in  the  erecting  of  the  planets,
the  lines  are  drawn  out,  the  heads  being  posited  according  to  their  course  and
nature  among  themselves. — See  the  Plate,  No.  1.

So  when  a character  is  to  be  found,  of  any  celestial  image  ascending  in  any
degree  or  face  of  a sign,  which  consists  of  stars  of  the  same  magnitude  and
nature,  then  the  number  of  these  stars  being  posited  according  to  their  place
and  order,  the  lines  are  drawn  after  the  similitude  of  the  image  signified,  as
copiously  as  the  same  can  be  done.


Ceremonial  fiflagtc.


195


But  the  characters  which  are  extracted  according  to  the  name  of  a spirit
are  composed  by  the  table  following,  by  giving  to  every  letter  that  name
which  agrees  to  him  out  of  the  table ; and  although  it  may  appear  easy  to
those  that  apprehend  it,  yet  there  is  no  small  difficulty  herein ; to  wit,  when
the  letter  of  a name  falls  upon  the  line  of  letters  or  figures,  that  we  may  know
which  figure  or  which  letter  is  to  be  taken.  And  this  may  thus  be  known;  if
a letter  falls  upon  the  line  of  letters,  consider  of  what  number  this  letter  may
be  in  the  order  of  the  name,  as  the  second  or  the  third ; then  how  many  letters
that  name  contains,  as  five  or  seven;  and  multiply  these  numbers  one  after
another  by  themselves,  and  treble  the  product;  then  cast  the  whole  (being
added  together)  from  the  beginning  of  the  letters  according  to  the  succession
of  the  alphabet;  and  the  letter  upon  which  that  number  shall  happen  to  fall,
ought  to  be  placed  for  a character  of  that  spirit.  But  if  any  letter  of  a name
fall  upon  the  line  of  figures,  it  is  thus  wrought:  take  the  number  how  many
this  letter  is  in  the  order  of  the  name,  and  let  it  be  multiplied  by  the  number
of  which  this  letter  is  in  the  order  of  the  alphabet;  and,  being  added  together,
divide  it  by  nine,  and  the  remainder  will  shew  the  figure  or  number  to  be
placed  in  the  character,  and  this  may  be  put  either  in  a geometrical  or  arith-
metrical  figure  of  number;  which,  notwithstanding,  ought  not  to  exceed  the
number  of  nine,  or  nine  angels.  — See  the  Plate,  No.  2.

But  the  characters  which  are  understood  by  the  revelations  of  spirits  take
their  virtue  from  thence,  because  they  are,  as  it  were,  certain  hidden  seals,
making  the  harmony  of  some  divinity:  either  they  are  signs  of  a covenant
entered  into,  and  of  a promised  or  plighted  faith,  or  of  obedience.  And  those
characters  cannot  by  any  other  means  be  found  out.

Besides  these  characters  there  are  certain  familiar  figures  and  images  of
evil  spirits,  under  which  forms  they  are  wont  to  appear,  and  yield  obedience
to  those  who  invoke  them.  And  all  these  characters  and  images  may  be  seen
in  the  considerations  of  each  day’s  business,  according  to  the  course  of  the
letters  constituting  the  names  of  spirits  themselves;  so  that  if  in  any  letter
there  is  found  more  than  the  name  of  one  spirit,  his  image  holds  the  pre-
eminence, the  others  imparting  their  own  orders;  so  they  which  are  of  the
first  order,  to  them  is  attributed  the  head,  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  accord-
ing to  their  own  figure;  those  which  are  lowest  possess  the  thighs  and
feet;  so  likewise  the  middle  letters  do  attribute  like  to  themselves  the  middle
parts  of  the  body,  to  give  the  parts  that  fit;  but  if  there  happen  any  contra-
riety, that  letter  which  is  the  strongest  in  the  number  shall  bear  rule;  and  if
they  are  equal  they  all  impart  equal  things.  Moreover  if  any  name  shall
obtain  any  notable  character  or  instrument  out  of  the  table,  he  shall  likewise
have  the  same  character  in  the  image.


Ube  Cabala;  or,


196

We  may  also  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  the  dignities  of  the  evil  spirits,  by
the  same  tables  of  characters  and  images:  for  upon  whatsoever  spirit  falls
any  excellent  sign  or  instrument  out  of  the  table  of  characters,  he  possesses
that  dignity.  As  if  there  should  be  a crown,  it  shows  a kingly  dignity;  if  a
crest  or  plume,  a dukedom;  if  a horn,  a county:  if  without  these  there  be  a
sceptre,  sword,  or  forked  instrument,  it  shows  rule  and  authority.  Likewise
out  of  the  table  of  images  you  shall  find  them  who  bear  the  chief  kingly
dignity:  from  the  crown  judge  dignity;  and  from  the  instruments,  rule
and  authority.

Lastly,  they  which  bear  a human  shape  and  figure  have  a greater  dignity
than  those  which  appear  under  the  forms  and  images  of  beasts.  They  like-
wise who  ride  do  excel  them  which  appear  on  foot.  And  thus,  according  to
all  their  commixtures,  you  may  judge  the  dignity  and  excellency  of  spirits,
one  before  another.  Moreover,  you  must  understand  that  the  spirits  of  the
inferior  order,  of  what  dignity  soever,  they  are  always  subject  to  the  spirits
of  the  superior  order;  likewise  that  it  is  not  incongruent  for  their  kings  and
dukes  to  be  subject  and  minister  to  the  presidents  of  the  superior  order.

Of  Magic  Pentacles  and  their  Composition.

We  now  proceed  to  speak  of  the  holy  and  sacred  Pentacles  and  Seals.  For
these  pentacles  are  certain  holy  signs  and  characters,  preserving  us  from  evil
chances  and  events,  helping  and  assisting  us  to  bind,  exterminate,  and  drive
away  evil  spirits,  alluring  the  good  spirits,  and  reconciling  them  to  us.  These
pentacles  consists  either  of  characters  of  good  spirits  of  the  superior  order,  or
of  sacred  pictures  of  holy  letters  or  revelations,  with  apt  and  proper  versicles,
which  are  composed  either  of  geometrical  figures  and  holy  names  of  God,
according  to  the  course  and  manner  of  many  of  them,  or  they  are  com-
pounded of  all  of  them,  or  many  of  them  mixed.  The  characters  which  are
useful  for  us  to  constitute  and  make  the  pentacles  are  the  characters  of  the
good  spirits,  chiefly  of  the  good  spirits  of  the  first  and  second  order,  and
sometimes  of  the  third  order.  These  kind  of  characters  are  especially  to  be
named  holy.

Whatsoever  characters  of  this  kind  are  to  be  instituted,  we  must  draw
about  him  a double  circle,  wherein  we  must  write  the  name  of  his  angel;
and  if  we  will  add  some  divine  name  congruent  with  his  spirit  and  office,
it  will  be  of  greater  force  and  efficacy;  and  if  we  draw  about  him  any  angular
figure,  according  to  the  manner  of  his  numbers  that  is  lawful  to  be  done.
But  the  holy  pictures  which  make  the  pentacles  are  they  which  every  where
are  delivered  to  us  in  the  prophets  and  sacred  writings,  both  in  the  Old  and
New  Testaments;  even  as  the  figure  of  the  serpent  hanging  on  the  cross,
and  such  like;  whereof  many  maybe  found  in  the  visions  of  the  prophets,  as


Ceremonial  naagic.


197


in  Isaiah , Daniel , Esdras , and  others,  and  likewise  in  the  revelations  of
the  Apocalypse.  And  we  have  before  spoken  of  them  in  our  First  Part
where  we  have  made  mention  of  holy  things,  therefore  where  any  picture  is
posited  of  any  of  these  holy  images,  let  the  circle  be  drawn  around  it  on
each  side;  wherein  let  there  be  written  some  divine  name  that  is  apt  and
conformed  to  the  effect  of  that  figure,  or  else  there  may  be  written  around  it
some  versicle  taken  out  of  part  of  the  body  of  holy  Scripture,  which  may
ascertain  or  deprecate  the  desired  effect.

If  a pentacle  were  to  be  made  to  gain  a victory,  or  revenge  against  one’s
enemies,  as  well  visible  as  invisible,  the  figure  may  be  taken  out  of  the
Second  book  of  the  Maccabees;  that  is  to  say,  a hand  holding  a golden  sword
drawn,  about  which  let  there  be  written  the  versicle  there  contained,  to  wit,
take  the  holy  sword , the  gift  of  God , wherewith  thou  slialt  slay  the  adversaries
of  my  people  Israel.  Or  else  there  may  be  written  about  a versicle  of  the
fifth  Psalm;  in  this  is  the  strength  of  thy  arm:  before  thy  face  there  is  death;
or  some  other  such  like  versicle.  But  if  you  will  write  a divine  name  about
the  figure,  then  let  some  name  be  taken  that  signifies  fear;  a sword,  wrath,
the  revenge  of  God,  or  some  such  like  name  congruent  and  agreeing  with
the  effect  desired.  And  if  there  shall  be  written  any  angular  figure,  let  it
be  taken  according  to  the  rule  of  the  numbers,  as  we  have  taught  where  we
have  treated  of  numbers,  and  the  like  operations.  And  of  this  sort  there  are
two  pentacles  of  sublime  virture  and  great  power,  very  useful  and  necessary
to  be  used  in  the  consecration  of  experiments  and  spirits;  one  whereof  is  that
in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse,  to  wit,  a figure  of  the  majesty  of  God
sitting  upon  a throne,  having  in  his  mouth  a two-edged  sword,  as  there  is
described ; about  which  let  there  be  written,  “ I am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the
Beginning  and  the  End,  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  come,
the  Almighty.  I am  the  First  and  the  Last,  who  am  living,  and  was  dead,
and  behold  I live  for  ever  and  ever;  and  I have  the  keys  of  death  and  hell.”
Then  there  shall  be  written  about  it  these  three  versicles :

Munda  Deus  virtuti  tuoe,  Sc. — Give  commandment,  O God,  to  thy  strength;
confirm , 0 God,  thy  strength  in  us.  Let  them  be  as  dust  before  the  face  of
the  wind:  and  let  the  angel  of  the  Lord  scatter  them.  Let  all  their  ways  be
darkness  and  uncertain:  and  let  the  angel  of  the  Lord  persecute  them.

Moreover,  let  there  be  written  about  it  the  ten  general  names,  which  are
El,  Elohim,  Elohe,  Zebaoth,  Elion,  Escerchie,  Adonay,  Jah , Tetragramma-
ton,  Saday.

There  is  another  pentacle,  the  figure  whereof  is  like  a lamb  slain,  having
seven  eyes  and  seven  horns;  and  under  his  feet  a book  sealed  with  seven  seals,
as  it  is  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse.  Round  about  let  be  written
this  versicle,  behold  the  lion  hath  overcome  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  root  of


108


ZEbe  Cabala;  or,


David.  I will  open  the  book  and  unloose  the  seven  seals  thereof.  And  another
versicle,  I saw  Satan  like  lightning  fall  down  from  heaven.  Dehold  I have
given  you  power  to  tread  upon  serpents  and  scorpions,  and  over  all  the  power
of  your  enemies,  and  nothing  shall  be  able  to  hurt  you.  And  let  there  be  also
written  about  it  the  ten  general  names  as  aforesaid.

But  those  pentacles  which  are  thus  made  of  figures  and  names,  let  them
keep  this  order;  for  when  any  figure  is  posited,  conformable  to  any  number,
to  produce  any  certain  effect  or  virtue,  there  must  be  written  thereupon,  in  all
the  several  angles,  some  divine  name  obtaining  the  force  and  efficacy  of  the
thing  desired ; yet  so  nevertheless,  that  the  name  which  is  of  this  sort  do  con-
sist of  just  so  many  letters  as  the  figure  may  constitute  a number;  or  of  so
many  letters  of  a name,  as,  joined  together  among  themselves,  may  make  the
number  of  a figure;  or  by  any  number  which  may  be  divided  without  any
superfluity  or  diminution.  Now  such  a name  being  found,  whether  it  be
only  one  name  or  more,  or  divers  names,  it  is  to  be  written  in  all  the  several
angles  in  the  figure ; but  in  the  middle  of  the  figure  let  the  revolution  of  the
name  be  wholly  and  totally  placed,  or  at  least  principally.

We  likewise  constitute  pentacles  by  making  the  revolution  of  some  kind  of
name,  in  a square  table,  and  by  drawing  about  it  a single  or  double  circle,
and  writing  therein  some  holy  versicle  competent  and  befitting  this  name,  or
from  which  that  name  is  extracted.  And  this  is  the  way  of  making  the
pentacles,  according  to  their  several  distinct  forms  and  fashions,  which  we
may,  if  we  please,  either  multiply  or  commix  together  by  course  among
themselves,  to  work  the  greater  efficacy,  extension  and  enlargement  of  force
and  virtue.

As,  if  a deprecation  would  be  made  for  the  overthrow  and  destruction  of
one’s  enemies,  we  are  to  mind,  and  call  to  remembrance  how  God  destroyed
the  face  of  the  whole  earth  in  the  deluge  of  waters,  and  the  destruction  of
Sodom  and  Gomorrah , by  raining  down  fire  and  brimestone;  likewise,  how
God  overthrew  Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  the  Red  Sea;  and  to  call  to  mind  if
any  other  malediction  or  curse  be  found  in  holy  writ.  And  thus  in  things  of
the  like  sort.  So  likewise  in  deprecating  and  praying  against  perils  and
dangers  of  waters,  we  ought  to  call  to  remembrance  the  saving  of  Noah  in
the  deluge  of  waters,  the  passing  of  the  children  of  Israel  through  the
Red  Sea;  and  also  we  are  to  mind  how  Christ  walked  on  the  waters,  and  how
he  saved  the  ship  in  danger  from  being  cast  away  by  the  tempest;  and  how
he  commanded  the  winds  and  the  waves,  and  they  obeyed  him;  and  also,
that  he  drew  Peter  out  of  the  water,  being  in  danger  of  drowning,  and  the
like.  And,  lastly,  with  these  we  invoke  and  call  upon  some  certain  holy
names  of  God;  to  wit,  such  as  are  significative  to  accomplish  our  desire  and
accommodated  to  the  desired  effect;  as  if  it  be  to  overthrow  enemies;  we


Ceremonial  fmapic.


199


are  to  invoke  and  call  upon  names  of  wrath , revenge,  fear,  justice,  and  forti-
tude of  God;  and  if  we  would  avoid  and  escape  any  evil  or  danger,  we  then
call  upon  the  names  of  mercy,  defence,  salvation,  fortitude,  goodness,  and
such  like  names  of  God.  When  likewise  we  pray  to  God  that  he  would
grant  us  our  desires,  we  are  likewise  to  intermix  therewith  the  name  of  some
good  spirit,  whether  one  only,  or  more,  whose  office  it  is  to  execute  our
desires;  and  sometimes  also  we  require  some  evil  spirit  to  restrain  or  compel,
whose  name  likewise  we  intermingle,  and  that  rightly,  especially  if  it  be  to
execute  any  evil  work;  as  revenge, punishment,  or  destruction.

Furthermore,  if  there  be  any  versicle  in  the  Psalms,  or  any  other  part  of
the  holy  Scripture,  that  shall  seem  congruent  and  agreeable  to  our  desire,  the
same  is  to  be  mingled  with  our  prayers.  Now,  after  prayer  has  been  made
to  God,  it  is  expedient  afterwards  to  make  an  oration  to  that  executioner,
whom,  in  our  precedent  prayer  to  God,  we  have  desired  should  administer  to
us,  whether  one  or  more,  or  whether  he  be  an  angel,  or  star,  or  soul,  or  any
of  the  noble  angels.  But  this  kind  of  oration  ought  to  be  composed  according
to  the  rules  which  we  have  delivered  in  the  former  part  of  our  work,  where
we  have  treated  of  the  manner  of  the  composition  of  enchantments,  Sc.

You  may  know  farther,  that  these  kind  of  bonds  have  a threefold  differ-
ence; for  the  first  bond  is  when  we  conjure  by  natural  things;  the  second  is
compounded  of  religious  mysteries,  by  sacraments,  miracles,  and  things  of
this  sort;  and  the  third  is  constituted  by  divine  names  and  holy  seals.
With  these  kind  of  bonds  we  may  bind  not  only  spirits,  but  also  other  crea-
tures whatsoever,  as  animals,  tempests , burnings,  floods  of  waters,  the  force
and  power  af  arms.  Also  we  use  these  bonds  aforesaid,  not  only  by  con-
juration, but  sometimes  also  using  the  means  of  deprecation  and  benediction.
Moreover  it  conduces  much  to  this  purpose  to  join  some  sentence  of  holy
Scripture,  if  any  shall  be  found  convenient  thereto,  as  in  the  conjuration  of
serpents,  by  commemorating  the  curse  of  the  serpent  in  the  earthly  paradise,
and  the  setting  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness;  and  further,  adding  that
versicle,  thou  shalt  walk  upon  the  asp  and  the  basilisk,  &c.  Superstition  is
also  of  much  prevelancy  herein,  by  the  translation  of  some  sacramental  rites,
to  bind  that  which  we  intend  to  hinder;  as,  the  rights  of  excommunication,
of  sepulchres,  funerals,  buryings,  and  the  like  sort.

Of  the  Consecration  of  all  magical  Instruments  and  Materials  which  are  used
in  this  Art.

The  virtue  of  consecrations  chiefly  consist  in  two  things,  viz.  the  power
of  the  person  consecrating,  and  the  virtue  of  the  prayer  by  which  the  conse-
cration is  made.


200


Ube  Cabala;  or,

For  in  the  person  consecrating,  there  is  required  firmness,  constancy,  and
holiness  of  life;  and  that  the  consecrator  himself  shall,  with  a firm  and
undubitable  faith,  believe  the  virtue,  power,  and  effect  thereof.

Then  in  the  prayer  by  which  the  consecration  is  made  it  derives  its  virtue
either  from  divine  inspiration,  or  else  by  composing  it  from  sundry  places  in
the  holy  Scripture,  in  the  commemoration  of  some  of  the  wonderful  miracles
of  God,  effects,  promises,  sacraments  and  sacramental  things,  of  which  we
have  abundance  in  holy  writ.

There  must  likewise  be  used  the  invocation  of  divine  names,  that  are  signi-
ficative of  the  work  in  hand;  likewise  a sanctifying  and  expiation  which  is
wrought  by  sprinkling  with  holy  water,  unctions  with  holy  oil,  and  odorifer-
ous suffumigations.  Therefore  in  every  consecration  there  is  generally  used
a benediction  and  consecration  of  water,  earth,  oil,  fire,  and  suffumigations,
&c.  with  consecrated  wax-lights  or  lamps  burning;  for  without  lights  no  conse-
cration is  duly  performed.  You  must  therefore  particularly  observe  this,  that
when  any  thing  (which  we  call  prophane)  is  to  be  used,  in  which  there  is  any
defilement  or  pollution,  it  must,  first  of  all,  be  purified  by  an  Exorcism  com-
posed solely  for  that  purpose,  which  ought  to  precede  the  consecration;
which  things  being  so  made  pure  are  most  apt  to  receive  the  influences  of
the  divine  virtue.  We  must  also  observe  that  at  the  end  of  any  consecration
after  the  prayer  is  rightly  performed,  as  we  have  mentioned,  the  operator
ought  to  bless  the  thing  consecrated,  by  breathing  out  some  sentence  with
divine  virtue  and  power  of  the  present  consecration,  with  a commemoration
of  his  virtue  and  authority,  that  so  it  may  be  the  more  duly  performed,  and
with  an  earnest  and  attentive  mind.  Now  I shall  mention  here  some  exam-
ples, that,  by  these,  a path  may  be  made  to  the  whole  perfection  thereof.

The  Consecration  of  Water.

So  in  the  consecration  of  water,  we  must  commemorate  that  God  has
placed  the  firmament  in  the  midst  of  the  waters,  and  likewise  that  God
placed  the  fountain  of  waters  in  the  earthly  paradise,  from  whence  sprang
four  holy  rivers  that  watered  the  whole  earth;  likewise  we  are  to  remember
that  God  caused  the  waters  to  be  an  instrument  of  his  justice  in  destroying
the  giants,  by  bringing  on  the  deluge  which  covered  the  face  of  the  whole
earth;  and  in  the  overthrow  of  the  host  of  Pharaoh  in  the  Red  Sea,  and  that
God  led  the  children  of  Israel  through  on  dry  land,  and  through  the  midst
of  the  river  Jordan,  and  likewise  his  marvellously  drawing  water  out  of  the
stony  rock  in  the  wilderness;  and  that,  at  the  prayer  of  Samson,  he  caused
water  to  flow  out  of  the  jaw-bone  of  an  ass;  and  likewise  that  God  has  made
water  the  instrument  of  his  mercy  and  salvation  for  the  expiation  of  original
sin;  also  that  Christ  was  baptized  in  the  river  Jordan,  and  hath  thereby


Ceremonial  flUagtc.  2ot

sanctified  and  cleansed  the  waters.  Likewise  certain  divine  names  are  to  be
invocated  which  are  conformable  hereto ; as,  that  God  is  a living  fountain,
living  water,  the  fountain  of  mercy,  and  names  of  the  like  sort.

Consecration  of  Fire.

And  likewise,  in  the  consecration  of  fire,  we  are  to  commemorate  that  God
hath  created  the  fire  to  be  an  instrument  to  execute  his  justice,  for  punish-
ment, vengeance,  and  the  expiation  of  sins;  also,  when  God  comes  to  judge
the  world  that  he  will  command  a conflagration  of  fire  to  go  before  him:
likewise  we  are  to  mention  that  God  appeared  to  Moses  in  a burning  bush;
and  also  how  he  went  before  the  children  of  Israel  in  a pillar  of  fire;  and
that  nothing  can  be  duly  offered,  sanctified,  or  sacrified,  without  fire;  and  how
that  God  instituted  fire  to  be  kept  in  continually  in  the  tabernacle  of  the
covenant;  and  how  miraculously  he  re-kindled  the  same,  being  extinct,  and
preserved  it  elsewhere  from  going  out  being  hidden  under  the  waters;  and
things  of  this  sort;  likewise  the  names  of  God  are  to  be  called  upon  which
are  consonant  to  this;  as  we  read  in  the  law  and  prophets,  that  God  is  a
consuming  fire;  and  likewise  if  there  are  any  divine  names  which  signify  fire,
as  the  glory  of  God,  the  light  of  God,  the  splendor  and  brightness  of  God,  Sc.

The  Consecration  of  Oil ,

And  likewise  in  the  consecration  of  oil  and  perfumes  we  are  to  mention
such  things  as  are  consonant  to  this  purpose,  as  of  the  holy  anointing  oil
mentioned  in  Exodus,  and  divine  names  significant  thereunto;  such  as  is  the
name  of  Christ,  which  signifies  anointed ; and  whatever  mysteries  there  are
relative  to  oil  in  the  Scriptures,  as  the  two  olive-trees  distilling  holy  oil  into
the  lamps  that  burn  before  the  face  of  God,  mentioned  in  Revelations.

Of  the  Benediction  of  Lights , Lamps , Wax,  Sc.

Now,  the  blessing  of  the  lights,  lamps,  wax,  Sc.  is  taken  from  the  fire,  and
whatever  contains  the  substance  of  the  flame,  and  whatever  similitudes  are
in  the  mysteries,  as  the  seven  candlesticks  which  burn  before  the  face  of  God.

Therefore  we  have  here  given  the  manner  of  composing  the  consecrations,
which  first  of  all  are  necessary  to  be  used  in  every  kind  of  ceremony,  and
ought  to  precede  every  experiment  or  work,  and  without  which  nothing  in
magic  rites  can  be  duly  performed.

In  the  next  place,  we  will  shew  thee  the  consecration  of  places,  instruments,
and  the  like  things.

The  Consecration  of  Places,  Ground,  Circle,  Sc.

Therefore  when  you  would  consecrate  any  place  or  circle,  you  should  take
the  prayer  of  Solomon  used  in  the  dedication  and  consecration  of  the  temple;
you  must  likewise  bless  the  place  by  sprinkling  with  holy  water  and  with


202


TEbe  Cabala;  or,


suffumigations,  and  commemorate  in  the  benediction  holy  mysteries;  such
as  these,  the  sanctification  of  the  thorne  of  God,  of  Mount  Sinai,  of  the
tabernacle  of  the  covenant,  of  the  holy  of  holies,  of  the  temple  of  Jerusalem:
also  the  sanctification  of  Mount  Golgotha,  by  the  crucifixion  of  Christ;  the
sanctification  of  the  temple  of  Christ;  of  Mount  Tabor,  by  the  transfiguration
and  ascension  of  Christ,  Sc.  And  by  invocating  all  divine  names  which  are
significant  to  this;  such  as  the  place  of  God,  the  thorne  of  God,  the  chair  of
God,  the  tabernacle  of  God,  the  altar  of  God,  the  habitation  of  God,  and  the
like  divine  names  of  this  sort,  which  are  to  be  written  about  the  circle,  or
place  to  be  consecrated.

And,  in  the  consecration  of  instruments,  and  every  other  thing  that  is  used
in  this  art,  you  must  proceed  after  the  same  manner,  by  sprinkling  with  holy
water  the  same,  by  fumigation,  by  anointing  with  holy  oil,  sealing  it  with
some  holy  seal,  and  blessing  it  with  prayer,  and  by  commemorating  holy
things  out  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  collecting  divine  names  which  are  agreeable
to  the  things  to  be  consecrated;  as  for  example,  in  the  consecration  of  the
sword  we  are  to  remember  in  the  gospel,  “he  that  hath  two  coats,”  Sc.  and
that  in  the  second  of  the  Maccabees,  it  is  said  that  a sword  was  divinely  and
miraculously  sent  to  Judas  Maccabeus;  and  if  there  is  any  thing  of  the  like
in  the  prophets,  as  “take  unto  you  two-edged  swords,”  Sc.  And  you  shall
also,  in  the  same  manner,  consecrate  experiments  and  books,  and  whatever  of
the  like  nature,  as  writings,  pictures,  Sc.  by  sprinkling,  perfuming,  anointing,
sealing,  blessing,  with  holy  commemorations,  and  calling  to  remembrance  the
sanctification  of  mysteries;  as  the  table  of  the  ten  commandments,  which  were
delivered  to  Moses  by  God  in  mount  Sinai,  the  sanctification  of  the  Old  and
New  Testaments,  and  likewise  of  the  law,  prophets,  and  Scriptures,  which
were  promulgated  by  the  Holy  Ghost:  and  again,  there  are  to  be  mentioned
such  divine  names  as  are  convenient  to  this;  as  these  are,  viz.  the  testament
of  God,  the  book  of  God,  the  book  of  life,  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  wisdom
of  God,  and  the  like.  And  with  such  kind  of  rites  as  these  is  the  personal
consecration  performed.

There  are  besides  these  another  rite  of  consecration  of  great  power  and
efficacy ; and  this  is  one  of  the  kinds  of  superstition,  viz.  when  the  rite  of
consecration  or  collection  of  any  sacrament  in  the  church  is  transferred  to
that  thing  which  we  would  consecrate.

It  must  be  noted  that  vows,  oblations,  and  sacrifices , have  the  power  of
consecration  also,  as  well  real  as  personal;  and  they  are,  as  it  were,  certain
conventions  between  those  names  with  which  they  are  made  and  us  who
make  them,  strongly  cleaving  to  our  desire  and  wished  effects,  as  when  we
sacrifice  with  certain  names,  or  things;  as  fumigations,  unctions,  rings,
images,  mirrors;  and  some  things  less  material,  as  characters,  seals,  pentacles,


Ceremonial  flUagtc  203

enchantments,  orations,  pictures,  Scriptures,  of  which  we  have  largely
spoken  before.

Of  the  Invocation  of  Evil  Spirits , and  the  binding  of
and  constraining  of  them  to  appear.

Now,  if  thou  art  desirous  of  binding  any  spirit  to  a ready  obedience  to
thee,  we  will  shew  you  how  a certain  book  may  be  made  by  which  they  may
be  invoked;  and  this  book  is  to  be  consecrated  a book  of  Evil  Spirits,  cere-
moniously to  be  composed  in  their  name  and  order,  whereunto  they  bind  with
a certain  holy  oath,  the  ready  and  present  obedience  of  the  spirit.  This  book
is  therefore  to  be  made  of  the  most  pure  and  clean  paper,  which  is  generally
called  virgin  paper;  and  this  book  must  be  inscribed  after  this  manner,  viz.
let  there  be  drawn  on  the  left  side  of  the  book  the  image  of  the  spirit,  and  on
the  right  side  thereof  his  character,  with  the  oath  above  it,  containing  the
name  of  the  spirit,  his  dignity  and  place,  with  his  office  and  power.  Yet
many  magicians  do  compose  this  book  otherwise,  omiting  the  characters  and
images;  but  I think  that  it  is  much  more  efficacious  not  to  neglect  any  thing
above  mentioned  in  the  forms.

There  is  likewise  to  be  observed  the  circumstances  of  places,  times,  hours,
according  to  the  stars  which  these  spirits  are  under,  and  are  seen  to  agree  to ;
with  their  site,  rite,  and  order,  being  applied.

Which  book  being  so  written,  is  to  be  well  bound,  adorned,  garnished,
embellished  and  kept  secure,  with  registers  and  seals,  lest  it  should  happen
after  the  consecration  to  open  in  some  part  not  designed,  and  endanger  the
operator.  And  above  all,  let  this  book  be  kept  as  pure  and  reverent  as
possible;  for  irreverance  of  mind  causes  it  to  lose  its  virtue  by  pollution  and
prophanation.

Now  this  sacred  book  being  thus  composed  according  to  the  form  and
manner  we  have  delivered,  we  are  to  consecrate  it  after  a two-fold  way;  the
first  is,  that  all  and  singularly  each  of  the  spirits  who  are  written  in  the  book
be  called  to  the  circle,  according  to  the  rites  magical,  which  we  have  before
taught,  and  place  the  book  which  is  to  be  consecrated  in  a triangle  on  the
outside  of  the  circle;  then  read,  in  the  presence  of  the  spirits,  all  the  oaths
which  are  contained  and  written  in  that  book;  then  the  book  to  be  conse-
crated being  already  placed  without  the  circle  in  a triangle  there  drawn,
compel  all  the  spirits  to  impose  their  hands  where  their  images  and  characters
are  drawn,  and  to  confirm  and  consecrate  the  same  with  a special  and  com-
mon oath.  This  being  done,  let  the  book  be  shut  and  preserved  as  we  have
spoken  before;  then  licence  the  spirits  to  depart  according  to  due  rite  and
magical  order.

There  is  another  method  extant  among  us  of  consecrating  a general  book
of  spirits  which  is  more  easy,  and  of  as  much  efficacy  to  produce  every  effect,


204


TLhc  Cabala;  or,


except  that  in  opening  this  hook,  the  spirits  do  not  always  appear  visible.
And  this  way  is  thus:  let  he  made  a hook  of  spirits,  as  we  have  before  shewn,
but  in  the  end  thereof  write  invocations,  bonds,  and  strong  conjurations,
wherewith  every  spirit  may  be  bound;  then  bind  this  book  between  two
lamens  or  tables,  and  on  the  inside  thereof  draw  or  let  be  drawn  two  holy
pentacles  of  the  divine  Majesty,  which  we  have  before  set  forth,  out  of  the
Apocalypse.  Then  let  the  first  of  them  be  placed  in  the  beginning  of  the
book,  and  the  second  at  the  end  of  the  same.

This  book  being  thus  perfected,  let  it  be  brought,  in  a clear  and  fair  night,
to  a circle  prepared  in  a cross-way,  according  to  the  art  which  we  have
before  delivered;  and  there,  in  the  first  place,  the  book  is  to  be  opened,  and
to  be  consecrated  according  to  the  rites  and  ways  which  we  have  before
delivered  concerning  consecration,  which  being  done,  let  all  the  spirits  be
called  which  are  written  in  the  book,  in  their  own  order  and  place,  conjuring
them  thrice  by  the  bonds  described  in  the  book  that  they  come  to  that  place
within  the  space  of  three  days,  to  assure  their  obedience  and  confirm  the
same,  to  the  book  so  to  be  consecrated ; then  let  the  book  be  wrapped  up  in  a
clean  linen  cloth,  and  bury  it  in  the  midst  of  the  circle,  and  stop  the  hole  so
as  it  may  not  be  perceived  or  discovered : the  circle  being  destroyed  after
you  have  licensed  the  spirits,  depart  before  sun-rise;  and  on  the  third  day,
about  the  middle  of  the  night,  return  and  make  the  circle  anew  and  on  thy
knees  make  prayer  unto  God,  and  give  thanks  to  him;  and  let  a precious
perfume  be  made,  open  the  hole  in  which  you  buried  your  book  and  take
it  out,  and  so  let  it  be  kept,  not  opening  the  same.  Then  after  licensing  the
spirits  in  their  order  and  destroying  the  circle,  depart  before  sun-rise.  And
this  is  the  last  rite  and  manner  of  consecrating,  profitable  to  what  ever  writ-
ings, experiments,  tfec.  that  direct  the  spirits,  placing  the  same  between  the
two  holy  lamens  or  pentacles,  as  is  before  mentioned.

But  when  the  operator  would  work  by  the  book  thus  consecrated  he  should
do  it  in  a fair  and  clear  season,  when  the  spirits  are  least  troubled;  and  let
him  turn  himself  towards  the  region  of  the  spirits;  then  let  him  open  the
book  under  a due  register,  and  likewise  invoke  the  spirits  by  their  oaths
there  described  and  confirmed,  and  by  the  name  of  their  character  and
image,  to  whatever  purpose  you  desire,  and  if  there  be  need  conjure  them  by
the  bonds  placed  in  the  end  of  the  book.*  And  having  attained  thy  desired
effect  license  them  to  depart.

And  now  we  proceed  to  speak  of  the  Invocation  of  good  as  well  as  bad
Spirits.

* I have  given  an  example  of  the  book  of  spirits,  by  which  you  may  see  the  method  in  which
the  characters,  &c.,  are  placed  as  above  described.  See  the  Plate.


Ceremonial  finagle.


205

The  good  spirits  may  be  invocated  of  us,  or  by  us,  divers  ways,  and  they  in
sundry  shapes  and  manners  offer  themselves  to  us,  for  they  openly  speak  to
those  that  watch,  and  do  offer  themselves  to  our  sight,  or  do  inform  us  by
dreams  and  by  oracle  of  those  things  which  we  have  a great  desire  to  know.
Whoever  therefore  would  call  any  good  spirit  to  speak  or  appear  in  sight,  he
must  particulary  observe  two  things;  one  whereof  is  about  the  disposition  of
the  invocant,  the  other  concerning  those  things  which  are  outwardly  to  be
adhibited  to  the  invocation  for  the  conformity  of  the  spirit  to  be  called.

It  is  necessary  therefore  that  the  invocant  religiously  dispose  himself  for
the  space  of  many  days  to  such  a mystery,  and  to  conserve  himself  during
the  time  chaste,  abstinent,  and  to  abstract  himself  as  much  as  he  can  from  all
manner  of  foreign  and  secular  business;  likewise  he  should  observe  fasting,
as  much  as  shall  seem  convenient  to  him,  and  let  him  daily  between  sun-rising
and  setting,  being  clothed  in  pure  white  linen,  seven  times  call  upon  God,
and  make  a deprecation  to  the  angels  to  be  called  and  invocated,  according
to  the  rule  which  we  have  before  taught.  Now  the  number  of  days  of  fasting
and  preparation  is  commonly  one  month,  i.  e.  the  time  of  a whole  lunation.
Now,  in  the  Cabala,  we  generally  prepare  ourselves  forty  days  before.

Now  concerning  the  place,  it  must  be  chosen  clean,  pure,  close,  quiet,  free
from  all  manner  of  noise,  and  not  subject  to  any  stranger’s  sight.  This  place
must  first  of  all  be  exorcised  and  consecrated ; and  let  there  be  a table  or
altar  placed  therein,  covered  with  a clean  white  linen  cloth  and  set  towards
the  east:  and  on  each  side  thereof  place  two  consecrated  wax-lights  burning,
the  flame  thereof  ought  not  to  go  out  all  these  days.  In  the  middle  of  the
altar  let  there  be  placed  lamens,  or  the  holy  paper  we  have  before  described,
covered  with  fine  linen,  which  is  not  to  be  opened  until  the  end  of  the  days
of  consecration.  You  shall  also  have  in  readiness  a precious  perfume  and  a
pure  anointing  oil.  — And  let  them  both  be  kept  consecrated.  Then  set  a
sensor  on  the  head  of  the  altar,  wherein  you  shalt  kindle  the  holy  fire , and
make  a precious  perfume  every  day  that  you  pray.

Now  for  your  habit,  you  shall  have  a long  garment  of  white  linen,  close
before  and  behind,  which  may  come  down  quite  over  the  feet,  and  gird  your-
self about  the  loins  with  a girdle.  You  shall  likewise  have  a veil  made  of  pure
white  linen  on  which  must  be  wrote  in  a gilt  lamen,  the  name  Tetragram-
maton;  all  which  things  are  to  be  consecrated  and  sanctified  in  order.  But
you  must  not  go  into  this  holy  place  till  it  be  first  washed  and  covered  with
a cloth  new  and  clean,  and  then  you  may  enter,  but  with  your  feet  naked  and
bare;  and  when  you  enter  therein  you  shall  sprinkle  with  holy  water,  then
make  a perfume  upon  the  altar;  and  then  on  thy  knees  pray  before  the  altar
as  we  have  directed.


tlbe  Cabala;  or,


206

Now  when  the  time  is  expired,  on  the  last  day,  you  shall  fast  more  strictly;
and  fasting  on  the  day  following,  at  the  rising  of  the  sun,  enter  the  holy
place,  using  the  ceremonies  before  spoken  of,  first  by  sprinkling  thyself,  then,
making  a perfume,  you  shall  sign  the  cross  with  holy  oil  in  the  forehead,  and
anoint  your  eyes,  using  prayer  in  all  these  consecrations.  Then,  open  the
lamen  and  pray  before  the  altar  upon  your  knees;  and  then  an  invocation
may  be  made  as  follows:

An  Invocation  of  the  Good  Spirits.

In  the  name  of  the  blessed  and  Holy  Trinity,  I do  desire  thee,  strong  and
mighty  angels  ( here  name  the  spirits  you  would  have  appear)  that  if  it  be  the
divine  will  of  him  who  is  called  Tetragrammaton,  <fbc.  the  holy  God,  the
Father,  that  thou  take  upon  thee  some  shape  as  best  becometh  thy  celestial
nature,  and  appear  to  us  visibly  here  in  this  place,  and  answer  our  demands,
in  as  far  as  we  shall  not  transgress  the  bounds  of  the  divine  mercy  and
goodness,  by  requesting  unlawful  knowledge;  but  that  thou  wilt  graciously
shew  us  what  things  are  most  profitable  for  us  to  know  and  do  to  the  glory
and  honour  of  his  divine  Majesty  who  liveth  and  reigneth,  world  without
end.  Amen.

Lord  thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven  — make  clean  our  hearts
within  us,  and  take  not  thy  holy  spirit  from  us.  O Lord,  by  thy  name  we
have  called  them,  suffer  them  to  administer  unto  us.

And  that  all  things  may  work  together  for  thy  honour  and  glory,  to  whom
with  thee,  the  Son  and  blessed  Spirit,  be  ascribed  all  might,  majesty,  and
dominion  world  without  end.  Amen.

The  particular  Form  of  the  Lamen.  — (For  the  form  of  the  Lamen
see  the  Plate.)

The  invocation  being  made,  the  good  angels  will  appear  unto  you  which
you  desire,  which  you  shall  entertain  with  a chaste  communication,  and
licence  them  to  depart.

Now  the  lamen  which  is  used  to  invoke  any  good  spirit  must  be  made  after
the  following  manner:  either  in  metal  comformable  or  in  new  wax  mixed
with  convenient  spices  and  colours;  or  it  may  be  made  with  pure  white  paper
with  convenient  colours,  and  the  outward  form  of  it  may  be  either  square,
circular,  or  triangular,  or  of  the  like  sort,  according  to  the  rule  of  the
numbers,  in  which  there  must  be  written  the  divine  names,  as  well  general  as
special.  And  in  the  centre  of  the  lamen  draw  a hexagon  or  character  of  six
corners,  in  the  middle  thereof  write  the  name  and  character  of  the  star,  or  of
the  spirit  his  governor,  to  whom  the  good  spirit  that  is  to  be  called  is  subject.
And  about  this  character  let  there  be  placed  so  many  characters  of  five  cor-
ners or  pentacles  as  the  spirits  we  would  call  together  at  once.  But  if  we


Ceremonial  fTOagic.


207


should  call  only  one,  nevertheless  there  must  he  made  four  pentagons,  where-
in the  name  of  the  spirit  or  spirits,  with  their  characters,  are  to  be  written.
Now  this  lamen  ought  to  be  composed  when  the  moon  is  in  her  increase,  on
those  days  and  hours  which  agree  to  the  spirit;  and  if  we  take  a fortunate
planet  therewith,  it  will  be  the  better  for  the  producing  the  effect:  which
table  or  lamen  being  rightly  made  in  the  manner  we  have  fully  described,
must  be  consecrated  according  to  the  rules  above  delivered.

And  this  is  the  way  of  making  the  general  table  or  lamen  for  the  in-
vocating  of  all  spirits  whatever;  the  form  whereof  you  may  see  in  the  Plates
of  pentacles,  seals,  and  lamens.

Nevertheless,  we  make  special  tables  congruent  to  every  spirit  by  the  rule
which  we  have  above  spoken  concerning  holy  pentacles.

We  will  yet  declare  unto  you  another  rite  more  easy  to  perform  this  thing:
let  the  man  who  wishes  to  receive  an  oracle  from  a spirit  be  chaste,  pure,
and  sanctified;  then  a place  being  chosen  pure,  clean,  and  covered  every
where  with  clean  and  white  linen,  on  the  Lord’s-day  in  the  new  of  the  moon,
let  him  enter  into  that  place  clothed  with  white  linen;  let  him  exorcise
the  place,  bless  it,  and  make  a circle  therein  with  a consecrated  coal;  let  there
be  written  in  the  outer  part  of  the  circle  the  names  of  the  angels;  in  the
inner  part  thereof  write  the  mighty  names  of  God  ; and  let  be  placed  within
the  circle,  at  the  four  parts  of  the  world,  the  vessels  for  the  perfumes.  Then,
being  washed  and  fasting,  let  him  enter  the  place  and  pray  towards  the
east  this  whole  Psalm,  “Blessed  are  the  undefiled  in  the  way,”  &c.  Psalm
cxix.  Then  make  a fumigation,  and  deprecate  the  angels  by  the  said  divine
names,  that  they  will  appear  unto  you,  and  reveal  or  discover  that  which  you
so  earnestly  desire;  and  do  this  continually  for  six  days,  washed  and  fast-
ing. On  the  seventh  day,  being  washed  and  fasting,  enter  the  circle,  per-
fume it,  and  anoint  thyself  with  holy  oil  upon  the  forehead,  eyes,  and  in
the  palms  of  both  hands,  and  upon  the  feet;  then,  with  bended  knees,  say  the
Psalm  aforesaid,  with  divine  and  angelical  names.  Which  being  said,  arise,
and  walk  round  the  circle  from  East  to  West,  until  thou  shalt  be  wearied
with  a giddiness  of  they  head  and  brain,  then  straitway  fall  down  in  the
circle,  where  thou  mayest  rest,  and  thou  wilt  be  wrapped  up  in  an  ectasy;
and  a spirit  will  appear  and  inform  thee  of  all  things  necessary  to  be  known.
We  must  observe  also,  that  in  the  circle  there  ought  to  be  four  holy  candles
burning  at  the  four  parts  of  the  world,  which  ought  not  to  want  light  for  the
space  of  a week.

And  the  manner  of  fasting  is  this:  to  abstain  from  all  things  having  a life
of  sense,  and  from  those  which  do  proceed  from  them,  let  him  drink  only
pure  running  water;  neither  is  there  any  food  or  wine  to  be  taken  till  the
going  down  of  the  sun.


208


Ube  Cabala;  or,

Let  the  perfume  and  the  holy  anointing  oil  be  made  as  is  set  forth  in
Exodus,  and  other  holy  books  of  the  Bible.  It  is  also  to  be  observed,  that
as  often  as  he  enters  the  circle  he  has  upon  his  forehead  a golden  lamen,
upon  which  there  must  be  written  the  name  Tetragrammaton , in  the  manner
we  have  before  mentioned.

Of  Oracles  by  Dreams .

But  natural  things  and  their  own  commixtures  do  likewise  belong  unto
magicians,  and  we  often  use  such  to  receive  oracles  from  a spirit  by  a dream;
which  are  either  by  perfumes,  unctions,  meats,  drinks,  seals,  rings,  <&c.

Now  those  who  are  desirous  to  receive  oracles  in  or  through  a dream,  let
him  make  himself  a ring  of  the  sun  or  Saturn  for  this  purpose.  There  are
likewise  images  of  dreams,  which,  being  put  under  the  head  when  he  goes
to  sleep,  doth  effectually  give  true  dreams  of  whatever  the  mind  hath  before
determined  or  consulted  upon,  the  practice  of  which  is  as  follows:

Thou  shalt  make  an  image  of  the  sun,  the  figure  whereof  must  be,  a man
sleeping  upon  the  bosom  of  an  angel,  which  thou  shalt  make  when  Leo
ascends,  the  sun  being  in  the  ninth  house  in  Aries;  thou  shalt  write  upon  the
figure  the  name  of  the  effect  desired,  and  in  the  hand  of  the  angel  the  name
of  the  intelligence  of  the  sun.  Let  the  same  image  be  made  in  Yirgo
ascending,  Mercury  being  fortunate  in  Aries  in  the  ninth;  or  Gemini  ascend-
ing, Mercury  being  fortunate  in  the  ninth  house  in  Aquarius;  and  let  it
be  received  with  Saturn  with  a fortunate  aspect,  and  let  the  name  of  the
spirit  be  written  upon  it  Let  the  same  likewise  be  made  in  Libra  ascend-
ing, Venus  being  received  from  Mercury  in  Gemini  in  the  ninth  house,  and
write  upon  it  the  angel  of  Venus.  Again,  you  may  make  the  same  image
Aquarius  ascending,  Saturn  fortunately  possessing  the  ninth  in  his  exaltation,
which  is  Libra;  and  let  there  be  written  upon  it  the  angel  of  Saturn.  The
same  may  be  made  Cancer  ascending,  the  moon  being  received  by  Jupiter
and  Venus  in  Pisces,  and  being  fortunately  placed  in  the  ninth  house,  and
write  upon  it  the  spirit  of  the  moon.

There  are  likewise  made  rings  of  dreams  of  wonderful  efficacy;  and  there
are  rings  of  the  sun  and  Saturn ; and  the  constellation  of  them  is  when  the
sun  or  Saturn  ascend  in  their  exaltations  in  the  ninth,  and  when  the  moon
is  joined  to  Saturn  in  the  ninth,  and  in  that  sign  which  was  the  ninth  house
of  the  nativity;  and  write  and  engrave  upon  the  rings  the  name  of  the  spirit
of  the  sun  or  Saturn;  and  by  these  rules  you  may  know  how  and  by  what
means  to  constitute  more  of  thyself:  but  know  this,  that  such  images  work
nothing  (as  they  are  simple  images)  unless  they  are  vivified  by  a spiritual  and
celestial  virtue,  and  chiefly  by  the  ardent  desire  and  firm  intent  of  the  soul  of
the  operator.  But  who  can  give  a soul  to  an  image,  or  make  a stone,  or


Ceremonial  finagle.


209


metal,  or  clay,  or  wood,  or  wax,  or  paper  to  live?  certainly  no  man;  (for  this
arcanum  doth  not  enter  into  an  artist  of  a stiff  neck,)  he  only  hath  it  who
transcends  the  progress  of  angels,  and  comes  to  the  very  achitype  himself.

The  tables  of  numbers  likewise  confer  to  the  receiving  of  oracles,  being
duly  formed  under  their  own  constellations.  Holy  tables  and  papers  likewise
serve  to  this  effect,  being  especially  composed  and  consecrated;  such  as  the
Almutel  of  Solomon , and  the  Table  of  the  Revolution  of  the  name  of  Tetra-
grammaton ; and  those  things  which  are  of  this  kind,  and  written  to  produce
these  effects,  out  of  various  figures,  numbers,  holy  Scriptures,  and  pictures,
with  inscriptions  of  the  divine  names  of  God  and  names  of  holy  angels;  the
composition  whereof  is  taken  out  of  diverse  places  of  the  holy  Scriptures,
Psalms,  and  versicles,  and  other  certain  promises  out  of  the  divine  revelations
and  prophecies.

To  the  same  effect  do  conduce,  likewise,  holy  prayers  and  deprecations  as
well  to  God  as  to  the  blessed  angels;  the  deprecations  of  which  prayers  are  to
be  composed,  as  we  have  before  shewn,  according  to  some  religious  similitude,
making  mention  of  those  things  which  we  intend  to  do;  as  out  of  the  Old
Testament  of  the  dream  of  Jacob,  Joseph,  Pharaoh,  Daniel,  and  Nebuchad-
nezzar: if  out  of  the  New  Testament,  of  the  dream  of  Joseph;  of  the  three
wise  men,  or  magi,  of  John  the  evangelist  sleeping  upon  the  breast  of  our
Lord;  and  whatever  of  the  like  kind  can  be  found  in  religion,  miracles,  and
revelation.  According  to  which  the  deprecation  may  be  composed;  if  when
he  goes  to  sleep  it  be  with  a firm  intention,  and  then,  without  doubt,  they
will  afford  a wonderful  effect.

Therefore  he  who  is  desirous  of  receiving  true  oracles  by  dreams,  let  him
abstain  from  supper,  from  drink,  and  be  otherwise  well  disposed,  so  his  brain
will  be  free  from  turbulent  vapours;  let  him  also  have  his  bed-chamber  fair
and  clean ; exorcised  and  consecrated  if  he  will;  then  let  him  perfume  the  same
with  some  convenient  fumigation,  and  let  him  anoint  his  temples  with  some
unguent  efficacious  hereunto,  and  put  a ring  of  dreams  upon  his  finger;  then
let  him  take  one  of  the  images  we  have  spoken  of,  or  some  holy  table,  or
paper,  and  place  the  same  under  his  head;  then,  having  made  a devout
prayer,  let  him  address  himself  to  sleep,  meditating  upon  that  thing  which  he
desires  to  know;  so  shall  he  receive  a most  certain  and  undoubted  oracle  by
a dream,  when  the  moon  goes  through  that  sign  which  was  in  the  ninth  house
of  his  nativity,  and  also  when  she  goes  through  the  sign  of  the  ninth  of  the
revolution  of  his  nativity,  and  when  she  is  in  the  ninth  sign  from  the  sign  of
perfection.

This  is  the  way  whereby  we  may  obtain  all  sciences  and  arts  whatsoever,
whether  alchemy,  magic,  or  else,  suddenly  and  perfectly  with  a true  illumina-
tion of  our  intellect;  although  all  inferior  familiar  spirits  whatsoever  conduce


210  XTbe  Cabala;  or,

to  this  effect,  and  sometimes  also  evil  spirits  sensibly  inform  us  intrinsically
and  extrinsically.

Of  the  Method  of  raising  Evil  or  Familiar  Spirits  by  a Circle;  likewise
the  Souls  and  Shadows  of  the  Dead.

It  is  hei’e  convenient  that  we  say  something  about  the  means  used  by  exor-
cists to  raise  up  what  are  usually  termed  evil  spirits  to  the  circle,  and  the
methods  of  calling  up  the  ghosts  or  souls  of  those  who  have  died  a violent  or
premature  death.

Now  if  any  one  would  call  any  evil  spirit  to  the  circle,  he  must  first  con-
sider and  know  his  nature,  and  to  which  of  the  planets  it  agrees,  and  what
offices  are  distributed  unto  him  from  the  planet.  This  being  known,  let  there
be  sought  out  a place  fit  and  convenient,  and  proper  for  his  invocation,
according  to  the  nature  of  the  planet  and  the  quality  of  the  offices  of  the  same
spirit,  as  near  as  it  can  be  done;  as  if  their  power  be  over  the  sea,  rivers  or
floods,  then  let  the  place  be  the  sea-shore,  and  so  of  the  rest.  Then  chuse  a
convenient  time  both  for  the  quality  of  the  air  (being  serene,  quiet,  clear  and
fitting  for  the  spirits  to  assume  bodies);  as  also  of  the  quality  of  and  nature
of  the  planet  and  the  spirit,  as  on  his  day  and  time  in  which  he  rules;  he
may  be  fortunate  or  unfortunate  sometimes  of  the  day,  and  sometimes  of  the
night,  as  the  stars  and  spirits  do  require.

These  things  being  judiciously  considered,  let  the  circle  be  made  at  the
place  elected,  as  well  for  the  defence  of  the  invocant  as  the  confirmation  of
the  spirit.  And  in  the  circle  write  the  divine  general  names,  and  all  those
things  which  do  yield  defence  to  us;  and,  with  them,  those  divine  names
which  do  rule  his  planet,  and  the  offices  of  the  spirit  himself;  likewise  write
therein  the  names  of  the  good  spirits  which  bear  rule  in  the  time  you  do  this,
and  are  able  to  bind  and  constrain  that  spirit  which  we  intend  to  call.  And
if  we  will  further  strengthen  and  fortify  our  circle,  we  may  add  characters
and  pentacles  agreeing  to  the  work;  then  also,  if  we  will,  we  may  either,
within  or  without  the  circle,  frame  an  angular  figure  with  the  inscription  of
such  convenient  numbers  as  are  congruent  amongst  themselves  to  our  work,
which  are  to  be  known  according  to  the  manner  of  numbers  and  figures
delivered  in  our  first  Book.

Further  we  are  to  be  provided  with  lights , perfumes,  unguents,  and  medi-
cines, componnded  according  to  the  nature  of  the  spirit  and  planet  which
agree  with  the  spirit  by  reason  of  their  natural  and  celestial  virtue.

Then  we  are  to  be  furnished  with  holy  and  consecrated  things  necessary,
not  only  for  the  defence  of  the  invocant  and  his  companions,  but  also  serving
for  bonds  to  bind  and  constrain  the  spirits;  such  as  holy  papers,  lamens,


Ceremonial  fTOagic.  211

pictures,  pentacles,  swords,  scepters,  garments  of  convenient  colour  and
matter.

Then,  with  all  these  things  provided,  let  the  exorcist  and  his  companions
go  into  the  circle.  In  the  first  place,  let  him  consecrate  the  circle  and  every-
thing he  uses;  which  being  done  in  a solemn  and  firm  manner,  with  con-
venient gesture  and  countenance,  let  him  begin  to  pray  with  a loud  voice
after  the  manner  following.  First,  by  making  an  oration  or  prayer  to  God,
and  then  intreating  the  good  spirits;  but  we  should  read  some  prayer,  or
psalm,  or  gospel,  for  our  defence  in  the  first  place.  After  those  prayers  and
orations  are  said,  let  him  begin  to  invocate  the  spirit  which  he  desireth,  with
a gentle  and  loving  enchantment  to  all  the  coasts  of  the  world,  with  a com-
memoration of  his  own  authority  and  power.  Then  rest  and  look  round  to  see
if  any  spirit  does  appear;  which  if  he  delays,  then  let  him  repeat  his  invocation,
as  above  said,  until  he  hath  done  it  three  times;  and  if  the  spirit  is  obstinate
and  will  not  appear,  then  let  the  invocator  begin  to  conjure  him  with  divine
power;  but  so  that  all  his  conjurations  and  commemorations  do  agree  with
the  nature  and  office  of  the  spirit,  and  reiterate  the  same  three  times,  from
stronger  to  stronger,  using  contumelies,  cursings,  punishments,  suspension
from  his  power  and  office,  and  the  like.

And  after  these  courses  are  finished,  cease;  and  if  the  spirit  shall  appear,
let  the  invocant  turn  himself  towards  the  spirit,  and  courteously  receive  him,
and,  earnestly  entreating  him,  let  him  ask  his  name,  which  write  down  on
your  holy  paper,  and  then  proceed  by  asking  him  whatsoever  you  will;  and
if  in  any  thing  the  spirit  shall  appear  to  be  obstinate,  ambiguous  or  lying , let
him  be  bound  by  convenient  conjurations;  and  if  you  doubt  any  thing,  make,
without  the  circle  with  the  consecrated  sword,  the  figure  of  a triangle  or
pentagon,  and  compel  the  spirit  to  enter  into  it;  and  if  you  receive  any
promise  which  you  would  have  confirmed  with  an  oath,  stretch  the  sword  out
of  the  circle,  and  swear  the  spirit  by  laying  his  hand  on  the  sword.  Then
having  obtained  of  the  spirit  that  which  you  desire,  or  are  otherwise  contented,
license  him  to  depart  with  courteous  words,  giving  command  that  he  do  no
hurt;  and  if  he  will  not  depart,  compel  him  by  powerful  conjurations;  and  if
need  require  expel  him  by  exorcisms  and  by  making  contrary  suffumigations.
And  when  he  is  departed,  go  not  out  of  the  circle,  but  make  a stay,  and  use
some  prayer  giving  thanks  to  God  and  the  good  angels;  and  also  praying  for
your  future  defence  and  conservation,  which  being  orderly  performed  you
may  depart.

But  if  your  hopes  are  frustrated,  and  no  spirit  will  appear,  yet  for  this  you
need  not  despair;  but  leaving  the  circle  after  licensing  to  depart  ( which
must  never  be  omitted  whether  a spirit  appears  or  not*, ) return  at  other  times,

•They  who  neglect  licensing  the  spirits  are  in  very  great  danger,  because  instances  have  been
known  of  the  operator  experiencing  sudden  death.


K«:


Ceremonial  HOapic.


215

doing  as  before.  And  if  you  think  that  you  have  erred  in  any  thing,  then
you  shall  amend  by  adding  or  diminishing;  for  the  constancy  of  repetition
encreases  your  authority  and  power,  and  strikes  a terror  into  the  spirits,  and
compels  them  to  obey.

And  often  the  spirits  do  come  although  they  appear  not  visible  (to  cause
terror  to  him  who  calls  them,)  either  in  the  thing  which  he  uses,  or  else  in
the  operation  itself.  But  this  kind  of  licensing  is  not  given  simply,  but  by  a
kind  of  dispensation,  with  suspension,  until  they  shall  render  themselves
obedient:  also,  without  a circle,  these  spirits  may  be  called  to  appeal*,  by  the
way  we  have  delivered  in  the  consecration  of  a book.  But  when  we  intend
to  execute  any  effect  where  an  apparition  is  not  needful,  then  that  is  to  be
done,  by  making  and  forming  that  which  is  to  be  to  us  an  instrument;  as
whether  it  be  an  image,  ring,  character,  table,  writing,  candle,  sacrifice,  or
any  thing  else;  then  the  name  of  the  spirit  is  to  be  written  therein  with  his
character,  according  to  the  exigency  of  the  experiment,  either  by  writing  it
with  blood,  or  otherwise  using  a perfume  agreeable  to  the  spirit.  Likewise
we  are  often  to  make  orations  and  prayers  to  God  and  the  good  angels  before
we  invocate  any  evil  spirit,  conjuring  him  by  divine  power.

In  some  former  parts  of  our  work  we  have  taught  how  and  by  what  means
the  soul  is  joined  to  the  body.

We  will  in  this  place  inform  thee  farther,  that  those  souls  do  still  love
their  relinquished  bodies  after  death,  a certain  affinity  alluring  them  as  it
were.  Such  are  the  souls  of  noxious  men  who  have  violently  relinquished
their  bodies,  and  souls  wanting  a due  burial,  which  still  wander  in  a liquid
and  turbulent  spirit  above  their  dead  carcasses;  but  these  souls,  by  the  known
means  by  which  they  were  joined  to  their  bodies,  by  the  like  vapours,  liquors,
and  savours,  are  easily  drawn  into  them.

Hence  it  is  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  are  not  to  be  called  up  without  blood
or  by  the  application  of  some  part  of  their  relict  body.

In  the  raising  therefore  of  these  shadows,  we  are  to  perfume  with  new
blood  the  bones  of  the  dead,  and  with  flesh,  eggs,  milk,  honey,  and  oil,  which
furnish  the  soul  with  a medium  apt  to  receive  its  body.

It  is  likewise  to  be  understood,  those  who  are  desirous  to  raise  any  souls  of
the  dead,  ought  to  select  those  places  wherein  these  kind  of  souls  are  most
known  to  be  conversant;  or  by  some  alliance  alluring  the  souls  into  their
forsaken  bodies , or  by  some  kind  of  affection  in  times  past  impressed  in  them
in  their  life,  drawing  the  souls  to  certain  places,  things,  or  persons;  or  by  the
forcible  nature  of  some  place  fitted  and  prepared  to  purge  or  punish  these
souls:  which  places  for  the  most  part,  are  to  be  known  by  the  appearance  of
visions,  nightly  incursions  and  apparitions.


Zhe  Cabala;  or,


216

Therefore  the  places  most  fitting  for  these  things  are  church-yards.  And
better  than  them  are  those  places  devoted  to  the  executions  of  criminal  judg-
ments; and  better  than  these  are  those  places  where,  of  late  years,  there  have
been  so  great  and  so  many  public  slaughters  of  men ; and  that  place  is  still
better  than  those  where  some  dead  carcass  that  came  by  violent  death  is  not
yet  expiated,  nor  was  lately  buried;  for  the  expiation  of  those  places  is
likewise  a holy  rite  duly  to  be  adhibited  to  the  burial  of  the  bodies,  and  often
prohibits  the  soul  returning  to  its  body,  and  expels  the  same  afar  off  to  the
place  of  judgment.

And  from  hence  it  is  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  are  not  easy  to  be  raised  up,
except  it  be  the  souls  of  them  whom  we  know  to  be  evil,  or  to  have  perished
by  a violent  death,  and  whose  bodies  do  want  the  rite  of  due  burial.

Now  although  we  have  spoken  concerning  such  places  of  this  kind,  it  will
not  be  safe  or  commodious  to  go  unto  them;  but  it  is  requisite  for  us  to  take  to
whatsoever  place  is  to  be  chosen  some  principal  relict  of  the  body,  and  there-
with make  a perfume  in  due  manner,  and  to  perform  other  competent  rites.

It  is  also  to  be  known,  that  because  the  souls  are  certain  spiritual  lights,
therefore  artificial  lights  framed  out  of  certain  competent  things,  compounded
according  to  a true  rule,  with  congruent  inscriptions  of  names  and  seals,  do
very  much  avail  to  the  raising  up  of  departed  souls.  But  those  things  which
are  now  spoken  of  are  not  always  sufficient  to  raise  up  souls,  because  of  an
extra-natural  portion  of  understanding  and  reason,  which  is  above  and  known
only  to  the  heavenly  destinies  and  their  powers.

We  should  therefore  allure  the  said  souls  by  supernatural  and  celestial
powers  duly  administered,  even  by  those  things  which  do  move  the  very
harmony  of  the  soul,  as  well  imaginative  as  rational  and  intellectual,  such  as
voices,  songs,  sounds,  enchantments;  and  religious  things,  as  prayers,  con-
jurations, exorcisms,  and  other  holy  rites,  which  may  commodiously  be
administered  hereunto.

The  following  instructions  are  the  principal  and  sum  total  of  all  we  have
said,  only  we  have  brought  it  rather  into  a closer  train  of  experiment  and
practice  than  any  of  the  rest;  for  here  you  may  behold  the  distinct  functions
of  the  spirits;  likewise  the  whole  perfection  of  magical  ceremonies  is  here
described,  syllable  by  syllable.

But  as  the  greatest  power  is  attributed  to  the  circles,  (for  they  are  certain
fortresses,)  we  will  now  clearly  explain,  and  shew  the  composition  and  figure
of  a circle.

The  Composition  of  a Circle. — (For  the  figure  of  the  Circle  see  the  Plate.)

The  forms  of  circles  are  not  always  one  and  the  same,  but  are  changed
according  to  the  order  of  spirits  that  are  to  be  called,  their  places,  times,


218


XTbe  Cabala;  or,

days,  and  hours;  for  in  making  a circle  it  ought  to  he  considered  in  what
time  of  the  year,  what  day,  and  what  hour,  what  spirits  you  would  call,  and
to  what  star  or  region  they  belong,  and  what  functions  they  have:  therefore,
to  begin,  let  there  be  made  three  circles  of  the  latitude  of  nine  feet,  distant
one  from  another  about  a hand’s  breadth.  First,  write  in  the  middle  circle
the  name  of  the  hour  wherein  you  do  the  work;  in  the  second  place,  write
the  name  of  the  angel  of  the  hour;  in  the  third  place,  the  seal  of  the  angel  of
the  hour;  fourthly,  the  name  of  the  angel  that  rules  the  day  in  which  you
work,  and  the  names  of  his  ministers;  in  the  fifth  place,  the  name  of  the
present  time;  sixthly,  the  name  of  the  spirits  ruling  in  that  part  of  time,  and
their  'presidents;  seventhly,  the  name  of  the  head  of  the  sign  ruling  in  the
time;  eighthly,  the  name  of  the  earth,  according  to  to  the  time  of  working;
ninthly,  and  for  the  compleating  of  the  middle  circle,  write  the  names  of
the  sun  and  moon,  according  to  the  said  rule  of  time : for  as  the  times  are
changed,  so  are  the  names:  and  in  the  outer  circle  let  there  be  drawn,  in  the
four  angles,  the  names  of  the  great  presidential  spirits  of  the  air  that  day
wherein  you  would  do  this  work,  viz.  the  name  of  the  king  and  his  three
ministers.  Without  the  circle,  in  four  angles,  let  pentagons  be  made.  In
the  inner  circle  write  four  divine  names,  with  four  crosses  interposed:  in
the  middle  of  the  circle,  viz.  towards  the  east  let  be  written  Alpha;  towards
the  west,  Omega;  and  let  a cross  divide  the  middle  of  the  circle.

When  the  circle  is  thus  finished,  according  to  rule,  you  shall  proceed  to
consecrate  and  bless  it  saying : —

In  the  name  of  the  holy , blessed,  and  glorious  Trinity , proceed  we  to  our
work  in  these  mysteries  to  accomplish  that  which  we  desire  ; we  therefore , in  the
names  aforesaid,  consecrate  this  piece  of  ground  for  our  defence,  so  that  no
spirit  whatsoever  shall  be  able  to  break  these  boundaries,  neither  be  able  to  cause
injury  nor  detriment  to  any  of  us  here  assembled;  but  that  they  may  be  com-
pelled to  stand  before  this  circle,  and  answer  truly  our  demands , so  far  as  it
pleaseth  Him  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever;  and  who  says,  I am  Alpha  and
Omega,  the  Beginning  and  the  End,  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to
come,  the  Almighty ; I am  the  First  and  the  Last,  who  am  living  and  was
dead-,  and  behold  Hive  for  ever  and  ever ; and  I have  the  keys  of  death  and
hell.  Bless,  O Lord!  this  creature  of  earth  wherein  we  stand;  confirm,  0
God!  thy  strength  in  us,  so  that  neither  the  adversary  nor  any  evil  thing
may  cause  us  to  fail,  through  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.

It  is  also  to  be  known  that  the  angels  rule  the  hours  in  a successive  order,
according  to  the  course  of  the  heavens  and  the  planets  to  which  they  are
subject;  so  the  same  spirit  which  governeth  the  day  rules  also  the  first  hour
of  the  day;  the  second  from  this  governs  the  second  hour,  and  so  on  through-
out; and  when  seven  planets  and  hours  have  made  their  revolution  it  returns


Ceremonial  rniapic.  219

again  to  the  first  which  rules  the  day.  Therefore  we  shall  first  speak  of  the
names  of  the  hours,  viz.

A Table  shewing  the  Magical  Names  of  the  Hours , both  Day  and  Night.


Names  of  Hours
of

the  Day.

Names  of  Hours
of

the  Night.

1

Yain

1

Beron

2

Janor

2

Barol

3

Nasnia

3

Thami

4

Salla

4

Athar

5

Sadedadi

5

Methon

6

Thamur

6

Ran  a

7

Ourer

7

Netos

8

Thamic

8

Tafrac

9

Neron

9

Sassur

10

Jay  on

10

Agle

11

Abai

11

Calerva

12

Natalon

12

Salam

Of  the  names  of  the  angels  and  their  seals  it  shall  he  spoken  in  their  proper
places;  but  here  we  will  shew  the  names  of  the  times.

A year  therefore  is  four-fold,  and  is  divided  into  spring,  summer,  autumn,
and  winter;  the  names  thereof  are  these:

The  spring,  Talvi ; the  summer,  Casmaran ; autumn,  Adarcel;  winter,
Farias.

The  Angels  of  the  Spring — Caracasa,  Core,  Amatiel,  Commissoros.

The  head  of  the  sign  in  spring  is  called  Spugliguel.

The  name  of  the  earth  in  spring,  Amadai.

The  names  of  the  sun  and  moon  in  spring:  sun,  Abraym;  moon,  Agusita.

The  Angels  of  the  Summer — Gargatel,  Tariel,  Gaviel.

The  head  of  the  sign  of  the  summer,  Tubiel.

The  name  of  the  earth  in  summer,  Festativi.

The  names  of  the  sun  and  moon  in  summer:  sun,  Athemay;  moon,
Armatus.

The  Angels  of  the  Autumn — Tarquam,  Guabarel.

The  head  of  the  sign  of  autumn,  Torquaret.

The  name  of  the  earth  in  autumn,  Rabinnara.

The  names  of  the  sun  and  moon  in  autumn : the  sun,  Abragini ; the  moon,
Matasignais.


220


Zhc  Cabala;  or,

The  Angels  of  the  Winter — Amabael,  Cetarari.

The  head  of  the  sign  of  winter,  Attarib.

The  name  of  the  earth  in  winter,  Geremiah.

The  names  of  the  sun  and  moon  in  winter:  the  sun,  Commutoff;  the  moon,
Affaterim.

These  things  being  known,  finish  the  consecration  of  the  circle  by  saying: —

“ Thou  shalt  purge  me  with  hysop,  O Lord,  and  I shall  be  clean : thou  shalt
wash  me  and  I shall  be  whiter  than  snow.”

Then  sprinkle  the  same  with  holy  water,  and  proceed  with  the  benediction
of  the  perfumes.

Benediction  of  Perfumes.

The  God  of  Abraham,  God  of  Isaac,  God  of  Jacob,  bless  here  the  creatures
of  these  kinds,  that  they  may  fill  up  the  power  and  virtue  of  their  odours;  so
that  neither  the  enemy  nor  any  false  imagination  may  be  able  to  enter  into
them;  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  c&c.  Then  sprinkle  the  same  with
holy  water.

The  Exorcism  of  Fire  into  which  the  Perfumes  are  to  he  put.

I Exorcise  thee,  O thou  creature  of  fire,  by  the  only  true  God  Jehovah,
Adonai,  Tetragrammaton,  that  forthwith  thou  cast  away  every  phantasm  from
thee,  that  it  shall  do  no  hurt  to  any  one.  We  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  to  bless
this  creature  of  fire,  and  sanctify  it,  so  that  it  may  be  blessed  to  set  forth  the
praise  and  glory  of  thy  holy  name,  and  that  no  hurt  may  be  permitted  to
come  to  the  exorciser  or  spectators;  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.

Of  the  Habit  of  the  Exorcist.

It  should  be  made,  as  we  have  before  described,  of  fine  white  linen  and
clean,  and  to  come  round  the  body  loose,  but  close  before  and  behind.

Of  the  Pentacle  of  Solomon. — (For  the  fig.  see  the  Plate.)

It  is  always  necessary  to  have  this  pentacle  in  readiness  to  hind  with,  in
case  the  spirits  should  refuse  to  be  obedient,  as  they  can  have  no  power  over
the  exorcist  while  provided  with  and  fortified  by  the  pentacle,  the  virtue  of
the  holy  names  therein  written  presiding  with  wonderful  influence  over  the
spirits.

It  should  be  made  in  the  day  and  hour  of  Mercury  upon  parchment  made
of  a kidskin,  or  virgin,  or  pure,  clean,  white  paper ; and  the  figures  and
letters  wrote  in  pure  gold;  and  it  ought  to  be  consecrated  and  sprinkled  (as
before  often  spoken ) with  holy  water.

When  the  vesture  is  put  on,  it  will  be  convenient  to  say  the  following
oration: —


Ceremonial  finagle.  221

An  Oration  when  the  Habit  or  Vesture  is  put  on.

Anoor,  Amacor,  Amides,  Theodonias,  Anitor;  by  the  merits  of  the  angels,
O Lord!  I will  put  on  the  garment  of  salvation,  that  this  which  I desire  I
may  bring  to  effect,  through  thee,  the  most  holy  Adonai,  whose  kingdom
endureth  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.

The  Manner  of  Working.

Let  the  moon  be  increasing  and  equal,  if  it  can  then  be  conveniently  done;
but  especially  let  her  not  be  combust,  or  in  Via  Combusta,  which  is  between
fourteen  degrees  of  Libra  and  fourteen  degrees  of  Scorpio.

The  operator  ought  to  be  clean  and  purified  for  nine  days  before  he  does
the  work.  Let  him  have  ready  the  perfume  appropriated  to  the  day  wherein
he  does  the  work;  and  he  must  be  provided  with  holy  water  from  a clergy-
man, or  he  may  make  it  holy  himself,  by  reading  over  it  the  consecration  of
water  of  baptism;  he  must  have  a new  vessel  of  earth,  with  fire,  the  vesture,
and  the  pentacle;  and  let  all  these  things  be  rightly  and  duly  consecrated
and  prepared.  Let  one  of  the  companions  carry  the  vessel  with  fire,  and  the
perfumes,  and  let  another  bear  the  book,  the  garment,  and  pentacle;  and  let
the  operator  himself  carry  the  sword,  over  which  should  be  said  a prayer  of
consecration:  and  on  the  middle  of  the  sword  on  one  side  let  there  be
engraven  Agla  f,  and  on  the  other  side,  ■(  On,  1 Tetragrammaton  t-  And
the  place  being  fixed  upon  where  the  circle  is  to  be  erected,  let  him  draw  the
lines  we  have  before  taught,  and  sprinkle  the  same  with  holy  water,  conse-
crating, <Scc.  &c.

The  operator  ought  therefore  to  be  prepared  with  fasting,  chastity,  and
abstinence,  for  the  space  of  three  days  before  the  day  of  operation;  and  on
the  day  that  he  would  do  this  work,  being  clothed  with  the  fore-mentioned
vesture,  and  furnished  with  pentacles, perfumes,  a sword,  bible,  paper,  pen,  and
consecrated  ink,  and  all  things  necessary  hereunto,  let  him  enter  the  circle,
and  call  the  angels  from  the  four  parts  of  the  world  which  do  rule  the  seven
planets,  the  seven  days  of  the  week,  colours,  and  metals,  whose  names  you
will  see  in  their  places;  and,  with  bended  knees,  first  let  him  say  the  Pater-
noster or  Lord’s  Prayer,  and  then  let  him  invocate  the  said  angels,  saying: —

O angeli ! supradicti  estote  adjutores  mihi  petitioni  & in  adjutorum  mihi,
in  meis  rebus  et  petitionibus.

Then  call  the  angels  from  the  four  parts  of  the  world  that  rule  the  air  the
same  day  in  which  he  makes  the  experiment;  and,  having  employed  espe-
cially all  the  names  and  spirits  within  the  circle,  say: —

O vos  omnes , adjutore  atque  contestor  per  sedem  Adonai,  per  Hagios , Theos,
Ischyros , Athanatos,  Paracletos,  Alpha  db  Omega,  <&  per  hcec  tria  nomina  se-
creta,  Agla,  On,  Tetragrammaton,  quod  hodie  debeatis  adimplere  quod  cupio.


222


IEbe  Cabala;  or,


These  things  being  performed,  let  him  read  the  conjuration  assigned  for
the  day;  but  if  they  shall  be  pertinacious  or  refractory,  and  will  not  yield
themselves  obedient,  neither  to  the  conjuration  assigned  for  the  day,  nor  any
of  the  prayers  before  made,  then  use  the  exorcism  following: —

A General  Exorcism  of  the  Spirits  of  the  Air.

We  being  made  after  the  image  of  God,  endued  with  power  from  God  and
made  after  his  will,  do  exorcise  you,  by  the  most  mighty  and  powerful  name
of  God,  El,  strong  and  wonderful,  {here  name  the  spirit  which  is  to  appear ),
and  we  command  you  by  Him  who  spoke  the  word  and  it  was  done,  and  by
all  the  names  of  God,  and  by  the  name  Adonai,  El,  Elohim,  Elohe,  Zebaoth,
Elion,  Eserchie,  Jah,  Tetragrammaton,  Sadai,  Lord  God  Most  High:  we
exorcise  you,  and  powerfully  command  you  that  you  forthwith  appear  unto
us  here  before  this  circle  in  a fair  human  shape,  without  any  deformity  or
tortuosity;  come  ye  all  such,'  because  we  command  you  by  the  name  Yaw
and  Yau,  which  Adam  heard  and  spoke;  and  by  the  name  of  God,  Agla,
which  Lot  heard,  and  was  saved  with  his  family;  and  by  the  name  Joth,
which  Jacob  heard  from  the  angel  wrestling  with  him,  and  was  delivered
from  the  hand  of  his  brother  Esau;  and  by  the  name  Anaphexeton,  which
Aaron  heard  and  spoke,  and  was  made  wise;  and  by  the  name  Zebaoth,
which  Moses  named,  and  all  the  rivers  were  turned  into  blood;  and  by  the
name  Eserchie  Oriston,  which  Moses  named,  and  all  the  rivers  brought  forth
frogs,  and  they  ascended  into  the  houses  of  the  Egyptians,  destroying  all
things;  and  by  the  name  Elion,  which  Moses  named,  and  there  was  great
hail,  such  as  had  not  been  since  the  beginning  of  the  world;  and  by  the
name  Adonai,  which  Moses  named,  and  there  came  up  locusts,  which  ap-
peared upon  the  whole  land  of  Egypt,  and  devoured  all  which  the  hail  had
left;  and  by  the  name  Schema  Amathia,  which  Joshua  called  upon,  and  the
sun  stayed  his  course;  and  by  the  name  Alpha  and  Omega,  which  Daniel
named,  and  destroyed  Bel  and  slew  the  dragon ; and  in  the  name  Emmanuel,
which  the  three  children,  Sidrach,  Misach,  and  Abednego,  sung  in  the  midst
of  the  fiery  furnace,  and  were  delivered;  and  by  the  name  Hagios;  and  by
the  seal  of  Adonai;  and  by  Ischyros,  Athanatos,  Paracletos;  and  by  these
three  secret  names,  Agla,  On,  Tetragrammaton,  I do  adjure  and  contest  you;
and  by  these  names,  and  by  all  the  other  names  of  the  living  and  true  God,
our  Lord  Almighty,  I exorcise  and  command  you,  by  Him  who  spoke  the
word  and  it  was  done,  to  whom  all  creatures  are  obedient;  and  by  the  dread-
ful judgment  of  God;  and  by  the  uncertain  sea  of  glass,  which  is  before  the
divine  Majesty , mighty  and  powerful;  by  the  four  beasts  before  the  throne,
having  eyes  before  and  behind;  and  by  the  fire  round  about  his  throne;  and
by  the  holy  angels  of  heaven ; by  the  mighty  wisdom  of  God,  we  do  power-


Ceremonial  flHaQtc>


223


fully  exorcise  you,  that  you  appear  here  before  this  circle,  to  fulfil  our  will
in  all  things  which  shall  seem  good  unto  us;  by  the  seal  of  Baldachia,  and  by
this  name  Primeumaton,  which  Moses  named,  and  the  earth  opened  and
swallowed  up  Corah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram : and  in  the  power  of  that  name
Primeumaton,  commanding  the  whole  host  of  heaven,  we  curse  you,  and
deprive  you  of  your  office,  joy,  and  place,  and  do  bind  you  in  the  depth  of  the
bottomless  pit,  there  to  remain  until  the  dreadful  day  of  the  last  judgment;
and  we  bind  you  into  eternal  fire,  and  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,
unless  you  forthwith  appear  before  this  circle  to  do  our  will:  therefore,  come
ye,  by  these  names,  Adonai,  Zebaoth,  Adonai,  Amioram;  come  ye,  come  ye,
come  ye,  Adonai  commandeth;  Saday,  the  most  mighty  King  of  Kings,  whose
power  no  creature  is  able  to  resist,  be  unto  you  most  dreadful,  unless  ye  obey,
and  forthwith  affably  appear  before  this  circle,  let  miserable  ruin  and  fire
unquenchable  remain  with  you;  therefore  come  ye,  in  the  name  of  Adonai,
Zebaoth,  Adonai,  Amioram;  come,  come,  why  stay  you?  hasten!  Adonai,
Sadai,  the  King  of  Kings  commands  you:  El,  Aty,  Titcip,  Azia,  Hin,  Jen,
Minosel,  Achadan,  Yay,  Yaah,  Ey,  Exe,  A,  El,  El,  El,  A,  Hy,  Hau,  Hau,
Hau,  Vau,  Yau,  Yau,  Yau.

A Prayer  to  God , to  be  said  in  the  four  Parts  of  the  World
in  the  Circle.

Amorule,  Taneha,  Latisten,  Rabur,  Teneba,  Latisten,  Escha,  Aladia,  Alpha
and  Omega,  Leyste,  Orision,  Adonai;  O most  merciful  heavenly  Father!
have  mercy  upon  me,  although  a sinner;  make  appear  the  arm  of  thy  power
in  me  this  day  against  these  obstinate  spirits,  that  I,  by  thy  will,  may  be
made  a contemplator  of  thy  divine  works,  and  may  be  illustrated  with  all
wisdom,  to  the  honour  and  glory  of  thy  holy  name.  I humbly  beseech  thee,
that  these  spirits  which  I call  by  thy  judgment  may  be  bound  and  constrained
to  come  and  give  true  and  perfect  answers  to  those  things  which  I shall  ask
of  them;  and  that  they  may  do  and  declare  those  things  unto  us,  which  by
me  may  be  commanded  of  them,  not  hurting  any  creature,  neither  injuring
or  terrifying  me  or  my  fellows,  nor  hurting  any  other  creature,  and  affright-
ing no  man ; and  let  them  be  obedient  to  those  things  which  are  required
of  them.

Then,  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  circle,  stretch  out  thy  hand  towards
the  pentacle,  saying,  By  the  pentacle  of  Solomon  I have  called  you;  give
me  a true  answer.

Then  follows  this  Oration.

Beralanensis,  Baldachiensis,  Paumachia,  and  Apologia  Sedes,  by  the  most
mighty  kings  and  powers,  and  the  most  powerful  princes,  genii,  Liachidas,
ministers  of  the  Tartarean  seat,  chief  prince  of  the  seat  of  Apologia,  in  the


224


XEbe  Cabala;  or,

ninth  legion,  I invoke  you,  and  by  invocating,  conjure  you;  and  being  armed
with  power  from  the  supreme  Majesty,  I strongly  command  you,  by  Him  who
spoke  and  it  was  done,  and  to  whom  all  creatures  are  obedient;  and  by  this
ineffable  name,  Tetragrammaton  Jehovah,  which  being  heard  the  elements
are  overthrown,  the  air  is  shaken,  the  sea  runneth  back,  the  fire  is  quenched,
the  earth  trembles,  and  all  the  host  of  the  celestials,  and  terrestials,  and  in-
ternals do  tremble  together,  and  are  troubled  and  confounded:  wherefore,
forthwith  and  without  delay,  do  you  come  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  and
make  rational  answers  unto  all  things  I shall  ask  of  you;  and  come  ye  peace-
ably, visibly  and  affably  now,  without  delay,  manifesting  what  we  desire,
being  conjured  by  the  name  of  the  living  and  true  God,  Helioren,  and  fulfil
our  commands,  and  persist  unto  the  end,  and  according  to  our  intentions,
visibly  and  affably  speaking  unto  us  with  a clear  voice,  intelligible,  and
without  any  ambiguity.

Of  the  Appearance  of  the  Spirits.

These  things  being  duly  performed,  there  will  appear  infinite  visions,  ap-
paritions, phantasms,  Ac.  beating  of  drums,  and  the  sound  of  all  kinds  of
musical  instruments;  which  is  done  by  the  spirits,  that  with  the  terror  they
might  force  some  of  the  companions  out  of  the  circle,  because  they  can  effect
nothing  against  the  exorcist  himself:  after  this  you  shall  see  an  infinite  com-
pany of  archers,  with  a great  multitude  of  horrible  beasts,  which  will  arrange
themselves  as  if  they  would  devour  the  companions;  nevertheless,  fear
nothing.

Then  the  exorcist,  holding  the  pentacle  in  his  hand,  let  him  say,  Avoid
hence  these  iniquities,  by  virtue  of  the  banner  of  God.  Then  will  the
spirits  be  compelled  to  obey  the  exorcist,  and  the  company  shall  see  them
no  more.

Then  let  the  exorcist,  stretching  out  his  hand  with  the  pentacle,  say,
Behold  the  pentacle  of  Solomon , which  I have  brought  into  your  presence;
behold  the  person  of  the  exorcist  in  the  middle  of  the  exorcism,  who  is  armed
by  God,  without  fear,  and  well  provided,  who  potently  invocateth  and  calleth
you  by  exorcising;  come,  therefore,  with  speed,  by  the  virtue  of  these  names;
Aye  Saraye,  Aye  Saraye ; defer  not  to  come,  by  the  eternal  names  of  the
living  and  true  God,  Eloy,  Archima,  Rabur,  and  by  the  pentacle  of  Solomon
here  present,  which  powerfully  reigns  over  you;  and  by  the  virtue  of  the
celestial  spirits,  your  lords;  and  by  the  person  of  the  exorcist,  in  the  middle
of  the  exorcism:  being  conjured,  make  haste  and  come,  and  yield  obedience
to  your  master,  who  is  called  Octinomos.  This  being  performed,  immediately
there  will  be  hissings  in  the  four  parts  of  the  world,  and  then  immediately
you  shall  see  great  motions;  which  when  you  see,  say,  Why  stay  you?


Ceremonial  fTOafltc.


225


Wherefore  do  you  delay?  What  do  you?  Prepare  yourselves  to  be  obedient
to  your  master  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  Bathat  or  Yachat  rushing  upon
Ahrac,  Abeor  coming  upon  Aberer.

Then  they  will  immediately  come  in  their  proper  forms;  and  when  you
see  them  before  the  circle,  shew  them  the  pentacle  covered  with  fine  linen;
uncover  it,  and  say,  Behold  your  confusion  if  you  refuse  to  be  obedient;  and
suddenly  they  will  appear  in  a peaceable  form,  and  will  say,  Ask  what  you
will,  for  we  are  prepared  to  fulfil  all  your  commands,  for  the  Lord  hath
subjected  us  hereunto.

Then  let  the  exorcist  say,  Welcome  spirits,  or  most  noble  princes,  because
I have  called  you  through  Him  to  whom  every  knee  doth  bow,  both  of  things
in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth;  in  whose  hands
are  all  the  kingdoms  of  kings,  neither  is  there  any  able  to  contradict  his
Majesty.  Wherefore,  I bind  you,  that  you  remain  affable  and  visible  before
this  circle,  so  long  and  so  constant;  neither  shall  you  depart  without  my
licence,  until  you  have  truly  and  without  any  fallacy  performed  my  will,  by
virtue  of  his  power  who  hath  set  the  sea  her  bounds,  beyond  which  it  cannot
pass,  nor  go  beyond  the  law  of  his  providence,  viz.  of  the  Most  High  God,
Lord,  and  King,  who  hath  created  all  things.  Amen.

Then  let  the  exorcist  mention  what  he  would  have  done.

After  which  say,  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  go  in  peace  unto  your  places;  peace  be  between  us  and  you;  be
ye  ready  to  come  when  you  are  called.  (For  the  figures  of  the  circle,
pentacles,  and  other  instruments,  see  the  Plate.)

Now,  that  you  may  have  an  idea  of  the  manner  of  composing  the  circle,
we  have  given  the  scheme  of  one  for  the  first  hour  of  the  Lord’s  day,
in  spring.

Here  follow  the  Considerations  and  Conjurations  for  every  Day
in  the  Week ; and  first  of
The  Considerations , &c.  of  Sunday.

(For  the  figure  of  the  seals,  planets,  signs,  names  of  the  angels  of  the  several
days,  and  names  of  the  fdurth  heaven,  with  the  characters  and  magic
book,  see  the  Plate.)

The  angels  of  the  Lord’s  day — Michael,  Dardiel,  Huratapel.

The  angels  of  the  air  ruling  on  the  Lord’s  day,  Varcan,  king; — his  ministers,
Tus,  Andas,  Cynabal.

The  wind  which  the  angels  of  the  air  are  said  to  rule,  is  the  north  wind.

The  angels  of  the  fourth  heaven  ruling  on  the  Lord’s  day,  which  should
be  called  from  the  four  parts  of  the  world,  are,  — east,  Samael,  Baciel,  Abel,
Gabriel,  Vionatraba;  — from  the  west,  Anael,  Babel,  Ustael , Burchat ,


ZTbe  Cabala;  or,


226

Suceratos , Capabili; — from  the  north,  Aiel,  Ariel , vel  Aquiel , Masgdbriel ,
Saphiel , Matuyel , — at  the  south,  Haludiel , Machasiel,  Charsiel,  Uriel
JVaromiel.

The  perfume  of  Sunday  is  Bed  Sanders.

The  Conjuration  for  Sunday.

I conjure  and  confirm  upon  you,  ye  strong  and  holy  angels  of  God,  in  the
name  Adonai,  Eye , Eye,  Eya , which  is  he  who  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come,
Eye , Abray;  and  in  the  name  Saday,  Cados,  Cados,  sitting  on  high  upon  the
cherubim;  and  by  the  great  name  of  God  himself,  strong  and  powerful,  who
is  exalted  above  all  the  heavens;  Eye , Saraye,  who  created  the  world,  the
heavens,  the  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  in  them  is,  in  the  first  day,  and  sealed
them  with  his  holy  name,  Phaa;  and  by  the  name  of  the  angels  who  rule  in
the  fourth  heaven , and  serve  before  the  most  mighty  Salamia , an  angel  great
and  honourable;  and  by  the  name  of  his  star,  which  is  Sol,  and  by  his  sign,
and  by  the  immense  name  of  the  living  God , and  by  all  the  names  aforesaid,
I conjure  thee,  Michael,  O great  angel!  who  art  chief  ruler  of  this  day;  and
by  the  name  Adonai,  the  God  of  Israel,  I conjure  thee,  O Michael!  that  thou
labour  for  me,  and  fulfil  all  my  petitions  according  to  my  will  and  desire  in
my  cause  and  business.

The  spirits  of  the  air  of  the  Lord’s  day  are  under  the  north  wind ; their
nature  is  to  procure  gold,  gems,  carbuncles,  diamonds,  and  rubies,  and  to
cause  one  to  obtain  favour  and  benevolence,  to  dissolve  enmities  amongst
men,  to  raise  to  honours,  and  to  take  away  infirmities.  They  appear , for  the
most  part,  in  a large,  full  and  great  body,  sanguine  and  gross,  in  a gold
colour,  with  the  tincture  of  blood.  Their  motion  is  like  the  lightning  of
heaven;  the  sign  of  their  becoming  visible  is  that  they  move  the  person  to
sweat  that  calls  them;  but  their  particular  forms  are  as  follows;  viz.

A king,  having  a scepter,  riding  on  a lion.

A king  crowned;  a queen  with  a scepter.

A bird;  a lion;  a cock.

A yellow  garment.

A scepter.

Considerations , <fec.  of  Monday.

(For  the  angel  of  Monday,  his  sigil,  planet,  sign  of  the  planet,  and  name  of
the  first  planet,  see  the  Plate.)

The  angels  of  Monday — Gabriel , Michael , Samael.

The  angels  of  the  air  ruling  Monday,  Arcan,  king; — his  ministers,  Bilet,
Missabu,  Abuhaza.  The  wind  which  these  are  subject  to  is  the  west  wind.

The  angels  of  the  first  heaven,  ruling  on  Monday,  to  be  called  from  the
four  parts  of  the  world.  From  the  east,  Gabriel , Madiel , Deamiel,  Janak;


Ceremonial  flUagtc.  227

— from  the  west,  Sachiel , Zaniel,  Habiel,  Bachance , Corobael ; — from  the
north,  Mael , Uvael,  Valnum,  Baliel,  Balay,  Ilumastraw; — from  the  south, —
Curaniel,  Dabriel , Darquiel,  Hanun , Vetuel.

The  perfume  of  Monday — Aloes.

The  Conjuration  of  Monday.

I conjure  and  confirm  upon  you,  ye  strong  and  good  angels,  in  the  name
Adonai,  Adonai,  Adonai,  Adonai,  Eye , Eye , Eye;  Cados,  Cados,  Cados,
Achim,  Achim,  Ja,  Ja,  strong  <Ta,  who  appeared  in  mount  Sinai  with  the
glorification  of  king  Adonai , Sadai,  Zebaoth,  Anathay,  Ya,  Ya,  Ya,  Maranata,
Abim,  Jeia,  who  created  the  sea,  and  all  lakes  and  waters,  in  the  second  day,
which  are  above  the  heavens  and  in  the  earth,  and  sealed  the  sea  in  his  high
name,  and  gave  it  its  bounds  beyond  which  it  cannot  pass;  and  by  the  names
of  the  angels  who  rule  in  the  first  legion , and  who  serve  Orphaniel , a great,
precious,  and  honourable  angel,  and  by  the  name  of  his  star  which  is  Luna,
and  by  all  the  names  aforesaid,  I conjure  thee,  Gabriel , who  art  chief  ruler  of
Monday,  the  second  day,  that  for  me  thou  labour  and  fulfil,  <&c.

The  spirits  of  the  air  of  Monday  are  subject  to  the  west  wind,  which  is  the
wind  of  the  moon;  their  nature  is  to  give  silver  and  to  convey  things  from
place  to  place;  to  make  horses  swift,  and  to  disclose  the  secrets  of  persons
both  present  and  future.

Their  familiar  Forms  are  as  follow: —

They  appear  generally  of  a great  and  full  stature,  soft  and  phlegmatic,  of
colour  like  a black,  obscure  cloud,  having  a swoln  countenance,  with  eyes  red
and  full  of  water,  a bald  head,  and  teeth  like  a wild  boar;  their  motion  is
like  an  exceeding  great  tempest  of  the  sea.  For  their  sign  there  will  appear
an  exceeding  great  rain,  and  their  particular  shapes  are: —

A king,  like  an  archer,  riding  upon  a doe.

A little  boy.

A woman-hunter  with  a bow  and  arrows.

A cow;  a little  doe;  a goose.

A green,  or  silver-coloured  garment.

An  arrow ; a creature  with  many  feet.

Considerations  of  Tuesday.

(For  the  angel  of  Tuesday,  his  sigil,  planet,  sign  governing  the  planet,  and
name  of  the  fifth  heaven  see  the  Plate.)

The  angels  of  the  air  on  Tuesday — Samael.  Satael , Amabiel.

The  angels  of  the  air  ruling  on  Tuesday,  Samax,  king;  his  ministers,  Car-
max , Ismoli,  Pajfran.

The  wind  to  which  the  said  angels  are  subject  is  the  east  wind.


Ube  Cabala;  ort


228

The  angels  of  the  fifth  heaven  ruling  on  Tuesday. — At  the  east,  Friagne ,
Gruel,  Damael , Calzas,  Arragon ; — the  west,  Lama , Astagna , Lobquin ,
Soneas,  Jazel,  Isiael,  Irel;  — the  north,  Rhaumel , Hyniel , JRayel , Seraphiel ,
Fraciel,  Mathiel ; — the  south,  Sacriel,  Janiel , Galdel , Osael,  Yianuel , Zaliel.

The  perfume  of  Tuesday — Pepper.

The  Conjuration  of  Tuesday.

I conjure  and  call  upon  you,  ye  strong  and  good  angels,  in  the  names  Ya,
Ya,  Ya;  He,  He,  He;  Ya,  Hy,  Hy,  Ha,  Ha,  Ha;  Ya,  Va,  Ya;  An,  An,  An;
Aia,  Aia,  Aia;  El,  Ay,  Elibra,  Elohim,  Elohim;  and  by  the  names  of  the
high  God,  who  hath  made  the  sea  and  dry  land,  and  by  his  word  hath  made
the  earth,  and  produced  trees,  and  hath  set  his  seal  upon  the  planets,  with  his
precious,  honoured,  revered  and  holy  name;  and  by  the  name  of  the  angels
governing  in  the  fifth  house,  who  are  subservient  to  the  great  angel  Acimoy,
who  is  strong,  powerful,  and  honoured,  and  by  the  name  of  his  star  which  is
called  Mars , I call  upon  thee,  Samael , by  the  names  above  mentioned,  thou
great  angel!  who  presides  over  the  day  of  Mars , and  by  the  name  Adonai,
the  living  and  true  God,  that  you  assist  me  in  accomplishing  my  labours,
dec.  ( as  in  the  conjuration  of  Sunday.)

The  spirits  of  the  air  on  Tuesday  are  under  the  east  wind ; their  nature  is
to  bring  or  cause  war,  mortality,  death,  combustions,  and  to  give  two-
thousand  soldiers  at  a time;  to  bring  death,  infirmity  or  health.

Familiar  Forms  of  the  Spirits  of  Mars.

They  appear  in  a tall  body  and  choleric,  a filthy  countenance,  of  colour
brown,  swarthy,  or  red,  having  horns  like  harts,  and  griffins  claws,  and  bellow-
ing like  wild  bulls.  Their  motion  is  like  fire  burning:  their  sign  thunder
and  lightning  round  about  the  circle.

Their  particular  shapes  are,  a king  armed,  riding  on  a wolf;  a man  armed.

A woman  with  a buckler  on  her  thigh.

A she-goat;  a horse;  a stag.

A red  garment;  a piece  of  wool;  a cowslip.

Considerations  of  Wednesday.

(For  the  angel  of  Wednesday  his  sigil,  Ac.  Ac.  see  the  Plate.)

The  angels  of  Wednesday — Raphael , Meil,  Seraphiel.

The  angels  of  the  air  ruling  on  Wednesday,  Mediate  king;  Ministers,
Suquinos,  Sallales ; the  said  angels  of  the  air  are  subject  to  the  south-west
wind.

The  angels  of  the  second  heaven,  governing  Wednesday,  that  are  to  be
called,  Ac.  At  the  east — Mathlai , Tarmiel , Raraborat,  — at  the  west,


Ceremonial  fniagtc.


229

Jeruscue , Merattron ; at  the  north,  Thiel,  Rael , Jarihael,  Venahel,  Velel,
Abuiori,  Ucirmiel, — at  the  south,  Milliel,  Nelapa,  Calvel,  vel  Laquel.

The  perfume  of  Wednesday — Mastic.


The  Conjuration  of  Wednesday.

I conjure  and  call  upon  you,  ye  strong  and  holy  angels,  good  and  power-
ful, in  a strong  name  of  fear  and  praise,  Ja,  Adonay,  Elohim,  Saday,  Saday,
Saday;  Eie,  Eie,  Eie;  Asamie,  Asamie;  and  in  the  name  of  Adonay,  the  God
of  Israel,  who  hath  made  the  two  great  lights,  and  distinguish  day  from  night
for  the  benefit  of  his  creatures;  and  by  the  names  of  all  the  discerning  angels,
governing  openly  in  the  second  house  before  the  great  angel,  Tetra,  strong
and  powerful;  and  by  the  name  of  his  star  which  is  Mercury;  and  by  the
name  of  his  seal,  which  is  that  of  a powerful  and  honoured  God;  and  I call
upon  thee,  Raphael,  and  by  the  names  above  mentioned,  thou  great  angel
who  presidest  over  the  fourth  day : and  by  the  holy  name  which  is  written
in  the  front  of  Aaron,  created  the  most  high  priest,  and  by  the  names  of  all
the  angels  who  are  constant  in  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  by  the  name  and
place  of  Ammaluim,  that  you  assist  me  in  my  labours,  <bc.  dec.

The  spirits  of  the  air,  on  Wednesday  are  subject  to  the  south-west  wind;
their  nature  is  to  give  all  sorts  of  metals,  to  reveal  all  earthly  things  past,
present,  and  to  come;  to  pacify  judges,  to  give  victory  in  war,  to  teach
experiments  and  all  sciences  decayed,  and  to  change  bodies  mixt  of  elements,
conditionally,  out  of  one  thing  into  another;  to  give  health  or  infirmities,  to
raise  the  poor  and  cast  down  the  rich,  to  bind  or  loose  spirits,  to  open  locks
or  bolts.

Such  kinds  of  spirits  have  the  operations  of  others,  but  not  in  their  perfect
power,  but  in  virtue  or  knowledge.

Forms  of  the  Spirits  of  Mercury.

The  spirits  of  Mercury  appear  in  a body  of  a middle  stature,  cold,  liquid
and  moist,  fair  and  of  an  affable  speech  in  a human  shape  and  form,  like  a
knight  armed,  of  colour  clear  and  bright.  The  motion  of  them  is  like  silver
coloured  clouds:  for  their  sign  they  cause  horror  and  fear  to  him  that  calls
them.

Their  particular  shapes  are,  a king  riding  upon  a bear.

A fair  youth;  a woman  holding  a distaff.

A dog,  a she-bear,  and  a magpye.

A garment  of  various  changeable  colours.

A rod,  a little  staff.


230


ZEbe  Cabala;  or,

Considerations  of  Thursday.

(For  the  angel  of  Thursday,  his  sigil,  Ac.  see  the  Plate.)

The  angels  of  Thursday — Sachiel , Cassiel,  Asasiel.

The  angels  of  the  air  of  Thursday,  Suth,  king;  Ministers,  Maguth,  Gutrix.

The  angels  of  the  air  are  under  the  south-wind — (But  because  there  are  no
angels  of  the  air  to  be  found  above  the  fifth  heaven,  therefore,  on  Thursday,
say  the  prayers  following  in  the  four  parts  of  the  world:)

At  the  east  — 0 Deus  magne  et  excelse  et  honorate,  per  infinita  secula / O
great  and  most  high  God,  honoured  be  thy  name,  world  without  end.

At  the  west  — O wise,  pure,  and  just  God,  of  divine  clemency,  I beseech
thee,  most  holy  Father,  that  this  day  I may  perfectly  understand  and  accom-
plish my  petition,  work  and  labour;  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  thy  holy
name,  who  livest  and  reignest,  world  without  end.  Amen.

At  the  north — O God,  strong,  mighty,  and  wonderful,  from  everlasting  to
everlasting,  grant  that  this  day  I bring  to  effect  that  which  I desire,
through  our  blessed  Lord.  Amen.

At  the  south — O mighty  and  most  merciful  God,  hear  my  prayers  and
grant  my  petition.

The  perfume  of  Thursday  — Saffron.

The  Conjuration  of  Thursday.

I conjure  and  confirm  upon  you,  ye  strong  and  holy  angels,  by  the  names
Cados,  Cados,  Cados,  Eschereie,  Escherei,  Eschereie,  Hatim,  Ya,  strong
founder  of  the  worlds;  Cantine,  Jaym,  Janie,  Anic,  Calbot,  Sabbac,  Berisay,
Alnaym;  and  by  the  name  Adonai,  who  created  fishes  and  creeping  things  in
the  waters,  and  birds  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  flying  towards  heaven,  in
the  fifth  day;  and  by  the  names  of  the  angels  serving  in  the  sixth  host  before
Pastor,  a holy  angel,  and  a great  and  powerful  prince  and  by  the  name  of  his
star,  which  is  Jupiter,  and  by  the  name  of  his  seal,  and  by  the  name  of
Adonai,  the  great  God,  Creator  of  all  things,  and  by  the  name  of  all  the  stars,
and  by  their  power  and  virtue,  and  by  all  the  names  aforesaid,  I conjure  thee,
Sachiel,  a great  Angel,  who  art  chief  ruler  of  Thursday,  that  for  me  thou
labour,  Ac.

The  spirits  of  the  air  of  Thursday  are  subject  to  the  south  wind;  their
nature  is  to  procure  the  love  of  women,  to  cause  men  to  be  merry  and  joy-
ful, to  pacify  strifes  and  contentions,  to  appease  enemies,  to  heal  the  diseased,
and  to  disease  the  whole,  and  procure  losses,  or  restore  things  lost.

The  familiar  Forms  of  the  Spirits  of  Jupiter.

They  appear  with  a body  sanguine  and  choleric,  of  a middle  stature,  with
a horrible,  fearful  motion,  but  with  a mild  countenance,  and  a gentle  speech,


Ceremonial  fniagic


231

and  of  the  colour  of  iron : the  motion  of  them  is  flashings  of  lightning,  and
thunder.  For  their  sign  there  will  appear  about  the  circle  men  who  shall
seem  to  be  devoured  by  lions.  Their  forms  are : —

A king,  with  a sword  drawn,  riding  on  a stag.

A man,  wearing  a mitre,  with  long  raiment.

A maid,  with  a laurel  crown,  adorned  with  flowers.

A bull;  a stag;  a peacock.

An  azure  garment;  a sword;  a box-tree.

Considerations  of  Friday.

(For  the  seal,  planet,  and  sign  governing  the  planet,  and  name  of  the  third
heaven,  see  the  Plate.)

The  angels  of  Friday — Anael,  Rachiel , Sachiel.

The  angels  of  the  air  ruling  on  Friday,  Sarabotes,  king ; Ministers,  Ama-
hiel , Aba,  Abalidoth,  Blaef.  The  wind  which  the  angels  of  the  air  are
subject  to  is  the  west  wind.

Angels  of  the  third  heaven,  which  are  to  be  called  from  the  four  parts  of
the  world,  are: —

At  the  east,  Setchiel , Chedusitaniel,  Corat,  Tamuel,  Tenaciel; — at  the
west,  Turiel , Coniel,  Babiel,  Kadie,  Maltiel,  Huphaltiel;  — at  the  north,
Peniel , Penael,  Penat,  Raphael,  Ranie,  Doremiel; — at  the  south,  Porosa,
Sachiel,  Chermiel , Samael , Santanael,  Famiel.

The  perfume  of  Friday — Pepperwort.

The  Conjuration  of  Friday.

I conjure  and  confirm  upon  you,  ye  strong  and  holy  angels,  by  the  names
On,  Hey,  Heya,  Ja,  Je,  Saday,  Adonai,  and  in  the  name  Sadai,  who  created
four-footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things,  and  man,  in  the  sixth  day,  and  gave
to  Adam  power  over  all  creatures;  wherefore  blessed  be  the  name  of  the
Creator  in  his  place;  and  by  the  name  of  the  angels  serving  in  the  third
host,  before  Dagiel,  a great  angel,  and  a strong  and  powerful  prince,  and  by
the  name  of  his  star,  which  is  Venus,  and  by  his  seal  which  is  holy;  and  by
all  the  names  aforesaid,  I conjure  upon  thee,  Anael,  who  art  the  chief  ruler
this  day,  that  thou  labour  for  me,  &c.

The  spirits  of  the  air  on  Friday  are  subject  to  the  west  wind:  their  nature
is  to  give  silver,  to  incite  men,  and  incline  them  to  luxury,  to  cause
marriages,  to  allure  men  to  love  women,  to  cause  or  take  away  infirmities,
and  to  do  all  things  which  have  motion.

Their  familiar  Shapes.

They  appear  with  a fair  body,  of  middle  stature,  with  an  amiable  and
pleasant  countenance,  of  colour  white  or  green,  their  upper  parts  golden;


TTbe  Cabala;  or,


232

the  motion  of  them  is  like  a clear  star.  For  their  sign  there  will  appear
naked  virgins  round  the  circle,  which  will  strive  to  allure  the  invocator  to
dalliance  with  them:  but

Their  'particular  Shapes  are: —

A king,  with  a scepter,  riding  on  a camel.

A naked  girl;  a she-goat.

A camel;  a dove.

A white  or  green  garment.

Flowers;  the  herb  savine.

The  Considerations  of  Saturday.

(For  seal,  dbc.  &c.  see  the  Plate.)

The  angels  of  Saturday — Cassiel,  Machatan,  Uriel.

The  angels  of  the  air  ruling  this  day,  Maymon , king;  Ministers,  Abuma-
lith,  Assaibi , Balidet.  The  wind  they  are  subject  to,  the  south  wind.

The  fumigation  of  Saturday  is  sulphur.

There  are  no  angels  ruling  in  the  air  on  Saturday  above  the  fifth  heaven,
therefore  in  the  four  corners  of  the  world,  in  the  circle,  use  those  orations
which  are  applied  to  Thursday.

The  Conjuration  of  Saturday.

I conjure  and  confirm  upon  you,  Caphriel,  or  Cassiel,  Machator,  and
Seraquiel,  strong  and  powerful  angels;  and  by  the  name  Adonai,  Adonai,
Adonai;  Eie,  Eie,  Eie;  Acim,  Acim,  Acim;  Cados,  Cados;  Ima,  Ima,  Ima;
Salay,  Ja,  Sar,  Lord  and  Maker  of  the  world,  who  rested  on  the  seventh  day;
and  by  him  who  of  his  good  pleasure  gave  the  same  to  be  observed  by  the
children  of  Israel  throughout  their  generations,  that  they  should  keep  and
sanctify  the  same,  to  have  thereby  a good  reward  in  the  world  to  come;  and
by  the  names  of  the  angels  serving  in  the  seventh  host,  before  Booel,  a great
angel,  and  powerful  prince;  and  by  the  name  of  his  star,  which  is  Saturn;
and  by  his  holy  seal,  and  by  the  names  before  spoken,  I conjure  upon  thee,
Caphriel,  who  art  chief  ruler  of  the  seventh  day,  which  is  the  Sabbath,  that
for  me  thou  labour,  &c.  <&c.

The  spirits  of  the  air  on  Saturday  are  subject  to  the  south-west  wind:  the
nature  of  them  is  to  sow  discords,  hatred,  evil  thoughts  and  cogitations,  to
give  leave  to  kill  and  murder,  and  to  lame  or  maim  every  member.

Their  familiar  Shapes.

They  generally  appear  with  a tall,  lean,  slender  body,  with  an  angry  coun-
tenance, having  four  faces,  one  on  the  back  of  the  head,  one  in  the  front,  and
one  on  each  side,  nosed  or  beaked,  likewise  there  appears  a face  on  each  knee


Ceremonial  finagle.  233

of  a black  shining  colour;  their  motion  is  the  moving  of  the  wind,  with  a
kind  of  earthquake;  their  sign  is  white  earth,  whiter  than  snow.

Their  particular  Shapes  are : —

*A  king,  bearded,  riding  on  a dragon.

An  old  man  with  a beard.

An  old  woman  leaning  on  a crutch.

A hog;  a dragon;  an  owl.

A black  garment;  a hook  or  sickle.

A juniper  tree.

Those  are  the  figures  that  these  spirits  usually  assume,  which  are  generally
terrible  at  the  first  coming  on  of  the  visions,  but  as  they  have  only  a limited
power,  beyond  which  they  cannot  pass,  so  the  invocator  need  be  under  no
apprehensions  of  danger,  provided  he  is  well  fortified  with  those  things  we
have  directed  to  be  used  for  his  defence,  and  above  all,  to  have  a firm  and
constant  faith  in  the  mercy,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  God.


“Those  spirits  who  appear  in  a kingly  form,  have  a much  higher  dignity  than  them  who  take  an
inferior  shape;  and  those  who  appear  in  a human  shape,  exceed  in  authority  and  power  them  that
come  as  animals;  and  again,  these  latter  surpass  in  dignity  them  who  appear  as  trees  or  instruments,
and  the  like : so  that  you  are  to  judge  of  the  power,  government,  and  authority  of  spirits  by  their
assuming  a more  noble  and  dignified  apparition.


END  OF  CEREMONIAL  MAGIC.


Gritbemius's  Boob  of  Secrets.


The  Translator' s Letter  to  a Friend  of  his , a young  Student  in  these
occult  Sciences.

My  Fkiend,

m NOWING  thee  to  be  a curious  searcher  after  those  sciences  which  are
out  of  the  common  track  of  study,  (I  mean  the  art  of  foretelling
events,  magic,  telismans,  &c.)  I am  moved  spiritually  to  give  thee  my
thoughts  upon  them,  and  by  these  ideas  here  written,  to  open  to  thine  eye
(spiritual)  as  much  information  as  it  seems  necessary  for  thee  to  know,  by
which  thou  mayest  be  led  by  the  hand  into  the  delectable  field  of  nature;  and
to  give  thee  such  documents  as,  guided  by  the  supreme  wisdom  of  the  Highest,
thou  mayest  refresh  thy  soul  with  a delicious  draught  of  knowledge;  so  that
after  recreating  thy  spirit  with  the  use  of  those  good  gifts  which  may  please
God  to  bestow  on  thee,  thou  mayest  be  wrapped  up  into  the  contemplation  of
the  immense  wisdom  of  that  great  munificent  Being  who  created  thee.

Now,  art  thou  a man,  in  whose  soul  the  image  of  Divinity  is  sealed  for
eternity,  think  first  what  is  thy  desire  in  the  searching  after  these  mysteries!
Is  it  wealth,  honour,  fame,  power,  might,  aggrandizement,  and  the  like?
Perhaps  thy  heart  says,  All!  all  these  I would  gladly  crave!  If  so,  this  is
my  answer, — seek  first  to  know  thyself  thoroughly,  cleanse  thy  heart  from  all
wicked,  vain,  and  rapacious  desires.  Thinkest  thou,  oh  man ! to  attain  power
to  gratify  thy  lusts , to  enrich  thy  coffers , to  build  houses,  to  raise  thyself  to
the  pinnacle  of  human  admiration;  if  these  are  thy  hopes  and  desires,  thou
hast  reason  to  lament  thy  being  born : all  such  desires  are  immediately  from
the  devil,  I mean  that  Being  whose  engines  ( i . e.  myriads  of  demons)  are
continually  in  the  act  of  placing  sensual  delights  and  luxuries  before  the
depraved  minds  and  hearts  of  man,  and  whose  chief  business  and  property  it
is  to  counteract  the  benevolent  actions  and  inspirations  of  those  blessed  spirits
who  are  the  instruments  of  God  our  Creator.

Fear  God  and  love  thy  neighbour;  use  no  deceit,  swear  not,  neither  lye;
let  all  thy  actions  be  sincere.  Here,  O man ! is  the  grand  seal  of  all  earthly
wisdom,  the  true  talisman  of  human  happiness.  When  thou  shalt  accomplish
this,  behold  nothing  will  be  impassible  unto  thee  as  far  as  God  permits;  then


ZTritbemlug’s


236

with  all  speed  apply  thy  mind  and  heart  to  attain  knowledge  and  wisdom;
with  all  humility  throw  thy  dependence  on  God  alone,  the  author  of  all
things  that  cannot  die.

To  know  thyself  is  to  know  God,  for  it  is  a spiritual  gift  from  God  that
enables  a man  to  know  himself.  This  gift  but  very  few  possess,  as  may  be
daily  seen.  How  many  are  there  tossed  about  to  and  fro’  upon  the  perilous
sea  of  contending  passions,  and  who  are  more  light  than  feathers!  how  many
in  this  great  city  who  place  their  chieftest  good  in  debauchery  and  letchery!
See  their  actions , manners  and  dispositions;  these  poor,  unfortunate,  miser-
able wretches,  such  is  their  fatal  magical  infatuation  and  ignorance,  that  they
think  those  mad  who  might  even  attempt  to  reason  with  them  on  the  vanity
and  misery  of  their  situation.  To  make  myself  more  intelligible,  these  are
what  the  world  calls  men  of  fashion,  a phrase  insignificant  enough  when  we
consider  that  the  universal  fashion  of  this  time  is  vice,  and  that  so  glaring,
that  it  needs  no  great  intellect  to  discover  what  is  daily  open  to  the  view  of
the  observer.  But  to  you,  my  friend,  I have  addressed  these  lines;  therefore
let  it  not  be  supposed  that  I am  reprehending  my  friend  for  vices  which  I
cannot  suppose  him  attached  to:  for  I know  thou  art  a young  man  designed
for  the  receiving  of  instruction,  in  much  higher  and  more  glorious  contempla-
tions than  those  sons  of  earth  are  capable  of,  therefore  I have  presented  thee
with  this  translation  which  thou  didst  desire  me  to  give  thee.

But  beware  of  flattery,  self-love  and  covetousness,  so  wilt  thou  thrive;  and
be  diligent  in  thy  occupation,  so  shall  thy  body  be  fed.  Idleness  is  offensive
to  the  Deity,  industry  shall  sweeten  thy  brown  bread,  and  the  fruits  of  it  shall
warm  thine  heart,  and  inspire  thy  soul  with  gratitude  to  him  that  blesses  thee
with  enough:  seek  for  no  more,  for  it  will  damm  thee;  pray  for  enough  to
feed  and  clothe  thy  body,  but  ask  no  more,  lest  thou  pine  away  in  heart-
rending poverty,  and  spend  the  remainder  of  thy  days  in  contumely  and
beggary.  For  know  a thing  most  necessary  for  thee  to  know,  that  if  by  thy
study,  by  thy  art,  or  any  other  thing,  thou  couldst  command  a million  of
spirits , it  should  not  be  lawful  for  thee  to  wish  to  gain  riches  suddenly,  for
the  Wisdom  Eternal  has  put  forth  the  fiat;  and  it  has  been  said  by  him  who
never  spoke  in  vain,  and  who  cannot  lye,  that  man  shall  get  bread  by  the
sweat  of  his  brow;  therefore  let  us  not  have  in  view  the  enriching  of  ourselves
in  worldly  goods,  by  supernatural  means,  or  by  a greedy  desiring  of  what  we
ought  to  look  upon  with  eyes  of  contempt,  draw  upon  us  the  wrath  of  God.
Rather  let  us  cheerfully  rely  on,  and  follow  in  very  deed,  spirit  and  truth,
these  words  of  the  apostle,  “Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  all  these
things  shall  be  added  unto  you;”  fear  not  but  that  God  shall  make  thy  house-
hold as  a flourishing  tree,  and  thy  wife  shall  be  as  a fruitful  vine.  Farewell,
remember  my  poor  counsel,  and  be  happy.  From  thy  true  friend,  F.  B.


Booh  of  Secrets.


237


JV.  B.  To  enable  thee  the  better  to  comprehend  this  Book,  I have  drawn
out  the  various  figures,  of  which  mention  is  made  in  this  work,  that  thou
mayest  see  the  very  exact  method  of  working;  likewise  the  images  of  seals,
spirits,  and  various  other  rare,  and  curious  instruments,  which  are  necessary
for  thee  to  know  and  see  with  the  eye;  therefore  in  the  construction  of  them
thou  canst  not  be  liable  to  error.

Fig.  1.  The  form  of  the  crystal  for  invocating  spirits,  with  the  plate  of  pure
gold  in  which  the  crystal  must  be  fastened,  with  the  divine  characters
around.

Fig.  2.  A magical  circle  (CDEF),  of  a simple  construction,  for  the
operator  to  stand  or  sit  in  when  he  calleth  the  spirits.

Fig.  3.  The  crystal  (A),  two  silver  or  other  candlesticks  (6G,)  with  the
wax  tapers  burning,  and  tripod  or  vessel  for  the  oderiferous  suffumi-
gation.

Fig.  4.  A wand  of  black  ebony  with  golden  characters.  The  characters  are
explained.

A Caution  to  the  inexperienced  in  this  Art , and  a Word  of  Advice  to
those  who  would  be  Adepts.

Brother,

It  is  necessary  for  me  to  inform  thee,  that  whatever  thy  desires  are  in  the
pursuit  of  this  art,  which  we  call  Magic,  so  wilt  thy  connexion  and  answer
be.  If  in  the  pursuit  of  revenge,  it  is  but  proper  thou  shouldest  know  that
thou  wilt,  in  any  of  these  experiments  here  laid  down,  draw  to  thyself  a
revengeful  demon,  or  an  infernal  furious  spirit,  serving  in  the  principle  of
the  wrath  of  God;  if  worldly  riches  and  aggrandizement,  then  shalt  thou  have
an  earthiel  or  fiery  spirit,  which  will  delude  thee  with  the  riches  of  the
central  world;  if  fame,  or  the  blaze  of  glory,  then  the  spirits  of  pride  will  be
allotted  thee,  who  will  gratify  thy  inordinate  desire  of  vain  glory;  for  all
these  ofiices  are  there  spirits  allotted  and  will  be  eager  to  mix  with  thy
spirit:  it  will  attract  thee  to  his  own  nature,  and  serve  all  thy  purposes
according  to  the  extent  of  God’s  permission;  and  as  thy  desires  are  and  from
what  principle  they  proceed,  so  shalt  thou  be  answered : but  if  thou  desirest
to  know  nothing  but  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  God,  and  the  help  of  thy
neighbour,  and,  in  great  humility,  fill  thy  heart  with  the  love  of  God,  thou
shalt  then  have  a pure  spirit  which  will  grant  (by  the  Lord’s  permission)  thy
desires.  Therefore  seek  for  that  which  is  good;  avoid  all  evil  either  in
thought,  word,  or  action;  pray  to  God  to  fill  thee  with  wisdom,  and  then  thou
shalt  reap  an  abundant  harvest.  There  are  two  ways  magically  set  before
thee;  chuse  which  thou  wilt,  thou  shalt  be  sure  of  thy  reward.  Farewel.

London.  1800.  F.  B.


£ tya,/^mJU6  otAmW
m/ri/AicA,  tib  ofiera
must stand cT^sctj
nfAsnAe.  us-&


<7L  fate-  S-^r/nt  tr£

/rr/AccA,  /nui*t  Ik, /hM  in  6c


JBooft  of  Secrets,


239


Of  the  making  of  the  Crystal  and  the  Form  of  Preparation
for  a Vision.


Procure  of  a lapidary  good  clear  pellucid  crystal,  of  the  bigness  of  a
small  orange,  i.  e.  about  one  inch  and  a half  in  diameter;  let  it  be  globular
or  round  each  way  alike;  then,  when  you  have  got  this  crystal,  fair  and  clear,
without  any  clouds  or  specks,  get  a small  plate  of  pure  gold  to  encompass
the  crystal  round  one  half ; let  this  be  fitted  on  an  ivory  or  ebony  pedestal,  as
you  may  see  more  fully  described  in  the  drawing,  (see  the  Plate,  Fig.  1.)  Let
there  be  engraved  a circle  (A)  round  the  crystal  with  these  characters


the  name  “ Tetragrammaton .”  On  the  other  side  of  the  plate  let  there  be
engraven  “ Michael , Gabriel , Uriel , Raphael ;”  which  are  the  four  principle
angels  ruling  over  the  Sun,  Moon , Venus  and  Mercury ; but  on  the  table  on
which  the  crystal  stands  the  following  names,  characters,  &c.  must  be  drawn
in  order.

First,  The  names  of  the  seven  planets  and  angels  ruling  them,  with  their
seals  or  characters.  The  names  of  the  four  kings  of  the  four  corners  of  the
earth.  Let  them  be  all  written  within  a double  circle,  with  a triangle  on  a
table;  on  which  place  the  crystal  on  its  pedestal:  this  being  done  thy  table
is  complete  (as  in  the  Fig.  D.)  and  fit  for  the  calling  of  the  spirits;  after
which  thou  shalt  proceed  to  experiment,  thus:

In  what  time  thou  wouldest  deal  with  the  spirits  by  the  table  and  crystal ,
thou  must  observe  the  planetary  hour;  and  whatever  planet  rules  in  that
hour,  the  angel  governing  the  planet  thou  shalt  call  in  the  manner  following;
but  first,  say  this  short  prayer :

“Oh,  God!  who  art  the  author  of  all  good  things,  strengthen,  I beseech
thee,  thy  poor  servant,  that  he  may  stand  fast,  without  fear,  through  this
dealing  and  work;  enlighten,  I beseech  thee,  oh  Lord!  the  dark  understand-
ing of  thy  creature,  so  that  his  spiritual  eye  may  be  opened  to  see  and  know
thy  angelic  spirits  descending  here  in  this  crystal:  ( Then  lay  thy  hand  on
the  crystal  saying,)  and  thou,  oh  inanimate  creature  of  God,  be  sanctified  and
consecrated,  and  blessed  o this  purpose,  that  no  evil  phantasy  may  appear  in
thee;  or,  if  they  do  gain  ingress  into  this  creature,  they  maybe  constrained
to  speak  intelligibly,  and  truly,  and  without  the  least  ambiguity,  for  Christ’s
sake.  Amen.  And  forasmuch  as  thy  servant  here  standing  before  thee,  oh,
Lord!  desires  neither  evil  treasures,  nor  injury  to  his  neighbour,  nor  hurt  to
any  living  creature,  grant  him  the  power  of  descrying  those  celestial  spirits
or  intelligences,  that  may  appear  in  this  crystal,  and  whatever  good  gifts,
whether  the  power  of  healing  infirmities,  or  of  imbibing  wisdom,  or  discover-


; afterwards


240


Uritbemtus’s


ing  any  evil  likely  to  afflict  any  person  or  family,  or  any  other  good  gift
thou  mayest  be  pleased  to  bestow  on  me,  enable  me,  by  thy  wisdom  and
mercy,  to  use  whatever  I may  receive  to  the  honour  of  thy  holy  name.
Grant  this  for  thy  son  Christ’s  sake.  Amen."

Then  taking  your  ring  and  pentacle,  put  the  ring  on  the  little  finger  of
your  right  hand;  hang  the  pentacle  round  thy  neck;  (Note,  the  pentacle
may  be  either  wrote  on  clean  virgin  parchment,  or  engraven  on  a square
plate  of  silver  and  suspended  from  thy  neck  to  the  breast),  then  take  your
black  ebony  wand,  with  the  gilt  characters  on  it  and  trace  the  circle,  (Fig.  7,
CDEF,)  saying,  “In  the  name  of  the  blessed  Trinity,  I consecrate  this
piece  of  ground  for  our  defence;  so  that  no  evil  spirit  may  have  power  to
break  these  bounds  prescribed  here,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen."

Then  place  the  vessel  for  the  perfumes  between  thy  circle  and  the  holy
table  on  which  the  crystal  stands,  and,  having  fire  therein,  cast  in  thy
perfumes,  saying: —

“I  conjure  thee,  oh  thou  creature  of  fire!  by  him  who  created  all  things
both  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  in  the  sea,  and  in  every  other  place  whatever,
that  forthwith  thou  cast  away  every  phantasm  from  thee,  that  no  hurt  what-
soever shall  be  done  in  any  thing.  Bless,  oh  Lord,  this  creature  of  fire,  and
sanctify  it  that  it  may  be  blessed,  and  that  they  may  fill  up  the  power  and
virtue  of  their  odours;  so  neither  the  enemy,  nor  any  false  imagination,  may
enter  into  them;  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Amen."

Now,  this  being  done  in  the  order  prescribed,  take  out  thy  little  book,
which  must  be  made  about  seven  inches  long,  of  pure  white  virgin  vellum  or
paper,  likewise  pen  and  ink  must  be  ready  to  write  down  the  name,  character ,
and  office,  likewise  the  seal  or  image  of  whatever  spirit  may  appear  (for  this
1 must  tell  you  that  it  does  not  happen  that  the  same  spirit  you  call  will
always  appear,  for  you  must  try  the  spirit  to  know  whether  he  be  a pure  or
impure  being,  and  this  thou  shalt  easily  know  by  a firm  and  undoubted  faith
in  God.)

Now  the  most  pure  and  simple  way  of  calling  the  spirits  or  spirit  is  by  a
short  oration  to  the  spirit  himself,  which  is  more  effectual  and  easy  to
perform  than  composing  a table  of  letters;  for  all  celestial  operations,  the
more  pure  and  unmixed  they  are,  the  more  they  are  agreable  to  the  celestial
spirits:  therefore,  after  the  circle  is  drawn,  the  book,  perfumes,  rod,  <&c.  in
readiness,  proceed  as  follows :

(After  noticing  the  exact  hour  of  the  day,  and  what  angel  rules  that
hour,  thou  shalt  say,)

“In  the  name  of  the  blessed  and  holy  Trinity,  I do  desire  thee,  thou  strong
and  mighty  angel*,  Michael,  that  if  it  be  the  divine  will  of  him  who  is  called

* Or  any  other  angel  or  spirit.


Booft  of  Secrets.


241


Tetragrammaton,  &c.  the  Holy  God,  the  Father,  that  thou  take  upon  thee
some  shape  as  best  becometh  thy  celestial  nature,  and  appear  to  us  visibly
here  in  this  crystal,  and  answer  our  demands  in  as  far  as  we  shall  not  trans-
gress the  bounds  of  the  divine  mercy  and  goodness,  by  requesting  unlawful
knowledge;  but  that  thou  wilt  graciously  shew  us  what  things  are  most
profitable  for  us  to  know  and  do,  to  the  glory  and  honour  of  his  divine
Majesty,  who  liveth  and  reigneth,  world  without  end.  Amen.

“Lord,  thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven; — make  clean  our
hearts  within  us,  and  take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit  from  us.

“O  Lord,  by  thy  name,  we  have  called  him,  suffer  him  to  administer  unto
us.  And  that  all  things  may  work  together  for  thy  honour  and  glory,  to
whom  with  thee,  the  Son,  and  blessed  Spirit,  be  ascribed  all  might,  majesty
and  dominion.  Amen .”

Note , In  these  dealings,  two  should  always  be  present;  for  often  a spirit  is
manifest  to  one  in  the  crystal  when  the  other  can  not  perceive  him;  therefore
if  any  spirit  appear,  as  they  most  likely  will,  to  one  or  both,  say :

“ Oh,  Lord ! we  return  thee  our  hearty  and  sincere  thanks  for  the  hearing
of  our  prayer,  and  we  thank  thee  for  having  permitted  thy  spirit  to  appear
unto  us  which  we,  by  thy  mercy,  will  interrogate  to  our  further  instruction,
through  Christ.  Amen”

Interrog.  1.  In  the  name  of  the  holy  and  undefiled  Spirit,  the  Father,  the
begotten  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  proceeding  from  both,  what  is  thy  true  name?

If  the  spirit  answers,  Michael , then  proceed.

Quest.  2.  What  is  thy  office?  3.  What  is  thy  true  sign  or  character?
4.  When  are  the  times  most  agreeable  to  thy  nature  to  hold  conference
with  us?

Wilt  thou  swear  by  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
that  thou  art  truly  Michael?

(Here  let  him  swear,  then  write  down  his  seal  or  character  in  thy  book,
and  against  it,  his  office  and  times  to  be  called,  through  God’s  name;  also
write  down  any  thing  he  may  teach  thee,  or  any  responses  he  may  make  to
thy  questions  or  interrogations,  concerning  life  or  death,  arts  or  sciences,  or
any  other  thing;)  and  then  shalt  thou  say:

“Thou  great  and  mighty  spirit,  inasmuch  as  thou  earnest  in  peace  and  in
the  name  of  the  ever  blessed  and  righteous  Trinity,  so  in  this  name  thou
mayest  depart,  and  return  to  us  when  we  call  thee  in  his  name  to  whom  every
knee  doth  bow  down.  Fare  thee  well,  Michael;  peace  be  between  us,  through
our  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Amen”

Then  will  the  spirit  depart;  then  say,  “To  God  the  Father,  eternal  Spirit,
fountain  of  Light,  the  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  world
without  end.  Amen.”


242


TErttbemtug’s


I shall  here  set  down  the  Table  of  the  names  of  Spirits  and  Planets  govern-
ing the  hours;  so  thou  shalt  easily  know  by  inspection,  what  Spirit  and
Planet  governs  every  Hour  of  the  Day  and  Night  in  the  Week.


Hours

Day.

Angels  and
Planets

Sunday.

Monday.

Angels  and
Planets
ruling
Tuesday.

Angels  and
Planets
ruling
Wednesday

Angels  and
Planets
ruling
Thursday.

Angels  and
Planets

Friday.

ruling

Saturday.

1

2

5

6

7

8
9

10

12

Day.

0 Michael
? Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
1 1 Cassiel
7£  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Cassiel

Day.

3 Gabriel
h Cassiel
7/  Saehiel
& Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
\l  Cassiel
7f  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael

Day.
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Vi  Cassiel
% Saehiel
5 Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel

Day.

9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Yl  Cassiel
% Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Yl  Cassiel
% Sachael
d Samael

Day.

7f  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Yi  Cassiel
7/  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael

Day.

9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
1 1 Cassiel
If  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Yi  Cassiel
7/  Saehiel

Day.

Yi  Cassiel
7f  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
12  Cassiel
% Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael

Hours

Night.

1

2

5

7

8
9

10

11

12

Night.

7/  Sachael
d Samiel
0 Michael
9 Anael
0 Raphael
3 Gabriel
h Cassiel
% Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael

Night.

9 Anael
0 Raphael
3 Gabriel
h,  Cassiel
If  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
\l  Cassiel
7f  Saehiel

Night.

Yl  Cassiel
11  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Yl  Cassiel
7f  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael

Night.

© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Yi  Cassiel
% Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Yl  Cassiel

Night.

3 Gabriel
Yi  Cassiel
If  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Yi  Cassiel
7/  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael

Night,
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Yi  Cassiel
7/  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel

Night.

9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Yl  Cassiel
If  Saehiel
d Samael
© Michael
9 Anael
9 Raphael
3 Gabriel
Yl  Cassiel
7/  Saehiel
d Samael

Note,  The  day  is  divided  into  twelve  equal  parts,  called  Planetary  Hours,
reckoning  from  sun-rise  to  sun-set,  and,  again,  from  the  setting  to  the
rising;  and  to  find  the  planetary  hour,  you  need  but  to  divide  the  natural
hours  by  twelve,  and  the  quotient  gives  the  length  of  the  planetary  hours  and
odd  minuets,  which  shews  you  how  long  a spirit  bears  rule  in  that  day;  as
Michael  governs  the  first  and  the  eighth  hour  on  Sunday,  as  does  the  ©.
After  you  have  the  length  of  the  first  hour,  you  have  only  to  look  in  the
Table,  as  if  it  be  the  fourth  hour,  on  Sunday,  you  see  in  the  Table  that  the  D
and  Gabriel  rules:  and  so  for  the  rest  it  being  so  plain  and  easy  you  cannot  err.


THE  CONCLUSION  OP  THE  MAGUS.


©be  Blpba  anb  ©mega.


If  thou  would'st  attain  to  perfection,  Oh!  disciple,  seek  not  to  harm  another;  seek
not  for  wealth  and  prosperity  in  those  things  about  you,  but  look  for  that  light  within
which  shineth  for  all  but  seen  by  few.


Btogvapbta  Hnttqua


ZOROASTER,  THE  SON  OF  OROMASIUS,

FIRST  INSTITUTOR  OF  PHILOSOPHY  BY  FIRE,  AND  MAGIC.

Zoroaster,  the  son  of  Oromasius,  flourished  in  the  reign  of  Darius,  the
successor  of  Cambyses.  * All  authors  are  full  of  variations  in  their  accounts
of  this  famous  person,  some  making  him  of  a much  later  date  than  others;
however,  we  shall  give  what  we  have  collected  from  those  who  appear  most
authentic,  not  omitting  the  traditional  history  extant  amongst  the  Magi,  with
which  our  readers  may  compare  the  several  stories  of  biographers,  and  accept
that  account  which  shall  seem  to  them  the  most  rational.  Zoraster,  king  of
the  Bactrians,  was  vanquished  by  Ninus,  and  passed  for  the  inventor  of
magic  t-  Eusebius  places  this  victory  of  Ninus  in  the  seventh  year  of

*The  Author  regrets,  that,  notwithstanding  his  laborious  researches  to  obtain  an  authentic  and
satisfactory  account  of  Zoroaster  to  present  to  his  readers ; that  a few  generals,  and  not  particulars,
can  only  be  given:  indeed,  the  most  serious  and  respectable  historians  differ  so  widely  in  their
accounts  of  him  that  nothing  certain  can  from  thence  be  deduced:  however,  we  have  above  recited
several  authorities  to  which  we  have  annexed  various  notes  and  commentations.

t Passed  for  the  inventor  of  magic. — It  is  to  be  noted  that  he  was  the  inventor  of  it,  and  the  first  of
the  magi.  Justin  informs  us  that  this  victory  was  the  last  of  Ninus ; that  Zoroaster  philosophized
most  judiciously  upon  the  nature  and  influences  of  the  stars,  and  on  the  principles  of  the  universe.
Thomas  Stanleius,  Hist,  of  Philos.  Orientalis,  lib.  1.  cap.  iii.  informs  us  that  Zoroaster,  according  to
Eusebius,  was  cotemporary  with  Semiramis;  but  it  is  certain,  according  to  Eusebius,  that  he  was
vanquished  by  king  Ninus.  Arnobius,  lib.  1.  pa.  m.  5.  says,  “Anciently  the  Assyrians  and  Bactrians,
“the  former  under  the  conduct  of  Ninus,  and  the  latter  under  Zoroaster,  fought  against  each
“other,  not  only  with  men  and  weapons,  but  also  by  the  help  of  magic,  and  the  secret  discipline  of
“the  Chaldeans.”  Hermippus,  who  has  wrote  cautiously  on  everything  relative  to  magic,  and
explained  twenty  thousand  verses  composed  by  Zoroaster,  relates,  that  one  Azonaces  initiated  him
into  this  art,  and  that  he  lived  5,000  years  before  the  Trojan  war.  St.  Augustin  and  Orosius  have
followed  the  tradition  mentioned  by  Justin.  Apuleius,  in  his  Catalogue  of  all  the  most  famous
Magicians  of  Antiquity,  with  great  justice  places  Zoroaster  in  the  first  rank,  and  proves  him  the  most
ancient  of  all:  “ Magicarum  artiumfuisse  per  hibeter  inventor  Zoroastres.”  Augustin.de  Civitat.Dei,
lib.  21,  cap.  xiv.  Eudoxus,  who  esteemed  the  art  of  magic  to  be  accounted  the  noblest  and  most  use-
ful of  all  wordly  knowledge,  relates  that  Zoroaster  lived  six  thousand  years  before  the  death  of  Plato.
Note,  that  the  same  thing  is  affirmed  by  Aristotle.  Agathias,  who  lived  in  the  reign  of  Justinian,
informs  us,  that,  according  to  the  Persians  of  that  time,  Zoroaster  and  Hystaspes  were  cotemporary;
but  they  do  not  say  whether  this  Hystaspes  was  father  to  Darius  or  any  other.  Sir  John  Marsham
positively  decides  that  he  was  the  father  of  Darius;  and  grounds  his  opinion  on  this,  that  one  of  the
elogies engraven  on  the  tomb  makes  him  the  instructor  of  the  Magi;  and  that  the  same  historian
who  makes  Hystaspes  excel  in  magic,  calls  him  the  father  of  Darius.  Ammianus  Marcellinus,  lib.  23,
pag.  m.  324.  says,  “After  the  time  of  Zoroaster,  reigned  Hystaspes,  a very  prudent  king,  and  the


246


ffitograpbta  Bntiqua,


Abraham;  now  several  authors  make  Zoroaster  appear  much  earlier.  It  has
been  reported  that  Zoroaster  laughed  on  the  same  day  he  was  born,  and  that
he  was  the  only  one  to  whom  this  happened,  and  that  the  palpitation  of  his
brain  was  so  strong  as  to  repulse  the  hand,  it  being  laid  to  his  head,  which
they  say  was  a presage  of  his  future  knowledge  and  wisdom.  It  is  added,  that
he  passed  twenty  years  in  the  deserts,  and  there  ate  nothing  but  a sort  of
cheese  which  was  never  the  worse  for  age;  that  the  love  of  wisdom  and
justice  obliged  him  to  retire  from  the  world  to  a mountain,  where  he  lived  in
solitude;  but  when  he  came  down  from  thence  there  fell  a celestial  fire  upon
it,  which  perpetually  burned;  that  the  king  of  Persia,  accompanied  with  the
greatest  lords  of  his  court,  approached  it  for  the  purpose  of  putting  up
prayers  to  God;  that  Zoroaster  came  out  from  these  flames  unhurt;  that  he  com-
forted and  encouraged  the  Persians,  and  offered  sacrifices  for  them  to  God;
that,  afterwards,  he  did  not  live  indifferently  with  all  sorts  of  men,  but  only
those  who  were  born  for  truth,  and  who  were  capable  of  the  true  knowledge
of  God,  which  kind  of  people  are  called  among  the  Persians,  Magi;  that  he
desired  his  end  might  be  this,  viz.  to  be  struck  with  thunder,  and  consumed
by  celestial  fire;  and  that  he  requested  the  Persians  to  collect  his  ashes,  after
he  was  consumed  in  this  manner,  and  to  preserve  and  venerate  them  as  a
pledge  of  the  preservation  of  their  monarchy;  that  they  for  a length  of  time
paid  great  veneration  to  the  relics  of  Zoroaster,  but  at  length,  neglecting

“ father  of  Darius.  This  prince,  having  boldly  penetrated  into  the  remotest  parts  of  the  Upper  India,
“came  at  length  to  a solitary  forest,  where  there  dwelt,  in  awful  and  silent  tranquilty,  the  Brachmans.
“In  this  peaceful  solitude  they  instructed  him  in  the  knowledge  of  the  earth’s  motion,  likewise  of  the
“stars;  and  from  them  he  learned  the  pure  and  sacred  rites  of  religion.  Part  of  this  knowledge  he
“communicated  to  the  Magi,  which,  together  with  the  art  of  predicting  future  events,  they  delivered
“down  to  posterity,  each  in  his  own  family.  The  great  number  of  men  who  have  descended  from
“these  families,  ever  since  that  age  down  to  the  present,  have  all  been  set  apart  for  cultivating  the
“knowledge  of  the  Gods.”  But  Ammianus  Mercellinus  was  wrong  in  saying,  that  this  father  of
Darius  was  a king;  and  no  doubt  he  committed  this  blunder  by  having  read  in  general  that  one  king
Hystaspes  was  a great  magician,  and  thought  there  was  no  other  Hystaspes  than  the  father  of  Darius.
But  it  is  beyond  dispute,  that  one  Hystaspes,  older  than  the  foundation  of  Rome,  and  a great  prophet,
is  mentioned  by  authors.  “ Hystaspes  also,  the  most  ancient  king  of  the  Medes,  and  from  whom  the
“river  Hystaspes  derives  its  name,  is  the  most  admirable  of  them  all;  for  under  the  interpretation  of
“the  prophecy  of  a boy,  he  informed  posterity  that  the  Roman  empire,  nay,  even  the  Roman  name,
“should  be  utterly  destroyed;  and  this  he  predicted  a long  time  before  the  establishment  of  that
“ colony  of  Trojans,”  Lactant.  lib.  VII.  cap.  xv.  pag.  m.  492.  J ustin  Martyr  informs  us,  that  he  predicted
the  general  conflagration  of  all  perishable  things,  Justin  Apolog.  ii.  pag.  66.  It  is  affirmed  that
Pythagoras  was  Zoroaster’s  disciple,  under  the  reign  of  Cambyses,  the  son  of  Cyrus : the  words  of
Apuleius  inform  us  of  the  fact.  Some  say  that  Pythagoras  having  been  made  a slave  in  Egypt,  was
transported  into  Persia;  others  will  have  transported  him  into  Babylon,  and  there  instructed  by
Zoroaster  the  Babylonian,  whom  they  distinguish  from  the  Persian.  We  find  no  less  than  five
Zoroasters  mentioned  in  history:  to  these  five  may  be  added  a sixth,  mentioned  by  Apuleius.  This
Zoroaster  lived  in  Babylon  at  the  time  Pythagoras  was  brought  thither  by  Cambyses.  The  same  writer
calls  him  “the  chief  interpreter  of  all  divine  mysteries,”  and  says  that  Pythagoras  was  chiefly
instructed  by  him.  He  appears  to  be  the  same  with  Zabratus,  by  whom  Diogenes  affirms  Pythagoras
was  purged  from  all  his  former  filth,  and  instructed  in  what  is  essentially  necessary  for  good  men  to
know,  viz.  God,  nature,  and  philosophy:  he  is  also  the  same  with  Nazaratus,  the  Assyrian,  whom
Alexander,  in  his  book  of  the  Pythagorical  symbols,  affirms  to  have  taught  Pythagoras.  The  same
person  Suidas  calls  Zares,  Cyrillus,  Zaranes,  and  Plutarch,  Zarates.


Btoflrapbta  Hnttqua.  247

them,  their  monarchy  fell  to  ruin  and  decay  *.  The  Chronicle  of  Alexandria
adds,  that  having  held  this  discourse  with  them  he  invoked  Orion,  and  was
consumed  by  celestial  fire.  Many  will  have  it  that  Ham  was  the  Zoroaster  of
the  eastern  nations,  and  the  inventor  of  magic.  Mr.  Bochart  refutes  this
falsity.  Cedrenus  observes  that  Zoroaster,  who  became  so  famous  for  wisdom
among  the  Persians,  was  descended  from  Belus:  this  imports  that  he  was
descended  from  Nimrod.  Some  authors  have  taken  him  for  Nimrod;  others
for  Assur  or  Japhet.  The  ancient  Persians  believe  that  Zoroaster  was  before
Moses  t-  Some  maintain  he  was  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  and  it  cannot  be  denied
that  they  ground  their  opinions  on  the  agreement  of  numerous  particulars
which  belong  to  the  one,  and  are  related  of  the  other.  George  Hornius
foolishly  imagines  that  he  was  the  false  prophet  Balaam.  Huetius  shews  that
he  was  the  Moses  of  the  Jews,  and  mentions  an  infinite  number  of  particulars
in  which  the  accounts  we  have  of  Moses  agree  with  the  stories  related  of
Zoroaster. — How  near  all  or  any  of  these  come  to  the  probability  of  truth
will  appear  in  the  sequel,  where  we  have  given  the  most  probable  and  rational
account  of  him,  as  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  trace,  from  the  tradition  of
the  Magi,  which  we  prefer  before  the  confused  and  partial  accounts  vulgarly
extant.  They  who  believed  that  Zoroaster  professed  and  taught  a diabolical
magic  t are  certainly  in  the  wrong;  the  magic  he  taught  (of  which  we  shall

* According  to  the  tradition  of  the  Magi,  we  shall  explain  this  fabulous  and  figurative  description
of  Zoroaster’s  end.  The  truth  is,  he  enjoined  the  Persians  rigidly  to  persevere  in  the  laws  he  had
framed,  and  the  doctrine  he  had  been  at  the  labour  to  establish,  which  was,  to  live  in  the  practice  of
moral  virtue,  to  avoid  all  species  of  luxury,  to  promote  the  liberal  sciences,  to  govern  all  their  actions
with  prudence  and  integrity,  and  to  meet  misfortune  with  resolution,  and  to  encounter  it  with
philosophy,  and  to  endure  the  unavoidable  calamities  of  life  with  fortitude : these,  his  disciplines,  he
left  as  a precious  relic  among  them ; which  while  they  strictly  adhered  to,  they  need  be  under  no
apprehension  of  tyranny  and  oppression. — these  they  collected,  and  for  some  space  of  time  religiously
followed  the  precepts  of  this  great  philosopher : at  length,  human  fraility  and  vice,  corrupting  their
manners,  caused  them  to  relax  from  their  duties,  upon  which  their  empire  fell  into  ruin  and  decay.
The  idolatry  falsely  imputed  to  this  wise  man,  viz.  his  instituting  the  worshipping  of  fire,  is  thus  to  be
interpreted.— Under  the  celestial  symbol  of  fire  was  meant  truth:— truth  he  ascribed  purely  as  the
great  and  wonderful  attribute  of  the  Godhead,  which  he  acknowledged  and  worshipped,  to  wit,  one
only  God,  the  eternal  fire  of  wisdom  and  everlasting  truth,  justice, and  mercy!— His  magic  was  the
study  of  the  religious  worship  of  that  Eternal  Being.  After  Zoroaster,  there  were  four  persons
chosen  to  educate  the  successor  of  the  king  of  Persia.  They  chose  the  wisest,  the  most  just,  the  most
temperate,  and  the  bravest  man  that  could  be  found.  The  wisest  man  {viz.  one  of  the  Magi),  in-
structed him  in  Zoroaster’s  magic,  the  just  in  government,  the  brave  in  war,  and  the  temperate  in
social  virtue  and  temperance.  Now  observe,  that  Zoroaster  is  called  the  son  of  Oromasius,  and  that
Oromasius  is  the  name  given  by  Zoroaster  and  his  disciples  to  the  good  God,  and  this  title  was  really
bestowed  upon  him  by  the  Persians;  therefore,  according  to  Plato,  this  Persian  Magus,  on  account
of  his  uncommon  learning,  religion,  and  wisdom,  was,  in  an  allegorical  or  figurative  manner,  called
the  son  of  God,  or  the  son  of  wisdom,  truth,  &c.

t Some  Magi  affirm  that  he  is  the  same  with  Abraham,  and  frequently  call  him  Ibrahim  Zerdascht,
which  is,  Abraham  the  friend  of  fire.

t The  preceding  note  fully  explains  those  erroneous  relations  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Magi.  Those
who  desire  to  see  a great  many  passages  which  testify  that  the  magic  of  the  Persians,  instituted  by
Zoroaster,  was  the  study  of  religion,  virtue,  and  wisdom,  let  them  refer  to  Brissonius  de  Regno  Per-
sarum,  lib.  ii.  p.  178,  c&seq.  edit.  Commel.  1595;  likewise  Jul.  Caesar,  Bullengerus  Eclog.  ad  Arnobium,
p.  346,  & seq.  Nor  are  we  ignorant  that  Gabriel  Naude  hath  most  learnedly  and  solidly  justified  our
Zoroaster  against  the  ignorant  imputations  of  necromancy,  black  art,  &c.


248  gtoprapbla  Hntfqua.

speak  more  anon)  was  only  the  study  of  the  divine  nature,  and  of  religious
worship.  Some  have  presumed  that  Zoroaster  was  the  promulgator  of  a
doctrine  of  two  principles*,  or,  two  co-eternal  causes,  one  of  good,  the  other
of  evil  things.  Of  this  doctrine  Plutarch  takes  notice:  he  says,  “that  Zoro-
aster the  magician,  who  is  said  to  have  lived  five  thousand  years  before  the
“Trojan  war,  called  the  good  God,  Oromazes,  and  the  evil,  Arimanius,  cfec.”
See  Plut.  de  Iside  & Osiride , page  369.

Dr.  Hyde,  in  his  excellent  treatise  on  the  religion  of  the  ancient  Persians,
cites  some  authors  who  clear  him  on  this  head.  We  shall  examine  whether
they  deserve  credit.  It  is  affirmed  that  he  was  no  idolater,  either  with
respect  to  the  worship  of  fire,  or  that  of  Mithra  f.  What  appears  least  un-

• It  has  been  much  contended  by  philosophers  whether  Zoroaster  was  the  first  suggester  of  this
doctrine  of  the  two  principles : the  one  called  by  the  Magi,  Oromases  the  good,  and  Arimanius  the
evil  principle.  It  is  certain  Zoroaster  asserted  the  one,  viz.  that  of  the  good,  or  an  essential  uncreated
self-existent  principle,  the  cause  of  all  good,  called  by  him  Oromasus,  meaning  a good  God,  &c.  In
respect  of  the  other  principle,  Arimanius,  we  must,  before  we  decide  either  for  or  against  Zoroaster,
consider  the  nature  of  the  thing  in  its  most  impartial  sense.

Those  who  ever  read  Mr.  Bernard’s  Journal  ( Nouvelles  de  la  Republique  des  Lettres,  Feb.  1701,  and
March  1701,  Art.  Hi.  l.i.)  needs  not  be  informed  that  the  Historia  Religionis  veterum  Persarum,
published  by  Dr.  Hyde  (professor  of  the  oriental  languages  in  the  university  of  Oxford)  at  Oxford,  in
the  year  1700,  4to,  is  one  of  the  most  excellent  pieces  that  could  possibly  be  written  on  such  a subject.
The  idea  which  the  learned  journalist  hath  given  of  this  performance  is  sufficient  to  convince  us  that
it  contains  a very  curious  erudition,  and  profound  discussions,  which  discover  many  rare  and  uncom-
mon particulars  of  a country  which  we  scarce  knew  any  thing  of  before.  But  to  come  to  the  point:
Dr.  Hyde  affirms,  that  the  ancient  Persians  acknowledge  no  more  than  one  uncreated  principle,
which  was  the  good  principle,  or,  in  one  word,  God : and  that  they  looked  upon  the  evil,  principle  as  a
created  being.  One  of  the  names,  or  attributes,  which  they  gave  to  God,  was  Hormizda;  and  they
called  the  evil  principle,  Ahariman;  and  this  is  the  original  of  the  two  Greek  words,  ClpOfiacrSeq
and  Airei/tavtos;  one  of  which  was  the  name  of  the  good,  and  the  other  of  the  evil  principle,  as  we
have  seen  above,  in  a passage  of  Plutarch.  The  Persians  affirmed  that  Abraham  was  the  first  founder
of  their  religion.  Zoroaster  afterwards  made  some  alterations  in  it;  but  it  is  said  hejnade  no  manner
of  change  with  relation  to  the  doctrine  of  one  sole  uncreated  principle,  but  that  the  only  inovation  in
this  particular  was  the  giving  the  name  of  Light  to  the  good  principle,  and  that  of  Darkness  to  the
evil  one.

From  a misconstruction  put  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  Magi,  some  considerable  misreports  of  their
tenets  have  been  propagated:  I think  none  more  curious  than  the  following — “That  a war  arose
betwixt  the  army  of  light  and  that  of  darkness,  which  at  last  ended  in  an  accommodation,  of  which
the  angels  were  mediators,  and  the  conditions  were  that  the  inferior  world  should  be  wholly  left  to
the  government  of  Arimanius  for  the  space  of  7000  years,  after  which  it  should  be  restored  to  light.
Before  the  peace,  Arimanius  had  exterminated  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world.  Light  had  called
men  to  its  assistance  while  they  were  yet  but  spirits;  which  it  did,  either  to  draw  them  out  of
Arimanius’  territories,  or  in  order  to  give  them  bodies  to  engage  against  this  enemy.  They  accepted
the  bodies  and  the  fight,  on  condition  they  should  be  assisted  by  the  light,  and  should  at  last  over-
come Arimanius.  The  resurrection  shall  come  when  he  shall  be  vanquished.  This  they  conclude  was
the  cause  of  the  mixture,  and  shall  be  the  cause  of  the  deliverance.  The  Greeks  were  not  ignorant
that  Zoroaster  taught  a future  resurrection.

f The  ancient  Persian  Magi  never  did  divine  honours  to  the  sun  or  any  of  the  stars.  They  main-
tain they  do  not  adore  the  sun,  but  direct  themselves  towards  it  when  they  pray  to  God.  It  has  been
found  amongst  Zoroaster’s  secret  precepts,  that  we  ought  to  salute  the  sun,  but  not  that  we  should
adore  him  with  religious  whorship.  He  proves  that  their  ceremonies  might  very  justly  pass  for  civil
honours,  and  to  this  purpose  he  makes  some  exceeding  curious  observations.  He  applies  to  the  fire
what  he  says  of  the  sun.  The  bowings  and  prostrations  of  the  Persians  before  the  holy  fire  were  not  a
religious  observation,  but  only  a civil  one.  The  same  thing  must  be  attributed  to  their  reported  wor-
ship of  fire,  which,  as  I have  said  above,  they  kept  in  their  Pyrea  in  imitation  of  the  Jews.  For
though  they  paid  a certain  reverence  to  the  fire,  and  that  by  prostration,  yet  this  was  not  a religious,


Btograpbta  Bnttqua.


249


certain,  amongst  so  many  things  that  are  related  of  him  is,  that  he  was  the
introducer  of  a new  religion  into  Persia,  and  that  he  did  it  about  the  reign  of
Darius  the  successor  of  Cambyses : he  is  still  in  great  veneration  among  those
Persians  who  are  not  of  the  Mahometan  religion,  but  still  retain  the  ancient
worship  of  their  country.  They  call  him  Zardhust,  and  several  believe  that
he  came  from  China,  and  relate  many  miraculous  things  on  that  head.
Several  authors  affirm,  that  all  the  books  published  hitherto  under  Zoroaster’s
name,  some  of  which  are  yet  extant,  are  suppositious.  Dr.  Hyde  dissents
from  this  opinion.  Suidas  affirms,  that  there  were  extant  four  books  of
Zoroaster:  the  first,  “Of  Nature,”  a book  of  the  Virtues  of  precious  Stones,
called  de  Gemmis;  and  five  books  of  Astrology  and  Astronomy,  “Praedic-
tiones  ex  Inspectione  Stellarum.”  It  is  very  likely  that  what  Pliny  relates,
as  quoted  from  Zoroaster,  was  taken  from  those  books,  Plin.  lib.  xviii,  cap.  24.
Eusebius  recites  a passage  which  contains  a magnificent  description  of  God,
and  gives  it  as  the  very  words  of  Zoroaster  in  his  sacred  commentary  on  the
Persian  rites.  Clemens  Alexandrinus  says,  that  the  followers  of  Prodicus
boasted  of  having  the  secrets  or  secret  books  of  Zoroaster.  But  most  likely
he  meant  that  they  boasted  of  having  the  secret  books  of  Pythagoras.  They
were  printed,  together  with  the  verses  of  the  Sybils  at  Amsterdam,  in  the
year  1689,  according  to  Opsopseus’s  edition,  Oracula  Magica  Zoroastris,  cum
Scholiis  Plethonis  & Pselli.

only  a civil,  worship ; as  it  is  from  the  force  of  custom  that  the  eastern  people  prostrate  themselves
before  any  great  man;  (so  they  might  with  as  much  propriety  be  said  to  adore  or  worship  him.)
Believe  me  we  ought  to  be  the  last  to  censure  the  eastern  people  with  such  gross  idolatry  as  has  been
represented.  The  Persians,  who  have  always  been  devoted  to  the  highest  study  of  wisdom,  performed
their  duties  in  life  for  the  honour  of  their  God;  and,  although  unenlightened  and  Barbarians, lived  as
men,  and  not  as  irrational  creatures : whereas  we,  who  know  our  duty  so  well,  yet  practice  it  so  ill : for
I may  truly  say,  that  notwithstanding  the  great  benefits  we  derive  from  the  divine  precepts  of
Christianity,  yet  I believe  it  will  be  found  an  incontrovertible  fact  that  man  to  man  is  a serpent,  a
few  individuals  excepted.  But  to  return  to  our  subject:  It  was  the  ancient  custom  to  fall  prostrate
to  angels,  as  being  the  messengers  and  representatives  of  God.  Besides,  there  are  many  examples  of
this  kind  of  worship,  not  only  in  the  Old,  but  New  Testament,  where  the  women  who  had  been  con-
verted to  the  true  faith,  upon  seeing  the  angels  at  the  sepulchre  of  Christ,  fell  with  their  faces  to  the
ground  and  worshipped.  Yet  they  well  knew  that  it  was  not  God  they  saw,  but  his  angels,  as  appears
from  their  own  confession  — “we  have  seen  a vision  of  angels.”  Therefore  they  are  wrongfully  called
Idolaters  and  worshippers  of  Are,  for  Zoroaster  was  the  instrument  of  their  continuation  in  the  true
faith.  He  was  a man  who  had  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  whom  he  peculiarly  worshipped  in  a
natural  cave,  in  which  he  placed  several  symbols,  representing  the  world ; Mithra,  representing  the
sun,  filled  the  master’s  place.  But  it  was  not  Mithra,  but  the  true  God,  that  he  adored : and,  lastly,  as
he  was  a true  philosopher,  a profound  alchemist,  greatly  informed  in  all  the  arts  of  the  mathematics,
strict  and  austere  in  his  religion,  he  struck  the  Persians  with  an  admiration  of  him,  and  by  these
means  made  him  attentive  to  his  doctrine.  The  sum  of  all  is,  that  he  lived  in  a cave,  dedicated  to  the
service  of  God,  and  the  study  of  all  natural  and  supernatural  knowledge;  that  he  was  divinely
illuminated,  knew  the  courses  of  the  stars,  and  the  occult  and  common  properties  of  all  compounded
and  earthly  things ; that  by  fire  and  Geometry  (i.  e.  by  Chemistry  and  the  Mathematics)  he  investigated,
proved,  and  demonstrated,  the  truth  and  purity,  or  else  the  fugacity  and  vileness,  of  all  things  know-
able  in  this  mortal  state  of  humanity.  So  that  the  fame,  sagacity,  wisdom,  and  virtue  of  Zoroaster
induced  some  certain  men  wickedly  and  frauduently  to  impose  upon  the  unwary  some  false  magical
oracles,  and  diabolical  inventions,  written  in  Greek  and  Latin,  <£-e.as  the  genuine  works  of  the  divine
and  illustrious  Zoroaster.


250


JBioflrapbia  Bnttqna.


HERMES,  SURNAMED  TRISMEGISTUS,

OK  THE  THBICE  GREATEST  INTELLIGENCER.

Mermes  Utisniccjistus,  (who  was  the  author  of  the  divine  Pymander
and  some  other  books,)  lived  some  time  before  Moses.  He  received  the
name  of  Trismegistus,  or  Mercurius  ter  Maximus,  i.  e.  thrice  greatest  Intel-
ligencer, because  he  was  the  first  intelligencer  who  communicated  celestial
and  divine  knowledge  to  mankind  by  writing.

He  was  reported  to  have  been  king  of  Egypt;  without  doubt  he  was  an
Egyptian;  nay,  if  you  believe  the  Jews,  even  their  Moses;  and  for  the  jus-
tification of  this  they  urge,  1st,  His  being  well  skilled  in  chemistry,  nay,  the
first  who  communicated  that  art  to  the  sons  of  men;  2dly,  They  urge  the
philosophic  work,  viz.  of  rendering  gold  medicinal,  or,  finally,  of  the  art  of
making  aurum  potabile;  and,  thirdly,  of  teaching  the  Cabala,  which  they  say
was  shewn  him  by  God  on  Mount  Sinai:  for  all  this  is  confessed  to  be
originally  written  in  Hebrew,  which  he  would  not  have  done  had  he  not  been
an  Hebrew,  but  rather  in  his  vernacular  tongue.  But  whether  he  was  Moses
or  not*,  it  is  certain  he  was  an  Egyptian,  even  as  Moses  himself  also  was;
and  therefore  for  the  age  he  lived  in,  we  shall  not  fall  short  of  the  time  if  we
conclude  he  flourished  much  about  the  time  of  Moses;  and  if  he  really  was
not  the  identical  Moses,  affirmed  to  be  so  by  many,  it  is  more  than  probable
that  he  was  king  of  Egypt;  for  being  chief  philosopher,  he  was,  according
to  the  Egyptian  custom,  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  priesthood,  and  from
thence  to  the  chief  governor  or<king.

He  was  called  Ter  Maximus,  as  having  a perfect  knowledge  of  all  things
contained  in  the  world  (as  his  Aureus , or  Golden  Tractate  and  his  Divine
Pymander  shews,)  which  things  he  divided  into  three  kingdoms,  viz.  animal,
vegetable  and  mineral;  in  the  knowledge  and  comprehension  of  which  three
he  excelled  and  transmitted  to  posterity,  in  enigmas  and  symbols,  the  pro-
found secrets  of  natute;  likwise  a true  description  of  the  Philosopher's
Quintessence,  or  Universal  Elixir,  which  he  made  as  the  receptacle  of  all
celestial  and  terrestrial  virtues.  The  Great  Secret  of  the  philosophers  he
discoursed  on,  which  was  found  engraven  upon  a Smaragdine  table,  in  the
valley  of  Ebron.

*The  Cabal ists  of  the  Hebrews  affirm  that  Moses  was  this  Hermes  and  although  meek,  yet  was  a
man  possessed  of  the  most  serious  gravity,  and  a profound  speculator  in  chemistry  and  divine  magic ;
that  he  by  divine  inspiration  on  the  mount,  became  acquainted  with  the  knowledge  of  all  the  natural
and  secret  operations  of  nature;  that  he  taught  the  transmutation  of  metals  per  Cabala,  i.  e.  by  oral
tradition,  to  the  Jews.


Biograpbia  Bntiqua.  251

Johannes  Functius,  in  his  Chronology  says,  he  lived  in  the  time  of  Moses,
twenty-one  years  before  the  law  was  given  in  the  wilderness.  Suidas  seems
to  confirm  it  by  saying,  “ Credo  Mercurium  Trismegistum  sapientem  Egyp-
“ tium  floruisse  ante  Pharaonem.”  But  this  of  Suidas  may  be  applied  to
several  ages,  for  that  Pharaoh  was  the  general  name  of  their  kings;  or
possibly  it  might  be  intended  before  the  name  of  Pharaoh  was  given  to  their
kings,  which,  if  so#,  he  makes  Trismegistus  to  exist  400  years  before  Moses,
yea,  before  Abraham’s  descent  into  Egpyt.  There  is  no  doubt  but  that  he
possessed  the  great  secret  of  the  philosophic  work;  and  if  God  ever  appeared
in  man,  he  appeared  in  him,  as  is  evident  both  from  his  books  and  his  Py-
mander;  in  which  work  he  has  communicated  the  sum  of  the  abyss,  and  the
divine  knowledge  to  all  posterity;  by  which  he  has  demonstrated  himself  to
have  been  not  only  an  inspired  divine,  but  also  a deep  philosopher,  obtaining
his  wisdom  from  God  and  heavenly  things,  and  not  from  man.


APPOLLONIUS  op  TYANA,

WITH  SOME  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS

REMARKABLE  MIRACLES,  PROPHECIES,  VISIONS,  RELATIONS.

Hppollonius  was  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  persons  that

ever  appeared  in  the  world.  He  was  born  at  Tyana  in  Cappadocia,  towards
the  beginning  of  the  first  century.  At  sixteen  years  of  age  he  became  a rigid
disciple  of  Pythagoras,  renouncing  wine,  flesh,  and  women,  wearing  no  shoes,
and  letting  his  hair  and  beard  grow  long,  and  cloathing  himself  only  in
linen : soon  after  he  became  a reformer,  and  fixed  his  abode  in  a temple  of
ASsculapius,  where  many  sick  persons  resorted  to  be  cured  by  him.  Being
come  to  age,  he  gave  part  of  his  estate  to  his  eldest  brother,  and  distributed
another  part  to  his  poor  relations,  and  kept  back  only  a very  small  share  to
himself.  He  lived  six  years  without  speaking  a word,  notwithstanding  dur-
ing this  silence  he  quelled  several  seditions  in  Cecilia  and  Pamphilia;  that
which  he  put  a stop  to  at  Aspenda  was  the  most  difficult  of  all  to  appease,
because  the  business  was  to  make  those  hearken  to  reason  whom  famine  had
driven  to  revolt:  the  cause  of  this  commotion  was,  some  rich  men  having
monopolized  all  the  corn,  occassioned  an  extraordinary  scarcity  in  the  city;
Appollonius  stopped  this  popular  commotion,  without  speaking  a word  to  the
enraged  multitude : Appollonius  had  no  occasion  for  words;  his  Pythagoric
silence  did  all  that  the  finest  figures  of  oratory  could  effect.  He  travelled

* According  to  the  best  authorities  to  he  taken,  Hermes  Trismegistus  lived  in  the  time  of  Pharaoh,
Israel’s  tyrant  and  oppressor,  and  was  not  the  same  with  Moses  who  opposed  Jannes  and  Jambres.


252


Biotirapbia  Hntiqna.


much,  professed  himself  a legislator;  understood  all  languages,  without
having  learned  them:  he  had  the  surprising  faculty  of  knowing  what  was
transacted  at  an  immense  distance,  and  at  the  time  the  Emperor  Domitian
was  stabbed,  Appollonius  being  at  a vast  distance,  and  standing  in  the
market-place  of  the  city,  exclaimed,  “ Strike  ! strike  ! — ’tis  done,  the  tyrant
is  no  more.”  He  understood  the  language  of  birds;  he  condemned  dancing,
and  other  diversions  of  that  sort;  he  recommended  charity  and  piety;  he
travelled  almost  over  all  the  countries  of  the  world;  and  he  died  at  a very
great  age.  His  life  has  been  fully  related  by  Philostratus;  but  it  contains  so
many  fabulous  relations  that  we  do  not  pretend  to  introduce  them  in  this
place.  There  are  many  who  have  very  readily  opposed  the  miracles  of  this
man  to  those  of  Christ,  and  drew  a parallel  between  them.  It  cannot  be
denied  that  this  philosopher  received  very  great  honours,  both  during  his  life
and  after  his  death;  and  that  this  reputation  continued  long  after  paganism.
He  wrote  four  books  of  Judicial  Astrology,  and  a Treatise  on  Sacrifices,
shewing  what  was  to  be  offered  to  the  Diety.

‘ We  must  not  omit  a circumstance  which  tends  to  the  honour  of  this
‘venerable  person.  It  is  related  that  Aurelius  had  come  to  a resolution,  and
‘ had  publickly  declared  his  intentions,  to  demolish  the  city  of  Tyana;  but
‘ that  Appollonius  of  Tyana , an  ancient  philosopher  of  great  renown  and
‘authority,  a true  friend  of  the  gods,  and  himself  honoured  as  a diety,
‘ appeared  to  him  in  his  usual  form  as  he  retired  into  his  tent,  and  addressed
‘him  thus:  — “ Aurelian , if  you  desire  to  be  victorious,  think  no  more  of  the
“ destruction  of  my  fellow-citizens ! — Aurelian , if  you  desire  to  rule,  abstain
“from  the  blood  of  the  innocent! — Aurelian , if  you  will  conquer,  be  merci-
ful!” Aurelian  being  acquainted  with  the  features  of  this  ancient  philoso-
'pher,  having  seen  his  image  in  several  temples,  he  vowed  to  erect  a
‘ temple  and  statues  to  him ; and  therefore  altered  his  resolution  of  sacking
‘ Tyana.  This  account  we  have  from  men  of  credit,  and  have  met  with  it
‘in  books  in  the  Olpian  library;  and  we  are  the  more  inclined  to  believe
‘ it  on  account  of  the  dignity  of  Appollonius ; for  was  there  ever  anything
‘among  men  more  holy,  venerable,  noble,  and  divine  than  Appollonius?
‘He  restored  life  to  the  dead,  he  did  and  spoke  many  things  beyond  human
‘ reach ; which  whoever  would  be  informed  of,  may  meet  with  many  accounts
‘of  them  in  the  Greek  histories  of  his  life.’  See  Vopiscus  in  Aurelian ,
cap.  24.

Lastly,  the  inhabitants  of  Tyana  built  a temple  to  their  Appollonius  after
his  death;  his  statue  was  erected  in  several  temples:  the  Emperor  Adrian
collected  as  many  of  his  writings  as  he  possibly  could,  and  kept  them  very
select,  in  his  superb  palace  at  Antium,  with  a rare  but  small  book  of  this
philosopher’s,  concerning  the  Oracle  of  Trophonius.  This  little  book  was  to


JStograpbia  Hnttqua.  253

be  seen  at  Antium  during  the  life  of  Philostratus;  nor  did  any  curiosity
whatever  render  this  small  town  so  famous  as  did  this  rare  and  extraordinary
book  of  Appollonius.

It  is  reported  that  a wise  prince  of  the  Indians,  well  skilled  in  magic,  made
seven  rings  of  the  seven  planets,  which  he  bestowed  upon  Appollonius,  one
of  which  he  wore  every  day;  by  which  he  always  maintained  the  health  and
vigour  of  his  youth,  and  lived  to  a very  advanced  age.  His  life  was  trans-
lated from  the  Greek  of  Philostratus  into  French,  by  Plaise  de  Vigners ,
with  a very  ample  commentary  by  Artus  Thomas , Lord  of  Embry , a
Parisian;  and  some  time  since  there  has  been  made  an  English  translation
of  his  life,  which  was  condemned,  prohibited,  and  anathematized  without
reason.


PETRUS  de  ABANO,  on  PETER  of  APONA,

DOCTOR  OF  PHILOSOPHY  AND  PHYSIC.

Petrus  Eponensis,  or  Aponus,  one  of  the  most  famous  philosophers  and
physicians  of  his  time,  was  born  A.  D.  1250,  in  a village,  situated  four  miles
from  Padua.  He  studied  a long  time  at  Paris , where  he  was  promoted  to
the  degrees  of  Doctor  in  philosophy  and  physic,  in  the  practice  of  which  he
was  very  successful,  but  his  fees  remarkably  high.  Gabriel  JVaude,  in  his
Antiquitate  Scholm  Medicce  Parisiensis,  gives  the  following  account  of  him:
“Let  us  next  produce  Peter  de  Apona,  or  Peter  de  Abano,  called  the
“Reconciler,  on  account  of  the  famous  book  which  he  published  during  his
“residence  in  your  university*.” —It  is  certain  that  physic  lay  buried  in
“Italy,  scarce  known  to  any  one,  uncultivated  and  unadorned,  till  its  tutelar
“genius,  a villager  of  Apona , destined  to  free  Italy  from  its  barbarism  and
“ignorance,  as  Camillus  once  freed  Rome  from  the  siege  of  the  Gauls , made
“diligent  enquiry  in  what  part  of  the  world  polite  literature  was  most
“happily  cultivated,  philosophy  most  subtilly  handled,  and  physic  taught  with
“the greatest  solidity  and  purity;  and  being  assured  that  Paris  alone  laid
“claim  to  this  honour,  thither  he  presently  flies;  giving  himself  up  wholly  to
“her  tutelage,  he  applied  himself  diligently  to  the  mysteries  of  philosophy
“and  medicine;  obtained  a degree  and  the  laurel  in  both;  and  afterwards
“taught  them  both  with  great  applause,  and  after  a stay  of  many  years,
“loaden  with  the  wealth  acquired  among  you,  and,  after  having  become  the
“most  famous  philosopher,  astrologer,  physician,  and  mathematician  of  his

*Naude  takes  notice  of  this  in  a speech  in  which  he  extols  the  ancient  glory  of  the  university  of
Paris.  We  have,  above,  recited  his  words  at  length,  because  they  incidentally  inform  us  that  Peter
de  Abano  composed  that  great  work  at  Paris  which  procured  him  the  appellation  of  the  Reconciler.


254  JStograpbta  Bnttqua.

“time,  returns  to  his  own  country,  where,  in  the  opinion  of  the  judicious
“ Scardeon , he  was  the  first  restorer  of  true  philosophy  and  physic.  Grati-
tude, therefore,  calls  upon  you  to  acknowledge  your  obligations  due  to
“ Michael  Angelus  Blondus,  a physician  of  Rome , who  in  the  last  century
“undertaking  to  publish  the  Conciliationes  Physiognomicm  of  your  Aponen-
“ sian  doctor,  and  finding  they  had  been  composed  at  Paris , and  in  your
“university,  chose  to  publish  them  in  the  name,  and  under  the  patronage,  of
“your  society.”  ’Tis  said,  that  he  was  suspected  of  magic*,  and  persecuted
on  that  account  by  the  Inquisition:  and  it  is  probable  that,  if  he  had  lived
to  the  end  of  his  trial,  he  would  have  suffered  in  person  what  he  was
sentenced  to  suffer  in  effigy  after  his  death.  His  apologists  observe,  that
his  body,  being  privately  taken  out  of  his  grave  by  his  friends,  escaped  the
vigilance  of  the  Inquisitors,  who  would  have  condemned  it  to  be  burnt.  He
was  removed  from  place  to  place,  and  at  last  deposited  in  St.  Augustin? s
Church , without  Epitaph,  or  any  other  mark  of  honour.  His  accusers

ascribed  inconsistent  opinions  to  him;  they  charged  him  with  being  a

* Naude,  in  his  Apology  for  great  Men  accused  of  Magic,  says,  “ The  general  opinion  of  almost  all
“authors  is,  that  he  was  the  greatest  magician  of  his  time;  that  by  means  of  seven  spirits,  familiar,
“which  he  kept  inclosed  in  chrystal,  he  had  acquired  the  knowledge  of  the  seven  liberal  arts,  and  that
“he  had  the  art  of  causing  the  money  he  had  made  use  of  to  return  again  into  his  pocket.  He  was
“accused  of  magic  in  the  eightieth  year  of  his  age,  and  that  dying  in  the  year  1305,  before  his  trial  was
“over,  he  was  condemned  (as  Castellan  reports)  to  the  fire;  and  that  a bundle  of  straw,  or  osier,
“ representing  his  person,  was  publicly  burnt  at  Padua;  that  by  so  rigorous  an  example,  and  by  the
“fear  of  incurring  a like  penalty,  they  might  suppress  the  reading  of  three  books  which  he  had
“composed  on  this  subject:  the  first  of  which  is  the  noted  Heptameron,  or  Magical  Elements  of  Peter
“de  Abano,  Philosopher,  now  extant,  and  printed  at  the  end  of  Agrippa’s  works;  the  second,  that
which  Trithemius  calls  Elucidarium  Necromanticum  Petri  de  Abano;  and  a third,  called  by  the  same
“ author  Liber  experimentorum  mirabilium  de  Annulis  secundem,  28  Mansion  Lunce."  Now  it  is  to  be
noted,  that  Naude  lays  no  stress  upon  these  seeming  strong  proofs;  he  refutes  them  by  immediately
after  affirming,  that  Peter  of  Apona  was  a man  of  prodigious  penetration  and  learning,  living  in  an
age  of  darkness  which  caused  everything  out  of  the  vulgar  track  to  be  suspected  as  diabolical,
especially  as  he  was  very  much  given  to  study,  and  acquainted  with  the  harmony  of  the  celestial
bodies  and  the  proportions  of  nature,  and  addicted  to  curious  and  divinatory  science.  “ He  was  one
“ (says  he)  who  appeared  as  a prodigy  of  learning  amidst  the  ignorance  of  that  age,  and  who,  besides
“his  skill  in  languages  and  physic,  had  carried  his  enquiries  so  far  into  the  occult  sciences  of  abstruse
“and  hidden  nature,  that,  after  having  given  most  ample  proofs,  by  his  writings  concerning  physiog-
“nomy,  geomancy,  and  chiromancy,  what  he  was  able  to  perform  in  each  of  these,  he  quitted  them  all
“ together  with  his  youthful  curiosity  to  addict  himself  wholly  to  the  study  of  philosophy,  physic,
“and astrology;  which  studies  proved  so  advantageous  to  him,  that,  not  to  speak  of  the  two  first,
“which  introduced  him  to  all  the  popes  and  sovereign  pontiffs  of  his  time,  and  acquired  him  the  reputa-
“ tion  which  at  present  he  enjoys  among  learned  men,  it  is  certain  that  he  was  a great  master  in  the
“ latter  which  appears  not  only  by  the  astronomical  figures  which  he  caused  to  be  painted  in  the  great
“hall  of  the  palace  at  Padua,  and  the  translations  he  made  of  the  books  of  the  most  learned  Rabbi
• Abraham  Aben  Ezra,  added  to  those  which  he  himself  composed  on  critical  days,  and  the  improve-
“ment  of  astronomy,  but  by  the  testimony  of  the  renowned  mathematician  Regio  Montanus,  who
“made  a fine  panegyric  on  him,  in  quality  of  an  astrologer,  in  the  oration  which  he  delivered  publicly
“at  Padua  when  he  explained  there  the  book  of  Alfraganus.”  Now,  many  respectable  authors  are  of
opinion  that  it  was  not  on  the  score  of  magic  that  the  Inquistion  sentenced  him  to  death,  but  because
he  endeavoured  to  account  for  the  wonderful  effects  in  nature  by  the  influences  of  the  celestial  bodies,
not  attributing  them  to  angels  or  daemons;  so  that  heresy,  instead  of  magic,  seems  to  have  been  the
ground  of  his  falling  under  the  tyranny  of  the  sage  fathers  of  the  Roman  Catholic  faith,  as  being  one
who  opposed  the  doctrine  of  spiritual  beings.


Btograpbia  Hnttqua.


255


magician,  and  yet  with  denying  the  existence  of  spirits.  He  had  such  an
antipathy  to  milk,  that  the  very  seeing  any  one  take  it  made  him  vomit.  He
died  in  the  year  1316*  in  the  sixty-sixth  year  of  his  age.  One  of  his  princi-
pal books  was  the  Conciliator,  already  mentioned.


APULEIUS,

THE  PLATONIC  PHILOSOPHER.

OLUCiUS  Hpuleius,  a Platonic  philosopher,  publicly  known  by  the  famous
work  of  the  Golden  Ass,  lived  in  the  second  century  under  the  Antonines.
He  was  a native  of  Madaura , a Roman  colony  in  Africa;  his  family  was
considerable;  he  had  been  well  educated,  and  possessed  a graceful  exterior;
he  had  wit  and  learning;  but  was  suspected  of  magic.  He  studied  first  at
Carthage,  then  at  Athens , and  afterwards  at  Rome , where  he  acquired  the
Latin  tongue  without  any  assistance.  An  insatiable  curiosity  to  know  every
thing  induced  him  to  make  several  voyages,  and  enter  himself  into  several
religious  fraternities.  He  would  see  the  bottom  of  their  mysteries.  He  spent
almost  all  his  estate  in  travelling;  insomuch,  that  being  returned  to  Rome,
and  having  a desire  to  dedicate  himself  to  the  service  of  Osiris,  he  lacked
money  to  defray  the  expence  of  the  ceremonies  of  his  reception,  he  was
obliged  to  make  money  of  his  clothes  to  complete  the  necessary  sum : after
this,  he  gained  his  living  by  pleading;  and,  as  he  was  eloquent  and  subtile,  he
did  not  want  causes,  some  of  which  were  very  considerable.  But  he  improved
his  fortunes  much  more  by  a lucky  marriage  than  by  pleading.  A widow,
whose  name  was  Pudentilla,  neither  young  nor  fair,  but  who  had  a good
estate,  thought  him  worth  her  notice.  He  was  not  coy,  nor  was  he  solicitous
to  keep  his  fine  person,  his  wit,  his  neatness,  and  his  eloquence,  for  some
young  girl;  he  married  this  rich  widow  chearfully  (and  with  the  most  becom
ing  philosophy  overcame  all  turbulent  passions  which  might  draw  him  into
the  snares  of  beauty,)  at  a country  house  near  Oea,  a maritime  town  of

*If  this  be  true  as  we  read  in  Tomasini,  Elog.  Vilor.  Tllustr.  p.  22,  Naude  must  be  mistaken  where
he  says,  that  “ Peter  Aponus  being  accused  at  the  age  of  80  years,  died  A.  D.  1305.”  Freherus  affirms
the  same  upon  the  authority  of  Bemardin  Scardeon.  Gesner  is  mistaken  in  making  Peter  Aponus
flourish  in  the  year  1320.  Konig  has  copied  this  error.  But  Father  Rapin  is  much  more  grossly  mis-
taken than  any  of  them  when  he  places  him  in  the  sixteenth  century,  saying,  "Peter  of  Apona,&
“ physician  of  Padua,  who  flourished  under  Clement  VII,  debauched  his  imagination  so  far  by  reading
"the  Arabian  philosophers,  and  by  too  much  studying  the  astrology  of  Alfraganus,  that  he  was  put
“into  the  Inquisition  upon  the  suspicion  of  magic,  &c.”  See  Rapin  Reflex,  sur  la  Philosophies,  n.  28,
p.  360.  Vossius  has  followed  Gesner,  and  makes  an  observation  worthy  to  be  considered.  He  says,
that  Peter  of  Apona  sent  his  book,  Be  Medicina  Omnimoda,  to  pope  John  XXII,  who  was  elected  in
the  year  1316,  and  held  the  Pontifical  Chair  seventeen  years.  By  this  we  know  the  age  of  this
physician.  But  if  the  year  1316  was  that  of  his  death,  the  conclusion  is  unjust;  neither  does  it  clear
Vossius  of  an  error.


Bioprapbia  Bnttqua.


256

Africa.  This  marriage  drew  upon  him  a troublesome  law-suit.  The  relations
of  this  lady’s  two  sons  urged  that  he  had  made  use  of  art  magic  to  possess
himself  of  her  person  and  money;  they  accused  him  of  being  worse  than  a
magician,  viz.  a wizard,  before  Claudius  Maximus , Proconsul  of  Africa.
He  defended  himself  with  great  vigour*.  His  apology,  which  he  delivered
before  the  judges,  furnishes  us  with  examples  of  the  most  shameful  artifices,
that  the  villainy  of  an  impudent  calumniator  is  capable  of  putting  in


* Besides  the  accusation  of  magic,  they  reproached  him  with  his  beauty,  his  fine  hair,  his  teeth,
and  his  looking-glass.  To  the  two  first  particulars  he  answered  he  was  sorry  their  accusation  was
false.  — “How  do  I wish,”  replied  he,  “that  these  heavy  accusations  of  beauty,  fine  hair,  &c.  were
“ just ! I should,  without  difficulty,  reply,  as  Paris  in  Homer  does  to  Hector.

nor  thou  despise  the  charms

With  which  a lover  golden  Venus  arms.

Soft  moving  speech  and  pleasing  outward  shew,

No  wish  can  gain  them,  but  the  God’s  bestow.

Pope.

“ Thus  would  I reply  to  the  charge  of  beauty.  Besides  that,  even  philosophers  are  allowed  to  be  of
“a  liberal  aspect;  that  Pythagoras,  the  first  of  philosophers,  was  the  handsomest  man  of  his  time;  and
“Zeno  — but,  as  I observed,  I am  far  from  pretending  to  this  apology;  since,  besides  that  nature  has
“bestowed  but  a very  moderate  degree  of  beauty  on  me,  my  continual  application  to  study  wears  off
“ every  bodily  grace,  and  impairs  my  constitution.  My  hair,  which  I am  falsely  accused  of  curling
“and  dressing  by  way  of  ornament,  is,  as  you  see,  far  from  being  beautiful  and  delicate:  on  the
“ contrary,  it  is  perplexed  and  entangled  like  a bundle  of  flocks  or  tow,  and  so  knotty  through  long
“neglect  of  combing,  and  even  of  disentangling,  as  never  to  be  reduced  to  order.”  As  to  the  third
particular,  he  did  not  deny  his  having  sent  a very  exquisite  powder  for  the  teeth  to  a friend,  together
with  some  verses,  containing  an  exact  description  of  the  effects  of  the  powder.  He  alleged  that  all,
but  especially  those  who  spake  in  public,  ought  to  be  particularly  careful  to  keep  their  mouths  clean.
This  was  a fine  field  for  defence  and  for  turning  his  adversary  into  ridicule ; though,  in  all  probability,
he  had  given  occasion  enough  for  censure  by  too  great  an  affectation,  of  distinguishing  himself  from
other  learned  men.  Observe  with  how  much  ease  some  causes  are  defended,  although  the  defendant
be  a little  in  the  wrong.  “ I observe  that  some  could  scarce  forbare  laughing  when  our  orator  angrily
“ accused  me  of  keeping  my  mouth  clean,  and  pronounced  the  word  tooth-powder  with  as  much
“indignation  as  any  one  ever  pronounced  the  word  poison.  But,  surely,  it  is  not  beneath  a philosopher
“to  study  cleanliness, and  to  let  no  part  of  the  body  be  foul, or  of  an  ill  savour, especially  the  mouth, the
“ use  of  which  is  the  most  frequent  and  conspicuous,  whether  a man  converses  with  another,  or  speaks
“in  public,  or  says  his  prayers  in  a temple.  For  speech  is  previous  to  every  action  of  a man,  and,  as
“ an  excellent  poet  says,  proceeds  from  the  Wall  of  the  Teeth.”

We  may  make  the  same  observation  upon  the  last  head  of  his  accusation.  It  is  no  crime  in  a
doctor  of  what  faculty  soever,  to  have  a looking-glass;  but  if  he  consults  it  too  often  in  dressing
himself,  he  is  justly  liable  to  censure.  Morality  in  Apuleius’s  time  was  much  stricter  than  at  present
as  to  external  behaviour,  for  he  durst  not  avow  his  making  use  of  his  looking-glass.  He  maintains
that  he  might  do  it,  and  proves  it  by  several  philosophical  reasons,  which,  to  say  the  truth,  are  much
more  ingenious  than  judiciously  applied;  but  he  denies  that  he  ever  consulted  his  looking-glass;  for
he  says,  alluding  to  this  ludicrous  accusation,  “ Next  follows  the  long  and  bitter  harangue  about  the
“looking-glass;  in  which,  so  heinous  is  the  crime,  that  Pudens  almost  burst  himself  with  bawling
“ out  — ’A  philosopher  to  have  a looking-glass ! ’ — Suppose  I should  confess  that  I have,  that  you
“may  not  believe  there  is  really  something  in  your  objection,  if  I should  deny  it;  it  does  not  follow
“ from  hence  that  I must  necessarily  make  a practice  of  dressing  myself  at  it.  In  many  things  I
“ want  the  possession  but  enjoy  the  use  of  them.  Now,  if  neither  to  have  a thing  be  a proof  that  it  is
“ made  use  of,  nor  the  want  of  it  of  the  contrary,  and  as  I am  not  blamed  for  possessing,  but  for  mak-
ing use  of,  a looking-glass,  it  is  incumbent  upon  him  to  prove  farther  at  what  time,  and  in  what
“place,  and  in  the  presence  of  whom,  I made  use  of  it;  since  you  determine  It  to  be  a greater  crime  in
“ a philosopher  to  see  a looking-glass,  than  for  the  profane  to  behold  the  attire  of  Ceres.”


JBtograpbta  Hnttqua,


257


practice*.  Apuleius  was  extremely  laborious,  and  composed  several  books,
some  in  verse  and  others  in  prose,  of  which  but  a small  part  has  resisted  the
injuries  of  time.  He  delighted  in  making  public  speeches,  in  which  he  gained
the  applause  of  all  his  hearers.  When  they  heard  him  at  Oea,  the  audience
cried  out  with  one  voice,  that  he  ought  to  be  honoured  with  the  freedom  of
the  city.  Those  of  Carthage  heard  him  favourably,  and  erected  a statue  in
honour  of  him.  Several  other  cities  did  him  the  same  honour.  It  is  said
that  his  wife  held  the  candle  to  him  whilst  he  studied;  but  this  is  not  to  be
taken  literally;  it  is  rather  a figure  of  Gallic  eloquence  in  Sidonis  Appolli-
naris,  Legentibus  meditantibusque  candelas  & candelabra  tenuerunt.  Several
critics  have  published  notes  on  Apuleius:  witness  Phillipus  Beraldus , who
published  very  large  notes  on  the  Golden  Ass,  at  Venice,  in  folio,  ann.  1504,
which  were  reprinted  in  8vo,  at  Paris,  and  at  several  other  places.  Godescalk
Stewichius,  Peter  Colvins,  John  Wiewer,  &c.  have  written  on  all  the  works
of  Apuleius.  Precius  published  the  Golden  Ass  and  the  Apology,  separately,
with  a great  many  observations.  The  annotations  of  Casaubon,  and  those  of
Scipio  Gentilis , on  the  Apology,  are  very  scarce,  and  much  valued:  the
first  appeared  in  the  year  1594,  and  the  latter  in  1607.  The  Golden
may  be  considered  (as  Bayle  says)  as  a continued  satire  on  the  disorders
which  the  pseudo-magicians,  priests,  pandars,  and  thieves  filled  the  world
with  at  that  time.  This  observation  occurs  in  Fleuri’s  annotations.  A
person  who  would  take  the  pains,  and  had  the  requisite  qualifications,  might
draw  up  a very  curious  and  instructive  commentary  on  this  romance,  and
might  inform  the  world  of  several  things  which  the  preceding  commentaries
have  never  touched  upon.  There  are  some  very  obscene  passages  in  this
book  of  Apuleius.  It  is  generally  believed  that  this  author  has  inserted  some
curious  episodes  in  it  of  his  own  invention ; amongst  others,  that  of  Psyche.

* I shall  instance  one  to  shew  that  in  all  ages  the  spirit  of  calumny  has  put  men  upon  forging  proofs
by  false  extracts  from  what  a person  has  said  or  written.  To  convict  Apuleius  of  practising  magic,  his
accusers  alledge  a letter  which  his  wife  had  wrote  during  the  time  he  paid  his  devoirs  to  her  and  af-
firmed that  she  had  confessed,  in  this  letter,  that  Apuleius  was  a wizard,  and  had  actually  bewitched  her.
It  was  no  hard  matter  to  make  the  court  believe  that  she  had  written  so,  for  they  only  read  a few  words
of  her  letter,  detached  from  what  preceded  or  followed,  and  no  one  pressed  them  to  read  the  whole,
At  last  Apuleius  covered  them  with  confusion  by  reciting  the  whole  passage  from  his  wife’s  letter.  It
appeared,  that  far  from  complaining  of  Apuleius,  she  justified  him,  and  artfully  ridiculed  his  accusers.
These  are  his  words:  you  will  find  that  precisely  the  same  terms  may  either  condemn  or  justify
Apuleius,  according  as  they  are  taken  with  or  without  what  precedes  them.  “ Being  inclined  to  marry,
“ for  the  reasons  which  I have  mentioned,  you  yourself  persuaded  me  to  make  choice  of  this  man.
“being  fond  of  him,  and  being  desirous,  by  my  means,  to  make  him  one  of  the  family.  But  now,  at
“the  instigation  of  wicked  men,  Apuleius  must  be  informed  against  as  a magician  (or  wizard),  and  I,
“forsooth,  am  enchanted  by  him.  I certainly  love  him : come  to  me  before  my  reason  fails  me.”  He
aggravates  this  kind  of  fraud  as  it  deserves;  his  words  deserve  to  be  engraved  in  letters  of  gold,  to
deter  (if  possible)  all  calumniators  from  practising  the  like  cheats.  He  says,  “ There  are  many  things
“which,  produced  alone,  may  seem  liable  to  calumny.  Any  discourse  may  furnish  matter  of  accusa-
tion, if  what  is  connected  with  foregoing  words  be  robbed  of  its  introduction;  if  some  things  be
“suppressed  at  pleasure,  and  if  what  is  spoken  by  way  of  reproach  to  others,  for  inventing  a calumny,
“be  pronounced  by  the  reader  as  an  assertion  of  the  truth  of  it.”


258  giograpbta  Bnttqua.

Horum  certe  noster  itce  imitator  fuit , ut  l suo  penu  enumerabilia  protulerit ,
atque  inter  ccetera  venustissimum  illud  Psyches , ’Eimo-oSior.  This  episode
furnished  Moliere  with  matter  for  an  excellent  Dramatic  Piece,  and  M.  de
la  Fontaine  for  a fine  Romance.


ARISTOTLE,

THE  PERIPATETIC.

Bristotle,  commonly  called  the  Prince  of  Philosophers,  or  the  Philosopher,
by  way  of  excellence,  was  the  founder  of  a sect  which  surpassed,  and  at
length  even  swallowed  up  all  the  rest.  Not  but  that  it  has  had  reverse  of
fortune  in  its  turn ; especially  in  the  seventeenth  century,  in  which  it  has
been  violently  shaken,  though  the  Catholic  divines  on  the  one  side,  and  the
Protestant  on  the  other,  have  run  (as  to  the  quenching  of  fire)  to  its  relief,
and  fortified  themselves  so  strongly,  by  the  secular  arm,  against  the  New
Philosophy,  that  it  is  not  like  to  lose  its  dominion.  Mr.  Moreri  met  with  so
many  good  materials  in  a work  of  father  Rapin,  that  he  has  given  a very
large  article  of  Aristotle,  enough  to  dispense  with  any  assistance.  Accord-
ingly, I design  not  to  enlarge  upon  it  as  far  as  the  subject  might  allow,  but
shall  content  myself  with  observing  some  of  the  errors  which  I have  collected
concerning  this  pilosopher.  It  is  not  certain  that  Aristotle  practiced  pharmacy
in  Athens  while  he  was  a disciple  of  Plato,  nor  is  it  more  certain  that  he  did
not.  Very  little  credit  ought  to  be  given  to  a current  tradition  that  he  learnt
several  things  of  a Jew,  and  much  less  to  a story  of  his  pretended  conversion
to  Judaism.  They  who  pretend  that  he  was  born  a Jew,  are  much  more
grossly  mistaken:  the  wrong  pointing  of  a certain  passage  occasioned  this
mistake.  They  are  deceived  who  say  that  he  was  a disciple  of  Socrates  for
three  years,  for  Socrates  died  15  years  before  Aristotle  was  born.  Aristotle's
behaviour  towards  his  master  Plato  is  variously  related:  some  will  have  it
that,  through  prodigious  vanity  and  ingratitude,  he  set  up  altar  against  altar:
that  is,  he  erected  a school  in  Athens  during  Plato's  life,  and  in  opposition  to
him:  others  say  that  he  did  not  set  up  for  a professor  till  after  his  master’s
death.  We  are  told  some  things  concerning  his  amours  which  are  not
altogether  to  his  advantage.  It  was  pretended  that  his  conjugal  affection
were  idolatrous,  and  that,  if  he  had  not  retired  from  Athens , the  process  for
irreligion,  which  the  priests  had  commenced  against  him,  would  have  been
attended  with  the  same  consequences  as  that  against  Socrates.  Though  he
deserved  very  great  praise,  yet  it  is  certain  that  most  of  the  errors  concern-
ing him  are  to  be  found  in  the  extravagant  commendations  which  have  been


JBlograpbta  Bnttqua.


259


heaped  upon  him:  as,  for  example,  is  it  not  a downright  falsehood  to  say,
that  if  Aristotle  spoke  in  his  natural  philosophy  like  a man , he  spoke  in  his
moral  philosophy  like  a God;  and  that  it  is  a question  in  his  moral  philosophy
whether  he  partakes  more  of  the  lawyer  than  of  the  priest;  more  of  the  priest
than  of  the  prophet;  more  of  the  prophet  than  of  the  God?  Cardinal  Palla-
vicini  scrupled  not  in  some  measure  to  affirm  that,  if  it  had  not  been  for
Aristotle,  the  church  would  have  wanted  some  of  its  articles  of  faith.  The
Christians  are  not  the  only  people  who  have  authorized  his  philosophy;  the
Mahometans  are  little  less  prejudiced  in  its  favour;  and  we  are  told,  that  to
this  day,  notwithstanding  the  ignorance  which  reigns  among  them,  they  have
schools  for  this  sect.  It  will  be  an  everlasting  subject  of  wonder,  to  persons
who  know  what  philosophy  is,  to  find  that  Aristotle's  authority  was  so  much
respected  in  the  schools,  for  several  ages,  that  when  a disputant  quoted  a
passage  from  this  philosopher,  he  who  maintained  the  thesis  durst  not  say
transeat , but  must  either  deny  the  passage,  or  explain  it  in  his  own  way.  It
is  in  this  manner  we  treat  the  Holy  Scriptures  in  the  divinity  schools.  The
parliaments  which  have  proscribed  all  other  philosophy  but  that  of  Aristotle ,
are  more  excusable  than  the  doctors:  for  whether  the  members  of  parliament
were  really  persuaded  that  this  philosophy  was  the  best  of  any,  or  was  not,
the  public  good  might  induce  them  to  prohibit  new  opinions,  lest  the  acade-
mical divisions  should  extend  their  malignant  influence  to  the  disturbance  of
the  tranquility  of  the  state.  What  is  most  astonishing  to  wise  men  is,  that
the  professors  should  be  so  strongly  prejudiced  in  favor  of  Aristotle's
philosophy.  Had  this  prepossession  been  confined  to  his  poetry  and  rhetoric,
it  had  been  less  wonderful:  but  they  were  fond  of  the  weakest  of  his  works;
I mean  his  Logic  and  Natural  Philosophy*.  This  justice,  however,  must  be
done  to  the  blindest  of  his  followers,  that  they  have  deserted  him  where  he
clashes  with  Christianity;  and  this  he  did  in  points  of  the  greatest  conse-
quence, since  he  maintained  the  eternity  of  the  world,  and  did  not  believe
that  providence  extended  itself  to  sublunary  beings.  As  to  the  immortality
of  the  soul,  it  is  not  certainly  known  whether  he  acknowledged  it  or  notf.
In  the  year  1647,  the  famous  capuchin,  Valerian  Magni,  published  a work

*To  be  convinced  of  the  weakness  of  these  works,  we  need  only  read  Gassendus  in  his  Exercita-
tiones  Paradoxicce  adversos  Aristoteleos.  He  says  enough  there  against  Aristotle’s  philosophy  in
general,  to  convince  every  unprejudiced  reader  that  it  is  very  defective;  but  he  particularly  ruins
this  philosopher’s  Logic.  He  was  preparing,  likewise,  a criticism  on  his  Natural  Philosophy,  his
Metaphysics,  and  Ethics,  in  the  same  way;  when,  being  alarmed  at  the  formidable  indignation  of  the
peripatetic  party  against  him,  he  chose  rather  to  drop  his  work,  than  expose  himself  to  their  vexa-
tious persecutions.  In  Aristotle’s  Logic  and  Natural  Philosophy,  there  are  many  things  which  discover
the  elevation  and  profundity  of  his  genius.

t Pomponatius  and  Niphus  had  a great  quarrel  on  this  subject.  The  first  maintained  that  the
Immortality  of  the  soul  was  inconsistent  with  Aristotle’s  principles : the  latter  undertook  to  defend  the
contrary.  See  the  discourse  of  la  Mothe  le  Vayer  on  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  and  Bodin,  in  page
15  of  Pref . to  Dcemonomania.


260


JBloQtapbia  Bntiqua.


concerning  the  Atheism  of  Aristotle.  About  one  hundred  and  thirty  years
before,  Marc  Antony  Venerius  published  a system  of  philosophy,  in  which  he
discovered  several  inconsistencies  between  Aristotle’s  doctrine  and  the  truths
of  religion.  Campanella  maintained  the  same  in  his  book  de  Reductione  ad
Religionem , which  was  approved  at  Rome  in  the  year  1630.  It  was  not  long
since  maintained  in  Holland , in  the  prefaces  to  some  books,  that  the  doctrine
of  this  philosopher  differed  but  little  from  Spinozism.  In  the  mean  time,  if
some  Peripatetics  may  be  believed,  he  was  not  ignorant  of  the  mystery  of  the
Trinity.  He  made  a very  good  end,  and  enjoys  eternal  happiness.  He  com-
posed a great  number  of  books;  a great  part  of  which  is  come  down  to  us.
It  is  true  some  critics  raise  a thousand  scruples  about  them.  He  was
extremely  honoured  in  his  own  city,  and  there  were  not  wanting  heretics  who
worshipped  his  image  with  that  of  Christ.  There  is  extant  some  book  which
mentions,  that,  before  the  Reformation,  there  were  churches  in  Germany  in
which  Aristotle’s  Ethics  were  read  every  Sunday  morning  to  the  people
instead  of  the  Gospel.  There  are  but  few  instances  of  zeal  for  religion  which
have  not  been  shewn  for  the  Peripatetic  philosophy.  Paul  de  Foix , famous
for  his  embassies  and  his  learning,  would  not  see  Francis  Patricius  at  Ferrara ,
because  he  was  informed  that  that  learned  man  taught  a philosophy  different
from  the  Peripatetic.  This  was  treating  the  enemies  of  Aristotle  as  zealots
treat  heretics.  After  all,  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  Peripatetic  philosophy,  as
it  has  been  taught  for  several  centuries,  found  so  many  protectors;  or  that
the  interests  of  it  are  believed  to  be  inseparable  from  those  of  theology:  for
it  accustoms  the  mind  to  acquiesce  without  evidence.  This  union  of  interests
may  be  esteemed  as  a pledge  to  the  Peripatetics  of  the  immortality  of  their
sect,  and  an  argument  to  abate  the  hopes  of  the  new  philosophers. — Consider-
ing, withal,  that  there  are  some  doctrines  of  Aristotle  which  the  moderns  have
rejected,  and  which,  must,  sooner  or  later,  be  adopted  again.  The  Protestant
divines  have  very  much  altered  their  conduct,  if  it  is  true,  as  we  are  told,
that  the  first  reformers  clamoured  so  loud  against  the  peripatetic  philosophy.
The  kind  of  death,  which  in  some  respects  does  much  honour  to  the  memory
of  Aristole , is,  that  which  some  have  reported,  viz.  that  his  vexation  at  not
being  able  to  discover  the  cause  of  the  flux  and  reflux  of  the  Eurippus  occa-
sioned the  distemper  of  which  he  died.  Some  say,  that  being  retired  into  the
island  of  Eubcea , to  avoid  a process  against  him  for  irreligion,  he  poisoned
himself:  but  why  should  he  quit  Athens  to  free  himself  from  persecution
this  way?  Hesychius  affirms,  not  only  that  sentence  of  death  was  pronounced
against  him  for  an  hymn  which  he  made  in  honour  of  his  father-in-law,  but
also  that  he  swallowed  aconite  in  execution  of  this  sentence.  If  this  were
true,  it  would  have  been  mentioned  by  more  authors.


JBioQrapbia  Bnttqua.


261


The  number  of  ancient  and  modern  writers  who  have  exercised  their  pens
on  Aristotle , either  in  commenting  on,  or  translating,  him,  is  endless.  A cata-
logue of  them  is  to  be  met  with  in  some  of  the  editions  of  his  works,  but  not
a complete  one.  See  a treatise  of  father  Labbe,  entitled  Aristotelis  &
Platonis  Grcecorum  Interpretum , typis  hactenus  editorum  brevis  conspectus ;
A short  view  of  the  Greek  interpreters  of  Aristotle  and  Plato  hitherto  pub-
lished; printed  at  Paris  in  the  year  1657,  in  4to.  Mr.  Teissier  names  four
authors  who  have  composed  the  life  of  Aristotle;  Ammonius,  Guarini  of
Verona,  John  James  Beurerus , and  Leonard  Aretin.  He  forgot  Jerome
Gemusceus  physician  and  professor  of  philosophy  at  Bazil , author  of  a book,
Be  Vita  Aristotelis , et  ejus  Operum  Gensura. — The  Life  of  Aristotle , and  a
Critique  on  his  Works.  Peter  Batle.


ARTEMIDORUS  of  EPHESUS,

THE

SOMNABULIST,  OR  DREAMER.

Hrtemtborus  (who  wrote  so  largely  upon  Dreams)  was  a native  of
Ephesus.  He  lived  under  Antonius  Pius,  as  he  informs  us  himself,  where  he
says,  he  knew  an  Athlete,  who  having  dreamt  that  he  had  lost  his  sight,
obtained  the  prize  in  the  games  which  that  Emperor  ordered  to  be  celebrated.
No  author  has  ever  taken  more  pains  upon  so  useful  a subject  than  Artemi-
dorus  has  done.  He  bought  up  all  that  had  been  written  upon  the  subject  of
dreams,  which  amounted  to  several  volumes,  but  he  spent  many  years  in
travelling  to  collect  them,  as  well  as  the  different  opinions  of  all  the  learned
who  were  then  living.  He  kept  a continual  correspondence  with  those  in  the
towns  and  assemblies  of  Greece,  in  Italy,  and  in  the  most  populous  islands;
and  he  collected  every  where  all  the  dreams  he  could  hear  of,  and  the  events
they  had.  He  despised  the  censure  of  those  grave  and  supercilious  persons,
who  treat  all  pretenders  to  predictions  as  sharpers,  or  imposters,  and  without
regarding  the  censures  of  these  Gatos , he  frequented  those  diviners  many
years.  In  a word,  he  devoted  all  his  time  and  thoughts  to  the  science  of
dreams.  He  thought  that  his  great  labour  in  making  so  many  collections,  &c.
had  enabled  him  to  warrant  his  interpretations  by  reason  and  experience,  but
unfortunately  he  ever  fixed  upon  the  most  trifling  and  frivolous  subjects,  such
as  almost  every  one  is  dreaming  of:  there  is  no  dream  which  Artemidorus  has
explained,  but  will  bear  a quite  different  interpretation,  with  the  same
probability  and  with  at  least  as  natural  resemblances,  as  those  on  which  that
interpreter  proceeds.  I say  nothing  of  the  injury  done  to  intelligences,  to


262  JBtograpbta  Hntiqua.

whose  direction  we  must  necessarily  impute  our  dreams  if  we  expect  to  find
in  them  any  presage  of  futurity  *.  Artemidorus  took  great  pains  to  instruct
his  son  in  the  same  science,  as  appears  by  the  two  books  which  he  dedicated
to  him.  So  eager  a pursuit  after  these  studies  is  the  less  to  be  wondered  at,
when  we  consider  that  he  believed  himself  under  the  inspiration  of  Apollo.
He  dedicated  his  three  first  books  to  one  Cassius  Maximus , and  the  other  two
to  his  son. — They  were  printed  in  Greek  at  Venice  in  the  year  1518.  In  the
year  1603  Higaultius  published  them  at  Paris  in  Greek  and  Latin  with  notes.
The  Latin  translation  he  made  use  of  was  that  published  by  John  Cornarius
at  Bazil,  in  the  year  1539.  Artemidorus  wrote  a treatise  of  augury , and
another  upon  chiromancy ; but  we  have  no  remains  of  them.  Tertullian  has
not  taken  notice  of  him  in  that  passage,  where  he  quotes  several  onirocritic
authors;  but  Lucian  does  not  forget  him,  though  he  names  but  two  writers
of  this  class.


BABYLONIANS.

“dUbCt  this  article  of  Babylonians  we  shall  just  give  the  reader  a general
sketch  of  the  antiquity  of  occult  learning  among  the  Chaldeans  of  Babylon ,
so  famous  for  their  speculations  in  astrology.  Diodorus  Siculus  informs  us,
that  the  inhabitants  of  Babylon  assert,  that  their  city  was  very  ancient;  for
they  counted  four  hundred  and  seventy-three  thousand  years,  from  the  first

* We  find  in  Artemidorus  some  of  the  most  trifling  incidents  in  dreams  noted  by  him  to  presage
very  extraordinary  things ; such,  as  if  any  one  dreams  of  his  nose,  or  his  teeth,  or  such  like  trifling
subjects,  such  particular  events  they  must  denote.  — Now,  as  we  cannot  attribute  a true  and  signifi-
cant dream  to  any  other  cause  than  the  celestial  intelligences,  or  an  evil  daemon,  or  else  to  the  soul
itself,  (which  possesses  an  inherent  prophetic  virtue,  as  we  have  fully  treated  of  in  our  Second  Book
of  Magic, where  we  have  spoken  of  prophetic  dreams), — I say,  from  which  of  these  causes  a dream  pro-
ceeds, we  must  ascribe  but  a very  deficient  portion  of  knowledge  to  either  of  them,  if  we  do  not  allow
them  capable  of  giving  better  and  plainer  information  respecting  any  calamity  or  change  of  fortune
or  circumstances,  than  by  dreaming  of  one’s  nose  itching,  or  a tooth  falling  out,  and  a hundred  other
toys  like  these. — I say,  such  modes  of  dictating  to  us  a fore-knowledge  of  events  to  happen,  cannot
but  be  unworthy  of  their  wisdom,  subtilty,  or  power,  and  if  they  cannot  instruct  us  by  better  signs,  how
great  is  their  ignorance,  and  if  they  will  not,  how  great  is  their  malice?  therefore  all  such  trifling
dreams  are  to  be  altogether  rejected  as  vain  and  insignificant,  for  we  must  remember  that  “ a dream,
comes  through  the  multitude  of  business,”  and  often  otherwise ; but  such  dreams  as  we  are  to  notice,
and  drawpredictions  of  future  accidents  and  events,  are  those  where  the  dream  is  altogether  consistent,
not  depending  upon  any  prior  discourse,  accidents,  or  any  other  like  circumstances;  likewise  that  the
person  who  would  wish  to  dream  true  dreams,  should  so  dispose  himself  as  to  become  a fit  recipient
of  the  heavenly  powers,  but  this  is  only  to  be  done  by  a temperate  and  frugal  diet,  a mind  bent  on
sublime  contemplation,  a religious  desire  of  being  informed  of  any  misfortune,  accident,  or  event
which  might  introduce  misery,  poverty,  or  distraction  of  mind;  so  as  when  we  know  it,  to  deprecate
the  same  by  prayer  to  the  divine  wisdom,  that  he  would  be  pleased  to  divert  the  evil  impending,  or  to
enable  us  to  meet  the  same  with  fortitude,  and  endure  it  with  patience  till  the  will  of  the  Deity  is
accomplished.  These  are  the  things  which  we  ought  to  be  desirous  to  receive  information  of  by
dream,  vision,  or  the  like,  and  of  which  many  are  often  truly  forewarned,  and  thereby  foretell  things
to  come,  also  presage  of  the  death  of  certain  friends;  all  which  I know  by  experience  to  be  true  and
propable.


JStograpbta  Bntiqua,


263

observations  of  tbeir  astrologers  to  the  coming  of  Alexander.  Others  say,
that  the  Babylonians  boasted  of  having  preserved  in  their  archives  the  obser-
vations which  their  astrologers  had  made  on  nativities  for  the  space  of  four
hundred  and  seventy  thousand  years;  from  hence  we  ought  to  correct  a
passage  of  JPliny,  which  some  authors  make  use  of  improperly,  either  to
confute  the  antiquity  of  Babylon,  or  for  other  purposes.  Aristotle  knew
without  doubt  that  the  Babylonians  boasted  of  having  a series  of  astronomical
observations  comprehending  a prodigious  number  of  centuries.  He  was
desirous  to  inform  himself  of  the  truth  of  this  by  means  of  Calisthenes,  who
was  in  Alexander’s  retinue,  but  found  a great  mistake  in  the  account;  for  it
is  pretended  that  Calisthenes  assured  him  that  the  astronomical  observations
he  had  seen  in  Babylon,  comprehended  no  more  than  1903  years.  Simplicius
reports  this,  and  borrows  it  from  Porphyry.  If  Calisthenes  has  computed
right,  it  must  be  agreed,  that  after  the  deluge  men  made  very  great  haste  to
become  astrologers;  for  according  to  the  Hebrew  Bible  there  is  but  two
thousand  years*  to  be  found  from  the  flood  to  the  death  of  Alexander.
There  is  reason  to  question  what  Simplicius  reports,  and  it  is  remarkable
that  all  the  ancient  authors,  who  have  ascribed  the  building  of  Babylon  to
Semiramis , have  no  authority  than  that  of  Ctesias , whose  histories  abounded
in  fables.  And,  therefore,  we  see  that  Berosius  blames  the  Greek  writers
for  affirming,  that  Semiramis  built  Babylon , and  adorned  it  with  the  most
beautiful  structures.  The  supplement  to  Moreri  quotes  Quintus  Curtius,  in
relation  to  the  immodesty  of  the  Babylonian  women  f,  who  prostituted  their
bodies  to  strangers  for  money,  under  the  idea  of  performing  their  devotions
required  by  Venus.  Observe,  that  these  sums  were  afterwards  applied  to
religious  uses.


*Epigenus  tells  us,  that  amongst  the  Babylonians  there  were  celestial  observations  for  four
hundred  and  seventy  thousand  years,  inscribed  on  pillars  or  tables  or  bricks.  Berosius  and  Critode-
mus,  who  make  the  least  of  it,  say  four  hundred  and  ninety  years.

t This  lascivious  ceremony  was  very  ancient.  Jeremiah's  letter  inserted  in  the  book  of  Baruch
touches  something  on  it,  but  in  an  obscure  manner,  and  wants  a commentary  taken  out  of  Herodotus.
Jeremiah’s  text  runs  thus:  — “The  women  also  with  cords  about  them  sat  in  the  ways— but  if  any  of
“ them,  drawn  by  some  that  passeth  by,  lie  with  him,  she  reproacheth  her  fellow,  that  she  was  not
“thought  as  worthy  as  herself,  nor  her  cord  broken.”  — Herodotus  informs  us,  that  there  was  a law
in  Babylon  which  obliged  all  the  women  of  the  country  to  seat  themselves  near  the  temple  of  Venus,
and  there  to  wait  an  opportunity  of  copulating  with  a stranger,  &c.  &c.


264


JiStograpbia  Hntiqua.


HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA,  Knight,

DOCTOR  or  BOTH  LAWS,  COUNSELLOR  TO  CHARLES  Y.  EMPEROR  OF  GERMANY,
AND  JUDGE  OF  THE  PEROGATIVE  COURT.

Mcnrp  Cornelius  Hgtlppa,  a very  learned  man  and  a magician  *,
flourished  in  the  sixteenth  century.  He  was  born  at  Cologne  on  the  14th
of  September , 1486.  He  descended  from  a noble  and  ancient  family  of
Nettesheim  in  Belgia;  desiring  to  walk  in  the  steps  of  his  ancestors,  who  for
many  generations  had  been  employed  by  the  princes  of  the  house  of  Austria ,
he  entered  early  into  the  service  of  the  Emperor  Maximilian.  He  had  at
first  the  employ  of  Secretary;  but  as  he  was  equally  qualified  for  the  sword
as  the  pen,  he  afterwards  turned  soldier,  and  served  the  Emperor  seven  years
in  his  Italian  army.  He  signalized  himself  on  several  occasions,  and  as  a
reward  of  his  brave  actions  he  was  created  knight  in  the  field.  He  wished
to  add  the  academical  honours  to  the  military,  he  therefore  commenced  doctor
of  laws  and  physic.  He  was  a man  possessed  of  a very  wonderful  genius,  and
from  his  youth  applied  his  mind  to  learning,  and  by  his  great  natural  talents
he  obtained  great  knowledge  in  almost  all  arts  and  sciences.  He  was  a dili-
gent searcher  into  the  mysteries  of  nature,  and  was  early  in  search  of  the
philosopher’s  stone;  and  it  appears  that  he  had  been  recommended  to  some
princes  as  master  of  the  art  of  alchymyf,  and  very  fit  for  the  grand
projection.  He  had  a very  extensive  knowledge  of  things  in  general,  as
likewise  in  the  learned  languages.  He  was  pupil  to  Trithemius,  who,  wrote
upon  the  nature,  ministry,  and  offices  of  intelligences  and  spirits.  He  was
of  an  unsettled  temper,  and  often  changed  his  situation,  and  was  so  unfor-
tunate as  to  draw  upon  himself  the  indignation  of  the  Popish  clergy  by  his
writings.  We  find  by  his  letters  that  he  had  been  in  France  before  the  year
1507,  that  he  travelled  into  Spain  in  the  year  1508,  and  was  at  Dole  in  the
year  1509.  He  read  public  lectures  there,  which  engaged  him  in  a contest
with  the  Cordelier  Catilinet.  The  monks  in  those  times  suspected  whatever

* As  he  himself  asserts  in  his  preface  to  his  three  books  of  Occult  Philosophy  and  Magic,  where  he
says,  “ who  am  indeed  a magician,”  applying  the  word  magic  to  sublime  and  good  sciences,  not  to
prophane  and  devilish  arts.  Paul  Jovius,  Thevet,  and  Martin  del  Rio,  accuse  him  not  of  magic,
( because  we  cannot  apply  that  to  necromantic  arts)  but  the  black  art;  but  we  shall  shew  in  some  of  the
foUowing  notes,  their  grounds  on  which  this  accusation  of  Agrippa  is  founded,  and  examine  how  far
their  information  will  justify  their  calumny  against  this  author.

t We  have  no  authority  to  say,  that  ever  he  was  in  possession  of  the  great  secret  of  transmutation,
neither  can  we  gather  any  such  information  from  his  writings ; the  only  circumstance  relative  to  this
is  what  himself  says  in  occult  philosophy,  that  he  had  made  gold,  but  no  more  than  that  out  of  which
the  soul  was  extracted.


Biograpbta  Hnttqua,


265

they  did  not  understand,  of  heresy  and  error;  how  then  could  they  suffer
Agrippa  to  explain  the  mysterious  of  Reuchlinus  de  Verbo  Mirifico  with
impunity?  It  was  the  subject  of  the  lectures  which  he  read  at  Dole  in  1509
with  grest  reputation.  To  ingratiate  himself  the  better  with  Margaret  of
Austria , governess  of  the  Austrian  Netherlands , he  composed  at  that  time  a
treatise  on  the  excellency  of  women;  but  the  persecution  he  suffered  from
the  monks  prevented  him  from  publishing  it;  he  gave  up  the  cause,  and  came
into  England , where  he  wrote  on  /St.  Paul's  Epistles,  although  he  had
another  very  private  affair  upon  his  hands.  Being  returned  to  Cologne , he
read  public  lectures  there  on  the  questions  of  the  divinity,  which  are  called
Quodlibetales ; after  which  he  went  to  the  Emperor  Maximilian's  army  in
Italy,  and  continued  there  till  Cardinal  de  Sainte  Croix  sent  for  him  to
Pisa.  Agrippa  would  have  displayed  his  abilities  there  in  quality  of
theologist  of  the  council,  if  that  assembly  had  continued.  This  would  not
have  been  the  way  to  please  the  Court  of  Rome , or  to  deserve  the  obliging
letter  he  received  from  Leo  X,  and  from  whence  we  may  conclude,  that  he
altered  his  opinion.  From  that  time  he  taught  divinity  publicly  at  Pavia,
and  at  Turin.  He  likewise  read  lectures  on  Mercurius  Trismegistus  at
Pavia,  in  the  year  1515.  He  had  a wife  who  was  handsome  and  accomplished,
by  whom  he  had  one  son;  he  lost  her  in  1521;  he  married  again  an  accom-
plished lady  at  Geneva  in  the  year  1522,  of  whom  he  gives  a very  good
character;  by  this  wife  he  had  three  children,  two  sons  and  one  daughter,
who  died.  It  appears  by  the  second  book  of  his  letters,  that  his  friends
endeavoured  in  several  places  to  procure  him  some  honourable  settlement,
either  at  Grenoble,  Geneva,  Avignon,  or  Metz.  He  preferred  the  post  which
was  offered  him  in  this  last  city;  and  I find  that  in  the  year  1518  he  was  chosen
by  the  lords  of  Metz  to  be  their  advocate,  syndic,  and  orator.  The  persecu-
tions which  the  monks  raised  against  him,  as  well  on  account  of  his  having
refuted  the  common  opinion  concerning  the  three  husbands  of  St.  Anne,  as
because  he  had  protected  a country-woman,  who  was  accused  of  witchcraft,
made  him  leave  the  city  of  Metz.

The  story  is  as  follows: — A country-woman,  who  was  accused  of  witch-
craft, was  proposed  (by  the  Dominican,  Nicholas  Savini,  Inquisitor  of  the
Faith  at  Metz)  to  be  put  to  the  torture,  upon  a mere  prejudice,  grounded  on
her  being  the  daughter  of  a witch,  who  had  been  burnt.  Agrippa  immedi-
ately took  up  the  cudgels,  and  did  what  he  could  to  prevent  so  irregular  a
proceeding,  but  could  not  prevent  the  woman  from  being  put  to  the  question ;
however,  he  was  the  instrument  of  proving  her  innocence.  Her  accusers
were  condemned  to  a fine.  The  penalty  was  too  mild,  and  far  from  a retalia-
tion. This  country-woman  was  of  Vapey , a town  situated  near  the  gates  of
Metz,  and  belonging  to  the  chapter  of  the  cathedral.  There  appeared  in


266  fftoarapbia  Hntiqua.

Messin,  who  was  the  principal  accuser  of  this  woman,  such  sordid  passions,
and  such  a total  ignorance  of  literature  and  philosophy,  that  Agrippa , in  his
letter  of  June  2, 1519,  treats  the  town  of  Metz  as — ‘■'■the  step-mother  of  learning
and  virtue .”  This  satyrical  reflexion  of  Agrippa’s  might  give  rise  to  the
proverb — “Metz,  the  covetous,  and  step-mother  of  arts  and  sciences.” —
What  induced  him  to  treat  of  the  monogamy  of  St.  Anne  was  his  seeing,  that
James  Faber  Stapulensis,  his  friend,  was  pulled  to  pieces  by  the  preachers  of
Metz  for  having  maintained  that  opinion.  Agrippa  retired  to  Cologne,  his
native  city,  in  the  year  1520,  willingly  forsaking  a city,  which  the  seditious
inquisitors  had  made  an  enemy  to  learning  and  true  merit.  It  is  indeed  the
fate  of  all  cities  where  such  persons  grow  powerful  of  whatsoever  religion
they  are  of.  He  again  left  his  own  city  in  the  year  1521,  and  went  to  Geneva ,
but  his  fortunes  did  not  much  improve  there,  for  he  complained  that  he  was
not  rich  enough  to  make  a journey  to  Chamberi  to  solicit  the  pension  which
he  was  led  to  expect  from  the  Duke  of  Savoy.  This  expectation  came  to
nothing,  upon  which  Agrippa  went  from  Geneva  to  Fribourg  in  Switzerland
in  the  year  1523,  to  practice  physic  there  as  he  had  done  at  Geneva.  The
year  following  he  went  to  Lyons , and  obtained  a pension  from  Francis  I.
He  was  in  the  service  of  that  prince’s  mother  in  quality  of  her  physician,  but
made  no  great  improvement  of  his  fortune  there;  neither  did  he  follow  that
princess  when  she  departed  from  Lyons  in  the  month  of  August , 1525,  to
conduct  her  daughter  to  the  frontiers  of  Spain.  He  danced  attendance  at
Lyons  for  some  time  to  employ  the  interest  of  his  friends  in  vain,  to  obtain
the  payment  of  his  pension;  and  before  he  received  it  he  had  the  vexation
to  be  informed  that  he  was  struck  out  of  the  list.  The  cause  of  this  disgrace
was,  that  havin’g  received  orders  from  his  mistress  to  enquire  by  the  rules  of
astrology  what  turn  the  affairs  of  France  would  take,  he  expressed  his
disapprobation  too  freely,  that  the  princess  should  employ  him  in  such  a vain
curiosity,  instead  of  making  use  of  his  abilities  in  more  important  affairs.
The  lady  took  this  lesson  very  ill,  but  she  was  highly  incensed  when  she
heard  that  Agrippa  had,  by  the  Rules  of  Astrology , the  Cabala , or  some
other  art,  predicted  new  triumphs  to  the  constable  of  Bourbon.* — Agrippa

* See  Agrippa’s  words  in  his  29th  Epist.  lib.  iv.  p.  854,  which  are  as  follows:  — “I  wrote  to  the
“ Senechal,  desiring  him  to  advise  her  not  to  misapply  my  abilities  any  longer  in  so  unworthy  an  art;
“that  I might  for  the  future  avoid  these  follies,  since  I had  it  in  my  power  to  be  of  service  to  her  by
“ much  happier  studies.”  But  the  greatest  misfortune  was,  that  “ this  unworthy  art,”  and  “ these
follies,”  as  he  called  them,  predicted  success  to  the  opposite  party,  as  you  may  judge  by  his  own
words— “I  remember  I told  the  Seneschal  in  a letter,  that  in  casting  the  constable  of  Bourbon’s
“nativity,  I plainly  discovered  that  he  would  this  year  likewise  gain  the  victory  over  your  armies.”  —
They  who  are  acquainted  with  the  history  of  these  times,  must  see  plainly  that  Agrippa  could  not  pay
his  court  worse  to  Francis  I,  than  by  promising  good  success  to  the  constable.  From  that  time
Agrippa  was  looked  upon  as  a Bourbonist:  to  silence  this  reproach  he  represented  the  service  he  had
done  to  France,  by  dissuading  4000  foot  soldiers  from  following  the  Emperor’s  party,  and  by  engaging
them  in  the  serivce  of  Francis  I.  He  alledged  the  refusal  of  the  great  advantages  which  were
promised  him  when  he  left  Fribourg,  if  he  would  enter  into  the  constable’s  service.  It  appears  by


Btograpbta  Bntlqua.


267

finding  himself  discarded,  murmured,  stormed,  threatened  and  wrote;  but,
however,  he  was  obliged  to  look  out  for  another  settlement.  He  cast  his  eyes
on  the  Netherlands , and  having  after  long  waiting  obtained  the  necessary
passes,  he  arrived  at  Antwerp  in  the  month  of  July , 1528.  One  of  the  causes
of  these  delays  was  the  rough  proceeding  of  the  Duke  of  Vendome,  who
instead  of  signing  the  pass  for  Agrippa  tore  it  up,  saying,  that  “ he  would  not
sign  any  passport  for  a conjuror.”  In  the  year  1529  the  King  of  England
sent  Agrippa  a kind  invitation  to  come  into  his  territories,  and  at  the  same
time  he  was  invited  by  the  Emperor’s  chancellor,  by  an  Italian  marquiss,  and
by  Margaret  of  Austria , governess  of  the  Netherlands.  He  accepted  the
offers  of  the  latter,  and  was  made  historiographer  to  the  Emperor,  a post
procured  him  by  that  princess.  He  published  by  way  of  prelude,  The  History
of  the  Government  of  Charles  V.  and  soon  after  he  was  obliged  to  compose
that  princess’s  funeral  oration,  whose  death  was  in  some  manner  the  life  of
our  Agrippa;  for  she  had  been  strangely  prejudiced  against  him:  the  same
ill  office  was  done  him  with  his  Imperial  Majesty.  His  treatise  of  the  Vanity
of  the  Sciences,  which  he  caused  to  be  printed  in  1530,  terribly  exasperated
his  enemies.  That  which  he  published  soon  after  at  Antwerp,  viz.  of  the
Occult  Philosophy,  afforded  them  a still  farther  pretence  to  defame  him.  It
was  fortunate  for  him  that  Cardinal  Campegius,  the  Pope’s  legate,  and
Cardinal  Be  la  Mark,  Bishop  of  Liege,  were  his  advocates;  but,  however,
their  good  offices  could  not  procure  him  his  pension  as  historiographer,  nor
prevent  his  being  imprisoned  at  Brussels  in  the  year  1531,  but  he  was  soon
released.  The  following  year  he  made  a visit  to  the  Archbishop  of  Cologne,  to
whom  he  had  dedicated  his  Occult  Philosophy , and  from  whom  he  had  received
a very  obliging  letter.  The  fear  of  his  creditors,  with  whom  he  was  much
embarrassed  on  account  of  his  salary  being  stopped,  made  him  stay  longer  in
the  country  of  Cologne  than  he  desired.  He  strenuously  opposed  the  inquisi-
tors, who  had  put  a stop  to  the  printing  of  his  Occult  Philosophy  when  he
was  publishing  a new  edition  of  it  corrected,  and  augmented  at  Cologne. —
See  the  xxvith,  and  the  following  Letters  of  the  viith  Book.  In  spite  of
them  the  impression  was  finished,  which  is  that  of  the  year  1533.  He
continued  at  Bonn  till  the  year  1535,  and  was  then  desirous  of  returning  to
Lyons.  He  was  imprisoned  in  France  for  something  he  had  said  against  the
mother  of  Francis  I.  but  was  released  at  the  request  of  certain  persons,  and
went  to  Grenoble,  where  he  died  the  same  year,  1535.  Some  say  that  he  died
in  the  hospital  (but  this  is  mere  malice,  for  his  enemies  reported  every  thing
that  envy  could  suggest  to  depreciate  his  worth  and  character).  He  died  at

the  1th  and  6th  Letter  of  Book  V.  that  he  held  a strict  correspondence  with  that  prince  in  1527.  He
advised  and  counselled,  yet  refused  to  go  and  join  him,  and  promised  him  victory.  He  assured  him
that  the  walls  of  Rome  would  fall  down  upon  the  first  attack;  yet  he  omitted  informing  him  of  one
point,  and  that  was,  that  the  constable  would  be  killed  there.


268


Blograpbia  Hnttqua.


the  house  of  the  Receiver  General  of  the  province  of  Dauphiny,  whose  son
was  first  president  of  Grenoble.  Mr.  Allard , at  p.  4,  of  the  Bibliotheque  of
Dauphine , says,  that  Agrippa  died  at  Grenoble , in  the  house  which  belonged
to  the  family  of  Ferrand  in  Clerk's  Street , and  was  then  in  the  possession  of
the  president  Yachon;  and  that  he  was  buried  in  the  convent  of  the  Domini-
cans. He  lived  always  in  the  Roman  communion,  therefore  it  ought  not  to
have  been  said  that  he  was  a Lutheran*.  Burnet  in  his  history  of  the
Reformation  asserts,  that  Agrippa  wrote  in  favour  of  the  divorce  of  King
Henry  VIII.  But  if  we  look  into  Agrippa' s letters  we  shall  find  that  he  was
against  it,  as  well  in  them  as  likewise  in  his  declamation  on  the  vanity  of  the
sciences,  where  he  says — “I  am  informed  there  is  a certain  king,  at  this  time
“o’day,  who  thinks  it  lawful  for  him  to  divorce  a wife  to  whom  he  has  been
“married  these  twenty  years,  and  to  espouse  a harlot.”  In  respect  of  the
charge  of  magic  diabolical  being  preferred  against  him  by  Martin  del  Rio  and
others  who  confidently  asserted,  that  Agrippa  paid  his  way  at  inns,  Sc.  with
pieces  of  horn,  casting  an  illusion  over  the  senses,  whereby  those  who
received  them  took  them  for  real  money;  together  with  the  story  of  the
boarder  at  Louvain , who,  in  Agrippa' s absence,  raised  the  devil  in  his  study,
and  thereby  lost  his  life;  and  Agrippa' s coming  home,  and  seeing  the  spirits
dancing  at  the  top  of  the  house,  his  commanding  one  of  them  into  the  dead
body,  and  sending  it  to  drop  down  at  the  market-place:  all  these  stories,
asserted  by  Martin  del  Rio , are  too  ridiculous  to  be  believed  by  men  of  sense
or  science,  they  being  no  way  probable  even  if  he  had  dealt  in  the  Black
Art. — As  to  magic,  in  the  sense  it  is  understood  by  us,  there  is  no  doubt  of
his  being  a proficient  in  it,  witness  his  three  books  of  Occult  Philosophy;  to
say  nothing  here  of  the  fourth,  which  we  have  good  authority  to  say  was
never  wrote  by  Agrippa,  as  we  shall  shew  presently,  where  we  shall  treat  of
the  history  of  his  Occult  Philosophy. — In  a word,  to  sum  up  the  character  of
Agrippa  we  must  do  him  the  justice  to  acknowledge,  that  notwithstanding
his  impetuous  temper  which  occasioned  him  many  broils,  yet  from  the  letters
which  he  wrote  to  several  of  his  most  intimate  friends,  without  any  apparent
design  of  printing  them,  he  was  a man  used  to  religious  reflexions,  and  the
practice  of  Christianity;  that  he  was  well  versed  in  many  of  the  chiefest  and
most  secret  operations  of  nature  viz.  the  sciences  of  natural  and  celestial
magic;  that  he  certainly  performed  strange  things  (in  the  vulgar  eye)  by  the
application  of  actives  to  passives,  as  which  of  us  cannot?  that  he  was  an
expert  astrologer , physician,  and  mathematician , by  which,  as  well  as  by
magic,  he  foretold  many  uncommon  things,  and  performed  many  admirable

* Agrippa,  in  his  Apolog.  cap.  19,  speaks  in  lofty  terms  of  Luther,  and  with  such  contempt  of  the
adversaries  of  that  reformer  that  it  is  plain  from  hence  Sixtus  Sienensis  affirmed  that  Agrippa  was  a
Lutheran.


astograpbia  Hntiqua.


269


operations.  John  Wierus , who  was  his  domestic,  has  given  several  curious  and
interesting  anecdotes  which  throw  great  light  upon  the  mysterious  character
of  Agrippa , and  serve  to  free  him  from  the  scandalous  imputation  of  his
being  a professor  of  the  black  art.  Now,  because  Agrippa  continued  whole
weeks  in  his  study,  and  yet  was  acquainted  with  almost  every  transaction  in
several  countries  of  the  world,  many  silly  people  gave  out,  that  a black  dog,
which  Agrippa  kept  was  an  evil  spirit,  by  whose  means  he  had  all  this  infor-
mation, and  which  communicated  the  enemies'  posts , number , designs,  &c.  to
his  master;  this  is  Paul  Jovius's  account,  by  which  you  may  see  on  what
sort  of  reports  he  founded  his  opinions  of  this  great  man.  We  wonder  that
Gabriel  Naude  had  not  the  precaution  to  object  to  the  accusers  of  Agrippa,
the  great  number  of  historical  falsehoods  of  which  they  (his  accusers)  stand
convicted.  Naude  supposes  that  the  monks  and  others  of  the  ecclesiastical
order  did  not  think  of  crying  down  the  Occult  Philosophy  till  a long  time
after  it  was  published;  he  affirms  that  they  exclaimed  against  that  work,  only
in  revenge  for  the  injuries  they  believed  they  had  received  in  that  of  the
Vanity  of  the  Sciences.  ’Tis  true,  this  latter  book  gave  great  offence  to
many.  The  monks,  the  members  of  the  universities,  the  preachers,  and  the
divines,  saw  themselves  drawn  to  the  life  in  it.  Agrippa  was  of  too  warm  a
complexion.  “The  least  taste  of  his  book  (of  the  Vanity  of  the  Sciences)  con-
vinced me  that  he  was  an  author  of  a fiery  genius,  extensive  reading,  and
great  memory;  but  sometimes  more  copious  than  choice  in  this  subject,  and
writing  in  a disturbed,  rather  than  in  a composed  style.”  He  lashes  vice,  and
commends  virtue,  every  where,  and  in  every  person:  but  there  are  some  with
whom  nothing  but  panegyric  will  go  down.  See  Erasmi  Epist.  lib.  xxvii
p.  1083.

Let  us  now,  in  a few  words,  and  for  the  conclusion  of  this  article,  describe
the  history  of  the  Occult  Philosophy.  Agrippa  composed  this  work  in  his
younger  days,  and  shewed  it  to  the  Abbot  Trithemius,  whose  pupil  he  had
been.  Trithemius  was  charmed  with  it,  as  appears  by  the  letter  which  he
wrote  to  him  on  the  8th  of  April,  1510;  but  he  advises  him  to  communicate
it  only  to  those  whom  he  could  confide  in.  However,  several  manuscript
copies  of  it  were  dispersed  almost  all  over  Europe.  It  is  not  necessary  to
observe  that  most  of  them  were  faulty,  which  never  fails  to  happen  in  the
like  cases.  They  were  preparing  to  print  it  from  one  of  these  bad  copies;
which  made  the  author  resolve  to  publish  it  himself,  with  the  additions  and
alterations  with  which  he  had  embellished  it,  after  having  shewed  it  to  the
Abbot  Trithemius.  Melchior  Adam  was  mistaken  in  asserting  that  Agrippa,
in  his  more  advanced  years,  having  corrected  and  enlarged  his  work,  shewed
it  to  the  Abbot  Trithemius.  He  had  refuted  his  Occult  Philosophy  in  his
Vanity  of  the  Sciences,  and  yet  he  published  it  to  prevent  others  from  printing


270  JBtograpbia  Bnttqua.

a faulty  and  mutilated  edition.  He  obtained  the  approbation  of  the  doctors
of  divinity,  and  some  other  persons,  whom  the  Emperor’s  council  appointed
to  examine  it.

“ This  book  has  been  lately  examined  and  approved  by  certain  prelates  of
“the  church,  and  doctors,  thoroughly  versed  both  in  sacred  and  profane
“literature,  and  by  commissaries  particularly  deputed  for  that  purpose  by
“CLesar’s  council:  after  which,  it  was  admitted  by  the  whole  council,  and
“licensed  by  the  authentic  diploma  of  his  Imperial  Majesty,  and  the  stamp  of
“the  CLesarean  Eagle  in  red  wax;  and  was  afterwards  publicly  printed  and
“ sold  at  Antwerp,  and  then  at  Paris,  without  any  opposition.”

After  the  death  of  Agrippa  a Fourth  Booh  was  added  to  it  by  another  hand.
Jo.  Wierus  de  Magis , cap.  5.  p.  108,  says,  “To  these  (books  of  Magic)
“may  very  justly  be  added,  a work  lately  published,  and  ascribed  to  my  late
“honoured  host  and  preceptor,  Henry  Cornelius  Agrippa,  who  has  been
“dead  more  than  forty  years;  whence  I conclude  it  is  unjustly  inscribed  to
“ his  names,  under  the  title  of  The  Fourth  Booh  of  the  Occult  Philosophy , or
“ of  Magical  Ceremonies,  which  pretends  likewise  to  be  a Key  to  the  three
“ former  books  of  the  Occult  Philosophy , and  all  kinds  of  Magical  Opera-
tions.” Thus  John  Wierus  expresses  himself.  There  is  an  edition  in  folio
of  the  Occult  Philosophy , in  1533,  without  the  place  where  it  was  printed.
The  privilege  of  Charles  V.  is  prefixed  to  it,  dated  from  Mechlin , the  12th  of
January , 1529.  We  have  already  mentioned  the  chief  works  of  Agrippa.
It  will  be  sufficient  to  add,  that  he  wrote  A Commentary  on  the  Art  of
Raimundus  Tullius  and  A Dissertation  on  the  Original  of  Sin,  wherein  he
teaches  that  the  fall  of  our  first  parents  proceeded  from  their  unchaste  love.
He  promised  a work  against  the  Dominicans,  which  would  have  pleased  many
persons  both  within  and  without  the  pale  of  the  church  of  Rome*.  He  held
some  uncommon  opinions,  and  never  any  Protestant  spoke  more  forcibly
against  the  impudence  of  the  Legendaries,  than  he  did.  We  must  not  forget
the  Key  of  his  Occult  Philosophy,  which  he  kept  only  for  his  friends  of  the  first
rank,  and  explained  it  in  a manner,  which  differs  but  little  from  the  specula-
tions of  our  Quietists.  Now  many  suppose  that  the  fourth  book  of  the  Occult
Philosophy  is  the  Key  which  Agrippa  means  in  his  letters  to  have  reserved
to  himself;  but  it  may  be  answered,  with  great  shew  of  probability,  that  he
amused  the  world  with  this  Key  to  cause  himself  to  be  courted  by  the  curious.
James  Gohory  and  Vigenere  say,  that  he  pretended  to  be  master  of  the
Practice  of  the  Mirror  of  Pythagoras,  and  the  secret  of  extracting  the  spirit

*“  In  the  treatise  I am  composing  of  the  vices  and  erroneous  opinions  of  the  Dominions,  in  which
“ I shall  expose  to  the  whole  world  their  vicious  practices,  such  as  the  sacrament  often  infected  with
“poison— numberless  pretended  miracles —kings  and  princes  taken  off  with  poison  — cities  and
“states  betrayed— the  populace  seduced — heresies  avowed — and  the  rest  of  the  deeds  of  these
“ heroes  and  their  enormous  crimes.”  See  Agrippa  Opera,  T.  ii.  p.  1037.


JBtoorapbta  Bntfqna.


271

of  gold  from  its  body,  in  order  to  convert  silver  and  copper  into  fine  gold.
But  he  explains  what  he  means  by  this  Key,  where  he  says,  in  the  Epist.  19.
lib.  v.  “ This  is  that  true  and  occult  philosophy  of  the  wonders  of  nature.
“The  key  thereof  is  the  understanding:  for  the  higher  we  carry  our  knowl-
edge, the  more  sublime  are  our  attainments  in  virtue,  and  we  perform  the
“greatest  things  with  more  ease  and  effect.5’  Agrippa  makes  mention  of  this
Key  in  two  letters  which  he  wrote  to  a religious  who  addicted  himself  to  the
study  of  the  Occult  Sciences , viz.  Aurelius  de  Aquapendente  Austin,  friar,  where
he  says,  “ What  surprising  accounts  we  meet  with,  and  how  great  writings
“there  are  made  of  the  invincible  power  of  the  Magic  Art,  of  the  prodigious
“ images  of  Astrologers,  of  the  amazing  transmutations  of  Alchymists,  and  of
“that  blessed  stone  by  which,  MiDAS-like,  all  metals  are  transmuted  into
“gold:  all  which  are  found  to  be  vain,  fictitious,  and  false,  as  often  as  they
“are  practised  literally.”  Yet  he  says,  “ Such  things  are  delivered  and  writ
“by  great  and  grave  philosophers,  whose  traditions  who  dare  say  are  false?
“Nay,  it1  were  impious  to  think  them  lies:  only  there  is  another  meaning  than
“what  is  writ  with  the  bare  letters.  We  must  not,  he  adds,  look  for  the
“principle  of  these  grand  operations  without  ourselves:  it  is  an  internal
“ spirit  within  us,  which  can  very  well  perform  whatsoever  the  monstrous
“ Mathematicians , the  prodigious  Magicians , the  wonderful  Alchymists , and
the  bewitching  Necromancers , can  effect.”

Nos  habitat,  non  tartara;  sed  nec  sidera  coeli,

Spiritus  in  nobis  qui  viget,  ilia  facit.

See  Agrippa  Epist.  dat.  Lyons , Sept.  24, 1727.

Note.  Agrippa’s  three  books  of  Magic,  with  the  fourth,  were  translated
into  English,  and  published  in  London  in  the  year  1651.  But  they  are  now
become  so  scarce,  as  very  rarely  to  be  met  with,  and  are  sold  at  a very  high
price  by  the  booksellers.


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS.

BlbertUS  ffllacjflUS,  a Dominican,  bishop  of  Ratisbon,  and  one  of  the
most  famous  doctors  of  the  XVIII  century,  was  born  at  Lawingen,  on  the
Danube,  in  Suabia,  in  the  year  1193,  or  1205.  MorerVs  dictionary  gives  us
an  account  of  the  several  employs  which  were  conferred  upon  him,  and  the
success  of  his  lectures  in  several  towns.  It  is  likewise  said,  that  he  practised
midwifery,  and  that  he  was  in  search  of  the  Philosopher's  Stone:  that  he  was
a famous  Magician,  and  that  he  had  formed  a machine  in  the  shape  of  a man,
which  served  him  for  an  oracle,  and  explained  all  the  difficulties  which  he
proposed  to  it.  I can  easily  be  induced  to  believe  that,  as  he  understood  the


JStograpbta  Hntiqua.


272

mathematics,  <fcc.  he  made  a head,  which,  by  the  help  of  some  spirits,  might
form  certain  articulate  sounds.  Though  he  was  well  qualified  to  be  the
inventor  of  artillery,  there  is  reason  to  believe,  that  they  who  ascribed  the
invention  of  it  to  him  are  mistaken.  It  is  said  that  he  had  naturally  a very
dull  wit,  and  that  he  was  upon  the  point  of  leaving  the  cloister,  because  he
despaired  of  attaining  what  his  friar’s  habit  required  of  him,  but  that  the
Holy  Virgin  appeared  to  him,  and  asked  him  in  which  he  would  chuse  to
excel,  in  philosophy  or  divinity;  that  he  made  choice  of  philosophy,  and  that
the  Holy  Virgin  told  him  he  should  surpass  all  men  of  his  time  in  that
science,  hut  that,  as  a punishment  for  not  chusing  divinity,  he  should  before
his  death,  relapse  into  his  former  stupidity.  They  add,  that,  after  this  appari-
tion, he  shewed  a prodigious  deal  of  sense,  and  so  improved  in  all  the  sciences,
that  he  quickly  surpassed  his  preceptors;  but  that,  three  years  before  his
death,  he  forgot  in  an  instant  all  that  he  knew : and  that,  being  at  a stand  in
the  middle  of  a lecture  on  divinity  at  Cologne,  and  endeavouring  in  vain  to
recal  his  ideas,  he  was  sensible  that  it  was  the  accomplishment  of  the  predic-
tion. Whence  arose  the  saying,  that  he  was  miraculously  converted  from  an
ass  into  a philosopher,  and,  afterwards,  from  a philosopher  into  an  ass.  Our
Albertus  was  a very  little  man*,  and,  after  living  eighty-seven  years,  died  in
the  year  of  our  redemption,  1280,  at  Cologne , on  the  15th  of  November;  his
body  was  laid  in  the  middle  quire  of  the  convent  of  the  Dominicans  and  his
entrails  were  carried  to  Ratisbon ; his  body  was  yet  entire  in  the  time  of  the
Emperor  Charles  V.  and  was  taken  up  by  his  command,  and  afterwards  re-
placed in  its  first  monument.  He  wrote  such  a vast  number  of  books,  that
they  amount  to  twenty-one  volumes  in  folio,  in  the  edition  of  Lyons , 1651.


ROGER  BACON.

COMMONLY  CALLED  FRIAR  BACON.

IROQCt  36 clCOU,  an  Englishman,  and  a Franciscan  friar,  lived  in  the  XIII
century.  He  was  a great  Astrologer,  Chymist,  Mathematician , and  Magician.
There  runs  a tradition  in  English  annals,  that  this  friar  made  a brazen  head,
under  the  rising  of  the  planet  Saturn,  which  spake  with  a man’s  voice,  and
gave  responses  to  all  his  questions.  Francis  Picus  says,  “that  he  read  in  a
“book  wrote  by  Bacon,  that  a man  might  foretel  things  to  come  by  means  of
“the  mirror  Almuchesi,  composed  according  to  the  rules  of  perspective;
“provided  he  made  use  of  it  under  a good  constellation,  and  first  brought  his

* When  he  came  before  the  Pope,  after  standing  some  time  in  his  presence,  his  Holiness  desired
him  to  rise,  thinking  he  had  been  kneeling.


Btograpbia  Bnttqua.


273


“body  into  an  even  and  temperate  state  by  chymistry.”  This  is  agreeable  to
what  John  Picus  has  maintained,  that  Bacon  gave  himself  only  to  the  study
of  Natural  Magic.  This  friar  sent  several  instruments  of  his  own  invention
to  pope  Clement  IV.  Several  of  his  books  have  been  published  (but  they
are  now  very  scarce)  viz.  Specula  Mathematica  & Perspectiva,  Speculum
Alchymice , Be  Mirabili  Potestate  Artis  & Naturae , Epistoloe , cum  Notis,  dbc.
In  all  probability  he  did  not  perform  any  thing  by  any  compact  with  devils,
but  has  only  ascribed  to  things  a surprising  efficacy  which  they  could  not
naturally  have.  He  was  well  versed  in  judicial  astrology.  His  Speculum
Astrologise  was  condemned  by  Gerson  and  Agrippa.  Francis  Picus  and
many  others  have  condemned  it  only  because  the  author  maintains  in  it,  that,
with  submission  to  better  judgments,  books  of  magic  ought  to  be  carefully
preserved,  because  the  time  draws  near  that,  for  certain  causes  not  there
specified,  they  must  necessarily  be  perused  and  made  use  of  on  some
occasions.  Naude  adds,  “that  Bacon  was  so  much  addicted  to  judicial
astrology,  that  Henry  de  Ilassia,  William  of  Paris,  and  Nicholas  Oresmius ,
were  obliged  to  inveigh  sharply  against  his  writings.”  Bacon  was  fellow  of
Brazen-nos e college  in  Oxford  in  the  year  1226.  He  was  beyond  all  compeer
the  glory  of  the  age  he  lived  in,  and  may  perhaps  stand  in  competition  with
the  greatest  that  have  appeared  since.  It  is  wonderful,  considering  the  age
wherein  he  lived,  how  he  came  by  such  a depth  of  knowledge  on  all  subjects.
His  treatises  are  composed  with  that  elegancy,  conciseness,  and  strength,
and  abound  with  such  just  and  exquisite  observations  on  nature,  that,  among
the  whole  line. of  chymists,  we  do  not  know  one  that  can  pretend  to  contend
with  him.  The  reputation  of  his  uncommon  learning  still  survives  in  Eng-
land.  His  cell  is  shewn  at  Oxford  to  this  day ; and  there  is  a tradition,  that
it  will  fall  whenever  a greater  man  than  Bacon  shall  enter  within  it.  He
wrote  many  treatises;  amongst  which,  such  as  are  yet  extant  have  beauties
enough  to  make  us  sensible  of  the  great  loss  of  the  rest.  What  relates  to
chymistry  are  two  small  pieces,  wrote  at  Oxford,  which  are  now  in  print,
and  the  manuscripts  to  be  seen  in  the  public  library  at  Leiden;  having  been
carried  thither  among  Vossius's  manuscripts  from  England.  In  these
treatises  he  clearly  shews  how  imperfect  metals  may  be  ripened  into  perfect
ones.  He  entirely  adopts  Geber's  notion,  that  mercury  is  the  common  basis
of  all  metals,  and  sulphur  the  cement;  and  shews  that  it  is  by  a gradual
depuration  of  the  mercurial  matter  by  sublimation,  and  the  accession  of  a
suptle  sulphur  by  fire,  that  nature  makes  her  gold;  and  that,  if  during  the
process,  any  other  third  matter  happen  to  intervene,  besides  the  mercury  and
sulphur,  some  base  metal  arises : so  that,  if  we  by  imitating  her  operations,
ripen  lead,  we  might  easily  change  it  into  good  gold.


JSfograpbla  Bntiqua.


274

Several  of  Bacon's  operations  have  been  compared  with  the  experiments  of
Monsieur  Homberg , made  by  that  curious  prince  the  duke  of  Orleans;  by
which  it  has  been  found  that  Bacon  has  described  some  of  the  very  things
which  Homberg  published  as  his  own  discoveries.  For  instance,  Bacon
teaches  expressly,  that  if  a pure  sulphur  be  united  with  mercury,  it  will
commence  gold:  on  which  very  principle,  Monsieur  Homberg  has  made
various  experiments  for  the  production  of  gold,  described  in  the  Memoire  de
VAcademie  Boyale  des  Sciences.  His  other  physical  writings  shew  no  less
genius  and  force  of  mind.  In  a treatise*  Of  the  secrets  Works  of  Nature,  he
shews  that  a person  who  was  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  manner  nature
observes  in  her  operations,  would  not  only  be  able  to  rival,  but  to  surpass
nature  herself.

This  author’s  works  are  printed  in  8vo  and  12mo,  under  the  title  of  Frater
Bogerius  Baco  de  Secretis  Artis  cfe  Naturae , but  they  are  become  very  rare.
From  a repeated  perusal  of  them  we  may  perceive  that  Bacon  was  no
stranger  to  many  of  the  capital  discoveries  of  the  present  and  past  ages.
Gunpowder  he  certainly  knew;  thunder  and  lightning,  he  tells  us,  may  be
produced  by  art;  and  that  sulphur,  nitre,  and  charcoal,  which  when  separate
have  no  sensible  effect,  when  mingled  together  in  a due  proportion,  and
closely  confined,  yield  a horrible  crack.  A more  precise  description  of  gun-
powder cannot  be  given  with  words:  and  yet  a Jesuit  Barthol.  Schwartz,
some  ages  afterwards,  has  had  the  honour  of  the  discovery.  He  likewise
mentions  a sort  of  inextinguishable  fire,  prepared  by  art,  which  indicates  he
knew  something  of  phosphorus.  And  that  he  had  a notion  of  the  rarefaction
of  the  air,  and  the  structure  of  the  air-pump  is  past  contradiction.  A chariot,
he  observes,  might  be  framed  on  the  principle  of  mechanics,  which,  being
sustained  on  very  large  globes,  specifically  lighter  than  common  air,  would
carry  a man  aloft  through  the  atmosphere;  this  proves  that  he  likewise  had  a
competent  idea  of  aerostation.  There  are  many  curious  speculations  in  this
noble  author,  which  will  raise  the  admiration  of  the  reader:  but  none  of
them  will  affect  him  with  so  much  wonder,  as  to  see  a person  of  the  most
sublime  merit  fall  a sacrifice  to  the  wanton  zeal  of  infatuated  bigots.  See
Boerhaave’s  Chym.  p.  18.


1 De  Secretis  Naturae  Operibus.


JBtograpbla  Hnttqua,


275


RAYMOND  LULLY,

A FAMOUS  ALCHYMIST.

IRa^mOUb  2Lull£,  or  Raymon  Lull , comes  the  next  in  order.  He  was
born  in  the  island  of  Majorca , in  the  year  1225,  of  a family  of  the  first
distinction,  though  he  did  not  assume  his  chymical  character  till  towards  the
latter  part  of  his  life.

Upon  his  applying  himself  to  chymistry,  he  soon  began  to  preach  another
sort  of  doctrine ; insomuch  that,  speaking  of  that  art,  he  says  it  is  only  to
be  required  by  dint  of  experiment  and  practice,  and  cannot  be  conveyed  to
the  understanding  by  idle  words  and  sounds.  He  is  the  first  author  I can
find,  who  considers  alchymy  expressly  with  a view  to  the  universal  medicine:
but  after  him  it  became  a popular  pursuit,  and  the  libraries  were  full  of
writings  in  that  vein.

Lully , himself,  beside  what  he  wrote  in  the  scholastic  way,  has  a good
many  volumes  wrote  after  his  conversion:  ’tis  difficult  to  say  how  many;  for
it  was  a common  practice  with  his  disciples  and  followers  to  usher  in  their
performances  under  their  master’s  name.  “I  have  perused  (says  Boerhaave)
“the  best  part  of  his  works,  and  find  them,  beyond  expectation,  excellent:
“insomuch,  that  I have  been  almost  tempted  to  doubt  whether  they  could  be
“the  work  of  that  age,  so  full  are  they  of  the  experiments  and  observations
“which  occur  in  our  later  writers,  that  either  the  books  must  be  supposititious,
“or  else  the  ancient  chymists  must  have  been  acquainted  with  a world  of
“things  which  pass  for  the  discoveries  of  modern  practice.  He  gives  very
“plain  intimations  of  phosphorus,  which  the  calls  the  Vestal  Fire , the  Ofla
“ LLelmontii , tfec.  and  yet  it  is  certain  he  wrote  200  years  before  either  LLelmont ,
“or  my  Lord  Bacon."

He  travelled  into  Mauritania , where  he  is  supposed  to  have  first  met  with
chymistry,  and  to  have  imbibed  the  principles  of  his  art  from  the  writings  of
Geber:  which  opinion  is  countenanced  by  the  conformity  observable  between
the  two.  The  Spanish  authors  ascribe  the  occasion  of  his  journey  to  an
amour:  he  had  fallen  in  love,  it  seems,  with  a maiden  of  that  country,  who
obstinately  refused  his  addresses.  Upon  enquiring  into  the  reason,  she
shewed  him  a cancered  breast.  Lully , like  a generous  gallant,  immediately
resolved  on  a voyage  to  Mauritania , where  Geber  had  lived,  to  seek  some
relief  for  his  mistress.  He  ended  his  days  in  Africa;  where,  after  having


276  DBtograpbta  Hnttqua.

taken  up  the  quality  of  missionary,  and  preaching  the  gospel  among  the
infidels,  he  was  stoned  to  death*.


GEORGE  RIPLEY.

George  IRiplC^,  an  Englishman  by  nation,  and  by  profession,  a canon  or
monk  of  Britlingthon.  His  writings  were  all  very  good  in  their  kind,  being
wrote  exactly  in  the  style  of  Bacon,  only  more  allegorical.  As  he  was  no
physician,  he  does  not  meddle  with  any  thing  of  the  preparations  of  that
kind;  but  treats  much  of  the  cure  of  metals,  which  in  his  language  is  the
purification  and  maturation  thereof.  He  rigorously  pursued  Geber's  and
Bacon's  principles,  and  maintained,  for  instance,  with  new  evidence,  that
mercury  is  the  universal  matter  of  all  metals;  that  this  set  over  the  fire,  with  the
purest  sulphur,  will  become  gold,  but  that  if  either  of  them  be  sick  or  leprous,
i.  e.  infected  with  any  impurity,  instead  of  gold,  some  other  metal  will  be
produced.  He  adds,  that  as  mercury  and  sulphur  are  sufficient  for  the  making
of  all  metals:  so  of  these  may  an  universal  medicine,  or  metal,  be  produced
for  curing  of  all  the  sick;  which  some  mistakenly  understood  of  an  universal
metal,  efficacious  in  all  the  diseases  of  the  human  body.


JOHN,  AND  ISAAC  HOLLANDUS.

were  two  brothers,  both  of  them  of  great  parts  and  ingenuity,  and
wrote  on  the  dry  topics  of  chymistry.  They  lived  in  the  13th  century,  but
this  is  not  assured.  The  whole  art  of  enamelling  is  their  invention,  as  is  also,
that  of  colouring  glass,  and  precious  stones,  by  application  of  thin  metal
plates.  Their  writings  are  in  the  form  of  processes,  and  they  describe  all
their  operations  to  the  most  minute  circumstances.  The  treatise  of  enamelling
is  esteemed  the  greatest  and  most  finished  part  of  their  works:  whatever
relates  to  the  fusion,  separation,  and  preparation  of  metals,  is  here  delivered.
They  write  excellently  of  distillation,  fermentation,  putrefaction,  and  their
effects;  and  seem  to  have  understood  at  least,  as  much  of  these  matters,  as

♦The  history  of  this  eminent  adept  is  very  confused.  Mutius,  an  author,  is  express,  that  that  good
man  being  wholly  intent  upon  religion,  never  applied  himself  either  to  chymistry  or  the  philosopher’s
stone : and  yet  we  have  various  accounts  of  his  making  gold.  Among  a variety  of  authors,  Gregory  of
Thoulouse  asserts  that  “ Lully  offered  Edward  III.  king  of  England,  a supply  of  six  millions  to  make
war  against  the  Infidels."  Besides  manuscripts,  the  following  printed  pieces  hear  Lully’s  name,  viz.
The  Theory  of  the  Philosopher’s  Stone:  The  Practise:  The  Transmutation  of  Metals:  The  Codieil:
The  Vade-Mecum : The  Book  of  Experiments : The  Explanation  of  his  Testament : The  Abridgements,
or  Accusations:  and  The  Power  of  Riches.


Biograjpbta  Hntiqua.


277

any  of  the  moderns  have  done.  They  furnish  a great  many  experiments  on
human  blood;  which  Van  Helmont  and  Mr.  Boyle  have  since  taken  for  new
discoveries.  I have  a very  large  work  in  folio,  under  their  name,  of  the
construction  of  chymical  furnaces  and  instruments.  Their  writings  are  as
easily  purchased,  as  they  are  worthy  of  perusal,  on  account  of  valuable
secrets  in  them,  which  may  pave  the  way  for  greater  discoveries.  See
Boekhaave,  p.  21.


PHILIPPUS  AUREOLUS  THEOPHRASTUS  PARACELSUS
BOMBAST  DE  HOENHEYM,

THE  PRINCE  OF  PHYSICIANS  AND  PHILOSOPHERS  BY  FIRE;

GRAND  PARADOXICAL  PHYSICIAN;

THE  TRISMEGISTUS  OF  SWITZERLAND;

FIRST  REFORMER  OF  CHYMICAL  PHILOSOPHY;

ADEPT  IN  ALCHYMY,  CABALA,  AND  MAGIC;
nature’s  FAITHFUL  SECRETARY;

MASTER  OF  THE  ELIXIR  OF  LIFE  AND  THE  PHILOSOPHER’S  STONE;

AND  THE

GREAT  MONARCH  OF  CHYMICAL  SECRETS;

Now  living  in  his  Tomb,  whither  he  retired  disgusted  with  the  Vices  and  Follies  of
Mankind,  supporting  himself  with  his  own

QUINTESSENTIA  VIT^E.

lPatacelSUS  was  born,  as  he  himself  writes,  in  the  year  1494,  in  a village
in  Switzerland , called  Hoenheym  (q.  d.  ab  alto  nido)  two  miles  distant  from
Zurich.  His  father  was  a natural  son  of  a great  master  of  the  Teutonic  order,
and  had  been  brought  up  to  medicine,  which  he  practised  accordingly  in  that
obscure  corner.  He  was  master  of  an  excellent  and  copious  library,  and  is
said  to  have  become  eminent  in  his  art,  so  that  Paracelsus  always  speaks  of
him  with  the  highest  deference,  and  calls  him  laudatissimus  medicus  in  eo
vico.  Of  such  a father  did  Paracelsus  receive  his  first  discipline.  After  a
little  course  of  study  at  home  he  was  committed  to  the  care  of  Trithemius ,
the  celebrated  abbot  of  Spanheim , who  had  the  character  of  an  adept  himself,
and  wrote  of  the  Cabala , being  at  that  time  a reputed  magician.  Here  he
chiefly  learnt  languages  and  letters;  after  which  he  was  removed  to  Sigis-
mund  Fugger  to  learn  medicine,  surgery,  and  chymistry;  all  these  masters,
especially  the  last,  Paracelsus  ever  speaks  of  with  great  veneration;  so  that
he  was  not  altogether  so  rude  and  unpolished  as  is  generally  imagined.  Thus
much  we  learn  from  his  own  writings,  and  especially  the  preface  to  his  Lesser


278  JBtoQrapbia  Hntiqua.

Surgery , where  he  defends  himself  against  his  accusers.  At  twenty  years  of
age  he  undertook  a journey  through  Germany  and  Hungary , visiting  all  the
mines  of  principle  note,  and  contracting  an  acquaintance  with  the  miners  and
workmen,  by  which  means  he  learnt  every  thing  relative  to  metals,  and  the
art  thereof:  in  this  enquiry  he  shewed  an  uncommon  assiduity  and  resolution.
He  gives  us  an  account  of  the  many  dangers  he  had  run  from  earthquakes,
falls  of  stones,  floods  of  water,  cataracts,  exhalations,  damps,  heat,  hunger,
and  thirst;  and  every  where  takes  occasion  to  insist  on  the  value  of  an  art
acquired  on  such  hard  terms.  The  same  inclination  carried  him  as  far  as
Muscovy , where  he  was  in  quest  of  mines  near  the  frontiers  of  Tartary  he
was  taken  prisoner  by  that  people,  and  carried  before  the  great  Cham;  during
his  captivity  there  he  learnt  various  secrets,  till,  upon  the  Cham’s  sending  an
embassy  to  the  Grand  Signior,  with  his  own  son  at  the  head  of  it,  Paracelsus
was  sent  along  with  him  in  quality  of  companion.  On  this  occasion  he  came
to  Constantinople  in  the  twenty-eighth  year  of  his  age,  and  was  there  taught
the  secret  of  the  Philosophers  stone  by  a generous  Arabian , who  made  him
this  noble  present,  as  he  calls  it,  Azoth.  This  incident  we  have  from  Helmont
only;  for  Paracelsus  himself,  who  is  ample  enough  on  his  other  travels,  says
nothing  of  his  captivity.  At  his  return  from  TurJcey  he  practised  as  a
surgeon  in  the  Imperial  army,  and  performed  many  excellent  cures  therein;
indeed,  it  cannot  be  denied  but  that  he  was  excellent  in  that  art,  of  which
his  great  surgery,  printed  in  folio,  will  ever  be  a standing  monument.  At  his
return  to  his  native  country,  he  assumed  the  title  of  utriusque  medicince
doctor , or  doctor  both  of  external  and  internal  medicine  or  surgery;  and  grew
famous  in  both,  performing  far  beyond  what  the  practice  of  that  time  could
pretend  to;  and  no  wonder,  for  medicine  was  then  in  a poor  condition;  the
practice  and  the  very  language  was  all  Galenical  and  Arabic ; nothing  was
inculcated  but  Aristotle , Galen,  and  the  Arabs ; Hippocrates  was  not  read;
nay,  there  was  no  edition  of  his  writings,  and  scarce  was  he  ever  mentioned.
Their  theory  consisted  in  the  knowledge  of  the  four  degrees,  the  tempera-
ments, Ac.  and  their  whole  practice  was  confined  to  venesection,  purgation,
vomiting,  clysmata,  Ac.  Now,  in  this  age  a new  disease  had  broke  out,  and
spread  itself  over  Europe , viz.  the  venereal  disorder;  the  common  Galenic
medicines  had  here  pi*oved  altogether  ineffectual;  bleeding,  purging,  and
cleansing  medicines  were  vain;  and  the  physicians  were  at  their  wit’s  end.
Jac  Carpus,  a celebrated  anatomist  and  surgeon  at  Bologne,  had  alone  been
master  of  the  cure,  which  was  by  mercury  administered  to  raise  a salivation;
he  had  attained  this  secret  in  his  travels  through  Spain  and  Italy , and
practised  it  for  some  years,  and  with  such  success  and  applause,  that  it  is
incredible  what  immense  riches  this  one  nostrum  brought  him  (it  is  said  upon
good  authority,  that  in  one  year  he  cleared  six  thousand  pistoles)  he  acknow-


Bioprapbia  Hnttqua.


279


ledged  himself,  that  he  did  not  know  the  end  of  his  own  wealth;  for  the
captains,  merchants,  governors,  commanders,  c6c.  who  had  brought  that  filthy
disease  from  America , were  very  well  content  to  give  him  what  sums  he
pleased  to  ask  to  free  them  from  it. — Paracelsus  about  this  time  having
likewise  learnt  the  properties  of  mercury,  and  most  likely  from  Carpus , who
undertook  the  same  cure  but  in  a very  different  manner;  for  whereas  Carpus
did  all  by  salivation — Paracelsus  making  up  his  preparation  in  pills  attained
his  ends  in  a gentler  manner.  By  this  he  informs  us  he  cured  the  itch,
leprosy,  ulcers,  Naples  disease,  and  even  gout,  all  which  disorders  were
incurable  on  the  foot  of  popular  practice,  and  thus  was  the  great  basis  laid
for  all  his  future  fame  and  fortune.

Paracelsus,  thus  furnished  with  arts,  and  arrived  at  a degree  of  eminence
beyond  any  of  his  brothers  in  the  profession,  was  invited  by  the  curators  of
the  university  of  Bazil  to  the  chair  of  professor  of  medicine  and  philosophy
in  that  university.  The  art  of  printing  was  now  a new  thing,  the  taste  for
learning  and  art  was  warm*,  and  the  magistracy  of  Bazil  were  very  industrious
in  procuring  professors  of  reputation  from  all  parts  of  the  world.  They  had
already  got  Desid.  Erasmus , professor  of  theology , and  J.  Oporinus  professor
of  the  Greek  tongue;  and  now  in  1527  Paracelsus  was  associated  in  the  33d
year  of  his  age.  Upon  his  first  entrance  into  that  province,  having  to  make
a public  speech  before  the  university,  he  posted  up  a very  elegant  advertise-
ment over  the  doors  inviting  every  body  to  his  doctrine.  At  his  first  lecture
he  ordered  a brass  vessel  to  be  brought  into  the  middle  of  the  school,  where
after  he  had  cast  in  sulphur  and  nitre,  in  a very  solemn  manner  he  burnt  the
books  of  Galen  and  Avicenna,  alledging  that  he  had  held  a dispute  with  them
in  the  gates  of  hell,  and  had  fairly  routed  and  overcome  them.  And  hence
he  proclaimed,  that  the  physicians  should  all  follow  him;  and  no  longer  style
themselves  Galenists,  but  Paracelsists. — “Know,”  says  he,  “physicians,  my
cap  has  more  learning  in  it  than  all  your  heads,  my  beard  has  more  experience
than  your  whole  academies:  Greeks,  Latins,  French,  Germans,  Italians.  I
will  be  your  king.”

While  he  was  here  professor  he  read  his  book  Be  Tartaro  de  Gradibus,  and
Be  compositionibus,  in  public  lectures,  to  which  he  added  a commentary  on
the  book  Be  Gradibus;  all  these  he  afterwards  printed  at  Bazil  for  the  use
of  his  disciples;  so  that  these  must  be  allowed  for  genuine  writings;  about

* We  feel  ouselves  happy  in  being  able  to  say,  that  the  taste  for  learning  and  arts(nothwithstand-
ing  the  follies  of  the  age)  was  never  more  prevalent  than  in  the  present  time;  the  year  1801
commences  an  age  of  flourishing  science,  in  which  even  our  females  seem  to  wish  to  bear  a part  —
instance,  a lady  of  quality,  who  went  in  her  carriage  the  other  day  to  Foster-lane,  Cheapside,  and
bought  a portable  blacksmith’s  forge  for  her  private  amusement ; her  person  was  strong  and  athletic,
and  very  fit  forthe  manual  practice  of  handling  iron,  and  working  other  metallic  experiments.


280  3Siograpbia  Hntfqua.

the  same  time  he  wrote  De  Calculo , which  performance  Helmont  speaks  of
with  high  approbation.

Notwithstanding  his  being  professor  in  so  learned  an  university  he  under-
stood hut  a very  little  Latin ; his  long  travels,  and  application  to  business,
and  disuse  of  the  language,  had  very  much  disqualified  him  for  writing  or
speaking  therein ; and  his  natural  warmth  rendered  him  very  unfit  for  teach-
ing at  all.  Hence,  though  his  auditors  and  disciples  were  at  first  very
numerous,  yet  they  very  much  fell  off,  and  left  him  preaching  to  the  walls.
— In  the  mean  time  he  abandoned  himself  to  drinking  at  certain  seasons;
Oporinus , who  was  always  near  him,  has  the  good  nature  to  say,  he  was  never
sober;  but  that  he  tippled  on  from  morning  to  night,  and  from  night  to  morn-
ing, in  a continual  round.  At  length  he  soon  became  weary  of  his  professor-
ship, and  after  three  years  continuance  therein  relinquished  it,  saying,  that
no  language  besides  the  German  was  proper  to  reveal  the  secrets  of  chymistry
in.

After  this  he  again  betook  himself  to  an  itinerant  life,  travelling  and
drinking,  and  living  altogether  at  inns  and  taverns,  continually  flushed  with
liquor,  and  yet  working  many  admirable  cures  in  his  way.  In  this  manner
he  passed  four  years  from  the  43d  to  the  47th  year  of  his  life,  when  he  died
at  an  inn  at  Saltzburg , at  the  sign  of  the  White  Horse,  on  a bench  in  the
chimney-corner.  Oporinus  relates,  that  after  he  had  put  on  any  new  thing,
it  never  came  off  his  back  till  he  had  worn  it  into  rags;  he  adds,  that
notwithstanding  his  excess  in  point  of  drinking,  he  was  never  addicted  to
venery. — But  there  is  this  reason  for  it : when  he  was  a child,  being  neglected
by  his  nurse,  a hag  gelded  him  in  a place  where  three  ways  met,  and  so  made
a eunuch  of  him;  accordingly  in  his  writings  he  omits  no  opportunity  of
railing  against  women. — Such  is  the  life  of  Paracelsus;  such  is  the  immortal
man,  who  sick  of  life  retired  into  a corner  of  the  world,  and  there  supports
himself  with  his  own  Quintessence  of  Life.

In  his  life  time  he  only  published  three  or  four  books,  but  after  his  death
he  grew  prodigiously  voluminous,  scarce  a year  passing  but  one  book  or  other
was  published  under  his  name,  said  to  be  found  in  some  old  wall,  ceiling,  or
the  like.  All  the  works  published  under  his  name  were  printed  together  at
Strasburg  in  the  year  1603,  in  three  volumes  folio , and  again  in  1616.  J.
Oporinus , that  excellent  professor  and  printer,  before  named,  who  constantly
attended  Paracelsus  for  three  years  as  his  menial  servant,  in  hopes  of  learning
some  of  his  secrets,  who  published  the  works  of  Vesalius,  and  is  supposed  to
have  put  them  in  that  elegant  language  wherein  they  now  appear:  this
Oporinus , in  an  epistle  to  Monavius,  concerning  the  life  of  Paracelsus,  pro-
fesses himself  surprized  to  find  so  many  works  of  his  master ; for,  that  in  all
the  time  he  was  with  him  never  wrote  a word  himself,  nor  ever  took  pen  in


33tograpbia  Hnttqua,  28l

hand,  but  forced  Oporinus  to  write  what  he  dictated;  and  Oporinus  wondered
much  how  such  coherent  words  and  discourse  which  might  even  become  the
wisest  persons,  should  come  from  the  mouth  of  a drunken  man.  His  works
called  Archidoxa  Medicinm,  as  containing  the  principles  and  maxims  of  the
art,  nine  books  of  which  were  published  at  first;  and  the  author  in  the  pro-
legomena to  them,  speaks  thus: — “I  intended  to  have  published  my  ten  books
“of  Archidoxa;  but  finding  mankind  unworthy  of  such  a treasure  as  the
“ tenth,  I keep  it  close  in  my  occiput,  and  have  firmly  resolved  never  to  bring
“it  thence, till  you  have  all  abjured  Aristotle,  Avicen,  and  Galen,  and  have
“sworn  allegiance  to  Paracelsus  alone.”

However,  the  book  did  at  length  get  abroad,  though  by  what  means  is  not
known ; it  is  undoubtedly  an  excellent  piece,  and  may  be  ranked  among  the
principal  productions  in  the  way  of  chymistry,  that  ever  appeared;  whether
or  no  it  be  Paracelsus’s , we  cannot  affirm,  but  there  is  one  thing  speaks  in  its
behalf,  viz.  it  contains  a great  many  things  which  have  since  been  trumped
up  for  great  nostrums ; and  Van  HelmonCs  Lithonthriptic  and  Alcahest  are
apparently  taken  from  hence;  among  the  genuine  writings  of  Paracelsus,  are
likewise  reckoned,  that  De  Ortu  Rerum  Naturalium,  Pe  Transformatione
Rerum  Naturalium , and  De  Vita  Rerum  Naturalium.  The  rest  are  spurious
or  very  doubtful,  particularly  his  theological  works.

The  great  fame  and  success  of  this  man,  which  many  attribute  to  his
possessing  an  universal  medicine  may  be  accounted  for  from  other  principles.
It  is  certain  he  was  well  acquainted  with  the  use  and  virtue  of  opium , which
the  Galenists  of  those  times  all  rejected  as  cold  in  the  fourth  degree.
Oporinus  relates  that  he  made  up  certain  little  pills  of  the  colour,  figure,  and
size  of  mouse-turds,  which  were  nothing  but  opium.  This  he  called  by  a
barbarous  sort  of  a name,  his  laudanum;  q.  d.  laudable  medicine;  he  always
carried  them  with  him,  and  prescribed  them  in  dyssenteries,  and  all  cases
attended  with  intense  pains,  anxieties,  deliriums,  and  obstinate  wakings;
but  to  be  alone  possessed  of  the  use  of  so  extraordinary  and  noble  a medica-
ment as  opium,  was  sufficient  to  make  him  famous.

Another  grand  remedy  with  Paracelsus  was  turbith  mineral;  this  is  first
mentioned  in  his  Olein  Spital  RoecJc,  or  Chirurgia  Minor,  where  he  gives  the
preparation. — In  respect  of  the  philosopher’s  stone  Oporinus  says,  he  often
wondered  to  see  him  one  day  without  a farthing  in  his  pocket,  and  the  next
day,  full  of  money;  that  he  took  nothing  with  him  when  he  went  abroad.
He  adds,  that  he  would  often  borrow  money  of  his  companions,  the  carmen
and  porters,  and  pay  it  again  in  twenty-four  hours  with  extravagant  interest,
and  yet  from  what  fund  nobody  but  himself  knew.  In  the  Theatrum
Alchemice  he  mentions  a treasure,  hid  under  a certain  tree;  and  from  such


282


JBtograpbla  Hnttqna,


like  grounds  they  supposed  him  to  possess  the  art  of  making  gold;  but  it  was
hard  if  such  noble  nostrums  as  he  possessed  would  not  subsist  him  without
the  lapis  philosophorum.


JOHN  RUDOLPH  GLAUBER.

5*  1R.  0laUbCt,  a celebrated  chymist  of  Amsterdam , accounted  the  Para-
celsus of  his  time:  he  had  travelled  much  and  by  that  means  attained  to
a great  many  secrets.  He  wrote  above  thirty  tracts,  in  some  of  which  he
acted  the  physician;  in  others,  the  adept;  and  in  others,  the  metallist.  He
principally  excelled  in  the  last  capacity,  and  alchymy.

He  was  a person  of  easy  and  genteel  address,  and,  beyond  dispute,  well
versed  in  chymistry:  being  author  of  the  salt,  still  used  in  the  shops,  called
Sal  Olauberi;  as  also  of  all  the  salts,  by  oil  of  vitriol,  tfec.  He  is  noted  for
extolling  his  arcanse  and  preparations,  and  is  reported  to  have  traded  unfairly
with  his  secrets:  the  best  of  them  he  would  sell,  at  excessive  rates,  to  chymists
and  others,  and  would  afterwards  re-sell  them,  or  make  them  public,  to
increase  his  fame;  whence  he  was  continually  at  variance  with  them.

The  principal  of  his  writings  are  JDe  Furnis,  and  De  Metallis , which,
though  wrote  in  Dutch,  have  been  translated  into  Latin  and  English.  It  was
Glauber  who  shewed,  before  the  States  of  Holland , that  there  is  gold  con-
tained in  sand;  and  made  an  experiment  thereof  to  their  entire  satisfaction:
but  so  much  lead,  fire,  and  labour,  being  employed  in  procuring  it,  that  the
art  would  not  pay  charges*.  However  he  plainly  demonstrated,  that  there  is
no  earth,  sand,  sulphur,  or  salt,  or  other  matter,  but  what  contains  gold  in  a
greater  or  less  quantity.  In  short,  he  possessed  a great  many  secrets,  which
are  at  this  time  in  the  hands  of  some  of  our  modern  chymists.


DOCTOR  DEE,  and  SIR  EDWARD  KELLY.

Doctor  Jobn  Dee,  anb  Sir  Ebwarb  1ftell£,  knight,  being  professed

associates,  their  story  is  best  delivered  together.  They  have  some  title  to  the
philosopher’s  stone  in  common  fame.  Dee , besides  his  being  deep  in  chymist-
ry, was  very  well  versed  in  mathematics,  particularly  geometry  and  astrology:
but  Sir  Edward  Kelly  appears  to  have  been  the  leading  man  in  alchymy.
In  some  of  Dee's  books  are  found  short  memoirs  of  the  events  of  his  opera-

fclt  has  been  asserted  by  several  eminent  chymists,  that  it  might  be  performed  to  advantage,  as
the  process  is  very  simple,  and  takes  up  but  little  time : all  that  is  requisite  is  silver,  sand,  and  lithargei


JBtograpbia  Hnttqua,


283

tions:  as,  Donum  Dei , five  ounces.  And  in  another  place,  “ This  day  Edward
Kelly  discovered  the  grand  secret  to  me,  sit  nomen  Domini  benedictum."
Ashmole  says,  absolutely,  they  were  masters  of  the  powder  of  projection,  and,
with  a piece  not  bigger  than  the  smallest  grain  of  sand,  turned  an  ounce  and
a quarter  of  mercury  into  pure  gold:  but  here  is  an  equivoque;  for  granting
them  possessed  of  the  powder  of  projection,  it  does  not  appear  they  had  the
secret  of  making  it.  The  story  is,  that  they  found  a considerable  quantity  of
it  in  the  ruins  of  Glastonbury  Abbey,  with  which  they  performed  many  notable
transmutations  for  the  satisfaction  of  several  persons.  Kelly,  in  particular,  is
said  to  have  given  away  rings  of  gold  wire  to  the  tune  of  40001.  at  the
marriage  of  his  servant  maid.  And  a piece  of  a brass  warming-pan  being  cut
out  by  order  of  queen  Elizabeth,  and  sent  to  them  when  abroad,  was  returned
pure  gold.  Likewise  Dee  made  a present  to  the  landgrave  of  Hesse  of  twelve
Hungarian  horses,  which  could  never  be  expected  from  a man  of  his  circum-
stances without  some  extraordinary  means.

In  the  year  1591  they  went  into  Germany , and  settled  some  time  at
Trebona,  in  Bohemia;  the  design  of  which  journey  is  very  mysterious.  Some
say  their  design  was  to  visit  the  alchymists  of  these  countries,  in  order  to  get
some  light  into  the  art  of  making  the  powder.  Accordingly  they  travelled
through  Poland  &c.  in  quest  thereof,  and,  some  say,  attained  it;  others  say,
not.  Others,  again,  will  make  them  sent  by  the  queen  as  spies,  and  that
alchymy  was  only  a pretence,  or  means,  to  bring  them  into  confidence  with
the  people.  But  what  will  give  most  light  upon  this  subject,  is  a book,  now
extant,  wrote  by  Dee,  entitled,  Dee's  Conferences  with  Spirits,  but  some
conjecture  it  to  be  with  Trithemius's  mere  Cryptography;  which  light  Doctor
Hook  takes  it  in.  However,  this  book  is  truly  curious  in  respect  of  the  many
magical  operations  there  displayed,  it  being  wrote  journal-fashion  by  the
Doctor’s  own  hand,  and  relates  circumstantially  the  conferences  he  held  with
some  spirits  (either  good  or  bad)  in  company  with  Sir  Edward  Kelly.

They  were  no  sooner  gone  out  of  England  than  Dee's  library  was  opened
by  the  queen’s  order,  and  4000  books  and  700  choice  manuscripts,  were
taken  away  on  pretence  of  his  being  a conjuror.  That  princess  soon  after
used  means  to  bring  him  back  again,  which  a quarrel  with  Kelly  happened  to
promote,  he  returned  in  1596,  and  in  1598  was  made  warden  of  Man-
chester college,  where  he  died.*

Some  very  curious  manuscripts,  with  the  chrystal  he  used  to  invoke  the
spirits  into,  are  at  this  time  carefully  laid  up  in  the  British  Museum .f

* Authors  differ  very  much  in  respect  of  the  place  where  Doctor  Dee  resigned  his  life : it  appears
from  the  most  eminent  historians  that  he  died  at  his  house  at  Mortlake.

t Although  Dee’s  manuscripts,  and  his  Magic  Chrystal  are  to  he  seen  at  the  Museum,  there  are  six
or  seven  individuals  in  London  who  assert  they  have  the  stone  in  their  possession;  thereby  wishing  to
deceive  the  credulous,  and  tempt  them  to  a purchase  at  an  enormous  price.


284


Btograpbta  Hntiqua.


As  for  Sir  Edward  Kelly , the  Emperor  suspecting  he  had  the  secret  of  the
philosophers  in  his  possession,  clapped  him  up  in  prison,  in  hopes  to  become
a sharer  in  the  profits  of  transmutation;  however,  Kelly  defeated  his
intentions.  After  having  been  twice  imprisoned,  the  last  time  he  was  shut
up  endeavouring  to  make  his  escape  by  means  of  the  sheets  of  his  bed  tied
together,  they  happened  to  slip  the  knots,  and  so  let  him  fail,  by  which  he
broke  his  leg,  and  soon  after  lost  his  life.


THE  CONCLUSION.

Having  collected  the  most  interesting  and  curious  accounts  of  the  lives  of
those  great  men,  so  famous  for  their  speculations  in  philosophic  learning,
we  draw  to  a conclusion;  having  only  to  add,  that  we  have  sufficiently
discovered  in  this  biographical  sketch  whatsoever  was  necessary  to  prove  the
authenticity  of  Our  Art,  which  we  have  delivered  faithfully  and  impartially,
noting,  at  the  same  time,  the  various  opinions  of  different  men  at  different
ages;  likewise,  we  have  taken  sufficient  trouble  to  explain  what  is  meant  by
the  word  Magic , and  to  clear  up  the  term  from  the  imputation  of  any  diaboli-
cal association  with  evil  spirits,  &c.  Also,  how  nearly  it  is  allied  to  our
religious  duties,  we  refer  the  reader  to  the  annotations  under  the  article
Zoroaster,  where  we  have  spoke  of  the  Magi , or  wise  men,  proving  the  first
who  adored  Christ  were  actually  magicians.  It  is  enough  that  we  have  spoke
of  the  principal  characters  renowned  in  past  ages  for  their  laborious  inquisi-
tion into  the  labyrinth  of  occult  and  natural  philosophy;  there  are  many
other  philosophers  standing  upon  ancient  and  modern  record.  A copious  and
general  biography  falls  not  within  the  limits  of  our  work.  We  have  intro-
duced some  characters  (applicable  to  the  subject  before  us)  most  distinguished
for  occult  learning;  of  which  kind  of  science,  whether  by  a particular  influ-
ence of  planetary  configuration,  which  may  have  directed  and  impelled  my
mind  and  intellects  to  the  observation  and  study  of  nature,  and  her  simple
operations,  as  well  as  to  the  more  occult,  I leave  to  the  judgement  of  the
astrologers,  to  whose  inspection  I submit  a figure  of  my  nativity,  which  I
shall  annex  to  a sketch  of  my  own  history,  which  I mean  to  make  the  subject
of  a future  publication,  including  a vast  number  of  curious  experiments  in
occult  and  chymical  operations,  which  have  fell  either  under  my  own  obser-
vation, or  have  been  transmitted  to  me  from  others.  In  respect  of  the
astrologic  art,  (as  we  have  already  observed)  it  has  such  an  affinity  with
talismanic  experiments,  &c.  that  no  one  can  bring  any  work  to  a complete
effect  without  a due  knowledge  and  observation  of  the  qualities  and  effects


JBtograpFMa  Hntiqua.  285

of  the  constellations  ( which  occasioned  us  to  give  it  the  title  of  the  Constel-
latory  Art;)  likewise,  a man  must  be  well  acquainted  with  the  nature,
qualities,  and  effects,  of  the  four  elements,  and  of  the  animal,  vegetable,  and
mineral  kingdoms;  which  knowledge  cannot  better  be  obtained  than  by
chymical  experience,  for  it  does,  as  I may  say,  unlock  the  secret  chambers  of
nature,  and  introduces  the  student  into  a world  of  knowledge,  which  could
not  be  attained  but  by  chymical  analyzation,  whereby  we  decompound  mixt
bodies,  and  reduce  them  to  their  simple  natures,  and  come  to  a thorough
acquaintance  with  those  powerful  and  active  principles,  causing  the  wonder-
ful transmutations  of  one  compound  body  into  another  of  a different  species,
as  is  to  be  seen  in  the  course  of  our  operations  upon  salts  and  metals,  giving
us  clear  and  comprehensive  ideas  of  the  principles  of  life  or  generation,  and
putrefaction  or  death.

Finally,  to  conclude,  we  are  chiefly  to  consider  one  thing  to  be  attained  as
the  ground  of  perfection  in  the  rest:  i.  e.  The  great  First  Cause, the  Eternal
Wisdom , to  know  the  Creator  by  the  contemplation  of  the  creature.  This  is
the  grand  secret  of  the  philosophers,  and  the  master-key  to  all  sciences  both
human  and  divine,  for  without  this  we  are  still  wandering  in  a labyrinth  of
perplexity  and  errors,  of  darkness  and  obscurity:  for  this  is  the  sum  and
perfection  of  all  learning,  to  live  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  in  love  and  charity
with  all  men.

FINIS.


fQtA$OOW
VA3  (VERITY
I USB ARv:


•H  o^jU>tA
