The Book of Good Counsels — Hitopadesha (Edwin Arnold translation, 1861)
========================================================================
Vishnu Sarma (attributed) — The Book of Good Counsels, from the Sanskrit of the Hitopadesha, translated by Sir Edwin Arnold (London: Smith, Elder & Co., 1861), public domain. The classic Sanskrit fable-collection — 'the father of all fables'; Arnold's 1861 rendering is the standard Victorian translation. Scan via Internet Archive.

Google 


This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 


■ m * MM— — m 


kll.n in >]{__ 


' MIWMIMUMtJMmJM 


1 
I 

i 
1 


* HARVARD COLLEGE * 


LIBRARY 


FROM THE LIBRARY OP 

THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON 

CLASS OF I 84 1 


1 


THE GIFT OF 

MRS. THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON 

AND 

MARGARET HIGGINSON BARNEY 


$ 


s 

k 


^mmmmmwfW^iwmmm mmmwi 


The Lion, the Jackals, and the Bull. 


the 


BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS: 


From the Sanskrit of the " Hitopadesa." 


BY EDWIN ARNOLD, M. A 

Late Principal of the Poona College. 


WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY HARRISON WEIR. 


LONDON: SMITH, ELDER & CO 


M.DCCC.LX1 


\ I f 


1*aV \i \o-^ 


HARVAhD CU! LC2E LI3RA.1Y 

Cirrc;-" 
mas. nrrv v:: r .nr.r:: s'iriirjnoN 


i<^<; 


A .i 


HARVARD UNIVERSITY 
UBRAHY 

OCT 5 W96 


'> 


*iv 


A 


jjnlhaiiflit. 


-•o*- 


Co bou, tear SliKtife— to toljom httitiit 00 toell?— 
Crue Counsellor avto triefc, at eberu fiftift 

5 bring mg " 9$oo& of Conweto : " let it tell 
3Largrne00 of lobe b» littlene00 of gift : 

ftnfc talte tfjifi grototj of foreign filucs from me, 
(ft 0cYjoIat'0 tfjanb0 for gentle Tjelp in toil) 

31<Bfjo0e leaf, " tfjougf) fcarft," lilte iH (I ton's Jftoemons, 
" Bear0 a bright goUren flotoer, if not in tfjio soil." 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


-*&•- 


The Lion, the Jackals, and the Bull 
The Monkey and the Wedge 
The Old Ilare and the Elephants 
The Dyed Jackal 


To face 


Title. 


!» 


P- 


49 


11 


P- 


87 


11 


P- 


97 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Preface ....... ix 

Introduction ...... 1 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 

1 . The Story of the Tiger and the Traveller 

2. The Story of the Jackal, Deer, and Crow 

3. The Story of the Vulture, the Cat, and the Birds 

4. The Story of the Dead Game and the Jackal . 

5. The Prince and the Wife of the Merchant's Son 

6. The Story of the Old Jackal and the Elephant 

THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 

1 . The Story of the Lion, the Jackals, and the Bull 

2. The Story of the Monkey and the Wedge 

3. The Story of the Washerman's Jackass 

4. The Story of the Cat who served the Lion 

5. The Story of the Terrible Bell . 

6. The Story of the Prince and the Procuress who suffered 

for their own Faults .... 

7. The Story of the Black Snake and the Golden Chain 

8. The Story of the Lion and the Old Hare 

9. The Story of the Wagtail and the Sea . 


9 
16 
18 
33 
37 
39 


45 
49 
50 
58 
61 

65 
69 
70 
74 


Via CONTENTS. 

WAR. 

1. The Battle of the Swans and Peacocks . 

2. The Story of the Weaver Birds and the Monkeys 

3. The Story of the Old Hare and the Elephants 

4. The Story of the Heron and the Crow . 

5. The Story of the Appeased Wheelwright 

6. The Story of the Dyed Jackal . 

7. The Story of the Faithful Rajpoot 

PEACE. 

1. The Treaty between the Peacocks and the Swans 

2. The Story of the Tortoise and the Geese 

3. The Story of Fate and the Three Fishes 

4. The Story of the Unabashed Wife 

5. The Story of the Herons and the Mongoose 

6. The Story of the Recluse and the Mouse 

7. The Story of the Crane and the Crab . 

8. The Story of the Brahman and the Pans 

9. The Duel of the Giants .... 

10. The Story of the Brahman and the Goat 

11. The Story of the Camel, the Lion, and his Court 

12. The Story of the Frogs and the Old Serpent . 

Notes ..... 


PAGE 

82 
83 
86 
89 
91 
96 
101 


114 
115 
116 
116 
118 
121 
122 
124 
125 
130 
131 
135 

145 


PEE E ACE. 


A story-book from ilio Sanskrit at least possossos tho 
minor merit of novelty. The " perfect language" has 
been hitherto regarded as the province of Scholars, and 
few of these even have found time or taste to search its 
treasures. And yet among them is the key to the 
heart of modern India — as well as the splendid record 
of her ancient Gods and glories. The hope of Hin- 
dostan lies in the intelligent interest of England. 
Whatever avails to dissipate misconceptions between 
them, and to enlarge their intimacy, is a gain to 
both Peoples ; and to this end the present volume 
aspires, in an humble degree, to contribute. 

Tho Ilitojtadesa is a work of high antiquity, and 
extended popularity. Tho prose is doubtless as old as 


X PREFACE. 

our own era; but the intercalated verses and proverbs 
compose a selection from writings of an age extremely 
remote. The Mahabharata and the textual Veds are 
of those quoted ; to the first of which Professor M. "Wil- 
liams (in his admirable edition of the Nala, 18G0) 
assigns a date of 850 B.C., while ho claims for the Rig- 
Veda an antiquity as high as 1300 b.o. The Ilitopadesa 
may thus be fairly styled " The Father of all Fables ;" 
for from its numerous translations have come Esop 
and Pilpay, and in later days Iteineke Fuchs. Origi- 
nally compiled in Sanskrit, it was rendered, by order 
of Nushiravan, in the sixth century a.d. into Persic. 
From the Persic it passed, a.d. 850, into the Arabic, 
and thence into Hebrew and Grcok. In its own land 
it obtained as wide a circulation. The Emperor Acbar, 
impressed with the wisdom of its maxims and the 
ingenuity of its apologues, commended the work of 
translating it td his own Vizier, Abdul Fazel. That 
Minister accordingly put the book into a familiar style, 
and published it with explanations, under the title of 
the Criterion of Wisdom. The Emperor had also 
suggested the abridgment of the long series of shlokes 
which here and there interrupt the narrative, and the 


PREFACE. XI 

Vizier found this advice sound, and followed it, like 
the present Translator. To this day, in India, the 
Ilitopadcsa, under other names (as the Anvdri Suhaili*), 
retains the delighted attention of young and old, and 
has some representative in all the Indian vernaculars. 
A work so well esteemed in the East cannot be unwel- 
come to Western readers, who receive it here, a con- 
densed but faithful transcript of sense and manner. 

As often as an Oriental allusion, or a name in Hindoo 
mythology, seemed to ask some explanation for the 
English reader, notes have been appended, bearing 
reference to the page. In their compilation, and gene- 
rally, acknowledgment is due to Professor Johnson's 
excellent version and edition of the Hitopadesa, and to 
Mr. Muir's Sanskrit Texts. 

A residence in India, and close intercourse with the 
Hindoos, has given the Author a lively desire to subserve 
their advancement. No one listens now to the preci- 
pitate ignorance which would set aside as " heathenish" 
tho high civilization of this great race ; but justice is 
not yet dono to their past development and present 


* " The lights of Cnnopus," n Persian paraphrase ; ns the Khirad 
Afroz, " the lamp of tho Understanding," is in Hindustani. 


Xll PREFACE. 

capacities. If the wit, the morality, and the philo- 
sophy of these "heasts of India" (so faithfully ren- 
dered hy Mr. Harrison Weir,) surprise any vigorous 
mind into further exploration of her literature, and 
deeper sense of our responsibility in her government, 
the Author will be repaid. 

E. A. 

Framfieldy Sussex, March, 1861. 


THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 


9-9-a 


INTRODUCTION. 


-»o«- 


gmtour fa <$amMt, (,) <M of IDMflm. 


J%w book of Counsel read, and you shall see, 
Pair speech and Sanskrit lore, and Policy, 

,. On the banks oi the holy river Ganges there stood a 
city named tataliputra ( 2 ). The King of it was a good 
King and a virtuous, and his name was Sudarsana. It 
chanced one day that he overheard a certain person 
reciting these verses — 

44 Wise men, holding wisdom highest, scorn delights, as false as 
fair, 
Daily live they as Death's fingers twined already in their hair. 

1 


2 TIIE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS- 

Truly, richer than all riches, better than the best of gain, 
Wisdom is, unbought, secure — once won, none loseth her again. 

Bringing dark things into daylight, solving doubts that vex the 

mind, 
like an open eye is Wisdom — he that hath her not is blind.'* 

Hearing these the King became disquieted, knowing 
that his own sons were gaining no wisdom, nor reading 
the Sacred Writings ( 3 ), but altogether going in the 
wrong way ; and he repeated this verse to himself — 

44 Childless art thou ( 4 ) ? dead thy children ? leaving thee to 
want and dool ? 
Less thy misery than his is, who is father to a fool." 

And again this, — 

" One wise son makes glad his father, forty fools avail him not : 
One moon silvers all that darkness which the silly stars did 
dot." 

" And it has been said," reflected he, — 

" Ease and health, obeisant children, wisdom, and a fair-voiced 
wife — 
Thus, great King ! arc counted up the five felicities of life. 

For the son the sire is honoured ; though the bow-cane bendeth 

true, 
Let the strained string crack in using, and what service shall 

it do?" 

" Nevertheless," mused the King, " I know it is urged 
that human efforts are useless : as, for instance, — 


INTRODUCTION. * 3 

" That which will not be, will not be — and what is to be, will be : 
Why not drink this easy physic, antidote of misery ? " 

" But then that comes from idleness, with people who 
will not do what they should do. Rather, 

" Nay I and faint not, idly sigliing, 4 Destiny is mightiest,* 
Sesamum ( 5 ) holds oil in plenty, but it yieldcth none impressed. 

Ah ! it is the Coward's babble, * Fortune taketh, Fortune gave; * 
Fortune! rate her like a master, and she serves thee like a 
slave." 

" For indeed, 

" Two-fold is the life we live in — Fate and Will together run : 
Two wheels bear life's chariot onward — will it move on only 

one ? " 


it 


And 


" Look ! the clay dries into iron, but the potter moulds the day : 
Destiny to-day is master — Man was master yesterday." 


n 


So verily, 


" Worthy ends come not by wishing. Wouldst thou ? Up, and 
win it, then ! 
While the hungry lion slumbers, not a deer comes to his den." 

Having concluded his reflections, tho Kaja gave orders 
to assemble a meeting of learned men. Then said he 
in their midst, — 

" Hear now, my Pundits ( 6 ) ! Is there one among 
you so wise that he will undertake to give the second 
birth of Wisdom to these my sons, by teaching them the 

1-2 


4 TIIE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

Books of Policy; for they have never yet read the 
Sacred Writings, and are altogether going in the wrong 
road ; and ye know that 

" Silly glass, in splendid settings, something of the gold may gain ; 
And in company of wise ones, fools to wisdom may attain." 

Then uprose a great Sage, by name Vishnu- Sarman, 
learned in the principles of Policy as is the angel of 
the planet Jupiter ( T ) himself, and ho said, — 

" My Lord King, I will undertake to teach these 
princes Policy, seeing they are born of a great house ; 
for— 

" Labours spent on the unworthy, of reward the labourer balk ; 
Like the parrot, teach the heron twenty times, he will not talk." 

" But in this royal family tho offspring are royal-minded, 
and in six moons I will engage to mako your Majesty's 
sons comprehend Policy." 

The Raja replied, with condescension : — 


" On the eastern mountains lying, common things shine in the 

sun, 
And by learned minds enlightened, lower minds may show as 


one." 


" And you, worshipful sir, are competent to teach my 
children the rules of Policy." 

So saying, with much graciousness, he gave the 
Princes into the charge of Vishnu-Sarman ; and that 


INTRODUCTION. 5 

sage, by way of introduction, spake to the Princes, as 
they sat at ease on the balcony of the palace, in this 
wise : — 

" Hear now, my Princes ! for the delectation of your 
Highnesses, I purpose to tell the tale of the Crow, the 
Tortoise, the Deer, and the Mouse." 

" Pray, sir," said the King's sons, " let us hear it." 

Vishnu- Sarman answered, — 

" It begins with the Winning of Friends ; and this 
is the first verse of it : — 


tt 


Sans way or wealth, wise friends their purpose gain — 
The Mouse, Crow, Deer, and Tortoise make this plain." 


THE WINNING OF EMENDS. 


" Sans way or wealthy wise friends their purpose gain — 
The Mouse y Crow, Deer, and Tortoise make this plain." 


4i However was that?" asked the Princes. 

Vishnu- Sarman replied : — 

" On the banks of the Godavery there stood a large 
silk-cotton-tree ( 8 ), and thither at night, from all quarters 
and regions, the birds came to roost. Now once, when 
the night was just spent, and his Kadiance the Moon ( 9 ), 
Lover of the white lotus, was about to retire behind the 
western hills, a Crow ( 10 ) who perched there, ' Light o' 
Leap ' by name, upon awakening, saw to his great wonder 
a fowler approaching — a second God of Death ( u ). 
The sight set him reflecting, as ho flew off uneasily to 


8 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

follow up the man's movements, an J ho began to think 
what mischief this ill-omened apparition foretold. 

" For, a thousand thoughts of sorrow, and a hundred things of 
dread, 
By the wise unheeded, trouble day by day the foolish head." 

And yet in this life it must be that 

" Of the day's impending dangers, Sickness, Death, and Misery, 
One will be; the wise man waking, ponders which that one 
will he." 

Presently the fowler fixed a net, scattered grains of rice 
about, and withdrew to hide. At this moment ' Speckle- 
neck,' King of the Pigeons, chanced to be passing 
through the sky with his Court, and caught sight of the 
rice-grains. Thereupon the King of the Pigeons asked 
of his rice-loving followers, ' How can there possibly bo 
rice-grains lying here in an unfrequented forest ? "Wo 
will see into it, of course, but "We like not the look of it, 
— love of rice may ruin us, as the Traveller was ruined. 

u All out of longing for a golden bangle ( la ), 
The Tiger, in the mud, the man did mangle." 

" How did that happen ?" asked the Pigeons. 


% 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 


®hu ^torjr of itu{ 8%cif and ttuj tymtlltr. 

' Thus/ replied Speckle-neck : ' I was pecking about 
one day in the Deccan forest, and saw an old tiger ( 13 ) 
sitting newly bathed on the bank of a pool, like a 
Brahman, and with holy kuskus-grass ( 14 ) in his paws. 

" Ho ! ho ! ye travellers,' ' he kept calling out, " take 
this golden bangle ! " 

Presently a covetous fellow passed by and heard 
him. 

" Ah ! " thought he, " this is a bit of luck— but I 
must not risk my neck for it either. 

" Good things come not out of bad things ; wisely leave a longed- 
for ill. 
Nectar being mixed with poison serves no purpose but to kill." 

" But all gain is got by risk, so I will see into it at 
least ;" then he called out, " Where is thy bangle ?" 

The Tiger stretched forth his paw and exhibited it. 

" Hem ! " said the Traveller, " can I trust such a. 
fierce brute as thou art ?" 

" Listen," replied the Tiger, " once, in the days of 
my cubhood, I know I was very wicked. I killed cows, 
Brahmans, and men ( 15 ) without number — and I lost my 
wife and children for it — and haven't kith or kin left. 
But lately I met a virtuous man who counselled me to 


10 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

practise the duty of almsgiving — and, as tliou seest, I 
am strict at ablations and alms. Besides, I am old, 
and my nails and fangs are gone — so who would mis- 
trust me ? and I have so far conquered selfishness, that I 
keep the golden bangle for whoso comes. Thou seemest 
poor ! I will give it thee. Is it not said, 

" Give to poor men, son of Kunti ( w ) — on the wealthy waste 

not wealth ; 
• Good are simples for the sick man, good for nought to him in 

health." 

" Wade over the pool, therefore, and take the bangle.'* 
Thereupon the covetous Traveller determined to trust 

him, and waded into the pool, where he soon found 

himself plunged in mud, and unable to move. 

"Ho ! ho !" says the Tiger, "art thou stuck in a 

slough ? stay, I will fetch thee out ! " 

So saying he approached the wretched man and seized 

him — who meanwhile bitterly reflected — 

" Be his Scripture-learning wondrous, yet the cheat will be a 
cheat ; 
Be her pasture ne'er so bitter, yet the cow's milk will be 
sweet." 

And on that verse, too — 

" Trust not water, trust not weapons ; trust not clawed nor 
horned things ; 
Neither give thy soul to women, nor thy life to Sons of 
Kings ( I7 )." 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. . 11 

And those others — 

" Look ! the Moon, the silver roaincr, from whose splendour 

darkness flies 
With his starry cohorts marching, like a crowned king through 

the skies. 
All the grandeur, all the glory, vanish in the Dragon's jaw ( ,8 ) ; 
What is written on the forehead, that will be, and nothing 

more." 

Here his meditations were cut short by the Tiger devour- 
ing him. ' And that,' said Speckle-neck, ' is why we 
counselled caution. ' 

* Why, yes ! ' said a cortain pigoon, with some pre- 
sumption, * but you'vo read tho verse — 

" Counsel in danger ; of it 

Unwarned, be nothing begun. 
But nobody asks a Prophet 

Shall the risk of a dinner be run ? " 

Hearing that, the Pigeons settled at once ; for we know 
that 

" Avarice begetteth anger ; blind desires from her begin ; 
A right fruitful mother is she of a countless spawn of sin." 

And again, 

" Can a golden Deer have being ( ,9 )? yet for such the Hero pined : 
When the cloud of danger hovers, then its shadow dims the 
mind." 

Presently they were caught in the net. Thereat, 


12 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

indeed, they all began to abuse the pigeon by whose 
suggestion they had been ensnared. It is the old 
tale! 

44 Be second and not first ! — the share's the same 
If all go well. If not, the Head's to blame." 

And we should romember that 

44 Passion will be Slave or Mistress : follow her, she brings to 
woe; 
Lead her, 'tis the way to Fortune. Choose the path that thou 
wilt go." 

When King Speckle-neck heard their reproaches, he 
said, ' No, no ! it is no fault of his. 

44 When the time of trouble cometh, friends may oftimes irk us 
most : 
For the calf at milking-hour the mother's leg is tying-post." 

' And in disaster, dismay is a coward's quality ; let. us 
rather rely on fortitudo, and devise some remedy. How 
saith the sage ? 

44 In good fortune not elated, in ill-fortune not dismayed, 
Ever eloquent in council, never in the fight aflrayed — 
Proudly emulous of honour, stedfastly on wisdom set ; 
Perfect virtues in the nature of a noble soul arc met. 
Whoso hath them, gem and glory of the three wide worlds ( 30 ) 

is he ; 
Happy mother she that bore him, she who nursed him on her 

knee." 

' Let us do this now directly,' continued the King : ' at 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 13 

one moment and with one will, rising under the net, 
let us fly off with it : for indeed 

" Small things wax exceeding mighty, being cunningly combined : 
Furious elephants are fastened with a rope of grass-blades 
twined." 

' And it is written, you know, 

" Let the household hold together, though the house be ne'er so 
small; 
Strip the rice-husk from the rice-grain, and it groweth not at 
oil." 

Having pondered this advice, the Pigeons adopted it ; 
and flew away with tho net. At first the fowler, who 
was at a distance, hoped to recover them, but as they 
passed out of sight with tho snare about them ho gave 
up the pursuit. Perceiving this, the Pigeons said, 
' What is the next thing to be done, King V 
< A friend of mine,' said Speckle-neck, < lives near in 
a beautiful forest on the Gundaki. Golden-skin is his 
name — the King of the Mice ( 21 ) — he is tho one to cut 
these bonds.' 

Resolving to have recourse to him, they directed their 
flight to the hole of Golden-skin — a prudent monarch, 
who dreaded danger so much that he had made himself 
a palace with a hundred outlets, and lived always in it. 
Sitting there he heard the descent of the pigeons, and 
remained silent and alarmed. . 


14 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

' Friend Golden-skin/ cried the King, ' have you no 
welcome for us?' 

' Ah, my friend ! ' said the Mouse-king, rushing out 
on recognizing the voice, ' is it thou art come, Speckle- 
neck ! how delightful ! — But what is this?' exclaimed 
he, regarding the entangled net. 

' That,' said King Speckle-neck, ' is the effect of 
some wrong-doing in a former life, — 

" Sickness, anguish, bonds, and woe 
Spring from wrongs wrought long ago( w )." 

Golden-skin, without replying, ran at once to the net, 
and hegan to gnaw the strings that held Speckle-neck. 

' Nay ! friend, not [so,* said the King, ' cut me first 
these meshes from my followers, and afterwards thou 
shalt sever mine.' 

' I am little/ answered Golden-skin, ' and my teeth 
are weak — how can I gnaw so much? No! no! I will 
nihhle your strings as long as my teeth last, and after- 
wards do my best for the others. To preserve depen- 
dants by sacrificing oneself is nowhere enjoined by wise 
moralists; on the contrary, — 

" Keep wealth for want, but spend it for thy wife, 
And wife, and wealth, and all to guard thy life." 

'Friend,' replied King Speckle-neck, 'that may be 
the rule of policy, but I am one that can by no means 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 15 

bear to witness the distress of those who depend on me, 
for, — 

" Death, that must come, comes nobly when we give 

Our wealth, and life, and all, to make men live." 

« 

And you know the verse, 

" Friend, art thou faithful ? guard mine honour so ! 
And let the earthy rotting body go." 

When King Golden-skin heard this answer his heart 
was charmed, and his fur bristled up for pure pleasure. 
' Nobly spoken, friend/ said he, 'nobly spoken! with 
such a tenderness for those that look to thee, the 
Sovereignty of tho Threo Worlds might be fitly thine.' 
So saying he set himself to cut all their bonds. This 
done, and the pigeons extricated, the King of the Mice 
gavo them his formal welcome. 'But, your Majesty,' 
he said, ' this capture in the net was a work of destiny; 
you must not blame yourself as you did, and suspect 
a former fault. Is it not written, — 

" Floating on his fearless pinions, lost amid the noonday skies, 
Even thence the Eagle's vision kens the carcase where it lies ; 
But the hour that comes to all things comes unto the Lord of 

Air, 
And he rushes, madly blinded, to his ruin in the snare." 

With this correction Golden-skin proceeded to perform 
the duties of hospitality, and afterwards, embracing and 
dismissing them, the pigeons left for such destination 


16 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

as they fancied, and the King of the Mice retired again 
into his hole. 

Now Light o* Leap, the Crow, had been a spectator 
of the whole transaction, and wondered at it so much 
that at last he called out, ' Ho ! Golden-skin, thou very 
laudable Prince, let mo too be a friend of thine, and 
give me thy friendship.' 

■' Who art thou?' said Golden-skin, who heard him, 
but would not come out of his hole. 

' I am the Crow Light o* Leap/ replied the other. 

' How can I possibly bo on good terms with thee ? ' 
answered Golden-skin with a laugh ; ' have you never 
read, — 

" When Food is friends with Feeder, look for Woe, 
The Jackal ate the Deer, but for the Crow." 

' No ! how was that ? ' 

'I will tell thee,' replied Golden-skin : — 

She £iorg of ifo J itclmt, Deer, R»d %*>»• 

' Far away in Behar there is a forest called Champak- 
Grove( 23 ), and in it had long lived in much affection a 
Doer and a Crow. Tho Door, roaming unrestrained, happy 
and fat of carcase, was one day descried by a Jackal. 
"Ho! ho!' thought the Jackal on observing him, "if 
I could but get this soft meat for a meal! It might 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 17 

i 

be — if I can only win his confidence." Thus reflect- 
ing he approached, and saluted him. 

" Health be to thee, Mend Deer ! " 

" Who art thou?" said the Deer. 

" I'm Small-wit, the Jackal," replied the other. " I 
live in tho wood here, as the dead do, without a friend; 
but now that I have met with such a friend as thou, 
I feel as if I were beginning life again with plenty of 
relations. Consider me your faithful servant." 

" Very well," said tho Deer ; and then, as the glorious 
King of Day, whoso diadem is tho light, had withdrawn 
himself, the two went together to tho residence of the 
Deer. In that same spot, on a branch of Champak, 
dwelt the Crow Sharp-sense, an old friend of the Deer. 
Seeing them approach together, the Crow said, 

" Who is this number two, friend Deer?" 

"It is a Jackal," answered the Deer, " that desires 
our acquaintance." 

" You should not become friendly to a stranger 
without reason," said Sharp-sense. " Don't you know?" 

" To folks by no one known liousc-room deny: 
The Vulture housed the Cat, and thence did die." 

"No! how was that?" said both. 
" In this wise," answered the Crow. 


18 THE BOOK OP GOOD COUNSELS. 


$h* J5tor]» flf tht Ctottav, l\\$ 0[at, and 

t\u Dints. 

' On the banks of the Ganges there is a cliff callod 
Vulture-Crag, and thereupon grew a great fig-tree ( c4 )« 
It was hollow, and within its shelter lived an old Vulture, 
named Grey-pate, whose hard fortune it was to have 
lost both eyes and talons. The birds that roosted in 
the tree made subscriptions from their own store, out 
of sheer pity for the poor fellow, and by that means 
, he managed to live. One day, when the old birds 
were gone, Long-ear, tho Cat, came there to got a meal 
of the nestlings ; and they, alarmed at perceiving him, 
sot up a chirruping that roused Grey-pato. 

" Who comes there?" croaked Grey-pate. 

'Now Long-ear, on espying tho Vulture, thought 
himself undone; but. as flight was impossible, he re- 
solved to trust his destiny and approach. 

" My lord," said he, " I have the honour to salute 
thee." 

" Who is it?" said the Vulture. 

"lama Cat." 

" Be off, Cat, or I shall slay thee," said the Vulture. 

" I am ready to die if I deserve death," answered 
the Cat; " but let what I have to say be heard." 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 19 

" Wherefore, then, corniest thou?" said the Vulture, 
" 1 1170," began Long-ear, " on the Ganges, bathing, 
and eating no flesh, practising the moon-penanco ( 55 ), 
liko a Braniacharya ( cG ). The birds that resort thither 
constantly praise your worship to mo as one wholly given 
to tho study of morality, and worthy of all trust; and so 
I came here to learn law from thee, Sir, who art so deep 
gone in learning and in years. Dost thou, then, so read 
the law of strangers as to be ready to slay a guest? 
What say the books about the householder? — 

" Bar thy door not to the stranger, l>e he friend or be he foe, 
For the tree will shade the woodman while his axe doth lay it 
low." 

And if means fail, what there is should be given with 
kind words ; as — 

" Greeting fair, and room to rest in ; fire, and water from the well — 
Simple gifts — are given freely in the house where good men 
dwell,"— 

and without respect of person — 

" Young, or bent with many winters ; rich, or poor, whate'er thy 
guest, 
Honour him for thine own honour — better is he than the best." 

Else comes the rebuke — 

" Pity them that ask thy pity : who art thou to stint thy hoard, 
When the holy moon shines equal on the leper and the lord ! " 

2—2 


i 


20 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

And that other, too, 

44 When thy gate is roughly fastened, and the asker turns away, 
Thence he bears thy good deeds with him, and his sins on thee 
doth lay." 

For verily, 

" In the house the husband ruleth, men the Brahmans * master * 

call; 
(**) Agni is the Twice-born Master — but the guest is lord of all.'* 

' To these weighty words Grey-pate answered, 
" Yes! but cats like meat, and there are young birds 
here, and therefore I said, go." 

" Sir," said the Cat (and as he spoke he touched the 
ground, and then his two ears, and called on Krishna ( 28 ) 
to witness to his words), " I that have overcome passion, 
and practised the moon-penance, know the Scriptures; 
and howsoever they contend, in this primal duty of 
abstaining from injury they are unanimous. Which of 
them sayeth not, — 

" He who does and thinks no wrong — 
He who suffers, being strong — 
He whose harmlessness men know — 
Unto Swerga such doth go C 29 )." 

' And so, winning the old Vulture's confidence, Long- 
ear, the Cat, entered the hollow tree and lived there. 
And day after day he stole away some of the nestlings, 
and brought them down to the hollow to devour. Mean- 
time the parent birds, whose little ones were being 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 21 

eaten, made an inquiry after them in all quarters; and 
the Cat, discovering this fact, slipped out from the 
hollow, and made his escape. Afterwards, when the 

* 

birds came to look closely, they found the bones of 
their young ones in the hollow of the tree where Grey- 
pate lived; and the birds at once concluded that their 
nestlings had been killed and eaten by the old Vulture, 
whom they accordingly executed. That is my story, 
and why I warned you against unknown acquaintances.' 
" Sir," said tho Jackal, with somo warmth, " on tho 
first day of your encountering tho Deer you also wero 
of unknown family and character: how is it, then, that 
your friendship with him grows daily greater? True, 
I am only Small-wit, the Jackal, but what says the 
saw? — 

*' In the land where no wise men are, men of little wit are lords ; 
And the castor-oil's a tree, where no tree else its shade 
affords ( 30 )." 

The Deer is my friend; condescend, sir, to bo my 
friend also." 

"OhJ" broke in the Deer, "why so much talking? 
We'll all livo together, and be friendly and happy, — 

" Foe is friend, and friend is foe, 
As our actions make them so." 

" Very good," said Sharp-sense; " as you will;" and 
in tho morning each started early for his own feeding- 


22 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

ground (returning at night). Ono day the Jackal drew 
the Deer aside, and whispered, " Deer, in one corner 
of this wood there is a field full of sweet young wheat; 
come and let me show you." The Deer accompanied 
him, and found the field, and afterwards went every day 
there to eat the green corn, till at last the owner of 
the ground spied him and set a snare. The Deer 
came again very shortly, and was caught in it, and 
(after vainly struggling) exclaimed, " I am fast in tho 
net, and it will he a net of death to me if no friend 
comes to rescue me ! " Presently Small-wit, tho Jackal, 
who had heen lurking near, made his appearance, and 
standing still, he said to himself, with a chuckle, " 
ho! my schemo hears fruit! When ho is cut up, his 
hones, and gristle, and hlood will fall to my share and 
mako mo some heautiful dinners." The Deer, here 
catching sight of him, exclaimed with rapture, " All, 
friend, this is excellent! Do hut gnaw these strings, 
and I shall he at liberty. How charming to realize tho 
saying !— 

44 That friend only is the true friend who is near when trouble 
comes ; 

That man only is the brave man who can bear the battle- 
drums; 

Words are wind ; deed proveth promise : he who helps at need 
is kin ; 

And the leal wife is loving though the husband lose or win." 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS- 23 

And is it not written — • v ' 

" Friend and kinsman — more their meaning than the idle-hearted 

mind. 
Many a friend can prove unfriendly, many a kinsman less than 

land: 
Ho who shares his comrade's portion, he he beggar, be he lord, 
Comes as truly, comes as duly, to the battle as the board — 
Stands before the king to succour, follows to the pile to sigh- 
He is friend, and he is kinsman — less would make the name a 

lie." 

' Small-wit answered nothing, but betook himself to 
examining tlio sna.ro very closely. 

" This will certainly hold," muttered he ; then, turn- 
ing to the Deer, he said, " Good friend, these strings, 
you see, are made of sinew, and to-day is a fast-day, 
so that I cannot possibly bite them. To-morrow morn- 
ing, if you still desiro it, I shall be happy to serve 
you." 

When he was gone, the Crow, who had missed the 
Deer upon returning that evening, and had sought for 
him everywhere, discovered him; and seeing his sad 
plight, exclaimed, — 

" How came this about, my friend?" 
, " This came," replied tho Deer, " through disregard- 
ing a friend's advice." 

" Where is that rascal Small-wit?" asked the Crow. 

" He is waiting somewhere by," said the Deer, " to 
taste my flesh." 


24 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

" Well," sighed the Crow, " I warned you; but it is 
as in the true verse, — 

" Stars gleam, lamps flicker, friends foretell of fate ; 
The fated sees, knows, hears them — all too late." 

And then, with a deeper sigh, ho exclaimed, "Ah, 
traitor Jackal, what an ill deed hast thou done ! Smooth- 
tongued knave — alas ! — and in the face of the monition 
too, — 

" Absent, flatterers' tongues are daggers — present, softer than the 

silk; 
Shun them ! 'tis a jar of poison hidden under harmless milk ; 
Shun them when they promise little ! Shun them when they 

promise much ! 
For, enkindled, charcoal burnetii — cold, it doth defile the 

touch." 

' When tho day broke, the Crow (who was still there) 
saw the master of the field approaching with his club 
in his hand. 

" Now, friend Deer," said Sharp-sense on perceiving 
him, "do thou cause thyself to seem like one dead: 
puff thy belly up with wind, stiffen thy legs out, and 
lie very still. I will make a show of pecking thine eyes 
out with my beak; and whensoever I utter a croak, 
then spring to thy feet and betake thee to flight." 

The Deer thereon placed himself exactly as the Crow 
suggested, and was very soon espied by the husband- 
man, whose eyes opened with joy at the sight. 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 25 

"Alia!" said lie, "the fellow has died of himself," 
and so speaking, he released the Deer from the snare, 
and proceeded to gather and lay aside his nets. At 
that instant Sharp-sense uttered a loud croak, and the 
Deer sprang up and made off. And the cluh which 
the husbandman flung after him in a rage, struck Small- 
wit, the Jackal (who was close by), and killed him. Is 
it not said, indeed ? — 

" In years, or moons, or half-moons three, 
Or in three days — suddenly, 
Knaves arc slicnt — true men go free." 

' Thou seest, then,' said Golden-skin, ' there can be 
no friendship between food and feeder.' > 

' I should hardly,' replied the Crow, € get a large 
breakfast out of your worship; but as to that indeed 
you have nothing to fear from me. I am not often 
angry, and if I were, you know — 

" Anger comes to noble natures, but leaves there no strife or 
storm : 
Plunge a lighted torch beneath it, and the ocean grows not 


warm." 


' Then, also, thou art such a gad-about,' objected 
the King. 

' May-be,' answered Light o' Leap ; ' but I am bent 
on winning thy friendship, and I will die at thy door 


26 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

of fasting if thou grantost it not. Let us be fi-iends! 
for 

" Noble hearts are golden vases — close the bond true metals make ; 
Easily the smith may weld them, harder far it is to break. 
Evil hearts are earthen vessels — at a touch they crack a-twain, 
And what craftsman's ready cunning can unite the shards 
again?" 

And then, too, 

" Good men's friendships may be broken, yet abide they friends at 
heart ; 
Snap the stem of Luxmee's lotus, and its fibres will not part." 

* Good sir/ said the King of the Mice, ' your conversa- 
tion is as pleasing as pearl necklets or oil of sandal- 
wood ( 31 ) in hot weather. Be it as you will/ — and 
thereon lung Golden-skin mado a treaty with tho Crow, 
and after gratifying him with tho best of his store re- 
entered his hole. The Crow returned to his accustomed 
perch: — and thenceforward the time passed in mutual 
presents of food, in polite inquiries, and tho most 
unrestrained talk. One day Light o' Leap thus accosted 
Golden-skin : — 

' This is a poor place, your Majesty, for a Crow to get 
a living in. I should like to leave it and go elsewllere. , 

'Whither wouldst thou go?' replied the King; they 

say, 

" One foot goes, and one foot stands, 
When the wise man leaves his lands." 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 27 

c And they say, too,' answered the Crow, 

" Ovcr-lovc of home were weakness ; wheresoever the hero come, 
Stalwart arm and steadfast spirit find or win for him a home. 
Little recks the awlcss lion where his hunting jungles lie — 
When he enters it he certain that a royal prey shall die." 

' I know an excellent jungle now.' 

' Which is that?' asked the Mouse-king. 

' In the Nerbudda woods, by Camphor- water,' replied 
the Crow. ' There is an old and valued friend of mine 
lives there, — Slow-toes his name is, a very virtuous 
Tortoise; ho will rcgalo mo with fish and good tilings.' 

' Why should I stay behind,' said Golden-skin, * if 
thou gocst? Take mo also.' 

Accordingly, the two set forth together enjoying 
charming converse upon the road. Slow-toes perceived 
Light o' Leap a long way off, and hastened to do him 
the guest-rites, extending them to the Mouse upon 
Light o* Leap's introduction. 

' Good Slow-toes,' said he, ' this is Golden-skin, 
King of the Mice, — pay all honour to him, — he is 
burdened with virtues — a very jewel-mine of kindnesses. 
I don't know if the Prince of all, the Serpents ( 32 ), 
with his two thousand tongues, could rightly repeat 
them.' So speaking, he told the story of Speckle-neck. 
Thereupon Slow-toes made a profound obeisance to 
Golden-skin, and said, 'How came your Majesty, may 
I ask, to retire to an unfrequented forest?' 


28 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

' I will tell you/ said the King. * You must know 
that in the town of Champaka thero is a collego for 
the devotees. Unto this resorted daily a beggar-priest, 
named Chudakarna, whose custom was to place his 
begging-dish upon the shelf, with such alms in it as 
he had not eaten, and go to sleep by it; and I, so soon 
as he slept, used to jump up, and devour tho meal. 
One day a great friend of his, named Vinakarna, also 
a mendicant, camo to visit him; and observed that whilo 
conversing, he kept striking the ground with a split 
cane, to frighten me. "Why don't you listen?" said 
Vinakarna. " I am listening!" replied the other; " but 
this plaguy mouse is always eating the meal out of 
my begging-dish." Vinakarna looked at the shelf and 
remarked, " However can a mouse jump as high as this? 
There must be a reason, though there seems none. 
I guess the cause, — the fellow is well off and fat." 
With these words Vinakarna snatched up a shovel, 
discovered my retreat, and took away all my hoard of 
provisions. After that I lost strength daily, had scarcely 
energy enough to get my dinner, and, in fact, crept 
about so wretchodly, that whon Chudakarna saw mo ho 
fell to quoting, — 

" Very feeble folk are poor folk ; money lost takes wit away : 
All their doings fail like runnels, wasting through the summer 
day." 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 29 

" Yes ! " I thought, " he is right, and so are the 
sayings — 

44 Wealth is friends, home, father, brother — title to respect and 
fame; 
Yea, and wealth is held for wisdom — that it should he so is 
shame" 

** Home is empty to the childless ; hearts to them who friends 
deplore : 
Earth unto the idle-minded ; and the three worlds to the poor.** 

" I can stay hero no longer ; and to tell my distress to 
another is out of the question — altogether out of the 
question ! — 

" Say the sages, nine things name not : Age, domestic joys and 
woes, 

Counsel, sickness, shame, alms, penance; neither Poverty dis- 
close. 

Better for the proud of spirit, death, than life with losses told ; 

Fire consents to be extinguished, but submits not to be cold.*' 


" Verily ho was wise, methought also, who wrote — 

" As Age doth banish beauty, 

As moonlight dies in gloom, 
As Slavery's menial duty 

Is Honour's certain tomb ; 
As Hari's name and Hara's ( 33 ) 

Spoken, charm sin away, 
So Poverty can surely 

A hundred virtues slay." 

" And as to sustaining myself on another man's bread, 


30 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

that," I mused, " would be but a second door of death. 
Say not the books the same ? — 

" Half-known knowledge, present pleasure purchased with a 
future woe, 
And to taste the salt of service ( M ) — greater griefs no man can 
know." 

" And herein, also — 


u 


All existence is not equal, and all living is not life ; 

Sick men live; and he who, banished, pines for children, home, 
and wife ; 

And the craven-hearted eater of another's leavings lives, 

And the wretched captive waiting for the word of doom sur- 
vives ; 

But they bear an anguished body, and they draw a deadly 
breath, 

And life comcth to them only on the happy day of death." 

Yet, after all thoso reflections, I was covotous enough to 
make one more attempt on Chudakarna's meal, and got 
a blow from the split cane for my pains. " Just so," I 
said to myself, " the soul and organs of the discon- 
tented want keeping in subjection. I must be dono with 
discontent : — 

" Golden gift, serene Contentment! have thou that, and all is had; 
Thrust thy slipper on, and think thee that the earth is leather- 
clad." 

" All is known, digested, tested ; nothing new is left to learn 
When the soul, serene, reliant, Hope's delusive dreams can 
spurn." 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 31 

"And the sorry task of seeking favour is numbered in 
. tho miseries of life — 

" Hast thou never watched, a-waiting till the great man's door 
unbarred ? 

* 

Didst thou never linger parting, saying many a sad last word ? 
Spak'st thou never word of folly, one light thing thou would'st 

recall ? 
Rare and noble hath thy life been ! fair thy fortune did befall I" 

" No ! " exclaimed I, " I will do none of these ; but, 
by retiring into the quiet and untrodden forest, I will 
show my discernment of real good and ill. The holy 
Books counsel it — 

" True Religion ! — 'tis not blindly prating what the priest may 

prate, 
But to love, as God hath loved them, all things, be they small 

or great ; 
And true bliss is when a sane mind doth a healthy body fill ; 
And true knowledge is the knowing what is good and what is 

ill." 

' So came I to the forest, where, by good fortune and 
this good friend, I met much kindness; and by the same 
good fortune have encountered you, Sir, whoso friendli- 
ness is as Heaven to me. Ah ! Sir Tortoise, 

" Poisonous though the tree of life be, two fair blossoms grow 
thereon : 
One, the company of good men; and sweet songs of Poets, 
one." 


32 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

' King ! ' said Slow-toes, ' your error was getting too 
much, without giving. Give, says the sage — 

44 Give, and it shall swell thy getting ; give, and thou shalt safer 
keep: 
Pierce the tank- wall; or it yieldcth, when the water waxes 
deep." 

And he is very hard upon money-grubbing : as thus — 

44 When the miser hides his treasure in the earth, he doeth well ; 
For he opens up a passage that his soul may sink to hell." 

And thus — 

44 He whose coins are kept for counting, not to barter nor to give, 
Breathe he like a blacksmith's bellows ( 35 ), yet in truth he doth 
not live." 

It hath been well written, indeed, 

44 Gifts, bestowed with words of kindness, making giving doubly 
dear : 
Wisdom, deep, complete, benignant, of all arrogancy clear ; 
Valour, never yet forgetful of sweet Mercy's pleading prayer ; 
Wealth, and scorn of wealth to spend it — oh ! but these be 
virtues rare!" 

' Frugal one may be,' continued Slow-toes ; ' but not a 
niggard like the Jackal — 

41 The Jackal-knave, that starved his spirit so, 
And died of saving, by a broken bow." 

' Did he, indeed,' said Golden-skin ; c and how was 
that ? ' 

' I will tell you/ answered Slow-toes : — 


THE WINNING OF FKIENDS. 33 


<$Iu5 ^iorjr of tiw $catt (Same and ita Ja^ial 

* Li a town called " Well-to-Dwell " there lived a 
mighty hunter, whose name was " Grim-face." Feel- 
ing a desire one day for a little venison, he took his 
bow, and went into the woods; where he soon killed 
a deer. As he was carrying the deer home, he came 
upon a wild boar of prodigious proportions. Laying 
the deer upon the earth, he fixed and discharged an 
arrow and struck the boar, which instantly rushed upon 
him with a roar louder than the last thunder ( 36 ), and 
ripped the hunter up. He fell like a tree cut by the 
axe, and lay dead along with the boar, and a snake 
also, which had been crushed by the feet of the com- 
batants. Not long afterwards, there came that way, 
in his prowl for food, a Jackal, named " Howl o* 
Nights," and .cast eyes on the hunter, the deer, the 
boar, and the snake lying dead together. "Aha!" 
said he, " what luck! Here's a grand dinner got ready 
for me ! Good fortune can come, I see, as well as ill 
fortune. Let me think: — the man will be fine pickings 
for a month; tho deer with the boar will last two 
more; tho snake will do for to-morrow; and, as I 
am very particularly hungry, I will treat myself now 
to this bit of stinking gut on the bow-horn." So say- 

3 


34 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

ing, lie began to gnaw it asunder, and the bow-string 
slipping, the bow sprang back, and resolved Howl o' 
Nights into the five elements (**) by death. That is 
my story/ continued Slow-toes, ' and its application is 
for the wise : — 

** Sentences of studied wisdom, nought avail they unapplied ; 
Though the blind man hold a lantern, yet his footsteps stray 
aside." 

The secret of success, indeed, is a froo, contented, and 
yet enterprising mind. How say the books thereon ? — 

" Wouldst thou know whose happy dwelling Fortune entereth 

unknown ? 
His, who careless of her favour, standeth fearless in his own ; 
His, who for the vague to-morrow barters not the sure to-day — 
Master of himself, and sternly steadfast to the rightful way : 
Very mindful of past service, valiant, faithful, true of heart — 
Unto such comes Lakshmi( 38 ) smiling — comes, and will not 

lightly part." 

What indeed/ continued Slow-toes, ' is wealth, that we 
should prize it, or grieve to lose it ? — 

44 Be not haughty, being wealthy ; droop not, having lost thine all ; 
Fate doth play with mortal fortunes as a girl doth toss her ball.'* 

It is unstable by nature. We are told — 

• 4 Worldly friendships, fair but fleeting, shadows of the clouds at 
noon, 
Women ( w ), youth, new] corn, and riches — these be pleasures 


passing soon 


»» 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 35 

And it is. idle to be anxious ; the Master of Life knows 
how to sustain it. Is it not written ? — 

" For thy bread be not o'er thoughtful — God for all hath taken 
thought : 
When the babe is born, the sweet milk to the mother's breast is 
brought. 

He who gave the swan her silver, and the hawk her plumes of 

pride, 
And his purples to the peacock — He will verily provide." 

Yes, verily,' said Slow-toes, ' wealth is bad to handle, 
and better left alone ; thero is no truer saying than 
this — 

" Though for good ends, waste not on wealth a minute ; 
Mud may be wiped, but wise men plunge not in it." 

Hearing the wisdom of these monitions, Light o* 
Leap broke out, "Good Slow-toes! thou art a wise 
protector of those that come to thee; thy learning com- 
forts my enlightened friend, as elephants drag elephants 
from the mire." And thus, on the best of terms, 
wandering where they pleased for food, the three lived 
there together. 

One day it chanced that a Deer named Dapple- 
back^), who had seen some cause of alarm in the forest, 
came suddenly upon the three in his flight. Thinking 
the danger imminent, Slow-toes dropped into the water, 
King Golden-skin slipped into his hole, and Light-o'- 

3—2 


36 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

Leap flew up into the top of a high tree. Thence he 
looked all round to a great distance, hut could discover 
nothing. So they all came hack again, and sat down 
together. Slow-toes welcomed the Deer. 

" Good Deer," said he, " may grass and water never 
fail thee at thy need. Gratify us hy residing hero, and 
consider this forest thine own." 

" Indeed," answered Dapple-hack, " I came hither 
for your protection, flying from a hunter ; and to livo 
with you in friendship is my greatest desire." 

" Then the thing is settled," ohserved Golden-skin. 

" Yes ! yes ! " said Light o* Leap, " make yourself 
altogether at home ! " 

So the Deer, charmed at his reception, eat grass and 
drank water, and laid himself down in tho shade of a 
Banyan-tree to talk. Who does not know? — 

" Brunettes, and the Banyan's shadow, 
AVell-springs, and a brick-built wall, 
Are all alike cool in the summer, 
And warm in the winter — all." 

" What made thee alarmed, friend Deer ? " hegan 
Slow-toes. " Do hunters ever come to this unfrequented 
forest?" 

" I have heard," replied Dapple-hack, " that the 
Prince of the Kalinga country, Eukmangada, is coming 
here. He is even now encamped on the Cheenah River, 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 37 

on liis march to subjugate the borders ; and the hunters 
have been heard to say that he will halt to-morrow by 
this very lako of ' Camphor-water.' Don't you think, 
as it is dangerous to stay, that we ought to resolve on 
something ?". 

" I shall certainly go to another pool," exclaimed 
Slow-toes. 

" It would be better," answered the Crow and Deer 
together. 

"Yes!" remarked the King of the Mico, after a 
minute's thought; " but how is Slow-toes to get across 
the country in timo? Animals like our amphibious 
host are best in the water; on land he might suffer from 
his own design, like tho merchant's son — 

" The merchant's son laid plans for gains, 
And saw his wife kissed for his pains." 

" How came that about?" asked all. 
" I'll tell you," answered Golden-skin. 


She jjrtott mtd ilxt Mjfc 4 the Pcrrtuutt's £mt. 

* In the country of Kanouj thore was a King named 
Virascna, and he mado his son viceroy of a city called 
Virapoora. The Princo was rich, handsome, and in the 
bloom of youth. Passing through the streets of his 


38 THE LOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

city one day, be observed a very lovely woman, whose 
name was Lfivanyavati — L e., the Beautiful — tbe wife of 
a merchant's son. On reaching his palace, full of her 
charms and of passionate admiration for them, he 
despatched a messago to her, and a letter, by a female 
attendant :— who wonders at it ? — 

" Ah ! the gleaming, glancing arrows of a lovely woman's eye ! 
Feathered with her jetty lashes, perilous they pass us by : 
Loosed at venture from the black bows of her arching brow they 

part, 
All too penetrant and deadly for an undefended heart." 

Now Lavanyavati, from the moment she saw the Prince, 
was hit with the same weapon of love that wounded him ; 
but upon hearing the message of the attendant, she 
refused with dignity to receive his letter. 

" I am my husband's," she said, " and that is my 
honour ; for — 

" Beautiful the Ko'il ( 4I ) scemeth for the sweetness of his song, 
Beautiful the world esteemeth pious souls for patience strong ; 
Homely features lack not favour when true wisdom they reveal, 
And a wife is fair and honoured while her heart is firm and leal." 

What the lord of my life enjoins, that I do." 
" Is such my answer ?" asked the attendant. 
" It is," said Lavanyavati. 
Upon the messenger reporting her reply to the Prince, 

he was in despair. 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 39 

• " The God of the five shafts ( 42 ) has hit me," he ex- 
claimed, " and only her presence will cure my wound." 

" We must make her husband bring her, then," said 
the messenger. 

" That can never he," replied the Prince. 

" It can," replied the messenger, — 

" Fraud may achieve what force would never try : 
The Jackal killed the Elephant thereby." 

" How was that ?" asked the Prince. 
The Slave related : — 


$tt<! gh\% 4 iluj <S)ht Jacltat and the (ftteptumi* 

"In the forest of Brahma ( 43 ) lived an Elephant, whose 
name was ' White-front. ' The Jackals knew him, and 
said among themselves, ' If this great hrute would hut 
die, there would he four months' food for us, and plenty, 
out of his carcase.' With that an old Jackal stood up, 
and pledged himself to compass the death of the 
Elephant by his own wit. Accordingly, he sought for 
' White-front,' and, going up to him, he made the reve- 
rential prostration of the eight members ( 44 ), gravely 
saluting him. 

' Divine creature,' said he, ( vouchsafe me the regard 
of one look.' 


40 TIIE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

. ' Who art thou ?' grunted the Elephant, ' and whence 
comest thou?' 

* I am only a Jackal,' said the other ; ' but the beasts 
of the forest are -convinced that it is not expedient to 
live without a king, and they have met in full council, 
and despatched me to acquaint your Royal Highness 
that on you, endowed with so many lordly qualities, 
their choice has fallen for a sovereign over the forest 
here ; for — 

" Who is just, and strong, and wise ? 
Who is true to social ties? 
He is formed for Emperies." 

Let your Majesty, therefore, repair thither at once, that 
tho moment of fortunate conjunction ( 45 ) may not 
escape us.' So saying he led the way, followed at a 
great pace by White-front, who was eager to commence 
his reign. 

"Presently tho Jackal brought him upon a deep 
slough, into which he plunged heavily before he could 
stop himself. 

' Good master Jackal/ cried the Elephant, * what's 
to do now ? I am up to my belly in this quagmire.' 

' Perhaps your Majesty,' said tho Jackal, with an 
impudent laugh, ' will condescend to take hold of the 
tip of my brush with your trunk, and so get out.' 

" Then White-front, the Elephant, knew that he 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 41 

Lad been deceived ; and thus lie sank in the slime, and 
was devoured by the Jackals. Hence," continued the 
attendant, " is why I suggested stratagem to your high- 
ness." 

Shortly afterwards, by the Slave's advice, the Prince 
sent for the merchant's son (whose name was Charu- 
datta), and appointed him to be near his person ; and 
one day, with the same design, when he was just come 
from the bath, and had on his jewels, he summoned 
Charudatta, and said, — 

" I have a vow to keep to Gauri( 46 ) — bring hither to 
me every evening for a month some lady of good family, 
that I may do honour to her, according to my vow ; and 
begin to-day." 

Charudatta in due course brought a lady of quality, 
and, having introduced her, retired to watch the inter- 
view. The Prince, without even approaching his fair 
visitor, made her the most respectful obeisances, and 
dismissed her with gifts of ornaments, sandal-wood, 
and perfumes, under the protection of a guard. This 
made Charudatta confident, and longing to get some 
of these princely presents he brought his own wife 
next evening. When the Prince recognized the charm- 
ing Luvanyavati — the joy of his soul — ho sprang to 
meet her, and kissed and caressed her without the 
least restraint. At sight of this the miserable Charu- 


42 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

datta stood transfixed with despair — the very picture 
of wretchedness ' 

"And you too, Slow- toes — but where is he gone?" 
abruptly asked King Golden-skin. 

Now Slow-toes had not chosen to wait the end of 
the story, but was gone before, and Golden-skin and 
the others followed him up in some anxiety. The 
Tortoise had been painfully travelling along, until a 
hunter, who was beating the wood for game, had over- 
taken him. The fellow, who was very hungry, picked 
him up, fastened him on his bow-stick, and set off 
for home; while the Deer, the Crow, and the Mouse, 
who had witnessed the capture, followed them in terrible 
concern. " Alas ! " cried tho Mouse-king, " he is gone ! 
— and such a friend ! 

" Friend ! gracious word ! — the heart to tell is ill able 
Whence came to men this jewel of a syllable." 

" Let us," continued he to his companions, " let us' 
make one attempt, at least, to rescue Slow-toes before 
the hunter is out of the wood ! " 

" Only tell us how to do it," replied they. 

"Do thus," said Golden-skin: "let Dapple-back 
hasten on to the water, and lie down there and make 
himself appear dead; and do you, Light o* Leap, hover 
over him and peck about his body. The hunter is sure 


THE WINNING OF FRIENDS. 43 

to put th'd Tortoise down to get the venison, and I 
will gnaw his bonds." 

' Tho Deer and the Crow started at once; and the 
hunter, who was sitting down to rest under a tree and 
drinking water, soon caught sight of the Deer, appa- 
rently dead. Drawing his wood-knife, and putting 
the Tortoise down by the water, he hastened to secure 
tho Deer, and Golden-skin, in the meantime, gnawed 
asunder the string that held Slow-toes, who instantly 
dropped into the pool. Tho Deer, of courso, when 
tho hunter got near, sprang up and made off, and when 
ho roturned to tho tree tho Tortoiso was gone also. 
" I deserve this," thought he — 

" Whoso for greater quits his gain, 
Shall have his labour for his pain ; 
The things umvon unwon remain, 
And what was won is lost again." 

And so lamenting, he went to his village. Slow-toes 
and his friends, quit of all fears, repaired together to 
their new habitations, and there lived happily. 


44 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

Then spake the King Sudarsana's sons, " We have 
heard every word, and are delighted; it fell out just as 
we wished," 

" I rejoice thereat, my Princes," said Vishnu-Sarman; 
" may it also fall out according to this my wish — 

" Lakshmi give you friends like these ! 

Lakshmi keep your lands in ease ! 

Set, your sovereign thrones beside, 

Policy, a winsome bride I 
And He, whose forehead-jewel is the moon ( 47 ) 
Give peace to us and all — serene and soon.*' 


45 


TO PARTING OF FRIENDS. 


Tiien spako tho Royal Princos to Vishnu-Sarman, 
" Rovcrond Sir ! wo liavo listened to the i Winning of 
Friends,' we would now hear how friends are parted," 

" Attend, then," replied the Sage, " to ' the Parting 
of Friends/ the first couplet of which runs in this 
wise — 

" The Jacked set — of knavish cunning full — 
At loggerheads the Lion and the Bull" 

" How was that?" asked the sons of the Rajah. 
Vishnu-Sarman proceeded to relate : — 

<$hc $torg of ilw lioit, iltc Jadtals, and 

«u mi 

" In tho Deccan there is a city called Golden-town, 
and a wealthy merchant lived there named Well-to-do. 


46 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

He had abundant means, but as many of his relations 

were even yet richer, his mind was bent upon outdoing 

them by gaining more. Enough is never what wo 

have — 

44 Looking down on lives below them, men of little store arc 
great; 
Looking up to higher fortunes, hard to each man seems his 
fate." 

And is not wealth won by courage and enterprise? — 

" As a bride, unwisely wedded, shuns the cold caress of eld, 
So, from coward souls and slothful, Lakshmi's favours turn 
repelled." 

" Ease, ill-health, home-keeping, sleeping, woman-service, and 
content — 
In the path that leads to greatness these be six obstructions 
sent." 

And wealth that increases not, diminishes — a little gain 
is so far good — 

44 Seeing how the soorma ( 48 ) wasteth, seeing how the ant-hill 
grows (*), 
Little adding unto little — live, give, learn, as life-time goes. 1 * 

" Drops of water falling, falling, falling, brim the chatty ( so ) o'er ; 
Wisdom comes in little lessons — little gains make largest store." 

Moved by these reflections Well-to-do loaded a cart with 
wares of all kinds, yoked two bulls to it, named Lusty- 
life and Roarer, and started for Kashmir to trade. 
He had not gone far upon his journey when in passing 
through a great forest called Bramble-wood, Lusty-life 


THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 47 

Blipped down and broke his foreleg. At sight of this 
disaster "Well-to-do fell a thinking, and repeated, — 

" Men their cunning schemes may spin — 
God knows who shall lose or win." 

Comforting himself with such philosophy, "Well-to-do 
left Lusty-life there, and went on his way. The Bull 
watched him depart, and stood mournfully on three 
legs, alone in the forest. ' Well, well,' he thought, 
' it is all destiny whether I live or die : — 

" Shoot a hundred shafts, the quarry lives and flies — not due to 
death ; 
When his hour is come, a grass-blade hath a point to stop his 
, breath." 

As the days passed by, and Lusty-life picked about 
in the tender forest grass, ho grew wonderfully well, 
and fat of carcase, and happy, and bellowed about thq 
wood as though it were his own. Now, the reigning # 
monarch of the forest was King Tawny-hide the Lion, 
who ruled over the whole country absolutely, by right of 
having deposed everybody else. Is not might, right? — 

" Rohes were none, nor oil of unction, when the King of Beasts 
was crowned : 
'Twos his own fierce roar proclaimed him, rolling all his king- 
dom round." 

One morning, his Majesty, being exceedingly thirsty, 
had repaired to the bank of the Jumna to drink water, 


48 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

and just as he was about to lap it, the bellow of 
Lusty-life, awful as the thunder of the last day, reached 
the imperial ears. Upon catching the sound the King 
retreated in trepidation to his own lair, without 
drinking a drop, and stood there in silence and alarm 
revolving what it could mean. In this position he 
was observed by the sons of his minister, two jackals 
named Karataka and Damanaka, who began to remark 
upon it. 

' Friend Karataka,' said the last, what * makes our 
royal master slink away from the river when he was 
dying to drink?* 

'Why should we care?' replied Karataka. 'It's 
bad enough to serve him, and be neglected for our 
pains, — 

14 Oh, the bitter salt of service ! — toil, frost, fire, are not so keen : 
Half such heavy penance bearing, tender consciences were 
clean." 

' Nay, friend! never think thus/ said Damanaka, — 

" What but for their vassals, 

Elephant and man — 
Swing, of golden tassels, 

Wave of silken fan — 
But for regal manner 

That the « Chattra' (•') brings, 
Horse, and foot, and banner — 

What would come of kings ?" 


. THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 49 

C I care not/ replied Karataka; 'we have nothing 
to do with it, and matters that don't concern us are 
best left alone. You know the story of the Monkey, 
don't you?' — 

" The Monkey drew the sawyer's wedge, and died : 
Let meddlers mark it, and be edified." 

1 No ! ' said Damanaka. ' How was it ? ' 
' In this way,' answered Karataka : — 


W\\$ £torjT 4 the gftmlttg and i\\t M\tyt. 

' In South Behar, close by the retreat of Dhurmma ( 58 ), 
there was an open plot of ground, upon which a temple 
was in course of erection, under the management of 
a man of the Kuyeth caste ( 53 ), named Subhadatta. 
A carpenter upon the works had partly sawed through 
a long beam of wood, and wedged it open, and was gone 
away, leaving the wedge fixed. Shortly afterwards a 
large herd of monkeys came frolicking that way, and 
one of their number, directed doubtless by the Angel 
of death, got astride the beam, and grasped the wedge, 
with his tail and lower parts dangling down between 
the pieces of the wood. Not content with this, in the 
mischief natural to monkeys, he began to tug at the 

wedge ; till at last it yielded to a great effort and came 

4 


50 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

out; when the wood closed upon him, and jammed him 
all fast. So perished the monkey, miserably crushed ; 
and I say again, — 

" Let meddlers mark it, and be edified. 1 ' 

c But surely,' argued Damanaka, ' servants are bound 
to watch the movements of their masters ! ' 

' Let the prime minister do it, then/ answered 
Karataka; 'it is his business to overlook things, and 
subordinates shouldn't interfere in the department of 
their chief. You might get ass's thanks for it, — 

" The Ass that hee-hawed, when the dog should do it, 
For his lord's welfare, like an ass did rue it." 

Damanaka asked how that happened, and Karataka 
related : — 


<3tfw £t0rg of t\\$ Wtmtermmts Jqta. 

' There was a certain Washerman ( 5 *) at Benares, 
whose name was Carpurapataka, and ho had an Ass and 
a Dog in his court-yard ; the first tethered, and the last 
roaming loose. Once on a time, when he had been 
spending his morning in the society of his wife, whom 
he had just married, and had fallen to sleep in her 
arms ; a robber entered the house, and began to carry 


THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 51 

off his goods. The Ass observed the occupation of the 
thief, and was much concerned. 

"Good Dog," said he, "this is thy matter: why 
dost thou not bark aloud, and rouse the master?" 

" Gossip Ass," replied the Dog, " leave me alone 
to guard the premises. I can do it, if I choose; but 
the truth is, this master of ours thinks himself so safe 
lately that he clean forgets me, and I don't find my 
allowance of food nearly regular enough. Masters will 
do so ; and a little fright will put him in mind of his 
defenders again." 

" Thou scurvy cur!" exclaimed the Ass — 

•* At the work-time, asking wages — is it like a faithful herd ? " 
" Thou extreme Ass! " replied the Dog. 

" When the works done, grudging wages — is that acting like a 
lord?" 

" Mean-spirited beast," retorted the Ass, " who neg- 
lectest thy master's business ! Well, then, I at least 
will endeavour to arouse him; it is no less than religion, 

" Serve the Sun with sweat of body; starve thy maw to feed the 

flame ( M ) ; 
. Stead thy lord with all thy service ; to thy death go, quit of 
blame.* 

So saying, he put forth his very best braying. The 
Washerman sprang up at the noise, and missing the 

4 — 2 


52 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

thief, turned in a rage upon the Ass for disturbing him, 
and beat it with a cudgel to such an extent that the 
blows resolved the poor animal into the five elements of 
death, ' So that/ continued Karataka, ' is why I say, 
Let the prime minister look to him. The hunting for 
prey is our duty — let us stick to it, then. And this/ he 
said, with a meditative look, ' need not trouble us to- 
day; for we have a capital dish of the royal leavings.' 

' What! ' said Damanaka, rough with rage, ' dost thou 
serve the King for the sake of thy belly? Why take 
any such trouble to preserve an existence like thine? — 

" Many prayers for liim are uttered whereon many a life relies; 
'Tis but one poor fool the fewer when the gulping Haven dies." 

For assisting friends, and defeating enemies also, the 
service of kings is desirable. To enter upon it for a 
mere living makes the thing low indeed. There must 
be dogs and elephants; but servants need not be like 
hungry curs, while their masters are noble. What say 
the books? 

" Give thy Dog the merest mouthful, and he crouches at thy feet>. 
Wags his tail, and fawns, and grovels, in his eagerness to cat ; 
Bid the Elephant l>c feeding, and the l>cst of fodder bring; 
Gravely — after much entreaty — condescends that mighty king." 

' Wqll, well!' said Karataka; ' the books are nothing 
to us, who are not councillors.' 


THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 53 

c But we may come to be/ replied Damanaka; l men 
rise, not by chance or nature, but by exertions, — 

" By their own deeds men go downward, by them men mount 
upward all, 
Like the diggers of a well, and like the builders of a wall." 

Advancement is slow — but that is in the nature of 
things,— 

" Rushes down the hill the crag, which upward 'twas so hard to roll : 
So to virtue slowly rises — so to vice quick sinks the soul." 

c Very good,' observed Karataka; ' but what is all this 
talk about?' 

' Why ! don't you see our Royal Master there, and 
how he came home without drinking? I know he has 
been horribly frightened/ said Damanaka. 

' How do you know it?' asked the other. 

' By my perception — at a glance !.' replied Damanaka; 
' and I mean to make out of this occasion that which 
shall put his Majesty at my disposal.' 

'Now/ exclaimed Karataka, 'it is thou who art 

ignorant about service, — 

" Who speaks unasked, or comes unhid, 
Or counts on favour — will be chid." 

' I ignorant about service ! ' said Damanaka ; ' no, no, 

my friend, I know the secret of it, — 

" Wise, modest, constant, ever close at hand, 
Not weighing but obeying all command, 
Such servant by a Monarch's throne may stand.'* 


54 TIIE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

' In any case, the King often rates thee,' remarked 
Karataka, f for coming to the presenco unsummoned.' 

' A dependant,' replied Damanaka, ' should never- 
theless present himself; he must make himself known 
to the great man, at any risk, — 

" Pitiful, that fearing failure, therefore no beginning makes, 
Who forswears his daily dinner for the chance of stomach- 
aches ? " 

and hesides, to he near is at last to he needful; — is it 
not said,— 

u Nearest to the King is dearest, be thy merit low or high ; 
Women, creeping plants, and princes, twine round that which 
groweth nigh." ' 

' Well,' inquired Karataka, ' what wilt thou say, heing 
come to him?' 

: ' First,' replied Damanaka, ' I will discover if his 
Majesty is well affected to me.' 

' How do you compass that?' asked the other. 

/ Oh, easily! hy a look, a word/ answered Damanaka; 
' and that ascertained, I will proceed to speak what will 
put him at my disposal.' 

' I can't see how you can venturo to speak,' ohjected 
,the other, ' without an opportunity, — 

" If Vrihaspati, the Grave 6 ), 
Spoke a sentence out of season, 
Even Vrihaspati would have 
Strong rebuke for such unreason." 


THE PARTING OF F1UENDS. 55 

'Pray don't imagine I shall speak unseasonably/ 
interrupted Damanaka; ' if that is all you fear, I will 
start at once.' 

1 Go, then,' said Karataka; ' and may you he as lucky 
as you hope.' 

" Thereupon Damanaka set out for the lair of King 
Tawny-hido; putting on, as he approached it, the look 
of one greatly disconcerted ■. The Rajah observed him 
coming, and gave permission that he should draw near; 
of which Damanaka availing himself, made reverential 
prostration of tho eight members and sat down upon 
his haunches. 

'You have come at last, then, Sir Jackal!.' growled 
his Majesty. 

' Great Monarch ! ' humbly replied Damanaka, ' my 
service is not worthy of laying at your imperial feet, 
but a servant should attend when he can perform a 
service, and therefore I am come, — 

" When Kings' ears itch, they use a straw to scratch 'em ; 
When Kings' foes plot, they get wise men to match 'em." 

' H'm ! ' growled tho Lion. 

' Your Majesty suspects my intellect, I fear,' continued 
tho Jackal, ' after so long an absence from your Majesty's 
feet; but, if I may say so, it is still sound.' 

' H'm ! ' growled the Lion again. 

' A lung, may it please your Majesty, should know 


56 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

how to estimate his servants, whatever their posi- 
tion, — 

" Pearls are dull in leaden settings, but the setter is to blame ; 
Glass will glitter like the ruby, dulled with dust — are they the 
same ? " 

u And a fool may tread on jewels, setting in his crown mere glass; 
Yet, at selling, gems arc gems, and fardels but for fardels pass." 

* Servants, gracious liege ! are good or bad as they are 
entertained. Is it not written? — 

" Horse and weapon, lute and volume, man and woman, gift of 
speech, 
Have their uselessness or uses in the One who owneth each.*' 

' And if I have been traduced to your Majesty as a dull 
fellow, that hath not made me so, — 

" Not disparagement nor slander kills the spirit of the brave ; 
Fling a torch down, upward ever burns the brilliant flame it 
gave." 

' Accept then, Sire, from the humblest of your slaves his 
very humble counsel — for 

" Wisdom from the mouth of children be it overpast of none ; 
What man scorns to walk by lamplight in the absence of the 
sun ? " 

' Good Damanaka/ said King Tawny-hide, somewhat 
appeased, 'how is it that thou, so wise a son of our 
first minister, hast been absent all this while from our 
Court? But now speak thy mind fearlessly: what 
wouldst thou?' 


THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 57 

'Will your Majesty deign to answer one question ?' 
said Damanaka. ' Wherefore came He back from the 
river without drinking ?' 

' Hush ! ' whispered the King, ' thou hast hit right 
upon my trouble. I knew no one unto whom I might 
confide it ; but thou seemest a faithful fellow, and I will 
tell thee. Listen, then,' continued his Majesty in an 
agitated whisper, ' there is some awful beast that was 
never seen before in this wood here ; and we shall have 
to leave it, look you. Did you hear by chance the 
inconceivable great roar ho gave ? What a strong beast 
it must bo to have such a voice ! ' 

1 May it please your Majesty, I did hear the noise,' 
said the Jackal, ' and there is doubtless cause for ter- 
rible apprehension therein ; but take comfort, my Liege, 
he is no minister who bids thee prepare for either war 
or resignation. All will go well, and your Majesty 
will learn by this difficulty which be your best ser- 
vants/ 

' Good Jackal,' said Tawny-hide, ' I am horribly 
frightened about it.' 

' I can see that,' thought Damanaka ; but he only 
said, 'Fear nothing, my liege, while thy servant sur- 
vives.' 

' What shall I do ?' asked the King. 

' It is well to encourage those who can avert disaster* 


58 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

If your Majesty condescended now to bestow sotaie 
favour on Karataka and the other 

' It shall be done,' said the Rajah ; and, summoning 
the other Jackals, he gave them and Damanaka a mag- 
nificent gift of flesh, and they left the presence, under- 
taking to meet the threatened danger. 

' But, brother,' began Karataka, ' haven't we eaten 
the King's dinner without knowing what the danger is 
which we are to meet, and whether we can obviate it ?' 

* Hold thy peace,' said Damanaka, laughing ; ' I know 
very well what the danger is ! It was a bull, aha ! that 
bellowed — a bull, my brother — whose beef you and I 
could pick, much more the King our master.' 

'And why not tell him so ?' asked Karataka. 
, * What ! and quiet his Majesty's fears ! And whero 
would our splendid dinner have been then ? No, no, 
my friend,— 

• " Set not your lord at ease ; for, doing that, 

Might starve you as it starved ' Curd-ear' the Cat." 

'Who was Curd-ear, the Cat?' inquired Karataka. 
Damanaka related : — 


Wfo ^torjr of flw d£at rofar mvnl ttti{ 3Rwr. 

' Far away in the North ( 57 ), on a mountain named 
" Thousand-Crags," there lived a lion called " Mighty- 


THE PARTING OF FKIENDS. 59 

heart ; " and he was much annoyed by a certain mouse, 
who made a custom of nibbling his mane while he lay 
asleep in his don. Tho Lion would wake in a great 
rage at finding the ends of his magnificent mane made 
ragged, but tho little mouse ran into his hole, and he 
could never catch it. After much consideration he went 
down to a village, and got a Cat named Curd-ear to 
come to his cave with much persuasion. He kept the 
Cat royally on all kinds of dainties, and slept comfort- 
ably without having his mane nibbled, as the mouse 
would now never venturo out. Whenever tho Lion 
heard tho mouso scratching about, that was always a 
signal for regaling tho Cat in a most distinguished style. 
But one day, the wretched mouse being nearly starved, 
he took courage to creep timidly from his hole, and was 
directly pounced upon by Curd-ear and killed. After that 
the Lion heard no moro of the mouso, and quite left off 
his regular entertainments of the Cat. No ! ' concluded 
Damanaka, ' we will keep our mouse alive for his 
Majesty.' 

" So conversing, the Jackals went away to find Lusty- 
life the Bull, and upon discovering him, Karataka 
squatted down with great dignity at the foot of a tree, 
while Damanaka approached to accost him. 

* Bull,' said Damanaka, ' I am the warder of this 
forest under the King Tawny-hide, and Karataka the 


60 THE BOOK OP GOOD COUNSELS. 

Jackal there is his General. The General bids thee 

come before him, or else instantly depart from the wood. 

It were better for thee to obey, for his anger is terrible.' 

" Thereupon Lusty-life, knowing nothing of the 

country customs, advanced at once to Karataka, made 

the respectful prostration of the eight members, and 

said timidly, * My Lord General ! what dost thou bid 

me do ? — 

" Strength serves Reason. Saith the Mahout, when he beats the 
brazen drum, 
* Ho ! ye elephants, to this work must your mightinesses come.* " 

' Bull,' answered Karataka, ' thou canst remain in the 
wood no longer unless thou goest directly to lay thyself 
at our Koyal master's imperial feet.' 

' My Lord/ replied the Bull, ' give me a guarantee of 

safety, and I will go.' 

'Bull,' said Karataka, 'thou art foolish; fear no* 
thing, — 

" When the King of Chedi ( M ) cursed him, 
Krishna scorned to make reply ; 
Lions roar the thunder quiet, 
Jackals'-yells they let go by." 

Our Lord the King will not vouchsafe his anger to thee ; 
knowest thou not — 

" Mighty natures war with mighty : when the raging tempests 
blow, 

- O'er the green rice harmless pass they, but they lay the palm- 
trees low." 


THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 61 

" So the Jackals, keeping Lusty-life in the rear, went 
towards the palace of King Tawny-hide ; where the 
Rajah received them with much graciousness, and bade 
them sit down. 

' Have you seen him ?' asked the King. 

' We have seen him, your Majesty,' answered Dama- 
naka ; ' it is quite as your Majesty expected — the 
creature has enormous strength, and wishes to see your 
Majesty. Will you be seated, Sire, and prepare yourself 
— it will never do to appear alarmed at a noise.' 

' Oh, if it was only a noise,' began tho Rajah. 

* Ah, but tho cause, Sire ! that was what had to be 
found out ; like the secret of Swing-ear the Spirit.' 

' And who might Swing-ear be ?' asked the King. 

* A goblin, your Majesty,' responded Damanaka, ' it 
seemed so, at least, to the good people of Brahmapoora. 
A thief had stolen a bell from the city, and was making 
off with that plunder, and more, into the Sri-parvata. 
hills, when he was killed by a tiger. The bell lay in 
the jungle till some monkeys picked it up, and amused 
themselves by constantly ringing it. The townspeople 
found the bones of the man, and heard the noise of the 
bell all about tho hills ; so they gave out that there was* 


62 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

a terrible devil there, whose ears rang like bells as he 
swung them about, and whose delight was to devour 
men. Every ono, accordingly, was leaving the town, 
when a peasant woman named Karala, who liked belief 
the better for a little proof, came to the Rajah. 

"Highness!" she observed, "for a consideration' I 
could settle this Swing-ear." 

" You could ! " exclaimed the Rajah. 

" I think so ! " repeated the woman. 

" Give her a consideration forthwith," said the Rajah. 

* Karala, who had her own ideas upon the matter, 
took the present and set out. Being come to the hills, 
she made a circle, and did homage to Gunputtee (^J, 
without whom nothing prospers. Then, taking sortie 
fruit she had brought, such as monkeys love extremely, 
she scattered it up and down in the wood, and withdrew 
to watch. Very soon the monkeys finding the fruit, put 
down the bell, to do justice to it, and the woman picking 
it up, bore it back to the town, where she became an 
object of uncommon veneration. We, indeed/ con- 
cluded Damanaka, i bring you a Bull instead of a bell — 
your Majesty shall now see him ! ' 

" Thcroupon Lusty-lifo was introduced, and, the in- 
terview passing off well, he remained many days in the 
forest on excellent terms with the Lion. 
. "One day another Lion, named ' Stiff-ears/ the 


THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 63 

brother of King Tawny-hide, came to visit him. The 
King received him with all imaginable respect, bade him 
be seated, and rose from his throne to go and kill some 
beasts for his refreshment. 

' May it please your Majesty/ inteq>osed the Bull, ' a 
deer was slain to-day — where is its flesh ?' 

' Damanaka and his brother know best/ said the King. 

' Let us ascertain if there be any/ suggested the Bull. 

' It is useless/ said the King, laughing, — ' they leave 
none.' 

'What!' exclaimed the Bull, 'have those Jackals 
eaten a whole deer ?' 

'Eaten it, spoiled it, and given it away/ answered 
Tawny-hide ; ' they always do so.' 

' And this without your Majesty's sanction ? ' asked 
the Bull. 

' Oh ! certainly not with my sanction/ said the King. 

'Then/ exclaimed the Bull, 'it is too bad: and in 
Ministers too !-■— 

" Narrow-necked to let out little, big of belly to keep much, 
As a flagon is — the Vizier of a Sultan should be such." 

' No wealth will stand such waste, your Majesty, — 

41 He who thinks a minute little, like a fool misuses more ; 
He who counts a cowry ( r, °) nothing, being wealthy, will 'be 
poor." 

' A king's treasury, my liege, is the king's life.* 


64 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

' Good brother,' observed Stiff-ears, who had heard 
what the Bull said, ' those Jackals are your Ministers 
of Home and Foreign Affairs, — they should not have 
direction of the Treasury. They are old servants, too, 
and you know the saying, — 

" Brahmans, soldiers, these and kinsmen — of the three set none in 

charge : 
For the Brahman, tho' you rack him, yields no treasure small or 

large ; 
And the soldier, heing trusted, writes his quittance with his 

sword, 
And the kinsman cheats his kindred hy the charter of the word ; 
But a servant old in service, worse than any one is thought, 
Who, by long-tried licence fearless, knows his master's anger 

nought." 

Ministers, my royal brother, are often like obstinate 
swellings that want squeezing, and yours must bo kopt 
in order/ 

' They are not particularly obedient, I confess,' said 
Tawny-hide. 

* It is very wrong,' replied Stiff-ears ; ' and if you 
will be advised by me — as we have banqueted enough 
to-day — you will appoint this grain-eating and sagacious 
Bull your Superintendent of Stores.' 

' It shall be so,' exclaimed the King. 

"Lusty-life was accordingly appointed to serve out 
the provisions, and for many days Tawny-hide showed 
him favour beyond all others in the Court. 


THE TARTING OF FRIENDS. 65 

" Now the Jackals soon found that food was no longer 
so freely provided by this arrangement as before, and 
they met to consult about it. 

' It is all our own fault/ said Damanaka, ' and people 
must suffer for their own mistakes. You know who 

said — 

" I that could not leave alone 
' Strcak-o'-GoluV must therefore moan. 
She that took the House- wife's place 
Lost the nose from off her face. 
Take this lesson to thy heart — 
Fools for folly suffer smart." 

'No!' said Karataka, 'how was it?' Damanaka re- 
lated : — 

©lie £ torn °i *M $rinr(| Md *k jpnmuicss 
lulto snflfcrd for flwiq ami Jputtfs. 

' In the city of " Golden- Streets " there reigned a 

valorous King, named Vira-vikrama, whoso officer of 

justice was one day talcing away to punishment a certain 

Barber, when ho was stopped by a strolling mendicant, 

who held him by the skirts, and cried out, " Punish not 

this man — punish them that do wrong of their own 

knowledge." Being asked his meaning, he recited tho 

foregoing verses, and, being still further questioned, he 
told this story — 

5 


66 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

" I am Prince Kandarpa-ketu, son of the King of 
Ceylon, Walking one day in my summer-garden, I 
heard a merchant-captain narrating how that out at sea, 
deep under water, on the fourteenth day of the moon, 
he had seen what was like nothing hut the famous tree of 
Paradise ( 6l ), and sitting under it a lady of most lustrous 
beauty, bedecked with strings of pearls like Lukshmi 
herself, reclining, with a lute in her hands, on what 
appeared to ho a golden couch crusted all over with 
precious stones. At once I engaged the captain and his 
ship, and steered to the spot of which he told me. On 
reaching it I beheld the beautiful apparition as he had 
described it, and, transported with the exquisite beauty 
of the lady, I leapt after her into the sea. In a moment 
I found myself in a city of gold; and in an apartment 
of a golden palace, surrounded by young and beautiful 
girls, I found the Sca-quecn. She perceived my 
approach, and sent an attendant with a courteous 
messago to meet me. In reply to my questions, I 
learned that the lady was the Princess Ratnamanjari, 
daughter of the King of All the Spirits — and how she 
had made a vow that whoever should first come to see 
her golden city with his own eyes should marry her. 
So I married her by the form called Gundharva ( 62 ), or 
' Union by mutual consent/ and spent many and happy 
days in her delightful society. One day she took me 


THE PARTING OF F1UENDS. 67 

aside, and said, ' Dear Prince ! all these delights, and I 
myself, are thine to enjoy ; only that picture yonder, of 
the Fairy Streak-o'-Gold, that thou must never touch ! ' 
For a long time I observed this injunction ; at last, im- 
pelled by resistless curiosity, I laid my hand on the 
picture of ' Streak-o'-Gold.' In one instant her little 
foot, lovely as the lotus-blossom, advanced from out of 
the painting, and launched me through sea and air into 
my own country. Since that I have been a miserable 
wanderer ; and passing through this city, I chanced to 
lodgo at a Cowkeepcr's hut, and saw the truth of this 
Barber's afiair. Tho herdsman rotumed at night with 
his cattle, and found his wife talking with the wife of 
tho Barber, who is no better than a bawd. Enraged at 
this, the man beat Ins wife, tied her to the milking-post, 
and fell asleep. In tho dead of the night the Barber's 
wife came back, and said to tho woman, ' He, whom 
thou knowest is burnt with the cruel fire of thine 
absence, and lies nigh to death ; go therefore and con- 
sole him, and I will tie myself to the post until thou 
returnest. , This was done, and the Cowkeeper presently 
awoke. ' All ! thou light thing ! ' he said jeeringly, 
' why dost not thou keep promise, and meet thy gallant?' 
Tho Barber's wife could make no reply ; whereat becom- 
ing incensed, the man cried out, ' What ! dost thou 
scorn to speak to me ? I will cut thy~nose off( 63 ) ! ' And 

5—2 


68 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

so he did, and then lay down to sleep again. Very soon 
the Cowkeopor's wife camo back and asked if ' all was 
well.' ' Look at my face ! ' said the Barber's wife, * and 
you will see if all is well.' The woman could do nothing 
but take her place again, while the Barber's wife, pick- 
ing up the severed nose, and at a sad loss how to 
account for it, went to her house. In the morning, 
before it was light, the Barber called to her to bring his 
box of razors, and she bringing one only, he flung it 
away in a passion. ' Oh, the knave ! ' she cried out, 
directly, aloud, ' Neighbours, neighbours ! he has cut 
my nose off ! ' and so she took him before the officers. 
The Cowkeeper, meantime, wondering at his wife's 
patience, made some inquiry about her nose; whereto 
she replied, ' Cruel wretch ! thou canst not harm a 
virtuous woman. If Yama and the seven guardians of 
the world ( 64 ) know me chaste, then be my face un- 
maimed ! ' The herdsman hastened to fetch a light, and 
finding her features unaltered, he flung himself at her 
feet, and begged forgiveness. For, 

44 Never tires the fire of burning, never wearies death of slaying, 
Nor the sea of drinking rivers, nor the bright-eyed of betraying.*' 

Thereupon the King's officer dismissed Kandarpa-ketu, 
and did justice by setting the Barber free, shaving the 
head of the Barber's wife ( 65 ), and punishing the Cow- 
keeper's. 


THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 69 

That is my story/ concluded Damanaka, ' and thence 
I said that we had no reason to complain.' 

' Well, but wo must do something,' said Karataka. 

* Yes ! How shall we break the friendship of the 
King with the Bull?' asked the other. 

' It is very strong,' observed Karataka. 

' But we can do it,' replied the other. 

" What force would fail to win, fraud can attain : 
The Crow despatched the Serpent by a chain.** 

** How did that occur ? ' asked Karataka. 
Damanaka related : — 

Wi\\ £toi[g afl the Dtacft £nnltt aitxt Ity (BoliUn 

dfluuir. 

' A pair of Crows had their abode in a certain tree, 
tho hollow of which was occupied by a black snake, who 
had often devoured their young. Tho Hen-bird, finding 
herself breeding again, thus addressed her mate: " Hus- 
band, wo must leave this tree; we shall never rear 
young ones while this black snake lives here ! You 
know the saw — 

" From false friends that breed thee strife* 
From a house with serpents rife, 
Saucy slaves and brawling wife — 
Get thee out, to save thy life.** 


70 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

"My dear," replied the Crow, " you need not fear ; I 
have put up with him till I am tired. Now I will put 
an end to him." 

" How can you fight with a great black snake like 
that ? " said the Hen-bird. 

" Doubt nothing," answered the other — 

" lie that hath sense hath strength ; the fool is weak : 
The Lion proud died by the Hare so meek." 

" How came that about ?" asked the Hen-Crow. 
" Thus," replied her mate : — 


ti{ ^torjr of the lion nml flw ®Ict f)taw. 

" On the Mandara mountain there lived a Lion 
named Fierce-of-hcart, and he was perpetually making 
massacre of all the wild animals. The thing grew so 
bad that the beasts held a public meeting, and drew 
up a respectful remonstrance to the Lion in these 
words : — 

' Wherefore should your Majesty thus make carnage 
of us all ? If it may please you, we ourselves will daily 
furnish a beast for your Majesty's meal.' The Lion 
responded, ' If that arrangement is more agreeable to 
you, be it so;' and from that time a beast was allotted 
to him daily, and daily devoured. One day it came 


THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 71 

to the turn of an old hare to supply the royal table, 
who reflected to himself as he walked along, ' I can 
but die, and I will go to my death leisurely.' 

"Now Ficrce-of-hcart, the lion, was pinched with 
hunger, and seeing tho Haro so approaching ho roared 
out, ' How darcst thou thus delay in coming?' 

1 Sire,' replied the Hare/ I am not to blame. I was 
detained on the road by another lion, who exacted an 
oath from me to return when I should have informed 
your Majesty.' 

6 Go/ exclaimed King Fierce-of-heart in a rage; 
' show me, instantly, where this insolent villain of a 
lion lives.' 

" The Hare led the way accordingly till ho came 
to a deep well, whereat he stopped, and said, ' Let 
my lord the King como hither and behold him.' The 
Lion approached, and beheld his own reflection in the 
water of the well, upon which, in his passion, he directly 
flung himself, and so perished." 

" I have hoard your story," said the Hen-Crow, " but 
what plan do you propose?" 

" My dear," replied her mate, " the Rajah's son comes 
hero every day to bathe in the stream. When he takes 
off his gold anklet, and lays it on the stone, do thou 
bring it in thy beak to the hollow of the tree, and 
drop it in there." Shortly after the Prince came, as 


72 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

was his wont, and taking off his dress and ornaments, 
the Hen-Crow did as had been determined; and while 
the servants of the Prince were searching in the hollow, 
there they found the Black Snake, which they at once 
dispatched. 

' Said I not well/ . continued Damanaka, ' that 
stratagem excels force?' 

' It was well said,' replied Karataka; 'go! and may 
thy path he prosperous ! ' 

" With that Damanaka repaired to the King, and 
having done homage, thus addressed him : — 

' Your Majesty, there is a dreadful thing on my 
mind, and I am come to disclose it.' 

' Speak!' said the King, with much graciousness. 

' Your Majesty,' said the Jackal, ' this Bull has been 
detected of treason. To my face he has spoken con- 
temptuously of the three prerogatives of the throne ( a ), 
unto which he aspires.' 

" At these words King Tawny-hide stood aghast. 

* Your Majesty,' continued Damanaka, ' has placed 
him abovo us all in the Court. Sire! he must be 
displaced ! — 

" Teeth grown loose, and wicked-hearted ministers, and poison- 
trees, 
Pluck them by the roots together ; 'tis the thing that giveth ease." 

'Good Jackal,' said the King, after some silence; 


THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 73 

'this is indeed dreadful; but my regard for the Bull 
is very great, and it is said, — 

" Long-tried friends are friends to cleave to — never leave thou 
these f the lurch : 
What man shuns the fire as sinful for that once it burned a 
church?" 

' That is written of discarding old servants, may it 
please your Majesty,' observed Damanaka; ' and this 
Bull is quite a stranger.' 

'Wondrous strange!' replied the Lion; 'when I 
havo advanced and protected him that he should plot 
against mo ! ' 

' Your Majesty,' said the Jackal, ' knows what has 
been written, — 

" Raise an evil soul to honour, and his evil bents remain ; 
Bind a cur's tail ne'er so straightly, yet it curleth up again." 

4 How, in sooth, should Trust and Honour change the evil 
nature's root ? 
Though one watered them with nectar Q 7 ), poison-trees bear 
deadly fruit." 

I have now at least warned your Majesty : if evil comes, 
the fault is not mine.' 

' It will not do to condemn the Bull without inquiry,' 
mused tho King ; then ho said aloud, ' shall we ad- 
monish him, think you, Damanaka ?' 

' No, no, Sire ! ' exclaimed the Jackal, eagerly ; ' that 
would spoil all our precautions, — 


74 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

" Safe within the husk of silence guard the seed of counsel so 
That it break not — being broken, then the seedling will not 
grow." 

What is to be done must bo clone witli despatch. After 
censuring his treason, would your Majesty still trust the 
traitor ? — 

" Whoso unto ancient fondness takes again a faithless friend, 
Like she-mules that die conceiving, in his folly finds his 
end." 

' But wherein can the Bull injure me ?' asked Tawny- 
hide ; ' tell me that ! ' 

' Sire,' replied the Jackal, ' how can I tell it ? — 

" Ask who his friends ore, ere you scorn your foe ; 
The Wagtail foiled the sea, that did not so." 

* How could that be?' demanded King Tawny-hide. 
" The Jackal related :— 


8ft* #torjT of t\\t WKnftliul and flw £«t 

' On the shore of the Southern Sea there dwelt a pair 
of Wagtails. The Hen-bird was about to lay, and thus 
addressed her mate : — 

" Husband, we must look about for a fit place to lay 
my eggs." 

"My dear," replied the Cock-bird, "will not this 
spot do?" 


THE PAltTIKG OF FRIENDS. 75 

"This spot!" exclaimed the Hen; "why, the tide 
overflows it." 

" Good dame," said the Cock, " am I so j>itiful a 
fellow that the Sea will venture to wash the eggs out of 
my nest?" 

" You are my very good Lord," replied the Hen, with 
a laugh ; "hut still there is a great difference hetween 
you and the Sea." 

1 Afterwards, however, at the desire of her mate, she 
consented to lay her eggs on the sea-beach. Now the 
Ocean had overheard all this, and, bent upon displaying 
its strength, it rose and washed away the nest and eggs. 
Overwhelmed with grief, the Hen-bird flew to her mate, 
and cried : — 

" Husband, the terrible disaster has occurred ! My 
eggs are gone ! " 

" Be of good heart ! my Life," answered he. 

' And therewith he called a meeting of fowls, and 
went with them into the presence of Gurud, the Lord of 
the birds ( f)0 ) . When the Master of the Mighty Wing had 
listened to their complaint, he conveyed it to the know- 
ledge of the God Narayen( 69 ), who keeps, and kills, and 
makes alive the world. The almighty mandate given, 
Gurud bound it upon his forehead, and bore it to the 
Ocean, which, so soon as it heard the will of Narayen, 
at once gave back the eggs. 


76 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

' How, indeed/ concluded Damanaka, ' should I judge 
of tho Bull's power, not knowing who supports him ? ' 

' By what signs, then/ asked the King, ' may I con- 
clude him a traitor ?' 

* If he comes into the presence with his horns lowered 
for goring, as one that expects the fight. That/ replied 
the Jackal, ' will convince your Majesty.' 

" Thereupon Damanaka the Jackal withdrew, and 
betook himself towards tho Bull, upon perceiving whom 
he approached slowly, with all the air of one greatly 
distressed. 

< Good master Jackal/ said Lusty-life, ' what goes 
amiss with thee?' 

* All goes amiss with such as servo wicked masters/ 
replied tho Jackal. 

' But what ails thee ?' asked the Bull. 
1 Alas ! ' answered the Jackal, ' what can I say in such 
a strait ! — 

" Even as one who grasps a serpent, drowning in 'the bitter sea, 
Dcatli to hold and death to loosen — such is life's perplexity." 

" And therewithal the Jackal heaved a deep sigh, and 
squatted down. 

' But, good friend/ said the Bull, ' at least tell me 
what is in thy mind.' 

' Bull/ began Damanaka, ' it is a King's secret, and 
should not be spoken ; but thou didst come here upon 


THE PARTING OF FRIENDS. 77 

my safeguard, and as I hope for the life to come( ro ), I 
will tell thee of what touches thee so nearly. Listen ! — 
the heart of the King is turned against thee ! ho hath 
sworn secretly that he will kill thee and feast upon thy 
flosh.' 

" Then Lusty-life the Bull was sorely trouhled, and 
he fell a-musing thus, — 

" Woman's love rewards the worthless — kings of knaves exalters 
be; 
Wealth attends the selfish niggard, and the cloud rains on the 


sea." 


* Can this ho the Jackal's doing ?' he reflected. Going 
with honest folk will not make one honest, — 

" Many a knave wins fair opinions standing in fair company, 
As the sooty soorma pleases, lighted by a brilliant eye." 

Then he said aloud, ' wherein can I have angered the 
King? Do kings hate without cause ? I can tell 
nothing, except that there is no happiness which abides 
long — 

" Where the azure lotus (*') blossoms, there the alligators hide ; , 
In the sandal-tree are serpents. Pain and pleasure live allied." 

I thought his Majesty noble as the sandal-tree; but 
that, indeed, is not wholly noble, — 

" Rich the sandal — yet no part is but a vile thing habits there ; 
Snake and wasp haunt root and blosrom ; on the boughs sit ape 
and bear." 


78 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

' Bull/ said Damanaka, * I knew the King of old for 
one whose tongue was honey and whoso heart was 
poison.' 

' But how very hard ! ' said the Bull, ' that he, being 
a lion, should attack me, an innocent eater of grass ! ' 

' It is very hard ! ' said the Jackal. 

* Who can have set him against me ?' asked the Bull. 
' Being so, it cannot be bettered,' replied the Jackal, 

* whoever did it, — 

" As a bracelet of crystal, once broke, is not mended ; 
So the fuvour of princes, once altered, is ended." 

' Yes,' said the Bull, ' and a king incensed is ter- 
rible, — 

41 Wrath of kings, and rage of lightning — both l>c very full of 
dread; 
But one falls on one man only — one strikes many victims dead.** 

Still, I can but die — and I will die fighting! When 
death is certain, and no hope left but in battle, that is 
the time for war.' 

' It is so,' said the Jackal. 

" Having weighed all this, Lusty-life inquired of the 
Jackal by what signs he might conclude the King's 
hostile intentions. 

* If he glowers upon thee,' answered Damanaka, 'and 
awaits thee with ears pricked, tail stiffened, paw up- 


TIIE PARTING OF F1UENDS. 79 

raised, and muzzle agape, then thou mayest get thee to 
thy weapons like a Bull of spirit, for 

"All men scorn the soulless coward who his manhood doth 
forget : 
On a lifeless heap of ashes fearlessly the foot is set." 

" Then Damanaka the Jackal returned to the Lion, 
and said to him : — 

' If it please your Majesty, the traitor is now coming ; 
let your Majesty ho on your guard, with ears pricked 
and paw upraised.' 

" Tho Bull meanwhile approached, and observing the 
hostile attitudo of King Tawny-hide, he also lowered 
his horns, and prepared for the combat. A terrible 
battle ensued, and at the last King Tawny-hide slew 
Lusty-life the Bull. Now when the Bull was dead, the 
Lion was very sorrowful, and as he sat on his throne 
lamenting, he said, — 

' I repent me of this deed ! — 

" As when an Elephant's life-blood is spilt, 
Another hath the spoils ( 7a ) — mine is the guilt." 

' Sire/ replied the Jackal, ' a King over-merciful is 
like a Brahman that eats all things equally ( 73 ). May 
all your Majesty's enemies perish as did this Bull.' 


80 TIIE ROOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

" Thus endeth," said the Sage Vishnu-Sarman, " the 
' Parting of Friends. 1 " 

" We are gratified exceedingly thereby," replied the 
Sons of the King. 

" Let mo then close it thus," said their Preceptor, — 

" So be friendship never parted, 

But among the evil-hearted ; 

Time's sure step drag, soon or later, 

To his judgment, such a Traitor ; 

Lady Lukshmi, of her grace, 

Grant good fortune to this place ; 
And you, Royal boys ! and boys of times to be, 
In this fair fable-garden wander free." 


81 


W AB. 


When the next day of instruction was come, the King's 
sons spake to the Sage, Vishnu- Sarman. 

" Master," said they, " we are Princes, and the sons 
of Princes, and wo earnestly desire to hear thee dis- 
course upon War." 

" I am to speak on what shall please you," replied 
Vishnu-Sarman. " Hear now, therefore, of ' War/ 
whose opening is thus : — 

" Between the peoples of Peacock and Swan ( 74 ) 
War raged; and evenly the contest ran, 
Until the Swans to trust the Crows began" 

"And how was all that?" asked the sons of the 
Kajah. Vishnu- Sdrman proceeded to relate — 

6 


82 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 


Ufa $nitU of ifa $umns ami ftttcoflts* 

"In the Isle of Camphor there is a lake called 
' Lotus-water/ and therein a Swan-Koyal, named ' Sil- 
ver-sides/ had his residence. The birds of the marsh 
and the mere had elected him King, in full council of 
all the fowls — for a people with no ruler is like a ship 
that is without a helmsman. One day King Silvor- 
sides, with his courtiers, was quietly reposing on a 
couch of well-spread lotus-blossoms, when a Crane, 
named ' Long-bill/ who had just arrived from foreign 
parts, entered the presence with an obeisance, and sat 
down. 

' What news from abroad, Long-bill ? ' asked his 
Majesty. 

' Great news, may it please you,' answered the Crane, 
' and therefore have I hastened hither. Will your 
Majesty hear me ?' 

' Speak ! ' said King Silver-sides. 

' You must know, my Liege/ began the Crane, ' that 
over all the birds of the Vindhya mountains ( 75 ) in 
Jambudwipa ( 70 ) a Peacock is King, and his name is 
" Jewel-plume." I was looking for food about a certain 
burnt jungle there, when some of his retainers discovered 
me, and asked my name and country. "lama vassal of 


WAR. 83 

King Silver-sides, Lord of the Island of Camphor," I 
replied, "and I am travelling in foreign lands for my 
pleasurc. ,, Upon that tho birds asked me which coun- 
try, my own or theirs, and which King, appeared to me 
superior. " How can you ask ?" I replied ; " the island 
of Camphor is, as it were, Heaven itself, and its King 
a heaven-born ruler. To dwellers in a barren land like 
yours how can I describe them ? Come for yourselves, 
and see tho country where I live." Thereupon, your 
Majesty, tho birds were exceedingly offended, as one 
might expect, — 

44 Simple milk, when serpents drink it, straightway into venom 
turns ; 
And a fool who heareth counsel all the wisdom of it spurns." 

For, indeed, no reflecting person wastes time in admo- 
nishing blockheads — 

44 The birds that took the apes to teaching, 
Lost eggs and nests in pay for preaching." 

' How did that befall ? ' asked the King. 
The Crane related : — 

<$It<t ^torjr jof ih<t Wtemtv Dints aiut % 

JJtonltc])**, 

' In a nullah that leads down to the Nerbudda river 
there stood a large silk-cotton tree, where a colony of 

6—2 


84 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

weaver-birds had built their hanging nests ( n ), and lived 
snugly in them, whatever the weather. It was in the 
rainy season, when the heavens aro overlaid with clouds 
like indigo-sheets, and a tremendous storm of water 
was falling. The birds looked out from their nests, and 
saw some monkeys, shivering and starved with the cold, 
standing under the tree. " Twit! twit! you Monkeys," 
they began to chirrup. " Listen to us ! — 

" With beaks we built these nests, of fibres scattered ; 
You that have hands and feet, build, or be spattered." 

On hearing that the Monkeys were by no means pleased. 
" Ho ! ho ! " said they, " the Birds in their snug nests 
are jeering at us ; wait till the rain is over." Accord- 
ingly, so soon as the weather mended, the Monkeys 
climbed into the tree, and broke all the birds'eggs and 
demolished every nest. I ought to have known better,' 
concluded the Crane, * than to have wasted my sug- 
gestions on King Jewel-plume's creatures.' 

' But what did they say?" asked Silver-sides. 

' They said, Rajah,' answered the Crane, * " who 
made that Swan of thine a King ? ' " 

' And what was your reply ? " asked Silver-sides. 

' I demanded,' replied the Crane, ' who made a King 
of that Peacock of theirs. Thereupon they wore ready 
to kill me for rage ; but I displayed my very best valour. 
Is it not written — 


WAR. 85 

" A modest manner fits a maid, 

And Patience is a man's adorning ; 
But brides may kiss, nor do amiss, 
And men may draw, at scathe and scorning." 

' Yet a man should measure his own strength first/ 
said the Rajah, smiling ; ' how did you fare against 
King Jewel-plume's fellows?' 

' Very scurvily,' replied Long-bill. ' " Thou rascal 
Crane," they cried, " dost thou feed on his soil, and 
revile our Sovereign ? That is past bearing ! " And 
thereat they all pecked at mo. Then they began again : 
" Thou thick-skulled Crano ! that King of tliine is a 
goose — a web-footed lord of littleness — and thou art but 
a frog in a well ( 78 ) to bid us servo him — him for- 
sooth ! — 


it 


Serving narrow-minded masters dwarfs high natures to their 

size: 
Seen heforc a convex mirror, elephants do show as mice.' 


»t 


Bad kings are only strong enough to spoil good vassals 
— as a fiction once was mightier than a herd of elephants. 
You know it, don't you? — 

" Mighty may prove things insignificant : 
A tale of moonshine turned an elephant." 

' No ! how was that ?' I asked. 
The birds related — 


86 TIIE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

W\u ^torjr of i\\t €M gm[* and ilw <8t<pfomis. 

' Once on a time, very little rain had fallen in the 
due season ; and the Elephants heing oppressed with 
thirst, thus accosted their leader : — ' Master, how are 
we to live? The small creatures find something to wash 
in, hut we cannot, and we are half dead in consequence ; 
whither shall we go then, and what shall wo do ? ' Upon 
that the King of the Elephants led them away a little 
space ; and showed them a beautiful pool of crystal 
water, where they took their ease. Now it chanced 
that a company of Hares resided on the banks of 
the pool, and the going and coming of the elephants 
trampled many of them to death, till ono of their 
number named Hard-head grumbled out, * This troop 
will be coming here to water every day, and every one of 
our family will be crushed.' ' Do not disquiet yourself," 
said an old buck named Good-speed, ' I will contrive 
to avert it,' and so saying, he set off, bethinking him- 
self on his way how ho should approach and accost a 
herd of elephants; for, 

" Elephants destroy by touching, snakes with point of tooth 
beguile ; 
Kings by favour kill, and traitors murder with a fatal smile." 

' I will get on the top of a hill/ he thought, * and 
address the Elephants thence.' 


WAR. 87 

" This being done, and the Lord of the herd per- 
ceiving him, it was asked of the Hare, ' Who art thou? 
and whence comest thou?' 

' I am an ambassador from his Godship the Moon,' 
replied Good-speed. 

' State your business/ said the Elephant-king. 

* Sire, began the Hare, ' an ambassador speaks the 
truth safely by charter of his name. Thus saith the 
Moon, then: "These hares were the guardians of my 
pool, and thine elephants in coming thither have scared 
them away. This is not well. Am I not ' Sasanka( 79 ), 
whoso banner bears a hare, and are not these hares 
my votaries?'" 

'Please your worship,' said the Elephant-king with 
much trepidation, ' wo knew nothing of this ; we will 
go there no more.' 

* It were well,' said the sham ambassador, ' that you 
first made^your apologies to the Divinity, who is quaking 
with rage in his pool, and then went about your 
business.' 

' We will do so,' replied the Elephant with meek- 
ness; and being led by night to the pool, in the 
ripples of which the image of the Moon was quiver- 
ing, the herd made their prostrations ; the Hare ex- 
plaining to the Moon that their fault was done in 
ignorance, and thereupon they got their dismissal." 


88 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

' Nay,' I said, ' my Sovereign is no fiction, but a great 
King and a noble, and one that might govern the Three 
Worlds, much more a kingdom.' 

* Thou shalt talk thy trqpson in the presence/ they 
cried ; and therewith I was dragged before King Jewel- 
plume. 

' Who is this ?' asked the Rajah. 

* He is a servant of King Silversides, of the Island of 
Camphor,' they replied ; ' and he slights your Majesty, 
on your Majesty's own land.' 

' Sirrah Crane ! ' said the Prime Minister, a Vulture, 
* who is chief officer in that court ?' 

' A Brahmany Goose,* I answered, i named " Know- 
all ;" and he does know every possible science.' 

i Sire,' broke in a Parrot, ' this Camphor-isle and the 
rest are poor places, and belong to Jambu-dwipa. Your 
Majesty has but to plant the royal foot upon them.' 

' Oh ! of course,' said the King. 

' Nay,' said I, ' if talking makes your Majesty King of 
Camphor-island, my Liege may be lord of Jambu-dwipa 
by a better title.' 

* And that ?' said the Parrot. 
i Is fighting ! ' I responded. 

' Good ! ' said the King, with a smile ; i bid your 
people prepare for war.' 

' Not so,' I replied ; ' but send your own ambassador.' 


WAR. 89 

'Who will bear the message?' asked the Rajah. 
1 He should be loyal, dexterous, and bold.' 

'And virtuous,' said the Vulture, 'and therefore a 
Brahman : — 

" Better Virtue marked a herald than that noble blood should 
deck; 
Shiva reigns for ever Shiva' while the sea- wave stains his 
neck ( 80 )." 

' Then let the Parrot be appointed,' said the Rajah. 

' I am your Majesty's humble servant,' replied the 

Parrot ; ' but this Crane is a bad character, and with 

tho bad I novor liko to travel. Tho ten-hcaded Ravana 

carried off tho wife of Ramchundra( 01 ) ! It docs not do, 

44 With evil people neither stay nor go ; 
The Heron died for being with the Crow." 

' How did that befall ?' asked the King. The Parrot 
related : — 

®!u £foi[g of ilut S«tJM rod Jty %<m* 

' The high-road to Oogein is a very unshaded and 
sultry one ; but there stands upon it one large Peepul- 
trcc ( oc ), and therein a Crow and a Heron had their 
residence together. It was in the hot weather that a tired 
traveller passed that way, and, for the sake of the shade, 
he laid his bow and arrows down, and dropped asleep 
under the tree. Before long the shadow of the tree 


90 TIIE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

shifted, and left his face exposed to the glare; which the 
Heron perceiving, like the kindly bird he was, perched 
on the Peepul-tree, and spread his wings out so as to 
cast a shadow on the traveller's face. There the poor 
fellow, weary with his travel, continued to sleep soundly, 
and snored away comfortably with open mouth. The 
sight of his enjoyment was too much for the malevolent 
Crow, who, perching over him, dropped an unwelcome 
morsel into the sleeper's mouth, and straightway flew 
off. The traveller, starting from his slumber, looked 
about, and, seeing no bird but the Heron, he fitted an 
arrow and shot him dead. No ! ' concluded the Parrot, 
' I like the society of honest folk.' 

'But why these words, my brother?' I said; 'his 
Majesty's herald is to mo even as his Majesty.' 

' Very fine ! ' replied the Parrot ; ' but — 

44 Kindly courtesies that issue from a smiling villain's mouth 
Serve to startle, like a flower blossoming in time of drouth." 

Needs must that thou art a bad man ; for by thy talk 
war will have arisen, which a little conciliation had 
averted : — 

44 Conciliation ! — weapon of the wise ! 
Wheedled therewith, by woman's quick device, 
The Wheelwright let his ears betray his eyes." 

'How came that about?' asked the King. The 
Parrot related : — 


WAR. 91 


' There was a Wheelwright in Shri-nuggur, whoso 
namo was "Heavy-head." Ho had good reason to suspect 
the infidelity of his wife, hut he had no absolute proof 
of it. One day he gave out that he should go to a 
neighbouring town, and he started accordingly ; but he 
went a very little] way, and then returning, hid himself 
in his wife's chamber. She being quite satisfied that he 
was really gone away, invited her gallant to pass the 
evening with her, and began to spend it with him in 
unrestrained freedom. Presently by chance she detected 
the presence of her husband, and her manner instantly 
changed. 

" Life of my soul! what ails you? " said her lover ; 
" you are quite dull to-night." 

"lam dull," she replied, " because the lord of my 
life is gone. Without my husband the town is a wilder- 
ness. Who knows what may befall him, and whether 
he will have a nice supper ? " 

" Trouble thyself no more about the quarrelsome 
dullard," said her gallant. 

" Dullard, quotha ! " exclaimed the wife. " What 
matter what ho is, since he is my all ? Knowest thou 
not — 


92 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

" Of the wife the lord is jewel, though no gems upon her beam ; 
Lacking him, she lacks adornment, howsoe'er her jewels gleam?'* 

Tliou, and the like of thee, may serve a whim, as wo 
chew a betel-leaf ( 83 ) and trifle with a flower ; but my 
husband is my master, and can do with me as he will. 
My life is wrapped up in him — and when he dies, alas ! 
I will certainly die too. Is it not plainly said — 

" Hairs three-crore, and half-a-crore hairs, on a man so many 
grow — 
And so many years to Swerga shall the true wife surely go ? " 

And better still is promised ; as herein — 

" When the faithful wife ( M ), embracing tenderly her husband dead, 
Mounts the blazing pile beside him, as it were the bridal-bed ; 
Though his sins were twenty thousand, twenty thousand times 

o'er-told, 
She shall bring his soul to splendour, for her love so large and 

bold: 1 

All this the Wheelwright heard. " What a lucky 
fellow I am," he thought, " to have a wife so virtuous," 
and rushing from his place of concealment, he exclaimed 
in ecstasy to his wife's gallant, " Sir ! saw you ever truer 
wife than mine ? " 

" When the story was concluded," said Long-bill, 
" the King, with a gracious gift of food, sent me off 
before the Parrot ; but he is coming after me, and it is 
now for your Majesty to determine as it shall please 
you." 


AVAlt. 93 

" My Liege," observed the Brahmany-goose with a 
sneer* " the Crane has done the King's business in 
foreign parts to the best of his power, which is that of a 
fool." 

" Let the past pass," replied the King, " and take 
thought for the present." 

" Be it in secret, then, your Majesty," said the Brah- 
many-goose — 

" Counsel unto six ears spoken, unto all is notified : 
When a King holds consultation, let it be with one beside." 

Thereupon all withdrew, but tho Rajah and tho 
Minister. 

" What think you?" said Silver-sides. 

" That the Crane has been employed to bring this 
about," replied the other. 

" What shall we do? " asked the King. 

" Despatch two spies — the first to inform and send 
back the other, and make us know the enemy's strength 
or weakness. They must be such as can travel by land 
and water, so the Crane will serve for one, and we will 
keep his family in pledge at. the King's gate. The other 
must be a very reserved character ; as it is said — 

" Sick men are for skilful leeches! — prodigals for prisoning — 
Fools for teachers — and the man who keeps a secret, for a 
King." 

" I know such an one," said his Majesty, after a pause. 


94 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

i 
" It is half the victory," responded the Minister. 

At this juncture a chamberlain entered with a pro- 
found obeisance, and announced the arrival from Jambu- 
dwipa of the Parrot. 

" Let him bo shown to a reception-room," com- 
manded tho Goose, in reply to a look from the King. 
" He shall presently have audience." 

" War is pronounced, then," said the King, as the 
attendant withdrew. 

"It is offered, my Liege ; but must not be rashly 
accepted," replied the other — 

" With gift, craft, promise, cause thy foe to yield ; 
"When these have failed thee, challenge him a-field." 

To gain time for expedients is the first point. Expe- 
dients are. good for great and little matters equally, 
like 

" The subtle wash of waves, that smoothly pass, 
But lay the tree as lowly as the grass." 

Lot his Excclloncy tho Parrot, then, bo cajoled and de- 
tained here, while wo place our fort in condition to be 
useful. Is it not said — 

" Ten true bowmen on a rampart fifty's onset may sustain ; 
Fortalices keep a country more than armies in the plain ?" 

And your Majesty," continued the Goose, " will recall 
the points of a good fortress, — 


WAR. 95 

" Build it strong, and build it spacious, with an entry and retreat ; 
Store it well with wood and water, fill its garners full with 
wheat." 

"Whom, then, shall we entrust with this work?" 
asked King Silver-sides. 

" The Paddy-bird C 85 ) is a good bird, and a skilful," 
replied his Minister. 

"Let him bo summoned!" said the King. And 
upon the entrance of the Paddy-bird, the superintend- 
ence of the fortress was committed to him, and accepted 
with a low prostration. 

"As to the fort, Sire!" remarked tho Paddy-bird, 
"it exists already in yonder large pool; the thing is 
to store the island in the middle of it with provisions, — 

" Gems will no man's life sustain ; 
Best of gold is golden grain." 

"Good!" said King Silver-sides; "let it be looked 
to." Thereupon, as the Paddy-bird was retiring, the 
Usher entered again, and making prostration, said: 
" May it please your Majesty, the King of all the Crows, 
Night-cloud by name, has just arrived from Singhala- 
dwipa, ( 86 ) and desires to lay his homage at your 
Majesty's feet." 

" He is a wise bird, and a far-travelled," said tho 
King; " I think we must give him audience." 

"Nevertheless, Sire," interrupted the Goose, "we 


96 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

must not forget that he is a land-bird, and therefore 
not to bo received as a water-fowl. Your royal memory 
doubtless retains the story of 

" The Jackal's fate, who being coloured blue, 
Leaving his party, left his own life too." 

" No! How was that?" asked King Silver-sides. 
The Goose related — 


' A Jackal once on a time, as he was prowling about 
the suburbs of a town, slipped into an indigo-tank; 
and not being able to get out he laid himself down 
so as to bo taken for dead. The dyer presently coming, 
and finding what seemed a dead Jackal, carried him 
into the jungle and then flung him away. Left to 
himself, the Jackal found his natural colour changed 
to a splendid blue. i Really/ he reflected, ' I am now 
of a most magnificent tint; why should I not make 
it conduce to my elevation?' With this view, he assem- 
bled the other Jackals, and thus harangued them: — 

' Good people, the Goddess of the Wood, with her 
own divine hand, and with every magical herb of the 
forest, has anointed me King. Behold the complexion 


WAR. 97 

of royalty! — and henceforward transact nothing without 
my imperial permission." 

" The Jackals, overcome by so distinguished a colour, 
could do nothing but prostrate themselves and promise 
obedience. His reign, thus begun, extended in time 
to the lions and tigers; and with these high-born at- 
tendants he allowed himself to despise the Jackals, 
keeping his own kindred at a distance, as though 
ashamed of them. The Jackals were indignant, but 
an old beast of their number thus consoled them : — 

' Lcavo tho impudent fellow to mo. I will contrive 
his ruin. These tigers and tho rest think him a King, 
because he is coloured bluo; we must show them his 
true colours. Do this, now! — in the evening-time come 
close about him, and set up a great yell together — ho 
is sure to join in ( 87 ), as he used to do, — 

" Hard it is to conquer nature : if a dog were made a King, 
Mid the coronation trumpets, he would gnaw his sandal-string." 

And when ho yells tho Tigers will know him for a 
Jackal and fall upon him. , 

" Tho thing befell exactly so, and the Jackal," con- 
cluded tho Minister, " met the fate of one who leaves 
his propor party." 

" Still," said the King, " the Crow has come a long 
way, and we might see him, I think." 

7 


98 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

" Admit the Parrot first, Sire," said the Goose ; " the 
fort has been put in order and the spy despatched." 

' Thereupon a Court was called, and the Parrot in- 
troduced, followed by Night-cloud the Crow. A seat 
was offered to the Parrot, who took it, and, with his 
beak in the air, thus delivered his mission : — 

" King Silver-sides ! — My master, the King Jewel- 
plume, Lord of Lords, bids thee, if life and lands be 
dear to thee, to come and make homage at his august 
feet ; and failing this to get thee gone from Camphor- 
island." 

"S'death!" exclaimed the Rajah, "is there none 
that will silence this traitor ?" 

" Give the sign, your Majesty," said the Crow, start- 
ing up, and I will despatch this audacious bird." 

" Sir," said the Goose, " be calm ! and Sire, deign to 
listen, — 

" 'lis no Council where no Sage is — 'tis no Sage that fears not 
Law; 
'Tis no Law which Truth confirms not — 'tis no Truth which 
Fear can awe." 

An ambassador must speak unthroatencd, — 

" Though base be the Herald, nor hinder nor let, 
For the mouth of a king is he ; 
The sword may be whet, and the battle set, 
But the word of his message is free." 


WAR. 99 

Thereat the Rajah and Night-cloud resumed their 
composure ; and the Parrot took his departure, escorted 
hy the Minister, and presented with complimentary gifts 
of gold and jewels. On reaching the palace of Jewel- 
plume, the King demanded his tidings, and inquired of 
the country he had visited. 

" War must be prepared, may it please you," said the 
Parrot : " the country is a country of Paradise." 

" Prepare for war, then ! " said the King. 

" Wo must not enter on it in tho faco of destiny," 
interposed tho Vulture-Minister, whoso tiilo was " Far- 
sight." 

" Let the Astrologer then discover a favourable con- 
juncture for the expedition, and let my forces be reviewed 
meantime," said the King. 

" We must not march without great circumspection," 
observed Far-sight. 

" Minister ! " exclaimed the King, " you chafe me. 
Say, however, with what force we should set out." 

" It should be well selected, rather than unwieldy," 
replied the Vulture — 

" Better few and chosen fighters than of shaven-crowns a host, 
For in headlong flight confounded, with the base the hrave are 
lost." 

And its commanders must be judiciously appointed ; for 
it is said — 

7—2 


100 ' THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

" Ever absent, harsh, unjustly portioning the captured prey — 
These, and cold or laggard leaders make a host to melt away.'* 

"All!" interrupted the Rajah, "what need of so 
much talk ? We will go, and, if Vachaspati ( m ) please, 
wo will conquer." 

Shortly afterwards the Spy returned to Camphor- 
island. " King Silver-sides," he cried, " the Rajah, 
Jewel-plume, is on his way hither, and has reached the 
Ghauts (° 9 ). Let the fort he manned, for that Vulture 
is a great minister ; and I have learned, too, that there 
is one among us who is in his pay." 

" King!" said the Goose, " that must he the Crow." 

" But whence, then, did he show such willingness to 
punish the Parrot ? " objected his Majesty. " Besides, 
war was declared long after the Crow came to Court." 

" I misdoubt him;" said the Minister, " because he 
is a stranger." 

" But strangers surely may be well-disposed," replied 
the King. " How say the books? — 

" Kind is kin, howe'er a stranger — kin unkind is stranger shown ; 
Sores hurt, though the body breeds them — drugs relieve, though 
desert-grown." 

Havo you never heard of King Sudraka and the unknown 
Servant, who gavo his son's life for the King? " 
" Never," answered the Goose. 


WAR. 101 


t< $torn b| tit* ^iutftflut lajpwt. 


<< 


I will tell you the tale," said the King, " as I heard 
it from € Lilyflower,' daughter of the Flamingo ' White- 
flag/ of whom I was once very fond : — A soldier pre- 
sented himself ono morning at King Sudraka's gate, 
and hade the porter procure an audience for i Vira-vara, 
a Rajpoot* ( 90 ), who sought employment. Being ad- 
mitted to the presence, he thus addressed the King : — 

' If your Highness needs an attendant, hehold one ! ' 

' What pay do you ask V inquired the King. 

' Five hundred pieces of gold a-day,' said Vira-vara. 

' And your accoutrements ? ' asked the King. 

' Are these two arms, and this sabre, which serve for 
a third,' said Yira-vara, rolling up his sleeve. 

i I cannot entertain you/ rejoined his Majesty ; and 
thereupon the Rajpoot made salaam, and withdrew. Then 
said the Ministers, ' If it please your Majesty, the stipend 
is excessive, hut give him pay for four days, and see 
wherein ho may deserve it.' Accordingly, the Rajpoot 
was recalled, and received wages for four days, with the 
complimentary hotel ( 91 ). — Ah! the rare betel! Truly 
say tho wise of it — 

" Betel-nut is bitter, hot, sweet, spicy, binding, alkaline — 
A demulcent — an astringent — foe to evils intestine ; 


102 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

Giving to the breath a fragrance — to the lips a crimson red ; 
A detergent, and a kindler of Love's flame that lieth dead. 
Praise the gods for the good Betel ! — these be thirteen virtues 

given, 
Hard to meet in one thing blended, even in their happy heaven.' * 

" Now the King narrowly watched the spending of 
Vira-vara's pay, and discovered that he bestowed half in 
the service of the Gods and the support of Brahmans, 
a fourth part in relieving the poor, and reserved a fourth 
for his sustenance and recreation. This daily division 
made, he would take his stand with his sabre at the gate 
of the palace ; retiring only upon receiving the royal 
permission. 

" It was on the fourteenth night of tho dark half of 
the month ( 92 ) that King Sudraka heard below a sound of 
passionate sobbing. ' Ho ! there,' ho criod, ' who waits 
at the gate?' 

* I,' replied Vira-vara, ' may it please you.' 

f. Go and learn what means this weeping/ said the 
King. 

' I go, your Majesty, answered the Rajpoot, and there- 
with departed. 

" No sooner was he gone than the King repented him 
of sending one man alone into a night so dark that a 
bodkin might pierce a hole in it, and girding on his 
scimitar, he followed his guard beyond the city gates. 
When •Vira-vara had gone thus far he encountered a 


WAR. 103 

beautiful and splendidly-dressed lady who was weeping 
bitterly ; and accosting lier, he requested to know her 
namo, and why sho thus lamented. 

' I am the Fortune ( 93 ) of the King Sudraka,' an- 
swered she ; ' a long while I have lived happily in the 
•shadow of his arm ; but on the third day he will die, and 
I must depart, and therefore lament I.' 

' Can nothing serve, Divine Lady, to prolong thy 
stay?' asked the Rajpoot. 

' It might be,' replied the Spirit, ' if thou shouldst 
cut off tho head of thy first-born Shaktidhar, that hath 
on his body tho thirty-two auspicious marks ( 94 ) of 
greatness. "Were his head offered to the all-helpful 
Durga, the Rajah should live a hundred years, and I 
might tarry beside him.' 

" So speaking, sho disappeared, and Vira-vara retraced 
his steps to his own house and awoke his wife and son. , 
They arose, and listened with attention until Vira-vara 
had repeated all the words of the vision. When he had 
finished, Shaktidhar exclaimed, * I am thrice happy to 
bo able to save the state of tho King. Kill me, my 
father, and linger not ; to give my life in such a cause is 
good indeed.' * Yes,' said the Mother, * it is good, and 
worthy of our blood; how else should we deserve the 
King's pay?' Being thus agreed, they repaired to- 
gether at once to the temple of the Goddess Durga, and 


104 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

having paid their devotions and entreated the favour of 
the deity on behalf of the King, Vira-vara struck off his 
son's head, and laid it as an offering upon the shrine. 
That done, Vira-vara said, ' My service to the King is 
accomplished, and life without my boy is but a burden/ 
and therewith he plunged his sword in his own breast 
and fell dead. Overpowered with grief for her husband 
and child, the mother also withdrew the twice-blooded 
weapon, and slew herself with it on the bodies of Vira- 
vara and Shaktidhar. 

" All this was heard and seen by King Sudraka, and 
he stood aghast at the sad sight. i Woe is me!' he 
exclaimed, — 

" Kings may come, and Kings may go ; 
What was I, to bring these low ? 
Souls so noble, slain for me, 
Were not, and will never be ! " 

What reck I of my realm, having lost these?' and 
thereat ho drew his scimitar to take his own life also. 
At that moment there appeared to him the Goddess, 
.who is Mistress of all men's fortunes. ' Son,' said she, 
staying his lifted hand, * forbear thy rash purpose, and 
bethink thee of thy kingdom.' 

" The Rajah fell prostrate before her, and cried, — 
' Goddess ! I am done with life and wealth and king- 
dom ! If thou hast compassion on me, let my death 


WAR. 105 

restore these faithful ones to life; anywise I follow the 
path they have marked.' ' Son/ replied the Goddess, 
' thine affection is pleasing to mo : he it as thou wilt ! 
The Kajpoot and his house shall he rendered alive to 
thee.' Then the King departed, and presently saw 
Vira-vara return, and take up ag^in his station as hefore 
at the palace-gate. 

' Ho! there, Vira-vara ! ' cried the King, ' what meant 
the weeping?' 

' Let your Majesty rest well ! ' answered the Kajpoot, 
' it was a woman who wept, and disappeared on my 
approach.' This answer completed the Eajah's astonish- 
ment and delight ; for we know — 

" He is brave whose tongue is silent of the trophies of his sword ; 
He is great whose quiet bearing marks his greatness well 
assured." 

So when the day was come, ho called a full council, and, 
declaring therein all the events of the night, he invested 
the faithful guard with the sovereignty of the Carnatic. 

" Thus, then," concluded King Silver-sides, " in en- 
tertaining strangers a man may add to his friends." 

" It may well he," replied the Goose ; " hut a Minister 

should advise what is expedient, and not what is pleasing 

in sentiment : — 

" When the Priest, the Leech, the Vizier of a King his flatterers 
be, 
Very soon the King will part with health, and wealth, and piety." 


106 THE BOOK OP GOOD COUNSELS. 

" Let it pass, then," said Silver-sides, " and turn wo 
to the matter in hand. King Jewel-plume is even 
now pitched under the Ghauts: What think you ?" 

" That we shall vanquish him," replied the Goose ; 
" for he disregards, as I learn, the counsel of that great 
statesman, the Vultui^ Far-sight; and the wise have 
said, — 

" Merciless, or money-loving, deaf to counsel, false of faith, 
Thoughtless, spiritless, or careless, changing course with every 

breath, 
Or the man who scorns his rival — if a prince should choose a foe, 
Ripe for meeting and defeating, ccrtes he would choose him so." 

He is marching without duo preparation ; let us send 
the Paddy-bird at the head of a force and attack him on 
his march." 

Accordingly tho Paddy-bird, setting out with a forco 
of water-fowl, fell upon the host of the Peacock-king, and 
did immense execution. Disheartened thereat, King 
Jewel-plume summoned Far-sight his Minister, and 
acknowledged to him his precipitation. 

" Wherefore do you abandon us, my father ?" ho said. 
" Correct for us what has been done amiss." 

" My Liege," replied the Vulture, " it has been well 
observed, — 

" By the valorous and unskilful great achievements are not 
wrought ; 
Courage, led by careful Prudence, unto highest ends is brought." 


WAR, 107 

You have set Strength in the seat of Counsel, your 
Majesty, and he hath clumsily spoiled your plans. How 
indeed could it fall otherwise ? for, — 

" Grief kills gladness, winter summer, midnight-gloom the light 
of day, 
Kindnesses ingratitude, and pleasant friends drive pain away ; 
Each ends each, but none of other surer conquerers can be 
Than Impolicy of Fortune — of Misfortune Policy." 

I havo said to myself, * My Prince's understanding is 
affected — how else would ho ohscure the moonlight of 
policy with the night-vapours of talk ;' in such a mood 
I cannot help him, — 

" Wisdom answers all who ask her, but a fool she cannot aid ; 
Blind men in the faithful mirror sec not their reflection made." 

And therefore I have heen absent." 

" My father ! " said the King, joining his palms in 
respect, " mino is all the fault ! Pardon it, and 
instruct me how to withdraw my army without further 
loss." 

Then the Vulture's anger melted, and he reflected, — 

" Where the Gods are, or thy Guru ( 95 ) — in the face of Pain and 
Age, 
Cattle, Brahmans, Kings, and Children — reverently curb thy 
rage." 

And with a benignant smile, he answered the King thus, 
"Be of good heart, my Liege; thou shalt not only 


108 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

bring the host back safely, but thou shalt first destroy 
the castle of King Silver-sides." 

"How can that be, with my diminished forces?" 
asked the Rajah. 

"It will come to pass!" answered the Vulture. 
" Break up to-day for the blockade of the fort." 

Now, when this was reported by the spies to King 
Silver-sides, he was greatly alarmed. " Good Goose ! " 
said he, "what is to be done? Hero is the King of 
the Peacocks at hand, to blockade us, — by his Minister's 
advice too." 

" Sire," replied the Goose, " separate the efficient 
and the inefficient in your force ; and stimulate the 
loyalty of the first, with a royal bounty of gold and 
dresses, as each may seem to merit. Now is the time 
for it, — 


41 


Oh, my Prince ! on eight occasions prodigality is none — 

In the solemn sacrificing, at the wedding of a son, 

When the glittering treasure given makes the proud invader 

bleed, 
Or its lustre bringeth comfort to the people in their need, 
Or when kinsmen are to succour, or a worthy work to end, 
Or to do a mistress honour, or to welcome back a friend." 


But is this expenditure needed?" said the King. 
It is needed, my Liege," said the Goose, "and 
it befits a Monarch; for, — 


WAR. 109 

" Truth, munificence, and valour, are the virtues of a King ; 
Royalty, devoid of either, sinks to a rejected thing." 

" Let it be incurred then ! " replied the King. 

At this moment Night-cloud, the Crow, made his 
appearance. " Deign mo one regard, Sire," said ho, 
" the insolent enemy is at our gates; let your Majesty 
give the word, and I will go forth and show my valour 
and devotion to your Crown." 

" It were better to keep our cover," said the Goose. 
" Wherefore else builded we this fortalice? Is it not 
said? — 

" Hold thy vantage ! — alligators on the land make none afraid ; 
And the lion's but a jackal that hath left his forest-shade." 

But go, your Majesty, and encourage our warriors." 
Thereupon they repaired to the Gateway of the Fort, 
and all day the battle raged there. 

It was the morning after, when King Jewel-plume 
spake thus to his Minister the Vulture — " Good sir, 
shall thy promise be kept to us?" 

" It shall be kept, your Majesty," replied the Vulture; 
" storm the fort ! " 

"Wo will storm it!" said the Peacock-king. The 
sun was not well risen accordingly when the attack 
was made, and there arose hot fighting at all the four 
gates. It was then that tho traitorous Crows, headed 


110 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

by their monarch, Night-cloud, put fire to every dwell- 
ing in the citadel, and raised a shout of " The Fort 
is taken! it is taken!" At this terrible sound the 
soldiers of the Swan-king forsook their posts, and 
plunged into the pool. 

Not thus King Silver-sides: — retiring coolly before 
the foe, with his General the Paddy-bird, he was cut 
off and encircled by the troopers of King Jewel-plume, 
under the command of his Marshal the Cock. 

"My General," said the King, "thou shalt not 
perish for me. Fly ! I can go no farther. Fly ! I bid 
thee, and take counsel with the Goose that Crest-jewel, 
my son, be named King! " 

" Good my Lord," replied tho Paddy-bird, " speak 
not thus ! Let your Majesty reign victorious while tho 
sun and moon endure. I am governor of your Majesty's 
fortress, and if the enemy enter it he shall but do so 
over my body; let me die for thee, my Master! — 

" Gentle, generous, and discerning ; such a Prince the Gods do 
give ! " 

" That shalt thou not!" replied the Eajah, — 

" Skilful, honest, and true-hearted ; where doth such a Vassal 
live?" 

" Nay! my royal Lord, escape!" cried tho Paddy- 
bird; a king's life is tho life of his people, — 


WAR. HI 

" The people are the lotus-leaves, their monarch is the sun — 
When lie doth sink beneath the waves they vanish every one. 
When he doth rise they rise again with bud and blossom rife, 
To bask awhile in his warm smile, who is their lord and life." 

" Think no more of me." At this instant the Cock 
rushing forward, inflicted a wound with his sharp spurs 
on the person of the King; but the Paddy-bird sprang 
in front of him, and receiving on his body the blows 
designed for the Rajah, forced him away into the pool. 
Then turning upon tho Cock, he despatched him with 
a shower of blows from his long bill; and finally suc- 
cumbed, fighting in tho midst of his enemies. Thus 
the King of tho Peacocks captured tho fortress; and 
marched home with all the treasure in it, amid songs 
of victory. 


Then spako the Princes: — " In that army of the 
Swans there was no soldier like tho Paddy-bird, who 
gave his own life for the King's." 

" There be nowhere many such," replied Vishnu- 
Sarman; "for 

44 All the cows bring forth arc cattle — only now and then is born 
An authentic lord of pastures, with his shoulder-scratching 
horn." (°°) 


112 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

" It is well spoken," said the Princes. 

" But for him that dares to die so," added the Sage, 
" may an etornal hcavon bo reserved, and may the 
lustrous Angels of Paradise, the Apsaras (^J, conduct 
him thither ! Is it not so declared, indeed ? — 

" When the soldier in the battle lays his life down for his king, 
Unto Swerga's perfect glory such a deed his soul shall bring." 

" It is so declared," said the Eajah's sons. 

"And now, my "Princes," concluded Vishnu-Sarman, 

" you have listened to ' War.' " 

"We have listened, and are gratified," replied the 
sons of the King. 

"Let me end then," said their Preceptor, "with 
this, — 

" If the clouds of Battle lower 

When ye come into your power, 

Durga grant the foes that dare you 

Bring no elephants to scare you ; 

Nor the thunderous rush of horses, 

Nor the footmen's steel-fringed' forces : 
But overblown by Policy's strong breath, 
Ilide they in caverns from the avenging death." 


113 


PEACE. 


When the tiino came for resuming instruction, the 
King's sons said to Vishnu-Sarman, " Master, we have 
heard of war, we would now learn somewhat of the 
treaties which follow war." " It is well asked," replied 
the Sago; "listen therefore to 'Peace,' which hath 
this commencement — 

" When those great Kings their weary war did cease, 
The Vulture and the Goose concluded Peace* 9 

" How came that?" asked the Princes. 
Vishnu-Sarman related: — 

8 


114 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 


<$h<t ©treat]! itiatttn t\\$ ^uacorlts and 

tit* $untltS. 

" So soon as King Jowcl-plumo had retreated, tlio 
first caro of King Silver-sides was the discovery of the 
treason that had cost him the fort. 

' Goose/ he said to his Minister, ' who put the fire 

* 

to our citadel, think you? Was it an enemy or an 
inmate?' 

' Sire,' replied the Goose, * Night-cloud and his 
followers are nowhere to he seen, — it must needs be 
his work.' 

' It must needs be,' sighed the King, after a pause; 
' but what ill-fortune ! ' 

' If it please your Majesty, no,' replied the Minister; 
' it is written, — 

" 'Tis the fool who, meeting trouble, straightway destiny reviles ; 
Knowing not his own misdoing brought his own mischance the 
whiles." 

You have forgotten tho saying, — 

" Who listens not, when true friends counsel well, 
Must iiill, as once the foolish Tortoise fell." 

* I never heard it/ said the King. ' How was that?' 
The Goose related — 


PEACE. 115 


tc £torjj of t\xt Sfai[tatsi{ anxt t\\$ $m$. 

1 There is a pool in South Behar called the " Pool 
of the Blue Lotus," and two Geese had for a long time 
lived there. They had a Mend in the pool who was 
a Tortoise, and he was known as ' Shelly-neck/ It 
chanced one evening that the Tortoise overheard some 
fishormen talking by the water. " We will stop here 
to-night," they said, " and in tho morning wo will 
catch tho fish, tho tortoises, and such like." Extremely 
alarmed at this, tho Tortoiso repaired to his friends 
the Geese, and reported the conversation. 

" What ever am I to do, Gossips?" he asked. 

" Tho first thing is to be assured of the danger," 
said the Geese. 

" I am assured," exclaimed the Tortoise; "the first 
thing is to avoid it: don't you know? — 

" * Time-not-come ' ( 98 ) and ' Quick-at-Peril,' these two fishes 
'scaped the net; 
4 What- will-be- will-be,' he perished, by the fishermen beset." 

" No," said the Geese, " how was it?" Shelly-neck 
related : — 


8- 


116 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 


Ufa £twg of <$tk and tfa ©Itrip <$\s]\qs. 

"It was just such a pool as this, and on the arrival 
at it of just such men as those fishermen, that three 
fishes, who had heard their designs, held consultation 
as to what should be done. 

i I shall go to another water,' said " Time-not-come," 
and away he went. 

' Why should we leave unless obliged ? ' asked " Quick- 
at-peril." * When the thing befalls I shall do the best 
I can, — 

" Who deals with bad dilemmas well, is wise. 
The merchant's wife, with womanly device, 
Kissed — and denied the kiss — under his eyes." 

'How was that?' asked the other fish. Quick-at- 
peril related : — 


3%e ^targ of tfa fttratatstied Wiift. 

' There was a trader in Vikrama-poora, who had a 
very beautiful wife, and her name was Jewel-bright. 
The lady was as unfaithful [as she was fair, and had 


PEACE. 117 

chosen for her last lover one of the household servants. 
Ah ! woman-kind ! — 

" Sex, that tires of being true, 
Base and new is brave to you ! 
Like the jungle-cows ye range, 
Changing food for sake of change." 

Now it befell one day that as Jewel-bright was bestowing 
a kiss on the mouth of the servant, she was surprised 
by her husband; and seeing him she ran up hastily 
and said, " My lord, here is an impudent varlet! he 
eats the camphor which I procured for you; I was 
actually smelling it on his lips as you entered. ,, Tho 
servant catching her meaning, affected offence. " How 
can a man stay in a house where the mistress is always 
smelling one's lips for a littlo camphor ?" he said; and 
thereat he was for going off, and was only constrained 
by the good man to stay, after much entreaty. ' There- 
fore,' said Quick-at-pcril, ' I mean to abide here, and 
make the best I can of what befalls, as she did.' 
' Yes, yes,' said What-will-be-will-be, ' we all know 

" That which will not be will not be, and what is to be will be : 
Why not drink this easy physic, antidote of misery ? w 

" When the morning came, the net was thrown, and 
both the fishes inclosed. Quick-at-peril, on being 
drawn up, feigned himself dead; and upon the fisher- 


118 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

man's laying him aside, ho leaped off again into the 
water. As to What-will-bo-will-be, he was seized and 

forthwith despatched. And that," concluded the 

Tortoise, " is why I wish to devise some plan of escape." 

" It might be compassed if you could go elsewhere," 
said the Geese, " but how can you get across the 
ground?" 

"Can't you take me through the air?" asked the 
Tortoise. 

" Impossible ! " said the Geese. 

" Not at all ! " replied the Tortoise ; " you shall hold 
a stick across in your bills, and I will hang on to it by 
my mouth — and thus you can readily convey me." 

" It is feasiblo," obsorved the Geese, " but remember, 

" Wise men their plans revolve, lest ill befall ; 
The Herons gained a friend, and so, lost all." 

"How came that about?" asked the Tortoise. The 
Geese related : — 

©to $toitH 4 Jto §f nms ami tto Ponpos^ (") 

" Among the mountains of the north there is one 
named Eagle-cliff, and near it, upon a fig-tree, a flock of 
Herons had their residence. At the foot of the tree, in 
a hollow, there lived a serpent; and he was constantly 


PEACE. 119 

devouring the nestlings of the Herons. Loud were the 
complaints of the parent birds, until an old Heron thus 
advised them : — ' You should bring some fishes from 
the pool, and lay them one by one in a line from the 
holo of yonder Mongooso to the hollow where the Ser- 
pent lives. The Mongoose will find him when it comes 
after the fish, and if it finds him it will kill him.' 
The advice seemed good, and was acted upon; but in 
killing the Snake the Mongoose overheard the cry of the 
young Horons ; and climbing tho tree daily, ho de- 
voured all that tho Snake had loft. Therefore," con- 
cluded the Geese, " do we bid you look well into your 
plan : if you should open your mouth, for instance, as 
we carry you, you will drop and be killed.' ' 

" Am I a fool," cried the Tortoise, " to open my 
mouth ? Not I ! Come now, convey me!" 

' Thereupon the Geese took up the stick ; the Tor- 
toise held fast with his mouth, and away they flew. 
The country people, observing this strange sight, ran 
after. 

" Ho ! ho ! " cried one, " look at the flying Tortoise ! " 

" When ho falls we'll cook and eat him here," said 
another. 

"No; let us take him home for dinner!" cried a 
third. 


120 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

" Wo can light a fire by tlio pool, and eat him," said 
the first. 

* The Tortoise heard these unkind remarks in a 
towering passion. "Eat me) — eat ashes ! " he exclaimed, 
opening his mouth — and down he fell directly, and was 
caught by the countrymen. Said I not well/ con- 
cluded the Goose-Minister, * that to scorn counsel is to 
seek destruction?' 

* You have well said,' replied King Silver-sides, dis- 
consolately. 

* Yes, your Majesty/ interposed the Crane, who was 
just returned, * if the Fort had been cleared, Night- 
cloud could not have fired it, as he did, by the Vulture's 
instigation.' 

' We see it all/ sighed the Kitfg, * but too late ! ' — 


" Whoso trusts, for service rendered, or fair words, an enemy, 
Wakes from folly like one falling in his slumber from a tree. 


i» 


* I witnessed Night-cloud's reception/ continued the 
Crano. ' King Jewel-plume showed him great favour, 
and was for anointing him Rajah of Camphor-island/ 

* Hear you that, my Liogo ? * asked the Goose. 
' Go on ; I hear ! ' said Silver-sides. 

' To that the Vulture demurred/ continued the Crane: 
— € " favour to low persons/' he said, " was like writing 


PEACE. 121 

on the sea-sand. To set the base-born in the seat of 
the great was long ago declared impolitic, — 

" Give mean men power, and give thy throat to the knife ; 
The Mouse, made Tiger, sought his master's life." 

"How was that?" asked King Jewel-plume. The 
Vulture related, — 


®hc ^torg Df the Icrlitsu and the $ftmst* 

" In tho forest of tho Sago Gautama there dwelt a 
llccluso named Mighty-at-Praycr. Once, as ho sat at his 
frugal meal, a young mouse dropped beside him from the 
beak of a crow, and ho took it up and fed it tenderly with 
rice grains. Some timo after tho Saint observed a cat 
pursuing his dependant to devour it, whereupon he 
changed the mouse into a stout cat. The cat w T as a 
great deal harassed by dogs, upon which the Saint again 
transformed it into a dog. The dog was always in 
danger of the tigers, and his protector at last gave him 
tho form of a tiger — considering him all this while, and 
treating him withal, like nothing but a mouse. The 
country-folk passing by would say, * That a tiger ! not 
he ; it is a mouse tho Saint has transformed.' And the 
mouse being vexed at this, reflected, * So long as the 


122 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

Master lives, this shameful story of my origin will sur- 
vive ! ' With this thought ho was about to take the 
Saint's life, when ho, who knew his purpose, turned the 
ungrateful beast by a word to his original shape. Besides, 
your Majesty,' ' continued the Vulture, " it may not be 
so easy to take in Camphor-island, — 

" Many fine fishes did the old Crane kill, 
But the Crab matched him, maugre all his bill." 

" How came that to pass ?" asked Jewel-plume. 
' The Vulture related : — 


®k $toitg fljf tfo dfntiw and t\u djjrak 

" There was an old Crano at a mero called Lily- water, 
in Malwa, who stood ono day in the shallows with a 
most dejected look and drooping bill. A Crab observed 
him and called out, * Friend Crane ! have you given up 
eating, that you stand there all day?' 'Nay, sir!' 
replied the old Crane ; * I love my dish of fish, but I 
have heard the fishermen say that they mean to capture 
every one that swims in this water ; and as that destroys 
my hopo of subsistence, I am resigning myself to death.' 
All this the fishes overheard. ' In this matter certainly,' 
they said, ' his interest is ours ; we ought to consult 
him; for it is written, — 


PEACE. 123 

" Fellow be with kindly foemen, rather than with friends unkind; 
Friend and focman are distinguished not by title but by mind." 

Thereupon they repaired to liirn : ' Good Crane/ they 
said, ' what course is there for safety ?' 

* Course of safety there is,' replied the Crane, ' to go 
olsewhero; and I wilfcarry you ono by one to another 
pool, if you please.' 

* Do so/ said the trembling fishes. 

" The Crane accordingly took one after another, and 
haying eaten them returned with tho report that he 
had safely deposited each. Last of all, tho Crab re- 
quested to bo taken ; and the Crane, coveting his tender 
flesh, took him up with great apparent respect. On 
arriving at the spot, which was covered with fish-bones, 
the Crab perceived tho fate reserved for him; and turn- 
ing round he fastened upon the Crane's throat and tore 
it so that he perished." 

" Well, but," said King Jewel-plume, " we can make 
Night-cloud viceroy here, to send over to Vindhya all 
the productions of Camphor-isle ! " 

* Then the Vulture Far-sight laughed a low laugh and 

said, — 

" Who, ere he makes a gain has spent it, 
Like the Pot-breaker ( ,0 °) will repent it." 

"What was that?" asked tho King. Far-sight re- 
lated : — 


124 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 


©he £iorg af the $rattman and lite gaits, 

" Thoro was a Brahman in tlio city of Vuna, whoso 
name was Deva Sarman. At the equinoctial feast of tho 
Dussera, he ohtained for his duxina-gift a dish of flour, 
which ho took into a potter's shed ; and there lay down 
in the shade among the pots, staff in hand. As he thus 
reclined he began to meditate, " I can sell this meal for 
ten cowrie-shells, and with them I can purchase some of 
these pots and sell them at an advance. With all that 
money I shall invest in betel-nuts and body-cloths and 
make a new profit by their sale ; and so go on trafficking 
till I get a lakh of rupees — what's to prevent me ? 
Then I shall marry four wives — and one at least will be 
beautiful and young, and she shall be my favourite. Of 
course the others will bo jealous; but if they quarrel, 
and talk, and trouble mo I will belabour thorn liko this — 
and this" — and therewith he flourished his staff to such a 
purpose as to smash his meal-dish and break several of 
the potter's jars. The potter, rushing out, took him by 
the throat, and turned him off; and so ended his specu- 
lations. I smiled, my Liege," concluded the Vulture, 
" at your precipitancy, thinking of that story." 


PEACE. 125 

" Tell me, then, my Father, what should be done," 
said the King. 

" Tell me first, your Majesty, what took the fortress, 
strength or stratagem ?" 

" It was a device of yours," said the King. 

" It is well," replied the Minister, " and my counsel 
now is to return before the rainy season, while we can 
return ; and to make peace. We have won renown and 
taken the enemy's stronghold ; let it suffice. I speak 
as a faithful adviser ; and it is written — 

" Whoso setting duty highest, speaks at need unwelcome things, 
Disregarding fear and favour, such an one may succour kings." 

Oh, my Liege ! war is uncertain ! Nay, it may ruin 
victor and vanquished, — 

" Sunda the strong, and giant Upasunda ( l01 ), 
Contending, like the lightning and the thunder, 
Slew each the other. Learn, the while you wonder." 

" Tell me that," said the King of the Peacocks. 
' The Vulture related, — 

" Long ago, my Liege, there were two Daityas named 
Sunda and Upasunda, the which with penance and fasting 
worshipped that God who wears the moon ( 102 ) for his 


126 THE BOOK OP GOOD COUNSELS. 

forehead-jewel; desiring to win his favour, and thereby 
the lordship of the Three Worlds. At last the God, 
propitiated by their devotion, spake thus unto them : — 

* I grant a boon unto ye, — choose what it shall be.* 

"And they, who would have asked dominion, were 
suddenly minded of Saraswati ( l08 ) — who reigns over 
the hearts and thoughts of men — to seek a forbidden 
thing. 

' If/ said they, * we have found favour, let the Divinity 
give us his own cherished Parvati ( 104 ), the Queen of 
Heaven ! ' 

" Terribly incensed was the God, but his word had 
passed, and the boon must be granted ; and Parvati the 
Divine was delivered up to them. Then those two world- 
breakers, sick at heart, sin-blinded, and afire with tho 
glorious beauty of the Queen of Life — began to dispute, 
saying one to another : ' Mine is she ! mine is she ! ' 
At the last they called for an umpire, and the God him- 
self appeared before them as a venerable Brahman. 

' Master,' said they, ' tell us whoso she is, for wo both 
won her by our might.' 

" Then spake that Brahman : — 

" Brahmans for their lore ( los ) have honour ; Kshattriyas for 
their bravery ; 
Vaisyas for their hard-earned treasure ; Sudras for humility.*' 


PEACE. 127 

Ye are Kshattriyas — and it is yours to fight; settle, 
then, this question by the sword.' 

" Thereupon they agreed that he spoke wisely, and 
drew and battled; and being of equal force, they fell 
at the same moment by an exchange of blows. Good 
my Lord," concluded the Minister, " peace is a bettor 
thing than war." 

" But why not say so before?" asked Jewel-plume. 

" I said it at the first," replied the Minister. " I 
knew King Silver-sides for a just King, upon whom it 
was ill to wage battle. How say the Scriptures ? — 

" Seven focmen of all focmen, very hard to vanquish be : 
The Truth-teller, the Just-dweller, and the man from passion 

free, 
Subtle, self-sustained, and counting frequent well-won victories, 
And the man of many kinsmen — keep the peace with such as 

these." 

The Swan-king has friends and kinsmen, my Liege : — 

" And the man with many kinsmen answers with them all 
attacks ; 
As the bambu, in the bambus safely sheltered, scorns the axe." 

" My counsel then is that peace bo concluded with 
him," said the Vulture. 

" All this King Silvor-sides and his Minister the 
Goose heard attentively from the Crane. 


128 THE BOOK OP GOOD COUNSELS. 

* Go again ! * said the Goose to Long-bill, * and bring 
us news of how the Vulture's advice is received.' . 

' Minister ! ' began the Bang, upon the departure of 
the Crane, i tell me as to this peace, who aro they with 
whom it should not be concluded?' 

* They be twenty ( lo6 ), namely ' 

' Tarry not to name them,' said the King; * and what 
be the qualities of a good ally?' 

c Such should be learned in Peace and War,' replied 
the Goose, * in marching and pitching, and seasonably 
placing an army in the field; for it is said, — 

" He who sets his battle wisely, conquers the unwary foe; 
As the Owl, awaiting night-time, slew the overweening Crow. w 

Counsel, my Liege, is quintuple, — Commencing, pro- 
viding, dividing, repelling, and completing.' 

* Good ! ' said the King. 

' Power is triple,' continued the Goose, * being of 
Kings, of counsels, and of constant effort.' 
' It is so ! ' said tho King. 

* And expedients, my Liege,' continued tho Goose, 
* are quadruple, and consist of conciliation, of gifts, 
of strife-stirring, and of force of arms; for thus it is 
written, — 

" Whoso hath the gift of giving wisely, equitably, well; 
Whoso, learning all men's secrets, unto none his own will tell : 


PEACE. 121) 

Whoso, ever cold and courtly, utters nothing that offends, 
Such an one may rule his fellows unto Earth's extrcmest ends." 

* Tlieii King Jewcl-pluino would bo a good ally/ 
observed the Swan-king. 

* Doubtless ! ' said the Goose, * but elated with victory, 
he will hardly listen to the Vulture's counsel; we must 
make him do it.' 

* How?' asked the King. 

' We will cause our dependant the King of Ceylon, 
Strong-bill tho Stork, to raise an insurrection in Jambu- 
dwipa.' 

* It is well conceived/ said the King. And forthwith 
a Crane, named Pied-body, was dismissed with a secret 
message to that Rajah. 

" In course of time the first Crane, who had been 
sent as a spy, came back, and made his report. He 
related that the Vulture had advised his Sovereign to 
summon Night-cloud, the Crow, and learn from him 
regarding King Silver-sides' intentions. Night-cloud 
attended accordingly. 

* Crow ! ' asked King Jewel-plume, € what sort of a 
Monarch is the Rajah Silver-sides?' 

* Truthful, may it please you/ replied the Crow; 
' and therewithal noble as Yudisthira ( lor ) himself.' 

* And his Minister, the Goose?' 

9 


130 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

* Is a Minister unrivalled, my Liege,' said the Crow- 
king. 

* But how then didst thou so easily deceive them?* 
'Ah! your Majesty,' said the Crow, ' there was little 

credit in that. Is it not said? — 

" Cheating them that truly trust you, 'tis a clumsy villany ! 
Any knave may slay the child who climbs and slumbers on his 
knee." 

Besides, the Minister detected me immediately. It was 
the King whose innate goodness forbade him to suspect 
evil in another : — 

" Believe a knave, thyself scorning a lie, 
And rue it, like the Brahman, by-and-by." 

' What Brahman was that?' asked the King. Night- 
cloud replied : — 


8flw ^torjr d| itru Urafamm and iltc <&wi 

' A Brahman that lived in the forest of Gautama, your 
Majesty. He had purveyed a goat to make pooja( 108 ), 
and was returning homo with it on his shoulder when 
ho was descried by three knaves. " If we could hut 
obtain that goat," said they, " it would be a rare trick;" 
and they ran on, and seated themselves at the foot of 


PEACE. 131 

three different trees upon the Brahman's road. Pre- 
sently he came up with the first of them, who addressed 
him thus: — "Master! why do you carry that dog on 
your shoulder?" " Dog!" said the Brahman, " it is a 
goat for sacrifice!" "With that he went on a coss( 109 ), 
and came to the second knave; who called out — " What 
doest thou with that dog, Master?" The Brahman laid 
his goat upon the ground, looked it all over, took it 
up again upon his back, and walked on with his mind 
in a whirl; for — 

" The good think evil slowly, and they pay 
A price for faith — as witness * Crop-car ' may." 

* Who was Crop-ear?' asked the King of the Peacocks. 


3%e ^U\[\) ojf flw gurnet, the lioit, mut Iris ((Joint 

' A Camel, may it please you,' replied Night-cloud, 
* who strayed away from a kafila( 110 ), and wandered into 
the forest. A Lion, named " Fierce-fangs," lived in that 
forest; and his three courtiers, a Tiger, a Jackal, and a 
Crow, met the Camel, and conducted him to their King. 
His account of himself was satisfactory, and the Lion 
took him into his service under the name of Crop-ear. 
Now it happened that the rainy season was very severe, 

9—2 


132 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

and the Lion became indisposed, so that there was 
mnch difficulty in obtaining food for the Court. The 
courtiers resolved accordingly to prevail on the Lion 
to kill the Camel; "for what interest have wo," they 
said, " in this Browser of thistles?" 

"What, indeed!" observed the Tiger; "but will the 
Eajah kill him after his promise of protection, think 
you?" 

" Being famished he will," said the Crow. " Know 
you not? — 

" Hunger hears not, cares not, spares not ; no boon of the 
starving beg ; 
"When the snake is pinched with craving, verily she eats her 

*SS" 

Accordingly they repaired to the Lion. 

" Hast brought me food, fellow?" growled the Eajah. 

" None, may it please you," said the Crow. 

" Must wo starve, then?" asked his Majesty. 

" Not unless you roject tho food beforo you, Sire," 
rejoined the Crow. 

" Before me ! how mean you ? " 

''I mean," replied the Crow (and he whispered it 
in the Lion's ear), " Crop-ear, the Camel!" 
. "Now!" said the Lion, and he touched the ground, 
and afterwards both ears, as he spoke, " I have given 


PEACE. 1 33 

liim my pledge for his safety, and how' should I slay 
him?" 

" Nay, Sire! I said not slay" replied the Crow; " it 
may be that he will offer himself for food. To that 
your Majesty would not object?" 

" I am parlous hungry," muttered the Lion. 

* Then the Crow went to find the Camel, and, bring- 
ing all together before the King under some pretence 
or other, he thus addressed him : — 

"Sire! our pains are come to nothing: we can get 
no food, and wo behold our Lord falling away, 

" Of the Tree of State the root 
Kings are — feed what brings the fruit." 

Take me, therefore, your Majesty, and break your fast 
upon me." 

" Good Crow," said the Lion, " I had liever die than 
do so." 

" Will your Majesty deign to make a repast upon 
me ? " asked the Jackal. 

" On no account!" replied the Lion. 

" Condescend, my Lord," said the Tiger, " to appease 
your hunger with my poor flesh." 

"Impossible!" responded the Lion. 

' Thereupon Crop-car, not to bo behind in what seemed 
safe, made offer of his own carcase, which was accepted 


134 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

* 

before he had finished; the Tiger instantly tearing his 
flank open, and all the rest at once devouring him. 

' The Brahman/ continued Night-cloud, ' suspected 
nothing more than did the Camel; and when the third 
knave had broken his jest upon him for bearing a dog, 
he threw it down, washed himself clean of the con- 
tamination, and went home; while the knaves secured 
and cooked his goat.' 

' But, Night-cloud/ asked the Rajah, ' how couldst 
thou abide so long among enemies, and conciliate 
them?' 

' It is easy to play the courtier for a purpose/ said 
Night-cloud, — 

" Courtesy may cover malice ; on their heads the woodmen bring, 
Meaning all the while to burn them, logs and faggots — oh, my 

King ! 
And the strong and subtle river, rippling at the cedar's foot, 
While it seems to lave and kiss it, undermines the hanging 
root." 

Indeed, it has been said, — 

" A wise man for an object's sake 
His foe upon his back will take, 
As with the Frogs once did the Snake." 

'How was that?' asked the Peacock-King. The 
Crow related : — 


PEACE. 135 


<$lw £ torn 4 the 4W and the (Did gorjatf. 

' In a deserted garden there once lived a Serpent, 
" Slow-coil' ' by name; who had reached an age when he 
was no longer ablo to obtain his own food. Lying list- 
lessly by the edge of a pond, ho was descried by a 
certain Frog, and interrogated, — 

" Have you given up caring for food, Serpent ?" 

" Leavo me, kindly Sir," replied the subtle reptile ; 
" tho griofs of a miscrablo wrotch liko mo cannot 
interest your lofty nrind." 

" Let me at least hear them," said the Frog, some- 
what flattered. 

"You must know, then, gracious Sir," began the 
Serpent, " that it is now twenty years since here, in 
Brahmapoora, I bit the son of Kaundinya, a holy Brah- 
man ; of which cruel bite he died. Seeing his boy 
dead, Kaundinya abandoned himself to despair, and 
grovelled in his distress upon tho ground. Thereat came 
all his kinsmen, citizens of Bramahpoora, and sat down 
with him, as tho manner is, — 

" He who shares his brother's portion, be he beggar, be he lord, 
Comes as truly, comes as duly, to the battle as the board ; 
Stands before the King to succour, follows to the pile to sigh ; 
He is friend and he is kinsman — less would make the name a lie/* 


136 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

Then spoke a twice-passed Brahman ( in ), Kapila by- 
name, ' Kaundinya ! thou dost forget thyself to lament 
thus. Hear what is written — 

" Weep not ! Life the hired nurse is, holding us a little space ; 
Death, the mother who doth take us hack into our proper 
place." 

" Gone, with all their gauds and glories: gone, like peasants, arc 
the Kings, 
Whereunto the world is witness, whereof all her record rings." 

What, indeed, my friend, is this mortal frame, that we 
should set store by it? — 

" For the hody, daily wasting, is not seen to waste away, 
Until wasted, as in water set a jar of unbaked clay." 

" And day after day man goeth near and nearer to his fate, 
As step after step the victim thither where its slayers wait." 

Friends and kinsmen — they must all be surrendered ! 
Is it not said — 

" Like as a plank of drift-wood 

Tossed on the watery main, 
Another plank encountered, 

Meets, — touches, — parts again ; 
So tossed, and drifting ever, 

On life's unresting sea, 
Men meet, and greet, and sever, 

Farting eternally." 

Thou knowest these things, let thy wisdom chide thy 
sorrow, saying — 


PEACE. 137 

" Halt, traveller ! rest i* the shade : then up and leave it ! 
Stay, Soul ! take fill of love ; nor losing, grieve it ! " 

But in sootli a wise man would better avoid love ; for — 

" Each beloved object born 
Sets within the heart a thorn, 
Bleeding, when they be uptorn.** 

And it is well asked — 

" When thine own house, this rotting frame, doth wither, 
Thinking another's lasting — goest thou thither ? ** 

What will be, will be ; and who knows not — 


" Meeting makes a parting sure, 
Life is nothing but death's door." 


For truly — 


" As the downward-running rivers never turn and never stay, 
So the days and nights stream death ward, bearing human lives 
away." 

And though it be objected that — 

u Bethinking him of darkness grim, and death's unshunned pain, 
A man strong-soulcd relaxes hold, like leather soaked in rain.** 

Yet is this none the less assured, that — 

" From the day, the hour, the minute, 
Each life quickens in the womb ; 
Thence its march, no falter in it, 
Goes straight forward to the tomb.** 

Form, good friend, a true idea of mundane matters ; 


138 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

and bethink thee that regret is after all but an illusion, 
an ignorance — 

" An 'twere not so, would sorrow cease with years ? 
Wisdom sees right what want of knowledge fears." 

" Kaundinya listened to all this with the air of a 
dreamer. Then rising up he said, ' Enough ! the house 
is hell to me — I will betake me to the forest.' 

' "Will that stead you ? ' asked Kapila ; ' nay — 

" Seek not the wild, sad heart ! thy passions haunt it ; 
Flay hermit in thine house with heart undaunted ; 
A governed heart, thinking no thought but good, 
Makes crowded houses holy solitude." 

To be master of one's self — to eat only to prolong life — 
to yield to love no more than may suffice to perpetuate a 
family — and never to speak but in the cause of truth, 
this/ said Kapila, ' is arniour against grief. What 
wouldst thou with a hermit's life — prayer and purifi- 
cation from sorrow and sin in holy streams ? Hear 
this !— 

" Away with those that preach to us the washing off of sin — 
Thine own self is the stream for thee to make ablutions in: 
In self-restraint it rises pure — flows clear in tide of truth, 
By widening banks of wisdom, in waves of peace and ruth. 
Bathe there, thou son of Pandu! ( ua ) with reverence and rite, 
For never yet was water wet could wash the spirit white." 


PEACE. 139 

Eesign thyself to loss. Pain exists absolutely. Ease, 
what is it but a minute's alleviation ? * 

' It is nothing else,' said Kaundinya : * I will resign 
myself ! ' Thereupon," the Serpent continued, " he 
cursed me ( 113 ) with the curse that I should be a 
carrier of frogs, and so retired — and here remain I to do 
according to the Brahman's malediction. ,, 

* The Frog, hearing all this, went and reported it to 
Web-foot the Frog-King, who shortly came himself for 
an excursion on the Serpent. He was carried delight- 
fully, and constantly employed the conveyance. But 
one day observing the Serpent to be sluggish, he asked 
the reason. 

" May it please you," explained the Serpent, " your 
slave has nothing to eat." 

* 

" Eat a few of my frogs," said the King. " I give 
you leave." 

" I thank your Majesty!" answered the Serpent, and 
forthwith he began to eat the frogs, until the pond 
becoming clear, ho finished with thoir monarch himself. 
* I also/ said Night-cloud, ' stooped to conquer, but 
King Silver-sides is a good King, and I would your 
Majesty were at peace with him.' 

' Peace ! ' cried King Jewel-plume, * shall I make 
peace with my vassal ! I have vanquished him — let him 
servo me ! ' 


140 THE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

« 

" At this moment the Parrot came in. ' Sire ! * said 
he, breathlessly, * the Stork Strong-bill, Rajah of Ceylon, 
has raised the standard of revolt in Jambu-dwipa, and 
claims the country.' 

' What ! what ! ' cried the King in a fury. 

' Excellent good, Goose ! ' muttered the Minister. 
' This is thy* work ! ' 

' Bid him but await me ! ' exclaimed the King, ' and I 
will tear him up like a tree ! ' 

' Ah, Sire,' said the Minister — 

" Thunder for nothing, like December's cloud, 
Passes unmarked : strike hard, but speak not loud.*' 

"We cannot march without making peace first ; our rear 
will be attacked.' 

' Must it be so?' asked the King. 

' My Liege, it must,' replied the Vulture. 

' Make a peace then,' said the King, ' and make an 
end.' 

' It is well,' observed the Minister, and set out for the 
Court of the King Silver-sides. While he was yet 
coming, the Crane announced his approach. 

' All ! ' said the Swan-King, ' this will be another 
designing spy from the enemy.' 

* Misdoubt him not ! ' answered the Goose, smiling, 
' it is the Vulture Far-sight, a spirit beyond suspicion. 


PEACE. 141 

Would your Majesty be as the Swan that took the stars 
reflected in the pool for lily-buds, and being deceived, 
would eat no lily-shoots by day, thinking them stars?' 

* Not so ! but treachery breeds mistrust/ replied the 
Eajah ; is it not written — 

" Minds deceived by evil natures, from the good their faith with- 
hold; 
When hot conjee once has burned them, children blow upon the 
cold." 

' It is so written, my Liege/ said the Minister. ' But 
this one may be trusted. Let him be received with 
compliments and a gift.' 

" Accordingly the Vulture was conducted, with the 
most profound respect, from the fort to the King's 
audience-hall, where a throne was placed for him. 

* Minister/ said the Goose, * consider us and ours at 
thy disposal.' 

' So consider us/ assented the Swan-King. 
' I thank you/ said Far-sight; ' but — 

" With a gift the miser meet ; 
Proud men by obeisance greet ; 
Women's silly fancies soothe ; 
Give wise men their due — the truth," 

J I am come to conclude a peace, not to claim your 
kingdom. By what mode shall we conclude it ?' 


142 TIIE BOOK OF GOOD COUNSELS. 

- * How many modes be there?' asked King Silver- 
sides. 

' Sixteen,' replied the Vulture. 

* Are the alliances numbered therein?' asked the 
King. 

' No ! these be four,' answered the Vulture, ' namely 
—of mutual help — of friendship — of blood — and of 
sacrifice.' 

' You are a great diplomatist ! ' said the King. 
' Advise us which to choose ! ' 

' There is no Peace like the Golden " Sangata," which 
is made between good men, based on friendly feeling, and 
preceded by the Oath of Truth,' replied the Vulture. 

* Let us mako that Peace ! ' said the Goose. Far- 
sight accordingly, with fresh presents of robes and 
jewels, accompanied the Goose to the camp of the 
Peacock-King. The Rajah, Jewel-plume, gave the 
Goose a gracious audience, accepted his terms of Peace, 
and sent him back to the Swan-King, loaded with gifts 
and kind speeches. The revolt in Jambu-dwipa was 
suppressed, and the Peacock-King retired to his own 
kingdom. 

" And now," said Vishnu-Sarman, " I have told your 
Royal Highnesses all. Is there anything remaining to 
be told ? " 


PEACE. 143 

" Keverend Sir!" replied the Princes, "there is 
nothing. Thanks to you, we have heard and compre- 
hended tho perfect cycle of kingly duty, and aro con- 
tent." 

" Thcro remains but this, thon," said their Pre- 
ceptor : 

"Peace and Plenty, all fair things, 

G race the realm where ye reign Kings ; 

Grief and loss come not anigh you, 

Glory guide and magnify you ; 

Wisdom keep your statesmen still 

Clinging fast, in good or ill, 

Clinging, like a bride new-wed, 

Unto lips, and breast, and head : 
And day by day, that these fair things befall, 
The Lady Lukshmi give her grace to all." 


THE END. 


NOTES. 


10 


NOTES. 


a) 

Honour to Gunesh. — Guncsli, or Gunputtcc, is the God of 
Prudence, whom the Hindoos invoke at the outset of all under- 
takings. His image, having four hands, and the head of a female 
elephant with one tusk, surmounts the portal of a Hindoo residence, 
as the guardian of the household. 

(2.) 

A city named Pataliputra. — Now Patna, near the confluence of 
the Soane and Ganges. 

(3.) 

The sacred writings, — The Vedas, or holy book of India. They 
are four in number, and are called the Rig- Veda, Yajur-Veda, 
Sama-Veda, and Atharva-Veda. Hymns and metrical addresses 
to the elemental gods occupy them mainly. 

(4.) 

Childless art thou f 

Less thy misery than his is, who is father to a fool. 

The force of this comparison is only perceived by recollecting 
the extreme anxiety of tjie Hindoo to obtain, and leave behind 

10—2 


148 NOTES. 

him, male offspring. The Sanskrit word putra (son) is declared to 
be a contraction from puttra^ which means a deliverer from the 
hell put ; and the simple performance of the funeral " shraddh " (a 
libation by a son) is held sufficient to procure repose for the spirit 
of his departed father. The Hindoo proverb says, " Whoso be- 
getteth a son, planteth a tree, and diggcth a well ; that man shall 
rest in Heaven." 

(5.) 

Sesasum. — The " tilla " seed ; which, together with the cocoa- 
nut, supplies Hindostan with oil. 

(6.) 
Pundits. — Learned men. 

(7.) 

The angel of the planet Jupiter. — Vrihaspati, the Instructor of 
the gods. Like the rest of the Hindoo divinities, he casts no 
shadow in moving, his eternally watchful eyes never even wink 
with fatigue, and the crown of flowers on his head blooms in per- 
petual beauty and freshness. 

(8.) 
The silk-cotton tree. — Sans. " Shalmali." 

(»•) 

Ilia radiance the moon. — The moon (Chandra) is a masculine 
deity in Hindoo mythology. The white lotus opens its blossoms* 
at night only, hence his descriptive epithet. 

(10.) 

A crow. — The Indian crow is everywhere seen and heard in 
India. Its plumage is black, with a dull grey hood extending 
over the head and neck. 


NOTES. 149 

(11.) 

God of Death. — Yama, called here Kritanta, or the "End- 
bringer." He is God of Justice as well as of Death, and sits in 
judgment upon disembodied souls in his infernal city of Yama- 
poora. Thence he dismisses them upwards to Swerga, downwards 
to Naraka, or back again to earth in the form of some animal. 

(12.) 

Bangle. — The bracelet, in one solid piece, of gold, silver, brass, 
glass, or earthenware, worn by all Indian women. 

(13.) 

An old tiger. — It is true to nature that an " old tiger" should 
be the villain of this episode, and devour the traveller ; for it is 
only when the tiger has lost his teeth and claws by age, and with 
them his power of securing antelopes, cattle, &c, that he becomes a 
professed man-stcaler. The popular notion was that the hide of a 
" man-killer " became worn and mangy as a punishment for attack- 
ing man, his lord ; but it is not until his hide thus assumes the aspect 
of old age that he has recourse to such easy but illicit food. 
Livingstone, in his African travels, first draws attention to this. 

(14.) 

Kusa grass. — Used in many religious observances by the 
Hindoos. (Poa cynosuroides.) 

(15.) 

Coivs, Brahmans, and men. — The tiger justifies his self-con- 
demnation by confessing to the greatest moral guilt possible, the 
slaughter of cows — a sin all but inexpiable. 

(16.) 

Son of Kunti. — Kiinti was wife of Pandu, and mother of the 
Pandava princes of the Mahabharata. 


150 NOTES. 


(17.) 


Neither give, Sfc, — Here, and elsewhere, the intelligent reader 
will remark a curious similarity between these ancient Hindoo 
proverbs and those of Solomon. 

(18.) 

Vanish in the dragon's jaw. — Rahoo, an evil spirit, with the tail 
of a dragon, was held to be the cause of eclipses, by swallowing 
occasionally the moon and sun. The legend had this origin. At 
the time when the gods were drinking the nectar, churned from 
the ocean by the direction of Vishnu, Rahoo insinuated himself 
among them, and began to drink. The sun and moon, as guardians 
for the gods, observed the intrusion and revealed it. Vishnu at 
once cut off the head of the venturous devil, but as the " amrit " 
drink had rendered him immortal the head and tail retained their 
separate life, and were placed in the stellar sky. Rahoo, there- 
fore, still mindful of the injury done him by the sun's interference, 
loses no opportunity of enclosing his ancient enemy in his jaws. 


(19.) 

Can a golden deer, frc. — An allusion to an episode in the great 
poem of the Ramayana. Manicha takes the form of a golden 
deer, in pursuing which Rama is led away insensibly from his 
abode, and Havana comes as a beggar and carries off Sita in his 
absence. 

(20.) 
The three wide worlds. — Heaven, earth, and the lower regions. 


(21.) 

The king of the mice. — The mouse, as vehicle of Gunesh, is an 
important animal in Hindoo legend. 


NOTES. 151 

(22.) 

Sickness, anguish, bonds, and woe, 
Spring from wrongs wrought long ago. 

By this theory of a series of existences continued until the 
balance is just, and the soul has purified itself, the Hindoo 
accounts for the origin of evil. Every fault must have its 
expiation, and every higher faculty its development; pain and 
misery being signs of and ordeals in the trial, which is to end in 
the happy re-absorption of the emancipated spirit. 

(23.) 

Champah-grove. — The champak is a bushy deciduous tree, bear- 
ing a profusion of white star-like blossoms with golden centre, 
and of the most pleasing perfume. 

(24.) 

Fig-tree (Sans. " Parkti "). — A large handsome tree, with leaves 
curiously waved. 

(25.) 

The moon-penance. — A religious observance, inculcated by 
Manu. The devotee commences the penance at the full moon 
with an allowance of fifteen mouthfuls for his food, diminishing 
this by one mouthful each day, till x>n the fifteenth it is reduced to 
one. As the new moon then increases, his allowance also ascends 
to its original proportion. 

(26.) 

Brahmacharya. — A votary of the Vedas, a name technically 
applied to young Brahmans after their investiture with the sacred 
cord, and generally to pundits and Vedic professors. 

(27.) 

Agni is the twice-born* s master. — Agni, the deity of Fire, under 
his manifestations of light, the sun, &c, occupies a large portion 


152 NOTES. 

of the Vedic liturgy. The twice-born is the Brahman, whose 
second birth is dated from his investiture with the " sacred 
thread. M 

(28.) 

Krishna. — The god Vishnoo under his most celebrated and 
popular form. He is [represented as of a handsome and graceful 
person, with the dark blue complexion which the name implies. 


(29.) 

Unto Swerga, frc. — Ileaven, the paradise of Indra, and the 
happy abode of the souls of the just and of the gods. 


(30.) 

And the castor-oiTs a tree, where no tree else its shade affords. 

The castor plant, although not altogether a shrub, seldom 
assumes the proportions and dignity of a tree. It either grows 
thick as a bush, or shoots up to twelve or sixteen feet, like a 
sapling. 

(31.) 

Oil of sandalwood. — An extract from the well-known fragrant 
tree of India. 

(32.) 

The prince of all the serpents. — Vasuki, or Ananta, the chief 
of the human-headed serpents, who people Patula, or the regions 
under the earth. 

(33.) 

Harts name and Hards, — The first is the god "Vishnoo, the 
second Shiva. 


NOTES. 153 

(34.) 

And to taste the .salt of service. — Italian scholars will recall the 
sorrowful lines of Dante, so nearly resemhling these — 

" Tu provcrai siccome sa di sale 
Lo pane altrui, e com 'e duro calle 
Lo scendere c V salir per 1' altrui scale." 

Dante, Paradiso, cant. 17. 

(35.) 

Breathe he like a blacksmith's belloivs. — This implement in India 
is a sewn goat skin, inflated with one hand and noisily emptied by 
the other. 

(36.) 

The last thunder. — Alluding to the " Pralaya," or termination of 
one of the Kalpas of the world's existence. 

(37.) 

Resolved into the Jive elements. — The five constituent ingredients 
of the body. A common periphrasis for death in Sanskrit 
writings. 

(38.) 

Lakshmi. — The wife of Vishnoo, Goddess of beauty and abun- 
dance. She sprang, like Aphrodite, from the sea, when the gods 
churned it with the mountain Mandara to obtain the " Anirit," or 
nectar. 

(39.) 

New corn. — The Hindoos are as fond, as the English learn to be- 
come, of the green car of the jowarcc stalk parched and eaten hot 
with butter and pepper. 

(40.) 

A deer named Dapple-back. — Antelopes are common in all parts 
of India. The true deer, such as the sambur, is found in the 
forests only. 


154 NOTES. 

(41.) 
The Kotl. — The black or Indian cuckoo. 

(42.) 

The god of the five shafts. — " Kama," the Indian Cupid. His 
bow is made of flowers, the string is a row of bees, and he wounds 
with fat arrows, typifying the fwQ senses. lie is known, also, as 
Manmatha, the heart-shaker ; Manasija, the heart-begotten ; and 
Ananga, the bodiless. The second title refers to his reputed 
origin from the heart of Brahma, though the god is also repre- 
sented as the son of Lukshmi and Vishnoo. He is called the 
Bodiless, from a misadventure with Shiva, whom he dared to aim 
at, but the indignant deity reduced the archer to cinders with one 
glance of his central eye. He is painted as a handsome boy, riding 
on a parrot, and surrounded by maidens, who bear his banner with 
the fish Makara. 

(43.) 

The forest of Brahma. — A wood where the Vedas are read and 
expounded. A Hindoo academe. 

(44.) 

The reverential prostration of the eight members. — The saluta- 
tions of India are Spanish in their variety and exactness. The 
" salaam " is universal ; but the native greets his neighbour with the 
more cordial "ram-ram," and receives it with gratification from the 
Sahib. The better hand must always be employed, and is raised 
pressed to the palm of the other to perform a " namuskar," the 
salutation of a Brahman. The prostration alluded to in the text 
is performed by lowering at once to the ground the hands, breast, 
forehead, eyes, two knees, and two ieet. 

(45.) 

The moment of fortunate conjunction. — The astrologer is an im- 
portant personage in every Hindoo town or village to decide upon 


NOTES. 155 

lucky or unlucky days. The rules for his decision are freely given 
by Manu. " The day of new moon," he says, " destroys the 
spiritual teacher (or gooroo), the fourteenth is bad for the learner, 
and nothing in the Vedas read on the eighth day and the day of 
full moon will be remembered." 

(46.) 

A vow to Gauri. — " The fair goddess," i. <?. P&rvati, wife of 
Shiva. 

(47.) 
He, whose forehead-jewel is the moon, — Shiva. 

(48.) 

The soortna. — (Unjun.) The antimony powder used universally 
by Hindoo women to darken the lids and lashes of the eye. It is 
applied with a small stick rubbed upon the powder, and a little 
consequently goes a long way. 

(49.) 
Chatty. — The large earthen pot employed to hold water. 

(50.) 

Seeing how the ant-hill grows. — In the great plains of India the 
large ant-hills form a marked feature. They are thrown up with 
great rapidity, and have been seen to rise by a public road to the 
height of three feet or more in a night or two. 

(51.) 

The chattra. — The white umbrella borne above the heads of 
Indian rajahs, and especially appropriated to royalty, like the 
Chowri or Yak- tail. 

(52.) 

The retreat of Dhurmma. — Personified virtue, under the form 
of the bull of Shiva, and with this title. 


156 NOTES. 

(53.) 

Kdyeth caste. — A writer; a man sprung from a Kshattriya 
father and a Sudra mother. 

(54.) 

Washerman. — The labour of the laundry in India is always per- 
formed on hard rocks by the river side, and principally by men 
called " dhobies." 

(55.) 

Starve thy maw, frc. — (Literally, " with the belly serve the 
Eater of oblations" — hutdshari), i. e. stint thyself to perform the 
sacrifice. 

(56.) 

Vrihaspati the Grave. — Regent of the planet Jupiter, and In- 
structor of the divinities. 

(57.) 

In the north. — There are no lions in India, excepting that called 
" the maneless lion," occasionally met with in Guzerat ; but they 
abound to the north-west. 

(58.) 

The King of Chedi.— Shishupala ; he took also the forms of 
Havana and of Hiranya Kasipu, to oppose Krishna, who killed 
him. 

(59.) 

Ounpatiee. — Gunesh ; the deity of prudence. Born from the 
bathing- water of the Goddess Par vat i. 

(60.) 

A cowry. — The little sea-shell used in India for small change. 
About 6,000 go to the rupee. 


NOTES. 157 

(61.) 

The tree of Paradise. — A tree growing in Indra's Swerga, which 
instantly produced whatever was desired. 

(62.) 

The form called Gundharva. — Manu, in his Book HI., gives the 
form of eight different kinds of marriage. This is that without 
ceremonies, and hy mutual consent. The ordinary Hindoo rite is 
very graceful, and resemhles in some points the classic custom. 
At any time after the " Moonj," or investiture with the sacred 
thread, the Brahman hoy is marriageable, and the girl must not be 
ten years old. They meet at the bride's house, the laganpatrica 
or " marriage horoscope " having been previously made out by the 
astrologer. There they go through the suptupadi, walking toge- 
ther three times round a fire, seven steps at each tune ; then their 
garments are tied together, and an offering is placed upon the 
flames, completing the rite. . The bride remains at her father's 
house until the age of twelve or thirteen, when she is claimed by 
her husband. 

(63.) 

Cut thy nose off. — The ordinary expedient of an incensed hus- 
band in the East. 

(64.) 

Yama and the seven guardians. — These eight protecting deities 
rank next below the Hindoo Trinity. They are : — 1. Indra, the 
air ; 2. Agni, the fire ; 3. Chandra, the moon ; 4. Surya, the sun. 
5. Pavana, the wind. 6. Yama, the lord of justice and of the 
lower worlds. 7. Varuna, God of the waters; and 8. Kuvera, 
the master of wealth. 

(65.) 

Shaving the head of the barber's wife. — This indignity reduced 
her to the appearance and the miserable status of a widow. 


158 NOTES. 

(66.) 

The three prerogatives of the throne. — Regal authority derives 
its rights from three sources with the Hindoo authors — viz. Power, 
Prescription or continuance, and Wisdom. 

(67.) 

Watered them with nectar. — The Greek word nectar, and the 
Sanskrit amrit, are alike in their etymology — " the immortal." 
Both were the food of the undying gods, and the Hindoo deities 
thus obtained their ambrosia. The Daityas, like the Titans, had 
waged war upon the divinities (the Suras), and these last betook 
themselves to Vishnoo for protection. He bade them cast certain 
medicinal herbs into the " sea of milk ; " then taking Mount Man- 
dara for a churning-stick, and the king of the serpents for the 
twisting-string, the god began to churn the ocean for nectar. The 
Daityas themselves aided on promise of sharing in the strength- 
restoring extract, and stood at the serpent's head while the Suras 
worked at the tail. The great Vishnoo also took part in the 
work as a tortoise, upon whose back the mountain whirled round 
backwards and forwards. Out of the seething flood there came 
up at the last a figure robed in white — Dhanwantari, the physician 
of the gods — who bore in his hands the first cup-full of the amrit. 
From the same ocean also rose the ever-lovely Lukshmi, — the mar- 
vellous cow, from which all things that could be desired might be 
milked, — and the kalkut, or poison which stained the neck of Shiva. 
The nectar thus obtained bestowed new vigour on the wearied gods, 
and was stored up in the moon, where the lunar rays ripen and 
perfect it. 

(68.) 

Gurud, the lord of the birds. — He is the vehicle and the 
attendant of Vishnoo, and has a human face with the wings of a 
bird. 

(69.) 

The god Narayen. — Varuna, god of the world of waters. This 
Deity is regent of the west, and a lord of punishment, holding a 


NOTES. 159 

noosed cord, wherewith to bind transgressors beneath the sea. His 
vdhana, a vehicle, is the great fish mukur. The present age (kalpa) 
of the world is called Varaha, or the boar's, and was initiated by 
Narayen. " When that supreme lord," says the Vishnoo Pooran, 
" woke and beheld the universe void, knowing that the earth lay 
hid within the waters, he assumed the body of a wild boar, and 
plunging in them raised up the earth till it floated upon the waves." 
The name Narayen, suggestive of the Greek Nereus, denotes Him 
" whose progress (ayand) is upon the face of the waters (narah)." 

(70.) 
The life to come. — Literally, " the other world" (P<tr<d6h). 

(71.) 

The azure lotus, — The lotus resembles our water-lily, but is 
more varied in form and colour. There are white, red, blue, and 
yellow varieties. 

(72.) 

Another hath the spoils. — There is a belief, constantly occurring 
in Hindoo writings, that the elephant's head contains precious 
stones, resembling pearls. The remorseful monarch alludes to 
tins, and compares his conquest to the slaughter of an elephant, 
which leaves guilt to the lion, and gives the pearls to some chance 
hunter. 

(73.) 

" A Brahman that eats all things equally? — This epithet, " sar- 
wabhakslia" and the comparison, are very strong, and suffice to 
quiet King Tawny-hide's conscience. A Brahman who ate flesh 
would be like the unclean " Rdkshasas " or demons. 

(74.) 

Peacock and Swan. — The peacock is wild in most Indian jungles. 
The swan (Sanscrit, hansa) is a species of flamingo of a white 


160 NOTES. 

colour, with markings of a golden yellow. The voice and gait of 
a beautiful woman are likened in the Hindoo poets to those of the 
" Ilansa." It is the vehicle of the god Brahma. 

(75.) 

The Vindhya mountains, — The chain between Hindustan and the 
south country or Deccan. The name is said to imply that they 
appear, from their loftiness, to stop the sun in his declining course. 


(76.) 

Jambu-dwipa. — " The land of the rose-apple w — the central of 
the seven continents, containing the regions known to Hindoo 
geographers. It may not be out of place to sketch in this note 
the Hindoo's cosmogony. He reads in his Poorans that Priyavrata, 
son of the Self-born, grieving to see the earth but half illumined 
at one time by the sun, drove round it seven times in his own 
flaming chariot, the wheels of which formed seven ruts, which are 
now the beds of the seven oceans. The continents thus divided 
are also seven. Jambu-dwipa is the central one, with Mount 
Meru for its own centre, where " men are born of the colour of 
burnished gold, and the women resemble blue lotuses ; where all 
live as do the gods, and have the vital forces of 10,000 elephants. 1 * 

Around Jambu-dwipa runs a sea of salt-water, and beyond it 
lies Plaksha-dwipa. There the happy inhabitants know nothing 
of sickness, and live 5,000 years. 

Plaksha-dwipa is divided by a sea of sugar-cane juice from 
Shdlmali-dwipa. The castes of this continent are the tawny, 
the purple, the yellow, and the red, and in it " the vicinity of the 
gods is very delightful to the soul." 

A sea of wine intervenes between this land and Kusha-dioipa. 
There no one dies ; but the gods and gandharvas, the heavenly 
minstrels, share in the pastimes of the fair and innocent persons 
who dwell in the land. 

Kusha-dwipa is separated from Krauncha-dwipa by its sea of 
ghee, or clarified butter. This last is twice as large as the first, 


NOTES. 161 

and the inhabitants dwell among its mountains with the immortal 
gods, whom they regard without fear. 

Outside Krauncha-dwipa rolls the sea of curds and whey, wash- 
ing also the shores of Saka-dwipa, a favoured land, where there is 
no vice, nor envy, nor injustice. In the black mountains (Syama) 
of this country the men are black, and they worship the God 
Vishnoo, as the sun. 

Round the dark shores of Krauncha-dwipa, " like an armlet of 
ivory on a Brahinanee's wrist," flows the sea of milk. It divides 
this continent from the last and farthest of the seven, the Pushkara- 
dwipa. In the perfect joy of this distant sphere, " there is no 
distinction of highest and lowest, of killer or slain, of truth or 
falsehood ; the people are of one form with the gods, and too high 
for duty or observances. " Food they consume, but it comes spon- 
taneously to them upon desire, and delicately prepared. There is 
no evil there, but endless good." 

And (for the mind yet unsatiated with receding infinity) beyond 
Pushkara is the sea of fresh water, equal to itself in breadth. 
Passing that is the Golden Land, without inhabitants, and yet 
beyond it lie the Loha loha mountains, dark, immovable, and 
10,000 yojans (50,000 miles) high and broad. Outside that dark- 
ness is the shell of the mundane egg. 

" Of which eggs," concludes the Poorana, " there be thousands, 
and tens of thousands — yea, a hundred millions of millions !" 

(77.) 

Their hanging nests. — These birds seem to select the bushes over 
the mouth of a well, or the slender twigs of a tree, as safe places 
from the snakes. 

(78.) 

A frog in a well. — Having no more knowledge than the frog 
has of light. 

(79.) 

Am I not Sasanhat — From the Sanskrit — Saia, a hare. 

11 


162 NOTES. 

(80.) 

Shiva reigns for ever Shiva, while the sea-waves stain his neck. 

At the churning of the waters, along with the u amrita" and 
the beautiful Lukehmi, came up also a deadly venom (Kalkut), 
fatal to mortals. To avert its evil influence the god Shiva drank, 
it up ; but it was potent enough to stain his throat black or dark- 
blue, whence his title of " Nilkanta," the blue-throated. 

(81.) , 

The wife of Ratnehundra, i.e. Rama, who was absent in the chase 
of a phantom deer of gold. 

C82.) 
Peepul tree.—Or " Timpal," the holy ftg. 

(83.) 

A betel leaf — The " pan-sooparee," a compound of betel-nut, 
lime, and cloves, wrapped up in a leaf of the pepper- vine, and 
chewed by all India. 

(84.) 

The faithful wife. — By such a death as that alluded to, she 
earns the title of Sati, the " excellent." 

(85.) 

The paddy 'bird. — The common Indian crane ; a graceful white 
bird, to be seen everywhere, and always, in the interior of Hin- 
dostan. 

(86.) 
Singhala-dwipa. — The " Land of the Lion" — Ceylon. 

(87.) 

He is sure to join in. — The cry of one jackal at night raises a 
chorus from all those within hearing. , 


NOTES. 163 

* 

(88.) 

Vachaspati.— Policy, " the Lord of Talk." Hodie, "Diplomacy." 

(89.) 

Ghauts. — A word applied to ranges of mountain, by which, as 
by a staircase, the country rises into an elevated region. Also to 
the step-like path leading over or through the mountains, and to 
the flight of stairs at a river side landing-place. 

(90.) 

A rajpoot. — Here synonymous with " Kshattriya," a man of the 
military caste. 

(91.) 

The complimentary betel — The " pan-sooparce " (see note 83), 
neatly folded into a triangular form, and pierced through by a 
clove, is handed round at the close of all occasions of ceremony. 
Judged by its popularity (and not by a first experiment upon it), 
it deserves the encomium which King Silver-sides cannot repress. 

(92.) 

The dark half of the month. — The Hindoos divide their month 
into two divisions of fifteen tithees (or days) each. " Shood\" the 
bright half, is occupied by the increase of the moon; and " Vua\" 
the dark half, marks the moon's waning. The fourteenth night 
of the dark half would be intensely dark. 

(93.) 
The fortune. — The " Lukshmi," the attendant genius. 

(94.) 

The thirty-two auspicious marks. — Tins superstition, preserved 
to us in palmistry, is of common occurrence in the Hindoo writ- 


164 NOTES. 

. % 
inga. In Book 19 of the Vana-parva (Mahabharat), Vahiika 
chooses his horses by the ten avartas y or marks of excellence. 
" Never," says King Rituparna — 

" Never shall we reach Vidarbha, drawn by steeds so slight and 
small." 

Vahuka replies — 

" Two' on head, and one on forehead, marks of mettle here be all, 
Two on chest, on this and that flank two and two, on crupper one, 
These the steeds shall reach Vidarbha long before the day be 
done." 

(95.) 
Thy Guru. — The spiritual instructor of a young Brahman. 


(96.) 

With his shoulder-scratching horn. — Large branching horns 
which reach backward and rub upon his shoulders. 


(97.) 

The Apsaras. — The houris of Indra's heaven. They also were 
produced at the churning of the ocean, in raiment and ornaments 
of celestial splendour. Their office is to receive into Paradise and 
to solace there with the delights of love the souls of all who have 
died fighting bravely. In the " Nala" of the Mahabharat 
(Book 2) Indra the god is made to say — 

" They, the just — the lion-hearted, — Lords, who, never yielding 

place, 
Saw the shaft's descending death-blow — saw, and took it on their 

face! 
Theirs this realm of endless joy is, as the Cow of Plenty mine; 
Let them come — the Dead in battle — Lo ! I wait them — guests 

divine." 


NOTES. 165 

(98.) 

Time not come, Sfc. — These composite titles may serve as in- 
stances of conjoined Sanskrit words. One such in the Champu 
of Trivikraraa contains 118 letters. 


(99.) . 

The Mongoose, — An animal of the weasel kind, very common 
in India, and valued for its active animosity against all serpents. 

(100.) 

The Pot-breaker. — This episode is the undoubted origin of 
" Alnaschar" in the Arabian Nights; and of a host of stories and 
proverbs against the imprudence of "counting chickens before 
they arc hatched. 1 * 

(101.) 

Sunda the Strong, and Giant Upasunda. — Two of the Daityas, 
the Hindoo Titans who fought against the Suras. 

(102.) 
That God who wears the Moon. — Shiva. 

" On whose brow the Moon shines brave, 
Like the foam on Gunga's wave." 

(103.) 

Saraswati. — The wife of Brahma, goddess of speech and elo- 
quence — inventress of the Devanagari character and of the Sanskrit. 
" Thou,** says the Sage Vasistha, addressing her in the Mahabharat 
(Salya Farva), u art nourishment, radiance, fame, perfection, in- 
tellect, light. Thou art speech; thou art Swaha; this world is 
thine, and thou, in four-fold form, art in all its creatures.** 


166 NOTES. 

(104.) 

Parvati. — The wife of Shiva — another name for Durga, the 
" Mountain Queen.'* She is the daughter of Himala, King of the 
Snowy Hills ; and her temple, as at Poona, stands generally on a 
lofty spot. 

(105.) 

Brdhmans for their lore, frc. — Here is a mention of the four 
castes, with their distinctive occupations. 

(106.) 

They be twenty. — I suppress in this place nineteen shlokes, or 
stanzas, of the original, which enumerate rather tediously the vices 
or failings to be avoided in an ally. 

(107.) 

Yudisthira. — The hero of the Mahabharat, who crowns the 
devotion of his life by refusing to enter Heaven, unless his wife 
and friends share in its felicities with him. 


Pooja. — Sacrifice. 


Coss. — Two miles. 


Kqfila. — A caravan. 


(108.) 


(109.) 


(110.) 


(111.) 

A twice-passed Brahman. — The young Brahman, being invested 
with the sacred thread, and having concluded his studies, becomes 
of the second order, — a householder — u grihastha." 


NOTES. 167 

(112.) 

Thou son of Pandu. — Yudisthira, titular son of the Prince of 
Delhi, in the Mahabharata. 

(113.) 

He cursed me. — The power of a Brahman's curse is everywhere 
illustrated in Hindoo writings. "Carry me to Viswamitra," 
says Vasistha, "lest he curse thee, O chief of rivers!" (Mahab- 
harata — Salya Paw). These sages transformed each other into 
birds, by the force of mutual imprecation. Bhagvata — Pooran — 
ix. 7, 6. But Vaswamitra was originally a Kshattriya, and be- 
came a Brahman by his austerities only. Vasistha, a true Brahman, 
resisted by a curse the celestial weapons raised against him. Saktri 
also, his son, met the King Kalmashapada, and, refusing to yield 
the path, was struck by him. The Brahman instantly cursed the 
King to become a man-eater, and the first victim of the imposed 
propensity was the powerful but improvident Saktri himself. 
(Mahabharata, Adi Parva.) The ocean, originally fresh and pure, 
became salt by the power of a Brahmanic imprecation. 


THE END. 


LONDON : 

PRINTED BT 8MIT1I. ELDER AND CO., 

LITTLE QUEEN AUBOU& COURT, OLD UAILET, E.C. 


- 7 c 


This book is a preservation photocopy. 

It was produced on HammermiU Laser Print natural 

a 60 # book weight acid-free archival paper 

which meets the requirements of 

ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992 (permanence of paper) 

Preservation photocopying and 

by 

Acme Bookbinding 
CharlestowQ, Massachusetts 

m 

1996 


THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS 
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON 
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE 
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE 
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES. 

Harvard College Widener Library 
Cambrigae^MfcOgTS^ (617)495-2413
