NATURAL

AGICK

John Baptifta Porta,

A N E A P 0 1 L I I A N E:

I N

TWENTY BOOKS:

1 Of the Caufcs of Wonderful things.

2 Of the Generation of Animals.

3 Of the Produdion of new Plants.

4 Of increafingHoufhold-Stuff.

5 Of changing Metals.

6 Of counterfeiting Gold.

7 Of the Wonders of the Load-ftone.

8 Of ftrange Cures.

9 Of Beautifying Women.

10 Of Diftillation.

1 1 Of Perfuming.

12 Of Artificial Fires.

1 3 Of Tempering Steel.

14 Of Cookery.

15 Of Fi(hing,Fowling,Hunting,$V.

16 Of Invifible Writing.

17 Of Strange GlafTes.

18 Of Statick Experiments.

19 Of Pneumatick Experiments.

20 Of the Chaos.

Wherein are fet forth
All the Riches and Delight*

Of the

NATURAL SCIENCES.

Printed for Thomas Young, andSoJw**/ Speed ; and are to be
fold at the three Pigeons, and at the Angel in St.

Paul 's Church -yard. 1658,

 uL ^

The Preface to the Reader.

Courteous Reader,

F this Work made by me in my Youth , when I was hardly fifteen
years old, was fo generally received and with fo great applaufe^
that it was forthwith tranflated into many Languages > as Ita-
lian, French, Spaniih, Arabickj and paffed through the
hands of incomparable men : J hope that now coming forth
from me that am fifty years old , it fhall be more dearly enter-
tained* For when I faw the fir ft fruits of my Labours recei-
ved with fo great Alacrity of mind, I was moved by thefegood
Omens ; And therefore have adventured to fend it once more forth , but with an
Equipage more Rich and Noble.

From the frfi time it appeared, it is now thirty five years, And {without any de-
rogation from my Modefiy be it fpoken) if ever any man laboured earneflly to dif-
clofe the fecrets oj Nature, it was I : For with all my Mindc and Power, I have
turned over the Monuments of our Ancefiors , and if they writ anything that was
f °.cret and concealed , that I enrolled in my Catalogue of Rarities . Moreover, as I
travelled through France, Italy, and Spain, I confuted with all Libraries, Learn-
ed men , and Artificers, that if they knew any thing that was curious , I might un-
der f and fuch T ruths as they had proved by there long experience. Thof ? places and
men , I had not the happinefs to fee, I writ Letters too frequently , earneflly de-
fying them tofurnifh me with thofe Secrets, which they efieemed Rare ; not failing
with my Entreaties i Gifts, Commutations, Art, and Induflry. So that whatfoever
was Notable, and to be de fired through the whole World, for Curiofities and Excel-
lent Things , I have abundantly found out , and therewith Beautified and Aug-
ment ed the f ?, my Endeavours, « NATURAL MAGIC K, wherefore by
moft earnefi Study, and confiant Experience, I did both night and day endeavour to
know whether what I heard or read, was true orfalfe , that I might leave nothing
unaffayed : for I oft thought of that Sentence of Cicero, It is fit that they who
defire for the good of mankinde , to commit to memory things moft profi-
table , well weighed and approved , fhould make tryal of all things. To
do this J have fpared no Pain nor Cofi, but have expended my narrow Fortunes in a
large magnificence.

Nor were the Labours, Diligence, and Wealth, of mofi famous Nobles, Potentates)
Great and Learned Men, wanting to afsifl me $ Efpecially {whom J name for his
Honour} the Illufiriom and moft Reverend Cardinal of Eftings : All which did
afford there Voluntary and Boiygiful Help to this Work. I never wanted alfoat

C my

The Preface.

myHoufe an Academy of curious Men, who for the trying of tbefe Experiments,
cbearfully disburfed there Moneys, and employed there utmoft Endeavours, in a fi-
ling me to Compile and Enlarge this Volume, which with f ? great Charge, Labour 3
and Study , / had long before provided.

Having made an end thereof, I was fomewhat unwilling tofujferit to appear to
the publike View of all Men (/ being now old, andtrufiing up my Fardel) for there
are many moft excellent. Things fit for the Worthieft Nobles , which fhould ignorant
men (that were never bred up in the J acred Principles of Philofophy) come to know,
they would grow contemptible, and be undervalued-, AsVh.tofaith, to Diony fi-
lls, They Teem to make Philofophy ridiculous, who endeavour to profti-
tute Her Excellence to prophane and illiterate Men.

Alfo here are conceived many hurtful and mifchievoui things , wherewith wicked
and untoward men may mif chief others, what thenmuft I do, let Envy be driven
away, and a de fire to benefit P oft erity , vanquifh all other thoughts £ The moft Ma-
jefiick Wonders of Nature are not to be concealed , that in them we may admire the
Mighty Power of God, his wifdom, his Bounty, and therein Reverence and Adore
him. whatf oever tbefe are, I fet them before you, that you may difcern my Dilligence
and Benevolence towards you ; Had I withheld thefe Things from the World , J fear
I fhould have undergone the reproach of a wicked man; for (Cicero drives th if
from Plato) we are not born for ourfelves alone, but our Countreywill
challenge apart, our Parents and our Friends require their parts alfo from
us. wheref or e fueh Things as hitherto lay btd in the Bofome of wondrous Nature,fhall
come to light, from the Store-houfes of the moft ingenuous Men, without fraud, or
deceit.

I Difcover thofe Things that have been long bid, either by the Envy or Ignorance
of others, Nor fhall you here finde empty Trifles, or Riddles , or bare Authorities
of other men.

I did not think fit to omit any thing by erring Honeftly, or following the beft Lea-
ders ^ But fuch as are Magnificent and moft Excellent, I have will' d by the Artifice
of Words, by Tranfpofition and. Depre fiion of them ; And fuch Things as are hurt-
ful and mifebievous, I have written obfeurely , yet not fo, but that an ingenueus
Reader may unfold it, and the wit of one that will throughly fearch may comprehend it,

I have added [omethings that are Profitable, and rarely Known, becaufe they are
moft true. Sometimes from Things moft Known, and meanly efteemed, we af :end to
Things moft Profitable and High , which the Mindecan fcarce reach unto : One's
Under{landmg cannot comprehend High and SublimeTbings , unleJT itftandfirm
on moft true Principles. The Mathematical Sciences, rife from fome trivial and
common Axioms,to moft Sublime Demonftrations. wherefore I thought it better to
Write true Things and Profitable, thanfalfe Things that are great. True Things be
they never f ? fma/l, will give occafions to Difcover greater things by them. The in-
finite multitude of Things is incomprehenfible , and more than a man may be able to
contemplate.

In one Method I jhall ohferve what our Anceftors have fiid 5 Then I fhall fiew
ly my own Experience, whither they be true orfalfe , and laft of all my own Inven-
tions, That Learned Men may fee how exceedingly this later Age hath furpajjed
Antiquity.

Many men have written what they never jaw, nor did they know the Simples that
were the Ingredients, but they fet them down from other mens traditions , by an in*
bred and importunate defire to adde fomething , JoErrors are propagated by fuccef-
fion, and at laft grow infinite, that notfo much Jlfc Prints of the former remain,

^m That

*

The Preface*

That not onely the Experiment will be difficult, but a man can hardly reade them
without laughter.

Moreover, I paj? by many men , who have written Wonders to be dtnered tq
Pofierity , promt fing Golden Mountains , yet Write othernife then they thought.
itenCe moji ingenuous men, and defirow to learn, are detained for a very long time
( andwhen they defpair of obtaining what they feek for, they finde that they [pent their
time, pains, and charge in vain) and fo driven to defpardtion , they are forced to
repent by leifure : Others grown wife by other mens barms, learn to hate thofe Things
before they know them.

I have divided the fe Secreets into fever alClaffes, that every man may finde what
he likes befi.

Lafily, I ftould willingly pafi by the offending of your Ears^ if I had no care to re-
fell the Calumnies of detractors and envtow men , that mofi immodef ly wounds me^
calling me a Sorcerer , a Conjurer, which names from my tender Touth I have ab-
horrd. Indeed I always held my felf to be a man fubjeB to Errors and Infirmities 5
therefore defined the a fi'ifiances of many Learned men , and that if I had. not faith-
fully interpreted, they would reprove me But what I always feared came to p&fs,
that I fhouldfall into the hands offome vile and hateful men,who by doing injury to
others, jufily or unjufily , labour to win the popular and bafe approbation, and Ap-
plaufe of the Vulgar, bywhofe renown d Teeth, thofe that are wounded do not con-
fume, but by retorting the venome back upon them, they overthrow their own Honor.

A certain Frenchman in his Book ftf//^Daemonomania5 Tearms me a Magi-
cian, a Conjurer, and thinks this Book of mine, long fince Printed, worthy to be burnt,
becaufe I have written the Fairies Oyntment , which I fiet forth onely in dete fiat ion
of the frauds ofDivels and witches ', That which comes by Nature is abufedby their
fuperfiition, which I borrowed from the Books of the mo ft commendable Divines,
What have I offended herein, that they fhould call me a Conjurer Z But when I en-
quired of many Noble and Learned Frenchmen , that were pleafed to Honour me
with there Vifits, what that man was , they anfweredthat he was an Heretick, and
tltat he had efcaped from being cafi headlong from a Tower, upon Saint Bartholo-
mew his day , which is the time appointed for the defiruRion of fuch wicked men.
In the mean time I fhall defire the great and good God (as it becomes a Noble and
Chrifiian man to do) that he may be converted to the Catholike Faith , and may not
be condemned whilfi he lives.

Another Frenchman who unworthily reviled all the Learned men of his Age,
joynsme amongfl them, and holds, that onely three Phyfitians, that are his Friends,
are Praife-worthy , as the mofi Learned of all men of our Times ; and amongfi them
he reckons up himfelf; for the Book tspublifhed in his Name , it is a wonder what
Inventions that man hath found out to win praife, who having no man to commend
him, nor is he worthy commendations , yet he hath undertaken to commend him-
felf. IpaJ? over other men of the fame temper , who affirm that I am a witch and
a Conjurer, whereas I never Writ here nor elfwhere, what is not contain d within
the bounds of Nature.

wherefore, Studiow Readers, accept my long Lab ours, thateoflme much Study,
Travel, Expence, and much Inconvenience , with the fame Minde that I pub-
lico them ; and remove all Bl'mdnefs and Malice, which are wont to dazle the fight
of theMtnde, and hinder the Truth ; weigh the fe Things with a right Judgement,
when you try what I have Written , for finding both Truth and Profit, you will (tt
way be) think better of my Pains. Yet I am affured there will be many ignorant
people s void of aU feriow Matters, that will Hate and Envy the fe Things, and

The Preface.

wiU Rajhly pronounce, That fome ofthefeExperiments are not only falfe,butimpoflibl£
to be done ; And wbilfi they flrive by Arguments and vain Difputes 3 to overthrow
the Truth, they betray there oven ignorance : Such men, as vile, are to be driven from
the Limits of our N A T U R A L M A G I C K : For they that believe not
Natures Miracles, do, after a manner, endeavour to abolifh Philof iphy. If I have
■ over-pafj ed f me Things , or not fpoken f o Properly of them, as I might ; / know
there is nothing fo Beautiful , but it may be Adorned; Nor fo Full, but it may
be Augmented,

J. B. P.

"WW wWa *5C£ ma& •S^t •JP**Xw

The

I

The FIRST BOOK

OF

i* Natural Magick :

Wherein are fearched out the Caufes of things which pro-
duce wonderful Effects.

Chap. I.
What it meant by the time of UMagick.

Orphyry and Aptfleius, great Platonicks, in an Oration made in
the defence of Magick, do witnefs,that Magick took her name
and original from Perfia. ThIIj> in his book of Divination,
faith, that in the Pcrfian language, a Magician is nothing elfe
but one that expounds and ftudies divine things ; and it is the
general name of Wife-men in that country. S.Jerome writing
to ?4«//'»«*,faith that Apolloniui Tfanatu was a Magician,as the
people thought;or a Philofopher,as the Pythagoreans efteem-
ed him. Pliny faith , that it is received for a certainty among
moft Authors,that Magick was begun in Perfia by Zoroaftres the fon of Orimafttu ; or,
as more curious Writers hold, by another Zoroaftres^ furnamed Proconnefiut) who li-
ved a little before. The fir ft Author that ever wrote of Magick, was Ofihanes9 who
going with Xerxes king of Perfia in the war which he made againft Greece) did fcatcer
by the way as it were the feeds andfirft beginnings of this wonderful Art,infeSing
the world with it wherefoever he came ; infomuch that the Grecians did not onely
greedily defire this knowledge , but they were even mad after it. So then Magick
is taken amongft all men for Wifdom, and the perfect knowledge of natural things :
and thofe are called Magicians , whom the Latines call Wife-men, the Greeks call
Philofophers, of 'Pythagoras onely, the firft of that name, as Diogenes writes : the
Indians call them Brackmans,in their own tongue ; but in Greek they call them Gy-
mnofophifts, as much co fay as naked Philofophers: the Babylonians and Affyrians
call them Chaldeans, of Chaldxa a county in Afia : the Celtcs in France call them
Druids, Bards, and Semnothites : the Egyptians call them Priefts ; and the Cabalifts
call them Prophets. And fo in divers countries Magick hath divers names. But we
finde that the greateft part of thofe who were beft feen into the nature of things,were
excellent Magicians: as, amongft the Perfians,Z0r*a/?rmhefon of Orimaftus^hom
we fpake of before i amongft the Romanes, 'Hyma Pompilitu ; Thefpion, amongft the
Gymnofophifts • Zamolxis, amongft the Thracians ; Abbaris, amongft the Hyperbo-
reans ; Hermes^ amongft the ./Egyptians : and Budday amongft the Babylonians. Be-
tide thefe, Apuleim reckons up Carinondas, Damigeron^Hifmofes^ApoUomtu^ta^ Dor*
damti) who all followed Zoroaftres and Ofthanes,

Chap. II.
what is the Nature of UWagick.

^pHere ire two forts of Magick : the one is infamous,and tinhappie,becaufe it hath
to do with foul fpirits, and confifts of Inchantments and wicked Curiofity ; and
this is called Sorcery ; an art which all learned and good men deteft ; neither is it
able to yeeld any truth of Reafon or Nature , but ftands meerly upon fancies and
imaginations, fuch as vanifh prefently away, and leave nothing behinde them ; a*
Jmblifhm writes in his book concerning the my ftcries of the Egyptians, The other

D Magick

% Natural Magick ? 2?oo^ i.

Magick is natural ; which all excellent wife men do admit and embrace, and worfhip
with great applaufcmeither is there any thing more highly efteemed,or better thought
of, by men of learning. The mod noble Philofophers that ev^r were , 'Pythagora/,
EmpedocleS)Democrites,ind Plato, forfcok their own countries, and lived abroad as
exiles and banifhed men, rather then as ftrangers ; . and all to learch out and to attain
this knowledge ■ and when they came home again, this was the Science which they
profeffed, and this they efteemed a profound myfterie. They that have been mott
skiifu. in dark and hidden points of learning, do call this knowledge the very high-
eft point, and the perfection of natural Sciences ; infomuch that if they could find
out or devife amongft all natural Sciences, anyone thing more excellent or more
wonderful then another, that they would ftiil call by the name of Magick. Others
have named it the practical part of natural Philofophy, which produceth her effe&s
by the mutual and fit application of one natural thing unto another .The Platonicks,
as Plot mm imitating Mercuritu, writes in his book of Sacrifice and Magick,makes ic
to be a Science whereby inferiour things are made fubjetf to fuperiours, earthly
are fubdued to heavenly ; and by certain pretty allurements, it fetcheth forth the
properties of the whole frame of the world. Hence the Egyptians termed Nature
her feif a Magician, becaufc the hath an alluring power to draw like things by their
likes ; and this power,fay they, confifts in love : and the things that were fo drawn
and brought together by the affinity of Nature, thofe (they faid) were drawn by
Magick. But I think that Magick is nothing elfe but the furvey of the whole courfe
of Nature. For, whilft we confider the Heavens, the Stars, the Elements, how they
are moved, and how they are changed, by this means we find out the hidden fecre-
cies of living creatures, of plants, of metals, and of their generation and corrupti-
on ; fo that this whole Science feems meeriy to depend upon ihe view of Nature,
as afterward we fhall fee more at large. This doth Platofeem to fignifie in his nlct-
biad.es, where he faith, That the Magickof Zoroaftres, was nothing elje, in bis opinion,
but the knowledge and fludy of Divine things, wherewith the Kings Sons of 'PerHa, among ft
ether princely qualities, were endued \ that by the example of the Common-wealth of the
•whole world, they alfo might learn to govern their own Common- we alt h. And Tally, in
his book of Divinations, faith, That amongft the Perfians no man might be a Kmg, un-
lefshe had frft learned thei/frtof Magick.' for as Nature governs the world by the
mutual agreement and disagreement of the creatures ; after the fame fort they alfo might
learn to govern the Common-wealth committed unto them. This Art, I fay, is full of
much venue, of many fecret myfteries ; it openeth unto us the properties and quali-
ties of hidden things, and the knowledge of the whole courfe of Nature j and it
teacheth us by the agreement and the difagreement of things, either fo to funder
them, or elfe to lay them fo together by the mutual and fit applying of one thing
to another, as thereby we do ftrange works, fuch as the vulgar fort call miracles, and
fuch as men can neither Well conceive, nor fufficiently admire. Fo* this caufe, Ma-
gick was wont to flouriih in ^Ethiopia and India, where was great fiore of herbs and
ftones, arid fuch other things as were fit for thefe purpofes. Wherefore, as many of
you as come to behold Magick, muft be perfwaded that the works of Magick are no-
thing elfe but the works of Nature, whofe dutiful hand-maid Magick is. For if (he
find any want in the affinity of Nature, that it is not ftrong enough, (he doth fupply
fuc'ci defeCts at convenient feafons, by the help of vapours, and by obferving due
meafires and proportions j as in Husbandry, it is Nature that brings forth corn and
herbs, but it is Art that prepares and makes way for them. Hence was it that Ami-
pho the Poet faid, That we overcome thofe things by Art, wherein Nature doth overccme
tut zndPlotwus calls a Magician fuch a one as works by the help of Nature onely,
and nod>y the help of Art. Superfiitious, profane, and wicked men have noohing
to do with this Science ; her gate is fhut againft them : neither do we judge them
worthy to be.driven away from this profeffion onely, but even out of Cities, and
out of theworld,tobegrievoufly punifhed, and utterly deftrayed. Butnow^what
h the duty , and what muft be the learning of this profeffor, we purpofe to fhc w in
that which foliowcih.

CHAP,

of the Caufes of Wonderful things.

Chap. III.

"The InfiruBion of a <JW*gician} and what manner of man a CMagician ought to he. ■

NOw it is meet to in'.buft * Magician, both what he muft know,and what he mud
oblerve ; that being luffciently inftru&ed every way,he may bring very llrange
and wonderful things to p2fs. Seeing Magick, as we (hewed before, is a pra&ical
part of Natural Philoibphy , therefore it behoveth a Magician, and one that afpires
to the dignity of that profeffion, to be an exa& and a very perfect Philofopher. For
Pi?ilofophy teaches, what are the effects of fire, earth, air, and water , the principal
matter of the heavens ■ and what is thecaufeof the flowing of the Sea, and of the
divers-coloured Rain-bowe ; and of the loud Thunder,and of Comet ,and firy lights
that appear by night,and of Earth-quakes ; and what arc the beginnings of Gold and
of Iron ; and what is the whole witty force of hidden Nature. Then alfo he
muft be a skilful Phyfician : for both thefe Sciences are very like and neer together •
and Phyfkk,by creeping in under colour of Magi;k , hath purchafed favour amongft
men. And furely it is a gieat help unto us in this kinde : for it teaches mixtures and
temperatures, and fo fhews us how to compound and lay things together for fuch
purpofes. Moreover, it is required of him,that he be an Herbalift,not onely able to
difcern common Simples, but very skilful and fharpfighted in the nature of all
plants: for the uncertain names of plants,and their neer likenefs of one to another,
fo that they can hardly be dtfeerned , ruth put us to much trouble in fome of our
works and experiments. And as there is no greater inconvenience to any Artificer,
then not to know his tools that he muft work with : fo the know ledge of plants is fo
neceffary to this profeffion, that indeed it is all in all. He muft be as well feen alfo
in the nature of Metals, Minerals Gems and Stones. Furthermore,what cunning he
muft have in the art of DWillation , which follows and refembles the fhowers and
dew of heaven, as the daughter the mother ; I think no man will doubt of it : for
it yeelds daily very ftrange inventions, and moft witty devices, and fhews how to
finde out many things profitable for the ufe of man : As for example, to draw out of
things dewy vapours, unfavoury and grofs fents or fpirits, clot?, and gummy or filmy
humours ; and that intimate eflence which lurks in the inmoft bowels of things, to
fetch it forth, and fublimate it, that it may be of the greater ftrengtb. And this he
muft learn to do, not after a rude and homely manner, but with knowledge of the
caufes and reafons thereof. He muft alfo know the Mathematical Sciences,and efpe-
cially Aftrologie ; for that fhews how the Stars are moved in the heavens, and what
is the caufe of the darkningof the Moon ; and how the Sun, that golden planet,
meafures out the parts of the world, and governs it by twelvtSignes : for by the
fundry motions and afpefts of the heavens, the celeftial bodies are very beneficial to
the earth ; and from thence many things receive both active and paffive powcrs,and
their manifold properties: the difficulty of which point long troubled the Platonicks
mindes, how thefe inferiour things fhould receive influence from heaven. More-
over, he muft be skilful in the Opticks , that he may know how the fight may be de-
ceived , and how the likenefs of a vifion that is feen in the water, may be feen hang-
ing without in the air, bv the help of certain Glaffes of divers fafhions ; and how to
make one fee that plainly which is a great way off, and how to throw fire very far
from us : upon which fl *ights, the greateft part of the fecrecies of Magick doth de-
pend. Thefe are the Sciences which Magick takes to her felf for fervants and help-
ers ; and he that knows not thefe , is unworthy to be named a Magician. He muft
be a skilful worktnan,both by natural gifts,and alfo by the pra&ife of his own hands:
for knowledge without pra&ice and workmanfhip,and practice without knowledge,
are nothing worth ; thefe are fo linked togcther,that the one without the other is but
v ain,and to no purpofe. Some there are fo apt for thefe enterprites,even by the gifts
of Nature, that God may feem to have made them hereunto. Neither yet do I
fpeak thi?, as if Art could not perfeft any thing : for I know that good things may
be made better , and there are means to remedy and help fowajd d>*t which lacks

D a per-

^ Natural Magick, ^Boo/^u

perfection. Firft, let * man confidcr and prepare things providently and skilfully,
and then let him fall to work, and do nothing unadvifedly. This I thought good to
fpeak of,that if at any time the ignorant be deceived herein, he may not lay the fault
upon us, but upon his own unskilfulnefs : for this is the infirmity of the fcholar,and
not of the teacher : for if rude and ignorant men fliall deal in thefe matters , this
Science will be much difcredited , and thofe ftrange effects will be accounted hap-
hazard, which are mtft certain, and follow their neceffary caufes. If you would
have your works appear more wonderful, you muft not let the caufe be known : for
that is a wonder to us, which we fee to be done, and yet know not the caufe of it :
for he that knows the caufes of a thing done,doth not fo admire the doing of it ; and
nothing is counted unufual and rare , but onely fo far forth as the caufes thereof arc
not known . Ariftotle in his books of Handy-trades,faith,that matter- builders frame
and make their tools to work with ; but the principles thereof, which move admi-
ration,thofe they conceal. A certain man put out a candle ; and putting it to a fione
or a wall, lighted it again ; and this feemed to be a great wonder : but when once
they perceived that he touched it with brimftone, then, faith (jaUn^ it ceafed to feem
a wonder. A miracle, faith Ephefttts, is diflblved by that wherein ic feemed to be a
miracle. Laftly, the profeflbr of this Science murt alio be rich : for if we lack mo-
ney, we fliall hardly work in thefe cafes : for it is not Philofophy that can make us
rich; we muft firft be rich, that we may play the Philofophers. Hemuft fpare forno
charges, but be prodigal in feeking things out •, and while he is bufie and careful in
feeking, he muft be patient alfo,and think it not much to recal many things ; neither
muft he fpare for any pains : for the fecrets of Nature are not revealed to lazie and
id le perfon?. Wherefore Spicharmus faid very well, that men purchafe all things at
Gods hands by the price of their labour. And if the effect of thy work be not
anfwerablc to my defcription, thou muft know that thy felf haft failed in fome one
point or another j for I have fet down thefe things briefly, as being made for wit-
ty and skilful workmen, and not for rude and young beginners.

Chap, IV.

The opinions of the antient Philofophers touching the caufe $ of ftrange operations ; and firft,
of the Elements,

TTHofe effe&sof Nature which oft-times we behold, have fo imployed theantient
Philofophers minds in the fearching forth of their caufes, that they have taken
great pains, and yet were much deceived therein; infomuch that divers of them
have held divers opinions : which it fliall not be amifs to relate, before we proceed
any farther. The firft fort held that all things proceed from the Elements, and that
thefe are the firft beginnings of things; the fire, according to Hippafus Metapomi-
tiUi) and Heraclides Ponticw; the air, according to Diogenes Apolloniates^ and Anaxi-
menes; and the water, according to Thales Mileftus. Thefe therefore they held to
be the very original and firft feeds of Nature; even the Elements, fimplc and pure
bodies (whereas the Elements that now are, be but counterfeits and baftards to
them ; for they are all changed, every one of them being more or lefs medled with
one another) thofe, fay they, are the material principles of a natural body, and
they are moved and altered by continual fucceflion of change; and they are fo
wrapt up together within the huge cope of heaven, that they fill up this whole fpace
of the world which is fituate beneath the Moon ; for the fire being the ligbteft and
pureft Element, hath gotten up aloft, and chofe it felf the higheft room, which they
call[the element of fire. The next Element to this is the Air,which is fomwhat more
weighty then the fire, and it is fpread abroad in a large and huge compafs ; and paf-
fing through all places, doth make mens bodies framable to her temperature, and
is gathered together lometimes thick into dark clouds, fometimes thinner into
mifts, and fo is refolved. The next to thefe is the water; and then the laftand
loweftof all, which is fcrapqd and compared together out of the purer Elements,

Of the Qaufes of Wonderful things. y

and is called the Earth ; a chick and groffe fubftancc , very folid , and by no means
to be pierced through : fo that there is no folid and firm body but hath earth in ir,
as alfo there is no vacant fpace but hath air in it. This Element of earth is fituatein
the middle and centre of all, and is round befet with all the reft; and this only
ftands ftill and unmoveable, whereas all the reft are carried with a circular motion
round about it. But Hippon and fritias held that the vapours of the Elements were
the firft beginnings : Parmtnides held that their qualities were the principles; for
ail things (faith he) confflof cold and heat. The Phyfitians hold that ail things cor.fiGc
of four qualities, heat, cold, moifture, drouth, and of their predominancy when
they meet together ; for every Element doth embrace as it were with certain armes
his neighbour-Element which is next fituate to him ; and yet they have alio contrary
and fundry qualities whereby they differ : for the wifdom of nature hath framed
this workmanfhip of the world by due and fee meafure, and by a wonderful fitneffe
and conveniency of one thing with another; for whereas every Element had two
qualities, wherein it agreed with fome, and difagreed with other Elements, nature
hath bellowed fuch a double quality upon every one, as finds in other two her like,
which (he cleaves unto : as for example, the air and the fire ; this is hot and dry,
that is hot and moift : now dry and moift are contraries, and thereby fire and air
difagree ; but becaufe either of them is hot, thereby they arc reconciled. So the
Earth is cold and dry, and the water cold and moift; fo that they difagree, in that
ihe one is moift, the other dry ; but yet are reconciled, in as much as they are both
cold ; otherwife they could hardly agree. Thus the fire by little and little is changed
into air, becaufe either of them is hot ; the air into the water, becaufe either of
them is moift ; the water into the earth, becaufe either of them is cold ; and the
earth into fire, becaufe either of them is dry : and fo they fucceed each other after
a moft provident order.From thence alfo they are turned back again into themfelves,
the order being inverted, and fo they are made mutually of one another : for the
change is eafie in thofe that agrecin any one common qualicy ; as fire and air be ea-
fily changed into each other, by reafon of heat : but where either of the qualities
are oppofite in both, as in fire and water, there this change is not fo eafie. So then,
heat,cold, moifture and drouth, are the firft and principal qualities) in as much as
they proceed immediately from the Elements, and produce certain fecondary ef-
fefts. Now two of them,namely heat and cold, are active qualities,fitter to be do-
ing themfelves,then to fuller of others : the other two,namely moifture and drouth,
are pafllve • not becaufe they are altogether idle,but becaufe they follow and are pre-
fcrved by the other. There are certain fecondary qualities,which attend as it were
upon the firft j and thefe are faid to work in a fecond fort ; as to foftcn, to ripen, to
refolve, tomakeleffe or thinner: as when heat works into any mixt body, ic
brings out that which is unpure,and fo whilft it ftrives to make it fit for his purpofe,
that ic may be more fimple, the bodybecometh thereby fmaller and chinner: fo
cold doch preferve , binde, and congeal ; drouth doth thicken or harden , and
makes uneven ; for when there is great ftore of moifture in the utter parts, that
which the drouth is not able to confume, it hardens , and fo che ucccr pares become
rugged ; for chac pare where che moifture is gone, finking down, and che other
where it is hardened, rifing up, there muft needs be great roughnefle and rugged-
neffe : fo moifture doth augment , corrupt, and for the moft part works one thing
byicfelf, and another by fome accident ; as by ripening, binding, expelling, and
fuch like, it brings forth milk, urine, monethly flowers, and fweat ; which the Phy-
fitians call the third qualities, that do fo wait upon the fecond, as the fecond upon
the firft: andfometime they have their operations in fome certain parts, as to
ftrengthen che head, to fuccour the reins ; and thefe, fome call fourth qualities. So
then,thefe are the foundations, as chey call chem, of all mixt bodies, and of all
wonderful operations : and whatsoever experiments they proved, the caufes hereof
refted (as they fuppofed) and were to be found in the Elements and their qualities.
ButEmpedocles Agrigentinus not thinking that the Elements were fufficient for this
purpofe, added unco them moreover concord and difcord, as thecaufesof genera-

6 Natural Magick , ©00^ i.

tion and corruption : There be four principal feeds or beginnings of all things • J*.
piter, that is to fay, fire ; Pluto> that is to fay, earth ;Juno9 that is to fay, air ; 'and
Neftisi that is to fay, water: all thefe fometimes love and concord knits together
in one, and fometimes difcord doth funder them and make them flie apart. This
concord and difcord, faid he, are found in the Elements by reafon of their lundry
qualities wherein they agree and difagree : yea,even in heaven it lelf, as Jupiter and
Venn love all Planets fave Mars&nd Saturn, Venus agrees with Mars , whereas no
Planet elfe agrees with him. There is alfo another disagreement amongft them,
which arifeth from the oppolit ions and elevations of their houfes : for even the
twelve figns are both at concord and at difcord among themfelvcs, is Mam/iusihc
Poet hath (hewed.

Chap. V.

7 hat divers operations of Nature proceed from the effential forms of things,

A LI the Peripateticks , and moft of the latter Philofophers could not fee how
all operations (hould proceed from thofecaules which the Antiems have let
aown ; for they find that many things work quite contrary to their qualities , and
therefore they have imagined that there is fome other matter in it, and that it is the
power and properties of effential formes. Bat now that all thing; maybe made
more plain, we mull ccnfiderthac it will be a great help unto us, for the making and
finding out of ftrange things, to know what that is from whence the venues of any
thing do proceed : that fo we may be able to difcern and diftinguifh one thing from
another, without confounding all order of truth. Whereas one and the fame com-
pound yeelds many effe£fs of different kinds , as we (hall find in the proceffe of
this Book, yet every man confeffeth that there is but one only original caufe there-
in that produceth all thelic effeels. And feeing we are about to open plainly this ori-
ginal caufe, we mull begin a little higher. Every natural fubllance (I mean a com-
pound body) is compofed of matter and form, as of her principles : neither yet do
I exclude the principal qualities of the Elements from doing their part herein ; for
they alfo concur, and make up the number oc three principles: for when the Ele-
ments meet together in the framing of any compound, the lame compound retains
certain excellent and chief qualities of theirs ; whereof though all help together to
bring forth any effe&s , yet the fuperiour and predominant qualities are held to do
all, becaufe they make the power of their inferiour, to become theirs : for unleffe
fome were ftronger then other, their venues could not be perceived. Neither yet
is the matter quite dettitute of all force: I fpeak here, rot of the firft and firople
matter, but of that which conlifts of thefubftances and properties of the Elements,
efpecially the two paflible elements, the Earth and the Water : and thofe which
Arifiotle calleth fometimes fecondary qualities, fometimes bodily effects, we may
term them the functions and powers of the matter ; as thinneffe, thickneffe, rough-
neffe, fmoothnefle, ealineffe to be clefc, and fuch like, are altogether in the power of
the matter, howbeit they proceed all from the Elements. Therefore to avoid con-
fufion, it is better to hold that the effects of the qualities come of the temperature
or mixture of the Elements, but the effects of the matter from the confidence or
fubftances of them. But the Form hath fuch lingular vertue,that whatsoever effects
we fee,all of them firft proceed from thence ; and it hath a divine beginning and be-
ing the chiefeft and moll excellenr part, ablolure of her felf , (he uietb the reft as
her inflruments , for the more fpeedy and convenient difpatch of her adfions: and
he which is not addifted nor accullomed to fuch contemplations , fuppoietb that the
temperature and the matter works all things, whereas indeed they are hut as ic were
inflruments whereby the form worketh : for a workman that ufeth a graving Iron in
the catving of an Image, doth not ufe it as though that could work, but for his own
furtherance in the quicker and berter performance thereof. Therefore whereas
there are three efficient and working caufes in every compound, we muft not fuppofe

any

Of the Qaufes of Wonderful things, y

any of them to be idle, but all at woik, fome more and fcmelefle • but above all
other, the form is molt afttve and bufie, lengthening the reft ; which furely would
be to nopurpofe. if the form fhould fail them , in as much as they are not capable
of heavenly infiuences. And though the form of it felf be not able to produce fuch
effe&s, but the reft alfo mull do their parts, yet are they neither confounded toge-
ther, nor yet become divers things ; but they are fo knit among themfeiver , that
one Hands in need of anothers help. He that fcans thefe things well by the iearch
of reafon, fhall find no obfeurity herein,nor confound the knowledge of the truth.
Wherefore that force which is called the property of a thing, proceeds not from
the temperature, but from the very form it felf.

Chap. VI.

Whence the Form cometh j and of the chain that Homer faigned, and the rings that Pla-
to memioneth,

SO then, the form, as it is the moft excellent part, fo it cometh from a mod ex-
cellent place ; even immediately from the higheft heavens, they receiving it from
the intelligences, and thefe from God himfelf : and the fame original which the
Form hath, conlequently the properties alio have. Zeno Citticm holds two begin-
nings, God and Matter ; the one of them aSive or efficient, the other thepaffive
principle. For God, as Plato thinks, when by the Almighty power of his Deity he
had framed in due meafure and order the heavens , the liars, and the very firft prin-
ciples of things the Elements, which waft away by reafon of fo many generations
and corruptions, did afterwards by the power of the Heavens and Elements, or-
dain the kinds of living creatures, plants, and things without life, every one in
their degree, that they might not be of the fame eftate and condition as the hea-
vens are ; and he enjoyned inferiour things to be ruled of their fuperiours, by a fet
Law, and poured down by heavenly influence upon everything his own proper
Form,ful of much ftrength and a&ivity:and that there might be a continual encreafe
amongft them, he commanded allxhings to bring forth feed, and to propagate and
derive their Form wherefoever fhould be fit matter to receive it. So then, feeing
that formes come from heaven, theymuft needs be counted Divine and heavenly
thingsrfor fuch is the pattern and the moft excellent caufe of them,which ?Atf0, that
chief Philofopher, cails the foul of the World, and Ariftotle univerfal Nature, and
Avicenna calls it the Form-giver. This Form-giver doth not make it of any thing,
as though it were but iome frail and tranfitory fubftance, but fiatcheth it meerly out
of himielf, and bellows ir firft upon intelligences and liars, and then by certain
afpe&s informetb the Elements, as being fit inflrumentsto difpofe the matter. See-
ing therefore this Form cometh from the Elements, from heaven, from the intelli-
gences, yea from God himfelf ; who is fo foolifli and untoward, as to fay thatic
doth not favour of that heavenly nature, and in fome fort of the Majefty of God
himfelf? and that it doth not produce fuch effects, as nothing can be found more
wonderfull , feeing it hath fuch affinity with God? Thus hath the providence of
God linked things together in their rankes and order, that all inferiour things might
by their due courics be derived originally from God himfelf, and from him receive
their Operations. For God the firft caufe and beginner of things, as Macrobtm
fakb, of hisownfruitfulneffe hath created and brought forth a Spirit, the Spirit
brought forth a Soul, (bur the truth of Chriftianity faith otherwife) the Soul is fur-
nifhed partly with reafon , which it beftows up Divine things,as heaven and the
ftars (for therefore are they faid to have Divine Spirits) and partly with fenfitive and
vegetative powers,which it beflows upon frail and tranfitory things. Thus much Vtr*
gil well perceiving, caileth this Spirit ,The foul of the World ; The Spirit, faith he,
cherifheth it within , and conveying it felf through the inmoft parts, quickens and
moves the whole lamp, and dofcth with this huge body. Wherefore feeing Man
ftands as it were in the middle,bet wixt eternal and thole tranfitory things,and is not

• altoge*

8 Natural Magick , Soo^ i.

altogether fo excellent as heaven, and yet, bccaufe of his reafon,more excellent then
other living creatures ; and he hath alfo the fenfitive power : therefore the other
living creatures, as it were degenerating from man, are indued onely with the two
powers that remain, the fenfitive and vegetative powers. But the Trees or Plants,
becaufethey have neither fcnfe nor reafon, bur do onely grow are faid to live on-
ly in this refpe&, that they have this vegetative foul. This the fame Poet doth ex-
preffe a little after. Seeing then the Spirit cometh from God, and from the Spirit
comcth the foul, and the foul doth animate and quicken all other things in their or-
der, that Plants and bruit beafts do agree in vegetation or growing, bruit beafts
with Man in fenfe, and Man with the Divine creatures in undemanding, fo that the
fuperior power cometh down even from the very firft caufeto thefe inferiours, de-
riving her force into them, likeasit wcrea cord platted together, and llretchcd
along from heaven to earth, in fuch fort as if either end of this cord be touched, it
will wag the whole; therefore we may rightly call this knitting together of things,
a chain, or link and rings, for it agrees fitly with the rings of Tlato, and with Ho-
mers golden chain, which he being the firlt author of all divine inventions, hath
fignified to the wife under the fhadow of a fable, wherein he fcigneth, that all the
gods and goddeffes have made a golden chain, which they hanged above in heaven,
and it reacheth down to the very earth. But the truth of Chrirtianity holderh that
the Souls do not proceed from the Spirit, but even immediately from God himfelf.
Thefe things a Magician being well acquainted withal, doth match heaven and earth
. together,as the Husband-man plants Elmes by his Vines ; or to fpeak more plainly,
he marries and couples together thefe inferiour things by their wonderful gifts and
powers, which they have received from their fuperiours • and by this means he, be-
ing as it were the fervant of Nature, doth bewray her hidden fecrets, and bring
them to light, fo far as he hath found them true by his own daily experience, that fo
all men may love, and praile, and honour the Almighty power of God, who hath
thus wonderfully framed and difpofed all things.

Chap. VII.

Of Sympathy and Antipathy • and that by them we may k»ow and find outtht vtrtHes of
things,

BY reafon of the hidden and fecret properties of things, there is in all kinds of
creatures a certain companion, as I may call it, which the Greeks call Sympathy
and Antipathyjbut we term it more familiarly ,their confcnt,and their difagreement.
For fome things are joyned together as it were in a mutual league, and fome other
things are at variance and difcord among themfelves; or they have fomething in
them which is a terror and deftru&ion to each other, whereof there can be rendred
no probable reafon : neither will any wife man feek after any other caufe hereof
but only this, That it is the pleafure of Nature to fee it fhould be fo, that (he would
have nothing to be without his like, and that amongft all the fecrets of Nature,
there is nothing but hath fome hidden and fpecial property ; and moreover, that by
this their Content and Difagreement , we might gather many helps for the ufes and
neceffities of men; for when once we find one thing at variance with another, pre-
fently we may conjeflure, and in trial fo it will prove, that one of them maybe
ufed as a fit remedy againft the harms of the other : and furely many things which
former ages have by this means found cut, they have commended to their pofte-
rity, as by their writings may appear. There is deadly hatred, and open enmity
betwixt Coleworts and the Vine ; for whereas the Vine windes it felf with her ten*
drels about every thing elfe, fhe fhuns Coleworts only : if once fhe come neer
them, fhe turns her felf another way, as if fhe were told that her enemy were at
hand: and when Coleworts is feething, if you put never fo little wine unto it, it
will neither boil nor keep the colour. By theexamp'e of which experiment, «/f»-
drocides found out a remedy againft wine, namely, that Coleworts are good againft

drunken-

Of the Caufes of W onderful things. p

drunken neffe, as Theophrafius faith , in as much as the Vine cannot away with the
favour of Coleworts. And this herbe is at enmity with Cyclamineor Sow-bread ;
for when they are put together , if cither of them be green , it will dry up the o-
ther:now this Sow-bread being put into wine, doth encreafe drunkenne{fe,where-
as Coleworcs is a remedy againii drunkenneffe, as we faid before. I vy, as it is the *
bane of ali Trees, fo it is mofi hurtful, and thegreateft enemy to the Vine ; and
therefore Ivy alfois good agaiolt drunkennefle.There is likewiie a wonderful enmi-
ty betwixt Cane and Fern, fo that one of them dellroyes the other. Hence it is that
a Fern root powned, doth loofe and fhake out the darts from a wounded body,thac
were fhot or caft out of Canes : and if you would not have Cane grow in a place,
do but plow up the ground with a little Fern upon the Plough -fhear, and Cane will
never grow there. Strangle-tare or Choke-weed defires to grow amongft Pulfe,and
efpecially among Beans and Fetches, but it choaks them all : and thence V'.ofcorides
gathers,That if it be put amongft Pulle,let to feethe, it will make them feethe quick"
iy. Hemlock and Rue are at enmity; they ftrive each againii other :Rue mult not be
handled or gathered with a bare hand, for then it will caufe Ulcers to arile ; but if
you do chance to touch it with your bare hand, and fo t aufe it to fwell or itch, a-
noint ic with the juice of Hemlock. Much Rue being eaten, becometh poifon;
but the juice of Hemlock expels ^it ; fo that one polon poifoneth another: and
likewiie Rue is good againii Hemlock being drunken, as cDiofcorides faith. A wilde
Bull being tyed to a Fig-tree, waxeth tame and gentle, as Zoroafter faith, who com-
piled a book called Geopomca , oat of the choice writings of the Antients.
Hence it was found out, that the ftalks of a wilde Fig-tree, if they be put to Beef
as it is boiling, make it boil very quickly, as P//»7 writeth ; and D/ofcorides mini-
ftrech young figs that are full of milky juice, together with a portion of water and
vinegar, as a remedy againft a draught of Bulls blood. The Elephant is afraid of a
Ram, or an engine of warfo called: for as foonasevet he feeth it, he waxeth
meek, and his fury ceafeth : hence the Romans by thefe engines put to flight the
Elephants of Vyrrhm King of the Epyrotes, and fo got a great victory, ^uch a
contrariety is there betwixt the Elephants members, and that kind of Lepry which
makes the skin of a man like the skin of an Elephant ; and they are a prefent reme-
dy againft that dileafe. The Ape of all other things cannot abide a Snail: now
the Ape is a drunken beaft, for they are wont to take an Ape by making him drunk;
and a Snail well wafhed is aremedy againft drunkennefle. A man is at deadly ha-
tred with a Serpent : for if he do but fee a Serpent, prefently he is fore difmaid ;
and if a woman with child meet a Serpent, her fruit becometh abortive : hence it
is, that when a woman is in very fore travel, if fhe do but fmell the fume of an
Adders hackle, it will prefently either drive out, or deftroy her child : but it
is better to anoint the mouth of the womb in fuch a cafe, with the fat of an
Adder. The fight of a Wolfe is fo hurtful to a man, that if he fpie a man firft, he
takes his voice from him; and though he would fain cry out, yet he cannot
fpeak: but if he perceive that the man bath firft efpied him, he makes no ado, but
his favagefury ceafeth, and his ftrength failes him. Hence came that proverb, Lu-
p*t infabtiUy the Wolf comethinthe nick; which TUto fpeaks of in his Poli-
ticks. The Wolf is afraid of the Urchin • thence, if we wafh our mouth and
throats with Urchines blood, it will make our voice fhrill, though before it were
hoarfe and dull like a Wolves voice. A Dog and a Wolfe are at great ecmity ; and
therefore a Wolves «kin put upon any one that is bitten of a mad Dog, af-
fwageth the fwelling of the humour. An Hawk is a deadly enemy to Pigeons,
but they are defended by the Kaftrel, which the Hawk cannot abide either to
hear or fee: and this the Pigeons know well enough ; for wherefoever the Kaftrel
remains, there alfo will the Pigeons remain, thinking themfelves fafe becaufe of
their protec>or, Hence Cecelia faith, That there is a kind of Hawks which the
common-people call a Kaftrel, that builds her neft about houfes, that is very good
to keep away hawk; from a Pigeon-houfe t If you take the Kaflrels youngones and
put them in divers earthen pots,and cover the pots clofe,& plaifter them round about,
ind hang them up in fundry corners of a Pi^eon-houfe, the Pigeons will be fo far

io Natural Magick, Sm^i.

in love with the place, that they will never forfake ir. Hither belongeth that no-
table Difagree men t that is betwixt Garlickand the Load-ftone: for being lineared
about with Garlike, it will not draw iron to it; as P/tttar^ hath noted, and after
him Ttolomans : the Load-ftone hath in it a poifonous vertue, andGarlick is good
againft poifon : but if no man had written of the power of Garlick againft the Lcad-
ftone, yet we might conjecture it to be fo, becaufe it is good againft viperr, and
mad dogs, and poifonous waters. So likewife thole living creatures that are ene-
mies to poifonous things, and fwallow them up without danger, may fhew us that
fuch poilons will cure the bitings and blows of thofe creatures. The Hart and the
Serpent are at continual enmity : the Serpent as foon as he feeth the Harriets him
into his hole, but the Hart draws him out again with the breath of his'nolirils,and
devours him : hence it is that the fat and the blood of Harts, and the ftones that
grow in their eyes, are miniftred as fit remedies againft the ftingiog and biting of
ferpents. Likewife the breath of Elephants draws Serpents out of their dens,
and they fight with Dragons; and therefore the members of Elephants burned,
drives away Serpents. The Storks drive out of the Countreyes where they are, Ly-
zards, and fundry kinds of Serpents, and other noifome things in the fields : and
the intrails of them all are good againft the Storks. The fame is done alfo in Egypt
by the bird Ibis. That Indian Rat, called Ichneumon, doth harneffe himfelf with
fomeof the Lote-tree, and fo fights asainft the Afp. The Lamprey fights with Ser-
pents, and with her biting, kills the Bafilisk, which is themoft poilonous fcrpeDt
that is. So alio the crowing of a Cock affrights the Bafilisk, and he fights with Ser-
pents to defend his hens • and the broth of a Cock is a good remedy againft the
poifon of ferpents. So the Snail and the Eagle. The Stellion, which is a b?aft like
a Lyzard , is an enemy to the Scorpions ; and therefore the oyle of him being pu-
trified is good to anoint the place which is ftricken by the Scorpion. The Barbel eats
up the Sea-hare, and is good againft the poifon thereof. A Swine cats up a Salaman-
der, without danger, and is good againft the poifon thereof. The Hawk is an enemy
to the Chamaeleon, and his dung drunken in wine, is good againft the poifon
oftheChamseleon. Likewife out of the Sympathies of plants, we may tather fome
fecret, which is helpful againft fome kind of hurt. The herb Corruda, whereof
Sperage comes, is mort fitly planted where Reed grows, becaufe they are of much
likeneffeandneerneff-jandbothof them are inciters to luft. The Vine and the
Olive-tree do joy in each others company, as Africanm writes: both of them are
very commodious for mens ufes. In like manner the Morehenne loves the Hart,
which is given to luft ; both of their members are inciters to venery. The Goat
and the Partridge love each other ; and both thefe are good for one and the fame re-
medy. So the fifh Sargus and the Goat. A Dog is molt friendly to a man; and if
you lay him to any difeafed part of your body, he takes away the difeafe to himfelf;
as Pliny reporteth.

Chap. VIII.

That things receive their force and power from Heaven, and from the Stars; and that
thereby many things are wrought.

ISuppofe that no man doubts but that thefe inferiour things ferve their fuperiours,
and that the generation and corruption of mutable things, every one in his due
courfe and order, is over-ruled by the power of thofe heavenly Natures. The
Egyptians, who firft proved and found out the cffe&s of the heavens , becaufe
they dwelt in the open Champion-fields, where they had continually fair-wea-
ther , and there were no vapours fent up from the earth which might hinder
their contemplation of heaven, fo that they might continually behold the
Stars in their brightneffe , did therefore wholly beftow themfelves in the know-
ledge of heavenly influences : and whereas others that were not fo diligenc
as they, flood amazed at the caufes of things, thefe men referred all to the
heavens and the Stars, that all things took their deftiny from them, and that the
influence of heaven bare great fway in all generations and corruptions; and thus
obferving the motions of the ftars to and fro, they wrought many wonderful things ;

Of the Caufes of Wonderful things. n

for this was their reiolution, that to certain hours and lee times , there were an-
iwerable ceruin afpefh of iuperiour powers,. wnercby all things were eff^&ed,
Ptolomj was of the lame minde, who reduced the heavenly influences to a certain
order, and thereby did prognoilicate many things: and he thought the mattr ih
clear, that it need not mnch proof: and moreover, that the increafe and decreafe
of all plants, and all living creature?, mcreorlefle, did proceed from the power
andftrokeof thefiars. Ar.ftotle , finding that the hi'^helt motion was the caule
aod beginning of all thing-;, \fcr if that fhould ceafe, thefemuit needs presently de-
cay) faith,that it was nectfl'iry fcr this world t obi placed very neerand clofe to the
iuperiour motions, that all power might be thence derived ; and he faw that all this
force of inferiour thing; was caufed itom the Sun, as he himfelf fitly (hews: The
winding courfe of the Sun, faith he, in the oblique circle of the Zodiak, caufeth
the generation and corruption of alltranfitory things ; and by his going to and frc,
diiiingu;fhath times and (Worts, TUto faith, that the circular motions of the hea-
vens are the caufes of fruitfuln.fl; and b-irrennefle. The Sun is the Governour of
time, and r he rule of life. Hence J m'Uchm following the do&rinc of the Egyp-
tians, i'aich,that every good thing cometh certainly from the power of the Sun •, and
if we receive any good from any thing elfe, yet the Sun mull pcrfeit and fnifh it.
Heraclittu calls the Sun, the Fountain of heavrnly light; 0,-phetts calls it the light
of life . TUto calls it a heavenly Fire, an ever li .ingC reature, a (lar that hath a Soul,
the greatett and the daily flar : and the natural Philofophers call it the very heart of
heaven. And Pfor/«*« fhews, that in antiem times the Sun was honoured infiead of
God. Neither yet is the Moon ltiTe powerful, bur what with her own force, and
what with the force of the un which (he borrows, fhe works much.by reafon of her
neemefle to thefe inferiours. Albu r.a\at faid, That all thing- had their vertue from
the Sun and the Moon : and Hermes the learned laid, that the Sun and the Moon are
the life of all things living. Tne Moon is nighelt to the Earth of all Planets ; fhe
rules moift bpdie?,and (he hath luch affinity wirh thefe inferiour , that as well things
that have fouls, as they that have none, do feel in themiclves htr waxing, and her.
waining. The Seas and Flouds, Rivers and Springs, do rife and fall, do run fome-
times fwifter,fometimes flower , as fhe tules them. The furges of the Sea are toft
to and fro, by continual fuccefhon ; no other caufe whereof the Antienrs could find
but the Moon only : neither is there any other apparent reaion of the ebbing
and flowing thereof. Li\ ing creatures are much at her beck, and receive from her
great encreafe : for when fhe is at the fml, as LucUius faith, fhe feeds Oyfters,Crabs,
Shelfifli, and foch like, which her warm light doth temper kindly in the night fea-
fon; but when fhe is but the half or the quarter light, then (he withdraws her nou-
riftiment, and they wafte.Tn like manner, Cucumbers, Grurds, Pompons, and fuch
like, as have (lore of waterifli juice, feel the ftateof the Moon: forthey wax as fhe
doth j and when fhe wiineth, they wade, as Athens.™ writes. Likewife the very
fiemsof plants do follow the ftate of the heavens; witneffe the Husband-man,
who finds it by experience in his grafting: and skilful Husbandmen have found the
courfe and feafon of the year, and the m nethly race of the Moon fo neceffary for
plants, that they havefuppofed this knowledge to be one chief part of Husbandry.
Soalfo, when the Moon paffeth through thofe fignsof the Zodiak which aremoft
peculiar to the earth, if you then plant trees, they will be ftrongly rooted in the
earth: if you plant them when (ru pafleth through thefigns of the Air, then the
tree fo planted, will be plentiful in branches and leaves, and eucreafeth more up-
ward then downward. But of all other , the moll pregnant fign hereof is found in
the Pome-granate • which will bring forth fruit julHo many years, as many daies
as the Moon is old when you plant it. And it is a report alfo, that Garlick, if it
be fct when the Moon is beneath the earth, and be alio plucked up at fuch a time,
it will lofe its ftrong favour.All cut and looped Woods,asTimber and Fewel,are full
of muchmoifture at the new of the Moon; and by reafon of that moifture, they wax
foft, and fo the worm eats them, and they wither away. And therefore Vtmoeritm
counfellcth , and VttruvtHi is alio of the fame rninde , to cut ox lop trees ia

E 2 the

i !•

\% Natural Magick, 2?oo^ i.

thewainingof the Moon, that being cut in feafon, they may latt long without rot-
tenneffe. And that which is more, as her age varies, fo her effc&s vary according
to her age; for inherfirft quarter, (he maketh hot and moiif,butefpecially mcitt j
from thence all moift things grow and receive their humidity in that time : from that
time to thefull of the Moon, (he gives heat and moiilure equally, as may be feen in
Trees and Minerals : from that time to the half Moon decaying, (he is hoi and rnoili,
but efpecially hot, becaufe (lie is fuller of light; thence the fifhes at that time com-
monly are wont to iwim in the topof the water • and that the Moon is in this age
warm, appears by this, that it doth extend and enlarge moift bodies ; and thereby
the moifturc encreahng,it caufeth rottennefle, and maketh them wither and wallc a-
way. But in her 'alt quarter, when (he lofeth all her light, then (he is meerly hot ;
and the wifes of £ka/dea hold that this ftate of heaven is beft of all other. So they
report that there is a Moon-herb, having round twirled leaves of t blewifh colour,
which is well acquainted with the age of the Moon ; for when the Moon waxeth,
this herb every day of her ags brings forth a leaf ; and when (he waineth, trie fame
herb lofeth for every day a leac. Thefe variable effefts of the Moon, we may fee
more at large, and more ufually in tame creatures and in plants, where we have dai •
ly fight and experience thereof. The Pifmire, that little creature, hath t fenfe of the
change of the Planets: for fhe worketh by night about the full of the Moon, but
fhe refteth all the fpace betwixt the old and the new Moon. The inwards of mice
anfwer the Moons proportion ; for they encreafewith her, and with her they alfo
ftirinkaway. If we cut our hair, or pair our nailes before the new Moon, they
will grow again but flowly ; if at or about the new Mcon, they will grow again
quickly. The eyes of Cats are alfo acquainted with the alterations of the Moon, fo
that they are fomctimes broader as the light is lefle , and narrower when the light
of the Moon is greater. The Beetle marketh the ages aud feafons of the Planets :
for he gathering dung out of the mixen, rounds it up together, and covereth
it with earth for eight and twenty daies, hiding it fo long as the Moon goeth about
the Zodiak ; and when the new Moon ccmeth, he openeth that round ball of dirt,
and thence yields ay oung Beetle. Onions alone, of all other herbs, (which is molt
wonderful) feels the changeable ftate of the Planets, but quite contrary to their
change frameth it felf; for when the Moon waineth, the Onions encreafe; and
when fhe waxeth, they decay; for which cauiethePrieftsof Egypt would not eac
Onions, as P/#;*n^writes in his fourth Commentary upon Hefiode. That kinde of
fpurge which k called Heliofcopium-, becaufe it follows the Sun , difpofeth of her
reaves as the Sun rules them • for when the Sun rifeth, fhe openeth them, as being
tfefirous that the morning fhould fee them rife ; and fhutteth them when the Sun
fetteth, as defiring to have her flower covered and concealed from the night. So
many other herbs follow the Sun, as the herb Turn-iolc: for when the Sun rifeth,
(he holds down her head all day long, that the Sun may never fo much as writhe any
of her (there is fuch love as it were betwixt them) and fhe ftoops (fill the fame way
which the Sun goeth : fo do the flowers of Succory and of Mallows. Likewifc the
pulfe called Lupines, ftill looks after the Sun, that it may not Writhe hisftalk; and
this watcheth the Suns motion fo duly, that like a Dial it {hews the Husband-man
the time of the day , though it be never fo cloudy ; and they know thereby the
iuft time when the Sun fetteth : and Theephraftus faith, that the flower of the herb
Lotum, isnotonelyopenandfhut,but alfofometimes hides, and fometimes ftiews
her ftalk from Sun-fet to midnight ; and this, faith he, is done about the River £h-
pbrates. So the Olive-tree, the Sallow, the Linden-tree, the Elm, the white Po-
ple-tree, they declare the times of the Suns (landing, when it turns back again from
the Poles ; for then they hide their leaves, and (hew only their hoar-white backs.
In like manner winter-Creffes or Irium, and Penyrial, though they begin to wither
being gathered, yet if you hang them upon a ftick about the time of the Solft ice,
they will for that time flourifh. The ftone Selenites, (as much as to fay, the Moon-
beam) called by others Aphrofelinon, contains in it the Image of the Moon, and
(hews the waxing and waining of it every day in the fame Image. Another ftone

there

Of the Qaufes of Wonderful things. ij

there is,that hath in it a little cloud that turns about like the 5un,fomtirhes hiding^
fometimes (hewing it l'e:f. The Beaft Cynocephalus rcjoiceth at thcrifingof the
Moon, for then he Hands up, lifting his fore-feet toward heaven,and wears a Roy-
al Enfign upon hi3 head : and he hath luch a Sympathy with the Mood, that. wru»n fhe
meets with the Sun (as bet win the old and new Moon) fo that (he gives no light,
the male, or He-Cynocephalus,never looks up, nor eats any thing, as bewailing the
icflc of the Moon j and the female, as male-content as He, ail that while piffeth
blood : for which caufes, thefe beads are nourifhed and kept in hallowed places,thac
by them the time of the Moones meeting with the Sun may be certainly known, as
Ortts writes in his Hieroglyphicks. The liar Ar&uru?, at his riling caufeth rain.DogS
are well acquainted with the riling of the Canicular ftar; for at that time they arc
commonly mad ; and lb are vipers and ferpents ; nay, then the very (landing pools
are moved, and wines work as they lye in the Cellar, and other great and ftrange ef-
teSs are wrought upon earth : when this ftarrifeth , Bafil-gentie waxeth whiterifh,
and Coriander waxeth dry, is Theophrafttumkcih. The riling of this ftar was
wont to be diligently oblerved every year ; for thereby they would prognosticate,
whether the year following would be wholefome or contagious, as Heracltdes Port-
ucut faith: for if it did rile dark and gloomy, it was a fign that the Air would be
thick ancTfoggy, which would caufc a peftilence : but if it were dear and lightfome,
it was a fign that the Air would be thin and well purged, and confequentiy health-
ful. In ancient times they much feared this Srar, fo that they ordained a dog to be
effired in Sacrifice to ir, as Columella faith, that this liar is pacified with the blood
and entrails of a fucking whelp; and Ovid like wife faith, that a dog bred on the
sarth, is facrificed toxhe Dog-ttar in Heaven. The Beaft or wilde Goat, which
in fgjpt is called Oryx, hath afenfe or feeling of this Star before it rifeth • for then
he looks upon the Sun-beams, and in them doth honour the Canicular ftar. Hip-
pocrates faith, it is not good either to purge or let blood, before or after this ftar
rifeth . and (jalen (hews that many very neceffary operations of this Star muft be
oblerved in Critical dayes ; and likewife in fowing and planting. Moreover, the
greater ftarsand conftellationsmuft be known,' and at what time they go out of the
iigns, whereby are caufed many waerifh and fiery impreffions in the Air. And
vrhofoever is rightly fcen in ail cheie things, he will afcribe all thefe infericurs to
the ftars as their caufes ; whereas if a man be ignorant hereof, he lofeth the grea-
ter} part of the knowledge of fecret operations and works of nature. Bfe of this
argument, we have fpoken in our writings of the knowledge of Plants.

Chap. fX.-

How to Mr aft ani draw firth the vermes of fnptriour Bodies,

Vfl/"E have (hewed before, the operations of celeftial bodies into thefe inferiours,
asalfothe Antipathy and Sympathy of things: now Will We (hew, by the
affinity of Nature, whereby ail things are linked together as it were rri one com-
mon bond, how to draw forth and to fetch out the vertues and forces of luperior
bodies. The Platonicks termed Magick to be the attra£tion or fetching out of one
thing from another, by a certain affinity of Nature, tot the parts of this huge
world, like the limbs and members of one living creature, do ail depend upon one
Author, and are knit together by the bond of one Nature: therefore as in us,the
brain, the lights, the heart, the liver, and other parts of us do receive and draw
mutual benefit from each other, lb that when one part fuffers, the reft alfo fuffer
with it ; even fo the parts and members of this huge creature the World, I meaft
all the bodies that are in it,do in good neighbour-hood as it were,lend and borrow
each others Nature; for by reafon that they are linked in one common bond, there-
fore they have love in common ; and by force of this common love, there is amongft
them a common attraction, or tilling of one of them to the other. And this in-
deed is Magick. The concavity or hollowneffe of the Sphere of the Moon, draws
up fire to it, bectufe of ihe affinity of their Natures; and the Sphert of the fire

likewife

i^. Natural Magick. hool^i.

likewife draws up Air ; and the centre of the worlddraws the earth downward,
and the natural place of the waters draws the waiers to it. Hence it is that the
Load-ftone draws iron to it, Amber draws chaff or light ftraws, Brimftone draws
fire, the '•un dnws after ir entry fl>w rs and leaves, and the Moon draws after ic
the waters. ?lotimuin&Sy*ep.tn fay , Great is nature everywhere; me layetb.
certain baits whereby to ta:cn certain things in all places : as fhe draws down hea-
vy things by the cenrre of the eanb, as by a bait ; 16 (he draws light things upward
by the conca\ity of the Moon ; by heat, leaves ; by moilture, roots ; by ore bait or
another, all things. By which kind of auraifion, the Indian Wilards hold that
the waole world is kr>ic and bcao1 within it ieif : for ' fay they) the World is a li-
ving creature , ever) wnere both male and female, and the parts of it do couple to-
gether, within and between themlelves, by reaion of their mutual love; and fo
they hold and 'land together, every mem ier of it beins linked to each o; her by a
common bond ; which the pint of the Worlc, whereof we fpake before, hah incli-
ned them unto. For thiscauft Orpheus calluh Jupiter, and the Nature cf the
World, mm and wife; becaufe the World is fodelirous to marry and couple het
parts together. The very or del of the Signs declareth, that the World is every-
where male and female • tor the former is the male , the latter is the female: fo
alfo Trees and H rbs have both fexes, as wetl as living treatures: fo the fire is to
the Air, and the water to the Earth, as a male to the femaie : fo that it is no mar-
vel that the parts of the World defire fo much to be matcht together. The Pla-
nets are t artly ma^ar-d partly female; zndMercurjis of both fexes itfeif, Thcfe
things the Husbar d man perceiving, prepares his field and his feed, for heavenly
influences to w< rk upon ; the Phjfirim likewife obferves the fame, anc works ac-
cordingly 9 for the preservation both of our bodies, and of univerfal Nature. So
the Pbilofopher who is skilful invhe Srars(for fuch is properly a Magkian)works by
certain baits, as it were, fitly matching earthly and heavenly things together, and
platting them as skilfully ore within anothei, asacunning Husband-man planteth
anoidcr fff intoa ycu g (lock: nay, he iayeth earthly things under heavenly
things , and bferiouts fo fitly for their fuperiours everywhere to work upon, as if
a nun mould lay iron before the Losct ftone to be drawn to it , or Chriifal before j
the Sun to be enlighten* d by it , or an Egge under a Hen to hatch it. Furthermore, as
fome can focheri hegges$tbat even without the help of living creatures, they will
make them live • yea and oftentimes they will prepare fuch matter, fo cunningly,
that even wuhout egges,or any apparent feeds, they will brine forth living creatures,
(as they will bring fc nu Bees, of an Ox ; and a Scorpion, of Bafil .) working toge-
ther by the help. >f universal Nature upon he vantage of fit matter, and a feaicn-
able or convenient r;,me: even fo the M.gician, whenonce beknow? which and
what kinds of makers Nature hath parti) framed, and partly Art hath perfected,
and gathered together, fuch as are fit to receive influence from above t thefe matters
efpedally doth he prepare and compound tosether,at luch a time as fuch an influence
raignethjand by this means c'oih gain tohimielf the vermes and forces of heaven-
ly bodies : for wherefoever there is any matter fo directly Lid before luperiour bo-
die?,is a looking-glaffe before ones fate,or as a wall right before ones voice ;fo doth
it prefently fuffer the work of the Superiours,the moft mighty Agent,and ihe admi-
rable life and power of all things mewing it felf therein. P.Utims in his Book of
Sacrifice and Magick, faith, That the Philolophers confideting this affinity and bond
of Nature, w" erewith all natural things are linked each to other, did thence frame
the Art of Ma°ick,and acknowledged both that the fupenours might be feen in
these inferiours, and thefe inferiours in their fuperiours ; earthly things in heavenly,
though not properly, bur in their caufes, and after a heavenly fc£t ; likewife heaven-
ly things in earthly, but yet after an earthly fort. For whence mould we fuppofe it
to be, that the plants called Sun.followers, mould ft ill follow the vuns motion ? and
likewife the Moon-followers, the Moons motion ? Wherefore furely even in esrth
we may behold both the Sun and the Moon ; but yet by rea!cn cf their quality up-
on earth; audio in heaven we may behold all plants,ard ftones.and living creatures,
but yet asfollowing the heavenly natures : which things the Aniieuts perceiving,

did

did apply and lay fome earthly things to fome heavenly , and thence brought down
the celeftial forces into thefe inferiours, byreafonof their likenefs one with
the ether; for the very likenefle of one thing to another, is afufficient bond to
link them together. If a man do heat a piece of paper, and then lay it a little under
the flame of "a candle, though they do not touch each other, yet he (hall fee the pa-
per prefently burn, and the flame will flill defcend till it have burned all the paper.
Let us now fuppofe the paper thus heated, to be that affinity which is betwixt fu-
pcriours and inferious; and fuppoie we alfo, that this laying of the paper to the
candle, to be the fit applying of things together, both for matter, and time, and
place: let us fuppofe yet farther, the flame taking hold of the paper, to be the o-
peration of fome heavenly body into a capable matter; and laft of all, we may lup-
poie the burning of the paper, to be the altering of that matter into the nature
of the celeftial body that works upon ir,and fo purifies it,that in the end it flieth up-
ward like burning flax, by reafon of fome heavenly feeds and fparks which it hath
within it felf.

Chap. X.

How the knowledge of fccrecies dependeth upon the furvey and viewing ef the wholt
Wtrld,

\X7E are perfwaded that the knowledge of fecret things depends upon thecon-
" templation and view of the face of the whole world, namely, of the motion,
ftate and fafhion thereof, as alfo of the fpringing up, the growing and the decaying
of things: for a diligent fearcher of Natures workes, as he teeth how Nature doth
generate and corrupt all things, fo doth he alfo learn to do. Likewife he learns of
living creatures; which though they have no underftanding, yet their fenfes are far
quicker then ours ; and by their anions they teach us Phyhck, Husbandry > the arc
of Building, the difpofing of Houfhold affairs, and almoft all Arts and Sciences i the
like may beoblerved in Metals, Gems, and Stones. The bealts that have no rea-
fon , do by their nature ftrangely faun the eyes of witches, and hurtful things : the
Doves, for a prefervative agiinfl inchantments, fcft gather fome little Bay-tree
boughs, and then lay them upon their nefts, to prelerve their young; fo do the
Kites ule white brambles, the Turtles fword-graffe, the Crows^ Withy, the Lap-
wing, Venus-hair, the Ravens Ivy , the Herns Carrot, the Partridges Reed-leaves,
the Black-birds Myrtle, the Larkes graffe, the Swans Park-leaves, theEa«le ufeth
Maiden-hair, or the ftone jEtites for the fame purpofe. In like mannner they have
fhewed us preservatives againft poyfons : the Elephant having by chance eaten a
Chamseleon, againft the poyfon thereof, eats of the wilde Olive ; whence Solinm ob-
ferves, That the fame is a good remedy for men alfo in the fame cafe. The Panthers,
having fwallowed up the poifonous herb Aconirum, wherewith the Hunters be-
fmear pieces of flefh fo to deftroy them, againft the poyfon thereof feek out mans
dung. The Tortoife, having eaten a ferpent,difpels the poyfon by eating the herb
Origan. When Bears have tafted the fruit of the Mandrakes, they eat Pifmiresa-
gainft the poyfon thereof. There is a kind of Spider which deftroyeth the Harts',
except prefently they eat wilde Ivy; and whenloever they light upon anypoyfo-
nousfood, they cure themfelves with the Artichoke; and againft Serpents they pre-
pare and arm themfelves with wilde Pajfneps ; fo do the Ring-doves Choughs,and
Black-birds ufe Bay-leaves. The little worm Cimex is good againft the biting of
Afpes ; as Pliny fhews by Hens, who, if hey eat that worm, are all day after , free
from the hurt of Afpes. Goats care not for Bafil-genrle, becaufe it bring* a Lethar-
gy, as Chryfipptu writes. The fame Beafts have alfo fhewed us what herbs are
good to cure wounds. When the Harts are wounded by theCretians, they feek out
the herb Dittany, and prefently the darts fall cue of their bodies. And fo do the
Goats. The Elephant being wounded, feeks out the juice of Aloes, and thereby is
cured. The fame Beafts have alfo found out purgations for themfelves, and thereby
taught us the fame. An Afle eats the herb Afplenum to purge his melancholy • of

whom

l6 Natural Magice. 2>00^i.

whom the Phyfitians have learned to Minifter the fame herb for the fame purpofe.
The Hinde purges her felf with large Cummin, before fhe bringeth forth, that
her birth may come the more eafily from her. Arifiotle faith, That Boars feed upon
the herb Aram, or Wakej-robin, to keepihem foluble Pigeons and Cocks feed
upon Pellitory, for the fharpening cf their ftomack. Dogs eat graffe to purge all
their noifome humours, which otherwife would make them mad. Of all thefe,
men have learned to ufe fuch Medicines againft the like difeafer. A Lion being
fickof a quartane Ague, eats and devours Apes, and fo is healed : hence we know
that Apes blood is good againft an Ague. The griping of the belly and guts, is
healed by looking upon Geefe and Ducks, and Vegetim writes ; and Columella faith j
that if a Duck do but look upon a fick horfe, fhe heals him : and Pliny faith, that if
you lay a Duck to the griping of ones belly, (he takes away thediieafe, and dies of
itherfelf; and LMarcellui writes, That it is good for one that is fo troubled, to
eat the flefh of a Duck. Goats and Does are never purblind,becaufe they eat certain
herbs. Hawks, as foon as they feel their fight dim,they eat Sc w-thiftle. Elephants,
againft the difeafes of their eyes, drink milk. Serpents have caufed Fennel to be
very famous; for as foon as they taftcof it, they become young again, and with
the juice thereof repair their fight ; whence it is obferved, that the fame is good to
repair a mans fight that is dim. Hares feed upon herbs that have juice like milk, and
therfore in their bellies they have a cream; whence Shepherds have learned to make
cream of many fuch herbs preffed together. Partridges eat leeks, to make their voi-
ces clear, as Arifiotle writes ; and according to their example, Neroy to keep his
voice clear, eat nothing butoyle of leeks, certain daves in every moneth. Thefe
Beafts have likewife found out many inflruments in Phyfick. The Goats, when their
eyes are blood-fhotten, let out the blood ; the She-goat by the point of a bull-rufh,
the He-goat by the pricking of a thorn, which lets out the evil humour, and yet ne-
ver hurts the eye, but reftores him his perfc& fight : hence, men learned by fuch
means to cure the eyes. The ^Egyptians fay, they never learned of men to minifter
clyfters, but of the bird Ibis, which ufeth it to her fclf for the loofneffe of her bo-
dy. And of the fame bird alfo they learned their diet, to eat largely at the waxing,
and fparingly at the waining of the Moon. Bears eyes are oft-times dimmed; and
for that cauie they defire hony-combs above all things, that the Bees flinging their
mouths , may thereby draw forth, together with the blood, that dull and groffe
humour : whence Phyfitians learned to ufe letting blood, to cure the dimnefle of
the eyes. The Gullie-gut, when he is full of meat, he pitcheth himfelf betwixt tw6
trees, fo to force out excrements.

Chap. XT.

That the likenefs of things (heweth their fecret vertues,
. . • . i ' ■ ■"• '

^^Ho fo looks into the writings of the Ancients, namely, Hermes firpheusy Zero-
afiresy Harpocration^ and other fuch like skilful men as have invented ard regi-
ftred the fecrecies of this Art, fhall find that they gathered all from that likentffc of
feeds, fruits, flowers , leaves and roots, as alfo of theflars, metals, gems,»and
ftoncsjthat likenefle,I fay,which thefe things have to the difeafes and parts of a mans
body, as alfo of other living creatures : and out of thofe Writers, afterward Hip-
pocrates > ViofcoridesyPlinyy and the reft, called out as many fuch fecrecies as they
found to be true, and recorded them in their own books;except fome certain thing?,
which they thought were no fecries , but either of folloy or of envy, accounted them
to be ordinary and plain matters. I will relate two or three examples of thofe
former fecrecies. Tbeophrafttti (puking of thofe herbs that refemble the Scorpion
and the Polypus, faith, That fome herbs have a peculiar kind of form, as the root of
the herb Scorpius, called by fome Walwort, and the root of Polypody : for that it
is like a Scropion, and is good againft the fling of him ; and this is rough, and full of
hollow partitions like the Polypus, and is of force to kill him. And in another-place
be faith, That many things ate written of the force of plants, not without juft caufe;

Of the Qaufes of Wonderful things. 17

at for exJmp!e,to make fruitful and barren ; both which, the herb Ragge-wort is
forcible unto for they grow double, a greater and a Imaller ; the greater helps ge-
neration, the frmller hinders ir. And this herb is called Tcfiicuhu. Some herbs are
good for procreation of a male, and ft me of a female ; as the herb which is called
Marifica,and Fceminipara ; both are like each other : the fruir of the Foeminipara is
like the mofs of an Olive-treejthe fruit of the Maripara is double like a mans ftones.
The fruit of whirelvy will make feed barreo,buc the fruit of Arfemery will make ic
fertile; which fruit is a fmall grain, like to Millet. The leaves of the herb Harts-
tougue will make a man quite barren,if the herb it felf be barren j for there is Harts-
tongue thac bears fruit, and this will make a man fruitful. It is a thing to be noted
in a Bur, that a flower grows within the roughncfle and prickles of it , which doth
not fhew ic felf, but conceives and brings forth feed within it felf ; much like as
Weafils and Vipers do: for they bring forth egges within themfelves, and Icon
after briog forth young ones; fo theBur contains, and cherifhes, and ripens the
flower within ic felf, and afterward yeelds fruir. But thei'e things have both the
active and paffive parts of generation. Dicfcorides writetb, That the herb Scorr ius
refembleth the tail of the Scorpion, and is good againfl his bicings. So he faith, thac
the herb Dtajon, both the greater and the lefs , is full of fpeckles like a Serpents
hackle, and is a remedy againd their hurts: fo the herb Arifaron in Egypr, and
Wake.robin, and Garlick, bear feeds like a Snakes head; and fo Bugiois and Or-
chanec bear feeds like a Vipers head . and thefe are good ro heal their venemous
bitings. Likewife Stone-crop and Saxifrage arc good to break the flone in a mans
bladder: and many other fuch things he there fets down. Galen faith, That the
Lark hath a crefled crown, of the fafhion of the herb Fumitory, and that either of
them is good againft the Cholick. Pliny hath gathered into his books, many things
cut of the Antients works that were extant in his time. We will relate fome of'
them. He faith, That an herb whidh grows in the head of an Image, being wrapt in
a cloth, is good for the Head-ach. Many men have written of Holy- wort : it hath
a flie-beetle in the ftalk, that runs up and down in it, making a noife like a Kid,
(whence it receives the name) ; and this herb is patting good for the voice. Or-
pheus found out by his wit, the properties of Stones. The flone GalacTites, in co-
lour like: milk, if you caft the duft of it upon the back of a Goat, fibe will give milk
m *re plentifully to her young ; if you give it a nurfein her drink , it encreafes her
milk. C hriflal is like unto water; if one fick of an Ague keep ir, and roul it in his
mouth, it quenches his thirft. The Amethift is in colour like wine,and it keeps from
drunkennefs. In the flone Achates you may fee fruits, trees, fields and medows*
the powder of it caff about the horns or fhouldersof Oxen as they are at plou°h
will caufe great encreafe of fruits. The ftone Ophites refembleth the freckles and
fpots of Serpents, and it cures their bitings. If you dafh the ftone Galcophonos, ic
founds like brafs : flage-players are wont to wear it, becaufe it makes one have an
excellent voice. The flone Hematites being rubbed, is like blood, and is good for
thofethat bleed, and for blood-fhot eyes: and the fioce Sinoper is of the fame both
colour and vertue. The refidue I will not here fet down, becaufe I have
handled them more at large, in that which I have written of the knowledge
or* Plants. °

Chap. XIT.
How to compound and lay things together, by this hkenefs.

»ryE have fhewed how that Nature layes open the likencfle of vertiies and
* ▼ properties; now let us fhew how to compound and lay thofe things to-
gether : for this is a principle of mod ufe in this faculty, and the very root
of the greateft pare of fecrec and flrange operations. Wherefore here thou
muft imitate the exact diligence of the Antients, fludying to know how to

F apply

18 Natural Magick. Hookj.

apply and by things together with their likes , which indeed is the chief matter
wherein the moLt fccrecies do confi'i. It is manifeft that every kind of things, and
every quality can incline and draw, and allure fome things to it, and make them
become like it felf: and as they are more a£tive, lb they more eafi!y can perform
it: as for example, fire being very a£tive, doth moreeahly convert things into it
felf, andfo water into water. Avicenna laith, That if any thingfiand long in fait,
it will become wholly i'alt ; if in an unfavory veffel, k will become unfavory: he
thatconverfes with a bold man, Hull heboid; if with a fearful man, he fhall be
fearful: and look what living creature converfes among men, the lame will be
tame and gentle. Such pofitions are ufual in Phyfick ; as, All parts of the body, are
nourifhed by their like, the brain by brains, teeth by teeth, lights by lights, and
the liver by the liver. A mans memory and wk is holpen by a Hens brain ; and her
skull, if it be put into our meat whilft it is new, helps the falling-faknefle ; and her
maw, if you eat it before fupper, though you hardly digeft it, yet is it good to
ftrengthen the ftomack. The heart of an Ape, takes away the palpitation cf a mans
heart, and encreafeth boldnefle, which is feated in the heart. A wolfs yard broiled
and minced, is good to eat for the procuring of luft, when ftrength begins to fail.
The skin of a Ravens heel is good againft the Gout ; the right-heel-skin muft,
be laid upon the right-foot, if that be gouty ; and the left upon the left : and final-
ly, every member helps his like. But thefc things, Phyfitians wrire of, whofe fay-
ings it is not our purpofe here to rehearfe. Furthermore, we muft cociider and be
well adviled, what things fucb or fuch a quality is in ; and whether it be there onely
after a common lore, or elfe in fome great meafure ; and whether it be an affection,
or perturbationjand whether it come by chance,by art, or by nature j ay for example,
heating , cooling, love, boldneffe, barrennelTe, fruufulnefle , ladnefle, babling, or
luch like ; and whether it can caufe any fuch matter as we would work thereby : for
examples fake : If you would make a woman fruiful, you muft confiderwith your
felf the moft fertile living- creatures ; and amongft the reft, an Hare, a Cony, or a
Moufe ; for an Hare is bigge even after fhe hath brought forth ; ftie genders every
month, and brings not forth all her young at once, but now and then one upon fun-
dry daies, and prefently goeth to buck again ; and fo conceives while (he gives fnck>
and carries in her womb at once, one young that is ripe, another that hath no hairs,
and a third that is but lately conceived. Again, you muft confider the parts and
members where that property lyeth, andminifter them to your Patient : as, to
make a woman fruitful, you muft give her the womb and curd of an Hare; and to
the man, the ftones of an Hare. In like manner, any particular creature that was
never fick, is a helpagainft all diicafes. If you would have a man become bold
or impudent, let him carry about him the skin or eyes of a Lion or a Cock, and
he will be fearlefle of his enemies ; nay, he will be very terrible unto them. If you
would have a man talkative, give him tongues, and feek out for him water-frogs,
wilde-geefe and ducks,and other fuch creatures, notorious for their continual noife-
making ; the tongues whereof, if you lay under the head or fide of a woman as (he
is deeping, becaufe they are moft clamorous in the evening, they will make her ut-
ter her night-fecrecies. Other things we omit, as being fuperfluous and unprofitable
here, feeing we have largely handled them in our books of plants.

Chap. XIII.

That particular creatures have particular gifts j fome in their whole bodj/y others have
them in their parts.

P Articular creatures are not deftitute of excellent and firange properties, but
are very powerful in operation , more then ordinarily their kind yields :
and this is by reafon either of fome hidden property , or rather of the hea-
venly afpedtsand influences working diverfly in divers particulars, as Alhertta
fuppofeth, and in one particular more then in moft other cf the fame kind.
Thefe fundry effects and inclinations cf fuch particulars , a Magkian muft

Of the Qaufes of Wonderful things. ij>

alfo be well acquainted with j that knowing fundry ways whereby to work,he may
make choice of the fitted, and fuch as may bcft ferve his prefent ufe and need ; for
this is our task, to teach the way and method of fearching out, and applying of fe-
crecies ; which done, no further thing can be required of us. Therefore to our pur-
pofe. Albertvu faith, That there were once two twins, one of them would open
doors and gates if he did but touch them with his fide ; and the other would fnut
them as fait when they were open. Some cannot away to look upon a Cat, a Moufe,
and fuch like, but prefently they fwoon. So, many have the gift from heaven to heal
the Kings-evil, and divers other fores : and that which hath troubled much, many
Surgeons, and they could not heal it, hath at length been healed only with fpittle.
Again, we muff well confider, what kinds of qualities are incident to what kinds of
parties j as, commonly queans are impudent, ruffians are luxurious, theeves are fear-
ful ; and fuch like paffions, as Writers everywhere mention. Moreover, fome natural
things have not only fuch properties in tbemfelves, but they are apt alio to commu-
nicate them unto others. A Harlot is not only impudent in her felf, but fhe alfo
naturally infe&s therewith, all that fhe touches and carries about her ; fo that if a
man do often behold himfelf in her glaffe, or put on her garments, it will Make him
impudent and lecherous as fhe is. The Load-ftone doth not only draw to it felf
that iron which it touches, but alfo all iron things neer it ;thc fame ring which the
Load-ftone draws to it felf , will draw many rings if they be neer, fo that it will
be like a chain ; the vertuc of the Load-ftone paffing out of one ring into another.
And the like may be obferved in other things. We muft note alfo, that the vertues
of fome things arc feated in their whole fubftance ; of other things, in fome of their
part*. The Sea-Lamprey ftayeth a Ship, not principally with any one part , but
with her whole body. And there be many like examples. On the other fide, ma-
ny things work by fome of their parts; as the Cockatrice and the Bafilisk, by their
eyes ; likewife Pifmires fhun the wings of a Rere-moufe, but her head and heart they
do not fhun ■ fo they fhun the heart of an Houpe, but neither the head, nor yet the
wings. The like may be obferved in other things.

Chap. XIV.

Of thofe properties and vertues which things have whtle they live j and of fnch as remain
in things, after death,

muft confider that almoft all thofe vertues which are found to be excellent
in things while they are alive, do quite perifh in death, and feldom are of
any force afterward. If the wolf efpy us , his eyes make us dumb • the eyes or*
the Cockatrice and Bafilisk will kill us forth-right; the Sea-lamprey ftaies the courfe
of a Ship ; the Struthio-camelus can digeft iron : but none of all the thefe being
dead,worketh ought;for when they perifh,their vertues alfo perifh with them. Ther-
fore it is a wife rule in natural Migick, that if a man will work any thing by living
creatures, or by any of their parts or properties , he muft take the benefit of them
while they be alive ; for if they die, their venue dies alfo. For the foul, faith AI-,
bertus^s a chief help, and flrikes a great ftroke in thofe qualities which arc in living
creatures;fo that they being alive, are endued with many operative vertues , which
their death, (efpecially if it be natural, that their humours are quite wafted) takes
from them,as Phyfitians do much obferve. Draw out a frogs tongue,take away from
the Ray or Fork-fifh his dart,thc eyes or ftones out of any creatures head,or any fuch
operative thing,not after they are dead,but while they are yet alive,and throw them
into the water again, that if it be poflible they may live ftill,left their vertue ftiould
decay , but rather that by their living "they might quicken thofe their natural
properties, and fo you may work better thereby. And thus we muft do in all
things elfe, which I fpare to fpeak of any further. Sometimes yet the proper-
tics of thing i arc operative, yea, and that more forcibly, after death. The

F % wolfe

zo Natural Magick , Soo^ i.

Wolf is hurtful and odious to (beep after he is dead : for if you cover a drum with
a wolfs skin, the found of it will make fheep afraid, when moli other creatures will
not be afraid ; nay, (beep will make a heavy noife , whereas it contrariwiie caufeth
fuchciamorous creatures as hear it, to hold their peace : lb if you cover it with a
bears skin, the found thereof will make horlesrun away: and if you make harp-
firings of all their guts feverally, and put them together upon the inftiumenr, they
willalwayes jar , and never make any conforr. The beaft Hyxna , and the Panther,
are naturally at variance ; hence the skin of a dead Hysena makes the Panther run a-
way ; nay, if you hang their feverall skins one againft the other, the Panthers skin
will lofe the hairs.So a Lions skin wafteth and eateth out the skins of other beafts ;
and fo doth the wolfes skin eat up the Lambs skin. Likewile, the feathers of other
fowles, being put among Eagles leathers, do rot and conlumc of themfelves. The
beaftFlorus, (it may be the Afs) and the bird vEgithus are at fuch mortal enmity,
that when they are dead, their blood cannot be mingled together.The Pigeon loves
theKaftrel fo well, that (he loves the Dove-houfe much the better, where a dead
Kaftrel is. In like manner, herbs, and other fimples, retain many operative qualities,
even after they are dried up. Thefe things malt be well confidered by a Maguian,
kit peradventure he be deceived in their working,

Chap.XV.

That all Simples are to begotten and ttfed in their certain Jeafons.

SEeing all inferiours, efpedally plants, receive their vertue from the heavens,
therefore we muft have a fpecial care to take them in their due leafons : for as
heaven varies the constitutions of the year, fo doth it vary plants, they being much
nourilhed by the temperature of the Air ; and the time of the year, as Theophrajltu
faith,is all in all from thcm.Whence that proverb was juftly fetcht,That it is the year,
and not the field, which brings forth fruit. Which may be underftood two wayes ;
either as the vulgar fort mean, cr after a more peculiar manner. Concerning the
vulgar undemanding thereof' \Diofcor ides Qiews,that we muft have a fpecial care both
to plant, and to gather ail things in their right leafons ; for they are operative onely,
as their feafon is obferved, but otherwife of no force. The time of gathering, muft
be a calm and fair time. If we gather them either too foon or too late, they loofe
their beft vertue. Roots muft be plucked up in the fall of the leaf, for then they are
fulleft, both of moifture and vertue ; their force hiding it felf within them when
their leaves fall, which lafts long in them, being at that feafon gathered. Flowers
muft be gathered in the Spring, becaufe then they have moft vertue : and
Leaves muft be gathered in the Summer. The like we muft oblerve in other things.
Know allo,that fome things lofe their vertua quickly, others keep it along time, as
experience and the rules of Phytick teach us ; that fome things may be kept many
years, others being long kept, are good for nothing. Whence it cometb, that many
experiments prove falfe, becaufe that which we work by, happily hath loft hisver-
tue,beingkept too long. But there are certain peculiar times to gather them in
(which the vulgar fort obferveth not) wherein the heavenly conftellations beftow
tiponthem fome lingular venue , proceeding from the moft excellent nature and
quality of the ftars : in which times if they be gathered, they are exceedingly ope-
rati ve.But there can be no fet and juft time afhgned,by reafon of the divers fituations
of divers places in refpe&of the Sun ; for as the Sun-beams come neerer or further
off, fo the earth fructifies fooner or later : yet we will give fome general obfervations.
Roots are t6 be gathered betwixt the old Moon and the new ; for then the moi-
fture is fallen into the lower pans , and that in the Evening ; for then the Sun hath
driven in the moifture , and by theftalkic is conveyed down into the root. The
time ferves well to gather them,when their wrinkles be filled out with moifture,and
they chap becaufe they have fo much juice, as if they were about to break in pieces.
Leaves are then to be gathered, as foori as they have opened themf^lves out of the
fprigs ; and that in the morning about Sun-rifing ; for then they are raoifter then in

Of the Qaujes of Wonderful things. %\

the evening, the Suns beat having drunk up their moifiure all day long. Flowers are
then to be gathered, when they begin to feed, while their juice is in them, and be-
fore they wax limber. Stalks are then to be gathered, when the flower is withered j
for then efpecially are they profitable. And feeds muft be then gathered, when they
are fo ripe that they are ready to fall. There are fome more peculiar obfervations.
Hot and (lender herbs ftiould be gathered when Mars and the Sun are Lords of the
celeftial houfes moift herbs, when the Moon is Lord $ but you muft take heed that
you gather them not in the falling houfes thereof. Thefe things well obferved in ga-
thering plants, will make them very profitable for Phyfical ufes.

Chap. XVI.

That the Countries and places where Simples grow, are chiefly to be conjidered,

M Any are deceived in plants, and metals, and fuchlike, becaufe they ufe them
that come next hand, never heeding the fituation of the place where they
grow. But be that will work foundly , mutt well confider, both theafpeft of the
heavens, and the proper nature and fituaiion of the place j for the place works di-
v erfly in the plants, according to his own divers temperatures ; and fometimes cau-
feth luch an alteration in the venues of them, that many, not onely young Ma-
gicians, but good Phyfitians and Philofophers too, have been deceived in fearching
them out. Tlato makes mention hereof : God (faith he) hath furnithed the places of
the earth with divers vertues,that they might have divers operations into plants and
other things according to their kind. And lb Porphyry faith, that the place is a prin-
ciple of a generation, as a father is. Theophraftus would have Hemlock gathered and
fctch'd from Sufa, becaufe Thrapai was of opinion, that there it might fafely be ta-
ken, and in other very cold places : for whereas in Athens the juice of it is poifon,
odious amongft the Athenians, becaufe it is given to kill men in common executi-
ons ; and Socrates there taking it, died prefently ; yet here it is taken without dan-
ger, and beafts feed upon it. The herb called Bears-foot, that which grows on the
Hill Oeta and Parnaflus, is very excellent ; but elfewhere, of fmall force: there-
fore Hippocrates , when he would cure Democntm, hecaufed it to be fetch'd from
the Hills. And in Achaia , efpecially about Cabynia, there is a kind of Vine, as
Theophrafius faith, the wine whereof caufeth untimely births ; and if the dogs eat
the grapes, they will bring forth abortives: and yet in thetafie, neither the wine,
nor the grape, differ from other wines and grapes. He faith alfo, that thofe Phyfi-
call drugs which grow in Eubcea, neer unto j£ge, are good ; but neer to Telethri-
um, which is a fhadowed and waterifh place, they are much worfe and drier. In
Perfia there grows a deadly tree, whofe apples are poifon, and prefent death ^here-
fore there it is ufed for a punilhment: but being brought over to the Kings intoE-
gypt, they become wholefome apples to eat, and lofe their harmfulnefle , as Columel-
la writes. Diofcorides faith, That the drugs which grow in fteep places, cold and
dry, and open to the winde, aremoft forcible; but they that grow in dark, and
warerifh, and calm places, are leffe operative. Wherefore if we find any difference
in fuch things, by reafon of the places where they grow, that they have not their
right force, we muft feek them out there where the place gives them their due
vertue.

Chap. XVII.

Certain properties of Places and Fountains, which are commodious for this work*

Difference of places, works much in the different effe&s of things. For the
place of the waters, and alfo of the earth, hath many miraculous vertucs,which
a Magician muft needs be well acquainted with : for oft-times we fee, that fotne
things are ftrangely operative, onely by reafon of the (ituation of the place, the dif-
pofit ion of the Air, and the force of the Sun, as it cometh nearer or further off. If

one

1% Natural Magick, cBool^i.

one ground did not differ from another, then we fhould have odoriferous reeds,
rufhes, graffe,frankincenfe, peper, and myrrh, not only in Syria and Arabia, but
in all other Countries alfo. Likewife many properties are derived out of Waters
and Fountains ; which otherwife could not be made, but that the waterifh humor
in the earth, conveys his fcent and fuch like properties, into the root of that which
there groweth, and fo nourifheth up that matter which fprings out , and caufeth
fuch fruit as favours of the place, according to his own kind, Zama is a City in A-
frica, and Ifmuc is a Town twenty miles from it : and whereas all Africk befides, is
a great breeder of beafts, efpecially of ferpents, about that Town there breed
none at all ; nay, if any be brought thither, it dies : and the earth of that place al-
fo killeth beafts,whitherfoever it is carried. In the great Tarquine Lake of Italy,
are feen Tree?, fome round, fome triangle, as the wind moves them; but none
four-fquare. In the Country beyond the River Po , that part which is called Mon-
fteraxj there is a kind of Corn called Siiigo, which being thrice fown, makesgood
bread-corn Neer to Harpafum a Town of Afia, there is a huge Rock, which if you
touch with one finger, will move j if with your whole body, it will not move.
There are fome places of the earth that are full of great fires, as j£tna in Sicily, the
Hill Chimera inphafelis • the fire whereof Ctejias writes,will be kindled with wa-
ter, and quencht with eartb. And in the Country of Megalopolis, and the fields
about Arcia, a coal falling on the earth, fets it on fire. So in Lycia, the Hills Ephe-
fli being touched with a Torch, flame out, infomuch that the ftones and fands there
do burn in the waters ; wherein if a man make a gutter with a ftaff, he fhall fee Ri-
vers of fire run therein. The like things are reported of water?. For feeing they
pafTe under the earth, through veins of allum , pitch , brimftone, and fuch like ;
hence it is that they are iometimes hurtful, and fometimes wholfcme for the body.
There are alfo many kinds of water, and they have divers properties. The River
Himera in Sicily, is divided into two parts : that which runs againft jEtna, is very
fvveer, that which runneth through the fait vein,is very fait. In Cappadocia, betwixt
the Cities Mazaca,,and Tuava, there is a Lake, whereinto if you put reeds or timber,
they become ftones by little and little, and are not changed from ftones again, nei-
ther can anything in that water be ever changed. In Hierapolis, beyond the River
Maeander, there is a water that becomes gravel, fo that they which make vvater-
courfes, raife up whole banks thereof. The Rivers Cephifes and Melas in Bxotia,
if cartel drink of them, as they do continually to make them conceive, though the
dams be white, yet their young {hall be ruffet, or dun, or coal-black. So the fheep
that drink of the River Peneus in Theffaly, and Aftax in Pontu?, are thereby made
black. Some kinds of waters alfo are deadly, which from the poifonou; juice of
the earth become poifonousj as the Well of Terracina called Neptunius, which kills
as many as drink of it ; and therefore in old times it was ftopt up. And the Lake
Cychros in Thracia, kills all that drink of it,and all that wa(h themfelves with ir. In
Nonacris, a Country of Arcady , there flow very cold waters out of a ftone, which
are called the water of Styx, which break to pieces all veffels of filver and braffe ;
>and nothing can hold them but a Mules hoof, wherein it was brought from Antipa-
ter^ into the Country where Alexander was, and there his Son JoUa killed the King
with it. In the Country. about Flafcon,thc way to Campania, in the field Cor netum,
there is a Lake with a Well in it, wherein feem to lie the bones of Snakes,- Lyfard?,
and other Serpents ; but when you would take them out, there Uno fuch thing. So
there are fome fharp and fowre veins of warer, as Lyncefto, and Theano ip Italy ;
which I fought out very diligently, and found it by the way to Rome, a mile from
Theano • and it is exceeding good againft the Stone. There is a Well in Paphlago-
nia, whofoever drinks of it, is prefently drunken. In Chios is a Well, that makes
all that drink of it, fottifh and ienfleffe. In Sufa is a Well, whofo drinks of ic, lo-
feth his .teeth. The water of Nilus is fo fertile, that it makes the clods of ear t£ to
become living creatures^In iEthiopia is a Well,which is fo cold at noon,that you can-
not clunk it ; and fo hot at midnight, that you cannot touch it. There are many other
like Wells, which Ovid fpeaks of : Jmmons Well is cold all day, and warm , both
morning and evening : ifre waters of Athamas,fet wood on fire, at the fmafl'oFihe

Moon :

Of the Caufes of Wonderful things. 2$

Moon : there is a Well where the Citones inhabit, thatturneth into flones all that
toucheth it, or drinks of it ; Crathis and Sybarismake hair fhew like Amber and
Goid ; the water of Salmax, and the iEthiopian Lakes , make them mad or in a
trance that drink of it ; he that di inks of the Well Clitorius, never cares for wine
after; the River Lyncellius makes men drunken ; the Lake Pheneus in A ready, is
hurtful if you drink it by night ; if by day, it is wholefome. Other properties there
are alio of places and fountains, which he that would know, may learn out o\Theo-
yhraftuiiTtn.&M, PojJidontHS) HegefiiS) Herodotus, Ariftides, ^Meirodorus , and the
jike, who have very diligently iought out, and regiftred the propertiesof places;
ard out of them , flinfa SoUnm , and fuch Writers have gathered their books.

Chap. XVIII.

That Compounds work_more forcibly ■ and how to compound and mix thofe Simples which
we would ufe in our mixtures .

NO-v we will fhew how to mix and compound many Simples together, that the
mixture may caufe them to be more operative. Procltu in his book of Sacri-
fice and Magick, faith, That the antient In ierts were wont to mix many things toge-
ther, becaufe they faw that divers Simples had fome property of a God in them, but
none of chem by it felf futficient to reiemble him. Wherfore they did attraffc the hea-
venly influences by compounding many things into one, whereby it might refcrnble
that One which is above many. They made images of fundry matters, and many o-
dors compounded artificially into one, fo to exprefle the effence of a God, who
bath in himfelf very many powers. This I thought good to alleadge, thatwernay
know the Ancients were wont to ufe mixtures, that a compound might be the more
operative. And I mv felf have often compounded a prelervative again!* poifon, of
Dragon-herbs, the Dragon-fifh, Vipers, and the ftone Ophites ; being led therein
by the likeneffe of things. The herb Dragon-wort, both the greater and fmaller,
have a ftalk full of fundry- coloured fpecksrif any man eat their root,or rub his hands
with their leaves, the Viper cannot hurt him. The Dragon-fiih being cut and open-
ed, and laid to the place which he hath flung , is a prefent remedy againft his fling,
as tAZttui writes. The Viper it felf, if you flay her, and ftrip off her skin, cut off her
head and tail, call away all her intrails,boil her like an Eele, and give her to one that
fhehath bitten, to eat, it will cure him : or if youcut off her bead being alive,
and lay the part next the neck, while it is hot, upon the place which The hath bitten,
it will (irangely draw outthepoyfon. Many men compound medicines made of crea-
tures living on the cmh, in the water, in the air, together with herbs and ftones,
you may find moll wittily devifed, in the books of Ktrannides and Harprocratio»3uc
now we will fhew the way and manner how to compound Simples, which the Phy-
tic ians alfo do much obferve. Becaufe we would not bring forth one effect only,but
icmetimes have ufe of two or three, therefore we muft ufe mixtures, that they may
cau e fundrv tfFe&s. Sometime things will not work forcibly enough , therefore to
make the a£l ion effectual, we muft take unto us many helps. Again, fometimethey
work too ft rongly, and here we muft have help to abate their force. Oft-times we
would pra&ice upon fome certain member, as the head, the heart, or the bladder;
here we muft mingle fome things which are directly operative upon that part , and
upon none elfe ; whereby it falleth out , that fometimcs we muft meddle contraries
together. Eut to proceed. When you would do any woik, firft confider what is the
chief thing which vourfimple or compound fhould effeS ; then take the ground or
foundation of your mixture, that which gives the name to your compound, and let
there be-To much of it, as may proportionably work your intent ; for there is a juft
and due quantity required for their working: then put in the other ingredients, as
fau:e sni fealoning,to help the ptincipal to work more eafily and in due time. So we
mingle fweet things with unfavory, and with bitter,that it may fmell and tafte well :
for if we fhcu id mingle onely unfavouty and bitter receits, they that we give it un-
to would loath ic, and their animal fpirits would fo abhor it, that though they took

24^ Natural Magick, ^Boof^x.

it, yet it could not work in them. So we meddle fort and hard things together
that they may go down more pleafancly. Sometimes there is Co little ina rcceitahat
the heat of the body waftes it before it can work ; here then is reqeked a greater
quantity: for, this doth not hinder the working , but gives the natural heaticme-
whattofeed upon, that in the mean fpace the receit may have fit time to work! As
forexample: If we would catch birds by bringing them to fleer, here we muft take
theNutMethella, which is of that force, as to caufe fleep and heavincfs of brain •
and let this be the ground of our mixtion : then to make it more lively in work-
ing, put thereto the juice of black Poppie, and the dregs of wine: If ic be too
hard, arsd we would have it more liquid, that fo it may fill out the pulfe oy other
baites.which we lay for them; put thereto the juice of Mandrakes, and Hemlock,
and an Ox gall: and that it may not be bitter or unfavoury, put hony, cheefe or
floure amongft it,that fo it may be fitter to be eaten : and when orce the birds have
tailed of it, they lie down to fleep on the ground, and cannot flie, but may be ta-
ken with hands. The like muft be obferved in other things.

Chap. XIX.
How to find out the jufl weight of a mixture.

WE mull alfo have a fpecial care to know the right mihiftringof a ccmpound,and
how to find out the juft proportion of weight therein ; fcr the goodneis of the
operation of things, confifts chiefly in the due proportion and mealure of them:
And unlefs the mixtion be every way perfect, it availeth little in working. Where-
fore the Antients were wont to obferve not only in compounds,but alio in Simples
due weight andmeafure ; and their experience hath left it unto us. If then thou
beftoweft thy pains in this faculty, firftthou muft find out the weight of afimple
Medicine, how much of it would fervefuch a purpoieas thou intendeft ; and to
that,thoumuft proportionabfy frame thy compound, obferving a due proportion ,
both in the whole and every part thereof. Let tby chief Simple, the ground of thy
mixture, be half the weight, and the other ingredients altogether muft be the other
half; but how much of each of thefe other ingredients , that thou muft gather by
thy own conjecture: So then,thy whole compound muft be but as much as if it were
onely afimple receit ; for we do not compound things, to make the receit grea-
ter, either in quantity or in vertue , but only becaufe it fhould bemorefpeedy in
operation : It muft alfo be confidered, that the weights of mixtures and medicines
muft vary proportionably, as the Countries and Climates vary : for this alters their
operation, as we fhewed before. Thou muft therefore work advifedly; and as the
operation of the Simples altereth, fo thou muft alter their weight, by putting to,
and taking from , and wittily fitting all things, that they may effect that which
thou wculdeft. This is the reafon, why in our experiments which we have fet
down hereafter, we have deicribed the parts thereof by their feveral weights : and
left the divers names of weights fhculd hinder thy working , we bate qfed thofe
weights and names which Cornelius C'e/fus ufed before us : for lb it is fitteft fcr all
mens fatisfaction.

Chap.XX.
How to prepare Simples,

HAving Chewed the way how to compound and find out ihejtft weight cf cor
compofition, it now remains we teach hew to prepare Simples ; which is a
matter chiefly neceflary for this work ; and greatefl <kill is feenin it. For the ope-
rations of Simples, do not fo much cor fift in thcmfelves , as in the prerarirg of
them; without which preparation, they work little or nothing at all. Tbtie be
many wayes to prepare Simples, to make them fitter for certain ufes. Tie rrcft u-
fual wayes are, Steeping, Boiling, Burning, Pcwning. Refolvirg into afher, Diftil-
Jing, Drying, and fuch tlike. To macerate oifteep any thing, isto drerch ardto

Of the Caufesof W "onderful things. 25

foak it in liquor, that ic may be throughly wet both within and without, fo that the
more fubtil and intimate pare of it may be drained and fqueezed out, and
the orcfler and earthly part be left behind, to receive that humour in the very
middle, which we would have in it. Boiling we then ufe, when we cannot other-
wife well pet out the juice of any thing : for by boiling we draw out of the centre
into the circumference, when we cannot do ic by Keeping ; though thereby the
flichtcr vapours may be relblved. So we ufe to burn, to rofte, to pown things, that
we may take away all their moifture from them ; for by this means, they may the
more eafily be refolvcd, and the fooner convertqd into liquor, and the better
mingled with other things tobi put to them. So we rofte or broil things when o-
thervvife we cannot break them, that they might become duft ; yet alwayes we
muft take heed that we do not fo burn them, as they may iofe their ftrength • nor fo
boil things but only as they may be fitter to receive that fubtil humor and quality,
which we would convey into them. Diftillation of things is ufed, as well to get out
water that may be of greater ftrength,therby to work more eafily & handfomly;as alfo
becaufe the {lighter and more fubtile parts of Medicines are fitteft for us, the grof-
fer parts muft be caft away, as being an hindrance to our purpofe : and the like we
muft conceive of other operations. Thefe things I thought fitteft for this work. He
that would be inftrufted more at large herein, let him look into the books of Phy-
fuians. But let us now proceed to further matters.

The

THE

SECOND BOOK

o f

Natural Ma°ick :

D

Shewing how living Creatures of divers kinds, may
be mingled and coupled together, that from them, new,
and yet profitable kinds of living Creatures may
be generated.

The Pro e m e.
n~<[ 7 ii*s<y. - li Qivi tfool <rirf »I tob^ si -r; • J* now i-ar)<ti Ur« w t«rh

H^w'»g wandred beyond my bounds, in the confideration of Caufes and their Alii-
ons ; which I thought fit to make the Subjctt of my firji bookj it will be time to ffcak
of thofe Operations, which we have often promtfed, that we may not too long keep off f torn
them thofe ingenious men that are very dejirous to know them. Since that we have Jaid,
That Natural CMagickjs the top, and the compleat faculty or Natural Science , in han-
dling it , we will conclude within the compafs of this Volume, whatfoever is High, Noble,
Choice, and T^table, that u dtf covered in the large field of Natural Hiftory. But that
we may perform this, Ifhallreduce all thofe Secrets into their proper places ; and that no-
thing may be thrufi out of its own ran\y IjhaH follow the order of Sciences. And J fhalL
fir/} dtvtde them into Natural arid Mathematical Sciences; and 1 fhaftbegtn with the N*->
tutal • for I hold that mofi convenient , that all may anfe from thofe things that are fim-
fle, and notfo laborioui,to tJMathematical Sciences. 1 fhaU from Animals firft proceed to
Plants, and fo by fteps to Minerals, and other works of Nature. J fl?aU briefly dcfcrtbc
Vountains,alfo whence flow Springs ; and 1 jhaH annex thereto the Reafons, and theCaufes •
that Indujirioui men made acquainted with thu,may find out more of themfelves. And
Jrecaufe there are two generations of Animals and Plants, one of themfelves, the other by
copulation: 1 fhallfirfi fpeak^of fuch as are bred without copulation • and next,of fuch as
proceed from copulation one with another, that we may produce new living C reatmres,fuch
4U the former ages never faw. Iff) all begin therefore with Putrefaction, becaufethat u the
principle to produce new Creatures ; not one I) from the variety of Simples , but of mixed
Bodies. I thought fit to leave none out, though they be of fmall account, fince there is no-
thing in Nature, appear it never fo fmall, wherein there is not fomethirg to be admired.

Chap. I.

The firfi Chapter treat eth of Putrefattion , and of a flrange manner of producing li-
ving Creatures.

Efore we come to (hew that new living Creatures are
generated of Purrcfa&ion, it is meet to rehearle the opini-
ons ©fantient Philofophers concerning that matter- Whereof
though we hive i'poken elfewhere, in the defcription of
Plants, yet for the Readers eafe, we will here rehearfe lcme
of them, tofhewthat not onely imperfe£f, but peifeft li-
ving Creatures too, are generated of Putrefa£ticn. Perphy-
ry thought that Living creatures were begotten of thebcwels
of the Earth foaked in water, and quickned by the heat of the Sun. Of the Same
mind were Archelaus the Athenian, Anaxagorat C ta^omemus-, and Euripides his Sco-
lar» ClcodemMe,md after him Thcopl.raftw) thought that they came of puuified wa-
ter

Uf we generation of Animals. ly

ter mixt with earth ; and the colder and fouler the water was, the unfitter it was for
their generation. Dtodortts, and many ochsr good Philosophers hold, that all living
Creatures did arife of putrefa&ion. For whereas in the beginning of the world,
the Heavensrand Earth, and Elements were tetled in their natural pUces, the earth
being left flimy and loft in many places, and then dried and Hricken with the heac
of the Sun, brought forth certain tumors and iwellings in the furface and upper-
moft parts: in thefe turners were contained and cherifaed many putrefaStions and
rotten clods, covered over with certain fmall skins; this pmrified fluff, being
moil-iened with dew l?y nighr, and the Sun heating it by day, after a certain icafon
became ripe ; and the skins being broken, thence iffucd all kinds of livingCrea-
lures ; whereof, they that had quickeft heat, became birds; the earthy ones be-
came creeping beafts ; the waterifli ones became fifhes in the Sea ; and they
which were a mean, as it were, betwixt all thefe , became walking-ireatures. But
the heat of the Sun Hill working upon the earth, hindered it from begetting
and bringing forth any more fuch creatures; but then,the creatures before generated
coupled together,and brought forth others like themfelves. Avicennn^ in that work
of his which he made of deluges and flouds ; holds, that after the greatflouds that
drowned the Earth, there was no mans feed; but then, man, and all living Crea-
tures elfe, were generated of rotten carcafes, only by the venue of the Sun: and
therefore he fuppofeth, that the womb, and fuch needful places framed by nature,
for the better fafhiocing of the infant, are not needfull to the procreation of man.
He proves his .flertion by this, that mice, which arife of putrefaction, do couple
together , and beget flore of young ; yea, and ferpents are generated chiefly of
womans hair. And in his book of living Creatures, he tels of a friend or his,
that brought forth Scorpions after a ftrange manner, and thole did beget other
Scorpions, not imperfect, or unlike to themfelves, but fuch as did alfo procreate
others. Averroes held,that the ftars were fufficicnt to generate imperfect creatures*,
as mice, bats, moules, and fuch like, but not to generate Men, or Lions. And dai-
ly experience teachcth us, thai many living creatures come of the pmrified matter of
the earth. And the Ancients fuppofing all things to be produced out of the earth,cal-
led it the mother of all; and i he Greeks called it Dimitera. Ovid hath very ele-
gantly fet down this generation of putrefaction, under the fable of Pytho ; that
the earth brought forth of its own accord , many living creatures of divers forms*
the heat of the Sun enliving thofe moitfures that lay in the tumors of the earth, like
fertile feeds in the belly of their mother ; for heat and moifture being tempered to-
gether, caufeth generation. So then , after the deluge, the earth being now
moift, the Sun working upon it, divers kinds of creatures were brought forth, feme
like the former, and fome of a new fliape.

Chap. II.

Of certain earthly Creatures, which are generated of ftttrefMion*

PLants and living Creatures agree both in this, that fome of them are generated
of feed, and fome of them Nature brings forth of her own accord, without
any feed of the fame kind ; fome out of putrified earth and plants , as thofc
Creatures that are divided between the head and the belly ; feme out of the
dew that lies upon leaves , as Canker-worms; fome cut of the mud,asfhel-
creatures • and fome out of living Creatures themfelves, and the excrements:
of their parts, as lice. We will onely rehearfe fome which the Ancients have
fet down, that fo we may alfo learn how to procreate new creature?. And firft,
let us fee, how

Mice

i8 Natural Magic k. j3oo{i.

Mice are generated of putrtfaBion.

Diodorut faith, that neer to the CityThebais in Egypt, when Nilus overflowing is
paft, the Sun heating the wet ground, the chaps of the earth fend forth great ftorc
cf mice in many places ; which aftonifheth men to fee, that the fore-part of the mice
fliould live and be moved, whereas their hinder parts are not yet fliapen. *P/;»; faith,
that after the fwaging of Nilus, there are found little mice begun to be made of
earth and water, their fore-parts living, and their hinder parts being nothing but
earth. tAHianta faith, that a little rain in Egypt, engenders many mice, which be-
ing fcattered everywhere in their fields, eat down their corn, and devour it : And fo
it is in Pontus ; but by their prayers to God, they are confamed. LMacrobittt and
Avicennafo], that the mice fo generated, do encreafe exceedingly by coupling to-
gether. Ariftotle found out, that a kind of field-mice encreafed wonderfully-} fo
that in fome places they did fuddenly eat up whole fields of corn : infomuch that
many Husband men appointing to reap their corn on the morrow, when they came
with their reapers, found all their corn wafted. And as thefe mice are generated
fuddenly, fo they are fuddenly confumed, in a few dayes ; the reafon whereof can-
not be fo well afligned. Pliny could not find how it fhould be ; for neither could
they be found dead in the fields, neither alive within the earth in the winter time.
Diodorus and tAitianus write, That thefe field-mice have driven many people of Ita-
ly out of their ownCountrey : they dtftroyed Cofas,aCity of Hetruria: many came
to Troas, and thence drove the inhabitants. Theoyhraftm va&Varro write, That mice
alfo made the inhabitants of thelflind Gyarus to forfake their Country j and the
like is reported of Heraclea in Pontus, and of other places. Likewife alfo

Frogs Are wonderfully generated of rotten daft and rain ;

for a Summer fhowre lighting upon the putrified fands of the fhore, and duftof
high-wayes, engenders frogs. tABlianus-, going from Naples in Italy, to Puteoli, faw
certain frogs, that their fore-parts moved and went upon two feet, while yet their
hinder parts were unfafhioned, and drawn after like a clot of dirt : and Ovtd
faith, one part lives, the other is earth ftill : and again, mud engenders fregs that
fometimes lack feet. The generation of them is fo eafie, and fudden, that feme
write it hath rained frogs ; as if they were gendred in the Air. FhyLrckm in Atke*
nam writes foj and HeracUdeshembm writes, that it rained frogs about Dardany
and Pceonia, fo plentifully, that the very wayes and houfes were full of them:
and therefore the inhabitants , though for a few dates at the firft they endured it,
killing the frogs, and fhutting up their houfes, yet afterward when they faw it was
to no purpofc, but they could neither ufe water, nor boil meat, bur frogs^would be
in it , nor fo much as tread upon the ground for them, they quite forfook their coun-
tries, as Diodorus and Exftathitu write. The people Autharidx in Thefprtaia, were
driven out of their Country, by certain imperfect frogs that fell from heaven. But
it is a ftrange thing that

%jd Toads are generated of dirty and of women s flowers,

InDariene, a Province of the new world, the air is .moft unwholefome, the place
being muddy and full of ftinking marifhesmay, the village is it felf a marilh, where
Toads are prefently geodred of the drops wherewith they water their houfes, as
*Pete r Martyr writes. A Toad is likewife generated of a duck that hath lyen rotting
under the mud, as the verfe fhews which is afcribed to the duck ; When I am rotten
in the earth, I bring forth Toads : happily becaufe they and I both, are moitt and
foul creatures. Neither is it hard to generate Toades of womens puirified
flowers; for women do breed this kind of cattel, together with their children, as
Celius Aurelianus *nd Plateariut all them, frogs, toads, lyzards , and luchlike:
and the women of Salerium, in times paft , were wont to ufe the juice of
Patfleyand Leeks, at the beginning cf their conception, and efpecially about the
time of their quickening,thereby to deftroy this kind of vermin with them. A certain

woman

Of the (feneration of Animals \ 19

woman latelytmrri-d, being in all mens judgement great with child, brought forth
in Head of a child, four Creatures like to frogs, and after had her perfeft health. But
this was a kind of a Moon-calf. Paracelftutod, that if you cur a ferpent in pieces,
and hide him in a veflel of glaffe, under the mud, there will be gendred many
worms, which being nourifheci by the mud,will grow every one as big as a Serpent J
fo that of ouc ferpent may be an hundred generated : and the like he holds of other
creatures. I will not gainfay it, but only thus, that they do not gender the fame ler-
pents. And fo, he faith, you may make them of a womans flowers ; and fo, he faith,
you may generate a Bafiiisk , that all (hall die which look upon him : but this is
a ftark lie. It is evident alfo, that

Serpents may be generated of mans mayrow^ of the hairs of a menfirmus woman,

and of a horfe- feftf, or mane.

We read, that in Hungary, by the River Theifa, Serpents and Lyzards did breed in
mens bodies, fo that three thouland men died of it. Tlinj writes, that about the be-
ginning of the wars againft the Marti, a maid-fervant broughtforth a ferpent. Avi~
cenna in bis book of deluges, writes, that ferpents are gendred of womens hairs e-
fpedaliy, bccaufc they are naturally moifter and longer then mens. We have expe-
rienced alfo, that the hairs of a horfes mane laid inthewaiers, will become fer-
pents: and our friends have tried the fame. No man denies but that ferpents
are eafily gendred of mansflefh, efpecially of his marrow. vj£i%anm faith, that
a dead mans back-mirrow being putrified , becomes a ferpent: and fo of the
rneekeft living Creature arifes the moft favage: and that evil mens back-bones?
do breed fuch monfters after death; Ovid (hews, that many hold it for a truth.
Tlinj received it of many reports, that Snakes gendred of the marrow of mens
backs. Writers alfo (hew,

Hot* a Scorpion may be generated of Baft I.

Fkretttinus the Grecian faith, That Bafil chewed and laid in the Sun, will engender
ferpents. P//»;addeth ; that if you rub it, and cover it with a ftone, it will be-
come a Scorpion ; and if you chew it, and lay it in the Sun, it will bring forth worms.
And fome fay, that if you ftamp a handful of Bafil, together with ten Crabs or Cre-
vifes, all the Scorpions thereabouts will ccme unto it. Avtcenna tells of a ftrange
kind of producing a Scorpion ; but Galen denies it to be true. But the body of a
Crab-fifn is ftrangely turned into a Scorpion : Pliny faith, that w hile the Sun is in the
fign Cancer, if the bodies of thofe fifties lie dead upon the Land, they wil be turned
into Scorpions. Ovid faith, if you take of the Crabs arms, and hide the reft in the
ground, it will be Scorpion. There is alfo a

Creature that lives but one day9 bred in vineger ;

as t&liamti writes ; and it is called Ephemeras, beciufe it lives but one day : it is
gendred of the dregs of fowre wine ; and as foon as the veflel is open, that it comes
into the light, prefently it dies. The River Hippantsy about the folftitial daies, yields
certain little husks, whence iflue forth certain four-footed birds, which live and flic
about till noon, but pine away as the Sun draws downward, and die at the Sun-fcc-
ting $ and becaufe they live but one day, they are called Hemerobion, a daics-
bird. So the

Tyrigones be generated in the fire ;

Certain little flying beads, fo called, becaufe they live and are nourifhed in the fire ;
and yet they flieup and down in the Air. This is ftrange ; but that is more ftrange,
that as foon as ever they come ouc of the fire, inco any cold air,prefcAtly they die.
Likewifcthe

Salamander

*o Natural Mag ick. hoof{i»

Salamander is gendred of the water j

.fcr the Salamander u felf genders nothing, neither is there any male or female
among!) them, nor yet amonglt Eeels, nor any kind elie j which doth not generate
of thernfelves eicher egge or young, as TUny noteth. But now we will fpeak of a
molt excellent generation, namely, how

Bees are generated of an Ox.

t/EHar>tu writes. That Chen are commodious many wayes; amongft the reft, this
ison6 excellent commodity, that being dead, there may be generated of them a
very profitable kind of Creamers, namely Bees. Ovid faith it, that as allputrified
bodies are turned into tome i'mall living Creatucrs, lo Oxen putrified do generate
Bees. Fhrentmm the Grecian faith, that Julias King of Africa, taught how to make
Bees in a wooden Ark. Vemocrittti and Varro fliew a cruel manner of making Bees
in a houfe: but it is a very ready way. Chufeahoufe ten cubits high, and tencu*
bits broad, fquare every way : but let there be but one entrance into it, and four
windows , on each fide one. Putin this room an Ox, about two or three years old;
let him be fat and fleftiy : then fet to him a company of lufty fellows, to beat him
fo cruelly, that they kill him with their cudgels, and break his bones withal: but
they muft take great heed that they draw no blood of him, neither muft they
ftrike him too fiercely at the firft : After this, flop up all the paflages of the Ox, his
noiirils, eyes, mouth, and neceffary places of evacuation, with fine linen clouts
befmeared with pitch : Then caft a great deal of honey under htaa, being laid with
his face upwards, and let them all go forth,and daube up the door and the windows
w'nh thick lome, fo that no wind, nor Air can get in. Three weeks after, open
the room, and let the light and the Air ccme in, except there where the wind
would blow in too violently. And when you fee that the matter is through cold,
and hath taken air enough, then (hut up the door and windows as before. About
eleven daies after,open it again, and you fhall find the room full of Bees clotted to-
gether, and nothing of the Ox remaining, befide the horns, the bones and the
hair. They fay that the Kings of the companies are generated of the brain, theo-
ther of the flefh, but the chief Kings of all, of the marrow ; yet thofe that come
of the brain, aremoftof them greater, handfomer , and better-coloured then the
reft. When you open the room firft, you fhall find the flefh turned into finall,white,
and unperfect creatures, all of the fame ftiape, but as yet only growing, and not
moving. Afterward, at the fecond opening, you may fee their wings grown, the
right colour of Bees in them, and how they fit about their Kings, and flutter about,
especially toward the windows, where they would enjoy their denied light. But
it is beft to let them light by the windows every other day. This fame experiment,
firgi/hath very elegantly fet down in the fame manner. Now as the beft kind of
Bees are generated of a young Ox, foamorebafe kind of them is brought forth
of the dead fkfh of bafer creatures j z/Elianns faith,

"That JVufpes are generated of an Horfe ;

when his carcafe is putrified, the marrow of him brings forth Wafpes ; a fwift kind
of fowl, from a fwift kind of beaft. Ovid faith, that Hornets are thence generated ;
and Ifiodore derives crabronemacabo^id eft caballoyt hornet of a horfe, becaufe they
are brought forth of horfes. Vlinj and Virgil fay, that wafpes and hornets both, are
generated of the flefh of dead horfes. In like manner

. - . '.^i.tr'-mulK' • • 3.mx • ' nrvftoh'il usiisO

Dronts cmt of MhIis> :

as

Of the (feneration of Animals. }i

as Ifiodore zfnimcth : and the Drone is called Fuctts quaf Fagos, bscaufe he eats
that which he never laboured for. But others hold that Locu(is,and not Drones,are
Generated of Mules fkft* So alfo, of the baieft bead cometh the bafeft fowl :

The Beetle is generated of the lAfsy

as Vltnj write?. If odor e faith, they come of fwifc dogs : zAllianus faith, they have
no female, buc lay their feed in a clot of earth for 2 8dayes, and then bring forth
young out of it.

Chap. III.

Of certain Birds^ which are generated of theTmrcfaclion of Plants.

fllatts Magnus, in the defcription of the North-countries of Europe, reports, thac
about Scotland, there be certain birds generated of the fruit of a Tree. Mmfiet
faith, there be certain Trees which bring forth a fruit covered over with leaves ;
which, if it fall into the water under it, at the right feafon, it lives, and becomes
a quick bird, which is called Avis arborea. Neither is this any new tale • for the
antient Cofmographers, efpecially Saxo (jrammatictu mentions the fame Tree. Late
Writers report, That not onely in Scotland, buc in the River of Thames alfo by
London, there is a kind of Shel-fifh inatwo-lcaved (hell, that hath a foot full of
plans and wrinkles : thefe fifh are little, round, and outwardly white, fmooth and
brittle (helled , like an Almond (bell ; inwardly they are great bellied, bred as ic
were of mofs and mud: they commonly flick on the keel of fomeold Ship, where
they hang together like Muftirome-ftalks, as if they were thereby nourifhed. Seme
fay, they come of worms, fome of the boughs and branches of Trees which fall in-
to the Sea ; if any of thefe be caft upon fhore, they die ; but they which axe fwal-
lowed ftill into the Sea, live,and get out of their (bell, and grow to be ducks or fuch
like birds. (Jcfner faith, that in the Iflands Hebrides, the lame

Birds are generated of putrified wood.

If you caft wood into the $ea,firft after * while there will certain worms breed in it,
which by little and little become like ducks, in the head, feet, wings and feathers ;
and at length grow to be as big as Geefe: and when they are come to their full
growth, they flie about in the Air, as other birds do. As foon as the wood begins
firft to be put rifled, there appears a great many wormes,fcme unfhapen, others be-
ing in fome parts perfect, fome having feathers, and fome none. Paracelftu faith ; As
the yelk and white of an egge, becomes a chick by the heat of an Hen ; fo a bird
burnt to afhes, and (but up in a veffel of glafs, and fo laid under the mixen, will
become a flimy humour ; and then, if it be laid under a Hen, is enlived by her
hear, and reftored to her felf like a Phoenix. Ficinnt reportet b, and he had it out of
AlbertusyTaix. there is a certain bird, much like a Black-bird, which is generated of
the putrefaction of Sage } which receives her life and quickning from the general
life of the whble world.

Chap. IV.
Of Certain fifkes which are generated of putrefaction.

HAving firft fpoken of earthly Creatures, and then of Fowlesj now we will
(peak of Fifties fo generated. And firft how

Seles are generated.

Amongft them there is neither male or female, nor egges, nor *ny copulation j nei-
ther

31 Natural Magick , "Bool^i.

cher was there ever fecn in any etThem,any paffage fit to be a womb.They have bred
oft-times in certain muddy pools, even after all the water and mud hath been gone ;
only by rain-water: neither indeed do they ever breed wkhouc rain, though they
have never fo much water otherwise ; For it is the rain, both that begets and nou-
iifhesthem, zsArifietlewint'?. They are alfo generated of putrified things. Ex-
perience hath proved, that a deadhorie thrown into a Handing pool, hath brought
forth great ftore of Eeles ; and the like hath been done by the carcafes of other
creatures. Artftotteii'uh, they are generated of the garbage of the earth, which he
faith,arifeth in the Sea, u\Rivers,ar>d in pools,by reafon chiefly of putrefa&ionjbuc
it ariies in the Sea by reafon of reeds ; in Pools and Rivers , it arifes by the banks-
fide, for there the heat is more forcible to caufe putrefaction. And a friend of mine
filled certain wooden veflels with water ,and Reeds, and fome other water-herbs,
and fet them in the or/en Air, hav ing 6ift covered them with a weighty Rone, and lo
in fhort time generated Eeles. Such is the generation of

Groundlings out of fome and frothy

which fifli the Greeks call Aphya, becaufe rain breeds it. Many of them breed of
thefomc thatrifes out of the fandy chanel, thatftill goesand comes at all times,
till at laft it is diflolved j fo that this kind of fifh breeds all times of the year, in fha-
dowy and warm places, when the foyl is heated ; as in Attica, neer to Salamnia,
and in Marathon, where Themiftocles got his famous victory. In fome places, this
fifh breeds of feme by the help of the rain ; and fwims on the top of the water in
the fome , as you fee little wormes creep on the top of mud. A then aw faith, This
fifh is confecrated to Venus , becaufe (he alfo comes of the froth of the Sea,whence
fhe is called Aphrodites. t/EUanw faith, Thefe fifhes neither do beget, nor are be-
gotten, bnt only come of mud : for when dirt is clotted together in the Sea, ic
waxes very black and flimy, and then receives heat and life after a wonderful man-
ner, and fo is changed into very many living Creatures, and namely into Ground-
lings. When the waves are too boiftrousfor him,he hides himfelfin the cliftol fome
rock; neither doth he need any food. And Opptar.w makes the very famedefcri-
ptionofthem, and of their generation. There is a kind of thefe fifhes, called a
Mullet- Groundling, which is generated of mud and of fand, as hath been tried
in many imrifli places, amongft the reft in Gindus ; where in the Dog-daies, the
Lakes being dried up, fo that the mud was hard; as foon as ever they began to be
full cf rain-water again, were generated little fifhes, a kind of Mullets, about
thebignefs of little Cackrels, which had neither feed nor egge in them. And in
fome parts of Afia, at the mouth of the Rivers into theSea,fome of a bigger fize are
generated. And as the Mullet-groundling comes of mud, or of a fandy lome, as
jirifiotle writes ; fo it is to be thought, that the Cackrel-groundling comes thereof
alfo. It feems too, that

A C*rPe is generated of putrefaftion,

Efpeciallyof the putrified mud of fweet water: for it is experienced, that in cer-
tain Lakes,compafled about with Hills,where there is no Wcll,nor Kiver,to moiften
it but only the rain, after fome few fhowers, there hath been great ftore of fifh,
efpccially Carps: but there are fome of this kind generated by copulation. There
arc alfo in certain particular Lakes, particular kinds of fiihes, as in the Lemane, and
the Benacian Lakes, there be divers kind of Carpcs, and other fuch fifhes. Likewife
there are certain

Earthly fifhes generated of pntrefaUion.

Tliny reports, that in Paphlagonia, they dig out of deep ditches, certain earthly
fifhes very good to be eaten • and it is fo in places where there is no (landing wa-
ter- and he wonders that they (hould be generated without copulation : but Aire-

Of the (feneration of ^Animals. jj

ly it is by vertue of fome moifture, which he afcribes co the Wells, becaufe in fome
of them fifhes are found. Likewife

Shel fijk are generated of the frothy mud,

.or elfe meerly of the falt-water ; for they have neither feed, nor male, nor female;
thehardneffe and clofenefle of their fhels, hindering all things from touching or rub-
bing their inward parts, which might be fit tor generation, Anfiotle faith, they
breed all of themfel?es; which appears by thi<, that oft-times they breed in ships,
of a forthy mud putrified : and in many placeSjWliere no fuch thing was before,many
fhel-fifhes have bred, when once the place waxed muddy,for lack of moifture.And
that thefe fifhes emit no feed or generativ e matter, ic appears, becaufe that when the
men of Chios had brought out of Lesbos many Oyfters, and caft them into Lakes
neer the Sea, there were found no more then were caft in ; onely they were feme-
what greater. So then Oyfters are generated in the Sea, in Rivers and in Lakes, and
therefore are called Limnoftrea, becaufe they breed in muddy places. Oppiaws
mites alfo, that they have neither male nor female, but are generated of themfelves
and their own accord, without the help of any copulation. So the fifh called Orti-
ca , and the Purple, and Mufcles, and Scallops, and Perwinkles, andLimpins, and
all Shel-fifh are generated of mud: for they cannot couple together, but live only
as plants live. And look how the mud differs , fo doth it bring forth different
kinds of fifties : durty mud genders Oyfters, fandy mud Perwinkles,the mud in the
Rocks breedeth Holoturia, Lepades, and fuch-like. Limpins, as experience hath
fhewed, have bred of rotten hedges made to fifh by j and as foon as the hedges were
gone, there have been found no more Limpins.

Chap. V.

That new kinds of living Creatures may be generated of divers beafis , by carnal
copulation.

\\^E have (hewed that living Creatures are generated of putrefa&ionrnow we will
fhew,that fundry kinds of beafts coupling together, may bring forth new kinds
of CreaiUres, and thefe alfo may bring forth others ; fo that infinite monfters may
be daily gendred : for whereas Ariftotle faith, that Africk alwayes brings forth fome
new thing j the reafon thereof is this, becaufe the Country being in moft places dry,
dners kinds of beafts come out of fundry quarters thither , where the Rivers were,
and there partly for luft,and partly by conftraint, coupled together, and fo gendred
divers monftrous Creatures. The Antients have fet down many fuch generations,
and fome are lately devifed, or found out by chance ; and what may be hereafter, let
men of learning judge. Neither let the opinions of feme Philofophers ftay us, which
hold that of two kinds divers in nature, a third cannot be made, unlike to either
of the parents; and that fome Creatures do not gender at all, as Mules do not : for
we fee, that, contrary to the firft of thefe their pofitions, many Creatures are gene-
rated of kinds divers in nature, and of thefe are generated others, to the perpetual
confervation of this new kind ; as hath been tried in many Villages,that divers kinds
coupling together, have brought forth other new kinds, differing from their proge-
nitors every day more and more, as they multiply their copulations , till at length
they are fcarce in any thing like the former. And againft their fecond Pofttion, we
muft not think that the one example of Mules not gendring, fhould prejudice the
common courfe of other creatures. The commiftionsor copulations, have divers
ufes in Phyfick, and in Domeftical affairs, and in hunting : for hereby many proper-
ties are conveyed into many Creatures. Firft, we will rehearle thole experiments,
which the Antients have defcribed, and then thofe which new Writers have recor-
ded, and our felves have feen in divers Countries. And by this, the ingenious Rea-
der may find out others. But firft I will relate certain observations, which Arifto*
tie and others have prefcribed, that this kind of generation may be more eaftly

H wrought,

34. Natural Magick, 'BooJ^z.

wrought. Firft, the creatures thus coupled, mutt be of an equal pitch j for if there
be great oddes in their bigneffe , they cannoc couple: a dog and a wolf, a Lion
and a panther, an Affe and a Horfe, a Partridge and a Hen, are of one bignefle, and
therefore may couple together ; but a Horfe and a Dog, or a Mare and an Elephant,
or a Hen and a Sparrow cannot.Secondly, they muft have one and the famefpaceto
bring forth in : for if one of them bring forth in twelve rrioncths, and the other
in fix, then the young will be ripe by one fide, when it is but half ripe by the other.
A dog mult have two moneths, and a horfe muft have twelve : and the Phiiofopher
ftith, no creature can be born, except he have his full time. So then a deg cannot
be born of a man, nor a Horfe of an Elephanr, becaufethey differ in the time of
their bearing. Again, the creatures which we would thus couple, muft be ore as
iuftfui as the other : for a chafte creature, that ufeth coition hut once a year, if be
have not his female at that time, he lofeth his appetite before he can fancy any ether
mate : but thole which are full of luft, will eagerly couple with another kind as well
astheirown. Among four-footed beafts, a dog,a goat, a iwine, anafs, bemoftla-
fcivious ; among birds, partridges, quailes, doves, fparrows. Moreover, they muft be
coupled at fuch a time as is fit for generation : for Nature hath prefcribed certain
limes and ages fit for that work. The common time, is the Spring ; for then almoft
all Creatures are prone to luft. The ages of them muft likewife be&c : for the ge-
nerative power comes to creaturcs,at a fet age. Neither of them muft be barren, nor
weak, nor too young ; for then their feed is unfit for generation : but both of them,
if it may be, in the prime of their beft age and ftrength. If any creatures want appe-
tite thereunto, there be many fligBts, whereby we may

UWake them eager in luft.

And if the female do caft out the feed, there be means to make her hold in it. Pro-
vokements to luft there are mar.y let down by Writers, and fome ufual with us e/£-
Uanu» writes, that keepers of fheep, and goats, andMare^, do befmear their hands
with fait and nitre, and then rub the generative parts of them in the time of their
coition, for their more luftful and eager performance of that action. Others be-
fmear them with pepper, others with nettles feed, others with myrrh and nirre ; all
of them kindle the appetite of the female, being well rubbed therewith, and make
her ftand to her male. TheHe-goa^s,if you befmear their chin, and their noftrels
with fweet ointmenr,are thereby much enclined to luft ; and contrariwife, if you tie
a thred about the middle of their tail, they are nothing fo eager of copulation. Jib-
fyrtm fheweth,that if you wipe off fome nature or feed of a mare, and therewith
belmear the noftrils of a Stallion horfe, it will make him very luftful. Djdimus faith,
that if Rams, or any other beafts, feed upon the herb Milk-wort, they will become
both eager to luft, and ftronger for the aft of copulation. Pliny fheweth, that Onions
encreafe defire of copulation in beafts, as the herb Rotchet doth in men. The She-
afs, holds the feed within her the better, if prefently after copulation fhe be well
beaten, and her genitories befprinkled with cold water, to make her run after it.
Many fuch helps are recorded by thofe who have written the hiftories of living
creatures.

Chap.VI.

How there may be Dogs of great courage, and divers rare properties, generated of divers
ki»ds of Beafts.

\^/"E will firft fpeak of Dogs, as being a moft familiar creature with us, and fuiting
with many beafts, in bigneffe, in like time of breeding ; and befides, being al-
wayes ready for copulation,and very lecherous, oft-times coupling with beafts of a
far divers kind, and fochangeth his fhape andfafhion, leaveth the bad qualities of
his owakind,andis made fitter to hunt,to keep any thing from fpoii,to play or make
fport,and for divers other ufes. And firft, how

Of the (feneration of Animals.

A flrong Indian-do* may be generated of a Tygre.

•This is called by fome,a Maftive ; by others a Warrior, or a Hircan-Dog/yfr//?^/*
calls them Indian-dogs, and laith, they are generated of aDog-and aTygce ; and
el.ewhere, of adog and another wilde beait, but henames .it not. Tim) write?,
that the Indians intending to generate dogs of Tygres, fie the She-tygres in the
woods about rutting time ; and dogs coupling with them engender young: but the
firft and fecond births they care not for, as being too fierce ; but the third they
bring up, as being milder and fitter for their ules. zAZliantts relates the ftory of this
kind of Dogs, out of Indian Writers : that the ttouteft Bitches, and fuch as are
fwifteft to run, and beft to hunt, are by the fhepherds tied to certain Trees within
the Tygres walk : as foon as the Tygres light upon them , ' if they have not before
met with their prey, they devour them; but if they be full of meat, and hot in luft,
then they couple with the Bitches • and fo gencfate,nota Tygre,but a dog, their feed
degenerating into the mothers kind. And thefe dogs thus gendred, fcom to hunt
a Boar, or an Hart j but a Lion they will fet gallantly upon. A Noble man of In-
dia made trial of the valor of thefe dogs, before Alexander the Great, on this
manner: firft, he fet an Hart before him; but the Dog (coming the Hart, Bir-
red not at him ; next, a Boar, but neither ftirred he at the Boar ; after that a Bear,
but he fcorned the Beartoo: laftof all,aLion ;then the Dog feeingthat he had an
even match in hand, rofe up very furioufly , and run upon the Lion, and took him
by the throat, and (lined him. Then the Indian that fhewed this fport, and knew
well this Dogs Valour, firft cut off his tail; but the Dog cared not for'his tail, in
comparifon of the Lion which he had in his mouth : next, he cut off one of his
Tegs; but the Dog held faft his hold ftill, as if it had been none of his legs: after
"that, he cauied another of his leg? to be broken ; but the Dog flill kept his hold :
after that, his third leg, and yet ftill he kept his hold : afifer that, his fourth leg, and
yet the Dog was ft'll as fierce upon the Lion, as at the firft : Nay, when laft of all
his head was cut off from his body,yet ftill it ftiickfaft by the teeth in the fame place,
where he took his firft hold. Alexander feeing this, was much grieved for' the
Dogs death, and greatly amazed at his valour, that he would rather feffer his life,
then his courage to be taken from him. The Indian perceiving that, gave to Alex-
anderfour fuch Dogs ; and he received them as a great Prefent, and accepted them
gladly and thankfully : and moreover, rewarded the Indian that gave them, with
a Princely reeompence. This fame ftory Fhiles alfo writes. But Diodorta Siculm
and Strata, (ay that Sopithes a King, gave Alexander an hundred and fifty ofthefc
Dogs, all very huge and ftrong, and ufually coupling with Tygres. And 'Pollux
writes the fame. And Vlmark^ defcribes the Indian-dog, and his fight before Alex-
ander , as it is before related : Pliny writes, that the King of Albania gave^ Alexan-
der a great Dog, wherewith he was much delighted : but when he brought the Dog,
firft Bears, then Boars, and then Deer, andfawhe would not touch them, being
much offended that fo great a body fhould have fo little courage, he caufed him to
bekilled. The King that gave him, hearing this, lent him another, and withal char-
ged the Meffenger, that he fhould not be tryed in fmall matches, but either with a
Lion or an Elephant. So then, Alexander caufed a Lion to be fet before him, and
prefentlv the Dog killed him: afterward he tried him with an Elephant ; and the
Dog briftled and barked at him, and affaulted him fo artificially every way, till the
Elepha^ was giddy with turning abour, and fo fell down and was killed. (Jratius
writesof this kind of dogs, thus generated of a Bitch and aTygre. There is alfo
another kind of Dogs x

generated

\6 Natural Magick, Hool^i.

Generated of a Lion,

And thefe are ftrong Dogs, and good Hunters. 'Pollux faith, that Arcadian Dogs
firftcame of a Dog and a Lion, and are called Lion-dogs. And Ceelittt writes the
fame : and Oppianus commends the Arcadian Dogs, and thofe of Tegca, which is a
Town of Acadia. This is alio

A firong and fwtft Dog, gendred of a kind of Wolf called lhosy

which, as Arifiotle writes , is in all his entrails like a Wolfs ; and is a firong
beaft, fwift, and is wont to encounter the Lion. 'Pliny faith, it is a kind of Wolf ;
Hefychituiiuh, it is like a Wolf • Herodotm, that it is gendred in Africa : Soltnnt
calls them Ethiopian Wolves : Nearchtu calls thefe beads Tygres, and faith there be
divers kinds of them. Wherefore Gratiut faith, that dogs generated of thefe Thoes,
are ftrong, and fit to hunt ; and calls them halt-iavage, as coming of a tame Dog,
and a favage kind of Wolf. There is alio a

Dog called Crocutay gendred of a 'Dog and a Wolf

Pliny faith, that thcfe Dogs break all things with their teeth, and prefently devour
them. As the Indians join Tygres, fo do the Gaules join Wolves and Dogs together ;
every herd of Wolves there, hath a Dog for their Ring-leader. In the Country
of Cyrene in Libya, Wolves do couple with Dogs, as Artftotle and Pollux write.
Galen in his book concerning the ufe of Parts, writes, that a Bitch may conceive by
a He- wolf, and fo the She- wolf by a Dog, and retain each others feed, and ripen it
to the bringing forth of both kinds. Diodorw faith, that the dog which the ./Ethiopi-
an calls Crocut a , is a compound of the Nature of a Dog and a Wolf. When Ni-
fhtu was hunting, one of his dogs eagerly purfued a (he-wolf, and overtaking her,
began to line her, changing his fiercenefTe into luft. Albertus faith, that the great
Dog called a Maftive, is gendred of a Dog and a Wolf. I my felf faw at Rome, a
dog generated of a wolf ; and at Naples, a (he-wolf of a dog. Ovid, faith, that
the dog Nape was conceived of a Wolf j and Ovid and Virgil both, mention the
dogLycifca, which, as ///Wor? write?, are generated of wolves and dogs coupling
together. Ccelitu call* thefe dogs Cbaonides j being gendred of a kind cf wolf
called Chaos, as fome fuppofe, whence they have that nunc, Eut if we would ge-
nerate fwift dogs, as Grey-hounds, we muft join dogs with fome fwift beafts. As ,
couple dogs and foxes together, and they will

Gender fwift Dogs} called Lacedamoman Dogs.

AriflotBy and out of him (jalen, report, that bcafts may couple together, though
they be of a divers kind ; fo that their nature do not much differ, and they be of a
like bigneffe, and thereby futabie for their times of breeding and bringing forth,
as it is betwixt dogs and wolves ; of both which, arc gendred fwift dogs, called
Lacedzmonian dogs : the firft births are of both kinds ; but in time, after fundry
interchangeable generations, they take after the dam, and follow the kind of the
female. 'Pollux faith, Thcfe arc called Alopecidz, fox-dogs i as Xenophou alfo
writes of them, and makes them to be hunting dogs : and furely the beft and
fwift eft hunting dogs, as Grey-hounds, are long-headed, and (harp-fnourcd, as
foxes are. Hefychiw and Varintu call them Dog-foxes. But now, if we would genc«
rate a kind of

Swift Dogs, and firong withal,

we muft make a medley of fundry kinds of dogs together ; as a Maftive and a Grey-
hound gender a fwift,and withal a ftrong dog,as Arifiotle writes:or elfe couple a dog
with a wolf, or with a Lion j for both thcfe mixtions have Hunts-men devifed ; the

former

Of the (feneration of aAnimals. 37

former, to amend certain natural defers in ope kind; and the latter, to make their
dogs ftronger for the game,and craftier to efpie and take advantagesjas corrmonly,to-
gether with the properties of the body,the qualities of the mindare derived into the
young ones. Ovid mentions fuch mungrels amongft dttaons dogs : and Oppiantu
in his book of Hunting, counfels to join in the Spring-time, divers dogs together, if
we defire to have any excellent parts in any ; artbe dogs of Elis, with them of Arca-
dia j the dogs of Crete, with them of Pannonia ; Thracians, with them of Caria ;
Lacedaemonians, with them of Tufcia ; and Sarmatian dogs, with Spanifti dogs. Thus
we fee, how to generate a dog as ttomackful as a Lion, as fierce as a Tygre, as craf-
ty as a fox, as fpotted as a Leopard, and as ravenous as a Wolf.

Chap. VII.
How to generate pretty little dogs to play with,

BEcaufe a dog is fuch a familiar creature with man, therefore we will (hew
how to generate and bring up a little dog, and one that will be play-full. Firft
of die generation

Of ItttU Dogs.

In times paft, women were wont to eftcem little dogs in great price, efpecially fuch
as came from Malta the Ifland fituate in the AdriiticalSea, neer to Ragufius. Cal-
Umaehus terms them Melitean dogs. And Artfiotle in his Problems, fliews the
manner of their generation ; where he queflioneth, Why amongft living creatures
of the fame kind, tome have greater, and fome have fmaller bodies ; and gives
thereof a double reafon: one, is the ftraightneffe of the place wherein they are
kept ; the other, is the fcarcenefle of their nourishment : and fome have attempted
to leffen the bodies of them, even after their birth ; as they which nourilh up lit-
tle whelps in fmall cages : for thereby they (horten and lelfen their bodies; bat
their parts are prettily well knit together, as appears in Melitaean dogs : for nature
performes her work, notwithftanding the place. Athentus writes, that the Syba-
rites were much delighted with Melitaran dogs, which are fuch in the kind of dogs,
•s Dwarfes are among men. They are much made of, and daintily kept , rather
for pleafure then for any ufe. Thoie that are chofen for fuch a purpofe, are of the
fmalleft pitch, no bigger at their beft growth then a moufe, in body well fet, having
a little head, a fmall fnout, the nofe turning upward, bended fo for the purpofe when
they were young ; long ears, fhort legs, narrow feer, tail fomewhat long, a fiiagged
neck, with long hair to the (houldcrs, the other parts being as it were (horn, in co-
lour white ; and fome of them are fliagged all over. Thefe being fhut up in a cage,
you muft feed very fparingly,that they never have their fill; and let them couple with
the lcaft you can find, that fo lefle may be generated ; for fo Hippocrates write*, that
Northern people, by handling the heads of dogs while they be young, make them
leffe then, and fo they remain even after they are come to their full growth : and in
this flupe they gender others, fo that they make , as it were, another kind. But if
you would know the generation of a

Dog that will do tricks and feats9

one that will make fport of himfelf, and leap up and down, and bark foftly, and
gnaw without biting , and ttand upon his hindermoft legs, holding forth his other
legs like hands , and will fetch and carry 5 you muft firft let them converfe and com-
pany with an Ape , of whom they will learn many fportful tricks ; then let them
line the Ape ; and the young one which is born of them two, will be exceeding
pra&ifed to do feats, fuch as Juglers and Players are wont to (hew by their dogs.
Albertns faith, that thefe kind of dogs may very well be generated of a dog and
a fox.

CHAP*

iijc'f oJifn oj el9))ti *Si Kb* ; baial obo nt *l:>tab kufitn msrro bosrnt •>/ ,1901101 '

n, 8«- 9- • ' • / ' ••Ji; ' '» % tic 'llwljlfcl , \ :tti» • 9fIJ5Ct1'i'^' i;l *9ob .

Chap. VIH.

Hi?w amend the defetts and lackj that are in dogs^ by other means,
^ , - , • <.?.rrii- :rwiq* r>\ >•■ [O) r o ~>v rV" ?n .-'jd gint.*;

\A/E may alfolupply the lacks that are in dogs, by other means, and teach them
new qualities, even by their food and nourifhment : for we have (hewed oft~
times, that qualities are drawn in together with the milk and nonrflfhment where-'
bywelive. filumeilafhewshovt

to make Dogs fireng and fwift s

• If you would have them full of ft out fpirits, you muft fuffer them to fuck the breads
of fome other beafts ; for alwayes the milk, and the fpirits of the nurfe, are much
available , both for the quality of the body, and the qualities of the foul. Oppia-
nm bids us to keep hunting dogs from fucking any ordinary Bitches, or Goats, or
Sheep ; for.this, faith he, will make them too lazy and weak ; but they muft fuck a
tame Lionefle, or Hart, or Doe, or Wolf ; for fo they will become fwift andftrong,
like to their nurfes that give them fnck. And ty£lianui gives the very fame precept,
in the very fame words : for, faith he, when they (hall remember that they had fuch
ftrong and fwift nurfes, nature will make them afhamed not to refemble their quali-
ties. Pollux faith,that for a while,the Dams milk is fitteft meat for whelps jbut after,
let them lap the blood of thofe beafts which dogs have caught, that by little and
little they may be acquainted with the fweetneffe of hunting. Ctefias 10 his book
of Indian matters, writes, that the people called Cynamolgi, do nourifti and feed
many dogs with Bulls blood, which afterward being let loofe at the Bulls of India,
overcome them and kill them, though they be never fo fierce: and the people
themfelvcs milk their Bitches, and drink it, as we drink Goats or Sheeps milk, as
i&lianut reports : and Solinus writes, that this is fuppofed to make that people
flap-mouthed, and to grin like dogs. We may alfo make

an Afs become cottragiousy

if we take him as foon as he is brought forth into the world, and put him to a Mare
in the dark; that fhe may not difcern him ; for her own Colt being privily taken
from her, (he will give fuck to the Afleasto her own foale: and when the hath
done thus for the fpace of ten daies, flic will give him fuck alwayes after wil-
lingly, though (he know him to be none of hers. Thus (hall he be larger, and bet-
ter every way.

"/."..*. . .. j: •...!./-,'■>'• .!um no,

Chap. IX.
How to bring forth divers kinds of Mules,

\7i7 E will fpeak of the commixtion of Affes, Horfes, and fuch like : though it be a
^ known matter, yet it may be we fhall adde fomething which may delight the
Reader. <j£lianm writes out of Democrittts^ that Mules are not Natures work, but
a kind of theft and adultery devifed by man : firft committed by an Affe of Media,
that by force covered a Mare, and by chance got her with foal ; which violence men
learned of him, and after that made a cuftom of it. Homers Scholiaft faith, that
Mules were firft devifed by the Venetians, a City of Paphlagonia. It is written in
G<?»<r//V,chap. 36. v. 24; that Anah^ kin fman, feeding his fathers Affes in the
wildcrneffe, found out Mules. Now

A Mule cometh of a, tMare and an Afs:

They have no root in their own kind; but are graffed as it were, and double-kin-

ded,

Of the (feneration of <iA nimah. %p

ded,as fcirro faith. If you would have a Puong and a big Mule, you m:;ftchufe a
Mareof the largeft aflize, and well-knit joints, nor regarding her fwiftnefle, but her
ftrength. But thsrc is another kind of mule called Hinnus, that cometh

of a Horfe and a She-afs.

But here fpec'ul choice muft he made of the Afle, that fhe be of the largeft affize ,
ftron°!y jointed,and able to endure any labour,and of good qualities alfojfor howfo-
ever it is the bire that gives the name to the young one,and it is called Hinnus,of the
Horfe ; yet it grows altogether like the Dam, having the main and the tail of an
Afle, but Hories ears ; and it is not fo great of body as the Mule is, but much flow-
er, and much wilder. But the beft She-mules of all, are generated

of a wilde Afs, andofa She-afs^

and thefe are the fwifteft too ; for though the Mule that is begotten by the He»afle,
be both in fhape and qualities very excellent in his kind,yec that which is begotten of
the wilde Afle, comech nothing behind the other,butonly that it is unruly and ftub-
born,and fomewhat fcammel,like the Sire.Thefe Mules thus gendced of a wilde Afle,
andaShe-afle,if they be males, and put to cover a Mare, beget excellent young
ones,which by little and little wax t2me,refembling the fhape and mildcefle of their
Sire, but the ftomack and fwiftnefle of their Grand-fire; and they have exceeding
hard feet, as Columella writes. Thefe happily are the Mules which Ariftotle writes,
are only in Syria, (vvift, and fertile, called by the common name of Mules, becaufe
of their fhape, though their kind be of a wild Afle. But there is a more common
kind of

Strong Mules gendred of a Ball and an A fs>

which is a fourth fort of Mules, found in Gratianopoli?,and called by a French name,
Jumar. Gefner report ?, that at the foot of the Hill Spelungus in Rhetia, was feen a
Horfe gendred of a Mare and a Bull. And I my felf faw at Ferraria, certain beafts
in the fhape of a Mule, but they had a Bulls head, and two great knobs in (lead of
horns i they had alio a Bulls eyes, and were exceeding ftomackful, and their colonr
was black : a fpedacle, wherewith we were much delighted. I have heard, that in
France, they be common; but I could fee none there, though I parted through the
whole Country.

Chap. X.

How to mingle the Sheep and Goats together^ by generation.

IF we would better any qualities in a Ram, we mud effect it by coupling them
with wild beafts, fuch as are not much unlike>either in quantity or in kind. There
is a beaft called

Mufymu, gendred of a Goat and a %^m.

Tlinj faith, that in Spain, but efpecially in Corfica, there are beafts called Mufimones
not much unlike to Sheep, which have Goats hair, but in other parts, Sheep : the
young ones which are gendred of them, coupling with Sheep, are called by the
AntientSjUmbri: Strabo calls them Mufimones. But Albertus calls them Mufini
or Mufimones. which are gendred of a Goat and a Ram. I have heard that in Rhe-
tia, in the Helvetian confines, there are generated certain beafts, which are Goats in
the hinder parts, but in the former parts, Sheep or Rams ; but they cannot live
long, but commonly they die, as foon as they are born : and that there the Rams be-
ing grown in years, are very ftr©ng and lufiful, and fo oft-times meeting with goats,

^,0 Natural Magick, TZook^i.

do run over them : and that the young ones which wilde Rams beget of tame Sheep,
are in colour like the Sire, and fo is their breed after them - and the wool of the
firft breed is foaggy, but in their after-breed loft and tender. On the other fide,
there is a beart called

Cinirtu, generated of a He-goat) and an Ewe,

as the fame Albert™ writeth. But the beft devifed adultery is, to couple in gene-
ration, and thereby to procreate young ones, of

A wilde and a tame Coat.

Writers affirm, that whatfoever kind hath fome wilde, and fome tame, the wi'de-
neffe of them, it" they ccuple with the tame of the fame kind, is altered in the fuc-
ceeding generations ; for they become tame. Columella writes, that many wilde
Rams were brought out of Africa into Cales, by feme that fet out games before
the people; and Columella, the Uncle of this Wjirer, bought fome of them, and
put them into his grounds ; and when they were fomewhat tame, ne let them co-
ver his Ewes: and thefe brought lambs that were rough, and hadthe colour of
their Sire: but thefe then afterward coupling with the Ewes of Tarentum, begot
lambs that had a thinner and a fofter fleece. And afterward, all their fucceeding
generations refembled the colour of their ^ires, and Grand- fires, bnt the gent le-
neffe and foftneffe of their Dams. The like is experienced in Swine: for we may
bring forth

Of a wild and a tame Swine, the beaft called Hebrides :

for a Boar is exceeding hot in luft, and wonderfully defires coition ; infomuch,th t
if the female refufe to couple with him,either he will force her,or kill her.And furely
howfoever, fome wilde beads being made tame, are thereby unfit for generation,
as aGoofe, a Hart brought up by hand from his birth ; and a Boar is hardly fruit-
ful! in fuch a cafe : yet there is no kind fo apt for generation, the one being wilde,
and the other tame, as the kind of Swine is. And thofe which are thus gendred,
thefe half-wilds, are called Hybrides, happily becaufc they are generated in re-
proachful adultery : for fignifies reproach.

Chap. XI.

Of fome other commixtions, -whereby other bea(ls of divers kinds are generated.

will fpeak yet farther of the commixtion of divers beafts differing in kinde ;
as alfo of other mixtions derived from thefe, fo to find out all fuch kinds : and
moreover we will fhew,that of their ycurg, leme take after the Sire moft,and fome
after the Dim. Andfirft,that

A Leonard is gendred of a Libard and a Lionefs.

The LioneCTe is reported to burn in luft ; and becaufe the Lion is not fo fit for copu-
lation, by reafonof his fuperfluity of heat, therefore fhe entertains the Libard in-
to the Lions bed : but when her time of bringing forth draws neer , (he gets away
into the Mountains, and fuch places where the Libards haunt : for they bring forth
fpotted whelps, and therefore nurfe them in thick woods very covertly, making
fhew to the Lions, that they go abroad only to feek fome prey ; for if the Lions at
any time light upon the whelps, they tear them in pieces, as being a baftard brood,
as Thiloflratm writes. In the wilde of Hircania, there are Leopards, as it were, ano-
ther kind of Panthers, which are known well enough, which couple with theLio-
nclTe, and beget Lions but they are but bafe Lions,as Solintts writes. Iftodert faith,

Of the (generation of Animals. 4.1

that the Libard and the Lionefle coupling together, procreate a Leopard, and to
make a third kind. Tliny faith, Thac thole Lions which are generated of Li-
bard?, do wane che mones of Lions. And Solwut faith, that the Lion can find
cut by his fmell, when the Lionefle hath played the Harlot; and leeks to re-
venge it upon her with all his might : and therefore the Lionefie wifhes h^r
felf in fome River, or elfe keeps aloof from him, till the lcent be wafted.
Now as there are two fores of Mules, one of a Horte and an Afle, the other
of an Afie and a Mire; io there are two forts cf Leopards, one of a Li-
bard and a Lioneffe, the other of a Lion and a Panther, or She-libard : that is
in body like a Lion, but not in courage; this is in bedy and colour like a Libard,
bac no: in ftomack : for all double-kinded creatures , take aloft after their
mother, efpecially for frnpe and quantity of their bodie?. Claudi*rmi faith ,
true there is a kinde of Libard, which he calls a Water-libard , that is gene-
rated of a mingled feed, when a ftrong and vigorous Lib5rd meeteth with a
Lioneff*, and happily coupleth with h;r: and this kinde of Libard is like the
Mre for his fpots, but his back and the portraiture of his body is like his Dam,
Now there is another copulation of the Lionefle, when the

Hyana, ani the Ltoneffe gender the beafi Crocuta ;

for the Lionefle is very furious in !uft, (as we fhewed before) and couples
with divers kinds of beafts: For Plmy writes , and Solimts writes the fame „
That the Hyaena and the Lionefle of /Ethiopia, gender the beaftCrccuta. Like-
v ifc the Panther is a moftluftful beaft, and fhe alio couples with beafts of divers
kinds ; with a Wolf efpecially : of both which, the i

Hycopanther^ or beaft called Thoesy is gendred ;

for the Panther, when her facoting is ccme, goeth up and down, and makes
a great noile, and thereby aflembles many, both of her own kind, and of o-
ihe: kinds alfo. And amoegft the reft, the Wolf oft-times meets and cou-
ples with her, and from them is generated the beaftThoes, which refembles
the D^m in the fpots of his skin, but in his looks he refembles the Sire.
Ojianm faith, That the Panther and the Wolfe do gender this Thoes, and
vet he is of neither kinde : for, faith he, oft-times the Wolfe couieih to the
Panthers Den, snd couples with her ; and thence is generated the Thoes :
whole skin is very hard, and is meddled with both their fhapes; skinned like
a Panther, and headed like a Wolfe. There is alfo a

Thoes gendred of a Wolf and a female JJy&na.

This medley, Uefychim and Varinns have defcribed ; That of them comes this
Thoes, as the Greeks call it. The Scholiaft upon Homer faith, Thatic is like
to the Hyaena: and feme call it Chaos. Plmy faith, That this Chaos, which
by the French is called Rapbium , was firit let forth for a fhew , in the
psmes of Tcmpey the Great: and that it hath fpots like a Leopard, but is fa-
ftiioned like a Wolf. But the Greeks nuke mention cf a very flrangc adul-
tery, thac

The BiMrian Camel is gendred of a Camel and a Swine ;

for Didjmtts , in his workes called Geoponica, reporteth , that . in certain
Moumaines of Jr-dh , Boares and Camels feed together, and fo fall to co-
pulation, and gen er a Camel: and this Camel lo gendred, hath a dcuble
nfing, cr two butches upm his back. Eut as the Mule which is generated
of a Horle and an Afs, is in many qualities like the Sire , fo the <£*mcl which

I is

Natural Magick, TSooJ^i.

is begotten of a Boar, is ftrong and full of ftiffe briftles like a Boar - and is
not lb foon down in the mud as other Camels are, buc hi lp.; himfelf out Judily by
his own force ; and will carry twice fo great a burthen as others. But tbereafon
of their name, why they are called Ba&rian Camels, is this; Becaufe the firft thac
ever was io generated, was bred in the Country of Ba&ria.

Chap. XII.

Of fundry c ovulations ^whereby a man genders with fundry kinds of Beafis.

IAm much afhamed to fpeak of it , that Man being the chief of all living Crea-
tures, fhould fo foully difparage himfelf , as to couple with bruit beafts,
and procreate fo many half-favage Monfters as are often feen; wherein Man
(hews himfelf to be worfe then a beaft. I will relate lbme few examples
hereof, thereby to make fuch wicked wretches an oblo-quie to the World,
and their names odious to others. Plutark. faith, That bruit beafts fall not in
love with any , but of their own kinde ; but man is fo incenfed with
luft, that he is not afhamed mod villanoufly to couple himfelf with Mares
and Goats , and other Beafts ; for Man is of all other Creatures moft leche-
rous, at all feafons fit and ready for copulation; and befides, agrees with ma-
ny living Creatures in his time of breeding : all which circumHances make
much for the producing of monftrous, and half-favage broods. And howfoever
the matter we (peak of is abominable, yet it is not fruitleffe, but helps much to
the knowledge of fome other things in the fearching out of the fecreciesof na-
ture. Plutark ya his Tract, which he calls the Banquet of the wife men, fheweth,
that a fhepherd brought into the houfe of Periander,

A Babe gendred of a Man and a Mare,

which had the hands, and neck, and head of a Man, but otherwife it was like
a Horfe ; and it cried like a young child. Tkales, as foon as he faw it, told
Periander, thac he did not efteem it as a Grange and monttrous thing, which
the gods had fent to portend and betoken the (editions and commotions
likely to enfue, as Diodes thought of it ; but rather as a naturall thing: and
therefore his advice was , that either they fhould have no Horfe-keepers • or
if they had, they fhould have wives of their own. The fame Author in his
Parallels , reportcth out of Agefilatu his third book of Italian matters, thac
Ffflvius Stella loathing the company of a woman, coupled himfelf with a Mare,
df whom he begat a very beautiful maiden-child ; and (he was called by a fit name,
Epna. And the fame P/«wr^reporeth alfo of

A maiden that was generated of a Man and an Afs ;

for Arifionymns Epbejitts, the Son of 'DemonftratM , could not away with a
womans company , but made choice of an Affe to lie with ; and (he brought
him forth after a certain time , a very comely maiden , and in {hew exceed-
ing beautiful: fhc was called Onofcelis , that is to fay, one having Affes
thighes : and this ftory he gathered out of Arifiotle , in the fecond of his
Paradoxes. But Galen cannot think this poffible; nay, it is fcarce poflible
in nature, feeing a Man and an Affe differ fo much as they do: for if a
man fhould have to do with an Affe , her wombe cannot receive his feed,
becaufe his genitories are not long enough to convey it into her place of
conception » or if it were , yet (he would prefently , or at leaft not long

Of the (feneration of Animals, 4.3

a'ter, tmrre hi; feed. Or, if (he could fo conceive, and bringherbirt.fi to per-
fection , how , or by what food fhould it be nourifhed after the birth ? Bur,
though this can hardly be, yet I do no: think it altogether impoflible , feeing all
men are not of a like complexion, but feme may be found, whofe complexion doth
not much differ from a horfes ; and lbme men alio have longer and larger genito-
rics then others ; as alio fome Mares and Affes have leffe and fhorter genitories
then others have : and it may be too, that fome celefiial influence hath a ftroke
inir, byenliving the feed, and caufing the Dam to conceive it, and bring it forth
in due time. And becaufe all theie things do very feldom concur together, there-
fore fuch births are very feldom fecn. tAZlianus writeth another ftory, That there
was once generated

A half-beaft of a Man and a Coat.

There was a certain young man in Sybaris, who was called Crachis, a lufter after
Goats ; and being over-ruled by his luff , coupled himfelf with a fair Goat ,
the faireff he could light upon , and lived with her as his Love and Concu-
bine, beff owing many gifts upon her, as Ivy and Rufhes to eat; and kept:
her mouth very fweet, that he might kiffe her; and laid under her foft graffe*
that flic might lie eafie, and flsep the better. The He-goat , the Ring-leader
of the Herd, efpying this, watcht his time when the young man was on flcep, and
fell upon him and fpoiled him. But the She-goat, when her time was come,brought
forth an infant that had the face of a man, but the thighs of a Goat. The fame
Author writcs,That

Women lie with He -goats, and with the Cynocephali ;

for the He-goats are fo lecherous, that in the madneffe of their luff, they will fet
upon Virgins, and by force ravifh them. Herodotus in his fecond book, writeth
of a He- goat , that had to do with a woman openly, and in the fight of many
men (fandingby. Strabo faith, that in the Mediterranean Sea, a little without the
mouth of a :River neer to Sebenis and ^Pharnix, there is an ifland called
Xoas, and a City within the Province of Sebenis, and the Citiel Hcrmopo-
lis and Mendes, where Pan is honoured for a Gpd, and with him is likewife
honoured a He-goat ; and there , as Pindaru* reports , He-goats have to do
with women : In the utmoft corner of the winding of the River 'Kilns , faith
he, are fed certain Herds of Goats; and there the lecherous He-goats are
mingled with women. */£lianust\(o writes of the Indians, that they will not
admit into their Cities any red A pes, becaufe they are oft-times mad in luff towards
women ; and if at any time they find fuch A pes, they hunt and deftroy them, as be-
ing adulterous beafts. Tliny writes alfo, That

Man couples with divers kinds of beafts ;

for fome of the Indians have ufual company with bruit beafts ; and that which
is fo generated, is half a beaff, and half a man.

Chap. XIII.

That divers kinds of birds may be generated of divers birds coupling together,

BEfore we come to fpeak of the commixtion of birds , it is meet to prc-
fcribe certain obfervations for the mote eafie effecting thereof • that if
we have need to fnpply any defects in any birds, wc may be the better

I 2 inftrufted

4.4- Natural Mag ick, Eoof^z.

inftru&ed how co perform it readily, to make them fitter for oar ufes. We (hewed
before out of Anftotle^tx. if we would mingle Creatures of divers kinds, we muft
fee that they be of like bigneffe, of a like proportion of time for their breeding,
of a like colour; but efpecUlly, that they be very lecherous ; for otherwife they
will hardly infert themfelves into a ftrange ftock. If a Falconer be defirous to pro-
duce fighting Hawks, or Cocks, or other birds, he muft firft fcek out good lufty
males, fuch as be thong and ftomackful, that they may derive the fame qualities in-
to their young ones. Next, they muft procure ftrong and couragious females: fcr
if but one of them be ftomackful, the young ones will rather take after the dulneffe
and faint-heart of the one, then after the quicknefle and courage of the other.
When you have thus made choice of the belt breeders, before their copulation,
you muft keep them together within doors, and bring them by little and little ac-
quainted with each other ; which you may beft do, by caufingthem to feed and to
live together. Therefore you muft prepare a pretty little cottage, about ten foot
loag,andten foot broad ; and let all the windows be made out toward the South,
fo that there may good ftore of light come in at the top of the houfe. In the mid-
dle you muft make a partition with lattifes or grates, made of Oficrs : and let the
rods ftand fo far afundcr, as that the birds head and neck may go in between them :
and in one fide of the room, let that bird be alone by her felf , which you would
make tame; in the other fide, put the other birds which you purpofe to join in co-
pulation with the ftrange bird. So then, in the prime of the Spring, (for that is the
time wherein all Creatures are molt eager in luft) you muft get you fruitful birds,
and let them be of the fame colour, as is the bird which you defire to become tame,
Thefc you muft keep certain daics at the fame boord as it were, and give them their
meat together, fothat the ftrange bird may come at it through the grate : for by this
means (he will learn to be acquainted with them, as with her fellows, and will live
quietly by them, being as it were kept in prifon from doing them any wrong :
whereas otherwife (he would be fo fierce upon them, that (he would fpare none,
but if fhe could, deftroy them all. But when once by tra& of time, and continu-
al acquaintance with his fellows, this male-bird is become fomewhac gentle, look
which of the females he is mort familiar witb,let her be put in the fame room where
he is ; and give them both meat enough. And becaufe commonly he either kills,
or doth am. care for the firft female that is put unto him, therefore, left the keeper
(houldlofe all his hope, he muft keep divers females for fupply. When you perceive
that he hath gotten the female with young, prefently you muft divorce one of them
from the other,and let him in a new mate,thac he may fill her alfo:and you muft feed
her well till fhe begin to fit upon her egges, or put the egges under fome other that
fits. And thus fhall you have a young one, in all refpe&s like the Cock : but as
foon as the young ones are out of the fhell, let them be brought up by themfelves,
not of their mother, but of fome other Hen-bird. Laftof all, the females of this
brood, when they be come to ripeneffe, that they ftand to their Cock, their firft
or their fecond brood will be a very exaft and abfolute kinde.

Chap. XIV.
Divers commixtions of Hens with ether Birds.

WE will begin with Hens, becaufe they are in great requeft with us, and are
houfhold-birds, alwayes before our eyes j and befides, they may be very pro-
fitable and gainful, if we can tell how to procreate and bring up divers kinds of
£hera. Cocks are of all other moft lecherous $ and they fpend their feed, not only
atthe fight of their Hens, but even when they bear them crake or cackle ? and to
reprcffcWir luft, they are oftentimes carved. They tread and fall to their fport,
almoft all the year long. Some Hens are very lufty, and withal very fruitful s info-
rauch that they lay three-fcore egges before they fit tohatch them: yea, fome that
; arc kept in a pen, do lay twice in one day 5 and feme bring forth fuch ftore

Of the (feneration of (tdmmals. 4.5

o? egges , that they confume themfelves thereby, and die upon it. We will
firft foew

How to couple <• Partridge with a Hen,

Partridges are much given to luft, and very eager of coition, and are mingled with
other birds of divers kinds, and they couple betwixt themfelves, and fo have young
ones ; as firft with Hens, of whom they procreate certain birds, which partake of
both kinds in common, for the firft brood ; but in procefle of time, when divers
generations have fuccefltvely paffed,they take meerly after the mother in all refpe&s,
as Artfiotle writeth. The field-cocks are ulually more luftful then houfhold-cocks
are, and they tread their Hens as foon as ever they are off the rouft ; but the Hens
are more inclinable to coition, abouc the middle of the day, as Athenam writes,ouc
of tAlUanm and Theophraftui : of which circumftances we may take our beft advan-
tage in coupling them with Partridges. After the fame manner

A Hen and a Phetfant may gender together ;

for, as Florentitu writes, the Pheafant and the Hen agree both in their time of lay-
ing, either of them bringing forth egges one and twenty daies after conception.
And though (he be not fo wanton as other birds are, yet in their treading time they
are glad of coition, and not very wilde, efpecially thofe that are of the fmaller
fort : for thefe may cafily be made tame,and iuffered to go amongft Hens ; but at their
firft taking they are very fierce, infomuch that they will not only kill Hens , buc
even Peacocks too. Some men bring up Pheafants to make a game of them : buc
fome breed them for delight and pleafure, as I faw at Ferraria in the Princes Court,
where was brought up very great ftore, both of Hens and Pheafants too. And this
hath been an old practice : for in Athentttt we find a faying of ftolomy^ that not on-
ly Pheafants wercfent for out of Media, but the Country Hens, they alfo afforded
good ftore of them, the egges being conceived in them by the treading of a Cock-
pheafanr. Firft then, you muft take a Cock-pheafant,and be very careful in keeping
of him tame amongft your Hens: after that, you muft feek out Country-hens of di-
vers colours, as like the colour of the Hen-Phealant as you can, and let them live
with the Cock-Pheafant, that in the Spring-time he may tread the Hens ; and they
will bring forth fpeckled egges, everywhere full of black fpots,far greater and good-
lier then other egges are. When thefe are hatched, you muft bring up the chicken
with barly-flour, and fome leaves of fmallage fhred in amongft it; for this is
the moft delightful and nouriflhing food that they that they can have. There
is alfo

A Chick,gendred of 4 Pigeon and a Hen :

the Pigeon muft be young, for then he hath more heat and defire of copulation,
and much abundance of feed ; for if he be old, he cannot tread : but young Pigeons
do couple at all times, and they bring forth both Summer and Winter. I had my
f elf at home a fingle Pigeon^c a Hen that had loft her Cock : the Pigeon was of a Urge
fize, and wanton withal; the Hen was but a veryfmall one: thefe lived together,
and in the Spring-time the Pigeon trode the Hen, whereby foe conceived, and in
her due feafon laid egges, and afterward hatched them, and brought forth chicken
that were mixc of either kind, and refembled the ftiape of them both. Ingreatneffe
of body, in fafliion of head and bill,they were like a Pigeon • their feathers very
white and curled, their feet like a Hens feet , but they were overgrown with fea-
thers ; and they nude a noife like a Pigeon : and I took great pleafure in them j
the rather, becaufe they were fo familiar, that they would ftill lit upon the bed, or
nuzzle into fome womans bofom. But there i%yec another mixture, when

A

Natural Magic k. £oo\i.

A Cockjt And a *Pe a, gender the (jallo-Pavm ;

which is otherwife called the Indian-hen, being mixt of a Cock and a Pea, though
the fhape be liker to a Pea then to a Cock. In body and greatneffe it rcfembles
the Pea, but it hath a combe and chackels under the chin like a Cock : it hath the
voice of a Pea, and fpreads forth her tail, and hath iuch varietie of colours as fhe
hath. The talk of her flefh relifhes like a compound of them both ; whereby it ap-
pears, that both kinds are not unfitly matcht together. But afterward, when the
ihe Gallo-pavus and the Pea-cock were brought up tame together, we had of
them very fruitful egges, which being hatcht, yeelded very goodly chickens, whofe
feathers were of a molt orient and glittering colour: and thefe young ones after-
ward growing bigger, were mingled in copulation with Pea-cocks and Pea-hens,
and the brood which was fo generated of them, were in a manner all of the kind
andfafhionof the Pea. The like a man may conjs&ure of other kinds of birds.

Chap. XV.
How to generate Harvkes of divtrs properties,

■^^E will d>ew fome cemmixtions of Hawks, by the example whereof, you may
imagine of your felf the like in other birds : and hereby it fhall appear how we
may amend divers faults and defects in Hawks, and engraffe in them fome new qua-
lities to be derived from their fundry progenitors. And firft, how

The bird Iheocronus is gendred of a Hawk^ And an Eagle \

Hawks are exceeding hot in luft ;and though there be divers kinds of them, yet they
all couple together among themlelves without any difference , as Anftotle writeth :
they couple with Eagles, and thereby engender ballard Eagles. Eagles are moft le-
cherous : and whereas among other creatures, the famale is not alwayes ready and
willing to yeeld to the male for coition ; yet the Eagles never refufe it : for though
they have been trod never foofc , yet Mill, if the male dtfire copulation, the female
prefently yeelds unto him. %/Ehamu accounts ordinary and common Hawks in the
kind of Eagles. Oppianm in his Ixeutio faith, that there is a bird known well
enough, called Theocronus, which is generated of a male Hawk, and a female Ea-
gle. There is a kind of Hawks fo wholly given over to luft, that in the Spring-time
they lofe all their ftrength, and every little bird maps at them ; but in the Summer,
having recovered her ftrength, fhe is fo lufty, that (he flies up and down to revenge
her felf upon thofe little birds ; and as many of them as (lie catches, fhe devours. If
the male of this kind do but hear the voice of the female Eagle,prefently he flies to
her,and they couple together : but the egges which fhe conceives by this bafe copu-
lation, fhe fcorns to hatch and fit upon • and that fhe may not be known of it to the
male Eagle, fhe flies faraway from him: for the male Eagle, if once he perceive
that fhe hath played the harlot, div orces her from him, and is throughly revenged
upon her. Thefe birds are now commonly called Sea-eagles . There is alfo a com-
mixtion, whereby the Hawk mingles himfelf

with a Faxlcon, and with a Buzzard, and the Eagle Nifa •

for Hawks do not onlv couple with their own kind, but with Faulcons, Buzzards,
and Eagles of divers kinds, as alfo with moft of thofe fowles that live upon the
prey and fpoil of other birds ; and according to the diverfity of thofe kinds, divers
kinds of Hawks are generated. Befides, they couple with flrange Faulcons of
other Countries, and other kinds: for as foon as they be hatcht and Pen-feather-
ed, if their parents fee that they are not right Faulcons,piefently they beat them a-
wty; and fo partly becaufe they cannot endure their parents rage, and partly to

Of the (feneration of lAnimais. 47

get their living, aiey flic ^ 'vay into Grange olaces ; and there finding no rrmes of
their own kird,ihey <eek cut a mate of another kind, the like - tn her own kind
that fiie car meer with, and couples with them. Sothen, if you haveHawk^. that
deicend rom t^e right and belt kind, art may more eafily work upon them, then
upon fuch as come of the baler fort. In like manner there may be generated of divers
kinds of Eagles divers fowles, as

The Ofprej) the fowl called Offifragtu^ and Ravens alfo.

Tliny difconrfing of the Ofprey, faith, That they have no proper kinde of their own $
but are defcended from divers forts of Eagles mingled together: and that which
cometnof the Ofprey, is of the kind of Oflifragi ; and that which cometh of the
Offifragijis a kind of little Ravens, and of thefe afterward is generated a kind of
grcar Ravens, which haveno».ffue at all: the Author of which affertions before
*P//«7, was Ariftotlein his book of Wonders. Oppianm faith, that Land-eagles are
a baltard brood, which their parents beat out of their nerts, and fo they are for a
while nourished by fome other fowles, till ac length they forfake the Land, and
fcek their living in the Sea.

Chap. XVI.
Of the commixtion of divers kinds of fijhes.

IT isa very hard thing for a man to know, whether divers kinds of fiftiesbe min-
gled together or no ; becaufe they live altogether under the waters, fothatwc
cannot obferve their doings ; efpecially fuch as they praftife againft the ordinary
ccurfeof nature. But if we rightly confider that which hath been fpoken bctore,we
may eafily cfFed their commix? ion, namely, if we take fuch fifties as are much given
to venery, ana match thofe together which are alike in bignefs ; in time of breed-
ing, and in other fuch conditions as were before required. Anftotle in his book
cf living Creatures, faith, that divers fifties in kind never mingle their feeds to-
gether: neither did ever any man fee two fifties of divers kinds couple in generati-
on, excepting only thefe two,

"the Skate and the Ray^ which engender the Rhinobatos J

which is fo called of both his parents names compounded together. And out of
Arifietle^ TUny report eth, that no fifties of divers kinds mingle their feeds, fave
only the Skate and the Ray ; of both which is gendred the fifh Rhinobatos, which
is like the Ray in all his former parts, and hath his name in Greek anfwerable to
his nature; fork is compounded of the names of both his parents. And of trjis
kind of fiih I never read nor heard any thing befides this. Theodoras Gaz>a tranflates
the word Rhinobatos into Sqaatim-raia in Latine, that is, a Skate-ray: and though:
fotne deny that there is any tuch fifti, yet furely it is found in the Sea about Naples;
and Simw Firttes, a very learned Philofopher of Naples, did help me to the fighe
of one of them . and the pi&ure thereof is yet referved, and it is to be feen.

Chap. XVII.
How we m*f produce new and firange Lfflon/lers.

STringe and wonderful monfters, and aborfements, or untimely births, may be
geadred of living Creatures, as by thofe wayes of which we fpake before, name-
ly, the commixtion of divers kinds; fo alfo by other means, as by the mixture of
divers feeds in one wombe, by imagination, or fuch likecaufes. Concerning Ima-
gination, we will fpeak hereafter. Now at this time let us fee the wayes of ca-
gendring fuch monfters, which the Ancients have fet down, that the ingenious Rea-
der

4$ Natural Mag icl 'Boofe.

dec may learn by the confideration of thefe wayes, to invent of himteif other wayes
how to generate wonderful monfters. Democntxiy zsAnftotle faith, held that the
mixture of many feeds, when one is received into the w ombe before, and another
not Jong after, k> that they are meddled and confounded together , is thecaul'eof
the generation of many MoDliers, that fometimes they have two heads, and mere
parts then the nature of their kinde requires. Hence it is that thole birds which
uic often coitions , do oftentimes bring forth iuch births. But Impedocles, ha\ing
forecaft all lcruples and doubts within himielf, ieems to have attained the truth
in this cafe : for he faith, that the caufes of the generation of monhrous Creatures,
Ere thefe ; either if the feed be too much, or if it be too little, or if it light not in
the light place, or if it be fcattercd into many parts, crif the congredienrs be not
rightly affected to procreate according to the ordinary courfe of nature. And Stm-
ton afSgnes many realms, why iuch monfters are generated ; as, becaufe feme new
feed is call upon the former, or fome of the former feed is diminifhed, or fome parts
trar.ipoied, cr thewombe puffed up with winde. And fome Pnyfitians alcribe ic
principally to the place of conception, which is eft-times mifplaced, by reafonof
irfl.ik ns. Anftotle faith, that fuch Creatures as are wont to bring fcrth many
y ung ones at one burthen, elpecially fuch as have many ceils cr receiprs for feed
in t'neii wombe, do moit commonly produce m?nHers .• lor in that they bring forth
feme that are not fo folly perfect, thereby they degenerate moreeafily itto mon-
fters: elpecially of all other, the tigs that arc not farrowed to their due time, but
fomecei aiodayes after the reft of the litter ; for thefe cannor chufe but be mon-
llers in one part or other becaufe whatsoever is either more or lefs then that which
the kind requires, is monftrous,and befides Nature. And in his bock cf Problems
he faith, that kmil four-footed Creatures biing forth monfters : but Man, and the
greater forts of four-fcoted beafts, as Horfes and i ff <=, do not produce them fo of-
ten. His reafon is, becaufe the fmaller kind^, as Bitches, ^cw -, Goats, ard Ewes,
are far more fruitful then the greater kinds are; (or, of thofe, every one brings
forth at leaft one, and fome bring forth for the moft part, many at occe. Now
Monfters are wont to be produced then, when there is a commixtion or conful:on of
many feeds together, either by reafon of fundry copulations, rr becaufe of feme
indifpofition in the place of conception. Hence it is, that birds alio may brirg
forth monfters ; for they lay egges fometimes that have a double yelk : and if there
be no fmall skin that keeps both the yelks afucder, then the corfnfon cf thtm
caufeth the breed to become monftrcus. Nature is earneft in the fefliioning of a
living Creature j and firli fhapes out the principal parts of the body: afterwards
' fiic wcrketh fometimes mere, fometimes kffe, as thematrercan rfford which fhe
works upon, Bill framing her felf thereunto : whereby it c< meth to psffe, ihat if tte
matter be defective, then fhe cannot have her forth ; if it be overmuch, then is na-
ture overcome, and fo both wayes hindered of her purpofe , ard thereby brings
forth mcnflrcus broods, as in artificial births hath been ofteD feen; feme being
defective, as having but one leg,or bur one eye ; fome exceeding the ordinary cour'e,
as having four eyes, or four arms, or four feet, and femetimes having both fexes in
them, which are called Hermaphrodites : and fo, look how ycur art difpofes and
layes things together, and after the fame manner, Nature muft needs accc mnlifh her
work, and finifh your beginnings. But whofoever wculdlt bring forth any mon-
gers by art, thou muff learn by examples,and by fuch principles be directed as here
thru mayeft find Firft,thoti mufi cocfider with thv felf, what things are likely and
poffibie to be brought to p^fl; : for if ycu attempt likely matters, Nature will aflilt
you, and make good your endeavours, and the work will much delight you : for you
flull feefuch thirgs effected, as you would not think of ; whereby alfo you may find
the mems to procure more admirable tS.As. There be many reafons and wayes,
whereby may be generated

KMonfiers in Man.

rnrft,thi5 "may come by reafonof inordinate or unkindly copulations, when the

feed

Of the (feneration of Animals. 4.9

feed is not conveyed into the due and right p aces : again, it may come by the
narrowncfle of the wembe, when there arc two young ones in it, and for
want of room, are preflcd and grow together: again, it may come by the
maning of thole thin skinnes of partition, which nature hath frJmtd in a
womans wombe, to diftinguifl* and keep afunder the young ones. Pliny
writes, that in the year of Caitu L<e/itu and Lucius Domitix* Confulflhip, there
was born a maid-child that had two heads , four hands , and was of double
nature in all rel'pefts : and a little before that, a woman fervaoc brought
forth a child, that had four feet, and four hands, and four eyes, and as ma-
ny ears , and double natured every way. Phtlofiratus in the life of Apollonius
writes , that there was born in Sicily, a boy having two heads. I my felf
faw at Naples, a.boy alive, out of whofc breaft came forth another boy, ha-
ving all his parts , but that his head only ftuck behind in the other boyes
breaft } and thus they had Ricken together in their mothers wombe, and their
na\ Us alfo did cling each to other. I have alfo feen divers children having four
hands and four feet, with fix fingers upon one hand, and fix toes upon one foot,
and monftrcus divers other wayes, which here were too long to rehearfe. By the
like caufes may

UHonJlers be generated in Beafts.

We fliewed before, that fuch beafts as brin^ forth many young ones at one burthen,
efpecially iuch as have many cells or receits in their wombe for feed, do of-
tencft produce Monfters. Ntcocreon the Tyrant of Cyprus, had a Hart with
four horns. o£lianus faw an Oxc that had five feet; one of them in his
fhoulder , fo absolutely made, and fo conveniently placed , as it was a great
help to him in his going, Livj faith , that at Sefla-Arunca a City in Italy ,
there was eaned a Lambe that had two heads j and at Apo\is, another Lambe
having five feetj and there was a kitling with but three feet. Rhafes re-
ports, that he faw a Dog having three heads. And there be many other
like matters which I have no pleafurc to fpeak of. But it may fecm
that

LMonflers in Birds maybe more eafily produced %

both in refpe& that they arc more given to luft, and becaufe alio they bear in
their bodies many cggesac once, whereby they may ftick together, and eafily
cleave each to other: and bclides this, thofe birds that are by nature very
fruitfull , arc wont to lay egges that have two yelkes. For thefe caufes. Co-
lumella and Leontiuus the Greek , give counfel to air and purge the houfes
where Hennes are, and their nefts, yea and the very Henncs themfelves, with
Brimftone, and pitch, and torches; and many do lay a plate of iron, or fome
nailes heads, and fome Bay-Tree boughs upon their nefts ; for all thefe are
fuppofed to be very good prefervatives againft monftrous and prodigious
births. And Columella reports farther , that many do ftrew graffe , and Bay-
Tree boughs , and heads of Garlkk, and iron nails, in the Hens nefts ; all which
are fuppofed to be good remedies againft thunder, that it may not marre thcic
egges • and thefe alfo do fpoilall the imperfect chickens, if there be any, before
ever they grow to any ripentiTe. */£liarw reporteth out of Apion , that in the
time of 0*««wKingof the South, there was feen a Crane that had two heads;
and in another Kings daics, another bird was feen that had four heads. We will fhew
alfo how to hatch

A chickgu -with four wings and four fecty

which we learn out Arifiotle. Amongft egges , fome there are oft-times thtc
have two yclkes , if the Henncs be fruitful : for two conceptions cling

K and

50 Natural Magick y Soo^ z.

and grow together, as being very near each to other ; the like whereof we
may fee in the fruitsof Trees , many of them being twins, and growin* into
each other. Now , if the two yelks be diliinguifhed by a fmall skinne^ then
they yield two perfect chickens without any blemifli: but if the yelks be' med-
dled one with another, without any skinne to part them, then that which
is produced thereof, is a Monger. Seek out therefore feme fruitful Hermes'
and procure fome of the perfected; egges that they lay : you rmy know
which are for your purpofe, by the bignefle of them ; if not , then hold
them againft the Sun , and you (hall difcern, both whether there be in them
two yelks, and alio whether they be difiingnifhed or no: and if you finde
in them fuch plenty of matter, that you fee they are for your turn, let them
be fitten upon, their due time, and the chickens will have four win°s and
four legges: but you mult have a fpecial care in bringing them up. And as
fome egges have two yelkes, fo there arc feme that have three : but thefe
are not fo common ; and if they could be gotten , they would yield chickens
with fix wings and fixs legges, which would be more wonderful. There hath
been feeri a fmall £>uck with four feet, having a broad ihin bill, her fore-
parts black, her hinder-parts yellow, a black head, whitifh eyes, black
wings, and a black circle about her neck, and her back and tail black, yel-
low feet, and not (landing far afunder •, and fhe is at this day kept to befeen
at Torga. No quefiien but fhe was generated after the fame manner as wc
fpake even now of chickens. So they report of a Pigeon that was feen which
had four feet. And many fuch monflers we have oft-times batcht at tome
for pie afure lake. So alio are Serpents generated, having many heads and ma-
ny tailes. Jrifiotle writes of certain Serpents , that they may be generated
after the fame manner, to have'many heads. The Poets, and the ancient de-
vifers of Fables, do fpeak much of that Hydra Lerna?a, which was one of
Hercules labours to overcome : which Fiction was without all queftion occa-
fioned by thefe kinds of Mongers. And whilft I was imployed about the
writing of this prefent work, there was in Naples a Viper feen alive, which
had two heads, and three cloven tongues, and moved everyone of them up and
down. Imyfclf have feen many Lizards that had two or three tails , which
the common people moll foolifhly efteem to be a jeft ; and it cannot be but thefe
were generated of fuch egges as had two yelks.

Chap. XVIIT.
Of certain other waies how to produce mtnflrous births,

tX/E may alfo produce Monflers by another way then that which we fpake of
before ; for even after they are brought forth , we may fafhion them into a
monflrous fhape, even as we lift: for as we may fhape young fruits as they grow,
into the fafhion of any vcfTel or cafe that wc make for them to grow into;
as- we may make a Quince like a mans head, a Cucumber like a Snake, by ma-
king a cafe of that fafhion for them to grow in; fo alfo we may do by the
births of living Creatures. Hippocrates in his book of Air, and Water, and
Places, doth precilely fet down the manner hereof ; and (Tieweth how they
do it, that dwell by the River Phafis, all of them being very long-headed,
whereas no other Nation is fo befides. And furely Cuftcm was the firft
caufe that they had fuch heads ; but aftciward Nature framed her felf to that Cu-
flome ; infemuch that they etfeemed it an honourable thing to have a very
long head. The begirnirg of that Cuftcme was thus. As focn as the child
was new born, whiles his head was yet foft and tender, they would pre-
fently crufrv it in thtir hards, and fo caufe it to grow out in length; yea they
wculd bindit up with fwathing bands, that it might not grow round, but all
in lergth: ar.d by this cuflcm it came to p»fle, that their heads afterward

grew

Of the (feneration of Animals* 51

grew fuch by nature. And in procefs of time, they were born with fuch heads,
io that they needed not to be fo framed by handling ; for whereas the generative
feed is derived from all the parrs of the body, found bodies yielding good feed,
but crazie bodies unfound feed ; and oftentimes bald fathers bef etbaid children ;
and blear-eyed fathers, blear-eyed children ; and a deformed father, for the moft
part a deformed childe ; and the like alfocomeih to paffe concerning other fhapes:
why fhould not alio long-headed fathers generate long-headed children ? But
now they are not born with fuch heads , becaufe that pra&ife is quite out of
ufe ; and fo nature, which Was upheld by that cuftom , ceafeth together with
the cuttom. So if we would produce a two-legged Dog , fuch as fome arc
carried about to be leen ; we mult take very young whelps, and cut off their
feet, but heal them up very carefully: and when they be grown to flrength,
join them in copulation with other dogs that have but two legs left j and if
their whelps be nor two-legged, cut off their legs ftill by fucceffion, and ac
the laft , nature will be overcome to yield their two-legged dogs by generati-
on. By fome fuch pra&ife as you heard before , namely by handling , and
often framing the members of young children, Mid-wives are wont to amend
imperfc&ions in them ; as the crookedneffe or fharpneffe of their nofes, or fuch like,

Chap. XIX.

Of the wonderful force of imagination ; and how to produce party-coloured births,

PLutar^ln hisrehearfal of the opinions of Philofophers, writes, that Empedocles
held that an infant is formed according to that which the mother looks upon ac
the time of conception : for, faith he, women were wont to have commonly pictures
and images in great requetf, and to bring forth children refembling the fame. Htppo-
irate*) to clear a certain womans honcfty that had brought forth children very
unlike their parents, afcribed the caufe of it to a certain picture which fhe had
in her chamber. And the fame defence QuintMan ufeth on the behalf of a woman,
who being her felf fair, had brought forth a Black- moor, which was fuppofed by all
men to be her flaves fon. Damafcen reports, that a certain young woman brought
forth a child that was all hairy ; and fearching out the reafon thereof, he found the
hiary image of John Baptift in her chamber, which fhe was wont to look upon.
Heliodorits begins that excellent hiftory which he wrote, with the Queen of jEthi.
opia, whobroughc forth Chariclea a fair daughter ; the caufe whereof was, the
fable of Andromeda pictured in that chamber , wherein fhe lay with the King.
We read of fome others , that they brought forth horned children , becaufe
in the rime of their coition they looked upon the fable of Att&on painted be-
fore them. Many children have hare-lips, and all becaufe their mothers being
with child , did look upon a Hare. The conceit of the mind, and the force
of Imagination is great; but it is then moft operative, when it is exceffively
bent upon any fuch thing as it cannot attain unto. Women with child ,
when they long moft vehemently , and have their minds earneftly fet upon
any thing, do thereby alter their inward fpirits ; the fpirits move the blood,
and fo imprint the likeneffe of the thing mufed upon, in the tender fubftance
of the child. And furely all children would have feme fuch marks or other,
by reafon of their mothers longing, if this longing were not in fome fort fa-
tisfied. Wherefore the fearchers out of fecretshave juftly afcribed the marks and
fignes in the young ones , to the imagination of the mother ; efpecially that
imagination which prevails with her in the chiefeft anions, as in coition, in
letting go her feed, and fuch like: and as man of all other living creatures, is moft
fwift and fleeting in his thoughts andfulleft of conceits ; fo the variety of his wit
affords much variety of fuch eflfc&s ; and therefore they are more in mankind, then
10 other living creatures: for other creatures are not fo divers minded, fo that

K 2 they

jt Natural Magick, ^Boo/^i.

they may the better bring forth every one his like in his own kind. Iacob was well
acquainted with this force of imagination, as the Scriptures witneffe : for en-
deavouring

To bring forth particoloured Sheep,

he took that courfe which I would with every man to take, that attempts any fuch
enterprize. He took certain Rods and Poles of Popler, and Almond-tree , and
fuch as might becafily balked; and cut off half the rine, pilling them by white
ftrakes, fothat the Rods were white and black in feveral circles, like a Snakes co-
lour. Then he put the Rods which he had pilled, into the gutters and watering-
troughs, when the Sheep came to drink, and were in heat of conception, that they
mighc look upon the Rods. And the Sheep conceived before the Rods,and brought
forth young of party-colours, and with fmall and great ipots. A delightful fight it
was. Now afterward, Iacob parted thefe Lambes by themfelves, and turned the faces
of the other Sheep towards thefe party-coloured ones, about the time of concep-
tion : whereby it came to pafle, that the other Sheep in their hear, beholding
thofe that were party-coloured, brought forth Lambs ot the like colour. And fuch
experiments might be praftiled upon all living Creatures that bear wool • and
would take place in all kinds of beatis ; for this courfe will prevail even in

(jemrat'mg party-coloured Horfes\

A matter which Horfe- keepers, and Horfe-breeders do pradtife much ; for they are
wont to hang and adorn with tapeftry and painted clothes of fundry colours, the
houfes and rooms where they put their Mares to take Horfe j whereby they procure
Colts of a bright Bay colour, or of a dapple Gray, or of any one colour, or of fun-
dry colours together. And Abfyrttts teacheth the fame in effeft •> counfelling us to
cover the Mares body with feme fluff of that colour, which we would have the Colt
to be of: for look what colour fhe is let forth in, the fame will be derived into the
Colt i for the horfe that covers her, will be much affeSed with the fight of fuch co-
lours, as in the heat of hislullhelookethon; and will beget a Colt of the fame
hue as the example then before his eyes doth prefent unto him. Oppianus in his firft
book of Hunting, writes the fame argumenr. Such is, faith he, the induftry and pra-
difednefle of manswir, that they can alter the colour of the young ones from the
mother, and even in the wombe of their Dam procure them to be of divers colours :
for the Horfe- breeder doth paint the Mares back with fundry colours, (even fuch as
they would procure to be in the Colt,)again(l the time that both (he defires horfe, 8c
the Stallion is admitted to cover her. So the Stallion, when he cometh and fees fuch
goodly preparation as it were for his wedding,prefently begins tofomc at the mouth,
md to neigh after her, and is poffeffed with the fire of raping luft throughout his
whole body, raving and taking on, that he cannot forthwith fatisfie himfelf upon
his bride. At length the Horfe-breeder takes off their fetters,and lets them loofe to-
gether; and the Mare admits him, and afterward brings forth a Colt of as many
colours as fhe beheld in the time of her copulation ; for as (be conceives the Coir,
fo withal fhe conceives thofe colours which fhe then looks upon.

How to procure white Pea-cocks.

.j ?Aizm nvil iinii svsfl T*r*ow rwib.'i 3 uc ■> i -\ ,ounj j 10

Informer times, white Pea-cocks were fuch a rare fight in Colen , that every one
admired them as a moft 11 range thing: but afterward they became more common,
by reafon that merchants brought many of them out of Norway i for whereas
black or elfe party-coloured Peacocks were carried into that Country to befeen,
prefently as they came thither, they waxed white ; for there the old ones fit upon
their eggs in the air , upon the tops of very high mountaines, full of fnow ; and by
Continual fitting there, it caufeth fome alteration in their own colour ; but the young
which they hatch , are white all over. And no doubt but fome fuch courfes will

Of the (feneration of <iAnimals. 53

take good effect in all kinds of birds ; for if we take their Cages of Coops wherein
they are kept, and their nefts wherein they fit, and white them on the infide with
fomc plattering work, or elfe cover them all over with white clothes or curtains,
and fo keep them in with grates, that they may not get out, but there couple
and fit, and hatch their egges, they will yeeld unto us white broods. So if you
would

Procure Pigeons of party colour sy

you mull take that courfe which Oppiannt hath fet down. At fuch time, as they fall
to kifliog their mate, and are defirous of copulation, let him that keeps them lay
before their eyes fundry clothes of the braveft colours they can get, but efpecially
purple : for the pigeons will in theit heat of luft be much affected and delighted
with the fight thereof, and the young ones which they bring forth , (hall refemble
the fame colours. The fubiil Fowler, faith he, that gives himfelf to take and to
bring up birds,is well acquainted with, and is wont to pra&ifc fuch experiments, and
very artificially procures fine colours in young Pigeons:he cafieth before their fpark-
ling eyes fine wrought tapeftry,and red coverlet s,and purple garments;and fo whiles
he feeds their eyes with pleafing fights, he fieals away their imagination to the co-
lours which they look upon, and thereby derives the very fame colours into the
young ones.

How to procure a (hag- hair'd Dog,

In fa .' ting time you muftftrew their kennels, and the places where they lie and
couple, and ufually haunt, with the fleeces and hides of beads • and fo, while they
continually look upon thofe fights, they will beget fhag whelps like Lions. This
we heard came to paffe by chance, and without any fuch intended purpofe, that a
little Bitch lying continually in a Rams fleece, when (he came to be with whelp, (he
brought forth puppies of the like hair as the fleece was.

How to procure Swine, and other beafis to he white.

Swine-herds, and Keepers of beads, when they would have white litters, are wont
to beautifie, and to build the (tables and places whither the beads refort to lye ,
with white roofs and white eaves; and the Swine which were brought forth in
fuch white flies, and the other beads likewife that were brought forth in fuch wht-
ted places, became thereby white all over.

Chap. XX.

How U may be wrought^ that Women jh <ouId bring forth fair and beautiful children,

BY this which hath been fpoken, it is eafie for any man to work the like efFe&s
in mankind, and to know how to procure fair and beautiful children. Nay,
Writers make mention , that thefe things which we fpeak of, have oftentimes fallen
out by chance. Wherefore it was not here to be omitted. The beft means to pro-
duce this effeft, is to place in the bed-chambers of great men, the images of Cm-
%idy Adonis, tadCanymedesi or elfe to fet them there in carved and graven works,
in fome folid matter, that they may aiwayes have them in their eyes : whereby it
may to paffe, that whenfoever their wives lie with them, ftill they may think upon
thofe pictures, and have their imagination flrongly and earneftlybent thereupon:
and not only while they are in thea£t, but after they have conceived and quickned
alfo: fo (hall the child when it is born, imitate and expreflc the fame form which
his mother conceived in her mind, when (he conceived him, and bare in her mind,
while (he bare him in her wombe. And I know by experience, that this courfe
will take goodeffeft } for after I had ccunfelled many toufcit, there wasawoman,

54- Natural Mag ice. ^oo^z.

who had a great defire to be the mother of a fair Son, that heard of it, and put it
in pradife ; for fhe procured a white boy carved of maible, well proportioned eve-
ry wayjand him (he had always before her eyestfor fuch a Son it was that fhe much
drfired. And when fhe lay with her Husband, and likewile afterward, when fhe
was with child, ftill fhe would look upon that image, and her eyes and heart
were continually fixed upon it: whereby it came to paffe, that when her breeding
time was expired , fhe brought forth a Son very like in all points, to that marble
image, but efpecially in colour, being as pale and as whice, as if he had been very
marble indeed. And thus the truth of this experiment was manifettly proved. Ma-
ny other women have put the like courfe in pradtife, and their skill hath not failed
tbem. Oppiantu mentions this kind of pra&iie, that it is ufual amongft the Lace-
demonians: for they, faith he, when they perceive that their wives are breeding
youngbones, hang up fine pictures, and place goodly images in their fight; fome,
of the molt beautiful and handfeme youngmen that ever mankind afforded , as
of Nireui, N^rcijftu^tnd valiant Hjacinthtu, and of other young lufly gallants that
were molt comely and beautiful in face, and very fightly for all the parts of their
body; andlome, of fuch excellent gods as was Apollo crowned withagarlaad of
frefh coloured Bay, and Evan that had a Diadem of Vine-leaves about his head,and
goodly hair hanging down under it: and this they did, that while their Wives
ftood gazing continually upon fuch brave pictures, and comely portraitures, they
might breed and bring forth children of the fame comlinefle and beauty.

Ch a p. XXI.
How we may procure either malts or females to be generated.

£?Mpedoclesrti$o( opinion, That males or females were generated according to
the heat or cold that was in them; and thence it is, faith he, that the firft males
are reported to have been generated in the Eaftern and Southern parts of the earth,
but the firft females in the Northern parts. But Varmemdes quite contrary sffirm-
ed, That males were efpecially generated towards the North, as having in them
more folidity and thickneffe ; and females efpecially towards the South,' as being
mere loofe and open, according to the difpofition of the place. Hppenax held,
That miles and females are generated, according as the feed is either ftrong and fo-
lid, or fluid, weak and feeble. jtn*xagoro4 writes, that the feed which itTucth
out of the right parts of the body, is derived into the right parts of the wombe ;
and likewife that which iffueth out of the left parts of the body, falleth into the
left parts of the wombe : but if they change courfes, and the right feed fall into
the left cell or receit in the wombe, or the left feed into the right cell, then it ge-
nerates a female. Leuci^pm ht\6, That there was no caufe either in the feed or
heat, orfolidi:y,or place, that they fhould be different fcxes, but only as it pleafes
nature to mark the young ones with different genitories, that the male hath a yard,
and the female a wombe. Democritm affirms, that cither fex in every part proceeds
indifferently from cither parent ; butthe young one takes in lex after that parent
which was moft prevalent in that generation. Hipponax faith, if the fetd whereof
the young is begotten, prevail moft, then it is a male; but if the nourifhment
which irreceivesin the breeding, prevail more then the feed, then it is a female.
But all Pbyfitians with one conlent affirm, that the right fide hath moft heat in it ;
wherefore if the woman receive and retain the generative feed in the right fide of
her wombe, then that which fhe conceives, is a male j but if inthe left fide, it is a
female. The experience whereof may be evidently feen in inch liurg Creatures
a; bring forth many at one burthen : for if you cut open a Sow that is great with
Pi?, you fhali find the Boar-pigs lying in the right fide, and tbe.Sow-pigs in the left
fide of her wombe. And hence it is, that Phyfitians counfel women, as foon as
they have taken in mans feed, to turn themprelently on their right fide. And hence
ifepchatrlf you knit up a Rams right ft one. he begets Ewe-lambs only, asP//>;wri-
icthv A Bull, as foon as he hath rid a Cow, gives evidenrfigns to any man to con-
jecture

Of the (feneration of <tAnimah. 57

je&ure whether he hath begotten a Cow-calf or aBulchin; for if he leap off by the
right fide, it is certain that he hathr begotten a Buichin . if by the left fide, then a
Cow-calf. Wherefore the ^Egyptians in their Hieroglyphicks,when they would figni-
fie a woman that hath brought forth a daughter,they make the chara&er & likenefs of
aBuil looking toward the left fidejbut to fignifie the birth of a fon,they make his cha-
racter as looking toward the right fide.But if you defire to have a male generated, A-
fricams, Columella, and Dtdymtts counfel you to knit up the left Hone of the Sire; if a
female, then to knit up his right ftone ; at foch times as he is to be coupled for
generation. But becaufe this would be too muchto do, where there is great ftore
of caitel, we may aflay it by another means. Northern blafts help much to the
conception of a male, and Southern blafts to the conception of a female, as4?/*'*/
reporceth : the force of the Northern air is fuch, that thofe beafts which are wont
taprocreate females only, this will caufe to bring forth males alio. The Dams at
the lime of their copulation, muff be fet with their nofes into the North : and if
they have been ufed to coition ttill in the morning, you mUft not put them to it in
the afternoon, for then they will not ftand to their mate. Ariftotte, a man moft
fubtile, and exquifitely feen in the works of nature, willeth us, that about the time
of gendering, we fhould wait for fome Northern blafts in a dry day, and then
let the flock feed againft the winde, and fo let them fall to copulation: if w«~
would procure females to be generated, then we muft fo wait for Southern blafts,
and lec them ftand with their heads towards the South as they are in copulation ; for
fo not only ^r//?0f/<?counfelleth, but Columella and t/Eltanut alfo: for it is a rule
that tAHioKtUyPltnjy Africantti mdDtdymu* do all give, that if the cattel, asfoon
as they have been covered, do turn themfelves toward the Southern winde, then
certainly they tave conceived females. There is alfo fome caufe of the procreation of
a male, or of a female , in the begetters themfelves ; nay further , feme caufe
thereof may be the force and operation of fome waters : for fometimes the waters
caufe that a male or female be generated. There is, not far from the City Pana, a
certain River called Milichus ; and not far from that , another River called Chara-
dius; whereof if the beafts drink in the Spring-time, they commonly bring forth
all males : for which caufe the Shepherds there drive away their flocks at that time,
and feed them in that part of the Country which lieth fartheft off from that River •
as Paufamai writeth in his Achaica.

Chap. XXII.

Of divers experiences that may be , and have beenyraBifed upon divers living Crea-
tures.

'J'Here remain now certain experiments of living Creatures, both pleafant, and of
fome ufe, which we have thought good here to fet down,to favc a labour of feek-
ing them any further. Andfirft,

How to make Horfes have white [pots on them.

Ic is a thing required in the art of trimming of Horfes, to be able to caufe white
fpots to grow in fome parts of them ; for crafty Horfc-conrfers are wont to coun-
terfeit white fpots in the forehead, or left thigh, or right (houlder of an Horfe,
thereby to deceive Inch men, as are wont to gefle at the goodneffe and qualities of
a horfe, by the conjecture of fuch marks. And this their counterfeit pra&ife hath
been detected by this chance ; that the hair of a horfes skin being galled off in any
place, after a while hoary hairs have grown up there of themfelves; and it is noc
unlikely but that this chance taught them that practife. The manner of the doing
it , is, firft to (have off the hair in that place where you would have a white fpot ;
and then rub off, or cut the upper skin, and fo you ihall there have a white patch.
But Oppitofu fpeaking of the fame experiment, (hews that it is to be done by fire.
There be fome Horfes, faith he, that are full of white round fpots intermingled

* with*

5<S Natural Magic k. <BooJ{i.

with their black colour: it comethby the induftry of the Horfe-breeder , who
when they are yet tender and young,cunningly burns eff their hair with an hot iron.
But on the contrary, if you would nave

'f he hairs of a wounded or galled place, to grow up of the fame colour, as the other hair
"'ft

Ttberiui hath taught the way how to do it. You muft knead three pints of bruiftd
or ground barley, and put to it the froth of nhre and a little fait, and make it into
loaves ; then you muft put them into an O/en till they are burned to coals ; after-
ward crufh them, and beat them ro powder, and then mix them with oyle, and
anoint the fore oc the fear therewith ; and this you muft do for twenty daies. But
whatfhould be the reafon that this bailey afhes fhould caufe, not white hairs, but
the like in colour to the reft, to grow upon the fears or fores of horfes whereupon if
is calf, that, Alexander Aphrodiftui afcribes to thi?, becaufe barley hath in it a purga-
tive and cleaning force, and fo wafteth and expelleth the humors,and all the naughty
fluff, that was gathered by the fore into that parr, becaufe it was maimed, and con-
fequendy nor fowell able to relieve it felf. Neither yet will 1 here omit thattoyifh
experiment whereby we may

Procure in Oxen a counterfeit fhctv of fatnejfe*

If you take an Oxe Will grown in years, and make a hole into his thigh, and blew
wind thereby into him, and afterward give him meat, he will fhewfat, though,
indeed he be very lean. We may alio, by giving them feme kind of water to
drink

C*ufe the flexes and hides of cattel to be of divers colours,

as tAZliantts fheweth. The River Crathis iffords one channel that makes bcafts
white .• for Oxen and -heep, and all four-footed beafts, as Theophraftus faith , as
foon as they drink of it, become white, though before they were red or black. In
Eubcea , all for the moll part, are white Oxen by nature. Sheep, by reafon of the
diveruty of mater which they drink, do divcrfly change their colour j the force and
nature of the Rivers working this change in them, efpecially at every ramming time.
Some are turned from black to white, and contrariwiie, fome are turned from white
to black: thefe alterations are commonly feen neer to the River Antandrus, and
ncer alio to a certain River in Thracia. The River Scamander, which is neer unto
Troy, makes as many Sheep as drink of the water thereof, to become yellow.
We may alfo corjc&ure and forefee by certain outward bodily figns in the Dam
or Sire,

What colour their joung ones will be of.

To foreknow the colour of young Mules, we muft take fpecial example of the hairs
of their Dams ears and eye-lids : forhowfoever the reft of their body is of one
and the fame colour , yet in thefe two parts we may difcern fo many and fuch co-
lours as the foal (hall have, as Columella writeth. So if you look under the Rams
tongue, you fhall there find certain veins ; which if they be black, then will the
Lambs be black alfo ; but if they be white, then he hath begotten white Lambs : for
look what colour thefe veins are of, with the fame colour will the fleece of the
Lambe be overfpread • infomuch that if there be fun dry colours in them, there will
be alfo fundry like colours upon the Lambes, as Arifiotle, Democrittu and Vidymnt
do witneffe. Now, how we may

Know bj the eggey whether the chickjvhen it is hatcht, will be a Cocf^ or a Hexy

*5i(l vd snob srt o)»h)i jtrfj tftz'M ' *'• ,f <{> "•.•>-..'

Arijlotle tca.heth us : for, faith he, if the egge be exactly round, then it will yield

*7

a Cock-chicken ; but if it be {Somewhat long, then it yields an Hen-bird : the rea-
tbn is, becauie in things that are round, the natural heat is more kindly and ftrongly
compacted together.

Now we will fpeak of the fociablencffe and familiarity which a certain Pic had with
a friend of mine: who by this pretty device did make the Pie iowell acquainted
with him, and fo fcrviceable to him, that (he would flic unto him, not only for the
fupplying of her daily wants, but as it were for love, never forfaking him night or
day. The device was this. While (he was yet unfeathcred intheneft, he broke
off her lower beak, evenio her very jaws, that the poor wretch could not eatany
meat but that which was put into her mouth with hands; and he himfelf gave her
with his own hands all the meat (he did car. After that, (he would flie to his tren-
cher at dinner and fupper, and would prate and chat unto him very flippant ; info*
much that nothing could be l'poken in the houfc, but (he would imitate it,and fpeak
it again ; and not only frame her tongue to their words, but her body alfo to the
imitating and refembling of their actions. And he was wont it ill to leave her loofe ac
home, and flie would flic about everywhere- but (till at dinner and fupper times (he
would return home.lt fell out that the man had occafion to go from home fifteen oc
fixteen days journey : fhc would alwayes bear him company, now and then flying a
great way before him, and would (it flili upon a bough till he came at her ; and then
(he would leap upon his cap and his (houlders, frisking about him for very joy ; and
fometimes flaying behind him • and then when he was gone a great way before, (he
would in all hafte flie away after to overtake him:and (he was alfo his continual bed-
fellow; andyettothisday he hath her, and enjoyeth her familiar company. But*
concerning the general tranfmutation and change of living creatures, letthefe thing;
be fomcicnt which we have already fpoken*

How to make a bird, [oc table and familiar -with thee.

L

The

58

the n

THIRD BOOK

O F

Natural Magick •

D

Which delivereth certain precepts of Husbandry •
and (hcweth how to intermingle fundry kinds of Plants,
and how to produce new kinds.

The P R O E M E.

\A7Ehave rehear fed concerning divers kjnds of new living (freatures ; nowtyalll fpeal^
of Plants j whtchravifh with Admiration the eyes and mtndsof thofe that content*
plate on them, with their abundant pleafantntffe, and wonderful Elegancy. Ihefe bring
more profit, and by thefe a natural Phtlojofher mayfeem more admirable. For ufe made
with the earth , is more honrft and honourable then With other things • and the ground never
grows old or barren^ but ts everywhere naturally rank^to deceive new feed, and to pro*
dttce new ; and u ever unfatisfied in fruttfulnejfe, and brings perpetual tncreafe- and if
nature be alwayes admirable, jhe will [tern more wonderful in Plants, Copulation was b ut
of ane kind, here it is almoft infinite ; and not onelj every Tree can be ingrafted into
ever y Tree, but one tree may be adulterated with them all. Living Creatures of divers
kinds were not eafily produced , and thofe that come from other Countries were hard to
get: here is no difficulty at all : grafts are fetcht and fent, if need be, to any part of the
world. And if diver fty of (freatures are made m Africa, by their copulating when they
meet at the %jvers, that fo new creatures are alwayes produced ; here in Italy, where the
Air is alwayes calme, and the Climate very indulgent, grange and wilde plants find a good
harbour, and ground to grow in, which is the mother ar.d nounfher of all, and fo fruitful
to produce new and diver fity of plants, that tt can hardly be exhaufled. And we can bet-
terwrite of them, andhnow the truth more then others, becaufe we have them ft til before
our eyes, and Jtn opportunity to conjider of their effetls. Ar.d if our Anceftors found n.a-
ny new things, we by adding to theirs, have found many more, and fhall produce more
excellent things overpaying them,becaufe daily by our art, or by chance ; by nature, or new
experience, new plants are made. Diodorus write s, that the Vine at firft was but one^
and that was wtlde ; but now by the help of Bacchus alone, from the quality of the ground,
the nature o f the climate, and the art of planting, it is varied ir to mar.y kinds, that it
were madnejfe to numb r them up , and not worth our time.l^ature brought forth but one
kind of Pear-tree : now fo many mens names are honoured by it, that one is called Decuma-
na , another Dolabelliana, and another is named from Decumius and Dolabclia. The
fame thing is obferved in Figges, of Livy and Pompcy. Quinces are of many kinds ;
fome called Mariana from Marius, Manliana/roTw Manliu*, Appiana Claudiara f-om
Appius Claudius, Cetfiana from Ceftius : their varieties have made the Authors names
immortal. What fhall I fay of Laurel cherries, found in Pliny his timet what of Citrons?
which as Atheraeus faith, were too fharp to eat in the days of Theophraftus,*^ the ance-
ftors o/Plutark and Pliny; but Palladium made them to become fweet. What oj the Teach <,
and Almond-peach Nuts, fruits our fore- father s knew not , yet now are they eaten% being
pleaf ant and admirable? what of Clove-gillifiowers, that the Cjardrers Art hath made Jo
dainty and frveet fcented ? and fo of ether plants I have everywhere fet down in this workj
Our 'Naples abounds fo with them,that we would not go forth to fee the Orchards of the
Hefpertde t, Alcinus, Semiramis, and at Memphis, that were made to hang above grwnd.
But /fhall briefly and plainly relate the Hiftory.

Chip.

Of the Trodu&idri of new Tlants*

Chap. t.

How new kinds of Plants may be generated of putrefattion.

S we have fhcwed before, chat new kinds of Living Creatures
miy be generated of putrefaction fo, to proceed in the
fame order as we have begun , we will now (hew that
new kinds of Plants may grow up of their own accord,
without any help of feed or fuch like. The Antientsqueition-
lefs were of opinion, that divers plants were generated of
the earth and water mixt together; and that particular
places did yield certain particular plants. We rehearied
the opinion of Diogenes before, who held that plants are generated of water pu-
trifled ink felf, and a little earth tempered therewith. Theofhrafttu held, that
the rain caufeth much putrefaction and alteration in the earth, and thereby plants
may benourifhed, the Sun working upon it with his heating, and with his drying;
operation. They write alio, that the ground when it is flirred, brings forth fuch
kinds of Plants alwaies, as are ufuall in the fame place. In the ifUCreta, the
ground is of that nature, that if it be tfirrcd anywhere, and bo other thing fown
or planted in it, it will of it felf bringfortha Cyprefle'tree: and their tilled
lands, thofe that are fomewhat moitt , when they lie fallow, bring forth thi-
flles. So the herb Laferin Africa, is generated of a kind of pitchy or clammy
rain and thick dirt ; and the herb will fhew it felf out of the earth prefently
afcerthe rain is fallen, Tlmy faid, that the waters which fall from above,
arethecaufe of every thing that grows upon the earth, nature (hewing therein
her admirable work and power: and many fuch things they report , which
we have fpoken of in the books of the knowledge of Plants. And I my ielf
have oft-times by experierce proved , chat ground digged out from under the
loweft foundations of certain houfes , and the bottom of fome pits, and laid
open in fome fmall veflel to the force of the Sun , hath brought forth divers
kinds of Plants. And wher-ras T had oftentimes, partly for my own pleafure, and
partly to fearch into the works of Nature , fought out and garnered together
earths of divers kinds, 1 laid them abroad in the Sun , and watered them of-
ten with a little fprinkling, and found thereby , that a fine lighc earth would
bring forth herbs that had flight Italkes like a rufh, and leaves full of fine lit-
tle ragges ; and likewife that a rough and fliff earth full of holes, would
bring forth a flight herbe , hard as wood , and full of cfevifes. In like man-
ner, if I took of the earth that had been digged cut of the thick woods,or
out of moift places, or cut cf the holes that are in hollow ftones , it would
bring forth herbs that had fmooth blewilh ftalkes, and leaves full of juice and
fubftance, fuch as Peny-wort, Puiflme, Senegreek, and Stone-croppe. Wc
made trial alfo of feme kinds of earth that had been farre fetcht , fuch as
they had ufed for the ballaft of their Shippes ; and we found fuch herbs ge-
cerated thereof , as we knew not what they were. Nay further alfo, even out
of very roots and barks of Trees, and rotten feeds, powned and buried, and
there macecrated with water , we have brought forth in a manner the very
fame herbs ; as out of an Oken root , the herb Polypody , and Osk-fern , and
Splenewort , or at leaft fuch herbs as did refemble thofe, both in making and
in properties. What fhould I here rehearfe, how many kinds of toad-ftools and
puffs we have produced? yea, of every fcveral mixture of putrified things * fo
many feveral kinds have been generated. All which I would here have
fet down, if I could have reduced them into any method; or elfe if fuch
plants had been produced > as I intended : but thofe same that were never

L i fought

60 Natural Magick, Hoohy 3.

fought for. But happily I fhali hereafter , if God will, write of tbefe things,
for the delight , and lpecuiation , and profit of the more curious forr : which
I have neither time nor leifure now 10 mention, feeing this work is ruffled up in
haite. But let us fee

How Toad-ftoolsmay be genera e A.

V'ofcorides, and others have written, That the bark of a whi.e Poplar-Tree, and
of a bia.k, being cut into imall pieces, and lowed in dunged lands or furrows,
will at all times of the year bring forth mufhromes or toad-tfools that are good
to be eaten. And in another place he faith, that they are more particularly gene-
rated in thofe places, where there lies fome old rufty iron, or fome rotten cloth:
but fuch as grow neer to a Serpents hole , or any noifome Plants, are very hurt-
ful. But Tarentintu fpeaks of this matter more precifely. If, frith he, you cut the
ftock of a black Poplar peece-meai into the earth , and pour upon it fome leaven
that harh been fteeped in water, there will i'oon grow up fome Poplar toad-flool?.
He addeth further >, If an up-land or hilly field that hath in it much ftubble and ma-
ny ftalks of corn, be fet on fire at fuch time as there is rain brewing in the clouds,
then the rain falling, will caufemany toad-ftools there to fpring up of their own
accord : but if, after the field is thus fet on fire, happily the rain which the clouds
betore threatned doth not fall; then, if you take a thin linnen cloth, and let the
water drop through by little and little like rain, upon fome part of the field where
the fire hath been, there will grow uptoad-ftools, but not fo good as other wiie they
would be, if they had been nourifhed with a fhowre of rain. Next we will
fhew

How S per age may be generated,

Vydimtu writes, That if any man would have good ftore of Sperage to grow, he
muli cake the horns of wilde Rams, and beat them into very imall powder, and
fow them in eared ground, and water it, and he fha.ll have his intent. There is one
that reports a more Grange matter j that if you take whole Rams horns not pownec)
into {mail pieces, bur, only cut a little, and make a hole in them, and lb let ibem,
they will bring forth Sperage. VUny is of Vidymus opinion, that if the horns be
powned and "igged into the earth, they will yield Sperage; though D/ofcortdes thinks
it to be impeflible. And though I have made often trial hereof, biu could noi find
it fotobe, yec my friends have told me of their own experience, that the lame ten-
der feed that is contained within the Rams horn, hath produced Sperage. The
fame my friends alfo have reported

lhat Ivy doth grow out of the Harts horn ;

and Ariflotle writes of an Husband-man that found fuch an experiment • though
for my own part I never tried it. But Theophrafiw writes, that there was Ivy foun^
growing in the Harts horn ; whereas it is inapoflible to think how any Ivy feed could
get in there: and whereas feme alledge,that the Hart might have rubbed his borp
t:zainft fome Ivy roots, and fo fome part of the horn being foft and ready to putrifie,
did receive into it fome part of the root, and by this means it might there grow ;
this Aippofal carries no fhew of probability or credit with it. But if theie things
be true, as I can lay or fee nothing to the contrary, then furely no man will deny
but that divers kinds of plants may be generated of divers kinds of living Creatures
horns. In like manner, may plants be generated of the putrified bafksajBd bougfts
of old Trees: for fo is

Pofypodj, and the herb Hyphear -generated j

on* a.o n to , rnatff w , bwori f .-^ijr n i

for both thefe,and divers other plants alfo,do grow up in Firre-treej,tnd Pine-trees,
and :uch othertfor in many Trees, neer to the bark, there is a certain fiegmatick Of
nvr.fl humour, that is wont to putrifie ; which, when it abounds too* much with-
in, breaks forth into the outward fhew of the boughs and the ftock of tbe Tree ;

ana

Of the TroduBion of nevo Plants. 61

ftp J there it meets with the putrsfied humour of the bark; and the heat of the Sua
working upon it there, quickly turns it into fuch kinds of herbs.

Chap. II.

How Plants are changed, one of them degenerating into the form of the oth:r.

TTO work Miracles, is nothing elfe (as I fuppofe) but to turn one thing into ano-
ther , or to effoft: thole things which arc contrary to the ordinary courfe of Na-
ture. It may be done by negligence, or by cunning handling and drefling them,
that plants may forfake their own natural kind, and be quite turred into another
kind ; wholly degenerating, both in tafte, and colour, and bigneffc, and fafhion:
and this I fay may eafily be done, either if ycu ncglc& to dreffe or handle them ac-
cording to their kind, or elfe dreffe them more carefully and artificially then their
own kind requires. Furthermore, every plant hath his proper manner, and peculiar
kind of lowing or planting : for fome muff be fowed by feed, others planted by the
whole ftem, others fet by fome root, others graffed by fome fprig or branch : fo that
if that which fhould be fowed by feed, be planted by the root, or fet by the whole
(rock, cr graffed by fome branch j or if any that fhou'.d be thus planted be fowed by
feed ; that which cometh up will be of a divers kinde from that which grows ufually,
if it be planted according to its own nature, as Theophra/lta writes. Likewife if you
fhall change their place, their air,their ground,& fuch like,you pervert their kind;and
youfhall find that the young growing plant will refcmble another kind, both in co-
lour and fafhion ; all which are clear cafes by the books of Husbandry. Some ex-
amples we will here rehear fe. If you would change

A white Vtne ir.to a blacky) or a black, into a white ;
fow the feed of a white Garden-Vine, and that which cometh of it, will be a black
Wilde-vine ; and fb the feed of a black Garden-vine will bring forth a white Wilde-
vine, as Theophraftus teacheth. The reafon is,becaufe a Vine is not fowed by feed,
but the natural planting of it is by fprigs and roots. Wherefore if you deal with
it otherwifethen the kind requires, that which cometh of it muft needs be unkind-
ly. By the like means

A white Fig- tree may degenerate into a black.
for the ftoneof a Fig, if it be fet, never brings forth any other butawildeor a
wood Fig-tree, and fiach as mod commonly is of a quite contrary colour ; fo that of a
white figtree it degenerates into a black, and contrariwife a black fig-tree degene-
rates into a white. Sometimes alfo, of aright and noble Vine is generated a ba-
ftard Vine,and that fo different in kind oftentimes, that it hath nothing of the
right garden-vine, but all meerly wilde. In like manner alfo are changed

The red Myrtle and the red Bay- tree into blacky
and cannot chufe but lofe tbeir colour : for cheCe likewife degenerate, a-s the fame
Theofhrafim reports to have been feen in Antandrut j for the Myrtle is not fowed by
feed, but planted by grafting ; and the Bay-tree is planted by letting a little fprig
thereof that hath in it fome part of the root, as we have fhewed in our difcourfe of
Husbandry. So alfo arc

Sweet Almonds and fweet Pomegranates changed into jowre ones.
for the ftones or kernelsof the Pomegranates are changed from their right blue, in-
to a bafer colour ; and the Pomegranate it felf, though it be never fo good, degene-
rates into a hard, and commonly a fliarp fruir. The Almond degenerates likewife
both in tafte, and alfo in feeling j for of a foft one cometh a harder : therefore we are
counselled to graffe him when he is prettily well grown, or elfe to change him, and
fliifthim oft. An Oak likewife will become worfe: and therefore whereas the
beft grows in Epyms, and many have planted the fame elfewhere, yet they could

never

6% Natural Mag ick. *Bookj.

never produce the like of that. In like manner, of the kernel of the natural
Olive tometh a wilde Olive ; (and they that fay that the male Cyprefle-tree for the
moil part degenerates into a female ;) and in procefle cf time there is iuch a change,
that it agrceth in nothing with the natural Olive, but is fo (tark wilde, that fome-
timesit cannot bring forth fruit to any perfection. Varro kith that

Coleworts are changed into Ra^e% and Rape into Coleworts.
Old feed is of fo great force in fome things, that it quite changeth the nature ; for
the old feed of Coleworts being lowed, brings forth Rape ; and contrariwifc, old
Rape-feed degenerates into Coleworts. By labour alfo and drcfllng

The Corn Typha, and Spelt ^ are changed into Wheats And Wheat into them j
forthismaybedone, if you take them being of a thorough ripenefle, and knead
them, and then plant them ; but this will not fo prove the firft nor the (econd year ;
but youmuft expe& the proof of it in the third year, as Theophraftftiihew tih. Pliny
writeth, that the Corn Siligo is changed into Wheat the fecond year. So all feeds,
either by reafon that they are neglected, or because there is fome indifpofition either
in the earth, or the air where they are, do oft-times degenerate from the excellen-
cy and goodnefle of their kind, and become worfe. Virgiltmh obferved it : I have
feen, faith he, the belt and choiceft things that were molt made of, at length yet to
degenerate, unkfle mans induliry did yearly fupplythem with his help: fo fatal
it is for all things to wax worfe and worfe, and l^ill to have need to be renewed.
Galens father, a man very fludicus of Husbandry, efpecially in hisoldaoe, beftow-
ed great pains and diligence to find out , whether the annoyances of fruits, thac
which mars their pure goodneffe, did ipring up of it felf, or arifc out of any feeds
of the fruits themfelves, which did degenerate into other kinds. Wherefore he
took the pureft, and the cleaneft Wheat and Barley that he could get, and having
picked out all ether feed whatfcever,fowed them in the ground : and when he found
much Tares growing in the Wheat, but very little in the Barley, he put the fame
experiment in other grain in practice ; and at laft found in Pulfe a hard and round
Fetch ; and moreover, that the herb Axefceed did grow among Pulfe, by a kind of
degeneration of the Pulfe into Axefceed. So, unkfle it be prevented by skill
and pains,

The herb Ballamint will turn into a Mint,

Wherefore it mufl be often flhifced and tranfUted from place to place, left it fo de-
generate, as Theophraftus counfelleth ; for when a man doth not look to it and
dreffeir, the roots thereof will grow very large, and thereby the upper part being
weakned, lofeth the rankneffe of his favour ; and that being loft, there remains in
it but a weak fmell, the very fame in a manner that is in a common Mint. I m • felf
have fowed Mint feed, and it hath been changed into wilde Peny-roial ; I mean,
in favour onely : for the fafhion of the Mint remained ftillinit. Martial writes,
Thac

Bajll-royal degenerates into wilde Betony9

if it be laid open to the Suns hoteft and greateft force : for then it ill bring forth
fometimes purple flowers, fometimes white, and fometimes of a Roue colour. And
it will not only degenerate into Betony, but into Ballamint alfo. Likewife the
boughs of the fhrub Cafia, as Galen reporteth , will degenerate into Cinamon.
Likewife

Cloves^ RofeS) V wlets, and GHli- flower sy of purple^ will become white y

either by reafon that they are old, or elfe if they be not well looked unto. For
IheophraftuittcardS) that Violets, Rofes, and Gilli-flowers, if they be not well
heeded, in three years will wax white; and the experience thereof I my felf have
plainly feen. Neither yet will Plants degenerate one into another, only in fuch
cafe as where there is a kind of vicinity and likeneffe of nature, but alfo where

there

Of the TroduBion of Mb Tlants* 6$

there is no fuch vicinicy, one plant miy be changed into another of a quite diffe-
rent kind : for

An Oakjmay be changed, into a Vine,

Mhtrm reporteth, (if the thing be as true as it is ftrange ; but let the truth there-
of lie upon his credit) he reports, I fay, that Oaken or Beechen boughs being in-
grafted into the Tree My tica, is quite changed into it • andfo into the Tree called
Tremifca, which is a bafer kind of wood: andlikewife if Oaken boughs be fetin
the ground of Alummum, a place fo called , they will be quite altered into right
Vines, fuch as their grapes yeeld good wine ; and fotnetimes the old Oaks, if they
be pared, degenerate into Vines. But we muft not think that this change is made
while thofe Trees or boughs laft ; but when once they are putrified, then the nature
of the ground works into them, and changeth them into Vines,

Chap. III.
How to make one fruit compounded of many,

AS we heard before of divers living Creatures, that they might be mingled in-
to one, by copulation; fo new we will (hew alfo how to contrive divers
kinds of fruits , by grafting into one fruit : for graffing is in plants the fame that co-
pulation is in living creatures : yet I deny net y %ut there arc other means where-
by this may be effected, as well as by graffing, But above all other, graffing is moft
praife- worthy , as being the beft and fitteti means t6 incorporate one fruit into
another, andfo of many to make one, after a wonderful manner. And whereas
it may be thought a very toilfome, and indeed impofltble matter, here the excel-
lent effect of the work muft i'weetcnai; thy labour, and thy painful diligence will
takeaway the fuppofed impoffibilky of the thing, and perform that which a man
would think were not pcflible to be done. Neither muft thou fuffer thy felf to be
difcouraged herein by the fayings of rude Husband-men which have attempted this
thing, but for want of skill could riot perform it, feeing experience teacheththee
that it hath been done. Wherefore againft fuch difcouragements, thou muft arm
thy felf with a due coniideration of fuch experiments as the Antients have recorded:
as for example, that the Figge-tree may be incorporated into the Plane-tree, and
the Mulberry-tree ; andlikewife the Mulberry-tree into the Cheftnut-tree , the
Turpentine-tree, and the white Poplar, whereby youmayeft procure white Mulber-
ries ; and likewife the Cheftnut-tree into a Hafel, and an Oak; and likewife the
Pomegranate-tree into all Trees, for that it is like to a common whore, ready and
willing for all Comers ; and likewife the Cherry-tree into a Turpentine-tree: and
to conclude , that every Tree may be mutually incorporated into each other , as
Columella luppofeth. And this is the caufe of every composition of many fruits into
one, of every adopted fruit which is not the natural child, as it were, of the Tree
that bare it; and this is the caufe of all ftrange and new kinds of fruits that grow.
Virgil makes mention of fuch a matter, when he faith, that Dido admired certain
Trees which (he faw , that bare new kinds of leaves, and apples that naturally
were not their own. hndTalladius faith^ that Trees are joined together as it were,
by carnal copulation, to the end that the fruit thereof might contain in it, all the
excellencies of both the parents: and the fame Trees were garnifiied with two forts
of leaves, and nouriftied with two forts of juices, and the fruit had a double reltfh,
according to both the kinds whence it was compounded. But now, as we did in
our traft of the commixtion of divers kinds of living Creature? ; fo here alfo it is
meet to prefcribe certain rules , whereby we may caufe thofe. divers plants which
we would intermingle, to join more eafily, and to agree better together, for the
producing of new and compounded fruits. Firft therefore, we muft ice that either
of the Trees have their bark of one and the fame nature : and both of them muft
have the fame time of growing and (hooting out of their fprigs; as was required
m liv ing creatures, that both of them (hould have the fame time of breeding their

young

6\. Natural Magigk. 'Boofo.

young ones : for if the graffc have a dry or a hard bark, and the ftock have a moift
or fofC'bark, or that they be any way contrary each to other, we (hall labour in
vain. Then we muft fee that the ingrafting be made in the pureft and foundeft
place of the ftock , fo that it neither have any tumors or knobs, or any (cars, nei-
ther yet hath beenblafted. Again, it is very material, that the young graffes or
fhoots be fetcht from the molt convenient place or part of the Trees ; namely,
from thofe boughs that grow toward the Eaft, where the Sun is wont to rile in
the Summer-time. Again, they mult be of a fruitful kind, and be taken <ff from
young plants, fuch as never bare fruit before. They muft alfo be taken in their prime,
when they are beginning firft to bud, and fuch as are of two years growth, and
likely to bear fruit in their fecond year. And the ftocks into which they art to be en-
graffed> muft likewife be as young as may be graffed into ; for if they be old, their
hardneffe will fcarce give any entertainment to ftrange fhoots to be planted upon
them. And many fuch obfervations muft be diligently looked into, as we have
(hewed in our book of Husbandry. But we muft not here omit to fpeak of the lome,
or that clammy morter, which makes

7heCraffe and the fiockjo clofe more eafly together j

fork is very helpful to glewor faftcn the skins of both the barks one into tbeo-
fcher : and if the barks be of a divers nature, yet by this lome they may be fo bound
into one, that they will eafily grow together. Andfurelyit is commodious in ma-
ny refpe&s. Firft, becaufe, as in mans body, the flefh being wounded or pierced
into, is foon clo fed up again with ftiffe and clammy plaiflers applyed thereunto;
fo the bark or the boughs of Trees being cut or rent, will clofe together again very
fpeedily , by the applying of this morter. For if you pill the bark eff from a
Tree, or flip off a little fprig from a bough, unleffe you clofe it up fo cunningly,
that it may ftick as fitly every way in the graffing as whilft it grew , it will foon
wither, and fade, andlofe the natural juice and moifture ; which inconvenience
this lome will prevent , and fit them one into another. Moreover, if there be
any open chink betwixt the bark and the Tree , prefently the air getteth in, and
wi lnoc fuffer them to clofe j therefore to makeitfure that they may clofe without
fai , this lome is needful. And whereas there are fome Trees which cannot away
to be harboured in any of another kind, this lome will knit them fo ftrongly into
the ftock,that they cannot but bud and bloffom. But here we muft obferve, that
this glue or morter muft be as neer of the nature of the thing engrafted as may
be; for then it will perform this duty more kindly. If you be diligent herein,
you may do many matters. We will give you a tafte of fome , that by thefe
you may learn to do the like. Pill eff the bark of Holly, and make a pit in
lome moift ground, and there bury your Holly rines, and let them there pu-
trifie , which will be done in twelve daies : then take them forth , and ftamp
them till you fee they are become a clammy flime.This is alfo made of the fruit Se-
beften in Syria • and likewife it may be made of ordinary birdlime : but the beft of
all is made of the rines of Elm-roots ftamped together; for this hath a fpecial quali-
ty, both to fatten, and alfo to chcrifh. But let us return to graffing, which is of
fuch great force, that it hath caufed a new kind of a baftard fruit that was never
heard of before) namely

!:3jol owj n,4 w osxihn.s;; sivv t.zii l sens) stfTbflS /IJ7 • 3 23".j;j>I1*-,t >

i jin Apple compounded of a Peach-Apple-) and a J^tt- peach;

., i Lib ?w ft «w vi v-ll .'■ Virjoqrfloo -"A v^vmituai orhdiodo/; ;bibto3&*
which kind of compound generation, was never feen, nor heard of, nor yet thought
upon by the Ancient. This is to be done by a kind of graffing which they call
eraplaftcring. . Take off two young fruitful Iprigges, one frcm a Peach-apple
Tree, and the other from the Nut-peach Tree; but they muft be well grcw-
cn, and fuch as are ready to budde forth. Then pare eff the bark of them
abcuc two fingers breadth in compaffc , fo that the budde to be graffed may
; tdi Hand

Of the TroduBion ofneto Plants. 6$

fttnd fitly in the midft betwixt them both j but you muft do it charily, left
you perifh the wood. Then cleave them thorough the middle a little way, that
they may be let one into another, and yet the cleft not feen, but covered with the
bud* Then take off a bud from one of thofe Trees, with the bark round about
the bud, and let it into the midft of the boughs which we fpake of before ; and
fo cngriffe them together into the othec Tree, having firft cut out a round fit place
for them therein. They muft be engrafted in that part of the Tree, which is
moft neat and frcfh-coloured ; the fprigs that grow about that place muft be cutoff,
left they withdraw the nourifhment from the graffe, which requires it all for it felh
And when you have fo done, binde it about gently, that you hurt it not ; and cover
It with Jomewhat, left the rain fall down upon it; but eipecially take heed to the
cleft, and the place where you pilled off the bark, that you plaiftcr it up well with
mortcr. Thus if you do , the graffe will very kindly proiper, and the bud grow
forth into a fruit that is compounded of both kinds, and it (hall carry the hue both
of the Peach-apple and the Nut-peach by equal proportion, fuch as was never feen
before. By this means alfo we may procure the bringing forth

Of a Figge halfe white and half blackj
for if we take the buds of each of them, paring them off together with the bark
round about them, and then cut them in the middle, and put the half of one, and
the half of the other together, and fo emplaifter them into the Tree, as we
fpake before, the fruic thereof will be a Figge half white and half black.
So alfo

Pomegranates may be brought forth , which will be fweet on the one ft demand fowre
on the other ;

If you take either the fhoots or the buds of each of them, and after you have divi-
ded them in the midft, put the half of each together, as before was fpoken. But
this may be done beft upon the fhoots or fprigs • for the bud can h « rd!y be pared
eff, nor well divided, becaufe the bark is fo weak, and fo thin, and (lender, thacic
will not endure to be much or long handled. Like wife

Orenges compounded of divers kinds, and fitch as are half Limons\ as alfo Limons half

fweet y and halffowre, may be produced,
if we mix them after the fame manner as we fpake before; for thefe are very fit to
begraffed by emplaftering ; and thefe kinds of compound Orenges and Limons are
very commonly to be feen in many Orchards in Naples, in like manner we may
mingle and compound

A Peaeh of the white and the red Peach,

if we put thofe two kinds together, by fuch emplaftering : for there are of this
compound fruit to be fold in Naples at this day. Likewife we may procure

A grape that hath a kerne/ or ft one half blacky and diverfly coloured.
We muft deal by the fhoots of Vines, as we fhewed before wis to be done by the
buds of other Trees ; cleave them in the middle, and binde two fhoots or more
of divers forts of Vines handfomely together ,that they may grow up in one,and graff
them into a fruitful Vine of fooae other kind. And the fame which we have fhewed
concerning fruits, may be as well pracWcd alfo upon flowers. As for example j
If we would produce

Rofes that ate half white and half red ;

we muft take the fprigs of a white Rofe,andof a red, and pare off the buds of each
of them ; and having cut them afunder in the middle, put the halfs of each together,
as we fpake before, and engtaffe them artificially into the bark, and then have a dili-
gent care ft ill to cherifh them,tbe compound bud wil in due feafon bring forth Rofes
which will be white of the one fide, and red of the other* But if yon would

14 make

66 Natural Magick. 'Boofo.

make trial hereof in Clove-gilli-flowers , and defire

To produce \ome that are half redy .
feeing they have no buds at all, you muftpra&ife this experiment upon their roof;
you muft take two roots of them, and cleave them in the middle, and match them
fitly togcther,that they may grow each to other; and bindethem upwell, and then
will they yeeld compound Clove-gilli-flowcrs : of which kind we have great ft ore,
and they are common amongft us everywhere ; and they do not onely brino
forth party-coloured flowers, but the very fame bough, and one and the fame
fprig, will, bear white ones and red ones , and iuch as are wrought and as
it were embroidred with divers goodly colours, moft pleafant to be feen.

Chap. IV. ' .
Of a fecond means whereby fruits may be mingled and compounded together.

T"Here is alfo a fecond way of compounding divers kinds of fruits together ;

namely, by another manner of grafting. A* for example; If we would
produce

'Pomegranates compounded of divers hmdsy

Theophraftus fheweth u> how to do ir. We muft take the young flips or branches
of divers kinds, andbruife them mih a Beetle, fo that they may ftick and hang
together; and then binde them up very hard each to other, and fet them in the
ground: and if they be well laid together, all thofe flips will grow up jointly into
one Tree ; butfo, that every one of them retains his own kind, and receives his
feverai nourifhment by it felf, and feverally digefls it: and the chief community
which they 'have all together, is their mutual embracing each of other. The fame
Theophrafius teaches us in the fame place,

How one and the fame Vine-branch may bring forth a blach^and awhite grape both toge-
ther ; and how in the fame grape may be found a -white and blacky fione hanging
together, . . ' . • ~ .

Take the branch of a white Vine, and another of the black, and the uppermoft half
of cither of them muft be bruifed together; then you muft match them equally,
and binde them up together , and plant them : for by this means they will grow
up both into one joint ; for every living thing may be matcht with another, efpe-
cially where one is of the fame or the like kind with the other : for then if they be
diflblved, as thefe are in fome fort when they are bruifed, their natures will eaGly
clofe together, and be compact into one nature: but yet cither of thefe branches
hath his feveral nourifliment by it felf, without confufion of both together ; where-
by it cometh to pafle, that the fruit arlfing from them is of a divers nature, accor-
ding as either of the fprigs requireth. Neither ought this to feem ft range, that both
of them concurring into one, fliould yet retain each of them their fcverall kind,
feeing the like.hereof may be found in certain Rivers which meet together by con-
fluence into one and the fame channel, and yet either of them keeps his own feve-
ral courfe and paff^ge ; as do the Rivers Cephifus and Melas in Bceotia. Columella
teacheth us to dd this thing on this manner. There is, faith he, a kind of engraffin<:,
whereby fuch kind of grapes are produced, as have (tones of divers kinds, and fun-
dry colours; which is to be done by this mean*. Take four or five, or more (if
you will} Vine-branches of divers kinds, and mingle them together by equal pro-
portion, and fo binde them up. Afterward put them into an earthen pipe cr a horn
faft together; butfo, that there may be fome parts of them feen ftanding out at
both ends ; and thofe parts fo ftanding forth , muft be diflolved or bruifed: and
when you have fo done, put them into a trench in the ground, covering them with
mud?, ;and watering them.till they begin to bud. And when the buds are grown
Salt together, after two or three years, when they are all knit aod clofed into one,

then

Of the Production of new Plants. 67

then break the pipe, and necr about the middle of the ftalk beneath the fprouts,
there where they feem to have moft grown together, cut off the Viue, and heal
that part where it is fo cut, and then lay it under the ground again about three fin-
gers deep: and when that lialkfhsll (hoot up into fprigf, take two of the beft of
them, and cherifh them^nd plant them in the ground, catting away all the other
branches ; and by this means you (ball have fuch kinds of grapes as you defire. This
very lame experiment doth Tlmy fet down, borrowing it of Columella. But Vidy~
mm prescribes it on this manner. Take two Vine-branches of divers kinds, and
cleave them in the middle • but with Inch heedful regard, that the cleft go as far as
the bud is, and none of the pith or juice be loft ; then put them each to other,and
clofe them together, fo that the bud of either of them meet right one with the
other : and as much as pcflibly may be,let them touch together,w hereby both thofe
buds may become as one:thcn binde up the branches with paper as hard together
as you can,and cover them over with the Sea-onion,or elfe with fome very ftiff clarri-
my earth; and fo plant them, and water them after four or five daies, fo long till
they (hoot forth into a perfect bud. If you would produce

«■

Alig^that is half white, and half red; /

Leontintu teacheth you to do it after this manner. Take two fhoots of divers kinds
of Fig-trees; but you mult fee that both the fhoots be of the fame age, and the
fame growth as neer as you can : then lay them in a trench, and dung them, and wa-
ter them. And ifter they begin to bud, you muft take the buds of each, and binde
them up together, fo that they may grow up into one fialk : and about two years
after, take them up, and plant them into another flock, and thereby you fhall have
Figs of two colours. So then by this means

tAttfrnks may be made to be party-coloured ;
and that not onely of two, but of many colours , accordingly as inany kinds of
fruits may be compounded together. Andfurely thefe experiments are very true3
though they be fomewhat hard to be done, and require along times pra&ice, as I
my felf have had experience. The like experiment to thele is recorded by Vatia*
dim, and by other Greek Writers, who fhew the way

How a Vine may bring jmh cl/ffters of grapes that are white, but the fiones of the
grapes black.

If white and black Vines grow neer together, you muft fhred the branches of eacb£
and prefently clap them together fo,that the bud of either may meet right togi
ther, and fo become one: then binde them up hard in paper, and cover them witl
foft and moift earth ; and fo let them lie three dayes or thereabouts : after that, fee
that they be well and fitly matcht together, and then let them lie till anew bud
come forth of a frefh head : and by this means you fhall procure in time , dive !
kinds of grapes , according to the divers branches you put together. I my lelf have
made choice of two fhoots of two divers Vines growing one by another; I have
cleft or cut them off in that place where the buds were fhooting forth, leaving the
third part of the bud upon the branch ; I fattened them together, and bound rbem
up into one very faft, left when the buds fhould wax greater, one ofthemmisht flic
off from the other : I fitted them fo well, branch with branch,and bud with bud,th^
they made but one ftalk ; and the very fame year they brought forth grapes that had
cloven kernels or ftones. This fhootfo fpringingup, I put to another ; and when
that was fo fprung up, I put that alio to another ; and by this continual fitting of
divers fprigs one to another, I produced clutters of divers-coloured and diver?-na-
tured grapes : for one and the fame grape was fweet and unfavoury ; and the P. cues
were fome long, fome round, fome crooked; but all of them were of divers co-
lours. Pontannt hath elegantly fhewed

How Citron-trees may bear divers kinds ;
namely, by joiniag two fuidry boughs together, after the bark hath been pare^ a-

M i * way.

*>& Natural Magick. Iioofo

away, and fafining each to other with a kind of glue, that they may grow up one
as fait as the other ; and when they arc engr.ff; d into one flock, they mutt be very
carefully covered and looked unio, and fo one and the Lme branch will bring form
fruit of clivers kinds. So you may procure

An Orenge-tree to bring forth an Apple half fweet and half fowre.
And this kind of comcnixtion was invented by chance ; for there were gr.ff.d two
boughs of Orenge-trees, one brought forth afwect, and the other a fhirp fruit.
When occalion ferved to tranfplant and remove the Tree, it was cut cfF in the
middle, according as Husband-men are wont to do when they plant fuch Trees af-
ter they are grown old; and by great chance, it was cuteff there where the two
boughs had been before engrafted: and fo when the Hock budded afrefh, there)
arofeonebud out of the (harp and fweet branches both together as they were lete
in the Bock; and this one bud brought forth Apples or fruit of bbth relifhes.
Wherefore no queliion but fuch a thing may be effected by art, as well as
it was by chance, if any man have a minde to produce fuch kind of fruits.

C H AP. V.

Of a third way , whereby divers kinds of [raits maybe compounded together.

tJI^Ewill alfofet down a third way, whereby we may mingle and compound
divers kinds of fruits together. A way which hath been delivered unto
us by the Ancients, though for my own part I think it to be not oneiv a very
hard, but even aa impcflible matter. Notwithstanding, becaufe grave An-
cient Writers have fet it down, I cannot icorn here to rehearfe it: and
though I have put it in practice , but to no purpofe, for it hath not fo fallen
out as they write, yet I will net dilcourage any man that hath a mu d to
make trial hereof; for it may be that fortune will fecond their endeavours
better then fhs did mine. The Way is this ; to: gather many feeds of tundry
Trees and fruits, and wrapping them up together, foto fow them tard when
they are grown up into ftalk?, to bind all the ftaiks together, that they may
not flie afnnder, but rather grow up all into one Tree ; and this 7r. e will
bring forth divers kinds of fruits , yea and one atd the fame froit will be min-
gled and compounded of many. Itfhould feemthat the Authors of this exreri-
menr, learned it firtt out of Theophr.-Jlw , who writes, that, If you fow two
divers feeds neer together within a hands breadth , and then fow two other
clivers feeds a little above them, the roots which will come of all thefe feeds
will lovingly embrace and winde about each other , and fo grow up into one
ftalk or ftock , and be incorporated one into another. Bui fpecial care mmi he had
how the feeds be placed; for they mult be fet wrath the little end upward, be-
caufe the bud ccr-eth not out of the lew and hollow parti, but our of the i eft.
And there are four feeds required, becaufe fo many will eanly and fitly elofe gcji
thcr. A matter, which if it were true, it might be a very ready means which would
produce exceeding many and wonderful experiments. By fuch a means

Berries that are f arty- coloured may be produced.
If yon take a great many berries, whice, and black, and red, one amon^ft another,
and fow them in the earth together; and when they are thot up , bind ml their
ftalks into one, they will grow together , and yeeld party coloured berries. Vlmy
write?, that this way was deviied trDmtbe birds; Nature, laith he,haih taught httf
tograffe with afeed: for hungry birds have devoured feeds, and having moil ened
and warmedthem in their bellies, a little after have dunged in the forky twines of
Trees, and together with their dung excluded the feed whole which erft they had
fwallowed : and fometimes it brings forth there where they dung it, and fir mrJmes
the wind carries it away into fome chinks of the barks of Trees, and there it br ings
forth. This is the reaion why many times we fee a Cherry-tree c: owii , ... ; W'iU

low,

Of the TroduBion ofnevo Tlants. 6p

ow , a Plane-tree in a Bay-tree, and a Bay in a Cherry-tree j andwkhal, that the
berries of them have been party-coloured. They write alfo, that the Jack-daw
hiding certain leeds in fome fecret chinks or holes, did give occafion of this Inven-
tion. By this feif-iame means we may produce

- A Fig that is partly white and partly red.
Le$n>itu attempts the doing of this, by taking the kernels or ftones that are in a
Fig fomewhat inclinable to this variety, and wrapping them up together in a linnen
cloth, and then lowing them, and when need requires, removing them into ano-
ther place. If we would have

An Orenge or Qtron-trce bear divers apples of divers rehftes ;
"TontHMu our Country-man, in his work of Gardening, hath elegantly taught us
how to do it. We muft take fundry feeds of them, and put them into a pitcher,
and there let them grow up : and when they come forth, bind the fprigs together,
and by this means they will grow up into one ftock, and fhrowd themfelves all un-
der one bark: but you muft take heed that the wind come not at them to blow
them aiunder, but cover them over with fome wax, that they may Hick faft toge-
ther ; and let them be well plaiftered with morter about the bark : and fo (hall you
gather from them in time very ftrange Apples of fundry reliflies. Likewife we
may procure

A DamoJfUj and an Orenge or Limon to be mixt together.

In our books of Husbandry, we me wed at large, by many yeafons alledged to and
fro, that fundry feeds could not poffibly grow into one ; but all that is written in
favour of this pra&ice, is utterly falfe, and altogether unpofllble. But this expe-
riment we our lelvcs have proved, whereby divers kinds of Damofms are mixt to-
gether. While the Damofin-uees were very tender and dainty, we f aliened two
of them together, which were planted neer to each other, as sailers plat and tie
their Cabies : but firft we pared off the bark to the inmoft skin, in that place where
they mould touch together, that fo one living thing might the more eafiiy grew to
the other: then we bound them up gently with thin lifts, made of the inner bark
of Elm, or fuch like fluff that is fbft and pliable for fuch a purpofe , left they mould
be parted and grow afunder; and if any part of them were fo limber that ir would
not ftick faft, we wedged it in with fplents ; yet not too hard, for fear of fpoiiing it.
Then we rid away the earth from the upper roots, and covered them with muck,
and watered them often, that by this cheriming and tilling on, they might grow up
the better : and thus after a few years that they were grown together into one
tree , we cut off the tops of them about that place where they moft feemed
to be knit together • and about thofe tops there fprung up many buds ; whereof,
thofe which we perceived had grown out of both Trees, we fafferedto grow ftill,
and the reft we cut away ; and by this means we produced fuch kind of fruit as we
fpeak of, very goodly, and much commended. And concerning Limons, I have
feen iome in the Noble-mens Gardens of Naples, which, partly by continual wa-
tering at feafonable times, and partly by realon of the tendcrneffe and the rank-
neffe of the boughs , did fo cling and grow together, that they became one tree ;
and this one Tree brought forth fruit compounded of either kind. We may alfo
effect this featly by earthen veflTels ; for the plants that are fet therein, we may very
conveniently cherifh up with continual watering, and perform other iVrvices to-
wards them which areneceflary for their growth.And as it may be done by Limon?,
fo we have feen the fame experiment pra&ifed upon Mulberry-trees , which grow-
ing in moift and fhadowed places, as foon as their boughs doled one with another,
prefently they grew into one, and brought forth berries of fundry colours. If we
wosid procure that

A Lettice Jhottldgrowy having in it ParJUy, and Ratchet , and BaJihgantUy

or any fuch like commixtion, we muft take the dung of a Sheep or a Goat ; and

though

yo Natural Magick. Sflo^j.

though it be but a fmall fubftance, yet you muft make afhift to bore theTruttle
through the middle, and as well as you can, get out the inmoft pith, andinftead
thereof put into it thole feeds whirh you defire to have mingled together, packing
them in as hardasthe Trmtle will bear it: and when yon have fo done, lay it in
the ground about two handful deer, with dung and hollow geer, both under ir,
and round about it ; then cover it with a little thin earth, and water it a little and a
little ; and when the feeds alfo are fprung forth, you muft Mill apply them with wa-
ter and dung ; and after they are grown up into a ftalk, you muft be more dilicent
about them ; and by this means at length there will arife a Lettice, mixed^nd
compounded with all thofe feeds. Palladius prefcribes the fame more precifely. If
you take, faith he, a Trutile of Goats dung, and bore it through, and make it
hollow cunningly with a bodkin, and then fill it op with the feed of Lettice, Cref-
fes, Bafil, Rotchet, and Radifh, and when you have fo done, lap them up in more
of the fame dung, and bury them in a little trench of fuch ground as is fruitful and
Well manured for fuch a purpofe, the Radifh will grow downward into a Roor, the
bther feeds will grow upward into a ftalk, and the Lettice will contain them all,
yeelding the feveral relifh of every one of them. Others effeft this experiment
on this manner. They pluck eff the Lettice leaves that grow next to the root,
and make holes in the thickeft fubftance and vein? thereof, one hole being area-
fonable diftance from the other ; wherein they put the forenamed feeds/all but
the Radifh feed, and cover them about with dung, and then lay them under the
ground, whereby the Lettice grows up, garded with the ftalks of fo many herbs as
there were feeds put into the leaves. If you would procure

Tarty-coloured flowers to grow •

you may effeft it by the fame ground and principle. You muft take the feeds of
divers kinds of flowers ; and when you have bound them up in a Linen cloth, fet
them in the ground, and by the commixtion of thofe feeds together, you fhall
have flowers that are party-coloured. By this means, it is thought that Dailies of
divers kinds were firft brought forth, fuch as are to be feen with golden leaves,
reddifh about the edge ; nay fomeof them are fo meddled with divers colours,
that they refemble little fhreds of filk patcht together.

Ch ap.VI.

How a double fr nit may be rnxde, whereof the one is contained within the other,

*T* Here is alfo another way of Compofition, whereby fruits may be fo meddled
J, together, not as we fhewed before, that one part of it fhould be of one fruity
and the other part of another kinde j nor yet that one and the fame bough fhall at
once bear two or three feveral kinds of fruits j but that one and the fame fruit fhall
be double, containing in it felf two feveral kinds, as if they were but one; where-
of I my felf have firft made trial. But let us fee how the Ancients have effeded this:
and firft

Mow to ma\e an Olive- gr aye,

TDiophanes fheweth that the Olive being engraffed into the Vine, brings forth a fruit
called Elaeo-ftaphylon, that is to fay, an Olive-grape. But Florentines in the ele-
venth book of his Georgicks, hath fhewed the manner how to engraffe the Olive
into a Vine, that fo it fhall bring forth not only bunches or clufte* s of grapes, bug
an Olive fruit alfo. We muft bore a hole through the Vine neer to the ground, and
put into it the branch of an Olive-tree, that fo it may draw and receive both from
the Vine, fweetneffe; and alfo from the gtound,natural juice and moifture, where-
by it may be nourifhed : for fo will the fruit tafte pleafantly. And moreover, if,
while the Vine hath not yet born fruit, you take the fruitful fprigs thereof, and
plant them elfewhcrc, thefe fprigs will retain the mixture and compofition of the

Vine

0/v the TroduBion ofww Tkints. y i

Vine and the Olive-tree together, and bring forth one fruit: that flftrll fiaff e in it
both kinds, which therefore is called by a name compounded - f both'their nam:?,
Eieo»tlathylus, an Olive-grape. He reports' that he fa w filch & rrte in the Orchard
of "Mariut Afaximtu ; and taftibg the fruit thereof, he thought with himfcif that he
felt the re ifhof an Olive-berrie and a grape kernel both together. He 'writes alfo
that fuch plants grow in Africa, and are there called' by a -proper name in their.
Country language Ubolima. But we muft fet props under them , to bear Up the
weight and burden of ihe boughs : though if we engraffe them any other way but
this, we fhall need no polls at all. I fuppofe alfo that by this felf-fame means it
may be effe&ed,

That a (jrape Jhould have Mjrtle in it,

Tarentinta mitts, that the Vine may be engrafted into the Myrde-tree, and the
Vine-branches thereon engraffed, will bring forth grapes that have Myrtle-berries
growing underneath them, Buc the manner of this engraftng he nath not fet
down. It you engraffe the Vine-branches in the higher boughs or arms of the
Mryrle, then they will bring forth grapes after their ordinary manner, not having
any Myrtle in them: but if you engraffe them as fhe fhewed before^ neer to
the ground, as the Olive-tree mult be into the Vine, then you may pro-
duce Myrtle- grapes , though not without fome difficulty. Wc may likewife
produce '

Damofins that ft) all be of the colour of t^uts ;

m

for fuch kind of fruit were produced by the Ancients, and called Nucipruna, that
is,Nut-Damofins, as Pliny reporteth. It is a peculiar property of thefe fruits that
are engrafted into Nut-trees, that they are in colour like to their own kinde, but in
tafte like unto Nuts j being therefore called by a mixt name, Nuci-prnna. So there
may be produced, as the lame Pliny writes,

Damofins that have fweet Almonds within them.
There is, faith he, in this kind of fruit an Almond-kernel, neither can there be any
prettier double fruit deviied.The lame Pliny reports alfo, that there is a kind of

Vamofn that hath in it the fuhftance of an Apple,
which of late was called by the Spaniards Malina, which cometh of a Damofift
en^raffed into an Apple-tree. There is alio a kind of fruit called by the Apotheea*
tics Scbeftcn, or

Mixa, -which hath in it a fweet Almond,

This fame Mixa is a kind of Damofin, which differs from all others; for whereas
others have a bitter Almond or kernel within their Gone, this only hath a fweet ker-
nel. It is a plant peculiar to Syria and Egypt, though in fltnies time it was com-
mon in Italy, and was engrafted in the Service-tree, whereby the kernel was the
pleafantcr. They engraffed it into the Service-tree, likely for this caufe,that where-
as the fruit of it felf would make a man laxative, the fbarp tafte of the Service
being mixed with it , might caufe it to be more binding. But now we will
ftiew

How to produce an Almond- peach, which outwardly is a Peach, bat within hath an Al-
mond-kernel.

The former means producing double fruits, which the Ancients have recor-
ded, are but vain fables ; not only falfe matters, but indeed impofnblc to be fo
done : for, we fhewed in the book of Husbandry, if you engraffe the Vine into the
^Myrtle, there will be no fuch fruit brought forth after that manner. Befides, it is
impoflible to engraffe the Olive-tree into the Vine; or if it were engraffed, yet

would

7% NaturalMagick. Boo^j.

would it not bring forth any fuch grapes* Pliny fpcaks of Apple-damofins, and Nut*
damofinsj but be fhe weth not the manner how they may be produced; happily,
becau e it was never feen nor known. But we will demonstrate the manner of it to
the whole world, by this example : this fruit is called an Almond- Peach by the late
Writers, becaufe it bears in it felf the nature, both of the Almond and the Peach
compounded together. And it is a new kind of Adultery or commixtion, wrought
by skill and diligence ufed in gr-ffing ; fuch a fruit as was never heard of in former
ages, partaking both of thefnape, and aKoof the qualities of either parent: out-
wardly it refcmbles the Peach both in fhape and colour? but inwardly it hath a
fweet Almond within the kernel , that both looks and taftes like an Almond j and
fo is the Tree alfo a middle betwixt the Almond-tree and the Peach-tree, outwardly
like the Peach-tree,and inwardly like the Almond-tree.The manner of engrafting is,
by clapping the bud of one upon the bud of another • either upon one of the trees
that bare one of the buds, or elfe fetting them both into a third tree, as we have
done when the Trees have been old. We may alfo go farther, and upon that branch
wherein thofe two buds grow up together, we may fet a third bud, and fo the fruit
will be threefold. Thefe trees we had growing in our own Orchards many years
together. By this ielf-fame means we may produce a very ftrange Apple j the won-
dcrfulntffe whereof will ravifhour fenfes and our thoughts ; namely

A Qitron that hath a Limon in the inner farts :
and this, I fay, we may produce by laying the bud cf a Citron upon the bud of a
Limon. And the moft of thofe kinds arc to be found among the Brutii, a people
dwelling neer Naples, and the Surrentines in Campania; and thefe fruits proceed
from the tart juice that is within the branch. In like manner

A double Orenge may be produced ;
which kind of fruit is common with us, wherein are double ranks of kernels in
fuch rare proportion, that you would wonder and be amazed to fee.

Chap. VII.

Of another device, "whereby fir ange fruits may bt generated, and made either better
or worfe,

Concerning the praifes and excellency of engrafting, we have fpoken elfe where
more at large : Here it fhall fuffice onely to fhew, that by engrafting, new fruits
may be produced, fome better, and Come worfe then their ordinary kinds. We
will relate fome experiments of our own, and fome which the Antients have found
out. And fir il

How to produce a Cheft-nnt of the heft.

There is one rare example hereof not to be omitted. CoreUiut, a Noble-man of
Rome, born at the City Atefte, engrarTed a Chert-nut upon a Cheft-nut branch, in
the Country of Naples, and fo produced a Cheft-nut called Corelliana, after bis
name. After that, his Heir, whom he made a Freeman, grafted the fame Co-
relliana upon another Tree : the difference betwixt them both is this, that the for-
mer is a larger Cheft-nut, but this latter is a better fruit. Thefe things have been
done by the Ancients : and the good that cometh by engrafting is fuch, as that if
any thing be engrafted into a flock or branch of its own kind, the fruit will there-
by be made better. The Cherry«tree is very kindly to be engrafted : and you (ball
fcarce ever have a good and a fweet Cherry, unleffc it be by engrafting upon fome
other Tree, as Pamphtlut reporteth. By the prefident of this example, we have en-
deavoured to change

The Barber y-Ttet inf %h* Tret tailed Tuber :

for I take it,that the Oxyacamha,or the Barbery-tree, is nothing elfe but a baftard,

or

Of the TroduBion of new Tlants. 73

or a wild Tuber : and therefore if a man follow that example of Co¥elliut\ and cn-
griffe the Oxyacantha oftentimes into the own branch or Hock, it will be much
bettered, and become the Tuber-tree: as alio on the other fide^the Tuber-tree, if
It be net dfrefled and looked unto, doth degenerate into the Barbery-tree. I my
felf have engrafted it three or four times into the branches of its own kind, in my
own Orchard ; and if I live fo long, I will Mil engraft; it fo, till it do bring forth
Tubers • for I find that it brings forth already, both greater and fwceter berries.
Now we will ipeak of luch fruits, as are engrsff^d not into their own branches, bun
into branches of another kind, which contain in them both the fafbion and the
properties of either kind: and we will teach the manner how to compound a new
kind of fruit lately deviled, namely

A F each-nut ^mixed of a Nut and a Peach.
There is a kind of Peach called a Peach-nur, which the Ancients never knew of,
but hath lately been produced by pains taken in graffing, as I my felf have feen.
It bears the name and the form alfo of both the parents whereof it is generated,
having a green colour like a Nut, and hath no mollie down on the out-fide, but ve-
ry fmooth all over ; the tafteofit is fharpandfomewhat bitter; it is long ere it be
ripe, and is of a hard fubftance like a Peach. That part of it which lies againft the
Sun is reddifh ; it fmells very well ; it hath within, a rough itone, and hard like *
Peach-floae ; it hath a pleaiant rclifh ; but the apple will not laft lb long as the Nut,
or kernel within. Which kind of fruit cannot be fuppofed to have been otherwife
brought forth then by divers engraffings of the Peach into the Nut-tree, one year
after another. We may alfo better the fruits by engrafting them into better Trees,
DiopbAries produced

Citron- apples compounded of an Apple and a Cttron,

for he engraffed an Apple into the Citron-tree, and that oftentimes • but it wither-
ed as foon as ever it did (hoot forth : howbeir, at length ittookfaft hold, and be-
came a Ck ton-apple-tree. Anatolius and Diophanes made a compound fruit called

Melimeltf of an Apple and a Quince mixt together ;
for if weengraffean Apple into a Quince-tree, the Tree will yield a very goodly
apple, which the Athenians call Melimelum, but we call it a St. Johns Apple. Tlwy
writes, that an ordinary Quince, and a Quince-pear being compounded,

Produce a fruit called Milviana,
The Quince, faith he, being en°raffed into a Quince-pear, yieldeth a kind of fruic
called Milvianum, which alone of all other Quinces is to be eaten raw. Now as we
have (hewed how to make fruits better by engraffing, both for (hew and foe pro-
perties, we will declare alfo, how by engraffing

Fruits may be made worfe*
We will (hew it firft by a Pear. Marcus Varro faith, that if you engraffe a xtvj good
Pear into a wilde Pear-tree, it will not tafie fo well as that which is engrafted into
an Orchard Pear-tree. If you engcaff; a Peach into a Damofin-trce, the fruit
will be much lefs : if into a bitter Almond- tree, the fruit will have a bitter r
Likewifeif you gnffe a Chert-nut into a Willow, and be fomewhat a latter fruif,
thetafte of it will be more bitter. And fo if you graffe an apple into a Damofin
tree, the fruit which it yields, will neither be fo great, noryetfo good,as it is in thje
own kind.

Chap. VIII.
How to procure ripe fruis and flowers before their ordinary feafon.

ARt being as it were Natures Ape, even in her imitation of Nature, effefterh
greater matters then Nature doth. Hence it is that a Magician being for-
nifhed with Art, as it were another Nature , fearching throughly inco thofe

N woiks

74* Natural Magick. Sgo^ 3.

works which Nature doth accomplifh by many fecret means and ciofc operations,
doth work upon Nature, and partly by thac which he fees, and partly by that
which he conjefts and gathers from thence, takes his fnndry advantages of Na-
tures inrtruments, and thereby either haftens or hinders her work, making things
ripe be'ore or afcer their natural feafon, and io indeed makes Nature to be his
inllrument. He knows that fruits, and flowers, and all other growing things that
the world affords, are produced by the circuit and motion of celcftial bodies;
and therefore when he is difpofed to hinder the ripening of any thing, or elfe to
help it forward, thatkmay be more rare and of better worth, he cffe&s it by
counterfeiting the times and feafons of the year, making the Winter to be as the
Summer, and the Spring-time as the Winter. Amongft other means, engraf-
fing is not a little helpful hereunto. Wherefore let us fee , how wc may by
engrafRng

Produce (j rapes in the Spring' time*

If we fee a Cherry-tree bring forth her fruit in the Spring-time, andwedefireto
have Grapes about thac time, there is 6c oportunity of attaining our defire, as
7*r*»f/'»«* wrneth. If you.cngraffea black Vine into the Cherry-tree, youfhall
have Grapes growing in the Spring-tune : for the Tree will bring forth Grapes
the very fame feafon, wherein it would bring forth her own fruir. Bin this* en-
grafting cannot be without boring a hole into the flock, as Dtdjmtu fhewr»h. You
muft bore the Cherry-tree flock through with a wimble, and, your Vine grow-
ing by it, you mutt take one of the next and goodlieft branches thereof, and put
it into the auger-hole; but you muft not cut it off from the Vine, but place it in
as it grows : for fo the branch will live the better, both as being nourifhed by
his own mother the Vine, and alfo as being made partaker of the juice of that
Tree into which it is engraffed; This fprig within the compaffe of two years, will
grow and be incorporated into the Cherry-tree: about which time, after the skar
is grown over again, you muft cut oil" the branch from the Vine, and faw off the
flock of the Cherry-tree wherein it is engraffcd, all above the boring place, and
let the Vine-branch grow np in the reft: for fo fliall neither the Vine b^ idle, but
frill bring forth her own fruit, and that branch alfo which was engraffed doth
grow up together with it, being nothing hurt by that engrafting. Wc may alfo by
the help of engrafting procure

A Rofe to jherv forth her buds before her time.
If we pluck off aRofe-bud from the mother, andengraff by fuch an emplaftering
aswefpakeof before, the fame into the open bark of an Almond-tree, at fuch
time, as the Almond-tree doth bud, the Rofefo engraffed, will bring forth her
own flowers out of the Almond bark. But becaufc it is a very hard matter to en-
graffe into an Herbe , and therefore we can hardly produce flowers fooner
then their time by that means , wc will fhew another means hereof ; And
namely,

How Cucumbers may haften their fruits,

Colume lia found in Dolus Mendeftu an ./Egyptian , an eafie way whereby this may
be done. You muft fet in your Garden in fome fhadowy place well dunged, a
rank of Fenel, and a rank of Brambles one within another } and after the aequi-
nodial day, cut them off a little within the ground ; and having firft loofed the
pith of either of them with a wooden puncheon, to convey dung into them, and
withal to engraft: in them Cucumber-feeds, which may grow up together with the
Fenel and the Brambles : for by this means the feeds will receive nourifhment
from the root of the ftalk into which they are engraffed, and fo you fhall have Cu-
cumbers very foon. But now let us fhew how we may accomplifh this thing by
counterfeiting as it were the feafons of the year : and brft, how wc may pro-,
cure thac

Cucmi

Of the Troduflion of new Plant s. 7?

Cucumbers fhaU be ripe very timely.
The Quinciles fay you muft take panniers or earthen Dots, and put into them fome
fine nticd earth mixed with dung, that it may be fomewhat liquid, and prev en-
ting the ordinary leafon, you muft plant therein Cucumber feeds about the be-
ginning of the Spring , and when the Sun fliines , or that there is any heat
or rain, they bring the panniers forth into the Air, and about Sun-fetting
they bring them into a clofc houfe ; and this they do daily , Bill watering
them as occalion ferveth. But after that the cold and the froft is ccafed, and
the Air is more temperate, they take their panniers and digge a place for
them inlome well-tilled ground, and there fet them, fo that the brims there-
of may be even with the earth; and then look well to ihem, and you (hall
have your defire. The like may be done by Gourds. Theophraftus (heweth ,
that if a man fow Cucumber feeds in the Winter-time, and water them with
warm water, and lay them in the Sunne, or ellc by the fire, and when
feed-time cometh , put whole panniers of them into the ground , they will
yield very timely Cucumbers , long before their ordinary icafon is to grow.
Columella faith , that Itberitti the Emperour took great delight in the Cucum-
bers that were thus ripened , which he had at all times of the year ; for his
Gardners every day drew forth their hanging Gardens into the Sun upon wheels,
and when any great cold or rain came, they ftraightwayes carried them in
again into their clofe hovel 3 made for the fame purpofe. Didymus (heweth

Rofes may bud forth) even before Winter be paft,
if they be ufed after the like manner ; namely, if you fet them in hampers or earthen
veflels, and carefully look unto them , and ufe them as you would ufe Gourds and
Cucumbers, to make them ripe before their ordinary fcafon. Pliny (heweth

How to ma\e figs that were of lafi years growth^to be ripe very foon the next year after ;
and this is by keeping them from the cold too, but yet the device and practice is
not all one with the former. There are, faith he, in certain Countries, as in Mas-
fia, Winter Fig-trees, (a fmall tree it is, and fuch as is more beholding to Art then
to Nature) which they ufe on this manner. After the Autumn or Fall, they lay
them in the earth, and cover them all over with muck, and the green Figs that grew
upon them in the beginning of Winter are alfo buried upon the Tree with them.
Now when the Winter is paft, and the Air is fomewhat calmer the year following,
they dig up the Trees again with the fruit upon them ; which prefently do embrace
the heat of a new Sun as ic were, and grow up by the temperature of another year,
as kindly as if they had then new fprung uptwhereby it cometh to paffe,that though
the Country be very cold, yet there they have ripe Figs of two years growth as it
were, even before other Fig-trees can fo much as blofibm. But becaufe we cannot
fo well pra&ife thefe experiments in the broad and open fields, either by hindering,
or by helping the temperature of the Air, therefore we will affay to ripen fruit and
flowers before their time, by laying warm cherifhers, as lime, or chalk, and nitre,
and warm water, to the roots of Trees and herbs. If you would have

A Cherry ripe before his time,
Pliny faith, that you muft lay chalk or lime to the root of the Tree before it begin to
bloffom ; or ellc you muft oftentimes pour hot water upon the root ; and by either
of thefe means you may procure the ripening of Cherries before their time : how-
beit afterward the Trees will be drie and wither away. If you would procure
the ripening

Of a %ofe before hit time ;

Dydmui faith you may effect it by covering the Rofe-bufh with earth, a foot a-
fcove the root of it , and there pour in warn water upon it, whilft the flippe

N 2 beginneth

y6 Natural Magick. *BooI^^

beginnetb to flioot up , and before any blcffom appearcth. Likemfeifyou
would have

AVtne to bring forth before her time,

you muft take nitre, and pown it, and mix it with water, fo that it be made of the
thicknefifc of hony ; and as foon as you have pruned the Vine , lay good ftore of
your nitre upon the Vine-buds, and fo (hall your buds (boot forth within nine days
after. But to procure the Grapes to be timely ripe, you mnft take the mother of
the wine before it is become fowre, and lay the fame upon the root of the plants
when you fet them j for ac that time ic isbeft fo to ufe them, as Ttrentmus and
Florentine both affirm. Moreover, if you would have any thing to bud forth very
timely, Theophraftui faith you may procure it by fetting the fame

Into the Sea- onion :

f«r if a Fig-tree be fet but necr it, it will caufe the fpeedy ripening of Figs. And
to be brief, there is nothing fet in the Sea-onion , but will more eafily and fpeedily
(boot forth, byreafonof the ftrong inward heat which that herb is endued with-
al. Vsmosritw (heweth another means, whereby you may caufe

The Fig tree to bring forth haft) Figs9
namely, by applying the fame with pepper, andoyle, and Pigeons dung. Florenti-
nm would have the dmg and the oyle to be laid upon the Figs when they be raw
and green. P.tlkdius counfelleth, that when the Figs begin to wax fomewhat red,
you ftiould then belmear them with the juice of a long Onioo mixed with pepper
and oyle ; and fo the Figs will be the fooner ripened. Our practice is this ; when
the Figs begin to wax ripe, we take a wooden needle, and anoint it ovei with oyle,
and fo thruft it through both ends of the Figs; whereby in few dayes the fruit it
ripened. Others cffc£t thi?, by heaping up a great many Rams horns about the root
of the Tree. PZ/a/fbews

How to ma^eColeworts branch before their time }
and this is by laying good ftore of Sea-grafle about it, held up with little props ; or
elfe by laying upon ic black nitre, as much as you can take up with three fingers* or
thereabouts ; for this will haften the ripening thereof. We may alio caufe

Parfley to come up before hit time.
Pliny faith, that if you fprinkle hot water upon it, as it begins to grow, it will (hoot
up very fwiftly. And Palladia faith, that if you pour vineger upon it by little and
little, it will grow up ; or elfe if youcheriftiitwith warm water as foon as ever
it is fown. But the mind of man is fo bold to enter into the vecy fecrct bowels
of Nature, by the diligent fearch of experience, that it hath deviled to bring
forth

Parfley exceeding timely*

ft grows up eafily of it felf • for within fifty or fourty daies it is wont to appear out
of the earth, as Theophraftm and others affirm, as by their writings may be fcen.
Our Country-men call it pet rofelinum. In the pra&ifing of this experiment, you
muft (hew your felf a painful workman ; for if you fail, or commit never fo foiall an
error herein, you will mifle of your purpofe. You muft take Parfley feeds that are
not fully one year old, & in the beginning^ Summer you muft dip them in the vine*
ger,fuffering them to lie a while in fome warm place : then wrap up the feeds in fome
(mail loofe earth, which for this purpofe you have before meddled with the afhes
of burned bean-ftraw : there you muft bedew them oftentimes with a little warm
water, and cover them with fome cloth, that the heat get not from them • fowill
they in (hort time appear out of the earth : then remove the cloth away, and water
them ft ill, and thereby the ftalk will grow up in length, to the great admiration of
the beholders. But in any cafe, yon muft be painful and very diligent ; for I have

affayed

Of the TroduUion of new Tlants. yy

affayed it ; and by reafon of fome error and negligence, I obtained not my de-
fire : hbwbeit,many of my friends having made diligent trial hereof, found it to be
a very true experiment. Likcwifc may

Lentiles be baftcned in their growth^

if they be fmeared over with dry Ox-dung, a little before they are fown ; but
they had need lie in that dung four or five daies before they be caft into the
ground. So

Me lens may be haftenedin their fruit ;

for if in the Winter-time you lay a parcel of earth in mixens that are made of hoc
dung, md in the fame earth fow Melon-feeds, the heat of the dung will caufe them
foon to fprout forth : you muft keep them warm with fome covering, from the mow,
and the cold of the night; and afterward when the Air is more calm, yon muft
plant them in fome other place : for by this means we have haftened the fruit
hereof. And by this fame device of preventing their feed 'time, we may
caufe

Cucumbers to haft en their fruit.

But Theophrafitte fcittth down another practice. Cucumber-roots, if they be care-
fully lookt into, will live long. Therefore if a man cut off a Cucumber clofe by the
ground,after it hath brought forthfruit, and then cover the roots over with earth,
the very fame roots the year following will bring forth very timely fruit, even be-
fore others that were moft feafonably fown. Theophraftut alfo fets down an-
other way

Of htftening Cucumber

and that is by macerating the feed before it be fown ; or elfe by fupplytBg it with
continual moifture after it is fown. So alfo we may procure

Peafe or Vitches to be timely rife ;
If we fow them before their ordinary feafon in Barley time, as Florentine faeweth.
But Theophraftus faith this may be done by macerating them in the water before
feed-time, but efpeciallyif you macerate themftiales and all : for there is but a
lictle of it will turn to putrefaftion ; and the (hale feeds the kernel well at thefirft,
howfoevcr afterward it turn to nothing. The fame Theophraftm fhewech alfo

How the ^ape-root may be haftened ingrowth.
If the Gardner, faith he, do hide the fame in an heap of earth, it will caufe it to
bring forth very timely fruit the year following. There may other fruits alfo be
timely ripened ; as-

A Quince may be haftcned in ripening,
■ . ..

if you daily bedew them with continual moifture, as Palladia Giewetb. And Pc
mocritm faith, you may have

jirh (3(1 3*4 <!' w - . jtCiliSnj at: op t>i- ri *vw»wo . . ' . *. r ,J
Rofes growing in the moneth of January ,

if you water the flip twice a day in the Summer-time. We may likewife pro-
cure that

gourds (haU bring forth very timely \

by underpropping and holding up their young tender Spues. In like manner we
may caufe

The forward Fig»tree to hafien her fruit,

byiCcm!?40r fc^kg thc bo<ty the Tree, that the milky juice may there fwell
and rug ulue out of it, that when the fuperBuous humor is gone forth, that which is

left

78 Natural Magick. 2?00^.

leftbehind,may be the more eafily concoded,and fo the fruit will be fooner ripened.
To be fhort, we may procure

The timely ripening of all kind of fruit.
If we fow or plant them in fomep' ace where they may lie ftill oppofite againft the
Sun, or if we put them into certain veflels made for the fame purpofe, and ftill
water them with warm water, and let them lie continually in the Suo. And if
we wonid have them to haften their fruit very fpeedily, we fhould have an Oven
made under thofe veflels, that fo by reafon of a double warmth, 00c from above,
and the other from beneath the fruit may more fpeedily be produced. And fufely
this is the only caufe* why fruits and flowers are more forward and fooner ripe in
the Country Puteoli, and the Ifland Inarime, then in all other places of Campa-
nia, bccaufe there they haften theconcoftionand ripening of them, by cherifh-
ing the roots thereof with fire and heat within the earth.

p*» **** *v*^*^t\?tf

C H A P. IX.

How we may have fruits andfowers at all times of the year,

BY thefc wayes of procuring fruit to be timely ripe, it may be cffc&ed, that we
fhali have fruits and flowers at all times of the year, feme very forward that
come before their ordinary feafon, and fome late- ward that come after : as for their
own time, then, Nature of her felf affords them unto us. Arifiotle in his Pro-
blems fheweth ...

How we may have Cucumbers all the year long,

both in feafon and out of feafon. When they are ripe, faith he, you muft put them
into a waterifh ditch, neer the place where they grew, and cover it over: for by
this means the heat of the Sun cannot come at them to dry them, and the water-
ifhneffeof the place will keep them topple and moift, fo that they will ftill be frefh
and green. And Theophrafitu after him faith the like ; that Gourds and Cucumbers
muft be taken when they are fmall, and in their tender growth, and mult be hidden
in fome ditch, where the Sun cannot come to wafte and confume their moifture,
nor the wind to dry them , which two things would mar and hinder their growth,
aswefeeitfallethoutinTrees, that are fo fituate, as both the wince and the Sun
have their full fcope upon them. If you would have

Citron trees betrfrmt all the year ;
tohaveCitrons ftill growing frefh upon the Tree, you muft obferve that manner
and cuflom which was firft peculiar in Affyria, but is now ufual in many place*.
When their feafon is to be gathered, you muft cut off fome of the fruit from the
Tree, and prune thofe parts well where you have left no fruit; but you muft leave
ibmebehinde, upon fome other parts of the Tree : fo (h\\l you find a new fupply
of frefh fruit there where you cut eff the former; and when thete be ripe, then cut
off thofe which you left upon the Tree before, and fo frefh fruit alfo will come up
in their ftead. *Pontanui hath fet down the fame experiment in verfe ; that
part of thi fruit is to be gathered, and the reft left hanging upon the Tree; forfo
it will come to pafle, that the Tree will bud forth a frefh in thofe parts where it
finds it felf deftituteof fruit, srieving as it were that one bough fhould be beauti-
fied with fruir, and the other fhould have none at all. We may alfo effe& this
by the help of engrafting : for if we defire

7o have tipples all the year,
Djdimw in his Georgicks faith , that if we erigraffe an Apple into a Citron-
tree, it will bring forth for the moft pait continual fruit. And if we would

*' t-r nrfj \sm Mini v: is I . \ ^ iftibaft bn-

tt «rfit< • '. ■ - ■ ■ Wa

Of the TroduBion of new Tlants.

Artichockes crow continually ^
we may learn to do it out of Cajfianwywho following the Authority of Varrd, faith,
that Artiehocks always bring forth fruit about the fame feaConthat they ire fet in,and
therefore it is eafie to have them all the year long. The ordinary fealon of planting
Artiehocks is in November & September,and commonly they bear fruit in July and
Auguft: but they will bring forth alfo in March and April, if they be planted ac-
cordingly ; for by that time they will have as perfect a foul, as at any time elfe. If
you pra&ife it three years together, to plant them in the moneths of November,
December, January, February, and March, you fhall have Artichockes of that
kind, as will bring forth frcfli fruit almoft all the year long. Likewife, if youdefire
to have

Sperage alwaycs growing frejh,

and fit to be eaten , you muft take this courfe : as foon as you have gathered the fruici
you muft dig round about the roots as they lie in their own place under the earth,
and by this means they will fHoot up into new ftalks. In like manner, if you de-
fae to have

Rofes growing all the year longy

you muft plant them in every rrioneth fomc, and by dunging them, and taking good
heed unto them , you (hall have frefh Rofes continually. By the like practice, you
may alfo have

Lillies aU the year long •

for if you take the roots or cloves of Lillies, and fet them in the ground, fome four-
teen, fomc twelve, fome eight ringers deep, you (hall by this means have Lillies ail
the year long, and fo many feveral flowers of thena as you have planted feverai
roots. And as this may be done by Lillies , fo Anatolim thinks the fame pra-
ctice will take like effect in ail other flowers. Theophrajita faith , that we
may have

Violets tlwayes growings

if we fet them in well-fenced places, andfach as lie open to the force of the Suns
for commonly fruits and flowers will grow there, when they will grow no where
elfe : but they muft be very carefully lookt unto, and then they will come on the
better. The beft way is, to fet them in earthen veffels, and keep them from vehe-
ment cold and hear, bringing them forth ftill when the Air is calm and temperate,
and applying them with moifture, and muck, and carefull drefling. So wc may pro-
cure alfo that

The Herbe Oenanthe (hall 'flourifo aB the year ;

tot Theophrtftw writes, that if we deal thereby, as in the procuring of Violets, wc
(hall have flowers upon it continually.

Chap. X.

How to produce fruits that {halite later and backward.

have already {hewed how to produce forward fruits that will be very timely
ripe ; now it rcmaineth that we fet down fuch cunning fleights and devices, as
whereby we may procure fruit to grow very later, not to be ripe before the lowed
of Winter. And this we may learn to effect by contrary caufes to the former j and
whereas we were to heat that which we would have to be timely ripe, we muft here
ufe coolers to make things ripen (lowly; andwherea* before we were to engraffe
later fruits into forward trees, here wc muft engrafts forward fruits into later:
Trees, Likewife we muft fow or plant late, that we may receive later fruit: for as

beafts

8o Natural Magick. Sw/^j.

beads that are long ere they be perfe&ly bred, are long before they have theit hair
and do not change their hair before the fame time of the year come again, in which
they were brought forth ; i'o alio in plant* it cometh to pafle^hae if they be fee late,

they will grow late, and bring forth backward fruits. To begin with engraffi
wewili fhew how thereby

To produce later Cherries,

There is a kind of Tree that brings forth a very bitter fruit, fo bitter that it is cal-
led Amarendula, that is to fay, a bitterling; a branch of this Tree being en-raff^d
into a Cherry-tree, after three or four fcveral engraffings will bring forth atlemnh
Cherries that will be very later: and howfoever the fruit of its own kind be very
bitter, yet in time it will forget the former re,ifh, andyecld a more pleafant tafte.
We may effect this alfo by that kinde of engrafting which we ipoke of in the eighth
Chapier • but that will be longer in working. Likewile we may procure that&

A Pear Jb all grow exceeding later,

if we engraffe the fame into a Willow , for we have declared before,that fuch an en-
grafting there may be ; and certain it is, that thereby a very latter fruit may be pro-
duced. But we muft fee that the Willow grow in fuch a place, as where it may oe
nourifhed with continual moifture ; and thi« engrafting mult be done about the lalt
dayesof the Moons laft quarter . and it muft be gwffcd betwixt the Tree and the
bark. If any man would have

Rofes grow later I

lEloremwui Chews how it may effe&ed. When you have engrafted the Vine-branch
into a Cherry-tree, as foon as ever the fruit ccmeth forth, you muft fet the bud of
a Rofe into the bark or pill thereof : for growing in another body, look what time
the Tree wherein it is fee, will fiu&ifie, and at the fame time will the Role open ic
felf, yielding a very excellent favour, and befides will be very pleafant to behold.
Tobefhort, all kinds of fruits may be made to grow later, by this kind of engraf-
ting. Now there is another way whereby we may procure the backward growth of
fruits : and this is by fhaking or plucking off the buds or bloffoms that grow firft
upon the Tree ; for while new buds are growing up in the room of the firft, time
wears away, • and yet if the Air be feafonable, thefe latter buds will be good fruir,
and well ripened, though they be flow. Thus we may produce

Figs that are very backward,
as ColameltatUtvtcih. When the green Figs arc very fmall, fhake them eff, and
the Tree will i bring forth others that will not be ripe before the latter end of
Winter. And Pliny following his authority, faith, that Figs will grow latter, if
the fir ft Green ones be fhaken off when they areabout the bigneis of a bean $ for
then others will come up in their ftead, which will be long a ripening. And by this
means it is, that Tarentinttittievfs how to produce

Latter Grapes,

We muft take away the bunches that grow firft, and then others will grow up in
their ftead : but we muft have an efpcciall care ftill to look to the Vine, that other
cluftcrs may grow, and at length be ripened. By this means likewile we may
caufe

Rofes to open or blow very latter,
if We tuck off the buds that grow firft, at fuch time as the flower begins to appear
and fhew forth it felf. This praaifc wiU take beft cffe& , if it be uied Ux>a
musk-rofes,efpeciallyfuchasarewonttobefulleftof leaves; for thus we have in
the Country ftore of Rofes growing all the Winter long, as they ftand in earthen
veflTels,and are fet up in Windows. So if you would have

Clove

Of the TroduBion of new Tlants* 81

Clove- gill fiowers blow Uter\
you muft tuck cff the firft ftaiks and flips about that time as they are ready to bud,
and fee them in the heat of the ^un all the Summer long ; but you muft water them
continually* that they lefe not all their moifture : for by this practice we have pro-
cured other Walks, and other flips which have yeelded flowers all the Winter long
even to the Spring, fo that we have continual Winter-gilliflowers, both at home
and in the Country abroad. There is alfo another device whereby we may caufe
frui; to ripen very late; not by fhaking or cutting off the buds, but by planting
them late, and keeping away the cold from them. As for example, If we would

Produce later Cucumbers,
becaufc we know that this kind of fruit cannot endure any froft,or fliowers,or cold
ftorms, therefore we mul fow the feeds in the Summer-time ; and when the Win-
ter draws on, we muft lay heaps of muck round about them, whereby no cold may
come at them to dettroy them, and they may be ripened through the heat and fat-
nefs thereof. But the beft way to have later Cucumbers , is, as we fhewed before,
cither to fet thereof into great Fennel ftalks, orelfetocaft the Cucumbers into a
pit for a certain leafon. If wc would have

A %o[e blow in the Winter ;
we muft watch the time when the tops of the fets begin to fhoot up, as they grow
on their beds ;and then take away the fets, and plant them in another place, where
the ioot afterward wil take,& fo yeeld us a w inter- rofe.Like wife if we defire to have

Straw berries in the Winter or Springs
as we have in the Summer, we mutt take them whiles they are white, before they
are grown to their reddtfh hiew, and put them leaves and all into reeds or canes,
flopping up the mouth thereof with fome fat foii,'and burying them in the earth till
Winter come ; and then if we would have them to be red of their own natural co-
lour, let them lie a while in the Sun, and we (hall obtain our purpofe. By the like
device as this is, we may relerve

Lettice for a Winter faUet,
When ftie hath brought forth her leaves, that they grow up round together, you
mutt bind the tops of them about with a little ft ring, and keep them growing in an
earthen veflel, in fuch a place as they may alwayes receive fit nourKhment ; and by
this means you (hall have them ftill white and tender. In like manner

Sndtvemay be kept ttll Winter^
to have it ftill frefh for any ule. Others take other courfes that are lefs chargeable;
as to cover them only with earth, or with ttraw and leaves. Gardeners with us co-
ver them in their Gardens with find or fuch like earth, whereby they keep them
very white and tender, and yet enjoy them all the Winter long.

Chap. XI.

How we may caufe fruit to grow bigger then their ordinary kinde.
IT remained! now that we fet down certain rules and wayes whereby fruit may be
*made greater,and far exceed the ordinary bignefs of their own kind : and this may
be effe&ed divers wayes* ; for it may be done cither by engrafting only (for indeed
this is the chief privilcdge that engrafRng hath, to procure bigger fruit) ; orclfe by
planting upon thofe Trees which bring forth greater fruit of their own kind ; or eHe
by gathering of the fruit here and there fome, if the Tree be overladen, that 4b the
juice may more plentifully beftow itfclf upon the fruit that is left behind ; or elfe
by drefling and trimming them; or by other devices, as hereafter (hall be fhewed,
Wc will firft begin with engrafting, and (hew how we may procure thereby

That apples or other like fruit jhallgrow bigger then they are wont,
A tree that is pl»n-ed with a graffcof her own kinde, will alwayes bring forth greater fruit, then if it
were not fo planted. We brought an example hereof out of Vlinj , that CortUius took a Scion of a
Cheftnut-trce, and engrafted the fame into the tree again,and thereby produced a greater and a bet-
ter Chcftjiut. And for rny own part, I have oft-times made the like proof in many other fruits, and
by experience have found that all fruits may be made greater by engrafting, and carefu looking
unto, but efpecially Citrons. Secondly, we may procure fruits to be greater then ordinary, by graf-
fing upon another Tree, whofe kind is to bear bigger fruit. As for example, if wc would produce

Pf ars that [hoidd be greater then ordinary,

O efpecially

8x NatuulMagick. <Bookj.

efpecially the kaft fort of Pears called Myrapia, or Musk- pears , we may effect it by
er^raffing them into a Quince-tree • bccaule the Quince- tree, of all o;her, bears
the greateft faut : and tuereby the leaft Pears that are may be fo augmented, thac
they will become a very goodly fruit, ; experience whereof,we have in many places
in our Country. So we may caufe

The (JWedlar-tree to bear huge Medlar s,
greater then any man would imagine, if we engraft it into the Quince-tree : the
proof whereof both I have made my felf, and feett it tried by many others •> and the
oftener we fo engraft it, the greater Medlars we (hall procure. Likewife

The [mall Ayrtcockmay be made greater ^
whereas they are the fmalleit kinde of Peaches that are. I have oftentimes engraf-
fed it upon that kinde of Damofin-tree which bears a Plum like a Goats Hone both
in fliape and greatnefs, (it may be it is our Scig-tree) and by this means I procured
great Apricocks : but if you ingriff it into any other Damofin-tree, it will yeeld
bnt a batfard fruit : for the Apricock doth not endure kindly, to be engraffed into
any other trees beiides. In our Naples and Surrentine orchards , there is excellent
fruit of this kinde ; and I never law any elfewhere. We may alio

augment the fruit of the Myrtle-tree,
The Pomegranate-tree and the Myrtle-tree are each delighted with others compa-
ny, as Didymus wtiteth in his Georgicks j where he faith plainly, that the Pomegra-
nate-tree being engraff-d into the Myrtle-tree , and likewife the Myrtle-tree into
the Pomegranate-tree, do each of them bring forth a greater fruit. But I am per-
fwaded that the Myrtle-tree brings forth greater fruit in proportion to her body
when it is engraffed upon the Pomegranate-tree, becaul'e the kinde of this is greater
then the kinde of that, then the Pomegranate-tree doth when h is engraffed npon
the Myrtle- tree. By fuch a kinde of means we may alfo procure

Mulberries greater then ordinary^
if we engraff a Mulberry into a Fig-tree : for fo Pailaditu hath written, That if the
Mu berry be engraffed into a Fig-tree,the Fig-tree will caufe it ro change his colour,
and will fill up the fruit thereof with a fat juyce, fo that they fhall be greater Mul-
berries then ordinarily their kinde is wont to yeeld. A third means whereby Ap-
ples or luch-like fruit may be augmented, is, by plucking off fome of the fruit here
and there,and leaving fome few upon the trees : for fo (hall the juyce of the tree be-
ftow it felf more liberally upon the fruit that is left,and make ic greater : as a mother
doth more bountifully feed one childe with her milk , then fhe can feed twain.
Wherefore if we would procure

Citrons greater then their ktxde,
Threntinw counfelleth us, that when the fruit beginneth to weigh down the boughs,
we fhouid pluck off here and there fome, and leave but a few behinde ; fo (hall
they that are left be thicker and bigger every way. Vontanta alfo faith the fame. If,
faith he, you would have great Citrons, big enough to fill your hand, you muft fhake
eff a great many from all the boughs, onely leaving fome few , (but you muft leave
both the greatelf , and thofe alfo that grow in the chiefeft and likelieft parts of the
tree : ) for, faith he, the heir which is left, will make himfelf merry and fat with his
brothers milk, and thrive much the better. Pailaditu fhews \

flow to make Apples greater then ordinary ,
and it is by this fame means. For when they hang thick upon the boughs, you muft
gather away the worft, that fo the nourifhing juyce may be converted to the beft,
and the faired may thereby be the better augmented. There is vet another means
whereby w? may caufe fruit to be the greater ; and this by duffing and trimming,
when we dig about them,and water them, and lay muck about them. And firtt, by
this means

Citrons may be made greater :
for, as Palladia faith , they are much holpen and delighted with continual digging
about them. And

Quince-pears may be augmented^
as the Tame Author fheweth, by watering them continually. And

Teaches may be augmented much, if

Of the TroduBion of neve Tlants. 8$

if we plant them in moift places , and fupply them with continual watering. But if
you would have the Peach-trees

Bring forth ver) great oms$
you muft watch the time when they bloflom , and fuckle them three days together
with three pintes of Goats mlk, as Palkditu (heweth. We have pra&ifed to caufe

7 he T omegranate-tree to bear a mighty fruit •
:nd that by this means. We took a good portion of fat muck, whereunto we put an
equal portion of Swines dung, «nd the lees of Wine and Barley-bran ; and we kept
all this in a dry place for a year together, evety month manging them again one with
another ; and at laft we put Vineger to it, and made it like an Ointment. Afterward
in O&ober and November, we digged away the earth from about fome parts of the
Pomegranate-tree-roots, and there wrapt in this Ointment round about them, and
at length covered them again with earth ; and by this Device I had greater Pome-
granates then ever the tree bare before. But now if you would go forward, and
praftife the fame upon it the two next years following , queftionlefs you might pro-
duce very huge Pomegranates, wonderful to be feen,as big as Gourds. Likewife
we have caufed Beans to bring forth great cods,

by anointing them with this fame ointment,and afterward fowing them in the earth :
whereby we had great, increafe , both for the bignefs of the Bean , and alfo of
the cod. Alfo

Leeks and roots of Radijh may be made greater •
if we tranflate them out of one place, and fet them in another, as Theophraftu*
(heweth. If you would have

A Rape grow bigger and rounder y
you muft fow it affoon as ever it is ready to be taken out of the husk : for by the ad-
vantage and benefit of the feafon wherein it isfowed,itwill be the more augmented;
becaufe the root will thereby be the better filled , and the larger grown. Likewife
Florentine fheweth, how to make a

Teafe of a bigger growth.
If, faith he, you take Peafe , and iieep them in warm water the day before you fow
them, they will grow the greater. Some men take more pains thenneedeth j who,
becaufe they would have a greater Peafe growing, they fteep them Chclls and all, and
put Nitre into the water wherein they are fteeped, and fow them in their (hells.

Vttches may be made bigger^
it they be fet with a little pole, to grow up thereby : for this will caufe them to
thicken, as Iheophraftus faith. So alfo

Onions may be thic\ned^
as Sotion (heweth. About fome twenty days before you tranflate them from the
place where they firft grew , you muft dig away the earth about them, and let them
lie a drying, that all moifture may be kept from them ; and then plant them again,
and they will grow much bigger. But if withal you pill of the top-skin , and io
plant them, they will be far greater. Likewife we may caufe

tArtichockj to bear a fuller fruity
as Varro fheweth. If you plant them in a well-foiled place, and cover them with old
dung, and water them often in the fummer-time , you (hall by this means have a
fuller and a more tender Artichock. We may alfo pra&ife another Device whereby
to make greater fruit, which Theo^hraflm hath fet down • and he brings an Example,
how to make Pomegranates to grow greater then ordinary:

for Art may caufe the greatnefs of Fruit. When the firft buds be formed upon
the boughs , they muft be put into an earthen veffel that is made with a hole
quite thorow ; and the bough whereon they grow, muft be fwayed downward with-
out hurting it : then cover the pot with earth, and fo you (hall have exceeding great
Pomegranates. The reafon whereof is this : The pot preferves the fruit from the va-
pours that would otherwife annoy it : and befides, the earth miniftreth fome moi-
fture unto it • fo that the bignefs thereof is increafed by the ftore of nourifiV
ment. It receives no more help from the tree, then if it were out of the earth.
*nd therefore the kernels are no greater then ordinary ; but the pill h much

O 2 thicker:

84. Natural Magick. Sgo^j.

thicker : the proper juice of it is fomewhat wafted andconfumed ; for which caufe
the tafte of this fruit fo handled, is waterilh and worfe then others: but thenne
receives outward nourifhment, and fpends none ; for which caufe that is much
thicker. The like pra&ife Palladius and Martial ufe, thereby to procure

A great Citron.

They take a Citron when it is young,and fiiut it up f aft in an earthen veffel : for the
Citron will increafe continually, till it come to be of the bignefs and fafhion of the
veffel wherein it is puc : but there muft be a hole made thorow the veffel, whereby
the air may get in unto it. By the like device, Theopkraftns allays to produce

Cucumbers and Gourds greater then ordinary
by hiding them while they are young, both from Sun and from Winde, that nothing
may come at them to hinder their growth. Like to this Device, is the fetting of
them in Fennel-ftalks, or in earthen Pipes •, whereby the natural Juyce and Nou-
rifhment is kept in, to the increafing of their gtowth. We will alfo (hew, out of
'fheophrafimi a like Device, whereby the Herb

tAli fender or 'Par (Ley may he made greater.
You muft dig the Alifander round about the root, and cover it with Cachryl , and
then heap earth upon it. For the roots fpend all the moifture themielves, and fuffer
no nourifhment to afcend into the buds. This Cachryl is hot and thick : and as
by the thicknefs it draws nourifhment to it, foby venue of the heat it doth con-
coct and digeft that which it hath attracted : and therefore feeing this doth both
draw more nouriftiment to the Alifander, and alfo concoct it , there muft needs be
a greater augmentation of that herb. This practice he borrowed of AnHotle. This
herb may alfo be made bigger by another means , namely, if when you plant it, you
make a hole for it in the ground with a great ftake : for the root will at length fill
up the hole. So there is a means to make

A %*di]h- root grow bigger,
if it be planted in a cold ground, as 'Pliny fheweth. For Radifties are much cherifh-
edand delighted with cold ; as in fome cold places of Germany there be Radifhes
growing as big as a little childe. Some have reported, that if you drive a ftake into
the ground fix inches deep, and put chaff into]the pit which the ftake hath made, and
then put in the Radifh-feed,covering it over with earth and muck , the Radifh will
grow Up to the bignefs of the pit. By a Device not much unlike to this,FlorentinHf

fheweth how to

Make great Lettife.

You muft remove them, and water them well ; and when they are grown half a
handful high, you muft dig round about them,that the roots may be feen : then wrap
them in Ox-dung, and cover them over again, and water them ftill ; and when they
arc waxen bigger, cut the leaves crofs with a (harp knife, and lay upon them a little
barrel or tub that never was pitched, (for Pitch will hurt the herb) that fo it may
grow not in height, but onely fpread forth in breadth. So the herb

Beet may be made greater^
as Sotion fheweth. To make Beet grow in bignefs, faith he,' thou muft cover the
roots over with fome frefh Ox-dung, and divide the leaves or buds, and lay a broad
ftone or a tyle upon it, to caufe it to fpread forth in bredth. You may alfo make

Leeks greater ,

by removing them, and laying a great ftone or abroad tyle upon them : but in no
cafe muft they be watered. By the very fame Dcvice^Anatolitu fheweth how to make

(jdrltcf^ greater y

Of the TroduBion of nevs> Tlants. 8f

by laying tyles upon the roots thereof, as upon Leeks. Thcophraflut fheweth ano-
ther kinde of Device, whereby to make

%^difhes greater j

and he faith that the Gardeners of his time were wont to pradtife ir. They took
away the leaves in the Winter-time, when they flourifh molt, and caft the Radiihes
into the ground, covering them over with earth ; and fo they lafted and grew rill
Summer came again , never (hooting forth either into buds or leaves,excepr it were
where the earth was gone, that they lay uncovered. The like Experiment doth Pal-
ladius teach, concerning the Rape-root, whereby to make

^ape-roots greater.

AfToon as you have plucked them up , you muft ftrip off all the leaves, and cut off
the ftalk about half an inch above the root : then make certain furrows for them in
the ground, for every one of them a feveral furrow ; and there bury them afunder,
about eight inches deep : and when you have caft earth upon them, tread it in ; and
by that means you fhall have great Rape-roots. By the like means , Jheophrcflm
thinks, we may procure

The herb Wakf-robbin to grow greater.
When it is moft full of leaves , and when the leaves be at the broadeft, we muft
bow them downward, winding them round about the root within the earth, that fo
the herb may not bud forth , buc all the nourishment may be converted to the head of
the herb. So may we make

Onions to grow bigger ,

as Theophrafim fuppofeth , if we take away all the ftalk, that the whole force of the
nouriftiment may defcend downwards ; left if it fhould be diffufed, the chief vertue
thereof fhould fpend it felf upon the feeding. Sotion faith,that if a man plant Oni-
ons, he muft cut eff both the tops and the tails thereof , that fo they may grow to a
greater bignefs then ordinary. Palladim faith, that if we defire to have great-head-
ed Onions , we muft cut off all the blade, that fo the juyce may be forced down to
the lower parts. In like manner, if we would have

Cjarltckiheads greater then conm$M,
we muft take all the greenifh fubftance thereof, before it be bladed , and turn it
downward , that fo it may grow into the earth. There is yet another Device,
whereby to make herbs and roots grow bigger then ordinary \ but yet I like not fo
well of it , howfoever many ancient Writers have fet it down : and firft,

How to make Leeks grow greater.
Columella hath prefcribed this courfe : you muft take a great many Leek-feeds , and
binde them together in thin linen clouts , and fo caft them into the ground , and
they will yeeld large and great leeks. Which thing Palladia alfo confirms by his
authority , in the very fame words. But both of them had it out of Theophraftw,
who putreth h for a general Rule , That if a man fowe many feeds bound up toge-
ther in a linen cloth , it will caufe both the root to be larger, and the buds to be
larger alio . and therefore in his time they were wont to fow Leeks, Parfly,and other
herbs after the fame manner : for they are of more force when there be many feeds
together, all of them concurring into one nature. Moreover , it makes not a little to
the enlarging of fruits, to take the feeds which we would fow, our of fome certain
part of the former fruit. As for example : we fhall procure

A Gourd of a greater or larger growth,
if we take the feed out of the middle of a Gonrd , and fet it with the top down-
ward. This courfe Columella prefcribes, in his Hortulm : Look, faith he, where the
Gourd fwells moft, and is of the largeft compafs , thence, even out of the middle

there-

%6 Natural Magick, 'Book^^.

thereof, youmuft take your feed,and that will yeeld you the largcft fruit. And this
is experienced not in Gourds onely, but alfo in all other fruits : tor the feeds which
grow in the bowels or belly, as it were, of any fruit, are commonly moft pa* fec>,snd
yeeld molt perfect fruitjwheras the feeds that grow in the outward parts,croducefor
the moft pan weak & unperfeS fruit. Likewife the grains that are in the middle of
the ear, yeeld the beftcorn ; whereas both the higheft and the loweft are not fo per-
feci: : but becaufe Gourds yeeld great incrcafe , therefore the experience hereof is
more evidently in them then in any other. Cucumbers will be of a great growth,
as the Quintiles fay, if the feeds be fet with their heads downward ; or elfe if you
fct a vcflel full of water under them in the ground,that fo the roots may be drench-
ed therein : for we have known them grow both fweeter and greater by this De-
vice.

Chap. XII.
How to produce fruit that jhall not have any flene or kernel in it.

JT is a received thing in Philofophy, efpecially amongft thofe that have fet forth
unto us the choice!* and niceft points of Husbandry , that if you takeQuickiets,
or any branches that you would plant, and get out the pith of them with fome ear-
picker, or any like inftrument made of bone,they will yeeld fruit without any ftone,
and wi'hout any kernel : for it is the pith that both breedeth and nourifheth the
fubtfaflce of the kernel. But the Arcadians are of a quite contrary opinion : for,
fay they, every tree that hath any pith in it at all, will live ; but if all the pith be
taken out of it, it will be fo far fromyeelding any ftonelefs fruit, that it cannot
chufe but die, and be quite dried up. The reafon is, becaufe the pith is the moifteft
and moft lively part of any tree or plant : for the nourifhment which the ground
fends up into any plant , is conveyed efpecially by the pith into all the other parts :
for Nature hath 'o ordained it, that all the parts draw their nourifhment, as it were
their foul and their breath , thorow the marrow or pith of the ftock,as it were tho-
row a Squirt or Conduit-pipe, Which may appear by experience, feeing any bough
or ftalk, fo foon as the marrow is gone, returns and crooks backward, till it be quite
dried up, as the Ancients have (hewed. But I for my part muft needs hold both
againft Theophraftns, and againft others alfo that have written of Husbandry , both
that trees may live after their marrow is taken from them , and alfo that they will
bring forth fruit having ftones or kernels in them , though there be no pith in the
trees themfelves, as I hive fhewed more at large in my books of Husbandry. Not-
withstanding, left I fhould omit any thing belonging to this argument,I have thought
good here to fet down the examples which thofe Ancients have delivered in writing,
that every man that lifts may make trial hereof ; and haply fome amongft the reft
u!ing greater diligence in the proof hereof then I did,tnay findc better fuccefs here-
in then I have found. There be many means , whereby Plants may be depri-
ved of kernels ; as namely, by engrafting , by taking out their pith, by foiling with
dung, or by watering, and by other Devices. We will firft begin, as our wonted
manner is, with engrafting ; and will fhew how to produce

*A "T exch- apple without a ftone.
TalUditts faith he learned this new kinde of engrafting of a certain Spaniard , which
he faith alfo he had experienced in a Peach-tree. Take a Willow- bough about the
thicknefs of a mans arm ; but it muft be very found, and two yards long at the leaft :
bote it thorow the middle,and carry it where a young Peach-tree grows : then ftrip
off all rhe Peach-tree-fprigs all bur the very top , and draw it thorow the hole of
the Willow-bou h : then ftick both ends of the Willow into the ground, that ic
may ftand bending like a bowe ; and fill up the hole that you bored, with dirt and
mofr, & bind them in with thongs. About a year after, when the Peach-tree and the
Willow are incorporated into each other , cut the plant beneath the joyning place,
and remove it, and cover both the Willow- bough and the top of the plant alfo with

earth ;

Of thtTroduBion of new Tlanis. 87

earth ; and by this means you (hall procure Peaches without ftonej. But this mud
be doneinmgift and water iflb places ; and befides, the Willow mutt be relieved
withcocnBU.il watering, that fo the nature of the wood may be cherittied , ( as it
delights in moiiture) and it may alio minifter abundant j'uyce to the plant that is
engrafted in it. By the like experiment we may procure, as Avieenna (hews, that

A Citranjballgrow without any feed, in it :
for, faith he, if we engraff it into a Quince-tree, it will yeeld fuch a fruic. Alberm
pcomifeth to produce , b3

^4 Medlar without any ftonesy
by engrafting it inro an Apple-tree, or a Service- tree. But experience proves this
to be falfe ; yet furely, if it be fo engrafted , it will have a fofter kernel a gre at deal.
The reafon which brought the Ancients to think and write thus, was this : They faw
that fuch fruits as have in them the hardeft Hones , do grow upon fuch trees as have
in them the hardeft pith ; as the Dog-tree, the Olive-tree, the Damofin-trec, the
Myrtle-tree, and the like : tbey &w alio, that fuch trees as have a loft and a fpungie
kind of pith in them, as the Fig-tree, the Alder-tree, and fuch-like, bring forth fruic
without any ftones in them at all : and from hence they gathered and concluded,
that it is the pith which nouriflhes the kerne). Which thing howfoever it hath fomc
little fhadow of truth in it, yet they ftiould not have extended it generally to all
plants , feeing experience proves it to fail very often. Now let us come to the fe-
cond means whereby fruic may be prevented of their kernels ; and this is by taking
forth the pith or marrow. As for example : if you would procure the growing of

t.a* Mot loot mm tyfjU ' -aLOvirlb .<C .\k aiiib swn rl»witDUA^\

A Grape without any fione in it>

Democrittu counfelleth you to take a branch or twig of a Vine , and cleave it juft in
the middle, and either with a ftone, or fome inftrumcnt made of bone, fetch out all
the pith, in that part which you will plant within the earth, or at kali as far as you
can hollow it without fpoil : then prefently bind up the parts together again with pa-
per ftiffly and tightly wrapped about them,*nd make a trench for them in fome moift
and very fertile foil , where you muft plant them in one > and fatten ic to fome fure
prop, that it may not be wreathed nor bowed ; fo will they foon grow up together
into one, as they were before : but ic would be much better, if you would put the
clove or head of a Sea-onion into that part which you have robbed of the pith: for
this is as good as glue to fatten them together ; and the moifture hereof will keep
them fupple,as alfo the heat hereof will cherifh them much. Theophrafim faith,thac
you may procure Grapes without any ftones in them, if you rob the Vine-branch of
the pith that is in it , whereof the ftones are wont to be gendred. And Columella
faith, that if you would have Grapes without ftones, you muft cleave the Vine-
branch, and take out all the pith ; but fo, that the buds be not hurt thereby : then
joyn it together, and binde it up again, fo that you crufli not the buds ; and fo plane
kin a well-foiled ground, and there water it often : and when it beginneth toftiooc
up into flips, you mutt dig deep about it oftentimes; and when it cometh to bear,
it will yeeld you Grapes with our any ftones. Palladium faitb,there is a goodly kinde
of Grape which harh no kernels in it, fo that it may be fwallowed down eafily, and
that with no fmall pleafantnefs, as if it were many Grapes ftoned and fupped up to-
gether. The manner of the procuring it is,as the Greeks record,by Art aflifted with
Nature, on this wife : The fet which we would plant, muft be cleft in themidft, fo
far as we mean to fet it within the ground • and when We have picked and clean
fcraped out all the pith of thole parts,we muft clofe them together again ; and when
we have bound them hard up, fet them in the earth : but the bond wherewith they
ace tied up, muft be made of Paper or Parchment ; and the ground where they are
(Jet, muft be a moift place. Some go to work more precifely , and put the plant fo
cleft and made up again, into a Sea-onion, fo far as the plant was cloven : for by the
help thereof, all plants do foonet and eafier take root. Pliny likewife faith, there is
t new-invented kinde of Grapes , when the Vine-branch that k to he planted, is

cloven

88 Natural Magick. ISook^ 5*

cloven in the middle, and til the pith fcraped out , and the pieces knit up together
again, with a fpecial care that the buds receive no harm any way : then they fee rhe
Vine-branch in a well-foiled ground ; and when it beginneth to fhoot forth, they
prune it, and dig orten about it : the Grapes which it afterwards bears, will have no
hard kernels in them, as Columella writes ; howbeit, it is great marvel that there
can be in them any kernels at all, though never fo fofc , feeing all the pith, which is
the mother of the kernel, is quite taken away. But furely I for my part marvel ac
thofc who think it ftrange that a tree fhould live when this pith is gone, & arc per*
fwaded :hat a Vine-branch can bear fruit without kernels when the pith is taken out
of it ; leeingmany men in the Country are eye-witnefles that there do many plants
live without any pith in them ; and feeing alfo it is impoffible almoft that any tree
fhould bear fruit without kernels , becaufe the kernel carries it felf the very feed
whereby one fruit may be generated of another. Likewife you may procure, as
Democrat* alfo fhewetb,

'Pomegranates and Cherries without any ftones;

if in like manner you pick out the pith of the young plants that you fct. And Afri-
canus faith, If you deal with thefe as with Vine-branches, plucking out the pith af-
ter you have cleft them, and then plant them-, and after a while cut off the upper
parts of the plants when they have budded forth, then the Pomegranate fet, will
yield fruit without any kernels. Palladim borrows this fame experiment of Africa'
nm, and lets it down word by word as he doth. Likewife that

A Cherry-tree may bring forth fruit without any {lone within;
^n/Wfhewethmore diftin£Uy. Cutcff a young plant about two foot long, and
cleave it a it Hands in the ground, down to the root, and then fetch out the pith
on both fides, and prefently tie them up again faft, andcovcrthe whole cleft both
on the top, and on both fides, with muck ; fo fhall they grow fait together again
in one year : then engriffe fome young fprigs of a Cherry-tree, fnch as never bare
any fruit before into thidtock, and by this means you fhall procure Cherries with-
out any floncs at all. Others, that they might accomplifh their purpose morefpee-
di'Y» did not cleave fuch tender young Cherry-trees, but bored a great hole tho-
rough Trees of good growth , fo that it might pierce the whole pith, and crofs it in
the middle of the Tree j then they put a ftake or a wedge into it, which might flop
thepaffageof the pith, that none might be miniftrcd into the upper parts. In like
manner Africanm teacheth how to procure

A 'Peach without any ft one.
You muff, faith he, bore a hole beneath through the body of the Tree, and having
fo cut off the pith from paffmg upward, you muft fill up the hole with a ftake of
Willow or Prick- wood j fo fhali you intercept the pith from afcending out of the
root into the branches. Some Writers there are, which fhew how to procure ftone-
lefs fruit by diligence in drefftng and trimming of plants. It is held for a rule in
Husbandry, that foft, fat, and moift nourifhment doth alter all wilac and unkindly
fruit into that which is milder and more natural : It is a kind of mildenefs in fruits,
to have a little, foft and fwcet kernel ; as on the contrary, it is wildencfle to have
a great and a hard kernel , for it cometh by reafon of a kind of harfh and dry nou-
rishment that the earth fends up into them. Wherefore no doubt but we may pro-
cute the kernel of a fruit to be fmaller and more tender, by diligence and skill in
dreffrng chem. To begin with a Vine :

How aV ine may bring forth grapes without a harfh and ftony kernel.

At fuch rime as Vines arc pruned, you muft take a fruitful fprig,fomcwhat neer the
top as you can, and there, as it grows, you muft pick out the pith at the higheft
end, never cleaving ir, but hollowing it with fome fit infirument as well as yoi
can, and there uphold it with a prop that it bow not down : then take fome Cyre-
oian juice, as the Greeks call ir, and pour it into the place that is hollow ; but firft

you

Natural Magic k. T&ooh^. 8p

you muftfteep this juice in water, to the thickuefs of fbdden wine: and this you
muft do for eight dayes together every day once, till the vine-branch fprout forth
agan. Columella faith the very fame; that the vine- branch as it grows upon the
Vine muftbecut, and the pith of it fetched ouc with fome fit inltrument, as well
as you may, out of the top without the cleaving of the branch, but the branch be-
ing whole, and ftill growing on the Vine, you muft put into it fome Benjamin or
Cyrenian juice Heeped in water, as was (hewed before, and fet it upright with a
prop, that the juice may not run forth ; and this is to be done for eight dayes to-
gether. So if we would procure

A Myrtle without a kernel

Theophrafliu teacheth us how to do ir. If you water the Myrtle-tree with hot wa-
ter, then, faith he, ihefruit will be the better, and without any kernel. Some
affirm, that this experiment was found ouc by chance: for whereas there flood
neenoaBath, a Myrtle-tree which no man regarded, the Commers by tookoff
fome of the fruit by chance, and found them without any kernels ; then they car-
ried fome home, and fet them, and fo this kind of fruit began firft in Athens. Di-
dymut alfo faith, that if the Myrtle-tree be often watered with warm lienor, it
will yeeld berries without any ftones or kernels within. Theefhraftus ftieweth yet
another way whereby this may be effected ; take, faith he, the filth or {havings of
skins, and put them in Urine, and fo lay them about the root of the Myrtle-trec
atfuch time as the buds begin to (hew themfelves, and fo fhall you have berries
that have cither none at all, or elfe very fmall kernels in thcm.Likewife the Pome-
granate maybe produced without any kernels within it, if you lay good ftorc of
Swines-dung about the root of thePomcgranate-trcc.

Chap. XIII.

Kowfruitm*) be produced without any outward rints or [hels.

THe very fame helps and devices which we prefcribed for the producing of fruits
wirhout their inner kernel , we may likewife ufe in the practice of producing
Nuts, & fuch like fruits as are wont to grow in fhells and rincs, that they may grow
naked as it were without any fhelat all-And firft this may be effected by taking away
the pith out of the plants that bear them fo.

A 'Hjtt without a {hell,

may be produced, as Damageron teacheth. If you bore a hole quite thorough the
Nut-tree, and put into it a flake of Elm to fill it up, you fhall thereby flop the
pith from afcending into the upper parts, and fo no fhells can grow becaufe it is
the pith only that caufeth them. Talladim counfelleth you to bore the hole through
the toot, and flop it up with a flake of box, or fome wedge made of iron, or of cop-
per. But 7^^r*y?*«fheweth,how to procure

Almonds and Qhcft'nuts with a, [oft {hell,
tnd this is by skill in dreffing the Trees. If you would foften and alter the fruit, we
muftapply the root with Swins-dung: for this is a very forcible worker* likewife
often digging will caufe both the plants to profper better, and the fruit to become
better alio: for the kernels will be fmaller, in fuch fruit as have any ftoncs in
them; and fuch fruit as grow in (hells or rincs, as Almonds, and Cheft-nuts,
will have the fofrer ihell without, and the larger kernel within: for the grea-
ter ftore of nourifliment there is applyed to the Tree, the moiflcr it is, and
the fubftance of the fruit is fo much the more encrcafed. Bat T4lla»
dius would pcrfwade us, that if we rid away the earth from the rootes

P of

90 Of the TroduBion of new Tlants.

of the Almond-tree fome certain daies before it begin to blcflom, and all that
while apply them with warm water , we fhall hereby procure the Almond-ftiels
to be very tender. If we would procure

"that kinde of Nut which it called Nux Tarentina,
the fame author Damageron hath fhewed us how to do it. Every Nut and Almond
will yeeld a mild fruit with a tender (hell, if we continually apply the body and
root of the tree with pouring afhes upon them ; and likewife all other kind of
fruits that grow in any (hell or rine, maybe fo wrought upon, and will fiiffer the
like alteration by the like means pra&ifed upon them. If you would procure a
1 arentine Nut, TaUadim faith, you muft water the Tree with Lye thrice a moreth
throughout a whole year , and fo you may obtain your purpofe. Others efh&
fuch alterations by corrj&ing the plants; as, by cutting off the tops of the roots.
If the Nut be too hard melled, you may alfo remedy it by cutting and paring rff
the bark of the Tree, as Damageron fheweth ; for by this means you draw down
thathaifh and wilde humour: The reafon whereof is, becaufe the bark of the
Tree anfwereth to the fhell of the fruit, as the pith of the Tree aniwereth to the
kernel of the fruit: and therefore, as to amend the inner kernel we abated the
pith, lo to foften or amend the utter (hell or rine of the fruit, we muft abate the ut-
ter bark of the Tree. A thing which we have obferved by another like example :
for a Peach being engraffed upon a bitter Almond-tree, the pill of the fruit thence
growing was fo bitter, that it could not be eaten till the pill were pared cff. This
fecret may dead you in many other experiments of the like kind. Bur this kind of Nut
which we now foeak of, I have growing in my own Orchard, and it hath fuch a
tender fhell, and fo thin, that as foon as ever it is but touched, the fhell faJls off,and
the fruit is bare and naked. Florentine affayed to produce

An Almond without a(hell,
on this manner : He break the fhell very charily, fo that the kernel was kept whole ;
then he took wooi, and fometimes green leaves of the Vine or of the Plane-tree,
and wrapt about the kernel, left if he mould have fet it without any covering about
ir, the Emots or fuch like vermine mould have gnawn it. Columella fheweth another
device whereby we may procure

A Filberd to become a 7 'arentine Nut.
When you have made your pit wherein you purpofe to fet your Nur, put into it a
little earth, about half a foot deep, and there plant the feed of Fennel-gyant ; and
when the Fennel is come up, cleave it, and within the pith of it put your Filberd
without any fhell upon it, and fo cover it all over with earth : this if you pracYife
before the Calends of March, or betwixt the Nones and the Ides of March, you
(hall have your purpofe. They prefcribc likewife another device, whereby

Gouyds may bring forth fruit without any feeds within them :
The Gourd, fay they, will grow feedlefs, if you take the firft branch or fprig of a
Gcurd when it is a little grown up , and bury it in the earth as they ufe to deal by
Vines, fo that onely the head thereof may appear; and fofoon as it is grown up
again, to bury it lb again : but we muft have a fpecial care that the flips which grow
op out of the ftalk be cut away, and none but the ftalk left behind j fo (hall the fruit
that grow« upon it, whether it be Gourds or Cucumbers, be deftitute of all feed
wLhin. Likewife they will grow without feeds in them, if the feeds which are
planted, be macerated or lteeped in Sea-famine oyle, for the fpace of three dayes
before they be fowed.

CHAP

Of the Production of new r rants*

Chap. XIIII.

How to procure fruits, to be of divers colour s, fuch as are not natural!) inc'tdeKt to
their kl"dc.

NOw we w ill fhew how to colour fruits: to the tffe&ing whereof there have
been divers means deviled ; as waterings, and engraffings which can never be
fnfficicntly commended or fpoken of, and other like pra&ifes. To begin with ett-
°ra(fin° ; If we wonld colour any fruit, wemqften^raffeituponaplant thatflou-
rifhes'with the fame colour which we would boirow. As for example, If we
would produce

Red Apples,

we muft engraffe them upon a Plane-tree, and the fruit will be red, as Dig-
phone* , Didjmus, and Taliadius affirm. So we may procure that the fruit

%i>odacen jhalhrow red,

if we'engrafFe it upon a Plane-tree, as Africanus witnefleth. Of whom Palladium
learned that the way to make Rhodacens look red, is to cngraff them into a Plane?
tree. If you would have

Citrons of a red fear let' colour \
m&W*™' '-win »r* -wlvf'M&rirt sot-iii llt'tOH* w tUMM* i #® , • *?,,y fff
Avicennafoews you may cffe& it by engraffing them into a Pomegranate-tree $
for we (hewed before that fuch an engraffing may well be made. Box if yoti
would have . ,

fitrons to be blood- red , j

tlorentinm fheweth that you may effect this by engraffing them into a Mul-
berry-tree ; which experiment Dtophanes approvetb, Likcwife he that tdcfircS
to have

Red Pears,

muft engraffc them into a Mulberry-tree j for by this means the Pears will
gtow red, as Tarentintu and Viophanes do witnefTe. So alfo you may pro-
cure

A white Pig to become red)

by engraffing it upon a Mulberry-tree, as the fame Dtophanes witnefleth. By the
fame means

Apples may l>e of a blood-red colour^

if they be engrafFcd into a Mulberry-tree, as Avicennaihcwcth. But Berititu and
"Dwphanes write, that the Mulberry- tree it felf, which makes all other Apple-fruic
to become red, may be cauled to bring forth

White Mulberries,

if it be engrafted into a white Poplar tree j for this will alter the colour of the fruit.
But Talladiuf procures this effect by another means ; not by engraffing the Mulber-
ry into a white Poplar, but into the Fig-tree; for this alfo will alter their colour,
and caufe

White Mulberries,

ishefhews-inhisverfes ; wherein he faith, that the Fig-tree doth perfwade Mul-
berries to change their own colour and to take hers ; whereof I tn^r felf have fcerl
the experience, Likcwiic, of

A white Vine mai be made red Wines

Pa Jf

92, Natural Magick. Wj.

if wc cngriffct white Vine into* Wtck: fot the ftock into which it is eneUffed
will alter the colour much, as I have teen by experience in hony-grapes, bo which
we call Greek-grapes ; for the Vines which have been engraffe G^k
Vines, haveyeeldedablackiftiuiceorwine; and the ofener fuch eD raffing fh
been made, the blacker jaice was yeelded. In the places about the Hill vffuv us
the wh.te- wine grape, which grows upon her own (talk that is engraffed I Z

to rneakeVme " ^ * ^ hi^coloured *** *« *"* dof Another ^y

nipples grow redy

LbIhSnt drcfll°g'eve.D by W^g them with hot and fat receipts,

for there are two chief Elements or principles of colours . white, and black n I C
coloured j now by dreflmg them , and applying fat things unto !hem w I dwk
cure every flower or fruit that is blackUh, Vo become brighter ^and fXr '7'°'
ed ; whereas on the other Gde,if they be negleaed,that nfS^b^lS^:
care in trimming them, their colour will nSt be fo lively, te^Z&ZZt
wbitenfchew ; for all colours that begin to fade, wax fomewhat S ^ v *
^1^^^^ -eredthe^i^

To frocttre red Pomegr4tuites9
watered the Tree with Bath-water (odden into Lye, and feme other water m?v,d
therewith. But there is yet another device, whereby we ma> Tprocure

t/i flies ttgrow redy

make thlm r^SV^S t (°!Ct of Ae I for th«

mane mem red. Birmm, tint be might ciofe the reflex of the Snn-h..™. „Tu

Swlrf™ iS h'?S*wn/l'e boughs tb«h.d ftuit upon them, he bound them

of ™«e7oeer ,h,L°S ' h™ JTSfS C* W°"ld P1,tt fcn« «■« «*HB
Snn"Sin",^b,,OBghS! c"iulg'ji«»h.sco»Ka8re) thufurely the be., of ,he
therwi.hXT ' «0° d"nfcbotv«pout5, which being reflefled tow-

jtfpples,

^^^^^t^^^ operation. Under the Tree he waswoncto

ibrwf ft n d knd their 8°0dly hcw to tbc APPles thac ?row °P°n ^e Tree
Scens' and'madT^^ " thC ke devicc nOC Up0n APPics> bltt UP0D Rho"

T^hodacenSy

Sl£Sf bV^f^1^*? T?c'^und ibo* tbe ro°". Lik.wile we may
Sefed e^ f°Jr,l00k Wh2t Colour ^procure in

frui will torn rl Li?TVl ln f0,mC C°lu-Urlcd li(*uor> or ^ anV oth« m^s>

with Sanguinary or Vermillion ; If we bury a Peach- (tone in the ground, and take
^ap ac,1? feven dayes after (for in that time the ftone will open of it lelf ) and then
^ into it fome Venn.lhon and bury it in the earth a°ain, and afterward look care-
*C .^^^^yP^cureVermillion-peaches. AndD^r/^is per-
PMchinnUK ^^^^"Koktayotber colour after thefame manner, The

ffi^x^rb^^s^• 11 ht ihins commonIy reporced aras

Of the TroduBion of new Tlants*

Teaches may be of a [anguine-colour)

by another means. You muft take a Peach-ftone, and put it into a Carrot that is
then growing, and the (talk which grows of thac (tone in the Carrot, if it be care-
fully nourtfhed and prelerved,will bring forth Peaches of a fanguine colour. In like
manner, If you would have

White kernels growing in a ^Pomegranate,
Palladium (heweth how to do it, by the authority of MatuaI. If you take chalk and
white clay, and with them mingle a quarter fo much plaftering, and apply the Pome-
granate-tree roots with this kind of foilage or dunging, for tire fpace of three whole
years together, you (hall obtain your purpofe. Likewite) ifyoudelirc

Me lions of a Sanguine colour ;
you muft take Mellon-feeds, and fieep them in fanguine liquor for three or foUr
daies together before you fet them, you may cafily have your defire. Orelfe, if yoii
open a little the skin of the feed, and put within it the juice of red Rofes , Clove-
gilliflowers, and Black-berries that grow upon Brambles, or of any other like
thing, fo that it be not hurtful to the leed, you may effect your purpofe. And I
iuppofc that the fanguine-coloured Mellons which are feen in thefe Countries, are
thus ufed, that they may be of this colour. Confequent upon thefe devices is that
flcight whereby

tA Peach mA) grow with an) writing upon it.

The Greeks affirm, that a Peach may be made to grow with a writing upon it, If
you take out the itone aad bury it in the earth for (even dayes j and then when it
begins to open, pluck out the kernel, and write in it what you will, with Vermil-
lion-juice: then bindc up the kernel into the flone again, and fet it fo into the
ground, and you (hall have growing a written fruit. Now as the Sun doth colour the
herbs that it may well come at, as we have ihewed j fo by keeping the force of the
Sun away from them, we may whiten them ; for fo

A Lett ice may be made white,
tsF/iwwiwwflieweth. If you would, faith he, procure goodly white Lettice, then
mutt you bind together the tops of the leaves, two dayes before they be gathered j
for lb they will be fair and white. Likewife you may whiten them by casing land
upon them. And with us

Artichocks are made white,
by the very fame means which we fpeak of. And if you would caufe

Beets to become whiter then ordinary,
you muft cover the roots over with Cow-dung, and as we fpoke before concerning
Leeks, fo here you muft cleave the bud, and lay a broad ftone or a tile upon it, as
Souon (Kcweth. So Columella teachetb how to make

Endive to grow white,

when the leaves are fhot forth, you muft tie them about the tops with a fmall
firing, and cover them over with ao earthen vcflel let faft into the ground, and the
herb will be white. Others ire at lefs charges, and cover them over with Ibme
earth : our Gardeners lay them in land , and fo make them very white. If you
would procure

White S per age,

you muft put the flips as foon as ever they appear out of the earth, into a broken
reed ; and there let them grow for a while, and afterward when you take away the
cauc or reed, thcSperagc wiii be whiter then ordinary*

CHAP.

Natural Magick^ Soo^j

Chap. XV.

How the colour of Flowers may alfo be changed.

IN transforming and meddling the colours of flowers together, we may procure
fuch ftrange medleys, as nothing can be more delightful to be feen. Thole which
are of a deep purple colour may be meddled with azure blue > thofe which are as
white as milk, may be meddled either with a duskifti hew, or with a green; or
criml'on, or fome other compound colours ; in the beholding whereof, the rainde
cannot chufe but be affected with great delight , and be ravifhed with admiration,
and as it were quite overcome with the excellent beauty of them. Wherefore we
will letdown certain Rules, whereby we may be able to alter the colour of flowers,
as we prefcribed certain rules before, whereby we fhewed how to alter the colour
of fruit*. And full we will fhew, how by engrafting

Cjilltflowers that are of themf elves purple, or elfe white > may become azure blue,
You muft cut off (fomewhat neerthe root)a ftalk of Endive or Blue-bottle, or Bug-
lofs, but the old wilde Endive is beftfor this purpofe, and let it be grown to an
Inch in thicknefs j then cleave that in the middle which is left growing in the
ground, and plant into it a Gilliflower new pluckt up out of the earth, root and
all; then bind up the ftalk* or flips with fome flight bond, and lay good ftoreof
earth and dung round about it : lb fhall it yield you a flower, that is fomewhat biu-
ifti, of amoft delightful colour to behold. This, many of my friends will needs
perfwademe, though for my own part, I have often made trial of it, and yet never
could fee it effected. But this I have feen, that a white Gilliflower- flip being en-
graffed iuto a red Carrot made hollow for the fame purpofe , and fo buried in the
earth, hathyeeldeda Sea-coloured flower. Likewife you may procure the white
Gilliflower to be of a skarlet-colour, if after the fame manner youengraffe it into
the root of Orchanet : by which means alfo you may turn a purple Gilliflower into
a skarlet. If you would have

A R«fe,asalfo the flower Jafmine to be of ajeBowcehptr ,
you may procure it by engraffiDg either of them into a broom-ftalk: for of all it*
ther, the broom-flower is moft yellow: and though we cannot do it fo well, by
clapping the leaf or the bud of the one upon theleaf or bud of the other, yet it
may be eff c&ed by boring bto the ftalk after this manner. You muft fee a Rofe or
a Jafmine neer to the broom, and when they are fomewhat grown, take them up to-
gether with the earth that is about them ; (for they will prove better when they are
let again, with their own earth which is about them, being as it were their mother,
then with any other earth that fhall be as it were their ftcp mother,) then
bore a paffage into the broom-ftalk, and when you have cleaned the paflage,
prune the rofe-ftalk and plant it into the brocrn: and there cover" thsra
with loam where the engrafting was made , and fo bind it up. Afterward! when the
fet is grown into the ftock, you muft cut off all the head fome what above the engraf-
ting place • fo fliall you have a Rofe or a Jafmine there growing, of a lovely yeliow-
ifh colour. Which kind of flowers are very ulual with us , and this their borrow -
ed colour is fo orient and bright , that the eye is (carce able to endure the brightnels
thereof. There is another means alfo whereby we may colout flowers, and that is
by pouring fome colouring iuto the roots. If you would have

tallies to be red,

we will {hew how to do it, as Vlorminm hath fhewed us. Take a Lil lie-clove or
head, and when you have opened it well, pour into it fome 'Sinoper, or any other
colouring, and the Lillie- flower that grows out of the clove fo drefled, will be of the
fame colour. But you muft be very careful that you hurr. not the clove, or head^
when you fo open it ; and befides, you mult be fure to cover it wkh fat, and, weiL
foiled earth. By the like means you any procure IMcm

Natural Magic k. 95

Lilly- flowers of a purple colour.
The manner whereof, Anatolim fheweth to be this. Ycu muft take ten or twelve
Lilly ftalksj abou: iuch time as they be ready to yeeld flowers, bind them all to-
gether and hang them up in thefmoak: then will there fpring out of them fome
i'mail toots, like unto a Scallion. Therefore when the time of the year ferves to fet
them, you mult fteep the ftalks in the Lees of red Wine, till you fee they be
throughly Rained wirh that colour: then you muft take them afunder, and fet every
oneot them by it felf, watering them ftill with the fame Lees; and fo you fhall
have Lillies that bear a purple flower. Cajfianus attempted by the very like
means

To produce white Ivy :

He fteeped it in white Marie, and covered the roots of it with the famemorter for
eight dayes together, and it brought forth white berries. We may effect the like
matters by careful manuring and dreffing of fruits ; for if we apply them with fat
and fertile muck, the flowers will be a great deal the better coloured, and may
be made blackifh j as we have often proved in Clove-gilliflowers, which we have
procured to be fo deep coloured, that they have been even black. And on the
contrary

%of. SiClove-giltiflowerS) and Violets will wax of a whiterijh colour^

if ithey be not carefully lookt unto, that either you do not water them well, nor
tranfplanc them, nor dig about them, nor feed them with muck ; for by this means
Iheophraftus writeth, not only thefe kinds of flowers, but almoft all other, that
grow in Woods and Forrefts unregarded, do become whiterifh. But Didymus hath
devifed another kind of fleight divers from thefe, whereby to make Rofes and
Clove-gilliflowers to become white very fuddenly ; and this is, by fmoaking and
perfuming them with brimftone about the time that they begin to open.

Chap. XVI.

How fruits and V lowers may be made to yeeld a better favour then ordinary*

AS it is pretty and delightfome to fee fruits and flowers wear a counterfeit co-
lour j fo it is worth our labour to procure in them a more fragrant fmell, then
their ordinary kind is wont to afford : which thing we may effect by divers wayes,
by planting, by watering, and by other devices. And for example fake, we will

firft fhew, how to make

Limons to become very odoriferous.

If we take that leaft kind of Limons which is called LimonceUum picciolttm, and
engraff into a Citron-tree , the flock will infpire the fruit with a very goodly
fmell j and the oftner that you fo engraffe it, thefweetcr fmell it will afford, as
by daily experience we have tried in our Naples Gardens. So alfo we may procure

Very odoriferous Pears,

by engrafting them upon a Quince-tree, for the flock thereof will lend the fruit a
grateful favour. D<^^«^avoucheth,that

Apples may be made more odoriferous,
if they be engraffed into a Quince-tree ; and that hereby are procured thofe good-
ly Apples which the Athenians call Melimcla. And I iuppofe that the Apple cal-
led Appium malum, was produced by the often engrafting of an Apple into a
Quince-tree: for the Imellof itisfomewhat like a Quince ; and it is not unlike
that Appiw Claudius found it out, and firft procured it by the fame means. Likewife
we, have with us great red Apples, and fome of them of a murry colour, which

yeeld

ptf Of the Trodullion of new Tlants.

yield the fame fmc 11 ; and qucftionlcfs could never be produced buc by the fame
means. So we have procured

The Centifole %ofeto be more odoriferous.

If you would do (o too, you muft engraffe it into that kind of Rofe, which, by
reafonof the fweet fmell of Mu kthat it carries with it, is called Moi'chatu'a; but
you mult oftentimes reiterate the engrafting of it again and again : fo (hall i: be more
beauurul, and fuller of leave;, and fmell fweeter. But it is beft to engraffe it by
Ino.uiation, by clapping the bud of the one upon the bud of the other ; for fo ic
will take fooneft, and prove bell. By a Height not much unlike to this we may
procure

Vines to fmell of fweet oh.tmentsy *

asPrf.*\*»««fheweth. If you would have the Vine to fmell fwectly, and the place
where it groweth, you muft take the branches and cleave them, and pour in iweet
ointments into them when you are about to plant them. But your labour will
take the better effect, ifyoufirft fteep the branches in fweet oyle, and then plant
or engraffe them. I have pra&ifed an eafler and flighter way, befmearing the bran-
ches that are to be engraff*d, with Musk, or elfe fteeping them in Rofe- water, if
the Musk did not (lay upon them. So alio we could make

Limotts to be as odoriferous as Cinnamon^
by taking the fprigs that arc to be planted, and befmearing them with oyle or the
water o: Cinnamon, and dreffing them with much induftry and diligence : And this
kind of Limons is nfual amongft us and is termed by the common-people Limon-
ceUum incancellatum. There is alfo another device whereby fruits may be made odo-
riferous, and roimellof Spices ; and this is, by taking the feeds of them, and fteep-
ing them in fwecc water before they be fowed. As for example : If we would
procure

Odoriferous Artichocks-)

Caffi mus hath declared out of Varro, the manner how to effect ic. You muft take
Aruchock-ieeds, and ftcep them for thefpaceof three dayes in the juice of Rofes,
or Lillies, or Bayes, or fome other like, and fo to fet them in the ground. Alio
you may make Artichocks fmell like Bayes, if you take a Bay-berry, and make a
hole in it, and put therein your Anichock-feed, and fo plant it. Palladia* records
out of the fame Author, that if you fteep Artichock-feeds for three dayes together
in rhe oyle of Bayes, or Spikenard, or Balme-gum, or the juice of Rofes, or of Ma-
ftick, and afterward fet them when they are dry, that then the Artichocks that grow
our of thofe feeds, will yeeid the fmell and favour of that which the feeds were be-
fore fteeped in. florentinut makes

MeUonsof the fragrant fmell of %ofes,
after this manner ; by taking Mellon-feeds, and laying them up amongft dry Rofes,
andfo planting them one amongft another. I have procured Mellons to fmell like
Mu*k: by opening that part whereby the feed fprouts our, and fteeping them in
Rofowater wherein feme Musk was diftilled alfo, and fo planting them after two
dayes tteeping. So we have procured

Odoriferous Letticey

bv taking the feed of Letrice, and putting it into the feed of a Citron , and lo plan-
ting it. After the lame manner, you may learn co make

Flowers grow that {hall fmell of Cloves;
if yon take the feeds of tholefl >wers,and lay them in Clove-powder, or the oyle
of Cloves, or Clove- water diftilled, and fo fet them : for by this means,the flowers
will entertain the fmell and favour of the Cloves. And this I take it, was the cun-
ning

Of the TroduBion of new Tlants* $y

the cunning flight whereby our ordinary Clove-gilliflowers were 6x3 produced;
for queftionleffe GiUiflowers do grow everywhere or thcmfeives without anyfuch
plealant fmeil ; and beGdes, they are of a (mailer affize, and of their own kinde
fomewhat wilde. But it fhould leem, that Gardeners did by their induftry ani
trimming, bcftow the lmell of Cloves upon them, by lieeping their feeds in Clove-
water, or by fuppling them witii the oyle of Cloves, or elie by (ticking Cloves in
the roots of them, and to planting them. We may adde to thefe Heights another
device,

How to make GirltcJ^grow that (hall not QneU ranhjy and unfavenrily,
Sotion hath taught us the way. If, faith he, you cOTet Gariick, and pluck it up agair, ■
both, when the Moon is undensearh the earth, it will not have any bad favour. And
Theofhrafini hath taught as a means

How we may procure %j)fes to yield a more odoriferous fmtlly
namely, if you take Gariick, and plant it neer your Rofer.

Chap. XVII.
How to procure fruits to be fweeter and pleafanter for tajie.

"THere are fome trees, which cannot away with any fear, but if you cur their flock
never fo little, or make any other fear in them, prcfently the Air and the excrin-
fccal heat get in, and fo the Trees perifh ; for the corruption will fall downward to
the root, and fo make the Trees prefently to wither and fade away. Now there are
other Trees, which will abide not only a fear, butalfo to have their flock cUfr,
and to be bored into ; yea, and by this means too, they will bear fruit more pit i-
tifully; as doth the Pcmegranaie-tree, the Almond-tree, and the Apple-tree ; o :
all which there is very great ufe. The reafon hereof is this: Their nature add
kinde is, to receive fo much nourifhment as is fufficient for them, and to void avva/
hurtful and iuperfluous humours : for as thofe living creatures which fweat mofr, or
have fome other iffuc in their bodies, are mod healthful and wont to live longeft ;
fo when thel'e Trees have a cut or a fear in them whereby they fweat out, as it were,
their hurtful and fuperfiuous moifture, they do more eafily digeft that moifture which
is left behind within them ; and the better that the moifture is digefted, the fweeter
and pleafanter is their juice. And befides, they will live, if the parts have any
continuation at all, though it be never fo little, only if they may bur hang together:
and therefore they will eafily defend themfelves from any harm that may happen
unto them by the cutting or mangling of any of t^eir parts. We will fhew how '
to procure fruits that fhall be fweter in tafte then ordinarily theit kind is wont to
afford, firft by engraffing, fecondly by boring or cutring, and Uft of all by other
means. And firft, by engraffing we may procure

Cherries that (hall have in them the relifh of Bayes^
For as we have (hewed before,engraffing may amend thofe defects that are in plants
and endue them with better qualities: fo that if you have any fruit that is loarh-
foroe, becaufe it is too fweet, do but engraffe it into a bitter Tree, and there will
be fuch a medley , that your fruit fhall have a very favoury relifh. Pliny faith, that
if you engraffe a Cherry upon a Bay-tree, you fhall have Cherries thence growing,
that will have the fmatch of the Bay. PalUdim faith the fame, engrifte a Cherry
upon a Bay- tree, and the fruit that grows thence, will have the relifh of the Bay.
In my time, there have been feen certain Cherries, in Naples, which they called
Bay-cherries, fomewhat bitter, but yet pleafant withal; a moft excellent kinde Oi
fruit, far better then aay other cherries, of a very large affize, full of juice, of a very
fanguine colour, that have a bitter-fweet tafte, fo that they are neither loathicrrse
for their overmuch fweetnefie, nor yet to be refufed for their overmuch biucrnefs.
So likewife may be procured

Sweeter

98

Natural Magick. 2>go^ 2.

S wetter Apples by engraft** them into a Qutnce
Por if you do engraff'e an Apple into a Quince, the Apple will have a relifh like
honey: which kinde of fruit the Athenians do therefore call Melimela, becaule
they tatte like honey, asD/'^Wrrfheweth. Now we will fhew alio, hew by hus-
bandry and skilful dretfing, fruits may be made fweetcr in tafte • namely, by pier-
cing or boring the ftock , or Icarrifying it round abour, or by fome other chaftifc-
ments, as the Husband-men are wont to call them ; for by theie means, the trees
may purge themfelves of their fuperfluous moiliurc , and io they will bear the fwee-
tcr fruit. As for example : If you would learn,

How to procttrc the Almond-tree to yield fruit without any bitternefs,
Arifiotle hath taught you the way. You muff knock a great nail into the body of the
Almondtree,thatthegumof the Tree, which caufeth the bitternefle of the fruit,
may drop out by that paflage. And this is fuch a Height that hereby you may tame,
as it were, wilde Trees, and alter their nature into a milder kind. Theophra(ttt»
faith, that if you dig round about the ftock of the Almond-tree, and bore thorough
it about nine inches above the ground, the gum will thereby drop our, and fo the
fruit will become the fweetcr by that chaftifement. If you cuteffa bough, or an
arm of it, l'othatthcgum may have egreffe that way, and if you wipe away the
gum ftill as it cometh forth, and obferve this for two or three years together, you
may by this means alter a bitter Almond-trec into a fweet one. For the bitternefTe
proceeds from no other caufc, but onely from the fupcrfluity of nourishment and
moifturc, which is abated by boring into the Mock : and when once that which is
fuperfluous is evacuated, then that which is left, is more cafily concocted, and fo
the tree becomes fertile in bringing forth a fweeter and a better fruit. Africans
likewife affirmeth, that if yon dig about the ftock of a bitter Almond-tree, and
make a hole into it fome four inches above the root, whereby it may fweat out the
hurtful moiflnre, it will become fweet. Pliny faith the fame; If you dig round a-
bout the ftock, faith he, and bore thorough the lower part of it, and wipe away
the humour which there iflueth forth, a bitter Almond-trec will become fwcer.
Some there are, who after they have made that hole, do prefently put honey into it,
that it may not be quite empty ; for they are of opinion, that the relifh of the ho-
ney is conveyed up into the fruir, through the pith, as thorough a Conduit-pipe. As
for example fake ; If we would procure

Sweet Citrons ;

(fcr that kind of fruit was not wjpnt to be eaten in Theophraflm time, nor in Athen*-
«xtimc, as himfelf reports, noryec inT linies time:) Talladiut hath fhewed, how
10 alter the bitter pith of a Citron-tree into fweet. His words are thefe. It is re-
ported that the bitter pithes of Citrons may be made fweet, if you take the Citron-
feeds, and ftccp them in honey-water, or elfeinEwes milk, (for this is better) for
thefpaceof three dayes before you fet them. Some do bore a hole floaping into
the body of a Tree, but not quite thorough it i by which paffagc the bitter humour
drops away : This holejbrey make in it about February, and leave it fo, till the fiuic
is fafhioned ; but after the fruit is fafhioncd, then they fill up the hole with morter ;
and by this device the pith is made fweet. This hath Pont arm fet down in his book
called, The Gardens of Hefperides. What is it, faith he, that Art will not fearchlnto ?
Cut a thick Vine, and make it hollow on the the top, about thy hand breadth j. but
fo, that the brims of the hole be brought round and Something clofe together,fo that
the fides be about an inch thick and nomorc.Pour into it and fill it up with liquefied
honey, and cover it with a broad ftone that the Sun may not come at it. And when
the Vine hath drunk in all that, then fill it up again with the like : and when that is
foaked in too, then open the concavity wider, and let the Vine grow : but you muft
continually water the tenderfoots thereof with mans water: and you muft be fure
that you leave no buds or leaves upon the ftock, that fo there may be no other moi-
fture let into it, but the whole Vine may grow up u it were in a fpring of honey.
PtBudiw ihcws alfo How

Of the TroduBion of newTlants.

99

How to m<*ke fweet Almonds of b.tter ones ,
even by boring a hole in the middle of the ftbck, and putting into it a woodden
wedge befmeared over with honey.

Sweet Cucumbers

may be procured, by fteeping Cucumber feeds in fweet waters,till they have drunk
them up : for they being planted, will produce fweet Cucumbers. Tbeofhraftus
fhews how to mike fweet Cucumbers, even by the fame fleight ; by fteeping their
feed in milk, or elfe in water and honey fodden together, and fo planting them.
Columella faith, that a Cucumber will cat very tender and fweet , if you fteep the
feed thereof in milk before you fet it. Others, becaufe they would have the Cucum-
ber to be the fweeter, do Ikep the feed thereof in honey- water. 'Pliny and Palla-
dia do write the fame things of the fame fruit, out of the fame Authors. Cafsianut
hath declared out of Varroy how to procure

Sweet Artichockj growing.
You mud take the Artichock-fecds, and fteep them in milk and honey, and after you
have dryed them again, then fet them, and the fruit will relifti of honey. So you
may procure

Sweet Fennel growings
For if ycu fleep Fennel' feeds in fweet wine and milk, then will the fruic
that grows of thofe feeds, be much fweeter. Or elfe if you put the feeds thereof in
dry figs , and fo plant them, the like effect will follow. So you may procure

Sweet Melons^

as PaUadim (hews • even by fteeping the feeds thereof in milk and fweet wine for
three dayes together: for then if you dry them, and fet them being fo dryed, there
will grow up a very fweet fruit. Likewife you may procure

Sweet Lett ice;

for if you water them in the evening with new fweet wine, and let them drink for
three evenings together as much of that liquor as they will foak up, it will caufe
fweet Lettice, as Arifioxenut the Cyrenian hath taught out of Athentus, So

A fweet %adifo may be procured t

by fteeping the Radifh-feeds for a day and anight in honey, or in fodden wine, as
both Palladiutznd Florentines have recorded. So you may procure the fame, by
fteeping the feeds in new fweet wine, or elfe in the juice of Raifons. There is alfo
another device, whereby to make flharp or bitter fruits to become fweet; and this
is by art and cunning in dreflfing them ; as,by pouring hot water, or the Lees of oile,
or cafting foil and fuch like about their roots. As for example : when we would
make

A bitter Almond to become fwee%,p

we caft fome ftiarp piercing matter upon the root, that by vertue of their heat, the
Tree may the more eafily conco& her moifture, and fo yield a fweeter fruit, fheo-
phrafttu faith, that if we apply hot and ftrong foil, as Swines-dung, or fuch like, to
the root of the bitter Almond-tree, it will become fweet: but it will be three
years before the Tree be fo changed, and for all that time you muft uferthe fame
husbanding of it. lAfricanui faith ; If you uncover the roots, and apply them ftill
with Urine, or with Swines dung, then will the fruit be the fweeter. The Quintils
report of Ariftotle, that, by covering the Almond-tree root with Swines-dung, in
March, of a bitter one it becometh fweet. And Paltkdim ufeth the very fame pra-
cWe. By the fame device

i Sbar

ICO

Natural Magic k. 2>g<?^ 2.

Sharp and fowre Pomgranate-trees may be made to bring forth afreet Trmegranate :
for thde all'- may bs changed from fharp and fowre itto fweet. jtrifioth (hews in
hiibockof plants, that_Pomegranate-crees, it their roots be applyed with Swins-
dnng, and watered with focm cool fweet liquor, the fruit will be the better and
thelwecter. Theophrafimim^ that the roots of a Pomegranate-tree muft be ap-
plyed witfi Urine, or with the offals and refufe of hides, yet not in too great a
quantity: for the roots of this kind of Tree have need of fome fharp matter to
knaw upon them, and raoft of all, every third year, as we faid before of the Al-
mond-tree ; but indeed the Pomegranate«roots are more durable. The reafon is,
becaule of a kind of foftnefle in the roots, which is peculiar unto them alone. Now
Swines-dung, faith he, or fomewhat that is of the like operation, being caft upon
the roots, doth fweeten the juice of the Tree: asalfo if you pour on good ftore
of cold water, it will work fome kind of change thereof. 'Paxanns prefcribes
this courfe,to dig round about the root of the Tree, and to lay Swins-oung upon it,
and then when you have caft earth upon that, water it with mans Uiine. Columella
faith ; If you have a Pomegranate-tree that bears a fharp and a lofvre fruit, this is
your way to amend it : Ycu mult cover the roots with Swins-dung and mans ordure,
and water them with mans Urine that hath flood long in fome veffel j and fo it will
yield you for the fir(t years a fruit that taftes fomewhat like wine, and afterward
a fweet and pleafant Pomegranate. Pliny reporteth the very fame thing out of the
very fame Authors. AnatoUm (hews

How to make an Apple-tree become [wetter ;
and that is, by watering it continually with Urine, which is a thing very comfor-
table to an Apple-tree.'Some do ufe Goats-dung and the Lees or dregs of old wine,
applyingthemtothe roots of the Apple.tree, and thereby caufe it to bear a iwee-
terifruir. Theophrajlui faith ; If you water an Apple-tree with warm water in the
Spring time, ll will become better. The like applications being ufed to Herbs,
will make them fweeteralfo. As for example fake j we may procure

Sweet Endive,

There be many thing?, which being watered with fait liquors, do forfake their bit-
terneffe, and become fweet. Of which fort Endive is one: and therefore if we
would have fweet Endive, Iheophraftus willeth us, to water it with lomefak li-
quor, or elle to fet it in fome fait places. The like praitife will procure

Sweet Coleworts*

And therefore the ^Egyptians do-mix water and Nitre together, and fprinkle it up-
on Coleworts, that they may be fweet: And hence it is that the beft Coleworts
are they which are planted in fait grounds: for the faltneffe, either of the ground
where it is fet, or of the liquor wherewith it is watered, doth abate and take a-
way the tartneffe and natural faltneffe of the Coleworts. In like manner, if you
would procure

Sweet Betony,

Theophrafins counfclleth you to water them with fait liquor, and fo they will be bet-
ter. Which very fame things Pliny reporteth out of the fame Author. Likewife you
may procure

Sweet %ochet)

fuch as will yeeld leaves that fhall bemoretoothfome, if you water it with fait li-
quor. There is another Height in husbanding of Pot-herbs, whereby they may be
produced fitter to be earen ; and this is by cropping the ftalks of them,

Bap I will grow the fweet er^

if youcroptheflalkof it: for atthefecond fpringing, the ftalkwill be fwecter

and

Of the TrodnBion of new Plants. lei

and pleafancer ; a moft evident reaion whereof is .aligned by Thsophraflui. So

Lettice will be the fleeter

at the fecond fpringing. 'theophrr.flm faitb, that the t'weeteft Lettice fprii^r up after
the cropping of the firft tops ; for the firft tops of their firft Springing, are fu!i oft
milky kind of juice, which is not fo pleafant, becaufe that iris not throughly ccn-
cofted ; but they which grow at the fecond fpringing, if you take them when ti.cy
are young and tender, will be far fweeter. He (hews alfo, how

Leeks may be made fweeter •
by cropping them once or twice, and afterward let them grow : the caufc whereof
he hath afligncd in his book of caufes, namely, that their firft (hooting up is the
weakeft and the moft unperfe&.The like is to be thought and pra&iied in other Pot-
herbs : for the cropping or cutting off,doth make the fecond lprouts to be the fwee-
ter, aimoft in all herbs. There are alfo divers other Heights in husbanding and dref-
fingof fuch Pot-herbs, whereby they may be made fweeter to be eaten. As for
example,

Garlickjnay be made fweeter ,

for Sotion is perfwaded, that, if you break the Cloves of Garlick before you fee
them, oreifefupple them with the Lees of oyle, when you do fet them, they
will gather and yield a far fweeter relifh. By another Height far differing
from this,

Onions may be made fweeter ;

for we muft confider,that divers things do exercife a mutual difcord or agreement &
concord of natures toward each other;whercby they cither help one another,if their
natures agree ; or, if their natures diflent,they hurt and deftroy one another. Nuts
and Onions have a fympathy or agreement of nature ; and therefore if you lay up
Nuts amongft Onions, the Onions will caufe the Nuts to laft the longer : in liew of
which kindnefs, Nuts do gratifie Onions with another good turn, for they eafe the
Onions of their fharpneffe, as Palladim hath obferved.

Chap. XVIII.

How fruits that are in their growings may be made to receive and refemble aH figures and
imprejfions whatfoever.

M Any things do fall out by chance, and hap- hazard, as they fay, which an in-
genious man lighting upon, doth by his great induftry, and often experiments
that he makes of them, turn and apply to very good ufc. Whence it is that the
Poet faith, manifold experience, and much labour and practice, fets a broach to the
world many new arts and rare devices.Andbecaufe the moft part arc not acquainted
with the caufe of fuch things, thence it is, that they are elteemed to be miraculous,
and to come to paffe befides Natures rule. We have oftentimes fecn in Citrons, di-
vers kinds of ftamps and impreffions, which were made there by chance ; as by the
hitting of fome carved matter, or any flick, or fuch like, which hath cauied the fame
ionprefltons : whence, the wit of man hath deviled to caufe divers kinds of fruits, to
grow up with divers kinds of figures on them. If you take an earthen vcflel,and put -
into it an apple that is very young,as it hangs upon the Tree growing,the Apple will
grow to fill up his earthen cafe, and will be of any form whatfoever you would de-
fire, if you make the cafe accordingly. Alfo if you pown any colours and bray
them together, and difpofe of them in places convenient on the fruit, on the infidc
of the cafe, the fruits will wear and expreffe the fame colours, as if they were natu-
ral unto them. Whence it cometh to paffe, that oftentimes the yellow Qu'mce is
made to grow like a mans head, having in it the lively refemblance of white teeth,
purple cheeks, black eyes, and in all points expreffmg the form and colour of a

man)?

:oi Natural Magick. TBocJ^^.

mans head, without any greeneffe at all, which is the natural colour of that fsuic
whiles it is in growing. And this is the fleight that Africans prefcribes, whereby

A Citron may be made to grow in the Ukenejfeof a mans head) or the head of an horfey or

any other living Creature.
You muft take feme Potters clay, or foft morter, and fafhion it to thebigneffe of a
Citron that is at his full growth: but you muft cleave it round about with a fharp
inftrument, fo that the fruit may be taken out of it handfomly ; and yet in the
mean fpace the fides of the cafe mull be fo clofely and firmly joyned together, that
the fruitgrowing on, may not break it open. If the counterfeit or cafe which you
make, be of wood, then you muft firft make it hollow within; if it be of clay,
yournay clap it on, as it is, fo that it be fomewhat dry. But then when the fruic
comes to be of a greater and ftronger growth, you muft prepare earthen veflels
made for the purpofe, with a bole in them at the lower end, that the ftalk of ihe
fruit may there be let in : Into thefe earthen veflels you muft enclofe the fruit, and
binde them about with a ftrong band, for otherwife the growth of the fruit will
break them open : And when you have procured the fruit to grow up into his
counterfeit, or fheath as it were, that it is come to the juft bigncfle of a fruit of
thatkinde, it will bear the fame (nape and figure which you would have in it. The
like wc have fhewed before out of F lorentinm. 'Pontanui alfo fpeaks of the fame
device. If, faith he, you would have a Citron to grow in divers (hapes, you muft
cover it being young, with fome counterfeit of clay, or wood, or earth, wherein
it may be fwadled; as a tender infant in his Nurfes bofom: and that counterfeit
will fafhion the fruit into any form ; and when it is taken out, it will refemble any
image that you have carved within the counterfeit. So alfo you may deal by

Pomegranates , 'Pears , or any kind of Apples , making them to receive any kinde
of for my

for the fame Author writes, that if you beftow the fame pains and diligent care
upon any other fort of Apples, you may frame them to every fafhion ; for fo it is
in brief ,faith he,that all Apple-fruits may be made to grow up to the fhape of any li-
ving creature,if you firft carve the fame fhape into a counterfeit of wood or earth,and
let the fruit be (hut up into that counterfeit, that it may gtow up within it. So may
you make

A Quince grow in the jbape of living Creatures ,

as Vemocritus affirmeth, by putting them into fome counterfeit that is carved within
to the fame proportion , and fo let the Quince grow in it. But it is eafieft
to make

Cucumbers grow to any form ;

for if you take earthen veflels of any fafhion, and therewith cloath the Cucumbers
when they are very young, and binde them veryfaft about, they will receive any
fhape or impreffion very cafily, If you take a Cane, and make it hollow all along,
and bind ir faft about, and then put into it a young Cucumber or a young Gourd, it
will grow fo pliable within it, that it will fill up the whole length of the Cane.
Pliny faith, Cucumbers grow to any fafhion that you would frame them unto ; info-
much that you may, if you will, make a Cucumber grow in the fhape of a Dra-
gon, winding himfelf many wayes. Likewife, a Gourd will be made to grow pick-
ed and fharp by many means, efpecially if it be put into a cafe that is made of fuch
pliant twigs as Vines are bound withal; io that this be done as foon as it hath caft
the bloflbm. But if yon lay a Gourd betwixt two platters, or difhes, it will grow
to the fame plainnefle and roundneffe ;and of all other fruit, this is the eafieft and
fitteft to be formed to any fafhion. You may make them to grow like a Flagon, or
like a Pear, great at the one end, and fmall at the other, if you tyeithardin that
part which you would have to be the lefferafterward when it is come to full growth,
dry it, and take out all that is in it, and when you go abroad, carry it about you, it

Of the TrockBtonofnewpTlants. ioj

if ill ferve for a cup to drink in. Hence we learn how it may be effected,
that

An t/flmoud jhoitldgrow with An infcriplion in it.

Take an Almond, and ftcep it for two or three dayes; and then break the fheli of
it very charily, that the kernel receive no harm : then you mutt write in the ker-
nel what you will, but write it as deep in as you fafely may: then windc it up in
fome paper, or lomc linen cloth , and overlay it with morter, and foil it with dung;
and by that device, when the fruit comcth to be of full growth, it will (hew you
your handy work, as AfncanMs recordeth. So may you make

A Teach to grow with An infer ipt ion in it,
as Democrat** fhewcth. After you have eaten the fruit , you muft fteep the ftone
of it for two or three dayes, and then open it charily, and when you have opened
ir, take the kernel that is within the ftone, and write upon it what you will, with a
brazen pen, but you muft not print it too deep, then wrap it up in paper, and fo
plant it; and the fruit which that will afterward bear, will (hew you what was
written in the kernel. But

A Fig will grow with An infeription in /V,

if you carve any Oiape upon the bud, the fig will exprefle it when it is grown : or
elfe if you carve it into the fig when it is firft fafhioned : but you muft do it either
with a wooden pen, or a bone pen, and fo your labour (hall be fure to take effect. I
have printed certain characters upon therincof a Pomegranate, and of a Quince-
pear, having firft dipped my penfil in morter ; and when the fruit came up to the juft
magnitude, I found in it the fame imprcffions. Now it remains that we (hew hour
We may

Fafhion Mandrakes )

thofecountetfeit kind of Mandrake?, which couzeners andcony-chatchers carry a-
bout,and fell to many inftead of true Mandrakes. You muft get a great root of Brio-
Die, or wilde Nep, and with a (harp inftrument engrave in it a man or a woman, gi-
ving either of them their genitories : and then make holes with a puncheon in-
to thofe places where the hairs are wont to grow, and put into thofe holes Millet,
or fome other fuch thing which may (hoot out his roots like the hairs of ones
head. And when you have digged a little pit for it in the ground, you muft let ic
. lie there, until fuch time as it (hall be covered with a bark, and the roots alfo be
(hot forth.

Chap. XIX.

How fruits may be made to be more tender , and beautiful, and goodly to the eye,

NOw at length, that nothing may paffe us, we will fet down divers kinds of
of Heights in husbanding and trimming of herbs and fruits, whereby tbey may
be made not onely tenderer , i wceter, larger, and better relifhed, but alfo Crefhcr
coloured, and more Tightly to the eye. And firft

How an Apple-tree and a M)f tie-tree may be bettered,
we may learn out of Theophraflm , who counfellcth to water their roots with warm
water, and promifcth the bettering of the fruit by that means j nay it will cauic
the Myrtle fruit to be without any kernel at all. And this, faith he, was found
out by chance, in certain of thefe Trees growing ncer unto a hoc Bath. If you
would procure

Goodlier Figs then ordtnarjy

ColnmtUa (hews, how you make them to grow more plentifully, and to be a foun-
der

i©^ Natural Magick. Soo^.

dec fruit. When the tops of the Fig-tree begin to be green with leaves, you muft
cue off the tops of the boughs with an iron tool ; and ftill as the leaves begin to bud
forth, you mull take red chaik, and blend it with Lees of oyle and mans dung,
and therewithal cover the root? of the Tree : and by this means, the Tree will
bear more (tore of fruic, and befides the fruit will be a fuller and better fruir. T li-
ny and PallaJiw record the fame experiment out of the fame Author. When the
Fig-tree begins to fhcvv her leaves; if you would have ityeeld you more and bet-
ter fruit, you mult cut off the very tops of them when the bud begins to fhew ic
felf; or, itnotfo, yetyoumuft before at the leaft to cutoff that top which grow-
eth oat of the midrt of the Tree. Talladius writes, that fome have reported,
that the

Mulberry tree will bear more and better fruit,

if you bore thorough the flock of the Tree in divers place?, and into every hole
beat in a wedge ; into fome of the holes, wedges made of the Turpentine-tree-,
and into fome of chem , wedges made of the Maftick-tree. Did/wtu lakh
that

The Talm, or Date-tree , and the Vawofn tree will grow to be of a larger and good-
lier affile,

if you take the Lees of old Wine, and afcer you have ftrained them, water the
roots therewith. And he faith, that it will take the better effect, if you calf up-
on it a little laic ever now and then. So

T'he Myrtle-tree will have a goodlier leaf,
and alfo yield a better fruit, if you plant it among Rofes : for the Myrtle-tree de-
liiihceth to be contorted with the Rofe, and thereby becomes more fruitful, as £>/-
djmtu rcporteth. So

%Me will grow tenderer, and more flourishing,

if ic be engraffed into a Fig-tree: you muft only fet it into the bark fomewhtt neer
the root, that you may cover it with the earth, and ib you (hall have excellent good
Rue. PImark, in his Symponakes, commends no Rue but that only which grow*
very neer the Fig-tree. Anftotle in his Problems, demanding the caufe of this, at
length concludes, thac there is fuch a fympathy and agreement betwixt the Fig-tree
and the herb Rue, that Rue never grows fo faft, nor flourifhes lo well, as when it
grows under the Fig-tree. If you would have

Artichocks grow without jharp prickles,
Varro faith, that you muft take the Artichock-feed, and rub it upon a flonc, till you
have worn it blunt at the top. You may caufe alfo

Lettice to grow tenderer and more fpreaiing,
as Palladia fnews, and Columella. Palladium faith, that if ycUr Lettice be fomewbat
hard, by reafon of fome fault either in the feed, or place, or leafon, you muli pluck
it out of the earth and let it again, and thereby it will wax, more tender. Columella
fhews, how you may mike it fpread broader. Take a litt'e tile-fheard , and Jay
ic upon the middle of the Lettice when it is a little grown up ; and the burden or
weight of the tile- fhcard will make it fpread very broad. Pliny faith, that it is
meet alfo to befmear the roots with dung when they fet them, and as they grow
up, to rid away their own earth from them, and rofillupthe place with muck.
Fkrentwmfahhy when you have a Lettice growing that hath been tranfplanted,
you muff rid away the earth from the root after it is grown to be a handful longhand
then befmear it with fome frefh Oxe-dung, and then having calf in earth upon it a-
gain, water it ; and Hill as the budorlcafc appears out of the earth, emit off till
ic gro* up ltronger, and then lay upon it a tile-fheard that hath never been feafon-
ed with any pitch, and fo ycu fhall have your purpofe. By the like device you miy
procure

Of the Troduction of nexp Tlants.

105

Endive to be tenderer and broader.
When it is grown up to a pretty bignefle, then lay a (hull tile-fheard on the mid-
dle of it,and the weight of that will cauie the Endive to fpread broader. So alio
you procure

Colervorts to be more tender,
if you bedc w them with fait water, as Theophraftm writes. The j£gyptians,to make
their Colcworts tender, do water them with Nitre and Water mixt together. So

Cucumbers will be tenderer,
if you fteep the feeds in milk before you fee them, as Columella reporteth. if you
would have

Leekj to grow Cloven,

theAntients have taught you, that firft you muft fow them very thick, and fo let
them alone for a while ; but afterward when they are grown, then cut them, and
they will grow cloven. Or elfe, you muft cut it about fome two moneths after it was
fet, and never remove it from the own bed, but help it Hill with water and mack,
and you fhail have your purpofe, as faUadius faith. Now we will fpeak of fome
monrtrous generations ; as of the generation of the herb Dragon, and of a cloven
Onion. And hilt

How to produce the herb Dragon,

Jt is a received opinion amongft Gardener*, that if you take Hemp-feed or Line-feed,
and engnffc ic into an ordinary Onion, or elfe into a Sea-onion as it grows neer the
Sea, or elfe into the Radiflvroot, thence will grow the herb Dragon, which is t no-
table and famous SaUet-herb. But furely, howfoevcr they boaft of it that this hath
been oftentimes done, yet I have made fundry trials hereof, and ftill failed of my
purpofe. By the like felting of feeds, they (hew

How to produce cloven Oniont, \
by making a hole into an Onion, and putting into ic a clove of Garlick, and fo plan-
ting it ; for that will grow to be an Afcalonian, or a cloven Onion. Now let us fee,
how to make

ParfUj to growfrix,led or curled,
Theophraflm writes that Patfley will grow friz led, if you pave the ground where you
have fowed it, and ram it in with a roller ; for then the ground will keep it in fo hard,
that it it muft needs grow double. Columella faith; If you would have Parflcy to
bear curled leaves, you muft put your Parfley-feed into a morter, and pown it with
a Willow peftle,and when you have fo bruifed it, wrap ic up in linen clouts, and fo
plant ic. You may effect the fame alfo without any fuch labour; even by rolling
a cylinder or roller over it after it is a little grown up, wherefoever or howfoevcr
it is fowed. TjlUdiut md Pliny record the fame experiment out of the fame Au-
thor, I have often-times feen

Bijtl growing with a kind of brufh li\e hairs upon it.
The feed of withy-winde being planted neer to Bafil, as foon as it fhoots up, will
prefently winde it felf round about the ftalks of the Bafil, and by often winding a-
bout them, will wrap them all into one. The like will be eff e&ed alfo, if the wi-
thy-winde grow elfewhere , and a twig of it be brought and planted neer to Bafil :
for by either of thefe mean?, the Bafil will grow fo bufhy and fo thick of hair, and
that in a very fhort time, that it will be moft plcafant to be' look upon. So you
may make the

Ivy to bear very Jightly berries,

if you burn three fheli-fifli, efpecially of that kind which is called Mures,
and when you have powned them together, caft the-afhes thereof upon the Tvy-

R berries;

\o6 Natural Magick. 2?w^ 3.

berries % or elfe, if you calf upon them beaten Alome, as Cajfianm reacheth. Theo-
fhrajlui mentions an experiment that is very Itrange, whereby to make

Cumn grow flour tfhingly^
and that is by curling and banning of the feeds when you fow them ; and Tliny
reporccth the fame out of Theophraftus : and he rcportcih it hkewiie of Baji/e, that
it wiU grow more plentifully and better, if it be lowed with curfing and banning. If
you defue to produce long

Cucttmbtfs, and fttch a* are not waterijh9
you may effeS it by this means. If you take a morter or any other like veflcl filled
with water, and place it ncer the Cucumbers, about five orfix inches dillant from
them, the Cucumbers will reach the veflcl within a day or two, and extend them-
felves to that length i The reafon is, becaufe Cucumbers have fucha great delight
inmoilture: fo that, it there be no water in the veflcl, the Cucumbers will grow
backward and crooked. To make them that they (hall not be waterifh; when
you have digged a ditch to plant them in, you mult fill it up half full with chafFe,
or the twigs of a Vine, and then cover them, and fill up the pit with earth ; but
you muft take heed you do not water them when they are planted. By all thele
things which have been fpoken, we may learn to procuie

A Trec> which of it feif may jield yon the fruit of aH Trees,
A thing which I have feen, and in merriment have oft-times called it, the Tree of
Garden-dainties. It was a goodly height and thicknefs, being planted within a vef-
fel fit for luch a purpofe, the mould which was about it, being very fat, and moi:^
and fruitful, that fo every way, as well by the liveliness and flrength of the plant
itfelf, as alio Wy the moiltnefs and thriftinefs of die ground, all things that were
engraffed into it, received convenient nourifhmcct. It was three-forked ; up#Q
one bougn or arm, it bare a goodly grape, without any kernels in it, party-colou-
red, very medicinable ; for Tome of the grapes were good to procure fleep, and o-
ther fome would make the belly loofe. The fecond bough or arm, carries a Peach,
a middle kind of fruit differing both from the ordinary Peach, and the Peach-nut,
without any ftone in it ; and the (mailer branches thereof bearing here a Peach, and
there a Pcach-nur. If at any time there were any ftone in the fruit, kwas com-
monly as fweet as an Almond ; and it did refemble fometimes the face of a man,
ibmetimes cf other living creatures , and fundry other (napes. The third arm
carries Cherries, without any (tone, (harp, and yet fweet withal, andOrenge? alfb
of the fame relifh. The bark of this Tree was everywhere befet with flowers
and Rofes : and the other fruits,all of them greater then ordinary ,and fweet er both
in tafle and in fmell, flourifhing chiefly in the Spring-time i and they hung upon the
Tree, growing even after their own natural fejfon waspaft: but there was a con-
tinual fucceflion of one fruit after another, even all the year long, by certain de-
grees, fo that when one was ripe, there was another budding forth, the branches
being never empty, but If ill clogged with fome fruits or other • and the temperate-
nefs of the air ferved every turn fo well, that I never beheld a more plealani and de-
lightful fight.

Chap. XX.

How divers kinds offruitSy and Ukewife Wines may be made medkiiahle,

•J He Ancients have been very careful and painful in fecking out, how to mix
Wine with divers kinds of Antidotes or preservatives againft poifon, and how
to ufe it bell in fuch receipts, if need Should be. A thing that might very
well be pra&ifedi for indeed there is nothing more convenient for that pur-
pofe. And therefore they have tried and fct down more curioufly then need re-
quif coVnany things concerning this argument , ft rang to be reported.de yet eafie to be

<8:&cdi

Of the Troduaion of newTlants. idf

effected ; which Itheophraftu* hath copioufly fet down. ^ About Hjraclia in A ready,
there is a kind of wine, which makes the men that drink of ic to become mad,and
thewomento become barren. And the like Athen&ttt recordeth of that wine
which they have in Troas , a place in Greece. And in Thraius there is a kind of
.wine which if it be drunk, will procure fleep j and there is another kind of wine
made in that l'ort,that it will caul'e a man to be watchful : and there are divers con-
fections of wines which you may read of in the mod exaft Writers of Phyfick, and
of matters of Husbandry, which arc eafie both to be learned, and alfo pracWed by
thole that are well acquainted with the operations of Simples; and they are fuch
as a mans own conjecture may well lead him unto; and indeed they are nothing
elfealmoft, but fuch qualities operative as the property of the place where their
Simples grow, doth endue them withal. Andiurely I would counfel that thefe kinds
of confedions fhould be miniftred to thofe that are timorous and queazie in the ta-
king of any medicinal receipts, that fo they may be fwallowed down plcafantly,
before they mould feem-loathfom. And fir ft,

How a Vine may be made to bring forth graces that {hall be medicinal againfi the biting of
ventmoHs beafts,

FlorentinusWids you inthe firft and fecond book of his Georgicks, to fet a Vine-
branch, and to cleave it in the lower part about the root, that the cleft maybe
lome four inches long ; there you mull pluck out the pith, andinftead of the pith
put Hel lebore into ir, and binde it fall about with fome pliant twig, and fo covet
it with earth; and by this means it will yeeld you grapes that being eaten, will
make your body foluble. Or, if you would have the grapes to be more operative
in this kind, you muft fupple the Vine-branches in fome Antidote or count er-poy-
fon, and then fet them inthe head of a Sea-onion, andfo cover them with earth ;
but you muft ftillpourc upon it the juice of that counter-poyfon, that the fets may
drink their fill of it, and fo the ftrength and vertue of the grape will laft a great deal
longer. If you would have a Vine to yield the grapes whereof the confections
called Proporaaca are made, Palladiusfaews you. You muft take the Vine-bran-
ches and put them in a velTel that is half full of Hippocras, or elfe of Conferves
of Rotes, or Violets, or WOfm-wood ; and the earth that grows about the root,
you muft refolve into a kind of Lye as it were made of Afhes ; then when the branch
that grows up out of the bud beginneth to bear a leaf, you muft take it away,8e fet ic
as you fet other Vines, in any other place, and the fruit will be fuch a grape as you
defire. ?Uny faith , that if you plant Hellebore about the roots of the Vine,
it will yield a grape fit for fuch a purpofe. Cato faith , that the herb Scam-
mony hath a wonderful quality in drawing into it felf the juice of the Vine,
Pliny fhews

How to make that k*»d of wine which u called"Phthoriumi and kills children in their mo*
thers wombes.

That Hellebore which grows in Thaffus , as alfo the wilde Cucumber, as alfo Scam-
mony, are good to make Phthorian wine, which caufeth abortives. But the Scam -
mony or black Hellebore muft be engrafted into the Vine. You muft pierce the
Vine with a wimble, and put in certain withie-boughes, whereby you may binde up
unto the Vine the other piants that are cngraffed into it : fo fhall you havt a grape
full of /undry venues. So you may procure

Figs that [hall be purgative ,
if you pown Hellebore and Sea-Lettice together, and caftthem upon the Fig-tree
roots: or elfe if you engraffe them into the fame roots, for foyou fhall have Fig1;
chat will make the belly loofe. Florentiniu faith, that you may make a Fig to grow
which fhall be good againft the biting of vencmoUs beafts, if y ou fet it after it hath
been laid in triade. So we may procure

Turgativc Cucumbers,

R % Ycu

io8 Natural Magic k. 2>oo^ 3.

You mult take the roots of the wilde Cucumber, and pown them, and ffeep them
in fair water two or three dayes ; and then waceryour Cucumbers with that liquor
for five dayes together ; and do all this five leveral times. Again, you may m ke
them purgative, it, after they are blcflomed, you dig round about their roots, and
cart tome Hellebore upon them and their branches, and cover litem over with earth
again. So you may procure

Turgative Gottrds9 '

if you deep the feeds of them in Scammony-water nine dayes before you fet them,
as the Quintiies report. Now if you would procure a man to be loofe bellied and
fl:epy withal, you may cauie

Purgative Vamojtns that be good alfo to cattfe fleep*

You muft bore thorough a bough, or through the whole ftock of a Damofin-tree,
and fill it up with Scammony or the juice of black Poppy wrapt up handfomeiy in
paper, or tome fuch covering : and when the fruit is ripe, it will be'operative both
for fleep and purgation. Cato fhews alio, how you may caufe

A V tie to be purgative.
After the Vintage, at fuch time as the earth isuledto be rid away from the roots
of Vines, you mull uncover the roots of fo many Vines as in your opinion Ytitl
make wine enough to ferve your turD: mark them, and lop them round abt.ui^jjd
prune them well. Then pown fome Hellebore roots in a raorter, and cait <rrem
about your Vines, and put unto them fome old rotten dung and old afhes, and
twice to much earth amongft them, and then cover the Vine-roots with mould,
» and gather the g.apes by themfclves. If you would keep the juice of the grape
long that it may la(t you a great while for that purpole, you muff take heed, that the
juice of no other grapes do come neer it. When yon would nfe it, take a cup full
of it, and blend it with water, and drink it beforefupper, and it will work with
y ou very mildely without any danger at all.Late Writers have taken, another courfes
they rid andcleanfe the Vine-roots, and then poure upon the juice of fome purga-
tive medicine to water them withaj ; and this they d&taf many dayes together, buc
efpecially at fuch time as the bud beginneth to fill out"? when they have fo done^
they caft earth upon the roots again, and they take fpecial regard, that the roots?
never lie naked and open when the Northern winde blowetb ; for that would draw
forth and confume the juice of the medicine that is poured upon the roots, f his
if you diligently perform, you (hall have grapes growing upon your Vines, that arc
very operative for looting of the belly. Ihaveeffc&ed

*Tke fame by another means ;
I pierced the Vine with a wimble, even unto the very marrow, and put into it cer-
tain ointments fit for fuch an effect; (it williuffke,ifyou put them within the rine;)
andthi I did in divers parts of the Vine, here and there about the whole body of*
t he Vine, and that about grafting time by Inoculation ; for then the Vine is full of"-
moidure j whereby it cometh to pafs, that the moifture it lelf afcending ac thac
time into the fuperior parts, doth carry up with it the vertuc of the ointmenf:,and
conveys it into the fruit, fo that the fruit will be operative either for purgation or
tor childe-bearing, either to hurt or help,either to kill or preierve, according as the
nature and quality of the ointment is , which was poured upon the roots of
the Vine.

Chap. XXI.

How to plant Fruits and Vtnes^ that they may yield greateft encreafe.

mi : w o .si'Jiii1 •> • d
•IT* Hat we may conclude this whole book, with a notable and much defired ex-
X periment, we will now fliew in the laft place, how we may receive a large en-
creafe

Of the TroduaionofneifrTlants. iop

jreafefrcm the fruits, and pulfe, and Vines which we have planted. A maiter
iurely tnat mint needs be exceeding profitable, for a man 10 receive an hundred
bufhels in usury ask were, for one bufhel chac he harh lowed. VVnich yet I wculd
not hive to befounderfiood, as if a man fhould Hill expect to receive an hun-
dretb for one, precifely or exa&ly lb much ; for fometimes the year, or the air and
weather, or cifc the ground, or elfe the plants may nor perform their parts kindly ;
and in this cafe, the encreafe cannot be lb great . (but yet it fhall never be fo little,
but that it fhall be five times more then ordinary ;) but if thole things do perform
their parts kindly together, you fhall receive lometimes for one bufhel, an hun-
dred and fifty by encreafe. This may feem a paradox to fome, and they will think
that we promife impoffibilities ; burfurely if they would confided all things rightly,
they fhould rather think it a paradox, why half a bufhel well lown or planted,fhouid
not yield two hundred bufhels encreafe, feeing that one grain or kernel that is
planted and takes kindly, doth oft-times fpread his roor, as we fee, and frutf ifie in-
to fundry and many Item?, fometimes into fifteen, amd in the ear of every one of
thole Halks, are contained fometimes threelcore grains? I fpare to mention here
the ground that lies inByzatiumin Africa, whereof Plir.y fpcaks, which, for cne
grain that was planted in it, did yield very neer four hundred fialks, and the Gover-
nour of that Country fent unto Nero three hundred andfourty Items growing out of
one grain. But let us fear_h out the caufe whereby this comes to pais. Some think
that the encreafe commonly falls out to be fo little, becaufe the greater part of the
fruit which is caft into the ground, is eaten up of worms, or birds, or moles, and
of other creatures that live in the earth. But this appears to be falfe, becaufe one
bufhel of Pulfe being planted, never yields above fifteen. Now the Pulfe or Lu-
pines, is of it felffo bitter, that pone of thjofe devouring creatures will tafte of ir,
but let it lie fafe and untouched s and when they are grown up, you fhail common-
ly finde about an hundred grains in the cods of every ilalk. Others referre the
caufe hereof unto the weather, as if the fruit were annoyed with over much cold,
or heat, or rain, fo that the fields are fometimes frozen with cold, and fometimes
parched with hear, whereby they are fometimes more fruitful, and fometimes more
barren. But this cannot be the true realbn, becaufe that though the weather be
never fo kindly, ye that cannot make one encreafe into thirty. But not to wan-
der or range any further about, we tnuft know that all grains that grow within
the ear or the husk, are not prolifical, that is, they are not all fit to yield encreafe ;
for God hath appointed fome of them for the food and fuftenance of living crea-
tures, and others for feed. There are fome grains in an ear, which areas it were
abortives, fuch as degenerate from their natural kind, and will not fru<5tifie at all,
but rot and wafte away into putrefaction. There are other grains in an ear, fuch
asareeafier to be ftript out of their husk, which are fitter for propagation, and are
better enabled by nature thereunto. Befides that, fometimes it falls out, that feeds
or grains are not planted in due feafon ; or if they be, yet fometimes the Husband-
man doth not beftow that due labour and induftry in looking unto them, which the
kind of the fruit requires. Wherefore if we can meet with all thefe impedi-
ments, we may procure encreafe according to our hearts defire. For the feeds will
be larger in the roots, and when they have fpread their roots under the earth of a
good length, then will they fend up a greater number of flems, and bring forth
good (lore of ears. Therefore you muft make choice of your feeds or grains, rot
of the forwarded , nor yet of the backwardefi , becaufe they commonly are
weakeft, but of the middle fort: then wafh them and dcanfe them from allo-
ther feeds; andbefmear them with fat ointments, and with the greafe of old
Goats ; and let them be continually fupplied with fufficient heat, and fuffuient
moifmre ; then lay them in foft and warm mould carefully manured ; for the live-
lier that the heat of the mould is , the better will the feeds clofc with ir,
and become more eager to propagation , and embrace it more fweetly, as ihe
male would do by his female. So fhall your your feeds be more enlivcd,and
bring forth a more legitimate and a larger encrealV. Let them be plante I in

IIO JXATURAL iVlAGICK. 'jlOOfa.

the full of the Moon or thereabout t for the larger the Moon is, the more bounti-
ful encreafe foe will procure. Concerning the Vine, you muft fee that her leaves be
not wanting, if you would have good ftore of Wine; for, if the leaves be away,
the Vine hath little heart to bear • and befides, (he.Giould be without an uTuefor
her fuperfluities, which commonly the leaves do receive into themfelves : onely
you muft pare off thofe twifted curies that are wont to grow upon it ; for fo, her
pride being taken away from her, the juice will be more delightful, and more
plcafanr.

THE

Ill

THE

FOURTH BO OK

O F

ywvt

Natural Mag-ick :

Which teacheth things belonging to Houfe-keeping 5
how to prepare domeftical neceflaries with a fmall coft j
and how to keep them when they are procured.

The P R O E M E.

FT^m %/fnimals and flants,we are come to Homfhold- affairs ; there we provided di*
verftty of new fruits fit for our u ft: now wefiiallfccm to have J owed nothings and pro dw
ced nothings unlefs we fhew how,& what we fowed and produced at great charge and pa$nst
may be treferved agaihft the cold, and injuries of the outward air, that the) may come
forth inihetr feafons. It were the part of a wicked and fiothful man carelefsly to let that
dye and come to nothing, which he had provided with Jo much care and yams : wherefore at
you Were witty to produce them, yon triufi be as diligent to prefrve them. And the Hus-
band-man that ftores up fruit, {ball have good provifionfor the lYtnter. For faith Marcus
Varro, they fervefor fever al meats, and uo man ftores them up but to produce them when he
hath need of them, to defend, or ttfe9or fell them. I fhaHfirfi fet down the inventions of
tur Ancefiors, who were very diligent herein, for tbej found fundry things by dtvers
means, and faithfully delivered the know/edge of them to pofierity- Then Ifhatt relate what
I know to be true) intermixing fome of my own inventions, and fuch as I thinkjo be of
greatefi concernment, and that 1 have often tried. J fh all be fides add fome eonfi derations of
pread, wine, and oyle, and fuch as are of great profit for the Hutband-man to provide for
his family with the leffir cofi, alwayes fetting down the natural caufes; that they being per*
fcttly known, a man may eafily invent and make them. But te proceed to the works

Chap. I.

How Fruits may be long preferred upon their Trees.

\ E will begin with Fruits : And whereas fruits and flowers both
may be preferved cither upon their own mother Tree which
bear them, or elfe being pluckc off from it, we will firtt fhew,
how fruits may be preferved upon their own Tree, and firtt
rehearlc thole things which the Ancients have fet down con-
cerning this matter, and next, what we our felves have
found out by our own experience. Our Anccftor?, when
they would have fruit to laft long upon the Tree, were wonc
firft of all to bind them to the ftock or to the boughs, lelt any tempeft Ihould ftrike
them off, or tofs them up and down. Befides, they did intercept that juice from
them, which fhould ripen them : for there are fome kinds of fruits, which, as foon
as ever they be ripe, willftay bo longer upon the Tree, but fall down of them-
felves, though they are not fo much as (haken : other fruits there are that will (lick
longer and fafter to their hold. Befides, they were wont to cover them with cer-
tain cafes or (hells as it were ; thereby guarding them from the injuries of the wea-
ther, both hot and cold, and aifo from the mouths of devouring birds. Where-
fore to make Tome'

in Natural Magick. jBoof^q..

Pomegranates hang long upon their Trees •
Some hi c wreathed and platted about the fruit the fmaller boughs that grow hard
By, that^he rain may not come forcibly upon it to break [ or chopir, for.if it^be
Qfate brufced, or thaV it-*do but gaps and have any chopsin it, it will foon^penfh ; and
Whenthe^f havefo done, they tyetbem faft to the ftronger boughs, that they may
not be fruken ; and then they bind the Tree about with a kindjof broom withes,
that the Daw?, or Crows, or other' birds may not. come at the fruit to gnaw it.
Some do frame earthen cafes fit for^the frnitj and cp_vcr the famewith ftrawie mor-
tcr, and let the fruit hang ftill upon the Tree in them. Others do wrap up every
one of the Pomegranates in hay or holm, and then daube it thick over withmor-
terwhich hath cbopt ftraW ink, andfo faften them to the ftronger boughes, that
the winde may not (hake them. But all threfe pracVifes muft be uled when the yvea-
■theris fair, and there is;ncither rain nor d^w ftirririg, as Columella teachetb.. Buc
BetitiHi ufeth this means to makcthem ftay long on their Tree.-Jdk take* the blof-
foms of the Tree when they begin bo wither, and wraps in them every Pomegra-
nate by it fclf, and then binds them about with bonds ; thereby preventing their
putrefaction, and their chawns and chops which otherwife would be in them. O-
thers put them in earthen pots every one by itfelf, and cover them well, and fettle
them faft, that they may not be broken by knocking againft the flock or arms,- of
the Tree, nor by hitting one againft the other: for by this means yon (ball hafc
them alwayes better grown then by any other. Var.ro faith, that if you take pome-
granates before they be ripe, as they ftick upon their (talks, and put them into a
pcttomlcfs pot, and cover them, boughs and all, in the ground, fo that no winde
may come at them, you fhall not only finde them whole when you take them out,
but they will be greater alfo then if they had hong ftill upon the Tree. PalU-

Citrons ma; Be preferved upon the Tree ;

even by (butting them up in certain earthen veflels fit for fuch a purpofe ; for fo yott
may keep them upon their Tree almoft all the year long. If you would have

Grapes hang upon the Vine^freflo and good, even till the Spring of thejeary
JSerititts prefcribes you this courfe. You muft dig a pit in a very fhadowy place peer
to the Vines, about a yard deep, and fill it up with fand , and fet up fomc props
in k : then you muft loofen the j oinrs of the Vine? branches, and winde them in to-
gether with the clufters of grapes to be tied to the props, and then cover them,
that no water may come at them. You muft take heed alfo that the grapes do not
touch the ground. A thing which I have oft-times put in pra<5tife, but it fell not
out to my expectation: for ftill the grapes were halfrotten, and their colour quite
faded. Colftn*e^<* ia"h, There is no furer way then to prepare certain earthen veflels
which may hold each, of them a clufter of grapes, fo that they may have lcope e-
nouih ; and they muft have every one four handles, whereby they may be tied to
the Vine, and their lids or coverings muft be fo framed that the middle may be the
place of clofing, where both fides of the cover may fall clofe together when the clu-
fters are in, and fo meeting may hide the grapes. But you muft fee that both the
veflels themfclves, and alfo their coverings be well pitched both within and with-
out ; for the pitch will do good fervicc herein. When you have thus covered and
fhut up.y" our grapes , then you muft lay good (tore f morter with ft raw chopt in it
upon the veflels. But in any cafe, look that the grapes be fo placed in the veflels,
that they touch no part thereof, larentinvu gives this connfel. The clutters that
firft grow, you muft pluck eff, and then others will ccme up in their fteads, if yon
look carefully to the Vine : now thefc later clutters will be very backward and long
4rc they be ripe : take fomc earthen veflels, and let them be fomewhat open be-
low : put into them your later clutters, and let the upper part of them be very clofe
covered, and then bind your veflels faft unto the Vine, that fo the wind may noc
fluke them. Palladia faith; If you be defirous to keep grapes upon the Vine till

the.

Of increafing HouJhold^Jlujfe. no

the Spring-time, you mutt take this courfe. Neeruntoa Vine that is laden with
•grapes, you muli make a ditch about three foot deep and two foot broad in a very
ihadowy place ; and when you have caft fand into ir, Itick up certain props, and
winde the bunches daily towards them, and when you have wrought them to ftand
that way, bind them to your props without hurting the grapes, and then cover them
to keep them from the rain. The Grxcians likewife counfel you to flint up your
grapes into certain earthen veflels which are fomewhat open beneath, but very
clofe and fad (hue above, and lb you may prcfervc them long upon the Tree.
If you would prcfervc

Grapes upon the fwe till new come again, fo that upon one and the [ante Vine-branch, may

be [een o 'd and new grapes both together,
you may effect it by this device, which I my felf have ufed i for, all the former
experiments are the inventions of Antiquity, and, becaufe there is great difficul-
ty in working them, and fmall profit when they are wrought, therefore I cfteem
them as toyes and matters of little worth. Buc this I have experienced my felf, and
preferved good grapes upon a Vine until May and June, and fo have feen both new
grapes, and grapes alio of the former year together upon one and the fame
br inch. When Vintage time is paft, you rrsuft take the tops and pliant twigs of fuch
Vines as grow by the honfe fide, and winde them in at the window into the houfe,
and binde them fad to the fummers or beams with the fprigs of Broom, as with
firings or thongs, that they may be furely Hayed from wagging up and down : but-
you mult let them in handfomely that the windows may be opened and fhut con-
veniently. By this means you fliall keep them fafe from the injury both of the
cold weather, and alfo of the devouring birds. When there isanyfrofts or winds
abroad, keep the windows clofe four, and open them again when the air is waxed
any thing calm and warm ; and fo deal by them till the Spring come. And when the
Vine begins to bear new buds and new leaves, then let your twigs out of prifon,
and bring them back again into the open air, and there let them take the comfort
of the warm Sun. So (hall there grow new grapes upon the fame twigs where the
old grapes are. I have alfo effected the fame

By another means.

Becaufe it was a great trouble, and a very irkfome piece of work, to take that courfe
every year, I have thought of another device whereby the fame effect maybe at*
tained both more prettily and miraculoufly. About the time wherein they are
wont to prune Vines, make choice of two fpecial branches upon the Vine, fuch as
aremoft likely to bear fruit. Cut tff the tops of either of them, but leave the
branches ftil I growing upon the Vine, and leave two or three buds upon either
branch.Tf.en take a vcff^i made of chalk or white clay,and let there be a hole bored
quite thorough the bottom of it, and fo place it , that it may ftand fit for the
branches to be drawn thorough ir, fo that they may ftand a little out above the
brims thereof. When your branches are fo feared, then fill up the veficl with earth;
aad, that you m-:y work more fnrely and fpt edily too, you mult fct over your ear-
then veffcl another veff 1 full of water, all the Summer long, which muft be ftopc
toward the bottom with a clout fomewhat lcoiely, that the clouts end hanging
down into the earthen veffel, may bedew the earth that is in it continually by little
and little; to (hall your iprigs or branches bring forth both fruic and leaves, and
moreover (hail take roo- within the veffel that will (hoot out into new twigs. Af-
ter Vintage-time, cut off the branches from the Vine a little beneath the earthen
veffcl, and lb carry them into a clofe houfe that isfituateina dry place where no
tempefts can come at it, as in Wine-cellars, or fuch like : Let the windows be net-
ted over, that the bird? may not come at them: In the Winter-time, if there
come any fair dayes, bring them forth into the Sun • andj when the weather is ex-
tream cold, keep them in fo much the clofer and warmer rooms. If you preferve
them thus until Auguft, you fliall have old and new grapes both together upon on^
branch, and each of them will be quick and well-coloured.

S , CHAP.

Natural Magic k. HgoI^ ^

Chap. II.

How Flowers may be preferved upon their own ftrtk>

By the like devices as thofe were, we may alfo prcferve flowers upon their own
ftalk ; yet not fo eafily as fruits may be preferved upon their own Trees : Nei-
ther yet can they be made to latt f© long as fruits, becaufe fruits are of an harder
fubftance, but flowers are foft and tender. Firft therefore we will (hew

How Rofes may be preferved upon their own fialhs.

If you take a Reed or Cane, and cleave it when it is green as it grows by the Rofes,
and put in the Rofe»bud as it is upon the flalk, within the Reed, and then bindc
fome paper about the Reed fomewhat loofely, that it may have as it were » break-
ing place ; your Rofes will thereby be well preferved upon their ftalk, as Vydimm
reportcth. Palladia* faith - If yon (hutup your Rofe-buds as they grow upon their
ftalk, into a growing Reed which you have cleft for that purpofe, and clofe up the
Reed again, that the cleft do not gape, you ftiall have frefli Rofes when you will, if
you open your Reed again. I have tried this device , and found it in feme fort to be
true , and anfwerablc to my intendment: I took the Rofe-buds before they were
blown, and fhut them up into a Reed (for the Rofes and the Reeds mult be piloted
neer together) and the cleft which I had made in the Reed, being but deader, I
bound it up again that it might not ftand gaping, (onely I left a fit paflage for the
Rofc flalk to ftand in) and fo I preferved them a great while. The like device
Iufed

'to preferve LiHies Upon their ftallyfor A long time*

I cleft the Cane betwixt the joints, and put the LiHies into it as they j^owopon
their ftalk before they were blown, and fo the joint of the Cane clofusg upon them
beneath, and the cleft above being flopt with wax, the Lilliss were thereby long
preferved upon their ftalk. The very fame experiment I pra&ifed wpon Clove-gil-
liflowers, and fo I had them growing upon their ftalk a great while : And wbenfoever
I would ufe them, I brake up their cafes wherein they were preferved, and fo by the
comfort and force of the Sun, they were blown and opened themfelvcs.

Chap. III.

Mow to make Fruit fafes^ or places wherein fruits may conveniently be preferved,

NOw we will (hew how you may preferve fruits when they are taken oS from
the Trees whereon they grow. Wherein becaufe our chiefeft care and labour
is, to keep them from putrefaction, therefore, that we may fo do, we muft firft know
the caufes of their putrefaction. The Philofophers hold, that the temperature of the
air being of it felf exceeding variable by reafon of the variety of celeftial in-
fluences which work upon it, is alfo of that force, that it caufeth every thing
which it cometh at, even whatfoever is contained under the cope of the Moon, to
haften towards an end, and by little and little to decay continually. For the air
which is apt to fearch every thing when it lights upon any f ruir, finds in it a certain
natural heat fomewhat like to its own heat ; and prefently doles with it, and enti-
ces as it were the heat of the fruit to come into the air: and the fruit it felf, ha-
ving a natural col dnefs as well as heat, is very well content to entertain the heat
of the circumftant air, which exhaufteth the own heat of the fruit, and de-
voureth the raoifture of it, and fo the fruit fhrinks, and withereth, andconfumes
away. But man is not of fuch a dull fenfe, and of fuch a blockifh wit,
but that he can tell how to prevent thefe inconveniences, and to devife fun-
dry kinds of means, whereby the foundneffe of Fruits may be maintained
againft the harms and dangers both of cold, and of heac. And firft we will

Of increafing of Hou jl) old ~ fluff e. t\j

fpeak of Fruit-iafes, or artificial places, whereby the danger of heat may be avoi*
oed. Then we will (hew that there i> eipecial choice to be made of times, whereiri
heat (lull be of imali force. And then we will prelcribe the manner of gathering
truits, led happily they mi^hr be brniled with handling or falling, which if they
fnould, it would be cheir bane, and the beginning of their putrefaif ion. Andlalf
of all, we will teach you how to lay them up in divers and lundry places, where-
by you may prevent the heat and moilture of the air, fu m doing them any harm.
Firft therefore, that we may prepare cold and dry places , wherein we may lay up
inch fruits as we would have to lalt long, and lo to keep away the extrinlecal hear,
and moidure, we mud underttand that there are places, lome general, and fomc
particular. We will fpeak of fome peculiar places of the world, which are excel-
lent good to preferve fruits in. Theophr.iftus faith, that iome truits will laft the lon-
ger, becaule they are laid up in fomc certain places. Wherefore, in a certain place
of Cappadocia, which is called Petra, fruits may be preferved fourty years, and
yet they are all that time fertile, and very fit to be fown: nay, fail h he, if they be
kept threelcore.years,orthreelcore and ten,thcy will IU11 be very good for meat to
be eaten, though not fo good for feed to be fown. The place he reports to be a high
place, and op nfor the winds, and to (tand lower towards the North then to the
other three quarters of the world- It is reported likewife, that fruits are preferved
in Media, and other high Countries, longer and better then in other places. But
thele are the properties of fome peculiar places onely. But generally for all
FruuMafes, it is the judgement and counfel of all the beft and leamedft Husband-
men, that they muft befoiuuate, that they may have windows towards the North,
which muft lye open in the Springtime, and every fair day, that tbe Northern
windrmay blow into them. But in any cafe- there muft no windows be made to-
wards the South, becaufc the Southern winde will make your fruit full of wrinkles,,
Let us lee therefore

What places arefitteft to lay up Quinces in,
Marnu Varro faith, that they will be preserved well if they be laid up in fome'
place that is cold and dry. Columella alfo layes them up in a cold floor or loft where
there cometh no moifture. Pattadiw likewife would have'them laid up in fomc cold]
aDd dry place, where there cometh no winde. So if you would

preferve apples well,

CV*wW/<* teaches you to lay them up in a very cold and a very dry lofr, where nei-
ther fmoak, nor any noifome favour can come at them. ePaBad$us would have them
laid up in fome dole and dark places , where the winde caonot come at them. And
Plmy would have them laid very thin one by another, that fo the air may come e*
qually at every fide of them. So

Pomegranates may be prefervedy

x%ColumelU reporteth out of Mago the Carthaginian, if firft ycu warm them in Sea-
water, and then belmear them with fome chalk, and when they be dry, hang them
up in fonv old place. And Palladium out of Columella, prefcribes the very lame
courfe. In like manner you may

Preserve the fruit called Ztz.iphum>
if you hang them up in a dry place, as the, fame Author is of opinion. If you
would have

Pigs to lafi a great while,

ColumeUatctchtth you, that as loon a? they be thoroughly dry,you muft lay them up
in a very dry room, and thereby you (hall preferve them for a long time. So

Damoftns may he long prefervedy '

nd Natural Magick. 2?0O^.

If you lay them upon hurdles or grates in ibmc dry place, where the Sun may come
at them. TaHaditufazvis , that

Ckeft-nuts may belong preferved,

if they be raked up in the earth, where they may lie dry. And I my felf have fcen in
Birryi

cAlmonds preferved found a great while^

three years or four years together, (bells and all, being laid up in a dry place. If you
would have

Wheat long preferved ;

V*rro faith, that you muft lay it up in high Garners which have a thorough air on
the Eait-iide and on the North-fide : But in any cafe there muft no moil) air come
at them from any waterifh places thereabouts. Some have their Garners under the
ground, as Caves , as it is in Cappadocia and Thracia. others have their Garners in
pits and dicches, as it is in the neerer part of Spain : only they lay the chaffe under
it, and take fpecial care that no moifture nor air may come at it, except it be when
they take it ouc to ufe Come of it : for if the air be kept from it, the worm cannot
breed in it to devour it. By this means they keep their wheat good and fwcet, fif-
ty years ; and they prefcrve their Millet above an hundred years, %% Theophaftm re-
cordeth. If you lay up your wheat with any duft in k, it will putrifie : for the ex-
trinfecal heat of the duft, doth as it were lay fiege to the natural heat of the grain,
and fo choaks it up, becaufe it hath not as it were a breathing place ; and by this
means it is over-heated, and fo putrifies. Vlorentinm reporteth out of Varro, that
Corn may be very well preferved above ground, if it be laid up in fuch places, as
Have the Eaftern light (tuning into them : they muft alfo be fo fuutte tbat the Nor-
thern and the Weftcrn winds may come at them moderately; but they muft be
fife from all Southerly winds : and you muft make in them a great many of channels,
whereby both the warm vapours may have iflue forth, and alfo the cooling air may
have accefs in. The beft way whereby you may

Trtferve Beam,

is, to parch them reafonably well ; for fothere will befefs ftore of moifture in them,
which will cauiethem to lift the longer. Iheophrafiut writes, tbat in Apollonia and
Tarcntum, they preferve Beans long without auy parching at all. Pliny make t m< n-
tion of certain Beans that were laid up in a certain Cave in Ambracia, which la-
fted from tbe time of King Pyrrhut, until the war which Pompey the great waged
againft the Pirates. The fame Tbeopkrtftui writes alio, that

Peafe may be long preferved,
•if you lay them up in high places where the wind hath his full force, a? in Media
and the J ike Countries t but the Bean will be kept there much longer, So
alio the

Pulfe called Lh pines, may be long preferved,

if you lay them up in a loft where the fmoak may come at them, as Columella mi-
*eth: for if any moifture do fettle upon them, prefently the worm breeds in them ;
and if once the worm have eaten out the navel as it were of the Pulfe, that which
is in them like a little mouth, then cannot the other part which is left, be ever fit
for feed; Palladim likewife faith, that this kind of Pulfe will laft very lon°, if it be
laid up in dry Garners, where no moifture can come at it; especially if it may be
continually perfumed as it were with fmoak. But now let us fhew how to do that
which is the moft difficult thing of all in this kind, namely,

How to preferve flejb and fi\h,

Ihavefeenflcfeand 6£h preferved from pucrefaaion, for a whole moneth toge-
ther

Of increajtng Houfhold^fluffe. WJ

ther in very cold place?, without toy other arc at all betides the coldnef? of the
place. In rooms that are made under the ground, and very cold, where there com-
eth neither heat nor any Southerly mode, buc that they are continually cold and
dry, alaiort every thing may be prefcrved wjchout putrefaction. In a certain mo-
naflery that is upon the Hill Parthcnius, neerunto Naples, I faw the carcafes of
men kepi whole and found for many years t6gether. The Hill is covered over with
£now almoft continually : and in the tops of the Mountains, where thefnowlie*
in ditches and pits, conveyed thither of purpole to keep it, look what Pears, and
Cervi.es, 2nd Apples, and wilde Cheff-nuts have been gathered up by chance toge-
ther with the fnow , and put into the fame pits ; after the fpace of a year that the
fnow was confuted away, we have there found the fame fruits, fo moift, and frefla,
and goodly to the eye, as if they had been buc then pluckc off from their Trees.
To conclude, there is nothing better and more available for the prefervatton of
anything, then is the drynefs and the coldnefs of fuch places as they are laid up
in, to be kept.

Chap. IV.

What facial time then mu$ be chef en for the gathering of fuch frnksy at J<m vnax to laj
ftp infttre for a great -while after,

THe principal matter which I would have to be obferved in this cafe,'is the choo-
fing of your time wherein to gather all fuch fruits as yo« would lay up in ftore,
that they might lalt long. For if we defire to defeat that heat and moifture which
will mar our fruit, and caufe it toputrifie, we cannot take any better courfe againft
them, then by making choice of fuch a time to gather our fruits in , as when thole
planets and ftars, which are the principal Authors of that heat 8: moiftore, are them-
ielves become cold and dry , or at the leaft not hot and moift in any high degree.
The Moon when fhe is in the waintng, is cold and dry : If there be any traits ga-
thered when the Moon abound th with heat and moitture, the very fame qualities
will alio the fruit abound withal, tndfo they will very foon beputrified, as every
man of any wit will eafily judge : and therefore allthofe that have written of Hus-
bandry, with one content do give k for a precept, that fruits are to be gathered in
the decaying of the Moon. Moreover, 'the night and the day, the morning and the
evening, d o beftow their moifture and their drynefs ttpon fruitsyaccordingly as they
themtelves are either moifi or dry. The day, by reafon of the prefence of the Sun,
is hot and dry. The night, by reafon of the abfence of the Sun, is cold and moift :
The evening, by reafon that it hath a little of the Sun, is partly wirm ; and yet
withal by reafon of the approaching nighr, is partly moift : The morning, is partly
cold, by reafon of the tail of the night; and partly warr, by reafon of the Sun
approaching: So then, let two or three hours of the day be (pent, and then the
time will be fomewhat dry, becaufe it hath begun to be a little acquainted with the
Son ; and withal fomewhat cold, becaufe it hath not yet quite forgotten and fluked
effche night ; and this is in all mens judgement the beft and the fntefl time wherein
to gather fruits. But leaft we fhculd make the matter too hard and difficult, by gi-
ving fuch Aftrological precept?, we will frame our felves totheplainett, and yet a
veryexai* rule; namely, that the fituation and afpe& of the Planets is to be regar-
ded, whereby the air becometh colder and dryer then at other times, and fo con-
fcquc-rtly the fruit may laft the longer. And, becaufe we will not be too tedious,
Wc will fpare to alledge authorities and experiments which might be brought for the
proof hereof, feeing all living creatures that are gendted in the full of the Moon,
cr feme what before, do grow much more then they that are gendred when (Tie is in
the waiaing. But let us come to examples. If you would know

The time, wherein Citrons arete be gather edy
PalUdim mchc* you in his book of the prefervin? of Citrons. If ycu would fa-
ther Citrons to kecp,lanh he, you muft pluck them with their boughs and leaves from

ihs

1 1 S N A t.ural Magic k* "BgoI^ q..

the Tree in die night time, when there is no Moon-light furring, Pontanmz Coun-
try-man Qf 66r$ hath elegantly fee down this matter. If ycu d< lire, faith he,to keep
L.nron - long without any harmorloU of their vigor,you mult take this courle: Pluck
hff the fruit together with the branches 3c leaves as they were upon the Tree,inthe
higt.tVime'when the Moon fhioes not at all : Then hang them up upon fomc hook or
tack in tome dark and clofe place ; fee that you touch them but very iofcly, and let
i bi. any v\i ide loitis at them ; or elle lay them up amongft chaffe and dry ftraw*
LofhiU you keep the fruit found and good, and the leaves alio green for a°reat
while together. There is alio

An appointed time wherein Qnince^pears are to be gat fared*
I have found no better or furer way to \ referve Quince- pears, faith Columella^ then
by gathering them that were very ripe and found, and without any blemifh, at
fuch time as the air was temperate, and the Moon in the waining. Likewifc the
fame Author prefcribing unto us

iA time wherein Apples are to be gathered that they may laft the longer ,
biddeth us to do thus. About Auguftj choofe,faith he, the fweeteft Apples , fu'ch
as be not over ripe, and they will be kept long. Pliny counfellcth us to gather them
a'terthc TEquinodial in Autumne, but nevet before the Moon be fifteen dayes old,
nor yet before one of the clock. And Palladim (hews,

What time Tears are to be gathered *>, that they may laft long.
In a calm day, when the Moon is in the waining, and that alfo toward the latter
end, betwixt the two and twenty and eight and twenty day of the Moon, you
muii take them effthe Tree with your hand, at fuch time of the day as the Sun is
in fome ftrength of heat, that is, cither betwixt feven and ten in the morning, oc .
clfe betwixt two and five of the clock in the after-noon: and the Pears which
you fo gather, mult be fomewhat hard and green. Tamphilm an Husband-man
ptefcribes

A certain time wherein to gather Cherries jhat they may laft long,

Cherries area kmde of fruit that will foon wither ; and yet if you gatherthem be-
fore the tiling of the Sun, and fo lay them up , they will be freCh and good a great
while. PalUdiui prefcribes

A certain time wherein to gather Medlar s^that they may laft long.
They are to be gathered, faith he, in a fair day about Noon-tide ; and they mud
not be thorough ripe. Colttme IU faith, that

The time wherein yon gather Pomegranates to he laid np and preferved,
fflaft be a fair day when the air is temperate. Tliny would have ycu to let them be
well dr^cd in the Sun, that there be none of the nights dew left upon mem. Dt-
dymtu choofeth

A certain time wherein Grapes are to be gatheredythat they may laft long.
If you would lay up Grapes that they may laft all the Winter long, yon muft, faith
he, gather them after the full of the Moon, when the air is clear and calm, about
four of #the clock after-noon, when all the dew is quite dry ed off from thtm : you
muft. gath t .hem when they be at the belt, even in their full ftrength, fo thac
they be neither raw, nor yet paft their r^peft ftrength. Authors likewife do
prescribe

A certain time wherein £orn is to be gathered and laid np.

When you have reaped your Wheat or Barley, ycu muft let it lye abroad in the
field cne or two dayes, or at the leaft one wh le night, and carry it away before
thcrifa^ of the Sun, that fb k may be throughly cold when it is laid into the barn;

fo*

Of increafmg of Houflmd' fluff e* i

for it is that which will caufc the Corn to laft much the longer. Columella fhews?
and he teaches it of his own experience

What time Beans are to be gathered) and layed up to be long preferved,
You muft fell your Beans, faich he, when the Moon is in the very laft of her laft
quarter, and you mutt fclL them before Day-light ; then, when they are waxed dry
upon the floor, prefemly ?'ju muft threfh them out before the Moon is renewed;
and when you have hid them on cooling, then carry them into your Gamer to be
laid up: for if you deal thm with them, youfhallbe fure to preferve them from
the worm., which otherwife will breed in them. The very lame experiment doth
Talladw record ouc of the very fame Author. Likewiic

Garden Teafs may be preferred fcr a whole J ear ;
if you lay them on drying in the Sun, and when you have fetched fcut all their moi-
fture, take them ouc of their (hells, and lay them up s for by this means (hall you
prefeivc them from putrefaction.

Chap. V.

Of the minr.tr how to gather fruits • as alfo ho» to help and drejfe the fialh^ that grows
into themt whereby we may prevent the firfi original^ and the occafion of thetr putre-
faction.

tX^Hereas our Anceftors did perceive that the firft beginning of putrefafUon in
fruits did arife from the little Oaik that % rows into them, or from that part of
the fruit where the ftalk is entertained into it ; (for it is requifue, that the begin-
ning of the fpoil. and d^'truitton of them mould arife in the very fame pare, where*
in rhey began fir [1 to live and recceive their nourifhment) they have therefore de-
viled lundry means whereby to prevent all fuch milchief and harm, as the talk
might bring upon the frui:, Moreover, fruits are very carefully to be gathered,
efpecially thofe which we would lay up for ftore,thac they be cot knot ki and hit one
againftthe other j for the hitting of them together will caufe their putrefaction.
Bcfide?, we muft fee that they be in their beft eftate when we gather them,that they
be not perfectly ripe ; for as they mull not be altogether fharp and green when they
are gathered, fo neither muft they be come to their full ripenefle. Furthermore,the
fruits that yoa would lay up, you muft take a diligent view of them, and fee that
they be found, without any bruife, or fpeckedncfle, or worm in them. But let
come to examples. Aud firft

How we mttfi gather Apple and how we muft drefs their ftalks,
ColnmelU would have fuch Apples to be prefcrved, which have a good relifh, and are
gathered when they are realonable ripe : and he would have them to be fo difpofed
and placed when they are laid up, that theblcffome-end fhouldftand upward, and
the ftalk-end downward, even fo as they grow upon the Tree: but they mult not
be laid to touch one another ; neither muft they be thoroughly ripe when they are
gathered, but fomewhat (harp and fowre. Befides, you muft fee that every fevcral
kind of Apples muft be laid up in a feveral room or cell by themfelves ; for when fun*
dry kinds are laid together in one cell, there will be a difagreement amongft them,
and fo they will the fooner pmrifie. Experience whereof we have in wine; which
if it be made of fundry kinds of grape?, it will not befo durable, as when it is made
onelyof onekinde. Palladia faith, If you keep Apples in ftore, you muft gather
them very charil -, that they be taken off from the Tree without any blemifhj and
you muft drench their ftalks in fcalding pitch, and fo place them upon a boarded
loft, with the ftalk*end downward; and you muft take heed that you do not
touch them, nor meddle with them till we take them out as being fit for our ufe.
P/iny likewife fheweth, that Apples muft be placed upon their (talk-end*. Apulvm
the Greek connfelieth us to gather our Apples when they arc in their full ttrength ;

Natural Magick. jBgo^l.

and we mull take fpecial regard, that they be gathered by hand without any bruife j
and then laid up in fuch fore that they may not touch one another : but in any cafe
they mu'tbc found, and not thoroughly ripe. He faith moreover, that if you be-
fmear the tops of the Apples with the juice of green Rag-wort, it will prefcrve
them from putrefaction. If you would have

Citrons to lajl long,

Fallaiiw counfelleth you to gather them with their boughs which they grow upon,
and lay them up in fcveral , as we (hewed before out of Pontanus. Columella
(hews

How Pears mttfi be gathered that they may endure long j

namely, if you gather them before they be thoroughly ripe: and Talkdim faith,
that they muft b« gathered charily by hand, that they may not be bruilcd ; and you
muft diligently cull out from them, all fuch as have fallen from the Tree, and lay
up none but thofe that are very found, andfomewhac hard and green, and fuch as
are gathered with their ftalks upon them. Democritu* faith that thofe Pears will
keep bed, which arebefmeared with pitch about the ftalk, and fo hung up. We will
alfo (hew the manner how to gather*

Cervices ,that they may laft,

Marcus Varro faith that Cervifes are to be gathered even while they are very fowre,
and fo to be hung up, that they may ripen but flowly, and that alfo within doors:
for if you lay them up when they are grown to fome ripeneffe, they will not laft fo
long. Theophrajlus by this means procured Cervices to defer their ripening even
until Winter* Columella faith, they muft be charily gathered with your hand. Pliny
faith, they muft be hanged up a; they are upon their boughs. Palladwt faith , they
mult be gathered when they are hard, and fo hanged up together with their ftalks
in fome clofe and dark place. So

Figs are to he laid up a* they are upon their boughs ,
as Africanm teaches ; but, faith he, they muft be gathered before they be ripe : fot
when oace they are come to be ripe, they will hang no longer upon their Tree, as
other fruits do, but fall oft prefently. They are alfo to be gathered and laid up
with their ftalk or their navel upon them, that is, the part which they hold by, and
depend upon their mother : for if they be fo gathered, they will laft the longer
found and good. Palladium alfo would have them to be gathered while they be
green and unripe, and that with their ftalks upon them, and fo to be laid up. Cato
faith, that the boughs of the Fig-tree whereon the figs grow, ate to be prefcrved to-
gether with their fruit ; and thofe figs that you would keep, muft be gathered fome-
what green and fowre. CohmsUa faith, that Figs, if we would keep them long, muft
be gathered, neither when they are very ripe, nor yet when they arc too green. Pal-
ladia* faith, that if you would have

Peaches well kepty

you muft fill up the navel of the Peach, that is, that part of the Peach whereby it
clofeth with the ftalk , with one drop of fcalding pitch. I for my part have pre-

ferved

Dame fins a great while together,

by hangingthem up with their ftalks, upon the rafters of an houfe • but there is none
fo good to be kept, as thofe that are of a purple colour. Palladtus would have them
to be gathered while they are unripe, yet he would not have them too raw ; but in
any cafe they muft be very found, and without any worm, or bruife, or any oihcc
bleoudi. So alfo the fruit called

ZixAphum may bs preferved>

if ic be gathered with the boughs that it grows upon, and io>dcd or wrapt up in his
own leave?, and fo hung upon the beams of an houfe, as PaQadttH (facwcib. So

Medlars maybe kept long-,
if you gather them when they are but haif-ripe,and hang them up with their boughs
infomehouic. Beritim (hews,

How Pomegra»atet are to be gathered and laid up to laft.
You muft gather them, faith he, with a very chary hand, left if you touch tbcm
fomewhat roughly, they fhould be hurt or bruifed ; and that would be an occauon
of their putrefaction. Columella faith, that Pomegranates are to be gathered with
their milks, and the ftaik> to be put into an Elder-tree ; becaufe the Elder-tree is
fo full of pith, that it may eafily entertain the Pomegranate ftalks. The fame Au-
thor rcports-out of Mago the Carthaginian, that all fruits, which you would lay
upinftore, muft be gathered with their ftaiks upon themj yea, and if it may be
without the fpoil or hurt of the Tree, they mart be gathered with their bonghs
-too ; for this will be very helpful to caufe the fruit to laft the longer. Talladiu*
&kh, that Pomegranates may be preferred beft, if you gather them found, and lay
pitch upon their ftalks, and bang them up in due order: nay, they will keep fo
much the better, the longer the boughs are, which are pluckt cfT from the Tree
with them ?tt»y faith, that they are to be gathered with their boughs, and the
boughs to be Uuck into the Elder pith, andfoto be preferved. Cato thews, how
we may preferve

Myrtle twigs with their berries upon them.

They muft be taken from the Tree when the berries are fomewhat fowre, and fo
bound up with their leaves about them. Didjmus hath taught us, how we muft
gather

Crapes that they may loft long.

We muft take fpecial heed that every gripe be perfect and found ; and for this caufe
. we mull have a very fharp knife or hook, to cut of thofe grapes that are unfound
eafily and without any ftroke, even with one touch as it were. When you gather
your grapes, they muft be in their full ftrength, neither too raw, noryetpaft their
belUtvclinefs. Some cut oflf the branches together with the clutters 5 and when
they have fo done, they efpy out all the grapes that are either putrified, or dryed
away, or unripe, and pluck them off with a pair of nippers, left they ftiould infeft
their fellows \ and after this, they take the branches whereon the clutters grow,
,and that end which was cut, they dip into fcaldiog pitch, everyone byitfelf* Ci-
thers hold, that grapes muft be hanged up in fome high roof, where the air may
have full fcope at them ; but the grapes muft be none of thofe which grow toward
the tops of the branches, but they muft be the lower clufters. Palladius (iitb ; If
we would have grapes to laft, we muft fee that we gather fuch as are without ble-
mi(h; they muft not be too harfti and fowre, neither mnft they be over-ripe, butic
muft be a very clear gripe to the eye, and fomewhat foft to be felt, and yet it muft
have a reasonable tough skin. If there be any amoagft them that is bruifed, or hath
any other blemifh, we mull cut it way ; neither muft we fu^eramongft them any
one that h over hard,which the Sun hath not in fome fort overcome with his heat
After all this, we muft drench the cut ends of the ftalks in fcalding pitch, and fo
hang them up.

T

CHAP.

\%% Natural Magick. ©00^4*

Chap. VI.

In what ground thofefrutts {hould grow and be gathered >which we wculdlayup.

tt/E muft not amit to fpeak of another neceffary obfcrvation in this matter.
vv namely, in what ground, in whac air, under what Climate, it is beft thai
thofefruit>, which we fhould lay up, fhould grow and be gathered. Wliatfoever
fruits do grow ia moift and waterifh, in hollow and low grounds; as alfo thofe
which grow in fuch grounds as are much foiled and manured with fat muck ; they
are much fubjc& to putrefa&ion ; for, in as much as they grow with great ftore of
moifture and heat in them, they have the occafion and original of their own bane
within their own bofome. But in wilde fruits, and fuch as grow upon the tops of
mountains, in dry grounds, and fuch as are noc manured ac all, and fuch as the
Southern heat doth continually beat upon, it falleih out clean otherwife : for the
fruits that grow in fuch places, are for the moft part,dry,and very folide, not aboun-
ding cither with heat or moifture. Hefiodm in his book of Husbandry , never
makes any mention of mnck or foiling, and queftionlefs, he would never have o-
mitted fuch a neceffary part of Husbandry as this is, but that he faw the inconveni-
ence of it in this refpee't, that it makes the fruit more fubje& to putrefaction, and
many infirmities. Fruits that grow in wilde and flony ground?, where the winde
hath his full force, will prcferve themfelves without any skill and device pra&ifed
upon them: wherefore, if other fleights.be added, which are helpful to their pre-
fervation, they will furely laft much the lon°er. But let us fee whether Antiquity
hath made any mention of this matter* and firft let us hearken to Theophraftut ,
who (hews

In what ground there grow the beft Dates or Palms to be preferved [or fiore.

If youpreferve and lay up any Dates or Palms, faith he, you muft make choice of
thofe which grow in fandy grounds, as in that Country which is called Syria cava :
and there are in all that Country but three fandy places where they do grow, and
thefe are excellent good to be preferved ; thofe which grow in other places, are
not durable, but prefently wax rotten. Of all thofe Palms which Syria yeelds, k
is held by fome,that cone arc good to laft,but thofe only which grow in the Palnae-
valley, a place fo called there. But thofe which grow in ./Egypt, and Cyprus, and
elfewhere, they are all very foon purrifled. And Pliny reports out of the fame Au-
thor, that thofe Palms which grow in fait and fandy grounds, as in Judaea, and Cy-
renian Africa, may be preferved : but not thofe which grow in Cyprus , iEgypr,
Syria, and Seleucia of Affyria. The fame Theophraftns fpeaking of Beans,
mews

In what ground there grow the beft Beans to be preferved for ft ore.

One Country, faith he, differs from another, and one Climate differs alfo from ano-
ther,in refpe& of the fruits that grow in them, either to beg»odto lay up, or to
be fubjeft to putrefa&ion.And therefore the Beans that grow in Apollonia which is
neer to the Ionian Sea,are not fubje& at all to any worms or rottenneffe,fo that they
are beft of all other to be preferved- Ukcwife the Beans that grow about Cizicum
are very durable.

Chap. VII.

How fruits muft be (hut up and kept clofe that the air come not at them,

have fhewed before, that, if we would preferve fruit long, we muft keep
away both heat and moifture from them; both which qualities arc found in

the

the air. Wherefore we will firlt fet down the devices of Antiquity in this behalf
and then our own devices and experiments. And tint

How to keep Apples ctofg without putrifying.
We will begin with Ariftotle-> who faith, thatfruicsaretobekeptin bottles full of
air, that lb the extrinlecal air may be excluded ; for thus he fpeaks in his Problems.
Wbcnce Cometh it, that the fruits of Trees, andfLfli, and luch like, do laft with-
out putrcf ad ion, when they are fhut up in bottles full of air, or in other veflels
that are well covered, and clofed up on every fide ? It is becaufc all things are
wont to be corrupted when they are ftirred or removed, but when things axe filled,
they (tand unmoveable ? for it cannot be, that any thins* Should be moved, unlefs
there be fome vacant fpace to be moved in .• now thofe things which are fo (hut up,
are every way full, and therefore are prelcrved without corruption. As if he
{hould £ay ; the air which is To enclofed, cannot fofoon procure putrefaction , by
xeafon that it is not fo fubje& to the daily alterations of the circumftant air. Or,
if the fruit could fend forth rheir Heat and moiHure which is in them, yet it (hould
be kept in upon them by the fulnefs of the bottles. But let us fee what the Ma.
iters of Husbandry do teach concerning this matter. As for example

tH* t'* r'i drttJC'l £ OOS . V .Jrv'T uW-'* J» Oll'CTSbOC t.^*** ~-£C/t 3*<1j i/IOOTl

How to preferve Citrons do ft without pmrifying.

PaBadst* doth thus preferve them from the air. He (huts up every Citron in a feve-
ral veffei by it feif, and plaiters them up, and fets them ord rly in a fit place pre-
pared for that purpofe. Sotiom faith, that the Pome-Citron muft be very well plat-
Itered over with ftampt m )rter, that fo it may keep one whole year logethc^wkh*
out any harm or blcmifh. So have others caught us the way

How to k*tf -Apples {but Up cbfe.

Columella faith, that every feveral kind of Apples is to be placed in a feveral celt
by themfelves ; for when divers kinds arc (hut up in one and the fame cell, they
will not agree fo well together, but will foon put rifle : Bsc when you have dif-
pofrd of your Apples that they are fet in good order, then (hut up the lids of the
cc ff:r or cell upon them • and plaifter the lids over with lome, that hatb ftrav*
chopt in it, left the air get in. Palladia would have every apple placed by ic felf
in a feveral earthen vtflel, which muft be pitched within, and plailtered over with
morter, or elfe t hey may be lapt up in clay, and fo preferved. IP liny fait h, that the
cultom in his time was, to make choice of the goodlicft apples , and 10 plaifter
them over with morter or wax, that it may be like a cruftupon them: but, faith
he, thev mult be fully ripe firft ; for otherwife they will grow and wax bigger, and
fo break our of their homes. Others put every feveral Apple or Pear into a feveral
earthen veffcl, and befmear the veffels all over with pitch, and then put the veflTela
with the fruit in them, into a barrel or tub, andfo preferve them. Apuletm was
wont to preferve them in an earthen pot laid all about on the infide with wax.
Some preferve them by lapping them up in Rcits or Sea- weed, and fo (hutting them
up into earthen pitchers: but they mult be every one wrapt upfeverally by it felf,
and fo laid, that they may not touch each other j and befides, the pitchers mult be
very well andclofe covered. Columella prefcribes this courfe whereby

Quinces are to befnut up, that they may lafi,

■

They muft be wrapt up in Fig-leaves • and you muft take fome Potters white earth
and cut in Wine- Ices to it, to make morter of them , and with that morter be-
fm=«r the Quinces : then you mult puc them into fome new veifel^nd cover them
all over with tome dry plaiftering that they may not touch one another. <Pw/k-
dius puts them between two tile-fheards , and clofes them upi with Lome
round about j and then covers them over with dry pUiftering > and fo

T z laics

Natural Magic k. 'Boot^ 4,.

Hayes them up in a New pot or bafeo, that they may be kept afunder. Vemocrittts
doth firft cover them over with leaves, and then he makes morter of clay or of
fome Potters chalk with hair chopt into it, wherewith he beiinears the Quinces j
and when he hath dryed them in the Sun, helaycs them up: and whenfoever he
would ufc any of them, he breaks up their cafe, and there finds his Quinces in the
fame taking as they were, when he put them in. But TUny teacieth as very briefly,
that if we would keep Quinces long, we muft (hut them up fo clofe, that no air
may come at them. By the like means, you may prefervc

All things clofe exceeding wellj

'M*goy when he would preferve any fruit clofe, he covers them all over very careful-
ly with Potters chalk, and then dries it in the Sun ; and if there happen to be any
thap in the mould, he ftoppeth it up with lome, and fo when it is dcie, layes it
«p. Others take a new earthen pitcher, and ftrew it with the duft or (havings of
Poplar, or clfe of the Holm-tree ; and then they place the fruit in it, in fuch fore
that there lies fome of the duft betwixt every fruit: then they boord that fpace, and
snake a floor over that ftoary ; and having fo done, they ftrew the fecond ftoary with
the like duft, and there alfo difpofe of their fruit as in the other ftoary: then they
boord that fpace too , and make a third ftoary , and fo a fourth , and fo for-
ward till the pitcher be filled up : and when it is full, they lay a covering upon it,
and plaifter it over very carefully with thick lome. Others pu: their fruit into a bar-
rel, but they place them in fuch order, that the one may not touch the other ; and
ahen they clofe up the barrel again, as Palladia* reporteth. Africanm ceacheth a way

ttgs may be (but up to be preferred long,

[You muft take a green Gourd, and make in it certain cells or hollow places of re-
ceipt, for every feveral fig a feveral cell; Into ihcfecells yon muft put your fig?,
and wrap the gourd about with a fwathe of cloath or leather, and then hang up the
gourd in a dark place where neither fire nor fmoak may come at them : But yon
tnuft fee that the figs which you would thus preferve,, have their tails ar ftalks upon
fehem. Others take 1 cup of glaflc, or fome 01 her cup that you may fee thorough,
Jand fet it upon the figs with the oaouth downward,and flop up with wax every place
ground about, that no air may come within the cups mouth; and fo the figs are
preferved without any corruption. VaUdim rehcaifeth the very fame experiment
SDUt of the fame Author, Likewifc

Cervices may be pout up in barrels-,
and thereby be preferved a great while.You muft take Cervices prefently as they are
gathered, and make choice of thofe that are not bruifed nor blemifhed any way :
Thefe you muft put into a barrel, andftiutup the mouth af the barrel verv clofe,
and plaifter it over with morter. Orelfeycu may take clay morter, that is well
made, and beaten together, that it may be about the thicknefs of horey , and
drench yourCervifes in it, and then hang them up ifo you may preferve them found
awhile; and afterward you muft wafli them, that the morter which (ticks upon
them, may fall c£ So, the fruit

Ziz,iphum may be fhiit up in earthen veffets
to be long preferved, as TaBadtus fheweth. But they muft be gathered by hand,
and that not before they be ripe; and you mnft foot them up in long earthen vef-
fcls,and plaifter them over, and fo lay them up. He ftieweth ajfothat

Medlars j And the fruit Tuber may be Jhut up in pitchers, fo to be preferved.

You muft put your Medlars into pitchers, that are befmeared with pitch on the in-
fidc ; bat the pitchers wherein you put your Tubers, muft not only be pitched on
thcin-fidc, but alio daubed aver on the out-fide. So Di&yimu (he wetb, that

Myrtle-bcrrie-c

Of increaftng of Houfhold<~ fluff e> 125

Myrtle-berries may be very well kept
to lift lono, if you gather them when they are green, and put them into a vefTel,.
that is not pitched, and Co cover iccloie, and lay the n up. Others lay them up
w ith tails or ftalks upon them. Palladia fheweth, that

Klits may be long prefervsdy
if you (hot themupdofe in coffers ; but the coffers muft be made of Nut-trce6*
The lame Talltdinthzws, thac

Chefi-nuts maybe long preferred,
if you put them in wicker baskets, and plaifter up the baskets round aboit : but the
rods which the baskets be made of muft be Beechen-rods; and they mult be cna4c
up fo ciofc, that no air stay come at that fruit which is in them. Like wile

Rofes may be (hut up to beprefervedy
if you take green Barley bem* pluckt up by the roots, and put them into a barrel
that is not pitched, and lay Rofes in amongft it before they be blown: for by this
means you may keep them long. So alfo you may (hut up

Ltlliesit0 make them lafi a whole year.
You muft gather them with their boughs,as they grow,bcfore they be biown,and put
them into new earthen veffcls that were never pitched, and when you have cover-
ed the veffels, lay them up ; and fo (hill you have Lillies of a year old. But if you
have ufc for aay of rhemia the mean time, bring them forth into the Sun, and by
the heat thereof they will be opened and blown. Wc Will fliew alfo out of Didj*
mtU) how

[Crapes may be (hut tip to laU hkgj

Some take certain cafes that arc pitched ill within, aid when they have ftrewed
them with the daft or dry powder of the Pitch-tree, er the Firre-tree, or the black!
Poplar-tree, or elfe with the dry flower of Millet, then they put in their grapes ,
and fothey laft long : but they take their grapes prefently after the time of Vin-
tage, and make fpecial choice of thofe grapes that ire without any bruife or ble-
mifh, andtheyfliutup the mouth of the veffels very dole, and overlay them with
morter. Or elfe they may be drenched in clay-morter , that is Well beaten , and
fome what liquid, and then be hanged up, and fokept for a while, and afterward
when you would nfe them, wafhthem over, that the morter may fall off. Colftmel~
la iaith;you muft take the great Teat-grape,Or elfe the hard-skinned grape,or elfe the
fair purple-grape, from the Vine> and prefently pitch their ftalks with hard pitch:
then take a new earthen Vatt, and fill it with dry chaffc well fifted,that it be with-
out duft, and fo hangup your grapes upon it: then take another Var, and covet
therewith the former, grapes and all : and when you have laid the brims of both
vatts rogether, then daube them up with more that is made with chopped ftraw l
and when you have fo done, place them in a very dry loft * and cover them all over
with dry chaff e.

Wheat may be laid up clofe to be preferred,

by putting it into caves or pits of the earth, a« we have (hewed out of Varro ; for
the Cappadocians and Thracians put their Com into Caves and Dens ; the Spani-
ards put it into certain pits, and make fpecial provifion that the moilture and air
may not come at them ; except it be when they take our. any for their ufe; for if
the air do not breath upon it, it will be free from the mice a in U like v ermine :
and it is known, that Corn being thus laid up, harh been kept clean and lweet fifty
years together. Marcus Varro faith, that

Beans and Pulfe have been laid up in veffels^ and fo preferred fit a Ion? time i

n6 Natural Magick. cBoo^.

but they muft be oyle-veflcls., and they muft be covered ov r wiih zChzs.P!iny writes
the very fame experiment out of Varro \ that Beans and Puiie being laid up in oyle-
buis, and covered over with afhes, have laficd a great while; and being laid up
in fome hole of the earth, they have lafted an hundred and twenty years. So the

Pulfc called

JLintels^have been prcfervtd long,

as CohimclU (lie weth : for if you puc them into oyle-vcffcls, or elfe into falting-tubs,
chat they may be-full, and fo plaifterthem over with morter, whenfoever you take
them forth again for your ufe, you fha.ll find your Lintels fwect and good.

Chap. VIII.

How the tAncients^when they had put their frwt tnto certaiuveffehy and fo {hut them ftp

cl.fe, did put them alfo into fome other vejfels fuU of liquor*

HOwfoever the Ancients, by making up their veflels clofe, did fhut out and keep
away the air as being the Author of all putrefaction, fo chat it could not come
in to the fruit : yet they did not by this means keep away the air out of thole places
where the veflels were laid,but that as the circumftant air was changed,eithcr being
drfpofed to heat ,or cold, or drouth,or moifture,lo the air alfo that is within,muftneeds
be changed , and confequently, the fruit alfo mud be affected with the fame change.
Wherefore, for the avoiding of all inconveniences which this way might eniue,
after they had plaiftered their fruit-\ effels^nd fo made them up fall, they did drown
thefe veflels in divers and fnndry kinds of liquors And furcly not without great
reafon, as experience fhews. For I have oft-times oblerved it, being fenoufl ira-
ployed in thefe affairs, that if the air he uniform, and without alteration, the fruits
and flowers that have been fhut up in veflels of glals, have laHed long without any
putrefaction :but when once they felt any alteration in the air, prefently they began
to putrifie. For this caufe are thofe vtflels to be drowned in CWerny, or ditches,
or fome places underneath the ground, that fo the variable alterations of the air
may not be felt by the fruit. And, to defcend to experiments, we will firft
(hew,

How Quince-pears being font ftp clofe, may be drowned for their better prefcrvathu,
'An experiment which Democritus hath fet down. You muft put your Quince-pears
into a new eartben-veflel, and then cover it, and pitch it all over, and fo put it into
a but of wine ; but fo, that they may have (cope to fwim upon the top of the Wine :
for by this means fhail you keep your fruit frefh and good for a long time ; and
beiidcs, the w inc w herein they float, will have a very fragrant favour. Llkcwile

Apples being (hut up clofe, and then put into Cifierns, wiUlaft long,
As Palladttufhewcih. You muft put your apples, faith he, into earthen veffels, well
pitched and made up clofe : and when you have fo done, drown thofe uffels in a
Ciftern, or elfe in a pit. /7/*;putteth apples in earthen Bafons, and fo let^ them
fwim in wine j for, faith he, the wine by this means will yield a more odoriferous
i'mell. Apuleiu* faith. that Apples aretobe pminto anew pot, and the pot robe
put into a Hogs head of wine that there it may fwim, and play on the top of the
wine; for fo, the App'es will be preierved by the wine, and the wine will be the
better for the Appl :s. So

Figs being (hut up clofe, may be drowned for their better prefervation,
As Jfricanm affi meth. They take figs, faith he, that are nor very ripe, and put
them into anew earthen veflel ; but they gather them with their tails or ftalks up-
on them, and lay them up everv one in a feveral cell by it felf ; and when they
havefo done , they put the veflel into an Hogs-head of wine, and fo prelcive their
figs, I have alio proved it by experience, that

Teathft

Of increaftng Houfhold^ fluff e. nj

Peades being flow up tn wooden Cifiernsy have been well preferred by drowning,

A^ d I have proved ii aifoin oihcr kinds of Apples, that if they be four up in a
fir i veffel that is very well pitched on the inter fide, and fo drowned in the bot-
tom of a Cittern of water, andk ;pt down by fome weights within the water, that
it m v. not float, they may be preferved many raoncths without any putrefa&ion.
By a fleight not much unlike to this,

Pomegranates may be preferved in a Pipe or But that is half full of water
as PaUdiut fhiweth. You muft hang up your Pomegranates wuhin the But ; yet
fo, tha- they muit not touch the water j and the But muft be fhut up dole, that the
wi-d may not come in. And as fruit may be thus preferved, if the veffels be
drowned ia water or other liquor ; fo there are fome of opinion, that, if you bide
thofe veffels underneath the ground, you may by this means alfo efchew the danger
of the alterations that are in the air. Columella fheweth, thac

Cervifes being (hut up clofey and fo laid under ground, will thereby [aft the longer.
When you have gathered your Cervifes charily by hand, you muft put them into
veffels that are well pitched, and lay alfo pitched coverings upon them, and plai-
fler them over with morter : then make certain ditches or trenches about two foot
deep in fome drv place within doors ; and in them fo place your pitchers, that the
mouth may be downward: then throw in the earth upon them, and tread it in fome-
what hard. It is beft to make many trenches, that the veffels may ftand afunder,
not above one or two in a trench; for when you have ufe of them, if you would
take up any one of the veffels, none of the reft muftbeftirred; for if they be, the
Ceruies willfoon purrifie. Pliny reports the like out of Catox that Cervifes are
put into earthen veffels well pitched, the covering being plaiftered over with mor-
ter,and then put in certain ditches or pits about two foot deep ; the place being
fomewhatopen, and the veffels fet with the mouth downward. And PaUadim
Writes our of thofe two Authors, that Cervifes muft be gathered while they be fome-
wbat hard, and laid up even when they be°in to be ripc.they muft be put in earthen
pitchers, fo that the veffels be filled up to the top, and covered over with morter,
and laid in a ditch two foot deep, in a dry place where the Sun cometh; and the
mouths of the veffels mul> ftand downward, and the earth muft be trodden in upon
them. The fame Author wriceth that

Tetrs being(hur up in veffels, ani fo laid under the ground, will Uft the longer.
You muft take thofe pears which are hard both in skin, and in skin and fubftance s
Tbefe you muft lay upon *n heap ; and when they begin to wax foft, put them into
an earthen veffel which is well pitched, and lay a covering on it, and pi aifter it
over with morter. Then the veffel muft be buried in a fmali ditch , in fuch a place
a? the fun doth daily fhine upon. Others as foon as the pears are gathered , lay
them up with their ftalks upon them in pitcht veffels , and clofeupthe veffels
with morter or elfe with pitch ; and then lay them abroad upon the ground , co-
vering them al l over with fand. Ochers make fpecial choice of fuch pears as are ve-
ry found , fc mcwhac hard and green ; and thefe they Quit up into a pitcht veffel,
and then covr r it and fet the mouth of it downward , and bury ir in a little ditch
in fuch a place as the water runs round about it continually. In like manner alfo

Apples being (hut up clofe , may be hidden within the ground for their better prefer-
vation,

As PUny fheweth. You muft dig a trench in the ground about two foot <feep, and
lay fand in the bottom of ir , and there put in your apples ; then cover the pit firft
with an earthen lid, and then with earth thmwn upon it.Some put their apples in
earthen bafons , and then bury them. Others put them into a ditch that bath fand
call into the bottom of it , and cover it oncly with dry earth. The like device k is
whereby

Pome-

Natural Magick. iSoofol

Pomegranates are preserved in fmall Buts which have fand in them.
You muft fill a fmall But up to the middle with land , and then take your ponvra-
mtes , and put the ftalk of them every one into a feveral cace , or into the bou n
of 4ti Elder-tree ; and let them be fo placed afunder in the fand, that the ftuit may
ftand fame four fingers above the fand : but the veffel mull be fet within the "round
in tome open place. This alio may be done within doors, in a ditch two foot
deep. Others fill up the But half full of water, and hang the pomegranates within
the But , that they may not touch the water ; and fhut up the But dole that no air
may come in. Cato fheweth how

Filberds maybe preferred within the ground,
You muft take them while they be new, and put them into a pitcher, and fo lay
them in the ground ; and they will be as frefh when you take them forth, as when
you put them in. In like manner Palladia fheweth that

(fheftnuts may be preferred, ■

if youpuc them in new earthen veffels, and bury them in fome dry place within the
ground. He faith alfo that

Rqfes being (hut up t may be buried in the ground for their better prefer ration,
if they be laid up in a pot , and well dofed , and fo buried in fome open place. Buc
now we will fhew'

How all things that are fhut up, may be preferred for many years.

Fruits are to be laid up in vials of glafs, as we fhewed before : and when the pipe
or neck of the glafs is ftopt clofe up , then they are to be drowned in cifiern?, and
they will laft good for certain whole years. Likewife, flowers are to be clofed up
in a veffel that is fomewhat long, and the neck of it muft be ftopt up, as we fhewed
before, and then they muft be caft into the water: for by this means theyrmybe
kept frefh for a long time. I have alfo put new wine into an earthen veflel that
hath been glazed within, and have laid it in the water with a waight upon it to
keep it down ; and a year after, I found it in the fame tafte and goodnefs, as when I
put it into the veffel. By the like device as this is, we may preferve

'things that are fhut up, erenfor erer,
if we wrap them up in feme commixtion with other things, fo that the air may not
pierce them through ; buc efpecially, if the commixtion it felf be fuch , as is not fub-
jeft to putrefaction. I have made trial hereof in Amber ; firft reducing it to a con-
venient foftnefs , and then wrapping up in it that which I defired to preferve : For
whereas the Amber may be feen thorow , it doth therefore reprefent unto the eye
the perfect femblance of that which is within it, as if it were living,and fo fheweth
it to be found , and without corruption. After this manner I have lapped up Bees
andLyzards in Amber, which I have fhewed to many , and they have been per-
fwaded that they were the Bees and the Lyzards that Martial fpeaks of. We fee eve-
ry where that the hairs of beafts,and leaves, and fruits, being lapped up in this juice,
are kept for ever ■ the Amber doth eternize them. Martial fpeaks thus of the Bee,
A Bee doth lie hidden within the Amber, and yet ftie fhines in it too ; as though
fhewere even clofed up within her own honey : A worthy reward fhe hath there
for all her labours ; and, if fh? might make choice of her own death, it is likely fhe
would have defired to die in Amber. And the fame Author fpeaks thus of the Vi-
per, being caught as it were in the fame juice : The Viper comes gliding to the drop-
ping Pine-tree, and prrfenrly the Amber juice doth overflow her: and while fne
marvails at it , how fhe fhould be fo entangled with that liqour , upon t he fudden
it clnteth upon her , and waxeth ftiff with cold. Then let not Cleopatra boaft her
felf in her Princely Tomb , feeinq the Viper is interred in a Nobler Tomb then fhe.
But if youdefire to know how to make Aubcr foft, though there be divers ways

whereby

whereby this may be effected, yet let this way alofte content yoti, to caft it into hot
boiling wax that is fcummcd and clarified: for, by this means it will become fo
foft and pliant, that you may ealily fafhion it with yoar fingers , and make ic frama*
blc to any ufe. Onely you mult bee line that ic be very new.

Chap. IX.

How Fruits may be drenched in Honey, to mal^e them hft for a long time,

THe Antients finding by experience, that the (hutting up of fruits in veffels, and
the drenching of thofe vtfleis in water, was a notable prefervative agaiuft cor-
ruption , did thence proceed farther , and began to drench the fruits thcmfelves in
divers kinds of liqoars ; fuppofing that they might be the longer preserved, if they
were fowfed in honey, wine, vineger, brine, and fuch like , in as much as thefe li-
quors have an efpecial vertue againft putrefaction : For honey hath an excellent force
to preferve, not fruits onely, but alfo even the bodies of living creatures from being
putrefied, as we have elfewhere fhewed that Alexanders body , and the carkais of
the Htppocentaur were preferved in honey. Mcer water they did not ufe in this
cafe ; becaufe, that being moift in it felf , might feem rather to caufe putrefaction. But
of all other liquors, honey was molt in requett for this purpolc, they fuppofing it to
be a principal prelerver againft corruption. Columella faith

That Quinces may be preferved . in honey without putrefaction ;

We have nothing mors cerrain by experience, faith he, then that Quinces are well
preferved in honey. You mult take a new flagon that is very broad brimmed, and
put your Quuinces into it, fo that they may have icope within , that one may noc
bruife another j then when your poc is full to the neck, take fomc withy twigs, and
plat themover the poc* mourn, that they may keep down the Quinces fomewhat
clofe, leaft when they (hould fwell with liquor, they fhould float too high : then fill
up your v-ffel to the very brimmc wuh excellent good liquefi d honey , fo that the
Quinces may b" qaice drowned in ic. By this means , you (hall not onely preferve
the fruit very Well, buc alfo you (hail procure fuch a well relifhed liquor, that it will
be good to drink of. Buc in any cafe take heed, that your Quinces be through ripe
which you would thus preferve: for if they were gathered before they were ripe j
they will be fo hard ,that they cannot be eaten. And thi* is fuch an excellent way,
that though the worm have fcized upon the Quinces before they were gathered, yet
this will preferve them from being corrupted any farther: for fuch is the nature of
honey , that it will fupprefs any corruption, and not futfer ic to fpread abroad : for
which caufe it will preferve the dead carkafs of a man , for many years together,
withouc putrefaction. Palladia iaitb, that Quinces mutt be gathered when they
are ripe , and fo put into honey , whole as they are , and thereby they will be
long preferved. Pliny would have them firft to be fmeared Over with wax,
and then to be fowfed in honey. Apitiut faith, Quinces mult be gathered with
the r boughes and leaves , and they muft be without any blemifh , and fo put into
a veffel full of honey and new wine. The Quinces that were thus drefled , were
called Mslimela,thzt is to fay, Apples preferved in honey : as Martial witnefleth,
faying, Quinces fowfed in pure honey, that they have drunk thernfclves full, are cal-
led Melimela. Likewife Columella fheweth that

Other kjnd of Apples may be fo preferved,

Not onely the Melimela , but alfo the Pome-paradife , and che Seftian Apples, and
other fuch dainties may be preferved in honey i but becaufe they are made fweccer
by the honey , and fo lofe their own proper relifli which their nature and kind doth
afford , therefore he was wont to preferve them by another kind of pra&ife. PaHa-
dim faith, That

Pears may be preferved w Honey,

v if

i}0 Natural Magick. <BgoI{ ^

if a hey be i© laid up t herein, that one of them may not touch another. So Africa-
wjwreporcexh, That

Figgs may be long preferved in Honey ,

if they be fo difpofed and placed in it , that they neither touch each other, nor yet
the veffel wherein they be puc; and when you have fo placed them, you muft make
fait the lid of the veffel upon them, and there let them lie without troubling them.
And Pall*diHt reports the fame : Green Figs, faith he, may be preferved in Honey",
if you place them fo that they may not touch each other. Florentine alfo fhcwcth!
That '

Cherries may he preserved in Honey,

it you put them into a veflel that is ftrawed in the bottom with Savory, and fo caft
feme honey upon them ; but your honey muft be fomewhat fharpc. So likewife

Medlars may be preferved in Honey ,
tolaft a great while wichout rotting, as Palladia fheweth : but then they muft be
gathered before they be throughly ripe. Martial fhe weth alfo, 1 hat

Nuts may be preferved in Honey ,

to be green all the year long ; and he fpeaks it of his own trial and experience. You
muft take green Nuts, and pluck them out of their fhells, and fo let them be fowled
in honey : and the honey wherein they are fowfed, will become very mcdicinable,
infomuch that if you make a potion of it , it will be very helpful to cure the Arte*
ries, and the Jaws. T 'alladim faith, That

'Peaches may be preferved in Honey,

if you take out the ftone before you fowfe them j and befides that they will laft long;
this will alfo make them to be very well relifhed. He faith alfo that they may be
well preferved in tbe liquor Oxymel. To be brief, Columella faith plainly thac
there is no kind of fruit but may be well preferved in honey. But heprefcribes ic
for a general rule in this cafe , that every kind of fruit (hould be preferved in feveral
by it feff : for if you lay up divers kinds of fruits together , one of them will corrupt
and marrc the other. So alfo

Crapes may be preferued in Honey,

and ihey will laft long without any blemifta in them, if they be fo preferved, as D/-
dymus writetb. But we will nSew now,

What kinds of fruits are bejf preferred in Honey.

For, I have endeavoured my felf in this Pra&ife, hov* to krep f i nits wuhout putre-
faSion, aad for this caufe, I laid up all kinds of fruit ii in veffels of ghfs filled with
heney, that fo I might prove, which might be prefen ed longeft : and I found j,reac
difference among them , fome kinds lafting long and iVme bm a !?ir lewhiie. For,
the fruits that were by their own kind, full of moifture , <Jiu attaint the honev ; fo
that the honey being it felf attainted, was notp ffibiy able to nrefewe the fruit
from putrefaction. Grape?, Figgs, and Pcachc? are foon putrified by rcafon of their
moiiinefs ; Quinces, Apples, and Pears do laft longer uncorrupted ; but Nuts will
will laft green and found a whole year together.

CHAP,

Oftncreafmg Houjhold U fluj) re. 13 1

Chap. X.

How fruits ma) be long preferved in ordinary wine, or fodden wine, or new wine, er elfe in
wme- lees,

T He Ancients likewife perceiving , that wine Would keep all things, and that
grapes-ftones lighting into the wine as it was barrelled up, did continue whole
in the barrels for the fpace of a whole year ; thence they gathered, that thofe fruits
which were laid up in wine , would be well preferred from putrefaction. Neither
did they ftay there,but alfo proceeded to ule ibdden wine , new wine, vinegar, and
win:-lees, for that purpofe, becaufe all thefe have a fmatch of the fubftance of wine
it felf. But we confidering that there may be a very pure and durable liquour ex-
tracted out of the fubftance of wine (for wine, as it is of it felf , will fooner be cor-
rupted) have therefore ufed the help of that extraction, whereby to prefcrve things
found and good time out of mind. But to return to them, and fee down their ex-
amples. Talladim fheweth, That

Quinces may be preserved in wine*

For, if we lay them up in veffcls filled with very good wine, half with ordinary wine,
and half with new wine, we fliall by this means preferve Quinces a great while.
Others fowfe them in barrels of new wine onely, and foclofe them up ; whereby
they caufe the wine to yield a very fragrant fmell. So Democritttt makes choice? of
the faireft and foundeft quinces , and putteth them into barrels of new wine, and
thereby doth preferve his quinces and better his wine. So

tipples may be preserved floating in wine,
as the fame Author (heweth. You muft put fome few apples into a barrel of wine
that they may float up and down , and fo fhall yon alfo better the wine. Democrt-
ttu would have them to be put into earthen pots ; but ApnUim would have them
put into barrel?, and fo clofed up ; and thus, faith he, fhall you procure an admirable
iweetnefs and pleafantnefs in the wine. Others would have them put into a new
pot, and the pot to be drenched into a barrel of wine, fo that they may there fwim,
and then the barrel to be made up clofe ; for this will be beft both for the wine and
alfo for the apples. Likewife

Figgs may be long preferved in wine,

as Africanm fheweth. You muft make a new earthen por, not altogether round,
but rather fomewhat fquare,having a good foand bottom ; then you muft gather your
figs with their fprigs and ftalkes , and that before they be through ripe j then put
them frefhinto yourveflel, and place them fo that they may lie from each other
a pretty diftance ; and fo put them in a barrel full of wine, and there let them fwim •
but the barrel muft be very well clofed up^hat the air get not in : and until the wine
change and become fowrrTh, the figs will never change, but continue in the fame
eftate as when they were put in. Palladia doth report the very fame experiment
out of the very fame Author. Be ritim fheweth, That

mm ; i rftr> 'Vy.ioi 333 ^im y^ri: :zih mpr- ::s 7 sJjraS \ ■ ■ 1 az ! r>n* - -'*'■
Mulberries may be prefer ved in -wine:

But it muft be fuch wine as is made of Mulberries ; and the vffells wherein they arc
put, muft be made up very clofe. Likewife Pamphilim fheweth, Thac

Damojins m.ty be preferved in wine,

^ the put loto HogfreadR either of fweet wine, or elfe new wine, there to fwim
op and down , and the Hogfheads well covered. Palladia alfo teacheih, That the

Natural Magick. TZoof^^

Zfaiphftm may b e prefer ved in wine.
fo that it (hall not have any fcrewls or wrinkles : for, if it be frefti gathered, and fup-
nko1 wi:h drops of new wine, it will continue plumpe and full without any wrin-
kles. Dtdymtti fheweth

How Grapes may be preserved in wine,
You mull take a barrel that is half full of new wine , and therein hang up your
grapes in fuch fort, as the clufters may not touch each other, nor any of them touch
the wine: for by this means they will continue as found as they were upon the
Vine. Some do prefcrve them in wine that is alayed with water. Grapes thus
preferved in wine, have been in great requeft among the Ancients. Athen&tu makes
mention of them out of Eubulm in Agglutinate : you muft, faith he, minifter unto
him good ftore of grapes preferved in wine : And Pherecrates, among other things
that are to be eaten, makes mention of grapes that were taken out of wine. Cute
fheweth, That

Tears may be long preserved in fodden wine,

efpecially the Tarentine-pears , and the Mull-pears , and the Gourd-pears. Varro
faith, That the pears called A nciana, and Serpentina ate to be preferved in fedden
wine. Pliny faith, That the Tarentine-pears, and the Ancianaare lo preferved.
PaQadim faith, That they may be preferved either in fodden wine or elfe in new winej
but, faith he, The vcffels which they are put into , muft be filled up with that liquor
wherein they are to be preferved ; which very fame precept he learned out ofDemo*
critvu. Columella fheweth how to make this kind of fodden wine of that Iwcet wine
which is called Muftum. PaUadttu (heweth alfo, how that kind of

Peaches, which hath the hardeft ftone, may be preferved long in fodden wine,

You muft fill up the Navel of the Peach (or that place wherein the ftalk was faftned)
with a drop or two of fcalding pitch, fo that the wine may not get into the peach by
that paflage; and then (hut up the vcrTel very clofe, that the air may not get in.
Columella faith, That

Cervifes may be long preferved in new wine,

if you plat feme dry fennel above them, to keep them under, that ftill the liquor
may overflow them: but the coverings or lids of theveffels muft be well pitched,
and plaiftered over with morter , that the air may have no accefs unto them. Pliny
faith, That Cervifes arc to be preferved in fodden wine , by the judgement of Cato,
PaBaditu alfo faith, That Cervifes may be preferved long in fodden wine. Columella
fheweth

That Crapes may be preferved in new wine.

You muft take a barrel that is well pitched , and put into it a certain quantity of
new wine • then make a hurdle as it were , of good ftiff rods platted together, a lit-
tle above the liquor : then place upon thofe hurdles , certain new earthen vef-
fels, and therein fo difpofeyour grapes that they may" not touch each other; then
cover your vefTels and flop them up, after that, make another fuch a loft of hurdles,
and then another , and fo forward, as far as the greatnefs of the barrel will give you
leave \ and in every one of thofe rooms place your grapes , as in the firft : then take
the pitched cover of your barrel , and fmear it all over with good ftorc of new yvine,
and when you have laid it upon the barrel, make it up clofe, and lay afhes upon it.
Others make no more ado, but onely put their new wine into the barrel , and make
certain hurdks over the wine , and there hang their gtapes out of the reach of
the wine, and fo cover the barrel and flop it up. The fame Author likewife report-
ed, That

Damo-

Damojins may be long kept in new Wine,

About barvelt time, you rauft gather Damofins not being throughly ripe,nor yet too
green, (bu: they mutt be wildeDicnofins, fuch as are in colour like to the Onix-
ftcae) andyoumultdry thsm in fomeftudowy place, the third day after they were
gathered: then you mult mingle vineger with new Wine, or clfewi-h fodden
wine, in equal portions, andfo put your Damofins into it. Buttheywill be pre-
ferved the better, if you make your medley ot a certain quantity of vineger, blen-
ded with twice fo much water. Or clfe you may take the purple- coloured Damo-
fins, and lay them up in an earthen veffel well pitched, and then fill it either with
new, or elfe with fodden wine, fo that the whole fruit may lie under the liquor*
and then lay the covering upon the veffel, and plaifter it up. We may alfo pre*
fcrve

Cucumbers in the Lees of Wtne^

as the Quintiles are of opinion. Youmuft,fay they, put your Cucumbers into the
Lee:, of White- wine, before it be fowre , and fee that your veffel be top-full; for
by this means your Cucumbers will laft irefh and good a great while. Didymm
writes, that

Olives and Grapes may be kept together.

You muft take Grapes while they be freOi, and new, and whole, and lay them up
in a veffel amongft Olives, fo placed, that every Olive may Hand betwixt two
Grapes, and fo every Grape betwixt two Olives; and thus, the veffel being
well clofed up, they will preferve each other. Columella faith, that

Corneile, or Hamberry m*y be kept in Lees ;
and if it be well preferved fo, it will ferve to be ufed in the ftead of Olives. Ovid
declares this in the eighth book of his Metamorphofis. Columella (hews that

Grapes may be preferved fre(h and green in the Lees of wine.
You muft gather your grapes when they are of a reafonable ripenef?, and then lay
them upon certain hurdles, fo that one clutter may not touch the other : then bring
them within doors, and tuck away the dry, and withered, and rotten grapes with
a pair of tuckers: and when they have lyen a while cooling out of the Sun, take three
or four clutters according as the bignefs of your pot is, and put them into it amongft
the Lees j and let the lid be made up faft with pitch, that the liquor may not
break forth. Then you mud take a great many of Vine-ftalks, and fquecze or prefe
them well, with their grapes upon them : then lay the (talks and husks in the bot-
tom of a barrel, and therein place your pots that you have filled with Lees and
Grapes, and let their mouths (land downward, and let them (tand in diftancc each
from other, fo that you may ram in good (tore of Grape-kernels betwixt them:
and when you have filled the room with Grape- (tones (tuffc in hard about the pots ;
yon muft make a fecond room like the firft , and fill it up in the fame manner : like-
wife you muft make a third room and fo forward, till the barrel ^be thoroughly fil-
led even to the very brim, with pots, and Grape-ftones crammed infaft and thick
about them ; then Itraightway cover the barrel and make it up dofe, and lay afhes
upon it. But you mult look to ir, when you take forth any of the pots, thatyout
take out a whole row together : for the Grape-ftones being (tamped in thick toge-
ther muft not be ftirred ; if they be, they will become fowrifli very foon , and fo
they will marrc the grapes. The Quintiles fay, that

Cucumbers may be preferved in vinegen
and that very frefh and in their natural (trength, if you hang them up in a veffel
that hath feme vineger in it, that they may not touch the vineger, and then clofe up
the veffel faft, that the air may not pafs into it; for by this means you may have
green and new Cucumbers in the Winter-time. So all other fruits may be prefer-
ved

Natural Magick. *Booltfl

yedln vfaeger: but becaule vineger doth mar the tafte of them, therefore we will
not fpeak of fuch prefervings. But hereby wc have learned to prefcrve, time out;
of mind, x

All things with 4 'fit lied wine :

for wine is of it feif fubjeft to putrefa&ion many wayes : but when it is often di-
ftilled, that the quinteffence be extracted from it, this extraction is free from all
putreta&ion whatfoever : wherefore all things that are drenched in this kind of li-
quor, if the veflel be carefully clofed up, muft needs laft unputrified even for a
whole age, nay for all eternity. At Rome, I law a fifh that was drenched in the
water that had been drilled out of the Vine, and fhe was preierved five and
twenty years, as frefh as while flie was alive : and at Florence, I faw the like of
fourty years continuance: the veflel was made of glafs, and made up with the feal
of Her me r. And I make noqueftion, buc that all things that arc fowced in this
kind of liquor, will lift found and good for many ages. How many forts of things
I have preierved by this one means, it were too long here to rchcarfc.

Chap. XT.

That fruits may be very well prefervtd in falt-waters.

NExt after wine, falt-water is of fpecial ufe for preferving from putrefaction ;
for fuch things as have been drenched therein, have lafted long very found
and good. The Ancients faw that whatfoever was preferved in fait, was kept
thereby from pucrifying : wherefore, that they might prelerve fruits from corrupti-
on, they have ufed to drench them in falt-waters. Homer calls fait a divine thing,
becaufe it hath a fpecial vertueagainft putrefaction, and by it, bodies are preferved
to all eternity. Plato calls it the friend of God,becaufe no facrifices were welcome
to him, without fait. Flntar\^ faith that the Antients were wont to call it a divine
influence, becaufe the bodies of creatures that werefeafoned with fait from abo.e,
were thereby acquitted from corruption. Salt binds, and dries, and knits together,
and doth priviledge bodies from putrefaction, that in their own nature muft needs
putrifie: as the TEgyptianscuftoroemanifeftly fheweth, who were wont to feafon
their dead bodies with fait, as Herodotus writeth. But let us come to examples, Be-
ritifu faith, that

Pomegranates are preferved in falt-wattrs.

You mud take fea- water, or elfe brine, and make it boil, and fo put \ o^r Pome-
granates into it ; and afterward when they are thorough cold, dry them, Nttft*
them npinthe Sun j and whenfoever you would ufe them, yr-nmnft fteep ttlerfffii
frefh water two dayes before. Columella rehearfes the opinion of acerain ptftftt
ginian touching this matter. Mago would have, faith he, that Sea-warer fhould be
made very hot, and Pomegranates being tied together with thread or broom-twigs,
to be drenched in it till they change their colour, and rhen to be taktn forth and
dried in the Sun for three dayes, and afterward to be hanged up: and when you
would ufe them, vou mult fteeptherrtin frefli and fweet water for the fpace of four
and twenty hours before^ and fo they will be fit fop your ufe. 'Pliny alio reports
out of the fame Anchor, that Pomegranates are firft to be hardened in hot Sea-
water, and then to be dried in the Sun three dayes, and fo to be hung up, that the
evening dew come not at them ; and when you would ufe them, to fteep them firft in
frefh- water. Palladia writes the fame out of PUnj • and he Iheweth alio, that

Damopnsmay be preferved in fait waters.
They muft be frefli gathered, and then drenched either in brine, or elfe in fea-
waterlctldin°hot, and then taken forth, and dried eitherin the Sun, orelfeina
warm Overt. Columella would have them drenched in new wine, fodden wine,and
vincger; but he gives a fpecial charg« alio to caft fomefak amoogft them, left the

worm

Of itrcreafing of Houfhold- fluff e. 135-

worm or any other hurtfal vcrmine do grow in them. PaUiim likewife fheWeth,
thai

Pears trill lajt long in falt-water i

firft the water is to be boiled, and when it begins to rife in furges, you muft skirri
it ; and after ic is cold , put into it your Pears which you would preferve : then af-
ter a while take them forth and put them up in a pitcher,and fo make up the mouth
of it clofc, and by this means they Will be well preferved. Others let them lie one
whole day and night in cold falt-water, and afterward fteep them two dayes in
frefh-wat-r, and then drench them in new wine or in fodden wine, or in fweec
wine to be prelerved. Others put them in a new earthen pitcher, rilled with new"
wine, having a little fait in it, and fo cover the veffd clofe to preferve thcm0
Likewife

Cfttcdlars maybe preferved in falt-water i

They muft be gathered when they are but half ripe, with their ftalks upon them,and
fteeped in fait- water for five dayes, and afterward more falt-watcfc poured in upon
them) that they may fwim in it. Did/mm fhewcth alfo, that

<j rapes may be preserved long in falt-water.
You muft take fome fea-water,and make it hot j or, if you cannot come at that, take
fome brine, and put wine amongft it, and therein drench your duffers of grapes^
and then lay them amonglt Barley ftraw- Some do boil the afhes of a Pig-tree, or
of a Vine, in water, and drench their duffer.; therein ; and then take them out to
be cooled, and fo lay them in Barley ftraw. The grape will laft a whole year toge-
ther, if you gather them before they be thorough ripe, and drench them in hot wa-
ter that hath Allome boiled in it, and then draw them forth again* The Autients
were wont

To put (alt to Winey to make it lafi the longer ,

isCW#wf#ifheweth. They took new wine, and boiled it till the third -part was
wafted away ; then they put it into veffels, there to preferve it for their ufe the year
following: they put a pinte and a half of this liquor thus boiled, into nine gallons
of new wine unboiled ; and after two dayes, when thefe liquors are incorporated
together , they wax hot, and begin to fpurge ; then they caff into them half an ounce
of fait beaten fraa.ll, and that made the wine laft till the next year* Theopbrafitu and
Tliny write, that

7he fruits of thofe Palm-trees which grow in fait places^ art fittefi td he preferred ;
as thofe which grow in Judaea, and Cyrenian Africk, becaufe thofe Countries efpeci-
ally do afford fait and fan dy grounds: for fait is a great nourifherof thefe kinds of
fruits, and they are preserved long, even by their own faltneffe ; fo that the faltef
the places are where they grow, the better will the fruit be prefcrved. So likewife
that kind of Pulfe which is called

deer, is preferved by its own faltnefs,
without any other drefiing ; for the nature thereof is, to have a faltifh juice with-
in it ; whereby it cometh to pafs that whereas all other Pulfe are fubjeft to corrup-
tion, and have fome vcrmine or other breeding in them, onely this kind doth not
engender any at all, becaufe of the bitter and fharp faltifh juice that is in it, as
Tbeophrafinsmk*\h* Dtdymm likewife writeth,thac

Beans wiUlafi long in falt-water : <
*or,if they be fowced in fca- water, tbey will continue long without anyblemifh,
Tliny alfo flicwetb, that

Carlickjnay be preferved in {alt-w.iter\
[; for

i$6 Natural Magick. IZoQfa.

for if you would have Gtrlickor Onions to laft long) youmuft dip the heads there*
ofin warm falt-watcr ; fo will they be of longer continuance, and of a better
taftc. So

Cucumber: are freferved in brine-,

as the Quintiles affirm j for if you prefcrve either Gourds or Cucumbers in brine,
they will laft long. So

tipples and Myrtles may be preferved,

by lapping them up in Sea-weed one by one, fo that they may be covered all over
with it, and not touch one another, as ^/>«/*/jw fheweth. Ifyou have no Sea-weed,
then you muft lay them updofe in Coffers. Artftotle is of opinion, that the fruus
of the Myrtle-tree need not to be lapped up in Sea- weed, thereby to keep them
from filling off from the Tree, becaufethey will flick on of themfelves rill they be
thoroughly ripe ; but the blades of them are preferved by wrapping Sea- weed a-
bout them : and the vapour of the Sea- weed thus wrapped about the blades, will
keep the juice oC the fruit from being changed to any further maturity, and caufe
ic to continue long at one ftay. and this is by reafon of the faltncfs of the Sea-
weed, whereby it doth intercept and dry np that moifture which fhould be derived
into the fruit, to ripen ic. We may learn alio to prefcrve

Olives in brine, to have them oood a year after.
Marcus Catod ith, that thofe kinds of Olives which are called Orchhes, may be
well preferved, if they be laid up in brine while they arc green j or elfe, if they be
powned with Miftick. Columella faith, that the Olives which are called Olenites,
and thofe which are called Panfae, and the lictle round Olive called Radiolus, are
to be knocked and beaten, and fo cart into brine, and then to be taken out of the
brine and fqueezed, and fo calf into a veffel together with the blanched leeds of
Maftick and Fennel ; then take a good quantity of new wine, and half fo much
ftrong brine or pickle, and put it into the veffel, and fo thefruic will be preferved.
Or elfe, you may caft your Oiives whole into a veffel, and put in firong brine a-
mongft them till the veffel be brim-full, and fo take them out for your ufes when oc-
cafion fcrvetb. There are a certain kind of black Olives, called alfo Orchites,which
Cate faith, are thus to be preferved. When they be dry, caft them into fait, and there
let them lie for the fpace of two dayes ; afterward take them forth and (hike off
the fait, and fet them in the Sun two dayes together, and fo they will be preferved.
UMarcHi Varro reports the very fame experiment out of Cato. Columella faith ; while
Olives be yet black and unripe, you mult tuck them off the Tree with your hand
in a fair Sun fhiningday ; and cull out the found ones from thofe that have any ble-
mtfh ; and into every peck and and an half of Olives, put a quart and femewhae
more of whole falc ; then put them into wicker baskets , and there let them lie in
fait thirty dayes together, that the Lees or dregs may be ftill dropping fcrth : after-
ward put them into lome trey or fuch like veffel that you may wipe away the falc
with a fpunge • and when you have done fo, barrel them up into a Hogs-head full of
new wine or elfe of foddenwine, and by this means they will be Ion gpreferved.
cDid]mu* tcacheth to make cendite or preferved Olives on this manner. When O-
lives are almoft ripe, youmuft gather them with their fialks and all : then wsfh or
fteep them a whole day in cold water, and aftetward lay them a drying upon wicker
Lattifes, handling them very gently ; then put them in the bottom of a veflel, and
cait good ftore of fait amongft them : and into five pecks of Olives, ycu mui put
in four gallons and two quarts of brine, and two pints and a half of vireger : And
when you have filled up the veffel, (hake them together, that the liquor may fwim
on the pot. Columella, Palladium and divers others do caft the Olive1; into Sea-water,
and there fteep them feven dayes together, and when they have taken them forth,
they condire them with brine, and fo pucthtmup intofome other veffel.

t HAP

Ofincreaftng Houjbold ji ujfe*

Chap. XII.

That things may be fpeciaUy well preferved in Oyl and Lees of 0/1.

OY1, and efpecially Lees of Oyl, do excellently conferve things, defending theoi
both from the injuries of the Air and of Animals. Cato doth in ftiort enume-
rate the faculties of Lees of Oyl , he fuba£ts the Barn-flores with Lees of Oyl , that
Mice may not cat his Corn. That alfo

He may preferve his Grain in hu Garner,

be dawbes the Pavement and Walls thereof with clay , confe&ed with Lees of Oyh
That alfo

Moths may not eat his clothes^
he be fprinkles them with Lees of Oyl : as alfo that

SeedyCorn, lying in the fields way be kept from erofion by Animals,

, i

if it be fteeped in Oyl lees , as alio Whetftones, Shoes, Brazen-veffcls from raft, all
Woodden-houfhold-ftuff, Pottei's-vcffels and the like. The fame Cato alfo ftitb,

7 hat Myrtle branches may be prejertted with their Merries ony in Lees of Oyl,

Bind thefe or any of the like Nature into bundles, put them into a veffel of Oyl-lecs,
fo that the 0;4 cover them, then cover the veffel. Didymtu faith,

That rofes may be kept in Oyl- lees

frcfii and vigorous , if they be covered over with this liquor.

If you would preferve Figtree- branches with their fruits in Oyl-lees^

bundle them up wich their leaves and all , and put them in a veffel of Oyl-lees, as
We faid of Myrtle ; but if you would keep dry Figs from corruption) lay them up in
a Potters veffel wet with Lees of Oyl decoded.

Olives maybe preferved in Oyl}

for when they have loft their colour they may be gathered with their ftalks prefer^
ved in Oyl , and a year after they will reprefent their green colour ; and if you be-
fprinkle them with common fait they will pafg for new ones.

: fnxiiahziti vat nyib ?i v ioi t*lduioq it tcarlj ishricr w ifhtucui tt3f!:o r:.f :•

Chap. XIII.

How Apples may belong conferved in Sawdttfi with leafs and Chaff or jiraw.

•T* He Ancients have invested many Trees, whofe fruits may be long preferved w
X their own faw duft becaufe of its drynefs. Now every fruit is beft kept in its
own leaves duft, and the like, as we have faid of Olives which are beft kept in Oyl*
Grapes m wine, &c.

OrengesmaybekeptinCcdar-d«Jr.
As PaBadiw afferts, who avers that many have experienced iryiri the likeniaimer;

Quinces may be long kept in duff,

becaufe tsVemocrittuivets the drynefs of the duft preferves them from putrefa&ion,
they may be alfo kept long in Wooll, fine Tow, or the like in Chefts.

X The

13$ Natural Magick. cBool[ 4,.

The fruits of the Fir-tree may he long kept in dnfl.
Many diffufe the faw-duft of the Poplar, or Fir-tree , amongft their fruits for their
prefervation. Apulcia faith,You may lay them involved in fine Tow into a vimine-
ons basket, and they will keep.

Pomegranates may be kept from par ef aft ion in Oal^ dttft.
Columella would have the dud firft ftceped in vinegar, and then they laid in it. Ma-
go would have us firft drew a new potters veflel with theduft, then lay in the ap-
ples, then ftrew another layer of dull, and another of apples , till the veflel be full,
which we mull (hut and dawb clofe up. Beritia would have the dud firft infufed in
vinegar.

Grapes may be kept in dufi.

Some keep green Grapes in dry poplar , or firre-duft. Didyma would have them
repofed in boxes overlaid with pitch , in the dry duft of the pitch or black
poplar-tree, fome prefcrve fruits in chaff, which by its innate frigidity , either
keeps the frofty rigor unmelted , or by its genuine drynefs keeps all things from pu-
critude ; or by being void of all qualities keeps fruits in their proper quality. And
firft

Orenges may be kept in Chaffs
As Palladia avers, or in fmall ftraw. And the fame faith, That

Quinces may be preferred in Chaff,
As alfo in fmall draw , as Pliny attefts, who aflerts alfo, That

apples may be kept in Chaffy
or ftraw, they being laid upon and in ir. Palladia faith, That

Pears will keep long in Chaff, and Medlars a/fi,

■53 ^ssI-I^O 1 ) v; * rsi ttwtjj jncfhflfi , Hi h tt »3y*»! jfotfi rfoiw cro ftiS&9!baft<J
if they be gathered on a clear day , half covered with chaff, and not again touched
PaUadta lakh, That

Pomegranates may be kept in Chaffy

if they be not moved , or touched after their repofure.

Grapes may be kept in C^ff*
Theclufters fhouldbe feverally laid along the pavement , fo that they touch not
each other, with lnpin-ftraw under them if poffible , for it is dryer and har deft, and
an enemy to Mice* but if not then Bean-ftraw, or fuch pulfe : but if none of thefe,
then dry hay cut final] . Palladia faith, That

N/tt swill keep in fir aw y
if Almonds cannot be eafily excoriated , cover them with chaff and ftraw, and you
mayef&#it, Sotion avers, That

. / ri . :.. 01.: f FID ;o IAS* ••v*d aw Z% f.-\-.n: . -s t%i:0 r»**3

Onyons may be kept from pmrefaBion in Barky-flraw,
Firft put them into hot-water, dry them in the Sun, that done, lay them fo in
ftraw that they touch not -each other. Palladia faith, That

Chefnuts may be preferved

in ftnaU Barley- ftriyfy or in their own leafs : As alfo

Quinces in Fig-leaves,

* Dew

3 Of increaftng Moufhold>ftuffe*

i:

VtmocrituswoMd have them involved in leaves , aid dawbed up with cl*yri *P<ttta-
dim faith, Apples may be kept from putretude in fig-leaves, who alfo avers,

That Orenges may be prefervedj
in their own leaves , if they be laid feverally, He alfo faith/

That Apples may be kept long in nut- leaves.

And Apnleitts faith, Their colour , odour, and grace • will be hereby prefervedj
and that beft if they be layed in frefh, not falling leaves : As alfo

That pears may be kept well tn wallnut-leaves,
Democrittu faith, The leaves muft be dry > and the pears will be green at a years endi
Pliny faith,

Figs may be kept in the leaves ofVervine without putretude,

PalUdhu would have them put in an Oven, and whil'ft hot impofed in their own
kites and reebnded in a pot. Columella would have dry Figs caft into a pitched
veftel with dry hay in it and upon them. We may alfo

Preferve (^berries in the leaves of Winter- favory,
if we firft caft the leaves, then the Cherries into a veffel , and fo by courfe , or if we
after thciamc manner lay Cherries in Reeds- leaves : thus alfo

May Jujubeesbe kept in their own leave /,
or effe they may be cat of with their boughs and fufpended. Thus alfo

May the Myrtle and its Berries be preferved,
cither in a dofe veffel, or in Lees of Oyl. Thus alfo may I j

Quince-pears be long kept in their own leaves, and Tfjfts in their leaves, but the leaves muft

be dry, Wheat may be kept in herbs,
Tarentinus would have it impofed Upon dry Wormwood and Semper-vive ; but dry
Qjiince leaves and fmall fand are better , which muft be layed in layers among the
Grain. It is beft to cover the flore with Coniza, add after ten meafures of Grain,
to lay another layer of Coniza till all be depofed j for thus the whole will not be
onely free from putretude for many years, but keep its due weight*

Barley may be kept fafe in dry Bay-leaves,
Dr^Grafs with Mint mixed. with Bran, preferve Barley fpecial well. Some bray
cummin and fait together , and make them into dry Mattes for the prefer vadon of
Barley.

Chap. XIV.
How fruits may be mixed with many thtngsfor their better prefervttt'en.

ANd now that we may not further protract our fptech , we (hall from ancient
Examples fhew how fruits by immerfion into feveral things, may be long kept
from putretude : and firft

Orenges in Barley putrefie not.

But if yon lay them on hot Barky-bread, they putrefie quickly. PaUadius faith,

That Quinces laid in Millet- feed) endure long,
for he thinks that Millet-feed corrupts not in many years, and fo what is repo-
fedin it cannot fpeedily putrefie. Democrittu faith, Barley is better, being dry *
boc always provided that theyl>e not laid near tedder and fugacious fruits*

X z fot

E # Natural Magick. 2?w^ ^

for they will vitiate them by their acidfapour, and putrefie grapes if they be neat
them.

apples may be alfo kept in the fame feed,

As PlinyUot mind. But Apttleins faith a heap of Barley is better. Butyoumuft
always mind to repofe each kind in its proper continent and place, becaufe if di-
vers kinds be occluded together, they vitiate fooner : wherefore the wine that is ex-
prcfledout of feveral kinds of grapes, is not fo fiim as the fimple and fincere.

,JU*<*f» Mat

Tears will keep amongfl corn,
For as Palladim faith, The Siccity thereof is notably prefervativc.

Mnjhrooms may be k£pt t» filtllet-Jeed.
The Vefuvians alfo keep them in dry fand , till new ones come.

Pomegranates may be kspt lay in Wheat,

if they be firft dipped into hot waters , then reconded in Wheat , till they become
rugous. Varro and Cats wonld have them put in a heap of fand for preservation..
T>ydimut faith,

'That Grapes may be kept well and long,

lx 30 tsn£rc j oifcns , Lihv a omi asii .a'O nth mx'-:,;. -zt\ arii {'/>:_» HiBawli
if they be fufpended in a Garner , for the duft that riles up of the corn when moved,
caufes long duration in grapes.

How Corn may be long pTeferved, ( alls 10

Tarentiniu faith, The afliesef Oaks ; others dry Beat** dung, fhrwed on corn pre-
ferve it j but fmall fand fu ja&ed with Lees of Oyl is better, for this corrupts all ver-
mine and keeps the corn more denfe and folid. Perfrigerated Argil is beli of all, for
it will keep corn thirty or forty years from corruption, you may let it through a
ftrait feive when you ufe it.

Tulfe will keep long,
if they be fprinkled with vinegar mixed with the juice of Lafer.

r.. rcsauw 3%©rfw ?aIi inn/ i • L)^.o 'pr> jgi • isitfoO toiivai ' <ntys. oj

Chap. XV.

How other things may be pre ferved from putrefaBiont

IK^Efhallhere recite what other things, though vile, maybe preferved, andfo
make way for further inquificions.

Quick: plverwillpreferve all things from ptttretude.
As fruits and the like , for we have often put fruits into a fit veflel , and. caft quick-
filvcr upon them, and fo preferved them long and well.

Flefh hanged on a Brafen-xail will keep long,

For Brafs is foftyptical and exiccative, that the fiefli it panes thorow putrefies
nor. . ,j Widl Jr\

How a dead Carcafe may be preferved*

Firft let the fide of the Body be opened, and the Carcafe exenterated ; let the Skull
be opened and the brains taken out , let the papills be fubftraaed , as alfo the privi-
ties with the pith of the Back-bone , then hang up the Body by the feet for three or
four hours, thenwafhh with a fpung dipped in vinegar zvda^na vita , then let it
dry, which done, ftrew it with nnqnenched Lime, Alome and Salt; let it bang
fo two days in the fmoak of Myrrhe , Bay , Rofemary , and Cyrre's in a dry
and openptoce. Then make a mixture of nnquenched Lime five pound, of burnt

Alcme

Of increaftng of Houfhold-flufe. i^t

Alomc one pound, good Salt two pound , of Aloes and Myrrhe half a pound > of
Aloes- wood half a pound , of the Oyl of Spicknard three onces , of the powder of
Rofemary-flowers five, of burnt Green-brafs and Calcanthum two , of the ben he-
riick four, of theduftof Cyprefs half a pound , of dryed Saffron one once, of the
feeds of Coloquintida three and a half , of Antimony beaten to powder one and
an half, of the afhes of Wine-lees five and a half, of Musk half a dragm, of Amber
two. Let all be diligently brayed and mixed together , and ftrewed upon the Body
which muft be for three days together ftrongly rubbed , in an open and dry place*
This alfo we admonifh, that in fat Bodies the fat of the Abdomen, Buttocks, Hips,
Mufcles of the Leggs, thighs ; and all other places muft be firft abttra&ed.

Things may be alfo preferred by Balfom.
But feeing we can compafs no true Balfom 5 or if there be any, it is exceeding deaf
we are glad to make artificial Balfoms , as we Hull fhew in due place*

Chap. XVI.
How divers forts of Bread may be made*

IX^E have fpoken of preferving fruits and other things: It remains to dhew how
wemayufe thofe we have kept. Amongft thetett, we ftull teach you con-
cerning thofe things that are moft neceffary fordaylyufe, as for many kinds of
Bread, Wine, Vinegar, andOyls; that not onelythe Houfholder may provide
for his family with fmall coft : but when provifion is dear , he may provide for him-
feif with imail pains in Mountains and Defarts , of all thofe things almoft we have
fpoken of. But we will begin with Bread , and fee what our fore-fathets ufed in
cafe of neceflity. I fliall let pafs thofe common things , as Spilt, and Bean-corn ,
Amel-corn, Typh-wheat, Panick, Sefamum j being all well known. But firft

To make Bread of Wall-nuts^

T)iof cor ides faith there is a kind of Thiftle commonly found in the waters , that one*
ly in Rivers brings forth a certain feed as big as a Chef-nut, with three points, mem-
branous, full of white pith , that taftes like Chef-ruts j they call them water- chef-
nuts vulgarly , and the Inhabitants ufe them in meats , as they do Chef-nuts. Pil-
grims make Chapelets of them. The Thracians that dwell by the River Strimon,
fat their horfes with this Thiftle when it is green , and of the fame feed they make
Bread to cat. Moreover, in places where they grow amongft us , the Inhabitants
when provifion is dear make Bread of them • as at Ferrara they do of Chef-uuts,
and the Brutii roft them in the embers and eat them for juncates. Almoft in the fame
manner.

To make Bread of the Lote trie.

Theophrafitu teacheth ir. The Lote-tree grows in plain ground, where the Coun-
tries are overflowed with water. The fruit is like a Bean naturally , but lefs and
more flender. That which grows on the head comes forth promifcuoufly, as Beans
do many and very thick together : When the Sun fets, it cfofeth, and opens when he
rifeth , and fprings up above the water. The head is as great as a Poppy-head,
where it grows in Euphrates. The Egyptians lay thofe heads on heaps to putrefie ;
and when the fliclls are putrefied , they wafh them in a River , and part the fruit
from them, and dry it, and break it and make bread of it , and eat it. PHtty, There
is alfo bread made of the feed of it, like to Millet feed, in Egypt by the Shepherds,
and rhey knead it with water efpecially, or with milk. They fay that nothing is
more wholefom then that bread, or lighter whilfl it is hot, but cold it is harder to
divert and becomes heavy. It is certain, that thofe who live upon that are never
troubled with Dyfenteries, Tenafmus,or any difcafes of the belly. And therefore ic
is one of their remedies. For it was of old a cuftom

Te

Natural Mag i ex. ©00^4..

To make bread of Dates,

which Pliny writes of, Dates that arc very dry cf Thebes and Arabia, that are dea-
der and very lean, with a continual vapour they are terrified , and are covered ra^
ther with a Shel then a Skin. In Ethiopia it is crumbled (fo great is the draught)
and like meal it is made into bread.

Bread of the Mulberrj-figtree,

In Caria and Rhodes there is a great Fig of Egypt, or increafe of the Sycamore-tree,
and in the neighbouring places where there is little wheat , the people for want of
cornufe it for bread, and for all bread corn. So great and continual plenty is there
of that Apple, and abundance of bread is made of it pleafingto the ftomach ; but it
affords but little nutriment , and we might make the fame if we would. We find it
in Writers of husbandry,

How we may make bread without leaven,

Out oi'Didymm fome adde Nitre , for Nitre makes bread more crumbly , as it doth
flefh alfo. Some the day before they make their bread, call Grapes into the water,
and the next day when they will make their bread they take them away , for they
fwim above the water , and they prefs them out , and ufe the moifture preffed forth
for leaven , and fo they make their bread more pleafing. If you would have leaven
laft you all the year, when the new wine hath boiled in the vefTels, Skim off the froth
that boils on the top,and mingle with it Millet-meal,and work it well together, and
make morfels of it, which dry in the Sun , and lay up in a moift place j and you may
take a fufficient quantity and ufe it for leaven.

Chap. XVIt.

Divers forts of Bread made of Roots and fruits,

NOw We (hall proceed to other kinds of bread , found out in our days , that are
nofmall profit to us when corn is dear.

How to make bread of the Roots ofCttckowpixt,

the root of Wake-Robin , when it is not too acrimonious is eaten and defired
in meat?. Diofcorides faith, The decoSion was drank , as not _ being over
fharp. Galen, That it was eaten as Rape-roots, and in fome Countries k grows
more corroding. To prepare it rightly , pour out the water of the firft boyling, and
prcfently caft it into other hot water. In Cyrene thofe Roots areotherwife then
amongft us, for there it is no Phyfical root, and is not acrimonious at all , fo that
it is more profitable then a Rape-root. Alfo our forefathers , when Corn was dear
ufed this Root in meats with great profit. Cafarde bellocivili, Alio there is a kind
of Root, found by them that were mxh Valerius, which is called Chara, which
mingled with milk releived a Souldier that was hungry, and it was made up like
to bread. There wa* great plenty of this Root , and of it bread was oij de , when
thofe of Pompey his fide objected to our Souldiers that they wanred food, they would
commonly throw thefe at them, that they might deceive their expectation. And
a little after the Army ufed this and were very healthful. And in Diofcorides in the
falfe names of fimples , Cuckow-pint was of old called Chara, with us it is fo acri-
monious that we fcarce can endure to touch it with our tongues. But I fhall open
thereafon how excellent bread may be made of it, and if I may fay fo , better then
Wheat-bread.The great Roots are made clean,and they are cut into fmall thin plates,
for the thinner they are cut, the fooner will they become pleafant , and they
muft boil in veflels of hot water, until you perceive the water grow ftiarp
and the Roots fomewhat fwect • pour out the former water , and pcur in fre(h,

Of increafing of Hou/hold-fluffe. 14^

then boil them again, till the water become fweet , and the root when it is chewed
hath no acrimony left. Then take them out of the water , and put them upon lin-
nen cloths, extended and hanging up until they be dry, then grind thera in hand-
mils and the meal will be exceeding white, which by it felf a with a third part of
wheat-meal added to it, will make mod pure bread and well tailed: There are
other ways to make it fooner ; when you hive obtained this art,you will be exceed-
ing glad I am very certain of it. For with great pleafurc

Bread of t/ffpfodils U eaten.
This is fo fruitful of round-heads with us, that no Plant Jiath more, for oftimes 8d
heads will be heaped together. Moreover, Mountains and Sca-fhores are full of
them , that it may be truly thought to be made for mans meat. ?/*»;, The Daffo-
dil is eaten with the feed and head terrified. But this rotted in the embers as Hefi~
«d affirrris , is eaten with oyle alfo braied with figs , it is eaten with great pleafurc.
Thefe Round-heads are like to Navews of moderate bignefs. So faith Galen alfo.
But with us they are fo unpleafant , and acrimonious in taft , that a man cannot eat
them j and Sowcs digging them up with their fnowts , will hardly feed on theoi*
no not when we want corn can we eat this in our greateft hunger, it was the poor
fair of frugal antiquity .But by boiling,the(harpnefs of it becomes more mild,and the
heat of it more tolerable , as we faid of C*c£?w-pint. It will be fufficient to fatif-
fie a mans hunger,as of old it was ufed : As Pliny faith, We have made molt whole-
fom bread of thefe mingled with meal , efpccially for men watted and in confump-
tions,alfo

Bread is made ofl^ape-reots, Tttrneps, and Sktrworts*

For of thofe boil'dand cooked, firft cleanfedfrom all excrements \ a moft com-
mendable bread may be made , as I have tried : But meal mutt be mingled with
them to a third part, or elfe half as much of one, and the other as we (hall (new a lit-
tle after. And not to be tedious , the fame way-bread to eat , may be made of all
Navews, Roots, or Bulbous-heads. Alfo there is made

Excellent bread ef (jourdsy
For Gourds may be had very cheap, and they make favoury bread with meal , and fo
the bread is greater, for this is the greateft of all fruits ; for with a very little meal
in time of Famine we may feed many men, and not onelyufeit for need, but for
dainties alfo : for feafoned with Sugar, and prepared for mens pallats, and to quench
fetverifh heats, they are carried about every where to be fold. The way to make
them up is this, Take great round Gourds , and fully ripe, and cut into many pieces
the dry skin , and the pith mutt be taken from them with a knife ; put them into a
kettle of boiling water, and boil them , for by long boiling the grafly greennefs, and
the rank fmell and loathfom tatte are taken away, and they will fmell better and tatte ,
and Bourifh better, and will latt as long as bread. Being now brought to the form
of an ointment, prefs it through a linnen ttrainer with your hands , that if any parts
of it be not well boiled or any woddy pieces be there , they may be kept back by
the narrownefs of the ttraioer. To this Mafs, adde a third part of meal , and make
them into bread together , which will be pleafant to eat daily , I will not have
you to eat yonr fill of it, but if you cat it moderately it will profit much. When it is
new it is excellent, butftale, it isnotfo fightly nor dainty. I have fhew'd you the
way how yon mutt nfc fuch things of fuperfluous moifture , now do you learn wifely
to do it.

m, 1

CHAP.

Natural Magick. 'Boofy*

Chap. XVIII.
Divers ways to make bread of all forts of Corn and Pulfe*

ANtiently they made Bread of divers kinds of Com and Palfe, it would be
necdlefs to repeat them , for you may find them in the Books of the Ancients,
and there can be no error in making them. In Campania very fweet bread is made
of Millet : Alio the peopJe of Sarmatia are chiefly fed Yf ith this bread, and with the
raw meal tempered with Mares-milk, or blood drawn out of the veins of their legs.
The Ethiopians know no other Corn then Millet and Barley. Some parts of France
ufe Panick, but chiefly Aquitane : Bur Italy about Po, adde Beans to it , without
which they make nothing. The people of Ponttts prefer no meat before Panick. Pa-
nick meal now adays is neglected by us and out of ufe , for it is dry and of fmall
nouriflament • of Millet bread and cakes arc made, but they are heavy and hard of
digeuion and clammy to eat. Unlefs they be eaten prefently when chey are newly
baked, or hot, elfe they become heavy and compact together. Of the Indian LMais,
heavy bread is made and not pleafant at all, very dry and earthly next to Millet : like
to this is bread called Exfergo , that is alfo void of nutrimental jaice. There was
alfo of old bread called Ornidos, made of a certain feed of Ethiopia , fo like Sefamum
that it is hard to know them afunder. Alfo

Bread is made ofLupins^
The beft kind was known alio to theAntients; VozVidymtu teadheth how Lupins
will grow fweet , being three days infufed in River or bea-water, and when they
grow mild they muft be dried and laid afide , and then the meal of them mingled
with Barley-meal or Wheat-meal is fit to make bread. But we make it thus, Firft
the Lupins are ground in mills, and are made into flower : fifcy pound of thefe are
put into a wooden vcfld , and fair water is call upon them, that it may fwim four
fingers breadth above them ; and it mutt be often ftirred with a woodden fticfcj
then let it fettle till the water grow clear, and the meal fink down, then l\ rain the
water well, that n© meal be loft ; and pour on water the fecond time , andftiric
as before ; do fo the third time till the meal and water be come fweet, which will
be done in one day if the water be often changed. As that i done, put the meal
into a linnen cloth laid abroad , that the meal may be feperated with a wooden
flice, and the water may run away through the cloth , and the meal may dry the
better upon the cloth. In the mean time boil two pound of Rice , and being boil'd
mingle them with the Lupins, divide the whole into two parts, and mingle one
with the leaven and a hundred pound of wheat-meal, and make bread of it ; let
the other be fet by with the leven till the next day, which being mingled again
with wheat-meal, will make excellent bread, and will not tafte of Lupins. But you
muft ufe all diligence in the making of it, for if you make it not of the beft meal,
the bread will be naught , wherefore the work lies in the right preparation of it :
For the worfeCorn or Pulie you make it of, the more Corn muft betaken to pre-
pare it. After this manner it may be made of Tares and Vetches , and the favour
of them is dulcified with water and mingling meal with them. Bread is made alfo of
Beafon, Ghiches, Tarfes, Lentils, Beans, and chiefly of Acorns. But it is not un-
profitable to make

Bread of Herbs,

If a man cut the Herb Clot-bur fmall and grind it in a mill to very fine powder , and
adde as much or a third part of wheat' meal to it, it will make good bread, that
may be eaten when there is a famine ; and I have heard that the poor eat it in tome
places , and it hurts them not , and that fomc in a fiege have lived a moncth with
fuch bread.

CHAP.

Of increafmg of Hou/hold^/luffe.

145

Chap. XIX.
Hew bread may be increased in weight.

NO* I fHall fhew how bread may be augmented ; a thing very ftrange and pro-
fitable, not onely to help in time of need, but it is good for the Houfholder,
for with little meal he may nourifh many, and fill their bellies ; and that three
wayes : For there be things that added to Corn, will increaie the fubftance of the
bread; other things are dry, and of a clammy oature, that will thicken the Ele-
ment by refra&ion into the fubftance of bread. The laft way is the life of the heat
of it, whereby it waxes and grows as if it were alive. As much as is loft by the
bran taken from it, is added to it, by calting water on it when it is ground, and in
theother workmanfhip. Moreover, the baking of bread takes away a tenth part
and a half of the weight. Let us fee how our Anceftors did by lbme Earth or

Cbalkjnake their bread more weighty and white.
T/iny teacheth that Spelt will grow white by a kind of chalk, thus. Let this Spek
be of B;er-corn, which he called a feed } the corns of it are bruifed in a wooden
morter, for itwillbefpoilcdandconfumedbythehardnefsof aftone: thebeftas
it is well known, is made by thofe that are condemned to bray in mortcrs for their
punifhment. For the beft there is an iron box, the hulls being then beaten off;
again, with the fame inftruments the marrow of it being made bare, is broken; fo
are there made three kinds ©f this Spelt-meal, the fineft, the fecond fort, and the
third that is the courfeft. But yet they are not white, which makes them excellent,
yet now are theie preferved at Alexacdria ; after this, (it is very ftrange) chalk is
mingled with them, that p?ffe« both into the body and the colour of them, and
makes them tender. You fhall find this between Puteoli and Naples, on the Hill
called Leucogaruroj And there is ext ant a decree of Dtvtts JittguBw, wherein he
commanded to pay them at Naples yearly 20000 Seftertiaout of his Treafury;
drawing hi? Colony to Capua, and he affigns the caufe,by reafon that they of Cam-
pania affiitned that Spelt- meal could not be made without that ft one.

Rice maizes bread weigh.

It neither corrupts the tafte or goodnefs of the bread, but increafeth both, and it
brings it cloferby one eighth part, for by a continual turning it, it will retain eth
volatil meal ; and from hence you fhall fee it coagulate, and when it is coagulated
put leaven to it ; but it muft firft grow cold, left the force of the coagularion fhould
be hindred. To binde this fugitive fervant faft, adde fo much Wheat-meal as may
fallen it well together, till you fee there is enough, and you fhall find it increafed
to the weight deftred. By this example

Tom may increase the weight of bread with LMillet.,

This is eafily done, for it is dry,ctumbles, and will not hang together, and is weak i
let it be bruited with a wooden peftle,and fitted through a fieve till the hulls be pat-
ted, as we fee it done at Rome and at Florence; by this we hold it, that it flic not
away by its hungry drin-fs ; then we mingle it with Wheat ^nd the air refle&s back,
and it will be converted into the fubftance of Alica, that you will think nothing
taken from the tatte, colour or goodnefs, nor yet added to it. Nor will it be un-
plcalant to fee

Bread weigh more by adding milk^to it.

This is an experiment of great profit and praife-worthy ; for it adds weight and

Y Whitcncts

Natural Magic k. Soo^ 4..

wbitcneffe to bread, aadmakesit fhort, being put in infteadof water wh ilft it is
hoc. I never tafted any thing more plcalant or tender. I thought fit to addethi*
for the (insular vertaeof it, adding alfo fuch things as we knew to beneceflary for
this art. Buc truly that is admirable ; by the fame

Wheat to increase the weight of Wheat,

This is done without any addition, for if we would, we Could do this with many
and almoft infinite things, with any fmall addition . but in this a leaven is drawn
forth of the very fubftance of the Wheat, which being (trained, cleani'ed and
added to the fame again, either by increafing the fubftance of it, or by retracing
the air into its fubftance, it will be much augmented : giving you this warning
before-hand, that the augmenting heat muft not be diminifJhed , but preferred
and increafed, that all may depend on this. But an admirable work of Nature,
and full of wonder it is, how it may be that

Wheat may increase out of it felf.

I cannot difcover this, how it came into my mind, left it fhouldbemade publike
to every common fellow, and ignorant Animal. Yet not to conceal it from in-
genious men, I fhall hide it from thefe, and open it to thofe. That onr fore-fa-
thers knew it not is clear, becaufe there is no fuch thing mentioned in all their
works of making bread. The whole bufineiTe confifts in this , that the Wheat-
meal may be managed with the life of its heat, which is the off-fpring of celeftial
fire. By nature it is of fuch tenuity, that being railed with its heat, it will make the
lump (well fo much, that it will come up to the top of the vtffel; the next day
calt it into a Hutch, and adde more meal to it, which again being raifed by i<s heat,
and coming back again by the fame, and meeting with the lump, as flowing
bark again , ic jo'ids into, the refracted Elements, and fo int» doners cf meal.
D.-i t^is thrice or four times, and fo you may increafe it continually, and this
muft be doneinaftove, that the dewy fpirit may be.toftered. I thought good to
tell you alfo before, that you mult not prick the lump, left the generative blatt
fhould breath forth, and flie into the air, for fo you will lofe your labour ; and
there muft not want prefently a dewy vapour, which being carried into the air,
and made to drop, may moiften the lump, fo you will rejoice at the wonderful
increafe: but you muft be cunning in the manual application. Pray do not deftroy
by your negligence, what was invented by the careful ingenuity of thofe that
tried ir.

Chap. XX.
How we may long endure hunger and thirfi,

THe Antients had fome cotnpofitions to drive away hunger and thirft, and they
were very neceflary bothin times of Famine, and in wars. Plmy faith, feme
things being but tafted, will abate hunger and thirft , and preferve cur forces, as
Butter, Licoris, Hippace ; and elfewhere, Scythia firft produced that root which
is called Scythia, and about Baeotia it grows very fweet. And another, that is ex-
cellent againft Convuifions, alfo it is a high commendation o\ it, that fuch as have it
in their mouths feel nor hunger nor thirft ; Hippace amongftthem doth rhe f-me,
which effefts the fame in horfes alfo. And they report that with thefe two herbs
the Scythians will faft twelve dayes, and iive without drink alfo ; all which he tran-
flated out of Thcophraftus firft book. The Scythian Hippace is i'weet alfo,
and fome call it Dulcis ; it grows by Maeotis. Amongft other properties, it
quencheth thirft alfo, if it be held in the mouth. For which caufe both with

Of increafing of Hou/hold- fluff e. 14.7

both with that,*nd with the ottnr called eqacftris,meD fay,the Scythians will endure
hunger and third twelve dayes, Hence it appears that TUny trar.flated all this out
of Iheophrajlttt. But I think he erred , for Hippace fi-nifies Cheefe made of Mares
milk, atid 1 no herb. Theoiorm traefhtedit Equcftrem, as itwrre a roor like Li-
cori«jfit to drive awav hum.erand third. For Hippocrates faith, the -cvrhian fhep-
herd- eat Hippace, but that i« Mares cheefe : and elfewbere. The Scythians pont
M-:cs mi;k into hollow vcffels of wood and (hake it, and that frorh? wu.ichurm-
ing, and the f t of it they call butter, which.fwims on the top, that w^ich is hea-
vy fink- to the bottom, they feparate this and dry it, when it isdry,they call it Hip-
pace : thereafonL, becaufc Mares milk noo ifheth exceedingly, and is as good as
Cows milk. DiofcortdesyThe weft Indians ufc another compofition alfo

To endure hanger andthirfl.

Of the herb called ToSacco, namely of the juice thereof, and t he afres of Cockle
fheils they make little balls and dry them in the (hade, and as they travel for three
or four dayesthey will hold one of them between their under lip and their teeth,
and this they fuck continually, and I'walJow down what they fuck, and fo all the
day they feel neither hunger, thirrt,nor wearinefs ; but we will teach another com-
pofirion, which Heron memion?, and it was called

The Epimenidian compofition, to endure hunger and thirfi.

For it was a medicament that nourifhed much, and abated thirft, and this was the
food the befiegcrs of Cities and the befieged alfo lived on. It was called the Epi-
menidian compofition, from the Sea-onion called Epimenidium, that is one of the
ingredients of that compofition ; it was made thus, The fquil was boiled and wafht
with water, anddryed,and then cut into very frmll pieces, then mingle fefamum a
fitt part, poppy a fifteenth part, make all thefe up with honey, as the beft to make
up the mafs, to mitigate it : divide the whole, as into great Olives, and take one
of theie about two of the clock, another about ten ; and tbey felt no hurt bv hun-
ger, that ufed it. There is another compofition of the fame, that hath of Athenian
fefamum half a Sextarim, of honey a half part, of oylea Cotyle, and a Chaenice of
fwett Almonds mundified: the fefamum and Almonds nauft be dried, and
ground, andwinowed, then the fquil muft have the outfides taken off , and the
roots and leaves mult be cut into fmall pieces, and put into amorter and bruifed,
till they be well mollified • then youmuli make up thefquils with the like quantity
of honey and o; oyle, and put all [into a pot, and fet them in cold, and ftir them
well with a wooden ladle, till they be well mingled, when the lump is firm, it is
good to cut it into little morfels, and he that eats one in the morning, another at
night, hath meat enough. Tbis medicament is good for an Army , for it is fweec,
and fo fills a man and quencheth thirft : we had this m an old Scholiaft, a Manu-
fcript upon the book of Heron, in the Vatican Library. I faw the fame compofition1
in PhiUy in his fifth book of wars, where he defcribes fuch like other things.

Chap. XXI.
Of what fruits -wines may be made,

NOw we fiiall fpeak of fruits, of which wines may be made. And firft our An-
ccftors did do thu?, but they had two wayes ; for ibme were for Phyficks,1
which are found plentifully in Phyfick books t others again were for ordinary ufe,
and thev were divers, and almoft infinite, according as the differences of places
and Nations arc : for what is granted to one is denyed to another. Firft

Natural Magic k. Hoof^ 4,.

Wine of Dates.

Pliny faith that in the Eaft they make wine of Date?, and he reckons up fifty kinds of
Dates, and as many different wines from them; Cariota: are the chief, fall of juice
of which are made the principal wines in the Eaft, they are naught for the head, and
thence they have their name. The beft are found in Judaea, chiefly about Jericho
yetthofeof Archelaiis are well efteemed, and of Phafelis, and of Libia?, valleyes
of r he fame Country. The chiefeft property they have is this, they are full of a
whkefat juice, and very fweet, tafling like wine with honey. The wine will make
one drunk, and the fruit alfo eaten largely. Diojcorides teacheth thus; Put ripe
Dates called Chydeae, into a pitcher with a hole at bottom, and ftopt with a pitched
reed; (hut the hole with linnen, and to fourty Sextarii poui on three gallons of
water. If you would not have it fo iweet, five gallons will be fufficient to pour on ;
after ten dayes take away the reed with the linnen, take the thick fweet wine and
fet it up. Alfo wine is made

. Of Figs.

Sothn relates it thus. Some make wine of green figs, filling half the veffel with
them, and the other half to the brim ihey fill with fair water, and they try ft ill
by tafting .for when it tafls like wine, they drain it and ufe ir. It is made faith
Diofcorides^oi lipefigs, and it is called Catorchites or Sycites, Chelidonian or
Phacnician figs called Caries, are fteeped in a pot with a hole in the bottom with a
pitched reed, and the hole ftopt with flax.- tofouny Sextarii you n ull pour on three
gallons of water, and if you will not have the wine fo fweet, pour on five gallons
and it will do. After ten daves the liquor is taken, and again the third time alfo the
fame meaiure of water wherein the figs were infuled, is poured on ; and in the like
manner, after four or five dayes it is drawn tff. Some to fix Amphora? thereof adde
ten Sextarii of fait, that it may not early corrupt : others put f ennel and Thyme
in the bottom, and the Caricae on the top, andfo in order, till the vcflel be full:
alfo men make

Wine oj Pears,

which from the Greek word for Pears is called tApjres, and from the Latin Pierj
Palluditts faith it was thus. They are bruifed and put in a very courfe bag of Can-
vas, and prefled with weights, or in a Prcfs. It lafts in the Winter, but in Sum-
mer comes it fowrcr. Diofcorides will not have the Pears too ripe; the fame way
is made

Wine of Pomegranates,

Sotion makes wine of the grains of the Pomegranate, taking away what is in the mid-
dle of the grains. Palladia put the ripe grains well purged into a Date pail, and
prefs them out with a fcrue prefs, then boil them gently to half ; when it is cold,
put it into veffels that are pitched or plaiftered with Gipfum. Some do not boil the
juice, but to every Sextarius they mingle one pound of honey, and put all in the
faid veffels and keep it. There is made

Wine of the Lote- tree fruit.
There is a kind of Lote without any inward kernel, which is as hard as a bone in
the other kind : wine is prefled alfo out of it like Mead, that will not laft above
ten dayes ; Nepos faith the fame from TUny, Athen&tu from Polybitu. Wine is made
of the Lote fteeped in water and bruifed , very pleafant to the tafte as the beft Mead
is ; it is drunk pure without water alfo, but it will not laft above ten dayes, where-
fore they make but little for ufe to laft onely fo long. Vineger is made alfo of it,
And yet not mien or good enough, yet there is made

Wine oj Myrtle terries and Cor nels>

Out

Of increaftng of Houfhold^flufe. 14.3?

Out of Sotion^ who of the berries of Myrtles and Cornels when they ice frefh,
pounded and preffed out, made wine. Now I Hull foew how we rruy nuke

Wine of Corn.

Drink is made of Corn. Diofcorides teacheth to make Beer of Barley, alfo* drink
is made of Barley called Curmi, they uf.that drink oft-times for wine; the like
drinks arc wont to be made of Wheat. In Hiberia toward the weft and in Britanyj
w .ence Pliny, of Corn drink is made : Beer in Egypt, called Zythum, in Spain Cae-
lia and Ceria, Beer in France and other Provinces. In */irijtotles book of drun-
kennefs, thofe that drink wine made of Barley till they be drunk fall upon their
backs, they call that wine , but thofe that are drunk with any other kind of
drinks fall any way, on the rii,ht,or left hand, forward or backward, but thofe that
drink Pioum, fall onely upon their backs. Wine made of Barley they call Brytum.
Sophocles in Tnptolemo,and ./Efchylus in Lycurgo. But Hellantcm faith, thai Bry-
tum i< made in Farms out of roots. He cat em faith, that the Egyptians ,»rinde Bar-,
ley to make drink, and that the Macedonians drink Brytum made of Barley, and
Parabia made of Millet, and Rice, faith Athemm. Alfo wine is made of Rice;
for faith oEHanm, when an Elephant fights in war, they give him notonely wine of
grapes, but of Rice alio. Now the fame drink is made in the Northern Climates
of Corn, and they call it Biera, but they put hops to it, for it cannot be made
without j Barley and Wheat are infufed in the deco&ion of it. We fee that of Bar*
ley and Wheat fteeped in water a drink is made that taftes like wine, and of them I
have made the beft aqua vita. But thefe drinks of old were Phyfical, rather then to
ufe as win;. But I fhall fhew how fome drinks that are fo like wine in ta&e, that
you would think they were wine indeed. And firft

Wine of Honey.

To nine veffels of water put eighteen pounds of Honey, into brafs Caldrons co*
vexed wi.h Tin, and let them boil a long time, ftirring all with wooden ladles, and
wiping away the froth that riieth with little brufhes,pour it out>& put it into a wine
veffei , then take two pounds of red wine Tartar, and boil them in water till they
be diffolved, to which add an eighth pare of a veffei of vineger, that the loath-
fomc and unpleafing tafte of the fweetnefs of Honey may be loft , let thefe be min-
gled ; then pour on two veffels of the beft wine, then let it fettle ; aftet fome days
ftrain it through a hair-cloth ftrainer, or one of cloth to cleanfe it from the filth
and excrements. A liquor will run from this that will fervefor fparing, and to a-
bate charge in a family , and it is good to drink in health and ficknefs : cover it
clofe, and drink it. I fhall fhew you another way to make

Wine of Raifins.

Pour into a brafs Caldron feven veffels of water, put in two pounds of Raifin ?, let
them boil till they be wafted in the water, and the water be fweet as Mead ; if
your kettle betoofmall, do it at feveral times: then take your kettle from the
fire, and when the liquor grows cold, ftrain it gently forth ; put up the ftrained li-
quor in a wine veffei, and pour into ic a mcafure of theftiarpeft red wine vineger
to abate the fweetnefs of the Raifins, then add nine pound of Tartar finely powder-
ed unto ic, and pouring on a fourth part of the beft wine , ftop the veffei clofc
when it is full, after one week ufe it. Another

Wine of Quinces.

Put into brafs Caldrons glazed with Tina veffei of new wine, and put thereto a-
bout fifty wild Quinces, namely fuch as are full of ftreeks and wrinkled, take out
their kernels, cut the Quinces in peices like as you do Rape Roots, boil all at a
gentle fire ; when they have boild a while, take them off, and let them cool,pound
the Quinces in a morter with a wooden peftle, prefs them out with a prefs, put
the juice preffed forth of them the new wine, and fet it up in a glazed earthen veffei
for a Whole year. When wine is fcarcc and yoti have occafion to ufe this, put

ilitO

lfo Natural Magic k. cBool^$.

n:oa veffel four parts of water, two of new wine, and one fourth part of the
aforefaid mixture, cover the veffel and let it boil, and when ic is clear ; uie it. Of all
thefe an amphora o? vineger , a pound of honey, as much Tartar in powder, lec
them boil a whilein a pot glazed with Nitre, and mingle them, and for every vef-
fel of water pour on an Amphora of wine, and cover all, and after twenty dayes
ufe it : or take honey one pound , as much red wine Tartar, half a pound of Rai-
fins,two Amphoras of Vineger, let them boil in a por, adde wine alfo to them,
and it will be for drink. I (hall adde the Northern drink

Wine called Metheglin.
The drink inPannonia, Poland and England is more pleafant and wholefome then
many wines are • it is made of twenty pound of good honey, and of water one
hundred and twenty pound, skimming it till all comesto eighty pound, which be-
ing cold and tunned up into a wine veffel, put in leaven of bread fix ounces, or as
much as will ferve to make it work, and purifie it felf, and withal put into a bag,
that hangs and may be put into the liquor, and not touch the bottom , of Cinna-
mon, granes of Paradife, Pepper, Ginger, Cloves two dram?, one haed full of El-
der flowers : let them ftand in a wine Cellar all the Winter, in Summer let them
fourty dayes in the Sun, till they tafte like wine, and the unpleafant rafle of the
honey be gone. But it will be more pleafant if you add a third part of wine.

Chap. XXII.
How vineger may be made divers wayesyand of what.

AFter wine it follows to fpeak of vineger : Firft, how our forefathers made it ;
then how of late years, that it may be made extreamfowre, which is not on-
ly good for a family, but is neceffary for many Arts. Alfo there are fome Countries
where wine, and to vineger is (citcc. Therefore in thofc places divers men have n-
fed their wits to make it : wherefore to begin, we fay that

Vineger may be made of the Fig-tree.
Out of Columella ; A green fig tnuft be taken very betimes, and alfo if it have rain-
ed, and the figs fall to the earth beaten down with fhowres, gather thofe figs and
put them up in Hogs-heads or Amphora , and let them ferment there; then when
it grows fharp, and hath fent out fome liquor, what vineger there is drain it out di-
ligently, and pour it into a fweet pitched veffel. This yields the beft fharp vineger,
and it will never grow mufty or hoary, if it be not fet in too moift a place. Some
to make more quantity, mingle water with the figs, and then they adde to them
the ripeft new tigs, and they let them confume in that liquor, until it tall fharp c-
nough like vineger, then they firain all through rufhy baskets, or withie bags •
and they boil this vineger till they have taken off all the froth, ard filth from it.
Then they adde feme terrefied fait, and that hinders worms and other vermine to
breed in it. Cajjiantts makes it thus : Put into a veffel old fig?, terrefied Barley ,and
the internal parts of Citrons. Stir it often and diligently, and when they are pu-
trified and foaked, firain them out, and ufe them, stfuleiu!, They make vineger of
figs, wet upon the Trees, and caft into water to putrifie, Diofcorides, The liquor
of figs fieeped grows fharp as vineger, and is ufed for it. There is made alfo

Vineger of Dates.

To Date wine we fpeak of, fome adde water, and receive it again ; and they do this
three, four, five or fix times, and at laft it grows fowre. From the fame, Plinj teach-
eth to make

Vineger of honey.

Yon mufl wafh your honey veffel?, or hives in water , with thi? decoflion is made
the rr.o'l wholefcme vineger. pJladim teacheth the way to make

V ineget

Of increafwg of Hou/hold-fluffe.

151

Vineger of Pears.

wild Pears are fuch as are (harp and ripe , are kept three dayes in 2 heap, then they
are put into a veflel, and fountain or river water is put to them, the vrffel is left
covered thirty dayes, then as much vineger as is taken out. tor ulc,io much water is
put in to repair it. fajfiantu makes

Vineger of Peaches.

Putfoft delicate Peaches into a veflel, and aade parched Bsrley to them, let them
putrifie tor one day, then ttrain them out, and ule it. We may trom C affiants*
nuke

Vineger without wine*

If you boil Gypfum and Tea-water, and then mingle it with River water, and ufeic
being drained. Bat if you will

Turn wine i»to vineger, and contrarily vineger into wine,
C^wahatb it. Htpun Beet rootsbruilVd into wine, ir will be vineger when
thrre hours are over. But it he would rcttore it again as it was, he puts in Cabbage
roots. So auo

To make the fame.

We may do it another way and quickly : Caft into wine, Salt, Pepper and fowre
leaven, ming'e ihetn and they wi.l foon imke it vineger. But to do v nrre quick-
lv quench in it often a red hoi brick or piece of ftcel ; alfo provi e for that uuripc
Medlars, Cornel?, Mulbcnics andP.ums. Bui Sotto* fhews to make

Sharp Vineger of new wine*
Dry the mother of wine of grapes at the Sun, and put them into new wine, adding
t ft w fowre grapes thereto and it will make fharp vineger that will be for ufe after
feven daves or put in pellitory of Spain and it will be fharp. Moreover, it you
boil a fourth or fifth part of vineger at t he fire, & put that to the reft,and fei all eight
days in the Sun, yon fhiil have moit fharp and plcafant wine. The roots or old
grafs , anci R;ifins, and the leaves of a wild Pear tree bruited, and the root r.f the
bramble, andwhevof milk, burnt Acorns, Prunes rotted, and the decoctions of
Chiches, and pot-fheards red hot, all of thele put feverally into vineger, will make
it tart. Apuletui teacheth

To double the quantity of vineger-
Take a good meafure of Vineger, about a Metreta, and to that adde one Mareta
of Sea water boiie'd to half, mingle 1 hem and let them afide in a vtff:l. Some tteep
Barley, and ftrait it, and of that juice they mingle one Metreta, and they Itir them
together, and thev c«tt in torrefied ialt when it is yet hot, a good quantity, then
they cover the vtflel, and let it tiand eight dayes. But I ufe to make it thus,

Vtnegcr of c/ttfters of grapes prejfed forth.
After the Vintage, we calt in the clutters when the wine is prcfled forth into a woo-
den veffcl, and we pour upon them a quantity of water, and it wilt be vineger
when a week is over. Moreover wea* the tcndieU from Vines, and bruile them,
and put water to them, and it will be vineger. Alfo thus,

/// wine is turned to vineger.
When the bunches cf grape* are prcfled forth, lay thern between two wooden
bowls,not very chick toge.her, let them grow hot for four days ; then pour on them
fo much naughty wine as may cover them, let them a one 24 hours, then ttrain
them into another wooden bowl, and after fo many hours, put them into another
bow),and do fo til it be turned into moft (harp white vinegerjand if you would rmke
more of the lame duffers, pour on upon them feme fharp vineger, and let them a-
lone till they be extrearrrfharp and fowre, then rake that out and pour ro mil wine,
and dots you did. Ltftly pre£ thofe clutters out in a prefs, and you (hall recover
83 great quantity as of the wine that was tpent,

CHAP,

\<>i Natural Magigk. "Bgo^ ^

Chap. XXIII.
How the defetts of wine may be managed and refiered,

OUr forefathers found out many remedies to preferve Wine, and in our dayes
we have taken no lefs pains. For wine is eafily corrupted) and takes to it
felf many flrange qualities. Taxamtu faith, wine either grows fowreor dead a-
bouttheSolftices, and when the feven ftars fet, or when the dog ftar caufeth heat,
and when his extream cold, -or hot, or rainy, or windv, or when it thunders. We
fhall fhew remedies for all thefe ; Firft, we (hall lay down out of Afrwantu,\\\z figns
to know wines that will laft, or will corrupt. When you have put your wine into
a veflel, after fome time change the veffel, and look well on the Lees, for thence
fhall you know what the wine is, proving it by fmellingto it, whether it corrupt,
or weevils breed in it, thefe are fignsit pmrifies. Others take wine out of the
middle of the veflel, they heat it, and when it is cold they taflc of it, and they
judge of the wine by the favour, feme by the fmell of the cover ; aftrong tafte is
the beti fi£n,a watry theworft, fharpnefsof duration, weaknefsof corrupting. The
(igns muft be taken at the times to be feared,wc mentioned. But to come to the re-
medies, we fhall (hew how

To mend weak^ wine.

The wine will be weak, when it begins to breath forth that force of heat ; fot
when the foul of it is breathed forth, the wine grows immediately fowre: vineger
is thecarcaffeof wine. Then we may prefently prevent it by adding aqua- vita to
it, for by t ha> it may put on anew foul : the mcafurc will be the fourth part of a
pound for a veflel. Another remedy will be

That wine may not grow hot.
In the cummer Solftice wine grows hot by the hot weather, and is fpoiled: then
put quick-Giver into a glafs-viol well ftopt, and hang it in the middle of the veflel,
and thecoldnefsof it will keep the wine from heating. The quantity is two
pound for great veflels ; for When the air is hot, the external heat draws forth the
inward heat, and when that is gone, it is fpoiled.- We

'That wine may not exhale
ufe this'remedy. The veffel being full, we pour oy le upon ir, and cover it, for oyle
keeps the ipirits from evaporating, which I fee is now ufed for all liquors that they
may not be perverted. Wines fometimesare troubled : But

To clear wines,

Fronto bids us do thus. Caft three whites of egges into a large earthen difli tad beat
them, that they may froth j put fome white fait to them, that they may be exceed-
ing white, and pour them into a veflel full of w>ne , for fait and the white of an
egge will make all thick liquors clear, but as many Dolia or fuch meafures as there
are in the veffel, fo many whites of eggesmuft you have, to be mingled again with
fo many ounces of fait, but youmuft llir the mixture with a ftick, and in four dayes
it will grow clear. Alto ic is done

That wines may not corrupt.

I laid that fait keeps all things from corrupting : wherefore for every Dolium, pow-
der one ounce of Alleme, and put it into the wine veflel with the wine,
for it will keep it from corrupting. The fame is done if you put in one
ounce of common fait, or half one, half the other: Alfo brimfton«
hinders putrefaction. Wherefore if you (hall adde to eight ounces of Alleme or of

Salt, f ur ounces of brimftone, youfhail do well. TheAntients were wont to
peierve wine, by adding Salt or fea-water to it, and it would continue along time.
C*/*w*/kieacheththus, whenthewinds are quiet you muft take water out of the
deepfea : when it is very calm, and boyl it to thirds, adding to it, if you pleafe,
feme fpices. There are many ordinary things, but we let them pafs*

Chap. XXIV.
How Ojl may be made of divers things,

IT is an excellent thing to fhew the diverfity of ways to make Oyl. That if
Olives (hould ever be fcarce, yet we might know how to draw Oyl from ma-
ny kinds of fruits and feeds. And ibme of thefe ways that came from the Antients,
yet onely tbc beft and fuch as are our inventions. Wherefore to begin , We fay-
that

Oyl may be made of Rieintu, call'd Cicinum.

Diofeorides makes it thus. Let ripe Ricini as many as you pleafe, wither in the
hot Sun, and be laid upon hurdles: let them be fo long in the Sun, till the out-
ward fliell break and fall off. Take the flefti of them and bruife it in a morter di-
ligently , then puc it into a Caldron glazed with Tin that is full of water : put fire
under and boil them , and when they have yielded their inbred juyce , take the
veflel from the fire, and with a (hell skim off the Oyl on the top, and keep it.
But in Egypt where the cuftom of it is more common : for they cleanfe the Ricini and
put them into a Mill , and being well grownd , they prefs them in a prefs through
a basker. Pliny faith, They muft be boiled in water , and the Oyl that fwims on
the top muft be taken off. But in Egypt where there is plenty of it, without fire,
and water fprinkled with Salt , it is ill for to eat , but good for Candles. But
we collected them in September , for then is the time to gather them, with it
parts from a prickly cover and a coat that holds the feed in it ; it is eafily cleanfed
in a hot Caldron .- The weight of Oyl is half as much as the feed, bat it muft be
twice knocked, and twice preffed. Talladm (hews how

Oyl of Maftick^u made,

gather many Grains of the Maftick-tree, and let them lye in a heap for a
day and a night : Then put a basket full of thofc Berries into any veflel , and
pouring hot water thereto, tread them and prefs them forth. Then from that hu-
mour that runs forth of them, the Oyl of Maftickthat fwims on the top is poured
off. But remember left the cold might hold it there , to pour hot water often on.
For thus we fee it made with us, and all the Country of Surrcmum: alfo, fo h
made

Oyl of Turpentine,

as Damageron teacheth. The fruit of Turpentine is grownd in a Mill, as the Olives
are, and is preffed out, andfoit fends forth Oyl. The kernels fcrve to feed hogs
and to burn. Likcwife

Oyl of Bays,

Boil Bay-berries in water , the fhels yield a certain fat , it is forced out by cru-
ftiing them in the hands , then gather the Oyl into horns. TaUadttu almoft as
Dwfeorides , in January boil many Bay-berries , that are ripe and full, in hot water,
and when they have boy'ld long , the watry oyl that fwims on the top that comes

Z from

154- Natural Magick. Hoofo.

from them3you (hall gently pour off into veffels,driving it eafily with feathers. The
Indians make as it is faid

Oyl ofSefamen,

It is made as we faid before, it fends forth excellent Oyl abundantly. There is made

Oyl of the Plane-Tree,

Plinj For want fometimcs they are forced to make Oyl for candles, of the Plane-
tree berries foaked in water and fait , bat it is very little as I proved. Pliny faith
the Indians make

Oyl of Chef nut s,

which I think very difficult, for but a little will come from them , as you flaall find
if you try. He faid alfo, That Gallia Ofalpina made

Oyl oj Acorns of the Oa\
to ferve for lights • but we can make very little. Alf© the Ancients ufed to make

0)1 of trallnmsy

that they preffed from the Wallnuts, unfavoury and of aheavytafte: for if there
be any rottcnnefs is the kernel , the whole manner is fpoil'd. Now Gallia Cifalpina
makes it for to eat, and for lights alfo. For lights, by parting the naughty Nuts from
the found ; but the beft ferves for to eat at fecond courfes. Thefe therefore are to
eat, and thofc for lights, they bum cleer, and there is nothing that yields more Oyl.
For it turns almoft all to Oyl, for one pound of cleanfedNuts will yield almoft
ten ounces of Oyl. Now follows

Oyl of fweet sAlmonds,

Oyloffweet Almonds is beft for food, andof bitter, for Phyfick, andof old it was
made with great diligence. Viofcorides {hews the way how half a bufliei of bitter
Nats cleanfed and dried , are pounded in a morter with a wooden petfle into
lumps , then a fextariusof feething water is poured on , and when for half ao hour
the moiftureis drunk in, they are beaten more violently then before ; then is ic
preffed between boards, and what flicks to the fingers is collected with fhells.
The Nuts being preffed again , a Hemina of water is fprinkled on them , and when
they have drank that up, they do as before ; every bufhel yields an Hemina. With
us it is commonly drawn out the fame way. Thefe are the Oylsofthe Antieots.
Now we (hall proceed with our Oyls : Next follows

Oyl of fmallNttts.

They yield abundance of fweet fented excellent Oyl , which all may ufe alfo for
meats : one pound of the cleanfed Nuts will yield eight ounces of Oyl , which for-
mer times were ignorant of.

Oyl of Piflaches

ferve for Meat and Phyficks. Out of

Pine \irneh Oyl u made
They are cull'd, and the naughty ones ferve for lights ; but the Oyl that comes from
the beft, is for to ear, and for Phyfick • very much is cxtra&ed. I fa w it at Ravenna.

But

Oyl of Beech,

the beft of all is preffed out in abundance , for meats and for lights. It borne very
cleer, and taftcs as fweet Almonds > and the whole Nut almoft goes into Oyl,

as

as rhe Wallnut doth. The elder the Maft is, the more Oyl it yields, and the Lees
of the Oyl is excellent to fa- Oxen and Hogs. They arc foon gathered, cleanfed,
bruited and prefled : We prefled alio

Oyl (rem the baftard Sycamore,

*s they call it; fork is abundant in feed, and in winter the boughs of it are feen
loaded with feed onely. In February we colle£ted it and crumbled it , tht fheilis
broken into fix or feven parts, the kernels are like a Pear, the are braifed and heat-
ed in a pan, then put into a prefs, and they yield their Oyl : They make clear light
in lamps, and the feed yields a fourth part of Oyl. There is drawn

Oyl out of the Sanguine -Tree

for lights. About the middle of September the ripe berries arc taken forth of the
cinders, let them drv a few days, bruife them, and let them boyl in water in a
bra!? kettle for one hour, then put them into the prefs, you (hall have green colour-
ed Ovl , about a ieventh part of the feed. The Mountainous people ufc it. There
is prtffed

Oyl out of the Grapes or Ra/ftns,
The Greek' call'd thefe Gigarta: Cifalpma Gallia makes oyl of them, bruifed, hear>
and prefled in a prefs, but it is very little fit for lights , becaufc it burns exceeding
clcer. There is much in Egypt

OylofRadifh-fced

made: they ufc it to feafon their meats, and boil it with them. BatCifalpinaGaBid
preff.rrh Ovl our of Radifti-fced, and Rape-feed : Rapes are polled up onely in 2v(tf-
vemh r hut they are covered with land together with their leaves. They are plan-
ten in Marchythn they may feed in LMay, For unlefs they be pulled up, they freeze
with winter cold. But thf re is another kind of Rape that is fowedin July ; it is
w.-eled, it comes forth in the fpring , in May it yields feed: out of a quarter of a
bufhel of ir, eighteen pounds of Oyl are drawn; it is good for liehts, and for com-
mon people to eat. If you fow a whole Acre with this feed , you fh#ll have five load
of feed, and of every load you may make two hundred pounds of Oyl : it is onely
plow'd and weeded. Alfo

Oyl U made of the feed ofCameline.

It is imde for lights, but thofe of Lombardy make great plenty of a golden-coloured
Oy] of a feed liketothisP called Dradella. It hath plaired leaves as wild Rochet,
which they fowe amongft Pulfe. The fame may be laid of the feeds of Nettles, Mu>
ftard, Flax, Rice.

Ch a p. XXV.
How a Honjholder m*y provide himfelf with many forts of thread,

NOw fhall I fpeak of many forts of Yarn, becaufe this may much help the Houfe-
hold, for the Houfwife hath always need thereof. Our Ancestors ufed ricmp
and Flax ; for thus they made

Tarn of flax:

yet there needs no example , the Thread is fo common. I will fpeak of thofe
that follow, and of other inventions. Pliny. Flax U known to be ripe two
ways , when the feed fmells, or looks yellow j then it is pulled up and hound
m handfuls, and dried in the Sun, letting it barg with the roots upwards
for one day : Then five of thefe bundles ftanding with their tops one
againft another, that the feed may fall in the middle* Then after Whcat-harve^

t 2 the

i$6 Natural Magick. *Boof{\.

the branches arc laid in the water that is warm with the Sun , they are kept down
by fome weight and foaked there , and again, as before, turn'd up-fide down .hey
are dried in the Sun. Then being dried, they are bruifed on wub a flax-hammer ;
that which was next the rind is cail'd hard, or the worft flax,and it is fit for co make
weiks for Candles, yet that is kemmed wkhhackes, till ^il the membrans be
piled clean. The art of kembing and making of it, is, out of fifty pound of Fiax-
bundles, to make fifteen pound of Flax. Thenagainit is polifhed in Thread, ic is
often beat upon a hard ftone with water , and when it is woven it is bruifed again
with Beetles, and the more you beat it,the better it is. Alfo there h made

Thread of Hemp^

Hemp is excellent for ropes. Hemp is plucked up after the Vintage , but it is clean-
fed and pill'd with great labour. There are three forts of it, that next the rinoris
the worft, and that next the pith, the middlemoft is the beft, which is called Mefa :
Another

To make Thread of Broom^

It is broken and pull'd from the Ides of May , until the Ides in June, this is the time
when it is ripe. When it is pull'd, the bundles are fet in heaps for two days to take
the wind; on the third day it is opened and fpread in the Sun,and is dried, and then
again it is brought into thehoufein bundles. Afterwards it is well fleep'd in lea-
water, or other water where that is wanting. Then being dried in the Sun again,
it is watered; if we have prefently need of it , if it be wet with hot water in a veffel,
it will be the fhorter way. But it muft be heat to make it good , for the frefh nor
fea-water cannot foften it enough. Ropes of Hemp arc preferred when they arc
dry, but Broom is preferved wet, to make good the drynefs of the g round it grows
on. The upper part of Egypt toward Arabia>mikcs linnen of Gotten. ARa makes
Flax of Spanifh Broom , efpecially for Fifhers nets to laft long ; rhe Shrub muft be
foaked for ten days. And (o every Countrey hath its Thread made of divers Plants
and Shrubs. We know that there is made

Thread of Nettles^

amongft the Northern people, and it is very fine and white: alfo there is made

Thread of Aloes intAmerica^
it is hard, white, and moft perfect. I fhall defcribe it by their relation, becaufe the
extream parts are full of prickles , we ftrike them off that they may not hinder us,
and we cut the branches into long pieces long ways, that the fubftance under the
rind may be the better taken away ; then two Poles of wood are fartned in the
earth, eroding one the other in the middle likeacrofs; thefe are held fatt with the
left hand, to make them hold faft together, and with the right the forefaid pieces or
fillets are taken by one end and drawn over the crofs , that the inward part may part
from the wooddy part , and the Flax from the fubftance, and then they are kembed
fo often, till they become white , pure, nervous, as Fiddle or Harp-ftrings, then
are they waftied, dried , and laid up. In thirteen years after that it is planted, the
leaves grow very long even twenty foot , theftalk rifeth in the middle forty foot
long, then the top is adorned with flowers and bears fruit : I faw this at Rome,
and I never remember that I faw any thing more beautiful. I fhall now fpeakof Flax
call*d Asbeftinum. Pliny faith there is Flax alfo found, That fire will not confume ;
they call it live-Flax, and I have feen Napkins and Table-clothes burning in the fire,
acF^afts, and they were better cleanfed of filth with the fire, then they could be by
water : Wherefore of this they made Coats for Kings funerals, to keep the afhes of
the Body from other afhes. h grows in India in the defarts and fcorched places with
the Sun, where no rain falls j but there are terrible creatures and lerpents, andthis is
pceferved by burning ; it is hard to be found , and difficult to wear, becaufe it is fo
fliort : when it is found it is as dear as the moft precious Pearls. The Greeks call ic
Asbeftinum from the nature of it , So faith ?//»/, out of which words it is plain thac

Ofincreafing Houfhold- fluff e. i^J

he kn?w nor the Scone Asbcftinum, when he iaid that it was hardto Fnd, and dif-
ficult to wear tor tlx fhormefs of it , for it is kembed and fpun by eierv w rh,tr al-
rnnft , it rti he r ot ignorant of it , as I faw at Venice , a woman of Cy ^ru and
another or "Valemia. that fhzwed me it in great abundance in the ArTenal or Hof-
pital. It is an excellent fecret, very rare and profitable, though few knew it of our
times: but I have freely communicated it, though it cannot be had,but at great rates;,

Chap. XXVI.
To hatch Eggs with em a Hem

NOw (nail I fhew how without a Hen , Eggs of Hens and other Birds may
be hatcht in iummer or winter, fo that if any lick people defire to eat Chickens
t en , they may have them. Birds Eggs are hatched with heat , either of the iame
Bird or of others , as the heat of man , of the Sun, or fire ; for I have feen Htcus
fit on Geele, Ducks, and Peacocks Eggs, and Pigeons fit on Hen Eggs, and aCuc-
kow to fit upon any of them. And I have feen women to folter and hatch Eggs be-
tween their brefts in their bofoms , and uDder their arm-pits. LtvtA Augttfia when
fn? was young and great with childe of Nero, by Cajar 1'ibcritu , became fhe carnelt-
ly defired i o bring firft a boy . fhe made ufe of this Omen to try ic by, for fhe fofter-
ci an Egse in her bofom , and when fhe mail lay it afide , fhe put it inro her nurfes
bofom, that the heat mi^ht not abate, Tlinj. But Ariftotle faith that Birds Eggs,
and Eeg> cf forefooted B-alts are ripened by the incubation of the dam ; for all thefe
la in the euth , and their Eggs are hatched by the warmth of the eartbc For if
fore oo ed B. aft- that lay Eg^s came often where they are, that is more to preferve
and keep th=m then otherwife. And again, Eggs are hatcht by fitting. It is Na-
tures way, but Eggs are not onely fo hatched, but of their own accord in the earth,
as in Ejjypt covered with dung they will bring Chickens. Diodortu SicnlmdeEgy^tiU,
Some are found nut by man? industry, by thofe that keep Birds and Geefe ; befides,
the ways that others have to produce them, that they may have Birds that are
ftrange, and -jrear numbers of them : for Birds do not fit upon their Eggs , but they
by their kill hatch the Eggs themfelves. At Syracufe a certain drunken compani-
on pu E -g- under the earrh in mats,and he would not leave off drinking till the Eggs
were hatcht. In Egypt about grand Cayro , E^gs are artificially hatcht ; they make
an Oven with many holes, into which they put Eggs of divers kinds, as Goofe e°gs,
Hen Eggs, and of other Birds ; they cover the Oven with hot dung, and if need be
they make a fire round abnut it , fo are the Eggs hatcht at their due rimes. Tanlm
Jovtwin his Book of his Hittories. In Egypt there is abundance of Hen Chickens :
For Hens do not there fit on their Eggs, but they are hatenr. in Ovens by a gentle
heat , that by a an admirable and compendious art , Chickens are hatcht in very
few days and bred up , which they fell not by tale, but by meafure. They make the
mealure without a bottom, and when it is full they take it away . And in the I fland
of Malta in Sicily, they make an Oven , where into they put Eggs of divers Fowls,
as of Hens, Geefe, then they make a fire roundabout, and the Eggs grew ripe at
times. But let us fee how our Ancellors hatched their Eggs, Democritm teacheth

If a Hen do not fih how fhe may have many Chickens,

The day you fet your Hen upon Eggs, take Hens dung , pound ic and fift it, and put
it into a hollow veffel with a great belly , lay Hens feathers round abour. Then lay
your Fs°s upright in it , fo that the fharp end may be uppcrmoft ; and then of the
fame dung, fprinkle fo much on them till the Eggs be covered. But when your Eggs
have lain lb covered for two or three days, turn them afterwards every day, let not
one touch the other , that they m*v heat alike. But after the twenty day when the
Chickens begin to be hatcht, you fhall find thofe that are in the bottom to be crackt
round, for this reafonyou muft write down the day they were fet, left you mi-
ftake the time : Wherefore on the twentieth day, taking of the (hell , put the Giic*
kena into a pen and be tender of them. Bring a Hen to them which is beft to order

158 Natural Magick. Hqo^.

vet I tried this moft diligently, and k took noerTec}, nor can I tell hcwitfliould
be done. They that commend the Oven, do not teach the manner how it ftiould

done. But what I have done my felf , and I have ieen others do , I mall briefly
relate, that with little labour and without Hens,any one may

Hatch Eggs in a hot Oven.

Make a veffel of Wood like a Hogfhead , let it be round, and the Diameter fo long
as your arm is, that you thruft in, that you may lay and turn the Eggs, jct it De four
foot in Altitude. This we divide by three boards within into four parts : Let the firft
be a foot and half , the fecond little above a foot, the third afoot , and the fourth
leaft of all. Let every concavity divided with boards have a little door thereto , fo
large as yon may thrult in your arm , and its fliuc to open and (hut at pleafure. Lcc
the firft and fecond loft be made of thin boards , or wrought with twigs , let the
third be of brafs arched , and the fourth of folid wood. Let the firft and fecond
ftage have a hole in the centre three fingers broad , through which muft pafs a bra-
zen or iron pipe tinned over , that mutt come half a foot above the fecond ftory,
and fo in the lower moft, but in the bottom the orifice muft be wider, like a Pyramis
or funnel,that it can fitly receive the heat of the flame of a candle put under it j in the
fecond ftory let the pipe be perforated about the top, that the heat breathing forth
thence , the place may be kept warm , and the Eggs may be hot in the upper part,
as they are under the Hen. Above thefe three rooms ftrew faw-duft, which I
thinks is beft to cover them : Let the faw-duft be higheft about the fides of the
Hogfhead, but lefs in the middle ; in the bottom where the pipe is lower, that the
Eggs that lye upon it may receive the heat that comes from the pipe every way : In
the third ftory where the pipe ends , let it beprcfled down about the fides, and
higher in the middle about the pipe, let a iinnen cloth cover the faw-duft, a fine
clorb, that if it befoul dit may be wafht again , and the Chicken hatchc may go up-
on it. Lay upon every ftory a hundred Eggs , more or lefs , let the great end of the
Eggs lye downwards , the fharp end upwards. The walls of the Hogfhead that are
above the faw-duft within the concavities, and the upper part pf the ftory mult be
covered with (heep skins, that their warmth may keep in the heat : In the lower
concavity under the Tunnel , muft a light lamp be placed , at firft with two weiks, in
the end with three, in fummer ; but at beginning of winter, firft with three, and
laft with four or five: Let the light fall upon the middle of the Tunnel, that the
heat afcendingby the pipe , the rooms may heat all alike. The place where this vef-
fel ftands muft be warm and ftand in a by place ; in the lower part where the lamp
is lighted, you muft lay no Eggs, For that heat there will not hatch them. But
where the Chickens are wet when they are firft hatched , (hut them in here to dry
them by the warm heat of the lamp, marking twice or thrice every day whether the
heat abate , be warm or very hot. We fhall know it thus , take an Egg out of the
place, and lay it on your Eye, for that will try it well: if it be too hot for you,the
heat is great, if you feel it not,it is weak ; a ftrong heat will hatch them,but a weak
will make them addle. So you muft adde or take away from your lamp, to make the
light adequate & proportionable:after the fourth day that the Eggs begin to be war-
med, take them out of the cells, and not fhaking them hard, hold them gently
againft the Sun .beams or light of a candle, and fee ♦yherher they be not addle, for
if you difcern any fibres or bloody matter run about the Egg, it is good j but if it be
clear and tranfparent , it is naught , put another Egg in the place of it : All that are
good muft be daily turned at the lamp heat, and turn them round as the Hen is wont
to do. We need not fear fpoiling the Eggs , or if any man do handle them gently .
in fummer after nineteen or twenty days , or in winter after twenty five or twenty
eight day?, you fhall take the Eggs in your hand , and hold them againft the Sun,
and fee how the Chickens beak ftands , there break the (hell, and by the hole of
the Egg take the Chicken by the beak and pull out its head ■ then lay it in its place
again, for the Chicken will come forth it felf , and when it is come out,put it in the
lower cell as Tfaid: But let the lamp ftand fomething from the parcment , left the
Chickens allured by the light , (hould pick at it and be burnt by it : And if you do

work

work diligently as I have (hewed you, in three hundred Eggs you fliall hardly lefe
ten or twenty at moft. Buc becauie they are hatcht without the dam, Imuftftiew
how to make

A Cockjojier Chickens as the Hen dothy

For they would die,if cone did keep them. But a Cock or Capon will perform what
the Hen ftiould ; do but (hew him the Chicken, and flroke him gently on the back,
and give him meat out of your hands often , that he may become tame. Then pull
the feathers off of his breft, and rub him with Nettlej, for in a few hours, not to fay
days, he will t.ke care of the Chickens fo well and give them their meat , that no
Hen did ever do it,as he will.

mwmmwwmmmmmtmmwmm

THE

 «6

THE

FIFTH BOOK

O F

Natural Magick :

Which treateth of Alchymy ; fliewing how Metals
may be altered and transformed, one into another.

Thi Proem e.

\X7£ are now come ( According to that order which we propofed mto our [elves in the be-
ginning) to $hofe experiments which are commonly called by the name of t/flchymy
meters, wherein not onely a great part of the world is much converfant , but alfo every one
is very defirous to be a practitioner in them , and doth thirft after them with an unquench-
able luft. Wherefore we are conftrained to fpeak^fomething concerning this Subject the
rather, because many rude and unskilful men , being dr awn on., partly by the hope of gain,
whtch they looked for by it , and partly by the pleafure and delight which they did take in it,
have be ft owed themfelves tn theft experiments to the great flander both of the %/irt it felf,
and alfo of the prof effors thereof; fo that nowadays, a man cannot handle it without the
fcorn and obloquy of the world, becaufe of the dif grace and contempt , which thoje idiot j
have brought upon it. For whilft they , being altogether ignorant of the Princtples ofthefe
things, have labored to make fophiftkal and counterfeit geld , they have utterly mifcarri*
ed in their endeavours , and wafted aU their fubftance , and quite undone themfelves, and
fo were deluded by that vain hope of Gold, which fet them on work* Demetrius Pbalere-
us faid very well of the fe men, That which theyfhculd have gotten , faith he, they did not
qet,& that which they had in their own poffeffientthey loft -and fo,whereas they hoped to work_
amttamorphofs or alteration in the Metals , the alteration and change hath lighted heavily
upon themfelves, tn rejpecl of their own eft ate : and when they have thut overthrown them-
felves, they have no other comfort left them but onely this , to broach many lies and coun-
terfeit devices, whereby they may I ike wife deceive others , and draw them into the very
fame lurches which themfelves have before f alien into, And furely the defire partly of the
Art it (elf, and partly of the great gain which many men hoped after by the fame , hath
filled the world with fo many Bookj , and fuch an infinite number of lies , that there is
fcarce any other matter in the like requeft ; fo that it was very welldone of Diodefian the
Emperour , and it was high time for him fo to do , to eilablifh a Decree , that all fuch lying
Books that were written concerning that matter, fhould be caft into the fire and burnt to
ajhes. Thus was an excellent good o/frt difcredited and difgraced by reafon that they abu-
fed it ; which falls out alfo in many other better things then this is. The Art of it felfis not
to be fet at nought , but rather to be embraced and much to be fought after ; efpeciall) by
fuch as apply their minds to Thilofophy , and to the fearching out of the fecrecies of Nature :
for they fhall find in it many things which they will wonder at , and fuch as are exceeding
neceffary for the ufe of men : and when they (hall behold the experience of many kinds oftranf-
mutations andfundry effects, tt wiUbe no [mail delight unto them ; and be fides, it will (hew
them the way to profounder and -worthier matters , fuch as the heft and foundeft Philofophers
have not been afhamed to fearch into , and to handle in their writings. J do net here pro-
mfe any golden mountains , as they fay , nor yet thatThilofophers ftone , which the world
hath fo great an opinion ofand bath been bragged of in many ages, and happily attained unto
byfomex neither yet do I promife here that golden liquor , whereof if any man do drinks, it
is fuppofed thut it willm^k' him to be immortal ; but it is a meer dream , for feeing that the
w irU. it felfis variable and fubjeEv to alteration , therefore it cannot be but that whatfoever
the world yield! , (hould likewife be fubjebl to deftruUion\ fo that to prcmife or to under-
take

Of Changing Metals. 1 6 1

take any fuch matters a& thefe are , it mere but r-.jh fiefs and meer foolifmtfs. Bat the
things which we purpofe to difcourfe of and to deliver, arerheje which here fier follow,
and I would requefi the Readers to take them tngood part , and to conte t thenfelves r ith
theje; h(l if they attempt to proceed to further experiments herein , they prove themf.lzes
M fooh\h and m m.id at thofe which we have fpoken of before* Thefe things which hey e you
[hall find , J my felf have feen , and proved by experience, and therefore I am tfte bolder to
fet tioem abroach to the view of the whole world*

Chap. J.

Of Tin, and how it may be converted into a more excellent Mettal.
%r,i ij ipn rnsTOv aoj 31000901 ^/.ijMoini srf jfrfi fsb«ro vJrmB baa ;'• 10
^*^vit7''i *nnc c'ot'1 counter^c anc' rcfcmblc Silver; and there is great
^Jt~~z~k amity and agreement betwixt thefe two Mettals inrefped of
their colonr. The Nature and the colour of Tinne is fuch, chac
it will whiten all other Mettals ; but it makes them brickie and
I eafieto be knapt in funder : onely Lead is free from this power
of Tinne : but he tha t ca« skilfully make a medley of this Met-
tal with others, may thereby attain to many pretty fecrecies.
Wherefore, we will endeavor to counterfeit Silver as ne r as
we can : A matter which may be eafily effected , if we can tell how to abolifh and
utterly deltroy thofe imperfections which are found in Tinne, whereby it is to be
difcerned from Siver. The imperfections are thefe : Firft,it is wont to make a crea-
king noife, and crafheth more then Silver doth : Secondly, it doth not ring fo plea-
fantly as Silver , but hath a duller found : Thirdly? it is of a more pale and wanne co-
lour : And laftly, it is more foft and tender ; for if it be pur into the fire , it is not
firft red hot before ir be meired , as Silver will be; but it clings faft to the fire , and
is foon overcome and molten by the heat thereof. Thefe are the qualities that are
obierved to be in Tinne ; not the effential properties of the Nature thereof, but one-
ly accidental qualities , and therefore they may be more eafily expelled out of their
fubj Let as fee therefore how we may rid away thefe extrinfecal accidents : and

firit,

How to remedy the foftnefs of Tmt and the creaking noife that it makjs.

You muft firft beat it into fmall powder , as you (hall hereafter be inftm3ed in the
manner how to do ic ; and when you have fo done, you mu't reduce h into one
whole body again. And if it do not lofe its foftnefs at the firit time as you deal fo
by it, ufc the fame ccurfethe fecond time, and folikewife the third time rather
then fail , and by this means you fhall at length obtain your purpofe : for, by fo do-
ing, the Tin will wax fohard, that it will endure the fire till it be red hot, before ever
it will melt. By the like practice we may alfo harden all other foft bodies , to make
them red hot before they fhall be melted : but the experience hereof is mere clear
in Tinne then in any other Mettals whatfoevcr. We may alfo take away the crea-
king noife of Tinne , if we melt it feven lever al times , and quench it every time in
the urine of children ; orelfe intheOyl of Wall-nuts : for this is the onelv means
to expel that quality and imperfection out of it. Thus theD we have declared the
manner how to extract thefe accidents from it : but all this while we have not fhew-
ed how it may be transformed into Silver : which now we are to fpeak of, as foon
as ever we have (hewed the manner

How to bring Tin mto Powder,
which we promifed to teach. Let your Tinne boil in the fire ; and when it is very
liquid , pour it forth into a sreac morter ; and when it beginneth to wax cold, and
to be congealed together again , you muft ftir it and turn ic round about with 3
wooden peltle , and let it not ftand ftill in any cafe . thus fhall you caufe it be con-
gealed into very fmall crums as little as duft : and when you have fo done , put it in-
fo a very fine ranging fieve , and fift out the fmalleft of it ; and that which is lefc

A a behinde

\6% NaturalMagick. 2>0o^ ^

behinde in yourfieve , becaufe it is too grew and not broken well enough, you
muft put it into the fire again , and ufe the very fame courfe with it to break it into
fmaller durt, as yon ufed before ; for unlcfs it be throughly broken into powder,
it is not ferviceable,nor fit for your purpofe. Having therefore (hewed you how to
break your Tin into fmall crams , as alio how to expel out of it thofe imperfections
whereby it is molt manifeftly diicerned from Silver j both which things are very ne-
ceflary preparatives as it were to the main matter which we have in hand , let us
now come to the principal experiment it felf, namely

How to alter and transform Tm9 that it may become Silver^
You muft take an earthen veflel fomewhat wide-mouthed ; but it muft be very
ftrongly and firmly made, that it be throughly able to endure the vchemency of the
fire, even co be red hot : Into this veflel put your Tin broken into luch fmall crums
as have been fpoken of, and therein you muft with an iron ladle ftirrc it up and
down continually without ceafing, till it be all on a light fire, and yet none of the
Metal to be melted : when you have fo done , that you have given it over, and it
gathereth together into one body or lump again , you muft beftow the very fame
labour upon it the fecond time , fo long as it may Hand in fmall crums all on a fire
for thefpace of fix hours together, without melting. But if fome part of the Me-
tal be melted by the vehement heat of the fire , and fome other part of it remain not
melted , then you muft cake away that which is melted , and when it is congealed,
you mu t break it into fmall powder once again , and you muft run over your whole
labour again with it, even in the fame veflel and with the fame iniirumcnt as before.
After this, when you have brought all your Metal to that perfection that it will en-
dure the fire without melting , then you mu!t put it into a glafs-fornace where glafs
is wont to be made , or elfe into feme Oven that is made of putpofc to reflex the
heat of the fire to the beft advantage , and there let it be tormented and applied with
a very great fire for the fpace of three or four days together , until fuch time as it is
made perfectly white as fnow : for the fmaller that it is broken and beaten into
powder, the more perfectly it will take white , and be the fitter for your purpofe,
and more exactly fatisfie your expectation. After all this, you muft put it into a
veflel that (hall be almoft full of vinegar, and the vinegar muft cover all the Tinne,
and fwim about three inches above it. There yon matt diftil it, and let the vinegar
boil with it fo long, till the 1 inne hath coloured it, and made it of his own hue , and
thickened it into a more grofs fubftance. Then let it ftand a while ; and when it is
throughly fettled, pour out that vinegar and put in new, and temper it well with
thofe afhes or crums of Tinne : and this you muft do again and again , till all your
Tinne be diflolved into the vinegar. If by this often repetition of this labour, you
cannot effect fuch a diflolution , then you muft put it once again to the fire in fuch
a fornace, or clfe into fuch an Oven as we fpakc of before , that fo it may be reduced
inro white afhes more exactly and perfectly , whereby it maybe the more eafily
diflolved into vinegar. After this, you muft let the vapour of the vinegar be exha-
led andftrained out , and the Tinne that is left behinde muft be put into a certain
veflel where afhes have been wont to be pur , and then melt fome fine Lead and put
amongftit: and becaufe the Lead that is put in will bear up the Tinne aloft, there-
fore you muft make certain little balls or pills compounded of Soap and Lime, or elfe
of Salt-peter and Brimftone, or fome other like fat earthy fluff, and call them in
amonsft the Lead and 'inne, and they will caufe the Tinne to drench it felf with-
in the Lead: and by this means, all v our Tinne that doth take the Lead, and is
incorporated into it by a juft proportion and equal temperature , doth become very
excellent good Silver. But this is a marvellous hard labour, and not to be atchie-
ved without very great difficulty. You may like wife alter and transform

'Time into Leadt

An eafie matter for any man to eff ect, by reducing Tinne into afhes or powder often
times: for the often burning of it will caufe the creaking noifc which it is wont
to make , to be voided from it , and fo to become Lead without any more

«Hr> •

Of Changing Metals. id j

ado; efpecially, if you ufc a convenient fire, wren you go about to reduce it into
powder.

Chap. it.
Of Lead, and how it may be converted inie another Metal.

THe Antieot Writers that have been coavcrfant in the Natures of Metals,
are wont to call Tinne by the name of white Lead ; and Lead, by the name
of black Tinne: infinuating thereby the affinity of the Natures of thefe two
Metals, that tbey are very like each to another, and therefore may very eafily be
one of them transformed into the other. It is no hard matter therefore, as
to change Tinne into Lead, which we have fpoken of in the former Chapter,
So alfo

To change Lead into Time-
It may be cffe&ed onely by bare wafhing of it: for if you bath or wafh Lead
often times, that is, if you often melt it , fo that the dull and earthy 'ubftance
of it be abolifhed , it will become Tinne very eafily : for the fame quick-filver,
whereby the Lead was firft made a fubtil and pure fubftance , before it con;ra&-
ed that foil and earthinefs which makes it fo heavy , doth Mill remain n the Lead,
as Gebrm hath obferved ; and this is it which caufeth that creaking and gnafhing
found, which Tinne is wont to yield , and whereby it is efpecially dicerned from
Lead : fo that when the Lead hath loft its own earthy lumpiflinefs , which is ex-
pelled by often melting ; and when it is endued with the found of Tinne,
which the quick-filver doth eafily work into it , there can be no difference put be-
twixt them , but that the Lead is become Tin. It is alfo poffiblc to transform

Antimony ir.to head :

For, that kind of Antimony which the Alchymifts are wont to call by the name of
Rcgulus , if it be oftentimes burned in the fire, and be firft throughly boiled, it
turnech into Lead. This experiment is obferved by Diofcorides , who faith, That if
you take Ancimony and burn it exceedingly in the fire , it is converted into Lead,
Galen fhewcth another experiment concerning Lead, namely,

How to procure Lead to become heavier , then of it [elf it u :
For, whereas he had found by his experience , that Lead hath in it felf an aethereal or
airy fubftance , he brings this experiment. Of all the Mettals, faith he, that I have
been acquainted with, only Lead is encreafed both in bignefs and alfo in weight for,
if you lay it up infellars or fuch other places of receipt that are under the ground,
wherein there is a turbulent and grofs foggy air, fo that whatfoever is laid up in fuch
rooms flisli ftraightways gather filth and foil, it will be greater and weightier then
before it was. Yea, even the very clamps of Lead which have been fattened into
carved Images to knit their parts more ftrongly together , efpecially thofe that have
been fattened about their feet , have been divers times found to have waxed bisger j
and iome of thofe clamps have been feen to fwell fo much , that whereas in the ma-
king of fuch Images the leaden plates and pins were made level with the Images
themfelves , yet afterwards they have been fo fwoln , as that they have flood fojth
like hillocks and knobs very unevenly, out of the Chriftal ftones whereof the Images
were made. This Lead, is a Mettal that hath in it great ftore of quick-filver, as may
appear by this, becaufe it is a very eafie raaftery,

To extratt Quiclcfilver out *f Lead,
Let your Lead be filed into very fmall duft, and to every two pounds of Lead thus
beaten into powder , you maft put one ounce of Salt-Peter , and one ounce of ordi-
nary common Salt, and one ounce of Antimony. Let all thefe be well beaten and
powncd together, and put into a fieve 5 and when they are well fifted, put them in-

Aa 2 t to

\6\ Natural Magick. 'Bookj}.

to i veflel made of glafs , and you muft fence and plaiftcr the glafs round about on
the outward fide with thick loam tempered with chopt tf raw, and it muft be laid cn
veryfaft; and that it may ftick upon the veflel the better, your glafs muft not be
fmooth , but full of rigoles, as if it were wreftcd or writheo. When your veflel is
thus prepared , you muft fettle and apply it toareflexed fire, that is, to a fire made
infuch a place, as will reflect and beat back the heat of it with great vehemency to
the beft advantage : and underneath your veffels neck , you muft place a large pan,
or fome other fuch veflel of great capacity and receipt, which muft be half full of cold'
wtter : then clofe up all very faft and fure, and let your fire burn but a little, and give
but a fmall heat for the fpace of two hours ; afterward make it greater , fo that the
vcflel may be throughly heated by it , even to be red hot ; then fet a blower on
work, and let him not leave off to blow for the fpace of four whole hours together,
and you (hall fee the quick-filver dropdown into the veflel that is half full of water,
being flighted , as it were, out of the M:ttal by the vehement force of the fire.
Commonly the quick-filver will ftick to the fides of the veffels neck , and therefore
you muft give the neck of the veflel a little jolt or blow with your hand, that fo the
quick-filver may fall downward into the water-vcffel. By this practice I have ex-
tra&ed oftentimes out of every pound of Mettal almoft an whole ource of quick-
filver ; yea,fometimes more then an ounce, when I have been very diligent and
laborious in performing the work. Another experiment I have fecn, which drew
me into great admiration,

Lead converted into quick-filver :
A counterfeiting practice, which is the chief caufe rhatill rhe quick-filver alrnoft
which is u ually to be had, is but baflard fluff, and meerly counterfeit ; yet it is
bought and fold for currant , by reafon of the neer Ukenefs that it hath with the beft.
Let there be one pound of Lead melted in an earthen vcflel , and then put unto ic
alfo one pound of that Tinny mettal which is ufually called by the name of Marcha-
fite : and when they are both melted together, you muft ftirre them up and down,
and temper them to a perfect medley with a wooden ladle : In the mean fpace you
muft have four pounds of quick-filver warmed in another veflel ftandir.g by, to caft:
in upon that com pounded Mettal; for unlefs your quick-filver be warm , ii will cot
clofe nor agree well with your Mettals: then temper your quukfilver and your
Mettal together for awhile, andprefently after caft it into cold water; fo fhall ic
not congeal into any hard lump , but flote en the top of the water, and be very
quick and lively. The ohely bkmifh it hath , and that which onely may be except-
ed againft it , is thi«, that it is fomewhat pale and wan , and nor all things fo nim-
ble and lively as the true quick filver is, but is more flow andflimy, drawing as it
were a tail after it , as other vifcous and flimy things are wont to do. But put it in-
to a veff-1 of glafs, and lay it up for a while j for the longer you keep ir, the quicker
and nimbler it will be.

Cm a p. III.

Of Brafs ; and hew to transform it into a worthier Mettal,

\X7E will now alledge certain experiments concerning Brafs ; which though they
are but flight and trivial, yet we will not omit to fpeak of them, becaufewe
would fain fatisfie the humour of thofe , who have a great defire to read of and be
acquainted with fuch matters. And here we are to fpeak of fuch things as are good
to ftain the bodies of Mettals with fome other colour then naturally they are endued
withal. Yet I muft needs confefs that thefe are but fained and counterfeit colour-
ings, fuch a; will not laft and ftick by their bodies for ever ; neither yet are they able
to abide any trial , but as foon as ever they come to the touchftone , they may eafily
be difcerned to be but counterfeits. Howbeit, as they are not greatly to be defired,
becaufe they are but deceivable , yet notwithftanding they are not utterly to be re-
jected as things of no value. And beciufe there are very few Books extant which

Treac

Of (Joangtng Metals. \ 6 J

Treat of any Argument of like kind as this is , but they are full of fuch experiments
and fleights as here effer themfelves to be handled by us (for ihcy arc very ctmmon
things, and in every mms mouth) therefore we will in this place fpeak enciy of
thole things which are eafiiy to be gotten , and yet carry wi h them a very goodiy
fhew , i.ilomu h that the belt and fharpeft censure may be deluded and miftaken by
the beauti.Ul glois that is caft upon them ; and it may gravel the quekeft and skilful-
le't judgement, to define upon the luddain whether they are true ore ourrerfeit.
Yet let them be efteemed no better then ttiey deferve. Bur. this yon muft know,
that as flight and trivial as they are , yet they require the handlir g of a very skilful
Arriflcer: and wholoever thou art that goeh about to praSke thefe experiments, if
thou be not a skilful and well experienced workman thy fel , be fure to t;-k" the
advice and ecuntel of thofe that are very good A it ins in tht kind } tor otheiwife
thou wilt certainly mifcarry in them, and be defeated of thy purpofe. Thee nief and
efpecial things which are of force to endue Brafs wiih a whuer colour, are thefe:
ArfenLk or Ok'r ; that kind of quick fi-vcr which i; ftnlimated, as theAlctnmifts
call it ; the fcum or troth of filver, which is called by the Greeks Lithargvron ; the
Marchafitc or fire-ftone ; the Lees of wine; that kind of Salt which is tound in A-
frick under thefand, when the Moon is at the full', which is ammonly called Salt
Ammoniack i the com i on and ordinary Salt which the Arabians call by the name
of Al-hali; Salt-peter, and laftly Alome. If you extract the liquor out of any
of thefe, or out of all thefe, and when it is difiblved, put your Brai?, being red her,
into it to be quenched, vour Brafs will become white: Orelfe, if vou melt your
Brafs, and aflbon as it ismolren, put it into fuch liquor, your Brafs will become
white: Or elfe, if you draw forth into very fmall and thin p'ates , and pewn thole
bodies we now fpeak of,into (mall powder,and th.n caft both the brafs that is to be
coloured, and the bodies that mml colour it, into a melting or calling vc (Tel, and
there tamper them together tc a °ood mediey, and keep them a great while in the
fire, that it may be thoroughly me ted, the brafs will become white. Or elfe, if
yon rue if your braf; , and then caft upon it fome of that coourii" in (mall
lumps, (fcl if ^ou call it in powder and dull, it is a doubt that the force
and ra^e of the ore will utterly conl'ume it, fo that it (hall not be ab>c to
ineftor i-ai-whcm ttal)bui if ycu cart good (lore of luch colouring uponthemol-
t fs, it will endue yoW brais with a Hranse and wonderful whiunels, iojo-
m-'.c.i that it will feem ro be ver > fil vtr indeed. But that y<u may l am the better,
h w to work Inch experiments, 3rd bifide , that yon may by occafion of thofe
things wbi h ?re here fet down, !e >m how to compound and w~rk other matters,
we will now fct forth u to you certain example?, how we may make

Brafs to cr-twterfeit Silver ;
for wb*n oa e yu -re trained op a little in the practice of thefr matter', then they
will fink more eafily into y our underllancing, then by all your reading they canao :
tnerefore as we have fpoken of fuch things ar will do this fear, fo alfo we will teach
you how to work artificially. Take an earthen pot, and let ir upon the fire with
very hot coals heaped round about it ; put lead into it, and when ycu fee that your
lead i? m >lten by theforceof the fire, take the third pare of much filver as there
was lead, and pown it into 'mall powder, and pu it to the lead into rhe pot $ but
vou muft 'prinkle it in onely bv little and little, that it may be fcorched, and even
burned as it were by the heat of the fire, and may float like a it were oyle on the
top and luiface of the lead \ and fome of it may befo wafted by the^ehemencv of
the heat, that ir vantfh away into the fmoak. Then let them reft a while, fo long
as there be any reminders of the coals left. After you have fo done, break the vef-
fel into pieces, and take away the fcum and drofs of the mettal ; and whereas
there will ftand 00 the top of the mettal a certain oyle as it were, or a kind of gel-
ly> you muft take that, a-d bray it in a morter, and caft it into a vefTel by little and
little where there is brafs melted; and though the brafs be three times fo nu h in
weight as that gelly i<, yet the gelly will endue all that brafs with a white filver co-
lour Nay,if ihere be more then three times fo much melted brafs put inro that nvtal,
k will make it all like unto filver. But if you would have your brafs endued with a

per-

\66 Natural Magick. ISookj).

perfect white colour , and not difcernable from filver, you mnft melt feme filver
and fome brafs together, and then throw them into the fire, and fo take them out
again after fome ftiort time ; for the longer you fufEer them in the fire, the worfe will
your experiment fucceed. Which is a matter molt worthy to be obfervcd in thefe
cafes : for if your work continue any longer in the fire then need requires, it will
fade in colour, and the violence of the fire will countermand the operation and ef-
fect of your skil and labour in tempering the mettals together, and fo the brafs will
recover his former colour in his firft eftate. Wherefore let your mettals be kept in
the fire as little while as you can, that you may make your brais the whiter , and in
colour moll like unto filver : howbeit, though you have made it never fo white, yet
in time it will wax blackifh and dim again; for the Arfnick that is naturally incor-
porated into the brafle, will alwayes ftriveto rellore it to the former dnskifhand
dim colour which it is by nature endued withal. We will now alfo teach you an-
other way how to make

Brafs to counterfeit Silver ;

and this is a more excellent and notable experiment then the former. Take fix
ounces of the Lees of wine, eight ounces of Criftal Arfnick , half an ounce of
quick-filvcr that hath been fublimatcd, two ounces of Salt-pecter, one ounce and
an half of glafs ; beat all thefe together in a morter , and fee that they be broken
into the fmalleft powder and duft that may be. After this, take three pounds of
Copper, that which is commonly called Baada Mediolinenfis ; this you muft have
to be drawn out into fmall thin and flender plates j and when you have thus pre-
pared your mettals and ingredients, you muft take of that powder, and fprinkle it
into an earthen pot by little and little, and withal put into the fame pot your flen-
der plates of Copper ; and thefe things you muft do by courfe, firft patting in
fome of your powder, and then fome of your Copper, and afterward fome pow-
der again, and afterward fome of your little plates again, and fo by turns one af-
ter another, till the pot be brim-full: then let a cover upon your por, and plaifter
it all over fir gulirly well with good ftiffe morter that is tempered with chopped
ftraw» thenbinde it round about with bands and clamps of iron; and trufs it
up very hard and ftiffe together, and then cover it over again with fuch morter as
before. Afterward let the pot be made hot with a great fire round about iti The
manner of the heating of your pot muft be this; fet the pot in a Centre as it were,
that the fire may lye as it were in the circumference round about it, to the diftance
of one foot from the Centre; a little after this, move you fireneererto the por,
that there may not be above the dillance of half a foot betwixt them; then with-
in a while lay the fire a little necrer,and fo by little and lktle let the fire be brought
clofetothe pot, yea and let the pot be covered all over with hot burning coals,
within the (pace of one hour, and fo let it ftand hidden in the fire for the fpace of
fix whole hours together. And after the fix hours, you muft not take away the
coals, but let them go out and die of themfelves, and let the pot fo ftand under
them until it be ftarkcold : and when it is thoroughly cold, break it into pieces,
and there you fhall find your little thin plates fo brittle, that if you do but touch
chem fomewhat hard with your fingers, they will foon be crumbled into duft. When
you have taken them out of the pot, you muft afterward put them into fome ca-
rting veffel that is very hard, and durable ; and there within half an hour it will
be melted: then put inio it fome of your powder by little and little, till all of it
be molten together ; then caft it all forth into fome hollow place, into fome form
or mould , that it may run along into rods ; and the metal will be as brittle and as
eafie to be broken into fmall crumbs, as any Ice can be. After all this, you muft
melt two pounds of brafs ; but you muft firft purine it andcleanfe it a little, by
cafting upon k fome broken glafs, and Lees of wine, and Silt-ammoniack, and
Salt-peeter, every one of them by turns,and by little and little. When you have
thus cleanfed it, you muft put unto it one pound of that metal which you made of
the Copper and powder before fpoken of ; and you muft Mill fprinkle upon them
fome of that powder ; and after all this, you muft take half fo much of the beft

filver

Of changing Metals. \6y

tiiver that may be gotren, and melt it amongft the metals before fpoken of, and
caft them all together into fome hollow },lace iike a mould, and fo you fhall obtain
your purpoi'e. But that the iurface and the utmoft out-fides of the metal may ap-
pear whLe, you muft throw it into the fire, that it maybe burning hot, and then
take it forth, and call it into that water wherein the Lees of wine and ordinary
fait have been liquefied and dillolvcd ; and there let it boil for a certain time, and
lb (hall you make it very white, and moreover fo pliant andfo eafieto be framed and
wrought to any fafhion, that you may draw it thorough any little hole, yea even
thrrough the eye of a needle. Furthermore, this is not to be omitted nor buried
in fi'.ence, for it is a matter of great ufe, and fpecial force in the colouring of metals,
that they be ir wardly clear/cd and purged of their drof?, that they may be tho-
roughly w^ftied and rid or all fuch leum and cffals, as are incident onto them ; for
being thu- handled, they wi!l be more lerviceablc and operathefor all experiment?.
As for example ; let brafs be molten, and then quenched in vineger, and then redu-
ced into powder with fait, fo that the more grols and infectious parts thereof he
extracted from it j and let it be fo handled oftentimes, till there be nothirg,of its
natural uncleannefs remaining within it, and fo fhall it receive a deeper dye, and
be changed into a more lively colour. Let the veflel wherein you melt your me-
tals to prepare and make them fit for your turn, be bored thorough in the bottom
withfundry holes thar the metal being melted may ftrain thorough, but the drof?,
and fcum. and cffals of it may be left behind, that there may be nothing but pure
metal to be u'ed in your experiments : for the lefs drofle and offals that your me-
tal have, they are fo much the more ferviceable for your ufe in working. Let this
therefore be a general rule alwayes to be remembred and obferved, that your me-
tals be throughly purged and rid from their drofs as much as may pofiibly be, before
ever you entertain any of them into your fervice for thefe intendments. There is
yet alfo another way whereby we may bring to pafs that

Brafs Jhould refembU ft her,

and this by Arfnick Orpine, which is an eff:&ual means to accomplifli this matter i
and whereas in craft of time the metal will fomewhat recover it felf to its own
former palencfs and dim colour, we will feek to remedy it and prevent it. Take
the belt Arfni:k Orpine that may be gotten, fuch as yawns and gapes as though it
had icales upon it ; it muft be of a very orient golden colour j you muft meddle this
Orpine witn the duft of brafi that hath been filed from it, and put into them ibme
Lees of wine* but they muft be each of them of an equal weight and quantity
when you drench them together within the liquor, andfo fhall it bear a con inual
orient colour, and glifter very brightly without ever any fading at all. After thby
take you fome filver, and diffolve with that kind of water which is called Jqua-for-
tU but it muft be fuch as hath in it very little ftore of moifture ; for the moll wa-
terifh humour thatis in it, muft be evaporated in fome fcalding pot or other iuch
veffrl, which you muft 611 up to the brim fix or fevenfeveral times, with the fame
water, after the vapours of it have been extracted by the heat of the fire that is un-
der the veflel : when you have thus done, you muft mingle your filver that is fo
diff lved, with the brafs filing', and the Arfnick Orpine which we fpake of before ;
and then you muft plain it and fmooth it all over with the red marble-ftone, that the
clefts or icales before ipoken of, may be clofed up ; and withal, you muft water it by
little and little, as it were drop after drop, with the oyle that hath been expreft or
extracted out of the Lees of wine, or elle out of the firmed Salt-ammoniack that
may be had. And when the Sun is gotten up to any ftrength, that it fhews forth it
felf in very hot gleams , you muft bringforth this confection, and let the force of
the heat work upon it, even till it be thorough dry : afterward you muft fupple it
with more of the fame oyle again, and then let it be dryed up again fo long, till
that which is remaining do weigh juft fo much as the filver weighed before it was
diflblved. Then clofr it up in a veflel of glafs, and lay it under fome dunghil till
k be diflblved again^nd after the diffolution be gathered together into aGcllyjthen

68 Natural Magick. cBookj.

caft into ic ten or eight pieces of brafs, and ic will colour them all, that they (hall
moll lively counterfeit filver. But if you defire

To make brafs {hew it felf of a filver colour, by rubbing it betwixt jour bands,
as boyes and cozening companions arc oftentimes went to do, that if they do but
handle any veflels of brafs, they will make them ftraightways to glitter like Silver,
you may ufethis devife. Take Ammoniack-falt,and Alome,and Salt-peeter, of each
of them aD equal weight , and mingle them together, and put unto them a fmall
quantity of Silver-duff, that hath been filed off ; thenfet them alltothc fire, that
they may be thoroughly hot t and when the fume or vapour is exhaled from
ihem, that they have left reaking, make a powder of them; and whatfoever
brafs you caft that powder upon, if you do withal, either wet it with your
own fpittle, or elfe by little and little rub ic over with your fingers, you
fhall find that they will feem to be of a filver colour. But if you would
vvhicen'fuch brafs more handfomely and neatly, you muft take another courfe :
You mull diffolve a little filver with Aqua fortis , and put unto it fo much
Lees of wine , and as much Ammoniack-falt ; let them fd lie together till
they be about the thicknefs of the filth that is rubbed off from a mans bo-
dy after his fvyeating: then roul it up in fome fmall round balls, and fo let
them wax dry : when they are dry, if you rub them with your fingers upon
any brafs or other like metal, and ftill as you rub them moiflen them with a
little fpittle, you fhall make that which you rub upon to be very like unto filver.
The very like experiment may be wrought by Quick-filvcr ; for this hath a
wonderful force in making any metal to become white. Now , whereas we
promifed before , to teach you, not onely how to endue brafe or fuch other
metal with a filver colour , but alfo how to preferve and keep the bodies fo
coloured from returning to their former hiew again, you muft beware that thefe
bodies which are endued with fuch a filver colour, do not take hurt by any
fharp-©r fowre liquor ; for either the urine, or vineger, or the juice of limons, or
any fuch tart and fowre liquor, will caufe this colour foon to fade away, and fo
difcrcdit your work, and declare the colour of thofe metals to be falfe and coun-
terfeit.

Chap. IV.

Of Iron, and bow to transform it into a more worthy metal.

NOw the order of my proceedings requires , that I (hould fpeak fomewhat al-
fo concerning Iron ; for this is a metal which the Wizards of India did highly
eftecm, as having in ic felf much goodnefs, and being of fuch a temperature, that it
may eafily be transformed into a more worthy and excellent metal then it felf is.
Notwithstanding, fome there are , which reject this metal as altogether unprofi-
table, becaufe ic is fo full of grofs earthly fubftance, and can hardly be melted in
the fire, byreafonof that firm and fetled brimtione which is found in it. But if
any man would

Change Iron into "Brafs ,
fo that no part of the grofle and earthly fubftance fhall remain in it, he may eafily
obtain his purpofe by Copprcfle or Vitriol. It is reported that in the mountain
Carparu s an Hill of Pannonia , at a certain Town called Smolinitium , there is a
Like, in which there are three channels full of water; and whatfoever Iron rs put
into thrfe channel*, it ji converted into brafs : and if the Iron which you cart in-
to thembe in fmall pieces or little clamps , prefently they are converted into mud
or dirt ; bur if that mud be baked and hardened in the fire, it will be turned into
perfect good brafs But there is an artificial means whereby this alfo may be affect-
ed; and it is to hc,do**eon this wife. Take Iron, and put into a catling veff 1 ;
a.»d when it is red hot with the vehement heat of the fire, and that it beginneth to
melr,you mull caft upon it by little and little fome fprinkling of quick brimftone: then

you

Of changing Metals. i gp

ycu muft pour it forth , and caft into imall rod«, and beat it wirh hammers i it is
very brittle, and will eafily be broken : then d flolve it with Aqua-frits, luch as is
compounded of vitriol and Aicme tempered together : let it upon hot cinders till
it boil, and be diffblved into vapours, and fo quite varifh away* and the fubfi-
dence thereof, or the rubbifli that remains behind, it it be reduced into one folid
body again, will become good brafs. If you would

CMake Iron to become white,
you may effect it by divers and lundry Heights ; yet let this cnely device content
you in this matter. Firft,ycu mull cleanle and purge ycur Iron of that drofs and re-
tuie that is in it, and of that poyfoned corruption of iuft that it is generally infe-
cted withal: for it hath mere earthly iubftance and parts in it then any other me-
tal hath, infomuch that if you boil it and purge it never fo often,it will ftill of it ielf
yield feme new excrements. To deanfe and purge it this is thebeft way: Take
feme fmail thin plates of Iron, and make them red hot , and then quench them in
ftrong lye and vineger which have been boiled with ordinary Salt and Alome ; and
ihh ycu rr.uft ufe 10 do wiih them oftentimes, till they be feme what whitened:
the fragments or fcrapings alfo of Iron, you muft pewn in a mcner, after they
have been fteeped in fait ; and y ou muft bray them together till the fait be quite
changed, fo that there be no blacknefs left in the lienor dfcit, and till the Iron
be cleanfed and purged frcm the drofs that is in it. When you have thus prepared
your Iron, you muft whiten it cn this manner : Make a plain1 cr as it were, of quick-
filvcrand lead tempered together; then pewn them into powder, and put that
powder into an earthen veffelamongft your plates of Iron that ycu have prepared
robe whitened: clofeupthe vcffclfaft, and plaifter it all over with mercer, fo
that there may be ro breathing place for any air either to get in or out: then put ic
into the fire, and there let it li ay for one whole day together, and at length en-
creale y cur fire, that it may be io vehement hot as to melt the Iron ; for the plai-
fter or cmfe&ion which was made of lead acd Quick filver, will work in the Iron
twetfrt^s ; for fiift, it will diipofeitto melting, that it fliall {©on be diflolved;
and leccrdly, it will difpofe it to whitening , that it fliall the fooner receive a glit-
teiing coleur. After all this, draw forth your Iron into rmall thin plates again, and
ptccceo the fecond time in the fame courfe as before, till you findthat it hath ta-
ken (c much whiter r fie as ycur purpoft was to endue it withal. In like manner, if
yet melt it inavtfftl that hath holes in the bottcm of ir, and melt with itlead,and
the Matthafite cr fire ftcce, and Arfnick, andfuch other things as we fpake of be-
fore ir cur experiments of brafs, ycu may make Ircn to become white. If you
put amongft it leme filver , thcu^h ir be not much, it will foon reff table the
colour of filver : for Iron doth eafily ftffer it fclf to be raedled with gold or filver;
and they may be fo thoroughly incorporated into each other, that by all the rules of
reparation that canbeufed, you cannot without great labour, and very much ado
feparate the one of them from the other.

Chap. V.

Of Quick; fiver, and of the tffetts and operations thereof.

IN the next place it is meet that we fpeak femething concerning Quick-filver.and
the manifold operations thereof: wherein we will firft fet down certain vulgar
and common congelations that it makes with other things, becaufe many men do
defiie to know t hem ; and fecondly, we will fliew,hcw it may be diffolved intc wa-
ter,that they which arc defircus of luch experiments, may be fatisfied herein. Firft
therefore wewillfhew

Hew Q*tick;f liter nta) he corgtahdard curdled as it Were with Ir*n9

r '

B b P*

170 Natural Magick. *Bookj>.

Put the quick-filver into a cafting vcffel , and put together with ic thar wa-
ter , which the Blacktmith hath ufed to quench his hoclronin; and put in alio
among them Ammoniack Salt, and Vitriol, and Verdegreafe , twice lb much of
every one of thefe , as there was quick-filver: lec all theie boil together in
an exceeding great fire 9 and ftill turn them up and down with an Iron flice
or ladle; and if at anytime the water boil away , you muft be lure that you have
in a readinefs feme of the fame water through hot to call into it , that it may fup-
ply the wafie which the fire hath made , and yet not hinder the boiling; thus will
they be congealed all together within the fpace of fix hours. After this,you muft cake
the congealed ftnff when it is cold , and binde it up hard with your hands in leather
thongs, or linnen cloth , or oficrj, that all the juice and moifture that is in it, may
be fqueefed out of it ; then let that which is fqueefed and drained out , fettle it feif,
and be concealed once again , till the whole confection be made : then put it into
an earthen veffel well wafhed,and amoogft it fomc fpring-water,and take off as ncer
as you can, all the filth and fcum that is upon ic and is gone to wafte ; and in that
veffel you muft temper and diligently mix together your congealed matter with
fprihg-water, till the whole matter be pure and clear: then lay it abroad in the
open air three days and three nights , and the fubjeft which you have wrought upon
will wax thick and hard like a rtiell or a tile-fheard. There is alio another congela-
tion to be made with cjlick-filver,

Congealing of Quickzjilver with halls of Brafs,

thus : make two Brafs half circles , that they may faften one within the other, that
nothing may exhale: put into them quick filvcr, with an equal part of white Arfe-
r.ick and Tartar well powdred and learced; lute the joynts well witnout,thit nothing
may breathe forth , fo let them dry, and cover them with coles all over for fix hours:
then make all red hot , then take it one and open it, and you fhall fee it all coagu-
lated and to ftick in the hollow of the Brafs ball j ftrike it with a hammer, and ic
will fall off ; melt it, and project it, and it will give an excellent colour like to Sil-
ver, and it is hard to difcern it from Silver. If you will, you may mingle it with
three parts of melted Brafs , and without Silver ; it will be exceeding white, (oft and
malleable. It is alfo made another way: Make a great Cup of Silver, red Arfenkk
and Latin, with a cover thac fits clofe, that nothing may exhale : fill this with quick-
filver, and lute the joynts with the white of an Egg, or fome Pine-tree-rofin^ as it
is commonly done : hang this into a p- 1 full of Linleed Oyl , and let it boil twelve
hours ; take it out, and ftrain it through a skin or tfraw ; and if any part be not co-
agulated , do the work again, and make i: coagulate. If the veffel do coagulate ic
flowly, fo much as you find ic hath loft of its weight of the filver , Arfenick and Al-
chymy make that good again , for we cannot know by the weight : ure it , it is
wonderful that the quick-filver will draw to it fclf out of the veffel , and quick- fil-
ver will enter in. Now I fhall (hew what may be fometimes ufeful,

■r I BJfflJ 6 ■ ' 91 9itll v

To draw water out of Quicks f\ Iver,
Make a veffel of potters earth, that will endure the fire, of which crucibles are made
fix foot long, and of a foot Diameter , glafted within with glafs , about a foot broad
at the bottom, a finger thick, narrower at the top, bigger at bottom. About the
neck let there be a hole as big as ones finger , and a little pipe coming forth , by
which you may fitly put in the quick-filver ; on the top of the mpuih \tt there bea.
glafs cap , fitted with the pipe, and let it be fmeered with clammy day [ and oiddfit
above that ic breathe not forth. For this work make a furnace fpt.ll he fa large
at the top, thac it may be fit to receive the bottom of the veff-1 > a foot broad and
deep. You muft make the grate the fire is made, upon, with that ajt , that when
need i" you may draw it back on one fide, and the fire may f.ill,b?r<«iuh. Set there-
for - the empty veffel into the furnace , and by degrees kindle Yhe fire : I.anly,ntake
the bottom red hot ; when you lee it to be fo, which you may know the^top, you
molt look through the glafs cap; prefently by the hole prepared pour hV fen or fif-
teen pounds of quLk-filver , and prefently with clay caft upon it flop that hole, «d

take

Of changing Metals* 1 7 i

take away the grare that the fire may fall to the lower pans , and forthwith quench
it with water. Then you fhall fee that the water of quick-filver will run forth at
the nofe of the cap, into the receiver under it, about an ounce in quantity : take the
veffel from the fire , and pour forth the quick-filver, and do as before , and always
one ounce of water will diflil forth: keep this for Chymical operation^. I found
this the heft for to fmug up women with. This artifice Was found to purifie quick-
filver. I (hall not pafs over another art , no lels wonderful than profitable for Ule,

To make quick-filver grow to be a Tree:
Diffolve filver in aquafortis , what is diffolved evaporate into thin air at the fire, that
there may remain at the bottom a thick un&ious fubftance; Then diitil fountain-
water twice or thrice, and pour it on that thick mitter , fhaking it well; then let it
ftanda little , and pour into another glafs veffel the moft pure water , in which the
filvet is : adde to the water a pound of quick-filver , in a molt iranfparent cryltalline
glafs that will attract to it that fil ver , and in the fpace of a day will there fpring up a
moft beautiful tree from the bottom, and hairy, as made of rmft fine beards of corn,
and it will fill the whole veffel, that the eye can behold nothing more pleafant * The
fame is made of gold with aqnarcgi<t.

Chap. VI.

Of Silver.

I Shall teach how to give filver a tin&urethat it may fhew like to pure gold ; and
after that,how it may be turned to true gold.

To give Silver a Geld- colour,
Burn burnt brafs with ftibium, and melted with half filver , it will have the pet*
fe& colour of °o!d • and mingle it with gold, it will be the better colour- We boil
braft thus : T know not any one that hath taught it : you fhall do it after this manner:
melt brafs in a crucible , with as much ftibium : when they are both melted, put in
as much ftibium as before , and pour it out on a plain Muble-ftone , that it may
cool there, and befit to beat i^to plates. Then fhall you make two bricks hol-
low, that the plates may be fitly laid in there : when you have fitted them, let them
beclofed fall together , and bound with iron bands , and'wcll luted : when they
are dried put thtmin a glafs fornace, and let them Hand therein a week, to burn ex-
aftiy, take them out and ufe them. And

To tihUure Silver into gold,
you muff do thus: Make firff fuch a tart lye, put quick lime into a pot, whofe bo^
torn is full of many imall holes, put a piece of wood or tilefheard upon it, then by
degrees pour in the powder and hot water , and by the narrow holes at the bottom,
let it drain into a c lean earthen vtflel under it : do this again, to make it exceeding
tart. Powder ftibiun and put into this, that it m?y evaporate into the thin air j
let it boil at an eafie fire: for when it boils,the water will be of a purple colouruhen
ftrain it into a clean veffel through a linnen cloth; again, pour on the lye on the
powders that remain, and let it boilfo long at the fire, till the water feems of a
bloody colour no more : Then boil the lye that is colour d, putting fire under , till
the water be all exhaled; but the powder that remains being dry, with the oyl of
Tartar dried and diffolved, muft be caft again upon plates made of equal parts of gold
and filver, within an earthen crucible ; cover it fo long with coles , and renew your
work, till it be perfe&ly like to gold. Alfo I can make the fame

Otherwije.

If I mingle the congealed quick-filver that I fpeak of with a cap , with a third part
of filver , you fhall find the filver to be of a golden colour : you (hall melt this with
the fame quantity of gold, and put it into a pot: pour on it very (harp vinegar,

B b 2 and

ij% Natural Magics. £00^ 5.

and let it boil a quarter of a day, and the colour will be augmented. Pat this to the
utanofi trial of gold, that is, with common fait, and powder of bricks, yet adding Vi-
triol, and fo fha.il you have refined gold. We can alfo extract

Gold out of Silver^

And not fo little but it will pay ycur coft , and afford you much gain. The way is
this : Put ihc fine filings of Iron into a Crucible that wiil endure fire, till it grow red
hot, and melt: then take artificial Chryfocolla, fuch as Goldlmiths ufe to ioder with,
and redArfenick, and by degrees ftrew them in : when you have done this, cart in
in equal part of Silver , and let it be exquifitcly purged by a firong vtffel made of
Aftiesrall the dregs of ihe Gold being new re moved,caft it into water of feparai ion,
and the Gold will fall to the bottom of the veflel, take it: there is nothing of many
things that I have found more true, more gainful or, more hard : fpare no labour, and
do it as you fhould , left you lofe your labour : or otherwife , let the thin filings of
Iron (oak for a day in fea- water , let it dry, and let it be red hoc in the fire to long in
a Crucible, till it run , then caftin an equal quantity of filver, with half brafs, let
it be projr&ed into a hollow place : then purge it exactly in an afh veflel : for the
Iron being excluded and its dregf , put it into water ot feparacion, and gather what
falls to the bottom, and it will be excellent Gold. May be it will be profitable to

Fix Cinnaher,

He that defires it , I think he muft do thus , break the Cinnaber into pieces as big
as Wall-nuts , and put them into a glafs veflel that is of the fame bigneis , and the
pieces muft be mingled with thrice the weight *f filver, and laid by courfes , and the
veflel muft be luted, and ftflfer it to dry, or fet it in the Sun j then cover it with
afhes , and let v. boil fo long on a gentle fire, till it become of a lead colour and
break not, which will not be unleis ycu tend it conftantly till you come fofar.
Then purge it with a doub e quantity of lead ; and when it is purged, if it be put to
all tryal«,i' will ftand the ftronger, and be more heavy and of more vertue: the more
eafie fire you ufe, the better will the bufinef^ be effected : but fo (hall we try to re-
pair filver, ard revive it when it i^ fpoil'd. Let fublitmte quick-filver boil in diftil'd
vinegar, then mingle quick-filver, and in a glafs retort , let the quick-filver evapo-
rate i^> a hot fire, and fall into the receiver : keep it: If you be skilful, you fhall
findbui little of the weiYh- left. Others do it with the Regulus of Antimony. But
othetwife you fhall do it fooner and more gainfully thus : Put the broken pieces of
Cinnaber as big as dice, into along linnenbag, banging equally from the pot fides ;
then pour on the fharpeft venegar, with alcmand tartar, double as much, quick
lime four parts , and as much of oak^ n afhes , as it is ufual to be made ; cr you muft
m*kc <cme. Let it boil a whole day, take it out and bcil it in oy 1, be diligent about
it, and let it ftay there twenty fcur hcurs: take the pieces of Cinnaber cut of the
oyl, and fmecr them with the white of anegge beaten, and role ir with a third
part of the filings of filver : put it into the bottrm of a convenient vtflVl , and luic
it well with the heft earth, as I faid: fet it to the fire three days, and at laft ircreafe
the fire, that it may almoft melt and run : take it off, and wafh it from its face that
are left , at the laft proof of filv er,and bring it to be true and natural. Alio it will be
pleafant

From fixt Qnnaber to draft out a filver hard.

If you put it into the fame veflel , and make a gentle fire under , filver that is pure,
net mixed with lead, will become hairy like a wood, that there is nothing more
pleafant to behold.

Chap.

Of changing Metals-.

Chap. VII.

Of Operations neceff.iry for ufe,

I Thought fit to fct down feme Operations which are generally thought fit for our
works : and if you knew them roc , you will noteafily obtain your dcHre. I have
fct them down here , that you might not be put to feek them eifwhere : Firft*

To draw forth the life of Tinnt,
The filing? of Tinne mult be put into a pot of earth , with equal part of falt-peter,
you fhall let on the top of this feven , as many o^her earthen pots with holes bored
in ihetn, and flop thefc holes well wiih clay : fct above this a glafs veffel with the
mouth downwards, or with an open pipe, with a v<ffel under it : put fire to it, and
you fhall hear it make a noife when i: is hot : the lite flies away in the Fume, and you
fliill find ic in the hollo vv pots, and in the bottom of the glaled veffel compacted to-
gether. If you bore an earr hen veffwl on the fide, you may do ic fomething more
eaftly by degrees,and you fhall flop it. So alfo

From Stibium

we may extras ic. Stibium that Druggifls call Antimony, is grownd fmall in hand-
miils, then ler a new crucibie of earth be made red hot in a cole fire ; caff into it pre-
lenrK- by dcgrees,S ibium,fwice as mu h Tartar,four parts of falt-peter, finely pow-
dred : when the fume ri eth,cover it with a cover, left the fume fifing evaporate : then
take it eff , and caft in more, ti'l all the pr wder be burnt : then let it lland a little
at the fire, take it eff ind let it cool, and kim r,ff the dregs on the top, and you fhall
find at the bottom what the Ovmiii* call the Regulus ; it is like Lead , and eifily
changed inro it. For faith Diofcorides^ fhould it burn a little more, it turns to Lead.
Now I will (hew how one may draw a more noble Metal

To the out-fdey

As foolifh Thymifts fay , for they think that by their impoftures they do draw forth
the parts lying in the middie,and that che incernal parts are the baleft of all ; but they
erre exceedingly : For they eat onely the outward parts in the luperficies, that are
the w akeft, and a little quick filver is drawn forth, which I approve not. For they
corrode all things that their Medicament enters , the harder parts are left , and are
polifhed and whitened: may be they are perfwadedof this by the medals of the
Amients, thar were within all brafs, but outwardly fee med like pure filver ; buc
thole were fodered together, and heaten with hammers, and then ftamp'd Yet ic
is very much to doit as they did, and I think it cannot be done. But the things
thar po'ifh are thele, common Salt, Alom, Vitriol, quick Brimftone, Tartar ; and for
Gold,onely Verdigreaie, and Salt Ammoniack. When you would go about it, you
mutt powder part of thtm, and put them into avcffsl with thcmetal. Thecruci-
blemuft be luted with clay, and covered : there muftteleft but a very fmall holefor
peripiration : then fet ic in a gentle fire, and let it burn and blow nor, left the nsetal
melt : when the powder* arc burnt they wih fiok down , which you fhall know by
the fmoke, then take c ff the cover and look into them. But men make the Metal
red hot, and then when it is hot rhey drench ic in : or othf rwile ; they put it in vine-
gar till it become well cleanf d , and when you ha^e wrapt the work in linnen-
rags that was well luted, cafHt into an earthen veffel of vinegar, and boil ir long,
take it out and caft it into urine, let it boil in fait and vinegar, till no filth almoft
rife, and the foul fpots of the ingredients be gone ; and if you find it not exceed-
ing white, do the fame again till vou come to perfe£*ion : Or eli'e proceed other-
wife by ord?r : Let your work b^il in an eart hen pot of water, with fait, alom, and
ra- ar: when the whole fuperficies is grown whire,letit alone a while; then let them
boil three hours with equal parts of brimftone, falt-peter, and fait, that it may hang
fo the middle of them, and not touch the fides of the veffel j take it out, and rub ic

vvithr

174- Natural Magic k. 2?00^ 5.

with fand , till the fume of the fulphur beTcmoved again : let it boil again as at firft,
and foil will wax white, that it will endure the fire , and not be reje&ed for coun-
terfeit ; you (hall find it profitable if you do it well ; and you will rejoyce, if you do
not abufe it to your own ruine.

Chap. VIII.

How to make a Metal more weighty.

IT is a queftion amongft Chymifts, and fuch as are addicted to thofe ftudies , how it
might be that filver might equal gold in weight , and every metal might exceed
it< own weight. That may be alio made gold , without any detriment to the ttamp
or engraving, and filver may increafe anddecreaf: in its weight, if fo be it be made
into lome veffrl. I have undertaken here to teach how to do that cafily, that others
do with great difficulty. Take this rule to do it by, that

The weight of a Golden veffel may increafe^
without hurring the mark , if the magnitude do not equal the weight. You (hall
rub gold with thin filver, with your hands or fingers, until it may drink it in, and
makeup 1 he weight you would have it, Hickingon thefuperficies. Thenpreparea
ftrong lixivium of brimttone and quick lime, and cart it with the gold into an earthen
pot with a wide mouth : put a fmall fire ut der, and let them boil io long , till you lee
that they hav e gain'd their colour • then take it out, and you fhall have it : Or elic
draw forth of the velks cf eggs and the litharge of gold, water with a ftrong fire, and
quench red hot gold in it, and 1 ycu have it.

Another that is excellent.
Yo'ifhall bring filver to powder, either with aquafortis^ or calx ; the calx is after-
wards wait with water, to wafh away the fait, wet a golden veflel or plate with
Water or fpiitle, thai the quantity of the powder vou need may flick on the outward
faperficies ; yet put it not on the edges, for the fraud will beeafily difcovered by
rubbing it on rhe touch ftone. Then powder finely fait one third part , bikk as
much , vif riol made red two parts : take a brick and maVe a hole in it as big as the
veflel is, in the bortrm whereof ftrew air m de plume : then agair pour on the
powder withyorr woikiill vou have filled the hole, then cover the hole with
another brick, and fatten it with an Iron pin, and lure the joynts well with clay :
let this drv , and let it (land in a reverberating fire about a quarter of a day ; and
when it is cold, open it , and you (hall find the gold all of a filver colour, and more
weigh y, wi'hout any hurt to the ftamp. N^w to bring it to its former colour, do
thus: Take Verdkreafe four parts, Salammoniack two parts, fait- peter a half part,
as much brick , alom a fourth part ; mingle thefe with the waters , and wafh
the veflel with it : then with iron tones put it upon burning coles , that it may be
red hot :take it off, and plunge it in urine, and ir will regain the colour. If ir fliine
toorru h,and you would have ir of a lower colour, the remedy i* to wet it in urine,
and let it ftand on a plate red hot to cool. Bnt thus you (hall make vitriol very red;
put it into a veflel covered with coles, and boil it till it change to a moH bright red r
take it out and lay it afide , and do not ufe it for an ill purpofe. We may with the
fragments of brafs

Do this tuft nefs other wife:
Thar fhall fupplv the place of filver, and it fhall become too weighty : Or otherwife,
melt two parts of brafs with filver, then make it into fmall thin plates ; in the mean
while make a powder of the dregs of aquafortis , namely of falt-peter and vitriol,
and in a Hrong melting veflel, put the plate and the powder to augment gold , fill
the vffel in a prepofleroo^ order. Then lute the mouth of it , and let it in a gentle
fir half a dav : take it off, always renewing the fame till it ccme to the defired
weight. We have taught how to increafe the weight , and not hurt the fafhion

or

Of Changing Metals. i

or ftamp. Now I fhall (hew how wihout lots in weight , nor yet the fiamp being
hurt,

Gold And Stiver may be diminished t

Some nfe to do it with aqua fonts, but it makes the work rough with koots and holes;
you (hall do i; therefore thus: Strew pewder of brimftone upon the work, and put
a candle to it round about , or burn it under your work , by degrees it will con-
fume by burning ; ftrikc ic with a hammer on the contrary fide, and the luperficies
will fall off , as much in quantity as you pleafe, as you ufe the brimftone. Now
fhall I (hew how

To fep irate gold from filver CH$S that are gilded :

For it is oft-times a cufiome for G<ildimithsr to melt the veffels and caft them away,
and tom>ke new ones again \ not knowing how wit hout great trouble , to part the
gold from the filver , and therefore melt both together. To part them, do thus :
Take fait Ammoniack , brimftone half a part : powder them hne, and anoinr the
gilded part of the veflel with oyl: then ftrew on the powder, and take thevef-
fei in a pair of tongs , and put it into the fire : when it is very hot , ftrike it with an
iron, and the powder fhaken will fall into the water, in a platter uuder it, and the
veflel will remain unaltered. Alfo it is done

Another way

with quick- filver : Put quick- filver into an earthen veflel with a very wide mouth,
and l~t it heat lb long at the fire, that you can endure the heat of it with your finger,
put into it: put the gilt plate of filver into it, and when the quick-filver flicks to
the go'd, take it out and put it into a Charger, into which thegoid, when it is
cold, wi 1 fall with the quick-filver. Going over this work again , until no more
gold appears in the veflel. Then put the gold with the quick-filver that was fha-
ken into the Charger, into a linnen clout, and preis it out with your hands, and let
the quick filver fall into ibme other receiver ,the gold will flay behind in the ragj take
it and pat it into a cole made wirh a hole in it,blow till it melt, make it into a lump,
and boil it in an earthen veflel with a little Stibium , and pour it forth into ano-
ther veff. l,that the gold may fall to the bottcm , and the Stibium flay atop. But
if you will

Part Cold from a veffel of Brafs9

wet the veflel in cold water , and fet it in the fire : when it is red hot, quench it in
cold water ; then fcrape off the gold with latin wire bound together.

Chap. IX.
To part Metals without aquafortis.

bat wo ji y/a ; if?ra fig fij ^-.>^-h A-31 b'!flf iiftjy 'srfj j*i baa $attst"d \*i «

BEcauie waters are drawn from falts with difficulty , with lofs of time and great
charges ; 1 fhall fta w you how to part gold from filver and brafs, and filver from
brals , without rqttafortit; but by fome *.afie operations , wich little coll or lofs of
time : And firrt I fhall (hew how

To part Go Id from Silver.
Caft a limns of cold mixt with filver into an earthen veffel, that will hold fire, with
the fame weight of Antimony, thus: when the veflel is red hot, and the lump is
melted, and turned about with the force of the fire ; caft a little Stibium in, and in a
little time it will melt alfo ; and when you fee it, caft in the reft of the Stibium, and
cover the veff, 1 with a cover : let the mixture boil, aslongas one may repeat the
Lords-prayer: takeaway the; veffel with a pair of tongs, and call it into another
iron Pyramidal veffel red hor, called a Cm ible, that hath in the bottom of it rams
fat!; fhaking it gently , that the heavier pau of gold fcparated from the filver , may

\*j6 Natural Magick. Soo^ 5.

fall to the bottom: if hen the veflel is cold it is ftuken off , and che part next the
bottom will be gold , the upper part filver ; and if it be not well parted, refufe not
to go over the fame work again , buc take a lefs quantity of Stibium. Let therefore
the gold be purged again, and let the Stibium be boiled, and there will be always
at the bottom a little piece of gold. And as the dregs remain, after the fame man-
ner purge them again in the copple, and you ftiall have your filver, withouc any lois of
the weight, becaufe they are both perfect bodies ; but the filver onely will lofc a lit-
tle. But would you have your filver to lofe lefs, do thus : adde to two pound and
half of Stibium, wine-lees two pounds , and boil them together in an earthen veflel,
and the mafs will remain in the bottom, which mud be alfo boil'd in a copple ; then
adding pieces of lead to ic, purge it in a copple, wherein the other things being con-
fumed by the fire, the filver onely will remain : but if you do not boil your Stibi m
in wine-lees, as I faid, part of the filver will be loft, and the copple will draw the fil-
ver to it. The fame may be done

Another -way.

Take three ounces of brimftone, powder them, and mingle them with one ounce of
common oyl , and fet them to the fire in a giazed difh of earth : let the fire be firft
gentle, then augment it, till it run, and fcemto run over: take ic from the fire, and
let it cool , then caft it into (harp vinegar , fo the oyl will fwim above the vinegar,
the brimftone will fall down to the bottom ; caft away the vinegar, and let the brim-
ftone boil in ftrong vinegar, andyoufhall fee the vinegar coloured : you fhall ftrain
the vinegar through a wilp into a glafed veflel, to which adde more brimftone , boil
it again , and again ftrain out the lye into the veflel : doing this fo oft ,
till the Lixivium comes forth muddy, or of a black colour. Let the Lixivium fettle
one night: again ftrain ic through a wi(p, and you ftiall find the brimftone almoft
white at the bottom of the veflel : adde that to what you had before, and fet it again
to boil with three parts as much diftilled vinegar, till the vinegar all evaporate and
dry the brimftone : take heed it burn not : when it is dry, put it again into diftilled
vinegar, working the fame way fo often, until putting a little of it upon a red hot
plate of iron , it will melt without flame or fmoke. Then caft it on a lump of gold
and filver, and the gold will fink to the bottom prefent ly, but the filver will remain on
the top. For if brimftone be boil'd in a Lixivium fo ftrong , that it will bear an egg,
until it will not fmoke , and will melt on a fire-cole : if ir be projected on a mafs of
gold and filter mingled , when they are melted , it will part the gold from the fil-
ver. Alfo there is an ingenious and admirable way

Tcrpirt fiver from brafs
with certain powders. The beft are thoie are made of powdred lead , half fo much
quick brimftone., and arfenick , and common fait double as much , falt-peter one
half ; powder thole fine each by themfelves, then mingle them. Take the mixt me-
tal, with half fo much more ef the powder, and in a vefTel that will endure fire, ftrew
it in by turns , and fet the veffel fil'd at a ftrong fire, till all melt ; take it out and
caft it into another veflel, that is broad atop, narrow at bottom, and hot, as we faid,
and imeeredwith ram or fowes greafe clarified: let it cool, for you (nail find the
filver at the bottom, and the brafs on the top: part one from the other with an
iron rafp, or file: if you will, you may purge your filver again in a copple. But the
filver muft be made into thin plates , that when it is ftrewed interchangeably with
the powders, they may come at it on all fides : then cover the veflel with its cover,
and lute it well. But the falc muft be decrepitated that it lean-not out , and the
brimftone prepared and fixed. But we may thus

Part gold from brafs :

Make fait of thefe things that follow,namelys Vitriol, Alcm, Salt- peter, qokk Brim-
ftone, of each a pound, Salt-ammomatk half a pound. Powder ihcmall, and boil
them in a lye made of aOie<;, one par, as much quick lime, four parts of beech-afhes:
melt them at the fire,and decant them,tnd boil them till the Lixivium be gone ; then

dry

Of changing Metals, 1 77

dry ir, and keep it in a place not moil}, letiitmelt; and mingle with it one pound
of powder ef lead, and ftrew on of this powder fix ounces for every pound of brafs
made hot in a melting veflel ; and let them be (haken, and ftirrcd vehemently with
an iron thing to itir it with : when the veflel is cold, break it, you fhall find a
lamp of gold in the bottom. Do the reft as I faid.

Chap. X.

A comfendiou* way to part gold or fylvtr from other Metals with aqua fortis.

•\X7£ (hall teach thus compendioufly to part gold from filver , and filver from other
metals ; and it is no fmall gain to be got by it , if a man well underftood what
I write : for 1 have known lbme by this art that have got great wealth. For example,
take a mixture of brafs and filver, diflblveitin common aquafortis : when it is coo-
fumed, cait foontain-water into >t , to remove the ftiarpneisof the water, and that
it can no more corrode the metal. Put the water into a great mouthed earthen vef-
fel, and plange plates of brafs therein ; for the filver will flick to them like a cloud,
the brafs is beft in the water : put the water into a glafs retort with a large belly, and
mike a foft fire tinder, and the fountain-water will diftil forth by degrees. When
\ou know that the whole quantity of fountain-water is diftilled out, or the belly of
the retort looks of a yellow colour , and the fent of the falts pierccth yonr noftrils :
t a ke away the receiver, and put another that is empty to it, and lute it well that no-
thing break forth. Augment the fire, and you fhall drttw off your aquafortis as
ftrong as before , and the brafs will be at the bottom of the retort : The aquafortis
will be as good as it was, and you may ufe it oft- times.

Cc

THE

178

S I X T H HE BOOK

o f

Natural Mao-ick :

Of counterfeiting Precious Sones.

The Proem i.

F Rom the adulterating of Metals , we(haXpafs to the counterfeiting of Jewels, They me
by the fame reafon, both Arts are ef kin, and done by the fire. And it u no (rand, faith
Pliny fo get gam to live by t and the defire of money hath fe kindled the firebrand ef luxury ^
that the moji cunning arttfis are fometimes cheated. They are counterfeited by divers ways,
either bj cutting Jewels in the middle, and putting in the colour s, And joyntng them toge-
ther ; or elfe by giving a tinttnre to Cryfial that ts all one puce , or counterfeiting Cry ftal
by many ingredients • or vie fh 'all attempt to make true Jewels to depart from their proper
colour, and all of them to be fo handfomly coloured , that they may (hew lt\e natural Jewels.
Lafily, I (hall fhew how to makf Smalt of divers colours*

Chap. I.
Of certain Salts nfed in the compofition of Gems.

E wil firft fet down certain operations , which are very necefla-
ry in the Making of Gems, left we be forced to repeat the fame
thing over again : And firft,

How to make Sal Soda.
The herb Kali or Saltwort is commonly called Soda: grinde
this Soda very fmall, and fift it into powder : put it into a brafc
Cauldron and boil it , pouring in for every pound of Soda, a fir-
kin of water. Let it boil for four hours, till the water be confumed to a third part.
Then rake it from the fire , and let it ftand twelve hours , while the dregs fettle to
the bottom , and the water becomes clear : then drain out the water with a linnen
cloth, into another vcflcl , and pour frefh water into the Cauldron : Boil it again,
and when it is cold, as before, and all the drofs fetlcd, filtrate the clear water out
a°ain : Do as much the third time, ftill having a care to try with your tongue, whe-
ther it be ftill fait. ' At laft, ftrain the water, and fet ic in an earthen veflcl over the
fire , keeping a conftant fire under it, until the moifture being almoft confumed, the
water grow more chick, and be condenfed into fait ; which muft preiently be taken
out with an iron ladle ; and of five pound of Soda, you will have one pound of falc.

How to make Salt of Tartar.

Take the lees of old wine, and dry it carefully ; it is commonly called Tartar : put ic
into an Alimbcck, made infuchforc, that the flame maybe retorted from the top,
and fo augment the heat. There let it burn, you will fee it grow white j then turn
it with yonr iron tongs , fothac the upper part which is white may be at bottom,
and turn the back upto the flame: when it hath ceaf'd frnoakin°, takeic out,and
break part of it, to fee whether it be white quite through , for that is an argumenc
of the fufficient burning; becaule ic oftentimes happens , that theoutfidc onely is
burned, and the reft of it renuincth crude. Therefore, when ic hath gained the co-
lour

Of counterfeiting precious Stones i y$

lour of chalk , it muft be taken out ; and when it is cold, grindc it, and lay it in wa-
ter in feme wide-mouth'd veflel a quarter of a day. When the water is grown clears
filtrate it, and Brain it into another veflel , and then pour water again unto the
fettlement , obferving the fame things wefpoke before , until the water have taken
out all the fait, which will come to pafs in the third or forth time. Poor your wa-
ters which you favcd,mto a veflel of glafs ; and all things being ready, put live coles
under it , and attend the work until the water be coniumed by the force of the fire,
which being done , the fait will (tick to the bottom : it being thus made, preferve
it in a dry place, left it turn to oyl.

Chap. II.

How Flint) or Cryftal is to be prepared^ and how Paftils are boiled.

THe matter of which Gems are made, is cither Cryftal or Flint, from whence wc
ftrike fire, or round pebbles found by river fides : thofe arc the beft wnkh arc
taken up by the river Thames, white, clear, and of the bignelsof aneggc; for of
thofe are made beft counterfeit Gemms , though ail will fervc in feme loit. Some
think that Cryftal is the beft for this purpofe , becaufe of the brightnefs andtranfpa»
rency of it ; but they are deceived. The way of making Gems, is this : Take river-
pebbles and put them into a fornace, in that place where the retorted flame is moft
intenfe; when they are red hot , take them out and Bing them into water: then
dry them, and powder them in a mortar , or a hand mill , uniil they arc very fine $
put them into a wide-mouthed veflel, full of rain water, and (bake it well in your
hands, for fo the fineft part will rid to the top, and the grofleft will fettle to the
bottom: to tkat which fwims at top pour frefh water , and ttir the duft again: and
do this oftentimes , until the grofs part be quite fcparated and funk down. Then
take out the water, and let it fettle, and in the bottom there will iie a certain flimy
matter ; gather together , and referve the refined powder. But whil'tt the ftone is
ground, both the morter and the mill will lofe femcwhatof themfelves, which
being mixt with the powder will foul the Gem : wherefore it will be worth the la-
bor to wafh that away : to which end, let water be often poured into the lavel , and
Birred abouc i the duft of the morter will rife to the top, by reafon of its levity , and
the powder of the pebbles will retire to the bottom by reafon of its weight ; skim
the lavel, and feparate them with a fpoon , till all that ftndy and black duft be taken
off ; then itrain out the water, and rcfervc the powder dry. Thefe being done, we
muft teach

How Paftils are boiled.

Artificers call thofe pellets which are made of the falts, and the forenamed powder
and water, Paftils. Take five parts of fait of Tartar , as many of fair of Soda j dou-
ble the quantity of thefe of the forefpoken powder of pebbles, and mix them very
well in a ftone morter: fprinkle them with water & wet them,fothat they may grow
into a paft, and make Paftils of them in bignefs of your fift $ fet them in the fun, and
dry them welL Then put them into a fornace of reverberation , the fpace of fix
hours, encreafing the fire bv degrees , that at laft they may become red hot, but not
melt ; wherefore ufc no bellows : when they are baked enough, let them cool, and
they will become fo hard , that they will endure almoft the hammer.

Chap. III.

Of the Fornace^nd the Parts thereof.

NOw the Fornace i<t0 be built, which is like to that of glafs-mikers , but lefs
according to the proportion of the work. Let your fornace be eight foot high,
and confii t of ?wo vaults; the roof of the lower muft be a handful and a half thick : the
vault icfelf muft have a little door, by which you may call in wood to feed the fire

Cc a there.

i8o Natural Magick. cBool{6.

there. Let it alfo have on the top, and in the middle of its roof, a hole about a
foot in breadth , by which the flame may penetrate into the fecond vault, and reach
N to the upper roof ; whence the flame being reverberated, doth caufe a vehement
heat. In this upper vault there muft be cut out in the wall fmall holes of a handful
in breadth, which muft open and fl\ut, to fet the pots and pans in on the floor , and
to take them out again. Artificers call thefe pots Crucibles ; they are made of clay,
which i- brought from Valencia , and doth very ftrongiy endure fire : They muft be a
finger thick , and a foot and a half deep , their bottom fomcwhat thicker, left they
fliould break with the force of the fire. All things being thus provided, caft in your
wood and fire, and let the fornaceheat by degrees, fo that it may be perfectly
hot in a quarter of a day. Your woikmen muft be diligent to perform their duty ;
then let the Paftils , being broken into pieces about the bignefs of a wall-nut, be
put into crucibles , and let in the holes of the fornacc built for that pur pofe , with
a pair of iron tongs to every pot. Wnen they melt, they will rife up in bubbles, and
growing greater and greater, muft be pricked with (harp wires ; that the vapor paf-
fingouc, the bubbles may fink down again , and not run over the mouth of the cru-
cibles. Then let other pieces be put in, and do as before , until the pots be filled
to the top: and continue the fire for a whole day, until the matter be concocted.
Then put an iron hook into the pots , and try whether the matter have obtained a
perfe& tranfparency : which if it have, take it our of the pots with iron inftruments
for that pQrpofe , and caft it into clear water, to wafh off the filth and ftaio« , and to
purge out the fait: for when the Gems are made, onafuddainthe fair breaks forth,
as it were fpued out, and overcaft them like a cloud. Yet there muft be a °reac
deal of diligence ufed, whilftyou draw out this vitrified matter , left it touch the
fides of the fornace ; for it will cleave thereto like birdlime , hard'y to be pu led
off without part of the will : as alfo left it fall into the veffcls : for it is very difficult
to feDarate it , and it prejudices the clcarnefs of the glafs. When it is cold, put it
again into the crucibles , and let it glow for two days, until it be conco&ed into
perfect glafs. When this vitrified matter hath flood fo for two days, fome, to make
it more fine and bright, left it fhouldbefpecked with certain little bubbles (to whi;h
glafs is very fubje<ft) put into the crucible fome white lead , which prefently erow-
eth red , then melts with the glafs and becomes clear and perfpicuous. Make your
tryal then with an iron hook ; for if it be clear of thofe bubble?, it is perfeSed , and
fo will be a oerfe& mafs of Gems Now we will teach the fcveral Colours, Yellow,
Green, or Blue, wherein we will caft our Gems.

Chap. IV.
To make Colours,

\K7Hile theCryftalis preparing in the fornace, by the fame fire the Colours may
be alfo made: Andfirft,

Hon to make Crocut of Iron :
Take three or four pounds of the limatureof Iron , wafhitwell in a broad veffel ;
for by putting it into water, the w-it;htof the iron will carry that to the bottom •
but the ftraws and chip*, and fuch kind of filth, will fwim on the top } fo ycu will
have your filing1; clean and wafh d. Then dry it well, and put ir into an earthen gla-
zed pot with a large mouth , and pour into it three or four gallons of the befl and
(harped vinegar : there let it macerate three or four week*, ftirring it every day fe-
ven or eiohr tines with an iron rod : then giving it time to fettle, pour out the vine-
gar inro another p< t, and put frefh vinegar into the iron* and do this , till the vine-
gar have con fumed all the filings. Then pur all the vinegar into an earthen vcflel,
and fet it on the fire, and let it boil quire away : In the bottom there will remain a
flimy durtv matter , mixr wirh a kind of fatnefs of the iron, which the fire by conti-
nua- ce will catch hold of : let it burn, and the remaining duff will be Crocus. O-
thers file your rufty nail?, and heating them red hot , quench them in vinegar ; then

flrain

Of counter feiting precious Stories. 181

ftrun thetn , and dry the ruft, and let icagain to the fire , till it be red her , the11
quench it again with vinegar ; this they do three or four times : at length they ' oil
the vinegar away, and take the remaining Crocus from the bottom. Next remaiiis
to (hew

How to reduce Zsphara into Powder.

A lit le window h to be made out of the fide of the fornace , nigh to which muft ,
be built a little cell or oven , lb joyned to the mouth of the oven, that the flatnc may
be brought in through a lit ilc hole. Let this cell have a little door without , to ad-
mit the workmms band upon occafion. Let this cell be afoot in length and breadth.
Set the Saffron upon a Potters tile, into the cell and fliu? the door : let it be red h or,
and after fix hours take it out and put v into water, fo will it cleave into pieces ; lec
it be dryed,ftamped, and io finely feirced , that ir may fcarce be felt. But if it can-
not be tftvcVd with a peftle and morter ; pour water upon the powder, and ftir ic
with your hand?, and let it fettle for a while ; then ft rain it into another veffel, and
pour frefa water into the powder ; and reiterate this io often, till that which fet-
lerh, beinsbea: and brayed, do pais through with water : then dry it , and it will
become very fine powder.

How to burn popper.

Set the filings of Copper, with an equal quantiry of fait mixt in an earthen pot, over
the fire, and turn it abouc three or four hours with an iron hook , that it may be
burned on all fide* : There let ic burn a whole natural day : t^en take ir out, and di-
vide it intotv o parts ; lay the one pare afide , and fct the other with fait on the fire
a°ain, for m artificial day : do the fame three or four times , that it may be more pec-
fe&ly calcined, always having a care thac ic be as hoc as may be, but that it melt not.
When it is borne, it is black.

Chap. V.
How Gems are coloured,

' A LI things being thus prepared ; there is nothing more, I think, remaineth to
A m«ke *n end of thii work , but to know how to colour them. And we will
begin with the way

How to dye a Saphire.

Artificers begin with a Saphire t for when it is coloured , unlefs it be prefently re-
moved from the fire, it loleth the tincture ; and the longer it remains in the fire,
thebrighteritgroweth. Put a little Zaphara , as they call it, into a pot of glafs,
two drachms to a pound of glafs ; then ftir it continually from top to bottom with an
iron hook : when it is very well mixed , make tryal whether the colour pleafe you
or no, by taking a little out of ihepot. If it be too faint, adde feme more Za-
phara j if too deep, put in more glafs, and let it boil fix hours. I hus you may

Colour Cjra»u49

or fea-water, another kind of Saphire. Beat your calcined brafs into very fine pow-
der , that you may fcarce feel ic ; for otherwife it will mix with the Cryftal , and
make it ccurfer : the quantity cannot be defined j for there are lighter and deeper of
that kind: for the molt part, for one pound one drachm will be fufficient.

How to counterfeit the colour of the Jmethtft:
To a pound of Crvftal, put a dram of that they call Manganefs , and fo the colour is
nude. If the Gem be great, m«k . it the paler ; if fmall, m*ke it deeper : for they nfe
inch for rings, and other nfes.

To counterfeit the Topaze.

To

i8z Natural Magic k. 2?oo^ 6*

To every pound of glafs, adde a quarter of an ounce of crocus of Iron , and three
ounces of red-lead, to make it of a brighter red. Firft put in the lead, then the
crocus.

The Chryfolite*

When you have tmdeaTopaze, and would have a Chryfolite, adde a little more
Copper, that it may have a little verdure : for the Chryfolite dirfcretb from the To-
paze in nothing, but that it hath a greater luftre. So we are wont

To counterfeit an Emerald.

This (hall be the laft : for we muft let our work be as quick as poflible , becaufe the
copper being heavy , when it is mixed with the Cryftal, doth prefently fink down to
the bottom of the pots , and fo the Gems well be of too pale a colour. There-
fore thu* you muft do: when you give the tin&ure to a Cianus , you may eafily turn
it into Smaragde , by adding crocus of iron, in half the quantity of the copper or
brafs, wi. if at firft you put in a fourth part of copper : Now you muft adde an eighth

Eart of crocus , and as much copper. After the colours are caft in , let it boil fix
ours , that the material may grow clear again: for the cafting in the colours will
make them contract a cleudinels. Afterwards let the fire decreafe by degrees , un-
til the fornace be cold : then take out the pots and break them , wherein you fliall
find your counterfeit precious Stones.

Chap. VI.
How Gems may otherwife be made.

THe manner which I have fet down, ts peculiar and ufual to our Artificers , and
by them is alio accounted a fecrer. But I will ice down another way , which I
had determined always to keep (ccret to my felf ; for by it are made with lefs charge,
lefs time , and lefs labour , much more refulgent, bright, and livelier Gems , whofe
fuperficies and luftre , the fait fliall not deface in a much longer time. Although
thofe old counterfeits which are found at Puteoli , in the mortar of ruined houfes,
and on the (hores, are yet very bright , and of a perfeS clearnefs , fo that they
feem beyond the imitation of our age: Yet I will endeavour by this way, not one-
ly to equal them, but to make much better. Wherefore give ear, and believe : the
materials are thus made : Take the comb of a Cock , and cutting his gullet in two,
keep the head and the neck.Put it into a pot,and fet it in a hard firejftcp it clofe,that
no coles or a(hes arifing with the fmoke, or foote,fall in, and fpoil the luftre of it.
When the fire is kindled , you will hear it hifs : when it is red hot, take it up with
an iron tongs,and quench it in clear water, and dry it : Do this three times, changing
the water left there (hould be any filth j then grinde it on a marble, till it be fo fine
that you may blow it about,and referve it for ufe.Thence have you the Philofophers
Stone,moft fragrant in fire , and chief in the triplicity. If thou art ignorant of the
Philofophers Stone , learn it from thefc verfes, which I found in an old Manufcript.

ArBttt eft hominU , qui conftat Jex element U.
Cui p ft addideru, s. in. m, mutate ft bene fcU.
Hoc urit os noftrum conftans laps Philofophorum.

Now we have advertif'd you of the materials: let usadvife alfo about the colour.
And firft of all,I will (hew you

How to counterfeit a Topax,e.
Pur your material into a pot, and cover it with a lid, full of holes ; over which there
muft be laid another, that it may exhale, and yet receive no hurt from thefmoke:
let it ftand in its fornace to the middle the fpacc of a whole day, and it will be aTo-
paze. Now To

Of counterfeiting precious d tones.

To counterfeit a Chryfolite^
cram the Cock, and for every ounce give him to eat two grains of the beloved flow-
er of Venus : ftroak him, and in due time thou fhalc fee.

To make an Emarald.

Feed the Cock again, and for every ounce, give him four grains of whear, and he will
fhine with a moft bright luftre. But

To make a Jacinth,

give the Cock grainesof the bloody Stone, infteadof wheat, and he will eafily lay
hold of them.

Chap. VII.
Of SeveralTintiures of Cryftal.

I Have declared tlivers tin&urcsof glafs, and thofe no vulgar and common ones,
bucfuch as are rarely known, and gained, and tried with a great deal of labour.
Now I will relate fome ways of Gaining Cryftal, and elpecially thofe that arc choice,
and kno w n to very few j if not onely to my felf.

To flam Cryftal with the colour of a Jacinth, or a Ruby, without breaking, or wearing it.

Take fix parts of Stibium, four of Orpin, three of Arfenick, as much of Sulphur, two
of Tutty s beat them all aiunder , and fift them through a fine feirce : put them into
a pot : hang your Cryftal by wires , or cover it over with the powders , and fo fet ic
on the fire , that it may be hot, four or five hours ; but ufe no bellows , left it break
in pieces , or melt. It is a certain fign of being perfectly coloured , if you take out
a piece, and that be of a bright and fhining colour ; otherwife deliver it to the fire
a^ain, and after fome time try it again. But you muft have a great care, left ic
cool too fuddenly when you take it off the fire , for it will crumble and fall to pieces.
If a violet-colcur pleafeth you, take it foonfrom the fire: if you would have a
deep purple, let it ftand longer : we can make a violet with Orpin onely.

To turn a Saphire into a Diamond.
This ftone, as all others , being put in the fire , lofeth his colour : For the force of
the fire miketh the colour fade. Many do it feveral ways : for fome melt gold, and
put the Saphire in the middle of it ; others put it on a plate of iron, and fet it in the
middle of the fornaceof reverberation; others burn it in the middle of a heap of
iron duft. I am wont to do it a fafer way, thus : I fill an earthen pot with unkill'd
lime, in the middle of which I place my Saphire, and cover it over with coalsj which
being kindled, I ftop the bellows from blowing, for they will make it flie in pieces.
When I think it changed, I take a catc that the fire may go out ic i'clf : and then ta-
king out the ftone , I fee whether it hath contrafted a iufficient whitenefs ; if.it have,
I put it again in its former place, and let iccool with the fire; if not, I cover it a-
gain, often looking on it , until the force of the fire haveconfumed all the colour,
which it will do in five or fix hours; if you find that the colour be not quite vani-
fhed, do again a? before, until it be perfect white. You muft be very diligent, that
the fire do heat by decrees, and alio cool ; for ic ofieo happeneth, that fudden cold
doth either mike it congeal, orfiie in pieces. All other ftoncs lofe their colour,
like the Saphire ; l'ome fooncr, fome later, according to their hardnels. For the Ame-
thi't you muft ufe but a foft and gentle fire ; for a vehement one will over-harden it,
and turn it to duft. This is the art we ufe, to turn other precious ftoncs into Dia-
monds, whio being cur in the middle, and coloured, makeih another kind of adul-
terating Gems ; which by this experiment we will make known : And it is

How to make a ftone white on one fide, and red or blew on the other.

I

184- Natural Magick. TSookjb.

I have feen precious ftones thus made , and in great efteem with great perfons, be-
in^ of two colours : on one fide a Saphire, and on the other a Diamond , and fo of
diver's colours. Which may be done after this manner : For example, we would have
a Saphire fhould be white on one fide , and blew on the other ; or fhould be white,
on one tide, and red on the other : thus it may be done. Plaifter up that fide which
you would have red or blew, with chalk, and let it be dryed ; then commit it to the
fire, thofe ways we fpoke of before, and the naked fide will lofe the colour and turn
white, that it will feem a miracle of Nature, to thofe that know not by how flight an
arc it may be done.

How to (lain glafs of divers colours,

I w ill not pal's by a thing worth the relation , which happened by chance , while we
were making thefe experiments. The flower of Tinne taketh away the peripicuity of
Cryftal gla!s,and maketh it of divers colours : for being fprinklcd upon Crytiaiglaffes
that are polifhed with a wheele, and fet to the fire, it doth varioufly colour them,
and maketh them cloudy ; fo that one part will look like a ftone , and another like
an Opaleof divers colours. But you muft often take it out from the fire, and order
it rightly, till it be according to your defire. I have before told you how to make
flour of Tinne for the purpofe. I will adde fomewhat more , indeed nofecret, nor
very neceffary, but that nothing may be omitted by us in this work, w*.

How to make a Jacinth
beautiful enough, and not much unlike a true one. Put lead into a hard earthen pot,
and fet it on the fire in a glafs-makers fornace , there let it remain for fome days, till
the lead be vitrified , and it will be of the colour of a Jacinth.

To counterfeit an Emerald.
You may do this almoft in the fame manner ; and it will refemble the colour oft
pleafant green corn. Diflblve filver with ftrong water f then calling into the water
iome plates of Gopper , as I told you, it will cleave to them. Gather it together,
and dry it, and fet it into a glafs-makers fornace in an earthen pot , within a few
days it will become an Emerald. To do the fame with other metals, I will leave to
the trial of others j it is enough for me to have found out and difcovered the way.

To counterfeit Carbuncles.

This we do with Orpin, and ufe it in fome ornaments , for they are brittle , and of
a moft flagrant colour , have much of the fcarlet blufh , and caft forth red fparkles.
Take four ounces of Orpin, and grinde it fmall : then put it into a glafs veffel, whofe
bottom you muft fortifie againft the force of the fire with mortar made with ttraw,
and flop the mouth of it gently. The fire being kindled, the fmokc flieth up , and
thethinneftpartof the material will rifetothetop : and you will fecit flick to the
fides of the glafs, and the neck : it will grow bigger by degrees , and new parts ftill
flying up, will make it grow thicker ; and like boyling water gather into bubbles,
which at laft will encreafe fo big , that they will fall down : Some will ftick in the neck
of the glafs , all of a moft flagrant colour, but brittle and fmail. Break the glafs, and
take off with a (harp point of a knife, thofe red congealed bubbles which ftick to the
glafs, and ufe them. If you would make one great one of thofe little bubbles ; lay
a great many little ones upon a piece of glafs, and melt them, and they will run into
one : a moft pleafant fight to fee.

Chap. VIII.
Of making [malt or EnnamcJ.

AFter Gems we will endevour to make Smalt or Ennamel. It is a work almoft
of the fame nature, and of the fame mixture and colours ; this onely difference
h between them , that in Gems the glafs is tranfparent , in this it is more deni'e and

folid.

Of counterfeiting precious Stones. 187

folid. In antient times they made their Checker or Mofaique work of it : and Gold-
fmiths do ufe ic in colouring and enammeling gold. It is Tinne that gives it a body
and folidity.

To make white Enammel,

Take tvvo ounces of Lead afhes, four of Tinne ; and make it into a body, with double
the quantity of glais : role it into round balls , and fet it on a gentle fire all night:
take heed it flick not to the fides of the pot, but ftir it about with an iron fpattle,and
when it is melted, incrcafe the fire, and the bufinefs is done.

To make black,Smalt,

To 4 pound of glafs, you muft adde a drachm of Manganefs, for fo it will be of the co-
lour of a Lyon :then adde a drachm of Zaphara,and the mixture will turn black : make
often tryal , if it be of a dark purple or violet- colour : for the Tin that giveth it the
body, will make it blacker.

To make Smalt of a deep yellow.

You may put to every pound of Cryftal a little Crocus Mirtis, and three ounces of
Jalloline, as they call it, which engravers ufe: at lafl,Lead and Tin. But if you defire

To make Smalt of a paler yellow,
Inflcad of Jalloline, adde Jaletto, and you will have your defire,,

To make green Smalt,

Adde burned Copper, and fo it will be of a deeper colour : but if you defire it a
paler, adde the flakes of Copper, which flic off, while the fmith hamtnereth it. be-
ing red hot.

To make red Smalt,
Adde the ruft of iron, very finely beaten : but when you would make

Smalt dark^on one fide, and tranfparent on the other,
Make your Paxils of earth, and double as much glafs ; fee it a whole night in the fire
of reverberation , and lec ic melt in a convenient vefiel, ftirring it with an iron rod :
fo you (hall perceive both tranfparenc and opacous parts in the fame little Orb. So

•T 0 make Smalt of the colour of an Amethift.
It is done with nothing but Manganefs : and if you would have it of a deeper co-
lour, adde more of the body, that is, of the flower of Lead and Tin.

To make Smalt of skje- colour.
It may be erTcfted with Zaphara , by adding fomcwhat more of the body.

To make fpeckjed Smalt,
which being full of fmall f pecks, Gull feem to be compounded cf a great many lice*
very pleafant to behold. The opacous Smalt being made, pour it upon marble, and
then prefently fprinkle feme Crocus upon it , or drop feme pale colour in fpecks, all
over it, and you flaall have your defire.

To make Smalt of two colours,
caft Smalt firft of one colour upon a marble, as before j and prefently after, fome of
another colour upon that : then with an iron rod prefs themclofc, and joynthetn
together.

To make the beft kind of Smalt,
fuch as Goldftniths ufe ; to every pot allow two roles of Sal Soda, and fome fand, of
which glafs is made, and it will be much more perfect.

Dd Chap«

i8(J Natural Mag ick. Scw^ 6.

Chap. IX.
To make Smalt of a clear r oft-colour,

THe moft skilful glafs-makers do labour very much, in colouring Smalt of a rofe-
colour j which is commonly called Roflldcre : feeing that in former times they
did ic moft beautifully and artificially. I will fee down what both I my felf have done
in it., and what I have received from other friends : I have performed the beft I could,
to fhew others an opportune way of making better. The manner is this : caft ten
pounds of Cryftal in a pot, and when you know ic to be well melted, addc a pound of
the beft red lead,by half at a time,ftirring it with an iron rod as faft as youcanj for the
weight of ic will make it fink to the bottom : when it is well mixed, take ic out of the
poi with iron inftruments fit for the purpofe,aad caft it into water:do this thricetchen
mix with it five ounces of Tin calcined,and Cinnabaris of a moft bright colour $ and fo
ftirring them about for three hours, let them ftand a while. When this is done, adde
moreover three ounces of vitrified Tin , and beat chem together without any inter-
miffion, and you will fee a moft lively rofe-colour in the ghfs, which you may ufe in
enamelling Gold.

To make Glafs of Tin,

Set a pound of Tinne in a ftrong earthen pot,into the fire : let it heat and melt ; then
remove it with iron tongs into the hotteft flames of theglafs-makers foraace , for
three or four days. Afterwards, the pot being taken out, and cold ; break ir, and
in the top you will find glafs of a faffron colour, not clear: but the longer it ft an d-
eth in r he fire, the perfefter it will grow ; neither have I known better in this kind,
of thofc many that I have tryed. It muft be reduced into fine powder : for the
which not onely a morter and mills will be requifite, but alfo a Porphyrian ftonc. If
k be too florid , you may make it of a more faint colour, by adding glafs to it.

Another way to make it.
This is onely for friends: Take niie parts of burnt Tinne, feven of Lead i two of
Cinnabaris ; of Spanifh-foder and Tartar, one part and a half ; of the Blood- ftone one
part, of Painters red a fourth part. And do with it, as in the former.

Chap. X.

Of leaves of Metal to be fut finder Gems,

THere are certain leaves of Metal laid under Gems, which being perfpicuous, are
thereby made paler or deeper, as you will : for if you would have them of a fain-
ter colour, you muft put under them leaves of a more clear brightnefs : if of a deeper,
leaves of a darker hue. Moreover, Gems being rranfparent, are feen quite through,
and difcover the bottom of the ring j which taketh much of their beauty off. This is
an invention of later times, who by terminating the tranfparency of ftones, with
leave-, of a moft bright andpleafant colour, dofkand makeup, and mend the co-
lour of the ftones. I have been very much delighted in this kindof work, and
therefore will deliver it particularly. The leaves are to be made either of Copper
alone, or of Copper, Gold, and Silver, mixt together. I will fpeak of thofc which
are made of Copper aloae : Yoamuft buy at the Brafiers.fhops feme thin plates of
Copper , of the thicknefs of ftrong paper, that they may be the eafier made thinner,
which you muft cut into pieces of three fingers in length, and two in breadth; fo
that a fheet of two pound , will be divided into a hundred and thirty parts : thefe
we mnft divide a^aininto two parts , that they may be hammered more eafily : Take
f^um' a* d beat them , asArtificers do gold, when they beat it out into tbinne rays.
Ler theanvile and hammer be fmooth and poliftied , left the heavy ftroaks fhould
make dents in the Copper , and break ir. Difcontinue your work by turns , fo that
you may hammer the Copper while ic is hot , and prepared by the fire $ and put it

into

Of counterfeiting precious Stones. 187

into the fire, when it is cold : for if you do otherwife, it will bre*k in pieces ; ^bicri
yen mult presently remove frcm the reft ; tor thofe that are broken,will break others.
But that they may be the more cafier prepared , when they begin to be extenuated,
I makeufeof this invention. There mutt be prepared two plates of iron, of a
hand lquare , and the thicknefs of paper.. Double one cf them, that it may receive
the other wirhin the folds of it : fo that they may receive the plates of Copper in the
middle , and enclole them on all fides , ihac they can neither flip out , nor any dvtl
or afhes fall in, to Hick to them. When you have thus encloled tbe Copper plates,
put them into the fire , aridheatthcmj then take them cue with irontongs, and
making off the afhes, beat them with your hammer tiiiihey are cold , and lb they
will become thin and fine rays. Buc while you are beating one, fet others to heat ;
and cothis eight times over,uciil you have hammer'd them very thin,and made them
fit for yourpurpofe. It will be worch your labor to look often upon them, to fee if
any be broken in the working , for they will break their fellows. But becauiethey
arewontto grow black in the working, and foul, fothac they oftentimes deceive
the eye . therefore it is fit, that you have a pot of water ready, with an equal quan-
tity ofTartar, andfaltinit, and let it boil over the fire : Put into it your rays, and
ftirre them about continually , till they be boiled white. Then take them out, and
wafh them in a pot. of clear water , till they be very clean : then dry them with
a linnen cloth, and then heat them , and beat them on the anvile again , as before,
until they fpread into rays, as thin as leaf-gold When this work is to be done, the
hammer and anvile mult be as fmooth, and polifhed, and bright, as a looking-glafs ;
which yen may efrc& in this manner. Firllofall, hold them to the grinde-ficne,
wherewith they grinde knives , until they be fmoothed and planed : then rub them
with fine land, and Pumice- fione 5 afterwards glaze tlicm with a wheele , andpolifh
them with a plate of lead, and powder of emerald: if youuleany other art , you
will but lofe your labour. Thus in two days your work will be finifhed, that is, by
heating your plates, eight or ten times, and preparing them, and by whiting them
four times at leaft : Finally, examine them all, whether they be whole, and of a fuf-
ficient thinnefs : fo that if any remain too thick , they may again be brought to the
hatrmsr and perfected. But 1 muft advertife you , that the thinner they grow, the
lefs time they mult lye in the fire, becaufe they will prefently melt : and fo alio in
the water, becaufe the fait will eat into them. At laft, cue them with fhcares into
fquaie pieces, that they may be more convenient for ufe.

Chap. XI.
Hew leaves of Metals are to be po'tjbed.

THe plates being this thinned and finifhed, we will fall to poiifhing of them. Buc
firlt we rand provide tools, wherewith to perform ir. Take a plate of Copper
cf a foot in length, and a hand in breadth, moft exquifitely burnifhed,ihat it may be
as fmooth as a looking-glafs: bow it either with your hand, era hammer, by little
and little, into tbe form of a femicylinder. Then turn a piece of wood, fo that it may
be equal, and fit for kin every pare, and be received into the convexity of it, where
being faftned with four nails at the corners of the plate, it may remain (iedfaft. Fix
this wood upon a little frame, wich two bars of a foot height, raftnedto the ends of
it. Now we will begin to burnifh the places ; which mull be thus done: provide
chalk made into fine powder, after thij fore • take Tome beaten clay, wrap it in a dean
and indifferently fine doth, and put it into a wafhing bowl full of water; flirreic
about here and there, in the water, that the frrielt part may be waChed through, and
the courier remain in the cloth : then put the new chalk into the cloth again ; ftirre it
and drain it till it all pafs through the cloth, and thenfuffer the water to fettle, and
ieirce it through a drainer i OEely dialing the water , until no grofs fettlemenc re-
gain : Then lay the cloth ever the mown of the veffel, which muft receive it, and tie
it flack on: foflrain it, that you may be the mote iure , that noibing but what is very
fine tan pafs through i thenpreG ru: the water , and refcrve the chalk, Lay this
^ f) d - day,-

1S8 Na tural Magic k. "Bool^ 6.

clay, thus prepared, upon the Copper, and rub it with a poplar flick, till it fliine
like gold : then wath ic with water, over a wide-mouthed pan, that may receive the
water. After this, have a bloodstone ready , very well polished, upon a plate of
lead, with the dull of Emeraid, it will become moft exqutfitely fmooth : therefore
lay your rays of copper upon the copper, and fpread it abroad with the thumb of
your left hand ■' then caft on the clay, and pour water on to wa£h it , and then wipe
ic off, an d let onely the water remain to fallen then? upon the copper. Then take in-
to your hands the ftone , being fattened to a flick ; andpolifh the plates with ic ha-
ving a great care that they do not run into wrinkles ; for then they are quite fpoiled :
but when they begin to move , pour on fome of the water, and that will fix them
again : Continue this, till you have made it all over as bright and fmooth as a look-
ing-glafs. A token of their perfect polilhing is , when ro marks of the runnier of
thettone, is fcen upon them. Then taking them off from the wood, caft tbcmin-
to a pot of water , until the rell are all finifhed ; and then wrap them in a clean lin-
nen cloth : dry them, and lay them up in boxes , freefrcm all dutt, and filth : but
bend them like a half-pillar, fothac the polilhcd fide may be inward; and tic them fo
with a firing.

Chap. XII.
Of building * fornacefor the colturtng Plates.

NOw we will (hew how to colour them: but6rft, lec us defcribe the fornace,
wherewith it muft be done. Therefore let a Idnace be made of iron plates
of a convenient thicknefs : let ic be a foot in height , and as much in the diameter of
the length ; let ir be covered on the top, with a circular plate : In the centre of the
roof of ic, cut a round bole, a handful in breadth $ and fet another fornace upon ir,
of the fame length and breadth, and make a hole in thataifo, which mutt be fee
againft the other, and joynchem clofe together. Make a little door in the lower
fornace , clofe-to the ground ; let it be made with an arch , four fingers wide, and
jet out half a foot , like the mouth of an oven, and be joy Bed in the fame manner to the
great fornace. Then kindle your coals in another place , until they ccafe moking,
and with iron tongs caft them into the forefaid fornace : Heat it very well, and
let the outward fornace or mouth of the oven be fill d half way with live coals.Thefe
being thus difpofed, fall to colouring the plates. And firft, I willtcach you

Hew to colour plates with a purple colour.

Take the places tyed about with thread , as I told you , and fit them upon a pair of
iron tongs,which you muft fatten at the fore-end with an iron ring, that they may not
open : hold them upon the hole of the upper fornace , that they may receive the
afcending fmoak ; and turn them about , until by degrees you (ball perceive them
gather a purple colour, without any other fmoak then what arileth from the heat of
the coals: when you think them coloured enough, remove them from the fmokc,
and lay them afide.

How to mafe them of a Saphire colour.
It is done much after the fame way : for taking the rays in an iron tongs , and hold-
ing them over the hole of the fornace, caft upon the coals through the low arched
door, the feathers of a goofe, which grow upon her breft , and then lay upon them
a red hot iron rod. For the fnvoke of the fearhers,arifing through the tunnell of the
fornace, will beat upon the rays, and make them of a sky-colour : when the iron rod
groweth cold, take another and put in. It h very admirable , how on a fuddain
thefc copper rays will change into feveral colour* : wherefore, when they have ob-
tained the colour which you defire, take them off the fornace prefently , for other-
wife they will alter into another.

How to make them of a fiver colour.
Take a little filver , and diflblve it with a^uafortu: then pour fome fountain-water

intu —i

Of counterfeiting precious Stones. 1 89

into it ,~and your copper rays : prefently the water will be troubled, and will flick
upon the copper like filver fleeces : caft away the water , and wafhthefilver , and
dry it in die Sun ; and when it is dry, lay it upon a mar ale, and mix with k an ounce
of Tartar , and as much ordinary fait ; grinde them together, till they be well mix-
ed. This being made into powder , lay it on copper, and rub it with your fingers,
and it will make it (hine like filver : then fpread the rays upon the round wood, and
the copper, wftf them with the water, lay the powder on them, and rub them
with your thumbs, that tbey may become of a filver colour ; fteep them in water,
and levigate them with the blood-ftone upon the forefaid copper • then fet them in
thefmoke>and they will fhine with a sky-colour.

Haw t» make them of the colour of an "Emerald,
It is very difficult, and there fcarce is one of very many that will prove right. Firft,
make your rays of a sky-colour, as before ; then take thofe which have not took
that colour rightly, and lay two of them upon the hole of the fornace j and through
the vault of the little door, fling fome leaves of Box upon red hot plates of iron,
where they will crackle like bay-leaves, and fend up a fmoke through the hole,
which will colour the rays. Butbefore they come to be of a green colour, they muft
pais through many other colours, as yellow, red, and sky-colour ; but they muft con-
tinue fome time before they obtain aperfed green.

How to make them red, like a %ub]r.
Fling fome flocks of Scarlet upon the live coles, and lay the thin plates over the hole,
and the arifing fmoke will colour them red.

How to mak« them of the colour of the Amethifl.
When it is made of a sky-colour, it pafleth through the colour of the Amethiftj take
it therefore off in time, and you have your wi(h.

Chap. XIII.
Hovt rajs are to be coloured by a mixture of Metals,

I Will now (hew how rays may be coloured by mixture with other metals j which
is of more difficulty, but of longer continuance. The former colt but little labour,
bat they eafily lofe their colour: thefe are harder to be made ; but keep their co-
lour longer. Take half a pound of copper , and melt it in a melting pot, put there-
unto half a crown of gold ; and when it is well melted , and mixed, adde fome tar-
tar, that when it cooleth, the top of it may be plain and fmooth ; after it is cold, fee
it afide. Then take another half pound of copper, and melt it in the fame manner ;
mix a drachm of filver with it , and let it cool : take it out of the pot , and file the
ou:-fide of it fmooth j for the leaft crack, or chap, would fpoii the work. You may
know whether there be any crack within fide or without , by this fign ; place it in
an even poifc upon a piece of iron,and ftrike it with another piece • if it found equal-
ly, and ring clearly, it is whole; if it do jar, it is cracked fome where. Let your
pieces of metal be about a finger inbignefs; beat them gently upon theanvilej left
they break fomewhere : fee them in the fire and feafonthem, and when they are cold,
beat them with the hammer into thin rays, as I have faid before : if they chance to
crack, file orTthe flaws ; and when they have been feafoned twice or thrice,in the fire,
have your pot of water ready , prepared with fait and tartar, to whiten them, that yoa
may more exactly find out the craks.

To mtke them of the colour of a Ruby.
The plates being finifhed, if you would make them of a ruby colour, do it with flocks
of fcarlct,as before j but then the rags muft be of the mixture of copper and gold.

To make them of the colour of a Saphire or Emerald.
Let the plates be of copper and filver : the Saphire colour is made with goofe feather?,
but the Emerald with box-leaves, holding them femewhat longer over the fire. And
thefe are the experiments which I have made concerning Gems.
 ° THE

THE

SEVENTH BOOK

O F

Natural Magick i

V

Of the wonders of the Load-ftone,

The Proem b.

i • .j ,, ~,ri, njstffii » on ^nt ?^7C"' i ».vJ d ^J/' *'.*v-"~i J'ivW 'i *jjj;'w
^^7£ pafs from Jewels to Stones : the chief whereof \ and the moft admirable is the Load'
ft one, and in it the Majefty ofb(jture doth meft appear : and I under eake this workjhe
wore willingly, becwfe the Ancients left little or nothing of this in wrtthg topofteritj. In a
few days, not to fay hours, when I fought one experiment, others offered themfelves , that J
collected almoft two hundred of principal note j fo wonderful it God in all his works* %*t what
wifer and learneder men might find out , let all men judge, I knew at Venice R. M.
Paulus the Venetian, that was bufied in the fame ftudy : he was 'Provincial of the Order of
fervmts , but now a moft worthy Advocate , from whom I not onely confefs , that I gained
fomething, but I glory in it , becaufe of all the men lever faw, I never knew any man more
learned, or more ingenious, having obtained the whole body of learning • and is not onely
the Splendor and Ornament of Venice or Italy > but of the whole werld. I fhall begin from
the mofi known experiments , and pafs to higher matters, that it may not repent any man of
his great ftudy and accurate diligence therein* By thefe, the longitude of the world may be
found out, that is ef no fmall moment for Say lor s , and wherein the greateft wits have been
employed. And to a friend that is at afar di fiance from ut, and faft (hut up in prifon, we
may relate our minds ; which 1 doubt not may be done by two Mariners (fompaffes, having
the Alphabet wrtt about them. Upon thisdepends the principlesof perpetual motion, and
more admirable things, which I fhaU here let pafs. If the Antients left any thing of it, I (hall
put that in by the way : J fhall mark, feme faffe reports of fame men , not to deteft their pains
and influftry , but left any man (hould follow them in an error, and fo errors fhould be perpe»
tual thereby. I (hall begin with the Name.

Chap. I.

What is the Name of this Stone, the kind of it, and the Comtrey where it grows.

Lata in lone writes, that Empedecles called this flone (Aaynr,^
bat Lucretius from the countrey Magnefia.

The Greeks do call it Magnet from the place,-
For that the Magnets Land it doth embrace.

And the fame Plato faith , fome call it Heraclms. Theophraftm
in his book of Stones calls it wf that is Herculeum, be-

caufe he found it about the city Heraclea. Others think it denominated from Her-
cules : for as he conquered and fubdued all beafts, and men j fo this ftone conquers
iron, which conquers all thing*. Nicandsr thinks the ftone fo called , and fo doth
Pliny from him , from one Magnes a fhepherd ; for it is reported that he found it by
his hobnail'd fhooes, and his fhepherds-crook that it (luck to , when he fed his flocks
ii Tda, where he was a fhepherd. But I think it is called Magnes, as you iliould fay
CM.igntis, onely one letter changed. Others call it Sideritcs from*^®*, that in

Greek

Of the mnders of the Load/lone, i o i

Creek fignifies iron, and the Latinc ctll it Magne«,H<;racli js,and Side :ire<?. Hef) t Ia*
«» makes the ftone Sidci-ices to be different from FLrcnlcus ; for he faith, one haul
in iron colour , and the other a filver colour. Alio Vlny from Set«cm m;kc.<- five
kinds of it. The Ethiopian, the Magnefan from Magnefia nc-'i Mtcedoni;? , t.sjhe
way lies to the Lake Bxbis, on the right hand ; the third in E.hium of B<x < ia, the
fourth about Alexandria at Troaderum ; the fifth in Magneto of Afia The firfl dif-
fereoce is, whether it be male or female , the next in the coiosr : for ihofe that aie
found in Macedonia and Magnefia, are red and black ; but the Bcsoiian h more red
then black: That which is found in Tress is black, and of the ?em*le kind, and hath
no force therefore. But the worft fort is found in Magnefia, of Afia ; it is whi< e, avid
attracts not iron, and is like a Pumice ftone. It is certain, that the blut r they arc,
the better they are. The Ethiopian is highly commended , aod it colts the weight
in filver. It is found in Ethiopia at Zirnimm ; for fo is the tandy country called.
It is a token of an Ethiopick ftone,if it will draw another Loadftone to it.There is gj-
fo a mountain in Ethiopia, not far off, that produceth a Hone called Theamedes, that
drives away all iron from it. Diofcorides defcribes it thus. The belt Loadlfon? is
that which cafily draws iron, of a biuifla colcur, thick, and not very weighty. P fax-
renfis makes three forts of them ; one that draws iron , another flefli , another that
diaws and repels iron ; very ignorantly : for the fleftiy Loaditone is different from
this,and one and the fame ftone draws & drives iron frcm k.Marlfodem faith Jt throws
amongft the Proglodites and Indians. Olaus {JMagnut reports , that there are moun-
tains of it in the North, and they draw fo forcibly , that they have (hips made fait to
them by great fpikers of wood , left they fhould draw out their n nails out of the
fhip< that pafs between thefe rocks of Loaditone. There is an ifland between Corfica
and Ttaly,call'd Ilva, commonly Elba, whereaLoadftone may be cut frrth : but it
hath no veriue. It is found in Cantabria in Spain, Bohemia, and manyother places.

Chap. II.
"the natural reafon of the Loadftone s Attraction,

BEcaufe feme have written whole Books, of the reafon of the Loadftores attract-
ing of iron : lettl fhould be cedious , which I purpofcaottobe, I think fit to
pafs over ether mens opinions, efpecially, becaufe they depend orely upon words
and vain cavils , that Philofophers cannot receive them ; and I fhall fet down my
©Wn, founded upon fome experiments : yet 1 fhall not pafs by the opinion of Anax-
agoraty fet down by Arifiotie in his Bock De Amma, who by a fimiliiudc calls it a li-
ving ftone, and that therefore it draws iron; and for ibme other peculiar forces,
which might be properly faid to proceed from the foul , as you fhall lee. Epicurus
would fain give a reafon for it, as Galen and Lucretius report. For, fay they, the
Atoms that flew out of the iron, andmeerin the Loadftone in one figure, lothac
they eafily embrace one the other ; thefe therefore, when they light upon both the
concretes of the ftone and iron,and then flie back into the middle , by the way they
are turned between themfelves, and do withall draw the iron with them. Galen
inveighs againft this; for he cannot believe, as he faith, that the fmall atoms that flie
from theftcne,can be complicated with the like atoms that come from the iron, and
that their embracing can draw fuch a heavy weight,Moreover,if you put another iron
to that which hangs,that will faften alfo,and another to that,and fo a third and fourth:
& the atoms that refult from the ftone, when they meet with the iron,they flie back,
and are the caufe that the iron hangsrand it is not poffible that thofe aioms fhould pe-
netrate the iron, & through the empty pores flhould rebound unto the former atom«,
and embrace otherswhereas he faw five iron icftruments hang one by the other.And
if the aroms be diffufed ftraight forward through the iron, why then do other iron
nails ftick, faftned but on the fides ? for the venue of it is fpread every way : Where-
fore if a very little Loaditone fhould touch many fmall bodies of iron , and thefe
others, ar;d thofe others a°ain,and the Loaditone mult fill them all ; that fmall -ftone
would even bcconlumed into atoms. But I think the Loaditone, is a mixture of

ftone

i9& Natural Magick. Hookj.

ftone and iron , as an iron ftone, or aftoneofiron. Yet do not think the ft one is
fo changed into iron, as to lofe its own Nature, nor that the iron is fo drowned in the
ftone , but it prefervcs it felf ; and whilft one labours to get the victory of the other,
the attraction is made by the combat between them. In that body, there is more of
the ftone, then of iron j and therefore the iron, that it may not be fubdued by the
ftone, defires the force and company of iron; that being not able to refill: alone, it
may be able by more help to defend it felf. For all creatures defend their being :
Wherefore, that it may enjoy friendly help, and not lofe its own perfection , it wil-
lingly draws iron to it , or iron comes willingly to that. The Loadftone draws not
(tones, becaufe it wants them not, for there is ftone enough in the body of it ; and
if one Loadftone draw another , it is not for the ftone, but for the iron that is in it.
What I laid, depends on ftiefe Arguments. The pits of Loadftone are where the
veins of iron are : thefeare defcribedby Galen, and fuch as deal in Minerals , and
in the confines of them both ; of the Hone and the iron they grow , and the Load-
ftones are feen, wherein there is more ftone, and others in which there is more
iron. In Germany a Loadftone is digged forth , out of which they draw the beft
iron; and the Loadftone, whilft it lies in the filings of iron, will ger more ftrength ;
and if it be fmeered or neglected, it will lofe its forces. I oft faw with great d^ light
a Loadftone wrapt up in burning coles , that fen c forth a bluefiame, thatfmeltof
brimftone and iron ; and that being diflipated , it loft its quality of its foul that was
gone , namely, its attractive vertue. It is the ftink of iron and brimftone , as fuch
who deftroy iron by reducing it to a Calx, or ufe other Chymical operations,can eafi-
ly try. And I thought that the fame foul , put into another body , muft neceflarily
obtain the fame faculty.

Chap, III.

That the Loadftone bath two ofpojite Poles^he North and Southend how the) may be known.

BEcaufe the effe&s of the Loadftone are many and divers , I fhall begin to diftin-
guifh from the effects of it, that the Readers may receive more benefit and dire-
ction. The effects of the Loadftone, are of the ftone onely, or of the iron touched
with the ftone,or of them both,the iron and the ftone.The fimple erTe&s of the ftdfeg,
are to draw the ftone, to refpect the Poles of the world, and fu.h like : alfotheyare
rrjixt and compounded.We fay therefore fir!+, that the ftone hath two points, that ftand
oppofite one to the other, be it in a great or fmall ftone,which we call the Poles : one
of them is directed to the North, the other to the South : For if the ftone bi at li-
berty, and hangs that ic may play, without any impediments from its weight, one
part turns freely to the North,and the contrary part to the South.The way to try it is
thus : Take a little piece of Cork, or Fennel- gigant, or fome other light wood, and
make it like a Boat , that it may fcrve to bear up the weight of the ftone. Puc the
ftone into this veflel, that it may be equi-diftant from the bottom. Pur the Boat into
a veflel full of water, that it may move here and there, and find no impediment; let
it fo alone,and the Boat will never reft, until the point of the ftone ftand full North,
and the oppofite point full South. When the Boat ftands ftill, turn it about twice or
thrice with your finger, and fo it will come again to reft, and return to the fame po-
fture ; and this fhall make you more certain of the North and South Poles of it.There
are many more ways to prove it , for letting it hang equally, as in the Mariners Com-
pafs ; for where it can move of it felf freely,it ftill directs to the fame points: and you
may do the fame if you hang it by a fmall thread. Hence we may eafily learn,

To know which Loadftone is the more perfect.
Which a man may eafily do by the former trial, and find out what Loadftone is void
of vertue , or moft forcible. For that Loadftone that doth fooneft bring about the
Boat to the points, and having found the north Pole, ftands ftill, is certainly the moft
forcible ftone.But that which fbwly works, and comes foftly about to its place, and
flops oft, is more weak and feeble. Alfo we may be ceriified another way : for that
which can turn about the greater piece of wood, or boat, not flowly, bur quickly, is
the beft ftone. And though there be more ways to try it, yet let thefc luffice at pre-
tent : we fhall fpeak of the reft in other places- Chap.

Of the wonders oftbe LoadJlone* ipj

Chap. IV.

Ti e force oj the ftone is fent by a right line fr cm North to South) through the length
of it.

BUt the two point": we fpeak of, are the end of the right line, running through
.tie n iddle of the tfone from North to South • if any man break the (tone, and
break this line, thole ends of the divifion will rrefently be of another property
and vertuc , and will be enemies one to the other : which is a great wonder :
for thefe two points, when they were joined together , had the lam- force of
turning to the pole ; but now being parted afunder , one wiii turn to the North,
the other to the South, keeping the tame potiure and pofkion they had in the Mine
where they were bred : and the fame happens in the lead bits that arc ieen in the
greater! load-Hone.

For example: let the rock of Load-ftonebe
ABCD, and let the line from North to South
be AB : if we (hall cut r he (lone AB out of the
rock, the very line AB in the rtonc will repre-
feot the polar line from Nor h to South. Bu: if
we break the Hone broad-wayes , e.ery little
piece will keep its line. Cut the Hone AB broad-
wav«,as CF,there will be twoHones ACD, and
EFB: I fay, the fl ones cut through the line CD,
each of them will have its poles of the world.
In the Hone AGD, the North -pole will be A,
the vooth G. In the (lone EFB, the N">rtn will
be H, the South B; and that i> beyond all ad-
miration, that the points GH whilit the (lone
was but one, were but one : as being agreed together, they had the fame forces;
but when the ftone is di ided, each part will hold itsvertue, and be quite contra-
ry and at enmity : for G alwayes turns to the South, and H to the North, and eve-
ry bir will have it" poles : and if you fit the divided Hones with boats, A and H
will turn to the North, G and B to the South : and the fame will fall our, if you di-
vide AG and HB into manv fmall pieces ; and if you afterwards join all thefe pieces
together as they were, their mutual difcord of nature will be piefemly reconciled.
Wnerefore Cardanm faid fali'e, that the Load-ftone draws where it hath but a thin
coer, and more in one part then another : for it attracts onely from one cert sin
point, as it had its pofttion before in the mines.

Chap. V.

V That ihepoUr line in the Loddfione is not fiablet but moveable.

BUt the like wonder of nature cannot but be admired amoagft many that God
narh made, and therefore I would have no man ignorant thereof. This polar
h elpoktnof, is not alwayes certain in the fame place, nor doth it ftand alwayes
firm ; hut changes, and qdces the contrary pofitions : but this is conftant in it,thac
it alwayes runs through the middle of the ftone, like a King that hath alwayes his
Court or fort in the midft of hi; Country : for confiding in the centre from whence
the extream parts are as it were the circumference, itcaneafily fend its forces to
all parts, and defend it fclf. But an example (hall clear this.

E e

tec

194- Natural Magic k. Hookj.

Let the ftone be AECF, and let the line A C
running through the length of it, be the polar line
we fpeak of, wherein the force of it refides, which
runs from the North to the South-pole ; I fay, if
you divide the ftone in two pieces by the'line AC,
that one piece may be AED, the other BCF,tf they
be taken afunder, that the force of it doth not re-
fide in the extream part of the line AD or BC j but
being divided in the middle, the force is received
in the middle of each ftone , and in the ftone
AED, it will be GH, and in BCF, it will be IL: which cannot be fpoken without
admiration, that in a dead ftone there ftiould be a living venue to move it felf : who
is there, unlefs he try it, that will believe thefe things ? Por as the line that ftretch-
eth from North to South was in the prime, fo if you divide the ftone into a thou-
/and parts,that force isfentinto all thofe parts, each of them holding its own line in
the middle of it ; fo if we fhalldivide the part AED into other parts, and fliall part
the fmalleft of them, what part focver is parted from its confines, it will have that
lame lively force tunning long-ways through the middle of it: and fo it will be,if you
divide the {lone into the fmalleft fand : but the greater wonder is,thac if you join all
the parts together again as they were at firft,they will all have the fame force united,
and that wili retire into the middle of the ftone.

Chap. VI.

That the ferce of North and South is vigorous in the points*

BUt what is more wonderful ? Though the force retreats to the middle of the
ftone,yet it doth not fend it felf forth by the middle,but by the extream parts of
the ftone,and lies ftill in the middle, as if it were aflcep j but it is awake in the end,
and there it comes forth : But if * man break the ftone, he (hall fee it more perfeft-
ly. I (hall give an example for fuch that are curious, to fearch out the vertue of the
Load-ftone. '

LettheLoad-ftonebeAB, and A the North pole, B
the South; I fay that in AB the end of trie ftone, the
force is greater, and in the middle of the line ILN,it is
more weak and drowfie, unlefs there be any vertue un-
known in the right and left fide CD: but the neerer it is
to theNorth or South,the more it augmentsjbut the far-
ther off it is,the more it faints. Break the ftone in C and
G, wherein there lay bid a vertue «»percr^ed, but it
will appear when the ftone is broken,and fnew its pro-
perties, and one point will fhew forth the North, the
other the South. And if thefe things feem fuperfloott?,
yet are they neccflary , as the grounds of what I
muft fay.

Chap. VII.

That by the touching of other ftonesy thofe joints will not change their forces.

ANd becaufe I faid that the Load-ftone doth not always hold its forces cqual,but
that one ftone i« more powerful in operation then another, for fome are faint
and weak;! fhall put the firft qucftion, whether by rubbing and touching the weaker
ftohes with the ftronger, thofe forces will be changed, or ftay as they were ; as, if a

Load-

Of the Wonders of the Loadjlone. 195

Load-Hone is flasgifh in pointing out the pole, whether in a flronger ftone
rubbed with the North point upon the North point of the weaker, can help ic
at ill ; or if we fhall rub the South point of the other on the North point
of this, wnether the North point rubbed on will be gone and become the
Souch point, or continue in its former venue ? Where we have not reafon to
direct Us, experience fhall prove it. For let a Loadftonc be of what forces and
properties it may be, by rubbing it againft a Loadftone of lei's vertue, it will never
lofe any thing, but continues immutable ; and being left at liberty in its boat, it
will cum voluntarily to its own pole , and decline the contrary part. And though
we cannot find the caufe of ir, yet it fcems not againft reafon; I fay, that inftones
of the fame kind, the greater ftones have the greateft forces ; and when one Load-
ftone is rubbed againft another, it will leave certain hairs, which are but the bruifed
fmall parts of the ftone, that ftick like hairs, and thefc are they that lend force to i-
ron and other things to attract, and to turn to the pole ; but if the ftone that is rub-
bed and receives it be greater then thofe hairs, it can never be that the greater ver-
tue ftiould be conquered by the lefs, alwayes the ftones being of the fame kind,
fince the hairs have as it were bo proportion to the magnitude of it. And as the
hairs to the ftones magnitude are infenfible,fo it is impoffiblc that they can wrcft th$
force of it to the contrary pole.

Chap. VIIT.
That a ho (lift one will draw a Loadftone^ and drive it from it.

I Shall fpeak of the other operation of it, which is of its attracting and repelling.
This is both admirable, and delightfome to behold with our eyes, and to confidcr
ia our mind, that the part of one Loadftone ftiould fo carefully fearch out another,
allure an<J attract it, to enjoy its company, and to fofter ic in its boiom , and again,
another ftiould be fuch an enemy to it, that they are at mutual difcord, fo that put-
ting their contrary ends together, the one will be fo contrary to the other, and hate
as ic were the force of it, that it will turn the contrary way: namely, the North
part of the one doth not indifferently draw any part of every other ftone, but a di-
ftinft and certain part ; nor doth it drive every part from ir, but that part it natural-
ly abhors, and cannot endure, as being contrary unto it. The North part of the one
will draw the South part of the other, and drive away from it the North part of the
fame ; and the South part of this is not an enemy to the North part of the other,
but to the South part of ir. The fame will appear better by an example.

Let there be two ftones ACD, and EBF : in the firft ftone let A
be the North pole, and the point G the South ; in the ftone
EFBlet the North part be H, the South B: I fay, if yon put the
South part G.of the ftone CAD, co the South part B, of the
ftone EFB, it will prefently drive it from it ; and the fame will
happen if you put the North pole A to the North pole G« A-
gain,if you (hew the North point A to the South point H, or
the South point B to the North point A, as being mutually a-
grced, it will draw the part to it that is not againft it. The rea-
fon of it I know ; for fince that the South part G, had formerly
been faft to the North part H, when the parts are divided they
alwayes feek to unite again, toprcferve the fame body, as Phi-
lofophersfay. But if the SoUth point G had been faft with the
South point B of another ftone, B flies off prefently, and departs fromic; or if
you (hew the North point A, to the North point H, the fame will come to pafs ; for
they refufeone the other, becaufe they did not fo ftand in their Mine. Here I fhall
confute the error of P/*»^,andof his followers, who think that no other Load-
ftone hath this vertue but the ftone of Ethiopia j but it is common to all Loadftone?,
Alfo,it is a fign, faith he,of the Ethiopian ftone, becaufe that will draw another

E e 2 whole

\$6 Natural Magic k. 'Bookj.

whole Loadftone to it. A\(o Cardanut falfly affirms that one Loadftone will not
draw another ; but it will draw it, becaufe the iron is concealed in it that it had firft
drank in. In brief, the poles that are unlike, will join together, by rcalon of the
fimihtudeof their fubftance, and likenefs of inclination ; but the poles that are the
fcme, by a contrary inclination are at enmity ; that is, the North point feeks the
South point,and the South the North point; fofhall the South and North points re-
y.St South and North points. Yet we mult tell you by the way,thac when we try the
iiones, let them not be both great and vaft Hones, that being hindered by their
weights cannot perform their office : but let one be great , and t he oiher <mall j
cr both imall , that they may be mutually repulied or drawn r,n. The trial is eafie,
if they be hanged by a thread, or put into their boats, or if they play equally
balanced upon the needle.

Chap. IX.
jlfportof the Loadftone,

r Will not pafs by a merry conceit of the Loadftone, that I have oft-times made
*my friends (port with , for the good of thofe that are curious in the fearch ot the
reafons of things. How in a fhort time two kinds of fands mingled, and aid on a
heap, may be parted one from the other very fuddenly : for the fianders by, that
cannot found the reafon of it will, think it impoflibie. f he trick is this : Pown a
Loadfione into very fine fand, and put fome white land, or fome other fand together
with ir, and mingle them, and make a heap of them .* for if you put a Loadftone to
it, either uncovered, or covered wuh linen (that the ftanders by may notkrowit)
prefently the fand of the Loadftone, as in league with it, will run like (mail hairs
joined together, and will ftickfaft to the Hone • which you may brtfh tff and lay a-
fide, then come again, and what is behind will run to the it one, till you have drawn
it all out; and it will ctufe no little wonder, that when the Loadfione comes to
the heap,the fands that were mingled fhould be parted afunder. But the more esfily
to powder the Loadfione, do thus. Put the Loadftone into in iron morter, lay a
blanket or fome other foft thing upon it, for it will thus yield to hand-(irokes,and
prefently crumble ; if not, you mud beat hard on the bottom of the morter, and
batter the peftle. Alfo the fame thing befals us in a certain fand that is brought to
us cut of an iron Mine from Porchys , for it hath the colour and (Lining that iron
hath ; and by the proximation of the Loadftone,it is foon parted from the other, to
the admiration of thofe that are prefent. It may be this experiment was madc,be-
caufe the antients report that the Loadfione will draw iron, fand, oyle, and all
things.

Chap. X.
The greater the Loadfione the greater is the force of it,

ANd yon muft know, that the bigger Loadftone will caft forth its force at a far-
ther diftance, and bnndifh it, and attract the oppofite Loadftone with more
violence, and draw it to it , and that in the lame fort of ft one ; as if aLoadrtone
be a pound weight, and another Loadftone be a good diftance fiom it, it will pre-
fently leap, and meet the other that draws ir. If we cut off half that flone, the
force of it will decay, and be dull as if it were dead, and the vigor of it is taken
away by the proportion of the part taken from it. If any man will not believe ir, ,
let a ftone be fetcht for trial; fora part being taken away, part of thevertue is loft
alfo : join the part taken away as it was, and the force will be reftored , and be-
come more lively, and will be as powerful is formerly, that it will leap at a Load-
ftone that meets it at a great diftance, and prefently embrace it. This argumenc
confirmut, that the greater the ftone is, the greater force it hath, even in the fame
fort of ftones: for I have feen divers Loadftoncs, brought from divers parts of the

world

. Of the Wonders of the Loadftone. ipy

worM , to have divers properties. I faw at Rome, a Loadftone weighed ad Ounce,
rhat drew two Ounces of Iron, and held it fo faft as it drew, that it could l'carce be
pulled from ir. I have feen others of forty Pound weight, that were fo feeble, that
they would fcarce ftir an Ounce. But that I may the more oblige the curiofuy of
S. udents in this nutter, I (hall teach in the following Chapters, how the Venue of
the Sione may be tried and equally balanced.

Chap. XI.

That the force of this Stone mllpa[s into other Stones, that fometimesyoH may fee as it

were a rope of Stones.

T He Stone with us is commended for another property ; for when it hath taken
hold of another Stone , it not only holds that fait, but it fends into the Body
of it an effluxion of its forces j and that having got m )rc forces, draws another, and
gives it the like faculty : the third made to partake of the fame vertue, draws others
that are necr or far off, and cafts forth and brandifheth the fame vertue j and this
draws another: and fo, by a reciprocal ejaculation, by the fame force it is held , by
the fame it holds others ; and from each of them to the other, are their darts Hying,
as it were endowed with the vertu? of them • and if you lift them up on high, they
leem to harg in links like a Chain , that they will not eafily be drawn one from the
other ; that we muft needs wonder exceedingly , how that internal and invifible
fotre can run from ore to the other, and pifs through them : and the more vertue
it hath, to the more it doth communicate it. Yet I thought fi: to forewarn
you that you faii not in your trial , that the Stones muft lUck the one to the other by
the parts that agree, and not by contrary parts ; for fo would not one impart his
venues to another , but bv the meeting with an oppofite part , would be held back,
and ccafc frcm doing its Office ; n3tncly,that the North point of the one,muft ttick to
the South point of the other , as I faid ; and not contrarily : for the South point ap-
plied to the South, and the North point to the North point, i'- contrary , and the fa-
culty will faint and decay at the prelence of its Ad verfary. Nor yet will we omit to
remember thofe that are curious to try this, that the Stones muft fucceflively be pro-
p ircionable, that the great one muft draw a iefs, and a little one muft draw one lefs
then it felf : for fo they will hang the f after, and not be fo carily pulled afuuder.

Chap. XII.
that in the Loadftone that hairjnefs is contufed.

HEnce comes that hairinefs of little Hairs, that we mentioned before, that
nicks lb taft to the Stone, that it can hardly be pulled off : for when one is
rubbed againft the other , or is beaten off with a light blow of the Hammer, thofe
fmili pieces being rubbed one againft another, do not fall to the Earth by their
own wtight , but are held up by the force of the Stone : and that one may ftick
fait to the other , turning its friendly countenauce to it , it can by no other means
ccmaeodiouflv faften to its fympaihizing part, nor be joyned with it, but like a Hair
or imill Ttuced ; and if ycu rub one ^tone long againft another, that heap of Sand
Wlil lo augment, that it will appear all hairy, or ike the down on a wans chin^or as.it
wc? hdet round with a heap of pricks. Nor is this to be parted witnout admiration,
That ir any man puts another Loadftone to it, or neer it, that is greater then ir,and
more powerful ; tbey will appear prefently to turn about, and to dire<St their friendly
parts to the like parts in the ^tone that is put neer them, and to ftrive tocome to it ;
and if the y cannot do it,for want of ftrcngth, they will fall to the ground.

CHAP.

!?8

Natural Magick,

$oo{j.

Chap. XTII.

The attractive part u more violent then the part that drives off'.

muft tell the Reader of mother thing before- hand, that having laid the frun-
daticn of what we fhall fay , we may proceed to greater matters. The part
that at'. rafts, draw s more vehemently j and hat which drives away , doth it more
faintlv i namely, the part oppofire to it : for if the South part or the Stone, » i k to
the North part of the other, it will draw at greater diHance and mere force : hur ccn-
trarily, it y< u urn the diiagreeing parts together, namely, the South parts to ihe
South, and the North parts to the North parts, the natural force is made dull, and as
though it were teeble and weak, it lofeth its force, that it cannot fo well perform its
Office; and if they be not very ncer,thc f< rcei^ ftopped,andcandovery litrle. If any
man defires to try, let him hang them up with threads, or balance them no a pin, or
put them in Boats , and he fhall finde thcii readinefs to draw , and their feeblcneis
and flaggifhnefs to drive eft rrom them.

THe parts we fpeak of, if they be joyned friendly together, they wi'l a<?it
were , enter a league, and help one the other, and will gain more force
and vertne. But if they be contrary, they are at fuch oppofition by their
N ture, and fuch lectet hatred there is between them , that being put toge-
ther by their diiagreeing points, as if their Adverfary were prefent, they will
ceafe from all their attraction, and lole all their force. As , if yon have
Loadttones in your hands , that have the oppofite parts united , the North
and South together j if another fione be put to them, neither of thefe ftones
will move or get the Victory ; for they n ither draw to, nor drive fr .m ; e-
fpecially, if both their force? be equal. But if one be Wronger then another ,
the hone that is put to ir,will move and ftir,and will either come forward or go back-
ward. But if yon take up his contrary Companion , he will either be drawn
after, or will flie from it willingly ; for it wiJ either go along with the part
it agrees with , or will go from that part it is contrary to : by which Reafon
you may knew, that one hinders the other. We may alio by another Experi-
ment, be made more certain of the fame thing : If you draw one Loadltone
with another, and let it hang in the Air ; if to the place where they joyn, you
apply the contrary force of another Loadllone ; by this meeting with their E-
nemy , both their forces will fail and faint: and if the fame be of a great force,
the Hone that drew will let the other go , and falls from it. And alio , not
without mirth and admiration , you (ball fee a Chain of many pieces of Load-
ftoncs hanging together ; and if you app y the contrary fide to the third or
fourth ftone, the Chain is prelently broken, and the part falls off , and will
not hang faft : but the other parts , whirher the force of it comes not , will
yet ftick fall together in a Link, uniefs you put the end of the contrary pare
to them.

\7"\^E may know by another and more certain way then that I fet down before,
which are the vertical points in the Loadftone, which turn to the North,
which to the South ; and efpecially , that point that fends forth the attractive ver-
tue, will be discovered. Thus : That point that mod vehemently draws unto it

the

C HAP, XIV.

The contrary parts of the Stones are contrary one to another »

Chap. XV.

How to know the Polar points in the Loadftone.

Of the Wonders of the Load/lone. ipp

the Sonth point of another ftone,and flicks faft to ir,thac is the North poinrjand that
point the North part of another ftone willingly joyns with,is theSourh point. The
fame alio may be known by the driving off : That point that drives off -rom it , and
refufeth the North part of the ftone put againft it, is the Norch point ; and the South
point, that drives from it the South point. And he that would have the true pole
more exa&iy demonftratcd, let him do thus : Put a little bit of a Loadlione, not much
greater or letter Men a Millet-Seed, to the Loadftone ; and if it prefently draw it at a
durance , and when it is drawn , it Hicks fait and is hardly taken from it , it is an
Argument of the true end whence that force proceeds. You may alfo draw about
a little bit about that point, to fee if it will draw weakly or ftrongly , and whether
it will part from that pUce of it fclf, or unwillingly. Briefly, That point that draws
with molt force, and will hardly let loofe what it hath attra#ed, is the true point of
attraction ; giving you to underftand ,

7 hat the Pole fends its force to the Circumference*

I have known it fo , as from the Centre to the Circumference. And as the light
of a Candle is fpread every way , and enlightens the Chamber ; and the farther
it is off from it , the weaker it fhioe?, and at too great a dittance is left ; and the
neerer it is , the more cleerly it illuminates : fo the force flies forth at that point ;
and the neerer it is, the more forcibly it attracts ; and the further off, the
more faintly : and if it be fet too far off, it vantfheth quite, and doth nothing.
Wherefore for that we flv 11 fay of it , and mark it for, we (hall call the length of its
forces the compafs of its venues,

C H A P. XVI.

7 bat the force of drawing and driving off, can be kindred bj no hindrance,

BUt this is above all wonder , that yon can never wonder fo much as yon
«hould, That the force of the ftone for attra&ion and repelling , can be in-
cluded in no bounds, can be hindered by nothing, or held back; but it willpene-
tmc invifibly , and will move and ftir thofe ftones that arc f> moathizing with ic,
if they be put to it , and will exercife its forces , as if there were nothing be-
tween : but this nraft be within the compais of its vertue : for if yon hang
fome Loadstone fitly upon a Table of wood , ftone, or metal, or lying equally
balanced , and you (hall put your Loadftone under the Table, and ftir it there , the
vertue of it will pafs from this body like a Spirit penetrating the folid Table, and
move the ftone above it, and ftir it as it fclf is moved ; as this moves, fo moves that ;
and when this refts, that doth the fame. But if the Table be made of Loadftone
or Iron, the vertue is hindred,and can do nothing : we (hall (hew the reafons of it
in -their proper places. Of fo many ftrange miracles in Nature, there is none more
wonderful then this.

Ch a p. XVII.
Horv to make an Army of Sand to fight before) oft.

ANd it is as pleafant as wonderful , that I (hewed to my Friends , who bebeldt
on a plain Table an Army of Sand divided into the Right and Left Wings,
fighting , to the wonder of the Spectators : and many that were ignorant of
the buhnefs , thought it was done by the help of the Devil. I ponned a Load-
ftone into powder, fome very (mail, fome fomthing grofs : and I made feme of little
bitsj that they might better reprefent Troops of Horfe,or Companies of Foot : and
fo I fet my Army here and there. The Wings were on the Right and Left , and
the main Body was in the middle, accompanied with Troops of Horfc : under a
fmooth Table I put a very principal Loadftone with my Hand. When this was put
chere , the Left Wing marched j and on the Right Hand , with another ftone , the

200 Natural Magick* 2?G0^ j.

Ri'.ht Wing marched : when they drew ceet together , and were more neer the
Loadi'oac , the Sands trembled • and by degre:s,they leemed like thofc that take
up rheir Spears ; and when the Loadtioce was laid down t they laid down
their Spears, as if they were ready to fight, and did threaten to kill and flay:
and the better the Loadftone was, the higher would thefe hair? I re ch forth thetn-
fclves : and as I moved my Hands by little and little, fo the Army marched on :
and when the ftones came neer to one the other , they feemed to fight , and
inn onewithin the other j fo the other Wings and Troops came on, and fhew-
ed the form of a Battle ; and you might fee them fomerimes retreat , fome-
times march forward; fometimes to conquer , and fometimcs to be corquered ;
fometimes to lift up their Spears , and lay them down again , as the Load-
ftone was put neer to them , or farther off ; and the more force there was
to fend forth every way. But this is the greater wonder , becaufe what is
done on a plain Board , may be done hanging in the Air, that you mav iee
them like the Antipodes in Bactel : for ftretcbing out a Paper, or fetting a Ta-
ble alofr, the Loadrloncs moved above the Table , will do the fame thing we
fpeak of , and fhew it to the bpe&stors. But if one that is ingenious do the
bufinefs, he will do more and greater Feats then we can write of.

Chap. XVIIT.
The Situation makes tkeVertnes of the Stone contrary.

TT cannot want wonder , *s it doth reafon , That the poficion fhould fhew
the Vertucs contrary to all that we have faid : for the ftene put abo e the
Table will do one thing , and another thing if it be put under the Table : for
if you fit the ftone by equally poifing it to make it move freely , or put it
into a Boat , and put a ftone above it, it will attract it, or reje£t ir, as we faid
before : but if you put it under the ftone , it will work comrarily ; • for that pare
that drew above, will drive eff beneath j and that will draw beneath, that
drove off above : that is, if you place the ftone above and beneath in a perpen-
dicular. By which Experiments, one may fee cleerly , That the fuuaticn will
work contrary operations , and change the forces of it by turns. Wherefore in
the operations of it, you muft chiefly mark the pofition, if you put the Loaftonc a-
bove or beneath.

Chap. XTX.
How the attractive force of the Loadftone may be weighed.

^^Ecan alfo meafure that attra&ing or expelling vertue of the Lcadfter.e, or
poifc it in a balance : which will be of no fmall corlequen.ee in rhe following
confiderations ; and efpecially , for a perpetual motion , and to matte Ircn hang
pendulous in the Air, when the true and certain attra&ive Venue is fcund cut
from the Circumference to the Centre. . The Art is this : Put a piece of a Load-
ftone into a balance, and" in the other fcale as much weight, cf k me ether matter,
that the fcale may hang equal : then we apply a piece of Iron lying on a T*b!e,thac
fr naay ftidk to the Loadftone that is hi the fcale: and that they tray flick fa ft by
their ffiepdly points, vou fhall by degrees caft feme fand into the othei fcale , .and
that fo loog, t ill the fcale and iron part j fo by weighing the weight of the fand, we
have the Vertue of the Loadftone we fought to finde. Wc may alfo put the iron into
the fcale, and lay the Loadftone on the table.

CHAP.

Of the Wonders of the Load/lone,

201

Chap. XX.

Of the mutual attractions and driving off of the Loadftone, and of Iron.

N Oar are we come to the other part of our Treaty, wherein we difcourfe of the
mutual union of Loadrtones, and of their differences one with the other: the
effects whereof are fo known, that they are in the mouths of all men , nor will any
man almoft fay that he knows them not. The operation is this : Becaufe there is
fuch a Natural concord and fy mpathy between the iron and the Loadftone, as if they
had made a League ; that when the Loadftone comes neer the iron, the iron prefent-
ly ftirs, and runs to meet it, to be embraced by the Loadftone. And that embracech
it fo faft, that with tofling of it up and down , you can fcarce part them. And the
Loadftone runs as faft to the iron, and is as much in love with that , and unity with
ic ; for neither of them will refufe to be drawn. But the weaker ftill runs willingly
to meet the other. That you may believe this, you (hall try it thus : Either hang them
both by a th read, or put them in boats, or balance them on the needle,P//'«? fpeaking
of this, faith, For what is more wonderful ? or wherein is Nature more wanton ? what
is more fluggifh than a cold (tone ? yet Nature hath given this both fenfe and hands.
What is more powerful than hard iron ? yet it yields and fubmits : for the Loadftone
draws it \ and that matter that conquers all things , runs after I know not what ;
and as ic comes neer, it Mops, and lays faft hold, and flays conflantly to be embraced.
Lucretimy fecking the caufe of this effect,

How itfhouldbe that Loadftone Iron draws :

And Orphetu in his Verfes relates , that iron is drawn by the Loadftone , as a Bride
after the Bridegroom , to be embraced • and the iron is fo defirons to joyn with ic
as her husband, and is fo follicitous to meet the Loadftone : when it is hindred by
its weight, yet it willftandanend , as if it held up its hands to beg of cheftone, and
flattering of it, as if ic were impatient that it cannot come at it by reafon of its
ponderosity ; and (news that ic is not content with its condition: but if ic once kift
the Loadftone, as if the defire were fatisfied,it then is at reft ; and they arc fo mutu-
ally in love , that if one cannot come at the other, ic will hang pendulous in the air.
Wherefore Alberttt* very ignorantly told Frederick the Emperour,that a friend of his
fhew*d a Loadftone that did not attract iron, but was attracted by it : Unce the light-
er of ihefe two will ftir, when the heavier approaches neer it.

i

C N A P. XXI.

' The Iron and Loadftone are in greater amity y then the Loadftone is with the Loadftone*

*J*He exceeding love of the Iron with the Loadftone , is greater and more effectual
and far ftronger, then that of the Loadftone with the Loadftone ; and this is eafi-
ly proved : For lay on a Table, pieces of iron , and Loadftone of the fame weight ;
and let another Loadftone be brought neer j when it comes to a fit diftance, the iron
will prefently ftir, and runs toward the Loadftone and embraceth it. And it is pro-
% ed better thus; Let a Loadftone embrace a Loadftone,and be fet foftly neer the iron,
when the force of its circumference comes to the iron, the Loadftone will prefencly
lec fall the Loadftone, and lay hold on the iron : but let iron and that be joyned
no Loadftone can ever take them afunder to flick there.

Chap, XXII.
The Loadftone doth not draw on aH partly fat at certain points.

' WC ?uft n^ lhl?k tbat thc Lotdflone dnm the iron with every parr, buc at a
let and ccrcain point ; which is 10 be fearched out, with great reafon, care, and

Ff dili-

loi Natural Magic k. 'Boottf.

diligence, You (hall find it thug : cither hang up the iron, or balance it on a Ta-
ble, that it may prefently leap to be embraced from them: then carry your Load-
ftone round about it • and when you fee the iron tremble, and run toward the Load-
ftone , touching it, that is the very point of attra&ion , and the beams of its vertue
arc fent round about from that point: wherefore, the farther from that point the
iron is, the more faintly and weakly will it move ; for the more forcible vcrtuc nsfts
in the Centre, as in its Throne.

Chap. XXIIT.
Thai the [ame Loadfione th-n drawsydoth on the contrary point drive of the iron,

THat no man might be deceived, thinking the Lcadftone that draws iron , to be
different from that ftone that drives it off ; 1 tell him of it beforehand , and I
fhall by experiments diffipate this cloud. Pliny faith, the Loadftone that draws iron
to it, is not the fame with that which drives iron from it. And again, In the fame
Ethiopia, there is a mountain that produceth the ftone Theamedes , that drives off
iron, and reje&eth it. Pliny not knowing this, erred exceedingly , thinking that they
were two ttones that had thefe contrary operations • whereas it is but one and the
fame ftone, that by fympathy and fitnilitude, draws the willing iron to it ; but with
the oppofite part, by antipathy of Natures , it drives it off. And you may be eafily
affured of this : for let iron be balanced equally, and let one end of the Loadftone
draw it, if you turn the other end to it , it will flyback, and turn to the contrary
part : thefe points run in a right line through the middle of the ftone. Yet obfervc
this , that the iron which is drawn by one point of the Loadftonc , or is within the
compafs of its vertue for a while, obtains prefently this vertue : that what is drawn
by the one end of it, will be driven off by the other. You fhall know thefe differ-
ences of attraction more clearly by the following experiment.

Chap. XXIV.
How irm will be made leap upon a Table, no Loadjlont being feen.

BY reafon of this confent and difcord of theLoadftone, I ufc to make pretty fport
to make my frien ds merry. For catting the iron on the Table, and not putting
any Loadftoneneer it , that the fpe$acors canfee,the iron will feem to move itfelf:
which is very pleafant to behold. I do it thus : divide a needle in the middle , cart
onehalf of k upon the Table, but firft rub the head of it with one end of theLoad-
ftone. Put your hand with the Loadftone privately under the Table, and there where
• the head of the needle lyeth , the Lcadftone will ft ick, and the needle will prefently
ftand upright: and ftandingfo, to the wonder of the beholders, will walk over the
Table, and follow the motion of the hand that guides it : when it hath gone thus a
while , prefently turn the ftone upfide down, and put the contrary part of theLoad-
ftone to the needle, and (which is ftrange)the needle will turn about : and if it went
on the head before, it will now goon the point ; and draw yonr hand which way you
will , the needle will follow it : and if you turn the ftone three or four times, putting
fometimes the fcuth point , fometimes the north point of the ftone to it , the needle
will turn as often, and fometimes ftand on the head, fometimes on the point upright,
or walk fo as you pleafe^ and fometime it will go with that part it ftood upon,fome-
times it will fand on the part it went. I can prefent my friends with the fame fight,,
in a more range manner : for if you put the two pieces of a needle upon a paper or
Table, whereof one hath touched the north point , the other the fouth point of the
ftone , I can lb place two Hones, that one of the needles fhall go upon the head, the
other upon the point ; and fometimes one fhaH turn, thcn both at once, or they fhall
dance orderly, and move when any mufickis playd on. And this is a pretty fight to
{hew your fricnds,that cannot but admire it.

. ■ Chip.

Of the Wonders of the Loadjtone. 203

Chap. XXV.
That the vertue of the Loadfiom^ is fern through the pieces of Iron,

TTHar vertue that is imparted to the iron, by the L^ad'one, doth not' ay in the
iron, but is lent from one to another For if you draw* .' eel needle byihe
touch of theLoadi-one, and put another needle to the end of that need'e, that pare
will draw the needle, and hold it hanging in the air j and if you apply another nee-
d e to rhat,it will do the fame.

Yob may do thi- with af many needles, as the force of the Load'one can reach
unto ; but when it grows faint, the needle will let the other needle fail , as not ha-
ving l.rcngth enough to bear its weight. And thus you may hang a great many nee»
dies in a chain in the air. PUto knew this venue , for he (peaks of it in lone :
which fone, not onely draws iron rings, but infufeth vertue into the rings them-
felves, that they can do the fame, and attract rings as the < one doth : whence fome-
times you fhall fee a long concatenation of iron rings , and all the vertue of them is
attracted from that none. Lucretius knew it alio.

A Stone there is that men admire much,
That makes rings hmg in chains by touch.
Sometimes five or fix linl^s will be
Fafijojw'd together , and agree.
AH this vertnejrom the Stone arifeth,
Such force tt hath —

P/f»jrfpeakingo'f the fame vertne, faith, Onely this matter receives Prength from
another None, and holds it a long time ; laying boid of another iron , that fome-
times yon (Vail fee a chain of rings, which the ignorant vu gar call Live iron Galen,
You may fee in the Loadftone, that when it toucheth irony-k will rick to it, withouc
any bands: and if that was fir^.tpuched, touch another, that will i Kk as the firtt
doth ; and ike wife a third to the fecond. jtuguftwe de ctvitate D «, fpeaking of this
wonder, faid, We know that the Load one will wonderfully draw iron ; which when
I firft faw, I trembled at it exceedingly. For T law an iron ring drawn by the done,
that hung in the air by it, that communicated the lame force to others : for another
ring put to the firft , made that hang alfo ; and as the firft ring hung by the done ,
fo the fecond ring huns by the firft ring. In the fame manner was there a third and
fourth ring applied , and faftned ; and fo their rings hung together by the outlines,
not faftned inwardly, like to a chain of rings. Who would not admire at the vertue
of thisftone? that was not onely within it, but ran through fo many rings, that
hun°by it, and held them raft withinvifible bands. But the greater the vertue of
the Loadftoneis , the more rings it will hang up : I have hang'd ten needles with a
ftone of a pound weight. But he that wou!d draw many needles , let him tub the
heads onely againft theLoadftone, and they will all hold the heads by their points.

Chap. XXVf.
The Loadflene within the Jphere of its vertue^ fends it forth without touching.

ANd the Loadftone doth not onely impart its vertue to the iron , by touching if,
but) which is wonderful, within the compafs of its vertue, it will impart vertue
10 the iron , if it be but prefent , to draw another iron. For if you put your Load-
ftone fo neer to the iron, that it may have it onely within the circumference of its
venue , and you put another iron neer to that iron, it will draw ic to it ; and if ano-
ther touch that which is drawn, it will draw that alfo : that you fhall fee a long chain
©f rings or needles, hanging in the air. But when they hang thus together ; if yoa'

Ff i re-

Natural Magic k. Sgo^ 7.

emove the Loadftone a little farther ofF,the laft ring will fall . and if yet yon remove;
t farther, the next will/ail, until they all fall oft : whence it is clear, that without
touching, it can impart its venue to the iron.

Chap. XX VII.

Hjjv the Loadftone can hang up iron in the air.

¥ Have a long time endeavoured much to make iron hang in the air, and not touch
X the Loadftone, nor yet tied beneath : and now I think it almort impoflible to be
done . fany faith it : Dmocrates the Architect began to vault the Temple of Arfinoe
with Loadftone, that therein her Image of iron might leem to hang rn the air : both
he and Ptolomy died, who commanded ibis to be made for his fitter ; fo that what
he began, be did not finifh The Greeks fay, that in the Temple of Serapis , that is
vaulted at Alexandria, there was a Load-rtonefet , that held aftatneof braf3inthe
air ; for it had a piece of iron in the head of it. But that is falfe, that Mahomets cheft
hangs by the roof of the Temple. Petrm Pellegrinm laith, he fhewed ia another
work how thac might be done : but that work is not to be found. Why I think ic
extream hard, I (hall fay afterwards. But I fay it may be done , becauie I have now
done it» to hold it fart by an invifible band, to hang in the air ; onely io, that it be
bound with a fmall thread beneath, that it may not rife higher: andthen rtrivingto
catch hold of the ft one above, it will hang in the air, and tremble and wag it feif.

Chap. XXVIII.

1' he forces of the Loadftone cannot be hindredy by a waller table coming between,

AS I faid before of the Loadftone , the venue of that and iron , can be hindred
by no body coming between ; but it will do its office. For whilft the Load-
ftone is moved under a Table of wood, ftone, or any metal, except iron ; the needle
in the Mariner? Compafs will move above , as if there were no body between them,
St. isfuguftine Lib. decivitateDei, knew this experiment. But that is much more
wonderful that I have heard : that if one hold a Loadftone under a piece ot filver, and
put a piece f>f iron above the filvcr, as he moves his hard underneath that holds the
ftone , fo will the iron move above j and the filver being in the middle , and fuffer-
isg nothing, running io fwiftly up and down, that the ftone was pull'd tromthe hand
of the man, and took hold of the iron.

Chap. XXIX.
How a man of wood may row a little Boat j and fome other merry conceits,

THe fraud here is notable* for women (ball fee a man of wood rowing a little
boat well waxed, in a large veffel full of water , and they can counterfeit here-
by as importers do divination by water. The fraud is thus began : the vffel is fil-
led with water, a little fhip of Wax is put into it, or elfe1 of wood ; in the middle fits
alitrlemanof wood, faftned through the middle with a hogs-briftle , fo t quail ba-
lanced, that with every light motion he may eifily Hirhimfelf : let him have oai sin
his hands, and under his feet a piece of iron. Let the Alphabet be made on the brim
of the veffel, round about : wherefore a woman coming to erquire of feme doubtful
matter, the little man of wood, as if hewonld give a trueanfwer, will row to thofe
letters that may fignifie the anfwer : for he that holds the Loadftone in bis band, un-
der the Table, can draw the boat which way he will , acd fowill aniwer by joyning
thefe letters together. Or put a boy of cork into a glafs viol , with abroad mouth,
that turns himfelf about the needle equally balanced ; and about the glafs v«flel,makc
the Alphabet, that the man turning round abcut may give anfwers. Butlmademy
friends wonder exceedingly to fee

A

Of the mnders of the Loadftone,

A paper go Hp A wall^and come down ef it [elf.

For T glew'd a piece of iron on the bsckhde of the paper , and I gave it my friends
to holdro the wall ; but behinde ftcod a boy with a Loadiione, apd the paper < !<at
was lefc there, ftood ftill : my friend commanded it to go up two foot : the boy that
heard what wis commanded, moved the Loadftone againft it, to that place : and the
paper moved thither alio, and i'o downwards, or fide- ways : they that knew not the
rcafon were aftonifhed at it. Bin, which exceeds all, when he moved the Load-
ftone over his head, by an arch of wood, it drew the paper after it . whereupon the
piper hung over our heads and moved : but ail that faw it , believed the Divel was
checaufeof it.

Chap. XXX.
A Loadftone on a plate of iron}will not fiir iron*

\AfE f*id that there is nothing coming between , can hinder the force of iroj?, but
iron onely : fo that if you lay a needle on a plate of iron, and flhall bring your
Loadftone to it, above or beneath, it hath no vertue to attract it, cr do its office : and
the reafon is eafie. For it ftands by realbn, that if iron lye upon iron , they are the
fame body, as a partis of the whole: and when the plate of iron, or piece, is big?ers
and too heavy for the Loadftone to draw, it moves nor. So that if you pu:. the filings
of iron upon a plate of iron , and with your hand underneath , you carry the Load-
ftone , the filings will not ftir, but ftand ftill upon the plate. Nor if iron or a Load-
ftone be upon a Table of iron , will they come to the ftone that is put to them , but
will lye as if they were afleep, and void of all vertue , or changed in their Natures.
Alio, if you put flat iron to a Load ftone , if on the other fide iron be equally balan-
ced , it will not ftir, nor move to meet it •, as if all the force of the Loadftone were
hundred by it. Lucretitu faith, that it will happen fo, not when iron, but brafsis
between them : but I rather think he writ fo by hear-fay , then by his fight , if we
uoderftand his meaning.

. Pieces of iron 1 have feen9

When onely brafs was put between
Them and the Loadftone , to recoil:
Brafs in the middle made this broil.

Chap. XXXI.
Thepofttion of the Iron, will change the forces.

"yyHat the Loadftone can do , the iron touched by the Loadftone, will do the
fame. I faid, that the Loadftone equally balanced , by putting the fouth pare
of the Loadftone above, it will draw the north part, and thenorth part will drive
off the north part ; but on the lower part, the Nature being charged, that which
drew before, drives off now • and that which drove off, draws to it. The fame I
judge of iron touched with the Loadftone. For iron in the Mariners Ccmpafs touch-
ed with the Loadftone , that part of the Loadftone that draws and drives eff in the
upper part, being put under, expels what it drew before, and draws what it expelled.
I would not omit,that amongft its admirable properties,the pofition fhould caufe fuch
alteration. Whence we may corje&ure,that as the ftone hath a pole-ar£tick and an-
tar&ick ;foit hath an eaft and wc(i part, and its upper and nether part, as the heavens
have : and therefore it is reafonable, that whereas the north and inferiour part from
above , drew the fouth and inferiour part of the iron ; now the pofiticn being chan-
ged, the upper part of the ftone will draw the nether part of the iron.

Chap,

%o6 Natural Magick. ^Boof^j. *

Chap. XXXII.

That the iron rubbed with the northern point of the LoadfioKe^rvilltHrn to the fouth tand with

the [oath point to the north,

I Come to the third part, that is, to the iron touched with the Loadftone, and they
are all wonderful. Hay then, that when we know the north point of the Hone,
and we have rubbed one end of the iron wich it, if it be equally balanced , or hung
by a thread, or lie freely in a boat,it Will turn of it felf to the fouth. And that hands
with real'on : for the Load 'One imparts its force to the iron. Fork is the natural
force of the Load tone , that being balanced equally, it fhould turn its north point
to the north, and his fouth point to the fouth. But when it is rubbed on the iron,
the upper part of the Loadftone is faftned to the iron ; but the lower part that is neer
to it, is free'd: wherefore, if you rub the iron with the north part , which fartneth
to the iron, andtoucheth its external fuperficies, it will be northern that feemsto
to be fouthcrn , and this fouth part will turn freely to the north. But contrarily, if
you ru5 the fouth point againft the iron, the fouth point is faftned to the iron , and
the north point is let loofe that turns to the north. Wherefore C^anm (peaks
falfe , that the iron touched by the north point , will turn to the north , and that
which was touched by the fouth point , will turn fouth ; for we fee the contrary.
Yet the iron mult be touched with one point , either the north or fouth point : for
if ore part bend northward, the other wiiltend fouthward; by the ufe whereof,
fo large feas are fail'dover, that being the conductor. Our Anceftors failed, by
feeing the fun by day , and the ftars by night. For in the middle of the fea, as they
wandred , they could no otherwife fee the coafts of the world. But wecannot one-
ly difcover what coaft we are in, but we can avoid the rocks under the waters ; and
in cloudy days and dark nights , we can at all times know the poles of the world.
Fl.tvim faith , an Italian found it out firft , whofe name was Amalphm , born in our.
Campania. But he knew not the Mariners Card , but ftuck the needle in a reed,
or a piece of wood , crofs over ; and he put the needles into a veflel full of wa-
ter, that they might flote freely: then carrying about the LoadN one, the needles
would follow it ; which being taken away, as by a certain natural motion, the points
of the needles would turn to the north pole • and having found that, ftand ftill.'
Wherefore, knowing the place before they fteer'd their courfe thither. Now the
Mariners Compafs is made, and a needle tou.hcd with the Loadftone, isfo fitted
to it , that by difcoveringthe pole by it , all other parts of the heavens are known.
There is made a rundle , with a Latir.-navel upon a point of the fame metal , that ic
may run roundly freely. Whereupon, by the touching onely of one end , the nee-
dle not alone partakes of the venues of it , but of the other end alfo , whether ic
will or not : For if you rub the needle with the north point of theftone prefently
that part will turn to the fouth , and the oppofite part to the north ; and one vertue
cannot be imparted without the other. So the needle touched by the fouth point
of the flone , will turn to the north , and the other part to the fouth ; fo that the
part of the needle that is touch'd, receives a contrary force, from that the flone
hath.

Chap. XXXIII.

That iron ton :hed by the LoadftoKe^will impart that force to other iron,

1 Ron touched by the Loadftone, by that touch receiveth the vertue of the Load-
1 (tone, that it will do almoft as much by attracting, and effe&ing, andturningit
felf to the pole. So the iron hanging freely , touched with the fouth point of the
Loadftone, will turn freely to the north : if you applv the fouth part of the ftoncto
the fame, it will turn to the fouth prefently. But if you touch another iron with the
iron that was touched, that will turn to the fouth j and do but point at ic with the

Of the Wonders of the Loadftone. 207

faid point of the iron , it will turn to the north. And this force is not onely fenc •
into the fecond iron , but to a third and fourth, is the force of the Loadftone is.
For if it be a ftrong ftone, it will fend its vertue through eight or ten needles.

Chap. XXXIV.
The virtue received in the irony is weakned'hy one that is ftronger.

YEt this I muft tell you, that the vertue received by the iron , is not fixt and cer-
tain , but is taken off by a ftronger that takes it from it. As an iron touched
by a weak northern point of the Loadftone ; if you rub the fame part of the iron with
a fouth point of a ftronger Loadftone , it will vanifh, and that former force of turn-
ing it felf to the fouth, is taken away, andic takes a fom hern vertue , and will turn
to the north without refinance. But if the Loadftones be of equal force, they are fo
aftonifhed and blunted, that they will neither receive both, nor either.

Chap. XXXV.
How in a fione the fouth or north point is difcerned.

AMongft thofe ways I fhewed before , I fhall fet down this alfo . and perchance
thisisthebeft, how to know the true northern and fouthern points. Let the
Loadftone be turned round, by the wheel of the Jewellers , and poltfhed. Then
make a flender iron, as long as theaxelcreof that round ball, and lay that upon
iheftone: for it will turn it felf upon that line, that points juft north and fouth.
Mark the line upon the flone, with fome delible paint: do the fame on the other-
fide of the ftonej and where it refts upon the ball, draw the fame line: do the
fame the third and fourth time , upon the middle of it : and where thofe lines crofs
©ne the other and meet , thofe are the polar points. We may alfo find it out thus :
Break a fmall needle, and put the fmalleft piece upon the fame ball, andftirit;
for when it comes to the juft northern point , the needle will ftand upright, that
will make ftanders by admire, and will ftand perpendicularly upon it : and till it do
rife thus, be not weary of moving it up and down ; for when you have found ir, you
will be glad of ir.

Chap. XXXVI.
Horv to rnb the iron needle of the Mariners Compaft.

I Know that fome are troubled how to rub the needle in the Compais with the
Loadftone, that it may get force to turn it felf to the north Pole. It muft be done
thus : When you have found the points in the ftone , as I faid before ; ftrike the
points lightly with a hammer, and the plates will be full of ttiff hairs : upon which
if you rub an iron needle , it will prefently get vertue to turn it felf to the Poles.
Yetobferve this , that if you would have your needle turn to the north , you muft
rub it on the fouth point ■, but if to the fouth, rub itwith the north part : For when
it is equally balanced , it will turn to thefc points in the heavens. But that it may
do it more forcibly , and do its office more exa&ly , I fhall lay down fome rules fit
to inftruft you. If you ftrike both ends of the ftone with the hammer , that hairs
may appear on both parts ,thtt you touch the needle at both ends, for fo the needle
will fooner do its office. Moreover, you muft obferve very carefully , that when
the iron rub'd againft theLoadflone, hath received thefe hairs , that you touch it
with no other iron or Loadftone , but keep it far diftant from them , and lock it up
in a box ; for by touching of others the iron will grow dull , and lofe its vertue , thac
ic will never point out the parts of heaven perfectly. For the iron coming within
the Cooapafs of the vertue of another Loadftone, will receive that , as we faid. So
the needle rriuft be proportionable to the ftone. For from a little Loadftone,a great

iron

208 Natural Magic k. <BooI^j.

iron will not receive much venue, nor (hew the pole : alio, a little piece of iron can-
not receive much venue ; for it confumes by the great force of the Loadftone. More-
over, the point that (hews the pole , muft not be fharp, but fiat a little , that it may
receive thofe venues of the Loadftone exactly , and hold them; for in a very fbarp
point, fcarce any venue will abide. Iron, the purer it is, the better will it hold the
vertue. For it will hardly take upon foul and rufty iron : wherefore Mariners make
it of pure fteel; for fteel is made of the beft iron. If you obferve this, iron once
rubbed, will hold the venue a hundred years ; and will certainly, without failing,
point exactly at the poles in the heavens, for fo long time.

Chap. XXXVII.
Of the divers ufes of Mariners Comp*Jfest

ANd the needle touched , doth not onely (hew the poles for the Mariners ufe,
but almoft it fcrves for infinite nfes ; as all men know that ii is day ly fpokea of
every where. I (hall fpeak of fome of the chief. The ufe of the Loadftone upon the
needle, is well known in Sun-dials : for when the needle ftands ftill over the line
that is made from north to fouth , we are fo directed by it , to know the hours
by the fhadow falling from the Gnomon. Alfo, thofe that work in Mines ufe the
needle, to find the veins of the metals , which way they run : for in caves under
ground, in that poflure the needle ftands that is touched whh the Loadftone, they
know the veins of the metals run on that tide of the heavens. Alfo, it doth ferve ve-
ry much for thofe that describe platforms of buildings, cities, countries, whilft the fi-
tuationof the corners are taken anddefcribed upon the paper. We ufe it alfo in
making paflages,for to bring water under ground , in digging pits , in making Mines
and Trenches , wherewith they ufe, with great skill , to blow up Forts , Caftlcs,
Rocks and Walls, by putting Gunpowder into them, and flopping all places of
vent : the Compafs guides them how to go on. Laftly ,how to level the discharging
of Canon, both by night and day, it is of lingular vertue, and for many other ufes, too
tedious to relate here.

Chap. XXXVIII.
Hon* the Longitude of the war Id ', m*J h found out If J he If of the Loadfltne*

I Will not omit, that amongft the principal ufes of the Loadftone, by the help of it
the Longitude of the world may be found our. Which notable work hath cm-
ployed the wits of the moft knowing men. It hath been obferved a long time by
our men, that the needle touched with the Loadftone , will not always reft upon the
Meridian line , but fometimes will decline nine degrees from it te the eaft ; nor
will it hold the fame pofture in all places ; but in divers places, it hath divers decli-
nations. But this errour feems to follow this order,that the neerer it is to the eaft,
the more it will decline from the Meridian line, toward the eaft; and the neerer
it comes to the weft, the point of the needle will decline the more to the weft. For
finding the Meridian line , as Ftolomy and other Geometricians teach how, and
fetting up a point thereon,that the fteel needle may turn freely upon the top of ir, in
Italy it declines toward the eaft nine degrees, of which there is ninety in a quadrant
of a circle, a< it is obferved in Sun-dials that are brought out of Germany, and it is fo
defcribed. Moreover, many famous travellers report, that amongft the Fortunate
Iflands, one is called the Azores , where the needle fet in the Compafs , will reft
dire&ly upon the Meridian line , without any variation at all. Alfo, they that fail
to the weft-Indies obferve, that the point of the needle will decline to the weft.
Therefore, laying down thefe for true Maxims , we may eafily know the longitude
of the world : for if we make a very great Compafs , about five foot diame-
ter , and divide the degrees and minutes , into feconds and thirds, &c.

Of the JVonders of the Loadftone. 2 dp

and failing under the Equator, we do obfervc the chief motions of the Needle, and
the declinations of ic,and (hall accommodate the i'anae to the proportion of our Voy-
ages; we ^all eafily know the Longitude of the Woild,beginning from the Fortunate
lflands. Whence both Longitude and Latitude in dark nights,and the greateli Tcm-
pelt* may be certainly difcovered Wherefore it is falfe that C W<?»wfaiih,That the
Needle in theCompil's declines from the Meridian Line , becaule it inclines to the
Pole Star in the little Bears Tail : whereas* the Needle declines nine Degree?, and
the Polar Inclination is not fo much.

Chap. XXXIX.

If the CMariners Needle ft.ind (till, And the Loadftone tnovey or contrail fyy the) will

move contrary vttys.

IT the Loadftone lie on the Table, and you put the North point of the Mari-
ners Needle to the South point of the Hone , and fhall carry it round about by
the right hand , the Needle will draw to the left : but moving th&Box to the lefc
hand , the Needle will run to the right ; and it will go fo far , until it Mand in the
middle between thole two oppofite pcints. The tame will be ieen in a Sun-Dia],
if that Mand , and the Loadftone be carried about : for if you decline to the righc
hand, the Needle will follow the fame part ; and likewife, if you turn to the left.
Hence it is apparent , That the Needle in the Compafs is drawn by the North- Pole :
for thofe that fail toward the Eaft , have it turned toward the Eaft ; and fo comra-
rily to the Welt, ic will move to the fame point of the Heaven : and if the Load-
Hone be turned about , the Iron will turn about alfo, as a pair of Compaflcs about
the Centre.

Chap. XL.
The Loadjlone imparts a contrary force to the 'Njcdie,

NOw I will fpeak of the Needle touched with the Loadftone , and of the won-
derful operations of it. The firft is ; That when the Iron is touched by
the Northern point of the Loadftone , and equally balanced ; if you put that
part to it from which it received its force , it will not endure it , but drives
k from it , and draws to it the contrary and oppofite part • namely, the Southern
part : the reafon whereof , I let down before. The fame falls out if you touch
the Needle with the South part of the Loadftone for if you prefently put the
fame to it, it will refill it, and draw to it the North point. Hence the parts
that are alike, are at enmity, and reje&ed as Adverfaries ; and the parts that
are unlike do agree as Friends. Whence it is apparent , that the Loadftone im-
parts to the Iron a contrary force from what the end it felf is , and the Steel
receives the force of that point of the Loadftone which it toucheth nor. And I
prove it thus : Take two Needles r and pat them in Boats , or hang them by
Threeds . that being toucried with the Loadftone, they may move freely :
they are contrary one to the other , and they will joyn in the parts that
were touched with contrary ends of the Loaditone, and will not endure the
ends that are alike.

. jTTo lOCtOJ t>*»iUHfD id» JIM} ^CIOW _

Chap. XL I.
Two "Hsedles touched by the Loadftone) obtain contrary Forces,

[ Will relate a Grange thing , yet not far from Reafon. If you touch two Needles
with a Loadftone together , and fet them on the fame point of it ; the other
parts that hang on the Loadftone, will abhor and Aie one from the other : and if
yon force them together with your hands , fofoonas you let them alone, they

Gg will

no Natural Magic k. 2><w^ 7.

L«ill prefcmly return to their poftures, and depart as far as they can firm one
another. The reafon is this : That if two Needles ttLk fait to one Northern
point of the Loadftone , with their points: you mult imagine , that they did re-
ceive a Souihern vertuc ; and becaule they are of the fame iirniliiude, they will
not endure one the other ; and becaule they arc fattened to the Loadftone, they
annocgeicff being compelled by a greater force : but the oppofke points of the
Needle , becaule they are both alike Northerly, they mult needs abhor one
the other: and when they are free , one will part from the other. And when
they are (o hanging on , if you put to them the Southern part of another Load-
ttone , they will prefently let go their hold , and go as far off as they can, thac
fomeiimes they arc pulled off from the Loadltone,being forced by an invifible vapor.

,

Chap. XLII.

That the force of th: Iron that draws, wtH drive off Iron by diverjity of Situation*

THat, as I faidof the Loadftone alone , is true of the Iron that is touched with
its for if you put a Needle touched with a Loadftone by a Boat, fwimming in
the Water, or hanged by a Threed, or turning on a point equally balanced : if yon
put upon this a Needle touched with » Loadttone, it will draw it : and that part
that attracted the Iron above, will put underneath , drive it away ; and the part
that drives off above, will draw to it, put underneath : where you may o6l'crve,thac
the pofition will work contrary operations.

Chap. XLIII.

The Needle touched by the Loadftone on one part, doth not alwayes receive Vertuc on

both parts.

T F the Needle be touched at one endby the Loadttone , it receives Venue at thac
end $ and at the other end, the contrary vertuc : But that muft not be under-
ftood abiolutely, but of that Needle that is of a proportionable length : for if ic
be too long, the venue will not come to the other end. But would we know how
far the venue is come, we muft know how far reached the Circumference of the
Venue I as I faidi Therefore if the Circumference of it be a foot , the force will
go a foot-long into the Needle. If we would try this : Touch a long Needle three
foot long with a Loadftone at one end , if it touch the Iron at the other end , the
Iron touched will not move from its place • but if you touch it a foot or two long,
namely* as far as the Circumference of the Loadftoncs Venue will reach , and then,
touch the Needle, it will prefently move and be drawn by ir.

j * j * ji?fi i xi. &n ^ 5 ' * * jfcrf^y XDo 1^ ioi vt^t* ^ ^ noil o ' ' i *^ j * * ^

C n a Pi. XLIVv

The Needle touched in the middle by 'the Loadftone ^ fends forth its Force at

....... , •• v; ' bn«^*?mio Adj 01 , v-i"<- • u pfl]

TF the Needle be fomewhattoo long , and we rub it with the ftbae in themiddlc
of it , the forces of the (tones part arc diffufed to both ends of it ; but very ob-
fcurelyj for you fhall not know which is the end:but if you touch it fomething farther
from the middle, the neerer part will receive the forces of the part that touched
it,bcktheNorthcrlyorSouthcrly pare.

CHAR

;titd ju!J?ni

11 ; 3i •> .■'•t~.'7 jfliil "fl ft'> mjflJ Til DfJi j WfllSlOJ.SOG

i-srfin;.' . ono 3$ brrt :oric!t IUy: « onofbsoa mIj no sfifcrt ttrlj ?nfc

Of the JVonden of the Loadjlone. 2 1 1

Chap. XLV.
An Iron Ring touched by a Loadftone^ will receive beth Vermes.

BUt if we rub an Iron Ring on the one fide with a Loadftone , then the part thac
is touched, will receive the vertue of the part of the Loadftone that touched it ;
ted the oppofite part will receive the contrary : and therefore the middle of the
Iron Ring will be capable but of half the force of it , as if it were ftraight. But if
we make a Pin round as a Ring ; and the part joy nted together with a joynt, be rob-
bed with a Loadftone* and being rubbed, be ftrctched ftraight again, the ends
fliall receive the fame vertue , be it Northern or Southern. But by degrees that
force will grow feeble ; and in a fhort time become Northerly , and the other
Southerly, or will receive more vertue then it firft had, may be when it was
touched farther from the end. But if you would , that of thefe a Chain of Iron
fhould hang in the Air, fo foon as one ring touched cn one fide with the Load-
ftone, hath received force on the other fide by it , we may hang a Chain of Rings in
the Air, as we may of Loadftones : lothen, if the Rings belaid in order upon*
Table, that they may one touch the other , though they do notfaften , put the
Loadftone to them, and not onely the firft will be drawn, but the next, and the third,
that they will hang like links of Rings : and not only will it be fo, if the Loadftone
touch the firft, that the reft will follow ; but if the (tone be but neer , it will do the
fame without touching them.

Chap. XLVI.
An Iron Plate touched in the middle , will diffnfe its forces to both ends,

l^Hit I faid of a long Needle, 1 fay alfo of an Iron Bar : for if you touch it in
the middle, the Beams of it are fpread like the Beams of the Sun , or light of
a Candle, from the Centre to the Circumference , and extrcam parts. But if we
touch an Iron Morter , being the force is feeble , where it is touched about
ihe iuperficics, fomc vertue may be be perceived ; but it is very weak in theex-
t ream parts.

Chap. XLVII.
How filings of Iron may receive force,

Tt? you wrap up filings of Iron in a paper, as Druggifts do,like a Pyramis • and put
a Loadftone neer it, all the filings together will receive the fame force , as a long
piece of Iron doth : but if you ftir the filings , and put them into an open paper,
that force is loft , and confounded , and can do nothing , as if it had never been
touched, by reafon of fo many different pieces.

Chap. XLVIII.
Whether Gxrlickcan hinder the vertues of the Loadftone,

NOw I fhall pafs on to other properties of the Loadftone : and firft, whether the
Loadftones attraction can be any ways hindred. Tltttarch faith, That Gar-
lick is at great enmity with the Loadftone ; and fuch antipathy and hatred there is
between thefe infenfible Creatures , that if the Loadftone be fmeered with Gar-
lick, it will drive away Iron from it. Ttolomy confirms the fame , That the Load-
ftone will not draw Iron , if it be anoynted with Garlic k ; as Amber will no more
draw ftraws, and other light things to it, if they be firft ftceped in Oy 1. It is a com-
mon Opinion amongft Sea-men , That Onyons and Garlick are at odds with the

Gga Load-

%\z Natural Magick. IZool^ y.

Loadftone : and Steers-men , and fuch as tend the Mariners Card are forbid to eat
Onyons or Garlick,!eft they make the Index of the Poles drunk. But when I tried
ail chefe things , I found them to be falfe : for not oncly breathing and bclchino
upon che Lcadlione afr er eating of Garlick , did not flop its vermes : but when it
was all anoyntcd over with the juice of Garlick, it did perform its office as well as if
it had never been touched with it : and I could obferve aimolt not the Ie*3 diffe-
rence , left I fhould feem tomake voidihe endeavors ot the Ancients. And again,
Wtu-n I erquircd of Mariners, whether it were fo , that they were forbid to eat
Onyons and Garlick for that reafon • theyfaid, They were old Wives fables, and
things ridiculous ; and that Sca.men would fooner lofe their lives, then abftain from
eating Onyons and Garlick.

Chap. XLIX.
How a Loadftone aftonijbed may be brought t9 it [elf again,

T F a Loadftone be drunk, and do not its office, not as we faid , by being breathed
on by Garlick , but rather by reafon of fome other parts of the Loadftone that
had touched it , lb that the vertueof it is decayed and gone j We fhall reftore it to
its former vertue, by covering it over with the filings of Iron many dayes , until, by
the vapors or company of the Iron, it can perform its office as it fhould.

C H A P. L.

How to augment the Loadftone s vertue*

THere are many learned men that have attempted to augment the Loadftones
venue , and that divers wayes , that having got more forces , it might lervc
for very ^rean ulcs. Alexander 6\hrodilem in the beginning of his Problems , en-
quires wbcicforc the Loadftone oncly draws Iron , and is fed or helped by the fi-
lm?? of Iron j and the more it is fed, the better it will be : and therefore it is con-
firmed by Iron. But wnenl would try that, I took a Loadftone of a certain weight,
and 1 nuried it in a heap of Iron-filings, that I knew whit they weighed j and when
I had left it there many months, I found my ftone to be heavier, and the Iron-filings
lighter : but the difference was fo fmall, that in one pound I could finde no fenfible
dec'iinarion ; the ftone being great, and the filings many : fo that I am doubtful of
the truth. Parace/fuit being skilled in diftillation, tried to do it another way : For
(faith he) if any man (ball quench often in Oyl of Iron, a Loadftone red hot, it will
by degrees recover force , and augment fo much, that it will eafily pull a Nail forth
that is faft in a Wall : which conceit pleafed me well ; and thereupon I made
the ftone red hot , and quenched it often in Oyl of Iron : but it was fo far from
getting more Orength,that it loft what it had : and fearing I had not done it right,
I tried it often ; fo I found thefalfity of it , and I warn others of it alfo. For a
Loadftone made red hot in the fire, will lofe all its vertue, as I fliall fhew after-
wards.

Chap. LI.
That the Loadftone may lofe its Virtue*

T Frund onr , That this is the onely true way, amongft many that are fet down by
Writers, by heaping Fire-coals upon the Loadftone : for once made red-hot , ic
pr:reD;ly lofeth all irs vertue , and avapcr flies from it that is blewifh black, or
Brirr ftone- like, (melling ftrong,as Coals do ; and when that flame and vapor ceafeth
to exhale , if you tike it out of the fire, all the force of it Is breathed forth : and I
always thou .hr, that that was the Soul of it, and the caufe of its attraction of iron s
whenas ircnismade of Brimftone not perfeft ; as I read in Celer and other

Writers

Of the wonders of the Loadjlone. 21}

Writers that treat of Metals : which is the caufe that it runs lb fwiftly to the Load-
ftone, and deiires lb much to be imbraced by it: and when that vapour is gone from
the Hone, it lolem all its vertue} and then it is but a dead carcafs, and it is in vain to
endeavour to revive it.

C h a p.LTI.

How the Iron touched with the Loadjlone lofeth its force*

THe fame way the Loadftone doth , the iron lofeth its force alfo : for chough
it have been excellently we.l touched by the Loadftone, if you heat it red-hot
in the fire, it wiil lofe its forces : and the realbn is ; becaufe chat part of the Load-
ftone that deaves to the iron , lofeth its forces in the fire ; and therefore the iron
deprived of that, lofeth the force auo. Wherefore in the Mariners Compafs , or in
other ufes, when the iron is ftuuified by the tou.h of other things , and hath not its
due forces to free it from this imperfection, we put it into the fire. Hence we
finde the error of many men, who when they put the Needle into the Compafs,
they firlt m^kc it red-het , and then they rub it with the Loadftone*, fuppofing ir will
by that means, rake in the Loadftoncs vertue the more : but they do not onely by
contraries , but they fo make void the Loadltone? venues, that it cannot do its of-
fice, but thatforce is driven out of the iron by the fire ; and it \e juft as it was before
it was touched with the Loadftone. Wherefore , as often as that force is driven a-
way with the fire, we may touch it again, and give it the fame force.

Chap, tilt*

It is falfeyThat the Diamond doth hinder the Loadftoncs venue*

E fh;wed that ir wa a falfe report , that the Loadftone anoynted with Gar-
lir k, lofeth its vermes. But it h more falfe , that it lofeth its vertue by the
prefence of th«? Diamond* For, fay ibme, there is fo much difcord between the qua-
lities or the Loadltone and the Diamond , and they are fo hateful one againfttheo-
thcr, and lectet enemies, that it tht. Diamond be put to the- Loadftone, it prefently
faiots and lofeth a'l its forces. Pltny, The Loadftone fo difagreeth with the Dia-
mond , tha: if Iron be laid by it, it will not let the Loadftone draw it . and if the
Lcadftone do attraffc it. it will fnatch it away a^ain fr^m ir. St. Auguftine. I will fay
whn I fiave read of the Loadftone : How chat it the Di«mond be by ir , it will not
draw iron ; and it it do , when it comes ncer the Diamond, it wiil let it fall, Mar-
bodeu* of the Loadftone:

All Loadstones by their vertue Iron draw j
"But of the Diamond it ft and s in awe:
Taking the Iron from* t by Naturts Law.

I tried this often , and found it falfe ; and that there is no Truth in ir. Butthefe
are many Smatterers and ignorant Fellows, that would fain reconcile the ancient
Writer*, and excufe thefc lyes ; not feeing what damage they bring to th? Common*
wealth ot Learning. For the new Writer, building on their ground, thinking them
true, add to them, and invent, and draw other Experiments from them, that are
fa lier then the Principles they infifted on. The blmde leads the blinde, and both fall into
the fit. Truth muft be fearched, loved and profeffed by ill men j nor mull any mens
authority, old or new, bold us from ir. But to return from whence thofe Reconcilers
idUnefs drew me : I took a piece of a Loadftone to try by ; it was hardly four Grains
in weight z I faftn-d the filings of iron very faft to it ; then I put the Diamond that
Was three or four times biggef then them bo* h ;. but that w^uld not make t; c Load-
ftone foriakc the iron : then I took off the filings of iron from the Loadftone,

ziq. Natural Magick. Hookjj.

and fet them at a juft diftance , and it drew the filings to it , though the Diamond
w ere by. I fay this, left they (hould think I failed in the trial , and to have taken a
Loadftone of twenty or thirty pound weight, and faftened an ounce of iron to it, and
then to have taken a very fnaall Diamond, and put it to them to make trial with.

Chap. LIV.

Goats blood doth not free the LoAiftone from the ittchantment of the Diamond,

J Said, That from falfe Principles , are drawn moft falfe Conclufions. Alfo I faid,
That it is related that the jnicc of Garlick fmeercd on the Loadftone , will take
away its attraction of iron ; and , That when the Diamond is by , it will not draw
iron , or will let it fall. But becaufe (fay fome) Goats blood will break the Dia-
mond, if the Loadftone be anoynted with Goats blood, it will recover. Cafttanut
m Geoponic. Gr<tc. The Loadftone draws iron to it, and again drives it away from it,
if it be annointed with Garlick : but that the force almoft loft may be rcftorcd , ic
muft be wafhed in Goats blood. Rhennius the Interpreter of Dionyfus,

'Gainft whichy nor fire,norfteel ever won ;
Goats blood if warmy can breakjhe Diamond:
^{or ftrokes o' th* Hammer can confume this Stone <$
Which from the Loadftone doth the Iron ta\e ,
That it woftldftill embrace tt, let alone :
Diamonds^ Loadftones vertttes empty make,

iMarbodeus of the fame,

tA Diamond is mighty hard: a Stone
That on the Anvil never can be broke ;
Nor fteel, nor fire hurt it , yet 'tis known.*)
It crumbles in Goats blood, if laid to foak*

Since therefore there is an Antipathy between the Diamond and. the Loadftone J
and there is as great Antipathy between the Diamond and Goats blood , as there is
fympathy between Goats blood and the Loadftone ; We are from this Argument
proceeded thus far , that when the vertue of the Loadftone is grown dull , either
by the prefence of the Diamond, or ftink of Garlick, if it be waftied in Goats blood
it will then recover its former force, and be made more ftrong: but I have tried that
all the reports are falfe. For the Diamond is not fo hard as men fay it is : for it will
yield tc fteel , and to a moderate fire : nor doth it grow foft in Goats blood, or Ca-
mels blood, or Affes blood : and our Jewellers count all thefe Relations falfe and
ridiculous. Nor is the vertue of the Loadftone, being loft , recovered by Goats
blood I have faid fo much, to let men lee what falfc Conclufions are drawn from
falfe Principles.

Chap. LV.
The Iron touched with a Diamond will turn to the North,

BUt this is moft true , that I found out by chance when T made trial , whether
the Diamond had any forces to weaken the Loadftones vertue , as I faid : fot
if you rub a fteel-Nccdle on a Diamond , and then put it into a Boat , or thruft ic
through a reed, or hang it up by a Threed, it will prefently turn to the North , al-
moft as well as if it had been touched with the Loadftone; but fomething more
faintly. And, what is worth noting , the contrary part will turn the iron to the

South;

Of the mnders of the Loadflone. 215

South : and when I had tried this in many (teel-Needles, and put therri all into the
Water, Hound, that thev all Hood eqai-diltant , pointing to the North. And
if they that wiicc, That the Loadstone i$ wcakned by the prefence of the Diamond,
had written thus, they had faid more Truth : for a Needle rubbed on a Dumcnd,
and ituck in allraw , and put into the water, that it may turn freely j being turned
with your finger, when it ftands ftill, it will turn North, and point at ic exa&ly.

Ch a p. LVL

Tlx forces and remedies of the Loadflone.

OUr Anceftors invented many things, by reafonof this admirable attra&ive o-
peration of the Loadflone, and found out many remedies that are worth ob-
ferving. From this drawing quality that it allures iron to it , and that they mutu-
ally attract the one the other; they did attribute unto it an undemanding of vene-
rious anions, and that they arc one in love with the other j nor will their mad love
abate, till they imbrace each one the other : and when they turn their backs , they
hate one the other, and drive one the other off ; and that they contain in them alio
the Principles of hatred. Marbodeus.

This Stone do.h reconcile the man and wifer

And her real that from her husband goes t

If one would know her leads a whorijh life ,

Under her bead, when that [he fleepSy it (hows :

For fhe that *s chafly will frefently imbrace

Her husband whilfifhe fleepth ; but a whore

Tails out o* th'bedy as thrown out with difgraee ,

Wnh flinky th* Stone, which (hows this, and much more.

And for this caufe, our Anceftors to fignifie as much , did oft-times engrave the pi-
cture of Venn* upon the Loadflone. Hence Claudian writes,

The Loadflone Venus oft-times reprefents.
I remember alfo,that many of the Ancients reported , That if a Loadflone were
beat into powder , and were ftrewed into burning Coles, about the corners of the
houfe, that the fmoke might flic up ; thofe that are in the houfe , will prefently run
out for fear the houfe will fall ; and frighted with thefe phantafmes, would run,for-
iaking all their homes : and thus Thieves may Real all their Goods. Marbodem,

Jf that a Thief can creep into a Houfe
& That's full of wealth, and Treafure hath goodflore ;
Let him on burning Colesy before he rowfe
T he peoplcyflrew the Loadflone dvft all ore ,
That fo the Smoke may at each corner rifcy
tA»d that will make the people wakey and thinks
The houfe will f ally and run out with great cries ,
Then may he take awaj their Gold and chink.

The reafonis, Becaufe the Loadflone is melancholick, as you may conje&ure by the
Colour of it; the fumes whereof, rifing into the brain, will caufe thofe that are a fleep
to have melaccholick phantafms prcfented unto them : and Coles will do the like.
The weight Davie, with Serpents fat , and juice of Metals , given to one to drin1 j
will make him mad, and make him runout of his Houfe, Country and Nation: and

l\6 Natural Magigk. 'Bool^y.

this it doth by exaggeration of black Melancholy: or ic will make people Iunatick and
melancholick if they do but hold it in their mouths : and by its drawing out of iron,
Phyfitians think it will help well to draw an Arrow-head ouc of ones body.

But we u"c the Loadftone in making Glafs. Plinj. After Glafs was found out,
as it is a very cunning invention5men were not content to mingle Nitrejbut they be-
»an to add the Loadftone thereunto, becaufe.it is luppoied, that it will attract the li-
quor of the Glafs into it fclf, and into iron,alfo. Hence it is , that in making Glafst
we add a little piece of Loadftone to it , for that lingular vertuc is confirmed by our
times , as well as former times : it is thought fo to attract into it fclf the liquor of
the Glafs) as it draws iron to it ; and being attracted, it purgeth it ; and from green
or yellowifh Glafs , it makes it white : but the fire afterwards confumes the Load-
ftone. Out of Jgricola. We read aJfo, That a Loadftone laid to ones head, will
take away all the pains. Cden faith , It hath purging faculties • and therefore it is
given to drink for theDrop(ie:and it will draw forth all the water in the Belly. Laftly,
I flull not pafs by the error of Hadrian >concctMn° the Loadftone : for he faith, That
the iron by its weight makes the Loadftone never the heavier. For the Naturalifts
report,That if a great Loadftone were weighed in a Scale, and after thar,(hould draw/
iron to it , it would be no heavier then it was when it was alone , though they be
both together ; fo the weight of the iron is as it were confumed by the Loadftone,
and hindred by it from any effeft or motion : which I finde to be falfc . It is like that
jear in Ariftopha»es, of a Clown that rid upon an Afs , and carried his Coulter at his
back, that he might not load the Afs too much.

■:.v. ? At?^xmiifrini^ «wa^ wt^frl t&T ;

THE

H7

THE

I

EIGHTH BOOK

o f

Natural Masick :

Of Phyfical Experiments.

The Proem i.

Intended to p*fs by thefe following Experiments infhyfitkj* became I have everywhere
^ mentioned them tn my Hiftory of Plants j and we have not emitted any thing, that was
certain And fecret in them th.it we knew , Hnlefs tt be fftch things as could mot be brought
into that rank: And though other things {hall be defcribed in my Bwl^of DfltlUttons ,
yet tfo> this place of Phyfck^ be not left empty , /changed my opinion y And have fet down
fome Oj them here.

Chap. I.

Of Medicines which caitfe Jleep*

t ^iT'^r^JK^ we may in order fet down thofe Experiments, of which we
fy^Z^jp^f^ intend to Jpeak, we will begin with thofe Diieafeswhich hap-
™* pen in the Head ; and firft, with Sleep : for Soporiferous Re-
ceits are very reqnifue to be placed among!* thefe Arcana, and
are of very great efteem amongft Phyfitians, who by Sleep
are wont to cheat their Patients of pain : and not of lefs , a-
mon^ft Captains and General s,when they pra&ice Stratagemes
ttpon their Enemies. Soporiferous Medicines do confitt for
the moft part of cold and moift things. Plutarch in Simpf,
faith, Thar Sleep is caufed by cold ; and therefore Dormitives hive a cooling quality.
We will teach, firft, how

7ocaufe Sleep with Mandrake,
piofcorides fauh, That men will prefently fall aflsep in the very fame pofture where-
in thrv drink Mandrake , lofing ail their fenfes for three or four hours after ; and
that Phyfitians do ufe ir , when they would burn or cut off a member. And skilful
men affirm , That Mandrake growing by a Vine, will tranfmit its Soporiferous qua-
lit/ into it ; fo rhat thore that who drink the Wine that i? made thereof, fhall more
ei% tnd readilv fall afUep. Here we will relate the pleafant flories of the Man-
drake out of Authors of Siratagems. Junius Trentinus reports, That Hannibal being
fent by the Charthagenians, againft fome Rebels in Africa ; and knowing they were
aNirion greedy of Wine, mixed a great quantity of Mandrake with his Wines;
thr quality of which, i^ between poyfonous and fleepy : then beginning a light Skir-
mifh, he retired on purpofe ; and in the middle of the Night, counterfeited a flight,
loving fome Baggage in his Camp , and all, the infc&ed Wine. Now when thofe
Barbarians had took his Camp , and for joy, had liberally tafted of that treacherous
Wine ; he returned, took and flew them all as they lay dead as it were before. Pa-
li nam the fame. And Cafar failing towards Nicomedia, was taken about Ma lea by
fome Cilician Pirates : and when they demanded a great Ranfome for his Liberty,
he promifed them double what they asked. They arrived at Miletum : the people

H h carsc

218 Natural Magick. <Bool{ 8.

came out of the Town to fee them. Cefar fent his Servant, being a Milelian, named
Epic ates , to thofe 0/ the Town ; defiring them to lend bim fotwe money ; which
they prelintly lent tQ hitii : Spkrates^ according to Cafar's Command , brought the
monev ; and wi.h it a uxnp-uous Binquet, a Water-pot full of Swords, and Wine
mixed with Mandrake. Cafar paid to the Pirates the promifed fum , and fet the
Banquet before them ; who , being exalted with their great Riches , fell freely to
it i and diking the infe^ed Wine , fell into a fUep : Cafar commanded them to
be kiiied fleeping, and prefeatly repiid.the Milefians their own money. Demefthc-
*ies, intending to exprefs thole who are bitten as it were by a fleepy Dragon, and are
fl :Vul, and fo deprived of fenfe that they cannot be awakened ; faith : They feem
like men who have drunk Mandrake. Tliny affirmech, That fmelling to the Leaves
of it,provokethfl;ep.

Tor the fame, with Nightshade,

We mav make the fame of Nightfhade , which is alfo called, Hypnoticon, from the
effect of it : a Drachm of the Rinde, drank in Wine , caufeth fl.ep, but gently and
kindely. This later Age , feemeth to have loft the knowledge of Solanum Ma-
nicon : for in the very defcription of it , Difcondes feems to be mad. But in my
judgement, (as I have elfewhere faid) he defcribes two feveral Plants in that place :
Ftffchiftihii Sirimonium,aad the Herb commonly called BellaDonnawbofe qualities
are wonderfully dormitive : for they infect Water, without giving it either tafte or
fent ; fo that the deceit cannot be dilcovered, efpecially , confidering it mutt be
given but in a very (mall quantity. T prepared a Water of it, and gave it to a Friend
for certain ufes ; who,in'tead of a Drachm, drank an Ounce ; and thereupon lay
four days wvhrui meat or motion ; fo that he was thought dead by all j neither
could he be awakened by any means , till at laft , when the vapours were digetted,
he arofe : although V^eorides threatneth nothing but death from the immoderate
ufe of it. The fame may be made alfo

Of Poppy

In a L^hoch. Take the Head? of Poppy , and cut them crofs-ways, with a tender
hand, iett the knife enter too deep : let your nail direct the ifluing juice into a Glafs ;
where let it ftand a while, and it will congeal. The Thebane Poppy is beft0
Y. u may do the fame with Nightfhade , Henbane. Of all thefe together, you
may make

A Sleeping Apple*

For it h made of Opium , Mandrake , juise of Hemlock, the Seeds of Henbane ;
and adding a little Musk,to gain an eafier reception of the Smeller : thefe being made
up into a ball, as big as a mans hand can hold,and often (melt to, gently clolc the eyes,
and binde thtm with a deep flcep. Now (hall be fhown

A wonder jnl way to make one take a fleeping Medicine in his Jleep.
Thofe things which we have already fpoken of, are eafily difcovered after fleep ,
and bring a fufpicion along with them. But our of many of the aforenamed dormi-
tive menftrucs,there may be extracted a Quinieffence,which muft be kept in Leaden
Veflel?, very clofely ftop'd, that it may not have the leaft vent, left it fhonld flie our.
When you would ufe it, uncover it, and hold it to a fleeping man 's Noftrils , whofe
breath will fuck up this fubtile effence, which will fobefiege the Caftle of his fenfes,
thai he will be overwhelmed with a moft profound deep , not to be (hook off with-
out much labour. After fleep, no beavinefs will remain in his Head , nor any
fufpicion of Art. Thefe things are manifeft to a wife Phyfitian j to a wicked One,
oblcure.

CHAP,

Of Tbyftcal Experiments. up

Chap. II.

To make a Man out of his fenfes for a day.

AFter thefe Medicines to caufe fleep, we will fpeak of thole which make meri
mad s the bufinefs is almoli the lame : tor the lame Plants that induce fleep, if
thty be taken in a larger proportion, do caufe madneis. But we will not tell thofe
things which breed it for ever, onely which may make us i'port for a day , and after-
wards leave no harm. We will begin with,

How to m.tke men mad with Mandrake.
We have told you, That a Imall dofe brings fl^ep ; a little more, madnefs ; a larger,
acath. Diofcorides faith, ThataDrachm of Morion wili make one fooiifh : we
will eafilierdo it with Wine, which is thus made : Take the Roots of Mandrake,
and but put them into new Wine, boyling and bubling up : cover it clofc s and let
theminfufe ia a warm place for two months. When you would ufe it,give it to fome-
body to drink j and whofoccr (hall tafte it after a deep fleep , will be ditfra&ed,
and for a day fliall rave : but after lbme fleep, will return to his lenfes again, with-
out any harm : and it is very pleafant to behold. Pray make trial. We may do the
fame

With Stramonium, orSolanUm Manicum :

The Seeds of which, being dried and macerated irvWine, thefpace of a night, and
a Drachm ot it drank in a Glafs of Wine , ( buuightly given, left it hurt the m^n)
after a few hours will make one mad , and prefenc ftrange vifions, both pleafant and
horrible ; and of all other forts : as the power of the potion , fo doth the madneis
alfo ceafe, after fome fleep, without any harm, as we faid, if it were rightly admini-
ftred. We may alfo infect any kinde of meat with it , by flrowing thereon : three
fingers full of the Root reduced into powder, it caufeth a pleafant kinde of madnefs
for a day ; but the poyfonous quality is allayed by fleep, or by wafhing the Temples
and Pulfes with Vinegar, or juice of Lemraon. We may alfo do the fame with ano-
ther kinde of Solanum, called

Bella Donna.

A Drachm of the Root of which , amongft other properties, hath this ; that it Will
make men mad without any hurt : fothat it is a molt p'ealanc fpeftaclc to behold
Inch mad whimfies and vifions j which alfo is cured by fleep : but fometimes they
refufe to eat. Neverthelefs , we give this precaution , That all thofe Roots or
Seeds which caufe the Takers of them to fee delightful vifions, if their Dole be in-
creafcd,will continue this alienation of minde for three days : but if it be quadru-
pled,ic brings death. Wherefore we muff proceed cautioufly with them. I had a
Friend, who, as oft as he pleafed,knew how

To make a man believe he was chanced
into a Bird or Beaft ; and caufe madnefs at his pleafurf. For by drinking a certain
Potion, the man would feem fometimes to be changed into a Fifh j and flinging out
his arms , would fwim on the Ground : fometimes he would feem to skip up , and
then to dive down again. Another would believe himfelf turned into a Goole,and
would eat Grafs, and beat the Ground with his Teeth, like a Goofe : now and then
ting, and endeavour to clap his Wings. And this he did with the aforenamed
Plants: neither did he exclude Henbane from among his Ingredients; extracting
the tflfences by their MenHruum,and mix'd fome of their Brain, Heart, Limbs,and o-
thcr parts with them. 1 remember wnen I was a ynung man , I tried thefe things
on my Chamber- Fellows : and their madnefs Mill fixed upon fomcthing they had
eaten, and their fancy worked accordingto the quality of theirmeat. One, who
had fed luftily upon Beef , fa w nothing but the formes of Bulls in his imagination,

H h a and

llo Natural Magick. TSool^ 8.

and them running at him with their horns ; arid fuch-likc things. Another man alfo
by drinking a Potion, flung himlelf upon the earth, and like one ready to be drowned,
ftruck forth his legs and aims , endeavouring as it were to fwim for life : but when
the ftrength of the Medicament began to decay, like a ShipwracVd perfon, who had
efcaped out of the Sea, he wrung his Hair and his Clothes to drain the Water out of
them j and drew his breath , as though he took fuch pains to efcape the danger.
Thefe, and many other molt pleafant things, the curious Enquirer may findcout : ic
is enough for me only to have hinted at the manner of doing them.

Chap. III.

To caufe fever al \^r,des of dr earns.

NOW we will endeavour to (hew how to caufe pleafant, fad, or true dreams. But
that we may more certainly effect it , it will be good firft to know the caufes.
1 he meat in conco&ion muft be corrupted , ( this mull be taken for granted ) and
turned into vapors ; which, being hot and light , w ill naturally afcend , andcreep
through the Veins into the Brain ; which being always cold , condenfeth them into
moiUure, as we fee Clouds generated in the greater World : fo by an inward reci-
procation, they fall down again upon the Heart, the principal feat of the fenfes. In
themean while, the Head grows full and heavy, and is overwhelmed in a deep
fleep. Whence it comes to pafs , that the fpecies defcendiDg , meet and mix with
other vapors , which make them appear prepoftcrous and monftrous 5 cfpecially, in
the quiet of the night. But in the morning , when the excrementitious and foul
Blood is Separated from the pure and good , and become cool and allayed ; then
pure, and ucmixed, and pleafant vifions appear. Wherefore I thought it not irra-
tional , when a man is overwhelmed with drink , that vapors mould arife partici-
pating, as well of the Nature of what he hath drank or eat, as cf the humours which,
abound in his body , that in bis flcep he fhould rejoyce or be much troubled : that
fires and darkncfs> hail and putrefaftions, flaould proceed from Choler, Melancholy,
cold and putrid hnmors. So to dream of killing any one , or being befmeared with
Blood, fhews an abundance of Blood : and Hippocrates and Galen fay, We may judge
a man to be of a fanguine Complexion by it. Hence thofe who eat windy meats,
by reaion thereof, have rough and monftrous dreams : meats of thin and fmall va-
pours, exhilarate the mindc with pleafant phantafms. So alfo the outward applica-
tion of firnples , doth iofec> the fpecies while they arc a going to the Heart. For
the Arteries of the body , faith Galen, while they are dilated, do attrait into them-
felves any thingthat is next them. It will much help too, to anoynt the Liver : for
thi Blood paflcth upward out of the Stomtck by evaporation , and runneth to the
Liver ; from the Liver to the Heart. Thus the circulating vapors are infe&ed , and
reprefent fpecies of the lame colour. That we may not pleafe the Sleepers onely,
but alfo the Waking, behold

A way to caufe merry dream <•.

When you go to bed, to eat Balm , and you cannot defire more pleafant fights then
will appear to you ; Fields, Gar dens, Trees, Flowers, Meadows,and all the Ground
of a pleafant Green , and covered withfhady Bowers : wherefoevcryou caft your
eyes, the whole World w ill appear pleafant and Green. Buglofs will do the fame,
and Bows of Poplar ; fo alfo Oyl of Poplar. But

Tomalf dark^and trotthUfome dreams,

we eat Beans ; and therefore they are abhorred by the Pythagoreans, becaufethey
caufe fuch dream-. Phafeoli,or French Beans, caufe the fame : Lentilcs, Onyons,
Garlick, Leeks, VVeedbine, Dorycnium, Picnocomiim, new red Wine ; thefein-
fufe drcames , wherein the phantafms are broken, crooked, angry, troubled : the
psrfon dreaming will frem to be carried in the Air , and to fee the Rivers and Sea
v under him : he fhall dream of misfortunes , falling, death, cruel tempers,
° mowers

r Of Thy fical Experiments. zii

fliowers of Rain , and cloudy daycs ; the Sun darkned, and the Heavens frowning,
and nothing but fearful apportions. So by anointing ihe afore laid places. with
Soot, or any adult matter, ar dOyl, (whi Ji I add oceiy to make the other ei.ter the
eafiet into the parts) fires, lightnings flalhing?,aod all things will apoear in darVoeR
Thei'e are lafficieni : for I have aireaay ihewed in my Book Phjtog»om% how to
procure true dreams.

Chap. IV.

Excellent Remedies for the Eyes,

Heretofore , being much troubled with fore Eyes , and become alrhoft blinde f
when I was Liven over by Phyfiiansof beit account, a certain Empyrick
u.i i nook me ; who, putting this Water into my Eye , cured me the very fame
day: I might alraoit fay, The l^mc hour. By Girts, Entreaties, Cunning and
Money, I gained the Secret , which I will not thick much to fet down, that
every one may ufe it at their pleafure. It is good for Inflammations , Biearnels,
&iilts, Fibula's, and fuch-like ; andcureth them certainly the iecond day ; if not the
firlt. It I fl>ou!d let down all thoie whom I have cured by it , I fhould be too tedi.
ou*. Take r wo Bottles of Greek' Wine , half a Pint of White* Rofe-water ; of
Olendine,two Ounce? ; of Fennel, Rue, Eye-bright, as much • of Tutty, half an
Ounce; cf Cloves as much ; Sugar Candy of Roles, one Drachm ; Camphire,
haif a Dracnm ; and as much Aloes. Tutty is prepared after this manner :
Let it be heat and exringuifhea fix times in Rofe- water , mixed with Greek- Wine ;
but let the water at laft be left out : powder what are to be powdered finely ; and
mix them with the waters. Aloes is incorporated with waters thus : becauieic
will not be powered , let it be put into a Mortar with a little of the forementicned
water* , and beat together until it turn to water, and Iwim about in ropings , and
mix wi h the waters : then pu it to the reft. Set them all in a Glafs-D>ottle , clofe
covered, and waxed up that it do not exhale abroad in the Sun and Dew for forty
ds.es, ftil i fhaking them four time* in a day : at laft, when it is well funned , fetic
op and refcrve it tor your ufe. It mult be applied thus

Ik Inflammations. Bleod-jhets And Ftftti la's,

let the Patient lie flat on his back; and when a drop of this water is put upon his:
Eye, let him open and (hut hi? Eye-lids , that the water may run through all the ca-
vities of his Eve. Do this twice or thrice in a day, and he (hail be cured. But thus
it mult be ufed for

A Pearl in the Eye,

lc the Pearl be a^ove or beneath the Cornea, make aPowder of Sugar-Candy of
Roles, burnt Allome, and the Bone of a Cuttle- Fifli , very finely beat and fcarched
exactly • and when the Patient goeth to Bed, fprinkle a little of this Powder upon
his eye, and by and by drop fome of this water into it, and let him Hiut his Eyes and
fleep : for he will quickly be cured.

Chap. V.

To fafien the Teeth,

J Could finde not any thing in all this PhyficalTraft of greater value then this
Rrnaedy for the Teeth : for the water gets in through the Gumms, even to the
very Nerve<=of the Teeth, snd firengthens and fafteneth them : yea, if they are
eaten away , it filieth them with Flefh, and new cloatbs them. Moreover, it
rmketh them clean, and white, and (hining like Pearls. I know a man, who by
this onely Rcceit, gained great Riches. Take therefore three handfuls of Sage,

Kettles,-

lit Natural Magick. 2?0O^8.

Nettles, Rofemary, Mallows, and the rinde of the Roots of Wall-nut wafh them
well, and beat them : alfo, as much of the Flowers of Sage, Rofemary, Olive and
Plantaine Leaves ; two handfuls of Hvpociftis, Horehound, and the tops of Bram-
ble ; one pound of the Flower of Mirtle; half a pound cf the Seed ; two handfuls
of Rofe- Buds, with their Stalks ; two drachms of Saunders, Coriander prepared,
and Citron-Pill : three drachms of Cinnamon in powder ; ten of Cyprcfs Nuts j
five green Pine Apples j two drachms of Bole-Armenick and Maffick. Powder
them all, and infuie them in (harp black Wine , and let them macerate three dayes :
then, lightly prefixing the Wine out, put them into an Alembick, and Hill them with
a gentle fire: then boyl the diftillcd water , with two ounces of Allome till it be
diffolved, in a Veffel clofe fiopt. When you would ufc it , fuck up fome of the
water, and flir it up and down your mouth until it turn to Froth : then ipit it our,
and rub your Teeth with a Linen-doth. It will perform what I have promifed :
for it fafteneth the Teeth , and reftorech the Gums that are eroded. Now wc will
deliver other Experiments

Tofafien the Teeth,

Macerate the Leaves of Mafiick, Rofemary , Sage , and Bramble ; in Greek- Wine :
then diftil it with a gentle fire through a Retort : take a mouthful of this , and ftir
about,till it turn to Spittle; it fafteneth the Teeth, maketh them white , and re-
ftoreth the Gums. The Root of Petitory bruifed,and put into the Teeth , takes
away the pain : fo doth the Root of Henbane. For the bleeding of the Teeth , I
have often made trial of Purflaine,fo much commended.

For the fwelltng of the (jttms ,
beat the Roots and Leaves of Plantaine , and lay them to thefwelling when you go
to bed } and in the morning you (hall finde your Gums well.

Chap. VI.

For other infirmities of Mam Body.

T Will heap together in this Chapter, fome Remedies not to be parted over, which
1 know to be certain, by continual Experience made j and although fome of them
are common, yet are they true. And firft ,

For the Hettd-ach^

There is a certain Eflence, of the colonr of Blood , extra&ed out of Rofes , of a
wonderful fweetnefs and great ftrength. Wet a cloth in this Liquor , and lay ic to
your Fore-head and Temples ; and if fometimes it doth not quite take away a pain
of long continuance, yet it will mollifie it. If the cloth be dried before your pain
ceafe , wet it again. I have often known the Ophites, or Serpentine Marble appli-
ed to the Head, both to take away, and mollifie the pain. The Vertigo, I have leen
it cured alfo, by applying the Hoof of an Elk, and by a Ring of it worn on the
Finger.

AgAinft the chopping of the Lips

the Seeds of Henbane are good : for being caft upon live Coles, if you receive
the rifing vapor through a Paper-Tunnel , upon the chopping of your Lips, as hot as
you can endure, it appeafeth the fwelling presently, and hcaleth the Clefts, that they
will never more trouble you.

Against the clefts of the Fingers.

It is a moll admirable Experiment, which I learned of Taracelfm ; but have often
practiced ic my felf : for it taketh away the fwelling and pain , and cureth the
Nail. Take a Worm, which creepeth out of the Earth ; efpecially, in moyft

Grounds :

Of Thyfical Experiments. 22$

Grounds : for if you fearch and dig there , you may eafily finde them ; winde him,
being aiive, about your Finger, and there hold him till he be dead , which will be
wir lin an hour. The pain will prefently ceafe, the matter dry away , and in a fhorc
vmt be cared : Indeed I do not knew a more admirable Remedy.

For a Tleurifie.

I found out a moft powerful Remedy made of the Flowers of wilde Poppy. Ga-
ther them in the Month of May , before the rifing of the Sun , and their opening
for , being chiD Leaves, they are eafiiy dried with a little heat, and fh^d : dry them
in the fhade , and lay them up for your ufe. Or elfc , Itill the Flowers , and keep
the water. If any one takcth a drachm of the powder in Wine , and fome of the
water ; or in the water alone : or fhall apply a Piaifier of the Powder to the place,
the pain will prefently ceafe, to the admiration of the Beholders. Mif-lcto of the
Oak infnfed in Wine, and drunk, doth the fame. There is a Stone alfo brought
out of the Welt-Indies, called inSpanifh, Delia Hijada ; much like an Emerald:
which being worn in Silver, upon the Arm, is accounted a prefervative againrt this
Diieafe.

Againft the Colicky

Civet is moft excellent in this Difeafe : for the quantity of a Peafe , applied to the
Nivil, and a hot Loaf out of the Oven clapt over it , prefently eafcth the pain : the
Patient muft ly on his Belly upon the Bread before it be cold.

Againft Crab lice.

The Dud which falls from the Curry-Combs , while the Ortler dreffeth Horfes, or
fuch kinde of Bcafts , enreth thctn without any pain. Or the Powder of Lithargy,
Aloes, Fraakiacenfe,Verdegreefe, and Alome, beaten and mixed together with Oyl
of Maftick, and anoynt the place. The Powder of Mercury praccipitttc , is beft by
far, being applied.

To bring away the Stoncy
Take Saxifrage, Maiden-hair, Pellitory of the wall , Parfely, Pimpernel and Cete-
rach ; diftil them in Balreo Marix, and let the Patient drink of it every other day :
for it corrodes and eats away the Stone, thongh never fo great ; and by daily experi-
ence, you will fee in his Urine, Gravel and Fragments of the Stone voided out.
M reover, the Fruit and Leaves of the Mulberry gathered before Sun riGng, and
dilt illed or dried in the fhade . if it be drank in Wine , or a proper water , early in
the morning, ooth wonderfully remove the Stone. Mufhronoes growing on a Rock,
tedtke.i inro Powder, or dried in thr fhade, or a warm Oven, and drank with Wine
in a morning, U very Soveraign againft the Stone. If the Kernels of a Peach-Stone
be <rCjjVd, and macerated two dayes in the diftilled water of Bean-Cods, and then
diftilled again , and drunk, bringdown the Stone. The Hedge-Sparrow, which
AettHi mentionetb, T know to be good againft the Stone in the Kidney or Bladder.
It is th- leaft of all Birds, liveth in Hedges , carrieth his Tail upright ; on the top
of hi- Wings, there are fome ftreaks of Afh-colour ; of a Ihort flight : and laftly,
much like a Wren. He hath avenue againlt the Stone beyond alltherelf, eaten
either taw or boyle<\ or dried or faked, or taken any way ; alfo reduced into Pow-
der,being made up dofe in a Pot covered and clayed up, that the vertue may rot ex-
pire ; and fo fet over the fire. I have alfo tried a water againll this Difeafe, running
out of a certain Vein, delcribed by Vttravim : which when I had diligently fought
after, and found cur , made me exceedingly rcjoyce. The words of Vitruvitu are
thefe : There are alfo fome Veins of acide Spring?, as at Lyncellum; and in Italy, at
Theano in fertile Campania ; and many other places : which being drunk , have*
vertue to diflolve Stones which breed in the Bladders of men. And this feems to
be naturally done, becaufe rhere lieth a fliarp and acide juice under the Earth,
through which, thefe Veins palTng, receive a tin^ure of fharpnefs ; andfo. when
they ccms into the Bodies of Men , they diffolvc whatever they finde there

con-

N.ATURAL MAGICK. JbOO\&.

congealed or fetled. Bur wherefore acide things (hould diflblve them, we may
thus guefs ihc Reafon : An Egg Laid in any Vinegar fome time , will wax foft , anS
his fhell will diffolve Alfo Lead, which is the toughdt and heavielt, if it be laid
in a Veffcl of Vinegar, and clofed up?wiil diffovle,and become Ccrufs. By the fame
means, Coper, which is of a more folid Nature, if it be ordered as the former,
will melt, and become Verdcgreefe. Like wife Pearl, as hard as Flint, which nei-
ther iron or fire can diflbJve of themfelves, when they arc heat by the fire , and
then Iprinkled w.th V>negar,break and diflolve. Therefore, when we fee rhefe
things done before our eyes, we may infer by the fame Reafcns, thar the Stone may
naturally be diffolved by acide things , through the fharpnefs of thtii juice. Thus
far Vitrttvtui. The place where the Vein is now to be found , is called com-
monly Francolife, about a mile from Theano , and runneth along the way to-
ward* Rome.

To Jlrengthen the Stomach,

We will not emir a wonderful Oyl, which helpeth conco&ion, and taketh away the
inc instions to vomit : it is thus made: Pour half a Pint of the beft Oyl into a bras
Pot, tinned within , and of a wide mouth : then t*ke fifteen pound of Romane-
Mint, and beat it in a Marble- Mcrttr, with a VVooden-Peftle , until it come to the
form of an Oymment ; add as much more Mint and Wormwood , and put them
into the O 1: mingle them,and ftir them well : but covet the Pot lcit any dun (hould
fall in j and let them ftand three dayes , and infufe : then fet them on a gentle fire,
and boyl them five hours for fifteen dayes together, until the Oyl haie extracted all
the venue of the infuled Herbs : then Brain them through a Linen cloth in a prefs,
or with your hand?, till the Oyl be run cleer our : then tike new Herbs, beat them,
and put them into the drained Oyl ; boyl it again, and (train it again : do the fame
the third time} and as often as you rent w it, obferve the fame courie until the Oyl
have coricra&cd a green colour : but you mull: leparatc the juice from the Oyl \cry
carefully ; for if the leaf! drop do remain in it , the Oyl wiii have but imall operati-
on, and 'he whole inrent is loft. A certain fign of perfect deco&ion , and of the
juice being confumed, will be, if a drop of it, being cart upon a plarc of iron red hot,
do not hifs. At laft, Take a pound of Cinnamon, half a pound of Nutmegs, as much
Mjftick and Spikenard, and a third part of Cloves : poun them feverally s and be-
ing well feirced, put them into the Oyl, and mix them with a Wooden-ftick. Then
pour it all into an Earthen VctTel glazed within, with a long Neck , that it may ea-
filv be fhur, and ftopt clofc - but let it be of fo great a capacity , that the third pare
of it may remain empty. Let it ftand fifteen days in the Sun , alwayes moving,and
fluking it three or four times in a day. So fet it up for your nfe.

Chap. VII.
That a Woman may conceive,

THere are many Medicines to caufe Conception ipread abroad , becaufe they
are much defired by Great Perfons. The Ancients did applaud Sage very
muc*i for this purpofe : AndinCoptus after great Plagues , the Egyptians that
furvived , forced the Women to drink the juice of ir, to make them conceive , and
bring forth often. Salt alfo helperh Generation : for it doth not only heighten the
Pleafures of Venn* , but alfo caufe th Fruitfulnefs. The Egyptians,when their Dogs
are backward in Copulation , make them more eager by giving them Salt-meats.
It is an Argument alfo of it, That Ships in the Sea , as Plutarch witneffeth , are al-
w«yes full of an innumerable company of Mice. And fome affirm, That Female-
Mice will conceive wirhout a Mile, onely by licking Salt. And FiftVwives are in-
fatiably leacherous, and alwayes full of Children. Hence the Poets feigned Venw to
be born of Salt or the Sea. The Egyptian Pricfts ( faith the fame Author) did moft
Religioi-ifly abftain from Salt and Salt-meats, becaufe they did excite to luft , and
caufe erection.

A

Of Thy/teal Experiments* xij

A remedy to procure conception.
This I havetryed and found the be f ; when a wormos courfes are pa0,' Iec her
take a new-laid e?ge, boil it , and mix a graiB of musk with it, and fop it up when (K e
goes to bed. Next morning take fomc old beans , at leaH five years old , and boil
them for a good fpace in a new pipkin , and let the woman when ftv- irifcth out of
her bed , receive the fume into her privities , as it were through a tunnel , for the
fpace of an hour : then let her fop np two eggs , and go to bed again , arid wipe off
the moifture with warm clothes : then let her enjoy her husband, and reft a while •
afterwards, take the whites of two eggs, and mix them with Bole-armenick and San-
ouis draconis,and dip fome flax into it, and applY it to the reins ; but becaufe it will
hardly flick on, fwathe it on from falling : a while after, let her arife, and at night re-
new the platter. But when {hegoeth to fleep, let her hold ginger in her mouth.
This (he mul* do nine days.

Chap. VIIT.
Remedies againfi the Pox.

Since this difeafc hath raged fo cruelly among'* men , there have been invented a
multitude of moft excellent remedies to oppofeir. And although many have
let out fevcral of them , yet I will be contented with this one only, which we may
ufe, not onely in this difeale , but almoft in all other : and I have feen many experi-
ences of it. It is eafily made,and as eafily taken. Take a pound of lingnum Guaiacum,
half a pound of Sarfapcrilla beaten fmall, five ounces of the ftalks and leaves of Sena,
one handful of Agrimony and Horfe-tail , a drachm of Cinnamon, and a? much
cloves, and one nutmeg : Poun them all, and put them into a veflel which con-
taineth twenty gallons of Greek wine; let it Hand a day, and then let the patient
drink it at meals , and at his pleafure : for it purgeth away by degrees all maladies,
befide the French-pox. If the patient groweth weak with purging, let him intermit
fome days. In the fummer time leave out the cinnamon, and the nutmeg. I have
uled it againfi continual head-aches, dcafnefs,hoarfnefs, and many other difcafes.

A prefervation againfi the Vox,

which a man may ufe after unclean women. Take a drachm of hartwort and gen-
tian, two fcruples of fanders and lignom-aloes , half a drachm of powderof coral,
fpodium,and harts horn burnt,a handful of fowthi'Ue, fcordium, bctony,fcabious, and
tormentil ; as much of rofes,two pieces of Guaiacum, two fcales of copper, a drachm
and a half of Mercury precipitate ; a pint of malmefey, a quart of the waters of fow-
thiSle,andfcabious: mix the wine and waters,and lay the Guaiacum in it a day,and
then the reft \ then boil them, till half be confumed; ftrain them, and lay alinnen-
cloth foakbg in the exprefTion a whole night; then dry it in the lhade : do this
thrice , and after copulation, wafh your yard in it , and lay feme of the linncn on j
and keep it clofe.

Chap. IX.
Antidotes againfi Pojfon.

IT is the common opinion of all Phyfitrans, that thofe herbs, ftones, or any other
thing , which being put into a Serpents mouth , doth kill him , is an Antidote
againft his poyfon . We read in Viofctrides of the herb Alkanet , which is very effi-
cacious againfi the poyfon of Serpents ; and being chewed and fpit out upon a Ser-
pent,killeth him. Upon this, I thruft half a drachm of treacle or mithridate , mixt
with Aqua vit*y into a vipers mouth,and (he died within half ah hour. I made a wa-
ter-ferpent fW allow the fame , but fhe received no hurt by it , onely lay a fmall time
ftupificd : wherefore I preffed fomc oyl out of the feeds of citron , and orange or

I f lemons^

%i6 Natural Magick. 8.

lemons , and dropt it into the ferpents month , and flic died prefemly. Moreover
a drachm of the juice of Angelica-roots will kill a ferpent. The Balfame, as they
call it, which is brought from the weft-Indies, is excellent againft them i for when
I anointed their mouth and jaws with it , they died in half an hour. Balfame of the
eaft, is a prefent remedy againft poyfon by oymments, or the biting of a ferpent,
faith v£tiHt, In Arabia, where it growetb, there is no fear of poyfon, neither dorti
any one dye of their bitings ; for the fury of this deadly poyfon , is allayed by the
feeding of the ferpents upon this pretious Baliame. But I have found nothing more
excellent than the earth which is brought from thelfleof Malta: for the leaft duft
of it put into their mouths, kills them prefemly. I have tried the fame vertue in
Lithoxylon, which Phyfitians ufe for the worms in children. There is a Hone called
Chelonites,the French name it Crapodina,which they report to be found in the head
of a great old Toad ; and if it can be gotten from him, while he is alivc,it is foveraign
againft poyfon : they fay it is taken from living Toads, in a red cloth , in which co-
lour they are much delighted ; fer whilft they fport and open themfelves upon the
fcarlet, the flocc droppeth out of their head, and falleth through a hole made in
the middle, into a box fet under for the purpofe, clfe they will fuck it up again. But
I never met with a faithful perfon , whofaid that he found it : nor could lever find
one, though I have cut up many. Neverthelefs, I will affirm this for truth, that thole
ftones which are pretended to be taken out of Toads are minerals ; for I remember
at Rome I faw a broken piece of ftonc, which was compacted of many of thofe ftones,
fome bigger, fome lefs , which Puck on the back of it like limps on a rock. But the
vertue is certain: if any fwallowit down with poyfon , it will prefervehim from
the malignity of it ; for it runneth about with the poyfon, and aflawageth the power
of it, that it becometh vain and of no force.

A moft perfect oyl againft poyfon,
often tryed in repreffing the violence of it. Take three pound of old oyl , put into
it twohandfullsof the flower of St Johns wort, and let them macerate in it for two
months in the fun. Then ftrain out the flowers, and put into the oyl two ounces
of the flowers of the lame herb, and fet it to boil in Baineo Mariae a quarter of a day.
Stop the bottle clofe, that it may have no vent , and fet it a funning for fifteen days.
In the moneth of July, take three ounces of the feed , ftamp it gently, andfteepk
in two glafles of the beft white- wine,with gentian, tormentil, white dittany ,zedoary,
and carline gathered in Auguft; red landers, long ariftolochie,of each two drams : Lec
allthefe mecerate in the wine for three days ; then take them out, and put them in
the oyl, and boil them gently in Baineo for fix hours ; then ftrain them in a prefs.
Adde to the expreffion an ounce of faffron, myrrhe, aloes, fpikenard, and rubarb, all
broiled, and let them boil in it for a day in B. M. atlaft treacle and mithridate , of
each two ounces , and let them alio boil in it fix hours as before : then fet it forty
days in the fun. It muft be ufed thus : In the plague-time, or upon fufpition of poy-
fon , anoint the ftomach and wrifts , and the place abont the heart , and drink three
drops of it in wine. It will work wonders.

Chap. X.
Antidotes and prefervatives againft the Plague,

I Have fpoken of poyfons , now I will of the plague, being of the fame nature , and
cured almoft by the fame Medicines. I will fet down onely them, which in our
time have been experimented by the Neapolitanes, Sicilians, and Venetians (whilft
the plague was fpread amongft them)to refift the contagion of that epidemical plague,
and prefcrve their bodies from infection.

A confettion of Gillyflowers againft the plague, of wonderful operation.
Gather fome clove-gilliflowers in the moneth of (JW47, of a red and lively colour,
becaufe they are of the greater vertue ; pull them out of their husks, and clip off the

green

Of Thy fecal Experiments. 217

green end , then beat them in a marble mortar with a wooden peftle , until they be-
come fo fine as they may hardly be felt. In the mean while, take three pound of fu-
gar for one of the flowers ; melt it in a brafs skillet, and boil it with a little orange-
flower- water, that may quickly beconfumed. When it is boiled fufficiendy, put
in lbme whites of egges beaten, enough to froth and clarifie it, ftill ftirring it, anHi
skimming off the froth with a lpoon, until all the dregs be taken our. Then put i«
the due weight of flowers, and ftir it with a wooden flice, till it turn red : when it u
almoft boiled, adde thereunto two drachms of cloves beaten with a little musk, th<
mixture of which will both add & excite a fweet fent and pleafantnefs in the flowers
Then put it into earthen pots, and fet it up : if you add a little juyce of lemon, it wil
make it of a more lively blood-colour. We may alio make Lozenges and rounrf
Cakes of it, by pouring it on a cold marble. If any would do it after the beft mm.
ner , they mull extract the colour of the flowers, and boil their fugar in that infufi-
on, for fo it will fmell lwecter. Some never bruife the flowers, but cut them very
fmall with fizers, and candy them with fugar; but they are not very pleafant to car.
This confeSion is moft grateful to thetaftc , and by reafon of the feet of the clove?,
very pleafanr. The venues of it are thefe, as I have found by experience : it is good
for all difeafes of the heart, as fainting, and trembling thereof ; for the megrom and
poyfon , and the bitings of venimous creatures , and efpecially againft the infe-
ction of the plague. , There may be made a vinegar, or infufion of it, which being
rub'd about the noftrils,is good againft contagious air, and night- dcw/s,and all effects
of melancholy.

Jgainfl the Plague*

Gather Ivy-berries in LM<*y, and wilde Poppies before the fun rife, left they open 5
In April gather goats rue : dry themin the (hade, and make them into powder. One
drachm of it being drank in wine, is excellent againft infectious difeafes. The Be-
zoar ftone, brought from the welt-Indies , being hung about the neck nigh to the
heart ; or four grains of it in powder, being taken in wine, is good againft the plague,
and the infection of all peftilential feavors , as I can teftifie : And taketh away
foundings, and exhilarateth the heart. The water or oyl, extracted from the feeds
of Citron, is a very ftrong Antidote againft the plague, Apparitiui Hifpanut, his
oy 1 is alfo approved againft the fame.

Chap. XI.

Remedies for wounds and blows 0

Here are fome remedies for wounds and blows, which (hall not be omitted*
for I have found fome of them to be of wonderful vertue.

The ojl ofHifpanusfor wounds and other things.

Take two pound of new wax, four ounces of Wax, asmanyoflinfeed, twoounces
of rofemary-flowers , and bay-berries, as many of betonyj of chamomil- flowers,
or the oyl of it,threc ounces ; of cinnamon an ounce and a half, as much of St Johns
wort , or the oyl of it , two ounces of old oyl. Dry the flowers and herbs in the
fhade ; and when they are withered , beat them , and feirce them through a fteve.
Melt the wax on the fire, then pour in the oyls, next the powders, ftill ftirring
them with a ftick. At length, pour it on a marble, and cut it into fmall dices, and
put it into a glafs retort • flop it clofe with ftraw-mortar , and fet it on the fire with
his receiver ; ftopthe joynts, and give the indofed no vent, left the virtue flye out
and vanifhaway. Firft, by a gentle fire draw out a water ; then encreafingit, and
changing the glafs, draw a red oyl; flop them clofe, and keep them for ufe: the qua-
lities of it are heating •, by anointing the neck, it cureth all creeks that are bred by
cold ; it healeth wounds, helpeththe contraction of the nerves caufed by cold j ic
mollifieth cold gouts, and taketh away the trembling of the hands j It may be drank
for the Sciatica, taken in wine ; it helpeththe quinfic: by anointing the reins of the

I i 1 back

228 Natural Magic k. 2?0O^8.

back, and the belly, or by drinking the water or oyl in wine, it will break the
ftone and bring it down , and affwageth poyfon. For deafnef?, you muft fteep fome
wool in it, and flop the ears with it : anoint the belly and back in any pain there.
Being drunk in vinegar, it enreth the falling ficknefs , and reftoreth loft memory ; it
provoketh the menftrues in women, by anointing their privities with it, or by drink-
ing fome drops of it in wine j taken in the fame manner, it provoketh appetice, being
taken early in the morning ; and is good againft the bitings of Scorpions : Drink it
going to bed, or when you arife in the morning, and it will cure a fi inking breath.

For cold aches.

Oyl of Hems is excellent to allay and remove all cold aches , the gout , fciatica,
griefs of the finews,convulfions, pain in the joynts, cold dcflu&ions, and other dif-
eafes of moifture and cold. In the Diomedian ifles, now called Tremity, in the Adri-
atique Sea , there are birds , commonly called Hearns , who breed there, and con-
tinue there, and are to be found nowhere elfe : they are a kind of Duck , feeding
on fifh, which they catch in the night : they are not to be eaten , though they be ve-
ry fat, becaufe they favour of the ranknefs of fi(h. Kill thefe birds, and pluck off their
feathers ; draw them, and harg them up by the feet , there will drop from them a
certain black yellowifh oyl, very offenfive to the nofe, being of a noifome fifiay fmell.
This oyl being applied to any place, as much as you can endure , will do the effects
before mentioned, and more : but it is very hurtful for any hot maladies. There is
a water alfo

For old Seres,

Take lime unkilled,and diffolve it in water ; ftir it three or four times in a day j then
when it is fettled and cleared, ftrain it and keep it ; wet a linnen cloth in it, and ap-
ply it to a wound or fore, and it cureth them. I will not omit

The venues of Tobacco.
Out of the feeds of it is exprefled an oyl , three ounces out of a pound, which al-
lays the cruel tortures of the gout: the jayce clarified and boiled into a fyrup, and
taken in the morning , maketh the voyce tunable , clear and loud ; very convenient
for fingicg Matters. If you bruife the leaves, and extract the juyce, it killeth lice in
childrens heads, being rubbed thereon. The leaves cure rotten Sores and Ulcers,
running on th c legs.being applied unto them. The juyce of this herb doth alfo prc-
fently take away and affwage the pain in the codds , which happeneth t© them who
fwimmingdo chance to touch their codds.

Chap. XII.
Of a fecret Medicine for wounds*

T Here are certain Potions called Vulnerary Potions, becaufe, being drunk, they
cure wounds : and it feemeth an admirable thing , how thofe Potions fhould
penetrate to the wounds. Thefe are

Vulnerary Potions,

Take Pirole, Comfrey, Ariftolochy,Featherfew of each a handful ; of Agrimony two :
boil them in the beft new Wine : digeft them in horfe-dung. Or take two bandfuls
of Pirole, of Sanide, and Sowe»bread one , of Ladies Mantel half one. Boil them
in two meafures of Wine , and drink it morning and evening. Binde the herbs,
which you have boiled, upon the wound , having mixt a little fait with them : and in
the mean while ufe no other Medicine.

The Weapon-Salve

Given heretofore to Maximilian the Emperor, by Paracelfu49 experimented by him,
and always very much accounted of by him while be lived : It was given to me by a

noble

Of Thyftcal Experiments. zip

noble nun of his Court. If the Weapon that wounded him, or any ftick dipt in his
blood be brought, it will cure the wound, though the Patient be never fo far off.
Take of the mofs growing upon a dead nan his fcull, which hath laid unburied, two
ounces , as much of the fat of a man, half an ounce of Mummy , and man his blood :
of linked oyl, turpentine, and bole-armenick, an ounce ; bray them all together in
a mortar , and keep them in a long freight glafs. Dip the Weapon into the oynt-
ment,and fo leave it : Let the Patient in the morning, wafh the wound with his own
water ; and without adding any thing clfc , tye it up clofe,and he (hall be cured with-
out any pain.

Chap. XIII.
How to counterfeit infirmities*

IT hath been no fmall advantage to fome, to have counterfeited fickneffes, that they
might efcape the hands of their enemies , or redeem themfelves for a fmall ranfom,
or avoid tortures ; invented by former ages,and ufed by thefe latter. I will firrt teach
you

How to counterfeit a bloody flux.
Amyhirettu Acantiusy being taken by Pirates, and carried to Lemnosy was kept in
chains, in hope that his ranfom would bring them a great fum of money. He abftain-
cd from mear, and drank Minium mixt with fait water. Therefore, wlien he went to
ftool , the Pirates thought he was fallen into a bloody Flux, and took off his irons,
left he fhould dye , and with him their hopes of his ranfom. He being loofe,efcaped
in the night, got into a Fifher-boat, and arrived fafe at Acantum: fo faith PolUnm,
Indian Figs, which ftain the hands like ripe Mulberries, if they be eaten, caufe the
urine to be like blood : which hath put many into a fright, fearing they fhould dye
prefently. The fruit of the Mulberry, or Hoggs blood boiled and eaten , maketh
the excrements feem bloody. Red Madder maketh the urine red, faith Diofcorides.
We may read alfo, that if you hold it long in your hand , it will colouryour urine. I
will teach you alfo

To make Any one /ool^pale.
Cumine taken in drink caufeth palenefs : fo it is reported, That the Followers of
Portipu Lxtro , that famous Matter of Rhetorick, endeavored to imitate that colour
which he had contraSed by ftudy. And Julius Vindexy that affertor of liberty from
tyro, made this the onely bawd to procure him an executorfhip. They fmoke them-
felves with Cumine,who disfigure their faces, to counterfeit holinefs and mortificati-
on of their body. There is an experiment alfo, whereby any one may know how

To caufe Sores to arife.
TakePcrwinckle, an herb of an intolerable fharpnefs , that is worthily named Flarn-
mula ; bruife it, and make it into a plaifter , and it will in a ftiort fpace ulcerate , and
make blifters arife. Cantharides beaten with ftrong water,do alfo raife watry blifters,
and caufe ruptures.

Chap. XIV.

Of FafcinatioM^and Prefervatives againfi inchantments.

NTOw I will difcourfe of inchantment • neither will I pafs over in filence, who
I they are whom we call Inchanters : For ifwepleafe to look over the Monu-
ments of Antiquity, we (hall finde a great many things of that kind delivered down
to poftericy. And the tryalof later ages doth not altogether explode the fame of
them: neither do I think that it derogateth from the truth of the (lories , that we
cannot draw the true caufes of the things, into the ftreight bonds of our reafons, be-
caufe there are many things that altogether impede the enquiry : but what I my felf
judge of others opinions, I thought fit here to explicate. You may find many things
in Theocritus and Vtrgilrf this kind i whence that verfc arofc : Tberft

%lo Natural Magic k. 2?00^ 8.

There's [cnte^ I know not vhofe unlucky eye
Bewitcheth my yong Lambs , find, makes them die,

JfigoKM and Memphedorus fay, There are fome families in Africa , thit bewitch wich
their tongue the very Woods : which if they do but admire fomcwhat carneftly, or
if they praifefair tree?, growing corn, lufty children, good horfes, or fat fheep, they
prefently wither, andd.eof a fuddain, from no other caufe or harm : which thing
alfo Saltr.w affirmeth. The fame Ifigomu faith, there are amongft the 1 riballians and
Iliyrians, certain men,who have two pupils in each eye , and do bewitch moft dead-
ly with them , and kill whatever they look carneftly on, especially with angry eyes ;
io pernicious arc they : and yong children are moft (ubje& to their mifchief. There
are fnch women in Scythia,, called Bithiac, faith Apollonides. Philarchtu reporteth of
another kind, called Thibians in Pontus, who had two pupils in one eye, and in
the other the pi^ureof a horfc ; of which Didymttt alfo makcth mention. Damon
relateth of a poyfon inEthiopia,who)e fweat would bring a confumption null bodies
xc touched : and it is manifeft, that all women which have two pupils in one eye, can
bewitch with ir. Cicero wrhcth of thcm; fo Plutarch and Philarchm mention
the Paletheobri, a Nation inhabiting in part of the Pontick Sea, where are Inchanc-
ers who are hurtful , not ooely to children that are tender and weak, but to men
of full growh,who are of a ftrong and firm body j and that they kill with their looks,
making the pcrfons languifhand confumc away as in a confumption. Neither do they
infect thofe oncly who live among them , but ftrangers, and thofe who have the leaft.
commerce with them ; fo great is the power and witchcraft of their eyes : for though,
the miichicf be often ought in copulation with them, yet it is the eyes that work;
for they fend forth fpirits , which are prefently conveyed to the heart of the bewitch-
ed, and fo bfect him. Thus it cometh to pafs, That a yong man, being foil of thin,
clear, hot, and fweet blood, iendeih forth fpirits of the fame nature ; for they arc
made of the pureH blood, by the heat of the heart : and being light, get into the up-
percnoft parts of the body5 *nd flye out by the eyes , and wound thofe who are moft
porous, which are fair pcrfons, and the moft foft bodies. With the fpirits there is
feet out alfo a certain fiery quality , as red and blear- eyes do, who make thofe that
look on them , fall into the fame difeafe : I iuffered by foch an accident my felf : for
ti e eye infecteth the air ; which being infected, infe&eth another : carrying along
with it felf the vapors of the corrupted blood, by the contagion of which,the eyes
of the beholders are overcaft with the like rednefs. So the Wolf maketh a man dumbj
fo the Cockatrice killcth , who poyfoneth with looking on, and giveth venimous
wound.* with the beams of his eyes : which being reflexetJ upon himfclf, by a look-
ing-glafs , kill the A uthor of them. So a bright Mirror dreadeth the eyes of an un-
clean women, faith Ariflotle , and groweth cloudy and dull, when (he looketh on it :
by reafon that the fanguinc vapour is contracted by the fmoothnefs of the glafs into
one place ; fo that it is fpotted with a kind of little mift, which is plainly fcen ; and
if it be newly gathered there,will be hardly wip'd off. Which thing never happeneth
on a cloth or flone , becaufc it penctrateth and finketh into the one , and is difper-
fed by the inequality of parts in the other. But a Mirror being hard and fmooth,coI-
leflrth them entire ; and being cold, condenfeth them into a dew. In like manner
a?moft, if you breath upon a clear glafs, it will wax moift as it were with a fprinkling
of fpettle, which condenfing will drop down : fo this efflux of beams out of the eyes,
being the conveyers of fpirits, ftrike through the eyes of thofe they meet, and flye to
t he heart, their proper region , from whence they rife ; and there being condenfed
into blood, infect all his inward parts. This Hranger blood, beiegquite repugnant
to the nature of the man, infers the reft of him, andmikeih him fick : and there this
contagion will continue, as long as he hath any warm blood in his body. For being
a diHem^cr in the blood, it will cart him into a continual fcaver ; whereas, if it had
been a diftemp'r of choler or flegme , it would have afflicted him by intervalls. But
» h ar all things may be more diftinctly explained , you muff know firft, that there are
two kind of Fafcinations mentioned by Authors : One of Love, the other of Envy or

Malice.

Of Thy fie al Experiments. z$t

Malice. If * perfon be enfnared with the defire of a fair and beautiful woman, al-
though he be caught at a diftance , yet he taketh the poyfon in at his eyes, and the
Image of her beauty fettleth in the heart of this Lover, kindleth a flame there, which
will never ceafe to torment him : For the foft blood of the beloved , being ftrayed thi-
therjOaaketh continual reprefentations of her : (he is prefent there in her own blood;
but it cannot fettle or reft there, for it continually endeavoureth to flye homeward,
as the blood of a wounded perfon fpirts out on him that givcth the blow. Lucretius
defcribeth this excellently :

He feekj that bo Ay, -whence his grief he found ;
For humors always flow unto a wound,
t/is brutfed blood ftdl runs unto the fart
That's ftruckj **d gathers where it feels the fmxrt :
So when the murtherefs of his heart** in place,
Blet(hes arife9 and red orefpreads his face.

But rf it be a Fafcination of Envy or Malice, that hath infected any perfon, it is very
dangerous , and is found moft often in old women. Neither can any one deny, but
that the dileiles of ihemindc do diftemper the body ; and thac the good difpofition
of ir, doth ftrengthen and corroborate the fame : and it doth not work this alteration
onely in its own body, but on others alio, by how much it ttirreth up in the heart in-
ward defires of love and revenge. Doth not covetoufactV-, grief, or love, change the
colour and difpofition ? Doth not envy caufc palenefs and meagemefs in the body ?
D jth not the longing of the mother , imprint the mark of what flie defired upon the
tender Embryo ? So when Envy bends her fierce and flaming eyes, and the defire of
rrri'Chief burfts thereout, a vehement heat proccedeth from them, wdi infe&eth thofe
that ttand ni^h , efpccially the beautiful • they ttrike them through as with a fword,
fet their entrails on fire , and make them watt into a leannnefs, efpecially if they be
of a cholerickor fanguine complexion ; for the difeafe is cafily fed, where the pores
are open,and the humors thin. Nor is it the paffions of the mind onely, that affedteth
the body thm : but the body it felf, as Avicenna provcth, may be endued with veni-
mous qualities ! many are fo by Nature j fo that it cannot feem a wonder , if fome-
times lbme are made foby Art. The Queen of India fent to Alexander a very beau-
tiful maid, anointed and fed with the poyfon of Serpents, as Ariftotle faith, and Avi-
cenna from the Tcttimony of Rufm. Galen Writetb of another, who eat Henbane
without any harm; and another, Woolf-bane ; fo that a Hen would not come neat her.
And Mithridates (as old Hiftories deliver it to us) King of Pentus, had lb ftrengthened
himfelf againtt poyfon, that when he would have poyfoned himfelf, left he fhould fall
into the hands of the Romans, nothing would do him any hart. If you give a Hawk
a Hen fed with makes or lizards flefh , or with barly boiled in the broth of them,
it will make him mew his feathers betimes : and many other fuch things are done,
which are too long to be recounted. So many men are of fuch a nature, that they will
cure feme difeafes onely with their ftroaking. Many eat Spiders and wilde Olives,
and care not for the biting of Serpents, nor faffer any watting or confumptiori, if they
be of fuch a nature , thac their looks or breath will not onely blaft men , but plants
and herbs, and any other thing,and make them wither away : and oftentimes, where
fnch kind of creatures are, you may find blafted corn, poyfoned and withered, m^er-
ly by the contagion of their eyes , the breath that cometh from them. Do not wo-
mea in the time of their couries, infeft cucumbers and melons, by touching or look-
ing on them, fo that they wither? Are not children handled with lefs prejudice by
men then women ?And you will find more women then men witches , byreafonof
theircomplexion ; for they are farther diftant from a right temper, and eat more un-
wholefome food ; fo that every moncth they are filled with fuperfluities, and purge
forth melancholy blood : from whence vapors arifc, and flie out through their eyes,
poyfbning thofe that ftand nigh them, and filling them with the fame kind of blood.
Hence fanguine complexioned men, andfomewhat cholerick,who have large, fhining,
gray eyes, and live chaftly (for too often copulation exhaufleth the moiflure) who by

frequent

lp Natural Magick. Sw^ 8.

frequent glances , and continual imagination , encounter point to point, beams (o
beam?, eyes to eyes, d© generally ttir up love. But why a man is taken by this Faf-
cination with one, and not another, appeareth by the former, and this realon: foric
happeneth from the intention of the Inchantor , who by thofe fpirits or vapors, is
tranfmitted into the bewitched perfon,- and he receiving them, is made like unto him :
For the infeftfonieizingon his mind, and fixing in his imagination,beccmes a perma-
nent habit, and maketh the fpirits and blood obedient to it ; and fo bindeth the ima-
gination,and irflameth them with the thing beloved. Although the mind(which opi-
nion is fathered upon Avice»t neither doth it want his authority) can of its own will
and power, produce fuch paflions. Mufatu will have the eyes to lay the foundation
of Love, and to be the chief allurements of it. And Diogcniamu faith, That Love is
begotten by looks, affirming that it is impolfible for a man to fall in love unawares*
So Juvenal placeth that Lover among prodigies, /
Who burnt with hove of her he never faw :

For the bright glances of the eyes , driveth the Obje& into a kind of nudnefs, and
teach the rudiments of Love. The other parts are fcarce any caufe of Love, but pro-
voke and entice the beholder to flay, and gaze a while upon their beauty, whilft the
eyes wound him ; for there they fay, Cupid lieth in ambufli with his bowe , ready to
(hoot his arrows into the beholders eyes, and fct his hearten fire. For thy eyes flida
in through my eyes (faith Apuleius) and raife a cruel fire within my heart. Now I have
difcovercd the original ©fit unto you ; unlefs you are quite mad,you may many ways
fortifie your felf againft it. But many one may well wonderjconfidering thofe difcafes
which come by infection, as the itch, fcabbinefs, blear-eyes, the plague, do infect by
fight, touching or fpeaking, and prefently caufe putrefa&ion , why Love's contagion,
which is the greateli plague of all, doth not prefently feize upon men, and quite con-
fume them : Neither doth it infeft others onely , but fomctimes it returneth upon k
felf , and the perfons will be enfnared in their own charms : It is reported by the
Antients of Sutelidts , that he bewitched himfelf by reflection in water, looking-
ghfles, or fountains, which returned his own fhadow upon him. So that he feemed
fo beautiful unto himfelf, that falling in love with that wherewith he nfed to entrap
others , he loft his former complexion, and died a Sacrifice unto his own Beauty. So
children oftentimes effafcinatc themfelves , when their parents attribute it to hag-
gards and witches. New take

Some Preservatives *gainft Love.
There ate many prefcribed by wife antiquity. If you would endeavor to remove the
fcharms of love, thus you may expel them. Torn your face away, that Che may not
aften her eyes on yours , nor couple rays with you ; for you muft remove the caufe
from the place,where it ufeth to make its impreflion : forkkc her company, avoid idle-
r.efs,cmploy your mind in bufinefs of concernment ; evacuate blood,fweat,and other
exert mens in a large quantity, that the infection may alfo be voided wuhthcrfl.

A Prefervative aeainfi Envy.

If it be the witchcraft of Envy , you may know it thus. The infected lofeth bis co-
lour, hardly opeceih bis eyes, always hangeth his head down, ftghs often, his heart
is ready to break, and (hcddeth fait and bitter tears , without any ©ccafion or fign of
evil. To difencharm him, becaufetfic air is corrupted and infe&ed, burn fweet pcr-
tnme topurifie the air again, andfprinklc him with waters fweetned with cinna-
mon, clove?, cyprefs, lignum aloes, musk, and amber. Therefore the old cuftome
is continueduntil this day, and obferved by our wemen, to fmokc their children, and
rowl them about in frankincenfe. Keep him in an open air, and hang Carbuncles,
J acinthes, or Saphires about his neck. Diofcorides accounteth Chrifts Thorn, wildc
Hemp, and Valerian, hungup in the houfe, an amulet againft witchcraft. Smell to
H5 flope, and the fweet Lilly ; wear a ring made of the hoof of a tame or wilde Afs ;
alfo Satvrion, the male and female, are thought the like. Arifiotlc ccmmcndcih Rue^
being lm c It to. All thefe do abate the power of witchcraft.

23j

THE

NINTH BOOK

O F

Natural Magick:

How to adorn Women, and make them Beautiful.

The Proems.

Since next to the t/frtof Phyfick^, follows the Art of Adorning our f elves, we (halt fei
down the *Art of Tainting ; and how to beauttfie Women from Hea* to Foot, in many
Experiments : yet left any man fhould thin\ it fuperfiuou4,to interpofe thofe things that belong
to the Ornaments of Women, I would have them confider , that I did not write thefe things
for to gtve occafion to augment Luxury and for to make people voluptuous. But when God,
the Author of all thmgs,would have the Natures of all things to continue, he created LMale
and Female t that by fruitful Procreation , they might never want Children : and to make
Man in love with his Wife, he made her foft , delicate and fair, to entice man to embrace her.
We therefore, that Women might be pleafmg to their Husbands , and that their Husbands
might not be offended at their deformities , and turn into other womens chambers , have
taught Women, how, by the Art of Decking themf elves and Fainting , if they be afiamcd of
their foul and fwart Complexions , they may make them fe Ives Fair and Beautiful. Some-
things that feemed beft to me in the Writings of the Antients , I have tried , and fet down
here : but thofe that are thebeft , which I and others have of late invented , and were
never before in Print, I fnallfet down laft. And firft I (hall begin with the Hairs.

Chap. I.

How the Hair may be dyed TelIot*,or Gold'colour,

Ince it is the fingular care of Women to adorn their Hair, and
next their Faces ; Firft, I will (hew you to adorn the Hair,
trsd next the Countenance. For Women hold the Hair to be
thegreatcft Ornament of the Body; that if that be taken a-
away , all the Beauty is gone : and they think it the more
beautiful, the more yellow fining and radiarit it is. We (hall
coDfider what things are fit for that purpofe ; what arc the
moft yellow things, and will not hurt the Head , as there are
many that will : but we (hall chufe fuch things as will do it
good. But before you dye them,

Preparing of the Hair

muft be ufed,tomake them fit to receive a tincture. Add to the Lees of White-
Wine as much Honey that they may be foft , and like feme thin matter : fmeer your
Hair with this, let it be wet all night : then bruife the Roots of Celandine , and of
the

greater Clivers Madder, of each a like quality : mingle them, being bruited, very
well with Oyl, wherein CumminrSced, Shavings of Box, and * little Saffron,
are mingled ;l anoynt your Head, and let it abide fo twenty four hours : then
wafh it with Lye made of Cabbage-Stalks, Afhes, and Barley-Straw : but Rye-Straw
is the beft : for this, as Women have often proved, will make the Hair a bright y el-
low, But yon (hall make!

Z54- Natural Magic k. 2>00/^<?.

A Lye to dj e the ffatr

thus : Put Barley-Straw into an Earthen- pot with a great mouth , Feny-Grec. and
wilde Cummin ; mingle between the m, Quick-lime and Tobacco, made into Pow-
der: then put them upon the Straw beforementioned , and pour on the Powders
again ; 1 mean by courfe, one under, the oiher over , till the whole Veflcl be full:
and when they are thruff dole, pour on cold water, and let them foftand a whole
day : then open a hole it the bottom, and let the Lye run forth , and with Sope ufc
it for ycur Hair. I fhall teach you

^Another.

TofiveGlsffesof Fountain- water, add Alume-Fceces , one Ounce ; Sope, three
Ounces; Barley. Straw, one Handful : let them boyl in Earthen-pots, till two
third", be boy led away : then let it fettle : (train the Water with the Afhes ; adding
to every Glafsof Water, pure Honey one Ounce. Set it up for your ufe. You (hall
prepare for your Hair

An Oyntment

thu>:Burn the Feces of Wine,hcaped up in a Pir,ts the manner is;fo that the fire may
go round the Pit : when it is burnt, pown it, and feirce it : mingle it well with Oyl ;
let the Woman anoynt her Head with it when fhc goes to Bed ; and in the morning,
let her wafh it < ff with a Lye, wherein the molt bitterLupincs were boyled. Other
Women endeavour

To make their Hair yellow

thus : They put into a common Lye, the Pi Is of Citrons, Oranges, Qainces, Bar-
ley-Straw, dried Lupines , Fceny-Grsec. Broom-Flowers, and Tartar coloured, a
wood quantity : and they let them there lie and fteep, to wafh their Hah* with.
O.hers mingle two pans Sope, to one part Honey ; adding Ox-Gall one half part :
to which they mingle a twelfth part of Garden cummin, and wilde Saffron : and
fating them in the Sun for fix weeks, they ftir it daily with a wooden-ftaff : and
this they ufe. Abo of Vinegar and Gold Litharge , there is made a decoction very
good to d e the Hair yellow as Gold. Some there are, that draw out a ftrong
Water with fire, out of Salt* Peter, Vitriol, Salt-Ammoniac , and Cinaber; where-
with the Hairs dyed, will be prefently yellow : bin this is wont to burn the Hair :
thofe that know how to mingle it, will have good effects of it. But thefe arc but
ordinary ; the molt famous way is

To make the Hairs yellow :
draw Oyl from Honey by the Art of Diftillation , as we fhall (hew : Firft , there
will come forth a clear Water, then a Saffron-colour, then a Gold-colour :
ufe this to anoynt the Hair with a Spunge ; but let it touch the Skin : for it will
dye it Saffron-colour, and it is not eafily wafhed off. This is the principal above
others , becaufc theTin&ure will laft many dayes : and it will dye Gray-Hairs,
which few others will. Or make a Lye of Oak- Afhes, put in the quantity cf a
Bean of Rheubarb, as much Toba< co , a handful of Barley-Straw and Foeny-Gra-c.
Shells of Oranges, theRafpings of Guaiacum , a good deal of wilde Saffron and Li.
quoriih : put ail thefe in an Earthen-pot , and boyl them, till the water fink three
fingers : the Hairs will be wafht excellently with this. Hold tbem in the Sun, then
caff BrimHone on the Coah, and fume the Hairs ; and wbilft it burns , receive the
fmcke with a little Tunnel at the bottom, and cover your Hcadall over with a cloth,
that the fmoke flie not away*

CHAP

Of "Beautiffmg W men. xyy

Chap. IT.

Haw to dys the H.ur Red,

BEctiifc there are many men and women that are ruddy Complexion* , and have
the Hm of their Heids and BearbsRed • which, fhould th y m*ke yellow-
er cured, they would not agree with rheir Complexions : To help theie alio , I
fe d wo thex Remedies : The Ancients ufed the fleco&ion or the Lote-Trce rajpr,
which we cili Mdo F iocco : and fo they made their Hair Red Or elfe, by burning
the Fceces of the old Wine, as I (aid, they added Oyl ot M .ftick thereto, which they
pro.idcd has tothe turpofe. They heaped up the ripe Berries of the Maiiick-
Tcee for fome day es, till they might wither : then they poured on water, and boyicd
them lo long in Brazen Kettles until they brake : they put them in Bags , and pref-
lcd cut the Oyl with a prefs. With thi> Oynmenr, they kept their Headanoynted
ail the oi^ht,and 10 made them Red. But hew we may

Vje the Hatr %ed

I (hall teach you. There is a Powder brought to us from Africa , they Commonly
tall Aicncna : if we boyl it in a Lye till it be coloured , and anoynt our Hair with
it, it will dye them red for many days, that is indelible : but whilfi you handle it,
t \- e heed ycu wet not your Nails therewith • for they will be fo died , you cannot
eafily mike them clean. So alfo we dye the Tails and Mains of white Horfes red.
But I can eafily do ir with Oyl of Honey j for when the clear and ^afFron-colourcd
waters are drawn cfF; increafe the fire, and the Oyl will come forth, the red.
This is ex client to make the Hairs red , and it will dye white Hairs red for many
dayes ; and when that tincture is worn eff, the Hairs will flune of a golden colour.
Boc when we anoynt our Heads with a Lye,we take a wet fponge wich nippers, that
we may not llain our Hands or skin of our Heads.

With Herbs a woman dfd her hoary Head :
Arts Colours kttcr'd Natures, as 'tis [aid.

Chap. III.

How the Hairs are dyed Black,

JT is worth the w^Jr, to fhew fuch as are afhamed to feem old, how to dye theif
hoary Hairs black , as if they might grew young again by ic. And if we provide
for youn.; women we muft do as much for aged Mitronsj eipecially , if it fall out
that they grow hoary too foon. Of old , they made a deco&ion of Sage-Leaves,
the green HoNk" of W4lrucs,SumacV, Myrtle-berries, Black-berries, Cyprefs-nuts,
Rindesof the Roots of Halm-Tree, and fuch- like : forthcRinde of the Roor of
H^lm-Tree, boyled till it be feft, and con(umed,and then fmeeredon all night,black$
the Hair, firft mtde clean with Fullers Eanh. Learn therefore

How Gray Hairs are dyed Black-
Anoynt your Hair in the Sun with Leeches that have lain to corrupt in the blackeft
Wine flxty daies , and they will become very black Or elfe , Let a lcxtary of
Leeches (land in two fextaries of Vioegar in a Leaden Veflel to corrupt,for fixty daies;
ar d as I faid, anoynt your Hair. TUny faiih, It will dye fo ftrongly.that unlefs they
hold Oyl io their mouths, when they dye the Hair, it will make their Teeth black
alio. But if y c u would have

hoysg and Black^Hair,

Ta'ce a qreen Lizard, and cutting oflF the Head and Tail, boyl ic in common Oyl, *sd
ano, nt your Head with it. You (hall have alfo

zy6 Natural Magic k. Booing.

Another,

Yet you may thus dye ycur Hair and Beard handfomely , if they be grown Gray :
Froth of Silver, burnt Brafs, mutt be mingled with four times the quantity of ilrong
Lye : and when it bubbles on an eafie fire , wafh ycur Hair with it j and when they
are dry, wafh therewith hot water. I ufed this as the Ancients taught it : and I
made a Lye of Quick-Lime and Oak-Afhes , that they commonly call the Capirel ;
in that I boyled Lithargcof Silver : then I tried it on white Wool ; for if it be dyed
black, as I would have it, then I took it from the fire • or clfc, I boyled it longer.
If it burnt the Wool, I put water to it ; or elfe, dyed with ir. Add Lyihargc. Wafh
your Hair or Beard with this, and it will dye thtm with a fhining black colour, and it
will not be decerned : for the more you wafh it, the better it will fhinc.

Chap. IV.

To m&ke Hairs part fmooth.

BEcaufe fometimes * pare is deformed with abundance of Hair , or for lack of
Hair , I fhall fhew how to make a fmooth part thick with Hair, and a hairy parr
imooth,by depilatories.

A common Depi/atory9

which men ufe commonly in Baths. Ic confifts cf Quick- Lime , four pans made
into Powder, Orpiment one part : boyl them. Try with a Hens Feather ; when
that is made bare with it, it is boy I'd : take heed you boyl it not too much, or that ic
Hay not too long upon your skin , for it will burn : but if it chance to burn your
skin, take Popultum and Oyl of Rofes or Violets, and anoynt the place , and the
pain will be gore. This mult be done in a Bath ; but if you cannot have one,lec
the Woman be covered with cloths very well , and let it be caft on burning Stones
or Tiles, that the may receive the fume of it, and fwear. After fhe hath lweat , lec
her wafh ber felf with her water, and wipe it cfF : then let her anoynt her felf all
over; for the parts anovmed thus, will preiently grow fmooth. And thus may all
parts be kept free from Hair. The Ancients ufed thefe, as Sajerna, as Varro reports,
teacheth in his Book of Husbandry. If (faith he) you would make any one fmooth
from Hair, caft a pale Frog into water, and boyl it to a third part ; and with thac
anoynt the Body. But by pale Frog we muft underftand a Toad : for a Frog hath
no fach faculty. A Salamander ibaked in Oyl, will pull out the Hair. Vtofcorides.
But it will be ftronger, if you fteep it long in Oyl, and diffolve it. The filthy mat-
ter that is white as Milk, and is vomited up at the mouth by the Salamander , if it
touch any part of the Body, ail the Hair will fall off. Vigfcorides faith , That the
Sea-Scolopendra boyled in Oyl, and fmeercd oti the part , will pluck off the Hair by
the Roots. But

To make Hair grow Jlorvljy

If you prefs Oyl out of Henbane-Seed with a Prefs , or do often anoynt the places
with the juice of it, they will grow again very fl>wly. The fame is done with the
juice of Hemlock. Or to take off the Hair ,men added to Ants Eggs,red Orpimenr,
and Ivy-Gum,with Vinegar } and they rubbed the^place where the Hair was taken a-
way. In former times, they rubbed the down-parts of children with the Roots of
Hyacirth'usand the Hair would never grow there. And therefore it is Well known in
trimming Medicaments fold here and there, that being fmecred on with fweet Wine,
keeps back the Beard, and will not let it break forth. But if you would

That Hatrfhould never grow again^
In which bufinefs I have taken great pains , and tried many things that I found to be
faile j Firft , foment the part with hot water , and pull out the Hairs one by cu-

w

Of beautifying Women.

vwthwcmens nipper : then diffolve Salt-Peter in water, and anonynt the boles
where the H lirs grew. It will be better done with Oyl o* Brimftone , or of Vi-
triol : acd o they will ne grow again ; cr if they do , after one yeer, they will
bevervf'f. : do then the fame again, and the parts wi! J he bare alwayes. So I have
made Wiun^ns Fore-heads longer, and have taken off Hair from parts hotter then
thereit.

Chap. V.

How Hair may grow again.

BUt for thofc that would have Hair grow where itfhould, thefe Remedies will
doit: fometimes womens temples ufe to be deformed for want of Hair. 1
Chili teach you ho v

H.iirfall. xg off before old agey miy be heldfaft.

And if any Hair hath fallen off, to make it grow again, torrifie Gith upon the
Coals ; when it is torrificd, powder ic, fift it, and mingle ic with water ;and anoync
your Head. The Ancients made their Hair grow again with thefe Remedies : with
the Afh sof a Land- Hedge hog, or of burnt Bees or Flies, or the Powder of them
died; allowih Man's Duo- burnt, and anoynted on with Honey , towhichthcy
added wel. the Afhes of Small-nuts, Wall-nuts,Chef-nuts,and other Bean likefub-
iiar-'ces : for ny al t lefe mingled togethcr,or by them finglc , Hair will be made to
grow. Bul if you will

That H Air fh all grow qttick^y9

I know that by often w»fhmg the place with that water that firft dibits from Honey
b, (tie hr:, much Hair will fooo grow ; or if you do but moyftenthc placewithwet
cloth; } and not wipe it , but let it alwayes continue wet. Alfo Noble Matrons
may u:c this

To make the Ha rsgtsw fofter.

Amuiltu was wont to burn his Legs with a burning Nut , that the Hair might grour
fofter. But

That H*ir may grow longer and quicty)

B'ui^e M»r(hM illow Root with Hog<?.greafe , and let them boyl Ion? in Wine:
then add Cummin-Seed well bruifed, M-tuick, and yelks of Eggs well boyled : firif,
mingle therm, mete-, arid then boyl them : ttrain all through a Linen-dour , and let
L (tjnd and fettle: then take the fat that iwims on the top and anoynt the Head hr^
wfh . But ro make them grow quickly , take Barley Bread with Salt and Bears
Gr^a e : burn ne Bread ; and with iurh a mixture anoynt the place. Some beimeef
a glazed Por with the fat of a Horfes Neck, and they boyl a River-Eel that is fat, and
cotrinto pieces in it,till it diffolve into Oyl,and they anoynt the part with ic.

Chap. VI.

To take away Sores and Worms that fpoil the Hair,

THere is a certain plarue of the Hair that befals them , and break? , cuts , and
takes the Hair quite ( fr from the Head. I will add the Remedies prefently,
whereby to r?ke them away. It is healthful, in thefe Difeaes, to applv bitter things
ro kill the fe Worms oiled Tiners or Syrens : take the Flowers of Myrtle-Trees,
Bro. m clary;boyl them in Vinegar, till the Vinegar beconfumed, and then rub the
end bf the Htir cominuilly with it. Alfogrinde bitter Lupines into fine Meahboyl
then in Vi -esar , and then rub the Hairs between your hands : for this will kill
thefe Siren-, and drive trrrn away. Bur I ufed very hot Bread, newly taken forth of
the Ov<;n , cut in the middle, and putting the Hair between them till they grew
cold. Chap.

Natural Magick. Boofa.

Chap. VII.
How to make Hair Curl.

Url'd Hair feetns to be no fmall Grace and Ornament to the Head : and women
that ufc painting do all they can to curl the Hair. If you will know how

To Curl the Hairt

Boyl Maidenhair with Small age-Seed in Wine, adding a good quantity of Oyl: fcr
this will make the Hair curl'd and thick. Pliny. Moreover, if you put the Roots
of Daffidils into Wipe, and pour this often on the Head, being lhaved, it wiil make
the Hair curl the more, as the fame Author faith : or elfe, bruife c*ie Root of Dwraf-
elder, with O 1, and anoynt the Head therewith , and binde the Leaves of the fame
upon the Head. Some fay that Camels Dung will curl the Hair : or elfe , poun the
Afhes of a Rams Horn, with Oyl; and with that anoynt the Head often, being firft
fliaved. So alio, will tht Allies of Chef-nuts or Hedge-hogs do, if you with Honey
fmeerthc Head 'with it.

Chap. VIII.

%emedies to make the Eje brows blacky

BEfore we leave off to fpeak of Hair , I (hall flieW how to make the Eye-brows
black, becaufe wt men are as defirous of this as of the reft. The Greeks call
them Calliblephara,that is, Fair Eye-brows: wherefore the Anticnts ufed

To dye the Eye- brows

with black Earth like Bitume or Sea-Cole : being burnt, it is a very fine black : and
it is added to thofe Remedies that ferve to dye the Eyc-brOws and the Hair
black: or elfe the Marrow of an Ox-bone taken out of the Right-Leg before, ancf
beaten with Soot, is good to dye the Hair, and faulty Eye-brows , and the corners
of the Eyes. Alio, Soot is tempered for this purpofe, with the fmoakof Paper,
and Oyl of Sefama, the fmoot being wiped off of a newVcflel with a Feather*
The Kernels of Dates burnt in a new earthen Pot , and the Afhes waflied , ferve
inftcad of Spodium ; and they are mingled with Eye- falves , and they makeCalli-
blephara ; adding Spikenard thereunto. And if they be not well burnt, burn them
again. Alfo Role- Leaves arc fit to burn for the fame ufe. Alfo,you may amend your
Eye brows thus ; Take Labdanum, and beat it with Wine, and mingle Oyl of Myr-
tles with it, and make a very thick Oyntment : or infule in Oyl the black Leaves of
the Myrtle-Tree, with a double quantity of Galls bnaifed, and ufe that. I ufc this.
Galls are fried in Oyl, and they are ground with a little Salt-Ammoniac ; and then
mingled with Vinegar , wherein the Pills of the Mulberry and Bramble have been
boy led : with thefe anoynt the Eyebrows,and let it abide on all night j then wa(h k
off with water. But if you would

Change the colour of childrens Ejes9
you fhall do it thus: anoynt the fore part of their Heads with the Allies of the
fhells of Hazel-nuts and Oyl, it will make the white eyes of children black, if you
do it twice. There are many Experiments to make white and gray Eyes black, and
to alter the col ur?. But I fhall let them pais , becaufe thofe that want them will
not fo lightly endanger theit Eyes • nor do they anfwer the expectation , asfome
have tried them.

CHAP.

Of 'Beautifying Women.

Chap. IX.

How tomakj the Face white,

T Tau ht formerly in my Book of P;aots, That with white cleer Silver-coloured
* Herbs, Shel-Fifh,and Mones, tne Face mi-ht be made wnite,polifhed and Silver-
co,ojred. 1 fh ill now fet d< wn feme examples, by whLh you miy invent many
more. I (hall fir tt (peak of Simples, then of Compounds : Simmies that are white,
make the face white- The Lilly is a complete wniie colour; the bullous tops or' ic,
iikcO^yons boyledjn water, or the drilled water of them, will make the Faces
cf Maidcs white , itthey wafh them thcrewiih , morning and evening. With-
wind bears a Flower like to the Lilly . without aoy fmeil ; but within like Saffron :
k is oncly white , and is as it were the Rudiments or N uure, when (he goes about
tofnm? a Lilly. The ditiilled water from the flowers will wonderfully make the
Face whole. Alfo with the decoiUon of Jvpjry, one may make the Face like Ivory.
Melinthium makes the Face beautiful. Vtofcorides. But i' fh:ws its excellency
when it is thus prepared: Pawn it, and fu't out the fineft of it, take the juice of Lem-
mon<, and let the Meal of Girh lie wet in it twenty <ojr hours ; tak^ it out , and
let it dry : then break an Egg wiih the Shell, and mingic it with it : then dry it in the
fhi de, and fift it once more. In the morning, when the woman riieth out of her
bed, let her put thii into a white Linen-clout, that is not too fine, and wet it with
water or fpitrle s and iet her rub her Face with the clout , that the moylture alone,
and not the Meal, may come ou the Face. If you will have

tour Face white9

it may be made as white as Milk many ways, and chiefly with thefe that follow : Lee
Litharge of Silver , halt an ounce , boyl in a Glazed Earthen Pot , with ftrong
Vinegar, until the thinner part be evaporaed : fet it up for ufe. Then , in another
Pot ler half a pound of clear water boyl : then mingle both thefe waters together,
and (hake them ; and it will become like Milk , and fink to' the bottom : when it
is fettled, pour it off ; water toeing plentifully poured in : and leaving it a while to
fet t le, pour it off again , and pour on frefh ; fhake it , and leave v to fett'e a fhorc
time , and fo forbear. T^iat which is fettled , fet in rhe Sun and when it is gr wn
fiiff, as ihu k pap, make fmall balls of it, and lay them up. You may ufe thefe with
Water to make the Face white. Orelfe powder Lvtharge of Silver, ei^ht ounces,
very i:ne: pour on the Powder, of the ftrongeft Vinegar five pints : dirt il them, and
keep them for your ufe. Then take Allome de Plume , Salt Gemma, one drachm ;
Frankincenfe,one ounce and a half ; Camphire, two drachms ; Oyl of Tartar , fix
ounce? ; Rofc- water, one pound : powder what muff be powdered, and pour it in :
dinil the water in Ch mical Veffels , and fet it up. When you woold ufe them,
mingle a little of both waters in the palm of your hand , and it will be like Milk :
rub your Face with it and it will be white. Or elfe take off the Pills of about
twenty Citron Lcmmons ; infufe the Pills in one pound of the beft Wine , and one
pint and an half of Rofe water, for fix days : then add one ounce of white Lilly and
Mallow-Roots, and lee them ftay as many days : then add Rofin of Turpentine/our
ounces ; white Mercury fublimate, two ounces ; Boxan,half an ounce ; ten whites
of E^gs made hard at the fire : and mingle all thefe together : let them ftay one night.
The next day, put a cap upon theVeffel,and luting the joynts well,that nothing may
breath forth , let the water drop into a Veflel to receive it : fet it afide for ufe. I
ufe thi*, that i< eafie to make , and doth the bufinefs completely : Take the Whic
of anE^o, and ft ir it fo long with an Iron, that it froth well: let it fland to turn to
water: then rake half an ounce of the beft Honey, and beat with that water, and
mingle them until they unite : add to them the quantity of two Corns of Wheat,
of Mercury fublimate, finely powdered ; when you goto bed,take fr me of the water
in the palm of your hand, and wafh your Face ; and fo let it dry in, that it mav not
ftick to the Linen: in the morning, wafhit off with Fountain-water , and ycudull
finde your Face cleer and white. Chap,

Natural Magick. 2?00^p.

Chap* X.

How women (hall make their Paces very clean to receive the Colour '■

BEfore any thing be ufed to make the Face beautiful , it muft be made very clean
and fit to receive it : for oft-times women have excellent Waters and Re-
medies brought them,but they have no operation: wherefore the matter is,that they
mull firft prepare their Face. This is the belt

^reparation of the Face.

Bind Barley-Meal-Bran in a Linen-cloth, and let it down into a Pot full of water.and
let it boyl till a third part be remaining, and prefs out the juice : with this deco^ion
wafh your face, and let it dry : then bruife Myrrh, and mingle it with the White of an
Egg, and burn it on hot Fire-fticks,or red hot Tiles,and receive the fume by a tunnel:
let the narrow part of it be toward the Face,and the broad to the fire: cover the head
with a Napkin .that the fmoak flie not away ; and when you have received fufficient of
the fmoak, rub your Face with a Linen-doth : then ufe your Remedy to anoyot your
Face. I fball fbcw you

One that is flronger.

When the skin muft be cleanfed or made white, you muft cleanfe fome parts of your
Face from skins that will not let your painting Oyntments ftick. Powder an ounce
of Sublimate very finely : put it into a Pot that is glazed , and caft into it fix whites
of Eggi, fo beaten,that they are turned into water : then boyl them on hot Embers,
till they grow thick : put them into a Linnen-cloth that is Ioofly weaved , and prefs
the water out of them with your hands,and wafh your Face with it : then mingle Ho-
ney, whites of Eggs, and the aforefaid water together, equal parts : put fome in youc
palm, and rub the place you would make white, with the palms of your hands : then
boyl fpelt ; and when it is boyl*d,take the fume of it by a tunnel : then rub your Face
with a courfc Linnen-cloth. Others wafh their Face with water , wherein fine flour
is boyled.

Chap. Xf.

How the Face may be mtde very jo ft.

THe next Beauty of the Face and Hands, is Tenderncfs, which is procured by fat
things-, and chiefly by Milk, and principally of Afles : for it takes off wrinkles,
and makes the skin white and foft. And therefore, it was not for nothrng,rhatPtf/>/><<4
Sabim, Nero's wife, had always five hundred Affes with her : and in a Bath with t
fear, flie foaked all her body with that Milk. Wherefore if you would have

Tour Face made foft and whitet
Steep crums of Bread in Whey or in Milk; then prefs it out, and with that water wafh
your Face ; for it will wonderfully white your Face, and make the skin fair. Or,
take fix Glafles or Milk , deep crumbs of Bread in it five hours : take ten Lem-
mom, make clean the Pills,andcut the Body of them into thin flices : then fhake
ten whites of Eggs ; bruife an ounce of Campbire, Allom Sauharinum, two ounces ;
mingle them all, and dirtil them , and fet it in a glazed Vcflel clofe covered, in the
Sun j and then let it up for your ufe. Here is one Wronger

For the fame pttrpofe,

Boyl two Calfs Feet in water; firft make them clean : then boyl the water till half be
conlumed ; put it in Rice one pound, and boyl it well: let crums of Bread fleep
in Affes Milk or Goats Milk, with ten whites of Eggs bruifed with their Shells : di«
flil all at a gentle firCjadd to the water a little Camphire and Borax : put into a glazed
vcffel,two yong naked Pigeons , with their guts taken forth, and pot in as much Milk
4s will cover therft ; and add one ounce of Borax ; Turpentine, three ounces ; Cam-
phire, one ounce ; fi v e whites of Eggs : put on the cover, and diftil them ^ for it is fat
things thar make the Face foft. I (hall fay more, when I come to fpeak of making the
hsodi white and fofc : the rcafon is the fame for both* Chap,

Of beautifjing Women*

chaj. xir.

How te make the face clear andfamng like fiver,

THe face is not oacly nude clear , but white as filver , by thofe thing* that I fai<J
were white as filver j yet not exa&ly as filver, but they (nine as clear as filver
There is ao herb commonly called Argentaria,or Argentina, or wildeTanfcy, whofe
leaves are green above, baton the backfide they (hinc of a filver colour : the dril-
led water of it is drank by women againfi fpots in their faces , and to make them
white as filver. The fnails that are found in moift places, and leave behind them, as
they creep, a filver cord (Dtofcorides faith, will cure the fpots in the face) women
much defire them : for they put them in a ftill and draw out water from them, that
polifheth the skin exceedingly, and makes it contract a filver glofs. And thefea-
fhell-fi&, like an ear, whofe (hell is of a filver colour within, or pearl colour, and ma-
ny kinds of (hells ; that being fteeped in vinegar, will grow pure, catting off the out-
ward cruft ; as the Oyfterfhel doth that brings forth pearl. There arc alfo (hells,
we call the Mothers of pearl, that inwardly arc (hining, and of a filver colour,
like pearls : all which women ufe for their art of beautifying themfelves ; for they
make the face fmootb , and to (hine as white as filver. But pearls do it beft of all
things, when they are diffolvcd in (harp juyces , and loaked in rotten dung, till they
fend forth a clear oyl, that is the belt thing to beautific the face , as I (hall (hew elfc-
where. For the fame ufe,is a glafs-ftone ufed,that (hines like filver. But no better wa*
ter is preparcdjthen from Talk,or Quick«filver,as I (hall (hew in that which follows/

Chap. XIII.
How to dijfelve Talk^for to beaut/fie womem

'J'HoHgh I (hall fpeak in a work , en purpofe, more at large , how Talk may be dif-
folved into water or oyl ; We (hall here onely fet down , how it may be fitted
for women s ufe. Of all fuch w ay s as are ufed , I (hall fet forth fuch as I have tried to
be good. Beat Talk in a mortar of metal ; then put it into a pot of the ftrongeft clay,
and cover it, and bind it in with ftrong iron wyer j lute it well all over, and flop the
joynts that nothing breathe out ; and fet it in the Sun to dry. Then put this (tone
in an oven* that flames ftrongly, or in fome other place, where the fire is rnoft vehe-
ment. When the fire of the oven is out , take it forth and break the veflel ; and
if it be well calcined, it is enough : Other wile do the fame again, until the calx of
it be as whke'as it ought to be. When the calcined body of it, is white, as it muft be$
grind it on a porphyry-ftone , and put it into a little bag, or upon a marble in a very
moift place, or deep well, or cittern ; and let it lie there long , and with much moi-
fture it will drop forth at laft: It will more eafily and perfectly diffolve into Water,
if it were burnt long enough, and turned into a calx. For the parts being turn d to
lime, and made exceeding dry by force of fire, they attraft moifture. It is alfo
done

Another way

that is good. Calcine the Talk, and put it in an earthen pot , and fet it in the hoc-
teft part of a potters oven, to ftay there fix days. When the Talk is thus turn'd to
a calx , put it into a gourd-glafs , which you (hall tarft make clean , and make a bole
at the bottom of it: and fettinga veflel under it, you (hall have the moifture of ic
drop forth , and the calx will refolve into Water .* put this into a glafs vial , and lei
the water evaporate in Balaeo : take the fediment out for your ufe. I ufe alfo

Another way;

Put fnails in an earthen veflel, in the open air , that they may be kept hungry three
days, and pine for want of meat, and be purged ; then take a filver Loadrtone, of
Talk, rnoft finely powdred , mingle it wkh the white of anegge, and make an oint-
ment ; anoint the earthen veflel with it , and put the fnails into it , for they will car.
tip all the Talk ; When they have eaten all , and voided their excrements , bruifo

11 tb*

l^X Natural Magick. "Boo^ 9.

the fnails with thcif (Wis j and potting them into a rctorc , draw out their
moifture with a gentle fire; the humour that drops forth, will exceedingly
adorn the face.

Chap. XIV.
The preparation of Sublimate.

T Said, that there was nothing better than quick-filver for womens paints , and to
cleanfe their faces,and make them fhinc. Wherefore,I Qull fct down many ways to
Prepare it,that you may have the ufe of it to yonr dcfire. Take one ounce and half
°t pure quick-filver , not falfified with lead : for if there be lead mingled with it, all
your labour is loft. How it muft be purged and known, 1 taoght ellewhere. Min-
gle this with half a pound of Mercury fubiimate, and put it into * marble mortar,
•ndwith a new wooden peftle , ftiritwcll, turning it round aboot. Firft, it will
be black , in fix hours it will grow white , if you ceafe not to beat it. Then adde
one ounce and half of white fait, always turning it about with the peftle ; for the
more you grind it, the perfe&er it will be. When it is very well ground , ir muft
bewafnt. Sprinkle boiling clear water into the mortar, andftirh} and then ttay
a while , until the muddy part may fink down , and the filth that was lighter, and
fwims on the top : laying the veflcl on cue fide, pour out the water gently, and pour
in frcfti ; do this five or fix times in the fame manner , until the pore and onely
powder remain without dregs : make little cakes of it , and dry it in the fun. Some
whilft they bruife it, fprinkle water on , left the powder by grinding fhoold be made
fo fmall , that it (hould fly away into the air. The chief bufinefsis to purge it, and
grind it well, that it be not troubled when it is ftrain'd forth : that which is gone to
the bottom, and fo pan of it be loft • fomeopen a hole in the belly of a pot, that
when it is iettled, the hole being opened , the water with the dregs may run forth.
Other to fubiimate, adde a third part of quick-filver, and grind it in a wooden mor-
tar ; and in the mean while they chew four grains of mattick in their mouths , and
they tpu the clammy fpittle out of their mouths into the mortar, until it be white, as
1 laid: then they boil it in one pound of the diftilled water, of Bryony root, tillic
be confumed : then they put a linnen cloth, to receive it at the mouth of the veffel,
and lb they ftrain it forth, and fet it in the fun : they make troches of it with gum
Traganth ; others to fublimate^tdd afixth part of quick-filver,bruifing it round about :
then they adde camphir, borax, andcerufs, half as much, and mingle all together,
The principal matter is, it is the beft way to fprinkle it with water whilft you grind
ir, left by grinding it, the powder become fo light, that it fly away : alio, when the
water is poored on, all the filth will come on the top, and more eafiiy be ponred off:
then when the fubiimate is wafhed, it is left to fettle down : then again pouring off
the former water , they pour on freGi, and they wafh it oft, till they fee it isenough,
and no black fwims on the top. But there is no better, as we faid, than

Water of quick, fiver.

But fome will not away with quick-filver, by reafon of the hurt it commonly doth to
the teeth : but they ufe other water. Yet there is no better water, then that which
is extra&ed from quick-filver ; it is fo dear and tranfparert , and the face anointed
With it, fhines like filver : it draws the skin haodfome, and makes it (oft by and by *
ted 1 never law a better : the manner was fhewed before*

Chap. XV.
How white-lead u prepared for the fate*

BEcanfe fnblimatets fo dangerous, there is a private way to do it with cerufs,
but not rbeulual ways that women may have their defirt, without hurting theit
skin or their tectb. 1 am now come to the bnfinefe of cerafs. Take of fwines grcafc

well

Of beautifying W men, 24. 3

Well wafhed and eleanfed in common water , at lead ten times: put it into a lye o1"
fweet water, and after fifteen days, into a pot, or earthen vefle\, with a broad mouth;
pouring in the (harped vinegar, put in your fwines greafe , that the vinegar may iwim
three fingers above it : then faften a plate of lead on the mouth of the pot , well ln-
tingthe joynts withlinnen cloths, that the vinegar may not evaporate. Every fif-
teen days take eff the cover, and fee how it is , if the lead be diffolved,and fcrape the
cover of all that hangs upon it,and put in thecover;anoint it all about,and let it ftand
fo long, till all the reft be performed, as I faid before , and the whole lead be turned
to cerufs. Cerufs muft be wafot thus : Pour water into a vcflel , put the cerufs into
it; flir it up and down , that what dregs there is may fwim on the top : the cerufs „
is heavy , and will fink to the bottom : Pour forth what fwims above in the reflelj
and pour on frefh water j and do this to often , until the pure cerufs be found with-
out dregs : dry it, and lay it up. If you will do it

Another wajr,

Take twobandfuls of eleanfed barley, let it fteep all night in fair water . then dry ic
on a linnen cloth, fpread abroad in the fun. When it is dried , poun it in a marble
mortar ; when it "rs bruifed , put it into a glazed vcflel, which is full of vinegar, and
caft upon this four whole eggs , with their fhclls s then flop the vcflel with a plate of
lead, that is arched, or not very even, and let there be no place that gives vent. Sec
it half in the find, and let it ftand in the open fun ; after ten days, take off the cover-
ing of the vcflel that you ftopt it with i ftrike down the cerufs that is in it with a
feather, and fcrape it off : then take the eggs out, and put in new, and do as you
did ; and after fo many days fcrape it off, until the whole plate be confumcd. Let
down the cerufs you have ftricken off, into a vcflel full of watcr,bound up in a linnen
cloth that is clean,and moderately fine • and ftir it in the water, carrying it about here
and there, until the muddy part of it run forth, and the fediment remain in the cloth:
let the water fettle, and ftrain it, and pour it forth, changing the water fo long, until
no dregs remain. Laftly, ftrain forth the water, and lay up the powder when it is dry*
This alone with fountain- water, will make the face white, mingled with the white of
an egge, and will make ic fhine. Some

isf neither wrf

wafh cerufs, and make it pure. Mingle bards of hemp, with Whites of eggs well
ftirr'd : role up the cerufs in the middle of it i and wrapping a cloth about it , boil ic
oae hour in a new earthen pot, putting water to it : as it boils, take off the skum :
then take it from the fire ; and if any Lead be funk down, caft it forth : afterwards
make Troches ©f it with Gum-Traganth,that it may keepthe better. Some bid boyl
in water of white Lillies, Cerufs very finely powdered, tied up in a skin, andfaft-
ned in a Linen-doth over it to the handle of the Vcflel. The manner of boyling is
the fame as I firft fhewed. Then pour it forth into an earthen difh, and ftrain it gently
from all its moyfture : dry it fifteen days in the Sun, and keep it,

Ch a p. XVI.
the foft Sepesfor women.

I' Shewed in particulars how you might procure whiteflefs , luftre, and foftnefs to
the Face : now fhall I fpeak of waters made of thefe , that will at the fame time
make, if it be firft rub'd clean,

•olgflriru&alitWirtLO v-.a^a >* .(snlljiaisYfi o?tiow<<- i b» -J -

TheFacervhiie^char^ruddyandfoft.
Thefd I fpeak of can do it , being compofed together , and diftilled. Take Cerufs
ready wafhcd,one ounce ; half as much Mercury fdblimare j Gum-Traganth as much ;
Tartar , one ounce : powder all thefe , and put them into a young Pigeon wafhed
and unbowelled , and fow them in : put it into a new Earthen Pot full of water*
diftilled by a Retort t boyl it till the flcfli part from the bones ; then drftil it : wheii

LI % yort

244. Natural Magic k. 2>00^ 9.

yougoVo bed,wafh you Face ; and in the morning wafh it with Fountain- water:
fo you (hall have it white, clear, foft, and well-coloured. Alio ycu may do it

Another way.

Bruife three pound of Bean-Cods, the fhells ; add two pounds of Honey, and one
of Rofin of Turpentine : put them into a Veffel , and dole it that nothing vent
forth ; and let it ferment eight days in dung : then add four pound of Affes milk :
and in the Veffel draw forth Oyl at the fire ; uic this water morning and evening.
If you will have

Another vraj ,

doicthu*. Diftil all thefe feverally ; Elder-flowers , and Flowers of wilde Roles,
Broom, Honey- fu:kles,5o/(7/wo»/-feal , and Briony-Roots, fowre Grapes, and Sarco-
colla : mingle equal parts of each, or diftil them again, andfet them in the Sun. This
willbethebeft. Ifhallfhcw

Another for the fame.

Pull off a Hens Feathers withouc water, take out her Emrals, cut her in pieces, let
infufc one night in white-Wine : in the morning waih her in it, and prefs her be-
tween your hands that no Wine remain ; and then adding two Cups of white-
Wine, diftil her in a Chymical Veffel : then diftil the Flowers of Bindeweed , Ci-
trons, Oranges together ; and keep this water by it felf. Then open Lemmons, and
prefs out the juice. And, alfo take water of Bean-flowers j then diftil fix cups of
Aflet miik,and as many of Cows-milk. You fhall do the fame with water of Gourds,
and of Milk well boyled, and of water of Bean-flowers , and of Rofin of Turpen-
tine, Then provide a glazed Veffel , put into it , Cimphire two drachms , four
ounces of Cerufs finely powdered : mingle them with the aforefaid waters , and fee
hin a foft Veffel in the open Air fifteen days and nights. When you would ufc it,
wet a Linen-rag in it, and wafh your Face.

/ti Kilsli*! n 1^ , jw 1 4 ^ ft 1 • ?>(> ' . ' ' " w t

Chap. XVII.
How to make the Face Rofc- coloured.

I Have made the Face white, now I will make it red , that the wife may be nude

wholly Beautiful for her husband. And firft,

To make a pale Face purple-co/oured.

And to adorn one that wants colour , ufc this Remedy. Take Vinegar twice di-
ftilled,andcaftintoktherafpingsof red Sanders , as much as youpleafe: boylic
at a gentle fire , adding a little Allom , and you fhall have a red colour mod perfect
to dye the Face. If you would have it fweet-fmelling , add a little Musk, Civet,
Cloves, or any Spices. Now

Another?

Take Flowers of Clove-Gilliflowcrs, bruife the ends of the fprigs , and dfaw forth
the juice ; if they be fo ripe that they are black,add juice of Lemmons, that they may
fhine with a more clear red. With this paint your Face, and you fhall have a plea-
fantred colour without any ftinking fmell ; or wet the fprigs of Clove-gilliflowers
in juice of Lemmons, and fet them in the Sun. Takeaway the old,and put in frefh,
until it be as red ts you would have inlet the juice dry,and the color will bemoft glo-
rious. Buc 1 draw a quinteffence from Clovegillflowers, Rofes, Flower-gentle, with
Spirit of Wine ; then I add Allom, and the juice of a Citron, and I made an excellent
colour to beautifie the Face. Take

Another,

If you add to the bed Wine one tenth part of Honey ,and one ounce of Frankinfence;

to)

Of beautifying Women. 245

and then diftil it , and tfcep in it the rafpings of red Saunders until it is coloured to
your mindc ; and then wafh your Face with it : it will make your Face white and
well-coloured. Alfo,

A Fftitts that cannot be detected •

And it is fo cunningly made, that it will delude all men • for a cleer water mikes
the Cheeks purple-colonred, and it will laftlong ; and the cleerer the part will be,
the more your wafh it with it,and rub it with a cloth of Woolen. You {hall draw
put a water from the Seeds of Cardamom , ( which the Apothecaries call Grains of
Paradife) Cubebs, Indian Cloves, rafpings of Bralil and Spirit of Wine diftilled :
when they have been infufedfome time, draw forth the water with a gentlefire,
or corrupt Dung, and wet your Face often with this. There are alfo Experi-
ments n

To colour the Body,

If you boyl Nettles in water, and wafh your Body with it , it will make it red-co-
lored, if you continue it long. If you diliil Straw-berrics,and wafh your felf with the
water, you fhall make your Face red as a Rofe. But the Ancients dyed their bo«
dies of divets colours ; partly, for ornament; partly, forterrour : as Cafar writes
of the Bricans going co war ; for they painted themfelves with wood. Theophraftui
calls it Ifatis , and we call it Guado. The Grecian-women painted themfelves
with wood, as Zetiophon writes. And in our days the Weft-Indians crufh out in
Harveft-time a blood-red juice from the Roots of wilde Buglofs : which the wo-
men know well enough , whereby they cover their pale colour with a plcafant red :
and fo change their over* white colour with this Experiment.

Chap. XVIII.
To wafh away the over-mnch rednefs of the Face

I Have fhewed you how to colour the Face , now I fhall fhew how to uncolour
it: when the Face is too red, and women that are very red defire this. The
way is :

To wafh away the too-much rednefs of the Faeey

Take four ounces of Peach-Kernels, and Gourd-Seed two ounces ; pown them, tod
crufti them out ftrongly, that you may draw forth aa oy ly Liquor : with this,momiag
and evening, anoynt the red Carbuncles of your face, and by degrees they will vanifh
and begone.

Another,

Take Purple- Violets, Egg-fhells, Saunders Camphire mingled with water : fet the
water in the open Air, and wafh the rednefs therewith. Alfo , I know that the di-
rt illed water of white Lillies will take away the rednefs.

Chap. XIX.
How to make a Sm-burnt Face white,

tXTHen women travel in the open Air, and take journeys in Summer , the Sun in
one day will burn them fo black, that it is hard to take it off. I found out this

Experiment,

Brat about ten whites of Eggs till they come to water : put them in a glazed
Veffel, adding one ounce of Sugar-Candy to them: and when yougo to bed, a-
ftoynt your Face, and in the morning Wafh it off with Foutain- water. P/i»y*\fo
faith thus.

Aw

Natural Magick. Hoofa

Another1,

If the Face be fcneered with the white of an Egg , it will not be Sun-burnr. With
us, women that have to do in the Sun, to defend their Faces from the heat cf it, that
they may not be black, they defend it with the white of an Egg beaten with a !iule
Starch, and mingled • and when the Voyage is done,they wafh off this covering with
Barley-water. Some do it

Another waj:

rubbing their foul Skin with Melon-Rindes ; and fo they eafily rub off Sun-burnings,
and all other fpots outwardly on the Skin. The Seed alio bruifed and rubbed on,
will do it better. Alfo, a Liquor found in little bladders of the Elm-Tree , when
the Buds firft come forth , makes the Face clear and fhining , and takes away Sun-
burnings.'

Chap. XX.
How Syots may be taken from the Face.

O Ft-times fair women are difgraced by fpots in their Faces ; but the Remedy
for it , is this : to ufe Abftergents and Detergents in whiting of their Faces.
Therefore,

♦ To take off fpots from the Facey

anoynt the Face with Oyl of Tartar , and let it dry on, and wafh it not at all : do
this for ten days : then wafh it with a Lixivium, and you fhall fee the fpots no more.
If the part be not yet clean enough, do it once more. If this plcafe you not, take

Another,

Put Quick- Lime into hot water ; mingle them , and ftir them for ten days. After
two day s,pour forth the clear water into a Brazen Vcflel : then take Salt-Ammoniac
between your Finger-tops , and rub it fo long at the bottom of the Veflel , until
you fee the water become of a blew-colour ; and the more you rub it, the better
colour it will have, and it will turn into a Skie-colour or Purple-colour,very pleafant
to behold. Wet Linen-cloths in this water, and lay them on the fpots, till they be
dry ; and wet them again, till the fpots be gone. See

Another,

Take two ounces of Turpentine Rofin , Cerufsasmuch j mingle them with the
white of an Egg ; and Hirring them well, befmeer Linen-cloths with them. And
when yon go tobed, let them ftick to the fpots : in the morning wafh the place } and
do the fame again , till all the fpots be gone. If you pleafe, here is

Another,

The diftilled water of Pimpernel , mingled with Camphire and laid to the Face,
will make women that defire to be beautiful have a cleer Skin , very fightly to
behold; and will take off the fpots. Diftil the Mulberry-Leaves ; let the water
Hand ten dayesinthe ^un : add to this, Mercury fublimate, Verdigreafe, artificial
Cbryfoco!U,called Borax, and a good quantity of the Powder of Sea-Cockle-fhclls
finely beaten. Set it fo many d&yes in the Sun, and then ufe it. If you will

rub off the w.m colour of your cheek* >
do thus ; efpecially, for women when they are in their courfes : Anoynt the place
wkhCerufs, and Bean-flower mingled with Vinegar ; or velks of Eggs , mingled
with Honey. The fame may be done with Bcan-meal and Feny-Grcck , fmcered
on with Honey. But we wipe aw ay

E lac\ and blew marks

thus ?

Of Thyfical Experiments. i^f

thus : If you wafh the black and blew places w ich the juice of the Leaves and Roots
of Thapfia made inco Cakes in the San , but one night , they will be taken away.
"KeroCtfar made his Face white from the ftrokes he had received in his Night-
walks , with Wax and Frankinccnfe ; and the next day his Face was clear agalnft
all reports. Or Oyl preffed from the Seeds of Flowers , when it is thick , will do
it rarely. Or the Root mingled with equal quantities of Frankindenfe and Wax,
(but let it Itay on but two hours at mod ) then foment the place with Sea- water hoc.
Alfo, Wal-nuts bruifed or lmeered on, will take away black and blew fpots. Vinegar
or Honey anoyntcd will take away the fame. So doth Garlick rubbed on : and
brings black and blew to the right colour. Or the Arties of it burnt , fmeered on
with Honey. The juice of Muftard-Secd, anoynted on but one night , is good for
the fame : or it is anoyntcd on with Honey , or Suet, or a Cerate. If a Briony-rooc
be made hollow, and Oyl put into it , and it be boylcd in hot Embers j if that be
anoynted on , it will blot out black and blew fpots, Marks that arc noted upon
Children by Women great with-child, when they long exceedingly, are taken away
thus : Let her firft eat of that Flefti or Fruit her belly full : then let her bindc on
that Flefti alive, or the green Fruit to the parr,till it die or corrupt j and they will be
gone. Or elfc , let her wafh the place with %4%tta Fortu, or %$gia , and the Skin
grows very black : fo it w ill take the marks away. Do it again

For fpots and beaut),

I will not omit Elian's Experiment of a Lion , which is a kinde of Locuft. For
in fome Membranes , where the Teftcs are bound together, under which there are
fome foft Carbuncles, and tender, that are called the Lions fat • This will help peo-
ple to make ill Faces look comely , mingled with Oyl of Rofes; and made into an
Oyntmcnt, it will make the Face look fair and (hining.

Chap. XXI.
, How we may take off red Pimples,

EcauSt red Pimples ufe to deform the Face; and fpecially,the whit eft : therefore,
to take them off, afcthefe Remedies, I often, to take off

Pimples,

ofed Oyl of Paper : namely , extracting it from burnt Paper. I ftiall Chew the way
elfewhcre , becaufc I will not ditturb the Order : where I ftiall fpeak cf the Extra-
ction of Oyls and Waters. Wherefore anoynting that on the red fpots , will foon
blot them out.

For the fame.

Rear Eggs are good, twenty of them boylcd hard cut in the middle , and the yelks
taken forth : fill up the hollow places in the whites, with Oyl of fwcet Almonds and
Turpcntine-Rofin : extract the Liquor in a Glafs Veflcl : ufe it.

Another,

Beat two Eggs well together, add as much juice of Lemmons, and as owch Mercury
fublimate s fet it in the San , and ufe it.

Another to polish the Face,
TakeSow-bread-Roots, three parts ; cleanfed Barley, fix parts ; Tartar calcined,
one part ; Roots of wilde Cucumers powdered, two parts ; Wheat-Bran, two
handfuls : let them all boyl in Water, till a third part be confumed : then wafh yotir
Face with it.

CHAP,

Natural Magick. Hoofa

Chap, XXIL
How Tetters may be taken from the face , or any other fart of the Body,

Ring-worms will fo deform the Face , that nothing can do it more : fometime?5
they run upon other parts of the Body, as the Arm-pits and Thighs : there drops
forth of them, a ft inking water that will foul the cloths. I found thefc Remedies

Agaitifi Tetters,

Diftil water from the Roots of Sowredock, and add to every pound of thefe , of
Pompions and Salt-Peter, half an ounce; Tartar of white- Wine, two ounces: let
them foak for fome days : then diftil them , and wafh your Face in the morning
therewith} and at night , fmcer it with Oyl of Tartar and of Almonds, mingled*
Oylof Eggs is goodalfo toanoync them with. Yetfometimes thefe Tetters are
fo fierce, that no Remedies can cure them. I (hall fet down

Another ^

that I have ufed with admirable fuccefs, when they were inveterate. In a Glafs of
fharp red-Wine, boyl a drachm of Mercury fublimatc ; then wafli the place with ic
morning and evening a let ic dry of it felf. Do this three or four times, tod the Tet-
ters will away, and never come again.

Another,

Take Salt-Peter, three ounces • Oyl of bitter Almonds, two pound ; of Squils, half
a pound ; one Lemmon without the Pills : mingle them, and let them ferment three
days : then, with Chymical Instruments, cxtra& the Oyl > and anoynt your Tetters
therewith, and they will be gone, though they feem to turn to a Leprotic,

Cha*. xxiii.

How Warts may be takfn away, »

^^LTArtsufe to poffefs the Fore-head, Nofe, Hands, and other open places: fodotb
hard Flefh, and other foulnefs of the skin : women cannot endure them, I

found out Remedies a.^ainft thefe deformities of the skin.

AgainftWaris,

The Ancient s ufed the greater Spurge , whofe juice, anoynted on with Salt , take*
them away : and therefore they called it Warts-Herb. There is aifo a kinde of*
Succory , called Verrucaria from the effect : for if one eat it but once in Sallets,
all the Warts will be gone from any part of the Body : or, if you fwallow one

drachm of the Seeds.

Another,

This one, and fo no more. There is a kinde of Beetle that is Oyly, in Summer yon
fhallfindeit inDuft and Sand in the way • if you rub that oa the^ Warts ,#they
will be prcfently gone, and not be fcen. A You may finde thefe )«/ndfccep them

for your ufe.

Chap. XXIV. ,m
' j Toitdke away wrinkles f rot* the Bod/,

11 Any parts of the Body ufe to begyrinckled . as the Hands, Face, Bellyafcef
IVI Child-bearing; andthelikc. *To contract the Skin therefore do thus :

* For a wrinekled Forehead 9

the

Of beautifying Wotnm*

the Dregs of Linfeed-Oyl is good : or Lees of Oyl of Olives • putting unto it a
little Gum- Arabick, Traganth, Maftick and Champhirc : it is good alfo for flapping
Brelts. 06 a

For a wrinkled Face,

When Eggs are boyled hard in water, cut them in the middle , fill the holes where
the yelk? were, with Powder of Myrrh : then cover one with the other half , and
binde them with a Thread, that they come not afunder: then take a glazed earthen
Veflel, with a bmad mouth, and lay flicks acrofs it, that the Eggs may lie upon them
hanging neer the bottom : let the cleft of the Eggs hang toward the bottom : put
the earthen Veflel into a cheft of Ofiers, and let it in a Well • let it hang one foot
from the water 5 by the moyflure whereof, the Myrrh will diffolve into Oyl of
water : anoynt your Face with it. The juice of the green Canes of the Pine-
Tree , but it is weaker then the difiilled water , being applied to the Face , with
a Linnen-cloih wet therein , will take away all wrinkles from the Face excellently
well. You have

Another,

Steep Kidney- Beans in Malmfey , one day ; then take away the black whence they
fprouc,and diftil them with Lemmonsand Honey. Take a quantity of old Cow-
Beef , and dittil that alio j minglcthe waters , and fet them in the open Air, in a
Glafs. Veflel in the Sun for fifteen days , and wafh your Face morning and evening
therewith.

Another,

Crop in the morning the Flowers of Mullens , andfteep them in Greek- Win*, with
the Roots of Sihmons-Sttl : then receive the water diftilled in Glafs-ftills s and if
a woman, when (he rifeth out of her bed, wafh her face with this , (he will be very
fair : and if you would take off the wrinkles with the fame water, add diftilled
water of Lemmons thereunto , and it will make you glad to fee the cffc£a But
this is the beft

Water to whiten, p!aw, and beantife the Face.

Take equal parts of the Root ©f SoUmons Seal , greater Dragcns and leffer , Spiri-
grafs, Bryony, and white Lillies,as much as you pleafe : bruile them a little, andcaft
them into an earthen pot With a large mouth ; let it be glazed : pour on Greek
Wine that may cover all : add to thcle juice of Lemmons a founh part, ten new
Egos bruiied with their fhell s ,an d Land Snails without fhe lis ;1 et them infufe a while s
then diltil them at a gentle fire , and keep the firft water a part : then augment the
fire,and keep the fecond ; that will be ftronger : for this wipes all fpots and redpim-
ples from the Face. Some mingle with this, water of Bean-Flower? , Elder, Pop-
py ,Honey-Suckles,and the like ; fo do they take away all wrinkles and fpots coming
from the Sun, and all the reft. But you may thus take off

The wrinkles of the BeUj after child-birth.
Unripe Services are long boyled in water : with thefe mingle whites of Eggs, and
water wherein Gum-Arabick is oiffolved : wet a Linen-cloth in fuch water,
and lay on the Belly j or mingle the Powders of Harts Horn burnt , theStonc
Amiantus, Salt- Ammoniac, Myrrh, Frankinccnfc , Maftick, with Honey ; and it
takes away all wrinkles.

D

Chap. XXV.
Of 'Dentifrices.

Entifnces are ufedamongft things to beautific women: for there is nothing held
more ngly then for a woman to laugh or (peak , and thereby to (hew their

Mm ruggc4

tfo Natural A4 a g i c k. "Book^ 9.

rugged ,rufty, and fpotted Teeth: foe they ail almoft, by ufing Mercury fublimatc,
have their Teeth black or yellow : and becaufe they ftand in the Sun when they
would make their Hair yellow, their Teeth are hurt thereby, and grow loofe, ready
to fall out ; and do ofcrimes. I fhall (hew firft how to make black Teeth white
as Pearls ; then how to make flefhgrow about fuch as are weak and bare of Gums,
and to make them ftrong. But of old were made

Dentifrice:

of the (hells of Purples,and others like trumpets burnt. The Arabian-ftone it is like
the fpotted Ivcry ; burned, it is good for Dentifrices. Alfo, of Pumex-Stone v ery
profitable Dentifrices were made. Vlmj, So with the Powder of Ivory rubbed on,
the Teeth were made as white as Ivory. Ovid.

That Teeth may not grow blac\Jorborn%
With Fountain- water wa{h them every mem,

Khali add

Another

that I ufe. The Crums of Barley-Bread burnt with Salt fprinkled on, and Honey,
will not onely make the Teeth white, but makes the Breath fweet. Alio, with red
CoraljCuttlc bone,Harts Horn, and fuch-like , whereof every one will well polifh
and wipe the Teeth clean: fo doth alfo the Grains of Cochinele. Alfo, tbcteis
made a water of Allom and Salt diftilled,that whiteneth the Teeth exceedingly,and
confirms them ; but the Oyl of Sulphur doth it beft: for it fmooths them and wipes
away all fpots : and if any one think it is too ftrong , it may be qualified with the
water of Myrtle flowers. Make a Tooth-fcraper after the faflaion of a Tooth ,
and pour on Oy l,and rub the fpots therewith : but be careful it touch not the Gums,
for it will whiten and burn them : rub fo long till the fpots be gonc,and they be very
white. I have now defcribed the moft perfect Remedy,

Chap. XXVI.
To hinder the brefts from augmenting,

Mongft the Ornaments of women, this is the chief, to have after Child-bear-
ing, round, fmall, folid, and not flagging or wrinkled Brefts. So we may

Hinder the augmenting of the Brefts9
if we will. Bruife Hemlock , and lay a Cataplafm thereof with Vinegar to womens
Brefts, and it will ftay them that they fhali not increafe ; efpecially, in Virgins : yet
this will hinder milk, when it (hould be feafonable. But if you will

Curb foft and loofe Brefts ,
Powder white Earth , the white of an Egg, fowie Galls, MaftLk, Frankincenfe •
and mingle them in hot Vinegar , and fmeer the Brefts therewith : let it ft ay on all
night. If it do not effect it, do the fame again. The Stones of Medlars ace good
for this alfo ; unripe Services , Sloes, Acacia, Pomegranate Pills, Balanftia, unripe
Pine-nuts, Wilde Pears, and Plantain ; if they all boil in Vinegar , and belaid to
the Brefiy, or lorae of them. The Antients commended for this purpofe a Whet-
ftone cf Cyprefs,that we fharpen Iron upon, to reftrain Virgins Brefts , and not let
them grow big. Diofeorides. But Galen faith, That it not onely ftops the encrcafe
of the BreHs, but will hinder childrcns Tefticles from growing: but I ufe the juice of
Ladies Mamie from the Leaves of it, and I wet Linen in it, and lay it on the Brefts,
and renew it ; for it will not onely hinder Virgins Brefts from increafing , but will
fa en the loofe BreHs of Matrons, and make them firm. It is more effectual to
ftfc the decoction of the Herb ; and if yon joyn any of the forementioaed things

there-

Of Beautifying Jforneri* t

therewith , is HypociHis, Pills of Pomegranates, and the like. So water diftilled
from green Piue- Appcs, mil draw in looic Brews , and make chem like the round,
tuxd, ioiid Br cits ot Virgins,

Chap. XXVIT.
How the Hand msy be made white,

THe Hands muft not be forgotten , bdt wr mu'1 make them white alfo , fmooth,
and iofi , thar are Orc<menrs ot the H*nds to be aefired. But how wbit«-nei;
ar d imoothnefs may be obtained, I have (hewed already ; lortnefs remains, whitn is
oneiy given to tat Hands.

To make the Hands as white as Milkj,

Tike thing* that are Milk- White , is A'monds, Pine-Kernels, Melon and Grurd-
Seed*,and the likr. Therefore bruife bitter Almonds , Pine^Kernels , and C rums
of Bread : then make Cakes of them with Barley-water, wherein Gum Traganth
hath been foaked. You may ufe this for Sope , when you wa(h your Hands j foi!
they fcowrc them, and make them white. I

For the fame,

ufe oft 'times bitter Almonds, half a pound : put them in hot water to blanch them :
then beat them in a Murble-Morter. Afterwards , take the it tier Dragon* , two
ounces ; Deers Suet and Honey, of each as much : mingle them all in an earthen
Por with a Urge mouth : tet them at the fire, and let them be itirted gentlv with a
wooden-.; ick that they mingle well : put it op in Boxes for your ufe. If you will have

Tour hands white,

wifh frefh Butter nine rimes in fweet water , and laft of all , in fweet -fented Rofe-
watcr , torakecff the ill fmell ; and that it may lock as white as Snow , then
m'mgie white wax with it , and a good quantity of Oyl of fwcet Almonds. Then
wjfh ycur glove in Greek- Wine, as the manner is , and fmeer on the forefaid mix-
ture : put on thefe when you *;o to bed , that ail night tbe< may grow foft by the
help of tar i hings. Then take pT'cb-Keinels, with the skin? picked tff, Seeds of
Gourd*, Melons, white Poppy, Barley-meal, of each one ounce and half . the jmce
of two Lcmm >n«, roftcd in the Embers : mingle thefe with as much Honey as will
make t'r-em thick as anOymment: ar.d to make them fmell well , yen may adds
hulr Moik or Civer , when you go to bed ; but in the morning w fh them with
Fountain- water ; and for Sope, ufe the Lees of Oyl of Nuts weil prcfled forth , or
Lee* of Oyl Olive. Others ufe this Liniment onely. Prcfs the Cream out of
Lemmon Seed; ; with two ounces of it, mirgle one ounce of O.l of Tartar, and
as much Oyl of Almonds. When at night you go te bed , w*fh your Hands in
Fountain- water ; dry them, and anoynt them with this Liniment, and put on your
Gloves. Take

Another,

For one weeks-time , in^ufe the Marrow of Ox bones in cold water; bur change
the water four or five time? a day ; and for t\ ery pound of Marrow , take fix ex el-
lent Apples, and cut them in the middle, and caft forth the Seeds and Core : then
beat them (mall in a Marble-Morter, and put them into a new Morter, that they may
fmell the fweeter : adding a few Cloves, Cinnamon, Spikenard \ let them boylirt
Rofe- water. When they ate all very foft, take them forth and ft rain them,and again
add afharp Lixivium.and let rhem boyl at a gentle fire,until all the water be wafhed<
Then fet thf m op in a Glafs- Veffcl for your ufe, or make them into morfcls. That
which follows is good

For the fame.

Make a hole in a Lemmon, and put into it Sugar-Candy and Butter , *nd cover it

Mm % with

%ii Natural Magick. "Bool^ <j.

with the Cover : wet Hards of Hemp, and wrap it up in , and boyl it in hot Embers,
and that it grow (oft by rotting : when yon go to Bed, anoy nt your hands with it, and
put on your Gloves.

Chap. XXVIIT.
Hm to cerrett the ill font of the Arm-pits*

Trie Dink of the Arm-holes makes fome women very hateful ; efpecially, thofe
that are fat and flefhy. To cure this, we may ufe fuch kinde of Experiments.
The Ancients againft the (link of the Arm-pits , ufed liquid Allome with Myrrh to
anoyntthem: or the Secrets and Arm-holes were ftrewed with the dry Leaves of
Myrtles in powder. The Roots of Anichoaks fmeered on, doth not onely cure the
illfent of the Arm-pits, but of the whole Body alfo. But Zemcratet promileth by
Experiment, That the fanltinefs of the Arm-pits will pafs forth by urine ; if yon
take one ounce of the pith of the Root boy led in three Lctnina's of Muskadelto
thirds ; and after bathi»g,fafting,or after meat, drink a cup thereof. But I am con-
tent with this, f I diffolve Allome in water, and I wa(h the Feet and Arm- pits with
it, and let them dry : (o in fome days we (hall correct the ftrong unell of thofe partsv
But it will be done more effectually thus. Pown Lytharge of Gold or Silver , and
boyl it in Vinegar ; and if you wafh thole parts well with it , you (hall keep them a
long time fweet : and it is a Remedy, that there is none better.

Chap. XXIX.

How the Matrix ovsr-widened in Chili-birth, may ike made narrower*

'TRmta faith , we may honeftly fpeakof this, becaufe Conception is footetimes
hundred by it, if the Matrix be too open ; and therefore it is fit to lead help for
fuch an impedient. For fome women have it ftand wide-open by reafon of their
hard labour in Child-birth ; and if their Husbands be not content with it , that the
men may not abhor the women, it is thus remedied. Take Dragons Blood , Bole*
Armeniac, Pomegranate- (hells, white of an Egg, Maftick, Galls, of each one ounce :
powder them , and make them all up with hot water. Put fome of this Confection
into the hole that goes into the Matrix. Or, Galls, Sumach, Plantain, great Com*
frey, Allome, Chamxlaea jj take equal parts of them all , and boyl them in Rain-
water, and foment the Privities. Or , beat fowre Galls very finely : mingle a little
of the Powder of Cloves with them. Let them boyl in (harp red Wine : wet a
woollen cloth in it , and apply to the part. Or thus may you retrain that part of
common whores, with Galls, Gums, whites of Eggs, Dragons Blood, Acacia, Plan-
tain, Hypociftis, Balanftia, Maftick, Cyprcfs-nuts , Grape-skins, Akorn-cups. Or,
in that hollow pirt where the Glans breaks forth ; and gaping, (hews the Nucleus,
with Maftick and Terra Lemnia. If all thefc be boy led in red Wine or Vinegar, and
the Matrix be often wet therewith , it will come very clofe, and be much ftraighter.
Or clfe powder all thefe , and caft them in through a Reed , or make a fume under
them, Great Ccmfrey will be excellent for this purpofei for flefh boyl'd with it,
will grow together. And the other alfo,if it be boyl'd,will very well glew together
frefh Wound?. The Decoftionof Ladies Mantle, or the juice, or diftilled wat<" ~e
it, cafi into the Matrix , will fo contract it , that Whores can fcarce be known fr m
Maids : or, if they (it in the Deco&ion of it ; efpecially, if we mingle other aft
gent things with it, and wet the Secrets therewith. Tbe diftilled water of Starw
being often injected into the Matrix, will make one fcarce know which if corrupt \
arid which is not. But if you will have

A woman defiowred made a virgin again ,
Make little Pills thus : Of burnt Allome , Maftick , with a little Vitriol and Of pi-
msn t ? make them into very fine Powder , that yon can fcarce feel them : when j

hi

Of 'Beautifying Women. 253

have made them Pi Us with Rain. water . prefs them clofe with your fitters ; ard let
them dry, being preffed thin, ^ and lay them on the Mouth of the Matrix , where ic
was firlt broken open : change it every fix hours , always fomenting the place with
Rain or Ciftern-watcr , and that for twenty four hours , and ic will here and there
make little Bladders ; which being touched , will bleed much blood , that flic can
hardly be known from a Maid. Midwives that take care ot thi*, do ic another way*
They contrail the place with the Deco&ion of the forementioned thing?, then they
fet a Leech fait on upon the place, and fo they make a crufty matter or (cab ; which
being rub'd will bleed. Others when they have (traightned the parr, wjeSt the dried
Blood of a Hare or Pigeon; which being moiftned by the moyfture of tbeMatrix$
Chews like live frefh Blood. I found out this noble way: I powder Litharge very fine-
ly ,tnd boyl it in Vinegar, till the Vinegar be thick; I Itrain out char, and put in more*
till that be coloured alto: then I exhale the Vinegar at an eafie fire, and refolvc it into
fmoak.

Chap. XXX.
Some fporis agatnfi -women,

1"Has far I have (hewed how to beautifie women, now 1 (hall attempt feme things
againft their decking of themfelves, and make fome merriment after thofe things
chat I (erionfly difcovcred to adorn them.

To make a pointed Face lodkjpale.
If you would know a painted Face, do thus : Chew Saffron between you Teeth, and
(land neer to a woman with your mouth : when you talk with her, your breath will
foul ber Face,and make it yellowifli; but if (he be not painted,the natural colour will
continue. Or burn Brimftone in the room where (he is:tor if there be Cerufs or Mer-
cury mblimat e on her Face, the fmoak will make her brown, or black. The painted
Women that wa k at Puteoli , in the Mountains of Phlegra , are made fo black , as
Silver-money is, (hut up in bags. We may alfo know thus,

ffhether fhe be painted with red.
Chew Grains of Cummin, or a Clove of Garliek, and fpeak clofe by her ; if it be
natural, ic frill remain ; but counterfeit with Cerufs or Quick-filver , it prefently de-
cays.

To make a woman full of red pimples.
Of aScellio is made an ill Medicament : for when he is dead in Wine, all the Faces
of thofe that drink of it, will be red-fpotted Wherefore, they that would disfigure
Whores, kill him in an Oyntment. The Remedy is , the yelk of an Egg , Honey
andGlafs. P/injf.

To mahjhe face green.
Avicenna faith, That the Deco&ion of Charnaeleon, put into a bath , will make him
green-coloured that days long in that bath ; and then by degrees he will recover
his former colour.

7* make tbt Hair fall off the Head and Beard.
Touch any pan of mans body with a matter white as milk , that che Salamander
vomits op out of its mouth, and che Hairs will fall off ; and what is couched is
changed into cue Leprotic, fliny.

THE

THE

TENTH BOOK

O F

Natural Magick:

Of Diftillation.

The Proem i.

NOrv I am cer»e to the *Arts,and I (hall begin from Diflittation , ah Invention of tatef
times, a wonderful thing, to be prat fed beyond the power of man j not that which the
vulgar and unskilful men ufe : for they do but corrupt and dejlroy what u good : hut that
which is dore by skilful Arttfts. This admirable Art, teacheth how to make Spirits , and
fublime grofi 'Bodies ; and how to condenfe , and make Spirits become grof Bodies .* And to
draw forth of Plants, tjttmerals, Stones and Jewels , the Strength of them, that arc in-
volved and overwhelmed with great bulk., lying hid, at it were, in their Chefts : and to
make them mere pure , and thin , and more noble , as not being content with their common
condition, and to lift them up ai high m Heaven. We can by Qhjmical JnfirHments,fearch
out the Vertues of Plants, and better then the Ancients could do by tafting them. What
therefore could be thought on that is greater t It is features part to produce things , and
give them faculties \ but Art may ennoble them when they are produced , and give them
miry feveral qualities. Let one that loves Learning , and to fearch "Natures Secrets,
enter upon this : for a dull Fellow will never attain to this Art of 'Diftilling, Firfi, we Jhall
extratt Waters and Oyls : then, the Efences, Tinftures, Elixirs, Salts, and fuch-like : then
wefb*lljhen> how to refolve mix'd Bodies in o the Elements, and make them all more pure, t*
feparate their divers and contrary qualities, and draw them forth , that we may ufe them at
pie a fur -e: and other things, that will never repent us to Itnow and do.

Chap. L

What T) ^illation is, and of how many forts,

Hcthcr the Aft of Diftillation were known to the Learned
Ancients, or no, I will not nndertake to difpute ; yet there
is another kinde of Art to be read in Diofcorides , then what
we ufe. He faith thus : There is an Oyl extra&ed one of
Pitch , by feparating the watry part, which fwimtneth on the
top, like Whey in Milk: and hanging clean flocks of Wool,
in the vapor arifmg from it while the Pitch boyls ; and when
they are moyft, fqueezing them into feme Veffel. This moft
be done as long as it boyleth. (fiber defineth it thus .Dittillt-
i ion i< the Elevation of moift vapors in a proper Vcflel : but we will declare the true
definition of it el'ewhere. He maketh three forts of it ; by Afccnt,by Dcfccnt, and
by Filtration. But I cannot but confefs , that Filtration is not properly a fpecies of
Diftillation. But I fay, by Afccnt,by Defcenr,and by Inclination, which is a mid-
dlebetween both , and is very neceflary : for when a thing is unwilling to afcend,
we teach it by this to rife by degrees, by inclining the Veffel . and raife it by little
and little, until it become thinner, and know how to afcend. The Inftw&ion* for
DiittUation fhall be thefe : Firft , Provide a Glafs or Brazen Veffel , with a Belly
fwelling out like a Cupping-Gltfs , and fharpened upward like a Top or a Pear : fit

it

Of Diflillation. 255

ic to the under-Veffel like a Cap ; fo that the neck of that lower VcfTcl may come
into the belly of the upper. A Pipe muft run about the Bottom of the Cap, which
muft fend forth a Beak ; under which , there muft Hand another Veflel , called the
Receiver , from receiving the diftilling water. Stop all the vents clofe with Staw-
mortar, or rags of Linen , thac the fpirituous Aery matter may not pafs our. The
fire being put under this Stillatory, the inclofcd matter will be diflolved by the hcac
of the fire into a dewy vapor, and aicendeth to the top ; where , meeting with the
cold fides of the Head, it fticketh there ; being condenfed by the cold, iwelleth in-
to little bubbles , bedeweth the roof and fides , then gathereth into moyft pearls,
runneth down in drops , turneth into water, and by the Pipe and Nofe is conveyed
into the Receiver. But both the Veffels and the Receiver muft be corfidered,accor-
ding to the Nature of the things to be diftilled. For if they be of a flatalent vaporous
Nature , they will require large and low Veflcls , and a more capacious Receiver :
for when the Heat fhall have railed up the flatulent matter , and that finde it felf
firaitaed in the narrow cavities, it will feek fome other vent , and fo tear the Veffels
in pieces, (which will flie about with a great bounce and crack , not without enda-
maging the ftandcrs by ) and beirg at liberty , will fave it felf frcm further harm.
But if the things be hot and thin , you muft have Veffels with a long and fmall
neck. Things of a middle temper , require Veflels of a middle fize : All which
the induftrious Artificer may eafily learn by the imitation of Nature, who hath
given angry and furious Creatures , as the Lion and Bear , thick bodies, but (bore
necks ; to (hew, that flatulent humours would pafs out of Veffels of a larger bulk*
and the thicker part fettle to the bottom : but then , the Stag, the Eft rich, the Ca-
mil-Panther, gentle Creatures , and of thin Spirits, have flendcr bodies and long
necks ; to {hew that thin, fubtile Spirits , muft be drawn through a much longer and
narrower paffage, and be elevated higher to purific them. There is one thing which
I muft efpecially inform you of, which is, that there may be a threefold moyfturc ex-
tracted out of Plants : The Nutritive, whereby they live, and all dried Herbs want;
it differeth little from Fountain or Ditch-water : The Subftantial, whereby the parts
arejoyned together; and this is of a more folid Nature : And the third is the Ra-
dical humor, fat and oyly, wherein the ftrcngth and venue lieth. There is another
thing, which I cannot pafs over in filence , it being one of the Principle* of the
Art, which I have obferved in divers Experiments ; which is , that fome mixt bo-
dies do exhale thin and hot vapors firft, and afterwards moyft and thick : on the
contrary, others exhale earthy and phlegmatick parts firft, and then the hot and fiery;
which being fixed in the irmoft parts, are expelled at laft by the force of the fire. Buc
becaufe there can be no conftant and certain Rule given for them , fome I will mark
unto you } others,youx own more quick ingenuity muft take the pains to obfervei

Crap. II.

Of the Extraction of Waters,

THe Extraction of Waters, becaufe it is common, I will difpatch in a few words.
If you would extract fweet Waters out of hot Plants , and fuch as are earthy,
and retain a iweet favour in their very fubftance ; thefe being caft into a Stillatory,
without any Art, and a fire made under them , yield their odors : as you may draw
fweet Waters out of

%ofes^Ora»ge-flowers t Myrtle and Lavender^ and fuch-ltkf^
either with Cinders, cr in Balnco Marias ; but onely , obfervc to kindle the fire by
degrees, left they burn. There are alfo in fome Plants, fweet Leaves, as in Myrtle,
Lavender, C itron,and fuch-like ; which, if you mix with the Flowers, will no way
hinder the favour of them, but add a pleafantnefs to the Waters: and in places
where Flowers cannot be gotten , I have feen very fweet Waters extracted out of
the Tendrils of them : efpecially , when they have been fee abroad a funning in a
ek>fc Vcffel for fome dayes before, there is a Water, ©f no contemptible fenr,

drawn

25 <S Natural Magick. Soo^io.

drawn out of the Leaves of Bafil gentle, (especially, being aromatized with Cirron
or Cloven) by the heat of a gentle Bath, heightened by degrees, an d then cxpofmg
it to the San for fome time. There is an odoriferous Water extracted out of the
Flowers of Azadaret, or baftard Sicarsore, very thin and full of favor. The way to
finde cast whether the odor be fettled in the f'ubftancc of a Plant , or elfe in the la-
perficiev or outward parts , is this : Rub the Leaves of Flowers with your fingers;
if they retain the fame lent , or cart a more fragrant breath , then the odour lieth in
the whole fubttance. Bat on the contrary, if ifter your rubbing, they do not onely
lofc their natural fent, but begin to fiink, it flvwerh that their odour refideth onely
in their fupciftcies, which being mixed with other ill favoured parts , are not onely
abated, but become imperceptible. In diltilling of thele, we mult uie another Art.
As for example,

T0 extract fwe t Water out of CiUfiowers, <JW«^, %ofts , Violets , andjafmine^ and

Lilies.

Firll draw the juice out of fome wiide Musk Rofes , with a gentle hear in Balneo j
then remove them , and add others : for if you let thtm Itand too long , the fene
whLh reftd thin the iuperhcies is not oneiy coni'umed, but the dull fiir.kin^ vapcur
which lieth in the inward pares is drawn forth. In this water, let other Rofe> be
infaied for lone hours , and then taken out and frefh pu in , which the okner you
do, the fweeter it will fnvll : but flop the V-.ffel clofe, left the thin fent flit cut and
be dilperfed in the Air ; and fo you v\i'lha\e a moll odoti erces Water of Mn k«
Roles, rhefame I adviie to be done wuh Jaimine, Gillifl wers, Lillies, aoa Vio-
lets, and Cr ws-toes,and the like. But if vou are not willing to macerate thrm m
their own waters, the fame may be done in Role-water. By this Art , 1 have made
Waters out of Flowers of a moft fragrant Im 11, to the admiration of Anirt , of no
fmail account. But becaule it happereth tometimes by the negligence of the Ope-
rator, that it is infe&ed with a ftirk of burning, I will teach you

How to eorrett the filu\ of burning.
Becaufc that part which lieth at the bottom f elerh more heat then the top, whence
it cometh to pafs, that before the one be warm, the other is bu nr , and oftentimes
Hinketh of the fire, and offendeth the nofe ; Therefore diflil yrUr Waters in Ba'nco
with a gentle fire, that the pure clear Water may afcend , and the dregs fettle in the
bottom with the Oyi,a great cauic of the ill favour.

How to draw agreAt quantity of Water by Vtfiillation.

Fatten fome Plates of Iron or Tin round the top of the Stitlatory j fee them upright*
and let them He of the fame height with it , and in the bottom fatten a Spiggeu
When the StiiUtory waxeth hot, and the elevated vapors are gathered into the Cap,
if that be hot, ibey fall down again into the bottom , and are hardly condenfed hno
drops: but if it becold , it prcfently turneth them into Water. Therefore pour
cold Water between thofe plates , which by condenfing the vapours , may drive
down larger currents into the Receiver. When the Cap, and the Water upon it
begin to be hot, pull out the Spigget, that the hot Water may run out, and frefh cold
Water be put in. Thus the Warer being often changed, that it way always be cold,
and the warm drawn out by the Spigget, you will much augment the quantity of your
Water.

Chap. T 1 1.
Of extracting Aqua Vita;.

IT is thu=; done : Take ftrong rich Wine growing in dry places , as on Vifeuvhis,
conamonlv called Greek- wine, or the tears or firft running of the Grape. Diflil
thii in a Glals-Rctort wiih Cinders t or in Balneo , or elfe in a long neckedStill.
Draw out the third pari of k , and refervc the reft ; for it is turned into a perfect
' fhirp

Of 'Distillation* zjj

(harp Vinegar j there remaining cnely the carcafe of the Wine : for the life and
cenuoui part is taken cut. Then dittii the lame again, an i the third time j alwayes
drawing off but a third part.Then prepare a Veffd with a ionger and Mraighter neck,
of thiee cubits, and diftil it again in this: at laft , put ic into themouih or the
Vcflel, cover it with Parchment , and let on the Cap of the Stil.atory , and kindle
the fire : thethin ipirits of the Wine, wiil pafs through all , ard fall down into the
Receiver ; and the palegm , which cannot get pafl'age , will fettle to the bottom.
The note of perie^ depuration from phlegm, will be , if a rag being dipt in ir, and
fet on rirc, do burn quite away : or, if fome of ic, being dropt on a plain board , be
kindled into flame , doth leave no moyliure or mark of it. But all the work de-
pendcth on this, that the mouth of the Veffelbe exactly Hopped and doled . l'otbar
thcleaft Spirit may not finde venc and flie into Air. The fittelt thing to Hop them
with, is an Ox's Bladder , or fome other Beads ; for being cut into broad fillets,
and wtiile ihey be wet, rolled and tied about where the mouths of the Veflels meet;
ic will alone keep in the expiring vapors. You may oblerve this in the Diltillation
of it. The 'loals being hoc, the Vcffel boyleth , and a mod burning Spirit of the
Wine, afcendeth througn the neck of the VeiTel : it is hot below , and cold on the
top, till it getteth up into the Cap , then,cncountring wich cold, ic turncch into wa-
ter , and runnech down by the nofe into the Receiver : and what was a long time
afcending, then, in a fmall interval of time, flows down again td the under-placed
Glafs. Then, the Cap being cold, fendeth down that quality through the neck into
the very belly of the Stillatory , until the Spiric , being feparated from the phlegm,
workech the fame effw<5r again. 1 ule to fuffer the Wine to afcend , fo long as the
Spirit runneth in vifiblc into the Receiver : for when the phlegm afcendeth , there
will appear bubbles in the Cap, and Hreams, which will run into the water through
the note. Then I take away that dead carcafe of the Wine, and pour in frefh Wine,
and extract the spirit out of that the fame way.

To do the fame a more comfendiom way,
Thofe who defire to do this in a fhorter time,mu!f make a Brafs Vcflel, of the bignefs
of an ordinary Barrel, in the form of a Gourd ; but the nofe of the Cap mull be made
of Glafs,or Brafs of fifteen or twenty foot, winding about with circling Revolutions,
or mutual croflings, or as it were with the circling of Snakes , which they muft fer
in wooden Vcflels, full of cold water, that pafling through, it may be received
into the Receiver. For when it hath dilHlled the third part of the Wine in three
hours,they mutf caft out the rcfidue,and put that which is dilHlled into the Stillarory
again j and the fecond time di I ill out a third part : fo alfo the third time in the lame
day. At length , they put it into a Stillacory with a longer neck , and feparate the
phlegm from it, Some make the Cap with three or four heads , fetting one upon
another , all being pervious but the uppermoft ; and every one having his nofe, and
his particular Receiver. They fit th^m to the Veffel with a long neck, fet them on,
binde them and lute them, thac they have no vent : the water which diHilleth out
ot the uppermost head, is cleereft and moll perfect : that out of the lowelt , more
imperfect, and mnftbe referved afunder ; for rhey will be of differenc eftimation :
thehigheft will becleercfrom all phiegm, the lower full of it, the middle in a mean
between both.

How to make Aqua Vitae of new Wine*

It may be done without the charge of Coals and Wood : for it may worthily be cal-
led * we?' neither doth it require the attendance of a learned Artilt , but of
an ignorant Clown , or a woman : for this Spirit is drawn out meerly by the vehe-
ment working of Nature, to free her felf without any other help whatever. When
the Wine is run out of the prsls into the Ho; fhead, and other Veflels , and begin-
neth to purge,place an earthen neck , or one of wood , being two cubits in len;th,
upon the Hung-hole of the Veflcl : let the Cap uo^fctbe neck , and luce the joynts
very elofe, that there may be no vent : fet the Receiver under the note to take the
Water Which floweth down. Thus thine cxhaltations being elevated by the working

N n Sp?-

25$ Natural Magic k. 2?00^io.

Spirits of the Wine, are converted into Water, meerly for the work of Nature,with •
out the help of fire, which therefore hath his particular vermes, which we will pals
over now, and mention them in another place.

Chap IV.

tJow to diftil with the heat of the Shu.

may diftil not onely with fire , but with the Sun and Dung. But the laft
tainteth the ditf illed Waters with a fcurvy fent. The Sun cxtra&eih the belt
Water, and very uleful for many Medicines. The heat of the fire changeth the
Nature of things , and caufeth hot and fiery qualities in them. Wherefore in all
Medicines for the eyes , we muft ufe Waters extracted from the Sun : for others do
fret and corrode the eye, thefe are more gentle and foft. The Sun extra&eth more
Water then the fire, becaufe the vapours do prclently condenfe and drop down j
which they do not over the fire, becaufe they are driven up with a force , and ftick
to the fides of the Stillatory, and fall down again into the bottom. There are
other advantages which (hall be explicated in their proper places. Befides , it is
good Husbandry : for the work is done without wood, or coals^ or labour. It is
but filling the Vcflels with the Ingredients, and fetting them in the Sun, and all the
pains is pat*. Therefore to explain the manner in a few words : Prepare a Form of
three foot in height, two in breadth, and of a length proportionable to the number
of the VefTels you intend to fet to work : if many, make it longer ; if a few , let it
be fhorter. Board up that fide of the Form next the Sun, left the heat do warm the
Receivers , and make the Water afcend again. In the middle of the upper plank of
the Form, make feveral holes for the necks of the Glafles to pafs down through.
When the Sun hath pafled Gemini , (for this muft be performed in the beat of Sum*
mer only) fet your form abroad in the Sun. Gather your Herbs before Sun- rife, pick
them and cleanfe ihem frcm dwft and durr of mensfeer, from the" urine and ordure
of Worms and other Creature7, and fuch kind of filth and pollutions. Then , left
they fhould foul and foil the Water, fhake them, and wipe them with clothes ; and
laftly, wafti your hands, and then, them, and dry them in the ftiade : when they arc
dried, put them into the Glaffes,take Come wire-Cittern ftrings,and windc them into
round clues ; f© that being let go , they may untwine themfelv es again : put one of
thtfe, into the mouth of each Glafs, to hinder the Herbs from falling out, when the
Glafles are turned downwards. Then thurft the necks through the holes ef the
Form into the Receivers, which are placed underneath , and admit them into their
bellies : fatten them together with lintn bands , that there may be no vent s and

place the Receivers in difhes of water, that
the vapor may the fooner be condenfed.
All things being thus provided , expofe
them to molt violent heat of Sun-beams ;
they will prclently diflblve them into va-
pors , and Hide down into the Receivers.
In the evening, after Sun-fer, remove then,
and fill them with frefc Herbs. The Herb
Polygonum, or Sparrows-tongue, bruifed,
and thus diftilled , is excellent for the in-
flammation of the eyes, and other difeafes.
Out of S.Johns-mxxjs drawn a water good
againft cramps,if you wafti the part affe&ed
with it : and others alfo there are, too long
to rehearfe. The manner of Diftilling ,
this Figure exprcfleth.

CHAP.

Of 'Distillation*

Chap. V.

How to dr*w Oyl by Exprejfion.

VrV^E have treated of Waters, now we will fpeak of Oyls, and next of Eflences0
* Thefe require the induftry of a moft ingenious Artificer : for many the moft
excellent Eflences of things, do remain in the Oyl , as in the radical moyflure , fo
clofe, that without the greatcft Art, wit, cunning, and pains, they cannot be brought
to light : fo that the whole Art of Diftillation dependeth on this. Thecheifell
means is by Exprelfion ; which, though it be different from the Art of Diftillation,
yet bccaufe it is very neceffary to it , it will not be unneccflary to mention here.
The general way of ir, is this : Take the Seeds out of which you would draw Oyl,
blanch them , and ftrip them of their upper Coats , either by rubbing them with
your hands, or picking them off with your nails. When they are eleanfed, caft them
into a Marble-Morter , and beat them with a wcodenPeftle : then fprinklc them
with Wine, and change them into a Leaden-Morter : fet them on the fire , and ftir
them with a wooden-Spoon. When they begin to yield forth a little Qylinefs, take
them from the fire,and prepare in readinefs two plates of Iron of a fingers thicknefs,
and a foot-fquare : let them be fmooth and plain on one fide , and heated fo, that
you can fcarce lay your finger on them ; or , if you had rather , that they may hifs a
little when water is caft upon them , wrap the Almonds in a linen-doth being
wetted, fqueeze them between thefe plates in a prefs : fave the Expreflion, and then
fprinkle more Wine on the preffed Almonds or Seeds : allow them tome time to

-inbibe it : then fet them on the fire, ftir them, and fqueeze them again , as before,
until all their Oyl be drawn out. Others put the Seeds when they are bruifed and
warmed,into a bag that will not let the Oyl ftrain thorow ; and by twining two flicks

. about, prefs them very hard and dofe : then they draw the Oyl out of them , when
they ate a little fettled.

To draw Oyl out of Nutmegs*

Beat the Nutmegs very carefully in a Morter , put them into a Skillet , and warm
them , and then prefs out the Oyl which will prefently congeal. Wherefore , to
make it fiuide and aprer to penetrate, diftil it five or fix times in a Retort, and it will
be as you defirc : or elfe, caftfome burning Sand into it, and mix it. and make it into
Rolls ; which, being put into the neck of a Retort, and a fire kindled, will the firft
time remain liquid.

To extrdl Oyl out of Citron- feed

we muft ufe the fame means. Blanch and eleanfe them : an Oyl of a Gold-colour
will flow out : they yield a fourth part ; and it is powerful Antidote againftPoyfon
and Witchcraft ; and it is the beft Menftruum to extract the fent out of Musk, Civet
and Amber, and to make fwect Oyntments of, becaufe it not quickly grow rank.

Oyl of Poppy- Seed

is exrra&ed the fame way, and yields a third part of a Golden-colour, and ufeful in
dcrmitive Medicines. Alfo, thus is made

OylofColoquintida'Seeds.

The faireft yield a fixih part of a Golden-colour : ic killeth Worms , andexpelleth
them from Children, being rubbed on the month of their Stomach. Alfo,

Oyl of Nettle- Seed.

An ounce and a half may be extracted out of a pound and a half of Secds,being pidscdi
and blanched : it is very good to dye wemens Hair of a Gold colcdr. •

N n 7.

%6o Natural Magic k. jBoo^io.

is made by another Art. Take fifty or fixty Eggs ; boyl tbem till they be hard :
then peal them,and take out the yelk, and fen them over warm Coals in a tinned Pol-
net, till all their moytlure be confumod ; ftill birring them with a woodcn-fpattle :
then encreafc the fire, but ftir tbem ucccflantly left they burn. You will fee the Oyl
fwet out , when it is all come forth, take away the fire, and skim off the Oyl Or,
when the Oyl beginneth to fwet out, as I faid, put the Eggs into a prefs, and fqueeze
them very hard : they will yield more Oyi, but not fo good.

Chap. VI.
How to extraUOyl with Water.

NOw I will declare how to extract Oyl without Expreffion : and firft , out of
Spices, Seed?, Leaves, Sticks, or any thing elfe. Oyl being to be drawn out
onely by the violence of fire , and very unapt to afcend , bccaule it is denfe : con-
sidering alio, That Aromatick Seeds axe very fubtile and delicate : fo that if they be
ufed too roughly in the fire, they willftink of fmoak, and burning: therefore, that
they may endure a ftronger fire , and be fecure from burning , we muft take ih« af-
fiftance of water. Thofe kinde of Seeds, as 1 faid, are endued with an Airy , thin,
volatile Effence ; and by the propriety of their Nature, elevated on high ; lo, that
in DilUUation, they areeafily carried upward, accompanied with water j and being
condenfed in the Cap of the Stillatory, the oyly and the watcrifh vapours, rim dowa
together intothe Receiver. Chufe your Seeds of a full ripenefs ; neither too new,
nor too old ; but of a mature age : beat them and macerate them in four.times their
weight of water ; or fo , that the water may arife tfee breadth of four firgers above
them : then put them into a Brafs-pot , that they may endure the greater fire ; and
kindle your Coals unto a vehement heat, that the Water and Oyl may promifcuonf-
iy afcend and flow down : feparate the Oyl from the Water , as you may eafily do.
As for example,

How to dtaw Oyl out of Cinnamon,

If you firft diflil Fountain water twice or thrice , you may extraft a greater quantity
cF Oyl with it : for being made more fubtile* and apt to penetrate , it pierceth the
Cinnamon, and draweth the Oyl more forcibly out of its Retirements. Therefore
take CXXXV pound of Fountain- water, diftilitin a Glafs-Alembick : when forty
pound is drawn, diihl that until fifteen flow out : then caft away the reft , and draw
fiveoutof thofe fiftteen. This being done, macerate one pound of Cinnamon in
five of Water , and diflil them in a Retort or Alembick. Firft , a Milky water will
flow out with Oyl, next cleer Water : caft the Water in over the Oyl, and feparate
them as we fhall teach you. Of a pound of Cinnamon , you will fcarce receive a
drachm of Oyl.

How to draw a greater quantity ef Oyl out of Cinnamon.

I do ufe to do it in this manner,to the wonder of thebeft and fubtilleft Artifts : Pro-
vide a Dcfcendatory out of the Bath, (the making of which , I will fhew hereafter)
and put your Cinnamon, being grofsly beaten into a Glafs-Retort : fet it in its pro-
per place, and put w ater into the Bath ; the heat of the fire by degrees, will draw a
little water in many days : receive it careful, and pour it again into the Cinnamon
that it may re- imbibe its own water ; fo let it remain a while : afterwards , kindle
the fire, and you (hall receive a little Water and Oyl. Do this third and fourth timef
and you will gain an incredible quanity. You may try the fame in other things,

Oyl of Cloves

may be extra£tedin the fame manner: To every pound of Cloves, you muft add
ten of Water; diliil them as before : fo fhaJl you have both Water and Oyl. Ic
will yield a twelfth part. The Oyl is good for Medicines » and theVVatcr for
'J* wees. So alio is made

Of THftillation.

Liquid Oyl of Nutmegs.
If you bruife them, and put them with the Water into a Vcffel , and diftil them as
before , they will yield a fixth part.

Oyl of Mace and Pepper
is drawn in the fame manner, much flronger, but in lefs quantity.

Oyl of Anifeed

may be thus extracted ; an ounce out of a pound. Ic congealeth in Winter like
Camphire or Snow : in the Summer it diffolveth. Let the Seeds be macerated in
the Water for ten days at leaft : for the longer they lie there , the more Oyl they
will yield.

Oyl of Fennel

is extra&ed in the fame quantity : when the Seeds arc ripe and frefh, they have moft
Oyl ; for they yield as much more.

Oyl of Coriander

yieldeth but a fmall quantity , and is of very hard extra&ion : there is fcarce one
drachm drawn out of a pound : new Seeds yield mcft. And to be fhort ; in the fame
manner are cxtra&ed the Oyls out of the Seeds of Carrot , Angelica , Marjoram^
Rue,Rofemary,Parfely,Smallage and Dill, and fuch-likc.

Oyl of Rofemary and Lavender-flewers, and

fuch-others , which being dried , afford no Oyl , may be thus extracted : fat trie
Flowers into a Receiver, and fct it clofe ftopt in the hot Sun for a month : there will
they diffolve into Liquor , and flic up to the fides of the Glafs : then being con-
denfed again, fall down and macerate in themfelves : at a fit time,add Water to then)
and diftil them, as the former : fo (hall you draw forth with the Water a moft excel-
lent lwcet Oyl.

Oyl of Juniper and Cyprefs-Wood

may de drawn out by the fame Art , if you macerate the duft of them in their own
or in F©i main- water fcra month , and diftil them in the fame manner : theOyi
will ceme out by drops with the water, of a ftrong fent, and excellent venue. Thcfc
1 have tried, the reft I leave to thee.

Cmaf. VII.

How to feparate Oyl from Water »

"IfX/Hen we extract Oyls , they run down into the Receiver together with the
* Water : wherefore they muft be feparated, left the flegm , being mixed
with the O) 1 do weaken the vertuc of it : that it may obtain its full vigour , it moft
be purified by Diftillation and Separation : for being put into a Retort or broad
Stiil,over a gentle fiie,the Water will run out,& the it maining Liquor will be clear
Oyl. This work of Separation is very laborious : yet there are very artificial Vcf-
« fcls invented, by the help of which, all the Water may be drawn off, and the flegm •
onely pure Oyl will remain. Prepare a Glafs- Veffel : let it be broad and grow nar-
rower by degrees downward?, until it come to a point, like unto a Tunnel. Put the
diftilled Water, which confifteth of the flegmatick Water and Oyl into this Vef-
fel ; let ic ftand a while : the Oyl will fwim on the top, and the Water will fink
down to the bottcm. But ftop the mouth of it with your finger ; fo that removing
ic away , the Water may firft run out , and the Oyl fink down by degrees. When
it is defended into the narrow part , fb that the Oyl becometh neat to your finger ;
ftop the hole, and let the Orifice be but half open for the VVater to pafs out : when

%6t Natural Magick. Hool^io.

it is all run out , empty the Oyl into another fmall Veffel. There is another very
ingenious Inrtrument found out for to feparatc Oy), with a great belly and a narrow
Beck, which a little nofe in the middle. Pour the Oyl mked with Water into
the Vcflcl, the Water will peffefs the bottom, the Oyl the neck. Drop Water gent-
ly into it,until the Oyl afcend up unto the nofe : thenencline the Veffel downward,
and the Oyl will run out pure and unmix'd. When you have emptied out fome, drop
in;more Water , until the Oyl be raifed again unto the nofe : then flop it downed
pour out the reli of the Oyl. But if the Oyl fettle to the bottom , and the Water
fwim on the top, as it often hapneth, filtrate it into a broad difli, or any other Veffel
with a cotten-cloth : the Water will run out, and the Oyl will remain in the bottom
very pure-

C H A ?, VIII.

Mow to mttkf a* Infirnment to extratt Ojl in a greater quantity and without danger of

burning,

E may with feveral forts of Inflruments , ufe feveral fcindes of ExtraSions :
among the reft, I found out one , whereby you may draw Oyl with any the
rnoft vehement fire, without any danger of burning; and a greater quantity , then
by any other x and it is fit for many other ufes alio. Prepare a Veffel in the form of
an Ege, of the capacity of half an ordinary Barrel : let the mouth of it, be of a con»
venient bignefs to receive in your arm, when there fhall occafion to wafli it, ot to fill
it with feveral forts and degrees of things to be diftilled. Let it be tinned within ;
then fet a brafs head upon it of a foot high, with a hole in the bottom fit to receive
the neck of the lower Veffel, and flop the mouth of it exactly. Out of the top of
the head, there muft arife a pipe of Brafs , fifteen or twenty foot long , bended into
fev eral angles, that it may take up lefs room , and be more convenient to be carried.
The other end of this Pipe,muft be fattened into the belly of another Vtffel, which
rauft be of lefs capacity then the former, but of the fame figure. Fix a head upon
this alfo, with a Pipe of the fame length, and bended like the former; whofe lower
end ftiall be received into another flraight Pipe,which palling through the middle of a
Barrel, at laft falls into the Receiver. The manner of ufing it is this : Put your Leaves,
Stalks, or Seeds, being beaten fmall , into the Brafs-pot , and pour asmnch Foun-
tain-water on as will cover them a hand-
ful or five large fingers over • then fet on
the head, and flop the joynts very clofe.
Put the other end of the Pipe into the o-
thcr Pot , andjoynt them exactly : then
fet on the other head, and faflcn the lower
end of its crooked Pipe into that ftraighc
one j which parting through the Barrel,
runneth into the Receiver. If the joynts
be anywhere faulty , ftop them with Flax,
and parte them with Wheat-flour , and the
white of an Egg ; then rowl them about,
and tie them clofe with Fillets, cut out of
a Bladder : for when the vapors are forced
by the heat of the fire, they arefo attenu-
ated , that they will break forth through
the leaft rime or chink , in fpite of all your
endeavors. Fill the Barrel with cold wa-
ter , and when it beginncth to grow hoc,
draw it out through a Cock at bottom, and
fopply frefh water , that the Pipe may al-
ways be kept cool. At length, make the
Pot boyl , at firli with a gentle fire J then

en-

Of THJlillation. %6%

encreafe it by degrees, Until the vehemency ot the heat, doth make the tapors hifs,
as it were ready tc break the Pipes , as they run thorow therh ; fo they will be ele-
vated thoraw ihe retorted Pipes, and leave the phlcgmatick water in the lower Vef-
fel j till ; atlin^ through the cold Pipe , they be condenfed into Liquor , and tall
down into the Receiver. If the water do coniurhc away in the boyling , pour in
more being firit warmed, thorrw a little Pipe which the Pot muft have on one fide
with a Spigget to it, for this purp^fe : but be fute to flop the Spigget in very clofe,
that r here m iy be no v enr. Afterwards, i'eparate the Oy 1 from the Water , fublime
and ptti iHe it in another V fiVl. Of all the Inftruments that ever I faw, not any one
extradcth a greater quantity of Oyl,and with lefs labour and induftry then this. Thns
you may without an, fear of burning, draw Oylouc of Flowers, Leaves, Spices,
Gum?, and Wood with the vehemcmett fires j as alfo out of Juniper andLaurel*5
Berries,

Chap. IX.

The Defcriptittt of a Vefceudatory whereby Oyl is extracted by Defcettt*

I Cannot refrain from difcovering here an Inf rument found out by my own pri*
vaic experience , which I hope will be of Bo imall profit tothe Ingenious , by
wtiicn ttiey may draw Oyl out of any the lcalt things without any fear of burning*
For there are man- tenuous, oy ly Flowers, as of Rolemary and Juniper , and other
t r g-\a Ma k, Amber,Civet,Gum,and fuch-like : out of which may be drawn Oyls
very tweet and medkinabie : but they arc of to thin aiubttance , that there is a
great hazard of burning them, when they are forced by the heat of the fire, without
wmch, neither fat things will be elevatedmor Oyl cxtra&cd. Therefore to remedy
the'e inconveniences, I have invented an InHrument , by wh'ch Oyl fhall defcend
without any labour or danget of burning. Let a Vcflelbemadeof Brafs,inthe form
ot an Fgg, <*o foot high , and of the fame breadth : let it be divided towards the
top, of wt ich the upper part muH ferve for a cover , and be to fitted to be received
into the lcw?r pan. that the joints may clofely fall in one another , and bcexa&ly
It opt In their wcr part,tcward- the middle, about half afoot from the mouth ;
let there be a Copper- plai e htted , as it were the midriff ; fo that it may eafily be
put ard take n cut : in which" muH be made three hollow places to receive the bot-
tom of three retorted V< (Tel<, the rtlt i f the plate muff be pervious, that theboyl*
irg Water and hot Spirit may have paffi e to rile upwards. Our of the fides of
the Vetfel there mull be three holes , rhrou^h the which the neck* of the Retorts
may pafs, being glued and fallned ro their Pipe? with Flax, and tied with Fillers of
Bladders: fo that not the leatt Air, mnch lets any Water may flic out. When
you prepare to work, fill the Glafs-Retorts wirh the thirgs you intend to Hill,
thrult the necks thorrw the holes outward, and lay their bodies in the prepared
hHl^wnefs of the crofc plate, 'rm.-what elevated. If there remain any void fpace
between the neck« , and the fides of the boles they pafc through, Hop ic with Flax,
ard i i" it about with Fillets of Bladder, and fill the Vcffel with with water, within
thrrc fio<?er< up tothe crois-plate. 1 he V ffel, being covered, and the joynts well
Hopt ar<l 2iued , and hound abrut ; fo that the force of the vapours arifing , may
rot burH i. open, ard fca!d the Faces of the by-ftanders , kindle the fire by degrees^
Untitli b'C mevfry vehement: then wil the vapors make a great r.ofe , almoh fuffi-
ci nr to ternfie one, and full Water , then Water and Oyl will diftil out, I can-
not conratn mv felf from relating alfo another InHrument invented for the lame
purpofe. Make an oval Brafs<V\ffel,as T advifed before, with a hole bored rhorow
the bottom to which fiften a pipe that may arife up to the mrurhof the VeiTel, let
th< m u h of it he wide, like a trumpet or tunnel ; fo that the lon« neck of aGrurd-
G ats miy pals through the P:pe of it, ardthe Wide mouh of the VefTel under, may
bv degree rrceive the f'welling part- of the neck. Adipt a cover to this Vcffel that it
mav *-e rlc'e ttopt and lured a we laid he'ore. You mull make a Furnace on pur-
pofe for this ufc : for the fire mnft not be made in the bottom, but about the VclTel.

Natural Magick. Soo^io.

Theufeis this: Fi.ltheGIaiswithFIcwerscr
other things ; put in I'ome wire Lute- firings
a!ter them , that they any not fall oui again
when theGlafs isinv.rfed. Thrulf the ntck
thorow the Brais-Pipe: let theVvflfeicn the
Furnace, and fill it with Water round about
the ariiing Pipe: put on the Cover, and plaifter
it about : fet the Receiver under the Furnace
that ir may catch the dropping Water andOyl :
then kindie the fire about the fides of the Pot,
the violence of which , will elevate vapors cf
burning water ; which,beating againff the con-
cave pare of thcCover,will be reverberate upon
the bottom of the Gourd- Glafs,who-:e fervent
heat, will turn the Water and Oyl into vapor,
and drive it dewn into the Receiver. 1 will
fet down fome examples of thofe things which- 1 maae trial of my feif. As,

H«w to extratt Oyl out of %ofemary F lowers.
Fill the Retorts with the Le.ives and Flowers of Rofmary, and fetthem in the Brafs-
Furnace : the fire being kindled will force ont firft a Water, and afterward a yellow
Oyl, of a very (irong and fervenrodnr ; a few drops of which, I have made ule of
in great ficknr (Te« , and driving awiv cruel pains. Ycu may extract it eafier. if yotf
macerate the Flowers or Leaves in their own, or Fountain- water, for a week, la
the fame manner

0; I of Citron-Till

is extracted. When Ci'ronsare come to perfect ripenefs, (have rff the peal
wi h agrofs Steal-File: put the Filings into a Pot,and fet them to macerate ten days
in du ig,h6iog clofe (topt up:then accomodate them tothe Fur»ace,and kindle fire;an
Ovl mixt wi'h water diliils ouc,of a moft pleafanr lent. The fame may be done with
Orange and Le mm on- peal. In places where Flrwers and FiUirs are not to be had,
they cut eff i he tops of the Branches and Tindrils , and flice them into four-inch-
piece?, and io diftil them.

0)1 of %ofeS) and Citron-Flowers

is drawn after the fame fort ; a moft excellent Oyl,and of an admirable favour. But
becaule the Oyl is very hardly didioguifh^d from the Water , pour the Water into a
longGlafs with a narrow neck, and expolc it to the Sun being clofe ftopt : the Oyl
will by litt le and little, afcend to the top , which you muft gather off with a Feather"
or pour cut by inclining the Glals.

Sweet 0)1 of Berjantin

is to be made, by putting Benjamin into a Glafs- Retort ,and fitting it to the Furnace :
then encrcaie the fire without any fear of combulf ion, and you will obtain a fragrant
Oyl » to be ufed in precious Oymments. So Oyl of Storax, Calamite, and Labdanum,
and other Gums. Soaifo,

Oyl of Cbfak^, Amber , *nd Civet
ctnnot be e xra&ed more comodioufl/ by any Inftrument, Art, or Labour, then by
thcaforefaid j for they are of fothin alubftance, that they can hardly endure any
the let t heat, without contra&ing a fcurvy bafe ftink of burning; yet by this Artifice j
it may be drawn out very fafely. I fee nothing to the contrary , but that we may
extfatf 0;1 out of Spices alfo, very fecurely by the fame Artifice.

CHAP-

Of Vtmllation

Chap. X.

How to extratt Oyl cut of Gums,

THcre is a peculiar Extrs&ion of Oyl out of Gums : which, although they re-
quire the lame means almcli as the former, that is, the mixing them wuh Wi-
ter», and macerating them for many days, then putting them inro a Brats-pot , and
by a vehement fire, forcing cut the Oyl With the Water ; yet oth i eome out but its
a Imill quantity of an excellent odor, and free from (he (fink of the nre j as thus
theyulually deal with Opoponax,Ga.banom, ttorax, ando^r*. Bui they aredi-
ftilled alio another way , by Afh^s ; which doth r< quite the diligent attendance of1
the Work-man, and a lingular jodgemtnt and provident dcxtetity in him : for it is
rather an ingenious then painful Operation. I will let down an example,

How to extraB Oyl out of Ber'\amin.
Maccratethe Beojimin inRofe-witer; or Omitting that, put it into a Retort i fet the
Retorr into* Pot full of Sand.fo that it may HI i up the fptce between the fides of the
Pot,and bottom of the Retort : put the neck of it into a Recei cr with a wide belly s
kindle the fire by little and little ; and without any hatfe or violence of heat , let
the Water diHil : by and by increafe the fire, that the Oyl miy flow out ; yet not
too intenfely, for fear of burning ; but moc'erately between bo h : the oyly vapors
will Hraight fill all the Receiver ; then will they be condenled and turn into flakes,
like Wool ; and flicking to the fides and middle of the Glafs , ptefent you with a
pleafant fpeSacle : by and by they are turned into little bubbles , fo into Oyl,and
fall down to the bottom : keep the fire in the fame temper, until all the Feces arc
dried ;then remove it,' or fear of uftion.

Oyl of Star Ax

is drawn in the fame manner ; bur if the Storax be liquified, it will run with a gentle
fire: it is of a Htono and Quick od< t. Calan.ites require* a m<" re lively he , fuch as
was uied inBenjtmin, and a diligent attendance : for toomacn fire will caule adulti-
on in it.

Oyl of Ladanum,

Beat the Ladacum, and macerate it fifteen days in Aq4aViu, or Greek Wine : at
lealt ten : for the ion er it infufeth,the fooncr it will run into Oyl : draw it with a
gentle fire, it wU diliil out by drops after the Water.

0)1 of Turpentine

is extracted eafily ; for it floweth with a gem le fire : but beware in the operation,
that no fmoak do evaporate out of it • fi t it preft rrly will take fire, and with a mag-
netick vertue attract the flame,and carry it into the Ruort , where it will hardly be cx«
tinguifhed again : which will happen in the extraction of

Oyl of Olives, 4nd Linfced Oyl.
If you diftil common Qyl, it will hardly run ; yet en. reaGng the fire , it will come
out in fix hours : vcu mull be verv careful , that the Afhes and Pot do not wax too
hot: for if the Oyl within take fire, it will break thcV^ffels, and flieup, that it
can hardly be qur rehed , and retch the very cieling ; fo that it is beft to operate
upon Oyls in arched Room*. From hence Artificers of Fire-works , learned to
put Oyl in their Compofuions, beCaufc it quickly takcth fire , and is hardly cx-
tinguifhed,

Oo Cbape

%66 Natural Magic k. ©00^10.

Chap. XI.

Several Arts bjm to draw Oyleut of other tkwvs.

T He Nature of things being diverfe, do require divers ways of diftilling Oyl
out of them : for lomc being urged by fire, are lublimed, and will not ciflblve
intoLiqu r; ethers cannot endure the fire, but arc prefently burned. From which
variety of tempers, there mult arife alfo a variety in the manner of Extra£hon. I
will fee down feme examples of thefe^hai ingenious Artilis may not defpair to draw
Oyls out of any thing whatever.

0)1 ottt of Honey

is hard enough to be extracted : for it fwells up with the letft heat , and rifeth in
bubbles ; fo that it wi.l climbe up thorow the neck of the Retort, though it be
never fo long, into the Head , and fall down into the Receiver before it can be dil-
folved into Liquor cr Oyl. There are divers remedies found out to help this:
Take a GUI's with afhort wide ne^k, put your Honey into it, ard flop it in with Flax
quite over-laid two fingers thick. This will reprefs the Honey when it fwelleth
and froaths, and make it fink down again. Clear Water will drop out at firlt : buc
when it beginneth to be coloured, take away the Receiver , and fet another in the
place ; fokeep the Waters leverally. Or. put Homy into any Veflel,fo that it may
nil it ud four large fingers above t e bottom , and cover it clofe , as the manner is:
then dig a hole in the ground , and fet the Vcflel in , as far as the Honey arifcth :
then lute ic , and plailter it about four fingers above the Ground , and drie it well ;
kindle your Coals round about it ; then will the Honey grow hot , and by degrees
Mick to the Pot : but becau e the heat is above it,it cannot fwell up,buc very eafily di-
Hilleth Water and Oyl ; firlt, yellow, next reddifh,until the Hooey be turned into a
very Coal. There is another way, which may be performed by any Worn in: Pour
the Honey into a new Pipkin, and cover it ; dig a hole , and bury it abroad about a
cubit undei Ground ; thete let it putrifie for ten days : then take it up, and there
will fwim on the top of the Honey a ChryfUl Liquor, which you mult ftiain out, and
flop the Pipkin again, and bury ic as before. About a week after, view it again, and
ftiain out the over-flowing water ; fo the third and fourth time, until all the Honey
be converted into water , which you may fee by uncovering the Pipkin : diftilthe
Water according to Art, and ic will yield Water and Oyl eafily enough.

Ojl of Camphire.

B-it Champhire very frmll, and put it ioto common AquaFortu , made of Salt-
Peer, and Copprefs difiilled and clarified : fet the Pot in a Bath or Stove for half a
day, and you will fee a e'eer bright Oyl fwim on the top of the Water : incline the
Pot gently, and pour it off, and clarific it in a Retort ; fo fhall you have a beautiful,
thin and fwcet Oyl-

Oyl of Paper and %ags.

Rowl up your Paper like a Pyramide, as Grocers do, whenthev lap up any thing to
lay by, or fend ahroad : clip the edges even ; and taking hold of the top of it with a
pair of Pincers \ fet it on fire with a Candle; and while it flametb,bold it downward
over a '-road difh half a finger diftant frcm the bottom , fo that the lmoak may hard-
ly flieout : and Mill as the fire confumes the Paper, let your hand fink , that may al-
ways keep the fame diftance frcm the Difh. When it is quite burnt, you will finde
a yellow Oyl, flicking of burning, upon the bottom of the difh. Gather it up, and
refcrve it : it is excellent ro drive away freckles and pimples in womens faces, being
applied. Almofi in the fame manner

Oyl of Wheat,

Lay your Wheat plain uoon a Maible-Morter , being turned with the bottom

up-

Of T)imllationi i6f

upwards, and cover it wUb a plate of Iron, almoft red hot, and prefs it hard : cfe of
the fides there will be exprcfled an Oyl of a yellow colour, and (linking of burning*
which i< good for the lame purpoles ; that which is good to rctreCh decayed Spirits,
is prv pared another way.

Chap. XII.
How to cxtrttt 0)1 h) Descent.

THe way is common and vulvar to all ; for it is done by Uftuhtion : but the
Oyls are of a molt off .nfivc la > or, and can be ufed only in outwaro Meoi ines;
for they arc not to be taken inwardly. Prepare a Pipkin made of tough v. lay , and
able toendure fire, well vermih.d within, that there may be no ufpkion or running
out : let the bott< m be full of boles, let upon another earthen Pipkin, whole
mouth is large enough to receive the bottom of the upper Pipkin j lute ihcm clole to-
gether. Fill the Pipkin with flices of your Wood : cover it, and lute it. lhen
dig a hole, and let the Pipkins into it, and fling in the Earth about it , and i read ic
down clofe , and throw Sand over it two inche? thick : make a gentle fire jmt o-
ver the Pipkin ; which you mull encreafe by degrees , until the Pipkin have Hood
there a whole day. After this, remove the fire t and when the heat is fpent, dig up
the Pi kins , and you will finde the Oyl ftiained down into the lower ; which you
mult diltil again in a. Retort , to purifie it from filth. To add fomething to the for-
mer invention, I always do thus : ImakeaTreflel with Legs of two foot in length.
There mart a hole be bored in the Plank of it , to receive the neck of the Limbeck.
Upon the Treffcl fallen an Iron- plate to keen the VVod from burning. Un-
derneath , about the middle of the Feet, fallen a Board, upon which the Re-
ceiver may ftand, and meet with the neck of the inverfed Veflel i which being filled
with the materials to be Hilled , kindle a fire about it. Therefore if you would
extract

Oyl out of Lignum <jHaiacttm<,

fill it with the Duft of Lignum Guaiacum, and lute it clofe with Straw-Mortar, twice
cr thrice double : wncn u is dtied in the Sun, put into the neck , wire Strings, and
thruft it through the hole of the Trtflel into the mouth of the Receiver , and mor-
tar them together. Then kind e the fire on the Plate about the body of the Lim-
beck, at fome ditfan e at firll, and by degrees nigher and hotter: but let it rot be red
hot, until you think it be all burned : then remove the fire , and let it reft a While,
ontil it be cold, and ycu fhall finde in the lower Veflel a black ftinking burnt Oyl. In
this manner is Oyl drawn out of Juniper, Cyprefs, and Lignum Aloes t but in this
laft, you mull uic more Arc and diligence , and a gentle fire , becaufe it is mixed in
Oymments.

[Chap. XIII.
Of the Extraction of E fences,

\^VTE have delivered the feveral kindes of Extraction of Oyls * now we are
come to QuinttfTences , the Extraction of which, we will here de-
clare. The ParacelUans define aQuioteflence i© be the Form, or Spirit, or Ver-
tue , or Life, feparated from the drofs and elementary impurities of the Body. I
call it the Life , brcaufe it cannot be extracted out of the Bones, Flefh, Marrow^
Blood, and other Mt mbers : for wanting Life, they want alfo the Quintcffence. I
fay , Separated from elementary impurities , becaufe When the Quinteffcnce is ex-
tracted, there remaineth onlv amafs of Elements void of all power : for the Power,
VertOe, and M.dicinable qualities , are not the Elements , but in their EfTences,
which yet are E ement«,and contain the vcrtue of the Elements in them,in the htgh-
ell degree r for bring feparated from the grofnefs of their bodies,they become fpiritu-
i1, and prit forth their power more effectually and flrongly when they arc freed from

Oo 1 them!

2<f8 Natural Magic k. So^io.

them, then they could while they were clogged with the Elements. They are fimll
in bulk, but great in operation. The Hrength of Quinteffenccs, is not to be judged
by the degrees of their qualities, but of their operation : for thole which iooceftand
clearlieft root out a difcale, arc reckoned in the firit degree. So the cflcncc of J«-
niper, is reckoned the firft degree of operation , becaufe it curcth thcLeprofie by
purging the Blood oncly. The effence of Ambar in the fecond , becaufe it expcl-
lcth poyfon, by purging the Hcart,Lungs and Members. Antimony in the third, be-
caufe ( bclide the fcimer venues ) it alfo purgeth the Body. But Gold of it felf
alone, hath all thofe venues, and reneweth the Body. Wherefore the fourth de-
gree and greater! power, is attributed to it. Bet how to extract thefe Effences is
a very difficult work ; for they may be either Oyl, or Salt, or Water, or of Extracti-
on: fome, by Sublimation ; others, by Calcination ; others , by Vinegar, Wine,
Corrofive Waters , and fuch-like. So that feveral kinde of menttruums are to be
provided according to the nature and temper of things. I willfet down forae
Rules for the chuiing of proper menllruums. Let the menftrom be made of thofe
things which are mod agreeable to the things to be extracted , and as fimple as may
but : for Effences ousjht not to be compounded, mixed, or polluted with any thing ;
be pure, fimple and immaculate. But if there be a neceffity of adding fome thing
let them be teparated after extra&ion. If the Effence of any Metal be to be extra-
cted by Corrofives,feparatc the Salt from the Waters, after the work is done, and ufe
thofe Salts only, which will eafily be taken out again: Vitriol and Allom are very diffi-
cult to be feparated, by reafon of their earthy fnbftance. Moreover, ufe not a wttry
m:nftruum,for a wacry Effence ; nor an oyly menHruum,for an ©yly Effence : becaufe
being of like natures , they are not eafily leparated : but watry Menllruums for
ovlv Eflcnces : and fo on the contrary. I will fee before you fome examples in
Herb=, fat of Flefh,and other things ; by which you may learn of yonr felf how to
perform it in the rell. There are an infinite number of Effences, and almoft ma-
ny wav sot Extraction : of them , fome I fhall fhew unto you , whereof the firft
fhall be

How to extrtlt thtEJletiCe out of Civet) LMtukj, Amb*ryAn& other Spices*
Take Oyl of Ben, or of Almonds,mix Musk, Ambar,Cinnamon,and Zedoary, well
beaten in it : put it in a Glafs-bottle, and fee it in the Sun, or in Balaeo, ten dayes t
then ftrain from it the Dregs , and the Effence will be imbibed into the Oyl ; from
which you may icparate it in this manner: Take Aqits Vits, , and if it be an odori-
ferous Body, Fountain-water, three orfourtimes difiilled, mix with tbeaforefaid
Oyl, and Hit it about, and fo let it digeft for fix dayes: then diftil it over Cinders :
the hot Waier and the Effence will afcend, and the Oyl remain in the bottom with-
out any fent. Afterwards,diflil the Aqtta Vit^tnA the Effence in Balneo, until the
Water be evaporated, and the Effence fettle to the bottom in the formof an Oyl.
If you will do it with AquaVttz alone , flice the Roots of Zedoary, beat them and
iofufe them in fo much ±AqnA Vit*. as will cover them three fingers over in a Glafi
Bottle: let them ferment for ten dayes according to Art; then diftil them over
Cinders or in Sand , unt il nothing but Water run out ; yet have a care of burning
it. Take the diftilled Liquor, fet it in Balneo ; and with a gentle fire, let the Aqu*
VitA evaporate, and the Quioteffence of Zedoaay will fettle in the bottom , in* li-
quid form Next

To extraB Effence out of Vlefb,

Out of three Capons,! have oftentimes extracted an Effence in a fmall quantity , but
of great (irength and nutriment, wherewith I have recovered life andftrength to
fick perfons, who'e Stomacks were quite decayed , and they almoft dead for want of
ncurin naenr, having not been able to eat any things in three dayes. Take Chickens,
or Hens, or Capons; pluck them , and draw their Guts out ; beat them very well,
and let them boyl a whole day in a Glafs-Vcffel , clofeftopt , over warm Embers,
until the bone% and nefh, and all the fubflancc be diffolved into Liquor: then drain1
ft into another Vcffcl , through a Linen-cloth , and Sing away the Dregs : for the

Uf LHjtMatton*

26?

remaining Bones are fo bereft of Flefh,fent, or any other quality , that a Dcg will
not fo much as frncll co them ; which is an allured Argument that their goodn^fs is
boy led out. Pour the drained Liquor into a Giafs-bottle , and diflolve it into va-
por in a gentle Bath ; the Effer.ce will remain in the bottom, either hard, or loft, like
an Oyntment,as youpleafe,of a moft admirable vertue , and never fufficiently to be
commended.

To extratt Effenccs out of Salts.

Take Salt and calcine it according to Art . if it be volatile , burn it , and grinde it
very fmall : lay the Powder upon a Marble in a mojft Cellar , and fet a Pan under
it to receive it as it diflolveth : let it ferment in that pan for a month j t hen fet it
in Balneo, tnd with a gentle fire let it diftil : call away the fwect Water, that comes
from it, and fee that which remains in the bottom, to ferment another month, theri
diftil out the fwect Water, as before : and do this, while any lweet Water will run
from it : keep it over the fire until the moyfture be all conl'umed ; and then what re-
mains fettled in the bottom,is the Quinteflence of Salt j which will fcarcely arife to
two ounces out of a pound.

To cxtratt Sjfcftces out of Herbs.
Beat the Herbs, and fet them to ferment in dung for a month, in a convenient Glafs-
Bottle : then diftil them in Balneo. Again, fet them in dung for a week, and diftil
them in Balneo again ; and thus macerate them fo long as they will yield any Li-
quor: then pour the diftilled Water upon the Herbs again, and diftil them in this Cir-
culation for fix dayes,which will make it of a more lively colour : draw of the Water
by Balneum.and the Effencc muft then be expreflcd out in a prefs : ferment it in dung
for five days, and it will yield you the fent, colour and vermes of the Herbs in per-
fection. A way to extract

The tffence of Aqua Vita:.

It is a thing bragged of by thoufands ; but not effected by any. I will hotcinic
the deicription of it, which 1 have found out, together with a Friend of mine very
knowing in Experiments, by the affiftanceof Latins. Provide fome rich, generous,
old Wine , bury it in dung for two months , in large Bottles clofe flopt and luted,
that they may net have the leaft vent. The whole bufinefs dependeth on this : for
if this be not carefully look to , you willlofe both your celt, and ycur labour:
the month being paft , diftil it in an ordinary Stillatory , referve the Spirits by them-
felyes. The Dregs and Faces of the Wine muft be buried a^ain, and the
Spirits be diftilled out as before, and referved by themfelves* Diftil the Far-
ces until they fettle like Honey or Pitch : then pour on the phlegm upon them,
wafh them, and lay them to dry : then put them into a Porters, or Glafs makers, Fur-
nace, and with a vehement fire burn them into white Afhes : wet them with a little
Water, and fet them in the mouth of the Furnace, that they may be converted

into Salt. There is no better mark to know the
perfection of your work, then by cafling fome
of it on a red hot PI are of Iron : if it melt and
evaporate,it is well done ; othcrwifc,you muft
re&ifte it. Mix the Salt with water, and put it
into a Glafs bottle with a long ceckjftop it with
Cork and Parchment : then fet on the Head,
and kindle the fire ; the force of which , will
carry it up thorow all the ftoppage into the
Head, and there it fiicks to the fides like durt ;
the Water will remain quiet in the bottOirijj
in which you muft again mingle the Salt j
and fo by a continual Circulation , draw it out
of it felf, until it be divefted of allitsGrol-
nefs , and obtain a more thin and fubtile Ef-
fence.

Chap,

ijo Natural Magick. Sgo^io

Chap. XIV.
What Magift tries arey and the Sxtrattion of then*.

I Said, That Qjiinteflences do participate of the Nature of mixt Bodies . on the
contrary, a Magiftcry taketh i he temper of the Elements : io, that it neither
extradteth the Spirits nor the Tin&ure , bur a certain mean between both. A Ma-
giftery therefore , is what can be cxtra,Sied out of things without reparation of the
Elements. Eflences do oftentimes keep the colour of the Bodies out of which
they are extta&ed : Tinctures always do it , Magi cries never. The means of cx-
tra&in^ Magiftci ies,is various, according to the diver fuy ot Natures in things. 1 will
fet down tor an example and pattern

How to cxtrAtt a Magiftery of Ctmst Coral and Pearl.

Beat the Gemsanci fet them in igm reverber (ill they be calcined j mi* them
with an equal quantity of Salt -Peter , and diffolve them in Aqua Vtx* : pour out
that whLh is hq ihed , and let the remainder of the Powder be caicined better*
then lay ic in AqttaVttA a°ain , and do this till it be all diflolvcd. Set this water in
a hot Furnace, until the moyflure be all evaporated ; ar d what fhall remain in the
bottom, i« the Magiftery ©t Gems. Pearls mu i be d.flblved in Vinegar ; and if
poflftble , in juice of Lemmons. Yon may augment the ftrength of the Vinegar
by ihoie things , w iich , as I fhewed you in AqnaVtt* , do quicken the Vertue of
it, that is its own Salt, being diflolved and macerated in Balneo, or in Fimo, for a
month % then diftil the Menftruum , and in the bottom will remain the Magiftery of
Pearls.

Of Charges.

I will deliver to you the way that I ufe ; for the Paracelfians do either conceal it , ot
notknowit. Beat your Gum very fmall , and diffolve ic in t^qua V.t<t: whenitis
liquified, pour that out, and put in frtfh : let them macerate for a month ; and when
all is diflolved, mix the waters all together, and let ic evaporate over a fire; foin the
bottom will remain the Magiftery of Charabc. It willuke away fears in the Face,
and cure the Vertigo.

The Magijlcry of Cnaiacum

is an excellent Remedy againft the Pox , and is thus extracted. Take the (havings
cf Lignum Guaiacum,or the duftof it , Which Turners wrk off : for the file , by
continual Frication, heats ic , and exhaufteth the beft Spirits. Lay it in clarified
Acftta Va<t a whole day : when the water hath contra&ed a red colour , which will
be when ic hath !u:ked out the oylinels and fuMlance of it , (train it oat , and pour
in frefh. Then ftir ic about , until the water become coloured again ; ftrain that
out alto, and put in as much more , until the Water do not alter its colour any more.
Then ftrain itinapfefs, and diftil the juice through Linen-cloth ; ard then boy 1 ic
till the moyfturebeconfumed .- theOyl, or Gum, or Magiftery will remain of *
bright colour, and moft fwcet fent , which you would think impoffible to refide in
fuch Wood. You may extract the fame in a fliorter time j but it will not be of the
fame value t for if you lay the daft of Guaiacum in diftilled Fountain-water , boyl
it for half a day , ('rain it, diftil it thorow a cloth , and let the moiflare eva-
porate over a fire : the fame Gum will fettle in the bottom. Youmuftchufe
the moft Gummy Wood , which being held neer a Candle, will Iweat out akinde
of Oyl.

The Magiftcrj of Ltgnttm Aloei.

Take the (having of the Wood Worked off, as the former , with a Turners Wheel j
lay k in *A q»a Vn*. till it colour it ; then ftrain ic out , and lec the rnoyfture evapo-
rate

Of T>iJlillation. 271

rare over i fire • and in the bottom of the Giafs , you will finde * rjioft odoriferous
OyJ, cxcclLntto be u'.ed in fweet Comments.

The Afarifterj of Wtne, c tnmonly called the Spirit of Wive.
I will firftfet down the Parace.fian way of extracting it , and a'teiwirds my own;
b caufe wc cannot ufc that in our Countries. P^ur fome lit ong generous good
Wine into a Glafs-Bottle : fo that it may fill two parts of ir • itoK the mouth t-f ic
very exactly , either with He m tu Sigillam , or a ftrong Glue , which } fluli here-
after deicrihe unto you ; and to tec it in Fimo three cr four months , with an un-
intermitted fire. In the Winter fet it out in the Fioft for a month, and let it f re- zc s
the Spirit or Magiftery will retire into the C entre , became its fiery Eflence make: h
it uncapable of conglaciation. Break the Vcfl'd, caft away the congealed part, aod
relerve the liquid which being circulated in a Pelican for a men' h , will yield you
what youfeek for. My way is, to put the aforefaid Wine into a round Qlals-Veffei :
let it ferment in Fimo, conglaciate it, as I fhall fhew you ; and then breakin" the
Vcflel torefcrve the unfrozen liquor, in which you will finde a great desi of vertuc :
but if you defirc to have it better, you may perleft ic by Circulation.

Chap. XV.

How to extraft linftures,

ATinaure i* thepureft arid moft aftive part of a coloured body extracted ; the
noblert Eflence in a Compound. It is extracted out of Gems , Flowers,
Roots, Seed-, and fuch-like. It differeth from a Quint eflence in this , that it efpe-
cially draweth the colour of the Body from whence it is extracted ; and rc-quireth
Art, and Cunning, and diligent Attendance , more then labour. It is feparattd by
Diilillation , clear from any oylinefs or matter ; free from the commii.ion of
other Elements , or any impure fubltance ; it imitateth the clearneis and perfpi-
cuityof the Air: and in thatbrightnels rcprefents thecoiour of the Gem or Flowtr,
from whence it was drawn ; of ib pore a fubftance , that in many ycers it will not
have any dregs in it , but will continue in a perpetual cleernefs , fubtiity, and
firength. After the ext ration, the matter remainethdifcoloured, andulelefsfor
any tning. I will prefent tome examples to you how to extra& the Tincture out of
Metals and Flowers, &c.

How to draw out the Tirtfure of Gold.

If the Vermes of this never-iufficicntly-praifed Met al, were known, a? well for the
health of the Body, as the conveniency of mens living, it would he adored with a
greater devotion then it is already. The Apes of wife Nature, cunning inquirers
in Exoeriments , perceiving a certain Glory and Brightnels in Gold , and an at-
tractive or magnetick Vertue , (if I may fofay) which at firft fight draws every mans
eye to look upon its Majelty and Beauty, and tempts our hands to touch and handle
it , and even our mindes to defire it , fo that even Infants do rejoyce, and laugh at
the fight of it , and reach their arms out after it, and catch it , an i will bv no means
part from it ; prefently conjectured, that there was fome extraordinary Vertue in ic
for the health of man. Aftrologers , feeing it contend with the !>un in Beams,
Brightnefs and Glory , and to have a Prerogative of Majefty among Metals , like
the Sun among the ctars , do therefore fet it down for a Cordial , and a Deftroyer
of Melancholy, and all the ill Companions of it. Refiners fay , That the Elements
are foproportionably mixt intheCompofition of it , fo pure and compacted, that
they account it a moft exactly tempered body, and free from corruption : in which
there is nothing deficient nor fupcrfluous ; fo compact and clofe, that itwillnoc
one y endure the fire without confumption , but will become more bright and re-
fined by it. Ic will alfo lie under Ground thoufands of yeers without contracting
any tuft : neither will itfoul the hands like other Metals, or hath any ill fent or taftc
in it. Wherefore, fay they, being taken into our Bodies * it muft needs reduce the

zyz Natural Magick. 2>0O^io.

Elements and humors into a right temper , allay the exceflive , and fupply tbe de-
fective, takeaway all putrefaction, refrefh the natural heat, purge the blood , and
encreaie it ; and not onely cure all ficknefles,but make us healthy, long-lived , and
almott immortal. rKAimldtu^%ji''mmdtu , and other Phyfuians of the beft eftecm,
do attribute to Gold , a power to corroborate and ftrengthen the Heart , to dry up
fuperftuities and ill humors , to exhilarate and enliven the Spirits with its Splendor
and Beaury, to ftrengthen them with ks Solidity, temper them with its Equality, and
preferve them from all difeafes , and expel Excrements by its Weight : by which it
confitmeth Youth , refioreth Strength, retardeth old Age, corroborateth the prin-
cipal Parts, openeth the Urinary Veflels, and ail other pafl'agcs, being ftopt : cureth
the Falling-ficknefs, Madnefs, and Leprofie , ( for which caufe, Ojiander the Divine,
wore a Chain of Gold about his neck ) and alfo Melancholy , and is moft excel-
lent again ft Poyfon and Infections of the Plague. We will now examine whe-
rher the old or new Phyfitians knew the way to prepare it aright , to perform thefe
admirable Effects. Nicmder doth mightily cry up for an Antidote againft Poyfon,
Fountain-water in which Gold hath been quenched ; fuppofing , that it imparteth
fome of its Venue to the Water in the cxtin&ion. Diofcorides , Taulm t£ginetay
and Aetittt* affirm the fame. ^Avicenna faith, That the filings of it helpeth Melan-
choly , and is nfed alfo in Medicines for the fhedding of the Hair, in liquid Me-
dicines,or reduced into very fine Powder ; it is ufed in Collyriums, or Medicines for
the Eyes, for the pain and trembling of tbe Heart, and other paflions of the
Minde. Tlinj ufeth it burnt in an earthen Pipkin , with a treble quantity of Salt ;
whereby it wiil communicate its Vertue , but remain entire and untouched it felf.
He alio makes a Decoction of it wiih Honey. LfrUrpliut Ficinvt* faith , It is Of a
folid fubftance , and therefore muft be attenuated, that it may penetrate the Body.
£ui he is ignorant of the way of it , onely he advifetfj to give it in Cordial- waters,
being beaten ouc into thin Leaves ; for fo the Water will fuck out the Vertue of it:
or elfe by extinguHhing it in Wine. There are feme of Pliny's Scholars, who would
have the parts of a Hen laid in melted Gold, until it confume it felf ; for the parts of
a Hen are Poyfon to Gold. Wherefore Ficinut mixeth Leaf-Gold in Capon-broath.
iThus far the Grecians, Latines, and Arabians , have difcourfed concerning the Ex-
traction of the Tincture of Gold ; but they have erred far from the Truth : for
what a vanity is it to imagine, that quenching it in Water , can extract the Vertue of
it? or, that the heat Of Man's Body , though it be liquified and be made potable, can
draw any thing from it, when the force of the moft vehement fire is ineffectual, and
cannot work upon it ? I have made trial of it in a moft violent fire for the fpace of
three months , and at laft I found it nothing abated in weight, but much meliorated
in colour and goodnefs ; fo that the fire, which confumeth other things, doth make
this more perfect. How then can it be concocted by the heat of Man's Body,
which is fcarce able to concoct Bread ? And how can it impart its Vertue by Ex-
tinction , when neither A fit* Vita , nor any ftrong Waters can alter the colour or
taiteof it ? 1 will fet down what 1 have feen. The later learned Men, and curious
I:*quirets into Nature, affirm, That the Magiftery, Secret and Quinteffence of Gold,
cocfifteth ia the Tincture : fo that the Vertue, Power, Life and Efficacy of it , re-
lldeth in the Colour. Wherefore it will be no frhall Secret to know how to ex-
tract tke Tincture ; no fmall labor and pains : for thofe who pretend to fpeakof it,
do it fo intricately and obfeurely , that they rather feem to ©bfeure it, or not to un-
derhand it, then to difcovcr or teach it. Know therefore , that the Tincture
canuot be extracted, but by perfectly diffolving it in Strong Waters ; and that ic
cannot be diffolved, as the work requireth, in common Aqua Fortu, or Royal Wa-
ters , becaufe thecorrofive Salts in them, are not perfectly and abfolutely diffolved
into Water . Wherefore you muft learn by continual folution and immiftion , fo to
diftil them, that the whole fubftance of the Salt may be melted; which muft be done
by reiterating the Operation. I have informed you, what Salts are eafie to be fcpa-
rated, the which muft onely be ufed in this Work. After perfect folution , caft in
that Menftruum or Water , which I have often mentioned for the Extraction of Ef-
fences or Colors. I have wkh great joy beheld it attract to itTelf thcGolden,Ycllow,

or

Of Distillation.

or Rcd-co'oar, and a white duft fettle down to the bottom. We muft then Sepa-
rate me Salt from the Mcnftruum : difloive it, and let the liquor evaporate away,
and there will remain true potable Gold, the right Tincture , and that great Arca-
num of Philoiorhers , difguikd wich to many Riddles ; fo thin, that it will
cafily penetrate the Body, and perform thole wonders, which Antiquity could only
prorate.

Twtture of Rofes.

Cut Red Rofe- Leaves with a pair of Shears into fmail piecesjlay them in AquaVita^
and they will prelcntly dye it with a fanguine color. After three hours, change thofc
Leaves , and put in frefh ones , until the water become very much coloured : then
ftrain it out, and let the Liquor evaporate quite away, and in the bottom will remain
the Tin&ure of Rotes. The fame may be done with Clove-Gilliflowers. We
may alio doit another more perfect way, without AqnaVita, Fill a wide-mou'hed
Glah, with Red-Role- Leaves : fct it into a Leaden- Limbeck , and till ic wich other
Rofes : then let on the Head, and kindle the fire; whereupon the vapours will arife,
and fall into the Glafs, of a fanguine-colour. This is a new way of extracting Tin-
ctures, which may be ufed in ^py coloured Flowers. So the

TinBures of LMarigoldsy Violets^ Buglofi, and Succory-Flowers,

If you exttact them the former way, the Tincture of Marygolds will be yellow j
of Buy ofs , Violets, and Succory- Flowers , Red ; becaufe the colours of thole
Flowers , is but thin and l'uperhciary : fo that it expireth with a little heat , and is
red underneath.

Tittlftre of Orange Flowers of an excellent feni.

Cut the Orange-Flowers into fmall pieces, macerate them in Aqua Vita \ and
when the Water is turned yellow, and Flowers have lort their lent, change them, and
put in frefh, until the Water become very fweer, and well-coloured, and lomewhat
thick : then ' rain it, and let it evaporate : it will leave behinde it a Tincture > en-
riched with the fen: and venues of the Flower . I

Tin&ure of Coral,

Beat the Coral to Powder, and with a vehement fire turn it into Salt ; add an equal
qnaotity of Salt-P ter to it : then extract the Salt with Aqtta Vtt* , and it will bring
out wich it, the Tincture of a wonderful vcrtue.

Chap. XVI.
How to extraSl Salts, '

SAlts do retain thegreatef* part of the Verttie of thofe things , from whence they
are extracted ; and therefore are ufed to feafon the fick perfons meat : and
ocherways , became they have a penetrative quality. It was a great Que) ion a-
roooe the Ancient s , Whether Salts retained the vcrtue of the things ; or, whether
ihey lo \ lome in the fire, and acquired others : but it is row manifefted by a thoufand
Experiment? , that the venues do not onely remain in them, but are made quicker and
more efficacious.

Salt of Lemmovs,

a jod f *- uT* ion ; wv.ni-m*j -> > r til f> ' . * 0*

DiPill the Le mmm* with their Peels and Juice : referve the Water, anddrythe
reft in the Sun, if the feafon permit it j or in an Oven. Put them in a Pot clofe luted*
and ca<cine it in igne rtvtrberatior,is. Then difloive the Powder in the Water , and
boyl them in a perfect Lye : cleanfe it with a Feather, that the Dregs may
ferrle tothe bottom : putifie it, ard let the Liquor evaporate: fothc Salt will
remain in the bottom ; which is moft excellent to break the Stone in the Blad-
der.

P p Salt

174, Natural Magick. BqoJ^iq.

Salt of Pcllitory of Sfain.

Dry the Roots, and burn k in a clofe lured pot , for three dayes, until it be re-
duced two white Afhes : pour on its own Menftruum : diftil it, and calcine it again ;
fo the third time : then cleanfc it with a Feather , boyl it in an earthen vemifhed
Pipkin, with the white of an Egg to clarifie the Salt : at length, a white grained Salt
will appear.

Salt of Cumine*

Put the Roots, Leaves, and Flowers in a clofe luted Veffel , and dry them, and put
them into a Potters Furnace, till they be burned to Arties. In the mean while,
difiil the Roots, Leaves and Flowers ; or, if you pleafe, make a decoction of them ;
and of that decoction, a fharp Lye : which, being ftrained very clean through a Li-
nen-doth three or four limes , muff be boyled to a Salt in a Glafs- Vtffel. If you
defire it very fine and white, ftrow the Salt upon a Marble, and fet it in a moift place
with a pan underneath to receive it as it diffolveth : cleanfe the filth ftill away j and
do this three times, until it become of a Chryftal colour ;fo refexve. In this manner
Sal Alchalt is made.

Of Saxifrage,

It is made like the former : if you feafon your meat with it , it protecteth from all
dargerof poyfoned bread or meat ; conferveth from the contagion of peflrlentiai
and infectious Air. The fame may be extracted out of other Alexipharmacal Bo-
dies, which Princes may ufe at meals, inftead of ordinary Salt ; for they fcarce differ
in tafte. A Salt may be made of Thapfia , very good to remove the Stone in the
Bladder or Kidneys, and to diffolve the Tartar, or vifcous Concrefcency ; to kill the
Worms, and purge the Blood ; to provoke fwtatby being often taken , and is ad-
mirable in Venereal Difeafes. The Salt of Pimpernel, being taken three days,anii
the third month,for a mans whole life-time, fecureth him from the Dropfie,Pihifickj
and Apoplexy. It alfo preferveth from Jnft&ionand pefiiferous Air, ard helpeth
digetiiwn in a weak Stcmack. But it is to be oblerved, That rhefe Salts mutt not be
eaten a:very day , lei* they become too familiar to the Stcmack , and be take© far
food. • There may be a Salt alfo extracted out of the filings of Lignum Guaiacum,
which is excellent in the French Pox, being taken as the former. By thefe you may
karri to make other Salts.

Chap. XVII.
Of Elixirs.

ELixirs are the Confervators of Bodies in the fame condition wherein they finde
them : for their Venue is to preferve from corruption, not by meliorating
their ltate,but by continuing it { and if by accident, they cure^ny Difeafes, it is by
reaion of their tenuity. They have a double Venue to prcferve from ficknel's , and
continue health , not onely in Men, but to prcferve Plants alfo. They imitate the
qualities of Balfam, and rcfort chiefly to the Heart, Brain, and principal Paw, Where
the Spirits refide. There are three kinds of Elixirs ; of Metals, of Gems, ind bf
Plants; as of Roots, Herbs. Flowers, Seeds, Woods, Gums, and iuch-like. An Elix*
diffcreth from Eflences,Tinc>ures, and the reft ; becaufe it is compounded of many
things void of fatnefs : therefore it cannot be an Oyl,becaufe it wanteth perfpicuity
and clearnefs ; not an Efl'ence , becaufe it is a Compound ; not a Tincture , but a
mean between all, and of a cenfifrence mofl like to Water : whence it had its name
ab eliquefco9to be diffolved or liquified.

To make Elixir of Timptrnel.
Dig up » he Roots in a convenient time , and macerate them in their Water, putting
fc me weight on.them to deprefs them under Water : when the Flowers are blown,
gather them, and macerate them in the fame manner , in a peculiar Veffel : the fame

mult

Of Diflillation. zji

muft be dooe with the Seeds : Then put them in an A limbeck , and dr?w out the
Water and Oyl, until the Faeces remain dry : then ieparate the Oyl (tt m tht Wa-
ter, and circulate it in a Pelican for two months : then take it out , and rcferve it tor
your ule.

e/4» Sltxir of many things.

Many Compofitions of Elixir, are carried about , which are erroneous and falfe to
my knowledge, and of lo hard a work to extraft the Oyl and Water , that you will
more probably iofe your time and colt , then gain any good by them : for they are
made for pomp and magnificence , rather then for ihe benefit of man. Befides , I
have found them often fail in the performance of what was promiied from them, and
cannot be made according to thofe deicriptions : But here I will deliver one to you
which will perform far more then is promiied. Take the Flowers of Sage , Origa-
num, Mugwort, Savory, Elder, Sage-Leaves, white Mint, Rolemary, Bafil, Marjoram,
Peniroyal, Rofe-buds , the Roots of Betony,Pdhtory, Snake- weed, white Thiltle,
ArMolochy, Elder, Cretan- Ditany, Currant*, Pine-Apples, Dates, Citron-Pill, of
each an ounce and a half ; Ginger, Cloves, Nutmeg*, Zedoary, GalaDgai, white and
long Pepper, Juniper-berries , Spikenard, Mace , Cubebs , Parflsy-ieed, Cardo-
moms, Cinnamon, Stxchados, Germander, Granes, Role of Jerulalem,Doronicum,
Ammoniac, Opoponax, Spodium, Scharinamhus, Bdellium, Mummy, Sagapenum,
Champhire , Maftick, Frankincenfe, Aloes, Powder of Ebony, Bole-Armenick,
Treacle, Musk, Galls, Mithridate, Lignum Aloes and Saffron,of each three drachms ;
of clarified Sugar , thirteen pounds ; of Honey two. I exclude Pearl , Rubies,
Jacinths, Saphires, Emeraulds and Leaf-Gold, from the Compofit ion ; becaufe, as
I have proved before, they have no operation ; efpecially , thus exhibited : and
th erefore are ufed in Medicines by none but ignorant Phyfitians. Reduce all thefe
into Powder, and put them into a Pelican or blinde Alimbeck,with twelve pound of
AquxVttA , very well clarified , as though the whole work depended on it : let ic
circulate in Balneo a whole month : take off the yellcw Oyl or Quinteflcnce of
all, with a silver- Spoon, and add to it a drachm of Musk and Amber , and fet if by
for your ufe in a Glafs- bottle dofe llopt. Diftil the remainder , and ir will . fford t
yellow cleer water: but you cannot extract the Oyl without a (link of burning.
1 have very exa&ly extracted Oyl of Gum*, Roots and Seeds of the forementioned :
and mixing them together, have effe&ed ftrange things with them. Moll of 'heir
operations areagainll Poyfons, andPetiilential Contagions . efpecially , thole that
are apt to fcize on the Spirits ; for a drop of it , being anoynted on the Lips of
Noftrils, rcvivcth the Soul, and keepeth it in perfect Senfes at leaft fix hours.

Chap. XVIII.

Of a Clyffwy and how it is made*

'J'Hat there may nothing be omitted, I will now fhew what a Clyflus is , and how
it may be made. ACljflusis theExtra&ion of the Spirits of every part of a
Plant, united in one common entity. There are in a Plant, the Root, Leaf, Flower,
Fruit and Seed, and in every one of thefe parts , there is a peculiar Nature, The
Operation is thus : Dig the Roots when they are full of juice,the Leaves when they
are frefti and green, the Flowers when they are blown, the Frmr and Seeds in their
due time. Extract the Spirits or Eflence- Dut of all thefe bv DilHllation , Macera-
tion or Calcination , or any ether of the former wayes. But when they are all ex-
tracted federally, one in the form of Oyl, another of Salt or Liquor ; then mix them
all together , fo that they may be conjoyned and united in one body, which is called
a Ch flu«. Seme mix them in Diftillation in Veflels made for the purpofe in this
manner: They put the Water , Salt and Oyl in three feveral Curbides of equal
height and bignefs ; and tying their three necks together , and put them into one
common Head, which may be fit to receive them all , clofe them , lute them , and
kindle the fire under. The heat will elevate the thinneft fubftancc in all of thenar

P p 2 which

%y6 Natural Mag ick. 2?00^io.

which will meet and mix in the Head , and run down by the &ofc, or Spout, into
the Receiver : fo fet them by for ufe. This Congregation of Eflences , doth
penetrate and fearch all the remote paffages of the Body, and is veryuiefulin

Phyfick.

Chap. XIX.
How to get Oyl out of Salts.

I Have declared many ways of extracting Oyl , now I will (hew how to draw it
out of Salts, that they may be more peuetrative,and work more powerfully,which
can be done no other way. They fcem to have fome kinde of fat in them, yet will
not burn ; fo that it cannot be called a perfect Oyl.

How to extratt Oyl of Tartar.
Barn the Tartar, and reduce it into a Salt, as I (hewed before : then lay it on a Mar-
ble in a moyrt place, and in a few days it will turn to Oyl, and run down into a di(h>
which you muff fet underneath to receive it. Thus you may eafiiy make it into Salt :
Beat the Tartar into Powder, and mix an equal quantity of Salt-Peter with it: when
they are mixt in Iron Mortar, fee them in the fire, until they be quite burned : grind
the remaining Faeces, and diffolve them in a Lye, ftrain it, and let the Lye evaporate
away, and the Salt will fettle to the bottom : then boyl fome Eggs hard , take
out ehe yelks , and fill up their place with Salt , and in a little time it will dhTolvc
into Oyl.

Oyl of Sal Sodx.

Diffolve the Salt in Water, and ftrain it through a cloth, then dry it, lay it on a Mar-
ble, and fet it in a rnoyft place, and it will run down in an Oyl. So

the famous Oyl of Tslk^
is extracted onely by the vehement heat of fire : yet I knew not at firft what it was
ufeful for. But I perceive it is much accounted of by women in their Fucus. Bear
it into fine Powder in an Iron-Morter, and put it into a very ftrong thick Pot, faften
the cover on with wire , plaifier it with Potters Clay, and fet it in the Sun for three
days : then thruft it into a Potters Furnace where the flames are moft violent. After
ihrec or four days, take it out , break open the Pot . and if you finde it not fuffici-
ently calcined, make it up, and fet it in again. When it is burned perfe&ly white,
lay it on a Marbk,and place it in a moyft room,or in a hole dug in the earth: and there
let it ftand for a good while , until it diffolve into Oyl ; then rcferve it in a Glafs-
bottle. So alio is made

%ed Oyl of Sulphur.

Grinde live Sulphur into a fmall Powder , and mix it with an equal quantity of the
former Oyl of Tartar : boyl it three hours in a Glafs-bortlej and when it is diffolved,
drain it through a Lionen-cloth into another Glafs, and fet it over a Gentle fire, till
ir thicken like clotted blood, and fo dry. Then powder it, and lay it on a Marble in
a motft Cellar ; there it will diffolve, and run down into the under-placed difli. Sec
this Liquor , being firft ftrained thorow a cloth in a Glafs-bottlc over warm Afhes,
until the moyfture be confumed, and there will remain a red Oyl of Sulphur.

Oyl of iMyrrh.

Boyl fome Eggs hard, cut them in the middle, take out the yelks, and fill their places
with Myrrh , powdered and feirced : lay them in an earthen Pan upon longcrofs-
fticks, that the Eggs may not imbibe the Oyl again , and (hut them in a aaoift Cellar ;
fo the Oyl will drop down into the Pan.

CHAP.

Of TUftillation.

Chap. XX.

Of AquaFortis.

NOw T will recite thofe Difiillations, which draw our neither Water nor Oyl.luc
a midJle between both : tor ihe terrene parts are screed up, turned incc Wa-
ter by the veheraency of the fire : from whence r hey do acquire Jo great a heat, that
cor'rodc and burn molt violently. They are extracted oncly in igne rcverbaaitor.u^
and with great care and labour.

How to draw Aqua Fortis, or Oyl, out of SJt.
It b a piece of Art difcovered to very few. Take Pit-Salt, put into a Glafs-Retort>
treble luted over,and dried : fetit in tone reverbtrzttcuii, where the flame- ao ii rug-
glemott violently : the fitft time ycu wtllgei but little moyfiure. Break the Re-
tort, and remove the Faces into another , and pour the cxtra$ed Water into ihtm,
and diiiill them again : the iecond time thou wilt get more. Do the i« me a third
time, and fo to the tenth, until the Salt be all turned into Liquor , which is a molt
precious jewel and worth thy labor. Some quench hot Bricks in the liquified Salt,
and then dihil them with a molt intenfe fire, as in Oyl of Bricks.

A Water fur the Separation of Silvsr.

Take Salt-Peter and Alem in rq<ial quantity, beat them in a Morter, and pur rhem
into a Giaf<- Retort luted over three dcuble : when it is well dried , let it in the
circulating hre , that is, which is reverberated on the top and below tco. Step
it dofe , and let a large Receiver under it : for if it be too narrrw, the (irong Spi-
rits will breakout with a great tcur.ee, crack theVcflel, and fiu: rare your la-
bour. Diltil it fix hours : if you calcine the Alcme-firc , the Water will be
ftrongcr.

A ffAterfor Separation of (jold.

Mix with the equal parts of Salt-Peter and Alcm, as much Vitriol , and diftil ir , as
befcre : there will proceed a Watet fo f:ircng,that ir will e\en ccrrode the ir£turc
of Gold. Wherefore, if this letm too violent, take nine pounds of the former Salt*-,
being diflolvedir VV-ster, and two ounces of Sal / n.mor.iacum : when they arc
melted, let ibf-mwc days ir Fimo, and with hot Afhe< you may diHil a VVaier ihat
will corrode Gold. If you rtfurdtht Water upon the Feezes , let them macerate
and ditiil it again, the Water will be much flrongec,

How to purge the phlegm from thefe fVters,
witbour which they are of no force : caft a little Silver into a little cf thicVVa-
ter> which, being overcharged with phlegm, will net ccrrcde it. But Jet ic
to heat over the fire, and ir Will prefertly do it : pcur all rhi Water ir*o
another Pot, and leave the Feces behinde in the former : fo the Water wU
be clarified.

Oyl of Vitriol.

DivTolve Vitriol in an earthen Pan with a wide mouth 5 let the phlegm evaporate^
then etcre-'e >he firr and burn it, til! it be all fed. ard the fourth part be cotlrmc d„
Put it into a Glafs-Retcrt, lured all overthrice double, and well dried, and let in tg-
xe reverter at in* if, ccntituallv auj rr.errirg the fire, and continuing it for threeday?,
until the Vtflel melt, znd an Oyl drop cut without any VVater. Every three pounds
will i ield one cunce cf Oyl. Put it into a Glals-bottle,and ftt it in hot Embersthac
the Water, if any Vein theCyl,rhay evaporate; for fo it will be of greater flrengihi
The fign cf a perfect extraction, is, if it make a piece of Weed, being cali into it,
fmcak,as if k burned it.

Oyl of Sulphur i

This

iy% Natural Magick. noo^io.

This is the proper way to extract O/l of Sulphur : Take a Glafs with a large mouth
in the form of a Bell , and hang it up by a wire : place a large Receiver under ir,
that it may catch the O/l, as it droppeth out of the Beli. In the middle between
theie, hang an earthen Vcffel full or Suiphur: kindle the fire, and make theSul-
phurrum; the fmoak of which, afcendeth up into the Bell , condenieth it feif,
and fads down in an cyly fubftance. When the Sulphur is coniumed , put in
more, until you have the quantity of O/l which you defire. There is alfo another
way to extraft it in a. greater quantity : Prepare a great Glafs-Receiver , fuch as I
defcribed in the Extraction of O/l of Tartar, and Aqua For lis : cut a hole tho-
row it with an Emerauld , and indent the edges of ft , that the fmoak may pafs
out : let this upon an earthen Pan , in which you burn the Sulphur. Above thi -,
fet another Vcffel of a larger fize , fo that it may be about a handful diftant
from the fir 1^ : cut the edges of the hole in deeper notches,thatthe vapor afcending
thorow the fir It, and circulating about the fecond , may diltil out of both ; fo you
may add a third and fourth. Pour this Oyl into another Glafs, and let the
phlegm evaporate over hoi Embers ; it will become of that flrength , that it will
difloive Silver : and I may fay , Gold alfo , if h be rightly made. The fume of
Sulphur is congealed in Sal Ammoniacttm : for I have gathered it in the Mountains
of Campania, and condenfed it into Salt , nothing at all differing from that
which is brought out of the Eaftern Countries. Thus Sal Ammoniac™ , which
hath fo long lain unknown, is difcovercd in cur own Country, and is nothing
but Salt of Sulphur, and this Oyl is the Water of Sal tsimm.mac , or Salt of
Sulphur. I would fain know how Learned Men do approve this my Invenri-
on. 1 take the Earth , thorow which the fmoak of Sulphur hath arifen , and dif*
folve it in warm Water, and purge it thorow a hanging Receptacle defcribed before :
then 1 mike the Water evaporate ; and fo finde a Salt nothing different, as I hope,
from Ammoniacum.

Chap. XXf,
Of the Separatist! of the Elements'

IN every Compound, there are four Elements ; but for the moft parr, one is pre-
dcminant , the rclt are dull and unprofitable. Hence , when we Ipeak of fe-
paraiing the Elements of aCompound, we mean the feparating that predominant
one. In the Water- Lilly , the Element of Water is chief ; Air , Earth and Fire
ire in lit, but in a fmall proportion. Hence there is but a fmall quantity of heat
and diinefs in it, becaufe Water overwhelms them all. The fame muftbeun-
detftood in other things alio. But do cot think, that we intend by the repara-
tion of the Elements, to divide them abfolutely . the Air from the Water , and
the Watet from the Fire and Earth ; but ouely by a certain fimilitude , as what is
hotter then the reit, we call Fire } the moiiler, Warer. Stones participate more
of Earth; Woods, of Fire ■, Herbs, of Water. We account thofe Airy, which
fill the Vtffcls and Receivers, and eafily burft them, and fo flie our. When the Ele-
ments are thus feparated,they may afterwards be purified and attenuated.The manner
of c xtrading them, is various according to the diverfity of natural things ; forfome
oiufi be calcined: lbme. fublimated , others dilHlled. I will fet down fome ex-
amples.

How to fepxrate the Elements of Metals,

Liy your Metal in Aqua FortU , as I {hewed before , till it be diflblved : then
draw out the Aqua Fortuby a Bath , and pour it on again , and fo again, until
ir be turned into an Oyl of a light Red, or Ruby-Colour. Pour two parts of Aqua
Fcrtii unto the Oyl , and macerate them in a Glafs in Fmo for a month : then diltil
them on Embers till the Water be all drawn out , which you mult take and ftill *-
gain in Balneo , until it afcend • fo will you have two Elements. BytheBath the

Of T>iJlillatiori. 2J$

Air is elevated , the Water and Earth remain in the bottom : the Fire continueth
in the botrom of the former Vvflel ; for it is of a fiery fubiiance : this , Nature^
and the Affufion of Waier, and the Diftjllation in Baineo will reduce into an Oyl
again : in which you mull correct the Fire , and it will be perfect. You may lay
Metal in Ember? , then by degrees encrcafe the fire : the Water will fin j gently
afcend, next the Earth. In silver, the firli Oyl is hlewifh , and in perfe£t repara-
tion, lculeth to the bottcm , and the Waier afcendeth ; but in Baineo, the Ele-
ments cf Fire and Earth : for vhe fubiiance of it is cold and moi(i : in Baineo the
Elements of Fire and Earth remain ; fir (i trie Earth will ccme out , afterwards the
Fire. Soot fin, the firft OA is yctlc w ; in Baineo, the Air will remain in the
bonom, the Fire, Earth and Water will afcend : which is proper orely to 1 in ; for
in no otner M.tal, the Air remaineth lad j bat in Tin, the Water is fir It elevated 5
next the Fire; Ian ot all, the Ear h. Of horns made a dark ruddifh Oyl ; Of Quick*
filver, a whire O I : the Fire iculeth to ibe bottom : the Earth and Water are elec
vatcd : and lo of the reft.

How to feparate the Elements in Herbs,

In Herbs there is a'wayes one E:ement which reigneth in chief. Take the Leaves
of Sage, bruile them, macerate them in Ftmo , and then difiil them : the Fire will
firft afcend, until the colours be changed; next the Water ; then a part of the
Earth: the Other part will remain ib the bottom, &ot being volatile, but fixed;
Set the VVatcr in the S^n fixdayes, then put it in Baineo : the Water will
afcend firft, then the colour will alter ; and the Fire afcendeth next , till the laftc
be changed : at length , a part of the Earth , the reft being mix'd with the Air,
tarrieth behinde in the Bottom. In Water-Plams, the Air arifeth firft ; nextthc
Water and Fire.

How to jinde out the Vertutsof Plants.

There are no lirrr Scare hers out of the Venues of the Plants, then our Ha»ds
andEves; theTaltei more fallible : for, if in Diftillation , the hott eft parts eva-
pcraiehrft, wr may <xr oude , that it cor fifteth of hot and thin parts : andfoof
the reft. Ytu may eafily krrw by the teparation of the Ek meets , whether*
Plarr tatcmt/tcf \ ht , or Water, or Earth, by weighing the Pant fir^ : then
sfttrwsrc, when if e Water ano Oyl are ex'r*£red, weighing the F<xces , and by
their proportion vtu rrav jucpe cf the degrees of each Elemenr in the Compofi-
tioncf it, arc r- m thtne of their Qualities. But the narrow limits of this
Book w ill not five me leave to expatia.t tarthcr on this Subject. Wherefore I will
leave the D.-lcourie cf it to a particular I reatife, which I intend tofet out at large on
thi, matter.

How to extratt Gum out of Tlants.

There are fome Plants cut of which we may extract Gum : fome Plants,! fay, be*
cauie many have rcre in th«m, ard nothipg can give mere then it hath. Fen-
nel, and ail other kind** ot ir, Opopcnax, and fuch-like Heibs are full of ir. Na*
ture i-> the bcftDue6>cr in exriaciirgthtm : for when the Sun fhines very hot , and
the Stalks of tide P arts are iwelled with fap , by reafon of the continual en-
creak of their juke ; they cpen them'eJves in little clefts , like a Woman whenhef
labcur arproacreth ; ard ihecce c oth the Plant bring forth , as it were in travel^
thar Nob e t'curr , which partly by the heat of the Sun , partly,. by a na-
tural Irclinaticn grews clitrmy, and is condenfed imoahard Body. Hence we
may learn

How to extratt Gum out ofOpoj>9»ax4

In the crrrmer colP ice gather the Roots in the night-time, that the heat of the Sun
oraytr r exfacft th< rrcyf nrc ; (lice it long way es, and put it into a well vernifhed
earthen Pipkin : then let it upfide down in a descending Furnace with a Receiver

under-

z8o Natural Magick. Sgo^io.

underneath , to catch the falling-Liquor : make a Fire about the upper part of the
V^flel, which will drive down a Noble Gum,which mult be purred in other VclTcls,
and miv be meliorated by Di illation. The fame may be fff did en Sagapene,
w.iole Roots mult be gathered at the fame time , and fliced ; and being put into a
V ffel with a gentle fire, will drop out a glutinous Liquor into the Receiver; whith>
being clarified, will harden like Gum, and is kept for McdLinal ulcs.

« Hew to extratt Cjnm out of Fennel*

Gather the ftalks of Fennel, when it is in its vigor, and the Flowers begin to blow,
about the full of the Moon j for then they are more fucculent : flice them im o pieces
of a hand-long, and put them into a Glafs-Tub of a hand in widened, and a handful
and a haif in length : fill it full, and fet the bottom of it , being full of little holes,
into a Tunnel fit to receive it , and the lower part of the Tunnel into a Receiver.
Then make a gentle fire about the Tub at a handful diftancc , which may beat upon
the ftalkes on every fide with its heat, like the Sun-beams. The Tub thu< growing
hot,will exclude fom; drops ; which, flying from the violence of the hcat,iTde down
thorow the holes of the bottom into the Tunnel, and from thence into the Receiver,
where they will condenfe into Gum , participating of the Nature of Fennel, ot no
contemptible vertucs.

r, r:

"W* Jrtfe •f* *A* A'* •A'* •A'* '■'A'" «*"*» — A* • A1* "A1* —A'-'

THE

THE

ELEVENTH BO

O F

Natural Magick :

Of Perfuming.

Thi 'Proem i.

AFter Diflillation,we proceed to Unguents and fweet fineRs: it is an Art next ofkjn to
the other ; for it provides odors oj the fame things, compounds and mingles Unguent s,
that they may Jend forth pleafant fents every r»*y* very far. "This Art is Noble, arAmuch
fet by, by Kings and great iJMen. For it teacheth to makj Waters, Oyls, ¥ owners, March'
fanes, Fumes ; and to make fweet S^tns that jhall hold their fent a long time ; and may
bs bought for little money : not the common and ordinary way , but fnch as are rare ^and
known to very few.

Chap. L

Of perfuming Waters.

Have in the former Book (hewed how fweet Waters may be
diftilled cur of Flowers and other things , as the place de-
dicated to Diftillation did require : here new J will teach
how to compound fweet Waters and Flowers, that may caft
forth odoriferous fents : as firft,

To make a mofl fweet perfumed Water.
Take three pound of Dama k Rofes, as much of Musk and
Red-Rofes, two of the Flowers of Orange, as manv of Myr-
tle, half a pound of Garden-Claver , an ounce and a half of Cloves , three Nut-
megs, ten Liilies : put ail thefe in an Alimbeck, in the note of which you muft fa' en
of Musk three parts , of Amber one, ©f Civet half a one , tied up together in x
clout : and put the Nofe into the Receiver, and tie them clofe with a cloth dip'd in
Bran and the white of an Bgg mixed : fet a gentle fixe under it , until it be all di-
alled.

Another.

Take two pound of Rofc-water , of Lavender half one , of Cretan-Wine thir-
teen drachms . of the Flowers of Gilliflowcrs, Rofes, Rofemary, Jafmine, the
Leaves of Marjoram , wilde Betony , Savory , Fennel , and Bafil gentle , half a
pound i an ounce of Lemmon-peel , a drachm of Cinnamon , Benjamin, Storax
and Nurmegs : mix them , and put them in aGlafs , and fet them out in the Sun
for four dayes then diftil them with a gentle fire : and nnlefs you put Musk in the
Nofeof the A limbeck, tie it up in a rag, hang it by a thread in the Water , whilft it
ftandeih funning for a month. Set it in the Sun,to take away the fcurvy favor of the
diftillirg, if by chance it conceive any.

Aqua'Hjnfa.

Take four pound of Rofe-watcr , two of Orange-Flowers , one of Myrtle , three

CLq onnce?

28!

O K

l8i Natural Magick. Hoo^ ii.

ounces of fweet Trifoi], one of Lavender : add tothefe , two ounces of Benjamin,
one of Storax,the quantity of a Bean of Labdaoum , as much Mace and CioVes , a
drachm of Cinnamon,Saoders,and Lignum Aloes,an ounce of Spikenard: let thefe all
be grofsly beaten, and boy led in a verniihed earthen Pipkin over a gentle fire, for the
fpace of an hear ; then let them cool. Strain them through a Linen-cloth , and
fet it up in a Glafs dofe ftopt. But tye up the Cinnamon , Cloves , Lignum A-
loes and Sanders in a thin Linen-cloth ; and fo put them into the pot, and boyl
them, as I faid before, and afterwards takeout the bundle : for after the boylingof
the wa:er,the remaining duft may be formed into Pills, and made into Cakes, which
may be ufed in peifuming , as I ftull reach hereafter. This Water is made divers
ways, but I have let down the beft : yet in the boyling, it will turn coloured, and be-
come red, fo that Hankercfoiefs or white Linen, if they be wetted in it, are ftained, al-
though they are made wonderfully Iwcet : which makcth many forbear the ufe of it.
Wherefore, if we would have

lAqttA Na»fa clarifitd,
Take the former Water, and put it into a Glafs-Retort , and fet it in Balneo, over
i gentle fire: the Water will become clear , and almoft of the fame fent : onely
a little weaker : keep the Water, and lay afide the reft of the Feces for fweet
Cakes.

Cmap.IT.

To make fweet Water by Infufion,

NOw I will teach how to make perfumed Liquors , and what Liquors they are,
which will receive odors beft j for Water is unapt to keep fent , Oyl is bet-
ter, and Wine , ( we may aflign the reafon out of Theophraftns : for W»ter is thin,
void of rirte or few, and fo fine, that it can gather no fent) and thofe Liquors which
are thick, favory, and have a ftrong fent. Wine, although it be not fweet of it felf,
yet being piaced nigh any odour , it will draw it , becaufe it is full of heat , which
doth attract. Water, being cold by Nature, can neither attract , nor receive, nor
keep any fent : for it is fo fine, flender and thin, that the odour flieth out again, and
vantfheth away , as if there were no foundation whereon it could fix and fettle, as
there is in Wine and Oyl, who are more tenacious of fent, becaufe they are of a
denfer and callous Bcdy. Oyl is the beft preferver and keeper of fent, becaufe it is
not changeable : wherefore Perfumers fteep their perfumes in Oyl, that it may fuck
out their fweetnefs. We ufe Wine to extract the fent cf Flowers , and efpecially,
Aqttn Viu ; for Wine, unlefs diftilled, infe&eth the Water too much with his own
fent.

MmkWater,

This Water fetteth off all others , and maketh them richer ; *wherefore it is firft
to be made. Take the beft AqaaVn*y and put into it feme Grains of Musk , Am-
ber and Civet , and fet them in the hot Sun for fome dayes : but ftop the Vcffel
veryclofe, and lute it; for that will very much add to the frangrancy of it. A
drop of this put into any other water,wil! prefently make it fmell rnoft pleafantly of
MUsk. You may do the fame with Rofe-water and Fountain-water often diftilled,
that it may obtain a thirlnefs and heat , which is very neceffary for the extraction of
Effences.

Water of Jafmine^ Mutk; %sfcs , (j tlliftorverS) Violets and LtHies,

is extra&edthcfame way : for thefe Flowers fend forth but a thin odour , which
dwelleth not in the iubftance of them , but onely lieth fcattered on the mpetficies ;
fo that if they remain too long on the fire, or in their Mcnftruum , their fweetnefs
degenerateth from its former pleafantnefs , and is waihed eff by the mixture of the
linking ill- favoured part of their fubftance* Wherefore we mult lay their Leaves

onely

Of Ter fuming. a 8$

oxiw.y in the belt Aqua Vtt& , that is , the Leave? of Lillie?, Jafmine, Musk Rofes,
and the reft ; hanging them ©n-athrecd, thai when the Water hath fncked out their
odour, we may pluck them out, becaufe their odour lieth onely on their fbperficies ;
fo that if they fhould remaiD long in the ^4quaVttA , it would penetrate too deep
into them, aod draw out a fent, which would not onely deltroy their former Tweet-
nets, but taint them with an ill favourtwhich accompanicth thofe inward parts. After
thefe Leaves arc taken out, fupply them with frefh , until you perceive their fent is
alfo extracted. But take out the Violets and the Gilliflowers fooncr th=n the reft,
left they colour the Water. This Wai er, being mixt with others, taketh away the
fcurvy fent of the Wine.

A fweet compounded Water.

Take a great Glafs-Receiver , and fill the third part almoft of it with tAqttaV.t&;
put into it Lavender- Flowers , Jafminc , Rofcs, Orange and Lcmmon Flower?.
Then add Roots of Iris, Cyprcfs Sanders, Cinnamon, Storax, Labdanum, Cloves,
Nutmegs, Calamus Aromaticus, with a little Musk, Amber, and Civer. Fill the
Glafs, and flop it well. But after you have filled the Glafs with the Flowers, they
will wither and fink down : wherefore fill it up with more. Set it in a very hot Sun
or in Balneo, until their fwcetnefs be all extracted. Then ftrain out the Water ; and
one drop of it in Rofc- water, or of Myrtle- Flowers , will perfume it all with a molt
fragrant I'm el I.

Chap. III.
Ho w to make fweet Oyhi

HOW to extra& Oyl oat of Spices and fweet things , is declared before : now I
will fhew how to draw fents out of other things with Oyl: or, as Ifaid be-
fore , to make Oyl the ground in which odours may be kept and prelerved a long
time ; which is done either by imbibing the Oyl with odors, or the Almonds out of
which we afterwards exprefs the Oyl.

Hor» to make Oyl of Betty

which is the fweeteft Oyl of all,ured by the Genois : take an ounce of Ben, a drachrri
of Amber, as much Musk , half a drachm of Civet : put them in a Glafs- bottle v\ ell
ft opt, and fet it in the Sun-for twenty days ; then you may ufe ir. But be fure that
k be clofe ftopt : for the Nature of odors being volatile and fugitive , it quickly de-
cay eth, lofeth his fragrancy,andfmelleth dully.

A way to make odoriferom Oyl of Flowers :
it is a common thingjnit very commodious for Perfumers,and may be ufed for other
things : he that knoweth how to ufe it rightly and properly , will finde it an Oyl
very profitable to him. Blanch your Almonds, and bruile them , and lay them be-
tween two rows of'Flowers. When the Flowers have loft their fent, and fade,
remove them , and add frefh ones. Do this fo long as the Flowers are in ieafon :
when they are paft,fqueeze out the Oyl with a prefs, and it will be moft odoriferous.
You may draw a fent with this way, out of thofe Flowers , from whom you cannot
draw fweet Water. Oyl of Jalmine, Violets, Musk-Rofes, Lillies , Crows-foot*
Gilliflowers, Rofcs, and Orange-Flowers, and of others, being made this way,fmel-
Icth moft fragrantly. Oyl of Amber, Musk, and Civet, may be thus made alfo : Cut
the Almonds, being blanched from the top to the bottom, into feven or eight flicts,
and enclofe them in a Leaden Box with thefe perfumes for fix days , until they have
imbibed the fent : then prefs them , and they will yield a moft fweet Oyl j and yet
perhaps not make the Musk much worfe.

Qj}2 Chapv

284. Natural Magic k. 2?G0^ ii

Chap. IV.
How to cxtratt Water and Oyl out of fweet Gums ty Infufion.

\7"W'E may extract fweet Waters by another Art that we fpoke of before, one of

Gums, by Infufion and Expreftton: as for example.

A / weet Water of S tor ax, Benjamin , and Labdantm ,
which affordeth a moft fweet favcur,and is thus extracted InfufeStorax or Benjamin
being bruifed, in as much Rofe- water as will cover them two fingers over : fet them
in Balneo , or a warm place for a week : then diftil them in Balnco , and you will
have a very pleafant Water from them , which you muft expofe to the hot Sun , that
if there ftiould remain any flink of the lmoak in it, it may be taken away. We may
alfo put Gums into Glafs-Veflels , and make a flaw fire under it : there will fweac
out a very little water , but of fweet favour , and the (Bwm will fettle to the bot-
tom, which will be uferol for other things.

To extratt Ojlof Benjamin, S tor ax, and ether things.
We may do this, by beating and mixing thefe Gums withOylof Almonds or of
Ben, and macerating them in Balneo for a month : then draw our the Oyl either by
a Retort or by Expreflio^which is better; it will yield a moft fragrant odour,that you
can hardly perceive whether it were drawn out of the Gums themfelves by a Retort*
Ben , called in Lacinc Glaus Unguentaria , is ufed in precious Qyntments in ftead of
Oyl. Pliny callcth it Morobolane. So alfo Martial,

What not in Virgil nor in Homer *s found,
Is of fweet Oyl and Acorn the compound.

It is without any fent, and therefore fitter to receive them • and when it doth receive

them, to referve them, for it never groweth rank.

Chap. V.

How to perfume Skins*

NOw we will difcourfe of the perfuming of Skins , wjjichis performed feveral
ways, either by lwect Waters , or rubbing thenrwith Oyls,or laying them in
Flowers, fo that they may attra& their odor. And firft ,

How to wajh Skins,

that they may lofe the fent of the Beafts and of Flefti. The manner is this : Firft waflb
them in Greek- Wine, and let them lie wet for fome hours : then dry them,and if the
fent continueth in t hemft ill , wa(h them again : that being takenaway, wafh them in
fweet Waters. Take four parts of Rofe- water, three of Myrtle, of Orange-Flowers
two, of fweet Trifoli one, of Lavender half one: mix them, and put them into a
wide mouthed earthen Veflel,and fteep the Skins in them for a day. Then take them
out, and hang them up in the (hade to dry : but when they are almoft dry,ftretcb and
fmooth them with your hands,that they may not be wrinkled. Do this thrice over,
till they favour of the fwcet Waters, and lofe their own ftink. Next

How to perfume Skins with Flowers.
They muft firft be rub'd over with Oyl ; for, as I have told you, that is the foundati-
on of all fent?,both to attract them,and retain them in a greafie body. It may be done
with common Oyl , but better with Oyl of Ben, becaufe it is without any fent of
his own : beft of all with the Oyl of Eggs, which I have taught before how to make.
The manner is thus : Anoynt your Gloves or Skins with a Spungeon the inward tide,

and

Of Ter fuming. 28?

and c'pcciilly, in the Seams : when that is done, you may thus make them attract
the tent ot any Flowers. Violets and Gilliflowers blow fiitt in the Spring ; gather
mens in the morning , and lay them on both (ides of you: Skins for a day. When
they gro-v dry iooner or later, fling them away, and lay on new5 ftirring ormovuv
them thrice or four time? in a day , left they mike the Skins damp, and grew muftyl
Wnen cneie Flowers arc paft, lay on Orange-flowcrs and Rofes in the fame manner :
ana lart of all, Jalmine, which will continue until Winter : I mean, Garden- Jafminc,
fork flourirheth two or three months. Thus your Skins or Gloves will become
very fweet in ayecrs fpace. The odour will quickly fade and die : but if you do
the lame the lecond time, it will continue much longer , and prelervc their pleafant-
nefs. It very much prcfetveth their fragrancy, to keep them in a dofc place, in either a
Wooden or Leaden Box : but if you lay them among Linen, it will fuck out their o-
qoui, and dull their lent.

How to perfume Sk^ns.

If you add Musk, Amber, and Civet to the aforefaid Skins , they will fmell much
more fweet and gratefully. Or take four parts of Weliern Balfam, one of Musk, as
much Amber, and rub it on your Gloves with a Spunge , and they will fmell very
fweer. I will arid one more excellent Compofition : Take eight parts of Iris, one of
Sander, two of Benjamin, four of Rofe-Pcwder, one and a half of Lignum Aloes,
half a one of Cinnamon, or rather lefs ; foften them all with Rofe-water and Gum-
Tragacanth, and grinde them on a Porphyretick Marble : then anoynt vour Gloves
with it in a Spunge, and take three Grains of Musk , two of Amber, one of Civet ;
mingle them,and rub them alio on.

How to take the fent ont of Gloves.
If you repent your felf of perfuming them, or would make fport with any onc,boyl
a little Rofe-water cr AquaViU; and while they be hot, put the Gloves in, and let
them remain there awhile. Thi< will take away their fent : and if you deep other
Gloves in it, and dry them, they will imbibe it. -

Chap. VI.
How to make fweet ?owier$,

NOW we come to making fweet Powders, which are either Simple or Compound :
ttiey are ufed in Muffing fweet Bags , in perfuming Skins and Competitions.
Learn therefore

How to make Cyprian Powder,

Take Mofs of the Oak, which fmelleth like Musk ; gather it clean, in December, Ja-
nuary, or February : walh it five or fix times in fweet Water , that it may be very
clean : then lay it in the Sun, and dry it. Afterwards , Steep it in Rofe-water for
two dayes, and dry it in the Sun again. This you muft iterate oftentimes ; for the
more you wa(h it, the lweeter it will fmell. When it is dried , grinde it into Pow-
der in aBrafs-Morter,and feirce it : then put it into the ceive, and cover it : make a
fire, and let feme fweet waters to boyl over it ; or caft on fome perfumed Cakes, and
let the fume arife up into the ceive. The more often you do this, the ftronger and
more laflinp fr nt will be imbibed by the Powder. When you perceive it to have at-
tained a fufficient odour , take one pound of thePowder, a little Mu<k and Civet
pcwdered,«nd a sufficient quantity of Sanders and B^ofes : beat them in a Brals-Mor-
ter ; firft pu> ting in the Mu«k,and then by degrees cafting in the Powder ; fo mingle
them well. At laft, cut the powders into a Glafs clofe ftopt , that the fent may not
tranfpire and grow dull. Theie are feveral Ccmpofiticcs of this Powder , which
would be too tedious to recount. It may be made, either white, or black, or brown.
The white is made of Crude Parget wafhed in Rofe-water, or other fweet Water ;
and adding Mutk, Amber, Civet, and fuch-like,it will fmell at a good diflacce.

Chap,

%%6 Natural Magick. ^BooJ^ ii.

Chap. VII.

How to make fweet Compounds,

THere may be made divers kindes of fweet Compounds ; of which are made
Beads, which lome u'e to reckon their Prayers by , and others to mm theii
cloihcs with : alio wafh-Balls to cleanfe and Iwecten the hands. And firli,

How to make fweet Bills
with fmall charge, which yet fhall teem to be very coltly and fweer. Take one <->unce
of Cyprian Powder , and Ber>j:miD of the belt mixture , which is brought out of
Turky ; half anounceof ( love?, a fufficicnt quantity of lllyrian Ins. Vint, melt
fomeGum Tragacancha in Rofe water : then with the former powder make it into
a Maf ,and rowl it up in little Balls: bore them thorow,andnx every one on afeveral
tent upon the Table : then take four Grains or Musk, diffolvc it in Rofe- water, and
wafli the f ucfide of the Balls with it : then let them dry : afterwards wet them a-
gain,for three or four times;io will they calf forth a molt plealant lent round about,
which the/ will not quickly lofe. But if you would bcttow more coft , and have a
greater tent, I will Chew

Hew to make them another way.

Take one ounce of Storax, of Amber half one, a fourth part of Labdarum cleanfed,
one drachm of Lignum •aicss and Cinnamon,an eighth part of Musk Brat the Gum,
Storax and Amber in a Brafs Morter with an Iron PcMe , beioi; both hot : when
thele are weil mixed, call inthe other powder> , and mix them all together : ai alt
add the Mu^k j and before they grow cold , form what you plcafe of tbem. I will
add alfo

Another Compound,

very nectfory in a rime of Plague, which will not onely refrefti the Brains with its
fweet odour , buc will preferveit againft lnic&ion : Take three ounces of Labda»
num., as much Storax, one of Benjunin, an ounce and a half of Cloves, an ounce of
Sanders, three of Ch;mphire,one of Lignum Aloes, Calamus Aromaiuus, and j"icc
of Valeriana drachm of Amber: mix all thcie in the juice of Balm, Rofe water, and
Storax diffohed. But to wafh the Face and Hands, I will letdown amoftNobie
CompofitioD.

Of wafting Balls or Mtuk: Balls,

Take the fat of a Goat, and purific it in this manner: Boyl a Lye with the Pills of
Citron in a Brafs Kettle « let the fat rr main in it for an hour : then (train it thorow
a Liren-cloth into cold water, and it will be purified. Make the Lye of two parrs of
the Allies of the Cerui's-Tiee, one of Lime, and half aPorringerof Alcm ; mingle
them, and put them is a wooden Bowl , with two holts in the bottom , ftopt w'th
Straw : then pour in water, that it may cover them three fingers over , and drain it
out thorow the holes: when the firli is run out , add another quantity of water,and fo
the third tirae^whilrt the water doth receive any faltnels. Keeptheie fevcra'i runnings
alunder.and add feme cf the fecond & third unto the firlt,while a new E<?g will iwim
in if: for if it fink and go to the bottt m, it will be too weak ; therefore add lome of
the firli running. If it fwim on the top, ard lie upon the furfaceof the Water, put
in lome of the fecond aed third junniny, until it deicend, lothat lcarce any part of it
be feen above the Water. Heat twenty pound of this Water in a Brafs Kettle, ard
put into k two of the fat : then firain it out in:o broad P.a:ters. and expofe it to the
hot Sun, mix in<*it often every day; When it is grown hard , nuke Pomanders of
it, and referv c them. You may thus perlumethem: Put two pound of the P< man-
ders into a Br,w', and wiih a VVooden Spoon , mix it with Rofe- water , tiilLbe
Very left : when it hath ltood flild a while, and is grown hard, add more water, and

Of Tet fuming. %%j

fet km the Sun t do this for ten days. Then tike half a drachm of Musk, fomewhat
lefs Civet, and as much of Cinnamon well beaten : mix them, and if you add a lutie
Rofe-powder,it will fmell much fwecter: chen judge of k by yournofe. If the ftnt be
too weak, add more of the Perfumes ; if too lirong, more of the Soap.

How to make Soap) and multiply it.
Since we are fallen upon the difcourfe of Soap,we will not pafs it over this:Take Soap
Geta , and reduce it into a fmall Powder : let it on the fire in a Brafs Kettle full of
Lye of a moderate firength ; fothat in three hundred pound of Lye, you may put
fourfcore of Soap. When the Water beginrieth to boyl up in bubbles , ftir it with
a wooden Ladle j and if the Lye do fail in the boy ling, add new. When the Water
is evaporated , take the Kettle from the hre , and caft in fix pound of ordinary Sale
well beaten ; and with an Iron Ladle empty it out, and let it cool all night. In the
mean time, prepare a brine, fo fharp that it will bear an Egg. In the morning , cut
the Soap into flices, and put it into a broad Veffel, and pour the brine on it : there
let it Ita nd one quarter of a day, and it will become very hard. If you put fome Sal
Alchali into the brine, it will make it much harder.

Cm a p. VIII.
How to mafy fweet Perfumes.

IT remaineth,that we fpeak of Perfumes ; for they are very neceflary for the fenting
of Skin?, Clothes, and Powders, and to enrich Noble mens Chambers, with fwecc
odors in Winter : they are made either of Waters or Powders.

How to make Perfumes of Waters.
Take four parts of Storax, three of Berjamin ; of Labdanum, Lignum Aloes, and
Cinnamon, one ; an eighth part of Cloves, a little Mask and Amber. Beat them all
grofsly , and put them in a Brafs Pot with an ounce and a half of Rofe- water. Sec
the Pot over the fire, or hot Afhes, that it may be hot, but not boyl ; it will caft forth
a pleafant odor : when the Water is confumed , put in more. You may alfo add
what you have refer ved in the making AquaNanfa : for it will fend out a very fwcec
fume.

Another way.

Take three parts of Cloves, two of Berj>mia,one of Lignum Aloes, as much Cinna-
mon, Orange-Pill and Sanders, an eighth part of Nutmeg. Beat them, and put them
into a pot, and ponr into themfome Orange flower-water , Lavender, and Myrtle-
water, and fo heat it.

tA^Kother way.

Exprefs and Grain the juice of Lemmon , into which put Storax , Camphire Lignum
Aloes, and empty Musk-Cods : macerate them all in Balneo for a week in a Glafs-
Bcttle clofeftopt. When yea would perfume ycur Chamber , caft a drop of this
Liquor into a Brafs Pot fnll of Role- water ; and let it heat over warm Afhcs, it will
fmell moft pleafantly.

Excellent Tomattdersfer ptrfuming.

Take out of the Decoction for Aqua Nattfa, Lignum Aloes, Sanders, Cinnamon and
Cloves j and of the remaining Powders make a mafs, which you may form into cakes,
which being burnt on hot Attics, fmell very Iweetly. I take out the Cinnamon and
the Woods, becaufe in burning they caft forth a ftiik of fmoak.

Another way.

Take one pcund and a half cf the Coals of Willow , ground into duft, and feirced •
fonr ounces of Labdanum , three drachms of Storax , two of Benjamin , one of

Lignum

z88 Natural Magick. 2?00^ n.

Lignum Aloes : mix the Storax, Benjamin, and Labdanum in a Brafs Mon er with an
Iron Peftle heated, and put to them the Coal and Lignum Aloes powdered. Add
toihefehalf an ounce of liquid Storax : then diflolveGumTragacamha in Role-
water, and drop it by degrees into the Morter. When the powders are mixed into
the form of an Unguent , you may make it up into the fhape of Birds , or any other
things , and dry them in the (bade. You may wafh them over with a liti k Musk and
Amber upon a Pencil ; and when you burn them, you will receive a moft fwcet fume
from them.

Another Perfume.

Anoynt the Pill of Citron or Lemmon witli a little Civet ; ftick it with Cloves and
Races of Cinnamon : boyl it in Rofe-water , and it will fill your chamber with an
odorifeous fume.

Chap. IX.

How to adulterate Mtukj

TTHefe Perfumes are often counterfeited by Impoftors ; wherefore I will declare
how you may difcem and beware of thefe Cheats : for you muft not truft whole
Mu k Cods ot ic , there being cunning Impoftors , who fill them with other
things , and onely mix Musk enough to give its fent to them. Black Mu-k in-
clining to a dark red, is counterfeited with Goats blood a little rofied , or loafted
bread i lo that three or four pans of them beaten with one of Musk > will hardly be
dikovered. The Impofturc may be difcerned onely thus : The Btead is eafie to be
crumb'd, and the Goats blood looketh clear and bright within when it is broken. Ic
is counterfeited by others in this manner : Beat Nutmegs, Mace,( innamon, Cloves,
Spikenard, of each one handful, and feitce them carefully : then mix them with the
warm blood of Pigeons, and dry them in the Sun. Afterward beat them again, and
wet them with Musk- water and Rofe-water : dry them , beat them , and raoyften
them very many times j at length, add a fourth part of pure Musk,and mix them well,
and wet them again with Rofe-water and Musk- water : divide the Mafs into feveral
parrs, and row 1 them in the hair of a Goat which growcth under his Tail. Others
do it

Another tvajy and

mingle Storax, Labdanum, and Powder of Lignum Aloes : add to the Competition,
Musk and Civer,and mingle all together with Rofe-water.The Impoftnre is discovered
by the eafie diffolving of k in water ; and it differeth in colour and fent. Others aug-
ment Mu.k by adding Roots of Angelica , which doth in fome fort imitate the fent
cf Mu>k. So a!fo they endeavour

To adulterate CiVet

with the Gall of an Ox and Storax liquified and wafhed , or Cretan Honey, But if
your Musk or Amber have loft their fent, thus you muft do,

To make tJMttikjecover its fent,
hang it in a Jakes and among ftinks : for by ftriving againfi thofe ill favour ?,it excitctb
its own vertue, reviveth. and rccovereth its loft fenr.

THE

x%9

THE

TWELFTH BOOK

O F

Natural Magick •

Of Artificial Fires.

The Pkoihi,

BEfore Heave off u write of Fire* I {hall treat of that dangerous Fife that work* won-
derfulthings, -which the vulgar call Artificial Fire , -which the Commanders of Ar-
mies ami Generals , ufe lamentably in divers Artifices and monfirosu Defigns, to tfeakjfejt
Walls and Cities, and totally to fubvert them; and in Sea-fight $,xo the infinite mine of mor-
tal men \ and -whereby they oft-times frufirate the malteiom enter frizes of their Enemies,
The matter u very ufeful and wonderful, and there is nothing in the world that more frights
*nd terrifies the mindes of men, (jod is coming to judge the world by Fire, I (hallde-
fenbe the mighty hot Fires of our Ancefiors , which they ufed to be^ege plates with ; and
Jfhall add thofe that are of later Invention, that far exceed them : and lafily , / fnaU fpea\
of thofeof our days, Tom have here the Ccmpoftions of terrible Cnn-pewaer that makes a
notfe. and then c f that which makgs no noife : cf Pipes that vomit forth deadly Firesfand of
Fires that cannot be <jue*ched,and that will rage under Water at the very botttm of it\Where-
br the Seas rerd a] 'under *i 0 if they were Undermined by the great violence of the flames
finving agair.fi them, and are lifted up into the Airy that Ships are drawn by the monjlront
Cutphs. Of Fire- Balls that fiie with glitter irg Fire, and terrific Troops of Horfe-men^ and
•vet throw them, S o that wt are come almofi to eternal Fires,

Chap, I.
How divers ways to procure fire may be prepared,

ttruviw faith , That it fell out by accident, that fuodry Trees,-
frequeatly moved with Windes and Tempcfts , the Bows of
them rubbing one againft another , and the parts fmiting
each other , and fo being rarified , caufed heat , and took
fire, and flamed exceedingly. Wilde people that faw this,
ran away. When the Fire was out , and they durft come
neerer, and found it to be a great commodity for the Body
of man, they preferred the Fire ; and fothey perceived that
it afforded caufes of civility , of converting and talking to-
gether. Pliny bub y It was found one by Souldiers and Shepherds. In the Camp,
thofe that keep watch , found this oat for necedity ; and fo did Shepherds * becaufc
there is not always a Flint ready. Theophraflm teacbeth what kindes of Wood are
good for this purpofe : and though the Auger and the handle are fotnetiraes both
made of one fort of Wood, yet it is fo that one part a&s and the other fuffers ; fo
that he thinks the one part fhould be of hard Wood , and the other of foft. Ex-
ample :

Wood that by rubbing together will take Fire,

They are fuch as are very hot, as the Bay-Tree, the Buck-thorn, the Holm , the fficl-
T ee : But UHneftor adds the Mulberry-Tree ; and men conjecture fo* becaufc they

R t will

7S$Q iSI A T U R A L M A G J C K. 2)00^ 1%.

WiUrrrfemly blunt the Ax. O" all thefe they make the "Airier, that by rubbirw
they may refilt the more , and do the bufin:fs more firmly. ; but the handle to re-
ceive thetn, is tobernade of foft Wood, as the Ivy, the wilde Vine, and the like, be-
ing dried, and all moillure taken from them. The Olive is not fit, became it is full
or fat .narter,and too much moyfture. But thofc are worft of all to make Fires, that
grow in fhady places. . Plinj from him. One Wood is rub'd againft another, and by
rubbing takes Fire . force dry fuel, as Mulhroomes.of- Le«ves,eafily receiving the Fire
from them. But there is bbthing better then the Ivy , that may be rubbed with
the Bay-Tree, or this with that. Alfo the wilde Vine is good , which is another
kinde of wilde Vine, and runs upon Trees as the Ivy doth. But I do it more con-
veniently thu :Rub one Bay-Tree aglinH another,and rub luftily,for it will prefently
fmoak, adding a little Brim'.tone : put your fueJ neerer , or dry matter made of dry
Toad-H'ools , or Leaves that are very fine, found about the Roots of Coltsfoot ; for
they will foon take fire, and retain it., L have done the fame with Ivy-wood cleanfed
from the Bark, and dried; and by rubbing one Reed againft another ; or, which is
better, drawing a cord fwiftly upon it. The Weft-Indians bindetwo dry (licks toge-
ther , ^ and t hey pot a Hick between-them, which they turn about with their hahds
moved from them, and fo they kindle .fire. Bat fince the minde of Man feldotn re; Mb
the thing once invented', but feeks,for new Inventions , by mans indulfry there is
fouccUur, N< in .. . * J •

s A Jlane that wtR.wfe Fire with &t>y moyfture.

The wiy to mike it is thus: Take quick Brimflone, Salt-Peter refined, of each a like
weight ; Cimphire the ruble weight to quick Lirnc ;. and beat fbem all in aMor-
ter, till they be io fine that they williTie into the Air. : ;binde them all fat* together,
wrapt in a Linen clou , and put them into an cartbcA pot ; let it be well Hopr r lute
it wel, with cla and. raw. , and let it dry in the Sun.-;-;, then put thcrfi intoa Potters
O en ; and when the earthen Vcflel is pcrfe61y b^ked , they will grow t*d*ther,
and be-hard a? a -tone: take them out, an^lay.^tftjup in a dry-place for fcfe.- I
went to try this \a batie, and my experience failed Oje>\ -I know certainly, ihapVrrnii.
of m; Friends have, done il : but the pot mull not have any vent, for it will all ryKd
away . Yet I have feen water ctH upoo^quick Lime,, and by putting Brim: -.one to-ir,
it took Fire, and fired Gun-pow der. This I can maintain.

i€. . * ' •

ft. • -

\ Chap. II, .... .

Of the Cempofit ions for Fire-) that onr Axceftors fifed,
j nT rtbsiil 5* i eu»bibos v? ! :i:o !Isi ji sn*7 < rbi* - - : \- y

BEfore I come to our Compofitions for Fire-worir^lfliall fer dowa thofe that our
forefathers ufed in Sea-fights, and in taking 6c «tefendiag of Cities. Thucifoics
faith, That thole that befieged Piataenenfes, when Engines wcu'd do no good , they
fell toFire works : for calling about the Wallsbundles of Huff, and throwingin
Firc BrimHone andPitch, they burnt-thc waJl : whence arofc Such aflame,that until
that time no man ever law the like. ■Hftan teachcth. j- That in burning of Walls,
after ycu nave made ahoieihorow, yoamcftpnr witKxd of the Pine-Tree under, and
*novnt,thtm with dry pitch, and powdered Brxrhrtone! together ? with Tar crOyl,
and fet this on fire. And ellew here heteacheth tdLbnrri wkh a pc**Take an earthen
Phcher , andbinde it about with plates t>f Iron on the 'cutfide ,'iiftMetit befnllof
fmall coal : let there be ahole about the bottom to put in the Beilows: for when the
coals take fire, by fprinkltng on of vinegar, pifs, or any other fharp matter, the Walls
are broken. Vegehttttttthkia what eombuftible matrer mutt beufetF: and he lifeth
burning Oyl, Hards-, BrimHcne, Bicnmen. Burning' Arrows are (hot in Crofs-bows
intotbc Enemies Ships; and thefe, being fmeered over with Wax, Pitch andRofin,
they quickly fire the Decks , with fo many things, that aflford fuel! to the Fire. I
Cull add

The Ftre-Djrts the AntfeHtf* fell.

Ammixntu Marcellinw d^knbidVuc-Dins^ kinde or" Weapon made after fuch a fl

fhio;

Of Artificial Fires. 2 pi

Giion: It is ao Arrow of Cane, joyned with many Irons between the Shaft and the
Head.and they are made hollow after the fafliion of a wpmans Diiiaff ;whertwuh Li-
nen-threed isfpunjn themidli cf it, it hath many fmalihoies,arjd in the very l,o\ow
of it, is put fire with iomc combuitibie matter, and io is it eafily (hot forth of a weak
Bow : for a Bow that is ftrong , puts out the Fire • and there is no m^an-, to put it
out , but by cafiing on Duft or Lees of Oyl. Livy, Seme came with burning Tor-
ches, others carrying Tow,Pitch,and Fire- Darts; and the whole Army (Tuned as if it
were ah in flames : but in the concave part or this Dart there was Glue and Fuel, for
Fire not to be cxtinguifhed,of Colopbonia, Brimftone, Salt-Peter, all mingled with
Oyl of Bays. Others fay, with Oyl of Peter, Ducks-grcaie, the Pith of the Reed of
Ferula, Brimftone ; and, as others think, with Oyl, Tallow, Colophonia,Camphire,'
Rofin,Tow. The old Warriors called this an incendiary compofition. Lux An fpeaks of
burning of Ships :

TV is plague to wattr is not consonant ,

For burning Torches, Oyl and Brimftone joyn'd,

Art caft abroad^ and fuel was not [cant :

The Ships do burn with Pitch or Wax combind.

And cliewhere*

He bids them fifoot their Shafts into the S ails\ ^
Befmeer'd with Pitch , and fo he feon prevails: rV
The Fire ftraight doth burn what's made ofFlaxy fcn [ft

And fo their Decks were fir'd by melting Wax ;
And tops of Mafts were burnt , and Sea- mens packs.

But in competitions for Arrows and Darts , that they might burn the more vehe-
mently, they put melted Vernifh, Printers Oyl, Petroleum, Turpentine, made up
with theftiarpelT Vinegar, prefled dole , and dried atthe Sun, ana wrap'd over with
Tow, and with fliarp Irons to defend it, Wrought together like to a bottom of yarn :
ah which at lalf , only palTing over one hole, are imcered over with Colophonia and
Bricnrtonej after the manner that follows. But by the fubtilty of the Greeks, there
was invented

A Fire-, called the Creekjrire,

To overcome the Ship prelently , they boyl'd Willow-coals, Sair, Spirit of Wine,
Brimftone, Pitch, with the yarn of the foftVVooll of Ethiopia, andOmphire;
which, it is wonderful to fpeak, will burn alone in the water , confumingall matter.
C-'i'tmachu* the Architect flying fromHeliopolis, taught the Romans that thing firft,
and many of their Emperors did ufe that againft their Enemies afterwards. Leo the
Emperor, burnt wirh this kinde of Fire thofe of the Eaf*, that fail'd agaihft Conftan-
tinople with 1800 Carvels. The fame Emperor, fhcrtly after, burnt with the fame
Fire 40C0 Ships of the Enemy ,and 5 5 o in like manner. Promethetu found out, thac
Fire would keep a yeerin the Cane Ferula : wherefore Martial fpeaks of them thus:

Canes that the Mafters love, but Boys do hate,
Are by Prt metheus gift held atgreatrate,

laorto >mi:a m >•<.; *'td i)om u > n*i t inn* i!y^0dHfln8 tth*T

Chap. III.

Of the divers Compo fit ions of Gun-powder,

fliould be ill fpoken of,if, that treating of fiery Compofuions, wefhould not
firftfay fomethingof that wonderful Gun-powder , that is the Author cf fo
many wonderful things ; for it is an ingredient in all mixtures, and all depends upon
it : not that I have any minde to fpeak of it , becaufe it is fo common ; but of fuch
thiags that have fomc new or hidden fecret in them. It is made of four parts of Salt-

Rr« Pecer«

%9% Natural Magick. 2>oo^ iz.

Peter, Brimftone and Willow-coals, of each one partw But the Salt-Peter muft be
refined from common Salt, the fat and earthly parts : for that is the Foundation and
Bafis of the reft. All of thele muft be well powdered and finely feirced , and per-
fectly mingled together. Therefore if you would have

(fUn-powder that (hall m*k* * great noife, and do much fervice,
Put in more parts of Salt-Peter ; namely,to one part of Brimftone, and one of Wil-
low-coal,pnt in fix or eight parts of Salt- Peter, but excellent well refined and min°led#
For four parts of Salt-Peter well refined and mingled, will do more then ten parts of
that which U fxculem, and ill mingled. From the Salt- Peter comes the force, the
noife of the flame ; for Brimftone it takes fire , and the fooner for the coal. But if
one would have

Gun-powder that willjboot a Bullet without noife,

he muft make weak the Salt-Peter,bur with feme fat fubftancc ; which is done by the
Glew and Butter of Gold , by mingling them according to a certain and due pro-
portion ; and fo it will (hoot a Ball with very little or no noife ; for you (hall
fcarcehcarit : and though the force be not foftrong, yet it is but little lefs. 1
will not teach the way, left wicked men fhcuid take occafion to do mikebief by it.

Chap. IV.
How Pipes may be made to caft out Fire.

THe fame Heron bids the Souldiers when they fcale the Walls , that they (hould
fct againft the faces of their enemies that defend the Cities, fuch hand-Guns that
they can turn, and that will throw fire a great way : for fo they (hall fo terrifie thofe
that defend the VValls,by thefe monftroui Engines that caft Fire- Balls at fuch great
diftance,and wlh lu:h furious flames,that they will never endure to behold tbem,nor
yet the Souldiers that mount up the Walls j bat will quickly run away. More-
over, in fights at Sea, andamongft Horfe-men,men of this later age make great ufe
of them : for Horfes are terrified with Fire, as Elephants were; and will cafily run
away, and break the ranks. Wncn Antipater befieged the Mcgarenfes, and the
Macedonians did fiercely lie upon them , the Mcgarenfes firft anoynted their
Hogs with pitch, and fet them on Fire, and fo fent them out amongft their Enemies.
The Hogs were mad at it, and ran furioufl/ among the Troops of Elephants , and
cried as they burned with theFire ; and,as fo many Furics^thcy extreamly dilcrdercd
the Elephants. But 1 (hall defctibe

%ockets that caft Fire a great wayt
Make a flick of three foct long , round on the outfide , and with a Turners Inftru-
ment make it hollow within : let the hole in the middle be four fingers diameter, and
the Wood a finger thick; but within let it be fenced with a thin Iron plate , and
without with Iron hoop?, at the mouth, in the middle, and on the end; and let the
Spaces between befaftnedand joyned together with Iron-wires, left by the violence
of the flames , ftriving within, the Engine (hould break in pieces , and hurt our
Friends. Fill the hollow hole with this compofition : Gou-powdcr three parts,
Colophonia,Totia, Brimftone, half a part : but you muft btuifeyour Brimftone and
Colophonia very well , and fprinklc them with Linfeed Oyl , and work them in
your hand?. Then try if your mixture will burn gently or fiercely: fill the (pace
between the joynts in a Reed with powder ; put Fire to it : if it burn vehemently,
that it break the Cane, add to it Colophonia and Brimftone ; but if mildly , then
put more Powder into your Rocker, preflfing it again with a (harp ftick : then ftop
the mouth of it, being full, with a Linen-clout, wax and pitch, and cover it, that the
Powder fall not out : and making a hole in the clout , faften a Cotton-match to the
mixture, that when neceflity is, it may take fire. You (hall learn fhortly after to make
the Matchr This is called a fimplc Rocket.

ffi*

Of Artificial Fires.

How to ma\e a Rocket armed.

This by a continual fending forch of Fire-balls and Leaden Bullets , and by the
(hooting off of Iron-guns, will ftrikc thorow the faces of thofe chac ftand by. Ic is
made of Turpentine- Rofio, liquid Pitch, Vernifh, \ rankincenle and Camphire, equal
pares; quick Brimftone a third part and half ; twopartsof Salt-Peter rehned, three
parts of Aqua FortU, as much of Oyl of Peter and Gun-powder : pown them toge-
ther, and make Fire-balls : put them into the hollow of the Pipe, that is broad e-
nough to receive them. Put into the hollow part the firft mixture, three fingers
deep,and prefs it down : then put in the little Ball of Gun- powder onely,weighing
one ounce, ready made : then put in again the firlt Powder : and do this by courfe
one after another, till ic be full ; and flop the mouth , as I faid. Some do not thruft
down a Ball,buc Hards wrap'd up in fquare pieces of Iron ; and that is fo pliable, that
the fir ft mixture can kindle the Gun-powder. Some put in with the Tow , Glat's
grofly powdered. Others, Salt and powder of Lead : for if the Lumps Hick to Ar-
mour or Garments>you cannot put them ouc with water or any thing elfe rill they be
confumed. Some there are alfo that compafs in the Rockcc with Brafs or Iron-Guns,
and at the open paflagc of the Rocket, they put in Gun- powder ; when fire comes
at it , with terrible and frequent noifes,~chey caft Leaden Bullets forth upon the
ftandcrs by. I faw a Rocket of extraordinary largenefs ; it was ten foot long, and as
wide as a mans head might go in: it was full of Fire-balls,Stones, and other matters,
and put into a Gun, and bound to the lower part of the Crofs-yard of a Ship, which
was-tranfported every way with cords, as the Souldiers would have it ; and in Sea-
fights was levelled againft the Enemies Gallies,and deftroyed them all almoft. Yet I
will not omit to relate how

A Brafs-Gftn once fired, may difcharge ten times.
It is a new Invention, that a great Brafs-Gun,or a hand-Gun , may difcharge ten of
more Bullets one after another without intcrmitfion. Make a dirk Powder, fuch as
I ufed in the precedent part, and fill it thus : Firft, put in a certain meafure of Gun-
powder, that being put in, may difcharge the Ball : then put in the Ball, but a imall
one, that it may go in loofely, and that the powder put in upon it) may come to touch
the Gun-powder: then pour in this dark powder two or three fingers depth : then
put in your Gun-powder, and your Bullet : and thus in order , one after the other,
until the Gun fcems to be full to the very mouth. Laftly, pour in fome of your dark
clammy powder : and when you have levelled your Gun to the place appointed, put
Fire to the mouth of it ; for it willcaft out the Bullets , and then Fire for fo long
time as a man may difcharge a hand-Gun at divers fhoots. And thus with one Brafs»
Gun you may difcharge many times.

Chap. V.

How Fire -Balls are made that are (hot off in BrafiGuns.

NOW 1 will {hew how to make fome Pot-compofitions of Fire-balls that are {"hoc
out of Brafs-Guns ; for divers ufes : either to burn Chips , or to give light to
feme men in the night* or at Solemnities to caft up into the Air, that they may feem
to dream along like falling Stars.

Firr balls flying in the Air,
that are made at Feftival times. Grind one pound of Gun-powder , one third pare
of Salt-Peter, two ounces of Brimftone, and as much Colophonia : mingle all thefe;
fow them up in Coffins made of thick Cloth in fafhion of Balls , and put them into
hollow half circles made in Wood, and ftrike them with a wooden Hammer thac tbey
may be hard as ftones; then binde them about with cords,and dip them in Tar three
or four times, they that may be well fenced about , left being dilcharged by the vio-
lence of a Brafs-Gun, they fliould break in pieces. Laftly , pierce them thrice tho-
row with a (harp ftickin the centre, and fill them with Gun-powder , and dry them

to

ipfy Natural Magick* Soo^u.

to be fenc aloft. When you would ufe them, raife your Brafs-Guns, or more con-
veniemly the but end of your Guns , and take the Ball in a pair of Iron Pinchers,
and give Fire to the holes,f hat ic may take : when your are certain that it is lighted,
with your right hand caft it into the hollow of the Gun ; and with your left , give
fire to the lowett touch-hole of the Gun : when it is hied, ic rebounds ; and be-
ing carried up by force of the Fire, it feems to run up and down in the Air,as I oftea
faw it at Rcme, and prepared it. They are made aifo

^Another waj.

Take Sea-pitch three parts, Turpentine-Rolin two parts, as much Brimrtohe , one
part Goats fuet : powder what mutt be powdered ; and melt in a Brat's Vcffel whac
will melt : put them together, and ftir tbera with a wooden tti.k. Then cah in Hards
of Hemp or Flax, fo much as will drink up all the mixture : then take the Brafs Kettle
from the fire , and with your hands make Balls asbig as you will, that they may be
fh-t forth of Brafs-guns; and before they grow hard , thruft them through with
Wooden fticks,makirgfmall holes: then put in Gun-powder broken with Brimttone,
and row 1 them about upon a Table ftrewed with Gun-powder,and through the holes
fatten cotton Matches rolled in the Powder, as I fhallfliew : let theie dry and grow
hard in the Sun. The way to difcharge them from a Brafs Gun is this : Chufe iuch
as are commonly called Petri!*, that are fitteft for thisnfe. The weight of the Gnn-
p- wrier to be put into the VetTel , mull be one firth part cf the Ball , or a little
mote or lefs ■ for if you put in much, they are either call down by the too great vk>
lence of the Fire, or elfe they are put our a< they flic, and do not anlwer our expecta-
tion. The Powder hein^ pnt into the Veflel, lay neither Hards nor Hemp upon it ;
bui fit the Ball upon the Powder, that as that fires, it may fire the Ba 11, and fend it
forth. Here is a more noble Compofuion

Another way.

Take five parts of Gun-powder, three of Salt-Peter refined, Brimftone two, Colo-
phonla one half part, beaten Glals, common Salt, of Oyl of Peter, andcf Linfeecf
Oyl,and rehned Aqua VttA as much : powder what mutt be powdered , and pafs it
through a fine Cievc: then melt it in a new earthen pot with burning coals, without
flame: let them not fparklc ; for fo theCompofition may take fire, Thencaftin
the Powders, th:t they may incorporate well together : then make round Coffins
of Linen cloth as 1 faid, and fill them with the Gun-powder alone , and binde tberri
with cord j about : then wrap your Tow in the Corapofition, and make a Ball of the
bignefs yon would have it ; and if you will (hoot it out of a Brafs Gun, binde it the
thicker with litcle cord.: then pierce your Ball through in many places with wooden
pricks , that they may come at the powder that lieth ia the middle : then put cotton
Match through , that when it flies in the Air fo violently , they may preferve the
fire. In another earthen Pot, melt Pine-Tree- Gum , Gun-powder and Brimftone,
and dip in your Ball into that liquor, that it may be allover-caft with it. When you
take it oat , lift up your cotton Matches with a flick , and ftrew them with Gun-
powder. This Ball will lorely punifh the Enemies with a great noife, cracking and
breaking afunder : the Fire cannot be put out : it will burn all kinde of Furniture,
Garments and what elfe , till it be all confumed ; for it will burn Armour fo migh-
tily, that unlefs they be taken off, they will burn the man.

Chap. VI.

Of Completions with burning Waters.

PMilofophers feeking the Reafon of Waters that lie hid above and under the earth*
and arc always hot, they fay, Bitumen is the caufe thereof, which being once oa
hre, hath this propertyi that k will not only act be put out, but if you calt o» water
h will burn the more. The Mountain Chimarra burns always in Phafelis,both night
and day, (jnidiM CteJtM faith, The fire of it is kindled by water, and is put out with

Earth

Of Artificial Fires. 29?

Earth or Hay. In the fame Lycia , Vulcan's Mortmains , touched with a burning
Torch, wiii lo burn, that the very It nes and land in Rivers are conmrhed by them,
and wiii bura in the midlt of the waters ; and that fire is maintained by w?.t?r. The
hollow Cave iu Nymptmim forefhews terrible things to the men Apoilonia : as
Thtjrom^m writes; it encreafeth by fhowres, and ic calis torth Bitumen, that muft be
tempered wkh that Fountain that cannot betaited, otherwifeitismorc weaktnen
aa, Bitumen is. Now 1 fhall fearch out the kindes of Bitumen. The firft kinde is
liq id, cailed Naphtha, we call it Oy 1 of Peter, which remains in ftonets and Ki.ram.
This haih great affinity with Fire , and the fire will take hold of it every way at a
great dnfance. So fome fay, That Medea burnt a whore, who, when rhe came tola-
entice at the Altar, the fire laid hold on her Garland. Another kinde is , that men
ca:l Miltha ; for in the City of Comagenes bamolata , there is a Lake fends forth
burning mud: when any folid thing toucneth i;,it will (tick to it ; and being icurh'd,
ir will follow him that runs from ic. So they defended the Walls , when Lucullm
befieged them, and the Soldier burned in his Armor. Waters do kindle it, and only
E ;rth can quench ic, as experience fhews. Camphire is a kinde or it : as Bitumen, ic
draws fire to it and burns. Piflaphiltum is harder then Bitumen : both Amber and
Jet are of this fort ; but thel'e burn more gently, and not fo much in the waters*
Moreover, in regard it burns in the Water,it is Brimftone ; for no fatter thing is du^
forth of the Earth. To maintain this fire, it ielf is diffident :it neither burns in the
waters, nor is it put out with water, nor doth it lail long ; but, ;'oyn'd with Bi-
tumen , the fire will lad always, as we Ice, in the Phlegrean Mountains at Puteoli :
and as fire, if Oyl be caftio, burns the more ; fo whenBitumrn i« kindled, war er cad
on, mikes the flame the greater. Wherefore I fhill make ule of thofe fires that burn
in and above the waters. Buc I fhall bring fome examples how is made

A B*ti that will burn under ' Water,
Firft prepare youF Gun-Powder; for this muftbe one Ingredient in all Competitions,
and • fves force to the reft to burn vehemently. If it be in great corns,pown it well,
and leirce it fine : to feven parts of this, add two parts of Colophonia, three of Salt-
Peter, one of Brimrtoner pown them all together,and mingle them; (prinklingonof
Na htha,or of liquid pitch Kitram \ moyftning them fo long,until the powder preffed
in your hand will day together. When thefeare well mingled, make trial by them :
it it burn too vehemently,add mere Colophonia,Salt-Peter and Brimfionejbut if buc
weaklv, more Gun- powder. This mixturemuft be wrapt in ftraw or lineri»rags,or put
into coffins mide of the fame things ; and binde it as clofe as you can with ftraw, or
little cord s round abooc : then dip it into fcalding pitch, and fo let it dry: then wrap
it again with liraw,and fmeer ic over with pitch, to keep it fafefrem water, and thac
it may not break afnnder by the violence of the fire When it is well dried, and a lit-
tle hole m ide in it,put in Gun-powder,and put fireto it : and when it begins to burn,
day but very little, and caft ic into the water. If will by us weight fall to the bot-
tom, and rhe flames will ftrive with the water, a'rid drive them far from it : fo it will
appear to bnrn above, and i« oblcured with a black imoak, that you will think you fee
the fnlphrreous waters at Pnteoli burning there/ Being then made liqhter bv many
turnings and windings, it willfcemto afcend to the iuperficies of the vr^er.which is
a moli pleafant fight : for yon will think that the water burns ; and y ou fhall fee
two contrary Element? fighting together, yet/ftp unite friendly until the matter be
fpenr. Others wrap in cloth nothing but Guh-powa'er a whole hancful; andthis
they bindein wiih cords : therithey dip it in inched fcaldingpuch, and bound very
fad, and wrapt in'many linen rags j they make a fma.U hole through it, ard they
pla .ethis in theCemrc of the Ball weeverincw fpakc of , that when it ccmesto
the fuperficies of the water, the fire taking hold on thepowder within , breaks
the Bail in pieces ; and with a mighty ncife , wounds all thole that ftan$ neer ir.
Some make it

Otherivife.

They make a Cc mpofirion of Brimftcne , Colophonia, Salt-Peter, Vernifh;
and to chis they add a fourth part of Gun-powder ; and they add Venice-
Tut-

296 Natural Magick. 'Boofai.

Turpentine-Rofin , Oyl of liquid Vernifh, Petroleum, Linieed Oyl, and the befi re-
fined A<\uaVtt* : with thefc they wet and fprinkle the dry Powders. I have leen
this take hie more vehemently, and to cart the Barnes farther. To do

The fame*,

Take Maftick one part 5 Frankincenfe t wo ,G rains of Vernifli,Brimflone,Camphire,
Gun-powder , of each three pares ; of Colophonia fix , Salt-Peter refined nine :
pown them all together , and fift them ; onely pown the Catnphire mingled with
the Salt ; for that onely will not be powdered : ftrew them all about upon an ear-
then dull with a large mouth, and fprinkle them with Naphtha , or Vemifh, or Lin-
feed Oyl, and mingle them with your hands. Take out part of the Powder, and put
it inco a hollow Cane, and try it, whether it will burn to your minde ; and if it burn
too weak, put in more Gun-powder • if too vehemently, more Colophonia : always
trying if it be as it fhould be. For to thefc Competitions, we add the fame things to
blunt the vehement burning of the Salt-Peter and the Gun-powder. Thee make
Coffins of Canvas , like Balls , and fill them with your Compofition , and Huff it
in well, and binde them well with cords round about. Then melt Brimrtone , and
let there be bit one fourth part of Gun-powder: ftir them together with a wooden
Akk, and lute the Ball over with that liquor, that it may be well fenced and crafted.
Then with a wooden prick make a hole in it in the middle to the Centre , and fill
that with powder $ and fo put in fire , and it will burn underwater : it may alio be
(hot forth of brafs Engines. I will fhew you how to make

Balls and Pots to be cafi forth of Ships*

The Ancients write, That Alexander the Great found out this Competition of Fire?,
to burn Bridges, Gates, Ships, and the like a but it will work new more vehement-
ly, by reaton of the Gun-powder added. Take Gun-powder, Salt-Peter, Brimftone,
Pitch, Pine-Tree- Gum, Vernifh in Grains, Frankincenfe, of each alike ; Camphire
one half: beat all the(e,and mingle them. Then take Oyl of Peter, liquid Vernifh,
Rofioous Turpentine, equal parts ; and with thefc, being liquid, mingle all together,
and fill Pots with them, to be cart among Ships and enemies : or, if yon make a Bali
of thefe, binde it hard about the head of a hammer, whole (hat p-tooth'd end maft be
a foot long, and the handle three foot. If at a Sea-fight, any one with a light Boat
ftrike this into a Ship of the enemies with one blow, he (hall raife a mighty fire, that
neither water nor any other thing will put out.

Chap. VII*

How Balls are made of Met sis that wiU cafi forth fire and Iron wedges*

I Shall fhew you how to make brittle Balls of Metal , that being filled with Gun-
powder, and all the places of vent ftopt, with the violence of the flame will flie
into many pieces, and ttrike through thofe they meet with , and on all fides they will
pierce through thofe who are not onely unarmed but armed men ; and thefe are to
be ufed in befieging of Cities : for cart amongft multitudes, they will wound abun-
dance. The danger is feen among Herds of Cattle. Make then

B Jills that will cafi pieces of Iron 4 great way off.
Let a Ball of Metal be made a hand-breadth diameter, half a finger thick : the Metal
is made of Brafs three parts, Tin one part, to make it fo brittle,that by force of fire it
may flie in (mail pieces. To make the Ball more eafily, make it of two half circles ,
for the charge is the lefs , and let them joy n together like a box , or let them fcrew
one within another : let it be equally thick , that it may break in all parts alike.
Then with a Nail drove through the middle , let it be fattened the better together,
a finger thick , that it may break in all parts before it do in the joynt*. Then
make a little Pipe as big as a finger , and as long as ones hand , that it may come
to the Centre of the Ball , and fo (lick forth beyond the Superficies , like s
fyrarais , the Bafis outward , the Point inward t fodder it fart to the Ba.lL

Of Artificial Fires. i$y

The nail , as 1 faid , muftccmeforth on both fides; and to thisfaften wires, that
runs through iron piles , that have a large hole through them , thac every wire may
have thirty of them } that when the ball is broken by force of the fire, the wires
of iron may break alfo, and the piles of iron may be thrown about, a great way, with
fuch force, that they may feem to be fhot forth of Guns and Ordnance. Laftly,
let the Ball be filled with the beft Gunpowder onely , but the pipe with that mixture
that burns more gently , that when fire is put to it , you may hold it fo long in your,
hand , until that flow compofition may come to the centre } and then throw ir a-
mongtt the enemies , for it will break in a thoufand pieces ; and the iron wires and
pieces of iron, and pares of the Ball will fly far, and ftrikc fo violently, that they
will go into planks or a wall a hand depth: Thefe arc caft in by Souldiers, when
Cities arc befiged , for one may wound two hundred men : and then it is worfe to
wound then to kill them, as experience in wars fhews. But when you wiil fill the
pipes , hold one in your hand without a Ball , full of the compofition, and try it
how long it will burn , that you may learn to know the time to cart them , left you
kill your felf and your friends. I (hall teach you how with the lame Balls

Troops of Horsemen may be put into confn^on-
There are made fome of thefe forts of Balls, that are greater, about a foot in bignefss
bound with the fame wire, but fuller of iron piles, namely with a thoufand of them*
Thefe are caft amongft Troops of Horfetnen, or into Cities befieged , orintofhips
with flings , or iron guns, which they call Petrels ; and divers ways : for if they be
armed with iron pieces, when they break they are caft forth fo with the violence of
the fire, that they will ftrike through armed men andhorfes, and fo fright the hor-
ies with a huge noife , that they cannot be ruled by bridle nor fpurs , but will break
their ranks. They have four holes made through them , and they are filled with
this faid mixture , that being fired they may be caft amongft Troops of Horfemen j
and they will caft their flames fo fir with a noife and cracking , chat the flames will
fcemjikc to thunder and lightning.

Chap. VIII.

How in plain greund^nd under waters, mines maj be frefeutly digged.

TO dig Mines to overthrow Cities and Forts , there is required great colt, time,
and pains, and they can hardly be made but the enemy will difcover it : I fhall
(hew how to make them in that champion ground, where both armies are to meet,
with little labour, and in rbort time.

To make Mines in plain grounds where the tArmies are to meet.
If you would do this in fight of the enemy (for they know not what you do) I (hall
firft teach how. A little before night , or in the twilight , where the meeting fhall
be, or paflage, or ftanding, there may pits be made of three foot depth, and the
one pit may be diftant from the other about ten foot: There fit your Balls about a
foot in bignefs , that you may fill the whole plain with them ; then dig trenches
from one to the other , that through them cotton matches may pafs well through
earthen pipes, or hollow cases ; but fire the Balls at three or four places : then bu-
ry them , and make the ground even , leaving a fpace to give fire to them all at once^
Then at the time of war , when the enemy ftands upon the ground , then remove
at your pleafure , or counterfeit that you fly from them ; and caft in fire at the open
place, and the whole ground will prefently burn with fire, and make a cruel and
terrible ilaughtcr amongft them ; for you (hall fee their limbs fly into the air, and
others fall dead pierced through, burnt with the horrible flames thereof , that fcarce
one man (hall fcape. Ycu fhall make ycur Match thus : In a new Tcft let the beft
jlquaviu boyl with gunpowder, till it grow thick, and be like pap • put your mat-
ches into ir, and role them in the mixture: take the Tcft from the fire, and ftxew
ob as much gunpowder as they will receive, and fettbem to dry in the Sun: puc

§ f this

298 Natural Magic k. cBoof^ u.

this into a hollow cane, and fill it full of gunpowder : or take one part refined falt-
pctcr, brimftone half as much, and let ic boy I in a Dew earchenpot, withoylof
linleed : put in your Match, and wet them well all over with that liquor , take them
away and dry them in the Sun. But if ycu will make

tjfrlines under the Water y

ofe this rare invention: Yon (hall make your Mines where the enemies Galleys or
Ships come to ride ; ycu ftviil upon a plain place fit many beams, or pieces of tim-
ber, faftned crofs-wiO, and thruftthrough, or like nets ; according to the quantity
in the divifions,youfhall niake ftp circles of wood, and fatten them, and fill them with
gunpowder ;the beams mutt be made hollow, and be filled with match and powder,
that you may fet fire to the round circles : with great diligence and cunning, fmeer
over the circles and the beams with pitch , and cover them well with it , that the
water may not enter , and the powder take wet ( for fo your labour will be loft) and
you tnuft leave a place to pur fire in ; then fink yonr engine with weights to the bot-
tom of the wtrer , and cover it with ftones , mud and weeds , a little before the
enemy come. Let a Scout keep watch , that when their Ships or Galleys ride
over the place , that the fnare is laid ; for fire being put to it , the fea will part, and
be caft up into the air, and drown'd the Ships, or will tear them in a thoufand pieces,
that there is nothing more wonderful to be feed or done. I have tried this in wa-
ters and ponds, and it performed more then I imagined it would.

Chap. IX.
What things Are good to extinguish the fire,

I Have fpoken of kindling fires, but now I fhall (hew how to quench them « and by
the way, what things obnoxious to the fire , will endure it and remain. But firlt
I will relate what our Anceftours have left concerning this bufinefs. VmuvUu faith,
That the Larch-rree-wood will not burn, or kindle by it felf , but like a Hone in the
furnace , will make no coles , but bum very flow ly. He faith thcreafonis, That
there is in it very little air or fire , but much-water and earth, and that it is very
folid , and hath no pores that the fire can enter at. He relates how this is known.
When C&fetr commanded the Citizens about the Alps , to bring him in provifion,
thofe that were fecure in a Caftie of wood , refufed to obey his commands : Cafar
bade make bundles of wood, and to light torches, and laythefe to the Cattle : when
the matter tockfire, the flame flew exceeding high, and he fuppofed the Caftie
would h*ve fallen down ; but when all was burnt , the Caftie was not touched.
Whence /V/jy writes, The Larch-tree will neither burn to coles,nor is otherwife con-
fumed by fire, tbentfones are. But ibis ismoft falfe: For feeing it is rofiny and
oyly, it prefendy takes fire and burns;and being one fired,is hard to put cut. Where-
fore I admire , that this error fhould Ipread fo far, and that the Town Larignum, fo
called from the abundance of Larch-wood , compaffed about with fire, fhould mffet
no hurt. Moreover. I read that liquid Alom, as the Ancients report , will ftand out
againft fire : For wood fmecred with Alom, and Verdigrcafe, whether they be pofis
or beam*, fo they have a cruft made about them , will not bunvwith fire. Archt-
lau* the General , for Mithridates made trial of it in a wooden Tower againft Syll*)
which he attempted in vain to fet on fire : which I find oblerved by Quadrtg*rimr
in his Annals. But this liquid Alom is yet unknown to many learned men : cor
Alum wants this property. But many fay, that vinegar prevails againft fire. Plu-
tarch fakh,T hat nothing will feoner quench fire then vineganfor of all things, it moft
puts our the flame, by its extreamity of cold. TolUnu* reports, AtkenaUs, when he
wa^befieged by his enemies , poured our of bra7 en veffels, melted lead upon the
tngincs, that were fet tofcale the place >and by this were the engines diffoived ;but
the enemies poured vinegar upon it, and by that they quenched tbe lead, and all
things elfethat fell from the walls: and fo they found vinegar to be the fitteft. to
qtlench fire, and an excellent experiment, if things be wet with it. T/ro/pray-

Of Artificial Fires. ipp

feth the white of an eggeto quench it, faying, that the white of an e»°e is fo flrong,
that if wood be wet with ic, kwill not burn, nor yet any garment. Hieron, to
cover fcaling engines, ufed the raw hides of bealls new killed , as having force to re-
fill fire j and thejoyntsof wood they fenced whh chalk, or with allies tempered
with blood , or clay molded with hair or firaw, and (vith fea-weeds wet in vinegar j
for fo they were (afe from fire. Carchedonim was the firtt that taught men to cover
engins and rams, with green hides. I have heard by men of credit, that when houles
were on fire, by a peculiar property, the menftruous clothes of a woman that had her
courfes the firft time, caft over the planks, would prefemly put out the fire. Thick
and mufcilaginous juyces are good againft fire, as of Marftv mallows. Therefore Al-
bert™ writ not very abfurdly, that if a man anoint his hands with juyce of Marfh-mal-
lows, the white of anegge and vinegar, withalom,

He may handle fire without hurt.

And it is a thing that hath much truth in it. But I think that quick-filver killed in
vinegar, and the white of an cgge,and fmeercd oD,can prefcrve any thing from fire.

Chap. X.
Of divers compofitions for fire.

T Shall fpeak of divers compofitions for fire to be nfed for divers ufcy. Bat men fay
* lM. Grtcchm was Author of this invention.

7* mAke a fiery eompofition, that the Sun m*y kindle.

Itconfiftsof thefe things: Oyl of Rcfineus Turpentine, of Quick-filver (other wife
then I (hewed in drilling) of Juniper, of Naphtha, Linfeed,Colophonia, Camphire ;
let there be Pitch, Salt-peter, and Dncks-greafe, double to them all ; Aqn<* viu refi-
ned from all flegtn. Found them all, and mingle them ; put them up in a glazed vef-
fel, and let them ferment two moneths in horfe-dung , always renewing the dung,
and mingling them together. After the fet time , put it into a retort, and diftil it :
thicken the liquor either with Pigeons-dung, finely lifted, or with gunpowder, that
It may be like pap: Wood that is fmeercd over with this mixture, and fet in the
fummerSun, will fire of itfelf. Pigeons-dung eafily takes fire by the Sunbeams,
Galen reports, That in My (la, a part of Afia,a houfe was fo fet on fire. Pigeons-dung
was caft forth , and touched a window that was neer ; as it came to touch the wood
that was newly fmeered with rofin, when it was corrupted, and grew hot, and va-
poured at Midfummer, by heat of the Sun, it fired the rofin , and the window ; theft
other places fmeered with Rofin , took fire, and by degrees part of the houfe began
to take hold j and when once the covering of the houfe began to flame, it foon laid
hold of the whole houfe , becaufe it hath a mighty force to inflame all. Ducks-
greafe is very prevalent in fire-works, and Phyfitians praife it extremely , that it is
molt fubtile, penetrating and hot , k makes other things penetrate; and as it h
moftfubtile and hot, foit takes fire vehemently, and burns. 1 fhallfhew how to
difiil

A moft fc aiding Oyl.

When I would prepare the moft excellent compofitions of burning oyl, I diftilled
common oyl in a retort , but with great labour ; yet what was diftilled was thin,
combuftible, and ready to fire ; that once kindled , it was not to be put out ; and ic
would draw the flame at a great diftance, and hardly let it go. But oyl of Linfeed is
flronger than it . for if you diftil it often, it will have fuch a wonderful force to take
fire, that it can hardly be fhut up in a veflel , but it will draw the fire to it: and the
glafs being opened , it is fo thin, that it will fly into the Air ; and if the light of a
candle, or of fire touch it, the Air takes fire, and the oyl fired by it, will caft the
flame afar off, fo vehemently, that it is almoftimpoffibleto quench ir« It muftbe
diftilled with great cunning, left the vcflcl over-heat , it fliould take fire within.
Moreover,

Sf * tite

joo Natural Magick. 2?00^ 12.

Fire that u quenched, with oyl^ is kindle A with water.
It is thus made : I laid that Naphtha will hum in water, and that Camphire is a kind
ofk. Wherefore, if yr.u mingle brimlione wich it, or other things, that will retain
fire ; if you caft in oyl or mud, it will quench it ; but it revives and flames more , if
you calt in water. L/'s^rcistcs, That iome old women in their plays, lighting Tor-
ches nude of theft: thing?, pafled over Tyber, that itfeemed a miracle to the be-
holder?. I faidit was the .ropercy of Bitumen to take fire from water, and to be
quenched with oyi. 'Diofcorides fai'h, That the Thracian ftone is bred in a certain
River of Scythia ; the name of it i; Pontus : it hath the Force of Jet , they fay it is
enfiamed by water, and quenched withoyl, like as Bitumen. Hicander fpeaks of
this (tone thus:

If that the Thracian ftone be burnt in fire,
And wet with water, the flame willafpire ;
But oyl wiU quench it* Thracian fhepherds bring
"This ftone from iti %jver Pontus^Poets fing.

Torches that will not be put out by the winds.

They are made with brimftone , for that is hardly put out, if once kindled.
Wherefore Torches made with wax and brimftone, maybe carried fafcly through
winds and tcmpefts. Thefe ate good for Armies to march by , or for other necefla-
ry thing?. Others ufe fuch: They boil the wick of the Torches in Salt-peter and
water ; when it is dried, they wet them with brimftone and Aqua, vita : of this mix-
ture then they make their Candles , with brimftone, and then with half Camphire,
and Turpentine, two parts Colophonia, three of Wax; of this they make four Can-
dles, and put them together: in the middle that is empty, they caft in quick-brim-
ftonc , and they will forcibly refift all things. Or thus : Boil wicks of Hemp or Cot-
ton in water, with Salt-peter ; take them out and dry them : then melt in a brafs pot
equal parts of brimftone , gunpowder, and wax; when they are melted, put in your
wicks to drink up part of the mixture; take them out, and to what is left in the
kettle, add Gunpowder, Brimftone, and Turpentine, of each a like quantity , of
which mixture make your Torches, and joyn them together. Alfo there is made

A cord that fet on fire, (hall neither [moke nor fmell.

When Souldiers or Hunters go fecretly by day or night , they ufe l'ome times to make
a Match , that being lighted , will neither tmell near hand, nor far off, nor make any
fmoke • for wild Beafts, if the Match fmell , will fent it , and run to the tops of the
Mountains. Take a new earthen por, and put into it a new cord fo handfomely, that
the whole pot may be filled : fo laid in rounds, that no more can go in ; cover it, and
lute it well three or four times, that it may have no vent; for the whole bufinefs
depends on this. Then make a fire round about it , by degrees , that firft it may
grow hot, then very hot, and laftly red hot ; and if fometimes the fmoke come forth,
ftop the chinks with clay ftill ; then heaped up under the coles, let it grow cold of
it lelf ; and opening the Pot, you fhall hnde the Cord black, like a cole. Light this
Cord, and it will neither fmoke nor fmell.

Cmap. XI.

Vire-compofitionsfor Fefttval days,

IHavefhewed you Terrible and Monftrous fire-works, it is fit to (hew you fome
to ufe at Solemn Times : not fo much for ufe , as to give you occafion to find out
higher matters. I fhall fhew then how to make one,

That when a man comes into hit Chamber, the whole Air may take fire.

Take

Of Artificial Fires. 301

Take* great qmntityof the beft refined Aquavit*, and put Camphire into it, cue
fmall, for it will foon diffoivc in it : when it is diflblved , (hut the Windows and
Chamber-doors, that the vapour that exhales, may not get forth : when the veffel is
foil with water, let it boil with coles, put under, without any flame, that all the wa-
ter may reiolve into fmoke, and fill the Chamber, and it will be fo thin, that you
can fcarce perceive it. Let fome man enter into the Chamber with a lighted Can-
dle in his hand , and the Air by the Candle light , will take fire all about, and the
whole Chamber will be in a flame, like an Oven, and will much terrifie one that goes
iD. If you diffolve in the water a little Muik, or Amber-grcCfe , after the flame you
(hall fmcll a curious fent. Alio there is made

Exceeding burning wau r :
Thus : Take old ftrong black Wine, put into it quick Lime, Tartar, Salt, and quick-
Brimftonc ; draw out the water of them with a glafs retort. This will burn exceed-
ingly, and never ceafe till it be all confumed. If you put it into a veflTel with a very
large mouth , and put flame neer it , it will prcfently take fire : if when it is on fire
you calf it againft a wall, or by night out at the window, you (ball fee the Air full
of fparks,and kindled with fires. It will burn, held in your hands, and yet will noc
fcald yon. Difiil it once again, and it will burn the ids; But if you take equal parts
of quick Lime, and Salt, and (hall mingle them with common Oyl, and make little
Balls, and call them into the belly of the retort at the neck , and then (ball draw
forth the Oyl by a vehement fire; and mingling this Oyl again with Salt and quick
Lime, (hall difl ill them again, and dull do the fame four times, an Oyl will come
forth that will burn wonderfully , that fome defervedly call it infernal Oyl. A So-
lemn Pleafant fire, is made for the Theater. If Camphire be ditTolved in Aqua vita,
and with that Fillets, Papers, or Parchments, be fmeered ; and being dried again, be
lighted, and (hall fall from a loft > as they fall lighted through the Air, you (hall fee
Serpents with great delight. But if you defirc

To ctft flame a great way,
Do thus : Beat Colophonia, Frankincenfe , or Amber finely, and hold them in the
palm of your hand,and put a lighted Candle between your fingers ; and as you throw
the Powder into the Air, let it pafs through the flame of the Candle ; for the flame
will fly up high. If you will have that

Many Candles fkall be lighted prefently,
on Feftival Days, as I hear they are wont to do amongft the Turks : You (hall boil
Brimftone and Orpiment with Oyl, and in them let thred boil ; when it is dry, bind
it to the wicks of Candles , and let them pafs through ; for when one head is light-
ed , the flame will run to them all , and fet them on fire. Some call ic Hermes his
Oyntmcnt. Any man may

Eating in the dark^cafi fparkjes out of hit mouth.
It is pleafant for the Spectators ; and it is thus : Let a man eat Sugar-candy,for as he
breaks it with his teeth, fparkles will (eem to fly out of his mouth ; as if one (hould
rub a fire-brand*

Cm a*. XII.
Of fome Experiments of Fires.

J Will fet down fome Experiments , that are without the ranks of the reft. I held
it better to conceal them : but they may give you occafion to think ©n greater niat-
•er s by them. If you will

That Bullets from Brafs Guns,maj enter deeper,

you may eafily try this againft a wall , or plank fet up. Let the Ball rather go into

the

501 Natural Magic k. cBooJ{\i.

the hollow of it, ftreight, then wide: bat wetitinOyl, before you put ic ih,andfb
caft it in : this Bullet (hot off by force of fire , will go in twice as far as otherwife.
The reafon is eafie : for the Oyl takes away the occahon of the Airs breathing forth •
for all vents being ftopt, the flames liriving within , calt forth the Bullet with more
violence, as we (hall (hew more at large. Soalfowill the Bullets of Brats Guns
penetrate with more force : and if you lard the Bullets , they will penetrate through
Arms of proof. I can alio by acunoing Artifice

Shoot a man through with a Bullet, and no place fhall be feen where it went in, or

came forth.

The minde of man is fo cunning, that it hath invented a way to fhoot a man quite
through with a Bullet, and yet no mark of the Bullet fhall appear, though all the in-
ward parts be braifed and beaten through. Confider, that what things are heavy, are
folid , and fo fubtile, that they will penetrate and leave no marks, where they cntred
or came out and they will do the fame, though they be united, as if they were dif-
joynted ; and every part will aft by it felf alone, as it would do being united. I have
faid thus, to take away all occafions from ignorant and wicked people, to do mifchief.
Ifaw

A Gun difcharge often, and yet no more powder wo* put in.

Famous Souldiers ufethis , not onely for Brafs Cannon , but for final 1 band- Guns.
It is thus: wrap a paper three or four tines about the rammer that is put into the
hollow mouth of the Gun , and drawing out the Gun-Rick , fill that hollow place
with Powder and Bullet ; here and there let the Bullets be flopt in, and gle wed faft,
that no feature or vent may appear in the paper. Firft, let it be put into the Gun,
but loofly, that the Powder put in above, may come to the vent-hole beneath : then
put your meafure of Powder in atop, and ftampin your Bullet , putting Gunpowder
to the touch-hole ; and putting fire to it, the upper Ball fhall be foot off with its
Powder : preiently thruft in a &arp inftrument at the vent-hole, and make a hole
in the Cartcridge, and feed it with Powdcr,and put fire to it again ; and in fhort time
it will dilcharge twice. I can

Blind jour eyes with the fmoke.
This may much profit , when enemies come to ftorra a City. But firft we muft con-
fider the wind , that it may be on the backs of our men, and may carry the fmoke
into the faces of our enemies. Let there bemeafures made like lanthorns, fo wide
that they may go in at the mouths of the Brafs Guns : fill them with Powder cf Eu-
phorbium, Pepper, quick Lime, Vine-afhes, and Arfoick fublimate; and put
them into the hollow ©f ir, after the Gunpowder : for. by force of the fire, will thefe
paper-frames break ; and the fmoke of the Powder,if it come at the eyes of the ene-
mies , will fo trouble them, that cafting away their weapons, they can hardly fave
their eyes.

Chap, XIII.
How it may Ire, that a Candle fhall burn continually,

BEfore we end this Book, I fhall difcovcr, whether it may be that a Candle once
lighted, fhould never be put out ; which feems very contrary to the reafon of
the corruptible things of this world , and to be patt belief. But let us fee firft whe-
ther the Antients ever attempted i^ or did it. We read in the Roman Hiftories, that
there was at Rome, in the Temple of the goddefs Vefiai and of Mtnc rva, at Athens j
and of Jpotioy at Delphi , a perpetual fire kindled. But this feem* to be falfc ; for I
remember that 1 have read in many Authors , that this perpetual fire was always
kept fo by the VcfialNuns, that it fhould never go out : as we find it in flutarch,\n
the Life of Numa • and then in the time of the Civil War, and of Mithridates, it went
out. At Delphi it was watched by widows, who took care , by always pouring in

Of Artificial Fires. 3 03

of Oyl, that ic fhou'.d never go fortb:but t is fai!ed,when the M^des burnt that 1 cm-
pie. Of the fame fort was that fire, God appointed by (JMofesio the Scriptures. The
fire (hall always bom upon mine Altar, which the i'riclt (kill always keep light cd,'
putting under wood day by day. Wherefore, the fire was not perpetual in the 1 e.m-
plcs of the gods cf the Gent) ies. Yet I read that about the Town Ateftc neer Pa-
dua, there was found an earthen Pitcher , in which there was another little. Pitcher^
and in that there was found a little light (till burning , which 'by the hands of iorne
ignorant fellows, pouring it rudely forth, was broken, and to the flame was
put onr. And in our time, about the year 600. in the iflacdNefis. that i auds
in Naples , there was a Marble Sepulchre of feme Roman found , and. ihax beipg
opened , a Vial was found within it ,' in which there was a Caadlc : wi: en this was
broken,and it came to the light, it went out: it was fhuc in before the coming pf our
Saviour Seme others I have heard of, by report of my friends, that Were found and
fecn with their eye-. Whence T colleit this may b-j done, and was done by our An-
cestor?. Let us fee if we can do the lame. Seme fay that Oyl of Metals may laft long,
and aimoft perpetually. But this is faife: for Oyl of Mcrals will not burn. Others
fay, Oyl of Juniper from the wood will la(t long , because the coles of that wood
may be kept a whole year alive under allies. But this is melt falle, becaufe I kept
a cole under afhes,and it would rot laft two,nor yet one dayjand thcOy I of the wood
burns moft vehemently , and is fooner wafted then common Oyl. Some boaft they
have drawn Oyl from the incombuftible Bone , thioking that flame cannot confume *
that : for a wick made thereof, will never be burnt ; and yet burns always, if you put
Oyl always to it : But if that be tiue, that the wick is not consumed by fire,yet that
follows not that Oyl extncStcd from it , fhould burn always acd never wafte : And
no man yet was ever fcen to draw Oyl from the ftone Amiants that would burn. O-
thers think that Oyl drawn from common Salt, will laft always; for ifycucaft Salt
intoO U it makes the Oyl in the Lamp laft twice as long, and not beconlumcd,
which 1 affirm to be true ; therefore if Oyl be drilled from it, it will burn always
and never willf. Yet this follows not that Oyl drawn from Salt will burn continu-
ally; and O; 1 oiHilled from it will burn no more than a ftor.eof Aqua fortu, that
part? Gold and Silver, of which kind it is. But it is an ignorant thing to imagine,
tha' an Ovl maybe made that (hall burn always, and never cenfome. Wherefore
fomeoiher thing muftbe thonsht on. Seme fay fan J they do not think foolifhly)
that fire in a Vial doth not always burn ; but in the Vial there is feme compofition
laid up, that lo loon as ir comes to the Air, prelently takes fire, and feems to burn
onely at that time, yet ir nevtrr burned before. This may be tiue: fGrasI often
have laboured in Chymical matters , aglafswell ftopt, and forgot by me after the
things were burnt in it ; and being io left for many moceths, I may fay, many years :
at laft, being opened, hath been feen to fbme, and burn, and lir.cke. What I had
burnt I had forgot , but they might be the lame things, that I heard of by my friend,
that had the fame chance: for when he had boil*d Litharge,Tarrar, quick Lime, and
Cinnaber in Vinegar , until it wa< all evaporated; and then covering and luting the
Vtffel well, be let it into a vehement fire , and when ic was enough, he f? t it by till
itwa«cold: after feme moneths, when he weDt to open it to fee his work, aflame,
fuddenly flew out of the Veftel > and fet fire on fome things , when as he thought of
no fuch matter: and the fame hath happened to many more. Moreover, when I
boiled Linfeed Oyl for the Prels, when the flames took within , I covered the pot
with clothes to put it out: after fome time I opened the Vtffel, the Oyl at thf Air
coming to it flamed again, and cook fire. Put experience is againft this opinion : For
wbofaw a fandlefbut upclofein aglais Via!, and to keep its flaming quality, and to
give light ? For the Ancients thought that the fouls of the dead did always reft in the
grave, as the allies do ; and that they might not lye in the dark , they endeavovred
all they could to fend cut this light, that their fouls might enjoy light continually.
Therefore we muft thirk on another experiment, and make trial of ir. But thismuft
be held for a rare and firm principle in Natures fhop,that the caufe of wonders is be-
caufe there can be no vacuum ; and the frame of the work will fooner break afunder,
tnd ill things run to nothing , thea there can be any fucb thing : Wherefore if a

Haute

304. Natural Magic k. 2?eo/^ u.

flame were (hut up in a glafs, and ill vent-holes ftopt dofe, if it could laft one mo-
ment, it would laft continually, and it were not poflible for it to be put our. There
are many wonders declared in this Book , aod many more (hall be fee down, that
have no other caufe. But how the flame fhould be lighted within fide, this is worth
the while to know ; It mult be a liquor or fome fubtile fubftance , and that will
evaporate but little ; and if then it can be (hut up in the glafs , when the glafs is (hue
it will laft always : which may eafily be performed by barBiog-glafics,fire,induftry,and
cunning. It cannot be extingnifhed , becanfe the Air can cone in nowhere to fill
Dp the emptinefs of the Vial : The Oyl is always turned into fmoke, and this, being
it cannot be diflblved into Air , it turns to Oyl, and kindleth again , and foic will
always by conrfe afford fuel for the light. Yo» have beard the beginnings j now
(carcn, labour, and make trial. '

THE

3©?

THE

THIRTEENTH BOOK

O F

Natural Masick :

Of tempering Steel.

' Thi Proems.

I Have taught y oh cowering monftrout Fires ; and before I part from them , Ifhdtreai
of Iron Mines ; for Iron is wrought by Fire : not that I intend to handle the Art
of it ; but onely to fetdown fome of the choicefi Secrets that are no lefs neceffary for the
ufe of me»y in thoje things J have fpoken of already, be fides the things I jpakf of in my Chy~
mteal works. Of Iron there are made the bejl ana the worfi Ir.firuments for the life of
tnan , faith Pliny. For we ufe it for works of Husbandry and building of Houfes ; and
we ufe tt for Wars ar.d Slaughters : not onely hard by j but to (hoot with Arrows , and
Darts, and Bullets, jar off. For, that man might die the fooner, he hath made it fwift, and
hath put wings to Iron. / (had teach you the divers tempers of Iron , and how to matte it
[oft and hard tb*t it (hall not onely cut Iron and other the hardeft fubfiances , but (hall
engrave the bar deft Torphyr and Marble Stones. In brief, the force of Iron conquers all
things.

Chap. f.

That Iron by mixture may be made harder,

T is apparent by moft famous and well-known Experience*
that Iron will grew more hard by being tempered , and be
made !oft alfo. And when I bad fought a long time whe-
ther tt would grew Toft or hard by hot, cold, moiftordry
things • I found that hot things would make it hard and foft,
and fo would cold and all the other qualities: wherefore fom-
thing elfe muft bethought on to hum cur thecaufec. I
found that it will grow hard by its contraries , and foft by
things that are friendly to it j and fo I came to Svmpathy and
Antipathy. The Ancients thought it was done by fome Superftitious Woifhip, and
that there was a Chain of Iron by the River Euphrates , that was called Zeugma,
wherewith Alexander the Great had there bound the Bridge ; and that the links of
it that were new made, were *rown tufty , the other links not being fo. TUny and
others think, That this proceeded frcm fome d iff rent qualities ; it may be forac
juices or Minerals might run underneatb,that left leme qualities, whereby Iron might
bv. made hard or foft. He faith. But the chief difference is in the water that it is
oft plun°ed into when it is red hot. The pre-eminence of Iron that is fo profit-
able, hat h made fome places famous here and there ; as Bilbilis and Turaflio in Spain,
Ccmum in Italy : yet arc there no Iron Mynes there. But of all the kindes , the
Seric Iron bears the Garland ; in the next place , the Parthian : nor are there any
other kindes of Iron tempered of pure Steel : for the reft are mingled, fnfiine
the Hiftorian reports, That in Gallicia of Spain, the chicfeft matter for Iron is found ;
but the water there is more forcible then the Iron : for the tempering with that,
makes the Iron more fiiarp • and there is no weapon approved amongft them, that

T c is

^06 Natural Magick. 2?0o^i 3.

is not made of the River Bilbiiis , or tempered with the water of Chalybes. And
hence are thofe people that live necr this River called Chalybes ; and they are heid
to have the bert Iron. Y^t Strabo faith , That the Chalybes were people in Pcntus
ncer the River Thertnodoo. Virgil ipeaks,

And the naked filybes Iron,

Then , as Pliny faith , Tc is commonly made foft with Oyl, and hardened by Water.
It is a cutlomc to quench thin Bars of Iron in Oyl , that they may not grow oriitic
by being quenched in Water. Nothing hath put me 'oiwird more to leik higher
matters, then this certain Experiment , That Iron may be made fo weak and loft by
Oyl , that it may be wrefted and broken with ones hands : and by Water it may be
made fo hard and ftubborn, that it will cut Iron like Lead*

Chap. II.

Hew Iron will wax foft,

I Shall firft fay how Iron may grow foft , and become tradable ; fo that one may
make Steel like Iron, and Iron foft as Lead. That which is hard, grows tofi by
fat things as I f*id ; and without fat matter, by the fire onely,as flmj affirms. Iron
made red hot in the fire , nnlefs yon beat it hard , it corrupts : as ir he fhould
fay, Steel grows foft of it lelf, if ic be oft made red hot-, and 1-ft to cool
of it feif in the fire : and fo will Iron grow fofter. I can do the lame divers;
wayes.

That Iron may grow foftt

Anoynt Iron with Oyl, Wax, Afafac ida ; and lute it over witb ftraw and dun?, *^d
dry is : then let it for one ni^ht be made red hot in burning coils. When it gr< ws
cold of it felf,voufhall findc it foft and tradable. Or, take Brimflone ihr e parts,
four parts of Potter1; Earth powdered : mingle thefe with Oyl to make it foft. Then
cover the Iron in this well, and cry it , and bury it in burning coals ; and, as I frid,
you may ufe Tallow and Butter the fame way. Iron wire red hot , if i; cooi alone,
it will be ft foft and du&ible, that you may ufe them likr Flax. There are alio fofc
juices of Herb«, and fat, as Mallons, Bean- Pod«, and 'uch -like, that can foften Tron ;
but they mult be hot when the Iron is quen;hed, and Juices, not diliilled Waters :
for Iron will grow hard in ail cold waters, and in liquid Oyl.

Chap. III.

The ttntfer of Iron mttft be nftd Uftn foft Irons.

J Have faid how Iron may be made fofter, now I will fhew the tempering o^ ir,
how it may be made tocut fharper. For the temper of it is diver? for divers ufes.
For Iron requires feveral tempers, if it be to cur Bread, or Wood, or Stone, or Iron,
thatisof divers liquors j and divers ways of firing it, and the time of quenching it
in thefe Liquors : for on thefe doth the bufinefs depend. When the Iron is fparkhng
red hot , that it can be no hotter, that it twirk es , they call it silver $ and then it
muft not be quenched , for it would be confnmed. But if it be of a yellow or red
colour, they call it Gold or Rofe-colour : and thenquer cbed in Liquors , it grows
the harder : this colour requires them to quench it. Bm obferve , That if all the
Iron be tempered , the colour muft be blew or Violet cole ur , as the cd e of a
Sword , Rafor or Lancet : fcr in thefe the temper will be loft if they arc made hoc
again. Then you muft obferve the fecond colours ; namely, when the Iron is
quenched, and fo plunged in, grows hard. The laft is Afh eclcur : and after this if
it be quenched, it will be the leaft of all nude hard. For example:

Of tempering Steel.

The temper of a Knife to cttt Bread.

j have feen many ingenious men that laboured for ibis temper, who, having Knives
fit to cut ill hardlubHanccs , yet they could l'carce fail Uuon a temper to cue Bread
for the Tabic I fulfilled their defire with fuch a temper. Wnerefore to cut Bread,
let the Steel be loftiv tempered thus : Heat gently Steel, that when its broken iecmS
to be made of very (mall grains ; and let it be excellent well purged from lion : then
ftrike it witn a Hammer to make a Knife of it : then work it with the Fiie, and frame
it like a Knite, and polifti it with the Wheel : then put it into the Fire, till it appear
Violct-coicur. Rub it over with Sope, that it may have a better colour from the Fires
then take it from the Fire, and anoy nt the edge of it with a Linen-cloth dipt in Oyl
of O ivc<, until it grow cold ; fo you (hall loften the hardnefs of the Steel by the
gentienelsof the Oyl,and a moderate heat. Not much differs from this,

The temper of Iron for Wood,

Something harder temper is fit to cut wood • butitmu* be gentle alfo : therefore
leE your Iron c< me to the fame Violet-colour, and then plunge it into waters: take
it out . and when it appears Afti-colour, call it into cold water. Nor is there much
difference in

The temper for Inflrnmehts to let blood.

It is quenched in Oyl, and grows hard ; becaufe it is tender and fubtile : for fhould
k be quenched in water, it would be wrefted and broken.

The temper of Iron for a Sythe.

A'ter that the Iron is made into* Sythe, let it grow hot to the colour of Gold, and
then quench it in O/l , orlm-erii with Tallow, becaufe it is lubtile Iron ; and
(houid it be quenched in waters, it would either crumble or be wrefted.

Chap. IV.
Hoiofor all mixtures, ron may be tempered m»Jf bard,

NOw T will fhew fome ways whereby Tron may be made extream hard : for that
Iron that muH be ufed for an In rumcnt to hammer, and poliflti, and fit other
Iron, muff be much harder then that.

The temper of Iron for Files.
It muft be made of the beft Steel, and excellently tempered, that it may polifh, and
fit o her Iron as it (hculd b : Take Ox hoofs,and put them into an Oven to dry,thac
they may be powdered fine : mingle well one part cf this with as much commofl
Salt, beaten Glals, and Chimney-foor, and beat them together, and lay them up for
your u:c in a wooden Veffel hanging in the imoak ; for the Salt will melt with any
moifture of the place or Air. The powder being prepared, make your Iron like to a
file : then cut it chequerwife, and crofsw*yc*,with a (harp edged tool : having made
the Iron tender and 10ft, as I faid, then make an Iron chert fit to lay up yoar files in,
and put them into it brewing on the powders by courfe,that they may be covered all
over : then put on the cover, and lute well the chinks with clay and raw, that the
fmcak of the powder mav not breath out • and then lay a heap of burning coals all
over it,that it may be red-hot about an honr: when you think the powder to be burne
and con umed, take t he cheft out from the coals with Iron pinchers, and plunge the
files into very cold water, and fo they will become extream hard. This is the ufual
remper for hies ; for we tear not if the files ftiould be wrefted by cold waters. But I
fliali teach you to temper them excellently

Anoth r way.

Take the pith out of Goats horns, anddrv it, and powder it : then lay your files
in a little Cheft ftrewed over with thi« Powder , and do as you did before. Yet
obl'erve this , That two files fupemumerary muft be laid in , fo that you may take
then forth ac plcafnre : and when yon think the Cheft , covered with burning coals,

It i hath

JC8 NaTURAI: MagTICK. 2>00^

bath taken in the force of che Powder, take cut one of the fupernumersry Files,
*nd temper it , and break it ; and if you finde it to be very finely grain "d within,
and r© be pare Steel, according to your defire, take the Chert from the fire, s nd tem-
per them all the fame way : or elfe,if it be not toyonr mindr,letthem ftay in longer*
and refting a little while , take out the other fupernumerary File, and try it, till yon
have found ic perfect. So we may

'temper Knives to be mefl hard.
Take a new Ox hoof, heat it, and ftrike it with a Hammer on the fide ; for the pith
will conde forth : dry it in an Oven; and, aslfaid, put it into a pot , alwayej
putting in two fupernumeraries , that may be taken forth, to try if they be come
to be pure Steel ; and doing the fame as before , they will be moft hard. I will
(hew

How an Haberveon or Coat of Arms is to be tempered.

ajsaVi^flJ « fHljfcsilfttfc *ff 'i '**d * b'»c v iuo •'■>• r.i . jm>nsii't r,fjirii9fl!SjJ'4
Take foft Iron Armour of fmall price , and put ir into a pot , fire wing upon ic the
Powders abovefaid ; cover it, and lute it over, that ic'have co vent, and make a good
Fire about it : then at the time fit , take the Pot with iron pinchers ; and Rriking
the Pot with a Hammer, quench the whole Hernefs, red hot, in the foresaid water :
for fo it becomes molt hard , that it will eafily refift the flrokes of Poniards.. The
quantity of the Powder is, that if the Harnefs be ten on welve pounds wcighc , lay
on two pounds and a half of Powder, that the Powder may Rick all over : Wet the
Armour in water, and rowl it in the Powder, and lay it in the pot by courfes. Bur,
becaulc it is moft hard, lert the rings of a Coat of Male (hould be broken, and flie in
pieces , ihc'fe mull be ftrength added to the hardnefs. Workmen call it a Return,
Taking it out of the Water , fhake it up and down in Vinegar , that it may be po-
lifhed, and the colour be made perfpicuous : then make red hot a plate of1 Iron,
and lay part of the Coat of Male, or all of it upon the fame : when itfhewsan A&-
colour, workmen call it Berotinnm j catt it again into the water , and that hardnefs
abated ; and will ic yield to the ftroke more eafily : fo of a bafe Coat of Male , you
fhall have one that will refift all blow*. By the mixture of Sharp things,iron is made
hard and brittle ; but imlefs Hreo^th be added,ic will rlie in pieces with every blows
therefore it is needful to learn perfectly how to add ftrength to it.

Chap. V.
Liquors that will temper Iron to be exceeding hard.

J Said that by Antipathy Iron is hardened, and foftened by Sympathy : it delights
in fat things, and the pores are opened by it, and it grows foft : but on the
contrary^ aftringent thing?, and cold , thatfhut up the pores , by a contrary quality,
make it extreme hard ; they leem therefore to do it : yet we mull not omit fuch
things as do it by their property. If you would have

tA S aw tempered to [aw Iron,
Make yonr Saw of the beft Steel, and arm it well that it be not wrefted byex-
tinguifhing it. Then make a wooden Pipe as long as the Iron of the Saw, that
may contain a liquor made of Water, Alom, and Pifs ; Plunge in the red hot Iron,
and take it out, and obferve the colouts : when it comes to be violet , put ill into
the liquor, till it grow cold. Yet I will not conceal, that it may be done by a Brafs
wire bent like a bow, and with Powder of Emril and Oy 1 : for you fhall cut Iron like
Wood. Alfo, there are tempered

Fifli'kookj to become extream hard.
The Hook ferves for a part to catch Fifh;for it muft be fmall and ftrongrif it be grear,
the Fifh will fee it, and will not fwaliow it ; if it be too fmall , it will break with
great weight and motion • if it be foft, it will be tmdeftraight, and the Fifh. will get

off,

Of tempering SteeL 309

cff. Wherefore, that they may be ftrong,fmall,aDd not to be bended in the ra<.uih •
.you (hall thus temper them : Of Mowers Syihes make wire,or or the belt Steel, and
mike Hooks thereof, fmaU and fine : heat them not red-hot in the Fire ; for that vviil
devour them : but lay them on a plate of red hot Iron. When they grow red, call
them into the watenwhen they arc cold,take them out and dry them. I hen make the
pliteof Iron hot again , and lay on the Hooks the lecond time ; and when an A(h
colour,, or that they commonly call Berotinus, appears, plunge them into the water
again, that they may be hrong : for elfe they would be brittle. So you may make

falters extream hard,

Jilbertnt^hiixxi whom others have it , faith , That Iron is made more ftrong,if it be
tempered with juice of Radish , and Water of Earth-worms , three or four times.
But I, when I had often tempered it with juice of Radifh , and Horfe-Radifh , and
Worms, I found it alwayes lofter, till it became like Lead : and it was falfe , as the
reft of his Receits are. But thus fhall you make Steel excream hard , that with that
onely, and no other mixture, you may make suiters very hard : Divide the Steel into
very lmall pieces like Dice , and let them touch one the other , binding Iron wires
over them, faftning all with an Iron wire : put them into the Fire till they grow red
hot, and fparkle, at leaft fifteen times, and wrap them in thefe powders that are
made of black Borax one part, Oyfter (hells,Cuttle-bones,of each two parts : then
ttrike them with a Hammer, that they may all unite together , and make C ulcers , or
Knives,or what you will :for they will beextream hard. For this is the moft excellent
fort of Steel , that onely tempered with waters, is made moft hard. There is ano-
ther, but not fo good ; and unlefs it be well tempered , it alwayes grows worfc.
It is this:

To temper a Graver to cut Marble,

Make your Graver of the beft Steel , let it be red hot in the Fire , till it be red or
Rofc coloured ; dip it into water, then take it away, and obfervc the fecond colour*
When it is yellow as Gold, cad it into the water. So almoft is

%A Tool made to cut Iron,
When the fame red Rofe colour appears, plunge it into the water, or fome fharp li-
quor that we (hall (hew ; and you muft obfervc the fecond yellow colour, or wheat
colour, and then catt it into the water. Thefc arc the beft

Tempers for Swords,

Swords muft be tough, left whilft we fhould make a thruft, they fhould break • alf©j
they muft have a fharp edge, that when we cut , they may cot oft what we cut. The
way is thus : Temper the body ot it with Oyl and Butter , to make it tough ; and
temper the edge with (harp things , that they may be ftrong to cut : and this is
done, either with wooden Pipes, or woollen Cloths, wet with Liquor : ufc it wittily
and cunningly.

Cm a p. VI.

Of the temper of a Tool jha&cut a forphjr Marble Stent*

OUr Anceftors knew well to temper their Tools , wherewith they could cafily
cur a Porphyr Stone , as infinite Works teftifie that were left to us : but the
way was (hewed by none,and is wholly concealed; which is a mighty difgrace to Our
t imes, when we neglect fucb rare and ufeful Inventions , and make no account of
them. That we might be freed from this difhonour, with great care, and pains, and
coft,I made trial of all things came to my hand, or I could think of, by divers wayes
and experiments,that I might attain unto it : at laft,by Gods great bieffing, 1 found
a far greater paffagefor to come to thefe things, and what exceeds this. And I will
not be grieved to telatc what I f©und out by chance, whilft I made trial of thefe

things,.

^io Natural Maqick. 2>00^ija

things. Tbebufinefs confined in thefc difficulties. If the temper of the Graver was
too ftrong and ftubborn,with the vehement blow of the Hammer it flew in piecesrbnt
if it was foft, k bowed, and would not touch the (tone : wherefore it was to be moft
ftrong and tough, that it might neither yield to the ftroke, nor flie alunder. More-
over, the juice or water the Iron muft be tempered in, muft be cleer and pure : for if
it be troubled * the colours coming from heat could not be difecrned : and fo the
time to plunge the Tools in would not be known, on which the whole Art depends.
So then,clcer and purified juices will fhew the time of the temper. The colours muft
be chiefly regarded : for they fhew the time to plunge it in and take it out • and be-
caufe that the Iron muft be made moft hard and tough , therefore the colour muft be
a middle colour between filvcr and gold : and when this colour is' come, plunge the
whole edge of the Tool into the liquor , and after a little time , take it out j and
when it appears a Violet-colour, dip it into the liquor again , left the heat , yet re-
maining in the Tool , may again fpoil the temper : yet this we muft chiefly regard,
that the liquors into which the Iron is plunged, be extream cold ; for if they be hot,
they will work the lefs : and you muft never dip an Iron into water, that other Iron
hath been dipt in before ; for when it is grown hot, it will do nothing • but dip it
into fome other that is frefh and cold ; and let this in the mean time, fwirn in fome
glazed Veffcl of cold water, that it may foon grow cold , and you fhall have it moft
cold for your work. Yet thefe arc

lo t •wa»B-» stilsitf ^><."i« { > _r»i!' { ' it jsoj 4t? rnrijfrH c Oiiw *:i*i>i ^diiii

The hardefi tempers of Iron,

If you quench red-hot Iron in diftilled Vinegar , it will grow hard. The fame will
happen, if you do it into diftilled Urine, by reafon of the Salt it contains in it. If yoii
temper it with dew , that in the month of May is found on Vetches Leaves , it will
grow moft hard. For what iscolle&ed above them, is fait ; as I taught elfewhere
out of Theophrafttu. Vinegar, in which Salt Ammoniac is diflblved , will make a
moft ftrong temper : but if you temper Iron with Salt of Urine and ^alt-Peter dif-
lblved in water, it will be very hard ; or if you powder Salt-Perer and Salt Ammo-
niac , and fhut t hem up in a Glafs Vcflel with a long aeck, in dung, or moift places,
till they reiblve into water, and quench the red-hot Iron in the water, you fhall do
better. Alfo, Iron dipped into a liquor of quick Lime, and the Salt of Soda purified!
with a Spunge, will become extream hard. All thefe are excellent things , and will
do the work: yet I fhall fhew you fome that are far better.

lo temper Iron to cm Porphjr Marble,
Take the fugitive fervant , once received , and then exalted agiin , and fhut it in a
glazed Veffel, till it confume in Fire or water ; fo the Iron Tool will grow hard,that
you may eafily have your defire : but if it be tco hard , that it be too brittle , add
more liquor, or elfe more Metal : yet take care of this alone,whilft you have found
themeafureof your work : for the Iron will grow ftrong and tough. The fame alfo
will be happily petformed by the foul moyfture of the Serpent Python , and by the
wafting thereof : for the fair gives force,and the fat toughnefs. And thefc are the beft
and choiccft that I have tried in this kinde.

Cha*. Vlt
How to grave a Torphjr Marble without an Iron tool.

SOme have attempted to do this without any Graver, but with ftrong and forcible
water; and this A rgument moved them to it : When they faw Vinegar and (harp
juices to fwell into bubbles, being caft upon Marble,and to corrode it,they fuppofed
that if they fhonld draw very ftrong fharp liquor from fliarp and corroding things ,
they might do the fame work without labour. At laft, thus they did it : Take a little
Mercury fublimate,and a little Salt Ammoniac;diftil thefe as I fhewed in Glafs Stills:
then take a little Verdigreafc, Tin calcined, and of thefire-ftone , powder all thefe
mihS4l<jaim£y and common Salt, and Salt Ammoniac, anddiftil them, and pour

Of tempering Steel. f

the diftiiled liquor again upon the Foeces, and diftil it again, and do it again the third
time : then keep the liquor in a Vcflel well ttopt. When you go about your work,
imeer the Porphyr Marble with Goats met , onely touch not thofe parts you mean
to have engraved : youtnult make a ledge about it , that whea you pour on your
water , it may not run eft here and there ; and the liquor poured on will eat moft
ftrongly : when it ceafethto eat , cart ic away, and pour on frefh j and do this fo
often, till you have graved it (o much as you pieafe, and yon have done.

Chap. VIII.
How Iron may be made hot in the fire to be made tradable for works.

M\ny feek mcft diligently , how by a fecret Art Iron may befo tempered, that
it may neither break, nor be (hot through with Guns. But ihele men do not
take care of what they have before them, and leek for what they have not ; for would
they confidcr whilft the Iron heats, the thing they feek for fo eargerlv, is before their
eyes I fay therefore , That the rcafon why Swords break and Hie in pieces , and
brctts of Iron are fhot through with Guns, is , becaufe there arc flaws in the Iron,
and it cleaves in divers places , and the parts are ill united ; and becaufe theie
clefts are fcarcc vifible this is the cauie that whenthey are bended or rtricken they
break: for if you mark well, whenever Knives or Swords break in pieces, you fhall
al wa>es hnde theie craks and Barnes, and the folid parts are not broken; and being
bended, refilt. Buc when I fought for ihecaufe of theie flaws, I found at la(f, that
in Smiths Shops, where Iron is made hot, they heap up coals over the Iron, and the
retufe of coal* ; fa\ ing, The iron will not beat fo eaiiiy, if feme rubbifh of the coals
and duff be not heaped over it : and with this trumpcry-duft , there are always
rci-gled fmall florec, chalk, and other things gathered together in pieces ; which,
whenthev meet in the fire , they caufc many knots omwarcly, or cavities inward-
ly, and crack ,rhat ihe pars cannot well fallen together. Whence, thtu^h the bn-
fineft be trivial and of iimll regard , yet this is the caufe of fo great inconveniences
thatfollow. Wherefore, to avoid this impediment, I thought on this courfe to be
taken: Ic*ft my roals into a wpoden bowltull of water: for they will fwim on the
r»-<p, 'but the tilth and br-cks will tall to the bottom; thofe that fwim, I take out and
drv them ; and thofe I ufefor my wotks. What a ble fling of God this profitable
Invenrion i> ! for thus m-n make Swords, Knives, Bucklers, Coats of Male, and all
forts of Armour fo perfect, that ir were long and tedious to relate : for I have feea
Iron brelts, that fcarce weighed above twelve pound, to be Musker -proof. And if
we fhould add the temper to them, they would come to far greater effects.

Chap. IX.

How "DamcukKnives may be made,

NOw whilft I fer down thefe Operations very pleafant, namely, bow Damask
Knives may be made to recover their marks that are worn out , and how the
fame marks may be made upon other Knives. If then we would

%enew the waved marks of Datnatl^ Knives that are worn out,
poYiih a Po*Mird , ' wr rd or Knife , very well with Powder of Emril and Oyl , and
then cleanfe it with Cnalk, that no parr may be dark, but that it may glifter all over :
then wet it all with juice of Lemmons mmoled with Tanners water, that is made
with Vitriol : for when k is dry, > he marks will all be feen in their places, and wave
as they did before. And if you will

M Me marltt wtth VamoikJCniveSy
And that fo acurately, thar vou can fcarce know them from Damask Knives : Polifla
a Knife very well , as I faid, and Icowrc it with Chalk : then ttir with your bands,

Chalk

yi Natural Magick. Soo^i}.

Ckalk mingled with water . and touching it with your fingers , iub the edge of the
Sword that was polifhed , andycufhall make maik; as v,ou pleafe : when yon have
do»e,dry them at the fire or Sumthen you mutt have a water ready wherein Vitriol is
diflolved, andlmeer that upon it : for when the Chalk i? gone, it will dyeic with a
black colour. After a little Hay, wet it in water, and wafh it off : where the Chalk
Was, there will be no ftain ; and you will be glad to fee the fuccefs. You may with
Chalk make the waving Lines running up aed down. If any enc defires

lo dr aw forth Vama^k^S'eelfor rvork^

You may do it thus : for without Art it is not to be done. Too much heat makes it
crumble,and cold is ftubbormbut by An,of broken Swords Knives may be made very
handfomely ; and Wheels and Tables, that Silver and Gold wire are drawn through,
and made even by,to be ufed for weaving : Put it gently to the fire,that it may grow
hot to a Golden colour ; but put under the fire for afhes, Gip caldned, and wet with
water : for without Gip, when you hammer it, it will fwell into bubbles, and will flic
and com: to be drofs and rcfufc.

Chap. X.

How ptlifbed Iron may be preserved from ruft.

T T is fo profirable to preferve Iron from ruft, that many hive laboured how to do it
wiih cafe. Plmy frith, That Iron is preferved fromruft,by Cerufs,Gip,and liquid
I itch B n he fhiws not how Ccrufs may be made : Yet thofe that know how to
make Oyl of Cerufs without Vinegar, Iron being fmeered therewith , is eafily pre-
fer vedtromrull. Some anoynt the Iron with Deer sfuet, and fokeep it free ftomtult;
but I ute the fat fubnance in the Hoofs of Oxen,

&&&& &&&&&& &&&

.-

THE

■7

THE

FOURTEENTH BOOK

O F

Natural Magick :

I ftiall {hew fome choice things in the Art of Cookery,

Thb Proem 1.

THe fak* Art hath fome choice Secret s, that may make Banquets more dainty And full
of admiration : Tbefe I purpofe to reveal, not that fo J might invite Gluttons and Pa-
rajites to Luxury, but that with fmallcofi and expense, I might pet forth the curiofi ties of
t/irt, and may give oceajton to others thereby to invent greater matters by tbefe. the Art
confifis about eating and drinking. Ifhallfirft fpeak of Meats, then of Drinks ; and by the
way IjhaH not omit fome merry pafs- times , that I may recreate the Gue[ts, not enely with
Banquet sy but aifo with Mirth and Delights.

Chap. I.
How Flefh may be made tender.

Shall begin with Flefh, and Anew how ic may be made tender,
that Gluttons much dcfire. I (lull do ic divers ways; Some
that proceed froth che kind of their death ; others from the
fecrec properties of things : and they will grow fo tender, that
they will aloioft refolve into broth. Then how whileft the
creatures are yet alive , they may be made tender. For ex~
le:

How to make Sheeps fiejh tender.

The Flefh of creatores killed by their enemies , efpecialiy fuch as they hate and
fear, will be very tender. Zoroafierla his Cjeoponicks faith , that Sheep killed by
Wolves, and bicren, their fLfh will be more tender , and fo the fweeter. Plutarch
in Sympofacie gives the caufe of ir. Sheeps Flefh,be faiih,bitten by a Wolf becomes
the fweeter, becaufe the Wolfe by biting, makes the Flefh more flaggy and tender.
For the breath of the Wolfe is fo hot , that the hardeft bones will confume in his
ftomach, and melt; and for this caufe, thofe things will the fodner corrupt, that
the Wolfe bites. And both Hunters and Cooks can tefti x , that creatures killed
divers ways , are div erfly affe&ed. Some of thefe are killed at one blow, that with
©neftroke they lye for dead: yet others are hardly killed ac many blow?. And
which is more wonderful, fome by a wound given with the Iron weapon, have im-
printed fuch a quality upon the creature , that ic prefently corrupted, and would not
keep fweet one day • and others have killed them as fuddtnly , yet no fuch quality
renaain'd in the flefh that was killed , and ic would lift feme time. Moreover, that
a certain vertne , when creatures are fliin or dye , comes forth to their skins, and
hair, and nails, Homer was not ignorant of , who writing ©f skins and thongs ; A
thong faith he of an ox flain by force, for the ?kins of thofe creatures are toucher and
flronger, when they dy not by old age or of difeafes, but are flain. On che contrary,
filch as dye by rhe bitings of Beads , their hoofs will grow black, and their hairs fall
off, and their skins will wither and flag. Thus far Tlutarcb, But I think thefe things

V v are

314- Natural Magigk. Soo^ij.

arcfalfe ; for bow fhoutd Sheeps flefhgrow tender by the Wolfes breath, I under-
ftand knot : For other creatures that are killed by their enemies , and flefhof *
contrary nature doth alfo grow tender , where there are no hot vapours. But I
think that the abfence of blood, makes the flefh tender , for thefe reafons. Quails
and Phcafants killed by Hawks, are very tender, but their hearts are found full of
blood , and hard within them. Deer and Bores, killed by Dogs,are more tender .
but harder if by Guns : and about,the heart the parts arc fo hard, that they can fcarcc
be boiled. Fear of death drives the blood to the heart ; the other parts are blood*
lefs, as fhall appear by the following experiments. As

How Geefr, Duck* Phcafants, Quails, and other Birds become mcfl tender ;
This is eafily done, if we hunt them and fly Hawks, and other birds of prey,tt them .
for whilft they fight , they ftrive to be gone , and they are fometimc held in the
Falcons Tallents , and are wounded with divers flrokes ; and this makes them fo
tender that it is wonderful: Wherefore, when we would eat crammed Birds we
ftiould purpofely fly a Hawk at them , and being killed by them, (hould grow more
tender to be defired. So

That Ox-ficfl) may grow tender ;
cfpecially of old Oxen } for they are dry and hard , and will not eafily boil. The
Butchers fet hounds at them , and let them prey upon them, and they will for fome
hours defend themfelves with their horns : at laft, being overcome by multitudes of
Dogs, they fall with their ears torn , and bit in their skin; thefe brought into the
Humbles, and cut one , are more tender than ordinary. Some of them fighting
openly with Bears, and fometimes kill'd by them, if any of the body be left, it will
be fo tender that it will melt in a mans mouth. We may do the fame, if we keep
creatures fometimein fear of death, and the longer yon keep them, fo the tender
they will be. For

To make Hens tender,

we flight them off from high Towers ; fo wedoTurkies, Peacocks: and when they
cannot fly away by the weight of their bodies, for fear of death, with great pains and
fhaking of their wings, they fall down, that they may take no hurt by falling. Thofe
that are fc killed with fear of death, grow very tender. So old Pigeons that by
chance had fallen into deep pits, when they had long laboured , ftruggling with
their fluttering wings above the waters to fave themfelves from drowning , with
Arugling and fear of death they grew very tender ; and by this accident we have
learned , that when we would have them very tender , we purpofely drive them in.
Horace in Serm. faith almoft the fame.

How a CocJ{ may grow tender,
if you moft fuddenly fet him before your friends , and cannot help it. If that a gneft
do come by chance at night , and if the cock be tough , not fit to eat, drownM him
alive in Mufcadel outright, and he will fooncouaeto be tender meat. We ufe to
hang up Turkics alive by the bills, at the fadlcbow, when we ride ; and thefe being
thus racket and toffed with great pains,at the journeys end yon (Kail find them dead,
*nd very tender.

Chap. II.

How fiefh maj grow tender fyfecret propriety.

SOme things there are, that by fecret propriety make flefh tender. I (hall record
two prodigious miracles of Nature. One, that hung on a fig-tree,

Cocks flejh grows tender,

and fo fhort, that it is wonderful : Another, that wild Cocks bound to a fig-tree, will

gro#

Of Cookery*

grow cacne , and ftand immoveable. Plutarch in his Sympofacks , gives the reafon,
why the Sacrifices of Cooks tiling to a Fig-tree didprefentiy grow tender and fhort,
when the Cook of Ariftian, amongft other meats, offered to Hercules a tender
dunghil-Cock, newly flain, that was cxtreamfinort x'Anftio gives the reafon of this
tendernefs to be the Fig-tree ; and he maintaned , that thefe killed , though
they be hard, will grow tender, if they be hanged up on a Fig-tree. It is cer-
tain, as we may judge by fight , that the Fig-tree fends forth a vehement and ftrong
vapour. This alfo confirms that which is commonly fpoken of Bulls, that the fiercer!
of them bound to a Fig-tree,will grow tame prefently, and will endure to be touch-
ed wich your hand, and to bear the yoke ; and they puff out all their anger, and lay
afide their courage that thus fails them : for fo forcible is the acrimony of the vapour
of that Tree, that though the Bull rage never fo much ,'yet this will tame him. For
the Fig-tree is more full of Milky juice, then other Trees are ; fo that the Wood,
Boughs, Figs, are almoft all full of it : wherefore, when it is burnt, the fmoke it fends
forth,doth bite and tear one very much ; and a lixivium made of them burnt, is very
detergeor, and cleanfing : alfo Chcefe is curdled with Fig-tree milk, that comes forth
of the Tree , if you cut the green bark. Some would have the heat to be the caufe,
that the Milk curds, by the juice of the Fig-tree caft in , which melts the watry fub-
ftance of the humour ; wherefore the Fig-tree fends forth a hot and fharp vapour,
and thac is digesting, and dries and conco&s the flefh of Birds, fothat they grow ten-
der. So

Ox flefh may fa made tender^
If vou pu* the ftalks of wilde Fig-trees into the pot , wherein Ox flefh is boil'd,they
will be boil 'd much the fooner, by reafon of the wood. Pliny, I gave you the reafon
of it before from Antipathy. The Egyptians alluding to this, when they would de-
fcribeaman that wa< punifhed to the height, they painted a Bull tied to a wilde
Fig-tree : For when he rores, if he be bound to a wilde Fig-tree, he will prefently
grow tame. If we will have

Pttlfegrow tender,

becaufe I fee that there is great antipathy between Pulfe and Choke fitch, that de-
ftroys and ftrangles them. Some call this Lions Herbe: for as a Lion doth with
great rage and furioufly kill Cattle and Sheep, fodoth choke fitch all Pulfe: where-
fore this Herbe put to Pulfe, when they boil, will make them boil the fooner. But

To make meats boil the fooner,
All kinds of Docks, though they be dry and juicelefs, will doit, that allflelb. will
grow tender, and become fit to eat. Wherefore the Antients always fed on it, that
it might digeft the meat in their ftomacks, and loofe their bellies. Alfo the root of
wilde Nettles boil'd with flefh, will make them tender. Pliny.

Chap. III.

How Flefh may be made tender othermfe*

T Here be other ways to make flefh tender: Firft, if flefh killed be rtiJDg in the
open Air , for they will grow tender, as beginning to corrupt , but they muft
not ftay there fo long till they corrupt indeed. Wherefore you muft know their

quality, which will keep longeft, and which not. For example ,;

W'lu v"» .>ouci \-y owl rlt a ;> « i v?'.j 315 n** r rpcj dikT £9U<d ">i»w aiod i .ear.

Peacocks, Partrtdge, Pheafants to be made tender. ; I
Ifaac faith, That a Peacock killed will be kept two days, and three in winter, that
the hard fl fh of it may grow foft. Haiiabas hangs thtm up three days , hanging
ftories to their feet. Savanrola hangs their) i up ten days without weights. Simeon
Sethi faith, That Patridge newly killed areYnbt to be cat, but after a dtyor two,thac
they may lofe their hardnefs. Pheafants in Summer tiling up twddays, and three
days in winter, after they are killed, will be fit meat. Arnolm* And to avoid tedi-
•ttfnefs, the fame muft be done with other rWh. The like

Vv 2 That

y6 Natural Magic k. 2?0O^ i^..

That B.rds may grow tender.
If you hang thofc in Moon-light, that were killed io the nighr,they will grow more
tender by boiling : For the Moon hath grtatvertue to make flefh tender, for it is
but a kit d of corruption. Therefore wood cot by Moon-light, will fooncr grow
rotten, and fruit fooncr grow ripe. Vaphnss the Phyfitian in jithenatu.

Chap. IV.
How SheU-crtamres may grow more tender*

Before T end to (peak of ways to make fkfh more render • Tc will not be amifs to
make Crabs tender, and by another way then I fhcw'd before. How we may
make

frah-jijh tender fiel'd.

At Rome they do fo, and it becomes pleafant and excellent meat for Noble mens
Tables. 1 fpeakof thole Crabs bred mfrefh waters : For at Veni ;e l have eaten
them that bred naturally tender in fair-waters ; they call (hem commonly Mollecas:
but they are not fo fwect , as they are ande at Rome $ snd they ask a Julius apiece.
The way is, in the Moneths cf June, ',u/yy ■dugHft, and September, the ( rabs nfe to
caft their fhels, and put iff their old coar ; at that time fiflaer-men fearcb about the
banks of Rivers, where they find their holes and caves half ltr.pt, and by that they
knew (he time h ccme to cafl their (hells ; for the more their (he; Is grow tender, the
more they fhut up their holes. They grow tendei fitrt about the feet , and by de-
grees it afcends over rheir whole bcd.es. When they have taken them, thev bring
them home, and put them every one in feveral earthen pots ; and they pur in wa-
ter, that it may cover half their bodies, andfo they let them remain eight or ten
days, chancing the water every day , and their (hells will grow more tender every
day. When it is all fofr, that it is tranfparent as Cry Hal, they fry then with butter
and milk, and bring them to the Table. So

Squils grow tender.

We muff do as we did to Crabs, for thev caft their (heljs as Crabs do: and Natnre
did this for fome end ; for when their (hells are grown too thick and weighty , they
can ic2rce crawl; wherefore by the excrements that go into it, that are contained
to make a new (hell within, the former that was made is broken, and falls off.

Chap. V.

That living fteatptret may be made more fat and welltajled,

I Shall endeavour to fhrw how living Creatures may be made more fat and well ta-
ped, that we may fct more favory meats before our gueifs. The Antients were
not negligent in this matters Wherefore you (hall find many ways , not oncly-a-
mongfl Cooka,but fuch as write concerning Husbandry. Liccorifh Gluttons found
cut the ways to fat Cattle, that they might feed on them more plentifully and dain-
tily. Hen. e they called them cram'd, becaufethey were full fed, and had erofs bel-
lies. Thofc were called Bird pens, where they fatted all forts of Birds. iJM-. Letita
Strab*> was the fiift that appointed this ; and he appointed Crammers to take care
of them, and* ordered how much every crammed bird (hould ear. They will fat
belie: in winter than in fummcx, becaufe Birds at that time of the year are bclf, be-
ing rjot fo torch wafted with yongj and Cocks will fat better then Hens , ard fuch
as never iro^Uaor made cgsjs. In fummer, when it is at an end, and the fowie Grapes
hang yet upon the Vines, they are at the beff . I fh all therefore teach

How H<ns and othr lirds mvjlbe crammed.

, ( y ChOofc

Of Cool^ery. py

Choofe a place that is hct and obfcure ; fhut ihcm ail up aparr, and fo clcfc in their
pens, ihat they cannot ccme together, nor tern ; and make two holes, one fcr their
heads- to tut forth, and the other for their tails , that they may botb car their meat
acd (nlie it cut again when it is digelied. Lay loft hay under them j for if they lye
hard, they will never fat. Pull off all the feathers frcm their heads, thigh*, and frcm
under their wings;there,that it may breed no lice ; here, that the dung corrupt it rot.
For meat, give them gobbets of Barley-Meal,madc up with water ; at the firti fcr feme
time, more fparirgly, then after give thtm as much as they can digeft ; and you mutt
give them no new mear, till you feel their crops that all the old is digetted. When
the Bird is full, let him go a while, not to w ander abroad ; but if there be any thing
that urgeth him, be may pick it off with his bill. Lethim not be fet to fatting before
five, or after twenty Moncths old. Yong Pigeons or Chickens, will fat better with
their dams, if you full off a few of their feathers , and bruife their legs, that they
may ftay in their places ; and if ycugive meat plentifully to their dams , that ihey
may feed tbemfelves , and their yorg ones {efficiently. Turtles are heft fatted in
fummer : give them nothing buc meat, elpecially Mrllet-feed, for they much delight
to eat that; but Geefe in winter: Theymuft be put up to fat fourMoneths, you
need give them rcthingelfe but Barley- Meal, and Wheat-meal three times a day 5
fo that you cive them water enough to drink , and bo liberty to walkabout ; thus
they will fat in two Moneths. Buc tender Pullets will not be made fat in forty
days. Ducks will grew fat with all nutriment, if it be abundance • elpecially with
Wheat, Millet -feed, Barley, and with Water- fquils, Locufts, and Creatures found
intakes. Lelumeta. Pheafants, Partridges, Heath-cocks, and Turky-hcns, will fat
be ing fhut up ; acd the firft day they eat meat, the next fet them water or good lxrong
w ine to drirk : Let their meat be raw Barley-Meal, made up with water, giving them
it by degrees; or tlfe broken andgrennd Beans and Barley fod with water, and
whole Millet-feed, Linfeed boil'd and dry, mingled with Barley-meal: to theft
you may add Oyl, and make gobbets of them, and give them to cat to the full , and
they will grow fat ac longeit in fixty days, Now I flhall (hew how

Four-footed Beafis are fatted.

The Sow will fooccft fat , for in fixty days fhe will be far. Firft kept hungry three
days, as all the reft mufi be. She grows fat with Barley, Miller, Acorn?, Figs,
Pears, Cucumbers } reft, and rot wandrirg. But Sews will growfacter by wal-
lowing in the mire. Figs andChkk-peafon, will fat them fooneft ; and they defire
change of meats. Varro* The Sow is fed with Beans, Barley, and other Grain j for
thele wi 1 not cnely fat them, but give them a good rellifh. The Olive, wilde Oj
live, Tares, Corn ir ftraw, Grafs : and they are all the better fprinklcd with brine;
but the more effectual will they be, if (be faft three days before. Artfiotle. Bean-
hur-ks.anc Coleworts aref leafart meat for them; Salt put to them, will make them
have a fir mack, which in fummer put into their troughs will feafon their meat , acd
make them eat it up ; and by that feafoning of it , they will dtink acd eat the more.
Columella. Oxen will grow fat with Corn and Grafs, Tare?, ground Beans, and Bean-
fblks: Alfo with Barky, whole or broken, and parted from the hulls: alfobyfweec
things, as preflea Figs, Wine, Elm-bcngbs, and with a Lotion of hot water, thri-
ftode. We feed th< m at home with Wine of Surrentum, or elle we put Calfs to two
Cows , and thus being fed with abundance of Milk, they can fcatcego for far. Al-
fo in their cratches we ftrew Salt ftcres, that they may lick them, and fo drink, and
they will grow exceeding fat and tender. ,

Cha>. VI.

How the fiefh of Animals it made fweetef.

NOw Chall I fhew with feme Meats, acd Arts , How not ocely the parts of Ani-
mals, but their whole be dies are made fat, tender, acd more delicate. And

feflg

^iS NaturalMagick. "Beof^ 14..

How to fat the Ltvers of Geefe.

Our wife Anceftours, faith P//»/, who knew ihe goodncfsof a Goofe liver, tau°ht
how by cramming to make ic grow great j alfo taken forth, it is augmented by fweet
Milk. And it is not wichout canfe demanded, who was the firft man that found out
fo profitable a thing : Whether it were Scipio Metellus, that was Conful , or Mar.
Sejttif that in the fame age was a Gentleman of Rome. Palladia* taught the way
how; when Gsefe have been fatting thirty days, if youdefircto have °their livers
tender , you (hall bruife old Figs , and fteep them in water , and make gobbets of
them,and feed the Geefc with them twenty days together. But QuimiliHi way is
when they grow fat, you (hall break dry wilde Radifh in fmall pieces, and tempering
them with wa:er, give them this to drink for twenty days. Some, that the liver may
be made great, and the Geefe fat, feed them thu«. They {hut up the Goofe, and catt
to him Wheac fleeped in water, or Barley the fame way. Wheat makes him fat
quickly, but Barley makes the flefh white. Let her be fed with the faid Tain, but
feverally with them both, for twenty days, giv ing to her twice a day a moyft Medica-
ment made thereof ; fo that feven of thofe meats, may be given her for the firft five
days, and by degrees the days following, increafe the number of thefe meats, un-
til twenty five days be paft, that the days in the whole may be thirty: and when
they are over, heat Mallows, and in the deco&ion thereof, being yet hot, give her
leaven moyftned therewith ; do fo for four days, and in the fame days give her wa-
ter and honey j changing it thrice every day, not nfing the lame again : and do this the
days following, till fixty days: mingle dry Figs, bruifed all this time with the faid
leaven, and after fixty daysvoumay eat the Goofe, and its liver,that willbe white
and tender. Which being taken forth, mufY be put into a large veffet, wherein there
is hoc water , that mail be changed again and again. But the Bodies and Livers of
the females are beft , but let them be Geefe not of one year , but from two years old
to four. Horace in Serm. fpeaks of this,

Fat Figs do make the Goofe white) Liver great.
And Juvenal Satyr J.

A Goofe' s Liver fed kef ore him ftoody
As big as a Goofe , and to eat a* good*

And UWartial,

The Liver's greater then the Goofe, thifs true,
But mow you \ I wonder where this Liver grew*

*A\hen*Hi writes, That this was of great account at Rome. When you kill the
Goole, takeout the Liver qnickly and caft it into cold water , that it may be folid j
then fry ir in Goofe-greafe, in a frying pan, and feafoa it with i pices. It is a di(h
for a Prince, and highly commended by many. So is

A Sows Liver fatted,

*Pliny. There is art ufed for Sows Livers, as well as for Geefe; It was the inven-
tion of Marcus Apicim , when they are fat with dry Figs, give them fweet wine to
drink, and kill them prefently. Aptcius. Add to the Liver of a Sow fatted with
Figs, Wine-pickle, Pepper,Time,L^vage, Suet, and a little Wine and Oyl. *&u*s.
If, faith he, any man feed that creature with drv Figs, the Sows Live* is preferred
before all meat. I faid out of Artftotle, that Figs and Chick peafon wiil fat a Sew
beft. GaUn. As whilft Sows are living, their Livers are fed for delight with dry
Figs ; fo for Geefe , I fee their meats are moyftned with milk, that their Livers may
be not oaely m^ft pleafant meat, but may be fed exceedingly , and be moft de-
licate, If you will

that

Of Cookery

That Cattle may be more excellent to eat.

Cattle that life to feed on Mafterwort, and to be firft cleanfed , will grow very fat,-
and their flefh will be exceeding fweer. Pltny. Whence it is that this Becjimin is
not for many years to be found in Cyrene,bccaufe the Farmers,that hire the grounds,
finding more gain by it , devour them by their^Cattel. Moreover in India, and
chiefly in the Country of the Prafii, it rains liquid honey ; which falling down on
the °rafs, and the tops of Reeds in the Lakes, is admirable food for Sheep and Oxen;
andlhe Shepherds drive them thither, where moft of this fweet dew falls from the
Air, and there they arc feafted with it, as with pleafant bankets : and they recom-
pence their Shepherds with a pleafant reward j for they milk very fweet milk from
them , and they have no need, as the Grecians do, to temper honey with ic.
an. But

How Tftllets are made moft whitey tender , And delicate.

Such as I ufe to fet before my friends : The way is. I (hut them up five days in cham-
bers or cellars, and I give them a difh full of chippins of bread, wet with milk , and
fometimes with honey : fed thus, they will grow as fat as greac Sappers in Fig time,
and fo tender, that they will melt in your mouth, and they tafte better by far then
Pheafants, Heath-cocks, or Thrufhes. Anditfeems theAntients knew this: For
faith 'Plinjy when a crammed Hen was forbid to eat at fupper, by the Laws of the An-
tients, they found out this evafion , to feed Hens with meats wet in milk ; and fo
they were far more delicate to fet on the Table. And Columella. They that will
make Birds notonely fat, but tender, they fprinkle the forefaid Meal with water and
honey new made ; and fo they fat them. Some to three pares of water, put one of
goodwbe, and wet Wheat-bread , and fat the Bird ; which beginning to be fatted
the firft day of the Monet h, will be very fat on the twentieth day.

Chap. VIT.
Vow theFUfk of Animals may be made better ; and not to be eaten.

A Gain, if we will that Flefhftiallbe reje&cdfor the bitternefs, and ill tafte ofitj
we muft do contrary to what hath been faid : Or if we Will not take the pains,
we muft wait the times that thefe creatures feed on fuch meats, as will do it, where-
by fometimes they become vencmous alfo. As if we would have

Decrsflefh become venemout,

Simeon Sethi faith, That Deers flefh, that is catcht in fummer, is poyfon ; because
then they feed on Adders and Serpents; thefe are vencmous creatures, and by eat-
ing of them they grow thirfty : and this they know naturally • for if they drink be-
fore they have digeftcd them , they are killed by them : wherefore they will abftain
from water , though they burn with thirft. Wherefore Stagj-flcfii , eaten at that
time, is vencmous, and very dangerous. Sometimes aifo

Partridge are nought,

Namely, when they eat Garlick. The Chyrrhxi will eat no Partridge , by reafon of
their food; for when they have eaten Garlick theyftink, and their flefliis ftinking
meat, that the Fowler will not cat them. So alfo

Quails, and Stares, are re\eUed,

at that time of the year, that black Hellcbonr is the meat they like onely. Where-
fore, when Quails feed on Hellebonr , they put thofe that feed on them into fo
great danger of their lives , that they fwellandfufFerconvulfions , and are fubjeel: to
vertigo's ; Wherefore Millet-feed muft be boil'd with them. Alfo

Birds are mt to be tattn^

whe©

^l© Natural Magic k. 2fo^ 14,.

when the Goofe-berries are ripe ; for theit Feathers will grow black thereby , and
men that eat them, fall into fco wrings. Diofcorides,

The Eggs of the Barbel, or Spawn, not to be eaten

in May, becaufe they are dangerous ; but the Eggs are not dangerous of themfelves,
nor do they breed fnch mifchiefs. For they do not do it always ; for often yon may
cat them without danger : but they are onely then hurtful > when they feed on Wil-
low-flowers, that fall into the water?. So are

Snails to bt reiettedy

When they ftick fart to briars and (brnbs , for they trouble the belly and the ftomack,
and caufe vomiting. Diofcorides. And not onely thele Animals themfelves caufe
this mifchief, but their excrements, as milk, honey, and the like. For

Milkjnufi not be eaten,
when Goats and Sheep feed on green food, becaufe it will loofen the belly the
more : but Goats-milk doth not try the belly fo much, becaufe thefe Car tie feed on
binding meats, as on the Oak, Maftick, Olive-boughs, and Turpentine- tree. But
in fuch places where Cattle eat Scammony, black Hellebore, Perwincle,or Mercury,
all rheir milk fubverts the belly and ftomack ; fuch as is reported to be in the moun-
tains of Judicium : for Goats that eat black Hellebore, that is given them when the
yong leaves come firft ouc,their milk drank will make one vomit,and caufeth loathing
and naufeating of the ftomack. 'Diofcorides. Alfo there is found

Honey that u venemom,
That which is made in Sardinia, for there the Bees feed on Wormwood. At Hera-
diain Pontus, fome times of the year, by a property of the flowers there, Honey is
made,that they which cat it grow mad, and fweat exceedingly. Diofcorides. There arc

Eggs laid that ftink.

When there are no fruits nor herbs to be feen , then Hens feed on dung, and fo do*
other Birds that lay Eggs. But then thofe tafte beft that feed on fat things, and eat
Wheat, Millet, and Panick : but fuch as eat Wormwood, theit Eggs ate bitter.

Chap. VIII.

How (Animals may be boiled, rofted^ and baked,att at once.

I Have thus far fpoken to pleafe the palate* Now I (hall repfefent fome merry Con-
ceits to delight the guefts, Namely,

How a Hog may be rofted, and boiled^Uat onte.
'Athenaus in his ninth Book of 'Dipnofophift* (Dalachamptt* tranflates it more elegant-
ly) faying ; There was a Ho» brought to us , that was half it well rofted, and half
of it was foft boil'd in water ; and the Cook h»d ufed great induftry to provide it,
that it fhould not be feen in what part he was ftuck: for he was killed with a fmall
wound under his (houlder, and the blood was fo let out 5 all hi^ interlines were well
wafhed with wine ; and hanging him by the heel*,he again poured wine on him, and
rofted him with much Pepper. He filled half the Hog with much Barley-flouer,
kneaded together with Wine and Barley $ and he put him into an Oven , fetiing a
brafs plattct under him : and he took care to roft him fb leafurely , that he (hould
neither burn, nor be taken up raw j for when hi? skin feemed fomewhat &ry, he con-
j e&ured the reft was rofted. He took away the Barley-meal, and fet him on the Ta-
ble. So

A Capon may be boil'd, and rofted.

Put a Capon well pulled * and his guts taken out , into a filver difli, and fill the one

1 half

Of Cookery. %ii

half of hirri with broh, and put him into anOi/en ; for th* upper part will b: rotted
bylhc heat of- the Oven, and the under part will be boiled. Norwill ic Deleft
pleafam to behold

A Lzmprey frtedy hi I d, and rofted all at once.
Before you boil your Lamprey , tike out his benes, to make it rmre graceful, for
his fl.-fh is full of bones ; which you (lull do with two Utile Huks held in both hands;
and i artning the Lamprey in the oaiJdle , you (hall cut his back-bone in the middle :
then his head and end of his tail , about which the bores are heaped , by rea'on of
the bones pulled out ; being cut off, and his entrails taken forth , put him on a 1'pit ,
and wrap about three or four times with fillets, all the parts that are to be rofied
and fried, tlrcwing upon the one Pepper ; and the fillets mat be made wet in P r-
flcy, Saffron, Mint, Fennel, and iWtet wine ; or with water and lair, cr brcth, for
the rotted part*; for the fried parts wuh Oyl: and fo let him be turned, always
moyftning the fillets with brewing on thedtCc&iooofOrigaeum: When part of ic is
rotted, take it frcm the fire, and it will be gailant ajcat j fct it before your kucft>\<

Chap. IX.
Of divers ways to drefs Pullets .

I Shall here fee down diver; ways t© drefs Chickens, that will be very pleafantfor
thegucfts. So that

A boiled Peacock^ m*J feem to he alive.

Kill a Peacock , either by ihiu^ing a quill into bis brain from above , or elfe cm h1*
throat, as you do for yon^. kids, that the may ecme forth : then cut hisrk'n
gently from his throat umo his tail ; and being cut, puliitcff with his feathers from
his whole body to his head : cut eff thai wirh the skin, and legs, and keep it : Roft
the Peacock on a fpit : his bedy beingil' free with fpices and iwect herbsjhicking firft
cn his brelt cloves,and wrapping his neck in a white linnm doth , wet it always with
water, that it may never dry: when the Peacock is rofted, and taken frcm the (pit,
put him into his c wn skin again ; and that he may item to (land upon his feet , you
fhallthruft fmall iron wire.*, made cn purpofe , through his legs, and fct fall on a
board, that they way cot be difcerned , and through his body to his head and tail.
Some put Omphire in his mouth ; and when he is fet on the table, they cart in fire^
P/atsra(hcn% that the fame may be done With Pneafanrs, Geefe, Capons, and other
Birds ; and we obfeivc thefe things amongif our Gucfls* But it will be a more rare
fifcht,' to fee

A Goofe rcfted alii/e,

A little before our times, a Gcofe was wont to be brcu ht to the Table of the King
ofArragon, that was rolled alive, as I have heard by old men of credit- And when
I went to try it, my company were l'ohafty , that we eat him up before he wa quite
rofted. He was alive, and the upper part of him, on thec utfide, was excellent well
rofted. The rule to do it is thu : Take a Duck, or a Goole,or feme fuch lu"y crea-
ture*,but the Goofe is bell for this purpofe; puil all the feathers frcm hisbcdv,leav?ng.
his head and bis neck t Tber make a fire rcucd about him, not tco narrow, left the
fmoke cheke him,or the fire (Viould reft him too foon ; not too widc,lefi he elcape un-
rolled. Within-fide let every where little pots full of water, and put Qalt and Mcurn
to them. Let thegoofi bt layered all over with ^et, and well larde d, that he may
be the better meat, and rctl the better : put fire abour, tut make net tor much hall r
when ht begins to rc(l , he will walk ab^ut, and cannct eetfcrih , for the fire ftcps-
him : when he is weary, he quencheth his thirft by drirking the warer, by cooling
his heart , and the red of his internal parts. The force of the Medicament loofneth
ard cleanfeth his belly , fothat he grew? empty; ard when he i- very hot, it r( (Is his
inward parts. C optimally moyflcn his head and heart with a frur sr. But when yr u
fee him run mad up and down, and to (Inmble (his bearr then wants mcyflure: where-
fore take him away, and fet him on the Table to your Gue(ls,who will cry as you pull
off bis parts j and you (hallalmoft eat him ur b efore he is dead. If ycu wcoldlet oat
th« Table A jong Tigee*, wtth hit bones pulled outf

X x yotf

p.% Natural Magick. TSoo^i^

Vou fhall t«ke out his bones thm : Put a yongPigeon, bis entrails taken forth and
well wafh'd,for to lye a night and a day in (iroog Vinegar : then m(h him well, and
fill him with Spices and Herbs, and rolt him or boil him, as ycu pleafej either way
you (hall find him without bones. Of old, they brought to the Table

The Trojan Hoc.

The Anient Gluttons invented, how a whole Ox or Camel fhould be fee on the Ta-
ble, and divers other creature*. Hence the people had a Tale concerning the Tro-
j nHog; fo called, becanfe he covered in his belly, many kinds of living creatures,
as the Trojan Horle concealed many armed men. Afacrobim reports, ^. Lib.Sxt»ra
That Qncitu in his Oration, where he perfwades to rut inpra&ife Tamtuihxs Law
concerning Moderation or Expence, did Object to the men of his age , that they
brought the Tr^jm Hog to their Tables. Collers of Brawn, and the Trojan Hog,
were forbidden by the Law of regulating expence.The Hog was killed, as D*/acbam-
fM trai flues it, with a fmall wound under his fhoulder : When much blood was run
forth, all his entrails were taken out, and cur < ff where they began ; and after that
he was often and well wafhed with wine , andhang'd up by the heels , and again
wafh'd with wine, he is ro led with Musk, Pepper: then the forefaid dainties,
namely ,Thru(hcs,Udders,Gnat-fnappers, and many Eggs poured unto them, Oyfters,
Scallops, were thruli into his belly at his mouth: he is wafhed with plenty of excel-
lent liquor, and half the Hog is filled with Polenta, that is, with Barley, and Barley-
Meal, Wine, and Oyl, kneaded together; andfo is he put into the Oven, with a
brafs pan fct under : and care rnult be had to roft him fo leafurely , that he neither
burn, nor continue raw : forwhen the skin fecms crup, it is a fign all is rotted, and
the Polenta is taken away. Then a filvcr platter is brought in , oncly gilded , btit
not very thick, big enough to contain the rofted Hog, that muft lye on his back in k,
and his be'Vy flicking forth , that is fluft with diveifity of goods ; andfo is hefeton
the Table. Athen&tttLib. y.Dipnofophift. But

That an Egge may grow bigger than a mans head.
If you would have an Egge fo big, there is an Art, how it may cover other Eggs in ir,
and not be known from a natural Egge. You (hall part fifty or more yelks of Eggs,
and whites, one from the other: mingle theyelks gently, and put them into a blad-
der, and bind it as round as you can ; put it into a pot full of water : and when yon
fee it bubble, or when they are grown hard; take them out, and add the whites to
them; 10 fitting the ve'k'~, that they may ftand in themiddle, and boil them again ;
fo (hall you have an Egge made without a fheil, which you (hall frame thus. Pow-
der the white Egge- (hells, clean wafhed, that they may fly into fine duft ; fteep this:
in ftrong or dialled Vinegar, till they grow foft ; for if an Egge ly long in Vinegar,
the (hell will diflove,and grow tender, that it may eafily be thruft through the fmall
mouth of a glals : when it is thruft in, with fair water it will come to its former harti-
nefs, that yon will wonder at it: when the (hells diffolved are like to an unguent,
with a Pcn. il m;k? a fhell about your E°ge that is boiled , and let it harden in ciear
water : fo (hall you have a true natural Egge.

Chap. X.

Hovs Meats mtj be prepared in places where there u nothing to roft them with.

Sometimes it falls out that Men are in places where there want many things fit to
provide ibbper; but where convenience wants, wit may do it: if you want*

frying p2n, yoyfhall know

How to fry fijh on a paper.
Make a fryingpan with plain paper, put in oyl andfi(hes: then fee this on burning
cole?, without flame, and it will be done the fooner and better. But if you will

"t\ofl a fchickin irithiHt A fire ;

That

Of Cookery. ^Jj

That Chickins may ro^ whilft we are in ou< Voyage : Pur a piece of Heel imo cl c
fire , pm this into a Chuken that is pulled and hi- gu s taken or n , and cover I in
well with clothes, rbat the heat breathe not out j and if he do mcll ill, yec the .neat is
good. If you want Servants to turn the fpit, and you Would have

A Btrd to rofi himfelf y
do thus : For the Bird wMl turn himfelf. Jlbww writes, That a Bird called a Rens
that is the fmallefi of all Birds, ifyouputhim ma fpit, made of Hazel-wood, and
put fire under, he will turn as if he turned himfelf Whicn comes from the proper-
ty of the wood, not from the Bird : and that is falle the Philofophet laid ; for if you
put fire under a Hazel rod, it will twilt,ard letm to turn it lelf ; and what flefhyou
put on it, if ii be not too weighty, will turn about with it. So

Eggs are rofied witheu.fire.
Eg^s laid in quick Lime , and fprinklcd with water, are rofied • for the Lime will
grow as hot as fire. The Babylonians have their invention, when thrv are in the
Wildcrnefs,and cannot have an opportunity to boil Eggs ; they put raw Eggs into a
ding, and turn them about till they be rolled. But it you

mm Salt

for your meats, the feed of Sumach ftrewed in with Becjamin, will feafon any thing,
flwy. If y»u want Salt, and would

Keef fiefb without Salty
Cover what flefhyou will with honey, when they are frefh. but hang up the vcffd
yon put it into, longer in winter, a lefs time in fummer. If you would have

That Salt-ficjh {bould he made frejh,

Fir ft, boil your Salted flefh in mi. k, and then in water, and it will be frefh. Jtficiut*
You flball learn thus

To waft) fpots from Unnen clothes,
If vou want Sope, for red wine will lo ftain them, that you can hardly Wafh them out
without it : Bat when it doth fall down and ftain them, cait Salt upon itKir, and it
wiil take out the ipots. If there want

Groundlings, how to make them.

Suidat faith, That when Niromedes, Kingo* Bhhynia, lonsed for fome cf thefe Fifh,
and living Mr from tbe lea, could get none ; Apiciui the glutton, made the Pi&ures
of thele Fifh, and fetthem cn the Table, fo like,as if they hao^been thefamei They
W?re prepared thus : He cut the female Rape-root into longthin pieces, like to tbe'e
Fifh, which beboil'dm CKl,andftrewed withSalt and Pepper, and lb he freed him
f rem his longing. As tAlthenam faith, in Cuphron, Comic. If there want fire, I have
foe wed already how to make divers forts of Artificial fires.

Chap. XI.

Of divers Confettions of Wines*

NOw I come to drink, for I have fpoken of meat fufficiently. And I will teach
you to make many forts of wines, and that they may be pleafant and odorife-
rous ; for I have laid already what ways it may be made without pains. If you will

That your Wine {hall fmtll of CMusk^
TaVe a glakVial, acdwxfhit, and fill it with Aqua vita , and put intOita little
mu>k . ( op the mouth clofe, that it vent not j fet it in the fummer-Sun two Weeks,
always ftirrinsthe water. Theufe is, if you put a drop of this into a gallon of wine,
aJl the wine will fmell of Musk j and to for Cinnamon or other. Spices, So you may
mike Xx a Hipfoera*

^i^. Natural Magick. Sflo^i^..

Htppocras Wtne,

Take the fwecteft wine, we call it commonly Mangiagatrra, and into four Vials full
of that, pour in two pounds of beaten Sugar, four ounces of Cinnamon, Pepper, arid
grains cfParadife, one ounce and half: let them infufe one day ; then flrain them •
adde in the end in a knot a little Mask , and it will be excellent Wipe ; or to pow-
dred Sugar we put a little Aqua vita , wherein Cinnamon, Pepper, Grains of Para-
dife, and musk have been infuled, as 1 faid, and it is prefently provided, for it draws
forth the quinteffence. I fhall (hew how

Wine may freeze in Glajfes.
Becaufe the chief thing defired at Feafts, is that Wine cold as ice may be drunk, efpe-
cially in fummer ; I will teach yon how Wine (hall prefently, net oncly grow coid,
but freezes tha: you cannot drink it but by fucking , and drawing in of your breath.
Put Wine into a Vial, and put a little water to it, that it may turn to ice the fooner ;
then cafiinow into a wooden veffel, and drew into it Salt- peter, powdred, or the
cleanfing of Salt-peter, called vulgarly Saiazzo. Turn the Vial inthefnow, and ic
will congeal by degrees. Some keep fnow all the fummer. Let water boil in brafs
kettles, then pour ic into great bowls , and fet them in the frofty cold Air, it will
freeze,and grow harder than fnow, and laft longer.

Chap. XII.
To mike men drunks and to make them loath Wine.

NOW we are come to fpeak of Wine ; before we pafs from it, I will (hew you how
to make your guefts drunk j for drunkennefs at Feafts, increafeth mirth : and
then how to keep them fafe from drunkennefs, when they are often provoked ro
drink healths, and to ftrive who fhall drink mo You may with thefe fruits

Make men drnn\.

The fruits of the Arbute, and the Lote-tree, being eaten, will make men as though
they were drunk : alfo Dates eat in toO'great a quantity, caufe drunkennefs, and the
pain of the head ; Sow-bread with Wine, makes a man drunk. Ambcr-greefe, or
Musk, put in Wine, exafperate drunkennefs : The filth of a Dogs car mingled wirh
Wine,makesone drunk,as Albert™ faith. But %ha[es, out of whom he took it, faith,
That Wine, wherein the feeds of Ricinu, are infufed, if any one drink it, it will in-
ebriate them. Camels froth, drunk with water by a drunken man , will make hira
mad , as pofleffed with a Devil: Let thefe fuffice, for I faid more in my defcription
of Plants. But on the contrary, thefe things will

Take away drunkennefs.
Becaufe Hemlock, with Wine, is the caufe of death by its venome, it hath been in-
vented and found true , that Hemlock is the caufe of life to other?. Fliny feems to
intimate as much. Alfo, venoms arc prepared to drink, fome taking Hemlock be-
fore , that they may drink, and die. If a man hath drunk too much Wine, that
doth him hurt, he fhall difcufs it thus : £ato bids, thar at the beginning and middle
of Supper , a man fhould eat four or five tops of rawColeworts, and it will take oft?
his drunkennefs, and remove the hurt comes by Wine, and will make a man as
though he had neither eat nor drank. The Egyptians, before all meat, did eat boil'd
Colcworts, and fo provided themfelvcs for drink. Many to keep themlelves fober,
take Cole wort-feeds firft. The Tibar/U, faith Simatu, before they drank , fenced
thcmfelves by feeding on Coleworts. Alexis.

Ttfierday then drattl^fi too much,
• And now thy head deth ake: but fttch
Vifiemper fafling cures; then
Bat boil'd ColtytQrts-idrinkjtgen,

t\ad

And Amphis.

Uf Cookery.

There is no means can half fo well
Asfudden trouble drinkji'Jpel.
For that will wonderfully cure ;
Eat tlfe %jtdtflj, that's ax fur e.

Tbey were wont in a veflel of Amethyft, to make another remedy for drunkennefs,
that they might drink Wine without danger. Atheh&m. If you would otherwife
hinder the vapours of the Wine, drink it well tempered with water; for they are
fooncft drunk, that drink ftrongeft Wines. Afrkantahitby If thon have drunk too
much, eat before meat three or four bitter Almonds : they are drying, and will drink
up the moyfture, and drive away drunkennefs. Plutarch relates, That there was a
Phyfitian with Vrufttty who when he had firft eaten five or fix bitter Almonds, he al-
ways corquered at the duel of drunkennefs. The powder of Pumex-ftone will do as
much , if the drinker take that firft. Thiophrafttti faith it is dangerous, unlefs he
drink abundantly. So Eudtmtes drank two and twenty Cups , at laft he went into a
Bath , and did not vomit ; and fupped, fo as if he had drank nothing : for by its dry-
ing quality, itconfumes all the moyf urc ; and being cart into a veffel of new Wine
that work?, the heat of the Wine is ft rait allayed. There are other things prepa-
red by the Antients, to extinguifh drunkennefs, as to eat Lettice at theend of Sup-
per,for tbey are very cold : we eat it now firft, to procure appetite : whence Martial
writes,

Why do we firft cur Lettice cat?
Our Fathers made it their laft meat.

Diofcortdes fcems to call it Acrepula, becaufe it hinders drunkennefs. Leeks difcufs
drunkennefs : and he that takes Saffron before, fhall feel no drunkennefs. There are
alio Herbs and Flcwers,that if you make Garlands of them , they will hinder drun-
kennefs; as Violets, Rofes, and Ivy-berries. Thcafhes of the Bill of a Swallow, pow-
dred with Myrrhe, and ftrcwed into the Wineyou drink, will keep you fecure from
being drunk. Harm the King of Aflyria found out this invention. 'Pliny, I have
faid how drunkennefs may be difpoied : new I fhall (hew how men fhall abftain,

That love Wwe, to refrain it.

There are many who when they have drank much Wire, that is the worft thing in the
world for them, fall lick, and die ©f it. Now if you would refrain, and abhor Wine
and ftrong drink, becaufe the Fountain Clitcrius is too far off ; let three or four live
eels, put into the Wine, ftay there till they die. Let one drink of this Wine, who
is given to drunkennefs , and he will loath Wine , and always hate it , and will ne-
ver drink it again ; or if he do, he will drink but little, and with much lobriety.
Another way : wafh a Tortois with Wine a tcod while , and give one of that wine
to drink privately, half a cupfullevtry morning for three days, and youfhallleea
wonderful vertue. Myrepfvu. When one complained before the King of the In-
dians, that he had Sons born to him , but when once they began to drink a little
wine, they all died ; Jarchus anfwered bim thus : It is better for them that they di-
ed for had they lived, they would have all run mad, becaufe they were begotlof feed
that wa? too cold. Therefore your children muft abftain from wine, to that they may
not fo much as defircit. V therefore ifycu have any more Sons born, obfervethis
rule : fee where an Owl lays her eggs ; and boil her eggs rere , and give them your
childe to ear 5 for ifthcchilde eat them before he drinks wine, he will always hate it?
and live fober , becaufe his natural heat is made more temperate. Phtloftratuijiw the
life of Apollomui. Democritw faith, the defire of wine is aboliftied, with the watry
juice that runs from Vines pruned > if you give it a drunkard to drink, who knows
not of it.

CHAfc

Natural Magic k. <BoqI{ 14.

Chap. XIII.
How to drive Paraftes and Flatterers from great mens Tables.

IT is an eafie matter to drive away from our Tables , and great mens Table?, all
fmell-feafts, and cogging foifting fellows, and this will make our guefts very cheer-
full and glad , to fee fuch Cormorants and Parabtes driven away, and derided by all
men. When therefore he fits down at Table,

7 hat his hands may grew blackjwhenhe wipes of the Napkin
Beat Vitriol and Galls in a Mortar, put them in a narrow clofe fie ve, that the powder
may come forth very fine j with this wipe the Napkin, and (hake it ; that what fticks
not, may fall eff : then rub it with your hands , till you find that it fticks very faft ;
then wiping and fhaking off what ftays not within , when the Parafite hath new wa-
fhed his hands and face, carl to him the Towel to wipe himfelf ; and when it is wet,
it will make his hands and face as black as a cole, that will very hardly be wafh d ouc
with many wafhings. Being now wafh'd and wiped,

That he may not [wallow the meat he chews.

And we (hall make him feel the more pain, if he be any thing dainty. I find in wri-
ting, that if you (lick under the Table a needle, that hath often fowed the winding-
fheetcf the dead ; and do this privately before fupper, the guefts cannot eat, that
tbey will rather loath the meat, than eat it. But experience proves this to be falfe
and fuperftiticus. TUrentinm faith. That Bafel is an enemy to women , and that fo
much , that if it be put under the difh, and the woman knows not of it, fhe will ne-
ver put her hand to the difh, before it be taken away : but this is a molt fearful lye.
For a woman and Bafel agree fo well, that they not onely fow and plant them with
great diligence in their Gardens , hanging in the Air ; but they frequently feed on
them in meats and fallets. I have done it oft-times ; I infufed in a glafs of wine one
drachm of the root of an herb we call BeHadoma^tvc Lady,not bruifing it too much ;
and after twelve hours, or a little more, pour out this wine into another cup,and give
him that muft eat with you,in the morning a cup of it to drink : then detain him with
you three hours • then call him to your Table , for the morlel he takes in his mouth,
he can by no means fwallow down, but he mult hurt his chaps, and be in great pain,
fo that he can hardly drink. If you would have him eat or drink, let him gargle a
good quantity of milk or vinegar in his mouth , and he will be as if he had luffered
nothing at all. If we will

Drive Parages from great mens Tables,
we can eafily do it thus : If we ftiew fome of the dry roots of Wake-robbin on the
daintieft meats, like Cinnamon or Pepper, in powder; when he takes a bit of it, it
will fo burn his chaps, and bite his mouth and tongue, and fo fetch off the skin of his
tongue, that he will fo mump , and draw his chaps in and out, and gape, and make
fuch fport , that will make people laugh : and the pain will not abate, until he hath
anointed his chaps with bucter and milk. Moreover, if you cut the leaves of Cuc-
kowpint fmall,and mingle them with fallets ; thofe that eat of them, will have their
mouths and tongues to drivel fomucb, with thick fpittle , that they cannot eat till
they have wafh'd it off. And it will be as good fport, if you like not your gueft.

That all things the fmell-feaj} eats, may tafte bitter,
If you rdb the ed^e of the Knife, and the Napkin he wipes his mouth with, with the
juice of Co!rquinuda,or flefh ofit, and lay it before him : For when he cuts bread
with the Knire,or any thing elfe,and fhall touch his lips with the Napkin,it will give
him fuch a filthy and abominable tafte, that whatever he toucheth,tafteth,or licks,will
have a rjicft horrible imack with it ; and the oftner he wipes bis mouth, that he may
wipe away this bitter tafte, the more will bis mouth, palate, and jaws,bc tormented,
that he will be forced to forfakc the Table. We can alio delude him fo, Thai

Of Coofyrj.

That when he drinks, the c/tpjhali flick^ to his mouthy that he can hardly full it off",

Befrheer ihecopsmcuth with themilk of Fig^andGum-traoamh diffolvcd in ir j for
when they are dry, they v»ill be clear: but when he drinks, the cup willliick fo faft to
his lips, that when he hath done drinking , he can hardly pull it off. We (hall do
thus,

Thatfie(h may look bloody and full af worms, and fo h rejected

by fmell-reafls. Boil Hares blaod, and dry it, and powder it ; and caft the powder
upon the meats that are beil'd , which will melt by the heat and movfture of the
meat, that they will feet* all bloody, and he will loath and refufe them. Any man
may eat them without any riling of his ftomack. If yon cut Harp-ftriags fmall , and
drew them on hot fkfh, the heat will twift them, and they will move like worms.

THE

5*8

; THE k " {, ■ . .

FIFTEENTH-BOOK

Natural Magick :

Shews to catch living Creatures with your hands,

and to dcftroy them.

The Proem i,

*y ^£ (ball ffeak. of Fawkni>-g , thit nrofi me*, and efpeeially great men, delight in. If
you will catch living creatures, the} are taken by force, or by craft. They are taken
by craft , and ki&ed. But how that may be done, fhJl be taught in Philojophy, that {hews the
"Hat we and manners of living Creatures: Tor it is caftt,when you £»«a» their Natures and
their Manners, cunning may find ways to allure and take them. Fir ft, I fh all teach how te-
a/lure and take them, by meat, whiftle, light, fmell, love, and other frauds j or elfe to make
them drunkj and take tbm, or to kill them with venome. IfhaUfet dewn examples.

Chap. I.

fft 4 W^At meats ^wers (°rts *f -Animals are allured.

f;; Here is nothing that more allures and draws on Animals , then
meat and plealure , and love. Wherefore from thefcfrull I be-
gin. They follow meat for neceffity; unlefs they would dye
for hunger , ihey mu t fearch for that : Bnt divers Creatores
feed on divers meats, andfomeof them feed on particular diet;
and youmsy g>iCfs at the reft thereby by your ownieafon,

7he bait for a Sturgeon^ or fVhale»fifh.
Srnrgcons or Whales are allured with the Lungs of a Bull rolled , hung upon a line
with a hook, call into the fea ; the Sturgeon prefemly fmels it , and being greedy of
it,prefentlv fwallows it down, and is caught with the hook : Oxen draw him to the

Chore. oElian.

A bait for a Sargtts.

The Sargus loves Goats exceedingly, as we fhall fhew , and hunts after the fmeil of
them Wherefore the Fifhir-man wets his parte in Goats blood, and cafts it into
that pare of the fea where they haunt ; and they are drawn thither by the fent of it,
as by a charm, and arecatched with the hook. Moreover, if men fatten to the hook
the bait that is made of a Moufe fifh fal ted, and move this gently in the fea, the Sar-
gi will come to ic exceedingly, and gather about the hook for the love of it, and are
eafi'y caught by their grccdineis after the meat.

tA bait for Thymalus.
Ticinus a River in Italy prod ucet h a fifh called Thymalus, that is not taken with the
d«nty baits that other fifh are, but onely with the Gnat, an enemy toman ; andfhe

delights in no other bait.

"the bait for an Aulopiut.
Coradni, blackfifh, whofc heads fhine like Gold, allure the Aulopii ; when they ob-
fcrve fome fuch dainty food, and they come to it rcjoycing.

Of Hunting, Fowling, Fifhing, &c.

A Bait for Stimmer-nhitings.
The Btic is made of the Purple f fh ; for this is bound raft to the line, and this rnskes
them iwim to the Bair,becavfe they love k;and when any one of them by greedinefs
lays hold of the Bait, the reft will run after , and catch hold of the hooks , that for
number you Chall hardly draw them to you , fo many will b; hanged together by fe-
veral hooks.

Bait for an Eel.

Eels lie in their holes ; and the mouthes of their holes being fmeered in the ponds
with feme odoriferous things , they are called forth as other Fifh are. Anflotla
Yet Pltny faith falfe, that they are not allured , but driven away by the font of
dead Eels. Ofiantu wittily faith, they are allured with garbage. Would y ou knew

A Bait for Mullets.

Beciufe the Julides are a Bait almoH for all Fifh , or your groundlings or little Sea-
fquils j therefore they are a part of all Baits. Or , take of the Liver of the Tuny
Fifh, four drachms ; Sea-fquils,eight drachma ; Sefamum-fecd, four drachms ; Beans
ground, eight drachms ; of raw Dog-fiflh , two drachms : pown all thefe, and make
them up with new Wine diftillcd into balls, for good Baits. This is

A Bait for all Fifh.

Tartntinm teacheth us this for all Fifh : Take of the flrong Whale% eight drachms ;
yellow Butterflies, Annifeed, Checfe of Goats Milk , of each four drachms ; of O-
popenax, two drachms . Hogs blood, four; as much Galbanum : pown them all, and
pour on fo v. re Wine : make cakes, and dry them ia the Sun,

Chap, II.

How Hiring Qrtatwes are drawn on with the baits of love.

THere are two Tyrants that rule over brute Beafts, meat, and pleafnre or love; not
fmell,noi found:nor fumes ; nor do other things allure their minds beGdeslove:
that we may fay of wilde Be*fts as well as of man , Wanton love can do any thing
with mortal Creature*. If we will

Take Cutties with the bait of love ;
To take Cuttles there needs neither wheels nor nets ; but you may catch them thu-,
with baits of love, to trail the Female Cuttle, and the Male fccii git never fo far off,
fwims presently after, and fafteneth cloic about her ; and whilft they thus embrace,
the Fifhcrs cunningly take them up.

To catch a Pollard or Cftpito.
*/£lian faith, that in the Grecian Gulph, the fharp-fighted Cupito is ; but I have feen
ihcm taken in the Adriatick Sea by the fury of love. The Fifher bindes the Female
either to a long fifli-pole,or to along rope ; but fhr muft be fair and fat : for the Male
cares not for one that is lean : fo is he drawn to the fhore : or,hc folows the net; and
you muftobferve how to lay hold of him : for when the Female is drawn, the Mjles
fwim after her,beingfuiioufly in love ; the Fifher man cafts in his net,and takes them.

To catch a Scartu or Gilthead.
The Scarus of all Fifh is the moft lafcivicus; his unfatiable defire of the Female, is the
caufe that he is taken ; cunning Fifhermen that know this , lay fnares for him thus :
They catch the Female, and tie the top of her mouth to a tore, and they craw her a-
live through ihc^ea in fuch places as they haunt : the Males arc mad vvuh lufr
when they fee her, and ftrive to ccme at her,and ufe all fuch means as lovers do : hut
when they come neer the net, the Fifhci draws in the Female, and the Males lwim-
aaing ia after her, are catcht. Opanm% Yy T&

ftO Natural Magick. cBoo!^ i$.

To catch Elephants.

There is a Pic made 10 catch Elephants , and four Females are put in to allure the
Males i the Maies come, and enter into the Pic : bu- thole that lie in wait,puil away
the Bridge, and lb they have the Elephants faft. ofLhan.

To catch a Ni^htinoale.

The Female Nightingale is fhut in a Case , the Fowler counterfeits their note ; the
Males come when they hear it ; and lceing the Female , the Male flies about till he
fall into the ncr.

Chap. III.

Alfo other Animals are c died, together by thivgs the) like.

A Lib, feme Animals by Sympathy , are drawn by the love of fome things, or of
fome other Creatures, which he that lays lnarcs obferving, ufeth fuch meats for
them, that whillt they follow what they love, they may fall into the fnares. If you
would know how

To catch a Sargus j

It is a mad way to catch them. The Sargi love Goats unmeafurably j and they are
fr> mad after them, that when lo much as the (hadow of a Goat , that feeds neer the
(hore.fhsll appear neer unto them, they prelently leap for joy,and iwim to it in haftej
and they imitate the Goats , though they are not fit to leap: and thus they delight
to come unto them. They are therefore cacch'd by thofe things they fo much defire.
Whereupon, the Filher putting on a Goats skin with the horns, lies in wait for them,
having the Sun bchinde his back , and pafte made wet with the decoftion of Goats
flefh : this he cafis into the Sea where :he Sargi ule to come; and they, as if they
werechatmed, runtoit, and are much delighted with the fight of theGoats skin,
and feed on the pafte. Thus the Fitherman catchcth abundance of them. dElian.
Opian doth elegantly defcribe it thus :

The Sargi doth rt*n mad for love of Goats,

And a little after,

7 he cunmrg F'jher hid in a (joats .r£/«,

(Jfric.kts two Cats horns unto hu temples faft ;

His bait mix%d with Goats bhcd1 / e doth within ,

7 he Sea let loofe. 7 he Sargiu ccrr.es m hafte :

For of the bait he deerly loves the fmeHy

And the (joats shin doth tole htm en m well.

How tc catch Cartridge.

■

Partridge love Deer exceedingly , and are cofened by their skin. Thus: If a man
pot on aDeer*s skin, and the horns upon his head, andecme clofely to them ; they
fuppciiWg it is a Deer indeed, will entertain him , and draw neer if him ; acd
will not flie aw»y; and rmbrare him as much as one would do* Friend, come
from a long journey : but by this great friend linefs , they get nothing bur nets and
fnares.

Catching of Buftardst

Buftards of all Birds are thought to be mcft in love with Horfes ; and it appears, be-
caufc they cannot endure other living creatures, but when they lee a Horfe,they will
prefently flie to him, with great joy, and come neer to him. If a man put on ahorie
skin, he may catch as many as he plcafe 5 lor they will come neer for love of the horfe.
So almoll are rl»

Of Hunting, Fowling, Fifhing, &c.

Ths Polypi or Pourcontrels taken?

The Polypi take delight in the Olive tree , and they are oft-times found faflned
wich their claws about the body cf k: fometimes alio , they are found clapping
about the Fig-tree that grows neer the Sea , and eating the Figs , faith Clearchus.
Wherefore Fifhers let down an Olive bough into the Sea, where the Polypi ule to
be. In fhort fpace, without any labour, they draw up as many Polypi as they will.
Opian handfomcly defcribes it thus :

The Polypus doth love the Olive tree,
And by the fpeckjed leaves {'tis wonder) he
Is catch 'd, "

He is enraged for the Olive ■ bough,
The wary Fijher doth by this know how
To catch this Fijh : for he doth bmde about
A piece of Lead> an Olive- branch throughout r
The Fifh lays hold, and will net let it qo ;
He loves it} and it proves his overthrow.

Chap. IV.

What noifts will allure Birds,

NOt onely Iove,but noifes and Mufick will draw them : and each creature delights
in fomefpecial noife. Firft,

The Dolphin loves the Harp,

And with this Mufick is he moft delighted , as alfo with the found of the Organ?.
Hence Herodotus firft, and others from him, report , that Arion was carried to Tena-
rus on a Dolphins back : for when the men of Corinth call him into the Sea, he beg»
ged that he mi^ht have bis Harp with him, and might fing one fong as he was thrown
in. But a Dolphin took him, and brought him to Tenarus. Opiau,

A Wolf is charmed by a LMinftrelor Flute.
A Minflrel at Pythiocara , when he fang and played very pleafantly , he made the
Wolves tame. *AZliau.

Her fes delight in xhcMufick^of the Flute.

The Horfesof Lybia are fo taken with the noife of the F'ute , that they will grew
traceable for mans ufe thereby, and not be obftinate. Shepherds make a Shepherds
Pipe of Rhododaphne ; and by piping on this, they will fo delight Horfes, that they
will run after them : and when the Shepherds play on,the Horfes will rtand ftifl, and
weep for joy. Euripides faith, that Shepherds provoke Mares to take Horfe, by play-
ing on a Pipe ; and the Horfes are fo provoked to back the Mares.

Stags and Bores are taken with a Pipe.
It is a common faying among the Tynheni. that Bores and Stags are taken moft with
them by Mufick: which fo comes to pafs. Nets being pitch d, and all things m?de
ready for to enfnarc them, a man that can play well on the Flute, goes through dales
and hills, and woodland plays as hegoes,neer their haunts : they liftcn exceeding-
ly after it, and are eaftly taken by it : for they arc foravi&ed , that they foryt
where they arc. And thus by delight they fall into the fnare, and are taken. e/£-
lian.

7 be Paftinica is taken by dancing and tJMufick*

Again

When the Fifheraun fees the Paftinica, or Ray , fwimming , he leaps ridiculoufly in

Y y a his

Natural Magick. 2>00^if.

his Boat, and begins to play on the Pipe : the Paftinaca is much taken with it, and fo
comes to the top of the water, and another lays hold of him with his Engine.

Grampels by Mufick^are enticed on land,
Fifhermen catch Grampels by Mnfick : feme lie hid , others begin to play with the
Pipe : when the Grampels hear the Mufick, they presently come forth of their holes,
as if they had been charmed ; and they are io raviftied, that they will come out
of the waters. Thefe go back and play on the Pipe, the others run and catch them
on dry Land.

Cm a p. V.

Fifhes are allured by light in the night*

AMongrt the many Arts to deceive Animals, Light is one : for at night , when
fomeFHh reft, Fifhermen carrying Light in their Boats, draw thefe Fifh to
them , and fo flrike them with a three-forked Spear , or catch them alive. Which
Opian knew.

Either at noon, or when the Sun doth fety
Are Fifhes caught^ or elfe in the darkjiighty
By burning torches taken in the'Het •
For whtlft they takefuch pleafure in the Light ,
The Fifherman doth fir ike them with hu dartt
Or elfe doth catch them then by fome fuch Art,

Many men have been much troubled how to make a Fire or Light under Water ,
that Fishes feeing it afar off, might fwim to it. 1 have done it thus : I made a Pil-
lar of Brafs or Lead , three or four foot diameter : it was flaarp or pyramidal below,
that it might fink the better into the deep ; end it was bound about with iron hoops,
that being funk by its weight, it might be drawn under the water : I fet on the top a
Pipe that was fifteen or twenty foot long, and one foot broad. The middle of this
Pillar had many open windows , five or fix , and thefe were Glafs-windows , well
poliftied and fitted to them , and the joynts were well glued with Pitch , that no
water could come in. I funk the Pillar by its weight in a place fit for it ; but the
mouth ©f the Pipe ftood at leaft two foot above water : then I let down a lighted
Candle into the belly cf the Pillar by the Pipe, with a cord; and it was fo provided,
that what motion foever it had , it fhould always ftand upright. Thr Light pafled
through the windows into the waters, and by reflexion made a Light that might be
feen under water very far : to this Light, abundance of Fifh came,and I catched them
with Nets.

Chap. VI.

That by Looking-Glajfes many Creatures *re brought together,

IF Females be wanting,Looking-Glaffes may ferve to make reflexion of themfelves;
fo thefe Creatures , deluded by their own pidures, are drawn thither. Alfo Li-
quors may ferve in tread of Glaflcs,

The Cuttle u taken with a Glafs.
Glaflfes put into wood are let down by a cord by theFiftiermen into the waters*
and as they flote, they are drawn by degrees : the Cuttle feeing himfelf in it , cafts
himfelf at bis own image ; and laying fart hold of the wood with his claws, whilft
he looks upon his own picture as enamored by it,he is circumvented by the Net, and
taken.

A Jackdaw is taken with 4 Looking Glafs,

Jack-

Of Hunting, Fowling, Fljhing, &c. 333

Jackdaws love themfelves : the Fowler following to take them, invents fuch waves ;
for where he fees they flock , there he fets a Bafon full of Oyl ; the curiciii Bird
coming thither, fits on the brim of the Veflel, looking down to fee her own Piclure ;
and becanfe &e thinks that fhe fees another Jackdaw, (he hattens to flee dc wn, and
fo falls into the Oyl, and the thick Oyl Hicks to her , and i"o fhe is catched wichouc
fnares or nets.

How Quails are taken with a Lookjng-Glaftt.

flearchus faith, that Quails fpend their feed not only when they fee the Female?^ but
when they hear their cry alfo. The caufe is the imprcfllon in their mindes , which
you fhall know when they couple , if you fet a Locking Glafs againft them, and
before that a Gin : for running foolifhly to their picture in the Glafs , they fee they
are catchr. Athenam and Ettfiathim .

Chap. VII.

How Animals are congregated by fweet fmells.

THere are many odou/s, or other hidden qualities, that gather Animals together,
from the particular Nature of things,or of living Creatures. I (hall (peak of the
fmelling odours and other aliments that they much defire. As,

The Unicorn is allured by fent,

Tretres writes,tbat the Unicorn fo hunts after young Virgins, that he will grow tame
with them ; and (onetimes he will fall afUep by them , and be taken and bound.
The Hunters clothe feme young luliy Fellow in Maids clothes ; and ftrewing fweet
odours on him , they fet him right again!* the place where the Unicorn is , that the
winde may carry away the fmell to the wilde Beaft : the Hunters lie hid in the mean
time. The Beaft, enticed with the fweet fmell, comes to the young man : he wraps
the Beaft's Head in long and large flceves : the Hunters come running, and cut off
his Horn.

To make ffheezles come together.

The Gall of a Stellio beaten with water, will make Wheezles come together , faith
Tltvj. Alfo , the wife Plinianifts write, that with the Gall of a Chamselion caft into
water, Wheezles will be called together.

To make CMice come together.

If you pour thick lees of Oyl into a Difh, and fet it right in the houfe, they will flick
toil. PtHadiM. But lAnatolitu faith , if you pour Oyl- Lees into a Brazen Ba-
fon , and fet it in the middle of the houfe , all the Mice at night will meet toge-
ther.

To make Fleas come together.

The fat of a Hedge-hog boy I'd in water, and taken off as it fwimson the top; if
you ano>nt a (taff with it, and fet it in the houfe, or under your bed, all the Fleas will
come to it. Rhafis,

To bringFrogs together.

The Gall of a Goat fet into the cart h in feme Vcffel, is faid to bring all the Frogs to-
gether, if they can finde any delight therein.

CHAP.

Natural Magick. ©00^15.

Chap. VIII.

How Creatures, made drunks may be catch'd -with the hand*

I Have faid what draws them, now I (hall fay what will make them drunk. There
are many fimples that will do k, that you may take them with your hand?, wbilft
they flsep : and becaufe there are divers Animals that are made drunk with divers
things, I (hall fpeak of them in order. And firft ,

Hew Dogs are made drunks
Athemtu faith , that Dogs and Crows are made drunk with an Herb called jEourra »
but Theophrafius, from whom he had it, faith, that the Root j£nothera, given with
Wine, will'make them more tame and gentle. Whence jEnutra comes , by corrup-
tion of the word. Theophrafttu his j£nothera is. Rhedodaphni, as 1 laid. So

Ajfes are made drun^

And when they fleep, they are not onely taken • but, if you pull off their skias, they
will fcarcc tee! you, norawke j which comes by Hemlock : for when they have
eaten that, they fall fo faft afleep, that they feem Uupid and ienflefs. So

Horfes are made flnptd
by Henbane feed, if you give it them with B-ncy; and they will be fo faft afleep,that
they will be half dead, ha f a day. A certain Cheat , who wanted money on his
way , caft this feed to fame of h'n company . and when they lay altnofl dead afleep,
and they were all much troubled for them , fcr a reward he promifedto help them,
which received, he put Vinegar to their NotfriU, and fo revived them. Whereupon
they went on their journey. So

Libards are made drHr.kj
Optin teacheth the way, and how they ire raken when they are drunk. In Africa,
fo foon as they come to a Fountain w iere the Libar is ufe to drink every morning,
there the Hunters in the night brin^ maoy y-fleis of Wine • and not far from thence,
they fit covered in blanker. The Libards, very thirlly,come 10 the Fountain, and
fo foon as they have drunk Wine, that they delight in , firft they leap , then they
fall fait afleep on the ground ; and fo they are eafily taken. If you defire to
know how

Apes are taken, being drmnkjt

Athenam writes , that Apes will drink Winealfo ; and being drunk, arecatch'd.
And Tliny faith, that four-footed Bcafb, with Toes, will not encreafe, if they ufe
to drink Wine*. So U

Sows run mad,

eating Henbane-feed. %Allia» fait h, thar Bears eating this Herb> fall fick of a lingring
difeafe , and are troubled : it is of the Nature of Wine that disquiets the minde and
head. So

Elephants Are made drunk.

Athemm reports out of Ariftotle's Book de Ebrietate , that Elephants will be drunk
with Wine. t/Elian writes, that they give the Elephant that muftgoto war. Wine
cf the Grapes , and made Wine of Rice , to make them bold. Now I will (hew
how Birds laid afleep, may be catch'd with your hands. If then you would know
how

Birds may be catch 'd withhands^

Pliny writes, A certain Garlick &rews in the Fields , they call it Alum, which being

boy led,

Of Hunting, Fowling, Fifhing, &c*

boylcd, and caft tethem, is a remedy a gain ft the vihany of Birds that eat up the
Corn that it cannot grow again : the Birds that eat it are prefeotiy (Inpid , and arc
catch'd with ones hand, it" they have ttaid a tittle, as it they were aflccc. Bu: if ycu
will

Hunt Cartridge that are drun'^t

Boettm teacheth ycu thus: You (hall eafily hunt <uxh Partridge, if youcaf* unto them
meal wet in wine t fot every Bird is loon taken with it. It ycu make it with water
and wine mingled,and put that which is ftrongei into the vefirls,lo loon as they have
but lipc a little, they grow drowfic and ftupid. He fheweth,

Howtotakt Ducks n th your hand.
If any cne obferve the place where Ducks ufe to drink ; and putting away the water,
place black wine in the place : when they have drunk , they fall down, and m2y be
eafily taken. Alio, wine-lees is beft.

Ducks and other Birds being dmxl^are foon taken

With fome meats, as arc the Bur Dock feed, l'rewed here and there in places where
Birds frequent : they are fo light-headed when they have eaten them , that you may
take t hf m a it h y our hands. Another bait. Tormentil boy'ld in good wine , and
boyi Wheat or Barley in the fame, cart to Birds, is good to catch them: for tKey will
cat pieces of 5 ormeutil with the feeds , and be drunk that they cannot fire j and
fo are they cate'd with yocr hands. This is beft when the weather is cold , and the
Snc w deep. Or cite drew Barley-corns in places where many Birds come , then
make a cempefuien likeapultis of Barley-meal, Ox-gall, and Henbane-feed ; fee
this cn a plank fcr them : when they have rafted it, the Birds will be fo ftupid,thac
they carnot file, but are catch'd with ones hand. Or mingle Barley, and mdhrooms,
that are to called from flics,with the feeds of Hcnbane,and mike the pap of it,and lay
on a board, as before.

To catch %pok* with your hands.

Powder Nrtxvcmica^od mingle it with flcfti. So alfoyou may make Fifh drunk-
pan teacheth fome ways. If you will

Make Ftfh drunks

Sow-bread will do ic : for I faid , that Sow-bread will make men more drunk. Hi?
Words are :

Of Sow bread- Rooty they make a pafte that's white
And fat, with which the recks ar.d holes they fmcer •
The water* s poyfon'd by it* and the might
And force thereof doth fpread both far and neer.
The Fifhes faS, the Fi(hes art made bltnde>
4/fnd tremble at it : for the fttnkirg fmell
Thif Root thm ordered , alwayes leaves behinde,
Doth make themdrm\ , as Ftfhers k«ow full welL

Chap. IX.
The peculiar poyfons of Animals are declared,

T""\0 not think I mean, that one poyfon can kill all living Creatures, but every one
I 3 hath his fevcral poyfon : for what is verome to one, may ferve to preferve ano-
ther ; which comes not by reafon of the quality, but of the dillindt nature, WculdF
we mention

The venoms that kill Dogf.

^6 Natural Magick. Soo^ 15.

Viefcbfides faith, thai white Chamscleon made up with Barley-Flour, will kill
Dogs^ Sows, and Mice , being wet wich water or Oyl. Theophrasltu faith , Dogs
arid S ows kneaded with water and Oyl : but with Coleworts Sow?. Nux vomica,
which from the effe£fr is called Dogs Nut , if it be filed , and the thin filings thereof
be given with Butter or fome fat thing to a Dog to (wallow, it will kill him in three
hours fpace; he wiil be aftonifhed, and fall luddenly , and dies without any noifc : but
it muft be frefh , that Nature feems to have produced this Nut alone to kill Dogs.
They will not cat the Fruit of the Afii, becauie it makes pain in their back-bone and
hips : yet Sows are fatted by it So there is one Plant , called Dogs bane. Chry-
Jtpptu faith, that Dogs are killed with it, if thefhootsof it are given to them with
water. Dogs cole, or wilde cole, if it be given with Flefh j fo the fumes of Lead.
jArtstotlc 'vb his wonders, concerning the Country of the Scythians and Medes, faith,
that there is Barley that men feed on ; but Dogs and Sows will not endure the Ex-
crements of tho'e that eat it, as being poyfon to them. I fay nothing of Acenitum,
called by Diofcorides, Dogs banc. I fliall fay the lame

Of Wolfs bane.

Wolfs bane kills Wolfs and many other wild Beafts; and it's fo called from the effect.
Mountebanks make venome thus : Take black Hellebore, two ounces ; Yew-leaves,
one ounce • Beech-rinde, Glafs, quick Lime, yellow Arfcpick , Of each one ounce
and half : of fweer Almonds three ounces ; Honey what may fuffice. Make pel-
lets, as big as a fmall Nut. Others take Wolfs bane , yellow Arfenick, and Yew-
leaves , of each alike , and mingle them. There are «ther Herbs that kill Wolfs:
but I pafs them, to avoid tedioulneis. %/Ehan faith, Bv Nilus grows an Herb called
Wolfs bane \ if a Wolf tread on it, he dies of convulfions. Wherefore the Egyp-
tians forbid any fuch Herb to be imported into their Country > becauie they adore
this Creature. There are alfo

Herbs that kj&OMice,
That Aconirum, which is called Myo&onon, kills Mice a great way off. Dtofeoridet
and 'Hjcaxdor. Staves-acre hath almoH the fame forces , whofe Root or Seed in
powder, mingled with Meal, and fried with Butter, kills Mice if they eat it. They
are driven awiy with the Root of Daffodils j and if their holes be llopt with it,thcy
die. The wilde Cucumber, and Colcquintida , kill Mice. If Mice eat Tithymal,
cut into (mall dices , and mingled with Flour and Metheglin , they will be blinde.
So Chamseleon, Myacanthus, Realgar , namely, of live Brimftone, quick Lime and
Orpimcnt will do the fame. But among \

Wolfs baneSy

is reckoned Libards bane , by whofe Root , powdered, and given with flefh , they
arc killed. Flefh is ftrewed with Aconitc,and Panthers are killed if they tafte thereof.
Their jaws and throat are prefently in pain : therefore ir is called Pardalitnches.
They are killed alfo by Dogs bane, which alfo they call Pardalianches.

Lions bane

i; called Leontophonon : "u is a little Creature that breeds nowhere but where the
Lion is. Being taken, it is burnt: and with the Afhes thereof, flefh is ftrewed ; and,
being caft in the high-ways where they meer , Lions arc killed :' fo Pardalianches
kills Lions as well as Panthers.

Ox bane.

The juice of black Cbamarleon kills Heifers by a Quinfey : wherefore fome call it
Ulophonon. Cxen fear black Hellebore, yet they will eat the white.

(joats bane.

There is an Herb , that from killing Beafts , but efpccially , Goats , is called &"
golcthros. The Flowers of it , in aw airy Spring-time, are venome when they

wither ;

Of Hunting, Fowling, Fijbing, &c 337

wither ; fo that this mifchicf is not found every ycer.

Harts bane.

Some venemous Ftfh are found in Armenia ; with the powder of them, they fcatrcf
Figs Hrewed with it, in the places where wilde Bealfs come : Bealts no fooner talie
of them, bur they die. And by this Art arc Harts and Bores killed. &£lian.

Horfe lanes,
are Aconite, Hellebore, and red Arfcnick.

Wheedles bane, are

Sal Ammoniac , and Corn moyftened with feme Liquor : fcatter this about fuch
places as Wheezles haunt : when they eat it, they die, or flic away.

Sheeps bane,

Nardum kills Sheep. Diofcoridet. Cattel and Goats,if they drink the water where
Rhododendron is ftceped,will die. Pliny and Omnymutt an Author nameleis. Flea-
bane kills Goats and Sheep : fo doth Savin,

•

Pigeons bane, *

Seraph writes , that Piseons are killed when they cat Corn or Beans ftcept in wa-
ter , wherein white Hellebore hath been iofufed.

Hens bane.

Hens die by eating the Seeds of Broom, called Spartum,

Bats bane.

Zortafies in Geopon. faith they die by the fume of Ivy.

Vultures.

Some Animals are killed by things that fmell very fweet to us : Vultures by Un-
guents, and black Beetles by Roles. The fame happens if a man do buc anoynt
them, or give them meat that is fmeered with fweet Oyntmcat. lAriftotle lib. lMi-
rabil,

Scorpions bane.

Aconite called Theliphonum , from killing Scorpions. Scorpions are ftupified by
touching it, and they wax pale, (hewing that they are conquered. The Eagle is*
killed with Comfrey : the Ibis with the Gall of the Hiaena : the Stare with Garlick-
feed i the Charadrius with Brimftone : the Urchin withPondWeed : theFaul-
eon* the 5 ea-goll, the Turtle, the black-Bird, the Vulture, the night-Bird , called
Scope?, pcrifrf with Pomegranate Kernels. T he Titling by the Flower of WilloWs :'
the C rew with Rocket- feed : the Beetle with fweet Oyntment : the Rbok with the
reliqucs of flefh the Wolf hath fed on : the Lark by Muftard- feed : the Crane by
the Viae juice.

Chap. X.

Of the venomesfor Fijhes*

T He Sea and Rivers ufe to be infefted with feme Herbs, and other fiaipjes
whereby the Fifties that fwim in thofe waters , are made drunk and die. Bur,
becaule they are feveral for feveralFifh, I ftiall let down both the Particulars an«f
the Generals, that the Fifherman taught by thefe, may invent others hknfclf.

Fijhes are killed,

huh<Tlin/i by the Root the Filters of Campania ufe, catted, found Bmh-ttorti

Z z called

338 Natural MagIck. 2?00^ 16.

called alfo the venome of the Earth. This Root they bruife, and mingle it with
Lime, and caft itin to the Sea: the Fifties come to it with great delight, and are pre-
sently killed, and float on the waters. Dtofcorides faith, that broad leaved Tithymal,
bruifed and ftrewed in the waters, kills Fifh. We ufe now to bruife the Roots ot
it, and with a weight let them down to the bottom of the waters, that will be in-
fe&ed by them, and kill the Fifh prefcntly. But in the Sea, we fhall fooner kill them
thus : Mingle Oriental Galls, two drachms •, Cheefe, one ounce ; Bean-meal, three
ounces, with Aqua Vit* > ma .c pellets of thefe as big as Chick-peafoo. Caft them
into the Sea, 'in the morning before Sun rife : after thrte hours , come to the place
again , and you fhall finde all thole that tatted of it either drunk or dead , and to
appear either on the top or bottom of the Sea ; which you fhall take up with a pole
and a hook fattened to it, or Fifh.fpeer. The Aqua. Vita, is added , bccau'.e it foon
flies to the head. The Oriental Galls are poyfon that aftonifheth them : the Bean-
meal is not of great concernmenr. This bait invites them ; and the Cheefe fraells
fo, that they fern it at a dittance.

N

Chap. XI.
other Experiments for hunting.

Ow I will add fome Experiments that feem to be requifite, that you may ufe for
neceffky when you pleafe. ,

To change a Dogs colour/ 1 -»v , .

Since white Dogs are feldom fit for hunting, becaufc they are fqen afar pS j a way is
found to change his colour, that will be done if you boyl quick Lime with Litharge,
and paint the Dog with it, it will make him black.

That a Dog way not go from you.
Democrites faith, a Dog will never tun from you , if you fmeer him with Buttef from
head to tail, and give him Butter to lick. Alfo, a Dog will follow you if you hav«
the lecendine of a Bitch clofe in a bag with you,and let him fmell to it. If you would

not have

Tour Dog to bark^ ;

If you have a Bitches fecond Membrane, or a Hares hairs,or Dung, or Vervain, about
you. In Nilus there is a black (tone found, that a Dog will not bark if he fee it: you
mult alfo carry a Dogs Tongue under your great toe within your fhooe , or the dry
heart of a dog about you. Sextut. Or , the hair of a Hare, or the Dung. Tliny.
Or cut off the tail of a yongWheezel, and put it under your feet : or give the Dog a
Frog to eat in a piece of meat. All thefe things are to keep Dogs from barking. Ni~
giditu faith, that Dogs will all day flie from him who pulls effa tick frcm a Sow, and
carrieth it a while about him. Optan.

if of Hj&nas siztn a piece you take^
And wear /f , <?// the dogs n>iU yon for fake ;
As fr'ghted they rvtllfie^ and nevermore
Barl^atyoU) though they barked mnch before.

That a ^og may not run.

If you anoynt him with Oyl under the fhoulders, he cannot ruu.

To make a Hawke coitragiottt.
You fhall animate ycur Hawk againft the prey, that he may affail and flee at great
Birds; Whenyouhawk, wee the Hawks meat with Wine. If it be a Buzzard,
add a little Vinegar to it when you would have him flie : give him three bit* of fleft*

wet

Of Hunting, Fowling, Fifhing, Sec. ft?

wet in wine : or, pour Wine in at his mouth, with a yong Pidgeon : fo let him fi.e.

To make Tartridge more bold to fight.
Give them Maidenhair with their mcar. Pliny.

That dung-hill Cocks may fight the better.
Give them Garlick to eac foon before they fight : whence , in the old Comedy , a
Cock ready and earnert to fight is wittily called l*y.oyfKrlati&9 fed with Garlick.

'That a Bird may not flic high. I

Take dm the Feathers of his tail , that make him flie upwards ; fo he will whirl a-
bout, and flic downward. If you will have

That a Bird jhaUnotfiie^

cut the upper and lower nerves of his Wings, and it will not hurt him ; yet he can-*
not flie out of your Bird-cages, or places you keep them ho*

&'A&s&s&sfi^s&s&& &&&&&&&&&&

Zzi THE

THE

SIXTEENTH BOOK

O F

Natural Maonck :

v

Wherein are handled fecret and undifcovered Notes.

The Proem i.

€ Make two forts of fecret marks, which they vulgarly callSyfers ; one of vifjble marks*
J. and u worthy of a treatife by it felf: another of fecret marks, whereof I have attempt, d
to fay fomething in this prefent Volume , and what are the confefuents thereof, for the
ufe of great Men, and Princes, that take care for things abfent > and write to fame man that
knows the invention. 1 fhaUfet down plainly fome examples : but the fe things and the con-
ferences of thtm muft be faithfully concealed , left by growing common ametigft ordinary
people, thej be difrefpeUed. This is that I (hall puhUfft.

Chap. L

How a writing difd in divers Liquors may be read.

Here are many, and almoft infinite ways to write thing? of necefluy,
that the Chara&ers (hall not be feen , unlcis you dip them into
waters, or pot them neer the fire, er rub them with du(t, or imeer
them over. I (hall begin with them that are read by dipping them
into waters. Therefore

If you defire that letters not feen may be read, and fuch ai are [ten may be hid,
Let Vitriol foak in boyling water : when it is diflblvcd, drain ic fo long till the water
gro/v clear ; with that liquor write upon paper : when they are dry,they are not feen.
Moreover, grinde burnt ftraw with Vinegar ; and what you will write in the fpaces
be: ween the former lines, defcribe at large. Then boylfowre Galls in white Wine,
wet a ipunge in the liquor : and when you have need, wipe it upon the paper gently,
and wet the letters fo long until the native black colour difappear , but the former
colour, that was not feen,miy be made apparent. Now I will ftiew in what liquor^
paper mult be foaked to make letters to be feen. As I faid,Diflblve Vitriol in wa-
ter : then powder Galls finely, and foak them in water ; let them flay there twenty
four hours : filtrc them through a linen cloth, or femething elfe, that may make the
water clear, and make letters upon the paper that you defire to have concealed; fend
it to your Friend abfent t when you would have them appear , dip them in the firft
liquor, and the letters will prefently be feen.

That dipping a linen rag in water, the letters may appear.
Diffolvc Alom in water, and wiih it make letters upon white linen, fheets, napkin?,
and the like ; for when they are dry,they will prefently vanifli. When you will hav«
them vifiblc,foik them in water, and the linen will teem to be darkned : but only
where the Alejn hath written, it will not : for the letters will grow fo clear , thac
yon may read them : for where Alom, Vitriol, and all aftringents are dhtblved, tbofe
pans will admit wi;er laR. So

White letters are made with waters*

Li-

Of invifible Writing. 34.1

Litharge is firft powdered and caft into an earcbenpot that hath water and \inegar
mix'd;boyl it,and ftrainit,andkeep it: then write letters with Citron Lemons joce t
thefe are added to them when they begin to dry. If you dip them in the liquor kept,
they will appear clearly and very white. If womens brefts or hands be wet in it,and
you fprinkle the faid water upon them, they will grow white as Milk. Ufe it. If ac
any time you want thefe, if you plcafe,

A ftone dipped in vinegar will (hew the letters.
Make letters with Goats fat upon a ftone • when they are dry. they will not be feen..
If the ftone be dipt into vinegar they prefently come forth, and fecm above the ftone.
But if you would have letters writ with water only, appear black , that you may the
better be provided,and more fpeedily for a voyage ; beat Galls and Vitriol fir ely ,and
ftrew this powder on your paper : rub it with a cloth ^and polifh it well,that fo it may
ftick faft to the paper, and be like it. Powder Juniper-gum , which Scriveners call
Vernifh, and add it to the reft : when you would ufe it, write with water or fpittle,
and they will be black letters. There are many fuch Arts, too tedious to relate.

Chap. II.
How letttrs are tn.ide vifible in the fire,

1 Shall fhew the ways how letters are not made vifible but by fire ; or not> unlefs-
light interpofe, or may be read when they are burnt. But

To make letters vifible by fire.

So we may bring forth letters written between the verfes , and in the clofe fett ing
together , or larger diftances of fyllables. Let the Epiftle contain fome void fpacc,
that the letters may not be feen ; and if this be intercepted, it will hardly be read.
If ycu write with the juice of Citrons, Oranges, Onyons,or almoft any fharpthingr,
if ycu make it hot at the fire , their acrimony is prefently difcovered : for they are
undigefted juices, whereas they are deie&ed by the heat of the fire , and then they
Chew forth thofe colours, that they wouldfticw if they were ripe. If you write with
a fewre Grape that would be black , or with Cervices j when you hold them to the
fire, they are conceded , and will give the fame colour they would in due time give
upon thcrree, when they were iipe. Juice of Cherries, added to Calamus, will make
a green ; to fow-bread, a red : fo divers juices of Fruits, will fhew divers colours by
the fire. By thefe means,Maids fending and receiving love- Lett ers,efcape from thofe
that have the charge of them. There is alfo a kinde of Salt called Ammoniac j this
powdered and mingled with water , will write white letters , and can hardly be di-
Uinguifhcd from the paper : but hold them to the fire,and they will fhew black. Alfo,

Letters that cannot be read unlefs the paper be burnt.
For the mixture will be white, and nothing willbe feen ; but when it is burnt , the
paper will be black, and the Characters will be whire : Take the fharpeft vinegar and
the white of an Egg : in thefe heep Quick filver, arid ftir it well ; and with that mix-
ture make Letters on the paper; burn ihc paper in the fire,and the letters will remain
unburnt; or make letters on the paper with Gum, or any kind of Salt or Lime ; thefe,
being they cannot be feen at the fire , when the paper is burnt and made black, they
will appear white. If you will,you may

Write letters that cannot be feen but by inter pofit ion of fire.
Do it thus : Mingle Cerafs, or feme other white colour, with GumTragantb,
foaked, and of this mixture is made a matter of the fame colour with the paper, that
it cannot be difcemed from it,ncrcanfe fufpicion : then this being put between the
eye and the light of a candle, the eye cannot pafs through where the letters are writ-
ten , and youfhall fee them darkly. This is by reafon of theOpticks : for that
part of thick matter oppofed againft outward light , hinders it, that the rays cannot
ccme to our fight j and fo the pruts of the letters are feen as a fhadovv,

Chap.

N A TUR A L MagICK, 2>00^ l6m

Hew Lett its rub d with dttfi may be (een.

NOw I will ufe another artifice, that Letter? rubbed with daft may be read , thai
were before iaviable, which I read was tiled by the Ancients : wherefore do

thus :

That Litters rubbed with mill- daft way be read.

That as in paper , fo on fome unfeen parts of the Body, Letters written may lie hidj
and be opened when need is ; write lecretly on your Back cr Arms, or other Limbsj
with Vinegar or Urine, and dry it that nothing may appear : now , to have it read,

rub it over with foot or burnt paper ; fc r fo the Letters will fhine fsrth. Or ,

Otherwise ,

If you make Letters with rat , Tallow or any other fatty lubftance , or with Gum,
or Miik of a Fig-tree, and drew them with the dull of cole or burnt paper , they will
appear. It may be by this craft , as Poly anus the Greek faith , Attaint ufed the im-
printed infeription in a Beaft for a facrifice. He, to raiie the valour of his Souldiers^
to make them fight valiantly with their Enemies, the French, that were far more in
number ; fuppofing it would be no little advantage to put them in hopes before- \
hand of the affurance of the victory, invented a trivial bufinefs ; but otherwile pro- ^
fitable , with the Priefi that was to effer the faaifice. Before the day they were to
fight, he prepares for the victory : for Sudinut the Southfaycr, being to offer facrifice,
pray'd unto the god? , and cuts the Sacrifice in two. But the King ufed powder-
ed Gum , and from the right to the left fide, he drew thefe words : Regis Vi&vria%
The Victory is the King's : acd when the Entrails were drawn forth , he thruft his
band into the hotteft and molt Ipungy place , and wiped clean the infeription. But
the Augur? changing the Other parts , and doing his Office, turns the part where
this inferiptien was contained, Regis ViEloria. This matter was no fooner publifh- *
ed , but the Souldiers generally rejoyced, and fhouted exceedingly , to (hew how
ready they were to fight ; fo geingenwirh a certain aflurance of the ViSory, and
depending on this promife frern the gods , they fought couragieufly , and fubdued
the French. But to the matter Milk of the Fig-tree Will do the fame , if it be
written on white paper, and afterwards lent from a friend, be rubbed with cole-duft
Hrewed upon it , and made clean again . fo will the Letters prefently appear black.
P//»7 faith, the Miik of Tithynals will do the like , to make the Letters , anddult
Hrewed on them rofcowrethem: and thus women, a3 he fays, had rather fpeakwiih
Adulterers., then by Letters. Ovid confirms this , admonifhing Maids in his Arte
Amandi^how they miy fafely write to their Sweet-hearts.

Write with new UMilk^, it's fafr, rtnfeen. Wt read
The writing with cole'dufl laid on [nil-right :
Moyft flax will write as if that none had been ,
And letters on year paper pafr the fight,

Alfo there is an Art that one would not imagine, to write upon Cbryftal : for,
being all tranfpsrent, no man will dream of it , and the letters may lie hid within.

Do it thus ;

That letters may appear upon Chryftal by fire wing on of fine dufi.

DhTolve Gum Arabick in water, or Gum Traganth, that it may be cleer $ and when
it is well diflolved, ir will not foul the Cryftal, if you write upon it, or upon a Cup
orGlafs ; !,or when the Letters are dry,they are invisible. No man Will imagine the
fraud, if a Cup be lent to one in prifon,or a Glafs full of wine : when be would fee
the letters, rub burnt Hraw or paper Upon it , and the letters Will prefently be feen.
Here is another fecrer, That

Of invifible Writing. 3^3

That letters on the paptr m<*y be read, net by fire^cr water, or any other thing, but

in the dufi only.

This i? afecrct worth knowing: diflolve Gcats fuet with a little Turpentine : rub the
parer with this iiqK>r,and keep it : when you would lend feme news to your friend,
lay on the paper imeered with the fat upon a letter you would lend to your tri^ndj
write upon that with an iron poinr, and the fuet will make the characters on the let-
ter : fend this away ; and if it be intercepted, no water will make the words vifible,
or any othec Arr, but only ftrewingdult upon it. A Mb you may make
7 hat upon blackjpzper, white letters may appear.

The rcafon is this : mingle the white and yelk of an Egg together,that it may be liquid
as ink: with this liquor, write on the paper what words you peafe , and dry them :
when the paper is dry,make a black colour over it,and dry it again,and fend k,but thac
the letters may be vifible,fcrape the fuperficies of the paper with a broad iron i for fo it
will be,thatthe ink being fcraped orfyvherechc letters were, they will appear white.-

Chap. IV.
How y oh may write in an Egg.

BEcaufe when prifons are fhur, Eggs are not Popt by the Papal Inquifkion, and no
fraud is fufpe&ed to be in tbem,I will fhew you how Letters may be writ cn the
upper (hell and white of an Egg alio : for example,

That letters may be writ on the Egg-[hell,

Wrap the Egg in wax,ind with an iron point make letters on it,asfar as to the fhell;
but break it net: for if ycu break the fhell with your iron, or point, or knife, rmiy
be detected. Soak your Egg one night inftrong water of depart, which f-parate- g^ld
from fi'.vcr : in the morning take away the wax, and rake off the Egc.fhells cover,and
hold she (hell between yonr eye and the %br,ard the letters will be feen verv clear
quite through thetranfparem (hell. The fame is done with the j ice of I., mtnons :
for it fofteneth the fhell; but foul it not, and you fhall have y cur dtfire. Will you

That letters may be fetn upon the white
yellow, and better when the Egg is bcyl*d. Boyl an Egc hard and rowl it in wax,and
engrave the letters on the wax with an ircn point, that the marks may lie open: put
this Egg into liquor with Alom and Galls powdered : then put it irtto fharp Vinegar,
and they will penetrate ; and takii g c ft the fhells, ycu fhall fee thesn in the white of
the Egg. y fficantu reacheth ic thus: Grinde galls andalcm with vinegar, till they be
as thick a^ ink : with this write what you will on an Egg \ and when the writing is
dried in the Sun, put it into fharp pickle: dry ir,boyl it, and takeeff the fhell,and you
fhall read the writing. I put it into vinegar, and could do nothing ot it. P. rhaps, he
means by pickle,capital lees. The caufe is this : the E^fhell is poreu',and hath large
holes, which is plain ; for being fet to the fire,it will fweat,and water will come forth ;
and looking at it againft the lighr, it will fhew clear : foihen, vinegar being fubtile,
penerates by the pore?,and makes the ftiell tender : and when it is mingled with the
Aloaa & Galls,it carricth their fubftance with U,and makes them appear on the white;
and when ir is put into cold water, it is condenfed, and comes to be hard as it was.
But obfefve, it muft cot May long in vinegar 5 for that will eat off all the fhell, and
will leave the Egg bare , having nothing but a thin .^kin to cover it : and if you put
that into cold water, the fhell will not ccme again. If you will know

How letters writ with water, may be feen in an Egg,
Diflolve Vitriol in the warer,and write upon the fhell, and dry ic, and nothing will
be feen. If ycu will read it, diflolve Galls in wine, and fteep the Egg therein : or,
write with Lime-water upon an Egg , and tfeep it in lye where Brafil is infufed ; and
fothe letters will feemtobe of a violet-color : or,write with fuet upon the fhell,acd
Peep it in water of vitriol : when it is dry , fcrape off the fuet , and nothing will be
feen : when you afterwards fteep it in the forefaid wine, white letters will appearin
1 black fhell. Iwillfhcwv

544- Natural Magick. 2>00j^ itf.

How Utters may become vijible npon an Egg by the fire.
Writ e on the Egg with juice or Lemmons,or Onyons, or Fig-miik : when you put this
to the fire, the Letters will appear yellow : and that muft be done on a raw Egg : for
if you boy I ir, the letters will be feet).

That letters may be feen on the Egg jhcllby dttft.
Mike letters on the fhell with vinegar, fuer, fig-tree- milk, or of Tithymal , or with
gums : when you would have them lccn, rub them with colc-duft, or burnt draw, or
paper, and they will fetm black. There is a way

Hoyv to put a fetter into an Egg.
Make your letter that you fend, narrow and long , fcarce broader then your middle -
finger : write your mindc in fhort characters, and with the edge of a knife,make a cut
in the Egg, and break the inward skin, and put in your letter at one end by degrees :
for it will cafily take it in, were it ten hands breadth : then (lop the cut , with lime
and gum mingled,that it may not be feen,and with Cerufs and gum-Traganth; for then
k is impofftble to difcern it. But if you will have this done more neatly, put the egge
in fharp vinegar three orfourhcurs: and when you findeit left, open the fhell with
the edge of your knife, put 'id your roll of paper : then foak it in cold water, and the
fhell will grow as hard as it was.

Chap. V.

He w you may write in dt vers pkces, and deceive one that can read.

T Have fhewed you divers wayscf writing invifible; now I come to thofe ways that
J. will teach you to write letters on divers things, which though they be vifible, and
intercepted, yet the Readers will be deceived by their fecrct device. Firft ,

How to write on a jmall threed.
Let us fee how they did this in elder times : GeHtts nott. Attic. relates,That when the
Lacedemonians writ to their Generals, that their letters being intercepted by the e-
nemies might not be read/invented this kinde of writing ; yet it is referred to Archi-
medes to be the inventor of it, Two (ticks muft be made long and round,and polifhed
with the Turners inftrument j they mult be equal for length, breadth and thicknefs*
One of thefc was given to the General when he went forth to war, and the other
was kept at heme by the Senate : as oft therefore as need was , a page was rolled a-
bout the Hick, as large as could contain the matter, that it might make a round vo-
lume, and i he fides of it were fo well joyned , that tbey were like a collar that ex-
actly fitted the woed,aod no chinks between: upon this collar,that thus was rolled
about the (lick, they writ letter? oven hwart, from top to bottom. The collar thus
wriitcncn, being long ard narrow, was taken off from the flick, and lent tothe Ge-
neral ; for they thcughr, if it was intercepted by the enemy , when they faw bits of
letters, and fyllables,and of word^/ofar divided,they would never difcern the thing:
and they were not deceived in this conjecture. For when they fell among the ene-
mie<vthe ene my did not imagine any thing was writ on the collar ; but let them pafs,
as with a thing done at all advenrure5,and infignificant : but he to whom it was writ,
applied this bacd,and rolled it about, as it was at firfi writ upcn: and then the words
lay jo\ n d as thev fhould be,and fo he knew the meffage. The Greeks call this kir d
of writing, <jv>-n*n. Plutarch fail h , A letter thus writ, was brought to Lyfander by
JHeHefpor.t. But I invented to v. rite lo with a Threed : make two imall (ticks alike
great and rcur d : one we give to our friend that goes far from us, and hold the other
by us : let us make them (tick fo clofe rogether, that they may joyn,and feem to be as
one, and trie wood not be leen : fit the Threed as it fhculd be, and write long-ways
on the flick what you pleafe; the broader the flicks are, the more lines will they re-
ceive. If you firft fteep your Threed in water wherein Alcmis diflolved , the Ink
will not fpread, but the letters will be the clearer : then take your Threed that is a-
bouc the (tick, and wrap it on a heap ; or to keep it the more fecrct , fow it upon the
edges of napkins or fhirts , and lend it to your abfenr friend : for the curious watch
fhall difcern nothing on the Tbreed,but fome fcattercd points. Your frierd winding
the Threed about the fame flaff, and taking care to make the points meet at the tops
and agree well, fhall cafily read them. 1 will (hew, Hon*

Of invifibie Writing.

How to write on Parchment, that the Letters may not b: feen

When you have writ on Parchment, put it to the light of a candle, or to the fire, and
it will all crumple and run together, and be nothing like what it was; if a man
look on it , he will hardly lufpeft any fraud. If he defires to read whst is iair, let
him lay it on tnoylt places , or fprinkle it gently with water , and it will be dilated
again, and all the wrinkles will be gone, and it will appear as it did at t rff, that ycu
may read the Letters upon it, without any hindrance. Now I will fhsw the way

How in the Setlions of Bookj the fharatters {hall be hid.

When the Book is well bound, and cut, and coloured black; if we open ir, and turn
back the leaves , that they may be turned in , we may write at the corners of ihe
leaves what we will : but when the Book is let back again, and the leaves put into
their own places, nothing is feen or can be imagined to be writ in them ; but f.e
that would read thofe Letters, muft let the Book that way as it was, and the Letters
will be read. So may we write on fly traps, thai are made with wrinkles, and then
draw them forth. If need be, we may do

7 he fame wiih Cards to flay with.
You may excellent well write on Cards, if you put them in fome order, that one
may follcw the other; and feme fhall be upright, others turned downwards. When
you have fet them right together, you may write all things where they divide : mingle
the Cards together again , and turn t htm , and nothing will be feen but fome dilor-
derly marks, if any man lock curioufly upon them. But he that would read them,
muft fct them in order, and they will joyn and be read exactly. Alfo, we may
write in white Pigeons , and other white Birds , feathers of their wings, turning
tbem upwards ; for when they return to their own places, they wiil fhew nothing.
Bur if the> be brought to their former pofiure, you will read the Letters ; and this is
no fmail benefit for thofe that fhall ufe them for meficngers. There is a way

To hide Letters Upon wood.
Any one may make Letters upon wood, and not be fufpe&ed; for they (hall not be
feen, but when we pleafe. Let the wood be flefhy and foft , of Poplar, or Tile-tree,
or !uch like : and with thofe iron Markers Printers ufe, when they maketfamps upon
Brat's , cemmonly called Ponzoncs , make Letters in the wood , half a finger thick t
then hew the wood with a Carpenters hatchet, as deep as the Letters go ; when ail
is made plain, and equal, fend the ftick to your friend, or board, to him thu knows
the matter } he putting the wood into the water , the wood will fwell out, that
was beaten in with the marks, and the Letters will come forth. That we may do in
wooden vefTcls^pGlifhed by the turner , if when they are turned, we mark the Let-
ters on them ; and then turn them again : when this is done , fend it to your friend^
and let him foke it in water, &c.

Chap. VI.
In what places Letters may be inclosed.

J Shall fpeak in what places Letters may be inclofcd, and not be fufpe^ed; and I
fhall fpeak laftcf Carriers. I fliallbring fuch examples as I have read in Antienr
Hiftcries, and what good a man may learn by them. Firft,

How to hide Letter sin wood.
Theophafitu^ opinicn was, that if we cut the green bark of a Tree, and make it ho^"
low within, as much as will contain the Letters , and then bind it about , in a fhorc
time it will^row together again, with the Letters fhut up within it. Thus he faith,
Th2t bv including fome religious precepts in wood, people may be allured ; for they
will admire at it. But I mention this out of Thophraftm , rather for a fimilitude,

Ala thee

^6 Natural Magick. 2?0o^

then for to do the thing I would have, for that wculd require a long time. But this
may be done well in dry wood, as in Fir:thus;the chinks fanning together with com-
mon white glew. Alio the Antiencs ufed

To conceal Letters in Junkets.
I will relate the cunning of the Wife of Poljcretes • forfbe, whilftinthe Milefian
camps they folemnized a Solemn Featt of their Country • when they were all faft
afleep, and drunk , took this opportunity to tell her brothers of it, and did thus. She
defircd Diognetut, General of the Erythreii, that (he might fend fome Junkets to her
brothers: and when fhe had leave , (he put a leaden fcrole into a cake , and flie bad
the bearer tell her brothers from her , that no man fhould eat of it but themfelves.
When they heard this, they opened the cake, and found the Letter, and performed
the contents of it. They came upon the enemy by night, that was dead drunk at the
Feaft,and conquered him. Alfo the Antients were wont

To fhut up L etters in living creatures,

Herodotw faith, That Harpagu* fent Letters to Cyrut , put into the belly of a Hare
whole entrails were take out, by one that counterfeited a fhepherd hunting. So

Letters may be htd in Garments,

The fecret places of clothes are bed, to avoid fufpicion, as in your bofom, or under
the foles of your feet. Ovid in his Arte Amandi, writes to this purpofe :

Letters may be concealed in your breft^
Wrap in a elowt^whtch way u held the beft\
Orelfe ym may under your feet provide
A place full clofely Letters for to hide.

To hide Letters in your belt.

Thole of Campania were wont , when they would difcover anything to the Cartha-
ginians , and the Romans befieged them round ; they fent a man that ieemed to run
from them, with a Letter concealed in his girdle; and he taking occafion to efcape,
brought it to the Carthaginians. Others carried Letters in their fcabbards, and
fent them away by meftengers, and were not found out. But we ufe now adays

To hide letters m the Bowels of living creatures.
For we wrap them in fome meat, and give them to a Dog, or fome other creature to
fwallow ; that when he is killed, the letters may be found in his belly : and there is
nothing negle&ed to make this way certain. The like was done by Harpagus. He,
as Herodotus faith, beingto difcover to Cyrutiomz fecrets, when the ways were flopt,
that he could do it by no other means , he delivered the letters to a faithful fervant,
who went like a Hunter, that had catcht a Hare; and in her belly were the letters
put, when the guts were taken forth, and fo they were broughtto Perfit. We ufc
alfo

To fhut up letters in ft ones.

- •

Flints are beaten very fine in brazen Mortars, and lifted ; then are they melted in
a brafs Cauldron, by putting two ounces of Colophonia to one pound of the pow-
der of the Hone ; and mingling them, put your letters into leaden plates, and hide
them in the middle of the compofition, and put the lump into a linnen bag, and tye
it faft, that it may be round; then fink it into cold water, and it will grow hard,
and appear like a Bint.

CHAP.

T

Of invifible Writing. 5^7

Chap. VII.

What fecret Meflengers may be ufed.

He Amiencs ufcd the fame craft for Meflengers ; for they ufed men that fhculd
be difguiled by their habits, and lome living creatures bcfides. For

To coun'erfeit the (hape of a T)ocy
It was the crafty counfel of Jofi^m , that the Meflengers fhould be clad with < kins,
and (othey pafr the enemies guards , and were not regarded ; for if they Were !een,
they were in the likenefs of Dogs ; and this was done until the enemy found out the
trick, and compifled the Rampart round about. And mans curiofity was not fatif-
fiedhere, till they found means for ways to pafs, where the Sentinels and Seems
might not difcover them ; wherefore they left the land, and fent by Water : But that
the writing might not be lpoiled in the water, &s Front whs faith, The Souldiers that
paft over the River Saltella, had leaden plates writ upon , faftned to their arms.
But Lncnllt*6, as the fame Frontinm reports, that he might declare to the Cyziceni,
that were befieged by Mithridates, that he was coming to relieve them, all narrow
paflages being liopt by the enemies guards , that were joyned to the continent by a
imail bridge, he fought a way by fea. For a private Souldier appointed for it, fitting
on two bladders blown, wherein the Letters were put in two covers • and fo like
fome fea-Monfter , he fwim feven miles at fea, and told of the coming of the Gene-
ral. So they often ufed

Arrows for ^Meflengers :
But that feemed not fufficient , for they feared mens cunning , left fome chance or
fraud might intercept the meltenger, and the fecret fhould be difcovered , or they
fhould be racked to make them confefs. Sometimes therefore they tbught a way in
the Air, and uied Arrows for meflengers, that none might intercept them. Heredo-
tm faith, That Art&baz,iti and TimoxexHt did this , when one would declare any thing
to the other j for the paper was folded about the foot of the Arrow, and the feathers
were put upon it, and it was fofhotinto the place appointed. To this appertains
the example of (^Uonymtu King of the Lacedemonians.He beficging the cityTroezenr,
commanded many of his beft Archers to (hoot Arrows into feveral places ; and he
writ upon them : I come to relieve your City ; and by this means he fet ladder?, and
his Armyfcaled the walls and went in, and plundered the place, anddefiroyed ic.
But w hen fafar heard that Cicero befieged by the French, could hold out no longer ,
he fent a Souldier by night, who ihould fhoot a Letter, fanned to an Arrow, over the
wall: when he had done this, the watch found the Arrow and the Letter, and
brought.it to Cicero. In it were thefe words written : fafar bids Cicero be conh-
denr,andto expect relief. So ^f/^rcame fuddenly, and flaying the enemies,relievcd
him. We can do it fafer, and better now adays with Guns : if the matter to be fent
be contained in few words , we may (hoot them forth with Muskets ; namely, by
folding up the paper, and putting it into a cafe of lead, where they caft bullets,
pouring upon it melted lead, but not burning hot ; the paper wrapt up in the lead,
we fhoot awav with the Powder to the place. But becaufe the Letters are but fmall,
we may fhoot many of them in a day. The way to melt the Ball is, by putting it to
a gentle 6re,or into quick-filver,and it will foon melt, and the paper not be touched,
I (hall fiiewnow

How to make Pigeons your Meflengersi

We may ufe Birds for Mrffengers • as Pigeons, Swallows, Quails, and others : For
thefe Birds carried to other places, when need is, if you bind Letters to their necks
crfeet, they will return with them: and when any thing was fuddenly to be rela-
ted, the Antients fometimes ufed thefe Meffengers. Htreita beingConfuUa? Fronti-
ntu trKihes, fent forth Pigeons from the neereft place he could from the wall'?, which
had been long fhut up in the dark* and half famifhed, to Decimw Brww^nho was

Aaa 2 be--

3^8 Natural Magick. <Bool{i6.

befieged at Mmina by Anthony. They being glad of light, and deHring meat, flew
and fat upon the higher parts of the houfes ; Brttttts catcht them, and lo was confir-
med how things were: wherefore, always laying meat in thofe pla;es , he call'd
them back again. Hence Fltny. Nor Ramparts, nor Scouts, nor Nets pitch'd before
Rivers, did profit Anthony ; for the M:flenger went through the Air. By the fame
way, in the very fame day, from OlympiatQ <AEgina> was the vifikory of Tauroflhe>.es
declared to his Father ; though others fay it was torefcen : others fay, That Tattrofihe-
nest when he went forth, took a Pigeon from her yong ones, yet weak and not abie
to fly, and as loon as he had conquered , he /ent her back again, purple-coloured;
and (lie making great haft to her yong ones, flew that very day from Pifa to v£>ina.
%/E.Uan writes this. Some have fought to do this by Swallows, taken out of their
nefts from their yong, and fent back again. Some alio atteft, that beyond fea Eaft-
ward, there are Pigeons that when the way is ftopr, will fly through the midft of the
enemies, and carry Letters under their wings, a very long way. It may be Juvenal
meant this, when he faid,

As if from divers farts a letter were

Brought with a donfful wing quite through the Air.

Alio in old Monuments and Hiltories it is declared, that there was a King of Egypt,
whofe name was Marrhesy who bred up a tame Rook , and this he made ufe of for a
winged mcflenger, fo oft as he had need : for, as if fhe bad reafon , (he would carry
the Letter where fhe was directed ; for fhe was fo crafty, as to be inftru&ed whither
to fly, and where to flay , or reft at any time. Mans wit hath invented thefeflhifts,
to avoid danger ; but by the fame craft is he wounded fomctimes , as it were with
his own weapons. When the Chriftians with an Army befieged Ptolemais, when
Saladint had appointed a Pigeon to be fent thus with Letters to the befieged, to
wifh them to be conftant, and expect his coming fuddenly j the Chriftians catch'd
her, and tied a contrary letter to her , and fent her away : whence it fell out, that
they defpalriogof relief, yielded ihemfelves : fo there can be no certain fecurity in
humane affairs, but there may be fraud in all things. Themiftitu faith, That amongft
Animal :, Pigeons have the beft memory* as having a clear and refined mind. Where-
fore, though all other Animals make haft to their yong ones, when they are taken
from them, yet none of them carried far, can comeback, becaufe their memory
fails. I have fcen the tryal with Pigeons. When my fervant came from my Farm,
he brought home feme yong Pigeons taken from their dams , and he wrapt them up
in a cloak as we Went ; and when we came home at night , they were fhut up in the
houfe; but when the morning came, they flew out of the windows ; and difcover-
ing the counrry afar off, they took upon the wing, and flew all home again. Where-
fore in Gsnefis 9 Hjah fent forth a Pigeon, which returned j but the Raven returned
not For the Raven wants memory. I remember in Tlittarchs works , what is worth
relating that I read there, That by the Pigeon fent forth of the Ark, in Dene aliens
flood, wis fhewed, that the waters were funk down, and the ftortns paft. Animals
that have newly brought forth yong ones, will do the fame.

Chap. VHI.

How Meffengen may be fenty whofhaR neither know that the J carry letter nor can they

found about them.

OUr Anceftors had another Art,that could not be difcovcred,invented by ftrange
crafr. Herodottu mentions it from Heftum, who was the Author of it. He
b iing born in Afia, when of noble place, when Darin* ruled , when he was with the
King in Perfia,and would privately write to Arijlagoras to fall from him , fearing left
if he fhouldnot do it cunningly, he fhould be difcovered, and be in great danger,
he invented this way. He fhavedoff his fervants hair of his head, asthoughhe
m:am to cure him , who for a long time had been troubled with fore eyes : and on

his

Uf invtjwle IV ruing. y±p

his head, with good ink, he writ letters, that contained what he fflenatto have doner
he kept this tellow at home with him, un il his hair was grown again ; when true
was done, he lent him away to Ar<ftjg(,rM , bidding him fay, when he ame to hiaij
that he (hould do unto him, in (having tff nis hair, as he did before : When the fer-
vant came to Anfiagorai. toMileiUm^hc iaid what his Matter bad him lay voAriftsgcrM:
he fuppo. ng the bu .neis not to be idle, did what he was ordered, and lo read the
meflage. The Amients found cut vhefc inventions, to fend mefl^noers with. Yer.
that can be no fate way, to (have eff the hair, and to write letters upon the head, for
the head will eaftly fweat, and put them out. And if the skin be pricked with a
needle , this will not avoid the iufjphti n, if he that we^rs the writing , be laid bold
on by the way : for then i> there molt diligent fearch : for fear and ncccfliry will make
men watch.ul, and they are never latisfied, till they have iearched every place.
Sometimes they try men by fair promifes, fometimes they fright them with threats ;
and if thete will not do, they term :rit and torture them, to make them confefs : and
if this will not do, that letters may not be fecreily conveyed, not oriely their hofe
and fhooes ufe to be fearched, their clothes pluckt off, and the feams ript, but they
will fearch their very guts ; fo tar is it from keeping any fecret upon the head , that
{hall not be look'd fcr. But I can (end Letters, and write io, that itcanbeunder-
ftoodby cone) but thofe that the letters aredefign'd for* And he thac carrieth
them never fo far off, if hefhould be taken by the way , and examined by torments,
he can confefs nothing , becaufehe knows nothing of it , and the Letter (hall al-
ways remain fecret. Nor will length of time , or iweat in travel , blot out the Let-
ters ; nor is it any matter if the meflengcr pafs through Rivers, Seas ,or Rain ; for wee*
will not hurt them. What good Princes may get by this , I leave to your cogita-
tions ; for they have melt need of this , when they would declare any thing to their
friend?, that are befieged t and oft-times upon one meflage, may the victory of a Ci-
ty or Army depend. The invention of thcAmiems, was partly good) and partly
bad. They writ Letters on his bead, which he could not read ; nor would water
or fweat, wafh them off, becaufc they were printed into the head : and when the
bair grew cut , they conld not be feen. And that the meflengcr might be ig-
norant what was writ upon his head, they took occafion for it, faying, he had a pain
in his eyes , that they would cure : and thus he knew not the craft they ufed. Buc
this fraud fecms not vefyfecure, for one that fhould fufpe&k might fhaveoff the
hair , and find out the fecret. Moreover , if the meflenger were to be fent fud-
denly, now could he flay a moneth , till his hair were grown again? and when his
skin was prickt for to make the Letters, he muft needs fufpect fomething. But Ice
us fee

How Hefiiaus could make the Letters on his head indelible*

He wound:d the skin with the point of a needle, or opened it with a rafof , and caft
in the powder of Colophonia burnt ; for to we ufe to make the names of Matters,
upon the faces of bond -flaves , that they (ball never come forth, and in time they will
look green. Alfo

Letters may be made between the that are indelible, upon any fart.
You may foon do it thus: Let Cantharides fteepa whole day in ttrong water, buc
fooner i< it done in water of reparation ; then make the letters with a Pen-knife, of
fit inftrument, upon the upper skin of the Arm, or any other part ; the flefh hurt with
the moytture, will rife in Witters, and be exulcerated; fo by the force of thiscorro-
dinf water, will there always remain the prints of white letters, and they will sever
be b o ted cut. And this is bett done by Heftttus fecret, becaufe the letters could
not be read under the hair , whereas white letters , like milk, would be feen. Buc
would we have rhrm ttay onely for fome time, and not always , we may do it many
ways. If you mike letters with Aejuafortisftbtt hath eaten filver or brafs, they will
appear many day % So it may be done with oy 1 of Honey. How I will (hew

How a man may carry Utters that are indelible and invtpble, and unknown to him • and
how to make them vtfib;e when need is* Vofi)

-jflo Natural Magick. 2>00^ 16.

You may do it thus: by writing letters on the rmflengers back, that he may not
know of, having firli given him an Opiat to make him deep fcundly , then write, and
let them dry in • when he awakes, fend him away, the letters dried on will not be
teen: The Antients knew thif. Ovid faith it:

Write on his bach^for paper, [ojoufloxll
Better csncealyour purpofejrom them all.

But let us fee whether we can write on the flefh with any liquour , that parting
through Rivers and Rain, the letters may not be blotted out with any moyfture, and
then bv ftrewin<j on of duli , may be made vihblc again. Write on a mans back,
which &all be vifible onely, by being wet with Come humour , and no man can find
om, unlefs he know the fecret. If you write with water, wherein Vitriol is diiTol-
ved, with a deco&ion op Galls, it will be feen. If it be made very fharp,it will pierce
the skin, and the letters will be delible : we may do the fame with the oyl of it. Salt
Ammoniac with quick Lime, crSope,wili make a blew colour. If they be rubbed
with oyl or Litharge, they will appear white , with Aqua vttt, or its equal, diltilled
vinegar, and water and Salt.

Cm a p. IX.

How (fharatters mxy be made, that at fet days (hall vanish from the paper,

1 Shall attempt to fhew how letters maybe written on paper, or in other matter,
that (hall diiappear at fet times : and other letters fhall be made invifible, that at a
time certain fhall appear, not onely ufefulfor fecret marks, but for other purpofes
neceffary for our lives. Letters that decay and vanifh , may be made two ways, ei-
ther with Aquafortis, that eats the paper, or feme decaying liquors , that will vanifh
with any light touch, and leave the place where they were, without any fpor. I fhall
teach

How letters are mjde> that eat the paper.

If you mingle oyl of Vitriol with common ink or any other black colour, in few days
by corroding the paper, or the ink it felf , the letters will vanifh, or in a moneth, as
you put in more or lets of the oyl ; and rbiis you may try before you fend away your
letter : If you would have it woik more flowly, add but a little oyl ; if fafter , put in
more: ycu may, when it is tootfrong, put feme water to it.The fame is performed,
if you mix a ftrong lye , they call it the Capital, with your ink ; forfirft they will be
yellow, and then they will vanifh. The fame is done by oyl of Tartar,or Salt Aikali,
or Soda, and ftrong water of feparation of Gold ; for thefe corrode the letters, and
the paper, that nothing of the letter? will appear. If you defire to know

How letters way ire made, that will f eon vanifh }
Make them with the ftrongeft Aqua vita, or ufe Camphir and burnt ftraws : for the
letters in time, will decay and vanifh ; the tin&ure will fall erf, when the glurrnoYis
matter is gone. Make a powder of a very fine touch-ltonc ;for the Sandy- ftonfifwiil
fooncr decay, that no letter fhall be fcen. Alio it is done

Another way :

Infufe the fmall filings of fteel in water of feparation ; take a treble quantity of this,
and add thereto liquid Pitch, or Soot of Turpentine, to make it the blacker, and co-
ver the veffel : grind this on a Porphy re-ffone, write, and they will vanifh and fall a-
way This fecret I thought not fie to overpafs, becaufe it is the principal thing to be
confidered, to make try aloft-time s ; for if it flay long on the paper, add more ftrong
water to it and if you be careful, no mark of the writing will remain. You (hall
do it like to this, another way. If it be good lb to counterfeit : Take Chry focolla,
Sale Ammoniac, and Alom, all alike ; powder them all , and put them into a Cru-
cible,

k Of invifible Writing. 551

ciblc , and make a flrenglyeof quick-lime, and laying a linnen cloth overche mouth
of the veflel, that muft receive it,ttrain it ; boil it a little, mingle this with your ink,
they wiir remain a while , but in fliort time the letters will vanifh away. Set it up
for yon ufe. But contrarily,if you will

That invtftble letters after fome time, (hall become vijible
tnd faew themfelves • I will give you fome examples , that you may invent more
thereby your felf. If you write with juiceof Citrons or Oranges, on Copper of
Brafs, and leave this fo for twenty days, the letters will appear green upon the place
the fame may be done many other ways, namely, by dhTolving lak Ammoniac in wa-
ter, and writing with it upon Brafs,the place will fooner appear of vcrdigreefe-colonr.

Chap. X.

How we may take off letters that are written upon the paper.

IF we woold take letters from off the paper , or that fnch as are blotted out might
appear again , we mutt ufe this art. As, if we would

Take letters off the paper,

or from parchment : Take Aqua fortis, that is it that parts gold from filver : with a
penfil wipe fome of this upon the letters, it will prefently wipe off letters , written
with Gall and Copras. If you ufe Aqua fortify wherein fait Ammoniac is diflblved,
it will be fooner done. But printed letters are harder taken out , becaufe that ink
bath neither Galls nor Copras: Or rub it with fait Alkali and Sulphur, making little
balls cf them , and that will eat them out , that nothing (hall be feen. But if you
defire to write any thing in the place you have made clean ; firft, wet the place with
water, wherein A lorn is diffoived, for the ink will not run about. If you defire

To renew letters decayed,
or to read fuch as are vanifhed : Boil Galls in wine, and with a fpunge wipe over the
letters, the letters will prefently be feen, when they are once wet thus, and be well
coloured as they were at firft.

Chap. XI.
How to counterfeit a feal And writing.

T T may be of great ufe when places arebefieged, and in Armies, and affairs of great
men, to know how to open letters, that are fealed with the Generals Seal , and
fisned with his Name, to know what is contained within , and to feal them again,
writing others that are contrary to them, and the like. I will (hew how

To counterfeit the Seal.

Melt Sulphur, and caft it into powder of Cerufr , while it is me'ted ; put this mixture
upon the Seal, bur fence it about with paper or wax, or chalk, and prefs it down ;
when it is cold, take it off, and in that (hall yon have the print of the Seal. I will
do it another way. Fill an earthen pot with Vinegar , call Vitriol into it , and a
good deal of Verdigreefe j let it bubble on the fire, put plates of iron into it ; after a
fttort time take them out, and from the out-fide with your knife, (crape off a kind of
raft it hath contracted , that is durty as it were, and put this into a di(h under it :
again, put them into the earthen pot, and fcrape more off when you take them c ut ;
do this fo often, till you have fome quantity of this durty fub^ance : caft quick-filver
into this, and make a mixture ; and while it is foft and ter.dr ^liy it on the Seal, and
prefs it down, and let it remain in the open Air , for it will grow fo hard , that you
may almoft feal with it5 for it will become even like to a Metal. It may be alio done
another wty : Take the filings of fteel, and put them in an earthen Crucible at a

ftrong

Tfil Natural Magick. Hoot^id.

ftroogfircs putfuch things to it, as will haften the melting of ic : when it is melted,
caftit into forae hollow place.,pcwnd it in a brais Mortar,tor it will be eafily done:do
k To three or four times ; then powder it, and mingle quick-filver with it , 'and let it
boil in a glazed vtffel fix hours , till it be well mingled ; then prefs the leal upon it,
and let it cool, and it will become exceeding hard. It is pcffible

To makf a great Semi left,
'fit (hould happen that wc want a lefferfeal, we rruft do thus: Take Ifinglafs, and
• dilfolvc it in water ; anoynr the figure with oyl, that it may not flick to the glcw ;
compafs the feal abeut with wax, that the matter run nor about ; put the Ifinglafs to
the fire, and melt it, pour it upon the feal ; after three hour?, when it is cold, take it
away, and let it dry, for the feal when it is dry, will be drawn lefs equally. If you
will

Imitate the fo m of a -writing,

do thus: Open the letter upon a looking-glal's, that wants the foyl : upon the letter
s Jay white paper, and a light under the glafs ; temper your ink as the writing is, and
draw your lines upon the lines of the letters you iee through. We may

Open letter s, and fhut them without fttfpitten.

Weufe to feal letters, putting paper upon them , which goes through the letter on
onefide, and was is put ortthe other fide, where it comes forth, andthereit bfeal-
ed. Ycufhall open the letter thu; : Break away that part of the paper, thatisput
upon the place, wheie it p'fleth through the letter , . and the hole is, the letter opens
prefently : read it, and fhu: it again, and put the paper torn off, in its proper place :
firft, anoyncingthe crack with »um-traganth, diflolvcdin water; for the piper will be
t fo «le wed,that it will be ftronger there then elie where ; preis it w ith a imall weight,
till it grow dry 5 the fraud cannot be difcovered,becaufe the glew is white, and is not
known from rhe colour of the paper.

Chap. XII.

How yen may Jp ak.at a great diflance.

THere are many ways how we may fpeak at a very great diBance, with our friends
that are abfcnt,or when they are iu ptifon, or (hut up in Cities ; and this is done
withfafety, and without any fulpition, as I ("hall fhew. Two things are declared
here, either to doit by open voice ret nplicated5or elfe by a Trunk. We may

With open voyce (hew feme thmgi to thofe that are confederate with hs.
It is wonderful, that as the Light, fo the Voyce is icvcrbcrated with equal Angles.
I fhall fhew how this may be done by a glafs It is -altnoft growD common, how to
fpeak through right or circular walls. The voice pafling from the mouth goes through
the Air : if it goes about a wall that is uniform, it pafTeth uncorrupted but if it be at
liberty, it is beaten back by the wall it meets with in the way, and is heard, as we
fee in an Eecho. I through a circular building, that was very long and tmooth, fpake
words to my friend, that heard them round the wall , and the words came entire to
his ears; but one ftanding in the middle heard not any noife, and yet I heard again
what my friend anfwered to me. In them^rning whenas I walkcdby the fea fliore,
I heard above a mile, what my friends talked in a Boat : the fea was very calm, and
fcarce moved , and the words came clearly to me, carried on the plain fuperficies of
the water. I hear that at Mantua, and other places , a sreat Gallery is built, where-
in one fpeaking in the corner, is heard by another that knows the bufinefs , ftanding
in another corner ; butthofe that Hand in the middle, perceive nothing of it. But
more exafit'y and clearly

To (tgn':fie to friends all things by a Trunks

Let

Of invifible Writing. 353

Let the pipe be of Earth (bntlcad is better) or of any matter well dofed , that the
voice may nor get forth in the long r afiage j for whatever yets fpeak at one end, the
voice without any difference^ it came tenh of ti e fpc akers roou.h, a mes 1© to the
cars ot him that hearkneth ; and I doubt not but tb i maybe dore fome miles cff.
The voyce not oivided or Scattered, foes whole a long way 1 have tried it for above
two hundred paces , when 1 had nooiher convenience , and the words W' re heard
fo clear, and open, as the fpcaker uttered them: Upon this it came into my mind,
to intercept words fpt ken by the way, with leaden pipes , and iO hold them fo long
as I pleaied dole in; that when I opened the hole, thewords fhould break forth.
I perceive that the iound goes by degrees , and thai being carried thicugh a pipe , it
may be fhut up in the middle ; and if a very longTiunk (hculd rake away the conve-
nience of it, that many winding pipes might iliut it up in aclofe place. I read that
Albert* midc an Artificial head , that fpakeat a fet time : I might hope to do the
fame hy thi> invention ; yet I never tried this farther then I have faid: yet I have
heat o by my friends, that lovers have ipokc a long time through a leaden pipe , from
their Hemes that fiood far afunder.

Chap. XIII.
By Might we may make Jigns by fire*) and with dufi by day.

IT remains to fhew whether we can make Ggns in the night by fire, and in the day
by duft, to declare our bofinefs. That may fall out twoways: Forbyfireof a
fndden, wc fhew to our confederate friends, or when we pleafe, by certain numbers
of Torches, wereprefent letters fit t© demonfuate what our purpofe is , thathofe
that are far t ff, feeing and obferving the motions may percen e our intern. The firft
way, we read that Medea- promiied to the Argonauts, that if (ht killed PetiM, (he
would fignifie io much unto them by night with fire frc m a watch-Tower , and by
day with fmoke. When therefore the bufineis was effected, as (he would have it,
(he counterfeited, that (he muff pay her vows to the Moon , by making a fire, by
lighting Toiches in the cpen Air,frcm the top of the place,as (he bad proaaifedi and
when the Argcnauts tnderfiood it this way, they invaded the Kings palace, and
killing the >rard, they made her to enjoy her wi(bes. We read alfo that CMaga,
having prfl ffi n of Paretonirm, agreed with the watch , that at night in the evening,
and again in the morning betimes, they (hcnld let up the light that was for confede-
racy ; arc1 by that me*ns fgns were made , that themcfiengcr came as far as Clius.
Alio to friends that live cut of the C ity, by fire we may rifle cur reverew, and the
quality of provide n. It is apparent, that Annibal, as Polybttu writes , when the peo-
ple of Agrigemum were refe^cd by the Remans, by many and frequent fires by
nighr, did Qicw forth the intolerable famine of his Army, and for that caufe many of
his Sruldicrs, fcr watt of victuals, fell effto the enemy. Alfo the Grecians compa-
cted with Sinon , that by night, when the Trojans were afleep , thofc that one
to Troy flic ul d have a token, when he fhould open the Trojan Horle, to let forth
the Sculdiers that were within. Whence Virgil,

When the Kings feet Uft uf the fames, jufi then
Vtet Sir, on I tt forth all the Grecian men,

Alfo by Torches letters may be fignified , as we find it in the Manufcript of Tolybim.
Tops of buildicgs or Towers, are very fit to fet up the Torches on. Let the letters
be divided into twocr three parts , if there may be eleven, orfeven parts of each.
If they be feven , thefiifi letiers are (hew'd by (ingle Torches , the fecond by dou-
ble ones , the third by three Torches. The number may be alfo divided into four
parts : but in representing them, we muft obferve the variety cfmotion. Forone
Torch once lifted up, (hall fignifie A, the fame lifted up twice B, thrice C; fo feven
times: the laft of the firtt order G, after that two onceH, fo many twice I, thrice
fignifies L, and fo of the red of the fame order. Then Q by the third order, once,

Bb Riby

y>4- Natural Magic k. Hoo^ \6.

R by the fame, twice , and thrice a* many of the fame, fignifies S, and fo it holds for
four. Thus a woman from a watch-Tower, with three lights (hewed five time?, then
wuh d^u^le ones twice, then with treble lights twice , then again with one at
once, at d wiih the fame four times, then five times with three lights, then thrice,
and with as minv four times , fhall fignifie, vir adefty the nan is come. Alfothe
lights may be of divers colours, if they would flicw that friends are neer. Alfo by
fmoke, w e may fhew that our enemies are neer, or fome other thing. Hence it was,
thar bv the policv of Jmilcar^ the men of Agrigenrrm , being drawn oft far from the
Cit5,amongtt their enemies that they pur'ued , unto an ambufcado, where the ene-
mies lay hid, and a by wood fet on fire, ftffered a great overthrew : for when they
thought the v were called back by their friends, byreafonof a Imoke they luppofed
to erne from the walls ; when they turned their courfeto goto the City. Amilcur
commanding , the Carthaginians followed them, who fled before, and fo flew them.

THE

5*5

THE

SEVENTEENTH BOOK

O F

Natural Magick :

Wherein are propounded Buming-glalTes , and the
wonderful fights to be (een by chem.

The Proem e.

N Or* I am come to Mathematical Sciences > and this place requires that 1 (hew fome ex-
periments concerning (^atoptrick:glaffes. For thefe (hine amongfi Geometrical ixftrw
ments , fur Ingenuity , Wonder^ and, Profit : For what could be invented more ingentoufly^
then thai certain experiments Jh oh Id follow the imaginary conceits of the mind , and the truth
of CMathematical'Demonfirations (h on id be made good by Ocular experiments ? what cop, Id
feem more w>nderculy then that by reciprocal firokes of reflexion^ Images fkould appear out*
wtrdly, hanging in the Air, and yet neither devtfibfe Object nor the Glafs feen? th*.t ikey
may fctm net to be the repercufftonof the Glaffes, but Spirits of vainThantafms { to fee
burning GUffts t not to burn alcne where the beams unne , but at a great difiance to caft
forth ternble firesy a> d fames, that art mcfi profitable in warlike expeditions , as in many o-
thcr things. We rt^d that Archimedes a: Sjracufe with burning Glaffcs defeated the forces
of the Remans : and vat King Ptolcmcy built a Tower m Pharos , where he fit a Glafs^
that he could for fix hundred miles , fee by it the enemies Ships , that invaded his Country^
and plundered it. Ifhalladde alfo thofe Spectacles , whereby poor blinde people can at great
■dtftancey perfitlly fee aUthtngs. And though venerable Antiquity feem to have invented
many and great things , yet I fhall fit down greater , more Noble , and more Famout things^
and that WiH not a little help to the Of tick Science, that more fubhme wits may ircreafe it
infinitely. Lafi/y, IfhaUfhcw how to make (jyfial and Metal Glaffes , and how topolifh
them.

Chap. I.

Diver s reprefentations made by plain Glaffes, i

Shall begin with plain G;a(Tes, for they arc morefimple, and
the {pcculitions thereof", are not fo laborious, though the ap-
paritions of ihem be almoft common, yet they will be useful
for what follows : and we (tall add fome fecret apparition j
unto them. The variety of the Images that appear , proceed
either from the matter or form of the Glafs. Cryftal mu(t be
clear , rranfparent, and exactly made plain on both fides : and
if one or boih of thefe be wanting , they will reprefett divers
ard deformed apparitions to oar fighr. I fhall therefore begin
from the matter, and (hew

How apparitions ma) feem to him that looks upon them) to be pale- yellow, or of divers colours.
When the G afs i- melted with heat in the furnace , with any little colour it will be
tainted ; if ycticaft in yellow, the face of him that looks into it, will l'etm to have
the yellow Jtundics.. it black, he will appear wan and deformed ;if you add much of
it, like to a blacktnoore ; if red, like a drunkard or furious Tellow ; and fo will ic re-

Bb 2 prefent

y}6 Natural Magick. 2>00^i7.

prefent Images of any colour. How to mingle the colours, I taught when I fpake of
Jewels. I have oft made fpore with the moti fair women, with thele Glaffcs ; when
they looked, and faw not themtelvcs as they were : but there are many varieties a-
rife from the form.

That the face of him that looks on the Glafs may feem to be divided in the middle,
Let the fuperficies of the looking-glaffe that ycu look on , be plain , and exactly
poliftied by rule ; but the backfide muft have a blunt angle in the middle , that the
higheft part of it may be in the middle; in the outward parts it muft be (harp and
prefled down ; then lay on the foil : wherefore the Image that falls on yout fight,
where the lines meet in the angle, will feem divided into two. If you will

That he that looks in the Glafs^jhall Jeem like an Afs^Dog, or Sow j
By variation of the place, the Angles, and the reprefentationof the Form beheld, will
feem various. If that part of the Glafs,ihat is fet againft your mouth,fhallftick forth
before like a wreathed band or a Bofs-buckler, your mouth will appear to come
forth like an Afles or Sows fnout ; but if it iwell forth againft ycur eyes , your eyes
will feem to be put forth like fhrimps eyes ; if the Angle be ftretched forth by the
length of the Glafs, your Forehead, Ncfe, and Chin, will feem to be fharp , as the
mouth of a Dog.

That the whole face may feem variom and deformed.

Let a plain Glafs not be exa£Uy plain and even : which that it may be done, when
the Glafs is once made plain.put it into the furnace again, and let it be turned by the
skilful hand of an Artift, till it lofe its right pofition , then foil it. Then the Image
on the hollow part of the Glafs, will rcprelent the oppofite part hollow ; fo it will
hold forth one lying along on his face, or crooked , and fwelliog outwardly and in-
wardly. Then if when the Glafs is polifhed , one fide be rubbed, the face will feem
loop and broad : wherefore it muft be rubbed, and fafhioncd on all fides, that it may
every way reprcfem a perfect face. I fhall (hew you alfo

Hrw to mtke a Glafs to refrefent many Images.
That it may fhew divers Images one after another , and of divers colours, make the
folid body of the Looking-glafs , or Glafs that is half a finger thick , and let it be fo
plained , that upon one fide,thc thicknefs may not be touched, but on the other fide,
the lines of the two fuperficies may meet , as the fharp edge of a Knife. Make alfo
another table of a Glafs the fame way : or elfe more ; lay a foil of Tin upon the laft,
and place one of them upon the other, fo that the thinner part of the one, may lye
upon the thick part of the other: fo will the face of one that looks into it, appear
to be two, one behind the other, and the nethermoft will always appear darkeft. So
if by the fame Artifice, you fit three tables of Glafs,tbe Image w ill appear to be three,
and the farther he that looks , ftands with bis face from the Glafs , the farther will
thofe Images or faces ftand afunder ; but as you ( one very neer , they feem to joyn
all in one : If you hold a Candle lighted againft it, there will be many feen together,
which comes by the mutual reciprocation of the fight and the Glaffe ; and if the po«
lifher* ofGlaffes be notneer-hand , we may make the fame with common Looking-
ing-glafles , putting one aptly above another , but let one be dipiant from the other
bv certain courfes j then fhui them in a frame , that the Art may not be difcovered.
N: r will I omit

How letters maybe cajt out and read) on a wall that is far diftant ;

which we fhall do with the fame plain Glafs ;and lovers that are far afunder, may
fo hold commrrce one with another. On the fuperficies of a plain Glafs, make Let-
ters wi h ' lack ink , or with wax , that they may be folid to hinder the light of the
t -a(<\andfhadcwit ; then hold thtGlafs againft the Sun-beams,fo that the beams re-
flettinrj on the* Glafs, may be caft upon the oppofite wall of a Chamber , it is no
dcubr but the light and letters will be feen in the Chamber , the Suns light will be

cleared «

Of jlrange (jlajjes. 357

cleared, and rhc letters noc fo bright ; fo that they will be clearly difcovered, as
ti.ey aic lent in.

Chap. II.

Other merry fprts with plain Locking- glares,

NOwT flull annex feme other operations of a plain Glafs, defcribed by our Ance-
ltors, that I may feetn to leave out nothing: and I will fo augment them, and
bring them to a rule, that they may be eafily made. I (hill begin with this,

How by plain Looking- glaftct, the head may appear to be downwards , and the heels

upwards.

If any man by plain Glaffes, defires to fee his head downward , and his feet upw as"
(though it U proper for Concave- Glaffes co rcprcicntthat ) yet I will endeavour t°
do it by plain GUffes. Place twoGbffes long-ways, that they may (Hck trgether*
and cannot eafily come afundcr, or move here and there, and that they make a right
Angle; when this is fo done, according to coherence the long way, fet this againlt
your face, that in one, halt the face , in the other the other half may be fecn ; then
incline ihe Looking-glaffe to the right or left hand , looking right into it , and ycur
head will feemto be turned, for according to cheir latitude, they will cut the face
into two, and the Image will appear to, a? if the head were under, and the heels
upwards ; and if the Glafs be large, the whole body will feem to be inverted. But
this happens from the mutual and manifold reflexion , for it flies from one to the
other, that it fcerns to be turned. We may

Makf a }l<tin Glafs that (haRreprefent the Image manifold.
A Glif? is made that will make many reprefemations, that is, that many things may
be feen at crce .for bv opening and Hunting it , you fhall fee twenty fingers for one,
and mere. Y^u (bail nuke it thus : Raife two brafs Looking-glaffes, or of CryHal,
at right Angles upon the fame balls , and let them be in a proportion called fe'qi i-
altera, thac is. one and half, or Icmeother proportion, and Jet them be joyned
together longways , that they may befhur and opened, like to a Book ; and the An-
gles be Hi ers, iuch as are made at Vet ice : For one face being ov jc£ted,you fhall fee
many in them both, and this by fo much the fltaighter, as ycuput them together, and
the Angles arelefs : butrhey will be diminifhed by opening them, and the Angles
being more cbiufe, vou fhall fee the fewer: fofhwing oce figure, there will be
more feen: and farther, the right parts will fhew right, and the left 10 be the left,
which is contrary to Looking-* laffe^ ; and ttiis is done by mutual reflexion and pul-
iation, whence arifcth the variety of Images intcrchangably. We may

M-Me a Glafs of plain Glaffesy wherein one Image comings is feen going backjn another.
Take two plain Glaffes , the length whereof fhall be double, or one and half to the
latitude, and that for greater convenience ? for the proportion is rot material,
but let them be of the fame length, and equal, and laid on the top of a Pillar, incli-
ning oneto the ether, and fojoyn'd together; and let them be fet upright upon
fome plain place perpendicularly, iothe Glaffes fa(tned,may be moved on the move-
able fid?. It is no doubt but vou (hall fee the Image to come in one , and go back
in the other Glafs ; and the more this comes neer, the farther will the other go j and
in one will it be feen coming, and in the other going. Alfo you may fee

In plain Glaffes thofe things that are done afar off. and in other places.
So mav a man fecretly fee,and without fufpition,what is done afar off, & in other pla-
ces,which otherwrfe cannot be dote : but you mult be careful in fetting ycur Glaffes.
Let there Ke a place appointed in a houfe or elfe where,- where you may fee any thing,
and fet a Glafs right overt ainft your window, or hole, that may be toward your
face, and let it be fet ftraight up if need were , or faftned to the wall, moving it here

558 Natural Magick. 'Bool^ 17.

and there, and inclining it till it reflet right againft the place; which you fhall at-
tain by looking on it, and coming toward it : and if it be difficult, you cannot mi-
ftake, if you uie a quadrant or fome fuch inftrument • and let it be fet perpendicular
upon a line, that cuts the Angle of reflection , and incidence of the lines , and you
(ball clearly fee what is done in that place. So it will happen alio in divers places.
Hence it is, that if one GUIs will not do it well, you may do the fame by more Glaf-
fes* or if the vifible Object be loft by too great a diftance, or taken away by walls or
mountains coming between • moreover, you (hall fit another Glafs juft againft the
former, upon a right line , which may divide the right Angle , or elfe it will not be
done, and you fhall fee the place you dcfire. For one Glafs fending the Image to
the other tenfold , and the Image being broken by many things, flies from the eye
and you fhall fee what you firft li^ht upon, until fuch time as the Image is brought to
you by right lines , and the vifible Object is not ftopt by the windings of places or
walls : and the placing of it is eafie. So oft-times I ufe to convey Images of things.
But if otherwife you defire to fee any high place , or that ftands upright, and your eye
cannot difcern it ; fit two Looking- glafles together long- ways , as I faid, and faften
one upon the top of a port or wall, that it may ftand above it , and the Object may
ftan<J right againft it ; the other to a cord, that you may move it handfomely when
you pleafe, and that it may make with the firft fomctimes a blunt, fometimes a fharp
Angle, as need requires, until the line of the thing feen, may be refracted by the mid-
dle of the fecond Glafs to your fight , and the Angles of reflection and incidence tfe
equal ; and if you feck to fee high things, raife it ; if low things, pull it down, till it
beat back upon your fight , then (hall you behold it. If you hold one of them
in your hand , and look upon that, it will be more cafily done. 1 fhew you alfo

How to make a Glafs thxt fhall fhew nothing but what you will.
Alfo a Glafs is fo fnmed, that when you look into it , you fhall not fee your own pi-
cture, but fome other face, that is not feen any where round about. Faften a plain
Glafs on a wall upon a plain , fet upright perpendicularly , and bow the top of it to
the known proportion of the Angle: right againft it cut the wall,accordingas the pro-
portion of fome Picture or Image may require , and fet it by it , according to a fie
diftance, and cover it, that the beholder may not fee it (and the matter will be the
more wonderful) nor can come at it : The Glafs at a fet place will beat back the
Image , that ihere wiil be a mutual glance of the vifiSle Object and the fight, by the
Looking-glaffes : there place your eye ; you fhall find that place, as I taught you be-
fore. Wherefore the fpectator going thither , fhall neither fee his own face, nor any
thing elfe befides : when he is oppofed to it, and comes to the fet place, he fhall fee
the Image or the Picture, or fome fuch thing , which he can behold nowhere elfe.
You fhall now know

How a Glafs may be made of plain Glajfes, whereby you may fee an Image flying in the Air,
Nor is that Glafs of lefs importance, or pleafure, that will reprefent men flying in
the Air. If any man would doit,it is cafily done thus : Fit two pieces of wood toge-
ther like a fquare or gnomon of a Dial, and being well faftned, they may make an
Angle as of a right angled triangle , or Ifofceles. Faften then at each foot one great
Lookiag-glafs , equally diftant, right one againft the other, and equidiftant from the
Angle: let one of them lye flat, and let the fpectator place himfclf about the middle
of it, being fomewh at rai fed above the ground, that he may the more eafily fee the
form of the heel going and coming : for prefently you fhail perceive, if you fet yonr
felf in a right line, that cuts that Angle, and it be equidiftant to the horizon. So
the reprefenting Glafs will fend that Image to the otber, which the fpectator looks
into, and it will ftiake and move the hands and feet , as Birds do when they fly.
So fhall he fee his own Image flying in the other, that it will always move, fo he de-
part not from the place of reflection, for that would fpoil it.

CHAP.

Of jlrange Cjlajfes.

Cnap. III.

A Looking" gla[s called a Theatrical Glafs*

P Rupert Articcity found outa Looking-glaf* made of plain Glalffs, wherein if
one Object might te leen, Jt would repreient more Images of the fan ie ti.ing;
as we ma, pen.ei\e by If me writirgs, that go in Vtolomies came. Lalfly, I tTizll add
to this what cur age hath invented, that is far more admirable and pieafanr.
Wherefore

To make an Ar.tiextftfhioxed Lookirg- glafs of f lain G.lajfes, wherein mere Ttfiures wiUbe
reprefenttd of the /; me thtng.

The way is this ; make a ha! f circle on a plain Table, or place where you defire luch
a Glafs to be fet up; ard divide this equally with points according to the number
of the Images you would fee. Make fubttndcnt lines to them, and cut away the
arches ■ i hen ere ct plain Leoking-glaffes , that may be of the lame latitude , and of
the fame parallel lines, ard the lame longitude} glew them faft together, and fit
them 10, that they may not be pulled afunder , as they are joy red long- ways , and
ere&ed upon a plain iuptrfkies. Laftly,lct the fpc&aior place his eye in the cen-
tre ot ihe circle, thsr he may have his fight umform,in iefpcc5t of them all ; in each of
them you (hall fee a feveral face , and fo quite round, as we fee it often when peo-
ple dance round , or in a Theatre , and therefore k is called a Theatrical Glafs : For
from the centre all the perpendicular lines fall upon the luperficies , and they are re-
flected intothrmfelves ; fothey rtfieft the Images upon the eye, each of them draw-
ing forth its own. This is the Artients way of making a Theatrical Glafs ; but it is
childifh: 1 will (hew ycu ere that is far more pJeafant , and wonderful; forinthc
f«»mer, the Images were feen cc more than the GlafTes were in number ; but in our
Glafs, by the rraaifold and reciprocal dartings of the Object and the Glafs, you may
fee fai mcre,anc aimcft in. cii e Images. The way is this.

Hew to m*ke an t/fmphitheatrital ' Glafs,

Make a circle on a Table what la fcenefs ycu defire, and divide it into unequal parts j
and in the place where the Ctj< ctor Face to be feen muft be oppofed, leave two
void fpaces : ever againft the parts, let a right line be made upon the lines that de-
termine the parts , let Lcckirg-glatfes be rai'ed perpendicularly ; for the face that
Cull be againft the Looking- glafs, placed in the micdle, will fly back to the beholder
of it, and lo rebounding tc anctrer, : nd frcm that to another, and by many rcfl< col-
ons you foall fee almoft infinite faces, ard the more the GlafTes are, the more will be
the faces s Jf you fet a Candle againft it , you fhall fee innumerable Candles. But if
the Glaffes you eree>, (rail f- e ot tbofe already defcribed, from fo many divers faces
of Affes, Sows, Horfes, Dogs ; ard of colours, yellow, Brown, red, the fpefta-
tcrs fhall fee afar more wcrderful ard plealant fight, for by reafon of the manifold
If flection, and diversity of the forms of the GlafTes, and colours, an excellent mix*
tuie willarife.

But I will now make one that is far more wonderful
and beautiful. For in that the beholder (ball not fee
his own face, but a moft wonderful, and pleafant, and
orderly form of pillars , and the bafis of them, and
variety of Architecture. Make therefore a circle as
you would have it for magnitude , but I hold the beft
to be where the diameter is two foot and a half: di-
vide the circumference into equal parts ; as for exam-
ple,into fourteen ; the points of the divifions (ball be
the places, where the pillars muft be ere&ed. Let the
place where the fpe&ator muft look i contain two
parts ; and take one pillar away, fo there will be tbir-

$6o Natural Magick. ^Book^iy.

teen pillars : Let one pillar be right againtt the fight ; then raife Looking- qhffej ttp*>
on the lines of ipacc bet ween, aoccxa&ly, but inclined: place then iwoLcokin°-
glatlesatoppcfnion in aright line , but the reft about the beginning, where they
joyn , and that fcr no other teafon , but that the beholders face , being not rightly
placed, may not be refkaed, as I laid before : for thus the Glaffes will not reprefent
taccs, but pillars, and 1 paces between, and all ornaments. Hence by the recipro-
cal rcfledhoB of the Giaffe* , ycu fhall fee io many pillars, bafis, and varieties, keepin*
the right cracr of Architc&^re, that nothing can be more pleafant, or more wonder-
ful to behold.Letihe peifpe&iVe be the Dorick and Corinthian, adorned with Gold,
Silver, Ptarls, Jewels, Images, Piaures, and fuch like , that it may fecm themore
Magnificent : the form of it fhall be thus. Let H. G. be the place for the behcldcr to

loek:c he pillar againli him fhal be A,in iheGlals
A B, or AC, the face of the beholder (hall
net be feen, but A B is reflected into I H,
and I H into B D, fo by mutual reflections
they are fo multiplied, that theyieemtogo
vety far inwardly, fo clearly and apparently,
that no fpe&ator that looks into it , unlefsbe
know it, but hewillthruli his hands into
touch the orders. If you let a Candle in the
middle , it will fecm fo to multiply by the I-
mages rebounding, that yon fhall not fee fo
many Stars in the skies , that you can never
wonder enough at the Order, Symmetry, and
the Profpea. I have raifed and made this
Amphitheatre divers ways , md to fhew other orders, namely two ranks of pillars,
fo that the one fluck to the Glaffes , the other Rood alone in the middle, bound with
the thief Arches, and with divers Ornaments, that it may fecm to be a moff beautiful
Pcrfpcaiveor Arcbiteaure. A 'molt the fame way is there made a little cheft of ma-
ny plain Glaffes, covered round : this they call the Treafury : on theground,arches
and walls, were there Pearls, Jewel?, Birds, and Monies hanging , and thefe were
fo multiplied by the reflcaions of the Glaffes , that it reprefented a mcft rich Trea-
fury indeed. Make therefore a Cheft of wood , let the bottom be two foot long,
and cne and half broad; let it be open in the middle, that you may well thruft in
your head; on the right and left hand, ereathe fide-boards a foot long, femicircn-
lar above, that it maybe arched, but not exactly circular, namely, divided into five
parts, each a hand-breadth. Cover this all about with Glaffes ; where the Glaffes
joyn, there put Pearls, Ptcticus-ftones, fpecious Flowers, divers colour'd Birds: a-
bovc the bottom fct heaps of Gold, and Silver Meddals ; from the Arches, let there
han° Pearls, fleeces of Gold ;for when the Ccffer is moved gently, they will move
alfoj'and the Images will move in the Glaffes, that it will be a pleafant fight.

Chap. IV.

Diver j operations of Concave- Glares.

BUt the operations of Concave-glaffes are far more curious and admirable, and
will afford us more commodities. But you can do nothing perfealy with it,
untiryou know fir ft the point of inverfion. Therefore that you may do it the better,
and more eafily

Know the poixt of Inverfion of Images in a Concave- glafs9
Do thus: Hold your Glafs againft the Sun, and where you fee the beams unite,
know that to be the point of Inverfion. If you cannot well perceive that , breathe
a thick vapour from your mouth upon it, and you fhall apparently fee where trie
coincidence is of the rcfleaed beams ; or fet under it a veffel of boyhng water.
When you have found the point of Inverfion , if you will

Of ftrange (jlajjes*

That all things {hall feem greater.

Set your head below that point, and you fhall behold a huge Face like a monflrous
Bjcchus , and your finger as great as your arm : So women pull hairs off their eye-
brows, for they will (hew as great as ringers. Seneca reports that He[tim made fuch
Concave-Glaffes, that they might make things fhew greater ! He was a great pro-
voker tohift ; fo ordering his Glafles, that when he was abufed by Sodomy, he might
fee all the motions of the Sodomite behind him, and delight himfelf with a falfe re-
prcfentation of his privy parts that fhewed fo great.

To kindle fire with a fincave G/afs.
This Glafs 13 excellent above others, for this, that it unites the beams foftrongly,that
it will fhew forth a light Pyramis of its beams, as you hold it to the Sun ; and if yell
put any combufiible matter in the centre of it , it will prefently kindle and flame,
that with a little flay will melt Lead or Tin, and will make Gold or Iron red hot :
and I have heard by feme, that Gold and Silver have been melted by it ; more (low-
ly in winter, but fooner in fummcr, becaufe the medium is hotter; at neon rather
than in the morning, or evening for the fame reafon.

To make an Image feem to hang in the Atr^ by a Concave- Glafs.

This will be more wonderful with the fegment of a circle , for it will appear farther
from the Glafs. If you be without the point of Invcrfion , you fhall fee your head
downwards. That with fixed eyes , and not winking at all , you may behold the
point, until it comes to your very fight: For where the Cathetus fhall cut the line
of reflexion, there the fpecics reflected will feem almoft parted from the Glafs : the
neerer you are to the Centre, the greater will it be, that you will think to touch ic
with your hands : and if it be a gnat Glafs > yeu cannot but wonder ; for if any man
run at the Glafs with a drawn fword , another man will feem to meet him, and to
run through his hand. If you fhew a Candle, you will think a Candle is pendu-
lous lighted in the Air. But if you will

That the Image of a ConcAve-Glafs (houldgo out far from the Centre ;
when y^u have obtained the Image of the thing in its point, if you will have it farther
di!taiu fr-m the Centre,and that the Picture of a thing fhall be farther ftrctched forth,
then voufha:l decline frcm the point a little toward the right cr left hand, about
the 'upr-rhcic of the Glafs, and the Image will come forth the farther , and will
come to your fi^ht : There, nimely where the Catheins doth the fartheft eff that is
poflible r ouch in.- hne of reflection , which few have obferved :from which principle
jmny (irangc wonders may be done. When you have this, you may eafily

T^efieEl heat, calJ, and the voice too, by aConcave-GUfs .

If a man put a Candle in a place, where the vifible Object is to be fet , the Candle
will come to your very eyes , and will offend them wi.h its heat and light. But this
is more wonderful , that as heat , fo cold , fhould be refle&ed : if you put fnow in
that place , if it a me to the eye , becaufe it is fenfible, it will presently feel the
cold. But there is a greater wonder yet in it j for it will not onely reverberate heat
and cold , but the voice too, and make an Eccho ; for the voice is more rightly re-
flected by a polite and imooth fuperficies of the Glafc, and more compieatly than by
any wall. I prove this, becaufe, if a man turn his face to the Glafs , and his friend
ftand far behind his back, when he beholds his face, he fhall decline his face from
the point of Invcrfion ; but on the right hand, about the fuperficies of the Glafs , and
his face will come forth far from the Glafs , and will feem very great abouc thefacc
of his friend : Whatfoever he fhall fpeak with a low voyce againlt the Glafs, he fhall
hear the fame words and motions of his mouth , and all motion from the mouth of
the reflected Image; and they that ftand in the middle between them, fhall per-
ceive nothing at all. But he that would fend his own Image to his friend, mult ob-
fcrve till his head (hall come to the Glafs. It is profitable alfo

Ccc B;

6% Nat u-r a l M agio k. 2>00^ 17.

By a Concave*Glafs to fee in the night what is done afar off.
By this very Glafs, we may in a tempeftuous night, in the middle of the fireets , ctft
the light agreat way, even into other mens Chambers. Take the Glais in your
hand, and let a Candle to the point cf Inverfion , tor the parallel beams will be re-
flected to the place defired, and the place will be enlightned above fmy paces, and
whatfoever falls between the parallels, will be clearly feen : the reafon is, becaufe the
beams fiom the Centre to the circumference, are reflected parallel, when the parallels
come to a point ; and in the place thus illuminared, letters may be read, and all
things done conveniently, that require great light. By the fame A rt we may

With a few [mall lights give h^htto a great Hall.
In Temples, Watches, and nightly Featts , any man m?y thus with a few lights make
a great light. At two or more places of the Chamber fet Concave-gkffes above,
and let them befo ordered, that the place of concurrent parallels may be coinci-
dent in the place required ; and in the point of lnvtrfionof them, the light will be
fo multiplied, that it will be as light as noon-day. Lamps are beft for this purpofe,
becaufe the light varies not from the place. Candles are naught , becaufe they alter
the peaces of reflection. More commodieufly then by a plain Glafs , to fignifie by a
Concave-glals,fectetly feme notes to your friend: Thus, do a? I faid, make tr.e marks
upon your Glais fuperficies with wax or fome dark fubftance , and fetting it againft
thr light, it will cart the light upon the walls of the Chamber, and there it will be
dark where the letters are made : one that knows the craft, may eafily read them.
But this is more admirable for one that knows not the caufe,

To read letter sin a darkjiight.
A Corsave-Glafs is of great ufe for this, and it may be this may be good in time of
r.ectfluv. Set your Ccncave-Glafs againti the Stars of the firft magnitude, or a-
gainM Ver.tu or Mercury , or a.:ainft a fire or light that is afar tfff; 'for the light re-
flected will meet in the point of burning, and reflects a moft bright light , whereby
youmayeafiiy read the fmalleft letters ; for putting the point of reflection to every
word, you (hall lee all clearly. But this is more necefiary and profitable,

At any hour of the daj with a Concave-Ghjs, to fet a Houfe or Fort on fire.
^ oa may fo burn the enemies Ships, Gates, Bridges, and the like, without danger or
fulpicicn, at a fee hour of the day, appointed the day before. Set your Glafs a-
gainfttheSun, 'andf rderitfo, that (he coincidence of the beams may fall upon the
point: tayfud there, and things that will take fire, as I (hewed you: and if you
would blow up Towers, make heaps of Gun-powder: at night fee your Glafs, and'
hide it, that it be not feen, for the next day the Sun will fall upon the fame point,
where you fet fuel fcr the fire.

Chap. V.

Of themixt operations of the flam Concave- Glaffes.

(Shall fet down the mixt operations and benefits of both thefe Glaffes , that what
one cannot do alone, it may do by the help of another. If we would

Kindle fire afar off with a plain and a Concave Glafs.
It falls rut fometimes that ere fbut up in prifon needs fire, and the Sun beams fbine
not in : orelfeT will fliew how we may kindle Gun-powder without fire , or make
mines and fill thcm with Gun-powder, to blow upCaftles or Rocks afar off without
danger , Jetting them on fire by a plain Glafs. A plain Glais as ir receives the pa-
rallel beams of the Sun, it fo reflects them, and therefore will caft the beams that are
equidirtant,a crcat way : hut if a Concavc-Glafs receive them, it i'o unites them, that
it fees things on fire. Wherefore, firft proving where the Concave- Glafs muft be

©laced

Of jlrange Cjlajfes. y&\

placed,thatitmayfirethefuclca iin : the next day, at the hour appointed, let ihe
piain Glafs caft in the bcarm upon the Concave- glafs,t hat will unite them : To with-
out danger, or any i'ufpicicnof the enemy, we may kindle fire for our life, Nor is it

ufeiefs, v v

That by a plain and (foncave-Glafs the fmallejt letters {ball ^ppexr very great,

when letters are fo fmall that they can ©nely be fcen : For I have feen St Johns Go-
fpel, /» the be;tf.ning)iic. writ fo fmall, in fo little place , that it was no bigger than
a fmall pimple, or me fight in a Cocks eye. By this Artifice we may mske them
feem greater , and read them with eafc. Put a Concave-glafs, with the back ot it to
yourbreft; over againft it in the point of burning, fct the writing: behind let a
plain Glafs, that you may fee it : Then in the plain Glafs will the Images of the Cha-
rters be reflected , that are in the Concave-gia fs, which the Concave-Glafs hath
trade greater, that you may read them without difficulty. You may

With a flam and Concave-Glafs, make an Image be feen hanging altogether in the Air.

Do thu>. I faidtbar by help of a Concave-Glafs, an Image may be fent forth : an^
this i: feen by none but thoic that ftand over againft it ; Set the Concave-Glafs to
yourbreft, without the Centre place a Poniard againft it, and going farther off, fee
a plain Glafs againft it ; and looking in that , you fhall fee the Image reflected trcrn
the Concave- glafs, hanging in the Air, and that exactly. But if an ingenious man
obferve it, he may wonderfully fee an Image hanging in the Air, that is received in
aplainG^als, and fent far out as I fhewed, without the help of a Concave-glafs, and
a vifible ipc&acle , by the means of a plain Glafs cnely, You may alfo

By a ylain Gfafs fee yomface turned the wrong way.
When you have fet the Glafs to your breft, as I faid ; fet a plain Glafs againft ir, and
look upon it , it will caft it upon the Concave-glafs , and that will beat it backwards
on the plain Glafs : fo have you your purpofc.

Chap. VI.

Other operations of a (foncave-Glafs.

BE ore I part from the operations of this Glaf?, I will tell youfome ufeof ir,that
u very pleafant and admirable, whence great fecrets of Nature may appear unto
uj. As,

To fee all things m the dark^ that are outwardly done in the Sm^with ihe colours of them.

You muft iTiU' all the Chamber windows , and it will do well to fhut up all holes be-
fides, left any ltghc breaking in fhcu!d fooil all. Onely make one hole, that fhall be
a bands breadth <?nd length ; above this fir a little leaden or brafs Table , and glew
ir, fo thick as a pa p^r. open a round hole in the middle or it , as great as your little
finger : over againft this, let there be white w alls of paper, or white clothes, fo fhall
yon fee all that is done without in the Sun , and thofe that walk in the ftreets, like to
Antipodes, and what is right will be the left, and all things changed • and the far-
ther they are eff from the hole, t he greater they will appear. If yen bring your pi-
per, or white Table neerersthey wiliftiew lefs and clearer; butycumulf ftay awhile,
for the Images will not be feen pre le nt ly : becaufe a ftrong fimilitude doth feme-
times make a great fenfation with the fence , and brings in Inch an iffecsion, that not
onely when the fenfes do a&, are they in the organs, and do troOvle them, but when
they hive done acting, they will ftay long in them: which may e'afiiy be perceived.
For when men walk in the Sun , if they come tni o the dark, that affection continue.*-,
thar we can fee nothing, cr very fcantly ; becaufe the affection made by the tight , is
fi'l in cur eyes ; and when that is gone by cegrecs, we fee clearly in dark places.
Now will I declare what I ever concealed till row , ard thought to conceal com ibu»
*Uy. It you pnt a fmali ecmicular Cryftal glafs to the hole , you (hall prefently fee

C c c 2 ail

}<$4« Natural Magic k. ^Bool^ 17.

all things clearer , the countenances of men walking, the colours, Garments , and
*H things as if you flood hard by ; you fhall fee thern with fo much pieafure , that
thofe that fee it can never enough admire it. But if you will

See all things greater and clearer,

Over againft it fet the Glafs , not that which difF pates by difperfing , but which con-
gregates by uniting, both by coming to it, and going from it , till you know the true
quantity of the Image , by a due appropinquation of the Centre ; and fo (hall the be-
holder fee more fitly Birds flying, the cloudy skies , or clear and blew, Mountains
that are afar off ; and in a fmall circle of paper (that is put over the hole) you {hall
fee as it were an Epitomy of the whole world , and you will much rejoyce to fee it :
all things backwards, becaufe they are neer to the Centre of theGlais,if you fee
them farther from the Centre , they will fhew greater and upright, as they arc, but
not fo clear. Hence you may,

Ifyou cannot draw a Pittttre of a man or any things elfe, draw it by this means •

If you can but onely make the colours. This is an Art worth learning. Let the
Sun beat upon the window, and there about the hole, let thercbe Pictures of men,
that it may light upon them, but not upon the hole. Put a white paper againft the
hole , and you fhall fo long fit the men by the light , bringing them neer, or fetting
them further,until the Sun cart a perfeft reprefentation upon the Table againft it tone
that is skill'd in painting, muft lay on colours where they arein the Table, and (hall
defcribe the manner of the countenance ; fo thelmage being removed , the Pi&ure
will remain on the Table, and in the fuperficies it will be fcen as anjmage in a Glafs.
Ifyou will

That all fhall appear right9

This is a great fecret : many have tryed it, but none could obtain it : For feme fetting
Plain Glaffes obliquely againft the hole, by reverberation againft the Table, they
could feefome things fomewhat direct , but dark and not difcernable. I oft-times
by putiing a white paper obliquely againft the hole, and looking juft againft the
hole, could fee fome things direct : but a Pyramis cut obliquely, did (hew men with-
out proportion , and very darkly. Bur thus you may obtain your defire : Put a-
gainft the- hole a convex Glafs ; from thence let the Image reflect on a Concave-
glafs: let the Concave-glafs be diftant from the Centre, for it will make thofe I-
mages right, that it receives turned , by reafon of the diftance of the Centre. So up-
on the hole and the white paper, it will caft the Images of the Objects fo clearly and
plainly , that you will not wonder a little. But this I thought fit to let you under-
stand , left you fail in the work, that the Convex and Concave- glsffes be proporti-
onable circles: how you fhall do this, will be here declared often. I fhall (hew
alfo,

How in a (Chamber you may fee Hunting, Battles of Sr.emics, and other delft fons.

Now for a condufion I will add that , then which nothing can be more pleafant for
great men, and Scholars, and ingenious perfons to behold ; That in a dark Chamber
by white flieets objected , one may fee as clearly and pcrfpicooufly , as if they were
before his eyes, Huntings, Banquets, Armies of Enemies, PJays , and all things
elfe that one defireth. Let there be over againft that Chamber, where vou defire to
reprefent thefe things, fomefpacious Plain, where the Sun can freely fhine: Upon
that you fhail fet Trees in Order , alfo Woods, Mountains, Rivers, ard Animals,
that are really fo, or made by Art, o Wood, or feme other matter. Ycumuft frame
little children in them, as we ufe to briog them in when Comedies are A#ed : and
you muft counterfeit Stag', Bores, Rhinocerets, Elephants, Lions, and what other
creatures you pleafc : Then by degrees they muft appear, as coming out of their dens,
upon the Plain : The Hunter he muft come with his hunting Pole, Nets, Arrows,
and other neceflaries , that mav reprefent hunting: Let there be Horn?, Cornets,
Trum Decs founded : thofe that are in the Chamber fliall fee Trees, Animals, Hun-
ters Faces , and all the reft fe plainly , that they cannot tell whether they be true

or

Of Jlrange Cjlajfes. ^6^

or delations: Swords drawn will glift r in atihet.cle, that they will m?k^ people
almoft afnid. I have often (hewed this kind of Spectacle to my friends, wi.o much
admired it, and tookpieafure to fee ftich a deceit ; and I could hardly by naturaj
rcafons, and reafons from the Opticks remove them frcm their opinion , when I \ -}
dtfecvered the fecret. Hence ic may appear to Philolopher?, and thofc that \-.wi-;
Opti k?, howvifion is made; and thequei ionof intrcmitfion is taken away , that
was antiently fo v i!cu(ted;nor can there be any better way to demon! rate hot fy nan
this. The Image is let in by the pupil, as by the hole of a window ; and t hat part of
the Sphere, that is ret in the middle of the eye, (lands in flead of a< r\(tal Table,
I know ingenious people will be much delighted in this. It is declared more at large
in our Opticks. From hence may one take his principles of declaring any thing to
one that is confederate with him, that is fecret, though the party be far off, (hut up in
prifon. And no fmall Arts may be found out. You (hall amend the diliance by the
magnitude of the Glafs. You have fufficienr. Others that undertook to teach this,
have utter*d nothing but toyes, and 1 think none before knew it. If you defire to
know

How yon may fee the Sun Eclipfed,

Now T have determined to (hew how the Suns Eclipfe may be feen.When the Sun is
Eclipfed, {hut your Chamber- windows, and put a paper before a hole, and you
(hall fee the Sun : let it fall upon the paper oppofite from a Concave-glafs ^ and make
a circle of the fame magnitude: do fo at the beginning, middle, and end of ir. Thus
may you without any hurt to your eyes, obferve the points of the diameter of the
Suns Eclipfe,

Chap. VII.

Hew J oft may fee in the dart^ what is light without bj reafon of Torches,

X7 Y^E may demonflrate the fame without the light of the Sun, not without won-
der. Torches, or lights lighted onpurpofe in Chambers, we may fee in
another dark Chamber what is done , by fitting things as I laid : but the light mull
not If rike upon the hole, for it will hinder the operation ; for it is a fecond light that
carries the Images. 1 will not conceal at laft a thing that is full of wonder and
mirth, becaufe I am fain upon this difcourfe,

That by night an Image may feem to hang it* a Chamber,

In a tempeftuous night the Image of any thing may be reprefented hanging in the
middle of the Chamber, that will terrific the beholders. Fit the Image before the
bole, that you defire to make to ieem hanging in the Air in another Chamber that
is dark ; let there be many Torches lighted round about. In the middle of the dark
Chamber, place a white (heet, or fome folid thing, that may receive the Image fent
in : for the fpe&ators that fee not the (heet, will fee the Image hanging ia the mid-
dle of the Air, very clear, not without fear and terror , eipccially if the Artificer be
ingenious.

Chap. VIII.

How without a Glafs or reprefentation of any other thing, an Image may feem to hang

in the Air,

B

Efore I part from this Image hanging in the Air, t will (hew how yon may make
the Images of all things feem to hang in the Air, which will be a wonder of
wonders ; chiefly being done without the apparition of a Glafs, or a vifible Object.
But firftwe will examine what the Antients writ of this matter. One V 'itellio de-
fcribesrhe bufinefs after his fa(hion,thus: Fallen the fegmcntof a Cylinder inthc
middle of the houfe , fet upon a Table, or Stool, that it may glance perpendicularly

up-

^66 Natural Magick. TBook^if.

upon the ground; then place your eye at tame hole or chink that is fomewhat di-
stant from the Glafs, and let it be fixed , that it may not move here and there : over
againft the Glafs break the wall , and make it like to a window : let it be Pyramidal
in fhape , and let the (harp point be within , acd the bafis without , as men ule to
do , when a Pi&urc or any Image is placed for the eye to look upon ; but let it be
refle&cd on by the fuperfictes of the Pyramidal Glafs , that the Piaure placed with-
out, which ycur eye cannot fee through the hole, may feem to hang pendulous in
the Air; which will caufe admiration to behold. A Pyramidal Con vex-gUfs will
do the fame , if you fit it fo that it may reprelenr the fame Image. It may be done
alfo by a Sphaerical Convex and Concave. But the matter promifeth more in the
Frontifpiece written upon it , then it will performe in the conclufion. Wherefore
the Image will be feen without the Glafs , but by the means of the Glafs ; fo that
the thing beheld in the Glafs, will feem to be without it. But he is foully miftaken
here, as in other places. He had faid betrer, by a Cylinder of Cryftal : For as a
pillar ic would make an irradiation outwardly, yet it would be worfe feen than in the
pillar, as I fhall fhew. But I fhall difcover what I purpofed always to conceal ;

That neither the Objeti nor Cjlafs may be feent yet the Image fhall feem to hang aloney fen'

Anions in the middle of the Chamber ;
And walking about, you fhall behold the Image everywhere. But is fuchathing
fit to be difcovered to the people ? fhall I do fuch an unworthy Aft ? Ahlmy pen falls
out of my hand. Yet my defire to help pofterity,overcomes ; for perhaps from this
gleaning as it were, greater and more admirable inventions may be produced. Let
it be fo : get not a Spherical Cylinder, or Convex difle&ion of a Pyramidal Concave,
the portion of which fegment is cot known ; but let it be that which may defcend
upon his right Angle by a half Cyiinderand a fquare , and is parted by an oblique
Angle. Of two parts it muft be received pendulous, and beneath in the half of its
diameter it is conveyed from the middle. Let all the windows of the houfe be
fhut: Hop all the chinks , that the light may not come in beneath. In that place
where the fpcftacle is prepared, if the Sun or Moonbeams fall in, the whole fhew is
fpoiled. So place the beams of the Image that are beaten back , that the head of it
may by repercuffion fall right upon the earth. So will the vifible Objeft that ccmes^
by reper. uffion, be reflected above and beneath; It will follow thefafhionof the
firft Glafs : let a Brafs or Mirble Table be fo placed upon it , as we faid ; and left
the light falling from the window fliould light upon the plain Cylinder , and the
crooked Glafs, it mu ^ be Hopped by a fhutter of a hands-breath, that is three times
as broad as the hole ; for it will break forth every way : You fhall cover the appari-
tion, that the Image may be fitted very deep, that there may feem to be a pit : as the
beams meet, let the fpc&atorcome, who cannot be in any great miftake. Bnt cover
vour fight r und,that the Glafs offend not your eye. Then is the Image feen, and it
fhall not apprar above the Table, where the falling of theCathetus will cut the
line of fight through the Centre of the Glafs. I could open the matter no plainer,
I have done what I could : I know he that can underfiand it,will rejoyce very much.

Chap. IX.

Mixtures of Glaffes^and divers apparitions of Images.

NOw will I try to make a Glafs, wherein many diverfities of Images fhall appear :
and though fuch a one be hard to make, yet it will recompence all by the di-
vcrfity of Imagec, and the benefit of it. If then you would

Maty a CjUfs that fiallreprefefit much diverfity of Images.
Take a great or fniaH circle , as you would have your Glafs , and here and there cut
off two parts of the circumference, one to the quantity of a Pentagon, the other of
a Hexagon , as is clear in the Mathematicks : let the arch of the Pentagon be made
hollow with fome table, or Iron, that it may exaftly receive it into it, and may feem

to

Of ftrange (jlajjes. ^6y

to be cut out of itjbuc the fide of the Hexagon fhal be contrary to thi?,for the quanti-
ty of that muft be received by a Convex Table , that the arch of it may fo flick forth :
Then take a foil of Wax or Lead, of a convenient thicknefs,thac exceeds the breadth
of the arch of the Hexagon , and in length exceeds therri both : Then crook this
plate fo, that it may exactly ftand in the hollow of the wood , that there be no ipace
or chink left betweenthem; then let the Convex luperficies that is preferved prt>
minent , be applied inwardly, according to ihe breadth of it ; .that the form of the
Concavity may not be againft the Convexity , but that the terne plate may receive
both portions without impediment : Having thus made your model,m3keycur Glafs
of fteel , or offome other mixture, as I ftiall (hew you • and when it is poiifhed,k
will fhew you many diverfites of Image?. Firft,the righr parts will fhew right, and
the left the left , whereas the nature of plain Glaflcs , is to fhew the right fide as
left, and the left fide as right : and if ycu go backwards , the Image will (eem pro-
portionable, and will come forward: if you come more towards the Convex fupcr-
ficies, the Image will fhew ugly ; and the necreryoucomei the uglier will it fhew,
and be more like a horfes head. If ycu incline the Glafs, that will incline too ; and
by varying the Glafs, and the fituation of it, you fhall perceive divers variations; .
fometimes the head down , and the heels up ; and you fhall fee many other things
that I think not needful to relate now: for being placed on a voluble fet , that ic
may fhew both parts before and behind , the fpe&ator of hirafclf may fee all things.
We may

Make a Glafs out of a!/,

that in that alone all Images may be feen , that are feen in all : many mouths ; feme-
times greater, fcmetim.es lefs, fometimes right, fometimes left, (bene neerer, feme far-
ther off, feme equidiftanr. If a crooked be fet in cnc place , in another a Concave,
and a plain one in the middle, you (hall fee great diverfity of Image-. Thefe are

The operations of a Convex Cylindrical Glafs.
When your face is agiinft it, the more deformed it appears in length > the more ugly
it is for flecdrrnefs : if the length of it cut the face ovcrthwart, it fhews a low pref-
fed down face like a Frogs, that you fhall fee nothing but the teeth t almofl the fame
way, as yen fhall fee it in a Sword , or any other long and polifhed fteel : if you in-
cline it forward, the forehead will appear very great, the chin fmall and fknder like
a horfes. But contrary to thefe are

The operations of Cylindrical Concave- glares.

If you look into the Concave, you fhall fee more Images of the fame thing, imitating
the laid Glafs. If you fet your eye to the Centre, you fhall fee it all the breadth of
the Glafs ; fo your forehead , mcuth , and the reft. If you turn fuch a Glafs, thac
it may cut your face broad-ways , you fhall prefently fee your head inverted, and
the reft that I related in the Concave-glafs.

the operations of a Pjramtdal Glafs turned,

are thefe : You fhall fee a fharp forehead, and a large chin. Bur the contrary way,
a long forehead, with a very long nofe. In a Concave you fhall behold many face?,
if according to the concavity you fit many portions of plain G affes : for one looking
into it, fhall find them as manv as there are Glafies, and all moving alike j and again,
✓what Glafs foevcritbe^ if it be not plain, it fhall fhew always different frGm the
Image.

CHAP*

Natural Magick. "Bool^ ij.

Chap. X.
Of the effetts of a Lsnticular Cryftal.

MAny are the operations of a Lenticular Cryftal , and I thick not fit to pafs
them over in filence. For they are Concaves and Convexes. The fame cf-
fc&.> are iu ipe^acies, which are mo \ neceffaty for the ufe of mans life ; whereof no
man yet hath sitijn'd the tffe&s, nor yet the rcafons of them. But of theie more at
Urge in our Opiicks. That no fpace may be empty, I (hail touch fomc things here ; I
call Lenticular*, portions of circles compared together, of Concaves and Convexes.
I will firftfhew

How with a Convex Cryftal I enticular to kindle fire.

A Convex Lenticular kindleth fire mcft violently , andfooner, and more forcibly
then a Concave-glafs : I gave the re a ions in my Opticks. For being held againft the
Sun, when the be.- m > meet in the oppofite part , it will kindle fire it is oppofite to,
melt Lead , and fire Metals. Moreover, if you will

By night five light afar ojf with a Lenticular Cryftal,
Set a Candle a little behind the point of burning, fo it will caft parallels a very great
way to theoppofue parr, that you may fee men pafs the ftreets, and all things done
int2hamb:rs that are far from you. The fame way as I faid of a Concave-glafs , we
may

In a darkjnight read a letter by a Lenticular Cryftal :

Put the letter behind the Glafs , againft the Stars or Candles a great way from you ;
whpre the beams meet , the words that are oppcfite wiJl be clearly leen in a dark
ni-;ht, and the Chamber (hut. But that which follows , will afford you a principle

tar better for your confederation : Namely,

By a Lenticular Cryftal to fee things that are far ojf^as tf they were clofe by.
For fetting your eye in the Centre of it behind the Lenticular , you are to look upon
a thing afar (ft , and it will (hew lb neer, that you will think you touch it with your
hand : You (hall fee the clothes colours, mens face*, and know your friends a great
way frcm you. It is the fame

To read an Epiftle a great way off with a Lenticular Cryftal.
For if you fee your eye in the fame place, and the Epiftle be it ajuftdiftance, the
Utters will ieem fo great , that you may read them perfectly . Butifyou inclinethc
Lenticular to behold the EpiHle obliquely , the letters will fcem fo great, that you
may read thtm above twenty paces oft. And if you know how to multiply Lecticu-
lars, I fear rot but fot a hundred paces you m^y fee the fmalleft letter, that from one
to another the Chara-ffers will be made greater : a weak fight muft ulc Ipe&adcs fit
for it. He that can fit this well, hath gain'd no fmall fecrct. We may

Do the fame more perfettly with a Lenticular Cryftal.
Co-cavel.enticulars will make one fee moft clearly things that are afar off » but Con-
vexes, things neer hand ; fo you may ufe them as your light requires. With a Con-
cu-e you fhail fee fmall things afar oft, very clearly j with a Convex, things neeret to
be greater, bu' more obfcurely : if you know hew to fit them both together , you
fhtll fee both things afar off, and things neer hand, both greater and clearly. I have
much hclpe ! iome of my friend s,who law things afar off, weakly ; and what was neer,
cocfulcdly,that they might fee all things clearly. If you will, you may

By a Convex Lenticular Cryflal fee an Image hanging in the Air.

If yen put the thing to be feen behind thcLeoiicular,that it nay pafs thorow the Cen-
tre,

Of jlrange (jlajfes. ^69

tre, and let your eyes in the oppofite pare, you fhaii fee the Image between the Glafs
and your eyes ; and if you fet a paper agaioft it, you fhall fee it clearly : fo that a
lighted Candle will fecm to burn upon the Paper. But

By a Concave Lenticular to defer ibe ccm[endicujljr how long and bread things are.
A Painter may do it with great commodity, and proportion : for by oppolui.cn to a
Concave Lenticular , thofe things that ate in a great Piain arc contracted into a fmiil
compals by it ; fo that a Painter thac beholds it, may with little labour and skill,
draw them all proportionably and exactly; but to leave nothing concerning fpe£U-
cles, Iwiilfhew

How a thing may appear multiplied^

Amongft fports that are carried abour, a fpe&acle is Gf no fmall account : that Glafs
Icllrument we put to our eyes, to fee the better with. For of thofe things that de-
lude the %ht, there can be no better wsy invented, then by the medium ; for that
being changed, all things are changed. Wherefore prepare that of very folid thick
Glafs, that it may be the better worked by awheel into proportions : wherefore fit
it into many Forms and Angles, whereby we defire to multiply any thing : but in the
middle of them, let the Angles be Pyramidal, and let it agree with the fight ; that
from divers Fcrms, Images may be retracted to the eyes , that they cannot difcerri
the truth. Being cow made of divers fuperficies , fet ihemtoyour eyes ; and if you
look upon any mans face hard- by, yen will think you fee Argus, one that is all Eyes.
If bis noie, you fhall fee nothing but rofe; fo his hands, fingers, arm?, that you fhall
fee no man , but Briaretu the Poet, faigned to have have an hundred hands. If you
look upon Money, you fhall fee many for cne , that you cannot touch it wiih your
hands, but it will often deceive you } and it is better to pay with it then to receive.
If you fee a Galley afar off,you will think it is a fleet of war : If a Sculdier walks, that
it is an Army marching. And thus are things doubled , and men ieem to have two
faces, and two bodies, Thus are there divers ways to fee, that one thing may feem
to be another : and all thefe things will be evident to thofe that feek and enquire after
them by tryal.

Chap. XI.

Of Spectacles whereby one may fet very far, beyond imagination,

I Will not omit a thing admirable and exceeding ufeful ; how blcarc-ey'd people
may fee very far , and beyond that one would believe. I fpake of Pletcmies Glafs,
or rather fpc&aclc , whereby for fix hundred miles he faw the enemies fhips coming ;
and I fhall attempt to fhew hew that might be done, that we may know our friends
fome miles t ff , and read the fmallcft letters at a great diftance, which can hardly be
feen. A thing needful for mans ufe, and grounded upon the Opticks. And this
may be d ^ne very cafily;but the matter is not fo to be publifhcd too eafily ; yet perfpe*
dive will make it clear. Let the tfrongeft fight be in the Centre of the Glafs, where
it fhall be made,andall the Sun beams are moft powerfully difperft, and unite not,but
in the Centre of the forefaid Glafs : in the middle of it, where diameters crofsone
the other, there is the concourfeof them all. Thus is a Concave pillar-Glafs made
with fides cquidiPanr. : but let it be fitted by thofe Sections to the fide with one ob-
lique Angle: but obtufe Angled Triangles, or right Angled Triangles muft be cut
here and there with crofs lines, drawn from the Centre, andfo will the fpe&aclebe
made that is profitable for that ufe I fpeak of.

CHAP

Natural Magic k. 2>00^ 17.

Chap. XII.
How we may jce in a Chamber things that are net.

I Thought this in Artifice cot to be dtfpifed: for we nay in my Chamber , if a
man look in , fee thofe things which were never there ; and there is no man fo
witty that will think he is mittaken : Wherefore to defcribe the matter, Let there be
a Chamber wherein to no other light comes , unlcfs by the door or window where
the fpc&ater looks in : let the whole window or part of it be of Glafs, as we ufe to
do to keep out the cold ; but let one part be poliftied, that there may be a£ooking-
glafs on both fides, whence the fpe&ator muft look in ; for the reft do nothing. Let
Pi&urcs be fct over againft this window , Marble ftatues , and fuch-iike ; for what
is without will feem to be within , and what is behind the fpe&ators back , he will
think to be in the middle of the Honfe , aa far from the Glafs inward , as they ft and
from it outwardly , and fo clearly and certainly, that he will think he fees nothing
but truth. But left the skill ftiould be known , let the part be made fo where the
Ornament is, that the fpe&ator may not fee it , as above his head , that a pavement
may come between above bis head : and if an ingenious man do this , it is impotTible
that he fhould rappofc that he is deceived.

Chap. XIII.
Of the eperations of a Cryftal Pillar.

NOr fhallthe operations of a Cryftal Pillar go unfpoken of , for in it there arc
fome fpeculations not to be defpifed. Firft,

7# kindle fire with a Crjfial TiUar,

by oppofingit to the Sun, it will kindle fire behind ic about the circumference: off-
tiroes lefc above the Chamber , when the Sun fhined, it burnt the Blankets. They
that will at fct hours and places burn the enemies camps , if it be laid upon fuel for
fire, it will certainty kindle ir. We may alfo

With a Cryfial Pillar, make an Image hang in the Aire.
It will fcew the Image hanging in the Air, both before and behind. Let the Obje&
be behind the Pillar, let the Pillar be between that and the eye , the Image will ap-
pear outwardly hanging in the Air, above the Pillar, parted every wr-cre from the
Pillar, clearly and perfpicuoufly j and if thevifible Obje& be between the eye and
the Pillar, the Image will appear behind the Pillar, as I faid. If it be a very vifible
Qbje&, as fire or a candle, the matter is feen more clearly without any difficulty : I
gave the reafons in my Opticks. We may alfo

In a Cryft*l Pillar fee many %ain-bows.
Make a folid Pillar in a Glafs furnace, fo great as a Walnut , and let it be made round
onely by the fire, as the manner is, as Glafs-makers ufe to do , that without any help
of the wheel, the outward fuperficies may be moft polite : where the Iron touched it,
there leave a Pedeftall. It is no matter for pure Glafs, for impure is beft « place this
upon your eye, and a burning candle over againft it ; the light refra&cd by bladders
will fhr w infinite Rain-bows, and all the light will feem Golden-colour'd, that no-
thing can be more pleafant to behold.

CHAP*

Of Jtrdnge (flajfes

?7<

Chap. XIV.
Of Bnrmng-Glafcs,

] Proceed to Burning- Glaffes , which being oppofed againft the Sun beams, will
kindle fire upon matter laid under them ; Intbefealfo are the greateft fecrets of
Nature known. I fhalldefcribe what is found out by Ettc Ude, 'Ptolemy , and Ar-
chimedes • and I (hall add our own inventions , that the Readers may judge how far
new inventions exceed the old. Fire is kindled by reflexion, retraction, and by a
fimple and a compound Glats. I fhall begin from a fimple rcfle&ion, and from

A Comave-Glafs that fhall kindle fire behind it :

which few haveobferved. Know, that a Concave-glafs will burn from its middle
poinr,m«o the hexagonal-fide above the Glafs, as far as a fourth part of its diame-
ter; from the hexagonal-fide, as far as the te-
tragonal without the Glafs, on the lower
part of it : Wherefore cut cff that part of the
fcmicircle, which is fituate from a pentagon
as fat as a tetragon, as it were the band of the
circle ; and this being polifhed , and oppofed
againft the Sun , will caft fire far from it , be- ;
hinde it. 1 will fay no morc,becaufc I laid more
at large in my O pricks concerning this. So al*
fo we may

With a Concave Pillar or Pyramidal, kindle fire:
but very flowly, with delay onely, and in the Summer-Sun % it kindles in the whol*
line, and not in a point, but being extended by the point of accenfion of its circle*.
The fame will fall out by a Pyramidal Concave.

Chap. XV. ^ (

Of a Parabolical Sett ion, that u of altGlaJfes the ntotf burning.

THat is called a Parabolical Se&ion, that more forcibly farther off, and in fliort-
enime, will fet matter on fire , that is oppofite to it: it will melt Lead and
Tin : My friends related to me, that Gold and Silver alfo ; but 1 have made them red
hot. By which invention of &4rchtmedcst as appears by the teflimony of Galen, and
many more, We read that he fet the Roman Navy on fire, when Marcetm befieged
Sjracnfe, his Country. Plutarch in the life of Pompliui faith, The fire that burnt
in Diana's Temple, was lighted by this Glafs, that is, by inftrurrents that arc made of
the fide of right triangle, whofe feetarcequal : Thefe made hollow, dofrom the cir-
cumference refpefl one Centre. When therefore they are held againft the Sun, fo
that the beams kindled may be gathered from all paits> andbe united in the Centre,
and that they do fever ihe Air ra rifled, itfoon fets on fire all fuel that is combu-
flibie oppeled againft it , by kindling firftthe li^hteft and drieft parts ; the beams
being as fo many fiery dans fallingupon the Object. In a Concave fpherical Glafs
the beams meeting together, kindle fire in * fourth part of the diameter under the
Centre, which are directed within the fide of a Hexagon from the fuperficies of the
circle. But a Parabolical Section, is, wherein all the beams meet in one point from
all the parts of its fuperficies. Cardarut teachcth how fuch a Glafs thoold be made*
If we would kindle fire at a mile diftance , we muft defcribc a circle, whofe diame-
ter muft be two miles longhand of this we muft take fuch a parr, that the roundnefs of
it may not lye hid5camely, a fixtieth parr,to which we muft add a dimetient,acccrding
to the altitude in one point , and upon the fixt diameter muft we bring about part
of the circle , which fhall delcribe the portion of a Sphere ; which when we have po-

Ddd* iTfhed,

Natural Magick. ©00^17.

lifhcd, if wc hold it againft the Sun , it will kindle a moft violent fire a mile off. *Tis
Grange bow many follies he betrays himfelf guilty of, in thefe words. Firft, he pro-
mifeth a Glafs (hould burn a mile off ; which I think is impolfible to burn thirty foot
off, fork would be of a wonderful vafinefs; for the fupcrficies of the Cane is fo
plain,& to receive any crookednefs, it can hardly be made fo great. Moreover, to de-
scribe a cirde,wliole diameter fhould be two miles long,whac compares muft we ufe,
and what plate ihall wc make it on,or whofhtll draw it about ?And if it be truc,thac
Jrchimcdet by a Parabolical Glafs did burn (hips from the wall,the diftance could not
be above ten paces,as appears by the words of theAuthors themfelves;for in the fame
plate he railed (hips , and threw them againft the Rocks : and his engines were Iron
bars, the greater} part whereof lay backward • and by reafon of thofe iron crews, it is
manifeftit could be done no other ways. There arc other fooleries,but I pafs them
for brevity lake, that I might not ieem tedious: the caufeof his error was, that he
never had made any fuch Glafles ; for hid he tried it, he would have fpokc other-
wife. But I will now (hew how

To make a Glafs out of a ^Parabolical Sell ion.
V -J . . .

1 he way to defcribe it is this : Let the diftance be known how far we would have the
Glafs to born, namely, A B ten fooc ; for were it more, it could hardly be done :
double the line A B. and make A E C, the whole line will be A C : from the point
A , draw a right line D A, and let D A and A E be equal one te the other, and
.ajt at ri^ht Angles by AC, but both of them muft be joined to the quantity AC,
as D C E, which in C make a right Angle, D C E. Therefore the Triangle D C E
is a right angled Triangle , and equal fides: and were this turned about the Axis
C Dentil it come to its own place whence it parted,therc would be made a right an-
gled Cane , EDNC, whofe Parabolical Se&ion will be A B C : the right line D C
will be the Axis of the Cane , and CE (hallbethefemidiamcter of thebafisofthe
Cane: Through the point C you muft draw a line parallel to D E , and that is HI
of the length ofC EandC D ; and by the point B draw another parallel to thefaid
line E D, which is F B G;and let B G and B F be bothof them equal to A C : fo F G
(hall be the upright fide , and H I the bafis of the Parabolical Se&ion : If therefore
a line be drawn through the points HE AG I, that (hall be a Parabolical Section,

the Diagram whereof is this that follows.

But if you will burn any thing, you muft
rot make your Parabolical Glafs to the
bignefs of the whole line H FA G I, but
onely take a part thereof, as if we would
take the top part of it LAM, that the
line L M may cut A C in K, or greater or
leffer : if you will make ore greater, cut
off A K beneath itjfor the bigger it i?,the
more quickly and vehemently wil it burn;
if you will have it lei>>rake it above A K.

But thus ycu muft do, that the crooked
line L A M may be more exadtly defcribed , that you may not commit the leaft error.
Wherefore on a plain Table I protraft the line ABC, and let A B be double\he
diftance, that we intend to burn any thing, that is, the length of the line ABC:
trcm the point B, I raifea perpendicular line BD,thc altitude whereof muft be of the
lame femidiameter of the Se&ion to be made,that is the line L M, the half whereof is
LK ; from thence defer i be a lemicirele, whofe beginning A muft pafs through the
poiat D.But you (hall find the Centre thus : Let the points A D be joyned by a line,
and let the Angle B A D be made cqnal to A D E, and the line D E drawn forth,
(hall ckAC in F,that(hall be the Centre : fo draw the femicircle ADC. If there-
fore weT(hall cut the line B C into fmaller parts , fo much the leffer Parabolical line
muft be defcribed. Divide it into four parts , and let the points of the divifions
be H G F : then defcribe three circles , that (hall be termined.by A from the three
points HGF : the firft is A F, the fecond A G, the third AH: and they fhill cut

Of ftrange (jlajfes.

Pi

2FC H

line B D ; the firft in F, the fccond inG, the thir'
in H • thence I take my Seaion to be perfc&ed
LKM, and I cut the line K A into (our parts, and
thorow thofc points I draw parallel lines to LM.Lec
BH be the neereft to the top of the Parabolical
Sea ion, the fccond BG that lollows next, and
thethird BF next to that, and afrer fhall be L M.
Thence by the lines LFG HA, draw a crocked
line, and do the fame on the other part fo far as M,
and that fhall be the line fought for, to make the Pa-
rabolical Seaion , and from that muft be made the
Glafs, as I fhall fhew.

Chap. XVI.

Hot* a FarabolicalSettion may be dejeribed, that may burn obliquely , And at a very

great diftance.

f

IHa ve defcribed a Parabolical Seaion , which might be made by rule and compafs,
becaufe we may ufe it at a fhort diftance ; but in greater diftance we muff proceed
by numbers : as for forty or for fixty foot , and not much more, left the GUfs fhould
be made of an unufual magnitude. The forefaid Glafs burns between it and the
Sun j and if the Sun be not as you defirek, the operation is loft : fo alfo by an oblique
Glafs, that is between the Sun and the combuftible matter,or over againft it.Whence
according to the fituation you may ufe them all , namely, wherein they anfwer your
expeaation } and efpecially when the Sun is in the Meridian , they burn with more
vehemency. This I muft tell you,that you may not be deceived jfor when you erre,
you commonly draw others into error with you. A Parabolical Glafs made from
the top, if the Seaion fhall be from the top, if we would burn far, the Glafs will
be plain ; and that it may have fome crookednefs , it will be wonderful great. And
if the Seaion be about the bafis, that will be worft of all ; for from the leaft diftance,
it will be aimcft flat : wherefore that we may have it with fome crookednefs , we
muft take a line about the neck of the Seaion, not the head, nor the feet. Where-
fore being to make a Glafs of a Parabolical Seaion , about the neck of the Seaion,
where thegreateft crookednefs of the Parabolical Seaion is made, and that may
burn far from its fuperficies, to twenty foot diftance ; Let the line A B be the firms
verfru eighteen foot long : from the point A, I raife a line to right Angles with A B,
which fhall be the line by which,the fourth part whereof is A B : cut A B in C,and let
it be two foor,and C B fixteen footrl multiply twice feventy two,and that makes one
hundred forty and four : the fquare root of this is twelve ; wherefore the line ere-
fted perpendicularly from the point C, unto the circumference of the Parabolical
Seaion , will be D I of twelve foot, wherefore C I will be the line appointed: joyn

I B, and the Radius that muft burn, will
be in the point B that was fought for:
■£j Wherefore the ray of the Sun , that is e -
quidiftant to the firm verfm H I, is rcfle -
fled by IfB inB; the Latitude whereof
will be about twenty foot : for the line
I C of twelve foot, multiplied into it felf,
will make one hundred forty and four j
and C B is fixteen foot, which multiplied
into it felf , makes two hundred fifty and
fix; addethefe together, andtheymake
four hundred : the fquare root of it is twenty foot, thus. Wherefore I am rcfolved
to takethe part of the Glafs , intercepted between the points I and F, and I feek
two thirds of orefoor, from C toward B, and I divide one foot into thirty parts,
that the crookednefs may be taken more precifely • and let C ® be twenty parts of

afoot,

574 Natural MagicK. <Boo/{\J.

a foot, fr^m A to C fixty p*Ks, became they arc twofoo^ : wherefore from A to G,
where we ttnil make our G afs, will be eighty parts. Wherefore let us begin from
A G fixty parts, to which I always add four cyfers oooo. for this purpofe, that When
numbers come tortb,wt!ofe roots cannot be extra&e'd , thofe that arc taken may be
to the leaft lots : wherefore we (hall make the Table under written. In thefirft line
are the points of the [ir,m verfw : in the fecond, the fqares, the lines to which ; from
tb<* muHiplication of the (mm verfitt, namely, the length AE, is feventy two foot : if
vvefl^l! reduce ihefe to pans, by multiplying by thirty , there comes forth 2160:
mu.aply bv the parts of the finm verfm A C, there will arife 1 29600 : in the third
line are too?' of the forefaid number, namely, the lines appointed: adding there*
fore to 1 20600, four cyfers, they make 1196000000: the fquare root of this is
3 6 000, of which laft cyfers, one fignifies the tenth part of afoot, another the tenth
ot a tenth part : thus, 3 6 0.0.0.0. lb will be the forefaid Table made.

\»

* « «
5 5 -

*5» * Si

«

to

R

5,

i
«■»

»& •

« r*
£ t

60

129600

360

0

0

61

1 31760

362

9

8

62

133920

365

9

3

63

I 36080

368

8

9

64

I 38240

371

8

1

6-5

140400

374

7

6

66

142560

377

5

*7

144720

380

4

2

68

146880

383

2

4

69

149040

386

0

5

t«4

* <% 2
2 vis

«c

0

h.

3;
*>

.
4*

t

1

«»

Q

1

v>

1 -
*• fc

70

I 51200

388

8

4

71

153360

391

6

1

7l

155520

394

3

6

7*

1 5768©

397

0

8

74

I 59840

399

7

9

75

1 62600

402

4

8

76

1 641 60

405

1

6

77

I 663 20

407

8

2

78

I68480

410

4

6

19

I70640

413

0

8

80

I7280O

415

6

I 9 ,

Thefe

Of ftrange (jlajjes. 575

Thefe things being done, Itakcthc
differences of cbe roots, of the great-
eft to the fmalleft, for they are from
160.0.0. to 4 is. 6. 9. Make choice
of themeafareof afoot, according to
which diftances we would make our
Glal's : let it be A B, which we divide
into thirty parts ; and take twenty
parts, namely, two thirds : I adde a
line to it at right Angles, namely 8,
and let it be BC, which I divide into
fifty five parts. I divide one pirt into
ten, and that one into ten parts more,
and thofe arc tens of tens. Let A be
nul , that is a cyfer , and there place
fincy ; the fecond parr fixty one : the line joyned to right Angles, will be t wo ; the
third pare fixty two; the line joyned to it will be five : fo the twentieth part will be
eighty, and the line joyned to the Angle fifty fix : to the extremities of thefe lines I
fatten a pin, and I put a brafs Cithern-wire upon them , and upon it I draw a line,
and the Parabolical line is exactly defcribed by it ; for flhould we draw it without
the help of this cord , it will be wavering, and not perfect. Then take a brafs Ta-
ble of convenienc thicknefs, and draw the line now found upon it , filing away all
that that fhall be above the line C A. Thefe things being done, take an iron rod of
an cxait length, namely, twelve foot, as the line D C, and at the end fallen a plate,
which Hull be for the circumvolution of the axis; at the other end faften a ipike,
that it may be faftned fomcwhere , and be handfomely turned about. So being well
fixed, we turn it about , by adding clay mingled with raw , that it may excellent

well make a hollow place , like to the
^.a c form of a Parabolical SeSion ; which be-
rg^ r^-j M ing dried , we muft make another folid

JffT: one, that it may contlin the liquid Me-
tal, as the maner is.

Chap. XVII.

A P 'ar Abohcul Sett ton that may burn to infinite dtfiance.

ZOmmtm the Greek, writes in the third Tome of his Hiftories , That Anaftafiut
moved fedition againft VitaliAnm a Thracian , and he got thofe of Myfia , and
the bcythians to If and with him ; and in the Country by Conftantinople , he plun-
dered the people , and beficged the City with a Fleet. <JMdrianiu the Deputy op-
pofed him ; and there being a fighr at fea , by an engine made by Vrodtu a moft ex-
cellent man, for he then was famous for Philofophy and Mathematicks ; for he not
onely knew all the fecrets of the moft eminent Artificer, jirchmedes , but he
found out fomenew inventions himfclf ; the enemies Navy was vanquifhed. For
*Procl$u is reported to have made Burning-Glafles of brafs, and to have hanged them
en the wall againft the enemies Ships ; and when the Sun beams fell upon them, that
fire brake forth of them like to lightning, and fo burnt their Ships and men at fea,
as Dion reports that Archimedes did formerly to the Roman s befieging Syracufe. But
I will fhew you a far more excellent way than the reft , and that no man as ever I
knew writ of , and it exceeds the invention of all the Antients, and of our Age al-
fo;and I think the wit of man cannot go beyond it.This Glafs doth not burn for ten,
twenty, a hundred, or a thoufand paces, or to a let diftance, but at infinite diftance :
nor doth it kindle in the Cane where the rays meet , but the burning line proceeds
rom the Centre of the Glafs of any Longitude, and it burns all it meets with in the
vay. Moreover, it burns behind, before, and of all fides. Yet I think it an un-
vortby a& to divulge it to the ignorant common people : yet let it go into the light,

that

Natural Maqick. jBgo^ 17.

that the immenfe goodnefs ©f our great God may be praifed , and adored. Becaufe
a proportional Radius doth proceed frcm the greater Section, from the lefs is made
the greater: to avoid this, make it of a Cylindrical Se&ion, for it is the mean, and
let it be fet for the axis of the fmall andcf the greater deflection , which may pafs
through the middle parallels : this held againfr the Sun, doth make refraction of the
beams fern into it, very far, and perpendicularly from the Centre of a Cylindri-
cal Section; and in this Art thcrcafon cannot be found , that the beams uniting
(houldpart again : Wherefore it receives them direftly , which it fends back again
obliquely into beams far frcm the fuperficies of it. For the beams pafling through
the narrow hole of a window, are forthwith dilated ; nor is their proportion kept,
by being far removed , therefore it may reverberate and burn where the Cane feems
cleared , which will be neer the Centre , nor is it far diftant from the point where
the rays meet; but neer the ray coming forth from that point , from the fuperficies
of the Glafs, called Parabolicall , which muft remain firm in that place which I faid
before. Let experiment be made of its venue , by threds pafling frcm its Centre,
or iron wire, or hair j and it is no matter whether it be Parabolical or Spharrica] , or
any Section of the fame order : then let it be excellent well fitted upon the Cemfe
of the laid Section: If the rays go forth above, or a little beneath, it is no matter,
if not much money, or much money be laid ouc to make it. The making of it de-
pends meerly on the Artificers hand ; the quantity is nothing, be- it fmall or great.
The Latitude of the hollow is not neceffary, onely let it be lent forth frem the mid-
dle, that the rays may meet excellent well in the Centre. Let the window be made
open afliunr ,. that it rmy receive a Parabolical Glafs; and thus fhall you have a
Glafs, if that be Well done I fpake of. He that bath ears to bear, let him hear • I have
not fpoken barbaroufly , nor could I fpeakmore briefly, or more plainly But if a
fmall one do not anlwer a great one in proportion, know that you will operate no-
thing: let it be large about the bafis, fmall at the top, equidillantto the Frft. Let
it not be a fteel Glafs, becaufe it cannot fuftain the heat of the burning , and by burn-
ing it lofeth its brightnefs. Let itbe therefore of Glafs a finger thick: Let the
Tin foil be of purged Antimony, and Lead, fuch as they make in Germany : let the
form be of clay : put the Glafs upon it , and melt it in a Glafs furnace, that it may

take its form. This is a wonder, that that '
which caufeth fo much burning in the work,
is cold, or at mcftbut luke-warm. If yon
would have it burn before, of the Section
which is about the bafis, make a circle, in
the middle point whereof fit the Artifice,
that the ray returning, may come forth* to'
the fore parr. This I have faid ; and I have
obferved, that we may ufe this Artifice in
great and wonderful things , and chiefly by
inferibing letters in a full Moor. For what-
foever we have written by this Glafs , as I
faid of a plain Glafs , we may fend letters of
it to a very great diftance : and becaufe I faid
it fends forth to infinite diftance, it is fent as
far as the Moon , efpecially being helped by
its light.

lidj y*W JH?Us2x-jt i' .fit 1*1 * UOV v* ?rDifi'/. I

Chap. XVIII.

To maj>e a Bftrning-Glafs of many SyhtTicxl SeRions.

"\Tltellio defcribes a certain compofition of a Burning-glafs, made of divers Sphaeral
Sections : but what he writes he proves not, nor doth he underfiand what he
fays: whilft I was fearching for that, I found this. Propound the diftance of com-
bufiion, let it be C B, let it be doubled, C A (hill be the femidit miter of the Sphere,

whofe

Of flrange (flajfes.

whole Centre B muft be extended to D, and the Diameter will be A D. Divide
C A into four points, but the more the parts are , the more prccife will be the de-
fcriptioncf the line, and fet the numbers to the divifions: fofettingthe foot of the
compafsfaft in I, and the moveable foot in B, make the femicirdc EF, and mark
it B I : and fcttingit in the ^. Centre at the fame widenefs , and the other movea-
ble foot in the line BD, defcribc another femicirclc and mark it 3. and fo to the
fourth and mark it 4. Then fctting the foot firm in B , at the diitance of B C, or
B 4, make a circle , and the immoveable foot (landing on the Centre B , upon the
diitance B 3, defcribc another: fo there is the third B, and the fonrth B A, as B I.
Then from the point, A, draw a line, and another from the point B ; and let them
meet in a point where the circle I meets , with the femicirele 1. for let them be
cut in G ; then draw the fecond line from circle 2. and another from the fame A
the Centre, and let them meet, where the fecond circle cuts with the fecond femi-
circlc in H • then from the third circle, and from B the Centre, and where they meet
in, I, by the meeting of the femicirele : fo from the fourth, where the fourth begins
in K, and from K I H G draw a line , which fhall be the Section to be defcribed.
The fame maybe done on the other pan of the circle, thereafonisthis: The beam
of the Sun L I falling upon the point I, of the Glafs, is reflected to B, becaufe B3.
andBl are equal from the fame circle: therefore the Angle B 3 I, is equal to B I 3,
But B 3 I is equal to 3 I L , becaufe it is fubalternate , for the ray of the Sun L I
is equidiflant to the diameter of the circle, wherefore the Angles L I 3 and 3 I B,
are equal , therefore it is reflected upon B. The fame is to be faid of the beam M H
and N G, and this Glafs is contrary to a Sphaeral Glafs : From divers points of the
circumference, the rays are reflected upon different parts of the diameter, and all the
diameters are from the Centre: but in this the refie&ed beams unite, not in one
point, and the diameter are various from the fourth of the diameter. But of this
more largely in my O pucks. Laftly, I will not omit that the Cane doth kindle fire

circularly , when that as far as this circle
it kindles in a point. Divide the Parabo-
lical line by finm verfiu, and let them meet
upon contrary parts. For example, lec
the Parabolical Section be C E F,they?«M
verfm D E : cut this circumference in E,
and let C F meet together in the manner
they flood before, that it may be E G F E,
and about the axis G H turn it round ,
there will be made a round Cane, make
it of Steel , or other Metal ; and polifh it,
and it will kindle fire round about.

Chap. XIX.
Fire it kindled more forcible by refrattion.

I Have fpokenof Burning-glafTes by reflection : Now I fhall fpeak of thofe which
burn by refraction; for thefc kindle fire more violently , I fhall fhew my reafon
in the Optick?. Wherefore

By 4 Cylindre of Cryfttl to kindle fire.
We may do it by fettingit againft the Sun, but very (lowly and by leafure • for all the
beams do net meet in one point, but in a line. The fame way almoft are we wont

Tobttrnmtha Pyramidal CryfiaKjUfs.
But this burns about a line , yet both burn more ftrongly than a pillar Glafs of a Py-
ramidal , in the place of this we may ife a Vial full of water. But the tnoft violent
of them all, is with

E e e i/1

278 Natural Magick. BooJ^ 17.

{ryftalSphare, or portion of it.

And if a Sphere be wanting, wc may {"apply it with a Vitlfullof water, that is
round and of Glafs , fet againft the Snn : if you fet behind it any combuftible mat-
ter, that is friendly to the fire, fofcon as the rays unite about the fuperficies, it
forthwith kindleth fire , to the wonder of the Spectators : when they fee fire rai-
fed from water ,that is extreme cold, fowill the portions of Sphxres, as fpedtades,
lenticulars, and fuch like, which we fpeak of already.

A Cryflal parabolick^Glaft wtU kindle fire moft vehemently of all,
we (hall fee ir,becanfe the beams all meeting, it kindles more than a Glaf?. Wc may
aifo, as I faid of a Glafs

By refraction, kindle fire afar ojf9

And almoft to infinite diftance, as is demonftrated by Obtick reafons ; and the more
by how much as refractions work more forcibly than reflections : and I ftiall per-
form this many ways , as I faid before , not onely by reafon, but by experience.
j4/meon(*\d, That he made the fame way parallel lines cut a croff. I have faid alfo,
that if they be oppofed in place, CryftalSph acres are fo perfectly oppofite by coition,
as arc Sphaeral and Cylindrical portions. Nor do they caft forth fire lb far , that it
is hard to believe it, and more than imagination can comprehend. Behold, I (hall
(hew you a more forcible way to kindle fire. It fends forth alfo unequal, andcom-
buft parallels. Let a uniform Section fall in , and ir will carry forth oblique beams,
ycu fhall fee the fire by a hidden and open beam, falling upon a right fuperficies, and
it will come forcibly and uniformly into that place , where she beams unite moft in
a fit combuftible matter : for if that combuftible matter that is oppofite , be not dry,
it is in vain to fet a Glafs againft ir, either a Convex Cylindrical , or Concave Sphe-
rical j for the matter will be found almoft pierced through with ftrong fire , and if ic
be not truly oppofite it will burn, wh^rher it be fmall or great. But it is considera-
ble, the portion of which it is. It will do alfo the fame thing, if the thing be op-
pofite, and be fmall or great, if need be.

Chap. XX.

In a hollowed Glafs how the Image may hung without.

BEfore I depart from a plain Glafs , it is performed by the later Artifts induftx^,
that in the fame Glafs many faces may be feen, or likenefles of the fame Image,
without any hindrance to the firft:for behind it they make the Glafs hollow, and make
a little Concave, whence a foil being laid on, as I fiiall Anew, and fitted well, it will
hold another forth without. Hence ccmes it to pafs by this excellent invention,
that a man looking in a Glafs , may fee the upright Im:ge of feme other thing v and
wonders at it , for catching at it , he can catch nothing but Air. I remember that
I have often feen it , and the matter is thus. A Glafs being made of Cryflal , they
make a hollow place on the backfide like an Image, as curioufly as (hey can ; thej»
they foil it over, and fet it in its place, now as deep as the hollow is with in, fomucti
will -it fhewitfeff without the fuperficies j and you cannot fatisfieyour felf , unlefs
you touch it with ycur hands, whether it truly flick without the Glafs or nor. So
Letters are truly read, that they will feem to be made in Silver upon the Cry ftal ; nor
is the eye fo quick, but it may be deceived when it looks on. Nor will I omit the
Artifice, : *rn;: ■' ;>

To fee in a plain Cjlafs that which appears no where,

I have often much delighted my friends , and made them admire with this Glafc
Provide thirty or forty little Tables ready , of a foot and half long, and two fin^r«
bread , and a third part of a finger thick ; fo artificially hewed, that the thictosefs
may be upon the one fide, and the thinnefs ©n the other fide, like the edge of a knife.

Place

Of Jlrange (jlajfes. 57 p

Place all thefe boards together , that the folid parts may Hand altogether, as to make
a perfect plain : Then paiac your own Picture, or of fome other thing upon it : yec
by this artifice and great obfervation, that if the Image be neer the Glafs, it mult
be drawn as it were afar off. If you would have it far diftant , let the forehead be
unmeafurably long, the nofe fomcwhat longer , and the mouth, and the chin, like-
wife. The manner how to draw this Form exactly in Tables , 1 faid in my Opticks.
When the Image is now defcribed, fatten the little boards upon a plain Table , that
the head may be fet downwards , and the chin upwards ; and place thefirft Table
after the fecond, and the fecond after the third , till they be all faftned, Hang the
Table above a mans height, that no man may fee into it , above the degrees of the
Tables : and place" a Glafs over this , diftant two foot from the Table , fo long lift-
ing it up , and putting it down till you fee the perfect Tmage. Now when any man
comes neer the Glafs to fee his own Image , he fhall fee the Image of fome other
thing that appears no where. In the breadth of the Tables you may draw fome
Picture, left they fhculd give fome occafion to fufpeet.

Chap. XXI.
How Spettasles are made,

y\/E fee that Spectacles were very neceffary fcr the operations already fpoken of,
or elfe lenticular Cryftals, and without thefe no wonders can be done. 1c
remains now to teach you how Spectacles and Looking- glaffes are made , that every
man may provide them for his ufe. In Germany there are made Glafs-balls, whofe
diameter is a foot long, or there abouts. The Ball is marked wi:h the Emril-
ftone round, and is fo cut into many fmall circles , and they are brought to Venice.
Here with a handle of Wood arc theyglewedon, byColophonia melted: And if
you will make Convex Spectacles, youmuft have a hollow irondifh , that is a porti-
on of a great Sphere, as you will have your Spectacles more or iefs Convex ; and the
difh muft be perfectly polifbed. But if we leek for Concave Spectacles ; let there
be an Iron-ball, like tothofewe ihoot with Gun-powder from the great Brafs Ca-
non : the fuperbcies wherecf is two, or three foot about : Upon the Difh, or Ball
there is ftrewed white-fand , that comes from Vincentia, commonly called Saldame,
and with water it is forcibly rubbed between our hands , and that fo long until the
fuperficies of that circle {hall receive the Form of the Difh, namely, a Convex fupre-
ficies,orelfe a Concave fuperficies upon the fuperficies of the Ball , that it may fit
the fuperficies of it exactly. When that is done, heat the handle at a foft fire, and
take off the Spectacle from it , and joyn the otfier fide of it to the fame handle with
Colophonia,and work as ycu did before , that on both fides it may receive a Con-
cave cr Convex fuperficies : then rubbing it over again with the powder of Tripolis,
that ir may be exactly polifhed j when it is perfectly polifhed , you fhall make it
perfpicuous thus. Theyfaften a woollen-cloth upon wood; and upon this they
fprinkle water of Depart, and powder of Tripolis ; and by rubbing it diligently, you
fhall fee it take a perre& Glafj. Thus arc your great Lenticulars , and Spectacles
made at Venice,

Chap. XXII.

How upon plain Concave and Convex Clafes , the foils are laid on and they are banded,

NOw it remains that T fpeak of fome few things,not to be overpafled of the band-
ing of Convex Glaffes , and of foiling plain Glaffcs, and Convex Glaffes , that
fo I may fet down the perfect Science of Looking-glaffes. Firft, for the terminating
of Looking glaffes , that are made of Cryftal and Glafs, then of other mixtures , and
polifhings, that a knowing Artificer may know, and know how to make them :
For though amoneft many thing;?, that fhew the Images of things , as water , fome
Jewels, and polifhed Metal doit; yet nothing doth fo plainly reprefent Images,

E c e a as

380 Natural Magick. "Bool^ 17.

as Lead foil'd upon Glafs. Plain Looking- glaffcs arc prepared of Cryftal, and of
Glafs ; thofc of Cryftal are poliflhed by wheels, and require another Artifice. But at
Venice

How Glafs Looking- glares are madey

I have fcenic. % They take the melted Glafs out with an Iron ; with their blaft they
frame an empty Pillar ; they open it on one fide with their tongs , and whilft it is
red hot they lay it upon a plain plate of Iron , that is equally made ; and they put it
into the furnace again, to make it fofter ; and that it may get the perfect plainnefs of
the iron plate , they leave it over the furnace to ccol by degrees ; When it is cool,
they do thus

Pol,(b plain GLffes.

Theyfaflen it upon a plain Table with Gyp; underneath lyeth a moft polite plain
plate of iron ; they caft upon it the forefaid fand j they rub it with water by a (tick,
leaning thereon, until it bcperfe&ly plain; they take it from the Table, and glew
it on the other fide, to polifh them both : then they make them perfpicuous, as I faid

they did. Now will I fhew

To terminate plain Glafs LoektHg-glaffes,
Glafs or Cryftal Looking-glaffes , when they are made plain aud equal , the Artift
makes a foil of the famebignefs of Tin, that is level and thin, as perfectly as he can,
For if Cryftal or Glafs had no foil of Lead behind it, by its ftrength and thicknefs ic
could never terminate our fight, norftay the Image Printed upon it, but it would
let it flip away j for Glafs is pure and tranfparent , and fo would not contain it , by
reafon of its brightnefs ; and fo the Image would vanifh in it , as light in the Sun.
Wherefore uponthisfoil you (hall wipe over with Quicksilver, by the means of a
Hares fcor, that it may appear all as Silver: and when you fee it fafton the fuperfi-
cies, you fhall put it upon a fair white paper , and (o upon the Glafs ; but firft made
clean with a linen clout, aud polifhed : for if you handle it with your hands , ihle foil
will not flick to it: with your left hand prefs down the Glafs, and with the right
take away the Paper, that the foil may cleave every where, and they bind faft toge-
ther ; laying a weight upon it for feme hours, and fo let it (land and ftir it nor. Now
I will {hew

How a foil is put upon a Concave Glajs,

But it is more laborious to lay a foil on a Concave- Glafs : Prepare then a foil of the
bignefs of your Glafs, that yon fhall lay upon the Convex fupeificies ; and holding it
faft with a finger of your left hand upon the Centre , with your right hacd ycu fhall
fit the foil rcund about, and fhall extend it on the laid fuperficies, until it become
of the fame fotm with that convex fuperficies , and flick every where even unto it.
Then of moill Gyp fhall you prepare a form of the Glafs , namely , by pcurirg Gyp
npen the Convex fuperficies ; and when the Gyp is dry, ycu have the form. Upon
the form extend a foil ©f Tin , and let it agree perfectly with the foim every where,
becaufe the foim and the foil are made after the fame fuperficies : ftrew quick'filver
upon the foil, and as I faid, make it flick by means of a Hares foot. The Artifts call
this Avivarei put paper upon it , andpreflmg this upon the Glafs , take away the
p*f er ; when you kne w it flicks faft, take away your hand, and lay on a weight, and
after rake it away, but with a careful balancing of your band, left it take wind, and
that the quick filver may all flick faft every where. Now remains how

To terminate finvex-Glajfes.
Make Glafs Balls, but of rure Glaf?,and without bladders as much as ycu car, as the
rr ceivers for dtf illations . and from the hollow iron that it is blown in by , let this
liquid moiflure be projected , mmely, cf Antimony and Lead ; but the Antimony
mnftbe melted twice or thrice, ard purged, ardcaft Colop honia in. So flir the
rtiixtcre in the hollow vtflel, and what remains caft forth: andfo in Gumany they
make Comex-Glaffcs. Chap.

Of ftrange (jlajfes.

Chap. XXIII.

How Metal Lookifg-Glajfes are made.

. l

BUt MetaUGlaffes are made another way. Wherefore if a Parabolical-Glafs be
to be made, draw a Parabolical line upon a brafs or wooden Table ; what is
without it, muft be filed away, that it may be equal, fmooth, and polilhcd : fatten ic
upon an Axis in the middle, and fit it with Inftruments, that maybe fitly turned
about, let there be clay with ftraw under it , made up with dung, that the Table be-
ing turned about , it may receive a Concave form exa&ly ; then let it dry, ftrcw
ames upon it , and plaifter clay above thar,of a convenient thicknefs ; let it dry by
the fire, or if you will, by heat of the Sun, takeitcflf, for it will eafilypart from the
allies : unite them together , that as much fpacemay be between both forms, as you
think fit , for the thicknefs of the Glafs : when it is dry , cover it with this, leaving
an open orifice on the top, and fome breathing places , that the Air may breathe
forth at if. Then make fuch a miiture } let them be put into a new pot that will en*
durethe fire , and lute it well within , that it may hold the fafter ; let it dry well,
and do this twice or thrice over : fet it to the fire, and melt in it two pounds of Tar-
tar, and as many of white Arfenick ; when you fee them fume, pour in fifty pounds
ofoldbrafs, often ufed, and let it melt fix or feven times, that it may be pure and
eleanfed ; then adde twenty five pounds of Englrfh Pewter, and let them melt toge-
ther : draw forth fome little of the mixture with fome Iron, and try it, whether it be
brittle or hard ; i& it be brittle,put in more Brafs ; if too hard, put in Pewter: or elfe
let it boil,that fome part of the Pewter may evaporate : when it is come to the tem-
per it fhould be , caft upon it two ounces of Borax , and let it alone till it diffolvc
into fmoke; then caft it into your Mold.and let it cool : When k is cool, rub it with
a Pumice.ftcne , then with powder of Emril. When you fee that the fuperficies is
perfectly polilhed and equal , rub it over with Tripolis. Laftly, make it bright and
Chining with burnt Tin ; nioft adde a third part of Pewter to the Brafs , that the
mils may be the harder, and become more perfpicuous.

THE

THE

EIGHTEENTH BOOK

O F

Natural Magick :

Treating of things heavy and light.

The Proihi.

MAnj miracles worth relating and to be contemplated, do offer themselves when 1 be*
gin to defer the heavy and light ; and theft things may be af plied to very neceffary
and prof table ufes, and if any man ft all more deeply confder thife things%he may invent many
new things : that may be employed for very prof table ends, "Hsxt after thefe follow wind
InftrnmentS) that are almoji ' from the fame reafon.

Chap. I.

That heavy things do not defemd in the fame degree 'fgravity^ nor light things afcend.

Efore I (hall come to what I intend to demonftrate, I omit
premife fomethings neceffary , and fee down fome anions ,
without the knowledge whereof we can make no proof, nor
demonftration. I call that heavy that defcends to the Centre,
and I fay it is fo much the heavior the fooner it defcends,
contrarily ; that is light that afcends from the Centre, and the
lighter that afcends foonetf. I fay that bodies yield one to
the other, and do not penetrate one the other , as wine and
water , and other liquors : Moreover, this action muft be pre-
mifed, that there is no body that is heavy in its own kind , as water in the element
of water , ©r Air in Air. Alfo vacuum is fo abhorred by Nature , that the world
would fooner be pulled afunder than any vacuity can be admitted: and from this re-
pugnancy of vaeutm proceeds almoft thecaufeof all wonderful things, which it may
be I fhall Chew in a Book on this Subject. It is the force of vacmm that makes heavy
things afcend , and light things defcend contrary to the rule of Nature , fo neceffary
it is that there can be nothiog in the world without a Body. Therefore thefe things

being prcmifed,I fhall defcend to fomethings.
And firft, a mo(i heavy body four up in a vef-
fel, whofe mouth is turned downwards into
fome liquor that is heavior , or of the fame
kind. I fay it will not defcend. Let the vef-
fel turned with the mou-h downwards, be
A B filled with watr r, the mouth of it be-
neath mu '\ be put into a broad mouth*d veflel
C D full of water, be it with the fame liquor,
or with another that is heavior. I fay the
water will not defcend out of the veflel A B.
Forfhouldthe water contained in the veflel
A B defcend, itmuft needs be heavior than
the water contain'd in the broad mouth'd vef-
fcl C D, which I faid was of the fame kind or

heavior,

3«j

heavior , if then it fhould fall down it would be againft the firft a&ion. The fame
would fall out if both veffels were filled with wine or water. For if the water con-
tained in the veffel A B, fliould defcenci into the place of CD, there would remain
vacuity in A being there is no place for the air to come in and that were againft the
fecond axiom : wherefore by reafon of vacuum, and becaufe the body is no heavior,
it falls not into the bowl beneath. But fhould one make a hole in the bottom of the
veffel A, that the air might come in , no doubt the water would not fall down into
thebazon: Alfo, if iheveltelA B were filled with anyli^ht liquor, and the broad
bazon with one that is heavior , they would not ftir from their place?. Let there-
fore the veffel A B be filled wiih wine , and the mouth of it turned downwards into
a bazon full of water ; I fay both liquors will keep their places , and will not min-
gle; for fhould the wine defcend, either Wf«»wmuft needs be in the body A, or
a heavy body muft afcend cut of the veffel C D , which would be againft the Nature
of Gravity : and the fecond axiom, namely, that heavy fhould afcend , and light de-
fcend: wherefore they will not remove from their places. Hence comes that which
is often done by great drinkers and gluttons,who pour by dropsjinto a cuphalf full of
water, o much wine as will fill the cup, they come foclofe together, that oncly a line
parts thofe liquors. And thofe that would fooner cool their wine,they dip a Vial full of
wine into a veffel full of water,with the mouth turned downward, and hold it down
under the water : for when the water toucheth the fuperfictes of the whje9 they can-
not mingle , and the wine grows fooner cool » though it is neceffary that the Vial
fliould be lifted up to the fuperficies of the water , and fuddenly turned abour, pour-
ed forth and drank ; then fill them agiin , and fet in the bottle as before. From this
advantage I compliin of thofe , who firft drink water, then pour in wine , for wine
being the lighter, and water the heavior, they can hardly mingle : wherefore fome
drink at firft the ftrmgeft wine, then mingled, and laft of all, water. At great mens
Tables they firft bring wine in a Glafs , then they pour in water, that the water by
its weight may mingle with the wine, and get to the bottom, and taft equally. Thee*
fhrtftui bids men firft pour in wine, then water.

\7"\7"Heii friends drink together , if we would by fuch a merry deceit delude the
guefts that are ignorant of the caufe hereof, we may provoke them to drink
with fuch a Cup ; Let there be a great Cup made like a tunnel, let the mouth be
broad above, and beneath narrow Pyramidally , and let it be joyn'd to a Glafs- Ball,
by a narrow mouth; Firft pour in water, till the whole Ball be filled ; then put in
wine by degrees, which by reafon of the narrownefs of the mouth will not mingle,
and the water is heavy,and the wine lighter ; He that drinks firft,fhall drink the wine;
then give it vowr f rind to drink, for he fhall drink nothing but water. But if your
friend fha'l challenge you to drink thus with him , and will have you drink firft; fill
the Ball of the Cup with wine, and pour water upon it , and ftay awhile , and hold
him in difcourfe ; for the water will fink down by the narrow mouth , and the wine
by degrees will afcend as much , and you fhall fee the wine come up through the
middle of the water, and the water defcend through the middle of the wine , and
fink to the bottom ; fo they change their places: when you know that the water is
gone down , and the wine ccme up, then drink , for you fhall drink the wine , and
your friend fhall drink the water. Hence it is , that to great inconvenience of thofe
that drink it , when we plunge our wine into a well in veffels of earth , or brafs, ill
ftopt,tocoolit, the water being the heavior comes in at the leaf! chink, and for-
ceth out the wine , fo in a little time the veffel is full of water, and the wine is gone,
that there is not the leaft tafte of wine in it t wherefore ftop the mouth very clofe.

Chap. IT.

How we may by drinking^ make fport with thofe that fit at Table with us.

CHAP*

Natural Magick, 2?oo^i8

Chap. III. '
How to part wine from water it it mingled with,

FRom thefe I fliall eafily fhew two things, that a heavy body (hut up in a Glafs vcf-
fcl, having the month of it put within a lighter liquid body , they mil mutually
give place , the lighter will afcend the heavier will defcend, and that without any
hindrance one of the other, which I (hall demo nit rate from the former principals.
Let the Glafs be turned downwards, and full of water, be, A B, the water is heavior
than the wine : Let the mouth of it B, be put into the veflel C D, that is full of wine.
Thefe are bodies that will mutually yield one to the other as I (hewed. I fay the
water will defcend into the veflel C D, and the wine will afcend into the veflel A B,
where the water was before. For the water, becaufe it was contain'd in the veflel
A B, it being heavy, prcfleth the wine in the veflel C D, that is lighter ; and becaufe
there is no body between them , the water defcends on one fide into the veflel
C D, and the wine afcends on the other fide into the veflel A B. Now if the wine
be red, that you may fee the difference of their colours, yon (hall fee the wine afcend
through the middle of the water , as far as the bottom of the upper veflel that is pot
downward into the other , and the water to defcend haftily to the bottom of the
v$ffel C D, and one defcends as low as the other rifeth high ; and if the liquors can>
not be feen diftinguifhed , yet one goeswithcut any hindrance of the other, and
without mingling, into its own place; and it will be a pleafant fight to beholdthe
wine going up, and the water falling down t and when they reft, they will be fo
well parted, that not the leaf? wine can remain with the water , nor water with the
wine. Wherefore, if you put into a Hogfhead full of wine , a long neck'd Glafs full
of water, in a (hort time the veflel turned downwards will be full of wine, and the
water will go down into the Hog&had. By this any man may cafily conjc&ure

How to part water from witte,
becaufe oft-times Country people and Vintagers ufe deceit, and bring wine min-
gled with water , to be fold to the Merchant : we may eaiily prevent theircrafc by
this Art. Let there be underneath a veflel filled with wine , that is mixed with wa-
ter, and we would feparate the water from the wine : But firft there moft be a vef-
lel that can receive all the wine, that is mingled in the other veflel ; and if we know
not the quantity, we mutt conjecture at it , how much it may be , of fomething lefs :
then fill thefaid veflel with water, and fet it with the mouth downwards on the other
veflel , that is full of wine and water, mingled together ; and let the upper pan of the
veflel turned downwards, touch the upper part of the lower liquour , that no Air
may enter , for then the water will prcfently defcend into the veflel underneath,
and the lighter part of the mingled liquor will afcend, and the water will fink downg
and if it be all wine , it will all afcend , no wine will day with the water ; if any
thing flay behind , you muft know that fo much water was mingled with the wine,
which may eafily be known by the fmell and cafte , if you do it as it (hould be done.
Then take a veflel that will hold more of the fame liquor, and put it into a veflel un-
derneath, till it takes it all in , whence by the proportion of the wine afcended,
and of the water , any man may know eafily how much water is mingled with the
wine. But for convenience, let the Vial that fh all hold the water be of around
belly, and the hole not very great, and let the veflel under, that contains the wine,
have a narrow mouth, that the upper round mouth may the better joyn with the
undermolt , and no Air come in. But becaufe it happeneth oft, that the upper Ball,
when it hath drank in all the wine > the wine will not fill it , and we would pare
the water from the wine ; take therefore the round Glafs in your hand , and turn k
about with the mouth upwards , then will the wine prefently rnrn about and come
uppermoft, which may by a tongue laid in, be all call'd forth. Be careful to fee when
the wine is all drawn out, remove the tongue, and the water will remain pure.

Chap.

Of ftaticl^ Experiments.

Chap. IV.

How otherwise jost may part water from wir.e.

I Can do this another way, not by levity and gravity,as I faid, but by thinnefs and
thicknefs ; for water is the thionclt of all liquors , becaufe it is fimple, but wine
be ing coloured , and colour crmes from the mixture of the Elements , it h more
corpulent: Wherefore to part wine frcm water we moll provide a matter that is
full of holes , and make a veffel thereof, into which the wine poured with the water,
may drean forth ; for the water will dreanferch through the pores of the matter,
that is opened by a mingled and corpulent bodv. And though many kinds of wood
'be fit, yet Ivy is the belt , becaufe it is fuil of pores and chinks: wherefore if you
nuke a veffel of Ivy wood that is green, and pour into it wine mingled wLh warer,
she water will inafhort time drean out ; Yet I fee that all the A ntients and mo-
dern Writers thought the contrary, yet both reafonand experience are againft
them. Fot Gtto faith, If you would know whether there be water put to your wine,
make a veffel of Ivy, put ycur wine you think is mixed with water, into it : if there
be any water, the wine will run forth, and the water flay behind , for an Ivy vef-
fel will hold no wine. And TUvy from him: The Ivy is laid to be wondctful for
proof of wine. If a v ffel be made of Ivy-wood, the wine will run forth, and the
water will flay behind , if any were mingled with it : Wher upon both of them are
to be noted for a twofold error, becaufe they fay it comes from the wonderful facul-
ty of the Ivy , whereas every porous wood t an do the fame : Again, he faith that the
wine will run forth, and the water flay behind, whereas it is the contrary. But
'Democrittu thought wha' was truett and more probable, whoufed not an Ivy veffel,
but one full of holes; faith he, they pour it into a new earthen pot not yet feafone^,
and hang it up fcr two days , the pot, faith he, wLl leak , if any water be mingled
with it. Democritas ufed another Art fot the fame purpole. Seme flop the mouth
of the veffel with a new Spunge dipt in Oyl, and incline it, and let it run forth ; if
there be water in it, onely the water will run fcrtb , which experiment alfo he ufeth
in Oyl : For the Spunge is full of holes, and open enough , and being dipt in Oyl,
that hinders that the liquor cannot run forth fo eafily. Africanm adds another rea.
fon : Pur liquid Alom into a veflel of wine , then ftop the mouth with a Spunge dipt
in Oyl , and incline it, and let i: run forth ; for nothing but the water will tun out :
For the Alom binds the liquors, that they drean forth very {lowly.

Chap. V.
Another way to part a light body mingled with a heavy,

IHaveanotber Art to feperate a light body from a heavy , or wine from water, or by
another way. Make a linnen tongue, or of bombaft , and dip it into the veffel,
where wine is mingled with water, and let the tongue fwim above without the li-
quor , and afcend above it , and fo hang pendulous out of the veflel , for the lighter
liquor will afcend by the tongue, and drop on the ouifide ; but when the lighter
afcends , it attra&s the heavy alfo : wherefore, when you fee the colour change, take
the veffel away , for the water runs forth. It is evident that the wine being lighter,
will always afcend to the top of the veffel, and run forth by the tongue ; though all
Vintners fay the contrary , that the water will run forth by the tongue, and that the
wine will ftay within.

Fff

I

Chap.

Natural Magick. $00^ 18

Chap. VI.

How light is mingled in heavy ^or heavy in light,

XTVfE can eafily know whether any light matter is mingled with heavy, or any
heavy muter with light : And I will expound the manner out of Archimedes
his Book, concerning things that fwim above water $ the caufe whereof is , that if
Wood,ftone, or any heavy Metal, be equal in weight to the fame quantity of w.l-
tet , the utmoft fuperficies of the body will be equal with the fuperficies of the wa-
ter ; if it weigh hcavior, it will fink to the bottom ; if it be lighter, the lighter it i.t
then the water , fo much of it will fwim above the water. Since therefore this is*
true, and wine is heavior then water, one and the fame thing will fink more in
wine, than in water, and in thicker wa'er the lefs. Wherefore vcffels are more
drown'd in River?, than in the Sea ; for Sea-water is thicker and more heavy, by rea-
fon of its fait mingled with it ; as alfo we have it in Alexander. If therefore you
would know

Whether water be mingled with wine.

Put the wine you fufpe& to be mingled with water, into fome veffel, and put an
Apple or Pear into it ; if the Apple fink, the wine is pure ; but if it flote, the wine
hath water mingled with it , becaufe water is thicker than wine: Which Democri-
tm faith is contrary and falfe. He faith it is neceffary fometimes to commit the Care
of the wine of new wine to Stewards and Servants , alfo the Merchant hath the like
rcalon to try,whether his wine be pure. They ufc to caft an Apple into the veffel,
buc wildc Pears arethebeft; others caft in a Locuft ; others a Grafliopper, and if
thcyfwim, it is pure wine, but if they fink, it is mingled with water. But if you
feekto know

If new wine have any water mingled with it,

it will be the contrary for the contrary reafon. For wine that is pure and fincere is
thin, but new wine at firft: is thick, feculent, grofs, clammy, becaufe the feces are
not yet funk down , but in time it will grow cleat and tbin. Wherefore if you put
Apples or Pears inco new wine, and the new wine be moftpure, the Apples will
flote above it; but if there be water mingled with it, the Apples will fink to the
bottom : for freeze-watcr is thinner than new wine, and lighter, it caufeth the Ap-
ple to fink, which is excellent well defctibed by Sohon, and very curioufly. He faith,
That we may know whether new wine be mingled with water, caft wildePear?, that
is green ones , into new wine, and if there be any water, they will fink to the bot-
tom. For when you fill the veffel with new wine , if you caft in Services or Pears
they will Iwim, the more water you put to it, the more will the Apple fink. But we
fball adde this for an addition,

When new wine is mingled with water •, to know which fart is the befi^ the upper or

lower part.

The Country people ufe after the preffing forth of the wine, when the clutters arc
prefled forth, to caii in a certain quaimity of water, and fo they make drink for la-
borers in the Countrey. This new wine they divide, the Country man hath half,
and the Landlord the other half: The queftion is which part isthebeft , the firft, or
laa,that runs forth of the prefs» But if you well remember what I faid before, the
wine being the li°bteft will come uppermoft, and the water being heavieft , will al-
ways fink to the bottom. Wherefore the firft that comes forth is the wine , that
which remains, and is preffed from the clufters, is watry. When water is caft on the
clufters, k^pes into the inmoft parts of the Grapes, and draws forth the wine that
is in them, and fo they mingle ; but being lighter, it cboofeth the upper place, there-
fore the upper part is beft, becaufe it contains naoft wine : but if you turn the Cock
beneath, the water will firft run forth, and the wine laft.

CHAP.

Of Static!^ Experiments.

Chap, VII.
Other ways how to part wine from water,

THcrc arc other ways to do it, as by diftiliing. For in drilling the light eft wilf
afcendfirH, then the heaviett, when the fire is not toollrong; ; nd that is but
reafon: wherefore that the liquor may afcend, it murt firft be attenuated into thin
vapours, and become lighter: therefore wine being thinne-r than water , if it be put
in a ftill in Balneo,the lighted vapour of wine will afcendby degrees, and fall into
the receiver : You ftiall obicrve the Aqua vita that diftills into the veflel, and by the
quantity of that , you may judge cf the proportion of water mingled with the wine.
Alfo note, that when the lighter! part of the wine is aicended , the heavy feces re-
main, as water, or as part or the wine. Oft-times ipour diftillations, when Aqua
vita was diftilled in Balnco,by chance the veflel brake that comain'd the Aquavit*,
and mingled with the water in the kettle: I put the mingled liquor into a Glals vei-
fel, and putting a foft fire to it, nift csme forth the pure s/iqua vita, fimgle with-
out any water , the water 11 ayed in the bottom, and kept not fo much as the fmell cf
the Aqua vita. By the veins running in the cup, I knew the waier afcended. 1 will
not omit (though it be for another reafon) for plcafure and ingenuity to (hew

The manner to part water from wine,
that by this means we may know how much water is mingled in the veflel. Take
the quantity of the wine, and put it intoaGlafs Vial, and put the Vial into very
cold water, that all that is in the Vial may freeze, as I fhew'd : If t he wine be finccre
and pure, it will be the harder to freeze, and longer ; if it have much water, it will
freeze the fooner : When the wine is frozen^break the Vial upon a difli, the ice mult
melt by degrees ; firft the wire, becaufe that is hotter : than the water will remain
frozen ; Part the wine from it, for it will be longer thawing : by proportion of this,
you may know what part of water was put into the veflel.

Chap. VIII.

How the levity in the water and the air, is different, and what cunning may

be wrought thereby.

NOw I will fpeak of heavy and light, otherwife than I fpike before; namely, how
it is in the air, and how in the water, and what fpeculation or profit may rife
from thence. And firft how we may know whether a Metal be pure , or mingled
with other Metals , as Gold and Silver, as in Gilded cups, or elfc in moneys : where
Silver or Gold is mingled with Brafs , and what is their feveral weights : which fpe-
culationis ufefui notonely for Bankers , but alfo for Ch\mifts, when they defire
to try Metals in fixing of Silver , or o her operations , which I will attempt to de-
clare plainly. But firll I will fee whether the Antients fpeak any thing hereof. Vi~
truviut faith Archimedes did write of this : For when Hiero purpofed to offer a Gold-
en Crown to the Gods in the Temple, he put it to the Goldfmith by weight ; he
made the work curioufly, and maintain'd it for good to the King , and by weight ir
feemed to be juft : but afterwards it was faid, that he had ftoln part of the Gold, and
made up the Crown with Silver to the fullweight. Hiero enraged at this this, bad
Archimedes to conhdet of it : He then by chance ccming into a Bath , when he had
descended into it , heobferved that as much ©f his body as went into the Bath , fo
much water ran over the Bath : when he confidered the reafon of ir, he leaped forth
for joy, running home and crying Eureka-, Eureka, that is? I have found it, I have
found ir. Then they fay Pie made to lumps of equal weight with the Crown,
one of Gold, the other of Silver . then he filled a large veflel to the very brims with
water , and he put in the lump of Silver ; the bignefs of that thruft into the water,
made the water run over: wherefore taking cut the lump, what flowed over he put

F f f . a in

^84- Natural Magick. 2?oo^ 18.

ina^ain, having meafured afixtpart, ardhc found what certain quantity of water
anfwered to the quantity of the Silver : then he put in the lump of Gold into the fall
veflel , and taking that forth , by the fame realcn he found that not fo much water
ran forth, but fomuch lefs of the body of the Gold was lefs than the fame weight in
Silver. Then lie filled the vtffel with water, and put in the Crown, and he found
that mere water ran forth by reafon of the Crown, than for the mafs of Gold of the
fame weight , and from thence becaufc more water run over by reafon of the Crown,
than for the Gold lump, he rcafoned that there mufl be a mixture in the Crowe. This
was the Greeks invention, that is worthy of praife, but the operation is difficult ; for
in things of fmall quantity the theft cannot be difcerncd , nor can this reafon appear
fo cleat to the eye , where the obfclute fafhion cf the veflel was wanting. Now a
wa> is invented how for all money, be it never lo fmall , we can tell presently , and
we want ;not m*ny iuftruments, that we may cry, We have overfounded Vpereureka,
Vpereurekay we have gone beyond Archimedes his Eureka. The way is this

To tyow any part of Silver mingled with <]old.
Take a irrfec* ballance , snd put in cne fcale any Metal, in the other as much of the
fame Metal, hut ihc pureflof its kind; and when the fcales hang eveji intheAir^
put them imo a veflel full of water, and let them down under waterabout half a foot:
ThenwUir.be a fcrmge wonder, frr the ballances that hang equal in the Air, will
change their ffature in the water , and will be unequal: forthe impure Metal will be
uppermoft, ar.d the cure will fmk to the bcrroro. The reafon is, becaufe pure Gold
compared with that kind, is heavier than all impure Gold, becaufe pure Gold takcth
lefs place ; wherefore it will v ay heavier by the former reafon. If then we would
kni.whcw much Silter is in that Gold, put as much pure Gold in the other fcale, as
will make the ball:oces equ,al under the waters ; when they are equal take them up,
and the- weight you added under water, will be the weight of the mixture. If yon
would kncjwuow much Gold is upon a vtffel Gilded, put the Cupia one fcale , and
as much -pure Silver in the other that the fcales may hang equal in the Air; then pot
them into the water, and the veflel will fir.k down ; put into the other fcale as much
pure Gold , as will make them equal under water , draw them forth, and that is the
weight of the Gilt of the plate : Youfhall do the fame for Silver, Brafs, Iron, white
or black Lead. But would you know whether in Money > Braf; be mingled with
Silver, or Coin be adulterated with Copper; put the Money interne fcaJe, and as
much of the fineft Silver into the other, ballance them equal ; then put them under
the water, the Money will go down ; adde as much Brafs as will make the fcales equal,
then take them forth , and it will be the weight of t he mixture. Now will I fet the
weights of Metals, how much they weigh more in the waters, rhan in the Air,where-
by without any other experiment we may know mixtures. A n Iron-ball that weigh-
ed nighteen ounces in the Air , will weigh fifteen in the waters ; whence it is that
a Ball of the fame magnitude muft ewe three ounces to the water; whereforethe
rropertioncf Iron in the Air to the fame in the waters, is as fifteen to nineteen. A
Leaden Kullet of the fame magnitude, weighs 3 1 ounces in the Air, in the water but
27: A Marble Bullet little Ids for bulk, weighs 7 in the Air, and 5 in the water:
Copper weighs 16 in the Air, and 12 in the waters: Silver weighs in the Air 125,
in the waters 113: Brafs in the Air weighs 6 5 Karats, and cne grain , in the waters
5 o Kara;s and two prains : Crown Geld in the Air weighs 66 grains, in the waters
62 : Gold called Zechini in the Air weighs 17 Karats, under water 16 Karats:
Turkifh Du.at Gold weighs in the Air 34, under waters % 2 : Common French Crown
Gold weighr in the Air 67, underwaters 60: Common Crown Gold of Hungary
that is old, in the Air weighs 1 7, in the water 16: Crown Gold of Tartary weighs
id in the Air, and 14 under water.

THE

THE

NINETEENTH BOOK

O F

Natural Magick :

Concerning VVind-Inftruments.

The Proem i.

T Have fptken concerning light and heavy , now follow experiments by wind : for thefe feem
to follow the reafons of Mathematics, and of the Air, and water , and * Philofopher
•wfo feeksy to find things profitable, and admirable for mans ufe, muft infifl on thefe things,
contemplate And fearch them out, in no thing doth the Majejly of 'Hat me (bine forth more.
There are extant the famous ^Monuments of the mofi learned Heron of Alexandria, con~
cernmgwind foftrumcnts, Iwilladde fome that are new , to give an occafion to fearch out
greater matters.

Chap. I.

Whether material Statues may fpcakbj any Artificial way.

Have read that in fome Cities there was a Cohffus of Brafs,
placed on a mighty high Pillar, which in violent tcmpcfts of
wind from the nether parts , received a great blaft , that was
carried from the mouth to a Trumpet , that it blew flrongly ,
orelfe founded fome other InHrument, which I believe to
have been eafie, becaufc I have feen the like. Alfo, I read in
many men of great Authority , that Albertus iJdagnut made a
head that fpeak: Yet to fpeak the truth, 1 give little credit
to that man, becaufe all I made trial of from him, I found to
befalfe, but what he took from other men. I will fee whether an Image can be
made that will fpeak. Some fay that Alberttu by Aftrological ele&ions of times,did
perform this wonderful thing : but I wonder how learned men ceuld be foguld;
for they know the Stars have cofuch forces : Some think he did it by Magick Arts.
And this I credit leaft of all , fince there is no man that prefeffeth himfelf to know
thofe Arts but Impoftors and Mountebanks , whilft they cheit ignorant men and
fimple women; nor do I think that the Godly man would profefs ungodly Arcs.
But I fuppofe it may be done by wind. We fee that the voice or a found,will be con-
veighed entire through the Air, and that not in an infiant, but by degrees in time.
We fee that Brafs-guns, which by the force of Gun-powder, make a mighty noife, if
they be a mile off, yet we fee the flame much before we hear the found: So
hand-Guns make a report , that comes at a great diftance to us, but fome minutes of
time are required for it, for that is the nature of founds ; Wherefore founds go with
time , and are entire without interruption , uclefs they breakupon feme place. The
Eccho proves this, for it ftrikes whole againft a wall , and fo rebounds back , and is
refle&ed as a beam of the Sun. Moreover, as I laid in this work, words and voices
go united together, and are carried very far entire, as they are fpoken at firft.
Thefe therefore being laid down for true grounds; if any man (hall make leaden
Pipes exceeding long , two or three hundred paces long (as I have tried) and (hall
fpeak in them fome or many word?, they will be carried true through thofe Pipes,

$6 Natural Magick. ®00^ip.

and be heard at the other end, as they came from the fpeakers mouth t wherefore if
that voice goes with time,& hold entire,if any man as the words arc fpoken (hall (iop
the end of the Pipe,and he that is at the other end (hall do the like,the voice may be
intercepted in the middle , and be (hut up as in a prifon ; and when the mouth is
opened, the voice will come forth, as out of his mouth chat fpakeit: butbecaufe
fuch long Pipes cannot be made without trouble , they may be bent up and down
like a Trumpet, that a long Pipe may be kept in a fmall place j and when the mouth
is open , the words may be underftood. I am now upon trial of it : if before my
Book be Printed the bufinefs take effeft, I will fee it down j if not, if God pleafe I
(hall write of it clfewhere.

C H A P. II.

Of Inftrttmtnts Miiftcal made with water.

OLd Water-] nftruments were of great efteem , but in our days the ufe is worn
out : Yer We read that T^ero took fuch delight in them, thac when his Life and
Empire were in danger , amongftthe feditionsof Souldiers and Commanders, and
all was in imminent danger , he would not forfake the care of them , and pleafure
he took in them. Vitrttvint teacheth us how they were made , but fo obfcurcly and
myftically, thac what he fays is very little underftood. I have tryedthis by many
and fundry ways, by mingling air with water, which placing in the end of a Pipe, or
in my mouth, where the breath of the mouth flrikes againft the air; and though
this made a pleafant noife, yet it kept no tune : For whillt the water bubbles , and
trembles or warbles like aNitingale, the voice is changed in divers tunes , one
noteisfweet and pleafant, two, fquele and jar. But this way it will make a war-
bling found, and keep the tune. Let there be made a Brafs bottom'd Cheft for the
Organ, wherein the wind muft be carried j let it behalf full of water, let the wind
be made by bellows , or fome fuch way that muft run through a neck under the wa-
ters j but the fpirit that breaks forth of the middle of the water, is excluded into the
empty place : when therefore by touching of the keys, the flops of the mouths of
the Pipes arc opened, the trembling wind coming into the Pipes,makes very pleafant
trembling founds, which I have tried and found to be true.

Chap. HI.

Of fome Experiments bj Wind-lnftrtimenls.

NOw will I proceed to the like Wind-In^ ruments , but of divers forts that irife
by reafon of the air, and I (hall (hew how it is dilated, comra&ed, rarificd by

fire,condenfed by cold. If you will

'That a vejfel turned downwards (hall draw in the water ',
do thus : Mtke a veffel with a very long neck ; the longer it is, the greater wonder ic
will feem to be : Let it be of transparent Glafs, that you may fee the water running
up; fill this with boiling water, and when it is very hot, orfetting the bottom of
it to the fire , that it may not prefently wax cold, the mouth being turned down-
wards that it may touch the water, it will fuck it all in. So fuch as fearch out the su-
ture of things fay, That by the Sun beams the water is drawn up, from the Concave
places of the Earth to the tops of Mountains, whence fountains come forth. And
no fmall Arts arife from hence, for Wind-Inftrumencs , as Heron affirms. Vitrnvim
fpraks the like concerning the original of Winds : but now it is come to be ufed for
homes. For fo may be made

A veffel to cafi forth wind.
You tmy make Brafs Bowie?, or of fome other matter : let them be hollow , and
round, with a very imall hole in the middle, that the water is put in at : if this be

hard)

Of Tneumatic/^Experiments. 58^

ufc the former experiment: when this is fet at the fire it grows hot, and being it hath
no other vent, it will blow firongly frcm thence , but the biaft will be moid and
thick, and of an ill favour. You may alio nuke

vejfet that (hall caft fort h water,
There is carried about with us a Glafs veffel , made Pyramidal , with a very narrow
loEg mouth, with which it calls water very fareff. That it may craw water ; fuck
out. the air with your mouth, as much as \ou can, and prclently ihrd'i the mouth in-
to the water , for it will draw the water into it , do fo until a third part of it be fi-
led with water. When \ou will fpcut the water afareff, fill the veffel with air,
blowing into it as hard as yon can; prefent ly take it from your mouth , and incline
the mouth of the veffel , that the water may run to the mouth , and flop the air;
and the air ftriving to break forth, will call the water cut a great way. Eut if you
will without attraction of Air, make water fly far v/ith it , heat the bottom of the
veiTel a little: for the air being rarefied fecks for more place , and (hiving tobreak
forth , drives the water before it. Thus drunkards making a little hole in a veffel
of wine, becaufe the wine will not run out , the meuth bcin^ flopr, whereby the air
might enter, they will blow hard into that hole; then as they leave rff, the wine
will come forth in as great quantity, as the air blowed in was. Now I will (hew

How to make water afcend conveniently.
We can make water rife to the top of a Tower : Let there be a leaden Pipe that may
comcfromthc bottom tothe top of the Tower , and go down again from the top to
the bottcm, as a Conduic : let one end fland in the water that we defire fhould rife,
the other end that mult be longer and hang down lower , mud be faftned into a vel-
fel of wood or earth that it may take no air at all : let it have a hole above the veffel,
whereby the veffel may be filled with water, and then be ftopt perfectly. Seta
veffel on the top of the Tower, as capacious as ihat beneath , and the leaden pipe
now fpokc of, muft be fallned at one end of the veffel, and go forth at the other end,
and mult be in the upper part of the veffel, and let the pipe be divided in the middle,
within the veffel , and where the pipe enters , and where the pipe goes out, they
muftbejoynted, that they take no air : when therefore we would have the water
to afcend, fill the veffel beneath with water , and fop it clofe that it take no air,
then opening the lower hole of thevcflel , the water will run forth; for that pare
of water that runs out of the veffel, will caufeasmuch to rife up at the other end by
the other leaden pipe, and afcend above the Tower ; the water drawn forth is filled
op again , we may make our ufe of it , and the hole being (topt, the lower veffel may
be filled again with water , and fo doing we (hall make the water to efcend tways.
We may alio

Bj\ heat alone make the water rife,

Let there be a veffel above the Tower, either of Brafs, Clay, or Wood, Brafs is beft:
let there be a pipe in the middle of it, that may defcend d own to the water beneath,
and be fet nnder it, but fattned that it take no air : let the veffel above be made hoc
by the Sun,or fire,for the air that is contained in the veffel rarefies and breathes forth;
whereupon we fhall fee the water rife into bubbles : when the Sun is gone , and the
veffel grows cold, the air is condenfed, and becaufe the air included cannot fill up the
vacuity , the water is called in, and afcends thither.

Chap. TV*

A difcnption of water Heur-glajfes, wherein Wind or Water- Inurnment s for to
(hew the Honrs are defcrtbed.

THe Antients had Hour-Dials made by water , and Warer- Dials wereufual, and
famous. Heron of Alexandria writ Books of Water* Dials, but they are loft.
I hive writ a Book of them, and that this part may not be deficient, I (hall (new two

that

Natural Magick. Soo^ip.

188

that are wade by contraries, one by blowing in the air , the other by fucking it out.
This (hill be the firft.

A Water-Vial.

Take a veffel of Glafs like a Urinal , it is defcribed
by the letters A B : On the top is A, where there
is a very fmall hole, that the point of a needle can
fcarce enter it ; at the bottom neer the mouth, lee
there befctaftaff E F, that in the middle hath a
firm Pillar going up to the very top of the veffel,
let the Pillar be divided with the Hour- lines. Let
there be alfo a wooden cr earthen veffel G H, full
ofwaiei : Upon the fuperficies of thai water, place
the Glafs veffel A B, that by its weight will prefs
toward the bottom, but the air included within the
veil el , keeps it from soing down : then open the
little hole A s whereby the air going forth by de-
grees, the veffel will gradually defcend alfo. Then
make by another Dial , the marks on the Itaff C D,
which defending will afterwards fhewchc Hour-
marks. When therefore the veflel goes to the bot-
tom of the wooden veffel, the Dial is done, and it is the lali Hour : But when you
would have your Dial go again, you muff have a crooked empty pipe, O K, the upper
mouth K muff be tiqpt with the finger K ; fo K being tfopt v.ith the hnger, that the
air may not enter , fink it under the water, that it may come within the veffel A B:
then put your mouth to K, and blow into it , for that will rahe the veffel upward,
and it will come to its former place and work again. I fhall alfo defcribe for my
minds fake

Another Water-Vialy

contrary to the former , namely, by fucking in the
air. Let there be a Glafs veffel, like to a Urinal as
I faid A B , and being empty fet faff on it the veffel
C D, that it cannot fink down : then fill it with wa-
ter, as far as B : Let there be a hole neer the top, E,
wherefore fucking the air by the hole £. the wa-
ter comes into the veffel A B from the veffel C D,
and will rife as high as F G : when therefore A B
is full of water , Hop the hole £, that no air enter,
and the water will fall down again: In the top of
the veflel A B, let there be another very fmall hole,
that the air may come in by degrees, and fo
much as there comes in of air, fo ranch water will
go forth. On the fuperficies of the veffel , make
Hour-lines that may (hew the Hours marked, 1,2,
3>&c. or if you will let the Still faftned to a Cork
fwim on the top of the water , and that will (hew
the Hours marked on the outfide of the veffel.

— £

 -<f —

■» —

. s

 8

 3

 ±8

 H

Chap. V.

tA defcription of Vejfels cafiing forth water by reason of Air,

NOw T will defcribe fome Fountains, cr Veffels, that by reafon of air caff forth
water : and though Heron iogenioufly defcribed fome, yet will I fet down feme
others that arc artifically found out by me and other men. Here is deicribed

A

Of Tneumattc^Experiments. ^

A Fountain that cajts Icrth water by comprefflon of the Air%

Let there be a veflel of water- work clofe every where, A B, make a hole tl rough the
middle, and let a Little pipe CD go up from the bottom of the water-work veflel D,
fo fir from the bottom that the water may run forth. Upon the fupcrficies of the
Tympanum let there be C a very little hole with a cover to it, or let it have as the
Greeks call it, Smerifmation, to fhut and open it haadfomely, and in the upper fur-
face of the Tympanum , bore the bafis quite through with a little pipe, which enters
into the hollow of the Tympanum , and having in the hole beneath a broad piece of
leather or brafs, that the air coming in may not go back : wherefore pour in water at
E, that it may be three fingers above the bottom; then blow in air as vehemently
as you can : when it is well prcfied in, (hut the mouth.; then opening the mouth A,
the water will fly up aloft, until the air be weak. I at Venice made a Tvmpanum
with pipes of Glafs, and when the water was call forth very far, the Lord tfiens much
admired it, to fee the water flyio high, and no vifible thing to force it. I alio made
another place neer this Fountain, that let in light , and when the air was extenua-
ted , fo long as any light lafted the Fountain threw out water , which was a thing of
much admiration, and yet but little labor. To confirm this, there is

An Artifice whereby a hand-Cjun may jhoot a bullet without fire,
For by the air oncly prcfled is the blaft made. Let there be a hand Gun that is made
hollowand very fmooth, which may be done with a round inftrum;r>c of lead , and
with Emril-powder beaten, rubbing all the parts with it. Then you muft have a
round Inftrument that is exa&ly plained on all parts, that may perfectly go in at the
mouth of the wind Gun, and fo fill it that no ait may come forth : let it be all fmcer'd
with oyl , for the oyl by its grofsnefs hinders any air to come forth. So this lead
Bullet being put into the Guns mouth, and thruft down with great force and dexte-
rity, then prefently take away your hands (but you muft firft (hut the little hole
that is in the bottom of the hole) and the bullet and little ftick will fall to the bot-
tom, and by the violence of the air prefled together it will caft out the Bullet a grcac
way, and the ftick too, which is very ftrange. Alfo I will make

A Ve(fel, wherewith at jou drinks the liquor [hall be {printed about your face.
Make a veflel of Pewter, or Silver, like to a Urinal ; then snake another veflel in
the faftuonof a Tunnel, or around Pyramis : let their mouths be equal, and joyn'd
pcrfe&ly together , for they muft be of the fame bredth : let the fpire of it be di-
ftant from the bottom of the Urinal a fingers breadth , and let it be open : then pour
water into the veflel, and fill the Urinal unto the hole of the fpire end, and fill the
Tunnel to the top, and the reft of the Urinal will be empty , becaufe the air hath no
place to get forth ; when therefore any man drinks , when the water is drank upas
far as the hole of the fpire end, by the air prefled within , is the water thruft violent-
ly forth, and flies in the face of him that drinks. Alfo there is a vcffel that no man
can drink out of it , but he who knows the art. Make an earthen or metal veflel, in
form of a Bottle or Flagon , and make it full of holes from the neck to the middle of
the belly : From the bottom let a pipe afcend by the handle of the vcffel, and the
handle being round about it, let it come above the brims of the vcffel, empty : under
the handle in a place not feen, make a little hole, that any man holding the veflel by
the handle , may with his finger ftop and unftop this hole when he pleafe : under
the brim of the veflel, where you fet it to your mouth , let there be another fecret
hole. Then pour water into the veflel: if now any man put the bottle to his
mouth, and raifeth it to drink, the water will run forth at the neck that is open,
and at the belly ; but he that knows the trick, taking the veflel by the handle, (huts
the hole with his thumb, and not moving the veffel, he dtawstheair with his mouth,
for the water follows the air, and fo he drinks it all up ; but if any man fuck, and (hut
not the hole,the water will not follow.

»

Ggg Chip.

s

5P4- Natural Magick. $00^19.

Chap. VI.
That we may ttfe the Air in mxny Arts,

^"VjTE may ufe Air in many Artifices, I fhall fet down fome, that I may give a hint
to ot hers to invent more. And chiefly

How wind may be made in a chamber^ that guefts may almaft freeze9
Make a deep pit, and put in afufficient quantity of river or running water ; let the
pit be dofeftopt, onely let a pipe convey it through the walls, that it maybe
brought into the chamber. Let the water be let down into the pit by a kind of
Tunnel, left the air mould come forth at the place where it goes in : by the water is
the tir of the pit expelled, and comes by the pipe into the chamber , that not onely
thofe that fleep there, butfuch as convcrfe there are extream cold, and benummed.
I will flicw

Hew Air may fervefor Bellows^

I faw this at Rome. Make a little cellar that's clofe on all fide?, pour in by a Tunnel
from above, a quantity of water ; on the top of the wall let there be a little hole, at
which the air may break forth with violence ; for it will come fo forcibly ,that it will
kindle afire, and fervefor bellows for Brafs and Iron-melting furnaces} the Tunnel
being fo made, that when need is, it may be turned, and water may be put in.

THE

39*

THE

TWENTIETH BOOK

O F

Natural Magick :

The Chaos, wherein the Experiments are fet down
without any Claffical Order..

Thi Proem i.

1 Determined at the beginning of my Book^ to write Experiments , that are contained in aU
"Hatural Sciences , but by my bufmefs that called me off , my rr.ind was hindred , fo
that I could not accomplifh what I intended. Since therefore 1 could not do what Iwonldy
1 mufi be willing to do what lean. Therefore I (hut up in this Beo^ thofe Experiments
that could be included in no flaJf's> which were fo diver fe and various ^ that they could not
m^kt 'Ap <* Science , or a Book^ ; and thereupon I have here heaped them altogether con;ufedly
as what. ! had overpajfed ; and if God pleafey I will another time give you a more perfect
Book. Now you mufi refi content with thefe.

Chap. I.

How Sea-water miy bt made potable,

T isnofmall commodity to mankinde, if Sea-water may be
made potable. In long voyages , as to the Indies it is of
great concernment : For whilft Sea men, by reafen of tem-
pers are forced to flay longer at Sea than they would, for
want of water they fall into great danger of their lives. Gal-
leys are forced all moft every ten days to put in for f re Cfo wa-
ter , and therefore they cannot long wander in enemies coun-
tries, nor go far, for enemies flop their paffages. Moreover,
in fea Towns andlflinds, when they want water, as in our
days, in the lfl:nd Malta, and in the Syrfes, Souldiers and Inhabitants endured
much hardnefs , and Hifiories relate many fuch things. Hence I thought it neceffa-
ry to fearch curioufl/, whether Sea- water might be made potable. But it is impoifi-
ble to finde out any thing for this , how it may be done, unlefs we firfftinde out the
caufe of its faknefs , and what cur Anceftors have faid concerning that matter ; efpe-
cially fince Arifiotle faith, That the fait may eafily be taken from the Sea , btcaufe the
fea is not fait of its own Nature , but by the Sun that heats the water, which draws
out of it , cold and dry earthly exhalations to the top of it , and thefe being there
burnt caufe it tobefak, when the moift fubtile parts arc refclved into thin vapors.
We therefore imitating Nature, byraifingthe thin parts by Chymical IrsHrwrients,
may eafily make it fweer. Fcr fo the Nature of the Sea, makes fwcet waters for the
Rivers. There are alfo veins of the Sea, in the deep parts of the earth , that are
heated by the Sun, and the vapours are elevated to the tops of the heigheft Moun-
tains, where by the cold iuperficies they meet with , they congeal into drops ; and
dropping down by the vaulted roots of Caves » they run forth in open firearm. We
firft fill a hollow viflel like a great Ball, with Sea-water, it muft have a long neck, and
a cap upon it, that live coles being put under, the water may refolvc into thin va-

Ggg 2 pors,

2fi6 Natural Magick. $00^20.

pors,and fill til vacuities, being carryed aloft : this ill fented grGffoefs,when it comes
to touch the coldnefs of the head or cap, and meets with the Glafs, gathers like dew
about the skirts of it • and fo running down the arches of the cap, it turns to water,
and a pipe being opened that pertains to it , it runs forth largely , and the receiver
Hands to receive it as it drops : fo will fweet water come, from fait, and the fait tar-
rycth at the bottom of the vcffel , and three pound of fait water , will give two
pounds of frefh water ; but if the cap of the limbeck be of Lead, it will afford more
water, yet not fo good.For Galen faith, That water that runs through pipes of Lcad,if
it be drank, will caufe an excoriation of the inteft ines. But I found a way

How to get a greater quantity of frefh water, when we difiil fait water,
Mike a cap of earth, like to aPyramis^aUfull of holes, thatthrough the holes, Uri-
nals of Earth or Glafs may be brought in. Let their mouths flick forth , well lured
that the vapor may not exhale 5 the cap after the fafhion of the limbeck, mull have
its pipe at the bottom running round, and let it drop forth at the nofe of ir. Set
this upon a brafs Cauldron, that will hold much water ; fill it with fait water , after
that the Urinals ; and putting on their caps, when fire is put under, both the Urinals
will drop, and the cap that contains others, by its pipe will drop out water alfo:
for the vapors rifing from the Cauldron of hot water, will make the Urinals drop, and
the cap will drop withal. But if at Sea the commodity of fuch a veffel cannot be had.
We may

Dtftil fait water oiherwife,
though but little. Diofcor ides fhews the old way of difiillation ; we may that way
difiil fea water in (hips , which Pliny fhews alio,. Fleeces of wool extended about
the (hip, are made wet by the vapors rifing from the Sea , and fwect water is prefled
out of them. But let us fee, whiter

Salt water may be made frefh another way,
Arifiotle faith it, tnd Solomon before him, That all Rivers came from the Sra, and re-
turn to the Sea ; for by the fecret paffages under ground , the waters thit are fent
forth , leave their earthly and dry parts mixed with the earth , and they come forth
pure and fwecc. He faith, The caufe why the fait water comes not forth, is, becaufe
it is ponderous , and fettles, and therefore onely hot-waters of falt-waters, can run
forth, for iheyhave a lightnefs that oveifways the weight of the fait \ for what is
hor, is lighted : Adde, that waters running through the earth are much (trained., and
therefore theheavior and thicker they are , the more do they continually fink down,
and are left behind ; and rhc lighter they are, the more pure do they come forth and
are fevered. For as Salt is heavy , fo fweet water is light ; and fo it c--mes, that
they are fweet waters that run forth. This is the very aufe why falt-witer , when
it moves and is changed, i; made the fweerer, for motion makes it lighter and purer.
Let U5 fee now if we can imitate Nature : Fill then great veflels with earth , and fet
them fo one above another, that one may drean into another; and thus falt-watcr
dreaning through many vefleis, may leave the fait behicde. I tried it through ten
veneis, and it remain'd flill fait : My friend /aid, that he made it fweet through twen-
ty vtffeis. Yet thus I thought to warn you of, that all earth is not fit for this ufe.
SoImh» faith, That fea-water flrain'd through clay will grow fweet ; and it is proved
that the fait is taken away , if you Krain it often through thin fand of a River. Earth
that lies in covered places, and under root?, is naught, for that is commonly fait ;ts
alfo where Cattle are flailed, which Columella faith is aaugbt for Trees, for that it
mikes falt-waier , what is ftrain'd from ir. Black earth is naught , for ir makes the
waters (harp, but clay grounds mike fweet waters. Paxavms, Anaxagorai laid,
That the faltnefs of the fea came from the Rivers, running through fait places, and
communicating that quality to the lea. Some approve River-gravel for this ufe, and
their reafon is , becaufe always fweet waters are found by the Chores , and they fay
this happens, becaufe they are ftrain'd through the fand, and fo grow frefh coming
from the falt-fea : for the fwect water that is found neer the fea , is not of the fea,
but fu:h water as comes from the tops of hills , through the fecret channels of the

earth,

The Qbaos. ■rj1

earth, thither. For waters that drcan forth fweet , arc fweet though they lye even
with thefea, and iD plain places ; as t/ffuila, where the waters drean not f.cm the
hills, they are fair. So on the fhores of Africa. But Ariftotle brings an experiment
from a veffel of wax ; for if one make a Ball of wax that is hollow, and fiull dip it
into thefea, it beingofafufficientthicknefs n^main , he fh>!l finds it fulloffrefh
water, becaulcthe corpulent faknefs cannot ^t in through the pores of the wax.
And by letting down little nets into thefea, and hollow balls of wax, or emp-
ty veffels ftopt, faith, they will draw in frefh water ; for fea- water firain'd through
clay will grow frefla. But I have found this to befaifc. For I have made pots of
clay, as fine and well as I could, and let them down into fait- water , and after feme
days I found falt-water in them. Alfo, if it were true, it is of no ufe, when as to
fwceten one pound of water, a thouiand Balls of wax a day were not fufficienr. Buc
for this many veffels might be invented of porous wood and Hones. A veffel of Ivy,
that parts,as*I faid, wine from water, will not part fait from water if it drean through
it. But ftones are brought from Portingal , made into veffels, into which fea water
put will drean forth fweet , if not the firtt, yet the fecond time , they ufe it to break
the ftone ; alfo, for that many pumex and porous ftones may be tried. Leo Baptfta
Alberttu hithy That an earthen pot wellftopr, and put into the fea, will fill with
potable water. But I have tried all earthen veffels, and I always found falt-water.
Arsjtotle in his Problems, faith, Tt may be done

Another way,

If falt-wtter cannot be drank cold, yet hot, and cool again, it is better to drink. It
isbecaufeathingufeth to change from contrary to contrary, and falt-water is con-
trary to frefli , and when it is boil'd , the fait part is boiL'd off, and when it is cold
ftays at the bottom. Thi« I tried and found it falfe , and more fait, for by heartbc
thin vapors of the water that are fweet exhale , and the fait flay behinde j and in
kffer water, the fame quamity of fait makes it falter, as 1 faid in my diftillations. I
wonder fuch a wife man would relate fuch falfities. Florentir.ua borrowing it from
him, faith, If water be not good nor potable, but ill, let it be boiled, till a tenth pare
of it beconfomed,then purge it, and it will be good, For fsa<wacer fo boil'd, will
grow fweet. Let me fee whether it can be made fo

Another way,

and that in great quantity. There is a thing that being cad into large veffels filled
with fea-water,by faftningthefaltwillmakekfallto the bottom, or by curdling it,
and foit frees the water from it. Wherefore we muft think on things that have a
ftiptick quality, the Antients tried this, the Moderns have effected it. 'Pliny. Ni-
tretu of bitter waters ; if you put Barley-flower dried to them, they are tempered,
that you may drink of them in two hours : therefore is Barlev-flower put into wine
facks, and eifwbere. Thofe that go to the Red-fea through the Dsfarts, make nitrous,
and fait, and bitter waters fit to drink in two hours,by putting in of Barley- meal, and
they eat Barley-meal. The like force hath the Chalk of the Rhodes, and our Clay.
Alfo, Cooks with Catlings, and Meal of Whear, will take fait cut of very fait meat.
I tried this oft but found it falfe, yetfomeof tfiefaltnefs was taken away. Fltny.
If you muft drink ill waters, ftrew in powder of Penniroyal. Leo Baptijla Alberttu,
when they take up the water of Nilus muddy , if they do but rub the edge of the
veffel with an Almond , it prefently srews clear : 1 tried this to, and found it falfe :
when common fait is caft into Aquafortis, that parts Gold from Silver, the Silver will
prefently defcend. We fee alfo, that in the making of that they call read Alac, caft-
ing but Alom into Lye , the fait and colour will prefently precipitate to the bottom,
and nothing will remain but dear water. We fee that milk will curdle with many
Herbs, which we fpeak of elfewhere. We (hall ufe therefore for this purpofe, coa-
gulaters and aftringents. Cooks fay, That a Spunge put into a pot of falt-water, will
draw the fait to it ; but preffed forth again, and caft in once more will take it all our.
So wood wrapt abom with fillets of linnen, and put into the pot , will draw the fait
to it. Others binde in a clont Wheat-meal, and put it into the pot, and draw forth

398 Natural Magick. ©00^10.

the fait. Palladim where he fpeaks of feafoning of wines, faith, The G reeks bid men
keep iea-water chat is clean , and taken out of the calm fea the year before , whofc
Nature is that in this time , it will lofe its faltncfs or bitternefs, andfmellfwcet by
age. It remains to fhew

ft

How fweet witters may be mended*
Lea Baptifia faith, If you place a glazed veffel full of fait, and well ftopt with lime,
putting oyl under that no water may penetrate into it , that it may hang in the mid-
dle cf the waters of a Ciftern ; theie waters will in no time corrupt. Others adde
alfo Quick-filver. If water begin to corrupt, caft in fait to purge them { and if fait be
wanting , put in feme fca-water, for fo at Venice they draw water from St 'Hicolas
Well , for Marriners that go long voyages , becaufe it ftands fo neer the fea, and fair,
lyes hid in it,by communicating with thofe waters. We read in Scriptiire, that EU-
z,em did this , who at Jericho or Paleftina, caft in fait into a Fountain , and made it
potable water, which was before bitter and corrupt. If water breeds worms caft in
quick Lime, and they will dye. When we would make wine clear, beat the white of
an Egge , and the troubled wine will defcend, if you put it in. Others caft in the duft
that is on the catlings of fmall nuts, and the Spaniards caft in Gyp, to make it clear
and all thefe we may ufe in waters.

Chap. II.
Hew to maif water of Air.

IF all other means fail , we may make water of air onely by changing it into air, as
Nature doth ; for (he makes water of air or vapors : Therefore when we want, wa-
ter we may mike it of air,and do as Nature doth. We know when the Sun heats the
earth, it draws forth the thinneft vapors , and carrieth them on high, to that region
cf the air where the cold is, thofe vapors are condenfed into drops, and fall down in
Rain. Alio we fee in fummcr , that in Glafs veffels well rinced , and that are full of
cold water, the air by coming to the outermoft fuperficies, will prefently clow'd the
the Glafs, and make it lcfe'uscleannei's • a little after it will be all in a dew and
fwell jnto bubbles , and by degrees thefe will turn to drops, and fall down, which
have no other reafoo for them; but becaufe the cold air fticking to the Glafs, grows
thick, and is changed into water. We fee alfo in Chambers at Venice, wherethere
windows are made of GlaiV, whenagrofs andthkk vapor fticks to the Glafs within,
and a cold vapor prevails without , that within will turn to dew , and drop down.
Again, in winter, in Brafs GunSjWhich are always very cold,.and are kept in Cellars,
and vaulted places, where men alfo ufe to be, that the air will grow thick, and light-
ing upon the cold fuperficies of them , they will be all of a dew, and drop with wa»
ter. But to fay no mcie : Make a large round veffel of Brafs, and put into it Salt-
peter, unrefined , what will fill ic ; men call it Solazzo mingled with Ice : for thefe
two mixed , as I faid in this Book , make a mighty cold, and by fhaking them, with
the wondeful force of the cold, they gather air about the veffel , and it will prefently
drop into a veffel underneath. A deligent Artift will adde more, that be may get
a greater quantity of water. It fufficeth that I have (hewed the way.

Chap. III.

How one ma] fo alter his face that not fo much as his friends fn all know him.

£ Uch s? are taken prifoners , cr Hint up dofe and defire to efcape , and fuch as do
bufinefs for grear men , as fpies , and others that would not be known , it is of
great mcrr.ent for them to know how to change their Countenances : I will teach
ihem to do it fo exaftly , that their friends and wives (hall not know them. Great
men do not a little < r.q«;ire fcr furh fecrets,becaufe thofe that can diffemble theirown
perfons, have done great matters, and lovers have ferved their Miftrcffcs, and Parents

have

The Qhaos. £99

hive not fafpe&ed ic. Ulifes attempting to know what the Trojans did, clothed in
counterfeit garments, and his face changed, did all he would, and was not difcovcr-
ed. Homer,

With many {cats he did transform his fact,
In Jervants clothe sy as from a beggars race.
He went to Troy, - — -

And when he defircd to know what 'Penelope and her filters did, he transformed hitn-
leif again. I (ball fhew how this may be done many ways •> by changing the Gar
ments, Hair, Countenance, Scars, Swellings; we may fo change our Faces, thac
in fome places it may rife in bunches, in other places it may fink down. And firft,

How tody: the Flcfb.

But to begin with the colouring of the Fkfh. The Flefh may be dyed to laft fo long,
or to be foon wafhed out. If you will have it foon waftAlofF, Steep the (hells of
Walnuts, and of Pomegranates in Vinegar, four or five days ; then prefs them forth
by a Prefs, and dye the face ; for it will make your face as black as an Ethiopian, and
this will laft fome days. Oyl of honey makes a yellow colour, and red, and it will
laft fourteen days or more. The fame of Brimftonc will difcolour the face, that
it will (hew fickly, as if one had long kept his bed, but it will be foon gone. But if
you will have it laft many days firm, and very hardly to come off : Ufe water of De-
part, that fepcrates Gold from Silver , made of Salt-Peter and Vitriol , and efpecially
if it have firft corroded any Silver ; this will laft twenty days, until the skin be chan-
ged. Bat if you will

Change the Hair,

I taught elfewhere bow ro do this : yet I will take the pains to do it again. Oyl of
honey dyes the Hair of the head and beard , of a yellow or red colour ; and this will
hold a raoneth. But if ihey be hoary, white, or yellow , we may dye them black
with a ftrong Lixivium , wherein Litharg is boiled. Alfo, it will notably alter the
Conntcnance,

To adde or take off Hairy

An Unguent ufedin Stoves and Hot-houfes , is good for that purpofe, made of Or-
piment and quick Lime ; for this will prefently make the part bald, fo the eyelids
and eyebrows being made fmooth, will ftrangely metamorphife a man. We can al-
fo make the Hair grow fuddenly , with water of honey, and the fat of an eel and
horfe, as I faid. One may thus

Make his face fwelledrfreffed down, orfuH of fears ,
Nothing doth more deform the vifage then the flinging of Bees. We can make fears
With cauflick Herbs, by applying them, and letting them Jye on for a little time. Tu-
mours and Cavities are made by ufingto the part milk of Tithymal, as to ti e Mouth,
Nofe, Eyes, efpecially where the skin is off , that by this remedy alor.e the face is
deformed; fo you may do the Cods and Tcfticles : water of Cantharides fmeered
on, doth prefently caufe bladders and humours. Turbith beaten, and boiled, and
anointed on, makes all fwell where it toucheth, chiefly the Teftides. The powder
of the Yew, doth fo exulccratc the skin, that the people will think the man is moft
miferable, and in a fad condition. The remedy is the juyce of the Poplar, orthe
oyl of Poplar. The fume of Brimflone and burnt ftraw , will difcolour the face , as
Hypocrites do , who by fuch means alter their countenance. Mingle together the
feces of Aquafortis one ounce, Pickle and Cnrcuma,of each one drachm, with Oyl to
the form of an unguent, and anoint your face, it will make it black. When ycu will
wafh it with cold water, it will come to its former completion. Ccmedians and
Tragedians, when they A & on the Stage, they fmecr their faces with lees of Oyl to
change them , that fuch as are their acquantance may not know them. Becauic the
flinging of Bees, Wafps, Hornets, do fo change the face, making the Nofe, Month*

^oo Natural Magick. Hoodie.

and other parts to ftand awry s and to be fuHof fwellings and deprefltons: If any *
manwafh bis skin with the deco&ion of Hornets or Waips, the place will fofwell,
that it will mike men fufpc£t fomc difeafe , yet it is without pain. The remedy is
' Theriot drank, or fmeered on the part : and this is the fraud that falfe women nfe to
counterfeit themfelves to be with child. Beat together OyUees , coles of a Vine
and Pomegranate-Pills ; and mingle them, and if yon touch your face with this lini-
ment, youfhall make it exceeding black : but the juyceof fowrc Gripes or Milk
willwafhitofF.

Chap. IV.

Thatftwet v. ay mcvealor.c.

TKe Antients lay, that the ftones called Prcchites and Afiroites , laid upon fome
other plain Hone, will move of themfelves, if you put Vinegar to them. The
way fhall be this : let a plain well polifhcd, on the outward fuperhcies,Porphyr Mar-
ble ftone, lye beneath ;lay upon this the HoneTrochitesor Aftroites, whofe outward
fuperhcics is made fmoothalfoj then put to them a little vinegar or juyceof Le-
mons, prefently of themfelves will the Trochite?, as well as the Aftroites, withonc
any thing moving them, go to the declining fupernaes : and it is very pleafant to fee
this. Cardan faith, That inch ftones have a\hin moifiure in them, which by the force
of the vinegar, is turned into a vapor; and when it cannot get forth , it tumbles
the ftone up and down : There is the beginning of a thin vapor, but it ccmes not
forth , becaufe it is credible that the phages are very narrow : I fhould think that
air is fhut up in the veins of it , for it is probable , where you (hall fee lubftacces of
divers colours. Wherefore vinegar, becaufe it is fubtile of parts, goes in, and drives
out the air, which pa fling out by the vinegar , moves the ftone. Yet I have found
that all ftones will move themfelves,that are mingled of divers ftone?, 8c have divers
open psflages in their veins.For the vinegar entring ia at the joynts, forcetb the Hone
to move it felf. The Alabaftcr ftone, called vulgarly Lodognium, moves excellently,
for it is difiinguifhed by divers veins, and varieties of ftones ; and I have feen a piece,
not onely of one pound, but of four pounds to move it felf, and it was like a Tor-
tois ; and when the Hone began to move, it feemed like aTortois crawling. That
kinde of Marble moves by it felf with vinegar, which is called Brocadello , which is
compounded of divers and mingled parts. A lfo with vinegar doth that fpotted
Msr 1c walk, which is ipctted with red, yellow, and brown fpots \ they call it the
Lowfie Hone, and it makes the beholders to wonder at it. 1 muft tell you this be-
fore I leave off, becaufe I would omit nothing. If the Marble be fpotted underneath,
and be above all of one colour and hard, or beneath all of one colour and hard, and
above of divers colours; when vinegar ispooredon, or any (harp liquor , it runs
prcfentJy to the declining part; femetimes in circles, fometimcs by jumps , and
fomctimes haliily moving it felf.

Chap. V.

Hot» an lnjlrument may be made, that we may hear by it a great way.

TN my Opticks I (hewed you Spectacles , wherewith one might fee very fat. Now
A 1 will try to make an lnftromenr, wherewith we may hear many miles ; and I will
learch out a wood , wherewith that may be performed better and with more eafe.
Therefore to finde out the form of this Inftrument, we muft confider the cars of all
living Cr:atnrcs, that bear beft. For this is confirmed in the Principles of Natural
Philofophy, that When any new things are to be invented, Nature mnft be fearched,'
and followed. Therefore to confider of Animals, that have the quickeft hearing,
we muft thick of thofe that are the moft fearful ; For Nature takes care for their fafe-
ty, that as they have no great Hrength, yet they might exceed ochers in healing, and
fave themfelves by flight ; as the Hare5CoDcy, Hart, the Afs, Ox, and the like. Tfcefe

Creatures

The Qhaos. $ot

Creatures have great ears and always open toward their foreheads ; and the open
pafl'ses are to carry the found from the place whence it ccmes. Hires therefore
have long ears Ihnoingup high. Pollux. But Ttfiiu calls the Hire, Auritum% becaufe
ofir. great ears , and qukkneisof hearing. Tbe Greeks call the Hare Lagos frcm
the s'reat ears ; for La in ccmpofiuon augment, and Os Ggnifies an ear, and k was
fit that a fearful creature fhould hear well, that it might perceive dangers farther c ff,
and take care for it fcifintime. The Egyptians .thought the Hare io quick of hear-
ing , that it was their Hiercglyphick for hearing. The Ccney is of the fame Nature,
and hath the famekindeof cars. Cows have great hairy eirs: (he can hear a Bull
rore when he fecks to Bull a Cow,thir:y furlongs cff,as giving this token ot his love.
o£lian. A Hart hath greater and longer ears , as it is a tearful Creature : If he holds
his ears right up, he perceives fharply , and nofnares can take him ; but if he let his
ears down, he i eafily Gain, thrift otle^r.d Pliny, from him. When they rai'.e their
cars, they hear quickly ; when they let ilum fall , the are afuid: and not to go
over all Creatures that have large right up ppen ears , 1 fay thofe th it have fuch ear^
they raii'e them and direft them forward, when they would hear afar eff, and they'
are of moll perfeft hearing. I (hall ft^w now by the coft! rary , that fuch Creatures
which have fhort fmall cars, and not lovifible, are of dull hearing. Great part of
Fifhes want ears , and fuch as have onely holes and no ear?, mul needs hear more
deafly; for the outward ears arc made by Nature, that the founds might be con-
veyed to the ears by them. Adriarmt Conful of Rome, is a mod clear wknefs cf
this , who having this fenfe hurt, made hollow catches to hear better by ; and thefe
he faltned to his ears , looking forward. And Ariftetle faith, That Horfes, Affes^
Do°s, and other Creatures that have great ears, do always ftir them about, and turn
thtm to hear noife, Nature teaching them the ufe of thole parts; and wefindethat
they hear lefs that have their ears cut cfT : wherefore it is fit, that the Form o, the In-
fhument for hearing, be large, hollow, and open, and with ferews inwardly. For the
fir \ if the found (nould come in directly , it would hurt the fence ; for the fecond,
the voi e coming in by windings', is beaten by the turnings in the cars, and is there-
by multiplied , as we fee in an Eccho. The fea-Periwinkle is an argument to prove
it, which being held to the earc makes a light noife. Now it remains to fpeakof
what mittet it mull be made. I think of porous Wood, for the holes and pores are
psffable everv way; and being filled with air, they found with every fma.ll flroke :
andamongftthe porous Wood, iuhe Ivy , and efpecially the tree called Smilax or
Woodbind , for a Difh mad? with Ivy, will let out the water, as I faid. Wherefore
?//»? fpeakingof the Woodbind, faith, It is proper to this matter, that being fet to the
cars, it will make a fmall noife. And in another place, I faid that the Woodbind-
Ivy would found, if fet to the ear. Therefore fit ycur Inllrument to put into your
car, as SpcSaclesare fitted to the eyes.

Chap. VI.

How bj [owe Impoflures we may augment weight.

I Hive fet down fome Impoftares here , that fuch as handle with wicked men, may
take heed that they be not deceived. As

To augment the weight of Oyl,
water is mingled with the Oyl, that the fraud may not be known, let it be done With
troubled water,' , as with the decodion of Wood, Rapes, Afphodills, that it may the
harder be decerned from it. Or elfe they put the choife(t Gumtragant into water1
for two days : then they bray it in a Morcar, always putting water to it , to melt the-
Gum : adde thefe to the Oyl dropping forth, and they will be turn'd to Oyl. By
the like fraud almoft,

Si/Fumade to weigh morey
They put it upon the vapour that rifeth from boiling water , and this makes it fwell
with moLure, and grow heavier. Others bray one ounce of Gum Arabick, and bc-

H h h Sng

4.01 Natural Magigiu Soo^i©.

ing well ptffed through a fievc, they mingle ic with the decoaion of Honey ; they
diflblve this mixture into water, and wet the Silk with it, and then let it dry. Others
keep it in the green leaves of Walnut-tree.. If you will

lnereafe the quantity of Honey,

Adde to it the Meal of Chettnuts of Millet, and that augments ir, and it cannot be
known. So you may

lnereafe the weight of VP ax :

Adde to the Wax Bean-meal, excellent well beaten ; and this will burn in Candles
without any excrement; for itincreafeth the weight andbignefs, and the fraud is
fcarce difcerned. So you may

Augment Sope.

If you mingle the Afbes of Oxens ftunk-benes , well burnt it Potters ovens, or
white Brimllone. For you ftull augment the weight and quantity, without and di-
ftin&ion of ir. If you would

Counterfeit Pepper,

You may gather green Juniper- berries, and let them dry till they fbrivel j then mis
them with grains of Pepper. Others gather great black Vetches, and firft they boil
them withwilde Pepper j forfwellingin the water, when they come to be dried,
they become wrinkled. I did fophhticate them fo, that I deceived in fport the beft
Apothecaries ; and afterwards, I did in mirth difcover the fraud. Take the Berries
of the ripe red Sanguinaria ; thefc when they are dried, will be fo fhriveled, and like
to Pepper, that any man almoft may be deceived by it, unlefs he tafts of ir. So w e
may

lnereafe the weight of Wheat,

By fetting a vcffelof Wood within itj full of water or vinegar. For as Pliny faith, It
will drink it in.

Chap. VII.

Of the Harp md many wonderful properties thereof.

*T* He Harp hath fome properties in ir, and things worthy to be obferved , which
a, I fhall propound here. Firft, I fhall mention fome wonderful effects , that the
Antiems fpeakof: then how they may be done , or how the Antients did then.
Since Mufick is now more Adorned and Noble, than it was atnocgft the Antients
( for then it was more rude and imperfect) and yet in our days it doth not perform
thole operations. It is certain that Mufical Tunes can do much with men, and there
is no heart fo hard and cruel , but convenient and fwect harmony will make it yield,
and on the otherfide, harfh Mufick will vex and harden a mans minde. tJMuftiu dif-
i covers, thatVerfe and Songs are a mofl delightful thing to Mortal man : and the
Piatonifts fay, That all things living are charmed by Mufick ; and there are many ef-
fects obferved of it. Drums found in the wars to provoke thofe that are flow to
fight ; and we read that the Antients did fuch like things. One Timotheut a MuficiaD,
as oft he he pleafed would play a Phrygian Tune , and lb enrage the mind of Alexan-
der, that he r; n prefently to the wars ; and when he would do othcrwife, he chan-
ged his tune, and took off all his courage making him Ialie, and would then draw him
being grown effeminate, to Banquets andFeafts: And Plutarch faith, That when
he heard Antigenida playing Melodies with a Pipe, that they called Harmatii,he was
foinflamed , that he rofe in his Arms , and laid hold of him that fat next to him.
Cicero reports, That Pythagoras made a yong man more calm by a flower tune, who
was a Tancomonite, and was whitled with wine, and mad for a whore, and fpurred
forward by a Phrygian tune ; for being a corrival, he fought to fet the houfe on fire

where

The Qbaos. ^05

where ibe where wa<\ And the fame Author faicb, If yong men are provoked by
the found of Flutes to commit any wickednefs, if the Piper play but a flower tunc
they are called GtTagain ; for by the gravity of the Mufick their petulant fury is slav-
ed. Bmptdorle: , when one fee upon his Hoft, thac provoked him with reproaches
and ill language turned the burden of his Song, and fo;{Twaged the fury of bis anger.
Tkeophrajim is reported to have ufed Mufical Tunes to reprels the psffions of the
minde. And 9sfgantem»o» departing trom his Country to go to Troy , doubling of
the chafiity of Clucmmftra, left a Harper , who with Mufick did lb incite her to con-.
tinency and chaftity , that Egyflm could not enjoy her till he had killed the Harper.
The Thracian Orphim by the playing oa his Harp, made batborcus Nations civil who
were as hard as lionestobe foftned. Mufick charms trie tender eais of children,
and Rattles will make them quiet, and hold their peace when they fry. Wherefore
Chryfppw is reported to have writrcn a peculiar Song for Nuri'es. Alio wilde Beafts
are tamed with Mufical Tancs. Anon the Harp:r made friend* of the Dolphins thai
want reafon, and they carried him fafe to the fhore , when he was cart into the Sea.
Strnbo faith, That Elephants are allured with drums. Stags arc held with founds, and
catchedwith fweet Mufick. The Swans under the North- vvindc are conquered by
the Harp and Mufical Tunes: Little birds arc enticed to the Net with Pipes; and
the Shepherds Pipe commands the Sheep, when they wander too fartofield,to ftand
Hill. In My fia, when Horfcs back Mares, a man fings to them as it were a marriage
Song, and the Mares are fo taken with the Mufick, thar they become great with
Fole, and they bring forth moft gallant Colt?. Vythoca.ru a Mufician, when he fang
eameftly fwift Notes to his Pipe , is faid to have made Wolves become more rame ;
and which is far more wonderful, Antiquity cured Wounds, Difeafcs, and Poyfons
by Melody, as Hiftories related. Terpandtr and ^4r»»of Methymna, cured the men
of Lesbos and Jonia of great Di:eafes. Afclepiade: a Phyfician cured deaf people by
a Trumpet, and by finginghe (tided the ledicious people. In timepaft there was
great ftore of Spiders in Aquilia, which they commonly call Tarantula?, when the
Sun isexrreme hot they bite moft peftilcntly, and vencmoufly ; for this danger this
healthful remedy is oncly found out , that he that is bit mull be charmed with ranch
(ingingof Muficians, and many mufical Ir.ftrum.cnts. The fick though he want all
fenfe, fofoon as he hears the Flute play, as if herofefrom a deadfleep, arifeth from
the earth, and danceth after the Mufi.k ; and if the Mufician ceafe to play, hepre-
fently faints, & grows ftupedtand as the Mufick flrikesup,fohe doth dance the more.
So to fevtral Difeafcs the Antients appointed feveral Mufick; for the Dorick Melody
caufed Prudence, Chaftity, and Learning; the Phrygians made men fight, and grow
furious , which the flute will do alfo. Therefore Artfioxenm in his Plays , when
he could not prevail with Dorick Mufick , he changed to Phrygian melody that a-
greed with them.TheLydian Hirmony fharpens wi: to thofe that are dull,and brings
in adefire of heavenly thing?, upon thofe that arc opprcfled with a love of earthly
things, jirtjiotle in his ^Politicks, Do wc not reade that the Lacedemonians reject-
ed that kinde of Mufick called Chromaticum , becaufe it made thofe that heard it tco
effeminate ? Whence I think it is not againft reafon, that the fame may be done by
the Lute or Harp alcne,but what is done by art or cunnir.g,is more to be wondrcd at,
which none can deny. But if we would feekout the caufeof this , we (hall not
afcribe it to the Mufick," but to the Iuftrument , and the wood they are made of, and
to the skins; fince the properties of ^ead beafts are preferved in their parts , and of
Trees cut up in their wood , as I faid elfewhere in this Book. And to take the moft
noted examples, if we will

Fright Sheepf

There is Antipathy between Sheep and Wolves, as I faid often, and it remains in all
their parts; fo that an Inftrument firunq with Sheep firings, mingled with firings
made of a Wolfs guts, will make no Mufick, but jar, and make all difcords* Tjth*'
gar as. If you will

Drive av9Aj Horfes,

Horfcs are frighted in battle by Elephants, and a Camel Naturally hates a Horfe , as

Hhh % Arijlotk

4.04* Natural Magick. HoqI^ io.

AriJiotle&dPlinjhy, and fome report that Horfes yvillburltif they tread upon the
Wolfs footing, when the Horfcmeo rides them. So that if drums be made of an Ele-
phant, Camel, or Wolves skin, and one beat them , the Horfes will run away and
dare not fiand. By the fame reafon,if you will

Drive aw*y Bearst

A Horfe,that is a Creature made obedient to man , hath a Capital hatred with a Bear,
that is a Beat* hurtful to man ; he will know his enemy that he never faw before, and
prefently provide himtelf to fight with him, and he ufeth art rather than ftrength for
it ; and I have heard that Bears have been driven away }n the Wildernefs by the
found of a Drum, when it was made of a Horfe skin. Again, if we would

Make Horfes gentle^

v£lian writes that by the playing on a Flute , the Lybian Horfes arc fo allured, that
by this means they will become gentle for mans ufe, and will not be fo furious jihey
will follow the Groom that feeds them , whitherfoever hepleafe to lead them with
his Mufick ; when he phys and Hands, they Hand Mill, and if be play eagerly on the
Flute, they are fo ravifhed with it, that they cannot hold crying, and let tears fall*
Thofc that keep Horfes make a hollow pipe of the Tree called Rofe- Laurel, and
they go amongftthe herd with this, and playing on it they charm ihcmall. Theo~
fhrtfttu hath told us that the Herb Oenothera will tame wilde Brails, and makcthtm
drunk ; and as I faid t\{cnhtTc9Theophr*fitu his Oenothera is our Rofe-Laurcl, agakift
Diofeorides. It is reported, that

Women ytiR mifcarry^

if Fiddle- firings be made of Serpents , efpecially of Vipers , for being put o» a Harp
and play*d on, if women withchilde be prefent, they fnffer abortion, and Vipers are
wont to do as much by meeting them, as many write. Hermemae9 a Theban, endea-
voured

To cure many of the Sciatic*
in Beotia, by Mufick ; and it may be his Inftrument was made of Poplar , toiDiofco'
rides faith, That the juyceof the Poplar-trec-bark will care them, or of Willow.
Alfo Hellebore is good

For mad men

And Xenocrates cured mad men with Mufical tunes , which Inflruments might be ea-
fil y made of Horfes Shank-bones, or the hollow flalks of Hellebore. Thales Mileri-
td ufed a Harp

Agtinft the Plagney

which could be ©f no other Wood than the Vine-tree $ fince Wine and Vinegtr are
wonderful good*g*inft thcPcftilence, or elfeof the Bay-tree, whofe leaves bruifed
and fmelled to , will prefently drive away Pcftilent contagion. Theophrafim writes
that fome arc excellent

Again/} the tit i figs of Vipers y

with Harps, Flutes, or other Inftruments, which Internments might be made of Juni-
per, Afh, Bays, the Stags-bones, Ferula, Elder, Vine, and fuch like many more. Pj-

thagorai

Againfi DrurMennefs

ofed Mufick alfo : for he withheld a yong man that was drunk from burning the houfc
of his corrival , may be with an Inftrument of Ivy, or Almond-ircc-wood , efpeci-
ally that as it is of the wi'de Tree, for thefe afford great remedy for drunkennefs ,7V-
tnotbcm did fo enflame the minde of Alexander the Great , that he was mad to fight,
and when he would he changed his minde, and drew out all his courage ; and he en-
deavoured

7V

The Chaos*

To draw hit Jluggijh And yieldtng thoughts from Battle to Ban if nets,
and fo carried him which way hepleafed, Which could not be done, but by Vine-
wood, oc Wood-Laurel. The Inftrument of the Harper, who when Agamemnon went
from Greece to Troy, did keep Q'ltmnefira chafte by, his Mufick was made of WiU
low, called Agnm Caftut j for the women in the Fcafts of Cereh amongft the Atheni-
ans, put Willow-Pirk-leaves under them, to keep them chafte when they lay in bed,
for fo they extinguifhed the defire of venery. The Pythagoreans u'ed iome Tnnes

Forjleep and waking }

for when they would by flcep overcome divers cares * they play'd cercain Tune?,
thaceafie and quiet flcep might come upon them; and when they arofe, fo toon as
they went out of their Chambers, with fome Mufick they would diipel all confufion
and dulnefs of flcep , that they might fet to their work. It is faid that the jEoliao
Mufick doth ftill thctcmpeftsof theminde , and rocks men a fL-ep : they provoked
men tofleep with Almond-tree, or Vinc-tree-wood, and they drove flecpoff with
Hellebore. Take this experiment that is common,

A Harp that U plafd on, will move another Harpfttung to the fame height.
Let the firings be ftretched alike, that both may come to the fame melody perfectly J
if you ftull ftrike one of the bale firings, the other will anlwer it, and fo it is in the
trebles, yet theymuftbeat a moderate diftance ; and if this be riot very clear, lay
ftraw upon it, and you (hall fee it move. But Suetonius TratHjuMa*, in his Book, Be
Ludicra Htjloria faith, That in Winter fome firings are firuck, and others found. Thus
any ignorant man may tune a Htrp , if one Harp be rightly tuned for Mufick, and lye
ftill, he by ftretching the firings of the other , and by flackning them, and flrikin° as
the firing of the Harp that lyes ftill guides him ; fo of the reft, But if you will °

That a deaf per fon may hear the found of the Harp,
or elfe ftop your ears with your hands, that you may not hear the found. Then take
faftholdof the Inflrument by the handle with your teeth , and let another ftrike on
it, and it will make a Mufical noife in the brain , and may be a fweeter noife. And
not oncly taking hold of the handle with your teeth, but the long neck, neerthe
Harp, and by that you fhall hear the found perfectly , that you may fay that you did
not hear the Mufick, but tafle it* Now remains what I think is very plcafanc

To mal^e a Harp or othtr Infirument be plafd on by the winde,
Do thus : When the windes are very tempeftuous fet your Infirument* juft againft it,
as Harps, Flutes, Dulcimers, Pipes the wind will run violently into them, and play
low upon (hem, and will run into the holes of the reeds ; whence if you ftand necr
and liftcn, you will hear mofi pleafant Mufick by confent of them all, and will rejoyce.

Chap. VIII.

To difcover frauds whereby Impoftors working by liatutal means9 pretend that they

do them by conjuration.

NOw will I open Cheats and Impoftors , whereby Jugglers and Impoflors, who
fain thcmfelves to beCujufers , and thereby delude fools, knaves, and fimple
women. I, to caft down their fraud, by admonifhing fimple people not to be deeci-
• ved by them, fhall open the caufes thereof. And firft,

By what means they fainy that the) can difcover Treafures,
The greater part of Cozners , when they are thcmfelves very poor and moft mifera-
ble of all men, they profefs themfclves able to finde our Treafures , and they promife
to other men what they want themfclves ; and they ufe four Rods that are double
forkedjthe tops whereof flicking dofc together croflways, they hold the lower parts

^06 Natural Maqick. 'Boofoo.

of them with their hands open, neer their belly, they fecm to mumble fome Verfcs,
and the Rods fall down , and where they fall , they bid thofe men to dig that would
find Treafnres, The caufe is, for that the Rods feem to ftand faft in their hands, and
yet have no hold at all, and they feem always ready to fall j and if they remove ne-
ver fo little from their place, they prefently fall down. Alfo, there are in mens
arms and hands pulfaiions of Arteries, which although they feem immovable, yec
they do move the hands unfeen , and make them to tremble: Yet tome Metal- Ma-
tters who report that thefc forked Rods are a great help to them in finding out of
Mines : For with a Knife they cm the Hazel-tree, which they fay is the fittcft of all to
findeout Veins, efpecially if the Hazel come upon any Mineral Vein. Others ufe
divers Trees, as the Metals arc divers ; for they ufe wands of Hazel for Veins of Sil-
ver, Afh for Brafs, Wilde Pilch-tree for Lead, chiefly white-Lead, or Brafs, or Gold :
then they take the Rod by both ends, and clinch their fift? , but they mutt hold their
fingers clinched upwards toward heaven; and that the Rod may be lifted up there
where the ends meet, thus they wander here and there through Mountainous places,
and when they fee their foot upon a Vein, the Rod will prefently turn about, and dis-
cover a Vein in any place ; when they come off from it, the Rod will be quiet , and
they fay the Veins have fo great force , that they will bend the Boughs of Trees thac
grew neer,towards them, as AgricoU writes more largely.

Another merry conceit remains, that three ?chroles of Paper not touched, (hall change

their places.

This cannot be done but an ignorant man will admire it. Make three long Schroles
of Paper, or of linen, and let them be one longer then another, equally; for all of
them being made equal at the lower end, and turn'd about equally, chey take one the
others place, and change their fituation j put the longeft in the middle or in the firft
place, they change their fituation ; if thelongcft be put laft,they hold as they were.
No man but will think this to be done by the Divel, yet this proceeds from no ether
caufe, but becaufein the end of the revolution, the longer remain?, and the laft from
whence it rifetb Hays bchinde. Anftotle in his Problems feems to mean this, why
the Section of a Paper , if any man cut it off ftraight from the plain bafis in meafuring,
it will be ftraight when ic is turned about ; but if it be bended, it will be twifted?
vvhethet this falls out , that when the rounds of another Section are placed on the
fame plain, that Section declining, is not equally oppofite,but fomewhat lefs: where-
fore when yon part them, thofe rounds that are contain'd in the fame plain, will make
a line, that belongs to their own order, &c. Some were deceived, who thought this
proceeded from the force of words, and they anfwered all quettions by ic as from an
Oracle : for if they changed their places , all fhould go well and profper , otherwife
they (hculd have ill fuccefs ; and they would not change their fupcrftitious belief,
with reafon and experience , becaufe they had fo believed many years. If you will
have

Money to turn about upon a point,

I oft have feen Tmpoftors that to cheat women ufed this fraud , that two Schrolcs of
Paper, or fome other light matter upon a plain, fhould lift up themfelves, and move
alone. If you fcarch in Barley, you (hall finde a fmall ear of wilde Oates, that is black
and wrefted, like the foot of a Locuft ; and if you binde this with wax to the top of
a Knife, or point of a Stile, and (hall fprinkle foftly fome drops of water upon them,
when it feels the wet, it will twift like a Harp firing, and the Paperwill rife, andfo
will Money turn on the point of a Stile. If we will

DiJ cover theft,

we may do it thus, and recover what is loft. There are many fuperftitions for thefc,
that ftand by Natural reafons, and Cheaters afcribe them to the vertueof Words.
There is the Eagle ftone,fo called, it is as one great with childe ; for (hake the flone,
and it rings in the belly: If then any one powder this , and put it into good bread
baked upon the Embers, and give it to a Thief, the Thief cannot fwallow it, when

he

The Chaos. ^07

he hath chewed it , but hemuft either be choked, or difcovered for a Thief . for he
cannot fwallow it being baked with that, as V.ofcortdes faith. The Natural caufe lor
this is, becaufe the powder thac is mingled with the bread is lb dry , that ic makes
the bread extresm dry , and like a pumifh, that it cannot be ;waik. wed , wbenic
comes into the thioat. Adde 10 this, that he who feeks to finde a Thi;f, mufi fay to
the fianders by,whom he fufpe£b that be will work wonders ; whereupon ;5ethat is
the Thief, hath his throat very dry, byreafonof the fear and terrour he ij in ; fo
thac he cannot fwallow this bread with the powder in it , for k will flick to his
throat j for if he were void of fear he could fcarcc fwallow ic. There is another
cunning invention : they write the names of thofe thac are fufpefited upon Schroles
of Paper, and make themfaft in clay bullet?, and put them under the water, the pel-
lets being well wet, open,aod the light fchroles of Paper rife above the water. A nd
thiscaufcth the fpc&ators to admire, andcofeppofe it is fome diabolical arr. The
clay pellets are made as many as the ftanders by are , and the names writ in the
fchroles, are wrapt up in the pcllccs : for the fchroles thac are cot very fail wrapc
in the pellets, are not very faft bound in ; buc if you will have chem never co open,
you fhall work ic well wich the fchrole, and fo it will never come fotth. If you will
have

Flowers to faH from a Tree :

When I faw this firft I was amazed, but I asked the reafon, and he (hewed me it. It
is a property of Mullens, that when in the morning ic opens the Flowers, if the Plane
be fhaken gently, the Flowers drying by degrees will fall all to the ground ; and one
that fees it will think ic comes from Magical Art, if he that fhakes them off fhall mum-
ble ibmc idle words. Alfo,

Women are made to caff off" their clothes and go naked:
To let nothing pafs that Jugglers and Impoftors counterfeit , They fet a Lamp wi;fi
Characters graved upon it , and filled with Hares fat ; then they mumble forth fomc
words, and light ic j when ic burns in che middle of womens company, ic conflrains
them ail to caft off their clothes, and voluntarily to fhew chemielves naked unto
men ; they behold all their privities, that otherwife would be covered, and the wo-
men will never leave dancing fo long as the Lamp burns : and this was related to me
by men of credit. 1 believe this effect can come from nothing but the Hares fat, the
force whereof perhaps isvenemous, and penetrating che brain , moves iberntothis
madnefs. Homer faith, The Miffagetae did the like , and that there are Trees whofe
fruit caft into the fire, will make all that are neer to be drunk and foolifh ; for they
will prefendy rife from their feats, and fall to leaping, and danciDg. There are
Thieves abb

Who bore through the head of a 'Pullet with an Auley and jet maintain that {be is alive.

And they fay it is done by conjuration, and they promife to make a man hard by this,
thac he cannot be wounded; for with Jbme Characters ':raudulently invented and
bound under che wiags , theythrufl through the head of the Cock with a Bodkin,
and ftaying awhile , they pull ic forch again , and the Pullet flics away without any
wound, or lofs of blood. When I confidered of this, and opened the Pallets head,
I found it to be parted in the middle, and the Knife or Bodkin paffing through that
place, hurts not the brain , and I have often tried it, and found it true. There is alfo

A remedy for the Sciatica,
Great Cato9 the chief man for all commodity, and the Matter Gf all good Arts, as VU-
kj faith, In his Books of Husbandry he ufed fomc charms agaicft the pains of the
Sciatica , faying , that if any thing be diflocated, you may charm it whole again by
this means. Take a °reen Reed four or five foot long, cut it in the middle, and let
two men hold th< m to the hudebones. Begin to play with another, S. F. mctas va-
ta duries dardaries ajlatanes dtfunapiter^ .until fuch time as they joyn together , and
fhake about your i word, when they come together, and one ccuchcth the other, take

4.08 Natural Magick. 200^20.

that in your right hand , and cut it afunder with your left ; bind it to the place diflo-
cated or broken, and it will be whole. See how fo worthy a learned mm brake
forth into fuch madnefs; nor did he know by his great learning, that without the
force of Words,grcen Reeds cut long-ways, will turn round of tberafelves and meet,
if they be pendulous, as the wands of Willows , and brambles will do. Jheophra-
fitu gives the reafon why they turn round, in his Books Ve Cattfs PUntarttm. More-
over we reade in Viiofcorid.es , that a Reed with Vinegar applied to the hucklcbones
will cure the Luxation of the loins, without words or fupcrftition.

Chap. IX.

Offome Experiments of a Lamp*

I Much rejoycedwhen I found amongft the Ancients, that Anaxikm the Philofo-
pher, was wont to make fport with the Snuff of a Candle and the Wick, and by
fuch delufions would make mens.heads fliew like Monfters, if we may believe Pliny :
By taking the venomous matter comes from Mares newly having taken Horfe, and
burning in new Lamps , for it will make mens heads feem likeHorfheads, and fuch
like : but becaufe I gave no credit to thefe things , I never cared to try them. Br
take thefe for truth.

To make men feem like to BlacknforcS)

Take Ink, but the beft comes from Cutles : mingle this with your Lamps, and the
flame will be black. Anaxilattt is reported to have done this , for oft-times by min-
gling Cutles Ink, he made the ftanders by as black as Ethiopians. Simeon Sethi
faith , That if any man fhall dip a Wick in Cutles Ink , and Verdigreafe, thofc that
and by will feem partly Brafs-colour, partly Black, by reafon of the mixture. And
we may imitate this in all colours ; for fetting afide all other lights that might hin-
der it , for elfc the other lights will fpoil the fport, and if you do it by day, (hut the
windows left the light come in there and deftroy the delufion. If the Lamp be green
Glafs and tranfparent , that the rays coming through may be dyed by the colour of
the medium ( which is of great confequence in this ) and green Coppras be mingled
with the Oyl,-or whatmoyfture it burns with , and they be well ground together,
that the liquor may be green ; make your Cottcn of feme linnen of the fame colour,
crbombaft; this being fmeered with it , muft burn in that Lamp: the light that is
oppofite againft you,will fhew all faces of the beholders and other things to be green.

To make the face feem extream pale and lean}

This is eafie ; pour into a large Glafs very old Wine, or Greek Wine, and caft a hand-
ful of Salt into it: fet the Glafs upon burning coles without flame, left the Glafs
fliould break, it will prefently boil ; put a Candle to it, and light it j then put out
all other lights, and it will make the faces of the ftanders by to be fuch, that they
will be one afraid of another. The fame falls out in (hops , where Bells and Metals
are melted, for they feem fo ftrangely coloured in the dark, that you would wonder
at it , their lips look pale, wan, and black, and blew : Alio let Brimftonc , when it
burn?, be fet in the middle of the company , and it will do the fame more powerfully,
Anaxilam the Philofopher w. 4 wont to work by fuch delufions. For Brimftonc put
into a new cup, and fet on fire, and carried about , by the repercufllon of it when it
bum?, makes the company look pale and terrible. That oft-times happened tome
when at Naples I walked in the night in the Leucogcan Mountains ; for the Brimflone
burning cf it lelf, made me look fo.

Chap.

The Chaos.

Chap. X.

Of fome mechanical Experiments,

TT Here arc fome Experiments that are witty and not to be defpifed, and are done
A by Simples without mixture, which I thought not unfit to communicate to in-
genuous Men, and Artificers. There is an Art, called

"The flying Dragon,

or the Comet : It is made thus • Make a quadrangle of the fmall pieces of Reeds, that
the length may be to the breadth, one and half inproportion ; put in two Diameters
on the oppofite parts, or Angles, where they cut one the other, bind it with a (mall
cord, andof the fame bignefs , let itbejoyned withtwo othersthac proceed from
the heads of theEngine.Then cover it with paper or thin linnen,that there be no bur-
den to weigh upon it : then from the top of a Tower, or fome high place, fend it out
where the wind is equal and uniform , not in to great winds , left they break the
workmanfhip, nor yet to fmall, for if the wind be ftill, it will not carry it up, and
the weak wind makes it lefs labour. Let it not flye right forth, but obliquely, which
is effected by a cord that comes from one end to the other, and by the long tale
which you fhall make of cords of equal diftance, and papers tied unto them : fo being
gently let forth , it is to be guided by the Artificers hand, who muft not move it
idly orfluggifhly , but forcibly j fothis flying Sayle flies into the air. When it is
railed a little (for here the wind is broken by the windings of thchoufes) you can
hardly guide it, or hold it with your hands. Seme place a Lanthorn upon it, that it
may (new like a Comet : others put a Cracker of paper, wherein Gun- power is roled,
and when it is in the air, by the cord there is fenc in a light match, by ariBgorfome
thing that will abide j this prefently flies to the Sayle, and gives fire to the mouth of
it, and the Engine with a thundring noife , flies into many parts, and falls to the
ground. Others bind a Cat or Whelp, and fo they hear cries in the air. Hence may
an ingenuous Man take occafion, to confider how to make a man flye , by huge wings
bound to his elbows and breaft ; but he muft from his childhood, by degrees, ufe to
move them, always in a higher place. If any man think this a wonder , let him con<^»
fider what is reported, that Archytas the Pythagorean did. For many of the Noble
Greeks, and Favorimts the Philofopher, the greateft fearcher out of Antiquities,have
Written affirmatively, that the frame of a Pigeon made in wood, was formed by Ar-
chytttyby fome art , and made to flic ; it was fo balanced in the air by weights, and
moved by an aireal Spirit &ut within it.

Soli Deo (jloria*

FINIS,

lii A

A TABLE containing the General Heads of
NATURAL MAGICK.

0 I

The firjl "Book \

Treating of wonderful things.

Chap.

'VTXTHat is meant by the namey Magickj.

* Ihe'Hgtureof MagichC 2
Inflrutlicn of a Magitian , what he ought
to be 3
Opinions of the Ancient Tbilofophers touch

Earthy Creatures generated ofpmrefatlion 2
Birds which are generated of the put'efattian
of Plants 5
Fifhes which are generated of putrefaction 4
New kinds of living creatures may. he gene-
rated by copulation of divers beafls 5
Dogs may be generated of great courage^ and
with divert rare properties 6
Pretty little dogs to play with 7
Amend the defers in dogs 8
Divers kinds of Mules . 9

ing the caufes of flrange operations , and j fidingle Sheep and (joats by generation I o
firft of the Elements 4 fimmixions whereby Beafls of divers kjnds

Divers operations of "Hature, proceed from j are generated II

the. effenttal forms of things 5
Whence the form cometh : of the Chain that
Homer faigned, and the %ingthat Plato
mentioneth 6
Sympathy and Antipathy \bj them to finde the
vertues of things 7
From Heaven and the Stars things receive

Copulations of a man with divers kmdes of
Beafls 1 2

"Divers kindes of Birds generated by divers
Birds coupling together 1 3

Commixions of Hens with other birds 1 4
Harvhes of divers properties generated IJ
('ommixion of divers kind of Fifhes 1 6

their force , and thereby many things are 'Hjiw and flrange Mongers 1 7

•wrought 8 Wayes to produce flrange and monftrom

Attracl the vertues of fuperior Bodies 9 j births 18
Knowledge of feci -ets dependeth upon the fur- Wonderful force of imagination, and how to
-. vey 0] the World 10) produce party coloured births ip

hikenefs of things (heweth their fea et ver- Women to bring forth fair and beautiful chil-
dren 20
Either males or females to be generated 2 1
Experiments ^prc.Bi fed upon di vers Jiving
creatures - 22

tues 1 1

Compound things by their Ukenefls 1 2

Particular creatures have particular gifts ;
fame in their whole body, others in their
parts 1 3

Properties of things while they live, and aftir
death 1 4

Simples to begotten and ufed in their fea-
fons 1 5

Where they grow, chiefly to be confldered 1 6
'Properties of Places and Fountains commo-
dious for this work^ 1 7
Compounds workjmore forceably ; and how to ,

The third Soofa

Of the produ£Hon of new
Plants.

Chap.

compound and mix thofe fimples which we j kindes of Plants may be generated

■would ufe in our mixture t 1 8 *■ ^ of putrefaction

Jufl weight of a mixture
Prepare Simples

p I Plants changed , one degenerating into the

20

form of the other 2
One fruit compounded of many 3
A fecond means 4
A third way 5
Fruits made double^ the one contained within
the other 6
Strange fruits may be generated and made
either better or worfe 7
HtrefaEiion) and of a flrange manner of \ Ripe fruits and flowers before their ordinary
producing living creatures 1 Hi ^ feafons

The fecond 'Soofa

Of the generation ofAnimals.

Chap.

The Table

feafens 8
Fruits and F Inters may be had at all times of

the year 9
Made late and backyard 1 o

Fruit to grow bigger then their ordinary

kinds 1 1

Fruit that ft aU have neither ftone nor ker

net 12
Fruit produced -without any rines or ft els i 3
C°lours fuch as are not incident to thetr

k>nde 1 4

Colours of Flowers may be changed I 5
Fruits and Flowers may be changed to a bet'

ter favour then ordinary 1 6

Fruits to be fweeter and pleafenter for toft 1 7
Fruits ingrowing may be made to reftmble all

figures and impreffions whatfoever 1 8
Fruits to be made more tender , beautiful and

goodly to the eye 1 9

'Divers k'ndes of Fruits , and wines made

medtcinable 20
Fruits and Vines planted that may yield grea-

tefi encreafe 2 1

The fourth ISoo^

The increaiing of Houfhold
StufTe.

Chap.

FRuits long preferved on their trees 1
Flowers preferved on their own fiallkj 2
Fruit- fafes or places to prejerve frutts conve-
niently 3
Time to be chofen for prefer ving fuch fruits as
you lay inflore for a great while 4
Manner of gathering fruits, and how to drefs
the fialk^ to prevent the original caufe of
their putrefaction 5
Ground* , fruits ft ott Id grow in , and be ga-
thered which we lay up 6
Fruits to be ftut up clofefrom the air 7
The Ancients ftut fruit clofe in certain vef-
fels, and put them in other vtffels full of
Heyuor 8
Frutts drenched in honey , to make them lafl
for a long time 9
Fruits may belong preferved in ordinary wine,
fodden wine, new wine , or elfe in wine
Lees I o

Fruits very well preferved in falt-water 1 1
Things that may be preferved in Oyl, and
LeesofOyl " 12
tApples long preferved in Sawdufi with
leaves, chaff, and firaw j 1 3

Fruits mixed with many things for their pre,
fervation j *

Things may be preferved from putrefaction 1 5
Divers f irts of bread may be made i 6
Bread made of roots and fruits i 7

Ways to m*ke bread of com andpulft 1 8
Bread increafed in weight 1 p

To endure long hunger and thirfl 2 o

Of what fruits wine may be made 2 1

Vinegar to be made divers ways and of
what 2 2

De feCts of wine managed and re(tored 2 3
Oyl made of divers things 24
Many forts of thread may be provided 25
Eggs hatched wit bout a Hen 2 6

The fiftbBoo^

Of changing Metals.

Chap.

TO convert Tin into a more excellent Me-
tal t
Lead into another Metal 2
Brafs into a more worthy LMetal 5
Iron into a worthier Metal 4
Quick: f lvers its effects and operations J
Of Silver 6
Operations neceffaryfor ufe 7
To make a Metal more weighty %
T 7 part Metals without Aqua fortis 9
To part Gold, or Silver, from other Metals
with Aqua fonis xo

The fixth 'Boofc

Of counterfeiting precious
Stones

Chap.

SAlts ufed in the compoftion of Gems I
How Flint, or Cry ft alii to be prepared,
and how Pafitls are boiled 2
The furnace and the parts thereof 3
To make colours 4
How Gems are coloured 5
Gems otherwise made

TinCtures of Brrfal 7
Mating Smalt or Ennamel 8
Smalt of a %pfe colour 9
Leaves of Metal to be put under Gems I O
Hew to be po lifted 1 1

Building a furnace for the colouring plates X 2
"Kays coloured by a mixture of Metals r ?

The

The Table

Tbefeyentb'Boo^;

Of tht Wonders of the Load-
ftone.

Ts Name, Kindey and Conntrey
Natural reafon of its attraction

Chap,
i

2

A man of wood may row about) with othet
conceits 2 p

A load ft one on a pi Ate of Iron-, will not ftirre
Iron 3 o

The P oft ion of the Iron , will change the
forces 3 I

'the Iron mhbed with the Northern point of
the load- ft one i willtxrnto the font h , and
With the fouth point to th e north J 2

Iron touched wiu b the load- ft one , will impart
the force to other Iron 3 3

The hoad'ftor,es oppofite poles., North, S outh, \ The venue received in the Iron, is weakened
and how they may be l^nown 3 ' by one that is ftronger 3 4

The Stones force fent by a right tine from To difcern in a Stvne the South or North
North to South, through the length 41 point , 3 5

T he polar line not ftable, but moveable 5 To rnt> the Iron-needle of the Marrinets com'
The force of North and South vigorous tn the pafs 3 6

points 6 \ The ufes of Marrmers Compares 3 7

By the touching of other ft ones, thoje points j The Longitude of the world may be found
will not change there forces 7 0tit h the help of the Load- ft one 3 8

A Load-ftone w& draw a Load-ftone, and If the Marriners Needle ft and ft illy and the
drive it from it 8 Load- ft one move , or contrarily , they will

A (port of the Load- ftone 9 move contrary ways 3 p

The greater the Loadjlone, the greater its The Loadftaw imports a contrary form to
force 1 0 the Needle 40

Two Needles touching by the Load' ftone, ob-
tain contrary forces 4 1
The force of the Iron that draws , will drive
off Iron, by dtverfity of Situation 42
The Needle touched by the Load- ft one on one
part, doth net always receive venue on
both parts 43
The Needle touched in the middle by the
Load ftone, fends frth its force at both
ends 44
An Iron %ing touched by a Load ftone will
rece tve bithvertues 45
An Iron plate touched in the middle will dif-
tts forces at both ends 4 6
Filings Iron may receive force 47
Whether Garlicky an hinder the vertues of the
Lead ftone 48
A Load-ftone aftonifhed m-:y be brought to
its felf again 49

The force of this Stone , will pafs into other
Stones I 1

In the Load- ftone hairinefs is contufed 1 2
The attractive part more violent,then the part
that drives of I 3

Contrary parts of the Stones , contrary one to
another 1 4

To know the polar points in the Load-ftone 1 5
The force of drawing and driving off, cannot
be kindred 1 6

Make an army of fand to fight 1 7

Situation maizes its vertnes contrary I 8
The attractive force of the load- ftone, may be
weighed 1 9

The LMfttual attraction, and driving off of
the load-ftone, and of Iron 20
Iron and the load-ftone in greater amity, then
the load-ftone ts with the load ftone 2 1
7 he load' ftone doth not draw on all parts, but

at certainpoints 2 2 ' fo augment the Load ft ones vertue 5 O

The fame load-ftone that draws , doth on the j That the Load»ftone may lefe its vertue 5 1
contrary point drive of the Iron 2 3 How the Iron touched with the load ftone lo-
Iron to leap on a table , no load-ftone being feth its force 5 2

feen 24 That the Diamond hindereth the load-ftones

The vertue of the load (tone is fent through the , Vertue is fa'fe 43
pieces of Iron 2 5 Goats blood doth not free the load ftone from

The load-ftone within the fphedr of its vertue, ' the inchamment of the Diamond 54
fends it forth without touching 2 6 The Iron touched with a Diamond, will turn

The load-ftone can hang Iron in the air 2 7 to the 'Hprth J %

The forces of the load ftone cannot be kindred, 'Forces and Remedies of the load-ftone 5 6
by a wall or table coming between 28 The

The Table.

The eighth cBool{ •

Of Phyfical Experiments.

CHap.

MEdicines which caufe Jleep l
To make a man out of his fences for a
day 2
To caufe fever al kinds of Vreames 3
Excellent Remedies for the eyes 4
To fatten the teeth 5
For ether infirmities of mans body 6
That a woman may conceive 7
Remedies againfi the Pox 8
Antidotes againft Poyfon 9
the Plague 1 ©

Remedies for wounds and blows 1 1

Afecret medicine for wounds 1 2

To counterfeit infirmities \ 2

Of F afcination-i and 'fefervatives againfi In-
ehantments 1 4

The ninth cBoofa
Of Beautifying Women.

A v::

O dye the hair Tellow, or Gold- colour I

J. 'Aei \ . 2

Blacl^ A 3

To hairs part fmooth 4

J7<w hair may grow again 5
7<? take away fores and worms that fpoil the

hair 6

1o make hair curl 7

To make the Eye-brows black. 8

To make the face white 9
To make the face very clean , to receive the

colour I o

To make the face very foft 1 1

To make the face [bine like fiver I 2

To dijfolve Talk-, for t0 beautifie women I 2

7 he preparation of fublimate 1 4

Mo ip Whit e~ lead is prepared for the face I J

The bcfi S opes for Women 1 6

To mtk? the face Rofe- coloured 1 7

jQgainJt reduefs of the face I 8

To make a Sun-burnt face white 1 9

To take fp ts from the face 2 o

To take off red Pimples 2 1

To ta\e i etters from the faceyor elfwhere 22

To take away Warts 2 2

To take wrinkles from the body 24

Of Dentifrices 25

To hinder the Brefls from augmenting 2 6

To make the hand white 2 7

To correct the ill fent of the Arm pits 2 8
How the matrix over-widened in childe-

birth may be made narrower 2 9

Sports againfi women 3 Q

n f -\fC<t 'j.i •>•> !*.} ■ ' ^* *

Of Diftillation,

"\J"^Hat Dift illation is, how many forts t

Extraction of Waters ■ 1

Extracting Aqua Vitse 5

To dtfiil with the heat of the Sun 4

To draw Oylby expreffion 5

1 0 extract Oyl with Water 6

To fepar ate Oyl from water 7
Toma\e an infirument to extract Oyl in a
greater quantity , and without danger of

burning g

The defcription of a Defcendatory 9

To extract Oyl out of Cjnms I o

To draw Oyl out of other things 1 1

To extract: Oyl by defcent 12

Extraction of EJfe^ces \ j

Magifieries what, their extraction 1 4

To extract tinctures \ j

To extract S Alts j 5,

Of Elixirs j j

Of a Cliffut) how made 1 §

To get Oyl out of Salts 1 9

Of Aqua Forcis 20

0/7&i? feparation of the Elements 2 1

TZ>e eleventh 2oo^;

Of Perfuming

OF 'Perfuming waters 1

7c w<t£f /W« water by infufion 2

7«> make fweet Oyls $
To extract Water and Oyl out of fweet Qums

by infufion 4

To perfume Skins J

To make fweet Powders 6

To make fweet Compounds 7

To make fweet perfumes 8

To Adulterate Musk. 9

D

The twelfth "Boofa

Of Artificial Fires.

/ vers ways to procure fire *
The compofitions for fire our Ancefiors

ttfed

The Table

Ujtd . 2

Divers compactions of Gunpowder 3
Pices made to caft out fire 4
To wake fire-balls that are jhot in Brafs-

gttns 5
Compofitions with burning waters 6
Balls made of Metals , to caft forth fire and

Iron wedges 7
How in plain ground and under waters Mines

may be prefently digged 8
Things good to extingmfh fire 9
Divers eompof tio ns for fre I O

Fire-compofitionsforfcaflival days 1 1
Experiments of fire H
Hsw a Candle {hall burn continually 1 3

The thirteenth ^Boo^
Of tempering Steel.

Chap.

I Ron by mixture may A» U*r/lj>*,*A t.
How Iron will wax foft 2
The temper of Iron mufi be ufed upon foft
Irons ?
How for all mixtures, Iron may be tempered
mofi hard 4
Liquors that wi 11 harden Iron J
The temper of a Tool {hall cut a Porphyr
Marble Stone 6
To grave a Porphyr UWarble , without an
Iron Tool 7
How I ron by heating in the fire, may be made
tradable for works 8
How Damask^ Knives may be made 9
Polifhed Iron, how pre ferved from rufi I o

The fourteenth Hoofa
Of Cookery.

1

Chap.

HOw flefh may be made tender 1
How flefh may grow tender by fecret
propriety 1
How flefh may be made tender otherwife 3
How Shell-creatures may grow more tender^
That living creatures may be made more fat
and welltafted J
How the fiefh of Animals is made fweeter 6
How they are made too bitter to be eaten 7
How Animals may be boiled, rofied, baked,
all at once &

Divers wnys to dre ft Pullets $
Hew meats may be prepared in places where
there is nothing to rofl them with I o
Divers confections of Wines 1 1

To make men drunl^, and loath wine 1 2
To drive Paraptes from great mens Tablesl 3

The fifteenth "Bool^-

Of Fifliing, Fowling, Hunt-
ing, &c. .

Chap.

"^"yHat meats allure divers animals l
How living creatures are drawn on

with the baits of love z
Animals called together by things they like 3
ffhat noifes allure Birds 4
Fifhes allured by light in the night j
By Looking' glares many creatures are

brought together 6
Animals are congregated by fweet fmells 7
Creatures made drunk^ catcht with hand 8
Peculiar poyfons of Animals p
Venomes for Fifhes ■ j 0

Experiments for hunting \ \

Tj£ ftxteenth TBoofa

of invifible Writing,

Chap.

HOw a writing dipt in divers liquors may
be read 1
Letters made vifible in the fire 2
Letters rub'd with dufl to be feen 3
To write tn an egge q
How you may write in divers places, and de-
ceive one that can reade J
In what place Letters may be inclofed 6
What fecret meffengers may be ufed 7
LMejfengers not to know that they carry Let"
ters, nor to be found about them 8
Characters to be made that at fetdays fhatt
vanijh 9
To take off Letters that are written on pa-
per 10
To counterfeit a Seal and Writing 1 1

To fpeakjtt a great difiance I *

Signs to be made with fire by night and with
d'/fi by day 1 3

TU

The Table

The feventeenth 2>0o^ .

Of Burning- glades , and the
wonderful fights by them.

REprefe rotations made by plain Glaffes i

Shirts with plain Looking' gl.iffes 2

A Lgoktv^glafs calleda Theatrecal-glafs 3

Operations of Concave glaffes 4

M xt operations of plain (for.cave glaffes 5

Other operations of a Concavt'glafs 6

How to fee in the dark^ 7

An Image may he ben to range in the air 8
OHixtares of Glares and divers operations

of Images g

£ff >tts or a Lenticular fryftal 1 o

Specifies to fee be)knd imagination 1 1

To fee in a Chamber^thtngs that are not I 2

( The operations of a CriJlal-ptUtr 13
Burntng-gfaJJes 14

A Parabolical Settion7which is of Glaffes the
moft burning I 5

That may burn obliquely and at very
great diltance 1 6

That may burn at infinite diftance 1 7
A Burning- glafsmade of many fpiritwal Se-
ctions ' 1 8
Fire kjndled more forcible by refraction 1 9
An Image to be feenby a hollow Glafs 20
How Spectacles are made 2 \
Foils are laid on Concave glaffes and how
they are banned 2 2
How Metal Looking' glaffes are made 2 3

The eighteenth *Boo\^

of Things heavy and light.

Chap.

1PH<*t heavy things defcend, and light
A. afcend in the fame degree I

By drinking to make fport with thofe that fit
at table . J 2

To part wine from water it is mingled with 3
Another way to part water from wme^
To part a light body from a he a vy 5
To mingle things heavy and light 6
Other ways to part wine from water 7
The levity of water and air different and
what may be wr aught thereby %

The mnteenth TSooh^
cf WincHnftruments.

V \fHetker material Statues may fpeakby
an Artificial way 1
Muficab-I nflrnments made with water 1
Experiments ofmnd-Inflruments 3
A Defer iption of iVater-hour-gUffes 4
Of a Veffel cafiing forth water by rea-

fon of j

How to ufe the air tn many Arts 6

The twentieth Hoo^
Of the Chaos;

Chip.

HOw water may be made Potable 1
To maty water of air 2
To alter the face that ones friends fhall
not know him 5
Tha tfiones may move alone 4
An Inftrument whereby to hear at great di-
ftance 5
To augment weight 6
The wonder fu I proporties of the Harp 7
To difcover frauds in Impoftors that wor^
by natural means and pretend conjura-
tion %
Experiments of a Lamp <y
Some mechanical Experiments 1 o

FINIS.

* S». L Bir^fafft
NOV 2(^1911
