TO FADES A


INCOTT


V


HITOPADESA


A    NEW


LITERAL  TRANSLATION   FROM  THE   SANSKRIT  TEXT


OF    PROF.    F.    JOHNSON.


FOR     THE     USE     OF     STUDENTS


BY


FREDERIC   PINCOTT,  F.R.A.S.


LONDON:
W.  H.  ALLEN  AND   CO.,  13,  WATERLOO   PLACE.     S.W.

PUBLISHERS   TO   THE    INDIA   OFFICE.

1880.

(All  rights  reserved.)


LONDON  :
PRINTED   BY   W.   H.   ALLEN  AND  CO.,  13  WATERLOO   PLACE.


PREFACE.


THE  object  of  the  present  translation  is  to  supply  an  exact  and  literal
rendering  of  Professor  F.  Johnson's  text  of  the  Hitopades'a  for  the
use  of  students  learning  Sanskrit.  The  Hitopades'a  being  generally
the  first  book  taken  up  by  learners,  it  is  obviously  of  importance
to  translate  it  in  such  a  manner  that  one  completely  ignorant  of
Sanskrit  may  be  guided  in  his  first  efforts.  The  following  trans-
lation, therefore,  is  made  somewhat  progressive.  The  first  chapter
endeavours  punctually  to  render  the  original, — case,  tense,  and  even
the  order  of  the  words, — as  far  as  may  be ;  for  the  purpose  of  showing
the  student  how  the  English  meaning  is  got  out  of  the  Sanskrit  text.
In  the  second  chapter  a  little  more  ease  is  permitted  ;  and  in  the  third
and  fourth  chapters,  while  still  being  precise  and  literal,  the  English
language  is  allowed  somewhat  fairer  play.

With  respect  to  authorities,  I  have,  of  course,  had  before  me
what  Sir  Charles  Wilkins,  and  Professors  Johnson  and  Max  Miiller
have  so  excellently  done ;  but  I  have  also  enjoyed  an  advantage  not
hitherto  brought  to  bear  on  the  subject.  Familiarity  with  certain  of
the  vernaculars  of  India  has  enabled  me  to  take  the  opinion  of  native
scholars,  who,  so  to  speak,  inherit  the  meaning  of  the  original  in  the
traditions  and  circumstances  of  daily  life.  I  have,  accordingly,  consulted
throughout  a  faithful  translation  in  the  Grwalerari  dialect  (India  Office


IV  PREFACE.

MS.  No.  2385),  also  a  Hindi  version,  one  in  Bangali,  and  another  in
Braj  Bhakha.  A  manuscript  version  in  Urdu,  in  my  own  possession,
has  been  of  singular  assistance  throughout,  by  frequently  supplying
Semitic  equivalents  for  the  Aryan  words  of  the  original.  This  MS.
deserves  editing,  for  it  differs  markedly  from  most  native  translations,
inasmuch  as  it  is  a  precise  line  for  line  rendering  of  the  original,
without  amplification  or  curtailment.  It  is  also  remarkable  to  find
a  Muhammadan  spend  so  much  labour  on  anything  Hindu.

The  five  translations  thus  availed  of,  were  made  in  different
provinces,  at  different  times,  by  different  men,  probably,  nay  almost
certainly,  in  profound  ignorance  of  each  other's  performances.  There-
fore, whenever  I  have  found  five  native  scholars,  unknown  to  each
other,  unite  in  ascribing  a  given  sense  to  a  given  passage,  I  have  felt
constrained  to  yield  some  deference  to  their  opinion.

The  main  point  aimed  at  throughout  has  been  accuracy.  Fluency
and  elegance  have  been  disregarded,  from  the  assurance  that  any
English  person,  with  the  precise  rendering  here  supplied,  can  clothe
the  sentences  in  such  Shakesperian  or  Johnsonian  phraseology  as  his
taste  may  suggest.

FBEDERIC  PINCOTT.


INTRODUCTION.


1.  May  there  be  success,  for  the  good,  in  what  is  to  be  accomplished,  through  the
favour  of  that  Dhiirjati,*  on  whose  brow  (there  is)  a  digit  of  the  Moon,  like  a  streak
of  foam  of  the  Jahnavi.f

2.  This  HitopadesXJ  attended  to,  gives   skill    in   Sanskrit  speaking,  variety  of
expression  universally,  and  the  knowledge  of  policy.

3.  A  wise  man  should  think  of  knowledge  and  wealth  as  though  (he  were)  unde-
caying  and  immortal ;  he  should  practise  virtue  as  though  seized  in  the  hairs  of  the
head  by  Death.

4.  Among  all  things  knowledge,  they  say,  (is)  truly  the  best  thing  ;  from,  at  all
times,  its  unstealableness,  its  unpurchaseableness,  and  its  indestructibility.

5.  Knowledge  truly  unites  a  man  with  a  king  difficult  of  access,  as  a  descending
river  (unites  with)  the  ocean  ;  hence  (results)  exceeding  prosperity.

6.  Knowledge  gives  prudence,  from  prudence  one  attains  fitness  (for  work),  from
fitness  one  attains  wealth,  from  wealth  the  (power  of)  doing  good ;  thence  (arises)
happiness.

7.  Arms  and  literature  (are)  both  (kinds  of)  knowledge,  (they  are)  the  two  (kinds
of)  knowledge  (conducive)  to  celebrity ;  the  first  (leads)  to  ridicule  in  old  age,  the
second  is  honoured  always.

8.  Since  the  pattern  impressed  on  a  new  (earthern)  vessel  cannot  become  otherwise
(than  it  is  at  the  time  of  manufacture),  therefore,  by  the  artifice  of  fables,  the  moral
guidance  of  youths  is  here  set  forth.

9.  The  Acquisition  of  Friends,  the  Separation  of  Friends,  War,  and  Peace, — having
been  abstracted  from  the  Panchatantra  and  another  book, — is  written  (here).

There  is  on  the  banks  of  the  Bhagfrathif  a  city  named  Pataliputra§  :  a  king  named
Handsome,  possessed  of  every  lordly  virtue,  was  there.  This  king  once  heard  these
two  verses  being  recited  by  somebody : —

10.  The  resolver  of  many  doubts,  the  revealer  of  invisible  objects,  the  eye  of  all
(is)  learning ;  of  whom  it  is  not,  he  truly  (is)  blind.


*  The  god  Siva.  t  The  river  Ganges.  J  Meaning  "  friendly  advice."

§  The  present  Fatna.

1


Z  PEASTAVANA.

11.  Youth,  riches,  power,  and  inconsiderateness,  each  singly  (lead)  to  disadvan-
tage ;  how  much  more  (so)  where  all  four  (are  united)  !

Having  heard  this,  the  king,  distressed  in  mind  by  the  inattention  to  books  of  his
own  sons,  unread  in  literature,  (and)  ever  following  improper  courses,  reflected  : —

12.  What  advantage  accrues  by  a  son  born  who  (is)  neither  wise  nor  virtuous  ?
what,  by  a  sightless  eye  ?     Truly  (such)  an  eye  (is)  trouble  merely.

13.  Of  unborn,  dead,  (or)  foolish  (sons),  better  the  two  first,  and  not  the  last ;  the
two  first  cause  pain  once,  the  last  day  by  day.

Further : —

14.  He  (is  really)  born  by  whom  (when)  born  the  family  attains  exaltation ;  in
the  revolving  world,*  who,  (when)  dead,  is  not  born  (again)  ?

Besides : —

15.  If  a  mother  (be  accounted)  the  mother  of  a  son  by  (reason  of)  him  whose
chalk  does  not  fall  quickly  in  beginning  the  enumeration  of  a  number  of  the  virtuous,
say,  what  (woman)  is  barren  ?

Also : —

16.  He  whose  mind  (is)  not  intent  on  liberality,  sanctity,  heroism,  learning,  and
the  acquisition  of  wealth,  truly  he  (is  his)  mother's  excrement.

Furthermore : —

17.  Better  one  accomplished   son:  not  even  by  a  hundred  fools    (is  there   ad-
vantage) ;  one  Moon  dispels  darkness  ;  (it  is)  not  (dispelled)  by  even  hosts  of  stars.

18.  The  son  of  him  by  whom,  in  some  holy  place,  a  very  arduous  penance  has  been
performed,  should  be  obedient,  wealthy,  virtuous,  (and)  wise.

And  it  has  been  said  : —

19.  The  influx  of  wealth,  continual   healthfulness,  a    beloved  (wife),  a  sweet-
speaking  wife,  an  obedient  son,  and  profitable  knowledge,  (are)  the  six  felicities  of  life,
Oking!

20.  Who  (is)  fortunate  by  (the  possession  of)  many  sons,  (no  better  than  empty)
measures  filling  the  granary  ;  better  one  family-supporter,  by  whom  the  father  is
renowned.

21.  A  debt-contracting  father  (is)  an  enemy,  and  (so  is)  an  unchaste  mother ;  a
beautiful  wife  (is)  an  enemy,  an  unlearned  son  (is)  an  enemy.

22.  In  the  absence  of  practice,  knowledge  (is)  poison  ;  in  (a  state  of)  indigestion,
food  (is)  poison ;  the  (royal)  court  (is)  the  poison  of  the  poor ;  a  young  wife  (is)  the
poison  of  an  old  (man).

23.  Of  whomsoever  the  son  is  gifted,  (that)  man  is  honoured ;  what  will  a  bow
effect,  faultless  (as  to)  cane,  (but)  stringless  ?

24.  Alas,  0  son !  (who  hast)  without  study  passed  these  nights  !     In  consequence
thou  sinkest  in  the  midst  of  the  wise,  like  a  cow  in  a  quag-mire.


*  The  revolving  series  of  births  and  deaths.


PBASTAVANA.  3

Then  how  can  these  my  sons  be  rendered  accomplished  ?

25.  Food,  sleep,  fear,  and  sexual  intercourse,  this  (set  is)  the  common  property  of
men  with  beasts.     Virtue  is   their  great  distinction.     Deprived  of  virtue  (men  are)
equal  with  brutes.

For:—

26.  He  of  whom  there  is  not  one  of  (the  attributes)  virtue,  wealth,  pleasure,  (or)
liberation  (from  transmigration),  his  birth  (is)  worthless  like  (that)  of  the  pimples  on
a  goat's  neck.

And  (as  to)  what  is  said: —

27.  Life,  (destined)   acts,  wealth,  knowledge,  and  death,  these  five  are  created
for  a  corporeal  being  (while  in)  the  embryo  state.

Again : —

28.  There  are  states  of  what  is  to  be  inevitably  even  of  the  great,  (to  wit)  the
nakedness  of  Mlakantha*  (and)  the  sleep  of  Hari  on  the  great  serpent.f

And  also : —

29.  What  is  not  to  be  will  not  be ;  if  (it  is)  to  be,  it  (will)  not   (be)  otherwise
(than  as  is  foreordained).     Why  is  not  this  anxiety-destroying  medicine  drunk?

This  (is)  the  speech,  arising  from  idleness,  of  certain  persons  incapable  of  what
should  be  done.

30.  Having  thought  even  upon  fate,  one  should  not  abandon  one's  own  exertion ;
without  exertion  one  cannot  obtain  oil  from  (even)  sessamum  seeds.

Besides : —

31.  Prosperity  attends  upon  the  energetic  lion  of  a  man.    Abject  fellows  say,  "It
is  given  by  fate."     Having  resisted  fate  act  (with)  manliness  with  (all)  thy  strength.
If,  on  effort  being  made,  (the  deed)  is  not  accomplished,  what  fault  (is)  there?

32.  Just  as  with  one  wheel  there  can  be  no  motion  of  a  chariot,  so  without  the  act
of  man  destiny  (itself)  is  not  accomplished.

Also : —

33.  An  act  done  in  a  former  birth  is  called  "  Fate  " ;  therefore,  unwearied,  one
should  manfully  make  effort.

34.  As  from  a  lump  of  clay  a  workman  produces  whatever  he  wishes,  so  a  man
obtains  the  destiny  prepared  by  himself.

Besides : —

35.  Though  perceiving  a  treasure  in  front,  obtained  like  the  fruit  of  the  palm
[which  unexpectedly  fell  and  revealed  its  rich  contents  to]  the  crow,J  Fate  itself  does
not  pick  it  (up),  it  waits  for  man.

36.  Deeds  are  accomplished  by  effort  not  by  wishes ;   verily  deer  do  not  enter
into  the  mouth  of  a  sleeping  lion.

37.  A  child  trained  by  mother  and  father  attains  eminence  ;  a  son  does  not  become
wise  by  being  merely  born.


»  The  god  Siva.  f  The  god  Vishnu.  J  Alluding  to  a  fable.


4  PRASTAVANA.

So  also : —

38.  The  mother  (is)  an  enemy,  the  father  (is)  a  foe,  by  whom  a  child  is  not  in-
structed ;  he  [the  child]  shines  not  in  company,  (he  is)  like  a  heron  amongst  crows.

39.  Possessed  of  beauty  (and)  youth,  born  of  noble  family,  (but)  destitute  of
knowledge,  they  shine  not.     (They  are)  like  scentless  kimsuka  flowers.

40.  Even  a  fool  shines  in  an  assembly  just  as  (he  may  be)  dressed ;  thus-long  a
fool  shines,  so  long  as  he  says  nothing.

Having  reflected  thus  the  king  convoked  an  assembly  of  the  learned.  The  king
(then)  said :  O  Pandits,  listen.  Is  there  any  one  so  learned  who  (is)  able  now,  by
instruction  in  politic  science,  to  effect  the  regeneration  of  my  continually  wayward
and  ignorant  sons  ?

For:—

41.  Glass  by  association  with  gold  acquires  an  emerald  lustre ;  so,  by  proximity  to
the  good,  a  fool  attains  cleverness.

And  it  is  said  : —

42.  The  mind  is  indeed   lowered,  0    son,  from  associated  with  the  low;    with
equals  it  reaches  equality ;  but  with  the  distinguished  (it  attains)  distinction.

Hereupon  a  great  scholar  named  Vishnusarman,  like  Vnhaspati,  conversant  with
the  gist  of  all  books  on  policy,  said :  Sire !  these  princes  born  in  a  high  family  can  be
caused  to  acquire  policy  by  me.  For : —

43.  No  labour  whatever  bestowed  on  a  worthless  object  can  be  fruitful :  even  by
a  hundred  efforts  a  crow  is  not  made  to  talk  like  a  parrot.

Moreover : —

44.  But  in  this  family  worthless  offspring  is  not  born :  In  a  mine  of  rubies  whence
(can  arise)  the  production  of  crystal  ?

Hence  I,  in  the  period  of  six  months,  will  make  your  sons  conversant  with  works
of  policy.  The  king  courteously  replied : —

45.  Even  a  worm  by  association  with   a  jasmine  ascends  (above)  the  head  of  the
good:  even  a  stone  attains  divinity,  (when)  consecrated  by  the  great.

Besides  : —

46.  As,  upon  the  eastern  mountain  an  object  shines  by  the  drawing  near  (of  the
sun),  so  by  the  proximity  of  the  good  even  an  out-caste  is  enlightened.

47.  The  virtuous  are  discriminators  of  right  and  wrong;  should  they  acquire  vice
they  become  faulty :    rivers  arise  (having  their)  waters  sweet ;  having  reached  the
ocean  they  become  undrinkable.

Therefore  you  (are)  the  authority  for  the  instruction  in  politic  science  of  these  my
sons.  Having  said  thus,  with  much  courtesy  he  consigned  his  sons  to  Vishnusarman
Then,  in  the  presence  of  the  princes,  comfortably  seated  on  the  terrace  of  the  palace,  by


PRASTAVANA.  5

way  of  introduction,  the  Pandit  said  :  0  princes,  listen —

48.  With,  the  enjoyment  of  poetic  works  the  time  of  the  wise  passes,  and  (that)
of  fools  with  vice,  sleep,  or  contention.

Therefore,  for  the  gratification  of  your  Highnessess,  I  (am  about  to)  relate  the
wonderful  story  of  the  crow,  the  tortoise,  &c.  The  princes  said :  Sir,  let  it  be  related.
Vishnusarman  said :  Listen  now ;  the  "  Acquisition  of  Friends  "  is  commencing,  of
which  this  (is)  the  first  verse: —


ACQUISITION   OF   FEIENDS.


1.  The  wise  and  very  friendly  Crow,  Tortoise,  Deer,  and  Mouse,  without  means,
(and)  destitute  of  wealth,  speedily  accomplished  (their)  purposes.

The  princes  said  :  How  is  that?  Vishnusarman  relates  (as  follows)  : — There  is
on  the  bank  of  the  G-odavari*  a  large  silk-cotton  tree ;  there,  having  assembled  from
various  quarters  and  countries,  birds  at  night  are  roosting.  Now  on  a  certain  night
being  ended,  when  the  revered  Moon,  the  friend  of  the  lotus  (was)  resting  on  the
summit  of  the  western  mountain,  a  crow,  named  Gently -alighting,  being  awake,  saw  a
fowler  approaching  snare  in  hand  like  a  second  Death.  Having  seen  him,  he  reflected
(thus) :  To-day,  even  betimes,  an  unwished  for  sight  has  appeared.  I  do  not  know  what
undesired  (circumstance)  it  will  reveal.  So  saying,  following  him  gradually,  he  moved
perplexed.

For:—

2.  Thousands  of  occasions  of  grief,  and  hundreds  of  occasions  of  fear,  day  by  day
approach  the  fool,  not  the  wise.

Moreover : —

By  worldlings  this  indispensably  should  be  done : —

3.  Each  day  one  rises,  it  should  be  thought,  a  great  danger  is  imminent ;  of  death,
sickness,  or  sorrow,  which  will  happen  to-day  ?

Now  having  scattered  grains  of  rice,  a  net  was  spread  by  the  fowler,  and  he  being
concealed  remained  (waiting).  Just  at  that  time,  the  king  of  the  pigeons,  named
Speckled-neck,  gliding  in  the  sky  with  (his)  retinue,  saw  those  grains  of  rice.  Then  the
king  of  the  pigeons,  perceiving  the  pigeons  covetous  of  the  grains  of  rice,  remarked :
Whence  (comes)  the  origin  of  grains  of  rice  here  in  (this)  deserted  wood  ?  Let  this  be
investigated  a  little.  1  do  not  look  upon  this  (as)  fortunate.  Haply  by  this  covetous-
ness  for  grains  of  rice,  we  also  in  like  manner  may  become —

4.  As  the  traveller,  sunk  in  an  impassable  quag-mire,  seized  by  an  old  tiger,
perished,  through  covetousness  of  a  bracelet.


*  In  the  Dakkhuu.


0  MITEALABHA.

Tlie  pigeons  said :  How  (was)  that  ?  The  king  of  the  pigeons  relates  (as  follows)  :
Once,  while  feeding  in  the  Southern  forest,  I  observed  an  old  tiger,  (who  had)  bathed,
with  kusa- grass  in  (his)  paw,  on  the  banks  of  a  lake,  was  saying  :  Ho,  ho,  traveller,
let  this  golden  bracelet  be  accepted.  Then,  attracted  by  avarice,  a  certain  traveller
(thus)  reflected :  This  arises  by  good  luck ; — but  in  this  (enterprize  entailing)  risk
within  itself  an  attempt  is  not  to  be  made.

For:—

5.  In  the  acquisition  of  the  desired  from  the  undesired,  a  felicitous  result  does
not  arise  ;  where  there  is  the  presence  of  poison,  there  even  ambrosia  (tends)  to  death.

But  everywhere  in  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  the  attempt  (is)  a  risk.  Thus  it  has
been  said : —

6.  Not  having  surmounted  doubt  a  man  sees  not  good  things ;  on  the  contrary,
having  overcome  doubt,  if  he  lives,  he  sees  (them).

Therefore,  I  (will)  investigate  a  little.  He  says  aloud,  Where  (is)  thy  bracelet  ?
The  tiger  having  stretched  forth  (his)  paw  shows  (it).  The  traveller  said  :  How  (is)
confidence  to  be  placed  in  thee,  a  ferocious  (animal)  ?  The  tiger  said:  Listen,
traveller-fellow !  formerly,  of  a  truth,  in  a  youthful  state,  I  was  excessively  wicked.
Through  the  slaughter  of  many  cows,  Brahman  s,  and  men,  my  numerous  children  are
dead,  and  (my)  wife  (also).  Now  I  am  without  family.  Therefore,  by  a  certain  vir-
tuous (person)  I  was  advised  (thus)  :  Let  your  honour  practise  the  duty  of  liberality.
In  consequence  of  his  advice  now  I  (am)  a  practiser  of  ablutions,  a  bestower  (of  alms),
old,  (and)  with  decayed  claws  and  teeth ;  how  (am  I)  not  a  (fit)  object  of  confidence.

It  is  said  : —

7.  Sacrifice,  study,  alms-giving,  self-mortification,  truth,  fortitude,  patience,  and
contentment, — this,  it  is  said,  (is)  the  eight-fold  path  of  duty.

8.  The   former   four-fold  class  is  practised  in  this  world  even   for  ostentation ;
but  the  latter  four-fold  class  dwells  only  in  the  magnanimous.

And  my  freedom  from  cupidity  (is)  such  that  the  golden  bracelet  belonging  even
to  my  own  arm,  I  am  willing  to  give  to  anyone  soever.  Still  (it  is)  really  hard  to
remove  the  common  imputation  to  the  effect  that  tigers  eat  men.  For : —

9.  The  world,  following  precedent,  does  not  constitute  a  good-counselling  bawd
an  authority  in  virtue,  as  (it  does)  even  cow-killing  Brahman.

And  by  me  religious  books  have  been  studied.     Listen : —

10.  As  rain  on  a  desert  place  so  (is)  food  (bestowed)  on  one  pained  by  hunger.
A  fruitful  gift  is  (one)  bestowed  on  the  poor,  0  son  of  Pandu  !

11.  As   one's   own  vital  airs  [life]  are  cherished,  so  also   (should  be)  those  of
(other)  creatures.     By  reason  of  self-likeness*  the  good  exercise  compassion  on  (other)
beings.

Besides : —

12.  Both  in  refusing,  and  in  bestowing,  in  pleasure  and  pain,  in  the  agreeable
and  in  the  disagreeable,  by  self-likeness  a  man  attains  a  (good)  authority.


*  Referring  all  things  to  self  as  a  standard.


MITRALABHA.  7

Again : —

13.  He  who  looks   upon  another's  wife  as  a  mother,  on  another's  wealth  as  a
clod,  on  all  beings  as  himself,  he  (is)  wise.

And  thou  (art)  unfortunate ;  therefore  I  (am)  anxious  to  give  to  thee.  And  it  is
said  : —

14.  Nourish    the  poor,  0    son  of   Kunti ;  do   not  give    wealth    to   the  wealthy.
For  the  sick,  medicine  (is)  beneficial ;  but  what  (do)  the  healthy  (want)  with  me-
dicines ?

Besides : —

15.  "It  is  to  be   given,"   thus    (is   the   command;  therefore)   whatever   gift   is
bestowed  upon  the  non-assistant,  in  a  (right)  place,  time,  and  on  a  (proper)  recipient,
that  they  esteem  a  virtuous  gift.

Therefore,  having  bathed  in  the  lake,  accept  this  golden  bracelet.  Then,  confiding
in  his  speech,  as  soon  as  he  had  entered  the  lake  to  bathe,  immediately  he  sank  into  a
great  quag-mire,  (and)  was  unable  to  escape.  Seeing  him  fallen  into  the  quag-mire
the  tiger  said :  Ha !  thou  are  fallen  into  a  great  quag-mire,  therefore  I  (will)  lift  thee
up.  Having  said  thus,  (and)  having  cautiously  approached, — the  traveller,  seized  by
the  tiger,  reflected  (thus)  :

16.  "  He  reads  the  Dharma-sastras,"  this  is  not  the  operative  cause ;  neither  (is)
the  repetition  of  the  Veda.     The  natural  disposition  of  the  wicked  truly  here  pre-
dominates ;  just  as  by  (its)  nature  the  milk  of  the  cow  is  sweet.

Again : —

17.  The  act  of  those  whose  senses  and  heart  are  not  under  control  (is)  like  the
washing  of  an  elephant.*     Knowledge  without  practice  (is)  a  burden,  like  ornaments
on  an  ill-disposed  wife.

Therefore  it  was  not  well  done  by  me,  that  confidence  was  here  reposed  in  a
ferocious  (animal).  Thus  truly  is  it  said: —

18.  Confidence  should  never  be  placed  in  rivers,  in  those  with  weapons  in  their
hands,  in  those  with  claws  or  horns,  in  women,  and  in  kings'  families.

Besides : —

19.  Of  everyone,  indeed,  the  natural  dispositions  are  tested,  not  the  other  qualities;
transcending  all  (other)  qualities  the  natural  disposition  is  at  the  head.

Moreover : —

20.  Truly  he,  sporting  in  the  sky,  destroying  darkness,  possessed  of  ten  hundred
beams,   moving    in   the   midst   of  stars,   even    the  Moon,    by  reason   of  destiny,   is
swallowed  by  Rahu.f     Who  is  able  to  avoid  what  is  written  on  the  forehead  ?

While  reflecting  thus  he  was  killed  and  eaten  by  the  tiger :  hence  I  say,  "  By
covetousness  of  a  bracelet,"  &c.  Therefore  a  not  properly  considered  act  ought,  by  no
means,  to  be  done.

For:—

21.  Well-digested  food,  a  circumspect  son,  a  well-governed  wife,  a  well-served
king,  a  well-considered  speech,  and  a  well-deliberated  act,  in  a  very  long  time  under-
goes no  change.


*  Uoofficacious  in  character.  t  Is  subject  to  eclipse.


8  MITKALABHA.

Having  heard  this  speech  a  certain  pigeon  haughtily  said :  Ah !  what  indeed  is
being  said  ?

22.  On  the  time  of  adversity  being  imminent,  the  speech  of  the  aged  ought  to
be  received  everywhere,  indeed,  with  consideration :  it  is  not  concerned  in  eating.

For:—

23.  All  food  and  drink  is  beset,  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  with  doubts  :  where  is
anything  to  be  done  ?  or  how  (is)  the  possibility  of  living  ?

And  it  is  said : —

24.  The   envious,  the   censorious,   the    discontented,   the    passionate,   the    ever-
suspicious,  and  he  who  lives  on  another's  fortune, — these  six  have  misery  for  their
portion.

Having  heard  this,  all  the  pigeons  alighted  there.     For : —

25.  The  very   learned,  resolvers  of  doubts,  versed  in  even  the  greatest  sciences,
(when)  fascinated  by  covetousness  are  afflicted.

Again : —

26.  From    covetousness  proceeds    anger ;    from    anger   lust  is    produced  ;  from
covetousness  (arises)  both  infatuation  and  perdition.     Covetousness  (is)  the  cause  of  sin.

Again : —

27.  The  production  of  a  golden  deer  (is)  an  impossibility ;  still  Eama  lusted  for
the  deer*;  oft-times,  at    a  season  of  impending   calamity,  even  the   intellects  of  the
masculine  become  clouded.

Presently  they  were  all  caught  in  the  net.     Then  all  the  birds  abuse  him  through
whose  speech  they  had  alighted  there.     Thus  it  is  said  : —

28.  One  should  not  go  in  front  of  the  troop, — when  the  act  has  succeeded  the
profit  (is)  equal;  should  there   be  a   disaster  in    the  affair,  the    leader  is  killed  on
the  spot.

And  it  is  said : —

29.  Unrestraint  of  the  senses  is  said  (to  be)  the  path  of  misfortune  ;  the  conquest
of  them  (is)  the  path  of  success :  go  by  whichever  (path)  is  desired  (by  you).

Hearing  the  abuse  of  him  Speckled-neck  said  :  This  (is)  not  his  fault.     For : —

30.  Even  a  friend   becomes  the   cause   of   misfortunes  which   happen :  even  a
mother's  leg  becomes  a  post  on  the  binding  of  a  calf.f

Again : —

31.  He  is   a  friend  who    (is)  able  to  remove  the  calamity  of   the  unfortunate ;
but  not  (he  who  is)  skilful  in  censuring  means  for  deliverance  from  what  is  appre-
hended.

And  in  time  of  misfortune  of  a  truth  perplexity  is  the  sign  of  a  coward ;  therefore
now,  resting  (on)  fortitude,  let  a  remedy  be  thought  of.     For : —

32.  In  misfortune  firmness,  in  prosperity  meekness,  in  the  assembly  eloquence,  in
war  valour,  in  fame  desire,  perseverance  in  study, — this  (is)  the  perfection  of  the  nature
of  the  magnanimous.


*  The  magiqal  appearance  of  a  golden  deer  deluded  him.  t  At  the  time  of  milking.


MITRALABHA.  9

33.  Of  whom,  in  prosperity,  (there  is)  no  exaltation,  (nor)  dejection  in  adversity,
and  (who  is)  firm  in  battle, — a  mother  rarely  gives  birth  to  that  son,  the  ornament  of
the  three  worlds.

Besides : —

34.  Six  faults  should  be  here  shunned  by  a  man    wishing  for  dignity, — sleep,
sloth,  fear,  anger,  laziness,  (and)  prolixity.

Now  let  it  thus  be  done, — being  of  one  mind,  the  net  being  taken  up  by  the  whole,
let  (us)  fly  away.

For:—

35.  The  combination  of  even  little  things  (is)  effective  of  what  is  to  be  done :  by
grasses  (which  have)  become  cord  furious  elephants  are  bound.

36.  The  best  combination  for  men  (is)  with  their  own  families,  although  small ;
stripped  of  their  husks  grains  of  rice  do  not  germinate.

Having  reflected  thus,  all  the  birds,  taking  up  the  net,  started  up.  Hereupon
the  fowler  from  afar  having  seen  those  removers  of  the  net,  running  after  (them)
reflected —

37.  Those  travellers  of  the  air,  combined,  are  carrying  off  my  net ;  when  they
alight  then  they  will  come  (into)  my  power.

Then,  upon  the  birds  passing  beyond  the  range  of  sight,  the  fowler  desisted.
Now  having  seen  (that)  the  fowler  had  desisted,  the  pigeons  said :  Sire  !  what  now  (is)
proper  to  be  done  ?  Speckled-neck  said : —

38.  A  mother,  a  friend,  and  a  father, — from  natural  disposition  (form)  a  friendly
trio ;  and  others  from  special  cause  are  friendly-minded.

My  friend,  then,  named  Well-to-do,  the  king  of  the  mice,  dwells  in  Pretty-wood,
on  the  banks  of  the  Gandaki ;  he  will  sever  our  bonds  by  the  strength  of  his  teeth.
Having  decided  thus,  all  went  near  to  the  burrow  of  Well-to-do.  But  Well-to-do,
through  continual  apprehension  of  danger,  having  constructed  a  burrow  with  a  hun-
dred entrances,  is  dwelling  (therein).

•.

39.  Perceiving  danger  not  yet  arrived,  an  old  mouse,  skilled  in  books  of  policy,
occupied  there  a  burrow  with  a  hundred  openings.

Then  Well-to-do,  startled  by  the  descent  of  the  pigeons,  remained  silent.
Speckled-neck  said  :  0  friend  Well-to-do,  why  art  thou  not  conversing  (with)  us  ?
Well-to-do  having  heard  his  observation  (and)  recognised  (him),  ran  out  hastily
(and)  said :  Ah  !  I  am  fortunate,  my  dear  friend  Speckled-neck  (is)  come !

40.  Who  has  converse  with  a  friend,  who  has  (his)  abode  with  a  friend,  who  has
condolence  with  a  friend, — there  is  none  here  more  fortunate  than  he  !

Seeing  them  bound  in  a  snare,  remaining  a  moment  with  amazement,  he  said :
O  friend !  what  (is)  this  ?  Speckled-neck  replied :  This  (is)  the  result  of  our  conduct
in  a  former  birth.

2


1 0  MITEAL&BHA.

41.  From  whomsoever,  and  by  whomsoever,  and  howsoever,  and  whensoever,  and
whatsoever,  and  how  much  soever,  and  wheresoever — good  and  evil  (there  may  happen
to  be,  it  is)  one's  own  act,  and  comes  from  the  predominance  of  Fate.

42.  Sickness,  sorrow,  regret,  bonds,  and  afflictions, — these  (are)  the  fruits  of  the
tree  of  the  personal  offences  of  corporeal  beings.

Hearing  this  Well-to-do  hastily  drew  near  to  sever  the  bonds  of  Speckled-neck.
Thereupon  Speckled-neck  says  :  0  friend,  by  no  means  so ;  first  just  sever  the  snare
of  these  my  dependants.  Well-to-do  replied  :  I  (am)  weak,  and  my  teeth  are  soft ;
then  how  am  I  able  to  cut  the  noose  of  these  many?  Therefore,  as  long  as  my
teeth  do  not  break  so  long  (will)  I  cut  thy  noose ;  after  that,  to  the  utmost  of  my
power,  I  will  sever  the  bonds  of  the  others  also.  Speckled-neck  said  :  Be  it  even
so ;  still  to  the  utmost  of  thy  power  break  the  bonds  of  these.  Well-to-do  replied :
The  preservation  of  followers  by  the  abandonment  of  self  (is)  not  approved  by  those
who  are  conversant  with  policy.

For:—

43.  (A  man)  should  preserve  his  wealth  on  account  of  misfortune,  with  his  wealth
also  he  should  preserve  (his)  wife ;  both  by  wealth  (and)  by  wife  he  should  always
preserve  himself.

Again: —

44.  The  vital  airs  (are)  the  causes  of  the  continuance  of  virtue,  wealth,  pleasure,
and  (final)  deliverance ;  by  destroying  these  [vital  airs]  what  (is)  not  destroyed,  by
preserving  (them)  what  (is)  not  preserved  ?

Speckled-neck  said :  O  friend,  policy,  truly,  (is)  just  such  as  this ;  but  I  am  not
able  to  endure  the  affliction  of  my  dependants ;  therefore,  I  say  this.  For  : —

45.  A  wise  man  would  relinquish  riches  and  even  life  on  account  of  another:
death  being  certain,  better  the  abandonment  (of  life)  in  a  good  cause.

And  this  (is)  another  especial  reason  : —

46.  Among  these,  there  is  community  of  race,  wealth,  and  qualities  with  me ;
state  (then)  the  advantage  of  my  sovereignty ;  when  and  what  will  that  be  ?

Besides  : —

47.  Of  a  truth,  these  without  recompense  do  not  quit  my  vicinity ;  therefore,  even
at  the  expense  of  my  life  preserve  these  my  dependants.

Again : —

48.  Abandoning  solicitude  on  (account  of)  this  perishable  body,  formed  of  flesh,
urine,  excrement,  and  bone,  preserve  my  reputation,  0  friend !

And  see  further : —

49.  If  eternal  unsullied  fame  can  be  obtained  by  the  transitory  body  charged  with
impurities,  why,  then,  should  (it)  not  be  obtained  ?

For: —

50.  Between  the  body  and  the  virtues  (there  is)  an  exceedingly  wide  difference  ;
the  body  (is)  perishable  in  an  instant,  the  virtues  endure  to  the  end  of  time.


MITRALABHA.  11

Hearing  this,  Well-to-do,  being  delighted  in  mind  (and)  having  the  hairs  of  the
body  erect  (with  pleasure),  replied :  Good,  O  friend,  good !  by  this  tenderness  for  thy
dependants  the  sovereignty  of  even  the  three  worlds  is  suited  to  thee.  Having  said
so,  the  bonds  of  all  the  pigeons  (are)  cut  (by  him).  Then  Well-to-do,  having  cour-
teously congratulated  all  (of  them),  replied :  Friend  Speckled-neck,  here  the  binding
in  the  net  being  altogether  fate,  disparagement  is  not  to  be  cast  on  thyself  (from)
suspecting  a  fault.

For:—

51.  The  bird  who  from  more  than  a  hundred  leagues  sees  here  the  prey,  even  he
at  the  appointed  time,  sees  not  the  thong  of  the  noose.

And  also : —

52.  The  Bahu-paining  of  both  Moon  and  Sun,  also  the  binding  of  both  elephant
and  snake,  and  the  poverty  of  the  intelligent, — having  seen  (all  these),  "  0  fate  (is)
powerful,"  this  (is)  my  opinion.

Again : —

53.  Even  birds,  solitary  wanderers  in  the  air,  meet  with  misfortune  ;  also  fish  are
caught  by  the  skilful  from  the  sea  (whose)  waters  (are)  unfathomable.    On  fate  (being)
really  unpropitious,  whence  (comes  benefit  from)  good  conduct?  what  advantage  (is
there)  in  obtaining  a  position  ?     Truly  Time,  with  hand  stretched  out  for  destruction,
seizes  even  from  afar.

Having  thus  counselled,  exercised  hospilality,  and  embraced,  Speckled-neck,  dis-
missed by  him,  with  (his)  retinue  went  to  the  place  (he)  desired.

54.  Whoever  (they  may  be)  friends  should  be  made,  and  hundreds   (of  them)  :
behold,  by  the  friendship  of  a  mouse  the  pigeons  are  released  from  bonds.

Well-to-do,  also,  entered  his  burrow.  Now  the  crow  named  Gently-alighting,  a
spectator  of  the  whole  occurrence,  with  astonishment  said  this  :  0,  Well-to-do !  thou
art  to  be  be  praised  :  therefore  I  also  desire  to  form  friendship  with  thee,  hence  thou
shouldst  favour  me  with  (thy)  friendship.  Hearing  that,  Well-to-do,  remaining  in  the
interior  of  his  burrow,  said :  Who  (art)  thou,  Sir  ?  The  crow  replied  :  I  am  the  crow
called  Gently-alighting.  Then  Well-to-do  laughing  said  :  What  friendship  (can  there
be)  with  thee  ?

For:—

55.  What,  with  whatever  is  concordant  in  the  world,  that  the  wise  should  asso-
ciate therewith :  I  (am)  the  iood,  you  (are)  the  eater ;  how  shall  there  be  friendship
(between  us)  ?

56.  Friendship  between  the  food  and  the  eater,   (is)  assuredly   the  cause  of
misfortune.     The  deer  caught  in  a  noose  through  a  jackal  was  rescued  by  a  crow.

The  crow  asked  :  How  (was)  that  ?  Well-to-do  relates  (as  follows)  : —
There  is  in  the  country  of  Magadha*  a  forest  called  Champakavati ;  in  it  for  a
long  time,  with  great  friendship,  a  deer  and  a  crow  dwelt ;  and  the  deer,  delighted  and
plump,  roaming  about  by  its  own  inclination,  was  seen  by  a  certain  jackal.  Having
seen  him,  the  jackal  reflected  (thus)  :  Ah !  how  (may)  I  devour  this  delicate  flesh  of
the  deer  ?  Be  it  as  it  may,  I  (will)  just  excite  (his)  confidence.  Having  reflected  thus


The  modern  Bih&r.


12  MITEALABHA.

(and)  drawn  near,  he  said :  Friend !  prosperity  to  thee  !  Quoth  the  deer :  Who  (art)
thou?  The  jackal  replied:  I  am  the  jackal  named  Little-sense ;  here  in  the  forest,
destitute  of  friend  and  relation,  like  one  dead,  I  am  dwelling  alone  ;  but  now  having
met  with  you  (as  a)  friend,  I  have  again  entered  the  laud  of  the  living  ;  now  by  all
means,  let  me  become  a  dependant  of  thine.  The  deer  said :  Let  it  be  so.  After-
wards, as  soon  as  the  glorious  (sun)  wreathed  in  scorching  rays,  had  reached  the  western
mountain,  the  deer  and  the  jackal  went  towards  the  dwelling-place  of  the  deer.  There,
upon  the  branch  of  a  Champaka-tree,  the  crow  named  Intelligent,  long  the  friend  of
the  deer,  was  dwelling.  Seeing  those  two,  the  crow  exclaimed :  0  friend  deer !  who
(is)  this  second  (person)  ?  The  deer  replied :  This  (is)  a  jackal  come  seeking  my
friendship.  Says  the  crow  :  Friend,  confidence,  all  of  a  sudden,  with  a  new-comer  is
not,  indeed,  proper.  That  (is)  not  propitious  behaviour.

Thus  it  is  said :

57.  Of  whomsoever  the  race  and  disposition  are  unknown,  (to  him)  house-room
should  not  be  given.     Through  the  fault  of  a  cat,  the  vulture  Old-ox  was  killed.

They  both  asked  :  How  (was)  that  ?     The  crow  relates:

There  is  on  the  banks  of  the  Bhagirathi,*  on  a  mountain  called  Vulture-peak,  a
large  waved-leaf  fig-tree.  In  a  hollow  of  it,  by  the  cruelty  of  fate  (with)  decayed
claws  and  eyes,  an  old  vulture  named  Old-ox  is  dwelling.  Now  compassionately,  for
his  support,  the  birds  dwelling  in  that  tree  give  (him)  each  a  little  from  his  own  food :
with  that  he  lives.  Now,  once  upon  a  time,  a  cat  named  Long-ear  came  there  to
devour  the  young  birds.  Then,  having  seen  him  approaching,  the  young  birds  agitated
by  fear  made  an  uproar.  Hearing  that,  Old-ox  said  :  Who  (is)  this  coming  ?  Long-ea
perceiving  the  vulture  timidly  paid  :  Ah  !  I  am  killed !

For:—

58.  As  long  as  danger  is  not  imminent,  so  long  (is)  the  fear  of  danger  to  be
entertained ;  but  having  perceived  danger  at  hand  a  man  should  act  becomingly.

Now  from  extreme  nearness  flight  is  impossible,  therefore  as  it  is  to  be,  so  let  it
be ;  I  (will)  go  near  him.  Having  resolved  thus  (and)  approached,  he  said  :  Sir,  I
salute  thee.  The  vulture  cried  out :  Who  art  thou  ?  He  replied :  (It  is)  I,  a  cat.
Says  the  vulture  :  Ah,  miscreant !  go  away  to  a  distance,  otherwise  thou  wilt  be  killed
by  me.  The  cat  (then)  said :  Just  let  my  speech  be  heard,  afterwards  if  I  deserve
death,  then  let  (me)  be  killed.

For:—

59.  Whoever  is,  anywhere,  killed  or  honoured  merely  on  account  of  birth  ?  having
scrutinized  the  conduct,  he  should  be  either  killed  or  honoured.

Says  the  vulture :  Tell  me,  of  what  sort  (is  thy)  conduct  ?  He  replied  :  Here
I  am  dwelling  on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges,  continually  performing  ablutions,  eating


*  The  river  Ganges.


MITEALABHA.  13

no  flesh,  as  a  religious  student  practising  the  Chandrayana  vow.*  The  birds,  the  objects
of  the  love  and  confidence  of  you  (who  are)  conversant  with  the  law,  are  for  ever
before  me  praising  thy  manifold  virtues,  hence  I  am  come  here  to  listen  to  an  expo-
sition of  the  law  from  your  Honour,  advanced  in  knowledge  and  years ;  and  (doth)
your  Honour  so  understand  the  law  as  (to  be)  ready  to  slay  me,  a  guest?  But
this  has  been  declared  the  duty  of  a  householder —

60.  On  even  an  enemy  arrived  at  the  house  becoming  hospitality  should  be  be-
stowed ;  the  tree  does  not  withdraw  its  sheltering  shadow  from  the  wood-cutter.

Moreover,  if  there  is  no  food  in  the  house,  then  with  very  kind  language  at  least
a  stranger  should  be  entertained.  For  it  is  said  : —

61.  Grass,  a  space,  water,  and,  fourthly,  courteous  language, — these  are  never
withheld  in  the  house  of  the  good.

Besides : —

62.  If  either  a  child,  or  an  old  man,  or  a  youth,  come  to  the  house,  respect
should  be  shown  for  him.     The  guest  is  everyone's  superior.

Again : —

63.  The  good  show  pity  upon  even  worthless  beings :  the  moon  does  not  withdraw
(its)  light  from  the  house  of  the  Chanda,la.f

Further : —

64.  From  whose   house  a   guest  turns  away  disappointed,  he  [the  guest]  goes
having  given  to  him   [the  householder]  his  (own)  misdeeds,  and  having  taken  away
his  [the  householder's]  virtue.

Moreover : —

65.  Even  a  low  person  come  to  the  house  of  one  of  even  the  highest  caste  should
be  suitably  entertained  :  a  guest  consists  of  all  the  deities.  J

The  vulture  replied  :  since  cats  are  delighters  in  flesh  and  young  birds  live  here,
therefore  I  speak  thus.  On  hearing  this  the  cat  having  touched  the  earth,  touches
both  (her)  ears,  and  says :  By  me,  with  extinguished  passions,  studying  the  books  of
the  law,  this  very  arduous  task,  the  Chandrayana,  has  been  undertaken.  For  of  the
mutually  discordant  works  of  sacred  authority  (there  is)  unanimity  on  this  point,  that
inoffensiveness  (is)  a  paramount  duty.

For:—

66.  The  men  who  abstain  from  injury  to  all,  who  patiently  endure  all,  and  who
(are)  the  asylum  of  all,  those  men  go  to  heaven.

Again  : —

67.  Virtue  (is)  truly  the  one  friend  which  follows  after  (its  possessor)  even  in
death ;  but  all  else  attains  equal  destruction  with  the  body.

Moreover : —

68.  When  anyone  eats  the  flesh  of  another,  behold  ye  the  difference  of  the  two  :  of
the  one  (there  is)  momentary  gratification,  the  other  is  abandoned  by  the  vital  airs.§

And  also  : —

69.  The  pain  which  is  produced  for  a  man   (by  the  thought,   "I)  must  die,"  by
that  reflection  another  (person)  ought  to  be  preserved.

*  A  fast  endnring  for  a  month.  t  A  member  of  the  lowest  cast.

J  Is  an  impersonation  of  all  the  deities.  §  i.e.,  is  deprived  of  life.


14  MITEALABHA.

Listen  again : —

70.  It  [the  stomach]  is  thoroughly  satisfied  even  by  vegetables  spontaneously  pro-
duced in  the  wood ;  on  account  of  this  craving  stomach  what  man  would  commit  sin  ?

Having  thus  inspired  confidence  the  cat  remained  in  the  hollow  of  the  tree.  Then
in  succeeding  days,  attacking  the  young  birds  and  bringing  (them)  into  the  hole,  day
by  day  he  devours  (them).  Now  by  those  disconsolate  birds  whose  young  had  been
devoured  an  investigation  was  commenced  here  and  there.  Perceiving  that,  the  cat
slipping  out  of  the  hole  fled.  Afterwards,  by  the  birds  searching  hither  and  thither,
there,  in  the  hollow  (of  the  tree),  the  bones  of  the  young  ones  were  found ;  and  im-
mediately concluding  that  their  young  ones  had  been  eaten  by  him,  the  vulture  was
killed  by  the  birds  combined  together.  Hence  I  say,  "  Without  knowing  family  and
disposition,"  &c.  Having  heard  this  the  jackal  angrily  said  :  On  the  first  day  of  the
Deer's  seeing  (you)  your  Honour  also  was  unknown  as  to  disposition ;  then  how  (is
it  that)  even  to  the  present  day  the  course  of  this  great  affection  with  your  Honour
increases  more  and  more  ?

71.  Where  there  is  not  a  wise  person,  there  one  of  even  little  sense  is  commend-
able ;  in  a  country  devoid  of  trees  even  the  castor-oil  plant  ranks  as  a  tree.

Besides : —

72.  "  (Is)  he  of  my  country  or  a  stranger?"  such  is  the  calculation  of  the  narrow-
minded  :  the  earth  itself  (is)  the  family  of  the  noble-hearted.

And  as  this  deer  (is)  my  friend  so  (is)  your  Honour  also.  Says  the  deer  :  What
(is  to  be  effected)  by  this  debating  ?  let  us  all  remain  with  confidential  discourse
enjoying  happiness  together.  For : —

73.  Noone  (is)  the  friend  of  anyone,  noone  is  the  enemy  of  anyone ;  by  conduct
friends  are  produced,  so  (are)  enemies.

The  crow  replied  :  Let  it  be  so.  Now  in  the  early  morning  all  went  to  the  place
they  liked  best.  One  day  the  jackal  secretly  says :  In  one  part  of  this  forest  there  is
a  field  full  of  corn  ;  having  taken  thee  there  I  (will)  show  (it).  Upon  (this)  being  so
done,  the  deer  every  day  going  there  eats  the  corn.  Then,  in  the  course  of  a  few
days,  having  noticed  him,  by  the  owner  of  the  field  a  snare  was  fixed  there.  After-
wards, the  deer  came  again,  (and)  grazing  there,  was  caught  by  the  snare.  Who,
thought  he,  other  than  a  friend  (is)  able  to  draw  me  hence  from  the  snare  of  the
hunter  so  like  the  noose  of  Death?  Hereupon  the  jackal  having  approached  there
stood  near  (and)  reflected  :  Ah  !  successful  so  far  (is)  our  deceitful  plot,  the  fulfil-
ment of  my  wishes  will  also  be  abundant ;  for  his  flesh-and-blood  stained  bones  on
being  cut  up  are  certainly  to  be  obtained  by  me.  But  on  seeing  him  the  deer
delighted  said :  Friend  Jackal,  just  sever  my  bonds  ;  speedily  deliver  me.

For:—

74.  In  misfortunes  one  may  know  a  friend,  in  battle  a  hero,  in  debt  an  honest
person,  in  decaying  fortunes  a  wife,  and  kinsmen  in  afflictions.


MITRALABHA.  15

Moreover : —

75.  He  (is)  a  kinsman  who  stands  (with  one)  in  festive  seasons,  and  also  in  afflic-
tion, in  famine,  in  tumult  of  the  country,  in  the  king's  porch,  and  in  the  cemetery.

The  jackal,  having  inspected  the  snare  again  and  again,  thought  (within  himself)  :
This  deer  is  so  far  fast  bound  in  the  snare,  and  says  :  Friend  deer,  these  thongs  are
formed  of  sinews,  therefore  how  (can)  I  touch  them  with  (my)  teeth  now  on  a  sacred
day.  (My)  friend!  let  us  think  (quite)  otherwise.  Therefore  to-morrow  morning
whatever  (shall)  be  suggested  by  thee  that  (will)  be  done  by  me.  Having  spoken  thus
he  remained  silently  waiting  in  [the  cover]  of  a  thin  bush.  Meanwhile  the  crow,  in
the  evening,  finding  the  deer  had  not  returned,  searching  hither  and  thither,  having
seen  him  in  above-described  condition,  said  :  O  friend,  what  (is)  this  ?  The  deer
replied  :  This  (is)  the  result  of  despising  a  friend's  counsel.  As  it  has  been  said  :

76.  Misfortune   (is)   near  him  who  hearkens  not  to  the  voice  of  well  -  wishing
friends :  that  man  (is)  the  delight  of  his  enemies.

The  crow  says  :  Where  (is)  the  jackal  ?  The  deer  replied :  Truly  here  he  stands
in  the  little  grove  waiting  for  my  flesh.  Says  the  crow :  Friend,  as  much  was  said
by  me  before.

77.  "  I  have  done  no  wrong," — this  (is)  not  a  reason  for  confidence :  there  ever
exists  danger  to  the  virtuous  from  the  vicious.

78.  One  departing  this  life  neither  smells  the  stench   of  an  expiring  lamp,  nor
hears  the  advice  of  a  friend,  nor  sees  the  star  Arundhati.*

79.  One  should  avoid  that  kind  of  friend  (which)  behind  the  back  injures  (one's)
purposes,  and  before  the  face  speaks  sweetly.      (He  is)  a  dish  of  poison  with  milk  on
the  surface.

Then  the  crow  sighing  deeply  (said)  :  0  wretch,  what  has  been  done  by  thee,  agent
of  wickedness !

For:—

80.  What  (great  affair)  is  it  for  those  talked  over  with  honied  words,  for  those
subdued  by  false  services,  and  for  hopeful  and  trusting  suitors,  to  be  deceived  in  this
world  !

Again : —

81.  0  venerable  Earth !  how  art  thou  supporting  that  treacherous  man  who  prac-
tises wickedness  upon  an  unsuspecting  pure-minded  benefactor !

82.  One  should  bring  about  neither  friendship  nor  even  acquaintance  with  a
wicked  person  :  charcoal  (when)  hot,  burns ;   (when)  cold  it  blackens  the  hand.

For  this  (is)  the  habit  of  wicked  people, —

83.  First  he  falls  at  the  feet,  (then)  he  bites  the  back-flesh,  in  the  ear  some
charming  tune  or  other  he  gently  murmurs ;  having  detected  an  opening  he  suddenly
enters  without  fear.     The  mosquito  practises  every  act  of  the  vile.


*  The  morning  star.     Mythologically,  the  daughter  of  Daksha  and  wife  of  Dharma  or  Vas'ishtha.


16  MITRALABHA.

And  thus —

84.  A  wicked  person  (may  be)  sweetly  spoken,  but  that  is  not  a  reason  for  con-
fiding (in  him).     He  has  sweetness  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  (but)  in  the  heart  virulent
poison.

Now  early  in  the  morning,  the  owner  of  the  field,  staff  in  hand,  coming  to  that
place,  was  descried  by  the  crow.  Perceiving  him  the  crow  said  :  Friend  deer,  making
thyself  appear  like  dead,  filling  (thy)  belly  with  wind,  (and)  stiffening  the  legs,  remain
(still).  When  I  make  the  sound  "  Caw,"  then  hastily  starting  up  thou  wilt  flee  away.
The  deer  remained  just  as  directed  by  the  crow.  Then  (he)  was  perceived  by  the
owner  of  the  field  with  eyes  expanded  with  joy.  Seeing  the  deer  in  the  above-described
condition,  "Ah  !  this  deer  has  died  of  itself,"  exclaiming  thus,  the  owner  of  the  field,
having  released  the  deer  from  the  bond,  began  to  fold  up  the  snare.  Then,  on  the
owner  of  the  field  being  retired  a  little  distance,  the  deer  hearing  the  noise  of  the  crow
hastily  got  up  (and)  fled  away.  Aiming  at  him,  the  staff  was  thrown  by  the  owner  of
the  field ;  (and)  the  jackal  was  killed  by  the  blow  of  the  staff  hurled  by  him.

Thus  it  is  said  : —

85.  "Within  three  years,  within  three  months,  within  three  fortnights,  within  three
days,  one  enjoys,  even  here,  the  fruit  of  extraordinary  vices  and  virtues.

Hence  I  say,  "Confidence  between  the  food  and  the  eater,"  &c.  The  crow
replied : —

86.  Even  by  thee  (being)  eaten  (there  would)  not  (be)  a  complete  meal  for  me  :
on  thee  living  I  live,  0  (thou)  harmless  as  Speckled-neck !

Again  : —

87.  Even  among  brutes,  whose  actions  (are)  pure  and  single,  confidence  (is)  seen  ;
from  the  excellent  disposition  of  the  good,  the  natural  quality  varies  not.

Moreover : —

88.  The  mind  of  the  good  even  (when)  angered  undergoes  no  change :  the  water
of  the  ocean  cannot  be  made  hot  by  a  wisp  of  straw.

Well-to-do  says :  Thou  (art)  fickle  (and)  friendship  with  the  fickle  should  by
no  means  be  formed.  Thus  it  is  said  : —

89.  A  cat,  a  buffalo,  a  ram,  a  crow,  and  a  base  man  ;  these  through  confidence  are
ascendent,  therefore  confidence  (in  them  is)  inexpedient.

Furthermore  you  (are)  on  the  side  of  our  enemies ;  and  it  is  said —

90.  With  an  enemy  one  should  not  ally  oneself,  at  least  with  a  closely  cemented
union  :  even  well  heated  water  quenches  the  fire.

91.  A  bad  person  is  to  be  avoided  even  although  adorned  with  knowledge :  the
serpent  (is)  ornamented  with  a  jewel ;  (but)  is  not  he  dangerous  ?

92.  What  is  impossible  that  cannot  be,  what  is  possible  that  truly  can  be :  a  cart
goes  not  on  the  water,  a  ship  goes  not  on  the  land.


MITEALABHA.  17

Besides : —

93.  He  who,  through  great  affluence  of  wealth,  confides  in  enemies  and  in  an
alienated  wife, — that  (is)  the  end  of  his  life.

Gently-alighting  says :  All  has  been  heard  by  me ;  still  such  (is)  my  determina-
tion that  friendship  with  thee  must  absolutely  be  formed  by  me,  otherwise,  by  my
abstention  from  food,  at  thy  door  my  body  (is)  to  be  abandoned.  Thus,  indeed —

94.  A  bad  person  is  like  an  earthen  vessel  easy  to  break  and  difficult  to  repair ;
but  a  good  person,  like  a  vessel  of  gold,  (is)  hard  to  break  and  quick  to  be  united.

Moreover : —

95.  "Union  of  all  metals  (is)  from  fluidity,  of  beasts  and  birds  from  instinct,  of
fools  from  fear  and  avarice,  of  good  people  from  merit.

Moreover : —

96.  Good  people  are  seen  to  be  formed  like  the  cocoa-nut ;  others,  formed  like  the
jujube,  (are)  charming  enough  externally.

Knowing  this,  the  society  of  the  good  is  desired.

For  :—

97.  Even,  upon  an  interruption  of  friendship,  the  qualities  of  the  good  undergo
no  change  :  even  when  broken  the  fibres  of  lotus-stalks  are  connected.

Besides : —

98.  Purity,   liberality,  heroism,   community  of   pleasures    and  pains,    kindness,
attachment,  and  truthfulness,  (are)  the  qualities  of  a  friend.

What  friend  other  than  yourself  can  be  found  by  me  endowed  with  these
qualities  ?  Having  heard  this  and  more  (of)  his  discourse,  Well-to-do,  issuing  forth,
said :  I  (am)  invigorated  by  this  nectar  of  your  Honour's  words ;  for  it  is  said  : —

99.  Neither  bathing  with  very  cool  waters,  nor  a  pearl  necklace,  nor  sandal-oint-
ment although  applied  to  every  limb,  so  gratifies  one  distressed  by  heat,  as  the  conversa-
tion of  good  people,  adorned  with  good  taste  (and)  resembling  an  attracting  charm,
has  power  for  the  gratification  of  the  mind  of  the  virtuous.

Besides : —

100.  Betrayal  of  confidence,  importunity,  harshness,   fickleness  of  mind,  anger,
untruthfulness,  and  gambling, — this  (is)  the  spoiling  of  a  friend.

Not  even  one  fault,  then,  throughout  the  course  of  this  speech,  is  perceptible  in
thee.

For:—

101.  Eloquence  (or)  truthfulness  is  known  by  the  appropriateness  of  the  state-
ment ;  unsteadiness  (or)  unwaveringness  is  ascertained  by  observation.

Again : —

102.  The   friendship  of   one  whose  heart  is  pure  is,  indeed,  of    one  kind;  the
speech  of  one  whose  mind  is  affected  by  deceit  acts  in  a  quite  opposite  way.

3


18  MITEALABHA.

103.  In  the  mind  of  the  wicked  (there  is)  one  thing,  in  the  word  something  else,
in  the  deed  something  else  :  in  the  mind  of  the  large-souled  (there  is)  singleness,
in  the  word  singleness,  in  the  deed  singleness.

Then  let  it  be  even  as  your  Honour  wishes  ;  saying  this  Well-to-do,  having  esta-
blished friendship,  (and)  having  gratified  the  crow  with  choice  food,  entered  (his)  burrow.
The  crow  also  departed  to  his  own  place.  After  that  some  time  passes  away  with  their
mutual  presents  of  food,  inquiries  after  health,  and  confidential  conversation.  One
day  the  crow  said  to  Well-to-do :  Friend,  this  (is)  a  place  (in  which)  the  food  of  a
crow  is  very  hard  to  be  procured ;  therefore,  quitting  this,  I  wish  to  go  to  another
place.  Well-to-do  says : —

104.  Teeth,  hair,  nails,  (and)  men,  removed  from  their  place,  are  not  beautiful ;
knowing  this,  the  wise  should  not  abandon  his  own  place.

The  crow  says  :  Friend,  this  (is)  the  speech  of  a  coward.

For:—

105.  Lions,  good  men,  (and)  elephants,  having  abandoned  a  place  go  (onwards  in
life) ;  crows,  cowards,  (and)  deer,  meet  death  at  the  same  spot.

Besides : —

106.  What  (is)  recognised  by  an  intelligent  hero  as  his  own  country  ?  or  what  as  a
foreign  land  ?    Whatever  country  he  resorts  to,  even  that  he  makes  (his  own),  acquired
by  strength  of  arm.     Whatever  forest  the  lion  ranges,  striking  with  teeth,  claws,  and
tail,  in  that  same  he  slakes  his  thirst  with  the  blood  of  stricken  elephants.

Well-to-do  asks :  Whither  must  (we)  go  ?  For  thus  it  is  said  : —

107.  The  wise  man  moves  with  one  foot,  (and)  rests  still  with  one  foot :  without
having  inspected  another  place,  he  should  not  abandon  a  former  station.

The  crow  says :  Friend,  there  is  a  well  inspected  place ;  I  am  (about  to)  lead
you  there.  Well-to-do  said :  What  (is)  that  ?  The  crow  relates :  There  is  in  the
Dandaka- forest  a  lake  called  Camphor-white.  There,  a  beloved  friend  of  mine,  acquired
a  long  time  ago,  the  innately  virtuous  tortoise  named  Torpid,  dwells.  For : —

108.  In  advising  others,  wisdom  may  be  easy  for  all ;  but  in  the  (path  of)  duty
the  following  oneself  (is)  for  one  of  exalted  mind.

And  he  will  regale  me  with  choice  fish-diet.  Well-to-do  said :  Remaining  here,
what  is  to  be  done  by  me  ?  For : —

109.  In  whatever  country  (there  is)  neither  respect  for  the  good,  nor  the  means  of
livelihood,  nor  friends,  nor  the  advance  of  knowledge :  anyone  should  abandon  that
country.

Besides  : —

110.  A  rich  man,  a  religious  teacher,  a  king,  a  river,  and  fifthly  a  physician ; —


MITBALABHA.  19

where  (these)  five  are  not  one  should  not  make  (one's)  abode.


im: —

111.  Traffic,  fear,  modesty,  honesty,  (and)  generosity, — where  (these)  five  are  not,
there  one  should  not  make  an  abiding-place.

Again : —

112.  There,  0  Friend,  one  must  not  dwell,  where  this  quarternion  is  not — a  payer
of  debts,  a  physician,  a  religious  teacher,  (and)  a  river  of  wholesome  water.

Hence  conduct  me  also  there.  The  crow  replied :  Let  it  be  so.  Now  the  crow
set  out  towards  that  pool  with  that  friend,  happy  in  discoursing  on  various  subjects.
Then  Torpid  even  from  afar  perceiving  Gently-alighting,  rose  up,  (and)  having  accorded
(him)  a  suitable  welcome,  performed  the  duties  of  hospitality  also  for  the  mouse.
For:—

113.  The  preceptor  of  the  twice-born  (is)  fire ;  a  Brahman  (is)  the  preceptor  of
(other)  castes  ;  a  husband  (is)  the  sole  preceptor  of  women :  a  guest  (is)  the  preceptor
everywhere.

The  crow  said :  Friend  Torpid,  render  especial  honour  to  this  one ;  for  he  is  the
chief  of  virtuous  actors,  an  ocean  of  compassion,  named  Well-to-do,  king  of  the
mice.  The  praise  of  his  virtue  not  even  the  Serpent-king  with  (his)  two  thousand
tongues  is  able  to  celebrate.  Having  said  this,  he  related  the  anecdote  of  Speckled-
neck.  Then  Torpid,  having  respectfully  saluted  Well-to-do,  said :  Sir,  thou  shouldst
state  the  reason  of  your  coming  to  (this)  desolate  wood.  Well-to-do  replied :  I  am
(about  to)  relate  (it)  ;  listen.  There  is,  in  a  town  called  Champaka,  a  residence  for
mendicants.  A  mendicant  is  dwelling  there  named  Tufted-ear ;  and  he  goes  to  sleep
(after)  having  placed  on  a  peg  (his)  alms-dish,  containing  the  food  given  in  alms,  the
remains  of  meals ;  and  I,  having  leaped  up,  each  day  used  to  eat  this  food.  After-
wards his  beloved  friend,  a  mendicant  named  Lute-eared,  arrived.  Engaged  with  him
in  various  topics  of  conversation,  for  the  purpose  of  frightening  me,  with  a  piece  of
split  cane,  Tufted-ear  kept  striking  the  earth.  Perceiving  this,  Lute-eared  said :  Friend*
how  is  it  that,  inattentive  to  my  conversation,  you  (are)  intent  on  something  else  ?
For:—

114.  A  pleased  countenance,  and  a  clear  eye,  attention  to  conversation,  and  sweet
speech,  exceeding  kindness,  and  a  ready  aspect,  (is)  ever  the  mark  of  an  attached
person.

115.  Giving  dissatisfaction,  ungratefulness,  disrespect,  publishing  (one's)  failings,
the  forgetting  (one's)  name  during  conversation,  (is)  the  mark  of  a  person  of  estranged
nature.

Tufted-ear  said :  Dear  Sir !  I  (am)  not  inattentive.  But  see,  this  mouse,  my
injurer,  continually  devours  the  alms-food  remaining  in  the  dish.  Lute-eared,  having
examined  the  peg,  said :  How  (is  it  that)  this  very  weak  mouse  jumps  so  far  ?  there-
fore, here  there  must  be  some  cause.

Thus  it  has  been  said  : —

116.  A  young  woman  suddenly  having  seized  the   hair  (and)  unmercifully  em-


20  MITRALABHA.

braced,  kisses  (her)  old  husband :  here  there  will  be  a  cause.

Tufted-ear  asks:  How  (is)  that?  Lute-eared  relates  (as  follows):  There  is  in
Gaur  a  city  called  Kausambin*;  in  it  dwells  a  very  wealthy  merchant  named  Sandal-
slave  ;  and  by  him,  when  in  the  latter  part  of  life,  with  mind  overpowered  by  desire,
through  pride  of  wealth,  was  espoused  a  merchant's  daughter  named  Wanton.  But
she  was  (in)  the  bloom  of  youth,  like  the  banner  of  Cupidf;  and  an  old  husband  was
not  to  her  satisfaction.  For : —

117.  The  heart  of  those  pinched  by  cold  delights  not  in  the  moon,  (nor)  of  those
oppressed  by  heat  in  the  sun,  (so,  the  hearts)  of  women  (take  no  delight)  in  a  husband
whose  sensual  organs  are  impaired  by  age.

Moreover : —

118.  Upon  the  grey  hairs  of  a  man  appearing,  what  passion  forsooth  (can  there
be)  ?  since  women,  with  hearts  fixed  on  others,  esteem  (him)  as  a  drug.

But  the  old  husband  was  exceedingly  attached  (to)  her.     For  : —

119.  The  hope  of  wealth,  and  the  love  of  life  (are)  always  important  among  living
creatures ;  for  an  old  man,  a  young  wife  is  more  important  than  life  itself.

Also : —

120.  A  decrepit  man  is  neither  able  to  enjoy  nor  to  renounce  sensual  objects  ;  (as)
a  toothless  dog  only  licks  a  bone  with  (his)  tongue.

Now  this  Wanton,  from  the  rashness  of  youth,  overstepping  family  bounds,
became  in  love  with  a  certain  merchant's  son.  For  : —

121.  Liberty,  residence  in    a  father's  house,  attendance   at   festive  processions,
unrestraint  in  the  presence  of  tribesmen,  also  residence  in  a  foreign  country,   the
repeatedly  consorting  with  unchaste  women,  the  wasting  away  of  her  own  means  of
subsistence,  the  old  age,  jealousy,  (and)  sojourn  abroad  of  the  husband,  (are)  the  cause
of  the  destruction  of  women.

Besides : —

122.  Drinking,   associating  with  bad  people,  and   absence    (from)  the  husband,
roaming  about,  sleep,  and  dwelling  in  another's  house,  (are)  the  six  faults  of  women.

Moreover : —

123.  There  is  no  place ;  there  is   no  opportunity ;  there  is  no  male  a  suitor ; —
through  that,  0  Narada,  the  chastity  of  women  arises.

Again : —

124.  Among  women,  no  male  is  either  agreeable  or  disagreeable ;  like  cows  in  a
forest  they  seek  grass  fresh  and  fresh.

125.  Women,  truly,   (are)  ever  inconstant,  (this  is)  notorious   even  among  the
celestials ;  lucky  (are)  those  men  of  whom  they  (are)  preserved  (pure).


*  Meaning  "  possessed  of  grass  and  water."  f  i.e.,  was  beautiful.


MITKALABHA.  21

126.  (It  is)  not  modesty,  nor  decorum,  nor  honesty,  nor  timidity ; — truly,  the  lack
of  a  suitor,  this  (is)  the  cause  of  a  woman's  chastity.

Besides  : —

127.  A  woman  (is)  like  a  jar  of  butter,  a  man  (is)  like  glowing  charcoal;  therefore
the  wise  should  not  place  both  butter  and  fire  in  one  place.

Again : —

128.  The  father  preserves   in    girlhood,  the    husband   preserves    in  youth,  and
children  (preserve)  in  the  aged  condition :  a  woman  is  not  fit  (for)  liberty.

129.  With  mother,  sister,  or  daughter,  one  should  not  be  sitting  sequestered  ;
powerful  (is)  the  aggregate  of  the  senses,  it  draws  even  the  wise  (into  danger).

Once,  this  Wanton,  seated  at  her  ease  on  a  couch  variegated  with  strings  of  jewels,
(in)  familiar  intercourse  with  the  merchant's  son,  the  husband  approached  unperceived ;
seeing  him  (she)  hastily  arose,  caught  (him)  by  the  hair,  (and)  ardently  hugging,
kissed  (him)  ;  and  hereupon  the  gallant  got  up  (and)  escaped.  It  is  said : —

130.  Whatever  science  TJsanas*  knows,  and  whatever  (science)  Vrihaspatif  knows ;
all  that,  even  by  nature,  is  firmly  implanted  in  the  understanding  of  women.

Seeing  that  embracing,  a  procuress,  passing  near,  thought :  Without  cause  she  is
embracing  him.  Afterwards,  discovering  the  gallant  (to  be)  the  cause,  Wanton  was
fined  secretly  by  that  procuress.  Hence  I  say,  "  Suddenly  a  young  wife,"  &c.  Here
there  must  be  some  cause  sustaining  the  strength  of  the  mouse.  Having  considered  a
moment,  the  mendicant  said  :  And  the  reason  here  appears  to  be  really  the  abundance
of  wealth.  For  : —

131.  Every  wealthy  person  in  the  world  is  everywhere  always  strong;  even  the
power  of  kings  arises,  founded  on  wealth.

Then  taking  a  pick-axe,  (and)  digging  up  the  burrow,  my  long-hoarded  wealth  was
seized  by  that  mendicant.  Then  daily  deprived  of  my  strength,  bereft  of  courage  and
energy,  unable  to  obtain  proper  food,  timidly  and  softly  creeping  about,  I  was  seen  by
Tufted-ear.  Then  he  said  :

132.  By  wealth  everyone  (is)  strong ;  from  wealth  one  becomes  wise  ;  behold,  this
wicked  mouse  has  attained  the  level  of  his  species.

Again : —

133.  All    the  acts  of  a  man  of   little  understanding,  deprived  (of)  wealth,  are
destroyed,  like  rivulets  in  the  hot  season.

Moreover : —

134.  Of   whom  (there  are)  riches,  of  him  (there  are)  friends ;  of  whom  (there
are)  riches,  of  him  (there  are)  relations  ;  of  whom  (there  are)  riches,  he  (is)  a  man  in
the  world  ;  of  whom  (there  are)  riches,  he  (is)  wise.


*  The  learned  regent  of  the  planet  Yenus ;  also,  the  author  of  a  law-book,  still  extant,
t  The  preceptor  of  the  gods,  the  ruler  of  speech  and  understanding.


22  MITRALABHA.

Again : —

135.  The  house  of  the  childless  (is)  empty,  (so  is  the  house)  of  one  destitute  o£  a
true  friend ;  for  a  fool  the  regions  of  space  (are)  empty ;  totally  blank  (is)  poverty.

Verily : —

136.  Between  poverty  and  death,  poverty  is  acknowledged  the  worse ;  death  (is
attended)  with  (but)  little  affliction  ;  poverty  (is)  exceedingly  hard  to  bear.

Besides  : —

137.  Those  senses  (are)  unimpaired ;  so  also  (is)  the  name ;  this  understanding
(is)  uninjured;  so  also  (is)  the  voice : — deserted  by  the  warmth  of  wealth,  the  man,  of
a  truth,  instantly  becomes  a  different  person. — Strange  this.

Having  heard  all  this  I  reflected :  My  remaining  here  (is)  now  improper ;  and  as
regards  relating  this  incident  to  another,  that  also  (is)  improper.
For:—

138.  A  wise   person  should  not  divulge  the  loss  of  wealth,   distress  of   mind,
malpractices  at  home,  the  being  cheated,  and  disgrace.

Also : —

139.  Age,  wealth,  family  dissension,  private  counsel,  sexual  intercourse,  medicinal
remedies,  penance,  almsgiving,  and  disgrace,  (are)  nine  things  to  be  carefully  con-
cealed.

And  it  is  said : —

140.  On  fate  (proving)  exceedingly  unpropitious,  and  on  manliness  being  exerted
in   vain,  whence,  except  from  the   forest,*  (can  there  be)  happiness  for  the  sensible
poor  ?

Again : —

141.  A  wise  man  dies  pleasureably,  but  reaches  not  penury  (pleasureably).     Fire
experiences  even  extinction,  but  approaches  not  coldness.

Moreover : —

142.  As  of  a  bunch  of  flowers,  (there  are)  two  states  of  a  wise  man ;  he  should
either  remain  on  the  head  of  all,  or  he  should  wither  in  the  forest.

And  as  to  living  here  by  mendicancy,  that  (is)  exceedingly  despicable.     For  : —

143.  Better  the  (funeral)  fires  were  satisfied  with  the  vital  airsf  by  one  deprived
of  wealth,  (but)  not  the  soliciting  a  churlish  sordid  person.

Besides : —

144.  From  poverty  one  reaches  shame,  overcome  with  shame  he  is  deprived  of
spirit,  (being)  spirit-less  he  is  despised,  from  contempt  he  approaches  despondency,
(being)  despondent  he  goes  on  to  misery,  afflicted  by  misery  he  is  deserted  by  intel-
ligence, (being)  sense-less  he  goes  to  destruction :  alas  !  poverty  (is)  the  seat  of  every
calamity.

Moreover : —

145.  Better  (for)  silence  to  be  kept,  but  not  a  word  uttered  which  (is)  untrue ;
better  impotency  for  me,  but  not  intercourse  with  the  wife  of  another ;  better  the
abandonment  of  life,  but  not  delight  in  the  words  of  a  slanderer ;  better  a  subsistence
on  alms,  but  not  the  pleasure  of  feasting  on  another's  wealth.


i.e.  voluntary  banishment.  f  *'•«•  one  were  better  dead.


MITRALABHA.  23

146.  Better  an  empty  hall,  but  a  wicked  leader  (is)  certainly  not  good ;  better
a  harlot  (for)  wife,  but  not  a  re-married  woman  of  (even)  good  family ;  better  residence
in  the  forest  rather  than  in  the  city  of  a  stupid  king ;  better  the  abandonment  of  life
rather  than  consorting  among  the  vile.

Also  : —

147.  As  service  (takes  away)  all  respect ;  as  moonlight   (removes)  darkness ;  as
old  age,  beauty ;  as  tales  of  Vishnu  and  S'iva,  sin ;  so   also  beggary  takes   away    a
hundred  (good)  qualities.

Having  reflected  thus,  how,  afterwards,  (shall)  I  feast  myself  with  the  food  of
another  ?     0  the  wretchedness  !  that  surely  (were)  a  second  Death's  door !

For:—

148.  Superficial  learning,  sexual  intercourse  purchased  with  a  price,  and  subsisting
subject  to  another,  (are)  three  miseries  of  men.

Besides : —

149.  The  sick,  the  long  exiled,  the  eater  of  another's  food,  the  sleeper  in  another's
house,  what  (part  of  life)  he  lives,  that  (is)  death  ;  what  (is)  death,  that  (is)  his  repose.

Though  I  reflected  thus,  still,  from  cupidity,  again  I  made  effort  to  take  his  food.
Thus  it  is  said : —

150.  Through  covetousness  the  intelligence  wavers  ;  covetousness  begets   insati-
ability ;  tormented  with  insatiability  a  man  experiences  misery  here  and  in  the  other
world.

Afterwards,  struck  by  Lute-eared  with  that  piece  of  split-cane,  I  reflected : —

151.  One   greedy  of    wealth,  of    unrestrained  spirit,  of  unsubdued  senses,    (is)
indeed  discontented;  truly   every  misfortune  (is)  his,  of    whom  the  mind  (is)   not
contented.

In  like  manner  : —

152.  Every  success  (is)  his,  of  whom  the  mind  (is)  contented  ;  for  one  whose  feet
are  covered  with  shoes  (is)  not  the  earth  covered  with  leather  ?

Besides  : —

153.  What  happiness  (there  is)  for  the  tranquil-minded,  satisfied  with  the  nectar
of  content,  whence  (comes)   such  for  those   running  hither  and   thither   greedy  of
wealth  ?

Moreover : —

154.  By  him   (everything)   has  been   duly  read,  by  him   heard,   (and)   by  him
practised,   who,  having  placed  expectation   behind   his   back,   has   relied   upon  non-
expectancy.

And  also : —

155.  Happy  (is)  the  life  of  anyone  not  spent  at  the  door  of  the  great,  which  has
not  experienced  the  pain  of  separation,  (and)  which  has  not  uttered  an  unavailing
word.

For  :—

156.  A  hundred  leagues  (is)  not  far  for  one  being  borne  along  by  desire  ;  for  the
contented  there  is  no  regard  for  even  the  wealth  held  in  the  hand.

Therefore  here  the  adoption  of  acts  suitable  to  (one's)  condition  (is)  best.


24  MITKALABHA.

And  it  is  said  :

157.  What   (is)    religion?     Kindness  to  creatures.     What  (is)  happiness?     The
healthiness  of  a  living  being  in  this  world.    What  (is)  kindness  ?    Good  nature.    What
(is)  wisdom  ?     Discrimination.

In  like  manner : —

158.  Discrimination    (is)    indeed   wisdom   when   a   calamitous   circumstance   has
occurred:  for  those  incapable  of  exercising  discrimination  there  are  calamities  step
by  step.

For  instance  : —

159.  (A  man)  should  abandon  one  (person)  for  the  sake  of  a  family  ;  for  the  sake
of  a  village  he  should  abandon  the  family  ;  the  village   (he  should  give  up)    for  the
sake  of  the  country  ;  for  the  sake  of  (his)  soul  he  should  abandon  the  earth.

Moreover : —

160.  Either  water  without  effort,  or  delicate  fare  followed  by  danger, — having
well  reflected  (on  this  alternative)  I  perceive  (that)  that  (is)  happiness  where  (there
is)  repose.

Having  reflected  thus  I  am  come  to  (this)  deserted  wood.     For: —

161.  Better  a  forest  haunted  by  tigers  and  elephants,  trees  for  shelter,  ripe  fruits
and  water  for  food ,  grass  for  a  bed,  bark  for  clothing ;  (but)  not  deprived  of  wealth,
living  amidst  relations.

Afterwards,  through  the  uprising  of  my  good  fortune,  I  have  been  favoured  by
this  friend  with  a  succession  of  favours  ;  and  now,  by  a  continuation  of  good  fortune,
your  Honour's  protection,  a  very  heaven,  has  been  obtained  by  me.  For  : —

162.  Of  the  poison-tree  of  the  world  (there  are)  indeed  two  sweet  fruits, — the
relish  of  the  nectar  of  poetry,  (and)  association  with  good  people.

Moreover : —

163.  Society,  the  worship  of  Vishnu,  (and)  immersion  in  the  water  of  the  Ganges,
one  should  esteem  three  essential  essences  in  (this)  purely  insipid  world.

Torpid  said : —

164.  Riches  (are)  like  the  dust  of  the  feet.     Youth  (is)  like  the  rush  of  a  moun-
tain torrent.     Manhood  (is)  fickle  (and)  unsteady  as  a  drop  of  water.     Life  (is)  like
foam.     He  who  with  unwavering  mind  does  not  perform  the  duties  (which  are)  the
key  of  the  gate  of  heaven,  struck  with  remorse'  (and)  bent  down  with  decay,  he  is
consumed  by  the  fire  of  grief.

An  excessive  accumulation  was  made  by  you ;  that  (was)  your  fault.     Listen  : —

165.  The  very  abandonment  of  accumulated  riches  (is)  really  (their)  preservation  ;
as  a  pipe  (is)  of  the  waters  stored  in  a  tank.

Besides : —

166.  The  wealth  which  the  miser  buried  deep  down  in  the  earth,  that  constructed
before-hand  a  path  to  reach  a  mansion  below.

For:—

167.  He  who,  obstructing  his  own  happiness  seeks  the  accumulation  of  wealth,
like  the  bearer  of  another's  goods,  he  is  a  vessel  of  misery.

Thus  it  is  said  : —

168.  If  (we  are)  rich  with  the  wealth  deprived  of  liberality  and  enjoyment ;  then


MITBALABHA.  25

we  (are)  rich  with  the  wealth  buried  in  the  caves  of  the  earth.

169.  (He)  of  whom  the  days  pass  without  giving  (or)  enjoying,  he  though  puffing
like  a  blacksmith's  bellows,  does  not  live.

170.  What  (profits  one)  with  wealth  who  neither  gives  nor  enjoys?  and  what,
with  strength,  who  does  not  repel  enemies  ?  and  what,  with  learning,  who  does  not
practise  religion  ?  what,  with  a  soul,  who  has  not  conquered  his  senses  ?

Moreover : —

171.  Through  non-enjoyment  (there  is)  common  property  in  wealth,  of  a  miser
with  others.     "  This  (was)  his,"  such  connection  (with  it),  on  (its)  loss,  is  attained  with
misery.*

Also : —

172.  Neither  to  God,  nor  to  a  Brahman,  nor  to  relations,  nor  to  himself,  does  the
wealth  of  a  miser  go.     By  fire,  thieves,  (or)  the  king  (it  is  consumed).

Moreover : —

173.  Distribution,  enjoyment,  (and)  loss,  are  the  three  courses  of  wealth;  the
third  course  is  his  who  neither  gives,  nor  enjoys.

And  it  has  been  said : —

174.  Liberality  with  kindly  speech,  knowledge  without  pride,  bravery  followed  by
compassion,   and  wealth  accompanied  by  its  abandonment; — these  four  excellencies
(are)  hard  to  be  found.

And  it  is  said : —

175.  Accumulation  should  always  be  made,  excessive  accumulation  should  not  be
made  ;  behold,  that  jackal  of  acquisitive  disposition  was  killed  by  a  bow.

Well-to-do  said :  How  (was)  that  ?  Torpid  relates  (as  follows)  :  There  was  a
hunter  named  Terrible,  resident  in  the  village  of  Prosperity  ;  and  he  once  (being)
desirous  of  meat,  taking  (his)  bow,  went  into  the  Vindhya-forest.  There  a  deer  was
killed  by  him.  Having  taken  the  deer,  while  going  along  he  saw  a  pink-eyed  boar  of
an  awful  form.  Then  having  placed  the  deer  on  the  earth,  the  boar  was  hit  by
him  with  a  very  sharp  arrow ;  also,  by  the  boar  approaching,  making  a  roar  dread-
ful as  the  clouds  at  the  dissolution  of  the  universe,  the  hunter  was  struck  in  the
groin,  whereby  he  fell  on  the  earth,  like  a  tree  cut  down.  For  : —

176.  Water,  fire,  poison,  a  weapon,  hunger,  sickness,  a  fall  from  a  precipice; —
having  met  some  cause  or  other,  a  corporeal  being  is  deserted  by  the  vital  airs.

Now  by  the  trampling  of  both  their  feet,  a  serpent  also  was  killed.  Hereupon  a
jackal  named  Long-yell,  wandering  about  in  quest  of  food,  saw  these  dead  ones,  the
deer,  hunter,  serpent,  and  boar.  Having  perceived  them  he  reflected :  O  the  luck !  a
great  feast  is  ready  for  me.  For : —

177.  Just  as,  for  corporeal    beings,  unthought-of  troubles  are  coming,  so  also
(come)  pleasures.     I  think  fortune  is  here  predominant.

Be  it  so  (or  not),  with  the  flesh  of  these,  three  months  will  pass  pleasurably
for  me.


*  Wealth  unen joyed  is  as  much  the  property  of  a  stranger  as  it  is  of  the  owner;  on  its  being
lost,  the  connection  of  ownership  is  attended  with  a  pain  (which,  of  coarse,  the  stranger  never
experiences).

4


ii6  M1TRALABHA.

178.  The  man  goes  to  one  month ;  two  months,  the  deer  and  the  boar;  the  ser-
pent goes  for  one  day ;  to-day  is  to  be  eaten  the  string  of  the  bow.

Therefore,  in  the  first  cravings  of  hunger  I  (will)  eat  this  unsavoury  sinewy  thong
attached  to  the  notch  of  the  bow.  Having  said  this,  he  did  so.  On  that  sinewy
thong  being  severed,  by  the  bow  quickly  springing  up,  Long-yell  was  pierced  in  the
heart,  (and)  immediately  attained  the  five-fold  state.*  Hence  I  say,  "  Accumulation  is
always  to  be  made,"  &c.

So  also : —

179.  What  he  gives  (and)  what  he  enjoys,  that  truly  (is)  the  wealth  of  the  wealthy  ;
others  sport  with  the  wife  and  with  the  riches  of  the  deceased.

180.  What  thou  givest  to  excellent  persons,  and  what  thou  eatest  day  by  day,
that  (is)  thy  wealth,  I  think  ; — (what)  thou  art  keeping   (is)   the  hoard  of  someone
else.

Let  that  pass  now;  what  (advantage  will  arise)  with  extended  description?    For  : —

181.  Philosophic-minded  men  desire  not  the  unattainable,  they  are  not  inclined  to
bemoan  the  lost,  they  are  not  perplexed  even  in  calamities.

Therefore,  friend,  thou  shouldst  be  ever  energetic.     For : —

182.  Even  after  studying  the  scriptures  they   are  fools,  but  he  who  (is)  practical,
he  (is)  the  wise  man.     A  well-devised  medicine  does  not  effectuate  the  health  of  those
in  pain,  with  the  name  merely.

Besides : —

183.  For  one  afraid  of  exertion,  a  precept  of  wisdom  effectuates  not  even  the
smallest  advantage.     For  a  blind  person,  what  object  in  this  world  does  a  lamp  make
clear,  although  standing  on  the  palm  of  (his)  hand  ?

Therefore  here,  0  friend !  under  existing  circumstances  tranquillity  should  be
maintained.

184.  One  should  attend  to  pleasure   (which)  has  come,  also  trouble   (which)  has
happened :  troubles  and  pleasures  revolve  like  a  wheel.

Moreover : —

185.  All  riches  unresistingly  approach  the   energetic  man ;  as  frogs,  the  pool,
(and)  as  fish,  the  full  lake.

Also : —

186.  Prosperity  voluntarily  goes,  for  an  abiding  place,   (to)  one  endowed  with
resolution,  unprocrastinating,  conversant  with  right  principles  of  action,  unaddicted  to
vices,  valorous,  grateful,  and  firm  in  friendship.

And  especially : —

187.  Even  without  riches  the  firm  (man)  reaches  a  position  of  much  honour  and
elevation ;  a  mean  (person),  though  endowed  with  riches,  attains  the  status  of  contempt.
Can  a  dog,  although  wearing  a  golden  collar,  acquire  the  naturally  lofty  dignity  in-
herent in  a  lion,  having  for  object  the  acquisition  of  a  multitude  of  (good)  qualities  ?

Moreover : —

188.  "(I  am)  wealthy,"  (this  is)  thy  pride.     What  ?  (thy)  wealth  being  gone  art

*  i.e.,  was  resolved  into  the  five  elements,  earth,  air,  fire,  water,  and  ether  5  that  is  to  say,
he  died.


M1TEALABHA.  27

thou  approaching  despondency  ?     The  falls    and  risings  of   men  (are)  like  a  hand-
tossed  ball.

Besides : —

189.  The  shadow  of  a  cloud,  the  friendship  of  the  base,  new  corn,  women,  youthful
pleasures,  and  riches,  (are)  to  be  enjoyed  for  a  certain  time  (only).

Moreover : —

190.  One  should  not  strive  excessively  for  a  subsistence, — that,  verily,  has  been
provided  by  the  Creator ; — as  soon  as  a  living  being  has  dropped  from  the  womb,  both
teats  of  the  mother  stream.

Listen,  0  friend !

191.  He  by  whom  swans  were  made  white,  and  parrots  were  made  green,  and  by
whom  peacocks  were  diversified  (in  colour),  he  will  provide  thy  subsistence.

And  hear  another  secret  of  the  good,  0  friend !

192.  They  engender  trouble  in  (their)  acquisition,  they  inflict  pain  in  disasters,
and  they  perplex  in  prosperity ; — how  (then,  are)  riches  vehicles  of  happiness  ?

Besides : —

193.  The  absence  of  desire  (is)  better  for  anyone  that  the  desire  of  wealth  for
(even)  religious  purposes.      The  non-contact  of  mud,  (by  keeping)  aloof,  (is)  better
than  washing  (it)  off.

For:—

194.  As  flesh  is  devoured  by  birds  in  the  sky,  by  beasts  on  the  earth,  by  fishes
in  the  water ;  in  a  similar  manner,  a  rich  man  (is  devoured)  everywhere.

Moreover : —

195.  From  the  king,  from  flood,  from  fire,  from  robbery,  from  even  their  own  folk,
there  is  continual  fear  for  the  wealthy  ;  as  (there  is  fear)  of  death  for  living  creatures.

In  like  manner : —

196.  In  a  life  abounding  with  troubles,  what  greater  than  (this)  misery  (can  there
be)  ? — from  which,  the  accomplishment  of  the  wish  is  not,  (and  still)  where  the  wish
ceases  not.

Again,  0  brother  !  hear : —

197.  Wealth  at  first  (is)  not  easily  acquired ;  (when)  acquired  it  is  preserved  with
difficulty ;  the  loss  of  what  has  been  acquired  (is)  like  death ;  therefore  one  should  not
be  anxious  about  it.

198.  If  this  thirst  were  renounced  who  (would  be)  poor  ?  who  rich  ?     If  its  course
is  allowed,  slavery  is  placed  on  the  head.

Moreover : —

199.  Whatsoever  has  been  desired,  from  that  (fresh)  desire  proceeds ;  that  object
is  really  obtained  wealth  from  which  desire  ceases.

What  (advantage  will  accrue)  with  much   (argumentation)?     With  affectionate
conversation,  let  the  time  be  passed  here  with  me.     For : —

200.  The  friendships  of  the  magnanimous  last  till  death,  (their)  resentments  (are)
vanishing  momentarily  ;  and  (their)  liberality  (is)  without  self-interest.

Having  heard  this  Gently-alighting  says :  Happy  art  thou,  O  Torpid !  thou  art
ever  to  be  resorted  to  (for  protection).     For : —


28  MITRAllBHA.

201.  The  good  truly  (are)  always  able  to  bear  tlie  misfortunes  of  the  good ;  of  a
truth,  elephants  (are)  the  burden-bearers  of  elephants  sunk  in  the  mire.

And  also : —

202.  One  appreciative  of  virtue  delights  in  a  virtuous  person ;  for  one  viciously
disposed  (there  is)  no  satisfaction  in  a  virtuous  person.     A  bee  goes  from  the  wood
(to)  the  lotus  ;  but  not  so  a  frog,  although  a  co-habitant.

Again : —

203.  He  (is)  the  one  to  be  praised  on  the  earth,  among  human  beings  he  (is)  the
best, — a  real  man, — he  (is)  fortunate, — whose  suppliants  or  refugees  are  not  departing
disappointed  in  hopes  (and)  face-averted.

Then,  in  this  manner,  they,  feeding  and  rambling  at  their  own  pleasure,  lived  at
ease  contented.  Now  once  (upon  a  time)  a  deer  named  Dapple-body  startled  by  some-
body came  there  (and)  joined  (them).  Then,  supposing  (that)  the  cause  of  the  alarm
was  coming  after,  Torpid  entered  the  water,  and  the  mouse  went  (to  his)  burrow,  the
crow  flying  up  perched  on  the  top  of  a  tree.  Then  Gently-alighting,  after  looking  a
great  distance,  discovered  no  cause  of  fear  whatever.  Having  come  back,  again  all
met  together  (and)  sat  down.  Torpid  said :  Friend  deer  !  prosperity  to  thee  !  according
to  thy  desire  let  provender  of  water,  &c.,  be  enjoyed  !  by  residing  here  let  this  wood
be  made  to  own  a  master  !  Says  Dapple-body  :  Alarmed  by  a  hunter  I  am  come  (to)
the  protection  of  your  honours.  For : —

204.  Should  one  abandon,  either  from  avarice  or  from  fear,  one  come  for  pro-
tection, the  wise  have  declared  his  sin  (to  be)  equal  to  killing  a  Brahman.

And  therefore  I  desire  friendship  with  your  honours.  Well-to-do  said :  As  to
that,  the  friendship  of  your  honour  with  us  (is)  accomplished  without  effort.  For : —

205.  A  friend  (is)  to  be  regarded  (as  of)  four  kind, — one's  own  offspring,  also
one  formed  by  connection,  one  come  in  the  line  of  the  family,  one  rescued  from  mis-
fortunes.

Here,  then,  stay,  without  difference  from  your  own  home.  Having  heard  this,  the
deer  delighted  fed  at  his  pleasure,  drank  the  water,  (and)  sat  in  the  shade  of  a  tree
near  the  lake.  For : —

206.  Well-water,  the  shade  of  the  fig-tree,  a  dark  woman,  (and)  a  brick  house,  in
cold  weather  should  be  warm,  and  in  warm  weather  cold.

Now  Torpid  says  :  Friend  deer  !  by  whom  wast  thou  alarmed  ?  In  this  deserted
wood  what  hunters  ever  are  roaming  ?  The  deer  replied  :  There  is,  in  the  country  of
Kalinga,  a  king  named  Gold-armlet ;  and  he,  having  arrived,  in  the  course  of  (his)
occupation  of  subjugating  districts,  is  encamped  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Moon's-
portion  ;  but  early  (to-morrow),  advancing  here,  he  (is)  to  be  in  the  vicinity  of  lake
Camphor, — thus,  from  the  mouth  of  hunters,  the  rumour  is  heard.  Therefore,  con-
sidering the  abiding  hereabout  (till)  the  morning  a  cause  of  alarm,  let  what  should
be  done  be  commenced.  Hearing  that,  the  tortoise  timidly  said  :  Friend!  I  am  going
(to)  another  water-tank.  The  crow  and  deer  also  both  said:  Friend,  let  it  be  so.


MITEAL^BHA.  29

Well-to-do,  having  reflected,  said :  On  again  having  attained  a  water-tank  (there  is)
safety  for  Torpid ;  what  kind  (of  safety  is  there)  for  his  going  on  land  ?     For : —

207.  The  chief  strength  of  aquatic  animals  (is)  the  waters  ;  of  residents  in  strong-
holds, a  fortress  ;  of  beasts  of  prey,  their  own  ground  ;  of  kings,  an  army.

Friend  Gently-alighting  !  by  this  counsel  it  will  be  thus —

208.  As  the   merchant's  son,  having  himself  seen  (his)   wife's  budding  bosom
pressed,  became  pained,  just  so  thou  wilt  be.

They  said :  How .  (was)  that  ?  Well-to-do  relates  (as  follows) :  There  is  in  the
country  of  Hump-backed-girls,  a  king  named  Heroic-host.  By  him,  in  a  town  named
Hero-city,  the  prince  called  Exalted-might  was  made  viceroy.  And  he  (was)  very  rich
(and)  handsome.  Once  (while)  perambulating  his  city  he  perceived  the  wife  of  a
merchant's  son  named  Loveliness,  (in)  the  full  flower  of  youth.  Then,  having  gone
home,  (his)  mind  distressed  by  passion,  he  sent  a  female  messenger  for  her.

For:—

209.  So  long  he  continues  in  a  good  course,  just  so  long  a  man  has  the  mastery
of  the  passions,  so  long  he  shows  modesty,  just  so  long  even  he  maintains  decorum, —
as  long  as  these  arrows  of  the  eyes  of  wanton  women,  drawn  and  shot  from  the  bow
of  the  eye-brow,  reaching  the  ear,  feathered  with  black,  stealing  the  steadfastness,  fall
not  upon  the  heart.

Loveliness  also,  from  the  moment  of  seeing  him,  with  heart  split  by  the  blow  of
love's  arrow,  became  fixed  in  thought  upon  him.  And  thus  it  is  said  : —

210.  TTntruthfulness,  precipitancy,  delusion,  envy,  and  excessive  avarice,  want  of
principle,  (and)  impurity,  (are)  the  innate  faults  of  women.

Now,  having  heard  the  messenger's  discourse,  Loveliness  said:  How  (can)  I
engage  in  this  wickedness,  transgressing  (against  my)  husband  ?  I,  faithful  to  (my)
lord,  do  not  so  much  as  touch  another  man.  For : —

211.  She  (is)  a  wife  who  (is)  clever  in  the  house  ;  she  (is)  a  wife  who  (is)  prolific ;
she  (is)  a  wife  who  (is  her)  husband's  life  ;  she  (is)  a  wife  who  (is)  faithful.

212.  Of  cuckoos  the  voice  (is)  the    beauty ;  woman's  beauty  (is)  faithfulness ;
knowledge  (is)  the  beauty  of  the  ugly ;  patience  (is)  the  beauty  of  ascetics.

Again : —

213.  She  (is)  not  to  be  styled  a  wife  in  whom  the  husband  delights  not ;  when
the  husband  of  women  is  pleased,  all  the  deities  should  be  satisfied.

Therefore  whatever  my  life's  lord  points  out,  even  that  I  unhesitatingly  do.  The
messenger  said :  (Is)  that  true  ?  Loveliness  replied :  Indeed  that  (is)  certainly  true.


30  MITBALABHA.

Then  all  that  had  been  said  by  Loveliness,  the  messenger  departing  related  before
Exalted-might.  Hearing  that,  Exalted-might  said  :  Heart- stricken  by  Vishameshu,*
without  her  how  shall  I  live  ?  The  procuress  said  :  Brought  by  (her)  husband,  (she)
should  be  surrendered  (to  you).  He  exclaimed :  How  (is)  that  possible  ?  The  pro-
curess replied  :  Let  stratagem  be  employed.  For : —

214.  Truly  that  (is)  possible  by  stratagem  which  (is)  not  possible  by  prowess ;  by
a  jackal  going  along  a  miry  road,  an  elephant  was  killed.

The  prince  asks :  How  (was)  that  ?  She  relates  (as  follows)  : — There  is  in  the
forest  of  Brahma  an  elephant  named  Camphor-marked :  having  seen  him  all  the
jackals  reflected  (thus)  :  If  he  by  any  means  were  to  die,  then  with  his  body  there
would  be  four  months'  desirable  provision  for  us.  Thereupon,  from  among  them,  an
old  jackal  made  (this)  promise  :  His  death  is  to  be  accomplished  by  me  through  the
energy  of  (my)  intelligence.  Accordingly  the  deceiver,  going  near  to  Camphor-marked,
fell  prostrate  (and)  reverentially  said  :  Sire !  grant  the  favour  of  a  look.  Says  the
elephant :  Who  (art)  thou  ?  whence  (art  thou)  come  ?  He  replied :  I  (am)  a  jackal,
by  all  the  assembled  beasts,  dwellers  in  the  forest,  despatched  to  your  honour.  Since
to  remain  without  a  king  (is)  not  proper,  therefore  your  honour,  endowed  with  every
princely  virtue,  has  been  selected  to  be  here  inaugurated  in  the  sovereignty  of  the
forest.  For : —

215.  (He  who  is)  immaculate  by  (reason  of)    family  duties  and    social  duties,
majestic,  just,  (and)  skilful  in  polity,  he  is  fit  (to  be)  a  ruler  in  the  earth.

Observe  further : —

216.  First  one  should  find  a  king,  then  a  wife,  then  wealth  ;  on  the  non-existence
of  a  king  in  this  world,  whence  a  wife  ?  whence  wealth  ?

Besides  : —

217.  Like  a  cloud,  a  king  (is)  the  sustainer  of  creatures  ;  even  on  the  failing  of  a
cloud  one  may  live,  but  not  on  a  king  (failing).

Moreover : —

218.  In  this  (one-to-)another-subjectf  world,  for  the  most  part  one  abides  in  his
proper  sphere  through  the   application  of  punishment ;  (for)  a  virtuous  person  (is)
hard  to   be  found.     Through  fear  of    punishment    a    virtuous  woman  obeys  (her)
husband,  although  (he  be)  weak  or  failing,  or  sick  or  poor.

Therefore  having  so  acted  that  the  auspicious  time  does  not  pass  away,  let  your
Majesty  come  quickly.  Having  said  this  (he)  arose  (and)  departed.  Then  this
Camphor-marked,  drawn  by  the  lust  of  sovereignty,  running  along  the  road  indicated
by  the  jackal,  sank  into  a  great  bog.  The  elephant  called  out :  Friend  jackal !  what
(is)  now  to  be  done  ?  I,  fallen  in  a  great  bog,  am  dying.  Turn  back  (and)  see.  The
jackal  laughingly  said :  Sire !  apply  (your)  trunk  on  the  tip  of  my  tail  (and)  get  up.
This  (is)  the  recompense  of  him  on  whose  word  confidence  was  placed  by  thee.
And  thus  it  is  said  : —

219.  As  often  as  thou  shalt  be  deprived  of  the  society  of  the  good,  so  often  wilt
thou  fall  among  companies  of  the  wicked.


*  The  god  with  odd  arrows,  the  Indian  Cupid  being  supposed  to  be  armed  with  five  arrows,
f  In  which  one  person  is  subject  to  another  person  throughout  all  stages  of  society.


MITRALABHA.  31

Then  the  elephant  sunk  in  a  great  bog  was  devoured  by  the  jackals.  Hence  I
say :  "  What  is  possible  by  merely  a  stratagem,"  &c.  Then  by  the  advice  of  the  pro-
curess, the  prince  made  that  merchant's  son  named  Pretty-gift  (his)  servant.  Then
this  (servant)  was  employed  by  him  in  all  confidential  matters.  Once,  by  advice  of
the  procuress,  the  prince,  anointed  after  bathing  (and)  wearing  golden  ornaments,
said  :  O  Pretty- gift,  by  me,  during  one  month,  a  vow  to  Grauri  should  be  performed ;
therefore,  beginning  to-day,  bring  (and)  consign  (to  me)  every  night  a  young  woman
of  (good)  family  ;  and  she  shall  be  honoured  by  me  with  due  ceremony.  Accordingly
Pretty-gift,  bringing  a  young  woman  of  that  description,  presents  (her)  ;  afterwards,
being  secreted,  he  watches  to  see  what  he  would  do.*  But  Exalted-might,  without
even  touching  the  young  woman,  having  done  homage  at  a  distance,  with  clothes,
ornaments,  perfumes,  and  sandal,  (and)  having  provided  a  guard,  dismissed  (her)  im-
mediately. Now  that  having  been  seen  by  the  merchant's  son,  with  the  confidence
engendered  (and)  with  mind  attracted  by  avarice,  his  'own  wife  was  brought  (and)
presented.  But  Exalted-might,  having  recognised  Loveliness,  the  delight  of  his  heart,
hastily  having  arisen,  ardently  embraced  (her,  his)  eyes  expanded  with  joy,  (his)  heart
delighted,  indulging  in  many  kinds  of  amorous  dalliance,  he  sported  with  her  on  the
couch.  Having  seen  this,  the  merchant's  son,  (motionless)  as  a  picture,  bewildered  as
to  what  was  to  be  done,  experienced  excessive  dejection.  So  also,  will  it  be  with  thee.
However,  disregarding  that  speech,  with  great  trepidation  Torpid,  quitting  (his)  watery
asylum,  started  off.  Well-to-do  and  the  others,  from  friendship  apprehensive  of
(something)  disagreeable,  followed  him.  Presently,  whilst  going  on  dry  land,  Torpid
was  caught  by  a  certain  hunter  scouring  the  wood.  And  he  having  captured  him,
picked  (him)  up,  fastened  (him)  on  (his)  bow,  (and)  saying  "  I  am  lucky,"  started
towards  his  own  house.  Now  the  deer,  crow,  and  mouse,  experiencing  extreme  dejec-
tion, followed  after  him.  Then  Well-to-do  mourned : —

220.  Ere  I  reach  the  end  of  one  trouble  like  the  further  shore  of  the  ocean,  lo,  a
second  (trouble)  is  ready.     For  my  faults,  troubles  are  multiplied.

221.  He  who  (is)  a  natural-born  friend  is  truly  produced  by  good  fortune  ;  his
inartificial  friendship,  even  among  misfortunes,  he  renounces  not.     For : —

222.  Not  in  a  mother,  nor  in  a  wife,  nor  in  a  full  brother,  nor  in  a  son,  (is  there)
such  confidence  for  a  man,  as  (there  is)  in  a  natural-born  friend.

Having  reflected  thus  repeatedly,  (he  exclaimed),  Alas,  my  ill-luck !    For : —

223.  The  effects  of  the  offspring  of  my  own  acts,  both  good  and  bad,  occurring
after  intervals  of  time, — even  in  this  world,  these  different  conditions  have  been  ex-
perienced by  me,  like  different  births.

But  even  so  it  (is)  : —

224.  The  body  (is)  near  its  dissolution ;  successes  (are)  the  seat  of  misfortunes  ;
meetings  have  (their)  departures ;  all  that  springs  up  (is)  evanescent.


*  Lit.  "  What  is  he  doing  P  "  thus  ho  watches.


32  MITRALABHA.

Again  having  reflected,  he  said : —

225.  By  whom  was  created  this  two-syllable  jewel  "  Mitram,"*  the  preserver  from
sorrows,  enemies,  and  fears,  the  depository  of  affection  and  confidence  ?

Moreover : —

226.  The  friend  who  may  be  the  elixir-like  delight  of  the  eyes,  the  joy  of  the
heart,  the  participator  of  pleasure  and  pain  with  a  friend,  he  (is)  hard  to  be  acquired ;
but  others,  friends  in  the  time  of  prosperity,  filled  with  the  greed  of  pelf,  they  are
everywhere  to  be  found  : — but  their  touchstone  (is)  affliction.

Thus  having  deeply  lamented  Well-to-do  said  to  Dapple-body  and  Gently-alight-
ing :  Ere  this  hunter  passes  out  from  the  wood,  let  an  effort  be  made  to  release  Torpid.
They  replied :  Quickly  point  out  what  is  to  be  done.  Well-to-do  says :  Let  Dapple-
body,  having  gone  near  the  water,  make  himself  appear  motionless,  as  if  dead ;  and  let
the  crow,  placing  (himself)  above  him,  scratch  somewhat  with  (his)  beak.  Assuredly,
the  hunter,  desirous  of  venison,  having  left  the  tortoise  there,  will  hastily  approach ;
then  I  will  sever  the  bond  of  Torpid.  Thereupon  Dapple-body  and  Gently-alighting
having  hastily  gone,  upon  its  being  done  as  agreed  the  weary  hunter,  having  drunk
water  (and)  being  seated  under  a  tree,  in  the  manner  indicated  having  perceived  the
deer,  placing  the  tortoise  near  the  water  (and)  taking  a  hunting-knife,  with  a  joyful
heart  went  towards  the  deer.  In  the  interim  the  tortoise  (whose)  bond  had  been
severed  by  Well-to-do,  (who)  had  approached  (him),  hastily  entered  the  water ;  and
the  deer,  seeing  the  hunter  close  by,  sprang  up  (and)  quickly  fled  away.  When  the
hunter,  turning  back,  approaches  the  foot  of  the  tree,  then  not  seeing  the  tortoise  he
reflected  (thus)  :  This  is  just  the  fitting  (recompense)  for  my  incircumspect  acting.
For:—

227.  Whoever,  quitting  certainties,  pursues  uncertainties,  his  certainties  are  being
lost,  (and)  the  uncertainties  are  actually  lost.

He  then,  through  his  own  act,  entered  the  village  disconsolate ;  and  Torpid  and
the  rest,  all  free  from  danger,  went  to  their  own  place,  and  remained  with  corre-
sponding happiness.  Now  the  Princes  joyfully  said :  We  have  heard  all,  we  (are)
delighted  ;  our  desire  has  been  accomplished.  Vishnusarman  replied :  With  this  much
the  wish  of  your  Honours  has  been  realized  ;  and  may  this  other  also : —

228.  May  you,  the   good,   acquire   a  friend !     May   prosperity  be   obtained  by
populous  communities  !     May  kings  continually  firm  in  their  duty,  nourish  the  earth !
May  your  Policy  endure  for  the  gratification  of  the  mind  of  the  virtuous,  like  a  newly-
wed   wife !      May  the  revered  Half -moon-Crested  onef  effect  the  prosperity  of  the
people!

Here  ends  the  first  chapter,  called  "  the  Acquisition  of  Friends,"  in  the  "  Friendly
Advice  "  collected  by  Vishnusarman.


*  "  A  friend."  f  The  God  S'iva.


SUHRIDBHEDA.  33

SEPARATION   OF  FRIENDS.


Afterwards  the  Princes  said :  Sir,  the  "  Acquisition  of  Friends  "  has  been  heard
thus  far  by  us,  now  we  are  desirous  to  hear  the  "  Separation  of  Friends."  Vishnusar-
man  replied :  Let  the  "  Separation  of  Friends  "  be  heard,  of  which  this  (is)  the  first
verse : —

1.  The  great  and  increasing  friendship  of  a  lion  and  a  bull,  in  a  wood,  was
destroyed  by  an  envious  and  very  greedy  jackal.

The  Princes  said  :  How  (was)  that  ?  Vishnu^arman  relates  (as  follows)  :  On  the
southern  road*  there  is  a  city  named  Golden  ;  (and)  there  a  very  wealthy  merchant,
named  Prospering,  dwells.  Although  his  wealth  was  ample,  (yet)  seeing  others  (his)
relatives  extremely  opulent,  (his)  opinion  was  that  a  further  increase  of  wealth  should
be  effected.  For  : —

2.  Whose  greatness  is  not  enhanced  (by)  looking  lower  and  lower?     Of  a  truth
all  are  becoming  poor  (by)  looking  higher  and  higher.

Moreover : —

3.  A  man  of  whom  there  is  abundant  wealth  is  honoured,  even  the  murderer  of  a
Brahman ;  although  equal  in  race  to  the  Moon,  (if)  penniless  he  is  despised.

Again : —

4.  The  non-persevering,  the  lazy,  the  fatalist,  and  one  destitute  of  courage,  Pros-
perity does  not  desire  to  embrace  ;  just,  indeed,  as  a  young  woman  (does  not  desire  to
embrace)  an  old  husband.

Moreover : —

5.  Laziness,  uxuriousness,  sickness,  tenderness  for  one's  native  place,  contentment,
(and)  timidity,  (are)  the  six  obstacles  to  greatness.

For:—

6.  He  who  is  content  with  even  very  little  wealth, — Providence,  I  think,  having
done  what  was  to  have  been  done,f  does  not  increase  that  (wealth)  for  him.

Moreover : —

7.  May  no  woman  whatever  give  birth  to  such  a  son  as  this — unenergetic,  cheer-
less, non-courageous,  the  delight  of  his  enemies.

Thus  truly  has  it  been  said : —

8.  One  should  desire  to  gain  (what  is  yet)  unobtained ;  one  should  preserve  with
care  (what)  has  been  obtained;  one  should  increase  properly  (what)  has  been  pre-
served ;  one  should  spend  upon  places  of  pilgrimage  (what)  has  been  increased.

And  uuincreasing  wealth,  in  time,  with  even  very  little  expenditure,  like  collyrium,
goes  to  waste ;  and  (the  wealth)  not  being  enjoyed  (is)  wholly  useless.


i.e.  the  Dakkban.  f  t.e.  having  made  him  contented.

5


34  SUHB1DBHEDA.

Thus,  indeed,  Las  been  said : —

9.  Having  observed  the  wasting  of  collyrium,  and  the  increasing  of  an  ant-hill,
one  should  make  time  fruitful,  with  alms-giving,  study,  and  (virtuous)  acts.

For:—

10.  A  pitcher  is  filled  gradually  by  falling  drops  of  water  :  this  (is)  the  cause  of
all  sciences,  of  religion,  and  of  wealth.

Having  thus  reflected,  Prospering,  having  attached  two  bulls,  named  Lively  and
Gladdening,  to  the  pole,  (and)  having  laden  (his)  cart  with  various  kinds  of  goods,
started  towards  Kashmir  for  traffic.  For  : —

11.  What  (is)  an  excessive  burden  for  the  powerful?  what  (is)  distant  for  the
enterprizing  ?  what  (is)  foreign  for  the  educated  ?  who  (is)  a  stranger  for  those  who
speak  kindly  ?

Now  going  along,  in  the  great  forest  called  Hard-to-pass,  Lively  fell  down  (and)
broke  his  knees ;  seeing  that,  Prospering  (then)  reflected :

12.  Truly,  let  the  prudent  man  act  energetically  hither  and  thither ;    still   the
result  will  be  just  that  which  rested  in  the  mind  of  the  Creator.

Moreover : —

13.  Dismay,  the  obstacle  to  all  enterprizes,  (is)  by  all  means  to  be  eschewed ;
therefore,  having  discarded  dismay,  success  in  what  is  to  be  accomplished  is  attained.

Having  thus  reflected,  leaving  Lively  there,  Prospering  went  on.  Lively,  also,
somehow  or  other  resting  (his)  weight  on  three  hoofs,  remained  there  in  the  forest.
For:—

14.  The  (allotted)  age  preserves  the  vital  members  of  one  plunged  in  the  abyss
of  the  ocean,  of  one  fallen  from  a  mountain,  (and)  of  one  bitten  by  even  a  venomous

snake.

«

Moreover : —

15.  Though  pierced  by  a  hundred  arrows  at  the  wrong  time  an  animal  dies  not ;
touched  by  only  the  point  of  a  blade  of  grass,  at  the  appointed  time,  he  lives  not.

16.  An  unguarded  object  remains   (safe,  if)  protected  by  destiny;  stricken  by
destiny  it  perishes   (though)  well    guarded.     One  lives,  though  abandoned  in  a  wood
without  a  protector ;  one  lives  not  in  a  house,  though  precaution  be  taken.

Afterwards,  as  the  days  were  passing,  Lively,  by  the  obtention  of  food,  &c.,  such
as  he  desired,  roaming  the  woods  frisky  and  fat  bellowed  lustily.  In  that  wood,  a
lion  named  Tawny  remained  enjoying  the  pleasure  of  sovereignty  acquired  by  his  own
arm.  As  it  is  said  : —

17.  No  inauguration,  nor  consecration,  is  performed  by  beasts  for  the  lion  :  lord-
ship over  brutes  (is)  the  natural  right  of  him  who  has  acquired  the  sovereignty  by
prowess.

He  [the  lion]  once,  distressed  by  thirst,  went  to  the  banks  of  the  Jumna  to  drink
water ;  and  there,  the  bellowing  of  Lively,  hitherto  unexperienced  by  the  lion,  was
heard  by  him,  like  the  roar  of  thunder-clouds  at  the  dissolution  of  the  universe.
Hearing  that,  without  drinking  the  water,  alarmedly  retreating,  (and)  returning  to  his


SUHBIDBHEDA.  35

own  place,  reflecting  on  what  it  could  be,  (he)  remained  silent ;  and  in  this  condition
he  was  seen  by  two  jackals,  named  Karataka  and  Damanaka,  the  sons  of  his  minister.
Seeing  him  in  that  plight,  Damanaka  said  to  Karataka :  "  Friend  Karataka,  how  (is  it)
that  this  (our)  master,  being  desirous  of  water,  withdraws  stealthily  without  drinking
the  water  ?  "  Karataka  says :  "  Friend  Damanaka,  with  my  concurrence  service  is  not
performed  for  him ;  therefore  what  (advantage  will  result)  by  investigating  his  actions?
for  great  trouble  is  endured  by  us  two  through  being  neglected  by  this  king.

18.  Behold  what  is  done  by  servants  seeking  wealth  by  service, — whatever  personal
independence  (they  possess),  even  that  is  lost  by  the  blockheads.

Moreover : —

19.  They  who  (are)  the  dependants  of  another  suffer  cold,  wind,  heat,  and  fatigue  ;
even  with  a  fraction  of  it  a  wise  man  doing  penance,  might  be  blest.

Again  :  —

20.  As  much  as  independence  (extends)  so  far  is  birth  profitable ;   (if)  those  who
are  (in)  subjection  to  others  live,  who  (are)  dead  ?

Moreover : —

21.  "  Come,  go,  fall,  stand  up,  speak,  keep  silence," — in  this  way  the  wealthy
sport  with  the  needy,  held  in  the  grasp  of  expectancy.

Moreover : —

22.  Idiots  adorning  themselves  carefully  make  themselves  subservient  to  others,
for  the  acquisition  of  pelf  ;  just  (as  is  done)  by  harlots.

Again : —

23.  Servants  esteem  highly  even  the  look  of  (their)  master, — which  (being)  by  its
very  nature  fickle,  falls  also  upon  the  impure.

And  especially: —

24.  He  stoops  for  the  sake  of  rising;  for  the  sake  of  living  he  resigns  (his)
breath  ;  he  becomes  miserable  for  the  sake  of  pleasure.     Who  (is)  a  greater  fool  than
a  servant  ?

Moreover : —

25.  From  silence  (he  is  esteemed)  a  fool ;  (if)  eloquent,  (he  is)  crazy  or  a  chatter-
box ;  by  patience  (he  is  thought)  timid ;  if  he  cannot  bear  (patiently,  he  is)  for  the
most  part  not  well-bred ;  he  remains  at  (your)  side,  (then  he  is)  certainly  impudent
(and)  from  (keeping)  distant,  (he  is)  irresolute; — the  most  embarrassing  duty  of  a
servant  is  unattainable  even  for  Yogins."*

Damanaka  said :  "  Friend,  such  things  are  by  no  means  to  be  done  even  mentally .

26.  How,  forsooth,  are  not  those  great  lords  to  be  diligently  served,  who,  in  a
very  short  (time),  when  satisfied,  satisfy  the  wishes  of  the  heart?

Moreover : —

27.  Whence  (can  come)  the  exalted  honours  of  the  chauri,f  the  upraised  white
umbrella,  the  horse,  the  elephant,  and  the  carriage, —  for  those  destitute  of  employ  ?  "


*  Sainta  who  have  acquired  supernatural  power.  f  Part  of  the  insignia  of  royalty.


36  SUHEIDBHBDA.

Says  Karataka :  "  Still  wliat  (have  we  to  do)  with  this  (which  is)  not  our  affair  ?
Interference  in  affairs  with  which  one  has  no  concern  must  be  avoided  by  all  means.
For:—

28.  The  man  who  desires  to  interfere  in  affairs  which  do  not  concern  him,  lies
struck  down  on  the  earth,  like  the  monkey  who  pulled  out  the  wedge."

Damanaka  asked :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  Karataka  relates  (as  follows)  :  There
was  in  the  country  of  Magadha,  on  land  in  the  vicinity  of  the  forest  of  Virtue,  a  plea-
sure-house begun  to  be  built  by  a  man  of  the  writer-caste,  named  Auspiciously-given.
There,  between  the  two  parts,  split  up  a  little  way,  of  a  wooden  post  (that  was)  being
cut  up  by  a  saw,  a  wedge  had  been  inserted  by  the  carpenter.  There  (also)  a  large
herd  of  monkeys  inhabiting  the  wood  came  for  pastime.  One  monkey  among  them,
as  though  sent  by  the  wand  of  Fate,  grasping  that  wedge  with  both  hands  sat  down;
then  his  testicles  hanging  down  entered  between  the  two  pieces  of  wood.  Hereupon,
with  his  natural  restlessness,  with  a  great  effort  he  pulled  the  wedge ;  and,  upon  the
wedge  being  drawn  out,  both  testicles  being  crushed  by  the  two  pieces  of  wood,  he
perished.  Hence  I  say :  "  Interference  in  affairs  which  do  not  concern  one,"  &c.  Da-
manaka said :  "  Nevertheless,  an  investigation  into  the  actions  of  a  master  should  surely
be  made  by  a  servant."  Karataka  replied  :  "  He  who  is  engaged  in  general  superinten-
dence (is)  prime-minister ;  let  him  do  it ;  for  interference  in  the  department  of  others
should  not  be  attempted  by  a  subordinate.  Behold : —

29.  He  who  should  interfere  in  the  department  of  another,  through  desire  to
benefit  (his)  master,  he  rues  it ;  like  the  donkey  beaten  through  braying."

Damanaka  asked :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  Karataka  related  (as  follows)  : — There  is,
in  Benares,  a  washerman  named  Camphor-cloth  ;  and  he  once,  having  sported  for  a  long
time  with  his  very  young  wife,  slept  soundly.  Hereupon  a  certain  thief  entered  his
house  to  steal  the  goods.  In  his  court-yard  a  donkey  was  standing  tied  up,  and  a  dog
was  sitting.  Perceiving  that  thief,  the  donkey  said  (to)  the  dog :  "  This  (is)  your
affair  ;  then  how  (is  it)  thou  art  not  awakening  the  master  by  making  a  loud  noise  ?  "
Says  the  dog  :  "  It  behoves  thee  not  to  trouble  about  this  business  ;  thou  knowest  how
I  protect  this  (fellow's)  house,  hence  he,  for  a  long  time  free  from  care,  does  not  know
my  value,  so  that  now  (he  is)  remiss  even  in  giving  my  food  ;  without  the  appearance
of  [(some)  6"  oger,  masters  become  inattentive  (to)  their  dependants."  Says  the  ass:
"  Listen,  blockhead —

30.  What  servant  (and)  what  friend  (is)  he  who  makes  demands  in  the  time  for
action?  "

The  dog  rejoins  : —

"  What  master  (is)  he  who,  in  the  time  for  work,  should  not  maintain  servants  ?

Moreover : —

31.  In  the  maintenance  of  attendants,  in  the  service  of  a  master,  in  the  practice  of
virtue,  and  in  the  begetting  of  a  son,  there  are  no  proxies."


SUHBIDBHEDA.  37

Then  the  ass  angrily  said:  "  Ah !  most  wicked  (art)  thou  who  art  neglecting  (thy)
master's  affairs.  Well,  I  must  so  act  that  the  master  (will)  awake.  For  : —

32.  One  should  serve  the  sun  with  the  back  ;  fire,  with  the  belly ;  a  master,  with
all  the  soul ;  (and)  the  next  world,  with  sincerity."

Having  said  this,  he  brayed  excessively.  Then  the  washerman,  aroused  by  that
noise,  getting  up  enraged  at  the  disturbance  of  (his)  slumbers,  beat  the  ass  with  a
stick.  Through  that  beating  the  ass  perished.  Hence  I  say,  "  Interference  in  the  de-
partment of  another,"  &c.  See,  the  searching  after  beasts  (is)  our  affair  ;  therefore,  let
(us)  be  busy  about  our  own  employment.  Having  reflected  (he  continued) — But  to-day
no  advantage  (can  arise)  by  even  thy  solicitude  (on  this  account)  ;  since  abundant
leavings  of  food  remain  for  us  two."  Damanaka  angrily  said  :  "  How,  art  thou  serving
the  king  merely  for  the  sake  of  food  ?  That  was  unbecomingly  uttered  by  a  servant.
For:—

33.  For  the  sake  of  the  assisting  of  friends,  also  for  the  sake  of  the  injuring  of
enemies,  the  favour  of  a  monarch  is  desired  by  the   wise.     Who   does   not   merely
nourish  the  belly  ?

34.  In  the  life  of  whom,  Brahmans,  friends,  and  relations  live,  his  life  (is)  profit-
able.    Who  does  not  live  for  himself  ?

Besides  : —

35.  But  let  him  live,  in  whom,  living,  many  live.     Does  not  even  the  crow  fill  his
own  belly  with  (his)  beak  ?

Behold  :—

36.  One  man  goes  (to)  servitude  for  five  puranas*;  another,  clever  one,  for  hun-
dreds of  thousands  ;  another  is  not  obtained  for  even  hundreds  of  thousands.

For:—

37.  In   the  equal  human  race  service   is  exceedingly  degrading.     Who  (is)  not
the  first  there,  even  he  is  reckoned  among  the  (merely)  living.

Thus  it  is  said : —

38.  Between  a  horse,  an  elephant,  and  iron ;  between  wood,  stone,  and  clothes ;
between  women,  men,  and  water ; — the  difference  (is)  a  great  difference.

For  instance : —

39.  A  dog  having  obtained  even  a  fleshless  bone,  smeared  with  fat,  with  a  few
sinews,  attains  delight,  but  it  (may)  not  (suffice)  to  the  satisfaction  of  his  hunger ; —
the  lion,  quitting  the  jackal  already  (in  his)  grasp,  slays  the  elephant.     Every  person,
though  reduced  to  difficulties,  desires  again  according  to  his  nature.

Further,  behold  the  difference  between  the  server  and  the  served —

40.  A  dog  wags  his  tail,  crouches  down  at  the  feet,  and  falling  on  the  ground
shows  his  face  and  belly,  for  the  giver  of  a  mouthful ;  but  the  noble  elephant  looks
gravely,  and  (only)  with  a  hundred  coaxings,  eats.


*  Small  coins.


38  SUHRIDBHEDA.

Moreover : —

41.  Even  an  instant  lived  here,  renowned  by  men,  (as)  being  associated  with  learn-
ing, valour,  and  fame,  that  the  knowing  call  truly  living.     Even  a  crow  lives  for  a
long  time,  and  eats  the  offerings.*

Moreover : —

42.  What  (is)  the  difference  between  a  brute  and   the  beast  of  a  man  (whose)
reason  is  devoid  of  the  discrimination  between  evil  and  good,  (who  is)  excluded  by
many   (conversant)   with  sacred  affairs,  (and  who  is)  desirous  merely  of  filling  his
belly  ?

Says  Karataka :  "  Both  of  us,  at  least,  (are)  without  authority  ;  then  what  have
we  (to  do)  with  this  affair  ?  "  Damanaka  replied  :  "In  how  little  time  may  a  minister
attain  supremacy  or  subordination  !  For : —

43.  No  one  in  this  world  becomes  esteemed,  (either)  respected  of  any,  or  vile ;  in
the  world,  his  own  actions  lead  a  man  (to)  dignity  or  disgrace.

Moreover : —

44.  As  by  a  great  effort  a  stone  is  raised  on  a  hill,  and  is  made  to  descend  down
instantaneously,  so  the  soul  in  virtue  and  vice  (ascends  and  descends).

Therefore,  friend,  dependent  on  self-effort  (is)  the  soul  of  everyone.

45.  A  man  by  his  own  acts  goes  down  and  down,  (or)  moves  upwards ;  j  ust  as  the
digger  of  a  well,  or  the  builder  of  a  wall."

"Now,"   said  Karataka,  "what  is  your  Honour   (about  to)   say?"     Damanaka
replied :  "  This  master   Tawny  from  fear  from  some  quarter,  without  drinking  the
water,  has  timidly  returned,  and  is  seated  (at  home)."
Karataka  asked  :  "  How  art  thou  knowing  that  ?  "
Damanaka  replied :  "  What  is  unknown  to  the  wise  ?     It  is  said  : —

46.  The  uttered  meaning  is  apprehended  even  by  a  brute ;  horses  and  elephants
(when)   bidden  move  forwards ;  a  wise  person   guesses  what    is    even    not   uttered.
(Acute)  intellects  (are)  successful  in  understanding  the  gestures  of  others.

Besides : —

47.  By  external  appearances,  by  gestures,  by  the  gait,  by  a  movement,  by  a  word,
by  a  change  of  eye  (or)  mouth,  the  inward  thought  is  indicated.

So  here,  on  an  occasion  (arising  from  his)  fear,  I,  by  aid  of  my  knowledge,  will
make  him  my  own.  For  : —

48.  He    is  wise  who  knows  the  speech   suitable  to  the  occasion,   the  affection
appropriate  to  the  good-nature  (of  the  recipient),  and  resentment  proportioned  to  his
strength."

Karataka  (then)  said :  "  Friend,  thou  art  ignorant  of  service.     Behold : —

49.  He  who  should  enter  uncalled,  (who)  speaks  much  unasked,  (and)  thinks  him-
self a  favourite  of  the  king, — he  (is)  dull-witted."

Damanaka  asked  :  "  Friend,  how  (am)  I  ignorant  of  service  ?     Behold : —

50.  Is  there  anything  naturally  beautiful  or  not  beautiful  ?     Whatever  is  pleasing
to  anyone,  that  (is)  beautiful  for  him.

*  Accounted  a  discreditable  manner  of  subsistence.


SUHEIDBHEDA.  39

Moreover : —

51.  Whatever  (be)  the  natural  disposition  of  anyone,  a  wise  man,  having  insinu-
ated (himself)  by  that  quickly  leads  that  man  (into)  his  own  power.

Again : —

52.  "  Who  (is)  here  ?"  (having  heard  this)   "I,"  he  should  say,  and  "Command
(me)  wholly."     To  the  utmost  of  his  ability  he  should  execute  the  exact  command  of
the  king.

Moreover : —

53.  Desiring  little,  steadfast,  wise,  always  following  like  a  shadow,  not  hesitating
(when)  commanded, — he  may  dwell  in  the  king's  palace."

"  Suppose,"  says  Karataka,  "  the  master  is  displeased  with  thee  for  unseasonable
intrusion  ?  "

Damanaka  replied :  "  Let  it  be  so ;  still  an  attendant  should  certainly  present
(himself).  For  :—

54.  Non-commencement  from  fear  of  (committing)  a  fault,  (is)  the  mark  of  a
coward.     0  brother,  by  whom  is  food  renounced  from  fear  of  indigestion  ?

Behold  :—

55.  The  king  favours  the  man  (who  is)  near  (him,  though)   unlearned,  of   low
family,  or  unpolished  ;  for  the  most  part,  kings,  women,  and  tendrils,  entwine  around
him  who  remains  at  (their)  side."

Karataka  asked  :  "  Now  having  gone  there,  what  (wilt)  thou  say  ?  "
Damanaka  said :  "Listen;  I  will  just  ascertain  (this :  is)  the  master  favourable
or  unfavourable  (to)  me  ?  "

Karataka  asked  :  "  What  (is)  the  sign  for  ascertaining  that  ?  "
Damanaka  replied :  "  Listen.

56.  A  look  from  a  distance,  an  exceedingly  courteous  smile  on  inquiry,  the  praise
of  qualities  even  in  (one's)  absence,  (and)  remembrance  among  agreeable  things.

57.  Attachment  to  one  not  serving,  liberality,  increasing  affection,  the  remem-
brance of  virtues  even  on  a  fault  (being  committed),  are  the  signs  of  an  attached
master.

58.  Procrastinating,   the  raising  hopes,  the  withholding  rewards, — a  wise   man
would  recognize  (as)  the  signs  of  a  disaffected  master.

Having  ascertained  that,  I  will  speak  so  that  he  shall  become  subservient  (to)  me.
Since : —

59.  The  wise  are  exhibiting, — as  if  bursting  forth  (as)  the  result  of  the  precepts
of  polity, — disaster  arising  from  the  exhibition  of  helplessness,  (and)  success  arising
from  the  exhibition  of  contrivance.

Moreover : —

60.  Qualities  (are)  of  three  kinds  in  (the  estimation  of)  a  master ;  faults  (are)
virtues,  virtues  (are)  faults,  faults  (are)  faults   (and)  virtues   (are)  virtues, — in  (the
opinion  of)  an  attached,  estranged,  (and)  impartial  (master  respectively)."

Says  Karataka :  "  Nevertheless,  on  an  opportunity  not  occurring  thou  shouldst  not
speak.  For : —

61.  Even  Vrihaspati*  uttering  an  unseasonable  speech  would  incur  contempt  (for
his)  understanding,  and  eternal  disgrace."

*  See  p.  21.


40  SUHEIDBHEDA.

Damanaka  replied :  "  Friend,  do  not  fear.  I  will  not  utter  an  unseasonable
speech.  For : —

62.  In  calamity,  in  straying  from  the  road,  and  on  the  opportunities  for  action
passing  away,  a  servant  desiring  (his  master's)  good  should  speak,  even  unasked.

And  if  upon  a  proper  opportunity  counsel  is  not  to  be  uttered  by  me,  then,  truly,
my  ministerial  office  (is)  worthless.  For : —

63.  That  quality  by  which  one  obtains  a  living,  and  by  which  one  is  praised  by
the  good  in  the  world,  ought  to  be  preserved  and  increased  by  its  possessor.

Therefore,  friend,  permit  (me  to)  go  to  Tawny."

Karataka  exclaimed  :  "  May  it  be  fortunate  !     May  the  result  be  as  desired  !

64.  May  (you)  go  for  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  for  prosperity,  for  conquest,  for
the  destruction  of  the  enemies  faction,  and  for  a  (safe)  return!  "

Then  Damanaka,  as  if  amazed,  went  to  Tawny.  Now  seen  by  the  king  even  from
afar,  (and)  allowed  to  enter,  (the  jackal)  having  reverentially  saluted  him,  sat  down.

The  King  said  :  "  Thou  art  seen  after  a  long  (interval)."

Damanaka  replied :  "  Although  for  the  feet  of  your  revered  Highness  there  is
no  need  whatever  (of)  me  (your)  servant,  still,  on  a  suitable  occasion,  a  dependant
should  surely  present  (himself)  ;  (hence)  I  am  come.

65.  0  king !  the  work  of  grandees  is  (done)  by  a  straw,  for  the  picking  of  the
teeth  or  for  the  tickling  of  the  ear ;  how  (much  more  can  be  done)  by  a  man  pos-
sessed of  body,  speech,  and  hands.

Although  a  loss  of  intelligence  in  long-despised  me  is  suspected  by  (my)  master,
still  it  (is)  not  the  fact.  For : —

66.  A  jewel  dangles  at  the  feet ;  glass  is  placed  on  the  head.     At  the  time  of  buy-
ing and  selling,  glass  (is)  glass,  a  gem  (is)  a  gem.     Again  : —

67.  Loss  of  intelligence  is  not  to  be  apprehended  (in)  one  of  resolute  habits,
although  ill-treated.     A  flame  of  fire  though  reversed  never  goes  downwards.

Sire,  by  all  means  a  master  should  be  discriminative.     For: —

68.  When  a  king  indiscriminately  acts    to  all  alike,  then  the  efforts   of  those
capable  of  exertion  is  prostrated.     Moreover : —

69.  Men  (are)  of  three  kinds,  0  king  !  superior,  inferior,  (and)  middling ;  thus,
therefore,  he  should  employ  them  in  three  kinds  of  work.     For : —

70.  In  (their)  proper  place,  both  servants  and  ornaments  are  becoming :  a  crest-
jewel  (is)  not  (worn)  on  the  foot,  nor  an  ankle-ring  on  the  head.     Besides  : —

71.  If  a  jewel  worth  placing  in  a  golden  ornament  is  set  in  lead,  it  neither  tinkles


SUHEIDBHEDA.


41


nor  shines  ;  (this)  is  the  fault  of  the  setter.

Again  : —

72.  (If)  glass  (be)  mounted  on  a  crown,  and  a  jewel  on  a  foot-ornament,  it  is  not
the  fault  of  the  jewel,  but  the  gaffer's  ignoranse.

Observe : —

73.  "  This  (is)  an  intelligent  fellow ;  (that)  a  faithful  one  ;  here  (is)  one  (possessed
of)  both  qualities  "  : — a  king  (who)  thus  discriminates  among  servants,  is  well-supplied
with  good  servants.

Thus,  also : —

74.  A  horse,  a  weapon,  a  book,  a  lute,  speech,  a  man,  and  a  woman,  become  use-
ful or  useless  according  to  the  peculiarities  of  the  person  who  has  obtained  them.

Besides : —

75.  What  (benefit  accrues)  by  one  faithful,  without  ability  ?     What,  by  one  able
(but)  antagonistic  ?     Me,  both  faithful  and  able,  0  king !  thou  shouldst  not  despise.

For: —

76.  From  the  king's  contempt,  (his)  retinue  becomes  devoid  of  understanding;
therefore,  from  that  principle,  no  sensible  person  is  (likely  to    be)  near.    On  the
kingdom  being  deserted  by  the  wise,  the  policy  is  not  good ;  on  the  policy  being
weakened,  the  whole  world  necessarily  sinks.

Moreover,  Sire ! —

77.  Subjects  always  respect  a  man  respected  by  the  king;  but  he  who  (is)  de-
spised by  the  king,  everybody  despises.

Moreover : —

78.  By  wise  people  an  appropriate  observation  is  accepted  even  from  a  child.    On
the  invisibility  of  the  sun,  is  not  the  light  of  a  lamp  (availed  of)  ?  "

Tawny  exclaimed  :  "Worthy  Damanaka!  how  (is)  this  ?  Thou  the  intelligent  son
of  our  prime-minister,  from  some  slanderous  speech,  hast  passed  all  this  time  without
coming  near.  Now  speak  as  you  please."

Damanaka  boldly  replied :  "  Sire !  I  ask  you  just  to  tell  me,*  why  the  master
desirous  of  water,  leaving  the  water  undrunk,  remained  as  if  astonished  ?  "

Tawny  said:  "Well  spoken  by  thee;  but  we  have  no  trustworthy  person  (for)
this  secret  affair.  Thou,  indeed,  (art)  such  a  one ;  therefore,  listen  (and)  I  (will)
relate  (it)  : — This  forest  (is)  now  occupied  by  an  extraordinary  creature ;  hence  (it)
must  be  forsaken  (by)  us.  And  by  thee,  also,  was  heard  likewise  the  unprecedented  great
noise.  According  to  the  noise,  that  creature  must  be  (endued)  with  prodigious
strength."

Damanaka  remarked:  "  Sire!  this  is,  to  an  extent,  a  great  cause  of  fear.  By  us,
also,  the  noise  was  heard ;  but  is  he  a  minister  who,  at  first,  without  consultation,
advises  the  king  (to)  abdicate  (or)  prepare  for  war  ?  Besides,  Sire !  in  this  doubtful
affair  the  utility  of  servants  (is)  to  be  ascertained.  For : —

79.  On  the  touchstone  of  misfortune  a  man  ascertains  the  strength  of  the  intellect

*  Lit.  "  I  am  asking  ;  let  it  just  be  said."


42  SUHRIDBHEDA.

and  goodness  of  the  relation,  wife,  and  servant  class,  and  of  himself."

Says  the  lion  :  "  Friend,  a  great  fear  oppresses  rue."  Damanaka  said  within  him-
self :  "  Otherwise,  how  speak  to  me  (of)  abandoning  the  sweets  of  royalty  to  go  to
another  place?"  Aloud  he  says:  "As  long  as  I  live,  fear  is  not  to  be  entertained.
But  let  Karataka  and  the  rest  be  encouraged ;  whence  (will  arise)  a  hard-to-be-obtained
body  of  men  for  the  removal  of  the  misfortune."  Then  both  Damanaka  and  Karataka,
honoured  with  great  favour  by  the  king,  having  promised  to  counteract  the  danger,
departed.  (While)  going  along  Karataka  said  to  Damanaka  :  "  Friend !  without
knowing  whether  this  cause  of  fear  is  capable  of  counteraction,  or  incapable  of  counter-
action, how  (is  it  that),  promising  the  removal  of  the  danger,  this  great  favour  has
been  accepted  ?  For,  without  having  done  a  service,  a  present  should  not  be  accepted
from  anyone ;  especially  from  a  king.  Observe : —

80.  In  whose  favour  prosperity  is  seated,  in  (whose)  prowess  is  victory,  and  in
(whose)  anger  resides  death, — he  surely  (is)  all- glorious.

Thus  also : —

81.  Although  a  child,  a  king  is  not  to  be  despised,  like  an  (ordinary)  mail ;  (for)
a  great  divinity  (is)  this,  residing  in  human  form."

Says  Damanaka  laughingly  :  "  Friend!  remain  silent ;  the  cause  of  alarm  is  known
by  me  (to  be)  the  bellowing  (of)  a  bull ;  and  bulls  (are)  food  for  us  ;  how  much  more
so  for  a  lion  ! "

Karataka  asked :  "  If  so,  then,  why  was  not  the  master's  fear  removed  on  the
spot?"

Damanaka  replied :  "  If  the  master's  fear  had  been  removed  on  the  spot,  then  how
would  there  have  been  the  acquisition  of  this  great  favour  ?  Besides  : —

82.  A  master  should  never  be  made  free  from  solicitude  by  servants ;  a  servant
having  made  (his)  master  free  from  solicitude  would  be  like  Curd-ear."

Karataka  asked:  "How  (was)  that?  "

Damanaka  relates  (as  follows)  : — There  is,  in  northern  parts,  on  a  mountain
named  Million-peaked,  a  lion  called  Grreat-valour,  the  tip  of  whose  mane,  as  he  lay
sleeping  (in)  the  mountain  cavern,  a  certain  mouse  (habitually)  nibbles.  The  lion,
perceiving  the  tip  of  his  mane  cut,  was  angry,  (and)  the  mouse,  (having)  slipt  into  his
hole,  (and)  being  unattainable,  he  reflected  (thus), — What  (is)  to  be  done  here  ?  Well,
it  is  well  known —

83.  He  of  whom  there  should  be  an  insignificant  foe,  (that  foe)  is  not  overcome  by
valour ;  to  capture  him  a  combatant  like  himself  should  be  employed.

Having  thus  reflected,  (and)  gone  to  a  village,  (and)  gratified  with  flesh  and  other
kind  of  food,  (and)  with  much  pains  brought  (him),  a  cat  named  Curd-ear  was
placed  by  him  in  his  cave.  Then  from  fear  of  that  (cat)  the  mouse  did  not  come  out.
In  consequence  the  lion  slept  tranquilly  with  his  mane  undipped.  Whenever  he  hears
the  noise  of  the  mouse,  then  especially  he  pampers  the  cat  with  a  gift  of  animal  food.
Now  once  the  mouse  pained  by  hunger,  coming  out,  was  caught  by  the  cat,  killed  and
eaten.  Afterwards  the  lion  heard  no  more  the  sound  of  the  mouse ;  then,  from


SUHEIDBHEDA.  43

want  of  (further)  use,  he  became  remiss  in  presenting  the  cat's  food.    Hence  I  say
"(  A  master)  should  not  be  made  free  from  solicitude,"  &c.

Then  both  Damanaka  and  Karataka  went  near  Lively.  There  Karataka  seated
himself,  with  stateliness,  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  (and)  Damanaka,  going  towards  Lively,
said  :  "  Hulloh,  bull-fellow,  I  (am)  he  appointed  by  King  Tawny  for  the  protection  oi
the  forest.  General  Karataka  orders  (thus), — Come  quickly ;  if  not,  move  off  to  a
distance  from  this  forest ;  otherwise  the  consequences  will  be  disagreeable  to  you.  I
know  not  what  (my)  angered  master  will  do.  For : —

84.  For  kings,  the  breach  of  commands ;  for  Brahmans,  disrespect ;  for  women,  a
separate  bed, — (each  is,  as  it  were,)  death  without  a  weapon.

Then,  ignorant  of  the  customs  of  the  country,  Lively,  having  timidly  advanced,
profoundly  saluted  Karataka.  Thus  it  is  said  : —

85.  "  Eeason,  indeed,  (is)  stronger  than  force,  for,  in  (its)  absence,  this  (is)  the
condition  of  elephants  ": — thus  proclaims,  as  it  were,  the  sounding  drum  of  an  ele-
phant, struck  by  the  elephant-driver.

Then  Lively  said  with  alarm. — General!  let  what  (is)  to  be  done  by  me  be
declared.

Karataka  replied :  "  Bull !  if  there  exists  a  wish  to  remain  here  in  the  forest,  then
go  (and)  salute  the  lotus-foot  of  the  king."

Says  Lively  :  "  Then  give  a  promise  of  safety,  (and)  I  (will)  go."

Karataka  said :  "  Listen,  bull-fellow !  enough  (of)  this  apprehension.     For : —

86.  Kesava*  gave  no  reply  to  the  King  of  Chedi  (when)  cursing ;  for  the  maned
(lion)   roars   responsive  (to)   the    noise  of    the  thunder-cloud,  not  (to)  jackal-yells.

Besides : —

87.  The  tempest  does  not  uproot  tender  grasses,  (which)  bend  quite  low.     It
throws  down,  indeed,  lofty  trees.     The  great  expend  valour  only  on  the  great.

Then  they,  having  placed  Lively  at  no  great  distance,  went  towards  Tawny  ;  then,
having  been  courteously  regarded  by  the  king,  (they)  saluted  (him,  and)  sat  down."

The  king  asked :  "  Was  he  seen  ?  "

Damanaka  replied :  "  Sire  !  (he)  was  seen.  What  was  heard  by  the  king,  (is)
indeed  correct.  He  (is)  very  strong,  (and)  he  wishes  to  see  the  king's  feet.f  Let  the
king  be  prepared  (and)  seated  ;  but,  from  a  mere  sound,  (one)  should  not  be  afraid.

88.  By  water   an   embankment   is    broken ;  so,  also,  (is)  unkept  counsel ;  from
backbiting  friendship  is  broken  ;  a  coward  (is),  indeed,  to  be  broken  by  words.

Thus  it  has  been  said  : —

89.  Not  knowing  the  cause  of  the  noise,  (one)  should  not  be  timid  from  a  mere
sound.    Having  ascertained  the  cause  of  a  sound,  a  bawd  attained  respectability."

The  king  asked :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "

Damanaka  related  (as  follows) : — There  is,  in  the  midst  of  the  Holy  Mountains,
a  town  called  the  City  of  Brahma.  A  popular  rumour  was  current  that  there,  on
the  mountain's  top,  a  goblin  named  Bell-ear  was  dwelling.  Once,  having  taken  some-

*  Krishna,  the  handsome-haired  god  (Wei  —  hair).    Tho  allusion  is  to  the  capture  of  Rukmini.
t  i.e.  to  pay  his  respects  to  the  king.


44  SUHBIDBHEDA.

body's  bell,  while  making  off,  a  certain  thief  was  killed  by  a  tiger ;  the  bell  fallen
from  his  hand  was  picked  up  by  the  monkeys ;  and  those  monkeys  every  minute
were  ringing  that  bell.  Then  it  was  perceived  by  the  townspeople  that  a  man  had
been  devoured,  and  the  noise  of  the  bell  is  incessantly  heard ;  thereupon  the  people
declaring  that  Bell-ear,  enraged,  is  devouring  men  and  ringing  the  bell,  all  fled
from  the  town.  After  (a  time)  the  king  was  (thus)  addressed  by  a  procuress
named  Gaping,  who,  having  reflected,  had  satisfied  herself  (that)  monkeys  were
ringing  the  bell :  "  Sire !  if  a  certain  outlay  of  money  be  made  then  I  (will)  finish
this  Bell-ear."  Then  money  was  given  to  her  by  the  delighted  king.  The  pro-
curess, having  drawn  a  (magic)  circle,  and  having  shown  homage  to  Ganesa  and
other  (gods),  taking  (with  her)  fruits  liked  by  monkeys,  entered  the  wood  alone
(and)  scattered  the  fruit  about.  Then  abandoning  the  bell,  the  monkeys  were  at-
tracted (by)  the  fruit ;  and  the  procuress,  picking  up  the  bell,  returned  to  the  town
(and)  was  honoured  by  all  the  people.  Hence  I  say,  "  From  a  mere  sound  one
should  not  be  alarmed,"  &c.

Then  having  brought  Lively,  they  effected  an  interview.  Afterwards,  he
dwelt  most  affectionately  for  a  long  time  there  in  the  forest.  Now  once,  the  brother
of  the  lion,  named  Stiff-ear,  came  (there).  Having  made  him  welcome,  and  seated
(him),  Tawny  next  sallied  forth  to  kill  beasts  for  a  repast.  Hereupon  Lively  said :
"  Sire !  where  (is)  the  flesh  of  the  beasts  killed  to-day  ?  "  The  king  replied  :  "  Da-
manaka  and  Karataka  know."  Says  Lively :  "  Let  it  be  ascertained  whether  there  is
(any)  or  not."  The  lion  laughingly  said :  "  Then,  there  is  none."  Says  Lively :
"  What !  all  that  meat  eaten  by  those  two ! "  The  lion  said  :  "  Eaten,  given  away,  and
wasted :  this  (is)  the  course  daily."  Lively  says :  "  What !  is  this  done  without  the
knowledge  of  your  highness  ?  "  The  lion  said :  "  Truly,  it  is  done  without  my  know-
ledge." Says  Lively :  "  That  is  not  proper.  Thus  it  has  been  said : —

90.  One  should  not,  of  himself,  do  any  act  for  a  master,  without  informing  (him
thereof), — other  than  the  prevention  of  misfortune.

Besides : —

91.  A  minister,  0  king !  (is)   like   an  ascetic's    gourd, — letting  out  little  (and)
taking  in  much.     What's-a-moment  (is)  a  blockhead ;  What's-a-cowrie  (is)  poor.*

92.  He  truly  (is)  always  the  best  minister  who  increases  (the  revenue)  by  even  one
Tcakini.^    The  treasury  (is)  the  life  of  a  king  possessed  of  a  treasury ;  the  vital  airs
(are)  not  the  life.

93.  Moreover,  a  man  does  not,  by  caste-observances,  attain  the  state  of  being
honoured  by  others :  destitute  of  wealth  he  is  deserted  by  his  own  wife  ;  how  much
more  by  strangers !

And  this  (is)  a  grave  fault  in  government.     Observe : —

94.  Extravagance  and  want  of  investigation,  also  unrighteous  acquisition,  (and)
peculation  by  those  residing  at  a  distance  (from  the  capital,  are)  called  the  bane  of  the
treasury.

*  Kimkshana  and  Icimvar&taka  may  be  adjectives  5  thus,  "  Despising  a  moment  (the  minister  is)
a  blockhead ;  despising  a  cowrie  (he  is)  poor."
f  Very  small  coin.


SUHRIDBHEDA.  45

For  :—

95.  Even  a  rich  man,  equal  to  Ugly-ears,*  inconsiderately  spending  (his)  income
according  to  his  inclination,  is  speedily  beggared."

Having  heard  that,  Stiff-ear  says :  "  Listen,  brother  !  These  two  old  dependants
(are)  the  administrators  of  the  affairs  of  peace  and  war ;  an  administrator  of  the  exe-
cutive should  not  be  appointed  controller  of  the  treasury.  Moreover,  on  the  subject  of
public  functionaries,  what  little  I  have  heard  I  (will)  relate:

96.  A  Brahman,  a  soldier,  (or)    a  relative,  is   not   commended   in  authority ;  a
Brahman  does  not  give  even  the  wealth  provided  (for  the  purpose),  except  reluctantly.

97.  A  soldier  employed  quickly  shows  the  sword  in  a  money  matter ;  a  relative*
encroaching  from  relationship,  swallows  all  the  money.

98.  A  long-employed  servant  (is)   fearless  although  in  fault,  and  disregarding
(his)  master,  he  acts  without  restraint.

99.  One  who  has  done  a  service,  (when)  possessed  of  power,  heeds  not  his  own
wrong-doing ;  making  (his)  service  a  banner,  he  plunders  everything.

100.  A  minister  jested  with  privately  himself  reigns  unchecked ;  from  familiarity
contempt  is  always  quickly  shown  by  him.

101.  One  inwardly  wicked,  endued  with  patience,  (is)  assuredly  the  cause  of  every
evil ;  S'akuni  and  S'akataraf  (are),  in  this  matter,  two  illustrations.

102.  Every  minister  to  be  appointed  should  never  be  wealthy.     This  (is)  a  maxim
of  the  accomplished — Wealth  (is)  a  perverter  of  the  mind.

103.  Not  securing  the  advantage  gained ;  the  bartering  of  property  ;  compliance  ;
neglect;  want  of  judgment;  (and)  pleasure;  (are)  the  ruin  of  a  minister.

104.  To  kings  belong  the  expedient  of  seizing  the  wealth  of  officials ;  constant
inspection ;  the  gift  of  preferment ;  and  also  change  of  office.

105.  Officials  are  generally  like  a  hard  tumour;  unsqueezed  they  do  not  give
forth  the  inner  store  of  kings.

106.  Officials,  custodians  of  the  king's  treasure,  are  to  be  repeatedly  cleared  out.
(Only)  once  squeezed,  would  a  bathing-dress  give  out  much  water  ?

Knowing  all  this  (the  subject  is)  to  be  dealt  with  as  occasion  may  require."
Says  Tawny :  "  That  is  indeed  so ;  but  these  in  all  respects  do  not  execute  my
commands."     Stiff-ear  replies  :  "  That  is  every  way  improper.


*  Vais'ravana  (Ugly-ear)  or  Kuvera  (Ugly-body),  arc  names  of  the  god  of  wealth.

t  S'akuni,  the  counsellor  of  Duryodhana,  who  led  the  Parnjava  princes  into  gambling  and  the
consequent  loss  of  their  possessions.  S'aka^ara,  the  minister  of  Nanda,  who  helped  the  Brahman
Chanakya  to  pat  Chondragapta  on  the  throne.


46  SUHEIDBHEDA.

For:—

107.  A  king  should  not  tolerate  even  (his)  children  breaking  his  commands ;  else
what  difference  (is  there)  between  a  king  and  the  picture  of  a  king.

Besides : —

108.  Of  the  stubborn,  the  glory  perishes ;  of  the  inconstant,  the  friendship ;  of
one  deprived  of  sensual  organs,  the  family  (perishes)  ;  of  one  intent  on  wealth,  the
virtue  ;  the  fruit  of  knowledge,  of  the  vicious  ;  of  a  miser,  the  peace  ;  of  a  king  with  a
careless  minister,  the  kingdom  (perishes).

Especially : —

109.  From  thieves,  from  officials,  from  enemies,  from  the  king's  favourite,  and
from  his  own  avarice,  a  king  should  protect  (his)  subjects,  like  a  father.

Brother  !  by  all  means,  let  my  advice  be  acted  on.  We  have  made  our  meal  to-day ;
let  this  corn-eating  Lively  be  appointed  to  the  care  of  the  food."  On  his  suggestion  being
carried  out,  Tawny  and  Lively,  giving  up  all  (other)  connections,  are  passing  the
time  with  great  friendship.  By  and  by,  from  perceiving  a  slackness  in  serving  out
the  food  of  the  dependants,  Damanaka  and  Karataka  communed  with  each  other.
Then  said  Damanaka :  "  What  (is)  here  to  be  done  ?  This  (is)  a  blunder  committed
by  ourselves.  On  a  fault  being  committed  by  oneself,  grieving  (is)  improper.  Thus  it
is  said : —

110.  I,  having  touched  Gold-streak ;  and  the  messenger  (who)  bound  herself ;
and  the  merchant  who  wished  to  take  the  jewel ; — these  from  their  own  fault  were
pained.

Karataka  asks  :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  Damanaka  relates  (as  follows) : — There  is,  in
in  a  city  named  Golden- town,  a  king  called  Hero- valour.  (While)  his  minister  of  justice
was  leading  a  certain  barber  (to)  the  place  of  execution,  a  wandering  mendicant  named
Cupid' s-banner,  accompanied  by  a  trader,  held  on  to  the  skirt  of  (his)  dress,  exclaim-
ing, "This  one  (is)  not  to  be  executed."  The  king's  officers  said:  "Why  (is)  he
not  to  be  executed  ?  "  He  said  :  "  Let  (this)  be  heard  "  :  He  (then)  recites  (the  verse)
"  I  having  touched  Gold-streak,"  &c.  Said  they  :  "  What  (is)  that?  "  The  mendicant
relates  (as  follows)  : — I  (am)  Cupid' s-banner,  the  son  of  Cloud-banner,  king  of  Ceylon.
Now,  once  while  in  the  pleasure-garden,  from  the  mouth  of  a  sea-faring  merchant
(it)  was  heard  by  me,  that,  in  the  midst  of  the  sea  (which  was)  near,  on  the  fourteenth
(day  of  the  month),  at  the  foot  of  an  apparent  Kalpa-tree,*  seated  on  a  couch  varie-
gated with  radiant  strings  of  jewels,  adorned  with  every  ornament,  like  Lakshmi,f
playing  the  lute,  a  certain  girl  was  to  be  seen.  Then  I,  taking  that  sea- going  merchant,
having  embarked  (on  board)  a  ship,  went  there.  Thereupon  (upon)  going  there  she  was
seen  by  me  exactly  (as  described)  ;  then,  attracted  by  the  nature  of  her  beauty,  a  plunge
was  taken  by  me  after  (her).  Immediately,  having  reached  a  golden  city,  in  a  palace
of  gold,  attended  upon  by  fairies  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  she  was  beheld  by  me,  seated
on  a  couch  just  (as  described).  Having  seen  (me)  from  a  distance,  she  sent  a  friend,
(and)  I  was  courteously  accosted.  And  then  her  friend,  questioned  by  me,  explained  ;


*  A  tree  of  Paradise,  fulfilling  all  wishes.          f  The  goddess  of  prosperity,  wife  of  Vishnu.


SUHEIDBHEDA.  47

"  This,  truly,  is  Jewel-stalk,  daughter  of  Cupid-sport,  emperor  of  the  fairies.  She  has
promised  (thus)  :  Whoever,  having  come,  shall  see  the  golden  city  with  his  own  eyes,
he,  even  in  the  absence  of  (my)  father,  shall  marry  me."  Thereupon  (I)  married  her
with  the  Gandharva  ceremony.*  Then,  on  the  Gandharva  ceremony  being  completed,
I  remained  sporting  with  her  a  long  time.  One  day  she  said  to  me  in  private :  "  Hus-
band, all  this  (is)  to  be  freely  enjoyed  ;  but  this  depicted  fairy  named  Gold-streak  (is)
never  to  be  touched."  Afterwards,  through  the  curiosity  (thus)  engendered,  that  Gold-
streak  was  touched  by  my  hand ;  and,  (for)  acting  thus,  I  was  spurned  by  that  picture
with  (its)  lotus-foot,  so  that  I  alighted  in  the  country  of  Surat.  Since  then,  I,  a
wretched  mendicant  wandering  the  earth,  have  reached  this  city  ;  and  now,  the  day
being  far  advanced,  in  a  cowherd's  house  (I)  slept,  (and  there)  beheld  (the  following
adventure)  : — In  the  evening,  having  entertained  (his)  friends,  the  cowherd  returned
from  the  pasture  (and)  saw  his  wife  conversing  with  a  procuress.  Then,  having
beaten  the  cowherdess,  (and)  tied  her  hands  to  a  post  of  the  house,  (he)  went  to  sleep.
In  the  middle  of  the  night  the  messenger,  this  barber's  wife,  came  again,  (and)  said  to
the  cowherdess  :  "  The  worthy  fellow,  consumed  by  the  fire  of  thy  absence,  is  as  though
about  to  die ;  therefore,  I,  having  bound  myself,  (will)  remain  here ;  do  thou  go,  con-
verse with  him,  (and)  return  quickly."  On  this  being  done,  the  cowherd  waking,
said :  "  Why  now  art  thou  not  going  to  (thy)  gallant  ?  "  When  the  procuress  said
nothing,  then  exclaiming,  "  From  pride  thou  art  giving  no  answer  to  my  speech,"  the
wicked  fellow,  through  mistaking  (her  for)  his  wife,  straightway  cut  off  her  nose.
Having  done  so,  the  cowherd  again  laid  down  (and)  went  to  sleep.  Now  having  con-
versed with  the  gallant,  the  cowherdess  returned,  (and)  quickly  asked  the  procuress,
close  in  (her)  ear,  "  Goody,  what  news  ?  "  The  procuress  said  :  "  Behold,  my  face  indeed
tells  the  news."  The  cowherdess,  then,  having  bound  herself  just  as  before,  stood
(there)  ;  and  the  procuress,  taking  the  severed  nose,  entered  her  own  house,  (and)  re-
mained (there).  Early  in  the  morning,  the  razor-case  was  asked  for  by  this  barber,
to  make  his  rounds  in  the  town ;  she,  not  giving  to  him  the  razor-case,  gave  a  single
razor.  Thereupon  this  barber,  angry  at  not  receiving  the  whole  of  the  case,  threw  the
razor  from  some  distance  at  (his)  wife.  Then  she,  making  cries  of  pain,  (and)  ex-
claiming, "  Without  any  fault  my  nose  has  been  cut  by  him,"  led  him  before  the
magistrate.  (On  the  other  hand)  the  cowherdess,  on  being  questioned  by  the  cowherd,
said  :  "  0  wretch  !  who  (is)  able  to  disfigure  me,  most  chaste  ?  The  eight  guardian
(deities)  of  the  world  are  aware  of  my  conduct.  For : —


111.  "  Sun  and  moon,  wind  and  fire,  heaven,  earth,  the  waters,  the  heart,  and
Yama,f  day  and  night,  both  twilights,  and  justice,  are  cognizant  of  man's  conduct.

"  If,  then,  I  should  be  perfectly  chaste,  (and)  leaving  thee,  know  not  another,
(and)  not  even  in  a  dream  have  enjoyed  another  man,  then  let  my  face  be  uninjured."
Accordingly,  as  soon  as  the  cowherd  brought  a  light  (and)  examines  her  face,  at  once,
seeing  the  face  with  a  prominent  nose,  (he)  fell  at  her  feet  (and)  having  ardently  em-


*  That  is,  without  any  ceremony  at  all,  see  Maim  iii.  32.  f  The  judge  of  the  dead.


48  SUHEIDBHEDA.

braced  her,  apologised.  And  as  to  this  trader  standing  (here),  listen  also  to  his  story.
He  started  from,  his  own  house  (and)  after  twelve  years  (he)  came  from  the  neighbour-
hood of  Malaya  to  this  city.  Here  he  slept  in  a  harlot's  house.  On  the  head  of  a
demon  carved  out  of  wood,  placed  by  the  harlot  at  the  house-door,  is  a  valuable  jewel.
Perceiving  that,  this  trader,  greedy  of  gain,  having  risen  in  the  night,  to  ascertain  how
much  this  valuable  jewel  might  be  worth,  placed  (his)  hand  on  the  gem,  and  pulled  the
jewel  forcibly.  Instantly  being  squeezed  by  the  arms  of  the  demon  moved  by  wires,
he  roared  with  pain.  Thereupon  the  harlot  getting  up  said  :  "  Son,  thou  art  come  from
the  neighbourhood  of  Malaya  ;  therefore,  give  up  all  (your)  jewels,  otherwise  thou  art
not  to  be  released  by  him.  Just  thus,  this  servant  (always  acts)."  Then  all  (his)  jewels
were  surrendered  by  him  ;  and  now  he,  stripped  of  his  all,  is  found  among  us  (mendi-
cants). Having  heard  all  this,  justice  was  administered  by  the  king's  officers.  The
barber's  wife  was  shaved ;  the  cowherdess  was  banished  ;  the  procuress  was  fined ;  (and)
the  wealth  of  the  trader  was  restored.  Hence,  1  say,  "  I,  having  touched  Gold- streak,"
&c.  From  this  (it  is  evident  that)  this  blunder  was  committed  by  ourselves.  In  this
case  regret  (is)  absurd.  Having  reflected  a  moment  (Damanaka  added),  "Friend,  as
the  friendship  of  these  two  was  brought  about  hastily  by  me,  so  also  is  a  separation  to
be  effected.  For : —

112.  The  dexterous  make  even  untruths  appear  truths  ;  as  people  skilled  in  paint-
ing (can  make)  hollows  and  eminences  on  a  level  (surface).

Beside : —

113.  On  even  the  happening  of  emergencies  he  whose  mind  is  not  confused,  gets
quit  of  difficulties  ;  like  the  cowherdess  (and)  the  pair  of  gallants.

Karataka  says  :  "  How  (is)  that  ?  "  Damanaka  relates  (as  follows)  : — There  is,  in
the  city  (named)  Many -gated,  an  unchaste  woman  the  wife  of  a  certain  cowherd  ;  and
she  amuses  herself  with  the  magistrate  of  the  village  and  his  son.  Thus  it  is  said  : —

114.  Fire  is  not  satisfied  with  wood ;  nor  the  ocean  with  rivers ;  nor  Death  with  all
creatures,  nor  bright-eyed  women  with  men.

Again : —

115.  Not  by  liberality,  nor  by  honour,  nor  by  rectitude,  nor  by  homage,  nor  by
punishment,  nor  by  precept  (can  they  be  made  faithful)  :  women  (are)  altogether  bad.

For  :—

116.  Women,  abandoning  a  husband,  virtuous,  famous,  handsome,  skilled  in  love,
wealthy,  and  young  ;  straightway  betake  themselves  to  a  man  destitute  of  amiability,
merit,  and  so  forth.

Moreover : —

117.  A  woman  does  not  experience  such  satisfaction,  even  sleeping  at  ease  on  an
embroidered  bed,  as  the  pleasure  she  attains  from  the  companionship  of  a  strange  lover,
on  the  (mere)  ground  strewed  with  durva  grass,  and  the  like.

Now  she,  on  an  occasion,  was  sitting  sporting  with  the  son  of  the  magistrate ;
thereupon  the  magistrate  also  arrived.  Perceiving  him,  having  placed  his  son  in  a
store-room,  she  played  in  the  same  manner  with  the  magistrate.  In  the  meantime,


StJHBIDBHEDA.  49

ner  husband  the  cowherd  returned  from  the  pasture.  Seeing  him,  the  cowherdess
said :  "  Magistrate,  having  taken  thy  stick,  seeming  to  be  angry,  hastily  go."  On  this
being  done,  the  cowherd  coming  there  questioned  (his)  wife  :  "  Through  what  business
came  the  magistrate  here  ?  "  Says  she :  "  He,  for  some  reason  or  other,  is  angered
with  his  son,  and  (the  son)  being  pursued,  came  here  and  entered  through  fear.  Put-
ting (him)  into  the  store-room,  he  was  saved  by  me ;  and  (he)  was  (therefore)  not
seen  in  the  house  by  his  father  seeking  (for  him)  ;  hence  the  latter  is  going  away
angry."  Then,  having  brought  the  son  down  from  the  store-room  she  showed  (him).
Thus  it  is  said : —

118.  The  food  of  women  is  known  (to  be)  two-fold ;  their  wit  four-fold ;  (their)
ingenuity  six-fold ;  and  (their)  lust  eight-fold.

Hence  I  say,  "  Even  upon  the  occurrence  of  emergencies,"  &c.
Karataka  said  :  "  Be  that  as  it  may ;  but  how  can  their  great  natural  affection  be
severed  ?  "    Damanaka  replied :  "  A  stratagem  (is)  to  be  devised.    Thus  it  is  said : —

119.  What  is  possible  by  a  stratagem,  is  not  possible  by  valorous  deeds.    A  she-
crow  caused  a  black  snake  to  be  killed  by  a  gold  chain."

Karataka  asked :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  Damanaka  related  (thus)  : — In  a  certain
tree  dwell  a  pair  of  crows  ;  and  their  young  were  devoured  by  a  black  snake  living  in  a
hollow  of  the  tree.  Then,  breeding  again,  the  she-crow  says :  "  Husband,  this  tree
should  be  abandoned ;  as  long  as  the  black  snake  (is)  here,  so  long  will  there  never  be
offspring.  For : —

120.  A  wicked  wife,  a  false  friend,  a  servant  giving  (saucy)  answers,  and  residence
in  a  house  with  a  snake  (in  it,  is)  death,  without  doubt.

Says  the  crow :  "  Beloved,  (it  is)  not  to  be  feared ;  repeatedly  his  great  offence
has  been  borne  by  me ;  now  (it  is)  not  to  be  again  endured."  The  she-crow  said :
"How  (is)  your  honour  able  to  contend  with  this  powerful  black  snake?  "  'Says  the
crow :  "  Enough  (of)  this  anxiety.  For : —

121.  He  who  (has)  intelligence  (has)  strength ;  whence  (comes)  the  strength  of
the  senseless  ?    Behold  !  the  lion  intoxicated  by  pride,  was  overthrown  by  a  hare.

The  she-crow  said :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  The  crow  relates  (as  follows)  :  There
is,  on  the  mountain  called  Bulky,  a  lion  named  Hard-to-tame ;  and  he  is  constantly
engaged  in  the  slaughter  of  beasts.  Then  the  lion  was  (thus)  addressed  by  all  the
beasts  assembled  together :  "  Sire,  for  what  purpose  is  a  slaughter  of  all  the  beasts
made  at  once  ?  Truly  we,  for  your  honour's  food,  every  day  (will)  present  a  beast."
The  lion  said  :  "  If  that  (is)  the  desire  of  your  honours,  then  let  it  be  so."  Now  all
by  regular  succession,  each  day  are  giving  a  beast ;  (and)  thenceforward,  every  day  he

7


50  SUHEIDBHEDA.

is  accustomed  to  eat,  one  by  one,  the  beast  allotted.    Now,  on  a  certain  day,  the  turn
of  an  old  hare  (being)  come,  he  reflected  (thus)  : —

122.  Because  of  fear,  homage  is  rendered,  (in)  hope  of  life ;  if  I  must  go  to  de-
struction, what  (advantage  will  result)  to  me  by  civility  to  the  lion  ?

Therefore  I  (will)  approach  very  leisurely.  Then  the  lion,  pressed  by  hunger,
angrily  said  to  him :  "  Wherefore  art  thou  come  tardily  ?  "  The  hare  said  :  "  I  (am)
not  faulty  ;  on  the  way  (I  was)  forcibly  detained  by  another  lion.  Having  sworn  to
come  again  before  him,  I  am  come  here  to  inform  (my)  master."  The  lion  angrily
said:  "  Go  quickly ;  show  me,  where  is  this  villain?"  Then  the  hare,  having  taken
him,  came  close  to  a  deep  well.  Having  said,  "  Let  (my)  master  come  here  (and)  see,"
he  showed  (him)  his  own  reflection  in  the  water  of  that  well.  Then  he,  inflated  with
anger,  from  pride  casting  himself  upon  that  (reflected  image),  attained  destruction.
Hence  I  say,  "  He  who  (has)  intelligence,"  &c.  Says  the  she-crow:  "(What  you  have
been  saying  has  been)  heard  by  me,  say  (what  is)  to  be  done."  The  crow  said  :  "  My
dear,  the  king's  son  comes  constantly  (and)  bathes  in  the  adjacent  pool.  Having  seized
and  conveyed  with  (thy)  beak  the  gold  chain  taken  from  his  body  (and  laid)  on  that
.stone  thou  wilt  place  (it)  in  this  hollow."  Now,  on  a  certain  day,  as  soon  as  the  king's
son,  having  placed  the  gold  chain  on  a  stone,  had  entered  (the  water)  to  bathe,  that
(plan)  was  executed  by  the  she-crow.  Then  the  black  snake  being  discovered  by  the
king's  officers  engaged  in  searching  for  the  gold  chain,  was  put  to  death.  Hence  I
say,  "  What  is  possible  by  a  stratagem,"  &c.

Karataka  (then)  said :  "  If  so,  then  go.  May  the  paths  be  prosperous  to  you  ! "
Then  Damanaka,  having  approached  Tawny,  said  respectfully  :  "  Sire,  thinking  over  a
certain  urgent  and  most  alarming  affair,  I  am  come  to  impart  (it).  For  : —

123.  In  (case  of)  misfortune,  in  going  on  a  wrong  course,  and  on  the  opportunities
for  (efficacious)  action  passing  away ;  a  friendly  man,  even  unasked,  should  utter  use-
ful advice.

Besides : —

124.  The  king  (is)  a  vessel  of  enjoyment ;  the  minister  a  vessel  of  work :  from
failure  of  the  king's  affairs  the  minister  incurs  blame.

This  (is)  the  (proper)  course  for  ministers —

125.  Better  resigning  life,*  or  even  decapitation,  but  not  the  tolerance  of  one
meditating  the  crime  of  usurping  the  dignity  of  (his)  master.

Tawny  respectfully  says  :  "  Now  what  does  your  honour  desire  to  say  ?  "  Dama-
naka said :  "  This  much :  Lively  manifests  improper  behaviour  towards  thee ;  and  also,
in  my  presence,  having  despised  the  master's  triple  power,f  even  lusts  for  sovereignty."
Having  heard  this,  Tawny  stood  mute  with  fear  (and)  astonishment.  Damanaka  con-
tinued :  "  Sire,  having  discarded  every  (other)  minster  this  one  has  been  appointed  to
the  superintendence  of  all  affairs  by  thee.  And  this  (is)  a  grave  error.  For : —

*  Euphemism  for  "  suicide."

1 1.  prdbhutwa,  the  maj  esty  of  the  king  ;  2.  mantra,  the  force  of  good  counsel ;  3.  uts&ha,  the  force
of  energy.


SUHKIDBHEDA.  51

126.  When  a  minister  and  a  king  is  (each)  excessively  exalted,  Prosperity,  having
fixed  both  (her)  feet,  stands  (firmly)  ;  she,  from  (her)  female  nature,  impatient  of  the
weight  of  both  (at  once),  abandons  one  or  the  other  of  the  two.

Again : —

127.  When  a  king  makes  one  sole  minister  in  the  kingdom,  from  infatuation  pride
approaches  him,  and  he  is  estranged  by  the  indolence  of  pride ;  in  the  heart  of  the
estranged,  a  hankering  for  independence  makes  a  foot-hold ;  thence,  through  a  desire
for  independence,  he  plots  the  death  of  the  king.

And  it  is  said : —

128.  The  complete  removal*  of  poisoned  food,  a  loose  tooth,  and  a  wicked  minister
(gives)  ease.

Moreover : —

129.  The  king  who  makes  prosperity  dependent  on  a  minister,  he,  on  the  happen-
ing of  calamity  sinks,  like  the  blind  without  guides.

And  he  acts  in  all  affairs  according  to  his  own  inclination.     Here,  your  Majesty
(is)  the  authority.f    But  this  I  know  from  experience,

130.  There  is  not  the  man  in  the  world,  who  does  not  desire  fortune.     Who  does
not  look  wishfully  at  another's  charming  young  (wife)?"

The  lion,  having  reflected,  said  :  "Friend,  although  (that  is)  so,  still  my  friendship
with  Lively  (is)  great.     Observe  : —

131.  Although  committing  faults,  he  who  (is)  beloved  is  indeed  beloved ;  (to)
whom  (is)  the  body  not  dear,  although  defiled  by  endless  imperfections.

Besides : —

132.  Although  doing  unfriendly  (acts),  he  who  (is)  beloved,  is  indeed  beloved ;  on
even  the  finest  house  being  burned,  who  (feels)  disrespect  (for)  fire  ?  "

Says  Damanaka  :  "  Sire !  that  (is)  indeed  a  fault.     For : —

133.  On  whom  the  king  much  casts  an  eye,  on  a  son,  a  minister,  or  on  a  stranger,
that  person  is  courted  by  Fortune.     Mark  this,  Sire  !

134.  The  end  of  what  is  salutary,  although  unpleasant,  brings  happiness ;  where
there  is  both  a  speaker  and  a  listener,  there  successes  disport  (themselves).

But,  having  cast  aside  hereditary  servants,  this  stranger  has  been  advanced  by
thee ;  and  this  was  improperly  done.     For : —

135.  Through  the    fault    of    hereditary  servants   (a  king)   should  not  cherish
strangers ;  there  is  no  other  greater  cause  of  dissension  in  a  kingdom  than  this."

Says  the  lion :  "  Mighty  strange !  since,  after  giving  an  assurance  of  safety,  he
has  been  brought  and  promoted  by  me,  how,  then,  is  he  plotting  ?  "
Damanaka  replied  :  "  Sire  !

136.  A  bad  person  reverts  (to  his)  natural  character  even  (while)  being  assiduously


*  Lit.  "  tearing  up  from  the  root."

f  That  is,  "  your  inclination,  not  his,  should  be  the  guiding  principle."


52  SUHBIDBHEDA.

well  treated  :  as  a  dog's  tail,  with*  (all)  expedients  of  warming  and  anointing  (remains)
bent.

Again : —

137.  Warmed,  pressed,  and  even  swathed  with  bandages,  (when)  liberated,  after  a
dozen  years,  a  dog's  tail  resumed  (its)  natural  character.

Again : —

138.  How  (can)  the  promotion  and  honour  of  the  vile  (conduce)  to  conciliation  ?
poison-trees,  though  watered  with  nectar,  do  not  bear  wholesome  fruits.

Hence  I  say  :

139.  Even  unasked  (a  man)  should  utter  what  is  friendly  for  one  whose  ruin  he
may  not  desire ;  this,  indeed,  (is)  the  law  of  the  good ;  the  reverse  of  it  (that)  of  the
wicked.

And  it  is  said  : —

140.  He  (is)  kind  who  shields  from   harm ;  that  (is)  a  (real)  action  which  (is)
pure ;  she  (is)  a  wife  who  (is)  obedient ;  he  (is)  wise  who  is  honoured  by  the  good ;
that  (is)  prosperity  which  does  not  cause  pride  ;  he  (is)  happy  who  (is)  free  from  han-
kering ;  he  (is)  a  friend  who  (is)  inartificial ;  he  (is)  a  man  who  is  not  tormented  by
(his)  passions.

If  the  master,  injured  by  the  wickedness  of  Lively,  although  warned,  does  not
desist,  then  (it  is)  no  fault  of  the  servant.     Also  : —

141.  A  king  devoted  to  pleasure  values  neither  duty  nor  interest ;  he  rambles  as
he  pleases,  following  his  own  inclinations,  like  an  infuriated  elephant.     At  length,
when  puffed  up  by  pride  he  falls  into  an  abyss  of  distress,  then  he  casts  the  blame  on
the  servant,  and  perceives  not  his  own  indiscretion."

Tawny  (aside).

142.  (A  king)  should  not  inflict  punishment  upon  others  through  the  accusation
of  another ;  after  personal  investigation,  he  should  imprison  or  honour.

Thus  it  is  said  : —

143.  (The  distribution  of)  favour  and  punishment  (when)  not  having  considered  in
due  form  merit  and  blame  (tends)  to  one's  own  destruction  ;  as  (when)  the  hand  from
conceit  is  placed  on  the  mouth  of  a  serpent.

(Aloud). — "  Then  should  Lively  be  admonished?  "

Damanaka  (hastily). — "  Not  so,  on  any  account.     A  breach  of  counsel  is  (in  that
way)  produced.     And  it  is  said  thus : —

144.  This  seed  of  counsel  should  be  so  preserved  as  that  it  should  not  be  ever  so
little  broken  ;  (when)  it  is  broken  it  grows  not.

Moreover : —

145.  Time  drinks  up  the  flavour  of  what  ought  to  be  received,  to  be  given,  or  of
an  act  to  be  done,  (when  it  is)  not  being  done  speedily.

Then,  surely,  what  has  been  commenced,  with  great  diligence  should  be  completed.
Moreover : —

146.  Counsel,  like  a  wavering  soldier,  even  with  all  (his)  limbs  covered,  cannot
bear  to  remain  long,  through  fear  of  injury  from  the  enemy.

*  The  instrumental  case  here  has  the  sense  "  in  despite  of."


SUHEIDBHEDA.  53

If  he,  detected  in  a  fault,  having  turned  from  the  fault  (is)  to  be  re-instated,  that
(is)  exceedingly  improper.  For : —

147.  He  who  wishes  to  re-establish  a  friend  who  has  once  offended,  receives  death  ;
like  a  she-mule  a  foetus."*

Says  the  lion  :  "Let  it  be  known,  at  all  events,  what  he  (is)  able  to  do  against  us."
Damanaka  replied :  "  Sire !

148.  The  nature  of  the  body  and  its  connections  being  unknown,  how  (can  there
be)  a  demonstration  of  ability  ?     Behold !  the  sea  was  confounded  by  a  mere  sand-
piper."

The  lion  asked  :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  Damanaka  related  (as  follows)  : — On  the
shore  of  the  sea,  a  pair  of  sandpipers  are  dwelling.  Now  the  hen,  being  about  to  lay,
said  (to  her)  husband  :  "  Master  !  let  a  place  suitable  for  laying  be  sought  for."  The
sandpiper  said  :  "  Is  not  this  very  place  suitable  for  laying  ?  "  Says  she  :  "  This  place
is  overflowed  by  the  waves  of  the  sea."  He  replies :  "  My  dear !  am  I  without  resource
(that)  eggs  deposited  in  my  house  are  carried  away  by  the  sea  ?  "  The  hen  smiling
said :  "  Master !  between  thee  and  the  sea  the  difference  (is)  great.  Now  : —

149.  "  (Am  I)  myself  able  to  mitigate   (this)  misfortune,  or  not  ?  " — of  whom
there  is  such  discrimination,  he  sinks  not  even  in  a  difficulty.

Also : —

150.  The  commencement  of  an  improper  act,  opposition  to  one's  own  folk,  rivalry
with  the  stronger,  (and)  confidence  in  womankind,  (are)  the  four  gates  of  death.

Then,  by  direction  of  her  mate,  she  laid  (in)  that  very  place.  Having  heard  all
this  (and)  intent  on  knowing  his  strength,  his  eggs  were  removed  by  the  sea.  Then
the  hen,  afflicted  with  grief,  said  (to  her)  husband:  "  Master !  a  misfortune  has  hap-
pened, my  eggs  are  lost."  The  sandpiper  replied :  "  My  dear !  fear  not."  Having
said  this  (and)  having  convened  an  assembly  of  the  birds,  (he)  went  (to)  the  presence  of
Garuda,  lord  of  winged  creatures ;  (there)  he  relates  the  tale  of  the  destruction  of  his
eggs.  Then,  having  heard  his  statement,  the  revered  lord  Narayana,  cause  of  creation,
preservation,  and  destruction,  was  informed  (thereof)  by  that  winged-one.  Thereupon,
obeyingf  the  Lord's  command,  he  went  to  the  sea,  (and)  the  sea,  having  heard  his
command,  surrendered  those  eggs.  Hence  I  say,  "  Without  knowing  the  nature  of  the
body  and  its  connections,"  &c.

The  king  asked :  "  How  (is)  he  to  be  known  as  treacherous  'if "  Damanaka  replied  :
"  When  he  comes  prepared  to  strike  with  the  points  of  (his)  horns,  as  if  apprehensive,
then  the  master  will  know."

Having  spoken  thus,  (he)  went  towards  Lively  ;  and  being  gone  there,  slowly
drawing  near,  made  himself  appear  as  though  amazed.  Then  said  Lively  courteously  :
"  Friend  Damanaka !  prosperity  to  thee  !  "  Damanaka  replies  :  "  Whence  (comes)  the
prosperity  of  dependants  ?  For : —

151.  Their  successes  (are)  subject  to  others,  (with)  mind  ever  unquiet,  even  un-
certain in  (regard  to)  their  own  life,  (such  are)  they  who  depend  on  kings.

*  Referring  to  the  notion  that  gestation  kills  a  mole,
f  Lit.  "  haying  placed  the  lord's  command  on  his  head."


54  SUHR1DBHEDA.

Again : —

152.  Who  having  acquired  riches  (is)  not  proud  ?     Of  what  wordling  (are)  the
troubles  gone  to  their  setting  ?     Of  whom  upon  the  earth  (is)  not  the  mind  distressed
by  women  ?     Who,  indeed,  (is)  beloved  (by)  kings  ?     Who  has  not  gone  into  the  arms
of  death  ?     What  supplicator  has  attained  dignity  ?     Or  what  man,  fallen  into  the  toils
of  the  wicked,  has  escaped  with  safety  ?

Lively  said  :  "  Friend,  tell  (me)  ;  what  (is)  this  ?  "

Damanaka  replied :  "  What  (shall)  I  say,  unhappy  wretch  (that  I  am)  !     See  : —

153.  As  (when)  sunk  in  the  ocean,  (and)    having  obtained  the    support    of  a
serpent,  one  neither  lets  go  nor  retains  hold,  so  now  am  I  perplexed.

For:—

154.  On  the  one  hand,  the  king's  confidence  is  lost ;  on  the  other  hand,  a  friend.
What  (shall)  I  do,  where  (shall)  I  go,  fallen  into  a  sea  of  trouble  ! "

Having  said  this,  sighing  deeply,  (he)  sat  down.

Lively  (then)  says :  "  Nevertheless,  friend,  let  what  is  passing  in  the  mind  be
related  in  detail."

Damanaka  said  whisperingly :  "  Although  the  king's  confidence  must  not  be
divulged  to  another,  still  your  honour,  through  my  promise,  came  and  remained,
therefore,  (what  concerns)  thy  welfare  should  be  imparted  by  me,  desirous  of  the  next
world.  Listen.  This  master  estranged  from  thee*  declared  privately — Having  killed
Lively,  I  (will)  satisfy  my  retinue.

Hearing  this  Lively  became  exceedingly  dejected.

Damanaka  continued :  "  Enough  of  dejection !  let  an  action  appropriate  to  the
time  be  adopted."

Lively,  reflecting  awhile,  said  :  "  This,  indeed,  is  plainly  declared  : —

155.  Women  (are)  accessible  to  the  wicked  ;  the  king  is  often  a  supporter  of  the
unworthy ;  wealth  (is)  an  attendant  on  the  niggardly ;  Devaf  rains  upon  rock  and  sea.

Also : —

156.  LakshmiJ  consorts  with  the  base ;  Saraswati,§  with  the  plebeian ;  a  woman
courts  the  unworthy  ;  Vasava||  rains  on  a  mountain.

{Aside). — Whether  this  (be)  his  doing  or  not,  cannot  be  ascertained  from  his
behaviour.  For : —

157.  Any  bad  person  acquires  lustre  from  the  beauty  of  (his)  patron  ;  like  smutty
colly rium  applied  to  the  eye  of  a  lovely  woman.

Then  having  reflected,  (he)  exclaimed :  Alas  !  what  (is)  this  that  has  happened  ?
For:—

158.  A  king  being  served  assiduously  does  not  attain  satisfaction  :  (have  we)  here
a  wonder  ?    But  this  (is)  an  unprecedented  kind  of  object,  who,  being  served,  (actually)
attains  enmity.

Here,  then,  diligence  (is)  unavailing.     For : —

159.  He  who  is  angry  for  a  cause,  on  the  removal  of  that  (cause)  is  speedily  tran-
quillized ;  but  how,  forsooth,  shall  a  man  satisfy  him  whose  mind  is  inimical  without
cause  ?

*  Lit.  Upon  thee.  f  -A.  name  of  Indra,  the  giver  of  rain.  J  The  goddesa  of  prosperity.

§  The  goddess  of  eloquence.  ||  A  name  of  Indra.


SUHR1DBHEDA.  55

What  has  been  done  by  me  against  the  king?  or  (are)  kings  causelessly  injurious?
Damanaka  said :  "  It  (is)  even  so.     Listen  : —

160.  Even  a  service  (performed)  by  the  discreet  (and)  affectionate  incurs  odious-
ness,  whilst  an  injury  (done)  by  others  openly  finds  favour.     How  surprising,  then,  is
the  conduct  of  those  who  resort  to  the  fickle  !     The  pre-eminently  difficult  duty  of
service  (is)  unattainable  even  (to)  Togins.

Moreover : —

161.  A  hundred  acts  (of  kindness  are)  lost  upon  the  wicked :  a  hundred  fine
speeches    (are)    lost  upon  the  stupid :  a  hundred  maxims   (are  lost)  upon  the  dis-
regarder  of  advice :  a  hundred  (wise)  thoughts  (are)  lost  upon  the  thoughtless.

Again  : —

162.  In  sandal-trees  (there  are)  serpents.     In  the  waters,  lotuses  ;  but  there  are
(also)  alligators.     Spiteful  detractors  (are)  in  (our)  enjoyment.     (There  are)  no  unob-
structed pleasures.

Again : —

163.  The  root  (swarms)  with  serpents ;  the  blossoms  with  bees  ;  the  branches  with
monkeys ;  the  upper  parts  with  bears.     There  is  not,  truly,  that  (part)  of  a  sandal-
tree  which  (is)  not  infested  by  the  vilest  impurities.

That  this  (our)  master,  says  Damanaka,  (is)  honey-spoken  (and)  poison-hearted  is
known  by  me.  For : —

164.  The  hand  outstretched  from  afar — the    eye  suffused — half  the  seat  relin-
quished— intent  on  a  close  embrace — respectful  in  kind  conversation  (and)  inquiries —
concealed  poison  within,  honied  without — beyond  measure  an  adept  in  deceit ; — what
a  wondrous  art  of  mimicry  truly  (is)  this,  learned  by  the  wicked  !

In  like  manner : —

165.  A  boat  (is  the  expedient)  in  traversing  a  mass  of  water  difficult  to  cross ;  a
lamp  (is  the  expedient)  on  the  approach  of  darkness ;  in  a  calm,  a  fan ;  a  hook,  for
curbing  the  fury  of  an  elephant  blind  with  passion.      Thus  there  is  nothiug  upon
earth  for  which  the  thought  of  an  expedient  has  not  been  taken  by  the  Creator  :  I
think  (that)  even  the  Greater    (is)  baffled   in  removing  the  inward  purpose  of  the
wicked."

Lively  (said)  to  himself :  O  misery  !  how  (is  it  that)  I,  a  corn-eater  (am)  to  be
slain  by  the  lion  ?  For : —

166.  Truly  between  two  equal  (in)  wealth,  (and)  between  two  equal  (in)  strength,
a  controversy  may  be  imagined ;  (but)  nowhere  between  two,  (one)  high  (the  other)
low.

Having  reflected  again,  he  said  :  "  By  whom  has  this  king  been  made  to  change
towards  me  ?  From  a  king  close  upon  a  rupture,  fear  (is)  ever  to  be  entertained.
For:—

167.  (If)  the  mind  of  the  king  (is)  anywhere  severed,  like  a  bracelet  of  crystal,  who
(is)  the  master  to  join  (it)  together  ?

Again : —

168.  A  thunderbolt  and  the  king's  severity,  (are)  both  exceedingly  terrible :  one
falls  on  a  single  spot,  the  other  falls  all  around.


56  SUHKIDBHEDA.

Therefore  let  death  in  battle  be  resorted  to;  now  obedience  to  his  command
(would  be)  improper.  For  : —

169.  Either  (by)  dying  he  obtains  heaven,  or  having  slain  the  enemy  (he  obtains)
pleasures ;  both  these  excellencies,  very  difficult  of  acquisition  (are  the  prerogatives)  of
heroes.

And  this  (is)  the  time  for  war : —

170.  Where  (in)  peace  (there  is)  certain  destruction  (and)  in  war  a  chance  of  life,
that,  truly,  the  wise  declare  the  time  for  war.

For:—

171.  When  in  peace  he  should  perceive  nothing  beneficial  (to)  himself  ;  then  the
wise  man  dies  combatting  with  the  enemy.

172.  In  victory  one  obtains  prosperity,  also  by  dying  (one  obtains)  a  celestial
bride ;  bodies  perish  in  a  moment ;  what  anxiety  (need  there  be)  about  dying  in  battle.

Having  reflected  thus  Lively  said  :  "  O  friend,  how  (is  it)  to  be  ascertained  that
he  (is)  desirous  to  slay  me  ?  "  Says  Damanaka :  "  When  he  looks  at  thee  (with)  ears
erect,  tail  elevated,  claws  raised,  (and)  gaping  mouth,  then  wilt  thou  likewise  display
thy  bravery.  For: —

173.  Of  whom  (is)  not  one  destitute  of    energy,  although  strong,  an  object  of
humiliation  ?     Observe,  the  foot  is  fearlessly  placed  by  people  on  a  heap  of  ashes.

But  all  this  (is)  to  be  accomplished  very  secretly ;  otherwise,  neither  thou  nor  I  (will
prosper)."     Saying  this  Damanaka  went  to  Karataka.     Karataka  said  :  "  What  (is)  the
result  ?  "     Damanaka  replied :  "  The  result  (is)  mutual  estrangement  between  them."
Karataka  rejoined  :  "  What  doubt  (can  there  be)  here  ?     For : —

174.  Who,  indeed,  (is)  a  friend  of  the  wicked  ?    Who,  excessively  importuned,  is
not  angered  ?     Who  is  not  rendered  arrogant  by  wealth  ?    Who  (is)  not  an  adept  in
villainy  ?

Again : —

175.  An  illustrious  (person)  is  made  infamous  by  rogues  for  their  own  advantage.
Does  not,  indeed,  association  with  the  vile  act  like  fire  ?

Then  Damanaka  having  approached  Tawny  (said) :  "  Sire !  that  evil-intentioned
(one)  is  come,  therefore  stand  prepared."  Having  said  which,  he  caused  him  to  assume
the  appearance  stated  above.  Lively,  also,  having  approached,  (and)  seeing  the  lion  in
that  way  altered  in  appearance,  showed  fight  after  his  own  fashion.  Then  in  the
great  conflict  between  them  Lively  was  killed  by  the  lion.  Now  the  lion  having  killed
(his)  servant  Lively  sat  resting  sorrowfully,  and  he  says :  What  a  cruel  deed  has  been
committed  by  me !  For : —

176.  By  others  is  the  kingdom  enjoyed  ;  he  himself  (is)  a  vessel  of  iniquity.     By
outraging  duty  a  king  is  like  a  lion  after  the  slaughter  of  an  elephant.*

Besides : —

177.  In  (estimating)  the  loss  of  a  portion  of  territory,  or  of  a  virtuous  (and)  wise
minister,  the  loss  of  a  minister  (is)  the  death  of  kings.    .

*  Because  others  appropriate  the  pearls  said  to  be  in  the  head  of  the  dead  elephant.


SUHRIDBHEDA.  57

Damanaka  said :  "  O  master !  what  novel  philosophy  (is)  this,  that  remorse  is
experienced  after  slaying  an  enemy  !  Thus,  indeed,  it  has  been  said : —

178.  If  either  father  or  brother,  if  either  son  or  friend,  (be)  conspirators  against
(his)  life,  (they)  should  be  killed  by  a  king  desiring  prosperity.

Moreover : —

179.  (One)  knowing  the  principles  of  duty,  interest,  and  pleasure,  cannot  be  purely
compassionate  :  a  forbearing  (person  is)  not  able  to  preserve  even  the  property  (already)
in  his  grasp.

Besides : —

180.  Forbearance  towards  both  an  enemy  and  a  friend  (is),  of  a  truth,  the  ornament
of  ascetics ;  (but)  towards  offending  beings  it  (is),  verily,  for  kings,  a  defect.

Furthermore : —

181.  For  (one)  desiring  his  master's  dignity,  through  lust  of  dominion  (or)  through
conceit,  forfeiture  of  life  (is)  the  sole  expiation ;  (there  is)  no  other.

Again : —

182.  A  compassionate  king,  a  Brahman  (who)  eats  everything,  a  disobedient  wife,
an  ill-natured  friend,  a  refractory  servant,  an  imprudent  officer,  and  one  who  does  not
acknowledge  what  hasabeen  done,*  these  (are)  to  be  avoided.

And  especially : —

183.  The  policy  of  a  king,  like  a  courtezan,  (is)  many-shaped :  true  and  false,
harsh  and  kind-spoken,  cruel  and  merciful,  parsimonious  and  generous,  ever  spending
yet  (intent  on)  the  influx  of  hoards  of  jewels  and  money."

Thus  with  deceitful  speech  tranquillised  by  Damanaka,  Tawny  regained  his  natural
temper  (and)  sat  on  (his)  throne.  Damanaka  being  overjoyed  in  heart,  said  to  the
king :  "  May  the  monarch  be  victorious  !  may  the  whole  world  be  prosperous  !  "  Having
said  this  he  continued  at  ease.

Vishnus"arman  said  :  "  (You)  have  heard  the  Separation  of  Friends."  The  princes
replied :  "  We  (are)  gratified."  Vishnu^arman  said  :  In  future  let  this  also  be, —

184.  May  the  separation  of  friends  be  (found)  only  in  the  abode  of  your  Honour's
enemies  !     May  the  wretch,  drawn  by  Fate,  day  by  day  approach  destruction !     May
mankind  ever  be  the  abode  of  all  happiness  and  prosperity !     May  (every)  boy  also
continually  delight  here  in  the  charming  garden  of  fable  !

Here  ends  the  Second  Chapter  of  the  Hitopadesa,  called  the  Separation  of
Friends.

*  The  ungrateful  one.


8


58


WAR.


At  the  time  for  re-commencing  the  story  the  princes  said  :  "  Sir !  we  (are)  princes ;
therefore,  there  is  curiosity  among  us  to  hear  (about)  war."  Vishnusarman  replied : —
I  discourse  (about)  that  which  is  agreeable  to  your  Highnesses.  Attend  to  War,  of
which  this  is  the  first  verse  : —

1.  In  a  war,  equal  in  valour,  of  peacocks  with  geese,  the  geese,  having  been  in-
duced to  confide,  were  deceived  by  crows  (who)  had  lived  in  the  enemy's  town.

The  princes  asked :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  Vishnusarman  related  (as  follows) : —
There  is,  in  the  island  of  Camphor,  a  lake  named  Lotus-sport.  There  a  flamingo  dwells
named  Gold-egg ;  and  he  was  inaugurated  in  the  sovereignty  of  the  birds  by  all  the
aquatic  fowls  assembled  together.  For : —

2.  If  there  be  no  king,  wholly  a  leader,  then  .the  subjects  would  be  tossed  about
like  a  ship  on  the  sea  without  a  steersman.

Again : —

3.  The  king  protects  the  subject ;  the  subject  aggrandizes  the  king :  protection
is  better  than  aggrandizement ;  in  its  absence,  even  that  which  (is)  existent,  (is)  non-
existent.

Once  upon  a  time  this  flamingo  was  sitting  comfortably  on  a  well-spread  lotus-bed,
his  retinue  standing  around.  Thereupon  a  crane  named  Long-face,  coming  from  some
country  or  other,  having  made  obeisance,  sat  down.  The  king  said  :  "  Long-face  !  thou
art  come  from  a  foreign  land,  relate  the  news."  He  replied :  "  Sire  !  there  is  important
news ;  in  (my)  desire  to  tell  it,  I  am  come  hastily.  Let  attention  be  paid.  There
is  in  Jambudwipa  a  mountain  named  Vindhya,  (and)  there  dwells  a  peacock  named
Spotted-colour,  king  of  the  birds.  In  the  midst  of  a  parched  wood  while  pecking
(food)  I  was  seen  and  questioned  by  his  attendants  (thus)  :  "  Who  (art)  thou  ?  whence
(art)  thou  come  ?  "  Then  I  replied :  "  I  (am)  an  attendant  of  Gold-egg,  king  of  the
island  of  Camphor ;  from  curiosity  I  am  come  to  see  a  foreign  country."  Having
heard  that  the  birds  said  :  "  Of  the  two,  then,  which  country  or  king  (is)  the  better?  "
Thereupon  I  replied :  "  Ah !  what  (is  this  which)  is  said  !  Great  (is)  the  difference !
for  the  island  of  Camphor  is  a  district  of  heaven,  and  the  king  (is)  a  second  lord  of
Paradise.  How  can  it  be  described  ?  What  are  you  doing  here,  alighted  in  a  barren
place  ?  Come,  let  (us)  go  into  my  country."  Then,  having  heard  that  speech,  the
birds  became  angry.


VIGRAHA.  59

As  it  is  said : —

4.  Milk-drinking  (is)  for  serpents  only  the  increase  of  venom.    Advice  (leads)  to
the  exasperation,  not  to  the  tranquillization,  of  fools.

Again : —

5.  A  sensible  (person)  may  be  advised,  but  a  blockhead,  never.    Birds  having
advised  (certain)  stupid  monkeys,  experienced  the  destruction  of  (their)  homes.

The  king  asked:  "How  (was)  that?"  Long-face  related  (the  following  anec-
dote) : — There  is  on  the  banks  of  the  Narmada,  in  the  land  skirting  the  hills,  a  large
silk-cotton  tree.  There,  in  a  nest  constructed  by  themselves  (some)  birds  are  residing
comfortably,  even  during  the  rains.  Now,  on  the  nether  sky  being  overspread  with
masses  of  cloud,  like  sheets  of  indigo,  there  was  a  great  rain  in  torrents.  Then,  per-
ceiving the  monkeys  standing  under  the  tree,  pinched  with  cold,  (and)  shivering,  the
birds  compassionately  said :  "  Ho,  monkeys !  hearken :

6.  Nests  have  been  built  by  us  with  straws  brought  with  (our)  beaks  merely ;  how
(is  it  that)  you,  endowed  with  hands,  feet,  &c.,  are  dejected  ?  "

Hearing  this,  the  monkeys  with  (their)  anger  aroused,  looked  up,  (and  cried) :
"  Oh  !  the  comfortable  birds,  seated  in  the  bosom  of  nests  sheltered  from  wind,  are
taunting  us.  Let  it  be  so,  until  an  abatement  of  the  rain."  Afterwards,  when  the
downpour  of  water  had  abated,  the  monkeys,  having  climbed  the  trees,  broke  all  the
nests,  and  threw  down  all  the  eggs  of  those  birds.  Hence  I  say,  "  A  sensible  (person)
may  be  advised,"  &c.  The  king  said :  "  What  was  said  then  by  the  birds  ?  "  Long-
face  resumed  : — Then  the  birds  angrily  exclaimed,  "  By  whom  was  this  flamingo  made
king?"  Then  I  with  anger  aroused,  said:  "By  whom  was  this  peacock  of  yours
made  king  ?  "  Upon  hearing  that  the  birds  prepared  to  kill  me ;  whereupon  I  also
made  a  goodly  display  of  valour.  For : —

7.  At  another  time,  forbearance  (is)  the  ornament  of  a  man,  as  modesty  (is)  of
a  woman.     At  an  insult,  valour  (is  appropriate),  as  (is)  lasciviousness  in  sexual  em-
braces.

The  king,  laughing,  said  : —

8.  He  who,  having  investigated  the  strength  and  weakness  of  himself  and  others
does  not  perceive  the  difference,  he  is  scorned  by  the  enemy.

Again : —

9.  Grazing  constantly  for  a  very  long  time  (on)  the  corn  in  a  field,  a  stupid  ass,
covered  in  a  tiger's  skin,  was  killed,  through  the  blunder  of  speaking.

The  crane  asked:  "How  (is)  that?"  The  king  related  (as  follows)  :— There
was  in  Hastinupura  a  washerman  named  Frolic.  His  donkey,  from  conveying  ex-
cessive loads,  was  become  weak  (and)  ready  to  die.  Then  the  washerman,  having
clothed  (him)  in  a  tiger's  skin,  turned  him  loose  in  a  field  of  corn  in  the  vicinity
of  a  forest.  Then  seeing  him  from  afar,  the  owners  of  the  field  fled  hastily  away,
with  the  idea  (that  it  was)  a  tiger.  Now  a  certain  watcher  of  the  corn,  with  a
body-covering  made  of  grey  blanket,  having  prepared  (his)  bow  and  arrow,  re-
mained, in  a  crouching  position,  in  a  retired  spot.  Then  seeing  him  at  a  distance,


60  ViGRAHA.

the  donkey  (with)  recruited  vigour,  thinking  him  a  female  ass,  trotted  up  to  him
braying.  Thereupon  he  was  killed,  through  (his)  gamesomeness,  by  that  corn-
watcher,  (when  he)  ascertained  that  it  was  (but)  an  ass.  Hence  I  say  that  "  For  a
very  long  time  continuously  grazing,"  &c.  Long-face  (then)  resumed  : — Afterwards
those  birds  exclaimed,  "  0  wicked,  vile  crane  !  (while)  feeding  on  our  ground  thou  art
reviling  our  sovereign ;  that  (is)  not  now  to  be  endured."  Saying  which,  all,  striking
me  with  (their)  beaks  angrily  exclaimed :  "  See,  O  fool !  this  gander  thy  king  (is)
altogether  spiritless  :  sovereignty  is  not  his ;  for  one  gentle  to  an  extreme  (is)  unable
to  retain  the  wealth  already  in  his  hand  ;  how  is  he  (then)  ruling  the  earth  ?  or  what
kingdom  (is)  his  ?  But  thou  (art)  a  frog  in  a  well,  therefore  thou  advisest  resort  to
him.  Listen : —

10.  A  great  tree  having  fruit  and  shade  (is)  to  be  respected:  if,  through  fate,  there
be  no  fruit,  by  what  (cause)  is  the  shade  withheld  ?

Again : —

11.  The  service  of  the  base  (is)  not  to  be  engaged  in :  resort  (is)  to  be  made  to
the  great.     Even  water,  in  the  hand  of  a  tavern-keeper,  is  thought  (to  be)  spirit.

12.  The  she-goat,  by  favour  of  the  lion,  browses  fearlessly  in  the  wood.     Vibhi-
shana,  having  met  Rama,  obtained  sovereignty  in  Lanka.*

Again  : —

13.  The  great  (possessed  of)  abundant  virtues  attain  littleness,  when  (depending)
on  the  worthless,  through  the  relation  of  the  receptacle  and  the  object  to  be  received ;
like  an  elephant  in  a  (convex)  mirror.

And  especially  : —

14.  Even  in  a  stratagem  there  may  be  success  over  an  exceedingly  powerful  king.
By  the  stratagem  of  the  Moon,  the  hares  dwell  happily."

I  asked  :  "  How  (is)  that  ?  "  The  birds  related  (this  anecdote)  : — Once  upon  a
time,  from  the  absence  of  rain  even  in  the  rainy  season,  a  herd  of  elephants,  troubled
by  thirst,  said  to  the  leader  of  the  herd  :  "  Sir,  there  is  no  means  for  our  living.
(There  are)  bathing-places  for  the  lesser  animals,  but  we,  from  the  absence  of  bathing,
(are)  like  the  blind,  (crying)  Where  are  we  going  ?  What  are  we  doing  ?  "  Then  the
elephant-king,  having  gone  no  great  distance,  pointed  out  a  limpid  pool.  Soon  after
the  hares  dwelling  on  its  banks  (are)  crushed  by  blows  from  the  feet  of  the  herd  of
elephants.  Thereupon  a  hare  named  Blockhead  reflected  (thus)  :  "  This  herd  of  thirst-
afflicted  elephants  will  come  here  daily  ;  hence  our  family  (will  be)  destroyed."
Then  an  old  buck  named  Victory  said  :  "  Be  not  dejected,  a  remedy  (can)  be  devised
by  me."  Having  thus  promised  (he)  set  out.  Whilst  going  on  (his)  way  he  reflected
(thus)  :  "  Having  approached  the  leader  of  the  herd  of  elephants,  what  (is)  to  be  said
by  me  ?  For : —

15.  Even  (when)  touching,  an  elephant  kills  ;  a  serpent  (when)  smelling ;  a  king,
even  (when)  protecting ;  the  wicked,  even  (when)  smiling.

Therefore  having  mounted  to  the  summit  of  a  hill,  I  (will)  address  the  elephant-
leader."  On  this  being  done,  the  leader  of  the  troop  exclaimed :  "  Who  (art)  thou  ?


*  Vibhishana  was  a  brother  of  Havana,  who  disapproving  of  his  brother's  wickedness,  ultimately
deserted  his  cause,  and  joining  Rama,  was  placed  by  him  upon  the  throne  of  Lanka  or  Ceylon.


VIGRAHA.  61

(and)  whence  come  ?  "     He  replied :  "  I  (am)  a  messenger  sent  by  the  revered  Moon."
The  master  of  the  herd  rejoined  :  "  Let  (thy)  business  be  declared."     Victory  said: —

16.  "  Even  among  uplifted  weapons  an  envoy  speaks   not   otherwise    (than  his
errand)  ;  through  his  inviolable  character  (he  is)  always  a  speaker  of  the  truth.

Therefore,  I  speak  by  his  command ;  listen :  Whereas  these  hares,  guardians  of
the  Moon's  lake,  have  been  driven  away  by  thee, — that  was  not  rightly  done ;  for  these
protectors,  the  hares,  (are)  mine ;  for  this  (reason)  my  (title)  Hare-marked  (is)  well-
known."  As  soon  as  the  messenger  had  spoken  thus,  the  leader  of  the  herd  timidly
said  this :  "  Sire,  this  was  done  ignorantly ;  I  will  not  go  again."  The  messenger
remarked :  "  Then,  having  here  saluted  and  propitiated  the  revered  Moon  trembling
with  anger  on  the  lake,  do  thou  depart."  Then  having  conducted  (him)  at  night,  and
pointed  out  the  reflection  of  the  Moon  quivering  in  the  water,  he  caused  the  leader  of
the  herd  to  salute  it.  "  Sire,  the  fault  was  committed  by  him  through  ignorance,
therefore,  let  it  be  forgiven,"  having  said  which  the  leader  of  the  herd  was  dismissed
by  the  hare.  Hence  I  say,  "  There  may  be  success  even  by  a  stratagem,"  &c.  After
that  I  said  :  "  Truly  he  our  sovereign  (is)  most  mighty  and  exceedingly  powerful,  the
sovereignty  of  the  three  worlds  is  appropriate  to  him  ;  what,  then,  (is)  a  kingdom !  "
Then  I  was  led  into  the  presence  of  king  Spotted-colour  by  those  birds,  (they)  crying
out,  "  Wretch  !  how  art  thou  at  large  in  our  territory  !  "  Then  having  exhibited  me
before  the  king,  after  salutation,  they  said :  "  Sire !  let  attention  be  paid.  This  vile
crane,  even  while  travelling  in  our  country,  despises  the  royal  feet."  The  king  in-
quired :  "  Who  (is)  this  ?  whence  has  (he)  come  ?  "  They  replied :  "  He  (is)  a  follower
of  the  flamingo  named  Gold-egg ;  (and)  is  come  from  the  island  of  Camphor.  Then
I  was  asked  by  the  prime- minister,  a  vulture  :  "  Who  (is)  there  the  prime-minister  ?  "
I  replied  :  "  A  ruddy- goose  named  Know-all,  thoroughly  versed  in  all  the  sciences."
Says  the  vulture :  "  That  is  right ;  he  (is)  a  fellow-countryman.  For : —

17.  A  fellow-countryman  perfect  in  family  observances,  free  from  deceit,  familiar
with  the  sciences,  not  attached  to  wicked  inclinations,  devoid  of  immorality, —

18.  Well  read  in  the  body  of  laws,  renowned,  of  pure  blood,  prudent,  a  producer
of  wealth ;  a  king  may  properly  appoint  (such  a  one  as  his)  minister.

Thereupon  a  parrot,  the  superintendent  of  justice,  said :  "  The  island  of  Camphor,
and  the  rest,  (are)  insignificant  isles  lying  within  Jambudwipa ;  there  also  the  sove-
reignty of  the  royal  feet  (extends)."  Then  the  king  also  said :  "  Truly  (that  is)  so."
For:—

19.  A  king,  a  madman,  a  child,  a  wanton,  and  a  purse-proud  (man),  hanker  after
even  the  unattainable  ;  how  much  more  (after)  what  is  procurable  !

Then  I  said:  "  If,  by  mere  talk,  the  authority  of  your  Majesty's  feet  is  established,
then  the  sovereignty  of  my  lord  Gold-egg  also  exists  in  Jambudwipa."  The  parrot
asked  :  "  What  demonstration  (is  there)  in  this  case  ?  "  I  replied :  "  Even  war."  The
king  jestingly  remarked :  "Goto  your  king,  and  make  ready."  Then  said  I:  "Let


62  VIGRAHA.

your  own  envoy  also  be  sent."     The  king  remarked :  "  Who  is  to   set  out  with  the
message*;  for  a  messenger  of  this  sort  should  be  appointed —

20.  An  envoy  should  be  loyal,  talented,  pure,  dexterous,  brave,  virtuous,  patient,  a
Brahman,  conversant  with  the  weak  points  of  others,  endowed  with  presence  of  mind."

Says  the  vulture :  "  There  are  many  such  ;  still  a  Brahman  should  be  made  envoy.
For:—

21.  Perspicuity  effects  the  success  of  a  king,  not  nobility.     From  association  with
Is*wara,  the  blackness  of  kalakutaf  does  not  depart."

The  king  said :  "  Then  let  the  parrot  go.  Parrot !  do  thou,  going  with  him,
declare  our  will."  The  parrot  replied  :  "  As  your  Majesty  commands.  But  this  (is)  a
wicked  crane ;  (and)  along  with  a  wicked  person  I  travel  not.  Thus  it  has  been  said : —

22.  A  vile  person  does  a  bad  action ;  surely  (that  bad  action)  produces  its  effects
among  the  good.   Should  the  ten-headed  onej  carry  off  Sita  there  would  be  a  bridging§
of  the  ocean.  Besides : —

23.  One  should  not  stand,  equally  one  should  not  go,  with  a  wicked  person  any-
where.    From  association  with  a  crow,  a  gander  was  killed  standing,  and  a  quail  going.

The  king  asked  :  "  How  (is)  that  ?  "  The  parrot  (then)  related  : — There  is,  on  the
road  to  Ujjain,  in  a  lonely  path,  a  great  peepul-tree,  whereon  a  gander  and  a  crow  are
dwelling.  Once  (upon  a  time),  in  the  hot  season,  a  certain  wearied  traveller,  having
placed  his  bow  and  arrows  under  a  tree',  dropt  asleep  there.  Then,  after  a  little  while,
the  shade  of  the  tree  passed  away  from  off  his  face.  Thereupon,  perceiving  his  face
overspread  by  the  glare  of  the  sun,  through  pity,  the  charitable-souled,  inoffensive
gander,  perched  in  the  peepul-tree,  having  spread  out  (his)  wings,  again  caused  a  shade
(to  fall)  upon  his  face.  Afterwards,  (while)  enjoying  "sound  sleep,  the  wearied  traveller,
fatigued  by  travelling  along  the  road,  opened  (his)  mouth.  Hereupon,  through  natural
malevolence,  unable  to  endure  the  comfort  of  others,  the  crow,  having  voided  excre-
ment into  his  mouth,  flew  away.  Then,  (the  traveller)  having  arisen,  looked  up,  (and)
immediately  the  gander  is  perceived  by  him.  Now,  through  the  anger  generated  by
thinking  that  the  voidance  of  excrement  into  his  mouth  (was  done)  by  this  (gander),
(he)  having  pierced  (him)  with  an  arrow,  killed  (him).  Hence  I  say,  "  Not  to  be
stood  with,"  &c.  For : —

24.  Quit  the  society  of  the  evil.     Cultivate  the  society  of  the   good.     Practise
virtue  day  and  night.     Remember  always  (your)  transitoriness.

Sire  !  I  am  (about  to)  relate  also  the  story  of  the  quail.  A  crow  is  lodging  on  the
branch  of  a  tree ;  and  a  quail  dwells  on  the  ground  beneath.  Once  upon  a  time,  all
the  birds,  by  engaging  in  a  pilgrimage  (in  honour)  of  the  Worshipful  Garuda,||  set  off
(towards)  the  sea-shore.  Thither  the  quail  went  with  the  crow.  Now  from  a  pail,
resting  on  the  head  of  a  dairyman  going  along  on  the  road,  (some)  curds  were  again
and  again  pecked  by  the  crow.  Then  as  soon  as  he,  having  placed  the  pail  of  curds  on

*  Interrogative  with  imperative ;  lit.  "  Let  whom  go  forth  with  the  message  ?  "

t  The  name  of  a  poison.  In  allusion  to  the  bine  neck  of  S'iva  caused  by  swallowing  the  poison
produced  by  the  churning  of  the  ocean  by  the  gods  and  demons.

J  An  epithet  of  Havana,  see  Vishnu- Purana,  Bk.  iv.  chap.  iv.

§  The  word  bandhanam  here  means  the  "  uniting  "  or  "  binding  "  of  southern  India  with  Ceylon,
by  the  chain  of  rocks  obstructing  the  flow  of  the  ocean.  The  Vishnu-Purana  says,  badhwti  ch&m-
bhonidhim,  "  having  bridged  the  ocean,"  and  the  Mahabharata,  iii.  16312,  setubandham  ak&rayat,  "  he
caused  a  uniting  causeway  to  be  made."

||  Mythological  chief  of  feathered  creatures.


VIGEAHA.  63

the  ground,  is  looking  up,  immediately  the  crow  and  quail  are  perceived.  Thereupon
scared  by  him,  the  crow  fled  away ;  (but)  the  slow-going  quail  was  caught  by  him
(and)  killed.  Hence  I  say:  "Not  to  be  travelled  with,"  &c.  After  that  I  said:
"  Brother  parrot !  why  speakest  thou  so  ?  In  my  estimation  your  Honour  (is)  even  as
the  revered  feet  of  Majesty."  Says  the  parrot :  "  That  may  be  so ;  but —

25.  Even  kind  (words)  being  uttered  with  smiles  by  the  wicked,  excite  my  fears  ;
like  unseasonable  flowers.

And  (thy)  villany  (is)  made  manifest  even  by  thy  conversation.  For,  in  the
(event  of)  war  between  these  two,  your  speech  (will  be)  certainly  the  primary  cause  (of
it).  See :

26.  On  a  fault  being  committed  even  openly,  a  fool,  by  conciliation,  is  tranquillized.
A  wheelwright  placed  on  (his)  head  his  wife  and  her  paramour.

The  king  asked  :  "How  (was)  that?"  The  parrot  related  (as  follows): — There
was,  in  the  city  of  Prosperity,  a  wheelwright  named  Dull-wit ;  and  he  knew  his  wife
(to  be)  unchaste ;  but  had  not  seen  (her)  alone  with  her  paramour,  with  his  own  eyes.
Afterwards,  the  wheelwright,  desirous  to  see,  said :  "  To-day  I  shall  go  (to)  another
village,"  (and)  started  out ;  (but)  having  gone  a  certain  distance,  he  returned  secretly,
(and)  getting  under  the  bed  in  his  own  house,  remained  (there).  Now  through  the
confidence  engendered  (by  thinking)  thus :  "  My  husband  (is)  gone  (to)  another
village,"  the  paramour  was  invited  by  the  wife,  in  the  evening.  Afterwards  the  wheel-
wright's wife,  whilst  sporting  fearlessly  on  the  bed  with  that  paramour,  from  a  slight
touch  of  the  body  of  her  husband  crouched  under  the  bed,  perceiving  her  roguish
husband,  was  dejected.  The  paramour  then  remarked :  "  How  (is  it)  ?  thou  art  not
sporting  with  me  freely  to-day?  thou' appearest  as  it  were  dismayed."  Then  she
replied :  "  Thou  (art)  an  ignorant  fellow.  He  who  (is)  the  lord  of  my  life,  (even)  he
to-day  (is)  gone  to  another  village.  Without  him,  this  village,  though  ever  so  full  of
people,  in  my  opinion  appears  like  a  wilderness.  What  will  happen  (to  him)  while
dwelling  there  among  strangers  ?  what  has  he  eaten,  or  where  has  he  lodged  ?  (with)
such  (thoughts)  my  heart  is  rent."  Said  the  paramour :  "  Then  (is)  this  thy  quarrel-
some husband  such  an  object  of  affection  as  this?"  "  0  blockhead  !  what  art  thou
saying  ?  Listen  : —

27.  That  woman  (is)  a  virtuous  wife  who,  even  spoken  to  severely  or  looked  at  with
angry  eyes,  (maintains)  a  very  placid  countenance.

Besides  : —

28.  Beatific  realms  (are  the  portion)  of  those  women  whose  husband  (is)  beloved,
whether  (he  be)  citizen  or  forester,  sinner  or  saint.

Again : —

29.  A  husband   (is)    indeed   the    best  ornament   of    a  woman,  without  (other)
ornaments.     She,  though  ornamented,  deprived  of  him,  shines  not.

Thou,  an  evil-minded  paramour,  from  caprice  of  mind,  art  occasionally  used,  like  a


64  VIGEAHA.

flower,  betel,  (or)  sandal- wood ;  but  he,  my  husband,  the  taker  of  my  hand,  although
far  away  (is)  able  to  sell  me  to  the  gods  or  to  give  (me)  to  the  Brahmans.  What  (need)
of  much  (argument)  ?  There  is  a  promise  (to  this  effect), — In  him  living  I  live,  and
on  his  dying  I  will  follow  after.  For : —

30.  Three  kroris  and  half  a  krori  (are)  the  hairs  which  (are)  on  a  man, — so  many
years  she  dwells  in  Paradise  who  follows  after  her  husband  (in  death).

Again  : —

31.  As  a  snake-charmer  draws  up  a  snake  from  (his)  hole  by  force,  in  the  same
manner,  taking  her  husband  from  (Patala),  she  enjoys  (felicity)  with  him.

Besides  : —

32.  The  loving  one  who,  having  embraced  (her)  lifeless  husband,  resigns  her  body
on  the  funeral  pile,  having  effaced  even  a  hundred  thousand  sins,  taking  (her)  husband,
she  shall  enjoy  the  realm  of  the  gods.

For:—

33.  To  whom  the  father  should  give  (her),  or  the  brother  with  the  father's  consent,
him  she  should  obey  (while)  living,  and  should  not  dishonour  (when)  dead.

Hearing  all  this,  the  wheelwright  having  settled  (the  matter)  thus  in  (his)  mind, —
"  I  (am)  lucky  who  (have)  such  a  wife  as  this,  sweetly-spoken  (and)  affectionate  to
(her)  husband," — placing  the  bedstead  with  the  man  and  woman  in  it  on  |(his)  head,
Dull -wit  danced  about  delighted.  Hence  I  say,  "  On  a  fault  being  committed
openly,"  &c.

Then  that  king  having  honoured  (me)  in  the  usual  manner,  I  was  dismissed.  The
parrot  also  is  now  coming  after  me.  Knowing  all  this,  let  what  is  proper  to  be  done
be  investigated."  The  prime-minister  the  ruddy-goose  scoffingly  said  :  "  Sire  !  (by)
just  going  to  a  foreign  country,  the  king's  work  has  been  (indeed)  executed  by  the
crane,  to  the  extent  of  his  ability.  But  such  (is)  the  nature  of  fools.  For : —

34.  "  One  should  yield  a  hundred  (points),  not  quarrel," — such  (is)  the  opinion  of
the  wise.     "  A  contention  without  even  a  cause," — this  is  the  sign  of  a  fool.

The  king  said  :  "  Enough  (of)  this  censuring  of  by-gones ;  let  the  matter  in  hand
be  attended  to."  The  ruddy-goose  replied :  "  Sire  !  I  (will)  speak  in  private.  For : —

35.  By  colour,  form,  and  sound,  even  by  change  in  the  eye  (or)  mouth,  the  wise
infer  the  thoughts  (of  others)  :  therefore,  one  should  consult  in  secret.

The  king  and  the  minister  then  remained  there ;  the  others  went  elsewhere.
Says  the  ruddy- goose :  "  Sire  !  I  am  of  opinion  that  by  the  instigation  of  some  officer
of  our  own  this  has  been  done  by  the  crane.  For : —

36.  A  sick  man  (is)  the  best  (subject)  for  physicians ;  a  profligate  one,  for  the
officers  ;  a  fool  (is)  a  living  for  the  wise ;  a  contentious  person,  for  a  king."

The  king  said :  "  Be  it  so ;  the  cause  in  this  case  should  be  investigated  after-
wards ;  at  the  present  moment  speak  about  what  (is)  to  be  done."  The  ruddy-goose
replied :  "  Let  a  spy  just  go  there  ;  then  we  (shall)  know  his  aim,  strength,  and  weak-
ness.  For  indeed : —


VIGRAHA.  65

37.  A  spy  should  be  (engaged)  in  discovering  what  (is)  to  be  done  and  not  to  be
done  iii  his  own  and  foreign  countries.     He  (is)  the  king's  eye.     He  who  has  not  one,
is  indeed  blind.

And  let  him  go,  taking  (with  him)  a  second,  a  confidential  (assistant)  ;  so  that,  he
himself  remaining  there,  having  very  secretly  ascertained  the  counsels  and  actions
relating  to  that  place,  (and)  imparted  (them),  let  him  send  forth  (that)  second
(one).  Thus  it  is  said: —

38.  (A  king)  should  communicate  with  his  emissaries,  having  the  appearance  of
ascetics,  under  the  pretext  of  studying  holy  books,  at  places  of  pilgrimage,  hermitages,
and  temples.

And  a  secret  emissary  (is)  one  who  travels  by  water  or  by  land ;  therefore,  let  this
same  crane  be  appointed,  (and)  let  just  such  another  crane  as  he  (is)  be  (also)  sent  as
a  companion,  and  let  the  people  of  his  household  wait  at  the  king's  gate  (as  hostages) ;"
but,  Sire  !  this  sort  of  thing  must  be  done  very  secretly.  For : —

39.  Six-eared  council  is  divulged  and  (is)  picked  up  by  common  report :  (therefore)
with  himself  and  another  (only)  a  king  should  take  counsel.

Besides : —

40.  The  mischiefs  which  befall  a  king   through   breach    of   counsel,  cannot   be
repaired:     Such  (is)  the  opinion  of  those  skilled  in  polity."

The  king,  having  reflected,  said  :  "  I  have  found  just  such  a  spy."  The  minister
replied  :  "  Sire  !  victory  in  the  war  (is)  already  gained."  Hereupon  a  warder  having
entered  (and)  saluted  said  :  "  Sire  !  let  attention  be  paid.  A  parrot  come  from  Jambu-
dwipa  waits  at  the  door."  The  king  looks  the  ruddy-goose  in  the  face.  The  ruddy-
goose  said :  "  Let  him  go  (and)  remain  awhile  in  an  apartment ;  by  and  by  (he  is)  to  be
brought  in  (and)  seen."  "  As  your  highness  commands,"  having  said  which,  taking
the  parrot,  the  warder  departed.  "  So,"  said  the  king,  "  war  (is)  imminent."  "  Still,
Sire  !  "  replied  the  ruddy -goose,  "  hasty  war  (is)  not  the  rule.

41.  (Is)  he  a  prudent   minister  who,  at  the  very  outset,  without  consideration,
recommends  the  king  either  preparation  for  war  or  abandoning  the  country  ?

Besides  :—

42.  One  should  strive  to  conquer  enemies,  (but)  never  by  war ;  because  the  victory
between  two  (parties)  combating  is  seen  (to  be)  uncertain.

Again : —

43.  By  conciliation,  by  bribes,  by  dissension, — by  these  (means),  either  combined
or  separately,  one  should  strive  to  overcome  enemies ;  (but)  never  by  war.

For:—

44.  Every  person,  forsooth,  (is)  a  hero  who  has  not  engaged  in  war.     Who,  not
perceiving  the  strength  of  the  enemy,  may  not  be  conceited  ?

Moreover : —

45.  A  block  of  stone  is  not  so  (well)  lifted  by  a  living  being,  as  by  a  lever.   From
a  small  expedient,  a  great  result;  this  (is)  the  great  advantage  of  counsel.

9


66  VIGEAHA.

But  perceiving  war  imminent,  let  there  be  action.     For  :—

46.  As  from  seasonable  preparation  husbandry  becomes  -fe&hful,  so  this  (art  of)
polity  fructifies  after  a  time,  not  immediately.

Besides : —

47.  Anxiety  when  at  a  distance,  courage  when  close  at  hand,   (is)  the  quality  of
the  great ;  in  misfortune,  the  great  evince  fortitude  in  the  world.

Again : —

48.  The  first  obstacle  of  all  successes  (is)  certainly  undue  warmth.     Although
exceedingly  cold,  does  not  water  penetrate  the  surface  of  the  earth  ?

And  especially,  Sire  !  (because)  this  king  Spotted- colour,  sovereign  of  the  peacocks,
(is)  very  powerful.     For : —

49.  There  is  not  (such)  a  precept  (as)  this :  "  One  should  fight  with  the  strong."
A  combat  between  an  elephant  and  men  (is)  not  like  a  foot-fight.

Again : —

50.  He  (is)  a  fool,  who,  not  having  found  a  (suitable)  opportunity,  engages  in
antagonism.     A  quarrel  with  the  strong  (is)  like  soaring  with  insect's  wings.

Moreover : —

51.  A  politic  (soldier)  having  withdrawn  (to)  a  tortoise-like  shelter,  should  endure
the  (first)  shock ;  but  (having)  found  an  opportunity,  he  should  rise  up  like  a  cruel
serpent.

Listen,  Sire !

52.  One  skilled  in  expedients  can  be  equally  successful  over  the  great  as  well  as
over  the  little  ;  as  the  current  of  a  stream   (is   able)  to  uproot  (both)  trees  (and)
grasses.

Hence  having  soothed  this  parrot-envoy  let  him  be  detained  here  until  the  fort  is
prepared.    For : —

53.  One  bowman  stationed  (behind)  a  rampart  is  made  to  combat  a  hundred ;  a
hundred  (can  combat)  ten  thousand  ;  therefore,  a  fortress  is  recommended.

Moreover : —

54.  Of  what  enemy  (is)  not  an  unfortified  country  an  object  of  contempt  ?     A
king  without  a  fort  (is)  helpless,  like  a  man  fallen  out  of  a  ship.

55.  He  should  construct  a  fort,  with  a  great  moat,  surrounded  by  a  high  rampart,
having  engines,  water,  and  rock,  with  the  protection  of  a  river,  a  desert,  and  a  forest.

56.  Spaciousness,  extreme  inaccessibility,  a  store  of  liquid,  grain,  and  fuel,  (with)
both  ingress  and  egress ;  (these  are)  the  seven  excellencies  of  a  fort.

The  king  said :   "  In  the  preparation  of  the  fort,  who  should  be  appointed  ?  "

The  ruddy-goose  replied: —

57.  "  Whoever  (is)  skilful  in  work  him  should  one  there  appoint.     Whoever  has
not  had  experience,  although  conversant  with  the  sciences,  is  bewildered  in  practical
matters.

Therefore,  let  General  Heron  be  called.     Upon  this  being  done,  the  king,  looking
at  the  Heron  (when)  present,  said :   "  0  Heron !  hastily  make  ready  the  fort."     The


VIGEAHA.  67

Heron  having  saluted  said :  "  Sire !  as  to  the  fort,  that  truly  for  a  long  time  has
been  prepared.  (It  is)  a  great  lake.  But  let  a  store  of  eatable  things  be  collected  in
the  island  in  its  midst.  For : —

58.  A  store  of  grain,  O  king !  (is)  better  than  every  (other)  store.   A  jewel  thrown
into  the  mouth  would  not  effectuate  the  sustaining  of  life.

Moreover : —

59.  Of  all  flavours  salt  is  renowned  (as)  the  best  flavour ;  without  that,  O  king !
sauce  is  as  cow-dung."

The  king  said :  "  0  General  Heron !  go  quickly,  let  everything  be  prepared."
Then  the  warder  having  again  entered  said :  "  Sire  !  there  waits  at  the  door  the  king
of  the  crows,  named  Cloud-colour,  come  from  Ceylon.  Attended  by  a  retinue  he  does
homage,  (and)  wishes  to  see  the  king's  feet."  The  king  said :  "  The  crow  (is)  wise,
and  has  seen  much;  therefore  he  is  to  be  received,  this  is  understood."  The  ruddy-
goose  replied :  "  Sire  !  that  may  be  so  ;  but  the  crow  (is)  a  land- goer,  of  a  different
party  to  us ;  therefore,  he  is  engaged  on  the  side  of  our  opponents.  How  (then)  is  he
to  be  received  ?  Thus  it  is  said  : —

60.  The  fool  who,  after  abandoning  his  own  party,  delights  in  the  opposite  party,
is  slain  by  those  strangers,  like  the  blue-coloured  jackal."

The  king  asked :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  The  minister  relates  (as  follows) : — There
was  a  certain  jackal  rambling  at  his  pleasure  in  the  outskirts  of  a  town  (who)  fell  into
a  vat  for  receiving  indigo.  Afterwards  unable  to  get  out,  in  the  morning,  making  him-
self appear  like  dead,  (he)  remained  (still).  Now  the  owner  of  the  indigo  vat,  having
picked  him  out,  (and)  carried  (him)  to  a  distance,  dropped  him.  Then  he,  going  to
the  wood  (and)  perceiving  himself  (to  be  of)  a  blue  colour,  (thus)  reflected :  "  I  now
(am)  of  the  finest  hue  ;  therefore ,  can  I  not  accomplish  my  elevation  ?  "  Having  con-
sidered thus,  the  jackals  were  called  together  by  him,  (and)  addressed :  "  Oh !  ye
denizens  of  the  forest !  I  have  been  consecrated  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  woods,
with  an  extract  of  every  medicinal  herb,  by  the  very  hand  of  the  adorable  goddess  of  the
forest.  Behold  my  colour.  Therefore,  beginning  from  this  day,  proceedings  should
be  conducted  in  this  forest  by  my  command."  Now  the  jackals,  perceiving  him  of  an
excellent  colour,  reverentially  prostrated  themselves  (and)  said:  "As  your  Majesty
commands."  Thus  by  this  process  his  sovereignty  among  all  the  dwellers  in  the
forest  was  (established).  Subsequently,  surrounded  by  his  own  kindred,  supremacy
was  accomplished  by  him.  Afterwards,  having  obtained  a  superior  retinue  (of)  lions,
tigers,  &c.,  looking  at  the  jackals  in  the  assembly  (and)  despising  (them),  he  removed
his  own  kinsmen  to  a  distance,  being  ashamed  (of  them).  Thereupon,  perceiving  the
jackals  dejected,  an  old  jackal  promised  (thus)  :  "  Do  not  despond,  if  we  who  know  the
vulnerable  points  are  despised  by  this  (fellow)  ignorant  of  policy.  It  can  be  arranged  by
me  so  that  he  is  destroyed.  Since  these  tigers  and  the  rest,  deceived  solely  by  the
colour,  not  knowing  (him  to  be)  a  jackal,  imagine  him  (to  be)  a  king ;  therefore  do


68  VIGRAHA.

something  whereby  he  is  (to  be)  detected.  (This)  should  be  carried  out  in  the  way
1  say.  All  of  you,  at  eventide,  in  his  vicinity  all  at  once  set  up  a  great  yell ;  then
having  heard  that  noise,  naturally  by  him  also  a  cry  (will)  be  made.  For  : —

61.  Whatever  the  natural  disposition  of  anyone  may  be,  that  (is)  hard  to  be  over-
come (by)  him.     If  a  dog  were  made  a  king,  would  he  not  gnaw  a  shoe  ?

Then  having  recognised  (him)  by  the  voice,  (he  will)  be  killed  by  the  tiger.  On
this  being  done,  that  (event)  happened.  Thus  (it)  is  said  : —

62.  An  enemy  of  one's  own  species  knows  every  defect,  vulnerable  point,  and
bravery  ;  and,  being  inside,  he  consumes,  like  fire  (consumes)  a  dry  tree.

Hence  I  say,  "  From  abandoning  one's  own  party,"  Ac.  The  king  said:  "Al-
though (it  be)  so,  still  let  him  just  be  seen  ;  he  (is)  come  from  afar ;  in  his  reception
(afterwards)  deliberation  should  be  made."  The  ruddy-goose  observed  :  "  Sire !  a  spy
has  been  appointed,  and  the  fort  put  in  order ;  hence,  having  seen  the  parrot  (and)
having  given  (him)  an  answer,  let  him  be  sent  forth.  But : —

63.  Chanakya  slew  Nanda,*  by  employing  an  active  envoy  ;  therefore   (a  king)
surrounded  by  (his)  warriors  should  see  an  ambassador,  separated  by  a  wide  space."

Then,  an  audience  being  arranged,  the  parrot  was  called,  (and)  the  crow  also.
The  parrot  with  head  a  little  raised,  having  seated  (himself  on)  the  seat  provided,
says :  "  Sir  Gold-egg  !  the  great  king  of  kings  Spotted-colour,  lord  of  the  peacocks,
(whose)  lotus-feet  are  illuminated  by  dazzling  strings  of  rubies  in  the  crowns  of  all
(prostrate)  monarchs,  commands  thee,  (thus)  :  '  If  thou  hast  (any)  occasion  for  life  or
fortune,  then  having  come  hastily,  salute  my  feet ;  otherwise  bethink  thee  (of)  starting
off  (to)  another  place.'  '  Having  heard  that,  the  king  angrily  said  :  "  Ha  !  is  there
no  one  in  the  assembly  before  us  who  strangles  him  ?  "  Then  Cloud-colour  starting  up
said  :  "  Sire  !  command  (me),  and  I  (will)  slay  this  vile  parrot."  (But)  the  minister
said :  "  Not  so,  worthy  Sir  !  Listen  awhile —

64.  That  (is)  not  a  council  where  there  are  no  elders  ;  they  (are)  not  elders  who
do   not   know  law ;  that   (is)  not  law  where  there  is  no   truth ;    whatever  fear  in-
fluences (is)  not  truth.

For  this  truly  (is)  law  :

65.  An  ambassador,  although  a  barbarian,  should  be  inviolable ;    for  the  king
(speaks  by)  the  mouth  of  the  ambassador.     Even  among  uplifted  weapons  an  ambas-
sador speaks  not  otherwise  (than  his  message).

Besides  : —

66.  Who  infers  his  own  inferiority  (or)  another's  superiority  by  the  assertions  of
an  ambassador  ?     By  his  inviolable  character  an  ambassador  always  states  the  whole
(of  his  message)."

Then  the  king  and  the  crow  recovered  (their)  natural  temper ;  and  the  parrot
hastily  arising  withdrew.  Afterwards,  having  conducted  (him  back),  apologized,  and
having  presented  (him)  with  gold,  ornaments,  and  the  like,  the  parrot  was  dismissed
by  the  ruddy-goose.  He  returned  (to)  his  own  country.  Then  having  reached  the
Vindhya  mountains,  he  saluted  his  own  king  Spotted-colour.  King  Spotted-colour
having  perceived  him  said  :  "  Parrot !  what  news  ?  What  (is)  that  country  like  ?  "
The  parrot  replied :  "  Sire  !  shortly,  this  news, — preparation  for  war  is  now  to  be

*  Chanakya  was  a  Brahman  who  conspired  and  succeeded  in  dethroning  the  Nanda  dynasty.     He
placed  a  robber  Chandragupta  on  the  throne  in  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great.


VTGEAHA.  69

made  ;  and  that  country,  the  island  of  Camphor,  (is)  a  district  of  Paradise.  How  can
it  be  described  ?  "  The  king,  having  convened  all  the  chiefs,  sat  down  to  deliberate.
Thus  it  is  said : —

67.  A  discontented  Brahman  (and)  a    contented  king    (are)    always   ruined :  a
modest  harlot  and  an  immodest  woman  of  family  (are)  ruined.

The  minister,  a  vulture  named  Far-seeing,  (then)  said :  "  A  war  unrighteously
(waged  is)  not  just.  For : —

68.  When  friends,  ministers,  and  allies,  should  be  firm  in  their  attachment,  and
(those)  of  the  enemies  the  reverse,  then  should  war  be  made.

Besides : —

69.  Territory,  a  friend,  and  gold,  (constitute)  the  triple  fruit  of  war ;  when  these
are  certain  to  result,  then  should  war  be  made."

The  king  said :  "  Let  the  minister  meanwhile  inspect  my  forces ;  thus  let  their
readiness  be  ascertained.  Then  let  the  astrologer  be  called,  (and)  let  him  determine
the  auspicious  moment  for  marching."  Says  the  minister  :  "Sire  !  still  hastily  march-
ing (is)  improper.  For : —

70.  Fools  who  begin  hastily  without  having  considered  the  enemy's  strength,  they
most  certainly  receive  the  embrace  of  the  edge  of  a  sword.

"  Minister,"  said  the  king,  "  do  not  repress  my  energy  on  every  occasion.  Point
out  the  way  in  which  one  desirous  of  conquest  subjugates  another's  country."  The
vulture  said  :  "  Sire !  I  (will)  declare  that ;  but  only  (when)  followed  (is)  it  fruitful.
Thus  it  is  said  : —

71.  What  (use  is)  advice  like  the  S'astras  (to)  a  king  (when)  not  followed  ?     No-
where can  there  be  the  cure  of  a  disease  from  the  (mere)  knowledge  of  medicines.

And  the  king's  command  (is)  not  to  be  disobeyed,  therefore  I  declare  what  I  have
heard.  Listen,  Sire!

72.  Among  rivers,  mountains,  forests,  and  forts,  wherever  (there  is)  danger,  O
king !  there  the  commander  should  go,  with  forces  drawn  up  in  array.

73.  The   superintendent  of    the  force  should  go  in  front,  accompanied  by  the
bravest  men ;  in  the  centre  (are)  the  women,  the  king,  the  treasure,  and  whatever  force
(is)  weak.

74.  On  both  flanks,  the  horse ;  the  chariots  on  the  flanks  of  the  horse ;  on  the
flanks  of  the  chariots,  the  elephants ;  and  (on  the  flanks)  of  the  elephants,  the  foot-
soldiers.

75.  Behind  should  march  the  commander,  encouraging  now  and  then  the  dis-
pirited, associated  with  counsellors  and  warriors,  the  king  taking  an  army —


70  VIGRAHA.

76.  Should  traverse  swampy  (and)  mountainous  country  with  elephants ;  the  level
(ground),  with  horses  ;  the  water,  with  boats  ;  everywhere,  with  foot- soldiers,

77.  The  marching  of  elephants  (is)  pronounced  best  on  the  approach  of  the  rains  ;
(that)  of  horses  at  any  other  (time)  than  that ;  (that)  of  foot-soldiers  at  all  times.

78.  Among  mountains  (and)  difficult  passes,  the  protection  of  the  king  should  be
attended  to :  although  protected  by  his  warriors,  (his)  sleep  (should  be  on  a  par)  with
the  sleep  of  a  Yogin.*

79.  He  should  destroy,  he  should  drag  the  enemy  through  difficult  passes,  thorny
brakes,  and  mire  :  on  entering  the  enemy's  territory,  he  should  place  the  pioneers  in
front.

80.  Where  the  king  (is),  there  (should  be)  the  treasury ;  without  treasure  (there
is)  no  royalty.     He  should  give  (liberally)  to  warriors.     Who  does  not  fight  for  the
generous  ?

For:—

81.  Man   (is)  not  the  slave  of   man,  O  king!  but  of   wealth.     Importance  and
insignificance  (are)  connected  with  wealth  and  poverty.

82.  Without  breaking  (ranks)  they  should  fight  and  should  protect  each  other.
Whatsoever  part  of  the  army  is  weak  he  should  place  in  the  centre  of  the  array.

83.  And  the  king  should  cause  the  foot-soldiers  to  fight  in  the  van  of  the  army  ;
and  having  blockaded  the  foe  he  should  sit,  and  should  desolate  his  country.

84.  On  the  level  he  should  combat  with  chariots  and  horse  ;  on  watery  places,  also
with  boats  and  elephants ;  on  (firm)  ground,  in  places  covered  by  trees  and  bushes,
with  bows,  swords,  shields,  and  (other)  weapons.

85.  He  should  always  spoil  his  (enemy's)  grain,  food,  water,  and  fuel ;  he  should
also  break  down  his  tanks,  ramparts,  and  trenches.

V

86.  Among  forces,  the  chief  (is)  the  elephant ;  for  a  king  (there  is)  none  other
like  him.     With  his  own  limbs  merely,  an  elephant  (is)  recognised  (as   possessing)
eight  weapons.

87.  The  horse  (is)  the  strength  of  armies  ;  (and  is)  considered  a  moving  rampart ;
therefore,  a  king  superior  in  cavalry  (is)  victorious  in  a  land-fight.

Thus  it  has  been  said : —

88.  Those  fighting  mounted  on  horseback  are  hard  to  conquer  even  (by)  the  gods;
their  enemies  though  dwelling  afar  are  in  their  hands.

89.  The  primary  means  of  carrying  on  war  (is)  the  preservation  of  the  entire
army  ;  the  clearing  of  the  roads  of  the  country  they  call  the  business  of  the  infantry.

90.  Naturally  heroic,  skilled  in  arms,  not  disloyal,  superior  to  fatigue,  (consisting)


*  That  is,  brief  and  light.


VIGEAHA.  71

chiefly  of  renowned  Kshatriyas, — (this)  they  consider  the  most  excellent  force.

91.  By  the  bestowal  of  even  much  riches,  men  on  earth  do  not  (fight)  so  (well),  as
they  fight  (for)  the  honour  conferred  by  the  chief,  O  king  !

92.  Better  a  small  choice  army,  not  a  multitude  of  heads :  the  overthrow  of  the
weaklings  would  evidently  cause  the  overthrow  of  the  best  (troops).

93.  Unkindness,  absence,  appropriation  of  the  share  which  should  have  been  dis-
tributed, procrastination,  non-requital, — these  are  the  causes  of  estrangement.

94.  One  desirous  of  conquest  should  march  against  the  enemy,  without  distressing
(his)  army ;  an  army  fatigued  by  long  marches  is  easily  overthrown  (by)  the  enemy.

95.  There  is  no  better  advice  (for)  causing  division  among  enemies  than  (the
setting  up  of)  a  claimant  (to  the  throne)  ;  therefore,  one  should  assiduously  raise  up
the  enemy's  heir.

96.  Having  formed  an  alliance  with  either  the  heir-apparent  or  the  prime-minister
he  should  excite  the  inward  wrath  of  the  firm-minded  enemy.

97.  And  he  should  cause  the  false  ally  to  be  slain,  either  by  overthrowing  (him)
in  battle,  or  by  capturing  and  carrying  off   his  cattle,  after  imprisoning  his  chief
dependants.

98.  A  king  should  populate   his   own  territory,  though    despoiling  his  enemy's
country ;  or  else,  (that  enemy's  country)  colonized  with  liberality  and  respect,  certainly
(becomes)  lucrative."

The  king  said :  "  Ah  !  what  (will  accrue)  with  much  (being)  said  :

99.  One's  own  rise  (and)  the  enemy's  fall ;  the  two  (constitute)  polity  : — thus
much  (sums  it  up).     (While)  admitting  this,  (the  worth  of)  the  eloquent  harangue
is  proved  by  actions."

The  minister  laughingly  said  :  "  All  this  (is)  true ;  but —

100.  One  nature    (is)    ungovernable;  another   (is)   restrained  by    moral    laws.
Whence  (can  arise)  a  common  predicament  for  both  light  and  darkness  ?  "

At  length  rising  up,  the  king  set  forth  at  the  time  declared  auspicious  by  the
astrologers.  Now  a  messenger  despatched  by  the  spy,  coming  to  Gold-egg  (and)
saluting,  said  :  "  Sire !  king  Spotted-colour  (is)  almost  arrived  ;  now  he  is  actually
encamped  at  the  foot  of  the  Malaya  mountains  ;  let  the  preparation  of  the  fortress  be
immediately  attended  to,  for  that  vulture  (is)  a  great  minister.  Besides,  (in)  the
course  of  his  confidential  conversation  with  someone,  I  have  got  at  this  hint,  that
(there  is)  already  somebody  employed  by  him  in  our  fort."  The  ruddy-goose  said :
"  Siro !  this  must  be  the  crow."  The  king  replied :  "  That  (can)  never  (be)  ;  if  so,  then
why  did  he  make  preparation  for  the  overthrow  of  the  parrot  ?  Besides,  his  efforts  for


72  VIGEAHA.

war  (have  been)  since  the  coming  of  the  parrot,  and  he  has  been  here  a  long  time."
Says  the  minister  :  "  Nevertheless,  a  new-comer  (is)  to  be  doubted."  The  king  said  :
"  Even  new-comers  appear  to  be  requiters  of  favours.  Listen: —

101.  Even  a  kind  stranger  (is)  a  kinsman  ;  an  unkind  kinsman  (is)  a   stranger.
Unkind  (is)  the  sickness  generated  in  (one's  own)  body;  (but)  kindly  (is)  the  medicine
found  in  the  woods.

Again : —

102.  Of  king  Low-caste  there  was  a  servant  named  Best-of-heroes  ;   he,  in  a  very
little  time  offered  up  his  own  son."

The  minister  asked:  "How  (is)  that?"  The  king  related  (as  follows): — For-
merly, in  a  pleasure-lake  belonging  to  king  Low-caste,  I  was  much  attached  (to)  Sprig-
of-Camphor,  the  daughter  of  the  flamingo  named  Camphor-sport.  There,  a  Kajput
named  Best-of-Heroes,  having  arrived  from  some  country,  approached  the  warder  at  the
palace-gate  (and)  said  :  "I  (am)  a  Bajput  seeking  a  livelihood  ;  procure  me  a  sight  of
the  king."  Then  introduced  by  him  (into)  the  royal  presence,  he  said :  "  Sire  !  if
there  is  need  (of)  me  (as)  a  servant,  then  let  my  pay  be  provided."  Low-caste  said  :
"What  (is)  thy  pay?"  Best-of-heroes  replied:  "Four  hundred  suvarnas  a-day."
The  king  asked  :  "  What  (is)  thy  equipment  ?  "  Best-of-heroes  replied :  "  Two  arms ;
and  for  a  third,  a  sword."  The  king,  reflecting  an  instant,  said  surprisedly  :  "  Friend,
that  (is)  not  possible."  Hearing  that  Best-of-heroes  saluted  (and)  departed.  Now
(this)  was  said  by  (his)  advisers  :  "  Sire !  giving  the  hire  of  four  days,  let  his  character
be  ascertained,  whether  he  (is)  useful  (that)  he  takes  so  much  hire,  or  (is)  useless."
Then,  from  the  advice  of  the  ministers,  having  recalled  (him,  and)  presented  (him  with)
betel*  he  gave  those  wages.  For : —

103.  Betel   (is)  pungent,  bitter,  spicy,  sweet,  alkaline,  astringent,  a  carminative,
antiphlegmatic,  a  vermifuge,  a  remover  of  the  defect  of  foul  breath ;  the  ornament  of
the  mouth,  a  detergent,  the  kindler  of  the  flame  of  love ; — these  thirteen  virtues  of
betel,  0  friend  !  (are)  hard  to  obtain  even  in  heaven.

And  the  application  of  the  stipend  was  secretly  watched  by  the  king.  One  half
of  it  was  shared  by  Best-of-heroes  among  the  gods  and  the  Brahmans  ;  half  of  the
remainder,  among  the  afflicted  ;  the  rest  (was  consumed)  with  expenses  of  food  and
amusement.  Having  done  all  this  (as)  a  constant  practice,  day  and  night  he  attends,
sword  in  hand,  (at)  the  king's  gate  ;  and  when  the  king  himself  commands,  then  he  goes
to  his  own  house.  Now  one  night,  on  the  fourteenth  of  the  dark  (half  of  the  month),
the  king  heard  a  piteous  lamenting  sound.  Hearing  that,  the  king  cries  :  "  Who  (is
there)  ?  who  attends  here  at  the  gate?  "  Then  he  answered  :  "  Sire  !  (it  is)  I,  Best-of-
heroes."  Then  the  king  said :  "  Let  the  lamenting  be  pursued."  Best-of-heroes,
having  exclaimed,  "  As  the  king  commands,"  set  forth.  Then  the  king  thought :
"  This  solitary  Rajput  has  been  sent  by  me  into  darkness  which  may  be  pierced  with
a  needle :  that  (is)  improper.  I,  also,  going  (will)  see  what  it  (is)."  Thereupon  the


*  Presented  on  the  completion  of  an  agreement.


VIGEAHA.  73

king  also  taking  a  sword,  in  the  course  of  following  (him)  passed  out  of  the  gate  of
the  city.  Then,  going  along,  a  certain  weeping  female,  endowed  with  youth  and  beauty,
and  adorned  with  every  ornament,  was  seen  by  Best-of -heroes,  and  questioned :  "  Who
(art)  thou  ?  for  what  art  thou  grieving  ?  "  The  woman  replied :  "  I  (am)  the  Fortune
of  this  king  Low-caste.  For  a  long  time,  under  the  shadow  of  his  arm,  with  much
happiness  (I  have)  reposed.  On  the  third  day  the  king  will  reach  dissolution.  I  shall
become  protectorless,  I  shall  remain  no  longer ;  therefore,  I  weep."  Best-of -heroes
said  :  "  By  what  means  is  your  Grace's  dwelling  here  still  (to  be  effected)  ?  "  The
Fortune  (of  the  king)  replied  :  "  If  thou,  with  thy  own  hand,  having  cut  off  the  head  of
thine  own  son  Energetic,  possessed  of  the  thirty-two  marks  of  a  hero,  make  an  offering
(to)  the  revered  All-auspicious  one,*  then  the  king  will  remain  a  hundred  years,  (and)
I  (shall)  dwell  happily."  Having  said  this  she  became  invisible.  Then  the  delighted
Best-of -heroes  went  to  his  own  house,  and  awakened  his  soundly  sleeping  wife  and  son.
They  both,  shaking  off  sleep,  sat  up,  (and)  Best-of-heroes  related  the  whole  of  the
speech  of  (the  king's)  Fortune.  Hearing  that  Energetic  said  with  delight :  Fortunate
(am)  I  of  whom  (there  is)  such  a  fitness  for  the  preservation  of  (my)  prince's  king-
dom! Father!  what  now  (is)  the  cause  of  delay?  Since,  at  any  time,  in  such  a
service  as  this,  the  abandoning  of  this  body^(is)  praiseworthy.

104.  A  wise  man  would  give  up  riches  and  even  life  for  the  sake  of  another.
Death  being  inevitable,  better  the  abandonment  (of  life)  for  the  sake  of  the  good.

The  mother  of  Energetic  said :  "  0  husband !  if  this  is  not  to  be  done  for  the
benefit  of  our  king,  then  by  what  other  act  will  there  be  a  requital  of  the  high  salary
(you  receive)."  Having  thus  reflected,  they  all  went  to  the  temple  of  the  All-
auspicious  one.  There,  having  worshipped  the  All-auspicious  one,  Best-of-heroes  said :
"Goddess!  be  favourable.  Let  the  great  king  Low-caste  be  victorious!  Let  this
offering  be  accepted  !"  Having  said  which,  he  struck  off  his  son's  head.  Then  Best-of-
heroes  reflected :  "  An  exact  acquittance  has  been  made  for  the  salary  received  from  the
king  ;  now  life  without  (my)  son  (is)  a  burden."  Thinking  thus,  he  cut  off  his  own
head.  Then  his  wife,  also,  through  grief  for  her  husband  and  son,  did  the  same.
Hearing  and  seeing  all  this,  the  king  with  astonishment  reflected : —

105.  "  Insignificant  creatures  like  me  are  born  and  die  ;  (but)  the  like  unto  this
(man)  has  not  been  in  the  world,  nor  will  be.

Therefore,  deprived  of  him,  what  advantage  (accrues)  even  with  a  kingdom  (at
disposal),"  saying  this  Low-caste  flourished  a  sword  to  cut  off  his  own  head.  Then
the  compassionate,  revered,  all-auspicious  one,  manifesting  herself,  seized  on  the
king's  hand : — "  Son !  enough  (of)  this  rashness  ;  there  is  now  (to  be)  no  injury  to
thy  kingdom."  The  king,  prostrating  (himself)  reverently  said  :  "  0  Goddess !  there
is  no  (further)  use  for  me  with  kingdom,  or  life,  or  prosperity.  If  I  (am)  deserving  of
compassion,  then  by  the  (sacrifice  of  the)  remainder  of  my  life,  let  this  distinguished
minister  my  servant  the  Rajput,  with  his  wife  and  son,  live  (again) ;  otherwise  I  will
attain  the  condition  (they)  have  reached."  The  Revered  one  said :  "  With  this  thy


*  The  goddess  Dnrg&.

10


74  V1QBAHA.

true  excellence  and  affection  for  a  servant  I  am  everyway  gratified.  Go  ;  be  victorious !
Let  this  Rajput,  with  his  family,  also  live !  "  Thereupon  Best-of-heroes,  with  (his)  son
and  wife,  restored  to  life,  went  home.  The  king,  unseen  by  them,  regained  the  terrace
of  the  palace  (and)  laid  down  as  before.  Then  Best-of-heroes  standing  at  the  gate,
again  questioned  by  the  king,  replied :  "  Sire !  the  weeping  woman  having  perceived
me  became  invisible.  There  is  no  other  news  whatever."  Hearing  his  speech  the  king
with  astonishment  reflected :  "  How  can  this  exalted  creature  be  commended  (suffi-
ciently) ?  For : —

106.  The  noble  should  speak  kindly ;  the  hero  should  be    a  non-boaster ;    the
liberal  should  rain  upon  the  excellent ;  the  brave  should  be  gentle.

This  (is)  the  characteristic  of  a  great  man.  In  him  is  all  (this  found).  Then
the  king  in  the  morning,  having  convened  a  special  court,  declared  all  the  events
of  the  (preceding)  night,  approvingly  conferred  upon  him  the  kingdom  of  the  Carnatic.

Why,  then,  (is)  a  new-comer  necessarily  an  enemy  ?  Among  them  also  there  are
good,  bad,  and  indifferent."  The  ruddy- goose  said  : —

107.  "  (Is)  he  a  minister  who,  to  please  the  king,  counsels  what  ought  not  to  be
done  as  though  it  ought  to  be  done :  better  wound  the  feelings  of  the  king,  bat  not
(bring  about)  his  destruction  by  what  should  not  be  done.

108.  The  king  of  whom  the  physician,  spiritual  guide,  and  minister  (are)  flatterers,
is  quickly  deprived  of  body,  virtue,  and  treasure.

Listen,  O  king !

109.  '  What  has  been  obtained  by  one  (person)  through  virtue,  that  also  will  be
for  me.'     From  infatuation  (arising)  herefrom,  a  wealth-seeking  barber,  having  struck
down  a  beggar,  was  killed."

The  king  asked :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  The  minister  related  (as  follows)  : — There
was,  in  the  city  of  Oudh,  a  soldier  named  Crest-jewel.  He,  desirous  of  wealth,  with  pain
of  body,  for  a  long  time  propitiated  the  Revered  one  whose  crest-jewel  is  the  half-
moon.*  Afterwards,  purified  from  his  sins,  having  a  revelation  in  sleep,  through  the
favour  of  S'ambhu,f  he  was  .commanded  by  the  Lord  of  TakshasJ  (thus): — "0  prince  of
soldiers !  to-day,  having  caused  (thyself)  to  be  shaved,  thou  wilt  station  thyself  (staff
in  hand)  secretly  at  the  door  of  thy  house.  Then  whatever  beggar  thou  seest  come
into  the  fore-court,  him  thou  wilt  mercilessly  slay  with  blows  of  (thy)  staff ;  there-
upon that  beggar  will  instantly  become  a  jar  full  of  gold,  with  which  thou  and  thy
family,  as  long  as  you  live,  can  remain  happily."  Thereafter,  on  that  being  done,  that
(which  was  declared)  came  to  pass.  Then  the  barber  who  had  been  brought  to  shave
him,  having  seen  all  (that  occurred)  reflected :  "  Ho !  this  (is)  the  contrivance  for
getting  a  treasure !  then  why  am  I  not  doing  so  also  ?  "  From  thenceforward,  the
barber,  every  day,  in  that  fashion,  (with)  a  club  in  his  hand,  looked  out  for  the
arrival  of  a  beggar.  Once  having  met  with  a  beggar  in  that  way,  striking  him
with  the  club,  he  killed  (him).  Through  that  crime  the  barber  himself  was  beaten
by  the  king's  officers,  and  died.  Hence  I  say  :  "  What  by  one  has  been  obtained
through  virtue,"  &c.  The  king  said : —


*  S'iva.  t  The  god  S'iva.  J  Kuvera,  the  god  of  wealth.


VIQBAHA.  75

110.  By  bringing   up  tales   of   former  occurrences  is   it  determined  whether  a
stranger  is  a  friend  without  a  motive,  or  a  betrayer  of  confidence?

Go  to !  go  to !  let  preparation  be  (now)  made.  A  king  named  Spotted- colour  is
now  encamped  on  the  table-land  of  the  Malaya  (mountains) ;  therefore  what  is  now
to  be  done  ?  "  The  minister  said :  "  Sire !  it  was  heard  by  me,  from  the  mouth  of
the  spy  (just)  arrived,  that  Spotted-colour  has  placed  no  esteem  on  the  advice
of  the  prime-minister  the  vulture ;  hence  the  fool  (is)  easily  to  be  conquered.

Thus  it  has  been  said : —

111.  The   covetous,  the  cruel,  the  intractable,  the   untruthful,  the    careless,  the
timid,  the  wavering,  the  foolish,  the  despiser  of    (antogonistic)  warriors, — is  known
(as)  an  enemy  easy  to  be  cut  up.

Therefore  as  long  as  he  is  not  blockading  my  fort,  let  the  Heron  and  other
generals  be  appointed  to  destroy  his  forces  in  the  rivers,  mountains,  forests,  and
roads.  Thus  it  has  been  said  : —

112.  Fatigued  by  long  marches,  perplexed   by    rivers,    mountains,  and   forests,
terrified  by  the  fear  of  dreadful  fires,  enfeebled  by  hunger  and  thirst, —

113.  the  furious,  straitened  for   provisions,  wasted    with    sickness  and  famine,
scattered,  not  very  numerous,  distressed  by  rain  and  wind, —

114.  bespattered   with  mud,  dust,    and  water,    greatly   perplexed,   scattered  by
brigands, — an  enemy's  army  thus  circumstanced,  the  king  should  destroy.

Besides : —

115.  The  king  should  always  smite  an  army  overpowered  by  fatigue,  sleeping  in
the  day-time,  worn  out  by  watching  from  fear  of  a  (night)  assault.

Hence,  going  (against)  the  army  of  that  negligent  one,  as  opportunity  (serves),
let  the  Heron  and  the  rest  smite  (it)  day  and  night."  On  this  being  done,  many  of
Spotted- colour' s  troops  and  officers  were  slain.  Then  Spotted-colour,  dejected,  said  to
Far-seeing  his  minister :  "  Father !  has  neglect  of  me  been  committed  by  thee  ?  or  is
there  anywhere  indiscretion  (on)  our  (part)  ?  Thus  it  has  been  said : —

116.  "  The  kingdom  (is)  gained," — (thinking)  so,  one  should  not  act  indiscreetly.
Indiscretion  destroys  prosperity,  as  decay  (destroys)  the  finest  beauty.

Besides : —

117.  The   clever  one  gains   fortune ;  the  wholesome-eater,  health ;  the    healthy,
happiness ;  the  persevering,  the  limit  of  knowledge ;  the  discreet,  virtue,  wealth,  and
fame."

The  vulture  said  :  "  Sire,  pay  attention : —

118.  Even  an  ignorant  king,  by  attending  to  one  of  accomplished  learning,  obtains
excellent  prosperity ;  as  a  tree  close  to  water.


76  VIGKAHA.

Again : —

119.  Drinking,  women,  hunting,  gaming,  the  unjust  seizure  of  property,  violence
both  of  censure  and  of  punishment, — (these  are)  the  vices  of  kings.

Moreover : —

120.  Great  successes   are  not  to  be  obtained  by  one  following  the  sole  impulse
of  courage,  nor  by  one  whose  inward  soul  is  at  a  loss  for  expedients  :  Prosperity  resides
in  both  policy  and  bravery  (combined).

Perceiving  the  energy  of  thy  own  troops,  inclined  only  to  inconsiderate  haste,  thou
hast  despised  counsels  though  suggested  by  me,  and  (hast  used)  harsh  language :  hence
this  fruit  of  bad  policy  is  experienced  by  your  Highness.  Thus  it  has  been  said  : —

121.  What  bad  minister  do  not  errors  of  policy  overtake  ?     What  eater  of  un-
wholesome things  do  not  sicknesses  afflict  ?     Whom  does  prosperity  not  inflate  with
pride  ?    Whom  does  not  death  kill  ?     Whom  do  sensual  pleasures  excited  by  women
not  torment  ?

122.  Sadness  destroys  mirth ;  the  winter,  autumn ;  the  sun,  darkness  ;  ingrati-
tude, good  deeds  ;  the  manifestation  of  kindness,  grief ;  (good)  policy,  misfortune  ;  bad
policy,  prosperous  fortune."

Therefore  I  reflected  (thus)  :  "  Ah !  woe  the  day  !  this  peacock-king  (is)  destitute
of  wisdom  ;  else  why  is  he  darkening  with  the  torch  of  (his  own)  talk,  the  moonlight
of  narratives  of  politic  science.  For : —

123.  What  (will)  he  do  (with)  literature  who  has  no  sense  of  his  own  ?  what  will
a  lamp  do  for  one  deprived  of  both  eyes  ?

For  that  (reason)  I  remained  silent."  Then  the  king,  (with)  clasped  hands,
becoming  aware  of  his  own  fault,  respectfully  said  :  "  Father  !  let  this  fault  be  mine ;
now  quickly  inform  me  how,  with  the  remainder  of  the  force,  I  (may)  retreat  (and)
reach  the  Vindhya  mountains."  The  vulture  thinks  (thus)  within  himself :  "  Here  a
remedy  (is)  to  be  devised.  For : —

124.  Anger  should  always  be  restrained  (if  felt)  towards  the  gods,  a  spiritual
guide,  cows,  kings,  Brahmans,  the  young,  old,  or  afflicted."

And  he  says  smilingly :  "  Sire !  be  not  afraid  ;  be  of  good  cheer !     Listen,  Sire  !

125.  The   skill  of  counsellors  is  manifested  in  the   re-union  of  what  has  been
severed;  of  physicians,  in  a  complication  (of  diseases).     Who  (is)  not  clever  when  an
affair  (is)  prosperous  ?

Besides : —

126.  Even  in  a  small  undertaking,  the  little-minded  easily  become  bewildered ;
but  those  of  mature  mind,  great  in  undertakings,  stand  unmoved.

Sire !  through  thy  valour,  having  destroyed  the  fort,  I  (will)  in  no  long  time  lead
thee  to  the  Vindhya  mountains,  with  fame,  dignity,  and  strength."  The  king  said :
"  How  is  1  hat  now  to  be  accomplished  with  (so)  very  small  a  force?"  The  vulture


VIGEAHA.  77

replied :  "  Sire  !  it  will  all  be  (done).  Since  promptitude  for  one  desirous  of  conquest
(is)  the  essential  requisite  for  the  accomplishment  of  victory,  therefore,  to-day  let  the
gate  of  the  fort  be  blockaded.  Now  Gold-egg's  spy  the  crane,  having  returned,  re-
ported :  "  Sire  !  truly  with  very  little  force,  king  Spotted-colour,  relying  on  the  advice
of  the  vulture,  having  come  will  blockade  the  gate  of  the  fort."  The  flamingo  said  :
"  Sir  Know-all !  what  now  is  to  be  done  ?  "  The  ruddy-goose  replied  :  "  There  should
be  no  fear ;  let  the  efficient  and  non-efficient  of  our  own  force  be  tested ;  having  ascer-
tained that,  let  conciliatory  gifts  of  gold,  dresses,  &c.,  be  made,  according  to  deserts.
For  thus  (it)  has  been  said  : —

127.  Fortune  does  not  desert  that  lion-like  prince  who  should  withhold  even  a
misapplied  cowrie,  (as  though)  equal  to  a  thousand  nishkas,  (but  who  is)  open-handed
in  (respect  of)  crores,  at  (proper)  times.

Besides : —

128.  On  eight  (occasions)  there  is  not  (such  a  thing  as)  excessive  expenditure  ;
(that  is  to  say),  on  a  sacrifice,  on  a  marriage,  on  distress,  on  the  reduction  of  an  enemy,
on  an  act  producing  fame,  on  the  reception  of  friends,  on  a  beloved  wife,  (and)  on
indigent  relations.

For:—

129.  A  fool,  from  fear  of  a  very  little  expenditure,  brings  about  the  loss  of  all.
What  sensible  person  would  abandon  the  merchandise  through  excessive  fear  of  the
toll?"

The  king  asked :  "  How,  at  the  present  time,  is  prodigality  appropriate  ?  It  has
been  said,  '  One  should  preserve  wealth  against  misfortune.'  "  The  minister  replied  :
"  Whence  (can  come)  misfortune  for  the  fortunate  ?  "  The  king  observed  :  "  Some-
times fortune  is  fickle."  The  minister  rejoined :  "  Sire !  hoarded  wealth  vanishes ;
therefore,  Sire  !  abandoning  parsimony  let  your  best  warriors  be  preferred  with  gifts
and  honours.  Thus  it  has  been  said : —

130.  (Soldiers)  knowing  each  other ;  pleased ;  regardless  of  life ;  resolute  ;  of  good
family ;  (if  properly)  honoured,  conquer  entirely  the  force  of  the  enemy.

Besides : —

131.  Warriors,  well-disposed,  closely  knit,  resolute ;  although   (but)  five  hundred
heroes,  they  crush  the  hosts  of  the  enemy.

Moreover : —

132.  A  mean,  indiscriminating,  fierce,  (and)  ungrateful  man  is  shunned  by  the
honest,  (and)  by  (his  own)  wife  also ;  how  much  more  (is  he)  not  (shunned)  by  others !

For:—

133.  Truth,  bravery,  and  also  liberality ;  these  (are)  the  three  qualities  of  kings ;
abandoned  by  these  a  king  assuredly  incurs  censure.

On  such  an  occasion  as  the  present  ministers,  at  least,  should  be  advanced.  Thus
it  has  been  said : —

134.  With  whomsoever  one  may  be  intimately  associated,  with  him  (is)  mounting
and  falling ;  fully  trusted,  (he)  should  be  employed  in  (matters  of)  life  and  death.

For:—

135.  Of  whatever  king  the  ministers  are  a  rogue,  a  woman,  or  a  child,  tossed  by
the  winds  of  bad  policy,  he  sinks  in  an  ocean  of  cares.


78  VIGEAHA.

Observe,  O  king !

136.  (He)  whose  pleasure  and  anger  (are)  restrained,  and  (whose)  treasury  (is
subject  to)  very  slight  expenditure,  and  (who  is)  continually  regardful  of  servants, —
the  earth  is  for  him  a  giver  of  wealth.

137.  A.  king  should  never  despise  politic  ministers,  whose  rise  and  decline  is  firmly
(connected)  with  (those  of)  the  monarch.

For  :—

138.  The  support  of  a  hand  from  firm  ground  is  given  by  faithful  counsellors,  for
a  king  blinded  by  passion  sinking  in  an  ocean  of  cares."

Now  Cloud-colour,  having  approached  and  saluted  said  :  "  Sire !  favour  (me)  with
a  glance.  This  enemy  the  peacock  desirous  of  war  is  actually  at  the  gate  of  the  fort ;
therefore,  if  there  is  a  command  from  the  feet  of  your  Majesty,  I  issuing  out  (will)
manifest  my  bravery.  By  that  means,  I  (shall)  approach  acquittance  of  the  debt  of
your  Majesty's  favour."  The  ruddy-goose  says :  "  Not  so.  If  (by)  going  out  (there  is)
to  be  fighting,  then  the  refuge  of  the  fort  (becomes)  useless.  See,  for  example  : —

139.  Although  ferocious  as  (he  is),  a  crocodile  come  out  from  the  water  (is)
powerless  ;  truly,  even  a  lion  strayed  from  the  wood,  would  be  like  a  jackal."

The  minister  said  :  "  Sire  !  going  yourself  let  the  fight  be  inspected.     For : —

140.  Having  advanced  the  army,  the  king  while  looking  on  should  incite  it  to
fight.     Superintended  by  (his)  master,  doeS  not  even  a  dog  certainly  play  the  lion."

Hereupon  they  all,  going  to  the  gate  of  the  fort,  produced  a  desperate  en-
counter. Next  day,  the  king  named  Spotted-colour  said  to  the  vulture:  "  Father  !  let
thy  promise  now  be  performed."  The  vulture  replied :  "  Listen  a  little : —

141.  The  defect  of  a  fortress  is  stated   (as  follows) — unable  (to  hold  out  for  a
long)    time*;  very  small;  commanded  by  a  fool  or   a   profligate;  unprotected;  and
(with)  timid  soldiers.

That,  however,  is  not  here  (the  case).

142.  These  (are)  declared  (to  be)  the  four  expedients  for  the  capture  of  a  fort, —
sowing  dissension,  a  protracted  siege,  an  assault,  (and)  daring  heroism.

And  here  effort  must  be  made  to  the  extent  of  (our)  power."  Spotted-colour  said  :
"  Even  so."  Then  upon  the  sun  being  risen  early  in  the  morning,  whilst  the  tight  was
going  on  at  the  four  gates,  fire  was  thrown  simultaneously  by  the  crows  into  every
house  within  the  fort.  Then  hearing  a  shout  "  The  fort  is  taken,  is  taken !  "  and
seeing  fire  evidently  kindled  in  several  of  the  houses,  many  soldiers  of  the  flamingo,
and  other  dwellers  in  the  fort  also,  hastily  entered  the  water.  For : —

143.  Good  counsel,  good  courage,  good  battle,  good  retreat,  at  an  appropriate  time,
one  should  effect  to  the  extent  of  one's  power ;  and  should  not  hesitate.

The  flamingo,  from  (his)  easy  nature  (was)  slow  in  motion,  and  attended  by  the
heron,  being  approached  by  the  cock,  a  general  of  Spotted-colour,  was  beset.  King


*  If  akdl  means  "  famine,"  as  is  the  case  in  Hindi,  then  this  sentence  would  mean,  "  suffering
famine."


VIGEAHA.  79

Q-old-egg  said :  "  O  General  Heron !  from  devotion  to  me  thou  shalt  not  get  thyself
killed.  Now  I  (am)  unable  to  proceed;  thou  (art)  still  able  to  go;  therefore,  going,
enter  the  water  ;  and  having  escaped  with  the  consent  of  Know-all  thou  wilt  make  my
son  named  Crest-jewel  king."  The  heron  replied  :  "  Sire !  such  an  unendurable  speech
should  not  be  uttered.  As  long  as  sun  and  moon  exist,  so  long  let  the  king  be  vic-
torious. I  (am)  commandant  of  your  Majesty's  fort ;  therefore,  at  all  events,  let  the
enemy  enter  by  the  gate- way  stained  with  my  flesh  and  blood.  Besides,  0  king  !

144.  A  patient,  generous,  and  appreciative  master  is  obtained  by  good  luck."
The  king  added :  "  That  is  so  ;  but —

An  honest,  clever,  and  loyal  servant  (is)  indeed  very  hard  to  be  found."
The  heron  said :  "  Listen,  Sire  ! —

145.  If,  except  (in)  battle,  there  were  no  fear  of  death,  then  (it  might  be)  proper  to
flee  elsewhere ;  but  death  (is)  the  inevitable  (lot)  of  living  creatures,  why  should  one
tarnish  fame  uselessly  ?

Besides  : —

146.  In  this  world,  perishable  as  the  whirling  of  waves  agitated  by  the  wind,
the  spending  of  life  for  the  benefit  of  another  arises  by  reason  of  virtue  (in  a  former
birth).

Then,  Sire  !  the  prince  is  always  to  be  preserved.

147.  Even  the   most  prosperous  prakriti,*   abandoned  by   (her)  lord,  lives  not.
What  can  even  the  physician  Dhanwantarif  do  when  life  is  extinct  ?

Besides  : —

148.  On  the  king  closing  his  eyes,  this  mortal  world  collapses,  and  on  his  rising,
it  revives ;  as  on  the  (rising  of)  sun,  the  lotus.

Moreover : —

149.  A  sovereign,  a  minister,  a  territory,  a  fort,  a  treasury,  an  army,  an  ally,  and
corporations  of  citizens,  (are)  the  essentials  (constituting)  the  members  of  a  kingdom.  J

Here,  also,  the  king  (is)  the  chief  member.

Now  the  cock,  having  approached,  inflicted  a  wound  with  his  very  sharp  spurs  on
the  body  of  the  flamingo.  Then  hastily  coming  up,  the  heron  shielded  the  king  with
his  own  body.  Immediately  the  heron  lacerated  with  blows  from  the  beak  and  spurs
of  the  cock,  having  covered  the  king  with  his  own  body,  pushed  (him)  into  the  water.
The  cock,  also,  torn  by  many  thrusts  from  the  beak  and  blows  from  the  wings,  was
killed  by  General  Heron.  Afterwards  the  heron  also,  overpowered  by  many  birds,  was
slain.

Now  Spotted- colour  having  entered  the  fort,  and  having  caused  the  property
remaining  in  the  fort  to  be  seized,  marched  forth,  praised  by  encomiasts  with  shouts
of  "  Victory."

The  princes  said :  "  In  that  army  of  the  flamingo,  the  heron  (was)  truly  meri-
torious ;  by  whom,  with  the  sacrifice  of  his  own  life,  the  king  was  preserved.  For : —

150.  Cows  generate  offspring  all  shaped  like  cattle ;  (but  only)  an  occasional  lord
of  kine,  (whose)  shoulder  is  touched  by  the  horn  (of  the  others).


*  The  s'dkii  or  female  correlative  of  deity.  t  The  HindA  Escnlapius.

J  These  are  called  the  eight  prakritis,  or  essentials,  of  royalty.


80  VIGBAHA.

Vishnusarman  said :  "  May  the  virtuous  enjoy  the  virtue-purchased  imperishable
worlds,  attended  by  Vidyadharis.*  Thus  it  is  said : —

151.  Those  brave  men  who,  loyal  and  grateful,  for  their  master's  sake  sacrifice
(their)  lives  in  battles,  go  to  heaven.

152.  Wherever  a  hero  (is)  slain,  encompassed  by  foes,  he  obtains  imperishable
worlds,  provided  he  does  not  descend  to  unmanliness.

'War'  has  (now)  been  heard,  by  your  Highnesses."  The  princes  exclaimed:
"  (And)  having  heard,  we  are  delighted."  Vishnusarman  (then)  said :  "  Moreover,  may
it  be  thus  also —

153.  May  there  never  be  war  with  elephants,  horses,  and  infantry,  for  your  High-
nesses !     May  enemies,  scattered  by  the  winds  of  politic  counsels,-  seek  refuge  (in)
mountain  fastnesses ! "

Here  ends  the  third  chapter  of  Friendly  Advice,  called  War.


*  Demi-goddesses  who  carry  the  sonla  of  slain  warriors  to  Paradise.


81


PEACE.


At  the  time  of  recommencing  the  discourse  the  princes  said  :  "  Sir !  we  have  heard
'  War  ; '  let  Peace  now  be  related."  Vishnusarman  replied :  "  Attend  !  I  am  (about
to)  relate  Peace,  of  which  this  is  the  first  verse, —

1.  On  the  great  war  being  stayed  between  the  kings  (and)  their  exhausted  armies,
by  a  conference  of  the  two  arbitrators,  the  vulture  and  the  ruddy- goose,  peace  was
immediately  made.

The  princes  asked,  how  that  (occurred),  and  Vishnusarman  related  (the  following
particulars)  : — After  (what  was  said  in  the  last  chapter)  the  flamingo  asked :  "  Who
threw  fire  into  my  fort  ?  (Was  it)  by  an  enemy,  or  by  somebody  engaged  on  the  side
of  the  enemy  residing  in  my  fort  ?  "  The  ruddy-goose  replied :  "  Sire !  Your  Highness's
disinterested  friend  Cloud-colour,  with  its  retinue,  is  not  to  be  seen  here ;  therefore,  I
think,  this  (is)  his  act."  The  king  reflecting  a  moment  said  :  "It  is  even  so;  this  is
my  bad  fortune.  And  (it)  has  been  thus  declared : —

2.  This  (is)  the  fault  of  destiny ;  assuredly  it  (is)  not  (the  fault)  of  counsellors.
An  affair  well  (and)  carefully  planned  is  spoilt  through  destiny."

The  minister  remarked  :  "  This,  too,  has  been  said : —

3.  A  man  blames  destiny  (when)   getting  into  an  unhappy  state.     An  ignorant
(man)  never  thinks  (it)  the  fault  of  his  own  acts.

Further : —

4.  He  who  heeds  not  the  advice  of  well-wishing  friends  perishes,  like  the  foolish
turtle  (who)  dropped  from  the  stick.

The  king  asked,  how  that  (happened,  and)  the  minister  replied : — In  the  country
of  Magadha  there  is  a  lake  called  Blooming-lotus  ;  there  for  a  long  time  dwelt  two
geese  named  Slender  and  Hideous.  A  friend  of  theirs,  a  turtle  named  Shell-neck,  lived
hard  by.  Now  once  (upon  a  time,  some)  fishermen  coming  there  said :  "  To-day
remaining  here,  early  to-morrow  we  must  kill  fish,  tortoises,  and  such  like."  Hearing
that  the  turtle  said  to  the  geese  :  "  Friends  (you)  have  heard  this  conversation  of  the
fishermen,  now,  then,  what  is  to  be  done  by  me  ?  "  The  geese  replied  :  "  First  of  all,
let  (the  matter  be  fully)  ascertained ;  afterwards,  having  well  reflected  that  which  is
fitting  should  be  done."  The  turtle  replied  :  "  Not  so  ;  for  I  have  already  witnessed,
a  disaster  in  this  place.  And  thus  it  has  been  said : —

5.  Fate-not-come  and  likewise  Eeady-wit  these  two  happily  escaped ;  What- will-be
perished."

11


82  SANDHI.

They  both  asked :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  The  turtle  replied  : — Formerly,  in  this
very  lake,  upon  just  such  fishermen  being  prepared,  three  fishes  (thus)  consulted
(together).  One  fish  named  Fate-not-come,  said :  "  This  very  day  I  (shall)  go  (to)  another
body  of  water ; "  saying  which  he  somehow  or  other  with  difficulty  reached  another
pool.  Another  fish  named  Eeady-wit  said :  "  From  the  absence  of  evidence,  where
should  I  go  on  account  of  the  future ;  therefore,  when  the  affair  has  happened  (one)
should  act  according  to  circumstances.  And  it  has  been  thus  said : —

6.  He  who  can  repair  a  misfortune  which  has  happened  is  wise  ;  as  the  paramour
(who)  was  disowned  by  the  merchant's  wife  before  his  face.

What- will-be  asked,  how  that  (was).  Eeady-wit  related  (as  follows) : — There  was,
in  the  city  of  Valour,  a  merchant  named  Sea- given.  His  wife  Jewel-bright  by  name,
was  continually  sporting  with  one  of  the  servants.  For : —

7.  No  one  is  either  agreeable  or  disagreeable  for  women ;  as  cows  in  a  forest  are
ever  seeking  fresh  and  fresh  grass.

Now  once  this  Jewel-bright  was  seen  by  Sea-given  to  be  kissing  the  cheek  of  the
servant.  Then  the  wife  instantly  approaching  her  husband  said :  "  Husband !  the
assurance  of  this  servant  (is)  great,  for  he  eats  the  camphor  brought  for  you.  I  have
smelt  the  perfume  of  the  camphor  plainly  in  his  mouth."  Thus  it  is  said : —

8.  (It  is)  known  (that)  the  food  of  women  is  two-fold,  their  wit,  four-fold ;  their
cunning,  six-fold ;  and  their  lust,  eight-fold.

On  hearing  this,  the  servant  also  pretending  offence,  said :  "  How  can  a  servant
remain  in  whosesoever  house  (there  is)  such  a  wife  as  this,  where  the  mistress  is  every
moment  smelling  the  servant's  mouth  ?  "  Then,  rising  up,  he  went  away  ;  thereupon
the  good  man,  apologising  strenuously  with  many  affectionate  speeches,  giving  presents
of  betel  and  such  like,  having  contented  (him),  brought  (him)  back.  Hence  I  say,
"  On  a  misfortune  that  has  happened,"  &c.  Then  What- will-be  said : —

9.  "  What  (is)  not  to  be,  will  not  be ;  if  (it  is)  to  be,  then  (it  will)  not  (be)  otherwise
(than  as  ordained).     Why  is  not  this  medicine,  the  antidote  of  anxiety,  drunk  ?  "

Then  in  the  morning,  Keady-wit  caught  by  the  net,  making  himself  appear  as  if
dead,  remained  (motionless).  Thereupon,  (he)  was  thrown  out  from  the  net ;  (but)
springing  up  from  the  ground,  (he)  entered  deep  water.  What-will-be,  caught  by  the
fishermen,  was  killed.  Hence  I  say,  "  Fate-not-come,"  &c.  Therefore  let  it  be
arranged  to-day  how  I  (may)  get  to  another  pool.  The  geese  said  :  "  Upon  reaching
another  body  of  water  (there  is)  safety  for  thee ;  (but)  what  way  (is  there)  for  thy
going  (there)  on  land  ?  "  The  turtle  replied  :  "  Let  a  method  be  devised  by  which  I
(may)  go  with  you  by  way  of  the  sky."  The  geese  inquired :  "  How  is  (that)  scheme
practicable?  "  The  turtle  replied:  "I  can  hang  with  (my)  mouth  (to)  a  stick  held


SANDHI.  83

in  the  beaks  by  you  two ;  in  this  way,  by  the  strength  of  your  wings  I  also  can  go
easily.     The  geese  rejoined :  "  This  scheme  is  practicable.    Let  it  be  so.    Still : —

10.  A  wise  man  while  thinking  (over)  a  scheme,  should  think  also  (about)
disaster.  The  young  ones  of  a  fool  of  a  crane  (who  was)  looking  on,  were  eaten  by
ichneumons."


The  turtle  asked:  "How  (was)  that?"  The  geese  related  (as  follows): —
Towards  the  north  there  is  a  mountain  called  Vulture-cliff ;  (and)  cranes  are  living
there  in  a  fig-tree  on  the  banks  of  the  Reva ;  a  snake,  also,  dwells  in  a  hole  at  the
foot  of  that  fig-tree,  and  he  (habitually)  devours  the  young  of  the  cranes.  Then  hear-
ing the  lamentation  of  the  grief -afflicted  cranes,  an  old  crane  said :  "  Do  you  act  thus ;
bringing  fishes,  (and)  commencing  at  the  burrow  of  an  ichneumon,  spread  the  fishes  along
singly  in  a  line  as  far  as  the  snake's  hole ;  then,  by  means  of  that  path  of  food,  the  snake
(will)  be  perceived  by  an  ichneumon  coming  along,  (and)  from  his  natural  enmity
(he)  will  kill  (him)."  Upon  that  being  done,  what  has  been  stated  occurred.  Now
the  sound  of  the  young  birds  up  the  tree  was  heard  by  the  ichneumons,  (so  that)
afterwards  the  young  cranes  were  devoured  by  that  ichneumon.  Hence  we  say,
'  Having  thought  over  the  remedy,'  &c.  Seeing  you  being  carried  along  by  us,  people
will  surely  say  something ;  hearing  that,  if  you  should  give  a  reply,  your  death  will
(assuredly)  occur ;  therefore,  by  all  means,  stay  here."  The  turtle  replied :  "  (Am)  I,
then,  an  idiot  ?  Nothing  whatever  shall  be  uttered  by  me."  Then  upon  that  being
done,  perceiving  the  turtle  being  carried  through  the  air,  all  the  cow-herds  ran  after
and  exclaimed :  "  Ho  !  a  great  marvel !  a  turtle  is  being  carried  by  birds ! "  Then
somebody  said :  "  If  the  turtle  falls,  then  he  is  to  be  cooked  and  eaten  here."  Another
said :  "  (He  is)  to  be  taken  home."  Someone  else  said :  "  Having  made  him  descend,
fetching  fire  and  roasting  (him),  I  will  eat  (him)  just  here."  Hearing  this  unkind
language,  forgetting  his  agreement,  he  cried  out  passionately:  "You  shall  eat  ashes  "  ;
in  saying  this,  he  fell  from  the  stick  and  was  killed  by  the  cow-herds.  Hence  I  say,
"  From  well-wishing  friends,"  &c.  Now  the  spy,  the  crane,  coming  there  said :  "  Sire !
at  the  very  first  I  indicated,  (that)  a  clearing  of  the  fort  should  immediately  be
made;  and  that  was  not  done  by  you;  hence  this  has  happened  (as)  the  fruit  of
disregarding  that  (direction).  Sire!  This  burning  of  the  fort  was  done  by  the  crow
called  Cloud-colour,  (who  was)  employed  by  the  vulture."  The  king,  sighing,  said : —

11.  "  He  who   confides   in   enemies,   either  from  respect  (shown)  or  assistance
(rendered),  awakes  like  one  being  asleep  and  fallen  from  the  top  of  a  tree."

Hereupon  the  spy  continued:  "After  having  accomplished  the  burning  of  the
fort,  when  this  Cloud-colour  was  come  (to  him),  then  Spotted-colour  (received  him  and)
graciously  said :  '  Let  this  Cloud-colour  be  inaugurated  here  in  the  realm  of  Camphor-
island.  For  it  is  thus  said : —

12.  One  should  not  obliterate  the  deed  of  a  grateful  servant ;  one  should  gratify
him  with  a  reward,  with  heart,  voice,  and  look.'  "


84  SANDHl.

The  ruddy-goose  said:  "  Sire!  have  (you)  heard  what  the  spy  says?"  The  king
asked :  "  What  followed?  "  The  spy  continued : — Then  the  chief  minister,  the  vulture
said :  "  Sire  !  that  (is)  not  proper ;  let  some  other  favour  be  conferred.  For  : —

18.  How  can  there  be  the  displacing  of  one  who  is  (already)  invested  with  autho-
rity ?  Favour  (conferred)  on  the  low,  O  king  !  (is)  like  an  impression  on  the  sands.


A  low  fellow  should  never  be  placed  in  the  position  of  the  great.     For  thus  it  is
said: —

14.  A  low  fellow,  having  attained,  a  position  of  dignity,  desires  to  cut  off  (his)
master ;  as  the  mouse,  having  reached  the  state  of  a  tiger,  tried  to  kill  the  saint."


Spotted-colour  asked,  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  The  vulture  related  (as  follows)  : —
There  was,  in  the  grove  of  the  divine  philosopher  Gautama,  a  saint  named  Great-
austerity.  In  the  vicinity  of  the  hermitage  a  young  mouse,  (which)  had  dropped  from
the  mouth  of  a  crow,  was  found  by  him  ;  (and)  was  afterwards  nourished  with  grains
of  wild  rice,  by  that  compassionate  saint.  By-and-bye,  a  cat  was  seen  by  the  saint
running  after  the  mouse  to  eat  (it)  ;  thereupon,  by  the  power  of  his  devotion,  the
mouse  was  transformed  into  a  very  strong  cat.  But  the  cat,  also,  (was)  timid  of  a
dog ;  therefore  (he)  made  it  a  dog;  (but)  the  dog  (had)  great  fear  of  a  tiger;  there-
upon (he)  made  it  a  tiger.  Now  the  saint  perceives  him,  though  a  tiger,  no  different
from  a  mouse  ;  hence  all  the  people  dwelling  there,  seeing  a  tiger,  say  :  "  This  mouse
has  been  brought  to  the  condition  of  a  tiger  by  this  saint."  Hearing  this,  the
tiger  uneasily  reflected  :  "  As  long  as  this  saint  shall  live,  so  long  the  disgraceful  story
of  my  origin  will  not  disappear."  Having  thus  reflected  he  rose  up  to  slay  the  saint ;
(but)  the  saint  knowing  his  design,  said  "  Become  a  mouse  again,"  (and)  immediately
made  him  a  mouse.  Hence  I  say,  "  A  low  fellow,  having  attained  an  exalted  station,"
&c.  Furthermore,  Sire  !  this  is  not  to  be  deemed  (so)  very  easy.  Listen  : —


15.  After  devouring  many  fishes,  good,  bad,  and  indifferent,  a  foolish  crane,  from
excessive  gluttony,  perished  through  the  grip  of  a  crab.


Spotted-colour  asked,  how  that  (was),  and  (his)  minister  related  (as  follows)  : —
There  is,  in  the  country  of  Malwa,  a  lake  called  Lotus-bearing.  There  an  old  crane,
who  had  lost  his  strength,  stood  making  himself  appear  as  though  afflicted ;  and  he
was  questioned  (thus)  by  a  crab  from  a  distance  :  "  How  (is  it)  your  Honour  is  stand-
ing here  renouncing  food  ?  "  The  crane  said  :  "  Listen,  good  Sir.  Fishes  (are)  the
causes  of  my  living ;  and  the  fishes  here  are  certainly  to  be  killed  by  fishermen ;  this
(is)  the  conversation  of  the  fishermen  (which  I)  heard  in  the  suburbs  of  the  city.
Perceiving,  therefore,  that  from  the  absence  of  a  livelihood  from  this  quarter  my  death
(is)  at  hand,  I  have  disregarded  even  food."  Then  all  the  fishes  reflected,  "  On  the


SANDHI.  85

present  occasion,  at  all  events,  he  seems  indeed  to  be  our  benefactor,  therefore  let  him
be  asked  what  is  to  be  done.     For  thus  it  is  said  : —

16.  An  alliance  (may  be  formed)  with  an  assisting  enemy,  (but)  not  with  an  in-
juring friend.     Helping  and  injuring  is  alone  worthy  to  be  regarded  as  the  distin-
guishing characteristic  of  these  two."

The  fishes  said  :  "  Sir  Crane !  where  (is)  the  means  of  our  preservation  ?  "  The
crane  said :  "  There  is  (as)  a  means  of  preservation  another  lake.  I  can  take  you  there
one  by  one."  The  fishes,  from  fear,  said,  "  Let  it  be  so."  Then  that  wicked  crane,
taking  those  fishes  one  by  one  into  a  certain  place,  (and)  having  eaten  them,  returned
(and)  said  :  "  They  have  been  placed  by  me  in  another  body  of  water."  Thereupon  a
crab  said  to  him :  "  Sir  Crane  !  take  me  also  there."  Then  the  crane,  desirous  of  unpre-
cedented crab's  flesh,  taking  him  courteously  placed  him  on  the  ground.  But  the  crab
perceiving  fish-bones  scattered  (over)  the  surface  of  the  ground,  thought :  "  Alas,  un-
fortunate, I  am  ruined !  Well,  now  I  (must)  act  suitably  to  the  occasion.  For : —

17.  As  long  as  a  danger  (is)  not  arrived,  so  long  there  should  be  apprehension
about  (it)  ;  perceiving  the  danger  arrived,  one  should  attack  it  fearlessly.

Besides : —

18.  When  a  wise  man  attacked  perceives  nothing  advantageous  for  himself,  then
he  dies  fighting  with  the  enemy."

Thinking  thus,  the  crab  severed  the  crane's  neck,  (and)  the  crane  attained  disso-
lution. Hence  I  say,  "  Having  eaten  many  fishes,"  &c.  Then,  also,  again  king
Spotted-colour  said :  "  Listen :  0  prime  minister  !  this  is  just  what  I  have  been  think-
ing of ;  that,  by  this  Cloud-colour  remaining  here  (as)  king,  whatever  excellent  things
belong  to  Camphor  island,  could  be  sent  (to)  us ;  by  that  (means)  we  can  remain,
with  great  luxury,  in  the  Vindhya  mountains."  Far-seeing  laughingly  said :  "  Sire ! —

19.  He  who  is  delighted  with  a  non-realisable  speculation,  will  meet  (with)  dis-
comfiture, like  the  Brahman  (who)  broke  the  pots.

The  king  asked  :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  Far-seeing  replied  : — There  was  a  Brah-
man named  The-Delight-of-the-Gods,  in  the  city  of  Goddess-fort.  At  the  (sun's)
passing  into  the  equinoctial  sign,  he  received  a  dish  of  meal ;  after  having  received  it,
oppressed  by  the  sun  he  laid  down  in  a  potter's  shed  filled  with  pots.  Then  taking  a
stick  in  his  hand  for  the  protection  of  the  meal,  he  began  to  think  :  If  I  should  sell
this  dish  of  meal,  I  (shall)  get  ten  cowries ;  then  with  those  cowries,  at  the  present
time,  having  purchased  pots,  dishes,  &c.,  (and)  repeatedly  with  the  increased  riches
having  successively  purchased  and  sold  betel-nut,  cloth,  &c.,  and  having  amassed,  by
trading,  riches  to  the  extent  of  a  lakh  (of  rupees),  I  (shall)  contract  four  marriages ;
then,  I  (shall)  bestow  most  affection  upon  her  who  (is)  the  youngest  and  most  beautiful


86  SANDHI.

among  them.  Thereupon  when  those  wives,  become  envious,  shall  be  bickering  among
themselves,  then  I,  irritated  with  anger,  will  beat  all  the  women  with  a  stick,"— saying
this  he  thrust  forward  the  stick,  smashed  the  dish  of  meal,  and  broke  many  pots  that
were  in  the  potter's  shed.  Then,  from  hearing  the  smashing  of  the  pots,  the  potter,
coming,  seized  (him)  by  the  throat,  and  turned  (him)  out  of  the  house.  Hence  I
say,  "An  unrealisable  speculation,"  &c.  Then  the  king  privately  asked  the  vulture
(his)  minister :  "  Father  !  advise  me  what  is  to  be  done."  The  vulture  replied  : —

20.  "  The   guides  of   a  king,  lifted  up  with  pride  like  an  excited  elephant,  as-
suredly incur  censure,  through  his  vagaries.

Listen  a  bit,  Sire !  Was  the  fort  demolished  through  our  pride  of  strength,
or  rather,  by  an  expedient  devised  by  your  Majesty's  genius?"  The  king  replied:
"By  an  expedient  of  your  Honour."  The  vulture  rejoined:  "If  my  advice  be  acted
on,  then  let  (us)  return  to  our  own  country  ;  otherwise,  in  the  rainy  season  now  at  hand,
on  war  recommencing  with  an  equal  force,  a  retreat  to  our  own  territory  will  be  diffi-
cult for  us,  (who)  have  lingered  in  the  enemy's  country.  For  the  sake  of  comfort  and
credit,  let  (us)  make  peace  (and)  retire.  The  fort  (is)  dismantled,  and  the  glory
acquired.  That  (is)  exactly  my  opinion.  For : —

21.  He  who,  placing  duty  in  front,  setting  (aside  his)  master's  likes  and  dislikes,
has  stated  wholesome  unpleasantnesses,  (is)  a  (real)  assistant  (of)  the  king.

Moreover : —

22.  (One)  should  desire  peace  with  an  equal.     Victory  in  war  (is)  doubtful ;  one
should  not  make  (it)  dubious.     Thus  said  Vrihaspati.

Besides : —

23.  Who,  not  a  novice  in  war,  would  cause  (to  be)  placed  in  the  swing  of  uncer-
tainty, an  ally,  (his)  army,  (his)  kingdom,  himself,  and  reputation  ?

Besides : —

24.  In  battle  there  is  sometimes  even  loss  for  both  (parties).     Were  not  Beauty
and  Ugliness,  equals  in  heroism,  slain  the  one  by  the  other.

The  king  said  :  "  How  (was)  that  ?  "  The  minister  replied  : — Formerly  two  greatly
distinguished  demons,  named  Beauty  and  Ugliness,  with  intense  bodily  suffering,  for  a
long  time  worshipped  the  Moon-crowned  one,*  through  desiring  the  sovereignty  of  the
three  worlds.  At  length  being  satisfied  with  both  of  them,  the  Eevered  one  said :
"  Ask  ye  a  boon."  Immediately,  through  the  dominance  of  Saraswatif  over  these  two
terrific  beings,  both,  desiring  to  say  one  thing,  gave  utterance  to  another. — "  If  your
Holiness  (is)  pleased  with  us,  then  let  the  Supreme  Lord  give  his  beloved  (wife)
Parvati."  Then  the  angered  Holy  One,  through  the  obligation  of  conferring  the  boon,
and  through  foolishness,  gave  Parvati.  Afterwards,  these  two  world-destroyers, — in-
inflamed  by  the  loveliness  of  her  person,  longing  in  their  hearts,  darkened  by  sin,
wrangling  with  each  other,  saying,  "  (She  is)  mine," — resolved  to  ask  some  arbitrator
or  other.  On  (this  opinion)  being  formed,  even  the  Lord  himself,  in  the  form  of  an


*  The  god  S'iva.  f  The  goddess  of  speech.


SANDHI.  87

aged  Brahman  came  and  stood  (before  them).  Thereupon  they  asked  the  Brahman :
"  To  which  of  us  two  does  this  one  belong :  she  was  obtained  by  us  by  our  own  might  ?  "
The  Brahman  said  : —

25.  A  Brahman  excellent  in  wisdom  (is)  to  be  honoured  ;  (so  is)  also  a  powerful
Kshatriya,  a  Vaisya,  possessed  of  money  and  grain ;  but  a  Sudra,  through    service
(done)  for  the  regenerate.

You  two,  then,  (are  of)  the  military  profession ;  fighting  (is)  truly  your  allotted
duty."  On  this  being  said,  they  both  cried  out,  "  Good ! "  (and)  the  two  equal  to  one
another  in  strength  perished  at  the  same  moment  by  a  mutual  blow.  Hence  I  say,
"  One  should  desire  peace  with  an  equal,"  &c.  The  king  said :  "  Then  why  was  not
this  pointed  out  at  the  very  first  ?  "  The  minister  replied :  "  Was  my  advice  at  that
time  listened  to  by  Tour  Majesty  to  the  end  ?  At  that  time,  this  war  was  not  com-
menced with  my  advice ;  for  this  peacefully  disposed  Gold-egg  ought  not  to  be
molested.  Thus  it  (is)  said : —

26.  A  truthful  (man)  one  of  noble  race,  a  virtuous  (man),  one  of  low  race,  one
having  many  brothers,  a    strong    man,  (and)  one  victorious  in  many  battles, — are
renowned  (as)  the  seven  (with  whom)  peace  should  be  made.

27.  The  truthful  cherishes  truth  ;    (when)  made  peace  with,  he  undergoes  no
change.     Even  at  the  risk  of  life,  manifestly,  a  noble  man  never  approaches  ignominy.

28.  Truly  everyone  would  fight  for  a  just  man  (when)  attacked.     Both  from  (his)
virtue  and  from  the  affection  of  his  subjects,  a  virtuous  person  (is)  hard  to  be  injured.

29.  Peace  (is)  to  be  made  with  even  the  low-born  on  destruction  being  imminent ;
(if)  without  recourse  to  that  the  other  cannot  gain  time.

30.  As  from  its  compactness  a  thick  bambu  surrounded  by  thorns  cannot  be  cut
asunder ;  so  (neither  can  he)  having  many  brothers.

31.  "The  strong  should  be  combatted  with," — there  is  no  such  injunction  (as
this).     A  cloud  never  moves  against  the  wind.

32.  From  the  splendour  of  the  son  of  Jamadagni,*  victorious  in  many  battles,
everyone  is  everywhere  always  subject.

33.  (With)  whomsoever  one  victorious  in  many  battles  concludes  an  alliance,  his
enemies,  by  the  power  of  that  (ally),  quickly  come  into  subjection.

Therefore,  in  the  present  case,  this  flamingo,  endowed  with  many  (excellent)
qualities  should  be  made  peace  with."  The  ruddy-goose  said  :  "  Spy  !  (we  have)  heard
all.  Go  again,  (and1  having  tried  him,  return  quickly."  Then  gold  Gold-egg  ques-
tioned the  ruddy-goose  (thus)  :  "  Minister !  how  many  should  not  be  made  peace  with  ?
I  wish  to  know  them."  The  minister  replied :  "  Sire !  I  (will)  relate  (them).  Listen  : —


*  Paras'u-R&ma,  fabled  to  have  been  many  times  conqueror  of  the  whole  world.


88  SANDHI.

34.  A  child,  an  old  man,  one  with  a  chronic  sickness,  also  one  expelled  his  caste,
a  coward,  one  with  cowardly  people,  a  covetous  person,  (and)  also  one  with  covetous
followers.

35.  One  whose  supporters  are  disaffected,  one  greatly  attached  to  sensuality,  one,
various-minded  in  counsel,  and  a  dispiser  of  Gods  and  Brahmans.

36.  One  stricken  by  fate,  one  anxious  about  fate,  one  afflicted  by  famine,  and  one
embarrassed  by  disorganisation  of  his  army.

37.  One  not  dwelling  in  his  country,  one  with  many  enemies,  one  who  is  not
apposite  with  time,  one  who  swerves  from  truth  and  right, — these  (are  the)  twenty  men.

38.  One  should  not  make  peace  with  these,  but  should  war  (with  them)  merely;
these,  being  warred  against,  quickly  reaclT subjection  (to)  the  enemy.

39.  Mankind  is  not  willing  to  fight  for  a  child,  because  of  his  insignificance ;  since
a  boy  (is)  not  able  to  understand  the  advantage  of  fighting  and  not  fighting.

40.  An  old  man,  and  also  one  long  sick,  through  want  of  the  power  of  exertion
these  two  are  undoubtedly  despised  even  by  themselves.

41.  One  expelled  from  all  his  kindred  is  easily  destroyed ;  those  very  relations,
gained  over,  kill  him.

42.  The  coward,  through  fleeing  from  battle,  destroys  himself ;  so  likewise,  one
with  timid  troops  is  deserted  by  them  in  battle.

43.  The  followers  of  a  covetous  man  do  not  fight,  through  the  non-division  (of  the
spoil)  ;  he  is  killed  by  covetous  followers  (when  they  are)  deprived  of  gifts.

44.  One  whose  supporters  are  disaffected  is  deserted  by  those  supporters  in  battle ;
one  excessively  addicted  (to)  sensuality  is  easily  overcome.

45.  He  who  is  various-minded  in  counsel  is  odious  (to  his)  counsellors  ;  from  the
fickleness  of  his  opinion  he  is  disregarded  by  them  in  an  emergency.

46.  Through  the  mightiness  of  religion  at  all  times  a  despiser  of  Gods  and  Brah-
mans fades  away  of  himself ;  so  also  (does)  one  stricken  by  fate.

47.  "  Fate  is  veritably  the  cause  of  success  and  of  misfortune," — reflecting  thus,
the  fatalist  does  not  exert  himself.

48.  One  afflicted  with  famine  sinks  of  himself;   there  is  no  strength  to  fight
begotten  of  one  with  demoralisation  in  his  army.


SANDHI.  89

49.  One  not  in  his  own  place  is  destroyed  by  even  an  insignificant  enemy ;  an
alligator,  though  very  small,  in  water,  drags  (in)  even  an  elephant.

50.  He  who  has  many  enemies  (is)  scared,  like  a  pigeon  among  kites  ;  by  what-
ever path  he  goes,  he  is  beset  with  danger.

51.  He  who  has  arrayed  his  army  unseasonably  is  slain  by  one  who  fights  at  the
(proper)  time ;  as  a  crow  (is  killed)  by  an  owl  on  a  starless  night.

52.  One   should  never  form  an  alliance  with  one  who  swerves  from  truth  and
right ;  although  made  peace  with,  from  want  of  probity  he  soon  changes.

I  (will)  relate  yet  more.  Peace,  war,  halting,  marching,  rallying,  (and)  dividing
into  two, — (are)  the  six  qualities.  The  manner  of  commencing  operations,  abun-
dance of  men  and  materiel,  discrimination  of  place  and  time,  the  repulse  of  assaults,
the  accomplishment  of  enterprizes, — (constitute)  the  five-membered  counsel.  Concilia-
tion, bribery,  dissension,  (and)  threats, — (are)  the  four  expedients.  The  power  of
perseverance,  the  power  of  counsel,  the  power  of  the  king, — (are)  the  triad  of  powers.
Having  attended  to  all  this,  they  who  are  desirous  of  conquest  always  become  great.
For:—

53.  Fortune  which  is  not  to  be  obtained  even  at  the  price  of  the  sacrifice  of  life,
runs  incontinently  to  the  house  of  those  skilled  in  polity.

And  thus  it  is  said : —

54.  He  whose  wealth  is  equitably  divided,  (whose)   spy  (is)  concealed,  (whose)
counsel  (is)  secret,  and  who  speaks  not  unkindly  among  (his)  fellow-creatures, — he
rules  the  earth  bounded  by  the  ocean.

But,  Sire !  although  peace  (were)  suggested  by  the  prime-minister — the  vulture —
still  (it)  would  not  now  be  agreed  to  by  that  king,  through  pride  of  the  recent  victory.
Therefore,  let  this  be  done.  Let  our  friend  the  heron,  king  of  Ceylon,  named  Great-
strength,  excite  a  disturbance  in  Jambudwipa.  For : —

55.  Maintaining   great    secrecy,    an   ardent  hero,   marching  about  with  a  very
compact  force,  should  inflame  the  enemy  ;  with  whom  (when)  inflamed  (he),  equally
inflamed,  forms  an  alliance.

The  king  said  :  "  Let  it  be  so."  Having  said  this  he  started  off  the  crane  named
Variegated  to  Ceylon,  giving  him  a  private  letter.  Now  the  spy  returning  said :  "  Sire !
just  let  the  conversation  of  that  (enemy's)  place  be  heard.  There  the  vulture  spoke
thus, — '  Sire  !  Cloud-colour  resided  there  long ;  he  knows  whether  king  Gold-egg  (be)
peaceably  inclined  or  not.'  Then  having  called  for  this  Cloud-colour  (he)  was
questioned  by  Spotted-colour, — '  Crow  !  what  kind  of  king  (is)  Gold-egg ;  or  the  ruddy-
goose  minister,  what  (is  he)  like  ?  '  Cloud-colour  said :  '  Sire !  this  Gold-egg  (is)  a
king  like  Yudhishthira,  magnanimous  (and)  truthful.  A  minister  like  the  ruddy-

12


90  SANDHI.

goose  is  nowhere  to  be  seen.'     The  king  said:  'If  so,  then  how  was  he  deceived  by
thee  ? '    Cloud-colour  laughing  said :  '  Sire ! —

56.  What  cleverness  (is)  there  in  the  deception  of  those  inspired  with  confidence  ?
What,  forsooth,  (is)  the  manliness  of  the  slayer  of  those  who,  having  ascended  to  the
lap,  are  asleep  (there)  ?

Listen,  Sire  !  I  was  detected  by  that  minister  at  the  very  first  glance  ;  but  that
king  (is)  magnanimous,  therefore  (he)  was  deceived  by  me.  Thus  it  is  said : —

57.  He  who,  by  comparison  with  himself,  thinks  a  rogue  (to  be)  a  speaker  of  the
truth,  even  he  is  deceived  by  that  (rogue)  ; — as  the  Brahman,  in  respect  of  the  goat.'

The  king  asked :  '  How  (was)  that  ?  '  Cloud-colour  related  (as  follows)  : — There
was,  in  the  province  of  G-aur,  a  Brahman  named  Worthy-of-sacrifice  ;  and  he  having
gone  to  another  village,  and  having  purchased  a  white  goat,  for  present  sacrifice,  placed
(it)  on  (his)  shoulder,  (and)  while  hastily  going  along  the  road,  was  seen  by  three
rogues.  Then  those  three  rogues,  having  reflected  thus, — "  If  by  any  dodge  that  goat
is  obtained,  then  it  (will)  be  a  stroke  of  policy," — seated  (themselves)  and  remained,
in  a  lonesome  spot,  under  three  trees  in  the  path  of  the  Brahman.  Then  one  rogue
addressed  the  Brahman :  "  Sir  Brahman !  why  art  thou  carrying  a  dog  on  (thy)
shoulder?"  The  Brahman  said:  "This  (is)  not  a  dog,  simpleton!  it  (is)  a  goat  for
sacrifice."  Then  again  the  same  was  said  by  the  second  rogue  stationed  at  the  distance
of  a  Jcos.  Hearing  this,  the  Brahman  said :  "  This  (is)  not  a  dog."  Having  said
which,  somewhat  disconcerted  in  mind,  (he)  placed  the  goat  on  the  earth,  (and)  in-
specting (it)  again  and  again,  replacing  (it)  on  (his)  shoulder,  he  went  along  wavering
in  mind.  For  thus  it  is  said : —

58.  Surely  the  mind  of  even  the  good  wavers  from  the  speeches  of  the  wicked.   He
who  is  induced  to  trust  by  them,  dies  like  Wonderful-ear.

The  king  asked,  how  that  was,  (and)  he  related  (the  tale  as  follows)  : — There  was
in  a  part  of  a  certain  wood  a  lion  named  Arrogant.  He  (had)  three  attendants,  a  crow
a  tiger,  and  a  jackal.  Now,  while  roaming  about,  a  camel  strayed  from  a  caravan  was
seen  by  them  (and)  questioned  (thus)  :  "  Whence  (is)  your  Honour  come  ?  "  and  he
related  all  the  particulars  regarding  himself.  Then,  being  conducted  by  them,  he  was
presented  to  the  lion.  Then  the  lion,  giving  (him)  an  assurance  of  protection,  (and)
conferring  the  title  "  Wonderful-ear,"  retained  (him  in  his  service).  So  the  time
passes.  Now  once,  through  the  bodily  indisposition  of  the  lion  and  because  of  exces-
sive rain,  not  being  able  to  procure  food,  they  became  perplexed.  Then  the  crow,  tiger
and  jackal  resolved  (thus)  :  "  Let  (something)  be  done  so  that  the  master  kill  Won-
derful-ear ;  for  what  have  we  (to  do)  with  this  corn-eater."  The  tiger  said :  "  He
has  been  received  by  the  master,  (who  has)  granted  (him)  an  assurance  of  protection  ;
how,  then,  is  this  possible  ? "  Says  the  crow :  "  At  the  present  time  the  weakened
master  will  even  commit  sin."


SANDHI.  91

For:—

59.  Even  a  woman  pinched  with  hunger  will  desert  (her)  child ;  a  snake  pained  by
hunger  will   devour  its   own  eggs.      What  crime   will  not    those   suffering  hunger
commit  ?     Men  wasting  away  (from  famine)  become  compassion-less.

Besides : —

60.  The  drunkard,  the  careless,  the  frantic,  the  distressed,  the  passionate,  the
famished,  the  covetous,  the  coward,  the  precipitate,  and  the  sensual, — know  no  law.

Having  thus  settled  (the  matter),  they  all  went  near  to  the  lion.  The  lion  said  :
"  Has  anything  been  found  for  food  ?  "  The  crow  replied  :  "  Sire  !  even  by  (great)
exertion  nothing  has  been  procured."  The  lion  (then)  remarked :  "  What  means  of
living  (is  there)  now?"  The  crow  replied:  "Through  neglecting  the  food  in  your
power  this  destruction  of  all  (of  us)  is  imminent."  The  lion  inquired  :  "  What  food
(is)  here  in  my  power  ?  "  The  crow  whispered  in  the  lion's  ear, — "  Wonderful-ear  !  "
The  lion  having  touched  the  ground,  touches  both  (his)  ears  (and  says)  :  "  I  have  given
him  an  assurance  of  safety,  therefore,  how  can  such  a  cruel  deed  be  perpetrated  ?
Thus—

61.  Neither  gift  of  land,  nor  gift  of  gold,  nor  gift  of  cattle,  nor  gift  of  food,  (is)  as
that  they  here  call  the  greatest  gift  among  all  gifts — the  gift  of  security  from  danger.

Again : —

62.  Whatever  advantage  (arises)  from  the  horse- sacrifice,*  fulfilling  every  desire,
that  advantage  one  fully  obtains  on  a  fugitive  being  preserved."

The  crow  said :  "  He  must  not  be  killed  by  the  master ;  but  it  must  be  so  managed
by  us  that  he  volunteers  the  gift  of  his  own  body."  Hearing  that,  the  lion  remained
silent.  Then  he  [the  crow]  finding  an  opportunity  deceitfully  took  them  all,  and
went  towards  the  lion.  Then  the  crow  said :  "  Sire  !  even  after  (great)  effort  food
has  not  been  obtained,  and  the  master  (is)  distressed  by  many  fasts.  Now,  therefore,
let  my  flesh  be  eaten.  For : —

63.  Surely  all  these  accessories  of  royalty  are  based  on  the  sovereign.     Care
(bestowed)  upon  trees  with  roots,  (is)  advantageous  to  men."

The  lion  replied  :  "  Friend !  better  the  resignation  of  life,  rather  than  engaging
in  such  an  act  as  this."  The  jackal  also  said  the  same  ;  but  the  lion  replied  :  "  Not
so."  The  tiger  said :  "  Let  the  master  subsist  by  my  body."  The  lion  replied :
"  (That  can)  never  (be)  proper."  Then,  while  they  were  speaking  Wonderful-ear  also
desired  to  speak ;  whereupon  the  tiger  remained  in  readiness.  Then  Wonderful-ear
also,  (his)  confidence  excited  (by)  looking  at  the  jackal,  crow,  and  tiger,  volunteered  his
own  body.  While  he  was  in  the  act  of  speaking,  the  tiger  ripping  up  his  flank  killed
(him),  and  he  was  eaten  by  them  all.  Hence  I  say,  "  Surely  the  mind  wavers,"  &c.
Thereafter,  having  heard  the  remark  of  the  third  rogue,  the  Brahman  convinced  (that
he  was)  wrong,  abandoned  the  goat,  washed  (himself),  and  went  home,  and  the  goat
was  led  off  and  eaten  by  the  rogues.  Hence  I  say,  "  He  who  by  comparison  with  him-
self considers,"  &c.

*  One  of  the  most  solemn  of  sacrifices,  which  won  an  immensity  of  merit.


92  SANDHI.

The  king  said :  "  Cloud-colour !  how  (is  it)  you  lived  a  very  long  time  in  the  midst
of  enemies  ?  or  how  was  their  conciliation  effected  ?  "  Cloud-colour  replied  :  "  Sire  !
what  is  not  done  by  one  desirous  of  the  master's  interest,  or  on  account  of  his  own
purposes.  See : —

64.  Do  not  people,  0  King  !  carry  fuel  on  their  heads  to  burn  ?     The  current  of
a  river,  while  watering,  cuts  away  the  root  of  a  tree.

Thus  it  is  said : —

65.  A  wise  man,  having  an  object  (in  view)  will  bear  enemies  even  on  his  shoulder ;
as  the  frogs  were  destroyed  by  an  old  serpent."

The  king  asked,  how  that  (was) ;  (and)  Cloud-colour  related  (as  follows)  : — There
was,  in  a  certain  withered  garden,  a  serpent  named  Slow-crawl ;  and  he,  by  (reason  of)
extreme  decay  (of  nature)  being  unable  to  seek  his  own  food,  laid  down  on  the  bank  of
a  pool.  Then  he  was  seen  and  questioned  from  a  distance  by  a  certain  frog.  "  Why
are  you  not  searching  (for)  food  ?  "  The  serpent  replied  :  "  Friend  !  go.  What  (ad-
vantage will  accrue  to)  thee  by  inquiring  into  the  circumstances  of  helpless  me  ?"  Then
the  frog,  (his)  curiosity  being  aroused,  said  to  the  serpent :  "  By  all  means  let  it  be
related."  The  serpent  replied :  "  Friend  !  here  in  Brahmapura,  the  son  of  the  Brah-
man named  Kaundinya,  about  twenty  years  old,  endowed  with  every  virtue,  was,  by  ill-
luck,  maliciously  bitten  by  me.  Then  seeing  his  son  named  Well-disposed  lying  dead,
Kaundinya,  become  insensible  through  grief,  rolled  upon  the  earth.  Thereupon  all
his  kinsmen,  the  inhabitants  of  Brahmapura,  came  there,  (and)  sat  down.  Thus  it  is
said : —

66.  He  is  a  relative  who  stands  (by  one)  in  a  challenge  (to  combat),  in  adversity,
in  a  famine,  in  a  contest  with  the  enemy,  at  the  king's  gate,  and  in  the  cemetery.

Then  a  householder  Brahman  named  Kapila  spoke  :  "  0  Kaundinya  !  thou  art  a
fool,  because  thou  complainest  thus.  Listen  : —

67.  As  transitoriness  from  the  very  first  takes  to  its  bosom,  like  a  nurse,  the  one
(just)  born,  (and)  afterwards  the  (true)  mother  (does  so), — then  what  way  for  grief  (is
there) ?

In  like  manner : —

68.  Whither  are  gone  the  rulers  of  the  earth,  with  their  guards,  armies,  and
chariots  ?     The  earth  remains  even  now  a  witness  of  their  departure.

Again : —

69.  This  body  is  not  perceived  (to  be)  every  moment  wasting  away.     Like  an
unbaked  pot  standing  in  water,  (when)  dissolved  (the  fact)  is  discovered.

70.  Day  by  day  Death  approaches  nearer  the  vicinity  of  a  living  creature ;  just  as
slaughter  (to)  a  victim  being  led  along  step  by  step.

For:—

71.  Transitory  (is)  youth,  beauty,  life,  a  store  of  goods,  lordly  dignity,  (and)  the
society  of  a  loved  one.     A  wise  man  is  not  fascinated  (by  these).

72.  As  one  piece  of  wood  and  another  piece  of  wood  may  meet  together  in  the
ocean  ;    and,  having  met,  may  part   (again), — such-like  (is)  the  meeting  of  human
beings.


SANDHI.  93

73.  As  any  traveller,  having  taken  refuge,  rests  in  the  shade,  and  having  refreshed
(himself)  again  goes  (onwards)  ; — such-like  (is)  the  meeting  of  human  beings.

Again : —

74.  What  lamentation  (need  there  be)  over  a  body  constructed  with  five  (elements),
resuming  the  quintuple  character,  each  element  finding  again  its  own  birth-place  ?  "

75.  As  many  connections,  dear  to    the  soul,  as  a  living  creature  forms,  so  many
thorns  of  grief  are  they  [the  connections]  planting  in  his  heart.

76.  This  (is)  not  a  permanent  dwelling  (which)  is  gained  by  anyone,  even  with
his  own  body  ;  how  much  less  with  anyone  else !

Moreover : —

77.  Union,  indeed,  proves  the  possibility  of  separation ;  just  as  birth  (does)  the
approach  of  inevitable  death.

78.  Truly  the  end  of  unions  with  beloved  (objects),  delightful  for  the  present
moment, — is  distressing ;  like  (that  of)  unwholesome  foods.

Again : —

79.  As  the  streams  of  rivers  flow  on,  (and)  return  not ;  so  also  day  and  night  for
ever  (proceed),  taking  (with  them)  the  life  of  mortals.

80.  The  society  of  the  good,  which  (is)  the  flavour  of  happiness  in  the  world,  is
yoked  to  the  carriage-pole  of  miseries,  from  its  ending  in  separation.

81.  For  this  very  reason  the  virtuous  do  not  desire  the  society  of  the  good ;  for,
there  is  no  medicine  for  a  heart  cut  by  the  sword  of  separation.

82.  Although  deeds  have  been  well  done  by  kings  Sagara*  and  the  rest,  still  those
very  deeds,  and  they  also,  have  gone  to  destruction.

83.  (By)  meditating  and  meditating  over  that  inexorable  punisher  Death,  all  the
efforts  of  even  a  clever  man  become  relaxed ;  like  a  leathern  thong  soaked  by  rain-
water.

84.  The  very  first  night  (on)  which  the  strongest  of  human  beings  attains  abidance
in  the  womb,  thenceforward,  with  unfaltering  march,  he  proceeds  day  by  day  towards
Death.

Then    reflect  (on)  the  world.    This  grief  (is)  an  evolution  of  ignorance.     Ob-
serve : —

85.  Ignorance  would  not  be  the  cause,  if  separation  (were)  the  cause ;  then  let
grief  increase  as  the  time  passes  away.    What  removes  (grief)  ?

Therefore,  friend !  compose  yourself.     Dismiss  all  talk  of  sorrow.     For : —

86.  For  the  blows  of  deep  grief  produced  not  by  the  fall  of  arrows  (but)  by  vital -


*  An  ancient  king,  fabled  to  have  conquered  many  nations ;  and  to  perform  the  funeral  cere-
monies of  whose  sixty  thousand  sons,  the  river  Ganges  was  brought  down  from  heaven.


94  SANDHI.

piercing  weapons,  the  greatest  medicine  (is)  not  to  think  (about  them)."

Then  having  heard  his  speech,  as  though  awakened,  Kaundinya  sat  up  (and)  said :
"  Enough  now  (of)  this  dwelling  in  the  house  of  hell !  I  (will)  go  to  the  forest."
Kapila  continued : —

87.  "  Even  in  a  wood  evils  prevail  over  the  sensual ;  while  in  a  house  the  restraint
of  the  five  senses  (is)  a  penance.     The  home  of  one  free  from  passions  engaged  in  a
worthy  act  (is)  a  grove  of  penance.

For:—

88.  Although   afflicted  one   should  practise  virtue,   in   whatever  station  of  life
engaged,  evenly  among  all  creatures.     The  badge  (is)  not  the  cause  of  virtue.*

And  it  has  been  said : —

89.  They^  surmount  difficulties  whose  eating  (is  merely)  for  sustenance,  (whose)
sexual  intercourse  (is)  for  offspring,  and  (whose)  speech  (is)  for  the  utterance  of  truth.

Again : —

90.  The  soul  (is)  a  river,  (whose)  holy  confluence  is  self-restraint,  (whose)  water
(is)  truth,  (whose)  bank  (is)  morality,  (whose)  waves  (are)  compassion.   Here  perform
ablutions,  O  son  of  Pandu  !     The  inward  soul  is  not  purified  by  water.

And  especially : —

91.  (There  is)  happiness  for  one  quitting  this  excessively  sapless  world,  attacked
with  the  pains  of  birth,  death,  decay,  and  disease.

92.  Pain  actually  exists ;  happiness  (does)  notf; — that  is  evident,  because,  in  the
alleviation  of  those  distressed  with  pain,  the  word  '  happiness'  is  employed."

Kaundinya  said  :  "  (It  is)  even  so."  After  that,  I  was  cursed  by  that  disconsolate
Brahman,  thus, — "Beginning  from  this  day,  thou  shalt  be  a  carrier  of  frogs."
Kapila  added :  "  At  the  present  time  thou  (art)  unable  to  be  bear  admonition ;  thy
heart  (is)  full  of  grief ;  nevertheless  hear  what  ought  to  be  done, —

93.  Society  should  be  shunned  with  all  the  soul ;  but  if  it  cannot  be  relinquished,
it  should  be  formed  with  the  good.     The  very  society  of  the  good  (is  healing)  me-
dicine.

Again : —

94.  Passion  should  be  relinquished  with  all  the  soul ;  but  if  it  cannot  be  relin-
quished, it  should  be  indulged  towards  one's  own  wife :  she  (is)  indeed  the  (proper)
remedy  for  that."

Hearing  that,  Kaundinya,  the  fire  of  (whose)  grief  (was)  extinguished  by  the
nectar  of  the  advice  of  Kapila,  took  the  (pilgrim's)  staff,  according  to  the  (sacred)
precepts.  Since  then,  I  remain  here  to  experience  the  Brahman's  curse  (and)  to  carry
frogs.  Thereupon,  that  frog  going  reported  all  (to)  Web-foot,  the  chief  of  the  frogs.
Then  the  chief  of  the  frogs  coming,  leaping  with  joy,  placed  himself  upon  the  ser-
pent's back.  The  serpent,  taking  him  on  (his)  back,  wandered  off  at  a  brisk  pace.
The  next  day  the  chief  of  the  frogs  said  to  him  (as  he  was)  unable  to  move :  "  Why
(are)  you  to-day  (so)  sluggish  ?  "  The  serpent  replied  :  "  Sire  !  from  want  of  food  I
am  weak."  The  frog-chief  (then)  said :  "  By  my  command  eat  the  frogs."  Then
having  replied,  "  This  great  favour  (is)  accepted  (thankfully),"  gradually  the  serpent


*  It  is  not  the  cowl  that  makes  the  monk.

t  That  is,  pain  is  positive ;  happiness  is  negative.


SANDHI.  95

devoured  the  frogs  ;  then  seeing  the  pool  denuded  of  frogs,  he  devoured  the  frog-chief
also.  Hence  I  say,  "  One  should  bear  the  enemy  on  the  shoulder  even,"  &c.  Sire !
now  let  the  relation  of  tales  of  former  events  cease.  This  king  Gold-egg  (is)  on  every
account  to  be  conciliated,  let  him  be  made  peace  with  ;  that  (is)  my  opinion."  The  king
replied :  "  What  an  idea  (is)  this  of  yours  !  Since  he  has  been  thus  conquered  by  us,
therefore  if,  by  my  command,  he  live  in  servitude,  let  it  be  so  ;  otherwise,  let  him  be
(further)  attacked."  Hereupon,  the  parrot  coming  from  Jambudwipa  said  :  "  Sire  !  a
heron,  the  king  of  Ceylon,  overrunning  Jambudwipa  now  occupies  (it)."  The  king
hastily  said  to  him  :  "  What  ?  what  ? "  The  parrot  repeated  (what  he  had)  said
before.  The  vulture  said  within  himself :  "  Well  done !  0  great  minister  ruddy-goose  !
well  done  !"  The  king  angrily  exclaimed:  "Let  him  stay  until  I  go  (and)  tear  him
up  by  the  roots."  Far-seeing  smiling  said  : —

95.  "  A  roaring  noise,  like  (that  of)  an  autumn  cloud,  should  not  uselessly  be
made.     A  great  man  never  proclaims  the  gain  or  disadvantage  of  the  enemy.

Moreover : —

96.  A  king  should  not  make  war  upon  many  opponents  at  once.     Even  a  fierce
serpent  (is)  infallibly  destroyed  by  swarming  insects.

Sire !  is  there  to  be  a  march  hence  without  a  peace  ?  In  that  case,  a  commotion
would  be  raised  in  our  rear  by  him.  Besides  : —

97.  The  fool  who,  without  knowing  the  gist  of  the  matter,  becomes  subject  to
anger,  is  afflicted  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Brahman  on  account  of  the  ichneumon."

The  king  asked:  "How  (was)  that?"  Far-seeing  related  (as  follows): — There
was  in  Ujjayin  a  Brahman  named  Honey.  His  wife  had  been  confined,  and  she,
leaving  her  husband  for  the  protection  of  her  young  offspring,  went  to  perform  ab-
lutions. Now  a  man  was  sent  by  the  king  to  fetch  that  Brahman  for  the  performance
of  a  Parvana-s"rtAiddha.*  Perceiving  him,  the  Brahman,  through  his  natural  poverty,
reflected,  "  If  I  do  not  go  quickly,  somebody  else  will  get  the  fee.  It  is  said  : —

98.  The  time  in  which  it  is  not  being  done  quickly  drinks  up  the  spirit  of  (any)
act  which  is  to  be  accepted,  given,  or  done.

And  there  is  nobody  (to  act  as)  protector  of  the  child,  therefore  what  am  I  to  do  ?
Well !  leaving  for  the  protection  of  the  child  this  ichneumon,  (which)  for  a  long  time
has  been  cherished  in  no  wise  different  from  (my  own)  child,  I  (will)  go."  This  (he)
did,  (and)  went.  Afterwards,  a  black  snake  silently  approaching  near  the  child  was
killed  and  rent  in  pieces  by  the  ichneumon.  Then  the  ichneumon  perceiving  the  Brah-
man returning,  with  feet  and  mouth  smeared  with  blood,  hastily  approaching  rolled  at
the  Brahman's  feet.  Then  the  Brahman,  seeing  him  in  that  condition,  thinking  that
his  son  had  been  eaten  by  him,  killed  him  with  his  staff.  Immediately  thereafter,  as
soon  as  he  approached  (and)  looked,  perceiving  the  child  sweetly  sleeping  and  the  dead
snake  close  by  it,  he  experienced  the  deepest  anguish.  Hence  I  say, "  Without  knowing
the  gist  of  the  matter,"  &c.


An  offering  to  ancestors  at  the  changes  of  the  moon.


96  SANDHI.

Moreover : —

99.  Lust,  anger,  covetousness,  envy,  pride,  rashness, — this  six-fold  class  one  should
forsake  ;  on  its  being  forsaken,  one  may  be  happy.

The  king  said :  "  Minister !  this  (is)  thy  conviction."  The  minister  replied :
"  Even  so.  For : —

100.  Recollection  in  important  matters,  deliberation,  accuracy  of  knowledge,  firm-
ness, secresy  in  counsel,  (is)  the  first  quality  of  a  minister.

And  it  is  said  : —

101.  One  should  not  perform  an  act  rashly  ;  inconsiderateness  is  the  source  of
the  greatest  misfortunes.     Successes,  covetous  of  merit,  spontaneously  seek  him  who
acts  with  deliberation.

Therefore,  Sire  !  if  my  advice  is  acted  on,  then,  make  peace  (and)  depart.    For : —

102.  Although  four  expedients  are  pointed  out  in  the  accomplishment  of  peace,
(this  is)  a  mere  enumeration.     The  upshot  of  them   (is)  a  success  based  on  negocia-
tion."

The  king  said :  "  How  is  that  to  be  speedily  effected  ?  "  The  minister  replied  :
"  Sire !  it  will  soon  be  (effected).  For : —

103.  A  wicked  person  is  like    an  earthen  pot,  easy  to  break   and  hard  to  join
together  again  ;  but  a  good  person,  like  a  vessel  of  gold,  (is)  hard  to  sever,  but  quickly
to  be  united.

Besides : —

104.  An  ignorant  man  (is)  easily  to  be  conciliated,  a  well-informed  man  is  con-
ciliated more  easily ;  but   not   even   Brahma    conciliates  a   man   puffed   up   with    a
smattering  of  knowledge.

And  especially  (bear  in  mind), — that  king  knows  his  duty,  and  the  minister
knows  everything.  This  was  perceived  by  me  formerly  from  the  remarks  of  Cloud-
colour,  and  from  perceiving  the  acts  performed  by  him.  For : —

105.  The   natures   of   qualities   out    of   sight  should    everywhere  be  judged  by
acts ;  therefore,  by  results  one  should  estimate  the  conduct  of  those  acting  out  of
sight."

The  king  said :  "  Enough  (of)  debating ;  let  it  be  done  as  desired."  Having
given  this  advice,  the  prime-minister — the  vulture — went  into  the  fort  saying,  "  What
is  proper  (is)  to  be  done  there."  Thereupon  the  crane  (who  was)  the  spy,  came
(and)  informed  king  Gold-egg :  "  Sire  !  the  prime-minister — the  vulture — has  ap-
proached us  to  make  peace."  The  flamingo  said  :  "  Minister !  some  designing  (person)
must  be  again  coming  here."  The  minister  smiling  said :  "  Sire !  this  is  no  cause
of  alarm ;  for  this  Far-seeing  (is)  a  gentleman.  But  this  (is)  the  habit  of  the  dull-
witted, — sometimes  no  suspicion  towards  an  enemy  is  entertained  ;  at  other  times
suspicion  (is)  everywhere.  Just  as —

106.  A  wary  goose  seeking  the   young    shoots  of   the   lotus  in  the  night,  on  a
lake  with  manifold  reflections  of  stars,  was  momentarily  deceived ;  again,  even  in  the
day-time  he  (will)  not  nibble  the  white  lotus,  suspecting  (it  fo  be)  a  star.     A  person
(once)  alarmed  by  deception  anticipates  disaster  even  in  truth  itself.


SANDHI.  97

107.  For  a  mind  spoiled  by  the  wicked  there  is  no  confidence  even  in  the  good.
Does  not  a  child  scalded  by  porridge  eat  even  curds  (after  they  have  been)  blow  upon.

Therefore,  Sire  !  according  to  your  ability,  let  (some)  article  (such  as)  a  compli-
mentary present  of  jewels  and  the  like,  be  made  ready  to  do  him  honour."  On  this
being  done  accordingly,  the  vulture — the  minister — being  courteously  led  from  the  gate
of  the  fort  by  the  ruddy-goose,  was  introduced  to  the  king,  and  seated  in  a  place  pro-
vided for  him.  The  ruddy-goose  said :  "  Great  minister !  all  (is)  subject  to  your
Honour ;  let  this  realm  be  enjoyed  according  to  your  pleasure."  The  flamingo  said :
"  Even  so."  Far-seeing  replied :  "  This  (is)  indeed  so ;  but  now  a  multiplicity  of
words  (is)  needless.  For: —

108.  The  covetous  should  be  won  over  with  money  ;  the  haughty,  by  joining  the
hands.*     A  fool,  by  humouring  his  inclination ;  a  wise  man,  with  truth.

Again : —

109.  One  should  win  a  friend  by  good  nature,  a  relative,  by  courtesy ;  women  and
servants,  by  gifts  and  honours ;  other  people,  by  dexterity.

Therefore,  now  having  made  peace,  let  (us)  be  gone.  King  Spotted-colour  (is)
very  powerful."  The  ruddy-goose  said :  "  Let  it  be  declared  how  peace  is  to  be  made."
The  flamingo  added  :  "  How  many  kinds  of  peace  are  possible  ?  "  The  vulture  replied  :
"I  (will)  relate  (them).  Listen: —

110.  A  king  attacked  by  a  stronger,  (being)  in  difficulty,  having  no  other  help,
should  desire  peace,  causing  procrastination.

111.  Kapala,  Upahara,  Santana,    Sangata,  Upanyasa,  Pratikara,  Sanyoga,  Puru-
shantara,

112.  Adrishtanara,  Adishta,  Atmadishta,  Upagraha,  Parikraya,  Uchchhinna,  Para-
bhushana.

113.  And  the  Skandhopaneya  peace  ; — these  sixteen  are  well  known.     Thus,  they
who  are  discriminative  in  alliances  declare  peace  to  be  sixteen-fold.

114.  The  Kapala-peace  (is)  to  be  understood  (as)  simply  an  equal  peace  ;f  that  which
results  from  a  gift  is  called  Upahara.

115.  The  Santana-peace  (is)    to   be   understood  (as)  preceded  by  the  gift  of  a
daughter ;  alliance  with  the  good,  in  a  friendly  manner,  (is)  called  Sangata.

116.  The  duration  (of  the  last  is)  as  long  as  life,  depending  on  equal  interests  ;  it
is  broken  by  no  causes  either  in  prosperity  or  in  adversity.

117.  This  same  Sangata-peace,  from  its  excellence,  (is)  like  gold ;  thus  it  is  called


*  A  token  of  respect.

f  A  peace  made  on  equal  terms.    Kap&la  =  a  skull,  and  a  water-pot  j  both  sides  of  which  are
exactly  alike.

13


98  SANDHI.

Kanchana*  by  others  skilled  in  alliances.

118.  The  (peace)  which  is  effected  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  mere  purposes  of
profit  has  been  called  Upanyasa  f  by  those  skilled  in  (profitable)  investments.

119.  The  peace  which  is  formed  on  this  principle — "  Formerly  a  service  was  done
for  him  by  me ;  he  will  do  the  same  for  me,"  is  called  Pratikara.  J

120.  "  I  am  helping  him,  he  will  also  help-  me," — this  also  (is)  Pratikara ;  like
(that)  of  Rama  and  Sugriva.§

121.  Where  the  well-united  authorities  go  to  work  wholly  for  one  object,  that
is  called  a  Sanyoga  (peace).  ||

122.  "  Let  our  purpose  be  effected  by  the  chief  warriors  of  us  two ; " — the  peace
in  which  (this)  stipulation  is  made  (is)  the  Purushantara.^"

123.  "By  thee  alone  is  this  my  purpose  to  be  accomplished  "  ; — where  the  enemy
should  make  this  promise,  that  (is)  known  (as)  the  Adrishtapurusha.**

124.  Where  he  is  quit  of  the  enemy  by  ceding  a  portion  of  territory,  (and)  peace
is  made, — that  is  called  Adishtaff  by  those  acquainted  with  alliances.

125.  A  peace  effected  by  one's  own  army,  is  called  Atmadishta^J  (that  which)  is
made  for  the  preservation  of  life,  after  giving  up  everything,  (is)  the  Upagraha.§§

126.  (The  peace  which  is  effected)  by  part  of  the  treasure,  by  half  the  treasure,  or
even  by  all  the  treasure,  for  the  purpose  of  saving  what  is  left,  (is)  called  Parikraya.||||

127.  (The  peace    resulting)  from   a  cession  of   the  most  fertile  lands  is  called
Uchchhinna ;  Iffl  (that)  by  the  giving  up  of  all  the  fruits  raised  upon  a  territory  (is)
the  Parabhushana  ***  (peace).

128.  Where  the  fruit  reaped  is  presented  on  every  shoulder,  that  peace  is  called
by  those  discriminative  in  alliances  Skhandhopaneya.ftf

129.  Four    alliances    are,  also,  to  be  discriminated, — mutual  assistance,  friend-
ship, relationship,  and  Upahara.JIJ

130.  The  peace  Upahara  is  the  only  one  approved  by  me ;  apart  from  Upahara  all
(are)  deprived  of  friendship.

131.  From  his  greater  strength  the  enemy  does  not  retire  without  having  gained
(something)  ;  therefore,  except  the  Upahara,  no  other  peace  exists  (for  him).


*  Golden.  f  Deposit  or  investment.  J  Requital.

§  Sugriva  was  the  monkey-king,  who  with  his  army  of  monkeys  assisted  Rama  to  conquer
R&vana  and  win  back  Sita.  ||  Union.  1"  The  peace  of  "  another  person."

**  "  The  disregarded  person  "  ;  because  the  rights  of  one  party  are  entirely  ignored,
ft  Assigned.  "ft  Assigned  by  self.  §  §  Grasping.

||  ||  Buying  off.  «JT1[  Cut  off.

***  "  Adorning  another."     Prof.  M.  Miiller  prefers  paribhfishana,  "  fully  adorning,"  because  it  is
so  given  in  the  Kamandakiya  Nitisara.         ftt  Shoulder-borne.         JtJ  A  complimentary  present.


SANDHI.  99

The  king  said :  "  Tour  Honours  (are)  great  scholars,  therefore,  in  the  present  case,
let  what  should  be  done  (by)  us  be  pointed  out."  Far-seeing  replied :  "  Ah !  what  is
said  ? —

132.  Who,  indeed,  would  act  inconsistently  with  justice  for  the  (sake   of  the)
body,  (which)  to-day  or  to-morrow  (is  doomed)  to  destruction  by  the  pains  of  mental
and  bodily  anguish  ?

133.  Truly  the  life  of  corporeal  beings  (is  like)  the  trembling  of  the  moon  in
water :  knowing  it  to  be  of  that  character  one  should  ever  practise  virtue.

134.  Perceiving  the  transitory  world  (to  be)  like  a  mirage,  one  should  associate
with  the  good,  for  (the  sake  of)  virtue,  and  for  (the  sake  of)  happiness.

Therefore,  with  my  concurrence,  let  the  same  be  done.

135.  (If)  a  thousand  horse-sacrifices  and  truth  were  weighed   by  a  balance,  truth
would  certainly  be  more  weighty  than  a  thousand  horse-sacrifices.

Therefore,  let  the  peace  called  '  Golden,'  be  concluded  between  these  two
monarchs,  preceded  by  the  oath  called  Truth."  Know-all  said  :  "  Let  it  be  so."  Then
the  minister  Far-seeing  was  honoured  with  complimentary  presents  of  robes,  &c.  There-
upon, pleased,  (and)  contented  at  heart,  Far-seeing,  taking  the  ruddy-goose  (with  him),
went  towards  the  peacock  king.  There  king  Spotted-colour,  at  the  suggestion  of  the
vulture,  conversed  with  Know-all,  (having)  previously  (conferred  upon  him)  honours
and  gifts.  Having  agreed  to  a  peace  of  the  kind  (above  specified,  Know-all)  was  sent
back  to  the  flamingo.  Far-seeing  (then)  said :  "  Sire !  what  we  desired  (is)  accom-
plished ;  now  let  us  return  to  our  own  place,  the  Vindhya  mountain."  Then  having
returned  to  their  own  place,  they  enjoyed  the  result  desired  by  their  hearts.

Vishnusarman  said :  "  What  more  (can)  I  tell ;  declare  it."  The  princes  replied  :
"  Sir,  by  your  Honour's  favour  every  branch  of  royal  procedure  has  been  learnt ;  there-
fore, we  are  delighted."  Vishnusarman  said  :  "  Although  (that  is)  so,  still  let  this  all
be  added : —

136.  Let  peace  (and)  happiness  always  be  (the  portion)  of  all  victorious  monarchs !
May  the  good  be  free  from  misfortune !     May  the  fame  of  those  who  perform  good
deeds  long  increase  !     May  polity,  like  a  loved  mistress  (be)  ever  on  the  breast  of
kings,  (and)  kiss  the  lips  of  ministers !     May  there  be  daily  a  great  festival !  "

Here  ends  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  Hitopadesa,  called  Peace.


FINIS.


ERRATA.


TEXT.

Line.

386.  For  ^hnrfw  reaft

527.  „

818.  „    IT

850.  „    *H

964.  „  fP

1212.  „

1342.  „

1369.  „

1682.  „

2081.  „

2101.  „

2432.  „

2639.  „

2640.  „


VOCABULAEY.


p.  121,  col.  1,  line  15.  For  ^TT?^         read
p.  168,  col.  1,  line  27.     „    ^''T^r  J}      ^^^r  and  transpose

the  entry.


London :  Printed  by  W.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,  13  Waterloo  Place.


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


PK
3741
H6E5
1880


Hltopadesa

Hitopadesa:  a  new  literal
translation  . . .
