# Full Text

(Source: C:\Users\1\.openclaw\workspace\tower-of-babel\books\ToB-0210\book.pdf)

HOUSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY

3347748866718  0

the  world

over  with  its  sly  and  ironic  por- 
trayal  of  human  life  and  foibles

from  the  unique  vantage 
of  Screwtape,

point 
a  highly  placed

assistant  to  “Our  Father  Below.”

At  once 
serious,  and  strikingly

wildly  comic,  deadly 
original,

C.  S.  Lewis  gives  us  the  corre-

spondence

of  the  worldly-wise

devil  to  his  nephew  Wormwoed,  a

novice  demon  in  charge  of  secur-

ing  the  damnation  of  an  ordinary

young  man.  The  Screwtape  Letters

is  the  most  engaging  account  of

temptation—and  triumph  over  it—

ever  written.

RAs 
SCREWTAPE 
LETTERS

BOOKSSBY:  C2

LEWIS

A Grief Observed 
George  MacDonald:  An Anthology 
Mere  Christianity 
Miracles 
The Abolition  of Man 
The  Great  Divorce 
The Problem  of Pain 
The Screwtape  Letters  (with  “Screwtape  Proposes  a  Toast”) 
The  Weight of Glory

ALSO  AVAILABLE  FROM  HARPERCOLLINS

The  Chronicles  of Narnia: 
The  Magician’s  Nephew 
The  Lion,  the  Witch  and the  Wardrobe 
The Horse  and His  Boy 
Prince  Caspian 
The  Voyage  of the Dawn  Treader 
The Silver  Chair 
The  Last  Battle

he 
SCREWTAPE 
LETTERS

with

Screwtape  Proposes  a  Toast

HarperOne

THE  SCREWIAPE  LETTERS.  Copyright  ©  1942,  C.  S.  Lewis  Pte.  Ltd. 
Copyright  restored  © 1996  C. S. Lewis  Pte.  Ltd. 
Preface  to  the  Screwtape  Letters.  Copyright  ©  1961,  restored  1996  C.  S. 
Lewis  Pte.  Ltd. 
Screwtape  Proposes  a  Toast.  Copyright  © 1959,  renewed  1987  C.  S. Lewis 
Pte.  leeds 
From  The  World’s  Last  Night by C. S. Lewis.  Reprinted  by permission  of 
Harcourt  Inc. 
Preface  to  Screwtape  Proposes  a  Toast.  Copyright  ©  1982  by C.  S. Lewis 
PterLtd.All rights  reserved.  Printed  in the United  States  of America.  No  part  of this 
book  may  be  used  or  reproduced  in  any  manner  whatsoever  without 
written  permission  except  in  the  case  of  brief  quotations  embodied 
in  critical  articles  and  reviews.  For  information  address  HarperCollins 
Publishers,  195  Broadway,  New  York,  NY  10007.

HarperCollins  books  may  be  purchased  for  educational,  business,  or 
sales  promotional  use.  For  information  please  e-mail  the  Special  Markets 
Department  at  SPsales@harpercollins.com.

HarperCollins  website:  http://www.harpercollins.com

HarperCollins®,  ® and  HarperOne™  are  trademarks  of 
HarperCollins  Publishers.

FIRST  HARPERCOLLINS  PAPERBACK  EDITION  PUBLISHED  IN  2001

Library  of Congress  Cataloging-in-Publication  Data 
Lewis,  C. S. (Clive  Staples),  1898-1963. 
The  Screwtape  letters  ; also  includes,  “Screwtape  proposes  a toast”  / 
CyS.Lewis: 
.  cm, 
Originally  published:  1st  Touchstone  ed.  New  York  : 
Simon  & Schuster,  1996. 
ISBN  978—0-—06-06 
§ 293-7 
1.  Christianity—zoth  century. 
I. Title:  Screwtape  letters  ; also  includes,  “Screwtape  proposes  a toast”. 
Il.  Lewis,  C. S. (Clive  Staples),  1898-1963.  Screwtape  proposes a toast. 
III. Title:  Screwtape  proposes  a toast.  IV. Title. 
BR125.L67  2000

248'.4—dc21

00-049860

18  19  LSC(C)  80  79  78  77  76  75  74  73

To J. R. R. Tolkien

Digitized  by the  Internet  Archive 
in 2024

https://archive.org/details/screwtapelettersOO00lewi_k7z3

The  best  way  to  drive  out  the 
devil,  if he will  not  yield to  texts  of

Scripture,  is to  jeer and  flout  him,  for

he cannot  bear  scorn.

LUTHER

The  devil...  the prowde  spirite  ...

cannot  endure  to  be mocked.

THOMAS  MORE

cri. or

PREFACEScripture,  is to  jeer and  flout  him,  for

he cannot  bear  scorn.

LUTHER

The  devil...  the prowde  spirite  ...

cannot  endure  to  be mocked.

THOMAS  MORE

cri. or

PREFACE

I have  no  intention  of  explaining  how  the  correspon- 
dence  which  I now  offer to  the public fell into  my hands. 
There  are  two  equal and opposite  errors  into which our 
race  can  fall about  the devils.  One  is to  disbelieve  in their

existence.  The  other  is to  believe,  and  to  feel  an  excessive 
and  unhealthy  interest  in  them.  They  themselves  are 
equally  pleased  by both  errors  and  hail  a  materialist  or  a 
magician with the same  delight. The sort  of script which is 
used  in this  book  can  be very  easily  obtained  by anyone 
who  has  once  learned  the  knack;  but  ill-disposed  or 
excitable  people who  might make  a bad use  of it shall  not 
learn it from me.

Readers  are  advised  to remember  that the devil is a liar. 
Not  everything  that  Screwtape  says  should  be assumed 
to  be  true  even  from  his  own  angle.  I have  made  no 
attempt  to  identify  any  of the human  beings  mentioned 
in the  letters;  but  I think  it very  unlikely  that  the  por- 
traits,  say,  of Fr Spike or  the patient’s  mother,  are  wholly 
just.  There  is  wishful  thinking  in  Hell  as  well  as  on

Earth.

G,  S.  LEWIS

In  conclusion,  I ought  to  add  that  no  effort  has  been 
made  to  clear  up  the  chronology  of the  letters.  Number 
17  appears  to  have  been  composed  before  rationing 
became  serious;  but  in  general  the  diabolical  method  of

dating  seems  to  bear  no  relation  to  terrestrial  time  and  I 
have  not  attempted  to  reproduce  it.  The  history  of the 
European  War, except  in so  far as  it happens now  and then 
to  impinge  upon  the  spiritual  condition  of one  human

being, was  obviously  of no  interest  to  Screwtape.

C.  $.  LEWIS

MAGDALEN  COLLEGE, 
5 JULY  1941being, was  obviously  of no  interest  to  Screwtape.

C.  $.  LEWIS

MAGDALEN  COLLEGE, 
5 JULY  1941

Cie 
SCREWTAPE 
LETTERS

My dear Wormwood,

I note  what  you  say  about  guiding  your  patient’s  read- 
ing and taking care  that he sees  a good deal of his material- 
ist friend.  But are  you  not  being a trifle naive?  It sounds  as 
if you  supposed  that  argument  was  the way  to  keep him 
out  of the Enemy’s  clutches.  That might have been so  if he 
had lived  a few  centuries  earlier.  At that time  the humans 
still knew  pretty  well  when  a thing was  proved  and when 
it was  not;  and if it was  proved they really believed  it. They 
still  connected  thinking  with  doing and were  prepared  to 
alter their way  of life as  the result  of a chain  of reasoning. 
But  what  with  the weekly  press  and  other  such  weapons 
we  have  largely  altered  that.  Your  man  has  been  accus- 
tomed,  ever  since he was  a boy, to have a dozen  incompat- 
ible  philosophies  dancing  about  together  inside  his  head. 
He doesn’t  think  of doctrines  as  primarily  ‘true’  or  ‘false’, 
but  as  ‘academic’  or  ‘practical’,  ‘outworn’  or  ‘contempo-

rary’,  ‘conventional’  or  ‘ruthless’.  Jargon,  not  argument,  is 
your  best  ally in  keeping  him  from  the  Church.  Don’t 
waste  time  trying  to  make  him  think  that  materialism  is

CG.  Ss  LEW  iS

true!  Make  him  think  it  is  strong,  or  stark,  or  coura- 
geous—that  it is the.philosophy  of the future.  That’s  the 
sort  of thing he cares  about.

The  trouble  about  argument  is that it moves  the wholeThe  trouble  about  argument  is that it moves  the whole

struggle  on  to  the  Enemy’s  own  ground.  He  can  argue 
too;  whereas  in really practical  propaganda  of the  kind  I 
am  suggesting  He  has  been  shown  for  centuries  to  be 
greatly  the inferior  of Our  Father  Below.  By the very  act 
of arguing,  you  awake  the patient’s  reason;  and  once  it is 
awake,  who  can  foresee  the  result?  Even  if a  particular 
train  of thought  can  be twisted  so  as  to  end in our  favour, 
you  will  find  that  you  have  been  strengthening  in your 
patient  the fatal  habit  of attending  to  universal  issues  and 
withdrawing  his  attention  from  the  stream  of immediate 
sense  experiences.  Your  business  is to  fix his attention  on 
the stream.  Teach  him to  call it ‘real life’ and don’t  let him 
ask what  he means  by ‘real’.

Remember,  he is not,  like you,  a pure  spirit. Never  hav- 
ing been  a  human  (Oh that  abominable  advantage  of the 
Enemy’s!)  you  don’t  realise  how  enslaved  they are  to  the 
pressure  of the  ordinary.  I once  had a patient,  a  sound 
atheist, who used to  read in the British  Museum.  One day, 
as  he  sat  reading,  I saw a train  of thought  in  his  mind 
beginning  to  go  the  wrong  way.  The  Enemy,  of course,

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

was  at his elbow  in a moment.  Before  I knew  where  I wasTHE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

was  at his elbow  in a moment.  Before  I knew  where  I was

I saw  my twenty  years’ work  beginning  to  totter.  If I had 
lost my head  and begun to  attempt  a defence  by argument 
I should  have  been  undone.  But  I was  not  such a fool.  I 
struck  instantly  at  the  part  of the  man  which I had  best 
under  my  control  and  suggested  that  it was  just  about 
time  he  had  some  lunch.  The  Enemy  presumably  made 
the  counter-suggestion  (you  know  how  one  can  never 
quite overhear  what  He says  to  them?) that this was  more  _ 
important than lunch.  At least I think that must  have been 
His  line  for when  I said  ‘Quite.  In fact  much  too  impor- 
tant  to  tackle  at the end of a morning,’  the patient  bright- 
ened up considerably;  and by the time  I had added  ‘Much 
better  come  back  after  lunch  and  go  into  it with a fresh 
mind,’  he was  already  half way  to  the door.  Once  he was 
in the street  the battle  was  won.  I showed  him a newsboy 
shouting  the midday  paper,  and  a No.  73  bus  going past, 
and  before  he reached  the  bottom  of the  steps  I had  got

into  him  an  unalterable  conviction  that,  whatever  odd 
ideas  might come  into  a man’s  head  when  he was  shut up 
alone  with  his  books,  a  healthy  dose  of  ‘real  life’  (by 
which  he meant  the bus  and the newsboy)  was  enough to 
show  him that all ‘that  sort  of thing’ just couldn’t  be true. 
He  knew  he’d  had  a narrow  escape  and in later years  was

Cc.  8S:  LEWIS

fond  of talking about  ‘that inarticulate  sense  for actuality 
which  is our  ultimate  safeguard  against the aberrations  of 
mere  logic’. He is now  safe in Our Father’s  house.fond  of talking about  ‘that inarticulate  sense  for actuality 
which  is our  ultimate  safeguard  against the aberrations  of 
mere  logic’. He is now  safe in Our Father’s  house.

You  begin to  see  the point? Thanks  to  processes  which 
we  set  at  work  in them  centuries  ago,  they find  it all but 
impossible  to  believe  in the unfamiliar  while  the familiar 
is before  their  eyes.  Keep pressing  home  on  him the ordi- 
nariness  of things.  Above  all, do  not  attempt  to  use  sci- 
ence  (I  mean,  the  real  sciences)  as  a  defence  against 
Christianity.  They will positively  encourage  him to  think 
about  realities  he can’t touch  and see.  There  have  been sad 
cases  among  the  modern  physicists.  If he must  dabble  in 
science,  keep him  on  economics  and  sociology;  don’t  let 
him  get away  from  that invaluable  ‘real  life’.  But  the best 
of all is to  let him read  no  science  but to  give him  a grand 
general  idea  that  he knows  it all  and  that  everything  he 
happens  to  have  picked  up  in casual  talk  and  reading  is 
‘the  results  of modern  investigation’.  Do  remember  you 
are  there to fuddle  him.  From  the way some  of you young 
fiends  talk, anyone  would  suppose  it was  our job to teach!

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

My dear Wormwood,

I note  with  grave  displeasure  that  your  patient  has 
become  a  Christian.  Do  not  indulge  the  hope  that  you 
will  escape  the  usual  penalties;  indeed,  in  your  better 
moments,  I trust  you  would  hardly even  wish to do so.  In 
the  meantime  we  must  make  the  best  of the  situation. 
There  is no  need  to  despair;  hundreds  of these  adult  con- 
verts  have  been  reclaimed  after  a  brief  sojourn  in  the 
Enemy’s  camp  and  are  now  with  us.  All the habits  of the

patient,  both  mental  and bodily,  are  still in our  favour.patient,  both  mental  and bodily,  are  still in our  favour.

One  of our  great  allies  at  present  is the  Church  itself. 
Do  not  misunderstand  me.  I do not  mean  the  Church  as 
we  see  her  spread  out  through  all  time  and  space  and 
rooted  in eternity,  terrible  as  an  army  with banners.  That, 
I confess,  is a spectacle which  makes  our  boldest  tempters 
uneasy.  But  fortunately  it  is  quite  invisible  to  these 
humans.  All  your  patient  sees  is the  half-finished,  sham 
Gothic  erection  on  the new  building estate.  When  he goes 
inside,  he sees  the local  grocer  with  rather  an  oily expres- 
sion  on  his  face  bustling  up  to  offer  him  one  shiny  little

CoS.  LE  Wall's

book  containing a liturgy  which  neither  of them  under- 
stands,  and  one  shabby  little  book  containing  corrupt 
texts  of a  number  of religious  lyrics,  mostly  bad,  and  in 
very  small  print.  When  he  gets  to  his  pew  and  looks 
round  him  he  sees  just that  selection  of his  neighbours 
whom  he has  hitherto  avoided.  You  want  to  lean  pretty 
heavily on  those neighbours.  Make his mind flit to  and fro 
between  an  expression  like  ‘the  body  of Christ’  and  the 
actual  faces  in  the  next  pew.  It  matters  very  little,  of 
course,  what kind of people that next  pew really contains. 
You  may  know  one  of them  to  be a great  warrior  on  the 
Enemy’s  side.  No  matter.  Your  patient,  thanks  to  Our 
Father  Below,  is a fool.  Provided  that any  of those  neigh-bours  sing out  of tune,  or  have  boots  that squeak,  or  dou- 
ble  chins,  or  odd  clothes,  the  patient  will  quite  easily 
believe  that  their  religion  must  therefore  be  somehow 
ridiculous.  At his present  stage,  you  see,  he has an  idea of 
‘Christians’  in his mind  which  he supposes  to  be spiritual 
but which,  in fact, is largely  pictorial.  His  mind  is full of 
togas  and  sandals  and  armour  and bare  legs and the mere 
fact that the other people  in church  wear  modern  clothes 
is a real—though  of course  an  unconscious—difficulty  to 
him.  Never  let it come  to  the  surface;  never  let him  ask

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

what he expected them to look like. Keep everything hazy 
in his mind  now,  and you will have all eternity wherein  to 
amuse  yourself  by producing  in him  the peculiar  kind  of 
clarity which  Hell  affords.

Work  hard, then, on  the disappointment  or  anticlimax 
which  is certainly  coming  to  the  patient  during  his  first 
few weeks  as  a churchman.  The Enemy  allows  this disap- 
pointment  to  occur  on  the  threshold  of  every  human 
endeavour.  It  occurs  when  the  boy  who  has  been

enchanted  in  the  nursery  by Stories  from  the  Odyssey 
buckles  down  to  really  learning  Greek.  It occurs  when 
lovers  have  got married  and  begin the real  task  of learn-

ing to  live  together.  In every  department  of life  it marks 
the  transition  from  dreaming  aspiration  to  laborious 
doing.  The  Enemy  takes  this  risk  because  He  has  a curi- 
ous  fantasy  of making  all  these  disgusting  little  human 
vermin  into  what  He  calls  His  ‘free’  lovers  and  ser-

vants—‘sons’  is the  word  He  uses,  with  His  inveterate 
love of degrading  the whole  spiritual world  by unnatural 
liaisons  with  the two-legged  animals.  Desiring  their free-

dom,  He  therefore  refuses  to  carry  them,  by their  meredom,  He  therefore  refuses  to  carry  them,  by their  mere

affections  and  habits,  to  any  of the  goals  which  He  sets

before  them:  He leaves  them  to  ‘do it on  their  own’.  And

GS;  LEWAS

there  lies our  opportunity.  But  also, remember,  there  lies 
our  danger.  If once  they get through  this  initial  dryness 
successfully,  they become much  less  dependent  on  emo- 
tion  and therefore  much  harder  to  tempt.

I have been writing hitherto  on  the assumption  that the 
people in the next  pew  afford  no  rational  ground  for dis- 
appointment.  Of course  if they do—if  the patient  knows 
that  the woman  with  the absurd  hat is a fanatical  bridge- 
player  or  the  man  with  squeaky  boots  a  miser  and  an 
extortioner—then  your task is so  much the easier.  All you 
then have  to  do is to  keep out  of his mind  the question  ‘If

I, being what  I am,  can  consider  that I am  in some  sense  a 
Christian,  why should  the different  vices  of those  people 
in the next  pew prove  that their religion is mere  hypocrisy 
and  convention?’  You  may  ask  whether  it 1s possible  to 
keep such  an  obvious  thought  from  occurring  even  to  a 
human  mind.  It is, Wormwood,  it is!  Handle  him  prop- 
erly and  it simply won’t  come  into  his head.  He  has  not 
been  anything  like long enough with  the Enemy  to  have 
any  real  humility  yet.  What  he says,  even  on  his  knees, 
about  his own  sinfulness  is all parrot  talk.  At bottom,  he 
still  believes  he has  run  up  a very  favourable  credit-bal- 
ance  in  the  Enemy’s  ledger  by allowing  himself  to  be 
converted,  and  thinks  that  he is showing  great  humility

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

and condescension  in going to  church  with these  ‘smug’, 
commonplace  neighbours  at  all.  Keep  him  in that  state 
of mind  as  long as  you  can,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

My dear Wormwood,Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

My dear Wormwood,

Iam very pleased by what  you  tell me  about  this  man’s 
relations  with  his  mother.  But  you  must  press  your 
advantage.  The  Enemy  will  be working  from  the  centre 
outwards,  gradually  bringing  more  and  more  of  the 
patient’s  conduct  under  the new  standard,  and may  reach 
his behaviour  to  the old lady at any moment.  You want  to 
get  in  first.  Keep  in  close  touch  with  our  colleague 
Glubose  who  is in  charge  of the  mother,  and  build  up 
between  you  in that house  a good settled  habit  of mutual 
annoyance;  daily  pinpricks.  The  following  methods  are 
useful.

1.  Keep  his  mind  on  the  inner  life.  He  thinks  his  con- 
version  is something  inside  him and his attention  is there- 
fore  chiefly  turned  at  present  to  the  states  of his  own 
mind—or  rather  to  that very  expurgated  version  of them 
which  is all you  should  allow  him  to  see.  Encourage  this. 
Keep  his  mind  off the  most  elementary  duties  by direct- 
ing it to  the most  advanced  and  spiritual  ones.  Aggravate

that  most  useful  human  characteristic,  the  horror  and

c.  Ss.  LEWIS

neglect of the obvious.  You must  bring him to a condition 
in  which  he  can  practise  self-examination  for  an  hour 
without  discovering  any  of  those  facts  about  himself 
which  are  perfectly  clear  to  anyone  who  has  ever  lived  in 
the same  house  with him or  worked  in the same  office.2.  It is, no  doubt,  impossible  to  prevent  his praying  for 
his  mother,  but  we  have  means  of rendering  the  prayers 
innocuous.  Make  sure  that they are  always very  ‘spiritual’, 
that  he is always  concerned  with  the state  of her soul  and 
never  with her rheumatism.  Two  advantages  will follow.  In 
the first place, his attention  will be kept on  what he regards 
as  her  sins,  by which,  with a little  guidance  from  you,  he 
can  be induced  to mean  any of her actions  which  are  incon- 
venient  or  irritating to himself.  Thus you can  keep rubbing’ 
the wounds  of the day a little  sorer  even  while  he is on  his 
knees;  the operation  is not  at  all difficult  and you  will find 
it very  entertaining.  In  the  second  place,  since  his  ideas 
about  her soul  will  be very  crude  and  often  erroneous,  he 
will,  in some  degree,  be praying  for an  imaginary  person, 
and it will be your task to make that imaginary person  daily 
less  and  less  like  the  real  mother—the  sharp-tongued  old 
lady at  the breakfast  table.  In time, you  may  get the cleav- 
age so  wide that no  thought or feeling from his prayers  for 
the imagined  mother  will ever  flow over  into his treatment

dd

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

of the  real  one.  I have  had  patients  of my  own  so  well  in 
hand  that they could  be turned  at  a moment’s  notice  from 
impassioned  prayer  for a wife’s  or  son’s  ‘soul’  to  beating or 
insulting the real wife or  son  without  a qualm.3.  When  two  humans  have  lived  together  for  many 
years  it usually  happens  that  each  has  tones  of voice  and 
expressions  of face which  are  almost  unendurably  irritat- 
ing to  the  other.  Work  on  that.  Bring fully into  the  con- 
sciousness  of  your  patient  that  particular  lift  of  his 
mother’s  eyebrows  which  he  learned  to  dislike  in  the 
nursery,  and  let him  think  how  much  he dislikes  it.  Let 
him assume  that she knows  how annoying it is and does  it 
to  annoy—if  you  know  your  job he will  not  notice  the 
immense  improbability  of  the  assumption.  And,  of 
course,  never  let him  suspect  that  he has  tones  and looks 
which  similarly  annoy  her. As he cannot  see  or  hear him- 
self, this is easily managed.

4.  In  civilised  life  domestic  hatred  usually  expresses 
itself by saying things which would  appear  quite harmless 
on  paper  (the words  are  not  offensive)  but in such a voice, 
or  at such  a moment,  that they are  not  far short  of a blow 
in the face.  To keep this  game  up  you  and  Glubose  must 
see  to  it that  each  of these  two  fools  has  a sort  of double 
standard.  Your  patient  must  demand  that  all  his  own

13

C.  SSE  Weiss:13

C.  SSE  Weiss:

utterances  are  to  be taken  at  their  face  value  and  judged 
simply on  the actual  words, while  at  the same  time  judg- 
ing all his  mother’s  utterances  with  the  fullest  and  most 
over-sensitive  interpretation  of the  tone  and  the  context 
and  the  suspected  intention.  She  must  be encouraged  to 
do the  same  to  him.  Hence  from  every  quarrel  they can 
both  go  away  convinced,  or  very  nearly  convinced,  that 
they are  quite  innocent.  You  know  the  kind  of thing:  ‘I 
simply ask her what  time  dinner  will be and she flies  into 
a temper.’  Once  this habit is well established  you have the 
delightful  situation  of  a  human  saying  things  with  the 
express  purpose  of offending  and  yet having  a  grievance 
when  offence  is taken.

Finally,  tell me  something  about  the old lady’s religious 
position.  Is she at  all jealous  of the new  factor  in her son’s 
life?—at  all piqued  that he should  have  learned  from  oth-

ers,  and so  late, what she considers  she gave  him such good 
opportunity  of learning  in childhood?  Does  she feel he is 
making a great  deal  of ‘fuss’  about  it—or  that  he’s  getting 
in on  very  easy  terms?  Remember  the elder brother  in the 
Enemy’s  story?

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

14

My dear Wormwood,

The  amateurish  suggestions  in your  last letter warn  me 
that  it is high  time  for  me  to  write  to  you  fully  on  the 
painful subject of prayer.  You  might have spared the com- 
ment  that  my  advice  about  his  prayers  for  his  mother 
‘proved  singularly  unfortunate’.  That  is not  the  sort  of 
thing  that  a  nephew  should  write  to  his  uncle—nor  a 
junior tempter  to  the under-secretary  of a department.  It 
also  reveals  an  unpleasant  desire  to  shift  responsibility; 
you  must  learn  to  pay for your  own  blunders.The  best  thing,  where  it  is  possible,  is  to  keep  the 
patient  from  the  serious  intention  of praying  altogether. 
When  the patient  is an  adult  recently  reconverted  to  the 
Enemy’s party,  like your man,  this is best done by encour- 
aging  him  to  remember,  or  to  think  he  remembers,  the 
parrot-like  nature  of his prayers  in childhood.  In reaction 
against  that,  he  may  be  persuaded  to  aim  at  something

entirely  spontaneous,  inward,  informal,  and  unregu- 
larised;  and what this will actually mean  to  a beginner will 
be  an  effort  to  produce  in himself  a  vaguely  devotional

#3)

c.S.  LEWIS

mood in which  real concentration  of will and intelligence 
have  no  part.  One  of their poets,  Coleridge,  has recorded 
that he did not  pray  ‘with  moving lips and bended  knees’ 
but  merely  ‘composed  his spirit to  love’  and  indulged  ‘a 
sense  of supplication’.  That  is exactly  the  sort  of prayer 
we  want;  and  since  it bears  a  superficial  resemblance  to 
the prayer  of silence  as practised by those who are  very far 
advanced  in the Enemy’s  service,  clever  and  lazy patients 
can  be taken  in by it for  quite  a  long time.  At  the  very 
least,  they  can  be  persuaded  that  the  bodily  position 
makes  no  difference  to  their  prayers;  for they constantly 
forget,  what  you  must  always  remember,  that  they  are 
animals  and  that  whatever  their  bodies  do  affects  their 
souls.  It is funny how mortals  always picture us  as putting 
things  into  their  minds:  in reality  our  best  work  is done 
by keeping things out.If this fails, you must  fall back on  a subtler  misdirection 
of  his  intention.  Whenever  they  are  attending  to  the 
Enemy  Himself  we  are  defeated,  but  there  are  ways  of 
preventing  them  from  doing  so.  The  simplest  is to  turn 
their  gaze  away  from  Him  towards  themselves.  Keep 
them  watching  their  own  minds  and  trying  to  produce 
feelings there  by the action  of their own  wills.  When  they 
meant  to  ask Him  for charity,  let them,  instead,  start  try-

16

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

ing to  manufacture  charitable  feelings  for themselves  and 
not  notice  that  this  is what  they  are  doing.  When  they

meant  to pray  for courage,  let them really be trying to feel 
brave.  When  they say they are  praying for forgiveness,  let

them  be  trying  to  feel  forgiven.  Teach  them  to  estimate 
the value  of each prayer  by their  success  in producing  the 
desired  feeling; and never  let them suspect  how much  suc- 
cess  or  failure  of that  kind  depends  on  whether  they are

well  or  ill, fresh  or  tired,  at  the moment.well  or  ill, fresh  or  tired,  at  the moment.

But  of course  the  Enemy  will  not  meantime  be  idle. 
Whenever  there  is  prayer,  there  is  danger  of  His  own 
immediate  action.  He  is cynically  indifferent  to  the  dig- 
nity  of  His  position,  and  ours,  as  pure  spirits,  and  to 
human  animals  on  their  knees  He  pours  out  self-knowl- 
edge in a  quite  shameless  fashion.  But  even  if He  defeats 
your  first  attempt  at  misdirection,  we  have  a  subtler 
weapon.  The  humans  do  not  start  from  that  direct  per- 
ception  of Him  which we,  unhappily,  cannot  avoid.  They 
have  never  known  that  ghastly  luminosity,  that  stabbing 
and searing  glare which  makes  the background  of perma- 
nent  pain  to  our  lives.  If you  look  into  your  patient's 
mind  when  he is praying,  you  will  not  find  that.  If you 
examine  the object to which  he is attending,  you will find 
that  it  is  a  composite  object  containing  many  quite

17

CSS  LE  WLS:

ridiculous  ingredients.  There  will be images  derived  from 
pictures  of the Enemy as  He appeared during the discred- 
itable  episode  known  as  the  Incarnation:  there  will  be 
vaguer—perhaps  quite  savage  and  puerile—images  asso- 
ciated  with  the  other  two  Persons.  There  will  even  be 
some  of  his  own  reverence  (and  of  bodily  sensations 
accompanying  it) objectified  and  attributed  to  the  object 
revered.  I have known  cases  where what the patient called 
his  ‘God’  was  actually  located—up  and  to  the  left  at  thecorner  of the bedroom  ceiling,  or  inside  his own  head,  or 
in a  crucifix  on  the wall.  But  whatever  the  nature  of the 
composite  object,  you  must  keep  him  praying  to  it—to 
the  thing  that  he  has  made,  not  to  the  Person  who  has 
made  him.  You  may  even  encourage  him  to  attach  great 
importance  to  the  correction  and  improvement  of  his 
composite  object,  and  to  keeping  it steadily  before  his 
imagination  during the whole  prayer.  For if he ever  comes 
to  make  the distinction,  if ever  he consciously  directs  his 
prayers  ‘Not  to  what  I think  thou  art  but  to  what  thou

knowest  thyself  to  be’, our  situation  is, for the  moment, 
desperate.  Once  all  his  thoughts  and  images  have  been 
flung aside  or,  if retained,  retained  with  a full recognition 
of their merely subjective  nature,  and the man  trusts  him- 
self  to  the  completely  real,  external,  invisible  Presence,

18

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

there with him in the room  and never  knowable  by him as 
he is known  by it—why,  then  it is that  the  incalculable 
may  occur.  In avoiding this situation—this  real nakedness 
of the soul in prayer—you  will  be helped by the fact that 
the  humans  themselves  do  not  desire  it as  much  as  they 
suppose.  There’s  such a thing  as  getting  more  than  they 
bargained  for!

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

19

7 capita

My dear Wormwood,Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

19

7 capita

My dear Wormwood,

It is a little  bit disappointing  to  expect  a detailed  report 
on  your  work  and  to  receive  instead  such  a  vague  rhap- 
sody  as  your  last  letter.  You  say  you  are  ‘delirious  with 
joy’ because  the European  humans  have started  another  of 
their wars. I see  very  well what  has happened  to  you.  You 
are  not  delirious;  you  are  only  drunk.  Reading  between 
the lines  in your  very  unbalanced  account  of the patient’s 
sleepless  night, I can  reconstruct  your  state  of mind  fairly 
accurately.  For the first time in your career  you have tasted 
that  wine  which  is  the  reward  of  all  our  labours—the 
anguish  and  bewilderment  of a  human  soul—and  it has 
gone  to your head.  I can  hardly blame you.  I do not  expect 
old heads  on  young  shoulders.  Did the patient respond  to 
some  of your  terror-pictures  of the future?  Did you  work 
in  some  good  self-pitying  glances  at  the  happy  past?— 
some  fine thrills  in the pit of his stomach,  were  there?  You 
played your violin prettily, did you? Well, well, it’s all very

natural.  But  do remember,  Wormwood,  that  duty comes 
before  pleasure.  If any  present  self-indulgence  on  your

20

GC.  S$:  LEW  LSnatural.  But  do remember,  Wormwood,  that  duty comes 
before  pleasure.  If any  present  self-indulgence  on  your

20

GC.  S$:  LEW  LS

part  leads  to  the  ultimate  loss  of the prey,  you  will  be left 
eternally thirsting for that draught of which you are  now  so 
much  enjoying  your  first  sip.  If, on  the  other  hand,  by 
steady and  cool-headed  application  here  and now  you  can 
finally  secure  his  soul,  he  will  then  be  yours  forever—a 
brim-full  living chalice  of despair and horror  and astonish- 
ment  which you can  raise to your lips as  often as you please. 
So do not  allow  any  temporary  excitement  to  distract  you 
from  the real business  of undermining  faith and preventing 
the formation  of virtues.  Give  me  without  fail in your  next 
letter  a full account  of the patient’s  reactions  to  the war,  so 
that  we  can  consider  whether  you  are  likely  to  do  more 
good by making him  an  extreme  patriot  or  an  ardent  paci- 
fist.  There  are  all sorts  of possibilities.  In the  meantime,  I 
must  warn  you not  to hope too  much from a war.

Of course  a war  is entertaining.  The immediate  fear and 
suffering  of  the  humans  is  a  legitimate  and  pleasing 
refreshment  for our  myriads  of toiling workers.  But what 
permanent  good does  it do us  unless  we  make use  of it for 
bringing  souls  to  Our  Father  Below?  When  I see  the tem- 
poral suffering of humans  who  finally escape  us,  I feel as  if 
I had  been  allowed  to  taste  the  first  course  of a rich  ban- 
quet  and then  denied  the rest.  It is worse  than  not  to  have 
tasted  it at all. The Enemy,  true  to  His barbarous  methods

22

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS22

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

of  warfare,  allows  us  to  see  the  short  misery  of  His 
favourites  only to  tantalise  and  torment  us—to  mock  the 
incessant  hunger  which,  during  this  present  phase  of the 
great conflict,  His blockade  is admittedly imposing.  Let us 
therefore  think  rather  how  to  use,  than  how to  enjoy, this 
European  war.  For  it has  certain  tendencies  inherent  in it 
which  are,  in themselves,  by no  means  in our  favour.  We 
may hope for a good deal of cruelty and unchastity.  But, if 
we  are  not  careful,  we  shall  see  thousands  turning  in this 
tribulation  to  the Enemy,  while  tens  of thousands  who  do 
not  go so  far as  that will  nevertheless  have  their  attention 
diverted  from  themselves  to  values  and causes  which  they 
believe  to  be higher than  the self.  I know  that  the Enemy 
disapproves  many  of these  causes.  But that is where  He is 
so  unfair.  He  often  makes  prizes  of humans  who  have 
given  their  lives  for  causes  He  thinks  bad  on  the  mon- 
strously sophistical  ground that the humans  thought them 
good and were  following the best they knew.  Consider  too 
what  undesirable  deaths  occur  in wartime.  Men  are  killed 
in places  where  they  knew  they  might  be  killed  and  to 
which  they go, if they are  at all of the Enemy’s  party,  pre- 
pared. How much better for us  if a// humans  died in costly

nursing  homes  amid  doctors  who  lie,  nurses  who  lie, 
friends  who  lie, as  we  have  trained  them,  promising  life to

23

Cc.  S|  LEWIS

the  dying,  encouraging  the  belief  that  sickness  excuses 
every  indulgence,  and even,  if our  workers  know their job, 
withholding  all suggestion  of a priest lest it should  betray 
to the sick man  his true  condition!  And how disastrous  for 
us  is  the  continual  remembrance  of  death  which  warenforces.  One of our  best weapons,  contented  worldliness, 
is rendered  useless.  In  wartime  not  even  a  human  can 
believe  that he is going to live forever.

I know  that  Scabtree  and  others  have  seen  in wars  a 
great  opportunity  for  attacks  on  faith,  but  I think  that 
view was  exaggerated.  The Enemy’s  human partisans have 
all been  plainly  told  by Him  that  suffering  is an  essential 
part of what  He calls  Redemption;  so  that a faith which  is 
destroyed  by a war  or a pestilence  cannot  really have been 
worth  the  trouble  of destroying.  I am  speaking  now  of 
diffused  suffering  over  a long period  such  as  the war  will 
produce.  Of  course,  at  the  precise  moment  of  terror, 
bereavement,  or  physical  pain, you  may  catch  your  man 
when  his reason  is temporarily  suspended.  But even  then, 
if he applies to Enemy headquarters,  I have found  that the 
post  is nearly always defended,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

24

My dear Wormwood,

I am  delighted  to  hear  that your  patient’s  age  and pro- 
fession  make  it possible,  but by no  means  certain,  that he 
will be called up for military service.  We want  him to be in 
the  maximum  uncertainty,  so  that  his  mind  will  be filled 
with  contradictory  pictures  of the  future,  every  one  of 
which  arouses  hope or  fear. There  is nothing like suspense 
and  anxiety  for  barricading  a  human’s  mind  against  the 
Enemy.  He  wants  men  to  be concerned  with  what  they 
do; our  business  is to  keep them  thinking  about  what will 
happen to  them.Your  patient will, of course,  have picked up the notion 
that  he  must  submit  with  patience  to  the  Enemy’s  will. 
What  the  Enemy  means  by  this  is  primarily  that  he 
should  accept  with  patience  the  tribulation  which  has 
actually  been  dealt  out  to  him—the  present  anxiety  and 
suspense.  It is about  this  that  he  is to  say  “Thy  will  be 
done’,  and for the daily task of bearing  this that the daily 
bread  will  be provided.  It is your  business  to  see  that the 
patient  never  thinks  of the  present  fear  as  his  appointed

25

Cc.  8S.  LEWIS

cross,  but only of the things he is afraid  of. Let him regard 
them  as  his  crosses:  let  him  forget  that,  since  they  are 
incompatible,  they cannot  all happen to  him,  and let him 
try  to  practise  fortitude  and  patience  to  them  all  in

advance.  For  real  resignation,  at  the  same  moment,  to  a 
dozen different  and hypothetical  fates, is almost  impossi- 
ble, and the Enemy  does  not  greatly  assist  those  who  are 
trying to attain it: resignation  to present  and actual  suffer- 
ing, even  where  that suffering consists  of fear, is easier  and 
is usually helped by this  direct  action.

An  important  spiritual  law  is  here  involved.  I have 
explained  that  you  can  weaken  his  prayers by diverting

his attention  from the Enemy Himself to his own  states  of

mind  about  the Enemy.  On  the  other  hand  fear  becomes 
easier  to  master  when  the patient’s  mind  is diverted  from 
the thing feared  to  the  fear  itself,  considered  as  a presentmind  about  the Enemy.  On  the  other  hand  fear  becomes 
easier  to  master  when  the patient’s  mind  is diverted  from 
the thing feared  to  the  fear  itself,  considered  as  a present

and  undesirable  state  of  his  own  mind;  and  when  he 
regards  the  fear  as  his  appointed  cross  he will  inevitably 
think  of it as  a state  of mind.  One  can  therefore  formulate 
the general rule; in all activities  of mind  which  favour  our 
cause,  encourage  the patient to be unself-conscious  and to 
concentrate  on  the  object,  but  in all activities  favourable

to  the Enemy  bend  his mind  back  on  itself.  Let  an  insult 
or  a  woman’s  body  so  fix his  attention  outward  that  he

26

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

does  not  reflect  ‘I am  now  entering  into  the  state  called 
Anger—or  the  state  called  Lust.’  Contrariwise  let  the 
reflection  ‘My feelings  are  now  growing  more  devout,  or 
more  charitable’  so  fix  his  attention  inward  that  he  no 
longer looks  beyond himself to  see  our  Enemy or  his own 
neighbours.

.

As  regards  his  more  general  attitude  to  the  war,  you 
must  not  rely  too  much  on  those  feelings  of  hatred 
which  the humans  are  so  fond  of discussing  in Christian, 
or  anti-Christian,  periodicals.  In his anguish,  the patient

can, of course,  be  encouraged to revenge  himself  by 
some  vindictive  feelings  directed  towards  the  German 
leaders,  and that is good so  far as  it goes.  But it is usually

a  sort  of  melodramatic  or  mythical  hatred  directeda  sort  of  melodramatic  or  mythical  hatred  directed

against  imaginary  scapegoats.  He  has  never  met  these 
people  in  real  life—they  are  lay  figures  modelled  on 
what  he gets from  newspapers.  The results  of such fanci- 
ful  hatred  are  often  most  disappointing,  and  of  all 
humans  the  English  are  in  this  respect  the  most 
deplorable  milksops.  They  are  creatures  of that  miser- 
able  sort  who  loudly  proclaim  that  torture  is too  good 
for their  enemies  and  then  give tea  and  cigarettes  to  the 
first  wounded  German  pilot  who  turns  up  at  the  back

door.

\

27

G.S  Ee  Wars

Do  what  you  will,  there  is going to  be some  benevo- 
lence,  as  well  as  some  malice,  in your  patient’s  soul.  The 
great  thing is to  direct the malice  to his immediate  neigh- 
bours  whom  he meets  every  day and to  thrust  his benev- 
olence  out  to  the  remote  circumference,  to  people  he 
does  not  know.  The malice  thus becomes  wholly real and 
the benevolence  largely imaginary.  There  is no  good at allin inflaming  his hatred  of Germans  if, at the same  time,  a 
pernicious  habit  of charity  is growing  up  between  him 
and  his  mother,  his  employer,  and  the  man  he meets  in 
the train.  Think  of your  man  as a series  of concentric  cir- 
cles,  his  will  being  the  innermost,  his  intellect  coming 
next,  and  finally  his  fantasy.  You  can  hardly  hope,  at 
once,  to  exclude  from  all  the  circles  everything  that 
smells  of the  Enemy:  but you  must  keep  on  shoving  all 
the virtues  outward  till they are  finally located  in the cir- 
cle of fantasy,  and  all the  desirable  qualities  inward  into 
the Will.  It is only in so  far as  they reach  the Will  and are 
there  embodied  in habits  that  the virtues  are  really fatal 
to us.  (I don’t,  of course,  mean  what  the patient mistakes 
for  his  Will,  the  conscious  fume  and  fret  of resolutions 
and  clenched  teeth,  but the real  centre,  what  the Enemy 
calls  the Heart.)  All sorts  of virtues  painted in the fantasy 
or  approved  by the  intellect  or  even,  in some  measure,

28

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

loved  and  admired,  will  not  keep  a  man  from  Our 
Father’s  house:  indeed  they may  make  him  more  amus- 
ing when  he gets there,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

29

7  i '

By  4

41h i thiaeades

oF pee

My dear Wormwood,

I wonder  you  should  ask  me  whether  it is essential  to 
keep the patient in ignorance  of your  own  existence.  That 
question,  at least for the present  phase of the struggle,  has 
been answered  for us  by the High Command.  Our policy,

for the moment,  is to  conceal  ourselves.  Of course  this has 
not  always  been  so.  We  are  really  faced  with  a  cruel 
dilemma.  When  the  humans  disbelieve  in  our  existence 
we  lose  all the pleasing  results  of direct  terrorism  and wemake no  magicians.  On the other hand, when they believe 
in us,  we  cannot  make  them  materialists  and  sceptics.  At 
least, not  yet.  I have  great  hopes that we  shall  learn  in due 
time  how  to  emotionalise  and  mythologise  their  science

to  such  an  extent  that  what  is, in  effect,  a  belief  in  us 
(though  not  under  that  name)  will  creep  in  while  the 
human  mind  remains  closed  to  belief  in the  Enemy.  The 
‘Life  Force’,  the  worship  of  sex,  and  some  aspects  of 
Psychoanalysis,  may  here  prove  useful.  If once  we  can 
produce  our  perfect  work—the  Materialist  Magician,  the 
man,  not  using,  but  veritably  worshipping,  what  he

3a

C.iS.  LEW2S

vaguely calls  ‘Forces’  while  denying the existence  of ‘spir- 
its-—then  the  end  of the  war  will  be in sight.  But  in the 
meantime  we  must  obey  our  orders.  I do not  think  you 
will  have  much  difficulty  in  keeping  the  patient  in  the 
dark. The fact that ‘devils’  are  predominantly  comic figures 
in the modern  imagination  will help you.  If any faint  sus- 
picion  of your  existence  begins  to  arise  in his mind,  sug- 
gest  to  him  a  picture  of  something  in  red  tights,  and 
persuade  him  that  since  he cannot  believe  in that  (it is an 
old textbook  method  of confusing them) he therefore  can- 
not  believe  in you.

I had  not  forgotten  my  promise  to  consider  whether 
we  should  make  the  patient  an  extreme  patriot  or  an 
extreme  pacifist. All extremes,  except  extreme  devotion  to 
the Enemy,  are  to  be encouraged.  Not  always,  of course,

but  at  this  period.  Some  ages  are  lukewarm  and  compla- 
cent,  and then it is our  business  to  soothe  them  yet faster

asleep.  Other  ages,  of which  the present  is one,  are  unbal- 
anced  and  prone  to  faction,  and  it  is  our  business  to 
inflame  them.  Any small  coterie,  bound  together by someasleep.  Other  ages,  of which  the present  is one,  are  unbal- 
anced  and  prone  to  faction,  and  it  is  our  business  to 
inflame  them.  Any small  coterie,  bound  together by some

interest  which  other  men  dislike  or  ignore,  tends  to 
develop  inside  itself  a  hothouse  mutual  admiration,  and 
towards  the outer  world,  a great  deal  of pride and hatred

which  is entertained  without  shame  because  the ‘Cause’  is

32

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

its sponsor  and it is thought to  be impersonal.  Even when 
the little group  exists  originally for the Enemy’s  own  pur- 
poses,  this  remains  true.  We want  the Church  to  be small 
not  only that  fewer  men  may  know  the Enemy  but  also 
that  those  who  do may  acquire  the  uneasy  intensity  and 
the  defensive  self-righteousness  of a  secret  society  or  a 
clique. The Church  herself  is, of course,  heavily defended 
and we  have never  yet quite succeeded  in giving her all the

characteristics  of  a  faction;  but  subordinate  factions 
within  her  have  often  produced  admirable  results,  from 
the parties  of Paul  and of Apollos  at Corinth  down  to  the 
High and  Low  parties  in the Church  of England.

If your  patient  can  be induced  to  become a conscien- 
tious  objector  he will  automatically  find  himself  one  of a

small,  vocal,  organised,  and  unpopular  society,  and  theIf your  patient  can  be induced  to  become a conscien- 
tious  objector  he will  automatically  find  himself  one  of a

small,  vocal,  organised,  and  unpopular  society,  and  the

effects  of this,  on  one  so  new  to  Christianity,  will  almost 
certainly  be good.  But  only almost  certainly.  Has  he had 
serious  doubts  about  the  lawfulness  of serving  in a  just 
war  before  this  present  war  began?  Is he a  man  of great 
physical  courage—so  great  that he will have  no  half-con- 
scious  misgivings  about  the real  motives  of his pacifism? 
Can  he, when  nearest  to  honesty  (no human  is ever  very 
near),  feel  fully convinced  that  he is actuated  wholly  by 
the desire  to  obey the Enemy?  If he is that sort  of man,  his

33

Cus.  LEWIS

pacifism  will  probably  not  do  us  much  good,  and  the 
Enemy  will  probably  protect  him  from  the usual  conse- 
quences  of belonging to a sect.  Your  best plan, in that case, 
would  be to  attempt  a sudden,  confused,  emotional  crisis 
from  which  he  might  emerge  as  an  uneasy  convert  to 
patriotism.  Such things can  often  be managed.  But if he is 
the man I take him to  be, try Pacifism.

Whichever  he adopts,  your  main  task will be the same. 
Let  him  begin  by treating  the  Patriotism  or  the  Pacifism 
as  a part of his religion.  Then  let him, under  the influence 
of partisan  spirit, come  to  regard it as  the most  important

part.  Then  quietly and gradually  nurse  him on  to the stage 
at  which  the religion  becomes  merely  part  of the  ‘cause’, 
in  which  Christianity  is  valued  chiefly  because  of  the 
excellent  arguments  it can  produce in favour  of the British 
war-effort  or  of Pacifism.  The  attitude  which you want  to 
guard against is that  in which  temporal  affairs  are  treated 
primarily  as  material  for obedience.  Once  you  have  madethe World  an  end, and faith a means,  you  have  almost won 
your  man,  and it makes  very  little difference  what  kind  of 
worldly  end he is pursuing.  Provided  that meetings,  pam-

phlets,  policies,  movements,  causes,  and  crusades,  matter 
more  to  him  than  prayers  and  sacraments  and  charity,  he

34

THE  SCREW  TAPE  LETIERS

is  ours—and  the  more  ‘religious’  (on  those  terms)  the 
more  securely  ours.  I could  show  you a pretty  cageful 
down  here,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

35

re GOL iy. 
om

¥ 
ie 
a

c

«

Rey  Alaa  “Ss

Pe he

Ser! 
Sle  ad  Reed  nf 9

el 
i  de  ;

:

7

ies

oa 
4 
7 
te  os  Very  Pe  ke

ane 
! 
mm 
os,

»  oy

:

y  ls

|

ra

2

°

is 
A

dean 
5 
; 
~~? 
35> 
Lf: 
"1. 
HGS  ee,  P

\s

ee

3

: 
a  <

‘

4  vi

bath

ir

R

.

.%

i

¥

we

lhy

owe

AT

bey) 
i 
—

9

t

\ 
nT

p

‘s

eh

Wy

if mi

,

My dear Wormwood,

So  you  ‘have  great  hopes  that  the  patient’s  religious 
phase  is  dying  away’,  have  you?  Malways  thought  the 
Training  College  had  gone  to  pieces  since  they  put  old 
Slubgob  at the head  of it, and now  I am  sure.  Has  no  one 
ever  told you  about  the law of Undulation?

Humans  are  amphibians—half  spirit  and  half  animal. 
(The Enemy’s  determination  to produce  such a revolting

hybrid  was  one  of  the  things  that  determined  Our 
Father  to  withdraw  his  support  from  Him.)  As  spirits 
they  belong  to  the  eternal  world,  but  as  animals  they 
inhabit  time.  This  means  that  while  their  spirit  can  bedirected  to  an  eternal  object,  their  bodies,  passions,  and 
imaginations  are  in continual  change,  for  to  be in time 
means  to  change.  Their  nearest  approach  to  constancy, 
therefore,  is undulation—the  repeated  return  to a level 
from  which  they repeatedly  fall back,  a series  of troughs 
and  peaks.  If you  had  watched  your  patient  carefully 
you  would  have  seen  this  undulation  in  every  depart-

ment  of his  life—his  interest  in his  work,  his  affection

3h 7h

CocS2)  EWES

for  his  friends,  his  physical  appetites,  all  go  up  and 
down.  As long as  he lives  on  earth  periods  of emotional 
and  bodily  richness  and  liveliness  will  alternate  with 
periods  of  numbness  and  poverty.  The  dryness  and 
dullness  through  which  your  patient  is now  going  are 
not,  as  you fondly suppose,  your workmanship;  they are 
merely  a natural  phenomenon  which  will  do us  no  good 
unless  you  make  a good use  of it.

To decide  what  the best use  of it is, you  must  ask what 
use  the Enemy wants  to make  of it, and then do the oppo- 
site.  Now  it may  surprise  you  to  learn  that  in His  efforts 
to  get  permanent  possession  of'a  soul,  He  relies  on  the 
troughs  even  more  than  on  the peaks; some  of His  special 
favourites  have  gone  through  longer  and  deeper  troughs 
than  anyone  else.  The reason  is this. To us  a human  is pri- 
marily food; our  aim is the absorption  of its will into ours, 
the  increase  of our  own  area  of selfhood  at  its  expense.

But  the  obedience  which  the  Enemy  demands  of men  is 
quite a different  thing.  One  must  face  the fact that  all the 
talk about  His love for men,  and His  service  being perfect 
freedom,  is not  (as one  would  gladly believe)  mere  propa- 
ganda,  but  an  appalling  truth.  He  really  does  want  to  fill 
the  universe  with  a  lot  of  loathsome  little  replicas  of

3838

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

Himself—creatures  whose  life, on  its miniature  scale, will 
be  qualitatively  like  His  own,  not  because  He  has 
absorbed  them  but  because  their  wills  freely  conform  to 
His.  We  want  cattle  who  can  finally  become  food;  He 
wants  servants  who  can  finally  become  sons.  We  want  to 
suck in, He wants  to  give out.  We are  empty  and would  be

filled;  He is full and flows  over.  Our war  aim is a world  in

which  Our  Father  Below  has  drawn  all other  beings  into 
himself:  the Enemy wants  a world  full of beings united  to

Him  but still distinct.

And  that is where  the troughs  come  in. You  must  have 
often wondered  why the Enemy does  not  make  more  use 
ot His power  to be sensibly present  to  human  souls  in any 
degree  He  chooses  and  at  any  moment.  But  you  now  see 
that  the  Irresistible  and  the  Indisputable  are  the  two 
weapons  which  the  very  nature  of His  scheme  forbids 
Him  to  use.  Merely  to  override  a human  will  (as His  felt 
presence  in any but the faintest  and most  mitigated  degree 
would  certainly do) would  be for Him useless.  He cannot 
ravish.  He can  only woo.  For His ignoble idea is to eat the

cake  and have it; the creatures  are  to  be one  with Him, but

yet themselves;  merely to  cancel  them,  or  assimilate  them, 
will  not  serve.  He  is prepared  to  do a little  overriding  at

yy)

Cass  LEWtsyet themselves;  merely to  cancel  them,  or  assimilate  them, 
will  not  serve.  He  is prepared  to  do a little  overriding  at

yy)

Cass  LEWts

the beginning.  He will set  them  off with  communications 
of His  presence  which,  though faint,  seem  great  to  them, 
with  emotional  sweetness,  and  easy  conquest  over  temp- 
tation.  But  He  never  allows  this  state  of affairs  to  last 
long. Sooner  or  later He withdraws,  if not  in fact, at  least 
from  their  conscious  experience,  all those  supports  and 
incentives.  He  leaves  the creature  to  stand  up  on  its own 
legs—to  carry  out  from  the will  alone  duties  which  have 
lost all relish.  It is during such trough periods, much more 
than  during  the peak periods,  that  it is growing  into  the 
sort  of  creature  He  wants  it to  be.  Hence  the  prayers 
offered  in the state  of dryness  are  those which please Him 
best.  We  can  drag our  patients  along by continual  tempt- 
ing, because  we  design  them  only for  the  table,  and  the 
more  their  will  is interfered  with  the  better.  He  cannot 
‘tempt’  to virtue  as  we  do to vice.  He wants  them to  learn 
to  walk  and  must  therefore  take  away  His  hand;  and  if 
only  the  will  to  walk  is really  there  He  is pleased  even

with  their  stumbles.  Do  not  be  deceived,  Wormwood. 
Our cause  is never  more  in danger than when  a human, no 
longer  desiring,  but  still  intending,  to  do  our  Enemy’s 
will, looks  round  upon  a universe  from which  every  trace 
of Him seems  to have vanished,  and asks why he has been 
forsaken,  and still obeys.

40

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

But  of course  the  troughs  afford  opportunities  to  our 
side also. Next week I will give you some  hints  on  how to 
exploit them,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

41

tg 
ee  9 
+

ri

lial  be  hte

ih  ST

syiper Fee

al,

e

Me  7p  RENT  IN Uys

-

&  ¥

2

‘

hie  hagle

nsYour  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

41

tg 
ee  9 
+

ri

lial  be  hte

ih  ST

syiper Fee

al,

e

Me  7p  RENT  IN Uys

-

&  ¥

2

‘

hie  hagle

ns

My dear Wormwood,

I hope my last letter  has convinced  you  that the trough 
of dullness  or  ‘dryness’  through  which  your  patient  is 
going  at  present  will  not,  of itself,  give you  his  soul,  but 
needs  to  be properly  exploited.  What  forms  the exploita- 
tion  should  take  I will now  consider.

In the  first  place  I have  always  found  that  the  trough 
periods  of  the  human  undulation  provide  excellent 
opportunity  for all sensual  temptations,  particularly those

of sex.  This  may  surprise  you,  because,  of course,  there  is

more  physical  energy,  and  therefore  more  potential 
appetite,  at the peak periods;  but you must  remember  that 
the powers  of resistance  are  then also at their highest.  The 
health  and spirits which you want  to use  in producing  lust 
can  also,  alas,  be  very  easily  used  for  work  or  play  or 
thought  or  innocuous  merriment.  The  attack  has  a much 
better  chance  of  success  when  the  man’s  whole  inner 
world  is drab  and  cold  and  empty.  And  it is also  to  be 
noted  that the trough  sexuality  is subtly different  in qual- 
ity from  that  of the peak—much  less likely to  lead  to  the

43

Cc.  S.  LEWIS43

Cc.  S.  LEWIS

milk  and  water  phenomenon  which  the  humans  call 
‘being in love’, much  more  easily drawn  into perversions, 
much  less  contaminated  by those  generous  and  imagina- 
tive  and  even  spiritual  concomitants  which  often  render 
human  sexuality  so  disappointing.  It  is  the  same  with 
other  desires  of the  flesh.  You  are  much  more  likely  to 
make  your  man  a  sound  drunkard  by pressing  drink  on 
him  as  an  anodyne  when  he is dull  and  weary  than  by 
encouraging  him to use  it as  a means  of merriment  among 
his friends  when  he is happy and expansive.  Never  forget 
that when  we  are  dealing with  any pleasure  in its healthy

and normal  and satisfying  form, we  are,  in a sense,  on  the 
Enemy’s  ground.  I know  we  have  won  many a soul 
through  pleasure.  All  the  same,  it is His  invention,  not 
ours.  He  made  the  pleasures:  all our  research  so  far has 
not  enabled us  to produce one.  All we  can  do is to  encour- 
age  the  humans  to  take  the  pleasures  which  our  Enemy

has  produced,  at  times,  or  in ways,  or  in degrees,  which 
He  has  forbidden.  Hence  we  always  try  to  work  away 
from  the  natural  condition  of  any  pleasure  to  that  in

which  it is least  natural,  least  redolent  of its Maker,  and 
least  pleasurable.  An  ever  increasing  craving  for  an  ever 
diminishing pleasure is the formula.  It is more  certain;  and 
it’s better style. To get the man’s  soul and give him nothing

44

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

in return—that  is what really gladdens  Our Father’s  heart. 
And  the troughs  are  the time  for beginning the process.44

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

in return—that  is what really gladdens  Our Father’s  heart. 
And  the troughs  are  the time  for beginning the process.

But  there  is  an  even  better  way  of  exploiting  the 
trough;  I mean  through  the patient’s  own  thoughts  about 
it. As always, the first step is to keep knowledge  out  of his 
mind.  Do  not  let him  suspect  the law  of undulation.  Let 
him assume  that the first ardours  of his conversion  might 
have  been  expected  to  last, and  ought to  have  lasted,  for- 
ever,  and that his present  dryness  is an  equally permanent 
condition.  Having  once  got this misconception  well  fixed 
in his head,  you  may  then  proceed  in various  ways.  It all 
depends  on  whether  your  man  is of the desponding  type 
who can  be tempted to  despair,  or of the wishful-thinking 
type  who  can  be assured  that  all is well.  The  former  type 
is getting  rare  among  the humans.  If your  patient  should 
happen  to  belong  to  it, everything  is easy.  You  have  only 
got to  keep him  out  of the way  of experienced  Christians 
(an  easy  task  now-adays),  to  direct  his  attention  to  the 
appropriate  passages  in scripture,  and  then  to  set  him  to 
work  on  the  desperate  design  of recovering  his  old  feel- 
ings by sheer will-power,  and the game  is ours.  If he is of 
the more  hopeful  type  your  job is to  make  him acquiesce 
in the present  low temperature  of his spirit and gradually 
become  content  with  it, persuading  himself  that  it is not

45

C.5:.7  be  WES45

C.5:.7  be  WES

so  low after all. In  a week  or  two  you  will be making him 
doubt  whether  the first days of his Christianity  were  not, 
perhaps, a little  excessive.  Talk  to  him  about  ‘moderation 
in  all  things’.  If you  can  once  get  him  to  the  point  of 
thinking  that  ‘religion  is all very  well  up  to  a point’,  you 
can  feel quite happy about  his soul.  A moderated  religion 
is as  good for us  as  no  religion  at all—and  more  amusing. 
Another  possibility  is that  of direct  attack  on  his faith. 
When  you  have  caused  him  to  assume  that  the  trough  is 
permanent,  can  you  not  persuade  him  that  ‘his  religious 
phase’ is just going to die away  like all his previous phases?

Of course  there is no  conceivable  way of getting by reason 
from  the  proposition  ‘I am  losing  interest  in this’  to  the

proposition  “This  is false’.  But, as  I said before,  it is jargon, 
not  reason,  you  must  rely on.  The  mere  word phase will 
very likely do the trick.  I assume  that the creature  has been 
through  several  of them  before—they  all have—and  that 
he always feels  superior and patronising  to the ones  he has 
emerged  from,  not  because  he  has  really  criticised  them 
but  simply  because  they  are  in the  past.  (You  keep  him 
well  fed on  hazy ideas  of Progress  and  Development  and

the  Historical  Point  of View,  I trust,  and  give him  lots  of 
modern  Biographies  to  read?  The  people  in  them  are 
always  emerging  from  Phases,  aren’t  they?)

46

DHE  SORE W TAPE  le? PE RS

You  see  the idea?  Keep his mind  off the plain antithesis 
between  True  and  False.  Nice  shadowy  expressions—‘Tt 
was  a phase’-—'I’ve  been through all that’-—and  don’t for-

get the blessed  word  ‘Adolescent’,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

47

: 0 stn nies avg

;

-

5

~

——~  ie

eh

, 
Ue tidele darkly

¥ 
? *

se are ret wt?

“ihe wens sai “ ven

LO

My dear Wormwood,Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

47

: 0 stn nies avg

;

-

5

~

——~  ie

eh

, 
Ue tidele darkly

¥ 
? *

se are ret wt?

“ihe wens sai “ ven

LO

My dear Wormwood,

I was  delighted  to  hear  from  Triptweeze  that  your 
patient  has  made  some  very  desirable  new  acquaintances 
and  that  you  seem  to  have  used  this  event  in a really 
promising  manner.  I gather that  the middle-aged  married 
couple who  called  at  his  office  are  just the sort  of people 
we  want  him to  know—rich,  smart,  superficially  intellec- 
tual, and brightly sceptical  about  everything  in the world. 
I gather  they  are  even  vaguely  pacifist,  not  on  moral 
grounds  but  from  an  ingrained  habit  of belittling  any- 
thing that concerns  the great mass  of their fellow men  and 
from  a  dash  of purely  fashionable  and  literary  commu- 
nism.  This  is excellent.  And you  seem  to  have  made  good 
use  of all his social,  sexual,  and intellectual  vanity.  Tell me

more.  Did  he commit  himself  deeply?  I don’t  mean  the 
words.  There  is  a  subtle  play  of  looks  and  tones  and 
laughs by which  a mortal  can  imply that he is of the same 
party  as  those  to whom  he is speaking.  That is the kind  of 
betrayal you  should  specially encourage,  because  the man

49

Cc.  8S.  LEWLS

does  not  fully realise  it himself;  and  by the  time  he does 
you  will have  made  withdrawal  difficult.49

Cc.  8S.  LEWLS

does  not  fully realise  it himself;  and  by the  time  he does 
you  will have  made  withdrawal  difficult.

No  doubt  he must very  soon  realise  that  his own  faith 
is in direct  opposition  to the assumptions  on  which  all the 
conversation  of his new  friends  is based.  I don’t think that 
matters  much  provided  that  you  can  persuade  him  to 
postpone  any  open  acknowledgement  of  the  fact,  and 
this, with the aid of shame, pride, modesty and vanity, will 
be easy to do. As long as  the postponement  lasts he will be 
in  a  false  position.  He  will  be  silent  when  he  ought  to 
speak  and  laugh  when  he  ought  to  be  silent.  He  will 
assume,  at  first  only by his  manner,  but  presently  by his 
words,  all  sorts  of cynical  and  sceptical  attitudes  which 
are  not  really  his.  But  if you  play  him  well,  they  may 
become  his.  All  mortals  tend  to  turn  into  the  thing they 
are  pretending  to  be. This  is elementary.  The real question 
is how to  prepare  for the Enemy’s  counterattack.

The  first  thing  is  to  delay  as  long  as  possible  the 
moment  at which  he realises  this  new  pleasure  as  a temp- 
tation.  Since  the  Enemy’s  servants  have  been  preaching 
about ‘the World’  as  one  of the great standard  temptations 
for  two  thousand  years,  this  might  seem  difficult  to  do. 
But  fortunately  they have  said  very  little  about  it for the 
last few decades.  In modern  Christian  writings,  though  I

5 Oo

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS5 Oo

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

see  much  (indeed  more  than I like) about  Mammon,  I see 
few  of  the  old  warnings  about  Worldly  Vanities,  the 
Choice  of Friends,  and  the Value  of Time.  All  that,  your 
patient  would  probably  classify  as  ‘Puritanism’—and 
may  I remark  in passing  that  the value  we  have  given  to 
that  word  is one  of the  really  solid  triumphs  of the  last 
hundred  years?  By it we  rescue  annually  thousands  of 
humans  from  temperance,  chastity,  and sobriety  of life.

Sooner  or  later,  however,  the  real  nature  of  his  new 
friends  must  become  clear  to  him,  and  then  your  tactics 
must  depend  on the  patient’s  intelligence.  If he  is a  big 
enough fool you  can  get him to  realise  the character  of the 
friends  only while  they are  absent;  their  presence  can  be 
made  to  sweep  away  all criticism.  If this  succeeds,  he can 
be induced  to  live, as  I have  known  many  humans  live, for 
quite  long  periods,  two  parallel  lives;  he  will  not  only

appear  to  be, but actually be, a different  man  in each of the 
circles  he  frequents.  Failing  this,  there  is  a  subtler  and 
more  entertaining  method.  He can  be made  to  take  a pos- 
itive pleasure in the perception  that the two  sides  of his life 
are  inconsistent.  This  is done  by exploiting  his vanity.  He 
can  be  taught  to  enjoy  kneeling  beside  the  grocer  on

Sunday  just because  he remembers  that  the  grocer  could 
not  possibly  understand  the  urbane  and  mocking  world

5 2

Cc.  S:  LEWISSunday  just because  he remembers  that  the  grocer  could 
not  possibly  understand  the  urbane  and  mocking  world

5 2

Cc.  S:  LEWIS

which he inhabited  on  Saturday evening;  and contrariwise, 
to  enjoy  the  bawdy  and  blasphemy  over  the  coffee  with 
these  admirable  friends all the more  because  he is aware  of 
a ‘deeper’,  ‘spiritual’  world  within  him which  they cannot 
understand.  You  see  the  idea—the  worldly  friends  touch 
him on  one  side and the grocer  on  the other,  and he is the 
complete,  balanced,  complex  man  who  sees  round  them 
all. Thus,  while  being permanently  treacherous  to  at  least 
two  sets  of people, he will feel, instead  of shame,  a contin- 
ual undercurrent  of self-satisfaction.  Finally, if all else fails, 
you  can  persuade  him, in defiance  of conscience,  to  con- 
tinue  the  new  acquaintance  on  the  ground  that  he  is, in 
some  unspecified  way,  doing  these  people  ‘good’  by the 
mere  fact  of drinking  their  cocktails  and  laughing  at  their 
jokes, and that to cease  to do so would  be ‘priggish’,  ‘intol- 
erant’,  and (of course)  ‘Puritanical’.

Meanwhile  you will of course  take the obvious  precau- 
tion  of seeing  that  this  new  development  induces  him  to 
spend more  than he can  afford  and to neglect his work and 
his  mother.  Her  jealousy,  and  alarm,  and  his  increasing 
evasiveness  or rudeness, will be invaluable  for the aggrava- 
tion  of the domestic  tension,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

52

II

My dear Wormwood,Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

52

II

My dear Wormwood,

Everything  is clearly  going  very  well.  I am  specially 
glad to  hear that the two  new  friends  have  now  made  him 
acquainted  with  their whole  set.  All  these,  as  I find  from 
the  record  office,  are  thoroughly  reliable  people;  steady, 
consistent  scoffers  and worldlings  who without  any spec- 
tacular  crimes  are  progressing  quietly  and  comfortably 
towards  Our  Father’s  house.  You  speak  of their  being 
great  laughers.  I trust  this  does  not  mean  that  you  are 
under  the  impression  that  laughter  as  such  is always  in 
our  favour.  The point is worth  some  attention.

I divide  the causes  of human  laughter into Joy, Fun, the 
Joke Proper,  and  Flippancy.  You  will  see  the  first  among 
friends  and  lovers  reunited  on  the  eve  of  a  holiday. 
Among  adults  some  pretext  in the way  of Jokes is usually 
provided,  but  the  facility  with  which  the  smallest  witti- 
cisms  produce laughter  at such  a time  shows  that they are 
not  the real cause.  What that real cause  is we  do not  know. 
Something  like  it is expressed  in much  of that  detestable 
art  which  the  humans  call  Music,  and  something  like  it

y3

CSA  EWS

occurs  in  Heaven—a  meaningless  acceleration  in  the 
rhythm  of  celestial  experience,  quite  opaque  to  us. 
Laughter  of this kind does  us  no  good and should  always 
be discouraged.  Besides,  the phenomenon  is of itself  dis- 
gusting and a direct insult  to  the realism,  dignity, and aus- 
terity of Hell.

Fun  is closely related  to Joy—a  sort  of emotional  froth 
arising  from  the play instinct.  It is very  little  use  to  us.  ItFun  is closely related  to Joy—a  sort  of emotional  froth 
arising  from  the play instinct.  It is very  little  use  to  us.  It

can  sometimes  be used,  of course,  to divert  humans  from 
something  else  which  the  Enemy  would  like  them  to  be 
feeling  or  doing:  but  in  itself  it has  wholly  undesirable 
tendencies;  it  promotes  charity,  courage,  contentment, 
and many  other  evils.

The Joke Proper,  which  turns  on  sudden  perception  of 
incongruity,  is  a much  more  promising  field.  I am  not 
thinking  primarily  of indecent  or  bawdy  humour,  which, 
though  much  relied  upon  by second-rate  tempters,  is

often disappointing  in its results.  The truth is that humans 
are  pretty  clearly  divided  on  this  matter  into  two  classes.

There  are  some  to  whom  ‘no passion  is as  serious  as  lust’ 
and for whom  an  indecent  story  ceases  to  produce  lasciv- 
lousness  precisely  in so  far as  it becomes  funny:  there  are 
others  in whom  laughter  and  lust  are  excited  at  the  same 
moment  and by the same  things. The first sort  joke about

54

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

sex  because  it gives rise to  many  incongruities:  the second 
cultivate  incongruities  because  they  afford  a  pretext  for 
talking  about  sex.  If your  man  is of the first  type,  bawdy 
humour  will not  help you—I  shall  never  forget the hours

which  I wasted  (hours  to  me  of unbearable  tedium)  with 
one  of  my  early  patients  in  bars  and  smoking-rooms 
before  I learned  this  rule.  Find  out  which  group  the 
patient belongs  to—and  see  that he does  not  find  out.

The  real use  of Jokes  or  Humour  is in quite a different 
direction,  and it is specially  promising  among  the English 
who  take  their  ‘sense  of humour’  so  seriously  that  a defi- 
ciency  in this  sense  is almost  the only deficiency  at which 
they feel shame.  Humour  is for them the all-consoling  and(mark  this)  the  all-excusing,  grace  of  life.  Hence  it  is 
invaluable  as  a means  of destroying  shame.  If a man  simply

lets  others  pay  for him,  he is ‘mean’;  if he boasts  of it in a 
jocular  manner  and  twits  his  fellows  with  having  been 
scored  off,  he  is no  longer  ‘mean’  but  a  comical  fellow.

Mere  cowardice  is shameful;  cowardice  boasted  of with 
humorous  exaggerations  and  grotesque  gestures  can  be 
passed off as  funny.  Cruelty  is shameful—unless  the cruel 
man  can  represent  it as  a practical joke. A thousand  bawdy, 
or  even  blasphemous,  jokes  do not  help towards  a  man’s 
damnation  so  much  as  his discovery  that  almost  anything

55

Cc.  8.  LEWIS

he wants  to  do can  be done,  not  only without  the disap- 
proval but with the admiration  of his fellows,  if only it can 
get  itself  treated  as  a  Joke.  And  this  temptation  can  be 
almost  entirely  hidden  from  your  patient  by that  English 
seriousness  about  Humour.  Any  suggestion  that  there 
might  be  too  much  of  it can  be  represented  to  him  as 
‘Puritanical’  or  as  betraying  a ‘lack of humour’.But  flippancy  is the  best  of all.  In  the  first  place  it 1s 
very  economical.  Only  a  clever  human  can  make a real 
Joke  about  virtue,  or  indeed  about  anything  else;  any  of 
them can  be trained  to talk as if virtue  were  funny. Among 
flippant  people  the Joke  is always  assumed  to  have  been 
made.  No  one  actually  makes  it; but every  serious  subject 
is discussed  in  a  manner  which  implies  that  they  have 
already  found a ridiculous  side  to  it.  If prolonged,  the 
habit  of  Flippancy  builds  up  around  a  man  the  finest 
armour-plating  against  the  Enemy  that  I know,  and  it is 
quite free  from  the dangers  inherent  in the  other  sources 
of laughter.  It is  a thousand  miles  away  from joy: it dead- 
ens,  instead  of sharpening,  the  intellect;  and  it excites  no 
affection  between  those  who  practise  it,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

56

12

My dear Wormwood,

Obviously you  are  making excellent  progress.  My only 
fear is lest in attempting  to  hurry the patient you  awaken 
him to a sense  of his real position.  For you  and I, who  see 
that position  as  it really is, must  never  forget how  totally 
different  it ought to  appear  to him. We know that we  have 
introduced  a  change  of direction  in his  course  which  is 
already  carrying  him  out  of his orbit  around  the Enemy; 
but he must  be made  to  imagine  that all the choices  which 
have  effected  this  change  of course  are  trivial  and revoca- 
ble.  He  must  not  be  allowed  to  suspect  that  he  is now, 
however  slowly,  heading  right  away  from  the  sun  on  a 
line which will carry  him into the cold and dark of utmost 
space.For this reason  I am  almost  glad to  hear that he is still a 
churchgoer  and a communicant.  I know there are  dangers 
in this;  but  anything  is better  than  that  he should  realise 
the  break  he  has  made  with  the  first  months  of  his 
Christian  life. As long as  he retains  externally the habits  of

a Christian  he can  still be made  to  think  of himself  as  one

G..S.  LE  Wis

who  has  adopted  a few  new  friends  and  amusements  but 
whose  spiritual  state  is much  the same  as  it was  six weeks 
ago.  And while  he thinks  that, we  do not  have to  contend 
with the explicit repentance  of a definite,  fully recognised, 
sin, but  only with  his vague,  though  uneasy,  feeling  that 
he hasn’t  been  doing very  well lately.

This  dim  uneasiness  needs  careful  handling.  If it gets  | 
too  strong  it may wake  him up and spoil the whole  game. 
On the other hand, if you  suppress  it entirely—which,  by 
the by, the Enemy will probably not  allow you to do—we 
lose  an  element  in the  situation  which  can  be turned  to 
good  account.  If such a feeling  is allowed  to  live,  but 
not  allowed  to  become  irresistible  and  flower  into  real 
repentance,  it has  one  invaluable  tendency.  It increases 
the  patient’s  reluctance  to  think  about  the  Enemy.  All 
humans  at nearly all times  have  some  such reluctance;  but 
when  thinking  of Him  involves  facing and  intensifying  a 
whole  vague  cloud  of half-conscious  guilt, this reluctance 
is increased  tenfold.  They  hate  every  idea  that  suggests 
Him, just as  men  in financial  embarrassment  hate the very 
sight  of a  pass-book.  In  this  state  your  patient  will  not 
omit,  but he will  increasingly  dislike,  his religious  duties. 
He  will  think  about  them  as  little  as  he feels  he decently 
can  beforehand,  and forget them  as  soon  as  possible when

5 8

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS5 8

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

they are  over.  A few weeks  ago  you  had  to  tempt  him  to 
unreality  and inattention  in his prayers:  but now  you will 
find him opening his arms  to you and almost  begging you 
to  distract  his  purpose  and  benumb  his  heart.  He  will 
want  his prayers  to  be unreal,  for he will dread  nothing so 
much  as  effective  contact  with the Enemy.  His aim will be 
to  let sleeping worms  lie.

As this  condition  becomes  more  fully established,  you 
will be gradually freed  from  the tiresome  business  of pro- 
viding Pleasures  as  temptations.  As the uneasiness  and his 
reluctance  to  face  it cut  him  off more  and  more  from  all 
real  happiness,  and  as  habit  renders  the pleasures  of van- 
ity and excitement  and flippancy  at once  less pleasant  and 
harder  to  forgo (for that is what  habit  fortunately  does  to 
a pleasure)  you will find that anything  or  nothing is suffi- 
cient  to  attract  his  wandering  attention.  You  no  longer 
need a good book, which  he really likes, to keep him from 
his prayers  or  his  work  or  his  sleep;  a  column  of adver- 
tisements  in yesterday’s  paper  will do. You  can  make  him 
waste  his  time  not  only  in conversation  he  enjoys  with 
people whom  he likes, but in conversations  with those  he 
cares  nothing  about  on  subjects  that  bore  him.  You  can 
make him do nothing at all for long periods. You  can  keep 
him  up  late  at  night,  not  roistering,  but  staring  at  a  dead

519

Cc.  8.  LEWIS519

Cc.  8.  LEWIS

fire ina  cold  room.  All the healthy  and  out-going  activi- 
ties  which  we  want  him  to  avoid  can  be  inhibited  and 
nothing  given in return,  so  that at least he may  say,  as  one 
of my  own  patients  said on  his arrival  down  here,  ‘I now 
see  that  I spent  most  of my  life  in doing  neither  what  I 
ought  nor  what  I liked.’  The  Christians  describe  the 
Enemy  as  one  ‘without  whom  Nothing  is strong’.  And 
Nothing  is very  strong:  strong  enough  to  steal  away  a 
man’s  best years  not  in sweet  sins  but in a dreary  flicker- 
ing of the  mind  over  it knows  not  what  and  knows  not 
why,  in the  gratification  of curiosities  so  feeble  that  the 
man  is only half  aware  of them,  in drumming  of fingers 
and  kicking  of heels,  in whistling  tunes  that  he does  not 
like, or in the long, dim labyrinth  of reveries  that have not

even  lust  or  ambition  to  give  them a relish,  but  which,

once  chance  association  has  started  them,  the  creature  is 
too  weak  and fuddled  to  shake  off.

You  will  say  that  these  are  very  small  sins;  and  doubt- 
less, like all young  tempters,  you  are  anxious  to  be able to 
report  spectacular  wickedness.  But  do  remember,  the 
only thing that matters  is the extent  to which you  separate 
the  man  from  the  Enemy.  It does  not  matter  how  small 
the sins are  provided that their cumulative  effect is to edge 
the  man  away  from  the  Light  and  out  into  the Nothing.

60

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETIERS

Murder  is no  better  than  cards  if cards  can  do the  trick. 
Indeed the safest road to Hell is the gradual one—the  gen- 
tle slope,  soft underfoot,  without  sudden  turnings,  with- 
out  milestones,  without  signposts,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

owes 1A Noa iit

a.

Uescodng  a abil ims

ate

gt

we

HH eg

je

we

My dear Wormwood,Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

owes 1A Noa iit

a.

Uescodng  a abil ims

ate

gt

we

HH eg

je

we

My dear Wormwood,

It seems  to  me  that you  take  a great  many  pages  to  tell 
a very  simple story.  The long and the short of it is that you 
have  let the man  slip through  your  fingers.  The  situation 
is very  grave,  and  I really see  no  reason  why I should  try 
to  shield  you  from  the consequences  of your  inefficiency. 
A  repentance  and  renewal  of  what  the  other  side  call 
‘grace’  on  the  scale  which  you  describe  is a  defeat  of the 
first order.  It amounts  to a second  conversion—and  prob- 
ably on  a deeper level  than  the first.

As  you  ought  to  have  known,  the  asphyxiating  cloud 
which  prevented  your  attacking  the  patient  on  his  walk 
back  from  the  old mill,  is  a well-known  phenomenon.  It 
is  the  Enemy’s  most  barbarous  weapon,  and  generally 
appears  when  He  is directly  present  to  the patient  under 
certain  modes  not  yet  fully  classified.  Some  humans  are 
permanently  surrounded  by it and  therefore  inaccessible

to us.

And  now  for  your  blunders.  On  your  own  showing 
you  first of all allowed the patient to  read a book  he really

6 3

Cc.  8S.  LEWIS

enjoyed,  because  he enjoyed  it and  not  in order  to  make 
clever  remarks  about  it to  his new  friends.  In the  second 
place, you  allowed ‘him  to  walk  down  to  the old mill  and 
have  tea  there—a  walk  through  country  he  really  likes, 
and taken alone.  In other words  you  allowed  him two  real 
positive  Pleasures.  Were  you  so  ignorant  as  not  to  see  the 
danger of this? The characteristic  of Pains  and Pleasures  isthat  they  are  unmistakably  real,  and  therefore,  as  far  as 
they go, give the man  who feels them  a touchstone  of real- 
ity. Thus  if you  had been  trying to damn  your  man  by the 
Romantic  method—by  making  him  a  kind  of  Childe 
Harold  or  Werther  submerged  in self-pity  for imaginary 
distresses—you  would  try to protect  him at all costs  from

any  real  pain;  because,  of course,  five  minutes’  genuine 
toothache  would  reveal  the romantic  sorrows  for the non- 
sense  they were  and  unmask  your  whole  stratagem.  But 
you  were  trying to  damn  your  patient  by the World,  that 
is  by palming  off  vanity,  bustle,  irony,  and  expensive 
tedium  as  pleasures.  How  can  you  have failed  to  see  that a 
real pleasure was  the last thing you  ought to  have  let him 
meet?  Didn’t you foresee that it would just kill by contrast 
all  the  trumpery  which  you  have  been  so  laboriously 
teaching him to value?  And that the sort  of pleasure which 
the book  and  the walk  gave  him was  the most  dangerous

64

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

of all? That  it would  peel off from  his sensibility  the kind 
of crust  you  have  been  forming  on  it, and  make  him  feel 
that  he was  coming  home,  recovering  himself?  As  a pre- 
liminary to detaching him from the Enemy, you wanted  to 
detach  him  from  himself,  and  had  made  some  progress  in 
doing so.  Now,  all that is undone.Of course  I know  that the Enemy  also wants  to  detach 
men  from  themselves,  but  in a  different  way.  Remember 
always,  that  He  really  likes  the  little  vermin,  and  sets  an 
absurd  value  on  the  distinctness  of every  one  of them. 
When  He talks  of their losing their  selves,  He only means 
abandoning  the clamour  of self-will;  once  they have  done 
that,  He  really  gives  them  back  all their  personality,  and 
boasts  (I am  afraid,  sincerely)  that  when  they are  wholly 
His they will be more  themselves  than  ever.  Hence,  while 
He is delighted  to  see  them  sacrificing  even  their innocent 
wills to His, He hates  to  see  them drifting away from their 
own  nature  for any  other  reason.  And  we  should  always 
encourage  them to do so.  The deepest likings and impulses 
of any  man  are  the  raw  material,  the  starting-point,  with 
which  the  Enemy  has  furnished  him.  To  get  him  away 
from  those  is  therefore  always  a  point  gained;  even  in 
things  indifferent  it is always  desirable  to  substitute  the

standards  of the  World,  or  convention,  or  fashion,  for  a

65

CHS  Wisstandards  of the  World,  or  convention,  or  fashion,  for  a

65

CHS  Wis

human’s  own  real  likings  and  dislikings.  I myself  would 
carry  this very far.  I would  make it a rule to  eradicate  from 
my patient any  strong personal  taste  which  is not  actually 
a sin, even  if it is something  quite trivial  such as  a fondness 
for county  cricket  or  collecting  stamps or  drinking  cocoa. 
Such  things,  I grant  you,  have  nothing  of virtue  in them; 
but  there  is a  sort  of innocence  and  humility  and  self- 
forgetfulness  about  them  which  I distrust.  The  man  who 
truly  and  disinterestedly  enjoys  any  one  thing  in  the 
world,  for  its  own  sake,  and  without  caring  two-pence 
what  other  people  say  about  it, is by that  very  fact  fore- 
armed  against  some  of our  subtlest  modes  of attack.  You 
should  always try to  make  the patient abandon  the people 
or  food  or  books  he  really  likes  in favour  of the  ‘best’ 
people,  the  ‘right’  food,  the  ‘important’  books.  I have 
known  a  human  defended  from  strong  temptations  to 
social  ambition  by a still  stronger  taste  for  tripe  and 
onions.

It remains  to consider  how we  can  retrieve  this disaster. 
The  great  thing is to  prevent  his doing anything.  As long 
as  he does  not  convert  it into  action,  it does  not  matter 
how  much  he thinks  about  this  new  repentance.  Let  the 
little  brute  wallow  in it. Let  him,  if he has  any  bent  that 
way,  write  a book  about  it; that is often  an  excellent  way

66

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

of  sterilising  the  seeds  which  the  Enemy  plants  in  a 
human  soul.  Let  him  do anything  but act.  No  amount  of

piety in his imagination  and  affections  will  harm  us  if we 
can  keep it out  of his will.  As one  of the humans  has said, 
active  habits  are  strengthened  by repetition  but  passive 
ones  are  weakened.  The  more  often  he feels  without  act-ing, the less he will be able ever  to  act,  and, in the long run,

the less he will be able to  feel,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

67

“4

,

Se: Bi  eet  CHREHIR A  oa dy  wae

AYes*  total  Fite  Fogle eg dedi ig  <Agid  sole aid 
bare  ne  De Braet  det bo”  ad  eer.  Pee 
SOO

<i

a  er  IeRES tee CP:  Pe

~

2

.

; 
pea  ‘  feria ext eWeh SS ri) Fa'be  eee  he 
wot Sie  a  0 ae

Nagy) 
iF  iFeea  Oo ie BOTA  ahha  art  Fi

*

=

way  Aisne  hay  oot  43 
iy

ig)

408

,

@  Re

.  a  fe

fae,  BR  tet  BcF  x2

4  Vast

>  i  9  ~  % “ay

re

By  ae bie  we  Sei  : tex}  <F  oe  a  fag &:

}  x  .

ud

-

y

aire

Psy

RAG  Het  ios)  ae  a  Seer eee  Sie  eel od ep

oo.

>”

oe

x

.

.

>“

gus

.

ey  ‘

ah  e

:

ae  SLOP  IE  el  IS  SH  PTI  THES  Shs  ton  14 
FA  Sus  OA  ni  ie  st Gaal Pala  4

.

:

.

<i!’

:

;

4 
h

*

3

es

—

_ 
Peg  atte  ot  Learnt  sesbalie

é 
ite

be

r

a

.

E

i

F

©

#  a

Ye

A

;

F 
aa)

~

«tes 
=

:

:

«

j

4

*

’

.

as  zu?

=

i?

®

\

wig

i

P

.

a 
-

s

>

"

-

‘

,

yg

'

4

*

rb

i

;

i

F

F

r

y

i.  hh

. x

ears 
<

vic

t

q

i

:

S

i

;

F 
¥

- 
;

‘

*

‘

Py

7

"

‘

ene

oo

ret

S

'

- a

i

S

Ses

eee

4

"7

‘

+

.

i  At

4

“

2

t  or 
.  (ab?

mR 
:

’

* 
F

'

j

;

; 
UE  VA  eke

|

.

&

ots

x

,

‘

.

‘

7

7

4

,

ie 
a

Ph

‘wih

'

7 
sks

4

es

y

‘

rs 
1 ay

by 
975% 
y 
: 
PEE

ve

14

My dear Wormwood,

The  most  alarming  thing  in your  last  account  of the 
patient  is that  he is making  none  of those  confident  reso- 
lutions  which  marked  his  original  conversion.  No  more 
lavish  promises  of perpetual  virtue,  I gather; not  even  the 
expectation  of an  endowment  of ‘grace’  for life, but only 
a hope for the daily and hourly pittance  to  meet  the daily 
and hourly temptation!  This  is very  bad.I see  only one  thing to  do at the moment.  Your  patient 
has  become  humble;  have  you  drawn  his attention  to  the 
fact?  All virtues  are  less  formidable  to  us  once  the man  is 
aware  that he has them, but this is specially true  of humil- 
ity. Catch  him  at  the  moment  when  he is really  poor  in 
spirit and  smuggle  into  his mind  the gratifying  reflection, 
‘By  jove!  I’m  being  humble’,  and  almost  immediately 
pride—pride  at  his  own  humility—will  appear.  If  he 
awakes  to  the danger  and  tries  to  smother  this  new  form 
of pride,  make  him  proud  of  his  attempt—and  so  on, 
through  as  many  stages  as  you  please.  But  don’t  try this 
too  long,  for  fear  you  awake  his  sense  of humour  and

69

CrS..  LEWES

proportion,  in which  case  he will merely laugh at you  and 
go to  bed.

But  there  are  other  profitable  ways  of fixing his atten- 
tion on  the virtue  of Humility.  By this virtue,  as  by all the 
others,  our  Enemy  wants  to  turn  the  man’s  attention 
away  from  self to  Him,  and to  the man’s  neighbours.  All 
the abjection and self-hatred  are  designed,  in the long run, 
solely for this  end; unless  they attain  this  end  they do us 
little harm; and they may even  do us  good if they keep the

man  concerned  with  himself,  and,  above  all, if self-con- 
tempt  can  be  made  the  starting-point  for  contempt  of 
other  selves,  and thus  for gloom, cynicism,  and cruelty.

You  must  therefore  conceal  from  the  patient  the  true 
end  of Humility.  Let him  think  of it not  as  self-forgetful-

ness  but as  a certain  kind  of opinion  (namely,  a low  opin-You  must  therefore  conceal  from  the  patient  the  true 
end  of Humility.  Let him  think  of it not  as  self-forgetful-

ness  but as  a certain  kind  of opinion  (namely,  a low  opin-

ion)  of  his  own  talents  and  character.  Some  talents,  I 
gather, he really has. Fix in his mind  the idea that humility 
consists  in trying  to  believe  those  talents  to  be less  valu- 
able than he believes  them to be. No doubt  they are  in fact 
less  valuable  than  he  believes,  but  that  is not  the  point. 
The  great  thing is to  make  him value  an  opinion  for some 
quality  other  than  truth,  thus  introducing  an  element  of 
dishonesty and make-believe  into the heart of what other- 
wise  threatens  to  become a virtue.  By this  method  thou-

79°

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS79°

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

sands  of humans  have  been  brought  to  think  that  humil- 
ity means  pretty  women  trying  to  believe  they are  ugly 
and clever  men  trying to  believe  they are  fools.  And  since 
what  they  are  trying  to  believe  may,  in  some  cases,  be 
manifest  nonsense,  they cannot  succeed  in believing it and 
we  have  the  chance  of  keeping  their  minds  endlessly 
revolving  on  themselves  in an  effort to achieve  the impos- 
sible.  To  anticipate  the  Enemy’s  strategy,  we  must  con- 
sider  His  aims.  The  Enemy  wants  to  bring the  man  to  a 
state  of mind  in which  he could  design the best  cathedral 
in the world,  and know  it to  be the best, and rejoice in the 
fact, without  being any more  (or less) or  otherwise  glad at 
having  done  it than  he would  be if it had  been  done  by 
another.  The  Enemy  wants  him,  in the end, to  be so  free 
from  any  bias  in his own  favour  that he can  rejoice  in his 
own  talents  as  frankly and gratefully  as  in his neighbour’s 
talents—or  in  a  sunrise,  an  elephant,  or  a  waterfall.  He 
wants  each man,  in the long run,  to be able to recognise  all 
creatures  (even  himself)  as  glorious  and  excellent  things. 
He wants  to kill their animal  self-love  as  soon  as  possible; 
but it is His  long-term  policy,  I fear, to  restore  to  them  a 
new  kind  of  self-love—a  charity  and  gratitude  for  all 
selves, including their own;  when  they have really learned 
to  love  their  neighbours  as  themselves,  they  will  be

7 =

CaS:  LEWES

allowed  to  love  themselves  as  their  neighbours.  For  we 
must  never  forget what  is the most  repellent  and inexpli- 
cable  trait  in  our  Enemy;  He  really  loves  the  hairless 
bipeds He has created  and always gives back to them with 
His right hand what  He has taken  away  with  His  left.His  whole  effort,  therefore,  will  be  to  get  the  man’s 
mind  off  the  subject  of  his  own  value  altogether.  He 
would  rather  the man  thought himself  a great architect  or 
a great poet and then  forgot about  it, than that he should 
spend much  time  and pains trying to  think  himself  a bad 
one.  Your  efforts  to  instil  either  vainglory  or  false  mod- 
esty  into  the  patient  will  therefore  be  met  from  the 
Enemy’s  side with the obvious  reminder  that a man  is not 
usually called  upon  to  have  an  opinion  of his own  talents 
at all, since  he can  very well  go on  improving  them  to  the 
best  of his  ability  without  deciding  on  his  own  precise 
niche  in the temple of Fame.  You  must  try to  exclude  this 
reminder  from the patient’s consciousness  at all costs.  The 
Enemy will  also  try to  render  real in the patient’s  mind  a 
doctrine  which  they  all  profess  but  find  it difficult  to 
bring home  to  their  feelings—the  doctrine  that  they did 
not  create  themselves,  that their  talents  were  given them, 
and that they might as well be proud of the colour  of their 
hair.  But always and by all methods  the Enemy’s  aim will

fa

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

be to  get the patient’s  mind  off such  questions,  and yours 
will be to  fix it on  them.  Even  of his sins  the Enemy  does 
not  want  him to  think  too  much:  once  they are  repented, 
the sooner  the man  turns  his attention  outward,  the better 
the Enemy  is pleased,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

i 3

hes MOR Bip se Rel  ahepats 8 
re * by eyes 1 aa zee! ay eae enti  2 Hive  fides 
sing Miter Spi JnTrhudnioalbidwts tid serie 
ne itt  ids Sve reine a sisteahiviieieal rt Sit VeOe

)

-

4  okt

*

rt

- 
Loe

ee

a

‘igs "ee a  . i  ies  cole: lay ni iy cf ss .

j 
7

.

7

my 
b 
ee 
.

F  $m,

a

j

»

f

r

:

T 
: 
5

7

*

ime 
mo

a

ia

=

¢

;

7  eee

ns

ee  ee  ee  te 4 oF  Oe)  Se  tise. ih ;  -

ioe‘igs "ee a  . i  ies  cole: lay ni iy cf ss .

j 
7

.

7

my 
b 
ee 
.

F  $m,

a

j

»

f

r

:

T 
: 
5

7

*

ime 
mo

a

ia

=

¢

;

7  eee

ns

ee  ee  ee  te 4 oF  Oe)  Se  tise. ih ;  -

ioe

SBSte  ber Baicinehig ay Fis  eoepesi

Hand

;

piles 
-

pa< 
;

rie

39

ey

hy

.

ba  $e {ee  se  arse, 
;

Z

b 
Basie hid.  igh  Vee  10  Te 
ee  eae

eh  ae

2

;

“Ped

a  ry

a

.

bas 
$  a4

= 
Rs

'

Cup

¢

ayy

ett

e.

P

3

.

"

od

;

A

p 
ao

’

em

-

aw  SOF

oF

t

"4

eae  01  bd 
rte

es  |  oa

se

ts

Petey  ete

‘

‘

A

a” 
3

ay

i  a 
,

sy

*

é.

%

a 
: 
Cokied  ae

Set)  6  ow

:

%

~

r

* 
Scot

S

‘ 
—es   \uate  *

‘

Pt

ey

7

a

ia 
;

a

a

We  Paes.  ex,

ee

er

=  T=

oe  44 thi aos

: 
“ 
ee

i  en

. 
& 
-it

“

"i

a

: 
ey

ee

<

trae

4

SESS

—"

ithe

¢ 
}

3

,

-

a

.

h

4

‘

i

7 
noe

rome 
Sa 
Pats

. 
aa

f

B

™

a  eh

Yair  ka  Ak  oS

ai

*

. 
r

abe 
,

-

ahs i 
ee  Be

+ 
“

~k 
a

Ana  oa

ie

x4

a  rie  Fee

Cite

b)

io]

SR  SRE  BRE  Rok

*  es r

:  !

Ri

-

yx

Ti

ie)

My dear Wormwood,

I had  noticed,  of course,  that  the humans  were  having 
a  lull  in their  European  war-what  they naively  call  ‘The 
War’!—and  am  not  surprised  that  there  is a correspond- 
ing lull in the patient’s  anxieties.  Do  we  want  to  encour- 
age  this,  or  to  keep  him  worried?  Tortured  fear  and 
stupid confidence  are  both  desirable  states  of mind.  Our 
choice  between  them  raises  important  questions.

The humans  live in time  but our  Enemy destines  themThe humans  live in time  but our  Enemy destines  them

to  eternity.  He  therefore,  I believe,  wants  them  to  attend 
chiefly  to  two  things,  to  eternity  itself,  and  to  that  point 
of time  which  they call the Present.  For the Present  is the 
point  at  which  time  touches  eternity.  Of  the  present 
moment,  and of it only, humans  have  an  experience  anal- 
ogous  to  the  experience  which  our  Enemy  has  of reality 
as  a  whole;  in it alone  freedom  and  actuality  are  offered 
them.  He  would  therefore  have  them  continually  con- 
cerned  either  with  eternity  (which  means  being  con- 
cerned  with Him) or with the Present—either  meditating

on  their  eternal  union  with, or  separation  from,  Himself,

ZS}

CFSE  WES

or  else  obeying  the present  voice  of conscience,  bearing 
the  present  cross,  receiving  the  present  grace,  giving 
thanks  for the present  pleasure.

Our business  is to  get them  away  from  the eternal,  and 
from  the Present.  With  this in view, we  sometimes  tempt 
a human  (say a widow  or a scholar)  to live in the Past.  But 
this  is of limited  value,  for  they have  some  real  knowl- 
edge of the  past  and  it has  a  determinate  nature  and,  to 
that  extent,  resembles  eternity.  It is far  better  to  make 
them  live  in  the  Future.  Biological  necessity  makes  all 
their  passions  point  in  that  direction  already,  so  that 
thought about  the Future  inflames  hope and fear.  Also, it 
is unknown  to  them, so  that in making them  think  about

it we  make  them  think  of  unrealities.  In  a  word,  the 
Future  is, of all things,  the  thing Jeast  like  eternity.  It is 
the most  completely  temporal  part  of time—for  the Past 
is frozen  and no  longer flows,  and the Present  is all lit up 
with  eternal  rays.  Hence  the  encouragement  we  have 
given  to  all  those  schemes  of thought  such  as  CreativeEvolution,  Scientific  Humanism,  or  Communism,  which 
fix  men’s  affections  on  the  Future,  on  the  very  core  of 
temporality.  Hence  nearly  all  vices  are  rooted  in  the 
future.  Gratitude  looks  to  the past  and  love  to  the  pres- 
ent;  fear,  avarice,  lust,  and  ambition  look  ahead.  Do  not

76

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

think  lust  an  exception.  When  the  present  pleasure 
arrives,  the  sin (which  alone  interests  us) is already  over. 
The  pleasure  is just  the  part  of the  process  which  we 
regret  and would  exclude  if we  could  do so  without  los- 
ing the  sin; it is the part  contributed  by the Enemy,  and 
therefore  experienced  in a Present.  The  sin, which  is our 
contribution,  looked  forward. 
To  be  sure,  the  Enemy  wants  men  to  think  of  the 
Future  too—just  so  much  as  is necessary  for now  plan- 
ning the acts  of justice or  charity which  will probably  be 
their  duty  tomorrow.  The  duty  of planning  the  mor- 
row’s  work  is today’s  duty;  though  its  material  is bor-

rowed  from  the future,  the  duty,  like  all duties,  is in the 
Present.  This  is now  straw  splitting.  He  does  not  want 
men  to  give the  Future  their  hearts,  to  place  their  trea- 
sure  in it. We  do. His  ideal  is  a man  who, having worked 
all day for the good of posterity  (if that  is his vocation), 
washes  his mind  of the whole  subject,  commits  the issue 
to  Heaven,  and  returns  at  once  to  the patience  or  grati- 
tude  demanded  by the moment  that is passing  over  him. 
But  we  want  a man  hag-ridden  by the Future—haunted 
by visions  of an  imminent  heaven  or  hell  upon  earth— 
ready to  break  the  Enemy’s  commands  in the present  if 
by so  doing we  make  him think  he can  attain  the one  or

Tai

Cc.  S.  LEWISTai

Cc.  S.  LEWIS

avert  the  other—dependent  for  his  faith  on  the  success 
or  failure  of schemes  whose  end  he will  not  live  to  see. 
We want  a whole  race  perpetually  in pursuit  of the rain- 
bow’s  end,  never  honest,  nor  kind,  nor  happy  now,  but 
always  using as  mere  fuel wherewith  to  heap the altar  of 
the  future  every  real  gift which  is offered  them  in  the

Present.

It  follows  then,  in  general,  and  other  things  being 
equal,  that  it is better  for  your  patient  to  be  filled  with

anxiety or  hope (it doesn’t  much  matter  which)  about  this 
war  than for him to be living in the present.  But the phrase 
‘living in the present’  is ambiguous.  It may describe  a pro- 
cess  which  is  really  just  as  much  concerned  with  the 
Future  as  anxiety  itself.  Your  man  may  be  untroubled

about  the  Future,  not  because  he  is concerned  with  the 
Present,  but  because  he  has  persuaded  himself  that  the 
Future  is going to  be agreeable.  As long as  that is the real

cause  of his  tranquillity,  his tranquillity  will  do us  good, 
because  it is  only  piling  up  more  disappointment,  and 
therefore  more  impatience,  for him  when  his false  hopes 
are  dashed.  If, on  the other  hand, he is aware  that horrors 
may  be  in  store  for  him  and  is praying  for  the  virtues, 
wherewith  to  meet  them,  and  meanwhile  concerning 
himself with the Present  because  there, and there alone, all

78

THE  SCREW  LIAPE  LETTERS78

THE  SCREW  LIAPE  LETTERS

duty,  all grace,  all knowledge,  and  all pleasure  dwell,  his 
state  is very  undesirable  and  should  be attacked  at  once. 
Here  again,  our  Philological  Arm  has  done  good  work; 
try  the  word  ‘complacency’  on  him.  But,  of course,  it is 
most  likely  that  he is ‘living  in the  Present’  for  none  of 
these reasons  but simply because  his health is good and he 
is enjoying  his  work.  The  phenomenon  would  then  be 
merely natural.  All the same,  I should  break  it up if I were 
you.  No natural  phenomenon  is really in our  favour.  And 
anyway,  why should  the creature  be happy?

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

Ho)

‘gnest

ena aay

;

‘

Phe 
‘cies 
ee  ee

iw ess ‘apie a ae weg

A: 
oligeae ives diaee ov beaipegeele

ee  eee aes eettoiteed mora

re  ere  aT  sate  “haar Mane  ox  On  fGe 
ae  ieee 
ee 
SEAS  Bd

fey  ges  Pear  Mp Cyt acd aed 7 
a icin 
Say Genecsied  jlacals  ani  a

i

eon

eek  CARN  eae  Braap: Witt, te Bites

¢

ik

“

Seiad  cae  ot See  PY  vie ee  oa  “acre  ae 
BER E AE,  SOE  aaa  as  iaaae  RIE  ce 
Peretti onc pei  ae lle  ee): ats tele Saipan oa 
}  rape,  om wes  SEs thee ye Sop  ie  eae 
Con  DF  ts  hae ee ns, sein dieing, ie meaning 
a eee  y gs. th ae Hig: Wott  : 
Aivaoaqrine Sip aoe Hconniy!

16

My dear Wormwood,

You  mentioned  casually  in  your  last  letter  that  the 
patient has continued  to  attend  one  church,  and one  only, 
since  he was  converted,  and that he is not  wholly pleased 
with  it. May  I ask  what  you  are  about?  Why  have  I no 
report  on  the  causes  of his  fidelity  to  the parish  church? 
Do  you  realise  that  unless  it is due  to  indifference  it is a 
very  bad  thing?  Surely  you  know  that  if a  man  can’t  be 
cured  of churchgoing,  the  next  best  thing is to  send  him 
all over  the  neighbourhood  looking  for  the  church  that 
‘suits’  him  until  he  becomes  a taster  or  connoisseur  ofchurches.

The reasons  are  obvious.  In the first place the parochial 
organisation  should  always  be attacked,  because,  being  a 
unity of place and not  of likings, it brings people of differ- 
ent  classes  and  psychology  together  in the  kind  of unity 
the  Enemy  desires.  The  congregational  principle,  on  the 
other  hand,  makes  each  church  into  a  kind  of club,  and 
finally, if all goes  well, into  a coterie  or  faction.  In the sec- 
ond place, the search for a ‘suitable’  church makes  the man

SI

Gc,  S>  LEWISSI

Gc,  S>  LEWIS

a critic  where  the  Enemy  wants  him  to  be a pupil. What 
He  wants  of the  layman  in  church  is an  attitude  which 
may,  indeed,  be  critical  in the  sense  of rejecting  what  is 
false  or  unhelpful,  but  which  is wholly  uncritical  in the 
sense  that  it does  not  appraise—does  not  waste  time  in 
thinking  about  what  it  rejects,  but  lays  itself  open  in 
uncommenting,  humble  receptivity  to  any  nourishment 
that  is going.  (You  see  how  grovelling,  how  unspiritual, 
how  irredeemably  vulgar He  is!) This  attitude,  especially 
during sermons,  creates  the condition  (most hostile  to  our 
whole policy) in which platitudes  can  become  really audi- 
ble to  a  human  soul.  There  is hardly  any  sermon,  or  any 
book, which  may not  be dangerous to us  if it is received  in 
this temper.  So pray  bestir  yourself and send  this fool the 
round  of the  neighbouring  churches  as  soon  as  possible. 
Your record  up to date has not  given us  much  satisfaction. 
The  two  churches  nearest  to  him,  I have  looked  up  in 
the  office.  Both  have  certain  claims.  At  the  first  of these 
the Vicar is  a man  who  has been so  long engaged in water- 
ing  down  the  faith  to  make  it easier  for  a  supposedly 
incredulous  and  hard-headed  congregation  that  it is now 
he who  shocks  his parishioners  with  his unbelief,  not  vice 
versa.  He has undermined  many a soul’s  Christianity.  His 
conduct  of the services  is also admirable.  In order to  spare

82

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS82

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

the  laity  all  ‘difficulties’  he  has  deserted  both  the  lec- 
tionary and the appointed psalms and now,  without  notic- 
ing it, revolves  endlessly  round  the  little  treadmill  of his 
fifteen  favourite  psalms  and  twenty  favourite  lessons.  We 
are  thus  safe  from  the  danger  that  any  truth  not  already 
familiar  to  him  and  to  his  flock  should  ever  reach  them 
through  Scripture.  But  perhaps  your  patient  is not  quite 
silly enough for this church—or  not  yet?

At the other  church  we  have  Fr Spike.  The  humans  are 
often  puzzled  to  understand  the  range  of his  opinions— 
why he is one  day almost  a Communist  and  the next  not 
far  from  some  kind  of  theocratic  Fascism—one  day  a 
scholastic,  and  the  next  prepared  to  deny  human  reason 
altogether—one  day  immersed  in  politics,  and,  the  day 
after,  declaring  that  all  states  of  this  world  are  equally 
‘under  judgment’.  We,  of course,  see  the connecting  link, 
which  is Hatred.  The  man  cannot  bring himself  to  preach

~

anything  which  is not  calculated  to  shock,  grieve,  puzzle, 
or  humiliate  his parents  and their friends.  A sermon  which 
such  people  could  accept  would  be to  him  as  insipid  as  a 
poem  which  they  could  scan.  There  is also  a  promising 
streak  of dishonesty  in him;  we  are  teaching  him  to  say 
‘The  teaching  of the Church  is’ when  he really means  ‘I’m 
almost  sure  I read recently  in Maritain  or  someone  of that

83

C.  SBE  WLS

sort’.  But I must  warn  you that he has one  fatal defect:  he 
really believes.  And this may  yet mar  all.83

C.  SBE  WLS

sort’.  But I must  warn  you that he has one  fatal defect:  he 
really believes.  And this may  yet mar  all.

But there  is one  good point which  both these  churches 
have  in common—they  are  both party  churches.  I think I 
warned you before that if your patient can’t be kept out  of 
the  Church,  he ought  at  least  to  be violently  attached  to 
some  party  within  it.  I don’t  mean  on  really  doctrinal

issues;  about  those,  the  more  lukewarm  he is the  better. 
And it isn’t the doctrines  on  which  we  chiefly depend for 
producing  malice.  The  real  fun  is  working  up  hatred 
between  those  who  say  ‘mass’  and  those  who  say  ‘holy 
communion’  when  neither  party  could  possibly  state  the 
difference  between,  say,  Hooker’s  doctrine  and  Thomas 
Aquinas’,  in any  form  which  would  hold  water  for  five 
minutes.  And  all  the  purely  indifferent  things—candles 
and  clothes  and  what  not—are  an  admirable  ground  for 
our  activities.  We  have  quite removed  from  men’s  minds 
what  that  pestilent  fellow  Paul  used  to  teach  about  food 
and  other  unessentials—namely,  that the human  without 
scruples  should  always  give in to  the  human  with  scru- 
ples. You would  think they could  not  fail to  see  the appli- 
cation.  You  would  expect  to  find  the  ‘low’  churchman 
genuflecting  and  crossing  himself  lest  the  weak  con- 
science  of his ‘high’ brother  should  be moved  to  irrever-

84

DLHESS  CREWTAPE  DETTE RS

ence,  and  the  ‘high’  one  refraining  from  these  exercises 
lest he should  betray his ‘low’  brother  into  idolatry.  And 
so  it  would  have  been  but  for  our  ceaseless  labour. 
Without  that  the  variety  of usage  within  the  Church  of 
England  might have  become a positive  hotbed  of charity 
and humility,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

8 5

vA Puyaate 4 oe ‘er “te >  gia ‘

,

: ie pes ti

by 
apt

>’

nT

yt  a

.

"Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

8 5

vA Puyaate 4 oe ‘er “te >  gia ‘

,

: ie pes ti

by 
apt

>’

nT

yt  a

.

"

4

’ 
ea  &

Ps

7

¢

y

> 
re

b. &

|

Ps

re 
: 
F 
_

} 
G f 
a

\  F,

i

4 i

4

.

.

,

’

2

is  aah  a

Neat eBags es  td bb

<  "

‘ 
~

f

4 
ae 
165  a}  SH  co

f

See  ate

z

‘ 
ee

ee, 
4 
erty  by 
Me at 
.

;

Wa

é

i 
oe]

'

be 
ros

eet

229

Ares 
!

i

et

-

*.

aves 
en  Ay  Fi  za 
sd

y¢

a

:

4 
:

‘e

Ls

CN |  jae  hy  act

z

4

t

.

.

a

:

Le

©

} 
wl

§

reyicae!

i

ei

er

i

:

el

mo

+

e 
;.

.

i

wa

,

*)

}

i

5

sc

ee

.a  2 
x

rata

ALS

‘ 
Bare 
¢

z §-4

2a

;

+

"

;

a

:

As  tae: 
7

"|e 
ey 
th

x

’

i 
44

ia

Li

; 
ao)

oe  tee

:

Ry

Keon 
Pl 
Me  Vi

iS

Y

‘

(

ie  del

SS

PNT  EMER

ie seat  ae

*

}

OT 
"eR

bees 
5

ae  a  en 
Vs

4 
i 
i)

.

;

va

7

; 
ek

\

'

Saal

bear

pei or

>

|

:

ry ¥

j

x

;

7

ik

H

,

4

. 
bls

<

mls

-

4

ie 
Lhe

i

:

r 
Rare 
ee

Vey

iY 
Ta

;

*

4  a  |

“a 
\eshat 
ra 
ea  is  2 
a:

“tf

ee 
ane

i

i

i

i

se

bhp. 
Crea

*  7

(EAR

oh)  i

.

5 
iL

)

1,

My dear Wormwood,

The  contemptuous  way  in which  you  spoke  of glut- 
tony  as  a means  of catching  souls,  in your  last letter,  only 
shows  your  ignorance.  One  of the  great  achievements  of 
the last hundred  years  has been to  deaden  the human  con- 
science  on that  subject,  so  that  by now  you  will  hardly 
find  a sermon  preached  or  a conscience  troubled  about  it 
in  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  Europe.  This  has 
largely  been  effected  by concentrating  all our  efforts  on 
gluttony  of  Delicacy,  not  gluttony  of  Excess.  Yourpatient’s  mother,  as  I learn  from  the  dossier  and  you 
might have  learned  from  Glubose,  is  a good example.  She 
would  be astonished—one  day, I hope,  will be—to  learn 
that  her  whole  life  is enslaved  to  this  kind  of sensuality, 
which  is  quite  concealed  from  her  by the  fact  that  the 
quantities  involved  are  small.  But what do quantities  mat- 
ter, provided  we  can  use  a human  belly and palate to  pro- 
duce  querulousness,  impatience,  uncharitableness,  and 
self-concern?  Glubose  has  this  old  woman  well  in hand. 
She  is a  positive  terror  to  hostesses  and  servants.  She  is

87

GOES  Ewes:

always  turning  from  what  has  been  offered  her  to  say 
with a demure  little sigh and a smile  ‘Oh please, please... 
all | want  is a cup  of tea,  weak  but not  too  weak,  and the 
teeniest  weeniest  bit  of  really  crisp  toast.’  You  see? 
Because  what  she  wants  is smaller  and  less  costly  than 
what has been set  before  her, she never  recognises  as  glut- 
tony  her  determination  to  get what  she  wants,  however 
troublesome  it may  be to  others.  At the very  moment  of 
indulging  her  appetite  she  believes  that  she  is practising 
temperance.  In  a  crowded  restaurant  she  gives a little 
scream  at the plate which  some  overworked  waitress  has 
set  before  her and says,  “Oh, that’s  far, far too  much!  Take 
it away  and bring me  about  a quarter  of it.’ If challenged, 
she would  say she was  doing this to avoid waste;  in reality 
she  does  it because  the  particular  shade  of  delicacy  to 
which  we  have  enslaved  her  is offended  by the  sight  of 
more  food  than  she happens  to want.

The  real  value  of the  quiet,  unobtrusive  work  whichThe  real  value  of the  quiet,  unobtrusive  work  which

Glubose  has been  doing for years  on  this  old woman  can 
be gauged  by the way  in which  her belly now  dominates 
her whole  life.  The  woman  is in what  may  be called  the 
‘All-I-want’  state  of mind.  All  she  wants  is a  cup  of tea 
properly  made,  or  an  egg  properly  boiled,  or a slice  of 
bread properly toasted.  But she never  finds any servant  or

88

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

any  friend  who  can  do  these  simple  things  ‘properly’— 
because  her ‘properly’  conceals  an  insatiable  demand  for 
the exact,  and  almost  impossible,  palatal pleasures  which 
she  imagines  she  remembers  from  the  past;  a  past 
described  by her  as  ‘the  days when  you  could  get  good 
servants’  but  known  to  us  as  the  days  when  her  senses 
were  more  easily pleased  and  she  had  pleasures  of other 
kinds  which  made  her  less  dependent  on  those  of  the 
table.  Meanwhile,  the  daily  disappointment  produces 
daily  ill  temper:  cooks  give  notice  and  friendships  are 
cooled.  If ever  the Enemy introduces  into her mind a faint 
suspicion  that  she  is  too  interested  in  food,  Glubose 
counters  it by suggesting  to  her  that  she  doesn’t  mind 
what  she eats  herself  but “does  like to  have  things nice for 
her boy’. In fact, of course,  her greed has been one  of the 
chief sources  of his domestic  discomfort  for many  years. 
Now  your  patient  is his  mother’s  son.  While  working 
your  hardest,  quite rightly,  on  other fronts,  you  must  not 
neglect  a  little  quiet  infiltration  in  respect  of  gluttony. 
Being a male,  he is not  so  likely to  be caught by the ‘AI 
want’  camouflage.  Males  are  best  turned  into  gluttons 
with  the  help of their  vanity.  They  ought  to  be  made  to 
think  themselves  very  knowing  about  food,  to  pique 
themselves  on  having  found  the  only  restaurant  in  the

89

C..8:89

C..8:

LE  WLS

town  where  steaks  are  really  ‘properly’  cooked.  What 
begins  as  vanity  can then  be gradually  turned  into  habit. 
But,  however  you  approach  it, the great  thing is to  bring 
him  into  the  state  in which  the  denial  of any  one  indul- 
gence—it  matters  not  which,  champagne  or  tea,  sole  col- 
bert  or  cigarettes—‘puts  him  out’,  for  then  his  charity, 
justice,  and obedience  are  all at your  mercy.

Mere  excess  in food  is much  less valuable  than  delicacy. 
Its chief use  is as  a kind  of artillery preparation  for attacks 
on  chastity.  On that, as  on  every  other  subject,  keep your 
man  in  a  condition  of  false  spirituality.  Never  let  him 
notice  the  medical  aspect.  Keep  him  wondering  what 
pride  or  lack  of faith  has  delivered  him  into  your  hands 
when  a  simple  enquiry  into  what  he  has  been  eating  or 
drinking  for the last twenty-four  hours  would  show  him 
whence  your  ammunition  comes  and  thus  enable  him  by 
a very  little  abstinence  to  imperil  your  lines  of communi- 
cation.  If he must  think of the medical  side of chastity, feed 
him the grand lie which we  have made the English humans 
believe,  that  physical  exercise  in  excess  and  consequent

fatigue  are  specially  favourable  to  this  virtue.  How  they

can  believe  this,  in  face  of  the  notorious  lustfulness  of 
sailors  and  soldiers,  may  well  be asked.  But  we  used  the 
schoolmasters  to  put  the  story  about—men  who  were

90

THE  SGCREWTAPE  LETTERS

really  interested  in  chastity  as  an  excuse  for  games  and 
therefore  recommended  games  as  an  aid  to  chastity.  But 
this whole  business  is too  large to  deal with  at the tail-end

of a letter,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

91

3 
\ 
: 
.

>

{

ee 
:  -

®

mr 
;

~*~.

‘

ie)

; 
ae  ty

xi:

sad 
*  a), ee

PLES

Se

he  ae  tle

‘

FIRES 
+ 
Sy

=

ge

‘

;

=>

et 
ial

,

aeYour  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

91

3 
\ 
: 
.

>

{

ee 
:  -

®

mr 
;

~*~.

‘

ie)

; 
ae  ty

xi:

sad 
*  a), ee

PLES

Se

he  ae  tle

‘

FIRES 
+ 
Sy

=

ge

‘

;

=>

et 
ial

,

ae

ey

e.

ee

84  ee  ah  a

i

bad

Va

_

ne 
a

‘

.

. 
;

ea

;

+  i

r 
._ 
re  eee

3 Htgtegts: bet | vatetrs

cal

f

‘

<<

msi 
ODN tnteke

began

=

-

ad

RS  i  ote 
~

=

rh

iced

Tey 
Ps 
F 
SL  PRs  A  be inet QO  bee  ret 
ix 
t

=

L-

~

-

aes

,

.

4

‘os

4

=

em

Joh

rah

ae

:

Wye

be

.

7

as

ite

oe

~

to

Eee

i

z

ioe

-F

*

2

%

4

-

ck

e

‘,

on4

sd

"7 
'

‘

ms

7

a

.

P

he.

‘

?

.

t

,

»

SS

~

‘

- 
: 
me

‘

~.

¥

‘ 
a

»

Tis

3

a

<

”

.

bP

-

Sa

a

ak

?  ~\

<3

¢

.

7

,

.

LP

%

i 
} 
,

d

’

?

i* 
a 
1

“

oy

4

~

Pha

|

é

~~

+

e

i

4

4

,

|

Ph

Li

VU

is 
-

¥

_*

‘A

“

$

y 
wei 
cod

j 
lays 
Cc} 
wrens

; 
See 
a

r

e

18

My dear Wormwood,

Even  under  Slubgob  you  must  have  learned  at  college 
the  routine  technique  of sexual  temptation,  and  since, 
for us  spirits,  this  whole  subject  is one  of considerable 
tedium  (though  necessary  as  part  of our  training)  I will 
pass  it over.  But  on  the larger issues  involved  I think  you 
have  a good deal  to  learn.

The  Enemy’s  demand  on  humans  takes  the  form  of a 
dilemma;  ether  complete  abstinence  or  unmitigated

monogamy.  Ever  since  our  Father’s  first great victory, weThe  Enemy’s  demand  on  humans  takes  the  form  of a 
dilemma;  ether  complete  abstinence  or  unmitigated

monogamy.  Ever  since  our  Father’s  first great victory, we

have  rendered  the former  very  difficult  to  them.  The  lat- 
ter,  for the last few centuries,  we  have  been  closing  up  as 
a way of escape.  We have  done this through the poets  and 
novelists  by persuading  the  humans  that  a  curious,  and 
usually  shortlived,  experience  which  they  call  ‘being  in 
love’  is  the  only  respectable  ground  for  marriage;  that 
marriage  can,  and  ought  to,  render  this  excitement  per- 
manent;  and  that  a  marriage  which  does  not  do so  is no 
longer  binding.  This  idea  is our  parody  of an  idea  that 
came  from  the Enemy.

DS)

G.  S.  LEW1sS

The  whole  philosophy  of Hell  rests  on  recognition  of 
the  axiom  that  one  thing  is not  another  thing,  and,  spe- 
cially,  that  one  self  is not  another  self.  My  good  is my 
good  and  your  good  is yours.  What  one  gains  another 
loses.  Even  an  inanimate  object is what  it is by excluding 
all other  objects  from  the space  it occupies;  if it expands, 
it does so  by thrusting other objects aside or  by absorbing 
them.  A self  does  the  same.  With  beasts  the  absorption 
takes  the  form  of eating;  for us,  it means  the  sucking  of 
will  and freedom  out  of a weaker  self into  a stronger.  “To 
be’ means  ‘to be in competition’.

Now  the  Enemy’s  philosophy  is  nothing  more  nor 
less than  one  continued  attempt  to  evade  this very  obvi-

ous  truth.  He  aims  at  a  contradiction.  Things  are  to  be 
many,  yet somehow  also  one.  The  good of one  self is to 
be the good of another.  This  impossibility  He calls  love, 
and  this  same  monotonous  panacea  can  be  detected

under  all He  does  and  even  all He  is—or  claims  to  be.

Thus  He  is  not  content,  even  Himself,  to  be  a  sheerunder  all He  does  and  even  all He  is—or  claims  to  be.

Thus  He  is  not  content,  even  Himself,  to  be  a  sheer

arithmetical  unity;  He  claims  to  be three  as  well  as  one, 
in  order  that  this  nonsense  about  Love  may  find  a 
foothold  in  His  own  nature.  At  the other  end  of  the

scale,  He  introduces  into  matter  that  obscene  invention 
the  organism,  in  which  the  parts  are  perverted  from

94

‘THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

their  natural  destiny  of  competition  and  made  to  co- 
operate.

His  real  motive  for  fixing  on  sex  as  the  method  of 
reproduction  among  humans  is only too  apparent  from 
the use  He has made  of it. Sex might have  been, from  our 
point of view,  quite innocent.  It might have  been  merely 
one  more  mode  in which a stronger  self preyed  upon  a

weaker—as  it is, indeed,  among  the  spiders  where  the 
bride  concludes  her nuptials  by eating the groom.  But  in 
‘the humans  the Enemy  has  gratuitously  associated  affec- 
tion  between  the parties  with  sexual  desire.  He  has  also 
made  the  offspring  dependent  on  the  parents  and  given 
the parents  an  impulse to  support  it—thus  producing  the 
Family,  which  is like  the  organism,  only worse;  for  the 
members  are  more  distinct,  yet also united in a more  con- 
scious  and  responsible  way.  The  whole  thing,  in  fact, 
turns  out  to  be simply  one  more  device  for  dragging  in

Love.

Now  comes  the joke.  The  Enemy  described  a  married

couple  as  ‘one  flesh’.  He  did  not  say  ‘a happily  married 
couple’  or  ‘a couple  who  married  because  they  were  in 
love’,  but you  can  make  the humans  ignore  that.  You  can 
also  make  them  forget that the man  they call Paul  did not

confine  it to  married  couples.  Mere  copulation,  for  him,

95

Cc.  Ss.  LEWISconfine  it to  married  couples.  Mere  copulation,  for  him,

95

Cc.  Ss.  LEWIS

makes  ‘one flesh’.  You  can  thus get the humans  to accept as 
rhetorical  eulogies of ‘being in love’ what were  in fact plain 
descriptions  of the  real  significance  of sexual  intercourse. 
The truth  is that wherever  a man  lies with a woman,  there, 
whether  they like  it or  not,  a transcendental  relation  is set 
up between  them which  must  be eternally enjoyed or eter- 
nally endured.  From  the true  statement  that this transcen- 
dental  relation  was  intended  to produce, and, if obediently 
entered  into, too  often wll produce, affection  and the fam- 
ily, humans  can  be made  to  infer  the  false  belief  that  the 
blend  of affection,  fear, and desire which  they call ‘being in 
love’  is the only thing that makes  marriage either happy or 
holy. The  error  is easy  to  produce  because  ‘being in love’ 
does  very  often,  in  Western  Europe,  precede  marriages 
which  are  made  in obedience  to  the Enemy’s  designs,  that 
is, with the intention  of fidelity, fertility and good will; just 
as  religious  emotion  very  often,  but  not  always,  attends

conversion.  In other  words,  the humans  are  to  be encour- 
aged to  regard  as  the basis  for marriage  a highly-coloured 
and  distorted  version  of  something  the  Enemy  really 
promises  as  its result.  Two  advantages  follow.  In the first 
place, humans  who  have  not  the gift of continence  can  be 
deterred  from  seeking  marriage  as  a solution  because  they

do not  find themselves  ‘in love’, and, thanks  to  us, the idea

96

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

of marrying with any other  motive  seems  to them low and 
cynical.  Yes, they think  that.  They regard the intention  of 
loyalty  to  a partnership  for mutual  help, for the preserva-of marrying with any other  motive  seems  to them low and 
cynical.  Yes, they think  that.  They regard the intention  of 
loyalty  to  a partnership  for mutual  help, for the preserva-

tion  of chastity,  and  for the  transmission  of life, as  some- 
thing  lower  than  a  storm  of emotion.  (Don’t  neglect  to 
make your man  think the marriage-service  very offensive.) 
In  the  second  place  any  sexual  infatuation  whatever,  so 
long as  it intends  marriage,  will  be regarded  as  ‘love’,  and 
‘love’  will be held to  excuse  a man  from all the guilt, and to 
protect  him from  all the consequences,  of marrying  a hea-

then, a fool, or  a wanton.  But  more  of this in my next,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

97

ake wd  tat 
vad

Si

PRUE  ee  ca  Tae  ee roy fencsive: Bese

=  PER  Psseak

‘ ia AAI Be serie: sore j

SPIELE  SS  Een  pastas tie) vos

is,

a

;

‘ie

=

ee  0s  sath

Si 
|

i

GF

2

"  my

:. 
=

»

iy

v Ben #] thee 
ve? 
i

A. A 
shed

Zaire puted tes sidiiwes

te  evi piminoad Woe exert}

i?

My dear Wormwood,is,

a

;

‘ie

=

ee  0s  sath

Si 
|

i

GF

2

"  my

:. 
=

»

iy

v Ben #] thee 
ve? 
i

A. A 
shed

Zaire puted tes sidiiwes

te  evi piminoad Woe exert}

i?

My dear Wormwood,

I have  been  thinking  very  hard  about  the  question  in 
your  last letter.  If, as  I have clearly shown,  all selves  are  by 
their  very  nature  in  competition,  and  therefore  the 
Enemy’s  idea of Love  is a  contradiction  in terms,  what 
becomes  of my reiterated  warning that He really loves  the 
human  vermin  and  really desires  their  freedom  and  con- 
tinued  existence?  I hope,  my  dear  boy,  you  have  not 
shown  my letters  to anyone.  Not that it matters  of course. 
Anyone  would  see  that  the  appearance  of  heresy  into 
which  I have  fallen  is purely  accidental.  By the  way,  I 
hope you  understood,  too,  that  some  apparently  uncom- 
plimentary  references  to  Slubgob  were  purely  jocular.  I 
really  have  the  highest  respect  for  him.  And,  of course, 
some  things  I said  about  not  shielding  you  from  the 
authorities  were  not  seriously  meant.  You  can  trust  me  to 
look  after  your  interests.  But  do  keep  everything  under 
lock  and key.

The  truth  is I slipped  by mere  carelessness  into  saying 
that the Enemy really loves  the humans.  That, of course,  is

99

CG.  S.  LEWISThe  truth  is I slipped  by mere  carelessness  into  saying 
that the Enemy really loves  the humans.  That, of course,  is

99

CG.  S.  LEWIS

an  impossibility.  He  is one  being,  they  are  distinct  from 
Him.  Their  good cannot  be His.  All His  talk  about  Love 
must  be a disguise for something else—He  must  have some 
real motive  for creating  them  and taking  so  much  trouble 
about  them.  The  reason  one  comes  to  talk  as  if He  really 
had this impossible  Love is our utter  failure to find out  that 
real  motive.  What  does  He  stand  to  make  out  of them? 
That  is the  insoluble  question.  I do not  see  that  it can  do 
any  harm  to  tell  you  that  this  very  problem  was  a chief 
cause  of Our  Father’s  quarrel  with  the  Enemy.  When  the

creation  of man  was  first  mooted  and  when,  even  at  that 
stage, the Enemy freely confessed  that He foresaw a certain 
episode about a cross,  Our Father very naturally sought an 
interview  and  asked  for  an  explanation.  The  Enemy  gave 
no  reply except  to  produce  the cock-and-bull  story  about 
disinterested  love which He has been circulating ever  since. 
This  Our  Father  naturally  could  not  accept.  He  implored 
the  Enemy  to  lay His  cards  on  the  table,  and  gave  Him 
every opportunity.  He admitted  that he felt a real anxiety to 
know  the  secret;  the  Enemy  replied  ‘I wish  with  all my 
heart  that  you  did.’  It was,  I imagine,  at  this  stage  in the 
interview  that Our Father’s  disgust at such an  unprovoked 
lack of confidence  caused him to remove  himself an infinite 
distance  from  the  Presence  with  a  suddenness  which  has

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERSTHE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

given  rise  to  the  ridiculous  Enemy  story  that  he  was 
forcibly thrown  out  of Heaven.  Since  then, we  have begun 
to  see  why  our  Oppressor  was  so  secretive.  His  throne 
depends  on  the  secret.  Members  of His  faction  have  fre- 
quently  admitted  that if ever  we  came  to  understand  what 
He  means  by love, the war  would  be over  and we  should 
re-enter  Heaven.  And  there  lies  the  great  task.  We  know 
that  He  cannot  really  love:  nobody  can:  it doesn’t  make 
sense.  If we  could  only find  out  what  He  is really  up  to! 
Hypothesis  after  hypothesis  has  been  tried,  and  still  we 
can’t find out.  Yet we  must  never  lose hope; more  and more

complicated  theories,  fuller  and  fuller  collections  of data,

richer  rewards  for  researchers  who  make  progress,  more 
and more  terrible  punishments  for those who fail—all  this, 
pursued  and  accelerated  to  the  very  end  of time,  cannot, 
surely, fail to  succeed.

You  complain  that  my  last  letter  does  not  make  it clear 
whether  I regard  being  in  love  as  a  desirable  state  for  a 
human  or  not.  But  really,  Wormwood,  that  is the  sort  of 
question  one  expects  them  to  ask!  Leave  them  to  discuss

whether  ‘Love’,  or  patriotism,  or  celibacy,  or  candles  on 
altars, or teetotalism,  or education,  are  ‘good’ or ‘bad’.  Can’t 
you see  there’s  no  answer?  Nothing matters  at all except  the 
tendency of a given state  of mind, in given circumstances,  to

IO!

Cus}  LEW  LSIO!

Cus}  LEW  LS

move a particular  patient  at  a particular  moment  nearer  to 
the Enemy  or  nearer.to  us.  Thus  it would  be quite a  good 
thing  to  make  the  patient  decide  that  ‘Love’  is ‘good’  or 
‘bad’.  If he is an  arrogant  man  with a contempt  for the body 
really based  on  delicacy  but mistaken  by him for purity— 
and one  who takes pleasure in flouting what most  of his fel- 
lows  approve—by  all  means  let  him  decide  against  love. 
Instil  into  him  an  overweening  asceticism  and  then, when 
you have separated his sexuality from all that might human- 
ise it, weigh in on him with it in some  much more  brutal and

cynical  form.  If, on  the  other  hand,  he  is an  emotional, 
gullible man,  feed him on  minor poets  and fitth-rate  novel- 
ists of the old school  until  you  have  made  him believe  that 
‘Love’  is both irresistible  and somehow  intrinsically merito- 
rious.  This  belief is not  much  help, I grant  you,  in produc- 
ing casual  unchastity;  but  it is an  incomparable  recipe  for 
prolonged,  ‘noble’,  romantic,  tragic adulteries,  ending, if all 
goes  well,  in murders  and  suicides.  Failing  that,  it can  be 
used  to  steer  the  patient  into  a  useful  marriage.  For  mar-

riage,  though  the  Enemy’s  invention,  has  its  uses.  There 
must  be several  young women  in your patient’s  neighbour- 
hood who would render the Christian life intensely difficult 
to  him  if only you  could  persuade  him  to  marry  one  of 
them.  Please  send me a report  on  this when you  next  write.

Mow

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

In the  meantime,  get  it quite  clear  in your  own  mind  that 
this  state  of falling  in  love  is  not,  in  itself,  necessarily 
favourable  either  to  us  or  to  the other  side.  It is simply  an 
occasion  which  we  and  the  Enemy  are  both  trying  to 
exploit.  Like  most  of the  other  things  which  humans  areexcited  about, such as  health  and sickness,  age and youth, or 
war  and peace,  it is, from  the point of view  of the spiritual

life, mainly raw  material,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

103

y

Pry “yf ay  ie ees 7

thy 
ekeyTiay  sn is wt  |  Bah:  "3 
Seal) 9  oe

Pas

La

Le

at Je -

:

7

airs  pede  hae

5  Ata has a i sain siti 
so  > BP Rere ast  yi a ae 
a 
er

ie noi

OT  ane hs walle 
i Me  taut  #3 oi “f ae 
SHE rer,  5 ae  ea 
ne 
ine  St sae an  --

4

Ca  aol  Ve brat  BS  ad  bbe, me

;  =e .

Em  st  >t  eattice  4

a

=  —  aE  ea  a  A  ey  ahs. 
ee 
- Mar Ms tassog  «acing a Be

|  eee

Sel a

2

eRe as  ae ks pce  Wigs sates

a no  dealin “eh  thes ese" ' 
Tre  Sa  ny aye ciped sees  Hee

ZO

My dear Wormwood,

I note  with  great  displeasure  that  the  Enemy  has,  for 
the time being, put a forcible  end to your direct  attacks  on 
the patient’s  chastity.  You  ought  to  have  known  that  He 
always  does  in the  end,  and  you  ought  to  have  stopped 
before you  reached  that stage.  For as  things are,  your man 
has now  discovered  the dangerous  truth that these  attacks 
don’t  last  forever;  consequently  you  cannot  use  again 
what  is, after  all, our  best weapon—the  belief  of ignorant 
humans,  that  there  is no  hope of getting  rid of us  except 
by yielding.  I suppose  you’ve  tried  persuading  him  that 
chastity is unhealthy?

I haven’t  yet got a report  from you  on  young women  in 
the neighbourhood.  I should  like it at once,  for if we  can’t 
use  his sexuality to make him unchaste  we  must  try to use 
it for the promotion  of a desirable  marriage.  In the mean-

time  I would  like to  give you  some  hint about  the type  of 
woman—I  mean  the physical  type—which  he should  be 
encouraged  to fall in love with if ‘falling in love’ is the best 
we  can  manage.

CoS)  LE  WLSCoS)  LE  WLS

In  a  rough  and  ready  way,  of course,  this  question  is 
decided  for  us  by  spirits  far  deeper  down  in  the 
Lowerarchy  than you and I. It is the business  of these great 
masters  to  produce  in every  age  a  general  misdirection  of 
what may  be called  sexual  ‘taste’.  This they do by working 
through  the  small  circle  of popular  artists;  dressmakers, 
actresses  and  advertisers  who  determine  the  fashionable 
type.  The  aim is to  guide each  sex  away  from  those  mem- 
bers of the other with whom  spiritually helpful, happy, and 
fertile  marriages  are  most  likely.  Thus  we  have  now  for 
many  centuries  triumphed  over  nature  to  the  extent  of 
making  certain  secondary  characteristics  of the male  (such 
as  the  beard)  disagreeable  to  nearly  all the  females—and 
there  is more  in that  than  you  might  suppose.  As  regards 
the male  taste  we  have varied  a good deal.  At one  time we 
have  directed  it to  the  statuesque  and  aristocratic  type  of 
beauty, mixing men’s  vanity with their desires  and encour- 
aging the race  to  breed  chiefly from the most  arrogant  and 
prodigal women.  At another,  we  have  selected  an  exagger- 
atedly  feminine  type,  faint  and  languishing,  so  that  folly 
and cowardice,  and all the general falseness  and littleness  of 
mind which  go with them,  shall  be at a premium.  At pres- 
ent  we  are  on  the  opposite  tack.  The  age  of jazz has  suc- 
ceeded  the age of the waltz,  and we  now  teach  men  to  like

106

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS106

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

women  whose  bodies  are  scarcely  distinguishable  from 
those of boys. Since this is a kind of beauty even  more  tran- 
sitory  than  most,  we  thus  aggravate  the  female’s  chronic 
horror  of growing  old  (with  many  excellent  results)  and 
render  her less willing  and  less  able  to  bear  children.  And 
that  is not  all.  We  have  engineered  a  great  increase  in the 
licence  which  society  allows  to  the  representation  of the 
apparent  nude  (not the real nude) in art,  and its exhibition 
on  the stage  or  the bathing beach.  It is all a fake, of course; 
the  figures  in  the  popular  art  are  falsely  drawn;  the  real 
women  in bathing suits or tights are  actually pinched in and 
propped up to  make  them  appear  firmer  and more  slender 
and  more  boyish  than  nature  allows a full-grown  woman 
to  be. Yet at the same  time,  the modern  world  is taught to 
believe  that it is being ‘frank’  and ‘healthy’ and getting back 
to  nature.  As  a result  we  are  more  and  more  directing  the 
desires  of men  to something which does not  exist—making 
the rdle  of the  eye  in sexuality  more  and  more  important 
and  at  the same  time  making  its demands  more  and  more 
impossible.  What follows  you can  easily forecast!

That is the general strategy  of the moment.  But inside the 
framework  you  will still find it possible  to  encourage  your

patient’s  desires  in one  of two  directions.  You  will  find,  if 
you  look  carefully  into  any  human’s  heart,  that  he  is

WO) 74

Cass  LE  Wispatient’s  desires  in one  of two  directions.  You  will  find,  if 
you  look  carefully  into  any  human’s  heart,  that  he  is

WO) 74

Cass  LE  Wis

haunted  by at least two  imaginary women—a  terrestrial and 
an  infernal  Venus,  and  that  his  desire  differs  qualitatively 
according to its object. There is one  type for which his desire 
is such as  to  be naturally  amenable  to  the Enemy—readily 
mixed  with  charity,  readily  obedient  to  marriage,  coloured 
all through with that golden light of reverence  and natural- 
ness  which we  detest; there is another  type which he desires 
brutally,  and  desires  to  desire  brutally,  a type  best  used  to 
draw  him  away  from  marriage  altogether  but which,  even 
within marriage, he would tend to treat  as a slave, an idol, or 
an  accomplice.  His love for the first might involve  what the 
Enemy calls evil, but only accidentally; the man  would wish 
that  she was  not  someone  else’s  wife  and  be sorry  that  he 
could  not  love her lawfully.  But in the second  type,  the felt 
evil is what he wants;  it is that ‘tang’ in the flavour which he

is after.  In the face, it is the visible  animality,  or  sulkiness,  or 
craft, or  cruelty which  he likes, and in the body, something 
quite different  from what  he ordinarily  calls  Beauty,  some- 
thing he may  even,  in a sane  hour, describe  as  ugliness,  but 
which,  by our  art,  can  be made  to play on  the raw  nerve  of 
his private obsession.

The real use  of the infernal  Venus  is, no  doubt,  as  pros- 
titute  or  mistress.  But if your  man  is a Christian,  and if he 
has  been  well  trained  in nonsense  about  irresistible  and

108

LHE  SCREW  TAPE  LETTERS108

LHE  SCREW  TAPE  LETTERS

all-excusing  ‘Love’,  he can  often  be induced  to  marry  her. 
And that is very well worth  bringing about.  You will have 
failed  as  regards  fornication  and  solitary  vice;  but  there 
are  other,  and  more  indirect,  methods  of using  a  man’s 
sexuality  to  his  undoing.  And,  by the  way,  they  are  not 
only efficient,  but delightful;  the unhappiness  produced  is 
of a very  lasting and exquisite  kind,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

109

44 ries «Sei wey woh Beene! 
incedbae' lace aailael  fishies noida 
i eeding  co  weet ey seve  anche 
PB yeh is  Sa Bisaauugs  32 =  Se  Re eines 
ests 1c hegpbals poe re  ae WB  OB 60 canara 2 ; 
re  2m  Mee eet eres sete,  yf a 
ita. 
oor  aeee  RRA ta tay ee ae ea

td i Phnbs a aie re Aste Ral 
mek Bardi  glass  bie Ripe sar che hed

epcs Bs Db Ss tees

ene La = pe!

a

mn a  ia ce cist  sab 
RRS Se 8 Vien elect oad aay 
on  igh  Pink tant eet Denne

7  |

My dear Wormwood,

Yes.  A period  of sexual  temptation  is an  excellent  time

for working  in a  subordinate  attack  on  the patient’s  pee- 
vishness.  It may  even  be  the  main  attack,  as  long  as  he 
thinks  it the  subordinate  one.  But  here,  as  in everything 
else, the way  must  be prepared  for your  moral  assault  by 
darkening  his intellect.Men  are  not  angered  by mere  misfortune  but  by mis- 
fortune  conceived  as  injury.  And  the  sense  of  injury 
depends  on  the  feeling  that  a  legitimate  claim  has  been 
denied.  The  more  claims  on  life,  therefore,  that  your 
patient can  be induced  to make, the more  often he will feel 
injured  and,  as  a result,  ill-tempered.  Now  you  will  have 
noticed  that nothing throws  him into a passion so  easily as 
to  find  a tract  of time  which  he reckoned  on  having at his 
own  disposal unexpectedly  taken from him.  It is the unex- 
pected  visitor  (when  he  looked  forward  to  a  quiet 
evening),  or  the  friend’s  talkative  wife  (turning  up  when

he looked  forward  to  a  téte-a-téte  with  the  friend),  that 
throw  him  out  of gear.  Now  he is not  yet so  uncharitable

CoS.  BE  WES

or  slothful  that these small demands  on  his courtesy  are  i 
themselves  too  much  for  it. They  anger  him  because  he 
regards his time as  his own  and feels that it is being stolen. 
You  must  therefore  zealously  guard in his mind  the curi- 
ous  assumption  ‘My time  is my  own’.  Let  him  have  the 
feeling  that  he starts  each  day as  the  lawful  possessor  of 
twenty-four hours.  Let him feel as  a grievous tax that por- 
tion  of this  property  which  he  has  to  make  over  to  his 
employers,  and  as  a  generous  donation  that  further  por- 
tion which he allows  to religious  duties.  But what he must 
never  be permitted  to  doubt  is that  the total  from  which 
these deductions  have been made was,  in some  mysterious 
sense,  his own  personal  birthright.

You  have  here a delicate  task.  The  assumption  which 
you want  him to  go on  making is so  absurd  that, if once  it 
is questioned,  even  we  cannot  find a shred  of argument  inYou  have  here a delicate  task.  The  assumption  which 
you want  him to  go on  making is so  absurd  that, if once  it 
is questioned,  even  we  cannot  find a shred  of argument  in

its  defence.  The  man  can  neither  make,  nor  retain,  one 
moment  of time; it all comes  to him by pure  gift; he might 
as  well regard the sun  and moon  as  his chattels.  He is also, 
in theory,  committed  to  a total  service  of the Enemy;  and 
if  the  Enemy  appeared  to  him  in  bodily  form  and 
demanded  that  total  service  for  even  one  day, he would 
not  refuse.  He  would  be greatly  relieved  if that  one  day

involved  nothing  harder  than  listening  to  the  conversa-

iA 4

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

tion of a foolish  woman;  and he would  be relieved  almost 
to the pitch of disappointment  if for one  half-hour  in that 
day the Enemy  said  ‘Now  you  may  go and  amuse  your- 
self.  Now  if  he  thinks  about  his  assumption  for  a 
moment,  even  he is bound  to  realise  that he is actually in 
this  situation  every  day. When  I speak of preserving  this 
assumption  in his  mind,  therefore,  the  last  thing  I mean 
you to do is to furnish  him with  arguments  in its defence. 
There  aren’t  any.  Your  task  is purely  negative.  Don’t  let 
his  thoughts  come  anywhere  near  it.  Wrap  a  darkness 
about  it, and in the centre  of that darkness  let his sense  of 
ownership-in-Time  lie silent, uninspected,  and operative. 
The  sense  of  ownership  in  general  is  always  to  be 
encouraged.  The  humans  are  always  putting  up  claims  to 
ownership  which  sound  equally  funny  in Heaven  and  in 
Hell and we  must  keep them doing so.  Much of the modern 
resistance  to  chastity  comes  from  men’s  belief  that  they

‘own’  their  bodies—those  vast  and perilous  estates,  pulsat- 
ing with  the  energy  that  made  the  worlds,  in which  they 
find themselves  without  their consent  and from which  they‘own’  their  bodies—those  vast  and perilous  estates,  pulsat- 
ing with  the  energy  that  made  the  worlds,  in which  they 
find themselves  without  their consent  and from which  they

are  ejected at the pleasure of Another!  It is as  if a royal child 
whom  his father  has placed, for love’s  sake, in titular  com- 
mand  of some  great  province,  under  the  real  rule  of wise 
counsellors,  should  come  to fancy he really owns  the cities,

Lis

Cc.  8S.  LEWIS

the forests,  and  the corn,  in the  same  way  as  he owns  the 
bricks  on  the nursery  floor.

We produce  this  sense  of ownership  not  only by pride 
but by confusion.  We teach them  not  to  notice  the differ- 
ent  senses  of the possessive  pronoun—the  finely  graded 
differences  that  run  from  ‘my boots’  through  ‘my dog’, 
‘my servant’,  ‘my wife’,  ‘my father’,  ‘my master’  and  ‘my 
country’,  to  ‘my God’.  They can  be taught  to  reduce  all 
these  senses  to  that of ‘my boots’,  the ‘my’ of ownership. 
Even  in the nursery a child  can  be taught to  mean  by ‘my 
teddy bear’  not  the old imagined  recipient  of affection  to 
whom  it stands  in a  special  relation  (for that  is what  the 
Enemy  will teach  them  to  mean  if we  are  not  careful)  but 
‘the bear I can  pull to pieces if I like’. And at the other end 
of the  scale,  we  have  taught  men  to  say  ‘my  God’  in a 
sense  not  really very  different  from  ‘my boots’,  meaning 
‘the  God  on  whom I have a claim  for  my  distinguished 
services  and whom I exploit  from  the pulpit—the  God  I 
have  done  a corner  in’.

And  all the time  the joke is that  the word  ‘Mine’  in its 
fully possessive  sense  cannot  be uttered  by a human  being 
about  anything.  In the long run  either  Our  Father  or  the 
Enemy  will  say  ‘Mine’  of each  thing that  exists,  and  spe- 
cially  of each  man.  They  will  find  out  in the  end,  never

Il 4

De  S iG ROB Wi TAN Pas  EsnlecTIl 4

De  S iG ROB Wi TAN Pas  EsnlecT

iH) RES

fear,  to  whom  their  time,  their  souls,  and  their  bodies

really  belong—certainly  not  to  them,  whatever  happens. 
At  present  the  Enemy  says  ‘Mine’  of everything  on  the 
pedantic,  legalistic  ground  that  He  made  it:  Our  Father 
hopes  in the  end  to  say  ‘Mine’  of all things  on  the  more 
realistic  and dynamic  ground  of conquest,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

HLS

vag “$9  tv isd

en ee NEA Pee  wan ca, bere | 
Katee 
Vikatan agin  ag a  aky  wre  ar

ae IW gee i vreinin big i?

ane  oat  a hie 
aa  tae  ee  eae  0»  heen 
00  Vee SR ite the  a oa 
eigen © ata me gcee  yen  saat us B ish: 
Th ENA  ak  nice 4

eae  ici ote Sips  Haire otha gg

Ps

<

a ae

FS  ae

ee

ae ‘ae, Poe iat  WS: aerig  FE  74 
a  Re  oa 7 
ilaeiance

ee 
PP  TRS  (hp  6

2

id

ee 
.

|

q

May

Ab

ae Wey |

,

~

ae

ie

-  eat Sas ids ot

ate.  eta an  + Pe

>  Akal free soba

un depeare

ie tapes i  ay tisk  g

ii seca es ia /

Pape

My dear Wormwood,

So!  Your  man  is  in  love—and  in  the  worst  kind  he 
could  possibly have fallen  into—and  with a girl who  does 
not  even  appear  in the  report  you  sent  me.  You  may  be 
interested  to  learn  that  the  little  misunderstanding  with

the  Secret  Police  which  you  tried  to  raise  about  some 
unguarded  expressions  in  one  of  my  letters  has  been 
tidied  over.  If you  were  reckoning  on  that  to  secure  my 
good  offices,  you  will  find  yourself  mistaken.  You  shall 
pay for that as well as  for your other blunders.  Meanwhile

I enclose a little  booklet,  just issued,  on  the new  House  of 
Correction  for  Incompetent  Tempters.  It  is  profusely 
illustrated  and you  will not  find  a dull page  in it.

I have  looked  up  this  girl’s dossier  and  am  horrified  at 
what  I find.  Not  only a Christian  but such a Christian—aI have  looked  up  this  girl’s dossier  and  am  horrified  at 
what  I find.  Not  only a Christian  but such a Christian—a

vile, sneaking,  simpering,  demure,  monosyllabic,  mouse- 
like,  watery,  insignificant,  virginal,  bread-and-butter 
miss.  The little brute.  She makes  me  vomit.  She stinks  and 
scalds  through  the very  pages  of the dossier.  It drives  me 
mad, the way  the world  has worsened.  We'd  have  had her

D7

GC.  Ss  EE  Walls

to  the arena  in the old days. That’s  what  her sort  is made 
for.  Not  that  she’d  do much  good  there,  either.  A two- 
faced  little  cheat  (I know  the  sort)  who  looks  as  if she’d 
faint  at  the  sight  of blood  and  then  dies  with  a  smile.  A 
cheat  every  way.  Looks  as  if butter  wouldn’t  melt  in her 
mouth  and  yet  has a satirical  wit.  The  sort  of creature 
who'd  find  ME  funny!  Filthy  insipid  little  prude—and 
yet  ready  to  fall  into  this  booby’s  arms  like  any  other 
breeding  animal.  Why doesn’t  the Enemy  blast  her for it, 
if He’s  so  moonstruck  by virginity—instead  of looking 
on  there,  grinning?

He’s  a  hedonist  at  heart.  All  those  fasts  and  vigils  and 
stakes  and crosses  are  only a facade.  Or only like foam  on

the  seashore.  Out  at  sea,  out  in His  sea,  there  is pleasure, 
and  more  pleasure.  He  makes  no  secret  of it; at  His  right 
hand  are  ‘pleasures  for evermore’.  Ugh!  I don’t  think  He 
has  the  least  inkling  of that  high and  austere  mystery  to 
which  we  rise  in  the  Miserific  Vision.  He’s  vulgar, 
Wormwood.  He  has  a  bourgeois  mind.  He  has  filled  His 
world  full of pleasures.  There  are  things for humans  to  do 
all day long without  His  minding  in the  least—sleeping, 
washing,  eating,  drinking,  making  love,  playing,  praying, 
working.  Everything  has  to  be twisted  before  it’s  any  use 
to  us.  We fight under  cruel  disadvantages.  Nothing  is nat-

LeiaLeia

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

urally  on  our  side.  (Not  that  that  excuses  you.  I'll  settle 
with  you  presently.  You  have  always  hated  me  and  been 
insolent  when  you  dared.)

Then,  of course,  he gets  to  know  this  woman’s  family 
and  whole  circle.  Could  you  not  see  that  the very  house 
she lives in is one  that he ought never  to have entered?  The 
whole place reeks  of that deadly odour.  The very gardener, 
though  he has  only been  there  five  years,  is beginning  to 
acquire  it. Even  guests,  after  a weekend  visit,  carry  some 
of the  smell  away  with  them.  The  dog  and  the  cat  are 
tainted  with it. And  a house  full of the impenetrable  mys- 
tery.  We  are  certain  (it is a  matter  of first  principles)  that 
each  member  of the family must  in some  way  be making 
capital out  of the others—but  we  can’t find out  how. They 
guard  as  jealously  as  the  Enemy  Himself  the  secret  of 
what  really lies behind  this pretence  of disinterested  love. 
The  whole  house  and  garden  is  one  vast  obscenity.  It 
bears  a  sickening  resemblance  to  the  description  one 
human writer made  of Heaven:  ‘the regions where  there is 
only life and therefore  all that is not  music  is silence’.

Music  and  silence—how  I detest  them  both!  How 
thankful  we  should  be that ever  since  Our Father  entered 
Hell—though  longer ago than humans,  reckoning  in light 
years,  could  express—no  square  inch  of infernal  space

I19

Cc.  Si  LEWIS

and no  moment  of infernal  time  has  been  surrendered  to 
either  of those  abominable  forces,  but  all has  been  occu- 
pied by Noise—Noise,  the  grand dynamism,  the audibleand no  moment  of infernal  time  has  been  surrendered  to 
either  of those  abominable  forces,  but  all has  been  occu- 
pied by Noise—Noise,  the  grand dynamism,  the audible

expression  of  all  that  is  exultant,  ruthless,  and  virile— 
Noise  which  alone  defends  us  from  silly qualms,  despair- 
ing  scruples  and  impossible  desires.  We  will  make  the 
whole  universe  a noise  in the end.  We  have  already  made 
great  strides  in this  direction  as  regards  the  Earth.  The 
melodies  and silences  of Heaven  will be shouted  down  in 
the end.  But  I admit  we  are  not  yet loud  enough,  or  any- 
thing like it. Research  is in progress.  Meanwhile  you,  dis- 
gusting little—

[Here  the MS breaks  off and is resumed  in a 
different hand. |

In the  heat  of composition  I find  that  I have  inadver- 
tently  allowed  myself to  assume  the form  of a  large cen- 
tipede.  I am  accordingly  dictating the rest  to my secretary. 
Now  that the transformation  is complete  I recognise  it as 
a periodical  phenomenon.  Some  rumour  of it has reached 
the  humans  and a distorted  account  of it appears  in the 
poet  Milton,  with  the  ridiculous  addition  that  such 
changes  of shape are  a ‘punishment’  imposed  on  us  by the

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

Enemy.  A more  modern  writer—someone  with  a  name 
like  Pshaw—has,  however,  grasped  the  truth.  Trans- 
formation  proceeds  from  within  and  is a  glorious  mani- 
festation  of  that  Life  Force  which  Our  Father  would 
worship  if he  worshipped  anything  but  himself.  In  my 
present  form  I feel even  more  anxious  to  see  you,  to unite 
you  to  myself in an  indissoluble  embrace,

(Signed)  TOADPIPE

For his Abysmal  Sublimity  Under  Secretary  Screwtape,  TE,  Bs,  etc.

D2

P

>

+

r
t

.

;

o
e

™
*

‘

e

*

=
 t
y

*

’

v
/

y

a

,

r
a
e

,

y

;

‘

a
7

“
P
i
X

a

‘

a
e

4

“
y
r

;

“

3

y
e

4

4

{
¢

“

‘

+

b

,

‘

*

tD2

P

>

+

r
t

.

;

o
e

™
*

‘

e

*

=
 t
y

*

’

v
/

y

a

,

r
a
e

,

y

;

‘

a
7

“
P
i
X

a

‘

a
e

4

“
y
r

;

“

3

y
e

4

4

{
¢

“

‘

+

b

,

‘

*

t

*
«

*
 H
n
}

:

25)

My dear Wormwood,

Through  this  girl and her disgusting  family the patient 
is now  getting  to  know  more  Christians  every  day, and 
very  intelligent  Christians  too.  For  a long time  it will  be 
quite impossible  to remove  spirituality  from his life. Very

well  then;  we  must  corrupt  it. No  doubt  you  have  often 
practised  transforming  yourself into  an  angel of light as  a 
parade-ground  exercise.  Now  is the  time  to  do it in the 
face  of the  Enemy.  The  World  and  the  Flesh  have  failed

us;  a third  Power  remains.  And  success  of this  third  kind 
is the most  glorious  of all. A spoiled  saint,  a Pharisee,  an 
inquisitor,  or  a magician,  makes  better  sport  in Hell  than 
a mere  common  tyrant  or  debauchee.

Looking  round  your  patient’s  new  friends  I find  that 
the  best point  of attack  would  be the  borderline  between 
theology  and politics.  Several  of his  new  friends  are  very 
much alive to the social implications  of their religion. That, 
in itself, is  a bad thing; but good can  be made  out  of it.

You  will  find  that  a  good  many  Christian-political 
writers  think  that  Christianity  began  going  wrong,  and

123

CG.  S:  LEWISYou  will  find  that  a  good  many  Christian-political 
writers  think  that  Christianity  began  going  wrong,  and

123

CG.  S:  LEWIS

departing  from the doctrine  of its Founder,  at a very  early 
stage.  Now  this  idea  must  be  used  by us  to  encourage 
once  again  the  conception  of  a  ‘historical  Jesus’  to  be 
found  by clearing  away  later  “accretions  and perversions’ 
and then  to  be contrasted  with  the whole  Christian  tradi- 
tion.  In the last generation  we  promoted  the construction 
of such a ‘historical  Jesus’  on  liberal  and  humanitarian 
lines; we  are  now  putting forward  a new  ‘historical Jesus’ 
on  Marxian,  catastrophic,  and  revolutionary  lines.  The 
advantages  of  these  constructions,  which  we  intend  to 
change  every  thirty years  or  so,  are  manifold.  In the first 
place they all tend  to  direct  men’s  devotion  to  something 
which  does  not  exist,  for  each  ‘historical  Jesus’  is unhis- 
torical.  The  documents  say  what  they say  and  cannot  be 
added  to;  each  new  ‘historical  Jesus’  therefore  has  to  be 
got out  of them  by suppression  at one  point and exagger- 
ation  at  another,  and  by that. sort  of guessing  (brilliant  is 
the adjective we  teach  humans  to  apply to  it) on  which  no 
one  would  risk ten  shillings  in ordinary  life, but which  is 
enough  to  produce  a  crop  of  new  Napoleons,  new 
Shakespeares,  and  new  Swifts,  in  every  publisher’s 
autumn  list.  In  the  second  place,  all  such  constructions 
place  the  importance  of  their  historical  Jesus  in  some 
peculiar  theory He  is supposed  to  have promulgated.  He

124

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

has to  be a ‘great man’  in the modern  sense  of the word— 
one  standing  at  the  terminus  of  some  centrifugal  and 
unbalanced  line  of thought—a  crank  vending  a panacea.has to  be a ‘great man’  in the modern  sense  of the word— 
one  standing  at  the  terminus  of  some  centrifugal  and 
unbalanced  line  of thought—a  crank  vending  a panacea.

We  thus  distract  men’s  minds  from  who  He  is, and  what 
He did. We first make  Him  solely a teacher,  and then con- 
ceal the very substantial  agreement  between  His teachings 
and  those  of all other  great  moral  teachers.  For  humans 
must  not  be allowed  to  notice  that  all great  moralists  are 
sent  by the  Enemy  not  to  inform  men  but  to  remind 
them, to  restate  the primeval  moral  platitudes  against  our 
continual  concealment  of them.  We  make  the  Sophists: 
He  raises  up a Socrates  to  answer  them.  Our  third  aim 1s, 
by these  constructions,  to  destroy the devotional  life. For 
the real presence  of the Enemy,  otherwise  experienced  by 
men  in  prayer  and  sacrament,  we  substitute  a  merely

probable,  remote,  shadowy,  and uncouth  figure,  one  who 
spoke a strange  language  and died a long time ago.  Such an 
object  cannot  in  fact  be  worshipped.  Instead  of  the 
Creator  adored  by its  creature,  you  soon  have  merely  a 
leader  acclaimed  by a partisan,  and  finally  a distinguished 
character  approved  by a judicious  historian.  And fourthly, 
besides  being unhistorical  in the Jesus it depicts, religion of 
this  kind  is false  to  history  in another  sense.  No  nation, 
and  few  individuals,  are  really  brought  into  the  Enemy’s

25

GaSSL  EWES25

GaSSL  EWES

camp  by the  historical  study  of the  biography  of Jesus, 
simply as  biography.  Indeed materials  for a full biography 
have  been  withheld  from  men.  The  earliest  converts  were 
converted  by a single historical  fact (the Resurrection)  and 
a  single  theological  doctrine  (the Redemption)  operating 
on  a  sense  of sin  which  they  already  had—and  sin,  not 
against  some  new  fancy-dress  law produced  as  a  novelty 
by a ‘great man’, but against the old, platitudinous,  univer- 
sal moral  law which  they had  been  taught by their  nurses 
and  mothers.  The  ‘Gospels’  come  later  and  were  written 
not  to  make  Christians  but  to  edify  Christians  already 
made.

The ‘historical Jesus’ then, however  dangerous  He may 
seem  to  be to  us  at  some  particular  point,  is always  to  be 
encouraged.  About  the  general  connection  between 
Christianity  and  politics,  our  position  is more  delicate. 
Certainly we  do not  want  men  to  allow  their  Christianity 
to  flow  over  into  their political  life, for the establishment 
of anything like a really just society would  be a major dis-

aster.  On  the  other  hand  we  do  want,  and  want  very

much,  to  make  men  treat  Christianity  as  a means;  prefer-

ably, of course,  as  a means  to  their own  advancement,  but, 
failing that, as  a means  to  anything—even  to social justice. 
The thing to  do is to  get a man  at first to  value  social  jus-

L26

LoMESSCREWIAPE  LETTERSL26

LoMESSCREWIAPE  LETTERS

tice  as  a thing which  the Enemy  demands,  and then work 
him  on  to  the  stage  at  which  he  values  Christianity 
because  it may produce  social  justice.  For the Enemy will 
not  be used  as  a  convenience.  Men  or  nations  who  think 
they can  revive  the Faith  in order  to  make  a good society 
might just as  well  think  they can  use  the stairs  of Heaven 
as  a short  cut  to  the nearest  chemist’s  shop. Fortunately  it 
is quite easy to coax  humans  round  this little corner.  Only 
today I have  found a passage  in a  Christian  writer  where 
he  recommends  his  own  version  of Christianity  on  the 
ground  that ‘only such a faith  can  outlast  the death  of old 
cultures  and  the  birth  of new  civilisations’.  You  see  the

little rift?  ‘Believe  this, not  because  it is true,  but for some 
other  reason.’  That’s  the game,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

L2y7,

A 9)

ee

Wie J  PY,

gees  ar  PER  ae  aE

ieee iwi d bri uety habs  casei  aaa 
PGR cents.  QP RR ere oli Rint 
le  (ide 22s Sap aabom  tay See 
SR Oa oh 
iy  se bee 
spots tec » octane 
OY VaR AR AUT  ane ieee 
RHI Vian ataag RAS iow as-haaj aeiggath 
Da SPC  Ree Hentiets  esa eris ed pete  Oe) 1 
Ned  GaSb  is wiht etelasiiaersil lle  St 
qh P nw  See. MPL Gate  wea  KLel eS  a 
Nn ee  Waete DNS  Fe  EI el tarot’ 
bi =  hast 
aang cae aed, Gina  acai 
a ees  se  “oes  won  3  Fi  yily  SAK arash 
ache PES  EMILE  SE ATM, 
St  A ert Sema Ap

6

CE

a

=t%

on.

A  Pee,  1a  Ste eR

ria

i  "ig Gly Yop oet

tiger tate  eT  yates 
core  aelgeg 
‘  KHive: she: ah  ore aE 
-  Beateeel  me Retest  = A aa gees 
Yh  WWE  West = tes x ake 
ottics  ype  sal  igi  ed  Wiel  See 
RC 
aa  irate An iC atiay Brhats 
Tal  ey  Orn  vy  ees SEER  tee!  bays, 
aR ee  al a i 
Site  “Wy  Desi  Ed  FON  EESAL  vain  aeeibal ilk

he: 
SN  CS a  Me

6  tact okt  ieee

in  FC

ceri? | +)

Deaedtael

ee

a

See

SSR  CEM 
~  Cry  chugs:  fa

PEO

'he: 
SN  CS a  Me

6  tact okt  ieee

in  FC

ceri? | +)

Deaedtael

ee

a

See

SSR  CEM 
~  Cry  chugs:  fa

PEO

'

nhl  ce

J

4

;

‘

y

i?

:

&

f  «=

LS  oA

: 
:

i  BS

Lhe 
1) 
La  aie  My

oe

‘4

a  ven  *

ey

24

My dear Wormwood,

I have  been  in correspondence  with  Slumtrimpet  who 
is in charge of your  patient’s  young  woman,  and begin to 
see  the  chink  in  her  armour.  It is  an  unobtrusive  little 
vice  which  she  shares  with  nearly  all women  who  have 
grown  up  in  an  intelligent  circle  united  by  a  clearly 
defined  belief;  and  it  consists  in  a  quite  untroubled 
assumption  that  the  outsiders  who  do  not  share  this 
belief  are  really  too  stupid  and  ridiculous.  The  males, 
who  habitually  meet  these  outsiders,  do  not  feel  that 
way;  their confidence,  if they are  confident,  is of a differ- 
ent  kind.  Hers,  which  she supposes  to  be due to  Faith,  is 
in  reality  largely  due  to  the  mere  colour  she  has  taken 
from  her  surroundings.  It is not,  in fact,  very  different 
from  the conviction  she would  have  felt at the age  of ten 
that  the  kind  of fish-knives  used  in  her  father’s  house 
were  the proper  or  normal  or  ‘real’  kind,  while  those  of 
the  neighbouring  families  were  ‘not  real  fish-knives’  at 
all. Now  the element  of ignorance  and  naivety  in all this 
is so  large,  and  the  element  of spiritual  pride  so  small,

129

G.S.LEWES

that  it gives  us  little  hope  of the  girl herself.  But  have 
you  thought  of how it can  be  made  to  influence  your 
own  patient?129

G.S.LEWES

that  it gives  us  little  hope  of the  girl herself.  But  have 
you  thought  of how it can  be  made  to  influence  your 
own  patient?

It is always  the novice  who  exaggerates.  The  man  who 
has  risen  in society  is over-refined,  the  young  scholar  1s 
pedantic.  In this  new  circle  your  patient  is a  novice.  He 
is there  daily meeting  Christian  life of a quality he never 
before  imagined  and  seeing  it all through  an  enchanted 
glass  because  he  is  in  love.  He  is  anxious  (indeed  the 
Enemy  commands  him) to  imitate  this  quality.  Can  you 
get him  to  imitate  this  defect in his mistress  and to  exag- 
gerate  it until  what  was  venial  in her becomes  in him  the 
strongest  and  most  beautiful  of  the  vices—Spiritual 
Pride?

The  conditions  seem  ideally  favourable.  The  new  cir- 
cle  in  which  he  finds  himself  is  one  of  which  he  is 
tempted  to  be  proud  for  many  reasons  other  than  its 
Christianity.  It  is  a  better  educated,  more  intelligent, 
more  agreeable  society  than  any  he has yet encountered. 
He  is also  under  some  degree  of illusion  as  to  his  own 
place  in  it.  Under  the  influence  of  ‘love’  he  may  still

think  himself  unworthy  of  the  girl,  but  he  is  rapidly 
ceasing  to  think  himself  unworthy  of the others.  He  has 
no  notion  how  much  in him is forgiven because  they are

130

TELE  SS CREW EA PE  1  BL  TERS130

TELE  SS CREW EA PE  1  BL  TERS

charitable  and made  the best of because  he is now  one  of 
the family.  He does  not  dream  how  much  of his conver- 
sation,  how  many  of  his  opinions,  are  recognised  by 
them  all as  mere  echoes  of their  own.  Still  less  does  he 
suspect  how  much  of the  delight  he takes  in these  peo- 
ple is due  to  the  erotic  enhancement  which  the  girl, for 
him,  spreads  over  all  her  surroundings.  He  thinks  that 
he likes  their  talk  and  way  of life  because  of some  con- 
gruity  between  their  spiritual  state  and  his, when  in fact 
they are  so  far beyond  him that  if he were  not  in love  he 
would  be merely  puzzled  and  repelled  by much  which 
he now  accepts.  He  is like  a  dog which  should  imagine 
it understood  fire-arms  because  its hunting  instinct  and 
love  for its master  enable  it to  enjoy a day’s shooting!

Here  is your  chance.  While  the  Enemy,  by means  of 
sexual  love  and  of  some  very  agreeable  people  far 
advanced  in His  service,  is drawing  the young  barbarian 
up  to  levels  he could  never  otherwise  have  reached,  you 
must  make  him feel that he is finding his own  level—that 
these  people are  ‘his  sort’  and  that, coming  among  them, 
he has  come  home.  When  he turns  from  them  to  other 
society  he  will  find  it dull;  partly  because  almost  any 
society  within  his  reach  is, in fact,  much  less  entertain- 
ing, but  still  more  because  he will  miss  the  enchantment

Let

C.SS  LEW  ESLet

C.SS  LEW  ES

of the  young  woman.  You  must  teach  him  to  mistake 
this  contrast  between  the circle  that  delights  and the cir- 
cle  that  bores  him  for the  contrast  between  Christians 
and  unbelievers.  He  must  be  made  to  feel  (he’d  better 
not  put it into  words)  ‘how  different  we  Christians  are’; 
and by ‘we  Christians’  he must  really, but unknowingly, 
mean  ‘my set’;  and  by ‘my set’  he must  mean  not  “The 
people  who,  in their  charity  and humility,  have  accepted 
me’, but “The  people with whom I associate  by right’.

Success  here  depends  on  confusing  him.  If you  try to 
make  him  explicitly  and  professedly  proud  of being  a 
Christian,  you  will probably  fail; the Enemy’s  warnings

are  too  well  known.  If, on  the  other  hand,  you  let  the 
idea  of ‘we  Christians’  drop  out  altogether  and  merely  — 
make  him  complacent  about  ‘his  set’, you  will  produce 
not  true  spiritual  pride but mere  social  vanity which,  by 
comparison,  is  a  trumpery,  puny  little  sin.  What  you 
want  is to  keep a sly self-congratulation  mixing with  all 
his  thoughts  and  never  allow  him  to  raise  the  question 
‘What,  precisely,  am  I congratulating  myself  about?’ 
The  idea  of  belonging  to  an  inner  ring,  of  being  in  a 
secret,  is very  sweet  to  him.  Play  on  that  nerve.  Teach 
him,  using  the  influence  of this  girl when  she  is silliest, 
to  adopt an  air of amusement  at  the things  the unbeliev-

372:

THE  SIGREWTAPE  LETIERS372:

THE  SIGREWTAPE  LETIERS

ers  say.  Some  theories  which  he  may  meet  in  modern 
Christian  circles  may  here  prove  helpful;  theories,  I 
mean,  that  place  the  hope  of society  in some  inner  ring 
of ‘clerks’,  some  trained  minority  of theocrats.  It is no 
affair  of yours  whether  those  theories  are  true  or  false; 
the  great  thing  is to  make  Christianity  a  mystery  reli- 
gion in which  he feels  himself  one  of the initiates.

Pray  do  not  fill  your  letters  with  rubbish  about  this

European  War.  Its  final  issue  is, no  doubt,  important, 
but that  is a matter  for the High Command.  I am  not  in 
the  least  interested  in  knowing  how  many  people  in 
England  have  been  killed  by bombs.  In  what  state  of 
mind  they  died,  I can  learn  from  the  office  at  this  end. 
That  they were  going  to  die  sometime,  I knew  already. 
Please  keep your  mind  on  your  work,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

ERC  111  CRMC RM EE  aP

mtu pre gonna  Soh 2  ae niniedoseaada 
A eterna  Nephgoal: pup rath pete alaba sho ogaREM 
ate stisriantha ety Minassian aenadey edbwespae =. 
Oni  td Renrasde Fo: et  tin scr ecto, aatigigtphey 
gonleb Sex Aste 1G tice  desta  anata swevkeadte 
ogy  se ata eres sibiaietnbesurgtic:.-.  ” 
och,  nagrittohash dy +o Seely Haast tgs  onl diel  bneg 
eich  peed, - ‘Ltdelue tv  ooneaph hacer 2 haar oats  . 
get

eae tT oa. telermaly gb at de ooerteg Pim cbantt orl oot fe ‘

‘Wieraintetevenn) deitg wth sed ~stinaiiaeet anilp gil,  | 
Pe rinse  apis: ee Rui  eas  ho wsadtiee jersbondy  if 
Me siadncieres  ak!l “aston  yell Nal ih: one ober locale  aim 
admesvertiss%  Soabeeads  pruets treo! sept  bib  crore aha 
dred & cary tty allen acpi coring, 
evi  tiles  coe ecabyadl Saat  lorie sere pode  =) 
ete  aia: ret 227)  ae  ae  wie Ve  Oe  Nee i, hy 
ma nisdtinlk  aikido  Fidihs  FSG  Nes,  Wes LG, 
biog  39 soy  ha SUA  ot wi Mio cabs  Me lgaeee  atin ib a,r  vert Wie 
mt vit.”  SR)  ees. 
Ysa  IM  Aa  bh ae da baliee

opcliee  iia  Pycieabe  rear  aleg atest,

. 
OMAR  Kiet  Ee  en yued®  waselh  a

ne eka  ae  4

:

sie

kewce  be  aa  oy Cy  tial  ervy: “Takats  5}

big  Ra Aca  hans Pec 
.  Paes  a  OX  ¢  Ai en  Sorgaibue oy

PSs  ate AP

Sd ge PM  ae  cherubs

SON  ae Haken hd

{

7  es

Ste

NOOR  iy

ne

pie

c

;

aot  Went  oh

mea  f  ee

*

>

a)

My dear Wormwood,

The  real  trouble  about  the  set  your  patient  is living in 
is that  it is  merely  Christian.  They  all  have  individual

interests,

of  course,

but  the  bond  remains  mere

Christianity.  What  we  want,  if men  become  Christians  at 
all, is to keep them  in the state  of mind I call ‘Christianity 
And’.  You  know—Christianity  and  the  Crisis,  Chris-

tianity  and  the  New  Psychology,  Christianity  and  the

New  Order,  Christianity  and Faith  Healing,  Christianity 
and  Psychical  Research,  Christianity  and  Vegetarianism, 
Christianity  and  Spelling  Reform.  If they must  be Chris- 
tians  let  them  at  least  be  Christians  with  a  difference. 
Substitute  for the faith  itself  some  Fashion  with  a  Chris- 
tian  colouring.  Work  on  their  horror  of the  Same  Old

Thing.

The  horror  of the Same  Old  Thing is one  of the most 
valuable  passions  we  have  produced  in  the  human 
heart—an  endless  source  of heresies  in religion,  folly in 
counsel,  infidelity in marriage,  and inconstancy  in friend- 
ship.  The  humans  live  in  time,  and  experience  reality

135

€.  S$.  LEWIS135

€.  S$.  LEWIS

successively.  To  experience  much  of it, therefore,  they 
must  experience  many  different  things;  in  other  words, 
they  must  experience  change.  And  since  they  need 
change,  the  Enemy  (being  a hedonist  at  heart)  has  made 
change  pleasurable  to  them,  just as  He  has  made  eating 
pleasurable.  But  since  He  does  not  wish  them  to  make 
change, any more  than eating, an  end in itself, He has bal- 
anced  the  love  of change  in  them  by a love  of perma- 
nence.  He has contrived  to  gratify both tastes  together in 
the very world  He has made, by that union  of change and 
permanence  which  we  call  Rhythm.  He  gives  them  the 
seasons,  each season  different  yet every  year  the same,  so 
that  spring  is always  felt  as  a  novelty  yet  always  as  the 
recurrence  of an  immemorial  theme.  He  gives  them  in 
His  Church a spiritual  year;  they change from a fast to  a

feast, but it is the same  feast  as  before.

Now  just as  we  pick out  and exaggerate  the pleasure  of 
eating  to  produce  gluttony,  so  we  pick  out  this  natural 
pleasantness  of  change  and  twist  it into  a  demand  for 
absolute  novelty.  This  demand  is entirely  our  workman- 
ship.  If we  neglect  our  duty,  men  will  be not  only con-

tented  but  transported  by  the  mixed  novelty  and 
familiarity  of snowdrops  this January,  sunrise  this  morn- 
ing,  plum  pudding  this  Christmas.  Children,  until  we

136

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

have  taught  them  better,  will  be perfectly  happy  with  a 
seasonal  round  of games  in which  conkers  succeed  hop- 
scotch  as  regularly  as  autumn  follows  summer.  Only  by

our  incessant  efforts  is  the  demand  for  infinite,  or 
unrhythmical,  change kept up.our  incessant  efforts  is  the  demand  for  infinite,  or 
unrhythmical,  change kept up.

This  demand  is valuable  in various  ways.  In the  first 
place it diminishes  pleasure  while  increasing  desire.  The 
pleasure  of novelty  is  by its  very  nature  more  subject 
than  any  other  to  the  law  of diminishing  returns.  And 
continued  novelty  costs  money,  so  that  the  desire  for it 
spells  avarice  or  unhappiness  or  both.  And  again,  the 
more  rapacious  this  desire,  the  sooner  it must  eat  up  all 
the innocent  sources  of pleasure  and pass  on  to  those  the 
Enemy  forbids.  Thus  by inflaming  the  horror  of  the 
Same  Old  Thing  we  have  recently  made  the  Arts,  for 
example,  less  dangerous  to  us  than  perhaps,  they  have 
ever  been, ‘low-brow’  and ‘high-brow’  artists  alike  being

now  daily  drawn  into  fresh,  and  still  fresh,  excesses  of

lasciviousness,  unreason,  cruelty,  and  pride.  Finally,  the 
desire  for  novelty  is indispensable  if we  are  to  produce

Fashions  or  Vogues.

The  use  of Fashions  in thought  is to  distract  the atten- 
tion  of men  from  their  real  dangers.  We  direct  the  fash- 
ionable  outcry  of each  generation  against  those  vices  of

By

CG.  Si)  LEWISBy

CG.  Si)  LEWIS

which it is least in danger and fix its approval on  the virtue 
nearest  to  that vice which  we  are  trying to  make  endemic. 
The  game  is  to  have  them  all  running  about  with  fire 
extinguishers  whenever  there  is a flood,  and  all crowding 
to  that  side  of the  boat  which  is already  nearly  gunwale 
under.  Thus  we  make  it fashionable  to  expose  the dangers 
of enthusiasm  at the very  moment  when  they are  all really 
becoming  worldly  and  lukewarm;  a  century  later,  when 
we  are  really  making  them  all  Byronic  and  drunk  with 
emotion,  the  fashionable  outcry  is  directed  against  the 
dangers  of the  mere  ‘understanding’.  Cruel  ages  are  put 
on  their  guard  against  Sentimentality,  feckless  and  idle 
against 
ones 
Puritanism;  and whenever  all men  are  really hastening  to 
be slaves  or  tyrants  we  make  Liberalism  the prime bogey. 
But  the greatest  triumph  of all is to  elevate  this horror 
of the  Same  Old  Thing  into  a  philosophy  so  that  non- 
sense  in  the  intellect  may  reinforce  corruption  in  the 
will.  It is here  that  the  general  Evolutionary  or  Histor- 
ical  character  of modern  European  thought  (partly  our 
work)  comes  in so  useful.  The  Enemy  loves  platitudes. 
Of a proposed  course  of action  He wants  men,  so  far as

against  Respectability,  lecherous

ones

I can  see,  to  ask very  simple  questions;  is it righteous?  is 
it prudent?  is it possible?  Now  if we  can  keep men  ask-

138

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

ing ‘Is it in accordance  with the general movement  of our 
time?  Is  it progressive  or  reactionary?  Is  this  the  way 
that  History  is  going?’  they  will  neglect  the  relevant

questions.  And  the  questions  they do ask are, of course,questions.  And  the  questions  they do ask are, of course,

unanswerable;  for  they  do  not  know  the  future,  and 
what  the  future  will  be  depends  very  largely  on  just 
those  choices  which  they now  invoke  the future  to  help 
them  to  make.  Asa 
result, while  their minds  are  buzzing 
in this  vacuum,  we  have  the  better  chance  to  slip in and 
bend  them to  the  action  we  have  decided  on.  And  great 
work  has already  been  done.  Once  they knew  that some

changes  were  for  the  better,  and  others  for  the  worse, 
and  others  again  indifferent.  We  have  largely  removed 
this knowledge.  For the descriptive  adjective  ‘unchanged’ 
we  have  substituted  the  emotional  adjective  ‘stagnant’. 
We  have  trained  them  to  think  of  the  Future  as  a 
promised  land  which  favoured  heroes  attain—not  as 
something  which  everyone  reaches  at  the  rate  of sixty

minutes  an  hour, whatever  he does,  whoever  he is,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

SEEN 28 i paid suai ehie w

us.

1

,

tp  Rie

¢

7

Ste. OP 
oy  ‘"

r

=

wir  =

P

=

4

Ks 
ray

x 
‘ee 
'

-

h

i

_—

t 
Ed

,

mee,

te 
igs

si 
xy

~

daa 
» 
ote 
* 
> 
.

.

?

—

See

ae ae

. 
o> 
|

~

an

_ 
ay yee atoitas  Ee

ain

ee

:

.

7] 
-

*

CSF  SADT  Sy iphcistc 
* 
wa 
.

Sec 
.

SO

A

_

‘ 
2s  8 
—_-

eae

- 
m 
n<ee

’

ray

;

a?

be  sage!  on  Reeth sence,  ‘.

c

“J

F 
Peug 
te

’

Sar

%  9 ae 
a

. 
3

t

at

we  Ete

x

‘

:

F

_

'

(

Fr  S

;

.

~

.

‘

2 
o

4  KEN 
sie

7

w

ial

’

3

fae

"

‘

:

;

al x

¥

vs

2

é  r DE  it

26

My dear Wormwood,

Yes;  courtship  is  the  time  for  sowing  those  seeds 
which  will  grow  up ten  years  later  into  domestic  hatred. 
The  enchantment  of unsatisfied  desire  produces  results 
which  the humans  can  be made  to  mistake  for the results 
of charity.  Avail  yourself  of the  ambiguity  in the  word‘Love’:  let them  think  they have  solved  by Love  prob- 
lems  they have  in fact  only waived  or  postponed  under 
the influence  of the enchantment.  While  it lasts you  have 
your  chance  to foment  the problems  in secret  and render 
them  chronic.

The  grand  problem  is that  of ‘Unselfishness’.  Note, 
once  again,  the  admirable  work  of our  Philological  Arm 
in substituting  the negative unselfishness  for the Enemy’s 
positive  Charity.  Thanks  to  this  you  can,  from  the  very

outset,  teach  a man  to  surrender  benefits  not  that  others 
may  be  happy  in  having  them  but  that  he  may  be 
unselfish  in forgoing  them.  That  is a  great  point  gained. 
Another  great help, where  the parties concerned  are  male 
and female,  is the divergence  of view about Unselfishness

141

Cc.  S.  LEWIS

A woman 
which  we  have  built  up  between  the  sexes. 
means  by Unselfishness  chiefly taking trouble  for others; 
a  man  means  not  giving  trouble  to  others.  As a result,  a 
woman  who  is quite far gone  in the Enemy’s  service  will 
make  a nuisance  of herself  on a larger scale  than  any man 
except  those  whom  Our  Father  has  dominated  com- 
pletely;  and,  conversely,  a  man  will  live  long  in  the 
Enemy’s  camp  before  he  undertakes  as  much  sponta- 
neous  work  to  please  others  as  a  quite  ordinary  woman 
may do every  day. Thus while the woman  thinks  of doing 
good  offices  and  the  man  of respecting  other  people’s

rights,  each  sex,  without  any  obvious  unreason,  can  and 
does  regard the other  as  radically  selfish.

On  top  of these  confusions  you  can  now  introduce  a 
few  more.  The  erotic  enchantment  produces  a  mutualOn  top  of these  confusions  you  can  now  introduce  a 
few  more.  The  erotic  enchantment  produces  a  mutual

complaisance  in which  each is really pleased  to  give in to 
the wishes  of the other.  They also  know  that  the Enemy 
demands  of them  a  degree  of charity  which,  if attained, 
would  result  in  similar  actions.  You  must  make  them 
establish  as  a  Law  for  their  whole  married  life  that 
degree  of  mutual  self-sacrifice  which  is  at  present 
sprouting  naturally  out  of the  enchantment,  but which, 
when  the  enchantment  dies  away,  they  will  not  have 
charity enough to enable  them  to perform.  They will not

142

THE  SCRE  WTA  PE  LETTERS

see  the trap,  since  they are  under  the double  blindness  of 
mistaking  sexual  excitement  for charity  and  of thinking 
that the excitement  will  last.

When  once  a  sort  of  official,  legal,  or  nominal 
Unselfishness  has  been  established  as  a  rule—a  rule  for 
the keeping of which  their emotional  resources  have  died 
away  and  their  spiritual  resources  have  not  yet  grown— 
the most  delightful  results  follow.  In discussing  any joint 
action,  it  becomes  obligatory  that  A  should  argue  in 
favour  of B’s supposed  wishes  and against his own,  whileB  does  the  opposite.  It  is often  impossible  to  find  out 
either  party’s  real  wishes;  with  luck,  they end  by doing 
something  that neither  wants,  while  each  feels  a  glow of 
self-righteousness  and harbours a secret  claim  to  prefer- 
ential  treatment  for the unselfishness  shown  and a secret 
grudge against the other for the ease  with  which  the sac- 
rifice  has  been  accepted.  Later  on  you  can  venture  on 
what  may  be called  the Generous  Conflict  Illusion.  This 
game  is  best  played  with  more  than  two  players,  in  a 
family  with  grown-up  children  for example.  Something 
quite  trivial,  like  having  tea  in the  garden,  is proposed. 
One  member  takes  care  to  make  it quite  clear  (though 
not  in so  many  words)  that he would  rather  not  but is, of 
course,  prepared  to  do  so  out  of  ‘Unselfishness’.  The

143

Cc.  8:  LEWIS143

Cc.  8:  LEWIS

others  instantly  withdraw  their  proposal,  ostensibly 
through  their  ‘Unselfishness’,  but  really  because  they 
don’t want  to  be used  as  a sort  of lay figure on  which  the 
first  speaker  practises  petty  altruisms.  But  he  is  not 
going  to  be  done  out  of his  debauch  of Unselfishness 
either.  He  insists  on  doing ‘what  the others  want’.  They 
insist  on  doing what he wants.  Passions  are  roused.  Soon 
someone  is saying  ‘Very well  then,  I won’t  have  any  tea 
at  all!’,  and  a  real  quarrel  ensues  with  bitter  resentment 
on  both  sides.  You  see  how  it is done?  If each  side  had 
been  frankly  contending  for  its  own  real  wish,  they 
would  all  have  kept  within  the  bounds  of reason  and 
courtesy;  but just because  the contention  is reversed  and 
each  side  is fighting  the other  side’s  battle,  all the bitter- 
ness  which  really  flows  from  thwarted  self-righteous- 
ness  and  obstinacy  and  the  accumulated  grudges  of the 
last ten  years  is concealed  from  them  by the nominal  or 
official  “‘Unselfishness’  of what they are  doing or, at least,

held  to  be excused  by it. Each  side  is, indeed,  quite alive 
to the cheap quality of the adversary’s  Unselfishness  and 
of  the  false  position  into  which  he  is  trying  to  force 
them;  but  each  manages  to  feel  blameless  and  ill-used 
itself,  with  no  more  dishonesty  than  comes  natural  to  a

human.

144

THE  SGCREWTAPE  LETTERShuman.

144

THE  SGCREWTAPE  LETTERS

A  sensible  human  once  said,  ‘If  people  knew  how 
much  ill-feeling Unselfishness  occasions,  it would  not  be 
so  often recommended  from the pulpit’; and again, ‘She’s 
the sort  of woman  who  lives  for others—you  can  always 
tell the others  by their hunted  expression.’  All this can  be 
begun  even  in the period  of courtship.  A little  real self- 
ishness  on  your  patient’s  part  is often  of less value  in the 
long run,  for securing  his  soul,  than  the first  beginnings 
of that  elaborate  and  self-conscious  unselfishness  which 
may  one  day  blossom  into  the  sort  of  thing  I  have 
described.  Some  degree  of mutual  falseness,  some  sur- 
prise  that  the  girl  does  not  always  notice  just  how 
Unselfish  he  is  being,  can  be  smuggled  in  already. 
Cherish  these  things,  and,  above  all, don’t  let the young 
fools  notice  them.  If they notice  them  they will be on  the 
road  to  discovering  that  ‘Love’  is not  enough,  that char- 
ity is needed  and  not  yet  achieved  and  that  no  external 
law  can  supply  its  place.  I wish  Slumtrimpet  could  do 
something  about  undermining  that  young  woman’s

sense  of the ridiculous,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

145

RE  Tp

PS tata ete

im

gid

jualeal? wise Misa bi wae, 
eck: 
ey ep a

gee ba  ol oe

3! i

2

6)

tebe lain i tema  a 1  913 36% 
~~ saab sb ass  isn, 
eC bene? restleomed bat 
4  oe Bane 
roel sere catencs  y

a {tt  ove  aa 
ee 
Sasi: iguanas 8  ai a : 
ce  er  ee 
atpneodk th ages roa ing 
apse: itis nent  Nex 
wish 
ineeguieoyeax 
Sree ‘hageutral  pias : 
venice 
i =i aie  tieekicy  dub phon Rue  ‘

gaan  sia ‘hi  lin

, 
t  fait.  pesipoe  adie  THe Ee ated tig fecuit 
beads fad Saipspes ay baie: 
evel, a see pk Sande

| 
Recchboaaiaaes

4 
oH

¥ say aT te  .

;

st

{4s 
hee

;

P

4

-

a?

Nia  aes 
f  ae

dy

4

sabe

een Mea eres  Le, We 
aire.  gts  nh

att:

Ea  oS

;| 
Recchboaaiaaes

4 
oH

¥ say aT te  .

;

st

{4s 
hee

;

P

4

-

a?

Nia  aes 
f  ae

dy

4

sabe

een Mea eres  Le, We 
aire.  gts  nh

att:

Ea  oS

;

Y  her?  hg

TE

My dear Wormwood,

You  seem  to  be doing very  little  good at  present.  The 
use  of his  ‘love’  to  distract  his mind  from  the Enemy  is, 
of course,  obvious,  but you reveal what poor use  you  are 
making  of it when  you  say  that  the  whole  question  of 
distraction  and  the  wandering  mind  has  now  become 
one  of the  chief  subjects  of his prayers.  That  means  you 
have  largely  failed.  When  this,  or  any  other  distraction, 
crosses  his mind  you  ought to  encourage  him to  thrust  it 
away  by sheer will power  and to  try to  continue  the nor- 
mal  prayer  as  if nothing  had  happened;  once  he accepts 
the  distraction  as  his  present  problem  and  lays  that 
before  the  Enemy  and  makes  it the  main  theme  of his 
prayers  and  his  endeavours,  then,  so  far  from  doing 
good, you  have  done  harm.  Anything,  even  a sin, which 
has the total effect  of moving him close  up to  the Enemy, 
makes  against  us  in the long run.

A promising  line  is the  following.  Now  that  he  is in 
love,  a  new  idea  of earthly  happiness  has  arisen  in  his 
mind:  and  hence  a new  urgency  in his purely petitionary

147

Cc.  So.  EEWIS

prayers—about  this  war  and  other  such  matters.  Now  is 
the time for raising intellectual  difficulties  about prayer  of 
that sort.  False  spirituality is always to be encouraged.  On 
the seemingly  pious  ground  that  ‘praise  and  communion 
with  God  is the true  prayer’,  humans  can  often  be lured 
into  direct  disobedience  to  the Enemy  who  (in His  usual 
flat, commonplace,  uninteresting  way) has definitely  told 
them  to  pray  for  their  daily  bread  and  the  recovery  oftheir  sick.  You  will,  of course,  conceal  from  him  the fact 
that  the prayer  for daily bread,  interpreted  in a ‘spiritual 
sense’,  is really just as  crudely  petitionary  as  it is in any 
other  sense.

But  since  your  patient has contracted  the terrible  habit 
of  obedience,  he  will  probably  continue  such  ‘crude’ 
prayers  whatever  you  do.  But  you  can  worry  him  with 
the haunting  suspicion  that the practice  is absurd  and  can

have  no  objective  result.  Don’t  forget  to  use  the  ‘heads  I 
win,  tails  you  lose’  argument.  If the  thing  he  prays  for 
doesn’t  happen,  then  that  is one  more  proof  that  peti- 
tionary  prayers  don’t  work;  if it does  happen,  he will,  of 
course,  be able  to  see  some  of the  physical  causes  which 
led up  to  it, and  ‘therefore  it would  have  happened  any-

way’,  and  thus  a  granted  prayer  becomes  just as  good  a 
proof as  a denied  one  that prayers  are  ineffective.

148

THE  SGCREWTAPE,  LETTERSway’,  and  thus  a  granted  prayer  becomes  just as  good  a 
proof as  a denied  one  that prayers  are  ineffective.

148

THE  SGCREWTAPE,  LETTERS

You,  being a spirit,  will  find  it difficult  to  understand 
how  he gets  into  this confusion.  But you  must  remember 
that  he  takes  Time  for  an  ultimate  reality.  He  supposes 
that  the Enemy,  like  himself,  sees  some  things  as  present, 
remembers  others  as past,  and anticipates  others  as  future; 
or  even  if he believes  that  the Enemy  does  not  see  things 
that  way,  yet,  in his  heart  of hearts,  he regards  this  as  a 
peculiarity  of  the  Enemy’s  mode  of  perception—he 
doesn’t  really  think  (though  he  would  say  he  did)  that 
things  as  the  Enemy  sees  them  are  things  as  they are!  If 
you  tried  to  explain  to  him  that  men’s  prayers  today  are 
one  of  the  innumerable  co-ordinates  with  which  the 
Enemy  harmonises  the  weather  of tomorrow,  he would 
reply that  then  the Enemy  always  knew  men  were  going 
to  make  those  prayers  and, if so,  they did not  pray  freely 
but were  predestined  to  do so.  And he would  add that the 
weather  on  a  given  day can  be  traced  back  through  its 
causes  to  the original creation  of matter  itself{—so  that the 
whole  thing, both  on  the human  and on  the material  side, 
is  given  ‘from  the  word  go’.  What  he  ought  to  say,  of 
course,  is obvious  to  us;  that  the problem  of adapting  the 
particular  weather  to  the particular  prayers  is merely  the 
appearance,  at two  points in his temporal mode  of percep- 
tion,  of the total  problem  of adapting  the whole  spiritual

149

C.S°  LEWIS

universe  to  the whole  corporeal  universe;  that  creation  in 
its entirety  operates  at every  point  of space  and  time,  or 
rather  that  their  kind  of  consciousness  forces  them  touniverse  to  the whole  corporeal  universe;  that  creation  in 
its entirety  operates  at every  point  of space  and  time,  or 
rather  that  their  kind  of  consciousness  forces  them  to

encounter  the whole,  self-consistent  creative  act  as  a series 
of successive  events.  Why that creative  act  leaves  room  for 
their  free  will  is  the  problem  of  problems,  the  secret 
behind  the Enemy’s  nonsense  about  ‘Love’.  How  it does 
so  is no  problem at all; for the Enemy does  not foresee the 
humans  making  their  free  contributions  in a  future,  but 
sees  them  doing  so  in His  unbounded  Now.  And  obvi- 
ously to watch  a man  doing something  is not  to  make  him 
do it.

It may  be replied  that  some  meddlesome  human  writ-

ers,  notably  Boethius,  have  let this  secret  out.  But  in the 
intellectual  climate  which  we  have  at  last  succeeded  in 
producing  throughout  Western  Europe,  you  needn’t 
bother  about  that.  Only  the  learned  read  old  books  and 
we  have  now  so  dealt  with  the learned  that they are  of all 
men  the  least  likely  to  acquire  wisdom  by doing  so.  We 
have done this by inculcating the Historical  Point  of View. 
The  Historical  Point  of  View,  put  briefly,  means  that 
when a learned  man  is presented  with  any  statement  in an 
ancient  author,  the one  question  he never  asks  is whether

it is true.  He  asks  who  influenced  the  ancient  writer,  and

I5o0

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

how  far the  statement  is consistent  with  what  he said  in 
other  books,  and what  phase in the writer’s  development, 
or  in the general history of thought,  it illustrates,  and howhow  far the  statement  is consistent  with  what  he said  in 
other  books,  and what  phase in the writer’s  development, 
or  in the general history of thought,  it illustrates,  and how

it affected  later writers,  and  how  often  it has been  misun- 
derstood  (specially  by the  learned  man’s  own  colleagues) 
and what  the general course  of criticism  on  it has been for 
the  last  ten  years,  and  what  is the  ‘present  state  of the 
question’.  To regard the ancient  writer as  a possible source 
of knowledge—to  anticipate  that what  he said  could  pos- 
sibly  modify  your  thoughts  or  your  behaviour—this

would  be  rejected  as  unutterably  simple-minded.  And 
since  we  cannot  deceive  the  whole  human  race  all  the 
time, it is most  important  thus  to  cut  every  generation  off 
from all others; for where learning makes  a free commerce 
between  the ages  there  is always  the danger that the char- 
acteristic  errors  of one  may  be corrected  by the character- 
istic  truths  of another.  But  thanks  be to  Our  Father  and 
the Historical  Point  of View,  great  scholars  are  now  as  lit- 
tle nourished  by the  past  as  the  most  ignorant  mechanic 
who  holds  that ‘history  is bunk’,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

e2AW  TT  AG  EE  RRO  344

a

.  yg  och  ee flr eae aging.  smante sesame  | 
ae ie a 2  eid waaay we taside, vole batbadond  ago 
seek, ‘cing Poise: voll) clea cosy   Seaeg arena 
ake 
A soi  leet  bes  rims  att besteatia at 
ee A  ice oh) pen adapriaeah eid  yl bas eet)  taiBich  260 ©  SP  patio  ces yo okt seclie Ragt 
ais tic S330.  posse, wal ante, lnc  eno  aay aneloagha 
Rene Che UAE  6 2  NO arith lee aoe aE oda 
EL  Res  oh Se AOR MEGioting pt. 9760)  oh ap = 
Rudden  stunts  Spheyrt  aeas Ala,  Doma Rtehpesgaddie | 
Foard  Bad ive gins Sma  seman  ay  oyiat gay ach bivey 
Bits,  the:  sco 
maened  alee:  ads  Seah,  TonHes  2a  samt, 
te  ovr teionsy $s eM 2S) SetD PGE,  TOE GES OE 
OSIAETSS:  TE A Be Nea irpealid ee) ieee  aanllse ramet 
atta  grh  sedgage aly ndtetne heey  san  eaairiad 
asl Sona Dita aeireaates Yes Pte Sane as 
Gee  aod  ote piesa ee

Sa

5D! ants ig Sathya wx “Sanlareoami

*.

r  ;

1

~  te  ‘48

Bs >  ty  wilt  "EN  Oi  etahs  wr,

SURG  iat: nits pes See  * a nisy  “ROT  oh ee 
atc  FSA 
Tit cE,  ables  adheres 
bie  PSA  Wee,  oct  elpecend Tht EMIT  RATE  ane

ROR ere  Bis

ah Ryl

28

My dear Wormwood,

When I told  you  not  to  fill  your  letters  with  rubbishROR ere  Bis

ah Ryl

28

My dear Wormwood,

When I told  you  not  to  fill  your  letters  with  rubbish

about  the war,  I meant,  of course,  that  I did  not  want  to 
have  your  rather  infantile  rhapsodies  about  the  death  of 
men  and  the  destruction  of cities.  In  so  far  as  the  war 
really  concerns  the  spiritual  state  of the  patient,  I natu- 
rally want  full reports.  And  on  this  aspect  you  seem  sin- 
gularly  obtuse.  Thus  you  tell  me  with  glee that  there  is 
reason  to  expect  heavy  air  raids  on  the  town  where  the 
creature  lives.  This  is  a  crying  example  of something  I 
have  complained  about  already—your  readiness  to forget 
the  main  point  in your  immediate  enjoyment  of human 
suffering.  Do  you  not  know  that bombs  kill men?  Or do 
you  not  realise  that the patient’s  death,  at this  moment,  is 
precisely  what  we  want  to  avoid?  He  has escaped  the 
worldly friends  with whom  you  tried  to  entangle  him; he 
has  ‘fallen  in love’  with  a  very  Christian  woman  and  is 
temporarily  immune  from  your  attacks  on  his  chastity; 
and  the  various  methods  of corrupting  his  spiritual  life 
which  we  have  been trying are  so  far unsuccessful.  At the

By

GS.  LEW  1's

present  moment,  as  the  full  impact  of  the  war  draws 
nearer  and  his  worldly  hopes  take  a  proportionately

lower  place  in his  mind,  full  of his  defence  work,  full  ofpresent  moment,  as  the  full  impact  of  the  war  draws 
nearer  and  his  worldly  hopes  take  a  proportionately

lower  place  in his  mind,  full  of his  defence  work,  full  of

the  girl, forced  to  attend  to his neighbours  more  than  he 
has  ever  done  before  and  liking it more  than  he expected, 
‘taken  out  of  himself’  as  the  humans  say,  and  daily 
increasing  in conscious  dependence  on  the Enemy,  he will 
almost  certainly  be lost to  us  if he is killed  tonight.  This  is 
so  obvious  that  I am  ashamed  to  write  it.  1 sometimes 
wonder  if you  young  fiends  are  not  kept out  on  tempta- 
tion-duty  too  long at  a time—if  you  are  not  in some  dan- 
ger of becoming  infected  by the sentiments  and values  of 
the humans  among  whom  you  work.  They, of course,  do 
tend  to  regard  death  as  the prime  evil  and  survival  as  the 
greatest  good. But  that is because  we  have  taught them  to 
do so.  Do  not  let us  be infected  by our  own  propaganda. 
I know it seems  strange  that your  chief aim at the moment 
should  be  the  very  same  thing  for  which  the  patient’s 
lover  and  his  mother  are  praying—namely  his  bodily 
safety.  But  so  it is; you  should  be guarding  him  like  the 
apple of your  eye.  If he dies  now,  you  lose him.  If he sur-

vives  the  war,  there  is  always  hope.  The  Enemy  has 
guarded  him  from  you  through  the  first  great  wave  of 
temptations.  But,  if only he can  be kept alive,  you  have

154

THE  SGCREWTAPE  LETTERS154

THE  SGCREWTAPE  LETTERS

time itself for your  ally. The long, dull, monotonous  years 
of middle-aged  prosperity  or  middle-aged  adversity  are 
excellent  campaigning  weather.  You  see,  it is so  hard  for 
these  creatures  to persevere.  The  routine  of adversity,  the 
gradual  decay  of youthful  loves  and  youthful  hopes,  the 
quiet despair  (hardly  felt as  pain)  of ever  overcoming  the 
chronic  temptations  with  which  we  have  again and  again

defeated  them,  the drabness  which  we  create  in their  lives

and the inarticulate  resentment  with which we  teach them 
to  respond  to  it—all  this  provides  admirable  opportuni- 
ties  of wearing  out  a  soul  by attrition.  If, on  the  other 
hand,  the middle  years  prove  prosperous,  our  position  is 
even  stronger.  Prosperity  knits  a man  to  the  World.  He 
feels  that  he  is ‘finding  his  place  in it’, while  really  it is 
finding  its  place  in  him.  His  increasing  reputation,  his 
widening  circle  of acquaintances,  his sense  of importance, 
the  growing  pressure  of absorbing  and  agreeable  work, 
build  up  in him a sense  of being  really  at  home  in earth, 
which  is  just  what  we  want.  You  will  notice  that  the 
young  are  generally  less unwilling  to  die than the middle-

aged and the old.

The  truth  is  that  the  Enemy,  having  oddly  destined

these  mere  animals  to  life  in His  own  eternal  world,  has 
guarded them pretty  effectively from the danger of feeling

Dy?)

Cc.  S.  LE.WISthese  mere  animals  to  life  in His  own  eternal  world,  has 
guarded them pretty  effectively from the danger of feeling

Dy?)

Cc.  S.  LE.WIS

at  home  anywhere  else.  That  is why we  must  often  wish 
long  life  to  our  patients;  seventy  years  is not  a  day too 
much  for the difficult  task of unravelling  their  souls  from 
Heaven  and  building  up  a  firm  attachment  to  the  earth. 
While  they are  young we  find them always shooting off at 
a  tangent.  Even  if we  contrive  to  keep  them  ignorant  of 
explicit  religion,  the  incalculable  winds  of fantasy  and 
music  and  poetry—the  mere  face  of a girl, the  song  of a 
bird,  or  the  sight of a  horizon—are  always  blowing  our 
whole  structure  away.  They  will  not  apply  themselves 
steadily  to  worldly  advancement,  prudent  connections, 
and the policy of safety first. So inveterate  is their appetite 
for Heaven  that our  best method,  at  this  stage,  of attach- 
ing them to earth is to make them believe  that earth can  be 
turned  into  Heaven  at  some  future  date  by politics  or 
eugenics  or  ‘science’  or  psychology,  or  what  not.  Real

worldliness  is  a  work  of  time—assisted,  of  course,  by 
pride, for we  teach them to  describe  the creeping  death  as 
good sense  or  Maturity  or  Experience.  Experience,  in the 
peculiar  sense  we  teach  them  to  give it, is, by the  by, a 
most  useful  word.  A great  human  philosopher  nearly  let 
our  secret  out  when  he  said  that  where  Virtue  is con- 
cerned  ‘Experience  is the mother  of illusion’;  but thanks

to  a  change  in  Fashion,  and  also,  of  course,  to  the

156

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

Historical  Point  of View,  we  have  largely  rendered  his 
book  innocuous.

How  valuable  time  is to  us  may  be gauged  by the fact 
that the Enemy allows  us  so  little of it. The majority  of theHow  valuable  time  is to  us  may  be gauged  by the fact 
that the Enemy allows  us  so  little of it. The majority  of the

human  race  dies in infancy;  of the survivors,  a good many 
die  in youth.  It is obvious  that  to  Him  human  birth  is 
important  chiefly  as  the  qualification  for  human  death, 
and  death  solely as  the  gate  to  that  other  kind  of life.  We 
are  allowed  to  work  only  on a selected  minority  of the  © 
race,  for what  humans  call a ‘normal  life’ is the exception. 
Apparently  He wants  some—but  only a very  few—of  the 
human  animals  with  which  He  is  peopling  Heaven  to 
have  had the experience  of resisting us  through an  earthly 
life  of sixty or  seventy  years.  Well,  there  is our  opportu- 
nity. The smaller  it is, the better  we  must  use  it. Whatever 
you  do, keep your  patient  as  safe as  you  possibly  can,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

Suen ralraGe  rb | bina idee 
Raesose oe iee Here atin +e suieatites

tacitea ne  i abe ie "

ae  - sails ta 
BRR  Tan

ar hy 
eres  ee  oi! tee 0%

%

;

eae

‘Ma  Bewss dalagn eres nacido 
EAE  owt hla  sileeoetsbics cad Oe 
ier  Bee LU evs  sa: ways aro laurgs

ba  iene:  a

nap rE

ie

iv

lent  psneny sebescaicany eel

i

|

ao

oe  bs  of  ‘Hino gies  “ry

ee  oo

rScKs Hn

:

POAT  Sieh 
.

3

ry

Phebe

SAR ot spe Reapshin oe  abana ak

i  ie  ge ihe.  (ae 
Soret hatiae pik wpa  aha

ary

5 4

mh i hye ante ‘thease oe Wiis  &

“

‘

4  CS  RL igs  wtaat He  the} site  Mason 
ORG!  GL:  Bae  atig An ai wr aa

aft

‘

¥ gf a i

see)

My dear Wormwood,

Now  that  it is certain  the  German  humans  will  bom- 
bard  your patient’s  town  and that his duties  will keep him 
in the  thick  of the  danger,  we  must  consider  our  policy.

Are  we  to aim  at  cowardice—or  at  courage,  with  conse- 
quent  pride—or at  hatred  of the Germans?Are  we  to aim  at  cowardice—or  at  courage,  with  conse- 
quent  pride—or at  hatred  of the Germans?

Well,  I am  afraid  it is  no  good  trying  to  make  him 
brave.  Our  research  department  has  not  yet  discovered 
(though  success  is hourly  expected)  how  to  produce  any 
virtue.  This  is a serious  handicap.  To be greatly  and  effec- 
tively  wicked  a  man  needs  some  virtue.  What  would 
Attila  have  been  without  his courage,  or  Shylock  without 
self-denial  as  regards  the  flesh?  But  as  we  cannot  supply 
these  qualities  ourselves,  we  can  only  use  them  as  sup- 
plied by the Enemy—and  this  means  leaving  Him  a kind

of foothold  in those  men  whom,  otherwise,  we  have made 
most  securely  our  own.  A  very  unsatisfactory  arrange-

ment,  but, I trust,  we  shall  one  day learn  to  do better.

Hatred  we  can  manage.  The  tension  of human  nerves 
during  noise,  danger,  and  fatigue,  makes  them  prone  to

iy?

GC.  SS.  2 EW  ES

any  violent  emotion  and  it is only a  question  of guiding 
this  susceptibility  into  the  right  channels.  If conscience 
resists,  muddle  him.  Let  him  say  that  he feels  hatred  not

on  his own  behalf but on  that of the women  and children, 
and  that  a  Christian  is told  to  forgive  his own,  not  other 
people’s  enemies.  In other words  let him consider  himself 
sufficiently  identified  with  the  women  and  children  to 
feel  hatred  on  their  behalf,  but not  sufficiently  identified 
to  regard  their  enemies  as  his  own  and  therefore  proper 
objects  of forgiveness.

But  hatred  is  best  combined  with  Fear.  Cowardice, 
alone  of all the vices,  is purely painful—horrible  to  antic-

ipate,  horrible  to  feel,  horrible  to  remember;  Hatred  has 
its  pleasures.  It  is therefore  often  the  compensation  by 
which  a  frightened  man  reimburses  himself  for  the  mis-ipate,  horrible  to  feel,  horrible  to  remember;  Hatred  has 
its  pleasures.  It  is therefore  often  the  compensation  by 
which  a  frightened  man  reimburses  himself  for  the  mis-

eries  of Fear.  The  more  he fears,  the  more  he will  hate.

And  Hatred  is also a great  anodyne  for shame.  To make  a 
deep  wound  in  his  charity,  you  should  therefore  first 
defeat  his courage.

Now  this  is  a  ticklish  business.  We  have  made  men 
proud  of most  vices,  but  not  of cowardice.  Whenever  we 
have  almost  succeeded  in doing  so,  the  Enemy  permits  a 
war  or  an  earthquake  or  some  other  calamity,  and  at  once 
courage  becomes  so  obviously  lovely  and  important  even

160

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

in human  eyes  that all our  work is undone,  and there is still 
at least one  vice of which they feel genuine shame.  The dan- 
ger of inducing  cowardice  in our  patients,  therefore,  is lest 
we  produce  real  self-knowledge  and  self-loathing  with 
consequent  repentance  and humility. And in fact, in the last 
war,  thousands  of humans,  by discovering  their own  cow-

ardice, discovered  the whole  moral  world  for the first time. 
In peace  we  can  make  many  of them  ignore  good and  evil 
entirely;  in danger,  the issue  is forced  upon  them  in a guise 
to  which  even  we  cannot  blind  them.  There  is here  a cruel 
dilemma  before  us.  If we  promoted  justice  and  charity 
among  men,  we  should  be  playing  directly  into  the 
Enemy’s  hands;  but  if we  guide  them  to  the  opposite 
behaviour,  this sooner  or  later produces  (for He permits  it 
to  produce)  a war  or  a  revolution,  and  the undisguisable 
issue  of cowardice  or  courage  awakes  thousands  of men

from  moral  stupor.from  moral  stupor.

This,  indeed,  is probably  one  of the  Enemy’s  motives 
for creating  a dangerous  world—a  world  in which  moral 
issues  really come  to  the point.  He  sees  as  well  as  you  do 
that courage  is not  simply one  of the virtues,  but the form 
of every  virtue  at  the  testing  point,  which  means,  at  the 
point  of highest  reality.  A chastity  or  honesty,  or  mercy, 
which yields to danger will be chaste or  honest  or merciful

161

CaS.  LEWES

_only on  conditions.  Pilate was  merciful  till it became  risky. 
It is therefore  possible  to  lose  as  much  as  we  gain by 
making your man  a coward;  he may learn too  much  about

himself!  There  is, of  course,  always  the  chance,  not  of 
chloroforming  the  shame,  but  of aggravating  it and  pro- 
ducing Despair.  This  would  be a  great  triumph.  It would 
show  that  he had  believed  in, and  accepted,  the  Enemy’s 
forgiveness  of his  other  sins  only because  he himself  did 
not  fully feel  their  sinfulness—that  in respect  of the  one 
vice  which  he really understands  in its full  depth  of dis-

honour  he cannot  seek,  nor  credit,  the  Mercy.  But  I fear 
you  have  already  let  him  get  too  far  in  the  Enemy’s 
school,  and  he knows  that  Despair  is a  greater  sin  than 
any  of the sins  which  provoke  it.As to the actual  technique  of temptations  to cowardice, 
not  much  need be said. The main point is that precautions 
have  a tendency to  increase  fear. The precautions  publicly 
enjoined  on  your patient,  however,  soon  become  a matter 
of routine  and this effect  disappears.  What you  must  do is 
to  keep  running  in his  mind  (side  by side  with  the  con- 
scious  intention  of doing  his  duty)  the  vague  idea  of all 
sorts  of things  he can  do or  not  do, inside  the framework 
of the duty, which  seem  to  make  him a little  safer.  Get his 
mind  off the simple rule (‘I’ve got to  stay here  and do so-

162

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

and-so’)  into  a  series  of imaginary  life  lines  (‘If A  hap- 
pened—though  I very  much  hope  it won’t—I  could  do

B—and  if the worst  came  to  the worst,  I could  always  do 
C’). Superstitions,  if not  recognised  as  such, can  be awak- 
ened.  The  point  is to  keep  him  feeling  that  he has  some- 
thing,  other  than  the  Enemy  and  courage  the  Enemy 
supplies,  to fall back  on,  so  that what was  intended  to  be a 
total  commitment  to  duty  becomes  honeycombed  all 
through with  little  unconscious  reservations.  By building

up  a series of imaginary  expedients  to  prevent  ‘the  worst

coming to  the worst’  you  may produce,  at that level of his

will  which  he  is not  aware  of, a  determination  that  the

worst  shall not  come  to  the worst.  Then, at the moment  of 
real terror,  rush it out  into his nerves  and muscles  and you 
may  get  the  fatal  act  done  before  he knows  what  you’re

about.  For remember,  the act  of cowardice  is all that mat-

ters;  the emotion  of fear is, in itself, no  sin and, though we

enjoy it, does  us  no  good,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

163

tue  | PAs 4a TER.

eee 7G Ren Hit 
fs seis  3  i. Sn iad oe

al a

7

Pe 
420), 
; 
)

ea

Geet  ae

~ 5

id

¥

q

y

=

h  Sythe  ORL: 1} *

>i  .

ba

r 
i,SCREWTAPE

163

tue  | PAs 4a TER.

eee 7G Ren Hit 
fs seis  3  i. Sn iad oe

al a

7

Pe 
420), 
; 
)

ea

Geet  ae

~ 5

id

¥

q

y

=

h  Sythe  ORL: 1} *

>i  .

ba

r 
i,

“

}

*,

pres  AE  EP Ita? Ye  pecs 
- stat}  P| ies  y

4  ~

+.

2

*  |

y

‘

4.

yen 
el

“

;

+ 
‘

os

} 
ie)

e 
iv

e ihr 
‘ 
- 
¥

p

: 
r

; 
; 
; 
se 
TW)  tics

=~

~

Pe 
1%

3 
;

:

.

\ 
\

’

wy

,  RP

paorae 
0  ASA

F.

> 
j

:

‘oe

por

|

ae

Win

hig 
rei

Opa  ¥ 
NR?  SLAY

“ 
BY

. 
:

‘ 
ee 
Wrst 
’

od

a

iy

A

; 
rt 
Sie 
i

,

y

1

,

a.

7

30

My dear Wormwood,

I sometimes  wonder  whether  you  think  you  have  been 
sent  into  the  world  for  your  own  amusement.  I gather, 
not  from your  miserably  inadequate  report  but from  that 
of the Infernal  Police,  that  the patient’s  behaviour  during 
the  first  raid  has  been  the  worst  possible.  He  has  been 
very  frightened  and  thinks  himself  a  great  coward  and 
therefore  feels  no  pride;  but  he has  done  everything  his 
duty demanded  and perhaps  a bit more.  Against  this dis- 
aster  all you  can  produce  on  the credit  side is a burst  of ill

temper  with  a  dog that  tripped  him  up,  some  excessive 
cigarette  smoking,  and the forgetting  of a prayer.  What  is 
the use  of whining  to  me  about  your  difficulties?  If you 
are  proceeding  on  the  Enemy’s  idea  of ‘justice’  and  sug- 
gesting  that  your  opportunities  and  intentions  should  be

taken  into  account,  then  I am  not  sure  that  a  charge  of 
heresy does  not  lie against you.  At any rate,  you will soon 
find  that  the  justice  of Hell  is purely  realistic,  and  con- 
cerned  only with  results.  Bring us  back  food,  or  be food

yourself.

Gas:  LE  Websyourself.

Gas:  LE  Webs

The  only  constructive  passage  in your  letter  is where 
you say that you still expect good results  from the patient’s 
fatigue.  That  is well  enough.  But  it won’t  fall  into  your 
hands.  Fatigue  can  produce  extreme  gentleness,  and quiet 
of mind, and even  something  like vision.  If you  have often 
seen  men  led by it into  anger,  malice  and impatience,  that 
is  because  those  men  have  had  efficient  tempters.  The 
paradoxical  thing  is that  moderate  fatigue  is a  better  soil 
for  peevishness  than  absolute  exhaustion.  This  depends 
partly on  physical  causes,  but partly on  something  else.  It 
is not  fatigue  simply  as  such  that produces  the anger,  but 
unexpected  demands  on  a  man  already  tired.  Whatever 
men  expect  they soon  come  to  think  they have a right to: 
the  sense  of disappointment  can,  with  very  little  skill  on 
our  part,  be turned  into  a  sense  of injury.  It is after  men 
have given in to the irremediable,  after they have despaired 
of relief  and  ceased  to  think  even  a  half-hour  ahead,  that 
the  dangers  of humbled  and  gentle  weariness  begin.  To 
produce  the best  results  from  the patient’s  fatigue,  there- 
fore,  you  must  feed  him  with  false  hopes.  Put  into  his 
mind  plausible  reasons  for believing  that  the  air raid  will 
not  be  repeated.  Keep  him  comforting  himself  with  the 
thought  of how  much  he will  enjoy  his  bed  next  night. 
Exaggerate  the weariness  by making him think it will soon

166

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

be over;  for men  usually feel that  a strain  could  have  been 
endured  no  longer  at  the very  moment  when  it is ending, 
or  when  they think  it is ending.  In this, as  in the problem 
of cowardice,  the thing to  avoid  is the total  commitment. 
Whatever  he says,  let his  inner  resolution  be not  to  bearwhatever  comes  to  him,  but  to  bear  it ‘for  a  reasonable 
period’—and  let the reasonable  period be shorter  than the 
trial is likely to last. It need  not  be much  shorter;  in attacks 
on  patience,  chastity,  and fortitude,  the fun is to  make  the 
man  yield  just  when  (had  he  but  known  it) relief  was 
almost  in sight.

I do  not  know  whether  he  is likely  to  meet  the  girl

under conditions  of strain  or  not.  If he does, make  full use 
of the fact that up to a certain  point, fatigue makes  women

talk more  and men  talk less.  Much  secret  resentment,  even

between  lovers,  can  be raised  from  this.

Probably  the scenes  he is now  witnessing  will not  pro- 
vide  material  for an  intellectual  attack  on  his faith—your 
previous  failures  have  put  that  out  of your  power.  But 
there  is a sort  of attack  on  the emotions  which  can  still be 
tried.  It  turns  on  making  him  fee/,  when  first  he  sees 
human  remains  plastered  on  a wall,  that  this  is “what  the 
world  is really like’  and that all his religion has been  a fan- 
tasy.  You  will  notice  that  we  have  got  them  completely

167

c.S.  LEWIS167

c.S.  LEWIS

fogged about the meaning of the word ‘real’. They tell each 
other,  of some  great  spiritual  experience,  ‘All  that  really 
happened  was  that  you  heard  some  music  in a lighted 
building’;  here  ‘real’  means  the  bare  physical  facts,  sepa- 
rated  from  the other  elements  in the experience  they actu- 
ally had.  On the other hand, they will also say ‘It’s  all very 
well  discussing  that  high dive  as  you  sit here  in an  arm- 
chair,  but wait  till you  get up there  and see  what  it’s really 
like’: here ‘real’ is being used in the opposite sense  to mean, 
not  the physical facts  (which they know  already while  dis- 
cussing  the  matter  in armchairs)  but  the  emotional  effect 
those  facts  will  have  on  a  human  consciousness.  Either 
application  of the word  could  be defended;  but  our  busi- 
ness  is to  keep the two  going at once  so  that the emotional 
value  of the word  ‘real’  can  be placed  now  on  one  side  of

the account,  now  on  the other, as  it happens to suit us.  The 
general  rule  which  we  have  now  pretty  well  established 
among  them  is that  in  all  experiences  which  can  make 
them  happier  or  better  only  the  physical  facts  are  ‘real’ 
while  the  spiritual  elements  are  ‘subjective’;  in all experi- 
ences  which  can  discourage  or  corrupt  them  the spiritual 
elements  are  the main reality and to ignore them is to be an 
escapist.  Thus  in birth  the  blood  and  pain  are  ‘real’,  the 
rejoicing a mere  subjective  point of view; in death, the ter-

168

DHE  SGREWTAPE  LETTERS168

DHE  SGREWTAPE  LETTERS

ror  and  ugliness  reveal  what  death  ‘really  means’.  The 
hatefulness  of a  hated  person  is ‘real’—in  hatred  you  see 
men  as  they are,  you are  disillusioned;  but the loveliness  of 
a  loved  person  is merely  a  subjective  haze  concealing  a 
‘real’ core  of sexual  appetite or  economic  association.  Wars 
and poverty  are  ‘really’ horrible; peace  and plenty are  mere 
physical  facts  about  which  men  happen  to  have  certain

sentiments.  The creatures  are  always accusing  one  another 
of wanting  ‘to eat  the cake  and have  it’; but thanks  to  our 
labours  they are  more  often  in the predicament  of paying 
for the cake  and not  eating it. Your  patient,  properly  han- 
dled, will have no  difficulty in regarding his emotion  at the 
sight of human  entrails  as  a  revelation  of Reality  and  his 
emotion  at  the  sight of happy  children  or  fair weather  as

mere  sentiment,

Your  affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

169

ere An a 
& 
r

ers

VE

te  De  Lens  pis  duel 
es

PEK  1  Has.  8 B. tt

:

TAT

eee 
2  BRS  AS  TRIS  ihe [epereys

ary)

gh

rl 
;

,

£2 
ES

Foes

he  ok 
TR:  Bi abe + Se % 
4 
j 
Li  Pa  P

s  as

oR  cae ROE STE

et

7

2

»

: 
i“?

2

¥ 
.

‘

a  F2ete%

4 
.

‘

1 
me

.

° 
sof 
$e

i

5

s

2

* 
4

.

>

My 
r

‘

~

gs 
z  4

re 
PS  Shes. S

‘

i

{

et

he 
Spe 
Shae 
a 
’ 
a 
—

fet 
£

*

fs

es 
. 
¢ 
os)  ae

oe  e

~~

bt

*

~y

a  .

iy 
are

’ 
Me  cao 
ge  Ot

2¢

+

e84

4

ate  dnd 
+

oe 
re

oe

Z

‘

as

,

‘

r

7

J

2

\

ve 
'T

tgad

ge  5

ae 
‘

;

seer

thie

by

hin’? 
vo  Phd 
pie 
A

~

?

te!

: 
A 
hn, 
:

i

4

A

31

My  dear,  my  very  dear,  Wormwood,  my  poppet,  my 
pigsnie,as

,

‘

r

7

J

2

\

ve 
'T

tgad

ge  5

ae 
‘

;

seer

thie

by

hin’? 
vo  Phd 
pie 
A

~

?

te!

: 
A 
hn, 
:

i

4

A

31

My  dear,  my  very  dear,  Wormwood,  my  poppet,  my 
pigsnie,

How  mistakenly  now  that  all is lost you  come  whim- 
pering  to  ask  me  whether  the  terms  of  affection  in 
which  I address  you  meant  nothing  from  the beginning. 
Far  from  it!  Rest  assured,  my  love  for  you  and  your 
love for me  are  as  like  as  two  peas.  I have  always  desired 
you,  as  you  (pitiful  fool)  desired  me.  The  difference  is 
that  I am  the  stronger.  I think  they will  give you  to  me 
now;  or  a  bit  of you.  Love  you?  Why,  yes.  As  dainty  a

morsel  as  ever  I grew  fat on.

You  have  let  a  soul  slip  through  your  fingers.  The 
howl  of sharpened  famine  for that  loss  re-echoes  at  this 
moment  through  all the levels  of the Kingdom  of Noise 
down  to  the  very  Throne  itself.  It  makes  me  mad  to 
think  of  it.  How  well  I know  what  happened  at  the 
instant  when  they snatched  him  from  you!  There  was  a 
sudden  clearing  of his  eyes  (was  there  not?) as  he  saw 
you  for  the  first  time,  and  recognised  the  part  you  had 
had  in  him  and  knew  that  you  had  it no  longer.  Just

CG.  S.  LEWIS

think  (and  let it be the  beginning  of your  agony)  what 
he felt at  that moment;  as  if a scab  had fallen  from  an  old 
sore,  as  if he  were  emerging  from  a  hideous,  shell-like

tetter,  as  if he shuffled  off for good and all a defiled,  wet, 
clinging  garment.  By Hell,  it is misery  enough  to  see 
them  in their  mortal  days taking off dirtied  and uncom- 
fortable  clothes  and  splashing  in  hot  water  and  giving 
little  grunts  of pleasure—stretching  their  eased  limbs. 
What,  then, of this  final  stripping,  this  complete  cleans-

ing?ing?

The  more  one  thinks  about  it, the  worse  it becomes. 
He  got  through  so  easily!  No  gradual  misgivings,  no 
doctor’s  sentence,  no  nursing  home,  no  operating  the-

atre,  no  false  hopes  of life;  sheer,  instantaneous  libera-

tion.  One  moment  it seemed  to  be  all  our  world;  the

scream  of bombs,  the  fall  of houses,  the  stink  and  taste 
of high  explosive  on  the  lips and  in  the  lungs,  the  feet

burning  with  weariness,  the heart  cold  with  horrors,  the 
brain  reeling,  the  legs aching;  next  moment  all this  was 
gone,  gone  like  a  bad  dream,  never  again  to  be  of any 
account.  Defeated,  out-manoeuvred  fool!  Did  you 
mark  how  naturally—as  if he’d  been  born  for  it—the 
earth-born  vermin  entered  the  new  life?  How  all  his 
doubts  became,  in the twinkling  of an  eye,  ridiculous?  I

172

THE  SGREWTAPE  LETTERS

know  what  the  creature  was  saying  to  itself!  ‘Yes.  Of 
course.  It  always  was  like  this.  All  horrors  have  fol- 
lowed  the  same  course,  getting  worse  and  worse  and

forcing  you  into  a  kind  of bottle-neck  till,  at  the  very 
moment  when  you  thought  you  must  be  crushed, 
behold!  you  were  out  of the  narrows  and  all was  sud- 
denly well.  The  extraction  hurt  more  and more  and then 
the  tooth  was  out.  The  dream  became  a  nightmare  and 
then  you  woke.  You  die  and  die  and  then  you  are 
beyond  death.  How  could  I ever  have  doubted  it?’As he saw  you,  he also  saw  Them.  I know  how it was. 
You  reeled  back  dizzy  and  blinded,  more  hurt  by them 
than  he  had  ever  been  by bombs.  The  degradation  of 
it!—that  this  thing  of  earth  and  slime  could  stand 
upright  and  converse  with  spirits  before  whom  you,  a 
spirit, could  only cower.  Perhaps  you  had hoped that the 
awe  and strangeness  of it would  dash  his joy. But  that  is 
the  cursed  thing;  the  gods  are  strange  to  mortal  eyes, 
and yet they are  not  strange.  He had no  faintest  concep- 
tion  till  that  very  hour  of how  they  would  look,  and 
even  doubted  their  existence.  But  when  he saw  them  he 
knew  that he had  always  known  them  and realised  what 
part  each  one  of them  had played  at  many  an  hour  in his 
life when  he had  supposed  himself  alone,  so  that now  he

173

C..S.  LEW  Ts

could  say  to  them,  one  by one,  not  ‘Who  are  you?’  but 
‘So it was  you  all the time.’  All that they were  and said at 
this  meeting  woke  memories.  The  dim  consciousness  of 
friends  about  him  which  had haunted  his solitudes  from 
infancy  was  now  at  last  explained;  that  central  music  in 
every  pure  experience  which  had  always  just  evaded 
memory  was  now  at  last  recovered.  Recognition  made 
him free of their  company  almost  before  the limbs  of his 
corpse  became  quiet.  Only you  were  left outside.

He  saw  not  only  Them;  he  saw  Him.  This  animal, 
this  thing  begotten  in a  bed,  could  look  on  Him.  What 
is blinding,  suffocating  fire  to  you,  is now  cool  light to

him,  is clarity  itself,  and  wears  the  form  of a  Man.  You 
would  like, if you  could,  to  interpret  the patient’s  pros-him,  is clarity  itself,  and  wears  the  form  of a  Man.  You 
would  like, if you  could,  to  interpret  the patient’s  pros-

tration  in  the  Presence,  his  self-abhorrence  and  utter 
knowledge  of  his  sins  (yes,  Wormwood,  a  clearer 
knowledge  even  than  yours)  on  the  analogy  of  your 
own  choking  and  paralysing  sensations  when  you 
encounter  the deadly  air that  breathes  from  the heart  of

Heaven.  But  it’s  all nonsense.  Pains  he may  still  have  to 
encounter,  -but  they  embrace  those  pains.  They  would 
not  barter  them  for  any  earthly  pleasure.  All  the

delights  of sense,  or  heart,  or  intellect,  with  which  you 
could  once  have  tempted  him,  even  the  delights  of

174

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

virtue  itself,  now  seem  to  him  in comparison  but  as  the 
half  nauseous  attractions  of  a  raddled  harlot  would 
seem  to  a man  who  hears  that his true  beloved  whom  he 
has  loved  all  his  life  and  whom  he  had  believed  to  be 
dead  is alive  and  even  now  at  his door.  He  is caught  up 
into  that world  where  pain and pleasure  take  on  transfi- 
nite  values  and  all  our  arithmetic  is  dismayed.  Once 
more,  the  inexplicable  meets  us.  Next  to  the  curse  of 
useless  tempters  like yourself  the greatest  curse  upon  us 
is the failure  of our  Intelligence  Department.  If only we 
could  find  out  what  He  is really  up  to!  Alas,  alas,  that 
knowledge,  in  itself  so  hateful  and  mawkish  a thing, 
should  yet  be  necessary  for  Power!  Sometimes  I am 
almost  in despair.  All  that  sustains  me  is the  conviction 
that our  Realism,  our  rejection  (in the face of all tempta- 
tions)  of all silly nonsense  and  claptrap,  must  win  in the 
end.  Meanwhile,  I have  you  to  settle  with.  Most  truly 
do I sign myself

Your  increasingly  and  ravenously

affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

175Your  increasingly  and  ravenously

affectionate  uncle

SCREWTAPE

175

aah dies J  saben otal fanllaoaditiads 2 
|  aesctaig saad Tama Testa ta  Rrolceaipsa 
‘ 
ag raneaalen  his raha)  paras PY ik apitt esate 
Hiei <bbvazont dnd) sesh chine, des: iid  Itinta 
(fh  Thy: Jeo Ptah ne tobe eth arama,  vssis Lerpiand ls aie 
iapieton sf G 21 visteouley  Sieahvikespiz oho 
ned a  a 
wath  Dorgeaaptly:  ae beers nie.  Bas Soesead  al afyr 
Tipe igyy dey akt a ot  ite  View  diem  ¢ Lidasilghelibvahly  bi ene? 
cial proaan  gneny atl Homes ‘honda  Ml 
neta 2k aataertges 4¢ Lecomnigil  s ‘sGoderbialiens a 
Malt withs  letcdudog  ez: elles  cass ihe ay sesh ase  asst ih ae 
sede a-steohi achge | jagtased ue ._ Hantogtige  Boe  tecay 
(PR:  §: Sobnsepriont ft Sraeey: oad Vincthoaaaid tite is  b 
Evel t chara 
teary te “Asay! dGicctpsiproncts ili susaciecibcme dpnints 
+ et  teed  di rf Rey 5  By ahs ‘ad Myrt. suri: =)  vitipergmene} les “it 5 
at wel wire  senditss Mugeis bint  oe%, Mion  S pHi lis: Voie 
eri? res  ey) iM ee 7 nes Aa  hD oe ads A ymaihvernn:

mare

+  wy  uy +i8 "4

Ww eI

—

He:

m

By  Tete

Lf  iy  :  9% i ray

;  torn  eet heated

~.  Aes re

7

SMSO

a

ree

be  wa yue ther rma teen  2 Be  tiewig) at, SLbdigea ay

RRS  Sia ta heel. giidia hi, soph 
spa  Sys  agama,  ee,  EM e 4

i

j

;

hast  Aghene.  te  ile 
mold:  inne  Blame beet ad “haw ih abe tiie 
‘

0  He: ‘eet iron, ae wind  ys u 
=  ree  Pin

SCREWTAPE 
PROPOSES  A  TOAST

PREFACE 
From  the  collection  of essays

Screwtape  Proposes  a  Toast0  He: ‘eet iron, ae wind  ys u 
=  ree  Pin

SCREWTAPE 
PROPOSES  A  TOAST

PREFACE 
From  the  collection  of essays

Screwtape  Proposes  a  Toast

C.  S.  Lewis  had  finished  putting  this  book  together 
shortly  before  his  death  on  22  November  1963.  It  is 
devoted  almost  entirely  to  religion  and  the  pieces  are 
derived  from  various  sources.  Some  of  them  have 
appeared  in  They  Asked  for a  Paper  (Geoffrey  Bles, 
London  1962),  a collection  whose  subjects  included  lit- 
erature,  ethics  and  theology.  ‘Screwtape  Proposes  a 
Toast’  was  initially published  in Great  Britain  as  part  of 
a  hard-covered  book  called  The  Screwtape  Letters  and 
Screwtape  Proposes  a  Toast  (Geoffrey  Bles,  London 
1961).  This  consisted  of  the  original  “The  Screwtape

Letters’,  together  with  the  “Toast’,  and  also  a  new  pref-

ace  by Lewis.  Meantime,  ‘Screwtape  Proposes  a  Toast’ 
had  already  appeared  in  the  United  States,  first  as  an 
article  in  The  Saturday  Evening  Post  and  then  during

c.s.  LEWIS

1960  in  a  hard-covered  collection,  The  World’s  Last

Night (Harcourt  Brace and World,  New  York).

In  the  new  preface  for  The  Screwtape  Letters  and 
Screwtape  Proposes  a  Toast,  which  we  have  reprinted  in 
this book, Lewis  explains  the conception  and birth of the 
‘Toast’.  It  would  be  quite  wrong  to  call  the  address 
‘another  Screwtape  letter’.  What  he  described  as  the 
technique  of  ‘diabolical  ventriloquism’  is  indeed  still 
there:  Screwtape’s  whites  are  our  blacks  and whatever  he

welcomes  we  should  dread.  But,  whilst  the  form  still 
broadly  persists,  there  its affinity  to  the  original  Letters 
ends.  They were  mainly concerned  with the moral  life of 
an  individual;  in the  “Toast’  the substance  of the  quest  is 
now  rather  the need to  respect  and foster  the mind  of the 
young  boy and  girl.‘A  Slip  of  the  Tongue’  (a  sermon  preached  in 
Magdalene  College  Chapel)  appears  in  a  book  for  the 
first  time.  “The  Inner  Ring’  was  a  Memorial  Oration 
delivered  at  King’s  College,  University  of  London  in 
1944;  ‘Is  Theology  Poetry?’  and  ‘On  Obstinacy  in 
Belief?  were  both  papers  read  to  the Socratic  Club,  sub- 
sequently  first  appearing  in the ‘Socratic  Digest’  in 1944 
and  1955  respectively.  “Transposition’  is a  slightly  fuller 
version  of  a  sermon  preached  in  Mansfield  College,

180

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

Oxford;  whilst  “The  Weight  of  Glory’  was  a  sermon 
given in the Church  of St Mary the Virgin,  Oxford,  and 
first  published  by SPCK.  All  these  five  papers  were 
published  by  kind  permission  in  They  Asked  for  a 
Paper.  “Good  Work  and  Good  Works’  first  appeared  in 
The  Catholic  Art  Quarterly  and  then  in  The  World’s 
Last Night.

At  the  end  of his  preface  to  They Asked for a  Paper, 
Lewis  wrote:  ‘Since  these  papers  were  composed  at  var- 
ious  times  during the last twenty  years,  passages  in them 
which  some  readers  may  find  reminiscent  of my  later 
work  are  in  fact  anticipatory  and  embryonic.  I have 
allowed  myself to  be persuaded  that such  overlaps  were 
not  a  fatal  objection  to  their  republication.’  We  are 
delighted  that he allowed  himself  to  be persuaded  in the 
same  way  over  this  paperback  collection  of pieces  on

religious  themes.

JiEIG.

181

oe

~

~-

2

.

ce

Faz

<

SCREWTAPE  PROPOSES  A  TOAST

I was  often  asked  or  advised  to  add  to  the  original 
‘Screwtape  Letters’,  but for many  years I felt not  the least 
inclination to do it. Though  I had never  written  anything

more  easily,  I never  wrote  with  less  enjoyment.  The  easemore  easily,  I never  wrote  with  less  enjoyment.  The  ease

came,  no  doubt,  from  the fact that the device  of diabolical 
letters,  once  you  have  thought  of it, exploits  itself sponta- 
neously,  like Swift’s  big and little  men,  or  the medical  and

ethical  philosophy  of  ‘Erewhon’,  as  Anstey’s  Garuda 
Stone.  It would  run  away  with  you  for a thousand  pages 
if you  gave  it its  head.  But  though  it was  easy  to  twist

one’s  mind  into  the  diabolical  attitude,  it was  not  fun, or 
not  for  long.  The  strain  produced  a  sort  of  spiritual 
cramp.  The  world  into  which  I had  to  project  myself 
while  I spoke through  Screwtape  was  all dust,  grit, thirst 
and  itch.  Every  trace  of beauty,  freshness  and  geniality 
had to  be excluded.  It almost  smothered  me  before  I was 
done.  It would  have  smothered  my  readers  if I had  pro-

longed it.

C.S,  LEWIS

I had, moreover,  a sort  of grudge  against  my  book  for 
not  being  a  different  book  which  no  one  could  write. 
Ideally,  Screwtape’s  advice  to  Wormwood  should  have 
been  balanced  by archangelical  advice  to  the  patient’s 
guardian  angel. Without  this  the picture  of human  life is 
lop-sided.  But who  could  supply  the deficiency?  Even  if 
a  man—and  he would  have  to  be a far better  man  than 
I—could  scale  the  spiritual  heights  required,  what 
‘answerable  style’  could  he  use?  For  the  style  would 
really  be part  of the  content.  Mere  advice  would  be no 
good;  every  sentence  would  have  to  smell  of  Heaven. 
And  nowadays  even  if  you  could  write  prose  like

Traherne’s,  you  wouldn’t  be allowed  to, for the canon  of 
‘functionalism’  has  disabled  literature  for  half  its  func- 
tions.  (At bottom,  every  ideal  of style dictates  not  only 
how  we  should  say  things  but  what  sort  of things  we 
may  say.)Then,  as  years  went  on  and  the  stifling  experience  of 
writing the ‘Letters’  became  a weaker  memory,  reflections 
on  this  and  that  which  seemed  somehow  to  demand

Screwtapian  treatment  began  to  occur  to  me.  I  was 
resolved  never  to  write  another  ‘Letter’.  The  idea  of 
something  like  a  lecture  or  ‘address’  hovered  vaguely  in

THE  SGCREWTAPE  LETTERS

my  mind,  now  forgotten,  now  recalled,  never  written. 
Then  came  an  invitation  from  The  Saturday  Evening 
Post,  and that pressed the trigger.

CSL

185

3

5

q

p- 
i

ord 
2

3

gaat 
>

=

ATC!  es ie  €

oe  elie)

ar

Ley

— 
GQ  s>

y

¥

aS 
3

“4% 
7

*

a 
>

ee. 
ES 
4

if 
a 
‘ 
Ss ty 
Wiese 
be,  oe DD

— 
|

» 
~

e< 
2 
?

o|  a  ae

Cea

4

a

+

1.

i

were 
;

7

‘

; 
+

Bx

'

itd

x?

>, 
F

ae 
' 
aN 
n't  hie  awed  we 
ean

el

cietse  4  isk

.

'

~~

“>

:

A 
A

a

—  4 
e,  >  ae

.

re

“) 
SR  Geis  tah  reer ctirg  Y  oY  bealee

3  ;

tet

St om  @

5

VE

=

fie

= 
y

R

«

~

i

OURS  Bry,  Sain a GUD)  by

7

z

aan

on

ete.

:

“4

Ms

Ae

We  Eg

*

f

=.

~i-

um 
gus

“are

1's

7

iy 
-

2)

z

a

1 
ers

‘ 
— 
)  ie ahee x  he  itt oy

re

.

f

¥

*

*

r

s

s

7  Lh

sy 
y

t 
ay

“|

ek

pa

J

- y

i

*

The  scene  is in Hell  at the annual  dinner  of the Tempters’ 
Training  College  for  young  Devils.  The  Principal,  Dr 
Slubgob,  has  just  proposed  the  health  of  the  guests. 
Screwtape,  who  is the guest  of honour,  rises  to  reply:

Mr  Principal,  your  Imminence,  your  Disgraces,  my

Thorns,  Shadies,  and  Gentledevils:  It  is  customary  on 
these  occasions  for the  speaker  to  address  himself  chiefly 
to  those  among  you  who  have  just  graduated  and  who 
will  very  soon  be  posted  to  official  Tempterships  on 
Earth.  It is  a custom  I willingly  obey.  I well  remember 
with  what  trepidation  I awaited  my  own  first  appoint-ment.  I hope,  and  believe,  that  each  one  of you  has  the 
same  uneasiness  tonight.  Your  career  is before  you.  Hell 
expects  and  demands  that  it should  be—as  Mine  was— 
one  of unbroken  success.  If it is not,  you  know  what

awaits  you.

I have  no  wish  to  reduce  the  wholesome  and  realistic 
element  of terror,  the  unremitting  anxiety,  which  must 
act  as  the lash  and  spur  to  your  endeavours.  How  often

87

c.S  LEWIS

you  will  envy  the  humans  their  faculty  of sleep!  Yet  at 
the same  time  I would  wish to  put  before  you  a moder- 
ately  encouraging  view  of the  strategical  situation  as  a

whole.

Your  dreaded  Principal  has  included  in a  speech  full 
of  points  something  like  an  apology  for  the  banquet

which  he  has  set  before  us.  Well,  gentledevils,  no  one 
blames  him.  But  it  would  be  vain  to  deny  that  the 
human  souls  on  whose  anguish  we  have  been  feasting 
tonight  were  of pretty  poor  quality.  Not  all  the  most 
skilful  cookery  of  our  tormentors  could  make  them 
better  than  insipid.

Oh to get one’s  teeth again into a Farinata,  a Henry VIII,

or  even  a  Hitler!  There  was  real  crackling  there;  some- 
thing to  crunch;  a rage,  an  egotism,  a cruelty only just less 
robust  than  our  own.  It put  up a delicious  resistance  to 
being devoured.  It warmed  your  innards  when  you’d got 
it down.

Instead  of this, what  have  we  had  tonight?  There  was  a 
municipal  authority  with  Graft  sauce.  But  personally  I 
could  not  detect  in him  the  flavour  of a really passionate 
and  brutal  avarice  such  as  delighted  one  in  the  great 
tycoons  of the  last  century.  Was  he  not  unmistakably  a 
Little  Man—a  creature  of the petty rake-off  pocketed with

188

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS188

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

a petty joke in private and denied with the stalest platitudes 
in his  public  utterances—a  grubby  little  nonentity  who 
had drifted  into  corruption,  only just realising that he was 
corrupt,  and  chiefly  because  everyone  else  did  it?  Then 
there  was  the  lukewarm  Casserole  of Adulterers.  Could 
you  find  in it any  trace  of a fully inflamed,  defiant,  rebel- 
lious, insatiable  lust?  I couldn’t.  They all tasted  to  me  like 
under-sexed  morons  who  had  blundered  or  trickled  into 
the  wrong  beds  in automatic  response  to  sexy  advertise-

ments,  or  to  make  themselves  feel  modern  and  emanci- 
pated, or to reassure  themselves  about their virility or their 
‘normalcy’,  or  even  because  they had  nothing  else  to  do.

Frankly,  to  me  who  have  tasted  Messalina  and  Casanova, 
they were  nauseating.  The Trade  Unionist  garnished  with 
Claptrap  was  perhaps  a  shade  better.  He  had  done  some 
real  harm.  He  had,  not  quite  unknowingly,  worked  for 
bloodshed,  famine,  and  the  extinction  of liberty.  Yes,  in a 
way.  But what  a way!  He thought of those ultimate  objec- 
tives  so  little.  Toeing  the party  line,  self-importance,  and 
above all mere  routine, were  what really dominated  his life. 
But  now  comes  the point.  Gastronomically,  all this  is 
deplorable.  But  I hope none  of us  puts  gastronomy  first. 
Is it not,  in another  and far more  serious  way,  full of hope

and promise?

189

Go.  SSL W is

Consider,  first,  the  mere  quantity.  The  quality  may  be

wretched;  but  we  never  had  souls  (of  a  sort)  in  more

abundance.and promise?

189

Go.  SSL W is

Consider,  first,  the  mere  quantity.  The  quality  may  be

wretched;  but  we  never  had  souls  (of  a  sort)  in  more

abundance.

And then the triumph.  We are  tempted to  say that such 
souls—or  such  residual  puddles  of what  once  was  soul— 
are  hardly worth  damning.  Yes, but the Enemy  (for what- 
ever  inscrutable  and perverse  reason)  thought them worth 
trying  to  save.  Believe  me,  He  did.  You  youngsters  who 
have not yet been on  active  service  have no  idea with what

labour,  with  what  delicate  skill,  each  of these  miserable 
creatures  was  finally captured.

The difficulty lay in their very  smallness  and flabbiness. 
Here  were  vermin  so  muddled  in  mind,  so  passively 
responsive  to  environment,  that  it was  very  hard  to  raise 
them  to  that  level of clarity  and  deliberateness  at  which 
mortal  sin becomes  possible.  To raise  them  just enough;

but  not  that  fatal  millimetre  of ‘too  much’.  For  then,  of 
course,  all  would  possibly  have  been  lost.  They  might 
have  seen;  they might have  repented.  On the other  hand, 
if they had  been  raised  too  little,  they would  very  possi- 
bly have  qualified  for  Limbo,  as  creatures  suitable  nei- 
ther for Heaven  nor for Hell; things that, having failed  to 
make  the  grade,  are  allowed  to  sink  into  a  more  or  less 
contented  sub-humanity  forever.

190

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS190

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

In  each  individual  choice  of what  the  Enemy  would 
call the ‘wrong’  turning  such  creatures  are  at first  hardly, 
if at  all, in a state  of full  spiritual  responsibility.  They do 
not  understand  either  the  source  or  the real  character  of 
the  prohibitions  they are  breaking.  Their  consciousness 
hardly  exists  apart  from  the  social  atmosphere  that  sur- 
rounds  them.  And  of course  we  have  contrived  that their 
very language should  be all smudge and blur; what would 
be a bribe  in someone  else’s profession  is a tip or  a present 
in  theirs.  The  first  job of their  Tempters  was  to  harden 
these  choices  of  the  Hell-ward  roads  into  a  habit  by 
steady  repetition.  But  then  (and  this  was  all-important) 
to turn  the habit into  a principle—a  principle  the creature 
is prepared  to  defend.  After  that,  all will  go  well.  Con- 
formity to  the social  environment,  at first merely instinc- 
tive  or  even  mechanical—how  should  a  jelly  not 
conform?—now  becomes  an  unacknowledged  creed  or 
ideal of Togetherness  or  Being like Folks.  Mere  ignorance 
of the  law  they  break  now  turns  into  a  vague  theory 
about  it—remember  they  know  no  history—a  theory 
expressed  by calling  it conventional  or puritan  or  bour- 
geois  ‘morality’.  Thus  gradually  there  comes  to  exist  at 
the centre  of the creature  a hard, tight, settled  core  of res- 
olution to go on  being what it is, and even  to resist moods

191

CGC.  St#LEWITS191

CGC.  St#LEWITS

that might tend  to  alter it. It is  a very  small  core;  not  at all 
reflective  (they  are  too ignorant)  nor  defiant  (their  emo- 
tional  and  imaginative  poverty  excludes  that);  almost,  in 
its  own  way,  prim  and  demure;  like  a  pebble,  or  a very 
young  cancer.  But  it will  serve  our  turn.  Here  at  last is a 
real  and  deliberate,  though  not  fully articulate,  rejection 
of what the Enemy  calls  Grace.

These,  then,  are  two  welcome  phenomena.  First,  the

abundance  of our  captures;  however  tasteless  our  fare, we 
are  in no  danger  of famine.  And  secondly,  the  triumph; 
the skill  of our  Tempters  has  never  stood  higher.  But  the

third  moral,  which  I have  not  yet  drawn,  is  the  most 
important  of all.

The  sort  of souls  on  whose  despair  and  ruin  we  have— 
well,  I won’t  say feasted,  but at any rate  subsisted—tonight

are  increasing in numbers  and will continue  to increase.  Our

.  advices  from  Lower  Command  assure  us  that this is so;  our 
directives  warn  us  to orient  all our  tactics  in view of this sit- 
uation.  The  ‘great’  sinners,  those  in whom  vivid  and  genial 
passions  have  been  pushed  beyond  the  bounds  and  in 
whom  an  immense  concentration  of will  has been  devoted 
to objects which  the Enemy abhors,  will not  disappear.  But 
they will grow  rarer.  Our  catches  will be ever  more  numer- 
ous;  but they will consist increasingly  of trash—trash which

192

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

we  should  once  have  thrown  to  Cerberus  and  the  hell- 
hounds  as  unfit  for diabolical  consumption.  And  there  are 
two  things I want  you  to  understand  about  this.  First, that

however depressing it may seem,  it is really a change for the 
better.  And  secondly,  I would  draw  your  attention  to  the 
means  by which  it has been brought about.however depressing it may seem,  it is really a change for the 
better.  And  secondly,  I would  draw  your  attention  to  the 
means  by which  it has been brought about.

It is a change for the better.  The  great  (and toothsome) 
sinners  are  made  out  of the  very  same  material  as  those 
horrible  phenomena,  the  great  Saints.  The  virtual  disap- 
pearance  of such  material  may  mean  insipid  meals  for us. 
But  is it not  utter  frustration  and famine  for the Enemy? 
He  did not  create  the humans—He  did  not  become  one 
of them and die among  them by torture—in  order to pro-

duce  candidates  for  Limbo;  ‘failed’  humans.  He  wanted 
to  make  Saints;  gods; things  like  Himself.  Is the dullness 
of your  present  fare  not  a very  small  price to  pay  for the 
delicious  knowledge  that  His  whole  great  experiment  is 
petering out?  But not  only that.  As the great sinners  grow 
fewer,  and  the majority  lose  all  individuality,  the  great 
sinners  become  far  more  effective  agents  for  us.  Every 
dictator  or  even  demagogue—almost  every  film-star  or 
crooner—can  now  draw  tens  of thousands  of the human 
sheep  with  him.  They  give themselves  (what  there  is of 
them) to  him; in him, to us.  There  may come  a time when

193

c.S.  LEWIS

we  shall have  no  need  to  bother  about  individual  tempta- 
tion  at  all, except  for the few.  Catch  the  bell-wether  and

his whole  flock  comes  after him.

But  do you  realise  how we  have  succeeded  in reducing 
so  many  of the  human  race  to  the  level  of ciphers?  This 
has not  come  about  by accident.  It has been our  answer— 
and a magnificent  answer  it is—to  one  of the most  serious 
challenges  we  ever  had to  face.

Let  me  recall  to  your  minds  what  the  human  situa- 
tion  was  in the  latter  half  of the  nineteenth  century—Let  me  recall  to  your  minds  what  the  human  situa- 
tion  was  in the  latter  half  of the  nineteenth  century—

the period  at  which  I ceased  to  be a practising  Tempter 
and  was  rewarded  with  an  administrative  post.  The 
great  movement  towards  liberty  and  equality  among 
men  had  by then  borne  solid  fruit  and  grown  mature. 
Slavery  had  been  abolished.  The  American  War  of 
Independence  had  been  won.  The  French  Revolution 
had  succeeded.  Religious  toleration  was  almost  every- 
where  on  the increase.  In that movement  there  had orig- 
inally  been  many  elements  which  were  in  our  favour. 
Much  Atheism,  much  Anti-Clericalism,  much  envy  and 
thirst  for revenge,  even  some  (rather  absurd)  attempts  to

revive  Paganism,  were  mixed  in  it.  It  was  not  easy  to 
determine  what  our  own  attitude  should  be.  On  the one 
hand  it was  a bitter  blow  to  us—it  still  is—that  any  sort

194

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

of men  who  had  been  hungry  should  be fed or  any  who 
had  long worn  chains  should  have  them  struck  off.  But

on  the  other  hand,  there  was  in the  movement  so  much

rejection  of faith,  so  much  materialism,  secularism,  and 
hatred,  that we  felt we  were  bound  to  encourage  it.

But  by the latter  part  of the century  the  situation  was 
much  simpler,  and  also  much  more  ominous.  In  the 
English  sector  (where  I saw  most  of my  front-line  ser- 
vice)  a  horrible  thing  had  happened.  The  Enemy,  with 
His  usual  sleight  of hand,  had  largely  appropriated  this 
progressive  or  liberalising  movement  and  perverted  it to 
His  own  ends.  Very  little  of  its  old  anti-Christianity 
remained.  The  dangerous  phenomenon  called  Christian 
Socialism  was  rampant.  Factory  owners  of the  good oldtype  who  grew  rich  on  sweated  labour,  instead  of being 
assassinated  by their  workpeople—we  could  have  used 
that—were  being frowned  upon  by their  own  class.  The 
rich  were  increasingly  giving  up  their  powers  not  in the 
face  of revolution  and  compulsion,  but  in obedience  to 
their own  consciences.  As for the poor who  benefited  by 
this, they were  behaving  in a most  disappointing  fashion. 
Instead  of using  their  new  liberties—as  we  reasonably 
hoped  and  expected—for  massacre,  rape,  and  looting,  or 
even  for  perpetual  intoxication,  they  were  perversely

N95

Cc.  8.  LEWIS

engaged  in becoming  cleaner,  more  orderly,  more  thrifty, 
better  educated,  and’even  more  virtuous.  Believe  me,  gen- 
tledevils,  the threat of something like a really healthy state 
of society seemed  then perfectly  serious.

Thanks  to  Our  Father  Below  the  threat  was  averted. 
Our  counterattack  was  on  two  levels.  On  the  deepest 
level  our  dealers  contrived  to  call into  full life an  element 
which  had  been  implicit  in the movement  from  its earli- 
est  days.  Hidden  in the  heart  of this  striving  for Liberty 
there  was  also  a  deep  hatred  of personal  freedom.  That 
invaluable  man  Rousseau  first  revealed  it. In his  perfect 
democracy,  you  remember,  only the state  religion  is per-

mitted,  slavery  is restored,  and  the individual  is told  that 
he has really willed  (though  he didn’t  know  it) whatever 
the  Government  tells  him  to  do.  From  that  starting 
point, via  Hegel (another  indispensable  propagandist  on 
our  side)  we  easily  contrived  both  the  Nazi  and  the 
Communist  state.  Even  in England  we  were  pretty  suc- 
cessful.  I heard  the  other  day that  in that  country  a man

could  not,  without  a permit,  cut  down  his own  tree  withcould  not,  without  a permit,  cut  down  his own  tree  with

his  own  axe,  make  it into  planks  with  his  own  saw,  and 
use  the planks  to  build  a tool-shed  in his own  garden.

Such was  our  counter-attack  on  one  level.  You, who are 
mere  beginners,  will  not  be entrusted  with  work  of that

196

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

kind.  You will be attached  as Tempters to private persons. 
Against  them,  or  through  them,  our  counter-attack  takes 
a different  form.

Democracy  is  the  word  with  which  you  must  lead 
them by the nose.  The good work which  our  philological 
experts  have  already  done  in  the  corruption  of human 
language  makes  it unnecessary  to  warn  you  that  they 
should  never  be  allowed  to  give  this  word  a  clear  and 
definable  meaning.  They  won’t.  It will  never  occur  to 
them  that  Democracy  is properly  the name  of a political 
system,  even  a system  of voting,  and that this has only the 
most  remote  and  tenuous  connection  with  what  you  are 
trying  to  sell  them.  Nor,  of course,  must  they  ever  be 
allowed  to  raise  Aristotle’s  question:  whether  ‘demo- 
cratic  behaviour’  means  the  behaviour  that  democracies 
like  or  the behaviour  that will preserve  a democracy.  For 
if they did, it could  hardly fail to  occur  to  them that these 
need  not  be the same.

You are  to use  the word purely as  an incantation;  if you 
like, purely for its selling power.  It is  a name  they vener- 
ate.  And  of course  it is connected  with  the political  ideal 
that  men  should  be  equally  treated.  You  then  make  a 
stealthy  transition  in their  minds  from  this political  ideal 
to  a  factual  belief  that  all men  are  equal.  Especially  the

LO7.

C./S.

bE  WisLO7.

C./S.

bE  Wis

man  you are  working on.  Asa  result you can  use  the word 
Democracy  to  sanction  in his thought the most  degrading 
(and  also  the  least  enjoyable)  of all human  feelings.  You 
can  get him  to  practise,  not  only without  shame  but with 
a positive  glow of self-approval,  conduct  which,  if unde- 
fended  by the magic word, would  be universally  derided. 
The  feeling  I mean  is of course  that  which  prompts  a

man  to  say I’m as  good as you.

The  first  and most  obvious  advantage  is that you  thus 
induce  him  to  enthrone  at  the  centre  of his  life  a  good,

solid  resounding  lie.  I don’t  mean  merely  that  his  state- 
ment  is false in fact, that he is no  more  equal to  everyone

he  meets  in  kindness,  honesty,  and  good  sense  than  in 
height  or  waist-measurement.  I mean  that  he  does  not

believe  it himself.  No  man  who  says  I’m  as  good as  you 
believes  it. He would  not  say it if he did.  The  St Bernard

never  says  it to  the toy dog, nor  the scholar  to  the dunce, 
nor  the employable  to the bum, nor  the pretty  woman  to 
the  plain.  The  claim  to  equality,  outside  the  strictly 
political field, is made  only by those who feel themselves 
to  be in some  way  inferior.  What  it expresses  is precisely 
the itching,  smarting,  writhing  awareness  of an  inferior- 
ity which  the patient  refuses  to  accept.

And  therefore  resents.  Yes, and therefore  resents  every

198

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

kind  of  superiority  in  others;  denigrates  it; wishes  its 
annihilation.  Presently  he suspects  every  mere  difference 
of being a claim  to  superiority.  No  one  must  be different

from  himself  in  voice,  clothes,  manners,  recreations, 
choice  of food.  “Here  is someone  who  speaks  Englishfrom  himself  in  voice,  clothes,  manners,  recreations, 
choice  of food.  “Here  is someone  who  speaks  English

rather  more  clearly and  euphoniously  than  I—it  must  be 
a  vile,  upstage,  lah-di-dah  affectation.  Here’s  a  fellow 
who  says  he  doesn’t  like  hot  dogs—thinks  himself  too 
good for them  no  doubt.  Here’s  a man  who hasn’t  turned 
on  the jukebox—he  must  be one  of those  highbrows  and 
is doing it to show off. If they were  the right sort  of chaps 
they’d be like me.  They’ve no  business  to be different.  It’s 
undemocratic.’

Now  this  useful  phenomenon  is in itself  by no  means 
new.  Under  the name  of Envy  it has  been  known  to  the 
humans  for thousands  of years.  But hitherto  they always 
regarded  it as  the most  odious,  and also the most  comical,

of vices.  Those  who  were  aware  of feeling  it felt  it with 
shame;  those  who  were  not  gave  it no  quarter  in others. 
The delightful  novelty of the present  situation  is that you 
can  sanction  it—make  it respectable  and even  laudable— 
by the incantatory  use  of the word  democratic.

Under  the  influence  of this  incantation  those  who 
are  in  any  or  every  way  inferior  can  labour  more

1 Ne

Cc.  Si  LEWwrs

wholeheartedly  and  successfully  than  ever  before  to  pull 
down  everyone  else to  their  own  level.  But that is not  all.

Under  the  same  influence,  those  who  come,  or  could

come,  nearer  to  a full humanity,  actually  draw  back  from 
it for fear of being undemocratic.  | am  credibly  informed 
that young  humans  now  sometimes  suppress  an  incipient 
taste  for classical  music  or good literature  because  it might 
prevent  their  Being  like  Folks;  that  people  who  would 
really wish to be—and  are  offered  the Grace  which wouldenable  them to be—honest,  chaste,  or  temperate,  refuse  it. 
To accept  might make  them Different,  might offend  again 
the  Way  of Life,  take  them  out  of Togetherness,  impair 
their  Integration  with  the Group.  They might  (horror  of 
horrors!)  become  individuals.

All is summed  up  in the prayer  which  a young  female

human  is said  to  have  uttered  recently:  ‘Oh  God,  make

me  a  normal  twentieth-century  girl!’  Thanks  to  our

labours,  this  will  mean  increasingly,  ‘Make  me  a  minx,  a 
moron,  and a parasite’.

Meanwhile,  as  a delightful  by-product,  the few  (fewer 
every  day)  who  will  not  be  made  Normal  and  Regular 
and  Like  Folks  and  Integrated,  increasingly  tend  to 
become  in reality  the  prigs  and  cranks  which  the  rabble 
would  in any case  have believed  them to be. For suspicion

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

often  creates  what  it suspects.  (‘Since,  whatever  I do, the 
neighbours  are  going  to  think  me  a  witch,  or  a 
Communist  agent,  I might as  well  be hanged  for a  sheep 
as  a lamb  and become  one  in reality.’)  As a result we  now 
have  an  intelligentsia  which,  though  very  small,  is very 
useful  to  the cause  of Hell.

But that is  a mere  by-product.  What  I want  to  fix your

attention  on  is the  vast,  overall  movement  towards  the 
discrediting,  and  finally the elimination,  of every  kind  of

human  excellence—moral,  cultural,  social,  or  intellectual. 
And  is it not  pretty  to  notice  how  Democracy  (in the 
incantatory  sense)  is now  doing for us  the work  that was 
once  done  by the most  ancient  Dictatorships,  and by the 
same  methods?  You  remember  how  one  of the  Greek 
Dictators  (they called  them  ‘tyrants’  then)  sent  an  envoy 
to  another  Dictator  to  ask his advice  about  the principles 
of government.  The  second  Dictator  led the envoy  into  afield  of corn,  and  there  he snicked  off with  his  cane  the 
top  of every  stalk  that  rose  an  inch  or  so  above  the  gen- 
eral  level.  The  moral  was  plain.  Allow  no  pre-eminence

among  your  subjects.  Let  no  man  live  who  is wiser,  or 
better,  or  more  famous,  or  even  handsomer  than  the 
mass.  Cut  them  all down  to a level;  all slaves,  all ciphers, 
all nobodies.  All equals. Thus Tyrants  could practise,  in a

230

c.S.  LEWIS

sense,  ‘democracy’.  But now  ‘democracy’  can  do the same 
work  without  any  other  tyranny  than  her  own.  No  one 
need  now  go  through  the  field  with  a  cane.  The  little 
stalks  will  now  of themselves  bite  the  tops  off  the  big 
ones.  The  big ones  are  beginning  to  bite  off their  own  in

their  desire  to  Be Like  Stalks.

I have  said  that  to  secure  the  damnation  of these  little

souls,  these  creatures  that  have  almost  ceased  to  be indi- 
vidual,  is a laborious  and tricky work.  But if proper  pains 
and  skill  are  expended,  you  can  be fairly confident  of the 
result.  The  great  sinners  seem  easier  to  catch.  But  then 
they are  incalculable.  After you  have played them for sev- 
enty years,  the Enemy  may  snatch  them  from  your  claws 
in  the  seventy-first.  They  are  capable,  you  see,  of  real 
repentance.  They  are  conscious  of real  guilt. They are,  if 
things  take  the  wrong  turn,  as  ready  to  defy  the  social

pressures  around  them  for the Enemy’s  sake  as  they were 
to  defy them  for  ours.  It is in some  ways  more  trouble-

some  to  track  and  swat  an  evasive  wasp  than  to  shoot,  at 
close  range,  a  wild  elephant.  But  the  elephant  is  more 
troublesome  if you  miss.

My own  experience,  as  I have  said, was  mainly  on  the 
English  sector,  and  I still  get  more  news  from  it than 
from  any  other.  It may  be that  what  I am  now  going  to

202My own  experience,  as  I have  said, was  mainly  on  the 
English  sector,  and  I still  get  more  news  from  it than 
from  any  other.  It may  be that  what  I am  now  going  to

202

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

say  will  not  apply  so  fully to  the  sectors  in which  some 
of you  may  be operating.  But  you  can  make  the  neces- 
sary  adjustments  when  you  get there.  Some  application 
it will  almost  certainly  have.  If it has too  little, you  must 
labour  to  make  the  country  you  are  dealing  with  more 
like what  England  already is.

In that promising  land  the spirit of I’m  as  good as  you 
has  already  become  something  more  than  a  generally 
social  influence.  It begins  to  work  itself into  their  educa- 
tional  system.  How  far its operations  there  have  gone  at 
the  present  moment,  I would  not  like  to  say  with  cer- 
tainty.  Nor  does  it matter.  Once  you  have  grasped  the 
tendency,  you  can  easily predict its future  developments; 
especially  as  we  ourselves  will play our  part in the devel- 
oping.  The  basic  principle  of the  new  education  is to  be 
that dunces  and idlers  must  not  be made to feel inferior  to 
intelligent  and  industrious  pupils.  That  would  be 
‘undemocratic’.  These  differences  between  the  pupils— 
for  they  are  obviously  and  nakedly  individual  ditter- 
ences—must  be disguised.  This  can  be done  on  various

levels.  At  universities,  examinations  must  be  framed  so 
that  nearly  all  the  students  get  good  marks.  Entrance 
examinations  must  be framed  so  that all, or  nearly all, cit- 
izens  can  go to universities,  whether  they have any power

203

c.s.  LEWIS203

c.s.  LEWIS

(or wish) to profit by higher education  or not.  At schools, 
the children  who  are too stupid or  lazy to  learn languages 
and  mathematics  and  elementary  science  can  be  set  to 
doing  the  things  that  children  used  to  do  in their  spare 
time.  Let  them,  for  example,  make  mud-pies  and  call  it 
modelling.  But  all the time  there  must  be no  faintest  hint 
that  they  are  inferior  to  the  children  who  are  at  work. 
Whatever  nonsense  they  are  engaged  in  must  have—I 
believe  the  English  already  use  the  phrase—‘parity  of 
esteem’.  An  even  more  drastic  scheme is not  impossible. 
Children  who  are  fit to  proceed  to  a higher  class  may  be 
artificially  kept  back,  because  the  others  would  get  a 
trauma—Beelzebub,  what  a useful  word!—by  being left 
behind.  The bright pupil thus  remains  democratically  fet- 
tered  to  his own  age-group  throughout  his school  career, 
and a boy who would  be capable of tackling Aeschylus  or 
Dante  sits listening  to his coaeval’s  attempts  to  spell out  a 
CAT  SAT  ON  THE  MAT.

In a word, we  may  reasonably  hope for the virtual  abo- 
lition  of education  when  I’m  as  good as you  has fully had

its  way.  All  incentives  to  learn  and  all  penalties  for  not 
learning  will  vanish.  The  few  who  might  want  to  learn 
will be prevented;  who  are  they to  overtop  their  fellows? 
And  anyway  the teachers—or  should  I say,  nurses?—will

204

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

be far too  busy reassuring  the  dunces  and  patting  them 
on  the back  to  waste  any  time  on  real  teaching.  We  shall 
no  longer  have  to  plan and  toil  to  spread  imperturbable 
conceit  and  incurable  ignorance  among  men.  The  little 
vermin  themselves  will do it for us.Of course  this  would  not  follow  unless  all education 
became  state  education.  But  it will.  That  is part  of the 
same  movement.  Penal  taxes,  designed  for that purpose, 
are  liquidating  the  Middle  Class,  the  class  who  were 
prepared  to  save  and  spend  and  make  sacrifices  in order 
to  have  their  children  privately  educated.  The  removal 
of this  class,  besides  linking  up  with  the  abolition  of

education,  is,  fortunately,  an  inevitable  effect  of  the 
spirit that says  I’m as good as you.  This was,  after all, the 
social  group  which  gave  to  the humans  the overwhelm- 
ing  majority  of  their  scientists,  physicians,  philoso-

phers,  theologians,  poets,  artists,  composers,  architects, 
jurists,  and  administrators.  If ever  there  was  a  bunch  of 
tall  stalks  that  needed  their  tops  knocked  off,  it was 
surely they. As  an  English  politician  remarked  not  long

ago,  ‘A democracy  does  not  want  great  men.’

It would  be idle  to  ask  of such  a  creature  whether  by 
want  it means  ‘need’  or  ‘like’.  But you had better  be clear. 
For here Aristotle’s  question  comes  up again.

205

C.  sake  Was

We,  in  Hell,  would  welcome  the  disappearance  of 
Democracy  in the ‘strict sense  of that  word;  the  political 
arrangement  so  called.  Like  all  forms  of government  it 
often works  to  our  advantage;  but on  the whole  less often 
than  other  forms.  And  what  we  must  realise  is  that 
‘democracy’  in the  diabolical  sense  (I’m  as  good as  you, 
Being  like  Folks,  Togetherness)  is the  finest  instrument 
political 
we 
Democracies  from the face of the earth.

could  possibly  have  for  extirpatingcould  possibly  have  for  extirpating

For  ‘democracy’  or  the  ‘democratic  spirit’  (diabolical 
sense) leads  to  a nation  without  great  men,  a nation  mainly 
of subliterates,  morally  flaccid  from  lack  of discipline  in 
youth,  full  of the  cocksureness  which  flattery  breeds  on 
ignorance,  and  soft  from  lifelong  pampering.  And  that  is 
what Hell wishes  every  democratic  people to  be. For when 
such a nation meets  in conflict  a nation where children  have 
been made to work at school, where  talent is placed in high 
posts,  and where  the ignorant mass  are  allowed  no  say at all 
in public affairs,  only one  result is possible.

One  Democracy  was  surprised  lately when  it found  that 
Russia  had got ahead  of it in science.  What  a delicious  speci- 
men  of human  blindness!  If the  whole  tendency  of their 
society is opposed  to  every  sort  of excellence,  why did they 
expect  their scientists  to  excel?

206

THE  SCREWTAPE  LETTERS

It is our  function  to  encourage  the behaviour,  the man-

ners,  the whole  attitude  of mind,  which  democracies  nat- 
urally  like  and  enjoy,  because  these  are  the  very  things 
which,  if unchecked,  will destroy democracy.  You  would 
almost  wonder  that  even  humans  don’t  see  it themselves. 
Even  if they don’t  read Aristotle  (that would  be undemo- 
cratic)  you  would  have  thought  the  French  Revolution 
would  have  taught  them  that  the  behaviour  aristocrats 
naturally  like  is not  the behaviour  that preserves  aristoc- 
racy.  They might then  have  applied  the same  principle  to 
all forms  of government.But  I would  not  end  on  that  note.  I would  not—Hell 
forbid!—encourage  in  your  own  minds  that  delusion 
which  you  must  carefully  foster  in  the  minds  of your 
human  victims.  I  mean  the  delusion  that  the  fate  of 
nations  is 7 itself more  important  than  that of individual 
souls.  The  overthrow  of free peoples  and the multiplica-

tion  of slave-states  are  for us  a means  (besides,  of course, 
being fun);  but the real  end is the destruction  of individ- 
uals.  For  only individuals  can  be  saved  or  damned,  can 
become  sons  of the  Enemy  or  food  for us.  The ultimate 
value,  for us,  of any  revolution,  war,  or  famine  lies in the 
individual  anguish,  treachery,  hatred,  rage,  and  despair 
which  it may  produce.  I’m  as  good  as  you  is  a  usetul

Dov,

C.8.  LEWIS

means  for the destruction  of democratic  societies.  But  it 
has a far deeper value as an  end in itself, as  a state  of mind, 
which  necessarily  excluding  humility,  charity,  content- 
ment,  and  all  the  pleasures  of gratitude  or  admiration, 
turns  a human  being away  from  almost  every  road which 
might finally lead him to  Heaven.

But  now  for the pleasantest  part  of my  duty. It falls  to 
my  lot  to  propose  on  behalf  of the  guests  the  health  of 
Principal  Slubgob  and  the  Tempters’  Training  College. 
Fill your  glasses.  What  is this  I see?  What  is this  delicious 
bouquet  I inhale?  Can  it be? Mr Principal,  I unsay  all my

hard  words  about  the  dinner.  I see,  and  smell,  that  evenhard  words  about  the  dinner.  I see,  and  smell,  that  even

under wartime  conditions  the College cellar  still has a few 
dozen  of sound  old vintage Pharisee.  Well, well, well. This 
is  like  old  times.  Hold  it  beneath  your  nostrils  for  a 
moment,  gentledevils.  Hold  it up  to  the  light.  Look  at 
those  fiery streaks  that writhe  and tangle in its dark heart, 
as  if they were  contending.  And  so  they are.  You  know 
how  this  wine  is  blended?  Different  types  of  Pharisee 
have  been  harvested,  trodden,  and  fermented  together  to 
produce  its subtle  flavour.  Types  that  were  most  antago- 
nistic  to  one  another  on  earth.  Some  were  all  rules  and

relics  and rosaries;  others  were  all drab  clothes, long faces, 
and  petty  traditional  abstinences  from  wine  or  cards  or

208

THE  SGREWTAPE  LETTERS

the theatre.  Both  had in common  their self-righteousness 
and the almost  infinite  distance  between  their  actual  out- 
look and anything the Enemy really is or  commands.  The 
wickedness  of other  religions  was  the really live doctrine 
in the religion of each; slander  was  its gospel and denigra- 
tion its litany. How  they hated  each other up there where 
the  sun  shone!  How  much  more  they  hate  each  other 
now  that  they are  forever  conjoined  but  not  reconciled.

Their  astonishment,  their  resentment,  at  the  combina- 
tion,  the  festering  of  their  eternally  impenitent  spite, 
passing  into  our  spiritual  digestion,  will  work  like  fire.

Dark  fire.  All  said  and  done,  my  friends,  it will  be an  ill 
day for us  if what  most  humans  mean  by ‘religion’  ever 
vanishes  from the Earth.  It can  still send us  the truly deli- 
cious  sins. The fine flower  of unholiness  can  grow  only in 
the  close  neighbourhood  of the  Holy.  Nowhere  do we 
tempt  so  successfully  as  on  the very  steps  of the altar.Your  Imminence,  your  Disgraces,  my  Thorns,  Shadies, 
and  Gentledevils:  I  give  you  the  toast  of—Principal 
Slubgob and the College!

209

ts

Mores  C. S. LEwts  CLASSICS

he

os

Warts’

LAST  NIGHT

CS LEWIS

The 
BUSINESS 
tO ven

HarperOne 
An  Imprint  of HarperCollinsPublishers

Discover  great  authors,  exclusive  offers,  and more  at hc.com.

More  C. S. Lewts  CLassics

LELGERS 
aOR Soe

CS: LEWIS [J cs.

CORES)  | xcs Gr, 
CS LEWis

spirits  a

SL EWwIs

HarperOne 
An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers

Discover  great authors,  exclusive  offers, and more  at hc.com.

248.4  L673 
Lewis,  C.  S. 
The  Screwtape

CENTRAL  LIBR 
03/19

CLIVE  STAPLES  LEWIS 
(1898-1963)  was  one  of  the  in- 
tellectual  giants  of  the  twentieth 
century  and  arguably  one  of  the 
most  influential  writers  of his day. 
He  was  a  Fellow  and  Tutor  in 
English  Literature  at  Oxford  Uni- 
versity  until  1954,  when  he  was 
unanimously  elected  to  the  Chair 
of Medieval  and  Renaissance  Lit- 
erature  at  Cambridge  University, 
a  position  he held  until  his  retire- 
ment.  He  wrote  more  than  thirty 
books,  allowing  him  to  reach 
a  vast  audience,  and  his  works 
continue  to  attract  thousands  of 
-  new  readers  every  year.  His  most 
distinguished  and  popular  accom- 
plishments  include  Mere  Chris- 
tianity,  Out  of the  Silent  Planet, 
The  Great  Divorce,  and  the  uni- 
versally  acknowledged  classics 
The  Chronicles  of  Narnia.  To 
date,  the  Narnia  books  have  sold 
over  100  million  copies  and  have 
been  transformed  into  three  ma- 
jor motion  pictures.

HarperOne 
An  Imprint  of HarperCollinsPublishers

Available  from  HarperAudio  and HarperCollins  e-books

Discover  great authors,  exclusive  offers, and more  at hc.com.

Pavar  dacian  and  illietratian:  Kimherly  Glyder

A Masterpiece  of Satire  on  Hell’s  Latest  Novelties 
and  Heaven’s  Unanswerable  AnswerPavar  dacian  and  illietratian:  Kimherly  Glyder

A Masterpiece  of Satire  on  Hell’s  Latest  Novelties 
and  Heaven’s  Unanswerable  Answer

“Apparently  this  Oxford  don  and  Cambridge  professor  is going  to 
be  around  for  a  long time;  he calls  himself  a  dinosaur  but  he seems

to  speak  to  people  where  they  are.”

—The  Washington  Post  Book  World

“T read  Lewis  for comfort  and  pleasure  many  years  ago,  and  a

glance  into  the  books  revives  my  old  admiration.”

—John  Updike

“If wit  and  wisdom,  style  and  scholarship  are  requisites  to  passage

through  the  pearly  gates,  Mr.  Lewis  will  be among  the  angels.”

—The  New  Yorker

“C.  S. Lewis  is the  ideal  persuader  for the  half-convinced,  for the

good  man  who  would  like  to  be a  Christian  but  finds  his  intellect 
getting  in the  way.”

—New  York  Times  Book  Review

“Lewis,  perhaps  more  than  any  other  twentieth-century  writer, 
forced  those  who  listened  to  him  and  read  his works  to  come  to 
terms  with  their  own  philosophical  presuppositions.”

—Los  Angeles  Times

For  news  and  updates  go 
to  www.cslewis.com.

ISBN  978-0-06-065293-7

| |

2 
<x

| wi

LITERATURE/RELIGION

USA  $14.99  CAN  $18.50

0415

9  "780060652937