ROLL


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Microfilm Publication M887


RECORDS OF THE UNITED STATES
NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT ET AL. (CASE I)
NOVEMBER 21, 1946-AUGUST 20, 1947

Roll 8

Transcript Volumes (English Version)

Volumes 19-21
May 1-21, 1947


THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION


WASHINGTON: 1974


INTRODUCTION

On the 46 rolls of this microfilm publication are reproduced
the records of Case I (United States of America v. Karl Brandt
et al., or the "Medical" Case), 1 of the 12 trials of war criminals
conducted by the U.S. Government from 1946 to 1949 at Nuernberg
subsequent to the International Military Tribunal held in the
same city. These records consist of German- and English-language
versions of official transcripts of court proceedings, prosecution
and defense briefs, and final pleas of the defendants as well as
prosecution and defense exhibits and document books in one lan¬
guage or the other. Also included in this publication are a
minute book, the official court file, order and judgment books,
clemency petitions, and finding aids to the documents.

The transcripts of this trial, assembled in 2 sets of 30
bound volumes (1 set in German and 1 in English), are the recorded
daily trial proceedings. The prosecution and defense briefs and
answers are also in both languages but unbound, as are the final
pleas of the defendants delivered by counsel or defendants and
submitted by the attorneys to the court. The unbound prosecution
exhibits, numbered 1-570, are essentially those documents from
various Nuernberg record series offered in evidence by the
prosecution in this case. The defense exhibits, also unbound,
are predominantly affidavits by various persons. They are
arranged by name of defendant and thereunder numerically. Both
prosecution document books and defense document books consist
of full or partial translations of exhibits into the English
language. Loosely bound in folders, they provide an indication
of the order in which the exhibits were presented before the
tribunal.

The minute book, in one bound volume, is a summary of the
transcripts. The official court file, in four bound volumes,
includes the progress docket, the indictment, amended indictment,
and the service thereof; appointments and applications of defense
counsel and defense witnesses and prosecution comments thereto;
defendants applications for documents; motions; uniform rules of
procedures; and appendixes. The order and judgment books, in
two bound volumes, represent the signed orders, judgments, and
opinions of the tribunal as well as sentences and commitment
papers. Clemency petitions of the defendants, in five bound
volumes, were directed to the military governor, the Judge
Advocate General, the U.S. district court, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Supreme Court of the United States. The finding
aids summarize transcripts, exhibits, and the official court file.

Case I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal I from November 21,
1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as the

1


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


records of the other Nuernberg and Far East (IMTFE) war crimes
trials, are part of the National Archives Collection of World War
II War Crimes Records, Record Group 238.

The Brandt case was 1 of 12 separate proceedings held before
several U.S. Military Tribunals at Nuernberg in the U.S. Zone of
Occupation in Germany against officials or citizens of the Third
Reich, as follows:


No. of

Case No.

United States v.

Popular Name

Defendants

1

Karl Brandt et al.

Medical Case

23

2

Erhard Milch

Milch Case

1


—

(Luftwaffe)


3

Joaef Alt8tcetter
et al.

Justice Case

16

4

Oswald Pohl et al.

Pohl Case (SS)

18

5

Friedrich Flick

Flick Case

6


et al.

(Industrialist)


6

Carl Krauch et al.

I. G. Farben Case
(Industrialist)

24

7

Vilhelm Liet et al.

Hostage Case

12

8

Ulrich Greifelt
et al.

RuSHA Case (SS)

14

9

Otto Ohlendorf

Einsatzgruppen

24


et al.

Case (SS)


10

Al fried Krupp

Krupp Case

12


et al.

(Industrialist)


11

Ernst von
Veizeaecker et al.

Ministries Case

21

12

Vilhelm von Leeb

High Command Case

14


et al.

Authority for the proceedings of the International Military
Tribunal against the major Nazi war criminals derived from the
Declaration on German Atrocities (Moscow Declaration) released
November 1, 1943, Executive Order 9547 of May 2, 1945, the London
Agreement of August 8, 1945, the Berlin Protocol of October 6,

1945, and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal.

Authority for the 12 subsequent cases stemmed mainly from
Control Council Law 10 of December 20, 1945, and was reinforced
by Executive Order 9679 of January 16, 1946; U.S. Military Govern¬
ment Ordinances Nos. 7 and 11 of October 18, 1946, and February 17,
1947, respectively; and U.S. Forces, European Theater General
Order 301 of October 24, 1946. The procedures applied by U.S.
Military Tribunals in the subsequent proceedings were patterned
after those of the International Military Tribunal and further

developed in the 12 cases, which required over 1,200 days of
court sessions and generated more than 330,000 transcript pages.


2


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The crises charged in the Brandt case consisted largely of
nedical experiments performed on defenseless concentration camp
inmates against their will; "euthanasia" carried out on the
mentally defective, the physically sick, the aged, and ethnic
and racial groups; and the murder of concentration camp inmates
for the express purpose of collecting skulls and skeletons for
the Anatomical Institute of the Reich University of Strassburg.

The following medical experiments were conducted:

1. High altitude: to investigate effects of low pressure
on persons.

2. Freezing: to test human resistance to extemely low
temperatures.

3. Malaria: to develop controls over the recurring nature
of the disease.

4. Mustard gas: part of a general research program in gas
warfare.

5. Sulfanilamide: to test the efficacy of the drug in bone
muscle and nerve regeneration and bone transplantation.

6. Seawater: to test methods of rendering seawater potable.

7. Epidemic jaundice: to develop an antitoxin against the
disease. /

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.

9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.

10. Poison: to test the efficacy of certain poisons.

11. Incendiary bomb: to find better treatment for phosphorus
bums.

The prosecution alleged and the judgment confirmed that these
experiments were not isolated acts of individual doctors and
scientists on their own responsibility but that they were the
result of high-level policy and planning. They were carried out
with particular brutality, often disregarding all established
medical practice. Consequently, large numbers of the victims
died in the course of or as a result of the experiments.

The euthanasia program was the direct result of a directive
by Hitler of September 1, 1939. It resulted in the secret killing
not only of aged, insane, incurably ill, and deformed German
citizens in sanatoriums in Germany but also in the clandestine
murder of foreign workers. The killing in gas chambers and by
injections in the sanatoriums served as a proving ground for
these forerunners of much larger installations in the mass
extermination camps.

In addition to these experiments, over 100 concentration
camp inmates were killed for the purpose of obtaining their y

skeletons. Their ghastly remains were found in Strassburg by
Allied troops.


The transcripts of the Brandt case include the indictments
of the following 23 persons all of whom were physicians except
defendants Rudolf Brandt, Viktor Brack, and Wolfram Sievers:

Karl Brandt: Personal physician to Adolf Hitler, Gruppenr
fuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Major General) in
the Kaffen SS, Reichskonmissar fuer Sanitaets- und Gesund-
heitswesen (Reich Commissioner for Health and Sanitation),
and member of the Reichsforschungsrat (Reich Research
Council),

Kurt Blooe: Deputy [of the] Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer (Reich
Health Leader) and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the
Reich Research Council.

Rudolf Brandt: Standartenfuehrer (Colonel) in the Allgemeinc
SS, Persoenlicher Referent von Himmler (Personal Admin¬
istrative Officer to Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler), and Min¬
isterial Counselor and Chief of the Ministerial Office in
the Reich Ministry of the Interior.

Joachim Mrugowsky: Oberfuehrer (Senior Colonel) in the
Waffen SS, Oberster Hygieniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police),
and Chef des Hygienischen Institutes der Waffen SS (Chief
of the Hygienic Institute of the Waffen SS).

Helmut Poppendick: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Chef des
Pcrsoenlichen Stabes des Reichsarztes SS und Polizei (Chief
of the Personal Staff of the Reich Physician SS and Police).

Wolfram Sievers: Standartenfuehrer in the SS, Reich Manager
of the "Ahnencrbe" Society and Director of its Institut
fuer Wehrwissenschaftliche Zweckforschung (Institute for
Military Scientific Research), and Deputy Chairman of the
Managing Board of Directors of the Reich Research Council.

Karl Genzken: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS and Chef des Sanitaetsamts der Kaffen SS
(Chief of the Medical Department of the Waffen SS).

Karl Gebhardt: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS, personal physician to Reichsfuehrer SS
Himmler, Oberster Kliniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Surgeon of the Staff of the Reich Physician SS and
Police), and President of the German Red Cross.

Viktor Brack: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Sturmbannfuehrer
(Major) in the Waffen SS and Oberdienstleiter, Kanzlei
des Fuehrers der NSDAP (Chief Administrative Officer in
the Chancellery of the Fuehrer to the NSDAP).


4


Waldeaar Hoven: Hauptsturmfuehrer (Captain) in the Waffen
SS and Chief Physician of the Buchenwald Concentration Camp.

Herta Oberheuser: Physician at the Ravensbrueck Concentration
Camp and assistant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the
hospital at Hohenlychen.

Fritz Fischer: Sturmbannfuehrer in the Waffen SS and assist¬
ant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the hospital
at Hohenlychen.

Siegfried Handloser: Generaloberstabsarzt (Lieutenant
General, Medical Service), Heeressanitaetsinspekteur
(Medical Inspector of the Army), and Chef des Kehr-
machtsanitaetswesens (Chief of the Medical Services of the
Armed Forces).

Paul Rostock: Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in
Berlin, Surgical Adviser to the Army, and Amtschef der
Dienststelle Medizinische Wissenschaft und Forschung
(Chief of the Office for Medical Science and Research)
under the defendant Karl Brandt, Reich Commissioner for
Health and Sanitation.

Oskar Schroeder: Generaloberstabsarzt; Chef des Stabes,
Inspekteur des Luftwaffe^anitaetswesens (Chief of Staff
of the Inspectorate of the^Medical Service of the Luftwaffe);
and Chef des Sanitaetswesens der Luftwaffe (Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe).

Hermann Becker-Freyscng: Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe
(Captain, Medical Service of the Air Force) and Chief of
the Department for Aviation Medicine of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe.

Georg August Weltz: Oberfeldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieu¬
tenant Colonel, Medical Service of the Air Force) and
Chief of the Institut fuer Luftfahrtmedizin (Institute for
Aviation Medicine) in Munich. __

Wilhelm Beiglboeck: Consulting physician to the Luftwaffe.

Gerhard Rose: Generalarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier
General, Medical Service of the Air Force); Vice President,
Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine, and Professor
of the Robert Koch Institute; and Hygienic Adviser for
Tropical Medicine to the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe.

Siegfried Ruff: Director of the Department for Aviation
Medicine at the Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt
(German Experimental Institute for Aviation).


5


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Hans Wolfgang Romberg: Physician on the staff of the Depart-
. ment for Aviation Medicine at the German Experimental Institute

for Aviation.

Konrad Schaefer: Physician on the staff of the Institute for

Aviation Medicine in Berlin.

Adolf Pokorny: Physician, specialist in skin and venereal

diseases.

The indictment consisted of four’counts. Count one charged
participation in a comnon design or conspiracy to commit war crimes
or crimes against humanity. The ruling of the tribunal disregarded
this count, hence no defendant was found guilty of the crime charged
in count one. Count two was concerned with war crimes and count
three, with crimes against humanity. Fifteen defendants were found
guilty, and eight were acquitted on these two counts. Ten defendants
were charged under count four with membership in a criminal organiza¬
tion and were found guilty.

The transcripts also contain the arraignment and plea of each
defendant (all pleaded not guilty), opening and closing statements
of defense and prosecution, and the judgment and sentences, which
acquitted 7 of the 23 defendants (Blome, Pokorny, Romberg, Rostock,
Ruff, Schaefer, and Wcltz). Death sentences were imposed on
defendants Brack, Karl Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, Hoven, Gebhardt,
Mrugowsky, and Sievers, and life imprisonment on Fischer, Genzken,
Handloser, Rose, and Schroedcr; varying terms of years were given
to defendants Becker-Freyseng, Beiglboeck, Oberheuser, and
Poppcndick.

The English-language transcript volumes are arranged numer¬
ically, 1-30; pagination is continuous, 1-11538. The German-
language transcript volumes arc numbered la-30a and paginated
1-11756. The letters at the top of each page indicate morning,
afternoon, and evening sessions. The letter "C" designates com¬
mission hearings (to save court tine and to avoid assembling
hundreds of witnesses at Nuernberg, in most of the cases one or
more commissions took testimony and received documentary evidence
for consideration by the tribunals). Several hundred pages are
added to the transcript volumes and given number plus letter
designations, such as page number 1044a. Page 1 in volume 1
(English) is preceded by pages numbered 001-039, while the last
page of volume 28 (English) is followed by pages numbered 1-48.

Of the many documents assembled for possible prosecution use,

570 were chosen for presentation as evidence before the tribunal.
These consisted largely of orders, directives, and reports on
medical experiments or the euthanasia program; several interrogation
reports; affidavits; and excerpts from the Reiahsgeeetzblatt (the
official gazette of Reich laws) as well as correspondence. A number


6


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


of the medical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.

The first item in the arrangement of the prosecution exhibits
is usually a certificate listing the document number, a short
description of the exhibit, and a statement on the location of
the original document of the exhibit. The certificate is followed
by the document, the actual prosecution exhibit (most of which are
photostats), and a few mimeographed articles with an occasional
carbon of the original. In rare cases the exhibits are followed
by translations or additional certificates. A few exhibits are
original documents, such as:


Exhibit No.

Doc. No.

• Exhibit No.

Doc. No

301

NO-1314

410

NO-158

307 .

NO-120

441

NO-1730

309

NO-131

443

NO-890

310

NO-132

451

NO-732

357

1696 PS

462

NO-1424

362

628 PS

507

NO-365

368

NO-817

546

NO-3347

403

616 PS


No certificate is attached to several exhibits, including
,exhibits 433, 435-439, 462, 559, and 561. Following exhibit 570
is a tribunal exhibit containing the interrogation of three
citizens of the Netherlands. Number 494 was not assigned, and
exhibit 519 is followed by 519a and 519b.

Other than affidavits, the defense exhibits consist of newspaper
clippings, reports, personnel records, Reichsgeeetzblatt excerpts,
and other items. There are 901 exhibits for the defendants. The
defense exhibits are arranged by name of defendant and thereunder by
exhibit number, each followed by a certificate wherever available.

The translations in the prosecution document books are
preceded by indexes listing prosecution document numbers, biased
descriptions, and page numbers of the translation. They arc
generally listed in the order in which the prosecution exhibits
were introduced into evidence before the tribunal. Pages 81-84
of prosecution document book 1 are missing. Books 12, 16, and
19 are followed by addenda. The document books consist largely
of mimeographed pages.

The defense document books are similarly arranged. Each
book is preceded by an index giving document numbers, description,
and page number for each exhibit. The corresponding exhibit
numbers are generally not provided. There are several unindexed
supplements to numbered document books. Prosecution and defense
briefs are arranged alphabetically by names of defendants; final
pleas and defense answers to prosecution briefs follow a similar

7


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


scheme. Pagination is consecutive, yet there are many pages where
an "a" or "b" is added to the numeral.

The English-language final pleas, closing briefs, and replies
to prosecution briefs of several defendants are missing, as are
a few German-language closing briefs and replies to prosecution
briefs.

At the beginning of roll 1 are filmed key documents from
which Tribunal I derived its jurisdiction: the Moscow Declaration,
U.S; Executive Orders 9547 and 9679, the London Agreement, the
Berlin Protocol, the Charter of.the International Military Tri¬
bunal, Control Council Law 10, U.S. Military Government Ordinances
7 and 11, and U.S. Forces, European Theater General Order 301.
Following these documents of authorization is a list of the names
and functions of the members of Tribunal I and counsels.

These documents arc followed by the transcript covers giving
such information as name and number of case, volume numbers,
language, page numbers, and inclusive dates. They are followed
by summaries of the daily proceedings providing an additional
finding aid for the transcripts. The exhibits are listed in an
index, which notes type of exhibit, exhibit number and name,
corresponding document number and document book and page, a short
description of the exhibit, and the date when it was offered in
court. The official court file is indexed in the court docket,
which is followed by a list of witnesses.

Not filmed were records duplicated elsewhere in this micro¬
film publication, such as prosecution and defense document books
in the German language that arc largely duplications of pros¬
ecution and defense exhibits already microfilmed or opening
statements of prosecution and defense, which can be found in
the transcripts of the proceedings.

The records of the Brandt case arc closely related to other
microfilmed records in Record Group 238, specifically prosecution
exhibits submitted to the International Military Tribunal, T988;

NI (Nuernberg Industrialist) Series, T301; NOKW (Nuernberg Armed
Forces High Command) Series, Til19; NG (Nuernberg Government)
Series, T1139; and records of the Milch case, M888, the List case,
M893, the Greifelt case, M894, and the Ohlendorf case, M895.

In addition, the record of the International Military Tribunal
at Nuernberg has been published in Trial of the Major War Criminate
Before the International Military Tribunal (Nuernberg, 1947), 42
vols. Excerpts from the subsequent proceedings have been pub¬
lished as Tridle of War Criminate Before the Nuernberg Military
Tribunal Under Control Council Law No. 10 (U.S. Government
Printing Office: 1950-53), 15 vols. The Audiovisual Archives
Division of the National Archives and Records Service holds motion
picture records and photographs of all 13 trials and tape re¬
cordings of the International Military Tribunal proceedings.


8


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


John Mendelsohn wrote these introductory remarks and arranged
the records for microfilming in collaboration with George Chalou.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 8
Target 1

Volume 19
May 1-7, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL l
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT at al
VOLUME 19


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


1-7 May 1947 pp. 6763-7192


1 :'^y 47-:'^S /-l-l-?oator-Int: rLjslor
Court ;.*o. 1


Official Transcript of tho -^aericon Military
Tribunal in tl;o matter of the Unitod Etatos of
-ai-rica against Karl irandt, ot al, defendants,
sitting at I’urn’jorg, Germany on 1 Kay 1947,
0930, Justico Deals presiding. •


SEE 1j 1RSK- L: Persons ip tho court took rill ploaso f ind
thoir sor.ts.

Tho Honor bio, tho J-.-d^oc of Military Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I is nor in sore ion. God sr.vo tho Unitod
Statos of America end tl is l.onorablo Tribunal.

Thoro will bu ordor in tho courtroom.

TITS P712SIDE'?: Mr. *-arsl cl, you r.ooortain if tho defend¬
ants aro all procont in court.

TEZ RSU/.L: H y it ploaco . our Honor, all dofordants aro
prosont in tho coxrt witt tho oxcopticn of tho Dofondant
Oberhousor, r.bsont duo to illnoss.

THE TCSjLSIT: Tx o Socrotnry-Goncrnl rill noto tho
prosor.co of all tho dofonlants in court oavo tho Dofondrt
Oborhouscr. Tho prison physician having fllod a cortif j.cato
tlic.t tho Defendant Oborhousor is unr.blo to attond court
today, sho rill bo oxcusod .xrsuar.t to that certificate,
it ap soaring th. t hor absonco will in r.o way projudico
her c-.so.

Counrol nay procood.


DR. VOR'/SRK: (Covnsol for tho Dofondant Romberg): ilr.
Prosidont, I think I am corroct in assuming that tho high
tribunal has Romberg's document book available to thon.


TE2 PH2SID2!?: ITo hr.vo not yot rocoivod it.


(Documont book handod to the Tribunal.


)


Dofor.co of tho Defendant I.osibcrE vrill nor


1 Ifr.y 47-?S~£ i-l- 2 -Poster-Int: Raaler
Court iro. 1

call tho Defendant Itor.be rg into tho witness stand, and in
the courao cf his oxanin. tion will submit the Individual
affidavits, "itl the approval of the Tribunal , I ask that
the Deforciant Romberg bo called into tho witr.oss at.nd.

PRZSIDHtT: At tho roo.uort of his counsel, tho Deforci¬
ant Romberg •-.•ill take the ritnoss stand.

D?.. nANSP.OJlDDRG, a defondant , took tho stand and to sti¬
fled as follows
BY J 'DOB SB3RINO:

Q. Tho Defondmt will raise l.is right h nd and bo sworn.

I swear by Gcd, tl o . lnir^ty .nd Omnicciont, that I will
spook the puro truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(Bo witness ropor.tod the oath.)

J!DG 2 SZBRII’O: You may bo son tod.

DIIGCT 2X.T-Il l .TI0N

BY. DR. VCR'.BRK:

'l. Your nano is I'ans "olfgang Ronborg, la th t corroct?

... Yes.

'. ’hen and wh ro xroro you born?

A. I war bom on tho 15th of hay, 1911, in Borlin,

.'oi ld 70 U plearo good onough to doccribo your
Cv.roor to tho Tribunal.

... I 1 ont to a humanist High School Gymnasium in Borlin
and tfl ilo going to school my main fiolds cf intorost uoro
medicine and technique. I decided to chooco tho nodical
profession, and from 1929 to 1955 I studiod ..t tho Univor-
sitios of Borlin and Innsbruck. In tho spring of 1935 I
took ny stato oxam. nation at Berlin and t) on proceeded to
work as an ir.torno at tho hospital in Priodrochahaln,
Borlin. I was thoro at the Internal and Surgical Depart¬
ment. Since it was ay intor.t..on tc become a surgeon, I
went to hrofoscor Buockner as an assistant to tho ?atho-


1 !tey 47-;!-£--i-c-roster-Int: Ranlor
Court Ko. 1


logical Institute in crdor tc gain a bcsic education
in tlo field of surgery there.

'•hilo working with Duochnor my interest in aviation
nodical questions v.-a awalconod, sinco in Buochnor»a Institu .0
thoro woro -n l a n l oxp .noients porfomod ccr.cor nir.y thoni-
eolvus with t! oso questions. Alroody r.t th-t tine I volun¬
teered ..a experimental subject for high altitude oxpor-
iiu-nts porfor.i.d by other physici.r.s because I was intorostod
in that fioid. In tho year of 1937 I participated in an air
nodical congross ct tl o P.Ii: in Jorlin, to which I gainod
accoss by tho mediation of Dtiochnor, and bocuno acquainted
with tho ontiro fioid of work of aviation medicino. As a
rosult of t*. is congress, 1 ducldod to bo cctivo in that
sphoro bceauso ti is roprorontod a very fortunr.to synthesis
of my nodical and tochnical int-rosts.

On tho 1st of January 1C38 I was omploycd by tho Air
Modlc..l Department of tho DVL of which Dr. huff wa 3 tho
hood. I was oriployod as sciontific co-workCr ;jid my
special assignment w..s tho thoorotic..l and pructic.,1 eval¬
uation of lr accidents. In audition, I simultaneously
\/orkod on r.ir medical i*osonrch quostions.

"i. i t, in dotcll, w s your work concerning air nodicr.l
rosonrch quostions?

a. Ir. addition to my accidont work I h.ad rosourch .-.sEign-
mente of various typos wi ich at first wore on tho fioid of
acceleration research. In fro courso of thoso uxp.rimonfcs
I worked in many airpl_.no tosts nth dive bombora and
carriod out centrifugal oxp.rinonts. ._ftor tho DVL, in tho
year of 193S, rucoivod ti-Oir own low prossuro chamber, ro
st.rtc-d tho rork in f. 0 field cf high-r.ltitudo rose; rch.

I currently carried on low ro esuro chamber oxporiaonts,
concoming flying ability and in addition thoro wero a numbor

6765


1 I Say 47-!*-S^-l-4-Po3tor-Int: Ranlcr

Court To. 1

of research c.asi^monta in tho fiold c ' high-cltitudo.

3*0 initiation for thoso oxp~ r^nur.ts originated partly fron
aerial accidont -.ork ard f ror. tho oxptrianco r/hich I gainod
c.e a result of investigation of air accidoris nl ich had
not aa yot b^on ox old nod. Thoso woro r.ir r.ccidonts on tho
basis of altitude sickness, rnd it nr.a &oy tint intor..stod
no costly. I scon began to aoo the fight .-.gainst high-
altitudo sioknoss and : oath aa uy special assignment. Ifco
first phaso of ny ctivlty in fci*o combat of accidonts
w. a concludod in t'. o spring of 1S40 with tho roport which

0

was alroady mentioned by Dr. ^uff rogerding hi~h-altitudo
aicknoaa and high-altituio doath. I spocializod in tho
fiold of high alt: tv.do ro so arch, rx.d carried out many
lo« prossuro oxporir.onts concerning flying ability in
that connoction.


1 Ilry-JMJG-2-i-.fclcy
Court Nc. 1


Q 'isbat was yeur tr.sk within the fracework cf high altitude re¬
search?

There was e CMbber cf activities going on in order tc improve
high altitude fineness with pharaccclocical ttuans regarding th- effect
of ccntinuwd exposure-to raspiration oxygen, concerning carbon dioxide
content, the effectiveness cf pervitin, investigations cf ,,•rachutu
descending free high altitudes, explosive decc repression oxperiioento in
the question cf hi.ch -ltitude flying in the pressure chamber, airplanes,
nnd c-ny sLail r rttors.

Q .ere there any series cf experiments in yeur institutions ccrried
cut by you ~t that ti_e, end who r.t th*.t tin- was in eh" rge cf yeur
experiments end when did ycu use as experimental subjects?

* Uo bad a serl-s cf expcrln-nts in oil these reaor.rch raaignn-nts.
ho ourselves were the expert, uital subjects. Sometimes we had exp-ri-
ncntal subjects coning fruu cur collaborators in cur own institutes,
end ooootinua freu other bronchos of the DVL. Usually 1 aySelf was in
charge of those experiments, except in case-s when I .myself was thu
cxporinontrl subject.

0 the, for the first tine suggested tc ycu that lew presnuro ch^nbor
experiments could be carried cut at Dachau?

« In Dccuiber 19L1, -ft-r ..eltz 1 visit tc Ruff, huff called mu
into his rcen and t Id c*e about his conversation with ’..‘cltz. He asked
whether I w,-3 prop.-rod tc rerk under these conditions wJ participate
in experiments for the purpose cf r--scuo from hifh altitudes.

Q Ycu arc scying under these conditions, whet conditions were ycu
speaking cf?

ft These wore the conditions wlch Dr. .eltz mentioned tc Dr. Ruff
cn the occasion cf his visit. The experisunts were tc b* performed on
s-ntvr.cod c r iminals vhc volunteered for these oq crlacnts.

'.as the concept "criminal" discussed at that lieu fire dy, end *
whet was tc bo understood by it?

A Cno meant criminals who had been sentenced by proper courts.

6767 -


1 It y-tt-DJ 3-2-2-.£-1=; (Int. Easier)
C.urt Jfc. 1


Q <ho dct&rain-d the aubj-ct which was tc be investigated ct
Dachau?

The subj.ct h d already beer, deturuir.-d ca a result cf cur
preceding work, and as c result cf the planned jcp.ri^nts which wore
tc be continued. Since tfcis subject, naaoly the rescue Lf persons
free high cltituic v-a particularly acute, r.t th't tiac huff cskod m
whether I w s prepared tc prrticiptto in these experiments, working cn
these questions.

Q In that era- as I correct in assuming th t already before the
Dachau experiments cxp*rin.,nt9 hcil been errriod cut in r similar wry,
rj*S th-t ether experiments wore to be continued fft.r the Dachau
txper- nents?

X 1*8.

f 4 IV.t th Dachau experiments n.rely constituted rn excerpt from
n largo scale oj^. ri-.ental jirn?

Yos, that is truei

Cj Uvt were your reasons to -coopt Dachau?

A One c-n only explain that decision conoid ring the situation
as it prevail®'* at th t timo* It w s the winter of 19U-19/.2 and tho
collrpoo cf the Sr.stcm front was already p-nding beccuce of the un-
ex: *ctcd severity of that winter. The emergency situ tion of the soldiers
ct the front bee: me very di r also r.t hoao for the first tiac. At
that tiac woolen things were collected for the Front and one could
imagine wh'.t actually was happening -*t the Front if one h-d tc resort
tc such deans. The pilots of the nodi c al planes tcld us wh-t actually
w-.s happening. *."c were also told about conditions by pilots cf thi DVT
who had been cccrittod r.t the Eastern Front for the purpose cf this
uoergarcy situation. In addition a. new cppcr.unt h'd -risen* tho
United States cf .jaericr, and we especially in aviation research were
cl. Ter about the ia ertmeo cf th't n-w opponent then o-ny ethers, *o
know what war being built in tho Unitc-d St t^3 end wh t the potential¬
ities were. In „a,rica Boeing 3-17 planes were flying with exhaust


1 ifcy-^-OJC-2-3-ifcloy (Int* krsalcr)
Court l


turbines ct higfr altitudes, the IhnaCerbclt planes were being used,

-a) r*c were rfalv tc s-c that the air wet w. ul' have tc uabrrk cn an
entirely new frm, ospeciflly regarding Ugh altitudes and numerical
cc»lcy=er.t. .e could only sake a stand if *c did everything tc dev-lop
;ur fight-rs. Horc we were particularly c-nc.m^'' with the .C 163 frrm
which we expoctod cc nsidcro.blo success. The increase of flying speed
was ef extreme iiyertrocc, rise for civilian rwi-ticn, rnd in this
situ-tier. dLveJOjrxnt, cf course, been, particularly .‘-cute, nnd cur
«.x; wriixnts were nccoss ry for the .urpese cf th;.c development, l.h-n
Dr. huff approached ne with thr.t quosti n I didn't consider it very
leng cs to wheth.r I was strong enough cr nheth-r 1 w uld rather stay
in Berlin where I had _y f-j-iiy and a comfortable pltcci to work, '..hen
I was relu sed tc dc rviaticn reae-rch work I never th-ught that this
would aern c ccofcrtable position, out I , -rtici.; ted in o great nu..b-r
cf experiments which r«.re ncith-r ; lonsent r.cr nen-dragereus.

(4 Didn't you h-ve any ocr.'vl cr a-dical -thical misgivings in
Carrying out these ox -ria^nts?

t\ I had nc :r--t ovor -1 misgivings. ;J. turaily, I thought about
the entire natter thoroughly, but the result of th-sc Iclibertiers
wrs the following: experiments cn human beings was on ev rydry tffrlr
with us. In the c urse cf ny -ctivity I axa sure I c-rriud cut about $
thousand self experiments, nn! Just as nny ex. erimonts ,n other people
who bulcr. <A tc the circle cf cur Institute. All these per, lc volunteered
cs experimental subjects, but that wrs den- within the fr.ncwcrk :f the
research of our Institute. I prrtici. te in utpwrin-nta for Iiuff and
ay own work, and I re sure that if any stronger wculi h~Ve ackod ac to dc
that I -n sure I wcul. r.ct h've consented, fithin the fr^no _rk of the
activity cf the Institute oil the cc-acrkers were gird t„ y rticipato,
though wo gained no advantages whatsoever from *-h' t work. If I was now
-'reached with the question whether I was going U use sentenced
cri Inris wh: v- luntccrcd fer the purpose of ex, crinents which were tc
serve t?;e rescue cf pilots, find k-xwing that if they survived th-se


6769


1 May-a-DJG-a-4- fclcy (Int. Rralcr)

Court He. 1

experiments these crlaincls »-ul-I receive r >-rdcn I think it is quite
u»-rst rodcble thr.t rlthcugh having tc cvci-cco*. cert in persenel
inhibitions I h-d no principle ekrftl nisgivings. In edditien I knew
c- -xperinents being perfemed or. Inantca in the v-ri us countries,

-nd the bcofcs of Peul dc Kruif, which I possessed, gr.vo at this
knerl^dgc.


Court Sc. 1

1 /■-ey 47-K-S-l-iB>ii*ckan (racier)


Although Professor Do Bruif, an I have l^am^d here free Professor
Ale xa nder, supposedly ie s-t in er unobjectionable position in America
and sosetisos allegedly d-es net cuite tell the truth in his nubllcotione,
It is not S3 decisive vhat ho reports about the individual erciriaents
perforaed by Gratei cr other people. It is such sore inoertert to con¬
sider the vay in vhich he is reporting these exocriaents'; that he is
glorifying these courageous rosearch workers as heroes; that hie bo'ks
vert a great success in Africa and in aery other countries; that the
Gtrsar editions v.ri crintid in Zurich, the land of the. f.cd Cross: that
I never heard cr read of an opinion vhich rejected the bocks cr the
experiments vhich art. described therein.

As I knov ncv f i was only ovarc ^f an lr-fir.ittly 6aall cart of
hunan oxcorinerts carried on abroad. -h^fo ^as yet another condition
vhich strengthened St in ay decision. At that tiae concentration camp
inaates vho volur.tc.red v-ero cosaltttd for the clearing of dud boobs
end, as far as I knov, vero cordoned aftor having cleared soac tvonty
such dud boobs. I think that c.aparcd to that tho lev pressure- chamber
exporiaonts scta.d t^ at t- be auch e.ro horsiest. and incurred much
less danger.

In addition, -f course, I put tfct ouir-tivn vhether I c*ro.r.nlly in
the ireo position v-uld have nlacti syself at tho disnooal for such
experisonts and I, of course, ansverod that ouistion in tho afflraativc,
for that in effect vus vhat I did.

Q, Bid it r.«t repel ycu at that tic*. v;rking in a concentration

casp?

A. It vill olvays be difficult to aak. it clear t: people that
hardly cno person kr.--v in Geraary anything about the r nccr.tr/-ti on cacpc.
According to nose, I knev of Bachau end, being a resident of Berlin, I
knev of OranKnburg. * never sav e casp perectally uo to that tine. I
hod heard that professional criminals and colitieal insotes vcrc incar¬
cerated in concentration cases. I had heard n-thing of prisoners of war


;T foreigners vho vtre in concentration cases. In the sane vay I hud


Ccurt *o. 1

1 .-lay 47HC-3-2-aWtf^h»n (Eerier)


ncTor heard anything of the Jewish extermination program or the raes
deportation of Java into concentration cerps, ^.ich allegedly already
started in thw year of 1936. When in th= year of 1940 or 1941 the Java
vtra deported free Berlin, we vere tcld that they voro 6«r.t to Ihoresien-
stadt and fr:e there vent to the various cities of the general government
in Poland.

Q, When did you takv the first steps in .rder to carry through
the experiments?

A. I'r.e first step vas =y Journey to iiunioh to Veits 1 s institnto,
vfacre Ruff accompanied so. "hat *as in Jenurry of 1942.

Q, A conference with Volts vat the turcosc of the Journey, vao It

not?

A. Tes.

Q, Did that conference take oloce in January of 1942?

A. Too, vc vent there for the purposo of this exoorinont.

Q, Woll, vfeo vas prosent at that tiso?

A. rrifessor Volts, Dr. hascher. Dr. Ruff, and I.

Q, Had you kn.'-n Ir. Raschvr before that conforoncc.

A. So.

Had you known b*f ,r< the c-nforcnco took place that Dr. Rascher
would be present?

A. So, I as sure that I did not knov tho nano.

Q. Vere you introduced to Rascher7

A. -cs, he vae intr.^iucod to no as an fborarst of the Luftwaffe.

v "as a fifth sen present during that conference or at least
present p*rt of the tine?

A. Tos, I remember that at tho beginning Dr. Luts vae present. I
think ho vas already thsre before tho beginning of the conference.

Q. Vhat in detail vae discussed during that conference?

A. I think that Dr. Huff already told about that conference lr.
essence, "he cueeti'.n -f the experimental subjects vas discussed once
sere. Dr. catcher had a letter fren Himmler vfaich give hia authority to


Court rc. 1

1 Xay 47-X-2-3-iH.----.ethan (Xaalor)


carry out the exueriscats, which he produced. It v*a decided to carry
cut the exoerlsenta for the curpoee of rescuing frea high altitude,
using the lew pressure chaster at Dachau. At the end of the conference
ve arranged to scot again the- next day at tka Heichcfuehror'e office at
Munich, where a nuster of.forsal cucsti;ns had y«t to he settled.

Wasn't it discussed that one w;uld have to establish contact
with the c-saar.der of the cc=p at Dachau?

A. I d.n't know whether Hascfcor had already suggested that at
that tiao. The first stop va 8 thi conference at the Hoichsfuehrer's
offico at Kuaich and I think that then, the decision v a8 srdo to estab¬
lish a conference with the c sssandcr at Dachau.

Q, luring that c:nfer«.nco did Hatcher wear the uni fore of an SS
officer or a Luftwaffe doctor?

A. So, he had the unifirs of an ftberarrt, a lieutenant cf tho
Luftvoffo.

Q, 'as he introduced to you ao an officer of tho Luftwaffe or on
officer of tho SS?

A. So, h« voa introduced to sc at ar. officer of the Luftvoffo.

"here did the conference take place, a*, tho Kclchsfuchror SS?

A. Cn the next day, during that c-nfcrcnco, v® aado tho acoualr.-
tanco of Schnitclor, the «unich adjutant of Kissl.r, who v» 6 doo in-
forsel about the cxo*ri=tr.ts. It v ao then decided to go out to Dachau
by car in ord.r to discuss tho necessary satters with tho coacander there.

Q. ‘as it arranged that Haccher was to carry out the oxo srioonte?

A. T«e, that was arranged.

£ 4 . 'ere y.u convinced that Hatcher vbe sufficiently Qualified to
carry out thes c exceriscnts?

A. Tea, naturally.

Q. Did you confer with his, or why v.rc ycu of that opinion?

A. During that conference at Viltz'a office naturally discusccd
=any Questions. I evt v»3 a lot -f profcssi.nal talk and Haschor nado a
very skillful ispression. He told about hie work at Schcngau, -here ho

- 6773


Court So. 1

1 Kay 47-jt-S-4-£EK-ti£chaa (Hauler)


vna vorkirg at an eek-ack school, vhere he bed rreuared a dl6tar.ee
guagu for the purtose of ack-uck *ork. In addition, he seecc-d to have
a go;4 general aedical education. I think he had verked in Munich for
three or four years doing surgical v—fc and he generally aade a skillful
iapreeslon.

Q. Vfccn did you actually go to Dachau?

A. V c ‘•ent there the n6*t day, sorting free the heieksfuchror's
office.

Q_, Vhot vae discussed vith the cans cccr.andur at Duchau?

A. Schnitrier, the i.'unieh adjutant, vunt cut vith ua and there
*~ro the four ;f us and the conn cor.nandor v»a also ureovnt during that
conference. During that e-nf.-rsr.ee all the basical oueslionc of the
practical execution verc settled. >iret, the bringing of the nrccourt
chasbor to Dachau, Its instollati-n In the c act, further the sclvction of
the experimental subjects. The camp cccnar.der had already bs.en inf-rcci
about it by Schni trier.

Kould you oleaeo or.co sore repeat what had boen arranged vith
the caap connunder concerning that point?

A. Basically thw fact that thv oxncriccntal subjects vxrc to bo
Sentenced criminals vh v -luntccnd for that purpose had Ken dctcrcincd
and vas scrcly confirmed diring that conference, "o sado certain do-
=onds regarding the caliber of the ewrloontal subjects. They had to
be A a certain age, ranging free tventy-five to thirty-five yoars;
they had to be in g-.d physical condition, had to receive additional
rati.ns in order that a g.vd comparison could be dra-n to the cors;nncl
of the Luftvaffe regarding ncurish&ont and rhyslcal ccnditi n. In oddi-
tion, it vac dotezeinoi they v^r-. r.-t to v.rk during the tic. of the
cxucriccnte. The camp cossacd&r then said that Saschcr var t . Voloct
the suitable people.


1 U&y-iWUS—err (lit. Homier J

C':rt I'*. 1.


T. ZJia ti.e ' r --.-r. -ier stute cn that ctcicn that in eay way
he h d ;ried f bring ab-ut a vrluntnry re^rticg :f the innatcc f r
that tor ese?

d. Ye*, he had n' d'uot whatsoever, that under these "ndici _s a
le-se aujher 'f jern'-aB w'ald rcocrt, 'S' e he cade the farts .'C't* t-
the... £f-a'oer w*b then t eele't tne auitfle .^e'ule fr'c that nd.

I an eure th. t tho caccor in i'fc tho 'acp 'rsewdor vaa t
nolr>'t ;1.0 ix-role wn» n't disposed in dotail, if I underot; nd y'U
"rre-tly? I *aac wtother they were t' ho gathered by »ay rf a r'll
'all 'r in any ftner way?

... I dr n't kcpw h'w it w*a d'ne, vhothar patera *ora out up 'r
whet.o.- they were gathered by .ey ff re 11 'all. -t any rate that rrro
n*t dlB'Ufloed at the ti e.

-. Via it tne.i air dy deiorsisod that Raa'hor alcr.e wrvld doal
with the 'axp eestander in the cattor ff the oxoerlsentnl cub;o'ta 'r
vero yu elec authorised t* interfere in these sAttero, woe it thon
air .iy dw.erclr.ad sbother Raa'hor nlpno n. a to solo't tho exoarloentrl
aubjo'tc 'r wore ycu t' have a veto tee?

... That, rf r'urae, w.ie left tr Raa'hor, be'ouse he had the
"rr s ending authcrlsuti n free Hisalor.

\ Did Res*h-p Dr'du'e that autherlxaticn during a 'rnloron-c,

duriiy; the ore'odlsy "nforen'o?

Yob, I elro dy said it banponod during tha tice we with

! 7 ol‘.s. Ho shewed ub Hii^slor'n letter.

C.. Dp ycu atill roneeber the r entonta 'f that letter ?

Yes, it said in tho lotter that the baei' authorisati'n f*r
tao osoutim of tho hi3h altitude emori-enta e aointair.ed and th. t
trxh or. orlt-onts <-uld be 'arrlod rut in the ern'eatratim 'a.p Da- au.
It farther said thi t 'rixdnnle whe had v'lunteered were t' t* used rad
that «rdwn -culd bo granted t' these non after tne "n'luei'O rf tho
ex •orioontal series.

a. Did you travel ba' - tc Berlin with Dr. Buff after these

' nf cron os? £-775


1 L.V-IXJIS-4-2-X ccjc (2ax=4«rJ
Court 1.


... Tes, a?tor this " cferorye we went tr 3erlin.

7, Certain oreparati as had to be cede fcr the beginning ri the.
on ■orison cb, »ac was entrusted with this jiro^awry work?

... .-reparations wore divided. Dr. Huff was to deal with tho
trar.c -rt 'f the Erbile pressure fhacbor. Then Hanker wan t' b*xc
all no essarj projarnti'r.3 in Daohau, seleotiag tho c/voritental sub-
Jo'ta rad oxacinlng then, and I wan tc gathor the s'ler.tifl' tatori 1 ,
an far as it was no*, yet available, and t- work 'ut an oxvor iir.or.tca
,r',\rra, the basis of w . i'b already existed?

-. Before you roturaod to ?*r2Xu, tho de<isi'n had already been
a do that sub experiments '«•-« * ‘*?r led though. is that right?

... Yes.

0.. Hid ycu, as t..o representative -f ycur Institute at Adlercb-'f,
nlrr dy previously collaborated vith a ro rosentativo of the ’olts
Institute?

... .o, not oil frequently, only *t 'no tiro in Jinuory, 1941,
whoa donllng with a sybile lew pressure <harbor, the witness Luts h.a
toctified about that horo, and rn that c'-oaim wo collaborated with
a ro;r*sentntive of tho 'oltx Institute. This vac dr no when tho
t^bilo <rcssure chaebor was orcaittod ir. the campaign t{ Franco in
rrdor t carry out spe'lrd oxpericonts <n the fighter squadrons. - v t
r aly "sits' institute Krti'iyatcd there, but there was a collaborate n
of uany igonoios.

C„ Vne did parti' lpato?

... There was cno *yslo ian cf tho Oerrm Experimental Institute
f-r .'lidor Hying, *hr w L « e civilian, »t-' participated: cne 'ixo fr- 1 .
.-.c'iili:., who was an wb*rarrt cf tho Luftunffe, and then there was Lr.
Luts fr n tho kunioh Institute, whe woe ale', I think, an uberarst f
:;-.e Luftraffc. and finr= y t*f or three .,h f ie ions, nodical cf fi'ore
of Air “loot He. 3.

?. Vr-o was in charge 'f the chamber r.t that titc?

... This chactor w* 3 3uporvised by the tedi'al insoeetrrote and


6776


1 ^;-r:S-4-S-C.c'jc nl crj

C^urt i.


whoa it ms in Pranf e it wca under the 'barge f ~ir elect 3. They
were 'tring for fuel, trowel crders, et'. Vi this our detail 'f
hyci* l.iM, Dr. Scoring rts entrusted with leadership. He had "no
fr . the 2 agency at Ee'hling.

:. Bid ycu dear* the individual phyai'ians 'f that teas at th.\t

t i-.o?

... I anew Dr. >ering perscnnlly very well. I rnly poasubly
lT> r- -he physician who case free the Rosoar'h Institute frr Slider
end I didn't at all ha'* Dr. Luts. I cnly know ho hud c'oe
fr tho Institute 7olt* lud I didn't a. ” any of the rthorn.

*. 'os toe •ituati'n auprcxicatel. tin 3 %m uaic<; the
'h.'_bor at Dachau?

To rhnt extent it w.s tho seuo 'f.loially I 'ann't Judge,
-.•over, I d' think it wvs rather aitil^r. Tho <bnebor hnd boon
fund shod by tho ccdl' ul inspect'rote and I wont thorc ac a rcore-
ocutr.tivo of the Hufi Inatituto wtilo Sac'hor wont thcro ac a Mir.bcr
rf the Volts Inatituto. •• i 11 went there frr tho purpose of "lln-
Vrati*a In order to carry out oxcoriaents for the nurocoa of roc-uo
fr i-h t ltltudes.

Let ua rovort t' tho Dachau oxioriMBts. Hew long did y'U
atc-c i”. 3orlin. after haring returned fr'* Dacnnu f Berlin?

I stayed thoro f r *. nuSbor cf rcohs, at lerot during tho
tiuo it t' x for the chixbor to leave 2 orlin and g- to kunioh. that
waa in tho beginning 'i February.

^ad aftor that y-u returned t- Lu.i<b. did you?

1. Yes, after tho 'beabor had loft Berlin I went aftor It by
rdl, aa o r to- days later, in order f carry out the noroesary
te'l-i'U -ro carat ic us cf tho chanter at Dachau with rase nor.

1 . rid y-u arrive in Bfc'bau before tho ch»bor or did. the 'hot¬
ter rrrivo before ..cu?

^ Tho chaster was Greeny there. «s B^n as I arrived at


6777


(Beanler;


1

t


ileal'I- I telephrned the lellz Institute t lind -ut whether the
hiisber had arrived. and I then learned it wee already at Ta<hau.
I e.: tolejhrnod Has'her end went 'tit there together with his.


67 ?&


Mr.y l-M-BK-5-l-Blnkloy (Int. Bamslv-r)
Court I, Cose :Io. 1


Q, .hen did the oxperinonts in Dachau 3t.ort?

« I roooeb-T that they actually started on tho 22nd

or 23rd of February, because I can still recall, -is tlio
-.itnoss Neff testified hero, that a birthd-y table, so
to spook, had boon prop-red for hie. Subsequently, a

numoor of difficulties arose concerning rfosch_r 1 3 being
detailed there. The exporiaunts after a day or two w<_ro
interrupted and k eschar wont to Schongau, whereas I re¬
turned to Borlin.

Before tho experiments started, did you have a


clearly defined program .<hich was to cov-r th^ extent of
the oxporiaents?

« Yos, I have already s id that tho initiation for this
oxporicentr.l series which was to oxtond over a number of
years origin .tod with tho commitment of tho mobile prossuro
chambers in Franco. There we discussed tho question of
parachute dosoent rroc high altitude with tho fighter
pilots employed thoro; end we had determined that tho

pilots wore not sure about this because they wore neither
prr.ctic 1 nor theoretic 1 experienced .on 1 \nd in those


quostion3. Those experiences g ined as a result of tho
conversations we h^ld with th- fighter pilots constituted

th*- initiation to start those oxporinv-nto.

In the year of 1941 I performed experiments with para¬
chute descents from high altitudes at tho DVL, which
extended to 12 kilometers. This w 3 the first important


praotic-1 question b-cause people wore already flying at
that height. «t that tine, however, tho flying altitude
was already being increased. Motors had boon built whioh


could increase the altitude of planes up.to 16000 motors.
Junker, ..rado, H-nschoi and many oth-r airplane manufac¬
turers, v._rc already building pressure cabihs; and tho


6779


Uzy l-’i-SK-5-2-Bl'kIoy (Int. Rncfiler)
Court I, Cr.su lio. 1


’•E-163, which I h vo broody mentioned, and which was the
first airplane with an independent rochet propulsion,
was already being tested.

Tho c.ir prossuro is artificially maintained in press¬
ure cabins by compression apparatus; in othv-r words, there
is always a stronger pressure in tho pressure cabin than in

the atmosphere which surrounds it. For planes employed at
the front a pressure corr-sponding to eight kilometers had
been provided, 'fh.ro was tho problem of how the crew oould
overcome an explosive decompression o-.used by n leak in tho
pressure oabin; end this w* s a question which had already
been dealt with by r. numbor cf institutes, who concornod
themselves with explosive decompression questions. Wo
also h'd carried out explosive decompression oxporiments
up to seventeen kilometers in height.

It nay perhaps be c proof r to how the entire problem
was pending r.t that time th . wc h d built in explosive

decompression ch mbers into he, mobile low proosuro
ch'jobers, because wo h'd in .ndod to lecture the troops

about oxplosivo d«-oompressi^n qu-stlons. Tho problem
which had boon entirely loft .aside, howovor, was tho
question of how tho '.ir crew could bo saved in tho casa

of an accident occurring in high altitudes, after the
cr^w had survived tho explosive decompression: How and
with what moans oan I bring the crew back to earth? - a
number of questions had come up: Is it sufficient to
use a parachute with oxygon apparatus? Up to wh t
altitudos would it be sufficient? Would tho pilol^e have
to drop for sen. tiflu with a p rachuto not unfolded?
Through what altitudes would they have to fall? Do they
wake up by thcnsolvos from altitude sickness or not? ,\ro

they alert enough afterwards to pull the lever? In what
altitude will they awaken?


Bay l-S-BK-6-3-3lakloy (Int» R onl.r)
Court 1 1 Case Ho. 1


Then in addition the question cane up of what effect
cold would have' r.nd in the ease of p rticularly
high fItitudes the question was added: Can one in such
altitudes just by using one's own body leav_, the plane
or do-s high altitude sickness appear 30 quickly that

cert .in cppr.rc.tus would have to be provided whioh would
got the crow out of the plane without their having to

act on th.ir am initiativo? Then the question cam- up
of how soon .after the explosive decompression the
altitude sickness arises; how nuoh tine is ct one's

di3pos..l in ord-r to st .rt rcscuo oonsures? These wjro

about the nost important questions which aoved us r.nd
which had to bo clrifiod durinj thoso experiments.

* ,/as it your intontion to carry out further experi¬
ments in Dr.ch-'u if tho opportunity was available?

.» Ho. By putting th~?e questions tho progr n had
b^cn clearly defin.d. On the oth.r h nd, the progr m
wa3 Large enough and a sufficient number of .ucstions

had to be ol.rifiwd. I a de the neocssary prep .rati ons.

• o know th -1 from . technical point of vi„w ten seconds
would be at our disposal for leaving the airplane.

B.t. VOif iELtK: -.r. ^resident, I h ve just learned that
figuro h d not bc-n mentioned which tho witness has
st ted. He 3'id th t at that tie*. motors had boon built
by r. number of m .nuf acturors which w~ro in a position
to riso up to 16,000 m-t^rs in height. This figure
apparently had not be.n n-mtion-d.

* witness, what w.as Rascher'3 position in D.aclr u?

« Tho position in itself had boon cl-rifled by tho

basical condition raised by Hi real .r that Haschcr had
received .uthorization and at the srru tine, owing to


6781


M y I—H-2K-5-4-51 Jcloy (let. R cd-r)
Court I, Case Ho. 1


the condition, th :t itesoher would have to participate in
the experiments, that any execution of tho experiments

without him was impossible.

•i .flint lends you to assumes that? flu t lends you to
assume that it would havo boon impossible to c:.rry out
th^3o jxparimonts without the participation of Rasoh.r?

Thrt can be seen frem o 1-tter writ ton by Brandt to
Slavers, written rho 21st of bl rch 1942, document 1501-r.

(PS) , Exhibit -.8 in Document Boo* II.

fH=. PRmSID^W: Counsel, th- Tribunal .<ill now bo

in recess.

[n rcoess was taken.)


67^2


1 May-ii-^P-7-l-K^rrov (Int* Ton Scion)
Court X


ihi BKaI; Person* In tae court roaa will pl^.oc find their
s-cts. iho . ribu ra- . i is o^oin in session.

3-; JS. Team

Q. Dr. Beeborg, before wo go on where wo stopped, I should lifco
to csk ou to speak about th«. noecstity of thes^ oxpwriucats and
to explain ydiat the significance of tnis aaccinc w^s th.t could fly
at an altitudo of 16 kilccctors,

a. I said tc..t motors for air planes were being built at this
tlno v-.ich could reach an altitude of 15 kilonet-ro. Dhat in, their
naziuuo . chievcoont was 16 xl loaders, ic actual coiling would
bo two or three kilouoter* higher than that.

Do you nc-n to soy th..t tnis cachino would, in pructico, bo
ablo to reach an altitude of 18 or 19 kilanctors.

a. Yes, th-t would oe tuo highest altitude «»icn it could roach
at all. At 16 fcilouotors it could fly with its entire actor power,

-hat do ou aeon by full prccouro altitude!
a. *2t. t is a very technical oprension connected with tho
eau'rcssors. At th.t altitude, tho actors work Just as a uotor not
b:ilt especially for nigh iltitudo works on tae ground, Artificial
pressur*. Is c rented which corresponds to so., lord pressure. aDovo
this altitude the efficiency of tho uaehino sinks rapidly.

n. I ball ova th-t tcis explains th..t point sufficiently,
bow, wo* 11 go bock to tho point of SLschor's position In tho
oxooriud&t. V u w,.r. just j. ginning to op-ok of this question beforo
tho roewos.

a. I said that, without Basener, it would norcr have been inwondod
to c.-.rry cut the capwriuentB and it never would have been possible.

‘h e croso fr:c Hinder's original assignment. PrxticJ. proof of
this is tho fact oh-t tho esp-rii-onts wcr. stopped immediately when
there w-rc difficulties with Haschcr's assignment. This is provod
b the lot;cr free ;.rs. B-schcr to the Eeichsfuehrcr SS, the 24th of


1 arrow ( Jnt. 7on ochea)

Court I

7ebruazy 1942, Docuucat "0-263, Sxhibit 47. la this letter, Hro.
acacher writes th-t thv.ro were difficulties of ccc~and -ad that
the cr-riaents wore stenpod; ta..t 2~schcr h -a gone b-Ck to Schongcu.
ict vei the tine \dica I wont bode to 3«rlla *=Jd l-.ter, whoa the
crotriueat* woro actually carried out. anchor had expressly forbidden
uo tc p-rfoiu cxoericoata la D-chaU without Ms per.Jission or hio
presence, so th-t I a.v-r did o^rfonx any experiments without Haschor.

I always waited until ho v..i th-rc. On the days when nc was In
Schncgcu, no experiments wore perforaod. Osaorally, I did not even
go to the ejnerixjcat.il st..tlcn -porh^js to write - but certainly
never to earn out experiments, ft it rulo, although, of courso,

It of tax delayed the vert, scuiod Justified to uo bee-use daschor
hrd tho uor-isslon frou Hlsaler to p^rfora those oxporiaunto and was
responsible to him for tfco cxp-rl-ental subjects. "Iso, I Pysolf was
under the authority of tho c-~? at Dachau which seriously restricted
ny independence. For oxenplo, uy fr^oda. of uovuaent or talking
to prisoners, sicil-r things, E-schor binself, on tho othur hand, on
tho b .sis of his oovero which ho had received f rou HinaHr and on tho
basis of h special p..oo, h..d a very freo position. The c^-p of
Dachau w .s under Kiuuler'o authority. That is shewn, for cxuuplo,
by tho letter fren HinaUr to .illch, Docjrxcnt 1617 PS of iTovaxbor,

1942, Achiblt 77. In this letter, Kiualor spoke of Holtloohnorin
conduct .jd rdds th_t tho c~.p Duchaa is under his orders, and Holt-
lochner would h_vo to subnlt. Under these conditions, K-sober had tekon
the low pressure ch-abor frxi hnnlch and sot it up.


1 May 47-H-^-8-l-Kaloy-V0X SCOCJL'

Court 1

£ Who took care of :he maintenance during the ex¬
periments, that Is who worked on the chamber, maintain¬
ed It?

A There was not a great deal of nalntalnance work
necessary for examply loading the batteries or supplying
the oxygen, that va3 taken care of by ?.ascher and It was
probably paid for by the camp

Q Was Rasonar responsible to you for that?
a No, Rasoher was not responsible to ae at all. He
was responsible to the medical inspectorate because the
ohanber belonged to them.

£ Did you have an opportunity to give Rasoher any
orders or prohibition or injtructlons?

A No, that can no doubt be seen froo what I have al¬
ready said. I oouli not give him any orders. I certainly
could not forbid him to jo anything only for tho progress
of these experiments for rescue from hijh altitude I had
a certain advisory right as Is custonury for two scien¬
tists who are working together on tho same taok, and when
one of the two has ;reater knowledge pertinent to the
specific task.

Q You 3ald tho experiments began on February 22 or
February 2, was that the time when you saw the experim¬
ental subjects for the first tine?

a Yes. On that day I went out to Dachau for the first
time together with Rascher, and net the experimental sub¬
jects for the first tine.

Q About how many were there?
a There wore 10 or 12.
s, Could it have been five?

a Five? No, there were certainly more than that.

6785


1 Kay 47-jf--iZ- 6- 3-Halcy-Von Schoen.

Court 1

Q Could It save been 15?

a Yes that Is possible.

Q Did you talk to the experimental subjects on that
day beforo the experiments began?

« I believe on that day we talked, primarily. Vhot-
hor any experiments were done at all on that first day,
whether any real experiments were done before the thing
was stopped for t£e first time I don't remember, .it any
rate I talked to the experimental subjects and got to
know them a little on the first day.

Q What did you talk a out with the experimental
subjects?

.v It w-'s quite new surroundings for mo, of course.
The were ill professional criminals who ware in custody.

Q How do you know that?

A They told me that gridu illy in the course of con¬
versation. They didn't have complete confidence on tho
first lay and told me all about their previous convic¬
tions. But after one Inquired carefully one discovered
sometime that thoy hid been co-.denned for certain crimes,
repeatedly convicted, and finally had oeen condemned to
Slcherheltsverwhrung (protective custody).

Q For what re .son did you t OX to tho experimental
subjects on this day?

It la quite natural when one begins to work with
such a group then certain personal cont .ct Is noaessary.
’.fu h*d to get to .<now e-.ch other. I talked to then
their profession, if I may say so, and cf courpe I was
told then something about the experiments, what It was
all about, what they themselves had to do to cooperate.
So the cooperation would be possible as with

6786


1 Kay 4 7- K- A£- 8- "'-Kal oy- Vo r. Sc ho an.

Court 1

the experimental subjects that I was used to.

Q Was the reason for this Investigation to prepare
the subjects of their activity or tc check whether these
people were actually volunteers?

a Ko, it was sore to get to know the subjects per¬
sonally. The situation was this, In thetalk with thu camp
comm '.ndont on the basis of the agreement with P.asohor, and
his authorization from Himmler, a very definite agreement
had been reached that those people wore to be selected
from the volunteers; a clear agreement had been reached
on the conditions, about which there could be no doubts
basically. When I met the subjects for the first time
personally and talked to them about the principle of
the experiments and their duties, and so forth, of course
I also lnqurled why they had volunteered, not beoause of
any distrust of the oamp authorities, but Ju3t for that
reason.

I didn't only believe that, but they were. They
told no so themselves.

Q How do you know that so doflnltoly for oaoh caie?

A In the course of time, not on the first lay but
In the course of time I talked to all of them frequently
in some detail, and gr dually they told me about their
previous convictions, and what other prisons and penit¬
entiaries they had been In, before they oomo to thecamp
and they also told me the reasons why they had volunteered.

3 Co you coon to soy that all the experimental sub-
Jeots who were used for the high altitude experiments
wore volunteers?

A Yes.

Q, Now befcrc these subjects entered the chamber did
prepare them for what they had to do, and told them the


67S7


1 K ay - '/r- B-4-Maloy- Von Scboen.

Court 1


significance of the whole thing?

a Ye8, of course. First I explained the whole ques¬
tion to then In broad outline, so that thaiy would know
what it was about and what the purpose of the experiment
was. In detail I told then apeolflcally what they had
to do in the experiments. There was the writing teat,
thoy had to write numbers from 1,000 backwards, then the
cardinal point was that after the altltudo sickness dur-
lng the experiments as aoon ao they oame to they had to
pull the ripcord. We had a handle in the chamber connect¬
ed to a bell. This was to represent pulling the rip oord
of tho parachute, and this had to be explained to then
carefully, otherwise they wouldn't have unierotood It
and wouldn't have reacted right.


fe? S3


Court 3c. 1

1 .ay <i7-M-9-l-Z3i-«wckan (V n ScfcCcn)


0 , Scv, tcf-Tc the experiments togas, did you have an eleetro-
cardiegre: of each eoxaroto subject?

A. Ye* esd later again.

Please explain that.

A. lirst Baechor had exasined the people to see if thy vre nuit-
atly fitted for the exptrlscnts, ao there would tc no heart defects or
anything like that. Then for an exact c;ntrol, boforc the beginning of
the exocriacnts vw tick an el-ctro-cardi-graa of ell the subjects and in
alcoet all the oxperiaenta the electro-cardi-grans were registered ar.d
at the end, vhen the ^xpuriaents were finished, vs took another electro-
cardlcgres of all the subjects la order to have material for, perhate
If tfacro vcre a- visible damage. their sight still be sccc effects
vhich c-uld be determined only by such tests.

q. Ucv, hcv long did these oxpcriacr.ts of rescue free high alti¬
tude lest apprexinataly?

X. VoU, they really b.gan on about tho 10th or 11th of i-arch
ar.d tfcoy lastsd until the 10 th -r 20 th of .'.ay.

•w lolloving «at. you prepared the rotor*. vhich hes ben eub-
aittod by the prosecution?

A. Yes.

Q. In this report you have a sentence saying that during the
experiments fir rescue froc high altitude there had boon no deaths and
that there had been n. dasago to health, is that correct?

A. Yes, that is correct that that sentence is in the report, ar.d

it is also true that there vus no death or other damage.

Q, B u t hero in the testimony of the witness 3cff you heard thit

thtro were deaths?

A. Yas.

Q, Vhat do you have to say about that?

A. In addition to our joint exporio-nts for rescue free high
altitudo, Kascher rad experiments of his ovr vhich he carried out. He
did not tell =e the exact trebles; he sorely said thet he vei carrying


67S5


Court So. 1

1 .'-a;* 47 -.;-S- 2 -irk-kechAC (Y.x Schoen)


.ut tiy-so ax=eria.-n*.« for Einsler and that they werf to do with the
explosive decocpraaaion sickness end electro-cardicgrac. He had onoar-
ently carried -ut secret experinant* for scse tine «n this rroblea, hut
thee In V presence he continued it with special subjects. In the cturse
if these cxrerUents at the end A April the first death occurred vhen
: v*s present, told -t in the course -f our convertatione that he
wanted to oualify as a lecturer cc the basis of these arxriaor.ts which
vara -rdered by Hlnaler. He wanted to get Ur. lahrenkacp into it but
this van n-t dor*. Sr. Eahrcnkanp did cot v.rk on this natter because
the experisents vtre broker, off.

2 cfor© the death, I had no reason to object to the experiatnts In
any way since Eascher war using ether subjects and had an ecsignncnt
fr»3 Klsnler for then souarately. I had the siilpwnt to cerry out tho
exoerinents for rescue iron high altitude and I. together with Easchor.
carried it out.

q, Hov cany deaths vero th*r« when you wore nroeent?

A. There wr* three.

q, But Koff spoke A five deaths at which you vero uresent.

A. *i.ore c.uld only have beon three.

q, • hy could there -nly have boon time?

A. Brcausn I re='.nb*sr. There- wore doath. after all -nd they cade

a definite intracsi.n on =e, I hn.w it.

q. Vhy did d;oth in the lew prescur ehacbor sake such ar. iurerea-

sl.n on you?

A. In the innuterablo lev pressure chamber eynerlEcnts not only
nadc by us, but everywhere in Ckrrary in other ir.titutos. ve never lad
ary deaths nt all and the rein*, of view at thot tine that ar,- oues-
ti.n of aviation n^dicine. which was necessary, could be solved without

deaths.

q. Sow, how did it harden that you were orient at these deaths,
as you say these wreeriaants did not belong to your series rf exrcri-

679C


cents?


Court So. 1 . .

i hay 47-h-9-&-£Ek-tie«hu (Tea Scfaoeo)

A. It the beginning of Afril or the aiddle of April catcher told
sc for the first tine that he v*8 oerforsing cxpcricentB with slow
ascension and he had attested to work with KctWnhoff tut the work had
t«e a interrupted when the latter was eeat away. I said that had nothin*
to dc with our experiacats eal vaa ouite uciaoortaat and uninteresting
fr--c cur point ef view. Ec aisitted that he eaid it vet a specific
oucation which especially interested his personally and which ho had to
work on. these ewerlscnts, which according tc records here lasted
eight to ten hours. I did not see. Ec pliably alwaya perforned than
.a the days I w. B not there because these eight to ten hours v*ld have
interfered considerably with our axperiaents. Ho expanded these crcori-
sents and perforsed tin* reserve oxporinente at certain altitudco to
test the adaptation which he hod b.tn tooting before in the ol^ e«*con-
si JB experiments. This was an exp*ri=«Rt the subject r^nair.a at

th# sane altitude in contrast to the falling or sinking cxrcritncnts
where the pressure is constantly increased, that is, when the altitude
is decreased. As his intemodioto reports show, he extended thoso to
high altitude. The ti=v reoorve voe etudied cither with or without
oxygon. The suggestion for this in tart cose ebvi.ucly frve other w:rk.

such as Et. XiiBCh«.e.

I soc<.tlr.es observed these cxpi rlsoats. Hv carried .Ut thiae
oroorlcont. oorractlyi he ..total the eubject. .0 that «"*“

Itself no objection to these crocrlncnts. The only thin* vno tint they
■nt.rfored - 1 th -nr oyc.rlncr.tt Iron the point of vie of tine, but
Catcher't unounctuallty »at a nuch ,Treater annoynne. In thlt rotncct.
Accor ling tc th. d.cue.nts, at veil at the vltnctt Scff, Jntchor acrar-
cntly tad death. In the oruerlncnts. She flrtt deaths v«rc appnr.ntly
uneyjoct.d. In the. uneycctcd daath. the .UctrT-cardlTgra* and the
autopsy findings, together .!th hi. reports. apoarently gave Hlnslar
the Idea that thee, eroerlncnt. should be carried en further, U vork
vi th. uehrenkanp In addition. to ert.nd then as far at possible eelonti-

;v-.rinc the* apparently Induced


fically. The fact that Hinnlcr was c-

6771


Court So. 1

1 -lay 47-K-9-4-2£*-fcechan (Von Schoea)

>■- i- ay presence to carry „-ut expcrissnts which vtr. dangerous, as? la
vhich deaths occurred. Iht fact that I had tees -Dreecst several tines
at previous exceriaents brought about ny ere bc see at that fetal croeri-
sest, tcc.

Q, '<cb It not ucueual to you that during as ox'ttriaental scries,
which ycu and Basoher ^-r<. t- carry out together, Kinder suddenly gave
Paicher order# far asocial erccrinents?

A. Tcs, of c.urat. I did s.t have any specific experience In this
ilructlon, tut on principle It Is nothing ur.ueual If tvo people are
working together on a certain Jot ent or both of then roceivo additional
aostgreent fr^s his chief and carries cut other v.rk. In addition,
Basoher vac also carrying out v.rlc in Sch.ngau at the nun- tine, vhich
v«e cn b-holf of Luftgsu 7. I, cyi.lf, had i-^ric -f ay jvs In the DVL,
vhich ay ass.elates v.re carrying on and which I ir.rulred atout vhcr. I
happened t- b«. In Berlin. That Klscler, a# Eslchsfuohror SS sr.d chief
.i the tlcraan Police and as .-aseher'a boso Insofar to he vao as SS sen-
tor, had the right to giv* orders to his subordinates er.d to give thoc
assigssccts and .rier then to carry out erevrinents on sxcoriauntal oub-
Jccts in a c -no. at ration cosp no cn» c:uld dispute.

Paichtr's caccoh v.rk, vhich Siff nentionsd here, is» which ho vut
gathoring blood free cancer patients to test then, that v B o alto going
.a at the oane tine. Later during thu cold axncrinants that vac sca-.-
thisg siailer. If Hinder gave the order to re-worn by asinal heat ar.d
asBChtr c-nductcd t’r.eso crocrlaontB within the fraaev.r)c of the cold
■-xporiaents, aft*jr Holslvchnar had left, that was ulso uossiblt in this
cast bocauGO no sn--ciel eouipsont vac needed for these C-ld exouriaonts.

• I *’ #


Ifcy 1-II-BK-lO-l-Cook (Int. Von Schocn)
Court No. i


„ la our experiments the oxocution of the experiments
depended upon tho presence of tho low pressure ohember,

and for thi3 reason ho carri-d out these experim-nts
simultaneously, end in goner .1 behind my beck.

•i Did Hcscher oth-rWlso in your experiments which
you hr.d carri.d out jointly ’..its him show thv. tv.nd-r.cy

to give tho experiments a wider scientific bu3is?

A Yes, th t W 03 definitely his tendency to expend tho
matter 'S ouch as possible and to burden our joint ox-
porioent3 with specific quo3tions which woro of no

prnctic .l importance. He wonted to carry out oxcoinc-
tions of tho spinal fluid, for in3t .nee , but I
sucooodcd in stopping 'll of th-so efforts. I nlways
urged thr.t tho exp.rioents be c-.rried out r.s quickly

-s possible in tho why noccss-ry for tho Luftwaffe,
thr.t is in tho w y neccss ry for rescuing fliers.

That explains the foot thr.t on page 2 of our joint
report th .re is something said that Huff ser.tion-d

yest .rdoy, thr.t the d-t lied cl-.rifle tion of scientific
.u:stion3 had to be dispensed with for the time being,
because I always insisted thr.t those hud nothin,.; to do

with tho subject; but it * ould have been possible in
Dachau, th-t is proved by the chomic.l :nd clinical
tosts during tho cold experiments.

. Now, in your opinion, whr.t i3 the distinction
between your presence r.t the experimnts for rescuo
from high altitudo and ycur pr.sunco during H sober 'j
experiments wh-re you hop. enod to be present?

« In the experiments of rescue from hish altitude it
was not just my presence. I performed the exp-rim ;nts

myself. that is, I mysolf called tho exporim-ntnl
subject,‘or sometimes rfascher c lied them. Of course,
then I explained to the people what they had to do, wh -t

, 6793


L'-y 1 -L-5S-10-2-Cook (Inc. Von Schcxn)
Court No. i


they had co write, what they had to pay especial atten¬
tion to, and then when they registered the electro-
C'rdiogr.n thjt in order not to interfere with this
they hed to b- still, couldn't nove; and th-n when the
exporiaont hed started I directed the experiment mysolf,

I wrtchod the altitude of the m-rcury indicator, and
the calculated 3p- -d of asccnrion and desc-nsion, which
I chocked with th~ stop wttch.. Of cours., at tho 3cmo
tima I observed th- subject. In othor word3, the persons
in the experiments. In Ha3chor'3 exporim-nts which were

-.t a o or tain altitude, that is, thor- *us ascension to
a oert ititud -, nd then they at y : G t that ltitudc.

I sometimes watched if I happ-nod to be there, j

happened to bo nt tho low pressure chmbur, but oth-rv/isa

ho p-rformod those experiments alone juct r.o ho did
when I was not present. Ho evon laid gr-et otr-ss on
porfor ning them alona. It is cloar to me now th t he
did not want roe to observe my sp.ci"l results, that is,
apparently why ho p-rforced the other oxperimonts in the

evening or oth rwis- when I was awey.

_ ..ftcr the first do th was there an .utopsyV
.. Yos, ther . was an autopsy.

Did -ou participate in it?

No, I did not participate. I was pre3ont and I
watched tho autopsy.

-v »hy did you watch tho autopsy if ie was not your

experim-nt? •

a Today, of course, that looks different than it did
at tho timo. It was n matter of course for o- then.
Raschor was a collacguo of min-. He had had *i f tr.l
accident in his exp~rin-r.ts. Ho asked me to watch tho

autopsy, and, of course, I wont. «nd I '.Iso had quite a


liny 1-ii-EK-10-3-Cock (Int. 7on Schoon)
Court No. 1


natural sci-ntific interest in the cause of death, ana in
che findings, .nd I admit it frankly, although I an
rw.nro of the danger th~t someone will say I was interested
in the death of the person too, but it happens in every
hospit .1, .11 doctors watch the autopsies. If, for

example, in the surgical ward, : patient died .ftar in
operation, then tho chief physician, or if he didn't
have tine, then tho senior physician, and tho other

doctors who h d nothing to do specifically with the patient
watched the autopsy, nd generally oven x-ray doctors
ofl^ ov r who didn't know th-. patient at .11; r.nd besides
if I hod not bojn pr-8ent, that would be oonsid-red today
an incomprehensible 1 ck of interest in tho doath, if I

h d not accepted Rascher's Invitation. If such a death
happened in c-ntrifug'l experiment in our institutv.,
if such m icoidunt h d happened which w is not in ay field
of work, I oert inly would have gone to wntoh tho :utopsy.
Ono au3t learn frem the findings, that is one's duty as

r*. doctor. One has to look t such things so th t one c n

draw one's conclusions r.nd be able to avoid 1 t r aooidents
■c Did you see any further -utopsies of H.aschor?

No.

i why not?

/. «f tor- this death there was a basic chavj- in my
attitude toward Rasch-r in the plan to break off tho
experiments, 3o that in tho case of l~t_r dc .ths I was •
not present because of this _ttitudc; and I do not bdliovo

ho invited nc to the uto sy and under the conditions in
Dachau I could not go there on my own initiative.

■< Did yo*a ask Rasch-r how this death came about, did

you warn him before the donth?


•r-v i-a!-3C-10-4-Cook (Iat. Von Sohooa)
Court Ho. i


„ Yos, I havo already said I was present at tho expon¬
ent. just as I had sometimes boon present at tho other
series of his experiments, just fren curiosity, just as

in our institute if tjxoro were centrifugal experiments
in our institute, I sometimes watched then too. There
was no roason for distrust but r.t that tine I just
vrtohed the e^erinents out of curiosity; th t was how
it happened I was present by necidont *.t tho oxporinent,
-jid I looked r.t the oloctrooardicgrun of this 3ubjeot.

One c n soo fron the olcctroo .rdio^reph on the screen a
little point of light vr.ich moves, and that is dotorninod
by tho h-~rt .ctivity. <hon it soon-d to no th t it was
gottin, d.nserous, th t thu heart activity was gettins
loss, I said to Kasohor: "You hr.d b-tter stop now.

»nd what did R soh-r do?

Nothing, he didn't re .ot to it. Hu ot y«d ut that

altitude and 1 t-r death suddenly occurred.

* ,/hon you obs-rv-d the olootrooardiogr.a was it quite

clear to you th :t tho p-rson would die in the next

cocond?

.» Ho, of course not, first of -all I had n.Ver ovon

scon c. doath frem high .ltitudo. That was the first
one I over saw. I coudln't know that nd in th- second
pl-ro this death certainly resulted fron in .air -mbolism
.and, therefore, suddenly, nd La the third place tho
olcctrooardiogr ua ch-ngo was. dangerous. I nysolf would
hevo Stopped th- experiment at this stage but he didn’t
and I only said th t because I would have stopped the

experiment th t moment.

v Did you spoak to Hasch-r about this of t-r tho


experiment?


Hoy i-il-10-5- BjC-Cook (lac. Von Bchocn)

Court l»'o. 1

.. It was not possible in view of Kaschor's position
that I should object, but I told his such tilings should

not happen.

% .uid what else did you do?

,* ..ftv-r this doith I went to Berlin and I told Buff
-bout it. Buff agreed with no that the death should not
bu allowed to occur in high .ltitudo experio-nt3 and
never had occurred before, but sinco Rasoher oorriod out

these experiments for Lianler on r. n r. who was condemned

to death, w- saw no way to prevent Rancher aft-r wo fcaro
the report officially. ./hat Rasohor said in general
vihon objections were njlo, I ao» n he simply referred to
the orders from Hiacler .nd the ra.ct th .t ho was covered
by them, fo remove the ch mbor free Dachau igalnot

Kinnler's and Rasoher's will was quite Dnpo as ibio. To

give this dQath ns a reason for removing the ch ober
w 3 3till moro impossibl e In the firot piaoo, Himmler

would not have re-act .d. H„ would oortainly not havo
givon up the chamber. Ho might havo started proooodingo
for treason or sabotage of an essential war experiment.

In fact, I had r-portod this to Ruff against ny
signature in a concentration camp, and like ov^ry
visitor to a concentration c.mp I h.d to sign . st .tc-
oent th-t everything I saw h-re .nd 30 forth in the

camp would be kept secret. Besides, at the beginning
of the oxp-rim -nts Richer h d received a special tolu-

gren from Himmler which ord-red silence about thoso ex¬
periments. .. specific obligation to secrecy was strength-

onod by thi3 crd.r frcn Himmler. Since I h-d reported
that matter to Ruff og -nst th- obligation to secrecy I
also had to be covered in this respect, and for this

reason again wo could not give the. death zs th- r-ason

6797


•fcy 1-U-3K-10-6-Cook (Int. Von Scnoon)
Court Ho. 1


for rocovtnr, the chcabor froa Dachr.u, aside free the fact
it would not have had any success.


6798


i tay-*:-GJ-ll-l-BLJelty-(int. Von Schon )-
Coart fro. 1 case 1

A Therefore, after see. consideration d-cid.d tint the only
possibility was for .-Jiff to ?o to kilen or Hippke ond Mk to have the
ci:-_nb r rjuwed, giving the xcuse that is w s needed at the front. Cn
the ot’xr tend, I was to conclude our .xp - risen ts quickly so .hat Hiao-
1 -r could bo told that the -xoeriaents were finished and that w could
prove this co that w; could claim the right to remove .he chanb r iron
Dachau. Otherwise Hi saUt would doubtless h.ve ord.rcd that the txperi-
aente should cc continued until the origin .1 f.o-1 had beer, r ached, that
, • olarlfi atlon o: tU quo tion of r-ecu- Ire* high altitude, and

he would doubtless h va gene to Gooring or eYea hitler and have arranged
to keep tte cho r,r lcn^r. : would ha- . said t..at in- uu of this chan-
ber it the front was uniaoert nt coc..>.red to its 'as-, at - aci.au in the
experiaent and would not havu r.l.as:d the choab

If I nynclf had not gone back to -nci.au, then ?asch. r would have
carried oat th rporiments for rescue iron high ItitudCS tlon.; and
he vrould doubtl.so -Iso h-.v, continued his o.n xp ri* Ota. i.aut was
the reason v.y I reluctantly -tent beck to Dachau.

V No ■, .rfcit was the perpcs. of your trip to Berlin?

A The purpose tt,.s this report to Ruff.

* Krs that the only purpos-?

A Yes.

* how did you explain this trip to Kaach-r?

a I told Rasch-r that 1 rraa going because of cy wife’s corriiticn.
:.y rife had ha.* a child in :: rch, and that was t good r-ason for my
going to Berlin.

Q Hov.- lore" vrere ye*: in Berlin?

A Only on-, or tro cays Mien I >ant back to ; *chau.

Q Sow, before you left did you oak- curt o: -ether Huf- *hd done
anything in response to your r- oort, wfcetli ur he had oor... anything to
get th- chamber cat of er.chr.u?

A Yes. Hoff tri-d to get Kippke but was not. iUj to .t that time,
sc that I r_ally did net knew rhat sas going on ar.c what roulc be -ccos-


plished.


67?9


Court No. 1 case 1

1 U-2-51-ckl-y-(int. Von Schor.)-

Q Sid yov notivw any tiling special when you c-i. back to Dachau?

Cid you native anythin; soccial obcut *-b- chaafr-r?

A Ice. OfcH I caa; back, the b.roneUr vas broken, -s UcSt has

already snidj and I had to go rijht back to Berlin to have the btro»-U r.

repaired.

: H &t Ion;, did you stay in Berlin this tine?

A As long 'S tf- repairing too-about t.-o reeks.

Q Then during this tine ttv_r rcre no e>c-rin^nts?

A So.

Q Kr. aid the exp-rinents b-gin again?

A The beginning of .ay or the rsidele of Uay I ‘Ult *ack with the
repaired apparatus; and then wa concluded the exptriaents as quickly
as possible.

q Did you abbreviate tn* progran rhich you nad l'id out or did
you change it ir. any way; or did you keep it to* wo;- it wts?

A No, no snort . • ? •• •' v;ri0 5

altitudes in order to conclude the .hole thing .as quickly as possible
but in ouch a way that it m actually cesspit tod with adequate results.

q Wh-n w s th- second d.at: wr.er- you .-ero pr-sar.t?

A That was soon, ft* days after ay return to ^ochau.

q Did the death of th. experimental subject occur ir. a way simi¬
lar to the first case?

A In gen-r 1, ; s. I don't knor exactly wist hap .»• a. • .r
I recall, it ir .n e>ptrinont at a rather high altitude, nd deOti; oc-

cur-d quicker, ncr. suddenly.

3 Arri when ms an. third d*ath r.er. you r.re pr e~nt;

A That was rigftt afUr that, on the next day, or th, second day.

Q Alter these deaths, :ic you never r.;-e -ny • rtus.nt with Reseller
.bout his experiments and the wqr in which he p.rfort.d tho^

A Yes, we ---ad sate ainor argu&.r.ts r.sultinr: free. q; ' j ctinns,
widen h- always refused tc accept; tut ait.r Lh- third d-itfc mien .
stert-d to obj-ct or air., he said first that Hiculer had ordered it raid


I wasn't o int-rfere. fiien I later brought 1

* 6603


i ii3y-*-GJ-U-3-Bl^clcy-(lai. Yen Sekon)-
Court .Ho. i ease 1

r- lost his patience, and we got rather excited. I uskod hie «hy he
-:-3 carrying out these- experiments; what he *rant.d to achiev_. said
he w s c. eC.rin; she proble- of caisson diseases, bends, aero-.cboliSE,
that he had to clrrify it because Hi=nier had orc.r.c it. He was eh*.

Jirot =r.n coring an autopsy ur.d.r wat.r to pror. th.se sir bubbles in
•he blood. Also th. question of the -lectrocardioyr.a in b.nds -nd
altitude sickness hxi to »>. clnr. bP l«;r had given hia s spe¬

cial ascisncoont >cr it, and Fshrenk c? tns to do this work together
with hia. He wanted to qualify as a professor * ith Schit u.nh..ln with
this work.

Than he brought out a letter tad r-ad to ia. that the oxp.riaents
Were to be continued; that Prof. Fshxvnkosp 'tat to b. called in; and
that people condesncd to death ho survived the .xp.rinents sould, of
course, be par'.cned. Then n. held the letter out to a- and ask.d a..
whether I could re-.d Hla.L.r'3 signature and whether I wouldn't b. sa¬
tisfied with thtt.

Q Vies this the lutt.r fr^n bo Prosecution Docus nt Soak 11, 1971b-
PS, E-hibit 51?

A l’cs, 1971-(b)-FS, cs Txhibit 51.

THE PrCSIEE.n: C'-unsel, can you give nc th. page of tr.. English Lo-
cuaent Bock on nhic.a that exhibit app.orc?

DP. VORFU'-C 51s.

Arvl what does this l.tt.r indicate"

A It showed that Hiaslur had actually ordered tiles-. -xpw rioents
that ho had cocplete, oflici-.l coverage; that tn subjects *-r. to b.
pardoned. It says so in the letter. Of course the person condemned to
death shall be pardoned to concentration caua> for lif_."

TKn it says that fahrenkaaa is to be consulted, On he n.xt pugc It
s >s that this order free Hialler gees to the Chief of tnc 3 curity Po¬
lice and the 3D and to ~ -=riF-defu.hr.r Gluccks, with t copy for their
infonauticn.


Q Eii Roschcr give you any furth r e x pl a nat ion o: tfiis letter?


1 Lr.j-i.-GJ-11-L—'21akl-/-(int. Von Schon)-
Court Ho. lcifil

A Since I had been prev-nt-c iron doing anythin? by this letter,
th_n I calsly asked his what id.s he had of these -xp-ri^nts; what n.
wonted to doj what he war. tad to achieve. He said that Ir. : hrenkaep
would help hia anc that he would fcav_ _1 ctroc xdiogr.-.-.s for heart fai¬
lure free the nest various reasons and would compare t -= with electro¬
cardiograms in th- case of death t high altitude, * ith the change in
severe altitude sickness, with laUr r covery, nd also in the ftosoiUl
in lUnich he load taken -lectrocirdiogr as in eases of heart failur..

In Dachau he said he had alsc r .gisUred electro', rciogr.v-s when there
were executions by shooting. If hv bed really ccnpil.d ell this material
and had evaluated thia a tcrinl together *. th heart specialists, it was,
of cours., quite valuable.


6802


Curt 1

y i-it-12-l-HD-Gro8e-von Scbon.

«re you vf tc_ oplni r. th.-t the exceri.S3r.ts vhioh
SiBcher -serf.riid vers -.erforuvd in order th t ne u.i 0 ht
cusUf? 85 s orofessur?

«. Whether th?c was the main 3-r-.se or not I cannot
, c y. That certainly pleyeu a role in It bet they oei’tclnly
vers .rdered by r.iuctlor.

. Nov, re ou of trw opinion thst cr.ese experiments
vers ordered oy Hlnal.r -it ..is 3- t; esti- or tr-ac Klmuler
.rder d the.a before he went to ionlerJ

a. Th . is dlffio-lt tv say. It probably nevel pod
oredually u.i tr.e O'-sic of r.ls -sports. The rep- rts are
written in such a way that he ^resent* the results es very
in ortrnt. Tr.ereuown aiatcler or_erea tn« t the experiments
be Cv* tinued.

Q. But, it Id no doubt a feet th«t .-ascher - t thrt
tine had s <iecl of nsteriol in order t bo able t.

qualify a? a orofessor*

A. ;os, ne doubtless nad.

... '.'as Faherkaao called up n t corroborate in

these ^yperinents?

a. No. he kept 3ayln b thrt Fnhrenkuep was wo Cons,
Chet he vao ftolng to work ’ lth r.l ., - nd evaluate tr.o
eloctrjcardlo^rans. 3at, as lea-t during ay tine, he uld
r. t c to Jacheu. In any case I never saw pirn. In the
1 -j c few days ^ bl- electrocardiograph cine, e bi b bldmens
nuohine, euch as we had lr. ur institute. I knew it e-nd
I told hascher that he wouldn't like it because trio
cienar.s machine Is very sensitive tv •’ll electrical
disturbances. On- can work nly in areas free of any
interferences.

*f u said Rasch r snowed ou the letter in which
incle’- riered the c-ntir.u tl«.*n of the 6xperlaenta and

- 63C3


C.JTt i

Hay I-lt-Xa-3-HD-Qroae-vcn acton

tflc psrdonir.- of the experiment 1 subjects?

a. Yea.

Did he also show you e telet oe saying that
- re n ng w.uld not effect Huaai»n6 and Poles. This Is
in - cumer.t 3 k II of thQ Prosecutior., page 6? in the
. rear., document l?71-G-?5, Exhibit 53, p-ge 66 in the
in-lleh. Page 66 in the En-llah Jocuaer.t Bock.

a. Ko he did hot show me that. He c ..id r. t Show
ae ttet. It la d ted 21 October 1942, a time wuan the hi 6 h
altitude experlser.ts had lon ft be_n c ncluded. It la
Introduced lr.t the Document Boot at this Joint because
lc refers to tr.ls letter f 13 April. In respond t this
teletype, the affld vlt which was 6 lvon t m for .l ; nture
c ntaln d a sentence which wrs wr ng - tn ; tha exowriments
•vd een pa f rated prlm'rlly n Russl-n .r Polo-. out
since I never sow Rucsl n r P le at tne experimental
atetl n I had to cr-oa out this statement and the inter-
r jftar oold tr.at didn't cake or.y clffvronce, t.:i c t.-^re
v: e d cument: to nr vo this feet. It seems to mo that
It is ur ven that n Russians or F leo were used In the
ijn altitude o*ce rimer, to, but r.ly in Ootooer 1^42 during
Che o Id exoerlmante after the n lrloe nor period.

here when the witness Kef w s examine- y <u heard
tn- t he scoke of cn rut psy lr. tno low pressure chamber.

D u remember that?

a. Yes, I remember that.

how what bout t is out psy in the low orcssuro

cna-foer?

a. I can... t r-m.abar t..is ut - 11 . I oannot say
vhothar or lr. what way It took clsce.

*. Vhan did yj hear of it for the first time? 'rfhen
did yoo hecr for the first tim^ that this incident was


Court 1

rJ v 1-a-i >3- j-urjea-Vvn ochjn.


= : 80 t - va napxer.ed?

«. .-r a Keff .-.are. -eff raid txa: I -'ad altitude

.ccr.eas ad v s ir.c-.nsci -e in this e cerix-sr.: nc. I
:• v ad 6 xav. -c v.ier. me altltoie ws re-ac-h e.ic. a de
: c .-^soaer zc? l .-.e w. - to $ -a c..o o vparlaant nci

: I vant tv ^at .it .f the on z: ■ r. 3.t, -Tt -->r

r'.ar d oa sent t nl-h r -Itit-da with at oayin any
ccanti r. c xy 31^.8. *r.d, I -ccaxo 2 tc< e^vir. r.d
no aaci aa ein. no ala. aid t.ot I -Id n,t --va any
p ; rt a tne a-t pay lr. any way oeceue- : the severe
altitude olcxnesa w/.loh wae d a :t c xtined vlth
. iC ores5- n disease. I was, n d i e, nc nsci a*. In
C.-.er experiments at j<;c..a. I frequently iia«- of tun cicioiau
sickness. I oannoc a ay a r.y taln c ''but an indivluUil
experiment.

*. Keff also reported ..ere, as a rec. 11, or.
l/.cldont wltn c tailor. Jo , *u r-sciia tala lncl .oiitV

«. ies. I reoexocr It. Hoff t Id two oaaee when
1 w/e Bipjosjd t. nave intervened. I c n ra.ioa.tar nly
- with this toll.r wnioil was i it tne xludle - *,rll.

In any erse, It ves after olavera’* visit, w/.icn • . * x;
me first a ye f A prll. If It a d bean Mfare c l? Visit
.'.?6&fier cartalnl w Id .* ve t«>ld slv^rcc- -’ll d it It

-s .1 t Id fr f335-r *.rjc t 1-tor. It '-as o> Jt --a
: 11 wa: Koff xet ffle in fcfke .. l', or In thfc office,

gic t so - r.e 3el- s .j^t..ln_ wr n & was ..-In c an

in tho checb-jr. .-aachcr Oed -rdcr Q a prisoner c :e :r J u ..t
•a «*r. exc-.rlxontcl subject. This nsn wee not a v lxr.t#er
end w.-.q n-/t l- ndosr.ed t dea til ene w« s be In- or i.ac by
an 53 -am, against .As will, ria knew It -ixself because
•.new tne man. r.e was a tailor w v s v.riln. In * 0
w r. sn.p. ne Mi xe t>> and se_ ^sener <r.a tr-; t


6605


_■ v (It.-— Yen Sc .cor.)

Coart !:o. 1


prcv-nfc it. I went to so; Sssch-r imwt dlat ol y -ad sated him hrt
- ?.s ^lr.j on and asked hia wha this subject vis and told hi*-. Hoff
jtner ... -son who was a tailor .r.d knew smoot h i ng was tro:^. xtaach.r
qvsetioned the SS nan rho had brou^lit t'r_ tailor end it was actually
isccvvrod that the tailor was neither cond-nnod to death nor had
volunteersd for any -xp.rii.-nt.

3 So.:, ditin *t you bccou. sua. icioua?

A nell, .'*sclv.r went r..- y to clear up tho mattor with the 66
, be was supfos-d -o La *an up, stc. Be dis¬

covered tbo SS nan had trJc«n too -_r 1;. hit own hands and,

. .rst oi all, be e :.t the tailor back t work sho;.

SS nan threatened tru, tailor r. ,ain fteschur said h. had r.port-d
th. incident, nd soon after that th. Caap C ocean dint c.-av. and
R sch-r told his about th- tt.ioL- is^idint indigently. He dciland¬
ed the So oar. be punished, and I can recall that afterwards ho
talked to Bfcj cbout this SS ann and said that those won- pcri-ape
not the worst orv_s but such a nan coul' not bo 'llon*d to stay in
th concontr-tion cap service. H- ettu consult ti»o Caop Con. -nd'Jit
-ad did probably disp.nru with th. charges against him nd finally
o . this aan oont to the c-.f-.r; front in a pen - that

h- roj-ort-d to th. Caap Ooiv-andam. and this iiraxdiat»-ly Jiapptnod
convincod ao that things in tho concentration caap i ,r. corr cts


6C0o


v 1—1I-5X—12-Ki-Qrooa (Int. Von 3c .ocn)

Court r <r» 1

prevent it. I wont to so-. aosehtr i-_i-dintcly and ad<ed hits . ivt
,-s t oin, on r.nd coked hin wha this subject r-as and told hi- Neff
jet-- xc who was a tailor xd knew soc-thing was v.ro:^. il-cch_r
q, rationed tho SS nun rho had raujit tt- tailor ar.d it was actually
discovered that the tailor was neither condjancd to dc'tfc nor had
volunte-r-d for \ay ..xo.r±i.nt.

; Now, didn't you bccotx, bus. icious?

A, sell, .'wachur went ary to clear up the natt-r with the ot
ran, wtothor he was ouppoa-d -a arlng this r* up, -tc. lie dis¬
co v. red the SS nan had t :ar. L< rti-r ir. .'.is own bands and,
first oi nil, Jv. sent t.w tailor hack to his work oho;, then tho
SS r.an threatened tfu. tailor r.„nin Rcec'ner said he had r-,x>rt-d
th incident, nd soon aft-X that th_ Ca p Conaindant c.-.-w and
B scii.r -old his about the r;^>lu ii-cider.t indignantly . B- dcavnd-
od tha So nar. bo punish.d, and I c;r. roc all that aft. marie ho
talked to ~ j cbout this SS aan and said that thoso wore p-r^aps
not tha *or8t orv_s but such a r.an could not bo allowed to stay in
tb concentration casp service. Ik did consult the c tap Cos :.t
ad did probably disp.nr- -rith the charges against his nd r innljy
-5 nan cent to th- Eastern front in penal company, rh t
reported to th- c-np Jo.jcnndanC and this lnaodintely lir.ppt-nod
convincod iau that things in the cone tion c r aorr ctj


fcCOo


r-y 1 —51-:—12-7—'-ross (Inc. 7on Scl'.oon)
Court ::o. 1


5c=h cxccsro* of individuals which co»ild hap en were ircediately
settled and punished* After this incident Kucher aide ac .,iw -v
»:ord of honor chit I would not say anything about the whole setter.

I ins obligated to secrecy nbcut the. experiments and whit I saw

ir. the concentration cnap but for this thing he felt certain
personal rcs;or.sibility and such an incident night start rumors
"jid put th- concentration crup in a bad li;ht. Since this matter
rs settled irwdiatcly quite officially ir/ Kucher I sw> him this
prouis.. Lctor on we want to iast Prussia • VrotooHK

Vast on tie train. H. told Professor luost of this incid-nt with
ell details. :»e expresscd his indignation and he spoke to V >• sc
for a long tit. whether teodiatj transfer to the front would be
enough punishn-nt and Profocsov test nssur.d hin that he had
acted correctly.

T: : manat Counsel, ta. MW All new V. ir; w*easfl until
It 30.


07


1 Kr.y 47-;.-S'~-15-i-?oster-Int: Rnmlor
Court 86 . 1


AFT-iHIfOON SESSION

(Tho Tibur.-l rooor.vonod r.t 1530 hours, 1 !i.y 1947.)

THE : -JISI- L: Bio Tribun rl is :.gr.ln ir. soerion.

EA-IS RT32HO - Rosuncd

DIRECT 2 u.' iT.-.TI01I (Continued)

.jv 7 jR. vor -ERK (Counsol Tor tho Dofondnnt Ronbor3):

n .. Ro-iburs, before the noon r-coas you wmo do scrib¬
ing to tho Tribun. 1 th j incidont with tbo tr.ilor. Do you
know who the r southing : ctur.lly h..p>onod in thr.t cr.so to tho
offoct thr.t tho S3 acn who h d brought tho tr.ilor .long
wr.a hold to account?

... Yob, t ny r..to ho t roeaoved fror. the caap. ?. .sc! cr
told no th .t bo w. s tr .nsforrod, nd 2 off r.lso stutod


horo tlv.t to r:.s r d.


o. Hoff wont on to toll bout - socond incidont r} cro
r.a roault of your intorvention cn oxporinontr.l subject
* a not \d.*.i ttod to tho oxpcricont. Do 70 U remombor th-.t
socond incident?

... Ho, I do not rcr.oabcr thr.t.

1 . Tihr.t vr s Hoff 1 s position during thoso ox/oriiaonts rnd
whr.t w;.3 his r.ttitudo tonrrd3 thorn?

... Hoff did not plry .ny oscor.ti 1 pr.rt for r.o during
thoco oxperinonta ;.nd he did not cono ut 11 into tho Iforo-
grourd. He r:.s tho block oldest of our oxocrinont 1 subjects
who wero livirr r.t tho block rri r.c . fornor nurso of that


str.tucn ho v s to .ssirt us whenever neccsr .ry. Vo h d
cert in qurlific .tions in his c. pncity r.s -. rv.lc nurro t’ t
Hoff .-opmontly plr.yed r. certr.ir. dcublo roll d-ring tfcofo
:inonts only bocao clerr to ao hero. :.t th t timo I


soluto inuressior. thr.t Hoff v s foolir.-* s prir-

d-V.


cr.-r cr.d-i\d tJo s .-re ttitUdo townrda Rr.schor'fi oxporlcor.tr


• 5 1 . r. 4$ jis the only vr.j ono cm oxplr.in th -t I rpoko to

j j 6(306


1 I'j.y 47-.-£”-12-2-?or Cor-Int: R.\nlor

Court Ko. 1


Jfo'f -bout ny ..ttitudo tow.'-rds ib.sctur's exp rimente r.nd

cl t I told. Lin th.-.t I wo'.'id ondo:.vor to got tl o ch.'-rabor

from there tl rough tho hoi? of !!ilch. If I Iv d consid-

-r-d Hoff 5 r. Kr.po, r.a c. tin who w e .'.gainst tho inn tea,

•

I ' ouId nov».r h..vo apokon to iioff ..bout ?. schor r aid Us

experiments in r. rojocting r.nd critic ;.1 r.;r.nur. I cannot

iut.gino tho fact tl- t Hoff !:now r.bout Rr.aclnr 'e cxporinor.ts

•

that hid r. fatoful roault, or th t ho hod :.ny knox/lodgo '
of thorn. I c n only explain that if ho hod known -bout thorn
Rnschor would h \ o told bin to k«op ovorytl ing secret.
Kr.turally, lo :uat h..vo kopt ctr*ctly to tlr.t diroctivo
cinco my betrayal of R .achor no Id hr.vo h d tho most
serious coraoquoncoa for Hoff.

In ..dditl n, Hoff h. d boon pro:ilsod roioaao tho anno wr.y
• .c all ether oxpori»..Gnt..l subjects . nd w..s actually
rolor.aed on anrch 1944. jjxy such proraiao, of course, h d a
fr.toful Import;.nco for Hoff nd th:.t wr.y porhr.po expi: ins
hie poculi .r behavior. In upito of that, thoro cm bo
no doubt tl. t .-.’off with his mr.omoct fooling was on tho
sldo of tho Inn toe. 11 is ic confirmed by tho fr.ct thr.t after
war ho wont back to Dachau rd onco more wont into tl o
r r.ks of tho inrr.twS, .-.rd also th.-t ho 1 ndod to tho a&er-
icm rroeps .11 incr^.iir tinr ..: ten .1 :.bout tho SS tl ore
rd told bout tl u ir<- lid . ctior., -’urthomoro, thir shows
th..t ho found 1 is placo within tho ranks of tho victii.s
of Fascism. li r.y of 1 ^s o cr.-g.r-tod and incorroct testi¬
monies c n bo explained 07 tho toetincnioc w: ich may
mennin to klnsolf too.

Wfc* t .jo the testimonies tl-.t you ccnsidor to bo oxag-
aorations, or that you consider to bo f iso to tinonios,

’-c wl .t extant do yov. beiiova tl* .t the so tor tinoni-s wore
ir.corroct? 6509


I - 7 47-..-S"-13-3-”o£ Gcr-Int: Itrjalor
Court :to. 1


I c n onl ox_.l..In t: .t In r. fcv individual cr.sos. Tor
ir.rtr.nco, Hoff is : lvmys apo..fcIn 3 of tor. wo non o vroro

u.cd during tl.cso oxpor'lnonts. In tfco documents, howovor,
only four r.ro bcir-s nontionod.


6810


, . i-A-'S-lli-i-rarrtw (Int. Ra-vlsr)

Court So. I

hay it please Y OUr =onor, whenever the defendant or
defense counsel are referring to statements of the witness Heff,
t0 uld they kindly refer to the i»^o n-xzber of the record?

EJf D VCC&-3®:

q Vfe'ra here concerned for exn r ?le with experiments or. .H-ssian
officers - experiments on two officers, if you rtweaber, V. R01-
berr.. These ire testimonies wr.ich can he found on page $?5 and
5 7 fc of the German transcript, tet is it you can say about these
experiments and Heff's explanation that he is giving in connection
with that experiment?

A l» not an expert in cold questions, 'out I think that the
description of this experiMnt to lordly exaggerated. I think it
1 , lnjoseiblo that it could hare boon ciu-rlcd out in that nnnor.

I have looked through the cold question. o. they bocoae opporont,
for inotar.ee, the Descent 1.28, Exhibit 91, on page U of foot
report, and I also looked at the Document Ho. Ml, Exhibit 93,
which io the report on tho cold onforeneo held ot ltumborg, on
peg, 1,3 of tho report, According to theeo doecrlptlone of the
other cold oxporiaonts, tho rotor begins to a ppear after a .cry
■aort tine, after approximately ton to twenty ninuteo, and makes
any lovccwnt or speech on tho port of tho experimental subjact
Impossible. After, at the latest on. hour, unconociousness appears,
gaff, or. tho other hand, states hare that these two Suasion
officers, ever, after a period of threo hours, were speaking to
one another and were in poesossion of their full conociousnose and

then ha Mid that they even .nook hands. I can not imagine that
thla-parted of tine could have elapsed. The ease becoees apparent _
frees the American work on cold „estiona where it is stated that,
in caae of sea rescue, the rigor occurs after e eery short tie*,
approximately ten sdnutos, and this regor would sake any entry

into toe rubber rescue boat impossible,
q Neff, or. page 69h of tho Ccrsan trensoript, goes on to My that


.(=; 1-A-TK-li.-2 -tarrom (Int. R-nir)

Court So. 1

g^scber w?e producing cya n c ali tablets which were to be Brulloved
tr the inaates. Sor.e of the people had died under severe pain. At
the and he s^-s "Axong our ccxxades we said, by way of figure of
speech, and I quote, they are producing a. drug which would kill us
very quickly as soon as sooethin happens."

A Well, he is contradicting hLrself here by saying that the in-
aates lost their life under severe pain. Then he goes or. to say they
found a drug by which they car. die without pain. 3ut, it is well
known that potassiua cyanide kills without any pain.

q i havo .lust been informed, Mr. President, that, through error,
tho release of Keff was stated as boin^ in the year of 39L5 instead
of the year 1912. It should oc 1912.

Regarding tho voluntary aspect of the oxoorinental subjects, Foff,
on page 656 and 657 of the Ooruan trrascript, as well cs on Pa&o
711 and 712 of th. Osman transcript, states as follows, and I aioto:

"A volunteering for the so oxp.rir-.nto >.«s made possibU rlicn tho
person concerned turrwd to Reecter on his ovn initiatiTc. That was
not difficult boewise RascJwr vos around the cr. p a lot. NaturA ly,
every prison, r who is hungry end is working on a difficult do toil,
knowing that at the experimental station ho would rccoivo better
nourishment, will try to got there. In addition, tho Roichsfuohror
5 S promised the inflates that they would bo roloseod."

yfo&t can you MQT about this testimony of ltoff*e?

A Tho first testiaony, There soys that of two hundred expori-
-ental subjects only ton worn voluntary, and this latter testiaony
that you ixntion cm not be brought into conformity, and, therefore,
contradict one mother. In addition, I think that tho. numb-r of
two hundred experimental subjects iu largely exaggerated.

q Let us now revert to tho experimental subjects. Whr.t '*'d"os
did the experimental subjects wear who wore at disposal for tho
experiments for rescue from high altitudes?

A They had badges as they wer. by professional tri ands.

6Ci w


l-A-3£—i_—3—Karro* (in;.

Court So. 1

4 -hr: they ^recn only, or wore other badges anon* then?

A ! ! o, oil these badges were trec-n. All, with the exce-tion of
Kifi, u o v.*as wearing arod bac^e, but ho was not a real expi-rixntal
subject.

Q Did Hoff participi tc in r.r^ experiments as an exp<rincntel
subject?

A Yes, he did, £r.d ho off-rad hi-see If to then.

■j Do yee retsoaber the badges v ich rare worn by the experimental
subjects who were used for Rose. -r*s cxixrioenU? T.hat kind of
badges w_ro thoy? Vrv they c ri Inals? Were they political
prison.rs? }Jhat can you say a’x>ut that?

A As far cs I saw tb. axperi-v.ntal subjects, and you oust keep
in aind that I only s-.w ao-.all ort of then, they wore green
badges end wuro thereby dosignatodos cri-ainals. Thor- wor-, hovr- *
ever, a fir., red ones aaon^, then vho had boon sonUnccd because of
high treason or such sinilnr offonsos.

; The witness Hoff, who tostifled horu, was also heard in tho
filch trial which was running ci ultaneously to this one. Do you
know that?

AYs.

1 Tho witness cays b.rc, on pa> ?73 to 97h of this record, end
I quotot

"It wns ay impression that Dr. Hcubcrg was not in corculoto rxcord-
nec >ith the oxperiaents Dr. Case her wr.s performing, and intondod
to got the chambers aw,-y fror the ca p as quickly as po»ible.
faschor, on tl- oth.r hand, 'as attcipting thu contrary. He v anted
to keep fro chancers as lor.- *s poaaiblc in th- coroonfcmtion c.aij.
Tc hat extent Dr. Rooberg succeeded in gotting the chambers away

Tlier, or rather, to what extent Itcschor succeeded in k-^ping then
th.ro for a longer period of tin-, I ‘on*t know."

Did you spunk to Hoff at fiat ti.-c to tbs effect that it was your

vish to rorovc the chambers fro th c.a p as quickly as uossiblc?

6013


r.y l-A-"X-lii-i;-&UTow (In.. 8a l.r)

Court To. 1

A all, be is s vir._. I discussed this setter aith Ida at

that tiro for the recsor. I siot_d before; naaely, that I considered
ikff r.s nasc:v;-rs op one at Rascher, of course, vaan*t allowed to
l^irn about that, and it ie for this reason that Neff hnors that I
endeavored to gut t'nt ch-»ber awry.

Q Wall, how «rer t. s. -xpcrjjxjnts finally stopped?


rci4


1 :'-.y 47—-Sh-lS-l-lL-ley-Int: Rualor
court HO. 1


. 71.o lx. sis for this atoppr.go v. s the r.gro orient ronchod
"lotwcor. Ei.ipkc, Ruff nd nysolf. o intondod to proiond
Chcro v a n» urgont re-sen for tho cfcaber being ronovod,
r.d tth.oroby atop the oxpor ironts. It v. a dif icult, howov.r,

Co oxocuto th:.t pirn. Hoithor towards Ilirrilor nor tonrrds
Rr.ccher could ro cito tho ror.son r.s to tlo f.-.t.-.litics
c .used V' Ih.achor. Tho only thing wo could s:.y xir.a thf.fc
th.oao chrabors \/oro urod for :.ir nccidonta. Ibis, of
courso, vr.sn't r. vory strong ror. aor.. Rr.sohor vhon I
roturned frou 3orlin -.nd tu.do tho first indie, tiona thr.t
cho ebrjabora w.a to bo usod .r.d v;hon I told l it: tl .t wo
would h-'.vo to finish tho oxporiinonts vory quickly, Ik.schor
didn't ror.ct to thr.t :.t s-.ll, but told .-ao th t ho would
interveno with. T.i :lor nd lliicb - nd got tl o permission
for t. longer uargo of tho ch-ribor, something w) ich ho in
offoct c.clicvcd, Ilowovur, whon llilch'a order to thr.t
offoct c ac tl o cl cxibor h:d alrocdy boon removed. Iho br.aic
proroquisito for gotting tlo chnabcr ..tn.y vr.a to bring
tho oxperinonts for roscuo from hiyh nltitudo to r. quick
conclusion .rd in ..ddition to finish tho film w' ich v/..a
to bo tr.kon r.'*out tloso oxp rinonts, 3 rosvlt of Klnrtlor's
order. Only by fulfilling tlo:.o two doonnds wlich woro
n.do by Cinalor v a ho ir. position to influonco Hc.sehor
to gr«o to tho toapor ry ronovr.l of th .t chmb-r. I
-xph.inod to hix th t there would bo littlo oonso in gutting
permission for tho cl.Jnbor to bo retained for furtl or
period of tv;o or throo vooks .nd told hin tl t I \k .s suro
tl t oi:o noodod the chc.s£>er t the front Vory quickly. I
siv ostod to hin tl :.t it t ov.ld bo r. much, hotter wey to got
ti ls chr-ribur :.t l~tor cLuto to Dr.chnu tl rough otl or no. ns
for r. longer period of tire. I told him th: : ho could


thon c.rry out tic work vl ich ho v .a ordered to do by

6S15


1 :v.;- 47-. -ST-15-2-:'--loj-mt: Rr.nl CT
Court "o. I

yiml.r. I said tint lo also could p rticiy^to cnco :?cro
in tho oxJcrinonts for tho pvrposo of savin- pooplo from
• igh altitudoa. Only bj* using this t.-.ctic wr.s it possible
t! r.t Ihasckor didn't opposo the ronov..l of tl c chc tibor .and
tk t ho didn't auccoud to get .an order to t* o crrtr .ry
from ki-iOcr or hilch. It cm hardly be concoivod th-at ho
would h:.vo succovdod ir. gcttir.3 such r.n order tl rough. Ho
actually did that, aid one cr.n soo it by looking r.t tho
lottor from Uiloh to 'olff, t: is ia Docunont H0261, Exhibit
63, in Document 3ook II dr.tod 4 Juno 1942. In conclusion
I si ould like tcstr.to onco coro tfcr.t r.t no ti.:o would it
hrvo boon possible for myono, not ovon ”ilcb or Kippko
to ro:.io”o tho chamber r.r .inst Uicxilor or Jl.ascK r's will
from tho concontr tion cmp.

*1. V/)on w o tho chamber ror-ovod from tho ocr.p?

... Hint was on tho 19th or 20th of Kay. :t any r.-.to
baforo tlio order l'ippko'8 or ‘'.ilch'o dated tl o 20th of
Documont 343?S, Exhibit 62, could havo achloved .any
offoct. Ih- t wr.s on tho 19th or 20th of ?!:.y, :nd not r.t
tho boginriing or ond of June .e Hoff said hovo or in ,.uyuct
r.s tho Prosecutor a ys,

low io it th..t you know ox ctly th t tho ch-mbor
left tho cmp on the 19th or 20th of "ay?

... I-’ortunr.toly I havo in ny possession r. fow fim datos

bout t‘is oxo. rir.ontr.1 sorios rl ich do givo mo sor-.o hints.

At first it w s tho birth of my child, da to 19tl of Hr eh

t rr'. ich tir.o I wont to 3 rlin. Sinco tho birth '-..e orig-.

inrlly oxpected on tho 9th of -hrch I know I xr s thon in

2-rlin. .-*3 I sc.id beforo I returned to 3orlln cn tho 19th

cr 20th of ' ri ch rnd thon I .also know tl- t I wont to

lerlin for Easter, .and that I rt.ayod th.oro r. fow days

ftor -hastor. I know th.at I was in 3orlin on the 1 st .ard

5816


1 Kny 47-—S15-3-Kaloy-Int: Ronior
Court No. 1

2 nd of 2>.y, and I also know that I scr.yod in Dmlir. for
scr.otiac because chon tfco bnronotcr was ropairod, I :.lso
•-now that T’hitoim occurred on tho 24 th of "ay and I know
it.t in tho wo ok boforo '.'it sun I had c.lro'dy loft. Dv.t
ur.s on n Tuo sd- .7 or V'odnoadr.y. I spont r fow days r.t tho
DVL, nd I know that ovon after ' itsun I didn't rotum to
Dr.chnu, For that ro. son I know oxr.ctly th .t tho chamber
u r rorovod on tho 19th or 20th in tho wook boforo "hitsun.

*. Dr. Ruff, who was fc.ro yostord.-.y or tho day boforo
r.s r. witness, h. s n-.uo st.-.tononta to tho offoct that a
detailing to branch of tho DVL r.t Dr.chr.u wr.a not possiblo;
v\v.t is your r.ttitudo to th-.t question; '/ill you oxplrin thr.t
;.s briefly r.s possiblo?

.a. Dr. Ruff h..a sr.id thr.t in ossonco. ’bon tho or.purimonta

start R .schor was still do tailed tc tho instituto of Woltz,

which was r. nilltr.ry agoncy of tho l'odior.l Dispoctorr.to,

L.tor Rasober sug orts, or o kr.ow fron tho lot';or of

:^s. Raschor, Document NO 264, Exhibit 60, thr.t to dotr.il

him to tho Branch r.t Dr.chr.u of tho DVL. -7b Iff writoa tho

e~no thing in his lot tor to Hippko. ibis can bo oxplninod

rinco R scher nor r.y othor SS agoncy woro clo r .-.bout tho

organization of tho DVL. *;o after .11 woro no military

organ! z. tion , r.rd Raschor noitl or during tho oxpcrlmonts

nor L.tor uhon ho wr.s in 3orlir. for tho pur peso of working

out tho roport wr.s dotailod to tho DVL. fl.oroforo, it wr.s

impossible for bin to bo do tailed to my branch which after

-.11 was r.or.-oxistont. If in cffoct my such dotails b*d

boun ra:do o’ojocti n would h.vo been raisoc in tho Pcrscnnol

Department end wo would t.uo found out about it. - t any

rate I didn't personally hoar or soo of any such dotails.

I re .lly didn't ’mow uhon ho loft tho ~oltz Instituto. I

or.l- know that tho ack-ack Artillery School at Schongau had

6817


1 'Vt 47-..-15-4-: Ir.loy-Infc: Rculor
Court iro. 1


te^n s“r.tod Ir. hi a orders Ixccuso ho ofton •:ont to this
pL.co by c-.r :-ai on th-.t occ tion ho told no ti: t ho would
ti.vo to bo officially dotr.ilod thoro sir.co otl orwiso his
ex would fci-vo to bo a topped. For tho purposo of 1 is Dr.chnu
journioe ho h. d rocoived spuci:.l por...iasion by tho Roich3-
fuuhror SS. Tho oxp-ro:sion DVL 1! br:.ncltherefore is wrong
rjxl u»y nilitr.ry transfer tl ore is inposaiblo.

Q. } .a it often h-.. poned tl t r. Ir forco officora h: d
boon dotr.ilwd to Adloratof to t! o DVL thoro?

A. Yea, v:o hrd LufturJfo officora working with ua.

Ihoy woro dotr.ilod to us by tho ~odic:.l Inapoctorr.to
who Imow tho aitu-tion r.nd who didn’t dotr.il thou to ua
diroctly, but to tho rdr ochool r.t . dL-rslof, or to sono
..ir forco institution thoro for tl o purpooo of ;.ctu..lly
working with ua.

Thoroforo, you r.ro of tho opinion thr.t r.ny dotr.iling
of ..ir forco p*. ycici..na ur.a iupocsiblo to your instltuto
bocr.uao your lratltuto w on't r. uilitrxy ono, do I undor-
rt nd you corroctly?

A. Yoa.

'. ihon did you rxrivo in : 5orlin r-ftor tho corclvoion
of tho oxpori.cnt?

A. I ulror.dy sr. id on tho 20th of r.y. I nm auro thr.t on
thr.t dr.to I wr.a r.g: in in Jorlin. j. fort vooks olr.peed,
purlv.pa two or tl rou uooka until R.-.achor :.rrlvod in Gorlin
in ordor to work out tho raxtu .1 report r.bout tho oxper-
ir.onts. !!o fc.d not boon dot .ilvd to us, ov.n for tl ...t
period of ti ;c. Me acr.Iy recoiv^d guest tr .vol ord-re w: ich
r.utlorizod hin to ont-r the tcrrr.in of tho DVL.


6818


Court I

1 16-1 - a - LJG . -jefaan (Reader)

5. How was this chamber sent — by rail or by cox to adlorshcf?

A. as Rufi said yesterday, it cane back by rail bocaus^ to did
not have enough dicool oil for that purpose.

How was the research report compiled, the report on tho
research of saving people from high Ititude?

,v. Rancher, as I said, care to Berlin in the beginning of Juno
and together we stirtcd writing tho report or. the basis of ny book
and that is tho report which is available h.ro. Raschor insisted on
pointing out the necessity for a continuation and extension of tho
experiments. I ha-1 no objection to that because 1 personally intend¬
ed to continue these oxperiianta too. In particular, to find out what
the eff^c.o cf cold wor. in tho caso of a parachute descent. Of courso,
our opinion as to tho onputtnants diff-rod. Rascher ir.tundad to con¬
tinue tno oxpuriaunts in Dachau on ir. '.toa, but 1 intended to carry
then on at r. institute, DVL, but I did not speck about that.

3hon at the end of tho report I acULd tho sontenoo that no cases
of death had occurred in taosc oxporlvaor.t3, Raschor had no objection
at all. his is a clotr proof that Rascherconsidorod tho oxporinonts,
which ho pjrfonaed by order of KimnLx, as his p^rscml work and
property, ‘hose experiments hod nothing to do with tho experiments
conducted for tho pur; os« of rescuing people from high altitude.

..hor. talcing into consideration Raschor '5 personality, there can bo
no do*i)t that Rascher would havu had no inhibitions to introducing a
ruport about death cases in a top 00 crat document if such nsc.s Jiad
occurrud in ’ho latter report. Regarding the cold experiments, whic
Rasc.cor wrote together ith Holxlochnor and Fink, there wore r-any
r-ports about cases of death.

Ir. addition, I would novor h -ve be.n irresponsible enough to in¬
troduce a r^saarch report, which mas t.o bo the r_scu_ basis for our
future flights and experiments and w:ich ras to influence the air-force,
in which I concealed such a decisive point as this would havo had tho

cost serious conseouer.ces for the future. It is really not necessary

6?19


Court I

* tey u?-A - 16-2 - LvG - Xoehazi (Havaler)


tc speak ebout itj it is just out of the question. Huff never would
hav^ countersigned any such report, it that tine there was really
no r-aaon to keep quiet about any cases of death, because no one
really would have held re to account for causing any cases of death.

Q. The witness, Jfcff; has testified hare that you yourself had
s-rved aa an experimental subject during these experiments. Up to
■hat altitude did you ascend?

A. I participated in a nuaber of experir.jnts. n t one ti;"e I
■as tno accompanying physician in the experiments and went up to
12,000 to 13,000 liters ard then 1 participated in a nunber of self
experiments, 'hioh hare been discussod hare. In addition there was
explosive doccapr-ssion axperiner.ts of a pursuit descent at 19 kilo-
aetero without a supply of oxygon.

4. In July cf 19U24 report was Bade to Hinnl&r, together with
Raschorj how did this roport coco about and what happened there?

In Ally -I hovo forgotten tho exact dato — teacher suddonly
ippjarod in Berlin. Ho telephoned ao at tho D.7.L. and asked no to
aeet hin. I loft .^dlurshof and - at hits in Berlin. Ho told no that
both of us had b.un ordered to go to the Fuehrer's hotdquarb.ro to
ruport and wo both wont to the Rcichsfuuhrer SS oflicu in Berlin.

There thoy already had our train tickets ready for us. Thon no hoard
tbs filn about th_- experiments, runt to ay department and I telephoned
luff. I told hin about the natter. Thon, I had to cntinge, pack,»and
we left tho saw evening. '.to had a special train with sleepers on
the train. Hascher mot Professor Vraost, -ho also was going to tho
Headquarters on this journey and ha told him once nore about tho
notorious reports -about tho taylor.

Q« u hon did you arrive at the Headquarters?

A. The next cornirg; we w„nt by car to Hlnaler's special train,

which had not y_t arrived,but which was due to arrive that •_ voning.

He arrived 1 te that night and he heartily grfeted teacher. Or. this

occasion, teacher introduced oe to nfcszlor. <e went tc a confer unco

6520


Court I

I fcsy L7 - a - 16-3 - LoG - Mbehan (Bsaiiitfr)

ram and a i=ci£r asked us to report to hie about the high altitude

experiments. a* did th.t by reading to hir the conclusions wo had

-rrivod at, as they can be found in the report here. Higgler was

rather aatlsfiod and said we should report to tho Reich Marshal too.

He said that he had been with Gooring for one week and they had

reached a good understanding. He then pointed to the gold flying

badge with diaconda which he had Just bo an given by Goering. I had

noticed that badge before and had silently thought that this highest

civilian decoration, which Hln-lor was i/oaring and which up to that

tine was only us ad in tha case of being ccnritted during vory dangerous

tost flights, was possibly tho reward given to Hinder for having

forgone his original wish to getting his own airforce with the $S,

which was his wish-drea.: and that Raschor also aontioned that to me.

-*ftor tho high altitudo experiments, HicjOer atirted to speak about

tho cold ttxporisumts and gave tho ordors to prepare thee.

3- Did HLmlor say anything further about tho cold experiments?

a. Yes, he xainly oaphaaizod that those exporinonts woro of

groat iaportoncu fer tho ar.-y, navy and airforce. Ho went on to

dovolop a r.urbar of t-sts about thoso uxpori.oanti and their ox-cution.

For inatonco, ho gave tho ordor to Raschor th-t he should go to tho

rescue stations for people who woro shipwrecked at tho Worth Soa and
%

find out how the ccnaunity population woro reviving tr-.jir shipwrecked

people. Ho wont on to say that tho population had found cut very

•ood and wo 11 proven moans to r^vivo pooplo, like with horos, ton,

eoffoo or things like that and at any rate one sust take the oxp-ri-

oncss gained by the population into consideration. He said ho could

well imagine th-t a fishsooan could woll toko her half frozen husband

•

into her bed end revive him in that aaanor and everyone said that
aninal warnth had a different effect than artifical warr.th. Ho wont
on to say that Rascber should have experiments to th-t effect and ho
would have to take into consideration tho popular ctoans used by the
population.


6 '. 21


Court I

1 toy hi -a - 16-ix - L-Jj - l-ie,han Rc.-r.Lr)


Q. 'what was your attitude toward thos.. statenc-nts coda by
Himaler?

a. Prompted by a sob^r and natcn.alistic attitude, I did not think
v.ry ..uch of those cystic oethods arrf therefore ralo-d an : J-ctien
against tht aort of experissant. I said that the eftin consideration
■aa nor to row-rr people, -rhothor to tjwpjt thro quickly or slorly
and if you oxncrioont around too leng you will los^ lives. ?ncro was
a painful silo nee and aft,r that I noticed tint thia was not tho place
for any contradiction.

Q. Mas Professor fluoat present during that conversation?

a. Xus, ho had ca . along with Hircler and ho was present thoro.

«. Did anyone object to your objection 1

a. Ko, certainly not with wards, but tho silonce hich occurred
nuant such core than icrds could haw x-ant. Later Rasc.-.or g»vo .«
a sovuro roerir'-nd and ho asked if I was entirely mad. Ku thought
I was undo to contradict tho "P-uicns .kaini" as hu _x?r..ss^d hireswlf
in that Banner.

Q. Did uuat'a rcaarko to Si-v-rs r^fer to tmt situation about
which Siovers has testified hero?

u. los, it can on3y bo in refcronco to t-.at situation.

Q. Siovers says upon paces 56 to 69 of tho Irrar. transcript,
and I quotos “liu-st once told vo about a confartrxu hich took elacu
it tho field hoadq.-art.rs of Hl-nl^r in the procenco of Hcsbarg and
dasetor. In th-t ccrwioction ho s id the rcung Bin had cc to hio
attention, although ho had forgotten his narx. Poaberg not only
opposed Hirxalor, but boyojtd that soda long statements. This caused
on ecfcarrMBitj; silonco anong tho pooplo prws-.nt." Is that tho 4P c -dent?

a, Ic3, 1 aa sur«j it aust ha7e been that.


6 ^ 2 .


: s-17-i-c > (a-.=.-ior)

c rt : . i.

3 Did HfcrOor say anything else during that ccr.-
forenco?

- After this G^-rr-ssL-i, ?ilcnc- fib ver, HisAcr
e vlca ah ut the d p p nn ds that that t tul x-j- effort node cr.
no and Ivj said th-.t it v-sa*t -akin: t? ruch v. use con-
cor.tr-ti. a c*r. lnrotus f r those c.vtri^nts, wha were n-t
-jipi.V -.t the front. This ie tl~ ray ties, people cculd
rehabilitate thoosclvcs, poaple qendtonod to dc-.th could
thcr-by bo pard;ncd, -ad they caul-’ bw :.ivcr. an opportunity
t* fi^kt r.t tho frrnt. Ho furt‘^r at id that weaver didn't
c-^Lrstnnd that c uld n t : r.vo unc'orst d th-.t in this vrr
V Cl:: r 6»nth for Oorasay. ?h«n ho
or.t n t- spe-Jc ab ut the 1 ssos in the Erst and pertieu-
1 rly the 1 sees cf the SS and h w his ho-rt vna blooding
ov-r;- ti-o ho ho-rd th-.t -n-thar thousand f his mrndarful
b >s hr/ diod.

1 . t laprossicn did th so at'.taints n-ikc on you?

*• ..oil those sure words tir.t actually ondu sonse

nr,.. • v r,

I V'O firstly decidjc' nov.r - -in t oo perate rith Rasofaur.

", An‘ vhr.t h-.pp_r.ci -ft_rt« r-’a, \.-.s tbj filn eh m?

Oh, yes, nft«nrords '« wont into a r. c and there
thJ fil ut the oxparlwcnts was shcui. Hlsnlnr was v ry
satisfied with the filr. -and the oxnrlints and ho thought
;.-t these ex?rfc*r.t3 n_ro f oxtr-r-o lap rtance fer tho
•^•ftwafl-- ‘.ad that they v uld 3~vo tho lives f snny n
pil t. Aftjrv-rs ve sax it in tc_ novs reel and in tho
P.uroian -Hit ary filr.

1 V.t v-.s y nr i-pressi n r.b:ut the entire confer¬
ence y u and with Hiaalcr?

A oil, r.t that tiro I did hava _ very strcnc ii>-
-russirn about this conference. Those s_ri-us conditions.


5323


(Sa-iiler)


1 -’ay jC-0.t-2-.Cook

'curt I /

I hoard .about the losses Ir. the East and about the total war effort

wer ® in such strong contradiction to what I had road in the press,

that : woild perhaps ever, have participated in the cold experiments as

•

they wore &rforned by Raschcr and the carelessness ha had sham toward
honor, life. For that reason, when HLmior askod ne to participate in
the cold exp.jris.mts I triod to got away trea that duty and I succeeded
ir. doing so.

1 Therefore, although you wore selected for those experiments
you rofusod to take part, is that right?

1 Yos.

^ '/hen did Raschor first plan to carry out the cold experiments,
so far as you krww?

A During tho high altitude oxporinonts in Dachau ho oolloctod
lit raturo on the subject, ar.d no doubt had it planned, and whother it
* Hinnl.ir cr Rasoher I don't know. Ho also showed no tho work by
faith and Fay about the treatnont of cancer with cold and ho askod no to
work on those planned oxporinints with hin, hut I always carefully triod
to pet out of it. <hcn he was in Berlin working on tho roport of tho
STL ho got to knew =y irrk and I was able ccnplotoly to convince hin I
v.7ia not tho right nan for thoso onporicor.ts and that it was too far
array fron ay fiold of intorost and ay fiold of work and Raschor stopped
trying to porsuado no to w>rk on tho cold oxporinonts. I was, thoroforo,
nploasantly surprisod -‘hen Himlar suddenly personally gavo no tha
iuri^Bont to carry out tho axpsriconts with Raschor. ;her. he gavo r.o
t; '° as3ismont I triad to got cut of it by saying I was already ovor^-
■••orkod at the DVL. Ho imedlatoly offered no assistance to got free
free tho DVL and I gave up objecting. I thought it


Court 1

1 -3-Cook lor) l;g

«»ld a P°asiile to ^t fro. by rynolf a* I decided to diMSpaar
inoonapicnpudly joot « it.too Mtf: alUtodo exponents a d I
c,odod it dotai >0. '.a .oatio! *c: , t ^ -, utloa

■drastc- '-'On tS. flL von «<», I, of course, did not brin up tho
oobjact_cf tit cold t= tri-oat,, end it iltwlf did not nontion it
.it-.-r, I on, all tho noro cottOa-ml toon wton Htschar in Uctobor
-p.atrad Ir. !.brtr nth Holtioain-r and they hod tlraody co ...lotod
tho exponent a.

^ Did .ou uv-r csk R-ochor Vnathor tho oxp-rinentel subjocta
waro pardoned or rol.es.d, tte poopla *-.o hid partlcipat-d ir. tho
high altitudo axpwrlaonte

A. Cr.Co ...on >c visits Hi aler, Hi ol.r a -id that the people
° Uid JO roloC3 ^ 1 ** v '‘ c " 1 .‘icac .or in Nurnb-rg at tho cold
.-—ting, I caked hi < and ha said that thoj had to.n r.lo. s*d.

3. loa -re Jvat awaking cl c fila ahown in thu R_ich Aviatjor.
.inistry, and you no doubt wot* a brief report on it. That ia docu-
»-nt b. k ; .2 of - - Iroa-cotlon, .\o 2?M, Inhibit 76j Than was
thia filai chown?

■

A. * ScRe., tho d to only fro' th is report rtiich I wrote and
which ia in ; docu.„nt bock. I !<n*r fr 01 that it *-a on tho 11th
of S..uwo-r. : nno on a trip r.t t .t tiao. I waa on lo ;vo and
t-.ie invit-.tior. or tuo order to attend this showing of tho fiLt
Dunt • 1 KcRt t( > t*io doich Avi-tion ministry on th .t date

and I s*t Packer there. Tfco r jS t of tho rooting is described bottor
in this file not* than I can r-perduco it froz =-.nory. ^ft_r tho

unsuccessful nttcept to show it, *ilch had failed to turn up and
aiscr.er ref-used to t_il re riout tn«sc axparioents without tho
pruseaco of Ich. This had annoyed tho doctors who wore Interested. .
Raschur 1 *. edi -ly aclo-


:.ur: So. 1

1 Hay-*-GLS-17-4-Cock (hanlcr) (20


jfcoced at. Siorers and t-ld hia about the feilurc of the Shoving very
is-il gr.r-r. tly, became hi8 vanity vas hurt, iievers, vfeo '-es just about
t. go -c e trip, asked both of us to ceaa to the rciir oei eteiion end
vhen vc =wt hi= there he tried to ctl= hatcher dovn end thought that
n.thing ceuld be achieved with exciteaent. He asked ae to v-ite e
brief note eb-u: vhat had happened that coming and to send it to
bin. He asked r:-ut the fila end when vw told hia ve had left the file
in the Avlntl.n kislstry he advised us to go get the fila bccruso of the
.bligation to secrecy, but I ves n.t able to do sc until the nort day.

Did yott h.rr anything acre about the fila later?

A. ’Jo, I never heard anything aorc about it.

In hroaaetttion Soomnt Hock So. 2 there art a nuabor of rie-
turcs. Did you take these oictures?

A. Ij, I did n »t take thoao pictures. ! cm say the folloving
ab-ut these pictures. Vfcen those olcturec voro thovn t. ac during as
Interrogation, I vac told they crce fr.a o ootion picture fila and the
prvsvcutioc said the scao thing hero. I thought that aoar.t the fila
which I Icaev the notl-n ticturo of the ojrncriaents vhon I v 0B nrcser.t,
hut vhcr. I looked at tho uictureo I vc# inaedia.tcly able to 000 that
f .ur of thoa at the a.tt could have cone froa that notion -oicturo. I
osouccd that Heather night have taken another fllr- behind *ry back. In
the seantinc I heve realitcd, having looked at tho oictures clorely,
that not c single -no -f then cocas free that notion picture. • knov
•hot because in the filr. vhich vos taken in tho exnoriaonte there
c cl-ck in the background and lnstruat&U in the foreground. Th: t vrs
necuseary in order to be able to use the fiLt lrt^r. It v*c oosaiblo
,niy ec the tint


6626


1

Court *o


3-17-5-Cook

. 1 .


~ltitu^c vcr„ rl * r;a relator n the fills* ..Iso
r-3Chi.r l'-'' put rountcr suits or. tho c,Xf.c.r ir-nt&l subjects
-•uriar picture.


0&-27


1 *37 47 -A-lft-I-pkp- 31'kloy (von Schon)

Court Mo. 1 Case 1

Q. In those pictures which arc in Document Book II sre there
» instruments -nd r.o clock?

A. Ko, I’ve looked at then carefully. Ttet could not bo
sverlookod. Tfut was & big clock with a big- seccod-hand which was
beside the head of the subject.

Q. That is proof to yen that these pictures do not came Iron
the fila?

A. That they do not cooe froa the fils, yes. The witness
jv’cff, who was probably present when these photographs were taken,
iaaodlately realized the difference when the pictures woro shown
to his here. He says on page 661 of the Gercrn transcript, I
quote: "■When the fils was token tho prisoners were given a civilir.n
suit and it could not be seen thfct they wore prisoners. These are
photographs; end I knar that when prisoners were photographed, they
wore given a fairly clean suit with no insignia. That is <hy ono
could not soo on the photographs or in the liLm who those people
-re or what insignia they wore."

1*. HARDY: Hay it please your Honor, I wish to clarify for
the record th?t it is not known to oe that the prosecution offered
those picturos in Docu^nt 3ook II as extracts froa the fiLa that
•at purported to hovo beon shown at tho Rlil but avroly as photo¬
graphs which woro found aaong th, personal effects of Dr. Sigmund
Easchor in his h>oo in Munich; nd I want it to be clear tfr t tho
flLn that was shown at tho uinistry is not in the hands of tho
prosecution. Had said film bs~n in the hands of the- prose-cution, it
certainly would h ve. be«n shewn hen. during our cae< in chief; nnd
m wtill art. in search of such films.

a. VQP.ZRK: kr. President, I should Uko to havo the ^

-xol nation of the prosecution tret the pictures in Document Book II
* re not submitted as having been taken during the experia-nts for
r-scue froa high altitude. If I understood urn. prosecutor correctly,
that is the explanation he just made.

IE. HARDY: Your Honor, the prosecution docs not state that

6823


1 ifcy hi -A-18-2-an- 31 kley (von- Schcr.)

Court !»o» 1 C'55 1

• acs- plctaros «vro not token during the course of those -xperiae.uts.

I ^3 c-r-ly trying to clorify it that these photographs which hcvo
w^n offer-d in -vidcncc end '.re contained in Docuaer.t 3ook 11 cro
not extracts of the fils, that is, as far cs m know. It nay well
b« that tte srac type oictures appear on the fila; out the prosecution
hes not soon t ho fila that was shown at tte RUi and docs not have the
filff that was shown at all. Th- first four pictures in Docuuont
9 odt II have boon oroperly identified by no less than defendant
Ro^Jorg hinsolf; -nd th. re.Tr.ind*r of the pictur.s hav- bu-r.
identified by the witrv-ss Neff when he w.*.s hero on the witness
stand. Me contend that these cxv pictures of the uxp-riner.ts at
Dachau.

ER. V23t-.'£RK: I esk th't tho transcript show thr.t these pictur-s
do not cco. froa tbs fila which was taker, of the oxperire-nts for
rescue froa high altitude.

1K£ PRESIDSirr: Eie record will sn*. the statenent of counsel
for tbs prosecution. That is ns far as tho Iribur.-1 will go in tho
aattor; red counsol nay proceed with tho ux'-duvition of tho witn-oc.

IRE i.lTiuESS: Ury I say sooething elt*. -bout those pictures?

Bf u&. V£P..tfRK:

Q. Plccaj do.

A. I said at the b-giming that when I was shewn those pictures

I was told that they cren. froa a notion picture fila; and the

prosecution said thj orj*. thing hero. I thaxght th-t night mocn ..

L.ic-. filn, f or jx.inple, not necessarily a nation picture. Only

when the pictur-a Were shewn to s« did I think that they nwint

th* t it actu' lly can- frea a notion pictun- nu tnought th t it-

night have ccrv. froa this notion pictuie of tho exp-ria-nts. Since ^

I did not know those photographs but only kr,-w tho notion picture, I

c 3 suT.;d ir. tile beginning that th--y wore th. s.-^ thing; but becaue-

tfo, iratruaer.ts are Lacking and because cf the t-stiaa-r.y of Neff, it

is clearly proved that not a single ore- of those pictures coo-s Iren

th. notion picture but Iran c private fila ir. the possession of

6329


1 1^7 47 -«-ia-3-3:^ 3I:kU7 (vcc ~chor.)
Court to. 1 Cr ^ 1


Rrscr.cr, r. Loic~- fils, photographs which he probably took for hia
priru. work or or -Is work to qualify ~a a professor,
hen '.ics the Cold sweting in Kumberg?

A. That was in October.

Q. How did it coa« about that you participated? Did you know

*

froatlv> 1 -ctur^ which you heard that there- hr d been deaths curing

th. cold experloer.ts?

A. First if :U cy pcrticipation was a aitter of courts
because it was ft .c.-ting of cyi r^dicin-, of evic tion doctors.

It was Just coincidence whit it was a Cold acting. I pcrticijr.tod
in r.loost -.11 such ocotings; nd, besides, I woj inter-ated in tho
s v cold problem since I was “t the tta* planning to carry out cold
ox.o-riaonts »ith tho low pressure chaaber, experiac-nts w.hich Were
lotur carried out.

As for this second question, whether I knew that any deaths had
occurred, ono aust aako c strict distir.ction Oetwocn ay personal
;alfta.nt ni thot which was cle.tr to the general public. Besides,

. aust r.ot ovtr-ec l » the attention -ttracUd by ouch 0 mooting.

! did not pprove of Rascher ard his -xperirwnts person' Uy. I had
Crokon off tho lew pressure experiments for that reason 'nd h'd
refus-d to participate in the cold experiments as Himmler had wishud.

If now in Nurnberg Holsloehn-r spoke of observations of cold
persons nd said tkt b had collaborateC with Dr. R'.scher -nd Dr.
rinke, if he spoke of observations or. d-ta persons, I persomll;-,

9

sir.c* I wen praj»diwd r.gni^t. R-nnh-.r, •‘limat «iwwvDtiaMly .inmraed

thrt this referr-d to th. exp.rim.nts, uso.ci'lly since rft.r Holz-

loehncr 1 a lecture Rasober spoke in a bad eXterrhl fora and said that

i Hiaalcr h-.ci taken th. r-spjnsibility for this -nd ord-rec' strict

secrecy. 3 ut in his lecture Holzloehner had spoken of the eiperionco

of rescue froa s-a, aniarl experiments, human exp-ria-nts, nd had

confused then in such a way tbit the listener who was not prejudice

wield have cssoi-d that the results were .xporier.ee fra cas.s of

n.scue at sea. This is espoci: lly true of people who knew how

6G20


: l-r 47 -A-18-A-?kp Binkley (vx Schon)

Court So. 1 Crsc 1

extensive this sea rescue service was, whs knew of its great success,

-,n! who knew tfet Finke end Holzloehnor had worked together in the sea
rescue service.

gev, Ur. Roeberg, one more question or. the previous matter
:r . thi pictures. In your presence during the Dachau experiments,
w.re any other lictur-s token, whether films or individual pictures,
acy others besides the ones which fora the motion picture which wr.s
L-.tcr ±J*r. r.t the Aviation Ministry nd to KianUr?

A. No, knew only that aotia\ picture. Th t is why I thought
of it first when I was shown the pictures.

Q. Then you did not tr.kc any other pictur-s?

A. No.

q. Did Rnsch-r t-ke any other pictures during the experiments
for rescue frou high altitude?

A. No; efc lo st not in ay presence.

C„ Aside froa you two, did any third per sen take other pictures
aside Iroa t his notion picturv?

A. I don't krvai whether anyone else took pictures.

Q. As fer as you were present?

A. No.

C. L-.tor did you do any further work in the field of hi h
altitude?

A. Yes. Tret was really cy field of work; but 1 also worked

specifically on the question of parachuting from high altitudes

or rescue froa high altitude3, the cold work which Dr. Ruff has

already pontionod, parachute junping, nd cold md 1 -ck of oxygen,

gn-at altitudes, - nd tire reserve experiments — that is , st->lng

* t high altitudes >»ith simultaneous lack of oxygen, "nd withhold.

During the cold experiments wc first worked on th- question of pcracr.uU

Jirpirg, as the non- important cu-stion; -.nd the s-ccrd thing was tho

question of the si ailtaifeous effect of T ck of oxygen - nd cold while

& •

remaining it high ltitud-s. Thes. were experiments on ourselves,

together with the associates, As Ruff has already said, w. wore

Go 51


1 £-.y L7 -^-LS-5-o:-p- Blfilclfly (vcn Schon)

Court So. 1 Cc*u 1

1 bV

iijr.t clothing and '.font down to : s far as 15 tegr.es be-lou ner; as
I -.a -s tao .-juts. Or.-, report each -os written or. the two teri.s of
.-.x-.rLsjris.

2?.. VDHnBBK: In this ccnrv.-cticr., l£r. Pr^siocnt, I should like
to submit fro,; joctiSer.t Book Rcriborg Docux.nt f.'unbor 1, the ffir'avit
jr. 1’clU.r Fruitag. I should like to sutait this as Exhibit 1. In
the first paragraph of this affidavit the affiant speaks of '.is work
with eh- djfcrdont Roaberg froa 1939 on at the Institute lor Aviation
jfedicins.

I should Hire to rend the second -> >h. I quote : "Dr.

I.olfptng Roaberg was diligent and industrious and carried out his
tasks conscientiously and to th. best ;f rla ability. The -.xp.riner.ts
ir, particular the work ir. the low pressure c ha sober oi^thw effects of
oxygon deficiency *t rurwl tuapeirtures ?rd in the- cold (up to linua
15 ■e.jTe 1 -s C.) required considerable .iuntr.1 conc«ntr tion *c Well ~s
eXtr..’c physic 1 exurtlcn. Dr. Rxiberg was always the first to suUoit
to those experiments. The importance of his persorr.l .ffort is
>edally caphadsed by thu L rge nuabei of tests and experiments.

The elucidation of a raw bur of iniiyi-u 1 qu-sticna was probably only
*.de possible jy this effort."

Than ttero folio.s a Judg^nt of tlv. character of th. defendant.
Then I shall r-ad tha last sentence: ’’I an convirced that he planned
•rd p.rfor.o-d the experiments ,on inn't-s .‘ran ~n absolutely uoral
st ndpdnt *.ne th t 1~, Just as Dr. Ruff, nas th -io of aoTJi,
treacherous deception. B There folla.tc a nignnt.ure n J rert-ffio-tiaa.
it is dated the 28th of January 19A7.


5852


I ?Jr.y 47-. -S' -IS-l-Gross -Int: Von S cron
Court !?o. 1

DR. VOH'. HR; . s Itosiborg Document i»o. 2, Exhibit Ho, 2,

I submit tic next .ffidc.vit b7 Dr. nod. Y/omor Loocklo.

First tho :.ffi:nt ape. lea of Ms own work end bow ho sot to
knoi tho dofondrnt. Then, in tbo aocond pnrr.srr.ph ho dcs-
cri'oos individur.l experiments, Ictv-r ho spo..ks of tho vol-
untoor nr.turc of tho oxporir.cnts, of t! o cr.rofvlnos3 of
tho defendant in r.ll hia o r.por ir.cn ta, thr.t tho subjects woro
voluntoors. Ikon I rho> Id Hi m to rord on pr.go 5 of tho
p:.r. sr~.pl th..t at .rtc rx little r.bovo tho niddlo of tho
p.'■•o. I quo to:

“I imt Dr. P.onborg a r. r.onbor of tho lnatituto remd

.-.bout 1938 or 1939. Ko v a m..inly concornod with ruoetiona

of high r.ltitudc physiology, nd pnrtioip.-.tod in moot of

tho pi nning of tho oxporlmonta, whoro ho provod to bo

r.n intolligont r.nd circvmaeoot, oxtr ordin. rily emtious

nd consciontious dvisor. Ko :.lw.~e p;-.id ep ocir.l

rttontion to r.ll aocurity instr.llr.tions r.nd precautions.

No;.rl” r.ll tho pcoplo working thoro confidently .akod hia

rdviso whon drngoroua or .-.a yot unknown oxporincnt.-.l

conditions h:d to bo tooted. Ko lw.-’*s undertook tho

tr: lning of now . saiatmt porsonnol, end Ms offorta woro

oxtrorioly auccossful, Ko Qlwx.ys took p t t hi-iaolf o.s r.n

•

oxporinontr.l av.bjoct in tl o oxporinonts nocossr.ry for
Ms own work :rd for thd work of other monbora of tho
ir.atituto ovor. if tho ox;\;rir.cnta w^ro unplor.flr.nt or
dmgorous. Ronberg only uorkod with volunteer oxporlmontr.l
subjects: I think ho would nover h d n~do uso of r.ny #
forcod 'roidir.gas to voluntoor*. In view of Ms ch-.rr.ctor
I consider it tc bo quito out of tho question for Dr. Rom¬
berg to h-.vc t l:on p. rt in unacrupi'.lous experiments
or in curoltics.

- Closer ccqur.intr.ncQ vith Dr. Houberg, showo hie

6832


I jfc.y 47-- - ST7- !9-2-Gro S s- Int: Von Schon
Court Ho. 1

colitioi.l afctitudo to bo open to the world -nd dofinitoly
.bovo tho narrow nr.tionr.llfl tie idor.s prevailing r.fc tfco
tino. Hi a objoctior.s against cortain measures of tho rogino
«cro woll thought out nd w~rc not without a cortain grin
•or.so of humor.

~Long convcrs. tiens with sinil r nindod persons In his

*

rcon woro a ror.l consolation, to us in thoso abnormal
tino a. It wr.a Dr. Ronborg who skillfully providod a poss¬
ibility to listen to fcroiyn r..dio stations in tfco instit¬
ute/'

jnd follows tho sign turo ;nd cortific. tion.

In viow of tho political attitudo of tho dofondont I
should like to submit Doc nont Romborg Ho. 3 as Exhibit
l<o. 3. This is -n .ffid vit of ’irs. Hodja Bortsch of
tho 20 February 1947 ..nd sho sr.ys: I quo to tho first p:xr.~

Sr-Phs

a; h;.vo Inform Dr. In a-'.o If gang Ronborg sinco tho euramor
of 1943 ns an o:t t r:\ord in..rily fcolpful physician nd co-
tonant. On clooor ..cqu intanco with him nd his f rally
I founl him to bo tho atrongost opponent of ll'.tionnl
Socialism, o all constantly listened together to foroign
bro-dcasts both in bio rooms -nd ours nd our conver¬
sations wo nyt. ing but pro-xv.zi.

;i I should liko to romarte horo that -c a non-ary n, I
would navwr hnva .srociatod with anyone who bad other *
ldo.. 3.

•fcon I hoard of oi* accuse -ions xaado against Dr. #
Ronborg, I could fc rdly believe thorn, for I know no ono
among my acquaintances who via suet a fanatic, i opponent
of Ration. 1 Socialism and, on tho otb.br h .nd, Wos such
a helpful physician and man.”

-aero follows tho si^atu.- nd certification.


1 ;ty 47- .—577—19-0—Gross—In’-: Von Schon
Court lio. 1

,. s Ronbo.g Do current So. 4 I should like to submit tho
i'i<i. vit of Frits Sbmoyor wl ick rill bo Roabo.g Exhibit
;to. 4. fhis is dr-tod IS Fobru. ry 1947. I quoto - first
p, .r: .grr.ph:

or t—vo known Dr. hrjis-.'oifry:ng Ronbovg ainco 1943.

3 .on tl.o .Tc.zi r.ut! orities refused no permission to marry
nj* fioncoo, who, according to tl o rogull.tionc in forco
.t tho tiuo, v. a of .iixcd doecont Grrdo II, Dr. Roub org
shorrod 11 s political viora by advising .:o to wr.it pr.tiontily
.•.s tl is rogiuo could not l-.at auch longer ad tl on I
should bo r.blo to Errry. .-ftor tl o coll.ipso in 1945 I
.irriod my fi-.ncoo.

•If Dr. Roaborg h-.d h d my ?ro-Ur.zi foolin's, ary fim-
coo r.nd I 'ouid h.v.o had nothing to do wit) hin or
hia f.nily. ;.p. rt from tl o foreign b . ..deists, to v\ ich
I const..ntly liatonod ..t bis 1 one, it wee Ms truly
fmi.tio.-l enti-r tion 1 -F.oci list .ttitvdo which sunportod
ao in ay views.

•H «ro fellows tl o si v turo and oortiflc. tior..

jtow,lot»s got b..ck to tl.o hi6h altltudo oxportaonta,

•

jr. ro-borg. I should like to ak you why did you not
forcibly provont R schcr iron br^ciking off tl o ox ; vrinioin:
when you sc.w th t it night bo f:.t:.l?

.i. You nom prevent hin fron c riving tl o experiment on?

q. Yoa.

A. Basically I cm s y tho following. An r.crdoaic nan

,.rd r. scientist by virtxxo of his oduc tior. :.nd tfr.inir.g

is h rdly ble to ..tt cl: some ono physic-.11*/ .nd nchiovo

my tiling by bruto forco. I porsonr.lly n not . violent nan

or . boxor I think you will bo rilling to believe. For

-S-scIf spocific-ily md for - scientist in gonor^l tb mrlco

l.is idem prevr.il by vioiorco. Ho relies more on words or

*6835


1 It.y 47-..-S -i9-4-C-ross--nt: Von Schott
Court iro. 1

_rguncnt8 or. Ms powers of persuasion. Ihat is tho gonor.al
nsvur, ..s for the spocific cuo.'ticn - in D .cfcr.u I cm any
-ho folio wins; *1- - I had any log .1 duty or right So inter¬
ior*. by forco I cannot inajino. In r.ny cr.sc I could not

•

rot this idou from tfco situation. I h.d apodal permission
— I trr.fi so to apoak . guest in tho Dr.c hr . u crap - r.nd I
had hid to 3igr. .. p..por saying I was under orders cf tho
cap -dE.ilnlatr. tion .ad SS courts. I had to submit to all
cidors end rulings dor.ling with the . dr.inistrr.tion of tho
cap. I could not givo orders to my ono in tho c.mp,
oith.or Plr.achor or *. priooncr. I did not ha vo r.ny right
:o criticise r.ny ordors of t! o Crap Counr.ndr.nt or to chango
thorn or to object to thon. I i.d no supervision ovor
•. schor nor over tho prisoners. 3ut Hc.scMr did h .vo eupor-
yleion ovor uo within the ooncontr ticn c np, Onl*. in tho
course of purfozulng our oxp< rlaonts for roscuo fron
high c.ltitudo did I l.rvo a right to aoko suggoctionc rnd
to givo rdvico to liaschor rad to our oxporiaenta, bcc..uro
of tho two ...on , I fcrd tho uoro cxperionco in 611 a apoc-
1 ic fiold rnd in thrt sonso I could mr.ko suggestions to
R .schor or give tin rdvico as is cuotonrvry roong two
sciottt&sta workingtogether in tho anno field. And ao I was
ole to .rrrngo for our oxporlmontal subjects thrt I
considored r.ocoscary r.nd tho ordinary porfommeo of tho
-porinonts and insist Lev of tor. thoy caao or that thoir
food Should bo good, otc. How, if liaschor in oxporimonts
ici: ho r:.3 ordered personally to perform fer Kirxlor«

’ore- 2 h-t his otm experimental subjects to tho rt-tion, those
* . non who 1 m condumod to death or volunteers,

a schor performed or.pcriru.nts with there :or. I co” Id
. -eh. I could oven dviao hir. to stop. I cox id ooir.t oi't

danger but I had no right to prevent hir. oven if I had

6856


1 " r 47-. -S -il-i—Gross -Ir.fc : Von Sc'.. or.

court :ro. i

e jn tth-.t Ic clo;-rl-_' intondcd to kill the oxp.rinor.t .1
auVjocts. IT I i- d ;.ttor.?tcd to attack Rr.schor porson-
.11;-, or hnockinr lin down, r inco ho r. .s z. Iii£t\ :S±o
officer ho :.lv:.v 6 enrriedr. pistol ho prob .bly would hr.vo
slot no or ho co*. Id lv.vc h d no r.rrcctod, In .iny c .eo I
could never !-.vo ^ottor. o t cf tl o c.iip. I did not cr.rry
^7 v'oepone , .. e c. civilir.n I didn*t orn ono. I could
novor .'ot. ck kin person lly.


6C37


Court I

1 Kay Ii7-» - 2C-1 - LJQ Xarrow (von Schoan)

Ih& whole idea cf or. attack on .-laschor scezs to ^ too grotesque if
I isaginj, for instance, that a civilian cozes into a research insti¬
tute in the Luftwaffe, such as a low pressure charter experiment with
fatal results — Ruff nxntioned such experiments her-- yesterday, for
. xA-n la — and then si .ply shoots at the ran who has perfomod the
exporiiair.t, and besides I should like to say that the whole problem
new, locking back on it, looks quite difforor.t. The facts were that
Raschor was ./crfordng oxporirunts which had boon ordered. Ho had the
authorisation from a competent an in the government. The subjects
woro volunteers; they had boon .ro-dsed t -t they would bo pardoned.

Ono can, with right, derand that a person object to the execution of
a criminal order or to tho execution of an order whicn ho does not
think is right, although tho setter becomes difficult here because not
overy ono is capablo of Judging ovory order, but ono can hardly derand
that a person attack sor» cno also in order to prevent hir. from carry¬
ing out such an ordar, risking both his cwn life and the lifo of tho
other person, "hot -rsonal cow rdice j ’ayed no rolo in my caso, I
should like to state expressly.

Q. Ncrw, did you do anything, and what did you do in order to stop
Raschor's oxporinents ar.d did you osru u any d-neor and, if so, vhat?

rt . What I did against nimoler's ord-rs and against cy signed
promise tc -:o-p s-crecy, tho fact that I reported the incidents to ny
boss who passed tho information on, was dangerous. Ono probably under¬
stands enough about conditions union Kiarlcr to realise that. Tho
witrwss Keff has described ry attdtudo to Rascher's exc*rir.ants. Ho
confirmed that I int—rr_r.ed in one cos - when he was pros-nt. Forhai'3
ho knows nothing about izy oth_r obj-ctions. In 6cn_ral, the debates
between Rancher and nys-lf did not trice place in the presence of the
prisoners. The lea pr-asTO ch:rc_r —os removed from Dachau, earlier
than intended, at our instigation, against Rsscher's and Hi«alar*s
wishes it was nav_r r_turned tc Dachau. Hew great tho efforts of tho

SS aero in this direction is shewn by the document. These of farts

0838


Court I

1 -fey a7-_ - 20-2 - LJG - Ear-row (Ten Schoen)

begin with -olf's t.l.grr.- to :ilch, the 12 th of toy, .vhich is aentioned
in rich's letter of the 20th of ay, Docuaanfc 3U FS, Exhibit 62,
which is denied in that letter. In answer to further efforts frai
Hi .Tier, fallen answers that the chanter is to regain two months
longer in Dachau. Docucont 261, Exhibit 63. ..t this tir c , we had
already ronovod the chaoh-r. Co the 5th of June, Rascher again
writes to Kinkier about tha low pressure charter. Document 231i,

Evhibit 61, is the answer to this letter of the 5th of Jut. She
lett-r itself is, unfortunately, not available. This letter, no doubt,
says that tho chaster was r-aov-d froi Dachau in Kay, while thv. prose¬
cution allegos that tho oxperinonts continued until august. ‘ ’ore,
tr.ero is a certain pauso in Raschor's and Hisalor's efforts, bocauso
Roachor Is busy with tho cold oxpcrioicnts. Raschor does not forget
when the filn is shown in 3^rlin in tho aviation ministry to toll
Milch again of his wishos in regard to tho low pressure charter, but
hardly has tho first phoso of tho cold oxpurir.ents — tho series with
Holzloohner — boor, finished, ard he writes on tho 9th of October,
Docuaont 161 0*5, Exhibit 73 — writes to Hinalor again. He asks
Hl=ml-r to g-t hi a the lew pressure cha ter so h* can continue his
exp.riL.onta and qualify as r. professor. Tho letter of thu21st of
October, 19b2, Document 226, exhibit 75, Silvers writes to Brandt
•-bout tho continuation of tho high altitude exp-rinunte which His-l^r
wants, but knowing of tho oxistir* difficulti-s, or for oth^r roosons,
he adds that Hii-inlur rill no doubt hav_ to write to :llch personally
in ordor actually to get the chafer. This happens on the 27th of
November, 19l*2, Docu^nt 269, exhibit 73 - a lotUr fro= *olf to
Kilch, on bohaif of Hirulcr. The request fer the lew pr.ssure cha bar,
*iich is exprossod in this letter, oontions the opposition of tho
Luftwaffe doctors ard is giver, definite errhasis. I loarnod fron a
telephone call freo Silvers, which ho aentioned in his testimony,
that ho was to buy a low pressure chasfcer for Raschcr on behalf of
Hiaaler. I was greatly- astonished at this telaphcr* call at tho tine,


Court I

I Jtay ii?-- - 20-3 - LJG - Harrow (von Sehoen)

b.cause I '-nsw very wall that Saschor certainly didn't want to have
this made public in any way. Kow, this telephone call has been
cleared up. Then I informed Ruff of this call — this' whole natter—
and he had Eockor-Freyseng take further steps, as he said hero yester¬
day. In an official lotter to various SS agencies, dated 13 Decolor
19U2, Docu,«jnt 1612 rS, Exhibit 79, Aaschor is given the assignment
to carry out high altitude oxporiixr.ts, by Hin-lor personally. On
the llith of i torch, 19L3, Docent Ko. 270, Exhibit 110, Raschor tells
of his discussions with Hippko and again says that hu »3r.ts to carry
out low prossur- chmtour oxp-ria-nts, together with ne, arrl finally,
on the 16th of ovorber r 19U3, Document !Io. 1057, Exhibit ii63 he
trios, through the Reich Research Council, in agrecnent with Himaler,
again to g.t a oobilo low pressure chscb-r in order to carry out
experiments. "hoc. are laschor'a and flinalur's efforts and, nevartbo-
liss, Raschor never again had a low pr.ssurc chamber -.t his disposal
for experiments.

Q. tfoll, vhat do you want to prove by these statements?

•v. This no doubt proves clearly how great teacher's and Hianlor's
efforts were. That ny conduct undor these circumstances was not only
cowardly, that it was much cleverer and much more successful, ‘.von
if I had had any legal obligations to prevent him by force, if I had
node tho cri minative attouot and tho attempt which had no prcspoct of
success to prevent hii frer. carrying out those experiments, •* would
have boor. Jdllod or locked up and Raschor would have been able to
continue his oxp-rinenta for a Iona tire without ary r.striction.

Q. at that time, was th_ro any possibility in Gemary to resist,
and ir. what did you see such possibility?

9

a. There were only thro- typ.s of resistance possible. First

cf all, for a person who was ablo, immigration. Second, open resistance

which meant concentration c»_-p or death penalty, and to cy knowledge,

r..v_r hod ary success. Third, passive resistance, th«- apparent & .ving-

ir., delaying orders, criticise among one's friends — -ha: thy “riters

5340


Court I

1 .lay u?--* - 2~-ii - LJG - Harrow (von Schoen)


art now ceiling "inner it: igraticn". But that really doesn’t have
-uch to do with the question. f-r as the direction question of pre¬
vention is concerned, I would like to say something moru. To take a
ccspariscr. froa the nodical field, it la unknown to na and I cannot
inagire fiat, for exaaplo, an assistance cl a scientist research workor
who is perfondng infections with a fatal disease — for example,
leprosy — on a prisoner, th:.t the assistant should, by force, pr-vont
tho scientist fre:: carrying out this infection, r-rhaps, if ho didn't
do th:.t, tho con right die in knocking, tho hypodermic syringe out of
his hard. I could foaginB th t sono assistant night, for personal
reasons, refuse to participate in such oxp.riaonts, but I cannot im¬
agine tr.'t, if th-ru should be a trial against this doctor, it should
be d.. and id that an assistant ire vent tho sciontist froa doing this.

2;. Thon, you arc convinced th t prevention by force was impossible?

A. lea.

But could you not hr.vo filed charges, for oxanplo, with tho
polico or idth tho public prosecutor, against ibischcr?

... Yos, of course, I could have, but if * had gono thv.ro and
said: "Haochor has carriod out cxp-uiiuionts ordered by Hinnlor —
by tho Chief of tho Gorman Polico and what olso was he, Hoichsfuohrur
33, Stato o-icrutary in tho Ministry of the Interior," they would
probably hav„ said: "»oll, can't do anything about it. If ho has
orders, then wo can't do anything about it. n

,. i«a3 Rnsclwr un or tho jurisdiction of th- civilian authorities?

... Ko, ho wasn't. <vs a tuftir ufo officer, he was, of courco,
ur.dor tho Uu -waffe.

Thon you would have had to report hit: to his superior in tho
Luftwaffe? •

loo, and I really did s through ny private channels. 1 went
to .viff arvd told hia abo t it and huff went to Hippk- who was Chief
of tr.e edical Service and, in a s-nso, the supreme sup.rior -f tho
-dicai Of icer Rise _r.


3S41


Court I

1 Kay c7-« - 20-5 - I*?3 - S'rrow (von Schoon)


%• '--r- President, this night be a suitable tine to break off.

7 3 .'. 5 J5SXHE>7: Counsel, can you advise the Tribunal as to how
•-<* yea -xpoct it will require to prosont your direct case in defense,
concluding rith this witness and any other witnesses you nay have,
and the documents you nay dosire to present?

DR. VOS SSXs For the direct examination I will r.o-d about half
an hour. There will bo no ether witnesses.

T3 PRESIDE!?i The Tribunal will now b^ in recess until 9:30
0 . 1 deck tomorrow rooming.

U recess was Ukon until 0930 hours, 2 Kay 191:7).


6G42


/W

2 *£cy-^-GJ-l-l-Foator-(iafc. Vor. Schor. ~nd Kurtz}-
Court 1

Official Transcript of the African kilitnry
Tribunal in the sitter of th. Unit-d States
of Accrica .gainst Karl Brandt, ct al.
defendants, sitting at Nuernberg, Germany,
on 2 kay 19h7, 0930, Justice Beals presidn*.

:.-ZL KARSEAL: Persons in the Court roos will please find their seats.

The Honorable, the J-dgvS, of Military Tribunal 1.

Military Tribunal 1 is now in session. Cod save the United States
of Asu-rica and this honorable Tribunal.

Thero will be order in the Courtroca.

THE FR3SDE.C: Ur. Wars hall, you ascertain if th_ defendants are
all present in court.

THE MARSHAL: kay it please your Honor, all d-fe.ndats are present
in the court with the exeption of the Defendant Gbcrheuscr, absent due
to illn ss.

THE r-E3ir£VT: The seer. tary-general idll note for the record the
prcs-nce of all the defendants in court s ve the Defendant Obcrheuuer
who is absent on vccount of illness, according to z note filed by th-
prison physician. The Secretary-General trill file the note.

Counsel nay proceed.

Dh. KA:S IXkBERG - Resuc.d
DIRECT EXAltftoTION (Continued)

BY DR. V0F..TRK (Counsel for the Defendant Rozberg):

Q !n. Rocberg, yesterday you nswered to ay last question, why it
w a impossible for you by using fore*, to oppose Rnach-r's exp-rinentc
and to prove that there would here been no purpos- in denouncing hin to
the Reich authorities. I would now like to ask you, assusing the case
yourself in a similar position today, would you take the
did then?

_xtr-seiy difficult becaus. the conditions
know fioschc r—I know the whole situation. 1 have
about that point. If, ay present knowl_dge.


6843


2 hay-K-GJ-l-2-Fcst^r-(int. Vo a Sc hen- nnc Kurtz)-
Court 1

I -^rc again put in th_ sene situation, : an certain that 1 would act
differently. I would probably go to Berlin after the death and report
it, end then I would go ha*., get a ncdical certificate saying that 1
m3 aick, .and write to Dachau end say that I could not cone back. That
Reach or did then and how th_ cxperlcuits turned out th. main thing would
be I would be out of it, then I would probably save nys.lf the one end
half years in prison -nd the trial.

Q Is that your true opinion:

A If I think cv r what I said on. of course often la&glnes that,

but I really don't b.liev_ I would do that because one can't act
• %

against one's inn r convictions, -culd prob bly not take this cold
calculating point of view and lot everything take its course. I would
porbably go beck Just th. vy J did j^d curry out the uxp.rlnaita, see
to it that the chacber could o_ take nay. I would probably do every¬
th* Just th- way I did it then.

HAPDI: four honor, I don't believe the Ifibun-l is particu¬
larly int-rested in what the Defendant Rodberg thought ho would have
done unde: tn. sen, circusatanCeS if they arose again. This is purely
Speculative.

THE PT-EoILG:.T: CtJecticno by counsel for the prosecution appears

to w-11 * .ken. »hat h.7, you to say couh: 1?

Th ^ defendant has been asked .hat attitude he would

♦

take if he ».r. faced with the sane situation which he faced t the
ti=e. Th Defendant has answered that qu-stion.

•HE RtZSILEJC: Bo you intend to pursue this line ray further?

LR. VCfvCTS: Jo, he has answered the qu .stion.

T.ar. P rE SEfc.fr: All right, x'roce-.d.

BY DR. VCSM5BK ( Continuing):

C itn.ss, in ti is court Mention has been raade that in the course
-he high- Itltude experiar.ntr a v_r 1 visits w v r paid by see.-. So
r .rs; i.r, you pr.o.nt in Dachau ah.r. these visits occured?

A Th - rlrit ^ ^ Dcchau that I renter ere the visits of Grav.ltz


CC-i4


2 Jicy-t.-GJ-l-3-r ostcr-( int. Von Schon nd Kurts)-
Ccurt 1

the Rcicbsnrte of the Police, and the visits of Sie-ers which Siev-rs
h-s already stationed her.. And I also know that Hiualer was tfr- re, th
was on Sunday and I was not there that day twt later, of course, I was
told all about it.

Q Vas that thy enjy visit you can recall?

A -he only visit of Hisraler's, or do yen n. an the only visit—

- The only visit by high t officers. • '

A I do not rc acu ber any ether visits.

Q Your c-dcfen-ant Si*,v_rs testified here that while he was there,
he noticed that an oxp. rifle ntal subject during th_ experiments pointed
to his ear in order to indic-.tc that the experimental subject suffered
froa pains in the ccr, thereupon, you produced : different altitude.

Co yc*i recall that incident, nd what have you to s-y about that?

A It was a sign which w had agreed upon, that they should point
to the car there if they had earache, perhaps curing the a-sccnt, and
that was probably what happened during this visits of Siovurs. We “lwnjr
Bade the disc nt slower or w.nt up a little again in order to do away
with the cccplaint.

Q "n>* do you particularly rvrv.nber that incident while Silvers was
there?

« Rancher wonted th. deccetit to be rapid and J step pod it on
purpose, nd he tcld bo later, -h.n visitors are there that has to bu
ion. quickly and 1 s id, * Whether we have visiters thero, cr Sievors
or scaubody Os., that nakes no difference, th. .xp.rie.eatc has to be
carried out in the ran. way.*


6845


2 I -.y k7-:^'jC-2-l-aDchan (Int., Ycr. Schoon . Kurtz)
Court I


1 At that tire when this incid-r.t bau .nod did Rascher roproach
you for bad conduct, or soaothing like that?

a Ho possibly la:Id tho point of view that when we bad visitors I
had to rak: tho axpcrlr-er.ts faster so to say considering tha fact that
wo had visitors at iha cxparii^nta, but I refused to do 3o«

Q "hat did ho aoan by you should do in taking the visitors into
considerations?

a Tha cxporiieent was to bo carried cut as quickly as possible,

Tfhilo I h-ld thJ point cf view that tho oxperiaont is tho :iain thing and
tho visitor has to look at tho oxporlr.ont and watch it in the fom in
which it is always carried exit. After , tbej re not douonstrations.

Q Another subj.ct no*, vhet attitude did you take after tho Dachau

experiments, what was ycer position with tho DVL/iftor tlu Dachau

\ / * --

axporinonts?

. A At first I was a scior.tific co-xorker Just :;s I had bu.-n before.

Our dopartr. nt for aviation n .dicino was expanded gradually and b.cono
an institute, and in 19U3 I boerno soction chief in tho soction for high
altitude.

Q "oday, do you still think that tho oxparlr.onts wore at that
tino important?

A los absolutely. Rodontly, I accidently obtained proof that thin
opinion i3 still correct today, I road an article about a nor avnition
oxporinont of a plana with a rocket profiler.

T ?iay it ploaso tho Court, at this point.I would like to offer
P.onh :rg Document 5, '.oaberg exhibit Ho. 5, an article frea "Iifo"
ragaziixi under tho heading, "Scientists Prepare to Fly Castor Than
Sound." This is tho issue of life la^aainj :f 20.January 191l7. This
should servo as evidence for -h_ fact that in aviation un&tr poo War
o aditions similar porblcns ara ro^'.rd.d as important, Just as troro tho
prcblons for which theso ox aria mats to rescue people from high - litudo.


6846


2 !i?.y U7—?• jC-2-2-^'©jhan (Int,, Von Schoon & Kurts)

Court I

p. HARM: Kay It ploase, lour -oner, it is ry understa n d in g that
the evidence of this nature will bo offered at. a later date and .dll be
actod on at that tiro by the Tribunal.

DR. VORYERX: !!r. President, ray it please the court, in thi3 caso
t:ds is rot an .xporlnent nado abroad and about which the court has
already ruled. This is not an experiment at all; this is merely to
show the fact that a certain problem oxists.

!<R. BIRDT* "hat being the caso. Tear Honor, I strenuously object
to the statements of tho dofonso counsol and this Docunent 23 being
absolutely inaatcrinl,

T!E PRSSIDEJJTi It is a matter of conion knowledge of which tho

court will tako judicial notico that tho experiments in connection with

pianos to attain speed and velocity by nachinos huivior than air is

being pursued by sciontiots ovorywl ore. That is a nafctar of oorr.on

knowlodgo of which tho ccurt will tain judicial notice. Counsel nay

of for this exhibit, it will bo rocoivod., but tho ccurt .ill tako

judicial notice of this, as it is cocr.on knowlodgo that overyono knows.

Tho docunant offorod will bo subnittod, but tho exhibit should not bo

•

road, it should moroly bo an exhibit and placod in tho record,

DP. VOfTERX: I did not intend at all, sir, to read tho Docunont.

Dr. Rooberg, what do yu have to say about tho fact of the inportanc
of yotir oxporirwnts connected with this article in "Life?'

A There is a similarity betsoen this doscribod now piano and tho
yjj 163, which wa3 tho vain occasion for our oxporinonts, sinco it is axso
2 plan with .a rocket drive and thus independent of aliitudo. It is
charact eristic that in those nw planes, just as at that tiro with cur
?fo 163 great hopes aro set in tb beginning for ftature ac?on?fishmonts.

spood of up to 1,700 sdlos is aentlbnod and tho pressure cabin, which
is equips and is built for an .altitude of 63,000 feet too. Tho
possibility to reach this altiiudo is already given and depends only
on th • supply of fuel. The -oericar. ..viation aadicine has r.cr reached
j sans point, which wa reached at that tire. The ".o 163 for us was


6e47


2 :>y jC-2-3-Wjehaa (Int*, Von Schaen & Kurtz)

Court I


out of tho experimental stage and ".ho Inarionn exports on aviation
nedldne, if they have not already done so, will no doubt be
stuctjring th. possibility of rescue freaa high altitude end high speed.

The necessity of rescue trau high spood is ryjntioned specifically ir.
this article and tho difficulty involved.

Q Dr. Hoeborg, tho necessity to carry out such oxporinents, is that
not shewn also by the hxsocution Dccunent No. 289, Exhibit 72?

THE rFSSirGHT: -T-et Doca»nt book is it?

U!. VC^EEX; Froeocuticn 3ocuncr.t book 2 .

THE FRESHKNTi On ?.*at page?

OH. TO'PESK: It is cn pago 106 cl tho -nglish version. Year Honor.

THE WITNESS: This is tho letter, ridel: Hippke wroto to Hlrmlor
after tho oxporlaonts woro oenpietod, in which ho discuasos tho rosult.
Ho anphnsizus that tho oxporinents were vuluabl and iiiportant in their
results. Ho says, it is true, that cold was net consid rod in this
-attor, which involves an incroasod burdan. o ourselves undertook

these cold oxporinents lator and furthoi* ono of th rest important
reoulto of cur report was ihat in rcscuo fror. thoso h'.gh altitude ono
sheuid prefer rescue dth . cl->sod parachute and for tho sane r eason,
it is suggested, or r* .or dsaandod, that tho .crachutw be oquipod with
a blocking equipment for hirn altitudo, so that it cannot bo oponod
accidentally or intentionail piano. In tho socond

place, dt is douandod in tho case the rar'chutor oocodos unconscious and
does not regain consciousness in tino, them will be an nuthematic
dovico stored barometrically to toper, tho parachute at an altitude
botuoon I:,000 and 6,0CC rvetors. Tho natter of cold does not play any
gre- role in this bocauso the tino speed in these high altitudes, where
tho tof^ioraturo is very lew, is very slow, 10 seconds por 1,000 motors,
-side for possible local freezing of tho face, for oxanple, no serious
damage free the ccld can be expoctad.

-7 D?„ VOS^ERK:

0, fiancss, a few questions on your reporting to Hinder during that
cortferenoo.


6348


2 :'ay !i7- FjC—2-L-'feefaen (Int., Von Schoon '■ Xurtz)

Court I

Was there any reference rado to thoso experiments which Rase her aade
on his ora in Dachau?

A ’.to, at least not in ay presence.

Q Did Raseher have any other conferences with HLmler apart fron
tho one where you wore present?

A Tes, on tho next rooming, Raschor talkod to hin again. I was not
present.

Q Do you knew what problems or orders Raschcr wantad Hiroler to
give hin in th field of high altitude research?

A When wo visited 'ho Headquarters, :arrlor had spoken of tho
continuation of tho high altitude oxpdrinonts. .''hat was intended and
tho details. Ono c-an no 'cut* s e ost cloarly fron this Docirunt
Exhibit 79, Docicont Bock 2, Docun-nt 1612-PS. That is tho official
assignment, which Hinmlor gave to raschor to carry cut a certain sorios
of oxporlncnts.


6849


Coart So. i

2 as? 47-W-3-1-iEk-Cooit (7,n Sch:on * Lurtr)


It Beys a^cng ether things end I auote:

■SS Eauptsturafuehrer Dr. Sescher ia being assigned by ne to carry
thr-ugh the follcving experiments:

"(1) Low pressure chcnber experiments, to be errried out under c-n-
ditions corresponding to those- actually prevailing under normal
-perr.ting conditions, for rescue froa high end extremely high altitudes.
Dcterai nation of changes In cheated caulllbriun, as veil os ges ooui-
libriua cf buatn body. Irperiaents ere to be repeated until a scien¬
tifically Incontestable basis for finding* Is established. Testing or
oreesuri-proof protection garments f-r the highest eltitudes to be
curried out vith the nssictcncw cf rcmifoeturers of such protective
' suits."

This shoe's that Beschar oerfcroud very extensive assignments end
Enecher no doubt intended to carry out the experiments. Eo, of course,
did n-t know the dotalls.

a

Ci. Did Eaachar ev«r tell you In vhat fields ho wo working? I
:cnn as fnr as high altitude oxocrir.cnts vero c r.ccrnod.

A. '.hilt we vero at Dachau?

Cf ttiiie y-u w^xfccd c: S* ch * u '' n y ,Jor fiTboriacnts to r^ocuc
people free high altitudes.

A. S-, he neva- said anything definite. He did sey that In the
cr.Se of 3u tx he wnted to elerr ua vith but, of course, he did not
give ac any dotcils r.bout hie rnsv^r.

Q. Vitn«-Bt, vhoa rrr-ng your co-defendants did you know in 1945,

at the beginning of 194E?

A. 3y nrae, Professor Srandt, hr-fcecor Ecndloser, Er ifeos-.r
AOCt ck. Pr.fcss.r Sc breeder • knew because he hrd visited ue ot the
DYL jnev -r tvice. I did not .'-now Dr. Senzkcn; Profeor .r Gebhcrdt,
Prof-.se .r Blcae by naac; Dr. Kn*ovsky a little; Poppendick not ft all;
Profess :r Eosu by nrne, I net him et meetings. Dr. Buff wee ny chief.

: did n-t knov hr. 3reck. Dr. Bccicsr-Ireystng I ka.w fraa aviation
.edicint v,r> '-hich ho did with rr-fess :r Strughcli, rsl Pr -fc.csor


6650


Ccart S3. 1

2 Aay 47-k-2-2-=5i-Ccok (Tan School & hurts)

Waltz I know. Of the other four end It. Gb«rheueer I know no one.

3. ’ tth vhoc did you hero ifficirl relations?

A. I had official relation® in eviction aedleine *-1 th Ir. f.uff,
of course; et tines with 3ccker-Jroyseng, also in tho way of c-nverec¬
tions. I didn't haw direct official relations with Ir. Schrcoder hut
he wee on official business vhon ho visited war institute, and I net
Professor bolts in 1942.

Q. Which of the cTCtrincsts discussed here were known to ycu whon
you were arrested?

a. Vhea I ‘as arrest.d the high ellltudo eroorients, of course,
end the cold crocrinwnte.

q, '-hen y«u scy the 'cold exoerlr.onts", do you nero to toy thr.t
thu fact that cold erocriiCRte wre corried out w«# known to you, or do
you want to try it vnt known to ycu t- what extent and ir. whet tennor
they wore carried out?

as to the extent and cxcct nanner I knew nothin/:. Ky knowledge
is hosed on the ccnferocco in Sucrnberg and on the fact that I had
heard thrt old experiments were to bo carried out.

Si .vax took orrt in the Kuernberg conference, did you?

a. Yes, I spoke rbout thrt yesterday already.

Did you take part in rny other ;eetlngs in 3orlln, St. Johann,

HohenlychOQ, or anywhere vise?

A. Ho, I did not attend any meting* of consulting physicians or
pay nettings which have been discussed here. Ihc other race ting* wro
internal r.cetings of the Luftwaffe doctors which to:k ul'ce frjq tire to
tine.

Q. Sow, a final cuecti.n. Why did you sign a retort tegether
with a nan like Easchar?

A. I have been asked the very is e cuitticn by Professor Al.xander,
why I signed a report together with a erininnl like Haschcr. : nay say
tuvercl things on that. She picture of EaschuT ec a crininrl is clear
t dcy. -or mo at the tine Sascher’s personality end his position. how-


6851


Court Sc. 1

2 Key 47-X—0-3“5St-Codc (Ton Sohoen & Kurtr)


ever, vcre act to cl«cr free the l«.gei and fro.- e acrel point of viev.

We repudiated Batcher's experiments icvordly. vhet ve did net like
vts the fact that he undertook human experiments on tracttices vhich in
our cpiaioa vere not of the highest importance and not of decisive orre-
ticel importance, end aieo in these exoerlcentt he did not oroce^ti with
the necessary cere and caution, ec that death occurred. Therefore, ve
not only repudiated the trierir.eute invrrdly, hut vc elto rcuudiated
them crtornally, that it, v® refusei to cooperate vith Batcher any fur¬
ther. But thii w>5 rarely our uereonel opinion and vnt alto tfco bpois
of our private attitude tovari him. According to knowledge of litera¬
ture rb-ut experiments :r. huun brings is ''ll countries, I today have
the pertenol opinion that in a nubwr of cites the cxocriucnte vere
aomctlmot unnecetiary md that tone cotta of death could have been
avoided; that nan? a pi.Ce of verk van not v e n O nough nrecarod rr.d
era n-t United t- vhat vat absolutely necessary. But fr:r. thit sub¬
jective uttltude to advance to the objective verdict that a certain
scientist vat a criminal, that vat a greet and decisive oto^, and to
I signed the report together vith Beecher. Buff did not have an," nio-
givlngt either rgclnst countersigning thit tciontifically correct
report and ndklng the retultt avrilrblt for furthor dovclo-or.onto.

Today I os ectunlly glad I did so for it is tho clocrcst nrocf of the ,
sepcrnti-n of tho Batcher cxtori er.ta fron ours. It i6 vory difficult
if one hat only the crosecution documents' and orosecution vitneoscs
vith vhich to conduct one's defense, and if this report vere r.ot
available .r.e A the nott important uroofs egrinst the serious charges
vould be nia6irg.

^ J-r tho tine bviag I have no further questions.

.-BiSI3i:'.T: /jo there cny oucetlont to bo propounded to thf
vitr.ess by defense counsel?

IE. TI??: rr. Time for the defendants Scfcroedcr end reckcr-
rreyeeng.


oS52


Coart So. 1

2 .‘jy 47-H—3—4—££h-Ccok (Vos Scfcoen 4 Zurtz)

3? 2E. II??:

VitneBE, ia this trial you gave an affidavit which was oub-
sittcd by the prosecution as evidence. It is contained in Docuncnt Book
j'o. 2 os page 1 of the text. It is Document So. 476, Zxhibit 40. Do
y-u htve the document at your disposal?
a. Yes.

I would nov ask you to look at figure e in thio document. There

you said:

"After the lov pressure experiments vere curpleted, Dr. naechor

end I ..ado a report which wo t approved by Buff and signed by the three

of us. This was circulated to all interested offices in the Luftwaffe.

In ".y opinion, Dr. Anthony of nodical Servlc© of the Luftwaffe oust also

have received a copy of this report. I do not rerember If Bcckor-Froy-

Cbae vne with the aedicel Inspectorate at that ti c but If ho was ho

certainly know that these ©rxriuonto vere being ccnductod."

Sow, of couroc, vc know, witness, that Dr. 3eCkcr-Froys©ng vno in

the nodical Inspectorate froo 1941 cn os en assistant expert. Therefore,

it nitf.t be pjseible that trua that nffidivit the orccceutlor. night draw

the cinclusion that Dr. Becker know of theso experiments and reports.

_ •

Ihvreforo, I v.uld like to ask y-u, witness, do you have any factual
proof rnd red knowledge of the fact that Dr. 3eckcr-7rcyceng in fact
knew of those experiments and rb-ve all of thio particular report?

A. So, I have no positive knowicdgo to that effect. In the inter¬
rogation I w-b asked whether the report - whether a copy of the report

VC6 sent to the medical Inspectorate a-ad I w e r convinced of this fact -

*ay I interrupt you a moment, witness. You say you were "con¬
vinced* of that feet that this report vre sent to the -edical # Ir.spcctor-
atc, but did you actually positively know it?

a. Ho, I did not sec the distribution list itself when it v C e
finally approved ty the Aviation hinistry and I wan? to spy that if
the report was sent to the Aviation Hinistry then it ves certainly sent
- - the Depart cut for Aviation kedieiae and the -xmert of this de-part-


6353


Court 5c. 1

2 .^eyi7-r.-C-6-lii.-Cccic (V-a Schien is Kurts)


-.cat 'culd certntaly here learned about it. I said especially that Dr.
Anthony probably received it. I do not re:-.e.:ber whether Becker-freysonc
was in the .-.edicel Inspectorate at that tine. I did not rer.t .bcr et
that tine the? Becker-freysene was working with Anthony, wps Anthony 1 a
assistant in the -iedicel Inspectorate et one tine. I thought that if
this Anth-ny had been an expert he vxld have learned of it, but if
£veker-7roysang had be*.a an exoort he would have learned of it, but I
knew that at that tine he v*s an oseietant expert while I hrd assuned
that Dr. Anthony was not there at ell.


6954


2 Kay 47-K-4-1-Schwab-Ku tZz and Von Schon)

Court 1

Q. Therefore, you vsrj saying, witness, that you norely
assumed this fact here?

A. Yeo.

Q. Then may I as* you In the same document and in the
sane paragraph"under Figure 8; please look at the last
sentence. There you say, Dr. Oskar Schroeder in 1542 was
the second-highest ranking officer in the medical ser¬
vice of the Luftwaffe, and probably he also know of the¬
se experiments, although I personally never talked to him
about then.

I should cay from this very formulation you have no
positive knowledge of the fact whether or not Prof,
dchroeder k*ev anything about this ouslness. Is that
correct?

Yes, what I meant to say by this formulation which
I worked out ax'tor consldoraole discussion In the lnter-
rogatlon, I adopted this formulation on purpose. "He
probably knew about hese experiments" but in order to
say that i had no positive personal knowledge— I said
that I personally never talked to him about the matter,
that I know nothing positive..

Q. Thank you very much.

DR. TIP?: kay it please the Court, the Defense Coun¬
sel for Veltz 18 not present today, no asked me to

%

put the questions on behalf of his client, and I would
like to obtain your permission for this.

TH2 PRESIDE:;!: The permission la granted.^

BY DR. 71??:

e. Witness, on behalf of defendant Veltz I still would
like to go into your affidavit. I would now like you to
go bacx to the first page of your affidavit. I am inter¬
ested here in Figure 2. There you speak first of all


685b


2 May 47-H-AX-4-3-Schwab-Kurtz and Von Schon.
Court 1


about the tire vh-n the experiments were conducted in
Dachau, and what was their purpose. Then you said, -.round
the riddle of the par<wrahp: *Dr. Ruff was first approach¬
ed to assist in the high altitude experiments at Dachau
by Dr. G.«*. Waltz, Chief of the Instltude for Aviation
Modloinp In Munich. This was in December 1041 or January
1942. Dr. Veltz advised Ruff that Dr. Sigmund Rascher,
a doctor in the Luftwaffe and also a renter of the SS,
was to perforr the high altitude experiments. /eltz
wanted an expert to wor«c with Rasoher on these experi¬
ments. "

Witness, now wo have hoard your t.stlrony and also
that of Dr. Ruff. .»nd Dr. Ruff, in particular, told us
in detail about the conference between himself and
Prof. Welts. That conference, if I understood Ruff and
you correctly, was aimed at Dr. Veltz's making Che ou£~
gostlon to have the second part of your experiments
which you, yourself, had conducted in Aldorehof ac
experiments on yourself; to transfer to Daohau, lo
experiment on lr-matea. .»nd that that possibility vas
made available by Dr. Rascher.

In your testimony here it looks as though teirz
or Rascher had planned experiments for Daohau, and as
rhou^h for those experiments which Weltz planned, you
or Ruff respectively were called in as experts to as¬
sist in the experiments, hay I now ask you, witness,
to tell me which opinion is the correct one: first
one which I have deduced from yours and Ruff's testim¬
ony—or the opinion which seems to become clear in your
affidavit?

In the discussion with Weltz— that is, the discus¬
sion between Ruff ar.d /eltz—I was not present, a3 Ruff


6655


<

2 Kay 4-Schwab-Kurtz and Von Schon.

Court 1

has already said, ily kr.o'led-'e or this dissuasion la
easel or. what Dr. Ruff toll sc later, and as ho explained
It that within a general discussion about Important ques¬
tions of aviation medicine, the problem of rescue froa
hl£h altitude came up, and this possibility of obtaining
experimental subjects for thjao experiments because Dr.
Rasohor had the peralssion to use then, was also ilccus-
3ed. The formulation In the afild ;vlt did not coze froa
co personally. It was submitted to ce In this fom. If
I did not object to this expression: "...approached to
assist... as an expert, It was because zy memory of what
Dr. Ruff told me about the discussion with 7eltz was not
In contradiction to It. Sono agreement on the experiments
had oeen reached In this discussion.

ft

Q. Now, today, wltnoos, you know froz Dr. Ruff's report
how this discussion went, and surely you will agree with
ce that it would be core correct to say that some of
your research program, the pro-ram of Dr. Ruff, or the
DVL, had to be continued in Dachau?
a. Yes.

Q. Very -roll, Now, another question, witness. .*c we
know, you collaborated for ooze time with Dr. Rascher
in Dachau, and I may assume, that Dr. »oltz was mention¬
ed in these ox eriaents. On those occasions did Dr. Ras-
cher evur toll you that he and Dr. ioltz dlfferej very
considerably In certain points?
a. Yes, he talked about that repeatedly.

Q. Can you jive us more details of those differences?
rfere they concerned with the facts perhaps that Prcf.
Voltz. wished to supervise Dr. Rascher, whe ut that time,
was still a member of his institute, whereas Dr. Rascher
in hi8 turn di’ not like that supervision?

-»• Yes, that was said. The telegram from Himmler


6357


2 May JC-4-4-Schvao-Kurtz and Von Sohon.

Court 1


played an important role, saying that the experiments
were to be kept secret. Rascher tookthl3 telegram to
Volts, showed It to him, and he told hin that he was
r.at allowed to give him any reports beci.u&e of this
telegram.

Q. That telegram you saw yourself,vitne38; did vou?

.*. Yes. Rascher showed It to me too. of course, to
emphasise my own obligation to secrecy.

4. Do you still recall the wording of that telegrnn?

I believe It was teletype; It was very short. It
cold only that the high altitude experiments In concen¬
tration comp Dachau were to be kept secret, absolutely
secret to everyone. I as not sure; It have said "Top
Secret".

Q. and, as you said yourself, Rascher showed this tel¬
egram to Dr. Volts, and thereby avoide 1 Veits's super¬
vision. Is that correct?

.4. Yes. I was not there, but he told me that ho had
showed It to Volts.

<1. Yen.... vory well. Now, did Rascher, as far ns you

wore concorned, moke any remarks on Prof. Volts't* char¬
acter? .

A. Yes; he said that ho was a strong Catholic, I bollove
he called him a "black" fellow, who collaborated with
the circles of Catholic activists, and who, therefore,
would not be suited to collaborate with such experiments
or to learn about tnem.

Q. .-lay I, therefore, understand you tc the effect that
Rascher did not like Prof. Veits, and declined to have
anything to do with him Just because of his Christian
attitude?

Yes.


6SG8


2 .'ay •»7— y.- 4— 5— 3c'vac— 2ur t z and von Schoen.

Court 1

Q. Very wall. Ore final set of questions, witness. './hen,
for the last time, did you talc to Prof, './alts about
the Dachau experiments?

-*• I cannot remember the time exactly; it was certainly
before the actual start of the experiments—when I talc¬
ed to Prof, felts the last tine.

Q. Do you, by any chance, know witness, whether your
last conversation with Dr. Volts took place before the
teletype was shown to Volts by Raoher— or afterwards?

Hy la3t talk tc Prof, felts was before this teletype.
5- Seforo the teletype. Now, do you have any Indication,
witness, for the fact that Prof. Volts know anything
about the actual experiments thoaselves?

.1. Nc.

Q. You said Just now that you and Veits saw each other
for the last time before the actual experiments really
started. That Is correct. Is It not?

A. Yes.

Do you know anythin* about the fact whether or not
Prof. Veits received any reports on :ho carrying out of
the experiments?

*'• He did not receive any from mo. as far ac I know he
did not recilve any at all.

Q. Car. you tell us, witness, whether RasOher perhaps on
some occasion reported to Veits about the experiments,
perhaps on the fatalities which occurred at the time too7

«. No; I considered that quite Impossible on the basis of

this telegram.

Q. Now, I should like to go back finally to your affid¬
avit, ir. order to make It quite clear. This Is Document
110-476 or. page one of the Dcoument Book II; Ir. Figure 10.


5855


2 /ay 4-5-Schwab-Kurtz and vonSchoer..

Court 1

Once again you talk of Prof. feltz, and you said, it is
the second sentence: "Dr. foltz certainly never express¬
ed any soral scruples against these high altitude tests
since it was he who originally asked Dr. Ruff and no to
assist Dr. Ra3cher.*


5860


Court I

2 toy-ii?—i - 5-1 - LJG - Harrow (von Scboen Hurts)

The question of any assistance given »e have already discussed.

I need not go into that new, only to clarify natters I would like you,
witness, to tell us what experiments ycu are talking about hero when
you sa-, that. After all, we know now that there ware two experiments
going on at Dachau; first, your oxperuxmts; that is to say, the
experiments called “rescue from high altitudes", and second, the
experiments made by Dr. Raseher alono. To what experiments do you
refer hero when yen say these things in this paragraph?

A. Of coura-, tho for rescue fron high altitude.

This expression was originally not in tho affidavit. 1 add.d it
specifically in orcor toi .dic--.to that ..elti had r.o scruples against
those oxperiaor.ta which he had previously discussed with Su Tl.

3. Sow, sinco you told us, witness, that Professor Wolta was
informed neither by you or by Baschor on th- conduct of tho exp nts,
you wish, therefore, to say, if 1 understand you correctly, that
Professor tfolts had no scruples against tho planning of tho experiments
fer; after all, that was all ho knew?

A. Yos, he could naturally only object to what ho knew about tho
experiments.

3. Thank ycu voxy much.

[ay it ploasu your Hcr.ors, I have no further questions.

BY DR. HOP. All (Dofonse Counsel for tho defendant Pokorny):

3. rtitnoss, after the end of tho war vor«. you a prisoner of
war or an internee in scac camp?

A. YeS, I was an int-rnoo for om y«ar in camps in tho British

Zone.

«. Did you, in those cars, uv_r hear any conversations about
sterilization cp.ratiers?

a. Yes, in *ho Ca^r.p isterwogen, wh-re 1 wa3 last, there was a
Dr. — Dr. key or. Ho told e, whan i ask„d him why ho was interned'

U. t was charged with performing sterilization operations in Holland.


5651


Court I

2 -ay h 7-1; - 5-2 - ICC- Xarrc* (von Schoaxi Kurtz)


4« Did he also tell you -r.-r, thus- operations w-re carried out'-*
In »hat year?

A. I au net sure oi lii- y-ar, I think that it was abet lvlil
or 19U2.

4. I see. I have no further qu-s-ions.

BY D?.. 3J3G&&A (Defonsc Counsel for the defendant Si-v.rs)j

4. Dr. *-c bwr R , iron w:^t ti-._ onwards did you know the co-
dufundent S.cv-rs?

a. I :wt nL: for t » first ti kj when h- cast on a visit to
Dachau iurir* th- high altitude ex-ii-l.v-nts shortly before aastwr,
19U2.

«. - jo high cl tit . ri--nts *. .r» in full swing at tho tine,
ware they not.

A. Yea.

4* Ar.d prior to that ti.o, you did not know hin? How often did
you a.o Sievors at Jcchau?

A. Only this or* t» v, at this visit.

4. And on that occasion, you w-re present too?

A. Yes.

How did it co o .'oout that Siev.rs took any part in thoso
vxpvrii—nts? .pis t'./t bocanse Roach or invited hiis?

a. don't knew exactly ho. th t happuv-d. teacher cnly 3cid
that Siev-rs cam fron the Ahnenerbo. I don't believe that ho care
especially for t-jo3e -xporinents, but ho was coning anyhow and that
he would look at th- -xp.rirur.ts. ;heth»r h- was ir.vitod to do so,
cr why Siov.rs cx-c, I don't knew.

4. And on that oxp-riaeat Si.v_r3 vzs r^r-ly a spectator?

A. Yus.

4. Did Silvers _v_r sugtust that he had -rc.rs to b- pr-s-nt in
the exp-riaents as an oxp.rt?

A. Kc, of ccurs_ not.


6862


2 *av 1.7— - 5-3 - LJj - Karrcs (vor. Schoen & Kurtz'

%

3. 1",^ ref ore. th. scientific sico oi the exp.rinfc-nts was no
concern of his?

A. NO.

q. ucre they ai^ fatalities ir. the experiments Si c vcrs saw?

A. Ho.

q. Iho tasks and functions of Severs which he carried out in
Dachau — did you know any dotails about that?

A. No, no details. I just know that hasetor told n» that Siovora
was tho Reich Business Manager of tho Ahnenorbo and had something to
do with administration or p.TsorjK.1 ovzstions th.ro.

3. Do you know anything bout the fact whether Siev.rs had
anything to do with t,;o sol.ction of tho experimental subjects’

A. Ko, ao c.rtair.ly had nothing to do with th.t.

'4« How, to suz. up. I con to tho result that the oxp '3
-ado would have boon made just the saao whoth-r Si.v.rs was th-re in
son capacity or wtottar flu .fouid r.oti

A. I.s, tho -xperia-nts had begun before h« was th*r«.

3. In your diroct expiration, you aontionod that you report-d
to HI. dor in hi. fluid h_adcj.art.-r.. At that ttou, .a. ■'rofos.or
nu.st present?

A. Yes, he was th-re.

3. And did you know she irofosscr nu.st was? What bis functions

w-ro?

A. I-s, Sasoher had told aa that on tho train on the way and rt>on
wo ia.t iVofessor Yfuest. Haschor told a- afterwards th.t ve-st was,

I believe ho said, tho curator of tho Ahnen.rbc md Rector of tho
University of ..unich, a h that ho was th. su?-rior of Sifv.vs in tho
Ahnon-rbe.

3. Then you said that, on that occasion, reference- was made to
further axpcrlaonts, that is to say, freezing experiments. You ex¬
plained that, in tho*) ex-erioents, the rewarding with .mi«al warmth
was to be carri-d Eut. Can you toll us whoso idea was this? Tho


6863


i/ourt I

2 3y hi-' - S-ix - LvTJ - Xarro (vor. Schoea Kurts)

r'rcs-cution dose ib-d these thicks as though that emthod of r-< arming
wa3 Sl-vors* brain child.

A. I b-li_7& that I ras pr.ser.t at tho birth of this idea, bo
to speak, Thor. Hlnnlur gave Reseller the assignment to go around tho
aoa rescue stations in tho North S.a — and inquire what radius tho
people- applied in such cases of roscuo cf frozen sailors, and ho said
that h«- could i-axgino that a fisherman’s wife would si-ply take hor
hilf-froz»r. husband into her b_d and uara him up that way. - .3

not a particularly striking suggestion at th. time. I believe that
this is done along the coast, but as I saw the suggestion turn up again
hero, I, of course, an horrified too.

Q. Can you recall whet _r r.- Mler, a*, that time, ordered Ras eh or
to have these r-warning expo lsp-nta c cried nut through using tho body
warmtli cf women?

a. No, he certainly did not give tho assigmunt y-t at that
tino. tho _ rater was simply discussed in conversation .bout tho
possibility js fer rescuo.

Q. And, in tliat conversation, Professor Sueat was present, was
ho not*?

A. ter, i<uest was prosont.

4. Ncr-, did M v'e3t nake any objection to such a proposition?

A. No, iiu.st cortcirJy cade no objection.

4. ir. what conversation on cold experiments and anything con-
r.oct*»d Jith cold experiments, did S.eV.rs cooo into that at all.

A. No, his name was Certainly not morticne-i.

4. Through the intimate contact butwosn yourself and Roscbor,
.'nich was t.ie r-sult cf tho c* ^rinents, you certainly h. rd*V.in
n.nticr. southing about tho fact that he wished to be transferred to
tho Ifaffon-SS?

A. Ye 5 , h- had srek-n abort that repeatedly. Perhaps during
* - high altitude ox>_ric_nts, but I don’t bulic-Ve so, but h. certainly
-p; about it *ie .7. we r v r« to report to 1-ilch ir. the Aviation inistry

6564


Ccurfc I

2 27 L7~~ - 5-5-€J3—Xorroi (Von Sohoon Sorts)

when ’>0 did not qu to succeed.

3 And did H i x i r.l or gj.v u any indication that he himself wished
Readier to be transforr_d to the <faff_n-GS?

A TOwn I 7isitod him? At that looting?

3 ¥os, or did Eascher tell you anything of that description?

A Easchor told r&- about it, but I don't believe it was n^naioned
during the discussion.

3 At least, not while you w>.rj present still because you said
before that thuro was another conferonco on the next d:.y?

A Tea, that's right.

^ How, final q -stion. Dr. Rods erg, would you pie so tako up
oncu again your doolatent bock coneormag high altitude oxperiiaents
and, in particular, your affidavit hich has been mentioned so of ton
boforo. That is Document U76, Exhibit of tho prosecution 4 UO, on
page 1 of Docunont Book 2. Cn Pare 3 , at tho hotter : ".'lolfram Siovora
of the Ahr.ur.~rbo Society of tho S3 :.a also f miliar with thu&o oxpuri-
o~nta and ms in Dachax* several tinaa whin they w«ro being conducted."

The word "fpal liar 0 - has it boon put thuro at your request?
B.causo, as I jAc.ali, 3iov-.ro h a been there only cr.ce as a moro
spectator and that he io not r. scior.tiot, I am rnthor surprised at
that tuna BfaoiUar".


5865


2°»fcy U7— - 6-1 - UB - hcloy (von Scfcon • Kurts)

A. fust formilttien of ---11 those affidavits did not originate
aith aj. I want to say that bo know about those experiments and that
.t one occasion he had watched one in Dachau and I saw him personally
it the o -pcrinontal station.

q. xn ot:-r words, that ho knew of the experiawr.ts — those
things which ha had seon himself';

A. YwS, apparently ho know that experiments were carried out
u-d ho knew what ho had Seon during th- visit.

3 . c final question, any reports, oral r-ports or reports in
writing, wero the. s-nt to Severs or t:o Ahn-norbo, as far ns you
know?

A. Not to my knowledge. I do not knew ^ ctly, however, but 1
ossusu that prv. cc.\ Of t roso rch report was Sent to tha Ahnonorbo.

DH. iftsisaofl'sai I have no furtbor questions, Your Honor.

T E E3S1D3HT: ?bo Tr -anal will now be in r-coss.

(Ta-reupon a r.cuss was taken.)


SB 55


C;nrt l»o* 1

2 Hay 47-r.-8—i—ZSt-Cook (Breve)


THE jtiESEAL: Persene is the courtrso: v-in please find their sects.
The Tribunal is again in session.

7-1 PBESIBEST: Are there any further auestiens of the vitnecs by
defense counsel? There being none, the prosecution say cross examine.

CHOSE 1SAXTSATI0B

3Y EAHI/Y:

x. Or. B.&eberg, vhere did you study eediclne, doctor?

A. 3crlin and Innsbruck.

Were ycu ever in the ’ ehraecht?

A. Yes, in 19?c and 193’, that Is, December 193d to January 1937
! had tvo aonths basic training in the Luftwaffe end then tv-, periods
if additional training so that at the beginning of the -or I '*nc ur.
Lnterarrt in the reservo.

Q. When vere you first assigned to the Coroan experimental station
f>.r avlatltc, the DYL?

A. I never vac in ar. oxoerlaental ctati n but fr:c 1 January 1978
I vaa in the DVL in Adlershof.

a

bss It bccauso of your oositlon in the DVL and ycur work in
the field -f aviation nellcioe the reason vfcy you '-ore not in active
■uty with either the Luftvaffe or tone other branch of the "ehrcafcht?

A. Too, I declared cssontlal f .v that agency, the DVL, »/ that

I c.uld serve in the DVL during the var.

Q, Veil nov, you have exorossed here in the course of your direct

crimination by virtue of s.ae affidavits vhick v-u have introduced in

evidence that you vero on anti-Karl. Is t?nt the inoresei.n you vent

*.- create upon this Tribunal?

A. I didn't ask for these affidavits, rather they --ere rent to ae
e- that I hod no influence on the »4y theee affidavits vero em/enEed,
particularly the Jevish ono frx Berlin.

Q, Yerc you a neaber A the Bari party, doctor?

A. Tes.

then did you Join?

686?


ro o


ourt Sc. 1

Hay 47-*i-S-2-£EX-C J cie (Srovn)

A. 1 hay 1933.

v You joined very early, didn't you?

A. Ihat vae the tine when ouite a number of people joined the party,
right at the beginning. I “£8 c student at Innsbruch at the tine and
Joined on 1 May 1933.

Q, Vae it to your advantage during the course of the tine you “ere
a student to be a senber of the Sari Party?

A. So, it hod no influence on sy studies.

Qj. Tou Joined by choice?

♦

A. At that tine I thought that good would coco of it.

Sow, doctor, you have stated here on direct exasinaticn the
first tiae you heard about the exp*rlnente to be conducted at the Dachau
concentration carp vos when Puff inforned you ho had a visit froo Profoe-
• or Veit*, it that correct?

A. Yes.

Ci. Aftor Professor ’’eltz raid a viait to Puff, how extensively did
you and Puff ditcuaa tho visit of Profeso-r Veltz?

A. That lasted a half an hour or perhaps at cuch as rn hour for turo.

At that tine vae it established that the concentration cam in-
nates voro to bo eubjects used in the exporlrcntc?

A. Yes, as I recollect, that was already said in this conversation.

Ct, Then it is true that Professor belts inforacd Puff that it *uo
*.r.c pier to conduct these erocrinerto at Dachau on inmates :f the concen¬
tration cunp?

A. Yes, that ’-as essentially the contents of that conversation be¬
tween Volts and Puff.

v bell then, in a setter ,f a few days y u end Puff nroceodod to
Hunich for a c-nfercr.ee, is that correct?

A. Chri6t=es intervened there, so probably it “as about a nor.th
later wkt.n that trie to h place.

S.v, “hen you arrived at Professor ’eitz's institute in ..unich,

“ u found PeScLor present, is thet it?


6uoB


Court 5=. 1

2 Av 47-J-.-6—c-iH.-C>oJe (Sr.vn)

- a. As I resccber. he vaan't there at the beginning. rt ceco later.

> t arrived first.

Ar-i that was the first tlae you ever set Batcher?

A. Tee.

aid you discuss enong yxirselvcc at that tine - that is the
conference wherein Veltx, Paschcr, Buff, and y cur self took nart - the
purpose cf these oroerinents?

A. Veil, the purpose v,* also discussed although It had already
teen established before that on the basis A the decision end vo vent
to Kunlch In the first nleco to carry vat these croerlsents.

Veil now, in this orollsinary nesting vfcat v C j the ooint which
you ver» trying to establish? Vat It research Into high altitudes
above 12,000 neters?

A. It vat the orosting orogren cf finding cut hov to rescue oooelo
froa those altitudes.

And this would bo the first tlno In this particular field that
such rcsoarch was to be conducted, is that it - that is, highor than

12,000 setorc?

a. Jo, •-« hod already gone higher at a slovcr descent froa If,000
and e rapid descent froa 17,000, not only v* in our institute but also
other institutes In Ocrsecy already done this.

Q, And then, of course, the all inaortant -oroblc-n case uo at this
discussion in fcunich that the inaetes of the concentre tlor. cnans would
K used, and now you stot^ Beecher had a letter free Flaaler granting
his authority to carry :ut these crcariaents at tho Dachau concentration
ccnc end to use the inuates therein. V-.uld you kindly tell the Tribunal
ns such as you can reneuber *ust *+.nt this letter said?

A. I can't say f-r sur<- any s-re now. Batcher reed it aloud to
ne. Soughly it said that the aoor .vcl in principle for Beecher to
carry out the crrxrlnents in Dachau was still given and that crlnlnal
prisoners ••vru to be uecd vfco volunteered.

q, Did it contain the words -crininal innate® would be uecd end


Court Sc. 1

2 .nay 47-*-e-4-IS(-Ccolc (rr>a)

|

that the innatcs vere to be volunteers"? Did it specifically state
that in Hinder's letter?

A. "Crininal inaatee" vas certainly act in tho letter tut the
verd ■crininal" vas in it.

Vas tho vord "volunteer" in it?

A. Yes, that vord ves in it.

Q. (k> on. '-hat else did the letter contain?

A. I don't beliuve there vee =uch sore in it. There vas sane
notice that other offices vere to be inforoed and then there vas the
signature.

(«. There vas definitely a eardon clauoe contained in Hlnaler'e
luttor, vqs there?

A. Yos, that vas in there.

< 4 . Voll nov, these experiaents that you «ero conducting vero to bo
In an altitude higher than 12,000 actors, and ’ call your attention to
the tact that Dr. Buff said that in Berlin they had only gene uu to
12,000 actors, that is, prior to the Dachau oxuvrlacnts, so far as hie
Particular roscorch vpa concerned. Wasn't it e very dangcrcuo situation,
.m vhercir. it vould be difficult, no re than difficult, to receive volun¬
teers?


567©


2 liiy W-^JC-S-i-^ohnab (Int., 5ron)

Court I


A First of all, I don't believe Raff said here that they had
gone only to 12,000 net era because he kncms very well that we had
conducted experiments at higher altitudes at the Institute and that
ho had participated in then. I don't runosber shat his preicso words
'fore, though. You never know ahead of tine how dangerous such ex¬
periments aro going to bo. That was the- case, also | with our own
experiments. It was a further ascent such as was gradually taking place
in aviation regarding speed and altitude and the size of the nachinos,
etc.

Q "on, now, what was tho date of this Hiaaler letter? D o you
recall?

a Ho. I don't know tho date. It was certainly in tho year 19U1,
beforo tho conversation.

Q And you woro suro that Himlor spocifiod persons to bo usod to
bo volunteers?

A Yos.

Q 'rfoll, now, who roquostod Hfcjrlor that subjocta bo sot asido
for the high altitudo oxpori:»nts?

A Thoso negotiations had takon placo beforo, betwoon Raschor and
HImlor. lo didn't know tho details. Raschor, howovor, shmod us
through this lottor tint ho had par-mission and plenipotentiary power3
fresa Kixmlor.

Q I soo. ‘*ell, now lot us turn to pago 53 of Docuaont Book io. 11,
which is Document No. 'X>-l602-?5—tho fifth document in tho book. This
la a lottor from Rascter to F-oichsfuohrer SS Heinrich Jdxsalor, dated
15 ay 19hl. I ask you now to refer to the second paragraph. I will
r^.d from it: "For thj time being I have boon assigned to tho
luftgaukorrando VII, itunich, for a nodical course. During this course,
•‘•ere researches on high-altitude flights play a prominent part
lateraimd by tho somewhat higher ceiling of tho English fighter
planes), considerable regret was expressed at the fact that no tests
"'h human material had yet been possible for us, as such experiments—"
-*- 3 the interpreter have tho latter. Document ?J>-l602-?S,'53 of the

6371


2 Kay U7-:>^jC-9-2-Schrab (Infc., Browr.)

Court I

English* I .in starting with the second paragraph.

Do you have the Document 3ook No. II?

INTERPRETER: The texts don't seen to correspond. If you will read
slowly tho inter pro ter will keep along.

• HARDY: Well, thero only three sentences in thj first paragraph.
It begins with tho fourth scntonco. It begins! "For the tine being
I have boon assigned to Luftgaukcerendo VIJ, Mirtoh, for a nodical
ccurso." Do you have it, Vj. 3rown.

INTERPRET 0 .: Texts don't correspond in Goman and English.

"R. HARDY: ? oll, they corresponded bofora, Hr. Brown, sono throo
or four nonths ago. It is obvious that you have tho wrong book thon.

INTERPRETER: I have 1602-fS, on pago 53.

’a. H. 1 RDT: That is right...tho iottor. I will road tho ontiro
letter; thon noybo it will help you. "1602-PS." Do you havo tho lottur
in tho Goman book? "Dear Raichsfuohror. !’y sincere thanks for your
cordial wishes and flcrors on tho birth of ry second son. This tino,
too, it is a strong boy, though ho has ccno 3 wooks too oarly. I will
pomit rysclf to sond you a picturo of both children it tho opportune
sonant •"

"For tho tino being I havo been assigned to tho—"

THE INTERPRETER: At this point tho texts deviate fron ono another.

'H. HARDY: Wall, wo will go back to that, sill you plonso chock
that imodiatoly? ’o will go back to that at a later iato. It is
important that you chock it in ediately, please.

DR. VORERX: (Ccunsol for the. defendant Hmberg)

?fr. President, in tho Geroan Docuaont Book II, page %, tharo is
ir. this docunent, tho part that tho prosecutor wishes to road if
designated as "illegible." In other words, it is not contained in the
Goman document book.

7rE FRESHEN: Coins ol, is tho photostat of thi original available

rero?


6872


2 :Cay JC-9-3-Scrarab (Xnt., Brcvn)

Court I

HR. HoEDI: No, Your Honor, that is in the tends of the Secrctary-
Oeneral.

TrU PRESIDENT: i-'oll, the Secretary-General will please bring to tha
Prosecution, a part is obviously not contained in the copy of the
declinent book which is in the original, ’low, if this pa rt is
subsequently to bo pit in, this would, in effect bo submitting a now
document. Therefore, I rcouost that tho prosecutor bo instructed to
show us this document twenty-four hours before ho wishes to pit in in
07idonco.

HE. H'lRDY: Of ccurso, in cress—examination I den't have to follow
that rule. ”ay I ask tho court reporter to kindly read tho noxt senton co
after tho first paragraph where I stepped reading and it boconos
incoherent to road in the noxt sontonco? Pardon no—tho Garoonj
cental nod in tho Goman docic-.ent.

INTERPRETER: In the Goman bock, this is tho word —

:<R. RiRUf: ..11 right, vmat ccnos after that — tho fir-t full
sontonco that corresponds is tho sentence in Goman, and that
corresponds in tho English document book—about three-eights of tha way
down tho pago: "Tho oxporlnonts nro mdo at Pormnont Luftrmffo
Tasting Station for Altitude Research—" that sontonco is in the eight
lino of the oocond paragraph.

I INTERPRETER: (Roads free Goman taxt)

R. HARD!: I will proceed, Ycur Honor, and wait for the original
exhibit. Of course, in this discussion, Ycur Honor, tho Dofcnso counsol
most boar in tend that this - document was presented to him—a photostatic
copy thereof—and will be tha same as the exhibit, whereas tho document
book may wall have that marked "illegible." Ho has had a photostatic
copy of this document—as it i3 in ovidcnco—sinco Deccrtocr tho Uth
1 % 6 .

THE PRESIDENT* The Tribunal is much interested, of ccurso, in tho
accuracy of these document books. They desiro to have, that matter
oarofully checked. *■


6973


2 Vmj ii7-W-?JC-9-i^ch*ab (Int., Brown)

Coart I

3T BtBDlt

Q .fe will go bade to that point. Dr. Sonberg;

Jfcw, after Dr, P-aschor has exhibited the.Hirrder latter to you
T»hich indicated subjocts to be used, nust be criminals, and that they
nust voluntoer. Did ycu after that tine positively establish that each
subject used was a voluntoer?

A You nean later, when the experiments wore actually carriod out?

Q Yes.

/. . ith the experimental subjocts for cur oxporinonts—I had talks
at sono 1 ngth during tho course of tine—and thoy corroborated that.

Q Well, now, you have tostifiod that you used sctio ton to fifteen
experimental subjocts in oxporinonts over which you and Huff had setae
control. Hew long did ycu uso thoso ten to fifteun subjects?

/. Throughout the wholo ccurso of thooxporinonts; thoy were available
for tho axporirvjnts and woro usod in then.

Q In othor words, you had thoso subjocts nvnilablo fro:^—according
to ycur cwn tcatiaony new—tho twonty-socond or February until tho timo
that tho oxporironts woro cooplctod—which ycu say was about tho
twentieth of -‘jiy?

A Yos.

q -'o ycu had thon tho •.’holo r»nth of -iorch, April; nearly tho
ffholo month of :!ay. That was ten to fifteen 3ubj:cts. Is tha i*ight?

A Tos.

q Did ycu talk to oach and overy one of thoso ten or fifteen
subjects?

*’• In ccurso of Use I spoke personally with all of th©3o non on

sorts of subjects; on their having boon sentence, on what thoij
r-ravious sentences had been, on their position in the camp, and why thoy
bad volunteered for tha oxporirxmts.

Q How mny tines was oach subject of this snail grtup submitted
* - an axperir. r.t—or subjected to an ex. crinent?


6874


2 Hey jC-S—5-Gckuab (Xnt., Brown)

Court I

X I should say about twenty—for each person.

^ Twenty tines each person went through an experlnentj Voll,
a<M, la the course of nearly throe norths you subjects each ono of
these subjocts to perhaps twenty exporLents apioco. Now, kindly, for
the Court rocord, giro us tho nanos of som of thoso subjects. You
rust havo wall known tholr nanos after working with than for such a
length of tl_x> as that. How =ony nacos can you ronceber?


5875


£ S-iC-l-:-:-rro- (Int.

Court *o. 1.


? :»rc wfia - ncn nnntd i-oc kinder.

S-cll, th-t plc~se.

n o 3 r e c e r

* 1 . o you kr.o- his first nrac?

... 2 *o, I don't

1 * *310" rherc. he t/.-s fro::, • krt hi a hone, cit; r-a,or

mythin- like tfart?

1 * 0 , I don't kno- th-t no* -ith-r.

‘I. ou tell nc ou cx-orr?-:itcd or. « ;irn tronty tr.es
•r.d you -cn't even knor Ins first nrrv., don't knor *-hcro he
is fro:’, or -nythir.r obout hop?

- didn't t^lk :•. o’ other's first n-n. a nor

5ut fchoa- dot oils. :t is possible tlrt i did find out
"here h- c-ric fror. -nd rhr.t is ‘irat n*ru -r.c, but I h-vo
forgotfcon it by nor-.

'ell r.or, cm you i-o us the nrj-.os of ray of the

others? it shouldn't be too dlffioi^lt. i think i could
%

re- 1 -^nbv.r the nrces of ten or fifteen non T "ork-d ••ith for
- c ■■ - ter. '3 th-t, on sue. m ? portent problen.
i'h-re v-3 r ncn nrnod Sobottc.

*i. Sx.ll th-t, pl--sc.

... SO u 0 T T ...

0 -n you give us -n- fvrt: r inforr-tion - out hi ?
h. Sobott- occupi-d - spoci-1 position th-r-, bee vse
Wf 3 th*. r»an '-ho rent throw ‘ th- ost -x--rar-nts, -nc'

" c tkc 3“ r '& tin hrd - sort •>. superior position m3idc tii-.t
3 r 'tp, nc I think Sobottr. r: the m I t-lked viM; -;03t
'll. Consequently, i rdiny bin thr.t he

srfeerre »r. Ho broke-into r. 1-rgo ..us trim St-te bmk,
or.- other things, md, so 'nr re I knor, he ”-s -n .'.ustrien
1. 7-11 no-, do you It.o-- t! n-r.-s of -ny of the
others?

5c 75


2 - S-lO-2-Krrro- (2rcr r.J

Court *o. 1.


*!• ill no-, do you kno- ’c.a rimes of -ny of the
others 5

' -a, I renenber - rn ‘ loos -nd the nmo Sozla!: or
so- t: ir. Ilk- th-t. yloos is oy-llud 3T L 0 or 0 0 S, -nr*
the oth-r, 2 0 S L .. K, -or sa-.t i of that sort, I don't
:<r.or that for sure either.

'I. -11 no-, don’t you.kao- m; p-rticulms about

these xn : It seers to :e thrt ; ou riitc frequently, m

the course of the cxperir.-nts, cft«-r th- non -ere uncon-

%

sclous nr.'* after they care to, ou ~io \Id rsk then questions
liko thw •' lic'tesser. denier. It "ovld seer to re thrt ou
-ould hr.vo ined rorc informt. or. shout thos- nen then -ou

h-ve durm the course of the e.r err:-nts. Don't you .Vve
rorc Inf or. vat ion nbout then to , ive us so th-t pv.ih-ps vo
cm fine’ ti er? Do you knov vh-ro t v -re?

O, I h-vc no idor..

n. E-c "ny of then survive the txpern ents?

... .11 survived the ex on its. The ltn^os Vior/oy,

:.- 3 corroborated thrt --on: others.

1 . .j\ they '0 volunteers?

1 . let you haven't found r.n; of then r nC brought the.-
here before this Tribunal?

... o-* rv I to find these cn *-hcn I r.: interned?

1 our defense counsel could roll put out r notioc
r.*! loo': for the?:. If -e could - -t the inform t ion, perhaps
‘ : could fine* ther. Perhaps ou can r-nunber the first nano
Sobottr? D-> you renenber t: ~t? This is the -r.n you talk

wd to the oot .

... To.

1. "or . 1 1 rcncnb.r hir?


6577


2 ray-r-r S-iO-3-Krrror (5rovn)

Court r'o, 7..

3. Thank you.

I certainly don't rc^cnber hi 3 first rrr*.

: T ov, vhrt r-s the r or ere that these volunteers
--re to ;et for being subjected to the cxp-rircr.t?

... '.hat t.ioy actually received :s r. revr.rd, I don't
knot for sure. I knor only fror the docunents her- th~t
Sobottr. cos released, rnd I know that he h-d theretofore
beon pro mised th-t he rould be y-rdom-c? -nr] th"t girr.ler h-d
personally verified this rhen .0 p-id Ms vi3it there.

Th>-n HiTfl-i*, rhen the report ws -do r.t the conclusion of
the oxperinents, s-id it again, and Rrachcr 'Iso arid that
they "ere to be set at libert; .

a. ro you runcnb.r the ji‘- 3 >botta fror these docu-
n.nta, or did you rencr.ber it fra.' ; oru conversations v/ith
hir?

... I r-r.cnb-rcd it fro:- our ennv, rae tiona. Particular
)y, because c University professor at ronr. h'd the s “.to none
and that is ~hy this r-ther unusual n*r.e stayed in ry
ncrory.

ell. of course, ’-hen ou rcr.ertbcred the professor
*t r onn ••ith the sane n-ne, you rust certainly h-vc -sked
th- folio-: '‘.‘.re ; ou any relation to Mr?-' Th-fc is - likely
quest! r., rcvldn't it be?

1 don't knor *-Mfch..r I -shed that or not. In
principle, the fret that r 'Jniverait; professor should be
r relative of - s-fccr-ckcr is not too prob-blc, but naybe
1 . did ask '. in, it is possible.

'. ou didn't find out fro. tint course of questioning
' .-.thor or not the fcllo- c- c fror yuniefc, .Sesgia/Sttnoo
or Mere, did you?

..s I h-vc s*id, in the c-se of Sobottr., I assure
-'t he s rr. ..ustrirn.


6875


2 T3-10-4—Krrror (3ro- )

'curt ;*o. 1.


”i. oil nor, I h-vc cs'-incc hero r.ll -Ion? thrt you
r-rv porhrpa - thouphtful physicinn rnd r.ppcrcntly c v_r;

—'cdspciontious ro3-~rch worker. It s:.:a uost unusunl thr.t
- n *n of your ccliber didn't hrve cnouyht interest in th.
people thr.t ho — s subjotftxnr to experiments to h-vc -,or-


information about then tk-.n you have. Didn't you errs?

- ou sr; , ;ou tell us hero, thrt ••«•. raked the*’ “hether they
-ore volunteers. Did you ju3t sr : -.-.re you voluntcenr,

-nd not rak thcr -ny further oiest. -.ns? 1 ou rcron't
interested? It sc ns strange for r physloirn not bo be
interested in sonc of the br. c’.:; round of the poople th~t he
is aubjetiny to experiments. von ^r. Mnr kner son., of
• he people thr.t he r-s usin'; m his cxp.rirents In Suchcn-
r-*ld.

..s I arid, I did talk "it: these people. I’orcovor
since I r.ssoci'ted -ith the /for tro or three months during
these experiments nnd put the- m the exp-rin-nts rnd or-*
rhet the * had to do, there is no ' oubt in ny nine' at -11
th-t tl volunteers. .hen I -aked then quoationa, I

didn't ask th^n in r critical spirit bee-use I h-d -.ny
mistrust of then, but these questions I -aked simply
occurred in the course of the conversations I h-d "ith then
o. .ell nodoctor, Titer . -ff'3 job there v-3 noro
or leas taking erre of th-s- experimental subj-cts, '-.-.sn't
.t? 'fr.an't he the block elder?

::ofr —3 the bloc'.: elr'er for this rroup, y s.
o. ell nor, he n-s m r. 'ositxon to knor norc -bout
thwse experinentrl subjects f.-n you, —sn't he? He p^r-
h.-’-s h~f c card index file on then.

... Fo, I don't believe he had a c-rd index file,
c. ell, he kne- norc -.bout then then you did, didn't
.? He lived "ith th..:-. Ho xma mother ifinrto.


6079


2 j-lO-5-:rrroT_^£Ero'T.)

Court o. 1.


-11 no--, 1 -off str.teti that ten lnrrtca h-d


Tint's possible. I don't :r,or ho-.: -oil he h-d
knorn tie— before or hor roll ho rir.Co friends nth then.

Tfc-t, of course, I can't Jut ;o.

1. Jo*c. ver, you rauld. bo villin; to ednit th~t per-
hr-s his testimony concernin’; th^ae subj-cts is r.orc
relicblc thrn yours?

... I crr.'t judge -s to tii& relirbilit; of Hoff's
c stinony. I Just don't hnor.

*$• ell r.ov, these tor. or iiftenr. - Neff referred to
then 's •'exhibitionists’* or *cx. iblticn subjects 1 '. T>o you
recall that?

It rm Vie" eg it *o used that tern for the first tine
here — ^exhibition subjects .’ 1

volunteered, didn't he?

•• • . cc •

1 . .3 r n-ttor of fr.ct, stated, that's pn p-yc *ld .

of the record, 'our Vonor. .11 no r, lu. rlso stated th-t
only one of the subjects used :-.n t>. experiments -“s r»-

ie-sed, didn't he?

+

... les, that's «-hrt he said.

'i. '-’he documents support ' is testimony, don't they?

... uc-rrdin? Sobott", he is o •uclficnll: jentioncd 'or
jrrdon in l.r-ndt's lett-r or .lasc r'a.

'.11 nor, do you rocr.ll . e. f str.tiny h-re th t lto
r.r.erbers the first dr.ys of f e erinents ”hen th-; hr;*
th- firs- series of exp-rin-nts, an th't he stated th't
Huff -nd ours-lf rere pr-.aont? .o ou r-crll th't?

... rirst, he said that ..uf. -s present on the first ^
-n luftcaifc uniform. Later, : - corrected hirself end acid
v- —s not ir. Luftrrffe ’in if or , -•«•* it tran't on tlx first
cither. Father, he ras in civilian cloth-s -nd it v:s
co.pi- o_ recks 1-fccr.


6560


2 ”rr-I -'-S-lO-6-K2rro*- (3ro-r.)

Court *'o. 1.

'!• Veil nor, tell nc, in these first series of
cxp~rir.cr.ts did you use these ten or fifteen non th -1 you
hr 1 ct rot r disposal?

/». res.

1- f-f.e 622 of the record - “.Titer Keff, o rr.n rho
lived rith these gentlcncn, rho v.tc the clock eldest, rho
knor rho r:r 1 going in end out of the lor pressure chr.nbor,
at-ted thet r.o derths h'd occurred in this first series on
tlrt dry, but this first series of oxperinents wrs not
errried out on the volunteers? Do you ronenber th*t?

.. off 3“ id h~rc thr.t all those ten or fifteen ->cn
”-r~ not volunteers -t nil. I reueiiber that very definitely
nd he - Iso srid thr.t thcr- rore no frtrlities. I’ot during
the first rev drys, but X t ink he sr.ld durins the first few
r oo tea.

. rIso arid tht these volunteers rere yoliticr.l
prisoners, didn't he?

... Koff sr.id hero that nil sorts of people "ere there
- -11 clrsscs or atretn that o\ •

-11 nov, -.'hen you :rdo our pie- or Rr. sober r.rd.o
h:s "le- to s^curo the volunteers for these experiru-nts,

"hrt fonj or in rh“t rrnn-r c id he r.yper.l to the inn* tea
of the D" :c’.ru conc-ntr-tian c*:ey3?


6861


2 Kcy4i-JB-H-l-aloy (Int. irawnj
Court I


j. oust how he did this I don't mow. 2 uis w..s not done 07
tL.sehcr, hut by the C_mp Con-under oa tsc. basis of the discussion of
2 uschar»c letter and the inform-ticn given by tne .adjutant Schaitzlor,
fro. ..unich, *t.z w .s prosentut the discussion, as for I fcnou
the pecplo Vi.ro ashed at the roll cJl vho wonted to volunteer and

:..en r. great number of volunteers -

3* Haw, you s-y roll Cull, do you nejj roll coll of only
habltv.nl criminals or crininuls condctmod to death boesuse you only
used cr in Inals in these experiments, or did the roll coll consists
of nil sorts of prisoners, political prisouore and evoryono also?

a. Just how the roll c -11 varus I don't know, :r whether r.
tpccific group w_s cstaolished a priori.

s. Tou actually don't .:..ow very ..uch ab ut tais, do you?

«. I h..d nothing t; dc with selecting then. Sborovas n
clear cut agreement with the c...p csx-ondor vuich h~d been rc.xhod
during this discussion. He r..h s-id thut wo would find on .ugh,

-nd told Er.schcr th..t ho c uld picle tho po.plc wh were physic -lly
qualified f-r tho experiments.

0 . How, vh .t did you offer the. at an indue aoent ta undorgo
thfcfiO experiments; that w_s the induce-cat, w .sn't it, ,ffaring thee
. n.xAth if they successfully ucdervwnt the experiments?

a. I didn't off or than a p-rdon. I wasn't in a position t: do

th t.

q. Tou must h-vo insisted before yr-u worked n then. tft_t they
vero to bo 0 xd nod. that is the gist of the testimony, you would
a t use men who at l-„st w.rc n-t offered a pard n after you n.d
•sc -rimentod on tha., w aid y u? I — sore y u wouldn't, w uld you,

D ctor?

a. %..t w_s .. clear cut st_tc-«.nt, also th .t the people should
bo pardoned end th-t their sentences should b- reduced, -his wee
• slooly a theory, but v_s sot down in writing, -nd Hi—lcr had


6S&2


2 :.:y-t^-ll- 3 -h_lor (la*. Brown)

C-u rt I


n.-f c tho bxc promise when ho v..a there.

Cf e:urso f Ei-Mcr's idea -b ut pard aing those uca v.Bn't as conclu¬
sive ac ; u stated, was it? You et-te la the original Hi_nlvr lotto?
tb :t Hi iJ.er v.-s in f-vor i: pardoning all the habitual criminals
taat wore subjected tc these exoori-ents; now, did Hi_J.or havo a
change of heart and l..ter withdraw th_t pro-dse, or what happened?

a o didn't take anything b_ck, at loast I didn't know it if
ho did, but f c uree, I c-n't check whethor or net ho kept his premise.
! can't forco a ~un like Hi—ler t: keep als word, -wo over at that
:L.o I h d no re-soa to believe th-t this was a -oranisi. ta..t v.-.a not
tc be kept.

Q. Voll, now, whoa those volunteora, no to spodc, did voluatcor,
were they warned of the haSards of the experiment?

«» ^loy wore not Just'oc-cullcd' and I Can 8ay th~t thoy wero
roally coluatccrs. I told tha: wh..t tho point of thoec oxporinonts
was, what tho:- had to do, what they h_d to particularly tJcc ears of,
and Just \fcat their nctivo purticipati m j cr>-ri. cnt_l subjoctn was
tc bo.

r. Uoll, now, y ax must h„vo told thou th t these experiments,
cat lem on, you aro going to go thr'ugh ar* painless and they won't bo
r~-rnful r.t all, y u -ay go^hrrugh s:ae distortions, howovor, at
that time ; u njy oo uacoasci us. Vhea you wjee up you won't realise
7 u have gone through experiments; thoro is a: danger f doath, end
•h tho purp cc of this exo^ri^ent is t o.nofit tho Ocmaa aviat rs,
sv.cthiag tc th .t effect; you must h Vv Said c-.othing sl.il-r to
that to tha:?

a. oxset-.lng similar, a t in dot.il at y u nave s-id it.

*. I ah uld tnink jnu w.uld have d ns it a-rc in dotvdl than
I . vc, because I a. n exocrt on th..t subject ..8 you ^rc?

a. I have air.ad," explained f tho: wt-t altitude siemens is,
erol .ined viiat th_t thoy would bee no uncnsci is .aid this was tho


5833


2 Ucjr-ifr-JB-ll- 3 -iialoy (1st. 3 rovn)

C:v_rt I

_:st L-p:rtcnt point, after wnicing up 3 for us they _rc cl>—r ir.
t_cir minds they sh uld pull the par-chute release. That v_s tho
.. :st i^Jortcnt thing, course, and I -Iso Jenow very cert .July I
iiss told tcec teat these were experinonts in which nothing v.uld
h^ponod cs far ns con's judgment gees.

la ether words, you impressed upon thoo that theso ixpcrLionto
were harmless?

a. I told tnai th.t to tne ocst of -ur ability wo would noo
t: it that a:thing happened t> theu. I -Iso tcld tho- th«ro vao a
certain rinh inv lved v.iich c uld not bo precisely culcul-tod, but
sc far os the physicians wero concerned the;- w-.uld see to it that
nothing happened tr thos- people.

Veil, now, D'-ctor, if th-t w . iso c-so, in tno c urao of
thceo high altitude experiments why vui it necessary t- use habitual
criminals and cri .Inals condCDBOd to death; in othor w.rdo, why vao
It nccocB. r.- t: -ffor that particular gr.-tro '* individuals an
inducasent t undorgo such hem less experiment; why couldn't you
-a well cull in tho politic.! prisoners avd h-vo §aid, "Jontloacn ,
we b.-.vo an ccpcrlmcct.il pr gru; hore", and oxpl.Jn to thee how
h.r..loas tho experiment ia, und "if you will undergo tho exocrUoat
wo will .ivc y u one moro loaf of bre-d than you ..re getting or -no
-era piece of eaus a d^-, "which giving t then would be quite an
indueoat, uhoro_8 you uacd criminals. which qb you auy-voro Juo-
tifihbly pi.cod in concentration c-^>s -ad voro a aonaco to tho public,
b-cause tho;' were criminals, and now yvar. goin.; t: subject tho.
t: a porf ctly h-r_K3fl capori-ont -ad -llow tho. t go out into
tho public and c ii.it sene core crime; it doesn't see. y„ic_l if
it is a har-oloss exp-riceat; there must be some d-agor to it?

-w -s to wh-t gro-^j of subjects w-r t to be chosen ..s aporiacatol
sabJacts I h-d no influonc.. Hi—lor as Soichofuehrer SS aoc Cniof
of Police issuui the dir.ctivo. *-e had no influence on th-t. That io


6:84


2 (Int. 3 rovn;

Court I


true of tie cose of doctors all over tue Vorld. the doctor d»oaa<t
caoose tie people, the St-te does?

a. Shat le right. I afc going to refer to It. I hope this Is
in order so we can read It, page 62, Document 3odc 2, Docunont
1971 —PS. Cils is the Klnuler letter to Eascncr in lUOswer to Hnschor
%fcoa Baschor sent la these preliminary reports, Sis is wncre
Eltcler says they shall be pardoned to a concentration cjjp for life,
dais is dated 13 -*>ril 1942 .

■Dear Dr. RoeCher i

I wont to answer your letter with which you seat ae your
reports.

■Especially toe lctost discoveries a-de la your oxporlaonts havo
interested ne. Kuy X ash you now the following:

■ 1 , This export..eat Is to bo r^o-tod on other sea ceadounod
to death*

■ 2 . I would iiico Dr. F-hrcaJcahp to bo t Jeon into consultation
on taose cjyorfc-onts.

■ 3 . C:nslderlng tho long coatinuod axploitod in such u nunnor
as to dotcraino whether theec con could be rec-llod to lifo. should
such an ooporiaont succeod, then, of courso, tho person condainod to
death shall bo pardonod tc. concentration c^rp for lifo.*

&..t was protty white cf him, Wasn't it? Th-t is <luito a p-rdon
to give G nun, isn't it? after you practically hill hi*, you oun
recall his life and if you arc succossful in recalling hiu to lifo
then wo will p-rdoa him not to go scott free, but to a concentration
c-p for life, th-t being -11 tho evidence wo have of p.rdon freu
aio-1-r, isn't it?

a. I did act ujco tho experiments. I did not got tno errors
frx: Hinul-r to c-rry the. out.

2 . Ton firuly indicated the attitude Hcinrcich nimbler hnd as
to pardoning coacoatr-tioa c...p lssi-tcg who h-d been conduocod to

6885


2 r.a^-*-vP-ll-5-kuloy Cat. Jron)

C:urt I

ilf.Ui; ao doesn't uvea ucatioa Habitual criminals who havu act boon
c-.-Zcnaod to d«-th, th-t is hit attitude. I this* it it oxttylary,
isn't it?

T ionit /Cacv just vh_t the general proccedure was vith
pardons ia such c-ses as this. Ia general people coadctr.ed to doath
aro bnopy if they are nardoned just at long os they don't die; now
vhothor a person ccndaoaod to doath could oe sot scott free I don’t
jt;ow, I can't jud,-w. however, this Wat Himl-r’s diroctivo. It
vat sont to the cocoss_ry office*, to tho Chief of tho hipo, Gluccks,
oad sc forth, and hero it iaye pooplo coadooaod to death are to bo
pardonod to conccntraticn Ca^p for life.

0 ,. Sow, la tnc course of your oxpori-cats you only used so
you and 2uff say, free 10 to 15 experimental subjects, all volunteers.
Was it node cle-r to thio gryxtp of experimental subjects, th.t is
tho ono ia the Hatcher cx^ori-oato and tho one ia tr.o ibif: -Rxuborg
operimouts, cad ..ccordii*. to Huff th-fc numbers in tho hundreds and
up to 80 wore billed uVwitu-lly in hi,* altitude «pcrluents. How,
w.a it undo clo. r to these suojucto vnea thoy vcluntu*.rad for o»-
pcrincats what the;- wore volunteering for; did tuo subject Jcacw vhothor
or act ho was volunteering for thu Ruff-*embor,- or haschcr expcriuont,
cr merely for the Saschcr cxpori-cat; hew did ho mow whon ho sot
into tho cxporL.ont. 1 ch-i-bcr who going t verk oa hi-, how
did he know that?

a. Our uoa lived, at the st-tioa .md e.rrlod on tho experiments
coutinously, :nd I told then exactly what experiments w^re tc bo
c xried out and to uh..t purpose they sorrod. Ihe othur expwriuontal
subjects Whoa R..schor used, I hA nothing to do with. ;:off e^s
they vorx brcu^it t: the station witn SS iT-i-rd* if 83U0 8 ;rt * ind
th. t Reseller then carried out tnc expori-ent* with thai.


6985


2 Haj^_-GJ-12l-^chan-(int. -rcrn)-
Court 1

'•» : '- 11 no-,Doc cor, cich arse cv-ry -. 1 .. n vxp ri-ental aujccc

-ntcrcd the lew pressur- chaafcer, did ycu lock at hie: end sake sure h-
w-s one of your ten or fifteen?

A If those were =y exp-ria-nts, th-n I usually called the people
..nyaclf in person, end said whose turn it was. I had a list to set that
to. _x?eri.-..nis were -vcnly divided saoog the experiment-.1 sub joe ta.

•i -11, you took -- list; *iat did you call in-a; nueb-rs one, two,

thrcc » ,our > :l "“» o-ven, -ight, nine, t n; or did you call then
by n -su.s?

A The nra.s w-re th.ro.

. You only ran-nb-.r thn.e n n-s end you used to call than by name?
. A I rocecber four neces.

3 Four cut fifteen '.nd you used to call these o-n by nr.a. and mkt
sure, one would not ha*u twenty tLxs in th. ehoab.r nd tin other five;
ycu wan Cod th-o to file in -v»nly, yet you era reader only four naats
of such an iaport'nt project.

A That was fiv- ye u-s ago and I carri-d out so many -xperinentn
during th-t tin- at Dachau -n.5 w s in the office too, I cannot Ull you

:.nts of the pocpl at the Institute cithor.

i Yet, whenever a person .ntired that experincntal chanber, you
knew whether or not it w -s one of your rxn?

A Yes, I knew that.

Q .j-.d ycu checked up -nch and ev.ry Ust on these individuals -nd
=ad. sur- that a wrin*_r was not wrong in on you; did you?

A I kn-w who th.se con w.re,

Q 11 nor, what i 1 ttitud-, Dr. Rettbere, .

•

capacity of a prisen-r or a p-rson incarcerated to volunteer for an
-xp_ri_-x.nt? You have n. rd h-rc at this Tri bun al, sooo cay that a pri-
::r ~ r could not volunt__r for anything, son- think he could end sorte
-fink he was co -reed, hat ever the situ-tion nay b_, raiat is your at-
ccnc-rninr th. capacity of a p-r3cp incarcerated to volunteer
r a medical -xprir^nt.

C


6887


2 Ks 7 -i*-<JJ—12-2- -.chan-(tat. Brown)-
Ccurt 1

A May I go Into this in see, detail?

Q Certainly.

A First we mist discrininat- in principle be tire an whit th. state
does end what the Doctor docs. That ah- state. c:.n take criminals condcn-
ned to death and make tba av ailable for experiment! so.

Q Doctor, just a resent. Please, before you go into th.. attitude
of the state and the doctor, let us gc into this phacc, whether or not
a person incarccrat-d in prison can hinself, of his own violation, vo¬
lunteer for an -xp.rincnt, regardless of state laws cr of doctors. Do
you think when i rarden of a prison or a concentration carp cccaandant
cases up to an inaatea and says, "Till you volunteer for this uxperi-
aent?" dc you think ha conscientiously volunteer:.; what is ycur atti¬
tude on that? You have heard it in th- courtrooa, you have heard three
or four versions; now I r-.nt to h-ar your version.

A Yes of course. It is ny view that we sast discriminate betne.n
the philosophical freodea of dotenain-- ion tad actual fr-edom of deter¬
mination. The philosophical fr.-dca of deternin-Icn, I don't know any¬
thing r.cr does -n/cn- -Iso know of free dee dot rain ion. Shun wa arri¬
ve at a decision, there is no such thinh rs philosophical freedoa. The
p.rson, cf coarse, ir Iso not free In the use of his rill, but pn the
other hind, he ir ccnpl _t,ly fr_„ in hi3 choic- betw-cn the various
possibilities that he is confronted with.

For instance, if a oan is condemned to death, he goes back to
his cell nd finds a letter saying that if he vclunt. rs for an expe¬
riment that is dangerous to life, h- pill be pardonn-d. You don't have
to issue in rd-r for him go do this. is p-rfactly free to accept

hie ntcnce r t thr ig he exp rirant. Ihls*is, -f c.ursu,

n extrene example.

Ana h-r .x npl. is a nan sentenced to r. long t_ra who volunteers
- r malaria -x?_rin_nts, ha is asked Is:, if he ..amts to volunteer
-ci h- can nak_ r. p rf-ctly fr v e ci.ricc. % e is cone-cn.d to t-n years
iaarisCTBent, h has the choice, ac^s n_ ~ nt fcc accept’ th. future of

68 S3


2 k2y-4WJ-12-»fe-shan-(lnt. -rcwn)-
Court 1

nalari :r ten years in prison. Tith in this possibility, he is p-r~
fcctly free in his decision. That the situation exercises certain eo
crci-n on him, is quit-- dear. That is nothing unusual as far as tne
doctor is concerned. I have already said that the state apparently re¬
cognised the fact that a p.rson can volunteer, because all over the
world it ijaa given prisoners a chance to volunteer.

The second question is what is the doctor's position? alnyys
says the state is tfau lan and secondly, the doctor is perhaps tore
accustosud to femulating a decision, when there is a eo crcion element
in the situation than ether people, “c is inclined to regard such con¬
ditions as voluntary conditions. F-r example, decisions for nines in
child delivery arc rude in event of a oaomrean operation. The dontor
docs not arrive at that decision because he wants tc, but because tho
situation makes it necessary. He has to oenfrent hicself with tho
problem, perhaps if I should let it bo a natural birth it will Ho
successful and perhaps sot. his to draw hit own ocnclusicns in this
situati-n. Perhaps if a pers.n is w-unded and says I was asked at that
tine whether I wanted =/ ara t: be amputated or net and I said I don't
ant it t be amputated and yeu can see now 1 have sy ar=. Undoubtedly
there arc such r.isc3. The doctor has tc say h-m.stly to the patient
that in his knowledge and to tho best of his knowledge your lifo is
in danger, if .tc dn't amputate this era. Hew, make up your nind,
if we d-n't amputate, yea arc in great danger, if we amputate ycu arc
brmd to resever, but you won't have «ne am. Haw, free tho talc- told
Hy this nan, who did n. t p-mit the input!ti r., we knew that, irvi
thero arc scr.e pe;pl-_ wh desire tr let the anputation take place and
= 1 . people wh' desire n t tc, they arc in a situati-n, where by iate
*-hvy ire under coercion. Fite b..s plieed then in this situation,

-id it is one wnioh the doct.r is ac re familiar with, because agaic
ana again oancs upon such patients.

~rZ r"SS3)E:«T: C-urecl, see will suspend the examination at this
*- f r i c.-ent. The Tribunal w aid like to examine German Document


2 May-4MJG-12-L-4icehan (Brcwn)
Ccurt So. 1


r; k 2. Kill c-unscl hand a cops* tc the Tribunal?

ifi. HARDY: I will check =y files cn this Document. It nay be
that odd rf the photostats are sissing.

THE PHI-?IT?T: Tee Tribunal desires tc examine that D-cument

beck.

JUDGE SEBRINO: Ur. Hardy, would net the official text of the
document, as it appears in the record cf the Interneti:nal Military
Tribunal Trial disclose the status ■ f this.

UR. HARDY: That nay net have been used before the I.U.T., I an
net sure, Y ur Hen r. It has an I.U.T. number, I den't knew, whethor
it was used or not, can you ascertain that?

JJDGE SB8RIN0: They quote cn the Hiobcrgfrll affidavit hero,

"I certify that Dreum-.nt No. 1602-PS was introduced into evidence as
Exhibit Sc. U.S.A. L5U in tho Trial by the International military Tri¬
bunal of Hermann flooring, ot al."

MR. HARDY: I will check the original in the I.U.T. file.

JUDE SEBRINfl: U.SJL. L5L.

THE PRESIDENT: This document, r.s it appears in the Qonaan docu-
oent book, varies greatly. There is c re text in the German than in
tho English document bo-'k. Th ^7 do n t c rrespend. N w the photostat
as returned hero manifestly, contains much m. re text than appears In
the English docicxnt book. Iho English opens with a sh.rt paragraph
of four lines, then f Hows a long paragraph and then two Very sh rt
paragraphs^ N .n the photostat shews either three very long paragraphs
cr twe long cn^s and two sh.rt .nes. N.w, the certificate, attached
tc this d euaent in the English d cuaent b ok, certified that the English
translati n is a true and correct translation cf the orig in al document,
which it manifestly is net. Du first page cf tho photostat shews
double ; rinting, what happened, I cann t tell, the double printing is
there together with a white blur, which makes part f it illegible.

S rt this d ccKnt, according tc the certificate attached thcrct , was
admitted bef re the Intcrnati nal Military Tribunal.


6SSO


2 May-lf-0 JZ-12-5-&: chan (Brcro)
Ccurt Ho. 1


UR. HARDY: It appears then are cbvicusly two different docu¬
ments, year K-ncr, I rill have it checked in =y and the files

• f the International Military Tribunal and I will try to report :n it
at 1:30 if I can do that.

"HI PRESIDENT: The Tribunal is ixch interested and is quit©
dissatisfied that we hare in cur document beck a nanif<-stly incorrect
translation of an important document, together with a cerfcificatJ-n
that it is true and correct.

UR. HARDY: It is surprising to a. thet this was not noticed
os this docuncnt was placed in its entirety into the record.

THE PHESIISNI: This is a pecu li a r circumstance, the Tribunal
Is confr nted with. I rill return the Dorman document and riginal
ph tostat and ccunsol will cake an investigation of the result.

The Tribunal will b%- in recess until 1:30 o'clock.

(A recess was taken.)


6821


C-MTt SC. 1

2 Xay 47-A-13-I-iSe-?cet«:r (Ton Schon)


SESSICS

(Thu hearing reconvened et 1330 hours, 2 kajr 1947.)

TES rtABSEAL: "he Tribunal is egeln in session.

HASS r.OG-£G - Eeeuncd

%

.•<5. HASDT: ieey It pleese Tour Honor, ft thle tine I vould like to
clarify the difficulty with Docunont HO Io02-?S. It Nc-.l that thle
docuneat exists in better condition than the photostnt originally
put in ae ea exhibit, end contains the paragraph that I vm ebout to
read fro:, the nnglith translation. Sov, vhen this ~tt introduced before
the International killtery Tribunal, the international Killtery Tribunal
prosecution sav fit to only introduce the pertinent sections to their
case, namely, the first paragraph, the third paragraph, and the last two
wragreohs, and they had u.t they referred to as a nertipl translation
of the document rod Indicated it vas a oartial translation by so heading
it "Partial Trcnslction of Document 1602-PS" and indicated the blank
spaces by dots.

lov, vhat happened vhen our document book wrs out together. The
prosecution hare desired to uso the oa..e document and only the o»ne por¬
tions thereof that had boon used bef or. the Dff and, rppprontly when
they re-translated the doc\n.nt or recut the stencil and certified it
by o different individual, they Inadvertently didn't indicate that this
vrs c partid translation and, by the sic. token, tho docu-ent that
vunt in v r .a one that v ee haty and they could not reed it, oo vhen they
cat the stoncils for the Jerran copy the Ocrnrn copy had the hasy ono

to go by ar.d v w rc unitle to include th.te vsr4c.

Sov I will pasa thin geed copy of the origincl exhibit up to you

for y:ur p.rusal, ea vll as the type of translation that v.nt in
bl-foro tho L%T, and ’ only vent to use the portion that '■•as used at


tv> o


=urt Sc. 1

Key 47 -A—15-2-iHK-Jester


(Tea Sehon}


iur document bock nov. the translation ve have no- I vent to use it as
i«. -=ut it ie paragraph number 1 in the Gersan - nunher 2 and 2 . in the
3er=an. and then the last tvo brief paragraphs in Genian before ^orc
•he signature aooeer. of Catcher. And you will note the copiea as such.

I have here another nineographed Gerean copy, tve copies of it, that
contain it in the sane nonner *. this here, that I Just received that I
can give the defense counsel for their use. 2 -ill have other nineo-
graphed copies of the Gernen cut and deliver it to then later. I -ant
to paes this up.

TG KGSIOST: Have you a cceplete translation of the docucent?

.£. KAPUT: The prosecution didn't see fit to translate the docu-
nent in it. entirety because of the inn.teri.lity of the other nere-
graphs. If Tour Honor rooucsts it, -e -ill have it.

TG HGilDnTT; As long as this confusion has occurred, the

Tribunal i.airta the entire docuaent translated

rih. KAPUT: Tes, Tour Honor.

TG GiSXUKTl —furnished to Oaraan counsel end to the Tribunal


SArBFs Thanh you.

TG rG£-JJi: C: Then there vill bo no ruction but "hat counsel
for both side, have the entire dccuacnt before then.


hh. KAPUT: Thank you, Tout Honor.

TG PGSBBM* Counsel. I notice also the stenographic notes
there. If thee, eoold he trenslet.d, he,, the. «X». If ««r eon *
read. I don't hnov vhether they can or not.

KB. KAPUT: Tcs, Tour Honor.

a-.. TCKtEiS: hr. /reeldent. I oh.-eet to the KteUelm of thl.
docunent for the follovle* reesone. 0.1. doeunent -« hy

tho oroeeoutlon before. It he. teen -tei-d «•* thl ' 4 ’“'

=ent there U . dl.ercnency h.tveen the -relon In the hndHeh doeonent

text end the version In the Semen doounent text, Sh. ^ to-. .*•
■illegible* while the bnglleh text confine this portion of tho docn-

. I Shtsild Ilk. to eteto that if e doonnent 1. illegible for the

5523


-ent


CO « J


ourt So. 1

Hay 47-A-13-&-i£X-5ost*r


(Von Scfcon)


purpose of copying it oust also be illegible for the purpose of transla¬
tion. which apparently was not the case. Is this document now being sub¬
mitted to c-oplete the orevious subaission. or is this a ccaolctely new
document? —

ifi. HIED?: Tour Honor, that is a very staple hurdle duo to the
confusion, thon I will offer this as croaa examination docuacnt and
aaaign it the saae nu=b*r that it has now and use it here now, the para-

9

graph, in the sane manner as if ve wore introducing a new docunont.

JUDQI SiBRIHG: kr. Hardy.

HR. EARDT: Yes, Tour Honor.

JUDGI S^SSIK: You say that this photostatic cony which has now
been furnished the Tribunal is a correct photo.tatlc copy of the origi¬
nal?

HR. HARDY: That is right.

JUDOS SSBRISO: Kay v« not a«ot the objections then by having tho
interpreters who aro here in the courtrooo read this docunont. trans¬
lating it as they go and road it into tho record?

hR. HARDY: That would be oerfoctly suitable, Your Honor. Do you
scan tho docunont In its entiroty?

Hi. VCS'ZEX: I believe X understand the nrosocutor corroctly if I
believe that this docun.nt SO 1602-PS is withdrawn as tho original docu-
=unt and ho now wants to sutait ti os a docunont for cross examination.

HR. HARDY: It is innaterlal the manner in which I do it. Your
Honor. I don't think the objection h*ro has any bads.

JES PRiSIUSST: bell, counsel, the Tribunal now has before it a
good clear photostat of the entire docusent in German. If tho trans¬
lators will now read that document, and it will bo of course translated
into Inglish for the record, will that satisfy you? Will that be a
satisfactory solution for you? The entire docuacnt then will be read
'into the record. You nay examine the photostat of the entire docunont
in tho German la ngu ag e.

HR. HARDY: He has a copy of it in the Gcraan language. Your Honor.


5834


Court Sc. 1

2 May 47-A-13-4-SB4-Ioster IVcn Scbon)

nineographed.

TEi A copy of the satire docunent?

MS. EAP-TT: Tes, four Honor.

TEZ ESZSXXfcSTl Is that a satisfactory procedure to you?

IX. 1CEUEX: Mr. President, the poiat is whether this document ie
w to subcitted a«rely for identification, for cross examination of the
defendant, or vhether it is submitted as a docuaont aad ie accepted by
the Court as a docuneat exhibit. la the latter case it %-ould hove to be
given to no 24 hours beforehand.

x YZ p?iS:2i:.T: I ns act impressed vith that objection. That is
the general rule tut unless counsel shivs tone good reason vhy in this
instance the rule should bo enforced, the natter coning uo, the Tribunal
vould not be inclined to cause dcla-' and confusion by eirroly vniting 24
hours for you to read vhat you can read now. It is on unfortunato error
tut there vns nothing inUrtionnl etout/^Tho ocoloyco vfcc copied the
docuaont simply neglected to state that it vas a partial cony instead
of a couplet* copy cad that can, the person vfco certified to it to bo u
true copy, also neglected to state that it v B o not a complete copy but n
translation ucrely of a portion of the docuncnt. In nher words, those
vho prepared this dccunsnt, the stencils for the inglish docunent book,
inply copied the sheet vhich ves in the record nc it v 00 lr.tr-educed
bef-re tho International Tribunal. It voa o careless nlrtako bit it is
easy to bbc hov it could hrvt hapocned.


6895


Court i

May a-Ar-14-l-ED-Cook-Von Schoen.

DR. VCRVSaK: Then I will consider the suggestion
of the President acceptable.

MR. HARDY: »,w la it my -nderetanding, your Honors,
y.u want the interpreters to read the German ar.d translate
it here into the record?

THE PRESIDENT: I don't think that is necessary. I
think If the counsel for the pro6ecutl n has the entire
document translated into English and stencils are cut and
c.unsel receives a mimeographed copy, counsel for the
prosecution may now examine the witness as to the portion
..f the document which ho desires. I can see no reason
for an objection. It will do no harm to the defendant.

You see that t..ls d cuaont will be furnished in a completed
f rm t the defense Counsel as s on as -possible.

MR. HaRDY: In order to do that I request of tr.o
Secretar: General that the Prosecutl .n be permitted t,
retain t.;ls document Exhibit 44 in it's possession until
wo ay check It for oafe-keeplng. .

THE PRS6IDEKT: I assume that the document vjill
be available in its complete fora by Monday?

MR. HaRDY: I hope so.

3Y MR. H«RDY:

Q. K w, Dr. P. mberg, you .^ve at-ted here th-1 Hr.
Rascher exhibited t; you a letter at this conference in
Munich, c ncernlng the fact tnat Klmuler ordered tnese
experimental subjects must be volunteers. Kow I wane to
" d y »u this p'-rti.'R of this document, which ncited
this alleged Himmler letter. I will start with the third
paragraph of the German walch reads as follows:

"For the time being I have been assigned to the
-uftgaukoamandv VII, Aunich, f ,r a medical c.urse. Durin 0
is c urse, where researches .r. ..i fc r. altitude flights


>Se6


iiay 2 -A-i 4 - 2 -HD-Coofc-V.n Schccn-

play a pr.minent part (determined by the a.mevhat higher
ceiling of the Hn a lieh fighter planes), considerable regret
was expressed at the fact that no tests with nunan oaterial
nad yet been oossible for as, as such experiner.ts are
v ry danger »ua and nobody volunteers for them. I put,
tharef re, the serious question: can you make available two
,r three professional criminals for these experiments?

The exooriaents are made at pernanant Luftwaffe Testing
Station for altitude Research, Kunich. The oraeriments,
fr in which the subjects can, of course, die w ,uld take
ilaco witn ay cooperation. They are essential for re¬
searches on higr. altitude flight and cannot be carried ut,
as has been tried with monkeys, vn. offer entirely
different teet-cihdltions. I have had a v.ry confidential
talk with a representative of the air forces sur o 0 '.n who
makes these experiments. He Is also of the opinion that
the question could only be solved by experiments on human
persons .*

and thor. the signature of Rascher aopcars on tho
djoucent. How, do /o- still maintain that after receiving
that l?ttor Himmler says you will use volunteers?

A. Ir. my opinion there is very little connection.
This letter la very old. It is dated 15 Hay, 19<1. At
obviously records Rascher'a first ideas lr. this dlroction
about experiments. It says, for exsm lo, that no expurl-
cants could be performed with human beings, yet, and tnsre
1 ? oroof against this In the work done in our institutes,
where many doctors and tr.eir associates volunteered lor
experiments up to at least 1 ? kilometers, but It is muen
rA her tr.an the calling of the fighter planes presently
in use mentioned here.

i. ;ow. Dr. Ruff, states that Dr. eltz and all of


58c 7


Court 1

;>• 2-A-l4-3-H5-Coolt-V.n 3cr.oen.


these -eople arrived at th c co.'.ol.siv., they visaed to
ixaerlaer.t n the Jac .au concentration conp inmates early
in 13-1. llov isn't t.iie the be c ir..in t ?

A. That the w.nt.d sac. experiments In 1941? No,
hoc in& was 6aid about that?

i. No this is the be e lnnin . Now they are Just
3 tart ini and ash Kiasler to find criminals for tr.ese
croer-ner.ta si.:ly because no bo ay vil’ volunteer for t.wm.
In -t. .-r words, 1. they could r.ovo volinteurs tney
wouldn't have had to resort to Joo/.aj c noentmtion cam?


inmates, ver s incle.

A. Not I ashed hi — l.r, -ut nasober oa/.ed Hirtulur.

That la n^c. lfc*t is wnet I art t. Uln 0 about,
naoc..er ashed Hlonl*r?

a. And whit he says here ia incorrect In oan. resueota
He r.aya no experiments a ve been performed, that is not
true, tad the eu o;: e3tion t-. -ae fc.ble minded jeoule
w lc he ua.-.es Is absolutely wort leas. ..r. ivuf. has
alro-dy spohen a- at that.

«. Now let's c o to the next l.tcer in that dooumont
b k. .oa say return that doOumant. It is on oc_e 54
of the dooument coo-. 2. unfortunately this document
doesn't contain a i te. however it states:

"Dear Jr. flasefaer:

8. ortly before flyin t to Oslo, the rxlcnafuehrer
iS a ve me ■ ur latter of lu xoy V 1, for oartlal rpoly.

"I cn lnfo-i you that DrlsoQcra will, of course, be
-ledly nado available for the ..1 ,n flight researches.


I .. e informed the Chief of tne Security Police of cnls
a-ra sent ^f the rtelohsfuehrer S5, one requested tna^
the c TcttinZ official be instructed to *ot in t ubh

w’t • ; oa. “


66S8


Court 1

May 2 -xv-14-4-HJ-Cook-Vor. Sohoen.

That la Initialed Rudolf Brandt, low this is the
letter w.-.ich g ve Mr. Rasoher the authority to use concen¬
tration camo inmates, Is It not? Isn't It authority to
use nrisonera for the experiments, and that the particulars
w_l be outlined by the Chief of the oeourlty Polloe,
doeen't It say that?

A. That Is an agreement of the Relchsfuehrer to tola

fIrst suggestion of Rasoher of Aay, 1941, but no details

*

ore set forth.

That Is right. It la ar, u 6 reement to allow

Raschsr to exuerl ..ent at Jaohau or at any concentration

c op, and to ^et prisoners tnorefrom, because of the fact

•

Rr.scher stated In the letter -wnich Incited thia answer
that ne couldn't get volunteers for such a program, Isn't
that what those two letters convoy to us?

a. hr. Rascher hod to deal further with this
problem. lhero woo no doubt furthor correspondence.

%. 3.t you don't Know that, do you? You don't know

that? You aro assuming that?

A. lo, I don't know what corresDondenco there was.

*. Your only answer to it Is an lmoglncable letter
fr to .ilcclor statin^ they must have volunteers, isn't
that It?

A. I do not see that. I stated there was a letter
from Himmler.'

Ve ion't have It here. I Just assume if Jhore
was sue a le.ter we would h.ve It here. Ve hove most
of them talking about selecting, an- setting aside experi¬
mental subjects, and .-.lmmler then in that letter rrom
Rude If Brandt and his other letters talked about persons
who were condemned to death, if he successfully lived
t .rough the ex .erlaent, or whereas he was recalled to life,


6399


Court i

liay 8—A—14— o-gJ— Co k—Y n ecuoen.

he asay -e p. rdoncd to She concentration cex? for life, 'it
in -11 of there le.ters ..r. r.ioiler never nentione tuat
Che; nj't he volunteers. This is not present in a one
of ;he document? in tnie case.

a. Thera erar.'t vary -any letters on it. T is letter
[ry cx -cle says nothin, eb^ut >'rdor.in-, 'nd r.in..ler
nanilned th< : in r let ter.

«nd perhaps that la t..o firat elite ne aai'.tionad
it. I don't think ve should i-tlo ab,ut that any xoro.
Lit'* _.o ou to ..nothar subject.

how concerning tne low pressure c.-a user, wnen
Ruff 6ont this low press-re Chamber from .-.is institute
-n ec'c.ou, did ;ou oc.oa? ny tne drivers fr<;a =«• iir. to
.nlcu with the chamber?

«. •h- tner 1 wont with them? jio.

%. nftcr the cnaih.r arrived in »>acnau, accordm*,
c- the to tioony of K ff, I belieye, -oe oo isted in
as e.a:lln c thh cneaber ao t.*‘t it w,uld >a lr. it6 eroour
f r- r.d use bio, la t .at correct?

a. Aft r t o c .. uoer arrlv b in i^onaa, I went out
to D ci-ai together wit-, assc.. r « nd nasc.ur .rv. the
instr^ct.rns vn*t nad to be done, an electric con ootion
d c be laid ->nu wnot else was necessary to use the
c-.«iabor.

*«.• -ell, did ;o urrlvc at whe aria tijo the onouner
arrived or diu ou arrive at 8ou^ 1 ter d te? •

a. I arrived lj. facr.au wit.'. .v»ecn r when tne Oiwxher
* s already there.

Veil now, to clarif th .n^s, ve want to et these
s trai-.-t in mind. .f_en di che c.'perlxjnts begin?
a. The first beginning vas actuall; on tne <22nd nd
3v_ o: rVoruary.


65GC


C art I

.is? 2- n


n.

w


oh—Von oo.ioer..


K . When did -o _s. e a? yoar es-r.c. t.-^t vsa Cr.o deje
v-ien t..c experiments be^an?

a. Ihay were eapooeed to e6 c in on tnet do:-- sue v
don't a..ow v-iethe: ?.-/ a.'-oeriventr ve a foto-lly oarriod
a; n c.iat day. «t any rate the? vera atooned elnoat
iuzediHCely.

±o vare Mere on tr.e 22r. o? febroery, o. oa.ld
t-- c on direct eraoir.ntior., 1 . 'da raaamber?

a. ¥ea, I wtb tr.ere or. the Sind cr the 33rd, yea.

'Then did . ou a ed-enl. diac-over yoa were at
tVc:a or. tr.i 3 2 nd ;a- of februer•* Vfiendjd - remo-noer
t . t, or v o Xw. ye re-ember-C. jX vara In O .o.iau
n Me 22 nl day of fadreary?

«. ..o, I juet resu-d-red tn*t »ni./.ere v..tsn Meff

la axaoln n told *hia, fcna.t *./o v;otc. - ie

alrtnday table, tnen I remembered t.at ft*-t, and ?lao I
.ov I in-. t n*ve bov.i there on t v c d-»S' e nd tr.o nc. t
_a bio use 1 oen remember che birthday trble.

"oil didn't <jj j he an a tatbt hero to imp»aon
the crudlbillt of ""rlMr ..off in at.-tln. you wee* not
in -aonaa on February 23r.d? Defer.ee c*. nca.l nore oada
an laeua of Cn.?t, tnat .ojvao not More, vt?‘ no-.; -o
daci.de t... c the testimony o. alt.r doff wy a cuito
credible?

a. .v* defense c r.sel didn't do thrt. I aa.llevj
c. t v-a Or. a- -tar.


6901


2 '.^j-e'S-ls-l-Fdct ( 2 at. van ichon)

Court I

1. A h_t is correct. It v^s Dr. Sautor, aid I vill re^d it to
vau, ?_.-e £57 of tie record: ■;. (3y Ir. Scuter) I should lifce to
put s:uo:ai . else to you. Hr. iocborg, will tell you under oath that
he or. tuo 22nd of February, IS-,2, the d_tc you uantioned yesterday, v.-us
not present, and no huovs th-t exactly for the following rc_aoa, and
: n to'li-g- you tais ia oner to on-ole you to refresh your ueaoiy.

f.nll: Itciecrg h.d ejected the birth of a child oa the 9th of ..arch
cad for tu.,t reason Dr. .-.cabers st-yed -t heue until the 9th of Kerch
uita his wife, and it v_s oal- oa the 10th of ..arch 1942 that no went
to Dachau,■ dov, Dr. Scuter is ua honorable Uun. Vou told hi;i undor
o^th th..t you wor. never th.ro „t th-t tino. eh_t ::^dc you change your
-ind?

Of course, ! never toll Dr. tx-utor tt._t I would testify undor
oath th .t on the ?2ad of February I v_s aot ia D..ca n. I only told
3ttf- I Know very veil th-t I Vut ia j.rlin oa tnc 9th of Korea oocauoo
I van ejecting the birth of tho caild at ta..t ti.o. 2h-t Dr. Soutor
interpreted t.a.t, th„t because I Know for sure ta. t I w„» ia Berlin
on tho 9th of . arch I ::ust not h.v« been ia D-cn.u ta tho 22ad of
Icbrucry, I hi nothing to do vitr. th^t.

">.• I don't vjt to got into a discussion of vhothcr or not you
aisled Dr, Suutcr, but he sec.ed to oc quito caphatie aoout tho fact
t t you v.uld testify under o_th, .ad I would bo willing to consider
tlv t Dr. Santor thought th„t, too. a uuttor of f^ct, I wouldn't
third: hr. Scuter would s-y such a thing unless you had either told hiu
or unless he ro^caaoly believed th_t th..t w.s what you told Buff. 3o
tn..t us it we vill go on. On February 22, 1942, the cxjfcriaents
began; is that correct?

a. I c-»'t tell you exactly whether any experiments were performed
or aot. Shat vj a Sunday. Probably vc didn't do any vorh on that
*-‘4 . 'out V_ irohe off the exoeri-eats i—cdiutoly, .md postponed then
until the be iaain of .._rch.


5902


2 X;?t-*J?>15-d-?dldt (Inti Vou oczoa)

Court I

0. 'ittl the be-jinaing of i._rch. iTov, hov t.any series of e;:pcH
ri.--nts did you h-ve? Tour, wasn't it? Tour series, so to span!:?

To hod four different copios in your report?

4. Tes.

H;w long did it t.Jcc you to collate Oach series of c;r>cri-:onto?
a. I can't t.y exactly in dot-11. Sonetl~ce they vcrc gol*- on
at the tr.ie tiiio, not one _ftcr the other, but they wore c-rricd out
p-r.-llol. Uhtll -11 four scries wore concluded, it too* until about
t.io 19th or 23th of i.-y.

How, whoa did t-o first donth occur?

2h~t -ust h-vc been the end of April.

I* That w.j the end of ^rll? 2nd of *pril. Sica -1-oot
L-.cdi tel;* thereafter you returned to Berlin, didn't you, after
tfl-t donth episode?

-k Tos.

^n!. r.ow lon«, did you raiuin in jerlln?
a. I didn't stej- Ion,-; -t first. I wont b.cfc a&-in, us far no
I roc all, and then there w^s the incidont with tho barouotor, so that...

I*ov, fust u —onent. -o will „ct to th .t, *ftor you went
to Jorlia tho first ti -c, th-t is, aftor tee death, tho douth havjonod
about tho ond of .s-.ril, tnca ou went to jerlln, -toon vhon you
rotumed, as I underst-nd it, you vitnessod oaotflOr one or two doaths,
is that ri^ht? 2h-t v-s before the b-Tenet er incident; is th_t ri,*iit7
a. .o, the buraiotor i .cident *.ust fc-vc been rijht uftor 2
roturnoc fra Berlin _ftor 2ech-u.

Q. She b..raietcr incident w-o -fter you returned to O.-cfi.-.u, that
io, _£tcr the first de-th. fhut is the b-rccetcr incident, all rl^ht.

Sou, after tno b-rcceter incident, th-t ~ust c .ve o^oa now aLioot tho
first of key, wasn't it? Zac o. ; rcc-etcr incident? You inist h-vc stayed
in jtrXia a t‘-c_ or setter.

.a. It took uiito ES-c vnile to h..rc tho oarn.cter rep-irofi.

I


6903


P-15-3-?eldt (In:, von Sehsa)


Co-art I

3. £cu lone did you st.y in n.rlin after tnc first deutr. and
until the ti_e you returned and found tne o_.rcu.etor broken?
a- Only a few d_ys.

*. oil, how naijy «L^s? Can't you oo u littlu -ore specific,
two, thr-o, four, five, six?

^ftor I roturnod frou reporting tnc death, perhaps four, fivo

4-C'B*

1. All ri£ht. Four, five day. In -t tJccc you nu..rly to
tho first of ..ay vton tho b .reactor was orokon, is t:;-t ri,*.ht? Almost
tnc first of i*-y.

a. It could oo »oout tn„t tl-o.

"U And uow whon did tr.g second one third doatn occur?

2 :..t v-i l..t«r, after I Ca-.o o_cx with tho repaired b..raiotor,
3. now Ion,; did it t Jec to secure tnc o_ra.ctwr? aoout two

weeks?

a. Lf course, I don't know or^ctly. I don't think it took

c^uito two wooes. It wouldn't h-vc ta^au th..t Ion,;.

•+

3. loll, wo Will « a;.- it took ..oout u week, fh-t will orini; us
») to tnc 7th of k^, wouldn't it? ftaon th^tvo dc_ths ocourrcd
^f.or you got b-c freu 3trlin with the oj-o^otor, isn't th-t ri«ht?


3. And they occurred now lon 0 -ft<-r th-t tine? when you colic
b.ck with tko b-rcuctvr, I -ssunc you -used tnc uressurc elu-oer boforo
Rntchor did. I assume you Carried on so.e of your work oeforo .-Uechor
did, anti then the tvo deaths occurred. Sow, it .mot h_vo beon c
period, of a week or tvo wcuks, or sacothinc lixe tn .t, wasn't it?

a. I ax euro tn_t _fter I ca-o b„c< with tho b-ra.otor I per¬
formed soco experiments. I w^s trying to . ot our experiments finishod.

3 . loll now tnen how Ion,; before the completion of your experi¬
ments did tho deaths occur? 2 hc two do_ths.

a. about w week bvfcri the «-ud of th- expn’im-nts.

6504


2 i»ey-JrJ?-l5-4-Jcldt (la*., von Scbcn)

Court I

3,. about a week. Ton arc ecowdin^ that ia pretty closely new.
Blink hard. about a week, lg to : ri : £t? Ihc do..th didn't occur
bluest a ii-nth ooforo taa conclusion of the cxp.rincnts, did It?

Ho, th..t is -bout ri^fct for the first doath.

11 right,. *hen, oa the 20 th Dey of iay tho pressuro
cn.ufocr left 3-ch_u -ad went b-ck to dvrlia, is ta-t vh-t you wish to
toll US?


. It did. Veil, now, 'tor you got the pressure chaibor b.ck
at jerlin vorc you tho-. when it got o .c to J~rlin?

A. Tot, I w..s ia J-rlia, too.

%. sow b dly sashed up w.j it vhea it got b..ck to icrlin, or
v k .i it in ;ood order?

ft. -hen it c_ac bacfc to Jcrlla there v-o nothing broken.

It v o in us-blc foru?

^ Tos.

How wo are going into hr. Hoff's testimony. Do you recall
that ..r. Hoff ot .twd tfc-t he sabotaged tho chauocr at D-cbuuT Do
you recall th t?

^ Tes, I rcawber th..t,

-hid n:v you co c .Ion.; -cd st..to th..t tho b..ra:our was
broken vhen you returned fra. j.rlin, waicn ..ore or lesn corrobor \tcs
tho tecti..;ay if ».r. Hoff th-t tho ch^-o-r h-d boon d.ii^;cd, dooen't it?

. Tes,

Q, Then *.r. Hoff st..tod th-t you went to Jerlin to get spare
pgrts to repair tuc b raict.r, or the pressure ca.„ 0 Lr, ,.nd-th..t it
took you ne rly two wc.ks, a- 6t-tcd, to gwt ta^ p rts, isn't that
ri.pit? Ei t is wh .t lioff told ua.

e>. Tot, th.t is about vh..t he s.ii.

.. Then by th.t token he «-id th_t was the ro^son why ej^K-rl^to
were still .oiog cn ia the -oath of June, isn't tk_t ri ht?


6905


2 2-.eg»wv?-l&-&-?aMt ( 1 st. von bchcnj
Court I


WU Yes, He even 6-id th-t thoy 1-stcd till tno bosinninfi cf

July.

I-.t'a ri^it. -oil now, cere ve h..vc . struc,;c thisg. Dofen-
d~nt Huff Docucest 3ook, this is -ixhibit 10, Docaicat Jo. G, in tho
Doouooct 3ocfc Ruff . o. 1, which is the affidavit of Dr. KoX hatch os.

Oa pa<;o 22 of the .-fcaff Docuaest Book, the socoad puTa<7raoh, Dr. ha.tthos
S-”S as follows: "Osly at tho th-0 of uy conversations with Dr.

Ho.ubor , did I also loara th_t a low pressure chtfJbflT h-d cone bach
free Daflh.au .ccordins to a;' rwoolloctioa, the low proaeuro oh.nber
uust have ca-c o-cx to tho Institute in ...y, 19«i2. I ca rw.w.bor tho
d-to b. cause after tno return of t-o low pressure chnabor I was
ordered by Dr. Huff to t Jee c trip to Colo-ync ic ordor to procure spare
parts. I ado this trip, and on th-t occasion I was in uy hcoo
to \rr. of Bonn. *h..t v .s ia t..o ti-.o froa 1 June to 10 June, 1942,
so that tho low pressure cc-.Ov-r auet h-v* beer, returned to tho
Institute in ..ay. 1942.' How, hero is a representative of xoxff's fott-
ia<; spore p-.rto octwooo tho d .tes 1 Juno and 10 June to repair n
low ?VW ouro ch.i.oor, .nd you rcc-11 th..t ..r. doff s.-id taat ho
c-J0t vd the chamber in the letter p.Jt of hay, Ad tn.t hr. Rosenborg,
woo two vochs ..'attic.? thv op.je v.rtg to rvtura to D.xhnu to repair
said chcfoor aid th .fc ho. returned .bout the aiddlo of Juno, How, isn't
this coincidentil, doctor?

d. Yws, it is.

It curt-inly is, isn't itT

-w But I thine I can explain it. ->.e b-ra.etcr v_.o rcpjirod in
Berlin by tho lutz fir., welch repaired e-ron^t-rs ~nc w..lch feed
su;>'licd tho b ..raster ia the first pl-cc. «ad .-...tthus' trip to
Bean —

4. To Cologne. =o w..a i.. Joan, his hccc —

Yes, Sons v-s hie hc*:o town. His trip to Cefegao h„d nothiu;:
t do with - rwp-lr of t,;» buren^t-r. If I reaa;oer correctly, Huff


6906


3 i^ 3 NwvP-l5-6-?«Ut (1st. von Scfcoa)

Court I

would probably h-r, fcieva Ui bettor — vie fira w..lc.i --do the
pitrp* v.a located la Colo & -ac, puops for low pressure eiva-oers.

(J. '-hat were you ^'OttlO£ spora p-rts for if the- low pr..96uro
ch..:jor was ia ?. ood eoaditloa whoa you brcu^it it b-c.: to Jorllaf

did you seed parts for at th-t tiao? That vaa ca tuaecoaaary trip
to t-':e uoa fra. hla hoao town oad acad hia -11 tao v-y to Colo.aio
to u ct parts when the;’ weren't seeded.

2 ho parts were seeded. X do sot .siow .....


5? 07


Court I

2 Way UT-A- 13-1 - LcG - Harrow (von Sc her.)


Q. leu stated h-re just a rlnute ago th t the chcab-r was in
good condition. Sew, i-t's aako up our ainds, Doctor.

A. I don't have to sake up ry .ind. The puaps which Vtetthos
picked up in Cologne — I don't oven know whether they wore for this
low pressure chanter or Mother tho. *.r. needed for one of too otfcr
mobile lew pressure chatter which Vero also in operation. This work
book of P’ohlaaister ifcich was sub^ttod here, it shews that th.ro
*.ru sever'.1 lew ..rvssure chi b_rs in .rlin. That book mentions a
low prossuro cha-bor at tho ti.-o when tho other chanter was at Dachau.

It was still undor construction and tho pusps wore prct.'bly for this
•ther charter. If you have the book t.vre — thr t ork book — you can
sec that cl-arly.

3. Wall now, let's discuss anot *-r section of this low pressuro
ctva.ifcor tr .rsfor. Who gave you tho authority, and Ruff tho authority,
to ruccvo tho low prossuro cheater fro.i Dachau to Berlin on tho 20th
day of Say, 191,2?

A. tiho authorised Ruff?

Q. lus.

A. Probably th t r s dona with tho -.dic il Inspectorate just
like tho transfer down to Dachau, in order to h ivu travel ord-rs. In
this case, it was a little difforont 1080 it was Sent by railroad.

3* That's right. Ho couldn't remove at without authority from
above, could ha? At lonst, th t's wiist ho tells us.

A. T ';o it out of Dachau?

3. 1-3.

<• Tuu didn't n-od p_raissicn fron above-, meaning fro-: Sio
Luftwaffo, so :uch as _ mission fro. Hirral.r ir.d ?.ascber particularly,
to g-t it out of Dachau.

4 . art!, you aaan to say til .t Dr. Ruff could have rjT>cv_-d tha
low pressuro chaster fro •. Dachau -at any ti-e ho so saw fit?

A. !Io, •.e certainly couldn't.


69C8


Court I

2 *a; U7-A - 6~2 - LJj _ Sorrow ,vor. SchoO)

boat's right. That's what o Bays. Hu couldn't.

A. YwS.

«. -ell r.cw, lut‘a look at ;.r. /ilea's letter on pug- 77 of
Doev.-ant Book luabcr 2. This happuna to be dated the 20th of .-ay,

19U2. It is Document 3^3A-.-5, Pago 77 of the English. Now let's
rood this:

"Dear -olffy:"

(It is oddru33ud to 53-Cb-rgrup.s_'.fu_3rcr Karl *«olff iroa Field marshal
hilch.)

"In reforcnca to your tologrr. of 12 May, eur radical inspector
reports to M that the ltitudc exj.r. or.ts carried out by the 33
and Iultwaffo at Dachau have boon fxnishod. Any continuation of those
expert. iuoae . )y unreasonable, Hew-v.r, the carrying out

of oxn-ri lor.ts of sonu ot \*r kind, ir. regard to p-rils at high s«as,
woulfl bo important. T.-...50 have boon prepared in i- A.il agrotnont
with the proper offioos,- Cfc-rst.bs.artt :>elts .\ill be ch.rged with
tho execution end St bsrxit .basefur will be node cv-.ll ble until
further or _r in -dciticr. to hie duties within *Jjc Vodic .1 Corps of
• • A c.v . . : tbjso docauros docs not appear nec-sotry,

urrf r. -niarge ur.t ci rha task in not cons id. red pressing -.t this
tiwi.

“uo low—pressure. civ*•■bur will n-t be noodcid for those low-lorap-r-
aturo experiments. It is urgontl; n-eded at cnoth.r place and thoro-
fer, car. r.c ior.a-r resain in Dachau.

"I convey tno spocial thanks.....otc."

-iiA ".41ch a .

, h_rc or. thu 23th of -lay, ••Hah is just beginning to discuss
V.o fact t.:at it should no lcng.r rca-oln in Dachau. He thinks it is
still ir. -cchau, d-^sn't r.c : You haven't received orders to ranovo
It ~t. H:. did you reaov*. at: L.t's turn to the next Ltt-.r, Doctor.

A. r by spying to Hose her, who >.ar..ed tc


5909


Court I

2 ~vy li"-a - lc-3 - LJ - Narrow (von Schon)

carry on the -xp_ri .jr.ts, "Reach~r, there's no point in your trying
to ae the c.aixer here any longer. You "ill only succeed in doing
so for two or three weeks, at the must. It will be better if v;e stop
with the c -jeber new and perform new experiments later", and P^scher
agreed to this. I ca led B and said, "*uff, I've managed it.

ne car. tale t o chamber away." Ruff sent the drivers down and tho
chamber was taken out of Dachau, and that's hew it happened.

Q. el new, hare we have another letter, fortunately, dated
1* June 1 2, on pa,e 7b, Document Book Nuatoer 2, and this is from
Milch to Hippie. It reads as Icllewa:

"According to t.ie agreooent with t e -teichafuehrer SS the lew-
pressure air chamber fur ex oriaeato in the neighborhood of iunich is
still to be available for tro months Icnioc

reover, the Stibsarst Dr. 'asc.'er ia, ir. addition to hia tests
in t c H'Xtwaffe, to be on dut; for ue ’rosent Jor the purposes cf
the Peichsfuehrer SS.

"Hell Hitler, Yours, .ilch."

Ko sent a co.v to SS Cfc -rgruopenfuohrer Aolff.

21 :-., esr.'t it ap oar that .alt.r ..off's -emery is muen better
tftas; yours7

A. No, I knew very io) th-.t ‘he chamber was already gono at that
tiomj tiut the high altitude experiments had been concluded. I at ia,
ir. part, cle r fr - a letter which Readier himself wrote to Hippkc.

Let's turn to the next letter, N0.28L, or. pa^e 79. Jurt turn #

•he pa,e:

"Dear Dr. R^scher:

"-our letter of 5 *Hr.e 1 - 2 ..."

Non we're up to the 5th of June, and, according to these documents,
the chaatoer is still there.

“Jeur letter of 5 June 1:2, to Reichsfuehrer-SS was handed
SS-^oergruppenfuehrer ITolff, Chief of BeJ chsf*ehrer-Si» Personal Staff,


6610


Court I

2 U7-A - 16-4* - LX Narrow (vor. Sctaon)

fcr furt.jer action, cr. whose behalf ^ wish to inforr you thut in
keeping with an order of Field Marshal -ilch the low-pressure cha.-aber
is to resair. available an additional two conths fcr experiments. Field
Marshal Hilch also ordered th-1 in addition to your experiments fcr
the Luftwaffe, also you are tocontir.ue working until further notice for
the purposes of Re'ch3fuehrer-SS."

Hew, according to this letter — not according to ycur opinion,
but according to this letter, the chaafoer is still at Dachau, isn't
it?

A. No, I don't 3ee tnat. The letter is nothing but.

3. Well, we'll lot the IMbunal decide. Tell me.

A. May I soy something?

Q. certainly. Go ahead.

A. This .ettor is >*roly or.o to pass on the letter fron dlch
which has just been rad. That is, the letter of the lith of June,
Exhibit 36.

Q. Bight.

A. Ar/i xulch writes tjat the chamber is to stay for two noro
norths.

3. Teat's right.

A. Whether llch, when he wrote hie letter, ictually knew that
the experinents r.ad already boon stopped and wrote thi3 letter never¬
theless; cr whether e didn't knew it, I can't Judge.

3. las, but you couldn't remove tiv.s charter — either you or
Ruff — withe permission f ppks cr -ilch. 't forget that.

You couldn't remove it. You ddr.'t have the authority to |fke it out
of there after you had one death occur — to step these experiments
of iascher. You ha: to i«avo it there because you would need a superior
order. How, here are, acj-e or loss, orders telling you to leave it
-.-.ere fcr two nenths, didn't they?

A. -i»e higher orders needed to renove the chanter had to coo
• - - .-r Beecher. Be dan t agree to returning tbo chamber.


6911


Court I

2 a- 47-A - 15-5 - I JO - Karr car - (Von Sc hen)


fclch hlisslf , or Eippke, as tic letter oJ the 20 th of say shows, could
say that tho chaaber was not needed by them. .that had to ha/pen hap¬
pened — that Rase her approached Ilch, through Himmler, and asked to
be ablo to .ee: it lcn.er and ilch writes, probably knowing th-t the
chamber had alreacfy loft: "Yes, you can keep it longer." Besides,
as far as the breaking off of the experiments is concerned, which
according to the appearance of the documents, lasted two months beyond
t .e J.th of Jr no ■— that was far into July — I should like to refer
to tho lotter of Raacher of tho 5th of .fane, l?u2, Document No. 283,
Exhibit £2. -asc :er writes: "a fen c\. s ago I *aa called into Hippko'
office for a oonferenoo. "her. 1 told hira that the report on all the
experiments was not available t, h d not demand any report. 0
Race.-.or himself writes on the 15th of June: "A few days ago I saw
Hippko 0 , t t is, let us s^ , on the 12th ct Juno, and 'no also rrj.tes
°*-he co plots report is r.ot finished", which ir.oicites tfc»t tho experi-
aer.ts were already finished at that tL>o.

5. Uf course, that can be inter reted t at tho experiments wore
r.ot finished and you had to finish thei u bolero you cculd finish tiio
report. • -.re are two irays of intor,orating that. Doctor.

Boo, toll co, Doctor daxx.-rg, after tho chufcer finally did got
back to Berlin and the ex-ariaonts wore concluded — whether it bo
the tlr.o you st-ato cr the ti v that is borne cut by the documents and
the tostiaony of (alter Neff — then, as you baifu pointed out in your
direct examination, Mr. Rase ;er received an assirnment from Hiitmler
liter in the year, t at i3, in the fall or winter of the year, and
•no f whc.se assi.nacnto, you havo ably pointed out, -as again rc3w.crch
with low pressure chauftcr ar.d in tba s.ie field. How, did Rascher
evur get a lew pressure chamber a^air.? In late 19L2 cr 19ii3V

A. No, he did net.

}. You have stated t. it ho cc* ldn't get one all over Germany,
didn't you? Xou stated on direct examination that he tried to got one
•r/i ha couldr. t get one?


5312


Court I

2 a; Ii7-«w - lo-c - LJG Karr:»w (von Schon)


and he couldn't got on-*?

A. No, I did not say th;t. -In qy direct examination I osroly
quoted the individual docua^nts showing nascher's efforts to get a
new lew pressure chamber.

i. .«ell, he didn't got one, did he?

A. To as./ knowledge and to the knowledge of the edical Inspectorate
which we contacted later, ho did not receive any chanter.

3. Did he get your chaster?

A. Ours? No.

Ho nust have gotten so-vi cha.bcr because he conducted oxyx-ri-
nents in 1&3 with a ch\-fc-.r. H.ro in t o SioVors Diary which 5s
Docuaont I?o. 538 containad on page 65 of Docu-!*r.t Book Nusbor 3, ia an
entry under date of Afril 6, 1&3, tho eighth 0 ntry node by Siovors
reads os follows:


S91.3


o to


1^7 ul -A-L7-1-; kp- Bioisi (vor. Schen) f

ourt Mo, 1 '•

9 9

■CoatiJtt&tion of the 1» pressure cipher experiments." *

it appears thit he had si_a sort of c: -aber down there, doesn't
it? ’-as it yours?

A. ;.h£t was the date of this entry? #

q. i believe I said the 6th of April 1913, end it is in the
Sic vers Diary. ^ need to look at it, Doctor. I quoted it to you.

A. So, I dt:i»t have it he re anyhow. I Just want to sa7 that
r «ght have something to do with Docuner.t .0-270, Exhibit UO, if.
Docwvant Book 3, rfcero Beecher tells boat is conference with
Hippke. Again, .a says tint 1* -ants to conduct low pressure efeabor
expertaants with r- at the saac t he was in Berlin. Anyhow,

ho went to sec Silvers ur.d s*dn told him ttrt h.. wanted to e-.ntir.ue
the low pressure chsntur vxr^ri-.et.ts. Just as ho .^d to\A Hippke,
q. tell, let's..- <n, Doctor. Kw, hr. Raborg, you* 1 nd
r .ur chief, Dr. Ruff, maintain th t -11: -u •-r interested in was
what the title of j ur - fad l report said: ■*->•«» fw High
Altitudes." And thit you wroiy to.k p- ,lc " n » quickly, up

by oxolosiv- M ? nocei-n, end dc«r. I B lflUi.or parachute and
that you w-ro o>t interacted in anything «!*«• 2s that right? * it
wos your jr internet - in

A. TU-t -ias <ur iS-inary ir.Ur-ot,

Q. Veil, now, I Want to turn to Docuaunt Bo k 2
91. This is D caa-nt .-C-1C2, y ur reo rt. T..ic will be >n p' >
the Gernnn; n:t of the Dvcu^-nt B; k, but of the Gemui document

itself.

How, ,n pego 16 of th- .rifiin-1, the L at paragraph the P« >,
YAX oay thaw in ttv report - .-xnd by the way I aiffrt ask y« - that
was y:ur sign lure on the report, was it not?

A, Ics.

Q. Ton soy fcboro: "In spito f the relatively Iatr. number

of oxperiaonto, tho actual enuso >f the sever* «ntr.l disturbances

and bodily failures (jr.ralysia, blindness, itc.) attend-.nt up n post-

hyp xesic twilight stAoc r^ins S0B&»hr.t cf a rSdclU.’ ' t 's the

*

riddle?

£911


2 Uc-j 1947 -A-iT-2-ok?- fliolsi (v.r. Schcr.)

Court Ho, 1

A. One could net say exactly whether these severe failur.s wore
caused line by tho L cfc of oxygon, ir whether they might have
sxethLng to Co with tho bond a disease - caisson disease - or the
bends disor.Se,

Q. Si, then, -u -..ere interested, according to y_ur own rooort,
in ttrt problem A -s or air bubbles, And your friend Rcschur
;bli od, suoolite tho nswsr to the riddle, didn't ho? !t> kilL-c’ a
fd» people fir y: u, rirht in your presence. You were t'.vro. You
watched tte autopsy. He shaied ?m tho bubbles in tho brain, in tho
brain's blood vessels - the bubbles which were c us.c by the do-
c cprossix.. That ran tho ms*.r, wasn't it...to the riddl.? You
thought it i,-8,

A. Ho. First A 11, Rsclwr was not .%y friend. An! "bends",

-* c.uoted her- in cnn-ctia with the dwoaweaoioo which wer. c:>-
porler.c-t tec us this was a <iell known oroblea which had el tun
teen co.roL.irv- f, nd th.ro existed <;uite - bit >f liter tur-,
it was kra-wn v-rticulTly by t vy in : isson dis-cs^...

it was not roally ro new probl-a. The finding .f ir bubbles in r.n
autopsy is not in itself .an explanation A these fr.ilurv synptaas.

Cro aieSit bo able to doternin e that in * >\,ry careful ex-ninr.tion if
one could prove -ir bubbles in a Certain center. But, s far as I Jmaw
that is very difficult or even impossible bec.uso air cobolim occurs

in surgical caiKio too, for exacple, if vein is cut during an

•

operation, it rIso occurs —

Q. I think wq -re l.agiUar with *11 that. Doctor. The joint I
rs trying to b.*r out is th-t I ca not trying to indie-.te that you
rd Ruff er.do Rase her do this, or tx A Rasch-r kill people, but you
let him do it, -nd you w.rv Very glad to h'vo the answer to your
riddle. Y.u at te in your p'per that ncit.hcr you nor Ruff after the
murder saw to it tht Rase her was indicted for murder, did you? You
needed that inf max ti on, nd you have it here in yxor report.

A. No, t- t of course is not right. I must object to that
strenuously. 7 o roierv-ti which Rsscla.r aado, which he gives in


6915


2 Ifcy Z.7 -A-17-3-?kp- 3iolsi (v» Schon)

C-urt Jio. 1

his interim re; .rts, he newer and* them public in -ny way, 'nd never
supplied then to the Luftwaffe, to Huff, or to ao in -ny way. He
reformed.

Q. Kell, doctor, ' 70 U go on c little bit in this document,

■here you and Ruff say...you end Rase her in this report... on the
aaxt page, an excerpt: "It appeared often 's though the phenomena
-f pressure drop sickness hid coobinud with the results of stver.
cxygon lack." Your chief, Ruff, now has admitted on the stand that
pressure drop sickrfcss does not occur if one takes people merely up
and d^in quickly, but that a person has to stay up 1 :r soao tiao to
develop this pressure drop sickness. 1 ell, who wen. those people
th t you refer to in t his import when you state "It appeared often. n
..ho do you coin by that?....Just you and Rascher? Certainly you don't
scan Just the two of y-u.

A. I CB referring, for >ne thing. Iso to the exp-rimunt which
■as used tor cl*riflection, nd Iso to the slmi sinking exa-riawntu
Shore these synptmis occurred, which *e,-o not clc r to us. And .as an
•tteapt to explain those poculi/ r synpt-»ss this experiment was us-c*
■here, without -.ny l‘ck of oxygen, when sustained i -r n long time —
it says forty minutes there — t thirteen kilometers, a siiailT
3vV-.ro corviition occurred with paralysis of both legs r ni interruption
i the si,*ht which Lasud for two hour 3 . A simil'r condition s in
the si*, sinking -xxrio-nts when, there, was really inly * l~ck of
'Xyi>r., nd really th.ru cxild be no bends te Jaigo by the time, but
Just b eaus- the Seri us symptoms in this on. experimental subject, and
*h. serious cyaatoas on my so If w.ro so ciiilr, this experiment on
nyoelf is quote. lierc nly f jr this reason.-

£. Th't's ri lit. will ex to th t. e wilL go into that
a.re specifically.

A. —And it is said "it pp.nr«L often."

.. Bight.

A. That rexairv-d open. ..o were not - ;i- to -.xol'in it quit-.

- =-ant *.v tried to -xplnin thus, sympt,:s.

-


2 1fay 47 -A-i>4-?k?- 3iolsi (vcn Schcn)

Court Kor 1

Q. ..oU, joctor, you and Ruff both boro h-vu claimed thrt
pur report «rdy concerted itself Kith repid -scant and iawdietd
descent. Saw, thet was rlready withdrawn by Ruff when ho waa on chi
st,-nd when I coafror.te. him with this part of the repx-t, the sclf-
experim^nt which you end Raschwr hod perforn-d boccuso you 'nd
Re sc her had stayed up forty minutes — I think yai stayed up forty
-inutos -r.i Reach-r t*m ainut-s — and them you include this in your
xxjpcrt oven th u^h this typo of re*, arch, risht here does not fell in
»ith whet you cL' 1- was y^ir pr jbloa at all, d>os it?

A. No, it ocs not. Tb-reforo....

Q. Th t «s rivht.

A. Thrt is why ^ didn't p-rf»n thes- ocp-riaonts on experimental
SUbjwCtS...

Q. And further, Ruff 'daitted that it was the most -.nacrous
experiment nd if it h-d not bv^n interrupted it might h-vu been
fr.tel, didn't he? Do y:u think the same is Ruff did?

A. Aac.rdin. to ay krwnlodgo today, yes. At the tlo. wo didn't
know .-.bout this death yet, which hrd occurred in such long lasting
experiments r.t • cert-in ltitude/ Ruff learned thrt in th- Acro¬
ss die 1 Center. This knowledro originated in 1946.

Q. HOW cany tls*s did y.u nd Rasehcr go through this nano

typo A experi-ount? Only that or>- time?

%

A. This uXporL&nt - this extremely lons-or*-?

W. Yes, th t orw.

A. It was p-rforo-d only once, I am sure, but otherwio- »o
stayed up for cor.si'er ble tim. in oth.r _x>rinents. Then th.ro
Wo minor disturbrncos.

;. Then you n- Raschur would hv. only exposed yourselves
t; such danger -s th t? Is thrt it?

A. •*. did not deliberately -xpos- .ourselves to thia danger
to make m oxtre.^ -xo-ri®-nt ,but we stayed uo th.iv because other¬
wise in th- two -r thr,o ascents porday which vi. usu-ily p-r! jtc*. 1 ..,


6317


2 !£-7 A7 -A-lT-5-pfcp*. 3i-Iai (vjn Sch~a)

C-urt b* 1

r<£ * -' tun'-re's ir. th. s-c.rc .r third "scent v- h.d t h~&w sjnpt^aa which
jit - t .ccur the -or at tine. And «« -.*jiUc then ted et-.rain~ riv-th-r
• he sysot xia wen. c.'.uflvc by going up three tlo-a * isy,&nd, scy, ter.
ml mi to a -t * tLo., r whether thu sra. uuld *ccur if -n- ges up
for --- Ir.If hour.

q. That .-“.a been -xpl ir.ed t- us fully by Dr. Ruff. But y.u
nctu".lly went up tv th-a- two b&i;r.ts, 13,000 .r 13,5C: f—t 'n-
y u et /eC trvvru 1 ,r n est*nsiv- length f tine on one oectaion
rly. Is that ri he?

A. Tr.-t r.-oeriJer.t t k place at 13 r 13.5 ton. That is what .
it a-ys bore.

Q. Y-s; nd u id it nly nc«?

A. 1 can't a.-.y th t with certainty, but \k did n t that t
:t.n. I M - Id n t Jmow f thia uxpori*mt t • U if it wen. n t
.-.-ntivned in .is r<-.> rt.


6918


2 iiay-.w- :S-18-l-::eehan (Yon Schosn)
Court I'.o . 1.


o. You just said you die r.ct do it very often; rhet
do you ’-osn rhen you say here: ;i It cypeered often ns though
the phenomena of pressure drop sicknoss (acroerbolis:-) hod
co’ binod rith the results of sovere oxygen Irek?" Vo r,
doctor, isn't it that you sinpl; ir, this report did not -ant
to r.ention the others, because they hrd died, since you one*
P.cschor never interrupted cn experiment boenuse of rain felt
by subjocts rnd rhen it says it appeared often, i£ certainly
did, ir. Ro sober's vork at least.


I did not quite understand tho quostion, but in
any ccoo, J this happenod often" that moms the t the synptais
in the slow sinking exporinonts, paralysis or interruption
of sight, occurod that thoso ayrptons rero fonilicr to those
In our o.*n exporinonts.

o. '.'oil, no~ you don't d.ony tho f^ct thrt Rrschor,
supposedly on his orr. initiative, conducted oxporinonts to
determine this gas bubblo situation and oir-or.bolisn and
prossuro drop sickness or :r you rant to call it. :*o

did that on tho people at Dachau on his o--n initiative and
p-rfor.:cd autopsies on then; you ar* tic autopsies; Ho


;id that, didn't he?

Of covrso, ho did porfor. 1 . experiments rith fatal

•

results, f -t is provod V t .o Doaurscnts and ho apparently
• v ral points in rind, ..ic'. ho -. anted to clenf- .

'ctualli told no hinsulf tiirt the 1.and Benda was one
of tho things, he rontod to clear up, he provod they r -ro
ir bubbles and he ranted to tvtr.cl: this problo-, but £hat
13 c field rhich had nothing to do ’ ith ours.

y. fut neither did tills oxperinent, -hich you oonduct-
. You - '. itted here right ...r- that this one experiment
..:i nothin-* to do rith your Xiold. ’.'o'11 go on ; ith this
or-ort. In the next sentence ov str.to, ir. tho sere *


6919


2 ::ay-5.-C :S-18-2-roehan (Von S— oor.)

Court Fo. 1.

*


prregrapl.: "In this connootio , t: c subjective accounts
ir*do by t e authors m t-o experiments, each r-s intcrcstin;,
for -'het happened to the objective findings, they -re only
thc subjective findings; rhet happened to the objective
findings?

Oar om observations? I crnr.ot s~y exactly. hy
disturbances ’-ero dcscribod according to the records that
Raschcr kept. He wrote dorr. my a motors, I, ?'yaolf, of
course, don't know that in detail. I rrs so seriously
rffoctcd, oven afterward, that I did not k..or exrctly --hat
had happened.

.ell then, you did r.ot la o* , vhether or not you had
pr.ssurc drop sickness, did you?

... ”o, durla: the experiment, I certainly did not

know it.

9 I

"1. 'Veil, nor here a.r.j so e tcll-tclo arks of your
connection in that pressure drop sic2:ness which played n
dofmito part. . Or. Prpe 18 of this report ’-horoin you state:
this is in the English copy at the top of page 92, the first
paragraph* the last rhrr3o in . ~ Inst sentence, lour u onor,

- -here you st'tc thcro and I c ot«: "so that tfco idea of

- combination of pressure drop phenomena nth tr.o phonononc
of oxygon lack Is definitely suggested." Koc, you her! not
othor clues to pressure dro sickness, than Rasch.r's air
bubble3 ml -c: he ha shorn to you during an autopsy, had ou

... 3o‘, the air bubbles which one sees in an autopsy-
are ot proof of t 13, the; 'or.'t necessarily havo nnytj-ing
. For ox , in erso of onbolisn, 1
is Cfiuacd dr'inlny a lun , ' esidec the see 11 blood v-se-l
:r_ generally cut and sr3 embolic: 13 caused in the blood
stresn and aor-.etir-.es this oa .urs in fatal operations, but it
:g not necessarily true that pcopU who die of gas embolism

tlon, vc , a.


5320


2 - ah&n [Von s

Court "o. 1.


One cennot srj thrfc tho picture ol gas erbolisn necessarily
lca^a to tho synptocs. Or. the other, tend one cannot sc;, if
there ere these syr.ptor.a in 5 death. In cn autopsy, one
piat h vc to find bubbles or i: tlx- rre found if they here
anything to do nth tho-sy=pto:is, but the syrptor.s ere not V
necessarily connected with these bub lea.

But, you acy h-rc, I ruoto: Thr.t the idea of
cor.binr.ti.on of pressure drop phonoTcna -ith the phcnor.ena
of oxygen lack la definitely suggested. 11 Soft, you coul'
not hrvc concluded that fror. your subjective experiences
could you?

Oh, :ea, bends r-r.s not a nc\ problu-. in eviction
r.odicinc, the -hole field o 1 beats or caisson disease, or
• hatever you ~ant to crll it, is v„r old problen. In tho
jrr.vy it is crlltd Crisson-diaor.ac end it is called tho saaio

thing in .h erio-, ! believe.

1. liov fror -our subjective experiences you could
hr vc stated th-t rrs due t> oxygen mtoxication, para¬
doxical effect of oxygon ad. mis tret ion, or Tiything else in
tho rorld; couldn't you?

... I don't think I understand tho question, tfould you ,
rind repentlng it?

*>. i 3r id, you co Id have fra- ; ou subjective exp-r-
ir.ents ou r.lrtcd h-rc, when you expeditod the aubjcctlvo
.xporienc-s, I s~ld -hat s-- m this report, fro:, the
f-c. of the report it 3 clf 'nd cn th. f-cc of your oxp-r-
kr.c.s, that ti ls condition* phich you describe, could. have
been due to anything else in th- -orId, it could be due
to oxygen intoxication, to - paradoxical offcct of ox; gon
:dnlnistration or -r.y other cause or reason for it; 13
that true?

h. To, Irek of oxygen or Id not have bo-n the.ocuso
ir. our eel. expcrir.or.t, - ach is described h-rc, -nd the

5221


2 Hey-;.- ;S-lS-4-Fc.hra (Ton S o...)

Court ;:o. 1.

ti-c of Irek of oxygen rra only about 5 seconds. The l'c.:
of 0 x 7300 ts ccrtcinly r.ot t.c only r. -son for t^sc
ayaptor-a. Or. the otixr Urn*, it wo a notororthy thrt in
these experiments th~ro ras paralysis -nd interference ' it.*
si ht after those five accor/s of Jack of oxyacn. It nca
unique cor.! it ion; First there rero for complaints 'nd
ch^n 5 seconds of lrcjc of o:;y; cn ~nd then suddenly th-se
s.nous interruptions ••if- the s. fct cna pr.ralysis. ?o* - - «
reason this cir cutis tr.ncc is used to ctcer-.pt to use the
unique conditions in tlu.se lo*. sinking oxp-nn-nts. hor
Cr 1 s 3 £#PP3i COS nothin »W , eo _ -fleet of it, for

cxnrple, tie disturbance of the eye si;:ht, tlx centrr.l loss
of sight in the middle of the of vision, thrt is

suffered ’o: almost everyone cko vr.o in the lot; pressure
clrrbor frequently -nfi the only explanation r-s, thor- must
be snail air bubbles, rhioh don't even hrve to be in tho
circulator; system, rhioh can be -n;vhere in the tissues me
rhioh lead to p-in, rhich is c'lled fends, -h-n such c~ -3
rro repeated in the tissues, it l-rds to paralysis and vhon
in th- brain it leads to disturbance in the sxyht. Th-t v's
kno* •?, : n r ’ particularly Ruff and fucker-Frey sens -orlced
on this problem in the nedioal cor.t-r, because this natter
h-d not b-on cl--rcd up. It v-.o clai: -d and- kno-n thrt such
venous co-plnints occurr-d., but it vas not clear rh-t
c-used thv s;rptor.s and this had r.ot boon cleared up by the
f-taliti-s rl.icnh occurred ropea.tcdly In the cas- of
C-isson sufferers, if they -ro*aot taken to a hospital in
tine.

n. •’ell, doctor, all thrt inforrr.tion is of course
valuable, but be th-t as it ::ry, here re h-vc - report.

;. report is, rs I unde-stand, a listin 3 of -hat a re-


5922


2 S-15-5*ochrr. (Vo Schocn)

Court i:c. 1 .

secrcher found out during the. c ourself the resor.rch ~ork.
Kor you hrve rrdc these st-tcr-cnts lr. tMs report, tfc ich is
r report of your r-ork ct Drehru, listed -hr.t ; ou discovered
there md you h'vc steted thr.t you hrve found this
phenononr., this cor:blnotion of the pressure drop phononcnc
trith the phenonenr of oxygen lock end you ary it is
suggested; hor: did you dot«r:-ine thr.t; rcro you just guess¬
ing, just guessing?

It r-a not "just gucasuig", it rna r theory which
could bw used to cxplrin the erttcr -rtf for tjict rcraon, I
did rritc;. "it often seined tfcrt the Irek of oxygen r;r S
cor.bined in orr^ir.otanccs nth yrc-aaure drop sickness 1 ',

Thrt is r scientific hypothesis.


5023


2 TZS-16-5-:*eehrn (Vo Schocn)

court ::c. i.

scorcher found out during the c x;rac^of the research rork.

No- you hrvc n-dc these st-tcr-cnta in tl-is report, rii ich is

r report of your r-orlc ct Dreheu, listed -hr.t : ou discovered

•

there end you fcrve ateted th-.t you hrve found this
phenonena, this combination of the pressure drop phenomena
rith the phe none nr of exygen lack end you ary it is

suggested; hoc did you determine thrt; cere you just guess¬
ing, just guessing?

... It vra not "Just guessing", it rrs r theory which
could be used to cxplr.in the er.ttcr -nd for that rerson, I
did rrito;. “it often se^nod thrt the Irek of exygen wro
in aorv.ir.atr.nces with asurc drop sickness 1 '.

Thrt is - scientific hypothesis.


3923


2 :lay 47-.j<c-19-l-C ode (I at., Ton Sekoen)

Court I

4 ~®U, as a -a-tor of fact, doctor, you didn't have to ©lass,
did you? Ail you had to do was ash ?. a sc ha A

A lose her ia Ms axporir^ate as ue knoif fre^ the Interin reports
lid not isorr. anything ia this respect. ::o results aro nontionod ia
the interim reports ia that direction. 3 0 sides .laschar did not infona
no of there result of Ms a.a work.

1 Ho didn't fcavo to inform you — you stood there and u*tched it.
Ho dida't have to Inf era: you at all?

Yos « I ••etchod one autops'.-. Shat vac sy duty.

1 Sure, that certainly '.; Q s. How Ruff has ainittod horo that tho
atnosphoric difforenco botveon tho ©round lovol and tho altitudes at
which you aero operating woe not sufficient to mko or.porioiood
aviation .nodical non to tMnk of prassuro drop sicknoss. That is sono-
thln. akin to tho caisson disoaso, tho bonds and so forth. ::ou, wasn't
it 1 anchor' s air bubbles and his dood non that undo you think of it?

.. "o, cortainly not. It was tho obsorvei disturbances savo
rioo to this thought. I ;^vo said t:«t such air bubbles can appear and
ofton do appear without any ouch disturbances.

1 ‘.’oil .now, doctor, -./hen again Aid tto first death occur?

JL About tho 1st of April, I said.

1 How, ha; did tho doath occur? Did they toko tho non up too
hlph, and have hie stay tharo too lony. Toll us tho particulars of
why tka- aa& died?

A It -.zxs an oxporlnont at, I baloivo 13 or 14 kiloioiore.
lasclor obviously stayed too lon£ at tha sano altitudo so that pro¬
bably tharo was a fatal air ccboli3n which caused doath.

* oil, now at this first doath, ha: did you happen to bo tharo?

1 already said that a anchor froquontly porfonsod axporlnonts
for v.ich ho had an assignee at frccHianlar, which ho was porfomins
in addition to our Joint oxporirents, and scroti nos I watch a! tho so
osporlnoats, just as in air instituto I sano tiros w ate hod tho contrf-
f ^al onporixaats of luff, aithough I was not working oa thoa qysolf.


6924


2 hay -17-^-7 jC-lC—2-Ccc> (Int., Von Schoord
Court I


r i "all you vara not asslgaod to watch thoso, vero you?

A No, I didn’t.

< Ha- did you knew ?. Q 3Chor wqs going to rarfcm ®n anporinont at
this tied?

A I didn’t knew it boforohand. Conorally, I was at tho o=;»ri:^o.ital
station and a. -ho leu pressure chantor anyhow and Haschor con-iod oat
oxporinonts with a different nan, outside of our sari os.

'I And hadn’t you Just carrioi on an ox.sorinor.t bofero and v.lthin
.ha 3a-^o pariod, -;ith ono of your :us3

A No doubt. ::o carried out oroorinonts ovory day on our aim
;ooplo.

1 That 1= atroxvso thon. Y 0 u irobably corriod out a couplo of
asporlitoats, aal :han Haschor said, :;oi a nirnito nou, Dr. Hontorg, wo
■••■ill have an a::porisont for Himiar. This has nothing to do with you,
stop aside, you ; ot out of tho way a bit, I an going to oxporicunt on
this fallow for ilimlar. Is that what ho said to you?

.» No, it tiara't liko that.

1 Thon ha.. - did you difforontioto botwoon tho Luftwaffo oxporirwnW
3rd thoSS avMrlaonts?

.. I kr.a; uhot experiments I ^rfomod .yaelf.

* Yes, but you r.’o e collaborators, -• o on't yoU? You woro rrdo ed
by Huff to o down there an! collaborate with Haschor, veren' yotf

A Yes, fo; those experiments fee reaouo froa high oltitudo. *./o
vorkei together on that.

ITcw f.-.eso three deaths that took ?la=o, how did tho seoo.d
'^ath occur 0

*

1 The second death?

*1 Yes.

A As far as I rocall that was an experiment at a raich higher
al.itudea, Id or than 14, it might haTe been 17, ani probably there
' a^ain a .'a:al eubolisc. After a certain tine at this altitude the

subject suddenly died.


6325


2 - a:' 47-i-?JC-1S-3-Cook (Iat., Ton Schoen)
Zvirt I


* Tell us about tho third death?

A Tve third death was just like the secoai one.

«, Haw about f.;e other deaths?

A I dor.'t -tax-. I can-only Judge from the reports there 3 a scher
reported these d eat* is to Klmler.

Z ■'ell ic.; I. # ;:<Haa®;’ interrogated you 03 . the 30th day of October
19-46. At that # .Lu> :*ou told hit: that you katfi that acre than threo
fatalltlos oeo’ir'.l, or-4 you thought it was approximately five to tan
.-eople died i« .ese a:.;eri:»nta. Didn't you tall that toltr. llcflacey
last OctobeM

I r«a- that, yes. I said that in theilileh trial too.

Z Vly 11 you hno-. about that? 7here did you get that knowledge
‘•hat oV «r deaths occurred!.

.*• I learned that from tho other prisoners who told me about it
uhor tJhe exporl-j:. a were brohon off. ?>.<,>' said they were really slad
\Ut 1 v vxar finished. X said, "why", and thoy said: "Because things
Wi happened." *>sy weren't definite, tut I condoled that thoro had
been other deaths.

Z ^ell werei't you a3ha=ed whoa you heard or that from the in-
-ites at the conclusion of tho experiments sceotime in June or July?
-eror.'t you ashatad you had been associated with Sasoher in his aurdor


-ill?


A The situation was not simple for me. I didn't t.’ant to have


anything aore to do with thane experiments; that can bo soon from tho
feet tliat I Interrupted them.

2 'fell now la the course of these deaths, Just what were you
: °Ing yourself? "ere you Just standic_ thoro looking ia the window or
•ore you operating some of the apparatus for a anchor?

A ” 0 , I have already said that at the first tir.9 I was looking a : -
olactro-car’.io'xa;:, tho point of light t:at follows tho heart.

Then you *..ero working with Rase her. You were studying tho
sl-icfcro sari lor a ? You were working with l a sc :or under Ruff' s orders.


2fc a y 47-^-c {C-ir-4-Codfc (2nt., 7©a Schoen)
Court I


You worked with Haschar on that experiment an! studied the olectro-
cardiogratJ

A 5o, I didn't collaborate with 2aschar. I happened to be •

-atebin* this e:periaent and I saw the electro-cardiograe, and when
I saw a critical point was being reached where I =yseIf would have
3 topped the experiment, I said to Sascher.

7.[ Well what did it require at that particular point to stop tho
experiment? Suppose you vero operating the controls that Hasohor hal
in front of him or the controls on tho pro3svro chamber. At that
particular point, the fatal point whore you noticed on the electro¬
cardiogram, when you wore studying it, nhat could you hove clone if you
were operating it to stop tbi oxperimont and savo the person from
dyir.ff vhat weld ha 7 o been the quickest thing to do, '/all a valvo
or what? This ia a sir.nlo quootlon, doctor. I think you can answer it
briofly. Did you turn a crank, or push in a plug or button, or throw
off a 7al7e, or ho./ would you atro hi:

A Do you moan if that had boon ay own experiment?

1 Yos, ha wculd you havo done at tho moment to save tho man,

If you saw ho warn oing to high, what -was tho crucial thing to do
to atop tho arporlaoat?

A I ha7o to oak you again. Do you roan what I would Iiavo dono
in ay own experiment with ny own oxporinontal sutjoct, or what I could
tevo dona to . aka P.aschor atop his axporlmoni?

1 I am not asking you oithar queetion. I an asking you what
cculd haTj boon ‘.one to stop tho exporiner.t at that particular point.

Ho; would you : top it, ho; would anybody stop it, '4iat did you do with
the equipment to atop tho experiment so that ha waild not die? Is tharo
o button you push, or what is there?

A ?. anchor had a control in his hand with vhich ho rogulatod tho
altitude. Ho would -avo had to turn that sc that tho proEtura u-vli


6327


2 Ear 47 -A-? £-15-5-0sole (Iat., Vca Sclvon)

Court I

o :/ 0 n no , on thoso chatters, you do unioretand h<w all of tho
oqulpcont works, don't yo«? It is olaaontary to you, isn't it?

A Yos.

1 An! you uoro thoroughly familiar with tho running of that
chanhor, varon' • you?

A Yos, I know that.

o You *:ad or xjrir-ontod with it yoursolf?

A Yos, of courso.

r 4 You wora cozu»ct»i uith an institute for aviation roaoarch?

A Yos, I was an ocployoo of 3uff* s.

n A-’vl you could dotoreiino free a study of tho oloctro-cardioyan
that tho aubjoct in that -articular chaibor at that tiao wan roaohini
on altitudo whoro it :A^ht woll rosult in doath? You ccald dotornino
that froa your oxporionco in tho fiold of aviation ^odiclno, caildn’t
you?

A Than doath occurs axactly I could a't toll bocauco I had novor
oxporioncoi any doatha in thia aphoro. I havo already said that I
p-ysolf, if thin woro .y oun oxpariconts, would havo otoppod.

^ Toll nou for tho first tia> i h«vo hoard it - it dooan't OPtoar
in your affidavit and it r.ovor opyoarod in your interrogations bof-ro
thi3 but horo for tho first tlno in your direct examination you
testified that you warned Saschor; you said: "Ha; bo caroful thro.
Signund, lot«s ho caroful, you aro eoine to hie*." Hon did you nay
that? If you did you rust havo known that doath *;as coinE to cozo out
of this thini, doctor?

A Ho, I din* t know that oxactly. I only taic*.- it was a
critically hi.h ;«int. I didn't say , I called hiriRasebor:

But as far as I ka ©a in ay intarro^tion hero I said that. I pointod
this out to Hanchor. This is not th- first tiaa I havo said that.

i Toll nou -.alio 3 a schor was opera iAi thoso controls could no
hiaaolf soo tho oloctro cardio^ratC


5528


2:.'ay 47-A-’£-19-6-Ccc: (Int., VcnSchoon)

Court I

A Yos, ho cculd.

^ Coil now could you, with your axccs roach out and poipt cut
tho Tribunal hot. far tho controls voro Tree tho oloctro cardio„rar.,
hot; far away was ho free this-physically? "as ho whora ho could loo?,
ovor and study It horo, and just ufcat mixs his position with rofcronco
to the oloctro-cardiosran.

A Yos, I con shew you. Horo pointing was tho window whoro 3aschor
..as watching tho axporissont, and :o tho loft about that far, w a n tho
sachino which ho had to ro^ulato tao altitude and to tho rlfcht was tho
oloctro cardloyrori.


602 *


2 Jiay-A-GJ-20-l-5cb»ab-{int. von Scfaoeo)-
Court 1

w '4hy couldn't you Just reach right over there and turned that
wheel and save that can's life.

« I said to Baecher he should go down.

y I an asking you a question: Thy couldn't you? You wire standing
at the electrocardiogram. You weren't t^n silts away. .Thy couldn't you
have reached over and turned that wheel 3nd save that nan's life , *ou
could have, couldn't you?

A If I said that to hln and he didn't do it—then I would not have
been able to achieve anything by fore... I would have had to beat him down,
or som.thing.

1 agree with you. Dr. Reeberg, that perhaps scientists ere not
;ood boxers or wrestlers, but ,x. Rasche-r was not a six foot six, p.rfcct
Kordic sp-ciccn; l>i was in fact a nan snail r thin you were. You were phy¬
sically batter than he was and you could null hav^ r.ochwd ov^r and tur¬
ned that whval and cavwd that nan'3 life, and than discuss > ita hin laUr
by use of word*— as you say, words ore so important, you an do acre
•it! words than ou ce with physic: 1 strength. Then you could hav« dis¬
cussed the H robl-a with hin int-lligcntly with words. And iJ you couldn't
have gotten further with words, th.n you could have walked out and gon„
back to Berlin, ind let hie do it as he wished. :iow, you v:.r. in a po»l-
•ion to r-ach ov.r snd turn that •••heel, weren't you, w.r.n't you?

A Ho, sonce I said that tc Rascher, and he didn't doit, he obvi¬
ously didn't intend ;.o do that. If, at that noa.nt, I had attacked hin
by Torce—

Q You wouldn't ha%*v had to attack hin—Just r^ich over and turn
the wheel. LonBt touch Rasch.r—just his hand—just turn the wh.-l. Very
siaplv.

A e has th wheel in his hand. If he do-.sn't do anything when I
t.ll hie to, h. wouldn't do it if I try to turn it. e would simply have
gene on with the exp^rin^nt.

Q You were bigger than Rssch-r, *uren't you?


6330


2 -ay-A-GJ-20-2-ccrcb-(int. von Scocn)-

Court 1

a It nay b- yes, I w a little taller.

Q - 11 , now, aft-r the parser, died, you rake it ridiculous that you
night w-11 have reported hi= to the police for rnrder. Vfhy didn't you do
that? It is a logical thing to do wh-n a non commits aurder. It isn't so
ridiculous to turn in a ~urd-rcr.

A It looks likv aurdtr now, and now that we know all about it w-
can decide that, but at the tin- I knew that Rasch-r was a Stabsarzt of
the Luftwaffe...

Q *u nv_ ask you one question . ->hcn you saw this dead nan, what
did itlook lik- then? It night look like =urd-r now, right in this court-
rocs, but you saw that dead s .an lying there—what did it lock lik- than?

A *t was an exp-ris-nt with fatal result. Such cxp.rliocnts do hap-
cen in th- world, and nobody says It is a aurder.

W Well, now you saw th- autopsies too, didn't you? Did they per-
fora an autopsy cn that nan?

A Its; I said that already.

Q Anri after ha vine objcct-d, as you say you did, both while th*.
nan was in the chaabcr end th- cltitud- was increasing, -nd then object
ing aft.r th. nin died—you still watschcd th- autopsy aft-r all this ur-
gua.nt you h-d with Raschor?

A I didn't hink it was r.ic- at nil. Rascher had continued the oxpe-
ria-nt too long, and th- .ear. died. But wh-tn-r he d-lib-rat-ly int-nded
to .rurdcr hie—I couldn't say. Put a death had occured, .nd do 1 wat-
:h-d th- autopsy.

i' Now, at this tin- wh-n this death cccured, Roschtr was in the
Luftwaffe, wasn't he? #r

A i-s.

-i Ycu were in the Luftwaffe—a civilian -spicy— of the Luftrafl-?

A No; I was an -cploycc of the Sc man Rcs-arch Institute for Avia-
*-lon. /- did not b-lon- to the Luftwaffe; therefore w. did net w.ar a uni-
fera.

. --11, ycu 7r;r- doing work for the Luftwsff-?


5331


2 uay-A-GJ-20-3-Scfcwafc-(int. von Schoan)-
Ccurt 1

A In part we worked for the Luftwaffe, too. But we also worked
for induetry.

ij So then you reported this death and all these deaths, as a natter
of fact—but you reported this first death to Ruff immediately, didn’t you?

A Yes.

Q dhftt did h. do about it? Did he call the police?

A No, as b_ said hiasclf, he did not. The police were not cccpet.nt
in tho case of Rascher. «e was a nuab^r of the Luftwaffe; Luftwaffe
courts were cccpctent. Ruff reported it to Rascher and his sup-rior. the


Chief of the Nodical Service.

Q Well, then after this first death, how does it happen that Rod-
berg didn't turn up his coat cellar and go out to get in the tractor
part od the charfccmnd drive it to Berlin? Why didn't you get that cham¬
ber right cut of th.-re inacdlatcly? You saw deaths there. Why did you


stay around?

A Wo talked about that for a long tis~, and as Ruff aentionod that
we deliberated what should do. It was dear that Ruff would report it;
we didn’t havo to think about that. We also rcaliz-d thatw. would achio-
y- nothing with Hinder by going to hie and saying Rascher furforaed an
e*p-Tiount and a person died. Hinder would probably hav- said, ■ I know
I gave hin the orders. That is none of your business. n

For this reason we decided that I should go back, that our exp-ri-
a.nts should be completed so that w. could s-.y the exp-rLnents had boon


concluded; the chaab-.r rill not be needed any sore. And then , In this
way, after the exp -ri.-t.nts w.rc concluded R.ach«.r gave his apporval and


; : i-ehr gave his approval—the chanter could b- rctaov-.d froa Dachau to

I r.*Jcc any further nark inpossible.

4 Tho fallacy of all that 3tory is that you had acpl. opo.rtunity
to just net repair the barco-t^r. fi»r- you wer^, trying to find a sch^ac
nd a way to quickly get that thing out of thor-, that chacber cut of


chau, and here was a brok.n part. !h_ only *ay to get it repaired was


6932


2 . iay-A-O J-20-k-Sch*ab-( int. von Schcn)-
Court 1

w gc to 3crlin to get the porta, and Ur. Ueff was so disappointed, he
«id his story was, h. was disappointed that you had returned with the
p-rt ^ fixed it, when he had sabotaged it. But you story is even far acre
fantastic. You said that you rushed right back in a naUr of a 2,3,U,5, |

days, instead of two weeks, like- Neff said, ruhed right back to get it in
order, and tfc-n two people died afur you put it bac*c into operation
agaiij. It certainly was an active way to stop teacher's work—wasn't it?

A I bcliwvu if it was cccparcd with what Raschcr intended to do¬
na the dccuacnts say; what I read this naming—it was a very effective
nothod.

Q It certainly was.

Well now, doctor, you than still had—after you even cleared out of
Dachau entirely, g t out of Dachau altogether— the Chaaber war. retimed
to °crlin, whether it bo May or July or August. Then you still associated
yourself with P-oscher when you reported and you wrote that report about
the filn, and the unfortunate fact that Milch didn't show up for the sho¬
wing in Septentcr. o still <-vcn in Soptv=ber you w„rc still friendly
Tith Dr, Raschcr and working with Dr. Rischcr, the nan that had proved
ninsolf to you to be a murderer, didn't ycu?

A It was not sc clear t~ se that he was a airdercr—neither moral¬
ly or legally i3 it quite clear, I said already...

Q Now, .t that tine, >cu aust recall that you have stated her¬
on this witness stand that you personally saw thre- deaths, and that at
the ccoplction of thv vxp.rinant—and you bring it way back in *ay that
your lnnatcs told ycu that there w-re scae ten deaths. And now, with that
in view, you knew this, you say—according

*


6933


2 • ■ 2^-1 o-ach v-b (1st. t:s ici 2 )

“onrt I

to .ur owe tcsti-.ony ia the -oath if h_y? kr vortj 2s Scptosbor you
_ru otiU .ssoci-tia,- yourself vitn H-scaor—proud to oc vitli hi-, vcron't

yrsl

j. ho, I w-s ccrt-tvdj* sot prad of vori:ia& "its H-schor. -after
Ei.-l-r -..vo sc orders to porfor- cold eroeri-cuto I could h-vc vorkod
with E-.BChor .JL1 2 w.nocd to.

“hor. did Iv.acswr ..ivc you tee r-ca-.oud-tioaa for - -odnl?

-'see die. that occur?

a. Hocxu.cad .tion....?

Sidn't H-ocui,r roexx-oad you for the sod.1 th-t Hi-x;l-r «avo

you?

So what extent ts.t co:c fro- fiuschor, 2 don't :mow oxc.ctly.

It uza doubtless a. th..t Huschor, hL.tolf—if it v^a he vno hundod in
is’ a-.:c-—voatod t..c -r ..crit Croat ?irat Clots. He told so hi-iailf
t. t ho clro/dy a.d a Second Cleat, and he w..ntod the ?irot Clean.

Hnsohor no doubt wanted to brioc uc in a tcnac to ,;ivo his bade
t..o lot*-proasuro chu b^r. *o -iso voated to continue with the
ecpcri-icnta. He hoped th..t 2 w^uld work with his ogula. hut I
a—id hw-ro about -y -ttitude to Hatcher, 2 did not toll Hatcher
p.rooaally, of course. 2 couldn't.

^ loll, y ,u were Given - ..cd-1, v.rca't y u? Yet or no.

Tot, 2 ^ot it.
s. ’Jfc 0 (j ..TO you tho std- 1 ?

a. 2 received it b; —11 with n docuaoat welch w„e tl^nud by
Keitel.

^ hcltclj 4C.C what did you ^ot the ucd-l for?

7or services in the field of -vi-tion rete_rch the Vur
..orit Cross Second Cl-sr, w-s aw_rdcd.

0^ -“nd the d‘cu*-cnts whicn show th_t Hatcher rocoa .ended you to
Hi.-J.or for that scd.-l, as 2 recall?

Tes, I h-ve tacu tout in the documents toe.


693 -


2 ^^-«7P-20-2»-6chvQb ( 1 st. voa bcios)
Caort I


I*, will oal;’


2 Kay 47- ^ 21-i~Sorrow-Von Soho.n,

Court 1

Q. Now, the Nurnberg conference on frwszing took place
in October, didn't It?

Yes.

Qi You were there?

4. I was there.

Q. Huff was there?

*. Huff waa there.

Q. You stated, on direct examination, that it was ob¬
vious that deaths occurred in the course of those exper¬
iments?

A. I didn't oay that it was clear. I said that it was
clear to no personally Just as the witness Lutz hero
testified that it was clear to hia.

0. It was also clear :o you, from the report given, that
deaths had occurred? Ia that what you are tryin; to tell
no? Or was it clear to you beoause of the fact that Holz-
loehner had told you. How waa it clear to you that deaths
had occurred?

It wac clear to no beoause I nyself had seen that
Haochor had had deaths, oecause I had broken off my
work with him for that reason, taken the chamber away for
that reason, refused to perform the cold experiments with
him; and, therefore, I assumed that Hascher had bad
deaths again in the cold experiments, and if Holzloehr.er
talked about deaths at the conference, obviously they
wore deaths which occurred thanks to the work of Hascher
and Finke. I personally assumed that these were deaths
that had occurred through cold experiments, but this was
not obvious to every one.

Q. Now,did Huff realize that persons had died in freezing
experiments?


6535


2 y.ay 47-A-^-21-2-Xarrow-7on Schon.

Court i

He was there at the meeting.

a. I don't know what Ruff said anyaore.

Q. Wh&t has he said here.

I don't Know exactly. I believe ha said he didn't
realize It.

Q. nnd now you realized, or. one hand, that deaths oc¬
curred in the high altitude experiments and you realized
that deaths occurred In the freezing exporlmenta. You
wore nt a conference In October for freezing experiments,
and, at such conference, there were several men there
of considerable Importance. Did you objects to these
wholesale deaths ao a result of the experiments In the
Dachau concentration camp, to any one? An active objec¬
tion?

actively, no. I didn't do anything but what I had
done before. The deaths which I know about positively
I had reported to the Luftwaffe, to Raoher's personal
chief and.

Q. (Interrupting) How, ao a physician, a man who was
fully aware of the manner ir. which Rascherworfced and
surely realized, sitting in that conference In October^
that even further deaths wore occurring in Dachau, did
you ooject then, as a physician? Did you stand up and
object or didn't you go to somebody and soy "This must
bo stopped"?

Ho, I did not. There were other people there who
realized It too, who were much more powerful than I.

2. Well, then, you didn't go anywhere or actively ob¬
ject at that meeting? Did you?

A. At this meeting, no. I didn't do anything active. I
had done that already.


6937


2 Hay 47—i*- ,X— 21—XaiTow—Von Schon.

Court 1

Q. Than I can assume that it didn't bother you one iota
if every innate of the Dachau concentration camp was Hill¬
ed, did lt7 It didn't bother you at all?

It would have bothered me very much. I personally
broke off the h^i altitude experiments for that very
reason and took the ohaaber away. I acted against Hitler
•a orders and against my signature whan I reported the
natter to Ruff which was certainly not without danger,
so as to stop the high altltudo oxperlnents. The Rascher
experiments in this way. and I can say, that he didn't
carry out any core experiments,

Q. One other question. You were down thjre as a subor¬
dinate of Ruff in Dachau, weren't you? .1 subordinate of
Ruff, according to Ruff's own testimony.

A. I was an associate of Ruff, yes.

q. it was your duty to report to Riff, wasn't it, the

workings and the activities of your experiments?

A. Of course.

Q. .;o further questions. Your Honor.

3Y JUDGE SEBRIHO:

q. Dr. Romberg, at the tlao this first death occurred
in the Rascher experiment, who was assisting Dr, Rancher
at the time as a technician?

-forking the controls. He did that himself as I have
described. In the motor car, where the pumps wore, it
was probably Neff or So'ootta; he of ton did :hat. Or some
other prisoner who knew soaothing about auto mechanics.
These three people always took care of the motor.

Q,. Do you know that to be a fast at that time this
first death occurred?

a. That it was one of these three wnc was in the pump
car?


5938


2 May 47-^AK-21-4-Karrov-Von S<jhon.

Court 1.

Q. Yes.

a. Yea, It certainly could have only boar, one of these
three because nobody else had any business In"that car.
These tvo experlnental subjects and Neff wore the ones
who always tookccare of the pump because they understood
those things.

Q. I understood Dr. Ruff to say, on *hls examination,
that the minimum requirements for tho conduct of an ex¬
periment was one doctor and one technical assistant.

How, who was present, assisting Dr. Rascher, at the time
the second death occurred?

. 1 . That was surely the oane situation. To go Into
Ruff's testimony when ho said technical assistant ho
he now doubt meant some ono to tako care of the pump.

In the DVL that was gonorally tho neohanlc, Fohlmelster,
or ono of the approntlcis In tho work shop. In Dachau,
there was no special employee or any one from tho DVL
present, but slr.oe the pumpo were built veryslmply any¬
one oould take care of then who knew a little bit about
auto sachanlc8 and so It cano about that ono of those
people always took care of It.

Q. Who was present as a technician or tochnlcal assis¬
tant at the time tho third death occurred that you
witnessed?

Tho situation was surely alway the same. I cannot

say axactly which of these men happened to be present

*

In this case.

3. .approximately when did the first death occur?

j%Z the end of ^prll.

'4. IS 42?

1942, yes. t

Q. When did the second death occur?


6S5S


2 May 21-&-Xarrov- Von Schon.

Court 1

-i. That oust have boon about ::ay. Perhaps about the 12th
to the 15th - about the eld die of May.

Q. When did the third death occur?

I believe that was on the next day or the second day
afterwards.

Q. When the first death occurred, who assisted In taking
tho:dead experimental subject out of the chamber?

< »

I can't say for certain, but It was probably so that
Rascher sent Neff ovor to the mortuary to announce It
and that two prisoners came from there with a stretcher
to take the body away.

Q. Where was the autopsy performed?

a. In the mortuary whloh belonged to the hospital.

Q. Who assisted in taking the dead victim out of the
chamber when the second death occurred?

.%. That was in the same way. The prisoners who worked
in the mortuary, who were assigned to the mortuary, took
away the body.

Q. Who assiotod in taking the victim out of tho.low
pr.ssure chamber when the third death occurred?

.i. That was no doubt the same two prloonero who took
the body away fren the chamber on a stretcher.

Q. I hive no othur questions at this timo.

TH£ PR2SID2NT: The Tribunal will be In rocoBs un-
tlll 9 :'K/ o'clock Monday morning.

U R2C2SS W.\3 T-KSH UNTIL 09*C hours, 5 Kay 1947)


5940


tlf 7

:: y 5-:r-3£-l-l-Fosc,r (Int. 3r?-m)

Coart Ho. 1

Official Transcript of the «n-ricen military
Tribunal in the career of the United dt:.t-s of
-e.-ric^ against 2arl Brandt, et r.i,dofQf.dc-nts,
sitting -t i.urab-ri, -Tyranny, on 5 Jiny 1947,
0930, Justic- Boils presiding.

TH- iLdCILi: Person? in the court rose will ple„so find
their SO it 3 ■

The Honorable, th- Judges of Military Tribunal I.

"ilit.jry Trlbiu-1 I is now in session. Sou save the
»

United States of .ci-ric. and this honor .blc Tribuncl.

There -..ill bo order in th- court roon.

TrC f.-CBID^If: Hr. L rshel, you nsoortein if the
'-fond.nts re .11 present in (jourt.

TIC I-.HJIL.L: M y it ?lo..3e, Your Honor, nil the
dof-nd r.ts .ire present in the court sav- the Defondant
Cb.rhr.uscr •■■ho is absent due to illness.

TIC ACBIJJI.T: Th, Secret.ry-Senornl will note for the
record th- ^resenoo of nil th- dof-nd ants in court ouvo
;hw Defendant Oj-rh-user who is absent on account of ill-
nuss. I have . note froti th- prison physici. n c-rtifying
tft:t Defendant Ob-rhauser is un: ble to npp- - in court

ted y. 5h: will b- #;:cu3cd pursuit to this certific vte,

•

it ..pp- ring th.t her nbsonc- will in no 'vise prejudice
her case.

Counsel aiy proceed.

Dr. IL-.J na.3-.tJ - Hosunud

ic-di.cc 2 -1:;. - io

3Y D.i. TOX.-hC (Counsel for the Defend .nt Houborg):

:hr . .tot‘.berg, wh.t uctiviti-s, in dot .il, v«ero fn-
<^iijie/^X.kin 3 o.ro of th- -l-ctro-curdiograa?

^ ^ N s ^* \

..ttjfc-fsc to the electros rdiogrnn bog m with putting

Vv^Y

'th- nru b alds 1 connected with the notal plates on the arc

th, subi-cjt .«nd 3t rting the current. This had to be

'.-e.-.^pjy'tn- -Xperin-nt b-g ::. Then the apparatus h-d

ir.tc th: circuit, the little dot th..t registers

6941


5-::-H::-l-2-r*ostor (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

6h - covenants on the film had tc bo started, end then this
r.ovins point of light hod to be obs-rvod, and nt the
non oat when you wanted to-record the motion the film had to
bo set in notion and this registered the actual olootro-
c rdiogran curve.

. Now I c_:i repeat then, in order to b- perfectly store
that I am right, th;.t attending to the oloctrocardiogrcn
in detail involves tho following activities: first,
gutting on the electrodes, secondly, cutting in the
eachino itself, the amplifier, then adjusting tho point of
light, then observing the point of light, end, fifth,

~ -;lng thj filx; in motion. I 3 that correct?

.. Yes, th it is so.

- No-, will you please concentrate on the experiment
in which tho first do r.t h took placo. In thi3 experiment,

0 took care of putting on the electrodes?

 Reseller, since thi3 was his experiment, and sinoo ho
1 id particular imp art a nee on registering the electro¬
's r'iygr-n.

. «hy w..s .iaach-r so interested in registering tho
lectroc .rdiogran r-cord?

.. iV.t probably interested him p rticul ,rly. He had
lr.; ,i.y spek-n of r’ahr-nkacp. ..s we have non seen frexa
Mi- doodn-nts, h- intended to work out the whole thing
: d -v luate it with rahronkanp.

. You have s id, though, that Fahronkaap was not present
t thus- exparic-nts.

•• -hat is corr-ct, the cxp-rin.nts wore brok-n off first.

. *r.s i' .hre.ik'CT specialist in any field?

- m s . he rt specialist, so f..r as I know.

. a a oak r words, you b-lieve that Fahroak.anp was to

••-v. been ireluded i.i these experiments because they were

"942


an


-v 34.'-SK-l-3-?ostvr (Int* Brown)

:’urt ::o, i


Mspcrlfl-nts in which th activity of tho heart .-id thus
tho control of the he: -t activity through tho oloctro-
c.Jdioir r. pi-y-d -n i.port.J&fe role? Is tint oorroct?

.. Y..s, th_t 13 so. fh.at c_n b_ soon fron Hioul-r's
1 -ttor.

v .hrt lett-r or- you r-forrinj to?

.. Pho lutt-r of 13 -prilt 1971 b P3, Szfaibit 51.

. rd ere you, therefore , of the opinion thnt in these
.xporlconts which Hasoher pjrfornod, r.lono he w..s particula¬
rly int-r-stod in tho activity of th- honrt and therefore
in obs-rvinfi tho loctroc.-rdiojr xi?

.. Y-s.

.j- yoy r.lso of the opinion that oven if you h:il wont¬
ed to ettond to th- cl-ctrocr.rdiosr:.a H.-.soh-r would not
hr.v- p -raittod it because thus ho would h.rvo boon lanvine
ap to you vih .t vns the cost important thins to hi:* in his
own exp-rir.-nt; is th t correct?

.. Yoo, h- was int.r-stod prior Jrily in tho oloctro-
or.rdiosrsn;, :.nd h- had to check it hii^olf.

i llow, to return to the experinont in which there was
the first d- .th. You said that Hnsoher hinsolf put on tho
electrodes. Now, who cut in th- amplifier?

itnsoher hinsolf did that, end ho ..iso adjusted tho

point of litfht.

. ..nd who observed the el-ctroc.Jdiofcrnfl durin; tho
-xp~rir.ont?

.. ..Iso Haschor.

, la year .affidavit, this Is th. first doounont In
prosooutlon doom-at book nuab-r 2 , It status that you had
studi-d tho lootroo rdiosru. during this first crporiaunt.

lot au ask you, Ur. Axiborg, this word "study", was
that c. were that you chose?


i: y 5 -1I-3K-I-4-7ooCcr (Int. Brown)

Court Ho. 1

.. No, I probably said th_t I took a look -t it, or sono-
chinj o' th.t 3ort, but I certainly didn't say study 1 ’,
because tills was 3uch a niaor thine for no that when I
ircw up this affidavit I didn't 1 y any importnnco

or. it.


5 Jny-4i-JB-3-l«-Cook (Iat.3ro*n)

Coart I

Z» Do you rc^aiber the iat<.rrog_ti oa oa the oasis of wr.ich this
affidavit uas drawn i^j?
a. Jot la detail.

Q. Do :-oi reecho or vacthcr ia th_t interrogation you g-vo an
aas’:or to ejja Individual question?

I can't ««jy th-t for sure today out I certainly did not uso
thi» vord "study* wnoa I gavo = 5 * ^asver.

7 W -ated to ch-r-ctcrio thie situation corroctly, »&ut
vord would you substitute for tho word "study"?

a. -oil, I probably s-id at th-t ti:>c th_t I lookod ut tho
dcctrocardlogr^a.

.Yauu.ua to e^r, toon, th„t yrax activity at tho wcporhiont
* act oao of supervision ia whicn you observed the olcctrocardio^rca,
b-.t you vented to s-y ta..t boc-usc jrva were orc«*at you .lore or lean
by accic.oat c-nt .. gl^nco -t tho oloctroc-rdlorai, which dr-w 0
-ttontisa ts itself uayaov because it coat_ins an electric spark which
froa tiuc to tit.® lit up and ..oved. Is th_t corroct?

Yos, there is a point of li.>.t .-.oviiy; oa a little screen.

In this first fatality who st-rted tho fllr. in .lotion?

S^tchor did, on tho b-sie 'f Ms constant observations thoro j
vac.; ho vantod to h .vo « o-rt of tho coyori-oat registered on the scroon
ho cut tho filu in.

^ Z assume further th_t runnia.: tala ~_caiao involves clso
*.ar 1\ ;ff tho filu. 3 ov who turned off tho filu and took it out?

a. ihat v_s dono by iL-schor also, and ho seat it to be devolqppod.
- l ow, mcordin,, to wh;.t you h_vo s-id, thcro arc six stics in
iizi- tc the olcctrec-rdio^r-a; now if tho Prosecution is of tho
Cyiaion th * i.. t~os ex?«.ri_ent you took c_rc of tho elcctroc-rdi o.rcn,

*• ca y 0 .a.ve don a _11 of tnesa tnin^s yours olf; now vnica of

h-.cso Six individual activities did you c_rry out in tho c-xperincnt in • •
vI ich the first de..th occurred?


5945


- -^y^^-JJ^-S-a-Coo c (Ir.t. 3rows)

Court I

■*. IToaa of thcc.

-• - ?~rt ia this expcri—ent ia cay athor way

*r uttending the eiectroc.rdi ogrtii?

• . 0 , Sascher was ia ch^r,~e of tho cjpcriaeat, and of course ho
fit everything.

But as lischer'c assiat-nt or for iUsoher you could have done

eort..ia thing* or you could a~vo t.acea c-r« of tao elcctroc-rdioc,r.^

or ^ 3a0 :a orr -=d of sxte sort ia support of the ex_5ori_octs of

h.schcr, out aow cone«.str_to on the coptriuaat vhica s-d the first

f~t- it aad toll ue, since you h-vc _lrcj*y said you didn't jttoad

t .o eioctroc..rdio„r^i, did you do -ayhtiag olsc ia this cxperLiontT

'Jo, and ---Bch-r v_a very acch concerned to curry out his

•

wri .cats hugolf when ho w..s ia eh.ovo of tno experiaonta.

* correct ia ay assumption th_t the c^)ori_cnt could havo
Doan iatornnted by turning „ little wheel?

*. rot.

... 'Jh: tooc c_re of this uhool, cad whoa he turned the wheel

vhut .urncaod?

• 3.io vhtul controlled tho o.-.try of tno air into the car.ibor.

?~schcr hed tho vhocl in his hand, «md by turninj this whool oao way
or .arthor no ro^ulntod tho altitude.

"id c..ocher h„ve tais wheel only occ-sioaully ia his head,

-r did ho h..rc it in sis hand tarou,iiout tho oxporiuont ?

*• -ou sad to ie«.ep it ia your hand all of tho ti^o in ordor
to rogulato tho atitudo.

- —®*- 5”u, would it have boon possible for you to reach

i..:s uhocl without attacking ^eser firet?

Since he had it ia his hand. I should hare first had to

ra.:oYt his hand free: tho wheel.

it is correct f r no to _ssu-e tfc_t ia order for you

- at ip tho osporiscst prematurely you could only h..vo done soaethiag

6946


5 Ihy-K-vS-a-fr-Cook (lat. jrcvn)

Court I

if : ■ h-d .it.cicod H-scacrt

A- “es.

:> How for the second ccperinea’., the one taut involved the

Be cond fatality; a v in this Ssporiaent who took care of the olectrcn

* ' . . _ --*•

c xli^z&l ' - ^

*. rnschor ...ust hove, but I don't knov aoout this in detail any

a-a-o because I didn't p.y any attontion to it.

V Sbv -ole-s. Just think of tuie second experiment; did you not
e oo t-c dotted light that aovod in the clectroc.r&io I 1 T.o?

^ In tho second orovriuent I v-s la the nutorooa of tho chaibor
becatteo vo had Just finishod oorforuing „xuwrL.oats ourselves, and -
v..s ctUl oa^.od in cv-luuting the croerU.ont Just concluded; thua I
didn't o.*v too much attention to those dct-ils.

«. Voro you present at _li three of those oxporLuonte only hocauso
;• ; vero BtiU evuluaticr tnc w^criucats you and Just Curried out on
rescue freu hi,>h altitude and Just hmponod to bo at tho ckjjber still,
is that conoctT

-s Vos, I -lv-ys cv-luatod tacso war>crin«r.ts sitting on tho
bench in the cha-bor because tho t..olos -* ultitodos vero in there,
and I tr.aisferred uy notos to tho record book.

Vo h..vc ha_rd here from v-ri;us vitncscoa, particularly'
prosecution vitaosscs, th..t ut most of lecher's ox?uriu«nto you
vero not present. Sov, .^cording to *h-t you h..vc Just said, your
proscnco in those three c_scs v~orc there vero f-talitiec ic to oc
..ttributod solely to the fact th-t ausekor's experiments took place
-ltitvdo end th_t for th-t re-son you wore ttill Jotting down notes
-a these experiments -nd tunpeaed by -ccidont to bo still at tho
cumber, is th..t correct?

a. TOO.

Z, In this second oxpvriucnt vncrc you vero sitting and unking

: ;c5, did you se^ the clactroc-rdiObTanl

*947


s V. & 4-Cook. (let. 3rown)

Court I

4 , to, I did act oomerro it.

^ l-a this the only experiment th_t noscher c^-riod cut at
is.., yotioca.x ti -0 or n_d ho performed otner caw previously olcac,

oao or two or throe or four orfive perhaps?

Ho hud carriedcut others before. I thin* about three.

^ -ad than in the fourth one oa that day there w_s a fatattyl

a. Yob.

^ ja this second f-t-lity. did ycuK*rn hia?

^ ho, I didn't ouy such -ttcatioa to it. I couldA't oo« n S-

t. lity was Lnlnoat.

3 . Do you <now for sure th..t yov. didn't worn hiat
± Si.oco I didn't observe tno oxperinent 2 cort..inly did not


warn hiu.

i. If you h-d observed it you would h-vo warned hiu?

A. Certainly.

4. Tien ai I correct In oaylnd roushly tho follovlnsi So
UT »»• ob.criod «h. oloetrocnrdlo.Tj in til. .«ond cnporUon.
Ji rMli.cd th.t the o*crlnont_l tubject v_. In 4an,;or, to ttu-.t
«» you vexned hill, but you 40 not ra-uob.r .bother yon realized
It ..14 vhother you ob.ervcd the elect r^.r41o„r^. to th..t eerrontt
*. Ho, I die. not obsorve it.

0 .. «4 0 M.«l«ntl.. you could not h-TO .-mod hlu.


.u Sh-t is so.

ffl. EjHDT: >Uy it P1.-.0 TOUT Honor. .. -re ..11 MU' «“»

in oenoh hn. S ran«od oon.14or.blo latitude to both promotion u=d
counsel burin.:: the couroo of cxaiinatlon. but it .cent to no

defense Cauned this aomlnfi ha. Ju.« been filrlhe uo a par*o


of 10.410.. quo.tiono end uaworius for the 4of.n4.nt. 1 roquet that
tie quest! -‘.a jut to the dofeud-nt be put oo that tie defond-u. eon


sver tnCQ cad a .t dofease c ounsel.

6946


O <J1


(let. Brove)

urt I


23 saasnsa: Defence counsel h-s bwO= aas lc-di=* question.,
r ri cst tn..t questions oe -Med in such a dinner us not too
closolr to surest to the vitae., the -never. Counsel a* proceed.


4949


CU


;


y s

ourt


- 3 - 1 -Karrow

1


(let. nrown)


Then, in this second c .sc of death, witness, did you
-.ttuna to thu -leetree -Jdiogr-c or tako an uctivo part
in th- experiment in any oth~r way?

.. lie, ns I h_vc r.lrcady s_id, I did not.

. *nd, fiow, how about the third fatal experiment of
.i 30 her in your presence?

« Th- situation was similar, namely, first wo h.d
carried out -xporin-nts and then Rascher hod carried out
experiments and, for this reason, X visa still in tho low

pressuo chamber.

„ Do you know whether, in the case of this third oxpori-
oent, you warned Rasch-r?

.. IIo, sinoo I paid no attention to that experiment, or
rather to the olectrccardiograc, I didn’t warn hin.

Tho prosocutor has eh irgod you with not knowing the
nnaos of tho cxpcrin-ntnl subjects, ihnt was your train¬
ing in the nehraacht?

.. I had basic training in 1936 and 1937 for two months
-nd subsequently was in can-uvers on two occasions.

•; r<M, do you remember the name of the wan who gavo
you basio training?

- lio.

v remember, you took a trip through Frnnoo with

Lutz and tho low pres 3 uo ohrmber. Can you rorumbor any-
on- who, cm th- occasion of your trip through Franch with
the ch-nbor, a ado a high altitude experiment with it?

.. No, I rememb-r there wore a oouplo of Knight’s "Cross
fearers , but I certainly don't remember any nemos.

.ihoa did you concludo your maneuvers with tho Luft¬
waffe?

.. Suem-r of 1939.

.aid s lac- thon you h .vo net boon n soldi-r?

69EC


::-y 5-::-3K-3-2-Kcrrow (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

- No.

V In Other words, throughout the entire war you wore
not - soldier but c. civilian?

.. That is correct.

. In the three fatal experiments of flnschor's did you
carry _ weapon?

.. No, I didn't carry a weapon nor did I oven own one
as a civilian.

. Did you wear : uniforn during tiles- -xporim^nts?

No, I didn't oven own c uniforn. I wr.s a civilian.

.. Did xiascher wear r. uniforn in these experiments?

.. Yoo, of course, he wore his Stabsarzt - C..ptala's
uniform.

v Did h- carry a woapon?

.. Yus, hu always carried his revolver.

<. Now, if you had wanted to interrupt thes. experiments
for any reason, you, as a civilian, would hav- had to
*.tt .ck a Ccptnin in tho Wohrnacht and hindor him by forco
in tho execution of his duties? Is that correot?

.. Yes, that is correct.

. Is it correct that if you had wanted to interrupt
this exp-rinent, you, as a civilian, without a weapon,
would have h-.d to attack an offioer who wr.s carrying
a weapon? Is that correot?

.. Yes, that's wh .t I should h.vo had to do.

. Before th- first fatal oxp or leant, did not iiasohor

0

8 ay to you at various tines that these wuro not tho «.x-
p.rinents that you wore carrying out in common, but that
these wore experiments that ho was carrying out alone on
Hir.-X r's orders and whioh had nothing to do with you?

1ZI. H..SY: l! y it please Your Honor, this defeats no.

j.a'e def .ns. counsel knew what a l-.,ding au-stion is?

6951


::ay 5-Jf-3£-3-3-JCnrrow (Int. Brown)

Court Ko. 1

I 3Uj_-5t that the Tribun 1 instruct defonso counsel in

*

ciu3o notbors.

D... 70.1 .-.uC: Hr. Pro si do nt, I on about to as k when, in
h t ’lords, end on what oocasion Raschor told the witness
those wore his own exp or inoots jid not coonor. oxperi-
n-nts.

:ii. R. .U>Y: Th.t's very truo, Your lienor. Hj is about to
-.sic that, but :iO oviiocco to d -to has brought out the f-.ct
that R-sohor h-d said that.

7H- Pk-SIDJI.T: Couns-1 cay procood.

BY DR. VCR G3K:

.. To ensvior your question, I :.lro- dy said in ny direct
ox ruination that - hen n-soh-r began oxporin-nts of his
our. in addition to our oooaon oxporinants, rr.fi I asked
Uiti rbout then, h- told ::u that the experiments hud boon
ordorud by Hicnler ...ad th-.t they ^r- to bo the nocn3
through which ho hoped to qualify us - professor.

.. Did ho ovur thr-..ton you - spying that if you triod
to interfere in th-so experiments....

:H_ PiUJIDTrn?: (Interrupting) Counsel, you're propound¬
ing a strictly la .ding question by asking the witness if
Raschor a id to hi:; certain things, ~sk hie what rtaschor
s id to hia and then tho witness o an testify us to what
k scher said. That e;k-s tho quostion not a loading
question, when you rep-at .taschor's words to tho witness,
you \r- skinj loading questions. Just ask tho witness
whr.t -C-asoher said upon r. o-rt .in occasion.

3Y DR. 70H TRK:

. Hr. Romberg, did a scher, on any occasion , say ny-

thiaj to you ;bout his own ,xporim-nts?

.» *s I just said, h- told na that th-se experiments did

not concern me; that they wore his experiments _nd that he

S952


- - y 5-l'-BK-5— i-X arrow (Inc. BrownJ
Court No. 1

-3 carrying thee out on Himmler's orders.

v ••hon did ho soy this?

*- told Eu this whonhe began hi3 experiments while we
™ rj 3till c;.rryin3 on cur other experiments - num-ly,

before thi3 fir3t fatality.

. Did ho say this to you once or several times?

.. do s .id sovoral tin-3 that those experiments hid boon
ordered by Kinnler, and p rticulor^y, whan I objected to
thv .30 experiments after the first fatality, ho said again
that this did not concern me; th..t I should not bother
r.ysclf about natters th .t wore not ny concern. Ho hod tho
orders nd he had to carry th-:: out.

. i or- there throats oonn-otid with what ho said?

- Veil, ho didn't threaten me oponly, but I do renenber
tht he once said that if I didn't stop objecting h- would
c.anc -1 ny passo while I was in the camp.

> *h. t would this hrv- m.ant?

•• *h-t would hav- noant th t I couldn't l-r.vo tho
c u p ..ny more.

. whr t Were your hum n relations with ti eschar? Is the
prosocutor correct in his assumption that you wore good
friends; th-t you used tho f.r.ili r form of tho personal
pronoun, nd th *t you c .lied bin Sigmund?

*• No, th .t is not true .t .11. I _ddr-3S-d hin nlw .ys
• ith the forr. .1 p.rson 1 pronoun. ISy rel .tionc with hin
u-re pure ly offici 1 nd I c llud him Lir. R ,sch-r.

* Can you find anything in the corr-spondonco or the #
docunents th .t could subst rnti-to this point of view of
the prosecutor?

- No, I know of no -vid-ncc for th .t in the docun-nts
ad, in fact, there are, in th- documents, s-v,r .1 st te¬
nants of -i.sch-r's - in th- docuc-nts which have been -

6955


*• 7 rro [In;.

Court .To. 1

subr.it bog - which rove. 1 th.t he w 3 hostile to tic.

->i.-c you oppos-d to .sch-r's oxporinents, is
... correct in .S3-cinj th .t you r-j..rdod th-s- throe
* -tr.lities s nurd-r, pur- „.d simple?

•• .Co, I couldn't r-snrd those -nporin-nto s just
Pi-in curd-r boc_us- ho h d boe;s ord-r-d by the v-ry
highest .utlicritics to o.rry out th-so oxporiuents. I,
hew-vor, ..nted to h vo nothing to do with then, :nd th.it
-s why I roport-d to Huff,

. Li cro3s—ox j;in .tion, the prosecutor s id th .t it
wouldn't h vo both-rod you . bit if .11 tho inn. t-s of
J oh .u h d di xl. Do you think you c n provo th-- contr ry?

.. X c-rt inly didn't oxpoot th t oh-rju, boo..use,
uabj-otinc; nyo-lf to p-rson J. d ng-r, I w..s th- ono who
o T "‘ — oi. nbar out of D oh *u. I wr.s tho

one who reported, nd I r-fus-d to h-vo cythin^ to do
• ith -*iy subsequent -xp-ric-nts o: Jhor'a.

- ~nd why did you net in this w.y?

— y re .son w..s th:.t I didn't w .at to h:-.vo -nythlng to
do with thosw oxperir..nts of n-.sch-r's, : .nd it w..s ay
opinion th t th.su oxpcrin_nt3 w-r- velu-losc end not
r.jousscry for tho Luftw .ffe or for .vi .tion rose.roh,

so th_t -xperin-nts which do not fulfill n pr-ssing or
urj-nt p'irpo3- should not bo carried out und-r such con¬
ditions s those.

v Th, prosecution is further of th- opinion thr.t no
etfc-r f;.t liti_3 could hov- occurred if the biron-tor
which you hud h.-.d r-pc.ired h .d cot b-_n rep ir_d. Is
th .t corr-ct?

- Ii-.3ohor would c-rt_inly h..vo bo..n bio to j-t hold
ef such b'-rcto.tor, p_rh-.ps h- could ove-n h-.vo jot one
in Schons u t th. r.irfield in his office, or, nt lcr.st,

*954


:: y 5-L f -aX-3-6-K '-xrou (In*. Brown)
Court .Vo. 1


' similar instrun-nt. Othor.'isc, In view of the ^ssist-
-jjcc ;jid the too priority thet h~ tins given by the 33, he
certainly would hr.vo been able to ict hold of such nn
instrument. In other fiords, th- important thing w.sn't
th t wo repaired thic barometer.

. Kcp. _nothor question, Hr. Honb-rg. How long woro you
ordered to st-.y in D ch:.u?

.. Until tho /experiments on rescue fro.\ high altitudes
had boon concluded.

v ,.ftcr those experiments were concluded you would not
have boon undor orders to st .y in Bachr.u -von if the
ch-nb-r h d reel ined thoro?

.. I jx.r 80 n.:lly could have l~ft, of course, just ns tho
ch.'Qbor was In Dnobr.u boforo I got th-ro; so after ny
.xperin-ntel series vies finish-d I cculd hr.vo left -nd
tho ohembor could have boon removed fro;- Daoh .u l-t-r,
-lthcr by Rasohor or the oenp oduiniatration.


5 — 2 y— 1 —. lcy-(int. ^rowr.)-

Court 1

Q Moving the cl&aber fcra the C-=p was not your Job?

A No.

Q '..hat w=3 thv reason th.t you :cud cv_r and beyond your orders?

A I did everything 1 could to get Rasen^r's promise to no7t the
-r—_h..r, although, he didr.' t nnt tc give thar consent and it is quite
cle-r that I 3taycd until th. v.ry lest Boaent, until 1 was absolutely
sure that the chacb-r w:s going to be movvd from Dachau. That was the
reason why I stayed there.

Q. ghat was the lowest decoration for a soldier In Germany during
the war?

A. So far as I knew, it was the War Merit Cress, 2nd Class.

Q. A nd what was tho lowest decoration for a civilian?

A. Also the ■*ar Merit Cross, 2nd Class.

Q. And what Decoration did you receive?

A. Tho War Merit Cress, 2nd Class.

Q. You were present at t:* Humbert? Cold Conference?

A. Yos.

Q. If you realized that ccnccntration caxp inmates had beon
used in the i rcoiing experiments, why did you not raiao an objection ut
this c* nfcronco?

A. I saw at this conference that the ox; e rimer.ts had b-^n carried
out an official orders. I had already clearly expressed cy personal
-.pinion of th.se oxp. risen to before. Ruff had passed this information
on. And at the Nurnberg Conference th-rc were much higher offices or
raris rcorv-ccnt-d, wfc in part ray also have r-alisod it. I know, Y r r
•■xitplc free what Dr. Alexander has said that many of then realized this,
'•■it that thoy said nothing. Uy position durLig this whole tln^ ras so
* r Jc, on the one hand, because of the refusal to Ras eh or and Hir.-J.cr, and
'a tho ether hand it was Tilt- dear; so that I really saw nc rearen for
-J r.iaing an objection at this Kumberg conference*

TP.. VOEnSRK: iir. President I have nc farther quostiens .

THE HESDOT: The Tribunal has several questions to propound to

6SK


2 -y-!4_3Ioy-(iat, orcim)-
Ccirt 1
the witness.

3T JUDOS SEERING:

v. Er. Rcnbvrg, is I understand ycur test irony, you and Dr. Ruff,

• ~ r - ordered t- Dachau to collabcrat. wit* Dr. Raschcr in a aeries of
wsts to deternin- th, possibilities of rcscu. of high altitude?

A

Q And 7ir.il. you were there you were actually under the cccannd of
Tr. flaschcr?

A I was not und.r Rnsch.r’s cccraad as a Etabsartz in the Luftwaf-
f-. I wac under th. ccc and really of th. carp cae-jader rhilv I was in
th; canp.

-i rut so far zo th..xpcrin.r.ts thersclv-s wer- coanc.rn.d and th e
c r.trcl cv.r th. Ire- pressure ctcabcr, Dr, h. acher hod responsibility in
-hat particular, is that corr ct?

A Tea.

i -.for; you ind Dr. Ruff wn«.t t: Uachau tc p.rfors ycur experic-nts
had s tailor t.cto be n aadc by th. G.man Luftr-afic or for th. benefit
cl the G.man Luftwaffe?

a You --an slail r .xperiaents?

Q XeS.

A YeB, in th. DVD re carried cut similar -xp.ria.nts, *.nd at ether
institutes Me a, rrrlcin for th. Luftwaffe siril.r .xp.rlacnts w.r. car¬
ried out.

1 In cth ' r3 -'ds, th. -:p rir.nts that had b..n c rri.d cut pri.r
t: th't tin. did r.ct differ free th. .xp-rioenis that you carried out
at a achau7

a Trie \~s continuation cf an axpari-eatol series which v *a alrca-
V u.ac.r -.riy r.d 'or is al77-.; 3 the cos. in exp-riaental scri.s, differed
fr-c preceding exporiaunts changing th. c:nditicns increasing the altitu¬
de the e ld, etc.

. Just hit Were ycur attceptinr to deterain. in the Dachau exp.ri-
—ntst.ua.t h a already been d_t.rrir.ed cr ascertain by ycur pr.vicus tests?

a Th. r ir. task was tc ir.Vestig-t. rescue at heights

6987


5 (int. 3rown)

Court I


-o orect _a 20 kilometers tc find out whether rescue of airplane crows
is possible _t such u high altitude at all. Theretofore it had been
ascertained t..at tue crow survives the explosive decompression vfcich
occurs at such an altitude when tee pressure cabin develops a leak,
an C now ve wanted to fine, out whothor tao person could bo brought
safely to o_rth from this altitude.

Vho gwvo the order for you and Ruff to conduct theso <-xperimentsT
a. 2ju;t v_s arranged by Ruff in nis t-lk with Professor Hippko,
tho -odical Chief.

0 , i. "ns the order a written or an oral ordor?

& o far as I know, it was an or_l order of Professor Hippko.

From wnou did you le-rn this f.xt7
a. Frxi Dr. Ruff.

Ci. 3 of or a going to Dachau, did you or «uff discuss your
assi-puont with anyone-other, of course, than tho discussion that
you said you a-d with bolts in norlin i . Docaabor 1941 or January 19427
<w of-or tno di texts si on that Ruff h-d first with Volts and thon
with jo, Ruff vent t' Hippko and go* his isroroxrul, and tho next dls-
cuasirr. took pl&eo with Volts in kunlch.

V. In other werds, at t.io ti-o taut you and Ruff had tno
discussion with Dr. Volts, tho approval for those experiments or
t.'.c tests ct De-chuU had not yet boon -proved by Hippko?

a, res, when Volts c—a to ->«.rlin f <r t.is discussion and discuss¬
ed this problem with Buff he h-d already told hla that in tho sujmor
of 19«il Hippko h_d given his ao r v^l on principle for such expe¬
riments find that diouko, along with Kottenhoff and Baschcr, had #
diGouaacd the quostion of tr.ese experiments.

Z. row, who did 7 ou understand that Hlxnko had given tho
anroval t that Veits told you about — to Hascher?

O. Just what took pl_cc in detail ..t these c references I canH

6968


5 ?-ir-2c->.-loy (Inti jrovaj

Court I


=-y 'aoe..uae I v^-i t present; it vj u discussion in valet Professor
"Ll-.Z, YotvvSliOff, ..ad E^acacr t-laed Vita Hi'J UCO uO'Ut t-iu o^pcrl-ontc,
—Ot tnU discussloa Eippiee £nro Lis -u rov_l rn principle.

-..ea t -iter t~o belts conference, -B I understand it. Dr.

3x21 veat t: hipplco, to eonfixu tLo aror-y-1 and to ot actual aiuro-

V 1 .i or .«,st toso, Purr and nxiber,-;. «ad no c.oic b.xn a-id reported
tn .t i’. ct t- ycul

•*. Tea.

7..c-.\ l.tor, la C-au„xy or ?eara-ry 1942, y :u and /Caff wont
t ..union .../ n_d w ctnfcrcnco with bolts .xd s-.o olacr ..ontlcion?
a. Ku.t is ri^t, yot.

after Huff r-turn-d fr „ot;in^ ..la ..>>rjv..l fro. Eipptc,
but boforc you otd Huff n^d y ur c af»r~nec vita Volts In i.unlch
ia cnamry or "wbru-jy 1942, vita vhu. did you disouos tnia usoi'.a-
aont?

a. Only vith Dr. Aiff.

v. You arc quite c.nfidont, tnoa, t:_t aoitawr you nor *uff
dl~c"sood t..ia oesigaaent vitb anyone cite prior to that huaich
aootia^?

a. I cort-ialy didn't t_lx ..oout it, and Huff only tulLod ..b,ut
it f "cits m tao tcc_oi*n .f tn-t first visit la Jcrlln.


6959


5 l r ~V 47-::-S r :-5-l-:to».hrji-lRt: 2rcvm
Court He. 1


7/ as tho ror.scn for that tho fact that was a ncro
cr loss socrot cr confidential assignment?

... It was an oxpcrinontal sorios, involving oxporinonts
at Ligh altitudo, in tl is caso up to 20 kilcuotors, so that
a tochnic-1 Jovolcpr-ont was app.jont fren tl:o prebloa
as ivon. JTew all oxporinonts in which tho subjoct cf
tho assignment cr tho title cf tho report shows a toch-
nic .1 dovolep .i-nt of tho planning of a technical dovcl-
cpiont cf sono s«rt, troro always socrot; in fact, thoy
woro tep socrot.

0 ., In tin touts tl t *.. boon conducted by y u and
Ruff, prior t: ycur g' lng to Dachau, cm ycu stato how
ny experimental subjects had been usod?

A. The oxporuaontts in our inetituto — I know moot abcut
thou — frr tlo firrt ox onnonts in paraebuto dosconts
frou 12 kiloaotors, wo usod si:: cr sovon oxporinontal
subjocts; for tlo oxpl sivo dccniprossion wo usod just
,'ocut overy no avr.ilablo at our instituto, nrjwly abcut
eight at the nest.

. B w, bof. re you would begin an oxporlsont cf t:..t
Icir.d, tho tncs ycu conducted in .lorlin, I suppose that it
uld 'x» an ii port r.t thing tc kn.tr si nothing about tho
physical health cf ycur oxperi.iont 1 subject prior to tl.o
ti iu y;u togin; would t: ..t mt o true?

... In cur jorlin oxporiaonts, we did net givo tho oxpv-r-
inent 1 subjocts a physical ox - inati a over*tine. T
’now the non, boc us*. tl^y t:ero al. st always tlo s:no
Xicplo. Or. tho tthv-r 1-«1, sicl* people, pocplo fer
ii'.st.nco * itl . he..rt dofect, n u r u not :-.ong then; there¬
fore , special crcaninntian vas not necessary.

In otl.or words, tloso uon .t 3-rlin, I talco It, voro

:vr. in tho ir force; and you h;.d the poi-con..1 data on

6560


5 47-::-S'-5-2-!t&tbLa-Int: Irowr.

Court I'o. 1


then; you know th air r.mx z , tlxir r.mke, t oir
thoir h- rt condition, tloir blood pressure , purl -ps
the condition of their other vitr.l org.-ns. Tfcoj* fc d k d
to unioi’co cocploto physic. 1 uxnr.in: tion, ..£ r. jv.ttor of
f ct, boforo they wore over :dr:itted Into tko ir forco;
is th .t net corroct? #

... ''o f tb t is net quito correct, boc .use wo wero
civilian ir.stituto, uid tko oxporinontr.l sublets woro
ourcolvos — our own .ssoci tec. I v ;s tko uxpori.nontr .1
subject, let us e .y, for m exp-rincut of Ruff, md our
no eh mic Fohl:»ietor, vhoco book Is boor subniifcbd here,
w.-.s frcquontl; cubjeot In oxp-ri or.ts; r.nd other r.psoc-
i to? of nlno wor* Iso c xpori; ontnl subjects. Kono of
those troro naibors of t iiftwnffo, but civilians
vfcor. ./o kns« pereonr.lly, but r.ot in sue! gro'.t dots. il :.c
ro Id result fror; re.-din 3 r. ro.wt on nr. ‘xny pkysicr.l
cxr.rinr.tion.

roll, the;* hrd undorsono physical ex-in', ions of
one sort or cr.othor; h- d the;* not?

oil, '-c * shod our psoci toe whuti jt tho;: woro lr.

1 h 1th, whothor tb.oy tuA ho.-rt defect, etc., but

wo did not give then ro.-.l physical oxnninr.Jion, euch -.s
%

..r i* on to dot-r me physic .1 fitnosa for tho . ir forco.
0 ,. Tow would they Imow thoy './ere in good pi ysiorj.
he ltl ? Su oso t’. t I, for o::.--:plo , , rooor.tcd jysolf
to your for :r. ex - .in-tier, ~nd c.id tlv t I vv.s *n yood
h* sic: 1 h . 1 th; -t wouldnt needs .rii; follow tl ttl\'.t
would bo true rt to er.t of fact, unless ;*cu know sono-
ing ‘.bout :.ty heart condition, cry blood pressure, nd
shcliko; vc-Id it?

. . -C £.


. r on I suppose th t whon test • 2 :*ur. ov .17 day in

69S1


5 I’,-.- 47—’!-S '.’-5-2 h - hm- In t: 3rown
Court Be. 1

•/our Berlin tcotrs you right run or.o tost or two tosts,
p«rh.‘-?fi something of thr.t sort? -- then in ordor to r.ccun-
ul&.feo your scientific dr.tr. cr your finr.l analysis rad
reports, I r. sauce th-.t you would hr.vo r. card for tho
oxpori-iontr.l aubjocta; 11 -V* , lot us r.sauno, end or. thr.t you
v;ould sot out your findings ..s to "A" in a particular oxpor-
h.ont of a dcsi gnr.tcd !:ind, conducted at a cortaln tir.o,
r.nd you would show tho roault of th-.t tost, all on tho
ono card; ia tfc.t coi*roct?

... '.:o did not hr.vo r. apocir.l card for ovory or.pcrir.cntal
subject, but entorod this data in r. roccrd book. Super¬
vision of their at.-.to of health woro undortakon at rogulr.r
intervals , not in connoction with tho spociflc oxpor-
lnont, but wo took x-rays, an olcctro-c. .rdiogran, and in
this vr.y kept on oyo on t; oir ovor-a.ll atr.to of health.

0 .. Precise 1;-. I*..or. , \.kon you would finish with an oxper-
iiiont, porhaps you wo. Id hr.vo tad let us a y, for oxanplo,
100 t jsc; on vrrioue oxporii ontr.l subjects. At tho ond of
thr.t or.o hundred tests could you look r.t your -.lnutos, or
your card, or your file, or wl*. tcv r you . -.aintainod, r.nd
dotor: J.no how nsny r.nd uhr.t hind of tosta or.ch of tho
oxpori::ontr.l aubjocts h d undorgono during tho courao of
tho rosoarcl oapcrir.cr.t; I nn talking about in Borlin.

... Yes, wo could soo thr.t fror. tho record book,

-. In other words, it world bo lnposaiblo to hr.ro r.ny
sort of noxperi ent for t: o purposo of rorerreh findings
thr.t world bo worth my thing, ur.loss you tad kopt notic-
ulous re cord a fro:; which. tho final roport could bo nedoj
is th-*-t not ccrroct?

... ho:, of courto wo always 2:opt a record book of or.ch
.. ri ... ts.


5952


5 I icy 47-:j-ST/-5-4-K(-c!_Jx rT S»t: Brown
Court Bo. 1


ion did you actually arrive ct Dccheu, p.r cpr.rcd
to begin the Feuff-Ronborg oxperieunts?

I errived ebcut the 20th of Fobruery. Things did not
stert off right then, but wo wont out for tho first tir.o on
the 21st or 22nd of Fobruery; the 22 nd ues Sundry, so it
might h vo boor. tJt) 23rd. 7 or. tlioro wr.s tho difficulty
with R schcr'a orders, end tho onpcrir.cnts wore brolcon
off r.gr.in by tho P.oichafuohrur.r. R- sc her wont to Schongeu
r.d I r turned tc Berlin end weitod for nows fron hin, r.s
to tzhun things h_d finally n put in order. I was
c rteinly in Berlin on Kerch 9th end on tho 10 th or 11 th,

I probably :.in rrrived et Dachau, end on t! is dr.y tho
ctuel oxperl*:untel curies bogen.

n.v.n you would or.y t‘ at your first toato bogan on
10 - 11 Here!, 19-12?

. . *'or; I cennot r y for sure, wbothor or not on tho
2 Crd or ‘Mtl of TVoru; ry e couplo of oxperlncnta wore
performed; 3 cwover, tho reel work bogen on tho 10 th or
lit! of Kerch.

. Car. you recoil.c vl t dr.y tho tuctc woro finelly
ooncludod? I rr ope-.!d.ng of the Ruff-Ronborg tests.

- . Thu experiments c :o to cn ond ono or two deys
before tho c! e:b_r was te!:on away; tl* 1 st dey wes spent
in peeking, nd the cl ruber v: as drivon out of tho c:uip
of Dachau on t; o 19th or 20t: of ’ey, \f. lie I wea poraon-
elly present.

During that p-riod, fron your erriv 1 until tho
cl .I'bor wes fin. Uy takon away, hew :: ny te:ts wero
.ctu..lly isr.do in your oxp.-ri-sonts?

. It is herd to give t* c prociso nunbor, but thoro

;ro ccrteinly botvoon two end throo hundred oxperinents.

6963


to c


v7—£' —5-5-*!oohr.n-Infc: ?rown

’-'o, 1


*, -.nd those two r.nd throo hundred tosts, t-s I undor-
st. nd it, v/orw for tho curpcso of deitorriining tfco poss¬
ibility of poaouo r.t higji r.ttitudos • th t is to sr-y
.bout 20,000 iiutors?
j.. Yea, thr.t w..s thoir purpoao.

*1.2 FESID21-T: iho iVxbunnl t/i-1 not: bo in rocoss,

(i. rocoaa wr.a trJeor.,)


5964


5 H'? K? r^-Trl-io- 31'klcy (R-aler)
e-urt ko, 1 Cr. 3 - 1

IKS J&R 1 HAL: The. fc-ibun 1 is “snin in session.

HARDY: U 7 it pie' ^ Your H-n r, in caylirnce with the
ruling f the Tribunal -f 1 - st Friday, I h va Just received the
c-apUU tr-ncL-ti.n of Dfiustnt 16C2-PS; irxl if you would lik- to
h-vc, ao wait until Inter I wiU distribute it then or do it n %t,
whichever the Tribun-'l desires, s = substitute fer the Document
1602-PS which is net- in Document Book II. I fcvo it completely
tr-nsl-ted nd copies f Gercr.n "nd inglish 'vcil blo n_w.

THS .UsSI)-JfT: Y u n'.y h* nd the c-py to the Tribun* 1 now.

!H. HARuY: The rigin-.l exhibit is h-.ndod herewith to the
Secret-ry G-n-r 1 .

EXAMINATION

BY THE TRIBAL (JU,Ci. l^BRI.'C):

C. Dr. R ober. Just bef >rv the C art te,k its recess you
a'.c'.c the ot'tccer.t th-.t during the period y^u wero .t Dachau
c.nducting tho Ruff-Rocoberg experiments y u uslisrtu Urt bvtweon
200 nd 300 tests wuro C.n y.ut .11 the Tribun- 1 nppr xim-.tely

h-w srny ef thos- teSvS w-rv parachute dr p tests nd, .n th- ther
tand, h 7 i sr.njr -f then »-r« explosive dec aprocsi n tests?

A. Yes. The pnr-.chuU rop experiments fr -a high altitudes,
that is t, a./, ltitudes over fourteen ,r fifteen kilwuet-rs, .-U
hnd t be prcc-dod by eXplosivu duc-mpressi n int > the high -ltitude,
the -ltitude of th- ctu-.l exporia-nt. In the cist _f a slow
-.scent up t*. thirteen kil.enters, f r instance, tSnro is no high
ltitude sickness. On the otfnr hm* si;* .-scent up to twenty
kil m-tero w ck* result in high altitude sickness, oven with oxygen.
Therefore, one r.cccrwls sl-wly *t firet in this experiment, to jioout
eight kil .a-ters, nd then g-es n with oxplo a ive decompression to
the altitude f the axria.nt pr per, the -ltitude fra which one is
to Ju-p.

Q. Thw -oint is, then, th t 11 f theso two hundred to throe
hundred tests included the cjabinrti n of explosive decxapresaion
r.d the parachute -scent?


6965


5 li y 47 ^ImZmpkp^ 3L-kloy (Rcnlerl
C-jrt lb, l Qrm 1


A. N-t “11 if thus; only those that went above the altitude
of f art-vn or fifteen kU-ctotcrs; r.ll of the*. were connected with
-xploaSvu decompression*

Q. Of tlx. two hurr’r^d or three hundred tests that were bc.Cq
zt Dachau, how erny would y,u estimate went above th. f urtcen or
fifteen kiloaotore?

A. I think aporoxlo Uly half went up to r. hifhor .-.ltitu.!o
-n*. w^ro t hcroforc c^imctod with oxplisiv. decazpression.

Perhaps n_>t cuite half A then, because toward the end not s~> nr.ny
experiments vero carried ait.


K-y 3W:-3K.8-1^:U i>Lr (Iat, j? anl..r)

Sourt Z, C :so *Io, 1

; You arrived it Piqhtu aon-whero our)d the 20th of
February 19*i2?

- Yjs, Fobru-ry 22 or 23*

< ..ad peril..ps oa. csr r o t-sts ’.;,ro aide on this day,
ni you than '/oat br.ckto Berlin o-cv.uao 3oao difficulty
hid ..risen concerning vino w..a in cwinnd, or 3on-thing
of thr.t 3ort. .ih it \i 3 th t difficulty?

*

.. Th-r* w-rj difficulties rif.rxding Rnschor's being
t3signed to D.tchr.u. Th-s- difficulties w.ro in prjt
connected • ith bis being issl-pijd to the .ioltz Institute,
x‘ on*the oth r h.ni his .ur.ignia.nt to Schong .u.

. ..ith v/hon w 3 the nattor t: k-n up in Berlin to
jtr ijhten out th-s- diffir.ulti_3?

.. I h .d nothin, t 11 to do -./ith th.it. I did not
n-goti t- ou th-t ;Uv. stio.\ t 11 . .; sch-r settled th.it
•ith the ,.ir -..u . t .lunioh. I personally had nothing to
uo ’./ith hia ail it j*y .osi^nu-nt,

. Then you c —- b\ck to D .ohtu 3oa- tieio around the
13ti. or 11 th of ti rch. .. -re you ordered bick to Bach.u?

- .Ic, it h .d b—a ..jre-d fro;: the outsit th t vie ./ore
joiag to c rry out th- -x?-ria-nt3. Only ;.n interruption

’ t..k~.i plr.ee, which .. .3 ov-rcoa- ift-r tho difficulties
...re linin; t-i r:j rd in , K .sch-r’s nssignaont.

, Hoe a-.ny t ^3t3 h .d you run r.fc 3-rlin an the s ue
-x ,,rir:.nt before you aov.d down to Bach .u?

.. I c..: not t .11 you th t .x otly, but in th- pi.r~.chut$
JuR' exp^ric nts, I u sur- th-r- wore -bout twenty or
thirty. In thoa- c 3-3 th- .ltitude w s auch low,r.

.as fir 3 explosive d-oonpr-ssion i3 concerned, wo p-r-
forried consideribl- nunb-r of exp-ri/:-nts.

. How n iiy *.;ould you siy?

- I sure th r- .poroxinatyly two hundred

*967


V y 5-*-BK-3-2-Gallagher (Iat. H^al^r)
CcUft I, C..3e Ho. 1


-xplosivj decompression teats.

Over what period of tine had th~so tests boon cede?

.. The par chute work h.dbocn canoludod in the /all
of 1041 , und th- explosive decompression t-sts were carried
out up to tho tine of the beginning of th- experiments at
D.-.ch .u, about four aonths.

v Then ov m* a period of four aonths you conducted about
two hundr-d explosive decompression tost3 at Berlin?

« Yes.

. ..nd how nar.y p-o.>le did you have s exporic-nt-1
3 ubJwCt 3 for your explosiv- dec expression tests, by which
I underst-nd tests nado .t ltitudes ~bov- fourteen or
fifteen kilometers?

.. They wont up to s-ventw-n kilometers, nd as to th-
nuab.r of th- oxporin-nt .1 sublets, you will h..vo to
keep in alnd th-3e w-r- m-ab-rs of the Institute. There
wore ..bout seven.

. ..u the poo lo u3-d in 3-rlin for the parachute

drop 3 at .ltitudes und~r fourt-en or fifteen kilometers
a different G^oup than th..t used for the explosive dc-
mxipr-ssion tests?

.. I Jo, we -lw-^TS h .d the sx. people in fl-rlin. That was

just the difficulty, -.e did not hvave a 1 -*5- nunbjr of
subjects; therefore, wo had to conduct various series of
exporia-nts on th. s People; during the explosive do-
c oppress ion experiments wo c rri-u out a large number of
airpl ne oxp-rirwnts, centrifuge oxperirwnts, end experi¬
ments reading the shock deceleration, that is the shock
of the parachute opening, or the braking effect in crash

landings.

„ n exp-rt in aviation medicine, what was your

Ti.w -3 to how often cn oxperCental subject should bo


X ? 5■4<£-BK-8-3-G'.llcijhur (Int. anool-r)

Court I, C.-.su ..o. 1

-xposed to c.n explosive decompression test? Th'.t i3 to
siy, how much time should elr.pse between one experiment
or tc3t, end the succeeding t-st?

.. explosive Jococpr-ssion is not the cost strenuous
pr.rt of th- cxp^ric-nt3. Th- r.ltitude which is recichcd
plys r: consider .bio p-rt, \nd th- lr.ok of oxyg-n which
occurs .s result. In Berlin we p.-rforccd explosive
d-coaprossion oxporin-nt3 irons ourselves, 3-v-r .1 tines
d:.y. .«o p rforrod sev-r~.l on one d y, end th-n wo

c -rri-d out oth .r cxporic-nts, th_r_ were test flights
when th-re w .s good wither, md then we v<ont b-.ck-to
th ch nber.

. Hew c-.ny tests n week did you conduct your oxp,.ri-
c-nts t D-ch oi? Did you work s-von d .ys r. w-ok? -r "
.. !io, thor- were no -xperic.nts on 3und..y.

. Did you -.K>rk on holidays?

,, Ho, t Beat-r, for i.istJioe, I wr.a in Berlin, end
there were n-v.r ry experiments carried out on ^und .y.

. How cl my Oj.cen holid ys were there in thr.t period
of tin-, do you recollect?

.. I think th-ro w:.s 2cat-r; then there w\s the 1 st
of :i.y, which w a . holid .y. Th-n thero w..s ..so-nsion
Dry, which u.-.s 3ur--ly holidr.y, md then there w~rc ell
the Sundays.


5 Hay 4 7-Yr- .-JC-a-1-Kaynes-Ra-llc-r

C3*j?.: : i


Q. At the iftstar holiday, hov a any days did you take off?
Good Friday? SSSarday? Hasten londay, perhaps?
a. Yes, and Monday too?

Thar., at the Taster" Holidays, in addition to your
Castor Sunday, there ware three days that you did not
experiment?

A. Certainly, yas.

How many days did you take off on ascension holl-

day?

s. I was not in Berlin for Ascension Day; there was
probably only one day token off.

Q. And on 1 r.ay, one day?

I was in Berlin 1 Hay. At that tins thoro was this
barometer business, so that I was in Berlin for some time.
I remember definitely that I was in Berlin on 1 Hay.

Q. When you actually rouchod Dachau to stay, along
about— ‘Veil, when your rirct oane to Dachau, tho 2*rd
of February, vher- werj you billeted in the camp?
a. I was not billeted in the camp. I had a civilian
apartment. I was living with a farmer or conebody, a
private citizen, outoldo the camp.

%, Hov far away from the camp?

.V. I thin* approximately twenty or twenty five minutes,
walk from tho camp.

;. Did anyone share this billet with you, or this a~
par taunt?

... Ho, I had a room with those people, which I rented.

Q. Did you aver aiaauns with th.*-5 your
being in Dachau?

Ho, naturally not.

Q. /here did you nes3 during the time that you stayed


in Dachau?


69?0


5 Kay - 7-9-3-B ayne s- Rani1 e r
COLRT I I

.!. I had ay noon meal In a little restaurant outside
the camp, or* el3o I lid not oat at all. In the evening
I often vent 1 r. to I.ur.ich, uid had supper there. If not
I always ate At the restaurant In Dachau,
ft. During that tlae, did you discuss with anyone-other,
of course, than Rascher or Ruff or some of the inspec¬
ting officers vho night coao to Dachau- the experiments
you vore conducting and the reason for ^our being in
Dachau?

Ho, I don't think that I talked to anyone, apart
fron those persons whoa you have sentloned.
ft. Did you ke«p the sane billet or apartnent and the
sane mess during all the tine that you stayed In Daohau?

H .. .j’tervards I was given a room In the SS bar¬
racks, which has outside the camp, out as before I ato
it that rentaurant which I mentioned,
ft. r.ien you wore in the 33 b/irraoas, did ar.vor.e share
your room flih you?

No, I had a room to ay self.

Q. But there were in the SS b-rraoks a great m»ny S3
people?

Xeu. This was an officers' birr eks where other S3
officers were living, ir.d there was also some office
space there.

ft. THoso wore 33 officers In charge cf the details of
rur.nir.., the camp, In charge of the prisoners, and that
sort of thing?

Ho, these 33 officers, as far as I know, lid not
belong to the gu .ra company of the camp, ?ut belonged to
the girrison, tne regiment, or whatever It was, which
was stationer at Dachau.

ft. I believe you sail on Friday that there w ere

6971


5 Xay sZ.— &-Hoynea- Haulier.

COURT I I

between 60 and 70 Innate8 of the camp who volunteered
as experimental subjects for the high-altitude exporl-
aor.ts which you and Ruff, in collaboration -nth Rasohor,
were going to conduct In the low-prcssuro chamber exper¬
iments.

-v ./ell, according to what the experimental subjects
told Ruff and me, approximately 60 persons volunteered
specifically for the lo'^-prossuro experiments.

3. *»nd i understood that the minimum requirements for
tho operation of the low-pressure chamber was two men,
one, thephyslclan in charge, and the other, the mechanic
•*ho operated the engines.

The physician, of course. w, t s neoossary. The mechanlo
did not have to be present constantly to attend the en¬
gines. Onco the pumps were working and tho motor was
running, everything was .all right. The mechanic had only
the tack to supervise the engines, to oil them whenever
neoeasary, etc., to see to It that no pump was ever run¬
ning hot. However, It was not necessary to servloo the
engine continuously, “he whole apparatus was kept vory
simple because It w-.s meant for service with troops,
and they did not always have experts available.

Q. During your series of authorized experiments, who
wore the men who acted as the mechanics for this low-
pressure chamber and who ran tho engines and looked after
them?

.i. In particular, Scoottn took care of tho engines. He
knew something about thorn,.oil then there was another per¬
son among the experimental subjects who knew about motor
era's. Neff sometimes concerned hloself about them, but
--Inly there were these two men who wore experts.

Sobotta and Hoff, then, were the experts.

6&72


5 ..ay -i%H-A£-9--fiayneft-Ha=llar.

ecu:-.? i cass :

.w Ho, the expert wa* Another ona, «a fas a noteroar
mechanic.

Q. What was the name, do you know?

A. I don't know that-any longer.

Q. What was Neff doln^ In the car.p? Do you know why
he va8 there?

I ,

a. .vs far as ho told me at the tine and as far as he
testified here, he was there because he had denounced
a bomb attick which was to be carried through by SS
men, In .aistna, and after that denunciation the men In¬
volved had been arrested.

Q. How long had he oeen at Dachau?

He said at the time that very soon after tho annex¬
ation of .ustria in the year 108 he had boen sont to
:he camp.

Q. as a political pilmnor?

A. Yes.

Q. What do you Knew ibout the non Sototta?

I know of Sobotta that he was an Austrian and that
for repeated burglaries he had boen sentenced, as far
as I know, he carried out a large-scale burglary In a
big Vlonna Bank or the Vienna State Bank.

Q. Ho, then, was a criminal prisoner, as you understood
it?

Yes, he had received a number of sentences, and he
was a professional criminal who, because of these rop-
oatea burglaries, had been put In preventive custoSy.

Q. Do you know what court had placed him In preventive
custody?

.w Ho, I do r.ot know that.

Q. How, what do you knew about the nan, the expert In

mechanics, whose name Is now unknown to you?

6573


5 May -fc7-M-.»iC-9-&-Hayaea-RanllJ?.
CttQI I C-3* II


rt. Why ha vae there, really, I can't tell exactly now.
I think It had something to do with his knowledge of
aotorcors. I assuue that he was carrying out hurglnrleo
In order to steal z.o tore are.

But you don't know that?

I don't *now that exactly.


6974


5 iiy-^-:3-10-l-Eoxsiu (Int. Haal ur)

Court Bo. I.

q During the period ef tithnt’you wore in Dachau, just
x-otly t activity did Hoff carry on that you know about? Ho r:n
V:j _xtor. I believo you said soavathing the other day to tho effect
that ho r-a in charge cf bringing the oxp-riaintcl subjects to the
chmbcr .-.nd returning thoau 'That olso did no do so far ;s you know?

A lief f was the so-colled bloc'.: oldest of these expiria-ental
to s.- to it that t "lock -ly. Ho

hnd to get food for ther., r.nd in addition ho carried cut nxib-r of
errr .da for Srsch-r within tha c-a?. For inat-nce, he vas cftcr. sent
to the ccntaon in ord-r to bxry tobacco for the oxperiBcntr .1 subjects
by ordur of Hnscher. So;»-tiae3 he assv.st-d during the -xp-riuents. Ho
« occasionally Mot into the roon to yet -nothor ^xoirijxnt-l subject;
r’.ion one sen was finished 3off va sent uft-r the noxt one; thor- v.ro

quit- ? nu. b-r of such errand*.

Q -m in efi-ct t>-n r. craa? trustee of eo:.x sort?

A I don't know oxrctlj vhat the relationship waa in that con-
ocotion. Ho only hid this swell group under him; it v -y

high position. From n military point of view, you would nrob-bly do-
si;<n“.t«. that position us block oldest.

q And, '.b I understand, ho Jived in the a mo quarters with

tho oxforiwontal subjects?

A Y-s, he lived in tho ana: quarters.

Q And r.tc with then, I suppose?

A Ies, ho ate tith than, although I r-nmb-r that occasion¬
ally ho went over to tho hospit-.l proper to out.

o And that is 'll ho did though, so fir ns you S®ow,4n and

T — ~~*~ m - -X- -

•-.round th- experiaonte?

A Xus.

Q Ho never was an exporincntul subject?

A Y-s, he pr.rticip-.t-d in oup-ria^nts. I forgot that now,

but I had rv.rc'dy nentionod it before.

q I thought you said that only Goraan criminal prisoners were

£575


5 !S5 5-lPg-goxaic (Int. Rar-lor)
‘ov:*t /o. I.


vs_d for ex-ris^nts?

A. jff it’s at this bloc:-:, -T.C upon his own initiativ- had
Yoi-i~.t-.rwd for those cx_-rirx:ats and vas in a r.uab.r of the:, just ns
X participated in axp-ricunts.

Q Her:, as I urd.rstr.nd it, th_ sixty or seventy imafcjs vrho
voluntc-red for the cxporim_nts w_ro .-rofossioml criminals r.'ho voro tho
gr-.n triangle?

A Y.5, as far as I on informed.

3 All of th;n vore the gre.n triangle?

A I didn't see all of these sixty. Tho experimental subjects
said that altog-th-T sixty persons had volunt-cr-d, 'nd frcci thaso
s.:ty our group had b-^-r. selected r.s being suitable for the -xp.ri--v.nts
r . tho point of *ri-> of physical condetior. and age.

Q Aid as you understood it, they wore all Gemnn nationals?

A lus.

Q And th. retard -2d out to those volunto-rs vr.o that coao
kind of L.nioncy ra going to bo -xtend-d to then if they surviv-d tho
experiments?

A fee, th.y n .r. /ran.s.d »vt tiv-y rould either be r-leased
fxxna • .) or t « t eeir s id bo mitigated. How-vor, lab r,

on tho occasion of Hiaalor's visit, .all of th_a r«re proais.d thoir ro-
lc-o-.

3 How do you knot* that?

A Tho experimental subjects naturally told no that outhucian-
tically when I rent thore tha day -ft.r hi tier's visit. Thoy said
t at hey had subjected tb^-.ves to experiments b-forc Hi- l^r, -nd
had reals-d thor. that they would b_ released if they ronduct.d
thms.'Tos prop-rly. Th.y an.ro jubilant about this.

Q In other words, ovor the pariod of tir-o that you wero at
' cl’.au, fror. 9 1 larch to -bout 20 l.ay, you wore in rather close touch
itk : : cvr tea or fiftocn axp crimen trl subjects' and had got their con-
fid, ac., ~t lunsr to the- extent that thjy told you of the fact that


5 2i7-*-lB-10-3-Hoxsic (Int. -taler)
Court No. I.


Ktsal~r, after his visit, .--<2 promised then leniency?

A Yes, th>y naturally told ae that.

Q About what tine of th: year was this?

A You ae?n the- Hiaalcr visit?

Q Yes.

A That nuat have been on a Sunday, the nidale or end of

April.

Q And when was it that tho sublets told you uhat Kiml-r had
ir.p-.rtod to then?

A They told no that or. tho Very r.oxt day ».hcn T entered the
station. That was the r„xt orday.

Q Do you knew who had cotmyod to thes- oxpcrinontnl subjects
tho statement of HirrQer to tha effect th-.t those nun uero going to ba
granted leniency?

A They told so that Hiaal^r had told then that personally
when ho was there.

Q Now, whon Hinder was thore, had ho witnesrod an oxjx-ri-
nent on those subjocts or had they been produced to hin for cbvss in¬
spection, or had ho 7isitcd their barracks. How did ho corn in contact
with tho group of then?

A Hi-aaler had corn out there to tho c-np as far as I know,
with tho aain purpose in raind of looking at theso expori-nentr. Maaler's
visit has bo.n describ.d r-thcr exactly in Tfolffs affidavit, which has
be.r. subnitted anong Ruff's docurv.nt3. I don't know tho nu bor of that
docu_*ent.

Q What did tho tar., Scbotta, do -around Dachau in connection
sith tha exporiiaents?

A Sobotta did nothing exco .t s.rw. th. purps, in addition to
taking part in the experiments as all the others did. Sobotta had no
saocial position at all. He, to be suiv, was th. most cnorgotic fellow
‘-.-r_, with tho nost initiative. :d_ no doubt participated in tho nost

£*- erts.nts, but Lc held r-o special official position.

5977


5 ' ay-}>-! 3-IC-ii-Hoxaiu (Int. Bealor)

Court Eo. I.

5 Wtaro did Sobotta live, did *3 live with the otter oxpari-
.-v:ntal subjects?

A Yes, te lived just liko ell the otter cxpariaontal subjects.

q go w < 3 quartered with ttear, end te was nossod with thee?

A Yes. Ho hadn't teen brought out in any way free the others
officially.

Q \la*, this unknoi.T. aan '-ho w-a the -utoaobilo expert, vhat

did te do around the oxpcriiijnts?

A T.'oll, togutter with Sobotta, ho worked ir. tho ?u=P car.

Hov and again ho ropaired Raseter's c-r, but othonr.se ho had no special

task. y

Q hhoru did he livo?

A Ho lived togothor with that group.

q Ard took his ^ 3 -Is with the;:, 3 suppose?

A Yoc.

Q How was ho drassed?

A Juat liko all tho other sublets. Thoy tead this stripod
or iso nor* a .suit.

3 Do you know what his nationality was?

A Ho was a Genian.

Q So that of tho throe nanfco telpad you conduct tho o.epori-
rttr.ts na rxwhanlcs, th-ro was .loff, tho political rritover, Cobotta,
tho Austrian criminal prioonor, and this aan whoso nr-u, was vtavx m
who you say was a Genian, and who you thought was a crLadnal prisoner
bacauso of aono burglaries or thefts ir. connection with automobiles.

A Yos, te ted been sort-need as a professional criminal.

5 Aid thoy telpwd you in your experiments during tho ontiro
period that you wore thcro?

A Vail, ttey didn't assist ro in any particular wiy. As far
as tho two mechanics go, thqy had cert-in supervisory task, in tho saxo
w-y - s a driver looks after a rotor car by oiling it from ti-o to tino,
etc. That's what ttes- non did.


6378


5 *iy-::-:3-10-5-Koxaii. ( 1 st. Rsr.l_r)

Court No. I.


Q I aaderstarxl, but unless the engines ren you couldn't con¬
duct cxpcriexmts, and those wore tho ;cn she looked .after the rschonical
details of tho actor to see that it was in good order, so you could
tuiid up your pru-esure or diminish your pressure in your low-pressure
ch":bcr?

A Yos.

Q Yfor. you said that you had between ten and fifteen expori-
^ntal subjects usod in your oxpjriixjnts, I assure that you included
those thrw- -on in your calculations?

A Yos, I included thaw

Q So that aside fron these thru, een you actually had twolvo
to seven expuriccntal subjects rather t.rn fifteen or ten?

.

A Yes, apart froa thos- you are right.

Q Tihon was the first tieo you actually saw .and talked to tho
sixty or seventy innate s vho had vclunt^.r.d for thv. high altitude ex¬
periments?

A I tv-T er spoko to th.se sixty or seventy innetet, but only
to the group of professional cri-einals who *er„ billeted -t the sta.tion.
?h-t w.aa on th- 22nd or tho 23rd of February, «hich was the occasion or.
which I saw than for tho first tie*.


5979


Court 1

&sy 5 -H-ll-l-HD-Ceok-Raasler.


slow what d- you -con by the group of professional
criminals, Just the entire 6 roup that were there, or the
sixty or seventy inmates who hod volunteered?

a. :io, the group wnioh woe billeted ct the station.

You mean the ten or fifteen?

a. Yes.

q. veil then, who told you there w^re sixty or seventy
v lunteers. Dr. Roseher?

a. Bo, the e sen told BO that themselves. :on I
asked how they were selected, etc., they replied that a
number of people had volunteered and fr.-c these Dr. Rnsohor
acleoted ua from the point of view of health ond ago.

'4. Vns a list ever given you showing the n-mea of
these sixty or seventy men?

A. Ho, I didn't see tne list of the other people.

3 . what physical or mentc .1 qualifications were
the men w.oo wee to bo finally seleoted for your experiments
required to have?

A. For one thing their ego had to range between
twenty ond thirty-five yocr 6 approximately, which
corresponds to the - 0 e of the flyln^ personnel of the
L ftwaffe. In addition, they h u to be generally fit,
th-t le to say, tlwv couldn't under any dreams t-incee
ve « weak heart or somo liver illness; they h d to bo
n-rmol he lthy aen. hontclly, of C-ursc, no considerable
requirements wore mode. They n d to h ve normal ffiont.al
c-p city. For lnst-nco, feeble-minded people w u^jln* u
have served the purpose.

i. Bow who fixed those physical or mental qunlifico-
=1 ns, you and Dr. Ruff? In Other words, who determined
cho type of non that you wanted for y-.ur experiaotits?

A. Ko, Ra'Cher s.lect-d tnen at the time we were in

6950


Coart 1

vny 5-K-U-2-ED-Cook-Rcmnler.


sorlin. This was done on the oasis cf nr. arrangement that

via maee with the c mp commander. I- had been ' ranged

tfant ir a the people ho volunteered Rascher was to select

t.-ls s roup. They had to fulfill this and that requirement,

and after they were billeted at tns station they had to

receive good nourlshaent. They wore not to work, see.

i. Who told Rascher that tho experimental subjects

woo were finally selected tod to be between twont. to

thirty-five years of nge, generally fit, v*th no weak

heart or other Internal ailments, and mentally normal'?

h. That was act down on the b sis of the conference

in Oaohau-Vlth the onmo commander. Present wore Ruff,

•• -

Veits nMitlM camp coatnndor, and ochnltzler.


... Whose decision w/'S it tn*»t men between the agos


of cwer.ty to thirty-five, vno were generally fit "nm
xentfSly normal, were to be seieotod? Was it you vno


demanded that type of son, was It Ruff who demanded thorn,
vc.8 It "eltz, w s It tho camp commander, wns It $ohnitzlor?
Stuoonc tod to determine what typo of man you wanted to
experiment on. Now, who actually determined that? uou
and Ruff wore in charge of the experiments. Who actually
determined tho physical md mental attributes that your
experimental subjeots were to x/ssoss?

a. Well, surely Ruff end I. Wo were to carry out
tho experiments and we set tho requirements. Who actually
pronounced the requirements or whether they wer- laic
down by discussion, I c n't say exactly now, bat at qny


rate Ruff and I were the ones.

But y.u know the requirement? you needed for tho

_-.cn in your 0 yperlmental group because this was simply

a c ntlnur.tion of the experiments that you nod D3gun at

Berlin, .and you w*ntca men who -s closely as possible baa

65 SI


Court 1

Jfay 5-y,-11 - 3- ED-Cook-Sa r.


Che fleas physical r.nd cental attributes as the experimental
subjects in Berlin? la that correct?

Yes that woe one reason, but there woe another
rareon whlca wee also the reason we selected certain
pers.ns In Berlin. For Instance, we didn't use any girla
c _,.ng tho technical assistants, who might have volunteered.
■ie bore in mind thrt oil of these experiments were to serve
the Luftwaffe and had to correspond to the personnel
normally subjected to similar dan&ore in the Luftwaffe na,
therefore, we nad to hve men of that :ge, not e lrla
or sick people.

i. When w 8 the selection of the ton or fifteen
experimental subjects from the sixty or seventy volunteers
actually cade?

a. I don't know tho exact time, but wnon the ohoober
arrived nt tho beginning of February nobody was as yet
billeted nt tho station, as f"r -s I recall. When, on Che
other hand, I returned on tho 22nd or 23rd of February,
they were already there, 60 this must lvvo hn-rocnod
during that period of tlae.

i. How, ->8 I understand it, this wos, as you say, a
vitally important experiment for the benefit of tho
Luftwaffe, and as a consequence had to be carried out v;lt:i
iieat erro, because froc the results of those tests you
vara going to make recommendations to the Luftwaffe
concerning matters w-.lch ir. actor 1 combrt mlgflt effect the
ilfs of the Luftwaffe members, Isn't that correct? #
a. Yes, wo were trying to rescue people from r.ign
rltltudcs.

And it w s for that reason tha. It w-8 indlspena-

ably r.d vitally necessary th-t you have experimental

subjects who were between the ages of twenty to t.ilrty-

6?&2


I


0-. art 1

Hey 5J^U-4-HP-C^ok-arsaler.

five, who we e generally fit, nnd who were oontally normal?

A. Yes, in order to drnv * g-od OMspsrta -n vltl1 t "°
ncraol pera ^r.nel.

i. Who v-'e preaent when the ten or fifteen experimental
sa-Jecta were selected free the sixty or seventy volunteers?

A. I don't know thet. I ee sure Rpsoher must have
beer, preaent. He w-s the one who selected them. Kao else


6 la-Cook—(Hamlc r) -

Court No. 1


r_5 preset I don't kr.tw.

. In other i rds, Dr. Raschcr actually made the s clction?

• Yes.

G TOwt teSts were given the* te ascertain father cr net they
hai thjiental and physical qualificaticns Ter experimental subjects?

« There was a normal nodical crani ration. In ether words he
listened t-' their hart and th-ir lungs and c.nversed with than.

Q Hew dc you knew that?

a he tcld a, abcut it and the experimental subjects also told no
that they had been examined.

G Then, as I understand it, before y'u began ycur experiments yeu
t'.lked with each ,n. cf these experimental subj-cts?

A I wouldn't say that I talked to these experimental subjects
tefcrc -ach experiment, but by a large and dod converse with these
pers-ns in erder to cake their acquitnncw and in rdcr tc tell then
»fcat was a stak. -luring these experiments. Naturally, the persons *nly
g:lned a certain c nfidcnce in me ao tic. progressed.

Q other w rds, y^u wanted tc get well acquainted with thus so
•:.-t they would aak- jxp.rir.ent l subjects who wculd aid y-m in yaur
* . because if they Were not willing subjects they would pet be as
h.lpful t ycu as though they were willing subjects, is that the point?

a loi, we wanted to have pr-per coperaticn on the part cf the
xp-rlrwntal subject.

1 • 3U PP'- 3t - that frea tice tc tin.. y?u deaand.d not n n ly prepor
perati n but c«rJial cc p.raticn?

n /ell, ye3, rr. had te dcp_nd cn a certain an unt cf ca p.raticn
And s th- group being v.ry small, cnly twelve tc seven,

•-a Keff eliminated, and Sabrt* el i m ina ted, and the unknown man
: U.ainat_d, you had a wy small greup, and in order tc establish a
•‘lati nship af g-.cd will, I suppose free tiec t time as each ,f than

r. ted h ins elf f:r the experiment, y u said: inhere are ycu froa?

- r '- y-« here? Shat is y.ur name, and s; f:rth? n

6 98U


& ; -i^>r^S-ll-2a-Coot (Baa-lur)
Court :~. 1.


A. Yes, these trro rxn, Sabots, ana the other did fully be Ion- to
f.v.t cxperiicntal group and participated in all our experiments. They
-.re no . isolated In any vxy ft*c that group. And I naturally con-
Tersed • *ith then frequently.

'2. In other vords, you ashed then, — Veil here ras a nan, perhaps
: lira*, experimental subject just valkod up and you could say: Arc
;*ou :icntally fit? Are you acntally nornal? Is your h-art strong? Do
you Iv.vo any liver ailoonts? Arc ycu generally fit, or nhat did you
say to tixn. You rare nooting ficn fa- tic first tine as an export
:*o had corx to Dachau to conduct certain experiments? You v re ncot-
ir.: then for the first tine in a concentration can?. They ixrc prisoners
there. You r.rc a coaploto stranger to thou, except it rat 'mem you
-.re an expert frea Berlin r*o rr.-a going to conduct the experiments.

:.v I T.ould thin:: that there novld 'x a considerable rcsistens>. on tho
p-.rt of die mien to present thc::s.lves unt 1 first ycu t'.x.i roll, or
in tlio otlicr hand tlvjy Senov you roll sc* that tlicy vould ha.v. confidence
a you and I -nuld think miorooror that .n ord.r to "In their confidence
ye- "e-f.d rant tc l:no" ’.hat their n.xxc ra.ro, and perhaps their bad-
grrxixl, •-'.•at part of the country they had co^x fron, rrhat fxyv.ro
doing in prison, hot* roll the vre tr.atmd. I vorld thin!: all of
thos. tilings vovld be ncccss-ry in order for you to g«.t the cv.pl.to
cooperation and t-v. good trill that irrs vitally noccssa.ry for your
.rpmrinonta, is that ;iorc or less correct?


59B5


Court S;. 1 .

£ Key 4?-l.-i2-l-h3t-h*rrov (Baesler)

A. Veil, by and large, that 1* correct. Of course, one c&uldn't
diccuse all details la the sane manner with these sen. To* Jnstanoe.
tho subject of their cvn sentences vas scnething about which they vero
ver/ reticent end only gradually started apeaxing. As tine crogrcssed,
they told whet brought then to the cenp. It Is ouite typical, and that
le also contained in the *olff affidavit, that Sobotka, when asked by
Hlaaler what he had done, had said that he had ncroly snuggled coffee,
but efterverds It had been found out that ho repeatedly conaitted severe
burglaries - breaking open banks. Saturally. they didn't talk freely
about their sentences and about their life In the carp. The real acquain-
t~r.ee only developed as tine progressed.

q. But ovor the period of tine you got veil enough acquainted, I
suppose, that ecco of then actually oonflded in you. At least, to tho
extent that you knew thtir agee, you know their nance, you know vhoro
they -oro frsa, you knew whether thoy had faaillos nt hoso - that sort

of thing!

A. Toe, naturally that varied. fic«o vero nore likely to converse
with ao, others less. 7or instance, one person who had forged noncy
told ne his entire background, including aany dotaile, on ono occasion.

At tho beginning, however, ho was rather reticent, but later ho told no
exactly hov ho was arrested and how ho s forging tho noney, otc.

Q. And you certainly knew, ovor that ucriod of tine of relationship,
th s t they won between tho ages of 20 ind 26 . that thoy were generally
fit, with no weak hearts or liver ailr.onts or bed kidneys ard that sort
if thing - and thet they were ncntelly normal?

a. Tcs, naturally I didn't exwlno the livers of these ooople In
detail. Easchar. by order, had carried out this r.ediccl examination. but
one could by merely looking at these people that thoy were fit, aid

I also discussed their health vith then.

Q, Did you ever see the records upon which haechor had sot down
the results of his examinations - either of the sixty to seventy volun¬
teers or of tho ten to fifteen non finally selected tot the cruerloents?

6936


C-UTt 10. 1

C jfBr 4’r-r.-12-2-l&i-£erTcnr (Ea r—l cr)


A. Eis record about his ovc experlnents - is that ycu mean?

v S-* no, you say that there vert sixty to seventy volunteers;
that free than he finally selected tea to fifteen experimental subjects
vho, by your direction in defining the neceetery physical and nental
requirements, %*.re betveen ages of tventy to thirty-five, vere generally
fit and vert mentally normal. lev, in order to doternine that fact, ho
undoubtedly geve than physical end nental examinations. Did you ovor
■oo the list of tho ten or fifteen men vho were finally examined and
vho voro found to have these physical Qualifications? Did you over non
it?

A. So, I nor«.r saw that list and ho didn't shov it to ns. Ho
just told no, "I hew oranined those people and they aro healthy."

^ Vhoa the ten to fifteon experlnentol subjects verc finally
•ducted, vfcat then bccaee of the other fifty-five or forty or whatever
va» lwft over?

a. I can't tell you that in detail; I don't knov vfcat happened to
thon. i*axtly, I'a suro that they vent beck or rather ronalned at
their vork dotell or vfcorever they voro, end partly, I an sure, Rescher
used these people for his ovn smerinents.

q, You think than that, of tho forty-five or fifty M.o -ore loft,
Rescher used come of then for his exocrinents?

A. Tvs.

Q, H-v do ycu knov that?

A. Eo told n* that he had volunteers for his experinents and
that ho vrs taking ovoulc vho had already vcluntsored.

Q, I see. Rascher told yau that. of those vho v«re not solatd
f ,r your experiments, he used soae of that group for his experinents?

A. Tes, ha said that some of those people "ho bad vcJxmtaarM
hr.d ?icon token by him.

q. Vhon did he tell ycu that?

A. I can't tell ycu that cvactly - vfcen it vos - but .1 'n sure

it vss after ha had started hie ova experiments along with curs.

69c7


Court 5c. 1

6 Kay 47-4t-12-5-*5>-£arr3v (Easier)


q, Yaea did he start his own oxperinents?

A. I can't give ycu the e^act date since he v*« ncrforning tho«o
experiments during =y ebsence end also at night. At any rate, I heard
ohcut that approximately in the aiddle of April.

q. Vho told you?

A. 2 a«cher hlaself told ac that. K« aaid that ho was norforning
additional experisenta.

q. And that vm aoce tine during the niddlo of April, 1942?

A. Tea.

q, And he t-ld you at that tine that he *«a uaieg, aa hie exoeri-
ccatal subjects, sono of the non *fco had originally volunteered?

A. Ha aaid that ho had a number of experimental subjects who
pertly had boon sentenced and voro profaaaional crininala, mi oartly
auns who had been asntencod to death.

q. I Know all about that, but in April. 1942, he told you that ho
vm using scuo of that original seventy tc sixty non *>o had voluntocrod
for your experinents but who hed not boon scloctod?

A. I cannot tell that oxactly. Thsso norsons didn’t voluntoor
principally for our exnerinents, but cade thcnsolvos available for
oxporisonts, generally speaking.

q, I understand, and of that seventy to sixty you found fifteen
to ten who had the physical and mental attribute, for your oxmrincnts?
Is that correct?

q. hell, there nay have been lore in that group -ho had the sane
attributes, I don't know that. I think thor„ verc about thirty or
forty in that age group but I cannot tell you that oxactly.

q. Did Has char over toll you that?

A. Ho, Ea.cher didn't give n. any details about his affairs.

q. Then you don't know vhether the non he used for his private
experinents possessed the physical and mental reouirenent. laid down

by you and Huff or not, dc you?

A. Ho, I cannot say that in every case.

5986


cn*o


sort 3 o f 1

s*? -.7-^-12-4--lKr.-icrrev (Sailer)


JEJ Tribunal “111 nov be in rebees until 1:30

o’dofk,

(a rocesa ve* taken until 13SC houre.)


69e9


5 h-y-xr-Jl^-13-1-7'Bt or (Int. ar'wn)
Court I


«r^23oai S2SSICE

( 2 io :nbucU roc nvcncd at 1330 h-ars, £ fa? 1947. )
TriS -i So a': Tho rribuncl is mala in *csei-n.

£aSS RCK3 jS 3 - EcB’i-Od


ZLM1L.2ICS.' 3T ES COUaT (Continued)


3T cUDC-2 SJPaJR)!

Q. Dr. Bxibor,-, la too c-.nduet of y-ur tests la tho Buff,

Honbcr i HaBchcr. experiment, what data or information wai it necessary
for you to roe id la record to Ooch't^t la order to set a true ;?io-
turc of that tost?

la tho cjc>«ri..oat« inv.lviiv; a relatively low altitudo, tho
©apcrinontnl subjects tha.solr.B wreto ms-bers frxi 1000 on up, or
wroto tlxolr acics. Xa cxp-rlnoatB lavolvla,; hlrhor ultitudos or in
tho littlo chamber, kj difficult towrlto, thorowoa a ■'it of
toicpa-.alo c anoctiOa with the .aorlmoatal tubjoct. Tao subject
bod omphocoB on oad fad a uiorcpnno bo th-t no w„b ablo to wioortfcla
how he ro.jCtod whea epoKen t-', and n that .no c uld uaowor cortnln
tLUOati no, quest! as ao>ut tholr cental cnditiin, Uiotuor they woro
porfoctly clear, and b“ f orth, -loo, -id this io very Important, thoy
wore obliged t pull tho parachute roleuBO ratnoir owr. Initiative vlth-
-ut boiac* told to, thus pr-via,- that thoy woro ca-plotcly in poBoooBioa
of tholr faculties, and thoy rocomnisod too situation In which they
f und tho -selves.

3 . and all of th„t data or Infoniati-n then Was roe rdod by you
_nd procorrod?

wa b written down. '

\?/ "U on what- V-b It writ*.on?

*v i . \ ... __


V/ tfcon What w_a it writ*.on?

' , r, -.ll T duhka; tho experiment It w_s written oa a pioco of

>w.- * J . ‘

'fcemutinco it vj written directly Into tho rocord, otherwise,

V • • :vT l > / -


?^>or.


it wns BhtVr id in the record aftar toe vsporinent. also tne numbers

6990


5 ncy-W?- 13-3-7ter (1st. 3r3wn)

C-urt I

_ad a^ies, the writia,- tosta, th..t the ^aperi-eatol rubjaeta conducted
wailo in the eh^tor, wore preserved.

la ether words ym preserved the a^ic of tho cspori-ontnl
subject, tho day and htur, I- suppose, q>‘-a which tae tost was oede,
c .-d hia reactions duria.- the c-urso of the teat. Zs that corroct?

*. Tea.

0„ So that *:ea you finished with year aeries of cxpcrL.oata
y;u c aid look .t this record, y*u C-uld tell the ach© of ojeh
Mpcriuontnl .abject, the date ua& tiuo up:n walch he had be® sub¬
jected to an ccaori-oat and h!a roactloae darla; tho c aroo of each
toper nto toot, la th-t correct?

*. Yos, th_t la ao.

1513 roeordod th^t infn.ation?

a. Daria* tho exooriaont itself 2 -sciior or ayaolf wroto down
theao individual data, wo uudo notes r«_rdin tho tiho whon tho
poraoa recovered cxaci uaacas -ad theao v*rc tho data on which tho

report w.a Bubauiuoatl;' worked out.

q. cd tk,t course of procoedarc wot followed thr -v^oat tho

ontlro courto :f tho 200 to 300 testa?

«. Tea.

0. .nd duria* tho 200 to 300 teats you u«od 10 to 15 acloctod

volur.toor suhjocta?

— Yos.

q, *ad f or tho 20C to 300 tests 70a always used tne aa-o 10 or

15 subjects?

- *oa.

q. end Lefa tiliO on csperU-oat -1 subject would 00 presented to

you or to Enichor in y.ur proaunco f or tho c aduct of tho toff - Boubcrc;

experiments, I suppose y:u either -shod Mi. hia m«o or ascertained

his use fraa the record .0 that r a could c :.pore tho data for tho tost

6991


5 Uay-^J?-13-3-Fcst*r (Srcwn)
Court So. 1


on v.e p. rticul r d-j* with the previ.us tests, Is th-t correct?

- Tcs.

0 . «ad toes you h_d finished the 2 C 0 or 300 tosts you then wero
in n po«iti‘n to ascertain ~*tr tno course of tne ospcrL-cnt new unay
tests Cftch volunteer hjl undergone?

Toe, th_t ie ri.Jit.

q. ^ad it w_s fr^: th *e so?-rnte lists ..e t- c^ch «eporiuontal
subjoct, it w..s fr n taoee thnt y u njdo y ur rec^erdati no to
hi„hor nutnrity f r leniency f-r toe a 9 erlneat.il subjects?

Secar.eodntl ns f*r leniency were n'-t r.nde by us, at lo.-.et
not by nyeolf. This w .e e natter whicn Eiiilur hA urrt-t«d to
hiiiself frr. the to 17 bc*innta£. Vo of tno XL hod at influonco
ca this.


6992


1 5 kay 47 -A-IA-l-rt?- (Brc*n)

Court Ho. 1

Hon would Higgler knew who to ucUnd lierency to unloss
scevoody g-'-vo hia the neats of the ucperlMtal subjects who had
euccossfully ca-.ol^tod the Usts?

A. There was certainly the crap card indue file on '11 those
■ho participated in the experirents. These people had aaved and
moreover livod in separate barracks so ttrt their aims could at any
tio- bo ascurt aired, The inturredinry who h"d ccr.tact with the crap
cooa-ndcr no1 with Hiaal-r and who had received the authority frctu
Hisader wns Raschcr. Y.v had no -direct contact with Hi-aolu*, written
or OtheTWiSJ.

Q. Then that was a nr tUr that wns left, so f-r as you and Ruff

■ore concerned, that was left to Dr. Rnsch-x?

A. Yes, Nj was th. ore who froa the v-.ry beginning had received

the authority and ^raiasicn Iron Hindi-r.

Q. Dr. Roaoorg, how n-ny tett runs on v.xp-rirentr.1 subjects had
you coopleted when to your knowledge Rcechcr began his first independent
•.xperirent un-’.or rds con r‘te ordv.r itea TianUr?

A. About ball of thus. Th t would be roufhly one hundred
or pwrlr.ns a little .'ore than r hundred axperirents.

Q. -,h.t was the -pproxin'to d‘te upon whid: you r/ined
knowledge tte-t Rnscher was conducting ire o undent ocperixints?

A. Ths boginning cr the aiddlu of April, tt 'ny r*to after
e-ratur of 19 m2.

Q. Th-n fron -bout 11 U rch 1942 to the oikll* of April 1942
yau h ,c run a littL. rer- than ore hundr.d of the two hmv.red cr throo
hundred hith altitude Ust? th t ycu were goire; to run in your
experiments?

A. Of course I cra't tell you exactly, but th-t is wh t I

estia.te it to be a-proxicrUly.

Q. How army test runs on volunW.r -xperia-ntal subject?
had you cocpletod ulwa to your knowl-dg- tt* first *o-.th occurr-' 1
La Rascher's irtepetx^ont jcjx-rSrents ur.’.r RLxiLx uring tlw> letter


'-rt of A^ril 19 -21


6SS5-


5 Ur7 Ul -A-lif-2-okp- *‘1°7 (Brown)
Court Ko. 1


A. That » the ei* of April. It o^ht h v. b^n « many CB
2C0 roughly, -ri*cnts ttot *d bo.n concLx-od by that tine,
t v-n oorc.

q. Hew anny tost runs had you coapluW. when to your kncmlug.
thu soconl death occurr-d in teacher's indolent o^riaents under
tho separate or lor of liiaslor?

A. That wra Just at the -cry end of the oeperinenta -bon uu
„„ -taoct ttow* . 1 th ttw« and didn't hr.» » «W I»rii».nt»
loft . W -oro Jurt 'olng tho lat «t-» ’■* grunt rltttudo*.

Q. He. ntf do you think you still hud to do?

A . net 1. rury hard to ay, tut youtavo to Ora. - dUtlnotlon
botnwon thooo th'-t uould fcr.w boon iono If tho oxporiaont. hr I
continued in h MMtlnr "* «•»* Met . did to bring tho o-rlco to
-doqu.-.te conolMlor.. It 1. .u-ntfinnUy twntlonod In tho Tuport, lor
ox-nplo, ttr.t out of 21 IntooCod u*;v.riuwnt. onljr aw .(» c--rrlo4 out.

Cowcouontly you o.-nnot uwlMt. tho oonoluolon. roach..' o. >J1 «
if they hat! fc-on cartW out on c great number of persons.

Q. 9 ut ycu ’a.'t kno« ho* aany aaru exporiaa-nts or tests you

probr.bly h":’ to run after lb- n.cor. I eonth.7

A. If «o had continued at tho aw* «t* ~* - h'd intvn’ed
there would have boon another 30 or 40 «re, but sine- tho e>rimont:J.
series -as United ttoafter less .xp.rirnts -ore aotonUy carried
out before wo roachad the end.

Q. Ho., I unlurotrh! thtt vhu weend *»th occur™' on ono toy
in 2 -.y rat tho third death occurrod th- n.xt dny, 1. that corr-ct?

A. Tea, zn'. that -os r.bout the nidO*> of Slay.

Q . Ho. nrny t-rt runo did you oak. or. your *n cap.rlawnt
uttor tho third death occurr.d, not ho. neny you h, urlglnnlly Hartod

to run, but he* aeny pi actually ran?

A. net could only baww b-en ^ry fc-, bcnu. after the third I

death th. ch-cabor .ao soon tutau. -*uy, mealy on tho 19th, oo th .t It j

right have been anchor 10 .

Ton s-id t&s norning that the reason you to* of the dor.th

. i


7


5 Ua 7 47 Ualoy (Brora)

Court So. 1

of ths aacon! an*. third exporisentol subject in the Roschcr test
rJ because of tte fact that upon the a&a: day nnd prior to the deaths
you ted Just finished conducting one of ycur own Roabcrg-Easchor
expci inonts, is that correct?

A. Yes.

Q. exactly what data were you recording at tin. ti-x Raschcr
was cow!uctin, his uxpcrLxnt in which the second death occurred?

A. I don't quite understand the question, »*»t data I had?
q. Thio morning yen said that you wore not at the controls at
the tlT» tte death occurred to the second eocperiaantal subject, but that
you were so^vhero -round tte low pressure chanter writing up your date,
because you had Just cccplotcd a test, is that correct?

I A. Yes.

Q. Sou what ate. uero you writing up?

A. After the experiments we wrote down the length of tin*, and
tho altitude rn ’ so to sp-ak wu drew tte curve in which tte dSsoents
occurred, and then wo entered in the book exactly "hat altitude cor¬
responded to any rrticuL-.r status of the oxporiraenUl subject. Tho
altitude was ae ■anr^' by a colucn of quick-silver, while lor the
practical evaluation wo had to kn;w» tte exact altitude at which tho
o-rson gain-d or lost consciousness. Consequently tte p^gue on tho
coliran of quick silver he. to bo translated into terns of 'ltitudo
c«! auUrs. That was tte work ttat had to bo or*, after tte uxp..riuont.
Q. i.tero wore you doing that work?

A. Usually I set in tte roco in tte low pressure etenter whore
tho doc«pr.«sion chapter was located. This was a Large truck, like
a furniture vac, n ’ there was an ant—rooa, -nd in the civ 1 was a tench
r*d a table >dth tho EXG apparatus on it, n sitting on this tench I
usually wrote up iy notes, :»d perhaps I referr- g“ln to the quick
silver b.aroojtcr if I h-dn't gotten soc*. of the figures. That is why
I did this work in tho low xessuro ctenter van, but of course not in


the ch-nber itself


6995


5 ILzj a -4-1.-4-pk?- Ifcloy (Brown)

Court Ko. 1

Q. An that is where you wore -t the ti--c Enschsr's m>cctu. tor.th
a-. tte third t-,th occurred with his ux;riG*nu-1 axbjects?

A. Toa.

Q. Hon for would you ostiar.te th'.t you wcr* sitting tr* a -.V
controls?

A. About two or t«o ird : htlf alters.

Q. '..ho wma manipulating tha controls st th~ time?

A. Rnsco-r T.s ccrryir.g out his own ejtpwiaunts, ar.i consequently
aanipuLitod tl* lovers of th- ZKC, nd tto other instruments himsobT,

■hen he tes doing tha ji>rio~nt.

Q. '.as thoro aajeno there helping ;*ja't t<x ti-»?

A. Ko, no or.o.


6096


5 *ir-i-2B-15-l-i^civin (Lnt. Brcrm)
ecurt 2s* !*


5 '.The re were you, when that errxirir^-ntrl subject, was first
brought intc the chamber; were you sitting in the ar.ti-roo:; working up

your into?

A '.uion the wcpurtacntni subjects e-ex up, yes, I vrs certain¬
ly in the lew pressure van."

Q Yob, I in t- Iking “bout tho cxperiaentnl subject who caao
there then?

A Yes.

Q They g-vc you tho irprossicn of sen, who understood they
were there r.s volunteers for high altitude exp'.riewr.ts that were being
c *xricd on within pro pur Unite?

A Yes.

Q How long wr.a it after the coaplction cf your oxporin.nt;
lot '-is consider nor: tho dry the second oxpsrlrcnt-.l subject.rut hia
tk.-th; how long a tiro wr.e it between tho conclusion of your oxperi-
unts, the Ruff-Ronberg cxpori?x.nts and tho beginning of tlx R“schor
ex.uriiMnts, wheroin tho oxp-riio-r.trl subject net his do-th?

A Rr.oehjr did not carry out tho experiments right away, which
led to the d-'-th. Bofer-j tho fatal exporfount, ho carried out other
oxporiuonts.

Q How nmy other oxperLo-nts?

A I think in this case there wore throe.

Q Thxv. oxpori-unto prior to tho tiv. of tho cxjxjrlnents in
vhich tho can aot hia death?

A That is right.

^ How long h“d the s-corai subject bcon in tho chador before

ho ess to his death? •

A I c-nnat Uli you that for sur*. boc-uSc 1 did not p y any
attention.

Q Tew long were you in tVt -nti-roon after you caaplotcd
your oxperirunte writing up your report?

A I rtust hav. b-on th_rc .about one hour.

G997


Court So. I.


Q Then, during tho course of tho hour, two or throe oxoori-
aonta were conduced, which hid no fatal consequences and tho fourth one
tegsn all within the period of an hour?

X Yes.

q After each r£ those experiments were concluded, tho onos
that did not result in death; did Raschor sake nctos of whet hed happened
to tho tost subjects?

A During tho uxpcriacr.ts Ranch or wroto down his notos.

q Krcto down tho notes, watched the altitude gauge, observed
tho cardiogra :, manipulated tho ^ossuro whevl and did everything nocos-
a-ry to carry out tho experiments and to xv-ccrd tho data?

A Yes.

Q Do you reivabor, who brought thoso oxporicontal subjects
that dry to the chacfcor ?

A I don't know for certain, but I bcliovj it was an SS am
froa the cinp who brought the.-.

Q Do you know vhoro thoy ermo froa?

A So, that I dc not know.

Q Did they com frc« tho r.io qu*rtcrs that your ten or fif¬
teen non on:* from?

A Ho, thoy cano froa sonewhoro in the cruap.

Q Had you and Raschor had any discussion on that day — by
tho way, wh-.t ti-.o was it that the doath of tho second oxp-rirontal
subject happomd?

A In tho late forenoon, I should say around noon.

Q So that you had conpleted ycur experiments then certainly

by eleven o'clock of that ;x>ming?

A Yes, by that tio w» had concluded our own experiments.

3 Had you and Raschor Ird any discussion botwe-n tho time of
tho conclusion of yeur oxpori-xnts at cloven o'clock -and tho experiments
-7-.cn tho socond death occurroci?

A So, we certainly did not talk with each other very much. I

6998


5 :ty-l-»B-l5-3-4fauhan (Irrt. Bream)

cc'.t" ::c. i.


^arob-bly s-id I was going tc evaluate ay aafcorial tb.rc, but wo did
rrt, s I a-id, talk with each ctlur vary nnxh.

Q Now, after this death occurred, the second death, hew nany
oxpjriants did you conduct cn tho sxvj day after th-t on your own, tho
Ruff-Sanborg oxp-riiAjnts?

A I b-lievo th-t I c-rricd out no further cxp-ricents on that

day.

Q What about tho third death?

A Th> situation ras sinilrr. I do net knew if tliis rns also
in the ..omlng, but I bolt-v- it w-s. To had carried cut our cwn ox-
pariants and R'schjr did his subsequently..

Q New, let us ccnsid-r for a aasor.t tho occasion when you
witnessed tho death of ono of Rasoher's cxp-riuntal subjects; tho
first tLath you say you x-itneesod during tho lattor part of April, 1912j
did you know this oxpori^jntrl subject?

A No, I did not know hia personally; ho was orv. of Rrschor's
ctm subjects.

4 Had ha boon used by R-schor for any other cxp_ri _nts
aricr to th't tire?

A That I really cannot toll you, I did not know hin, but it
is quite possibio that R'aclur had us_d hi: for other ones.

Q Had you over sc on hia beforo?

A No, I cannot recall that I had.

Q Did you knew his nano?

A No, I did not knew his n- ».

Q Did you know his nationality?

A No, I hoard hin spoakir^ and ha speko Goman with Raschor.

q Has ho one cf tho ton cr fiftc-n non, who had be-n sc lac tod
for tho Ruff-Ronb.rg experiments?

/

A No, ho certainly was not.

Q ' "as h_ one cf tte 6C or 70 innate s who had first voluntocrcd,

free, when you h-d selected sere ten r fifteen subjects?

C-999


5 ’I'-y-A-?3-25—. -iieshen (Int. Brown)

Zovrt So. I.

A Tint I cannot soy bjc-.usc I dcn't know wfcothor he was cno

Cf th«U

Q Shat tin* of d-y did this death happen?

A That I cannot say for certain, but I believe th=t it was
around noon cr after luncheon.

Q Had you conducted any oxpsrixer.ts that day?

A Tub, ro had.

Q How -any?

A I really cannot toll you. At that tlno we had conducted a
relatively Largo nueber of oxparinonts, but I really cannot give you
prociso figures.

Q Did you conduct rny cn that dry after the doath?

A Mo, 1-don't boliovo so.

Q Do you reaenher vtoothor cr not tho first oxp-rirwntd sub¬
ject who diod, was ^conscious at ths tiio ho was taken fron tho low
pressure chaobor?

A Mo, when they woro brought out, they wore cortd. nly dead,
not sir^ly unocnscious.

Q I on talking about tho first rsan.

A You conn in our own oxporluonts cr do you noon in Raschor'a
oxporirronts.

Q I an talking about tho Raschor oxporioints, that first urn
’•ho cai» out of there, whon you say diod; wno ho doad when takon free
tho choabor?

A Tea, ho certainly was. Ho diod at tho high altitude or
during tho doscont. I believe that ho diod while ho was at tho high
altitude and died of air onboliaa. *

Q Vis that tost suddenly brought to an ond, ?r rr-'s it ccn-
a.udea as it would have been if a nan would not have diod?

A I don't knew haw long Raschor *:uid havo conductod this ox-
K-rl-,ont, had tho -an n;t died.

Q rToll, how did you cr Raschor knwr that the ran was dead

700 0


5 Liny-A-rS-lp-5 ban (let. 3nrrm) #

Court So. I.

while ho via still in the L-w pressure chamber?

A I did net pay v^ry cliso attention to this, but Raschor
cortainly saw this fren the olcctrc-cardigran and probably -iso fron
tho rc-spiraticn cf the subject cad for tint reiser, brought hb dewn
fron the high altitude.

Q In ether wrrds, those machines would not oporato, they
•ould go dead ir. effect because there was nothing to register; is that
correct?

A What machines do you roan?

Q The clectro-cardiogmo.

A I did not lock at it vary closely, but if tho ran was dead
I assuao thoro would bo nothing to register.

Q That is what I on trying tc got at; who took thj first sub¬
ject fron tho chaab^r?

A Raechor sent vor to tha narguj and two prisoners cate with
a strotchcr and took hii; away.

Q Tf.vxa did ho sond to tho norgiu?

A Sj far as I kn_w, ho sent .''►off over to the aorgixi.

Q Yfns tho re any no olso arouxd thoro «t tho tlmo besides Noff?

A No, I don't think so.

Q Who was running tho onginos at tho tino?

A Tho oontrcls ran throughout tho entire exrcrirwxnt, tho
pa:po did not have to bo manipulated, only tho air pressure was regu¬
lated, tho accosa ,-f air to tie chamber and that regulated tho alti¬
tude.

1 I aiderst end. TTas tho nochimic around there at the tiro,
3sbctta, -r ycur unknown ran idle so nice you do not knew?

A I really c-nnet toll you vhothor cno af then was in tho
■ick of tho van in tho nachino rc.n* There was another truck noxt to
t;io v.n, which contained tho machines; n-w uhothor cno cf then was in
v~’rc, then I don't knew. The axe. op.rated, whother senoono was thoro
tho tiro or n-t.


7001


5 ::-7-«-?E-15-6^4&ohin (mt. Brcwn)

Court Nc. I.

Q rfeil, if he was thrro you did n?t sco hie?

A No, I cruld net :~vo soon hin because he was insido the van.

Q TThen you began your experiments that arming, who started
the onginos and who was in charge rf then far the Ruff-Rerberg experi¬
ments?-

A In the rcroing, a coco no, usually Sabrtta cr Koff, cane
around and sot tho naters in notion#

Q Do you roroebor who did it that corning?

A No, I don't rctxebar.

Q Do y u rerxj.ix-r who was thjro as a nechenic nt tho tiro
rf tho second death?

A No, I don't.

Q At tho tiao f tho third death?

A I also cannct ay, it wr.o oertainly one of tho throe, but
Just who it vna I dan't know.

Q In tho ease of tho second death; who took tho nan out of
tho chamber.


7002


CGXT«9,

q The .san* is true in regard to the thirl death?

A Tee.

Q And in »ach oase, it would be Seif, Sobctui, or your unknown
rsohaaie, * uan who?j rare you do rot rersesber?

A Ufco was at the pu--p, you aeen, or who was rent ovar to the morgue?

Q Tee. wh- w;s cent to the morgue in each case.

k Tiat raa probably no* Sobotta cr the other, because they wore
busy with the uoVra- I, war ircbably Neff or one of the others rho
bi'-T/ed t: tn.it .roor. SobottA ini he other man were usually busy, as
T ‘fi\. yci.tr. the amjc *>\d motors and didn't run errands an often.

q In otter *orda, wmen Rau^her conducted his experiments, be always
had Neff there or Sobotte there to run orrax^to or to do thinjo of that
sort, uho-.ill it become nocetsa-’, i- tap.* orrect?

A frao Meal/./, the yon nr a al/aya e t the st.tion. The room thoy
lived in rau only a l'-v. inters frta the rax; so that actually thay were
al-rnyr. a-^ilablc ai*« it ou'fio.>d uiu Jy to yell A» oruirt- to *"t one of
th* 1 ..

q In Other words, if anythin^. ai-culd happen in tha chamber, then a
sinju.. y ul would brine Sabottt or Naff or the othe.* rum to the ohaor,
tociu;. they lived cr^. a very few i»t«r. fioa wtere the experiments were
heir* ccndv.oted.

A Tea, they lived close by.

Q All of yevr exper'njr.tal subjects livod right there so that you
ac»ild have them as jc * meded theta?

A Yes, tha-.-s ri ;it.

q And .you think that on the occasions of these deaths, if Neff or
Sabotta was not at t.» pressure charier ~x at the engine in the van, that
^ .jri-r air ply yelled for sa^or-e in bar-achs *lon e by to *>^e out?

A He simply had to leave the van and 30 to the terrc*a »»- a 'd


rr v?fco^- wc-ild 3urely come.


7005


5 :iar IT-.- (let; r rc.x)

jourt S3. 1

Q And 70U think that is what he did on each of these three
occasions?

A Ias, that Is what I believe.

q Then it was a reasonable thine to as3une that those experimental
subjects knew that Rascher was conducting experinent3, as well as
yourself, and that he was conducting independent experiments?

A They certainly knew that.

q And the:.* knewthat sometimes yew were there writing up your data
at the sc--* tine that ho ‘.ad bean conducting the experiments?

A Yes.

q • as there any occasion whan you acted as an experimental subject
in the low pressure chamber while Rascher manipulated the controls fron
tlie outside?

A Yes, that happened several tines.

Q •'hen was that?

A '.Then I went with the eiperlaor.tal subjects into the chanter for a
slow sinlinr deceit, for exanplo from 12,000 or 13,000 kilometres, in
order to watch the writing teots that they were doing. Thon FAflcher
stayed outsiie and nardpulated tlie charier. I also carried out oxplosivo
■‘sconproesion experiments during rhich I was inside the chanber and Raschor
was outside. In the experiment described in the report, the experiments
or. sc*self, Rascher was inside tut who was outside, 1 don't Invow, it can't
i'jwo beer. Rascher in this case.

.1 *"hen you wire inside was there anyone outside with Rasohor, or was
ho doing the whole tiling by hir-solf?

Ke was outside and took care of the machinery, yes.

Q !Jr one ra3 assisting h&B at the tine?

* r •

A Ho, it wasn't noooesary.

q '."hen was this?

A I was in several tines.

q liars the dates.

a I can ft tell you really. I was in there in the beginning, when we


7004


5 'ar : 7-w-«7Z>-i6-3-^r^lr-? or (Int Brcwr.)

Court :to. X

r&io the experlaents at twelve or thirteen thousand zetres altitude and
I was in there at the conclusion and several tires in between, but I
car.'t fix tile precise days.

q -ere you in there as an experimental subject any tine after you
had seen the first, the secoir, or the third experimental subject in
the Tlascher experiment die?

A Yea — I carried out an e*>crfnent at 19 kilometres, which
certainly toofc plaoe after the first fatality — not after the seoond

or third fatality, ho.-over.

q And no one vaa at the oontrois but Dr* Raacher?

A That's riht.

Q And you had full confidence in hie at the tino?

A I was confinoed tixit in tho experiments that we were carrying
on continuously, nothin would happen, and for that reason I wont in as
an export: um tel subject*

q VTtit would have prevented Raschor from pitting you through tho
sane course that ho put tho experimental subject through?

A Today I wouldn't so in, now that I know what I know, but at that
tin* I had no reason to assume that he wis *;oins to kill no in an
jxpcriuor.t,

q r he luxd already conduotod ono orierlnant in which, froa your
observation tho expariaentfll person would dio, and you remonstrated with
hin after that, you wore still idUina to go hick into tho chamber, and

Ud go back?

A In this experiment, I wasn't ir. a position to say doath must occur.
I would, terevor, say it was cfcngorous and that 1 qysolf would have
interrupted tho export aont. On tho other hand, tho experiment scheduled
was a free fallinc experiment. In tho expert-ment in which I participated,
they exactly laid down how high I was to go and hew far I was to fall, t
ms ms exardned on account of the experiences coined by the experiments
that nothing wild happen and I had no reason to believe that ^ascher
>/ould suddenly chan-e the program and change the descent in any way, so


that ao mo thine rtrht happen. 7005


5 May U 7 -^-ArD-l 6 -Jj-i'iT^ine ar (Ir.t. 3 toto)
Court -fc. 1


1

I 9 Before either of those three deaths occurred, did Easchor show you
I an outline of the test upon which ho was about to «±arkT In other words,
" as to the first oxporlnent did he have a s teteoent there of the kind of


excerinent he was goinj to conduct?

A I don't kner -bother ho had one. At any rate, ha didn't shoe it to
M. Ho always said that these experiments ad not concern no! that they
were orders that he tad reoalYed, and that I shouldn't uorry about then.
B 3 ad not lot =. in on that experinont, tat kept no at a a.tanoo.

Q And that rraa also trio in rotprd to the nature of the cxparlnonts
at the socond doath and at tho third loath?


A Yos.

0 ’then was tho first tim that you coiviuctod an o*> ^rlnont after you
idtncssod tho doath of too first axperincntcl subjoct in Raschor'B
oxporlnonts in April?

A rihon, after tt death, did I carry out an «peri=-nt in tho

franc vroric of ry own progren, you noon?

q Of course, that's what I«n tslkire about,

A I oortainly carried out taperinonts on the very next day and than
I went to Berlin. I Ain't C o to Berlin on «ta sauo day, but carried on
tho axporiconts (Nirthjr until ay departure.

q '-hat was your purpoco in goinc to Borlin?

A Tho roason was tto doato that had occurred. I told Raschor,
hewovor, that I wonted to visit wife who was about to hnvo a child.

Q whan did you soo in 3 crlin?

A First I went home, saw ay facdly, of course. Then I went out to

tho DVL in Adlorshof and sow Ruff,
q : 7 hat did you toll hin?

A I told hin that in those experiments that Raschor was carrylne

cut, ho had had a death yesterday or the day before, that I tad seen fren

the olcctrocardiogran that it seened to no aslf the ^arinont should bo

interrupted and that I told hin this'. So, however. Ad not Interrupt the

0


7X6


5 Vc-7 li7^%.tMS^Jisila*or (Int. Brora)

Court Vok 1


cxncrlaont on =7 sousestion. I told hla that those expcri.ior.ts rero
nothin" that I ranted to tare anything to do with. Ruff uca of the sane
opinion end re discussed how re could bring those experiments to an end.


7007


5 l-31ahlpy (3r3vn/?o£;ler)

Court I Case 1


3- Did 5aff advise you to return to Dachau?

-w -e t^llced about that at great length, about how we could
best do wh„t we wanted; but we both e«v clearly that we could not
•ln-ply tell oascher or Hinkler, for inst^e, th,t a fatality hud
sccurred and. consequently tne experiments would have to atop, tout
we would have to do would be to bring our ejperiaents to a conclusion
and then toJre the cho-ber out and »woy fran Dachau.

Saschcr's exoerinental subject died in tha low pressure
chuobor la ayril—that's tne first subjoct—I bellevo you sold ho
vus taken to tho corgue for the purpose of on autopsy, toore was
the uorgue in rolatlon to the location of the low nressure cncnbor?

a» One had to go through another barracks and then through a
long corridor loading through a ca-*> etroot or a court. &cctly what
distance that w.e I don't know precisely now. I cetiuatc th-t it
Was avrosluctely a hundred ueters,

v* On the d-y on the death, which you s-y occurrod -oout ulddty,
70 U had ca ;>lotod your experiments perhaps ^n hour prior to th_t tluoT
-w Yos, wo c^rrlod out er'iorimonts In tho ..oralng. tocn wo
wore through, I don't roc~ll exactly.

Ihcn tfcat did you dc with your oapcrL-unt JL subjects? hi ay
wont back in tho barracks?

a. Ivor- ono of our experimental subjects went book to tho
billots of tor tho experi .cat was ovor.

Ev.t billet was Just eovorJ notors from tho chambor?

Yes, that Wasn't f ,r at all.

“U toff, Sobott-, -nd yourothcr nan whoso xuciO yoa don't k.«ow
lived there?

O. Yes, the;- lived there too.

How long .ftor the dc^th of tho first subject was it before
the autopsy tcok placo?

I con hardly tell you th_t exactly; but I should think it

7008


£ >U3*-WP-17-2-31 ^elej (Int. 3rcwn/iuilcr)
Court I Caso 1


*os about half ca hour l^tor.

3- lio v _s present?

«• caachor, I, and tho ixcates free: the pathological station,
nobody else. _

Is tli..t wr...t you would cell tho dissection rocc, the innates
of dissoctioc rocc?

. Yes; yes, that's right.

3* In other words, thoro wort proscat at tao autepsy you,

Haschor, two non free the dissection rocc. Vos 3cff thoro?

a. Ko, I don't think so.

Yes Sobotte there?

a. Ho, I aa sure Sobotta wasn't thcro. Ho had nothing to do

with it.

'Jhat w..s actually dooo at tho uutcpcyt
It was c norcal autopsy. Iho skull, tho breast, and tho
abdcuinrl c..vity wore oponod.

Is that all?

*. Yos, that W.I a ccuplete autopsy. 2h_t is what is ordinarily
deno in an cutopsy.

3. Just open the broast, skull, and tho abdouinal cavity and your
autopsy is over?

«• First tho breast is opened; then the abdominal cavity is
opened; end at tho end tho ckull. Ihon tho individual organs aro
rponed, tho heart, lungs, -i is nccoss^xy in tho caso of a norrud
autopsy.

1. How, what is tho purpose of all this? Vhy in this particular
ease did you want an autopsy? Tew know tho ~an w„s doad, didn't you?

<w I didn't w.nt tc c„rry out this autopsy, but Hasefcor.

<• I undorst.-nd; but I 'a tolhicg about the oon Saschor. Uhy
ah-uld thoro hove been an autopsy?

’-‘oil, I can't toll you th.t. I think probably in order to find


7009


5 K ay-W?-l 7-3-31 del cy (Xat. 3rown/iUilcr)

Coert I Case 1

3 *it the came of de_th.

^ Z thought you o_ld that ii vai bec-uso of tho f.xt that tho
Udi hod been subjected to high altitude for .o long a period of tine
that hi. heart failed; hi. ho„r* Just stepped. Wasn't that tho cuiao
of death?

-oil, whethor the hoart stepped because of It. wonk, bocauso
of act being ablo to curry out it. work, or whothcr it w_s bocauso of
a central paralyaia italic* frcn brain, cno cannot toll, it
la tee a.jic cm In tho c-se of anesthesia, in too caao of a chlorofonaa
anesthesia. Then the ho_rt c.ih atop because of tho effect of tno
anoathotlc, but tho heart c * also stop whenever tho he.j-t is over¬
burdened. It is hard to say in detail what tho cause of tho death

Vus.

q. ben, What did floschor find out w^s the Cuuso of death in this
Particular c.iol Ho Wus tno oao who porfon-cd tho autopsy, Wasn't
ho. Doctor?

*• a3 far no I could coo ho couldn't find tho oxoct causo of
the death. A t any r .to, I couldn't clarify tho c .uso itself.

Sid ho Brice any st .talents in your prcscnco it tho tiuo as
to wfcc.t he considered tho c-uso of doath?

Tea, In tho c_io of ti.is autopsy sir bubblcn woro found; and
" c thou « fct t*' t these air bubblos would have aonotfaing to do with it,

*1 though I poraoaclly om not at all c.nvincod tn..t oao can S 4 y th..t
with cortaiaty.

'-horo woro tho c ir bubblca found?

The;- wore found in the v_rious blood voaaola.
i* -11 avor tho body?

fee; at any r„to aa f-r ua tho body vjj autqpaiod. brother
-ir bubblos woro existent in tho logs I cannot say.

UoU * * o^roo in y .ur own niad with the c ase of doath

-a concluded by Dr. Haachcr? Did you think it w_s causod fr-ui air

7010


5 ksy-A-JP-1 ?—;- 3Icklcy (lut. arcvn/Sxlor)
Court I Cose 1


babbits?

-w I ecu hardly i—giua th.t the visible ones wore tho c_uso be—
e-use such visible air bubble* after, occur -s a result of _ surgiCvd.
interference xft do not nocoss^lly lo-d to doatn. la iiy -pinion it
Was a sudd on control failure Caused by perhaps u disturbance of tho
blood flow. EewoTor, I c-nnot s.y th .t exactly.

Do you know of deaths c.uscd by a suddon control failure duo
to stop*}040 of tho blood flow? Is th-t a known c-uso of douth in
nodic.l circles?

a. I know it now bccanso of tho crporionco of tho jtiorican air
forcos whoa they tried to cx^-ino tho fitness of thoir flyers.

In 6 cases during a prolonged #t_y - I think th-t in twolvo kilouotor
oltltudo - a suddon dOath occurrod; since there io no physician pro-
sont during thoso *;eric..n tests but only sca.o sergeant or corporal,

I only know of t .is frai what thoy s-id. Ait judging fra- tho ontiro
description, they cannot horo boon .jiy other ensos of doath, but
causod by suddon enbolisos.

Did y^U hnov th..t f -ct at tho tii.o of tho doath of tho
Huscher subject? Did you h-ve th..t uodioal knowlodgo?
a. Vo, I only know th_t now.

Zien how oonld y u dltagroo with Rischcr's diagnosis about
tho untter if you didn't have that knowledge th.t you now say you

haVC?

a. at th. t tino wo only knew of tho corresponding c .see frcti
tho subunrino crows who had sufforod frai si~il_r syrnta-e in tho

Case of rescues frou U-boats th t h <L beca sunk. In the sano wa

0

nu-bor of doath ease# are known fra- caa-orcial ..odicino in too c aso
of c.isson workers. People like th-t, whenovt-r they wore found
unc'nsci'.us in the street, •. oro always Carrying - certificate


describing t..a. cs cuisson workers >3 were to bo taken t' tho
noxt hospital ns quickly J possible. 2 hus thc.prlnciplo of this

7011


5 Xay-*r-v?-17-4-3lGkloy (iat. 3rcvn/=.nlor)
Court I Onto 1


bubble.?

-v. I cun hardly iii-gino th .t the visible ones wore tho c.use bc-
c-uso such visible air bubble* oftc- occur .4 a result of - surgical
interference and do net necessarily load to doath. la uy pinion it
was a sudd or. control failure caused by perhaps u disturbance of tho
blood flow. Hewovor, I Cannot s.y th .t exactly.

Do you know of deaths c .used by a ouddoa control failure duo
to stOTonfO of tho blood flow? I. th..t a known e-use of death in
□cdic 1 circles?

a» Z know it now boc.uso of tho exporionco of tho jcoricun air
forcot whoa they tried to ox.iilno tho fitness of thoir flyers.

In 6 c scs during a prolongod st_y - I think th-t in tvolvo kilouotor
oltitudo - a sudd on do_th occurrod; and since there is no physici xx pre¬
sent during these *icrlc..n tests but oaly soue sorgo oat or corporal,

I oaly knot; of t .is frou what they s..id. Dut Judging frx; tho ontiro
description, they c.amot havo been any other eases of doath, but
c ;usod by tuddon cnbolisas.

Did know U...t f ci at tho tiao of tho doath of tho
Butcher subject? Did you h-vo th..t nodical Knowlodgo?

Ho, I only knew th„t now.

rhea how c.uld y u disagroo with R.tchcr'a diogn.'sic about
tho natter if you didn't have that knowlodgc th .t yra nsv say you

have?

at th t tine vc only know of tho cor respond lag c-soo frou
tho subuariae crows who h_d sufforod frxj similar synpts-s in the

ease of rcscuos frou D-bOuts th t hjL been sunk. In tho oa:o way a

*

nu-oor of death eases -re known frou cxn!brciul .odicino in tho c ..so
of c.issoa workers. People liko th_t, whonevor they wore found
unctasci us ia tho stroct, > ore always carrying - certificate
describing the- cs caisson workers who wero to be taken t-> tho
aoxt hesoit .1 at quickly _a possible, xhus the principle of this

7011


5 Ki^jrvB-17-6-dl.Jcloy (lit. grown/iUaler)

Court I Case 1

illness ic gcaor.-lly *nown also la coa.ercial uedicine.

Veil, it is very aach tse sohe tniag, then, as the c-rd that
c diabetic carried, who Ojy t_vc b —c tort of ^ strolco us a result
of either l.ch of insulin or insulin shock? Isn't that what you aro
trying to generally speaking?

— Veil, the purely uodic.i progress is different; but diabetics
generally c.xry a certific-te with theu et.ting th~t thoy ..ro suffering
fra: diabetes .ad th-t this and that i.oasure would have to be tukon
in c.jo of thoir foiling unconscious.

l» Vas a writ.cn record cf tho findings of ts-c autopsy of that
furet de-th undo by K^schor?

■». Tos, liascher noted down .0.1 the dot- on tho individual doath
certificate, had the int«ation of evaluating thou in scuo w^y.

Shat is truo ia regard to all throe doatho, I sxqnoso, for
tno second and third doaths? You witnessed the autopsies .®d vory
auch the s-aio orocoduro w.. 8 followod as ut tho first autopsy?

«• Vo, I v. sn't present during tho othor autoosios becauso
R-scnor didn't usk uo to attend, .*t th-t ti-.o uy relationship to
3oschor v.-.o olroJly ctralnod boc..use of tho interruption of tho
onsrluent*.


7012


5 »7 47-..-£--13-1-2 .11 .ghcr-Int: lirrclop

Court ITo. 1


. Did you soo or ro.-d or hasp tlo report or writton
record of t!-.o findings on tho nutopay thr.t w.-.a nr.do by
hir. In tho cr.ao of tic flrat dor.th,

-* . Jto, I did not eco It.

-• 3ut you ar.tr kin noting cortr.in no to a. Did ho dia-
cuaa with you r.s ono pr of o a aiora.l na would likely do with
enotl or rhr.t ho thou^.t ho we. a finding, ca ho redo tho
ox\n±n-.ticn?

•• ' r oa, he p.jticulfply polntod out tho ir bubbloa ho
h*d fount’, raid or.proaaod th t t! o-ght wfcon writing dotm tho
findinga.

• :Iot; # tton # aof-r r.a thr.t r.vtopcy vr. a ooncemod, whr.t
posrlblo uco could bo rvdo of thoco findinga rofr.r c thoy
woi'ld * conotltuto infor.-.tion to nodicr.l pooplo who roro
uoatod in flying, thr.t ia, in vi ti iicino, or,
to pooplo who wore intorortod in th..t typo of rcdicino whoro
cn :po o ngr-god in working under wr.tor, or in cr.laaone,
under tro -.©ndoua proeauro; vlv.t poaaiblo uco could bo ardo
of thoac findings?

... .'oil, I t: in’: tl t ono cov.ld not uao iis notoa very
'■dl boc vco a sinculrr c- o of docth, ainco ita e.-.uao
if v. ry 1- rd to doternino. Ono ncodc lr.rgo oxp.rionooa,
cu.ch r.a cor: orcir.l hygionicta would l*:.vo in t: oir corres¬
ponding field, -ncl if such r. hygionist who ur.a very uo 11
c-yv.intod with t! o cubjoct !;.d boon r.blo to loo!: -t the so

findings, I n euro ho would bo r.blo to drr.tr ao:-o conclusions
fro;, it.

* conclusions do you t ink he cov’d hr.vo drr.ttn?

If hu ruuld eoi?r.po tk.t finding with other findings
cf cri8Bon dor.th c~aoa , nnd wl ich ..ro known fror. thr.t
cr.iacon literature, ho could hr.vo ‘bought tho whole t: ing on
t: ° B *P a doneninr.ter. Eonevor, in one individurj. ..-.ro it is


7013


5 K-r 47-A-£*-16-3-Oraii3hor-Int: Under
C ourt Ho. 1


very hnrd to drrjr my conclusion.

f.. Eon :imy cr.aos could it trJco Dr. Kaachor to roally
coiio to --.ny roal conclusion about thr.t nr.ttop?

... Thr.t ic v-ry herd for-t.:o to e r.y, be ecu so I m no
oxp-rt in t' is fiold. ..n cxp.rt in tie cr.isaon field dooa
not only know of tfco r.ccidonta which ho 1 inaolf hrd wit-
no eaod, but ho ia noil acquainted with tfco litorr.fcuro on
tho avbjoct, and with findings of other pfcyeicirns, r.rd fror.
c.ll thr.t ho draws hia own concluaion.

'I. '..fcet about an exp ort in tho high nltitudo fiolds. If,
for oxaaplo, you had r. rocord for r. cr.ao history of fivo-
fcundrod dor.the rosuiting under tho eroo conditions r.a
thr.t Rr.sober did, end when you perfornod your c.utopuy r.ir
bubbles woro found t. rougfcout the blood vossols. Would
you fron tb“t bo r.blo to £;r.in r. cortr.in knowlodso thr.t
would bo vr.lur.blo in fly in-?

In tho ontiro litorrturo r.bout eviction iiodicino, I
know of r.o cr.ao whore r.ir bubble* h.d boon doecribod. Thr.t
ia probably bocr.uao durinc on r.ir r.ccidont r. conaidur. bio
tine pr.secs until r.n autopsy ic nrdo posciblo. In addition
tho bodies or corpse a in tho c r.so of on r.ir r.ocidont nro
usur.lly raitildtod, ao th.t aviation nedioino hr.a no proot¬
le .1 finding, -'-t r.ny rr.to, I ’-now of nono in Gorrtony.

Tl’on tho only way you would bo r.blo to dotorriino

finding a would bo if thoro h:d boon or to bo r. series of

•

oxporinor.tc in which you hod uaod oxporincntr.l subjocts,
in which tho ::en woro subjected to ecuo oxporir.onts trfr.t
3r.acr.cr subjoctod then to, conducted over r. rp? or.t period
of tirio, w ith r. great rimy run, end, if considorr.blo r.id
in eviction rjodicino, rout it not?

Th: t is not quite correct. Ccrtr.inly in order tc clar¬
ify tfco. findings, or.o ought to fc-.vo the possibility to


7014


5 Kr.y 47-..-sr-lS-S-Sr.lIr.sfcor-Int: Hcnloz

Court :>o. 1


pcrfom r.utopsica on r. nunbcr of corpsos ir.dcr auitr.blo
conditions. 2 - t quostion itsolf, however, bor.rs no inter¬
net for r.vi .tion r:od'.cino. Cr.sos of don th hrd not boon
obeorvod on hmd witi ..in bubblos, r.nd thcro wr.e no ror.son
to do thr.t. Ihoro wr.a no ro..son to r.aeuno thr.t t: is condit¬
ion h~d plr.yod my rolo in cr.soe of dor.th. This wr.a r. fiold
which vr.s r.lion to r.vir.tion :icdicino rosorreh. Horovor
r.licn, this cm bo soon fror. tho fr.ct tJ r.t ..1thouch I sr.r
ono such cr.so by r.ccidont, I novor e.gnin dor.lt with tho
question. I night , howo*or, for ir.str.nco, hr.vo dono
tho or. :c t: inc, ue g r.nlr.ls r.s or.porincntr .1 subjects,
if I h d fc\d r.ny prr.ctio.'.l intoroat in thr.t fiold, or

hrd onpootod nay benefit. This is proccduro tl t doos

•

not nr.tt^r ;.t fill, "or thr.t ror.eon thoro wr.a no intoroat
in cTrying out lr.rgor nuribor of oxp-rlaanta.

•

I boliovo you sr.id in your tostinony Pridr.y tl.r.t you
of r.t lor.et two or throo of tho non conr.octod with
thu oxpuriaonta who voi*u rooora-.ondod for lonioncy, or
cor: ut..tion for t: «ir crir.inr.l sontoncoc bocr.uso of thoir
i rticip tion in t: o onperir-onta. ho woro thoco two or
throo non?

-• Ho, I only ’.now xii .t c.n soon Cron tho docunonta
horo. Sobotor. 1 d boon p. rdonod by thoao pocplo.

In '.dditicn to th:.t, tic two inn., to a in tho dissection
roori h d been offered, or rocorviondod for sc::o sort of
lonioncy, Ir th..fc whr.t is sh-oi/n hero by tho docun nts;

‘-roco r.ro t; o two or three r.un you roferrod to?

- I found thr.t out her- on tho v r.rie of docuxmts.

-vt oxcopt whr.t you found out on tho br.als of the so
locunonta, would you 'mew f r.t rr.ybody wr.r rocorr.ended for
1-nioncy?

7015


5 :s.~ 47-. -S--I3-4-r-.il -cr-r-Int: R-nlor
Court ITo. 1

... 'To, I cm only ropor.t vl.r.t I hr.vo r.lro.dy sr.id, thr.t

• •

this h-d 'ivuii proniacd to those persons :.t t’-.o outsot.
ELsil-r undo noro prouiaoe to tl on v;hon ho visited tho
..nd rope..ted t - v-v-rr s-.-.o thing, wfcon I roported
to kin, s^aoly, tlv t tkoeo pcoplo troro to bo rolonsod.
Basel: or .’.Iso edneornod hirrsolf with working on tloso
rol-r.aoa, ol-.t -.ctu-.l work 1 -r.d boon done, nd to v/lv.t or.-
tunt Kii-.J-or did not koop lila prord.ee, I don't know.

I. Dut jo fr ; s you .\rc ccncorncd, you .vdo no rocou-
nondr.tiona?

A. IIo, I could not do thr.t.

'. bon did you trJJc with i.-r:l„r?

... Ij^lnr.inc or lidla of fuly 1942.
h t ..bout*

• . I nlre dy : ontlonod t: .t nr.se’. or auddonly tolo-
phonod no in lorlin, nd told i.o t: ;.t both of ua voro
to roport to Eiiv.l.r; tl-.t wo \ oro to lor.vo thr.t vory
a.-io nigl t. Sle-p-r tioketa v.oro ulrordy prop..rod. Thon
ti e nonfc ovoninj v:o ropertod to l.L. ..bout those o::por-
t~n;s on tie br.eia of r. typowritton roport, vrMoh thon
wr.e ..lrordy f ini shod.

b dry true thr.t; r.ll you iaiow is in July sonotino?

A. 17c 11, . o Ian: fron the docurxmts, it rx.y bo, troll,
boforo tl o 14th or 13th. of July, bocr.uso R. achor rofors
to t* tt d .y in spor-king .bout tho roport to Hirs'.lor. It
is poaciblo th t it w..c fcl .t dry , otle rviso, I could not
I vo ronoriborod tl.o d:.to oxuctly.

.. Tut ..t tiho ti. o of tl ^ confer^nco, you r.nd Hr.sehor
ucrc tl ero tog^-tl or witL Mrrilor, risking rn orrly roport
on tl u roaults of your orcporiconta?

... Yea.

n .. At thr.t tlr.o did Hr. scl u r r.lso rrlro a roport on his


7016


£ 47-.,-S'.'-lC-3-C. 11. ! er-Ir t: Ih-dor

C<-ur t iro. 1

0

* * /

oxpurinonts?

... ho, t ceny rr.to, those orrporinonts vc.ro not : t r.ll
Jcucfcod on in r$- prosonco, ho spoko to hi: ..lor onco r.oro
t: o no::t c.crnin^, nd~ it is possible tl .t on occ:.s:.cn of
s; ic conforonco ho enid so.ro thing -o kin r.bout th .t. ..t
;.ny r .to vo only d iecr.es od o.' wri*:onts of persons roecuod
frou high r.ltitudo, rend n .-l-r a .id tlv.t Ooorin^ w;.a to
bo Infcr.ied .bout tho results of tl is oxpcrL.ont ..s
quickly : 3 poasibis,

0 # . In your prosonco I!irv:l«r -do no rof-ronco to P.r.ocl or is
oreporiuonta?

... Jo, nothing r - t 11 I 3 a “ id -bout it.

r .. ..nd Rrcschgr errdo no :-r.tion to Himlor of H:.sohor*s
o:cp ri;x»r.tr?

A. i’o •

n .. -fton:nrds did you *. ..vo r. confuronoo with Oooring, or

• ^

roportod to Oo-ring on t!.o subjoct of your oxpuririont s?

... ho. Ilira rl^r rr.5d during tl t ccnforonco t’.. t tho
ro suite we i'o of oxtrono inport.'.nco, r.nd t] .t vo woro to
report tlx. to 3c-rin,~, ci’ porsiblo. Kovov-r, t*. ..t did
not : .turi..li_o, nd I ;.cr.*;co t’..t tho roport wh.ioh vrr.s
to t..ko pic.co r.t !lilch*r pi .co, u‘. ich r.lso did not trlro
plf.co, ur.s to hr. vo boon tho substitute for tho plrnnod
report to Joorir.^. ..c c..n bo coon fro::: tho docvrxmt, Rr.sohur
obviously herd boon v..ry interested^ and* r.lvr.ye ho turned
to either Ilir_:l>r or 3rr.ndt whether tho roport would bo
r_.do, obviously boc-.uco of his porsonr.l r. nbition tie. t
it vers of r ror.t vr«luo to roport to Oooring or mich.


5 :£y UWHtfM9-a-asyaoa (Int. Raasnier)

Court So. 1, Case I

Q You rreant Yarl Srendt or Rudolf Brandt?

A I so an Rudolf Brandt. ?hs letters wore always addressed to
Rudolf Brandt.

Q After the borooetor-and low pressure charbor wasbrokon by Hoff,

I believe you said that you had it replaced, ^fhon was it brokon? I havo
forgotten.

A According to ay nmoiy, that was at the -nd of April. I was in
Berlin and then returned. Then the baroaetor '.fas suddenly broken. I took
that brokon baronotcr back to Berlin to hare it repaired.

Q And when was the low rossuro chamber again In working ordor?

A I can not toll you that .xactiy, but 1 should say that it was
on tho 10 th or 12 th of "ay, or soaor/hero around there*

Q How nary tests woro undo’in the Ruff-Rcribarg expjrirwmto after
that?

A After the roturb?

Q And after the lew prossuro chaabor had again b<x>n put in working

ordor. *

A Yos. Perhaps about 50. '-oil, I don't thLnk that thoro woro so mny
as that. I can't give you tho exact figure. 1 think thoro woro a littlo
loss than 50.

Q Haw -any tests die.’ Raaobor conduct after that, to your knoifloigo?

A 7oll, I oan only rcuabar tho days when I was pres on t. Thon thoro
oro about throo or. one day, and a sir'll‘.r nunbor on tho next day, I don't
know exactly what he di*', booanso ho nay h-.vo worked nights or overlings.

Bowaany deaths occurrod in Rascher's oxp>.rinjntal subjects after
tho repair of tto low pressure ohanbar?

A Tho two oases of doath which I ha to already contionod. *

Q Hew, then, as I understand it, you fina l l y aado a report on tho
Roff-ftor-iborg-Ra3 chor axporirxmta?

A Yes.

Q That appears bore in tho Prosocution docunont book?

.» Yos, that is that report.


7018


f

5 *fcr U 7 ^-ATM 9 - 2 -Bayncs (lot. gran l er )

Court !fc. 1, Case I

q .^nd that was compiled and your ooaol u sloos wurs drown.and your
raco~undations woro aide or. the basis of certain research data aado at
Dachau; is that correct?

A The report was nod* on tho basis of ry record about tho expori-
nonts. In thet report, certain rocorreondations are nado for the future
dcvclcpnent.

Q bocane of those records which you nado the basis for this

roport which is hero in cvidcnco?

A 1$ record, you uoan?

Q Vhatovor rocards you used.

A I den* t knew what happened to it finally. It was in Berlin in

tho safe, .’hethcr thoso records were destroyed, toeothor \&th all tho

other socrot flics when tho Fcussians oano to Adlorshof or whether tho

Russians havo rcr.ovod thoso files, I dor.*t know, booauso I irsnot with

tho D7L ct tho ond of tho war. I think that Ruff would probably know

•

about that. That is to say, if ho rcrxr.bers what the records wore that

- • I

woro doatroyod whon tho Russians narchod into Borlin.

Q !Jow, as I undorstand it, ycu are unablo to say what tho naaos of
your ton to fifteen axp-ri:cental subjoots woro, what their nationalities *
woro, or for wfet purposo thoy had boon incarooratad at Dachau? You say
you don*t raoollect that?

.. Yes, I 4>nt rux bar all the natvsof tho individual pooplo, as I
alroa-V said. That all of thca woro Ooman I know exactly booauso I spoko
to then. They wore tho broen badge of the professional erininals, and
thoy also told no rhy they woro there, ftiy ovary individual was there and'
what his none was, of course, is difficult*to say.

q Do you rcrur:bcr any of the nanus?

A Apart fron the four whoa I -ntioned yesterday I do not raa-rbar
any. . .

Q Tfhat four?

A Sobotta, Klos, Rocki^or, and Zoslalr.

d iieff, Sobotta —


7 CIS


5 lb 7 U7-A-^TD-l>-3-S^o3 (Int. Handler)

Coirt llo. 1, Case I


A I didn't nontion "off.

3 But thoro was thoro *"s Sobotta, and who was too next ono?

A Rockingor.

3 Haw do yai spoil that?

A RrO-C-X-I-H-G-3-R*

Q Anti who was the fourth ono?

A SLos, X-L-O-S.

Q Do you roraj-'-bor oru aoro?

A Zoslak, Z-0-S-Z^-K, or C-Sj I*a not suro which.

q -Thoro wasRockirsar fraa?

A I car.* t toll you that. I ;bn't know whoro ho was fro:’..

Q \fharo was &os fron?

A I roally cton't knot vhoro thoy all caias fron. I think that ono
of them aa=o fron vrostorn Gomany, but I raally can't tell you that
with any anount of caaotitudo*

Q "hero did ZoslrJc cono fra".?

„ i oar.'t toll you that oithor. I don't kno where ho orou fron.

I bollcro ho eauo fron Silosia, but 3 roally don't know that exactly.

1 Those w.jro ell Oormn nationals who wore crininal prisonor3 who
'cr.d bc-n condcnad to doath and -rho had volunteered for tho uxporirvonts?

A they wore not OjRtonood to doath, tut they r-oro sontanood
to prorontivo custom, bocauao of their rop.atod crircs as professional
crinirvils*

q Do you know tho nanos of th. two inaatos of tho r'lsa action roots
who wero prerisod lonioncy or recorrvjndod for leniency? ' as that I-CLos and
Zoslak?

A ’to, 1 really don't know their nanos.

IKE mESnEHT* questions of the witness on the ..art of Dofonso
Connsal?

: 5 J. B.prjy* lour Honor, I had assuaod that Defense Counsol had finishod


re iireot ox animation.


7020


5 "~y i7^-ATD^94-Hayr.as (Int. feeler)

Court No. 1, Casa I


TJC PR3SIDENT: Defense Counsel has, but tiny my anr.rd.no too
witruss on too testix^ony that IcabooR put in since that tine.

This axanination, Counsel, -ill bo lid tod to th:- questions pro¬
pounded to the witness -after tho Do fans a had r os tod.

DT. S..U1ER* Certainly, ?!r. President. Dr. Saitor, Counsel for tho
defendants' 3lone and Ruff.

31 DP* S.VJTERl

1 iltnoas, taring your present acardnntion, you wore tolling us
.-.bout a prisoner at !>aohau who had boon arrested and put into Daohau
boonuse ho had donounood saw undartnkins of tho SS. You know when I
anon?

A Yoe, to-.t was Moff.

q ’.fho wr.s it?

A "off.

0 Ho was a political prisoner, was hj not?

A I os.

q ’"hat badge did this !Ioff wear?

A Ko wore a rod badge.

q A rod brdgo. ' as "off also used for oxp.rlner.ts?

A !Ioff, as I already said, -artidpetod in oxporinonts hinsoif
booauao ho voluntoorod for thu;, ar. 1 on his own initiative ho partici¬
pated in those oxpjrir.-<nta, the saaxj way as I did.

q ’.itneos, you ware asked about tho conditions in Daohau, and I
would bo interested in the followii^: ~foon you entered the canp of
Dachau ware you able to novo about fr-/sly?

A No, I could not*

Q That -cas tile situation?

A I had the order to co straight to toe axp-ri*3.ctal station and
otherwiao was rv;t allowed to nave around freely in tho oanp, for instance,
roinr to other blocks. I vas Halted to cing straight to :ry oxporinontal
station*


5 %y r>-19-S-Haynos (mt* 3 a. -r i or )
Court to, I| Ccso I


q I asstoa that when you oanc to Dachau, you had to report at tho

gatoj Is ttat rt-ht?

A Too, I had a pass which I had to show there.

Q Could you then walk aleno to those barracks, or were you
acocrtpaniod by a guard?

A Afterwards I was allowed to go there ryself, but at tho voiy
boginnijr; a guard of tho SS aooonpaniod no. It said on tho pass that I
tad to go fron Onto I or sens thing like that up to Block 5, and it also
said that I had to uso the shortest ray to that block. This is oustoia-.ry
in the or.so of official buildings in Gemary. '•'hen one ;.oos to c certain
office, ore had always to choose tho shortest way,

q Tltnocs, is it correct that you woro exprossly ordered not to
spook to any one froa tta gato to the barracks exoopt to oxperiuntal
subjoota?

A I haro alroacV that I was obliged net to opoak to any of
the irr-.-.tes and to stay only at thoso places whore ny prosonoo was
officially nucossary, and I tad to si^n a pap^r to that uffoot. Thoro
woro limitations upon ry froodon, and uary witnesses have conflr.-od
that,

q :tow, if I un.’ars tan-1 you ocrrootly, you ooull lo-.rn about tho
conditions as they prov.ilod ir. tho concentration oanp only by listening
to what tho -xp-rir-ontal subjects or tho C-pos or p rhnps Raschcr had told
you. Other lrratos, or. tha other hand, oculd not toll you anything is
that ri^ht?

.. Ios. Do you :»an I'off whon you say Capo?

q Yds.

A •'oil, Hoff certainly was not a Capo. I ‘on't knr- axaotl/what a
C-po is, but I think he holds a hi'h rank aron- innatos.


Court 1

Key S-ji-J^-l-HD-Soxsie-Rcnmler.

i. „t r.ny race other instates o:' the cr.ap could not
tall you anything about the conditions and the method that
?rev«iled in the c^np?

*. Ko. Haturally I only spoke to Keff end ay own
erperlment'l subjects.

You were asked vhr.t you spoke to these experimental
subjects about, and you rnswered that by way of telo?.u>ne
always -• naged to eperk to them. You wore outside the
chamber, and the experiment*1 subjects were Inside the
chamber, and you were able to sneak by way of telephone?
a. Yes.

i. Veil, I assume now that In particular after the
o malesIon of any single experiment you hi-d roper.tod
vp ortunlty to converse closely with tho experimental,
subject. In particular I am vondsrln e whether y.u didn't
discuss with the experimental subject oftor the conclusion
of the experiment vnrt tr.e subject oxp-rlor.ced during t.ie
-xporlscnts, whether he suffered any p.-ln, whvtr.er he
suffered any dlcslnoss, or wnether the oars h-d hoard, 'nd
then on the occasl.n of these conversations, you were r.ot
at all controlled by the S3 sen, and tner-fore were In n
oosltlon to specie quite freely with tr.oso exporl .ontal
subjects, inoludln-, prlvrte conditions.

a. li-turally seen conversations wore not o.ntr llod,
unless, of course, R-6cher w-s present, b>it ho wns not
"lwnys present. Then, of course, I co Id speck to thc-i.,
out I must say that even or. the occasion of tr.oso
conversations I never heard any det'lls "bout the concen¬
tration craps, p rtlcul rly details rs I know them now.

I cannot ia'glno that anything like :h-t h; d h opened '•t
that time In Jnohau. I am sure that they vottld fcc.vu told

t t once In a while. It ary well be, of course, th-t

7023


Court 1

Kay 5-A-20-2-HD-nox8ie-HanaLer.

ir, principle they didn't discuss such natters. I would
rather believe though that t.-cy didn’t tell c. anything of
that r.-ture because they didn't have any such experiences
themselves.

d. doctor, whenever you conversed with the experi¬
mental subjects rfter any experiment, I assume you attached
particular v-luo to whether any p'in hrd ori6en during
the experiments with the experimental subjects, is that
riaht?

*i. Wall not quite, because wc Knew that during
hlgh-altitude alchn-sa they couldn’t suffer any complaint.

It Is well Known that in the c-urso of hl t h-nltltudo
sicK.noso the experiment is completely foreign to tho
person undergoing it ~o if ho was under on rnoathotlc,
the anno way that a person isn’t rxaKod of ter on anesthetic
whether ho felt some thing because it ia Known he Oouldn't
feal anything.

But| Dcotcr, one does Know, ~nd we layman also
-.now It, that preceding unconsciousness there a a oortaln
it go whore one d^oo feel soaet lng beocuso one still does
rctrln n oort-ln amount of oonsol.usnoes, and r.l6o zb a
layman one inova tr.ero is o certain stage nfts,r awakening
fr a unconsciousness where one dooa feel aoaot.iln^. I an
Interest-d t > Kn-w whether before tho bo b lnnln a of
jr.c.nsciyusness and rft.r this atnte dleccpo'rod the
experimental subjects coaplr.lnud b.ut •* pain, for instance,
“b ut pains w.lca rose ip to tho point of jnc-nscl-u^pose
,r rb.ut certain aft.r-effects rfter unconsciousness.

Ih't is what I cm lnt-rest^a to Kn^w, especially did they
h~yo my p-'lns, did they c molair. o- nv p'-lns b_f <re o
iter unc.nsclousnosa?

«. Ko, they did not, -r.d I as not rt -'ll surprised,

because I personally had suffered from rltltude sloKness

7C2lx


Court 1

'/.-j 5_A-20-3-HD-5oxele-Ranmler.

s- often, th-.t I -now this condition fron my own experiences,
-r.i I ~m ears tfact -r. Ruff would hrve told you the v^ry
sn=c thing. The b tinning of high -Itltude sickness 1 b
aialW to Intoxication. The transitory period to complete
anc nacl'.uaneas, la slsllcr to rlchol Intoxication.

However, th«t Ipata very ahortly, nly " few seconds.

Then awakening is v^r* elollnr. There la « aanll, ? very
a v.rt plreo whore the subject does not know whore ho la,

-nd there are .:o complaints, ra I know from attny experiences
myself.

*. Witness, a little wnlle ago n coopiate oopy of the
document, 1 S 02 -PS, woe auboltted to you. I think yu have
It b fore you,

I am "frold I didn't reoeivo It today. I had It on

Friday.

But you do know thnt dooument, don't you?

I believe I do. I think I remember It approximately.
How, I would be Interested in Che following natter
In oonneotion with that document. i>ld you at that tlao
when h"kln b the acquaintance of Rasohor know, or did you
na uao th*t Rnecher h-d already onrrled out the experiments
with a low-preaaure ohaaber ?t an earlier date?

a. Naturally he s-ld that he had worked In the field
of ?vrlatl.n aodlolne.

•’ith the low-preaaure om abor?
a. Yes.

«r.d in tr.ia document wnloh I Just aentlonod, '1302,

the letter by R?acher to Himmler, the word 'low-pressure

camber" la not at rll mentioned. Rracher la speaking of

experiments, end he raka the Reicnsfuenrer Hinder for a

number of profession? 1 crlaln-la for theec experiments.

However, he does n t mention r low-preaaure chamber.

7025


C art 1

.. y 5_rt-20-4-HD-aj^8la-RaB=ler.

"itneas, I v all lli- tv draw y ar attention to the t-'ot
t _ t in t.'.ia decent Rnscher is vritin t , or.d I quote,:

■The exs.riaents are v_ry dangerous. 9 Teen In .n.ther
passage he writes, and I quote rgr.in, “ixo^riaents ir. which
experimental subjects aoy, of course die." «nd than there
ia » tnird pcss:' e e where it erys, and I vJote, "Inac.ne
:a. ;lo cm lsv oe us„d ce expcriaentrl actorlr.l. n These
threo sentences ire not correct if wo 'ss-ce the testimony
of the defendant Dr. Raff hero t. be correct, an- thOBe
sentences cm neither be correct if your own testimony
should bo t'ker. re being correct. 3oty of you hrve
testified here th"t the oxcorlaonta do not incur any dan Q er
whenever they "re orderly performed, -n. I ra now epeailng
t f cne high-altltude experinents >f Ruff-ml Rocb~r a .

Ruff hrs told us tnrt lnsme ae-ile c-.uld not ee us~d
beo use of well inown reasons. *r.d in spite of that
R^ oher la steting these three sentenced which I Just
reed. C-n you explain th t in ny wey?

HR. KaAOY: hay it please your Honors, I stranously
object to any farther questlonln a Ion* these linos by
Dr. o'Jter. He .v.e rsied this vltn.J6s on the witness
stmd whether or net those experiments wera a Inful, Just
what the aubjects endured dur the c urae of these
experiments, rnd the witness hrs -nswered him. .‘hct more

car. he do?

TE2 PRESIDENT: I thiiu the quescion is proper. The
witness mry answer.

3. (By Dr. Sautcr) How, 'itness, I wrs putting three
n-ir.t? to you t~men frun Rrscher'e letter, wh a you et
th c time designate ns an expert in this field, .-.ere ao
is Iryir.j dpwr. three sentences which do not correspond

7026


Court 1

Hey &^A-20-5-H3-Hox*l:—3a^aler.

with your end Dr. Ruff's testi-ony. Hov can you explain
that?

a. This 1-tter bears cn earl, date, kny, 19-*1, and
^bvi.ual” It la the 'outcome of c soont-n^oua Idea on the
part of Rnscher. He vc6 on lspulelvc han, and iai-odletoly
sent a letter to Slmaler vltx*. th/'t oontonta. The fret that
ho 8pork6 about the dangerous r.6pect v uld not bo conspicuous
In Its aelf. I think th : yr.onavar one rsakae r demand to
tr.o competent aupre'*- authority to c lve their por.r.l66i.n
f«r auen oxr-flaer.ts to oe carried out on prisoners, It
is .acre a sole to oxn-eorate rctaor than -lnlalzc In oaso
•oa«thine should happen to the exherlaentrl eubjeot. In
t 1 b case one hae nothin* to r-proach to onosolr, In cnoo
aoaet/ilng should happen. I don't think that this sontenoo
la c.neplouous, nnd one could.even nssuno It to be retuer
oonelble of hlo not to a*'/ th-t he la sur. n-.tr.lng will
h'o-.en but to a-y that people any die. To wh«t extent
ho was -lro.'dy viewing Bone concrete pl"n f,r hie own cxporl-
nanta I cannot a-y. Howev«r, I don't think that hv already
had any pl^na at this o-rly dote. I can hardly lcailna It.

% How do you exolalr. the third sentence ab.ut the In¬
sane? Accordlno to yv-xr opinion such a sentence coald not
bo undoreto d -*11 oe being uttered by an exp.rt.

a Well, both of us alro"dy testified that lr.6nno people
c.-ld In n cnee be ueod for vur ejperiaents. Whether he
rlready had a ie special experi.c.«ta lr. air.d nr.d wne planning
:hcn, weleh were perhaps to be carried /ut with Insane people,
' oanr.-t aay of c >urae.

* Dr. R-=b,r e , y u ere.here starting a trend f th ught
i3fc 1 didn't veu-.t to aentiort b. f rc, In order not to be
"Caused of outting r lending question to y u, but you 5 avo

er -esalon b the th ught which I rers nelly had lr. elnd.

7027


5 UByw.-DJG-2>6-Hoxsie (Iimler)
Court Ik.. 1


It is correct, end I en sure tfcct ycu ccnfiru it hcccuse *e already
heard it, that ir. addition tc high-altitude cxperi.-*u te, Dr. Kascher nas
car;yin- out ether experiments. That is a vell-knari fact here, is it
ret? Kc», could it pcssiblyhe assumed thet thc^c t'.ircc sentences which
I Just read to ycu, (a) clout the -’.pngorcusness of tl it experiments; (b)
about the possibility of the death of any experiment! L subject; (c) ebcut

the possibility tc uso insane people, that thcao :t »t-c -an could be intoiv

%

pretod as cpplicatle to the cthor expvrinu.ts whit i 1 a oh if -vp carrying
out in addition tc ycur hlgb-eltltudc experiments, hx 8h -oro fer tho
purpose of rescue frea hirh rltituit. Cculd net these .'entances bo
applied there?

n Certainly fer thoc xpe: L^nts he co ill have us> i». ino

0

persons because there vra nc r-r t cooperation c.ccossory on the jv rt
of the experimental subject.


7025


5 !fev-»-DJG-21-l-Cooic (/adsr)
Court Sc. 1


*


C. *hcn you probably also "ill confirm that these ether experi¬
ments of nascher, the experiments he cairiod cut on his cnr. iniotivc
were auch core dangerous because people actually died. .'Jew if you
cnee core recall that letter cf Dr. Heat erg, is it ycur opinion that
Rascher in the case cf this letter, dated 15 -ley 1911, which was long
befere ycur experiments, perhaps did not at ell think about the high
altitude experiments of Ruff and Rcoberg but was thinking of his cwn
experiments', or ere ycu not cf that opinion?

A hell I an sure he lid net think cf cur high altitude -xp-ri-
nents because this whs r. very special subject which r-suited fr:n our
spedcl field cf activity at the DVL. :Jeturally this ».;■ net something
which was not cccossi'-le to cyery cr.u in aviation medicine He certainly
did net think cf that. To what wXt-nt he ct that tine w:s already
planning the ojqjerimenta thich he carried cut a year 1' ter is, of
course, very difficult to say.

Q lie* sea-thin, else. Dr. Rcoberg.

IHZ HJiSlDS»T: The Tribunal will new bo in recess until
nine-thirty tcrxrrcw acming.

(The Tribunal rocoss-t rt 1535 hours.)


7029


cM-ay-M- J-5-1 4 2-l-K’jr'v(^u:-l. r)
Court Ho. 1.


omclTl Transcript of tho^orlcan Military
Tribunal In the matter of thu Unite! Statos
of America against Karl Branit, ct al, ie-
fendants, sitting at Hamburg, Germany,
on 6 Kay 194?, 109*0. Justice Be -Is presiding.

THS KaESH^L: Persons in the court room will please
fini their seats.

Thu Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I Is now In session. Qci 6avo the
Unite! states of .turlc-i an! this honorable Tribunal.

There will bo crier In the court.

THS PHiSIOitir: Mr. Marshal, will y->u asoortaln If
the defendants are all present In court?

THS ILASlLd*: Hay it please Your Honor, all lefen-
lants are present In the court.

THS PR23IDSNT: The Secratary Gonjral will note
for the reesri the pr-jsence of all the lofon lante In
oourt.

Tho Tribunal has another question to propound to

the witness.

H.*td aOHBiaO - He suae!.

SXoMIZ^TIOH.


3Y JUDOS SORING:


q. Drt. Romberg, we wore speaking yesterday about
the experiments or tests that were conluoted by Dr.


Rascher an! you say that those tests or experiments
were under a separate order from Himmlor fcnl had nothing
to do with the Ruff-Romberg experiments. How many tests
ill you sec Rascher make, either while you were pr~30nt


from the middle of .»pril approximately
the time that I knew ab^ut these
he told me abcut them — he experimental


or


were lr. the proximity of tho low prossuro


70 *0


6 Hny-H-GZS-l a 3-1-Karrov (Racier)

Court No. 1.

often, referring to the clarification of questions, but
these exporlaents did not ini to any fatal cases.

ft. I understand that, but how cany such tests
would you thin* that he ran froa the r.ii.ilo of dprll
on, at least while you wore there.


70-»0a


6 Hay-:*-GHS-l & 2-2-£arrcw (Raminr)

Court Sc. I.

X I saw directly cyself or, at least, I was in his proxirdiy when
he exporinantod daily or alaost daily. It is very difficult for no to
estiate the r.urber of experirents because I didn't page any parti¬
cular attention to then at the tire. I an sure, however, that botwoon
fifty and one hundred experiments wore carried out.

Q That is, from the .addle of April until you left them?

A Yes.

Q Thank you.

THE KISSIDSi.Ts Has counsel for defendant Ruff any furtbor
quoationa to propound to the witness?

A Ho.

THE fR2S.DS.vrt Docs any other defense counsel have any questions

to propound to the witness. Ccunsol for tho dofo:>dant uay propound

questions to tho witnoai if tho answers givon to tho questions fro-,

pounded to tho defendant by tho Court affect his client. Arc thoro
any other questions?

DR. V&BIZRK (Dofenso couitaol for do fondant Roaterg): Dr. Rotator g
you replied yostordiy to a quostion of Jud<-c Sobring to tho of feet that,
boforo tho bo ginning of tho Dacliav. ojqxjriamts, siailar experiments on
tho on.-?o subject wore already carried out by you in Adicr3naf during
which you used sovon oxp«rlao:ital subjects, who wore numbers of your
Instituto at Adlorshof. You further said that those experiments
oxt-andod over a period of approxir-atoly four months and that, during
those four -.aonths, approxiswt-1y two hundred such experiments wore
errriod out, during which you reached an altitude of S'.vontoen
kilodetors.

A Yes, that's ri^SA. Ti.osc •••ore tho explosive decompression
exporinonts.

q Did tho experinontal subjects that you used there -xorciso enf¬
etter activity but being oxreri»nt 1 subjects.

A 1’aturally, and that was tho difficulty with our work. That was
orjj of the r-ascns why vo acc-,Ajd tho of for at Dachau. All those


6 Hay-M-KJS-lia-^-jf ,rrov-(RH=lor)-.S
Court :;o. i.

pvir* ns had their nerval Jobs to do. Ruff was the head
of the Institute. I had my cwn activity to fulfill and
that vis the case with every one else too. The experim¬
ents vere contlunuing during our time cf duty. At the
same time, another difficulty arose because of the
fact that Vd couldn't concentrate on one series of ex¬
periments for any long period of time but whenever good
flying weather came about we had to carry out a number
of experiments in airplanes for several days running,
•fnen there was oad weather, we concentrated our worfc
on the low pressure chamber and the oonSrlfugal chamber.

Q. w.re other experiments but these two hundred
altitude experiments carried out with these experimen¬
tal aubjoot?

Yes. certainly.

a. Mr. President, I have no further questions.

TH£ PRJdlD^T: Counsel for prosecution may cross-
examine.

AmCROdS-mA-eil NATION.

3Y JR. K «RDY:

Cl May it please Your Honors. Dr. Romberg will
you kindly explain to the Tribunal, in Gorman medical
terms, Just what a pathologist is and what hla duties
are?

A. ^ pathologist is a physician who has special¬
ized in the changes which -are caused by illnesses in
the human body and which are determined after death
has occurred. To examine these matters carefully is
the task of the pathologist.

Q. Then, in order to examine these natters, is
it necessary for him to perform autopsies?

Yes, in order tc examine these matters he has

to carry out an autopsy.


70^2


6 Kay“±*-GR^-l&2-7-Xarrov(Rannlor).

Court No. 1.

Q. I h* v< 3 no further questions. Your Honor.

DR. VOR SRX: I have no further questions, Mr.
President, ,nd this concludes the evidence or. behalf
of the defendant Dr. Romberg. With the approval of the
Hioh Tribunal, I should like to reserve the right to
submit a number of affidavits which nay arrive in the
future.


70’ 2 a


: ._v -:XES-l h 2-1-Karrear (P.rjOcr)
Court Ifc. 1


^dSIDHtt: Counsel nay subait affidavits --hen the;* arc in
pr.prr - r-ito b»- sub; it ted to the Tribunal before the close of t!»

ease.

Defendant Eoriberg rill r-sunc his piece in the d;ck.

The Tribunal rill n*r proceed - ith the caso against tho defendant
TToltl.

DM. IL1£ (Defense Counsel far defendant "oltz)i President, rith

the approval of tho High Tribunal, I c all start tc suteiit ovidonco
on behalf of the defendant Tbits, I nay p_rhap3 point :ut tho subject
of :y evidcnco. Tho indictijont d.cs not charge Profoasor *'cltz to
have participated personally and directly in the Dachau cxporln-nts
c rvuctcd by Dr, Raachcr, The Prosecution docs charge, hwrover, that
participated in tho wrk and is co-r-spcnsiblo for tho work of
Hasch-r, Ho. berg, and Ruff by jiving the inventivo for those exper¬
iments and, for that roas'n, rould also have to bear responsibility
f r the o:rjcri -ntc. Th. prosecution a*so believes to have boro
points rojardin . freoring and cans piracy Tith rhich to char go hii.:,
with ut giving furth-r partic Lars. I sh uld like ta ask y.u that I

RSittod tc subnit ry -.cqucnco: At first,

I should like t ask th- Tribunal V- ;xr it u. t* call the dofondant
’.'cits pers nail;* int th- vitnooo stand. In addition, the .nvcocuti^n
has appreVv-d that the -.-itfwss Dr. .‘on t fr .. Karlsruho be penitted
t t-stify ho re. ~cndt Is th. f r.~r assistant of Pr-fessor Tolf..
furthermore, in rder t- rub.it proof, I '.eve 3ub.itted tue decua nt
books t aho Tribunal, including t-enty-fr.-o C cun.nts. Th.se d.cu-
n-.ata c ntain, -.or oth-rs, the affidavits by eleven -.ritnossos,
u stly c--- rkcra cr pr-fessicnal ocll-nju^s cf Profess-r Cits.

D-fer- I start the direct examination of tho defendant, I shall road
an affidavit f Dr. “erner Eaatho .at "-rlsruh.. Reading this affidavit
‘ill -Zx if unnecessary f-r a. to ask the defendant about vari us
phases cf his professional life and “ill, therefore, contribute tc-
■arc's th, shortening f tho prcco.dir._r, Jranr handing t; Jso


7033


6 ay-h-«jDS-iCarrGW-(Rasclor)-
Court Ho. 1


‘rlfcu n a l the document Weltz ?li*, which I shall designate as Exhibit
*1. I shall only read this document where Professor no the mentions
the professional life of rofessor Weltz. *rofessor Knothe was the
President of the u tmn X-Ray Association and, for that reason, i3 a
person well in a position to giv^ a characterisation of the d^fencar.t
Welts. I quote: \

" Georg August Wcltz ranks among the first X-Ray scientists of
Germany; his works, particularly on X-Ray physiology, have been reco¬
gnized at hccc- and abroad to the sane extent, and have communicated
principles which will nur«r lose their value. Wcltz holds a leading
position in the lirld of gastrc-intcstinal iymograpty, jnd the d^volop-
ment of hymography can n^v v r mentioned without consideration of
hia fundamental works, ±t is a remarkable fact that these works were
carried out by him in his private X-Ray institute, which he had
fitted up as a proper scientific instiutte. In recognition of his
scientific achievements, he was blectcd to Uvj board of directors,
and the Advisery Council of the German X-Ray Association. In 1936 and
1936 he was sent at Vi„ma, Prague and Turin, to the meetings of the
Austrian, Cz-choslovakian, and ‘talien X-Ray Associations, as official
rcpr« sontativc of the Association. In 1937, he was at th> internation¬
al X-Ray Congress in Chicago, as official representative of the ”^rman
a- Ray Association. In 1936, *eltz was appointed Head of the Ocnaan
X-Ray congreis at kiniefc. The fern of appreciation Aeltz exper¬
ienced as a scientist and as a moral personality free experts, can
best be illustrated by the fact that he wa3 offered the post of H;ad
of the Association in 1930, by Professor Irik, then President of the
X-Ray Gorman Association and repeatedly by me in th. following yfars,

•is the last President of the Association, with full consent of the
Board of Directors. He, however, always riAised it. Appreciation of
Welts 1 s personality extended far beyond the limits of the German X-Ray
Association, to other scientific associations, of which I shall only
Eention the Association .or Surgery, for Circulation Research, and

703ii


Court So* 1

6 Kay 47-h-GlS-142-S-Karrcv (EaasUf)


for Internal Medicine. A fact by which '.eltx especially distinguished
hiaself was hie constant readiness to help in scientific re veil as in
cereonel.nattcre. After a visit to hie institute one vae elvers en¬
riched in knowledge; he did not refrain free giving the reeulte of his
current scientific vorlee, even if they bed not yet boen published, and
ho vi.a pleased if he was able to exercise an inspiring and etiauloting
effect on ethers.

"As e pilot during the first vorld war and as a balloon pilot he
had already been engaged in aviation nodical probltns frea a very early
date. On account of this aptitude cf his ho vas appointed lecturer of
aviation aodlcinc at Munich. eotablishcd a dcrrrtacnt for aviation
aedicino at the Physiological Institute at ..unich, for which ho hiosolf
furnished the funds to a great vxtcr.t end vhich he fitted up with his
>vn apparatus. The vork ctrriod out in this institute vat also on a
high level.*

es. President, I have finished the affidavit of Xncthe referring
to sonu characterlxatlone -f Profossor Vcltx. I ohould now like to nek
you to pernit o.. to call bin to the witness stand.

7M PRiSIIiW: The defendant Oocrgc >»cltt nay take the witness
etond.

K3. HABOTl May it ploeeo Ycur Honor, coy I inauirc of counsel how
long he anticipates tho defendant will be on direct expaination?

ES. ’ ILLE: hr. President, this is extreaoly difficult to soy. It
depends how Professor heltx will react to ny truest ions. I personally
cs tiaate it to lest one to two days.

«P. EARDT: Thank you.

*

Tri PSiSlEEHT: Tho defendant George Veltx will tpke the vitnesc
stand.

(GGlEGI AuGDST ’ nLTZ, a witness, took the stand and testified cs
f-llows.)


7035


6 i:ey 47-H-0J5-1 & <2-7-K<-rrov(Hamnljr)

Court Ho. 1

BY JUCGi 3SSaiKG:

Q. Held up your right hand and be sworn.

I svoar by Jod, the .^Inlghty and oaniscient, that
I •'111 speax the pure truth .and -<111 withheld and aid
nothing.

(The viwass ropoated the oath.)

You may be seated.


*


70-*6


6 Kry U Halo/ (a-sL-r)

Court JJci 1

A. UjX'tbor ..-a a pbsnccist in LoSrigshofon. ily grrad-
father was c -v.ysician. A brother of ny father was also a physician.

I visit* ' various schools in LuCwigshcfwn an;* Lannhoia. Nothing of
r.ny importance. can be tolA .bout that perioi* of time. I engage ', in
a groat mount of sport, an- in the y*ar 1908 I entered thu Corxn
c hasp Unship for rowing. In thu year of l*>f I was graduate: froa
thi Cjtnasiun and I subsequently stuiioc! .medicine. The reasons which
novc ' a*. to the study ,f xeJicino tt th t tine I can no longer st-to
exactly today . ..t that tis*., as was the case with asst students, I
h:' a v-ry incaalete conception of tho profession of n physician. I
hac! a .pro.- 1 nuebor of wide interests at th t tLs.. I hie travels', a
great deal. In tfc. year A 1911 I visits the Unit-' States of
Aauricc i r -irst tLsu. I was intorostod in - rt and philosophy.

«t th t tin. .11 the branches of acdlcioo a^n-t'. equally interesting
to no. They wc.ro all jww. I stalled at Jena, Kiel, Konunigab-rg,

Munich, uboro I had a great znabco* of exooUunt teachers. I don't
reC-11 th t anyone f these U-.crt.ra eXorci«*.a ny p'.rtlcul-r influence
OB. In lie y r f 1913 I tool r.y str.ts oxaalnation nr>i -.:ent to
Gorlin to t:-w Ch'rits, and I workud ;ith Kuolpn at tho ifediocl
Polyclinic, .-ad 1 .ter with Fmnx t the X-r.ay Polyclinic. Arounu
th t tia’i I lunrnud to fly. 1 rt-.Ve tho International Pilots Certifi¬
cate Ho. 62.',. as roon as the First forld .far st rtod I was attr.chod
to tho Flying 3rttr.l±on SchleisshcLa. I p-rticifx.Uc’ in tho First
..orla ..*r partly j a pilot r.d partly .s a physician. At th t tl.au
I was concerning ayoolf :or t rt- firct tlau with viition a.dicr.l
problvca. . Ihe rroblcns concerned tho selection of

fliers wiiic.i i that tla. >.as an entirely r.eW field. Then wo
corpiled ccia-nt st tistioa - rtS .orks of sLaiL'r nature. Aftorstho
i.-r h'd erdvd. I went to P.oaUrg, to Munich, to the first nodicrl
clinic, nd after half - jit I went to lauorbruoh to the surgical
Clinic, Vorki.: »ith Sauerbruch I gained t,e first real conception
af t aid n Is, r.d ~ v.t trt. x-dic: 1 profession ■%.an3. yy

tsacbors thirc two School ~nd Crass-i. .Pile with Sauorbruch I


7037


6 li-f u7 - 1 — 2 - 2 -*~.loy (Rcjalor)
Court .-fc>. 1


s~w the huar.n attitude towards physici-n. Sauerbruch pl'ccd the
patient in tit center of interest. K- r-pr-sented the point of view
thet too radical irof^csion was -n -rt ard not a technical skill. He
said it was an Tt in which or.- hod tobc talented r.nd h_ always
pointed out tb-fc wfrjn treating r patient science would h-vo to
remain ' servant. That, of cours_, does cot exclude that in other
fields sci-nco bocaaos an ond ir. itself.

In tt*. y-'r 19^3 I settled detn in kunich r s a speci-list in
X-ray work, nd I want to mention two researchers whee 1 was fortunate
to know, nd who -xurcised s»j influence on ay trend of work. First
was the Dutch r.soarcher Storn van Le-wcn, 3-t-o-r-n v-c-n-
L-o-c-v-e-n. Storn was a physiologist end his rpeci* 1 field was tho
detairo Branch of study. I visited Storn frequently and we worked
logo tier. Cur interests then extended to climatic diseases. Wc
took balloon rides to;jctJxir studying that problem. Ho died in tho
A'r 1533. The oth-r significant r-se rcher who was r. friend of sdno
•r.d who exoroisod influence ir. ay .lor'n was Pl.illlpp Rooser, a.
physiologist • t tho University of kunich. Rcras-r encour’ god me to
start - little .vi tion *.>aic~l department at hie Institute, and I
have auch to thank him fer sci-ntifici lly. I was practicing X-ray
physician and coil* ocr-ted with * theoretical physic In, *nd this is
a practice w ..ich I follow-.o in the future, >roapt.d by the consideration
that the isolation of the individual branches of oodieixx, ccnstituteo
• «M knows in i- c*n be bridged over by such collaboration.

Q. If I uix'erctand your s-aurc^nts correctly your main profuo-
sicr. is a &p-ci“li-t in X-r-y work.

A. T-6.

Q. vou ucre -ctiv- t your oriv-t- institute in Munich?*

A. i~e, -v-r since 1923.

C. Could you pi- Se t-11 tho Triburr 1 .a little nor- bout
your profession -1 activity nc your cKC&jr ships in v-rious medical
associations?

A. I *.as • cesibur of th. Gera an X-ray Association for Internal

7033


6 May LI li-loy (RomL-r)

Court Xo. 1

liodicine, Association for Bosearch of Circulrtioe, a i/omber of the

•

Austrian Jr-rr.y Association, c-nber of the It-lion X-ray Association,
the Goresr. Physiols ic 1 Association, the Lunieh Physicians Society,
the Liliunthal Association, end I think this covers all of them.

Dp.. Ur. President, subsequent to thts- st tcaonts of

the defendant oltz I scbuittoc - list of is sci.ntific publications.
This list is contained in docuo-r.t Waltz Ho. 1, rri is Docuaent No. 1.

I should like to -ffer it _s Exhibit No. 2. This list is certified by
Professor ..'citrus secretary, who actually conpilcd it. There are 50
publications of .alts hiasclf and Z.1 by his collaborators.

Q. Professor oltx, I shall have this document handed to you;
could you confirm under oath that it r-pree-nts a complete list of
yaur scientific publications?

A. I triod to check this list r. s far ns it was possible for do
to check it n' re tr r .as I knew it Is conploto.

Q. Would you oe good enough to tell thj Tribunal with what your
work was eercorn-d?

A. Tc*j l'rgost part of ay work is of an X-ray naturo. I tried
to embark oi. not roads. X-ray work so far had been morphology,
which is to toy -rr.tocicrl study of living hucr.n being. I tried by
using rv.w oothods to ct rt n X-r y physiology, that is to say X-ray
which toes n>t bother so much with tho forn .of the organa, but with tho
functions of the or;-ns, consequently I nppliod awthods which concerned
thaBselves with knewm s^thods, or kynograpijy and cinematography.
Generally I nov-r w s Laterosted in th, rareness of the disease, but
I rather tried to follow the physiologic 1 basic re-.sons of *ny given
dioe-se, nd on- rn ^ th t looking t a nuaber of my published
works. Another : rt of -y mk concerned itself with aviatioi^
me die ire .

Now, if I uxx.eTst/.rd you correctly, your work is partly
ccr.con.--d with the f.-ld ;f or'ctic .1 a-dicine, and p-rtly with
scientific r-aliz.aJ.cn of th t a-dicine. Didn't you also work on
negative subjects, subjects of extermination , subjects as they ;«ro


70>9


6 - y 47 -a-3-W:>- il 1 oy (Raasior)

Court Ha. 1

desisted by Ocr».ral Taylor when he was speaking here?

*• Ha, I nev.r worked on any such sublets.

Die you concern jours-If wit a politics, at.rill ration,
eothencsia, did you write about th-a- aubj-cte?

A. Xo, I never nubliah-u anything.

<• I'tur "-u *jr- act It- :.s - i-cturor and & a professor at
th« University of oinich; wh't sublets wero you professor in?

a. I w.aa an vj-traordir. ry prAusaor for X-ray physiology.

Q. And how can you -xpiain y-ur ctivity in aviation oadicinc
at the Univ-rsity?

A. In the year 1935 I ivc-iv-i • lecture assigrwunt for
aviation a- Jicirc t tfc. University of Munich. I 1-ctured two hours
r. Nockj an! as I lro'vy said 2 had institut-d r snail exp-ri-^ontal
dep-rtaent t -ho Phyaiolocj Institute A th. University of llunicfc,
which t that tiow support.’ a, in ay work, 'no this was tno occasion
f-r .ae to qualify - a r lecturer.

Q. h*t was .h- purpos- of your scientific travels?

A. You k-nn ny scientific balloon travels?

Q. Yes.

a. P rtly in or'or to do research in th, South l/ind oroblua,
aainiy lr*a t.ie nodical point of vi.w, then there were a nua.b-r of
ccteDlogic l questions which h*J to be cl"rifled, for instance the
fomatioa A rlorioloc. P rtly these wer. sport travels.


7040


6 :>v 4T-il-fjC-4-1-4:ooh-j: (Iat., 5“'or)

Court i


" 31d occmoot any nUitary purp-sos with thorn travels?

A no, tho balloon -.t that tico h-4 no longor ray ailltcxy
Bigaificaaco aid this b-j agrood upon by nil cirdoa or tho nir-forco.

1 7-tt briefly doscribo you actlTitios na a locturor in

aviation coiicino?

A A° locturor in aviation aodiciao, I otrurtod to loctuxo two
h°UT8 ovory wook and I usod cy tiao, which I could ap-.ro froa ay
practise, to work in tho o*poricentol doportnont, which I hod cro-tod.
To did thoro what ia dosignntod os basic roao-xoh work and woro con¬
cerned with tho basic questions ooncornlcg aviation nodiolno -ad tho
of foot cf tho lack of oxygon.

* lad rrrlTl D6 fron tills activity, tho Iaatituto for Aviation
Todicino inJIunich was eroatod?

A Pertly, yoa. Tho I natituto fer Aviation Hodlcino during tho
Vrx Wl28 r - “iWtery Institute. Uy prlvato doportaont at tho Phyalolo-
aor.l Iaatituto was on institution of tho University nr* at flrat h*
nothing to do with tho airforco. Thoro la a ocnnoction on tho othor
hmd, because tho Ir.otituto for Aviation H<*11 clno hod boon croatol by
tho Luftwoffo bocauao tho fcuadr.tion for it wig already pxoaont in tho
civilian dopart:;out.

1 "hat woro tla quostione that tho oiviUaa dopcartt woa werk-
lac, on at tho University?

A Thoao woro quoatl:ns ecnoornod with basic rosoorch.

' And thoeo questions woro aainly cf a cciontific choraoior?

A ?hoy i.ero oxolu3ivoly cf a sciontific charactor. Uo did not
“1 all doal with practical quostlons.

* *’~ uia y ;u Plo - so toll u t, stnot.ilng abcut your political past?

A I noTor ccncomod aysolf very aueh with politics. *:hon wo
rotur:od fren tho first "orld Tar, wo bog-n to knew politics in a
• ory unploasant fom. Revolutions proValod and aftorsardo thoro was
inflation. P-rticul-rly at this tLej a nuebor of oloror.te cano up in
Politics which convinced no that politics is a handicraft in tho


70U


Court So. 1

5 nay 47- rt -4-2-iEA-keeh*n (rosier)


•xercisa of which one could easily get dirty hand*. I kept away from
politic* and did cot become a center of any oarty. After 192? one vaa
facad vitfc declaiona which were lsnosed fros the outside and which one
could cot circuavent. In =y personal field I had to aake a decision
in two factors, first. concerning the Oerean X-ray association. In the
X-ray association there was a danger that the leadership of tha*.
association would fall into the hands of a few radical cersons who uo
to that noint had played no o*rt in X-ray physiology. If wanted to
nreserr- the International reputation of the association and if wo
wanted to safeguard our representation aborad. then it was necessary
that a number of X-ray workers beccmo secher* of the Party, because
only in this Banner w. it poe.ible to do .way with petty ouarrel.
within tho X-ray association.

The other field where I had been forced to Bake a decision was
ny department at the Physiological Inetitute. If I wonted to continue

v'jrk thor., I could only do p * r, ’ r - Ic lh * C ““ * W

baloce rid.., In -hlch I -» Tory Intoro.tod. It ... uo..lbl. for =.

,0 continue -or. -Ithlu th. fr«e-or* of th. P*rty. In th. yo.r 1937
; boc.no . noebor of tho forty without Identifying Woolf - 1 th .11 tho
principle* of th.t norty. In portlculor. I 1-W* r.j.otod th. moll
nrlnclple* of th. forty. I ». noyor on .ntl-Sonlt. nnd for th.t
ronion I had nwy J-loh ollor.to In Xunlch. I oontlnuod trc.tlng
Jo-0, in .pit. of th. prohibition, up to 1944. but tb.n I -.* d.nouncod
and I had to co..« thl. bocuo. othor-l.o ny ur.=tl=« -ould hovo boon

closed.

Q. I no- go oTor to your .ctlTltl.. during tho -w. »hon -oro

you drafted?

A. I -as drafted at the end of August in 1939.

Q. - hen did you go to tho toot ot.tlon for .ltltudo So. 4 In

..unich?

A. At flrot I -no In Seublborg «t . Pilot- cr.nln.tlon coot.

^ ct0 I stoyed until .uororlnntoly Koroubor of 1939. I —< *<• ««

?0A2


Court Si. 1

6 aay 47-*-4-3-&&-kcohan (Sanlef)


tast station in January of 1940.

Q, Vould you please describe to the Tribunal vhereln lies the
difference betveen the test station and a pilot's examination station?

A. The fliers exanination post, were I stayed at first, carried
cut general Investigation vhich is perhaps comparable tc the Investiga¬
tion carried out by a life insurance coopery, vhenever one tries to
take cut a policy. It is a very thorough examination of the circulation,
heart, eyes, etc.

The tost stations dealt exclusively vith the investigation of
altitude effects. At the beginning of the war tho tlae had ccoo vhon
machines -ant up into high altitude and at that tine a number of fatali¬
ties had occurred as a result of altitude sickness. These fatalitios
wort explained by the fact that altitude sickness, as it has been
described here freouently, causes no pain whatsoever, but on tho con¬
trary in its first stages has an intoxicating offoct on tho person,
causing his to have high spirits, vhich lends to an over-estimation of
his ovn pavers and vhich in no vay apooars to bo dangerous to tho person
involved. Because of thoso peculierltiesjeltltudc slcknoss o number of
fatalitios had cccurrod. It vat therefore decided to cauco altitude
sickness at certain intervals of tino cn all the flying ocrtonnol in
order that ono could doaonstratc tho peculiarities of that sickness to
thea in that cannor and in ordor to drav thuir attention to tho neces¬
sity of recognizing tho first symptoms of that sickness in thoosolvos.
These examinations verc carried out at the test stations in sorios and
normally tvonty to thirty persons were exeained per day. The persons
got this altitude sickness vithln three to fifteen minutes and in this
sannor they gained the knovlcdge d.ich they had to apply vben actually
flying.

q. In that case you were the head for the test station for high
altitude effect So. 4 up to the creation cf the foundation of the Mili¬
tary Institute for Aviation Medicine?

A. Tcs.


70.3


Court He. 1

6 Aar 47-K-4-4-tEK-Kethaa (Eafller)

Q> Veil, how did this foundation of the Military Institute for
Aviation Medicine ccae about?

A. Continuing the tradition of =y civilian decartnent, we carriod
out a nuaber of scientific ojaainations at the teat station Ho. 4.

That possibly "at the reason for Elppke's suggesting to ae in the Burner
-f 194 i that a larger institute should be created In Munich. This insti¬
tute had been planned on a large seals. It ~s to bo connected with
an CTdinarlat at the university and a nunber of new buildings were oro-
rldod. I had aisgivings about this large-scale nroject because in the
final analysis I rented to reaain an X-ray physiologist. All those
large-scale plans were dropped anyway because of aerial warfare, and a
slsilar institute was founded vhlch essentially continued the tradi¬
tions of ny civilian dopartaent.


7044


6 i. -v 4 -* »-J?—5-1- C ook (Inti Railur)

Court I

-V.ou you vore designated _• the ho_d of th-t institute when
it v_a fouadedT

ros.

-Tint tasks did the hilit_ry Institute for aviation medicine

h-ve?

Che idlitjy Institute for avi-tion nodicino, as I already
■aid, coatinuod the tradition of tho civilian department, that is to
say, it mainly concerned itsolf vith basic research, oninol experi¬
ments, whereby particular attention was given to problems with which
we Had dOalt onrlior, which was a lack of ojygon and yencral phy¬
siological quostion», for instanco, collapse.

v Vos tho research nrogr-w prescribed, which you woro ordorod
to Carr/ out as a cort^ln •> 1 an7

a. I die cub sod the brood outlino with Hippko, upon waich
too instituto was to be uctivo, but by and largo I had a froo hand,
aoro woro a fov excooti jns. Z.o Reich *vlati:n kinlstry and Hodlcal
laspoctorato oosiissiaoed uu with a nuabor of questions wnich wo
had to solvo, but theso wore relatively raro c-sos and the t-eks had
n particular iuport-nco.

X* Uhnt w..s : ur relationship t the Rolch Resoarch Council?
a. u’o had no rol_tionship to tho Roicn Rosoarch Council.

3. You acy th t you had a free hand. Is it to bo attributed to
you thon, that yrar instituto epocializod in tho rescuo of fliors?

a. Yos, uo specialized in finding -othods for tho rescuo of ,
fliers, end t.:is according to ay plun; but this olun was workod out in
_grouiont vith tho intentions of tho kodical Inspectorate.

*

Did tnc ..ilit-ip Institute also deal witn questions of
extermination, killing or the effect of offensive weapons?
a. Ho, no rich questions were evor worked upon by us.


X* Uould you ploaso indicate who y ur collaborators wore?
a. iy oldest collaborator was Dr. von Vers. Vers caoe to no


6 k-y-W-J?-5-2-Cook (Iat. Hauler)

Court 1

during tho JO_tnaiu s -f the war because he hod reason to change hi#
residence. Ho Was being looked for by the Gestcpo, was persecuted
for racial reasons, and for th_t reason decided to give up hi#
position a# a cnief pharajcologist in a 1 -rger phoxcaceuticol iastitu-
tioa. I ves in a position to engage hi.-* in ay institute through a
Civilian contract and ho succeeded in staying with no throu^iout the
entire war without any intorforence. Aero was soao quostion about
th-t frcu horlin wnicn threatened his oosition but decaer-Troysong
i n u u god to e..vo fe situ-tlon. lerz wa» a phanoacologist. Ho ori¬
ginally wonted to qu_lify as > lecturer but th..t did not i-utoriulizo
nd he caao to .0 afterwards. Ky socoad coll^oor-tor w u s Lutz,

Luts. I took Lutz frou an ack-ack battalion. *t tfc„t tlno
ho was r. r thor unknow Dun, but wnilo working with uo dov-lopod vory
quickly into o very good -ad significant scientist. Hy third colla¬
borator w.-.e Vendt, »&o was an S-r^ physiologist, and aostly workod
upon tho ray questions. Eo took Care of tho entiro corrospondonco
of the Instituto .ad sinult-noously was hood of tho tost st-tion of tor
I h-d bccuo ho.d of tho Instltuto. Later, on undor c civilian
contr.ct, vo alloyed a physiological chouist, Dr. Sohlkopf, wno also
cu:o froa tho ph..ruacoutica industry. This v_# tho o..sic st-ff of tho
Instituto. Eton wo h_d a auabor of coll-oor-tors who, however, cauo
-nd wwnt, and ri. 0 only oec.uo taper-ry -unbors of tho Inotltuto.
rheso voro Lr. Eanton, who caio frarj tho front and wantod to do his
doct3r«s thesis, and there vuro a nuuber of people wao for other roj-
coas wanted to do scientific w;rk for a tL.o. I h-d no influence in
tne selection of thvsc fluctu_tin<, jid ch-nging coil_borators, *but in
-uiny lnct.ac_s tncy woro just assigned to ay Instituto without uy over
-nowiag then.

How would you pie sc briefly describe what your t-sks wore
-s he^d of tho Institute?


70/.6


e Kw-ir-JT-5-o-Ccck ( 1 st. ?-dor)
Court I


.u a 3 chief of the Institute I at first received, for uyeelf
_ field of work, for uy ova research work, and it addition it was
ay dut;* to establish the lOlicy of the oat ire Institute, as a
rule wo had dlscu sions nco w week during wtict we exc h a n ged our
experloncos. Brerybody reported wh_t he hod worked upon and a futuro
prograu was detomined. Since wo wore r-thor snail and since wo didn't
hare enough ooll_oorators, a d-nger existed th_t we would disintegrate
and go different ways, and for th-t re-son I attached v-luo to the
continuity of tho whole t_sk being preserved. I wanted to coo that a
muber of essontial problans wore s elected and tn-t wo should coi>-
ccntrato cur entiro energy upon th*-sO proolans. At too very Deginning,
p-rticulnrly, thero was on inclination to follow up orory ide- waich
was considered to bo good, and in this aona*r a nuubor of tasks woro
started vdiici- woro never finishod. Hew ideas originated which
uoant th .t old worx w.s put asido. Pinully, wo draftod a program which
hud to be obsorvod rigidly -nd waich represented our oxuct lino of
work.

3* I shall now turn to the individual counts of tho indictuont.

You woro charged witr. h-ring p-rticip-tod in a conspir-cy. I shall doal
with t:iis point only when all of tho other points havo already boon
cl-rificd, Tho next count and almost tho only count which is to bo
takon soricusly is your connection with tho high -ltitudo o^jorluonts
at Dachau* Zi ay arc -11 centered -round tho na-o of Haschor. I
thvreforo .a.: you at first, when did you first hoar of 2 aschor?

a. I hoerd of a-scher for tho first tiuo in tho suunor of 1941,

I he-rd of hfci t a rough Aotteahoff. Eottahoff at that tluo tild uo
that Haschar h.d - prc-chwd hi u and had su^t-sted that ho Carry out
t.io hi©a altitude experiments at Dachau. Xottonhoff, I uuy explain,

Was at tlx.t tlocfl Oberfcldarst with tho Air Gau Coaoand. Xottcnhoff
in the years 1933 to 1939 h_d already been with ay civilian dopartuento


7017


6 K-^ii-JP-5-i-Cook (1st. Eoiler)
Court I


He received his specialists training it the Physiological Instituto
it Huaich. Liter he qualified _s a lecturer it ny Institute and
verged in uy dc>_rt-.cnt us a guest vhenevor he visited nuaich. auong
other uettors, he _t one tlue st-rted a scries of experiacats vita a
aorJcsy.

%. Dr. Volts, I shall sow h_vo tho lcttor of Hischcr to Hiaulor,
dated 1 ..oy, 1941, handed to you.

?1_&!3&3| 3oforc st_rting on th_t phaso of tho oxcalnitlon
tho Tribunal will bo ia recess.

(a short rocoss v_s tJcea)


7-xe


6 -ay-J-GJ-7-l-Blackiey-(int, Kurtz&Vcm Sch-n)-
Ccurt 1 Case 1

Th. Tribunal is -grin inscssi:n.

BY EE. TLI2:

Q Dr. -.citz, Just before the recess I was abcut to give ycu Dccu-
oer.t HO-15Q2 PS, Prosecution exhibit LL; and that is where we st.pped at
the- recess. I shall n.w send th. document up to y:u. I understand yep
hrve it already. Please r.fer t it. The prcsecutirn maintairs and I
should like to hear ycur attitude abcut this—that ycu arc the represen¬
tative cf the Air fleet physician mentioned in this letter here.

a Rancher writes in this letter cf the 15th ef -ay 19iil first that
he was assigned in -unich at the Luftgau Cca a ande VII fer a medical selec-
ti:n course. P.e also writes that high altitude research was icp.rtont in
this cruise because the English fighter plan.s had a sen.what higher
ceiling, he alledged that it was acnticned in this course that unfortu¬
nately we had net been able to carry out exp.riocnts with human material
yet since the experiments were very dangerous and no cne volunteered.

He therefore furiously asks: Is it possible that two or three profes¬
sional criminals b-. made available by you for these experiments? What
.'.'‘sch.r writes her. is v.ry peculiar because it is likely to have been
generally known at that tine that in th. Luftwaffe there was hardly a wcll-
kn wn r.scarch w rker who had net p.rf r=ed extensive experiments on him¬
self. Fr-m the lorg. number of names I should like to mention o,.ly n few
here. Ruff, Romberg, 3eCkor-Frey3eng, and Lutz have already been mentioned.
Klemann, Frauerherger, Doeh ring, B.nzinger, Luft, Febcitz, Kvtt.nhrff, Hal-
bo.ch, Sauer, those are only a f.w nam.s which Just ccur tc me. There were
s me heroic cxp.rin.nts, fer exacpl., B.nzingor-Halbach -xp.rii.cnts on ox-
pl sive docanprcssi-n up to 19,000 c.ntrifuge experiments by Doehlen.

*“e 3tayed in th. Centring. until he had subcutaneous heaerriveges) that is,
his wh.l. skin by the centrifuge, which was a sensatirival thing at the time.

knew -f all th.s. experiments, and there was hardly anyone familiar
with aviation medicine who could have made such a remark. Now, this remark
c aid :nly haw. been made at a report :r. high altitude aviation research.

It- three lectures which were held on altitude during this course I knew.


70LV


6 —ay— jJ- 7-2-5 lac kl _y- (ir.t. Xurtz&Vcn Schcn)-
Court 1 Case 1

I held one of then myself. I did net say that. Bucchn-r nade one and
K'ttcnhoff the third; and I heard both lectures; and the other tw lectur¬
es did net contain this assertion either. *c knew fr-n further dcval-p-
nor.ts that he Seans here Kett^nheffs lecture; and K tt.nhrf Certainly
did net say that either. Certainly not in this frrn; and he says the sane
thing hinself in a affidavit.

.Sew, Rascher gees on th. write that the expv.ric._nt3 are cade at
the Bed-nstaendige Prucfstcllc fuer H-chenf^rschung der Luftwaffe in
'.unich. The head in this institute at the tine was cyse-lf. Rascher did
net cone u oc, although 1 was a lecturer at this course. I did not give
hin pv.'-niasi-.n t- pv.rfcm theS- experiments at this institute; and I
would net have be-n able to give hin that pernissirn t~ perforn these
expertsents at this institut,; and I w-uld n t have been able t give hie
that p-missl'n. That w uld have been s nothing which w uld have absolut -
ly r.quircd consultation with the utdical Inrp-ct rate and the approval
. f the kedical I_spect rate. I c'nsider it iap:ssible that Kettenh ff gave
his this pvraissi n because K^ttenneff was net at this testing station;
he was with the Luftgau. was in charge of the departaent for therapy
and care; and he c uld n:t and did net give Rascher this pemissi n,

1 as convinced of that.


6 :: 7 -i7 -H-S r- Inta« Vcn£chota-iiir t z

Court ::c. 1


ilor:, IT Hr.aclor goos on to vrito: tho cxporiiaints

Q

during which, of courco, tho subjects could dio woro to
t*ko ol".co with v' cooper .tion; th t thoy rro c rriod
out on isonlcoya r.s Lithorto boccuao ccnkoye .ro of m
ontircly diff«ront tost condition; r.s I grid r.lro'dy ho
iontionc rsonkoya bocr.uro Mot -on.' of: 's lecture roforrod to
l.ia oxporlisor.ta or. ::on!:oya. I l'.vo 1 rvd r. very ccnfidont
tr.llc on tfci.t witl. tl o reprurontrtivo of tho r.ir

float ph;eioi:n rlo did :srko tide roo^ .rcl oxpori-ont, r.nd
ho wr-.a fleo of the opinion tl- c tho preblone involvod cm
on^; bo aclvod by oxporinenta on lainra boings.

I knew fresi ni r.t Kottonl.off L-.a told so, tl : .t Rr.acl or
did tr.ll: to hiii t r.t tl-.t tu.o, :.nd , after r.ll, Kotton-
l.off says th.t too in lie affidavit. On tl o othorh.nd,
n.'.ecl.or 1 lias0If v/ritoa that tho conversation v.-.s r.bsol-
utcly crnfidontr.il. Thin s’ owa tl..-.t 1 0 uid not tr.ll: to so,
«o f:r a tl.o roproaonts.tivo of tho r.ir fls,ot plyeicim
is ccncor nod, ho wr.s noitl *.r Mottonhoff nor nyeolf. Ul\o
r.ir floot phyaioi .n ur.a >ris, ;.t th t tino. I’o 1 * d no
ruprosont tivo in Munich. ,\t lur.at vo two woro not Me
roprocont..tivu 3 . Ono .airt, tl.oroforo, obsox*vo , that in
tils letter R.-seMr h 0 :-/.o quitu r. lot of confusion
with prrtly 1 elf-truths, sortl; howovur conplutoly untruo
et Xx. .nt:. H.oso ro ;.pp rontly r. dc for r. vury dofinito

purpoao, s nd, I ina* ir.o tl 0 pvrpcaos of tile 3 tt^r is

%

for .. scl>r t! on tc :-.ko fflmlor boliuvo th t t? «.ra rw r.a
n urrjor.t noed for hunrn ox >. rs. :onta. ho Isr wmtod to
•-ire liss boiiovo tl t ho 1 e talked to so?;o ccnpotont
persons on the subject, vl icl could not hr.vo boon tho
or.so . cccruin-: to tl - at: tc of -.ffrira. I j obviously ex¬
po tod V, t if Hi:, lor :;ivcs !i tie per sierion, t! 0 f t! or
utkbrities involvod, th.t is sr/aoif, tho r.ir ~..u, tho


7051


6 Hay L7-4I-Si:-8-2-C-allaghei^Int3: v-n Sch n-Eurts
C urt S'. 1


medical Inepcct'r, and sc f rth, that is, if an rdcr f pcrmissi'n
fr : Hirr.lcr is presented, that wo cauld n t .pp so his wishes. I think
that is rather el?er in the c: n tents :f this letter rf Rasch-r's.

I thuTefere, state :nco aero that Rascher did n t talk te no at
all at the time. He certainly did talk tc Kettonh ff. In his lccturo
K ttenh- ff ocrteinly did n-t nakc the statement which Rascher pat in
his anith. He talked ib ut the adjustment f c nkoys ani rabbits to
high altitude, ani I kne-r n thing at all f the wh lo dcvolcpoents
at the tire. It rrj quite imp ssible that ’.uring this c urso ho obtain¬
ed pemissi n r assurance that theso experiments wuld be carriod ut at
tho Luftwaffo To -ting Stati n f r altitude research. There was
nr. no thoro who c uld have given his this pemissi n.

DR. WILJE: ifay it ploaso tho c urt, I, pursuant tr tho tostir. ny 'I
Dr. Holts, shall n w subrdt the affidavit by Dr. K ttonh ff, which
has "lrcady been roferrod t several tines. This is c ntained in
Cheusent 9 k I f Kelts Ifccunont Ko. 2, and at the saaj time with
this I subnit hero a public".ti n by Dr. K. ttenh*ff which has tho
file: "lncr so f erxlurnnoc for nigh altitudos." This is e ntainod in
.icltz D cunont N . 2, D cumcnt Ho. 18, and b th d ounonts t'gothor will
bo eIts Exhibit :: . 3. rr c tnis affidavit I w uld like tc sake tho
fell wing brief 3 bite cents. On page ? Kettonh ff st-tos, at tho t'p—
THE FRESHEN?: Dr. Sillo, tho d curxnta boing c- ntained in sopar-
to d cuncnt b ks, I suggest that they bo narked separately as
Exhibit N' . 3 and Exhibit He. 3-A.

DR. WILIS: Uay it ploaso tho c urt. In acc^rdanoa with j ur
H n'rs ruling, I shall submit those d cuseats as Exhibits


7052


6 May 47-lfr-S -2-2-Cc. Oegher-Ints; von Schan-Xurtz
Court No. 1


Nos. 3 and 4. Perhaps I m? briefly ca-u back to whet I .»es about
to say. Kottunboff said on pngo 2, first, t:at during the training
co'iroe, ho gave e Itcture on high altitude as to tho adaptability of
rrbbita erd nonfcoys. He confirmed th reupon that after the licturo,
th.t Rase her opproachsd Kottonhoff, art! th t the t*o of thorn hid a
confidential discussion together. On page 3 of his affidavit Kotten-
hoff confirms ttat Raschor sndo tho .-iroposition to hL= to have Idgh
altitudo tot s scC.o on profess loro 1 crxaincla, and that they had
to be volunteers. Hu Iso said in his affid. vit, th t is, Kotton-
hoff, errf I oiv.il quote the last prr-gr*ph on page 3: "Suv-ral
tsooks altor our first discussion Raschor ciaa to •*>, crxJ inf or nod
no far Uw firpt tisie that he tad approached HinUr far pumioaicn
to conduct rdfih-altitudo adaptability, <r.>;rirur.tc on professional
crinirola, an! ttat he hid received tha uritton p-radssicn fr^<a him.
Thereupon 1 c: ressed ooco more ay scruples is ct tod under Ko. 12,
prcciocd hin, however, to discuss tho v tt*r with Professor holt;.
In tho sub. oeuoit discussion '..oltz shrrod .ay acri^Ur." Sin’ of
quotation.

I, • rsfon, : - t. t-*, c (-.elusion if your Honor ploosoa, that
Prolcss-r ..cltr, - s far t s nil these aatfc r conournsd, hoard
only mny, .‘n y ueks Inter about th-o, and, as it has b-en or nrud ,
t tho purson who Jins had th c nv ra“ti n '•‘.th Raschor*


7053


l; ; 6-H-HK--9-1-*!(I t. Yna 5cko-n it Kurtz}
Court S*o. 1


v Dr. .eltz, I shall now cctio bick one a nore to
3cjsohJT v 8 lotter to Hirelwr; will you t -,11 2 v In c. fow
brief words wh. t did .-i .sch-r intend with these incorrect
st .tononts?

.. I bwliovo I have clroc.dy Lidic ted thr.t. I inter¬
pret th<- letter to b„ th.t rfischor, during Kottonhoffs
i->ctur«. x ct ids.- . of pwrforcd.no experiments on human
v-ings in Dr.ch.~ix; t!i t without s .ylng nythin& to Kett^n-
heff about it he sot p-raissicn from Himmler th .t in order
to obt .in this permission ho yrotendud to Himmler th -t ho
h .d t Iked to authorities end zh t th-r- was urs-at need
for those experiments -nd th n it sc ..ex tone that it-.3Cher
t th.t tioo ilrondy lnt to :,utiify os : looturor,
hoer.uso the f-ct th t ho a-ntion-d tho t..3tmj station
for .ltitude research .c tho r^oncy which wrs to c rry
out tho uxpvriments le-.ds us to boliovo that at th .t tioo •
hw w .3 loo kin 3 for a ccntr.et with tho University which
would h:.v. boon possible through no, and tho ? ysiolocic .1
I .stitutu with Testing ec tion •••

i Or. •< lsz, Z . 11 *.ow hand to you an oss -,y by Kotton-

hoff and by Fr;.u rtu-hl-3tnisl..us. This essay i3 on ex-
pcrlnonts on nonkoys. Your He., r, this essay i3 in
D cuiunt B wk 2 of ltz, pegu 69 end 70. Dr. *'_ltz,

••dll you plo. 3 w cxpl .in this p .p-r?

.. T is is ; corrwction 3haet of . paper which K.ttcn-
hoff Inter publish-d in the journal for -»vi:.tien *iwdic£ne.
Is is N . 33 in the li3t of public .tians which hex been
submitted by ay r.sslst nts.

DR. <IL—I: i: ;• it ple_Sw the C urt, D.cun-nt 17, I
sh 11 3uonit this papar which will become .‘.-ltz Exhibit
5 .

~ Dr. ltz, wh .t did Xottonhoff tell you when for


7054


” y S-i!-3K-9-2-Uloy (lilt. 7or- 3cho..n £c Kurtz)
Court Ho. 1


the first tiao he t iked to you ..bout it.saber's pl.jis?

— Perhaps I a.y first cocnont briefly on this paper.

It is hooded 'Increase of the degree of resistance to high
ltitud-s through acclinit ization in the c.-.sc of rth-sus-
nonkoys." .-nd in tho suoa.ry Kottonhoff describes how ho
twsta the :A .pi -tion to .ltitudc with nonk^y 3 , and how he
succeeded, by c. .king the ascent extremely slow, in robb¬
ing higher .ltitudo, nd keeping tho nonkey _livo longer
thin ml s possible through the quiok 03 ccnt. Ihoso iro.
tho sane oh uiges ’.fcich Kottcnhoff end I h-d ;.lro ,dy
previously determined in rabbits. Thora arc a group of
reactions which in aviation o:.ll oC. acciin..tization

t

to high ‘ltitudc.

^ Wow, will you pi-..so answer tho question which I put
to you before ..nd which you haven't .nsv.er-d yet. «lu:t
did Kottcnhoff toll you when he tc.lk.xl to you about
ar.soh.r'3 plans for the first tine?

.. Kottenhoff s id to no that xtnsohcr w..s acquainted
with H Junior -- that Hasohur had obtained puiuission frori
Hionler to p-rfora ox.orix.-nts on huuan being.'.. He said
that the subjeots ware to b- profossion .1 criminals, th.t
theso pooplo w-ro to voluntoor ..nd then were to receive
. reduction of tholr punishment and at th.t tin* Haschor
h-d suggested to Kottonhoff that this effect of allia-.ti-
zitioa to altitude which I just read about fren Kottcnhoff*s
paper, this effoct should be tested. I s .id to Kottcnhoff
that these r.c digitization tests were no doubt quite •
interesting physiologic illy but th..t for prnctio .1 r.via-
tion medicine they wer- without any significinoc becauso
this -ffoct of adjustr-nt occurred only when one delayed
th- -scent for hours; bat since tho tines for descent
during * jr-tine do not bococc longer, but re radically


7055


y y 5-i:-2Z-9-c-~: ioy (Ime. -'on ^choea L Hertz)
Court l*o. 1


short-ned, rad iharofoxc th- effect h .1 ao pr.-.ctic
significance wh tsoev.r. Kottonhoff hid misgivings ^ last
R. sober's suggestions for other rouapea. ^ st .tuS the

point in dot-.12 in hi- nffid^it.

«. frr -.s 2 know rs to Heschcr’s plans there s a
_ nv_rs tion b-tw-ca Kottonhoff and Hippk-; you were
pr iB..u during this oonv^rs. tion, and wh t do you know
.bout it?

.. This discussion ao doubt oco .sioned by what
Hcaoher h-.d said, but it not ro..lly r. conf-ronoo for
the execution of those experiments. On the occasion of a
visit to ..ir Or.u VII Klppfco hod invited us in tho evenins;
thus- ere r.bout 13 non frer. the ..ir D‘.u. I was sitting
*.t Hippkc's l^ft. Kottonhoff first was sitting at tho
louor end of the t bio. Then Kottonhoff onmu up, a .t
down botwo-n Hippkc and myself and asked Hippko and
l;.t-r told Hippko wh-t he had h.trd fra. H.schor, nd he
.sked Hippko tihtt his b-sic attitude tovrrds those oxpori-
nonts w s. Hipko and Hottenhoff d-batod tho-problem
b-.ck and forth for .hilo. Kottonhoff said to hippkc
th-.t uo'or these conditions one could perform experiments
b-c-.uso in th- last nnlysis thus- oxp-rin.nts wore Tor
the benefit even of ori..ln..l3, ixC since tho formulation
which had boon brought out s^m-d to :.o rather unfortunate
I iatorv-n-d toward tho end of th-- conv-ra .ticn .nd tri-i
to expl in to Hip ko :.y own opinion on this point. I h..d
r~th-r cl- _rly formal t-d opinion, b-c:uso not too long
b-forc I h.d road Do Kruif's bo.>k 'Hunger Fighters.' 1 My
friend Storm via Uouuon h d given it to no ad Storm v n
Loeuvjcn had told me about D- Kruif. H- wis v. ..m-ric n of
Dutch descent. H- know Storm vm Ueireon, and had visited
hi. intending to .n-it- something r.bout Store*s work.


7056


try 6-ir-flK-9— i-il -ioy ( lot . Vo:: 3choon ie /oirtz)

Court Ko. 1

XU. .ILL-: II ;y it pi- .so th- Court, ;:t this point a..y
I -sic tho Court whoth-r s exhibit I would be allowed
tc subait extr *.cts frac. the just c&ntionod book by Dc
Kruif. I TlO .11 in this connection th .t r. little tine
.130 tho Court ruled that the defense would be allowed
to oubcit nil a'tori 1 connected with the hunrjx mtcri-.l
cr.ly t tho end of the presentation of evidence. How,
this doour—nt I do not wish to sutr.it in oone-ction with
th« legal 3>cts of hAi n oxp-rU:cnts, but only to prove
th t in this ccnv -rs tion botr.—.j — ltz aid liippko which
dor.lt with the conditions of -x,:rir~nt3, ..-ltz ..ct-d in
3ood faith, mil therefor- I think this dooun-nt hr.s a
different signific no- in this connection th n just to
explain the oxperic-nts to the court. U..y I submit it
here?

Sl.JJY: Ih.y I inquire Your Honor novo spocifio .lly
.h t doounent he is reforring to?

D.t. .ItLJ: Your Honor, this is an extract free the beck
by D- Hruif .nd it is only that p .rt of the -xtr .ct whioh
do .13 with the oxp-ri.-.-nts by ^oldb-rgor.

TKJ RL3E»HTs Doctor, which dccunent is that?

D.i. .ILIil: It is in Doo unent hock ;-ltz lo, r.nd I would
offer it if the court per nits no, .s Exhibit ’.io. 6. U y I
c-ntion her., Your Honor, thr.t the book is in ny possession.

lie. rl-QY: . Your Honor, I still a .ko . sincor- ttonpt

to find out what docun-nt th-y _r- referring to?

- 1 •

THJ PlLSIDLl.T: ./h t is the nunb-r of tho decun-nt.to


whioh you refer?


II y 6-41-BK—10—1-11 c oh.‘-n (Int. Von Scho-n i; Kurtz)
C-ourt Ho. 1


D--.. .ILL-: I.i Docua-nt jo.I< <-ltz, 3 I toll Your Honor,
it is Docua-nt iio. 13 . L'ry it ylor.s- th- Court, it is on
y i-js 59 to 63 of th- i*:ijlish Docut-.nt book. »L.y I off-r
this Dccua-nr?

-i. H—tDY: Your Honor, u:.y I -.sic Mh'.t the, <T.cf-ns-
couns-l is ettocpting to provj by usin;,- this Doounont. I .
fits cl- Tly into th- criterion of the other Docunont3
whor-in tho D-f-nso is a .kinj _n nttoept to show th .t
exporin-nts ^ ,r- o-in_; oonduot-d in oth-r countri-s _nd
I think this should bo dol.yod until th- d:.te, wh-n tho
Tribun Ion rule on this Docua-nt r.t th- sr.no tin, ..s it
•jill rul 1 oth-r oridonoo of this nhturo. I don't

so.j th- conn ;otl n of .-ltz «ith this n t«.ri .1,

TH- P.u-LID-i-T: /ill th- oouna -1 for tho defend .r.t pic. .Bu¬
st t. « in Jh. t hi8 purpose is in offering this Doeux.-nt,
ih .t prob. tiv- v ,lu- h- thinks it h_s?

i>... .ILI-: L,.y it plw_8u th- Court, ..a I siil fc-foru,

•

thi3 Doouo-nt, r.th-r tho ^-f-nd .nt .ultz roforrod hiuaclf
to this Document, b-o .use ho told tho court .t th..t tLuo
h- -x~l: inoc* his kno'Jla*.5- of tho .dr.iss .bility of hun n
experiments to Hippko -id ho b sod hi;csolf on this book
of Do Kruif. Th-r-for-, for -ltz in this c so tho
qu- 3 tior. i 3 not to expl .in tho lir:it .tiens of hua..n ax-
-rin-nts to tho oourt, but only to nr.ko it orcdiblo to
tho court th t ;t th .t mcn-nt oltz ••/..£ inforn-d by zn
ir.t-rn tion lly well known book th t such vxp_rL'i-nts wore
'nissibl-. I do not wish to ont.r r. dob .to on tho lictttc.-
tions c.. hiu:.-m cxp-ria-nt3.

Id-. H._DY: Your Honor, th t b-inj tho enso, I would
t.'.ink st tervmt of cour.s,l is .11 thr.t is nooossnry h-ro
r.l th- Docun .nt could bo off-r-d _t 1 :t-r d..to with th-


■ th r3.


70*S


i!'7 6-lI-5K-lC-2-L'„„h \n {Int. Yon Schoun k Kurtz)

Court He. 1

JUDCi- SEB.v£«G: Dr. -ilie, you _r- rofo-rrin^ to Docuriont

Ho. 13 in ..ultz Docuc-nt Book 1 i.t page 59? witness,

•when did you first beCun- fxiili.ir eith-r with this exoerpt

in your Docuc-nt book or the book itself, entitled
"Hunger Fighters?"

. THE .iITHKSS: The book "Hunger Fight js" belonged to
Stom v si Lo^uwon nd he sav- it to no.

JUDG S-BRING: when?

THU .ITHEGS: In 1933 ‘he died and no nust have given it
to no before 1933.

JUDGE *.KBRINC: ..nd wh .t conclusion did you dr .w frea

the book at the tin- ;*Jjd p .rticul. rly froca this oxocrpt?

THU WITNESS: The experiences of Goldberger doscribod in

this book I considered the school aortel for whr.t is per-

niss.-.ble in accord nee viith intern .tion .1 st ndr.rds, nd
I told this to Hippka in this fom.

JUDGE GE3HEIG: You believed in go >d f ith that this

represented the intern .tionr.l nedic .1 st nd .rd in reg rd

to th- r.afct-r of experimentation upon hun si beincs; is

th t correct?

THE ..ITNESS: Yes.

JUDGE oUBiillli: Dr. -ille, w..s th .t the purpose for
-which you vie-re w nting to offer thi3 exhibit at the

present tine? '

Dii. .ILLE: Yes, it w .8.

JUDG- SEBuING: Th-n th-re is no particul r necessity
for your pursuing the natter furth_r at this tine?

DR. .ILIE: No, 3ir.

THE BRfiilDENT: Thu Docuiient then will be .dnitted for
the purpose mentioned by counsel nd United to that pur¬
pose; th .t will be Exhibit 6, counsel, viill it not?

DR. .ILLS; May it pie s. the Court, I offer it s

Exhibit No. 6.

7059


'•~-7 S-K-BiC-lO-S-iliohrji (Int. 7on Scho-.n cc Kurtz.)
wourt Kc. 1

THi SRSSZD2!?: Tho Tribunal assumes that counsel does
not intend to read this Docuc-nt into the record.

Dr.. .ILLS: No, Your Honor, I do not Intend to rued

the Document into tho record, but only to offer it to

th~ Court and to put a few brief questions to the defond-

_nt, Prafossor «oltz, following this discussion of tho
Document. I want to ask you this regarding tho point

Hippko ; whr.t caused you to quote a po ; jul r book or refer

to c pcpul-.r book betwoon scientists and oxp~rts; don't

you think in th t conversation, it would have been noro

3cnsiblo for you, to rofer to a really export scientific

work in thi3 connection?

7iI2 .ITIESS: I have already said that the fornulation,
which Hippko rnd Kottunhoff h-d seemed to no rather un¬
clear and that I folt a n-ed to olnrify my point of
view and formulate it clearly. This example happened to
ocour to no end this was good beoauso it shews very
clearly thw points which I was interested in and then I
oxpl -lnod those points to Hippke. I 3 .id to hixi, first
of all the oxporir. .nts 0 one era urgent natters whioh o..n
not be ol .rified by aninil exporinents; secondly, tho
oriainr.ls r.ust be volunteers and third, they must roooivo
c reward. Those w.ro tho conditions, whioh I dealt with
in o one id or r hi dot il. In this book, there is nuoh
noro dotr.il than i3 c us ten ary in scientific works. In
scientific works in goner:.l one find3 only bri-f technic-
1 st twr. *nts performed by so n ny persons, 3uch nd such
w-ro the conditions, while h-re in Do Kruif s book t»5
nun. n conditions -.re d^scribdd in considerable dotail
and vory clo xly. That the st tonents node in tho bock
are correct, I had no doubt. I said before that Stern
v n Loouwon and D- Kruif know oach eth~r porsonclly. I
knew that De Kruif was one af the most p ipul x and


7060


jr-y 5-i-:-SS-10-i-* l -oh -n (Int. Von Sch >sn & :-airtz)

Court 2* . 1

rospootod audio i "Ait bora in tho field of pjpul .r sci-nc_.

•

This w .3 f-r g_ su x -at__ enough t 5 b- .ble t..- a-ntion
eh- bo ic to Hippie-. iicroovuT tho s^n-r .1 popul.xity .jk'.
the wide oiroul-'.tija of 3uch -i bo K is tho boat at..r.C..rd
f_-r wh t is CTHsidorod p-ruisstblo :.nC wh X is not. iJo
Kruif's bo ics wore printed by th- nillion c-nC w«rc
tr .nsl .ted into a ny l'.ngu Hvon if tho st .tenants

atdo in tho b.ufc vox- incorrect, whioh th-ro is no
r-.. 3 on to b-Uovj, .t i»-3t tho book would bo pro>f of
whr.t intxn tion .lly tho s-n-r.l public considers
porr.iss.tblo. Th .t, a I s 1C, xo the r.r.sons which
.t tho tin^ undo cm t pr-3-nt this cl .ssio -x nplo to
Hippicc rad I b-li-vo -v.n t/.r.y it wr.s *; vory auitr.blo
ox'r.plo.


7061


Court So, 1

5 K ay 47-tt-ll-l-LHK-Sook (Sasnler)

• •

IS. ' ILL*: If Your Honors clease, in I.cuacnt rook * eltx Sc. 2
under Be. 1S-A to C, on pages 72 to 76 of the English dccusent book,
ther* are throe docusents which have tho purpose of supcortirig the
credibility and significance of De Xruif'e bocks which the execution's
radical expert has challenged. I intend to subait these docuacnts for-
aally at this point without reading thee and taking uo the Court's tine
with then, but since the first dccuaent has been siaittod in this con¬
nection I beliOTO it is logically necessary also to eutoit those threo
annoxuo at this noint.

IS. FAEDT: lay It nUnee Ycur Honors, during the course of this
trial I believe I fcavo objected to dccueento being adaitted into evi¬
dence nearly a hundrod tines or better but for the first tiae I aa lost
for werds. I have reac these dccuaents and to uso tho word icmatorlal
sight bo fine but they ere not even ronctoly connected with »-hot is in
issue here and I can't soe why they should even bo tondervd. I objoct
to their aiaission, Your Honors.

'IKE PriSirEK?: The Tribunal will take this natter under considera¬
tion and anncunco its ruling at one thirty o'clock.

IS. VILLE: lay I continue now?

HY 2a. '•ILLi:

Q, Bjw <r.c% a-ro I wont t, go bock to the conversation with
Kippkc during that evening in the Prcyaing Palais. Please answer this
auction. You said that Hipoke gave his agreement to the excoriaonta
under the c-nditi-ns as y,u described: volunteers, pardons to a sensible
degree, and adjusting the sentences of the eyoericcntal ocrsono7

A. Yes, only Fip-.ke wanted us, and Eottinhof and I agreed, to

¥

limit it to exceptional cases where aniaal cxnerlaente would not serve
the outdoso, that is, this was not to bec:ce a standard. It was to be
United to urgent, exceotional cased and under those conditions Eipoke
had no basic objection to experioents beirg carried out, and I have al¬
ready said that this was not a concrete cess of a crogrea which was
being discussed. Flppke ves aerely discussing basic Questions. Kotten-


Court So. 1

6 Kay 47-h-ll-2-Sa-Cook (Easier)


hoff did cot even ask hin to be allowed to exuand any oregran. Kotten-
hoff and I had already agreed that vhat Eaacfcer had suggested to us so
far va. unlaportant and it vas oulte out of the Question.

Q, Was it a conversation vhich obligated you? V a s a progran
decided an concerning your future handling in the institute of these
things?

A. Bo, that was not the case. Eascher vas not in ay institute
yet at that tlco. As I have said. It vas a conversation vithout any
definite practical intent. It vas a theoretical conversation os to
whether and to vhat extent experisents can be oerforced on crlninalo,

etc.

Q, Cid you tulle to Klpplet about excerisontc on non-voluntoero?

A. So, ve did not discuss that. In the last analysis the aubjoct
had been brought up by Eatcher and Baschor hlasolf sooko only of volun¬
teer oubjeets.

I*. WILE: Kay it please the Court. I nov sutelt Docucent ’ oils
So. 3 and I offer It as Exhibit Veils So. 6. I a= so sorry, So. 7.

This ie a record of a statccent =ado by Professor Flprko in the case
against nilch. rrofos.or Eiptke gave hla version of the conversation
which he held in the evening in ouostlon.

KH. EABTY: nay it please Tour Honors, the Tribunal has ruled hero
that,whenever extract, free another trial are offered to the Tribunal
to tu-ce Judicial notice thereof, it was necessary and a regulation that
said extracts bo certified by the Secretary General either of the IHT
or the Secretary General of the tribunal hero. I von't object to this
being offered in evidence but I wggeet that it bo offered crovision-
ally and in order to follow the ruling of the Tribunal that the*»old
certificate frea the Secretary General be obtained in each case of
this nature.

TEE PEESIEE1T: Counsel is correct, bhon there is offered before
this Tribunal vhat purports to b. a transcript of the testiaony before
another tribunal, that should be offered in the fora of a certificate


706J


Court So. 1

6 Kay 47-Ji-ll-3-X&i-CocJc (Kessler)

by the Secretary General that it is an official record of the trenscrict
of the testiaony aai when It is bo offered the Court will take Judicial
notice of the testieony. It say be wintered ae an exhibit or not, that
vill bo iseaterial, but the CcOrt will take Judicial notice of it and
this vill be adaitted provisionally subject to the signing of a proper
certificate that it ie a rocord of the testiscny by the Secretary General.

£R. VXXL&: If Tour Honors please, say I explain this. Four or
five days ago * took this extract to the Secretary General which I now
offer, in order to act according to the Court's ruling. Unfortunately
I did not receive the docusent beck end therefore I as unfortunatoly not
in a position to follov the Court's ruling issediately but I vill tako

\ I I •

the liberty to hand in the docusent later on.

ThX fRLSirhT.T: That ‘-ill cccply with the ruling of the Tribunal.

BY EH. ' ILL£:

Q, kitnoss, once again I case beck to the subject which ve
originally discuseod before vo discussod the handling of docusent.

This conversation with Kippko was caused by anchor's intontlon to make
the axporiaents in Tachau. Sow, what v CB Haschor's own attitudo toward
these experisents? Pid ho hisself not always refer to voluntccro?


L K y 47 -U-12-1- ro- Aiaia^r (von Schon - Kurts)

C-urt .o. 1

A. The first tii- when I tear* Iran Kott-nbaff bout Kr.schor's
soge-stions, Kottcnhoff was spooking rolnnUcrs. Later, ftcr ft*#
talk with Hiopto I spoke to F-isch-r; Beach £ ? ik - 31

volunteers. r.t then when •#- talte-d to Ruff-R-±H.re *t cy Institute,
Reschor r-si' in s-ite. cf volunteers. .*t tte fcirnberg conference, in
the run rlc which h- —' - bout liolzlo-tak-r'a l.etur-, Yu. .&ia a!ik -
nf vjluntvors. fiu b> spike of volunteers ^ the way h fr.cth..
IJurnborg oonforone. to St--.bs.-rzt Kraur^r ir^a St. Jftenn, ’« 1 *-•
fry. r.r. ffi-rvit u-. In th. Utter X -schtr's uncU, Men tes
bven subaitU’., it v-s stcUti th-t Rancher rr<: etid tte subjects »^re
volunteers. I rtfk.r .V rd Rr.eclxr say nythint -1»- but th-t th« subjects
would be volunteers -ni, a I tev* said, th-t v.->s the n.»ajn for us not
to discuss Involuntary .r.p-rim-nt-1 oubj.cts witn Blppkft.

DR. ‘.ILLd: IX .cr H -n r pU/»#, .a j I interpolate hole briefly
for y;ur inf r.a ti r. th't tte affidavit mentioned bore Just now by
Kraootr was sabnlttod by Dr. --It- on teTnalf of the Defordant !>.nd-
losur r.d it is in document book. E xhibit to* IS.

Q, -.itn--ss, 1 ill you now toll . d aft-r th n-

versation with Ri >>ke?

A. ».ftor fta conversation with Hippies nothing ha opened. It was
not uxpoctvd t.V t acyl im null happen. - had no astdgiwunt froa
ifippko to do anything. On the otter tend 'dppto h d fiven i.ia tecio
ropronl. I, in turn, ted no oce. six. to do rythin*-. 3 tevu \lro Oy
said t t! r* stlon of tostin U slow osc^nt w •

Q. ill you till mo in :»re <kt-il vtet were Rnechcr's oL-ns at

tte tiae?

A. Rrschcr's 1-ns were to test how ouch hirber on« pan k6 a
haa-r. tein& if on*. taUs hla ip slowly, cowafed to ft- - ltitudu wlach
bo could staM ifuia tekon pp quickly. H I ttlw a tear* being up
quickly, tten t c-xb-ir. Ititudu te suffers frea .ltitudo sieVnoss
-nd th. sp-of ’it;, which this sickest occurs du.outes on th. spood of
the scent. if I ^-otrr ct th- asc-nfc f«r s-nrpl hears, which

would h vc otberwiso teen -cccaplisfu.d in fo. minutes, if I drew it


6 47 -i*-L&- 2 -okp- Arain^-r (vor. Schcr - Kurtz)

Court Ko. I

out over four or five hours, th»n th- body has .n opportunity to r.djust
to thi nu* aituition. 7b-n- are reactions, idaptations, and these
adaptations of tht oody seen that in this slow asc_nt a higher eilir.5
is reached tten in t n. fast ascent. I boli-v- thr:t Rsschcr wanted to
tjst this mther uniaportant effect in ord.r to substantiate notion
ho ted. I would cssujks th t* he wa & counting on Kottonhoff's and uy
vanity -.s re Boer Ch iwrkers when he suggested tbtt we perforra _x.ourirt.onts
or. huarn brings concerning -n -ff-ct, which w- ourselves hrd discovered,
beer. usd, to J said, thars uas no practic-1 r.-cessiiy for testing this

rtttU-rr ‘ • -

• ^

Q. Could you axolr.in how teach-r did cat*, to your Institute?

A. I qnnaot explain that. I Jenw nothing tout it. I JouM only
that prooav-bly in .Nov-aber, 1941, I r-ci-v^d .* written 'nnounc-aur.t
irom the Air Gnu th c r.'.sober u : tr nsferrd to our Institute. I
did not request hi.. 1 did know throe ;h Xottenhoff th t teacher
ntttd to ocefc to ay Institute. I did not do r.ything to get hid there.
Bardt brought *» tils lvttur frout . J :

was surprised. I could only* -,ujss that iviach-r h d p/vr.-r.tly con¬
vinced oax r.uthoilty at tne „ir C*.u t vt 1~ should be tr no/erred to
ay Institute. t sat, I Jo not knew.

Q. Km. & tiers orOfTvM witr. I setter in your Institute?

A. fcachwr c a*. to x, 1 r-fusod to llo. hin to t-st this
olow ascent :t how ho wanted to p-r/ ra cold eXpcrinorAs. In thu
susvxr of 1941 I had b_en in France nd I visited h- S.: Dirtr-ss
St ations. I hrd b-cn interested in th. old probl-.a rri I 'r-soo¬
th <t teach* deduced Iren this trip th t -.re WuT« interested ir. -id.
Just 3 P.ascfcer l<v® tooS: up 11 leers th t can- within '.is T-'sp,
h. took up th- >roblca of cold rt suggested to ■%. thrt he sh^ld
o-rfora cold r xrivnts yn hua r. beings.

1. Did you ;*>rov- of th t int-ntion to perforc. cold jxpurLacnts?

A. I r-fused these axpuri-xnts too. 1 r< no necessity r huonn
Jcperixnta. the n-coss-ry pr-par-.t \-v ni>vl xperin-nts h not b-on


fc Ifcjr 47 -t-I3-3-?k>* xr=ic^.r (vcn 3chon)(Kart-)

Court No. 1

concluded yet, nd the*. entail experiments premised gre-t success
t tb. ti_^, so that h?c no reason whafcuvar to perform any experiments
or. human beings, nd I r-fused to lot R-scher perform these oxcxrim-nts.

Q. Did you toll Booeber that Kippke could not be gotten for ox-
peri.-a.nt a in Dccheu?

A. I told Reaeter tb- point of vi->w which Kippke had ocplrixxd to
a., tn'.t is, that : : ippko, Just like ajoolf, was of tb. opinion that
under certain coalitions, which we considered correct, one c-n Perform
experinv-nts cn huana beings, but that this aust be xeserved for
n.clly urgent eases, where bo done in a ny oth-r wBy .

This was Hippko's point of vie* nd I informed P.-sch-r of this ooint
of view of Hippkc's

Q. How did you trert the whole P.asch^r rot tor t«arda your
collu gues in t ho Institute?

A. Dr. Lutz ir.a already testified lv.ro and Ir.s said tht I
discussed the questions cn burn beings with him too; thrt wc sookc of
it in tb. theoretic1 Sense. Lutz did rot h v» ony rw ideas on it.

I told hia aout the diccussion -i the Preysing Palais. I told him
whrt concision ro i-d r-ached -nd Lutz had r.o r.-w contributions.

Q. Non the question "nich h.s b-en oia. into by various people
befere: did you sic or. of your colle-guos to make experiments with

Rr.scher in Dccfru?

A. No, I did rot. Th-re was no occasion to do this. I did
rvot wont to perform ny experiments in Dnchru t that time. 1 did rot
esk ki-ndt or Lutz, or «erz or ny other uho r.a in ay Institute
to perform -ny exnerimv.nts.

Q. But later on, you -llx«ed R-tcheT to rJc- eX>rL^-nts with
Ruff-Romberg. My in tht cas., -lid you not c-rry out those experiments

in your Institute wit.' Rraebe-r?

A. In t h. exp-riments with P.uff-Rccbcrg, we wore de/liru; with
completely different experiments. Tits- wore urgent -t the tirU. end
Ruff-Re-oberg 1. ve lre-dy -xpl iiwc here why, a l E •- pnrov 1
f or ti.utAj expori.-m.cto, out those uxperLaonts wer- of o sosnletoxy

7067


6 fcgr LI -lt-12-4—ySj>* (vx Schw - Kurtz)

Court So. 1

diflursnt degr- :>* iaportanes iron tb* sog^sticna which &‘»chor had •
fff.do,

r m Did yJi aot cnco s-riously ask your ooUflzgue Lutz to n:k&

experizvnta with Beschor in Dachau?

A. I told Lutz tfc t-Rzscher 1 a rfiggoations would ..at divert us _
Iroa tho act xr%roa of th- Institute, which * s laid datn in writing.
Hatcher was a sea about whom we knew nothing in p-r ticuL-r and I die
rot have the slightest reasen to change ay InsitituU'a progr.vn which^
nM been dtscuea~d 1 -ngth and which was pL-r.nod lor the long range,
just because a young unknown d >ctor case to us with certain suggestions.
I told Lutz that. I said, "I will not perform any experiwints in
Dachau. Do you ;«ant to?" 71.-1 "Do yM want to?" was ft purely
rhetoric-1 question -m Lutz doubtlessly u^orstood this rhetorical
quostiui in tho way it was o-ant. Lutz hr.s testified here, that ho
did not kr.J* Uv.t rny pr'yr-ja uxiated. Lutz toetifi~d ihloely thr.t 3
«ado a suggestion to Lendt. At tds discuss!, which c-n be the only
one in question, ..uicit woe not «v«n pr~scnt and ^ndt will testify
here ..lmself th-t I did not a ke ;ny suggestion to lion, nor did I
cake any eugfipaticn to Lutz VCO* Lutz '.lco caaortod that

ho a rumored ao th t he uca not robust enough for ouch ~xp~ri.-vr.t3.

I do not believe that er. Lutz could h v~ vdo ~n7 ™ch -n vu»ov,
boc-.uae hi would. r. v~ or.c~ idnseif rather ridiculous. Of courao, I
kn» tho opinions -no habits nd the life of ny osiot-.nt, with whoa
I work-d 1 or fo-nr years, *nd 1 den't or.nt to go into Ui~so Uunt,o in
too much dutr.il ..ere; but I cen say that :!r. Lutz c.r*->irly h-.d no
reason at UV.t tine nnd no opportunity to s-.y to x, that bo wot, not
robust enough Tea- than- -xvri vr.ts. Otherwis-, 1 would have iv.-nindod
hia thit th-t answer would hrv« » tie -dx -operr rat ~r ri- ic<n MS. T
did not tell Lutz th-t he was too religious for th.se .xporL^nts
-ither, :ec-.us~ ' t wr.s not ~y opinion. T:.is coravrsfi-n h-.s :n
nreaented quite incorrectly by Luts. I resort, I tolf Lutz, -n I
r~ c 1L, th-t I would not Lt Rancher cringe .ur pL-.ns. I tol? Ida,

"I tti.ll rot v.-iMuo n7 otpericznts in D-ch-.u; ;-uld you like to?"


O CT*


K'-y 17 -Jfr-ia-5-picp- Araiagw (von Schvi - Kurtz)

-urt So. 1

I do not doubt tJrt Lutz unf-rstood this rbatcrlcal question
rightly *t thr. t tine.

THE j^tESIDET!!: Counsel, trx. Tribun-1 will now b& inreCwsa until
1:30 O'clock.

(A roooa# wra liken until 1330 hours.)


7069


mi

6 S-.y-A-'3-I3-l-?ost=r (Ints-Von Schon & Ranler)
Co-art Ko. I.


AFTERNOON SESSION

(Tho hearing roconvoiKd at 1330 hours, 6 Uay 191:7.)

THE PARSK. J.: The Tribunal is again in session.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho objection interposed to tho admission into
ovidonco of Defendant's Docxeunt Ho. 19a, and the following documents,
is sustained. The docuncnt will not be received in evidence.

Counsel nay proceed.

DR. GEORG HELTZ - Resuaed
DIRECT EXiJOHATICK (Continued)

BY DR. WHIZ (Counsel for tho Defendant Volts)i

Q Defendant Holts, you have not yet conpletely answered ny
question 59 which I nskod you, the vory inportsnt question about Luts
and tho offor which you aro supposed to have nado to hin. I man,
that yon have not yet touched upon tho following point: Lutz alleged¬
ly roforred to tho gentleness of his mturo, and also allegedly said
that ho would not be ablo to look a. dog in tho oyo without becoming
soft-ho-rted. Do you n. :ajber any such statenants?

A No, thorc isn't ..iuch I can soy about that. I hoard for tho
first tlso in this courtrooa about cert'in scruples which Lutz had
about his expjrirxnt'l nnlnals. Lutz always conploinod toward no that
Ik had too little oxporia.nt.al aniaals. Ho used n fair hundred of thin,
but ho nov-r told m that h; had .any scruples in using than. I don't
know t/hy he is talking .about that particular subject here.

CJ Have you ..ado enough rv.arks “bout his religious attitude?
I don't rj.i-.bor that exactly at tho nooont.

A I don't want to go into that at great length. At that
tine^t-nas. not ay opinion that Lutz was in any way particularly ro-
;i^iOus. Naturtl^y, wc had soro Imagination as to what his religious
attitude was, but l\ never saw Lutz go into church. I never saw a re¬


ligious book on_
opinion that Lut


isk and I don't know how I could arrive at tho
particularly religious and would giv.. such a reply.


q Kswywhon did ?.asc'_r Tor th. first tine ap,-roach you with

7070


6 *>7-.v- 3—13-2-Foster (Ir.ts-7on Schon A P.onler)

Court No* Z.

his plan, Kith his sug c ostion to p^rforc experiments under you?

A I loarnod “.bout that for the first tiue through Kottonhoff
who told co about those suggestions. Thin I was once together with
Raseher and Kottonhoff. At that tiuo h- already spoke* about his
qualifying as a lecturer. I rejected that because he was on entirely
unknown nowcorar to this work. It is custor.ory in Gcruany that before
tho thesis to qualify as a lecturer ore* would have to cccpletc a nua-
bor of other works. Rase her hod conpleted soao papers about tho
cryst-llic'tion of salts, and tto study as to whathor one could ex¬
ploit salts for cancor diagnosis or endocrine diagnosis. Those papors,
honover, were not of such a nature that would have warranted his being
suggested for qualifying as a lecturer. In addition, it would hnvo been
a natter of course for » to give preforonco to ry own people, who had
be n workirv, on that subject for a longer period of tir». Later, wium
Rasctor was detailed to uy institute, which nas approximately in Novc:.*.-
bor 19ltl, ho -.ado thi suggostion to carry out cold oxtorlck-nts, as I
already said. I also rejected that proposal.

Q Tlwn in gon.r'1, I understand you to siy that up to about
D-Ce.ilxr 19U1 ttoro w-.s no ,x-ctical work of Raschor's at your instit¬
ute "t all?

A No.

Q \ as that result of your antagonisn, your rejection of liis
suggostion si

A Cjrtaialy. Had I approved, thj oxperinents in Dachau would
have begun 1. odiutcly.

Q Now, tl» pros.cuter assu os that in this tiro you attorapted
to a Vo rc ore Hippke's alleged rosistar.co to experiments in Dachau/ Did
you do -nything in this direction?

A I olro-dy described in detail what Hippie, *s attitude w-.s
on the occasion of this rrutual conference in the suxiur of l?Ul at the
FTjysong Palace. At that tiv our attitude was quite clear. \y
opinion t-llied with Hippko's. Tharo vr-s no reason to remove Hippko


7071


6 ?fay-A-:B-13-3-Footer (lnta-7or. Schon L Hater).

Court So. I.

in eny way, but, on the contrary, I agreed with hia fully. I didn't dis¬
ease this point with Hippko later, and I certainly didn't try to chongo
his CTinion in any way. There was no occasion for that.


7C/72


6 !Jay-A-*0-Iii-l-3lakley (Ints-Racler & Von Schon)

Court No. I, Case No; 1»

Q Then free y ou r answer I can note that the assumption of
the prosecutor is incorrect that you attempted during this tine to uro-
aote Rascher's plane in the Inspectorate? Cta the contrary, you actually
prevented than?

A Tea. Dp to that point I prevented Rase tier's starting the
experiments. I didn't suggest anything at all to HippRe and consequent¬
ly nothing ras done.

IP. HARDY: Kay it pleaso your Honor, I have no objection
to raise at this tine; but for the Tribunal—and I'o sure for myself—
it irould be much oaeier to follow this exaaination if both defense
counsel and the defendant would refer to tin specific dates noro often
than they are at the present tine doing. I think we could follow tho
chronological order and the sequence of ovents core thoroughly if thoy
used the dates a little bit more often.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsol's sug^ostion is woll taken; and it
would be helpful if countel and the witness would refer to tho dates
or approxlnato dates on which certain events occurred.

DR. NILIE: Hr. President, I would like to say tho following
to this sug^oetion of tho prosecutor. I shall, in aceordanco with tho
suggestion of tho Tribunal, endeavor to givo tho dates as accurately
as possible; but I nay point out that on tho wholo those arc events
ittiich did not happen on definite dates, definite days, for example, I
say that .nscher until tho end of Docortocr l*?Ul was without any
practical work.

TE rRESIDS/T: Co insol, it is ny intention to convoy the
idea to you to use probably only approximate datos Just in order to
preserve sooo orderly sequonce so that it can be noro easily foll^red,
both as we hear the evidence and when the record is road.

DR. 7.IL1E: Thank you.

BY DR. TRUE:

Q How, Dr. ITeltz, please answer tho questions about col¬
laboration with Dr. Ruff. Ha; did you get into contact with Dr. Ruff

7073


6 Msy-A- 3— Ui-2-Blaklsy (Ints-Ranler It Von Scbon)

Court No. I, Case No. 1.

In Dcconfcer 19ul?

A '.'ay I catch up with a few dates beforehand in order to
clarify what perhaps has been unclear up to new? I know that Xottenhoff
spoko to ae for the first tine before the conference with Hippko.
Hippke's conference with Kcttenhoff and ne took place in tho sunt.or of
1911 I reaoaber that this was a long day and that it regained light
very long. Afterwards I was in France, active in sea rescue work. I
tr-veiled around France and expired the aviators who had crashed into
the water and vrho had been rescued fren the seas. I visited the hospit¬
als in Cherbourg and Boulogne and tho sea rescue stations, and subseq¬
uently had a conference in Paris with tho fleet physician, in which
Holiloahnor and tho chief physician of the Soa Rescue Service were
present.

On this occasion wo drafted a circular about rescuo froa tho
high sons. I cannot state oxaotly whether tho first talk with Rcachor
took placo before or aftor this Journoy. At any rate, the first talk
with Raschoi* and tho second tall; with Kottonhoff regarding that subjoct
still took placo in the wrr.or of 1®U1. Rascher could not havo been
dotailod to ay institute before the 1st of Novoabor 19l*l because Kotton¬
hoff states that ho didn't find out anything about that. Kottonhoff
thon travolod to Ruoania; and that »cs on tho 1st of Hovunbor lphl. In
tho course of November, another talk took placo with Rascher. On this
occasion, he suggested to e» that I start tho cold work. I think that
those are tho dates which I can mention in this connection.

In December of 19U1, I accidentally wont to Berlin on nnothor
nr.ttor; I also visited Ruff on this occasion. Wo discussed tho work
rhich was being dono at tho tro institutes. All tho rest is known es¬
sentially from tho descriptions given by Ruff and Roaberg. I told Ruff
that Rascher was at ray placo. I told hia that Rascher intended to carry
out exporirwnts at Dachau. Ruff on his part told ae that ho intanded to
continue ills old series of ojq>erinuRts, tho parachute descent from high

-ltitudos, up to 12,000 ntt_rs, which was known to ae already, but that

TO74


6 :ir/-A-:3-lL-3-3lakl07 (Int»-Raalar & Von Schon)
Court So. I, Case Ho. 1.


he could proceed only very slowly because of his difficulties. Sot
only did ho have difficulties because of tho experimental subjects
being active during the day but also because of tho fact that he was
limited to a very snail raster of experimental subjects. Then, if
thoso subjects adapted themselves vary slowly to high altitudes in
that case, they could do longer bo considered normal experimental
subjects, they would have to bo eliminated.

The situation at that time for no was the following: Roschor,
without any of ay doing, had been totalled to the institute. It was
quito clour that ho was going to execute tho order which ho had re¬
ceived froc Himlcr. The conditions under which Rancher told us that
ho would oxecute the experiments woro such that ono could tako tho
nattor into consideration. Nothing originated at my place boccuso
Rascher's plans could not bo tallied with our plans. It was difforont,
however, in tho esao of Ruff. Noithor Ruff nor I changed tho plans of
our institute because of Raschor, who was relatively unknown at that
time, but tho fact was that Raschor's plans to carry out experiments at
Dachau soorod to fit into Ruff's experimental program and at tho s.amo
timo an oasy solution was offered to him ro gar ding oxporimontnl sub¬
jects, whorois in ny institute Rascher's plans did not fit into tho
gontral plan of tho institute. .

I rojoctod Raschor's quaLifying as a locturorj but at that
tiro I had no reason to bcliovo that Raschor would not bo in a position
to fulfil tto tasks assigned to him within tho framework of tho pro¬
gram which I had arranged with Ruff. Raschor, considered from tho
point of viow of an assistant, was a woll-trainod physician. Ho had
rxarly cooplotod his surgical training. At tho Schittenholn ClinicJ
• hich ~rs one of the first clinics in Germary, ho had been active in
raich whore ho mato his doctorate. Ho had publishod a few papers,
which spunks of a certain scientific ir.t-Tust. Ho hid a quick mind
and know about the basical concepts of aviation medicine. That is in
effect why ho took part in that course. Ho had worked out his own


7075


6 laklcy (Ints. Raalor l Von Schon)

Court Ho. I, Case No. 1.


procedure reading tho distance aoasuruaants which ho learned at
Schoongau. Then, considering that ono rsndo demands to Rascher to ful¬
fil tho Job of an assistant, ono could well imagine that ho was well
up to it. Of course, the aattor is entirely different if you consider
Rascher. as an independent researcher..

Rascher case to ae with the docand that ho qualify as a
lecturer and start tho career of a lecturer. For that his qualifica¬
tions were not qiite sufficient for do at that tii*. Today ray judgment
about Raschor in that regard is oron noro severe. Rascher, during tho
ontiro period, which I can ovorlook, did not have ono original idea. Ho
always cLai-od the idoas of others without any scruples and represented
then as his own ideas. Ho started to work upon these idoas but he
didn't carry out a singlo ono of those idoas with any consequoncos. Ho
always acted like a parasite and clung to eoaoonu olso who had export
knowlodgo in any particular field. That nay bo tho caso with Ruff and
Rooborg, Holsloohnor or Feix.


7076


::&y 5-A-5K-15-l-Karro*w (I *.t. Von Sohoen & Racnler)
Court Ho. 1


Rascher had no personal qualifications in the auxiliary
sciences, such as chemistry and physics, and I want to nuke
a clear differentiation hero that it is quite different for
co to judge soceone simply os an cssi3tant or to judge
soneone sicply as an independent researcher. Of course,
thoro i3 another judgaent which is the noral judgeont.
Porhaps I cay contion in this connection how ny opinion
dovolopod in that rogerd. when I ado Kaschor's aoqoint-
anco for the first timo in the succor of 1941, ho was a
captain of the aediOul corps of the Luftwaffe about whoa
1 know very little. Ho displayed the customary manners
and I had to reason to become 3uspioious in that regard.

Why should I ic.vo bocouo suspicious? Ho was tho sono
o apt air. in tho nodical oorps as any other captain I havo
soon. Uy aorcl Judgaont about R sober, howovor, ohangod,
when in F .bruury or M.joh, 1942, I was told by ny.
assistant -andt and assistant Horgschnidt that Haschor
hed got ton his father into a conoontrntion ocuap. Wy
judgment boo.'jao ovon uoro rojooting whon I had this quarrel
with rfasohor about which I xz going to spoak Inter. Of
course, ny judgment become really nogutivo whon X saw his
behavior during tho Nurnborg Ccngross. To sun up, I ..ust
state that, from a noral point of view, ny judgment about
R-sohor changed considerably according to tho kr.owlodgo
which I h .d -bout hin.

I- I . ow rovert to that arrangement with Huff - Huff
only attached value to soo to it that these experiments
were to bo - nutu^J. undertaking of both the institutes
.ad that R soher was to bo employed as on assistant,

I said before his knowlodgo for th.t was sufficient in
every way. During tho entire further course of events
nothing happened which could have- been the result of the
fact that Raschor had not been sufficiently trainee.


7077


May 6 - -BK-15 - 2 -K or r ow (I t, Yon Sahocn & R cmlor)

Court Ho. 1

„ Professor -..ltz, than, during the tine which you
c-.liod your first period, you learned no thins against
R-.sohor -.nd his personality or his soiontific ability .

Now, I should like to coma back to a point which is of
dooisivo importance for you. T at is tho following: At
that tine, did you go to «. 1 rshof for tho spocific pur-
po3o of offaring your collaboration to Dr. Huff or, in
tho vital senso, Rasoher'3 assistanco, or did this wholo
natter ariso booauso you happonod to bo there, in the
oourso of conversation?

.. Yos, Ruff had boon n collaborator. In a olosor
senso, wo had boon friends. wo had oollnboratcd in tho
field of aviation nodioino and knew oaoh other very woll.
..s I stated before, I wont to Berlin in order to visit
Ruff and, at that tine, I didn't know what Huff was doing
or v«hat his work was. I didn't know at nil that Ruff
h-.d intandod to continue tho final port of tho first
sorios of oxporinents. when I wont to Berlin, I oouldn't
know that Ruff had started a sorico of oxporincnt3 during
vjhioh he had difficulties with tho experimental subjocts.
Consequently, it only resulted accidentally during tho
convers ion at ~dlcrshof that those two institutions had
mutual interests. Naturally, .... N'lf nor I did any¬
thin:: in any way which would have deviated fra- this
originally intended program, ivory one of us could only
follow the interests of our rospootivo instituto3. It was
my inturost to sco that Raschor, who was unemployod witfi
me, would rccoivo setao reasonable occupation. I wnntod to
300 that this unfortunate order or permission by Himmler,
of whioh I knew that it would bo carried out undor nil
circumstances, would bo exploited and used for an object¬
ive which was worthy. I wanted to see to it that the


May 5-rt-BK-15 -3-K arrow
Court No. 1


(Int. Vo*. Sehoen & Raculor)


experiments ware to bo carried out under proper export
leadership. ->s I say, that was ay interest. It was
Ruff'3 interest, on the other hand, to got experimental
subjects. None of us doviatod in any way fror. the
progrnn or the intoro3ts of our institutes. It was an
accidental neotins of our autual interosts. Wo clearly
arranged how we were to so about it. This was to bo a
autual und or taking during which Ruff was to detail Ronborg
and I was to detail Rancher. Ruff naturally was to bo
tho chief of Ronborg nd I, ns a natter of course, was to
bo Rnsoher's ohiof. Ruff oouldn't give any ordors to
Rosohor. Rafloher was a captain in tho ncdioal corps
and Ruff was a oiviliun. I couldn’t give any ordors to
Roaborg boonuso Raiberg was a oivilinn while I was a
soldier. Naturally, this is how tho distribution was.

It had to bo that way. Furthermore, it was cloar that I
couldn't, in any way, rotiro. I couldn't Just lonvo
R'.sohor to Ruff. It was quito cloar that I had to
participate in thoso oxporinunts by exorcising super¬
vision but not by aotivoly participating. Tho progron
had already boon determined. Nothing was changed in tho
oro6ran. It was cloar that I was not to collaborate
porsonclly. If any publication h..d onorged fron that
work it would have boon provided with tho titlo: Fron
cho Goman Sxporinontal Institute for elation, from tho
..viation Institute at Munich, and it would probably
have'listed Roaberg and Raschor cs tho authors. Thoro was
no porsonal cooperation on ay part. There was no change
of the program carried out by do. Tho program had already
boon determined whon I cano to ^dlorshof.

* Do you stiU today, looking book on those things,

-lo you toko tho responsibility for tho ngreononts which

you reached with Ruff at that tine?

'* 7079


H , y 6-»-BK-15-4-Karrdw (Int. Von Schoen ic Roail-r)

Court No. 1

. k It 13 cy opinion that this crrangcriont to which I
czao with Ruff was unobjectionable in every way. I take
full responsibility for it.

i Novi, plor.so explain-to ae and to the Tribunal - chd
you icnediatoly on the spot in your first aooting with
Ruff roach a fin^l agroonont to tho effect that experi¬
ments wore to tako placo in Dachau?

No, Ruff has already described that. Ruff wanted to
consider that and he couldn't coco to any orrongooont with
no ianodiatoly. -t least not to any binding arrangoaont.
Ruff hlnself noodod Hippko's porr.ission. Tho basic por-
nission by Hippke or rather tho faot that Hippko had no
objoctions of any basio nature against theso oxporiuonts

I knew and this is what I told Ruff.

<4 Now, would it not havo boon a natural thing, at tho
tine, to negotiate personally with Hippko for his approval
of tho oxporiconts? You had talked to Hippko in Munich
in general about oxporinont3 on c.indocnod porsons.

« I didn't do that intentionally. I toow whit Hippko'a
opinion was. In tho case of tho new sorios of oxporinents
wo wore concerned with a plan which had boon drafted at
-dlorshof. Its nooossity oould be founded at «dlorshof
in a r.uch bettor way than at ay place. ..dlershof was in
connection with tho technical circles whereas I had no
such connection. I know that Hippko would only approve
inport ant experiments and I wanted Hippko to docidc,
without ny influencing him at all, whether this soride of
experiments was in oonplirnoo with his coalitions and
whether he considered it to bo important or not. I wanted
Hippke to note* his decision without any influence and
that is exactly what he did. Ho gave Ruff tho portion

to carry out tho oxpericents.

7G60


May 6-~-BX-15-5-Karrow (Int. Von Schoon & Hnnalcr)

Court No. 1

s. Professor, you have already told us a lictlo about
your opinion with regard to Raschcr's personality end
qualifications, his scientific oai non-sciontifio
chrraotoristios which ho had at tho tino. Now, will you
ploaso tell us wh it you told Dr. Ruff in this respect?


7081


Court So. 1

6 Kay 47-A-16-l-iSi-Kaloy (Vac Sckoen A Raouler)

A. At that tine I naturally told Ruff everything I knew. I said in
detail what I knew vken I vent to Adlershof. I knew nothing about the
-oral aide of the natter. On the other hand I knew vhat I have already
testified here aboit the nodical training. Since Rascher at first had
no porsaaent task assigned to hl= In connection with these eroerlnents
and since Ecaborg ves to be the pomanent nan, It really didn't oley
any particular part whether rascher had progressed further or not in
his training. I as sure that he could do vhat he was supposed to do
there and I already oaphasited that no difficulty arose because of the
fact that Rascher had not been sufficiently trained. Naturally, ae Ruff
and Rcaberg have already described. I told Rascher the exact conditions
under vfcich this sattsr was to bo carried out. that these were to bo
professional crialnals sontencod by ordinary courts; that they were to
recoivu awards, otc. All of that has been described her© froouently in

detail*

Q, Now, I rotor to your agreenent with Ruff, a Question which, in
ay opinion. Is of tho groatest iooortanco to the Tribunal. Did you not
havo alsglvings against the cxneriaonts being carried out in concentra¬
tion cwpsl Vhat did you know at that tine, at the end of 1941, about
concentration caspsl

A. Fros sy point of view I didn't really think that experiments
vere to bo carried out In the concentration carps. From the outside I
had been isprossed with the necessity to face that problcs. At that
tine I knew little about concentration caaps. I know, Just as cany
others, that there were two casps, one at Dachau and one at Oranionburg
I only heard of Buchcnvald later when Thaelsann had boon killed because
of an air attack. I knew that uolitical and non-political nrtsonoro
were kept in concentration canp*. I knew that at the beginning of tho
vnr all the old prison, and penitentiaries had been vacated and had
been transferred to the concentration ca=ps. Conscouently. I vas not
surprised that cxoerlconts, which in literature are always described
as having taken place In prisons, were now being carried out in concern-


Court So. 1

5 Hay 47-1-16-2-IEX-Haloy (Yen Sehoen a Harder)


iraticn casps. That didn't surprise ne because I knew that prisoners
in penitentiaries had been transferred to the concentration cacps.
Satuxally, I know that a nuaber of Jews free itunich had disappeared into
the concentration caepo for a oartain period of tine. I remenber a col¬
league of sine vfco care back after approxiaately four nonthe. I didn't
soeak to his personally but I heard free other colleagues that he re¬
ported that ho had been treated ouite correctly. In addition I cay ro-
nind yourself, Ur. Wills, that you told ne about an aeouaintanco, the

president of the Bavarian Automobile Club, vfao at that tine as a Jew

who of '♦i 30

was also sent to lachau./reappeared after a fow nonths and/it vae re¬
ported anon* circles of the Automobile Club that he had been normally
troated there. Of course, there was some excitonent in our circles
about the fact of his arrest.

Q, You hadn't heard any news free foreign radio broadcasts?

A. Sews frou foroign radio broadcasts were not easily obtainable.

No had rented a house and thero wero a number of boarders thoro who could
easily donounee us. The whole thing would be punishod by a death oon-
tunco and it wasn't as simple as that. However, I did listen to for¬
eign broadcasts and tried to forts a Judgaent. I oust say that this vno
not ouite so staple. A great nueber of these foroign broadcasts was
biased and false. I cust recall now that three tines I heard tho false
retort of (boring's death, once free the Strassbourg breadcasting station,
and onco frees a southern anglisb broadcasting station, and I have for¬
gotten the third source. Tho reports free the foroign broadcasting
station were naturally easily recognizable to us as propaganda and tho
character of propaganda lies in the fact that one nixes true and false
reports to such an extent that they aro no longor recognizable b/ tho
recipient. At any rat* these foreign broadcasts were in no way a sourco
of information to us which could have given ua a clear picture of the
true situation. laturally, I know today that the persons who had come
back from concentration cases had every reason not to say anything, but
I didn't know that, and nobody froa =y proximity had dis-

7065


at that tine


Court So. 1

6 kay 47 -A-16-3-LEk-haloy (Von Schoen & Rosier)

appeared Into a concentration casp, and I e= talking about my close
proxlclty. Keturally, among sy farther friends some hod dltoppeared.

Up until the end of the war I never had occasion to soeak to a poreon
who had come back directly fren a concentration casp.

Q, Sov I come back to your agreement at Adlershof vhich me tho
point of deoarture of everything that followed. You did not reach a
final ogreesent at Adlershof that Elpoke vented to obtain Hitler's ©er-
slsslon; vas this done? You mentioned this before but please answer it
definitely, the Question whether a definite agreement vas reached thore.

X. Ho, no definite agrecaent was reached at Adlershof and Ruff
already doscribcd that in detail. I made the suggestion to hie and ho
vantod to consider It. "urlng our second talk with Roobtrg and Raschcr
at nunlch he told ec that Elppko had givon pereisslon. I think that
was alrocdy said here.

Q, Vas this discussion which you mentioned r.t your institute
tho sece one vhich tho witness Luts speaks of hero?

A. It can only be that conversation becauso only cno such conver¬
sation took place In ay institute.

Q, The prosecutor has brought out In this discussion soaothlng
which he soys Is rother unusual and which Lut* has confirmed, that at
the beginning of the discussion you csked him to leave tho room and he
thinks that is unusual. Please cromonl on that?

A. The situation at tho beginning vas the following: I had to
acouaint Ruff and Rcnbvrg with Raschcr and that was the primary pur¬
pose of the conversation. Ruff and Romberg had come early and Raschcr
vas not there. Since Ruff and Romberg knew the gentlemen of my insti¬
tute to a greater or smaller extent, I called ' ondt and Lut* into my
room to giv^ them an opportunity to converse up to Raschcr 1 $ arrival.
Vc conversed. There vas a lot of orofoaslonal talk and w« waited
until Raschcr arrived, bhun Raschcr finally came, I told my men that
I was going to etert the conference and I think it Is a ouestion of

tact as to how clearly I would have to indicate thet to anyone. Lut*

7034


Court So. 1

6 «ay 47-A-16-4-LEn-r.al.oy (Yon Schoon A Rannltr)


had nothing to do In that conference. I really didn't need the sugges¬
tions of ny pupil Luts. I was enough of an expert nysclf. Ruff and
Eccb^rg were also not In need of Luts'e opinion*. The experiaents were
•ecret In the ene that they vere described here by Ruff and Roabcrg.
They were secret because they constitute an asslgncent fron which the
technical develcpeent of the airplane was recognisable. In other words,
it could be roccgnlxed froa the assignment that we were developing a
high altitude airplane. If we had needed Luts, however, this would
have beon a rer*on against hie presence. Luts would then have cone
undor this order of secrecy, but on the other hand it is natural that
whoever Is not participating in the work would ao t have been asked to
attend any suoh conference. If Luts has stnted here that ho found It
peculiar that he had to leave the r-oo, then on the othor hand I aa of
the opinion thrt this was natural. I nay perhaps clarify this differ¬
ence of the conception of these people If I speak about a saoll cxnori-
e-nco which I had during sy recent lnprisonacnt at Dachau. Luts hi<d
been at Dachau shortly bofore no as a prisoner, 'hen I arrived, ho
had already left. It then becane known In Dachau that I had engaged in
aviation nodlclnc during the var and the case physician there asked no
in a surprised nnnner whether I hrd worked at that large lnstltuto
undor the fanout Dr. Luts. Dr. Schneider was very surprised vhon I
told bin thrt I v* t the chief of that lnstltuto and when I told hln
that the institute wasn't a large Institute but in reality rather snail.
I cuito believe that Luts was disappointed at not being able to pnrtici-
pege in that conference. I nust state, hoover, that fcls presence was
not necessary.


7065


6 : ay li?-A-?JC-I7^Wi»ehaa (Int., Von s choen & Raaler)

Court I

3 But of co’rse, if one was suspicious, one couic' get the idea that
you attacpted artificially to keep Luts away fro= this conference and to
conceal the subject of the discussion froz hin.

A That the subject of the as si mast was secret, was not initiated
by m, but that was ar. order.. If I bad personally wanted to beep any¬
thing secret frai Lutz and endt, it would have been extronely bad
tactics on «y part, to have t at conference in the institu.e, and fUr-
tha oioro to aa’.c just those two -ontleaen into ay roo*, so that everyone
would notice that *iiff and craberg are t ere now, and than Rascher also
joins the®, etc. In this way, they really learned there was a conference
Tf I had wanted to keep the faot of the conference itsoif secret, we
could have set just as well in biffs hotol or in ay private apartaent
or anywhere else and in that case nr one in the institute vculd havo
known suoh a conference lad taken placo. I think one can sec frea that
that I had not the slightest reason to keep the fact of the conference
seoret at all.

Q Kow, about t e conversation proper, on that occasion, wat. your
ocraion trip to Dacha a'rood upon?

A Yes, this was arrang-d. .uf , as well aa Dr. roaborg, have
already testified about the contents of that conference. They testified
that Tascher dioplaj’ed the letter, that is the lotter by -tL-anler, thoy
testified that the oonditiens w*re oiraotly detailed in that lettor,
profeoaioral criminals who volunteered, rewards, etc. The progran was
•\j reaefc' deterninod, it raeded no further discussion, all we had to do
was to explain it to Raschor. And or. thr other hand, we had arranged
with Tascher that we would go to Dachau together and Rascher on his part
arranged that trip via the ?Jinich Reichsleitung SS.

3 now often were you in Dachau altogether?

A I havo been in Dachau once, I have already discussed that trip.

Q That ha pened?

A Ruff and Rooters have spoken abcait that also in detail. It first
we went to the ca=x cocr^r.der, we discussed the conditions with the
cam oconander ar.d 1 nay perhaps suppHzent the testiaony of Tuff and


7066


5 Msy U7-A-FjC-17-2-?'ecn*n (Ir.t., Von ^choen & Rosier)

Court I

R cob erg to the effect that Schnitzler brought an order by Hitler to
the c 43 ^ oocsnander, saying what kind of experisental subjects were to
be used, in other words the contents of the letter Rascher had shown
to us. I want to esphasize that, because, that way we were certain
that the camp coazander would have to comply with this order by Hitler
therefore, we were not al all dependant on the "yes" or "no" of the
canp coenander, we regarded it as a matter of errors that the camp conn-
ander had with an order by Hitler. It was a natter of course that we
assumed that ho would in effect comply with this strict and clear order.

Q Then, why did you personally go to 3 achau, would it not have
been sufficient, if Ruff and Rooberg had gone alone, to settle the
technical details?

A This trip merely took place in order to discuss the technical
preparations with the oaap cat ander, to inform ourselvos about techni¬
cal details, about the current, about the entranoe of the camp, the low
chamber transport, etc. ?rca that point of view, ay presenco would not
have been necessary, because Ruff and Iceberg, who knew all about that
chamber, could have do no that thensolves. I went along bocauso I
attached value to being present during that conference with tho camp
coenander and because I wanted to use the opportunity of obtaining
some impression of a concentration carp, since I knew so little abexit
them.

Q Did you have an opportunity to talk to prisoners there?

A Ho, that was forbidden.

Q And your general impression?

A *y general impression was roughly the same as Ruff s and we
discussed it later. The impression was absolutely favorablo, wo .saw
a tidy clean carp, the barracks were not overcrowded, only two beds were
located above one another and sometimes there was only one level of bods.
The hospital was alreacty doscribed in detail by Ruff. It was against
all expectations a dean hospital, well ocpiipped with all medical appa¬
ratus, patients were actually there with relatively 3light illnosses,

7C67


6 May U7-^-FJC-17-3-?*:eeaan (Int., Von Schoen k Ramler)

Court T

ao that we had to assume that not only people In their death throngs
were actually brought to the hospital, but people were there who wore
treated because of little things such as bronchitis or similar natters.
Ihe favor charts were kept in a proper aa n nsr and we as medical men
rrero naturally in a position to decide very quickly how well these
nedical natters were handled. I oust say that I was suprised about the
good impression I had of the hospital.

Q And what happened the; when did the low pressure chamber coao?

A I cannot recall the date exactly, I think the low pressure ehan-
bor arrived at the boginning of February, although I cannot rooall the
oxact date, luff already described that, ha said that tho chamber had
boen handed over to to. In othor words, tho keys and tho documents of
tho chamber wero given to mo. The drivers arrived that night fran
Berlin and tho next day tho SS drivers oaac along to fotch the chamber.

I don't bollovo I oan add anything now to that question.

Q Now, Professor, tto quostion which you have to answor in oonsido-
rablo dotall; how was tho responsibility distributed botwoon yoursolf
and Puff at tho tiso?

A I bollovo that I already said something about that. Tboro was
a door arrangement nxistin; botwoon Ruff and that this was to

bo a Joint undertaking, it was dear that luff oxorcisod supervision
over Rcoborg and I oxorcisod supervision ovor Raschor.

Q In several prallciiwry interrogations, you pointed out that it
was your 4ity to superviso Raschor; will you ploaso toll tho Tribunal
what you did to fulfill this obligation?

Q obligation to supervise Raschor was very doar. I was his
disciplinary superior and I was naturally responsible for tho scienti¬
fic program to which I assigned him. The coirs, of things was that
Rasohar, after my conversation at the instituto with Ruff and Rotaborg
and after our trip togotter to Dachau, did no show up again and I did
not 3oo Mm, Raschor was only detailed to me on paper, in fact, ho

was still active at Schongau in his old office and since I really did

7033


6 ’lay U7-U?JC-i7-b-«eoban (int.. Von Schaon & Ramler)

Court I

not noed his, I did not urge hia to com. 'ban, however, the arran-
gocasnts had boon made with Ruff and Rostoorg and when it was reported
to =» that Raschor was in !!unich without reporting at ny institute, I
had a letter written to hin by Wendt, written in a strictly official
tone, telling hin to report at my place twice a week and 1 designated
two days, Tuesday and Friday. As a result of this lotter, Raschor cane
to bo and I asked hia what the natter was and why he didn*t show up.

This first conversation took place approximately in tho ndddlo of Feb¬
ruary, 19L2 and Raschor told no that tho experiments had not ovon started
yet at Dachau ar.d that thereforo he had nothing to roport to mo. Ho
said ho was still at Schongauj I told his that thoro was no cliange and
that ho had to roport to mo twloo a wook. On the second occasion,

Borlin had tolophonod to, it was in tho noantimj Anthony asking what
tho situation was as to Raschor, ho said that Raschor wnntod to bo
dotailod to Dachau and askod, how tho Dachau oxporinonts woro progrosoing
I told Anthony that I could toll hin nothing about tho rat tor booauso
nothing had boon roportod to no. "hon Raschor came tho second time. I
told hie that this toluphono call oaae through from Borlin and that I
wnntod to ha va soon clarification how things stood and with Dachau.

Ho did not want to roport anything to mo ovon at the socond conversa¬
tion. I told him on tho occasion of that socond talk that I was going
to Borlin and I wanted a door ducisien whothor or not ho would report
to ao. I told him that I tould discuss this point with Hippko, thoso
conversations took placo once ovory half wook, bocauso I told hin bo
roport to mo ovary Tuosday and Friday. On tho occasion of tho third
talk, I oxpcctod a sharp argument and I therefore askod Hondt to coma
into tho room. Bcforo that, I confronted Raschor with tho alternstivo
eithor to report to or ha would have to leave the instituto. But this
third talk was vory briof, Raschor shewed mo a tologrnm from Hinaolor,
this tolograa road: "Zxparinonts aro to bo kept socrot fren ovcryono. n


7039


6 Iiay-A-!5-lS—1-Beard (Ints: Von Schon & Eanler)

Court Ho. I

I said that this nade the situation very clear. I told hin he could
no longer stay at ay institute. Rascher said goodbye. I conposed a
letter together with Wendt, signed that letter and Wendt sent that
letter the sane day to the Air Gau. I wanted Rascher relieved, and
that relief cane back within a few days as ras cub tanary. We re¬
ceived the report that Rascher's assigment had endod. Rascher
automatically thereby cane back to his old agency, which was the Anti
Aircraft Artillery School Ho. U at Schongau, that is the Air Gau Medi¬
cal Department Ko. 7.

Q Would it not have been to your advantage. Professor, to
go to Dachau yourself, when Rascher did not report to you on the first
and second occasion? You night have been able to get information
from the trip — on the spot?

A I could not go to Dachau without having first recoivod
an express permission for that. I could only receive that permission
through Rascher.

Q Professor, the Tribunal would like to havo tho dates sot
as accurately as possible; can you tell no when Rascher was relieved.
You gave the tine in general, but perhaps you can ciako it noro exact?

A I can reconstruct that approximately on the basis of
the documents. The telogran which Rascher shewed no, mist havo boon
the reply telegrac to the tolotype which was mentioned by Frau Mini
Rascher in her letter. .lay I, perhaps, indicate the number — this
is document No. 263 PS, Prosecution Exhibit U7.

Q I will cots to that afterwards. Now, another question
to detcr±ine this date. You arc certain then that Rascher was relieved
in February or at the beginning cf • arch?

A ‘i/hether this happened in February, I cannot sqf, but at
the latest, it must have happened during the first days of "'arch. It
is, however, evident from the further correspondence; that on the 16th
of “'arch, Rascher had already been detailed to another agency.

'J Then, did you inform the liedical Inspectorate that Rascher


7090


6 :fey-A— 3-18-2-Beard (Ints: Von Sehon & Racier)
Court Ho. I.


had left?

A After Rascher had shown re the telegran, I rent to Berlin
ard ranted to apeak to Hippke; Hippke was on an official trip. I
telephoned Antony. He told ne that Hi poke ras not there. Since I
knew Antony rather well, we arranged to have supper togother. Antony
can* to ny hotel and we discussed the entire natter together. I re¬
ported to Antony that Rascher was no longer at ry agency. I told hia
about the natter with the tele gran and I also told hin about sore thing I
bo1 rocontJy loomed, nace^jr, that Rawher had brought his father into tho
concentration oanp. Antony reserved his decision. Ho said, I nust
get Rascher to Dachau in socae other way. At any rate, Antony did not
toll no definitely what ho intended to do and how he was going to do
it.

Q Please describe to tho Tribunal the furthor dovolopnents,
for oxaaple, with Rascher leaving your Aviation ’todleal Institute in
•■unich, did your contact with hin Boise then?

A Raecher's assignment finished with that, because of his
relief, every connection with ay institute had onded. Raschor no
longer contacted us personally. And, ry only subsequent connections
with hin was the fact that I saw hin occasionally in liunich, which
wrs really unavoidable. I saw hin during tho Nurnberg Congress.

Those worn accidental meetings. Tfe behaved correctly toward ono
anothorj we greeted, but thoro was no conversation,

Q After he left you, you did not talk to hin any noro about
the visit to Daohau?

A Ko, Rascher did not evon report to no, when I asked hin
to do that officially. Still nore, ho did not tell ne anything,
when I was no longer his superior, and when I had no right at all to
know anything about it.

Q Did you not lave other reasons to remove Rascher fron
your office. It was apparently a personality who was not vory popular.

A Rascher was not unpopular, becauca he was not there. If


7C81


6 l^ay-A-IE-13—3-Ba -ml (Infcs: Von Schon & Ranler)

Court Ko. I.

Lut* says hare, ho did not like hia fro- the very beginning, I can not
judge that; but, this did not beccce externally obvious because Raschor
did not stay with us at all; and, then, T.'ondt says he hardly knew hin,
and ny own attitude toward hia I have already defined. At the end of
February 19U2, that was the tine, I found out that Rascher had brought
his fathor into the concentration canp; froa that accent on, I reject¬
ed his personality very firaly. This, of course, had no influence in
cur official relationship. This relationship was very clear and later
on forcibly intermixed when Raschor showed ne that telegran.

Q Professor, please toll us, as accurately ns you can, whan
you loarned that Raschor sorrt his fathor to a concentration conp?

A That was at the ond of February or tho first of March.

Q After tho talk at Adiorshof?

A After tho conversation at Adiorshof, of courso. If I had
known that already it Adiorshof, I would have thought carofully,
whothor I was going to offor Raschor the cooperation of Ruff.

Q New, ono question. Uould it not havo been right for you
to report thoso facts to Kippke, that Hcscher had sent his father to
a concentration cnap, in order to olinlnato Rischcr conplotoly?

A I told Antony, Antony, at that tine, was of tho opinion
that ono could do little with that officially. Cortainly, thore woro
a nvt-ber of pooplc at that tine who woro ready to conceivo of that
attitude on Raschor's part as a Sport inn kind of horoisn. I, on ny
part, did not know what the closer connections were; I did not know
for instance, whether Rascher's father hr.d provoked hin in any unusual
runner. I had no info motion about all that. Anyway, this information
w-s not suitable to be used officially.

q Do you beli^vo that with the olinination of Raschor, .and
your infornation given to Antony .and Ruff, your responsibilities wore
finished in every respect.

A There is no doubt about tho fact that with the olinination

of Rascher every responsibility had ceased for no. I had no possibility

7092

%


6 Uay-A-1 3-l8-i±-3eard (Lite: Yon Schon & Raaler)

Court Ho. I.

of influencing Rascher any furtherb I could not issue any orders to
hia, nnd I did not know whet he was doing; he did not report to no.
And, it was quite clear that ay official responsibility of hies had
stopped*

Q How, in private, at least, your statement agrees with
sooa dccurxnts itiich the Proaocution has su trait tod. I should liko to
ask you, hawovor, to clear up a fow contradictions. I shall have
those ckicu'aonts handed to you so that you will be able to cctnnont on
then. Thero is first of all tho letter fraa Dr. Rancher, signod by
Frau Nini Rnsohsr, of 2U Fobruaxy 1$U2.

DR. *ILLZ: Hr. Prosidor.t, this lottor is in tho Prosocution
docunont book 2 on page 56 in tho English toxt.

(Continuing question.) This is document No. 263 of tho FTo-
socution, Schibit U7. This is, in fact o filo note of SS Oboraturo-
bonnfuohror Schnltsiur of tho 28th of liarch 19U2. This docunont is
also in docuuont book 2 of tho Prosocution, pago 73 of tho English)
this is docunont NO. 261, Prosocution Exhibit 60.


7093


May 6—-BK-19-1—mingor (Inc. Von Sohoon & Racalor)

Court Ho. 1

Tho third letter in tho sane book is signed by „olff,
tho hood of tho Personnel Staff. It is addressod to Hippko.
This is Docucent NO-318, exhibit 57, Docunent Book 2 of
tlio prosooution, pa.'vp 70 of tho English text. Now, will
you plenso look at tho first docuncnt, tho lettor of Mrs.
Mini Raschor end will you ploaso oxplain it?

« Ur 3 . Rcschor writes in tho socond ParaGraph, and I
quote, "On tho 24th of Juno, tho Roichsf uohror SS
cuthorizod tho oxperinonts, ct that tifor Dr. Rcschor,

Dr. Kottonhoff, and Dr. Waltz. Dr. Kottonhoff was appoint¬
ed ..ir Ocu Phyaioica for Runani.. in ..ugust end thoroby
wr.a oxoludod free; tho group. u End of quoto. Hero, at
first, I hr.vo to oorroct that Kottonhoff vns not appointed
-ir Gnu Physician for Hunnnla in ..ugust, but r.s, ho says
himself on tho 1 st of Wovoabor, 1941. That Hinnlor
authorized tho oxporinont I already stated and I also
stated that Raschor got this authorizntiur. without first
inforninj U3. Hu noithor infornod Kottonhoff nor nysolf.

>/o only foun: out about that 3ubsoquontly. Frau Rcsohor
3008 on to say that nothing was dona up to tho tino to
support Kottonhoff. Thet is corroct and I alroady stated
that. Frau Rasohor goes on to soy that Dr. ..oltz was to
start tho tochnioal execution of tho oxporinents. This is
rather a quick ronark, boocuso I cortainly wasn't tho ono
to carry out technical preparations, but, rnthor, R c scher
would have to do the work and I was only to supervise it.

She goos on to say, 'Since .«oltz foarod inturforonco tty
Gonornl Oborstnbsarzt Hippko u ond of quoto, and sho goos
on again, "j.s he was afraid of obstnolos on the part of tho
-ir Force Uodical Inspoctor, Goncrcloborstnbsorzt Dr. Hippko,
who described uxparin-nts of this kind as anoral, Joltz
a atinued postponing tho beginning of tho oxperinonts,

although ho was thoroughly acquainted with their importance."

7094


I'.zy 6-.--3K-]
Court No. 1


(Int. Von Sc.'iocn & Roomier)


I olroady said that I feared no obstacles on the part of
Dr. Hippies, but I was in comp lot o agreement with bin.

Jc wanted to carry out import ant experiments but wanted
not to tolerate unimportant experiments as they woro
sus^ostod by Rnsohor. I told that to Rascher at that
tine and I said that Hi.jpke would certainly not approvo
of his experiments. Therefore, the description as Frau
Raschor was Giving it must be incorroot. Sho goos on to
say, "In Doconbor of 1941 hu - that is .«oltz - askod tho
Board of Directors of the ..ir Force Rosonroh Instituto
Borlin-.-dlorshof, if tho bosses there, Dr. Ruff end Dr.
RonborG could u»*. or taka tho experiments with Dr. ncsohor.
Both of thorn inioClztoly ao cop tod, doliverod tho low-
prossuro olinnbor and oano hero.*' Th-t ngnin is obviously
a false statement. Frau Rascher i3 tryinj to nnko it
appear as if tho oxporinonts whioh I disoussod with Ruff
and Renter,; \k re tho sane as tho oxporir.ont3 which Rascher
had augjostod to no boforo. In reality thoso woro two
different kinds of oxporinonts. >«hat Rnsohor su^ 30 Stod
to no at first was an asoont with a particularly slow
spood; by a slow asoont lnstin3 tor hours tho compatibi¬
lity of tho persons for high altitude was to bo tostod.

It has boon explained in detail whet tho Ruff proGrrxi
was. It was to tho contrary an oxporinontol erransonont
wh ro ospooinlly quick chonsos of prossuro took plaoo.

It was ontircly diffuront fra. what Rasohor had suaGpstod
to no. One couldn't at all confuse those two series, of
experiments end Rascher must have boon very cloor in his
mini about that. On tho other hand, Raschor was in a
dilcanr. In his lotter dated tho 15th of May he had
writ ton to Himmler that ursont oxporinonts were to be
carried out and asked him at that time for professional
crL.inr.ls. Rascher or iirs. Rascher can not suddenly s:.y


7095


;:- y 6-^-B£-i9-3-.j:r-in3^r (In* . Vor. Soiioon ic Rcnnlor)

Court No. 1

that the experiments which were considered at that tino
to be so urgent, '.re ao longer urgent today, but on tho
other hand wo wontc d to carry out quit.- a difforont ex¬
perimental prc«r:u., iwue-ly tho program of Ruff and Ronborg.
Frau Raschor novoi by hor dilaonc is confusing thoso two
series of experiments, although thoy really can not bo
o .nf usod at all.

Frau Raschor goes on to scy, and I quoto, "It was oloar-
ly doterninod that tho experiments w^ro only to bo
outhorizod in collaboration with Dr. -tf.sehor." ^nd of
quoto. The permission to work at iteohau, naturally,
depended upon tho porson of Rasoher. •*> never consider¬
ed carrying out the oxporinonts without Rasoher, booauso
that would have been impossible. None of ua had aocoss
to Dnohru. Neither Ruff nor Routers, nor I, if Rasoher
didn't enre to agroo. If Mrs. Rasohor -

JUDUR SEBttlNJ: On several occasions you have roiboratod
that tho possibility of oarryine out oxporinonts at Dachau
’.upended entirely ui»on Dr. Raschor. IffD* 6 that the of.oct
of what you havu said from tin.o to tino?

.ilTNaSS: Y 03 .

JUDO- SFB.(Ii»: -«hct do you aoc.n by that? I don't quito
understand. In what way wa3 it solely dependent upon
Rasohor, end apparently if it was solely dependent upon
Raschjr, froi. whet you scy you knew that from tho outset,
•/ill you pleaso explain what you mean by that?

..IThHoS: Raschor could refuse us ingress to Dachau at
any tine. Ja coul 1 only ontcr Dac!?au if Raschor had ob¬
tained permission before hand, as it v/r.S done in tho ce.so
of our journey to Dachau, or, if, as it was the case with
Ronborg, Rocibors roceivcd a permanent pass. Raschor,
howovor, felt hinsolf to be so powerful that, as Romberg

7096


Hay 6---3K-19-4—-rainier Hat. Von Schoen Bonnl or)

Court No. i

iica already said yesterday, ho could threaten Heebprg with
having this ponsanont pass undo invalid for the period of
tino ho was in the oenp. This would have noant that
Hon bore couldn't have sotton out of tho concentration
oonp. On tho other hand, wo oould never provent Roschor
free eoine to Dachnu. .‘hen I was Haschcr's suporior,

I also didn't have tho possibility to prohibit Rcsohor's
3oin<j to Dachau apart fron his hours of offioial duty.

But if Rnsohor ha:’, told no that "during ny froo tino, X'n
Soine to Dachau," I cortair.ly couldn't have prevontod his
doing so.

JUDCd 3EBRINC: *<hon did you first learn that ho had
this trenoa'.ous authority to sain ingross and oGross
into Dachau that you did not hr.vo? Did you know that
at tho tix:o that you orifinally talked about this propo¬
sition and tho collaboration with -tuff? Did you know
thon that itasohor was such a pov;orful individual so far
cm Dcohau was oonoemod?

.ITK&33: Thr.t Raaohor oxorcisod a Groat influonoo on
Hicriler wo certainly know, booauso ho had rocoivod tho
authority to carry out the exporinents. ./hot tho ronl
connections woro only bocano oloar to us or, at loast,
boc-jx) clear to no, vihon 1 wont to Daohau for tho first
and only tino. I thoueht that tho wholo thine was uuoh
easier and entailed auch less rod topo. «t any rato, I
thought that there was a nuch closer collaboration
betwcon the various branches of the «rnod Forces nj id I
didn't think that the concentration oonp and what was
connected with it would be such an isolated complex into
which one could only ponotrato when you had received por-
cission which was bumuoratioally controlled. I didn't
know that before ny visit to Dachr.u.

JUDG- -ell, ti^n you and -tuff collaborated in

7097


May 5-..-BK-19-5- in^ir (Int. Von Schoon & Ranml j)
Court No. 1


the hi. 3 h altitude experiments. H esc her was your sub¬
ordinate. Romberg was Ruff's subordinate. Y„t, after
Rosohar hod cone to Daobau you, his superior, could
not 30 tfcoro, end in ^nchau, *<uff, who was Rouborg's
suporior, could not 30 thora end Romborg, who was
Ruff's subordinate, could stcy thoro only at tho will of
Rase her? Is that what you moan to say?

.iITNik>S: I could assume after the coup oomnondor had
ruooivod tho order from Hkxiler that we woro to carry
out theso experiments and oertainly I couldn't assuno
that Hixt.lur would suddonly recall tho permission thet
was 3 ! von rw originally. Himmler's telegram constituted
tho opposite to what ho h^d said bofore, for Rnschor
says that in a lettor by Himmler of tho 24th of July
ho had rocaivod permission to carry out theso experiments
togothor with Kottonhoff.


7093


6 W-W?-2C-l~iiol«i (Hauler)

Court I

This cert-.inly had oe.n arranged with the c_sp cceaander, and tnls
entire situation had been overthrown by thie telegros of Kiraler vhich
case os a caolote surprise to so. It vna clear to no that I could
not get into Dachau -s a visitor, but I could eanect, on tho basis of
HisnlorU order, that whenever tho experiaents would nocossitate it
I could 30 to Dacha u at any tine.

?eiu_?s I a^' coatinuo to discuss the letter.

?rau Haschor ;oe* on to soy:

■Veits 5..V0 the assurance th-t he would take c„ro of tho corres¬
ponding authorisation of Dr. 3-scher. Ho w_s only able, however, to
obtain ono ossigaaent, which would on-ole iu-scher to cariy out tho
preparatory worts at D-chuu, and stated ia reply to a quostion on tho
subject by .r. Haschor, '3io authorisation can bo oxtendod ut uny
tiso.i I

I don't know wh„t Truu Haschor ooans by thcso nsslgncor.t difflciv
itos. doccaor v-s always t-licing about thceo assignoont difficulties
in dot-dl but such difficulties didn't roally exist. I would huvo
given him tho o:\'.or to worts at D-chau to r<roort to so at rogular
intervals end. frai that point of view tnis assignsunt wao uorfoctly
in ordor boc.uso, as far as I -n concoraol tho assignees was unli-
nitsi pouor. ' nether krs. Haschor hero coons that ho only had to
reiort to ao twice a Weds, end she thought this oo-nt interruption
in his assignment, I don't xnow; but at any rate . sothinks free this
entire st..t«jcat th_t she tries to soke it apuo-r th-t I wantod to push
out Roschor... and I roally think an intrigue is going on hero with
the intention of eliminating so. He presonts the sawtor to hisclor
in t'-ch a wp that I wanted to eliminate hie. In reality, however,
it w.c nis intention to push no out of tho way, and ho actually succeed¬
ed ia doing that through that telcgr-s.

and now I ccce back to the telogr-u. I find it hero on y_ge 2


7099


6 kay-^-J?-2C-3-3lol»l (icier)

Court I


of the letters • o result thereof hascher conferred with Oborstura*-
fuehrer Schnitsler on the 19th (Jeletypo Ministration SS). n

I think that the telegrc th-t was shown to ne was the r«*ly to tno
teletype which is aentioned in the let-.er. ?r-n ^aseher goes on to

write:

■Zbporincnts of Rco'oorg-Ruscher oeg_n at 3-chuu, a clear pro-
r.ounc«eut by both, th-t Veit* wj not neoled any nere, Rccborg was
also surprised that anchor was now to be chucleed overboard in snito
of hi* fin* agreaients. Oborstumfuehror Schnitsler h^i for tho tico
being stoipod the continuation of the expwrinents without Raschor
until tho docision of tne Roichsfuchrer has be^n obtained." End of quoto.

I novor learned anything -bout tne stoppage of tho wyorluents.
iUscnor didn't toll ro th-t. Jhesu experioonts wero stoppoi bohind cy
baflk. *o f .ct th..t they wore stopnod I only le-rnod hero froo tho
document. "Cberstumfuefaror Scbnitilor", Tr-u Rancher goos on to
write, «hae boon asked try Raschor to obt-in an icuediato authorisation
either free tho Chief of Staff UH 14, or St-ff kedical Officer Dr.
Schaiit, lilceviso UU 14."

I aay point out in this oonnoction th-t tno very see hro Raschor
who wrote at tho o+lznlz* of tho letter, th-t hippko was rejecting
tho oxjoriuonts and considering tno* to be icnorul. vrltos bore that
oho is turning to UH 14— which is ag-ln hipnlce's agency, trying
is gel iaaediat- authorisation froa alp-iko. Oborstunafuohrvr
Schr.itzlor no doubt telephoned Rerlin, acd this w-s the occasion
that aatony on his part teloihonod ce, as I described It boforc.

at the cad of the letter, at tho end - Rascher says th-t ho

0

want'd to participate under all conditions as a aouoer of the
■ahnenerbe*. aad obtain an iasediate assigaeat froa HippJce. delong¬
ing to tain docuaoat is Idle Bote Schnitslor, Docuaent Ho. 2*4,

inhibit 73. Shis bears the date of 28th of -oril 1942. I ce sure

7300


6 Key-W^-20-3-3iol*i ( 1 st. Easier)

Court I

th-t tall date 1 . vron. I think It should be 28 February 19-2. I think
that tali is so for tvo review: f irot ..rs. Eaicher write, here in

the third pardCNghl

•2ho aisl&naent of Dr. richer oust immediately be chj^cd to
•^•Ifiment to Ration feit Institute dcrlin - *dlernhof, *ncsenstollo
Dachcu* (3ranch Office D-ch-u) - not Institute Velti, because Volt*,
u« he it..tod. Intends to c-ncel the ussi*n=ont immediately, If no Is
not to participate In it.*

ao.o-.or oa too 16 th of ia.reh 1962 nal been dotuilod to the
Brunch Offloo Daohu». ttl. o-» bo fr °“ Eoouoont «o. 316,

Prosecution Jo. bit KO 47. In tnl. lot tor it road. very clearly
tn-t anchor. fra. th. 16 th of l-rch to the 16 th of «rll had boon
detailed to tho orant Office D-chuu. bhother thi. e Branch Office

Dachau over e.-l.tod, I don't vant to .. I «’ thlnlt 11 411

oxiotod in r-nlity. But no doubt it hocouo. -T-ront frou thi. letter
that on too 15 th of ..arch -a.chor .a. no longer -t ny office, '--horefo.-o,
iron Beecher c.nnot pc.lhly art. on tho 23th of “prll, that a chen.o
.hould ho U.do valch hj -lr.aiy tenon clone on. uonth earlier. thi.

1 , -no first roaton »hy I bellev. tnl. date rtould read the 26 th of 3*>
ore or/, .'no .ocoud ro_.on i. that in tnl. letter Uentlon 1. nude
that I u going to Berlin and .a. to .peak to Hlpoko. I «cnt to
Berlin, naturally, irnhodlatoly after .<_echcr h J *l»en no tho
tolegr_n. and I certainly didn't wait for tvo uonthc In addition,
fren thi. file noto, Docunont Be. 264. the foUovin, rCuark ha. to
be a.doi •Ob.r.tab.ar.t Dr. holt, .till in.l.t. in taking c.rt in
the., oa-.erlaent. end ho fully re.pon.ttlc for th*. If not, th.
a..lg*cnt of IT. da.chor to tho Institute holt, not be eh_ngoS.- *U
refer. Vito ole-rtj to th. .econd t-lk bet.ecn 3a.=hor and ny.olf
during vuioh I threatened hie to have bin r-aovod fro, uy Institute if
ho didn't report to co.


71*1


6 Kay-WP- 2 ^-V-iiolsi (a_uler)

Court I

and tie next sentence: nTeltx personally does not c-ro about
tno o^crlneate.- -Hot- is underlined. Fr® that sentence it can bo
..en th t I didn't Want to »urticip-te in these experiuents nysclf
but th..t I only wanted to exercise supervision over d-scher. I
a* saying tfc.t because is accusing uo of haring vaM ^cU ? ra=ptod
by scientific Coition, th-t I wanted to ru:ove bin. fiie very saao
Krs. -h.schor vie =-de this assertion s^s here, using h.r own words,
th-t I w..s not personally interest* in those czoerioonts. The
next thing refers to tno conversation with -ntony about w..ich I

alre-dy told. If I Bay shortly point to the 1-st p-r.gr.ph:

* 3 , Voltt confldonti-lly infornod i. ih-schor th .t there is
gre-t uistrust gainst hi. in the Oft boc-use of the exccrincets; -Sb
necbor.nl?- there 1. also oniuoslty in the r (Km o<u>nd l.unich for

this ro. son."

I tfcinS th..t this sentence refers to cy h-vin,i told Kascher or.
various occasions th-t no would not always nention Hinnlor. If
scaothin;; didn't run a. qulcSly or a. cuoothly Ha.chor w-nt«d it to
run bv nlw.-ys aontioned hlualor, he always s-id, -I have to report
th-t to Hiualor B . I replied to th-t that ho would hardly Bake friondo
either with tno nodical inspectorate or with the *ir Oau if ho con¬
tinuously roforrod to hiaalcr in this n-nnor.

2— ?.u^IDE?I* The Trio-anal will now oo in rocess until CMC

o'clock fco-uorrev.

(2ho 'Tribunal adjourned until C930 heuro 7 Kay 1M7. )


7i;2


Court 1

v-v 7-H-l-l-HD-?ester-V.;n5ohon - Kurtz.


Official Ir^nscri^t of the juaerican military
Trlbonr.1 In the a: t r ;f the United 6trtos _
of «meric* ~erlnsc K?rl Br ndt, et el, de^enoants,
sitting e t Humbert, Gersu-ny, on 7 li^y 1947,

0930, Justice Beel6 presiding.

THE HnAShA-: Persona In the court rooa will please find
their se-ta.

Th» Honor bio, toe Jja t os of Mlllt ry Tribunal 1.

Xllltsry Tribun-1 1 Is now In session. God eeve the
Ur.ltod Jtntea of «aerlea er.d this nonorr.ble Trl.unel.


There will be order In the oourtr.om.

TEE FRErlDSKT: hr. itersh^l, you -scertaln If the
defendants are *11 present In c.urt.

THE M*R6HjiL: Mty It plerse your honor, 11 defendants
*ro present In tr.e c art.

THE PRESIDED: The 3acretrry-0enorr.l will note for the
record t.iooresonce of r 11 the defendants In court.

C. unsel ary proceed.

OH. GEORG JELTZ - Resumed
DIRECT EXs-iIKaTIOK (Continued)

3Y DR. 't ILLS ( Counsel for the Defendant Waltz):

Mr.y I remind you, witness, tnnt you arc still
under 0 th. Yostordry, we finished when I - sited you about
.no three d counts. rt-'y I n-v ''s.t - to tell mo wh'-t

.u mrlntrlr. *s r> reoult of those three documents?

«. These :re HO 233, HO 264 -nd HO 318. Those
d cuaents without d ubt belon t Cv 3 otncr and deal with
cno p ao a-ttors. The letter of Hre. Rasonor, Doouaent 263,


Is r^tnor confusing alxture of half-true and untrue
e^GjkJtents,Victim: at first It w s not e^sy — even for
V— to reco^nlz^. the real uros- of tills letter. 1
yii believe, nowever, tn-S 1 can now soy thrt the r6serti(
V-.^t I want d'to dtooae Rascher •'nd tne other, the assertion
tVt tnecc werSydifflcultics with the ®esle,naont, thrt


.on


7103


Court 1

»y 7 -k-1 - 2-HO-Fo s te r-Vo n Schon-K arts.

C.-.oaa two st tosente are not correct »nd were merely made
for certain ..ur3oa,c. The -uroose wee tv ellalncte xe
:r a control over Ra sober. In order t>- underst nd why chnt
se-acd dosir'ble to Raechcr, perhaps I nay brlefl: sux up
the situation In which Rrscnar was when this letter was
written by lire. Mini Roacner. Raschcr, t c olnst ay will,
with.ut ay ?.36ist^ncc, cane to ay office In :«ovc.ooer 1941.
Ho v s In Schongnu rt that tlae and I did not urge zhr t he
be assigned to ay office. I did not n~od his. Richer
said that he still rad things to do -t 3chon a ou *nd I

w-a satisfied with tret. But when tne a&reoner.t had been

•

ronohed with Ruff rnd nomb-r.* when the worX was to otnrt
In dachau, rtesoher ctlll did not cooo to uy office but I
loarned that ne w*.e in ..ur.ich. I nr.ve alro -dy eald that.
This as the occasion for oo to write a. letter to alia,
rn offlcl'l letter, wr.lch I still remember very well.

Ills lector w-a In a rather allIt:ry f^ro. It fftld about
-a follows: You nre to rooort to ou; twice a voeX c
ton ir. t e aornln^ on Tuoc-df • and Friday, olgned Voles.

The tons of t..le letter was unusual ot ay office.

Vo were .v.t very military In our be.v vior. I 0 enerc.lly
wore civilian clothes rt the institute nd this letter
to Rracher forced no to uo to the institute In uniform
twice a weeX. Tr. t 16 why I reaealer It. After this
letter R“6caer c uld nave no doubt that I emphasized
ay relationship of military superiority towards nlc, and
t.e:t I did net desire to ^r-r.t him the special position
•; ich hu cl-lxed -*6 a. friend of .-.ixslor. Reseller's
c nduct toward /.is superiors has been described here
repeatedly. I reseaber uls meeting with Gravitz for
instance. Rrscher forxally submitted this order, he
"ctuelly anperred three tines. There Is no doubt that


Court 1

Hay 7-fc-l—5-Ei)—Foe t&r-Vcn icnon-Kurtz

tiie f-.ra in w~Ich I managed the relationship of military
eubordlnatl in v. a unpleasant to hi a. I treated him
like - subordinate. Medically, I treated him cs an
assistant vno • e to follow instructions. And I have
no doubt thc.t this was particularly cvroleasont to him
end th-t these relationships finally led to the conflict,
the core of which le Mrs. nesener's le:tor of the 24th
of February 1342.


7 *y aban (Int, Kurtz, tot. Schon)

Court Ho. 1

A3 I havo said, Raschor than showed sc the telegran which ho had
roccdvod froc Hinaler. Tho fbrra in which I was clisinatod by tills
tdiTr.u -3 so unusual and was such a violation of good nil i tary foxn,
such aa vo ’ jro used to, that I was very indignant about it and of
course, for ay part, draw tho obvious conclusions fron it. I have al-
rootfc' said that I told lascher thit ho could not stay in ay offioo,
than I dicta tod a letter to Walts dtasandlflg his dismissal and then he
was r.otually dismissed. IJjr relationship with Raachor was thereby
finally finished and I, for ay part, wanted to h-.vo nothing aoro to
do with Rasohor in any forr. if posslblo and I also wanted not to have
any roro oontcot with ax& SS agency, because it was oxtrcnoly inoon-
aidarato of Htasler to have sy own subordinate, without any explanation,
givo no a tolograa olininatlng no froa investigations In whioh I
doolarod qyaolf willing to participate, .aeroly in order to permit an
order of JL-aler to bo carried out.

Q >hy I toko it froa your doscription that Raschor vas rulijvod
of hia work in your instltuto by ycur request boforo you hoard anything
of tho Dachau oxporinuntnj is that correct?

A Ton, rufarrin to this bulugrnn Raschor had rofuood to givo
no any report.

0. A for aoro .juustions on th. nltitado probleras. After as oh or 1 a
resignation, dL. 1 you talk to Ruff or Roijorg-on the Dachau experiments?

A I did not talk about tho experiments oithor with Ruff or with
Rocfcarg, because I kne>. that tho secrocy ordor was in of foot and of
cour3 a wo had to rospoot this ordor.

Q Did you r jojivo any raore co.t unioations about tho oxporlnontn?

A Ifo, I did not receive ary coniunioation?.

3 So, therefore, you did not kno* the final report of Ruff,

Raschor and Romberg?

A Ko, I did not know about it.

Q So th-roforo you did rot know of the fatalities that happened
at Dachau?


7106


7 S--7 u,

Court To.


jhan (It-*-, "urtz, von Schor.)


A I td not hoar of any of thus*

- ycrr what is your osition to what th. 7rosocution charges that
;-cu succeeded at tfca tiz*> in overcozdng tho resistance pot up by tho
?$yttcol Inspectorate against the Dachau experiments?

A This ohargo does not offoot no. I exerted no influonoo on
:-lppko. After this talk at the Preysing palais vhora wo had both
grossed our basio attitude, I did not talk to Hippko about it at all.
KLppko had given ocmisoion for the ojpuriaonts, according to Ruff's
report. I olroatfr said that I deliberately avoidod exerting any.
influonoo on Hippko, because 'iippko was to roach his docision inde¬
pendently and since I not knorring tho construction program of tho
luftwaffo, aould not doddo her urgent tho exporirunts wore and of
courso Hipoko 2nd =»ro lnsiyht in tho aattor. I in no '/ay tried to
influonoo Sippko«s attitude*

•fcr-, about tho frooSing an* cold cxporlBentS) what waro your
relations toward ti e cold urporir. nts at Dachau?

|

A I had no relations at all to tho cold experiments at Daohau,

Q But you yoursolT werkod a gre t doal in tho untiro fiold of
tho oold prograa| would you like to toll us hon you Wuro lod to tills
work and rhr.t your werk consistod of in thoso problem?

A !fc* attention was oallod to tho cold problan in tho "inter of
19liG-i9kl by a report which I had b«n sont by tho Airfloet physician
3. This report sunod up a nurfccr of oxparioncos of aviators who had
fallen into the ohannol during that winter, sono had boon roscuod
success fully, sons had boon roscuod after they had (Hod and some had
died after titty had boen roscuod, Thoro woro in particular vary
moving experiences which thoso mar. had rona through. From tho nodical
point of view, I realized how little wo know about doath from
froozing. In particular, there was sara. tines a mysterious doath aftor
tho people had boon roacned, after they ~oro already in safoty in tho
hospital. They died and vary litUo was known about tho causo of
thoir doath. Tte ±>ctrlno provaiiod at that tins that such .persons who


7107


7 'fcy 17i4MJr-2-0-*fcofc.nn (Int. Hurts, vor. Schon)

Court So. 1

had boon exposed to cold could be rowarsod only very carefully, Wo
tlsoardrb that perhaps they had been remrned too quickly. It was not
dear vlv.t role alcohol ms to play in those rescues, should the people
co given alcohol or shculd thgy not bo givan alcohol. The basic questions
ttjpo astonishingly unclear, It ins not clarified whether the person
slwuld keep still in tho water to save his strength or whether he should
novo in order to create warmth, "it ms not clear whether ho should keep
hia clothes on, his shoos and gloves, or whether he should take his
dotting off — in order to aove noro easily. All those questions had
not boon clarified. Thereupon, I received pemissiqn to visit .all
aviators, who had fallen into tho soa and. boon roscuod - nost of then
hr.d "civ. bad to th?ir units- and question then ebeut thoir experiences.
! also visit ad tho soft rescue stations along the cl-annul end tho
French count. is I said ye sturdy, C also visitod tho cdlitary hos¬
pitals ir. Cherbourg and 3oulo"no TtCjcro sonotirvia scran such res creed
pooplo wore trotttod. This work ima carried out portly in tho winter
or 191:0 and 19U1, partly when I was ir. Vranoo for a longer period in
.about August of iSnl. Then, stajdy by questioning those roscuod
persorc Hi) lan mod ft mr*or cf important faots -nd were ablo to draw
up a a -orandun containing c irtair. instructions. This for tod tho
first basis for ire tractions on conduct during vc. ter Inn dings.

3 This wort you arc talking about, rrs that conncotod in any¬
way rith tho tap erica nts at DftOhau?

::o, th.ra ns no eon . motion as I hava air Cdy said. This work
rraa noro or loss conplfcoi in t... saner of 19ul and there was no
question of" -any cold juperlaenta in Oac'-au yot.

»3o, th Proseoution has submitted Docunont Ho.

Prosecution jshibit 52, in order to prove that you had been detailed
for tb j freezir.; cficpcriaants ir. Tcdheu. TM.3 is the -.-ell known
nifty* Ljtt-r. This Documint is in the Prosecution Book "o. 2 on
pago 77 of th- Snglish text. loa Dr. ~*altz, among oth.rs aro aor.tionod
as beinr; in charge to '..'ork or. sea rescue problems} please ocplair. this


vt V* 5


7 H37 L7- '-ATT-2-1.-'e shar (In*-, :'urtz-7er. Scbon)

Court ?k>. 1

to a.

.. i r. vc-r h.'.d cry krc-.riodse of this letter. I loomed of it
only hero. I was rot asked -.<hat aj c.inion was on such cn assi^nr-ent
ar/i I novar received cry order, which would have brought about tho
axocution of this plan. “If tlu su- ?astion of 20 ’lay, 3^1*2, which
:liai iviktis here tcs put into cotton, I would h-.vo had to bo r^von
an order to that affect, I novar received any such order and I novor
1 oar™d anything of this letter,

Q Veil, do you know perhaps how this lottor was drawn up and who
wore proposed for those experiments?

k How thu letter rms drerrr. up, I do not know. Thoso things


happonod in Berlin end wo in urdoh know nothing about theta. I only
know what 'tippka hixoelf a his tostiaony in tho :iloh trial,

►thor.dsv I knemvothir.-; of it.


7 ?'ay-^i-'3-3-l-Blakley (Inta: Kurtz & Von Schon)

Court Ho. I, Casa No. 1.

DH. FILLS: Jfey it ploaso tho Court, the records of !'_ilch«s
state: ant, that is to sjf, Hippke• s testinony in the hilch trial, I
vill subtiit to the Court as soon as it has been certified by tho
Secretary General. As I jmtionod yesterday, I've asked for this to
bo do no. Hipoko says in the record that he had e imarked Woltz for
thi.se Dncimu oxperirents because fcu had _cdo anirnl experiments about
cold problo.AS before. When he had a conversation with Raschor about
this, ho renumbered that Wcltz was a jan uho was purdy interested in
tho thoorotical aspect and was not roally suitable for this task. Ho
therefore suggostod Prof. Hclzlochrer instead of Wcltz bocauso ha liad
already worked practically on those problems. Thereupon, Holzloohnor
was sono to Dachau officially.

Q Dr. Woltz, novurt’wless, I should like to ask you to ccbi-
nont on another two dccuxntr which I shall now hand to you. This
first document, NO-233, Sxhibit Nuifcor 32, fron the Prosecution Book
XXX, Phgo 12 of tho English text, is tiw roport by Raschor to tho
Roichafu-hrvjr SS.

A Rase her reports horo about a talk ho had with !iip]Jco; and
ho says, "At tho snno tixo os hud for perniasion to carry out tho cold
and water exporlaonte in Dachau and asked that tho following >. ongagod
in thoao oxperirentsi Prof. Dr. Jarisch, of tho University of Inns¬
bruck, Prof. Dr. Holzloehnur, cf Kiel, and tho Luftwaffe pathologist
Prof. Dr. Singer, of Schwabiag Eospital." Oa tho 15th of Juno 192*2 tho
plan that I t. -a to carry out tiiosc axporirxmts had already been dropped;
and other rraoa woro sontionod.

Tho next lottor, NO-286, 2xhibit 83, was addrossod to tho
Roich3fuchror SS. It coucs free L. I. lU, and it says that Holsloohnor
has rocoivod a research assignment on tho effect of freezing of w-»i-
blcodod subjects; that to carry out thoso invast igations a research
group "Hardships at Sea" is to bo set up; that this group consists of
Prof. Holzloohnor, Dr. Raschor, and Dr. Finko; and that it is intended
to dissolve the research group at the latest by l£ October I9h2.


\

? }fcy-:^!5-3-2-eiajcley (Inta: Kurts & Von Sc ho a)
Court No. I, Caao No. 1.


Koro again the experiments are reported on, and ny none is
not oonticncd. I believe that the docioants submitted by the prosocu-
tion shew tint I had nothing to do with the cold experiments in Dachau.

Q 1 reoenbor here that you mentioned before to *uj that
Baschor proposed to you earlier that cold oxperirants be carriod out in
Dachau, that is to say, after you had tumod down his altitudo oxter i-
conts with a slow ascent. Pleaso explain this to us.

A That is true. I said that yesterday. When 1 rejected
Rasetor'a first suggestion, high altitudo experiments with slow ascont,
ho cane to no with a now suggestion. That was about Novor.bor 19bl«
This now suggestion was that co3d experiments should bo carriod out in


Dachau.

q Now, why did you doc lino to tnko part in the froozing ox-
perirvents whereas you approved tho lew pressure cxp>rinonts of Rufft

A First of all thcro would not havo boon a possibility of
carrying out those cold oxForimonts in Dachau undor good conditions.

But ttuse exporironts did not soon to no to bo nocosshry at that tire.
At least they soecod too early. At our institute .animal oxporinonts
wore still going on; and this sorios of anircl experiments which wo
had begun was rory successful at that tire. So that there wm no nood
for us to ;erfom hman experiments. Ho wore making good progress with
our anianl oxpa-irents; and it was Just tho other way around in this
fiold which wo wore working on. In thu field of basic research it is
much simpler and rare confcrtablo, realizing our other considerations,
to work with snail cniaals than to work with human b-ings. Wo had no


reason to want to carry out hucan experiments.

q Ac far as I know, you carried out cold experiment#'on
pigs, ftjrhaps you can concent on tlicso.

A Later, in 19li3, because -f tho air war, I aoved the in¬
stitute to Freysing to an estate eight kilcotcrs away fron Freysing.
Tho transfer vr-.s effected with consideration of the point of vaow
that pigs wore bred there and that in this way wc would be ablo to got

7111


■


7 lfcy-!>-:B-3-3-91fikley (Ints: Kurts /: Vcn Schon)

Court Ho. I, Caso Kg. 1.

pi~ 8 38 experimental m i^Os, which of course were not available othor-
wiao during wartime. The pig was desirable as an experimental anircl
be can so exponents rlth aaali animals, of course, are United "trover
dimensions, weight, and fur arc important. In the case of the pi& one
cones such closer to tho conditions of toe human being. Tho pig is not
only relatively clcso to tho hunan rotabclisn; it has also diaunsions
co itc 5ponding to these of Iran beings; and it does not havo a great
deal of fur so that in tho pig we saw an ideal experimental anise 1 as
a substitute for a hunan being for experiments which wore rolativoly
close to reality, and w> succocdod in finding a series of facts wo bo-
liovud wore iriportont.

Q So do I understand you correctly if I toko it that you
tr.do experiments on pigs in order net to Havo to purfrm experiments
on human brings, and alto boc-uso ytur experiments on pigs wero so
satisfactory that you had no noed to use hu-vrn beings? Is that how I
should understand you?

A Tub.

Q TJbon did you horr for too first tioo that cold oxporinonts

wore bolng carried out at Dachau?

A In tho sun-or of 1?U2 a few nontos bef ore tho Hurriborg
conferonco, two dolegates turned up sent by Holzloohnor who asked ny
associate Welts to carry out -xygen tests with certain apparatus 'thich
•re had at the iimtituto. Kelts asked tho non why they needed it. Tnoy
said toot they wore not allowed to give any details about tho experi-
-.onto. Kelts refused tr detoraino tho oxygen content, ho inforaod no;
and I approved of his refusal. Shortly afterwards, tho two nan cane
beck and naked that w e so^d the machine, the chorolcrator, Sc Dachau,
loaning it to then. *elts brought the toe non in to ny office tc soa
ne and said that wo wauld net give up tho uachino and that ho did not
want to hare anything tc dc with Dachau. I was present. I apprvod
what ho said. It was absolutely in accord with my feelings .and on ny
orders that ho refused to give up this machine. I did .oat want to have


7122


7 ifey-l£*i®-3-ii-dlakley (Intss linrtss -1 Von Scton)
Court Ko. I, Case So. 1.


~rytM"g noro to 6c with Rase her under any conditions.

Q 77111 ycu please give us the date as precisely as possible
as to r;hen these people frea HOlslo e hn ar turned up to see you?

A I cannot say anything more definite than that it uust
have boon in the aumer of 19U2. I cannot give the date any ovoro ac¬
curately.

Q This apparatus of which you talk, was that perhaps the
snae apparatus which Rascher mentioned in his letter to Hinalor of
9 octobor 19U2? I cr. handing you this letter new. It is in Dccunont
Beck :f tho prosecutirn IT, Pa^o 108 of the Eajlich version, and Docu-
ix,nt MO-l£lO-F5 cf tha prasocutton and 2xhibit Number 73« Plor.so ccra-
nent on this letter.

A Base tor writes, "Tho Oltz Institute dcos not wont to ^ivo
j o apparatus sin ply because they are afraid that I will have good re¬
sults on hunan oxporinents srro quickly than is possible in years of
anlnal oxperlaants. Kelts, instoad of now admitting that wq roachod
cur goal aero quickly in tto frooting problems through exporirwnts on
huran bolnge arei nood tto ap.xvratus, r-akus tto oxcuso that nt tlvo pro-
sont tito ho is conducting froozing oxforiaaonts on shavud cats and
noods tho apparatus for this purpose." This is tho machine of which I
apoko. I should liko to rofor to this enornous iapudoncu with which
Raschor simply docandt freo .» that I oust give hi:, a machine which bo-
longs to ny institute, a naehi&s on which to has not tho slightest
clain; and ho said that I nsdo tla oxcuso that I needed it nysolf. Ho
oxcecta that I shruld apologise to hia for nodding ry own anchino and
for not bolng willing to sivo it to him. I just wanted to mention that
os an illustration of Rascher*s attitude. ,

Then he writes, "Through tto OCT ’toIts is trying to got cap¬
tured Russians as subjects fee hia experiments. Hunan experiments con-
dvr ted outside of camp do not soon expedient low." How Rascher cotnos
to make this assertion that we were trying to get captured Russians
through the K:* I don't know. TTe never oven considered that.- I don't

- . 7U3


- 1


7 j4ay-iHG-3-f>-clakley (Inta: Kurtz i Von Schon)

Coirt Ho. I, Case Ho. 1.

know how Raoctor imagined that; hem ha thought that we were opening a
private concentration cacp. I can't understand what this suggestion
z*ana. Tie never even thought of it. I said that just about this tine
we were having a groat deal of sincess with our aninal exccrincnts
and that later we wont on and experimented on pigs.


M^y 7-L!-3K-4-l-Galla3hcr (Iat. Von Schoor. & Kurtz)

Court I, Coso 1.

. Did Rasohor muk~ more lies and untruthful state¬
ments like thi3?

.. Yes, ho nolo very many untrue statements, sofar
as I can check hero. I remember that h- toll Ronbors
ns wall as Slavers, that I was a parson of Catholic
oriontetion. I never bolonjol to tho Catholic Church,
and I never p xticipatcd In Catholic politics. That was
also rn untruth which ho had purely invontod. I was on
vory distant toms with -tasohur end oortninly never talk-
od to hi:: on ideology. This ronark which Rasohor nado to
Roabore, as woll os Clovers about the "blaok robed
brother" woll, that is pure invention.

I Coming book to Holzlo her, do you not think it was
dangerous for you not to fulfill Rasohor's wishes.
Thoroforc, you ogroo with tho dofendant Siovors, inas-
uuoh c.b ho said on cross examination th it you wore ono
of tho traitors who declined to make experiments on
human beings, that you prof erred to have Gorman soldiers
dio instead of carrying out experiments?

May it pleeso tho Court, this passage was taken from
the lottor of 24 Ootobor 1942, which has boon roforrod to
boforo. This lottor nay oolneido sofar ns tho dato is
conccrnod with tho porlod of tine with which wo arc
ooncornod hero. It is Document N0-1609-P3, Exhibit No.
92, fra: Document Sook 3 of tho Prosecution, prgo 77 of
tho English text.

Professor ./oltz, do you still remember ny question I
asked you? ./hotter it was dangerous for you not to comply
with Rnschor's wi3hos?

« according to what I soo hero in tho correspondence
I would have to assume so. Howevor, at tho time I did
not knew it. I ’i-: not know how dangerous Rasohor. was.


7U5


jj-y 7-ll-BK-4-2-Gallegher (Inc. Voa Schocn * Kurtz)

Court I, Cnso Ho. 1

I lid not iongino tt-n of course, that he would report
-v-ry detail to Hinder personally. On the contrary I
thought that the relations with Hinder, which he was
always talking obeut vias just boasting, but I sou now fron
the correspondence that he actually had a vary strong
inflaonoo, and that ho inforcod Kinder about ovory detail.

I believo that Koschor would have bu-n just tno can to
use that authority .ihich ho had been given in this
Docuc-nt 1G09-PS; similarly he is supyosod to havo dono
soaothing against his father, but I don't know the details
about that.

v ..part frai the fact that Holzloehnor's dologatos ocno
tc soo you in order to oelloot tho C-.lorionoter f roc you,
afterwards, \*>ro you given any other indication of con¬
duct in; the cold oxporlconts at Daohau?

.. Certainly boforo the Nurnborg oonforor.ee, a week or
two before, Holzloohnor onao to soo no at tho Institute,
and suggested that wo should coop or a tho rosults. *<o
both knew that there were to bo leoturus at J’urnberg,
beoauso wo had r-coivcd the agonda for tho Numbers oon-
foronoc in tho c entice. Thon Holzloohner ouco to ac
and sugg-sted wo should ooapero our oxporiuont3, should
discuss then with occh other, and should oloar up any
differences beforehand, so that vio would not contradict
each other during tho conference. 3uch discussions
botwoon two oxperts is in goneral quite useful, and it
is quite understandable that Kolzloehnor aadc this s* gcot-
ion. Thon I said to Holzloohner that undor no conditions
would I hrvo anything noro to do with Kasohor and Dachau,
after tho experience I had had. I told liolzlo^hnor
exactly what had happonod to no in conduction with Husch-r,
I refused to tuli Holzloohner what success I had had, ana

7U6


K-y 7-M-3X-4-3-Gall a^hor (Inc. Von Sohoen & Kurtz)

Court I, Case So. 1

A

I refused to listen to whet he had discovered. Consequent¬
ly I lour no I of Holzloohnor results only -what ho reported
at tho Uurnbors conference.

i

4 Rttschor said you had done all of this booauso of
3 clentifio Jealousy?

.. ..oil, that was a cutter of courso. Rasohor oan not
sr.y thr.t I repudiated hi. for reasons of character. Ho
has to - different reason, but tho suss~stion which

Holzloohnor ruxdo would h vo boon to ny advantage, too,
sinoo r. forml' coul* easily have boon found in ordor to
preserve tho priority rights of ouch individual. In such
Cisoussi ns one oould h .ve oxolinnsod rooords, and
inpurtlal expressions,’soaothin?. like that, nioro would
have boon nothinj gainst it, cad in j.nornl it is quito
useful for two non working in tho snuo field to coup arc
thoir insults beforehand so that they do not surprise each
other ct tho conference. ?h-t is to the adventure of
Doth parties, but in this case I refused beoauso I want-
od to Bake it quito Clear to tho outside that I would
not huvo anything ooro to do with Rasohor.

q ..bout tho results of tho Dachau oxporiaenta you had

hoard for the first tine in Numbers*

.. I heard in Numbers Holzloohnor' a report and no nore.
Like all the other persons at tho conforenoo. I listonod
to Holzloohnor's lecture, and Rasohor additional ronark
subsoquontly, but to nothins -Iso.

i Now could one deduce free Holzloohnor* s lcctura that
thorc were fataliti.s in the Daohau uxporinonto?

.. Of course I lestc-ncd carefully to Holzloohnor's
lectur. anf. one ecu Id read between tho linos that Holz-
loahner hoi reported about at least one South case but
it could not be d.tert^aod whether this one death was


7117


May 7-M-BK-4-4-Gol lather (1:6. Von Sohoon ^ Kurtz)
Court I, Case V.o. 1


free. tho 3 c .-rosouo service, or vfcothor it was r. doath
which hr! occurred .t Dachau. In a very unclear way
Kolzlochn-r h ad nixed up tho experinents fron tho soa-
rcscuo service, and what he had discovered at Dach„u, so
even c person woll informed about tho dotails could not
easily distinguish in the first place how aany deaths
there had boon, and, in the socond plaoo, whether tho
one death, which tney said existed, had boon in the soa-
rosouo sorvioe, or in an oxperinont at Dachau.

'I Did you and Holzlo-hnor talk together of tor this
lcoturo?

- I talked to Kolzloohner aftor wo both aavo l~oturo3,
and discovered th .t . Tactically wo had oano to tho scuo
results, but ti: .t in tho theoretical interpretation of
death of persons wj h d different opinion. I told Holz-
loohner, of course, I would bo vory interested^in know-
in; how ho explained his opinion, and I said thatI
would ;;ivo hi:, ny records about tho nninal exporinonts,
but I asked that he aivo od his reoord3 in turn, and to
send then through official channels. I knew that Holz-
loohnor was not in a position without agroouont to givo
no any details. Readier had said after liolzloehner'o
lectures that these oxparinents were scorot, and, in
offoct, wore top secrets, and that I, therefore, asked
Holzloehner to send no his rcoords through offiolel u.
channels to explain his theoretic 1 opinion, and I would
plnco r.y own record at his disposal in turn. Holzloehner
proaisod to do it but I hoard nothing noro about it. I
nevor received the records.

<1 How it would bo interesting to know how Acsoher
behoved after tho lecture?

‘ 7118


..


7 -S'seo (!-*• Schcn/lurtx)

Co-art I Cc*o 1

a. Let* h.* already de*ccibcd th.t here, ^ftor holnloehnor hod
finished, -nachur added a few rather unit-port_=t scientific nc-rh*.
and then in n rexy unfortunate foxn, n« u_de the st.-taxent which ha.
boun diacucoad here r*ne-tedl;- th-t the expwrtnents had been u-ne i
uoe.ielo b- the aoich.fuehroxw Sd l .h-t they wore secret, th.t thw
h d noon ^erforaod on roluntoer*. criclnal. was h_d boon regul-rly
conlaanod—tac rax-ric which ha. been diacus.od here repeatedly.

^ Die* 7 on di.cu.. tno.e two lecture, with ota»r i-rticip.ntB of

the tootin';!

a. To., of cour.o, w. t.JUod about it. Tor X triced

to M. cad Juochnor-Jrolburg about It. b. »or. all of too oplolon
that tho fora la «ueh 3_.ol.or bad aajo hi. roa.ro .a. «tr^oly 111-
cho.on. i. aad. th.t lo o trlfllBt fora. mlch »c _U cor-.ldorod a
.eriou. lwO-'; of tuot.

DH. VXLLU If it Plou.0 *•"<> Court * 1 ? olal 0,11 h0r ° bri0fly

th-t there i. on affidavit at the di.oo.al of the Court of ^rofcn.or
Xnotho which ref or. to tho di.ouo.ion which thc.v ooopla had -ftor
Sn.ehorU -ud holxloohner'a locturoo.

3Y IR. VXSSSt

q. Dr. *-elts, *-t did you think of H...eh«rU .t..tasont«? Did
.-cm, -ftor holtloohncr'a lecture and .ub.«n*aont to *-.ohorU o^ovhat
■tr_n*o boh_Tior, feol th-t Archer w.. prob-bly - crtuin -1 or a
dascrali.ee. ch.jr.oterT

O. *_t i. -orob.bly tot quit. th. right tom. I ban .oy that
tho n_a.tr lh uhioh -t_.oh.r n_4o tbl. r«al «-• ortrmol, dloa«roe-
U bl. to M, _hd BcMhor B_fo aooth.r rmaric to m aft.r tho locturo.
Ho .out past BO _nd .aid. laughUgU. that OhC. tho roputatloB 1.
rulnod, ono oaa IIt. o.ry .oil. a. rolo -blot ho ulayod th.r.
apur-M? UlCaBOd Bin T«v aurh. ahd th-t 1. Vhat «. fbUBd «-
olQoaant.

: u'.'s- say that aolxloahner*. attitude wj q lito difforent.


C-art 1

.-:y 7-h-5-2-HJ-Hryr.cs-V,n Schon-nurtz.


S.lzloehncr presented tile srtt-r scrl.ualy, ph d of c uree
VC; c lhed rb at it. Baechr.er pi id Knothe thought that
lzloabn^r had not contributed such that the animal
exyericents bed not clrerdy shown and did not :nlnk that
Holzloahner'a experiments were valid for that re-son.

Did h ne of the orrticlpnnts of the aeetin 3 *..0
anything -g-lnst Rr.echer? =vce of these gentlemen were #
obvl asly indignant -boat the lecture -nd Hracher's
c.nduct, rad it w.uld hrvo beer, the obvious thing to do
for tb.se -pec le to trice action.

h. It la perhaps too each to spy th-t tne O o.*.tloaen
wore very lndl 0 nrnt. I did :\j t ..err any oplni.n6 fr,a
a st thea nt rll. I ern apeoft only of tile p« pie who
wore nerr me nnd to w:.oa I talked nb ut the ;ar tear.

•

Knothe and Bueohner end Vert were three people woo
repudiated the zeeter. Te wait -r .ent the ;tnora re llted
it et ell, I do not /.now. In a uoh r congress, .an ^no
la staffed with lottu ce rnd 6donce, -ne Is not bo
rocoptlv*. that one lleter.a carefully t every lecturo If
,nc Is not eapecl lly Interested In It. I could very
anally la glno thrt people did not ne r It t all, 1-
n.t notice anything soocl-l -bout It. One v'e .t
»lv ys lr.ltl * ted. It Is v ry r.-'rd to Judge now frr
ce-.^lc understrnd things In such bl- aoetlng.

;. w , you ..uraelf lectured -t the Kumber 0 aeotln a .
On the brsle of dirt lecture yoa ver~ charged, when the
Prosecution a-de Its ooonln b 6t tea-nt, with 6 met.:iu.
very special. I shell now h-nd you r. photoetrtlc copy
of th-t lecture.

If it pie ses the Court, this la document Volt* No. 5,
and It will be ‘iltz Exhibit No. 8.

Dr. Veitz, will y-a olecse toll the Court what Is


7120


Court 1

Kry 7-lt- 5-3-HD-Von acbon-Kurtz.

significant, end now f~r the charges of Che Prosecution
rr« justified?

A. The lecture ^esls with rc-warclng eft.r dangerous
c. ->lln.. .iry I point -ut once aore that "cooling - or
"chilling" nenns the general chilling of the body, for
cxr.Eple, in cold water. -This decs not oecn local frcez-
lr. 0 , perhaps >t the errs or ciu. feet or the fingertips
or the n-.a>, such as occurrs rather frequently. This
lecture denis nly with the chilling of th- entire body.

It reports cn nnlaol experiments. There Is no doubt
whatever that the lecture derls >nly with enlnr.l oxperi-
nents. I on -11 re'-d the third sentence:

"Our exoarloental animals wore r-’cblto, rats, and
^ulnec nigs." We tested sevor-l aocsurcs to rescue those
-nlarls, and wo disc vered that q;ici re-wnralr.g was an
extremely effective cersure. Ir. ord^r to O lvo r figure,
wj were able lr. a c so of anlcrla ot which 23 per cent
died — or rather, were e& per cent died, we were ~blo
to snow that the mrsslVv introduction of w rath Is the
,r..et effective. We s.i,w*i th‘t It anies no great ;.lffjrenoc
In which f»ra th- weroth Is introduced, whether by short
w-.voa jt by hot baths. Vo rl3o .-v« the reasons why wo
believed that results which v. hd fumnd cn r.nlaals here
were v*4d f -r human bv.in t s -s well. For U6 It was quite
clwrr th-t these results did cpply to hum^n boln e o, -nd
wo expressed tr.ls assu .ption cle-rly In the p per. Thi6
w'3 b.c-usu thw pnthologic-1 -ni matoaic-nl conditions
In death fres cold, which h ve long bo*.n .<nown In the ^
c-so of huanr. beings of course -nd which 3uechn_r had
.~e-.lt with in the areC-alng lecture, wore the same in hua-n
beings rnd In mlmcls. Tnor., If there Is any difference
between hunr.n beings •-nd animals, It can concern .-nly


7121


Z art 1

t-HU-H yncs-V-n bchen-Xurtz.

-*- c skin. Ir, short waves ve had feand a some which could
':o allied in C"3„ tho skin of the hoarn celng should react
differently fr.n tae skin of the mia.l, which w*s not
nco_sa'rily t.to case.

?-r q-ick rcw-ralng, for therapy in these o.ndltlons, we
h-d v rk.d oat a formula of a-thonwtlopl precision. It
re :.s: Om. must apply r s aaoh vermth ce possible, as
quickly r a possible, tc re great a volume of the body cs
tossiele. That Is the essential contents of the papor.

*• sj, if I enduret nd you c.meetly, ns far as the
pr-otlonl possibilities of rescuing pc pic wore concerned,

J -chiov.d the sane results rs ri,lzlo*.wcr.

x. e c a. to the same practical results, but wo
ballsvod that ir. theory we .. vo - bettor explanation.
Holzlowhner woof the opinion—I'll deal with this only
rrl.fly—th't c.ldd sages the organs, tnct the hoart lc
affooted mainly, that the human bein 6 dies because tho
ho-rt i 3 rffacted by tho cold. Cur •. lnlon, which wo
believe hne been proved ir. the mo-ntlnc, is that we c'uld
t v th-*t cold does not u:.a- e e tno or b nns, tne c^ld merely
paralyzes the organs and ankes then lnctive. Lutz had
s • ,vr. thrt f-r the he rt of the guinea ol e , rnd I had
shown it fr a the int-stinuc of the rablt. Tho or 0 -no
~ v ~ ® d.-a* = .d 1 : tno Sv.es t.. it tn~t tr.ore is enough
ex; # on, but this orygw-n supply in cold becomes extremely
difficult because thw tx-ar.siort of oxy^n by tho red

M

corpuscles n longer functions, so that in tho last
-nalysls tee decisive f ctor is hemoglobin and the fact of
whether there is enough rxygen avail-bio or not.

x. “ere oa -Ite certain that the results which 'ou
'.C-olev.d with -'r.ieris v aid also rrly tp human therapy?


7122


Z art 1

I>y 7-IV-5-5ynea-V.n ochou-Kartz.


/v. "e wore cortnIn,tand that w*e Very -tally 0 xr.rcG.j 0 d
lr. 1 = ice tare, th-t -t le"3t no fora of the llor.tlon
iv;at is np Herbie tv hu. zrr. beings too, wrra v tor of
ol.ctrlclty. At lo-et -n. v aid bo effective. Now we
k*™ tb’t both forns rr. equally effective. It is only
"• question of technical facility, *a to which way rcrches
tee b.djr quicker.

'• K.v, i: • a were t. 0 iv. a final statesunt on nil
tela, r.'.v 'oar -*nd r-dzlochoor 1 9 ex-erisont9 era in
n t --C.. >tiwr, t..la voai. e-.r^e, I tr.ee it:

•.a f-r rg the orr.ctlcnl headline was c.nc-rned, y-.a h.th
"ohlov <1 the scjw rcoultfi. «s far ne theories and
onlm’tl.r.a nr. c ncorned, you i und the oottor 8' lution.

2 /✓' think th~t Rrsch^r's *nd Kolzlochner's J-chnu
or oriaonts v^r. c sblotoly useles ?

a. y.j, no orr. not be ef this opinion. If I aoeak
nl of tfle techr.lcrl *>nd scientific ascects an:, lynoro
Z~.j toral 'Qp-cto C/spletolv, »n_ c*n ooo very cle-rly
fr z the tw<. reports in wn~t enoh _>'.i sc.-s his Bain task.

’c K.re lr.t.rested in th_ sector wfclc.. • no al s ht beat
doaorlfco "a b"elc research. v® were interested priamily
in cnovln b bnsloolly ho-* anlanls cm to srved froa death
- c.ld, and secondly wo wore interested in why nn -nla'll
dies ir- a cold at nil.

H.lzljahnor w-.s ir.terected in -tore prrctlcal questions,
.-.olzloohnor w s trying to find .at whether w rctn orn bo
- : by - hot Vt.. f by v srtfcd oeth, or by r 11-ht urndle,

whether or.v can prevent coolir^- c spocl-l suite.
r - lzloehr.-r investorted r. naaber of each questions nnd
ujiv^d a of th_s # w..lch wore "beolutely necessary .and
i -.ortant in ar-ctico. One can n.i any thot Solzlochner 1 s
-r-e ’ iaents wore in vain. Ho erno to quite r n.ab,r of


7123


C 'art 1

-iry 7— i*“5-6-HB-E«ynus-Vvn schon—Kurtz


c nclusions which ve .-.•’d not lr-vestl^rled at ell .'nd which
••3 c aid net ..:vj Investigated hoc'use these o-ncluslcns
c aid 'sc drawn only fr-ja ojnaricente with hooirn bolnas
-r.d n-.: with •nlarls. _

THE FRSSIDSKT: The Tribunal will new ;e In rcco&a.

U recess w.-s trken.)


? K ay 47-*;-yjC-7-l-fceehan (Icj., Yon *choen)

Court r

THS XaBSKAL: The Tribunal is ageia in session.

ST 25. VULE:

Q. Sow, I have the following Question to put to you; can you
without immodesty say that your discovery of the effects of oulck
rewarding wra ir.portant and significantT

A Kay I correct your Question? It was cot a discovery it vbb
a rediscover:-. The fret that oulcic revaming can save the lives of
chilled people was discovered in 1868 by Lepschineky. This work was
ignored or forgotten, so that since that tine the doctrine nrovoiled
that rewcrr. ng was daeger^is and night Iced to collapse. V e realised,
of course, that this rediscovery wes of great slgniflcrnce, oepecially
in wi>r tl.no, when marp* people are exposed to chill. The Sevy very
soon reported to us that they hrd had good euccoes with this method and
if I understand this 'inofficial Information correctly, then on the basin
of this t*rk hundreds of lives were saved during tho war alone in the
c.nvoy dostroyors in tho Sorth Sea and of course in tho future it will
to r blessing. It wan vory clear to us that wo hod had tho real good
fortuno which a resorrch workor scldto has, that vc hod discovered a
liotsure which »*s vory simple and cheep rnd could be apoliod every¬
where. We had found something that would srvo nary lives. It lo known
to no that in tho American press this discovery was hailed rs the
greatos doed of German mod lei no during the war. I would osnoclrlly
like to disown such exaggerations. One cannot rank scientific work
in different fields ths way one can rank tennis players, that is
impossible. Of course, it was cleax to U6 that our discovery was
ir.cortnnt. Then, in the German proas, I was subjected to attacks
beceuse of this verk, it wra ::eintained that I had killed nnny people
in -echcu together with Saschor. I was celled a beast in human form.

I believe it v;uld hrvt been better if the German press had used this
spree which was dovoted to these ottac'-s, for an objective explanation
of h.v trercherous iceth by cold is rnd h-w easy it is to save the
lives of such pe.ple.


7125


7 hey «7-k-rjC-7-2-*eeiaQ (let.. Von Schoen)
Court I


If I reporter correctly, according to a newspaper report In
th, last cold period, 95 ceople died fron cold. I also think that
th*.se 95 people right have teen saved with a little hot water frea
the locorxtlTe of the train they were in, hut these 95 people died
because there wes no one In tho train *to knew what to do end know
h-w dangerous death by cold is. I only wish what wo discovered nay bt
spread and disseminated as soon ns possible so that such things roiy
bo printed in the futuro.

^ hr. President, to illustrate whet tho witness hat Just
said, I tculd liko to out in Veltz Document So. 20, Exhibit So. 9
free Docunont Book So. 2, an excerpt fr-c a aagatinu, nan sly the
•Reader's Digest* of January 1947. This soys that tho nethod of
rewarding was used by Aoerlce in the war against Japan and it is
now a genorelly recognized nethod. This is page 77 of Docuncnt
Book 2. Sow, Professor Volte, let ns ask you; did you do what you
did in order to eoc that your inportant discoveries voro ndocmatcly
publicised?

A Cwj aont s after the Hurnberg conference, I published an
extonsive paper in the wuendhnor Mcdlzlnseho Vochonechrift, a Oc-rr.an
porlodicrl with a largo circulation. Of course, wo did not keen our
disc -vorlce oocret, we published thor. as widely as possible, so that
n^t onl” tho Goman -ehmp.cht, tut everyone who read it, including
our onouies, could cake full use of it, once they had reed it.


7126


• - y 7-I‘-3Z-6-l-HoX3 io (Inc, Brown)
Ceurt .:c. l


However, within ay field of work I saw to It that the know-
leljw was I'ias-runnfced, I o.lLi together the doctors of
t&*- ' -i.scuu --rvic-. ..o delivered lcotur-s in Paris.

However, we colloct-d the discoveries th'.t had boon node
in Norway rnd on th- .«ost Const so that wo could work
furth-r in this field, and of cours-, th^ro nro a lot of
problems involved h-re so that it is not possible at any
OR* tine to a .y that the problem is aolvod. There aro
£mny questions that nust b- worked on in tho future.

D.i. elLLL: Hr. President, I shell put in ns Docun-nt
21 , Exhibit Ho. 10, the paper th t Dr. eoltz just riuntion-
o’ th t he had published. This is an oxpandod version of
the looturo ho !cliv-rod in Munich.

1 Dr. eeltz, I havi ooncludod uy questioning on tho
fre zinj question nd now con- to the last char^o aj».in3t
you, n.vuiy, the ch ryo of oorw^i. *'lr3t of all I

should lik. to «3k you wha; of thosu in the dock you know.

I 3hnll r,. .d th .ir nai*j3. Karl ornnet, Hundlosor, kostook,
you don’t know then?

.. Ho.

„ -mother <iuostion, did you hr.ve any relations with
the kaich kasenroh Council i.i your capacity as head of
tho iiodiorl Military Institute in Munich?

- No.

h Do you know Professor Schrood.-r?

.. Y-s, I knew hi;., of ocurae. Ho was ny inaodicto^
superior. Professor Jchroodor has hinself stetod whan and
how often wo 3pok- with each other. I nay repeat it happen-
-I four tines. First of all, 1938, at tho X-ray Confess
th t I was chnirnan of; secondly, tho second tine in 1940.

I r-n-nbor very well that I delivered a lecturo regarding
tho effects of altitude, and thv- duties of tho aviation

7J27


'• y I-5E-8-2 -Kcxsi c (I/.t. hr own)

Court Jo. i


lector who wr.s in ofcarcc, Thi3 was in Brussels. The
thir: ti.. I sew Dr, Schroodcr la 1943, in autuan, when
I was 3ick in tho hospital, Dr, Sohroeder has also des¬
cribed this noctin^,. Professor Scfcroodor was about to
be appointed inspector and Xn-w that, and this was tho
rowson why I asked Professor oc.iroodor tc say whether
the policy I was following at tho instituto should be
continued. I roporfcod tc hia briefly on our oxporinontal
work. Other thinjs w-ro not discussed, abov« all things
that have anything to do with tho natters in tho in.'.ict-
n-nt horo. The last tiao I sew Profo33or Schroodor wns
in Bad Kclhub, 1945, in February. Hero ajain I told hin
of tho work wo wore doinj Ln th~ instituto, end nothin;;
the t boro p.ny relation to tho indictr.cnt hero.

v Do you know Gonzkcn?

.. Ho.

v Professor (Jobber dt?

.. For . while I was with hin at tho iJ/tuorbruoh Clinic
ln tho beji.ininj of tho 20's, but I curtuinly havo not
sown hin 3inco 1926.

w Dr. Kurt Dlouo?

Boforo the war I hnd dealings with hi u in nut tors
concerning tho G*r:wn ^-rny association, but not sinco
tho war haro I so.n hi . or had anything to do with hiu.

. Krujowsky?

Kru;;owsky? didn't know liic oithor.

A hud elf 3r andt?

- Didn't know hin either.

v Poppondiok?

Didn't know hin oithor.

. S levers?


Didn't know hin oith-r


:: y 7-::-3X-e-3-Hoxsio (Lit. Brown)
C -arc . 1


. Bid you havo any connections with -hnonorbc?

.. II . Silvers has already said so.

t Did you know Professor Hose?

-- Professor Hoso hah also testified that we saw each
othor twice, once before the war in a glider contest, and
the second tir.u at the Numbers Oonforonco.

- Huff and Hoab-r3 have boon olerifiod already. Did
you know Brack?

« No.

, Bocker-Froysins?

.. I know hin. H. w :a the okpurt during the lattor
period. ..t the mil I had c ntinual official relations with
hi .. I novor spoke to liii- personally about Dcohau. On tho
other hand, I knov th..t ny institute, n^iaely, Lutz, was
in touch with hin ..t one tin... Let no rteocribo this. I
recall it r.a follows: I have already sail that our
theories differed fro: 1 . Holzloohner's ro.jardlnj the question
of Tropins death. Nov., Lutz had 3ub:iittod his papers for
publication and in thi3 paper this lifferencc of opinion
w a brought to lijht. I believe a 2r ;ft of this paper
was sent to Holzloohner so that he could stato his opinion
on it. T;, >n Holzloohner returned thu paper and in sub-
st nti .tioa of his opinion pointed out things in Holz-
loehns.r'3 report. .«e lookou up this report since wo woro
very intorostod in thi3 particularly, particularly sinoo

at the Nurnberj Conferenoo I had soon Holzloohner and it

M

was ascertained that tho r-port was not to bo found at
tho Jodi cal Inspectorate. Thus .alonj this circuitous
path \tc were not able to 300 the report either, uuch as
it would hxvu interested us.

. Did you know any of the other £o ntlcr.cn?

.. Schaefer, Hovon, Heialbocck, Pokorny, Ooorhausor, I
’.id not know any of then.


7129


V.'-.y 7-::-5eC-£-i-2:xsic firown)

Court To., 1

1 How, I nn not of the personal opinion that the con-
I’wronc s in Nurnbors and cl3c.ih.r3 were aeotin^s of
ocnspirator3, but I should like to know whether you took
part In any consultins conferences?

:io.

4 nd what do you havo to sr.y about the Nurnbere Confer¬
ence?

.. The Numbers Conference was not a consulting oonforonoo.

\ .<hr:t was It thon?

.. It was r. sclent If lo conference, dodientod to a specific
subjeot in which f.uiy people wero interested,,and con-
se t uontly tiony people attended. I don't believo that any
ernod foroo in the world could jjet cions without having
such oxchrnscs of opinion cu;ons their exports in oortnir.
fluids. Frcn n scientific point of viow tho liurnbors
C ^if-rence was certainly the nost significant nootinc
that over took place to consider this subject. I know
the literature on froozlnc very woll, nn5 I :how of no
oonforonoo which devoted itsolf to r.edloul freezing
rcso:roh so profoundly as the Numbers Conference.

. Did ycu consider your relations with »uff and Nauborg
r. conspiracy in the usual 3ensc of the toru?

.. I have s id hero in ^reat dot ail thnt I consider uy
rel tions with ituff a3 irreproachable. Wc do not have
to reproach oursolve3 with tho fact this was a vrar
nooos3ity. I b.licvo that the ngroonunts I had with kuff
can b. Ji,asurod njainst th^ strict criteria of pcacctino.

The purpose of our plan r.nd cgrocnont was to save hunan
liv»s, md I do not believe that such an agreoaont c..n
be ch r .cterizod as a conspiracy.

. Nov , answer ce one last question. Tho Prosecutor has
reproached nil the defendants with violating the


IJcv 9-”-a£-8-5-Hox3ic (Int. Sr own)

Court Ho. 1

Hippocratic oath, I should like to hava your personal

.ttitudo as a physicirn toward this subject.

.. The Hippocratic .path which has booouo here a bone

of ooctontion i3 the '.-rofessi jnal oath of a certain

profession which pledges llc.gianco to certain principles.

It is an honor .bio historical iocuaont, whioh, however,

does not altogether fit pros on t tiuos. If it is to bo

applied today its ward in;; has to bo changed very oxtensi-

Vuly, an- in thoso reformulations i series of now oaths

h Vw boon drawn up whioh hr.vo only a v*juo relv-.tion to

tho anoijnt Hi^-ocrntic oath.

•


7131


Court 1

& y 7-k-s-l-H£-Cv oi-3rown.

*t tne cnlversit •• tt vhicc I £ tailed it wss not cas-
;ca r- thr £ t-rsona t-ke such m o-th when they were bein s
-r-flu-ted, but those new foraul"tions . f the or th r_ bpsod
.a cne tcnerol principle of "nil noc-rv", rn:. I beliova nl6o
t.vc in discussions with leysen the s-m* f°lee opinions
-ri^e, fit leeet the discffsaion -.ore seeus to n v* ehjwn
Chrt medicine tnsca or. the trinciolo of "nil nocere" is c
very impov rlshod u.dlclne end we -re ur.forutn Uly not in
c position tc. carry un medicine on th t simple srinciple
codry. It ie - o%.tcer of c arse t at we must r^c aaend
to jur patients ' n :o r o.' o-raures of wnich we know in
hdv r. o under ccrtrin conditions they c r. ee harmful.

Thv doctor who ots CvOrdln fc t, the principle of
"nil nocore" is by r.o senns •* O o.d ofaysloirn if no _.lvws
too such wei-ht tv ta t orinclple. It is frequently the
mrn w .10 cannot decide, who is s-tlsfl-d with lnrdoqu-.to
methods. I believe tnat if the t eks -nd duties of c
doccor *r. t. tv Aofln.d with r. Lrtin ft-rmulr, Care
c uld bwteer bw ueacrlb d O' the orincl-lc "6"lue c^voti. .
au-.renr 1 .x vSto 0 , a mln c thrt the he ltd of tao v ciont
e .'ll b. the hi,heat law. I believe t..nt this prlr.cl )lo
defined the tasks of the lector than the prinoi lo
"nil n^c-re" '* .lch cm bo tele under stood. *1' of these
n-w f rmui-tivns of the oath b-sed on the r.ipoocr tic
o 'th a iv sense sv f?r the rel-tl ns botw«.#n the
doctor rr.d the r*ti nt re conc.rr.~d, but they become
entl ly noBS.nsic-1 vh.r. exp-rlcent*1 n.alcln worse
a h-'lthy subjects. I con s«i, n-. connection eetveen
the .-ip ocratio oath vnlc.i re c ul t.s th« doctor's re¬
l-tl. n to -. sick person, * r.d tr.e question of whether e
vrusin -1 i; to jo ..“iCut-ii nd wr.tn r r.e is fires to
be • =k..d whether he v_,ald llkv to subject ..las elf to .on

7132


■


C.urt i

jfcy 7-H-9-2-HD-Ccck-5rovn .

e:rporlc_nt. I soy, I can sec no connection. When the
Ei'-ocrntlc oat.', was first f oraulr ted there was no such
thing re cxp-rimental medicine. Experimental medicine
is c new development within the 1-st century. It hr a been
highly successful. « medicine not b'sed on the success
of experimental medicir.e is Inconceivable today. We
would have no oenesthetlc and a~ny oth-r things which
are very ossontlal in oedlcin- today. If thoro c.r-
indlvidur.l doctors like Professor Leibbranat h-r^ who
repudiate all exp.rlmentatl-n oven voluntary experiments,
then one must rsic whether th't is not *» sort of double
entry book keeping, if on the one hand those doctors
avail tho 08 wlvca of wh't experiment"! medicine hr.o
discovered and un the other hand requdirto the metnods
through which these diacoVvrl-s were made. I think
this la essentially Illogical. I personally am of the
opinion th.t in experimental medicine >T the innumerable
papers and works tnat we U3e h-re only partially and
accidentally totally a now int .rnrtionrl sfndard will
be dcvelop-d r.s to vh?t is permissible, wh.at Is .l.lu to
be of n dubious nature end what is to <x. forbidden. Now
I personally h vo only considered permissible voluntary
vX^erlm-nts on legally condemned crimln-ls. I Iso said
that this 1s not to b.cos. the g.nornl procedure or
;.on-r~l rule but vo dlsc-ssed the f-ct with Klopke to
wxperlmwr.t on ours elves, - hich is to bo th. basic rule
and uhet these other experiments were to be reserved for
c mlninum number of problems where mlm-1 experimentation
w uld not suffice -nd where experiments on one’s Self
for one ronson or mother ves impossible. «6 I odd I
believe that those principles corres-ond to rn lnt^r-
natien-1 standard and tr.-t they are ac.eptpble,. This


Court 1

Hry 7-#-3-3-HD-Cook-3rown

Is * Very complicated problem and I don't hrve co Geuen It,
whan on- smeats of .xc.rincnts on minors or mentally ill
p-rs ns "nd so forth, the proolcm w aid become very, very
c implicated, "Iso whether or not th_ State mrfcj- these
j~ -ale l- 3 ~lly pvallable, all of these rre mr.tt-rs with
which I pc not concorn-d my6-lf, but r6 I arid voluntrry
exp-rlsents on l-urlly oondonned criminals In ccses where
ther means of oxpor loon tot Ion r«.r- n-t rvnilrblo I
c nsld-r oerBl6elble.

DR. "ILLS: At the moment, Your Honors, I n-ve no
father questions.

BY JUDOS 3D3RIHQ:

Q. Profoe-'or "cltt, I enderstmd that prior to the
time thrt the high nltltuae experiments were to begin In
Dachau, you h~d a conference in Scrim with huff end
R aborg concernln 6 the possibility of conducting these
high altitude experiments t Daohau concentration oonrp.

D-. I underetrnd that correctly?
a. Yea, that is so.

I also und-rotand that subsequent to the Berlin
c.nference but prior to the time th»t t.io experiments
c- a an nt Dachau, you nrd o conference in A-nlch, la that
so?

a. Y-a, thrt Is so.

Q. Vho w a present ~t that c nf-rence?
a. Ir. the a-c^nd c nferenoe, . e mean? Ruff, Romberg,
A^sohar and myself. This v~e the conference rt which
"en&t ~r.d Lutz were previously lr. the room. «

k. So -t thrt time you rctu-lly went Into the details
-t this conference when you four men, Ruff, Romberg,

R~Echcr -nd >urself were present? -
a. Yes, th-t is so.


713 L


Court 1 .

I'-sy 7-X-3-4-HJ-C^oiL*3rvjira.


i. Kjv rt the aoetlng, the Berlin meeting r nd tha
Menlch conference, what was the clo~r understanding
c ncernin*. the ion who wer^ u> be used rs experimental
subjects?

«. first, let me make a correction. It Is not correct
t- speak of c. conference In Berlin. It w-e slaply c
c nv-rsatlon between Ruff and a: a If and later on. tho
dleoasslon in Munich, we assumed regarding the -x eri-
oental subjects what Acsohor always t Id us, and which
wc.s to be rend lr. the letter from himalor, Wi.lc ho
showed us •'t that tine, ur .ssaapti.n vra that th-se
were legally c .ndonnud crimin'le, not pjlitlorl prisoners,
thrt these persona wore to volunteer, -nd that they should
bo rewarded In accordance witn the extent to which they
voro used. That la vh-t Asohor C Id ‘>e, °nd that Is
-la 1.. the Hi rami or lett r.

g. Vi- It to be understood thrt nny distinction wr.o
i be Eadc ectween ^craan *'nd non-Go’'man nationals?

a. .’o did njt dlscuaa t .la point In detail ~.t that
time because then tr.e foreigner v e not legally
o ndoanod by German Courts -t ell. Thrt took ol*cc only
l?.ter lr. :hu coarse of the w-r, namely, that German
c irte passed Judgment on th- forced lbor in Germany.
There w s very little of that at thrt tlao.

i. Did this latter phase teko pices durln e the ouriod
»hich hr.d boon set nsl-o for y*ur wjrp-rlo^r.ts, t.irt Is to
a-y, eld your rol«tionahio durln^ tiv»t period of tlae
cen.j, to . -ur knowledge did tho Gorcnn government ^

„vcr pretend to exercise any Judicial control over
n^n-Gerxrn r.-tlonrls with the result thrt non-German
nrti.nals were incarcerated In the concentration ccar?

-t D-chau?


7135


Court 1

Xay r -M- 3-5-HD-C ok-3ro*R.


ji. JCo, we w„re Breaking of people who had been legally
c ndenned by German courts and at that tiae nly Germans
were under the Jurisdiction of German courts. Tho number
of foralaners wes very small at that time 6- th't they
:l~y~d no r lo of ~ny rractlcrl lmport-mco.

i. Then y.u understood these were t j be nrla nera
w. were Gorsra. nati -nals who had be^n tried end sentenced
b e regularly c.r.6tltuted German Court In Germany?
a. Yes.

That r s a re8alt of tr.ls trial* these Germrn
nationals wiv. nod b._n legally c ndemned by c G-rorn
C urt on oerarn 3,11 were serving t^rns In Jrche.u?
a. Yes.

Vfifl that the dear under3t~ndln e of all those who
were present?

a. I believe th-t those Conditions were porfcotly
ole-r and were not misunderstood b; 'ny one because
1 : ho understood it correctly -1 ur first Discussion,

*»nd 'Iso the witness Lutz nr a s^lu h-r- tn~t he understood
It cle-rly -nd I do not bellove there >•' s any d uot
that -lr.t whatsoever.

Tn-ro certainly w's no d ubt In your mind .-bout
the a-Her?

a. Ho, huff, ?. mborg and myself did not doubt this
r.t •’ll boc-uao this wr.s the cardinal point wnlcn hr.d
developed 't tnu first c nv^rertl n with dufl lr. Berlin.

y-s any distinction to be n^de In regard t the
;; ;e of ser-t-nce that th^se inmates hr.d received? #


7136


Court I

7/*y rj-fi

A 5g, ve knew that persons imprisoned for preventive reasons
vere involved. Tht w« cade clear tv the discussions vith Prokovsky,
tut vhether these vere persons condemned todiath or people vith long
terns there vas no distinction drawn tetveen then. I believe that it
vas the general notion that ve just had to draw a distinction here In
regard to the dangerous nets, of the experiment. I an referring ncv to
the discussion vith Eippke vhere there vas only generel discussion of
the experiments and no specific discussion.

q Did you knew, at that tine, tho type of prisoners ‘too vere
in Bechau, that is to say, vhether it vas tho canp vhich heused only
criminals condemned to death and life termers, as ve call it in
America, or vhether it also contained prisnors vho vere sorving o
nuch lessor sontence for such less dangerous or severe crimes or
offensos? Do you understand the inport of ay ouostionT

A I believe •&. In oy direct examination I said that I
knov that prisons and penitentiaries had teen emptied into tho con¬
centration camps. Thus, all the ia-atec could be cxcoctod to be tho
sane sort cf prisoners that you »culd find in orisons or peniten¬
tiaries - froo light terns to heavy '.nee.

q And you understood that you would oxpect to find tho sane
typo of prisoners at Dachau?

A Tes, I knev fron newspaper reports, as I srid, that prisons
and penitentiaries had teen emptied of their oontents into the con¬
centration camps.

q During the course of any of your prelininary discussions
or negotiations vith Ruff, Romberg end Hatcher, or vith any or cithor
of then, did you gentler.on adopt any voll dofined policy as to tho
typt of men - inmate - upon Wxon you vere going to experiment; that is
to say, did you develop a policy that you vcr< going to conduct your
experiments only upon prisoners vho had been condemned to death or
did you edopt a policy that you v«ld conduct experiments on prisoners
vho had beer, condemned to death and else on prisoners vho vere serving


7137


f Kay 47-#-FJ0- 10-2-Xarrow (*at., Brown)

Court I

long: terms e* habltuel criminals, cr did you say that nay criminal who
then was la 3achan who presumably had volunteered v-uld he used during
the e-urse cf your experiments?

a Skis Question was first discussed when ve sev the camp
cocuander la Dachau. Thera there was discussion of the selection of
t*t experimental subjects cn the basis of the Instructions that the
camp commander had received via Schnltzler frer. Blnalar and then
people In preventive custody vere taken.

Q Vhat class of people did you undorstend could cone within
the category cf tr eventive custody?

A I knew that protective custody waE the sentence In the onso
of unccrrcctable recidivism and were standard pcllcios here. I hnpooned
to know this thr ugh a bock that a well-known criminologist had reed
to r.e end had concerned himself with the theory of protective custody.
The book is by Kolndl and is ontltled "The Habitual Crlnlnal" and
there is a statoesnt of when and under what clrcunstnnces protective
custody Is pernlsslble so that I had good knowledge of this as a
laynan.

Gonorally speaking, then, y -u. Huff, Honborg and Rascher
understood that those experiments wero to carried out elthor upon
persons who had been condemned to death or upon thu habitual criminal
who was In protective custody? Zs that correct?

A *eo. As scon as w® had spoken with the camp conrandor wo
knew that people In preventive custody were to to used.

<; Was It known to you that, at the same tine the Ruff-
Rccterg-Rascher high altitude experiments were being conducted at
trehau, that Rascher vre also supposed to be carrying out separate
high altitude experiments on his own account under some sort cf
secarate order fron Himmler?

A I didn't kno that no. «s soon as the experiments began,

I received no further news fr-m Rascher. I tallevo I have stated
that here in some detail.

<i Did you receive any rep.rts fron any .ne else?


7136


7 hay 4?-K-?JC-10>HCarrcv (Int., Srcwn)

Court I /

A Tou i.ean regarding Rascher's second experimental series?

Regarding any of Rascher'e experimental series of regarding the
Ruff-Rorterg-fiascher series which was then taking place at Dachau?

A Ho, I have already said, in direct examination, that es soon ns
Has char shoved ne this telegram and from then on I heard nothing more.

And this telegram was the reason why nothing acre was told to ne.

^ Then I assume that you heard nothing freo rny one concerning the
death of Rascher's experimental subject which was supposed to have occurrod
in the niddle of April or the latter pert of April, 1942?

A I heard of these deaths only here in ny interrogations.

Q that you said in regard to the April death vould also he true in
regard to the two deaths that are supposed to have occurred in Kay, 1942,
in what one of the witnesses said hero vae Rascher's separate oxperinento?

A Tes.

^ After tho Ruff-Ronterg-Rascher experlnent wps completed - the ono
in which Rcnborg was to act as a subordinate to Ruff - Roschcr was to
act as the subordinate to you - and you and Ruff wore to collaborate, did
you recoivo eny un-fflclol reports as distinguished fron official roporte
concerning the rosults of those experiments?

A Raschor nov«.r worked undor ay direction. Rnecher loft at e tino
bofore tho experiments had begun or after only a couplo of axporlnontB
had teon carried out ab-ut which I, however, know nothing. I oersonnlly
know, at the uonont when Rase?-;r loft, nothing ab.ut whether the experl-
no nts had begun 3T not in Dachau.

^ Upon what date did you understand that Reseller's official connec¬
tions with you or y^ur institute was severed?

A I figured out note or lose as follows: On the 19th of February
as it con bt seen, fron Frau Rascher's letter, an lnouiry was directed
to the Relchsfuehrer SS rnd, at this tire or shortly thereafter, the
experiments in Dachau were cut -ff. Tho telegram that was shown to
ne is presumably the answer to this lnouiry of the 19th of February and
it must have reached Bascher a few days later. Sow, it appears that
Saschsr didn't show it t - ne lrr.ediately tut carried it around fra


7139


7 Xay 47-M-JJC-lO-^-Iarrow (let., Brown)
Court I


ftv days in hi* pocket, and if this conjecture of nine !• correct as
la Schnttrior* a file note of the 28th of February, then that wes A
Saturday, and on the Friday following I vaa In Berlin and reported to
Anthony. Then, according to this, Hascher aust bare left on the Tuesday,
before tb: Friday I Just mentioned. I should liice to assume, on the
basis of these dates, that Baacher left at the end of February or the
beginning of March. It aeeas certain to ae that on the 16th cf February
Hascher was already under a nev eoesand. That can be seen froa Dccuaent
Jlo. 318, Exhibit 67. In this dccuaent, as of the Hth of March, Hascher
is at another station with a new Jot. In tho aoantlae, however, he ves
with the Luftgau Modlcal Department. Tho Interval hero Is not very
great. Bascher must have left ae during the fliut days of March,


71iiO


7 Uay-iL-' 13-11-1-Arainger (Int. 3ro*n)
Court No. I.


Q Did Ruff or Rocbcr- ever toll you, or did you ever gain
any information from then in any other manner that during the latter
part of Ifey 19 L2 a death had occurred at Dachau in high altitude ex¬
periments?

A No, I never found that out.

Q Neither did Ruff or Roaborg over tell you of tho deaths
which occurrod in Hay, 19127

A No.

THE raSSIDSJTt Have ary of tto defense counsel questions to
bo propounded to this witness?

Dil. 70R..ERK: Vorrxirk for Rojxjrg.

JUD'S CRAi.FOSDi Just a ninuto. Cno noaont, Coujuiel.

BY JUDGE CRX FCRDi

Q FTofossor Soltz, you stated that you rocoivcd permission
to question persona who had boon rosouod fron accidents at son 1 , per¬
sona v«ho had boon oxpojod to tho cold* '/ho gave you that permission?
Fron whoa did you receive tho poraiaeion?

A -Frott the Air Floot Ihysicir.n III, whoso scat was in Itiris
and I driftjd around in his area.

Q Who directed you to question those pcoplo?

A I looked for people of whoa I know that tltey tod fnllon
into tho soa and had boon rosc-ied. For instance, I knar.* t;*at ono such
person was in Bordeaux and another in Boulogne, and I took thoso trips
in order tc look the so people up individually and *sk tlwn what thoir
experiences tod boon.

Q You stated that you expi riaented on animals. rtho gave you
this remission, or who directed you to niku these aniaal experiments?

A Within the froao work of ay gonorol research -rork in con¬
nection with ny tasks at tho Institute I was able to carry out those
animal experiments, and I did not need permission at all. I had general
orders to carry out basic research and within tho frame - ark of tho pro¬
gram, I could do these experiments.


7111


7 »fay—”-3-11-2-Araingor (Int. Brown)

Court Ho. X.

Q As I understand it, if someone received permission or was
directed to oake nir.i experiments, he did not have to obtain porcia-
ion free Hiacder, but if the experiments were to be nedo on concentra¬
tion canp Iwatee, Himlor's pern, is si on hod to be obtained?

1 Yos.

Q Then the only thing that Hianler had to do with those ex-
porinonts tea to give pernission for the use of irc-tos of concentra¬
tion caai*?

A Of course, we oould not eerry out any experiaents in a
corcentration canp without Hirxolor's peraiasion.

Q But, os I mdorstand, Hirclor didn't do the planning of
those experiments. Kc would Just givo the permission for the material
to carry out those experiments.

A Yos, wu as nonborc of the Luftwaffe needed in addition on
order frees the Luftwaffe, the nodical inspector, for carrying out the
experiments.

JUDGE CRAAFCRD: No further questions.

BY DR. VOaf£RXi

Q Profossor Holtz, do you know that tho Aviation Rcsoirrch
Institute at Adlorshof in fall, 1911, published a report undor tho nuo-
bor FA lhl6, under the titlo, "Parachute Doscont fron Groat Heights"?

A This will be on tho oxpuriaants up to 12,000 mctr.n. Yos,
I bolievo wo rocelvad that*

Q then you knew that the Rasearch Institute was working on
thj problun of rescue free great hoights?

A Yj(^ I know that.

Q In your discussion with Ruff, Roeabcrg and Rnschor, jea a
there ever sent ion of other oxpa-iconts than tho oxpcrlmmts concerned
with tho rescue free great altitude?

A I be lie vo that in =y direct examination, I said that whan
I went to Berlin, Ruff had r. credo to rrsinod program which he told no
about and so far as I was concorned in this whole natter, noticing was


7112


7 May-’. VJ3-11-2-Aminger (Int. Brown)

Court Ho. I.

q la I understand it, if sore one received permission or was
directed to n&ke aninal experiments, ho did not have to obtain ponais-
b lor. free HiarOar, but if the experiments were to be nede on concentra¬
tion canp inmates, Marnier'8 permission had to be obtained?

A Yos.

Q Then the only thing that Hicnler had to do with these ex¬
periments has to give permission for the use of ina-.tos of concentra¬
tion caapo?

A Of course, we could i»t oarry out any experiments in a
concentration conp without Hizzalor'a permission.

q But, as I understand, Hirclor didn't do tho planning of
theso oxpjrLuor.ts. Ho would Just give tho ^mission for tho material
to oarry out thoso experiments.

A Yos, wo as oenbors of tho Luftwaffe noodod in addition .an
order fren tho Luftwaffe, tho nodical inspector, for carrying out tho
oxperiajnts.

JUDG2 CRAAFCRD: Ho further questions.

BY DR. VOBNERXi

q Profossor Holtz, do you know that tho Aviation Ro3onrch
Institute .at Adlorshof in fall, 19U1, publishod a report undur t!» num¬
ber PA Uil6, undor tho titlo, "Parachuto Doscont frora Groat Haights"?

A This will bo on tho ojqx»rinonts up to 12,000 no true. Yos,
I boliovo wo rocoivod that.

q Then you knew that tho Rose arch Institute was working on
tto problem of rescue free groat hoights?

A Y oe, I know that.

q In your discussion with Ruff, Roaborg and Rr.sc!wr,^wr.o
thore ever aantion of other ox?«rioonts than tho oxjxrir>.nts concorncd
with tlvo rescue free groat altitude?

A I believe that in nj direct examination, I said that when
I went to Berlin, Ruff had a predetermined program which ho told no
about and so far as I was concerned in this whole natter, nothing was


7112


Court No. I*


1-3-^rminger (Int. Brown)


chinged in this program.

Q Thus I understand you to say that you had supervisory con¬
trol over those experiments in rescue free great altitudes. Before
Raschor loft you, you intended to suporviso these experiments, is that
so?

A Hot quite. It was very clear that the purposo of our
collaboration was to carry out this program. New, what would have hap¬
pened if I would want to change this progroa I do not know, because I
novor discussed this with Ruff.

Q Frofesscr tfoltr, you misunderstood ne. I moan the follow¬
ing! If Raschor had not left you, you were to havo supervisory control
over Raschor in these oxpsrir»nts on rescue from groat altitudes, bo-
causo ho then would still havo bolonged to your institute?


A Yos.

Q Through tho fact that Romberg was to assist in those ex¬
periments, did this fact limit your supervisory powers?

A No. Those things wore quito independent of one anothor.

]*y supervisory control and duty over Raschar was a puroly military mat¬
ter and whether Romberg was there or not made no difforonco.

Q You stated that you spoke with Hippko about tho varioty of
tho possible oxperimntal subjects and that they woro to bo graded ac¬
cording to the dangerous no ss of tho experiments. Did you ever discuss
this question with Ruff or Romixirg, or with Ronborg and Ruff separately?

A No. with Hippko when we discussed it — with Hippko t!io
word murder was used a little bit too frooly tho first time and it was
later ascertained that those porsons did not always have to bo murderers.
Those wore noraly theoretical considerations, which were not »sod on


any concrete


investigations.


DR. V


■


No f\a*ttar questions.


BY JUXG2 SE3RIHQ:

Q After you and Raschor, Ruff and Romberg had your discussions

at :*unich, when was tho noxt tire you saw and talked either with Ruff

71u3


7 ^y-M-IS-ll-^-Arninger (Int. 3rcwm)

Court No. I.

or with Rceberg?

A Sitter on the next day or the day after that on our joint
trip to Dachau.

Q Subsequent to that tino, when was tho next time you talked •
with there?

A After our joint trip to Dachau, I did not eoe Rombarg for
several years. Ruff visited co once. That oust have boon when he re¬
turned fron his visit to Dachau. Ho cam» to ny house. In tte meantime
I had gono on tho basis of that telegram. Ruff told co that ho already
know that Rase her had loft and ho said ho couldn't tell no anything
ncro about tho oxperisonts, because they wore socrot.

Q Wore tte ex{B rimonts that Ruff and Rocborg wore carrying
out at Borlin in tho sano oxporLaant'l scrios secret?

A Yes, tho fact that wo wont to Dachau did nothing to change
tte fact that these oxperimonta woro socrot.

Q toll, he discussod those with you, didn't ho?

A Yes, that was a diffororrt sort of a socrccy. Himmler's
tologrin was hireling only on the pooplo to whom Himmler had given por-
raisslon to spoak of those things. Military secrecy in gonoral was of
such a sort that otter pooplo could be excluded fron tte socrot. For
instance, I could have callod Lutz and said, "You aw a part of tho
question and fron now on you cast observe that socracy. In thoso dovol-
opaontal assignaents that Ruff rejntionod which included tho program
free Dachau tho situation was generally hold secret only in tho first
stops whon it was bo Lag developed. Then after tho experiments woro
concluded, thoy were declared perfectly opon, or parts of thaa were made
public, because thoso results had somehow to bo cado general, ly Vnown.

That is why wo ted the experiments. In other words, at the beginning
of tho experiments there was a general obligation to maintain secrecy
and later it was oitter partially or totally lifted.

q 'Jm what date was it when Ruff came to soe you at !iunich
on the occasion of your conversations you have jest been tailing us about?


71LL


11 I


Court So. I.


(Int. 3rown)


A My last aeeting with Ruff after tte experiment began, you

Q You eaid that after you wont to via it Dachau, then at
•oae subsequent furled of tins after you wore no longer with the ex¬
periment, Ruff esse to HUnloh and told you that ho could not discuss
the results of the oxporlrxnt with you because you were no longer con¬
nected with the oxperlcont. What date was that?

A Ruff has alrea<$r stated that date. That was shortly after
her left, as far as I can see. In tho first half of !Sarch, I think
said it was. I qysolf do not know tho precise date for suro. I
know that thj visit took placo after Rascher.loft.


711:5


Court I, Case i

7 Kay-K - 12-1 - LJG - Binkley (Brcvn)


• 4 . Subsequent to th t ti*o did you over have a talk with Ruff
or soo Buff?

A. Y-s, I eait hia several tixos; for example, at the Gocrlit 2
conference or the confuroncs in Freiburg; but we did not apeak any
aore about Dachau.

q. Thon nothing was o7-r 3aid butwoon you and Ruff after tho
conversation in -unich conc-rnir.s Dachau; and of the experiments at
Dachau; any of tho results at Dachau; cr the fact th-t any of thu tests
had resulted fatally?

A. I only found out tho results of the experimenta when thoy wore
cado public. I never discussed with Huff the individual experiments
and, specifically, so f ~r as deaths w u re concerned.

Q. Did you ov-r see Huff and have convers itions with hi-? after

Uay 19h2 (

A. I-s, I have said that 1 et hi, for cxaoplo, in conferences
it Ooerlitz and Freiburg. I »ot hiu : eVoral times.

q. All of those conferences wore after tho month of Kxy 19Wt
A. Yes.

THE rH2SID3:T: Are there any other questions of thu witness by
defense counsel?

DR. MARXi Dr. Karx for Bccker-f*eyseng.

BXAl'IKATIOH

BY DR. MARXi

Q, Prof-ssor, 1 gathered from your direct examination that re-
g rding ^aschur'a plans for high altitude -xp-riuvonts in 19U1 and l?h 2
you spoke both with irof-ssor Kip ke and Frofessor Anthony, tho expert
for aviation ^-dicino ir. the ' edical Inspectorate of the Lnftwaffo at
that tL»e* Let ex ask you nc U cl. r up this matter whether at this
timo you 3 . okc with krofosscr <Xckur-.ro/Eung on these experfMents.
A. Ko, I did not.

Q. You '.Iso said to t froa your institute inquiry was * do at

tho aadicai inspectorate regarding tho final report of Racchor and

7U6


Court I, Case 1

7 Way-K - 12-2 - L TG - Blakloy (Brewr.)


Koelzlohner or. these cold oxp-riaunts. Can you r-sCiibor th^t?

a. Yw3, Lutz told xu about this; and I repeated it as I hoard

it.

4« Than you could dr*w tho conclusion that you or your institute
wore of tho opinion th t this report could be found at the nodical
Inspectorate? Will you plc .se rake e st'.teaent on this subject? How
did it happen th t you or Lutz .asked for this report fron tho Medical
Inspectorate?

A. I believ- I said th t bef ro. -he report that Lutz sont in,
tho paper that was to be penittod to be jublish-d, cont'ir.ed opinions
that differed free Holzlochn-r's; arid in crd.r to brirg those differ¬
ences into scuo sort of r^rowcunt, as far as I rui-mbor, the papor was
sent to HolzlcK.hr.or. Holzloehnor for his p.rt said tht in order to
substantiate his opinion, Bockor-rYeyseng shou.d take a look at tho
report. Bocker-Kruysong looked for tho report and didn't find it.
Consequently wo didn't know how Holzloohn-r substantiated his opinion.
That is how I roaorfcur it.

Q. But BeCkur-Froyserg did not say th t ho had r»cuiv.d or 30 on
the report?

A. On tliw contrary, the report, ns I Just said, was not found.

Q. Well, even if it wasn't found, ne could still have seen it
before; but he told you th t he hadn't received it at all?

A. Ho, he didn't say that to no. This involved lutz.

3. Now, cnoth-r subj-ct. Tfi-ro has been fr^qaent mention of tho
Nurnb-rg Luftwaffe conference regarding sea and winter rescue in

October of nh2. Fron tho naterial put in by tho prosecution, it can

♦

be Suen that Frof-sscr Anthony w-.t chnirraar. of this conferenco. I
should like to ask you, was this the only such conference in idiich
you took p-rt, or were th<ro several such conferences'*

A. There w_re such conforonccs at regular intervals. I already
n-r.tioned the J Oerlits conference. Another c nfer-nce was in Hcwburg.
Ihcro wure also conferences of this sort during p-acoti-ac.


Court I t C -sc 1

7 tfcy-M - 12-3 - LJG - Ulakley (Brown)


mho '-as chairman of tr._s_ conferences -is long as Anthony
w.a At ex rt, that is, until ifciy cf 19hh?

A. I:~ o; --.rt was chairnan, I b-lioVe. BeCker-FreyscnG was
cnairzan of tie Goorlitz coofuroneo.

3. Anthory was oxp-rt until Via.- of 19Ui?

a. I don't know tho rociso date but th t could be.

3* After Anthony left, Were thuc oth.r conferences; ind, if so,
who ws in chugs of thou?

A. I Just told you toe uo.rlitz conference wus under Bockor-
Fro Seng. Otherwise I do not rar.^rhor any further conferences rftor
Anthony left.

3* ^rofeseor, At the i.'urrfcerg conf-rence you read a paoer. I
b ay assuiBe that you ‘.Iso spoke at tho other conferences, Therefore,

I want to ask you, did you have to show thu car.uscript of your pnpor
to the odio-*l Inspectorate buforeh nd, or did you Just tell thom the
subject and gonoral contents?

A. It you wrr.bed to ru-d a paper at such s conf-renco, you In¬
formed thu odical Inspectorate of tiio subject and give there a ono or
two pc-ao precis of tho contonts. often even that vis omitted.

3* In other words, tho senuseript Itself was not subnittod’

A. Ho.

3. How, a final question about the humbug conference. In
your dir-ct examination you arid that /ou had concerned yourself with
freezing Te 3 e~rch in you institute, therefore, I ctn assuro t at you
knew the jx-ople in the Lui twaffu who know about fru-zirg experin-nts
very well. How, so far s you now, was fleci'er-hreyscng or.e of those
doctors who had practical experience in sea rescue or who h 8 scientific
knowledge of and had worked on freezing problems?

A. Ho, I can say pretty definitely th t B^cker-Freystng did not
have anything to do with freezing. His field lay elsewhere.

3- Did Bockor-Froysung tako part in the discussion at the Hum¬
ber g conference, or did you happen to hare

71h8


talks of a scientific nature


Co ur t I, Cose 1

7 - 12 -t - LbG - blakloy (rown)


about the freezing problem with hi-s?

A. T.at ^ cannot say for sura. It could b- th-t in connection
«£th a to 0 "r experiments with .rigs wj ttlked about matters that
were n -1 t-d to this; but I racily can’t say for sura.

4. You tan only anlaal oxperlaonts hero?

A. ifcrpuriaants on pigs.

< 4 , I refer you to Docuaont 93U of the pros.cution, xhibit li$8.
This ia a list of research aasiiirtnts for 19Ub. You undoubtedly
ron*. her it?

A. I loiow tli.t this list was submitted.

CJ. It was put in during the direct ox-rduhtion of iTofesaor
Schro-der. How, fro. this doevu-nt it oan bu s—n th t you received
a r-se-rch .-.saii otnt fron t .j -dical Inspectorate. bill you plenau
3 y her. it r...p^ned t .t .'-ou received this assigrrr-nt, although you
w-x-o the he -d of an institute belonging to the luftwaffo and «Vofoosor
Schro.d.r has said here on tho witn.aa stand that auch r.Se rch nssign-
h.r.13 -a. ir-r. or. y to civilian institutes a a general rule?

a. . I ask you wh t this r s- rc‘ assign -nt was?

4 . Unfortuir wl2 I don't h.v* thedocu>fer.t -.v'liable. Did you
receive s-vnv.l r.a.arch ossigne-nts/

A. Y-s, w« did.

... Can you not r- u bor a r—-.rch usui^r. «nt of th. your 19hli?

a. 8 re:. nai,n>.nt t.i *e r.Cwlv^d had a sort of

p^culi r ori-in. -cause of nrr.-.ucr; ale dif iculties *e h *.d no funds

.veil couldn't c.tM- thin 3 in c^hj and We sUply had to

send bills. 1 ft £d, wnths 1 t.r, by the Luftgau.

santKi tly, it w*o an unpleasant fact th t couldn't buy" nything,
not even . ^ncil or r. -rnswr, but could only buy it on ccount. For
this reason 1 .ad - r.s.arcn nssi r. -at iv.n to e. This -:-ant w t
w« recai -d sorv. r-ady c ah; nd I chos. as the subject for this r_-
s. ref. nasi n.-.nt zny old subject ta t wo "_ro working on anyway.

1 ait just told, Frofessor, t' t it was t r.Se .rch assi .is -nt

711x9


Court I, Cesc 1

7 iky -: - 12-5 - Lv~~ - -Inkle* (Brown) '

r«£ rding the g Jtrc-int-stir-Jl charm-1 under pr-scur-.

A. 1-5, tat was a for.-.J. r-3-arch assigno-nt. Bef_ro I founded

the institute, there verc research 3si.%n '-nts th .t w_r_ of soio

significance. Thun at the o-ftinr.ing of ay civilian institute, before

tho V-r, this research assiare^nt wan of sotvj taportencoj but 1 -tor,

•

during tho war, it h d none. It b-c sso _f no i-port-.nco when tho
Insti MU* f r -dicino was founded; th t is to say, it had no furth-
-r scientific i port nee. It did iavu a financial importance.

Q. nhu.n you m-ro giv-n this aasi-in-nt, did you r^ceivo any
instructions regarding ho- ou - to carry on your r-s-'-rchY
A. Ko, and in general t: t was net possible.

THS ;':tESIDErr« Counsel, the Tribun.1 will new b- in rocoss until
1:30 o'clock.

(A r-coso rj t-Jccr. until 1330 hours.)


715C


7 kay 47-A-7jC-13-l-7oster (Int., Ton Schema)
C-urt I


AJTlcSOCS SESSIOK

(She Tribunal reconvened at 1330 h.urs, 7 kay 1947.)

TFL .iASSEAL: The Sribunal 1# egain session.

DR. GLQ3J WLLTZ - aesu-.ed

TEL PRLSIDL5T: Any further cuestiens to bb propounded to this
vltness by defenee counsel?

Dr. Marx does not seen to be present. He had not coapleted hie
examination.

DR. -on (C -unsol fir the Defendant Welts): Mr. Proeldent, qy
colleague Dr. Marx asked ce to tell you that he has no nore Questions
to put to this vltness.

TEL PRLSIDLS7: The prosecution nay cross examine.


CROSS LXAKISATIC®

BT *R. KAEDY:

Q Dr. Welts, vhere vere you at the end of the war?

A At the end of the war I was In Iking, 25 kllonetcrs ouuth of
Munich.

Q Wero you takon prisoner by the Allied Forces at the ond of tho


wer?

A So, I re-mined In ny snail country h-use until on tho 20th cf
July 1945, I was roouested at ny city heno to report to tho CIC in Munich
in Heuerkirchstresso. Up to that tine I was free.

^ When wei tho first tine that you wore placed under arrest and in¬
carcerated in a prisoner -,f ver eanp r civilian interment canp by


Aaerlcan authorities?


rio* only arrested once, fhat is, I wrs asked to report on the

, f/t/KV 0k

21st of July lnNiauerklrchstrasse la Munich, the CIC. 7ron there, I was


sent to the pri'sJd at Freising for sone tine, then I was a prisoner in
the hospital in liaising—I had beo:ro sick. Then on the 26th of
September 194$, J believe it vi«, I 'vnt to the Mcosburg Canp. I
steyfd lajj&*wc until the 6th of December 1945. Tho 6th cf December
15v5^—?-vSs transferred tc Dachau.

V$1


7 May 47-A-F„*C-13-2-7o-~4r (let.. 7cn Sehoen)
Court I


q What vs a the reason why yen vere pieced under arrest at that
time In July 19467

A I never learned that.

q Were you In the automatic arrest category because of ycur rack?

A I vas teken avay free Freising In automatic arrest to Moosburg.

Q S;v, you had on institute in Munich. When did you first take
charge of this Institute in Munich?

A You mean nev the Institute fer Aviation Medicine of the Luftwaffe?

Q Tes.

A This institute was assigned to no when It was founded. It was
founded on paper In the fell of 1941.

q Hov long did you reaain at the institute after It vne founded,
until tho end of the vnr?

A Until tho end of the vnr, yes.

q lid the institute evor recolve any boohing*?

A Yoe.

q Was it sovorely damaged a* a rosult to tho bootings?

A I have already *aid that in 1943-44 I ooved the institute one
soction at a tino. One department vent to Freising, one vent to the
State Farm 3irehnu near Freising. Bathing happenod to theso barracks,
tut tho original tvo barracks vhlch ro-ained in Munich, and the labora¬
tory that remained there, vero completely burnod out in 1944. They wero
wooden terracks and n.thing remained of them.

q Well, nev, vhen you moved your Institute because of the bootings
were you able to salvege y-ur eoultcent, your filoe and furnituro, and
the necessary things, so that you could continue your work?

A To Freising and to the State Farm at Kirschau, ve moved almost
all the scientific eauipcont vhich ve noede, but the laboratory ifhd tho
official files vhich did not refer to tur research remained in the
■pfe in Munich. We couldn't move the safe and besides, the laboratory
vns still working there. I have already seid that the files of the
Institute for Aviation Medicine and the files of the laboratory ware


7152


? May 47 -a-FJC— 13-3-7otter -(Iat., Tea Schoen)

Court I

taken care of together by Stebsarst Vendt, and Stabsarzt Vendt regained
ia Munich. All the file* which referred tc transfers, assignments, secret
records, they were turned ia Munich la 1944. Ill the new records were
kept at Freising, tor scientific records, the library, special publica¬
tions, and so on, we had taken with us. That wes oartly at Hirecheu end
partly at Freising.

Q How, dc you recall being interrogated in June, that is the 6th
day of June 1945, that is bofore the tico you were arrested—you were
still ■ free nan—by Major Alexander of the U.S.Aray Kedicel Corps?

A That was not an interrogation, at leest • didn't reallzo that it
was an interrogation. Professor Alexander ca-.e to us as a scientist who
was Interested in jut work. He asked us about our work, Vo had pre¬
viously been visited by sobs aviation oedical comissions end we shewed
Professor Alexander what he was interested in. It wan no interrogation.
Professor Alexander did not represent hlnself as an investigator but
he presented hlaself as a Doctor who was interested in our scientific
work, and wo discussed with hin the future of the institute. I c uld
not see that this was any legal exaalnation or any such thing.

Q Veil, now, Dr. Alexander, that is the sane Professor Aloxander
who appeared here as an expert witness, was interostsd in chatting
with y.u, or interrogating y-u, concerning your work, or any work, on
shock fr ms exposuro to cold on hunan beings. Did you inforn hin about
your knowledge of experimental on anicalsl


7153


7 Hoy 47-^-S'-—!<?-1-Gall _£her-von Schon
Court So. 1

a. Too, I showod hie our files.

Did you infora hia about the work of the Geraon Savy and the
G^roan ai^-ic reacuo service in Prance?

a. Tea.

", Did you infora hia about your knowledge of work on huoan beings?

a. So. Profeasor alcx-ndor w a nted to know about our work, and
wo hod not porfomed any teats on hunan beings, and the teata on
u nlma'a .nd pigs, I have deacribod, -nd I showed Professor alex-ndor
all thoso rocorde.

<&. Did Profosaor *loxander uek you whether any work on hunan boingo
v..e boing done, oither by youraolf or any one else when you knew?
Didn't he ask you that in Juno 19467

Profosaor *loxandor asked no how I know that oftr uothoda had
pprovod of valuo in rcgjd to hunan beings, und tho only thing I
foilod to toll Profoaoor olexar.dor nt that tino was ny uttondunco
at tho Sumbwrg Conforonco, and what I know about tho tfurnborg Coxw
fcronco.

X. Of courao, you know that Dr. ^loxandor was at that tino working
on what was oallod CIOG-Iurgot. So. 24, hodic-1 Investigation Toun
for tho Combine of Intolligcnco Subjoctivo Subcoauittoo 0-2, Dlvis-
lon of Shaof, and ho wroto un extensive report aa tho rosult o*
hia work, and this report I h-vo u copy of hero, which w a a written
in tho year of 1945, wnich vm a considerable long tino ago, that
is, before ho c.ao horo , and , thut is before tcia trial, beforo tho
tiuo you woro indicted; ho stated in that report on pago 12 in refer¬
ence to ono Dr. bolts, whoroin I night add ho gives you considerable
credit, that you wore uskod whether you hud ever dono any work on
huunn boinga, end he hod asked, and I quote wfa_t he anid about you,
"Ho" referring to boltr,"who was then aakod whether an;- work on huomi
beings was dono either by hicsolf or by any ono elao with whoa ho know
and ho waa again quite positive in denying the question." Sow, what

VJh


7 key 47-,r.SlV£-Galleghcr-Int: von Schon
Court i'o. 1


was your reason for not Informing Dr. alcx-ndor about your knovlodgo
of work by Peschorf

D3. BILLS: kr. ?j esi- ent, aay I object. I hear that Professor
Alexander is horo ir. tho building, and he Can appear as a wltnoss.
Since the Tribunal follow* the principle that tho bost and shortest
ne-ns cf cridoneo is always to be uppliod, I ask the Tribunal that
Profossor olo»,ndor bo c-llod to tho stand pursonolly, Instead of
re-ding a docraont.

KH, EaRDY: &..t is not nccossary, Y our Honor. I as not calling Dr.
Aloxendcr to testify. I as no roly asking thin witnoss on tho stand
'hat ho said in answer to questions two yo-ri ago. I an Deroly Just
searching tJie witness for inforcatioo about hot' ho folt about theso
Q-tt-.ro two years ago, and if tho witness deni.-n what bo said it
nay nocoocit to calling Dr. Alexander on tho stund. X ao introducing
tnis report, tdiioh v-s »n oxhibit before tho International kilitury
Tribunal, and I can Ji I wish, request tho Tribo.ial to toko Judicial
notico thc.oof. I doit unnocossary, I as Deroly probing tno wit-
noss, and I as not rol. leg on Dr. ^lox-ndcr's testimony whatsoever,

THE PBiSXDfcf* eottosa fer tho Prosoo ition uoy -»•’< tho wltnoss if

if Dr. alouandor ca the tino and >1 -co nontionod propounded certain
questions to tho wltnoss, and tho wltnoss has answered tho suuo. If
tho rcoord is preserved, tno quostlon propounded by that question can
bo taken frou that record and propounded to tho wltnoss. With that
understanding the objection ovor-rulod.

3Y i.R, ZsSOTl

3 . Dr, t'olts, what w-s your reason for not info ruing tho officlalo
of the United Statos aruy in this Gutter about all tho activities at

Dachau cencoming exp eric oat at ion on huaun beings, wherein you woro
fully aw. jo of tho activities, inosaucb -s you had known tho results
of Profossor Holzloohnor's work at livrntorg Conferonco. Vo# it bocauso

you thought you eight oo iuvolvod in scco criuinal activity, or,
v_s it because you did not want to give tho oceey further inforuation?


7 Key 47-«-S‘—14-3-OaUcfihcr-Iat: von Schocn
Court So. 1


*• I olrcudy aold th^t Professor ^loxuador nev_r ia any way vu rocog-
alaablo as or presented hinself to ae, or to ay associates, us on offic¬
ial invest lent or, and particularly not as an investigator of tho jeor-
ican Judicial or intelligence Servico. He cuae as a scientist uho
was lntorootcd.

I iurgine the scientist w j extremely lntorostod in knowing
wkotr.or or not tho work os result of your research, and the roooerch
of Lepchineky of the 1800 , had been performed on huoan bolngs; not frou
0 legal aspoot, but free an scientific -spocj. Tou had far uorc rocsons
to infora Dr. Alexander about that work on tho hu m an bcingc, didn«t youT
a. I olr c.jjy said that I gavo ''rofessor Alexander all tho filos
cojplotoly wo hud preservod oxccpt what woro burnod in Munich, wnloh
wcbo not of intcrost to Dr. Alexander. I had ro.ison not to toll any¬
thing unloss I was uskod directly for the following roasons: At that
tir.u th.re started a wu*o of orrvsts, wnich no ono could then grasp. I
rououber a nuabor of uy ocqualntoncoe hod been or r os ted, and wo did not
know for what rousona they were urrentod, und wo did not know whoro
tho oooplo woro boing sent. Xhor»foro, in ordor not to bring anyone
in tho danger of arrest I said no noro than too things for w,» ch I
was responsible. I gave ''rofossor Alexander ull tho inforaation about
things for wnich I wao responsible to do. X did add nothing, for
ronsono of ccaradoship. I did not concidcr I hud any right to glvo any
additional inforaatlon, and put other people in danger of arrest,
bccaU'O wo could not soo how that information would bo used.

Then you wore uttaipting to covor up Dr. Raschor?

0

a. I knew very little about fiascher's activity.

You know ull about his activity. You woro at the Octobor neeting
in 1942T

a. Vos, it bocaio quite clear here how such I .cnew about Raseher. I
know that ho porforued tho exp or is cats in Dach a u together with Holrloei>-


7 Kay 4?-,r-SV-14-4-Galicghor-Int: von Schon
Court So. 1


cor. I did cot know th.t any do-ths hud occurred. I did not know to
what oxtent these experinents were legj. I knew very littlo about
thcc. Particularly of course, since uy knowledge was so indofinito,

I and no reason to talk about other institutes, anc boc-uso it
h.-p>ened outside of ay ova institute, which was soaetoing about which
I had no exact inforu^tion to giro.

"octor, this oxeuicatlon is going to tuko considerable longth
of tiuo. During the remainder of the examination I want you to coop¬
erate, and I wont you to try to bo consistent. You have introduced a
docuuont horo this morning uhoroln you have attcuptod to show this
Tribunal how important w a s this work on Shock Jroa xhposuro to Cold
to tho united States Huvy aid allies in tho Asiatic uroa, which was
writ tor. in the Boudors Digest; and here you state now inconsistently
that you yoursolf woro violently oppoood to voluntooring any i.tfor-
uation on tho oxoorlnentg! work cccductod on huma n beings, a nd that
tho answer vu* avullablo for tho Unitod States hodical survicos by
virtuo of your knowledge at the conferonco in October. Mow, Doctor,
wo shall try to prococd froc horo uad do so in a bettor uannor than
you havo for tho lust half hour.

a. hoy I correct what you Just said. Two oxnert commissions hrd
visitod us before ta^t time, «riution medical oxperts, and I gavo those
two commission* all our ctudios published and wh-t had not boon
•published us yet. Vo showod tnose gontloaon all our films; wo sado all
our filos available to thou, and also wo 6avo thoo cur ccpaJato prints.
I draw vp a report in fivo copies cn the work waich was boing carriod
on, and made suggestions how to keep the institute going, and how
our ax'crloaco can be turned ov<_r to the hands of tho ^icrican aniioo.
uo undo detailed suggestions.

Did you also tell those invo-.tig^ting toems tnat exo •.rinents
on h nan beings h_d been eocductod at Dachau?


7 Xay 47 -^-s^-l 4 - 5 -G^llu^aer-I^t : von Scnoen
Cc -rt So. 1


-w I said..

3Uit con bo answered, yes or no. Doctor? Did you or did you not?

Am I told tboc about the work of ay institute, and not of other
institutes.

v. ihat is what I understood. When did you join tho aSDaP,Doctor?

Am I suid, that was 1937.

<• 1937. Tou were also a ucuber of the Satlonal Socialist Physicians'
Association?

Am roe.

Tou were a aaibor of tho Uationul Socialistic Locturors Asoociution?

as Too.

“ow when did you coue into tho Iwftwaffe? Tou soy in yair
rrfidorit in august 1939. “ow, what was tho first rank you hold in
tho Luftwaffe?"


7158


(hurt 1

Kry 7-j»-15-l-HD-E»yn08-Vvn Schon.

a. 1 wns St-ba-rtC. That Is the s:ce t..in c -s
ccptnln.

v. «nd then when were ye nr.acted t. anjor?
a. I believe round the frlat a-If cf 1940. I don’t
rase after exactly.

... Old ou rise any higher?

a. At the end of the w?r I w-a Cborfeldnrzt. The.t Is
equivalent to lieutenant c lonel.

*. Thnt we t. e last r-nh y.»a h Id In the Luftwaffe?

a. Th^t wpa trv, .. 1 -nest r/»nfc, yea.

i. Vhen .our Institute v 6 first formed, in 1940,

s * r

was It -

a. 1S41.

%. In 1941, wh t w s the nra> of oar Institute at
that tlce?

a. The Institute w a r lv»ye C"ll-6 "Institute for
AVl-tl n Hadlolno, “ Hunlch. ■

W. Vhnt w a Luftoau Nuaber 7?

a. The Luft 0 nu 7 w-8 tr.e r *lon 1 or^ nlzrtl n of
the Luftwaffe. All Oeru-r.y v s divided lnt'. a r, aber of
Lui'te"us, -nd Luft^ru No. 7 v~s the one In the -roa r.round
H.nloh.

«. And were y.e under the Jurlsdlctl n of Luft^nu

No 7? ‘

A. : ,v ec nviic nd disciplinary purposes, I rs
under Luft^r.u 7. *6 nerd of t-.o Institute, In scientific

r-5"vets, I w a under the Xedlc 1 Inspectorate of .-.vlVtlun
Kedlclno, directly.

d. Th-t would ee ntn. .ys office?

• H. Yc8.

’-all, n.w, lr. Luft^u K . 7, did tu-y h.ve r. aedlcal

-\o*:rr ta.nt?

715?


C.urt 1

I '.-y 7-«-i5-i-iij-fifync6-V.n ochon.

a. Xee. They n d e mecic 1 -ffleer there. he w s
cne Loft e au physician.

%. Did they ov fc r consult witn o- ib.;t rny matters
of resj^ren or things of t.vt nature, between tr.e nodical
tap t-taunt of Luft c eu No. 7 rnd y.ur Inr Citato?

a. No. In scientific t..in s s va ..d nothing t-. to with
11 . luftgru, cxceot in the rare c:eas v.icn the Luf t c au
c-llid upon us, for excarcle, in the trr.ning c.ursu which
Ere char writes of. In such caec6 wo wire calloc. up. n to
help in the projects .f the Luftceu, but the UiftoC.u had
no Influence or. ur r-eerrch work. Thu reaerren nesl 0 n-
.aent 3 , re I ivve already anl~, wore In p rt ; .c .-r:.in. to
directives which I received from t o Hidlc 1 Inspeutorate,
pn& a outlines I receiver definite rsel-nmenta fr m the
hotlor.1 Ins pec torn to.

i. Veil, now, did the medic 1 teprr*.oent of Luft_.AU
H.. 7 have c nsultmts or sped Hate or. t.iolr staff; eay,
for Instance, did cne n.dic’l cemertojnt of Luft 0 au Ko. 7
.we Intornista, -nd things of t .At nature?

a. I wo Id Assume so, yes. All the doctors who worked
ot cho Luft 0 cu, nad a oertaln field th?t they were in
o-' r^o of.

%. Suoose js wanted s^not. ln^ done; bjo >oee you were
f- rmln 5 research, for n moment, end you wanted some
‘‘rtloular wor.-c done for ’ou In the c.urse cf . ur research
whloh you c Id not dc yourself :aocuA3 of cne fret teat
y : c-.ld not h-rvu a specialist ir. y~ur or^rnlzoti-n t^,do
lc for you. Then vno w uld you h’ve referred to? •'••old
u n ve referred to L ftgau Nc. 7 and asked them for cn
expert or ?eked them to t< ke core of this p. rtloular
situation thet y.uv-nted cie;red up?

a. I car. not im- 0 lne a c se sue.*. s .u re eshln 3


7130


C.urt 1

X~y ?-«—15—3-HD-H’ ynea-Y n Schon.

Y'-- -asuae thr c toe Luft c pu = lvea se a research ssaignmsnt?

... Ho, no, whst I na tryin = Co s l j t la this: D.

• - recall one cf our docuaenta concerning freezing,
vh.reln Dr. Kjlzloehner, Dr. rinkc ?nd Dr. Singer were

roc amended t carry out-it la Docuaent I.’o 283, -n P'ge

12. It is ? letter fr^a Poacher to .-..aaler, where he
at tea thrt he has tailed for peral6«ion—toot la, .-Up- dee
hra .eked for oeralsalon—to eorry out the cold wr.ter
experiments In Dsohr u ®nd ashed tort the following oe
engr.ged in choeo experiments. He ary8, one, Profaeaor
Jr. J-rlac.*., tw , Professor Dr. Ovlrloebner, me. Chen rs
well -a the Luft c au pathologist, Jr. Singer of the
Sohv-blr.g-Koaoltrl. Tell, now, whrt I ra getting ?t lc
fir3t, we aaac eatpbllan tho position of Profeaaor Dr.
3ln-cr. as ou And I both itnow, h; refused to do any
w- rk of th t s-.rt na soon a no discovered whrt it woe,

?nd ..ow did the name of Profeasor Jr. ein c or hsp on to
’;a mentioned in t.-.i* latter? ’so ho o consulting ?et.v-
olo.lat to -ur institute, or wes he Juat a >• toologlst
vn che at ff .>f the achw. bing-ftoapltsl, or how did this
cohesion rrlae that Professor oln & ^r was aentloned?

h. I'll answer ,oar first questl-n first. Professor
Singer In his clvlllrn position w:6 p pathologist rt
Bchwabing-Hospitel. During the wrr h- continued with
t is w.rk, nd pc the seae tl ce he va e pathologist in
Luftgru 7.

%. Ir. Luftgru 7? •

,.. In Luftgau 7. I p*.reonelly hru nothin,, wh tever
c v 1 th 51r.-er. Ky institute wrs quite independent
In scientific respects. If I h d ever hrd nnd cn: ?:£h~
-lo-ic-'l ?nd gn»t.alcol work to do, which w* = not die
c?e;, c en I c aid hrve -one to oin^er rnd coulc. hrve


Court 1

Kr.y 7-A-15-4-HD-Hoynes-V«.n Scfaon.

naked Singer, on the oasis of his c-prclt os consulting

pathologist, to help no In this work.

Tell, thin actually Doctor, If you needed the

services of Professor Dr. Singer, then you theoretically

w uld &o thr^u^h the ohrnnel of Luftga.u No. 7 and ask

for hie services ea tne patnolo-,lst In Luft^au No. 7;'

Is th-t correct? He Is r. Qoaber of the Luftwaffe, so

to sc-ok. iL Is p. art of /our organization, the overall

organization, end If you n.-oded the services of a

octholofclst, then you would &o to “in^er; is that rl a nt?

It w uld be because of tne fret 1ft he was In Luft^au

Ho. 7, not - private jnyslclm In schwabln^-Hos^ital?

a. I p.rsc nelly could *o to any p tholo e lst wno

aoeaod suited, and In practice. In 0^806 where I went to

* irtn .lojlst at all, whon I ---'a Interested In flndln 0 s,

for sxnnole, liver findings—vhrt does the liver look

like In ree^le who h'Vc drown.d in the cold, In suoh oasos

In pr'cdce I "lways went to -u.chr.jr because Bueohnor

had s ;eclflc experience in the field of cold, but

Chaorctioally I could h~ve b one to binder, too, or I

c uld h. vj b ono to tne Vienna p-tholojlst, If I t.v-u b ht

♦

th!t he ws especially qu Ilf led. I w s quite unrestricted
In tn t respect, but the routine path -logical v.rk wont
c 3in^r. Let 1 6 take an ^jcaolo. « uvn hr.s been
r.aohlxlrted fr.x b sollne fumas . t cr. airfield. The ccso
is n t clo-r. There is -n • utopsy. T is autopsy w^uld
utoiU ticrlly nave cone under binder, or In Luft b a.u-7
"n airplane had x-de rn emergency lmdln b and ther- h d
been Injuries. Th t v.«ulb hrv_ been dinners work. That
h-d n thlnt t do with ay Institute. I w"s directly
under the nvlati n ministry sclentlflc-lly, and In
or-ctice it did r, t ;.~-rren th t * .vur celled upon Singer


Court 1

K rr 7-«-15-5-HD-H-yno 6-T n Schon.

for assistance.

x. '.‘all n w, vnrt kind of a~a vs Dr. Singer? Ho
" errantly vs <* suistp.ntlrl ch-r-ct^r, wasn't no?

a. H-j~ I rjk whnt o« senn exactly, in what respect?
”j! 1 , it is rpp rent aero fr a the evidence oof ore
• a in b..ls Tribunal that Dr. Singer hrd the opportunity
to assist nd t collaborate with & sonar nna iulzloehnor
•nd -'inke ?t Jr.ohau, end ?po*'rencly ho refused t.
cvll-borrto when .10 heard of the nature >T tno exsorlaonts,
~nd being a orthologlst, ha aust h vc known very well
tirt dor the w old occur or tnej w uldn't need r.is
services, a> consequently ho v aid n vj no p rt of it.

Now, I would line to /.n.w Just wa t c pc of aen dr. oin^er
was. Was he a credible p«ra-n? f-s he r c iuu >nyaicien,
e g'od pathologist? \'es he c-nsldercd by yourself to
be of go d reputation, 'nd so forth?

A. Y-3, respecting r.iu .scientific onpnolty and ilia
char oter, I never ..onrd anythin^ b d. In eeccvtiao one
sly internes, « y.e c~n see fr jj a ll6t of publications,
wr to 6 r.*.tiln e n the h-rrt rnd rather br.nohltio t
Sing-r's institute. I n^v.r he rd anythin^ brd ?o ut
Singer's c.i-recter, rnd he h«d a _.o d ronut-tlon ~6 a
scientist.

h. Did vu ev.r hear of - St bnrzt Cnken, O-N-X-E-N,
the -djutpnt of ca. acdlcnl den rta-nt of Luft^GU 7? Did
y e ever near of thrt nans?

a. I d. aet reoeaber la a~ra nrlly. I do reaeijj^r
t;.„ n^ae, tn u w h, but I can't reaeaber tod- - lr. wn t
c nnection I he rd it.

.'ell, nvw, being the ad Jut nt .f tna aeulcal
..op rtaent of Luft^nu No. 7, he vuld nrve a^ne sort of
Jurisdiction, schr.pa dlecielln ry, over your institute.


71o3


(kart 1

M-y 7-jk-15-o-HD-n.*ynca-V..n au-n.


w uld no not?

a. Til- Luft-,"u pnyslci n did, not the nijut nt.

Veil, that office w-uld; the medical department

w Id.

A . I just r.member, Okon w a adjutint of the Luft a ^.u
pir/’lcl-n of Luf t. 3 ;u 7 for sometime.

i. '-’oil, now, who would he the sup-rlor of the mo&ioal
don-rSmont of Luft 0 u 7? .’to did they In turn ro->ort
t.-oir 'ctlvltl-s to?

All the i-aft c rus war- -naer the .iodic 1 Inspoctorcte.^
% . Than tfcrt n ule 30 directly to .-.lppito or to
oohroedor*

«. The Luft s J 6 ?nd th Luftoeu payslclans were
under the .'.-dlcl Inspector to. to vn t sootlon that
went, th t -op-nded <n th- subject matter.

i. Well, n-w, would 3ockor-Fre/aen., to your knowledge
of chose activities, her* ..cd rny interest in s me of the
ra porta -nd w rk of the m-dlc -1 a.p. rteent of the Luft^.u,

' r v.ald ho be merely Interest-d In the work o;
organizations saoh re yours?

a. To whnt extent c 11 bo ration between 3cckor-
Fro'/ser.ts's Sop rtaent nnd the Luftft'ru physicl~ne waa
carried out, I don't know; I c n't say anythin,, 'b.-ut


tele oro'r.lz"tl n.


Hay 716-1 --.rein 3 cr (Int. Von Sohoon)

Court Ho. 1

How, Doctor, what was your f~alin.; toward tho

Fuehrer? './oro you on ordent Nazi?

.. I have attended to explain that. X will bo -Sind to
do so in core detail. .In 1933 when tho devolution ceno
-rid tho National Socialise oaoo to power, I was quite
remote fra- any politic -1 activity and quite outside of
any party. On tho other head, it was quite clear to cost
G or nans at that tine, that it w-s u decisive stru-jlo to
docido which of tho two arced parties would .jot control
of Oernany. In 1932, in Gercany, yo had throe arced
parties and these throo arewd parties all had their own
party orny, or their own party r.uard, and they fou;ht
oaoh other. .Jlth powor that surprised no, tho National
Socialists soized power. I was quite foreijn to tho idoas
of the Party at th^t tico. Bec-.uso of tho serious un-
ocploynent end the depression free 1930 to 1933, tho
party with an energy which «::in surprised co brought
about an oconon.o iaprovonont whioh inprossod very
nuoh not only rw, but no doubt cost pooplo. I h :d tho
opportunity at tho Olynpio Oanos in 1936 to speak to
quite a nunbor of foreigners and there wore quite a
f on people re on : then who were o.uito inprossod by these
ccanonio icproveconts. I do not uxpoct that a party
fulfill all ny person 1 idoas lOO* in its pro^rac —

..ell, Dr. ..oltz, I don't think it is nocossrry for
us to .0 into .ill this back round; wh t I want to know is
were you in favor of tho Fuehrer or were you perhaps,
or were you like ..olfrac Siov-rs, a noeber of tho
itc 3 istonoe Hoveoent?

„ Ho, X not n nunbor o t - -osistonoo -lovouent
enfl ts fox ns ny rolntions with tho r'uohror ore oon-
o.rnod, I cun cnly toll you that it ohmc* n nunbor
or tines cccordin ; to ny knowledge of thlnss on. persons.

7165


l!cy 7-^-BK-16-2--rr.in3or (Int. Von Schocn)
Court No. 1


V.'hon did thi3 attitude take place, in 1938, '39,

•40, *41, '42, '43, '44, or *45, just when?

.. Tha year was 1939; for tho first tine I realized
that the big lino of policy which Hitlor hau proaised
had boon wrecked. That was when tho war broke out. Of
course, then c.uao successful campaigns, which I was glad
to see as a Gernnn. Then very, soon I roulizod that in
spite of those succosscs the war was lost for Goraony,
boccuso I knew very woll the --auric, n -ir 1 ‘orce Construc¬
tion program I know a great nay figures of then and I
did not understand then, fraa tho year 1941 on, that this
dangor was not clearly soon and that the people wore so
optinistio. Before Stalingrad, I realized that tho
wholo osnpr.ign in the Hast was a fr.iluro. Perhaps 1 a ay
rxntion sonothing that helps ay noaory. Before Stalin¬
grad, when wo occupied otalin :rad, but whon thj offonsivo
hr.d not started yet, I bet Mr. Lutz n bottlo of oognno,
th .t wo would have to leave »(us3io, while Lutz thought \io
oould keop nil .tussle, up to the Ural. I Ju3t happenod to
renonbor that. How, as the war beoano noro and iaoro
senseless, fro:i 1941 on at tto latest, uy ettitudo toward
tho party becaoo aoro hostile and in tho last yo-rs it
was definitely antagonistic. Now, for a aan in uy
position without special conductions, without special
inforartion, it was r .ther difficult to do anything,
not only becauso thin ;s were dangerous - we cxporionccd
all kinds of danurous things during the war - but the
grinary difficulty was that ono should havo a sansiblo
;ocl. I tried to - pier so don't think this is a claia
that I bclon ;cd to a .tesistanco Movonont; I just wont
to tell you about it - I had a saall group of officers
who bolievod as I did; I gathered then around no. 'we


Ur .y 7»..-BK-16-3-..rnin3or (Int. Von Scfaoon)
Court Ho. 1


cl lscu3sod tho situation in a way that was different free
othor officers of tho hospital. It was cloar that the
war vies lost and all tho talk of now weapons wero
nonsense and bluff, but none of us sucooodod in sotting
up a sensible pro ;rr.c which ni;;ht havo had eny prospoots
of realization. They woro extremely difficult things, bo-
o .uso everyone realized that any Putsch at ell would Just
c»an tho oollnpse of tho war and above nil that of tho
Eastern front and nh t that would coan wo aw dearly.

.10 thought about it a ;roat doi.l, of oourso. .^o didn't
liko to see cities liko Munich ..nd Nurnborg suffering
from one r.ir raid after another, bein’ slowly destroyed.

.4 Before you lot into tho later phase of tho war, in
1938 whan Oo) finny started to inv.ado countries, thoy
inv.dod ..ustria and various other countries, from then
on, what was your foolin ; thon about tho Fuohror? *'ero
you still willin'; to follow hi i when ho w.m invading
..ustria?

., Wo In Southern Bavaria oxporionoed tho invasion of
..ustria rather closely and the inpro3sion which wo had
thon froc nil the Austrians coning over was not tho
impression th.it of a yoor country being attaokod. Before
that I had boon in -ustria ny3df and ns a noutral
observer, I h..d nn opportunity to r.oot pooplo in Vienna.
Thoro was no doubt whatever th t in ..ustria nt that
tine ti ere wore a gro t many pooplo in favor of tho
.mschlus 3 . If there is an opinion to tho contrary today,
that is a distortion of history, undoubtedly.

. Thon, didn't you soo th t when tho Fuehrer wc.s
tnkin * tJu.se forward stops th-t v.nr was inevitablo?

.. .«o hopod that throu ;h tho Munich Conferonce, this

danger of w-r would bo cliuin .tod md I was very happy


7167


liiy 7-.v-HK-15-1 ^rr-in”or (Int. Von Schoen)
Court No. 1


about tho agreement which was reached there.

. You wore of the opinion, wore you not, at that
tine that ..dolf Hitler was the 3 roatcst non in the world
for ponce, weren't you?

~ ..t that tine I considered -dolf Hitler an important
politician who had the aim of the United States of Buropo
and was tc.kinj up against a tradition which had failed
with N.polo on. Jo realized that tho split of Miropo
into aany simll countrios in rolntion to the lr.rso
spr.oos of .jiorica end .<us3ir. was an intolerable situa¬
tion and that wo had to create r. unified turopc in order
to exist, and th t was Hitler's aim, and that was on
r.in which I approved of.

. Now, Doctor, in 1941, wo soo tho first ovidcnco of
oxporinontntion on huar.n boins, that is, tho first
thought nbout it, hero boforo this Tribunal, by virtue
of the Naso her D 0 cun-nt 1G02-PS, uhich is now in Document
Book No. 2, that 13 a substitute for tho ono that is in
tho docunont book, Your Honor, whioh is datod tho 15th
of liny, 1941. Now, you, in tho course of your diroot
oxcr.ination, have discussed the feasibility of rfaschor's
proposition hero nd I would like to know what was tho
first tirjo that plans or thou ;hts or any schoao for ox-
porinonts on human bcin;s for hi.;h altitudo roscorch
upon concentration c iip inn.tos was brought hoao to you?

.. I boliovc, I said that iu cy diroct examination ns
woll as I can. Boforo tho discussion with Hippko.

•v Ju3t a moment. The discussion with Hippku was whon?
when was that?

.. On ono of tho longest days of tho year. I remember,
that I drove Hippke home in my car find it must have been
one of the longest d ys of the y^ar sinco it was still

?lo3


i;-y 7 . -3K-16 -S--»rr. in 3 c. r (Int. Voa Sc ho on)
Court No. 1


li ;ht vihon \tc vent hone.

I That would have boon in Juno or July?

.. I assucc that it was the ond of Juno, end Kottonhoff
shortly bofor-hend hnd spoken to no for the first tine
about .iischur* s plans end when Kottonhoff and Hippko
wero talk ins I olroody knew that Kasohor hod approached
Kottonhoff, and hed aado tho30 suggestions to hin. It
was nothin;; now to cc whon Kottonhoff told Hippko about
it. Kottonhoff iuX told no beforehand.

It nu 3 t have bocouo known to you about the sauo
tinu ns xtcfiohor's cccu-unioation with tho Hoioh ruohrunj,
that is tho 15th of Key, 1941, is that tho correct
soounption?

.. Ho, whet Kottonhoff told no was oonsidorably lctor.
That was shortly before tho talk with Hippko.

. How, actually when this knowlodso of tho intontion
to uso concentration coup lnnatos was brought hone to
you, th :t was perhaps the first of Juno 1941, not in
Hay 1941, but in Juno, before thu neotin ; with Hippko,
is that ri;;ht?


7 Kay-A-®-17 4e 18-1 Ifcloy (Int. Von Schon & Kurts)
Court So. I.


A I can't give you any core exact information about it than
I already have. It was shortly beforo the talk with Hippke that Kot-
tenhof told r-.e about it for the first tine, but I certainly did not
hear of it after. I assume that this was May when Raschor was taking
this course. I knew nothing about it.

Q Well, now where did Rase her take this course?

A When?

Q Where, where?

A The course was in the building of the Luftgau Connand in
Pr lnsregontenstrasse•

Q Was that near ycur institute?

A Mo, ay institute was in tho wost, in Pottenkotorstrasse,
in tho University quarter, and tho Luftgau building is souowhoro olso.

Q Who was giving this course? has Kottonbof tho instructor?

A Ho.

Q ’.'hat wore Kottonhof's duties?

A Kottonhof's pormanont function was an oxport for therapy
wolfaro with Luftgau ihysicion Mo. 7, I boliovo. Who gavo this course -
Luftgau 7 was rosponsiblo for it. Who actually gavo the course, - I
don't know. In any case Luftgau 7 organised tho c our so and had a
msnber of locturos for this courso, and set up a program for tho lect¬
ures. I remember for oxaaplo Buchner, Kottenhof and myself locturod
there. I boliovo that Singer did too, and scoo neurologist, whatever
locturers trero available to this Luftgau and tho neighboring luftgaus,
they wore asked to assist r.t this courso, and it was rather an exten¬
sive program.

q Well, then Kottenhof had no connection with ycur Institution?

A Mot at this tine, not officially.

q Well, whon did Kottonhof first havo connection with your
institute?

A With ny institute for aviation uodicine, Kcttcnhof never
had any offic i a l connection.


7170


—

7 Kay-A-IB-l? i 13-2-Meloy (Ints: Von Schon & Kurt*)
Court He. !•


Q You have introduced a lot of docunents here about the
knowledge of Kottenhof concerning there natters, and you neon to say
Kottenhof hod no connection whatever with the institute?

A Kottenhof was at ay civilian department at tho University
In 1936 bofora the war.

3 Was he ever in your Luftwaffe Institute, did ho ever come
there and pay you a visit?

A Ho.

Q !!* never did?

A He was not e nonber of it, but of course ho did visit no
once in owhilo. Ho had no official relation with it.

Q Troll, then Kottenhof wr.e tho first ono to inf cm you about
tho intentions to use concentration canp imntos, was ho?

A Yos.

Q Ho got his knowlodgo free Rasober?

A Yos.

Q Thon when Rase her referred to his confidential taUc with
a representative of tho Luftgau physicians, do you assurao ho was re¬
ferring to Kottenhof, in this Document 16C8 PS?

A I ibsut.o so for two reasons, first cf all Kottorhof told
do about it afterwards. That ho had talked to Raschor. And socondly,
it seons to no tho letter indicatos this, tho renark about nonkoy ex¬
periments. I have already said that Kottenhof, as a visitor at oy
civilian section, had perfonod thoso experiments on nonkoys and In had
reported tho results of those tests at this courso at Uiftgau 7.

Q Well, now, let's go on. How did Hippke happen to cone
into tho picture? That w-s this conference in June 19ijl wherein Ihe
occasion arose for a discussicn concerning experiments on inmates of a
concentration camp; first of all where was the aoeting?

A It was in tho rVcycing Palais in Munich. It wrs not a
conference, but as I said before, Hippke happened to be, for reasons I
do not know, a visitor tc luftgau 7 and oxprossed the wish to sac a few


7171


7 llay-A-': 3-17 k 18-3-lfeloy (Ints: Yon Schon k Kurtx)
Court So. I.


of us in the evening. Tfo were all in civilian clothes. Tie wore per¬
haps 15, including the Luftcau physician and these 15 gentlenon gather¬
ed in the ireysing Palais, and we dined with Hippko.

Q You were thcro?

A Yos.

Q Hippke was there?

A Yes.

Q Xottenhof was thoro?

A Yos.

Q Hoe Raechor there?

A So, ho was not.

q v.'as anyone olso thoro when ro have nontionod hero in this

trial?

A Nobody. Of tlw people nontionod hero in this trial 1 do
not roeonbor anybody I don't boliovo.

Q Tfaa Luts thoro?

A No.

q Was Tloreit thoro?

A No.

Q Now, will you kindly toll us how the discussion happonod
to arise concerning oxporiaonts on huaan beings in the concentration
crape? Who brought up that subject?

A I boliovo I reported tids alroady. Early in the evening,
Kettunhof was sitting at tho top cf tho tablo, and I sat on Kippko's
left. Kottonhof Joined 'is and sat botroon Hippko and nysolf, and
brought up this subject to Hipffeo. He askod hie what ho thought about
all this and Kottenhof told Hippko that Raechor had approachod'hir, with
those plans to oxporiront on criminals and this idoa he re port od tc
Hippko and asked hiu his opinion.

q Poll, now at this tiro what did Hippko say, can ycu re-
non±or as nearly as possible Just what Hippko said ab ut itj what was
his reaction to it?


7172


7 liy-A-i3-17 £ 18-ii-iialcy (Ints: Von Schon & Kurt,)

Ccurt Ho. I.

A At first HippkB was rather reserved, rki didn't say vary
s-jeh. Knttonhof thereupon gave a few reasons, as I havo said boferc.

He a-id for instance this natter would be also to tho advantage of the
criminals and Hippko saw the point there — ho also described that
they said this cnl that. Hipffca didn't say no, but he also emphasized
that oxporimsnts by doctors on themselves must bo the basis. However,
tho conversation was very unsatisfactory, end reached no conclusion, and
as I said boforo the definition scosod a very unfortunate one. Vo
talked past eaoh cno and at crcas-purp seo, and therefore I thought I
should sh w by a practical oxr.-.ple what I thought would bo permissible
and '..hat would not bo pomissiblo.

Q Now, did Hippko as* you, inasnuch as you had an instituto
and t/oro on export in this fiold, did Hippko ask you "Prrfosoor Holts,
is it nocoss.ary to resort to concentration cnape in order to conduct
thoso oxpDriaor.te?"

A No, ho didn't ask do that. Tho purp^so of tho conversation
was tho f ict that Rose her had appror.chod Kcttonhof, hid nado this offor
and tho quortion of whether tho offor should bo approved or not was tho
topic of tho conversation, and I said bcf.ro no concrete oxporimont
was being discussed at that point, that they should begin noxt month,
and that thoy should bo high altitude oxporinonto. It was a theoreti¬
cal conversation whether such things wore permissible and xsulor what
conditions thoy would bo pomissiblo. That was tho basis of such a
conversation.

Q Free what you say it would have been possible for you and
Kottonhof and Kippko to havo nipped in tho bud any experiments on human
boings in Dachau at this doc ting in liay 19U1, wouldn't it have/

A Now today as I Javow tho facts I aa not inclinod to think
so, because tho reason why experiments were carried out was the fact
that Rascher had approached Kinolcr and Hlmoler had given permission.

Q T.Tiat was Rase her' s rank in Juno 19U17

A Ho was Cburarst ar Stabearrt of the luftwsffo, I run not sure.


7173


7 ifay-A-fcB-17 Sc 18-5-ifeIoy (Ints: Vcn Sc hen & Kurtz)
Court Ho. It


Q i.hat kind of a unifora did ho wear, the Luftwaffe or SS?

A '..hen he ca=o to sec no ho wore a I^ftwaffo unifora.

Q l.ho was chief nodical officor of tho Luftwaffe?

A That was Hippko at tho tine.

Q Doesn't tho chief ajdical officer of the Uiftwaffo havo
authority to transfer any oonbor of tho nodical services of tho Luft-
vToffo subordinate in rank to hin to nnothor place?

A Yos, he had that authority.

Q Stall, now, did you discuss at this rooting of Juno 19U1

whether or not volunteers should bo usod?

A Yos, as I said bofcrc that was tho basis of tho whole con¬
versation.

Q I sao, and thon you disc us nod tho volmtcors and thon you

discussod tho necessity for tho oxporinonts, I presume?

A Yos, arri also all tho points which Rascter kopt bringing
up as to professional crisdnals, volmtcors. Thoso prints woro roport¬
ed to Hippko by Kottenhnf, Just ns Haschor had told hin himsolf, bo-
causo theso conditions woro being discus sod.

Q Didn't it soon a little ridiculous to Hippko who was a
rathjr well-educated min to havo to rosort to concentration ennp In¬
mates? After all, all you woro going to use volmteors, you could per¬
haps get volunteers in Munich, when tho low pressure chamber would bo
usod in another place, ratter than got non in tho concentration onnpe
and use men who were not well-fed and not up to standard, and you would
have to bring tten up to starxiard to use then? Didn't Hippko havo

scnothing to say along those linos?

A All I con say about that, Kottenhcf asked Hippko*to dofino

his attitude about Raschcr's offer. It wasn't that wo were short of
Tciuntours in the Luftwaffe. Rascher had made tho offer to Kottonhof,
and Hippko was, at Kettentef's request, to define his attitude toward
' that offer. That was why we had our talk that evening.

q Did you define your attitudo at tho sane tino; you certainly


7 ifay-A-46-17 & 18-6-Haloy (Ints: Von Sc hen L Kurtz)
Court Sc* I.


nust hare given your attitude?

A Yes, I certainly did. I did not interfere in tho cenvor-
saticn at first, but when tho definition se--»d tc bo a little vague I
uxprossod ny attitaio cn the basis -f the Goldbcrgor de Kruif examples.

Q Thon ycu were in favor of instituting this oxporiiaonta-
ticn on tho hinen beings in the Dachau concentration cruop after tho
qualifications y^u have outlined, naaoly volunteers and habitual
criminals, and a pardon 'to bo grantod; that is, if thoso qunliflotions
wore to bo carried cut you wero in faver cf it, wore you, at this tino?

A As far as I was conc-rood I never had the desiro to mnko
any oxporirents and tte wholo quostion would not have cono up to tno if
I had net boon facod with tho nocorsity to dofino ry attitudo about
tho wh;lo problon. Tlx. wholo problem as to whether :x not thoro wculd
hevo been experiments in Dachau would not have arison as far as I «
conzomod, if I hid n-t been pushod into tho nh'lo thing by tho fact
that Raschor hooded ay institute, and I therefore l»ad to dofino ny at¬
titudo.

Q »ihat was your fooling whon ycu wont away from tho mooting
In Juno 19L1, was it your feeling er Kettonhof's fooling, that Hippko
would bo agroonblo to exporioontation on human boings ot Dachau?

A I think I said this in detail, Hippko pointed out that
tho basis for rosearch in tho Luftwaffo must bo experiment on onoo
self, oxcopt of course for cortain oxporirontal purpasus when condi¬
tions which wo could regard as inpoccablc, if thoso conditions prevailed
then ho cculd give his approval in theso exceptional eases for thoso
experiments to take place.

Q Tfoll, new, w. wiU loavc tho ncoting of Juno 19hl *xl go
cn. -/hen did tha occasion aris^ Ter action on your part to lay tho
groundwork for tho experiments to be conducted r.t Dachau?

A I believe I described all this.

Q Describe it again. I an soing to give ycu the opportunity,
p.-hen or what date did Rasetor approach ycu or you approach Rasci-r and


7175


7 Moy-A- 5-17 4 18-7-Jfcloy (Von Schon & Kurt*)

Court !fc • I«

did you sect with Hippke cr did you a»t with Himler or whce did you
sect to doc Ido you would carry out experlaeiita at Dachau that neces¬
sitated you inviting Dr. Ruff and Dr# Ronborg to collaborate with
Rasctor and ycuraolf, now whon did this tako place?

a In the course cf the srrxer Rasctor hiasclf cane to no and
proposed to uo, as I have dcscribod, to try out this alow ascent, I
also described haw this nr a position soeuod to ae n-t debatable. I
tumod it down fer tto reason which I said bof re, it waa net necessary.
Kottcnhaf did not nwn tto ffor very ^uch, for different roasons.

Q Haw, why did Reactor cono toy u, he waa not a aonbor of
your inatituto tton7

A No, he waa net a aoaber f ny institute, and I can only
oacure, as I acid bof-rc, I assuno, and I can say it with cortr.inly, bo-
ccuao Roach or said ao hinsolf Later on, .at that tiao Raachor intended
tc qualify as a lecturer, .'owl tho only pLaco whoro aviation medicine
waa dealt with in tho Luftgnu, and had any connection with tho Univer¬
sity waa qysolfa Ttoro waa no cthor agency thoro whoro Raactor could
find corrections with aviation uodicino on tto one hand and a univer¬
sity on tho othor. The testing station and I ryaolf was tho only
ngoncy and I think that oust havo been tho reason why Raachor enno to
BO*

Q Mow, did you have a low pressure chanbor right in your cwn
inatituto rfiich wna in tho building, in tho courtyard, in tto building
of rhyaiolcgy f tto University cf iiunich; didn't yru havo a low pros-
sure chamber thore?

A Yea, we had a low presevro chamber of our cwn.

q Is that perhaps tto reason Rasctor cane tc you, bec*.u3w
•/. u had a low pruaauro ctonber?

A I an not quite clear on that point. Race her didn't toll
ae this, and I cannot even today quite imagine whether Rascher know
we had r. nubile lew pressure chanter, cr whether he thought


7176


7 Kiy-A-0JC—17 &lS-la-Ual oy (Karts)


Court Ho* 1


the Dachau people would coao to us in 1 tunic h. I don't know what idea
ho had at that time.

q T:U1 you kindly repeat slowly in Goman the official name of
-.-our institute?

A Institute for Aviation Itodicinc, ttmich.

Q -oil, nor:, Document 1602 f5, -dll you kindly turn to that docu-
aant. That is the now version, the ccuplote translation. In 1602 FS
on pose 1, Hascher refers to an institute, tho name is in Goman. Duo
to ^ incapacity in tho Gernan language I an unablo to pronounce tho
woxda. I rrill requost the interpreter to rope at, in 1602 FC, it is
about seven or eight linos up fito tho bottom in quotations, tho nano
of tho Gernan institute, trill you kindly road that to Dr. oltz.

(Interpreter roads: Bodcnstandigo Poufs to lie fur Hohon forschung
dor Luftrraffo*)

q Hoir is that yoir organisation?

A At that tine, on 15 iiay the institute for aviation medicine liad
not coao into oxistonco. It vas founded in tho autumn. At that time
I >.ras tho hoad of tho Tosting Station four, '-hich I doscribod in dutail.

Q This testing station hero, that ic roforrtd to horc, that io ycur

organisation?

A That is quite obvious Raschcr ocr.na here, I have no doubt...

Q I an not concomc<i hero with on explanation. I am not asldng
his organization, I am asking you was that the name of your organization;

Lutz said it was, ncr» do you say it is?

A At that tins I was tho head of tho Testing Station four, for high

altitudo effects .

31. HUBDI:. To'jr Honor, I have Joked tho .dtnooo throo ttaoo nhothor
or not this ts tho najoo of hio organisation. It only raqriroo a yuo or
no aiCTor , arf I roqueot tho Tribunal to inotruct tho uitnooo to —r
xy quotation.

A. I m -bout to oay in this caoo that richer chooc the title urongly.
,y institute was called somthiJV. -Isc*

7177


7 Lay-A-0J0^17&lB-2a - MpI o y (Kurts)
Court So. 1


Q *hon this doos not rofor to ycur instituto?

A :fo, I wanted to say that although Raschcr used tho inccrroct titlo,
but that I nysclf have no doubt ho means ry institute.

Q Then ho noans your institute?

A Xcs, there is no doubt at all.

1 oil, then hero on 15 toy 1910- vty is Raschcr roforrir.s to your
institute rhen 5» hinself has not as yot contacted you concerning tils

problem, according to ycur toetiiiony?

A I laiotr nothing about that, bccauso I its not in contact rith
Rnachor at that tine. Tho L-ttor beerme Imer.-n to ao only hero, and X
can only assure that Raschcr iaaginod it like this and Hi.:-lor had to
L ivo hin p*. mission first, and thon he aosirxd that to nil of us would
a ay as soon as ho had Hinder'a pc miss ion. One thing lc certain I could
not tall; to hlr at tho tlix. because T rculd not have been in a position
to _ivu hin pendssion. That would have been up to tho Modical Inspector
:jvl I tharoforo did not give hin permission.

Q Xou had a lor pressure chamber oarly In 19!d, as a nattor of fact
you nay iiavo had it earlier?

A los, since 1938, I boliovc.

Q Airi that lor pressure charter --as burned dom in 19Ui in y<*ur
institute?

A Xeo.

Q As a nattor of fact tho notrd pots are still thorc, tho pots that
didn't bum?

A I think so. I assure tat.

q -far, rhon you nevod ycur institute to your n^v location^ did you
thon build another lor pressure cicixr?

A Xos.

Q T.vrn did you begin work on this lor press-ore chamber?

A In 19UU, but that chamber ~a never completed, and ras never usod.

Q However, fro*: 1938 until 19lili you always had a lor pressure


chamber available?


7173


7 l^WJJGJ.7«a3-3a-«al-y (ferta)
Court Ho. 1


A For all practical pur osos, thoro nua only tho ttinich Ion
pressure efaasfcor which was used, it too used sinco 1938, I bo-


liovc, up to the point -«hcn it rrza turned.


7179 ’


I


Court 1

May 7-A-ls-l-HD-Coofc-Xurtz.


I see, and you have stated here a moment e-c that
you oo-Id bars ^ot -lent of volunteers tnrou B h the Luft¬
waffe, didn't you, that Is, that wasn't the question. You
seated in the meeting of June 1941 wherein Kottanhoff told
Hlpphe about Rascher'a proposal, namely Rascher could get
subjecte and permission from Himmler to worn in Dachau,
you seated that the purpose of your discussion there was
to merely extend t.ls proposal of Rascher 1 a to rilppke
for hie cunslder*tl.n, end, they you stated, tn. c oi
course the Luftwaffe could have gotten plenty of volunteers
had they wanted to. Low do you wish to correct that
statement or era o- of the earns conviction, that you
could have a ot plenty of volunteers without resorting

to the proposal of Reached

a. I believe In ay direct examine*tlon 1 eooha quite
dearly about this. Of course, he extent of the tusk
Is v ry important v.-.ether I have enough volunteers or not,
how man volunteers there were In the Luftwoffo, i
clrevdy indicated, 1 gave e few names r nd In our case,
in b v Immediate aohero, esoccl. lly e ve were concentrating
on animal ex-eriaents on the v olo, there was ne'-or any
wish expressed t. -se inmates as experimental persons.

Cur pro .ram never lead us to this wish.

... Kindly answer ny question. You neve ta° n ~ astray
?±5in . Could ou .vv* got, If ou had wanted to, for any
experiments in low pressure or vh tever It may be, ten
to fifteen volunteers without resorting to Inmates cf
concentration camps?

a. That cependod on tne Cash, what the people were
expected to do.

The people were expeoted to -c tl.r>u 0 h these
harmless nl-h altitude experiments, now could you t


71-0


Court 1

Aey 7-A-l3-2-HD-Cook-K urtz.


ton or fifteen?

It depended entirely on whet * wanted the people
to do end how much time they had end how much I was
justified to demand of their tine, our^ly, It Is obvious
fast sometimes I could a et students end soaetla-s I
couldn't. In ny sphere In any case, within my program
there was no necosslty to fall back on prisoners because
we did r.ot h ve a program which would make that necessary.

Now is Ruff's case it was quite different.

Just a mement doctor; you have stated now when
I asked ''ou concorntn 0 the meeting In the summer of
1941, why thl9 discussion arose, and Hlppke was there,
about those matters, end ou hove volunteered the
Information to us that It wosn't necessary to discuss it
because we could h, vo gotten all the volunteers wo
wanted to, but this was merely a manner In which Kotten-
noff wanted to present t..lo proposal to Hlpoke for
consideration. Now you mode the statement: ‘16 can get
ell th- volunteers we w nt to. Could you get ten or
fifteen volunteers If you, Ur. Voltz, ted decided you
would like to experiment in high altitude research on
hufl»n beings, co Id you yourself havo obtained theso
many volunteers you spoke ebo .t?

a. Probably not, I didn't try - but -
Q. Then why did .ou eay you could In defense to that
ether question her* some hour ago?

A. I said tr.e q-e=tion would not hrvo arisen as to
croetimental persons If Rasoher had not brought up that
subject and forced us to define our attitude toward that
problem. That Is what I said.

k. Veil then you had e lew pressure c/^ab-r vallable
in our institute in 1941, didn't ou?

7171


Court 1 „

Kay 7 -A- 19 - 3 -HD-Cooi-A.ur-r.


a. Yea.

i. «nd vclcntc.rB could taro boon node evallablc, '
could they?

A . It depends upon what for and to what extent,
i. roll I a- asking you specifically: *> ” ou thlnk
et t.iat time you could have got a volunteer to volunteer,
a volunteer to volunteer for high altitude experiments as
outlined by Ruff and Romberg and RafiOhor at the concentra-

tloa camp Dachau?

a. '»*1 Shout any difficulty.

Then you could have got ten or 15 volunteers

without any difficulty?

a. The Is more difficult.

Well, let's don't 0 et involved, why In the world
did you then enter Into a conference with Ruff, Ror-bor*
and Rascher to go to Dachau and uu*o all o: those
errans ments end spend all of this valuable time during
wer tine when you could do other research, whon - 11 you
had to do was to *0 out ena O ot ten or fifteen vo untoore
and say now Ruff here Is the low pressure chamber and
ton or fifteen volunteers, 6 o to It? It was just as

alnnl- as that, vesr.'t It?

a. First of all I should correct h-ro that the
exyerlciwnta could not have been made with our low pressure
oh. mbur beccuse our model wee a different one.

It could nave been made wit:, your low oressure

oc.-m‘ser co ldr.'t it?

a. The experiments made hr Ruff and Romberg could
ne-or have be * a-do with a* low pressure chamber.

Couldn't you have mad. ten or fifteen subjects
available to Ruff and Roabor. to be usod In their
oressure cumber, bearing In mind. If course, that the


7132


Court i

fey 7-A-i:---i-SB-Cooi-Kurtr.

low pressure eh mber stopoed in your Institute overnight
you could heve cerely held It there end said to then now
here ere ten or fifteen subjects, you make your o»3eriment6
ri^-it here. It would neve, avoldad all this confusion,
wouldn't It, end you could ht-va 6een what went on In
these experiments, because yo- wouldn't have had. to have
p pass to git Into a concentration oann, Isn't that true?

No, this Is not true, because first of all our
low pressure chamber was unsuitable for these experiments,
because It did not have sufficient cape*city. Secondly,
if I had had the experimental subj-cts in hunloh, Ruff
in 3orlin would not h ve had any advantage of that, and
t -lrdly, the election cs far as I was concerned was this;
That I had to define ay attitude to Rasonor, and noreov.r
Raac-.cr and orders from Himmler, In which he w. s ordered
to Ooffl- to ay Institute to carry out the experiments.

Just a cement now, Raschar wasn't In the sS, was
he? flaoch.r was In the Leftweffe. Lot's etralfent3n that
it now. In 1&41 at the tic* of these activities and
tills iler.r.in a of Che experiments at hachau, Rasohor
was not In the 33, em I correct? Piers- correct me,
..octor, If I pm wrong.

4. «t that time Rascher was in the 33 and w s also
c jtcbsarzt In the Luftwaffe.

He v^s on active duty In the Luftwaffe, wasn't
he? Don't w 3 h.ve e lot of correspondence here wherein
tiey re blcherln^ bach snd forth about Raachor?
a. He was or. 00 officer and In the Luftwoffo.

In tne Luftwaffe?
a. Yes In the Luftwaffe.

I ;we to study the documents. This Is news to
. . ow lr. Dececber 1941, you orocoedod to --erlln


ac


Court 1

» y 7-,.-i9-5-HD-Cook-Kur t *.

to 83 3 Huff?

A. Yos.

i. ?rlor to tat MK you had *W( thca. oxporl-
aunts with Luts and Wendt, hadn't you?
a. No, tht t la not true.

Lutz said you ned.

s. *»». I had dleoisee- It vltfl Lutz oni a , ! 8al4 ln
* 4l " 0t dxaIlnocl °n I told Lutz about tel. convocation
with Hlppka rnl „„ carried on that convocation oni
discussed tho posUbllltloe for end e e ainat tho problem.

I did not (pack ln detail to -ondt. I don't recall at
•11 nevln t ulsouaaed It with endt.

”oll row Lutz testified /oj offered hlu an
opportunity to collaborate with Hasober?

*• 'Oil, I diSPUtO the t.

X: -UCSX3 apparent socofriao before Docombor 1941 ,
or uaybe ln Do ccabor 1941, that Rasohor was to conduct
experiments t tho fftoliaii concentration camp, didn't it?

Ha so.*, r wanted to carry out ills oxperlo-nto In

Dpoh.'U.


7 Kay 47—j*-SV-l9-l«-Cook-Zur t x
Court So. 1


That cecane dour when Huff scented ay proposition.

q. tffay would you have offered Buff o proposition If there
hadn't teen sene dlecueeion about it before then?

4 , I do not understand thut question.

Si. You invited ^off to collaborate with Hatcher. How did you
happen to nave knowledge, how did you h*>pen to know Hascher wanted
8 ooobody to collaborate with bin, what did you go up there fort
Did you hare a vision suddenly and decide he wantod to have scce
experiments and eay to Huff: Do you want to collaborate with Hascher
I will assign you to hiu? Didn't you h„ve scce sort of a noeting with
Ratchor beforeh.u* and have scce sort of a plan? You wouldn't have
invited Huff and «ooborg to assist you if you didn't have soao sort
of r. plan. It didn't Just ecne out of thin air, did it?

ju I thought I hod described this sufficiently. Probably in
Soveubor 1941 Sascher w u s ordered to ay institute without uy doing
anything about it. without ay knowledge ovon, and now he was a aoebor
of uy Institute and ho hud un assignment free Kiualor to carry out
thoso ox.oriuonts, ait I did not know what to do with hia, that wao
the situation.

Si. Row we are getting to it. In Hovoubor, 1941, Hascher was csoignod
to your institute, wasn't ho!

A, 1 ossune that, 70 s.

q. Ro bcc.-ne your subordinate in the Luftwaffo, didn't he?
a. afl it was called tochnlcaiy he was orderod to work in ny
institute.

q. and he was your subordinate? Vhon you are in tho Luftwaffe or
c:qr otr-or branch of the Vohrcacht before you c a n put e can free ono
Job to another it le necessary to order bin, ho has to care written
orders, tho . : ae in the Gcrcan aTbj ae in tho D S aicy or in the havy or
coy other arcy, and so Hascher received orders wnorein ho wao tronr-


7 Hay 47-^-S*-19-2»-Cook-rnrtz
Court So. 1


forrod to the Instituto Veits, wasa«t he, cad he bccoao your sub-
crdiactet Let'* not quibble about it, doctor.

a. Yes, that la hit position.

Q. Then Haacher had on assignuent wherein ho could, if ho so
visaed, use subjects of the concentration cocp Dachau, is that right?

Toa.

He jbuld have equally as veil have accccpliohod his objoctivo
by using voluntocrs othvr than volunteers of inautes of Dachau concon-
tretion crop? •

a. x hat depends on vbet Hascher's ala was. Boschor did not havo an a in
at that tine. That v^s tho difficulty, *»o proposod oxporinento to ao
for which aianler wanted to uso the ejqicrisontal subjocts , wxl I did
not approve of Raschcr's ain and that vos how tho unhappy situation,
as far as Bascksr was cone or nod, aroso. On tho ono hand ho had Hiunlor's
pemission -nd on tho other ho had no cia to do anything with that
pi-mission, and ho proposod to no this slow ascent oxporlnont, which
Z turned down.

then was that, in Hovsobor 1941?

a. Th..t proposal he node to Sottonhoff when ho not hin for tho first
tin a.

Sow what proposals did ho coke to you after ho bocauo your
subordinato lr. Sovsuber 1941?

a. 'chon in Soveabor 1941 ho bocauo ny subordinato and when I had
turned down his first proposal , ho then, as I said beforo, ho thon
Dado a proposal to do for tho cold oxporioents to be carried out in
D chau, and that I also turned down, os I said before.

Q* Voll then vhon did ho propose that ho wanted to uso tho low
pros rare chaaber? *0 aust have proposed it soi-o tioo in Hovaabor—
when?


7106


7 :fcy-A-iB-2O-l-Karrcw (Int. Kurtz)

Court So. Z.

A The use of the low pressure chamber?

q res.

A His first wishes to make high altitude experiments were
based on the fact that a low pressure chamber must be used, bit we
never reached that point in our conversation because, from the begin¬
ning, I said *He shall not make those experiments" and Rascher had no
reason to ask ne what low pressure chamber to use.

Q Let as ask you a question. Did they perform some e;.-peri-
monts in Dachau on high altitude from your knowledge, from sitting hero
in the dock for five months? Did ti.oy?

A Yes.

Q Well, now, who proposed thorn? In November, 19hl, Rascher
cure to work for you, as your subordinate in your institute, ordered
there by the Luftwaffo. It ran only the Luftwaffe which could change
his assignment bocause he was a rombor of the Luftwaffe. Now, when did
he propose tlwse experiments? If ho didn't propose them, thon Weltz
proposed them and went to got Ruff and Roaborg. Now, why did you ask
Ruff and Ronborg if somebody didn't propose theso experiments? Who
proposed thon in Novcnbor, l°!il? You had rejected Ills other proposal
earlier on tho slow descor.t proposition. Now thon, did lie oxtond a
new proposal to you in November, 19lil, or by what token did you atop
forrard aid invite Ruff and Roaborg down to Dachau and get thooe two
men in all this troublo? Now, how did tliat happen?

A I believe I described this in detail. I say once again
that in Novcnbor, 19U1, thit Rasclior cu» to cy institute. He made tho
new proposal to have cold experiments. I thon told Raschor that "wo
aro not interested in cold oxperirents. Our anise la arc tjuito suffic¬
ient here. There's no point to it." Then I dcscribod htfr, by chance,
whon I was on a trip to Berlin, I visited Ruff and Ruff told mo of the
difficulties of his own progr am and ether difficulties which ho had
with experimental subjects. I, in turn, told Ruff that Hi sc her was
hanging around cy institute and I did not know what to give him to do;

7137


7 lfey-A-43-50 -2-fcarrow (Int. Kurt*)

Court So. I.

that Raschor had permission to mako experiments in Dachau; and, there¬
upon, I proposed to Ruff to have his experiments carried out on tho
basis of Rasober's permission in Dachau. Surely I described this all
in detail, and Ruff did too.

Q How, I have 1 is to nod with great interest to what you have
just said. Do you want to think for about one ninute and confirm to
tho Tribunal that that is how the ox-orioonts started at Dachau? That
is Just the answer I wanted. Kow, think about it a minute and will you
confirm to tho Tribunal that that's how tho experiments strxtcd in
Dachau.

A Tho experiments cano about that I said that on a trip to
Borlin, I tnlkod to Ruff, that I told Ruff that thorc was a jwssibility
to havo expirimonts carried out in Dachau and that Ruff, in turn, told
mo how short ho was of experimental subjects. That, I think, is all I
have to say in this connection.

Q That's porfoct, Doctor. Ko won't havo to discuss that

any further.

How, after you talked to Ruff, then you sot a dato for a
meeting, didn't you, in Munich, and this dato for a mooting in Munich
took placo whon? Whan was that dato? Tfhon did it actually tako placo
in Munich?

A I cannot give you tho dato. I assume that it must havo
boon in December, ftjrhape tho middle of Docember, 19ll.

Q That was also in December that thoy wont to Munich? You
wAnt to Berlin in Deccsbor and they came to Munich in December, is that
right?

A Ho, I'm sorry, I made a mistako here. I assume that the
conversation in Munich took place in January. I slipped there.

Q All right. Now, Ruff and Rcnberg were invited to partici¬
pate in thoso experiments with Raschor by you because they were exports
on tho subject, is that right? You wanted some experts to work on this.
If you were going to use inmates of tho concentration ermp, you decided


7 >by-A—G-2O-3-Korrcm (let. Kurts)

Court Ho. I.

you would like to have experts doing it, and that's your reason for
asking Huff and Romberg to collaborate with you and Rase her, is that
it, because thoso xon wtre exports in the field i

A That is a distorted description and Ruff and Ronbor-j's
affidavits aro on the basis of this, and in their crocs examination
they have corrected their affidavits. It is a distorted way of putting
it to say that I had called in tta exports Ruff and Romberg to my ex¬
periments. How it really happened was I effexed to Ruff whothor iie
wanted to cako exporinents with Raseher. Rostoerg, in turn, had decidod
on the program. Tho program was not ay contribution. And on that
oasis, tho collaboration occurred.

Q And, in tho ovont that you had not offered this to Ruff
and Rocb-'rg, than Ruff end Romberg would net bo in this dock todry,
would thoy?

A I assume so.

Q roll, no*, the hurdlo I na trying to got over is that 'Jr.
Luts soya you offorod It to liin. Of courso, you dony that. And ho ro-
fusod, ani gives very olaborcte reasons for his refusal in that ho
wasn't strong onough — that is, in his hoart - to porforn those ox-
perinonts on faumn beings. And tho hurdlo I m trying to got ovor
new is tho statement you mute on direct wJ»n you said that such a play
on words by Luts was ridiculous; tnat you had nover noticed Luts to bo
roli^ious or to have any misgivings about such things and you made a
statonont which hae bothered ne considerably "herein you state j n I
would have reminded Luts of things which make this answer ridiculous."
Jiot, was Luts aixod up in scroothing criminal? What was this hero that
would liavo node his answer ridiculous?

A Luts' reply wo-ud have boon ridiculous according to tho
views hold at the tine by Luts on the overall situation. Luts, at that
tine, 7ms an ardent advocate cf total war with all means and his con¬
ception roughly was - I now speak cf 15ll - he realised that the war
would be a hard and sovero one and he was of the opinion tint this war


7 L-.y-A-3-2O-fe-Earrow (Lit. Kurtz)

Court Ho. I.

-ust be f-ught with all means at our disposal. At that tino ho used
the following expression quite frequently, tha expression: "If wo are
to win this w~r wo, in Germany, nuat use shooting in the nock ncro
frequently." I think Lutz didn't mean this litorally. Hhat ho nonnt
vms perhaps this. He believed that wo, in Germany, were sitting be-
twe-n two chairs. On the ono hand, the daaocrotic net hods with ihich
you could wag© war sucoossfully wo had got rid of, and, on tho otlwr
hand, ho thought that the total warfare mo the ds which wo saw ombodiod
in Russia had not been introduced 1005, -nd tht wes his opinion that
he expressed in tho words that "Li Go raw, wo should shoot people in
tho nock r»ro." Just at that tiro and just before, thoro wore snail
differences between Lutz and rysolf on tho point that lutz usod his
elbows quito a bit. I tell thuso things nhich aro not of vast import¬
ance - I an not very koon about tolling those things about ny assist¬
ants - but if it helps to olnrify thoso things I have to toll those
things. If over I had snail difficulties with sy subordinates-it oc¬
curred rathor raroly - it was always c-n tho point that Lutz usod his
olbcws too ruthlessly. Later on, i* hod a difforonco with our ohar-
wenan, and when I eont hie on m assigmont ho had arguaonto vhon ho
nisbolv-.vod rathor awkwardly with tho Gauloitor and I had to roocuo hia
froc a vory hoavy difforonco of opinion with tho Gauleiter which was
not without considerable risk as far as I an concerned.

Q So new, Doctor TToltz, thoso little incidents of Lutz' per¬
sonality - what you refer to as making his refusal to participate in
hizain being oxporicents in Dachau ridiculous — is thnt what you baso it

on? That slin ovidoncc of his character? Tou baso it on that?

•

A A nan who tolls no that "norc people should bo shot in
tho nock in Go many* cannot toll no in tho sano breath "1 on too soft¬
hearted. I an not robust onough." I ;rust say I would have docLarcd
that ridiculous. I don't know that that is only cy opinion.

Q Uoll rviw, in this meeting in January, 19U2, who rein Ruff
and Roaberg attended, whe else » s present at the conference?


7190


7 n'y-A-i£-205-Xarrcnr (let. Kurtz)

Court Ho. I.

A Present were, at that conference, Ruff, Romberg, Rascher

and myself.

Q Ruff, Romberg, Raseher and yourself, yos?

A Yob.

Q And Luts w-.s not thcro?

A I described this. Rasebar was late. Ruff and Romberg
wore present. Before the conference opened wo talked in ray rocn on
different setters and when Roeclwr arrived - !w had n car accident -
and .uado apologies and when Rase her finally turned up I told those
gent loco n Thank you very uuch. I wish to begin new" and began the
conference, and tho gontlonen left ay roon.

Q I see. Then Luts' tostLxny that you told him you woro
going to liavo a conference and that ;'eu didn't want hia in tho roon is
true, isn't it?

A Yos, it is.

Q This is a good breaking point. Your Honor.

THB PRESIDENT: Tto Tribunal will be in recess until 9:30
tomorrow morning.

DR. FROGSCHMANN (Dofonso counsel for defendant Brack): !!ay
it please tho Court, nay I ask tho Court's indulgonco for two minutes?
In the court* of tho trial the following witnosscs havo boon proposod:

Wolff, Dietrich, Soivort - I an dofo:iso counsel for Brack - Wolff,

%

Dietrich, Soivort, Hodorich and Pfnronuoller. I have docidod not to
use Soivort and Bsdorioh. Wolff was turned down as a witnoso. Mow,
tliero is a difference betw&.n nysolX and tho Secretary General about tho
twe regaining witnesses: Dietrich and Pfannauollor# They should be
called into tho witness stard as witnesses. I would be grateful for a
r uling cf tho Court to allow ne there two witnesses on tho stand.

KR. HARDY: liay it please the Tribunal, I nay be able to
help you here. I don't knew the status of Pfanrouellor right now. Tho
Doctor does. But I turned Pfcnnnuclior over to the Gorman courts for
trial sene two aonths age and I don't know whether he has departed free


7191


7 Ifcy-A—!3-2Q-S-Earrow (Int. Kurts)

Court Ho. I.

J.'umborg yet. "hay ire proceeding very rapidly. Ho may bo hero now -
I don't knew that - but I assume that ho is in Frankfurt awaiting trial.
I don't knjn whether he r.ill bo available for this Tribunal.

TrS PR2SHJEKT: Tfell, if counsel for the dofondant Braok and
the prosecution will ccao to ay office inaodiatcly upon this recess,
we'll discuss the natter with then there.

(A HKCESS yUS TAXE2J UJ/TIL 0930 HOURS, 8 I'AY 19li7).


7192


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 8
Target 2

Volume 20
May 8-14, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


I


1


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT at ol
VOLUME 20


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


8-14 May 1947 pp. 7193-7574


mi

Hz? 8-U-3K-1
Court No. 1


Official Transcript of thu -cwrioan Military
Tribunal In tho natter of the Onitou otc.tc.-s
cf —•aerion c.;ainst KjI ornndt, ot al,
defendants, sitting r.t Humber:;, Gernany, on
May 8 1947, 0930, Justice Boils presiding.

Till ll.UUH.X- Persons in tho courtrooa will ploaso


find choir scats.

Tho Honorable, bho Judges of Military Tribunal I.

Ullitcry Tribunal I is now in sossion. God savo tho
United Gtr.tos of ..fierio.nd this honorable Tribunal.

Thera vjill bo order in tho courtrooa.

THJ PI.ISIJJKT: Ur. ~ rshcl, you ascertain if the
defend.at s re all pro a oat in tho court.

TH- H..U3H..L: May it plonso Your Honor, all dofondants
tro .resent in tho court.

T:u ..t-Giaarr: The Secretary Goner .1 will note for tho
rocord the presence of all .the defendants in court.

Counsel uay proceed.

DU. e-C’.cG- <.ULTd - Uosucod
C.i033 UX.ddIIT.J10U (Continued)

BY .K. H.-OY:


t Dr. -oltz -

TiL, c. Counsel, just one aonont.

The Tribunal desires to r^et throe r.ouburs of the
Gorn-r. oounsol, to bo ohoson by tho Gum sn oounsol, a
q quart or before four this Jtoruoon in tho Jud;os'
entorooci to discuss tho n:.tt_r of tho tine to bo
allowed oounsol for x :uc:ent at the clo3o of the oaso
If counsel for the do fond ats will choono a cor-iittoc
^^jSmJVioJscot with the Jud ;es this afternoon^it a
Wartor bofor£-Your, the natter will b- discuss .


Counsel cmy'


JCddr;«rio:i (Continued)


Uaj S-K-3K-l-2-?cstcr (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

had taken up the noetin,; in L'unich in January 1942, and
you stated that .;uff, Hoebors, ^esoher and yourself wore
present at th^t ncetin^. Now, between the nootinj in
Munich end your nootin : with ;tuff in Borlin, did you
then inforu .iasohor thet you had successfully roooived
the support of ;iuff and rtunborg, so that iasohor then
could oarry out work in hi ;h-altitudo rosoerch nt Daohuu?

.. Certainly, otharwiso iiesohor would not havo oone to
this tooting. I had tc invito .teacher to this ncotins,
and on- of the purposoc of this n-otins was to aoquaint
.tuff end Itonbora with ncsohor.

1 Now, after tho aootin : had cssonblod I presume that
you had ono or two stops to consider. First of all,
did tho four of you disouso tho necessity for tho ex¬
periments, bo rin; in mind, oi course, that all four of
you woro familiar with this field of research, nuff,
Itonbors and yourself b-in : nor. ,• ;rticuln-ly exports in
the field.

.. ..o acquainted .tesoher with tho ^ro.^.ui; hcschor in
hi3 turn told us wh t the conditions woro. Ko showed us
the Kirn_lor lot tor th^t has boon mentioned horo; and
tho pro Tar; was already laid down. Th^ro was no further
discussion of tho pro Trx:. Tho ^roj-Ji )«3 ulroedy dear
at ^dlorshof.

. This lottor that you have r.forrcd to, th-t Dr.
•tor;b„r ; r-fo r-d to, did you havo tho opportunity ^to road
that lett.r of Himmler's?

- Yes, -Cisch-r showed it to us in this riuotin>

l Can you substantially toll this Tribunal just what
that letter contained?

- The letter contained tho st tenant that Hinmlor :avc
his rr.isaion for ox;>.ri::-nts in Daoh.u, th t these


!'iy 8-.I-BK-1-3-?QStcr {Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

experiments woro to be undertaken on habitual criminals,
th .c thoso habitual originals noro to bo volunteers,
end that they wore to receive a suitable nitiqation of
:unishnunt. -.11 thoso facts wore certainly sot forth in
the latter.

v ..oil, now, doesn't it soon stranju to you, Dr. .<oltz,
chinking lojic-lly for tlw sonant, that Hirr.lur in his
letter authorizing xtaschor to conduct oxporinents at
Dachau, would hovo interposed the reccric in hie letter
that tho subjoot3 to bo used nust ho voluntoors, in view
of the letter of lo !day 1941, whoroin hnooher wrote to
Hiiiilor end told Hin..l.r that voluntoors could not bo
had end that it was nooossr.ry that originals bo sot
asido for use in thoso oxpor ixiunts?

.. Of ooursj, I don't know what Hinnlor and dosch-r
discussod, but if I o .n s.oculatc on this oubjoot, I
should think that it obviously bcoauo cle.j to rtr.soher
that tho jueation of tho volunteers played a *;rcat role
when h- talked to Kottonhoff. Kottonhoff expressed to
.{-isch^r scruples to the effect that criminals vuro not
tho persons for the oxporixients that ilasoher and Kottun-
hoff wore planninboo use tncy oould not tx. voluntoors
in offoot. In tho experiments planned by .tosoher and
Kottonhoff oxt^nsivw cooper -tion of the experimental
subjects was count .d on, hoc .uso we had found out in
our experiments with rabbits that tho ruspirution had
to be carefully r j;ulotod if atitudo adaptation wu« to
be acnieVed. .mi Kottonhoff h .fi nisjivinjs about wbother
p.rsons who nure forced to subsit to tho oxporit— ats
would so rojul .td thv-ir respiration voluntarily, fhet is,

I pros use, why thi3 question of whether the subjects

*

wer- volunteers pleyoC such e jreat role with musch-r all
of l sudden, bcoousc .sch~r realised frer. his discussion


8-M-BX-l-4-Foator (I.:t. Brown)
Court Bo. 1


•vitb Kottonhoff thr.t tho question of the subjects'
bcin^ volunteers was very important. Otherwise, of
courso, I do not know how these letters oano abcut nor
Ju3t what hnpponod between .<asch~r and Hinnl-r.

. How, how olsborntoly did Hianler express tho view
that the subjects to tx, used in these- experiments oust
bo voluntoors, that i3, in that latter which Raschcr
produced at tho January 1942 oootin; r.t your institute?

4 . It was simply aontionod that tho subjects should bo
volunteers. There was nothin-; in the letter about the
way tho selection w .a to b^ undo.

. Now, doesn't It seen inconsistent to you, or doesn't
tho document 1971 b P 6 whioh is on pajo 64 of the
•in ;lish Dooun ;nt Book, whioh is the lottor fraa Hinalor
to Uaschor which ho rccoivod after Hinalor hod previous¬
ly r-coivod Rasoher '3 interim roport, tit t ho sont this
letter to Rasch;r wheroin ho stated, one, this experiment
is to bo repented on other nun condcanod to death, end
so on? Isn't tho olor.ont of tho voluntary nuturo of
the subjects conspicuously ub3ont from this letter?

.. I don't have thi3 lottor before uo.


8 ajy ii10-2-1-Galle.;::ar (Int. Brcrm)
C urt 8o. I, Case 1


Q Do ycu have Document 3c<* Ho* 2 there?

A 86.

Q Produce Oermn Docunont Book No. 2 please. (Whereupon book
delivorod tc too vitnoso). Sow this lott_r says: "1. This oxporinont
is to be repeated on othor -von comlenned to death. 2. I would liko Dr.
Fahronkanp to bo takon into consultation on these experiments. 3. Con¬
ti idorir. the lor. -continuod action of the heart, tho experinonta should
bo specifically oxploitod in such a mnner as to dotorodno whether those
non could bo recalled to life. Should suoh on ojp -rlrxint succeed, then,
of course, tho person condo:siod to death shall bo pardoned to concen¬
tration canp for lifo* Hainrich Ittmlor." >tow wo don't soo the word
"voluntary" nontioned in this lottar, do we, Itoctor?

Q I boliovo that this lottor obviously rofors *to Hasohor's
oxporirwnts, and not to ours. Wo Id not carry out ary axporiiajnta on
which wo tod to boo how lor\ tho hoart continues to boat aftor altitu do
sicknosoj Raschor in his rolations with Ruff, Rorfcor;, and no.

Q Non, Doctor, I can well soo that you are now 'oin<: to draw this
lino of demarcation botwoon Raachor's axp-riaonts, and the Ruff-Rciriborg
oxporliaants, an there is no point in our arguing further on this luttor,
but I lo wish to call your attention to this lottor whoro Maalor now,
you atatod, wroto to Raschor boforo this tine, and statod that tho
oubjocts WL*ro to bo par ’onod. ?Sow, in this lottar ho 3tatos that thoy
aro to bo par toned if they are killed, and thon called back to lifo —
thon you will grant then a pardon to bo jwt in a ooncontration camp for
lifo. Jtow that's too only instanco .herein we see tho "pardon" clause
coning forth, isn't it?

A I don't knew whether what Raschor told us always wot tho sane as

what ho discussed with Hinalor. I can only say what Raschor told us, and

I car. only refer to this one statement of Hisrlor's that I sr. and there

i3 no doubt that the question of the voluntary subject played a role in

•

the discussion botr.oon Xottonhoff end Raschor, and that our . ntiro dis¬
cussion with Ruff and Roracrg also involved the voluntary olenent in a


71 97


8 »y U7-’W.7!>-2-2-<>allnr*fcer (Int. 3rcwn)
Court !fc. I, Case 1


vary ir^xertant role. !*oir I do not knew vhethor Raschcr got a separate
letter froro Himlcr stating this, or how it was,

Q flew om brier quostion along those lines. Isn't it true, or won't
you concede, that, after roadiivj this lottcr which is in I^cunont Book
\k. 2, an‘ you say that you saw anothor latter fro::. Himlor, which
unfortunately we do rv>t havo hero in ovidonco, doesn't it soea to you
that the attitude of Ijoinrich Hitrsler changed considerably, koeping both
lottoro in ndnd?

A What I hoard about Hij^lor's attitude horo, if I o value to that
now, than I oust say that Kinrlor's attitude did change radically.

Q You don't have to go into a long discussion. Doctor, on Hirmlor's
attitu'e. I ns t r -U cin c about the two letters. You sa\ ono lottor nhoroin
you state that Riasler olid tod that tho oxporinjnts r.uot bo porfomod
upon cr ininale, for ono, and, t»;o, thoy aist bo value too rn, and, nuiabor
three, they will bo -ivon a pardon, '.km you say you saw anothor lottor
of Virdor'a wherein ho said that tho oxporirants can oontinuc on persons
condcr.nod to death, and secondly, that if aryono ties or bocotaos uncon¬
scious in the course of tho oxperinont, and thoy arc collod bade to lifo,
then thoy my bo pardoned to a concentration canp for life, ifow do thoso
two letters one of which you saw, which this Tribunal and I unfortunately
have not soen, and, the letter which wo have before us, do they oxhibit
tho attdtudo of ono ran on tho sano subjoct consistontly?

A Whether or not thoy ruro to bo volunteers is, as far as.'Iccan
see in this Himlor lottor, Decuasnt 1971-B-PS, not aontionod. It -loos
not 3cy that thoy should bo volunteers, ner does it say that thoy should
not bo voluctoors.

Q That is right.

A In other noxr’s, this lott.-r which I knew only dron the records —
loos not ippoar to no to ax elude tho possibility that at another tine
Hirulor wroto a letter in which the condition was laid down that tho
•mbjects should bo volunteers, articulariy since Raschar had to know that
t'•> question of their being volunteers was a vary inportant point to us.


7196


8 Ifey u7^.TD-2-3-Gallatfwr (let. 3rean)

Co-art Ko. I, Case 1

Q }taw, Dcstor, - this sarx neetiny in January 19U2, tho question
of tho uao of the lev-pressure chadsor arose, and, I assumes, it was
.vjrcod that .luff and a*borg bring their ler-pressuro chamber
dorm to use at Dachau. How, did thoy agree to neve this charbor to
Dachau directly, ani what was the reason for s toppin; off over night at
tho Institute .felts? This scons to to of consiiorablo intcrost horo.

A Ruff tostifiod on this at groat longth. Durin,; tho discussion in
ny Institute in Munich, tho individual conditions weron«t laid down
under which the dumber could bo usod. If I ur.’orstood Ruff corroctly,
the canp cosnandant nado thoso lenands riirectly of Ruff, and I know
nothin,.. Than tho oharbor camo I was tcld that the papers and tho key
to tho clumber troro to bo loft with no. Ruff has already explained,
that. The Berlin drivers arrivod in tho Into afternoon i tho chart or
res not loft at ny Institute, however, but was loft noar tho station,
and on tho next day tho SS Irivers caao to =xj and fotchod tho papers
and the key, and drovo tho chaabor on.

Q Thoso experiments, nxf Doctor, woro to bo perforaod on habitual
criminals; thr> criminals troro to volunteer, and thoy ;xro to rocoivo a
pr.rton after thoy had un orjono tho experiments. ‘^hat was tho roaaon for
tho socrocy in the plcxnin, of thoso oxporinonts, if everything con-
oomin; thin was honorable?

A Ruff hastestifiod regarding this point; the socrocy wa3 doteminod
fron two points of view. The Luftwaffo required a socrocy of a linitod
sort because of tho naturo of tho cssigmont was such as to indlcato
that a high altitude cachino was un dor ''oval? fount in Genvany; all tho3o
lovolopn-nts on ra3oarch aasignaont woro tc bo kept sccrot until thoy
'‘■ore finished, and, whan thoy had boon condudoi, oithcr thoy bocar.o
secret onco for all, thoy vora rario partially open to tho public or
anviroly . pen. Tlio '.ecision as to this ..-as, sensibly enough, always
reached only after it was ascertained wlct tho experiments had prcducod
in tho way of results, .‘.air, -.rhilo .ovale paunts rcro un lorway, thoy were all
secret. In contra-^'istincticn, to wjr basic reasoarch on animals, which woro


7199


3 '.ay 19U7-?t^T!>^-iH3allasher ( 1 st. Browr.)

Court Ho. I, Cass i

always open axp^ririents. That was the reason for secrecy deuandod by
the Luftwaffe. Hoi., the 3S also dares led secrecy, bocauso of tho con-
contrqtion canp. This was a (;enoral decani of tho SS. It was not because
we wore now porforair^ expori&snts, but those were pirnaneht.secrecy
requires.* nts pertaining to tho concentration carp. There wore two sort3
of secrocy, and too rules on socracy.

Q loll, now. Doctor, you stato that in tha Hinrlcr lottor ho r.oroly
stated that the subjects to bo used rsust bo volunteers, that ho gavo no
particulars, nor di he not sot forth arc’ regulations for tho selection
thereof. Henco, it follows thet Ruff,norberg, Sascher, and Tfolts, at tho
neetin ir. ?!unich at your Institute, January 19U2, naxst liavc sot forth
a proscribed courso to foil or in tho selection af voluntoors. ffow will
you ploaao toll tho Tribunal just what stops y.u outlinod for the
selection of ycur voluntoors?

X Those points w^ro not deoi’od on at tho liscussion at ny Institute,
but at a Hscussion one or t*ro ’ays later with the camp coanandor at
Dachau, when wo drove out to Dachau.

Q Ioj noan to tell so that at a scientific discussion in your
Institute, whon it was socrot, whoroin you had to ask !!r. Lutz and 'lr.
ffondt tc loavo tho roco, and tlwt tho pnr.uaount ttoujlit in your rdnd was
that tho subjects to be usod wore wluntoors, that you didn't at that tino
discuss how they *oro to bo solcctod boforo ymi not tho concentration
can? corxsan riant? Tha basic problen horo was tho aoloetion of tho innvitos
to ba used, if it wasn't the basic problco, you iidn't have to go tho
concentration carp, do ycu aoan to toll ne that you four gentleman with
rollogo oducations, =*cb.,rs of the nodical profession, didn't discuss
such an inportent problon at your rooting in .Munich?

M


7200


n«e— 3rown.


«. I do not see why you think tills Is a problem, "e
coald find out the v. ,1- tcofinlcel elde of It cr.i the set¬
up only bo scoin;, the crop coaa~ndcr, and t .1 t is tna
reneon vc went one or two days la cor to Jeencu. It was
only there that tn_ technical details were disc-seed,
c know at the meeting in Munich that they were to 00
volunteers, but without exact knowlod c o of tnc living
c nations, regulations, etc., in the camo we could not
decide whether tr.oy should bo chosen at roll-coil or in
s.b~ o tiler \ ay. All these tilings we had to leave to the
ccj:; commander, end had to volt till h. oedo suggestions.

5 . Just a moa-nt, Joctor. You have stated nov; that
yoc. couldn't tell whether you would irv- to c et thorn from
cho roll-call or vhr : you must do. Then you must have
talked about It at the Munich a-~tin 0 . You couldn't have
:sojrtolnwl these t.An.s unless ou Oh tted about it or
j ire d on eoact.ilng . t the Amici. mo .tine;. Now, what
did ou rjroe u on? You must hrva arid, "We can't dcoldo
on this volunteer business until wo cet to see the
concentration camp cone*-ndrr.t. But r'oove til, the man
au*6 bo henlthy; the man must volunteer; he muse :o
warned of thu hazards of th. experiments; wo must thtrou b hly
dlsousa these cxperlm.nts with each inmate to ec used
so th t we will b. sure that he will coo*>or?te in the
manner that Xottonhoff has elaborately outlined; ..idr.'t
• ou a.feree on those things, or were you ncgllo^nt in your
preparations?

a. Th c w s no problem for U6. from the v.fy first
t :o offer made to us nrd been for velur.tovra, and wo
ad no reason co doubt tills question or to dlsc.es it.

To m.rclj had co s.j to it t.vt the a»nuitlons promised
us were fillflllcd regarding the %-oluntrry. consent, there

7201


Court 1

.. •- S-H-3-3-HI>-Heynes-3rovn.

was no s reat clsc-ssior., bee. use til t was simply the
erereqeislto th. * vcs taken cs 5 natter of course, and it
v s not discussed.

*. I can understand that it v s no problem for you
at that tim_. But It is the bi c problem today. That Is
way you are h>re, because you didn't consider It a
problem then. 3- that °s it may, then you vent to Dr.c.icu.
«ou arrived at itec/xu, and then you discussed the nrturc
of the volunteers. Now tell the -ribuncl Just what
’e mulations you set up for the selection of those volunteers
•*ow oerofully did you outline to the concentration camp
com., r.dent what type of subject you wanted?

3chnltrl.r, tne a-Jutrnt of the Rolchsleitunm,
Informed tne c mp c »cmander In our prosenco.that his
orders from Himmler were, one, that Himmler had olven his
permission for these ex^erlm-nto; two, t.vt all of us
were to o rtlclocce in them; thro., that they were to be
vol.ntoors end that they wore to b*. h bltual criminals.

Then, between Schnltrlar, Roscher, and the camp commander,
fere was brief discussion, In which they decided teat
C*.,y would cake the rrlsoners from block suoh- and - such.
These numbers did not mean very much to us, and thon we
f-und out th -1 the camp commander—

'oil, now. Just p moment. The decided they would
ta^o the subjects from one block or another block; they
s oeclfi.d hrt blocks that they were ^olng to ps.t for
volunteers? Is that It?

a. Yea.

■«.. Continue, jo or.oEd.

«. Tne cam commander said, ■bail. If these are the
conditions, ta.en It w.ll 00 best to take tne prisoners
from such and such r block."


Court i

A - y S-I'-3-3-H3-Haync e-ar o wr..


Nov, whet were these conditions . gain?
a. Ruff has slr-ady said to t. .*e 9aid tort those
conditions wore to correspond to the average requirements
of the Luftvoffo.

Veil, now, did you then, wr.lle 11 of you were
there, the gentlemen woo had arranged the pirns for those
c:'oonaont6, a* vo the selection of the volunteers take
pl co so tr.'t y 0 would bo obi- to -scertrin wither or
not you could use .thjts?

a. No. That v s decided on 1 ter.

% . You mean any a^n who volunteered vo-ld co of use

4

to -eU if ho vn s wealthy?

a. Ho hod to meet certain requirements, pr.d we knew
Himmler's ord-r wnioh dchnltrl.r communicated to t.*.o
oncp oonmar.der lr. our oreeenee. Vo knew what sort of a
O roup of pe. il- they wore to bo. Tho: vore to b- h bitunl
crlminrls, and so forth. Vo knew all th t. Th-ru was no
room for any doubt or any uncertnlnt: in this mttor.

... lou have c nclueively sthted that a subjeot co
30 used in Che course of tnese experiments must be a
•nan who Is willing fully to coop rate. He must be a.
person ce outlined by Kcttcnhof on Page 11 of v our dooument
book, wherein Kottenhoff states:

"Rsech.r cr-e to me after the lecture end spontaneously
.ardc tlu •proposition to conduct the above nder No. 10
f..rt.*.er described hlgh-rltltufte adaptability tests, wrloh
since 1237 I had plannee to conduct on Luftwaffe
. yelolons r.d illots, on professional crlnin Is. I
explained to nla that the experiments lr. questlcr. could
vnly succeed If tr.e test o-rsons, overcoming t.ne respiratory
ir.-d.bicions c c. is altitude, could considerably ir.crose
: .eir respiratory activity inc-ntionrlly (by exei'tin-


Court 1

hey 3-/.-3-4-HD-Hcynes-3rown.


tr—lr will power); furtfa.rnore, that t:ioy had to carry out
t.-is forced rcsplr-tion in c certain rhythm, mainly using
abdominal muscular pressure (stomach respiration) and
in a horizontal position. This increased respiratory
activity could only 0 e done volunt-rlly and should, under
no circumstances, bo interfered with the thought of c
so s Bible danger of life in the Be experiments. Therefore,
the only persons qualified for the experiments would be
those who really volunteered without any compulsion and
who could be convinced that these experiments wore not
d-r.gerous. Even a t that time I expressed my doubts whether
people other than Luftwaffe physicians and pilots woro
suit-bio for the experiments planned. 0

i.'ow, Doctor, "0 "n expert, keeping in mind Kottenhoff'o
r-ooomondatlons which you irvo supplied here in evidonoc,
v lch you obviously were aware of prior to the tlmo you
vlclt-d Daohr.u, wherein you made *rr. ngoments for t.io
selection of the inmates, why didn't you—being the
expert th^t -ou -r- ( having full knowledge of another
-x:ert's views on these nr.tiers—why didn't you then,
yourself, inasmuch as rtasen r was to -ct as your
subordinate in these jxp-rlm^r.ts, nemberg to act cs
nuff's oubordln te, wny didn't you then carefully cso.rrtnln
t.ie subjects Co bj U8wd n- be cert in tart they would
cond ct tnemselv-s in the srn..*r outlined by yourself
an. o* aottenhoff, so you would bo sere of no mi stakes?

That Is wtot wo did. Huff h-s testified at * r
length on tnle, point in*, oat t.irt ~v_n for t.ils different
.roup.

e. Huff n-v.r t-lked tc one of te.se subjects. fort
do you me-n, Ruff testified at l.neth? no never spoke to
oa.e. zou nev r saoko to on.-, •*r.d Roaber c could remember

72 OL


• «.»


n-e-crovn.


cart 1


-j r.’-e3 of onl;- two or t.'.rea, aejsa four. -*ho did
-;o theae people? Rr.schsr? Did oi larva IS up to


R-sonar?

If t.-.c oxoeriAentrl aabjecte did what was expected
of : :-n ^a volunteers, pulleu the p«r. ohuto relo so,
ieaoribed wnrt t.ia experienced daring their re otlona,
c.-_an Romoer 0 zuat fcjvo spo/.en wit.-, them bjforehrnd. The
••u 1- _r:t,r wra settled os for ra I w'a conc«rn.. by
t;._ f ct t.irt, r^-lnst a-/ will, I was eliminated by
a* 00.1a r—c b . r in a t c; will, at tne beginning of the ox?-rl-


fc-att,

Vo'lX : o into thr.t - bit l^tur, Doctor. Nou, you
ct-tc Somber^ testifies t.-*t they callow the rip cord,
t.vt they oolr.ted to tnclr w rs, tfert they did everything
3 inatruotwl. Crr. ou 'newer me t la oueation: duppoao
to sorrow uornln-, you .'.~clio to do o iilgh-oltltudo expon¬
ent, *r— I *1 ->n ir.n tc of o oo-.centrrtlon csjp» rnd ;ou
sr* to zo, "I B feoln& to e»o ; f ou In on e pcrlz-nt totay."
I n not vol-nte-rin., eootor. "I "a -oln... to use you
in -n -yo^r a-nt tod?y, ~nu t..io exp.rlient 16 c.-n' 5 or'U8.
If ou don't pall Ch. rle coru ct such rnd each tlase, if
a don't tall ae t is hrppenln. to yo., how you nro
fa.il..., .o .-oar errs ‘re, If ou uon't roeoonc. to our
ou. cions qalokly, you'll die. - Sow do you tnlnk Mr.

- r:.y Is e oln e t.. cor—uct .ilssulf in that low-pressure
c;.;aj r? I Inline I would contact a^lf much cotter


CA-n t..: 'V r v lur.tJjr, v: -aldn't I?

rt . i • frrId thft 1 didn't quit, anderafnd the
:.v .'Ort of tAC question.


i. I ?t.*tu :^ln: .ou rra ^olr.e to conduct r.n expcrl-
x;nt. Thle Is ..ypot-oticui. I .-a -n ina:ce of c
c.r.contr tlon -rzp. iou cose to ao rnd 3?y, ;, -ou, I aa
“ tu aa • oa ir. tAls nljJv-Pltltude experiment rl^'.t


Court 1

Key =-:>


--1 ynes-Brown.


now. ■ I cs not volunteering. You ere tekln 0 ao by force,
In th- ir.nnor In which they took thea by force In the
typhus exp-rinents end other experiments In concentration
c.-mps. Then you ey to me, "You ere -oing Into this
chamber. '•'a ere ^olng to trice you uo to 15,COO feet, or
45,COO feet"—w.vt.v.r you 6-lect. You eny that you want
rr— to pull a rip cord nt a Cvrtalr. tlm„ end that If I go
ur.conacious, when I coo. to -g-ln you cro going to ask
sc questions end you er.t au, to answer the questions end
that you w-nt me to point to ay errs when I foul pain
in ay core, or whatevwryou wish a. to do. You ere
Instructing mo. «r.d then you e-.y to me, "Mr. Hardy, If
y.u don't follow Instructions, you will die. If you uo
fellow instructions, notr.in 0 will hera you. You will
be oerfcctly ell rl B ht." Now, don't you suppose that
..no Mr. Hrrdy will conduct himself In a manner in that
chaab-r whoroln you can get all lnt information you need?
I don't w-nt to die, Doctor.

i. To this I can oay two things. First of all, I
v.didn't h-vo t~kcr. you if you h-d not been a vuluntcor,
becaus. It was our pl-n and our lnt.ntlor. from the very
beginning to take only volunteers, so th-t that
prop sitIon which you fc-ve suggested Is fallacious. That
sltu-tlon w aid r.-ver hrv- -risen. I would nev.r have
forced you.

Secondly, If we hrd taken concentration c-mp Inmates
lr. 1 r e numbers r.d wanted to B et true lnfora-tion from
those people, then these people. If they had be.ri forced,
Would prob oly have had enough s^nse to give us all sorts
of wrong Information so that tney could srbotage the
experiment, and thus -11 tnls Information we got would
be scientific lly useless to us.


72^5


Otars 1

S-l*- 3 - 7 -ED-K ynce-Bvuvn.


k. how, Joctor In the coarse or tr.ese experiments—
c-la is D-rely a toohnlcal question, end you bcm e ?. _'n
*.f.;o hse woried with low-pros sure chrabers for r oonsldor-
• ;i_- length of time, h ving had on- in yo-r own Institute
—*nd there la -n clement of curiosity or. ay p rt—-
a .vpoee I hr 4 volunteered for tneao experiments. Or
84,9083 1 v olunt-ercd for the v.n hehnal exporlm-nts in
^eidolixrg or hlglv-cititudc -xoeriaenta rnywhore, conducted
in a nnor -a you ary the Rurr-R.obcrg oyperiaonta wore
c r. .acted, nd I hrd volunteered to b- willing to suoalt
uyaolf to a aeries of -xperlacnta. how, bein b a layman,

I dan's Know just how muon of that I Cauld at/nd. how,

/•- long co Id I atpnd these -xaeriaenta—one individual?
Kov, you would use ao, we'll ay, in twenty experiaenta
.r twenty-five uxporla-nta. Coaid I st-nd twenty
exoeriiBcnta? Could 1 stand fifty uxperia-nte? .v.v long
c eld I atqnd that, nna over wart period of tine?

a. Tn-c dooonde or. the r.-ture of :he experiment, out
ur long-time Luftwaffe doctors, like Ruff and A mborg,
f r 'nd 1 co-id nrae you otaers—prove that you

c n a tend ti: uasands of experiaenta over t.io c.-urao of
yc ra without nything rndicrl happening to you.

*• 0 aid I et-nd, we'll any these explosive

doc ..BDresel.n exoeriaents—could I *t-nd two er.oh day
ftr thirty days?


720 ?


e Hay LT-’l-ATiJ-a-l-Hcxsie (In*,. Breen)
Court 3fo. 1


A Xoo would tare to find that out. Xcu don't say right at tho
beginning, I am loin^ to carry out erarinents for 30 clays with tho
experioantal subject, but after you have Join one c^riront you reflect
on how it turns .1 out. -

Q Hr-vo you found in you oxp.ricncc don: these linos that sono-
tiaos you use a subject once end you find that you cannot use bin
a^ain? That rsust occur quite of ton.

A Sproa-ttiv; tho experimental subjects out ever a long period of
ti-.’ was lono, as Ruff also said, not bocauso the exporir^ntal subjabts
were oxhaustod ncr because their condition was bad. They wore sproad out
over a lonr period of One in order to keep th? experimental subjects
from adapting thoas elves to hi h altitude, tho condition, for example,
tho mountain climber in tho Himlayns artificially creates in hinsolf
so that hi con cliifc hi her. Jtow, a person whs has bocoro adapted to
hi h cltitudM m this ray is no longer an index of what an average
person, -fhon Rori,or^ spread tho cxp^rlronts with any one person out over
■" l0 ‘ a ‘ P yri ° J 0 tlno * not bocauso the nan would not have boon

capable of bain- experimented on tho next day, but to avoid tide a.lap-
tation to hi.h altitudes on the part of tto subject.

Q :iew, h-r many tiros have you ypursclf boon subjected to high-

%

altitude oxporlstor.ts?

A I havo gone throu h a lar- 0 *o nunbor of lor-pressuro chanbor
oxp-rl'i;nts, and today I cannot.


Q T;cul ‘ yc.u say you hove ;ono threu-ch thirty-five, forty-fivo,

-ifti', oni hunirod, ona th?usanhot many?

A I can't rocctely estimate that today. That covers a nunbow of
years, any years.

Q * oll » hcw ofter y-u had undergone these uxsrir^r.ta did you
boccno acclimated to than, so to sp? Did you bcccro accustom’ to tho
~ h altitude after tor. uxperin-nts, after ;oing throu^ it ton tines, or

:• -in- throu h it five tines, or how ion : bafero you bocano -ecus-
to high altitudes?


r> U?-.-TTVij-c-H'XSic (ifct. Brrr.;

rx'. So. 1

.. I 1 J»«t voric personally in tSxia fiel-’, namely the field of
r. dapt.-.tion tc hi h alttcudoe, but poo pie in ny instituto did. That was
the rfork...

* ’. oil, Dactcr, '-hat I c: fcryin to arrive at is, whan dees c parson
coaso to be useful as an cjp-erL-vntal subject? I i-aa ino Ruff is net
useful new as an oxporixvntol subject because he has subjected bins elf
to these aprfnenta so rany tines that he has bacons adapted to hi,-h
altitudes, and the sane for Rasher •.

.. Adaptation tc hi ; h attitudes is net so.methin- that lasts for tho
rost of your life, but aoaothir. which at first rapidly and then noro
al wly is lost a-dn. ! One can assume that if a poraon !vis not boor, in
a lo-.'-prossuro charfcor for throe or four aonths ho has roturnod to a
norm! state.

Q On an avorvjo, can't >*o strike an avorc-o from your experience in

this field on how Ion it takes for a person to bocorar adaptable to

•

hi h altitu’s? I afoul,* think that would be a very important problem in
aviation me ’idno, inasmuch as ycu could then Just tako lon-prossuro
chambers an.* march your pilots into then an’ keop tten in thoro so loxv
each lay, for a period of thirty cr forty 'ays, and then they could fo
ar 1 flyan’ it wouldn't havo’as much effect on th-n. lfcw Ion can you
un>r -o this bofor* you boccoo adapted to tho hi h nltitudo7

A That is a very important problem in aviation medicine, an', has al-
roa'’y besn ’oalt with by a nurtoor of pooplo, such as Luft and Lupitu,

■•ut I myself 1 d r»t work in that field and consequently cannot toll you
arythin about it from my own oxp.rier.co.

You near, that you oro not qu-Oified tc detoriine wfor. a person is
a daptable to hi h altitude?

T.-S IdTT'drT.nr;: He misun ’orstood tho question. ,.s it a.:ain«

A I aan toll by lookin at a person. IT today he is subjoet to
rltitu ’ij sickness at ,50C •’tore, and then a week later ho can stand
1., .00 actors. Than I kne; ho has r ’acted diinsolf. This adaptation varies
of course with the individual.*

* ith era person it is quieter, with another slrwer. It is bar l to rive
H ures for that.


L7->-r<.T3-L-3-:taxs±e (Int. ^rowr.)

Court Ko. 1

Q (By Hr. tody) Say ycu used a sublet on Hond^ and put ^ up
to 8,000 foot, 8.0C0 to taro, pardon no, and then you used tin on Tawdsy
I and int tin u'p to 8,000 no tar, a : .ain on Tuesday. Then you used tin
on Friday and put tin up to 8,000 nttero araln on rrlday. Over that period
of flvo days, raid it be rather likely that on the third occasion ho
my not ,-et rick? Would it bo as close asthat or uould tho scries have
to o into ton, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty times, or woul-* it bo
or* or two tines, an-' after one, two, three, or four tiaos ho may beeono
adapted to 8,000 feat, or 8,000 fetors?

A Tho first roaotions occur as soon aa tho aoconi* or third time and
iW °“° ^reaftor. It does not happen all of a sudden. It is a radual
adaptation of tho bo-> which bo ins slowly with the, sooond or third

. oor.t, .an then it .r-vdually roaches a aaximun abovo which it does not

rlao.

Q Th0n TOU1 you 8fty if 3"°° s«y four tintow a week for

a month, woul* it bo very iicoly that ho woul' bo adapted to hi f: h alti-
tudoa thon?

.v vour tir.es a nonth, id you any?

1 "our tir.os a wook,

A Four tlm, , nook? Too, after four tir.es a nook . certain effect
on 2 tfa v'ould ’oubtlosa bo ictiooablo.

i oil then, in tho oourso of experiments it would bo necessary, if
! "ore oin to conduct a lar.o Rufeor of experiments, to have perhaps
a suitable number or subjects available, wcul'nit it? If, for instance,
yci v.-aro oin to conduct ono hun’rod oxp.Tiswnts, and you were :oin- to
con Met tMt ona hun'ro' exp.rinor.ts in a period of one month - do you
rollo-.» no, lector, one hur. ro * experittmt. in one month - you would J*v«

40  W that °P 50 '  ■ -:l« experiments per week,

rvant^fiva o^ri.er.ts j*r week. Jferr, how mny subjects woul! you need
40 perfcra ^'cnty-fivo experiments p-r -oak? »ould you r.oed twenty-five
ejects or woul ’ you need say five -objects and rive each one of then an
seporinent each day, and th®, of ccurse, after you ~nv Q one of then an


7210


« ''.-IV k 7-:h-..e (Int* Bream)

Court !fo. 1


experiment each J ay ha ay fcccccc a'apted and you nay not bo able to uso
rdn any Ion er. Az I thinkin dearly on this subject?

- This question camot ba decided in eneral toraa, because you are
ju3t .ivin r e a jonoral outline an’ ire not tellin- s» what the experi¬
ments ore to bo liko. If you want an answer, you -ust tell no specifi¬
cally just what these exporlaonts aro, how rapidly the ascent is, at what
altitude tho v.n r«rviins, all these thin s -'etcmin? hov; the boy roads
to altitude,

1 Lot’s say that they era experiments "herein a man is oin; to be
tnkon above 12,000 foot, lib: "biff an' Totfiorr's experiments. Say they
aro oapjri'Vints just of that nature. !faw, if you hi l one hundred experi-
:-;t.ts to ,• rfon in tho short time of one month, not throe or four nontha,
but ow nonth, than ho-' aany subjects woul \ you, as an expert in this
fiol , roquiro, booauio, you see, you hnvo to perform fivo axparinents a
'ay, booauso ycu usually/ 'on*t work Saturdays and Sun’ays, I assurao. Do
sciontists work Saturdays or.’. Sun'nyj.?

<v Whether Itorfcorfc trerked on Saturdays and Sundays I ’©n't know.

Q Jfew* you hero about fivo experiments to con (bit each day. Now, how
—ny subjocts would you uso oach day? 'oul ! you uso aerdy fivo subjeots
a day, in other words, you would havo five subjocts to uso for tho
tvronty-fivj oxperironto that week, and orui wan would un or,o five
oxporlojr.to in a wook, or how \oul ’ you plan it out if you ha J just ono
aor.th to o it in? Tou had to orfora about one hundred exporinonto to
collect tho ’ata nocersar . HW' :any subjects would you have volunteoro l,
rould you accept?

A Tho answer open’3 on various consi 'orations. If I havo nothin., rlso
t r consi dor I can U3a each person only once and simply order ns r*ny
experimental subjects 23 I no: * for each oxpirimer.t.

Q "Foul ’ that be the best thin? to *o?

A Thi3 solution would have both a'.rants'es an'. Usa dvantapos. It would
oubtless have the a ’vantage that there would bo no adaptation to hi~h
•altitude. On the other taac', it has certain advanta ea for an experiment


3 'Ay .TD-c—S-^cxsi 3 lint. 3roic)

daart !.o. 1


you can fora sere •£ 'leal opinion as re^ar J s any one arson, about
fart person's eiural qualifications an 1 ’, resistanca; there are advantapes
an* *isa'.var.ta-ea in this plan. Jkr.;, the other extrene would be to have
just onj experimental subject. In t v at case I soul-* have to 'eci ’.e by the
subjoot's reaction ho - often I could carry tho experiaent out without
the subject's c'.aptin hinsolf. This is southin' I cannot answer
t‘ .oretically, bscauso the figures vary with the in 'ivi dal.

3 How, Doctor, you have here tho hypothetical question of one
hundred exenriaonts in oas nonth. Sach block is a wook, four blocks,
ivir. us twonty-fivo oaporiaents per week. Now you aro plannlrv your
■jx.-orij-- into at tho outset to conhict one hundred expcrinonts, and you
only ;«vo a nonth booauso of tho fact that tho ..cro-lio-’lcal Center In
Hjic'nlbszT * oul > only let you uso tho air-pronsure chinbor for one
Month. They have to havo it back, '.’hat voulyou soy would bo tho
'•isirablo nuabor of subjocts? 'aild you consider usin five, just fivo
i’or. an' put tin the fivo wn throu h fivo exj>-'rhacnts each ’ay cr each
. ook, . ar ’or. a.;, oul ’ you use fivo *n an’ \xil each ono of that throu-h
five »«7‘ -rl x-r.ts a v,y>!<, or ..-oul * it bo bettor to uso ton -ion, twonty
non, or thirty r in, *£wn yew only v a o ouch a short spaoo of tiao to
con’act ycur sxporiaents?

A If I haa short tine I crosuno I shoul * uso a relatively larce
rattfcar of oxperirwntal subjocts so that I ceui ! sproa l then out bottor.
Tat Afoul.’ bo a .iattor of course. If I have lore tino I oan ;ot alonr
vrith ferrer subjects, Unco I -yself haven't worico! in this field of
oxpiosiva locociprossion, as you kner.-, I Von't lave any person oxperionc uj
in this attar.


8 X«y ••'7-M- .JC-5-1—Malay*- (Brown)
C ,uz*t 1


£. f'.u would bo a little ole cautious about usin'

Just rivu son, for this period of a conth? wouldn't you?
Jus - five men.

... I never -;..vo .:uch thought to the question of tho nuia-
bor of experimental subjects, under the conlltions you
cite.

Q. Do you mean you arrange an experimental plan anl
Ion'S :lve thou ;ht to somethin,; like that? I shoul \ think
that would 03 quite important, looter, Just how many sub¬
jects you neo 1, because y-u have to have thorn on han 1.

If y u wore performin' experiments in your Institute in
Munich ani ualn* Luftwaffe volunteers or, say, citizens
of Munich, ani offorln.: them 200 lollars to volunteer
or somethin* like that. Thon you'd have to lotermlno
how many you would r.eel available. Vfoul i you any you
coul l use 5 men for ICO experiments to bo performed in
one month anl use them safely anl ;et ijool results?

In ether words bear in mini that that man has to go
through nr. ^xporlaont oaoh Jay, pretty near, in other
words, ho has to 'o through 26 experiments in ^*0 days?

I have already sail that tho question lo not simply
one of tho oxporlaonta and the numbers lnvolvol in tho
experiments, but it 16 important how often and how
frequently a person la subjoctel to hl.'h altitude during
tho experiments, dad ns I havo already sail, I don't
know hew explosive decompression aniparnchuto descent
affect adaptability to high altitude, becauseaaa I say
I haven't worked in that flolu. I know nothin*; about it.

If I wore doing this I >culi carry on with a certain num¬
ber of persons as long as the results soemol to bo homog¬
eneous and.as scon as there vis deviation in the results,

I would get more subjects.

1223


Brown)

Court 1

«. Iou say Chat you ion't snow much about tbo fieli
of explosive decompression, that you perhaps never
spaolalltei in it ani nevor ooniuotei any experiments
in It, then what In what in the world were you loin.,
by «rran::lrv; for'aasoher to oor.luot experiments If you
Isn't Know any thins -.bout It, you lon't know whether
a nan can so over 12,000 reet or not an: not suffer...

JUDOS 32ERING: .:r. Harly, you keep referring to
18,000 feet. I think If y.u will look at the reoori
/ou win ri„, it is 12,000 meters. I think you win
finl also when you referral to the Eaohnu ex.erloents
that over the perlol of tine of two nonthe or perhaps
a little lon..er, that la to say froa about 10 or 11
^aroh until 20 Hay when me ohnaoor was suppose 1 to
have been removed, there were between 200 an.’. a 00 exper-
lnentu, With about 50 per cent of then male about 14
or 15 kilometers, which woull be 14,000 or 15,000 meters

not 16,000 feet.

5. That's what 1 meant, your Honor, in as nuoh as
ju^-e Bobrin* has jot to the polnr f or U s. woull you
klnily tell mo. Doctor, whether It woull be feasable
from the 10th of March to tho 20;h of Hnyi — Dr. Ruff
anl Dr. RjBbor* maintain, mat the first experiment
took place on the 22n 1 of February 22 they discontinue!
until Rasoher cams back from Sohon-tau. He returnol from
Bohor.-au an l Somber - returned from Berlin whore he was
vl si tin* his wife, about 10 Kerch, an they start*! the
experiments 10 March, froa 10 H troh to *1 March, you
have approximately 20 cays, the month of .,->rll which
is approximately -’O or ’1 .ays, ani you have 20 lays In
Hay, so you have there a total of Seme 7., iaya , whlch


e Hay u?-J-.,iC-o-'-Haloy-(Brown)

Court 1

la lass than two and a half months. in a period of two
ani. a half months you performed nearly *00 experiments
on 7 to 12 subjects; doesn't that seems to be quite a
number of experiments to require one nan to endure dur-
lng a of .two and a half months? you divide 12 In¬

to 00 and then 11 vide ? into * 00 ; that la underpin a
ccr.sl lerable number of experiments, isn't he?

... Yea, are you talking about the effects on their gen¬
eral health, or are you talking about the effects as
regards aiaptatlon to high altitude?

Ho, I an not. I an not talking about the effect
r.n their gonorU health. I an referring to tholr adap-
tability t: hl.;h altitude, anl whothor or not they would
centinuo to oe useful In the experiments as ox>wrlmental
subjects, and bearing In mind of oourse, as Judge Seb-
rlr. • intod out, that these men 're going 50 per cont
of the tine above 1-,,000 meters.

- 31g fl ;uros soon to aako a .jreat lnpresslons on

you, but I and Ruff have already told you that the
ultimate altltu-o is not alone Important, but Just as
auoh depends on the tine. Whether the subjects alapt
themselves or not In a certain exonmont, that I can
see; in the program that Romborg drew up, I beliovu
thoro was sorl, us .adaptation to high altltulo,.

Q. You have stated that It ia possible that a person
oould be adaptable to cno height In a period of three
or four nr five ex oriments; now, suppose you were ex¬
perimenting anl as soon ae you saw he was adapted, would
you Irop him ,ut?

1 8a r tha “ * tiireo or four experiments

the subjects adapt themselves. I said that if you are
trying to achieve adaptation to high altltulo and arrange


8 . '.ny -x7-M-.Ji«B-i-Keloy-(Bn»on )

Court 1

tha experiments so that a high da too of accllBitiia-
tior. will result, then you oan start seeln* results
after two or throe ascents, that is what I sal \.

Q, Veil, as scon as you soo the result, then y-»u wr.ulin
not use the nan In further experiments, would you?

If In the course of an ocgorlmental series I see
that the subjoot la becoming adapted and llsruptln;;
the experlaent, then of course I ion 1 1 use that sub¬
ject any further.

-ell, the ether an ;le, what a out the health of the
subject uniertfoin.; we will any such a largo number of
experllaer.ta In tho course of a month as 25, or 20 ox-
pexliaents in two nan tbs, would that have •anythin.': tr lc
with It?

•v. Lot as clear this up. Adaptation to high altitude
Is not on injury to one's health, but It la a reaction
which la ooaotinea deliberately indues 1 , by sonllni*
people to tho noun tains, for example. It has nothing
to lo with lam age tc one's health. It is a perfectly
normal condition, one that results naturally In high
altltules In the mountains, an 1 a condition whloh a
person voluntarily brings about If he la going to
spend his vacation In a high mountain terrain. No in¬
juries to the person's health are to be expected, I
can thlnfc of no case, except for one or two cases where
there was sci-e question of tuberculosis having resulted
after a large nu^eor of experiments. :%b I say, except
fer these o-ses m the course of perhaps Billions of
ascents I snow of only two oases «here TB resulted.

In doubtful connection with hi h altitude. In other
words, for all this Is of no consequence, because It


72i:*


g May -:7— - .«K-5— 5- Malay— (Brown)

Court 1

is much too rare. For all practical purposes lasa>:o to
jalth is non-existent In nl :b-altltulo experiments.

1 . 'Yell, now. Doctor, t$oln£ tic/, to the su bjects use !
at Dachau, ill y^u over personally talk to one of the
SUbJOOtS use 17

... Ho, from what I nave sail It must be pretty clear
that I 11 In' t. I was In Dachau only at thl9 or.-- Uscus-
elon before the bo;innir..-: of the experiments, an 1 , nevj
0 ,,‘ain.

i. I see, an! the iiaoussl^n that you had at Dachau
was merely the pr-llolnary meutlnml the inmates
wore soloote.V at a later 1 -te; you 11 In't even see the
lnaateo?

... The principles were llscussel, aocorlln.? to which
the subjects v-.-o to be selectel. They were 'f course
actually oho son later. I know nothing aore about all
these events, beoauso I was r.o lon;or lnforr-sl of what
was -oin.- on.

<1. How, you 11 in’t see the subjects, an 1 you no tes¬
tify before this Tribunal unlor oath from your own
Knovie i -e that the subjects usol woro volunteers?

... 31r.es I never saw thea, I oan't testify on that
subject at all. I can only say that it was a,*reei with
the camp commander •-'hat the nature of these experiment'd
subjects was to be. That la the extent of ay knowledge
on the -natter, ^ftor thatl know nothin.:.

Veil, now, after that .aoetin-j, car. you tell us whet¬
her or not you llscussel ;he nature of the subjects,
that la the character of the subjects with anyone; -111
anyone afterwards tell you where they *ot the volunteers?
... I toll you in cy airect examination hov thln:s


721V


e May

c-.urt 1


“Or wn)


7-'A-. £.- 6-o-Mal cy


continual as far as I was concarnad. I hear! n thin:
'■•trd ab.ut the pre^rass of tha axparlrtonts. Has char
vr.e in 3chon,-au on 1 that was thj raason why I aahad
■■ through tha letter fcln to report on what was
;oin, on. Raacnor tell ra that ha vaa atlll In Schon^au,
that tha axpcrlaonts In Dachau hadn't started yat.

MR. fLiRDY: .»t this tlEc I would llfcu to aeX tha
court roportara t clarify tha record wherein I hava
rofo rel to floras, na oly 8,000, 10,000, 1-..000, or
15 , 000 , If I hava uaal tha word fact, hinlly atriJeo
that an. lnclu a the war. a^twra. I uaal tha vor 1 faat
arrone ualy.

Thio la a :c *d broa/.iiv; point, Your -Honor.

i— ?RJS 1 D 5 .:?: Tna Tri-unil will be In rooias.

(Thereupon a recuec was tahan,)


3 ’fey 1 r. in :r (Int. >jnl«r)

Court :u>. 1

T~Z .. d'-IJ.: Persons in the courtroa; .vill please find their salts.

Tribunal is a air. in session.

: . T. .elto, it has boer. called to ry attention urin- the

• .

rices;: t: t you and I are oon 'uctir. our examination rueh too rapi dly,

or. ! tho court reporters are havin' considerable difficulty in takin • lorn
tho tos: irony, so, if you will attest to cooperate, I will (to the dame
ai. ’ see if we can slow doin', a bit.

? Doctor, wo lave hear’ here in this courtroon tho opinion of various
persona, namely. Professor loibrondt, Rostock, Rose, Giovors, an.l several
of t:.o othor defendants, conccrnin tho capacity of a poraon incarcerated
to volunteer for an erpcri/Mnt. hat is your at ti to do about tho capacity
of a prisoner to volunt-»r for vdical e'rporlnente?

.. I boliova that in this caso ono must clearly ’istin uish bn two on
t;w philosophical concept o. froo ./ill arid tho lor.al froo will on tho ono
har.’, ani tho natural, sciontific '.o tor.-d nation of our actions. Hvory ono
of our actions is of courso toterrdnod casually by drcunstancoa which have
piMc . '.ot that ction, by tho nature of one's personality; and, thcroforj,
any dll is ,’otor. irwtf naturally, scientifically by innur»rablo causes. •
; uito indoponient of that consideration is another consi toration which
confronts mo with a choioo of vhothor to to somethin or not to to it.

Tho ycor person vho voluntoors because of a sun of noroy I ham offeror!
hin is certainly not oir., that of his own froo will, in tho othor fom;
hi is also boin forco! to accept money, bocau3o of his entiro situation;
V.^t the other .ay of lookin at it. If I havo ail opportunity cither yoa
or no without boin thraatonod 'irectly because of ny docision, ono has to
say that tJ» prisoner has the svo ,'roo ri'ht, to !oci ’.o as is tho caso with
any other hunan bein . That obviously is tho poiviral opinion, because,
oth3m5.se, oxae coul ’ never su’snlt an affidavit .to a prisoner; ho docidos
;uito fr>oly whoever or not h; is oin*: to si n. He can make nany other
icisions. Just as can nako that decision. I was aske ! in tho ccnp
rhothar T was «iilin tc to a rather of thin s which of courso arose fron
the fact that I wa3 imprisoned. Had I not been Inprise nod, nobody noul'


f T U ?—’ V,. 7?-"-;ir ^aSlcr)

^ourt So. 1

h3Yo tharht of askir. no those questions, Idle Imprisoned I was in a
.■'ft'Ltioa to '.'-i *.o freely Aether, for oxarqrle, I irante' 1 to .to cor tain
, for on i "ition to -y rations. TfcU ms a conplotely fro? docision.

- rooll' tor«t 3^3 why a prisoner basically is actin' ur.-’or different
cor - tions than any ethos Person. Tba prerequisite is, of course, that I
a . not threatened but na . iver. an opportunity to rako this .decision freely


3 :a»y 1 : 7 --..“--3-1-5=(Int. ’anler)

Court Jfc. 1


a Then, ir. substance, Doctor, \t is your opinion that 2 -?rsor. oran
incarcerated, cm actually, in tho true sense of tho -or’., be a
,nr.; r for 2 laical exparisont?

A 3 or thinly,

1 ell, now .’o you think that in tho case of cor.cantrr.tion canp ,
in-.os — heroin here in Germany :re ha” a unique situation, that you
had arininal prisoners or.’. political prisoners — ’o you think that
applies to either category equally ae r;oll?

.v Th ro is no -,'cubt in «y oir. t over, in a concentration canp,
roluntoar ’acisions coul-' be offered to *tho parsons there in 00 faith,
that these prsora wore actually froe in their decisions. If I an
now subsets er.tly tol? that that 't not happen in nr.ny casos, I can only
nay — and that has already boon a r. Luts ~ that it ns nn

ojior.tous surprise for us at - vo <nd cf tho war to lean; that thoso easy
con ‘itiosa of voluntariness . ero obviously i»ot fulfilled, as 1.0 loarnod
tlrou-h the .'r.'ss. It vonl'. have boon very oasy for tho Stnto to comply
irif. hssc conditions. Ko o.ponse woulhave boon incurred for tho Stnto,
an*.’, vorythin coul' havn boor. cn. absolutely Irreproachably, For that
reason, it w-s r.r. orormus surprise for us that this cor.’itior. which was
so -csy to fulfill, ms obviously not fulfilled ir. so many oasos.

0 'foil, now then, eensi ’arin*- the overtoil picture of tho status of
the prisoners in tho ©v. , the only real issuo is whet the particular
pricor.rr Kill bo o - ' .r 0 tho e xporimnt. Tor instance, a

crlainal will be offeroi a ardon, a ce nutation of his scntoncoj or a
political prisoner coul bo offers ' a par 'on or a cormitatior. of hi 9
sentence; or a political prisoner ooul' bo off-rod hotter foo , like, for
instance, you state that you ui t hava bo-n of fore 1 , a '.iitifcnal rations
if ytw 'id certain 'uti-s.

'oil, no.;, ’ban you ha’, this .-satin; , on' ’laschcr ahowod you the
ruthority of Xiaalor to use crirdr.-ls for experiments t i 'n*t it occur
to  u that th_ pardon .oul' bo p'rhr.ps allcwir .3 a criminal who, -3 you


3 fcy '-i-ScTv.dfc (7nt. Sadiar)

Court Ik>. 1


szr/i .ms legally' oondesmed, to the:. return to society and rdn.;le therein?
i h*t that ele n opt crop up in your tin'?

.. 17 on considers an atonasent to society, I don*t think that
there is ny iifforence whether this atonanont takes tho fom of a certain
rj-.oun; of tii.a spont in a prison, or whether it is sorved by subjecting
oneself to danror, in tho intorost of socioty. I don*t know what tho lojml
aspect is, and I never worried about it. Whether it was legally permissible
or not was so-vothiir for the State to consider. .7e woro rarely confronted
with tho fact than offer had boon and* to us to carry out oxporinonts
under oortain conditions rd&ch wo boliovod to be irroproachablo. That was
tho situation we faood. It oertoinly was not our task to ohanrjo thoso
conditions in w ay. All -o had to -sk ouraulvoa waathlsi Aro thoso
conditions objectionable, or are they not?

T'.io con’itions thoy woro told to :a by Raschor, ns they vroro con¬
tain,. in Hi-T-l-r's letter, an'. as I n rood with -tuff, I oonoidor and I
want to repoat oivso sere — to bo irroproachablo fron an international
standard, rv* ^esurod against tho strict standards of poaco.

Q Well no r, vruro ytx: fonHiar with t*vj manor in which thoso aubjoots
usod in thoso exp.rir.onts wore approached?

A How thoso persons woro approached?

Q Tos.

A I already said that the conditions were discussed with Pyrokowsky,
After that I didat x^ar. anythin , also about tho further ooursa of ovonts.

3 (Toll, now, baforo you t alkod — or, while you roro talkin; with tho
concentration crjr: ccmantmt, di-* ycu at *h'-t no a tint; — or did Ruff or
Rorfcerg cr Raschorj ono of your "roup — instruct tho concentration canp

eaavmdant on how many subjects they thou Jit they would nood? Did they

M

say, l! wo will nooi t»r. subjects, or twenty subjects, or thirty' subjects —
and woe pick thirty volunteers or a hundred volunteers?'

A C-rtainly. naturally, FVrkow3ky would have to know about how many

tKrsons woro needed*

Hcv cany volunteers did thoy docido at that nootin- would bo


necessary?


3 !2xy !j7-M-ArD-8-3-6cnrab (Int. ^-dcr)

Ccwrt So. 1

A I can't roceaber now whother an exact was given,

Q Well, they wore supposed to co-id from certain blocks in the canp,
weren't they? You started to naco two or throe blocks wherein they would
go and select tho volunteers. Is that correct?

A Tea.

Q What did tho concentration cnxro comandant say? Sinply, wo will
uso thxa from two or throe different blocks" — or Just what was that
convorsati.cn? ’Toil'', you ropect it for ae, please?

A I renoabor the follmdnc* Schnitd.or first infomed Phrkcnrsky
about Hisraler's central order. Then >*o oxplainod tho oxtont of tho
expjrirxnts to Pyrkovrsky — what it was all about, Anl I an sure that ho
was given an approximate fijuro. Than Pyrkowsky considerod from which
blocks those porsons wero to bo solcctod.

Q Do yo: know how nany imatos w„ro housed or quartered, in ono block?

A I know that now, after having: livod in those blocks for a con¬
siderable porlo' of ti. -lysoH", 7 ton, of course, I could lnaglne nothing
by tho oxprossion "block *•

Q Fould you toll tho Tribunal froa your experience in Dachau since
tho war ended how .any paoplo can bo haisod in ono block?

A Vo wore up to 160 persons in a roc-nj thr-jo bods, ono abovo the
other. There wore six rooris.

Q That consists of ono block?

A Yes, that was one barracks.

Q Thon, in othor nerds, you ha*’ six rooms with 260 porsons to each
roon?

A Tes, that was tiio situation when thu roans were fully occupied, and
that i 3 what I expertuncod.

Q And h. sot aside t-.-o blacks to bo usod — or two blocks fror which
they would select the volunteers?

A That I isn't know.

Q I see, Toll, you d? knew that they sot asi lo ono block to bo use i —
or di ! the concentration caap oc.-rordant say, well, wo will ot our volun-


7223


8 Hay l*7-M-AIZ>-3-ii-Schrab (Int. Ranter)

Court 'Jo. 1

tears frco Blocks 1, 2, 3 and h? Or did ha say, wo will got than fron
just Block *>• 1?

i The figures Pyrkowsky nentionod at that tine !idn*t naan anything
to rti. ffc osntiorod ono block or the othor. Therefore, I ion»t know whether
he sail that wo shall got than free Block 2h, or that 2*» sold 28, or any
other block. I can»t say that because tteso figures didn't naan anything to
no.


722Ji


S -&V-: H3-9-1-Gillaghar (Int. Rraior)
Ccurt Nc. I, Case Be. 1.


Q How, Dec tor, after tho conference in January 191*2, and
then after the meeting in Dachau, which ta a couple of days later,
then the lev pressure chamber was sent to Dachau via y-ur Institute,
and tho oxporlaonts were to be "in cn February 22nd. Hnr you had had
y-ur quarrel with Raseher?

A May I correct something?

Q Yea.

A Tho experiments . oro nt t start n tho 22nd .f February,
that was net known t: no. I know nothing about that. Tho only thing
I learned was that tho low pressure cHarbor arrived, but when tho ex¬
periments were to start, or what else was arranged, I don't know.

Q Ifell, now, when did you have your first disagreement
with Rasclier, approximately what date, in tlie month of January, or tho
nonth of Feb ruary, or in the month of Uarch, your first disayoonont
with him? How, as of the tire you loft Dachau in January when you
visited the concentration comp cc.i arxiant and -ado arrangononts for tho
perfcmcnco of the experiments, that is, tho technical arra:igo.acnt at
that tire when you wont to the concentration camp with Ruff and Romberg,
that is, Ruff was Romberg's superior, and you said in the direct that
you wero Rascher's superior; now after that tiro whon arrangnonto wore
being mado, when did you have your first disagreement with Rascher?

A T fo separated in 1 unlch aftar tills visit at Dachau. Rascher
returned to Schongau, while Ruff and Roaberg returned to Berlin; after
that I heard nothing more.

Q ’Toll, now — tho:; you say that Rascher was relieved in Feb¬
ruary, or in -he beginning of larch, on your direct examination, or,
tho latest would have boon during the first week in March thatryou no
longer had any connection with Rascher. lion just when did you have
your disagreement with Rascher, and received this telegram, and so
forth. I want to try to fix tho date. Doctor, when Rascher pointed
out to you abo’.rt in a telegram that this was to be a secret, and ho
could not toll anything about it and so forth?

1225


5 toy-W-JB-9-2-Gallsghcr (Int. Punier)
Court Fo. I, C:-se Jk>. 1.


1 I an just clarifying that. After to had separated at
Dachau, Rancher had returned to Schongau. He was at that tine still
residing there. It rude no difference to no personally when the ex¬
periments would start. I had no interest in pushing then, so T did
not bother about it. I was in Munich.

Q You wore in l&inich?

A Yes.

Q But at this tine before the experiments started on a data
which was unknown to you at that tiao, you wore still in tho position
as Raschor's superior, and Roaborg was subordinate to Ruff, in the
sano position that you wore when you loft tho ennp at Dachau, after
tho arranger*nta had been aado, is that right?

A Raschor at that was ry subordinate. Ho had boon do-
tciiod to ay Institute. This aS3igxnont until that tino had only boon
southing on pspor, incsruch as Rare her Jiad told re ho still had work
tc do in Schongau, whore ho was doing sorbthing regard i.vg tho distant
gaugo, and I did not try to got Raschor quickly, bccauso I did not
nood him for cy purpose. I then hoard accidentally that Roseher was
staying in Munich, core one had 3ocn hia there. Than I van of tho
opinion that if ho cm:* to Junich anyhow, ho may report to no. Thoro-
upon I wrote hie a letter saying that ho would have to report to no
twico a took, while ho was residing them. I already described that.

Q This happened whon, what date, approximately tho 1st of

February?

A I conclude fron Docoaont Ho. 23k that tho last conversa¬
tion took place at the end of February, or at the beginning of March;
the two preceding tines that Rancher core tc suo mo were also* a half
a wcok oarlier.

Q hell, than you ordoracl Raschor to report to you twice a
wcok, after you lad discovered he was in Munich. Kow, that was in Feb¬
ruary, is that right? *

A Yes, that ras in February.


7226


3 Jfey-24-y2-9-3-Gallaghcr (Int. Easier)
Court No. I, Case 2o. 1.


Q Now he reported to you, did he, in conpliance with the
lottor, or the order?

A The first tise Rascher care to soo no and I asked hin why
he never looked ne up, and ho answered that ho still had work at Schon-
gau, and ho said that after all the experinents at Dachau had not yot
started.

Q And did you at that tine have a sovero quarrel with him,
or did you then see hin at a later date?

A I kept cd- cal* during this first conversation; I could
say there was a certain tension, and I nade it clear to Raschor I
wanted to preserve sy status as his superior, and that tension was
notod free, the tone ir. which I wrote tho lotter to hin. Tho lottor
was not addrossod, "Itf dorr Rasohor, ■ but was stated, '’You aro re¬
quested to report to no twico a week wearing your uniform.'' !k> could
have no doubts on account of that lotter that I was not approaching
hi* os sceo good acquaintance, or a friond of his, but that I was ap¬
proaching hi* as his superior. Ho had no doubts on hi*.

Q Ho coco tho first tire?

A Yoa.

Q That first tiiaa would bo about tho 1st of Fobrv-nry,
wouldn't it?

A No, I don't believe so. That must have happened later.

Q Anon would you say. Could you set some date about that?

A If I laid tho last conversation when ho showed re the
tolcgrar., about the end of February, or tho beginning of »!arch, I
would say the first conversation took place cne and a half rooks
earlier.

Q That would be about the 20th of February, approximately?

A Yes, that could bo.

Q Foil, new then tho experiments be^an the 22nd of February

*

unbeknown to you?

A No, that was not known to re.


7227


8 Hay-lHB-0-Ji-Gallagher (Int. Roaln r)

Court No. I, Case No. 1.

q Rascher reported to you again. When did he report to you

the second tlao?

A Half a week later, as I had ordered hia.

q That was about the 1st of Uarch, or about the 27th of
February, or tbo 1st of parch?

A No, if I assuao that the first report took place on tho
18th or .20th of February, then the second report nust have tn!:en placo
throe days later.

Q Threo dv» later. Well, then, ho had started tho exFeri-
nonts on 22nd of February, did ho report to you tho second tiro before
or after ho had started tho oxporJmonts, do you know?

A I never learned that. I can not tell you anything about

that.

q Ho reported to you fer tho second timo, about tho 22nd of
Fobruary, or tho 23rd of Pobruary, around in there?

A Tos. •

q And what happened on that occasion?

A In tho aeantiru Anthony had telephoned mo fron the Ikjdical

Inspectorate, and had told no - rather had inquirod fron do how tho

experiments at Dachau wore progressing, and how long they would contin¬
ue; wheroupon, I told Anthony, "I can not tell you anything about that."
I said that I did not know anything about tho Dachau oxpxiccnts. Vihon
Rascher cams, I asked hie about Dachau. I told hin that tho "odical
Inspectorate had rung ce up, and that day wanted to know what was going
on- Hnschor insisted that he had yet to roceive his instructions and
only then would he be in a position to report to no. He would thon
knew how nuch ho would tell no, and I then said to Fischer *hat I would
not enter in such dealings, oitJxr would not I bo participating in tho
experiments, or else he would have to be eliainated fron ny agency. I
imagined that tho ifcxt tine thore would bo a considerable quarrel be¬
tween us because I had put Rascher before an alternative. I was quite
prepared that Rascher would raise sono other objections, and, ttereforo


7228


8 J&v-H-B-9-5-GaH-gber (Int. Raslar)

Court No. !, C-T90 No. 1.

asked »Texxit to attend the third conversation. I already testified to
that bore. Rascher handed =» Hirr-ler's tolcgra-., whereupon I told hin
that cleared this situation entirely, "You can no longer roaain in
office." Rascher did not rake aiy further renarks. The report had
ended. I dictated a letter to Bondt addressed to the Uiftgna, asking
that Rascher be released. I than went to Berlin, wanted to report to
Hippke. Hippl:e, however, was not there. Consequently I told the
entire story to Anthony.


7229


Court Hu. 1

8 Kay 47-K-10-l-LHX-Eaynes (Easier)


Q. And did Anth-ny appr-ve the transfer .f Batcher fr-o y.ur
institute?

A. Yes, he aper-ved it. He .lust accented it as an acciaoliehod
fact and he said n his nart that he v.uld have t c sc t' sene ther
oettlecent vith the Air Gau. He did a t say vhat his final decision vac
because he pr. bably culdn t du that. He probably had to rev rt the
natter either tc his chief of staff vr to Kippke or get int c ntact
vith the Air Gau. Z d x't ka v vhat ho did.

Q, Vail, nev, this all happened about 1 Aar chi That is the datol

A. I assuae that the conversation vith Anthony t«-k place during
the first doys cf Kerch.

period cf .....

q. After that/tine Enschcr vas no longer y ur sub'rdinatol

A. Ho, that elluiaated hi* very clearly.

Q, Then y u vore n 1 nger connected vith anything that Batcher

did!

A. He.

^ toll, n v, y u have dravr. the Tribunal’s attenti n tc D cunont
HO 264, vhich is dated 2fc Acril 1942, in vhich y u have efforod the
explonati-n that it is Quite tbvi-us fr-B the turn rt events, as y-u
have explained the* t the Tribunal, that this dato f 28 Anril sh-uld
read 26 February, rather than April.

This is n cage 7? f Y'ur Boners' d cusent book nuaber 2, Exhibit

Sc. 60.

Bov, 3 ct r, if vc ogsuso for the s sent that your oesumoticn that
the date should bo 26 February is c-rrect. thon it Ml vs thit herein
it is recues ted that the asaignsent f Hascher suet issediately be
changed tc the Aviati n lest Institute. Bcrlin-Adlcrsfccf. Aucoenstclle
Dachau, and acc rding t- y ur testiseny, because f y ur dispute vith
Baschor .a 1 Kerch y-u then vent t the Luftgau and else rec rted t-
Eippke via Anth ny that y u vere no l.nger assuring rose nslbility f r
Batcher and that Bascher vas to be transferred fr = yur institute. Ecv
that is the natural c urse of events if v« assure that this date is 26


7230


Court Sc. 1

8 Hay 47-H-lC-2-IHX-Eaynea (--.asler}

February, is that correct?

A. Yea, if ay assumption la correct that aascher was etill in ay
office on 28 February, the date of this letter; hoverer. he v«b certainly
no longer at ay office bn 16 March, as can be seen from Document 318.
Prosecution Exhibit 67.

Q, That ia page 70 of your Honora' docunent book, 318, that the
defendant la referring to. Do you have the document book there, Dr.


Veit*?

A. I have thoee tv« docuncnta.

Q. bill you kindly point out again to the Tribunal vhy you maintain
that the docunent dated 16 Aoril 1942. on page 70. ahova that Eaachor la
no longer in your lnatitute? Vhat ia there apparent in that docunent
that ahova that?

A. In Docunent SC 316 la anya, and I ouote;

"The Stabertt Dr. Saach,r vs detailed for special evnexinonto, tho
execution of vhich together vith the experimental oatabllahnent for uir
navigation vaa rendered poaaible by the Keichafuehror SS at Dachau, to
the oxpcrlaentnl eatabliahnent for aviation, branch office Dachau, free

March 16 until April 16, 1942."

That la to aay that Raechor during that time hold a different
aaaignnont. Therefore, he could not have been working at ay lnatitute.

I think that there can be no doubt about that.

Veil, now, vhat institute v^ild ho be at according to thia

lettor? Who it he aaaignad to now?

A. Veil, I can apeak only of vhat ie contained in thia letter.

There ia aentlon nado here of the branch office. Dachau, of the German
Experimental Institute for Aviation, 7hi. ia an agency vhich probably
has act existed in this fora, because I cannot imagine that there existed
~en cxceriaental institute for avietion vith a branch office at Dachau.
Where this designation cones from and hov it originated I of course don't
know. For ne it i. important only to prove that Eaacher hod another
assignment on 16 March and vaa no longer working with me. Whether this


7231


Court So. 1

8 Hay 47-H-10-2—fcHX-Eeyrcs (Easier)


nssigcrsent wes to e place vhich la designated correctly or incorrectly
tears no inportance for this caso. Vert then eeieed that this pesignuent
te prolonged. The vhole thing ♦'as intended to bring Fascher to Dachau.

Q, And Eippko, according to this letter, is veil avero of the
fact that you vere no longer connected with Easehor, is that true?

A. I don't have the letter fros Eippice bofore no. If you can toll
no where it is—

q. This lattor of 16 April to vhich you referred is addressed tc
Hlppke.

A. Yes, but there is another letter in existence, the ronly lettor
of Hlppico, vhich I can't rcaenber at the accent. Hippkc then in offcct
prolongs Haschor's assignment, as far as 2 con rosonbor, but I haven't
got the lettor befero ne.

q. Sell, nov, attune for tho nocont that the docunont on page 73,
that is, 264, SC 264. Exhibit So. 60, assunc for tho aonent that the
date 2e April is ccrroct, as it is on the docunont, rctually is on tho
document - that that is corroct. Troa this file note of SS-Cboreturn-
bannfuchrer Schnltrlor it atnoers cults conclusively that Batcher is
still the subordinate of Veltr on 26 April 1942, doosn't it, talcing
that letter on i\* face?

A. If vs essuae that tho date on this note of Schnitslcr is cor¬
roct, then ell the statenonts vhich Hrs. Raschor has nedo ero not cor¬
rect. Tho entire letter can then nakc no sense.

Q. 3a that as it aay, Doctor, I nsked you n oueetion. Frcn this
lettor, in and of itself, disregarding any other letters, from this
letter vith the date 26 April thereon, it is eponront that Rancher is
still your subordinate, isn't itl 7r;a thle letter?

A. Yes, but that is not true.

q. All right, Sov, *ust a aoaont. Do you recall the nano
Anneliese Frick?

A. Yes.

q. Can you tell the Tribunal vfao Anneliese Frick is - F-R-I-C-Z?


7232


Court So. 1

5 Key 47 -M-l 0-4-*2K-Eay ne■ (Hauler)


A. Kies Frick v»a a technical assistant cf our Institute.

She li the daughter, la she not, cf Vilholn Frick, vho vee e
defendant before the International Military Tribunal?

A. Tee, she is Frick'a daughter, and also the daughter of hie vifo
vho divorced kin. I think that at the tine sho vp.o at ny institute they
were elroedy divorced.

Veil, when did Kies Frick Join your institute?

A. That I can no longer toll you. I really don't knov.

Q. If Klee Frick aaid that she Joined your lnatitutc on 16 April
1942, vculd y-u aaaune that thrt was about right?

A. I can hardly check that. 16 Atsril 1942?

Tea.

A. It la poealble.

Q, Poealble. boll, nov, did Dr. fiasehor ever cone to viait you
after you had your disagreement in March? You stated in dlrcot that you
only oa.v fclu accidentally a few tluos after you rolievod hlu.

A. The statements are contradictory to that offoct. As far ne I
roneebor, it vns roported to r.o that Baachar had appoarod several tinea
in tho institute, behind ay back. On the other hand, Vcndt did not knov
anything about these visits, vhich wore reoortod to no by othor oconlo.
Today I no longer knov whether Batcher a.ppearod several tinea at ny
lnatitutc during ny absence or not. Cn the occasion of rr first inter¬
rogation I stated that Ha.acher eooeared at tho inetitute behind ny back
because I thought that I could rer.cnbcr one such roo'.rt.


7233-


8 May-W-iB-U-l-iioxsie (Int. Rasler)

Court He. I.

Q Did Rascher over ap;«ar at your institute in late April or
May tc see you?

A I don't know that.

Q You don't renenber that?

A You naan, did Rascher once core visit ne after the telogran?

Q Yos.

A I don't rcc.cnber that.

Q Do you recall a particular incident which occurred cither
the latter part of April or first of May or tho niddlo of Hay or in
that period of tire, not in tho month of March or first of April,
whorein Rascher was casing to seo you, and you wore pretty busy and
you didn't want to spend too nuch tino with him bocauso you wore too
busy? Do you recall any such thing as that?

A Ho, I don't renoabor anything like that, but I always said
that it is qulto possible that Rascher appoarod at tho institute aftor-
wards. I said already that I remember a report which I had that ho Was
there onco more. This, hewovor, cannot bo brought into confamity
with Wendt's statement. That is, thoroforo, why I.don't know what tho
correct situation is.

Q I an not referring to Rosebar's visiting you bohind your
back. I want to know rvwr whether you can recall having had a visit
fron Rascher in late April or early !!ay, or oven 3 coo tino during the
month of Uay, the whole month of lay. Did Rascher ever visit you,
yourself, go to your office to see you in April or ltay?

A I don't renestoer that, but I wouldn't exclude that possi¬
bility at all.

Q How, let us try to refresh your recollection.* As it so
happened either in late April or early !toy you had broken your watch,
or you didn't have a watch so that you could tell tiz£, and do you ro-
call asking Kiss Frick for the loan of her watch so that whon Rascher
care you »culd bo able to judge the tine because you wore so busy, and
you were unable to spend toe such tiao with him. How, en incident like


8 May-lWS-ll-2-Hoxsie (1st. Ranler)

Court Ko. I.

that oust be cne you can roaenbor clearly, when you borrowed Hiss
Frick's watch upon a visit by Raschor so that ycu would be able to
titto hin and allow hi= a specific amount of tine for a conference with
you- Do you recall that?

A Ko, I ten't remaster it, tut if Miss Frick says so, I
don't want to exclude that possibility.

Q Well now, did you ever ask Raschor for an invitation to
Dachau to attend the experiments?

A Do you norm en invitation to Dachau to attend the experi¬
ments? After Raschor had »h:wn no the to lu gram, it was quits clear

that I —

Q At any tlno. At any tin*, before or after.

A Would you ploaso repeat the question?

Q Did you request that you bo allowed to attond the experi¬
ments at Dachau before the telegran?

A Bofora the tologrsm it certainly was ny wish to attond
tho experiments.

Q And did you tell Raseher that if you could not attend tho
experiments that Raschor would be withdrawn or you would roliuv o
Raschor or roquast his transfer from your institute?

A Cortd nly. That was the argunont in tho conversation.

Q And you fully deny cr exclude tho possibility that you
issued an ultimatvxa that Raschor would bo withdrawn in case you woro
not invited to attond the oxpoiinonts before tho first day of May, not
Iferch, May?

A That I asked Rase ter, that I wanted to participate in tho
experiments, was really the coro of ay arguments with him/ but I don't
beliovu that that happened in May. As I can see frcn tho documents, tho
entire affair took placo at tho beginning of March.

Q Uow, this Document 26i* has a date on it, 28 April, 23 April.
You maintain it nay wo 11 bo 23 February, and in that document it ap¬
pears that you want to sea then tho whole arrangement at Dachau. Itar,


2 l^y-^:'3-il-3-:ioxsio (Int. Reader)
Court KOa I.


if that date ia correct, then it light bo correct that you could have
asked F^soher tint you wanted to go there and see what was going on, and
it Ruscher was still your subordinate, if that letter is correct, and
:u said that if you didn’t sea the experimnt you wore going to relieve
hin, as Into as April 28, April that lettor is dated. How, you ox-
clude that possibility alto^Jthor, don't you?

A The letter by Mrs. h'ini Rnscher dated tho 2Jith of February
could then hardly bo explained.

(J I dicta't ask tho letter to bo troll explained, Doctor. Wo
will oxplnin that in nrgxECRt* I cc now asking you to think again,
did you relieve Rancher from your cosrand in March, or did you relievo
Raschor fron your cooaind in, say, Juno?

A I cannot r.iko any othor statcrasnt than what appoart fron
the document. I have tried to reconstruct tho entire fitter on tho
basis of what I havo seen in tho documents. I cannot interpret JIrs.

Nini Rnschor's Litter dated 2iith of February otter than to mean that
I was prohibited to attend tho experiments, md that tho entire dlo-
ovoslons as to itaothor I was to participate or not nust bo placod in¬
to Fobruaiy, and that is tho only indication that I have i tlioso

\

foots,

Q Wo 11 now. Doctor, would you say that Milch would havo
boen informd that Raschor was no longer associated with you when this
break took plnco in March, or would Milch have been niclod and boon
iris informed as la to as 20 May, 19U2?

A I can toll you nothing about that. I don't know what
happened bo tween tho Medical Inspectorate and Milch.

Q noil, liilch did consider you and Raschor associated as
Into as 20 May, 19hZ, didn't ho, according to Docuscnt 3k3-FS which
is in German Documnt Book and Docurwr.t Book Ho. 3# tho freezing ex¬
periment document book, on Pago 11, wherein l!ilch addresses Wolff in
tho "Dear Whiffy" letter, and Milch states: "In reference to your tolc-
TvU of 12 May our sanitary inspector reports to no that the altitude


3 :>v'-4>-:2-ll-4-HoxEio (Int. Rader)

Ccurt Ho, I,

cxporlaents carried out by the SS and Air Force at Dachau have been
•'Inisbed. Any continuation of thoso oxper incuts Boons essentially un-
onable. However, the carrying out of experiments of sore other
kind, in ru,~.rd to perils at high son, would be important. These have
been procorod in ircediate agreenent with tho proper officos; Major
.cits rd 11 be charged with tho execution and Cr.pt. Rase her will bo
available until further orders in addition to liia duties within tho
Medical Corns of the Air Corps." Kcw, it appears there that Hr. llilch
still considers you and Hascter as associates and hln being subordinate
to you, doesn’t it, as lato as 20 '.lay?

A That does not soon to bo the case. It be coma a clearly ap¬
parent from Hlppico's state sent hovr this suggestion Uilch to Wolff
has originated. Hippko testifios that there was a dosiro to carry out
frooting exporlunts and that Hippko hod made another suggoetion com¬
pletely indouendont of tho high-altitudo oxporiraonts, to ask mo to at-
to»d the so froosing oxpciLnonto boenuso I hod already worked on that
subjoct. That has nothing whatsoever to do with the high-altitudo ox-
jxriaants and therefore doos not prove whether I nt that tiro workod
togettiur rrith Rnschcr or not. That was a suggestion that Hippko mndo
to -'ilch on his own initiative and was ontiroly independent of whether
Rr.sc her was working at cy ofiico or not.

Q It so.ms rather strange that Hippko would suggest you work
with a can again with when you had a sevoro disagreement, doesn’t it,
on oxpori.-r.ent3 which are al3o going to bo in a concentration carap who ru¬
in there is an alleged telogroa that you ware not allowed thoro, that
ttoy woro secret and Hinder ro-ld not lot you in. It sccns rathor
strange new that they would sort of associate you with this nan whom
you have absolutely transferred free your organization and don’t want
ary cere association with, doesn’t it?

A That may be strange if I had later again worked with him,
but from the fact that =y name was dropped, and from tho fact that
throughout the entire later correspondence qy nano no longer apj»arod.


7237


5 • k-y-iS-HS—11-u-Boxsle (Int. Racier)

Court Ko. I*

experiments carried out by the S3 and Air Force at Dachau havb boon
•'inisted. Any continuation of those oxporimonts soens essentially un-
: .onable. However, tte carrying out of experiments of some other
and, in regard to perils at high sea, would bo L-yortnnt. Tliosa have
been pro cored in immediate agreement with tho proper offices; Uajor
.cits rill be charged with tho execution and Capt. Rnschor will be
vnilr.blo until further orders in addition to Ids duties within tho
lie die al Corno of the Air Corps." Now, it appears thoro that Ur. llilch
still considers you and Raschar as associates and his being subordinate
to you, doesn’t it, ns lato as 20 Uay?

A That does not sees to bo tho ensj. It becomes clearly ap¬
parent free Hippke's otatocont haw this suggestion try Milch to YTolff
has originated. Hippke tcstlfios that thoro was a desire to carry out
freezing oxporiunts -nd that Hippke hod nado another suggostion com¬
pletely indouendont of tho high-altitudo oxporinonts, to ask so to at-
tond tho so froosing oxperisonts bocauso I had already worked on that
aubjoot. That h-o nothing whatsoovor to do with tho high-altitudo ox-
Txriaonta and therefore does not prove "bother I nt that tiro workod
together rrith Base her or not. That was a sugguction that Hippko nado
to Jllch on his own initiative and wns entirely independent of whothor
Raochar wno working at =y ofiico or not.

q It so-ns rather strange that Hippke would suggest you work
with a man again with when you had a sevoro disagreorwnt, doesn't it,
or. oxperi-Tonts which are also going to bo in a concentration comp whoro-
in thoro is an alleged tolograa that you wore not allowed tlwro, that
they wore secret and Himler rovld not let you in. It soens rather
strange new that they would sort of associate you with this jan whom
you have absolutely transferred from your organization and don't want
any rr-re association with, doesn't it?

A That may bo strange if I had later again worked with him,
but from the fact that cy name ms dropped, and from the fact that
throughout ti« entire later correspondence ny name no longer appeared.


7237


3 : _-.y-^-!E-ll-5^Ioxeic (Int. Ra&lcr)

Court No. I.

it cm be Ken that this first^suglostion by Kippke could not be erec¬
ts for acc» reason or other, and I would as|UDo that tte reason was
.-.at at that tino I no longer worked with Raschor, that I at that tire

V. Tiruady quarreled with hin. I assume that teacher said to Kippke,

^ #

■You arrested Welt*, but to is not tho nan with whom I would like to

collaborate." I don't really know tto detail of that disoussion, but
tho very circumstance that I was aug'ostod and that this suggestion
was not perfected afterwards scans to the contrary to prove that tbora
=ust have boon certain reasons not to carry out this plan of collabora¬
tion between R-scher and holt*, and I nuot assure that this is because
of tho quarrel that I had had with Raschor bof ore hand. That Hippko was
not inferred or. tto 20th of Itey 19U2 about ry quarrel with Raschor
reuld not bo very surprising booauso fren tho point of view of tho
icdicol Insp«ctor'.to such quarrels did not constitute any groat ovont.

I testified hore that I didn't report that natter to Hippko but re¬
ported it to Anthony. Therefore it is quito posciblc that oithur
Anthony did not infors Hippko about this natter in sufficient detail or
it nay "Iso bo that Hippko had forgotten tho affair in tho rennttao.
Proa Hippko«s point of view tho rattor did not boar very nuch irport-
anco. I again refer to tho tologr.ua. toy I explain why I nosumo from
tho files that this tolcgraa was subnitted to no after tho 19th of
February?

Q Just a noewnt, Doctor. Ko tovo explained this sufficient¬
ly well enough, I think, and I want to give you another docunont to
help you along so that you can explain it. Your nnmo hasn't appeared
in any other of those documents, you any, at this later drto. How, wo
are going to look at Docurent HO-1359, first offering it for identifi¬
cation as Prosecution's Exhibit h?3, your Honors. Kindly read that
document aloud. Doctor.


7233


-k-iS-l- --JD-Kr 1. y- 3 r ovr..


It Is "^TTrce, slen.d "Slavers, S3 Obersturib-.nn-

feenr-r.

°SS- .nter stureifuohrer Stpbsnrzt Jr. Raacttcr reported
..i -•--r.lcb -n 25 April 1942 bout ttta result of the
c nf - -r.cc with Oborstobaerzt Jr. ‘..’eltz. ‘-.'eltz requested,

: t Jr. Rraoner be withdrawn in ttta o ee t.irt ... wo ell
..-•6 be Invited to -ttend too exearinent until Fridry, 1st

1242. The Heichsfuehror S3 \:re lr.foracd frccurdinily.
re orderci S3 Od^r^r evsonfuettrer uol/f on 30 April 1C42
c. s nd r t-let;-oo to Fl-ld-H'rettal Allen requesting
Jr. Rrsetter 1 e detail to the G-re-'n djocriaentrl Institute
' r «virtlon, Jrci'u erenoh, rnd that •’t the dl6noenl of
r.-iott fuottrer-SS. *

This '* ~0‘ ra in your Jooua. nt 2 04, doted 28 April,
*n. t ie d- ca.ee nt hero or ted .iry 3, refers to c..e d"to of
2C A~rll, "lou refers t, ttt- f ct the v; rooue t.-l tttnt
. 1 -setter o- withdrawn i the event no w.uld nut .. ve you
tcend l.u .?: arimenta bofor- t..o ot. of ivy, r.u then it
la v.rv llKely tnla tele^rro you r.ferre- to re :leo

• nt; n b at Ifst of April, isn't it*

a. ..i, a w t._ ontl - tt.r lootts a^aowift different
If I - hv. t..ie file not. of olev-ra in • .dltion to ay
. c. _'»cui nts, I wo aid h-v. ttn vn tu-t th. noCeo of
.c.\nltzlor vra con-cct, -n- th t croro aust ee ~ncttter
-.feasibility t ox'.Is in ara. iilnl Rrecner's letter. This
le e r, n c.ie ttter n«nd, c* nr. t oe explained now. I
o :: n y try to rec ns tract in tt-tes fr<-in the, i.o.un-nts

• 1 c. *• e-e V’il'bl- tterd, sine- I no lon 6 -r xn w t.icia


d e' , r. , 1-te discuss the freezing experiments,
et v; efter te.is letter of --Her. w.s ls-e-d w-.ereln . u
_c_ :-u--esC_d with dasetter t c nuUct the f reezing -xperi-
. .r.ttP rr._ ..ilch mie_csto_ r.u were t —■’*


C- urt 1

H-y S—K-12—2-HJ-br 1. y-3r wr..


the freezing experiments, did y^- b;c me aware of the
;rct that Rllch had ar-o erran^monts In this arnncr and
-d 60 it,C£t-d t^-'t sec.'. r.r-an a cmont8 be m?_o that you
h.-ndlo the v.xe«;utl ; n of the* freezing experiments?

n. I .irvo already testified noro thet I nev-r learned
r.f tnis letter of Milch, d"tod 2C Hoy 1242. Th.sc thlp«fl
v>ro happenin 0 lr, Berlin end I never f^und out that I was
to be Involved, *n order never reached no and I was never
caIced vhat my ttltubo was.

%. '/ell, th. fr^ezlne experiments v.ore of c. nsluornble
interest to- y» u, weren't they?

a. Certainly, ve had also worked in the fi-ld of
c« Id, and lready anld her^ th* t I repe^t-dly .*. naked
for Rolzlochnor's renyrt, beoauev I wre interested In
wii't was fcolng :n.

%. ’ell, now, ••ore you c nducti n our »nla*l
e* arlmunts th-t are re'jrtod In * -jr document book on
w-lch y e r.^ rt-d eo r. :t the Number, o nferenco in
Oot-uer; did ”jU c nduct -.or onlmrl crrerlmonta rt the
'’cmo time R^.sober r.d AolslOvbner ana Fin/.e wore c.nduct-
ln^ c. elr experiments on human beings t Drohr.u, or *v>A
y u c rnpleted y.ur w *rk 6 time bef.re or 'fter; can
y -lercw e*y just vr. t tim.- you were conducting, your
ar.la -1 ex oriaents rs .p :*-8wd to the human experiments
f ft-> sober, .vlzloohn.r rnd Fink..?

a. ’»a oert-lnly c rrl.d out t..e nlaal experiments
slmelt*ne.usly, tn?t w s d.;rln 0 the tlo. th. cxoclmonta 1
series hvizloo.in„r, Finite and R sc.i.r wre runr.ln* rt
Dach-'U, we worked on tno animal experiments at -ur Institute
.n vnich I re-p.rtj*. <-t Number^,. I think that Is the wey
: ve -lw ;s described It.

I sa»,; -:eil now, wh.n you worked or. animal


c.-rt 1

- y 5-14-12—5-HD-.4 1. y-3r >vr..

experiments, were you working on 1 r~er animals t all or
?.l?rys si~ll nniscls; I thought A understood you tv say
. wore working on nigs, larger animals. Is that true?

«. No, I dldn'-t say that. Je started to work vn
smaller anim~ls an- at fir3t started tv v-rk on the basio
problems ualn G 6 e-» 11 anicrls. Once nrving established a
certain b sis wc w-nt ov-r to largo animals which wore
m-ro -roensive. o st»rted with rrts f*nd guinea ol^a
nd wont over to r bblts end c?t6, and nt last wo worked
-n olgs.

%. '.’n't typo of ^qulpm^nt WvUld y.u use In freezing

experiments with small animals? Would there bo a difference
between the equipment used for small animals or large
an lar is?

i*. Certainly, for th- lar.-. 'nlo ls I need a big cage
int which It cvuld be run, whero in the case of tho
sm-11 anlna .1 I ^nly need a very sa il 0 l.-ss ovntalnor.

Vkrt elsl I n.vd for ay vquioaent v.oponds upon what I am
v rklng.

i. -.ton did y.u e.r.d the oqulncer.t th^t you had used
f r ur oxperlraents with the l*rga animals to Dacna.u?

. That ws never the erso.

i. Vha t h*'o-ened to the equipment?

a. You are eoenfcl g of equipment for 1 rge animals?

k. Ye3.

A. This equipment fvr i-r 0 u animals consists of two
c _es -.f ovale cross-section.

Two tubs?

a. Yes, two tubs.

«nd wh't lioocr.ed to th sc, vht -lid you do with
tho.e; did • u tiv\>w them away -r n v them burned «.r
•were they b mbvd, jc what hrpooned t.. them?


C v.rt I

12 --=-•“*D-.v-loy-5rown.

These two 1 r b e tabs were et the dstcte Hirachau,
and if nobody took them sway fra still there.

i. Is that where hr.jor Alexander visited you at the
end of th- ver In I believe, 1945?

«. Yea thrt Is the plrce.

Dr. Alexander v's enable to find the larfae tubs,
v-ar.’t he?

«. '.'ell, If Professor Alexander hed told us that he

v a Interested in scein. two lrr^e tabs I would hvo beer.
_l'd c, la“d .'.Is Into the plasty wnor c these tw. tuba
were 'nd shown them to him.

‘Jfcot did . . d.. with the tharooaetera c.nd

e-i lament y. u used - n the lsr 3 c nnlm«ls; wee tr.-t still
rv-liable?

a. Cert-Inly, tr.ey were not removed, certainly not
u:on y order. <‘e mostly aensured ch- temperature by
electricity, wo also used thermometers, osneclrlly f'jr
S3'3arlnc the temperature of the w tor. as for as I know
n.t in c w'8 ev.r r moved from thjre. «t pny rate I n^v^r
a ve noraiaslon to do that. I think I s«id to Professor
Alex'.nder z:.-t I vr c uely r-acsbwred that Wendt hed re^rtod
C ue th-t Ainlch, r.,t Hlrechau, hed ordered O'..net..ino
“ be removed ‘' -lie I v. e absent, -»nd somebody wanted to
t'kc 3 aethlne to Drohciu. 'lien I returned 2 hoard ebjut
e rt rr.d I brohlb&od any such practice. Wendt does not
.oes to remember th-t, so that I cjz nr. t qalto sure r.b ut
ic. I -s sure thrt wo refused t. lend the oolorlatfor.

i. Then according t^ .‘endt, .no of you witnesses,

3. so -f your equios-nt v-s sent t. Dachau?

, ,n the contrary .’endt s~ys that nothin! was
sent t*. Dcc-'U, : . t nothin, was ever ..cnanhed. On the
e^nbcr_d vaguely tn. t I once returned fr-.m


- cner .irnd re


c.tft :

j~-- ~ -&-I2~5-HD-iialoy-3r own 4

r vr cation nd d'endt had told so mac eomat..an a w e deuianded.
fl ; my Me I know for certain t.i c - told .«‘endt tact
nior r.. circumstances 8 no aid pr.yt/--n e bo furnished to
Dacn»u and I certainly reaeaber t..ls ".ffelr wit/, the
C-lorlscter. S-thlng v ae over ..Ivon awry. '•hat I aa
ary In- now refers to Munich, but I ra quite sure that
t'/.ln 0 w 9 sent t-> Jochru fr.-a Hlrsofaau. There was no
0 inaction between Dacha a pr.d Hlrscnau. I don't think
t/-'i anyone w- aid h vc t/.. u a ht of 3-r.dino anyone to


72:3


8 (Bro~n)

Court So* 1


Hirschau fron Dachau. I can 3ey Tor certainly not only I aor.lt !t.ot: of
any such thing happening, but I c= quite suro it didn't. As far as
Ainich I car. say that nothing --as roaoved without qy approval. I aa
quite sure the o^-gen voters '.rere rofused and that the Colornetor *.fao
also refused. Tihether in :y ebsojioo anything was furnished without re¬
orders I cannot say#

IT.. HARDYt Hay it ploasc the Tribunal, if the Tribunal will boar
with ix I can conplotc ^ axardnatior. in about 5 ninutos, and -.hereby
complete it before tho noon rccoss.

T.l T&smxai Vory Troll.

Q Doctor, Tore yen of tho opinion it rao nocossary to conduct freezing
oxjxriaronta upon hunan bolhga?

A I don't knot: tho extont of Uolxloohaor's froozing erper! onto,
tlvct rosultc can bo achieved by US in- hunan beings that cannot l>o ac¬
hieved by using aninala was quit, clear to no. That is a snWor of course.

a

Q Thon you wore not corqrlctelc' opposed to conducting froozing experi¬
ments upon Itunan beingsT

A Cortainly not. I approved of tho high altitude ox avto nto vldch
Ruff ras carrying on and if froozin, ox;orients had boon used un’.or tho
sain eloer conditions it would haw boon vory -llo. leal if I v uld liavo
any moral misgivings. Thoso natters always depond upon tie oxooution.
However, I rrust say that in thu aao- of frees ng oxptrfciunto I ml set
up a .such stroagor measure, boc:.v ;c they arc connected with a rent many
:»ro inccnvonioncos to tho exp risontal cvbjwct. These inoonvonionebu
can bo Cuju-tod by asthotics.

O Than it is your opinion, as: staled on pego 36 of your JocUliont
Dook, that is the sooond pa o 36 ; thru raw tyo pages 36, You- Honor.

This is hbltz Document So. 5 . Xou stated in your report which •*»
report before the October conference in burrtberg, as follors:

"I-uiy people rill certainly bo reluctant to apply the -.bovo abrupt
nothods of warring to hunan beings without further consideration, since
tho former vie- lias always been that lids kind of troata-nt oust load


6 IJay-Ci-D JG-12-2 a-Uzlcy (Bream)

Court Ho, 1

to .lost severe collapse. ~e havo, as stated above, never obsorvod such
a co 11 apeo rith cur animals. At the beginning of the hot both ttc even
found a quick increase of the nu;clc tonus which according to Y. iondcr-
cor., should counteract any tendency to collapse. One car., Iiov.wor, raiso
tbo objection that the whole orocoss of regulating temperature by Tray of
the skin is sc diffcror.t in the cases cf humans and furred cninals that
ere cannot draw any binding conclusions. This objection is certainly
•.forth attention ami cannot b- refuted by animal experiments. 11 Then it i3
your opinion, as stated here, that ex -jriixnts upon human be in-3 are just¬
ified for freezing?

A Hay I ask you tc go on roedi i •ill find ny point of view,

cni I cher that as this consideration, namely that t;»ro aro dji Curdncco
botucon human beings and ani.als which our. be circumvented by cenoidering
electrical rc-caraing and that no objection can bo nado In tho cnoo of
cloctrical rowarsdng. If you go on reading you will coo that one of tho
two forra of rcr/andne woyld havu to be applied in the caao of human
boinyo.

Q That is truo. How on pace 37 of this soao document, it sto.toa:

» 0 no noro crporionce rith short tmvo warning coons to uo important.
Following; a suggestion nado by Profoscor Holzlochiior, wo v/arrwd the aninaln
by way cf comparison with snail olco -rodcs on the neck and head only in
the region of the vital centres." '".or. did you got this suggest! n from
iiclslochnor?

A Tills su. - ..stion was nado to ae by Holzloehnor during tho Cortfor-
cnco which I nontionod, which took pl-.co in Paris in tho raaaor of 19lil.
naturally, wo discussed cur cctusl probloso ro-.ardiiv. thy.cause of loath
by cold, Holzlochner at that timo in prrls in tho aumor f 19U was ol'
tho opinion that the coding of tho vital cantors cf tho medulla oblongata
was to. cause of death. During tho Dachau experiments Holzlochner changed
this opinion ami looking at tho Hurnborg ropert of Hdzloohnor you -.rill
f?md that it is his opinion that the cold death of a hunan being is caused

72 h$


6 I^3*4WMG-I2-3a--yaloy (Brown)
Court Ho• 1


by a defect in the heart. Free: this change of opinion it is clearly
evident that what I was investigating hero ar*d was at that tino Holz-
lochner*s opinion, was an old opinion of his ami not the opinion which
he hold later as a result of Ids experiments.

Q Thon did you first learn of tho freozing experiments on human
toings at Dachau?

A I already said that when theso people cane to us and asked us to
carry out oxygon examinations in tho blood.

Q Tfhat date was that approximately?

A That oust havo been in tho suivcr of 19li2, tr»e or throe aonths
boforo tho Hurnborg conforcnco.

Q Did they ovor ask you or sond to you bodies to bo sont on to Dr.
Siixior for autopeics?

A Ho,

Q And thon the next tino you heard about the oxporiuonts at Dachau
was at tho conforonco in Octobor, is that right?

A Yos.

Q Did you perform thoso 'elood tests or thoso oxygon blood tents an
roo.ucntod?

A ’to. .orz roviewod that and ho reported it to no later. I didn't
carry that out, but Tfor z did. I naan basically it was Tforz' task to carry
out oxygon tests and not rdno.

Q TTho was "ora?

A Tfor* was ry oldest assistant. I tela you that,

ill. HAR2Ti Ho furthor questions, your Honor.


THEi iTlZSIDEHT: Tho Tribunal idll bo recess until 1*30.

(Thorcupm the noon rcco3s was takon.)


/ 1¥7

o- tcr-f^rosn)


Court I


aTJiXA crSbl ..


(Th- hearing rcconven-d at 1330 hour-, 8 -ay 19L7.)


THc. The Tribun :1 is again in session.

DR. GLOfeG uLLTe - Resuo-d.

r.il Has Counsel lor d-.f-ns. any forth..r examination

of th- witn-ss?


RLDI SCI XZUk':iGS.

1 >.ILL'. (Counsel for the Defendant lta):

h Dr. .Teltz, I return to ah. ..u-stion first of all that w..ro dis-
cus.'’.: yesterday, n....l y, the- qu. atlohs U.it t.:. prosecutor directed
to you curing th ecurs. of ; >st .rday.'s session, tad I ask you, first
of ill, to anrw.r th- foilowln question: ifould it not hay- be-en possi¬
ble fo confirm th. xp.rinor.t:;! 3eri-3 that were discussed by Ruff ar.d


herb rr in A 1 .rsho*, outside, of concentration c-rps? The prosecutor
feels that e.xperis> ntln; in coneentrati* n coops could hav- be n avoided,
few, *iv_ :t. a cl a: answer and t -11 ce, would you have received the n -
* srary limber of -X? rle.ntrl subjects, namely, 15, iron th- Luftwaffe?

a It .v.r difficult to find that nu=b r of volunt- rs lor such a
1 n. th of tin, for th r-asona Ruff h:s lr dy at forth. Pbopli ^re
rot released from their officials duties so that •<«. could h-v- th-n .v.i-
1 L . So f r a tr.e, i:-r- .oploytcs of th. Institute, th-y J. d to conti-
r.u. do.n* t. ir daily work so that lor this r.ason they were not really
ivaliable, t 1 .3 1 pr cticJly ac-. :«ow, I *as ask.d whether enough
volunteers would h v volunt red. Incr-. acre lwiys plenty of Luftwaffe
volunteers for hivfc ltitud- xp -rin-nts, so fir as it depended on the
■ ill of th- volunteers. If-, ’-skwdrquadron, "who of you wishes to


jeu:it.. "


ji .-ltitud exo_rin nts? , nd if had b-.n able to


“ill K > r !■ v d of your other duties lor the


d eorir. . i;.. 4r,*\ -xp.rlc.nts r c riled out, th n, of course
.bout v rj- or., irj ch t cquadron would .. v. apoli d, b.cuis 'or
^-'s^epeopl r.i h A'-Mwoe ucpric-nts w-r . soo-thing hat t.h.y ,-r.

that i.-. involved r.o p in or unpL isant&css,

J * Ui -^-


721*7


: ,ay-*e-GJ-13“2—i C3t-r-(Boro)-

Coart 1

-bd tflc conditions brought -bout by those -xp.rix_r.tc wore conditions
i tfc.y Ir.ndy knew. That w_ could aot proceed in this wry was dctcr-
int by '.uitc other factors, ana-ly th- fact that during the war ov.ry-
hie -ore work to do then h. coule do, that the inuividut.1 of ices
- --9-frt ib -■ v-ry important that tneir employ.should not lo3e a sin-
|1 hour fron their regular work. And w. hid the ana- sort of troubles
r.ith students. If r_ .ask.d *.-hnt stud-nt wanted to volunteer, then a lot
cf ttudents would have been re.ndy to, but if ir> proceeded to th- pructi-
c-1 nngl. ins 8aid:"Tooorroo I wmt you her. for n .rhol. day," then
th. difficulties arose, b.caus. all thes- students nad other obligations.
This tic. was not a t their disposal. Th-y, of th.ms.lveS, would have
liked to volunt. -r nd this app.rvntly th- difference, if on. says that
cn th. one hand, then. Were plenty of peopl. in th- Luftwaffe who wanted
•o olunte nd, or. th- oth r hind, it turned out to bo'impossible, in
tin pr ctioal field, to get then.

•* ]:or > let us assure -hta you had received the people iron the Luft-
nff.. Could teacher have be.n rtatrained free carrying out his 0TW1 lX*
periBents in Cachau?

A Cert: inly not, because at th- neoent h.n on the 15th of kiy 19L1
! cchtr asked Fir.tier whether he could pernit such experiments, and fros
•' =°»-nt on Then Jiialr p-raitt.d the.a- -xp riser.ts, Raschur had the

-ty s 5 -nan towards hisalcr to oak. use of this p. mission th t Hiar.-
l>r had recorded nin. r.aacfccr l -.y? occupied i dual position. On the.

Che hand h- was a S'-bsorzt o.‘ tix Luftwaffe, and in tills capacity stood
ir. i clearly tl. line* ailit-r. subordination and co..aiasion, r>d on th.
other hnd, R aci.er rrx a n-ater ox tr.e ^.neral-SS, nd in this capacity
. -ras subordinate to laaLr, nd onl, in this capacity did he turn nt
tc i{ta -' - r In ora_r o r-ceivv permission to c xry out thes*


? 21;3


xperiB.ntc


3 Hay L7-T.-Z -L.-l-Cook ( Prawn)

Court No. i

Tv. us it ors quite clear that at tee sxaent when Hior-ler give

r.lr?i:r f r tte experiment s Raseher certainly did take advantage
i that permission.

. :.o.. a not her question relating to vnur examination of yest rday.

* - e Prosecutor among other charges accused you of being guilty of the
fact that Ruff and Eo.-.bcrg who carried o-jt the experiments and r.re
ir. tie docl: today and you answersd this question in tho affir- ive.

I assume t! or of ore tSv.t this is an ad at solan of guilt for your person
in f.c Judicial or ever. Aral sense, or a a I -rong in that. ..ill you
-lease explain «Our oos'.tion again.

n. 1 can my to th-.t that If Raschor had not boor, assigned to ry
office gainst ny will er.d without ay intent tit t then X wouldn't be
in tho deck here aitler. In the Inst analysis tho whole indictaent tea
-,r.o about b or luce Kseebor, contrary to our profroa, without our
knowledge, di< thi-va th t arc clorgou in the ir.dictaont hero. Neither
I , ncr .It. -itt nor Rocberg ate in any -ay roeoor.aiblu for that.

Q. Kan I a vo a few questions regarding thie loming's cross e;jia-
Liition. This trains the Prosecutor suddonly showed you a row document
!r. order to orovo thr.t Hr odor did not lorve or. the 20th of February
because of the einnUr telegran but left only lator. how I ask you first
of >11 on t.'O basis of rf-.at date did you dotcrninc tho time for tho
individual ccurrcncca, >a-ticuLarly the tlao when Raschor loft your
cffico?

of course, .stay 1 do no longer have in mint the datos for "
oecurronctr tl »t hqjpered five .,a?ara ago. I did try or. tho basis of
tfco docuannt* here in evidence to r co.iS.ruct tho clronolo y of tho
•jtUz >.nd I i. vc I ifdd v ry ciculy in ay direct oxaainati r.%ist
I came to £ 1 - on tho datos t. t 1 aid’fix on. It was oy point of
;• rturo ti t *• a datos arc /tost certainly incoaoatible. Ir. the ooou-
-_n*. NO-3IS - r. s th-t Rrsch r or. t.-.o 16 of *trch 1912 a t '.Iroary boon

.:•! gr.cd t- t . Dachau fie ic station oi ..ir Ho soar ch Institute, and in
. Sc.-iitzlur file note, which is docuse.it 2bU,


8 ifoy -.7-A-J..-L. -2-Cook-(3rc*n)
C art Ko. 1


it says: R-sci.r's noaigrctent to -actnu raust bo ismodi-toly clunged
- en -a isi sncont to Air Rcaa&rch Institute Berlin-Adlcrshof, Dachau
- ■ -*- Station. In -rentlxiOia: In ..&itz' institute, since as Wonts
Lis us hi hevo the .assignment cancelled imediately unless
... takes . ..rt. Hon one of these dccuncr.ts has to be erroneous, that
is to soy, it oust be wreng because Pr;.u Sc sober cannot on the 2Sth
of « ril ask for an aasiga-vnt sco-wh.ro, which recording to tbo

•

other docu air Lvon to Rasohtr a nonth earlier.

Thio w a ajr joint of Jvjr.rtuTe cod I thought I could by assaying th"t
tho Schnitzlor file not-, newly N0.264, baa a false dr to on it, and
that the da to should not be the 2Sth of « ril but tho 28th of Feb¬
ruary of 19Al. ;bt. fc-rough tho submission of the new docunont, MO.
1359, th* file :oto of Si-v.rs, au-i-.s to neks It clear to ao that tho
Gchnitzler fit- ;.otc r.- Uy dots be'r tho correct date, newly the
28 of -oril 1942. 1 rust therefore conf-oo that I cannot clarify this
contradiction. Harv.fare, t'.-re really is th» contradiction in tho
two documents JO. 264 and KO. 318. Fra the rate rial I havo available
;.--rv I cannot ol.'-r u.a this contradiction. Purely objectively 8?oak-
ing thia fait do. s nothing to c l.ir.Qu what I have said kora cxcont as
to ay c x.jocturo r arming ti.<« dates which I now dthdr ». p-rticul-
rly It changes at* i;:,- in .?y atatcaunt that nothing of th. Dachau
-rjaxi.ts . ^ ro ort-d to v. On tho contrary, Siovers Document
0. 1359 co-. rol 'rated anew that I sked Reach-r to re- ort to no and
I ,>1. cud before ;j. . the ait zT.ative ol oitherre alining in ny institute
an? royortiitg to a. or leaving. It car. cieo be seen froru tha
Siwv.rs docuaur.t that th.ro w-a r.o r.*:rt to c>r. the Dachau

•

xvrir-.ntz an t. t just .-.aa rt son f.r ay ju'rr-ls with Rancher.

•*. I have or.- 1 st u- ition t. Glorify t -la contradiction. Mow
n.aicb a: r.v. i si^es t is cor.tr Licti r. do you think is the core
l ikwly? e have the letter tra: ...Iff or. tlx 10 Jarch u!-J.ch is r
rt of fficial Occur-rt, whereas Rase -r*s r-yuftior. for veracity
a*t-r .1 I heard -about hia w_s not very cr-at, now w; Jch do you think

7250


y i.7-*»-Sh— Ur-3-^ ^J:-(3r:jfa)

Court .*Io. i

is C 3T03t?

. -ir.ct <y first attest to clarify this contradiction c.ano to
.. at t I - i-i. net like to try again. I eiaply can soo no Key to
clarify it t:*, ir sis -of t:.- r.torinl t cf oro ec.

DR. ' Ili d ' .: Ko further questions in xv-direct examination.

TldL PKJSUHri: Arc there no fuxth.r questions to th. witless?

DP. TIPP: Dr. Tipa for oseixr Freys ing.

THS rflSSIDS;?: The ro-oxa_dr. tion of this witness at this tk.o aust
b« linitwd t, .r.tUrs which were elicited fraa the witness, etato-
•x-nto w.dch h. . o cn cross of-dr.-tian.

DR. TIPP: Vory woil, -r. Pr-sidont, I will *ut only that sort of
c;uostions.

BY I-?.. TIP?:

Q. -Voforo r, in the crocs ex* sinr.tion in snw.r to a question by
th* Proa>cutor rw&ordir.- the chain of co •.•and in your institute you
redd tr. f->11 a.ii.i : 2c jaaolcally and disci;'Ur.rily I ro subordinate
to the Luft nu in L'unich but in scientific respects to tho medical
ir.r- octcr* to. yp # :;rdy whereupon asked you whether that was
..nthony'o :ffico -rvdyou said "yes", and fraa tils it could be roducod
that yz u recoivid r orders r*' dirocti-.xj. in research nutters or
in all scientific natters fraa «nt!.:ny«s office, that is to say, tho
office for Luftwaffe ,->.dj.cine, for aviation nv.dicine in tho nodical

vetorsto r cy th*. ten L-i charge of those natters. Is that
Kh-.t ' ,*x u t nt t)s professor, or how can you explain thi3 rear rlc?

... It ir r * sard: o.--ly ir the scientific ros'ect I 1. a aubox^-

’.'in: to t: tr». -'leal insaectvx-ate, d t e x-iinal Inspectorate tv.?o

r >rcsont-d £ r »- eit.vr by the ...r -ctor .in so If by the (ftriof of

Staffj the technical ex a-t .il not yivo any rderc. That went on

through the Ls -ct.r or tax J' ic-f of St-ff. I simply . anted to sny

that r.th r.y a as ‘he dop rt-o.at ex- rt :t th- sax ffice i the modicnl

•

it rate .r c rich I also received ray srtUrr fr.n it's erf f.

7251


C ::--7 47-..-S..-r.-w: -ok (3 tj n)
c art K . I


. In the cros3 acr ir.atin you aIso said that in the Luftg&us

t: • r- c jr suiting .'hysiciens. Untir fcht t m "con3ultin;; hysic-

ns" ujo or.'orsteals that you rlao low* th- doctors who advised
..e wr *.3 c nandants, that is the. ..ir Fleet •hysici'ns, jr tho
leal cl.t-fs tlv-i*. Ives. Now, Professor, do you aeon by th~t that
,;^re ’*-r- consulting -hysicians in that technical sense to the

,uft 'us ^r tho ir institutes. Did you say that iraa your torconal

It.-hL. l,e .r i.■ 3 whrt you said yoeter'ay oiayly a conjecture?
n, ..hethvr the Luftgnu had advisors that 1 do n^t kna;, ..o uoro
concenv-d then nith Professor -inrer and I :>nly -nt that tho
technical ox -rte ir. t;*j various fields wore also the advisors to
tho Luftgftus. whether they hold title of consulting’ ihyaici“ns I do
not knew. Pr Xe» or Sir- .r, with whoa wc wore th-n concerned, was,

1 be.lievo, called "Luftjau Pathologist'" Jr somethin’ of the sort. His
fficial title );/ :iothing about an advisor in it. But rognrding
thoso .natters I fcavo only vrtial knowledge because I had not v-ry
vach to do nith t t.


72>'2


c rt I

lay .1 - 15-1 - ' 3 -aria _r (®r pa)


3* Saw cncth -r ucsti it rofera t tils I ftgnu path St,
Dr. Sir. r. Tao prcsocut.r s * at.rday :n cr ss-^xaain-ti n that
. t.- •' ca oats it could be saca th .t Dr. Singer r-fused t c.llnb-
:• •• ■- '.-1..r arc -a!- i r ethical rt sene. 1 .vve a.*:

clock-c. ti-j- o ,h tr.® drcu«xint3 and 1 era*, find n such d-cuxjnt. oinco
j u vcj.j int ..t v. ted y J stox'dny sb* —.t this 6 curort, I want to osic you
U'-V.or j r tax.* ;hdt the reference km.

- . a D?: jy it j-30 S': "*- Hon rs, t e last question of defenso
counsel, I don't <uidors'~nd rv.at ho ooana. I can't i;ot tnc iivort of
tho question or *hat ho it aring to. T cunderstand it at all.
..ill you hco hi ro;-ixrace the cusstion?

T !'3 r 23IDS'?t Vtill Counsol re.^oat We question?

D . TIP?: I asked Professor selte tho follcaving: The e. osa-
exwsination -.ord\ , r. Hardy quoted a document and dre* fro-n this
docu..»o..t tr.o conclusion th t the tunicli pathologist, Dr. blnijor, refuaod
to wor'.* .dt.i io z ohr.er ami nho xn to D chau ex .erlrucntp for othicul
reason . com d i id tx do«”u«-.t fro. *hicft that could *oe soon, and,
t.v.roforo, I caked Dr. felt* j mt document it was.

H. .v27r Your BbObr, that is an erroneous eosuaptlon on the
part o' the defence ocunsel. i didn't refer to a document. I sorely
..sired Dr. ..elts fro; t o 2ociMer.ts in ovidoncc was it a parent that
Dr. i.i.^or vi-'idre dro’ wo oxperinants and, if he did -itheirnw, was
sthici reasons. - didn't st„vo that such a document existed.

D . P: Then tiict aot-les ta.t ucation, No*

•2. I the cross-ox:. ’ion u h s said tha* the Lvftaau
physicians rare suberoinste t- t e ed Inspectorate. For '.any
yyxrs - 'iu were a -eater .f he L.- Uaifo and fcne- hnr it -.me rjanized
' -.5 I do. .kr* t please lei Dunal whether the Luftj.au

coc- rs T.-rc d •. . ; ate t a.e . edical Inspectorate cr was

*. re an iavxr ediwy office?

A. The v.: t’au doctors 'ere subordinate aost of the tire to the
Air - loot Sect rs and thus cnl^ indirectly, subordinate to the edical


7253


Cc.rt I

3 ay -k - 15-2 - I :• - Arainger (3ro-r*J

Inspectorate.

D. . TIP?: Thank you.

~ Z , -373 afT: Any furt .er questions of the witness?

T o defendant ,.e_?.tz -o excused fron the stand and will resume

nia place.

(I,ie wit.less was excused)

a. -^mx Ha it pie -jo Your Honors before defense counsel con¬
tinues the presentation of his Cocurontary evidcocb, I should li :e to
inr.uiro 03 to whether not Defense Couj^ei lor .eltz intends to call
mot.ier witrviaa at this tv e for t..o Defendant .elts and then after
toe completion of tie Holts case, who-, or or not the Defense Counsel
for the Defondor.t Brock inU-.ds to cull the Defendant Brack to the
at -.d firs- r to cull one rf h\s two witnoar.ua, or in v-hnt procoso
ao th tic ;ou‘;j wy work ovar tiso fell owing fow days.

Dt. ;ill.i •:* 'r. rr-.3ido.-t, I was About to :rsku a atutcaent of
this question. Toe witness ondt was hurt, having turned up on tho
2Ufc, of .v.ril. ho-, tie intorro aticnr of Ruff and u-turg took longer
then wo bod o ected. ..er.dt io u doctor, an x-ray men, in K-rleruho,
ir.d <eltz' rovious assistant. I consequently r-leaBod hiw rter tak¬
ing long affidavit fro- hit*. The affidavit is n..r«. It vs x out.
•v-onti- ty.awrUten pages and discusses vie hole question i:i n ..orfoctly

satisfactory w . , seeded in having this

doca-ent transl- vjd into o.. lish, so tr. tier, present it to the
Tribunal only in Goman* ar.d 1 assw-c hat it is not possible to put
it in tttfi o wo h v. the . *lish tr - r'.rtlon. However, if yen' wish,

1 co- :d tell - -r ^unrJ. wi*. . he ; rtait joints in this affidavit
re • t, of c r. .dint t. If .•'• -' h f T cr “ u1d do

t.- • t in ?. vary riaf way.

2 . 3Sj3E*.Tj I think it ould b better to '.ait until t; e
ir.y.ish ‘.-.-elation is co . lu*o.

•• If Year Honor pleases, - *<xT.d like to n- x fro.v ti»
Dufonso oovnsal Froosc.ar.nn for Brack and see what his intentions aru


3 aay-A - '-5-3 -10- Ar in^cr (Broun)


r ,d s;-: what co-rrse he wil fol - in his defense.

v _S:D2 T: Did Counsel for the Defendant ueltz understand
f at-.tA. jurt that tne affidavit that he xentionud nay to offered t*on
its translation into fingjish is co ..ole ted?

DR. ..1112: Thank you.

THB i-UES'fDBffi Counsel for Defendant Brack, did you hoar the
question su;. ;ested 0 . the proeecution aa to whether or not you djsiro
to call Defendant Brae!: t j the s and cufore *ny other witnesses

D . .'.CfJSC'-' 17: *Cr. irccider.t, in the last fun days, I told
t, w s.civtuy onoral and the prosecutor in writing th t it was my
intention to call first the t-. vitiwssos, Huderich and Pfaoninuullor,
md the roof ter, if it piv s- the Tribunal, to c .11 the defendant to
tne stand.

imn sy uestion.

TliZ t .031D2T: Very re.'. , Coansol, wo understand; you may folio'/
ti. .t rocjd ro. Covuksol ie-y procuod.

D... nj* ! ay it pl«cso the Tribunal, 1 t-f continue w caso
by putting in the documents that arc to oa feund in Dccuawnt Boo!'

:ro. 2. First tf nil, I - t i:. an of - . t Doctor von »-rz. This
is of the 7t 'f Oonuarj, 79i»7, Boon oat he. l*j 1 put it ir. 3 .oltz
Exhibit .*0. r. I Might 3/y regarding this very briefly t • .

,.arz ..altz 1 coll borator. Hu describes his own attitude

rj-yu'din^ -ho jinai y-riy .nd his pertici.r.tior. in ti.- freudow action
rf iroric. For this r-xso:. .0 was condo uied to do th. I mi^ht rood

• f U M hi-os .if t he s .ys r. • raing shish it autrns to .no inc : i3-
. . i >lo th t A r... v.rt . ; r- . fro • .•:-* 1 I he locus tnt,
h>r.tuncu fr*-a ■- ph :

n At the o t-br.. Jc <r . . : r 1 r.oov^d my r-ridenco to unich,

.3 1 .d n sovnd reason for 1 king a ttaoly oSc..pc from persecution
by tho _*,3‘. -po. I r:a, thtreforo, ;.] ■ to ia-cdlately rifch a
-■ood rucei .vcr. at th©scorch Institute of Aviation : -dicino' 1 in

unich vhosj chief ?-t that tire was f rofossor «tltz. u

*


7255


Court 1

3 ay X - 15--. - ' - Jln;,.r (5r<*m)

Kcr Cro^i pv.j 2 i r.ad fro- the first paragraph:

ho — nzxoiy, i.oltz — was not only billing tc --CiCnowledgo
too vrJi'j f ry scientific viows, but else respected ay political
cor .’ ctio o — an attitude o'un scarcely coop^tlbla vith his position
-j. Jv. ..a d cf tho Institute, our association turned out to be an en¬
tirely h -monicus one."

ihon in his affidavit . -rtz dcsc.-j.b_s aniaal cxpcrlaonts at tho
Institute and describes, a.-.ong other things, hon two of Holzloohner's
_r- loyocs c&ao tc hiss for blood s rpl-s for Dachau. Jrofcsscr 1/oltz
has described that event fro.s tho sr< -rxisa stand. ~rz describes how
that p.nsdssion was refused. I rend tho last paragraph on tho c.;.o,
tr.0 last Sentence*

"Vfnon tho two roijors of .-iolz'ochner's staff again turned directly
to Prof os sor holts in n att^ept -o borrm., at l-.st, an apparatus for
l.j ddtcreirv.xion of o;yg_n content, he consulted no and approved cf
ny lin.l refusal, .xproosed in the str- .*jst t^rms."


7256


e Kay 47-.v- X- 16*- 1-. Schwa- (Brown)
Court No. I.


From page 4 of the document I real the last sen¬
tence. "I an not aware that Dr. Lutz or Dr. Wendt ever
offered Voltz employment In Dachau. Such an offer was
never made to ae In any .orm whatsoever."

Now. your Honora, I put In another affidavit from
eclontlflc assistant. This Is tfeltz' document No. 6;
:/31tz Exhibit Hr,. 12. Dr. Piohotka, at the end of last
year, when he hoar! th t tfcltz was unlor lnllctmont, by
readln. It In the papers, nado himself available to me.
They are aoqualntel with each other through having
exchanged scientific correspondanoe. rhoy collaborate \
scientifically 3inco they were active in the same scien¬
tific flell. Llxe Herr von Nerz, he points out the par¬
ticularly dignified manner In scientific manners that
'fcltz ha'.. Thu8 he says that weltz frequently hal res-
e -rch experiments in his Institute stopped vhon ho
hoarl that Plchotka was w^rkln - on the same subject.’,
./oltz wanted to ^lvo his c^ lleaijue piohotka a head
start. It is also Important for this trial that ho
states that he knew of tfoltz'a efforts tc keep a close
watch on Rischor. He, th^reforo, also inew that Hascher,
on the basis of the tele.:ram from Himmler, was removed
from rfeltz.

.uj the next document I offer an affidavit of Dr.
.inann. This do /eltz Document No. 7, jbchlbit 1. Hay
I oriefly explain this. Dr. .tnann was a collaborator
of Plchotka's, *n ^ his testimony. Is to the same effect.

Tho r.ext documents are affllavlts by former
fer.ale assistants In Weltz's aviation me Heal institute.
I offer them as Joltz Documents 6, Sxhlbit No.—

TSL: PPJISIDSiT: What exhibit number do you assign

7257


6 May - : 7-.r*.^-lc-2-Schwab- (Brown)

C/urt Mo. 2.

Yoltz Document 8?

DR. rflLLE: Eight Is Exhibit No. 14; Document No.

9 la Exhiit No. 15.

The next is 7oltz Document No. 10, an afflifcvlt
by Elizabeth For port. This will bo Voltz Exhibit 16.

Tho naxt locunont la Document No. 11, which will bo
Exhibit No. 17. I nay say a few wer is about thia locu-
mont; It la an affidavit by ono Frau Erna Hoffmann,
from hunlch, who was In charge of a Luftwaffo roat
con tor. She la not a .a*yan, nnl .'lvoa information reg¬
arding Prof, feltz's political attitude. Mrs. Hoffman
waa nrrai,;nol ooforo a people* a Court for unlortnlnln,-;
the iofon6lvo atren.th of the nation. Pr'-f. Voltz spoke
In her bahalf although he expose! himself personally
by so doing to roat political danger.

Tho next document la 7oltz No. 12, Exhibit NO. 18.
This is an offllavlt by a previous employee of tho
V 0 ltz institute, Mrs. Plmor. Tho purocao of that affi¬
davit la the following. Hro. PlPnar, in her boarding
house, hal male iofor.tlet utterances nnl hal sail that
It was madness to continue with the war. There was a
trial for high treason aralnat her. feltz first suc¬
ceeded in having the trial ta*e place before a Luft¬
waffe court. In the main proceeding he, hltself,
volunteered fror among the nudlonoo, and 8poke in her
behalf in such n way 08 to hive her declared not guilty.

The next document will be Veltz Dicumont No. 16.
This will to Exhibit Ho. 19. Thia la an affidavit of
Prof. Hclthuaen, of Hamburg, r e.-ardln~ Veltz* a scien¬
tific si. rni fienneo.

the las* iocu-.ent in ny collection, I submit


6 Hay -7- A- EX-16- *- Sctovab- (Brown)
Court So. I.


Teltr document Ho. 22. This becomes Exhibit No. 20.

This is an affidavit by Prof. Klrklin, tho chief of
the X-ray department of thj Mayo Clinic. Kirilin bore
discusses his acquaintance with welts, as veil as Volts
1 s professional reputation In .^merlca scientific cir¬
cles. The letter vas sent directly to no by prof. Kir¬
ilin. There is, to bo sure, no certificate of signature,
but since It was sent directly to mo on a form from
tho clinic, I have nc loubta as to Its authenticity.

I shovel this letter to tho Prosecutor vooV.s ago and
ha oal 1 .that he approval of It.Consequently, I Ion 1 t
expect any abjection from him.

MR. K.R3i: That la perfectly right, Your Honors,

I stipulated that I wouldn't object to the submission
of this. I merely want to state that I do not want to
create a precedent. I merely want to reserve the right
to object to the introduction of documents of this type
In the future.

THE PRESIDENT: Your stipulation will be without
prejudice.

DR. TILLS: MR. President, In conclusion of my case,
I might new put In the certificate of authenticity reg¬
arding tho Miloh record, which I hive received from
tho Sec rotary-Goner a! ... ^ ~~

IKS PRESIDENT: Did I understand Counsel to say that
the certifloate from tho Secretary-General Is now ready7

Did I understand Counsel to say that the certificate

«

from the Secretary-Genorol is now prepared?

DR. TILLS: Yes.

THE PRESIDE.:?: Counsel for tho Prosecution, examine
the certificate.

7H& .


8 Hay -x7i-^JC-l6-^3chwai>-(Brown)
Court No* 1


HA. H..ADY: (sota^ines certificate) The document
Is in order, Your Honor.

THi PRESIDENT: “ho document which Is W 0 ltt Document
li 0 . * la reooived before the Tribunal to be considered.

To save confusion, this doounont has boon nnrfcod
as -x hi bit 7. The Tribunal will take Judicial notloo of
It without its bolnjjosrkad an exhibit, but It la boforo
us In this case as Exhibit 7.

Does that dose Counsel's case?

DA. VILL£: Yes, that concludes my presentation.


5 hay 47--FjC-l?->0oll^xor (Int., Brown)

Court I

P2B5ID2UT: 2ic Tribunal now calls the coso against the dofei>-
d-Jt Brack.

25. 7SG£5Q£.a^h: Hr. Preside-t at tho beginning of the submission
of the evidence in the case cf Brack, I shell permit myself to submit
to you a short presentation, in ordor to illustrate tho point of
view freti which I Shall subuit cor evidence.

It is or intention in ordor to refute Counts 2 and 3 of tho
iadictuent, to call at once tho witnesses Hodcrich aai Pfaanuuellor,
and, then in order to rofuto all counts of the indietuoat, I should
like poruission of tho Tribunal to call tho defendant Brook hie self
.is a witness to tho wit.'.oss stand. During this submission of ovidonco
I snail subuit tho relevant documents.

Tho submission of tho ovldcnco by tho defendant Brack hiusolf
will includo: First, a short description of his lifo up to his
entry into political lifo; Soccndly, to Count L, consoiraoy; thirdly;
his -ttitudo towards the Jews, in tho preparation for tho cxtoroinatlon
of whou ho is olloged to huvo participated throutfi his proposals for
sterilisation in connection with his attitudo towards lc.tional
i»oci_lisu; fourthly, his ueuborship in tho SS, with which ho is
charged undor Count 4 of tho indietmont; fifthly, to a gonoral
survey of Brack*s activity in the Chancellory of tho Fuehror, con¬
sidering especially him attitudo towards tho quostion of proventivo
custody inmates, which represented a large part of his notivity. I
shall, furthermore, dca with sixthly, tho storiliration proposals,
r4 aftorvards tho connection of 3ruck with tho oxtoruinction plans
of Hlm.--.lor, which Was doalt with by tho Prosecution on tho Form
14-F-13, which was called genoeido by the Prosecution. *hon, sovonthly,
Z shall deal with his participation in the outhonasia prafiren, and
his attitude towards the euthanasia program. I ask tho permission
of tho Hi eh Tribunal to sutait tho evidence according to this plan.

7261


3 hay 47--7jG-17-2-Gall-ghor (int, Jr own)

Court I

IhS P=iSID2.'J: How counsel n^y proceed, using his evidonco accord¬
ing to the plan ho has outlined.

DR. 720&SCHIUHV: Thank Tou.

nS. ¥111 you kindly supply no with tho spoiling of the

anno of tho first witness, please.

B2. VBOZSGatsSHt Hr. President, with tho approval of tho High
Tribunal, I ask that the witness Eodcrich be called to tho witness
stand.

ZdZ PR26XDSR: Tho k u rshal will sunnon the witness hodorich.

iC*?i HiDEdICH, a witnosa, took tho stand and tostifiod no follows:

JUDGE SI3RIEG: *x.o witness will miso his ri.-£t hand end ropeat
this oath of tor :iOi

I swear by God, the almighty and Onnisciont, th..t I will spook
tho puro truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(The witnoos repoatod tho oath)

JUDGE S2BRIKG: You auy bo sontod.

3T DR. TROZSCauHHx

^ Vitnoss, givo uo your porsonal data.

a Hy naio is lari Eoinz Hoderich. Born on 29 Octobor 1902 in
Vucsiodel, upper Franconia, as a son of a Socondary School Profoosor
Hodorich thoro.

Q Would you plooso doscribo your gonoral caroor to tho TribunaLt-

A I attondod the olamontury school at Vunsiodol. I thon ontorod

tho socondury school for u aaubor of years. Then for oovcral years

I followed a proctlccl profession in industry, and also worked in

various building installations. In tho year 1923 I wont to Munich

as a student, whero 1 studied at the University. In 1925 I was grudi>-

ctod at tfurnoorg at the Obcrrealschulo. I thon wont to i.unich as a

student to the Technischc Eochschulo and tho University, and frou thore
I went to technical hi,h school at Doatig. Ir. tho year of 1931 1 node
iy examination as a Diplcca amgineor. In the year 1932, to get

7202


8 May 47-*-?Jo- 17 - 3 -Gall a^er (3rowr.)
Court Ho. I


acquaint ad .ltd th. hl.hor .tut. cdnlnl.tr.tion, I «. arployod - 1 th
the Eelch Hallway Directorate at Hurnbers.

q Witness, would you please speak a little slowor.

A Yes.

q Will you proceed!

A Tho alii of ny education wae c university career.
q. But you later bocauo involved in politics. Vhat vne your
political caroerl

* I joined the USD-? on 29 October for the firot tiuo. -fter the
north on the poldhorrnhullo, la which I participated, I loft tho HSDaT.

in Doc tub or of 1932 X Joined tho SSDrf for tho ..cond tlno. In tho
year of 1933 X -a. a no.her of tho loadOMhip of tho demon Student

Lootfio. In tho your of 1934 I -ent to Roleh.ldtor Bouhlpr.

d won. before you got to the nolch.loltor Douhlor, ho- did you
bococo acquainted with tale!

A O. tho ro.ult of a nunbor of contro-oralo., I loft tho loodor-
.hlp of tho Oomon Student League, but In aprll 1934 Bouhlor nohod no
to attend a conference In Berlin, and at tho no. tlno node tho unroot-
ion to uc to enter into his sphoro of activity.

d -hat -ore you to do thoroJ -hat -a. your took to bo thoroJ
. at that tlno ho -a. tho Pro.ldont of tho Party Cam.lo.lon for
tho Protection of national Soclall.tlo Literature, and ho -anted .one
collaborator, on that taok. I had boon roccuumdod to hit. by acquaint¬
ance. of hi.. I only knew bin .lightly, a. a rcult of ny oon-or.atlon

- 1 th bln, and after having told hlu about ny via.., and rftor ho had
told hln hi. attitude, and hi. opinion.. I decided to accept hi. offer.

On tho 1 Hoy 1934 I then enter*! hi. offlco in tanlch.

d Witness, would you quit, briefly do.crlbo to tho 'tribunal the

work of thl. emulation that you arc .peaking of. bocautO It -ill bo

of souo importance - 1 th regard to -hat you -111 later to.tlfy toT

» D,. task of thl. literature Cmnl.slon -a. tho clorn.ing of
politico! literature frm tho phontnona that appeared at that tlno.

During every politick revolution, during every political reorganisation,


8 W-A-7jo-l7-4-Gcll3^:ar (3rown)

Court I

cs it happened in the year 1933, thoao in power wore followed by
c flood of Kariatic literature, and atepa had to be taken to conbat
thia. One could today uae the technical expreeaion "hyper denazi¬
fication." Thin taek vta deliberately entni8ted to Kr. 3ouhler,
bocouae for thia taak, a toak of political hygiene ono noedod on
agency which woa entirely independent of politlc-1 literaturo. Mr.
Souhlor had certain qualification* that equipped hlii for thia tusk.
Ny activity waa a political organlrational one, and I vna to croato
tho nocevaary prorequiaitea for tho carrying out of that work.


3 Iiy-A-r 3-13-1-nayncs (Ir.t. ?-ttlL.t)

Court Ho. I, Case Ho. 1.

Q Uitness, what wore the positions that you hold in 3ouhlcr's

office?

A At first I was his business manager. Afterwards I develop¬
ed fx tho coaaission, which contained a number of persons, a new office
which I headed. Under ay leadership it became a Reichshauptant a lit¬
tle later. *hon in the year 1937 I left tho Reich Ministry of Propa¬
ganda, 1*. Bouhior asked =c to cooperate somowhit closer with his entire
work. 'Tithin tho sphere of the Fuehrer's Chancellery, the chief of
which’ho was, ho created a cultural political department.

Cl Joro you tho hoad of that department?

A Yu9j this department was later enlarged and was then sub¬
ordinated to EJO.

q At tire progreseod, did you noro or loss represent Touhlor

entirely?

A In tho course of all tho devuiopaonts, Bophlor offorod
his representation to mo, and I was to be ti» chiof of staff. This
intention, howovor, never a-turiolirud boe-uao of cort’in political
duvolopoints. In tho yoar 19U0 Bouhlor had received tho order from
Hitler to ru-organizo the oducatior.nl litorcturo. Tho praotioal ox-
ocutior. of that work wns trarsforred to m,

Q You Just used tho oxpression "chief of staff". In tho
course of tho evidence, thin word "chief of staff" will play n certain
rolo. Hill you please explain to tho Tribunal what at that time in
Genanny was understood by "chiof-of staff"?

A Under "chief of staff" oro understands tho position within
an agoncy which has to coordinate the organizational r.ork of tho various
departments within that agency. In tho Party structure,"one coi*d com-
• pare tint position with a ministerial director in a ministry. It is a
central post for administrative tasks. As for who is in charge
political ratters, it is always tho head cf cv.ry individual depart¬
ment, but never the chief of staff.

q nhat were the tasks of your offico within tin Chancellory


8 !',-y-A-l 3-13-2-Haynes (Int. Rf*lor)
Court Ko. I, Case No. 1.


of tho Fuehrer?

A I had to co-ordinate the activities of Mr. Bouhlur, which
were very diverse in nature; on the one hand the Chancellory of tr.o
Fuehrer, on the other hand tho activities connected with literature.

In addition to such co-ordination teste, there were individual tasks
Khich referred to applications which were sent to Hitler, coninp from
tta fiolds of science, high schools, publications, etc. I may, for in¬
stance, mention tha troataont of tho question of tha Frobenius Institute
or, for instance, tho p^st Walter von 1 bio. sought tho protection
of Hitler boenuso he felt hirsolf op roseud by Rosenborg. Ho rucoivod
this protection.

Q What ms his naso?

A Walter 7on Vblo.

Q Thank you.

A I had to dual with a number of such quostioas within my
department.

Q Witness, did you work temporarily at thu Reich Ministry
of Propaganda?

A I pointod out a littlo earlier that in tho yoar of 1?37 I
was working in tho Reich Jiinistry of Propaganda.

q Would you ploaso bo vory brief?

A Yes. Evun at the beginning of his activity in thJ field
of literature, itr. Bouhlur had a great do-1 of difficulty with rog^rd
to Dr. Goobbcls, and Ur. Rosonborg at tho Party publishing houoo. As
a result of internal events, Dr. Ooobbuls decided in the yoar IV37 to
employ a now staff in his liter-turo doprxtaont, and ho approachod Hr.
Bouhlor regarding no in that natter. )*r. Bouhlur at tjftt tine was in¬
terested in arriving at sono fire decision with reference to tho diffi¬
culties c.s th-y prevailed with "x. Rosenborg.

q And thjr. you again rcro eliminated fnn that department?

A Yes. In the year 1938 I left this ninistry beer use of dif¬
ferences which I had with the linistcr■

7266


8 Jloy-A-' 3-18-3-Hayna s (Infc. Raalor)
Court No. I, Cose No. 1.


Q Witness, free your description of your career and your
activity so far, we can conclwio toot you repeatedly came into contact
Tdth tho forcer Roichsleitor Eouhlor. You know that Reichslcitor
Bouhlor was alono the responsible person to execute euthanasia, and I
aa of the opinion that if Bouhler wero wtill living, Bouhler would bo
aittins in tho dock and net Brack. That is ay opinion and not yours.

I B-y Maim, however, that considering tho cloao relationship which
is alleged to have existed between Brack and Souhler, this similarity
in attitudes nay have cceac to light in Brack's activities, and for
that reason, I should like to put a number of questions to you which
dool with tho personality of Bouhler, in order for th> Tribunal to kne*
what personality they are conoornod with in considering the outhonnsia
program.

)R, HARDY: May it ploaso Your Honor, I request that tho Du-
fonso Counsel be requested to quostion this witness. Ho has a canploto
sot of notes boforo hia. He is reading from tho notes, ord in addition
tho question is a rosumo on tho part of Defense Counsel. Tho Tribunal
should bo in to rooted in Iw-ring tho witness testify, not in a logoi
argument hero .and a sot of noto3 up thoro. I think wo should put it
or. a more legal piano than it is on rip.ht now,

THE RESIDENT: Counsel, tho Tribunal will be erateful if
you will lead this witnoss to testimony in connection with tho issues
boforo tho Tritwrcl.

DR. FFCESCKSttNN: I only doalt with that question in order
to give thj Tribunal an opportunity to have a picture of the character
of those two personalities which aro going to bo repoatodly nontionod.
BY DR. PRCESCfflttMKi

Q TTitness, could you give us some statement about the
Fuehrer's Chancellery, about tho significarco of tho Fuehrer's Chan¬
cellery, and about the extent of your activity? Y.ould you please do

that as briefly as possible?

A Lot mo at first spo-k .about tho significance cf tho

7267


3 l'ry-A-: 3-lfWt-Hayncs (Ini. Hnjilor)
Court Ko. I, Case f.’o. 1.


Fuehrer's chancellery. Hr. Bouhlor w s tho business nnns;;or of tho
IEDAF at first, and since in tho yoar 1933 this activity was trana-
f. rrcd to !lr. Schwarz, he h_cax:o unonployod. When Hess assigned him
to tho position of the arcsidoncy of this Cceznittoe for t Yc Protection
f Lit-miuro, wo also find that Hitler had arrived at tl» decision to
r.-orgnniso his personal affairs. Previously Hoss had had char go of
then. Simultaneously with tho nppointoont of Hess as tho Fuehrer's de¬
puty, the situation had changed, and Hitior oxprossed tho wi3h to sop-
rrato personal ratters fron P*rty loadorship. Within tho sphoro of
Hess' activity. Hitler's personal natters wora dealt with by Albert
Boraann. Hitior, however, did. not liko Albert Bom.ann, .and when !io
was looking for * now person to take ovor tho personal mattors, ho
thought of ir. 3ouhlor; raid that is how Bouhlor camo to Berlin at tho
urid of 1931., in ord r to create a new offico to taka care of Hitler's
personal affairs, with tho task —

THT. :RESIDENT: Ccunsol, T und-rstaod that ycu dosirod thin .
witness to give a briuf characterization ,f Bouhlor. If ho will pro¬
ceed to that subject and in a few words give a otatonicr.t on Bouhlor,
tho Tribunal would bo glad to hoar it.

1 Witness, I r.sk you to bo rx briof as possible. What was
your personal .attitude toward Bouhlcr? Did you onjoy his special con¬
fidence? Did you receive an insight into his pjrsonal lifo?

A Thoi’u duVolcpod very soon a spocial dogroc “f confidonco
between us. Ho gave no rather o.rtonsivo insight into his porsmal
thinking. Ho asked rau to work closely with him, not only r.lthin our
official work, but also personally. He often invited mo to join hie
fasiily, end the relationship was filled with confidonco.

.1 Did Bcuhlcr also draw y u into his confidonco with regard
to his opinion of his associates?

A i'os, Yr. Bouhler ften took the opportunity tc discv3s his
associates with me. At ore tiiao :» asked e to’ 3ubnit d-ta an the
qualifications uf his assoemt-s, -r.d for this reason I got in touch

with a well-krcnn profession graphologist in Berlin.

7260


8 hay 47-a-?J0-19-l-^r-ingcr (Int., Hauler)
Court I


^ Vnat was tko iaoressicn you gainod of Houhlor?

* In connection with this question, I nay asauro you that I an
perhaps the only person who is in a position to spook about doubler's
personality, who is in a position to give scuo sort of cctrprchoa8ivo
inf emotion about his inner attitude to life. For ton yours I huvo
boon in close connection with bin and I au suro that there is no
quostion concerning his lifo that I did not have to discuss with hla
in dotail, because litor^turo oxtonds throughout ull shporos of lifo.
bo startod freu this. I Bay say that ».r. Houblur was a quiot uon, a
aun with porsonul roticouco, a nan of clean thinking, hio ucsital
attitudo was gonerous, uot at ull do,;uatic. he v_s n uon tint is
generally callod a oon of libera tninklng. Ac difforonccs, which
resated freu different choructor pocaaritios of hi* ooad not bo
uonc;od by hin oaflily. Ho did not h».ve sufficient courugo, ho Wasn't
detominod oaough.

Q bhoa douhlor exorcised bin activity a* tho hond of tno Chano-
Uor 7 of tho Fuchror, did ho have any difficatlo*T boro diffioatioo
c.iusod by othor porflonfl in dlfforont ugonciofl?

a Bouhlcr' s work hod difficatio« in so fur us hio enuignuont
was novor dourly liuitod and afl a rc«ult he inuodiatoly hod diffica-
tiofl with the Rolch Choacollory, which in tho uoantiuc hud boon work¬
ing on a nuubor of tuflk« for Hitler. In addition u strong oontruveroy
onfluod with tho «tuff of tho Fuehrer «• deputy situation, howovor, w u o
uitigatod vhon Hess «ui tho chief of hitler's staff boc.v.co of Hooo's
persona quulitiea. bhen, however, ut a later date, i.artln i.oru..nn
took over the leadership of the party chancellory, tho ensuing flifferon-
ccs of opinion could not be pruvontod.

DP. FEOSSCHi.ai'V: hr. President, in this connection I ah (mid liko
to subuit Doc uncut So. 14 free -y Document Hook, which io to be found
on pages 36 to 38, as Exhibit So. 1. I shall have it .u-mdod to the
Secretary Genera. Skis is an extract f rcxi tho Hutionnl-Sociaietic


Ioar 3ook of 1942.


7269


8 h aj 47-2»-7jC-19-S-an;icgcr (Int., Hauler)
Court I


Jrcc this Tear Bock, I shall confine Byself to reading the two
paragraphs which deal with this field of the Fuehrers chancollery
and work of tho so-called party c h ancellory. I shall start rouding
frca Document No. 14, this paragraph:

■ The Chancellery of the Fuehrer has to secure the ianediate
contact of the Fuehrer with tho party in all questions subuittcd to
the Fuehrer personally. Thoro aro hardly any sorrowc and troubles
which arc not subuittcd to the Fuehrer in boundless confidonco in
his holp. The dealing with pious for raaission or suspension of
sentences has developed to a particularly extonsivo field of acti¬
vity."

I shall now read a short pur-graoh regarding tho chancellory
of tho party and I qucto;

■ as f rcxi 12 Kuy 1941 tho Fuohror has fully rcouiiod tho por-
sonal loadorship of the party; the agency douling with the cS f-iro
of tho lo^dor of the NSDiP is ncaod chancellory of the party; its
rosponsiblo loader is Rolchsloitor Kurtin Borcuan.

"all throads of tho party work convorgo in tho chancellory of
tho party. Horo all internal plans and suggestions concerning tho
party, as woll as all vital questions concorning tho oxistonco of
tho Ooraan nation and lying within tho scopo of tho party, aro h*Dd-
lod for tho Fuohror. Frcu here diroctivos aro givon for tho whole
work of tho party oither by tho Fuohror hi.isolf or by hio ordor. In
this way, tho unity, hoaogenocity and fighting powor of tho iiSDoP
as boaror of tho National Socialist idoolo.y is #?icrantood. ■

^ Witnoss, I shall now continuo with your oxauinction. You
have alroudy spoken of the difficulties which Bouhlor hod *o fuco
as a result of taking over tho Chancellory or tho Fuohror, but
albert Bo moan, tho brother of kartin Boruunn, was his oido, was
ho not? Didn't that create a strongar connocticn with tho two
agencies? Why not?

7270


8 y 47-a-?jC-19-3-*»mia.-cr (Int., Hoaxer)

Court I

* h'o, t—ere was an independent onnity betwooa the two brother*
for f_y:ily ro_soaa. kurtin Boxuonn had cone frau tfco private chan¬
cellory ^nd hud then bee cue the adjutant of Hitler. He was a very
ordinary personality without ~ny particular distinction. Ho thon
iud began to r.avu dif:icultie« with his brother, uhcro was no
connection possiblo as a result of the connection of those two
brothers.

q Witness, in this trial, as well us in all the othor trials
which aro dealt with by the HUltory Tribunals, ono porson plays an
ehtraordin-ry part and his n^io was Hlii.lor. What was Bouhlor'o
relationship to Hinnler?

a Tho relationship of hr. Bouhlor to Hlnulor was cool, rosorvod
distant. 30*11.107 on tho baois of his norson.il concept was in contrast
to tho ldeoloar us it v_s roprosoated by Hliiulcr. Ho hold no func¬
tions of any practical naturo within tho SS. His usuborshlp to tho
SS w..s f.oroly foruol.

$ Do you Know that frcu your own knowlodgo?

a Too. I do Know that frou ay own knowlod£ 0 , bocauoo I re¬
peatedly had discussions of questions with Mr. Bouhlor on nunorouo
occasions; allocutions woro u^do by the SS and our at tit'do had to
bo dofinod.

Q Could you civ® us u brief char xter study of Hiuilor's
porsorvalt; 7

a Hn.t is not quite possible for no, becauso I had no personal
relationship to Hiiuiler aid I tuvrofore tci in no position to charac¬
ter! ro this person.

^ -hvt Can you s^ about 3r.xk's pcrsonnlityT Do you knew
3rack| How lone have you known hint

a I have known Brnck for a poriod of 12 yoars. Ho is tho
oldost colleague cf Bouhlor. Ho V..8 alroody activo in Bouhlcr's
offico when 3ouhler w^s still in Kunich. kr. Bouhlor, when Brack ..


8 luiy 47-^r-?j0“19-4—Aiulagc-r (lat., Heeler)

Cotirt I

*“ assigned to Oorlln, took hit. oloos n, hi. chlof of St off. drank

>*“ the dlfflcultlo. -Men I hooo olrooiy nontionod.

1 Do you uoji 3ouhlor'e difficulties?

a Yes, the Bouhlor-Boraaan, difficulties, the Bouhlcx^Einuler
difficulties, and so forth, -hoe trying to deal with those difficul¬
ties, Brack did not always find support which would hovo boon noco-
ssary frea kr. Souhlor, that is by reason of the connections of
Bouhlcr which I h_vo picturod.

q What was BraCAo attitudo toward his work?

a flocauso of those difficulties, Brack w^s roliovod of his po¬
sition us Chief of Staff. Saoo of tho reasons for that can bo found
in his personality.

4 How?

a I knew Brock as an opon-cindod uan, who was always roudy to
help. Ho w^s far removed free any fanutlcisu intoloranco or any
narrowness of ho. rt but he luckod a purposeful lluitation to his
coacroto fiold of work. Ho locked political consequential thinking
rxd in cy opinion thoso two doficloacios in tho nan, nro tho rouson
for his present uisfortuno.

^ Tou £..Tu us this picturo I assuuo on the basis of your
acquaintoneoship for twelve yours?

a Yes. I h .vo already s-id I h..vo known Brock for 1A yoars.
i hovo ofton visited his faally; I know his parents; I 2 mow his ois-
tors; ~nd tills qualifies no to give this Judgment frou hero.

^ Tou did work with Br..ck in tho Chancellory of tho Tuohror?
you in a position to toll the Tribunal sene thing about Brack's
fiold of work as briefly as possiolo?

a After tho applications for pardons, and so forth, had been
t-kon away freu Brack's fiold of work and were dealt with as an
i -Cpenicr.t office and oftor ao was roliovod of his function as

'-lief of Staff, kr. 3oualcr trunsf transferred to hiu tho r.c—called

7272


8 Huy 47-«-?jC-19-5-«rcir--:cr (Int., H a u ler)

Court I

Departaont 2 of the Cnaaccllery. Tho department was crllod "Political
Complaints." Xhc tasks of that offico wore not quite easily doscribcd
too haruonious, because there Was on abundance of quoctions and appli¬
cations directed to Hitler which arrived at this offico. Thoro was a
huge nunbor of cocplaints. This is why it is difficult to explain
this field of work frou ay own knowlodgo. I can illustrcto the con¬
dition there, becauso I was present whilst 3ouhlcr was sorting the
nail wfcon Hltlor hissolf ontorod the roai unnoticed.


7273


-t _r - ving locked at 11 this ..-ark he sid *'I know that there nay
-- nuocrcus cnoxscua purposeless applications and letters by people who
jist grar.lc cr i_nour.ee -jjeng that heap of aril, but I txiink that in
cn>- c-'-Sc cr another questions nay ccae up whore the persons concerned
r*- c 'llin g for help, where valid situaticr.s cf uaergency exist, ;nd I
darr.d that th-se people be helped. Th:e, cf course, gets c. ver;
thorough lerlir.g with the correspondence necessary, he often had nr.il
an- it ccr.stitutcu applications fer pardons nd releases fror. ccnccntra-
-icn coups, ihere were applications regarding racial questions regarding
aiti^'ticr. in dealing with the Jewish question. Ihere were coaplains
-; ' ppliccticns with rofwrencc to the hereditary laws for the prevention
of h-roJitar; diseases.

"• Did ; cu ever discuss certain difficulties with the defendant
5rtc #: vhicii he experienced when decline with these nutters in connection
with r. third person who pl.-^od - public part r t that tine? 1 ru new
p rticulorl; referring to I^rtin Bcrcann, whoc ;cu Just ncnticned, and 1
rleo referrin: to Obergruppcnfuchrcr Heydrich.

... In Uth eases because cf a nusier of ref eons groat controversy
-nsu.d, n’ th t for different re-aens. In the case of Heydrich I know
th t Heydrich wanted the oiiainntion of Brack free Bouhlur's office,
b-cause he did not grew with the attitude of thu dufenJent.

't. ‘.hat wr.s that attitude?

... In the case of Heydrich t is wos r-ostly concerned with
r vl'.ints regarding the work cf the Gestrpe nd questions regarding the
r-lusc frt. ccncentreticr. croaps. 1 r—uocfcer on the basis of report
which I received frea- 3cuhler, because ho r-« r.r«'U'-.rtno*<i to .itAnur.s all
th-.su b sic.-l questicno *.ith no, thtt Heydrich had doa-nded th. t he
Should 3op“-T* te r - l* - *v- Vr Brack, because ho would have to accuse
-r. Brack cf a grt\e breach of orrfidHnoc. I dm»«t k. aw t..io incident
in its details. I cnly knew the" basic attitude of ~r. Br ck towards
- t inci-'cat. Fer th t reason I know ta t we were here ccnccmod lith
r eh of a nfidencc r Heydrich called it reg-rding the auostions of
-•-crecy r SD fii-s concerning defen-.nt cf tile 5D.


8 ^y*.-G3S-23-2^1cy (Verier)

Court 3a. 1.

•„ Do I ur.d erst end you correctly, witness, it scans to be thrt
5r*ck had given a defendant, cn accused cf the SD, insight into these
d-cements in order tc enable hie tc defend himself?

Yes, thrt is correct. Sene person h-d been charged \<ith scao-
V ine and Br*cl-: enabled thr t parser, to yin insight into the documents.

Q. Thrt is sufficient. Th~nk jcu. How about the affair with
r m-nn, why did he quarrel with Beroann?

The difficulties with Beraann lie somewhere else. Theso
tifficultica find their reasons in the ccntrcvcrsy between Ilr. Bouhlcr
•nd Ur. Beroann. The enmity of -.r. Boznran tc Brack, which he only
ccnaiderod one point rf opposition because hia dooirea were extended
through tho entire field cf work cf Bouhlcr. Froca 3cmann wo always
received cccplrints that tho attitude of department two too wr.s net rigid
ugh in its ideological eutlcck according tc Bemnnn's ideas. Ho
theujit that this rttitivJo r a tco adld. He wanted that a change bo
effected by r. D< uhler. Bomonn auccc-dei in elim i n ating Bouhlcr'o
right f reporting U Hitler clout questions cf relor.so from concen¬
tration cr. -ps, * nd a forth. This, of ccurac, h-.d ns its result c
rdicrliceti.cn, tee-use naturally the nn^r ir. which those matters were
reported to Hitler had its effect in the decision that Hitler re. ched.

Dn. FuC:£ CH«-J.Ti: is. Freaident, 1 cnly put those questions
: ec-uso t;i- r Ictionship between ii'rtin Be recur. end Beuhlor and Brack
n. h .uhler ill piny a considerable part later cn. 1 ask you to excuse
•v taking up sc ouch time cf the Tribunal.


7275


3 ^*.;.--A-C-^5-2i-l-Ccok (Int. Rc=Itr)

Court 'io. i.

'Si. H.-HDI: Enough tine has bc^n t?kcn up with this quezsticn,
exactly one hour, end I fail tc sec the ix.teridity of the testimony
thus far. I ern't see the connection, I can't understand the testimony.
*fter the witness is through testifying the Prosecution nay well request
cn affidavit or sccc thing so thet »e con hove e clarification of the
t-stimeny. The issues against Brack arc very ainplc, the connection
between Brack .nd Buehler arc quit,, sicrlc. ‘his witness on the strnd
has testified he perhaps knews rxrc about the activities of Brock than
an;’ car. alive end I think we can got the fi cts cf this ease ouieMy
rathor than :cir,g c r.und imbin Heed's bra ir. this xaanner.

TH* PloSIDSiT: Does counsel «xp*.ct to continue trith the
exmination of this witness in the neminrv

Dh. nXilC‘2iCr. Presiccnt, I have concluded two-thirds cf
the cxeciiu-.ticn of the witness Hederich. hat 1 want to hear now refers
essentially to euthanasia.

TH- XkESlDStt: If the witness will testify tc son* facts rele¬
vant tc the issueo before tho Tribunal >o will hear hia .".gain in the
_cming, but 1 v.c ld surest in the acuiwhile that :cu talk the natter
ever with the witness end instruct hin to answer to questions directly
and rathor cere briefly and give the frets which will be of assistance
to tho Tribunal*

Tho Tribunal will now recess until nine-thirty tomorrow .aoming.

Tho ricunrl will axet the Corraittoo.

(The Tribunal rdjeurned at 15:27 hours.)


9 li-7 MMS.-L-l-i St r(Frank)
Cjurt :;j. i


Official Ti^nscrint of tho African Uilit-ry
I rib arc 1 in the aatt-r of the United States
3f lu-xric'. -against Karl Brandt, -t al,
deferriants, sitting at .\urnlxrg, Arseny,

.r. 9 Ifcy 1947, 0530, Justice 3oals 'residing.


Tnd 'IvRSKAL: P.rs3-.s in the c^srt r; a *ill pie?.a. find thoir
seats.

The Honorable, the Judges of iiilitcry Tribunal I.

liilitnry Tribunal I is no* in session. Cod save the United St?.tee
f /unerica and this b-norrtle Tribunal.

Thvr<- will bo order in tho c.urtrocca.

THIS PRES1DXT: &•. Unralrl, y -u ascertain if the defendants
arc -11 presort n c-»urt.

THE lARSJLvL: Hay It please y or ii n r, all defendants aro present
in the Cwiirt.

THE PRiSIEal'JT: Tho Secret. ry-Gcncrr.l nill n*te f r the record tho
prvSo:.co of all tho dofvariants in c art.

.Counsol any proceed.

K«RL HSWUCH 1EDJJCK - Ruocaid
DIRECT fck«JfI!l.7I0N (Continued)

BY eR. FR0ESCHlWa;(C3Ui»a f r the Dcfon ant 3r .ck):

-.itneso, ai,ht I rooind you first of -llth't you .are still
urc\r ath. ist-ray / u had bc.n speftkin,. ?.b ut tho Defendant Brack's
■.ctlvities in Don-rt-.-r.t 2 of the Fuehrer's Chancellory. I want to
nut tills question to y u. Did Brack in t-.is iffice, Depart; nt 2
that is, have “utr.wri.ty t sake d-ciaicns n his *n?


'JOm

I.is ' th. rity t nkv ’.c si an:, i'± Ruichsloiter Bauhler


better. E uhler and Brack with regard
knew -.uhler's attitude regarding tho


7277,


9 Ilay /.7-::-Sr.-l-l-F s' r (Fr.ri)
C-urt No. 1


tr r.tr*nt jf tasks assigned t- him, Bouhler?

... The r_l-'.ti ‘ '.ship wu such tixit Brack had to kn.w Bauhlor's

• -ttitudo recording this sphere A influence A his.

. i ?Ur ay --;u had already talked nbrut tlx fact that B.uhlor's

• ttitu's os C;-i«f >t thb Chancellory .. boon = t.lerant -.no, is

that c ir-ct?

■

a. Yea,

R-Vv you boon able t- make sun. that Brack's attitude regard¬
ing tne tr 't. *>nt f t sks which op prose hod hia, particularly
rufarding tho rvlease A concuntr ti n canp inactes and applications
c ning fr xx v rious half-Jewish persons, was t lurant?

... ..a far *o I h' d pp-rtunitiea tj Lari f Brick's activities,

I saw then -o being t^l-rant and r.er.Lr us.

f. Av\-1her ctxisti n. The Defend at Brack during his interrogation
ir.a so.'ken ab ut .a a -called ."da. scar plan ntich in 1940 cano up
f r discussion in the Chance 11;ry f the Ku-hrer nndw's do-It
with there. La y u have ary knowledge .f r. iWoscar Plan?

<» •* ? •

Q. iVt do y u kj. w abuut t? Viet was the -lia f that *lan?

It ias t c Mu f that-plan to dofol pu and submit suggestl -no
regarding ti.o solution f the prjblm of halloas Jews which was to
be 3 Wed by creating a new rdcr in our p« which w.uld glvo thorn
state svstun ;f their wn. This wac d no frxi the p int A view
-duptud b Gerern policy -f th* tin., maoly, with conaid-ration
rth sat vat i r. in Pal 5 tine and the «r-b quest! n.

C.^v ;I %V lust s ken .t at the -ituati n in Eur =pe —I think that
auet b- adstakt, yeu -aern tfv siturti n in the a rl!? -‘r.. s y.ur
st-te.xnt oining a*, the Jews Living in E-ir-pc at tho tins?

.... In comwcti ndth tl» i'-dascar Plan, I'd hoard at the tiro that
t, p rsilaUty exist..’ Ur.t tb. war w aid e x to an end, and
c rre-3 adlnr.ly ti. t suggestion had b.en -.ado t Great Britain, and
ir c rr.-cti r. ivv r l plans of different nature h’d been-dovd. -d


7278


9 Ihy 47-tf-Sf-l-3-F jt r(Frrnk)
c-'a-t ns. i

• n ir. this csnr.ectir: I c?:x -:r ss t. _ prbbleos c ntcinoc in tin.

; '-.'.scar plan. BnuhUr in hie sphere f ..ark hrd it ic'lt vith or
cl.-r.lt with it htaoolf.

.. T.is '.-.'r. ?3C'.r Finn, die’ that Lave cr. cr.ti-JeWish tendency?

.. for u I na able t sponk n thu strength of x:y «r. kn w-

L > .-or.., r . It was njr inpressi >n t;.-t this ms m effort, o
I«d sr.it! ftt thj b. £w± .3 , t- eolw. t e ,<r bleu A h ncless J..wa
by -urns f ci\.-tins r. apodal state.

r„ This special st-U, was that to cr-atu n h , 0 f rtho J-.«s on
tho Island of :hdng=sc.ar? Is l!rt c .met?

I..S.

DR. FROdSCHEL Vr. Fivsi'cnt, ..y I have y or xraiool,n J o thiu
c nnwctioo t) qu t.. ft* .jy d-curaent book. Volusia t. <. 2 , pnj.c 3« 1
nii r«f..rrLnc t i ex . nt KO 27, and it it Exhibit NS. 2 , "hicl: I
" aid like t ffer t the Tribur. 1 t this pint. It ncrcly c ntrj.no—
!K. K'.H)Y: The r socati n hr.o n t y t rocoived D.eurent B ok No.

2 f tho Dofondnnt Br-ck.

THE PRESH) Tribinal h-a n t rocoivod tho v'iur,e either,

DR. FRDiSOEDJtt:: rrvsiduafc, .-any I ronnrii in this c nnocti n

tl t ny »’ Ciun::t ks Ir.vo boon teir’cd t th. 3ecrot-ry*-Gon..r“.ltri
ffice three >r i ur "vete rgj, and th“t, tf.erof re, 1 h-d the riyht
t ux.’x ct t.r.t t.xso d cu:*nt b >ko * uld bo ct tho dicp cnl A tho
Tribunal r.t the tine. Only the .opor.dix 3 c uld bo c r.nlotod ’.urine
recent Sya because r.u.b.r f uxhibitis war- c.ntnir.v! therein which
1 iayaelf only njciov. ’ in r»-cont days. I need n.t r ad tho docunont
I r ferrod t , 1 1 .xr.ly ;f-ring it t the Tribunal dth tho roquost

tl: t y u trJee ju icir.l n tico -f it.

THL Pr_lSJDE T: ill c unsol : ~in ref. r t tit i cx-.-nt nuaber
in his b-?k.

DF.. readme:It is D cu . r.t S . 27, in the 2r.’ v lino i ny
c ynt fc k, ’ it is n jr-go 3. I’ • ’-7 - ..'---ir..-, uxtrr.cts ft*

trx tncycl :utiia ~nd it S.-is iith the psych l.'giccl f-etd f


7279


y - - -- st r(Frink;

C urfc S '. 1


It-ASEr - c:r «

t:.: EESIDET: nit exhibit nu=fc_r *.» y u assign t: this U cunurit?

D . Pa^SSCffiaffd: Exhibit 2, or. President.

HR. K.FDY: ii y it pltr.se y>ur K -n,r, ti.e Secret- ry-Go:xral his
.t .t -jy c’is. js-l a copy of Ddcutfmt B ok No. 2, and if defenso
ounsolcnros to introduce it non, the pr?socuti:>n Mill agree. H-.i-
uv.r, I fcr.vo -n bjtcti n to the- d cu-e.t in as nuch .a the c'.'cu . r.t
ia c nceinine tho pr -poaci plan t sene’ the so-c*Lled h odors
Jens ti .. ag; scar, -and this Tribunal is r. t .V lin. with mttura
f ttvt it tiro. It rs t th-. t ejection that tho d cu.axr.t ia

i/. v.tv.rial and I b ^ ct t its -'.ur.i88i.in in evidence.

B JTISSID. t la the f t. is • cunont, o unsol?

DR.-re.- jC’ r. Pr.silent, nthe c ur.e f ti* ocn.nia-.ti a
f t,x Dofen ant 3r*ck I shill oal with the circuaatnnces in detail
why sr ck particularly, aid hie c -LL'bjmt re, turned tbjir
thought a up ;n the Ieimd ,f ifcdagr.acar. Tho bjoctl n night bo
raised that t t lai n’ was a unoc r. deal that tho plan of Bottling

4

r. c 1 ' bo c ns Herod Just u cruol is thoir otructi
the oxtoraianti »n f the Jews, and in rl«r t holp this High
IVibun'l, which, 1 asarno, f c ursc, fee full kn *»io C& f tho jo
ttoro, it sh.jul’ a Is r.v*o d cuxnt ry basis t docido u~>n,
km tho liberty »f aubaitting tit d.c amt. That wna
all I was a Lain, at thr u,h it.

TiS PRESIDE: !: D-fer. nt br ck io directly ci- rged by the indict-
-afc with Cvrt in specific ffona~r. Tj*. Tribur. 1 is in >1 ubt ns to
the r b-ative v*lue in c nrxeti n.ithcny aich ir f -s 7 u .amti nod
-r lx a r in up :: the issues ir. this c-iso, in s - f r as gpfenlant Brack
isc no-rned.

DR. FROrSC-i—..:.: Do for. - r.t Br ek wishes to doll with tho allogati n
f the >r recuti^t th- t he bad lx on hostile t> tho Jens an! that

. t rtici; to. in tho plans f the oxtorainati n .1 tee Jews,

7260 .


9 -y 47-21-S5f-l-5- F--stwr(Frank)

C art Hi. i


-rt wants to T 7/e th t his -ttitu^ irs .lir-ctly -pp;site tD this
Iw hrs --Lays drno everything -issiblo in rdor t> c.untomct
. pinna -r J wish cxtomimtl m that he had to rC -f. 7.. t is,

f c ur.-, L.- r assn why this Madagascar plan, >f which tho riofen-
‘•"xt Jr. a s ker. during his irtorr jgr.ti r., is c insidered to bo
rol.vr nt by 20 ,

T5C .HaSIDSl.T: Tho Tribunal is f tho >ini n that tho rr-.tt-p-

t Uaat at tills tiro — is entirely with ut any rrob-.tivo vnluo

in c nnecti-n with tho issue ixf;r- tJ is Tribun* 1. Tho bjection will
be sustained irith lo rm ti ro- ff v r tho d'cuacnt Inter. »s tho
evidence dovcicnes it ary bo do to rad nod that the letter tre s no
■r b tivo value, but t this tiro the >bjucti n is aast-inod.

The d-JCtnont will n o bo daittod.

BT DR. FRCBSCK

Q. ''itnens, wiion and h « did y u le:rn A the euthanasia nuasuros
adopted in Gcmony?

... h'-y I t til: p int raw y«r r.ttenti si t a/ affidavit datod
th- 23th f June l 1-ct y. or which Dr. Robert Sonrtiuo submitted
t tho Int-rmti nal IliUtrry Tribunal in Kurnborp,?

Th t 0 ciojnfc is nut a d.ctr.ont whioh I oysolf have Kibaittod
•'Wl ttoroforo y.u conn at r-f.r tu it, but I do t: ink that 70 U can
toll tto Tribunal such ;» rt 3 f th t decunvnt as ,ry be >f interest
with rc-ran' to this spec! 1 qu-sti n which I -nit t y.»u.

DR. rROoSCin-u-I.: .* y I ask tho Tribun It t giv. jxraissian
th t witness Bed-rich my i\ .d fr tho affidavit sutnitted t> tho
Into nr. ti n.l Military Iribunal, such - fo« sentcnc-s :.s can answer
ttc question which I have put t * hia just n w?

Ilr PRjoTDSIT: 7:w D-extent t which 7 u xvfor has n t boon called
’ tho attonti n 1 ' t.o Tribun 1 with t n. quest that tho Tribunal
take Judicial ntice jf the t* extent.

DR. t KJJSCITinJK: To. d cun. nt was submitted during tho trial

72=1


si*x{Frnnk)

C art I


b. f rj the Ir.Unrti -r.al ry Tribunal. It *-s siiboitted by

■y c LLv .juu, br. S-rvatiuE, as an exhibit.

I™ PK 1 .T -sKT : I understand th~t, but it hasn't as yet boon
br u, ht t t, e attention -f this Tribunal. Thu Tribunal * ;vHA like
t t“-..iir— the d>cuaont.

'JR. H.JDY: li.y it please y or H nor, the dc unci it referred t. is

nitre8s .% the stand. If in

inti tic .r >bLoa of euthanasia r the issues in this case, tho witness
is here, ho can ask th. witness without bothering with tid3 d -cu-
xmt, r sidn tic c urt t take n tic. f thor d.ouiscnt. Ho
has th. witnjas available and can qu-sti n bin -n th-t 3 int.

THE FRSSXDSNTs The Tribunal would like t oxnsdnu the d cumont. Vill
y u subalt it to the Tribunal?

DR. FROBSCKi.fflt : Ci.-xnt is in ands f tho witness. I
zysoll' don't have it.

(Docusont Inqu.sti n is tended t t'.io Tribunal.)

THE PRBSIDS !: Is th re aqy Ejijliah tr nslati n f this docunont
v liable?


>252


9 li7-::-,.TD-2-l-?cslcr (IdTT. Frank)

Court He. 1

D . F33BSCK-.KK: Vr. President, I nyself don»t have an English
translation because I nysolf wasn’t . oing to refer tc the ’ocunent. It
ytZ3 the witness who ran tod to know sonatfcin~ fror it an* infom tho
Tribunal, of these carta.

nt? PRESIDENT: foil, tho witness nay use the locuiwnt to rafresh
his rocolloetion, answer any questions that are mterial to thi3
inqiiry.

3 s ’ DR. FIEOSCRIi'.im (Continuin )

q Titnoss, l repeat ry question asto 'hen an’, how dir! you learn
of the euthanasia ensures a "onto! in Goraany, an’ I also waul’ liko to
ask you to uso tho .’.ocui-^nt in tho sonso which the Prosi ’ont has Just
instructed you.

A Of tho so-callo 1 euthanasia preco^hiro, I hoard at tho bogLnnlni: of
19li0| 'Than tho natter bad to so:» extent alroa ty na lo constdcrablo
pre toss, an* accor *lr. • to y rocolloetion thoro wero sourcos of tho
dorry who rot into touch :1th tho Catholic Church an' tho Protestant
Church, sources with whoa I was rorkin to other.

0 So that.until tho boinnlir of 19b0 you ha! ha*, no knorloigo that
Bouhlor or Brack voro occupying tho: .solves in anyway with euthanasia
noasuros, is that ri-ht?

A That is correct, I hod no kncwlo !"(*.

q Did you speak about this with Sradc?

A I ton't thirfc that I talked about thoso quostions in detail with
the dofon !ant, but I Id s;:ock about then in detail to Bouhler.

0 In this connection I an only intorosto' in one sin lo question.
Di.! BouKLeo* tell you in this connection about tho fact that euthanasia
noasuros which ho was carrying out, or had carrio! out, had #&.n Is¬
sues©'! by hir. with Judicial sources in the Reich?

A That was a very focal point of Bcwhior's an’ or.a of tho lea iing
..roblciJs which occupied hln for c Ion- tin a.

q "net di! Bsuhlor tell you about that at th. tine, as to whothor
he considered Hitler's do croc- of the 1st of S opt trior 1933 to bo a legal


7283


9 y U7--ATD-2-2-“06 ter (Int. Frank)

Court ?«*c. 1

basis of legal nature?

A Bcuhler himself —

Q fould ycu min' loavln• the Hr. an’ *'rs, off because Bcuhler is
enough for us, you knew.

A Bcuhler hlasolf rs^aivUn the locality and a oral basis of
euthanasia ha ’ no 'eubts -thatover• liis objections loalt with tho formal
legal shape cf the tasks -ssi nj.’ to him and tho leral formula. Con-
3i.'.orirr the far roaehin effects of the t?sk, he .ranted to avoid misuse.

0 . Thorofore, if I un tors tend veu correctly, then tho train of
theu hts which Souhlor had was that Hitler’s lecreo meant to hin a
lo- ally sour.basis, but that in his opinion it was essenti a with
recard to tho general public that all individual .measures which wero
now boin-; usothrough euthanasia, or should be uso:!, should ho clOthod
in a formal Soich’s Law.

A That is oorroct, and Bouhlur’s opinion was atronythonod when
because of those difficulties ho offerod Hitler his rcsi nation, and
whon in the 'iscession r.hich arose in that connection tlv: 1 : lity of
thoso ooaiuros was wnfir.ad ‘ hin in that connection.

Q Jist onj nonont. Your testimony would loa ’ to tho conclusion
that Bouhlur bad ou-ekun .. 1 th Iltlor about tho necessity of a lo a
formulation of tSi<. .uthanasia lecroo or order, cr locroo — whichever
you want tc call it.

A Yes.

Q And then ycur testimony woul' further show that Hitler '1th
regard to Eouhlor 1 a sup post ion had turned that ’own?

A I aii net fully inforao ’. about thu exact contents of tho Fcuhlor-
Hitl-sr oonforenca, but t*>- outewa mas that it became Bcuhler '3
that his task was lawful, an that bocnao the subject of further 1 s-
cusoions with the Raich "irdster of Justice.

q Di 1 tho further '.'jvolojnents in l?hO make it ’cr.orrr. to you that

51 uhler also cenferr ’ tith scurcos of tlv; iMch * Inis try cf Jus tic.:

continuously, that a -raft iv. was * * o obtained fr?:: iitler? -

72S4


? U 7-^-ATD-2-3-?cster (Ir.t. Frank)

Court Ho* 1


A Efforts a'a tonar Is such a ’.raft law ro back to tha early stay os
sf euthanasia.

1 riC'V do you know?

A Bcuhler tol l to thr t when I approached hir. ro.-ar liny reasons which
I ha l aentionec* to you at the be inninv of qy testimony. Ho told no that
when ha ’ascribe! to ~.o the task Hitler bad assi.-rv. 1 to hin an 1 r rr. Brock.

q Did Bouhlur tell you at tha tiro that threurh his collaborators,
an particularly Brack, such a lrnft law ras to be developed or had bean
developed?

A Bouhlor not only told :*> so but he oven showol no on that, and
other occasions, of oxtonsive nr.tcrial which "as to servo tho drafting
of such a law.

Q Di:l ycu ycursolf roa ’ tha draft law?

A to.

Q i.n' then what happen*! to this raft law?

A Bouhlor, when isro- nr ’in: tho fortnl wor in- of his task turned
out to bo consi lorablo, an*, when ho had to loci'la —

q You sai l that alr*c%

«. ’lay I ask you to report tho question. I --t loot.

q I want to put this question to ycu. Ti ’ you as uonths wont by
in 19U0 learr. o ' th<- fate ro ar in »his Iraft law?

A I thsu ht I hal nnsworo* that by syyin- thrt Hitlor hal turno 1 it
'own.

q But i 'r^t Pouhler oonfor with the Rich Minister of Justice
rogarinr’ its Iraft law?

A Yes,

Q ’.'oil, then, '.hat wr.s tho attitu lo a ’ortol by the Reich ’iniotor of
Justice?

0

A Itr. Bouhlor -’opto 1 tho view th t tills was a -atier for tho Reich
Inistr of Jus tic.' anl the P.oich Chancellory nsw to achieve tho proper
* - railae for this law. He hinself found hinaalf in considerable i ffi-
’ IM'is '.ec'.'is- os; or.-- .-5.‘a •~'s referring to an or Vr from the hirhost

72&5 . ’


9 ::~y u7-’'-;,TI>-2-^ostur (Ini. r*sak)
Craft itoi 1


rllitary comander at the hoa of t .c state, with all the functions
which Hitler hel , and on the ether si ’.© ho saw the responsibility of
iirUvi-iial niniators whoa ha ecul !n*t influence but fron whoa he was
eran'inr that they in urn, if Ifficulties arose, shcul ’ fir.' tho
leval solution. That wasn>t, after all, his task.

Q I an askir.;: ycu, what was the attitude a top to.' of the Reich
inis try of Justico with regard to Oouhlor's wish that a draft law shoul 1
boccce law?

A As far as I knov, the -fitter uas left in aboyanco. Ho further
clarification was achieve except that on tho strength of tvs con-
feronco botwoon Bcuhler and 'iitlor an a -roonont was reached between
him an', tho minis tor that tho attcr '..-as now boin- settled..

Q So that if I understand ycu correctly the Reich Unis try of
Jiistico or tho Reich ’dinister of Aistico, in spito of Bouhlor«3 con¬
siderin'- reprosontation, a ’opto l tho vi.r that this s in ordor.

.. “hat was my opinion, yes.

Q Di ’ you hoar about it, that the defen dant Prack too, ha d know-
lodr'o of tho no .-otintionn botwoon “ouhlor an thu Roich :*iniator of
Aistico?

A Yes.


7236


Court So. 1

S .-'Ey 47-tf-3-l-£B»-Iarrov (Track)


q. “itness, in eubseouent tines you yourself didn't exactly deal
with euthanasia re a rare a but you had heard about the.: end you discussed
then with various gentlenon in the Fuehrer's Chancellery, is that cor¬
rect? —

A. Yea.

Q. Cn the strength of such conversations, or any other converse-
tions, did you ever cone across the words "useless enters" and that they
would have to be removed in this vey? Bid you ever cone across that?

A. The tendency hidden behind tho words "useless eaters" has now
only becoae known to ne through evidence submitted by tho prosecution,
but froc Bouhlvr's statement, as far es this problon was conccrnod, they
vmIA never have given ::e an indication of such an attitude.

Cc Did you hear anything about tho fret or the oucotlon why Hit¬
ler's decree wao issued ,'uet at tho beginning of the war?

A. Fran stateuor.ts which have boon nr.do available to no I havo
learned that wo w^re concerned with psychological considerations.

Ci. Voll thon, what wns the typo of the psychological considera¬
tions?

A. They wore of such nature that they believed that the under¬
standing of biological and heriditary probleas should bo awakened anong
tho population.

q. Just o aoaent. The eugenic and heriditary biological trends
of thought, did they have a decisive value with record to euthanasia?

A. As far as I rn infomod, that was the basic point of euthanasia
naaoly, that the problem of useless living beings - the living beings
who had dropped below a certain level - should bo solved by neons of
the nercy death.

q. I think you have expressed ycurself soccvhot incorrectly thore.
The auestion of eugenics and heriditary biological theorios do not, of
courso, have anything to do with what you Just said.

A. '-Oil, I wasn't really going to try to link it up.

Q. bell, I an coning to qy final ouestions. "id you gather fror.

7287


Court So. 1

9 May 47-H-3r2-'BHM-£arrc*' (Frank)


Bouhler' b statements any knowledge regarding the point of vie*- which ho
and Brack night have had when they considered cuthenaoip to to justified?

A. Free the events I had nore than sufficient opportunity to
learn of Bouhler attitude with regard to these Questions. First of
all, there were his considerations of a legal nature, and then there
vee the type of action he took with the objections raiced fron clerical
sources. I had the i .pr^ssion there that the religious noaentun con¬
nected with euthanasia, in connection with the otjccti-ns raised by the
•

church, occupied first oleeo with hr.- Bouhler. I also learned fron tho
legal arguments which he raised, a siniljr point of %*iow th»t he was
fighting for it oessionately, that he wasn't merely concerned with the
formal foniulati ..a of a task, but that he was interested in the legal
conception and tho lovful idea of tho whole rffair.

q. Did Bouhler also toll you that tho defendant Brack ohared thoso
views?

A. : nl"ye assumed that sinco Brack, with regard to all thoso
cuootions, was, »ft«.r all, only tho deputy - tho r.nn to *-hon u task
was essignod by Bouhler.

q. I vns Just about to coao to this lest question. I havo a6kcd
you earlier during your tostiaony whether Bra.ck in hlo Department 2 had
authority to nake decisions of his own and you roiswcrod that ouostion,
of ccurso, in the negative. Svw, I wish to ask you which position
Brack actually occupied within tho framework of this so-crllcd eutha¬
nasia program. Vas he of tht scni rank as Bouhler? Did he have similar
responsibilities, or was he acting on hie KhaJf, or how can you doscribo
his position?

A. Bouhler called hinself the ->nly responsible person wh»n he
talked to about the problem of outhenrsia pnd Kr. 3rack. The port
which Kr. Brack played wps that of a. subordinate official who had
administrative and organisational tasks.

2 n. FSOLSCrKASH: Hr. President, in the course cf this trial, if

I'- net mistaken, Karl Brandt's defense c unsel submitted the document

7283


Court So. 1

5 Hoy 4?-H-c-3-EHh-K*rrow (Trask)

SO 156. It vas offered ae Eracdt's Exhibit So. 4A and 43. That document
dealt with a letter fros the Chief of the Juehrer 1 s Chancellery,
addressed to the Beich Minister of Justice Cuertner, in which the author
states that "on the basis of. the authority issued by the Fuehrer, I ac
considered as the sole resoor.sible person for the carrying out of the
tasks which I consider necessary and I have given corresoonding instruc¬
tions to ay collaborators". At the tiao the signature below this docu-
xont could not bt clearly identified. Kay I su^cit this document to
this witness with the recuest or the ouestion whether the signrturo over
vhich this docuaent appears will be rocognised by hia i-v being that of
Bcuhlcr?

THE PEESnJU.T: The document tsay be eubaittod to the witness. If
ho can identify the signature, he nay testify.

(Tho docuaent was subaitted to the witness.)

2Y DR. 7HCi.SCHKAKK j

tltnoss, will you please read through this docuaent and will
you answer ay ouectlon as to vfco has signed this docuaent? This is n
photostatic coo; , by tho voy.

A. Tho signature is that of Boohler.

Q. Can you recognise it without doubt as being Bouhler's?

A. I can recognise it for certain¬
ty Well, I cone bock to ay initial ouestion now; namely, what wuo
tho position held by the defendant Brack within tho fraaowork of the
euthanasia progrea?

A. I repeat, Ernck'a position vac of a very subordinate nature and
he was defending on Bouhler's orders.

Q. "’ould it be right for ac to say that Srack, within the; so-called
euthanasia progrea occupied, the position of a general secretary, shall
we say?

A. I would say that that c-uression is too strong.

Q, It is, is it? Veil, ho vob Ues than a general secretary?

A. I would say that the evuresslon is too strong since 3rr>c':'s

7239


Coart 3o. 1

9 May *»7-M-3-4-BEM-£arrov (Frank)


authority with regard to other deuertaeats vao limited and since
Bouhler always emahasized, when talking to =e, that apart from hit own
sphere of influence the sohero of influence of the Belch Ministry of
Interior prevented independent action and position in the euthr-nasie
orogran.

May I then state finally that, according to your statement,
the defoedant Brack, in the so-called euthanasia program, only had a
subordinate position on the strength of which he had to obey Bouhler'o
instructions without Questioning and in connection with which his acti¬
vities wero confined to the carrying out of such instructions as Bouhler
would give hin.

A. Ye*.

EH. reCKSCKhJOV: Mr. Presidont, for tho najon* T have r.o further
Questions to this witness.

THE ffiSSIBZOT: Eas any dofonee counsel any auootion to propound
to this witness in connection with the case as it affocte their r*oooc-
tlvo clients?

ZSt. FP.CSSCHhAini: I have no further auostions, Mr. President.

BY ZB. HGFnuW (Counsel for the defendant Pokorny):

Q. ■itnecs, you said that in 1940 the Madagascar Plcn hod boon
dovolopod. Mfcnt was the reason for which this Dlan was dcvolopod?
Surely you could have loft tho Jews la Germany.

A. The reason for th« development of this plan I have already
• •
dealt with in ny initial answer, I thought. It was general considera¬
tions with regard to a peace of tho future which ono thought “a® 1 “ti¬
nt nt at the tlao. -uring thv development and representrtions of that
period, plans and suggestions wore cede regarding any intcr-Eurooean
settlement of that problem. As for as I a= informed, e.c far as '■ could
gather from Bouhler'* statonentt,that is, it bed been indicated to him
that ho needn't bother about that plan any further since it would be
the subject of discussions if and when the time cone, and tho way I
always understood that that it scant it would be of inter-European


7290


Court So. 1

S ..ay •*?-aC-3-5-£3i-Xarr:v (Frank)


coseera because the var was considered to be inter-Zurocean at that
tiro. France vas interested - any plan about Madagascar couldn't be
discussed without France - and Zngland vas interested.

All right, witness, but were there different clans, further
plans, dealing with the s5lution of the problem? To bo very exact, vac
the question of sterilisation ceniionci?

A. I don’t know anything ebcut that.

Q. You don't know anything about that?

A, So, I knew nov by the an to riel eubaitted by the crosecution.

Q. In that case, I have no further ouestions.

TKZ KZSIIHST: An.” other ouestior. by defonso coun6ol? If not,
the crosecution nay cross-cxcaine.

MS. E j&mt Hay it please Your Honors, the prosecution hat no
ouestions to put to this witness.

TKZ FRZSIHZN7: Counsel for tho defendant 3rock any procood. The
vitnoos will to excused fraa the stand.

ESv. FRC&SCliiAKS: Of course, I haven't any further ouestions to
ths witness.

Mr. President, nay I havo tho Tribunal's Demission to call to
ths stand n witness whose none is Dr. Hcraann Pfanrxuollcr and hit
titlo is Gberncdlrinelrat?

TKZ pazsnEKT: Tho itarahel win suaaor. the witness, Dr. H^rcann
Pfannsutll<.r, to the stand.

(EZ3HASK PFAKWUZLLZS, e witness, took the stand and testified as
follows.)

BY JU30L SJF.IS5:

Q. You will raise your right hand and be sworn.

I swear by God, the almighty and Chaise lent, that I vHl socak
the euro truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(Tho witness -ec-.ated the oath.)


Y3U any be seated.


7.191


u u>


curt He. 1

iay * ! 7-44-£-6-LSt-iarrGv (Trask)


DELC7 xJUfUXAIIOI

5T as. 7SQiSC3iA£3;

Q. Witness, please vill you tell at your first end lest ran© end
the date of birth? Can you hear ae? ,


A, So.

q. Please, vould you put on ycur headphones end I’ll repeat the
question, and then -ill you please nuke a pause so that the interpreter
can follow, and will you then answer it?

THZ PTiSILL'.^: Counsel vill propound hie ouection to tho vitness


again.


BY DR. raCESCEHiMM:

Cc Please, vill you state ycur first and last nano and your date
if birth?


A. Dr. Kuraanr. Pfannaucllor. Bom 6th of June. 188G.

Q. Witness, please vill you tell this Tribunal briefly of your
career and vill you caphasiie your acdical training and tho positions
you hold?

A. I visited four for-.s of tho oloaentary school in Munich and


then I vent to the secondary school in Kunich vhcro I obtained the cor-
tlfloate entitling =. to university Wining. I then etudlei nedlelne
.1 the University of Munich, unde ny prellnlncry cknu. there, nnd In
1911 pcseod the stole smu. with good results. Subsequently. I worked
nt sovorel lnetltutee nnd also n. n prnctltloner: thnt le. I worked In
several hospital, and practiced and this Included Hunlch. I then wont
tc Breeden to the Konon-e Clinic where I held further training for els
nonthe, and then in 1913. upon being por.uadcd by uy teacher. Krepelln
- I an a scholar of Kreeclln In Kunich - I -ont to the cental Institute


in Wcinauenster - Vcinaucnater, by the vay.


is in Sassou - in order to


work under the head of that institute towards reorganising the Institute
for -oderr. psychiatric diagnosis and treatnent. This was actually done.


end then vet caac.


7292


9 ay - ?-?j-ii-i—.’-.lav (Tnt. Franks)
Court No. i


Eurint the war apart froc workin in this instituto I also ha’ to
toputise for tha local gaa.rcl practitioner, an’ I ayself was the head
of research occupation.

Q It wfin't bo necessary for yen to go into all these do tails. Just
7«:ak Moro generally.

3 I than entorc! the state institutions in Bavaria at Honbor",
rlvoro I beoor.a a :»<ttoal officer, froa 1916 to 191?. ;.t tho enl of 1919
I worked at Sober' an ’ in I-toei berg I operate 1 a Re-1 Cross observation
hospital. At tho s-Jio tino in 1919 I want to Anabach an! central
Prankonia folio sins a call, an*. I ras prone tod to th. next highest civil
service group, which was entitle Oborarxt.

Q •-'hit was tho Institution?

A Anabach, in tho mnidpol essontlal instituto r.t Anabach. Then
I took over tho ’oporoont for seriously sick persons, since I hal ro-
eoivod ny conpleto trainin'; as a toe tor at that tiro, an * loalt with
rwurolo leal casos, sinco I hr.! had oaploto tr.ainir.. with that in !!unich,
an! at that tiro I aloptel no om therapy jthob, an ! I ha ! tho honorary
task of -oin tc Dorontorf and tho Protostqnt Hospital of tho Onnor
’•lesion, 'hero sick an' insane chil’ron .r<jro stationod. At tho sano tine
I iras ’xiil In up a now topartront of a largo hospital.

q Doctor, will ym speak a littlo noro slcwly, booauoo tho intor-
rotorn won’t bo able to folia., you; everythin: y<ai say aist bo translatel
into tho En lish langua :o, ar.! there foro will yen spark a littlo slower
an’ toko pauso3?

.. I cssioto 1 in tho '.'ill-in up an.' oquipjln of a na..* nursing
hx-.a for very a 1 - ' .forao ’ an, insane children.

*1 "•hat wa3 ycur further oar xr?

A Thi3 took up th: tiro until 1930. In 1930 I -:as apj ointod 3c-con !
jputy to tho Chief of tha rental institution at KauT ourar., an *, after a
ri of perio ’ ho entrusted no with tho organisation of the welfare for
uatal -tiints i:i Suebia.


7293


9 y ' 7—'--T~—' —2- --lev (Int. fcato)

: urt ::c. i

a This ns Bavaria, i=sn*t it?

A Bavaria, Suebin. I cc.vpletol that task ani iirinr- ny activities
in this sanitoriun a nurfcer of scientific works were 'evelo of. which
'salt vith tJto question of the care for an hospitalization of 'rinkors,
otc. I ton't want to list then ell, but that was the bulk.

Q ' hen wero you finally transferred to 5?olfin'*-: : acr?

A first of all tiiero was so :othin-: olsa. In 1935 tho I Municipal
CorrtLttee at Au .s'mr , throu h the local »'!ical cffio«.-, a ppointo 1 no
the her.’ of the L eal 1th Jtejrrtran , an’ the ’.opnrtsent for *hich I
uorkod iealt with racial nations. hoa.’. of that 'c/artzaent Ay
lor. Hq ■ task was th. of h. roditary 1 b of tho population,

and tho carrying out >f a hereditary health law in tho capacity of an
oxporinont, aw’, also tru ca.*ryin. out of the unrital hero it.iry health
lo»j ala- the paychiatrio caro fbr chil Iron, particularly school
chil’ron an’, tho liaison top rt»nt froa tho nodical ’.opartnont to tho
ny chin trie Depertnont at Au s’-ur , an! thu transfer of cases that .voro
in rvioi or hospitalization.

Q Di *. ycu st to ^-alfir. -liarr?

A Lot no a V! first of all tir.t ’urir. • thin p rioc! frorc 193a until
ny rosi^nr.tion fMn j.u s’ ur I was honorary hoa! of tha Catholic nurslnr
ho no for ’Tinkers, an’ its ’.o-art. -nt • t ‘aitln-en, which activity load
to it that larry.r3 consulted no in oonnootion vith hospitalization of
*rinkor3 — accorUn to 1 era r-.-h i: -C - consultu ! rv. a3 a nodical
a; .-port, I to think that this is ixiportant. In 1933 v.lthout a. ;lyin * for
this position an' without h'vin anybo^is protection or help 1 bocana a
1 rector an 1 hoa-'. — *ron a r> b.c l point of view — of tho rental sani-
toriwi of E-elfin , which i3 the ' i cat of its typo in Bavaria,

Q That i3 in *wnich? .

.. Yos, 15 'dieters frcci Tiinich,

3 How :iany bo’s i tho .nant-l sanitoriun at - olr'in havo?

A At tho bij.innin . of y work about 2500 -.n' we increase! that to


a' oua 3, O- bods


729 L


- >-19l?-* ^TD-L-3-”2lc7 (Ir.t. Pranks)
court ::o. i


Q An* hem .any insane patients were there on the average?

A "ell, a;air. between 27CO an' 28X, an! approximately 3000. The
fi Tiro of 30CO was, however, after oxcooded.

q Tnich a,-;Q croups reru represented in this hospital?

A Every age croup, bopinninc with the smilost children to really
ol poopif, since I had a children’s house which I had taken over fron
cy predecessor.

DR. TROlSfr :.:r *: V. President, tho Srosecution in the course of
its cr.au intro tucod a nurfcor of documents which wjro shorin that fron
20 Sj.itor.ber 19?;0 transports left S-jalfin. which included Jcr.rish insane
pooplo. For this reason I should like to jut tho following quostion to
tho vdtnoaa:

Q Di I your nontal institution at Eyolfin hiring the yonrs 1939 to
19li2troat Jewish Inaano pooplo?

A Yos, in ry hospitcl Jewish inaarc ..atients roro proaont in tm>
cato :orlos, thoy Jsut no . uoh as any oth.r patients, vjero troatod
nomally an’ thoy weren't in wards of thoir own.

Q 'hat tyyd of instructions di’. yeu rocoivo re par 'in - tho transfer
of tho3o Jewish Insane pooplo in 1? : 0 an* if so fro:; .h-t source ’i: you
got then?

A I ton't knerr for cortnin vhr.t tho 'ato ms, but I ’i ' rocoivo
n 'ocision fro., tho Bavarian State inis try of th Interior, nccor Unr to
which a nuvb.r of Jewish >atienta fro : all lavnrian Institutions, woro to
bo colleotod ir. :y hospital, l-iat ttey shrul * bo placed in spodal wards,
which I .;oull have to clear for tho urposa an’ that thoy w oro to be fo 1.
in tho re ular cate.'orios, an ’ that thoy wore ta to taken care of and
treats ! until thoy war:- tranaferro’. by authority of this Bavarian "inistry
or tha Department concerned in tho Daprrtaont of the ’Ministry of Bavaria.
Ac far as ay own insane persons wore concerned, by o*.m Jewish patients,
th?y renained in their ori inal war 's until they 'ere callod nray.

q Did you have further instructions accordin' to which those Jewish
insane people wore to ’ a taker, fro: thoir hospitals and should bo brought

7295


amy.


9 !iay li ?-?{-. (Int. Franks)

Court !fo. 1

* ros, they came free the State Jflnlstry cf Bavaria, an*, as far as I
reacEbor this stated these patients had to be handed over.

Q Is it possible that the transportin': of Jewish Insane patients
took place on or a*»ut tfco 20th of September 19U>?

•'* - as » - think that is the aR.roxinato tine when these patients

loft.

Q Do yen have any kno.rlod-o about tho fact whether this dopartinc
transport of Jewish insane patients wn3 ccnncctod with euthanasia
-ensures of any kin.'.?


*


7256


Court 1

;/'-y 5-1—HD-Cook-Fra nk.

Ko, it wrs st ted that those patients wore boin t
transferred to a Jewish Institute.

*. You were especially told th t?
n< Yes.

i,. Th nit you. Nov mother question. Witness, you
rt'vo -oecrlood in r.at detail what your career was and
•>u have spoken about your psychiatr. training, which basic
attitude did you a .opt with r- e ard to the welfare and care
of insnne people, first of -'ll with ro c nrd t^ their treat¬
ment, and, secondly, with regard to tekln. care of them?

ti. Without wanting to speak about my own past, I want
to Coll yo- that I was a definite follower of therapeutic
treatment. * In psychiatric circles, in the pessimistic
circles. The circles of Fnlkonhausor, I was cnlled the
Poll-pragmatic. It is ay opinion with ro c rd to curln u
of these patients thnt everything .mist bo done and that
every attempt is essential to holp the insane patients and
t nvko available to hl_ curative treatment. I, thoroforo,
belong to thos^ practical psychiatrists wno, together
with Fnlkonhausor ay friend and teacher, I do want to say
that we, made every effort that the admission of patients
and the release of the patients w^s a decision which should
bo made generally oc.6ier fe»r the her- of an institute, in
order to .jOt the cases there quickly when they were fresh
and to remove them as quickly as possible from the
ataos-horo of a currin._, a,mo, which always has a favorable
Influence. Likewise, fur the same reason I was a convinced
and fanatic follower of the orir.ciple of soparntin. nj^ntal
Institutes and s -crll.d currin t homes which were to be
looked after by psychiatrists, experts, oeople with
scientific and expert knowledge, mcdic-'l personnel from

i .jsc institutes where the more simplified c. re of cases

7297


C urt 1

5-l.-c-2-r.3-C - ok-5 rank.


c uld be carried -at, no longer a therapy, I nean patient3
who couldn't be helped by therapy.

k. So I car. summarize that It was your point of view
that every typo of treatment should be employe! in order
t- brln^. about « cure f.r such Insane persons as could bo
ourel?

ii. Yes.

Q. xnd that th-y should bo accomodated In so-called
aental Institutes, and on the other hand Incurable Insane
people who only noidvu to be looked aft^r - In other words,
maintenance of their life should bo accomodated In special
Institutes?

n. Yes, and in fact that happened In S^clfln^. I
refused p tl-nt-- who only were In need of cr.ro in order to
sake room for those y tlcnto who ne ded treatment and to
kcop any staff for the treatment of the Insane patients.

k. Then what typo of insane pooplo would psychiatrists
loserlbe no Incurably insane people?

«. To out It briefly, Is very difficult but lot no
any this: The oolr.t of view ou_ht to be approximately
that: Incurably Insane 8K those who are permanently In
n_ed of treataont In a institute and those for whom any
c nt"ct with their surroundings from a social psychiatrist's
point of view. In other word6, the point of view maintained
where the common foelln of a human boln_ Is lnckin., that

bu a final condition or it may be the condition of the
be-lnnlntj of idiocy. For Instance, those Insane patients
vh suffer fix;ra organic diseases cf the brain, such ns
paralysis, epileptics-

k. Now, doctor, cay I Interrupt you please. Would you
; ind spcokin L Into the microphone?


I didn't know there was one - paralysis*epilepsy,


G-urt i

Jfcy 3-#-5-3-K3-Cook-Fr nk.


idiocy, certain cases of idiocy are duo to serious dcsinsos
the brain, on* In tr.at case those due to Interior
'.isturbences, usually they are horodltrry causes, but most
cf all the schizophrenia* else dementia praecox, those
cases w.'.loh we consider as hopele66 pers-ns who must bo
f.cnlol any contact with their surroundings and with the
huaan community, end who also lack th_ capability of
tainkin$ normally, those who were in perpetual need of
caro and for years and those that could only be cakon care
o: through outside help in o nur6ir._ home. 4 hey would

9

h.ve to be ronov d permanently from the community, because
of the type of their -isease, an., the practlc 1 psychia¬
trist would best describe then es permanently In need
of confinonent to a zont ; «l Institute they are a-soclal-
doctor, you hrve Just used the worl °a-ooclal",
do you near, by that lr. the psychiatrist's conception
of tho word a-soclal?

A. Yos, an', in connection with it I wont to point
-t that tho a-soclal insane al^ht bo particularly
n.^ressivo cs the disease _oo9 on and particularly a6 the
typo or. development of the disease shows Itself, r.nd
that he can b- considered an a-soclal because of hie
r ressiveness.

doctor, ni_.ht I ash you to perhaps lllustraty by
ueans of two or three brief ex.-moles to this Tribunal, Just
‘ r/ - £ - ch 0*608 are, such cases of Incurably Insane people,

- mo.r, v;ould you offer a descriptive example of such *
people?

«. I don't want to quote tho6v cases of serious
idiocy who are bodily re-uced w.-.o cannot be spoken to
th whom one cannot make cor.t ct, th t fall lr.t^ a
co:;ui, who ere anxious to destroy are ohyslcally rjressivo
:r *'- w - :o "ued fe^dir._ by hand and who can r.o lon_er cops


Court 1

Xay 9-#-5-4-HD-Cook-Frank.

with the normal requirements of their body, who are dirty,
not only dirty with dirt, and urine, but who would 6mear
"boat each excretions, have no fueling pain and who no
longer dlmonstrate even simple emotions. I only want to
deal with th ; final 6to c es of schizophrenia, tr.at is, with
human beln.s who commit senseless aotlons, senseless not
only towards their fellow humans, but who actually beoome
a-soclol bc.caus< they may kill members of the medical staff.
I myself h ve exnerienced four ci-oes when the most valuable
numbers of the staff became the victims of such Insane
patients. Many fell ill, and many at the age of forty
r forty-five, became useless and old, let me talk about
those who lnfllotcd upon themselves serious damages, who
removed their testicles and tore them out, patients who
.amaged their mouths, not because they wanted to oonmlt
suicide but oimply because they did not understand their
own actions, patients who nalonod themselves in the moat
serious manner, I think that ou e ht to be enough.

DR. FROSSCKKaK: Mr. President, in this connection I
want to submit from my document book the appendix No. 3,

I be-, your pardon, it is appendix 2 , appendix 2 , and I
am referring to document No. 45 on pages 36 to 44, which
Is an edition of the periodical "Life,"

THE PRESIDENT: Ve don't have that oopendix to your
document book.

DR. FROESCHMaH: I h-ve submitted it Mr. President, it
follows Brack tie. 2, and it is at lecst a fortnight ?feo
that I did so.

MR. HaRDY: The Pros, cation does not hrvo a copy of that.
Your Honor. However, it is apparently n magazine which
Ives conditions in the US mental hospitals. United States,
and thi3 evidence will come under the category of that


Court 1

May 9-M- 5- 5-HD-Cook-Fr e nk.

evidence with the Tribunal has ruled will not oooo up and
will not 00 offered In evidence until c later date.

DR. FR0E8CHKaH: Mr. President, I was eioin a to ask the
witness, Dr. Pfannmueller, Just one question, namely,
whether such types os rre depleted in this periodical by
means of pnoto. raphs, whether they are the types which he
hss Just talked ab^ut.

THE PftEoIDSKT: It Is a matter of common knowledge that
suoh types exist all over the world, such types, cf defective
mental exist everywhere end the Tribunal will take Judicial
notice that such types ~r t found everywhere.

DR. FROESCHMnNX: In any case, Me*. Pr sident, I wasn't
trying to moke the Impression, if I have, of only doscrlb-
ln the oo.n..ltlon of Insane potlonto In jtcerlon.

THE PRE3IDEDIT: Wo understand that counsel.

DR. FROESCK/aNK: There was e Gorman book I w?s goin^
tv submit to the Tribunal which oontalne the soay typo of
jlcturoe. May I then, Mr. President, submit the document
Mo. 45, os Exhibit Ho. 3, siay I submit that to the r.l,,h
Tribunal as my next exhibit?

THE PRESIDENT: Wo do r.ot nrvo the document book.

MR. HkRDY: I want to object to the submission of this
document until such time ns I have time to pursue the
.'voument. I haven*t seen the document and the Prosocutlon
hnan't boon presented with the document defense counsel
refers to.

DR. FROESCHMaKK: In that case I will put that beck*
ntil the document book Is ready.

THE PRESIDENT: We will recess for tnlrty minutes and
visibly durin.- that time counsel can examine the document


7301


9 Kay 47-y>-S'j C-8-l-hal oy (Int., Von Schocn)

Court I

THZ KaESHaL: The Tribunal is again in session.

2.5. HaEDY: May it please, Tour Honor, this 3rcck oxhioit
which is Docunont Vo. 145 is contained in Liffi iiegazine of 6 Key
1946 edition; it narrates tho bedlaa of 1946; tho titlo is "Koot
U. S. kontul Hospitals are • ohaso and a Disgrace." I want to pass
tho exhibit up to the tribunal for their perusal cuch as the Prosecu¬
tion doa:s it ic-atorial. 2 to conditions in tho Insane hospitals of
the United Statco aro not at issuo hore. The quostion whother or not
thu iruutos shown therein as fit subjects for euthanuoia. It does
not sea: tho Prosecution fails to soo tho relevancy of tho docucont.

SR. PHOiSCnf.aiC;: Hr. President, I stato oxprosnly that tho
text to thoso pictures was in no way intondod by uo as ovidonco in
tho caso of Viktor drock. I linit uysolf oxcluoivoly to tho quostlon
to tho witness whether such types us pictured, tharo uro tho typos
of incurably lr.s«no porsons, and I ulso liuit uysolf to tho question
of whothor the pr.otcgraphs in this Goman voct book of psyehioly by
Ploussnor, on pugo 4C5, following uro also such types. Tho bool; it-
solf bus boon glvon uo by a third purty and I oannot offor it in ovi¬
donco, but I bolievo that «n inspection of thoso photographs would bo
of lntorost to tho Tribunal and would bo useful for tho cxuuinution ef
tho witness as to whothor thoso aro typos of incurably insuuo porsons.

hH. HaHDY: kith referenco to this book containing tho co
pictures, Y'ur Honor, bus stated tho Tribunal will toko Judicial
mtico of the conditions -f ouch poiplc -e existing all over tho
k:rld, henco I don't see tno necessity of sh'/wing thoso pictures
to the witness. . - *

Ta3 PHaSIDirrs Tho Tribunal takos Judicial Sotico f the f_ct
that all :vcr tho k rid, in every country, civilizod or uncivilized,
there uro insane >ooplo, incuraoly insane oocplc of w.ri me degrees,

-uny who h_vo a: Mentality at all, us described by the witness, and
tho Tribunal is f the 5pini:n that uduittiog exhibits containing

pictures sh'.wing such people is submitting a natter :i no probative

7302


9 ay h7-"-FjC-S-2-,'aloy (Ir.t., Von Schoen)
Court I


value before the Tribunal, an-* ad s nothin to tte Ju 'ic3l Notice which
tte Tribunal will take of such situations. Counsel nay farther ir.torro-
ate tha witness as to what class of arsons he !©en3 subjects for
euthanasia, if the witness does teen any person n proper subject for
euthanasia. That is a ifforont natter, but insofar as counsol showing
pictures and Ascriptions of incurably an.! hopolessly insane people tho
Tribunal takes Ju licial totieo t 'at thore are such people everywhere.

Tho objection to the acMssion of those exhibits is sustained.

D3. FSOESCKl.UNt In view of this ruling nay I at least show this
book for th*ir notice?

THE PRESIDENTi Yos, counsol my exhibit the book to tho Tribunal,

Q Witness, You have hoar.* tho statement of tho Tribunal iust now.
Later when I spook of euthanasia of incurably insano por3ons I shall
cone to this question. Now I shall continue in nay case, and I ask you
lid your institution in S elfin:: have a chil Iron's ward?

A Yos.

q How woro those children tree to'.?

A Tho children's ward, tho so-called children's houso I took ovor
fron ny Predecessor under the toctor who always was in charro of this
house, and tho chil ! ron wore all without any distinction as to the nature
or course of their liseaso, or their social position wore all traatoi in
the soj-w way, were all ;;iven tho sane ration, tho sono that aocordin-: to
ro ulationa existed in such institutions.


7303


9 Hay-iS-Kl-9-l-Cook (Ir.t. Yon Scoot.)
Court Ho. I.


A The children hcd especi a lly good food even during tho war.
They hod vholo a ilk, hot cereal, narralodo, odditional fruit rations
and oosily digestible childrens * food and tiut food proscribed by
childrens* doctors, =ilk lit nil foms. Tlw children wore t roe tod just
as they always are elsewhere.

Cl Witness, what is roar.t by children with serious lioredit-
nry and genital diseases?

A This r^ans children who are conpletoly incapable of taking
a placo in huaan society, who are nar.tally or ns a result of disccso,
a severe infection, for example, a brain disease in their early youth,
who are so ill that any social core of tho child outside of n special¬
ist ir. an institute is quite ixtpocciblo. That those ohildren hr.vo a
life a ran which is limited, .and any I add rone thing olso, this includes
serious physic 1 deformities, for oStaple, tho lack of iwnbors. I had
ono child who had no arms and logo, only just tho trunk, and dofomi-
tios rrhoro it is hardly possible to feed t!io child; whox*o tho children
havo to bo fed .artificially. I ..ad a child with an opor. hoart, and a
dofomity of tho bonos so ti-at tho brain is exposed, .and spinal de¬
formities th paral^-sis as a result of congenital blindnoeo and deaf
.and dunbnoss, other serious defects, nicrocophil and . aero cophals.

Q Plo.asc speak a littlo noro slowly, witness.

A liicrocophals, nacrocophnls, and I believe that is about
onough and. idiots, coaploto idiots.

Q Now, doctor, havv these children wheo you havo just dec-
crib-d so vividly, wore they troatod in any other way than children
who, so to spook as a layman, vc lose severs mental diseases and who
*^ro taken into your institution?

A !«o.

Q Doctor, I cay point out to you that tho irocccution has
submitted a document. This is No. 863, Exhibit Ho. 333, in tho German
iece.-x-rx cok Hi, part I, pa e , and La the English document book ih,
p. 5 22 . This document contains tbo toc .irory of a certain Ludwig

73JL


9 Hay-%:-!2~9-2-Cook (Lit. Von Schon)
Court No. I.


lehnor, who in the fall of 1939 was -it your institute for n visit .-.a a
nodical student. Non I show you fron ay document book, I show you this
docuraant and I ask you first to cogent on his statement that you,
doctor, and it could only''have boon you according to the description
which to cakes of tto person, that you, doctor, on this to'ir took such
a poor child out of the bed and showed the child around like an
onisial as it wore, and said: r .'e lot those children starve to death.

This is cuch sispler. Iboplo aborrd '.'ill net be able to object if wo
starvo then this way." I have already iivon you a copy of that docu¬
ment. You have this?

A Yos.

Q How, ploaso doctor, co,: ont on this docurtnt No. 0f>3*

A nbon I ruad tto document I was not only astonished at tho
incrodtblo contents, but horrified. First of all lecture tours with
dononstrations in tv institute were conducted in exactly tho sn.jo way
as ray predecessor conducted thon. Tho purposo of those tours was to
infona tho public about tho mcosrity of preventing various dlsonsos,
cental and norvo diseases, and tho niafortuno v.hich falls upon humnity
when such children arc born, and to inferr. and instruct tho people
about this nisfortune. First, I nay s~” ono thing, an adnierion ticket,
I never issued in qy wholo lifw, and I naver saw ono. That is an in¬
vention. Second, the tour which Vr. Lohnor c.xaks about, ho is appar¬
ently a teacher, not a *>-dical student -recording to the docunant, this
is sup.osod to have be.n in the fall of 1939. I never spoke about
uthanasia at -all. Euthanasia was a top secret natter. Do sides in tho

fall of 1939 as far as I knew euthanasia had not been started and

•

nothin was done to children. T t-lkcd about hereditary diseases, and
for example I showed feeble nindednosr was horeditary and I showed coa¬
litions axxi I told tto people how important it is to pass a law like
tho hereditary health law to carry it out thoroughly and op:hly. If
one says, and I must go into individual things here - if he says I
ter. a poor child out of its bed with ny fat hands, I would say in ay


? -2-Coolc (Int. Von Schor.)

>art So. I.

life I never had fat hands. I certainly n_v_r grinned et such a thing.

I never laughed. I r-.s always fully aware of hem sorious the uattor
wee. I never pulled a child out of- its cod. The child was quietly
picked up by the nurse according to the condition it wes in, nnd hold
in her lands and in her ans and shorn to the people who wore present.
The priest Kens Jacob froi Baden, n writer who is fairous for his des¬
cription or his Swiss tour, a Iandtr.g delegate, a Catholic prioat, des¬
cribed such children after going to an insane asylum in Baden, in one
of nio Swiss tours, end said - mid I never said that he bulievod that
these children — I can't rcxabcr his exact words, - but this about
what ho said: Hobody know hew they were civated, whether they were tho
work of a d-vUish invention. I never s-id th~t. I only pointed out
the horror of this condition and tlio accoarity for relieving theso
poor crj'tuxvs awl their relatives of pain and the child of suffering,
ana by passing tho hereditary health law as tho greatest good given to
tho Nation.

Q Doctor, Just oinuto. ay X point out so nothing to you
at this pcix.t. Tou arc sup^om-d to havv said that those eventuros,
manning those children, of couro-, represent for no as e national
socialist viroly burdens for our nation'l health, please oxplain that?

A I can cay ovor. if this child wac to be charged frpn tho
point of vice of outhonasia, I rover iookod at this child fron tlx point
of view of national socialise. 2ut,*masia and tho affairs of the Roioh
Con -ittoe in cy opinion had nothing to do .ith national socialism. It
is like tho lav: for tho prove .tier. cf die aces of progeny '.nd tho Sar-
riago Laws, which are laws, lo;*a measures, which happonod to ariso
under tfco National socialist r.£i-x. Tho cause, however, r^v. back for
centuries. Gcntleaca, regarding such a child starving to death was not
mentioned at all, for nothing - s beln^ done at all in the children's
ho'Ufc at this cric-d. I r.jcct such a thin*. These aro prob-biy tho
rubsequmt ir.te rpn. tat ions of an opponent.


Court Sj. 1

5 Hay »7-.-lG-i-ErX-Oel lcgher (Vos Schoea)

q. Doctor, vhet did the Reich Ministry — I shall rcocet — what
did the Eeich Ministry of the Interior do, in fact, 'diet reflations
did it issue cor.cerr.iw; these children that you have spoken of, these
cretins and deforced children, in 1939?

A. In 1939 no reflations were issued concerning these childron.

I know nothing about it and w uedittricien knows nothing about it
either.

q. Then when did you loam of such regulations?

A. I should like to soy thrt the cate of the establishment of tho
Belch Co;v.ittoc Station for handling and dealing with deforned children,

I don't know exactly the oroper tern now, I cannit romtnbcr the dote,
but I alsays thought it was in 19*1, tut it is not entirely l-.possiblo
thst it night have been in the late Sumner or Fall of 19*0. I cannot
say exactly today. Sut nay I contim-o end tell you ho« it hepoenod.
First, I van celled to tho Baverirn Ministry of tho Intorlor, tho Hoplth
Department; there v*ro sonc gentlemen there from Berlin. I ronenber
Dr. Venilcr, end the establishment of tho Reich Coivittuo Station in
Bavaria was discussed. So fer as I can rocell, thi head >f tho chil¬
dren's clinic in Munich present, end I believe this station ’-eo to

oe set up in the children's clinic, bccauso of tho necessity of ^crat¬
ing on those defamed children’freouontly. If I roaenbor corroctly,
that is, olceso, I cm toll you only -diet I Just haooen to rer.erbor,
this vrs expltinod because of thi leek of soace anc' lr.ek of personnel,
that this Reich Craittoo Station could not be set up there, and thon
the conclusion vos reached that the Eeich Connittco Station vac to bo
set up in ay institution, beceuso th.ero wco a children's house there,
end bccr.usu there vere a number of ceces who were idiots, cases of chil¬
dren psychiatry, deformity, neurological ctseB, and, I believe it was
tho Deputy President of the District Association who vac to have eco¬
nomic 8uptrvi6i;n in my institute, who put the children's house at dic-
posal, end I wes told to taka over the Eeich Committee Stption. I asked
the- for a dec:or to take charge of this station rnd he- vas given to me

7307


Covrt So. 1

9 '.lay 47-H-10-2-IrR-0aileghfcr (Von Schoen)

to take care of the children's clinic.

IE. JHQESCKKAIE: Kr. President, nay 2 e.sk whether Suoplenent 3 of
cy document took is in the hands of the President as yet. I handed this
Sucplcnent 3 in, ns I hevealroady said, only a fov days ago, tecausc I
had just Obtained this final docunent. If that is not the case, then I
shall co=c back to this supplement later.

T>_E PESSIULFT: Vo hrve only the docunent books ono end two.

3Y SR. TaGLSC&tASHl

Q, Doctor, you were saying that in 19-*0, you think, er.d in the
beginning you said '41, you learned that the Pcich Cor.r-lttoc to deal
with such people existed, is that true?

A. Yes.

q. It vas only at that tine that y .u learned-that the general
diroctivos vere finally issued by the Reich Kinlstry of the Intorlor rt
Seriin?

A. Yes, I learned of that first at the tine.

ER. FRCfcSCEUffiS: bince the Tribunal dooe not yot have this Bupolo-
•ontrry docunent took, I shall n t now wish to ureecnt the docunent.

ZhL PriSIDilT: Vo have Just received what is entitled "Suooloncnt
I of the Brack Docunent Book". Is that the suooleaont to >*hlch you
rofor?

IE. JRCE8GEMAO: Xc, Hr. President, I an now sneaking of Suoole-
jont 3.

IS PRhSIIhSI: Sov v« have Suppleaent 2.

hr.. HAB2Y: Your Honor, I have Docunent Book So. 1, which takes ne
to Document Ho. 25, end I have Document Book So. 2, which takes no to
P-cunent So. 40. Then I h; vc the eurplc=«nt which is m ereertt of the
Life Mrgezine, that is Docunent So. i6. Other than that I have no other
docunent.

TS PSiSIDaHI: Supplement 1 contains the documents Nos. 41 to 44
inclusive.

«R. EAST:: I don't have that, "our Honor.


73 OG


LJ


surt So. 1

May i?-4i-lG-3-R=fc-G«tlUghcr (Von Schoen)


THi PrISIDiST: Copy must be available bc-cause it was Just handed
to us.

D?.. JECESCAASS: Kr. President. I shall not go into this Suople-
nent 3 et this point in order to avoid delaying the Court. But in the
course of the examination of the defendant Brack I shall cone back to
this document. Hovever. I say tell you, Doctor, that the nrosecution in
the course of the trial has subsitted a document vith a number 1696-PS,
exhibit Bo. 367, vhich is in the ingljth document Book 14 - you vill
fini that in 14. I vill give you the exact page. In the Gercan Document
nook it la page 128. I shall find the cage in the inr-lish Document Book.
This document, Kr. President, vas submitted only in Dart by the nrosecu-
tion. I got a photostatic copy of the original document from tho Secre¬
tary General; I see from it that the ohotostatic cony has other Dagos
vhich tho Drosecution did not submit and. because these pages vere not
submitted, I have, by vny of precaution, included thceo pages no a
document exhibit in Documont Book 3. Pages which vere not submitted
contain a reforcnco to the minister ini decree of the Reich Ministry of
the Interior on 18 'higust 1929. Theycontain first of all an information
for tho official doctor shoving that such severely deforced chlldron
can be sent to a soecinl asylum; second, that every attenot vill bo
mado there to treat those children vith oil modern means of therapy,
and, thirdly, that this cay be done only vith the oDprovnl of tho
parents.

BY Da. JRCSSCEMASS:

Q. Doctor, nov I vill ask you, do you knov of such instructions
of the Reich Ministry of the Interior, such instructions as I have Just
described to the Tribunal.

A. aubscouently. after tho Reich Committee Station in the chil¬
dren's house vas created in the Rgelfing-Kaar cental Institution. I
learned of these directives, vhich ~ere not sent to no as head of the
institution, vhich I did not knov about, because I w*s not e government
doctor, and I had not been informed that there vas any obligation te


7305


Court So. 1

5 Xay 47-K-lC-4-hBX-Gallagker (Von Schoen)


reoort such a case. I don't knoy vhy, because I had children vho fell
under the provisions of this lav; but nov I refer to a docuaer.t vhich I
have obtained froa the defense counsel, and I have noted it down hero.

It is in Volume 14,2, psees-e8-90, HO-1138/349.

Q, That is aO-lliJfi, inhibit So. 349 in the German document booh 14,
voluae 2, page E6, end I shall find out later vhat the page of the
hnglish document book is. It is peg* 151 in the Lnglish document book,
161 . «o on ploaso, vitness.

A. Gentlemen, I think this is an important document. On 1 Juno
1944 I had transferred a child vhich from a psychiatric and pediatric
noint of view foil under the obligations to report on 1 June 1940 to the
Institute Schoenbrunn for highly idiotic children, nerr Munich, for care.
Then I vac told froc Berlin that I --an to give the rooort on this child,
on tho child's condition. Cn 1 June 1940 there could not hove boon ary
Belch Connittoo Station, or institution, boceuso I sent this child to
Schoonbrunn. In the sc-ond place I obviously had no idea when I trans¬
ferred this child that I hnd to report it. because I sent it to a nontal
institution vithout reporting it, and I vrs asked to got an opinion on
this child. Anccrently this child eanc undor the provisions of tho lov
at Schoonbrunn when this institution vis registered, and because it vaa
a child, the registration fora vas forwarded to tho .

corresponding Belch agency. That is ay assumption. Of course, I don't
knov that froa ay own knowledge.


7310


CO-'-Tt I

9 Hay-rf - 11-1 - LJC- - Karrcw (Von Schon)

T2E ;*.-3SIDE!t?t Counsel, tho witness is not on trial before this
Tribunal and I fail to see tho relevancy of such of this testimony
in regard to the case against the defendant Brack. The witness has
hoen explaining certain documents which apparently reflect on hir., but
ho is not on trial here.

DR. FROESCHMnNNt Hr. President, I singled out this case only
becauao in tha examination of Brack I shall have to deal with this
document aa on oxap'e of the ..rosecution's evidence because the pros¬
ecution with t'neso documents, including this particular document,
intended to prove that all the things in ^.ich *rack was concerned
which tvro stated in these documents, wore against humanity and are
war crimes. ^ureforo, rinco this witness can give information about
thoso docir.onts, I have aekod him about them. I rcall.o that I must
avoid everything thrt right be a personal defense of tho witnsss. I
have nothing to do with that, i an loraly coancnting on tneao docu¬
ments in tr.e courso of ry dofonso against Count II of tho indictnont.

TPE rt-i5IDENT: Counsol r.ay procood,

Bf DR. FdtaSCHJUHMs

Q. Doctor, wo'11 go on n<*( and ccr.e to tho questionnaires, very
generally, wifich woro iniroducod under tho Reich Committee. Unfor¬
tunately, we do net have such i questionnaire in the documents. Can
you rcnu.liur tho contents cf those questionnaires of tho Reich Conmit-

teo?

A. ius, I rlli toll you overythins th t I can romor'-ur. First,
the porsonal data -..ora required cf the child, than tho horiditnxy
situation. Then it was askod, as far as I cj renenbor, r.bovt diffi-

m

cultias at birth.

w. ho don't ncjd to hoar all tneso details. Just a general
outline. I I understand -ou correctly, th-_ c-us«.s rare askod about?

A. Tos, and than tfcw caus.s cf the condition of the child has
ho be desc- ; bud very carefully and it finally :isked whether any ensures

7311


Court I

9 Hay-rl - 11-2 - LJ3 Kcrros (Von Schon)

had boon token — any therapy ag'.inst the disease — and than, as far
a? I can raaecbor, it was asked vfaat the child's life expectancy was
ir.d whether too child cculd bo oxpectud tale any useful placo in
society. Scr-othing like to t.

Q. These questionnaires. Doctor, rare l_tjr s-nt fro: Berlin to
tnc .iovorment doctors with instructions th-t when such births occurred
tho questionnaires were to bo filled out and sent back to Berlin?

A« f-3.

3. If 1 speak of lerlir., I don't know *tetn-r you and I under¬
stand tho so.-o thing. You roro talkinj about Berlin o-feru. what
did you x>cn by that?

a. hhon - said Berlin I was talking about the Reich Co-vdttco.
That's t o only agency T had anything to do with th-rc, and to *oru-
ploto ny answor to too Last quosticn I can s.iy th. t the questionnaire
was published in sozo ninistoriel journal or so>ro l;w Journal. It was
printed there I believe by the Wien /iniatry of the Interior. I lenrnod
of that only later when tho Reich Co- ittou Station ulTe dy existed
in my instituto. I think clerk told o so. a, any rate, tho duty
of midwivos to roport and doctors, -to., was mentioned.

Q. Another question. In too proceedings b-foru tho Reich Co vit-
too there roro oxoorto working?

a. Yes, I L_ rr.cd of tost later.

«. You know nothing of it at too tine?

A. No, I kn w nothin? f it at tho too. I knew noti.ing about
the nothod.

W. And toon, I assrr-j, you knar, nothing about who decided that
a child was to bo suit to such a specialized clinic?

a. No, I know nothing about that.

Q. Doctor, I core now to a qu-sticr. which, under Gumon Law,
w*uld give you the rigat tc refuse an msuar.

; -r. President, I should like to ask you to instruct the witness
t .at, in the c-asu qu-s ions daich -i at expose hip. to prosecution,

7312


Ccurfc I

9 Har-. - 11-3 - L-JG - KarrciKVon Schon)

ha ir-y r_iuso to answer.

T>3 .-^SISBOTt Is tho witness new under Indictment or charges/

D... FROBSCH&F : Hot that I knew ef.

.HE ./IT1SSS: Ho, L-h ve received no indictments. I h.vc merely
been interrogated.

THE FPESIDEyr: Tho witness is htnover under restraint.

DR. FRCBSCmFN: Yes, Hr. President.

T E tRESHJBfT: Tloll, the witiK.se is instructed that, if in his
Judgnont, to answer any question propounded tohi- would t-nd to in-
crindnato hii. or subject hiei to indictment, h- has the right to refuse
to enswor tho question.

BY D3. FROSSCJTAHNs

Q. Did you understand th-.t? You haw, the right, if you are
asked a question nhich rtLfcht involve >ou yourself in a trial, to any,

"I refuse to anarnoT*. You any .answer it is you wish.

lieu, I roV you — when, Lat.r, ir your institute a Reich Corwdttoo
Station s s.,t up, .: ■) defer cd children sunt tc this Reich Coramlttou
Station?

a, Would you ple”ao repo .t th t?

Is it true th-.t la tor — 19lil or 19L2, I'll leave th .t ti«no
open — in tho provincial : ant el station, th^re wis a so-cal led Reich
Co ;,iittce Station for these children?
a. Yes.

4. Who told you abort th t?

«• T t was tr.o result of a r’isejssion ir. unich in the i inis try.
i. ”ot/, did y u recoivo authorization fro*: any source to tr«_.at
these children according to -.odvrn Kthods of therapy and, if the
treatment was cc pletoly hopeless, t shorten the life of these child
re:i?

a, Yes, that as in tho letter cf authorisation.

1. Fro ho i did thi3 latter coic?


«s far as 1 reorder, fro the' Reich Co—ittec


Court I

9 itay_K - n-ii - LJG - Sorrow (Von Sohon)

2 . And tho Belch c OssJ.tfcee was hoidcd by

a. (Interrupting) I must toll you 1 don't knowfrois ray own knowl¬
edge.

Q. Then you say th*t you received authorization? It was in
writing?

A. TeS, it was in writing, -uihorizatiens for every individual

case.

Q. y ou received soparato authorizations for each case; th.t these
deforced children - idiots, etc. - wore to be treated by the modern
nothods of ttorapy and if thoso c sos rare hopeless ttien the life should
be shortenod? Is that true?

a. .toll, it didn't any that tho children's lives should bo ohort-

onod.

K. U.DX: a; it plcaso Tour Honors, I object to thuso lording
questions on t rfc of the dofor.se c nsol. It scobs to rae that
the witness is a prychiatrist, ho is tho chief of a Rental institution,
and that ho is foci liar w 5 th tfi outhanasia program and is fully capablo
of ring tho questions without being led in this manner.

DR. F.lOaSCH.-WW: * r. Irasidcr.t, I . not aware of h ving askod
any loading qu*-tions.

TH2 hOSIDB’-Tt Counsel nay procaod,
bi dr. yp. oisck^Mi

3. Doctor, the >ast ^uu cion in this connection. Do you know who,
in oorlin, reached these decisions th .t a child wr-s to bo assigned t.o
the Reich Caaritbee Station?

u. I loaned I vor u :.t » e- questionnaires on children which

were- recei ved wero axaidnod and the tdical opinion was ...rprosst-d on
tho i. who decided, I don't know.

Q. '‘non, I shall closo this chapter about too Reich Conaittou for
Children witli Severe -eriditary Disoos-s md I cor„ to tho socord pre-
ceduro: &;tlianasia f the lac.- / bly inr uae.

■


9 2-12-l-:Moy (Int. Yon Sc boon)

Court ;«3. I.


Q I should like to “sk you first to explain to tho Tribunal
your fundamental attitude on tho question of euthanasia?

A Ccntlcj^nt, I have a positiv. attitude toward the idea of
o':than*.'ia. I an .an advocate cf tho subject of euthanasia. T know
the literature on Iho sublet. I h'vo : ivon considerable thought to
the problem of outkanasis. I ras interested in it already as a nodical
stud.rt. ..r.on -y father was dyinfc, ho suflured severe eurcnic attacks
repontjd .,v_ry far rinates, a terrible sight, not only for .yaclf but
for :iy 4 ioor father. Tho doctor finally shortened ay f-th-r'a lifo.
Later I b-cnoe an advecato of it rs a practicing psychiatrist, nftur a
sight of t'.io .aisery ir. tho rental it.otitufio.is and th. distress of tho
mothers and fathjre of thoso chiidron. That is v.hy I looked at
euthanasia positively. And I put ysolf .at tho disposal of tho Reich
Work Union whon I *at> < llod upon. I know tto opinion of important
Q-r;an rofunsers and their attitudo upon cuthrnasia, nd 1 .xrsonally
and seriously accepted tho idea.

Cl Doctor, is it true that f ~ru are two kinds of euthanasia
up to 1539, rvr.oly, aid in dying, that is relieving th. pain cr fail¬
ure to ••d.alnistor stimulants, and aid ;o dio, that is riving drugs if
if n-s Curt in that duath would *ccur vtry shortly, and the tcrriblo
death sur’ lu sucl *r ycu haj just d. scribed in the cr.so of your
fr.thor could be shortened?

A Y« s, this distinction \s -ado. I once t Heed of n major
and a minor euthanasia, tn_ ainor euthanasia thj simpler aid in dying
and tho -.'.lor cut ha male, hich ;r ii.tanded for individualc incapablo
of living, such aa Krttsclxer and H-r.s Jacob and others have advocated.

Q Doctor, what was do:uj in 1939, if I judge the r.tt r

correctly, is consider>fcly different fro: the typo cf outharr.sla curt-

omt y up t fiir.t tine, that is tc shorten tho lives of tit incurably

insane who mi^ht live for yerrs cr decad-s possibly in this p*inful

•

condition in as painless * way as possible, is that true?

A That is true only insofar tncsu patients, of course.


9 lay-: -2-12-2-' iloy (Int. Von Seboen)
Court Ko. I.


were not in coiincnt danger of death ~ixi wore included in tho drive of
the Reich burking Union, but even th_so cases could not ir. any ease be
expected to live very long. Sobody can .r^dict that, of course, but I
wrote a paper once on the lifu s.vn of incurably insane people and I
proved ay statistics that, outside of institutions theso cases have a
shortened life span. This work ins iven -reat attention in Dutch
nodical circles, and I got -a g-od criticisn in a Dutch p:;xr which was
sent to ::o by a Dutch doctor.

Q iiow, doctor, how did it cone about that you worked in tho
so-called euthanasia progr-e:, in tho general consideration of tho
procedure within the euthanasia program?

A Ono day, I re afraid I don’t know the tine oxactly, I
thought it v-a in 19U0, but I can't duny tho possibility that it night
have been in tho o-rly winter or late f11 rf 1939, I received a re¬
gistered lottcr fron tho Chancellory of the Fuuhrur with r. requsst to
report in Berlin at the Chancellory of th/ Fuehrer for a conference,
at a certain meeting.

Q "oil, now lot .« interrupt you; do you knew whether tho
invitation itself came fron the Grnceliory cf the Fuehrer or fron tho
Raich Kinistry -f tfw Interior in the of ice of tho ChancoUory of tho
Fuehrer?

A As far as I rcc-11 tta onvolopo had a stamp on it "Chan¬
ce iloiy .'f tho Fuehrer", and as far as I roneuber it was signed
"Bouhlor."

Q That will be enough, hitnoss, now wh“t was tho subject of
the discussion at this, oaoting?

A As far as I c-n r. onbor this mooting, which ms u*Vv.ry
long ti:\j a£,o, ay iepressien w.-s that tho separation of the mental in¬
stitutions into curable cases and incurable cases. Th-t was ay in¬
press ic® at this corXv.rer.co. The transfer rX Certain paticr.tr, to
provincial institutions, was discussed. • thought that certain serious
ca • r vh: could nrX co tre ted psychiatrical!? were to be transferred


7316


9 * T- 3-12-3- ' -Icy (Ir.t. Ton ^h»n)
C x?rt Ho. I.


to special institutions.

Q ..'-s tho word "euthanasia" used?

A As fir os I can ren-. b^r the word "euthanasia" was r.ot

used.

Q ’..'itiKss, after this coating passed, a fow we~ks later,
oven longer, w^rc you asked to work as an export in a procedure judging
those insane people?

A Yea, I was ir. Berlin repeatedly. I took card of tho
questicn-iairos cf the p .tier.ts in ay institute on whoa questionnaires
were drawn up, and then I wrs called into a Ducting in Berlin r.1toro as
far as 1 re - ber I think there r.r- a a.* professors tix.ro too, but
in any ca.co ttere wore psychiatrists -nd doctors. I considered that
a looting of oxi»rt Judjes, and w- had a discussion "nd wurc civon
dir-otiv^s on Judging thu question.*.'.irer, and I believe this v;ac be¬
forehand that I was asked to w rk as an ox.vrt Judge.

Q r.'ha was in chatgo cf those conferences, w r that loohlcr

or Lindan?

A Ho, I think Union was than.. I think Dr. Brack was
there, but I can't say for certain. I don't believo Soohler was at
this conference, naybe only temporarily, I can't say for curt-in.

q Xoifc what did you do as .an oxpert Judge?

A I received an appointment, a letter fron tho Reich Inistry
of tho Interior. I can't say exactly whothcr it was sip.rod by Lindon,
but I received r. letter in the r.-.xj f tho Reich 7/ork Union, and I
don't knir ho»; it read, but in any c-so in thu progr n tf tho Hcich
\ork 'hion I vac asked to work as -n ox.crt Judge, and 1 considered it
riy duty to sj, bee mse I raa in f v r f euthanasia.

q Krr, this work consisted *f passing Judgnont on these
questionnaires, is that rif-,ht?

A Yes, photest.atic copies f thoia.

DR. FP.CESCHMAN.V: lif t, t'ne&j quosti -nr.aircr, ’tr. Ir«.sider.t,


-re ceiitai:v;i in the German D cnynt ~ .k 110. >25, Exhibit 35>i, in thu

7337


o V)


2-12-U-tiloy (Int. V;r Schocn)

:urt So. I.

Gsraan >-curv;nt Book Hi, part 2 , tr -50 133. In the English Document
Book, I shall give you tha page nuubor this rXternoon.

Q Doctor, do you r^x. ber the contents of these question¬
naires or shall I show you th- docirxr.t?

A 1 would appreciate it if you would give m, the. document.
THE HESIDEWTs Before going into this natter of the dccu^nt
book, the Tribunal will bo in rec-sc until 1:1*5 this afternoon.
(Thereupon the noon recces rs taken.)


/f«7

9 UTjr-A-IB-lJi-l-Ccok (Int. Rorslor)
Court Ho# I.


AFTsmax)’; session

(The Tribun-1 reconvened at 13‘:5 hours, 9 !?-iy 19U7.)

TJ2 ARSHAL: Persons in th- C ;urt rocc will please find
their seats,

T!u Tritur.-l is again in session.

T.'J. iRLSIDErff: Counsel any proceed.


DR. JPAWPOELIZP. - Ilcsurcd
D7RECT SX.V IH.YTICK

BY DR. FRCESCH :iNK: (Cour.s.l for Vilrtor Brack)

Q Witnoss, I rer-ind y.u that you nro still under ".nth.

Hr. iToaidont. I any repent what I hnvo f-1 led to note?
this norning, noaoly, docw*nt 1133, Exhibit 3l;9 is in English docu-
nont volume* 1L, pago lSl, 1696 K> Exhibit 3l<7 is to bo found in
English docununt book Ik, pngo 209.

Witness, this nomine wo stop;*od discussing tho quest¬
ion whot’wr you still ronjefcorod the quca -lc naairo which *rs usod dur-
in tho outhonosia procedure in thi case of incurnblo Rental p-tionts.
And first I should liko to interpolate a quoation. You were m ox-
pi rt, na .an export, did you over : ivo nay opinion r.bout questionnaires
which had to bo filled out about tho patients of your instituto?

A ho.


•1 Vihy did that r, >t happen?

A Docvjse we received, directives th-t wo could not qiva


such x.-ort :pinions .an quosti n-. airco rhich cava undor >ur own in¬
stitute._

c*-' - - Q to what principles did ycu oxerciSu y ur 1 expert

jfeiitfens whon expertising these questionnaires?

A I observed- the following principles when filling out tho

questionnaire, whan filling out tho l~ft lower corner f that question-

V /

niirsfim Tho principles were told us in Berlin during th-.t exjxrt con-

v * *

fertneo which I have already ivntionod. .0 vurc told with regard t.


731?


9 Mny-A- S-ll:-2-Cock (Int. Rr aa lnr )

Court So* I.

feeble nindedaow that it was divided into three forra, the light feeble
ninded, tho nodluB feeble winded and ah. severe idiotic fern. '..bon
charging feeble ninckdiKss, one has to tajeo into consideration tho dc-
•;rec of tho intellect aid-tho personality involved. In tho cases of
schizophrenia, the cause of tho illness, tho ntntal picture and tho
corvditirn :f the patient, tho fair of schizophrenia, and noet import¬
ant, wo wore then concerned with a condition which has to bo considered

•

when giving an expert opinion, tho valuation tc bo attached to tho do-
greo of daaogo to the personality of tho aan involved, and whon giving
the prot.nosis of tho rind. In tho case cf organix psychosis and in
this conrscticn I nay in particular nontion epilopsy and paralysis, and
Just to mention too one has to bsurv^ in tint atago tho paralysis is
and vhat kirxi of treatment has preceded that stage. Ono has tc observe
whethor thoro is a refractory f.vjr.aay condition, vfcich is .a ccrviiticn
which can no longer bo treatoti, a ccoplotoly final condition. Ono has
tc tako into consideration whottor any such condition has resulted.

In tho case of opllopsy cne has to find out vhothur tho personality of
tho nan involved has changed in any way, whether he is subjoct to at¬
tacks, ot cetera. Psychosis rognrding ago has to bo rejected. Tho
treatment in itself and tho c.aro in nn institute would have to bu con¬
sidered whoever giving a Judgnont .about tho case. Pooplo who wore
injured as a result if war should not be exportizod positively ospoci.al
ly in thieo c-scs whon tho danago as a result cf war is not oithor an
organic connoction or any cthor conr.octicn with the Dental condition
cf tho patient. At a later date the quosticn was discussod whuthor
people who received damages as a result cf w>rk should not bo expert¬
ized positively. This quosti n was n.-t dc'lt with ccontoic-fly ac-
c. rding tc groups, for instance house work, or paper work. In othor
rr rds, it was not graded as tc light work, nodiun work or har.*y work
and no nation was nadc about .agricultural work, it cetera, but this
merely was ucod as a diagnostic psychiatric .aid in ardor tr evaluate
tixj ability ,f the patient t- work within his environment. It was ox-


9 :iay-A-:e-lii-3-Cocic (Int. Rarcler)

Court Ko. I.

pressed that this questicn ms to bo considered in a very serious tray
and the occupation of tho patient should have to be changed very
favorably. Furtherscre, rwnticn was aado that tho oadical expert
and especially tho previous exports who wore used would only have to
donl with radical points. In no case wore thoy to touch upon other
questions contained in the questionnaire, quostions concerning visits,
ot cetera.


S'


7321


:: -y 9 -- -3ZI-15 -1 -Ga 11 a^hor (Int. itaualor)

Court I, Caso Ko. 1

4 Doctor, ccy I ask ycu to r.oko a 3nnll pause between
your individual sentences, ••ill you please continuo?

.. Th- Jaws who wore at the Institute frexi a aodio :1
point of viow wore to bo considered in the soac way as
ny other .a-yon. iiacc should ccrJce no difference. Forui-n-
ors woro not to fall under the question of jiving on
-xport opinion, >>o were told th-t J-ws, us well as
foroi ;n^rs, do not fc.ll -itbin the couoept of euthanasia,
s it was cronnt her-. -Iso c decidin; factor for the
export ;.;.S the way the questionnaire wr.s filled out, Jhun-
A*-r no firr. dooi3ion could be erriv-d .t, r» h .d not tho
ri*;ht to insert either u class nejor or dnor nt tho
lower lofthund oorn-r, but wo oouid o-ll i oaso question¬
able, wo oouid add th t was done by either export, nt
any rate, by co. Thoao woro sont on, tho case history,
or else n person .1 ex r:in tien of the p tiont is necessary.
-11 of thoso things woro actually observed. Thuro wea oven
tho possibility to insert a detailed roiiork on the back
of the luostionnaire about any natter which was left un¬
ci-..r, or ebout any invostixtion which 3till :u.y b-
nocossury. I think those *.i-r«. tho brond outlines on thoso
oints which I o..n r.ontion.

Can you still ron-ubor, witness, who issued thoso
directives?

- These uirectiv-s nr- tho oor.3 equonoos of a talk cnonc
the expert physicians who . rrtioip-.tod in this conf-ronoo,
of experts. This was tho suaninj-up of this outird con-
f-ronco. I think that I said that I don't know whether
Boukl-r was there, but I think that ho nay h vo been ono
of the people who were in the Praosidiun, but it was not
of psychiatrists.

. Doctor, by insertin’ in your answer th t stajteaont,
you answered also mother question is to what category the


H.v 9--.-Z2C-lS-2-Gnllajhor (Ir.t. Handler)
Court I, Cd3C Ho. 1


p.rsons wore oliiiinated. Cor. you tell no why in spite of
this exception, it vir.s sot down thr.t the questionnaire
had to be filled out regard in.; foreigners? .

.. questionnaire, I never sow ■ questionnaire about
foreigners.

v «hat exactly do you neon? Dootor, I should like to
point out to you that a 3o-o_lied regulation shoot wuo
attached .t. tie questionnaire?

.. Ho, I never rocuivod that.

4 There see;is to be a littlo nisundorstanfiiai botwoon us.
You arc richt that under the activity of the experts, which
you just described, you only know cf the photostntic oopy
of the questionnaire, perhaps in addition to the ca3o
history. However, I new asking you about the filling
out of the questionnr.ire, the fillin : out of the questionn¬
aire on tho ba3i3 of the previous questionnniro, which had
been sunt to your cental Institution. You wore asked to
fill out the questionnaire r.ooordin; to the cate ;orius
which wero laid down in the previous shoot of which I an
3;e kin;,. Do you hwo Docun.nt SCO-825 before you? Th.it
locu-^nt, you will find it La the Gurnan Docun~nt Voluno
14, pa jo lee. I shall have th_t Doeuuont do ok handed to
you. The doeuuont is liO-825, exhibit Ho. 358. I alroudy
cited the papu in the -n lish Docunent dock Ho. 216,
Document Bock Ho. 14, port II. would y>u please look at
this shoot, I think it was on jrocn paper?

.. I never received thr.t, never did.

«. Didn't you?

.. No, I never did. I never even saw it. I would h :ve rc-
-xibarcd thr.t. I r: sure T would have rononborod if thero
e.3 sonsthina like that thero on ~reon paper. However,

I never received it.

7323


May 9-f--SiC-15-3-Gallnqhor (Int. Ilamlcr)

Court I, Cr.so iJo. 1


- May I inter polcto a question, ./hen in tho Fall of
1939, or tho boginnin.; of '40, you wore asked to fill out
questionnaires about certain p.-.ti^nts La your Lastitution,
such a questionnairo would have to bo directed to your
of fie-, is that right?

.. Yes. Those questionnaires wurc sent to uo, yes.

. I asked c.l3 0, perhaps you con not rooonbor it, that
a regulation shoot was at too hod to that questionnaire,
whether it was on greon or white neper really nnkos no
differonco, and I think that in this rojulation 3hoet a
oertr.iu oato;;ory of persons vr;s sot dov/n who w-ro to be
considered when fillin'; out tho questionnaire. First,
those persons who v/ero suffering of illnesses and could
th-roforo not be used for any work at all; secondly, 3uch
persons who for a nux.b-r of years, I think five years, .
had been In an institution; thirdly, persons who frou a
le;al point of view could be considered, and fourthly,
foreigners. I want to ask you whether you knew for what
r.aoono the filling out of «,UeStionn .ire was necessary
f:r foroi/ners in3.kto of the st..tev:ont wiiich you Just
ciedo to tho offoct thr.t foreigners did not cone under
euthanasia. Do you undorstaxxl do?

<• Yos.

. If you don't know that, .lease don't nakv. any assouap-
tion. Just s x/ so.

I only received these directives rturin;; the export

•>

conference, and I can not renccbor having r-Cuiv-d pre¬
viously any re dilation 3heot attached to the questionnaire,
sofar as I can rcr.ocbcr. I just received the questionnaire.

. In other words, you can not tell us anything about
" t. You can not say why qu-stionniire had to bo
filled out about these foreigners?


9-«-3K-15-4-G-llQ.*2bc r (lot. xlr.---J.or)
Court I, Cr.3c No. 1


« No, I con not sa7 that.

t m that case I wish to conclude this chapter by
Putting two questions. On tha basis of thoso questionn¬
aires, could a roliablo decision bo node about the fact
that the cental illness of a patient concerned was still

in effoot inourablc?

„ It is ny point of view that a questionnaire is a
sufficient basis for a psychiatrist expert in order to
Ju j 3 o whether the case should bo transferred to one of
the core institutions of which I have spoken about pre¬
viously, or not. In addition we ware told durln;;' this
export conference that an opinion by throe pro-exports
Should bo subject to a cession of top exports, and
that this comission of top experts should onoo core
mvo.tl-.-ato the ease concerned la case of anythin-; that
„ss unclear. They should either visit the patient con¬
cerned personally, or else obtain its case history, -t
on, rate they should do socethiu.; in order to obtain
Clarification ru^.rdlnp the oases. The deal.ion would
huva to bo undo at the end. The physician who is to
accept the patient into the institute is to have another

voto •

. ..hat you just said is of considerable Interest,
espoolally because the Prosecution has sutcittod Docunont
3865-PS, Exhibit 365, which is to bo found in the -man
Do.unent Book 14. P~.se 156, and in the dnilish^ocun.nt
Book nt pr.,o 230. This is a doouaont wherein feaalo
witness points out that a oomission of physicians
visited yoar. institute, who stayed there for a nueber of
d ,ys, end there personally oxmlned a number of patients,
-ft.r havin' studied th. case history. Do you thine th t
this oomissioh of which this femle witness is spockinp


.y J--.-5K-15-5-G_ll_:;h~r {Int. Hander)

Court I, Case No. 1

was probably the- condssion of which you wore just spooking?

.. I can not ror.enb-r that a conriission of physicians
was at ziy Institution in the year of 1040. I assuno this
concerns one physic! a who visited uy Institute. I only
assure that. I think that this uust be the physician
ur.o gather ad all the physicians of the entire personnel,
and al3o the ones of the personnel who woro to doul with
the qujstionneiros which woro to ,;o to Berlin. He wonted
noro investigating of those questionnaires in order to
arrive at soco decision. I think that was the c;.s... But
I don’t think it wa3 c oomission.

•* u Doctor, you told ac th_t tho questionnaire noant for
you a sufficient ba3i3 for Jud ;ing the do ;rco of oontul
illness. But I would rather gonorolizo this question,
in view of wh.t the .resident hr.s told r.e this uorning,
hd I would not like to Unit it to your or. 30 . Tho
psychiatrist physicians who woro conorally intended to bo
ox, -rtn, could they also rccanriend the dogroo of nontul
illnoss on the basis of the questionnaire?

•

.. Jof r r.s I knew only the nosfc experienced expert
physiciuns wore used for those expert jobs. ..non;: then,

3of .r as I know, there wore tLo' University Professors,
tho Crdinnriuses, tho oxtra-Oruinariusos, and tho practical
.sychir.trists. I don't know the norios of the exports in
ciotiil, boonuso that u .a :;-v .r told to r.o. Frou later
re. erts , however, for instance, fro:.. Hoidolborg, I know
that only tho ;:pst officiant poo]lo woro selocted^ I
know and I think that those poop lb had the 3 ur.o point of
view as I had. However, I oi not sure about that.

7325


9 £nar—A-s :.J.~ l6-l-Karrc*T(Ir.t. Rrxsnier)

Court I

q. Doctor, ir. spits of your opinion that, on the basis of those
questionnaires, the doly^o of tho rental illness could bo defcor-
-ir.ed very cloarly, do you think that errors were possible?

a . Doctor, there is a principle which soys "Errare huaamzn
oat 11 - To err is hu-an. Even in the case of trials which are last-
irg for decodes, trials of a purely lcenl nature, errors have beer,
aide and errors will continue to be sado. This is exactly the

situation as in the case cf an export. These experts were used
in the sane wry as all the exports .aro used during any trial and
it 10 possible also for them to aakn an error once in a while,
but I do think that ne'ra here only concerned with singular caoos.

I don't think that any principal -rrors wore possible.

Q. Doctor, I only have a few qu.stiens to put to ycu. One
question ay yet have to be discussed in that conwection. In the
course of the evidence the prosecution has raised the charge that
these questionnaires were expertized by those experts in huge
nu&ors and wit >ly short xjorlod of tine.

k. Thoso queationnar-s cone to the pre-export in a register¬
ed packago and th-so uuontionnair.s wer- to bo de .It with as quick¬
ly os possible. That n s d,3irud during the expert co: nco, but

it ns nl3o point-d out th jy were to bo dealt with c .reful’y.
dhon dealing with any such quustionnairo and when considering the
period of tL-o it takes, oik rust hear in *ind that ti tm is really
not the Important factor. There aro persons who arc in r. position
to work quickly and others w-.o work ore- slowly. There are pooplo
who have their desks littered with files and c:.n never get anything
dorv,, and th-re are the people who sit at their desks and navor
leafce it before their Job is finished. In the case of th-se ques¬
tionnaires, tho contents cf the questionnaire is the ost impor¬
tant thing, k questionnaire can be kept in such a form that '’ion
Underlin: nf. psychiatric questions -ith red or blue pencil one rji -t
often co 30 tc a decision within r. Period of one dnute. One could


9Kay-vfc--^. J«—16-2—Karrc*^ ( Int. Rsaulor )

Court 1

perhaps roach a negative decision, not necessirily a positive de¬
cision. However, there wero other questionnaires, and that par¬
ticularly in the case of the Later questionnaires when the cases
woro :ioro difficult and not as clear as before, that one could pon¬
der about such a questionnaire for days and not g_t finished with it.
In that case, a question n:rk had to be put down and the decision
had to be left to other agencies. In any case, I don't want you
to accept that as ary defense of any p_rsonal nature, but I want
to put that to you as a defense for oil exports. 1 have dealt
with those questionnaires no c ref ally as possible and in order to
ba quite sure personally A looked through a few huiidroda of those
questionnaires one ornin , let thc*a lie, then perhaps looked at
another bunch of th-8e files In th_ afternoon, and then once *oro
looked at tile first heap of these questionnaires and only then gave
•sy opinion on tYiauu

Q. Doctor, tills brings o to the end of th- .jost oxtenaivo
point of view rog rding the procedure which w .s adopted by the Reich
Co-, dttcu v. thin the outhnnasia procedure. It is now only necessary
for m to put a nub.r of 3 aI 1 cu-otlons to you which :ircs- frop
your activity and Which have to be illos tr a ted so it. Did you,
at any tL -, hoar that th-se poor Amtal patients, .r>d these poor
Children tK,ro designated as "useless eaters"?

A. Tiio expression "useless c-ters" I he rd for the first ti->o
Tinile being here. I >aver heard this expression when doling with
-r.y .encioo with ..ich I was iu contact. You -ay believe '*o that
if any serious rinded j>_rscn had hoard that expression hf would
have thrown everything away and would have- said "I -t. r.ot goin to
cooperate.""

3. Doctor, ora witness has stated in an affidavit that in
the year of 19u2 there was a conference in the Ministry of the
Ir.vricr during which the directors of th. institutes ir v rc to have


9 May-u-, V-3-Korrcr; ( Int. Ha. -tier )

Court I

received the directive to kill these useless uat_r3 by slo><
starvation. Do you knot: cf zxiy such conference ir. the Bavarian
Ministry of the Interior?

A. Thor© was a conference in the Bavarian Ministry of tho
Interior of all tho institute directors coring from Bavaria. Thi3
conference was called by the Bavarian Ministry of tho Interior. I
don't know what the na -js of all tho participants w 0 ru, but, as far
as I reuoabor, th- directors of all these institutes were actually
present as far as they held the offices. There was the follovlng
reason for the callin'; of this conference. The public rental in¬
stitutions, fro . the point of view of nourishrTent, wore tr-;tud
in a riaiwor niiich is uoual to certain institutions *..hich do not
correspond to ucntnl institutions; for instance, work hous-o. »o
wero subjected to whatever woru dished out in the way of rations,
nhun, in tho la.tor years, nourish >ont b-crurte a problem and, in
particular, the rations were reduced, difficulties began to nriso
within the institutions. In particular, those- patients who w>,ru
working within tho productive program of that institution had to
starvu. They could no longer oat to thoir satisfaction and, as
i result, becarjo worse in thoir condition, as other directors of
institutions, I attempted to incroaso the ration by oking a nu bor
of applications at the Food Office in itnich. I tried to get a
special ration cf food to the sine extent as was iven to heavy
workers. I had to visit this office for ten tia_s and I only re¬
ceived rations for that personnel in y institution who were un-
ga&od ir. the heaviest work and only that after isany, uny ifcedious
rv. jottntiona. I only received that for tubercular patients and
People who had to stand on guard for as long as t-n hours. Thu
whole thing was refected for the. patients. Then, of course, I
had to sake a cocoplaint to the district office -nd I also turned
to the :{inis ry of the Interior in 3avoria. .-»t a later date I


9 Hay-i

Court I


’alee 16
J-ii-Karrc


( Int. Ra.-r.lcr


)


lcorrud during that conference that the sane, thing had happened
in the case of other diroctore of institutions without twin? a-
blo to co .w to any understanding. However, nothing was given to
us. So-so &djusbs«nt had to be j-ade with the rations which wo re¬
ceived at tho institute and it was then dot-r ir.wd that the pa¬
tients had to be treated in a different way who w u rc at a uch
loner social level for tho bon-fit of the oth..r patients, and I
think I want to point out scuothing .-lae- I would not hav^. been
in a position to o&intain one of ”y insulin depart-r^nts if 1
hadn't received enough nourishment'#

Q. Doctor, if 1 understand you correctly, this dealt r.lth
tho giving of nourish.-ent to these institutions by the Pood Office
which had nothing to do at ell rith outhanasis. How, another ques¬
tion- aoong the cental patients who were transferred to an eutha¬
nasia station fron your institution, were th-re any such people
who could bo considered as valuable work-rs?

A. Gontl-r-on, I filled out the uontiennuir-s of ay insti¬
tution by having every or*. of y patients presented to me persona¬
lly. This -fas done by the head nurse of that particular dooart-
TOht. That was dona in the pre3_nce of the head nurse and in tho
presence of tho physician «f tho aopnrtoont, who had previously
filled out tho questionnaire. Also in the presence of the ordi¬
nary nura~ or the parson who was controlling tho work of that
■atiunt, I looked at th- case histories. I don't really know
what other safeguards I could havw token#

3 . t any rato, you sa jf "no to the question that any valu¬
able workers nero transferred to tho euthanasia program?
a. Ho, that is out of the question#

7330


j art 1

1: ; loy-Rrmslcr.

Di- v r -in knovle: j t.-.n petiants ware trans-
;.rr-i fr * — nt 1 Institutions f r authrnpsln?

.i. - c,t r ; I thini I f.r ot avoetolin.. fr.m before.

I : - c* o tl-nts-r.:. I ..idn't .-an:, tr^s ;n t. the
■rvns-ort in c aas whore I didn't tl-inh they should be
Srpnsferred to the transfer institutions.

Sow, I snail once mure repent the quest?, n. Bid yuU
«v r .Bln knowlod.e t..st uetlants ware transferred from
;er,:ri instltutl.na into eutr.?n sir stations in >rder to
v.rj- Je sufficient e)fve f.r y unded' .©rsonnel?

a. I didn't i.„> that It v a poselpla, however, that
: on:iot re.fiem:r t.-.le, durin ; tr.c c nf-.rence In Berlin,

^r. E.-nlor'6 c nforence, ■» rclo->ee of soace •■•re discussed
.. -he f r.Uf.va of C.vt spree :.r «ray purposes. «t
*"• rate Is • s a rticul rl. dleousaed th.t this rp&co v;ps
c. be vacated f.p -purposes .f .. elm.., put t within the
:r*. * y > rh .f outnrnaaie, eutheneale ves not rt ell

'l v-saod.

I . vc -nc : r: question to * u; to whom v*ro the
authpaaei* etstione eubordlnrt ::. fr a of loir I point
: view?

a. :r-. n of id? 1 oir.c i view t..ey •./ere s ub. r:\lanttd
i'.lnlitr f tic Interior xe. lcrlly, from the ao.noalc
* lnt of view the; rare nbordi «ntc:. c tne rtaHi-iearrt
?r-~ldent, t..- : is c.. ; district president, w..o *i- *. e.
arena o: r: nr ta c _ap rtaent. .is was p lc .el sen
s ..at chad for ta : -ep rtaent.

•• Joct.r, v s there e Xftti ,nal docl-list .Kurscs Oorpe?

«. I nevor xa rd of myth in- lihe thrt in »; life.

3?.. rRO£cw-.Aft.- : I s-Id llha t :oln: juc th« • the

- : neecutl s submitted *-ocua=nt 3 R2r3, .exhibit 571,

- c-aenc 3oox 1-., a 123 of c.e -^racn edltl rn: m


Court 1

:->.y 9-^-17-2-HDrifcloy-aeat-ler.


the English edition p?^e 262. This Is the rf.’id-vit of
Jordans, wherein It Is stated these injections in the cose
of c.-lldren were introduced by physicians »nd nurses of the
so-called National -Socialist Nurses Corps.

THE WITNESS: Gentlemen, thrt Is madness. That is
complete C"dne86. We had nurses who cane from r free
nursin.; association. ”e had male oersonnel and femrle
oersonr.el nurses, end I know of r.o other nurses. I never
heard of the National socialist Nurses ^ssocl tion. I
w ulu h vo known It If such e tr.ln- had existed.

v. Now, the one last question, Doctor. Do /cu .in.w
that euthanasia iwd been carried ut because of dsfonoiva
and political reasons?

*. No, during ay Interrogation by tne /uoorlcan gentle¬
men I hve been asked ob-ut that quc a tion, but I don’t
know anythin- ab ut that.

DR. FR0E3CmiA.;N: Hr. President, In that connection I
refer to another doouaent whloh has been submitted by the
Prosecution, Document No. 38 ?6, Exhibit 372, In volume 14,
P'.e 184 In the O-roan edition, vnd pr c e 233 of the
English document book, w..ich deals with the affidavit A
Dr. 3prauer, where he says that aentlvn was ma-e durln w :
the c.nfcrer.cc In 3erlln that eutr.'n-sla wes n-cosoary for
defensive and political recsons.

x. Kow, I npve one other question. Did you -ein
::nowled-.e that euthanasia vts to be extended to elderly
psocle?

a. No, on the contrary.

DR. rROEoCHrUKN: Hr. President, In this connaction I
refer you to Document 81 , Exhibit 373, Document Book
D-rasan 14, pe.e 167, rn- the English Document Sock p e
35h. This :s sn affidavit c. tn. just mentioned Dr. 3prau«r.


Caurt 1

Kay 9- A-17-^-HD-Kaloy-R isnlcr.

q. Sow, one last question. When discussing the
exceptions you were sayIn : that people who were injured
as a result cf the war war.- to be excepted, perhaps you
didn't express yourself quite properly. I as5 putting to
you that in a document, which I don' c find, suomitted
by t '*! Prosecution, there was a list, of a number of
death cases where loath notices wore contained, and I
thlnx that three or four participants In the World War,
191 to 1918, were also mentioned there. Doctor, It is
qv. question now, Is It correct that only those partic¬
ipants In the World War were to be excepted where the
mental Illness was in connection with a wound which was
inflicted during the war, cr and that I can hardly as¬
sume, that all participants in the forld War wer .* to bo
excoptod who became aontally 111 as a result of thoir
injury?

*. Well, I oan't toll you that. I can only tell
you that in the caso or tnose people who oufforod In¬
juries as a result oi the war, and In which case there
was a connection between that Injury and thoir nontnl
condition had to be considered In a negative way. .is
for the others, I canr.ct tell you how they are Juried.

I thlnh It says here “military conscription from the year
of 1914-1918“ and then we inserted either "yes" or "no".
The -xport opinion loos not aopend on that at all. All
the nedica psychiatric questions of the transfer which
really had nothing to do with the expert. Now, somothlm;
else, gentlemen, I thlnK I oan romomber that this was
outlined in the file. Whenever participants lti the World
War were mentioned you must cons! lor that It is o.uito
possible that wo didn't Know from the case history whet¬
her the person concerned actually was a participant in
the War or not, because that was net laid down. It is
quite possible that


3-art 1

Vi;- 9-A-17—r-HD-iisloy-R?naler


e "no" vc8 lneert.d rt first, because -nc only s - it down
rccoraln- to tha adainistrr.tive files on tap. 6 o«r« a, -nd
,ne doesn't et all find • it whether c * aan *.•: * in t..e ypr.

If «n the otner henA he bed ' very visible Injur;*, -s r
result of t-ie war, supposing one of .lie erz6 was tni?sln tt
or .ne of his fin^-rs was -ls8in r , .r au-vuem.. - severe
hyalcol condition foe resulted be ecus* of t..o war, re
tuberculosis, I oen assure you tn t these people vere
not considered positive.

DR. FRCIcCHo. nr. President, I n ve n. furt. er
questions to the witness.

JUD32 SS3R::*o: Vltr.asa, the Iribur.yl hrs no or two
qUoStlor.s It would like to ask.

3Y JUDC-I 333R K3:

.. Ao I recollect your ts-tiu r,y * u s’ld t.vt ct

.19

tna aeetln- of t.ie neioh Joaulttc.- in £ s rl!n where t..e
euthmael" problem vrs consider .( is */. s there Cerur. nod

tie Jews vere not tc be Include; ir. the eut..v.*elr
:r-_rnx; did I undereten- you correctly?

*. I sn afr id I veen't in - >«it - our

question erectly.

ot^te whether or not Jv*;6 *-jre tv be included *n
c.e euth*ncsle pro.ran?

«. I didn't unow th t Jews vers to b. included. I
nevsr ne»rd of tnrt.

Then -..u don't jcn>.w v-.etaer fi.e vere : e
-.".eluded or exeluedcd?

^ *

«. That I really -or.'t Ita.w. The cusse an

institutions vere tre. : d equally* 1 once no difference rt

% »

.o i

s. Then fiu f- r e- m - in snort inn these v-rl us

• *

? icrs r. wo Id be eycrtiti '.id a decisi n aada - r-n


Court 1

Ivy 5-1?— b-dD-sp loy-Rp zizltv.


- yc tie trie pnd ser.tel colnt f view with -c slightest
c^nslderetl-n ba in^ r~e tv vnether he wre . Jew or :i.n-Jew,
is tlvt correct?

«. ‘.'ell, I navcr_i<-.e any difference w-.an dealing

wit.-, these c^sas, bet n^r.a of teen were trensf^rred.

None of whom?

a. Nona of the Jaws, none of t.u Jews vor* or .isferred.
Kona of tile Java wore sent to t.-j outhtnesla tr ns >• rC ns
far as I enow.

Why?

«. as I already eel.. Initially, t.ie Jews ware sent
to e Jewish Institute thr-sJ.h ■' c. llsctlve transp.rt n
the basis of en order by tne B'-vsrlen ministry vf t.:«
Interior.

And do ; a know whether or t ^t :.--5 J«wi*h
Institution selections were :*•&« for zevey de«tns?

a. No, I don't icnov tfcrt. I hid not.-.in- t tj
with tfc«t.

DR. FROESSStaNK: :«r. President, ar“ I it- te t.. t
witness is eoaevbst f, r... t*. t is v.y, I -s.. tb-t

•;..e Interpreter ene*fc o 11 c. 1 ? leader when spa-din l.i


* raipn to the witness


9 !&y 47 Cs-sk (Baaalfcr)

Court Ho. 1

7K2 &E&XDZKT: Has defensu counsel -ny further questions to this
.itr»-ss? There Join; non* the Pr >sueubion nay cross ocaaine.

CROSS SX.13NAT10N

aria, k.jdx:

Q. Dr. P.anrnuellfcr, have y_u boon intorr ate ' by Hr. Rodtll?

a. Yes, I -nly learned his rca* a little Inter.

Q. An.' ou hrsvo boon inter T; 'tod by Dr. H~>cbiald, the Czocho
Slovakian attorney workin, for th. Prosecution here ir. Number,:?

Tea, there was another ;cntloarn there. I don't know whether
that was Hr. KochwnV r not. I later learned a certain "r. Hochwnld
»(to th-re.

Q. Hr.vo y u 'con into.rro_-.Uj ’ by th. Prosecutor of the Gerst-n
Court in Frankfurt?

A. Yec, I was interro,-.U * by a nuabor f ir.vesti rating jud{.»s,
thruo )r f ur f tton.

Q. .. .on y .u tiv.ro inUrr te by Hr. ho ell and Hr. HachwalO
wore y.u un or nth?

... Tea.

Q. i*.ro you under .nth when y u were interrogated by theGor.vn
Prosecutor?

A. Ko.

Q. Then i*oU realize, f course, you ~ro un’er o".th hero?

n. Tos, certainly.

Q. will u kindly tell the Tribun' 1 in your opinion why the
outhon-.sin r. ,raa was institute in Geraany?

I ..on't kr. w that. 1 us not inf r.r^ ab ut that r od I,
therefore, conn t tell y:u that. Only rt a later ‘ate I had^.ccasion
to sco tho Roichs loiter 3ouhler,'.lvro hu sh we-' .-ae- - letter, aca.,r 'ir<£
to which a decree had been issued by the Fuehrer which constituted
the b sis for the execution of the euthanasia ,or -ran. B~uhler shewod
.ae that .Krson-lly u,»or. ny request. I 'on't kn« whether at that tlno
I already kr.-sr about euthanasia or whether the question was.just >r.'.ir~
t.teo. nt any r - tc I assumed th't euthanasia ar.y case into question.


7335


9 Itiy 47 -..-18-2-pkp- Co k (Rar-ulor)

C urt Hi. 1

r.. Di’ iwhler 8how -/m r. letter Vrxt th. Fuehrer?

... Yes, I thou ht thr.t this »ss the ori. inal. I saw the
phot <st'tic c~ »y ir. Frankfurt. I can no len .r rcouTber that eX-ctly
tut I know th t in the letter which Bwhler sh we- to nw —

Q. V'vu the letter. I lust .-roly rant to -ask you a few
questi-ns bout it. Can y-u tell us the date on the letter, was it

1 September 1939?

«. I idn't write-ny letter.

Q. I rn 'sUr, : you about U« Fuehrer letter thr.t Bouhlcr
exhibit*;’ to you?

n. Oh, the Fuehrer -cr_o, yes. '.cult* yvu please repent your
quotti n?

Q. hrt ur.s th- *ato on the letter?

«. In 1 %n vr knw thvt. I think in Frankfurt I saw thr.t it
was 1 S- >terlor 1939, th t is, the h.-toot tic c ay which was ih»n to
e in Frankfurt, .h t was tho first f Se't.ab.r 1939. May I add that
I sirestate' in Frankfurt that I <rn ru 1 n er say with certainty
whother that tins th- Cocu.*»unt. I hr always th u-ht that n tlx, left
1 v*or c ;rxier thoro was .a remark: "Reich hiniatry f the Interior"

-r so.a».thin like that. .»t any r to I can't ren-abor that drouont
exactly. I Iso »liev<- n tho ocua nt sh am to -x, too re was
"Reichcleiter . uhler -n.' 3ran:’.t."

C,. '.‘e have th- cuoer.t. You don't r.ocd to explain the '. ocunont.

I sorely ask- ’ y-u the ate. Sew you pay attenti n * rxl answer the
questions I -a askir, you. N-w Doctor, in tho course f your r’irect
oxrninr.tl n hero dr’ you have notes written ut. Do y-u have notes
there before you?

«. Here, no.

Q. Y.u -n't have any papers there with notes written thoroon.

Y u wore italic iron a paper this rain . Do you hr.v- nAes written
r. the jtaor, any pencil notes or notes supplied to you by dofenso counsel?

i. t .1 you h-VC there * efj-e J 1 ?


7337


9 H-jr 47 -A-iS-3-pkp- Cook (Hf-acler)

Cwt to. 1

A. Before a- I hrvc oxcor.its fr the ;cuoent b -ks. Yos,

I node sr-t notes on the pages of thoso documents.

Q. doctor, you noted on the photostntic copy of the

Fuehrer Letter the cfcto 1 September 1939, tb you recall the date that
'-he Germans invaded Poland?

A. So, I don't know that.

Q. ..isn't tlsfit 1 September 1939?

A. ell that any bo but I don't knew that exactly. I wasn't
ctivc militarily with the exception of hiving b-cn conscripted to the
ixeta guard at the end, but otherwise I wasn't in *ny military sorvico,

Thu war started on tte> 1 st of September, 1939. I do know that.

Q. You I; vo .answ«rv*d ay emostion. Kow do you recall in your
Intorrof* tion of 21 September 1946 when asked the same question th‘t 1
naked you !»re today e to what was your opinion as to why the euthanasia
program was instituted and r.t that time you said that -ou thought it
was a military m»: sure for hospital purooeor. Do you recall answering
that in your interrogation in Suptuabor?

A. Me.

Q. RooQcbor you ro under oath hero, doctor.

A. I don't re=umtxr details any aero. I any say on<. thing. I

was interrog: ted so rapidly ~t that tins, th t 1 hardly had any oocsibillty

to think, r«d orw mix thing - it is possible that 1 slid that hospital

measure* were t~k.n into consideration for the purpose of the army. I

still say t<x 7 it is possible th t wounded people were discurscd but

%

I can r.j longer r-cerfc-r exactly. I don't want to say nythiie. which is
untrue.

;. ..bll nan when did you receive your invitation fran Boyhlc-r to
participate in th. euthanasia program?

A. I’oli, I just r.entiorxd thrt there was no talk of euthanasia
when I was with Bouhlc-r. At that tia*. I had not yet soon the decree.
During the . cuhler conference there- was only talk bout transfer into
thi c.unty car- institutions. As far as I kn •• this wis * etasur.. to
separate case j for care end c*svs tor treatment.


7333


9 '1-y 47 —18— i.~o kp— Cook (Rr.ar.l6r)

Court Ho. 1

Q. .’ell rc« when did yea receive your ir.vit-.tion fro-i Bouhlor?
t dr.to in the susre^r of 1940?

A. I repeatedly stated th-t I cen no longer remeaber the dates..

Q* roataber, witness ~ You rvaeabvred it very well in
Frankfurt.

A. I ror*Att41y said in .rnnkfurt thr.t I cannot renumber the
dr.tos which nor cuntioned. I don't know whether it was in the rpring
of 1940 or in the frill of 1939. I really can't roaembur th“t and I
repeatedly said so.

Q. .ell now, doctor, we fortunately h-vo records of your
previous interrogations. Now, doctor, during the course of your
ex-rain- tion in hr nkfurt you stated that when you Kent to tho Fuehrer
Chancellory in the suarier of 1940 th-t Bouhkr e vo you as a reason
far the execution of tfc. outhonasir. progrna th't it was necessary to
got nrre space - or the purpose ,.f the -m.1 orcoe, -nd in addition to
that you at tod th t it w-s also - prog rca wherein you would got rid of
ira-r tes who wore not fit for work. Kow don't y;u recall telling that in
an ex nirr.tixi in lrsnkfurt?

A. In Frankfurt? I m sure I didn't say it there. I really
don't r«nombor it.

You C -n't roaunbu* th't y u stated that on. of tho insane

noylucs, the n~n»o wr.3 Caber sec, spelled C-a-b-e-r-s-e-c- , was handed

%

aver to the euthanasia program?

A. I bog y-ur pardon. Gabersoe was the sister institution of
.air. e, located in upper Bavaria. Caber see w.as then vacated. I already
8:dd in rr nkfurt I no linger know t > which of these institutions but
•a mefcor of patients wo Sent i ay institute frea C buroe^ -.nd I .already
st ted in Frankfurt so far as I rv.ne.ab-r that p tients had lre.ady been
s^nt away r little while after they had coao. I did not p-rfcicipato in
the vacation of Gabcrsce. I said thr.t in Frankfurt the vacation if
the Gabersee institution was carri.d -ut wit. ut ay ssistance.
t lie contrary-


7337


9 k'jr 47 —A-i€-5-pkp- C^-k (Raccl^r)

Court. I. . 1

Q. I didn't ~.ak you th‘t, doctor. I ak-o' you uketh&r or not you
it-ted thr.t in conn ctd. >n with ‘2,%. outbannsin pr:gr.i c.t Gnbcraoo -
A. 74s.

Q. Kindly r.awor ay cu6cti».fls, doctor, rna wait until I complete
.oy quest! ns b« f*ro you atort answering, Uy quucti:na .%ill bo bri-f “nd
y.ur ni-Aura like 'iao ooy be brief.

Hovi who took charge of the ir.sone -vsylu= Gnbera.*. at that ti: ( ic?


9 'i-ay-u-: 8-19-1-0llagher (Int. Rader)
Court I, Case :.o. 1.


A Iho Ifental Institution at Oabersoe was teken over by the
DAF, tla Gcram labor Front, so far a» I know.

Q That is the Gersan ^abor Front, isn't it? Tlie D.iF?

A Too.

CJ Thank you.

A Yes. .ithout ry prosenco, of course.

Q when you entorod tluj euthanasia progrsa, did you t-ko

an oath?

A ..oil, I think tnat at any rate 1 was obligod to koop
tatters a secret. I think that tint happonod in Borlin at one time.

At any rate, during the first co»ifcre.nco it was said at tho end that
trw entire conference fell vithin the dc-si^ation, Socrut Reich let¬
ters, Top Secret.

3 I nok you again, did you tako an oath?

A Ho, I was told that I was to say nothing about thaao nego¬
tiations, and that under tho circur^stancos, a death sontonco would bo
carried out.

Q •*bc told you that?

A - - if that T..is viola tod.

Q ;ho told you that?

A 1 don't knor oxactly tho told vo that. At any rate I can
not ruaouber it. At any rate 1 i c obliged to koep tho secret in a
scn3e.

3 At th. tico the individual told you that, did he aloo chuke
hands with you to indicate by his handshake that it was agreed that you
vcr» : udizittod?

A Yes.

•1 .'end who was it?

A That was not a coronony, there was no •oronony with that.

If it were otherwise I would have roaenberod that instance, but really
it w.ns an obligation in tho sense of secrecy, and in tho sons® of riy
t c -sk which was siren to :u in t o Reich Linistry of tho-Interior, in

7Z'l


9 2-17-2-j-H- shcr (Int. Raalor)

Court Ho. I, Crse Ho. 1.


sgr capacity as an expert.

'i Doctor, who el so did that. Did someone else ask you to
kc.. p fcnosa -atters a secret?

A I bog your pardon.

Tou had testified in a previous interrogation tint the
entire ;roup of individuals took this r ath who directed tho work of
cuthar.--.si-". program, and that the oath was taken in tho fora of a hand¬
shake, and you said you r.ust keep this a secret, and now 1 want to
tell this “Tribunal who that was, just what was said, and oil the in¬
cidental conversations that accompanied it. You know just what X ron
referring to, I boliovo?

I no longer knar, '.hen this Reich C omit too was ciuotod,

I was obliged c secrecy anyway, and I can no iongor state that in
exactitude who tho agency .-s, that obliged .» thus.

• Q ‘.ihan were you interrogated? Uhon were you interrogated by
tho prosecution in Frankfurt, tho Qorsr-n .rosocution?

A I have not got tho d-to ho re. I think it traa in January
or February.

Q It is not fivu years r.jc?

A It can bo in April.

•1 It is not five yoarc • ;o, Doctor. It is a natter of .lontho?

A Yos, but at tlu tiro also in Fr.nkfurt I stated that I no
lor„- .r know who that war. I don 1 - !mow whethor it was Munich : (inis try
of the Interior, or w hotter it was in Berlin. I really don't know that
exactly.

'X *.iho conducted tho rooting in Munich of tho Ministry of tho
Interior? ' £

A Tho e*_ting at the Vinistiy of tte IntLrior v-s headed by
Ministerial Director Schulre.

.*> That ie right?

A That is right.

^ You don't recall telling any or.o within the- past Tan months


9 K-v'-i-®-lS'-3-G2lla«bar (In-, Saalor)
Court ;.'o. i, Case >‘o» 1.


that it was Victor Brack who shook hands with you when he svoro you to
eccrccy?

A 3 certainly was not sworn in in any wcy. ?!xjrc was no
s '-irinj, and I really would have rc-trb-rud it had such a thine taken
placj. I i r.g only obliged to k©-p tho ivitter a top secret, but it is
possible Victor Brack would have to know that hinself. I no longer
Sene* that, I would not exclude tho possibility,

3 Did you ever hero sveh a ecu ting with Victor 'rack whoroin
you shook hands with hin "t tho ti-^o, considering tho socr«cy of tho
cuthanasin pro gran?

A i‘oil, howovor, wo are coning back to thj same thing ng in.

I no longor know of those tilin'.s, and I can not stato thorn exactly.

These things ore so rvany yoaro back, gontloaon, that 1 can not no
longer recall *.11 thoso details; "13 thus.: dat.s are nixed up in ray
aiiid, and I co Id only reconstruct thon truly on tho basis of tho
docu’vint.

Q Thon I shall try to bolp ycu, doctor. I will not ask you
to go h-ck three or four or five yoara. I rill ask you to recall your
interrogation of tho past few -ronyis. Do you r-call tolling Just that
to an interxa>cator, either to y staf , or tho staff of tho General
Proe-jeuter in frankfurt, that is not vory difiicult to ronenber, two
or thxa-’u v/>r.thc back?

A ' at do you want to roicotoor. I don't quito know what

you want.

0 Ono of thoso intorro;;-tors had nskod you if Victor Track
shook hands with you and told you tho things must bo kept a secret
concerning th- euthanasia pro gran. Did you or did you not toll tho
interrogator that in Frankfurt, yes cr no?

A I really don't know that cny raorc, I did not receive *ny
copy of ny interrogation, therefore, I con not t-.ll you that.

You have state/ that they had a conference in Sjrlin in tho
:u! . or of l$iiC, who attended that conT-renc-?

731x3


9 1 ay-»-i'-19-4*-Gallagber (Int. Rader)
Court No. I, Cose Ko. 2.


A .oil, I don't knov what conference you arc talking about,
ouid that te tho export conferonce? '. as it the expert conference?

‘1 Herr; cany conferences did you have in tho sun or of 19)i0?

A I no longer know that. Sc otines I took tte questionnaires
uc thore, and delivered thee to so.ui njjo rcy, xnd then briefly spoko to
the so puoplo. I only had tro conferences ir. Borlin, so f.-.r as I rcran-
ixr. Ore of t!uso conferercos was the first conference to which 2 was
invited by Jouhlcr, sid the second conference was the export conference
in Borlin, about which wo have boon spooking today, wherein wo received
nil our principles.

3 Now let's take th. first conference. You wore invited to
tho first conference by Bouhlor. Tins that tho first timo you I»ad
ho rd about the institution of euthanasia progrnn of tho Uoroan Reich?

A Tint was tho first tiao I was over in Berlin. T had
nev».r been to Borlin before tint, and I had nothing to do with it be¬
fore that.

Q Doctor, you will answer th: questions briefly. New you.
could have answered tho last question, >us or no. Now, kindly try to
do that, and taj will procoed auch noro rapidly. Thor, this v.s tho
fLrnt tltt you over hoard of tho outhanasln rrograu when you rr^ro in¬
vited to a necting or conforc.«co in Berlin in tho Sun: or of 1?1*0.

That is tte first confurcnco you nteor«dcd whore Bouhlor invitod you.

No.; as louhlor present?

A Yos. Yos, Bouhlor was there.

Q And who else was there?

A So far -.s I can rem.bor, Conti was present, Linden was
present, Professor Kaido was tterc, ard lotzo. I think Dr ^Brandt was
there•

Q Yes.

A Brandt and 3rack, and I think I can still r.ranter tteso.

Q Now you say Dr. Brandt was there. ..as that Dr. Karl

73iU‘


Sruidt?


9 >^A-j:o-I5-5-G&ll2ghor (InU Raalor)
Court lio. I, C~sj Bo. 1.


A Yes, sir.

-i ' -is Frofessor Nictzschj tbero?

A So fa r if I can rci^rtb. r, Doctor Karl Brandt was there.

3 *.'rs rrafcoscr Kietscho thore?

A I don't believo so.

Q TiSa Yarburg thoro?

A ’t.’arburg? I don't know hin.

Q Yea Horc-Ininn there? Do you know that ran?

A Keffcraaro?

Q Hevolraim, jro»?

A I can not rosoebor Jicvelmnn. I can not roroa-»r ho was
present during the conference.

Q Yes Blankenbir , there?

A RIankorburg? Yea. I nade hia ncquaintoncc lr.t.r, but I
enn not ru.urfjor whether ho was tluro.

Q Y-a Dr. Schuhnr :« thoro?

A Ho.

Q Yra Dr. ?alkhauaor there?

A Ho.

Q 're Professor 'rack there?

A I beg your (r.xx’on.

Q ‘.as n-ofossor 3rack there?

A Brunck?

Q Victor Brack?

A Victor Brack, yeo, I b-liovc lw W'S there?

Q You say at that nsoting a letter frcr> the Fuohr r cliar;;od
Dr. :“rl Lrandt sA R-ichr loiter Bouhlor with tho authority to give
pomission to oth-r :x-n to aonnuct the outh^naeia progrra vr.s exhibited
to you for tho first tire?

A Ko, I rxiver raid that. 3!o 3outer was shown to no d’lrins
that confer: nco. This eo-called dccnx. of which 1 sa photostat; c

co "7 ttt.s shown to co by loel-ier such, mch later when he was at this

•


9 3-19-6-GnIla gher (Int. itaslor)

Court !Jo. I, C-8v Ko. 1.


very institution. Ho did taut upon =y rosuost. I wonted to know
-.h.t.^r thoro w~s to l» s trr.nsf«.r of . -.tionts, which had earthing to
do rith this question.

Q That is contct, tint this outline of the letter of tho
ruohr.r was not exhibited, is that correct?

*' 0 . I did not know anything about tho outhanasia procure.
Viet was the purpose of tho noting?

A Tho transfer of patients who w-re to bo treated and to bo

< i

sc j-rau.d to ot.Vr institutions, .and, persons who were to be tnlcon caro
of, to bo sent to otter institutions, the sjrr.ration of these two c.asoa
of intionts.

Q All right.

A That is how I understood it.


Id ay 9---B2-20-l-K«rrow (Int. .tar-A -r)

Court So. 1

, Then whan was tho first tine that tho innates wore
to bo exterminated?

.. I nov .r hoard an yt hi ns about extermination. Pardon

•

; o if I 3.-.y so, but I didn't fcnow the expression "oxtornin-
ntod". I no longer know exactly when tho thought :roso
that this was to bo an euthanasia measure. I think it must
havj nhppomxl when I visited Berlin or perhaps triton I was
in Hunich. I no longer know that. I repeatedly said so..

I c.n't toll you that now. ..t cny rate, at tho bo-r’inninj
of thu action I was fully 002 : 3 cious that these people were
to bo 3-nt to welfr.ro institutions, probably for tho pur-
ose or euthanasia, but when oxaotly outlianasia was to
start I did not know.

. May I ask you one question, Bootor, nlon; those linos?
.« s thor*. over any one, to your knowledge, killed under
the outhann3ia prosrna. Phot i3, accorded a ujrcy der.th,
or helped ftlon.; so that they oould die without any further
sufferinj. To your knowledju, do you knew that?

.. Ho, I heard bout that for tho first tine in Fr eikfurt
Ono of tho int erro -. tors told r.e In Frankfurt th t the
action h J continued aft-r it was supposed to be stopped.

I didn't know mything about that.

. Then you know about tho com .one alien t of that action?
..hen did this beji:i so far as you knew?

V/oll, I don't know t. at either. I don't know when
tho action started. I n.v.r said th .t 1 did know it. I
d n't know it. I was never asked to participate in any
discussions r..,.rha; th t.

. How nony children did you accord a mercy death in
your ..3yiu:i?

.. I cn't tell you that either exactly bocnu3o I no


longer know the r.umb-r


Hy 9 -a:-20-2-Korro-.. (let. it seel or)

Court Ho. 1

%

- You cp./liod*...

.. (Interrupt in*j) lio, on the basis of the authoriza¬
tion I hod those children fall asleep.

. .itict do you call that?

~ ‘fh~ children received luninal. In the oa3o of tho3o
children a very littlj dose was sufficient in order to
raliovo-the suffering oi those pitiful little bcinjs.

. How cany childron did you do th-t too? Two, threo,
two hundred, fivi hundrod,• or.o thousand, or eighty
thousand?

.. f’or Cod's sakel I really don't know how nuny tnuro
wore. I don't know whether thero woro a hundrod cases
or ov;r a hundrod cas^s. ‘The oases who woro purely put
into a slu;:b^r ;.usc niL.bor .round on, hundred twenty
liowovor, I can't tell you that with certainty. I cn under
oath h*-ra, you know.

. I re lize that , Doctor. Do you know when the Inst
ohild was aooordod a nercy de .th in your institution?

•• No, I don't know that exactly but Dr. itodell - I
think, Dr. nondoll - said that ir. Frankfurt tii t shortly
before the -.norloans arrived children were still troctod
with ot^mnhsi x. He Cent .onjd one child - but I era not
■juito sure. ..t that tine I was Very exoitud a . roadlt x
of these questions.

. .toll, how Ion; '.id you o.jry out euthanasia of
children in your institution? Free 19*10 to what d;.to?

.. In 1939 I had no euthmasi--, I on juito euro -that
i3 v/ron;. I mi quite oortair. it i3 wronj. I Iror.dy
cention-d a document tod y.

. (Interrupt in j) I didn't iiention the date of 1939 to

:.y knowlodso. I said 1940. d^aybu ;ot an inoorreot
tr ns let ion. 1940 I said.

73 hO


rl .rro*.' (Ir.t. xt ■ ir-.lcr)


3-..-b;:-2o- 5-
Caurt Ho. 1

- I think you said 1939.

. .ell now, toll no, frot. 1940 on you woro ....

~ (Interrupting) Dc you want to knew when it started?

• I want to know when it started , yea.

.. ..ol., I really can't tell you that exactly. I said
the acno thins in Frankfurt. You o-.n't oxpeot fro. uo
that I roooebur -.11 these single dates nftor so ..any
years have passed. with tha bust of :.y will I can not
toll you that. This is the question r.^ain nd ajain.

. ‘..hen did it stop?

.. what oto^od? >.k t do you uoan?

. Tho killing of those ciiileren,

-. Thu killin’; of th^sc ohildr^n? The killin; of those
ohil r-n was never stopped.

. TJ- recordiji' of n :i >rcy death to theso ohildren.
f ho authorization was never stopped, not until the
very end. I n« v,.r received ny such stopping. Tho action
r - rein * the .;rcwnups was stopped, end iftur that, .;rown-
up people woro no lon.;«r subjected to outln.n:sia in ray
institution ,m\ Wero no longer transferred. There, oust
be so..u :.ixu.< hero.

. How nany ;rownup3 woro accorded a nurcy death in
your institution?

.. well, these re ti.e very s-.r-o questions which have
bee.: put her. before. ..l3o in Fnnkfurt. * can no lonc;or..

. (Interrupting) Just .. aur.ent, doctor. Just a noaer.t.

I will ask tho questions r.nd you answer thou. If^you do
not chocsv. to answer the question ’will you kindly 3ay
*1 refuse to answer the question. 1 ' liit-hor answer tho
qu.stioa or don't answer tho question. I don't wont to
bu r jjv r:orv quibbling fra. you.

we , 1 t's continue. Ho*.- may ;rownups - that is,

■' uits - lid you accord a .:.;rcy de .th in your institution?


M j 9--.-3K-20—i-Karrow (Inc. itcsilcr)

Court :io. 1

- The n-jrcy death, in ny institution - I didn't prant
th'.t to *ny adult. I just transferred tho patients.

. *oll now, this first conference in Berlin - tho first
ono, tho one. that 3ouhl.r invited you to - thot concerned
t!;« tran3f »r of inmtes fren one* institution to another?
.•os that its purposo?

- Tho purpose of that oonforunco was tho transfer of
patients, who could no longer bo tr.;.t«-u, into euro insti¬
tutions. Those wer- county care institutions, and that
vtza tho ..xprossion I hoard thero for the first tine.

. Then what happened ire:o<iir.toly .iftor th t conference?
Did you then jo bach to your institution and start to
transfer tho inettos affoctud, or then did you va.it n
’.a.ilo and have nnoth-r floating in Borlin, or did you have
to ittond another cenforonco beforo the ./rogrnri ;ot under¬
way, or just what did happen?

/• I returned to Munich. ,

. You r.turnod to Munich. Now did you then ionodiatoly
3t rt to transfer im-'.tos?

.. Wo, I transferred the ptionts ns soon as the first
transport was demanded fro;; no. Th .t is quite impossible
v*at you re saying.

e .*hon was tho first transport... I'n not sayinj any¬
thin . I'u questioning you. Wow, lot's not have this
hostile attitude*

“ I bo.” your pirdcn. It hurts cu because those are
natters which I io not understand. It excites i.o. •

* well, all rijht now, after your fiectin, in tho suaoor
of 1940, you returned tc your institution. i*ow, when did
ycu receive the first order to send patients away from
"our institution?

- --5 far as I renccber, I received' that order Jurin;; the

7350


liay 9-*.-3K-20-5-iCar~c'.v (las. -ic_ r -mlcr)

Court No. 1

sane year, and I think that was probably in the lato fall
of 1040.

. Now, in the sauo summer, that is, tho sunmor of
1910, did you attend another neotinj or conference ir.

B rlin.

... Yes, tho export confer unco. I clro jdy said that.

. Now, will you tell no about tho export conference?

.. ;j Brack tharo?

.. I bollovo ho was there, yos.

. ‘..03 Bouhler thofc?

.. I don’t know th t any rsorc. It any bo that ho looked
in, but I really don’t know that oxnctly.

. .ell, just -bout two hours aco, on diroot examination,
;/ou st -.tod that at this conference of exports in Dorlin,
Braok was th-ro but fiouhler w.as not. 13 that what you
3 aid then?

.. 1 s*id that 'i believed that Bouhlwr wan not thoro,
but I orjx't ronenbor th-sc, p.rsomliti a now. I don’t
buliovo aouhl-r w.s thoTo. However, I oan't exclude tho
possibility, if ycu or. speaking of possibilities, I e .n
hardly say “no".

. Was brack introduced to tho aenbors of this confer¬
ence?

.. I don't know. I oan't toll you thA. I don't know v
that.

; who presided over the co:iforonoc?

.. ..s f .r as I roficmber, tho conference was presided
over by I’r. Brack. ..s far as I ronunbor, Profossor
Nietzsche 3poko frcri tho physicians. I -ilso spoko. ..11
11» Other physicians spoke. Thi3 w.as a Conor .1 discussion.

. This is a pood breaking point, Your xCnor.

ESC i.ui3i::: .... this point the Tribunal will be in
r.cess until 9:30 o'clock Monday morning.

r-ccss was taken until 0920 hours, Id id .y 1948)


/f -7

Hoy 12-i!-BK-l-l-Fosc^r (Int. Von Sciioon)

Court No. 1

Official transcript of the .Ji^rican military
Tribunal in tho natter of tho United States of
.Picric, against Karl Brandt, ot ul, defend.-nts,
sitting at Nurnberg, Goraeny on 12 14ay 1947,
0930, Justico Bonis presiding.

TH- Persons in tho court roon -will please

find their 3oats.

Th~ Honorable, tho Judges of Military Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I is now in session. God save tho
United 5t-tes of -jiorico nd this honorable Tribunal.

There will be order in tho courtroon.

i'HM ?.L.JlD_2«T: Ur. Marshal, you ascertain if tho
defendants *Je .11 present in court.

THM U.-UH..L: M y it please Your Honor, all tho defend¬
ants are present in oourt.

TIL- ?.L*eID_ii': The Secretary-General will note for tho
record the pr-senoe of all the defendants in court.

Counsel .y proco-d.

PF.e:.:.U«LL-,i - Nosunod
C.tOSG IN..TI0JJ (Continued)

BY Hi. H.-OY:

i Dr. Pfannnueller, at tho close of tho session on
rrid .y vie wora discussing tho organization of tho cutha-
nasi . pro;r.oa and I an intor-sted in having you explain
to the Tribunal in nore detail the activities and events
of the v ,riou3 conferences in the suru^r of 1940. I want
tc go bach novi, for the nonent, to the first conference
wharoin you \*-r- invited by Bouhl-r to attend tho con¬
ference, th .t i;; the fir3t conference in the sunuor of
1940. Do you understand no?

conference, after you arnvod and
c.lled to order, -who was tho presiding

oouhler.

was the sucj-ct of the conference?


Hay 12 -U-BK-l-2-Fos to r (Inc. Von Schoen)

Court No. 1

~ -ho discussion was r.bout dealing with incurably insane
persons in institutions and their transferring to care
institutions. I never had any other idea of the purpose of
this aeotinc.

’ Now, after the incurably ill patients wore transferred
to oexe institutions was it dooidod at this conference -what
would bo tho final disposition of those particular patients?

.. -t this uoetin; nothing was said about thnt. The word
euthanasia was not nontinned at all. It w.s never nontionod.

* I see. Now, did 3ouhl -r refer to jiy state order thnt
this transfer nu3t take place?

«. No.

» Then the di3cus3ien nercly includv-d the truujfor of
incurables fron various institutions, such 03 your own,
to th-3e 3c—o.. 11 - . c .re institutions, in tn .t correct?

.. Y-s, in cy opir. on. That is tho inprossion I hud.

fc I sot. You have attempted, for the benefit of the
Tribun-l, to rooolloct thou- in ettondanoo at that ooetin^.

I cji fully aware or the fact th..t this aeetin.; took pl-cc
? years c."o ;hd it i3 with consider bio difficulty that
you ere r.t --r.pt inj to recollect those present. Could you
tell us how Many were thor-, that is, were thoro 20 pooplo
thero, or thirty people, or fifty people? Do you roc all
that, aoctor?

.. I hollovo th-re wore not over twenty, rathor, loss. I
c n’t say exactly.

. Did anyone else oth-r than Douhler p xticipate and
have anything to say at tho n-ctinj?

.. Yes. •

i. who was that, lo you rouaabor?

.. Yes, I b- ’ieve I c..a roraonbor that there was Brack. I
o-liuvo I c .n renetib-r Professor Haydo, I cui’t ronenbor
with absolute cert—nty but ! b-liove h.- was thcr-. I


Hay 12-i4-0K-l-3-Fo3tcr (Int. Von Schoon)

Court No. 1

bcliavo I can rot-oubor Proi'ossor Hoinzc, I chink, but I
Con 't know for sura, chat Linden was there free the rfwich3
Ministry of the Interior. «nd I think that Oonti was there
coo, but I can't rcaanbcr these two definitely. There wore
other people there too.- Ike introduction was -3 it usually #
is, I don't un’.orst nd nenes end you just anile. But I
think I con renotibor that during the discussion the question
of incurability was discussed and I boliovo that Professor
Hoinzo Si.oka, aid I said eorwthins, and I think Professor
Hoy do nc.de n rocork too. That is what I ronenbjrod about
this conference and ;/h .t I think I oan 3wcar to.

. 6 I see, did Blank-nburj participate? ^id ho have
anythin; to s..y?

.. Bl nk-nbur; - I don't know. I don't know. There was
c. snail nan when I u t l..*or but I don't renonber on whr.t
ocon3ion. I don't believe that he was r.t that nuetin*;
but I can't sny for cert..in.

v How about Pfofo33or Hlotsoho?

.. I dc not believe no. I think I Uet Professor Niutsoho
for the first tine at the sooond experts nuotinj.

. How about Professor ur. K rl Brandt?

.. I believe so, I think so, but I can't say for ocrt.dn
but I think he was there. 1 didn't know th..t ho was a
professor.

. I see. was Professor Dootor Kurt ^lor.e th^ro?

.. I don't know, I r.ovor talked to Bloae. I don't know
bin. I don't know Bloao.

i well, now, Doctor, s best as you can recollect/ what
was the final outcode of this portioulnr u-etinj, this
first r.cotiiuf? '..ns anythin- absolutely decided? Just
•jfcr.t wore the final results?

.. No, th- fin .1 result of the nootins, as f as I can
rcfconber, mis that the c ;rt in patients who were cons lucre d

7354


!.'iy i2-’--3K-l—4-rostcr .'lat. Von Schoon)
Court Ho. 1


incur .bio end In noed of pornanont Institutional care
nijht have to bo put in separate institutions. I don't
:tnow whether the ncao ..oich working Union was auntionod
t tho tku, but thojiain point of tho nootinj was that
tko .cople wore to bo transferred to thoso institutions.

It was said that bods woro to be rolcusod for curable
eases, for curablo oases which required troatnunt in thoso
institutions. ~nd during the course of thoso nany oxoaine-
tions I hivo been thinking this ovor. I think it was also
said that bods woro also to bo roleosod for wounded, I bo¬
ll-vo, but in any onso I roaccbor only that bods woro to
bo released for our able eases, that is, tho institutions
woro to bo exclusively Institutions for curin; curablo
cases. One of the oldest followers of praotio: 1 psyohiatry
I was in favor of separating the curable and incurable
c sos and I know tho surest ion vory thoroughly. «nd I
-.y add aocothinj that has since occurred to uo. I was
dfraid at tho tiroj th;.t r:y institution nijht bo dissolved
if I acoe.,tod neny peraanont oases. I think that I ox-
,'r-33od these ioi3jivin^s but ..ftor this Ion; lapso of
tir.o you c n't think ill of ao if I don't roccubor all
these dotails.


7353


Kay i2-2J-3K-l-4-?osfccr (Int. Von Schocn;

Court llo. 1


incur -bio end in nood o t pornment institutional c_ro
r-ijht have to b- put in separata institutions. I don't
know whether tho ncao ..oich working Union was uontioned
t tho tine, but the coin point of tho nootinj was that
tho pooplo wore to bo transferred to thoso institutions.

It was said that bods woro to be rolcusod for curablo
coses, for curable eases which required troatnont in thoso
institutions. ..nd during the course of those uany oxouina-
tion3 I h wo boon thinking this ovor. I think it was also
said thr.t beds wore ?.l3o to bo roloasod for wounded, I bo-
llo VO, but in any cose I roucubor only that bods were to
bo roloasud for curable cc.3os, that is, tho institutions
woro to be exclusively institutions for curin; ournblo
coses. One of tho oldest followers of praotior.l psychiatry
I was in favor of sopor at in;? tho curablo and incurable
cases ind I know tho surest ion very thoroughly, .oid I
nay add soa-thinj has since occurred to uo. I was
afraid at tho tiaj that r.y institution riijht bo dissolved
if I acce..tod fiony pomanont ousos. I think that I ox-
.rossod those uisjivinps but ftor this Ion* lapse of
tine you can't think ill of uo if I don't ronuibor all
these dotnils.


7353


12 - y-i j-GG-S-l-Golla. her-(vcn Scfccn)-
COurt 1 cose 1


.j New, was th.ru anything xurthcr you recall about that aseting
that you would like tc tell as ab.ut?

A Nc, I con not rcncaber anything else.

Q Well new—

.» (Continuing) no thing else was said. I ha' 1 no i’wo as to why that
conference w.s called. The invitation c’ii net say.

v} New, Dr. Phamauollcr, after a completion oi this conference,
y:u th.n, I supp sc,n.turned tc ycur Institute, an 1 when did you here—

A Yes.

Q When did you b_or again about this suoject?

a 3pfnr as I can n.c licet, I rccciv.' the questionnaires. It had
b-.on si*. that the boa .f the Institute would receive questionnaires:
in connection with re.-istrin- the patients; I believe that was the first
emoting, but I rcceiv. : tho questionnaires, and had tc fill then out,
am’ I lid fill then cut about the 3ocalit 1 percaner.t eases.

Q Those were questionnaires-

A An• then I believe I was told, I Ion't knew by when, if it was
cne of the cv-nat this oetinr. I can not say whether Brack — it was
net Bcuhl-r, but I 'cn't kn w wheth.r it was Brack, or wheth.r it was
Heformnn, wh. night havu been th-re, I don't kn-w any longer, but 1
rcc«:ober the nifie froo later, I was t 1*1 I was to take care r these
questionnaires .s quickly as possible, tc examine the cases quickly, ar.
tc take the questi- nr. a ires up tc Berlin, because they wanted to discuss
with ce what cental institutions there were in Germany. Apparently, no
pr.lialr.ary w.rk ha-* fc.en dene ir. B-.rlin, an 1 tcck the two volur-es
r-.rks on «ental Institutions ir. ^craany, I ion't rcc-ab r the year when
it was published, I ’cn't have these things with ce, I tock.fhat .lcng
tc b- able tc tell th. gcntlncr. see™thin *bout the size and nuab r r.f
beds, r. 3cferth, cf the various institutions.

Q Now when ycu received this questi maire, did you h.v„ filled cut
which rcre to be filL .2 cut with only the patients in ycur hospi¬
tal, is that c rroct?

' 7333


12 t~ y—3J-2 -2-Gallaghr-( von Schcn)-
Ccurt 1 case 1

n Yes, yes ,c i ccursc.

Q After you ha- ccoplwtcU f i l li ng cut these questionnaires cn the
patients in yur h:spit--.l, then ye u ha to sen. 1 , the questionnaires tc
Berlin, cr, 'i • yau have to carry th.a tc Berlin personnally? Do you
recall that?

* I believe twice I tcck questionnaires cc Perlin pc-rsanneily by
request. It took a lcr. tiec tecaust T ..rrkei there cnrefully-I tes¬
tified so in Frankfurt—I bolievu the rest of then w<x» sent by registe¬
rs! tail to the fetich rkin; Bnicn.

Q Hell, new. Dr. Pf.anrcucl cr - - -

A I 'on't reccsbcr the aellrtss but 1 think it was in the Columbus
House. I 'cn't rcaocber.

Q Hew, Dr. PfaiWBUcll.r, aft r thos upis -* :f zvccivin qu-sticn-
naircs tc bo filled rut en the fBtinots in y ur hospital, th.r. there
too another acetlnr, hell, that is, a ooctin? . f the u (parts lr. the Gun¬
ner of 191*0. C"n you tell us Just what was the reiser, far the calling
of this cectin,: cf experts, -s you ur.-'crsttuv' it to be an: what dom-
lopc-l at thu ne ting, -nD whit was the .uts ire f the meeting

« Gofar oa I can recall, I shall Lfy, of C’.urc.., about it.

That conference was cMld, I believe, *rr. I _t i written invita¬
tion. It alfcht b- that I was ask*, by t.lephcn. tc ccou, I n't kr. w
exactly. I think I ct a written invitation. »t .et in the anto-rc.c
At then or..: f the ctrriier wr.3 t *cuhler 's office, an tr.en wo were ta¬
ken ver tc a ss-ll conference r\ c. i on't rexnester f.ow many p< pi
re, I •*. tw nty. Sefar s I can

recall the conference wa s open- ., tr presi 'e i ver, I len't rca.nber
exactly, by x. Lin cn, r -as it Tr, -“rack, <r v.aa it. S-pho *y else,

I car. not rcatcher exactly. Of .pi . attcn T d, this cx.f\ rebec, 1

think I a..n ren-aber Brack. Durir.<- th J iscussi n I b.li-ve 1 can r-avic-
b<*r Professer Heinre, Prrftsscr 2 iotsclx, wb.ee I rt r: know better at
t iae. I h- known *.L- t ro ns » ae=b. r-< :* tfc< r -.r ' -

ay -f . • • ■ ■ . • : :


>7


12 ay-2-3-A}J-Galla?her-(vOn Schen)-
Ccurt 1 Case 1

Nassau Institutes. I can restater one cf thus, bcc use I worked from
• • :r* . - t sjjrt in -ti.n in Nassau, that was Cr. Schnoidcr-

I bt? y u par !cn, perhpoa ^ u can help rv . I renembur saecbo y . lse,

iknkvl, a physician cr scache-y like that, cut-

Q Let's see-

Q .he =ai3t also have bicn a Nassau Director,

Q I can so through a few for you and si. if I can refresh your rc-
crll'-.cti a to help you.

A Please.

Q Was Beuhl-r the re V

« . id that Frankly that I can not remember for sure. It may N
r.. was thero for c while, but he did not preside a ithis meeting, other¬
wise, 1 wool' have remembered it,

^ You say 7ict:r -rack was thereY
a Tea, he spoke te , so far as I ’-in r«mM4x r,

. «»(is Blankor.burs there.

j. Blankcnburr was nev^r in such . cl*>3c contact with a., i >\ ul.

zeer. and I car. renter ti.it I

m 3 a abort man, piyoicolly stall cm, but I r .-ally n’t k:.-». n..
he was present er net. No*, wl h c.r’ linty anyway.

^ ics ven H*-Rer.er there?

A I don’t kr.:w.

Q Wes Verwerk there?
a Verwerk?

Q Yes.

.» Torwtrk, I teli-.v* Wcrw.rk was present, but I cr.'t know ! r c. r-
v - that r.*- was rheru at the n , ut T ..' t k:: • • r : ••• ,

e-ntleoun. I b-li^vo that a f«w wer ! s were sai about th- transport -l*the
patients, and that ni=ht have t-.-.n V'c-rwcric. it was discussv I thvy should
V- r.= Ye * ir. buses, d don't kn * for certain.

Q Van Professor *\.yde there?


7 think r refers r *Yy:c war. there, j y


12 ±.iy-~-Q2-2-L-Z-.llr.*k>. r-(vrnSchon)-

C'urt 1 C23C 1

Q '-hat about Frofcssor Nictschc, he was there?

a Yes, he tack a very active part in the cenfcrcncc, in the discus-
aicr. about the diagnostic an;', prognostic Judgnents of the institutional
cases.

< ••as 2r. Linden there?

« Yes, I fc .litre Linden was there.
k us Dr. Centi there?

a I ’cn’t think sc. I 1 n't believe that Centi was present. I
can net rerxac*-r havin seen Conti.

^ Cr. B1 sic was there?

a I don't knew Bleat. I .:n't knew who Blcac is cither.

* Is the none of oilers fasili'.r tc you. #as ,.11 .rs th..rc?
a aIIts?

Q les.

a S’ , no Ahlors. Be was ny supurl-r in nu?abur,-.

THE IJT P.Pf T «Ii..rs, nllera, «Ucrs?
a Allers, no.

BY K. HaRCIs

Q -«o Dr. Schunanr. there?

' I thought r for : 1 r. - tj: . ; n* • kr. w f r sure. I

'on't recenb.r whether it was .'ahlaann cr Schunonn. I can't toll,
w Waa href sscr Dr. bran t there?

a Ho, I believe that he was net there. I don't reQuaber about
that very n.ll. I only havw a faint recollection ef hie. I s.w hia a fa in
here during t.h_ walks. He rill be abl- •- c-nfinr th:t. In ay pinicn
I saw Pr.f sscr - nn t only at this first Eouhl.r nectin/. I cannct r- -
:-nber if h- was at th. scccn. conference.

3 las Dr. Falkcnh’.usor there?
a lalkenhaaser?

-4 les?

n :.'o, that was a v.xy g. I frier. : ef nlna, qy paternal friend, nJ


-j t-.achcr. •*-. r-_s r.-a there. r -. was art present at this c r.f ronce


12 k3y-«-GJ-2-$-Ckilla6hcr-(v. a Scbcn)-
Ccurt 1 cmc 1

Q ‘as Dr. "onacckc thcr.?

a I fajlicvi. that ycu aisunierstc-d ra_, probably that was tennckc.

Q •‘cnnckc?

« Yes, uenneke.

■i Yes, Jenneke?

« I e'en't r-aaenber, I can not recast*, r uenneke. I know xunntkc only
fren laur scientific cectin^, a stall convention ir. nc.i:’lcberg at the
Psychiatric clinic, of Professor Schneider.

4 Can yru tell us new Dr. Pfannou.il.r what developed?

a £xcuse*rx for interrupting yru. There were other lectors present,
tut I did net Imrw then.

Y.s, can ycu tell us what ’cv.lopc : at this acotin Jtpi rts.

<hat was the purp sc cf the c.ctir.g, as yru un'.ratr. : it; what was
the final cutcen.? Can ycu kin-ly tell the Tribunal Just what JevelcpeJ
at this ncetiivr?

a Th. results of tha ncoting was core or less what I have testi¬
fied tc her. I was oxanine by Dr. Krocachnaim, in ny capacitor ef an
•xpert. That i3, ir. the liscussicn ;f «... doctor, the neiioal conclu-
sl ns iTer. reache ' ab ut the cvr.luati.n rf the pernor, .nt cas.s, which
were to be tr.-nsforrei tc ether ins* ituti r.s, and ah.ut Ktails ef the
J i. meals an" prepr. sis cf cases, nl i.i their repiatraticnj ib.ut the
use of the questicuvair by teeters with scientific \nd practic 1 ex¬
periences and kncwlcJrc, .as .xc-rts, an t. ’diver that questionnaire.

I believe I ear. rcn-.rh.r that a questionnaire rf this type such as wan
an.nr. tr t. here was exhibit; , and th. technique was iscucs.d f nark¬
ing praitivc eases with a plus r-ark, and the r.cgativ cases with a ninusj
and the -! ibtful eases with a quest! n -ark.


73 * €


12 _-y Ll lice rn n (vcr. Schon)

Court Mo. 1

Then I believe I can r- :—;^r it .ns said tret it ;es possible for
t!.< experts, if thay wore appointed, to .acto pcrson.nl ruoarks, 30.no-
• i •> rjo'it th. caeo history of pc. sanal oxaaiir tio.as nd runarks
; fill .-- out of trx. questionnaires, th-“t they »cr- not till.-d
^ jt carefully. Fin’Uy, :s far as I can rcojafeor, gontl-aon, it wes
Iso discussed b» the whole activity was xecnisod, the proli.nin.ary
export, thi chief ox ort , how Gov-rnxnt -goncy caas in the
Roichs V.orkin union, the adadnistr*tivo elements nd th_ fin 1 de¬
cision by the ir.a in ch rgc of the institution. Gentleman, I eannot
say with certainty whether it be cane obvious t this point that Eu¬
thanasia was r. ,'rogma. I don't rceodb r, but I beli.v- it wa:i only
la tor th"t 1 heart bout Bothrnr.sia, th-t i.a ne-r to the ti>j wlvn
Souhlor appear t y institution. I cannot say with certainty, but
I do not want to Cony the possibility th-.t it was said due to th-
treats at of d.v -r.tiuits it night lead to their dying. 1 cannot cry
with certainty, but I believe th-.t is 11 I can toll you from ay orn
twsury .“bout t!ds c-aference -s far r.s I ern n-ouaber after *11 these
>'rs.

I forgot one t.lng, RwntL.»-n, to riv- you a true pic tun., in
both conferences it was said th-.t the discussions were toy suorwt .and
that crioinr-.l vocwdin s would bv started if r.yxie would do cl ro -any¬
thing b ut this ho ad;ht be tried and it drht involve tho death
pumlty. I don*t roauabur when I was obligated to s-crecy -nd in what
way, whether by solemnly shaking hands or *t the end of the acoting
wh,n we wore walking xit. I cannot tell you th t, but Later ay >ersonnol
was obligated to }xop those things a top s -cret.

Dr. Pfannatt.llor, ftir th. completion of this .-o-otin -.rhun
did ,-ou far first tine, a far s you* car. r-cali, hoar tfc-t
Euthanasia was t e applied ir. th. can. of th-se- incurables, .after they
h d beer, first recorded i.. t.ao questionnaire by the chief doctor of
the institute when they we-re hospitalized; when did you first near that
the fin'd, disposition woulc -e to -ccor.' thusu patients -a a-rev !uati*.7
Do u usx-orstand the i-~nart f the cues n, doctor?


7361


12 ±-7 l ,7 -?:-3-2-p*p- Hcutm (van Schcn)

Court Ka. 1

Yes, I Jx.wi whtt pi >.•«, ut I was not Tblw to fornolato
nil of your st ct oa un t,

'son nca the. 'irst ti-c th't you borrd or were inforrxd that
_ . ji x:-.a to v applied tv those incarable pntiunts?

A. «a far na I enn rcxrocr, tlx iirst tio- itna when 3cuhlor visited
- I bolievc 1 to in Ux ai.-rr.cr of 1940, t .jy institution. I fc-liuvo
I suspoctod it bef oxv hand, but -a f"r 's I c-n ixaesbor I wru tol V
t.l>phone a-ca Berlin r.houi nine in the aorninr that 3ouhl*»r was ^.oing
to viait a- r.' I was not to leave the office. Thu call hr.d boon
omouncod and then I was told ha mi -.-'ini to visit ny institution.

I united .t the office axil told the official trr t when the
Reichaloiter c? e, ..e should bo shown intc .ry office. Then
P.uicholeitor l.il-r 6ua to .iy office iv'. “.sk-J no to show in -round
t!.o institution. I took hi- to v-ri^us buildlnra, 3 showed him tlx
trontwnt boil in , the reception r. .i, the acute on so a, the v-ry old
p.ntionta rv 1 •:. .in t hi purely- tnti-a cial departments, - luo the
head working. ctaiis. At the end ,f Ih. discussion, I naked Roicha-
loiUr Bouhler tell ae whether Euthanasia -x-suroa were roanenoiblo
for the trrnsfui of -rx»e pttiunta. And then I saw U» ducreo of tho
Fuehrer for tho first tine. If y-u ok ae - ut the dr.to ~.t tho top
of it, I r.uat toll -*ou that I e: nn-t reex ,'xr. _ I looked .-.t tlx dccrou
..-.d I know ti.-t th&ro was tlx insignia at the left top of it. Thoy
told a. in rmnkfurt th't it was in > 1 , but it was not in c t>l , I
would h.v- notice.’ it it. '.lately. It was bl'ck si>:n. It was not a
photcatatic c y, but wixthor it a~.s ; carter. copy or r.ot 1 cannot say.

I th:ught it :-os tlx xiginal, rccording to the signature Adolf Hitler
-.t the bottaa -t tte rir:ht, but I on't know x'or sure. 1 rlw-.yr thought
tr.-.t tho r.-xs Brmdt nd 3-uhl.r were on two different lines, but it
c ulx! trve been a fl«- srao lie. I _ r. t sure. I cannot roraonihor that
it talked, bout L.cur'bly sick people, but it t lk-e ’bout incurably
ins&rx -^ople. I lay be nist-.ken, .ut I think t the bottoa rt tho
L-ft, i€ arid, To ..x ‘.eich iinicters." I IS ink i* a-.id Reichs
linisters. I road the deerv., tlxn 3 said t rjuiiler nd asked him


7362


12 -Lay i(7 ‘■'-.'-r- ilo-bax. (•» Sch.n)

C our t S'*- 2-

wlrt would be done whon eathanesla wjoU be tin. Ho »’id not give
-v. ::ny answer, be said that the law was being worked out, tho
r -ulrti.-r. -r the. execution 1 or this lat: u ru being worked ut. That
8 the s-c. f what he said rel -Iso that tho Law would bo published
•t the proper tlx. I said th-'t it ai ht bo expedient 11 have r
plebiscite or this question, but Bouhlor for politic-1 reasons rejected
t: is, h- it wes impossible for this to be done because there was
a war >r.. Th t is re or less what I discussed with Bouhlcr -t that
tin* 'n Bouhlcr s'id h. was strcngLy impressed by many the thin s
he had scon. he had terrible i~<pr_osi.n ho said >f arny do? rfciaonts
in which tbore were the tetri 1- cafes 1 Lscusscd hero already.

Q. K*, rr f. . o r, when did y.,u first receive c inclusive knowledge,
that io twca-x fully "-re, of the f-ct that those persons declared
perrr.iKntly incurable »-rc to Se accorded r*rcy death?

A, I L riw * th't in th vay ir. which th. fuiwral p pul ticn
le-rntd it. .h transports -ere token way fren ay institution,
tho first rws kcim by motor bus. 1 ti.ink Voniurk was present at tho
first transport, but I oa n-t sure, hswror, I think he was tnoro, ftio
transports left and I don’t know if it was Iter th. J ir3t or second
tranap rt, I 'on't re«eatoe-r the date ex-ctly, but I thlrk it was in tho
l' i. foil of I960 or tho spring of 1941 but I cannot tell y u . otly,
in ny c 3u after tho s.ccr.e transport approxinr toly it was said that
.vtiontc in those transports had led, because- the relatives had in t.ho
aoantisv. received the death notice. There were .a nunbor of run<rs
which wore spruce r- m the rul tivus, visited the patients on tho
usu-1 visiting ays. They c-u out ir .a Munich by tr-dn to ny institution

and the ru. rs -.ere s :i-ac on the train. Oik r two people craw to no

•

rxl told a. rhjut th. .kath of the p*tients :nd that ir how I learned
about it. Then I believ. 1 recciv-d instructions, I don't kno~ -ahutiior
it was fr - Terlin r Munich, I think Iron 3erlin, I was to work out
• letter t e uf act til t b; r.r : t R ic ... fen a. 3 sain ionor,
within the fr -acwork of plamwd -.c. u :y rw--sur.s, ivgistration •»"’s t
take place in oho : -ntal instituti^is. ~ a. Hair., like U. t suer. ■' such


rjvrX


12 Uay 47 -e4-3-4-okp- ISeefcan (von Schon)

Court o. 1

, pctiart hr. • been transferred lor this rons* minstitution.
Trda nas -.11 that I was told nd that the relatives would b« informed _
hy fcho Otter institution a>vut the rti-nts arrival' a* :.is'veil boing.
r.'.-t is t V it was as far a* I can rea^abor.

Q. :,oll now DocCor when did the -occasion nrisc of necessity for
yM to rsk your employee in the instituto to take ai -ath, siiil-r to
the enth th t vo sec hero in the Docu.oj.ts that they * nbl keep s. crot
,11 the activities c morning this jr.rticular phase of yuir work;

When did th~t occasion -.rise? Doctor, in Docuner.t Bo k No. Y>, thoro
is jn tte nsxt v.,o, ye* 8, an nfXlfevit « tn obli-ation signed by
Erich Fr-nk, I prosu/v Erich Frank vas otx> of your ooploytos?

A. That was jy r dainiatrator, eputy administrator ns the
administrator was away in th- war.


73C4


12 Ifey 47-tf^*ID-Hcxsie (Int. vcn Sober.) -l-l
Court »c. 1


Q This obligation y Erich Prank is dated 20 February 1942, end
then on rc-c. 7 there is an c libation cf contract sc tc spook, sijnod
_:;rue -xn. That is dated ;.pril, 1941, I don’t happen to have any
there here at the present tine, tut when did it become necessary for
ycu tc require ycur cnplcyecs tc si^n such obligations or contrqcts? If
Defense Ccunsol has Gcra&n Dccuaoit Boek 17, I rculd cpprocirtc it if ho
v-*.uld su -it it tc the . itness fer his perusal.

.. YeS, plcrac. I cm ror.-i -r both these deouaents, thr t ia, I
can only renu_er soein pfcotcstetic copies. These photostctic co-pics
were shorn to so during an interrelation here. I don't render the date,
bas it in Octe’. er cr when?

Dh. FR02SCKIUW (For Defendant Brack): Ur. ?resident, ivy I inter¬
rupt for a ament? I should rarely like tc point cut thr.t this obligation
in Doouaont Bock 17, rngo 7 refers tc proceedin'-* before the fcoich Cora-
cdttoo, th-t is, regarding children, while the cn<- cn •*«£« 8 refers tc
Measures re -rding the r-'ult incur-.’ ly insrne patients.

TfU ITsISS: I nay say the following: The3o two obligations hr.vo

n-thin* to do Kith cutWnsie. They v.re drawn up after the erection of

the Role* Ceaaittce especially fer children, expressly -t the su cation

of cnc cf the sen whe asked ac tc 3ct up this Reich Ccnrdttee ot- ticn in

•y institution. That is ccn; lctelj soparcte free euthanasia. Thr.t is why

I di n't follcw ycu, Ur. Trcs-cutor, ‘-cc'-uso the Keith Korkin: Ccimaitteo —

Hoich "erkin Union and Reich Korkin. Cccsrdttoo were confused. The two

things wore entirely separate in ay ain l. This is sc nothin-; about the

..oich Cca^ittce, nl it referred cnly to this personnel. For the ixment

I di ln't rcn--a er these c v ligations -t ril luring the interrelation hero.

•

I thou*ht they were ferneries. But I theu ht it cv-r fer - Ion - tiac, and
then I raa«~l -r that I had tc issu- thm. Tint wr-s after the visit, as far
as I can reefer, after 1 h*i tc sen! th-pediatrician tc Berlin, end ho
e-no back an tell ac it was tc? secret, and that the p.erscn working on it
had tc Vc c'.li.-tcd tc secrecy. That referred cnly tc ay aIrdnistraticn
an.' t< the personnel fer observation cir! tror. taunt in the HeieV. Ccsrdttce
Static.-., th-t is the nursin' personnel.


73C5


12 !fcy U7-4J-A7D-h~2-Hoxsie (Int. von Schon)
Court *fo. 1


!icr, to -j> ever to tho Reich forking Onion, the rod euthanasia,
Gontlenen, I never issued any written obligation. I said to tho personnel,
- . i *t reocrior exactly when, that the transports wore to be kept secret,

that they ware not to be discussed or talked about. It was not merely
secrecy of th3 official to which ha obligates hir.scli undor an oath of
office, but beyond that there wore things which one does not talk about,
boc-'.uso tho personnel discussing there night start rumors. I said, "I don't
talk about it either."

A nan visitod me onco at the institution. I think it wr.3 Dr.
Schrmlonbach. Ho earn fro:: Berlin, and ho suggostod to no — Ho had
questionnaires frou no that he vas chocking on, tho questionnaires, to
see whether tho patients who woro roported thoro woro called realty for
tr nsfor frer. no. That is, ho had a certain supervision. I had a fight
with his bocauso I ob joctod to that. Ho was a rather young iaar.. I was an
old, oxperioncod psychiatrist, and I said that I considorod this thing
and took care of it carefully with uy physicians and ray own poraonnol,
and I didn't think this was necoasary, but I couldn't objoct. Of course I
couldn't (Vi anythin Yiout it. k said to no, 'Is your porsonnol obligated
to socrecy?" I said, 'I told than in January that thoy would koop it
socrot, but I did not toil than that there was a doath penalty." He said,
'You Jrnvo to toll then that beforo our conference bogins." This wao a
ccnforenco dth tho ‘.loads of all tho departments and the hoads of the
nuroing personnel and I objected to that. I said, 'Dr. Schnnlonbach,
if you have such an assignxmt you can do it ycursolf," : nd at the be¬
ginning of this conference about tho pationt3, he did so. I ditttti.

Q (Sy Hr. Hardy) Approximately fhon did that occur. Doctor? Tho
conference.

A Again I oist say that I really can't ronaaber tho tine. I can
only reconstruct that it nust have boon after four or five or maybo ovon
six transports. I can't say exactly, but several transports loft beforo
that tine because patients who wc.ro or. transport lists, I had keop then
back, the sane thing that I disco sed or. tho telephone with "alkanhausor,

736S


12 U7-tt-iro-i*-3-35Xsio (Int. von Schon)
Court !fo« 1


feat I refused. If X «» supposed to -duo up a patient, end I thought
get tto prerequisites for tremfer an' possible sulhanosia -ere net given
I retained too patient.- that is not a defense on ry part but proof
.-at as an expert I took seriously the safeguard, involved in the proeoduro.

- This conferoneo that took place, that is live conference -herein
your oojloyees and your employed .Personnel -ere -r.med and told of the
coorot nature of this -ork, that cast have taken place in the fall or
-inter of 191 * 0 , is that about right, after the fourth or fifth transport,

is that corroot?


A I can't say for suro. X don't rosier exactly -hen the transports
began. I can only say that it night have been in the -inter. I don't kno»
for sure. I think it -as -am in the office, but it night have been in
the spring of 19bl or tho -inter of 19W. I don't kno- exactly -hen, but


transports loft before that tirw.

a go-. Dr. Pfamnuollor, did yen ever see anyone refuse to partici¬
pate in this -ork, th-.t is, any of your cnoloycos that die not -ish to

toko this oath of secrocy r'.xm they -ore asked to do so?

A No, no om refused. I only had four people here and they had
nothin- to do -ith the Sole!, -orting Union. These -ere tho throe nurse,
in 9ocu.-v.-nt Book 17, thoso throo nurses ani uy deputy adnlnistrator,

-.rich Prank. Other«iso I didn't addnistor any oath.

q I an reforrlns to tho group in 19bO, the conforonco you held
-heroin you refused to toll you- employees, ani your visitor, Dr.
Sclrutlonbach, -us there, -ho adnlnlsterod the oath or told tho employees
of the secrecy of the idssion an! so forth. I an referring to that tine,

and did anyone refuse to continue their -ork there?

A Me, no. .11 the personnel, all the doctors -ho .re there -ere
the heads of ivpnrt-.ents an, ril tho chief nursing personnel -he -ore
present attended the neotin.. I believe a pretest -ould have had no value.
It -as a discussion about the condition of the patients. Oentlenen, it -a.


necessary, so that'nothing -ould happen, that the doctor, and the nurses
be ares out, but nobody objected. It -as' an oral talk without any discussion

7357


12 Kay U7-^.:D-c-li-3tocslQ (Int. Von Schon)
Cpurt No. 1


It was an order, you krow. It ras an order that they cono. A statement
• / Sc'ml.nbacfc was what it '.-as.

-7 , Doctor, here In 19U) then, in the fall or tha *.dntcr, aftor
visit by Boufcler, you, for the first tins realised that evontunlly
t’.w patients leaving in transports would go to other institutions and bo
.-.ooorlod aorcy deaths, that is, if their condition was such that thqy
era suff ring and that a :aorcy death would bo tho proper thins to do.
as that tho first tino, in tho fall or winter of 19JiO that you realized
that?


7563


12 May 4?-M-.T;<-5-l-Gro6&-(Von3chon)
Court I


a. I believe that was about that time. The rest
was assumption but I thought at anyate that thla time
I hoard of It for the first time. A time when the driver
was to begin was never mentioned. I don't knew that at
all. I always thought that at first there would be a gen¬
eral registration of all German institutions and that
Euthanasia measures might than subsequently bo ordered
by the agencies in Borlin which I had nothin'; to do with.

Da.FF02SOHH.i2IN: Hr. President, I believe that tto
time when the witness learned of Euthanasia has boon
discussed so long and sc often that no • more questions
on the subject are necessary and I ask that prosecution
go on to another subject.

THE PRESIDENT; Osjeotlon on the part of oounsel for
defendant 3raok 1 j over-ruled. Counsel aay proceed.

BY HR. H.iRDY:

q. Dr. et innnuellor, when I asked you about the
administering of oaths to some employees, I was referring
to page •• of Dooumont Bock 17 that you have in front of
you. Do you still have that there? This is German Document
No. 11. I believe it is on page *i of your Document
Book - a letter from Kdelzol to you. Now, would you
kindly road that through and explain to the Tribunal
Just what the situation was at that time?

This letter which I read once before when I was
looking at the documents I cannot remember. It is a letter
from Ooerartt Dr. Hoelzel from the year of 19-.0 in which
he states he was at Scwanzsee near Kltzbuohol on leave.

I can't remember the letter because at this time nothing
had been said about Euthanasia at all, I assume. Gentlemen
that the date in this letter 16 wrong, I assume so,

73GS


12 May *i?-H-.»:<-5-2-Grcss(VonSchon)
Court 1


I don't know whether Dr. Hoolzol who wont over to tho
Supply office, although I asked him to remain at ay
institution. Ho explained hi a resignation by saying that
hi8 career would bo advanced bettor In tho Supply Office.
There were many such cases among psychiatrists at that
tine. I asked him to stay and what was the immediate
cause for this letter I don't remember If I over receiv¬
ed It. 5ut of all-this In 19*0 I can't Imagine that,
i/hat was Dr. Hcelzol to collaborate with and what way
w is ho to collaborate. Ho had no collaboration oJcoept
what every doctor In overy institution In Germany had
to do..»nd I don't know cf a alnglo oaso in which an
institutional doctor in Bavaria or hea! of an institute
in Bavaria, after the beglnnlngof the removal of pa-
tlonts anl after those measures tho ornoopt of Suthan-
aala became generally kn wn, lecllol tc resign. I don'
t know of a single o/iso. Therefore, I don't unlorstand
It ftt *.11. Does ho ..loan conference of tho Sohmalonbach
type or release of the patients. I lon't know but tho
late, gentloaon, I aust put three question marks after
it. .aid, I can't renumber this letter nt all.

'I. Now, Dr. Pfonnmuellor, at the bottom of the
letter, I note here on the English copy I have, It
stat. s - In handwriting appears the following language
"Received 29 .»ugu8t 19*iO 1600 hours" anl then initiall¬
ed xfannmuoller. Nov, io you wish for me to -et tho
original copy wo have here or the photostatic eppy
and see whether or not that date la different?

TH2 PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal desires to have the
original of this document procured and shown to the
wltness.

7370


12 May -.T-H-.^-S-^-Groes-tVonSci’.on)

Court I

HR H.wUK: Will tha Sacratary General kindly go to
tho Document Division and bring Document No. l^ia which
Is In English Document 3ook No. 17. Miss Johnson will
give you tha Exhibit number.

DR. PF.iNNKLIELLER: May I add something. a rooeptlon
notice of time - I navor had any such stamp as long ho
I was director at Egolfing-Haar. It navor happened that
a data was recordod on Incoming mall. I must assume that
that was added later. It 1s very dlfilcult for me to say
that It is a forgery but - It never was done by mo.

MR. H.JIDY: Vo will wait until the original document
arrives, doctor, and wo will than go Into another subject.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal will now bo in reoess
while the original dooucont is being procured.


I


7371


ll:y 12-::-BK-7-l-*:cloy (Int. Broun)
Court So. 1


riiJ M._leIL.L: Thv. Tribunal is again in session.

D... 1 Ljd: Mr. President, us Booker-Freysen^'s counsel
I request th:.t for th.. purposes of prepurinj his case that
Hockor-Proysonj bo excused freti attending tho session this
:S tor noon and tomorrow afternoon.

THJ P.US2DJZJT: On r-quest of counsol for defendant
Ueokcr-Froysjr.G the dofendant Froysenj cay be excused
free attendance beforo the Trivunal this afternoon. I
understand that Bee ker-rrey song's ccso will bo called
following tho ease of the dofendant Brack. I do not know
..hen tho dofendant Brack's case will be closed, but
defendint Bcck-r-Freysen;; nay bo excused this afternoon.

ILi. H..T.DY: I understand, Your Honor, that dofondcht
Brack .

(Cjrnr.n coninj threu-jh the niorophone as well qs
dnjli3h, not understood.)

THJ P.aUIDhl.T: Thu defendant Becker-Froysong aay bo
.xcusod before thv. Tribunal this afternoon, and did
counsol C3k for tomorrow afternoon also or tomorrow all

day?

B.v. .L-iX: L'r . President, I asked also for tomorrow
aft_rnoon.

P.uSIDJMT: The defendant Bockor-Froysdng nay also
c» excused frot: attendance before the Tribunal touorrow
afternoon on request of his counsel in order to consult
with tho defendant in preparation of his ease.

c.i03o-j.w..i:J..rio;; U suned)

BY 2 Li. H.JIDY:

. 3r. Pf-mnnueller, durin;; the recess I presented tho

.hotostatlo copy of the docunent I»o. 1313 - which is found
:: .: 4 of the iL.glish Docuc-nt 3ook Ho. 17, Your Honor.

ter reading that copy does that brine any oth„r thoughts


7572


May 12-:s-3K-7-2-i:cloy (Inc. Brown)
Courc No. 1


to your nind, Dr. Pfsnnnuollcr?

.. No, I soo now Chet the copy of the docu-iont corres¬
ponds with tho photostatic copy, and I sco that that
kmdwritton ronork at the bottom i3 cine, howavor, I
can not racr.il that any c jraooonts wore ro&do on tho
basis of this letter. Not at all so. Perhaps this
latter was written after the ^utachtor conforonoo, or
somethin;;, I don't know.

. woll, thon is that your initial on tho document,
Doctor?

.. Yes. Yes.

. Noll, now in connection with this docunent is
tho writer of the lettor referring to your work in
connection with tho Ncich Co:*.it toe, that is tho
ohildron, the 0 hi Id r on patients in this institution?

.. T’ _t I don't know my lon3or. But it could be that
:-.o was to bo used as a psychiatric export or sonothin^
of that 3ort, but I don't rononbor any noro with tho
b-st will in the world.

. ..ell, now, D r . Pfanncuellor, that i3 all tho
questions I have on that document. Will you please ro-
turn it to the paja? lieu, when you wore ordered to fill
out questionnaires on each ono of tho patients in your
Institute did such order requiro you to fill out a
questionnaire on each and ovary last patient or only
lac patients which you doonod to be incurable?

I don't know th-t for sure any Ion or, but I do,

know that in tho course of the transports thor- was a

•

registration requ’irod cf ell tho innatos in tho institu¬
tion on tho basis of tho questionnaire. Then ther- was
...e directive by tho .tcich Minister of the Interior

cordin': to which those questionnaires should bo filled
rut whenever n-w arrivals cone.

i mi ■ ■fc 1 7373


U~j 12-i£-BK-7-3-Haloy (I .. 3 r.)

C urt No. 1


v ./oil, now, Dr. Pfannouc 11 or, after you conplotod those
questionnaires r.nd they wore sent to Berlin, then trans¬
ports v;orc arran^ad at your institute end said transports
took patients to other "hocos, is that, correct?

.. Yes, those woro questionnaires.

. ..oil, now whoro did you receive patients frou, did
the patients also cor.o to your instituto free other
institutes?

- 3 .ds that boor.no froo in ay institute in consequence
of thj transports woro again occupied by patients ooaing
free J v riji nursing hones, end as far as I know Nussborg
night have boon anon;; it. These bods woro transferred to
ny Instituto. That was cn the order, I bolievo, of the
Hoieh Ministry of the Interior, I no longer know exactly
whoso ordor it was. .


7o7d


Court 1

ir;- 12—«-8-l-HD-iv3 e he n-3rown.


llov, how -any Jewish inartss did - - Vv t.ore;

_ had o cjnsldarsble number of Jowlsn inaetoe?

*. I don't know n-v, how a^ny Jewish prtdonts I
M.Z., but thare la a Document tart I re d ncre-Ju-c -
aoaent.

That la In Document i«o. 17, Jr. rf~-i.ia-c.ll-r

y; 6 0 6, i‘0. 1310.

A. Just n moment, oleeea. I don't fa ve It hero* I
cu sorry, Pn-e Si?

Jo o'-or Hpybo I can help you. I h ve '-no Document
her a, wfalon I wish to refer «nd t la jit:’ ..el3 ue. ’ov:
i: you will fclndl rend thrt over once, then I h ve a. me
Questions to put to you. Tr-la la Document ;«o. 131 > In
Document 3ook 17, P? D o 6.

(The Dooumer.t li htn-od t she witness.)

how, Doctor, this lctc.-r ac toe -fader the e ojoct,
"Transfer of Kent'lly Ill Jers - hinistmll ^oolslon
of 4 September 1940, ho. 523o a 44 : ■ on - salimtan ua
a to the hlnlet-rlil Decision th S you received?

«. That w-a the consequence of sno .'.miat-rl 1
-_c isl - n, the trtmsf-r of Jews fr .a -:* lnitltuia t.-
Jewish lnacitation. I lolleve, t.i^rc ware bo c fifty
Jewish prtlonts who ver*. in ay own institute.

Jo you recall, Jr. rf-nnmuollor, Ju->t w.- t this
lilnlst rlr.l Decision arid; did • r—tlvc rn ormr, c
or In ted order, rnd -o ou recall t c ntonte A the
docielon?

«. This hlnletericl nuclei n s-ld t/.*t rll Jewish
tler.ta In 3-v-rlm i*ientr.l Institutes were to. c t -ton
Into ay institution, where they ware c- be tre-c.i 'nd
c red for until on orders of the hlr.lellry t.iay wore .'.?in
Fetched away. The 3«varl^r. ..ml? cry A the Ir.t ri.r v:-u_d


7375


Court 1

ifey 12 -«-S- 2 -H3-Meehan-Brown


turn these people Over to me end then the Jewish patients
In Bavarian Institutes were tc be transferred to Jewish
institutes.

i. How many Jewish patients were sent to you ra a
result of this decision?

This decision had nothing et oil to dw with
Euthanasia.

No, I aa not referring to £uchana6lr. I an
merely trying to clarify the transfer of the Jewish patients
wore sent to your institute as a result of this order, Just
fifty or aore; do you recoil?

h. Those th-t were sent to ay institute from else¬
where?

S*. Yes.

a. There was more than that, tnere was mors than
one hundred. I cannot tell you the enret number, but
there woro more than one hundred. It v: s all tho Jewish
patients from all Bcvarlcn Institutions, which were
transferred to me and were out In a seporate buildln 0 .

Q. Now whore did t«.ey c o after having be-n received
by you; do you know whether tney were 9ent to Lublin,

Poland?

I c' nnot tell you th*t for sure. I know ^nly
one thing, I wrs told to surrender these Jewish p.-tlents
again because they were trken to r Jewish collective
Institute. This wa6 to be done on directions from Berlin,
It was said they were to be sent to Jewish institutes In
Poland. Th-'t va never told t- me officially -j the
Ministry, but I a6kc& c can in ch rge of a transport,
where he w/’S coin* and that Is what he t.ld ao. Tncy
were O olng to a Jewish institution In Poland, Toother
the word Lublin wrs mentioned, tnor. or later e herd toe


Court 1

A?? 12-»-8-3-HD-*fe e ha n-Brown


nane Lublin, tnrt 1 do noc know.

How you scy that ot tnat tune that ia r. v: the
naze Poland becane known to you r.nd 1-t r . ju .ndcr-fi.od
they ware transferred to Lublin; vaatf y.u refer tv 1 ter,
do '.»u see now or ouch 1 ; ter; Just vh?t do ;. u aean?

«. I Clean by that when Inquire? re e rrilni Jewish
p.«tlents wore nrde ce t; where the --tlonta were.

Low once when I v-s in Berlin, I we t Id thrt 'ch-. were
sent to o Polish Institute and I thlnb tnr-t wr.e Lublin.
Unless tne am in cnerge of the trona .rt lAc-d.

Q. fell now, were ... required t. fill out
questionnaires on tr.ese Jewish p Clints Wt pres*d
d.r u-h your Institute?

a. No.

%. Jr. Pfnnnnuoller, It Is a .nderetmdin-,
aco^rdlnb to the evidence here -nd accoroln_ a oiv.rt
drawn by Viktor Brack, let^r v-erc ^La a.; export nd
it v s your function to expertise UdStiunnaroe fra
.ther Institutes. «r.d I la 0 ine tnr t tne re* avn f r
,ur being an expert we, becruee of your y-rre of
,r ctlcol experience In your Institute, I ;:o:ld ll.:o
tj hnow Just how -'c*- happened t. bee aa ?a exoorc; v
requested you to trke t.v t r-ooiticn mi whet ,\ ur
functions were ?e rn expert to expertise these quostioa-
nr.lrea sent t; . .u by rrofe9Sor tfuyde or one of cue
other top experts; do under?t nd t - ''a c luln-
~b.ut, Doctor?

a. Yea, I uet the r.*n = n Idea. Tne .-\eloh .hnistry
vf the Interior wrote he rere ...ally *uln- ae rn s;:;.ert
within the freaework of thea fnd t is fell to cne colons
brnlnu union. Then I vr.6 set h ?c m oxo-rt, re I
id, upon what-the basis w- s decided :« «::;-erts


7377


Court 1.

Hey’ 18-H-8-4-HD-5feehen-3rovn


conference In Berlin. X only received a pnotostctlc copy
fro»i. Che various institutes. Plus or minus, ell queetlon-
eires were marked by me, but only as a preliminary expert.

I think Caere were three or four preliminary e:iperce,
then It went to a fife expert in Berlin. How -■*- * ^
decision wps there was not my concern, so I dor.'c know

about It.

Well, now you received those quest ion-Ires fr.m
other institutions, vhrt wore you Instructed by higher
authorities lr. Berlin to do with the questionnaires?

I was to exp-rtlse on the Kedloal quostl.no that
wars to be found in the que-tionnrlre. In other words,
to make p note lr. the left lower corner whether I thought
th't this case vss one th-t should be transferred w a
land martin* noae or not. I simply had to juu e e in the
preliminary procedure from the aedlcr.1 psychiatric point
of view and to put ay observations down.

Well now ir you v-ocldod tr.ey snould ee treno-

fjrred to r nursing home.?

«. I had nothin,, to do with that and 1 h. d nothing
to do with tne transfer of these people, not tne slightest
I simply hrd to make the preliminary export jud-ment,
whether the case ohould be transferred or not, or were
editable for transfer, was decided on the be sis of my
expert opinion. It w^s not ay concern.

Well now vh. t recomxendrtlor.s cuuld y.u arko;
could you sake one, two, three or four different

racumendatlone on each q*.tl„nn»ir. subDltt.a to yon?

Of course.

C*. Well, now suppose.

I had many doubtful cases.

C.. If ou received e cuestl-.nneIre regerwin. the


Court 1

•ip y 12 - 3- 5- HD-.'.e s hr r.-3r o vr..


CE ae of a person who wrs Incurable rr.- tr.e nr.' ire

c, -Dieted outlined the conditions attending tna p tii.it end
y. u decided upon reeding tna qu stlcnneire tart this
3 ETtlculer ?: tlcnt was peraunentl" incurable; v - - sugges¬
tions or rscvmsentecl^ns could y u a
A . If he vaa lncurrble?
i. Yes.

A . In ay opinion?
i. Yes.

A. Then I could rat down t.v»* he 9 *• o.siclve onso
for tra'.efer eltner olus or sinus wrs written .1 - ' .war
left hand corner, no cnee his tor'- w t* written or *ny
pars-nel sxnainstlon. I oade ay ju„ e aont on the b el* of

pinion of tn. questionnaire. According to a: itfpraseiwn.


12 Ifcy U7-iWtT!>-9-l-a^ne8 (Ir.t. "rcm)

Court No. 1, Case I


Q TThan you save, say, for instance, an opinion, and your diagnosis
«aa that thid was a plus case, did you have knorlodge as to whether or
not that patient, if decided by the top expert and the other experts that
it was a plus case, did you have knowledge as to whothor or not that
patient would bo givon tho privilege of a nercy death?

A No, I didn't know that, bocauso tho final decision rostod with
the doctor at the institution to which the patient was sent. I found out
that j»tionts from ay institution who had had exp-rt opinions expressed
on then by other preliminary oxperts later died. That I did find out.

Q Woll, did you know at all whethir or not a questionnaire which
;ont through all the exports and tho top export and was classified ns n
plus caso, that that patient would bo accordod a norcy doath?

A No, that was outside «y coi*>otcnco. I did not know, I did not
docido that,

q What I aa trying to rind out. Doctor, is .vhon you perused and
studied ono of ttoso questionnaires and you wero ordorod by Berlin to
cake rocoaaendations and you had tSaroo rocorxymdations to nako — plus,
ninus, and so forth — and you rocerondod that this particular pationt
rna a plus caso, what of foot would your rooomondation havo? V/oro you
inforrvid ns to what offoct it would havo?

A No, I simply rcccivod orders to det ns a preliminary export and
to oxpros3 ny medical and psychiatric opinion on tho condition of tho
enso which was then to bo aont by authorities with whom I had nothing to
do, to a nursing hone. I hod nothing to do with theso othor things.

Q Now, when yea were finally co— issioned by Berlin as a expert,
were you told by tho top authorities in Berlin or did you havo reason to
believe that you wore acting as an expert within the framework of thu so-
called euthanasia program?

A Ttet I was working within tho franowork of the euthanasia pro grin?
That is probably ate t res’ll ted from the whole affair, but directly within
the fmr»w$rk of the euthanasia program I did not rork. I worked sinply as
a wdical specialist. As I said, I had nc effect or influence on the out-


7360


12 :t.y lx7-w-.TD-9- 2-Bxynes (Int. Brown)
Court No. 1, Case I


ccoi of what I happened to do as a •nodical expert Just as any nodical
expert appearing in a ease before a court*

Q New, Dr. pfanr.r«ellar, did you have a Dr. Schnidtaann in your
institute as ycur deputy?

A Yes. Ho ras ny first chief physician*

Q Hotr lore did he work as ycur deputy? Do you recall?

A Fren the noaont that I -..-as called to the institute at Eglfing-
Hanr as a diroctor — -hat wn3 February 1933 — until I was taken away
on 1 st of Hay 19U5#

CJ * 021 , now, did you, aft--r ycu assuraod these now duties as an
export to exportdzo questionnaires of other institutions, did you thon
ha vo another deputy, or wero you able to carry on both your work at the
instituto as woll as your expert work?

A I did not have a deputy as an oxpert. I had boon personally
appointed as an export. Ccnsoquontly, 1 could not have any ono olso do
this sane ^ ork, and I did not try to. At the beginning 1 was vory over¬
burdened in ny work, and the activities os an expert I took care of first
bocouso I thought that this tas an honorary appoin.tncnt, T fillod out tho
quootionnairos alono. I workod on tho photostat copios alone.

Q How long did it take you to expertise each questionnaire?

A That quostion was asked no in Frankfurt. I can not bo answorod
Just off tho cuff. Only an export cr a physician can answer tint quostion.
If I on workirc on such a questionnaire and if I havo oxp;.riaaco in
a rid. nr on such questionnaires, T can under cor, conditions t.ako caro of
tho questionnaire roletivoly rapi 'ly according to psycbiatric-oadical
•mostions. Sodo cf then I get done seen; oth:r3 I !on»t got dono at all.

DR. FK)zSZ'Z'j\'T,i 'T. President, 1 object. Tho -dtnoss has gone into
t'vsso ratters ir. direct examination at groat length. I do not understand
hy the natter has to bo ventilated again* Consequently, I objoct to tho
scries of questions now being put to tho witness.

MB. HARDY: Hay it ploaso Ycur Honor, just as Dofcn3a Counsol said,

- :so mestiers wore taker, up vory elaborately in direct oxrssipatlon, aid


7561


12 Hay U7-9-3-»*&7i>-Saynq« (Ir.t. Brora)

Court }?c. I, Caso I

it is ry under starv’Ang that tho purpose cf cross examination is for the
Prosecution or tho cross exminer to 50 ever the natoriol taken up in
.iroct. I can’t go outside tho material that was taken up ir. tho direct.

THE rRSSIDBHTt Tho objoction trill bo overruled.

BT HU. H.VOT:

0 After you had received these now duties as an export, did Jhat
require all your tiai? 'oro yoi ablo to still dovote so::o of your tine to
datioa aa diroctor of tho institute?

A Tho fact that I was delivering export opinions did not obligato
ra to glvo up :y activity as diroctor of tho institution. I used ovory
froo :dnuto to work or. thoso quostionnairos. Usually in tho morning I
did ry regular dutios at tho institution, and then at nif<ht, often until
rif'.night or ono o’clock in the norning, I worked on tho photostats of
thoso quostionnairos. I did not taka off any Saturday or Sunday. Evon on
Sunday afternoon, insto-ad of taking a walk with ry wifo and children, I
o-.t and worked until late at night.

q ’’oil, Ebetor, how xxny hours a day did you work as an oxport; can
ycu oatinato?

A No, I can’t toll you that. I 'Ain't know. I did not keep an oyc on
tho clock, and this businoss of delivering o Xpert opinions. X emphasize
.vain, is not a natter of ti.-.j but a natt.r of tho contont of tho
nioatiornairo. Sor.ctiros I can look at a questionnaire for half an hour
•without boirg ablo to rvako anythin out of it. I also went through ovory
questionnaire twico, an’ between looking at it for tho first and second
tine, I let a lapse of tine of at loast a morning or an afternoon take
placo before tho questionnaire finally went out.

Q Now, Doctor, will you kindly turn to Docunont ND 112?, which is
Frosecutior. Exhibit 35U 1*11 send a oopy up to you to make it easier f<r
you. This is in Document Book Hi, Part 2.

THE !?lE5IDD?fr: Ifhat page is it on?

MR. HARDY: It is to be found on page 175, Tour Honor.

7 K3BU

.7302


12 Ibj h7-1.TI>-5-l-H37T^3 (Int. 3rcim)

Court 33. I, Case I

Q It will porhapa bo easier for you to folic* no, tritncss, if I
pass you up the photostatic copies of this document.

A I'll take your word for it,

Q The first page of this document is a letter fron you to the
Reich Association of Hospitals and 'Mrsing Establishments, Berlin, to
the attention of Professor fteydo, Exhibit 35h.

I might inform the interpreters that for the next two or throe
days we'll bo taking up the problem of euthanasia whilo the defendant
Brack is preeonting his case, and it may wall bo that we'll discuss
Document Book lli. Part lj Docu:»nt Book 1U, Part 2j Document Book 1U,
Part 3, and Document Books 15, 16 , and 17*


7333


1 :*ay L l-Jr-r. T'-IC-l-C-r c ~ 3 (Int. Brown)
Court No. 1


q How, this first latter in these series of letters refers t# a
letter of 12 No venter wherein Hayda sent to you 300 /aesticnraires for
your expert opinion. Now, he apparently sent these on the 12 November
and you are re turnip then entoe 19 November. Then you wiU see the
next letter, nr. Pfannmueller, is 22 Novecber wherein you are returning
258 questionnaires and the third letter is the 23 November and you are
returning 3CO questionnaires. The fourth letter is the 2$ November and
yn are returning 300 core questionnaires. And, so or. through this
entire list ycu are returnin these questionnaires which you have giver,
an opinion on u? to the date of 1 Pecerbor 19U0. And then you jump to
15 April 19U1. But, up to 1 December 19li0, that is from the 12 November,
this dorus»nt indicates that you had between theso dates tho opportunity
to expertize 2C5* questionnaires. New, what I an anxious to know, is hew
long it would have taken you, as I asked you Vefere, to evaluate cr.e
questionnaire because it is obvious fr*n this document, Doctor, that
from the period from 12 November to, we will say, the 17 December
you had the opportunity to expertize and did expertizo 2058
questionnaires. New, if you had boon working ter hours a day or.
questionnaires you would have boor, able to do about 121 Questionnaires
r -r day, that is, if you took Tivo rdnutos on each questionnaire - new,

would that ho a trae pic’xjro?

A I don’t understand your firal question.

q yould that bo a true picture - what I am presenting to you for

your consideration - the longth of tino?

A No. 1, as a doctor I rojot I cannot follow this lagalistic
•.and of thought. From theso nrabers it carnwttbe seen at all what would
h* expertized, where and what tho cases -wre. At tho be^irxing ilifcould
rave been cases that could have beer, easily expertized easily ar.d
rapidly. Theso numbers may include lots r£ utis that 1 never werked
or. at all. I could rave sent the whole batch back without working on
•her. and I ask your pardon but here I am a *>ctor fronted with a
lawyer ar.d our points of vie* are completely divergent. You cannot

7334


12 May U7-*t-A7D-I3-2-Gor3S (Int. Brown)
leurt !fc. 1

calculate the length of ti_* in working or. these questionnaires. Ir.

German law, that is penal procedure, you car. find questionnaires that
are as long as six weeks ir. (jiesticmble cases that coze up before the
Court. And after six weeks yc_ can free those con-* tc a conclusion and,
if this actually' cones to -e I would then ask agair for several weeks
sere to expertize this particular case. Sco-tines, or. the other hand, It
takes eight to ter. days to expertize 'questionnaires. As 2 say, it all
depends or. the contents of the questionnaire. As 1 said before, we
singly aren't talking the sane language. I regret that.

Q Well, now. Doctor, what I a* trying to ascertain from this
dc cutter, t io whether or not you expertised ever 2C<T questionnaires
iurirg this period of tine. It appears to nc quite obvious that fror.

•to 12 lJoveabor to the 1st of Decwer you had the opportunity tc
expertize ov-r 2000 questionnairessand ir. fact you state ir. your
letters in each instance that you aro returning to Heyde a certain
rsa*er of quest!orraires which ycu have already examined. Now, then, if
during a period fro* 12 November, that is the first date when those
questionnaires were shipped to you from Berlin, a rA I presume it took
a day or two for the questionnaires to set tc your institute, from that
date to 1 Dec other, which is approriawtely 20 days, now ir. that period
of 20 days it seeas evident to ao her- that you had the opportunity to
expertize over 2000 questionnaires. !'ow, can't you se- how important
it i 3 to a layman like myself arri the Tribunal Is Uve you explain to us
just what length of time is necessary for a psychiatrist, and a man with
your experience, to study one of these questionnaires In ordor to
ietorsdne whether or not this should be a plus case or a minus case, -to
you understand the import o; ay questioning, the reason for it,. now7
A I alreatfc' told you repeatedly - T can't lay down an average
length cf time to work on any one questionnaire and I don't understand
your mathematics hero because I had to concern Byself with the contents
Of the questionnaire.

7335


12 Yz y UT-W-ATD-lO-Z-Oorss (Irt. Browr.)

Court So. 1

calculate the length of tl* in working or. these questionnaires. Ir.
germn 1 aw, that is penal procedure, you can fir/i questionnaires that
are as long as six weeks ir. questionable cases that ccae up before the
Court. And after six weeks you can fren those ccoe te a conclusion and,
if this actually* comes to m I -.raid then ask again for several weeks
cere to expertize this particular case. Sowtinec, cr. the other hand, it
takes eight to ter. days to expertize questionnaires. As 1 say, it all
depends or. the contents of the questionnaire. As 1 said before, we
simply aren't talking the same iar-suago. 1 regret that.

Q Well, new. Doctor, what I am trying to ascertain f roa this
document is whsther or not you expertised over 2C0C questionnaires
iurirg this period of tins. It appears to oo quite obvious that from
the 12 IJovpxbor to the 1st of December you iad the opportunity tc
expertize ov-r 2 CCO quesUoncairoarand ir. fact you state ir. your
letters in each instance that you aro returning to Heyde a certain
rusher of quoetiornaires which you have already examined. Now, then, if
during a period from 12 Movuber, that is the first date wlwr. those
questionnaires were shipped to you from Berlin, and T presume it took
a day or two for the questionnaires to set to your institute, from that
late to 1 Decoder, which is approrijaately 20 days, now ir. that period
of 20 days it seeas evident to me here that you had the opportunity to
expertize over 2000 questionnaires. !!ow, can't you seo how important
it is to a layman like myself and the Tribunal to have you explain to us
just what length of time i 3 necessary for a psychiatrist, and a man with
your experience, *o study ore of these questionnaires ir. order to
dterrain whether or rot this should be a plus case or a minus case. -Ic
0 rcu understand the import o- my questioning, .the reason for it v now?

A I already told you repeatedly - I car.' t lay down an average
length of time to work on ary one questionnaire and I dcr.'t understand
your -ath*catic 3 hero because T had to concern myself with the contents
of the questionnaire.


12 ifey ii7-^-A7~-lC-3-C-rrss (Int. Brown}

.'curt No, 1

q «ow. Doctor, let ua gc to the question of children - the Reich
remittee. Now, when did you first receive information and when did
you jsut first become familiar with the Reich Ccmritteo for Hereditary
and Constitutionally Sovere Diseases?

A That must have keen*around April 19L1. I see that fron Document
3ook 17, page 7. This is the outline of the duties for tho nurses ir.
rursir* homes. I can't tell you the recLse date when it «aa. It was
after a mooting in the ministry of Interior when I was told to establish
a branch of this Reich Coonitteo ir. my institute.

Q Tell, new was it your opinion —

A PIease?

Q .Vas it your opinion that tta Reich Comittee for Hereditary and
Constitutionally Severo Diseases was linked up in ary »nr.er with the
Euthanasia program?

A No. I repudiate ary correction between the Euthanasia rrogran
and the Reich Coanittee. The two things had nothing to do with each
other nor do I know of ary interne dU to connection with tho Reich Verkin?
Union. The Reich :tinistry of tho Interior was tho office that determined
to what extent the Reich Ccumittce as such; what it was to bn composed
of. I don't knew. That 2uthanasiA tad anythin; to do with that I know
nothing about. I know a couple of doctors there but whether they had

anything to with that I don't know.

3 q Did you ever hear tho name Viktor Track associated with tho
.Reich Comittee for !er«<tttary and Constitutionally Severe Disoasrs?

A No, I knew that for 3ure.

q Qhy I ask you that, doctor, ir. Document >W-253, which is a chart
irawr. by the defondar.t Viktor Brack he aw ted therein: "I, Viktor Hermann
Brack, havin' been duly sworn hereby declare that I was Cbcrdierstloiter,-
CMof of Department 2 in tta Ctanrellcxy of the leader of the ^tional
.socialist Party, headed by Reichsleiter Philipp Bouhier. In this office
I knew exactly all and was entrusted with the orgar.inaticn's uthanasla
program, and the leich Remittee for Hereditary and Constitutionally


73nS


12 Uay UT-Jt-AH—iO-u-Orc ss (Ir.t. rrcwr.)

Court Sc. 1

12

Severe Diseases". And ir. parentheses (approval for operations or. newly
torn tables not worthy of life indicated in red spotted line cr. the
chart. And he further 3t«:tes -I J»ve carefully studied this plan, etc."

Sow, the defendant “rack has outlined in this chart that his
organization by the dotted lines was associated with the Reich Conrvittoe
for Constitutiorally Severe Disease and this action withe the children.
Well, r-cw I aa interested in kno-fing whether or not yew had the occasion
to have learned of Viktor Frack>s association with this program, that is,
with the progran of the Reich Ccmittce in as such aa I recall that you
mentioned the nan> Dr. Hefelsanr. ar.d or. this chart drawn by Viktor *rack
ho ir/iioatea Dr. Hefelsarr. to be the head of a division under the
Chancellery of the Fuehrer. Do yrw understand what I an pointing out,

Deo tor?


7337


:Jny 12-U-BK-ll-l-Hoxsic (Int. Brown)
Court ::o. i


I don't know tint document th&t you have there before
you nor do I know whet Brack's tostinony was, but ns to
whether I .v~r kn~w that Dr. Brack was .ctiVo in the -ieich
Couaittoc is soaathinj th.t is entirely unknown to no,
absolutely unknown. The nmu w..s n-v-r nanod to no in
that connection.

„ Doctor, would you kindly look cv.r that chart which
was dr_wr. by the Defend„nt Brack, end you-will see tho
iottod line3 around th~ blocks wherein his nano is con¬
tained, nd tho nnnos of Bouhlcr, Hofolnmn, etc., and
that dotted lino continues ov.r tho top of tho chart
ov-r to Kcrl 3rnndt'3 and through to linden, tho Ministry
of tho Interior, and then tho outside blocks on tho oxtrcr.o
Uft-hand side of the chert jive tho organizational sot-up
of the iiuich Corr.ittoo. Novi, this wn3 drawn for us by
tho Deferent Brack hinsclf, and you will notice tho oath
oy the Defendant Br .ck in Goman in the left-hand corner.
Now, -..ill yoa kinily study th.t -nd soo v, bother or not
this r-fr-jshos your recollection to any extent?

.. I nev«r s-w this ch-rt befor-. I only know th..t tho
3oich Coonittou had soaethinj to do with the .<eich ministry
^f the Interior. I see theso linos that show that connec¬
tion, but I never sew this orj_nizationul set-up boforo.

I an f.lweys under the inprossion that y.pu. believe I took
.art in orjanizin" these things. I had nothinj to do with
rll these natters.

„ .#oll now, did you associate the nano Hofolnnnn with
tac Hatch Conr.it too, or did I r.isund^rst uid you earlier

today?

.. No. HofeIoann I associated with tho Neich Connitteo,
Tat I don't knew anythin^ about his activities in tho
-leich ./erkin^ Union. I don't know what his functions wore.


u.-_y i2-l!-3K-ll-2-Hoxsio (In-. Broun)

Court So. 1

I singly know that Kofolc.nn - that is, this is c.y
opinion - I believe ho was in the Reich Coanittoo at tho
beginning >*nd signed.for it, but I don't know.

Thank you. Now, Doctor, in -pril, 1941, you first
he .rd of thi3 lie ic .V Co r ,dttce. How, when did tho ontur-
_.risc develop?

.> Prob.bly thet is when I hoard about it, yos.

i ./hen did the enterprise develop to tho extent th-t
tho authorities in 3orlin, that is tho state through
the Ministry of Interior, -.ranted tho pornission that
ihildron sufferine an incurable disonso, children doonod
to bo in such a condition, that it would bo only worthy
to accord then a coroy death? .»hon did that start to
function, that Is tho actual accordinj of norcy doc.ths to
children in this oatojery?

.. That w-.o n conforcnoo. I received fron tho Roich
Connittou, which I nev-r hoard of before, knowledge of a
jonforonoo in the Roich Ministry of the Interior. I Wts
.aked to .ttend this confvrenco. That was in tho Ministry
of the Interior under tho cheiraanship of Ministerial
Director Schulze, as f J _s I con recall, ond I believe
also tho deputy of the President of the Upper Bavarian
District .jsoei ;tion wa3 there, ~t ony rote I was c-llea
to this conforaico. Th-re wore ,-roscnt b-sidos those
two I Just national, well, nay bo Von Hojon.r was there,
cr Hofclnann, one of thesrtwo anyway, I don’t kn»., and
Dr. ..enzlor. I know that Dr. ..enzlor, who was a aecibor of
the Board of Directors of the Union of Hospitals for oiok
Children, was told by the Reich Coaaittco to take care cf
fcju re istroticn of ill those sick children. First of all
h a station was te bo set up in tho Childrens'. Clinic
in Munich. This, I boUovc, was turned down because of


l_rj ia-H-HK-11-3-Hoxsic (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

1'cic of 3paco and bcoauso they had enough work to do
there anyway. Than they hit on the idea th..t not only
sur;;ic: 1 c 3cs of physical deformation wore involved
but also beor.uso nentc .1 c sea w-rc involvud, cs I soy,
they hit on tho idea of sotting up a dep irtxaont in tho
children's house ct Jijlfini-Hscr at the uxpenso of tho
R„ich Conaittoo, and this depextaunt was to take ocrc cf
those childron. I ar.do spuco available, and I wus jiven
a doctor by tho Children^ Clinic. I h.vd to send,this
doctor to Berlin and ho cone bnok with authorization as
to just what measures were to bo -used nd thinjs wore to
bo done, lika tho term of obser/.tion or tho details
about tho treatment, 11 sorts of thin.;s, what tho vitamin
troataont ms to bo, what tho operative trontnont was to
bo, whr.t sort of occupational therapy w..s to bo usod, and
so forth. Those o s.s wor- those whoro tho child could
bo oxpooted to livo only for a Very short length of tine,
and it was those who woro to be put to sloop somehow.

v You mentioned th~ none Von Ho-oner. Could you spoil

that for the record, please?

H-g-o-;' - H-o- 3 -o-n-o-r, Von Hejunor.

.. Von Kroner ployod bij rolo in thin Koloh Corahlttoo,

did ho?

.. That I don’t know. I only know that he sent no tho
.uthorization.

On Friday you stated th-t after this .ioich Committee
was established and stnto authority was jranted of jiven
for this purposo that in your institute you had several
childron who you dcv-nod to bo in such n condition that they
should b. accorded c corcy death. Now, how nuiy such
children did you deer, to bp in that condition in your own

institute?


y 12- M-3K-U--i-Hoxsi c. (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

Ih--X I can not tell you. Children fror: thv, institu¬
tions and nursinj hone at Nou-Oottin.;, Sohoenbrunn, otc.,

.11 of tlk.30 children 2 took over alonj with the nurses.

How, how cany of thco w^re fit I don't know, but tho jroot
najority of then were terribly ill. I have n-v-r seen
children .is siok as ell th.t, but just how nany thero
•rf.ro, that I cn sorry I nun not toll you.

Cm you tell us, Doctor, this is of considerable
interest to ix:, as to whet fora would tho outhancsia
tdeo, thit is, how would you be able to ncoord thoso
children r. corcy donth without too cuch sufforin;, etc.?

,h .t did you use? ..oro thero certain roquirouonts out¬
lined by tho stnto end th- itoich Cocnittoo, or was that
left up to the discretion of or.oh doctor? Can you onlijht-
cn us on that, Doctor?

.. That was left to the discretion of the physician
..inaolf obviously. The doctor who o -no fron Berlin oor-
t inly had u policy laid down by Berlin, rnd in uy in¬
stitution luainnl was used, I believe. I boliovc 1 onco
said veronal was ;;iv~n but this is wron^j, it was only
lucinal.

. How auch luninal would be required to accord one of
these terribly sick persons a u«roy death?

-* Plo.sc?

. How auch iuninr.1 would it require?

^ The situ .tion here is exactly as with tho quostion of
tine involved, it varied sronbly. -» hydrocephalic can tako
lose after dose of luain..l. The naxinun daily dose as sot
down by law, th.it dos~ was, under certain cirounstcnoos,

:.6t sufficient, nd, on the other hand, it could hr.ppon in
case cf an idiot with a stronger developed heart
-ctivity, he is capable of takin ; noro than that dose of


II-V 12-3K-11-5-Hexsic. (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

lunin .1 . You just have to ;;ive the child enough luainal
so th .t eftur a few d..y3 he just quietly joes to sloop,

.nd I rust O'.phasizc this is not e n_ttur of poisoninj.

The child sinply dies of a certain con;ostion in the
lunjs,it docs not die of poisoninj .s I said once before,
.nd on interference with circulation in the lunjs. I hove
s„cn this wor> nyself, and if there is anythin; such ns
puttin, a person to sleep gently then this is oortnlnly
it to aocord u cercy dooth.

, Nov/, do you have to apply coro luuinal to n person
that is older? For instance, v/ould it require noro
lux..inel v/ith a person one y-or of or ten years of
a^o, or is that a factor rt all, Doctor?

.. The nnxinur. C .osos .jo crrnnjod according to ajo. It
is prescribed that for children up to n certain ajc vto
:lvo r. dose of luninr.l which is one-third r.s snail as in
the o-.s- of adults. These doses are proscribed those
anxinun doses and vary jre.atly and nro ..lways boinj re¬
vised.

..ell now, theso children in your institute that woro
in such a dreadful condition, did you use your own discre¬
tion ns to whother or not they should be jivon luuinal or
did you have to fill out a questionnaire and hr.vo that
sent to tho Ministry, or was it solely up to yoursolf?

u The questionnaires had nothing to do with jivinG tl10
child luuinal and puttinj it to sloop.

„ Mo, I x: tryinj to det-raino whether or not quostionn
..ires were also used by tho .ieich Couidttoo as woll^os by
the euthanasia projrou. I rtti not confusinj tho tv/c,
Doctor. I v. noroly tto.iptinj to find out whother or not
r. child could bo -,ivon luninal so as to relievo hiu fron
r.is pair, by noroly the decision cf yourself or another
aysicion of aiothor institute, or .ms it necessary to hav

the o;inion of soue oth-r psychiatrist or -Xpert?

73C2


c


—

-y 12 -uI-BiI-12-I-—-loy (Int. Brown)
ourt No. 1

.. The way things worked was quite different. I did not
—kc th~ final decision. The child was sent, or was
announced in 3orlir. through th- questionnaire, then as I
found out these questionnaires wore worked on by experts.

I don't know how finny nor who they were, I only know that
Cr. .lOnzler was one of these final experts, and what the
roccduro of axpertisinj was in detail I do not know. I

C

did not have anything to do with it. Then on tho basis
of the questionnairo a decision was oado in Berlin and
on authorization was sent back to the instituto scyins
that within the framework of the directives of tho itoich
Cconittoo the child should bo accordod the troatnont and
then tho child was treated accordingly. Dospito this
authorization fror. higher up I could still, if I was of
a different opinion, ncnoly that tho child was not a oaso
for troatnont, or to be noro exact, n ease to bo put to
sloop, I could nevertheless if such was tho caso still
rofuso to follow the authorization and sond tho questionn¬
aire back. Then oftor watching and obsorvinj the child
for a Ion": tine with special personnel, two nurses, and
then 1 had the child continually observed by ay pediatri¬
cian and ascertain exactly what tho case is, that tho
c^3c histories wore worked out cost meticulously, beoauso
tftoro also was n scientific purpose in tho proccduro,
particularly in the case of our foeble nindnoss and
cxijonous and indigenous problems and wc discussed this
with all the personnol concerning once more, then
finally I could toother with ay pediatrician, say r.ow
"the case can be treated," and thon the date for tho
troatnont was dotorninod on. Then I received notice when
“he troatnont boson and the relatives wore inforned -
act about tho troatnont, out thet they should visit tho

child.

7393


!2-i:-aK-12-20: .loy (Int. Brown)
Court No. 1


How, when tho children were set aside for euthanasia
did you then -
.. Ploaso?

; .hen you decided that children should bo subjected
co euthanasia to relievo thee froa their suffering, did
you then notify the parents or guardian of the phildren
concorncd?

.. Yes, they were told ahead of tine by ny dopartnontal
physician.

They woro told boforo you applied tho outhonasic?

.. Oh, yes. Jo told tho rolativcs that it would bo
expedient to visit the child boccuso the child wes sick
and tho relatives did cone. In tho bo^inninc of luninal
treatment tho child wakes up frcti tine to tine until tho
final cunutntivc offoct of lucinnl sots in.

i>id you instruct the paronts and guardian that you
wore ;oino to adnlnistor luninal treatment to tho child?

.. No, no, that was a top socrot nnttor.

H.atDY: I hevo no further questions to tho wltnoss,

Your Honor.

D-l. PiaJOLilu: Mr. Prosidont, boforo this session is
recessed nay I request that Dr. Schaeffer bo excused
fra: attondinj tho session this afternoon, and tomorrow
nernins, since ho is not ccnoorned in tho natter now
under discussion, for tho preparation of his cose.

?KJ Rt-SSIDSMT: Counsel, you are attornoy for defendant
Schaeffer and you dosiro to consult withrhin this after¬
noon concerning tho preparation of his ease?

Dii. PJLHUili: .eid tomorrow also, please.

TH- PlLSIDlirT: Defendant Schaeffer's case will soon be
called for trial. Upon request of his counsel defendant
Sch .offer will be excused from attendance before tho


7394


j.f _y x2-:*..BK-12-3-i; .Xoy (Int. Brown)
Court *io. 1


Tribunal this afternoon *.nd t a.or row norninj, in or dor
that hi3 counsol nay consult with hin for the preparation
of his cr.so.

Before proceedin; with the further oxaninetion of this
wit no 3 s I would ask counsel for defendant Brack if ho
desires to exauino this witness _ny further?

D.v. ?»cGJSCrfLL-.ii: Ur. President, I had intended to con¬
duct a r_ther ext-nsiv- redirect oxurvin ;tion.

fJL- P.tJSID JIT: V^ry well. Boforc oponinj th- rodiroct
the Tribun-1 will take a neon roco33, «..»d will rocoss
until 1:30.

(Theroupon th- noon recess was tnkon.)


73C5


22 Hay Z.7-..-?JC-l>l-f&s*-er (Int., von Gchc-n * Bro»r.)
Court I


r—-xm cssajcn

(The Tribunal repccyened 6- I33C fapurs { p Hay 15AV.)

THE Ji-ESHO.; The Trltjmal is again in sassicr..

IKE pE^ID2.'T: Ccunael fcr the Defendant nay r^-^ajrine the
witness.


H906JS FFANJSfJSIZh - Reaumed
2EJISBC? 2XAJO&.?KS

?Y DR. FROESCHICJiN (Counsel for the Defendant Era-*):

C '.fitness, in the crcss-exanir.aticr. by the preceoutcr you aasen-
tially repeated, all the statements that you had nade caring the direct
examination, only in a few poir.ta could year answer perhaps be clarified
tc avoid any errors, ar.d it is these points upon which I should like to
question ycu new. First cf all, a personal question Doctor, you, your¬
self, are a neurologist.

A Yes.

Q And consequently, knew the tern "prison psychosis" from science.
Is it true that you, witness, found yourself in such a state in Frank¬
furt on the Main?

A No, I did rot have a prison psychosis any longer in Frankfurt,
as far as I remember, it was the beginning of Jctober until almost n
year ago now. This prison psychosis was terrible, and I wouldn«t want
oy worst enemy to go through "hat I experienced.

Q Doctor, I do not want tc kr.-w the condition, I 3imply went to
knew when you had this prison psychosis. It sc-ms to have leer. l?A5-Ao.

k There were the acute symptoms hallucina tior.s and illusions,
ccr.diticri-ot-<j-in^al^clarity, but net ccaq-lete, and then 1 was in a trans-
V L ~p'Jra£?%-ity, and in Frcrkfcrt it became worse e.-rffh.


•'lja'.joStUlt -ppyoR^itj’, and in Frcrkfcrt it became worse e~itfh.
/^/ ’* '\'l\

,1'A I aA interested in thi3 connection in only one further

lotion, Dees this prifecr. psychosis still have an effect on you r«cw.


partiaulsrly in


to dates?


« sea?ryjh^rb ecome consider!’-ly weakenod since I wes ill, and
rhay3 even 'efere t:iat tine, because cf all the conditions of‘arrest


12 May 47-fc-f jC-i3-fc-Fcater (Int., vcr. Sefcoen 5ro»r.)

Court I

»d *,d free. my «rk. I deft te«> but there ere many things thet
T emit render et ell and «ny things that I eer. only rmesber pertly.

q Doctor, I ask this question only bemuse the prosecutor et the
beginning of his oroso-exssdnetior, submitted various things to you
that you had said in Frankfort to the i.oerican interrogator or the
leruan ir.vestigatir.g .rticial, and because the ^partial observer bust
gain the impression that -hat you said in Frankfort does not agree 1th
■hat you said during your direct examination.

A During the interrogation hero, before I went into Jranfcr.,

„„ in ..rs. condition. Suddenly being looked up -as a terribl. ex,a-
rienoa for na, and 1 beU.ve 1 cm say that I bad sign, .f hallucina-
tior. 3 . I was not aware of any differer.ee.

9 Doctor, it is oy impression that you nsde visible -Cfcrts t.


-peek the absolute truth?

A I think I oar. say that.

q and did s. in all the question, that the prosecutor asked you.
hat me no. tun. to the .tatters that I should like to discuss 1th you «y-
aslf. The first subject is the folldng. » »!*• of the he. Top
Secret matters -ere treated. Do you kno. that it «. a genera rule in
-.ormary that administrative officers, '.Jehrmacht officers, etc., hod
specific orders, according to -hid. the so-mlled top secret matter,
were to be handled only by people *0 .ere specificslly authorised ta.

A Tee’ that .as the case even before the -nr .hen my personnel
.ere drafted into the any. 1 ™ obligated. 1 put the paper,

into the safe nyself.

9 Cm you also say that an the basis of this order authorised
people .ere obligated by a handshake and .ere inf.muvi sf the rrovisi.ns
af German la., that If they failed to maintain secrecy they «ould be
subject to severe penalty ar.d tc the death during wartime.

A Yes, 1 knew that when the utilization erders came rut 1 vyAt
ms obligated to secrecy by a hmdshske by m>- superior authority, and I

tola that there .ore severe penalties aid perhaps even tho.death


7397


penalty


Court 1.

jSay i2-«-l4-l-HU-iteehan-Von 3ohon-Brown.

Then this obligation Co was a general secrecy
measure In the Interest of the security of the German Aeioh?

jt. I assume bo, as the 03t„ of office of the cl 11
servant Is the basis of his function.

Q. Now, the second subject I should like to bro?ch.

Ihe Prosec/.tor has charged yo- on the basis of Document
No. 1313 in Document Boob 17, page 6 of the En-llsh
Document 3oob. This la the letter that Dr. Hoelrel sent
to you?

a. It Is on pa Q e 4.

Yes, p-ge 4. It le d-*ted 2R August 1S-10. I an
now Interest d only in the date. I doU14 11* to discuss
this letter with you briefly. Do you have the boom before
*ou now?

A. No, I handed it In.

yjl. .iaRDY: May It please Your honor, jofeneo Counscx
has stated erroneously that the Prosecution has o.vr,cd
this witness with some activities.. I don't know what no
Is referring to, in connection with this doouaent. 1
merely put tne document to the witness for »r. explanation,

I .won't charged the witness with anything, to my know¬
ledge, end I wish that to be clarified.

DR. FROBoCHAaKN: Mr. Pr.eldant, I quite a a reo with
the Prosecution, but I do believe It will help the
Tribunal If I aid ash one question re^rdm* t..ls letter.

•THE PRESIDENT: Counsel may propound the question.

3Y DR. FROESCHMANN:

i. In this letter on o t .e 4 I shell- c-nd />u cne
document. “That bee endered to ce the wor.-. in tne Child¬
ren's House was r.ot the scientific interest, ouc the
physician's urge, midst our often frltless Woov, to nelp
nd at least to Improve many of our cases here. Tne


Court 1

Vgy i2-A-14-2-HD-Me ehar.-von3cho n—Brown.

psychological evaluation, and the curative and pedagogic
influence were always much closer to ay heart than anatomical
curiosities, no matter how interestln- they were. atA sc
it comes about that, aUl-uu^n I am sure that I can preserve
ny full objectivity In 5 lvir.g expert opinions, - feel my¬
self somehow tied emotionally to the ohiliren as t.ielr
medical guardian."

Doctor, my question to yo Is, It can be seen from
tnla letter of Koelrel that at th: ; timo you wanted to
commission him with the dlreotlon of this children's home,
so that he could anoly new therapeutical methods there?

A. I cannot deny that possibility, but it lo also
possible that at the time the first questionnaires were
-iven out for the registration of these o.illdren, I don't
remember.

Q. Thank you. The third question. *t the conclusion
of your testimony, It was cold that you, witness, did not
ask the consent of the parents of the children who wero
to be subjected to Euthanasia?

A. No, that was not done.

Q. Now my question lo, do you know that the oor.sent
of the parents for admission to the Children's nomo end
thuo to the possibility of Euthanasia had to be given to
the Affitsarzt?

a. 1 know that the Amtearzt could send the children
to the Institution on the basis of the questionnaire. I
also know that the children could be accepted only tith
the consent of the parents. The child simply came to me,

I did not ask the oarent's consent either. They were sent
by the Amtsarst or by the family; but I don't know that
the parents were told about the treatment given to t.io
Children.


73f?


Court 1

. -a;' 12-A-14- 3-aD-lfe e ha n- vonacho n-Brown .


This zorninB you said, in answer to a questi.-n
v- the Prosecutor wnlch had to do with t.ie .ollect^i. of
Jewish centel patients in your institution end cneir later
;ransfer to Poland; do you renenber Chat?

A. Yes.

I put to you now document Ko. 1175, <u exoerpfc cl
which Is contained in *xjcunent Booh 14, Pe^e 25. T.nis is
tne collection of the transport lists, wnicn .^-d t. .e
shown to the director of the cental institute oy tne
transport company whenever there was a transport ana tne
patients wh we e listed were c mp red with the list alven
the Institution, Now please ta.ie a loo/, nt t. is Hat ^nd
toll me what you know about the ecoomos .yln^ lot ere from
tne transport company, how does it .e^ln?

a. "In accordance with tne dec 10 Ion of tne otate
ministry of the Interior, I have icon order of the Helen
Association of mental Institutions, Helchsarbelte^enieln-
schaft, and as responsible chief of tne lenerol Petlentc
Transport Company G.m.b.n., taken c.x>r..o of tne transfer
of the oetler.ts enuaereted In the list below to a Helen
Institution." I don't know the letter.

q. You do know tnls letcer, don't you?
a. No, I never saw it.

Q. Your administrative officer saw It, Is Cnac wnat
you xean?

a. No, we did not fill that out, we nevav saw ic.
q. You don't understand av queacion. If e trans¬
port train reac.ied your institution and fetched awa;
ostients, you h£d previously received s.'ae sort of notice
to prepare for the transport a certplr, r.umcer of patients;
Isn't that so?

a. No, the method w cs a 11 tele different.


I-wp.s jlven


Court 1

•'•sy lc-«-*4—4-nJ-Meehan-von 3c.ior.-5rown.


transport ll6ts; these lists said that the patients were
to be picked up on such and such a day by the General
Patient Transport Company.

Q. And then the lender of tills transport filled out
this certification that you Just read?

A. I don't know, I merely n. d him 6 lve me a confirma-

%

tlon that he had taken such and such patients.

Q. -.nd It says here, *Ir. accordance with the decision
of the State Ministry of the Interior, A have, upon order
of the Reich Association of cental Institutions."

A. I don't see that. No, this is cl a ned by the
commissioner.

Q.. But In the c r.flrmatlon ltseir, It says, "In
accordance with tne decision of the otatc Ministry of the
Interior and ucon order of the r.eich «asoolatl.-n cf
Mental Institutions;" I lay particular weight upon these
two words. New, If you will turn a Tow p Q oe over where
I stuck the little slip of paper, this is a llGt 01 the
Jewish patients who wore taktn away or. 20 ae>tambnr 1540,

Is tnere an accompanying letter?

A. No, there is no accompanying letter, no, no.

i. Please examine the document carefully.

a. Oh, yea, here It Is; on pa t e 13, you mean.

Q. Now, when adult Incurably Insane pers< r,s were
fetched was there not a ;rlnted form that woe used?

a. No, this paper — the patients were taken by me
today, leader of the transport, Eglfln^-Haar and the •

date that Is by me, because I told tne man I wanted

a receipt for the patients, otherwise he would not nave
lver. me any.

C*. Now, from tr.l3 document please note; that ra.srd-
in.i ell other Incurably insane persons there were fora


71U


Court 1

12-rt-l^-5-jO-Keehar.-von echon-Brown.

lists of transports which were printed; you find transport
lists six, seven, eltht, etc.

«. I don't b9lleve I filled them out, I don't know,
i.. I don't believe you did either. I simply want
so ask you, end this is tne molnc of my wnole series of
questions; in tne transport of 20 September, 19-*0, in
t.-is document I nave shown you, t..ia list of ths Jewish
patients; wrs t. l6 list also centIn *d in the printed form
or was it made up especially by you?

«. I am sorry, I did not understand your qu3~tiun.

%. In the document 1 heve Just tut to you, tne Hat
of the 'V.elsh patients, of 20 September 1940....?
a. The 23rd you mean?

4. No, the 20th.

a. The 20th? Or. pa d e ie it says 23.

Q. Veil, never mind the dete, et least its Sopton'oor
1940. Let's go on. Now, I will p.ak you again. Io this
list on a printed fora list for transports, or is this
list of tne Jewish patients somethin! that you yourself
prepared on a special poper?

a. Ho, that la the list v.lon I was O lvon, it is
a transport list ,lvln e the names end tr.elr datae of birtn.
i. And who wrote this trane-jort list?
a. I received it from the tr?n6oort uom any rs far
as I know. I don't ..now exactly how it wrs in the trens-
f,-r of the Jews, but in eny case tr.t transport ovmpany
:r>ught the list. It orobr.bly cam from the minis#;'
in Munich* I don't know.

If I understand you correctly, you said five
minutes a^o that 'ou sew to it t. $ ;ou ot eucn a list
so you would nave somethin- in your mends b; vey o. a
receipt?

7hC2


12 nay-»-GJ-l5-l-Kaynos-(vcn 5chcn&3rcwr.)-
Court 1 case 1

« Mo, no, that is 2 misunderstanding. I got a receipt, a certif¬
icate cn 2 ropy of the. transport list. The acn in charge cf the transport
had a list, an I had earlier receive ‘ a list of tne patients who were
qcing to be picked up, and on the list which I hail receive.’, on the car¬
bon copy of it, I had had thu nan vivo s. a certificate that he had
taken these patients. That is hew it happened.

Q Then this e mir.*, you said ols: that you were toll that these
patients were taken to Poland?

A The nan in charge of the transport told m_ that, I believe.

Q An I wren; in saying that on Fri'ay aornin,; you seM that theS-
Jewish ncntal patients were to be sent to a Bavarian Jewish institu¬
tion?

a I can't remember s.yinr that they went to a Bavarian institution,
but a Jewish Institution, an institut. for Jewish insane patients, but
I Icn't renenber exactly.

Q Do you kr.'w, Doctor, that one cf the Jewish women named cn
this list died ir. 3c ho In, according to your own r-pert?

A No. 'hen I got a book cr a ccllccticn of documents, free you,

I found something, in there about death notice in Schelra. I can't re¬
member the name? 3chela.

Q New, -noth.r question. «hen w.*.a th; second co-tini. in i\,rlin in
"hieh you took pert?

A The no.ting cf exp-rts?

Q Th- escen acting.

a I don't knew Dee ter. Kith the best intentions, I can't renumber.

I havw s-i,'. so r^peate.ly, but it was about I think, a few nenths,per¬

il

haps threw ninths, later. I cn't know exactly.

Q In connections with this meeting, you w.re th*n asked t<: take up
your activities that is how it was.

. Doctor, you h27„ repeatedly said, that it was in y-air ideas
it the first zee ting that this was tc b_ a total registration .f oil
insane p.rs ns for the purp- Se -i transferring then separate mental


12 -»ay-*-GJ-l5-2-ri-:ync3-(v' n Schcniorcwr.)-
Ccurt 1 case 1
institutions; is that sc?

A lea.

l Now, in the course cf the scc^r.-’ acetin^j was there any tonticr.
of any measures, without us in. tha wor'""’ euthanasia," which i l, however
refer tc euthanasia?

n Lector, this questicn is Very 'ifficult tc answer. I cannot deny
the possibility. I eonset ren.nb.r anything in -.tail in .ni3 connection,
tut I really roust a tit the pcssibility that euthar. sia cr measures
for c linin'tine such patients wen. discussed, but I repeatedly saiJ
in Frankfurt, toe, that eftor all these years or.t 1 in view of my con¬
dition ir. cannot raseofcur details.

Q Consequently, you will .alac a.fait the possibility that wh-n
carrying cn ycur activity s an exp.rt you knuw, if not inletsil, then
at anynte in gen_r.Vi, that the purp.se of tills expert activity was
tc separate the curable from the incurable rental patients?

A Yes, of ccurao.

Q Non, cn-j last question Dec ter: You were specifically instructor’
by the tribunal to refuse tr. answer questions that nipht serve tr incri¬
minate ycu. You hav. aae no use of that ri:ht, an:’ particularly in ans¬
wer to the qye.-ticn ef the 'rcsccutcr, s to h r. cany children there
wer- whose lives y u shortened in ycur institution by the use ci luminal
ycu answers: 1 . in a neat credible way that you gave - mercy death tc ICO
or 120 -f these wretched creatures.

A I don't rececb-r the nucb.rs .xactly.

Q I js n.-t a r such interested in th. actual lumbers as in the fact.
You further replied, ith na regard lor ycur p rs. nr.l safety, that y-'u
haJ been known as an advocate of euthanasia for c~re than twenty-fiv.
years. Is that true?

A Yes.

Q Ycu also said explicitly that in cases naifonce’. or feeble-
::in'e-J children you felt justified, ir. view of the -.ir.ist rial deci-
sitn an f what was s :i: in this «. ..pert c nl rer.ee in rrantin; th.se


1? kay-n-GJ-15—3-^3 r ncs-(v in SchcaJtBrcwr.)-
Ciurt 1 case 1

children euthanasia after ycu had received previous authorization to
dc so, is that true?

A Yesi

Q Finally, you a Ini t tod ini scil that the Banner of administering
death that yeu chest was th. s-'vh^ that cculd put these pc-r children
cut of their nis-iy with th<T least pair, to thtaselves, is that so? Is
that true;?

A Yes.

«1 Id oth-r words, y u acted with craplot: conviction of tne legal¬
ity cf what yeu di 1 ?

A Yes.

* Hew, cy col l eague Servatius, his called one final question to ny
attention, which I sh ui: like tr iscuss with ycu briefly. Doctor at
the beginning cf cy direct -xaninntion, ycu said that you hv abrut 2900
insane patients in your institution in 1939 and 19L0, approximately.

Is that correct?

A Yes.

W Now, when ycu received those questionnaires, regarding roughly
hew many people did ycu fill cut questionnaires?

A I did net understand ycur question.

Q >hcn you received the questionnaires ruenrJins the inaurablo nen-
tr.l eases, you ha ' to fill then wUt?

A lee.

Q qucstioi is: Regarding hew many Dental cases, approximately,

'id y:u fill cut these questionnaires?

a I don't remember. I think it w?.3 less than 1COO.

Q Uas than 1COO?

n Yes about a thir'.

Q fttre foreigners aacn thus?

A I can't rcDoct-r any foreigners. I lon't kr.rw exactly. I had a few.

3 k.w many cental patiuits were taken away, transferred, from your

7U05


institution?


12 x-.y-A-GJ- 15 -i-*-yat 3 -(vcrCchan£t=rowr.)-

Court 1 case 1

« Dc you tear. peti-nto f-ra ty cun institution?

4 I scan only your cur. incurable ones*

« Certainly csry loss than the r.uaxr if questionnaires.

Q I want to ask ycu h_w aany approximately.

A Veil, aporcxiEhtely, nay be 50C to 600, I estimate. It was lik-
thic: These transports generally effected the pocplo in transit.

ii I slcply wanted to knew roughly hew tuny of the pc epic c«-vcn.i
by questionnaires were in the course of tine transforrei elsewhere.

A I can't , ivc figures cxaotly, cf course, but ccrt-Lr.iy net
as cany as recorded in the questionnaires.

W And these questi nnaircs whieh * rc caie out by you, they were
expertise*, by other exp- rts?

A Yes, cf course. They wore dene by ether people.

Q Maw, if they were expertize' with, a plus sl*n, were they pretty
-uch in the cane, prop* rti-n as the questionnaires "hich y:u yrurscli

expertized? litre there core or wrr. there ltsr?

A Quito a number of eases which 1 ha ju ye positively vt-re not pic¬
ked up.

Q In ether werds tc the best cf ycur kn-wlt.'ge, the patients whew
you sesifnato.' as p'sitive were .pparently declare. 1 by ether experts
to be re.-.iy for euthanasia?

a I cannot t- el you the reason why they were not picke. up, l octcr,
There -ieht nave been scdo other reason., but the transfer c-a«>s sent
to ny institution freo .diet institutions were Oen3i!eroi srre urgent
for transfer than ay cwn ca3.s, nd for that reason perh'.ps ny own cases
were put aside. I cannot say, bec-.ust the project ‘id net i.c cn.

I ion' t knew the reasons.

q Doctor, tbc3 aernin-s the -rcsccuticn brought to ycur attention
the nuaber cf questionnaires that yeu hat expertised. I> y*u rcaecb. r

that?


.. Yes.

■:< .-.t the last Breen- I set h i ' cf one rr the questionnaire f th


12 Hay-n-OJ-15-5-fiayn^-(ven Schcnirrowt)-
COUTt 1 CESw 1

original typo. I cannot of course, pat this qu-sticunoirc ir. as a ’.c-
cuacnt because the tine available is tar sh rt, but, with the p'-missicr.
.t the Tribunal anl the Prosecution , I should like v. shew such a qut>s-
ti nmirc fora tc th- witness an: ask hie to tell the Tribunal briefly,
if possible, whttbor the c-ntents of such a qu.aticnr.aire, if it sets
fewn the ceniitirn very briefly of the patient, whether it could be
put aside by you as positive, n nassc, so to speak, ir whether or r.:t
it couldn’t be sc r. right free the beginning that hun.’rc ls of tho
questionnaires «r. fille out incorrectly .n* so tn just put os lie.
Hew was that?


Court 1

'.•Jay 12-«-l5-1-HD-iro66-Brown-v r. donon.

a. In meny cases In fillin- out questionnaires I sew
from the very be*innln. thnt t is w; s not a ceea ior
transfer. In oth.r caee6, hovover, I ves cal* t <=
immediately, If It v s filled - it ri-^t - t.. t is ar, old
idiot, that la congenital ldlo-ty , t t le an Id case of
schizophrenic deterioration, whore j ~ c.-n jud a only
positively.

* HR. HnRDY: Froaecuti n h a nj objection ; aa of
cnls document, your .-onor.

THE ?R£oID£.;T: Counsel may proceed.

Witness, please Uhe e loom : t..is question¬
naire. .-ow, fr.»m vn t ; «a s e there o. n you ary whither
this man la plus or olnua, or Just what is he?

a. as I aiopoaed to form • Judgment on the
oitlent on this fora?

i. The entri there.

a. It aejoa to oc that It la not filled i ut
C'.m letely. It ar.ye nere — First of all, it la not
dear....

liR. HuRDY: Just a moment, witness. My it ?leroc
. ur r.'.nor, apo-rently I misunderstood tna Import of
Defense Counsel's queetlon. I th.ugha ..e merely wanted
t. use the questionnaire as a fora to out to the witness.
There rre aome oencll notati.r.9 v.n c is fora, however, It
doesn't appear fr a ay qiicfc o*rued r.d a. 1 ca of
uarmen Knowledge th*>t this purports to oa an c > ilo?tion
or e questionnaire completely filled .ut In sale winner
that he would h ve received sue., a question. Ire w.ian
he was acting Ir. his capacity e<3 :n expert. If C.. t ie
wh t Defense Counsel deelres to do nere, I su- est t.-at
he .utllne a hypothetical ( lesti n in fer mors ha.ail
than he has done on thrt queetl-nnaire and explain to


Court 1

May 12 -A-lo- 2 -Hio-Grc ss-3rown-von-3chor..


the Tribunal his purpose. Thus far I can't ascertain
his pur ose, what Is on the questionnaire, and obviously
the witness can't either.

DR. FROESCHHidili: In showing this questionnaire to
the witness In Its German crl B inal I wanted to a ive the
witness the opportunity to read the contents of the
questionnaire end tell the tribunal what he hec to say
about whet the entiles In this questionnaire, so th -c the
Tribunal car. see vheth r a lrreprooch bio evaluation of
this patient could be undertaken. That w: s the purpose
of ay question.

MR. HrtRDY: Your Honor, I feel certain the Tribunal
will be as Interested as I will to hear the answer of
the witness. However, this questionnaire has not been
filled out, and If the questionnaire Is r.ot filled out
I don't see now tne witness can answer the question caked.

THE PR.2oIDE.1T: Submit tne dooument to the Tribunal.

JUDGE SEEKING: Counsel, In t..ls fora that you have
submitted to the wltnese thore appears to be a consider¬
able number of questions to be answered If the fora Is
to be coniolete. However, in some of tne vacant spaces
after questions appears nandwrltln- by someor.o. Those
handwriting Is that?

DR. FRCESC3U.cn: That I cannot toll you rt the
moment, because durln e the noon recess I rcoeas I
received this questionnaire, and a doctor wrote what Is
on tilet fora In, as an sample, so to soeak. Nov,. I
wanted to hear whether. If the witness had received
such a questionnaire, he s uld Ivve been In e position
to say rl Q ht off *1 can characterize t..is as jlU6 cr
minus," or would ne nave to say "I w uld have Co return
t. is questionnaire as incomplete".


Co-art 1

Key l2-*v-lo-3-HD-Gross-irown- von Scnon.

JUDGE 323RU5G: ■ill it not be necessary t. i u
ask certain preliminrry qaestl-ns before . oa c -c to th't
question? Gr.a, to the witness, "rfn t is the t> ^er ^ now
nana you" “Jo yi»- reco 5 nlze the f;rm?" If he b. ould
0a y, "Yes, It is e fore often u-ed by is In ur clinical
wor* in determining the diagnosis end oro^nosls of a
disease of a certain person," then, "?tote v.-e-har u v
n„t the hypothetical clinical f lnain^ tlv t I n>ve
written In this familiar or cemuere- with any clinlo.-l
findings you have ev~r seen, or Is It similar to tne one
thrt was used?" Then, "Can you ep.y fr.a t.vt c * of
clinical finding wfai t w.uld ;i vo been your result,
olus or sinus?"

DR. FROESCa-oil'S: Thar, a y I sic tntt x be 3 lvon
the wre a-aIn? The questionnaires re m Document

book 14 II.

MR. HrtRDY: Ray It please y^ur .-..nor, w;ula lc oe
possible for the benefit of the Froeecitl-n th c Jafonso
Counsel outline the hypothetical question set .ort.: in
tnls queatlor.alre before It Is put to the witness :or
r.n answer?

THE PRESIDENT: Yes, t..e Trlbuiel see no o .joUion
to cnat.

DR. FR0S3CHAiI i*.: nr. Pr.sident, In the clinical
•ascription In t. la questionnaire t..e follovin c is sale:
■Schizophrenia - 2 relapses - lest one 1917 - elnce
1115 final condition rcacned - ver; reatleee - eaverfu
attests at suicide." It seys further, "Scniz.ohrcnia
lew case? *No. - Final condition? — Yee. Cure? - Ho.
Furthermore "Theracy twice. - Permanent results? - HO.
Those are tie entries.

?S. H-vRDY: Xi fc ht I farther inq ire, Your & n r,


Court 1

Hay 12-A-15-4-HU-Gro3C-3rovn-von 3chor..


what the note Is on the too of the questionnaire?

PR. FROZ3CH.-.OT: I didn't read that.-

HR. HARDY: Tner. I assume that the witness is to
ignore the note on the top of the q-eetlor.r.alre ?

DR. Fa036CHH*NK: ~Kc.

JUDGE 3E3RING: Dr. Froeschmanr., I suppose that from
the statement of facts that you have now propounded to
the witness, you want him to say whether or not merely
from a cursory examination ne would recommend tnis man for
the privilege of a mercy death. Is thet the point?

DR. FROESCh&iKK: Yes, that is rl^nt.

Witness, did you hear the Junes' explanation?

A. Whether I would Jud.:* this case positively or net.
Gentlemen, tnlo questionnaire is useless. You can sec
that In this minute I was not aolo to reach any doolaion.
The Tribunal could see that, I wanted to nako a slnilar
note before. It says 2 relapses 1917. *t the bottom
It says, since 1915 final condition. Thet ic a He.

That questions ire is Inaccurate. If t..ot man was in
a final condition In 1915 he can't hrve relapses ir. 1517.

I say that case can't be dealt with.

DR. FROEoCiirfAld.: That suffices. Thanh you.

DR. PFaNNKJSLLER: 3osldo6, it soyc nothin* about
therapy.

DR. FROSSCrfiUK:.:. That quite suffices. *'-r. President-

DR. PFaUKHUELLER: Such questionnaires would never
have been cent out by ay institution, tranks to my
doctors nd the Intelligence of ay r.ursln 6 personnel.

DR. FRCEoCHIUia>. But, you as an expert did see
such questionnaires?

«. Oh, yes, I very inadequate ones.

And dues that explain your statement tnis aci'nlr.*


Court i

May 1 £-a- 15-5-HD-Gross-Brown- von ; ebon.

that ou cuUld Cake w ole -illes or these questionnaires and
aay they were coxoletely useless?

A. Y e, I put n red line thv a. a such tarn.a end
Chat w s that.

Q. No further questions, your a-nor.

DR. 3ERV«TIUS FCR T.--E DEF£i3*::T K«RL 3RA. V DT:

Q. Mr. President, oleaae permit ae one question
re 0 ardlna the nunb»r of foreigners 1 r cne inetituti n ct
the beginning of tne war, in 1?32? 'itr.esa, v: -a'ny
foreigners in c. e institution when the war started?

«. Doctor, it is l-oos l>le for ue to answer t.ist
question. Just c.noider, that vr s 7-2 years or
somethin* like tnrt. I don't know.

i. .’ltness, you auat hare s .je sort of 1 >reae:.v/n?
a. No, 1 nave impression at all. -1 •*«& e .• few
foreigners - I don't think =ore t .an 5 or 6.

q. In other words, ou ore a’ole to answer t..e
question - 5 or 6.

A. But 1 don't know exactly, doctor, I can't
re-e-ber any aor: forel c ner6 ft that tins,
q. Ho f :rther questions.

THE PRESIDENT: *..y further questions in bans If of
Do ense Counsel? There belnv n r.e, .xs the fresco .:ior.
er.;* further questions?

MR. Hardy: The Prosecution i’s no further questions
So .ut to this witness, your honor.

THE PRESIDENT: Tne witness PFanonouller is

m

excused fr a the witness stand.


May 12-J-.-3K-17- 1 -Hoxsio (Int. 3rov»n It Von Schoon)

Court Ho. 1

DR. FR035CHLL.HH (For Defendant Viktor Brack): Ur.
Prosidcnt, with tho poraission of the Tribunal, I should
liko to call tho Defendant Viktor Brack as a witnoss ct
this tine.

THE PRESIDENT: .*t tho request of his counsel, tho
Defendant Viktor Brack will take tho witnoss stand.

JUDGE SEB..HIG: You will raiso your ritfht hand and
tako the oath, ropoatin .3 aftor no.

I swear by God, tho -lnijhty and Onnisoient, that I will
spoak tho pure truth and will withhold end add nothing.
(The witnoss ropoatod tho oath.)

JUDGE 3EB.JNG: You any bo scatod.

DIRECT XXUIH..TIOH

BY D»i. FuOESCHLL.Nl.’:

'I Ur. Braok, ploaso stato your full nano.

.. Viktor Hornann Braok.

(1 l<hon vioro you born?

.. 9 Novonber, 1904.

Y*.ur father was a doctor, a Qonoral praotitionor
in Wp.ohonhoirrt
.. Yos.

1 «nc*. thon in Bad Duorkheir. your father oponod a
children's sanatoriun?

.. Correct, yos.

Your not her was a Ooman ot foroi:;n birth?

.. Yos.

i uhat was the consoqucnce?

- In ay youth I was sent to ny relatives abroad, and
jot to know tho Ratio States and Russia.

-i How wore you brought up in your own hone?

.. ./u- were all very strictly brought up. Idy nothor was
a very strict Catholic.

7103


M y 12-..-B£-17-2-Hoxsie (Int. Brown & Von Schocn)

Court No. 1

D... 31t023CHM...JJ: I: this connection, Mr. President, I
subr.it fron r.y Docuaont Book 1, ^ocunont No. 19, pe-go 53.

This will bo Brack Exhibit 2. I shall road fron this
affidavit by a Dr. -.lbert Buerklin of wnohonhein in tho
Palatinate, of 27 January 1947, signed and ccrtifiod by
a notary. I shall road froc: Paragraph 4 tho first and
secon’ sontoncos. "Brook's houo was distinguishoA for
its ospooially highly oultivatod end rofined intellectua¬
lity. Viktor Brack was brought up in this environnont,
and it was hero that he absorbed tho values of holpfulnoss,
doconcy, and purity of thought."

•4 (By Dr. Frooschnann} ..’itnoss, whet 30hools did you thon
at toad?

.. First I had privato instructions, booauso I was abroad
a groat deal when I ^s a ohild. Labor I wont to public
school in -‘achonhoin, Duorkhoi sooonf’wjy school, Monl-
schulo in Bod Duerkhoin, labor tho Oborroalschulc in
Ludwigshnfon end Munioh.

In 1923 I was graduated in Munich. Of oourso, all l :y
schoolin', was or.do uneven by the :.any chongos, tho war,
and tho shortago of teachers.

q, How did it hap.cn you woro graduated in Munich? wr.3
thoro soco event in your frxdly life that nccossit.atcd
your noving to Munich?

.. In 1921 ny .. ironts wero oxpollort fron tho Palatinate.

My father had to fin’, a new way f earning a living,
and went to Munich. Ho- settled in Munich c.s a goncral
practitioner. He had difficulties, but thoy wero ovcrcone
in a few years, because ho had settled in a workers'
quarter, in tho suburbs of Munich, so that soon ho had
a very extensive practico.

<i witness, thon you lost your hono in 1921, and your
father lost his norms of livelihood?


U y I2-..-BK-17-3-Hcsxsic (Int. Brown Sc Vj.n Schoon)
Court N^. 1


.. Yes, ho lost his sonctoriun end then ho lost his
fortune through tho inflation.

•1 It woa n consoquoncc of tho Treaty of Versailles,
wasn't it?

.. Yv.3, it was tho rosult of tho oxpulsion free tho
Palatinate, on tho basis of that treaty.

•i -t that tino you wero soventoon yo.ors old. Now, did
these events have any influonco on your further develop¬
ment?

«• Yea, of oour30. Wo woro rofucoos in Munich, as
people today coao fron the oast, perhaps, and arc r efujees
hero. We wore rcocivod thoro accordingly. Wo had to try
to adjust ourselves enow. That, of courso, nr.do a jrcat
impression on younc pooplo.

You hnvo already scid that your father ttaon settled
in r. suburb of Munich in a workina pooplos' community?

4 . Yea.

•i. «nd then your father throu.jh his ..ractico cot hiu-
solf back on hi3 oconcmic foot Cohin. Did you then
hr.vo occasion to nako a closer acquaintanoo with your
fathor's praotico, and if so, what lmprossions did you
Cain free, boconinc acquaintod with your fathor's praotioc?

.. The practice was very oxtonsivo, booauso it was a
suburban praotico. My fathor ncodod a oar to tako oaro
of his praotico. Ho himself could not drivo, and so I
drovo hi., until 1932 almost constantly whon I was froo,
in addition to ay work, in addition to ay 3tudios. I
accompanied him everywhere. I :ot to know not only his
praotico but above all his patients. During these years
whon unemployment was constantly increasing distress
and lack of funds constantly increasing , one, of courso,
obtained strong impressions in thoso families of ay
fathor's patients.


7U5


Mry 12-ii-BK-17-4-Hoxsio (Iat. Brown cc Von Schocn)

Court !*... 1

k Then in the no mol course of events you cane in
touch with families where sickness was a Great calanity.
Could you also note thet tho s. iritual lifo of tho
fenilies suffered undos theso circuastancos?

That is difficult to dofinc. ..t that tico, as a
younj nan, I did not acoopt thoso thinas rationally but
oaotionally. It was absolutely cloor to no, howovor,
th'.t when there was a lonj and serious illness of a
nonbor of tho fgaily, there was an autonatio novinG
away of tho fanily fror: tho patient. That doos not noon
at nil that this was nr.licious or. unfoolinj, but the
relatives wore of ton not ablo 3. iritual ly to copo with
the Ion-th and extent of tho sicknoss.

1 But in thi3 way you experienced a certain focllnj
of . ity for the sick person?

.. No, I can not say that thi3 Just arose thon.
Synpathy with the sick is . natural tiling in everyone,
but free, this personal observation it was incroasod. I
can ronoabor very clearly '.t this tine a ronark of ny
fathor on sono occasion, "For hln it would really bo a
roloaso if ho could die soon," but, of courso, in all
its in; lication3 I did not understand this ronark.

. witness, wh .t was it your original intontion to
boc one?

.. I wantod to bocono a faraor. I beyan to study
agriculture. I studiod agriculture for threo souosters.

•l Were you ablo to continuo in those plans?

•• Mo, I could not continue uy plans. I changed horses.
I bocan tc study econccicsi I had to earn ny own way.
lly father had enough to do to earn a living for the
fonily, especially for ny younger brothers and sisters.

I did different kinds of work. I participated in notor-

7 U16


M-y IE-..-3K-17-5-Hoxsic (Int. Brown & Von Schoon)
Court So. 1


cycle me os.

6 When die 1 , you set your diplcoa as .in economist?

.» In 1928 I 30 1 ny diplonr. ns an oconanist at the
Technical C 0 II 030 in Munich.

^ U to that tine or lctor, did you concern yourself
with politics?

.. I did not concern nysclf with politics directly.
Howovor, bocauso of the lnfluoncc of ny frionds and
follow studonts, fron about '23 to '27 I bolonsod to
tho artillory unit of tho S-. roj;inont in Munich, a ^roup
which had orison frou cn NSD..P unit which cxistod bc-
foro 1923 , but ny studies, ny work, and ny creat interest
in sports kept no away fron politics.

q, what did brdn ; you to politics then, was it jqnoral
oonsidorations or soncthirvi else?

.. ..11 kinds of influonccs effootod no, prinarily, of
courso, tho jreat social tonsion, tho unonployuont, tho
30 no ml distross; on tho othor hand, tho fr.ot that ny
paronts wero intorostod in .politics, although thoy were
not aotivo - for all thoso reasons I wont to political
nootincs, osiX5cially liationc.1 Socialist nootinas.


7!J-7


1< "?.y a7-A-AT0-l 1-i- feloyr (Ir.t. vci Scoot & Brown)
Court He. i


D, F‘03SCH*a'C : : Ir. this connection, Yr. President, I shall take the
liberty of putting ir. fro-i sgr Jocurwnt Book I Document 20, page 55,
Inhibit 3, an affidavit by August Pfur.dt, a painter in Munich, dated
27 January i.9U7, signed August ffundt, certified by a Hotary by the name
of Nobis. I shall confine myself to reading frejr. this affidavit only
the last rire linoson page 55/ whore it says,"!! - , spite of his own
material needs, he Brack always, however, w.-.3 holpful ar.d Tilling to
make sacrifices for third persons, wherever the need of others had to
bo mitigated. This characteristic may not have boon the least reason
for his taking up National Socialism, th-- idealistic promises of which
ho trjoted faithfully. However, to allowed politically differently
minded people to keep the.r own opinion, and rover looked upon such
persons as political adversaries who bad to bo combatted. I oxporioncod
this for myself, bocaus*, I was an adversary of National Socialism, and
at frequent mootings I disclosed political questions with him."

I further submit, as 5rac' dibit .j, Document 23 from Docunont
Book I, page 62, an affidavit iy ;arl >uther of 18 Vnrch 19h7, certi¬
fy ed by the Notary's Offico in nnnboim and I ask tho Tribunal to
take notico of it. I noed rx'. read it.

1 Titnoas, w« have r.cer r-achod the time when you er.torod
political activity. Before wo consider this natter further, I should
liko to discus? the theme tto.t I told tho Tribunal I was going to tnko
up, namely Tc*uit IV of th> Indictoent, conspiracy, and I should like t®
you v , ides euthanasi sterilisation experiments, you

tod any oorr.ecticm Ith the pt oplo now in the dockj ncr. Hr, -rack,
regardin'’ the question c ronspiraiy T ask you, which of tho dofendants
did you know before l?u5?

A I knewtht r^rus of ’dor. loser, ostock, Genzkon, and Febhnrdt.

T nev’r talkod to ary of thaso son personally. I never had anythin; to


Lj with then officially, I tewpersonally Sari Frandt, ~lcno, ar.d
•v.Joif Frandt. I saw Tu elf ranct a fe- times when I was in Miml-r's


18 Ifcy I.?-A-AII>-l3~2-!felcy (Ir.t. vcn Schon L Brown)
Court No. 1


office. Aside fron speaking to bin, '.as sin:- the time of day, T had
nothing to do with Mb, I have known Blerva since -ha riddle or or.d cf
the 1930*3, from officio! meetings where we saw each other and spoko to
each other. Between the offices, tha Chancellery cf the Fuehrer or. one
hand, where I worked, and the Reich Chamber of Physicia n s on the other
hand, where Hr. Slone worked, there were certainly official connections
such asthe Chancellery of the Fuehrer had to all Party and state agencies,
tut I oan.not renerter and I do net believe that I over myself had any
official contact with Blose.

Q Dr. Brack, let b» anticipate here, within tho framework of tho
euthanasia program you are charged with having be*r. present at the
’iirdeh corXerence with BLaao, ar.d having spoken with Mr. thoro; would
you ploaso say briefly whether cr/ to what extent you lad official
roiatiers or even personal rclatiorsMp with Mono at this ccrforoncu?

A later I shell havo to •<* into rooting in deV.il, but about
r.lom> I car. say; I was sont to thin r,.etinv or. behalf of Bcuhler, as Ms
representative). Tho Booting was oallod by Conti ir.c* rot by Bloir.o, T do
not roK-ssber having seer. Dr, P-loae thoro. I cannot exclude th<* possibility
that Blorae wa3 also at this rooting. 1 definitely did not have anything
official to do with Mb at this coating, and Blono navor had any official
contact with mu about euthanasia.

Q How about tho Defendant Professor Marl Brar.dt?

A I know Karl Brandt since about 1933 or 193a. The acquaintance,
however, up to 1939 was United to very superficial contact?, as in tho
case of Bloae. Only through the outhanasia assignment from HI tier did I
occo into closer contact with Brandt. I shall have to spoak about that ir.
iitail later. 4

Q T 03 , ar.d how about tho ro3t of tte defendants?

A All tho ro3t of the dufcndr.r.ts I mot personally and ever, by name
only during tho trial.

D r.'ow, what answer do yen -ivo to the question as too whether you
~ • *. or wish to deny having taken part in a conspiracy for the comission


10 Mey U7-A-ATD-l8-3-*4al07 (Int. von Schon & Brown)

Court No. 1

of war crirea or crinea against humanity with any of tho dofondants whom
yai have just Mentioned?

A I deny having boon in a conspiracy with any of the defendants
to cosaait war crinesor ericas against insanity.

Q So far as you were concerned, tho Prosecution hasaado no limi¬
tation regarding certain of the experiments with which several of the
defendants are charged; I mist thorefore assume that tho Prosecution still
alleges that you could have participated in experiments othor than steri¬
lisation or outhanasia.

Now, I ask ycu, asido from euthanasia and sterilization oxporimonts,
did you have any connection with any e>porimcnts which aro subjocts of
tho indictment in this trial?

A No, I was not in contact with then, nor did I know anything about

thou.

Q I can loavo that point now and go on to tho noxt point. I must
concern myself horo with tho affidavit that you mado for tho Prosecution,
nils is Document No, U26, Exhibit 160, English Document Book Hi, pago 10,
Gorman Document Book Hi, Voluno I, Witnoss on 20th May 19h6 you woro
arrested?

A Yos.

3 The rxxt day you wore sent to tho prison at Traunstoin, on 19

to the Moosburg Camp, and on 2U August 19li6 you woro brought to
.Wirrborg, is that correct?

A Yos, that is right.

3 You know that earlier I objected to the submission of this affi¬
davit in ovidenco, and also objocted to the conclusions that the Prose¬
cution drew from this affidavit. I should like to give you an opportunity
today before this High Tribunal to make a statement regarding this, in
ei *lCh connection 1 nay toll tho Court that with the agreement of tho
.Tosacution, I have in the meantime received expert testimony on tho part
tho prison physician. This statement of Dr. Buerkncr reached no through
Prosecution a few days ago. I don«t believe it is necessary to rut this

7U20


18 Itiy 2j7-A-ATD-l8-U-4feloy (Int. von Schon & Brown)

Court lie. 1

as a docunent in evidence. I assume that both the Prosecution ir. its
corss-exaa i nation and I in my direct examination will keep the contents
of this statement in mind. ?fow, witness, will you please tell Tribunal
in what condition you.....

HR. HARDYI Your Honor, this document he is roforring to the
Frosocutior. has agreed, as stated by defense counsel, but if ho wants
to use it he must offer it in evidonee.

DR. FBOESCHAT'KH: If I understood tho Prosecutor correctly, ho
wishos this document to bo put in evidence, namely tho questionnaire
that I sont to Dr. Duorknor, with tho aid of tho Prosecution, and which
then was answered by him, is that corroct?

MR. HARDY: ?<ay it ploaso Your Honor, ay collcaguo Dr. Hoclmald is
moro familiar with this thon I aa, and I wish he would address tho court
on this natter ard toll tho circunstar.cos surrounding this docunent.

DR. HDCHWALD: If your Honor ploaso, I rocoivod tho questionnaire
of Dr. Frooschmann tc tho Oornan prison doctor about a fortnight ago
and attachod some quostiona on bohalf of tho Prosocution to this
questionnaire. All of those questions wero answrrod by tho doctor of
the prison. If Dr. Frooscfeann wants to use this documont I do think
it would be proper if ho put it in ovidonco, tho docurwr.t as a wholo,
tho answers to his quostiona and tho answers to tho questions which wo
pjt to the prison doctor.

THE PRESIDE?^: Doos Covnsol for tho Defendant understand tho
propositions put by tho Counsel for tho Prosecution?

If Counsel for tho Do fondant dosires to uso the documont, tho
ontire docunont should bo prosentod before tho Tribunal.

So Tar counsel, tho decision to uso tho document rests with you,
but if you do desire to uso tho document the whole documont should bo
presented.

DR. FROESCH' AlP.i : I take it from what the Prosecutor says that my
assumption is correct, namely that the Prosecution also intends to u3o
the document,,,,,.


7U21


16 Sfcy U7-A-A7I>-i6-5-4ialoy (Int. vor. Scbon & Brown)

Court No, 1

T® PREGIDBNTi That was not 3tated, Counsel, The Prosecution did
not state whether or cot it would use the document if you did not.


71:22


12 Y^y-k-l 3-19-1-ifeehfin (ints: Von Schoo & Brown)

Court Ko. I.

HARDY: Your Honor, I want to clarify this point. The
situation re roly is this that tho defense counsel sufcoitted interroga¬
tories to the Doctor of the prison concerning tho defendant Brack- At
the snre tire Dr. Hocftwald, on behalf of tho prosecution, 3utaittcd
cross interrogatories to tho Doctor in tho prison. Tho doctor in the
prison answered all interrogatories put by the defense and tho prosec¬
ution. I subait scid intcrrogatorios are ono Document in its entirety
and if the defense counsel for defense dosires to use said interroga¬
tories thon wo request that ho use the entire documents, that ho subait
all interrogatories, rarely his interrogatories -a well as tho croso-in-
terrogatorios of the prosecution.

THE HIE3IDEOT: That was tho proposition as stated by tho
Tribunal. If counsel for Defondant Brack desiros to uso this documont,
tho or.tiro document should bo placed boforo tho Tribunal. But so far
as I am advised, tho choice of whotiwr or not tho Document will bo uood
at all, rosts with counsel for tho defendant.

Pit, FiCCSCHTANN t

!tr. President, I shall not uso the Document, because I con¬
sider that many parts of it go too far.

THE HlSSIDEffT : If coisisol choosos that position thon tho
Docuiront, of course, should not be referred to in any way in tho ovid-
onco boforo tho Tribunal. Tho vattv-r will rest right r.horc it is now.

BY DR. FXZSCHIAN’J:

Q '..'itness, without reference to this Document, about which
there was just .a discussion, will you picas a purely subjectively toll
your opinion of what your st-ato of health was at that tiro and what tho
co.asoquoncos wore to you as a result of this state of health you found
yourself in.

A At that time I was considerably weakened by undornourish-
aent as well ns by tho period in tho Tr.aunstoin prison as wall as ir.
aho .bosburg camp. I had so=c intestinal disorders, I don't !mow
>:~c ;ly of :*afe nature, 1 laad vary painful spasms and I was aindor con-

7:-J23


12 Lry-A-28-l£-2-ifeehan (lots: 7on Schon Brown)
Ccirt Ho. I.


stmt radical treatment. 3esidos, during tho previous weeks in Ibos-
burg, I had received very bad rnwa from sy family. Two of ay children
had tuberculosis because of urdcr-nouriohnant. Uy wife had boon arrest¬
ed repeatedly and because of similar things I was very depressed mental¬
ly and vary weakened physically.

About eight or ton days after being sent to this prison, I was
called before an interrogator in this condition, who, without informing
no as to whether I wae a witness or a dofondant, asked mo to take on
oath. I did so and then I was asked and interrogated about my rork at
the Chancellory of the Fuehrer, ny collaboration in tho Buthannsia
question and ottor things including ny ntsborship in tho Se, otc. I
was also askod to cake a sketch of tho organization of Euthanasia. That
was pore or loss what took placo in tho first interrogation; this was
follcwod by many others. I was simply not capable of coping with thoso
interrogations and I oft^n tried feverishly to find words to oxplain
setae evant. I was mistaken about many things, I was unnblo to romora-
bor many things and thou I allowed cysolf to bo persuaded again and
again to accopt tho answer which tho interrogator suggested as correct,
although partly because of tho German languago and partly bocauso of
tho circumstancoB, it was not always exactly true. I certainly v»a« not
capable at that time of Judging tfuso things correctly. Tton, in tho
course of tho interrogations, I don't know which ono it was, I askod
quito cloarly whjther I was under indicta-nt, whether I was a witnoss,
a d-fondant or just what I was. I said under Gorman lavs ono has an
opportunity to refuse to testify if one oar. incriminate onosolf. This
objection was simply rejected with tho remark that this was not custom¬
ary before Acuricon courts, that it had nover hnpponod that soipobody
r-fused to testify and besides I was only a witnoss insofar as the
interrogator was concerned arri ho did not have to decide whether I would
becoaa a defondant.

Q In ono of tho interrogations of 1 September 1939, you dis¬
cussed Hitler's order?


12 H"3r-.W3—19-33toeh2n (Ints: Von Sc non : Browr.)
Court ho* I.


A Y 03 , the decree ins shewn to .» ard a conversation I might
say follcwrod tack end forth -.s to trotter this docrco tad tho power of
lew for us. I nnswer-jd ttat in the iff iiuntive as well as I was ablo
to express -ysolf ard at tta end of this talk the interrogator ashod
m to sign an affidavit. It ra indicated by the whole interrogation
that it could only bo about this one point, ttat is whether tho decree
tad tho force of law or not. At tho next interrogation, after I tad
said, yos, of course I will sign such a staterent, to ny surprise I was
b ivcn tho affidavit which has been presented as an oxhibit. It contains
a considerable number of oount_r-statcrents which I tad nado in the
course of tho intorrog-tion. Thoy arc torn out of their content, in
particular in thu formulation they do not follow tho wording which I
used and tho interrogator told wj, or rather tho interrogator drew his
conclusions, which I qysclf did not draw.

Q However, you did oiy\ this affidavit; did you na.ko correc¬
tions or any objections?

A 1 r.ndo virious corrections, but in many ca.Sv.8 I allowed
cyoelf to be persuaded that what w*s written down should bo accoptod.
This 1s tho only way that I car. oxpLain it. Because of tho long poriod
of tine, fivo, six, seven and oven eight years, cy rocoliootion was
very incomplete In many eases, but tho intorrog-tors tad written ovid-
• nce, documents. In perfectly good faith, I agreed with tho interrog-
tcr fcoc-rso since they had dociments in thoir hands, thoy had to bo
bottor informed about the facts than I who had to rcl£ on my imperfect
-er.ory. I don't think it is fair and I could not inagino that tho in¬
terrogators would deceive no into m-king incorrect statements as was
done. Thcro is no question of .any dolitarately untrue sta.tonor^s. I
could tell ir. dotail whenever incorrect words are used, incorrect sen¬
tences or when something was thrown out of its context or vhcro con¬
clusions wore drr*n that I never expressed, I must oxpl'in this.

Q Witness, you have now stated your fund-cental attitude to-


rd this rX-idavit which was signed on that occasion, and I ask you to

7U25


12 ilsy-JL-: 3-l?-c-Meehan (Ints: Von Schon <1 Brown)
Court iiOm I.


express yourself in the individual points where there arc inaccuracies.

A Yos.

Q I can now turn to the next point in ny case, nanoly re-
rn-dlng Victor Brack's atitudo tor-rd the Jaws ir. th? pro par-ti on for
the extermination of whom bo is alleged to have participated. :'r. Brack,
what wra your attitude toward tho Jaws.

A Precisely la view of tho charge that I participated ir. tho
pronarations for the extermination, I nusi state ir. the boginninc that
I never had aty hatred of tho J tr.:a, noithor against any individual or
against Jewry as a whole. I rojoctod the bad onos and approvod of tho
good ones perhaps to a hl(j»or do;ro- than is customary sen* places in
the world.

Q Did you havo personal friends :aong tho Jowo?

A Of course I always had contact and I had some personal
friendship with Jows. An old school friond of mine livod at our houso
and he rs at our houso alaoat ovary day until ho wont back to South
A orica to his relatives.


ilQjr 12-n-3x1-20-1—3. Hasher (Lit. V .n Schoon & Brown)

Court I, case N... 1

T.on tUero was another one with whoa I .v-s friendly,
evon after I had fin is hod cy studies, end I :<n. w 3oao
half-flows who wore socotinos at cy pnronts houso; soco-
tic^s nt our ski-hut, end even as a party nonbor viion
I followed the progran of tho NSD^P for s5oihl rocsons,
onl evon approved the anti-Sccitic paragraph of this
progroa. It is botter to add to the pr 03 r.au that I con¬
tinued to .assooiato with tho Jowish pcoplo who wero cy
friends and roaainod cy frionds.

^ One nor.ont.

Dit. PROESCHVLJW: Mr. President, in this connection I
should liko to sutcit a doou/iont fron ny supplonont.ary
voluno as No. 140. This will be Braok's Exhibit Ho. 5,
an affidavit by his brother, Eric Brack, of 17 ...,ril
1947, signed by Eric Brack, certified to by uysolf on
tho snno day, a»l I should like to bring your attention
in this connection to paragraphs ono and two. I n^od
not road this, and I ask tho Tribunal to take notioo of
it.

BY D.i. FRO.SSCHM..NN:

Now, witness, plo.asc continuo and givo uo tho nauos
of a fow pooplo who can corroborate through affidavits
whr.t you have Just said?

.. You have just 3 ubcittod .an affidavit by ny own
brother, who can 3 ivo tho nacos of sono of our frionds.

Then I w'-ul*. like to none cy friend Hans Ollendorf, who
was g three-quarter Jew according to the National b-'ciclrsb
ist ideas, who is one ->f tho friends of nine, oven today,
who has .also subnittod an affidavit.

D.d. PaoBSCHBLJOl: Mr. Presidont, I put in now as Ex¬
hibit H . 6 Djeucont No. 9, pace 26, troci cy Docunent
Bjok No. I, an affidavit by Hr. Hans Offondorf. I have


May 12-..-3K-20-2-Gal lather (Int. Von Schnon & Brown)
C'urt I, Case Ho. 1


clrondy nskod the Tribunal rojnrdins this offid.avit, which
is not in exactly the fore the Tribunal wishes, neverthe¬
less, it is r.n affidavit which should be acinittod bccr.uso
it is cado in South -c^ric., and the Tribunal has told
no that it would bo acceptable.

THi P.iESIDBOT: .hdid you say infornod you, oounsol,
that the affidavit would be acooptod in its forn? Did you
3ay tho Tribunal infornod y ->u?

Dli. PitOSSCHLLaJN: Mr. Prosidont. On 19 February I
appliod in writing to the Tribunal that Dr. Hans Ollonsorf
and Gerhard Oilondorf had only on 5 Ootaber 19-16 sent no
cncloso’ affidavit. I statod that tho ,ricinnls wero in
ny pos80S3i on. That both .^ontlonon live in South «norior.,
and that tho two non had assuned at the tino that Viotor
Brack was not beforo .an .-nerio-'.n Military Tribunal, but
boforo a Gornan denazification Court. Thorof.oro, on
the br.3is of the rulin;; of tho court af 27 J muary 1947,

I roquesto-d as the natt-r that thoso tw > affidavits bo
adnitted in ovidonoo cxcoptionally in tho forn in:which
they exist, and should bo included in ay Joounent book,
and, thoroupen, on 6 Mar oh I rccoivod this letter fren
tho Sccrotary-Gonoral, which I now show to tho Prosecution,
according to whioh the affidavits aro adrdssiblo. I, of
course, r.ssunod that this ruling was sor.othin; that
originated with the Tribunal.

THJ P.ilSIDZNT: .#‘hat is tho doouri-nt that oounsol has
statod? «

J-L(. HOCHe.XD: May I hand tho docunont to tho Tribunal.

TH3 P.G3IDEHT: It u\y very likoJ.y bo that this affidavit
my be received as statod in lieu of tho noto.

D.i. F.tOESCIflLaOI: I now show tho Tribunal Dccuacnt No.

9, Brack’s Exhibit No. 6.

71:20


cl-y 12-..-KC-20-3-Ga dllaghor (Int. Von Schoon & Brown)
Court I, C^ac No. 1


THE PiiESIDENT: Just a noaent, counsel, until we decide.
This docunont fron the So oratory-General says that the
Tribunal approved pernission on bohelf of counsel for the
do fondant Brack to offer the docun^nts. That doos not say
end that is not in regard to saying they would bo adnitted.
That porni3sion to counsel is given to offor thon in
cvidonco, but it would not bo an ednissian. Tho Tribunal
c uld aako no ruling that tho docunonts woro odnissiblc
in evidence actually until tho nnttor was considered. I
know, however, that here tho affidavit says that tho
following affidavit is to be presented boforo tho denazi¬
fication board, and th .t f .Iso statononts in tho affidavits
cro punishes' sovoroly, and, therefore, do cl-.rod tho follow¬
ing on oath. I ’.on't know. Has counsel for tho Prosecu¬
tion any objocti xi to tho adnission of this docunont?

M.t. HOCH ..coord in g to tho ruling of tho Tribunal

this docunont is not executed in tho proper fom, so
tho Prceocuticn, of courso, objects to tho offer of this
docunont.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho original of tho docunont oontains
sono certification in Spanish, which is under tho ncaa of
Doitood, or seaothing. If sono ono w ml.l intorprot the
certificate for tho benofit of tho Tribunal, it night be
of assistance.

D.t. FKOESCHU.JJI: Key I point out to Your Honor that
tho translation is also thorc, tho Goman translation
of the original Spanish docunont.

THE PRESIDENT: The ccrtificatian by sono officer who
witnessed tho signature, have that translator..

DR. FR0I3CKM..NN: This affidavit was originally in
Spanish. Then at that tine I ha'* r.ado .a Goman translation
and had it interpreted into ny docun.-nt book. Now th^re
ust be a tr.anslati n of this into English in the English


7 129


-'•y lB-^-BK-20-4-Gallagher (Int. Von Schoon ec Brcwn)

Ceurt I, Cnso No. l

Docunont Book, that is, Bxhibit 6, No. 9.

ili. KOCH.'.»LD: Y >ur Honor, I just h.avo boon inforncd by
counsel for the dofenSo that tho original of the docunont
is in Spanish and not in Goman. Jloroovor, I do not soo
any certification that this i3 a true and corroct transla¬
tion fron Spruiish into Gornen. But it is not into Goman
and I havo no Idoa who translated thi3 docunont into
Goman. It i3 translated, I soo, fret; Goman into
£n~lish, but thoro is no certification wh.atsoovor who
undo tho trr nsl tion fr xx tho Spanish int > Gcruan. Now
I would liko to soo a certification that any person who
nr.do this translation is entitlod to do so.

TK3 PlhSIDZNT: Y~s, that is corroct, counsol is
corroct in that tho docuuv.nt book contains nothing con¬
cerning tho translation of tho doounont fr a Portujoso
or Spanish into Goruan. It is now tine for roocss,
an*. I woul' surest this natter bo discus 30 :’ and o on-
si'.^rod betwoon now end tomorrow nornin^', and that
counsel also c nsidor tho question of the competency
of the first paragraph of tho .affidavit, and tho offoct
>f it flight woll bo c .nsidored, to bo undo in liou of
this, which flay be considered by the Prosooution.

ILl. HOCH ...LD: Yos.

TH2 PitESIDJfllT: Tho Tribunal will rocoss until 9:30
tomorrow r.jrnino.

('.•horou;. xi tho Tribunal adjourned until 13 May 1947
at 0930 hours.)


7lo0


mi

13 .Fester (it*. _.rcvr.)

Court I


c :ici-x . —soR2>» c __ c.- u-ifosr

xhlJUl^L It the sailer cf the jiitad abates
^5 erica a^iinst —rl ar-ndt, et al,
defendants, sitting . urnoerg, C-er-iony,
oa 13 hay 1947 , 0930, Justice jeals preaillng.


xl- ciiuL: Persons In the court rccu will please find their

seats.

'Jho Honorable, tho Judges of ..ilit-ry tribunal I.
hUit-iy Tribunal I is' now in cossion. God s-vo the United states
cf jo orlca and tnis honorable Tribunal.

iSioro will bo order ic tno court rocc.

•jl—?—-ISi-T: hr. narsh-l, you ascertain if the dof^nd.-nts arc
all v.csoat ir. court.

T..w ...- d af-aLi hay it '.l'j-co your noaor, -11 tho defend—its arc
•j;-oa-at in court with tao Question of tho Defiant Schaefer v/hc
excused o the friounal yostorday.

J—?—SI 1*11.Is The aecret-ry-ocaor-l will noto for tho rocord
tho prc<,enco of all tho defendants in ccurt s-vo t«io Dofao'.-nt
Schaefer vho is oxc isod by tno Tribunal for tno ;;ur-,osa of consulting
with hin co msel.

Ccunsol nay pr'wood.


Yltio.x JtuCl - KogUEcl.

.h 2 . K^hETi h«y it ile-se your ..onor, def-nso c:unsel for tho
def nd;uit ar..ck introduced ar-cc Docuccnt . o. 9 and a-rxod it ua
-ifc bit .o, 6 in yesterday's -ftorneon session. The prosecution raised
objection to the -dnlssion «*f the document into oridonco due to tho
fact that tno document v.i executed in Jraxil and aT^aTently tho

is in Spanish, which h-s been translated into aoruan oar. is
uo& on p-.,© 25 -ad 26. It o-JOars ncro in English,

la -s uucfc ua tno deeuxent io only -s to tno ch-r-ctar oa tho

• , *ra t

defend at --r.ck, tne presec-ticn vitedr-ws Its cb;'ection, however,
without urejudice ,io the ri^ht cf tne -ro3©cutio . to ©eject to lo-
cabs of taif.jLtu e in tne future, In-snuch ... it iocs net coaly


7lJ1


13 .;jy-4r-JT--l-S-?cct9r (in*, arcwn)

Court I

with the regulations ef the Tribunal, The trosao tioa agrees to
stiyil-.to on?* jdult this deepen t, if defense '•ounsel will in turn
stipulate tlx_t they will r.ot re-d it into the record.

In addition to that, Tour Honor, I have another point to bring up.
Airin the co rse of tno discussion cf the ?rioan*l and defense counsel
recording tie auccittlng of triefs 3-.fe.-e this Tribunal, it S*"- 1 ® -o
if thora was u uisunderstandirg of tr»-.t conference vr.erein I esr.la-.nod
I voul?' =a!ce an uttec-.t to unhe availaele closing briefs, cf the
prosecution before the International hilit-ry Tribunal for the defense
counsel to study so tn-t they will nderstand t .0 nethei tr.e Tribunal
wishes to Invoice tore. I have ono '•ccplotc set of oriefs in uy ovn file
and I will hand tnoso over to def.nse counsal. -ofease counsol aiparen-
:ly uisundorstoed and thought I was going to sua.it 19 briefs in the
case of .debontrop. Veil 19 separate copies aro not available. I uorcly
h vo one sec and h„vo sJo theso avail-olo, and if 1 gave the iinrennier.
taut . intended to sutdt core tuan th-t, I cust witr.draw it new bccauoo

that is tuo only co-ies I h a vo available for tac defense counsel.

%

ila_ ?. In regard to the last st^ttuoat by tno prose¬

cution concerning the briefs waich were filed vitn tno Sesrotaiy-
Osr.oral in connection with tho International Tribunal, counsel prer-nt
b..vo heard the atateuent of tnc prosecution to the of feet that he has
sale av..liable to tr.e ceftr.sc counsel t.ie only cosy 0 : tais brief Y/:loh
fco h .s, th..t, therefore, tno 'ufonso counsel will in t-irr. h-ve to
«tbiino th.it briof. For cy ?-rt, I did not luierstaad counsel for
:‘-o >rea-o tior. to oay th«t he would f r..i sh 1 ? cepicg ef tne brief,
fr-t at any event, th.t is all that it is cr> B «icle tc furnish.

j.2. Ha.JTf: I h-ve, lour honor, furnished taa: vita one cosy 6f
•-- closing -jriuf of each defendant Otfere u;e International ..ilitury
-'rib-aal.

~  — I2A-T: The - -rosocuticn n-s therefore dent all th„: it is


"•■ai’olc in order to uic* cf^r.se counsel b* allowing t-.a- to study tho


1? llay-.'£-Jj-1-3-Fcstcr ,Int. Brown)
Court i


fen cf ths brief such as the Tribunal desires. Did counsel far the
Defendant Brad, hoar the statement _f counsel in connection with
Brack Document N:. 9?

DR. FHCESCKUAJiN (Counsel for the Defendant 3rack): I h.ve hoard
nh: t the prosecutor said and an willing to dispense with reading th« t
affidavit in such r. fern as tc have it reed into the record.

iR. HaTUY: Ycur Honor, in addition tc that, defense counsol hes
two oth-r dccuamts, I believe, of n like eh ractcr to this docuBont.

I rn w il lin g to stipult^ the sane ccnditicns fer these two documents.

THS .RESIDENT: In vi_w of Use statement cf counsel. Brack Docu-
r^-r.t Ho. 9 offered as Brack Exhibit 6 will be received in cvi lcnco
on: filud ns rn exhibit. This ruling of the Tribunal is without
prejudice tc the right the prosecution to cbject tc ether iccurrcnta
which fail to ccnply with tho rules laid down by the Tribunal, end tho
counsel is free to object, anJ the Tribunal is freo to reject cthor
dccun-ntn. As this ruling will constitute fer precedent for tho
future, it will not be bin-ling upon th. prosecution ncr tho Tribunal,
it is not decided as a precedent, \lith that understan-ling, these
d-sununto will be received in evidence.

Counsel, whet ore the nunbors cf tho ether two rtocunjito?
that dccune.-.ts are they?

DR. FTEISCKuAfCI: Dccunent !i:. 8, Document Beck Me. 1, cn page
24, and affidavit by Joseph G-rhard Ollor.dcrff of 21 October 1946,
signed by hir., end p-rhaps I eiight also put in at this tiae Dccumont
!fc. 11, ccurr.nt book No. 1, ar. nffi avit by Hans Ollendorff's wife,
lira. Heine Ollondcrff, of 21 March 1947, signe-d und certified by a
n. tray.

*

Thij affidavit -ertifies tho correctness of the signatures of her
husband and father. Hew, dccunent X . 8 will be Exhibit Brack He. 7,
and 11 ef Beck I idil bo Brack Exhibit lie, B.

*KS «hBSlD2.T: Tho documents will t_ received r.ith Use


7433


13 :;&7-!'-JP-l-4-Foster
3ourt i

undowtading announced by the i*rlbun«l. ihey vi! 1 not oe roud Jut vill
bo u.dc ef the reccrd btfort the .rlbufi.il and vill be considered
for irob^tlTo v-luo they h-v«.

2-. h-gt I eontitue sy r^ae, /our Honor?

i 1 --— ?£ESIBB?: Just u =cu*.nt, cc onscl, until ve E^ric cur
dccuaea*. —

Counsel uoy r.roceoi.


13 Hay L7-M-A7D-2-l-Ueshan (Ir.t. Brown)
Coart No. 1


VIKTOR BRACK - Rosuoed.

Ttt'KCT m?aiftTION (Continued)

BY m. FROSSCittAW:

0 witness, I rioind you again that you are still under oath,
‘Witness, at tho conclusion of the afternoon's session wo woro
examining whether and to what extent you in tho period between 1921 and
1923, i.o,, tho date of your entorlrg political life, had personal
relations with Jews, Wo stoFpod whan discussing Messrs. Ollendorff,
whose affidavit booaso tho subject of soao discussion. Did you continue
such friendships, e.g„ with Ollendorff, after 1933, too?

A Yes, I an still friendly in tho sane way with Ollondorff as I
was previously. I did not cons trio tho Party ar.ti-Scnitism tho way
Hianler, Bornann and Hoydrich did, otherwise I would not have continued
those friendships,

Q Now, it was your view that this anti-Sonitisn, which you .Just
mentioned, despite and aftor tho soizurc of power, would gradually tako
on a more quiot for*?

A Yes, that wasny opinion bocauso I saw in tho anti-Gonitisn that
the Party proachod something of a propagandists naturo and boliovcd it
would soon bo tusporod. I w\s supported in this view by tho various cases
in which Bouhljr was succossfbl when reporting to Hitlor on bohalf of
Jews, half-Jews, persons of nixod bleed, etc. Thoso offorts on Bcuhler's
part wore directed toward helping Jews and persons of nixod blood not
only in the T ar*y itself but in tho ’»chraacht and in civil sorvico.

Q Now, witr. 033 , in the course of tino, as a party aembor, you
becane f and liar with party's attitude toward tho Jewsj did this not
make you doubt tb» correctness cf your views?

A Those doubts only arose later. I kr.ewwhat tho Party view toward
the Jew was. I considered it Just that .the Jews' influence should be
United ir. a curtain way and to a certain extent. Tho fast that Jews had
.ohi-ved such error as they had struck st as a .-iniiar situation t"> the


13 V-y U7-J*-ATC-2-2-He9han (ir.t. Brown)

Court Nc. 1

power the nobility had during the influence of the Kaiser. In tho Kai3or's
Germany the nobility did actually occupy aU tte influential positions
and I found this to bo ur.ju3t Just as I consider the autocracy of any
one class unjustifiable. I had toward the Jews no other attitude than
the or.o that I had toward thj nobility. Tfe spoke only in torm of
"ISaorus Clauaus 1 ' and I considorod t?.at justifiable.

Q It did however bocoru known that certain violent propagandists
attonptod considerable influonco, I rocall nan like Stroichor and his
newspaper "Dor Gtuermor;" what was your attitude toward those oxcossos?

A This oxaggorctod a wild sonltisn I always repudiated, Bouhlor
did tho same and I can roaembor that Bouhlor made tho effort and was
nearly successful in having "Dor Stuornor" prohibitod altogothor. Ho
regarded it as a destruotivo newspaper without culturo and a dotrimont
to tho welfare of tho country.

Q Did you support Xurrberg in tho strugglo against Martin?

A Tea, wo did,

Q Mow, after tho issuing of tho Kurnborg laws, tho quostior. of
anti-somitisn bocaco noro crucial?

A Of courso, after thoso laws wore passod I saw that tho loador-
ship of tho country ms set on oliainatine tho Jews from all influential
positions in Germany, ^ithin th: froo oconany, I saw so many opportunities
ind possibilities for tho Jews to oarn a living that at first I had no
nlsgivinga, to ny own of.lco, Ant II, in the Fuehrer's Chancollory all
ronpiaints emanating fron Jews and half-Jows wore worked on. I havo

treaty -aid Just what they were concornod with, tho3o woro oenplaints

*

'-cut political oxcossos ant' all sorts of other requests. I havo already
said that Bcuhier frequently had success here. •

Q Mr. Brack, I .don't want it to bo thought that it is only at this
~ : Y.r.t at thi3 trial that you iiscororod how enthusiastic ar. anti-
i-ito you aro. Lot jm ask you on your oath in conclusion if in your
" 'vitios ir. the Fuehrer's Chancellory, with no regard for political


13 Hay U7-£-ATD-2-3-4teehan (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

or material gain, ycu U3ed yewr influence in favor of the people
concerned and particularly in affrirs that concerned Jow3?

A Tea, that ia correct.

Q Lid ycu r.ct on the othor hand have the opportunity prociaely

in your activities in the Fuehrer*s Chancellery to work on requests from

%

Jaws and to take a nogativo attitude toward the® if that had boon your
persuasion?

A Not only would I have tho opportunity, but actually that was my
duty, but T could not rcconcilo myself to theso policies.

Q Thor, you actually did the opposite from what the Party doctrines
roquosted?

A Yea.

Q New, wo got to tho year of 1938 and to tho program of tho 10th
of Novanbor. Nfcat lnfluenco did that event have on you?

A Thia ojror.t surpriaod bo enormously. It appoarod to mo r.ot only
svil, but also stupid and false. A friond of mine, tho director of tho
Hanborg Torld ’’conomic Instituto, I asked to toll mo what tho reaction
was in foreign ccuntrios, to this ho made a collection of more than 600
•xcorpts fron newspapere, which I gavo to tho Roichsloitor, and I also 3ont
a copy to Hind .r arxl to tho thon Mini3tor Frank,

Q Did this over orouao a vory specific roaction in you. Lot mo
isk tho question difforcntly. In view of theso events, did you not want
to resign altogether from tho Tuehcro’s Chancellery?

A Of course I was strongly Dovod by those ovonts, and it was my
intention to rosigr. Actually I had many other intorcsts than ainply doing
negative work. Vy work thoro wa3 oba_rvin-. that somethin- waa going wrong
and if something was going wrong, I had to listen to complaint*, make
out reports arvd try to straighten things out where other people out of
; Vapidity or calico made somethin; go wrong. Now, the only way to do that


is to request assistance frer. otrer offices-and aftor a whilo that becomr."


r-iuoua


7L37


13 Hay L7-H-ATD-2-U-yeehan (Ir.t. Brora)

"curt No. 1

Q But I want to knew if tho events of the 10th of JJoveeber 1933
did rot have seme specific influence or effect or. ycu; did you not at
that time draw a plan cr viewpoint?

A />s, I did. It was at that time I struck up various connections
with private in-ijstry ard received certain assurances from representatives
of industry,

Q From 1933 to 19U2, in your activities ir. tho Fuehrer*s Chancellery,
lr. cany ca3os you used yoir influence in favor of Jews and half-Jews; did
ycu on thoso occasions simply havo tho intorest of tho individual Jews in
ycur mind or were you coved by some larger principle?

A First or all, I was concerned primarily with tho interest of
tho individual, but as acre froquunt and core applications of one kind
can: in, I saw that a a trugglo «is undcrrrcy here against an ontiro
soyaont of the pcoplo and I did not consider this 3trugsl 0 to bo a good
ora, Tho achi<ivcjc?nta of non liko endolssoh, or Heine of Dr, Ehrlich
I was always nsutoly aware of and I ackod cjysolf why should humanity
drprivn itself voluntarily of tho work and holp or such non ns theso.

In recognizing theso nor. and in tho ontiro human evaluation of thorn and
Vr/.ir tradition, I had to repudiato 3uch a policy of hato, and that is
■•hat happened.

1 And thin later when ycu hoard of tho actual policy of oxtermination
of Jews, what was your attitudo then?

A There ras no other reaction but tho offort if possible to help.

9 Were you -!uab foundod at first?

A Of course I was.


13 »ay-4;-OJ-3-l-Cock-(Errnr.)-
Ccurt 1

Ycu never fccwvcr in ytur cwr. interests failed to htjlp a Jew who
applie for h-lp? Rather you accccte cry request that cans t ycu -r.
did net consider y:ur cwn interests, is that sc?

A Yes.

That concludes ry discus tier, of ycur attitude tewari the Jews
end new I turn $c y-ur attituno towar National Scciali3r-. Please t-.ll
the ritunal what you i between 1929 an- 1933 for the tazi Party:

a Fren 1929, on I worked far National Socialise. Its pres ran con¬
tained a great leal that could be cl value lor brainy, an: at that
tins I saw in National Socialise th- only p.ssibility ' f snvir..- tlx.
country free eocaaaio distress an’ uhenploynen*.

Q .fere you what night be- kr.-.wr. as a typical National Socialist'
a Certainly net. I was always a National Sevialist with reservations
t is the ^r.ly way I can put it, because -cnal freoden,

press, censorship and so forth, were contrary to =y convictions. Those
things, I thu.htwcri either a basis fer aisuiv'era tending •* ticnil
3 cialisn as a whole or they were Jeviati r. of Nr.ti nal S<ci-.lisr. into
a falsa channel.

Q Did ycu concern y.ursdf with the Fuehrer principle?
a First of all I idn»t understand it a*, cii. Later when ths words
’•Fuohcre principlo" was usee tin. frequently, I '.1 concern ays elf with,
it, but I ’it’ net ? rlrht ‘.way that this Fuehrer Frinciple, unless
it had sen-.- c.rrccti7_3, was n't pemanuitly unable form ->f 3tato
Oovemaent. I was deceived by the oucct^ses ar by the success that
•‘ati'nai Sccllaisc hi. in «ccncaic fields, and party in the field of
foreign affairs, and that is wr.y I ai_r.' t understand this at first.

Q Did you later un^rstand it? #

a I only understand thsi vvry late, in cy pretty .*icple way of
thinking I sew this net as a r. a? n f:r criticise: but a s a reason to
ivc «l • an-’ tc try to repair this ill. I was an ecployee of the Forty
but certainly net a fanatical representative ; : its interests,

v. Di i y.-u fell s? these principles in eing y.-ur work in that ffi-


13 ^7-!4-<iJ-3-2-Ccrk(Ercim)-
Court 1

A I have alrea y sp.k^n about this is. Connection with ry attitude
toward the Jew;. I fell owe thu e-xo policy, cf course, in the conduct
of the rest of ny cfficc work. 1 also observe these principles in ry
private life. In the oducati-r. cf zy children; ry wife left the !.’3
Frauenschart in 1936, or.' I ‘11 net bale no t- .ry of the various Forty
organisations, the DaF, the .‘CSV, which cr.e sr.cul' really Felcni' tc an
which one was clwcys pr«.ssc 1 tc Join. The Farty sccbv'J tc z>. to be 6 r
coons toward ir. -.r.I saw this end a * the salvation of Jercary frea
distress unusploynent. Icrxrpelitleal unity was necessary to achieve
this and the Party itruci -.s the ccrr'c*. - m: i ward that end,

Q New, let's turn to the year 15!*2, the year ir. which ycu left the
Fuehrer Chancellery. *'hat was your attitude ir. 151.2 toward "ati nal So¬
cialise? Did ycu 3till fculieve that the .chraacht would win the »nr or
iid you hove soar <icubt nbtut this?

•i In 191*?, I was sure that ih. ehr-aacht would win the “ar, hut I
hop., that after the victory there w~uld be a earn-a ir. Hitler's heart
anJ in th»j loading personalities tc do acn.thin bvtter. I believer that
there were unny forces and c n still in existance who ha : reserved '.c-
concy an' 1 oalisn in thccsclvor. Only new, 33 tin-, went n, 1 cane
to see that this was trom.cun.

Q *.hat sbeut Stalirucrad?

A After Stalin?rad I saw that : clear cut victory for '■'cr.aary nas
not possible ary l-n^er althcu h I '.i'n't believe that the flar was
one hun re! per cent 1 st. 1 believe: Gennany c*uT’ still remain tc
be a political factor in Eu.cpe an 1 at the c aent -f the lan.'.in-* in
1911, this hope, cf course, var.irh-.d is well.

•

W And form then cn y.u saw the situation as 1 .finitely hopeless?

A Yes.

Q Sew what p.-ramal -xpri.nce occure urir.j this time that affec-
te ’ ycur attitu e t-war l National S.ciolisn?

A rV-c this zcc.nt n , th^r b. -an within r,e that jtc-ioua spiritual

• .

stru ole * reconcile qyscli -'aticnal b.ciilisn, .hr.t critic ion


13 O-3-Ccck-Csrowr.) -

Court 1

Hitler and the serious rd. stokes he Bade and critic is- also cf sy cwr. ac¬
tion, ax/! I spoke ebeut these natters tc friends at seme length.

Q Hid you consider takin or. active stand against the Government?

a He, and I test hcr.cs tly say I weu*d r.ot hove he;n able tc join
a resistance tcvcn.r.t. I was a soldier then and nothing core, and as
such I did cy duty like s cillims of ethers Jtneush with n: her, cf suc¬
cess.

DP.. F.attSCRWH:

Mr. Fresident: lx; closing this chapter I sncul'* ilk' tr put ir. ,
Exhibit Ik. ?, frea supplement :io. 1 to ry !ceu.acr.t hwk, affidavit by
Friedrich .ilheln KXniclain of i April 19..7, cn page U of the sup lc-
acntsry vcluae. This is docunant He. ui- si- r.' ’ by Kloinlcin and cer¬
tified by nysolf. free Cep-*cfc‘r 15h2 until CepttBhcr l?lau, K1 inloin
was the intelligence liais-n officer frr the foreign office Rnd in
this capacity was in a p-siticr. to talk cf aany things with Brack. *ay
I read a paragraph fr:a this dccumcr.t, paragraph 3:

Turin* these Jiscussi.ns past an.’ present measures were freely
criticised an! in this connection , Frock caphasitod to n. hrn wrrr.*
he ha-’ thought the treatment cf tho Jews in his tine, when they were
coop#lied to enigrat', leaving part cf their property behind. He also
coodeoncv the Jewish program of 153^.’

lir. President, this concludes also cy treatment of Prack’s attitude
tewar ‘ N’ati-r.ol Spcialisa, and new I turn V the char,-u cf the meiabcr-
s hip in the 33.

BY PH. IBCESCH^JO;:

Q i.r. Brack, you arc charred with regaini n g a iwmKr at the- al¬
ter 1 September, 1?39, and thus n mentor cf an rrp.anizaticn iklarod
criminal by the I H 7. leu belong-- b'th to the General 33 an- tc the
vfafftn 33 and were an officer ir. those two organisations. Flense lull
the Court h w can: y u tc d'ir. the Gtr.cral 33 in 1°38? Describe your
career in the Si briefly, .. *ur attitude m : y.ur tpertbnces, an a thr.
take up up the <*aff t >3.


13 Liy-^O-J-3-a-C v.k-< Brovr.) -
Court 1

a la 1923 or 1729, I taJe Hlarir.r's personal acquaintance. Ky
Father a* that tis*5 had assieted ~rs. Hinder ir. p - difficult child
birth atti this eiroucstancts br^urnt about closer relations between
=y Father and Hinrdor, and thus I tec nadc the aequo intence of Purler
and others wno took up relations * th ny father cn Hinder 1 s rccenman-
daiiens.

Q Yru then Joined the General 3‘ under 'he influence of Hinder?

A In 1729 ur.' cr Kisslcr's innucncc, and I rtey say on his re¬
quest I Joined the general S3, and that hreueht with it autenutlcally
entry into the party. Then fr's 173° to 1731, I served in a 33 unit.

At the boginnlnf. of 1731, : was entrusts with the leadership cf a
batallien cf ton ear. which was to bo na !t Inter ir.tc a notorize- squad
In 1732 I had erffmiaod a further unit which was used cn special :c-
c os ions.

y What w.s yeur 3S nucher?

a H was 17to.

i In 1930, you then receivod the civilian kcoraticn of th-- S3,
is that ac?


a Yes, that is so.

Q that was Its nucterV


13 Jfcy J7-!I-A7lU-l-Grass (let. Brorr.)

Court Ho. 1

A 901. This happened because in the neuntizso a lot of non in tho
ncantirv; left the SS, ccrt-inly several hundred. Thu3 I was one of tho
oldest SS coafcjr3 at that tine. This circucstance was, of courso, r.ot
without its influence on ay rola ior. with Himlor. That is how tho
r.urfccr dropped froa 19UC to 931 - ny order nunber in tho SS. Then in
1931 on Hirdcr's wishes I sot up a notorized training unit which was
used purely for notcr sport purposes ar.d nothing else. And, this unit
later had groat success in conpotitions.

Q Mr. Prosider.t, in this connection I put in as Brack Exhibit 10
Socwint No. 1, Doouaont Book I, pago 1. This is ar. affidavit by Karl
Freiherr Hichol ven Tuasslir,"., torn 27 July 1907, signed by hire on 31
Parch 191*7 and ccrtiflod by tho Intcrnoont Cnnp official at '{ogenstnrp,
Frxa this affidavit I road only tho paragraph or. nago 3 which bogira
>dth tho werds "Thr.ro can bo no question of Brack's having ongngod in
S3 activity in tho usual senso 'tiring th period from 1933 to 1939".

I should llko the Tribunal to take notice cf the rost of that
paragraph.

How, in 193b you moved to "erlir.. Did you <to sorvico at that tine
fer tlic Gor.eral SS?

A :io. Fror. I9l.li when I noved to Porlir. I did no ncro work fer tho

f*. aoral SS.

Q How, what wn3 your activities between 1929 and 1933 in tho
Senoral 35?

A Before 1933 tho Tarty as active in rviny mootings and domon-
s'.rations. Tho political opponent of tho Party, particularly tho
~ciip>mists, nado of r crts to disturb those d^onstrations and did not

• iltr.to to attack speakers ar.d aipporters. It is erroneous to bGievo

• * Jl - S3 and tlv 2 SA on thoir own initiative wont through Oernnny
if.- trouble and attackin'' defenseless bystanders. If an 5 : son nado

13 of *‘ i3 fists it ras done in salf dfen3e. Sooccnc would hit-bin and
• Bed hi ;; t a asi*» and this rrastJw only tray that he erulri

* i himself.


13 toy UT-H-ATD-a-Z-Gross (Int. Srcrc)
Court .Vo. 1


Q How it was the task of the SS to dofond thoso demonstrations.

Is that what you want to say, or di' it have a further task beyond
that?

A The SS had no further task. That is to be scon by the name SS,
which "Schutzstaffol’, which a protection guard. It occupied a pa roly
security function vdthin the framework of the Party. From 192? to 1933,
this was the only way I could sea this, since the SS r.aroly, if over,
was used for propaganda purposes durfr« that tine. I participated in
propaganda activities only twice during that period.

r * Kr. Prosidont, as Exhibit 11, I put in new ttocunont h, pago 9,
of Document Pook, affidavit by lari ’ olf, a forn.r Ooncrol in the V/nffon-
SS and signed by him or. 27 '-arch 19U7 and cortified by nysolf. I ask the
Tribunal to take notico of it and to road only from it pnrarrraph 2,

■hich roadsi

"Brack's and ny activitios in the ror. ral SS was doterminod by,
ard rillod with, the dociro to h:lp the army unjmploycd compatriots to
ot work and broad again, and to r-lnstrta Germany to ar. hcnorabla
plaao in th. family of rations. In tho Go no ral SS, wo saw nothing but
the Irotectivo Squad (Schuzstaffol) which was to quaranteo tho security
A tho leading nor., oxposod an they wore to attacks from political
opponents when appearing in public at mootings and .aass rollios. To
counter such attacks and to koop political uvonta naacoful and orderly
*.ns the task of the Gor. ml SS. 'to nov r observed any criminal
activities of the SS during the yo re of our Joint servioo 1931/33."

vitr.ess, what attracted ycu to the SS particularly, what sccnod to
you to bo its salient characteristics?

A In the SS, I saw an eabodiuorvt of the spirit of conrndorfftp end
-* sacrifice such as ono could not find elsewhere at that time. I did not
'ind this spirit in sport clubs or ether organizations either to the
tent I found it in tho :JS. In the $3 there was a largo number cf
.thusiastie motorists with whom I had cocaor. 3port interest. Scorcising
activities in the 35 kept no fren doing other work in the S5.

Ihhh


13 Hay U7-H-A7T-<i-3-jross (Int. Stott,)
Court So. 1


Q liow, did ycur motoring activity bring you in closer touch with
Hirmlor?

A Tcs. Froa 1930 on often, I served ishis chauffeur from that
tino on. I was frequontLy-with liin in tho car and in this vay I made his
acquaintance noro closely, got to know his attitude toward nary fields
*f life. Through these conversations rith Himler I dotoctcd in him a
strong idealism. Ho oxpressod, as I say, a strong rfegreo of idoalism,

-o ao and I saw hin as a man of noblj traits of character in .rt>on I felt
I could have explicit confidence.

Q Was politics carried on in your circles in the SS?

A In tho circlos in tho to which I bulcngod no politics was
cirri-d on it all. a tailed about seorto and technical nwittorn. Not
only for no but for tho greeter majority of ry comrades this was tho
total oxtont of our participation in tho SS. had no notion of tho
Gor.cral basic policy according t© which tho S8 was being aini3od.

Q Then you bocast ungagod to gat married and ycu rccoivod an OK
for this engagement freo Hinelor. Kinder had r^proachod you and it win
only than you saw that ocrtiin norms woro laid down according to which
an S3 nan was oxpoetnd to bohavo, 'Tvs ms th. consoqu.nco of this
bohavior with Hinder?

A As I say, I had not concerned rysolf with thoso natters to¬
rero. But then I became ir.t or os tod in finding out what Hinolor had dona
with the SS, or what his intentions *or: in th~ future. And 1 saw ir. the
roan time Kinder had croatod a Fuehrer Corps, with ar. S3 badgo and I saw
•hat 'tUalar intondod to v.: a special body of the SS. 1 hoard it called
a "uard or ur. lit a Troop that *is to bo jl.-vited abovo tho r.ie3os. It
•ir. Ms intention to -chicvo this through careful selection, through
“turn discipline. In this way ho was going to croato an organisation on
hich h. could roly with certainty in the future.


13 Haj h7-W-r.TD~S-l-Earrcw (Int. Brown)
Court No. 1


Q Did you take any part in this inner life of the SS?

A No, I took no further part ir. this inner life of tho SS. From
193b or. I attended no meetings of tho S3 although I had frequent
opportunity. I also refused to bo moved to a SS Conmnity although I
should have liko to havo cwr. house.

Q Now, then, you rocoivod the death-head ring frota Hinrelor with
tho data cf the 30th of Juno, 1931. Vow, will you ploasc toll us why
you received this docoration bccauso tho prosecution charges that in
193b ycu received this docoration froa Rianler in recognition of your
services to tho S3?

A This doalh-hond ring, like t:» dagger and ot'...r docorations, was
given to noabirs by th: RoichofUehror if they had belonged to tho SS for
quite a while over, if th y hadrt«t accomplished ary particular sorvico.
This ring is dated 3C Ain, 193b. However, I recall vory d ofinitoly that
I did not rocoivo it until 1935 end I think it was 1936. I nantior.od this
during interrogations. I me told, during ny interrogations, that tho
date was n »Mr.o 193b and I atcoptod that statement by tho interrogator
in good faith bocauso they said they had my S3 filoa available and knew
that. I deniod it, ut later believed this. That is v;hy I si-nod it in
the affidavit, tho date 30 JUr.c 193a. ftowuvor, in the moantlnu, I have
boor, thinking it over and I s o that the docoration was given to rao much,
much lator.

Q Mow, you are lakir.; of y«ir second affidavit, are you net?

A Yos.

>1 Hr. Presidont, I now jxtt ir. as ’bthibit 12, Document ;'6, Document
"ook 1, Pago In, an affidavit by Ur. ernar Post, bem 10 July 1903, of
1 J 'obraary 19b7, signed by him end certified by aa. Dost hero cohc„rr.3
hior If with the donth-ho^d ring its engraving and the dato at which it
•as received corroborates exactly what the defendant Brack has said; so
T ask tho Tribunal to take notioo of this document.

Witness, yev 3 ust said that you did nothing more ir. the general SS.
v.?cvor, you remained a rxsnbcr. *(ctt, ::’njr didn't you resign i:' you had nr


13 Hay -i7-it-Am~>-2-?l-irrcvr (In*. Karrcw)
Court No. 1


furtfcor interest in the General SS?

A Being a n-^.ber in the SS made no further difficulties for nc.

It would havo boon sere logical for ns to go to the KSIK bocauso of ray

Interest in sportj but ry superior, Hoichsleitcr Eouhlor, was also a

ooebsr of tho SS. Further, I didn't rant to arouse any unfavorable

attention by loavir »3 tho SS and what probably decided ra to remain was

tho fact that by bolon^ins to th- SS many things, that woro associated

%

with my work in t!« Fuehrer's Chancellory, could bo promoted much better
by tao if I wore a Berber than if I w^ra not. For this roason, after my
transfer to Berlin, I oven had myself transferred to tho SD from the
rater unit of tho SS to which I had previously belonged in ordor that the
complaints about tho Justice, tho Gostapo and complaints concerning
concentration camp inratoc could bo bottor roprosontod by mo at the SB,
bocauso those complaints icado it necessary that wo remain in closo touch
with the officials of thu Gestapo.

Q Thor., I oay aim: up by sayin\ that ycu roaainod a nttnbor of tho
Oor.jrol SS, for or/j reason, bocauso you had friends in it from tho years
1929 to 1933 and, later, bocauso ir. your professional career you found it
noro oxpodior.t to remain there to ta!;o care of tliese complaints and
appeals that you Just mentioned?

A Yus.

q Now, vfc have considered yair aoaborship in tho Panoral SS. Now,
briefly, tho question 0 " tho ' ’a *fon-SS. Did you havo opportunity in
peacetime to observe tho activities of * affon-SS units?

A No. I received rry military training with the mountain repinonts

99 and 99.

How, why did ycu Join the toffor*-SS instead of tho Amy? 0

A That was the result of an accidor.tal acquaintance with a
ecmandor of a mountain division of the SS. I applied to tho J affcn-S3
in April of 19h2 for entry ir.tc it and requested ?ouhl-r to approvo ny
rvice on the front. This tpj iver. to a at first for six months and was
'.on extended a number of tiras.


13 fey U7-4i-ATD-5-3-KarrciT (Int. Ercim)

Court Ho, 1

Q .'tow, what wasycur opinion of the- nil it ary activities of the
Taffen-SS at that tics?

A I regarded tho feffon-SS asan excellent military organization,
bo cause its reputation after th, French Campaign wasgood. Its military
accomplishments wore ovorywhero acknowledged.

Q * ?h:,n y° u ontorod tho Tfaffon-SS, what ranks did you havo until
you left at tho end of the war?

A At first, I wasordnanco officer for a division. Later, I was
again an ordinance efficor with tho quartermaster gcrcral of a corps.
Then, for a time, I was tho su»ly officer of a division, and then I was
tho quartermaster general of a corps. In August, 1 9hb, w comandor was
sor.t to tho Carpathians to built up a lino of resistance. This p-ovod,
however, to be impossible. In October or Kovorfcer, 19LL, I bocamj an
export for tho V»affcn-SS in a cortoing-out action for soldiers in Denmark.
Then, in March, 191,5, I becaao a transport officer in Gooring's staff.

Q I subnit from supplementary voluiso .71, Document 1,3, Exhibit 13,
‘ l ”° 6. I do not havo to road anythin, from this documont. 1 simply ask
the Tribunal to ta.'co notice of it. Otto Haslroltor drew up this affidavit
of 17 April 191,7, signed by him, certified by mo. I further put in
Document K, Documont Book H, Pc 3 o 12, Brack Exhibit Uj, an affidavit
by ferbort Qoitnor, Uving in A*»ch, who also knows tho defendant Brack
:rm that period and doscribos tho activities that Brack hiasolf has Just
Ascribed. Ho says that ho nover heard of 3rack's boing guilty of any
inhumane acts and ho says further that ha considers Brack incapable of
conaitting any act of cruolty. This is signed by Goitner on 31 March
I9ii7, and certified by a notary in Jfcnich. I fu-thor put in from
Supplemental Volume 71, tocurent Lb, Page 8, Exhibit 1?, an affidavit
by ono Ot,to »toopohl, of 17 April 191,7, signed by him and certified by
He describes tho nature o tho fitting in the war zone in which
rook Was thcr * tivdly ongagod. He doscribes the malicious attacks, >tc.

1 nOQd not 60 infto in detail. However, I ask the Tribunal

take notice or this fccuwnt. I vrely point cut that it is his point


13 May U7-H-ATD-5-k-Karrow (Ir.t. Brown)

Court Ho* 1

of view that, despite the inhumane cruelty on tho pert of the enemies,
the troops were not guilty of such things.

Toll ao, : !r. Brack, did ycu find cut of any activities on the part
of tho troops to which ycu bolorgod which wore contrary to any regu¬
lations, to international treaties or contrary to the law3 of humanity?

A I krow of no such activities. I knew, however, that my comnnd-
ing officers w-.ro always against any sort of infractions and issued
orders to that effect, to wit, that oxcussoa and infractions should bo
punished.

q How, lot no-remind the Tribunal again of rhat I put in as
exhibit jfll, tta affidavit by Karl olff. Document Jli, and on pago 1C
of Docunwr.t Pook ,ZL, tore ' olff aontlons his n--tin;: with Brack in
Berlin In 19'.iZ and ttan lafc-r speaks of his connections with Brack in
tho Serbian Front. It be'ins with tho words "I act Brack only infrequent¬
ly during tho war. 8

•low, wo have cono to the yo-r In this connoctlon...

T.r. 1 TiSIDChT: (Interrupting) Counsel, before proceeding with tho
examination, tho Tribunal will bo ir. recess.

(A recoss war taken)


13 May l7-M-n“^-l-raUschor (Int. Ranlor)
Court I, Cuso I


THE MARSHAL: Tho Tribunal is again in session,

DP. VJiBXt Dr. Marx for the defendant Dr. 3ecker'-Freysong. Mr.

President, as difonso ncunsol of too defendant, Dr. Bockor-^royseng,

I should like to ask that ho ba perdttod leave of tho scorning and
afternoon sessions cf temerrow, Wednesday, boeauso it is nocossary for
hin to have a number of discussions with no in order to proparo his
3ofonso.

THE PRESIDCHTi On request cf counsel for tho defendant Bockur-Froysong,
the defendant will bo oxcusod fron attendance boforo too Tribunal
tonorrow, Wednesday, In order to consult with his counsel in connection
with his proposed defense. This, of course, is subject to tho rceall
of tho defendant if his cr.so should bo reached for trial prior to
tonorrow moraine or afternoon,

DR. '!ARX: Thank ycu vary cuch, Your Honor.

THE PRESIDENTi Counsel my pro coo d.

"y dp.. raosscaiAWi

Q Witness, how wasycur no.nburship in tho SS concludod in tho yoar

of 15U5?

A Aftor ray roturn froo Doruiark, Bcuhl-r's had a nuabor of largo
-ontr'*vjroi«;B with Brrrcom, bocauso Bouhlor disapproved of tho oroctlon
cf tho Homo Guards, as woll as tho oxtorrinaticn ordor of Bornean 1 aj f*r
that reason Bouhlor approached Gearing's staff went with Gearing to
"b-rsalzborc. Than together with Coaring, Bcuhl-r ras santoncod to doath,
and I was arrested by tho 3D, when I tried to establish contact with
Bouhlor at thj Obersalsborr, and waoincarcorated with Deuhler, and a
muiber of oth.r arsons. rher: wo wero told that wo had boon arrested by
order of Martin Boraanr. because of anticipation in Goorin3*3 t rc-asca,
and that we would bo shot, Wo wore brought into tbo 33 barracks at
"alzburg tho suno wight, E«uhl:r told ne later tho sontcnco wn3 not
executed, because the order had r.ot transnit ted correctly, On toe ovepiag
" 3^ April he received too report that Hitler was dead. This I.felt freed
• ' .ay oath towards *atler, I run; I'd with th Ary Scuth which cano


13 1—y_h7-M-A7C—7-2-Gill&ghcr (1st. Rader)
Coart I# Cs3o I


from ZtU7i and obtained ny release,

DR. FH3DSC3IAXKS Mr, President, in order to prove tho assertion
which was just node by Hr. “rack, I submit ths Document No. 21; from ny
y>' rancr.t Volume No, I, which is to be found on pa go 63. This trill
bonesr. Exhibit Ho. 16, I*, ia ar. affidavit of Werner Ibsko, who was
bom or. 7 January 1913, Tho affidavit was signed or. 26 February 1917,
and was certified to by m in tho proper maimer,

I should also lik. to offer tho Docueor.t He. 2t, which i3 also to
bo found in Document Volume Ho, 1, cr. a»o 65, This will bccoao
Brack*a Exhibit Ko. 17. It is m affidavit by Fritz Gccrnr.ort, bom
or. 13 March 1907, Tho affidavit ras sigrod on 7 March 19li7, and signed
•y him. It was again certified to by mo.


Ccurt So. 1

13 May 47-M-8-l-EHX-Keekan (Seder)


I should like to ask the Tribunal to take notice of the contents of
these two affidavits, which I shall dispense vith reading.

BY SB. 7HGSSCHMANS:

Q» Hr. Brack, In conclusion we should like to deal briefly vith a
nucber of Questions concerning the SS which hrve arisen froc the Judg-
sent of the International Military Tribunal and which are icoortant vhon
considering your alleged neabershlp in a criainal organisation. I shall
put these auestions before yai very briefly and I should like you to
answer then with either "yes" or "no" if possible and only elaborate
whenever necessary.

I now ask you: fid you know that the units of the Vaffen SS were
active participants in the aeasurcs which have led to aggressive war?

A. No.

Q. Why did you not bellevo that, ospoclelly after the Sudeten
countries, as well as Bohoaia, Moravia, and the ncael.had boon occupied
by the SS units?

A. According to tho official publications of the Ceraan governoont
we could not deduce that we were there concerned with aggressive acts.

Q, Did ywi know about tho existence of the Eohnloin Froc Corps?

A. So, I did not know anything about that.

Q, Did you know that in a nucber of Vaffen SS divisions there
were shootings carried out on unaraed prisoners of war and that this
vae general usage?

A. No, I did not know anything about that either.

Q, And did you have knowledge that SS units wore used for the
execution of the Gersenization plane in the occupied countries and also
participated in the deporting of the Jews and fcrcignors?

A. No.

Q. And finally, did you know that Vaffen SS units were to have
participated in the rurder and eistreataent of the civilians of the
occupied territory?

A. So, I did not know that either.


Court So. 1

17 - J -*y 47-H-6-2-lEK-Kcchaa (rosier)


Q, “id you know they participated in the extermination of Jews,
politically undesirable persons, and other atrocitios?

A. So.

Q, Eov did you consider the subordination of the SS under the
notch Leadership SS7

A. Froa ny own knowledge I know that the Vaffon S*>, froa tho point
of Tiev of supplies, vac equipped by tho SS Operational Main Office.

The technical commitments and other ecuipaent were arranged by the- array
and therefore had nothing to do with tho Heichsfuehrcr SS.

Q, In that case all the ordors for the coonitaont of the SS
originated froa the aray?

A. Yes, they olvaye did end I, as a supaly officer, recoivod oil
ny orders froa tho orqy and never froa the SS.

Q. Did you know that the concentration caraps vero under the
administration of tho SS?

A. Yes, I knew that theso casps vero under the administration of
the SS, but I always thought that tho guards of tho concentration comps
constituted a special body of polico. The political loodorshlD of tho
concentration coops was under the RSKA or, as it was called before, tho
Gestapo Offico.

Q. Did you arrive at that attitudo because you know that Keydrlch
was at the head of the Gestapo?

A. I arrived at that attitude becauso of the handling of the
applications for release froa the concentration caaps, which could
always be handed over to tho Gestapo whenever they arrived at the
Fuehrer Chancellery office.

Q, Witness, you alreedy hinted and the witness Kederich'vrs also
dealing with that auostion for sooe tine; you aado the ecaunintmce of .
released inmates. I now esk you, did you learn froa these inmates
r.bout ony mistreatment in concentration ceracs?

A. Ko, I did not. A number of inmates, after thoir rolease, enso
*.3 the Fuehrer's office, but none of them ardc any concrete etr't'oacr.ts

7U53


Court So. 1

1? -tay 47-H-6-3-£BC-keehan (Easier)


about any nistreatment. It was Quite impossible even for ae to pene¬
trate the cloak which had been spread by Heydrich and others over the
real goings-on in the concentration canes; as I realise nov, it was
ouite iaposalble.

Q, Hr. Srecfc, but at least you did see eoac of these innates nftor
their release. Personally could you not base on the personal impression
that those lnaotes gave you and deduce thrt you voro concerned with
people who had been aorolly or physically burdened because of their long
interment?

A. Yes, of course I had to gain that iaerosoion in the cpbo of a
r.uaber of these Inmates.

q, You were also sabring thrt you spoke to these lnnatce, but you
voro only able to gain insufficient reports froa then, is that right?

A. Ko, I had no concrete reports free then at all, not evon
inouffieiont ones. Everyone of then said I had to sign, I would not
connunicntc to anyone about the Internal conditions of the cane, they
could not do that.

q, In that case you aro acroly confiraing what tho wltncco
Hilscher has testified here In so aovlng e aenner that ve wore concornod
with persons hero who were perhaps veering a arsk, is thrt right?

A. Yes.

Q. Witness, did you hour anything to the effect that a policy of
exploitation was carried out toward these innetos?

A. So.

q. Did you over hear about the eysten of slave labor?

A. So, I did not hear that. Although I knew fron the innates
that they were counted for work, rt no tine, however, did ! ItSrn
about the forn of slave labor as it was actually carried out.

q, And finally, did you hear anything to the effect that experi¬
ments were carried out on ccncontretion cene incites?

A. So, I heard nothing at all about that.

q, Cn the basis of your general lnpresrion you have been


c5-art S3. 1

13 ftoy 47-M-3-4-lcX-heehan (racier)

explaining to us today concerning the auelity of the SS. Could you
aasune that this highly disciplined orgr.nl set ion, es you expressed, then
could he used for sees curder?

A. Ko, no one- could lneglhe that and I certainly did not.

Q, The International Kilitery Tribunal has used a nunber of oolnts
in that connection es e criterion for the crinlnal nature of the indi¬
vidual SS ner. and for that reason I should like to ask you the folloving.
Did you hear about the sooeches cade by Klaalor in tho year 1943 vhon
he was praising the SS because of thoir toughness and ruthlessnoss?

A. Ho, I did not hear about these speeches.

Q. In the course of this coming'• oxasim.tion we shall cone back
to that point, but I do vent to tell you nov that in tho yeor 1941 in
January and in April of 1942 you had tvo personal conferences with
Hinder. Thcso coaferonces pemitted you r cortoin insight into his
peroonal thinking. Kov I rsk you vhother those conforencos did not
com it tho thought that he wanted to uoe the SS for the execution of
such plans ns wore nentloned in tho judgnont of tho International Mili¬
tary Tribunal.

A. I could not arrive at that conclusion, but on the other hand
I oBCur.od that ho was planning these things as the head of tho Goman
Pollco. I could not a.ssuno that the SS was to be used for such pur-


posoe.


Court 1

May 13-K-S - l-E^-Co o > -Ra =al c r.


Q. In other words, you didn't associate the Ser.eral

So with the rlans of hlousier as far as you got to Know them?

%

A. No, I did that In no way at all.

■*. didn't your own thinking as an So nan play some
p?rt in tnose Impressions?

A. Certainly It did because In my capacity as an S3
men I never received any criminal orders.

Q. In conclusion I may state that you did not knew
"nythlng about the usln t of the SS for criminal purposos
and you neither knew about the usoage of tho Waffen 5S for
any such purpose u-, to the year 1945, Is that right?

*. Yes, that Is correct.

Q. And now one final question In this connection.
Repeatedly and also In this trial mention was made of the
so-called 35 system, did you ever hear anything ab-^ut that
or did you hove any th .-ghts about It?

a. I have not recognized m any form any existing S3
system, end I, therofore, couldn't have any thoughts about
it.

m. Hr. President, that brings me to the conclusion of
tho point raised by the Prosecution rcgnrdln b membership
In the qoueral 3o end tho Waffon 35 and I shall now pass on
to the subject of the general activity of the defendant
Brack within the chancellory of the Fuehrer. I shall
discuss the relationship with 3ormann, Himmler and Hoydrick,
and his attitude toward the concentration camp questions
from the years 1934 to 1940, and I shall leave aside tho
question of euthanasia. I shall try to do it as quickly
as pos-lble In order to got to the point of sterilization
this afternoon.

Witness, I ask you to avoid repetition of everything
thrt tho witness Hederich has mentioned here In a somewhat
broad form.


7L56


Court 1

Kay 13-K-9-2-:iD-Cook-Ra-nler.


You may perhaps refer to hie statements but please try to
tell us something new. I repeat that up to the year 1932
you made the acquaintence of the Reichlelter Bouhler only
passingly, is that ri e ht.

a. Yes, that is true. I only knew him superfically.

In the beginning of July 1932 Rouhler offered to me the
oosltlon of personal adjutant. He held, at that time the
position of the Relcho business manager of the NSDaP ct
that time and * took that offer because I was then
unemployed.

ft. Didn't you nt that time make contact \#lth Himmler?

a. I saw Himmler after I hrd been employed at the
Brown Houso almost daily when wo had lunch, but our relation
didn't _o any further than with any other good ncqualntoncc.

ft. Veil what was your at-ltude in general toward
Himmler?

A. In general it was pleasant and Himmler certainly
realized that I nad a oocitlve attitude toward national
socialism and that I had a certain amount of personal
confidence in him.

ft. Did you also at that time make the acqualntonce
of Heyirlch?

it. Yes, I did make the acquaintance of Hoydrlch in
the year 1933.

ft- And how did you Judge him, briefly?

A. He Gecmed to me to be very c-splclous, not open
and really from the point of view of feolln B 1 rejected him.

%. At the R9lch Party Rally of 1934 Bouhler received
an order from Hitler to hand over the managment of the
NSDA? and to found a Chancellory of the Fuehrer in Berlin,

Is that right?

«. Yes, that is true. He asked me to go alon^ with

7157


Court 1

May 13-H-9—3-KD-Cook-Rammler.


him because ha wanted to have at least one man In this
strange environment, whoa he knew and In whoa he had
confidence. The task Itself also seemed very difficult to
him and I promised him. I would help him as far as I could
and that I would not leave him, and then I cnce more returned
to Munich because I hed married In the meantime, and In that
connection I may perhaps say that, without consideration cf
future criticism, I was married In ay So uniform In Church,
all of my chlldred were also aombers of the Church.

Q. The XaF, which la an abbreviation for the Chancell¬
ory of the Fuehrer, Kcydrlch said was the bl e chance for
Bouhler and ho said further that tnls agency was to be a
very active agency for the purpose of adjusting, the very
many deficiencies which were connected with any utilitarian
systom. He did not have to deal now with the alms of the
Chancellory of the Fuehrer, and I should merely ask tho
Tribunal to recall ay document, which Is document No. 14,
which was Exhibit 1. This 16 already In evidence and It
describes the alms of the Chancellory of the Fuehrer, as
well os the Party Chancellory.

It Is true, witness, that there were applications
coming In from all th-_ various Gaus to tho Party Chancellory
and that they concerned all aspects of the Party and tho
State?

a. Yes, that Is correct. Our Incoming applications
w -rc enormous. Within my personal sphere of work I had to
.cal with about three to six hundred applications dally.

Q. And as a result of these applications you gainod a
vary lively picture about the political, especially tho
?.-rty political life and know about the general morale of
the copulation?

a. Yes that Is true. Bouhler, however, within the

7L<8


Court 1

May 13--4-3—l-hI>-Cook-Ranmler.


frawork of his own tasks was not In q position to remove
those deficiencies, which beerme- evident on the oasis of
those ap llcatlons. Ke was porhaos in a position to make
corresponding criticism when ho case into cor.t ct with
Hitler r.nd sou to It that such deficiencies were renoved.

He confined himself, however, to Bottling these difficulties
directly with the r c encles w.iich were concerned and to
keep a-'ay these natters from HI tier as far as he Could. He
thought it to be nis task to oxerclso n coordinated and
efficient activity. In this manner the Chancellory of the
Fuehrer became an assisting i^oncy for all walks of life
ana -alned a certain popularity as a result, nowover,
,olltlcal success could not bo achieved by that Chancellory
of the Fuehrer.


13 ' lay—-—D 01*052 (R 2 alcr)

Court :.o. 1


Q And hew about your personal activity?

A At. first I was sitting in Bouhler* 3 ante-roca. fennel
title was Chi of cf Staff, though I ria i>iv c r Chief of Staff in tho
true sanso of that word, I -mat adnit, that I n_v^r had the personal
ahbition to play ary political part or to gain any large position, I
nereiy wanted to assist those people whon it was necessaxy to assist.

Q Tho period of tioo during which Beuhler tried to create this
chancellery as a coordinating factor in Oersan life passed v«.ry quickly.
As Hodorich already testified certain circles ar&urd Hitler very soon
realized Bouhlor's weakness?


A Xos, that is tru., especially j-artin Bornann.

Q Martin Bornann?

A Yes. Ho was the chief of Staff of the Fuehrer's Doputy in that
agoncy and after Hess' oli-u nation in the y-or of 19ul tho Party Chan¬
cellory was croatod. Tho real head of that agoncy had always boon
Bcrmona sinco the very bo -inning in 1933,

Q And Bor-onn was a hard working r .an, is that right?

A Xos,

3 H- was in a position to grasp things v„ry quickly and was in
a position to adjust hl-solf to any kind of circumstance, is that truu?

A X^-s. ,\P far os I could survoy pcsititn frer ry agency Bormann
succeeded dthin a very short ti->j tc gather a circlo of men around


hi;: whom ho feraed into a strong organization very quickly which was
suporljpoeod over the Part; and the Stato and this agency had no adjuting
activity but was surely carry n. on power politics.


Q A-;ain Hederich talc us that Pomann up until the y<-ur - 193li


M>as sonohvat indifferent to Bouhl-r but toon “hen the Chancellery cf
the Fuehrer ir-3 founded had of necessity to bring then tc a controversy.


Is that true?


A Yes, that is correct,

Oi .ruanr. ta.<o any fields cf :rk away frr.-i the- Fuehrer's


Chancellery, -specially in such cases whoro ho saw personal success?

7U60


13 lay-y-D Ji-lQ-2-Gr e s 3 (Ronlor)
Court Kc. 1


A Yes, that is true.

Q Did you receive insight, perhaps fro- hearsay, as to rhat hi3
relationship to Hitler was?

a I really can only judgo that froa hearsay. But according to
what I loomed, partly free Bouhlor and partly from other people,
Bonaann was aeaaingl/ blindly do voted to Hitler but in reality ruled
Hitler.

Q Mention was cade horo already about tho power and radicalism
of I rtin Borrann. (topes^d to that was thoir policy as pursued by
Bouhlor, a so-called "solft policy"?

A That is tho expression which 'as used by Bouhlor 1 s political
opponents, nearly that ho was ursuing a "sc-ft-policy" 6 And that, of
course found a rwady ear with Bor ann. Because of this "s^ft-policy"
tho original controversy botwcon 3ouhlor and Bonaann bucarao an omrity
later and was naturally itonalfiod.

3 In thu year 1936 Buehlor garo you the leadership of tho Dopt.
II witnin the Chancollery of tho Fuehrer. You iccoptod that off or?

A Yos.

3 Now wjuld you please tell tho 'ribunal very briefly what your
official position was and in particular whether you had any authority
to •sake ary docisicns.

A Complaints fro:, all osrts ;.f people from ill over Oormaiy
arrived at that office. I had just as little authority to mako deci¬
sions as ary of the ether departmental heads. I was to prepare cc.j-
plaints, etc. fer further handling. I was to raise points, otc., and
the final decision r«3ted with Bouhlor. I knew Bcuhlor's basic con¬
cept! a to all these question* and I c uld, therefore, prepare his
decisi ns for hia because I knew how t .lerant Bouhlor was and I knew
what his wishes wore and for that reason it was simple for me to pre¬
pare such tolerant decisi ns.

3 He' about the result of Bcuhlor's reports tc Hitler?

A The result was extro-rely favorable, h’itlor very often, and


13 i—-—0 J>-10-3-Gross (R&fc-lor)
Cs-'irt Kc. 1


I c.uld alaoat say nost cf the followed Bcuhlor's proposals and

that, particularly in the field of the Jons ana poople ?f mixed blood,
he vury often adhered to the a unrest ion proposed by Bcuhlor. Very
oeldoe ware complaints regarding political loaders who had boon misusing
th-ir office given way to because in these cases Bcraann would bo
called in. In eases like that Bcuhlor c uldn't carry his opinion
through one for that reas n there was v^ry str ng controversy with
Bomonn.

Q Mr. President in that connection I should like to ask you to
accopt c number of Docunonts which all r-fer to Brack's activity with-
ln the Chancellory of the FUOhror which I shall not read into the
record for tho purpose cf brevity. I should no roly like you to tako
nctico cf the d ernonts. Thv-so croi Dcain-nt No. 17, Voluas I, pago
U9. This is an affidavit of Gustav Gerhard Quast :f H.rnboburg, dated
27 Jonu-ry 19U7, sisived by lustr.v Quast and cortifiod by th_ Notary
Dr. Lucdonann. This will booo^j Brack Exhibit 18.

I should further like to submit Doctraunt N. . 18 which is an
affidavit by Dr. jornor Schulooann cf Brunswick. This is dated 30
January 191*7. It was cortifiod by Notary H. Hardogon and it will
bucono Brack Exhibit 19.

Furthermore, I svfc it Docuaont No. 21 which is in Dccumont Book
I and is the affidavit of Albert Gcdurbauor dated 13 January 19li7.

Tho date 19ii6 ia your copy is inccrroct. This was cortifiod on tho
19 February 19ii7. It will beoo e Brack Exhibit No. 20.

Fttrthoraoro, I should like t refer tc in this connection to tho

Brack Exhibit 10 which is tho affidavit f Freiherr vvn Tuossling

£

which I have already road.

And, finally, I subrlt tho Brook D cuaont Bo. 16 in Document Bock
I which is the affidavit cf Dr. Hans Grouninger, dated 20 January 191*7
arul signed by hi:j. It was certified by u~ and it is to bo found cn

he cf tho D:cir-.ent B ok. I offer it as Exhibit 21. *11 thoso
affidavits describe Brack's activity and agree in enphasising the


13 J'ay-y-DJl-lC-ii-Orcss (Bader)
C-urt No. 1


readiness to help of the defendant and speak of all the efforts which
th«j dofendatn Brack Bade in his fight against injustico.

New, witness, you were Bouhlor*3 oldest ccllcbaratcr?

A Yea.

3 Could 3ornann as sun i that you too tried to mlntaln Bonhlcr’s
attitude of tolerance or was Boraann «f a different opini-n?

•v Jfo. Eorr.onn nust have .assumed and he knew no personally
froei Munich that I was working fully in line with Bcuhler and fer that
reason his criticise was justified, I tried te think in a hunano
nannv-r ^nri I tried to act in that manner. I wasn’t any political
acc unting machine, I was on a car plotoly different level in tho
Jewish question as opp:aod to Beraann, I was opposed to tho total¬
ari an syaton of the Party, I was against tho 11 citations of personal
frwodcu and Borr-ann n. d^ubt knew that I was supporting Bi uhlor with
theso thoughts,

Q Wo aro new getting to tho cenforoncos which you had with
Hinder and I should like to aok you, did you c'fton ns.ot Himlor in
the yoars froa 1935 to 19ii0?

* During: that tirau I very raruly not HL-tnlor. Tfo cccasionally
cone into contact and officially only -hon Bcuhler sont me to hici to
report to him. That in particular when we were concerned with roloasca
fr r. concontraticn camps, Hisnlor in no3t of these cases conpliod with
ay attitudo and ay wishes which woro also those of Bcuhlor dospito
Hoydrichs' c ire instances and eppesitijn, Hy relate nohip to Hinolor
was in no way particularly close. If it was a little closer there
c uld have developed p-rhaps a relati-nship -f a fatherly friejjd but
in ordor to say that I nust point out I sot him too rarely.


13 Yr li’’-44~ATi>-ll~l-Earrcw (Int. Haaalor)
Cw. !rj. 1


Q And what was year relationship to Hcydrich?

A ’*y relationship to Hcydrich since the beginning of sy activity
at Berlin were alt/ays unpleasant and tense because the work in the
Chancellery of the Fuehrer of ton extended to fiol£s which wore under
the supervision of Hjydrich# After I had ostentatiously assumed an
or.tirjly different ar.titudo and especially in view of political inmatos,
and since I triad, partly by order of Bouhler ard partly on w own
initiative, to help those people to thoir roloaso, Hoydrich had to
oppose no. Ever sinco tho yoar of 193V T had to fool personally threatened.

Q Tas, this was tho incident about which Hcdcrich had roportod?

A That’s right.

Q Jiow, vory briefly, did Hoydrich eonsldor you a ran who was
comitting troasor. against National Socialism?

A Yes, ho thr-'ator^d no with arrest* Ho said I was cocnitting
treason. Ho aslwd oouhlor to release no fron my position, and things of
that naturo.

Q Hr* Prooident, ir. that connection, I should llko to submit a docu¬
ment from Document Book '2, which is 7 ,29 6n Page 6. An affidavit by
Dr* ’fans Zhlich o.' tlvi 7th of fobruary, 19l»7. It was signod by him ar.d
certified by a:| I should lik. to point in . articular to Paragraph 2.

Thin vdll bo Brack Exhibit *22. I should furthermore like to offer ny
Doeumont Y39 from Document Veluao 71 or. Page 60. This is an affidavit
or Gertrude Kaiinayor, datad tho second cf April, 19b7, which was signed
by hor and certified by no. This will boooae Exhibit ^23. In both of
those documents tho attitude of Hcydrich towards the defendant Brack is
illustrated and also tho difficulties in -which Brack, at that timo,
found bins If. Ir. that connection I nay also remind you of tho Document
^rack /U, Exhibit 11, which is already in evid_nce which is to be found
oa Papa 10 cf that docunant where these controversies are also discussed.

How, "r. Brack, wo rop-atcdly discussed tho nature of the appli-
:*• cions which arrived at eh. Char.collary and I need not doal with that .

-y mere; thi.: fi.ld of fork, chose .'"fish irplicitiens and complaints, :tc.

Tl6k


13 "ay U7—I '—A7T—11--2-K arrow (Int. Rasadcr)

Court So. 1

Conplaints ft?on Party agencies and deali n g with release of protective
custody inaates brought you nore and noro into contact with Hoydrich and
Bomann, end nor, would you please say in that connection what your
attitude was concerning th~ .right of the state to intom persona in an
interment cesp where a danger arose for that person and for general
society?

A At that tico I resigned qysolf to thj fact of a concentration
canp. That was net only true of Oorsany. In the neighboring state of
Austria there was tho big concentration canp of TTolloradorf vheroin tho
Austrian state loadership, vhich >ais than not Katlonal Socialistic,
v.aa incarcerating th_ Qor.-nn slctional Socialists and national Socialists
who wore th opponents of that rogine. In view of tho political situation
as it prevailed in hxropo at ‘.hit tine T didn't consider that any state
tod a right to do that, but I resigned xyaJlt to tho fact of their
existence. If, for political reasons, you do plnoo persons into pro¬
tective custo<ty, you can only, of course, do that under tho obsorvanco
of all huaan rights and naturally, any such incarceration, oan only last
as long as la nccossary for tho protection of tto stato and, under
protective custo<ty, iirsatos would have to tovo a possibility to work and
earn oorvj non07 booauso ono has to consider that their fanilios aro at
totio. Ttot is tho only conclusion ono can arrive at fron a idonlogical
point of viow. Thi^-, hor.'ovor, has nothing to do with any incarceration
of preventive custody prisoners, of crininals, but that had nothing to do
with our office. rro woro only doaling with people who wor - political
opponents.

Q Did you always consider it to bo a x'act that any person's
^plications with whon you Soalt was rcall” opposing the rogino?

A On the basis of tho statas.nts redo by rolativos, and on tho
basis of th-. various positions taken by tho agencies involved, I ofton
saw no reason for the naintonanco of that protective- custody status, and
'-s ti.no progressed, I grow noro and noro skeptical towards cvoiy protective
casto^* arrest.

7U65


13 May U7-^t-A7D-31^-3-2arroK (Int. ?.order)

Court Ho, 1

Q For that rooson did you creato a special deportaent within your
offico?

A Yo3, of tor these applications for roloaso grew noro numerous I
reported that question to 3ouhlur and Doubler ordorad that a special
dopartetnt within that offico bo created for the handling of theso
not tors. It was a very difficult task which had to bo dealt with by tho
head of that doportrxnt. Every single case had to bo evaluated and
constituted a numb or of difficulties. One had to bo in touch with tho
Gostapo and tho Gou leadership or v.'hocvor initiated tho porson to bo
placod in tho concentration cr.np in tho first place*

Q Mr. President, in that connection I nay subiait one o^iibit
which rofors to tho troatnont of the application of Jov.lsh persons of
nlxod blood. This tho Document <0.0 to bo fwind in -Docunont Book fl. on
pago 27. This is tho affidavit of Hulivi Ollondorff. I already nontioned
tor this naming. It was signod by hor on tho lhth of March, 19b7, and
cortifiod by tho notary thoro, Drdncr. I an not .".oing to road that
affidavit but it illustrate* VQ17 strongly tho nannor in which tho
dofondnnt 3rack, without any consideration to his porson and his
position had interforod on bohalf of hor fathor. This villi bocono
Bxiiibit ffii. In connection with tho quostion..

DR. FROPSCIB'A !<!•': I bog your pardon. Your Honor. Exhibit t!2$. In
that connection, I cn outodtting Docunont.

THE FRESIDTin't (Interrupting) Counsul, should not this ortiibit bo
♦2U? Chock your list, plooso.

BY DR. FR0E3Cffi!Ai;;i

Q Yos, I nust correct nyself onco coro. It should bo 2li. I beg
y^ir pardon.

And now I an going to subnit tho Docunent ♦22 fro.- Document Book A,
?ago 59, ®hich is tho affidavit of Dr. Luidg Schrltt, da tod tho 26th of
March, 19U7, and signed by hin. It was cortifiod by tho no tar;' thero,

I‘obis, on the sane day. I should like to read the lost sentence fron
that affidavit because it illustrates th. character of the defendant

7U66


13 !Say U7Hfr4TMi-i*-Zarraw (Int. Rain-lor)
Ccirat !fo. 1


3radc, and he soya, I quote:

"I considar it a fine, coiragoous and h u a anitariar. act for Brack
to repeatedly endeavor to arwliorato ny circuastancee in the- face of
danger to hLnsolf

I nuat r^iark horo t'.iat Schnitt had boon in a concentration canp
for a certain period of tijao. I quote again:

"It is typical of his dosiro to holp that h: iraaodiatdly gavo ny
assistant, Frl. Dr. Richter, full details of his conversations with
Hi-aalor; Bouhior, ho-rovor, could not be approachod arynoro and declined
to do ary noro for no. It is :y honost desire to state facts to show
that Brack at that difficult tine showed a hunano and docont attitudo."

I furthor aubrdt, in that connection. Brack Docuaont frl/)* This is
to bo found in Qjcuriont Book 2, on pego 61:, and it will bocono Exhibit
Brack #26. This is an affidavit of a certain Bernhard of Schrruinfurt,
dated th. 5th of April, 19U7, signjd by hir and cortifiod by thj notary
thjro, Georg Lan,;. It will bocouo Brack Exhibit #26. Fron this affidavit
I shall only road the roll<wd-*v. sontoncos:

"I an narriod to a Jowoss.

"K/ aothor-in-law, Alico Suligstoin, had her last rosidenco in
Berlin. Viktor Brack helped r*» tlu-oo tinos in socuring a postponement of
ny no tho r-in-lar * a deportation to a concentration canp. Sho was to bo
deportod in Octobor, 19iil for tho first tine. At her call for help, I
hastened to Borlin in order to 3avo hor. All sy attenpts woro unsuccessful.
I applied to all possible officos including the Gestapo at the Aloxander-
platz. In desperation I telephoned ny flm. Hr. Brack was known to ny
Tim. They called hir. up, rcccoser.dod no, and askod hie to grant ny
r;quest, thor. I called on tho Chancellory of tho Fuehrer, whore Brtfck was
working, I was received by hi3 oocrotory. Sho apparently had boon informed
alroady, and explained to no that '.'r. Brack was willing to holp. Sho took
to Hr. Vorbcrg, who apparently had also boon informed. Ko pronisod to
settle tho affair imoiiately and ho wanted to put in a word so that ny
"ther-in-law would bo excluded fron tho tmnport, I gavo the porsonal

7U67


13 May U?-»*-AT>«ii~ 5 -Kirr 3 W (Ir.t. Rasxalcr)
Court to. 1


data of ay uotiier^in-iaw. After this I called on the Joiriah cornunity who
confirmed on the following day that ay cother-irv-lar >3 nano had boon
cressod out in the list of the transport."


Court Bo. 1

13 .toy *i7-H-12-l-a=M-Keloy (Bailer)


The next sentence:

"In viev of the assistance vfcich Hr. Brack eo unselfishly rendered
to ay aother-ia-lav and ay faally in our greatest need I thought it only
Just and right to acauaint -the court vith ay experiences vith Mr. 3n«ck
vhen I learned soco nonths ago that he was charged ns one of the vnr
crinInals.

"I have nade this stateaent voluntarily. No one, neither Mr. Brack
nor ary of At. Brack's friends nor anyone else who knows of this affair,
induced ae to sake this stateaent. It is very well possible that Hr.
Brack does not even reneaber the whole affair or ay nano."

Q. Hr. Brack, you have already been sneaking about the difficul¬
ties in which you wore when dealing with these applications, on which I
have suboitted in extracts a cusbcr of oxasplec. Bo you believe that
there wero only personal reasons which brought ubout this difference
botweon Haydrlch and yourself, or wero the reasons of a deeper nature?

A. As I Judge the natter now in rctrosooct and in the full
knowledge of all these crlsos, I cust cooo to the conclusion that thcoe
vers not personal cattors, but natters of a fundnaental naturo. It
nust havo boon Koydrlch's aln to oxtercinato nil his political oononento
in concentration caaps. As I said before air cad:/, I could find out
nothing about that froa locates who had been rclcaeod. Hy own oosition
woe far to weak and insignificant to lot ae hone that I could bring
about at any tine a fundanontal change of that situation. I could do
nothing but report those natters to the Eeichsleitcr, or sonetinOB even
to Hiaaler. At any rate v<- did try, through the Party Chancellory, to
go beyond tho applications which arrived at our office and belt) those
who had been errested. Ve sinply ettenpted to forn grouoe vhifch ve
considered to be suitable for release and we suboitted such proposals
to Bouhler who then in turn discussed it with Hiaaler. It web in
effect achieved that certain categories of persons, forcer participants
in tho war, fathers of large feallles, forncr aenbers of oppositional
parties were released in groups. I rescabor one figure completely.


7 169


Court So. 1

13 May 47-H-12-2-iS<-*aloy (Raaaler)

because it constituted the very first success of this npture vhich
Souhler had brought about. On the occasion of Hitler's birthday in
the ywcr 1937 , 4300 protective custody inaatos had actually been released.
In the yeers 1936 to 1941 the figures of those that were released, as a
result of those Basses released I was speaking about, aust, I an sure,
hevc increased to 10,000 or 12.000, if not 15,000. On the basis of the
singular epDllcetions fr .= the relatives to the Chancellory of the
7uohror, to Souhler, to HlcaKr, etc., at least 3,000 to 5,000 people
were released. At that tine we were proud of our results. Todcy,
after knowing the enoraous oxtont of the concentration caape, as I can
now survey tho nuabers that voro involved, I se« how ridiculously low
it wus, whet wo achieved at that tine. Then, however, I couldn't survey
it.

rR. TROESCiMUGI: To ny rogret. Mr. President, I learn thnt Sueplo-
nent III is not yet available to the Tribunal. For that renson I auot
reserve sysolf the opportunity to suboit at a later date a docuacnt
which constitutes a rhort exorpt froa Kogon's book "The SS State" and
vhich io relevant in this connection. I at that tiao spoke about tho
rolorso which vns curried out as a result of hitler's 50th birthday,
and that was carried out in Buchenvald.

BY UR. FP.CXSCEXAK.I:

Q. Mr. Brack, ell your activities lead to e nur.ber of letters
about you which were sent to Bouhlsr's and also lead to difficulties
which were lncurablo for you, is that right?

A. Yes.

Q, You thoe tried to enter the sport through intervention of
Reich's Sport Leeder von Ischoaser und Osten?

A. That is true.

C. iver since 1937 you vre an honorary acebor also of that
organization nnd carried out sports activities there. Vhy didn't you
carry tiirough that intention?

A. I didn't realize ay intention of transferring to snorts e'eti-


Court So. 1

13 Kay 47-4i-12-3-I3(-Kalcy (Scaler)


vity cr Industry because at that tine the war had broken out. Sinul-
taneously a decree vos issued by Hitler vhich vas a prohibition to
lcevo any governmental agencies. Personally I vas not satisfied with
=y work because I had too =aoy diffieulties and I saw no basic assistance
was possible. The only resistance vr.s in single cases. In the final
analysis, hovevor, I believed that I could not rcloese the possibility
of helping singular people.

BE. FECLSCKHANS: Hr. President, to sun up I would like to submit
at this point Docuscnt Ho. 7, Yiktor Brack Doeunont Book No. 1, oago 15,
vhich is an affidavit of Irngerd Grube, dated the 4th of February , 1947,
which vas certified by the notary, Dr. Stophnns, and vhich will becono
exhibit Brack Ho. 27. I ask you to take notice of the conditions of
this affidavit becauso it illustrates the entire activity of Brock
vithin the Chancellory of the Fuehrer freo 1937 to 1942. This will bo
exhibit 27.

This, Tour Honor, brings no to the ond of tho conplox regarding
Brack's activity vithin tho Chancellory of the Fuehrer and I shall nov
be in a position to go over to tho subject of sterllixation. I think
this night bo a suitable tine to adjourn.

THi PBLSIDESTs The Tribunal will bo in rccots until 1:30.

(Thereupon tho noon recoss ves takon.)


Court 1 '191

Hay 13-A-13—l-HD-Fcstur-3rown.


_ m AFTERNOON SESSION

IThc Tribunal reconvened at 1350 hours, 13 Hay 1947.)

THE MARSHAL: The Tribunal Is again In session.

VICTOR BRACK - Resumed

DR. FROESCKaaNN (Counsel for the Defendant Brack):

Mr. President, I pr-vlously neglected to put two documents
in evidence that concerned the subject lost under discussion.
These are document number 2. Document 3ook No. 1, pn 6 e 5,
affidavit by Her.nlr.g Von Nordeck of 31 March 1947, signed
by him and certified by me. In this affidavit I draw your
attention p rtlcularly to paragraph 3. I do not, however,
have to road It. This will bu Exhibit 28. The second
dooument that I wish to put in Is document 15, Document
Book No. 1, pa t e 39, an affidavit by Werner Best dated 25
January 1947, signed by him on th*»t dnto and certlfl-d by
myself. Here It is stated specifically tint whole u roups
of Inmates were rolons.d from concentration camps In what
was known as ar. amnesty. This Is Exhibit 3rnck 29.

DIRECT EXAMINATION (Continued)

=Y DR. FROEoCHKhNN:

Q. Lot me remind you e c aln, witness, thc.t you arc still
testifying under oath. Hr. 3rack, this mornln^ wo went into
your activities lr. the Fuehrer’s Choncellory, so far a6
was hero nocesoary, and from many affidavits that I have
- could ascertain that you were always ready to givo assis¬
tance lr. the cares and tribulations of your fellow men, and

that, particularly. In many cases you interdecdod In the

- ^ •

-:.turesV3 g^Jews. Nov, on apparent contradiction to thl6

chapto'r'wh'lch we aro about to enter upon, nemely the

Count charging you with War Crimes end Crimes against

Humanity, committed in forst order thr ugh your sterilization

propose to Himmler in the course of 1341 and ’42. I ask

jX r *°'' : Co g.O'Tnto this whole croblem ct some len D th.


7472


Court 1

Hoy 13-H-i3-2-Hi>-?o8tcr-Browr..


*. Both tho occurronces of -‘ovember 1938 and the
refaction of the Jews, both before the outbreak of the wer
and durin 3 the war, were not -nknown to me. 3ut I always
hoped that things would gradually quiet down, and, actually,

1 had no thin^ to do with these th n 6 s anu could have some¬
thing to do with them only If someone in search of help applied
to the office where I was omployod. Any Intention to
exterminate Jews lr. 1339 and 19 0 was not known to me. If
uch intentions did exist at that time, I can only say today
that the persons who had such Intentions wero able to koop
thorn completely secret, hiding them behind a hoavy veil.

In tho summer, however, 1941, something occurred wnlch
gave no misgivings. An associate of mine belonged to
3orm3nn'8 office before he coma to the Euohror'a Chenoollory,
Oosoite the tense rolatlons between these two officers, this
man 6till maintained personal connections with people lr,
3ormann's office. Consequently, ho know much more about
the ultimate intentions of 3ormnnn'o office than I did.

One day this associate brought me tho news that Choro was
t.,o intention to find a radical solution of the Jewish
:ro'olora. Just what the solution was to be lr. otr.il could
not Immediately be ascertained by me. I couldn't find out
whether the Intention was outright extermination. There
was talk of s,.ndln c all tno Jews to the East of Europo,
primarily to Poland. *t th. same time, tho onti-oametlo
attitude on the part of the Polish population woo mentioned
• .lch wa6 expected to led to cogroms was also expected.

At any rate, all these things seamed mo6t dubious to
ue. However, we ourselves, were comoletely 1 upotent to do
anything about it. I, in my Party Office, oould not find
ut anything more pb,ut these plans or undertake anything
frustrate ti;em. Nevertheless, si roly because our


7473


Court 1

Kay 13-A-13-3-H0-Eoster-3rovn.


conscience node ua do 60 , we aid decide to try to do
somethin to combat this tendency. After wc of the Party
Ch nccllory found out tnat these clans existed, only
Martin Bornann coulc; be the instigator of them, JJow,
whether that could be traced back to a wish on the part of
Hitler or wnether it wes 3ormanr.'s owr. idea, ac tho witness
Lncners stated, that I cannot cay rr.d I do not knovr even
today. But the essential thln b for us was that Bonaann
w s concerning himself with the 60 matters, and whon
Bornann concerned hixsolf witn soacthir.tj, then things
were very dangerous beoausc witn his radical point of
viov we ad to counT on tndr boln 0 carried out in an
alto b etn„r ruthless fashion. Thoro was nobody in Gornnny
who could oppose Bornann, Hitler was tho only nan who
oould give hin orders.


13 ' toy -A — j J-ld-l-Gollagh e r - ( Brown) -
Ccurt 1 case 1

In the- tense inimical relation b.tween Souhler inti Boraann, there
was simply no question of intervention on Bouhl-r's post. That simply
»r?s to be reckoned with tlv. fact that in sea. icm or another, either
in there beins, deportee, or in scathing worse, the ( .-»s were ^oing to
hav “ trouble, i; any cnc had a counter suggestion, it would cf c:rst
have to be norc in a similar direction, but it would be intended to
rive the Jews a sccnhat better chance. This proposal would have to be
taken ir.otly to Hitler, because only he war in a position to change
3ortuinn's nin.. Others Were too weak for that.

Q Mow, *r. Brack, in your if idavit No. 426, Exhibit 16C, in this
Document Sock, lk page 10, you stated,'Me developed the idea of depar¬
ting Jers. • Will you plcace say sonthirv, about that statement of yours?

A Pirat cf all, the expression of the word •deporting 1 * was not my
word, but it was chosen by the man wha drew up the effidavit. 1 alrea¬
dy said what I thought - - cr think abcut this affidavit, and how it
came about. I was not aware at that time of the a.nnin* rf tho word.

If : had, I certainly would have refused to use it. At any rate we were
thinking cf a rc-settlenent in a decant Sense of the word, rather than
th- deportation.

Q Mow what was the political situation at this time?

A In the Sumer of 1940 the situation in Europe ni.-ht bo summari¬
zed as follows: After the Polish campaign Poland was divided between
Soviet Russia and dersvanyj Belgium and Holland >.ere in German hands,
and Denmark and the Netherlands were under German control. There was
ir. Armistice with France nnd a political approche3ent apparently, Ita¬
ly was cur nlly. There w w re good relations with Hungary and Yugos¬
lavia, and for or. outsider, such as I was, it sejaed as if there* was no
danger free the side of the Soviet Union cr from th. United States of
America. Cnc heard that measures were under way with premises of sucess
•'ith England, an: everything sc-m-.d to p’oint tc the fact that the war
would sot. be c-ncludod. That is the way the nercal aortal appraise-
the situation at that ti-_.


7475


13 liay-A-GJ-lli-2-<i;llagh^r-(i>rown)-
Court 1 case 1


Q And what attitude then were these countries expected to take
towards the Jews at the end of the war?

a It was supposed that iftcr the war nony European countries were
to adapt thensolves to U-raan legislation regarding the Jews. Thus,
for all the Jew3 in Central Europe it would be irgstssible to levelop
further, as I s .id, there wa3 a large- scale re-settlement plan, which
was to give th. Jews a now hcceland. This would both have removed
Palestine ss a bon. of contention, and so leave the natter to the
thoughr of settling, or proposing that the Jews be Settled in Madagas¬
car. It w'-uld net be difficult fer >ranc. to give up Madagascar in ex¬
change for a previous German Colony, that ccul<' be arrange ! in the pea¬
ce treaty, but at any rate, such prep'sal c uld only be put into ef¬
fect through Hitler, and if Hitler agree.! to such a proposal, then
Bcrmnr.'s intentions would be automatically frustrated.

Q Why Just *4aJ igasc-ir?

A Uadogasc .r was ncntior.ed already by Chain ..aitzaunn, in his Sio-
nist plans. It is an islan of 6c ,coo square kilccjeters. In other words
considerably l-.rger thatn Gerainy, and it has cnly 3,500 inhabitants.

It is sparsely settled, and in the cpinion of the GO Bulletin, it
could support roughly a population of tw.nty cillion, and the acconoda-
ticn of eight to ten nillicn European Je.fs there fore would affsrd no
difficulty. Th_ climate in >eada;.asc.-.r c-'v.rs the whole range of pnssi-
Kle climatic conditions, nd resembles the climate that is to be found
in Pal.atina. The natural resources of coal, cin.rals, oil :ind soferth,
aide it likely that a firmly rcut.i industry could rrew there-, kcr.over
there are considerable opportunities for cattle raising. The gracs-
lar.es are fertile, and what would be needed was an increase of this
population in ord.r to cake usl cf these. >rca the agriculture point
f view, .11 sorts of crops could be ^r-wn th_re, Tobacco, wheat, cotton,
etc., an:, consequently this country soused to be Very appropriate
for the reception of oi.-ht tc ten million people.

7176 '


13 *ay-A-GJ-ll.-3-G=llagner-(Brown)-
Court 1 case 1


DH. FRCESCHKANN: Hr. President, in this connection I put in Document
Ko. 27 Dccunent Bock Bo, 1 - - No. 2, correction, page 3 Exhibit No.

30, which I have already discussed during sy interrogation of th*. wit¬
ness Hc.-h.rich. This is a brief ,xc-rpt free the dictionary well known
in G.raany as "Dcr grease "rcckhaus. 1

T * PRESIDENT: Counsel, it was already offered in evidence, and
rejected by the tribunal.

DR. PRCESCHlUIfK: I understood this rejection on the part of the
Tribunal to apply only cf the .offering of this document in connection
with the ftcderich testimony. I want to put it in explicitly here ns
evidence, because it substantiates “r. track's testimony here. An I
incorrect in this belief, Mr. Pr.siknt?

THE HtESIEEVT: No, I think counsel is correct. Counsel had lcavo
ts offer, it, to offer v<ua.nt at sew. liter time, end you offer it
new. What dees counsel for the 'rosecution say?

HP.. HCCH AID; The Prosecution objects against the .'ocuo.nt as im¬
material.

T F. PRESIDENT: The *ribun--l will admit the document in evidence
at thia tine for probative valuo it nay hsvj.

TR. FHCESCHKANH: Then I put this in as c rack's Exhibit No. 30.

I shall dispense with tho reading of it.


7A77


15 i..y-<r-e.—14-lcf-Gullogh-r (int. 3rovn)

Court I

3T DP, rBOSSCauZ.':

q. -itness, ia other words, the natural qualifications of Kadafias-
cr.r eccncd to be good. Sow wh^t fo:n of govorment did you concoivo
for the Jews who wore to go_th«r« froa Cor-any and xurqjo?

-u or a person who is not trained in a governuent, it is vary
difficult for hin to ajco u nropoaal in tnia nattor, so let no point
out that, however, our suggestion -t th_t tine was node with no cluin
..t all on being correct or cctnlctc. at that tino wo thoutfit that tho
gOTwrmont.l fora would b>. a govurreont - - a Jewish governnont under
° 5or ‘ , ' ul Governor; this sot fora w.j to end uUtceaticuUy when through
tnc consolidation of tnc lcc-l goverroent and tho ceoncuic situation

that o-c-vic possible,

Z. 'ihore uignt r„iie a possible objection horo, Hr. dr.xk. You
luiow th. t the veraan "Government" unfortun.tol;- h„s received an ui>-
plonsnnt connotutiot in Gcroany in tno 1 -st few yoers, bocauso thcro

two a ita-r.il governnent-- Governor Saner. 1 under 7ran>c in Poland,

•ho por-ittod hundred of thousands of Jews thuro to oc Killod. Aono
events on tho part of tho Gov.rnoiw<>onor-1 in Poland in 1940, tforo thoy
aiown to you?

Of thos- events I certainly enow nothing, and 1 boliovo nothing
was known ttaong tho general population about that.

Q. In your circlo wnoro you were concerning yourself with fchoso
plans, did y-.u xnow anything a oout tae personality of tne governor, and
did it ooet: to you th..t this nxn's churucter was such as to ua':o it
likoly th..t tho Jews would receive nomul, haoano and log^ rights?

*S Lot no first of all go into the diccucoion about tho govornuont.
-o tnougnt that the "gov^rnaent* would be nee osc.iry because for many
years tnc economic situ.ition of a new State; canosbd of icui rants
'■-uld h. -o to be so difficult tn^t it would develop only with tho help
:i a functioning St_tc free tho cutsido. In order to create a new ia-
i aad a new industry, oad a new housing, a new tr_ns-iort..tior.,


71*78


13 >.ay-»-J?-14-2»-Gallughor (let. Hildoshoiuor)

Court I

so f ortfc.

E2 ?;aSX3fi?: Counsel, it s,c.s to tho friounal the witness
h^ vin o •--id he w„o not on expert on gc7«rcocnt_l affairs, and having
st.-to: 1.1 hia opinion teat' tho govcr.tont to bo uaiatainod and sot
ia hodagascor would be a f-ir, reasonable and liberal gOYornoont,
tho subject has b^on pursuod long enough by tho witness.

EH. J3C2SCdUHX: Vory well. Your honor.


/


1L11


Court 1

-■fey 13-A-15-l-Hi)-Meehan-Brown


3Y DR. FROEoCHMAlJH:

Q. '.'Itn^as, did you think thst such a plan that you
have described was to bo incorporated into tho peace treaty
and would be successful?

A. Yes, wo hoped that if 3ouhlor, whom wo intended to
bo tho governor, could create a nev homeland for tho Jews
this would provide hope for all the Jews in the world. The
coononic connections with Germany offered better opportun¬
ities for tho peace negotatlons and in the future peace
these connections would certainly add to tho country's
aocurlty.

Q. Witness, was this thoueht something that occured on
the spur of tho moment or was it based on mutual reflec¬
tion and careful thought?

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, I intended to convoy to you
tho ldoa that tho subject of Madagascar and tho proposod
oolony had boon gono into sufficiently as to onllghton
the Tribunal on the witness' idea. I think that
Madagascar con bo abandoned and you cr.n go on to tho next
subject.

3Y DR. RR0E3CHHAKN:

Q. Very will Your Honor.

Kow, you submitted this olor. to Bouhlor and Bouhlor
submitted it in turn to Hitler?

A. Yes.

w. However in your affidavit, under No. 16, it says:
r Ve put tho pirn to 3ouhlcr, a -parently tnls plan was'not
acceptable, so we changed our attltudo, etc." Now, I
don't quite understand this statement in the affidavit, it
does not corros:ond with what you Just testified.

A. A r e had worked out this plan with groat care and
iver. it a great deal of attention, usln c foreign experts
"s consult:-nts.


7480


Court 1

•-ay 13 -a— 1 5—2—&)— Xeehan—Brown.

It was not Bouhler who rejected the plan, 3ouhlar put It
before Hitler. Sow when I signed this affidavit, I did
not see that this statement here in the affidavit was
wrong. Bounler adopted, the plan, s is shown, and tried
to pwrsuade nltler to accept It. Hitler, nowover, turned
it down, and Hoderioh has already testified to that
effect hore.

How, lot us go a step further, I Just mentioned
Point 16 in your affidavit, which carries the hendlr. b ,
"Sterilization Program;" What did you mean by that?

A. This heading was not ay Idea either, but was tho
thought of the mar. who drew up the affidavit. If you
want to define Himmler's sterilization program, you can
If you went. I cor. clearly say hero under oath that I
nerer hoard of any such program. I nuvor heard of Hadaus 1
work, or Clauberg'e work or that of Pokorny in 1941 or
YAZ, nor when I signed tne affidavit did I know anythln 6 .
In other words, the expression "Sterilization Program"
did not enlighten me at the time or I would h ve objected
-o it. It Is of course coarlble that because of my condl-
c on at th t time I was so exhausted thot A could not
concentrate on what I vr.6 re.-dlng there In the affidavit
as Point 13 is rl 6 ht at the er.d of tho affidavit.

x. -sut vou must have som. vi fc ue recollection of some-
t.-.ing when you s^eak of x-ray exocrlmunts and such things;
you must have known somethin., about those tuinga at that
:lac; now what do you hnvo to say about that?

a. I aid have a vague recollection, I heard something
or other about x-ray experiments, which were made by some
doctor or other, oat not in connection with anythin^ like
e sterilization program. I believe that Bouhler told me
- a: .--icier had turned this down, out now that we have


Court 1

Kay 13-A-15-3-HD-&. ehan-Brown.


looked into it core closely and particularly and since
I have seen the documents, I can say that none of that is
true.

Q. In other words, you wont to say th-.t this statement
which you made In this port of thu cfrid-vlt presents an al¬
together erroneous picture?

a. It Is Incomplete, it is out of context and for that
reason It Is misleading.

;. Now, Mr. Brack, at the end of 1940 did rilmmlor
write you a letter? Now, this Is Documont N0-018, Exhibit
404, English Document Book 15 Pago 172; do you have that
Document 3ook7

a. Yes.

Q. Please toko a look at It - Pago 171. Lot mo
quote.

THE PRESIDENT: We are not getting the translation
in the En 0 ll8h Document book.

THE MONITOR: He stated It was Document N0-018,

Document Book 15 and oorroctod the error from page 172
to pn^c 171.

BY DR. FROESCHMaMN:

3. May I quote? HlmaU-r writes this documont No. 018
to you regarding the oonditons In the Euthanasia Station
Orcfeneck, which h d become known to him and h„ writes:

B 3S-Standartenfuohrer Victor Brack,

Staff-Leader at Reich - Leader 3ouhlor,

Dear Brack, I hear there Is treat excitement on the
Alb because of the Institution Orafeneck.■

And he says ct the bottom:

"May I ask for a report as to how tho difficult
problem was solved. Hell Hitler! (signed) Heinrich Himmler."


7482


Court 1

May 13-A-15-4-ED-Meeben-3rowr..


This letter 16 rattier 6tricklng because «lmmler ie
ap lying directly to you in the tatter that concorns
Euthan-sla; hrd you theretofore communicated with Himmler
regarding Euthanasia?

A. Yes. Shortly after receiving the Euthanasia
assignment Bouhlor sent me to Himmler to discuss Euthanasia
problems, and I shall cone back to this problwm lator.

The reason for this letter from Himmler to me, Jocumor.t
No-018, was a letter tmt the highest Party JudtO Buch
wr to t » Himmler. Tills lett-r was out In as No. 002, It
is also in Document 15, pa 6 e 3? of the Gorman.

Q. Hr. President, lr. the c-n^llsh Document book It is
Document Mo-002, It Is on po 6 o 43 and Is Exhibit 332.

Please continue.

A. Now without doubt Himmler recalled my visit at
that time rnd wrote to a with the request that I try to
cloar up those difficulties. I showed the letter to
Bouhlor and Bouhlor thereupon decided that Grafeneck was
no longer to be usodaa rn Euthanasia station and sent mo
to Hlmmlor to toll him so.

Did you then ^o to Himmler?
a. In January of 1341 I went tc Hlmmlor and told him
of Bouhlor 1 8 decision. «t that time, to be sure, I did not
know that Himmler on the basis of his racial theory was at
tii-t tick, working on the development of a cheap and
effective method of sterilization. That car. be seen from
document No. 440, Exhibit 14, Document Bock 6, which la an
affidavit of Rudolf 3rcr.dt.

This Document, Hr. President, Is No. 44C and is
contained In the English Document Book 6, p.;* 0 e 1.

Please c >ntinue.

7^83


13 ?5ay L7-A^v73-16-1-Cgo:< (Int. Frown. Raaaler)

Co-art !To. 1

A According to this affidavit H i c alor was interested in eliminating
thj Jcv3 but 3till kojping their man power. Perhaps at that tine ho al-
roady know of Broaann's plans and did not wish to affiliato hinsolf with
thoso plans.

Q What plans aro you talking about?

A Tho plans to oxtorrdnato tho Jaws which I told you about before
and having known them end having boon in the Party Chancellory in the
course of this conversation when I told Staler Grafenock was to bo
abandoned, Staler also told ao of coicunications he had received fron
Poland, according to which tho Juws thoro »oro using tho temporary in-
potonco of tho Polish govonrxnt to strengthen their orm position and
Himmler said »net-dng had to bo done about this. Bo said southing had
to bo undertaken to stop this bocauso through tho nixing of blood in
tho Polish Jews with that of tho Jaws fron Vos tom 3uropo a much greater
dangor for Gomcny was arising than oven boforo tho war, and ho said it
•an his intention to storilizo the Jaws according to reliable not hods,
according to a; proceAu*o-which -would rv.it mss atorillsation. Oporativo
storilization was out of tho quostion for one thing bocauso ym
couldn't do that without leaving some scar. Thon ho brought up the
question, could not this bo done with x-ray treatment? Howovor, I didn't
know about this for suro, and in fact nobody know about it, and
especially didn't know -..hothor tho person in question could bo treatod
rithout noticing sonothing, 'iixnlar then said that Bouhlor had gathcrod
together so nany scientists and doctors in tho euthanasia program, con¬
sequently I should try to hoar free hin what he could toll no about
storilization, and toll hin to report to na again.

h Wail, what was tho effect of this corramication fron Htafcr on

you?

A This cede a groat inprossion on no. I believed that Hoydrich could
~ vo really boon tho instigator of all of this. In r$* interrogation I told
Interrogator that I regarded such a plan of exterminating tho Jews
■'orthy Of Oerrony and its leaders. Frcta what I knew of HtaLor it would


7484


yaj li7-A-ATmi6-2-Oook (Int. Brown, Rarxdcr)

Court ^o. 1

aovor have occurred to ra the. such a destructive idea could have origi¬
nated in his H i nd . ?o that, however, r.3 it nay, whether the idoa origi¬
nated with Ssydrich or Boxwcm, ay attiturio was opposed to this; and I
felt that I was ur.dor obligation to do anythin" I could to provent this.
If I had raised tho least objection to it openly I would have aroused
groat suspicion of ;4yself and ..ould havo aroused an all togather and
falso reaction in Maurlor, Therefore, 1 had to nafcu the bost of a had
natter and had to protend that I agrood with Hirrlur. Thoroforo, I
protondod to bo villing to clarify tho question of rvi3S sterilisation
through x-ray twthodo. "oars ago I had boon subjected to x-ray
troatmnt for quito a poriod of ti.vj and had discussed vdth the doctor
tho offoct cf x-rays on tho human body. New I r-rxi.ibc.rod fron thoso
discussions that the offoct of x-ray on tho soxual erganais only of
slight innortanco and aro not lasting. lioroover, I Icnjw that ono of ny
associates was personally ncqunirtod dth a x-ray specialist and ho told
no that this cp-ci-alist was conducting oxporin-nt3 on the offocts of
-'.-rayo on th fertility of onluls. Ha-over, th ro soarnod to bo no result.

Q Mr. iYosidont I jxit in now Docuront Ho. 26, fron ry docur.ont
ix;ok II, pago 1, of 25 February 191:”, an .affidavit by Dr. Martin Zeller,

* specialist, bern 3 .Tocorter 1630, living in Munich, sliced by him on
tlii3 sane dato and cortifiod by ny3olf. This affidavit contributes to
tho understanding of this ra*tur no.' undor discussion and I quotos

"I r-r-^ibor distinctly that 10 to 15 years ago I spoke to Viktor
Brack about x-ray injuries. Brack -.as worried that ho night dovolop an
”-ray injury, at that tiro hi3 knoo had boon x-rayod. ,»hon soai tino
afterwards he had rough hands ho thought that -dcht be an x-ray bum.

explained to Mr that no inj'rries could result fron our x-ray exami¬
nations sinco tho qiantitics of radiation used for diapnosis were snail
ani besides, tho acre distant parts of tho body (that is, in the case of
a picture f t!~ lavo being taker., tho hands and genitals) .roro not in
dar.g.-r zone under aoioni technical conditions.


1- k7-A-ATD-l6-3-Ccok (Int. Raaalar, Brown)

Court ?fc. 1

Q I also ir.do tL->: rcr-nrk that :van an intentional sterilization
by x-ray trcatisont would, ospocially in the caso of young persons, bo
'ifiicult to achieve and oven then only with a strong dosis of prolonged
radiation."

And thon in paragraph 2 tho witnoss continues:

"It is qtiito pcssiblo that Brack in this way developed the views as
brought forward, i.o., that the effect of x-rays upon the sexual organs
is negligible, and that the danger of sterilization does not exist at

TIjc laynen will not differentiate between x-ray diagnostics and
x-ray ttorapy."

This will bo Exhibit !lo« 31. '-fitness, nleoso ccntinuo.

A I took this associate into :^r ocafidenco and told him of ny
intention to docoivo Hi- lor, if only to gain tine. Wo agreod to docoive
dj :l .r by "ivinr him a cortificr.to that Soenod to say that storilization
by x-ray -xtheds was possiblo and would thus eut idr. to pursue n
falso path. Ju-jt wh t was said in this certificate I do not know any
longer. At aigr rote thoro wero no positivo results in it so that wo
couldn't put it to 7 fir Tiler in tJdo fom.

Mr. Prosidont, lot :io remark in thi3 connection, that after groat
efforts I have succoadod in finding tho nen who drow up this certificate
of which the witnoss has just boon speaking. I havo feund out his name
-.rvd address. He lives in the Russian zone and for that reason it was
rot possiblo for vo to get a copy of that c^rtificato that ho dr err up
•at that time. Howovor, I havo undo oor.tact with this doctor and ho has
■cclarod his roadinoss to cone to IJurnbor-a and to givo mo an affidavit,
arcauso as ho said it would bo a nattor of course that ho should help an
iTiocsr.t Kan if his testimony could do so. Ho does ronm:±»or having given
tais certificate to Brack or to his associates and I ask remission to
r - 3 rv ° right to pit this affidavit in ovidunco as soon as I havo it,
a perhaps th. doctor vashad a chanco to speak to the nitnoss — to
JVndar.t.

7UB6


13 Hay li7-A-;.r>-j6-ii-Cco:< (Int. ?xcnlcr, Srown)

C'urt So. 1

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel for defendant Brack nay offer tho affidavit
as soon as it is received so long as it ccr.plies with tho evidanco in
tho case*

OR. FBOESC&i'JRIt Thank y«x, Your Honor. "witness, ploaso continue.

A Naturally, this factor of uncertainty had to bo taken into
consi dorati on.

Q What oxactly are you spooking of?

A 1 an talking about tho report wo revived.

Q You man tho nan who draw up tho certificate, tho export?

A Yos.

TrE FR2SIDSI7: Mow ccunsol I don*t rant you to cd sunders tend no.

I said Counsol my offor tho affidavit, that noons it is offorod
oubjoct to any objoction raiaod by tho Prosocution as to the fem of
tho affidavit or its rclovancy. Yoctorday tho affidavits fren Brazil
wore possibly offured by you bocauso tho Tribunal had said w-at thoy
night bo offered. The right to offor ninply noans offerod sub.loct to
objoction and that io not oquivalont to saying that thj affidavit will
bo rocaived in ovidonco, but it ray bo offorod. That is tho sonso in
which I have usod the word ’’offor'’ in this affidavit.

DR. FKJSSCHKA’JKt Yos, Your Honor, I understood tho Prosldont and
I shall only suhnit an affidavit which is in conplinnoo with tho regu¬
lation of thi3 Tritwnal. Would you ploaso continuo, rritno33?

A '.fy collaborator changod this cor ti flea to in it3 contents in such
a .-armor that sterilisation bocccos apparent as sonotliing possible from
a nodical point of via*/. That is exactly what is contained in ny
affidavit. Thus this lot tor dated tho 28 1-arch 19iil, originated with
this docunont Ho. 203, Exhibit l6l.


13 ifcy U7- A-FJC-17-l-Gress (Lit., Racnlor)
Court I


5 !r. President, v.ifch roforoncc to tho Document Ho. 203, Exhibit
IjI, you con find it in the *nglish -ocumcnt Volume VI, page 35. Lot us
reconstruct this letter quite shortly. I shall quote. Volume VI, page
35, addrossod by Brack to ULs-Jor, narked top secret.

"Door Roichafuohrcr:

11 Unclosed I sent to you for your information the report of the
examination regarding the possibility of an x-ray sterilization or
castration. I ask you to toll ac riothor anything can bo done in the
nattor oithor theoretically or practically."

Timt is the covering lotter. This covering lotter, *7itnoss, in
connection with tho report rhich is cttachod ras considered by tho Pro¬
secution as being a sorious suggestion for sterilisation and Prosecution
in that connection has statod that tliis noodod no corrxmt. t.Tiat is your
attitudo tcnrcrd it?

A ’{either tho first nor tho latter is correct. I admit that if
one roads this lotter or roport without '.sawing the connections that
impression c-n bo created. I, therefore, have to attenpt to onalyzo
this report in ordor to explain to tho Tri’x-nal tihat ro tried to
achieve rith this letter. I have to c.uphasizo onco more that tho ontiro
thing arcs a nanouvur of deceit.

Q T.'ith roforenco to tho report rhich you attached to thi3 lotter
MO—203 I should like to quote from it a very brief passage. It con bo
found in Dociuicnt Velum VI, page 35 ana roads:

"Report on Exporimonta concerning X-ray Castration.

"Tho exporinente in this field are concluded. Tho follorinr result
can bo considered as established and adequately based on scientific ,
rcsoorch.

"If any persons ore to be sterilised permanently, tliis result can
only bo attained by applying Xrays in a desago high enough to produce
castration with all its consequences, sinco high X-ray dosagos destroy tho
internal secretion of tho ovary, or of the testicles respectively.


7488


13 Xiay !:7-A-F jC—l?-2-Gras3 (int., Racier)
Court I


Lower dosages would only tcwpor-rily paralyze tho procrcativo capacity.

Tho cansoquoncos in question aro for oxrnplo the disappearance of
nonotruation, climacteric phenomena, changes in capillary growth, modi-
fication of metabolism, etc. In arqr ease, attention nust bo dram to
thoso disadvantages.

"Tho actual desage can bo given in various ways, and tho irradiation
can take placo quite impcrcoptiblyv Tho nccoasary local dosago for non
is 500-600 r, for wen 300-350 r. In general an irradiation period of
2 minutes for non, 3 ninutos for wcoan, rith the highest voltago, a thin
filtor and at a short distance, ought to bo sufficient. Tho re is, however
a disadvantage that has to be put up :4th: as it is impossible to covor
unnoticoably tho rost of tho body with lead, tho other tissues of tho
body :rill bo injur-d, and radiologic nalaioo, the so-called "Rcontgon-
kator", •..ill ensuo."

'i’itncss, would you dofinc your attitudo toward this lottor which
I partly read?

A I was opoalcing in connection with tho talk I had with Himnlor in
tho year of 19U1. This boconos apparor.t fron tho paragraph "I hororrith
oubtdt tho result of an x-ray examination. It looks now as though in
offoct oxporimonts had boon carried cut by 3ciontisto, which was not tho
case. Himnlor had to bo assured and that is why ix had to oephasiao that
tho experiments had boon concluded and the rosult could bo basod cn
sciontific work. Of courso, to couldn't staxo tho result as boing abso¬
lutely positive, “o had to leave it to Hirsilcr hiicclf to Judgo it. In
tho first instance it was our intention to remove Hirxlor's mind from
that thought. That is hy wo choso the f emulation which can bo scon in
that lottor - "If any persons arc to be sterilized pcrrmncntly 1 . It
coat in cffoct tliat this this theoretically possible. At tho same tine
however, wo pointed out that this succoss cannot bo concoalod and that
phenomena will arise. That obviously was done by the contents of tho
certificate itself and it is emphasized tliat permanent sterilisation
aalccs high dosage of x-ray necessary. Those high dosages would then


7A89


-3 Hoy U7-A-?jC-17-3-Gross (Int., Harder )

Court I

bri .13 about tho offocts of castration with nil of the acconparying
ayxptcrc which would bo noticed irrxodiatoly. If, however, lorror
dosaecs wore used you will have only stopped productive capacity for
a short tine. To actually said that at tlio ersi of tho roport, naicly,
that the result of sterilization eculd bo ascertained after a conpara-
tivoly short tiao but that it was impossible to achieve tho results of
brine about sterilisation without being noticed, and in this ray wo
tiiought wo could get Hirolor to give up that idoa.

Q Voir, this was tho first part of ti>o lottor. ?fow lot us discuss
tho socond part. I an again reforring to the aothod which you suggested
to Jliieilor. You thought at that tine "One practical ray of proceeding
would be, for instance, to lot tho persons to be treated approach a coun¬
ter, where they could bo asked to ansvrer sono questions or to fill in
fomo, which would take then 2 or 3 rdnutes. Tho official sitting bo-
Jiind tho ccuntor could operate tho installation in such a way as to turn
a switch which would activate the two valves simultaneously ( since tho
irradiation os to operato frou both sido3.) TTith a two-vrlvo installa¬
tion about 150-200 persons could then be sterilizod per day, and thoro-
foro, :rith 20 such installations as w.ary as 3000 - IjOOO porsons por day.
In uy estimation a larger daily mefcor could not in any caso bj sent
away for th-is purposo."

IS-. Brack, how could you arrive at this idoa of turning switches.

This is conplotoly unundorstandablc for a laynan.

A Hi.nlcr wanted this pracoduro to be carried out as simply as
possible. Thcroforo, wo had to suggest a a sinplo a method 03 wo cculd
think of. On tho other hand this nothod increased the uncertainty of
of directing the ray3 to the corresponding parts of tho body. That is
what was discussed by ry collaborator with his acquaintance. '7o suggested
this tch rothed to Hinmlor with tho idea of naking this nattor as slw-
plc ?s possible and at tho sane tine to prevent any active x-ray reach¬
ing tho body.


7-90


13 S/-'.-? jC-17-li-Gr '53 (Int., ?.r_- Icr)

-Ol’T- I


Furthermore, only 2-3 ndnutcs were suposted as the length of tin: for
these people to be subjected to those x-roys. How wo arrived at these
5CO-&X) figures - or 350 r. - I don't knew whether they wore just invent¬
ed or ufaothor they were based upon a one thine. I don't know, lut look¬
ing at it as a wholo it contained a nu;her of points that wore to dono-
atrato to Stickler that the wholo thing could not bo carried out. There
is scientific basis for theso suggestions.

Q Itr. Prosident, in correction with this point I havo triod to got
on unobjectionable irreproachable certificate for the correctness of
whn: the defendant just stated. I shall got a cortiflcato fron a
specialist. The nan concerned soys that this suggestion is absolutely
sonsolcss. I had, however, to wait for this certificate bocauso I had
to wait for an affidavit fron anothor oxpert physician. ’?ith tho
pemission of tho High Tribunal I shall obtain a corresponding certifi¬
cate fron a radiologist Title can take it appoar credible that thi3 entire
suggestion was roally scientific nonsense.

A Tho possibility for Hi"dor to accopt this proposal in spito of
all thoso difficulties wo had to toko into account, "o know, howovor,
that tho preparation of any such installation would tako up a long
poried of tire, building, otc. Tfo thought that tho war would ond vory
quickly and as I said boforo I didn't knew thorc was any throat fron

tho bast. And, in caso of pcaco tho Plan of iiadagaskor which had al-

•

ready be on rojoctod could once noro bo placod in tho foreground, If
on tho other hand this suggestion was to bo accoptod and if at that
tino the war had not yot onied, tho carrying out of this exporinont on
tho 100-200 Jews was nuch loss of an evil than Hirrlcr taking tho Jews
and sterilizing then on nasso or doing something worso to thou.


7491


ij U i—^ria-Lier;

Court Be. 1


Q Mr. Brack, if I unlarstand ycu correctly, y:u« re saying that,
at that tir.fi, you had to roake a decision between either killing r.illions
of Aiks or chocsing the sma l ler evil by only suggesting this snail
nurcor which you have mentioned upon whrrj experiments .right be carriod
out. Is ay opinion correct?.

K During ny interrogations I designated this dilema in a way
by saying that this was our last vay out. But, naturally, when judging
these two possibilities ono must take into c nsidoraticn that ono
decides upon ono possibility and, at the sar*, time, fools an inner
Justification for doing so. The sane way as a troop ccumndor sacri¬
fices a few thousand people sc«snhore if he can savo a hur.drod thousand
somewhere also.

Q Nov, Ur. Brack, in order to conclude this letter I want to say
that you havo at'.tod tho following at the end of that lettor, and I
quotoi

"In sun ary it nay be said that haring regard to tho .resent state
of radiology teohniquo and rosoarch, mass sterilization by moans of
X-rays can bo carried cut without difficulty. Hcwevor, it sooins to
bo inpcasiblo to do this in such a nay that tho persons ocncornod do
not, aoonor or lator, realizo with certainty that thoy havo boon
sterilized or castrated by X-rays."

In your covering letter you apparently mentioned your second
lottor, and I quote*

"I request your instructions as to further theoretical or practical
steps which .-.re to be taken in this mat ter."

"Shat is the significance of this latter statement?

k By using this f emulation I endeavored to keep tootl'd cf tho
dovolcjcont of that natter. I never really counted on the realization
of these experiments and I never had any intention to submit a serious
proposal to Hinnler which would cause the sterilization of millions of
Aws, but if H fcna l nr was to accept this nonsensical proposal I ranted


7492


-zy 13-—3K-18-2-Xarrow (Int. itcrzilor)

Court Ho. 1

to have a delaying effect on his idoe for as long as
possible. If this suggestion had boon sorious on ny part
I would havo had to be a fanatical Jew hator, end I think
I have already proved tjhr.t I was not such a person, end,
in that connection, I any oqphcsizc- the following: Jit the
s-uie tine I sent this letter to Hiunlor, influential
circles node efforts that the Kaiser ./ilholn Institute for
ooll physiology was to b- transforrod to an old Party
noabor. ..t the head of that instituto. Professor Dr.

.•orburg had boon placed, who was a half Jew.. It was the
aL. of these oirclcs to obtain tho norits of the research
work which ./nrbur 3 had boon carrying on - who had in¬
cidentally won tho i.'obol Prize. If 1 had boon a fanatic¬
al National Socialist I would havo supported this on-
doavor of these circles. I, however, did oxactly tho
opposite. I helped /orburg end I thoroforo sustained
this institute for Oar.iany and for tho world.

4 Ur. Prosidont, I or; now going to subnit tho important
doouoont // 12 , to be found in ny doounont book on pr.go
32 end 33, of Professor Warburg. I want to point out that
this affidavit hid already boon handed to the Panily
3rack before tho beginning of this trial i:i order to holp
Brack in tho trial which he expected before tho do-Nezifi-
cation board, ..ftor the beginning of tho trial I turned
to Profossor ./orburg, asking hin to ohango tho introduc¬
tion of that affidavit tc fit it for tho purposes of tho
Military Tribunal at Nurnborg. Dr. •> or burg corresponded
tu ny request and I shall now road that doeuxiont and I
quote:

■'I, Professor './ \rburg, scientific nenbor of the Kaiser
••ilhcln association since 191-1, dirootor of tho Kaiser
• ilheL-i Institute for Coll Physiology since 1931, nonber
of tho 1‘oyal Society in London, winner of tho Nobel Prize


7493


- - :-y 13--v-3K-18-2-Ivarro*.v (It.-. Rood or)
Court No. 1


for nodicino, horowith give thb following affidavit. I
have boon advised that this affidavit will bo subnitted
to tho Military Tribunal I in Numbers nnd that I will
bo subject to severe jxmalti-s if I r.ako fal30 statements.

'The Kaisor ••ilholn Institute for Coll Physiology', tho
director of which I hnva boon since its foundation, was
established and partly supported with funds fro;, the
Rockefeller foundation. Becauso of this fact, I rotainod
ny position until 1941, although I on a half-Jew.

" In 1941 I was diSQissed by tho Kaiser Rilholn associa¬
tion. The then C hicf of tho ^hcncullory of the Fuohror,
Philipp Bouhlcr, terxnod about ;;y disnissal and orderod
his staff londor Viktor Brack to review ny oaso.

"In r. few wocks Viktor Brack saccoodou in having t.y
dismissal cancelled; in this way ho no3t probably 3c.vod
r.y life and for science a nodical research instituto of
world ronovm working exclusively for ponooful purposes.

"'I did this', Breok told no cn June 1941, 'not for
you or for Oornony, but for tho world.'

"Consic'.orins that Brack did this at a tino when raoial
hatred nnd war psychosis had roaohod thoir olinox in
Gorri'ny, ono hrs to adniro the ccurago with which Brack
advanced tho cause of tolor.anco end tho noacuful work of
3cioncc against tho bnsic principles of N'.tionnl Sociclisr:.

"I have road tho cbovo affidavit and I have found it
to be in all parts correct.

Signod: Professor Otto urg."

Thu authenticity of the cortificato i9 cortifiod by
the notary von Lctiinski on tho 3rd of February 1947.

In addition to that document I also ....

TiiJ PitEJUKNT (Interrupting): Counsel, will you give
U3 an exhibit nur.bor for this document?-


7U9L


any 13-..-3K-18—4-Knrrow (In-. Sonnier)

Court Ho. 1

3Y D... FitOSSCr2L>r.;:

. Ilr. President, I bog your pardon, this will booone
Exhibit 32.

In oddit ion to thr.t document I subr.it Document j/13 in
r*y docun-nt volun~ which is the affidavit of Professor Dr.
’./niter Sohoollor residing -t -llcnsbcch on the Lake of
Constr.noo. This will be Exhibit 33. I quote:

"For anny years I was r. n^nbor of the Kaiser hilholn
Socioty and curator of tho Kaiser “ilhuln Institute for
Coll Physiology which was hondod by r:y friend Profossor
.far bur. 3 . In that capacity I hoard frea Dr. i’olschow,
the Director of tho Kaiser •'ilhola Socioty, that the
Ministry of Culture has askod tho Kaisor •'ilholu Sooioty
to dismiss .farburs, <s ho was 'racially tainted', frai
hia father's side. To provont this I ^ot into touoh
with noichs loitor ^ouhl.r who appoarod o;>on to ny re¬
presentations and oi.trustod his assistant in the Chanoo 11 -
cry, Viktor Sreok, with tho handling of this oaso. Ur.
Brook's efforts woro oo:j; lotcly suoocs 3 ful. Tho pertinent
dopositlor.3 of r r ofos3or 'ifcrburg as r.ado in his 3tatonont
of 5 Soptonbor 1946 are in every respect in cccordanco
with ay recollections."

Thi 3 st.?tor»nt of 5 Soptonbor 1946 is the one I oontion-
cd earlier; nonoly tho one Ur. ./arburc aide available
to tho Fariily Brack for tho purposes of submission boforo
tho do-Nozification board. I sont copies of this affidavit
to Professor Schoollor. Ho 300 s on:

«I have carefully road tho above st tenant and found it
correct in every respect . 11

Signed and certified by Dr. Carl Hr.cnsol under tho date
of 7th of February, 1947.

ISr. 3rack, you have stated on the 26th of Uarch, 1941


7i95


13-..-3K-lB-5-K„rrou (Int. iic:iil~r)

Court *»o. 1

that you sent this letter to Hitler. You further stated
that if there was nc other evidence for the correctness of
your statement you would point to the affidavit of Professor
/erburg. That is the sense of what you said?

.. Yes.

0 In order to brine this nattor to a conclusion, did you
oxgoricnco r.ny resistance to your efforts inconnoction with
i ir bur 3 ?

Yes, I had considerable difficulties. Th~ Gestapo and
Borannn loomed about ::y ondoavors on behalf of ./r.rburg* My
own collaborators warned ;-.c a few tines not to bring these
aattoxs to an ox.-losion out I did th'.t in spite of all
thoso difficulties and hoi. cd ?refos3or .fnrburg. I was then
as tod to call on the Gestapo and I was given a warning by
Gru..ponfuchror Muollor.

I Witnoss, I nust again rovert to your affidavit. In
this affidavit you aako souo aontion of having nado a ste¬
rilisation suggestion to Hitler. Kathor, that you did not
send hin that suggestion directly, but you discu3S0d th-t
question v/lth your chiof, rtoiohsloitor Bouhlor.

.. It nay woll bo that I disoussed that natter with Bcuhlor.
In view of the rejection of the Uadagasc a* Plan I on suro
that Bouhlor would havo rcjcotol any such proposal, but I
i.ixod these two t ings up and I on afraid that ny nenory
vrsn 1 1 quito olanr at that tine.

. But, lir. Br:.ck, a i oounent was subnitted here, tho
Doounont No. 21G, Exhibit 170, which is to be found in tl?e
Gera an d ocunent bock 6, page 5-1, and in tho English docur.cnt
voluno 6, pago 56. This is a file notice of July, 1912. This
file notice originates fron tho defendant .tudolf Brandt and
r.fors to a c nferonco which took place on tho 7th.of July,
L912. between t!i~ Aeichsfuohrer SB, S3 Brigade! a-hror

7496


May 12-rt-3K-2B-6-Karrow (lat. itaEaler)

Court No. 1

Prof03sor Dr. Gobhordt, Bluecks cad Klauborc- You have
tho dccunont book beforo you?

- Yos.


7Z.97


13 Moy-A-GBS-19-l-Koloy (Ir.t. Rirr.ler)
C'urt " . 1.


Q. In Paragraph tw the nano of Profoss r Dr. Hchlfeldar is
r.-riti 'nod wh is a:i X-ray socialist In Romany. Re says "It ah uld
nls be o xml nod, preferably in c perati n with ?r fa as- r Dr.
Kchlfoldor, .n X-rav apooialst in Gom'ny, in what way sterilization
f r.en c vld bo achieved by X-rcy trcatrxr.t." Toll us wh.- t r.a Dr.
B'iilfoldor?

A. H hlfoldor ma the hnad f tho SS X-ray Unit.

Q. »hi t d y u rwan by SS X-ray Unit?

A. The X-ray Unit waa an instituti n f tho SS and of ’’imlor.

It ha J existed 1-n* boforu tho War. It waa cTrittod t carry ut
invoati ( -»ti na in aroia which ware subjoot to tuberculosis. A noth d
had boon f und portly thr ujr. H-hlfoldor which mdo it p saiblo far
X-ny invoatigoti-n t bo oarriod ut with q n rani filn. Such units
wore thon oatabliah-'d and w.ru g< in - through tho a untry.

Q. But yiv Vn w that fr n bof ro 19-.lt

A. Yaa, I think that t k place in 1937 r 1938.

Q. Did y u over apeak t H hlfoldor?

a. Ho, I didn’t ier w H hlfclJor and I never taikod t.<- hin.

Q. Titnoas, roodln^ tint d cunont now uld orriw nt tho
th u^ht that Hi.arlor waa r naultin* those X-ray spcolnlista hcc^uso
ho didn't quite <• nsidor v- ur su-^osti n feasible Jfrieh hod prooedod
that lott:r; cc.n that be possible?

A. Y», th t i» Feasible, but in n way c-.n bo c-ntcat with
that ay £:•<-<! intonti n which I had when r.okir c, that pr<poaal. Th"t
f c urao y u conn t rcnevc. At first I roe ivod n- rop rt fr -n
Hlmler'a staff at all which lot ao c ncludo thot he was c-ntinuin; with
hie st^rilizati n intonti ns. T wna c nplotely coin ‘hinking th-.t I
had achieved ny purpose and had deviated Himurl's nind fr.n this
atorilizati n idea. The D cur^nt NO 204. the reply letter frrw
^irr.ler tr no caao t ve r.ly a ftor porl i cf n ro th~n tw n nths.

DH. FatESCTlAlTV* ”r. Prosifont. the Dacuncnt !I0 20i can bo
f und in the Snglish D cur?.*nt 3 k Veils- C, pa go 36, and in tho


7498


lb :toy-A-GZS-19-2-Mnl y (-fcsclar)

c-'urt :r . i.

Gormn Document Bor* Volu=e G, pr.go 37. I nr.y oote f is short doou-
*>nt in *rdor t clarify mttorsi
"Top Socrot"

nddrosscd t<- "Cborstdior.stloitor Viktor Bnck,

Berlin T .*8
Voss Strosso 4,

little while before his departure t Grooce by clone tho
Roichafuohror-SS govo nu tho • r-1 r t thank yiu very rucy for vaur
roport ab ut tho X-my esstrati n experiments f«rwnrdod t< us with y««r
letter f 2f Uoroh 1941. He has road tho report with inturost and
will discuss this quest! n with v u r.t the first opportunity.’

"That lid y u o included fr n tills letter?

This lottor pr voe to ca Hissnior's interest. It c nteins no
rojooti n, but node the pursuance r f the ontiro not tor Gopcndont
upon an ther discussl a. Tils disoussl n, h wovor, did n >t o-.no about,
and th r<-with I th u;ht I had w n . consldorablo ported <f tico, and
that Mm lor w-uld n’t o ntinne with this idea.

Q. Did y u speak t< Ifimlar jw *thcr tlao in tho v-ar 1941?

... lea. I noc n.ro dealt with Hisnler in 1941 in ornnucti.n
with tho or so f Dr. Ludwig Sohnltt, wh so offidavit was svbnittcd
this r. mini;.

Q. ! d roly wanted t- ceci-'oin wh:thcr y u hod any rv.ro
dealings with Fisilor in the year 1941. That kind of roacti-n did y u
fool in tho ens" f Sohnitt ab ut wh n y-u woro spanking? One jnajwmt—
DS. FROESCH?*.^?Ii *!r. Presidsnt, my I ror.lnd tho Tribunal of
tho exhibit 25, Which I have submitted ‘his aming, which is the
nffidavit f Dr. Ludwig Schnitt, the n s* port ef which I have alroady
road. Frcr. this affidavit I shall.tnly qu^to nn- ihor tw short para¬
graphs. This is in the Gcman Dccunant B<"k 2, page 69. I an sorry
D'cu o.nt B- k 1, rc-o 59, t Schnitt. It says heroi

"T was first arrested f r e sh rt roriod in S-venbsr 1935 and
• -nin n 21 April 1934 when 1 was detained for 1-1/2 ra-ars. I was


7499


13 !'p y-..-“S3-1 j-g-Vo lr.y (Ramie r)
Ccurt V . 1.


arr stei f r political raas ns at the port-'ml instil ti n f
Sbydrich. T had holpod abcut 1« persecuted anti-fascists over tho
border. Among those were: The well known socialist Sternberg fren
Berlin, Sort 3rocht's fe=nle assistant and Brocht's child, Otto
Strassor nr.f* his friends.

"It was 3mck's opinion — as ho later frankly drlttod thr>t,
thouch ho was a nnti-«nl socialist himself, ho did not oxpoct every
Cormr.n to have tho sane political views. It should bo tha right of
ovory Com n to leovo Cormny and to adopt another country, if ho lis-
approvod the r.«ticn*l s.-oiclistlcal rogino. If I helped theso Gomans
to oaeono, my aotlor. was pr< nptod by idoalistio notivos end should not
bo punished by tho Sail stnto. That is why he fully undorstcod ny
aotim and did mt hcslt.t? t intorvonu n rtf behalf."

And then, Tiltnoss, It c ntinues:

"In 1941 I w-s nrrostod for the third tiro, again for p litic-l
r .as no. Brock again then personally drafted t^gothor with Bcmhlor
a potiti-n t< !llrar lor and kept -v rolstivus inf mod nb ut tho pcsiti «n.
Ho noc npanlod B uhl->r t- u imlor, nnd onothrr tlno ho called on Him-
lor alono in ardor t obtain nv release. Hew vor. Pis*lor refused my
release and doolorod that I w uld hnvo t> remain in tho o nc mtratl.n
cirp JVr th- root of my life. Hlrr.lcr r.lso provontod all further
offorts c-scorning rysslf with Hitler nnd warr.od both 0 uhl«r and
Brack not to undertake an” further aoti n 'nry behalf."

This is the -».ttor if Dr. 1/idwig Schmitt.

... Yes.

Q. -.-hat reaction did ;* u fo?l because -f this fact?

... This br -ught ob^-ut os ovon str r.gor rojooti. n of Hi-clor’s
attitude• : c uldn't understand it. Fer =eny yonrs I ronsidorod him

t. have a dacont charaotor end aw suddenly I found that I had been
wr-wig. ..11 th? human trends which ho had des not rated up to that
p int wore suddunly lost. I nsrur.o thrt Hoydrich's hand was appuront
behind the so matters, but r.f c-urso I also erred in nv opinion abrut

7500


13 ’ r ny-.i-r3S-19-4-*a 1' y ( feral-r)

C-urt V.r. 1.

Hiarl r. Sinultnno usly I think also in the sunrv r f 19-12 s-nt other
-as. ir:s" in c nnoction with s>—' reloaso fr ti tho c ncentm ti-n corip.

3 uhl“r had onion v rod th t r f r= r fficcr of tha "ohrceeht bo rc-
lansai frem *ho c ’r.cjntr ti-r. cecp end si. rtly b.fcro this prnntad re¬
lease ho lit* under suspielus circ'-astanccs in the c ncontritl n ennp.
Thcro woro joed ro is ns f- r suspicion. Ho had boon visited and soon
by s-no monbors f his f nily lr. a e npl-toly healthy stoto, and I
think th»t ho h d died within two d'ys. B uhl ir discussod that mttrr
with Biunlcr, all >f which br ucht mo t< dispeir f Himler’s nttitudo.

Q. Thin y u did hr*'., d ybts .»b ut !iir»lor's nontality, but y u
didn't quito so thr ugh it yut, did y u?

A. 7.-11, I ha-’ brliorod in that »an f r t lorn; a poried >f tino.
I th.u»ht that everythin- aricine tod fr n Hoylrioh, and I tli ught that
Hoydrioh was dcoclTlns Flro-.lor, but then for tho first tino I boctno
d-ubtful ob-ut Himnlor hir.s If.

Q. Did you ever !mr thnt Hirrlor was pursuod f r storillsatl-n
Intent 1 r.e rn-' in particular dll y u h ar anything t» tho offoot that
yair letter which w had nonti nod in dotail b;f ro, hod boon sub¬
mitted to Ft hi, tho Oborgrvp pan fuehrer P hit

A. I neither received krf wlod^o f th« fact that Hirrlor was
pursuin’ the cterilisati n intonti ns, n r lid I hi'* that this lottor
had been submitted t« Hoydrioh, n;t P<hl. I —.ly roc-nstructod thnt
fr b tho elounnte which I h- v soon hero.

Q. H w, Mr. Brack, y u kn w thnt it is tho Pr soouti n's
pcsiti n that y«-u didn't nly pnrtioip"to In the --xtuminatlon of
J.mry by writing this lottor olc&j, but th t y«u s.-nt s further lottor
to Hirr.l-r in 19-12; in this oon&octicn in particular vru oro br ught
in oonaucti -n with s wrv infsr. us nano, Gl.-b.-chik; wuld y u plonso
inf rm ‘hj Tribunal *hon end rndor nhet circ> instances y u mdo
G 1 b-chik'; acquaintance?


75^1


13 Iiay-A-iB-2C-l-Qa 11 ighor (Int. Rosier)
Court Jo. I, Coso ?io. 1.


Be g i nnin g with Sopt-rbor I accccpcniod Bouhler on a rido to the
forrer Gcvcrncr-Gortral Fran!:. fo then ret Globocnik and I nr.do his
.acquaintance at that tire.

0 Wiat was the subject of your conversation with Globocnik?

A I did not have .any conversation with him at all. I just
listened to what ho said to Bcuhlor. Globocnik told Bouhler .about his
entiro wort: in Poland; about his spec Lai assignment according to whioh
tha poopla who had boon ronovod fre-u Go many were c omitted for work
in Poland. Furthornorc, ho said that factorioo wuro to bo instituted
in tho Ukraine with sicilar installations as in the concentration canp
of Dachau, which wore to bo instituted by tho governor-general.

Q Did Globocnik giva you .an opportunity to view and ins poet
this work vhich was being created?

A I wont to ono of thaso works accoapaniod by tho Roichsloitor,
whoro a number of things were producod. Part of tho workors woro
housed in barracks, and part of thon in town, scat* had boon residing
thoro, and sono had boon rc-scttlod. So far as I can rot'.enbor, they
were producing shoos, motor errs, snail fvxnituro, and thoro woro sono
tailor shops. Those other things I soil! rononber. I an dito that
thoro woro a fow thousand Jons thoro who wore working thoro. In this
rather great factory I s~w nothing about -ny torture, or anything liko
that. Tho physical condition w-.s pod, and they soccod to bo nouriahod
proporly.

Q !fow, 3tr. Brack, did Globocnik at that time tell you about
the exploitation of labor - of the Jewish labor, which w-.s intondod by
Pohl?

A !Io. Ttero was no cent ion .^ado of any exploitation. Thoro
w-.s only oontion cade of proper ccmittnor.t of that labor.

Q In that ease you saw —

A i/hat I saw was absolutely positive creative work.

Q It was no concentration canp, t re it?

A :io. It was a big work coopowd. Tiiero wore no barbed w^rcs,

7502


--7-A-I.S—2C— 2 -Jjillaglksr (Ir.t. Rosier)
C' jrt :ic. I, Case No. 1 .


or anything like that. It looked oust like any other largo factory.

Q Did you on this opportunity notice anything of any installa¬
tions which could serve as any exteroinition of Jews? Did you sec any
gas chambers, or anything like that. Did you possibly hoax southing
of ouch chambers free Globocnik, or sorebody olso?

A J!o, noithor did I hoar of anything liko that, nor did I soo
anything which attracted ay particular nttontion. It was my impression
that this was an absolutely normal fact ex 7 compound.

Q When was that again?

A It was in the Fall of 191*1. I think the beginning of Sep-
tor.be r 19U1.

Q Now in the lato Fall of 191*1 you loft for a considorablo
period of tiau, and that -at the end of October 19U1 you c.amo bnok from
your lonvo, is that true?

A Yos.

Q During that tino a cort in decision arose within you, as
you linvo told no, which matured, may I put it that way?

A I wanted to volur.tocr for tho front. I wanted to Join tho
Army, bjeauao I did rot liko tho entiro political dovolojnont. So far
as I could judge. Hitler's a ins beenno no re arri no re r-dical. I per¬
sonally was watebod by tho chiof cf tha Gostapo. I was wsrnod by him
and Hirr.lor warned no becauso of =y interference in tho cnoo of Schmitt,
and there woro many similar moasurcs so that I s-w no longer any possi¬
bility for positive work to bo deno on by no. TThjn voicing this in¬
tention I found intensive resistance on tha part of many of ry friends.

They said if I loft ny post, thorc would bo nobody loft to whon ono

•

could turn in caso of political dif J iculties, and who, disregarding
any personal agency, was always ready and willing to help, ever, poli¬
tical opponents.

Q It. Brack, nay I catch up with something I for cot a little
."hilc ago. You ware saying that Globocnik had boon talking about a
special assignment?


13 Jfay-A-:B-20-3-Gollaghcr (int. ?.calor)

Court !io. I, Case Mo. 1

A Yos, a few speci-al ascignsonts,

Q You Irncw that tho expression "special assignrent" has Gained
a vory unpleasant coining during tho trial hero in Kurnberg, because
one over* likos to understand bv "special assignront" special troatnont,
and spocial treatment in that regard soecs today to have purely a
conning of liquidation, f.'cw .then Globocnik was discussing his spocial
assignment in connection with the oonnittaont of labor consisting of
Jews, did you have tho idea that it coant oxternination?

A Ho, no idea at all, I hoard tho oxprossion "spocial troat-
r.cnt" of this coming hero for tho first tino,

Q Rad you known about this expression "special troatnont" from
your physical activity?

A Ho, of course not.

Q How nay I continue whoro I interrupted before. VYo now re¬
turn to tho ti*3o of tho ord of Gctobor, or tho beginning of November,
which brings us before Christens of 19ial. What hnpponod Chrictraast of

19U1?

A !{y intentions of becoming a soldier, and going to tho front
»/cro a35isto<l by a spocial assignnont frwa Hitler. Tho Anianont Mn-
istry Todt previously roportod to Kit lor that tho Amy alono could
not donl trlth the problon of housing, and winter aid to tho troops in
Russia during that catastrophy in tho winter of 19lxl, which has boon
discussed hox*o in detail, .and I shall dioponso with reposting it in do-
tail. Tho "uohror ordered at that tiro that ray nodical institution,
that all sanitary institutions would have to help ir. that nnttor, and
among then ms Bouhlor's Institution which doalt with euthanasia. I
as hod Bouhlcr for pomissirn to tako a few buses and sono of his pdfc-
sonncly and to participate in this aid action within the framework of
t'.*e Todt organisation. I nusa state here teat in August lTljl outhanasia
had tour, interrupted by order of Hitler, and a largo part cf tho per¬
se me 1 for that reason was released. Inspito of that, tho personnel was
t used, and many cf than wore in a position to participate in this

750A


33 liy-i-!2-20-u-G^ll'iEher (Int. Raaler)

Ccurt Ho, I, C;se Ho. 1.

aid action. Jr. the Winter of 19U1 I went to the £ast, and in January
19U2 a lorgor group also wont to tl»3 Scat for that purpose. That can
bo seen frcn a letter written by the witness lionnoke to his wife.

Q Hhon did you return frou the East, in order to bring this
chapter to a conclusion?

A I returned at the boginning of March. The details about
cy activity thoro ought to bo listed hero.

Q (Tell, then, you roturr^d to Borlir.?

A Yes, when I returned to Eerlin, ay nothc-r died within a for;
days. Up to that tine 1 had beer, abligod to lock after hor, and now
that was no loxvior necessary. I had no porsonal concerns at hoco any
longer, and, I, th^roforc, v->luatoorod for tlic front. Of covrso, with
tho approval of Re ichsloiter Eouhlor. But soaothing happenod in tho
noant las, thuro was a couv^rs: tion With Hisnlor.

DR. FRCESCffi'ANH: Mr. Prosidor.t, 1 an now coaing to tho socond
conversation botuoon Brack and HiaJor, which will take up r.ono tino,
in which Hiaalor told Brack -'.bout his far ronehlng plan, and perhaps
it would bu advisable to take a rocooo new.

THE FR&32DEK7: Tho Tribunal will tako recess until 9:30
o*clock tonorrow naming.

(Tho Tribunal adjourned until lfj ”ay 1917 at 093C hours).


7?C5


Court So. 1

14 Hey 47-jl-l-l-ZHM-Joeter (Hosier)


Official Iranscriot of the American Military
Tribunal in the catter of the United States
of America against Karl Brendt. et al,
defendants, sitting at Suornberg, Germany,
on 14 Hay 1547, 0930, Justice Beals presiding.


IE*. r-ABSHAL: Persons in the courtroom vill cloaso find their scats.
The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I. Military Tribunal I
la nov in session. God save the United States of America and this Hon¬
orable Tribunal. Share 111 b* order in the courtroom

SHE PBESI2HIT: Kr. wxshal, you ascertain if tho defendants are all


present in court.
THE .kAESrAL:


Hay it plerse Your Honor, all tho defendants are


present in tho court vith the exception of tho defendant BccVrcr-Freyeeng,


vho is absent, having been excused yesterday.

TKi P&2SXXUR: Ths Secretary General vill note for tho record tho
presonco of all tho defendants ir. court rave the dofondant Beckcr-
Froyoong vho is oxcustd upon roou^st of his counsel in order to consult


vith his counsel.

Counsel nay proceed.

Sn. FHCLSCHijUr.: (Counsel for tho defendant Brack): Mr. President,

I hevu a roouost to sake at tho beginning of this coming's session. In
the erso Brack, vhich I initially i.naginod to bo only snail, it has
become extended in the last six months, oving to tho onomous emount of
material, to one of the biggest cases of this proceeding. Altogether
I had received over 7S0 applications, offers, and representations from
ocoolo vho declared the iselves reed.” to cor.c hero as vitnessts or vritc
affidavits ;n hit b.hrlf. Of this large cur.ber I only submitted 36

affidavits t*»^thi. Tribunal. Three of these affidavits are contained In

•

a supple-;ontai e'oiv.^ vfcich I submitted to tho Secretpry General only n
. fev days ego because,they had coco in too late. I should be very grate¬
ful to the TribuctS if they v*£d asic the Secretary General to have this

suuolc-iur.tal v ,)LL ransleted by to-.r-r-v morning because at that tiro

\ ^ - ' Xv /

J'hope ti bt.fiS^hed vith the direct examination,of my client.

V 7 U; .V-* /

H-£ rBESIB&i 7: The clerk of the Tribunal vill convey to the Secro-

7506


Court 5c. 1

14 Hay 47-k-l-2-iEX-7o6ter (Seller)


tary Gonoral the recuott to expedite, ae puch as possible, the docu¬
ments referred to by counsel for tho defendant Brack, and place before
t:.o Tribunal at the earliest possible tine tho suppleucntal document
book to vhich counsel has referred.

DR. 7EG7SCF. Aif:.: I didn't cuito got the Gcmon translation; I
didn't have ay switch on correctly. I vas concerned vith 6unoler.ontal
volvuo cuabor 3. Thank you very nuch, Tour Honor.

VIKTGR BRACK - Resunod
DIRLC? EXAKISaTICH (Continued)

BY DR. JRCSSCFMAIB (Counsel for the defendant Brack):

Q. witness, I at first ronind you that you arc still under oath
today.

A. Tos.

Yoctcrday vc concluded the sostion vhile you wore talking
about tho tins you volunteered for the Ar.*-. Vhat happened boforo you
Joinod the SS?

A. On tho occasion of ay mother's death I not ny brother - ho was
a aochenicnl snglnasr and a aotor transport officer in an SS division.

He coaplaincd to oc that he v*s continually rccoiving wrong technical
orders, vhich in part hed a rosu.it in the ertostropho resulting fron tho
lock of lot ir vehicles. !, .myself, while in Russia aiding the wounded
people, had on opportunity to observe our aotor transport problca.

?,r that reason I decided to visit Elnalsr and report these natters to
hia in order to improve that situation, if possiblo.

DR. 7RCt.sc:-: -Ui5: hr. President. in that connection I should like
to revert to exhibit Ho. £, which is the affidavit already suViitted
by the br-th.r of the defendant Brack, B.cu^ent 41, prrcgra.nh 3. Thie
is to be found on ptgo 1 of supple, icntal v^luuc num.bcr 1.

5Y DR. TRCaSCEtARN:

Q. Voald you continue please.

a. I reported these -atters to Hinder but subseauently, I don't

know why, voiced criticisn about ,thcr natters within the SS.

7507


Court So. 1

14 May 4?-k-i-S-ZEk-JoEtcr (aadcr)


Hinder culotly listened to ne out then tried to convince ne in his ’••ay
about the correctaeaa of what he was doing. He adnitted that eono
-■'.It. a in the So weren’t as he would like then to be, and that eoae of
the can in the SS did not aulte fit into the organisation. Sut, ho 6aid,
at thia critical point he needed ever;' single one of the old SS ceobero.
He said, aporoxiaatoly, only if the old coarades would stand by hin
faithfully could the S- cleanse itself of theoo oeoole who did not fit
into it. He cculd only expect the nost heavy tasks to bo carried out
by the old SS members. Ihen ho euddonly stopped and told ne that Hitler
had soae tiao ago given hln the ordor for the oxtoraination of the Jowo.
He said that tho oreoarntlonc had already been node, and I think that
ha used tho exorcesion that for ronsons of caaouflago or.c would hove to
work as quickly as oossible.

Ho aecnod to say thoso things devoid of any innor aoorovol of thoo,
but ho also said then as if they were a natter of course. I hod tho
fooling that ho didn't lnnorly aoorovc of thoso ordors but ho showed no
sign of any mental shock. I, hovevsr, vao doeply shocked to hoor of
thoso duvelopcents bocauss now for the first tiao I had heard concretoly,
by sccobody -ho was In a position to know, that all of those ruaors
voro actually true; that there was in offoct tho intention to exterminate
tho Jove.

I don't know whether Eiaeler expected to cake this inpreeeion on
no. I thought thot Binder cxoectod that I vtxild offer ray neoletanco
in thia natter. I couldn't say anything but that this aoecod to nc to
be an enornoue toe:-: and that I could not understand how Final or could
boor the roaoonsibility before hunanity for these ncte. I thon tried
to conclude thia conv^raation ea tmickly es posBible, and on thia occa¬
sion told Hlnaler that Souhler hod oorcitted ne to volunteer for tho
Army end that for thot ourpocc I had already gone to the /uehrungshauot-
ent. After that I departed.


7508


Court 1

-~y l-l-jt- 2 -l-HJ-C ok-Rpoalcr.

v. -ffcat ws the result of that conversation?

"• 1 redoubled my efforts to get to tne front and I

ti’icd t e.nolafta the forianllties aa qaiokly r.s possible.
Nov a fate was taking Its -course, which I did not think I
c.ld sucoo38fally oppose. I s-w befor- me a possibility
to £• a nothing for my nrtIon ir. n decent way. However, I
wanted to et away fron an office and a fuenr^r whoso
radicalism I had bo c an to realize m r- ana more and whv.ro
_y rocson would not allow mo to coopera to any longer. I
thought th~t ^nly as t seldler c,uld I pat distance between
thoso thin-s and myself. I did vnly *h t .aany of other
oomrados had alro *»-..• lone be for.., comrades who no longer
wnted •'nythln a t do with tne high leadership and who
went to thv fr»nt.

ft. ! v Hr. 3rrok thor. I think at the end of April or
tno beginning of Key you went to the front, bat wasn't
thcro an ther event In a rll which -ay be f some imoor-
t- nee for the Tribunal?

ft. Yes. Before I left I met - and by ncoldont, we
O' Id .ascertain :he date, the 19th of «pril - I met
el ,b cnik • t a c.-ncert on the 19th of A prll In Berlin.

Globecnik ocked me whether Relchieiter 3 uhler was in
3erlln and whether he could speak to nla. I said, yes,

3o uhler w e tnor*. and he could visit him. Clobocnlk did
ti-at and 3 abler t Id m«. ftcr this o nvers-tl n that
Glob cnlk had '.sited hi j tv furnish him supervisory personnel
:*.r his w rklng s.iops in 3-rlln, w.ilcn w s to be taken
fr c thv. i-4 euthanasia program. Reichslelter B.<unlor
id iic c apll d wit/, this request of Globonik, but he
reserve, the rl cC teat t::ese people should return to him
“s So. n -s the ex-cuti.-n of the euthanasia was once more
Jt-'rtw \. I approximately re member the words of Bouhlcr


7509


Court 1

Hr.y 1 - 1 —&- 2 - 2 -KJ-Cock-Ran_ior.

w said: "Here these people will be used In a productive
capacity, because they wuuld be workln_ In the canpe, and
as e n • , a I no*.d thee I sh"ll get then once core." Bouhlor
t Id ae I v"s t Issue n dlrwCtivo t T-4 that theso peoples
*ero t bo furnished. These people w^re then •separated
:r t.:e rynnlrr tlon end wor- dot 'lied t his.

v. 'iltneso, there Is n J cunent .available hero, NO-
a05, Exhibit 153, English Jocuaont Bo k, volume 6, page
33. Tills Is the wpll .cn,vn sec nu letter In which you
o- ncernvd y urself with euthanasia proposals. You wrlto
n the 83 June 1942, ana the letter Is addressed to
r-ltnv.lor:

"On the lr.structl no of Relchlolter B uhl.r I placed
s no -f evy non - already s.n_ tine a--. - at the disposal
of 3rl .’’do-fuehrer Olebocnlk t:« cxecuto r.la special
fiilssl n."

Have u the d cucent before you?

a. Yes, I h^vc it.

a« far as I read this lntroductl n In this letter,
la It n reference t' the c nv rsntl n you r.rd with Olobocnik,
- r Is It n rof_ronco t the .lrectlve which B.uhler ^avc
/fiU as a result 1 f til t conversatl -n which you hod with
Olobocnik?

a. Yes.

i. -ltness, I nee n re r^v^rt to y ur affidavit NO-
-126. There Is paragraph in tir t -ffld-vlt entitled:
a Connect I- n between tn*, “E" uregran, the euthanasia pr<.-
-ram, and 6c Stigadafuohrer Slob cnlk." uld y u eleoso
define ur attitude toward tr.ls r tnor strange title In
•• ur ni*fl_nvlt?

«. Tr.e f rnulntl r. f th-'t title os not ri a ln:te

:’r - as. It was ch sen by the author f that affidavit.

7310


C urt 1

May 14—14-2^3-nD-Co ok-Sonnier.


‘hen I v a interrogated I did. r; t w anything a tout any
c .. .^cti n between Glotoonlfc end the euthanasia program*

Too interrogator perhaps thought It expedient to formulato
•J:v c title in auch e. manner. *9 a natter of fact thuro
% .a n c nneotl n .between the execution of outhasasla and
wh tever G1 b anl . was doing. The ne was euthnsnsla,
mercy death f r sick pe'pie vh ae existence c uld really
n t bo called llvlr._ any 1 r._or, and the ther meant tho
r.urder f hundreds f th uacnd8 of Jew3. «t that tine I
didn't really nay any attontl n t» the title but United
nyself to the t~xt, aa f'r aa I could understand it.

.. Vltnese, in other w rds you v-nt t any that when
submitting this affidavit, a a far aa y u were In a
iv.aiti n to fellow it, you ttachod more luportanco to tho
text c ntainjd m your statement than you did to the titles
given t the vari ue chapters within y ur -ffidavlt? For
that roas n y a did n t attach the importance to this
hopding, which seems to establish n connection between
euthanasia and aiotocni/., that cn utsido observer ml ht?

«. I didn't really understand it in its significance.

K w In this 6t"tcnent y.*u were referring to this
pers nnol which w-s t be furnished f -r Lublin. With
inference to par'- raph 14 within your affidavit, is there
anythin y u would like to add? Did y u at that time
perhaps renenbor the matter somewhat differently? It says

hero: "The Fuehrer nsko.. me t send this pers.nnel to

•

Lublin, after a c nforonco with Himmler, at the disposal
of tho B"l_adefuehrer Globocnlk.*

A. ^t that time I really -idn't kn-v it exactly. I
really didn't know what the connections were nt that t.nc.
as a natter if fact it vs Glob cnik who discussed th-t
(flatter with 5 abler and not Himmler. Ky limitation in


7?li


Court 1

i-ir.;* l4-ti-2-4-HD-Coofc-Haniler.

that sentence, as I believe. Is really justified.

Then you on to say; «Bouhler asked at to furnish
those orstnnal which could be released because of the
t ppot.o f the action." This d„es not quite correspond
with y ur stateaont now, because now you .nly say y
were „■ in- to furnish a part of these people.

A. I already at* ted that at the tlae th-t we were only
c.neorned with a sonll part .f the pooplo, about twenty to
thirty, only small part f then wore released. Even
after the euthasaalr. as such was st.oped, the scientific
and propatory work, h wever, was still 40 ln t * n.

Q. Y'.u stated durln- y ur Interrogation what you hnvo
said to the Tribunal today, that 3ouhler told y^u at that
time that he wanted to reserve the rl^ht t- use that
pors nnol l^ter for outhar.asla?

A. Yee, I stated that at the tlno. I said that E.uhlor
was w rried, thet Ehrmann would carry on with the
euthanasia program If ho didn’t contr 1 It any longer,
and that then a misuse was to be expected, and I further
F-tatcd It w s ay opinion that this pers nnol w uld bo
usod In the work camps. Perhaps I didn't omvhaaitc that
sufflciontly when I was lnterrs/ated at that time, boonuso
:..y memory at that time wasn't clear on u.h. It was quite
cloar that Scuhlor only furnished pers nncl for that
purpose, and under the condition that they would nly bo
used In the work snaps* ^

Q. '.?ltneas, tho Pr locution asserts that 3-unler,
in full knowled ge of tho puro-sss for which they were
t' be used, had furnish.a T-4 pers nnol to Olobocnlk in
.rdor to oxte-rain-te the Jews. You were previously speak-
in, of a c nversati.n with Hlamlor which took place In

tho be .lnnlnv of «?rll 19-42. «ccordln tt to y ur f urther

7312


Court 1

May 14-K-2-&-H2- Cook-Rannler.

statement Globoonlk, on the 19th or 20th April 1942, had
ap Icon tc*3ouhlor. I can then understand the point of
view f the Pr.secuti n when they say that >n the occasion
of thi 2 visit of 20 April 1942, 5,uhlor, by request of
Ql.boonlk, furnished that pers nnol t hlo for the pur¬
pose of the extorslnntl.-n »f the Jews. You knvV what
tfc~ witness Kederlch hod testified hero nb.ut Bouhlor.

Vo need n t repeat it. I an asking y.u, however, knowing
the aentallty and the pers nallty cf the Helchleitor
3cuhler, do y->u c neldor it possible, or would you say
that it was ut -f the question, that 3-uhler in that
c nversotl'.n of the 20 April 1942, furnished the
personnel of T-„ ti Globe cnlk for the purpose of tho
externln^tl <n .f the Jews? Have y,u anything that
c Uli n<-co yu believe that, yes or no?


7?13


Hi hay-S-GJ-3-l-Grc«s-(Ro*lcr)

Court 1


A I think that it is quite 'ut -1 the qu-sti n that Sruhl-r wrull
tuv, lurniahed the p rscnxvcl tc Glebecnik had b-_n known that it was
G1 b^cnik who hod rcc-.lv..*; th erdor fr-c Hicrl-r tc extuninato the.

J*.ws. I an convinced that Bouhl-r would have r-J-ctcd any such th'u-rht,
os he actually .id lour, -ad I actually id Infcra hin -f th- subject
f cy ccnv. rsati. n witi. Hinrl-r.nt that occosi n Bouhl r quite cp.nly
-xpr- 330 : his la.opprcvol about this, .-id h.. eai’/'This is the
b-:iania- of th- wad", I had nc cccision, an Bcuhl.r had no cccnsirn
to connect Gl.becnik in orjy my with ext rninod^n of the eews. Beth
oi us wh.n visitin; Lublin In S_pt.=bcr 1911 ho.' s—n 11 c* th- construe-
tier, werk 41 ». saw th :t s.c- f th . foct-.ri s w-r. already operating.

could n t ino: in- that tfccs p_oplc w.r.. tc be us.:'; for anythin- -la,
but verkin in th-3e corps.

Q .1 trv.es, l*.t ne int.ro I t- a qucaticn. Did you at any tirve
urine th- . or 1-urn th.t pacpl v r. c arcitt.-l frcca th. T-*i for the
porp-sw f ct.rain ti n ~i th. J-ws, or hav-. / u only hoar*, that th.y
ulUpcdly w.r. c.emitted 1 . r suer, n purp s.?

.. >r-c xy enw knavl- . I con soy nothin.-. I alr-u 'y uanhusized
urin oy pr*.-intcrrog.oti-n that I r.-'ird at the cni of 19U2 that thes-
p.'-pl. w-r. for th- -xterainoticn f th. Jews, .‘bother

the* were ..a ctually used for such a purp.o. - I still don't knew that.

I za c- n-dnc d at first that th-y actur.il> wer- us-d in th- pnn.r
Aol note by B..uhl.r, nue. .ly •* rkin-. c-rsps. It ic possible that
j 1 t.rnik 1 ter ho' start t use then frr th- .xt*.rainatirn of th-
Jews, it.r havirv th u.*ht p.rhop3 thot th.r_ woul b- no r bjoction on
the pert of -VuM-r. t

1 itr.-ss, as yc-x stot ' corli-r, you w-nt to th- front ot the
.nd of /.pril or beeinnin;. i 'iey-your division ms stati n- J in th-
2ruth. In -h. c urs Juno 19L2 !id yru race nrr*. return t. B-rlin?

a Up t'. th*. tir. -ho livisirn w-nt intr .cti-n I *-nt o f-.w
' io. -3 tc c.rlin because the li vision wis :nly b-in activated aid I
_t- supply Jxic-r h :ft-n tc ,-c tc -Lrlin. That is why on 9 Jun-

' 751A


1L ■ t-y- --2J-3-2—Grcat--(p.irl_r)-
Ccurt 1

I ^-s in Berlin b.c:,use ay Ccaeandin Officer hart asked to attend
th. funeral cf r-y.-rich an:’ had to fly to Berlin. On this --ccaaicn

U - ls t;<Ss B - alcn e 1/1 Plane, t that ti., I r aainc in Bvflin
fer . fc.r 'lays in order to do s c. r;rk there.

.] Cn. nonent, dr. President, in order to ccofira the Ustineny
cf th. r tn«jjs /rack to tho effect that on 9 June and there aft.r
which .till b. set*, isp-rt nee, h_ w.s in 3.rlin-I should likv. to refer
tr ny “jthibit Brack, 11 on pyc 2 iari 2. This is the affidavit cf Karl
Wclf.

TIE PRFSHEST: Pa:,o ? o! what D cua.nt berk?

Dr ‘* rnO'XH»iJ«: Tliis is ay Jooua-nt Nc. U pacru 9 -.1 Docunont
Be* Mo. 1 an! suboitfccr by a. as Exhibit Brack Hr. n. it is on pare
10, Paragraph 2. “t says:

•I net Brack only lnfr.qu_.itly urin the #nr, sc for instance at the
fun.i 1 cf Heydrich in Berlin .an 9 Jun_ 19U2.‘ *

This establishes th_ correctness of th_ tostiaeny cf thw witness
■rick. Vit.~i.ss, will ycu pi,. ,3s. continue.

n Durin; these ays I vac in B.rlln I olsc visit..'. Bouhler.
r.. t.l n. ta t Gl.tccnik had visit/ nla . sec-nd tta. an/ had ask!
that a- re p.rs.niv.1 be d.ttU.J rr-.a T-L. Bcuhler agreed because h.
ti.' Ur’ht h. crul dispense With SCO. acre of his p.rsennel. after getting
his asr.ja.nt 01 -bocnik t k hit int • i 3 cenfi .nc. >5 the conversation
pr.rr.8sc ' .and t> 1 hir. that he h be.n ccianittci b, the Reichsfu.hrer
1'i-sJv.r t- h.lp carry -ut th xt.rrinaticn cf the Jews. Bcuhler was
quit, ah-cke I ab.-ut this inf.-mitim an.' h. lxAs'.iateli with Irow his
vr^atnt b- furnish this- p rsnn.l, an' he als asked that p-gcnnel
wr.tch h .lr.-. v 1 b.en . tailed tc hin should b. r.turn. B.uhler, as
:..t-i: ne, maintain,' the paint -f vi.w that it was utterly i-ip.ssible
t. us. p_ pi f.r th. -Xecuticn cf Euttaasia nc. they had already b en
uc. 1 r such a terrible parpas_. u. saia that th. nssi.;ntaont as
G1 h-cnik was carryin thr.u-h had .s a result tho bs elute de^radaticn

r. brut-liz.ti n :f tr.. p.cple inv lv_:. Glebccnik h.DW_v_r, th_n tCld

7515


11. H'.j 3-33rcss-(itarlir)-
Court 1

him that Uv.Sc pec pie waul n't be us. for that purp s-, but w.-.uli* '-nly
be us ’ as supervisory p-rsenn ,1 in werkin- conns. 3cuhl< r then with¬
er r this rbjectin tc the use ct the personnel.

•i AnU wh-.t .abcut y:u witness?

.. I ha -1 alrwi’Jy iv-n up all hep- after that ccnv.rsation with
M.-j.l.r that th Course cf this fat. ccul 1 * b. stopped in any way. 3ut
I had always hoped that feroinn p.litical considerations ai^ht p-r-
h-.ps dissuade Hitler f. rr carryin'; out all these plans. Bui, if that was
n«t th- ease th- th uchc arose in c- vh.th-r an-- shouldn't cnee more
fl.ke th- .at Wept t lissunde Hitl-r free th-3v pi-ns far purely prac¬
tical reiser., which ». .\ul'. «t that st:--. . f tn- w.r th. labor supply
pl-y-d • considerable [*art. In -11 c- untri.s lot r was n— Vi forcud
lab..r be^.an ta be us_‘. h c. us. ur cwn r.s ure.s wer- nt longer suf¬
ficient. Un r tn-.s- censi enU ns . n. etui.: p. rhaps p-rsuad- hitl-r
that it w-ul b- r. re .x^'Uno tc use thes J«ws in ^ab:r rath-r
than ext.min t- thm. I t 1 3 dhler i that tine that in th. case
cf th.se. C t- 10 cilli-n urcp..an .8 tb-re oust, I aa sure be a Rr-eit
nureb r I Vs who ire capable for work. On- su3t put it -o hitler
that it was cl iua-.nae inn .—-me. tc 9aV- this p t.nti-1 labor pc 1.
Hitler's c nc.ro that Go many its-lf c jl’ be cn an-crcd f r th- futur-
woul hav. t b- count-re : by t-llin Me -hat th- sterilisation plan
ccul b- me- -or- put int -x-cuU n, bee use by us in.- thi3 plan cf
perr. n..nt st.rills ti n th*- danrer c<ul! b_ reu ved. If hitl-r would
entertain th--t -h l/ht w- L..i'inV that s nuch ti*a- weuli lapse that
th . r v. ul * C R- to n n in th- n-antii— . This would n.m really

that n t inly t:.s. --ws capubl tc * rk but all : tlur «J_ws would be

•

spare-:. Lv-n if this i.e-pti'-n w.re noticed at th- -n , 1« n. time

would have laps- ’ in th. u.-n tii~.


7516


l'~y 14-iT-BK—i-l-Karrow (Int. Hauler)

Court; :io. 1

- witness, if I understand you oorroctly, after receiv¬
ing that information from Bouhlor ana rJ* t ,r hearing that
Globockik had boon commissioned to exterminate tho Jews in
thu 2nst, you initiated the thought of stopping this
terrible measure by tryinj once more to put to Himmler
ar.d Hitler tho plan of a permanent sterilization of tho
Jews?

•* I brouht up that thoujht in the debate because
Bcuhl-r w.3 so shocked, and was always asking, 'How c.ji
we possibly help? How o ~n wo k-op this madness from
happening?" ..nd than I thought of tho sterilization pro-
Grom. *./o triud to fin’, soao .-os .ibility to help. It wqs
like the straw vihich tho man drowninj tries to ;rasp.

i Did the situation r.p.oar soncvdmt cosier because of
Heydrioh's death in January, 19-il?

.. Yos, it seem,’, considerably oasier. I always thought
that it was Hcydrich who played a considerable role in all
these brutal n.. 9uros. ..fter Heydrich's death, I believed
that Hior.l.r ha.’, quieted down somewhat. Bouhlur listened
to all these proposals, but did not dare to approach Hitler
.^rsonally. ..nd he was rijht: Ho told ne that after ho
a3 .(eic lisle iter h .d already bo-n refused permission to
c rry out tho ilnd 0 jr. 3 c.ar Plan he could not possibly,

.-rticul rly lr. view of Bormann's attitude, suGjcst anothor
such plan to Hitler; but he said that there was a possibi¬
lity of tryinj it via Himmler. Then, of course, oftor
havinj been rejected by Hitler onoo, ho could not hin-

•

3-lf pro..cso that plan, because if this pl'ji was p; In ro¬
uted it would have boor, very unpleasant for him. Ho said
“!: t if I was poinp to do that, becauso of ay jood rolntion-
to Hirmler, that would bo somethinj entirely difforont,
'.n 1 than he would be able-to sup. ort me, because I was his


7517


li y l-i-2d-3K—i-2-Karrow (Inc. nnr.nler)

Court No. 1

subordinate, in oaso any difficulties for no arose with
Hin.,lor.

1 >i itness, when discussing this conversation you wore
spo kin'; of the labor problon which bo/jan to bo of pern-
oount iuportanco. Did Hinclor, in any way, participate in
the solution of this . roblon?

.. Not directly. Hii*.J.er, as Globoonik told us, had al¬
ready issued the order in the fall that forosts wore to bo
planted in the Lkrein^ and that, of oourso, would havo boon
a possibility of a lor ;o-scalo labor oonnittilont.

. ~nd for that reason you boliovod that Hinnler was tho
suitable ;urson, noodiiv; oo nany workers, for you to :;ivo
tho arjunont to that workers wore noccsscry?

.. We had plenty of work but there weren't suffioiont
workers and, for th t reason, wo would have to put it to
hia thr.t ho would have to save is r.ony workor3 as possiblo.
How, of course, he could put that ar.ttor to Hitler in turn
was his own off air but, at my rat©, Hi/^alor was tho noro
powerful r.an, not 3ouhlor.

g Now witnoss, Bouhl> r thought thr.t ho personally could
not approach Hitlor. Bouhlor didn't soon to bo particularly
anxious to approach Hinnlor. How did it oono about that
you offer..! yourself in approaching H inn lor?

.. Bcuhler .L'to-w put this off-r into ay aouhh. He said
"You o-.n do it." His own relationship to Hinalor was too
•.stran/.od, and he said th .t ho could support no in oaso
any difficulties for ne .ro3e. I, -.t thr.t tino, already
knew that ;ft-r iioydrioh'3 death thoro couldn't bo any
iatttdi .to drjijer. In addition, I was nlrondy in tho arny.

I really didn't think that ho would notlou so very quickly
that this ; lan couldn't bo carried out in prr.otico - I
theu *ht that would take r.ony .lonths.

; Now, Ilr. Brack, let us turn to tho nost inportait point.


May 14-il-3£-4-3-Karrow (Int. Nacalcr)

Court No. 1

TJio prosecution has submitted tho Doounont 110*205. During
th.- oponin; str.tonont at tho bcjinninj of this trial it
-’.oai'jnatod this lottor as a 3ub-hunan and dopravod report,
vjid they s id that this was no sterilization to exterminate
;o--plo sufforin; from horiditrry rlisonscs, but that hero
sterilization was used for criminal purposes. You will have
to r.dait thr.t thi3 assertion of the prosecution, can net
bo considered in view of this letter, to be without justi¬
fication. I n3k you now, in view of this enormous chorGo
which was raised against you, to tell the Tribunal how
you cone to write this letter of 23 Juno 1942, .and how
you wen tod to be understood. In this way, tho Tribunal will
be in .a .osition to join an obj^ctlvo picture of what
happened end what was done.

.. Hovi I oor.o to write this lottor I already told you. It
v/as \a a result of th t conversation with Bouhlor. How this
letter was actually subuitt^d to ue in tho intorro.jutions
I can't rononber. I saw only tho first two sontonoos, and
also ac know led jod uy si mature undo month it. ..t that tine
uf tho date of this latter I was already with tho army and
when this letter was first shown to no I thoujht that thi3
letter couldn't possibly have originated from no. In tho
me ntino, however, I rocallod noro of the details. Today
I can only repeat th .t I do not bolievo that thi3 letter
>ri -inat ;;’ fren no in actual wording. I think that it had
only boer. sent to :ie for my si .nature. I believe I con
r-n~r:b-r either th it I Irv.fted this letter roujhly, or •

•j.'.ve on- of ;.y oollabor .tors the order to write it. No
natter hov. th .t m ly bo, this letter repr-sents essentially
the intentions B_>uhl-r and I had. The significance of that
1 ttur is not in its oo jinn in - is not in its introductory

r'.s. Th. si jnific r.ce of that lottor is solely that
mention is r.vlo of the possibility of the labor committr.cnt


Kzy 1* -il -3K-I—l -Ka it c*» (lav. .icniJ.or)
Court ilo. 1


of tho Jews.

. I think that it is correct that I onco aoro cito thi3
docunent, with tho approval of tho Tribunal, in ordor to
enable every ono to understand tho question. It is the
Docunent 205, Voluno 8, Snjlish Doounont Book, pt.jo 39.

Tho lottur is not Ion ; and will only toko a few uinutos
to road:

"Viktor Brook, SS-Ob-rfuehrer
‘To;’ Socrot
“Berlin, 23 Juno 19-12
"Door .ioiohsfuohror:

"On tho instructions of .voichsloito? Double^ I plaood
soao of riy r.on - already 3> no tina ry;o - at tho disposal of
Bri'jadofuohror Globoonik to exooute his spaolal uission.

On hi3 ronowod request I now transferred additional porsonn-
ol. On this occasion Brij.adof uehror Globconik stutod his
o. inion thr.t tho whole Jew-..otion should bo oonplotod as
quickly as . ossiblc so that ono would not .jot ocu.jlit in
tho niddlo of it one day if soao difficulties should nako
a stop; njo of the action nocosscry. You yoursolf, Foichs-
fuoliror, have already ux.irossod your view, that work should
..rojross quickly for reasons of ooaoufl.ajo ulono. Both
points -which in principle* arrive at tho snnorosult ore
aoro thr.n justified ns far os t.y on ex, orionco ^oos;
nevertheless would you kindly allow no to subnit tho
foil win or juriunt:

10 Trillions cf Jews La *uropo are, I fijurc, r.t *
least 2 to 3 -.illion3 of non and wonon, who are fit enough
f :r work. Considering tho extraordinary difficulties,
th: labor probl-ja presents us with I hold the view that
2 or o nillions should be specially selected and
reserved. This c j howov-r only be done, if at the sent
ticu they' are rendered inca. ablo to ..ropajate. ..bout c


7520


::-y l4-ii-BK-4-5-Knrrow (Int. Roador)
Court No. 1


yo .r -30 I rojortcd to j *u -that agents of cine have convict¬
ed, tea experiaents necessary for this purpose. I would
like to recall those facts onco core. Sterilization, as
norcnlly perforce d on persons with horiditary dlso«.sos,
is hero out of tho question bocause it takes too Ion;
end is too oxponsivo. Castration by x-rays however is
not only rolitivoly cheap, but can also bo porforaod on
finny thousands in the 3hortost tico. I think, that et
thi3 tino, it is .lro..dy irrolovent whothor tho pooplo
in question bocor.o aw ju of h.-.vin 3 boon castrated of tor
sono woeks or aonths, or.co they fool the offoot3.

'•'Should you, .toichsfuehrer, decide to ohooso this way
in tho interest of the .*osarvition of labor, thon
iioichaloiter Douhler would bo propnrod to pl.aco nil
physicians and oth-r personnel n^odod for this work at
your disposal. Likewise he ruquostoi no to infora you,
that then I would have to order tho apparatus so urjontly
ncodod with tho jre -.tost spood."

Si;ned, Viktor Brook.

•Jltnoss, I a 3 k you now to define your ettitudo toward
that lottor.


753 .


lit ::.y-:>-:B-5-lrHaloy (Int. Punier)
Court Ko. I.


A I bavo already said that tho significarce cf this letter 3s
only tho Ichor forces which are aentiorKd. I had nothing at ell per¬
sonally to rk) with tho eoHnitneat of labor. It was a nattor cf com¬
plete indifference to co, and it would have teen a r-attor of complete
indiffororKc to -o whence Hitler or Kirsilor got their workers for thoir

plans. If I had a proposal to HireJer mentioning tta capability of tho

•

Jews to work it was only based upon ny wish to stop this aoss murder at
tho last i&inuto and try to point out th. possibility of permanent ster¬
ilisation, which was already mentioned in ny previous letter to Hinnlor.
Tho pretext which I used was old.and I know that this method could
really not work. I didn't concorn myself with tiw manner any core, and
no experiments had boon carried through. Tho new thing in this suggoat-
ion is ny reference to the bnlntonanco of productive labor, lifter
not having spoken to Himlor since April 19U2 I had to find sono ycint
of attack, and I did gat this point of attack by ny referonco to tho
conversation between Olobocnik and Bouhlcr regarding tlx? detailing of
T-U personal. Hinalcr w-.s hardly infonud that Olobocnik had taken
Bouhlar into his confidonco about his extermination assignrunts. 3 had
to explain that, and for this reason I cede referonco to tho furnishing
of personnel to Globocnik. If a special mission is wntionod as tho
purpose of this furnishing, I must say that under "special mission" I
understood the large-scale work products at Lublin, which 1 had visited.
In this way I pointed out the r.anpo.ror possibilities to Hlir.lor I had
to mako sono reference to when and how Globocnik told Boufclor of his
plans and for this reason I constructed tills introductory sontonco as
you already road it. I would like to ouphasizo, however, that tho
words "or. this occasion" in this letter are not at all synonor.ouc with
tho wtrds "in this connection", what it should moan is "ir. tho course
of this conversation", and that is exactly hor I described it before.

Q Von, witness, you were saying hor that you had written to
Hindu r reminding him that you had spoken to him before and telling
him th-t you had olrearfc* furnished thcs_ ixn from the T—ii to Globocnik


7522


11 3-5-2-:Liloy (Ir.t. Easier)

Court Ko< I.


in April of 19U2, and you then thought: Hisnler couldn't possibly know
how I cmc- to know about Globocnik's order to exterminate tho Jews,
and I shall have to explain how this cane about; and this is exactly
why you node this introduction in this way?

•H. EOCHKAlOTt Just a'noacnt, please, I object against tho
explanation. This witness told us for quite a long tin* how he under¬
stood tho let tor, how he wrote the letter and why he wrote tho letter,

I do think it is unnecessary that dofenso counsel is just repeating what
the witness just said froa tho stand.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel for tho lioswcution is correct. This
is ontlroly superfluous. Objection is auotainod.

Q Would you pleiso continue, witness. Wo had stopped at tho
introduction of tho letter*. And now will you please pass to the con¬
tents of tho letter itself?

A How I have explained th.- connection with Olobocnik. Further¬
more, it says in tho lotter that tho action was to be carried out as
quickly as possible. 1 had to count on a v,ry quick development of
things. Therefore, I had to .apparently agroo with Himnlor's and
Globocnik's opinion in ordor to find .an occasion for tho lottor.

'.H. HOCHTC.UOT: May it ploasc. Your Honor, I had tho Impression
that ry objoct was against further discussing tho lotter and the docu-
nont as such. The defendant Brack has spoken about his lotter for
so do tiro and I do think he has told tlw Tribunal ovorything .about tho
lottor. I do think that what ho is referring to new is conplotoly re¬
petitious.

DR. FRGZSCHHA.’Ws !!r. President, I c-nnot at -11 agroo to that
opinion. Tho possibility raust be 'von to the defendant Brack under
all circunstcncos to be in a position to explain to tho Tribunal exactly
what he wantod to express with tho letter in detail. Defendant Brack as
f nr as I aa info mod, is almost through with the letter and needs only
a few more sentences. I ask that thj opportunity be extended to the de¬
fendant Brack to explain himself and defend himself properly on this

7523 ,


Hi ' ay- 2-5-3-toloy (Int. R-nlcr)
Court Ho. I.


vital point.

THE IPiSIDEST: The defendant any explain this letter any way
he desires, but he should avoid repetition and not repeat liiat he has
stated before. If defendant desires to =nko any point which he has
not already ande, the witness any"sake the explanation.

THE WITNESS: Y-s, Your Honor. I oxpxvsscd tho fact that I
was counting on a quick dovoloFrent by writing that In ny opinion and
fron ay own experience I felt that a rapid dovelopnont of this procedure
was r.ore than Justified. Ir. that connection I was thinking of ay ex¬
periences with euthanasia, in which I had found out that crr.ouflago was
possible. In that way I apparently agreed with Himlor ac to tho ex¬
pediency of a quick dovolojront; but then I added that I would liko
hin to koop sonothing in Rind; and then I said that dorpitc tho fact
that his interest in a quick dovclornont was justified, ho should also
tako into account ry point of view; and this brought nx> to the real
purpose of that letter, nacoly not to oxtcmir.ato the Jews, but to pro-
sorvu then. In order to bo able to bring up ay old sterilization plan,

I had to renind Hisrlor of what So had told .su in tto y ear I9tl, when
ho was developing his sterilization plans. That is why I furthermore
adapted cys^lf to his oontolity, .and his w.y of thinking, by saying
that that could only b-_ dono if they wore rendered unable to propagate.-
In that way, I protended that 1 shared Hitler's worry that the Jura
would bo in a position to ur.dangor Go many if they .are not sterilized.

If I say then — and I have boon asked about tiw significance of that
sontorco — that it was ianatorial whotlxer tho people in question bo-
coce awaro of having be r. sterilized cr not. I did so in ord.-r to allay
tho suspicions Hinder nust have felt as a result of ny letter of
'torch I9hl* wharo I said that sterilization cannot be carried out with¬
out being noticed. I said' that nor those nisgivir^s were not longer
worth;.* of discussion, because knowledge of tte externination of th_

Jons had already penetrated into too largo a circle. In tho last para¬
graph, I oneo nore enphasiso that tho labor r-ter ill would have -c b_

75 a


Ili Kay- 3-5—-~loy (Int, ?. clur'
Court llo. I.


preserved, and I wanted to enphasiso this print ns strongly ns possible.
I Iso mentioned that Raichloiter Bouhlcr would bo Vole to plnco our
physicians -ni other personnel nc-ds fer this iork, because Hinrlcr
niiht hnvu objected that wc didn't hav ^nou-b physicians for tho exec¬
ution of that work. I'y Inst rcrark to tho effect that v,o ourselves
would be able to cot tho apparatus necessary was to give BouJiicr tho op¬
portunity to delay getting the X-ray apparatus.

Fron tho Document 206, exhibit 16. in Documnt Book 6, it can
bo soon that the first report about tho sterilization experii*:nts had
been sent on tho 29th of April Ifbh.

DR. P30BSCH?2»K": "r. Frosident, the docun-nt to vhich tho do-
fondant is now referring to, Docun.nt 208 can be found in tho English
Document Book Volmo 6, pauu U3»

A (contimed) Orx. year and a half had passed until oven a
report was ready to be r.adc. I personally don't knew mything about
the further development of any matter, but I can certainly conclude on
this very late d.to that It w-s possible fer Dcuhler to delay tho be¬
ginning of those experiments to a groat extent.

TH" ?HvS!DE:rrt Before going into discussion of this othjr
letter, the Tribunal will bo in xvcoss.

(Th^roupon a rcooss n*s taken.)


7525


Hi '',ny h7-*:-ATD-8-l-Cross (Ini. von Schon)
Court So. 1


~-Z KkPSKAL: Tho Tribunal is a^ain in session.

THU sSESIDTST: Counsel my proceed.

fs re. rcsscs&rai:

1 Witness, before the rccoss you had concluled 'discussing
Document No. 205 and yew were dealing with Document So-206j and you
had emphasised that tho erqxirfrfcnts, which Kero apparently performed
by Dr. Schumann without ycxir krxwlod^cj, after one and a half years cane
to a nopative result,

A I should like to correct an error - not 205. I had roforred
briefly to Docurv nt !'o-203 which is Exhibit 166. I said that as far ns
I can ju %o now Rouhlcr had succoedod in delayin' the bo .innin;. of tho
experiments by arran in- that tho x-ray rachinos wore delivered late,
bocauso this time ras a year on' a half later. Put, : r^oclf had
nothin- noro to ’o -.ith these thin s from that movant on. Consequently
the answor letter to linolcr, which was ’T-206, did not cone to ny
attention. Exhibit I I, on por 0 11 of the Document Book VI. This letter
nho.ro that Kimlor accepted tho siren "workurs" an'* now I soo from
this docu xnt that icnl r s-mt a corbcn copy to Pohl. Thin .ocurunt
:r-206 also shows that HL .nl r wanted to j .rfom oxpcri.'.jnts first.

Thu3, tho delay which I had inter.od in caso Himl.r should -ivo up hi3
intention of oxt-rrlnatin tho Jews ha* b< successful, bocauso tho
execution of tho exocrine nts would have boon sansoloos if tho extermi¬
nation of tho Jaws had continued at tho sona tine. To ’my I an convinced
that by p ,rfomin- thoso exporlrvinta hundreds ,6f thousan la, if rot noro,
Jcr.rs wire saved. This lottar also shows that Hinaler in tho last analysis
considered rvj rcrcly a riddle nan batuoon himself and Douhl r because
he says, "I would be grateful to ftAchuleitcr Mahler if he would place
physicians at ny disposal. 1 naV-r .*y successor Blankcnburv was able
also to carry on ’ ilayin tec ics ainnt Hitlvr I do not know. Do curvet
id -206, Exhibit 165, Occur, ur.t Cook ’I, pap.o 1*2 in th hvlish, shows
that ir. this latter tc -axtal.r ho ha * a Toed to stablish contact >rith
tu, ; Chief of tv ..in Office for Concentration C-raps. That all .-3 on.


7526


li; "ay Ii7-J-ArD-c-2-Gross (Inf. vcr. Schon)

Court !Io. 1

to conclude that he also attempted tc lolay th_- natter, but I didn't know
whs. rsssi-n-xnt Bouplar had ‘4von hia until these letters woro sub¬
mitted hero during the trial. I had no idea of their existence and later
7 never asked Bouhler what happened in this ratter and -whether ho made
ary doctors or one ’octor available. I can a. rely aay fron hearsay that
Dr. Schumann was rr lo available, but if this was dona by Bouhler then
Bouhler certainly ur-red Dr. Schunann to lake as mch tino as possible
with the exjvrirx>ntsi ’row I can rofer a;ain to Document :&-20P, Exhibit
166 , pago 1,3 of th. .-:r.;li3h 3ocir»ont Hook VIi This last letter, vhich
was submittod by Prosecution in this connection, indicates clearly
that the delay which at least X intcn*od> ovon if ccnpljto success was
impossible, did occur, bob-use tv lottvr vas written only one and ono
half years later. T don't krwr rh-t ffchunann's work was that is
mentioned hero. I Jon*t know about it. That Blankcnbur" in this lottor
asserted that H i m lor ha ' ashed ao to oontinuo Schurannts work is not
truoi Guch a roquedt as seo: o to bo rwntioned in thin lottor was never
expressed to io by Himlor. olankoribur- apparently concluded from the
lottor - ’D-206, Exhibit l61i - that Binalor was asking ouch a request.
That is, however, wrorv , because in this letter Himlor snys that ho
himself is interested in havin' tho exports nts carrlod out. Tho
request to rviko tho -'actors available to hin prov-.s that Hi nlor himself
wanted to arrongo for ar.- cany out thoso experiments. Tho letter which
I just mentioned, l*)- 206 , exhibit 166, on yv;o lx 3 in the Ik Ush
Document Book ’/I, proves finally that in practice the procedure
sumootol was a .rf.vctly -oo * jthod.

Cl "fitness, e have finished, tho discussion of thoso letters which
tho Froaocution submitted to provo your collaboration in tho Pro ran for
the TbcV rr dilation of the Jews. You have explained everythin'; to tho
Court, I need not r p at. I should re roly like to express ny personal
opirdon an’, a-,!: vheth r it is true, and uheth r you ft :dt, that
actufdly y/>i wor - actin' with a banana int_r.tion an fron stupi-'ity
i t yourself h-, involves; in a matt r~ dch you li-' no., u. torstan-. 13
that true?


7527


lU 2ta7 li7- , -.«TI>-f-3-Cros3 (int.- von Schon)

Court No. 1

A Yes, that is true.*

Q Vow, *lr. Brack, the ruoosof two doctors mentioned in theso
letters which were the subject of discussion at your interrogation -
ono is Dr. Schumann, who has been mentioned repeatedly, and the other
la Dr. Eborl. In the ccurae of this trial the Prosecution has
repeatedly jxpressed the suspicion that Schumann had sono connection
Tdth the T-k Euthanasia ! rograr. or >articipitod in the extorndnation
of the Jews. Can yew out to briofly -iva ths Court yewr personal
knowlodgo about those tetters?

A nr. Schumann ias the head of a Euthanasia Instituto an 1 in
port also acted as nn psychiatric oXpert. I say Schurann the last time
in tho Rescue work in the East whore iio wasin charge of a nodical post.

As far as I recall, after that ho loft tho service of tho Euthanasia
organisation and rosunod his privnto practice. hcn and whoro ho was
assigned to the sterilization experiments I do not know. But, I mist
assure that Bouhlor did that hlnsolf with th; intention, howovor, of
delaying tho storilization oxporiaonts, since Schumann was -v.rsonally
lenovm to him. I qysolf had nothin-, to do with this appoint.lent. It was
long after ny tine. Dr, ^bcrl was also know to no from T-Uj of his
participation in tho Hj-13 Irivo I Invrr nothing. Of his activity in an
oxtornination canp I heard about in 19)*3 once or twice through third
parties. Ho al30, when tho iithanasia pro-ron was stopped, loft tho
organisation of T—i», I bell ova, bocauso I nover sin hin again.'

q Now, witrvoss, I cooo back to tho affidavit U26, Exhibit 160,
English Docuojnt Book 1U, page 10, anti it is No. 15 that interests
no at this point, I shall quotoT

"Anon*; tho doctors who assisted in tho Jewish extermination program.,
woro Eborlc and Schumann. Schurann performed nodical exporirnonts on
priaorers in Auschwitz. It would hr.vo boon Impossible for those ran to
participate in such things without th.« personal knovlodgo and consent
of Karl Brandt. Tho order to sand those r.en to tl>; East ccul'l have boon
Ivon only by airrlor to Brandt, possibly throurh ’ caihlor. 1 '


Ik Hay li7-r4-nTD-8-i*-Orasa (Ir.t. vcr. Schon)
Court No. 1


But it aays there very definitely that you had knowledge about
this, that Schurann pcrforrad nedical experiments on prisoncrsiln
Auschwitz and also that thoso experiments could not have taken place
without the defendant Dr. Cnrl-3rcjv't kr.o>.-irv: about it. This dOvis
not a^reo :dth ycur testinorfc* cc far. hr.t can ycxitdl us about that?


7529


lii I '-v'--——-9-1-Harrc* (ir.t. 7or. Schcn)

Court Bo. I.

A Tho inclusion of this paragraph in the affidavit w~.s not
done by ao, but hy tho person who 'row up th: affidavit. I rs told
that paragraph 15, just like paragraph 12, case fron no. At first, I
refused to sign it but I was told that that was -oroly a logical c<r.-
elusion fron all tha things that I h-d said buferc. As I have just
said, I told then that I had herrd fron a third party that Eborlo had
participated in tho ozternination of tho Jews. I did not nantion tho
none of Dr. Schminn in connection with tho oxtornination of t!*o Jow3
because I know nothing about it. TThcn tho affidavit was given to no,

I saw in nunbor 15 that Schucann was nontioned in this connection. I
therefore deaondod that tho sontcr.cu bo added that Schurvann had not car¬
ried out "sterilisation oxjxrinonts", and thon I changed tho expression
to "nodical exporinonts". And it ms tho sar» T.lth tho .nttor cf
Brandt's kiKWlodgo. I objected to this forr.ulotion because tho fact
quite unknown to ro, 'nd tho interrogator said "was impossible",
would bo changed to "it would have been impossible", to indicate that it
was Boroly r. deduction.

Q Just a cinute, witness. In tho original .affidavit which was
given to you for your signature did it s-y "it was In possible for those
con to participate in such things without tho knorlodgo cf Brandt"?

A I can't say that with aosoluto cort inty, but I do bolicvo I
can rcuorbor it.

Q I'n asking you, witnoss, because you said "was" was cliangod
to "would have boor."?

A Yes, that's what I re .urbcr, but 1 can't say for certain. I
did not want to sirn this vrrorr sentence, but 3 was told again -nd r._ain
that this was only a deduction, end if this deduction, which rarely
reproduces your opinion is net true, it is quite possible for Brandt
to correct it. I was in a condition at that tioo which id not allcw
r *° to realize that I was in no way obligator? to accept e doduction cf
etter pocplc as own deduction, and that is how it c.ano boot that I
signed 715.


75>0


lii ' ~j-~ ^-9-2—rrorr (Int. 7cn Schcn)

Court Ho, I,

Q And then at tho end it reads, "possibly through Bouhlor".

Did you put that in?

A Ye3, bee-iuse I did not know the relationship between Kin Her
md Brandt, wh^le I Sene/, through tix. euthanasia assignment, how Bouhlor
and Brandt worked together.

Q Now, witness, in #16, and this brings sc to the end cf this
affidavit, there is a sontenco, "Hinder donarded that a n?no of a
doctor be given hin. Schumann, as f*r as I can recall, gave no and
Bouhler a report on his experiments." Is that true?

A That does net really correspond to tho facts. That vas what
the interrogator told =e - that 1 ! idler aaSajd for a specialist doctor.

I was not able to check the correctness of this statement and assumed
that it was correct. Tho report which is nsntioned in 016 was not tho
19Ua report, which is oontioned in Docuaont No. 208. It refers to a
vague rocolloction of nine of information fron Schumann that he hinsolf
had som knowledge of X-ray .antters airf had oarlior carriod out experi¬
ments in it. Tho report which he govo in 191^ I loaned about only
hero,

Q Then, I havo finishod the discussion of tho charge of ster¬
ilization. Do you have anything more to say on this subjoct?

A I can only say that J bolievo that in ay testimony so far I
havo explained that I never had any intention of exterminating tho
Jewish people, but attempted to achieve the contrary, to protoct the
Jows and save then fron a terrible fate. That I attempted so nothing
that was far boyond ay power, ay position, =y ability, I must admit is
true. But since, in all my life, I have always been helpful toward
and never had any hatred of Jews, I can't inagino why I should have be¬
come a champion of tho oxtoraination of tho Jews.

Q Aro you finishod? IS. Fesidont, I should like to make one
brief remark concerning sterilization. I have endeavored to have tho
associates of the defendant Brack concerned with this subject found, lfcr
offerts and the efforts of the prosecution, as far as I an inTomcd,

7531


Hi !ay-v- H£-3-Harrow (Int. 7cn Schoa)

Court !Io. I t

have been unsuccessful. For tret reason, I rust unfortunately depend
on the testimony of the defendant Brack alone in this connection. I
as convinced that if I had succeeded in finding one of the nun who are
mentioned, as a witness, tho Court would hear a confirmation of Brack's
statement. I conclude my evidence in r- and to sterilization experi¬
ments and near I turn to thj charge that “rack collaborated in cuthanash
for as a preliminary step toward :onocide. .iitnoss, you Imotv that on
the basis of the testimony of the witness ifennc-cke, tic prosecution
attempts to bring you into connection with tho superficial - almost too
weak a word - examination of political prisoners, Jewish prisoners,
prisoners in preventive custody, ir. tho concentration camps. '.That do
you have to say to this charge Gf tho prosecution?

A True, tho prosecution called euthanasia a preliminary stop
toward genocide. Considering thj documents and tho witnesses available
to tha prosecution, I can understand such an assumption on tho port of
a rofrosentativu of the United States. Tho socrocy which surrounded
Hitlor'o docroe of tho 1st of Soptcmbcr, 1939, -and the elimination of
political opponents, prisoners of war, noch-rs of othor nations, and
finally, tho murder of millions of Jews could and had to perhaps givo
tho prosocution tho impression tint tl» O overa*;nt of Gcrr.'ny, from
tho beginning of tho war, had tho intention nf making tin euthanasia
arrangemont an instrurent to b_ used against all real or iro-inary
onosiius of Gcrer.ny, within tho framework of .an ostensible euthanasia
program. This assumption, however, is definitely mistaken — that
euthanasia, in tho hour of it3 -irlh, had Lx-un intended as such a
method, or that the thought could have oven arisen that, for reasons
of expediency, the whole Gercrn people rcra to be fre<-d from t'a so»cailed
"useless eaters" and thun, in tn* future course of events, enc aios of
Germany would be extorairatad under the pretext of euthanasia. when
euthanasia was introduced, ro welcomed it, becaus. it was based on tho
ethical principle of sympathy and had humane considerations in its
favor, of the same sort that the opponents of euthanasia claim for 'thi.ir


7532


lii lfay-*'- S-9-ft-Karrow (Ir.t. Von Schon)

Court Ko. I.

own ideas. I aitoit that thsre were imperfections in its execution,
but that does net change the decency of the original idea, as Eouhlor
and Brandt and I nysalf mdorstood it.

Q Witness, we know from tha case so far that, in the 0010 * 3 %! of
tijno, euthanasia installations isoro used for this Action lh-?-13 end
everything that followed. Do you consider it possible that Hinnlor,
free your kncwiodgo of things today, might lv-.vu gotten such idc23 from
sone words which Hitler dropped in conversation and fron these ideas
created tho Action lli-F-13? Is it possible that non like Hi-TiJor,
knowing that those sterilization oxpcrinjnts would bo unsuccessful -
tho so experiments that wo wore just speaking about - that he, in ap¬
plying outhanasin, with ttosc coons and methods saw a rwro useful tool
than tho ueoloaa sterilization oxporiments?


7533


II; liaj- (Int. Vc n Schor.)

Court Ko. I.

A As I judge Hicaler today I consider that possible.

Q Then wuld that not load us to the conclusion that KiixOur
cccr.itted the eri c against huaanity since h. took the idea of
euthanasia about which ore ".i^iit have fliffofv.it opinions on tho ideol¬
ogical point of view, distorted it for re aeons of hatred or bigotry,
and used it for t'.ic lairdor of Jaws?

A Yes, that is doubtless pns3iblc, because tho idea of
euthanasia was nis-used by tho coa s is oi on f -.11 cf theso criros. What
w-.s dono hero ins nothing tc do vith out hams la as a benefit to tto
Person who is living a life inworthy of living. I don't want to say
a groat doal ho re abcut tho othiccl basis of euthanasia, but by vay of
Introduction to this subject, I should like to say that ny whole attit¬
ude was based on religious up-bringing. Only ry holpfulnoss toward
overyono and ospoc Laily towards tho sick _iado no an advocate of tho
idea of euthanasia.

Q Kcw, witness, I asked yev rt tho beginning to spoak about
Monnecko's tootiircty*. leu thought it right to give briefly your othicol
attitude toward cuthoanstaj bar, hew about Ibnnocko'n testimony?

A According to th. docurcnts it is true that in l?ljl, accord¬
ing to 1151 FS, Exhibit till, th- Dociuent Book 16, page Hi of tho
Gorman, 12 in tho English, it rtrs on the 12th cf Koveribor l?hl that
Hicnlur sunt radical cccrdssions to tho concentration canp to soicct
tiio prisonors. I can say with a door conscience that up to this trial
I had hoard nothing of tho order cf Kir. lor. Tho filo note liiF 3.3 was
completely — foreign tc to r.s a cc;.co.-t, up to this trial. I cannot
recall that I over hoard ttese nu.fx.rs lii and 13, or road then in this
connection, but if that should havo boor, the ease then I certainly
didn't think .anything about it, but road it over just like .any other
file note that one gets when one gets thousands f letters a day.

"hose file notes were always copied autoaatically from the incoming to
the outgoing letter. But oy .ad_lt : .ir. ; this possibility I do not naan
to inply that I have even tho slightest recollection -f this 1M 13,


753 L


XL J'ay-L-::3-iC-2-:: lev (Int. Y*\\ Schon)
Ciurt Kc. I.


but I can say very definitely that up to tlx beginning uf this trinl I
did not knc*r fchet these nuBbcrc indicated any particular action and
certainly not tiiis particular one. If I led known the nature of the
project which Has concerned _u.adcr this sign, 11* F 13, net .nly would
I have not consciously participated in such a project, but I would
have rescind any possibility of supporting such a project in any form.

Q Her, witness, what rj the situ-ui'n?

A Tho witness Hielscter, on the 16th of April 15L7, said that
the prisoners in concontra-i.n camps, a s. 11 nuntocr of rrhoja I becaao
acquainted with nde a tcrrlKLc i.jrcc: ion. !.’o said that :»c3t of then
wuro spiritual wrecks. He said that tho majority of thou rouainod cick
for tho rest of thoir lives, that thoir umtnlity and I night say vital¬
ity, were broken. This c?ndlti-n of the erioonora uight havo boon
known to Hie.-lor fror. roports of tho concentration conpe. To what ox-
tont Hiolsch.r'e \ssertion is correct that Hirsalor expressly through
his system broko tho spirit and health cf r.c3t cf those prisoners I
cannot judge. In this connection I should like to recall -the conversa¬
tion which 1 had with Hirrlor in January of 191*1. I also saw flaws
then whon ho spoke cf his intentions of st«.ri: the Jews. I had

certain doubt3 thon /bother tho iuprorsicn I had had of Hianlor up to
that tine was quite correct, but thoso thoughts wore sr.rohow dissipatod
because I hoard nothing r»ro about it, .and I thought Hinalcr hacl given
up his intentions against tho Jews. I considered it as a confirriatlon
of this opinion of nine th-t Hinlor Jnd bccorw n-.rc humne that in tho
suarwr of 19L1 I «•*= tcld by Bcuhlcr that Hirrlor intended to liavo the
most seriously ill persons in tho concentration cx-apc examined for their
physical and aontol conditi n. Hiaclnr askod Bcuhler to jive hlA
neutral doctors, since u did not have onourh confidence in tho . bility
cf the caap doctors. Bouhlcr asked =o to jot in touch with tho T-L and
inquire, or ratter ask that experienced psychiatrists bo assigned to

ax-uina tte prisoners in the concentration camps. I did sc. Whothcr I

•

passed t:ie request on to I.'ietzscho .ana Heyde, I really can't say.


7535


lii Ua7-y-iB-iO-3-}feloy (Lit. Von Sc non)

Court bo. I.

Q .'itncss, you Jus . said seething ratixc incidental when
speaking of the personality cf Hitler, you saiifl ,-ou \a* tte impression
ttet H --- er becorerorc hursno a^ain in t* sucaer of IfLl, that
Bo-ohlor said to you that te r: lor hac asxcd hfzi, i uhler, t acid electors
to the concentration car.ps to oxmio the per jL e hen Hi- lcc a/ i.as
described) that right pive the luprccii n that ;yc •. didn't thin; this
thine is very important it the txmc’ t, but it a oe s to no that that
ms a very important assipwent, a *. iry irportt nt request that Hlnalcn
• av <- to Bouhlor. Didn't ;-ou think 'i\ " tlw tfci:np *06 as important then
as it ray appear today?

A At tlxj tire I thei !r; a request rate quite a scoondary
letter. I ';avo to co-jo beck . ir want I s.-id day b-fnro yostordry.

I was von.urkod in thj Cha- cc* . ry _f t:»o Fuoh.-4'r. What work I did
for thu euthanasia organic ';i n war roally only o. n t.a side, and at
this tie in 191*1 was lin'.c< uoro?y to .v.cair.;; *r.» inutructicn3 from
3Cuhlor, and tho question* roiuosts ef T-l». Diurii* tfeat tire J
had nuch i. ro work nt Vjr Chancellory cf tho Fuom^r. I action this
asnignnont -uroly boc .uno th.s nado re think that i'i^r.Jer hnd seno
good intent!jn here, c nscquontly I didn't hnvo any \Ury exact recol¬
lection to when I farced it on, to ono of tho non in flicrgarton Stras.-o
U, and I don't infer rhat bcc-;» cf this nssiennont. I*t Is possible
that the result *jf th.no oxroinations \na ivon to T -U, a id tlion oithor
to tho Inspoctojr.t.; cf the Concentration Caiape cr to "n/ploi', but “t. tho
tir.o I was n t ablo to caunt on tho possibility th-t :! j-a‘l«-r, on tho
basis f t'- sc results, intended to oxUnimto prisonarc, whom, ac¬
cording U ry feeling at the tie Ijo ;as having oxardnud for meuano
conci-Orations. I could net assure tint.

Q lou accepted this assigns.nt fren Souhler lu frh; fV?3ew>rk
■■f all thj other asslgnoents ycu were given at tho tin,; you Wire glad
that 'licr lor wanted to give a psychiatric c-xscinaticn to fcbero po'r
people, but that y?u had no reason to think that this result night bo
usad for such an action as the ritness Ifcnnccko described, is that true?

A Yes.


7536


i- H y -if-OJG-11—l-!6»chen (vcn Sheen)
Ccurt He. 1


Q Mew, witness, when you possed this assigna-nt on ycu know that
it wculd be dcflt vith by Ticrgartenst rr s s c 4; did the personality of
the Doctors werking at Ticrsartwnstrrsse 4 cff.r ycu rny certainty that
these Dcctors rculd carry cut thw nssijroont fren a purely nodical
pcint of view?

A Neither free Chief Escort Pref. Hoyde ncr Chief Export Nietzsche
was I sv-r able tc obsorvo that thure was ever any inhuann cr brutal
treatoont, but in addition, cs far as a lyaaan can judge, I hr/' the
impression that these two wero outstanding Doctors. There wero many

other good psychiatrists who were called on to help thin cut in their
work. 1 thought that this assignment was in the bert hends.

Q Ken did ycu know that rTter this assignment was passed cn in the
Burner :f 1941 there was any influence at werk, uhethor frem Hi.nl cr, tho
Inspectorate cf the Concentration Carps cr anyone els*., in dictating a
criminal intent ultir- toly; lid veu knew that?

A All of a sudden 1 did not have the ticc tc take any interest in
tho erganizrticn at liorrrrtonstrassc 4. At the end cf 1939 or beginning
cf 1940, by the order of Rvichsloitcr Bcuhlcr, 1 tcck an interest in the
organization of this nor .matter, but lrtcr that stepped. 1 hardly ever
wont tc TiirgJ rtonstraaso 4 syadf • The office was under ochnc at first
and lctvr under .Jlers end it worked quit* independently. own office
wqo cn Vesatrasse rrv’ tho Euthanasia crfice was ct li.rgcrtonctrroso 4*

I n.*3 therefore unable tc oba .rvu the relations cf liergcrtonstr ssc 4
tc ether ,e*ici».s and, cf course, I woo unable to ebs^rvo whether in
the toccntino »dthcut ay kr.crltdgc or Bcuhlcr* c knowledge, other influ¬
ences had assorted these elves there. 1 can only assuac that tc c>; I

consider it cuito possible, however, that cn the basis c! thu events,

*

in tho spring cr succor cf 1941, >hat Couhlcr asked fer the oxrwsiv ti. ns,
closer ccnnecticns iwvolcpcd between Tiergartenstrasss 4 and the Inspector
cf the Ccr.centrrticn damps cr sc-au, olh r rg.ncit.r-, cf which I knew nc-
tiiir.g a;*: -h t suggestions cane directly fre:- there tc Tior^artenstrasso
4 t: hevc new _xenin.atic.as carried out in the ccnccntr.aticna ca.Tps,
widch we.1:1 then f-11 under the «cticn 14-F-13.


7537


14 3fty-.fOJG-U-«fcch=r. (von Shcn)
Court He. 1


Q /fitness, let us £c back fer ? y«rr fer r mcmcnt. Witness Hen-
necks allowed th«t in th- spring ^r sutler, net cf 1941, but of 1940,
he received instructions Cre a Nietzsche, Professor Hoydo cr yourself to
visit the concentration carats and tc fill cut questionnaires there
about priacr.ers, who were selected by the c nap physicians; cr.n ycu ro~
cnnb_r this testimony?

A Yea, but I resossbur that in the Cross Examination, Aianc eke changed
this stetooent end he seid he could not ary with certainty tlsr.t he talked *
to rse ’t ril ct.ut his rerk in the ccncentraticn craps, jicnucckc’s
as sort! on thrt with the people whoa he mentioned he visited the concen¬
tration cr-T>s in 1940, it secos tc no, is doubtless an error in hin
ncaory. In the spring cf 1940, Zuthan: si' was just boginni.v in the
Euthanr.si? Institute: , the B-Inotitutcs, etc., and at th t tlu. thoro

wr.s definitely rot enough time tc send Doctors to concentration crops cn
special r;, 3-jiconts. I can only •arune that the .dtness .lonnccko con¬
fuse r 1940 with 1941 hero. It in pcssihic, that he parti¬

cipated in this first ox-nir.-.ticn --ho wh.lv physical and mental
oxroimticn cf the ccniiti. f the pett sat* in conce itrati n cn ps,
which was ordered by Bcuhler. These sere perfectly legitimate oxAiin-
r.tions, is chc:.n by the roues cf the ether Doctors when Mornccko
.zonticned, Dr. FnlkoLhauacr, Dr. StoLzxaoyor and Dr. Hiat zb oho. These
ore all noricuc ddor psychiatrists, who would certainly never h.-va

permitted thcasolves tc t- used for ny non-acdicnl action Ter : jo3itical
natives.

Q hit.: css, the court Jcc3 net knew Fdkttlhnuacr, Stui/vnoyer end
Nietzsche and 1 dc net knew thee either, sc thr.t 1 could net judge. .o
arc depcndii cn yettr judgment, but 1 csk ycu aro these men. Dr. Frli.el-
hr.uscr. Dr. SUir.r.ey_r end Dr. dotssche, -there they a« U^o
F f rjinnu oiler?

A • Ol, in particular th-y -vre .1 .r tl;n Dr. Pfennaudlcr, I
think they were all cl lor. In any esc, they sc^cd tc ac tc be nature,
worthy, highly decent human beings. I cannot o.ve my ether i .pressicn
bucru c die-* orde •* very cut—standi.'.: i prcssicn.

Q I -ms chcut r.sk ycu whether these, ...n ucro squall: cccnt ir.


7533


14 .L- v v-.i-0oG-il-3-Iioth,-_n (von Shcn)
Cc-urt Mo. 1


their thinking, tc «y ncthine >f their action, at least ca Dr. Pfenn-
nuciler aha. ed hires elf tc think r.^re?

« Doubtless, yes.

Q Kev, I have another question; Witness licnnecka said th:.t in 1941
ha received a suarxns tc select Jc*.s arr'. foreigners cr lly frciii Heydo
-nd Kiotzscho end, ec frr as he could rasarber, from you, but c.s frr ns
ycu were concerned, ho later admitted he c-uld net raaenb^r that de¬
finitely; whet do ycu scy r.bcut this? This was 3941, "hen could t’da
assigna-nt hrve bee:* given?

A Acccrdinj tc his cun letters, which were sub.:.', t ted by the Ircsc-
cuticn, this ctsijnnent cast Jiav. boon in October c: . r of 1941.

At this ti-no ltoydo was net verkinr at Ticr;r.rtcnntrraso 4 cnyuero. Ho
left in ..u uot cr July cT 1941, I don't knew if it was July cr August,

To this extent it is definitely an error r.f ucauiry on Uonncckc'n part,
acrocver, I ccnsidcr it entirely isrpcsaiblc that Koydu, with all Ids
docont personality, wculd have given sue; an rsoicincnt and this scons
txaio cf the eld and serious Professor Nietzsche.

Q And did ycu yourself in Kevinber er t any ether tine in 1941
give Ho,inockc such an r.ssigmont to oesnino prisoners in concentration
conp; in c superficial way ignoring the i-e-'icnl point of view ro
ilcnnock assorts?

A I xaxst deny that emphatically. 1 did not give Uunnocko nuch
an os3i ^nreent and I nev^r talked to hin r.bcut such an aaaic-nment. Tliat
wculd have been against ay whole rxcral attitude. I b«.lievo 1 hrvo al¬
ready proved hew intensely I werked for yerrs against the institution
cf concentration ccops. 1 would have had tc be as tw :-facc-i no Hinder
presumably was because this assiyxn-.nt was U be carri -d cuS in an
irresponsible way, as 'axnocku said and as the letters to his wife in¬
dicate. I wculd net Irvu been * U li:.q tc participate in that.

1 witness, in this ccnnccticn I coo interested in another statement
cf I&nn©eke, which is in contradiction tc wh:.t you just said. The Witness
Lfennecko said that ycu had objected b_cause’ ir. his judgment f the


7539


U n-4-Jfechan (vcn Sbcn)

Ccurtr lie# 1

questienr. ires; ho tcck tee strict nr. attitude, dc ycu raseAer that?

A Yc3.

Q 'Ant ic ycu have tc say about thrt?

/. I deny this tee, according tc contents ct least it is untrue end
possibly th feet that 1 discussed such c thine with hia t 11 is untrue.
I m net e Doctor end I could not criticise an expert in nr.y ' ey ern-
ccrnin.; his ocdic'l work en his questionnaires concerning Euthanasia.

But, I adait the possibility that t the requests cf i-refossors i'oydc
-ad Nietzsche, I asked Connect in aoao ether connection to bo ixro
careful, th't is in f ini nc cut the questionnaires in his trips to tho
dental institutes, beca«isc if the qu.sticnr.airca were not flUod cut
carefully cncu.jh, *s the hitness . frucvaiollor testified h-rc vihon ho
saw a questionnaire net cc^ilotelj filled cut, then the psychritri’t
docs net hevo the onto rl id. fer Ju^rinc the ease and then the vsrk has
boccno senseless and thero aro no results. Sinco .lar.nocko, as his
letters indicate, res striving tc establish records, thero is tho
possibility ttvt ho worked a little hratily, but I cennct remomber that
I telkcd tc Ucnnocko at all en such r. subject.


Hi iy U7-C4-AE-12~l~C do!: (Int.von Schor.)
Court So, 1


O “Titno 53 , then hew ;o you explain this testimony of tho witness
l-'onnccke, the assertion .'--jf-'-or i ;us in the sunner of 19iiO-19Ul,
and whither it rne because of you iiotzschj or Koydo that he ;ot an
ossifinosnt to carry out oticn ll—F-13?

A /hen •'ennecke appeared haro on tho witness a tan 1 ho *ns
in a very bad or unfortunate s'-tu-.tion. Re had been condcnnod to
death by another Court. Therefore, this testimony to the extent that
it does not corrospon 1 . to tho truth, I can explain only froa an
effort in hia difficult situation to shift the responsibility fron
hdnnolf to others, in this case to no, so that he could, ro 'uca his
01 m responsibility nn’ perhaps obtain clocuncy. It is quite oossiblo
that Yonnecka received au'. test ions for v'vit ho lid fren 1 , ndocrat
Borne tat an* his associates. I havo boon able to loarn nw that tho
Kosso avont BemotAt ires obviously a ra ’icol advocoto of outhanasia
an* had a cirdo of such ra 'ical a ’vacates of euthanasia. I also
boliovo that '.onnockn through '■-racist -.res roeomondod to Hey '.0 or
aono one also as an expert.

0 T 01 noon that Yonnccko through a third porsen or pjrhaps on
liia o'iTi initiative had a very superficial an* peculiar aotivity without
orders fror. Hoy’.o or Kletxsche or you?

A Ho, ho it anot even ancoura-.od,

O How, >»r. Track, it has boon established that tho euthanasia
institutions, I rerx'-ubor tho unfortunate nano Bernbur , opjnod thoir
doors to these transports of invalids ao that these unfortunato people


ho were not sick could be {.assod there, a fact frou which every docent
hunar. bein' raiat turn a*ray in horror? Thon in your opinion how could
such a thin; happen?

A I learned that hero hirir. he trial. It is ccnpletoly


inexplicable to no. I kw nothin about it at the ti’ae. I can explain

it only by influ nco fro . outsit e, fron so., other source, on T-)i,

p'-rh-.pr. tho ins • ctorato of concentration canos, p. rhans "rnwito, perhaps

throu-h Lin r., . T-icl: •> puty for intal institutions, : don't krow.

7541


1’; !Iay U7-?5-.lTD^L2-2-Coofc (Int. von Tchoen)

Court Ik), 1

Bouhler, if he had any idea of it rrouid have icncdiately forbidden it
an*', so would I a

Q Witness, you have testifiod to your knowledge about the action
lli-7-13, you adnit that in tho~sumer of l?ltl through 3ouhlor you aero
authorized to pass on an cssi^nncnt to ?-U, to havo octors available
for psychiatric a xnn t n ations of prisoners, but you dory havin' anything
to do with action Ui-F-13, as tho witness .-tennecko described on tho
basis of th. order of 20 Kovoabor, 19fcl, is that correct?

A Yes.

DP. FHOISCKV.r.’Ki '.fr, Prosidont, th.n I havo finished the
charge of tho Prosecution ccr earning tho action lfi-F-13, and no.; I
caw to outir.nasia. Should I V;vin tint no.: or loos tho Court vish
to racoss?

THE PKESEEliT: Tho Tribunal iriil now bo in rocoss until 1:30.

(The Tribunal adjourns I for the noon recess)


75A2


14 —'7 47 -A— 13 - 1 —- Foster t?~Lr)
Court So. 1


AfTsC--^:; swisic-a

(Tr.- h,-rir.' r-oonv^n-d it 1330 . ours, 14 Jiiy 1947.)

-17. 7-.- AL: Tho Tribun 1 is -ciin in session.

77 1 i: Counsel azy proceed.

VIXTCil ERACX - i'eauaod
DEL-Cr ajkiaiULTIOi; (Continued)

3'/ DP.. F„ 4SCSttl.Ti (Counsel for th. DeTvjxJ-at lr ck ):

it.-.-cs, I rusdne yoa thr.t you -jv still under xth.


Q. ..itness, dealing with the fine! eh ptur >i outhnncaie, I
shill havu to sive you -n opportunity to -o^lnir. your iffidr.vlt 42o,
in thoEnglish Doeaxa' Book Voluac 14, 10, 'nd spunk 'bout it ..'it’i

ref r-r.c- to tbu point which denis with out tone ale. You h .vo * 1 reedy
mentioned the circunat ntxs under -rich you r. -7 tl-is afcr.taount, nd you
told no to out tho i'ct tint you considered il the ssertions by thtf


prosocutian r.u a oin? Justified, nd y.xa di.r.'t aff-r ny criticiao.
Aculd y xi pL-r.oc find out *.hur« the atdtoesonto thr.t you re vi! ( i, v n \»
dovir.t- froa tho otrtOD-r.to s '.eiv .,iven by you then?

A. I novur r f ■•..'r. sin i -r -r., tho ir.Urrv-torn
used th t ward . r t..v first tin.. 1 ' 2m - r I objoctud to

th t word, but, in off.ct, -rograa ennoot bo t- Iked of - wfc. n s iw~Jdne
about 5ro.yr^ 1 uncorat.' nd - project rhich it lLvitod by tkk. rtf
which is plmrwd ccrofully, -nd > :;_r, cucc-cs it expected t UiO -nd.

In order to -r iu the uxinimtion * little sicr, 1 ohril continue
to uso the .ord ■program", It bough the -Tessi^r. its.If is not corroct.

Tho pro&ocuticn r. th 10th of J.muiry 1947 arid tj t t:-is <ro ria


6


*~S c rried- :• . L . until ...-ril 1945. Urt is£ t

orrect. It w'^>'^30ed in Auyest -f 1941. Ire eut.m r.i oro rvn


'4-jring thit pcri.xl/fck tin. dc-.it only with .r.o<ir-ble -_r.v 1 to.

21

•thit happened • . i^i^ust 1941 w-.r not tho -Xecutior. if th aro r u,
x -r. is - sorted '// •ul. proa-cution, - uhic. 1 - hid s its i: J: r;-slc . tic
aird-r or --nsv nundreds ;d t- us'r.dfi I r. --.in s, ' _v.-x< _r

l' ins at a.rscns, d.fora~d chiicftvn r. - oi- suff-rin? f c i lo


U liiy 47 -^13-2- ?- roster (?.=L.r)

Ccurt i>o. 1

diaca»-s, -s Coo-ral T"ylor sale in his opening statement on 21 . ovembor
1916, page 1 of th- transcript - but it «a& r-th^r an ttwnot to
solve or oblcc \ Id. eh is as old -s the Id story of huaanity itself* \!hrt
happened .ftor the stoppage if tir.t jx-ogran in 1941 hr s nothing -t " ll
to do vjith the execution of cuthenesi.a, dth perhaps fe:. singular
exceptions.

C. itrwsa, the prosecution i.*s subedtt-d th. affidavit J -
certain Leuss-.r. This is prosecution docirs-nt nuabor 3S U?i, ;:hibit
367, English D.-rja^it Book Jio. 14, page 251; German document 3ook
VoliMt 14, part 3, page 170. Have y>u th t docus-nt bool: befir* >*ou?
Document Volume 14, > rt 3, p g« 251? In this docua-nt Doctor Lausscr
soys that the transports extondod Iroa 1940 to 1941, up until 1944.

Whftt have you to nay 'bout that?


7544


Court 1

May 14-*r-l4-l-HD-Grcss-Haamler,

A. In paragraph -2 of that document Dr. Leusser says
rad I quote: "My knowledge about the occurences in the
lunatic asylum at nnsbaoh during the war are based on
lnforc'-ti n, which I received In the first olace mostly
fr a Dr. Schuch, but also from Frau Dr. asan, one Dr.
Priosnann, who wt 6 working at the asylum, but was removed
on account of nla aomborshlo to the party, and fr.m the
nursin, eersonnel.“

In other words, Leusser does not spook fr.m his own
knowledge but Is s peakln- on the basis of knowledge he
received from third aartles. These thlr- parties are,
however, make entirely different statements. One of tho
nurc s, as well as «ea:. onu ichuch, places the time of tho
transfers up to the beginning of 1942. That Is not quite
correct In view of the clear period of time when Euthasnoln
etO; ad which can dearly be proved. It was nu^ust 1941.

I roalnd you hare of tho testimony of tho witnesses
Monnocko and Schmidt.

Q. Hr. President, with respect to the witness
Onnzor I may ref^r to Prosecution Document 3867-PS,

Exhibit 359, English Dooument Book 1-:, p-.;o 256. Gorman
Document 3ook 14, part 3, pa^e 176.

A. The statement with which we are c ncorned can
*oo f and m his last paragraph and I quote:

"I ostlm: te that In -'ll five transports of this
kind wore sent out from the Heil-uni Pflo 0 e ^nstnlt,
Ansbftch, between the years 1940 and the beginning of *
1942.“

G£. Now, would you please speak about NO-246.

«. During these transfers - I don't know tho wording
of the decree of tho 1 September 193^ which was issued by
hitler, which erron.-usly v-s -desisted as secret.


7505


Court 1

11 y 14—*—14— 2 -HD— Gross-Rammler.

<• Mr. President, the decree which is Just mentioned

4

'ey the witness can be found in Document 630P3, Exhibit 330,
-n llsh Document 3ock Volume 14, po^e 3, and German Document
Bo3k Volume 14, parti., page 1.

«. It says in my affidavit this decree entrusted
3cuhlor and Brandt with the responsibility of killing
poo lo who were not capable of life. This does not
correspond with the f^ct but it snye in the decree Dr.

Brandt and nolchalelter Bjuhler are ch r e., with the
res 'or.slbillty of enlar^ln^ the authority of oertr ln
Physicians to be desl 0 nated by name in such a manner that
.orson who, according to human Jud sent, arc lncurnblo con,
u ion must careful diagnosis of their condition of sickness,
bo accorded ^ mercy death."

4. Kow in your affidavit Para c raph 12 you also
dealt with the urpoeo of too so-called Euthanasia Pro¬
gram and here some of y^ur statements need also be
olucldatod.

In that connection I can only say that this
entire or -raoh, the same as p^ru^ra-ah 15 of my affidavit,
does not originate from me but was draftod by the
Interrogating officer. «t first I objected to that
pare ,rnph because I never really learned the true reasons
of Hiltcr. I also stated that when Euthanasia was
ordered and executed I did n.t represent tho opinion
that is c ntaln d lr. that p-r* raah. However, in view of
everything I h«ve realized since I actually hold the
lnt of view rt the time of my lnterro c atl-n that these
could have been the true motives which moved Hitler.

Thr.t is why I coul_ bo persuaded to si^ my none to that
para raah the contents ^f which don’t originate from me.

Th t refers to oara^ra fa 12 of my affidavit.

. • IbUo


Court 1

May 1 3-KJ- iroes-Raunior.

3. Till6 is to ba f^und in Document Volume 14 and it
Is -'•ra-rauh 12 of 3nck‘6 offliavit. I quote:

"litl^r's ultimate reason for tho establishment of
the Euthanasia Program m Germany was to eliminate thoso
c. lc c^nfino.’. to Insane asylums and similar Institutions
wiv. could no longer be of any use to the Heich. They
were considered useless enters and Hitler felt that by
oxt_rmin tin_ th sc a -called useless -ater6. It would
be possible to relieve z/.vc doctors, male an.’, female,
nurses, and other pors.nncl, hospital beds and other
facilities for uso of the .-*rmod Forces."

Th*»t Is the *-'arn raph?

A. Yes that Is correct. Daring tho Interrogations
I oir.- hnslzod that ,r. our or.rt nny oosltl.n, any attitude
as It Is stated here roGordln t useless oatera was actually
nevor taken. If, n the other hand, any such reasons of
expediency wore Introduced Into the debate by third parties
they were almost rigidly rejected. I have already pointed
out that I really need not n-vo to resort to draw any
such conclusions. I Just recognized then.

N w, witness, we need not revert to what tho
wltnu6G Lancers has 6ald hor^ because this really would
bo an r^unont wr.lch c»ul.. only be included In tho final
loa. 3ut Is It not true that If Hitler had had tho
Intention to designate these insane oc le as useless
cr.torc he w. Id have used this expression In some manner
tuwrr s Lryaners, too?

«. I assume with c.rtainty that s m ouch uxorccsion
w aid h-ve been used durin ne._-Otlr.ti ns with Lamnor3 If
cny such intor.tl ns hr existed at th: t time. I would
like to point oat, however, that It w uld hav- been utterly
senseless t merxorm Euthanasia for reasons of expediency

72*7


Court 1

May 1<4—A-14—r—H*W5ro 88—Racaler •

at a tine when there was a sufficient stock of nourishr.ent
and then to stoj Euthanasia nt time when the events of
tr.e war required stricter measures and when lack of nour¬
ishment come nb.ut - an-* it Is exactly In that year when
Euthanasia was stopped.

In that c .nnectlon A submit Breok Exhibit 3-1 into
evidence which will be Document Ho. 30 which is to be
f and In ay Document Book Ho. 2 on 9. This 16 the

affidavit of Dr. .niter acnultze who w'8 born 1 January
1894 in Horebraci, former .Ministerial Director In the
Bavarian Ministry of the Interior. This Is an affidavit
made on 11 April 19.7.

THE PAE3ID2KT: '*111 ou once a-re qIvo ne the exhibit
number that you assigned to that document?

DE. FROESCKMaHK: I offer that document, Mr. President
as Exhibit No. 34. This .ocumcnt bears the date of 11
April lSi? and was signed by Dr. ochultzc. It W's
certified by me In the proper manner. I shall only road
the following e. rt sentences from the - cuocnt. The
witness says I quote: "«t the end of 1939 or early In
1940 the former Bavarian Minister of the Interior an'.
Gr.uloiter «dolf J a ner received nr. official visit by the
rloichelelter 3\iuhlor.

"as the Chief i._ icai Of flc.r uf Bavaria I was asked
1 1 attend this discusser.. On thl6 occasion 3ouhler
officially Informed {tuner of n secret or .lnance of the
F.fehrer. Bouhlor showed Vainer the orl Inal document
which nad in t top left corner the swastika and the
name «5olf Hltl-~ Ir. old print 0 .

I o on reailn fr □ par- raph 3:

"3. I recall tee f llowln ; - details of tills discussion:

■«) 'S also discussed the s.tivce f r these measures


72.8


Court 1

May l4-A-l4-5-HD-Jroe8-nnscler.

and felt certain that this Fuehrer ordinance would be
-..-elo.'oed -s a measure dictated by purely ethical reasons
as ex? ain d by 3o:hler. The ^ve mentioned procedure
ensured tfl* t any misuse and human error vs eliminated.

On the strer. th of this discussion I was o nvinccd
:'n~ hal this conviction c nflraud oy Va..ner after B.uhlcrs
'.oparturo, that the intentions were entirely clean and
hi hly ethical."

■5) The expression “useless eaters" I never heard
oonti nod ’ey either Bouhler or Br-ck, nor h-'vo 1 heard
it elsewhere.

“oraok once naked -ie how it ml. ht be possible to
rc-eayloy the n-nies which would bo saved as u result of
the a; llooti;n of euthanasia for the benefit of curable
caaos of oontal deficiency. I was very pleased at this
question as it ,'rovod to me thrt it was intended to
utilize such a.noy for the bonoflt of tho sufferln..
oom.aur.lt/ and not for other ?ur:cses In tho National
buV.ot. However, I pointed out to 3raok at the tlco that
It was more import' nt In r.y ooinlon t • -rovlde more ’'odo
for To victims as T3 was rapidly Increasing to epidemic
roportl ns and r.e there were oxcepti mally few T3
cinat »rla lr. CX,rmany. n

n 7) Hod I possibly had any doubts In this matter,
Bouhler6 ers nallty w.uld hove reassured me that this
s-ur.d and Serious matter hn bc^n laced in >od and j;orper
h-nds, . ;r I nad known d uhler f.r u,my years as ah
exce..tl nrlly fine, hi hly Intellectual almost holy
person."

- shall ask the Tribunal to tnhe notice of the rest
of the document. Aitne63, w^uld you -lease continue with
the discussion of ur affidavit NO- 26 as far c9 you think
that you can raise any more objections that r-fer to


11 ; ?Ssy L7-.>*ATD—15-1-Cvorrcw (Int. Rarrlcr)
Court So. 1


A I would only shortly like to point tc the question of the Reich
^ O'! lit to . ?rcn the vary ba.innin I pointed out that this .nttor was
’ .alt with in tho Raich Ministry of the Interior '07 Dr. Linden ami that
I coul only ivo V017 inexact information about that attor. 'hot I can
say today is essentially the result of conferences bottroon defense
counsel an! persons Tho had knowledge about these natters, as -.'ell as
r^* own study of tho files in this trial. According to this result, tho
Roich Co.r.itto.. for tt Collection of fooj&e Sufferln. fron Hereditary
Diseases was not ore of tho tasks of the euthanasia pro ran.

1 ltn.'cs, this brJ.n.s yen to tho conclusion of your attitude
ro; nrrttnr th deviatin ' points in ycur affidavit.

*!r. Prcsifont, I think that it is expedient u '.vlsablo that,
at this nononfc, I sutrait to tho Fi ji Tribunal tho chart which, had boon
■rown by th. defendant Crack an' it refers to the organisation of
uthanasin. It feris c part of tho affidavit which Brack had rad 0 in
tho course of the ovi donee on tho art of the 'ofendarit Karl Brandt,
whon this otaturunt of Brack was undo on the 27th of January 191? and
I incorpcr'tod it i: orient book ft as D<v:ur».nt 26, on pajo 5. I

offer it an - rack Exhibit .'35, J havo lad charts safe for tl» benefit
of tla prosecution and for thb benefit of the Tribunal which, according
to their contents, ixactl • coir-jspond with the chart to bo found on the
■••all. I -ask you to use this chart Than fcilorin - th. rri ’-nco.

'itnoss, in th. course o." the .vi ’co.ce concernin' euthanasia wo can
bo nuch briefer than ve orir rin a l l y intended boa , on tho ono hand,
the witness Horhrich an! sninly, the .dtness Pfenrtaiellor, havo spoken
about the .lutails at groat lon'th. I think thit this would bo ig con-
pliance with tho wishes of tho Tribunal and that thcy would -’eslro us to
procio ’ in a lanr.er whore I would ask yen whothor you havo any additional
str.t Hunts to rake to the st-.t v.nts which w-.ro alroady nado by the
it noises, let us be os brief as possible in or v =r not to take up to^


mica tl-v of the Tribunal


7550


Hi ’fay li7-»-ciID-15-2-*irrcw (int. Z&rler)
Court ’io. 1


Witness, you are tiv? very -an trho, to; eth;r with Bouhler, and by
order of Pcuhler, fron tiw vary beginning., has boon active within
euthanasia* You are the nan who executed Doubler 1 s orders* Is it correct
that, in the course of tho yoor of 4.939 - and that was already stated
by the defendant 'ran it - r: kc tod applications arrived at ycur insti¬
tute <mnna tin” fron rarants >.ho naked that a n-arcy death should bo
ranted to th:ir deforced children through nodical intsrferonco? Is
that rir/ht?

A Yos, that is ccrroct,

Q Furthermore, is it correct that Hitler found out about that
through his Adjutant's offico?

A Yos,

T Sow, what do you knn/ about t!» further devclopjont of things
to tho oxtont as it ms not alron^* dr.rlfiod by Ffannruollrr or
Ho derich? I enphasizo new that we aro, at first, concerned »dth tho
roi<istration of tho dofomod children :.*hlch roally tho *ro-histcry to
euthanasia an it concorrMd insane pooplo,

A Conti had called a co raitto-j throu^ »hoa ho trl id to ascertain,
an^' that o.a I ha r 1 frer. oouhl. r by or ’or of Hitlor, how a basical
solution ecu] ’ bo arrivo’ at cor.comir.; them applications* This snail
cirdu or pcoplu ns called tho Reich Co.nitto.- for tho Ro'Astrotlon of
Pationts Sufforlnr Iron Jicoasoa Causa 4 . by ifaroditary or Pro Aoposltion.

Q You wore just 3i\yiiv- that Conti had rcc-.ivod thj or ‘or fron
ihtlor to call to’othor a co-Tittoo in cr'.or to brine about a basical
solution of that question* VAas that quite correct? War. it not rather
that, at tbo bo'A min', only tho known cases to bo conrldnr.-rl and,

is a result of the known casus, son; udical Ju Ipnant was to bo fox-aul?

DR. ’CCh'ALD: If the Tribunal plcaso, I iml 1 .ask Dr. Frcoscfraanr.
not to put a question in such a loadin'; Jay,

DR. FK>.'5SG^&N?‘* I an not conscious of bavin put a leadin',
question*

7551


Hi *Siy ii7-..-.;TT>-l5-3-iv5rrcTr (Int. Basalor)

Cc-art So. 1

TJ'S PR2SI0RWT* Counsel my proceed. The witness my explain.

TT DR. PHOESCS'JUfiij

A Mr. 3ouhlcr stated clearly that Conti had received the ordor to
soarch a basical solution to that problem. Those cases want to various
agencies and Hitler only, by accident, loomed about one or anothjr
case whenever the Adjutant's office got to know about it. Conti,
hovrovor, inforrod Me th?.t such applications arrivod at various offices
and, os a result, Conti received the order to search for sono oppor-
tunity to register all thoso cases in order to enable a nodical opinion
to bo nado.

Q Witrass, tho witnoss Pfcmrucllor and th. uitrass Hod-rich have
ropoatodly nontien. : th. na::a of Linden in that connection. This
Dr. Linden, as far as I can overlook tho natter, seons to havo played a
conaidorablo juirt altldn tho frarawork of euthanasia. It would bo
expedient for you to s-oak sououhat about Dr. Lindon and. his official
position because to appears in tho chart in the oryanization of
outhanasta as tho .. ich i'lonipotonMarj- for rental Institutions, ’ley I
point tho Tribunal's attention to tto bex which oan bo found on tho
loft hand sido of tho chart.

a This Dr. Linden m3 a : umber of the Health Depart ion t of tho
Roich "inistry of tho Interior which was headed by Conti. I only Ircw
hin in this plan, mntionirv hio striotly official capacity - namely the
Reich PIunipet jnti,ary for 1 Cental Institutions. In addition, Undon also
headed the R^ich Ccr.nitta© for tho Ro.-istration of Pati.ar.t3 with Sovoro
Diseases Caused by Horodltary or rro disposition. This, towovor, was no
state position; his state position ms the position of Roich Pi. nipo-
tontiary for fental Institutions an' as such ho was dram under ttto
block of Conti. Ho m 3 a physician, .accordixv: to ny recollaction, ho ms
oven a psychiatrist, hat his ;dical clitical ales wore, I cannot say.
At ary ra to, ho ha d had a consi I.jrabl j expenier.ee in nodical r. ‘rlni-
stratlor,. Before tovir.j cone to th-- ? inistry of Interior ho had already
bo-sn active ir. -i.-lcal r “inistratior.. at first, \.as subor iirate to


7552


lii !fey Irt^^TtWS-k-Sarrow (Int. gamier)
Court No, 1


Frick-and after 19la3 was subordinated to Hiraler. That his other fields
of work within the 'Inistry of th: Interior, except the Saleh Plenipo¬
tentiary for llental Institutions, I don't know. In th: courso of tho
development of tho porfortanoo of outhanasia, Linden took an incroasinrly
stronger influence in that execution. I personally knew nothing about
tho nodical problen. I ns only 3cuhlor's assistant. It was, however,
roassurln;- for no to know that the Reich "inistry of tho Interior had
collaborated in a task which conornod it to that extent. Of courso, I
didn't knew a nuBber of natters 'diich I could only fin-’ out on the basis
of tho documents which aro available to no. If Linden was only partici¬
pating in tho expert quostions and if ho wusonly participatin' in tho
orranrcwvinta of th: transfers, n connection botwoon his office and tho
office of Tior; irtoastrasso U has rosulto!. This was posaiblo bocauao
Bouhlor was in no way opposoi to his aspirations for indopondonco and
tho two officials ^ohno an-’ Allors '.rare officials of tho Rolch "inistry
of tho Interior, Thoco two officials have bo:n ontorod upon this chart
and can bo found undor tho squaro “Organisation for tho dr-ocution of
.,uthanaoli M — bor.jath that, 'Public Foundations for Institutional Caro -
Bohno and Allaro." In via* of tho arrant coo nts regardin'.; tho allocations
of bods considerin' the air situation. Linden, on his own initiative,
do to mine 1 thin or.: to whet institutions th:y wore to bo transferred.

This is s-nothin that Bouhl_-r orf-jinally directed, but it was th<m
takon over by Lir. dor..


t


14 May 47 —A-16—1—pkp— iiioy (Ranler)
Court No. 1


Q. Didn’t he lac designate the institutions which wore
taken into consid-ralien as euthanasia institutions?

A. Y-a, linden was the only or.*. Mho could d-sign-t- th t.

He was the Reich Plenipotentiary rnd he had supervision over -11
those institutions.

Q. Very well, . itn«ss, we alro-dy discussed that, that is r.
b‘ sic problca concerning deforced children; rhen, -.ccordirg to your
present recollections, wore these rwgotiations concluded within that
Reich Concittoo?

A. I person'Uy did n»t prrticipntc in these negotiations -nd
I only know about then as - result jf nh-t 3-uhler had told no. 1
knew what the result of thus- rv-gotlations was. This is a circular
decre- which was issued on the l£th of August 1939. This decree was
not exactly published, but was sent to the individual adainiotrativo
agencies. According: to th t date the negotiations -iuot h-v, been
«*oncluded •’round July.

' itr..ra, on tho o> n of the derlch,

I already <.%mticr.ed th-1 t-cr-o, r.-=xly the decree of August 1939, ’is
that the du'-rco you are speaking of?

A. Y-;», th- is tfK decree according to which 11 r.ursos and
institutions h-d ehe duty to report all th, births of deformed children
to thin Reich C rittoe.

DR. FRC'SJ! ;.rN: iir. President, uni irtun toly 1 an not in a
positiar. t‘j subnit this decree to U» Tribunal, b-cause I have not-yot
the suppl.sttr.tal volume. However, taaorrow roming I shall have th t
doeun»nt voliuB, :»d a 11 t:.-n give this document -n exhibit number.

Q. itnoto, did'y-,u at th-.t ti*. gain kr.rwledgc of t his decree?

A. Yea, I fid.

. Didn’t you have* sr» peculiar fueling -s a result of this

deVito?

A. No, 1 could only wolc^ae it. as a result of this deer
there was a -ssi iility granted that 11 th-Se childr-n » had a-
suffer inder oov-rc physical conditions aicr. to be registered r.d then


U 2-y 47 —A-lf-2-pkp- lialoy (R al-r)

Court .^c. 1

*-r>. to be helped out ns frr ns possible. Brandt hasolruady Ascribed
'r.e c8k n:£r.rding Leipzig, rvd I needn't raonfcion it ones norc, 2nd there
ana e possibility to grant aurcy death to - sense in ecu or the other
ease.

Q. This duty of registration by the nurses end physicians was
this to fore the basis for tlfo decision of each individual ccs-,
spanking quite go no rally? «

A. Jc3, this duty of registration was to give us the opportunity
to present these eases to the Fuehrer for ,-is decision. Of course,
th. Minister of tho Interior would have preferred to keep tho decision
with its own limits, but it was dot-rained differently.

DR. FORJSCIv&fXs Ho* wu conclude :ur discussion "bout the Reich
Conraitteo and wo shall new go over to th- r-rl r-cults of the elocution
of euthanasia, in which Brack participated, nd which has now become
the subject of tho indictment.

C. Witness, un to the year 1939 did you deal with tho oroblon of
euthanasia?

A. Ho, up to the year 1939 I did not doal with the problcn of
euthanasia rd ,:y sphoro of work within tho Chancellory of th- Fuehrer
did not at nil bring .x> in contact with rny such orobica. That, •'part
fr:*a individu-'l nrsos which 1 havo jurt untloned, when parents asked
for tho a rcy death to b- granted to their d-forauC children, both of
tfiotti applications were *,nt over to the Reich Ministry of th Health.

Q. a did you hear about ird-r by Hitler that irrurabl
rur.tal p-atic.ts :o *ld bo granted th- acrey Coath under certain conditions?

*• I i»arre. that -.nd that was -.aal^o surprise tone, -t
the -nd f July jt beginning cf August. This was r.ot in connection .:ith
noR-ti' tior.s : >ut the R-ich Camadtt-c, but I ncard it quite sponJar/-
ously lr-x: ay superior ReicheL-iWr Bqphlor, who told xe oiu last ?r.y
that Hitl.r had discuss-d that question with closed circle r /1 bad
suid that he nc.3 considering t hu nref death to insane people, j/ that
Eouhlcr was to consider that possibility Iso. At that tLo. 3ouhl-r
already said that i. was Hitlor's opinio, that. ... r- ; Mt-n •'.!» n«.


7S55


U Lay 47 -A-i:-3-?kp- ifaloy (RaaUr)
Court fo. 1


with persons -who wur- unable to live, were r.ot happy and whoso
existence ir. this arid meant a moral burden to themselves, hhd to
the members of their families. Bouhler, I think told oj on the. no: t
day th'-t ho hed considered that matter, nd th~t ho had accepted the
order of the Fuehrer, ifc- -shod to toll him whether I knew anything
• bout t h. probL.,3, what my ttitudo was end what I thought of it.

Q. ‘.hat did /;u toll 3ouhlor?

A. I -.t first told him r uite professionally that such assignment

rr.d nothing to do with tho Chancellory of the Fuehrer. That it wr.3 a

puroly medical ant tor, rrd it oould at the ixst bo called a matter of

public hygior.o, nd r.t cny rate foil within the sphere of Conti. I

pointed out that Conti w -uld be able to call a similar small coaoittoj

who could discuss tho c.u-stion of deformed children and arrive t some

•

decision. c, of course, didr. 't r.*to any oxp,rta to do that, and wo
had no executive functions which would permit us to perform -ny such
work. As far 'a I remember 1 lre dy then pointed out th’t this would
only bring about iv.« conflicts with Borsann, because Conti in -d<>ition
to his position s undor-Secr.t-ry of itato and Minister of Interior,
was • iso simultaneously a cumber of tho staff of Boraar.n. Bouhlor chon
sold that he had repeated fch.t to the Fu.hrer and had poir.tou »ut
ospeci- lly ra to the nroblea of Borraanr.. 'itlor, however, had .answered
thr t he would bo ro.dy to sp-ak to 3orm nn person- lly. Bouhlor then
tri-d to »>t Frick's support, because- Conti in his capacity ns under¬
secretary of State was subordinated to Frick. JUS fears regarding
Bormann, nd also y fears, wore justifi.d bec_use Hermann stated to
Bouhb'p himself few days Iter that the euthanasia was n matter for
Conti, the Reich health Leader, nd he further said it would not be
limit.d to incurable :.ental p-ti-r.ts. Thereupon Bcxihlor thougm that
Kltlsr would take this .-sjign-.nt away from him arri give it to Conti,
This, however, would >. ve meant th:t the entire euthanasia mat tor
would h v-.- been transferred to Boraann's influence, which would h-vc
--used extensiva. jds-uso. Therefore, I u r.t t~ Frick and discussed
• r Prick, • a the advice f Frick h« i:


7556


14 Hay LI -A-l6-4-?kp- Maloy (Raaal-.r)

Court No. 1

of the support of Gouring ard Hinder.

Q. Hew, witness, we don't need to go into «U those details,
because it would take us such too far away. New, let us cone to the
period of tiac whon Bouhlcr finally received this order by Hitler?

A. I can't five you the exact period of tia.. 1 ear. cr.ly say

this happened in c p-riod of a few days, all th-oe negotiations between

Bouhler, Conti, I rick and Goering. At any retc Bouhlcr wont to t h*

Fuehrer nd told specific*lly h. would accept this aosignewnt in

spite of his questionable incaapo to r.cy. Hitler at that tine replied

that he dusir.d a r.or.-bureaucr-.tic solution of this problem, because

^ didn't want an rg.ancy like the Reich Ministry of the Interior which

had definite tracks after all to take over such a definito assignment.

He said that th.- o’.yaicinna th-aselv-s could not do it because tliey had

I

no definite- or cniartier. v.il-ble. Hitler said Unt Bouhlor himself
was to create the necessary organization for that purpose. As far as
it was necessary the Reich Ministry of th- Interior should take over
these things which already fall wit! • ts sphere of jurisdiction. 1J *
is in cases -.here tho executive powers or th- Reich :anict-ry of the
Interior could alleviate the task of the outhanasia.

Q. ‘»it:v sa, die d.unl.r Ull you ryt. ing ’-t that tine concerning
thu socr-icy concerning thesu oat tors?

A. I cannot roojaber th’t. However, I b-lieVe that ho said
frvr. tho very - riming that this.- entire -anttors had to be ‘rented ith
tho a'llr'ir.t \rfi -:- 1 * .


Hi Hny-A-3-17-l-feeh3n (Ints: JLasicr 6 V-n Schon)

Court Nc. I.

3 How, witness, after Boohler had told you about these de¬
tailed suggestions by the Fuehrer; what did you do, what was your im¬
pression?

A At first I had no idea about the extont of this assignment,
no doubt I did not conceive of this entire thought to its great ex¬
tent, however, after I heard the description by Bouhlor about the con¬
dition cf thsse persons, I deciced to cooperate in the collaboration cf
that cssignrent. I took a number of the associates of Bouhler into
confidence and asked then to ccoporato.

Q witness, ycu apoko to your collaborators, you spoke to
Bouhlor and vhat was the result c I all these negotiations; what problcn
did you solve?

A The pro hi era to which I was entirely alien was purely nod-
ical. Ho as party officials could not solve it in any way, tre had to
bo clear about tho follawinj quostiens "Haw can tb; oxport physicians
be included in t!w solution cf that problon?" Brandt was net a psy¬
chiatrist, Bouhlor was not a physician. The ru-sen for entrusting 'thoso
two porsons for tbo aeslynrer.t was only bocauso Hitler had epocinl con¬
fidence in thon f :r carrying tho Batter through correct ! proporly.
Vto now had the pr-bloa cf patting oxForts, who w.ro in lino with tho
idea cf Buthar.aeia end whe were ro-dy to cooperate as oxierts. Only
in thi3 uannofc could tho prrtlcn b. solved in a clean and correct run nor.

Q Y'.tn whet physicians apeoared to ycu at that tine to be
suitable psythi arista for that purp-so and whoa in effect did you
chose?

A It is correct fer you to say, vhre did you actually got to
knew, because prior to that ;xjriod of tiix» I did not know anyone.

Bouhler for instance had known Fr-fessrr Hjido through sonc feroor •
asscciati ;n, however, neither 3ouiiler r. r 1 knew any other psychiatrists.
Fer that reason Bouhlor asked no to try and find Professor Hcido's ad¬
dress. This is hsvr I contacted Eir. ler for tb- first tis:e ror rding
Euthanasia. There was no oth-; way cf jotting to Koide, because va did

• 7553 .


Ui ltoy-A-^3—17-2-4feehcn (ints: Rx:ler i von Schcn)
Court Mo. I.


not know his adcress only the fact that ho was a nonber of the 3S. On
this occasion, Eouhlor repeated his promise of support, which 1 have
alre dy mentioned. Tfhetter Growltz had nominated scno noro oxpcrts, I
do not knew. I do kn.-w, however, that Dr. Linden had givon a number of
nanes of physicians to Scuhlor. According to ny rocoliocticn, six or
more University professors were among tho experts which Bouhlor usod.

Q ]*r. FVesidcnt, at this tine I 3hall subnit ny Docurxir.t Ho.

38 free !>ocuaent Book 2, page 57, that is an affidavit of Dr. Yfornor
Kirch.'rt, da tod 2? January 19e7, *hich tl» counsel for tte defendant
Karl Brandt has already sutcittod ns Karl 3ra:x! Exhibit No. 15. 1 need
not road it. It doals with tho events which the vltnoss has just des¬
cribed.

Ploasa continue, witnoas.

A In any caso free those first dlscuasicns, I rorv.mbcr de¬
finitely tho nano cf Prfcsscr Nicttscho, Professor Dikrinic, who was
tho hoad cf tho Ordin.riat at orlin, Pr-fuosar Xiohn fren Join, Dr.
Schneider fren Heidelberg, Dr. Fnlkc-nlnousor -f Kaufbourcn. Thnoo aro
probably the onos who participated in the first discussions and thon
core oxperts wore sworn to secrecy. Tho witness Jfanmuollcr already
tustifiod about this. They noro net cnployori, but tkto cn an honorary
basis. Fran tho number cf those gontlonon, when wo were gradually
gotting to know, during tho riddle or beginning of August, Bouhlor
callod a tieotin,- in his «n ffice, in tdiich I and sene of ny asseciatoo
participat.d,

THE jUDSIDENT: Counsel, I did net understand that you assigned
a number to Document No. 33; is that Exhibit lio. 35?

DR. FRCESCHIIANN: kr. President, I did net give it any Exhibit
number, because it was ny impression that since this Document has al¬
ready been submitted, by ny colleague. Dr. Sarvatius, for Karl Rrandt,
with tho Exhibit No. 15, this Dccicent is already in evidence, 'hrzly
so that tho report will be able to f 11 * w ny are sentati .r. if evidence
better, I have copies it again in ny D cunent book. If ti>. court siir.ll


Uj /-A-13—; 7-3—c chon (Ints: Ranlor Yen Sch.n)

Court H-, I.

consider it necessary for no to give this Dccuronfc an Exhibit me&ar,

I shell cf course be glad to dc so.

TIE PRESIDENT: It is not necessary, counsel, but it should be
identified for tho record. Do I understand this is Karl Brand Exhibit
Ho. 15?

DR. FRCSSCHUAHKs This is Exhibit Karl 3randt Hr. 15. I may
reaark regarding tha other Kirchert affidavit in qy Document Book Ho. 1
with tho Ho. 33, dated 7 Fobruary 19k?, that I shall not subnit this
affidavit and it can bo struck out.

THE {RESIDENT: That is satisfactory, counsel.

BY DR. FROESCKAHH:

Q How, witness, you know five t!io testimony of tho witnoss
Pfo.nnr.ualier that this witness in particular, in answer to quostions of
tJxi Prosecution, ropoatodly spoke of tho two noutings in which ho
participated; ono osoting at which, in his cpini' n, thoro was inoroly
an intended division cf tho ront -1 institutions into two groups, while
-t th thor meeting tho group of exports are supposed to lwvu not.

In your foil,-.ring tostirv ny, I ask you to consider Pfannnuollor«a testi¬
mony .and to mko it cloar to tho court vhothor there noro only those
tno aoetingo dealing with tho ontiro prcblui of Euthanasia, or whothor
in addition to thoso two noetin^s thoro wore thor mootings. I also
consider it Important that you toll tho court absolutely frankly at
what mootings you participated .an-* what y u did in detail, so that tho
iapressicn will not ou giver, that you arc trying t' koop anything
secret7

A I can only say that of course there wore many r. re- than two
such meetings and meetings f v?ri us different kinds, but it is^quito
impossible for raj to give any figure. 1 don*t kn w whether there were
ton, twenty, fifteen, or twenty fi to. There -^rj big ratings and
snail meetings, there wore seating which Roichslcitor Bcuhler called
ciroc :ly, especially in the ber inn ia;. Thjro .Tore noetin ;s laarely f
t!x experts, which Fr'fossor H-idc, Pnfossor Nietasch- cr Irofbsr r

7360


lii : ay-A-'B—17-4.—’feahan (Ints: Ramler x Von Schon)

Court Ho. I.

Lindon cailod. There wore all kinds of costings at various tines and
various places and with various grouse of people.

Q I should like to interpolate a question hero, because I havo
been asked by one of ny colleagues to shorten the ease of the defense
oounsol saaewbatj I ask you: was the defendant Dr. Blotae involved in any
way?

A From ay c*m knowledge, I can confirm that Blcco never at¬
tended any of tho nestings rtaich I attended and I did attend very many
meetings. In any case, I know that ho was never at Bouhlor 1 a office,
as I voulc! certainly have learned of that and I never hoard anyono
montion Blooo in connection with Eut!.anc.3in. I have already said that
I personally had nothing to do r.ith him in connection with the Euthan¬
asia pro err an*


l-Zj li-..-3X-18-i-Ccok (Inc* Von Schocn)

Court; No. 1

i .*itnoas, at tho request of cy colleague Sautor for
do fond ant Bloce, I should liko to clarify s >cethin;; hero.

On oho chert which was drawn up during tho interrogation
froa tho inforantion ;ivon by you, that is, No. 2C3, it is
No. 253, it says at tho to; to tho loft tho nano ‘'Blone",
a., erontly in connection with Dr. Conti, and indirectly
in connection with tho defendant Brandt, ./ill you briefly
toll us whothor that square Bloao hero was justified at
all?

.* In view of tho hondinj, "-uthoncsir. Projron" , the
addition of tho coco alone is oortainly not justified. I
jointed this out at tho interrogation and when I si. •nod
thi3 chart that this was not justified but 1 was parsued-
od that Blono, ns Do. uty of tho heioh Health Loader
logically hud to ap.ocr, but whon I said that 3ior.o had
nothing; to do with euthanasia, the second lino was not
.at around tho square in which Bioao's nnuo appoars, and
that is a . lain square in contrast to the squaro of Conti
and Lindon. I boliovo that was how it happonod. It is
difficult for no to reocab^r all of those things La
dotr.il, but that is how it hr. ..onod I boliovo. It was
baenuso Bloao had nothin * to do with euthanasia.

. Now, witness, plonso oci;hasizo in your descri.tion
those ncetin"3 which woro in.ortont for tho development
of tho euthanasia .ro.ran, first of all, tho first moot¬
ing which Bouhler called in order to discuss tho problem
itsolf and ir. order to find cut the attitudo of tho doctors?

Those wore snail ncotinas md .rinarily the .eoplo
•

whoa I h-:vu already aontionod pertici. atod.

% Just a noaont, witness. I should lik-j to hoar froa
you froa the very boginnin^ whon you speak of your
associates, which associates you noon. One con os sane


liny 1-i -/v -BK -18 - 2 -C ook (Jet. Von Schoon)
Court No. 1


with c decree of certainty that the Prosecution and cross
oxacination will ask thoso nanus, and oven if it is not
pleasant zo you to ccation theso nones, I as your defense
oounsol consider it r.y duty to ask you to state which of
your associ.-tos, no natter in what respoot, had s quo thine
to do with the euthanasia ;roprcn. .«ho woro tho90 assooic-
tos? --

— Thoro woro only four of cy associates who had anythinc
to do with euthanasia in any decree. That was ny roprosent-
ativo and later ::y succ-sscr, Blcnkonbur.;, then HoConor,
end thon Hovolnnnn and 'forbore. Thoso aro the four whoa
I havo put in tho corrcctod . Ian. -.11 of the other
associates in tho Chanceliery of the Fuohror had nothing
to do with euthanasia, and to a l'.rco oxtont woro not
infomod -bout it.

. I should like to heu that last thin.; a;ain. Within
tho Chancellory of the Fuehrer there was tho soorooy which
wo shall spook about later end it was ko ; ,t?

.. Yes, of course, that was an order, even within ny own
offico.

t Then this ox. lains tho fact that the witness tfodorioh
froa 1939 to 1910, as he 3oiu, actually know nothin.; about
outhnnasia beinj dealt with in your offico?

.. I considor tho stntoaont absolutely true. I con only
on. hasizo it.

t ~nd you, Mr. 3rack, you worked with thoso nootin:;s?

 Yc3.

Did you not ir. private conversations with third
arsons soy soaothln* about your activities cr any hints?

.» I nust honestly say later I did so with a very

definite intention, and later I had to dual with tho

filr: I accuse." Of course, I told a few ;eo; lc who were

•

connected with it wh t it was ill aoout, but in "oncrnl


7563


I!ay 1--..-3K-1G-3-Cook (I;.-. Von Scho-n)
Court No. 1


I hold to.the socrocy very strictly.

I ‘itnoss, in answer to ay express question you javo the
ri'-.o of four of your associates, I want to know very briefly,
’id Dr. Xiovelnann, whet was his attitude toward tho .roblcra,
was ho in favor of it, was he infornod about it?

.. Yes.

i ./as ho verj* cuch in favor of euthanasia?

- Yos, for a ;urely . orsoncl roason. In hiw own fanily
he had heel r. horrible nisfortuno. Ho had a nothor who for
yonrs, I don't know how cany years, was suffer ins fr or»
c.-ncor and couldn't die, although 3ho vr.ntod to dio, and
ho was in favor of euthanasia because of this experience
of his own.

1 —nd wh-t about Vorbors?

.. Vorber/j was not so favorably inclined toward euthana¬
sia, but ho did fellow the order, and since ho fro:i a
business aoint of view hd 8 onethine to do with tho
organization of this transport oa..-uny, oven if it was
against his will, ho did folic*.# tho order.

i '••ell, how about Hejonor?

4 . Ho;;cnur was very nuch .aore o>n nindod toward this
; rob Ion because he hic-solf was connected by tnrri ago with
an L'vcrtant doctor who had acquainted hin with the problun
and ho knew Dr. Un;or, as well ns Hovolnann, who wrote tho
book, the raanuscri. t of which I later used in . re-arin.’ the
file.

i -*nd tho last one, Blarikcnburc?

.. .»t first ho Smew even loss than I did about tho ;roblon
but later ho warned u, to it, but I nust say it was less
for etl ical reasons than for rational roasohs. -hr.t the
r.suits were, tho froein ; of bods, for oxnni'lo, he was
;.or interest. I than I. To no it node no difference whrt-

7 ^


over


::..y 11-*»-BK-18-4-C ook (I_.it. Von Sohooni
Caurt No. 1

l Nov., let '3 o beck to the nesting -which Bouhlor oallcd
at tho bc-inninj of ~u yust 1939. You hevo already told
us that as far as you - reneober you ware at this acotiny,
i3 chat riyht?

.. It is very likely I was at the first do otins- 1 °hn
not inline ay not bo in : thero.

% wall, What do you rccoabor about this ocotinj 1 ?

.. .*s I said Bouhlor wanted to find out tho attitudo
of tho doctors toward the .robloa of tho ba3i3 justifica¬
tion for outhenasie, which was unaninously a. yrovod by
every ono ; rosent. Of courso, all donnnrtod that safe¬
guards bo oror.tod. <hon Bouhlor askod about the nunbor
of insane in Germany I rouonbar that exactly, very
different fi :uros wore ;;ivon, so that we did not oorio to
any clear iflOn. There wero ostiraatos butwoon 200,000
and 600,000, Out in .•.onornl the nuribor of incurable ot\803
in tho iiintr.1 institutions wore ostinntod at about thirty
aor-oont.

t "itnoss, you have ndx-itt-d that until 1939 you did
not hevo anythin; to do with tho - robIon, you did not
think about it. £vur. noro than your description this
tiornin : which ^avo you occasion to .oint out your lack
of trainin'; in this lino, I should like to soo now how
did it ha; .an that you os a con. loto l.:ymn dotjlt with
thi3 natter. Did you try to cl'jify in your own raind
this . roblcr. of euthanasia -us an aid to dio?

i

Fi) c I would like to correct soncthin ;. l^didn't
deal with the problem. I was ;;iven an ordor to deal
with it. That, cf courso, I inforaed nysolf as thoroughly
as I could ns a laynan. That was a ;iattcr of oourso.
Ioncdiately after the heichsloiter told no ho had rc-
c.iv d this ord r I visited sor:c of the bi ; ncntal insti¬
tutions in Berlin and in tie noijhborhood of -orlm to

7565


May 1S-5-Cook (Inc. Vca Schoon)

Court No. 1


f lr/‘ out whr.t these .'co;;le looked like who ore to bo re¬
lieved frea suffering. I think the first one I visited was
3uch, which has over 3,000 bods, end I vi3itcd Goerden,

I visited two or throe other institutions in and nunr
3crlin, and what I saw there was torriblo. Even I who are
only c layoan, find it difficult to describe, it, but I can
rononbor soc.o of the torriblo cases clearly, bo cause os the
first ones which I h s'. ever soon in ::y life, they nodo q
lost in : iri.rossico. In tno institution Such I saw a wor.an
who was thirty-oi;ht to forty years old, a.,roxiontoly, who
was wearing n heavy, tou^ shirt, and sitting in a kind of
a ca :o on woolen shaving. Sho bared her tooth ct ,xjo;- 1 o
when they cone near her nd sho was absolutely inoatablo
of any oontnot. She took h-r food like an nnio.il. She did
indecent things with her oxoronont. Sh- was constantly
obsoone, she was incn;able of Si»eakin:, md as the nurso
told uo she h I- bojn in that condition for oi.jhtoen or
nineteen years.


7566


K y--.*-^-GZS-19-l-Cr ss (7cnschoen)

C i»rt B . 1.

... (cntinucd) In the r-r-.o instituti*® I sow n child. It ms a
: lrl r threo r f«r years cf o^c.  was sirrly 0 torso. It had nc
errs. r. la s, a bif. ha-d, r.lbin , red inflamed eyas, -ad, at thot
a-a it ms n t eble t sjoclc a sin-1* wrd yet. It sms a terrible si-ht
__ sir.r.ly a b dy with •. head '-ar. possibility that n human boinr c< uld
dovol.-K fr n this creature. ,.nd. then T>r. Hainr In Goordon shewed no
a case, f-mcrly o highly trlor.tcd engineer wha had built s~mo bic
bridROs abroad. This rr-n hvd porolvsis end the nr.lr.rio cure ms usod
too Into. Ho had ty-rv t tho cl into tor lata. Ho wee quite slut id but
n tho thar hand still s -.-rossivc. Ko had delusions if Rrandour. Ho
osllod silly soribblin^s blue prints. It wo terrible to soo thoso peo¬
ple. In '.uertt-Rb r^/3*. '.on I had the 'npertOnity to visit rthor
inetituti ns. I sow at lanet ton r twelve instituti no 'f vari-us
kinds r.nd saw nil kinds f ersos but I oen't doscribo oil t thorn.

That W'uld bo quit" inprssihl .

Q, I think y u node . Mistake hef.ro when y u said y« saw r.
povehlctrist in th» institution. Tf-.ni nosnt j paralytic.

a. lea,

Q, Bow, Hr. Brock, yvu have described y ur wn l-iprossl.'ns whon
v u -isitod thTse instituti ns. Did y u ■'bsorro vori.ua wth:de of
tr 'tin- tho insane?

A*. Yos I saw th- curing Hold and th.' oaring Hold. 1 sow all
tho r-. dr.rn -. .thods includin’ therapy, :lcot±lo sh ck, insulin,
polorin ntid"to, otc. Than I saw the • ccvpnti ml therapy — n t mly
in thr curin’ field hut Is- in the car in- Hold sc tht patients
said bo kept quiot under tho necessity f r w rkino

Q. t irrr csi r. did - u n t cf this -oth • .:f aocupntionnl
therapy?

... I eon say n thin- oh ut it os a lnyaan but what was 1 n: with
tV. incur bio oas.-s ms impressive. It w s dostr-yin,: tho di.-city f
hurr-r. cr "tur- 3 , rrkir..- them r b:ts — it was r. t w rthy >f hurun
h • ir.-s.


7567


i ; Vov-A-G3S-lS-2-Gr-ss (Vca Sch'< n)

C ’irt ». 1«

D3. KOCJTALD; If ycur Honors plcaso, I do think this line cf
quest! nine is nievt*' exhausted. Tho witness has ,;iTun all his
r«os r.a -Ay ho nitied thoso po«plo and so a. I *o n t think it is
note rial.

D*i. FZOZSCHiV.iTi Hr 7 President, I nn finished with this subjoot
>ut T th urht it nooossary f-r tho witness t toll us whot ho thou C ht.

73*2 r"2SID2!Mi Prcaood t scon. . thor question of th? ease.

Q. It. Brock, through person 1 abscnnti'n y'-u ocnvincod y ur-
soIT *f tho Oi-nditi ns of thoso patients hut thoro woe still tho Me
quosti n — con T ;ive tsy aid t a projoot which shortens tho life of
those patientsT 'Shot did y *j do?

... I road tho literature in this field. First I road the
standard w-rk :f Hindin.:-!! cho. I didn't like it von- .-mch. I rood
Ifclsor. I also rood T^lthor. I ro“d Berth. I also rood litarnry
w rks like 7h tri Morus and Vn&r, oto. All thoso things — tho total
effoot f nil the literature is woll os the pars nol impress! ns which
I hod in tho rental inr-tituti ns — os woll as what I luornod in talks
with 1! psyohintrists hr urht ao t > th: idoo thr-t it wis not anythin,-
Md hut that it W.-S :• d to help in this toko if thoro wus cn rdor.

Q. Did ” u discuss tlweo ouosti ns with y ur ossreie-tos Hovcl-
mnn arv' Dlonkuntar,:, otc?

... i.-s, cf c ursu. Vo discussed th. pr-blon and dot-ails .f the

problon rt front length.

Q. Vr. Prosidrr*, in thic ccnr.oeti.r. I sh ul<' lik-. t» rofor to
by Brack Exhibit 27. That ia D curvr.t 7 in D curvnt 3c Ic 1, pa *o 16,
tho affidavit f Imgnrd Crubo, wh w-s f< r nany years secretary in
tho Chancellery f thu Fbohror and in this e nnoeti n I sh uld like tc
read fr v. 2 b), nly the first t» sentences, and than fr c 'f I sh uld
like t r d a little .art. Ko. 2 b says, "Srack's rvst -bvi us
characteristic was his unc nditi-nal readiness t help. Brack never
refused t help ar.b wh asked f r his assistanco in nr. oror ;ancy.
This r"-.diness t help >r.«w "t . f on absoluteIv decent ar.d hunano f' el
inr. Braev tried t c rsproh-nd thcr pc pli's feelings end t utf’or-

7568


l-‘ ’•o"-„-Grs-19-3-'3r -s8 (7en Schr.en)

C crt v «. 1.

stand the

irvi then I ah- uld like t h vc y-y c nsIdo* fipuro d in +his
e mooti r. whoro the witness *--rnti ns everything th-.t tho da Tonicnt hns
just described in detail. She says that sh rtly before tho -utbroak
-f the Thp the d>*eroc was issuod by Hit lor. That this rdor w «b tho
aukj-et r* may discussi ns in office II md she •ays* "1 *r.s pros.-nt
s ratines iurin; tv oh ‘i scut si ns between Brack, Hofelmnn, Blonkon-
hur.- and Ho jonor t<- take d am shorthand n.-tos. I c ncludod fr n thnso
discussi ns end oxjlwaxt! ns f th-'sc sen that tha ’iscussl ns -n this
subject vr rn tokor. von' t ri-uslv by oil c scorned, they continued untJl
late at ni-ht. ..11 tho . fronontl-nod were c nvincod that this w.is o
probloo f th* hi-host othioal in-ertaneo. Itoas ns • f expediency -vere
entiroly rulod ut. 1 r.< v r htord Braofc use tho w rds "usolres oatora",

I can r ally n t i-n.nb r ovor t' h to hoard this w-rd. Arpucants and
ocuntcr :>r-ur.jnts ware '.iscusscd in dotail. Tho docisivo footer was
alwnya 3raok’a froquontly ox-r-asod views that th s ;.c pie wore noroly
vc -otatin - end thoir oxistor.co was 'T no vnluo. Fn.fossar Niotrsoho
r'ssisaod an ext nsiv librr.ry, which wos e> noornod with the pr bl .m S
outhar.asin. 3r'c!e ‘iscuasod in detail n nunbor f those b Jes with
'•i tsech-.- : tv! studied o bo f th n. Th> quostl n was re isod whether
puhlicati r.s had boon nado c ncornin- tho -.regress f outhonnain in
Torsi,*n o untrios."

I ask th c urt t toko u.tico of th.- rost f this nunbar -1.

j: -r, -fitness wo hr. olr v dy hoard fr n th -.ritnoss Hodorich ond
y u h-.vo c nTirmad it that th- issuaneo f the outhomsia nssi.-nnont t
3 uhlor had n thin- t d« with tho Ch.ncollory f the Fu-'hror. 'hit
w ro thj e nclusi ns f r Bcuhlnr there and y u?

... Sc machine h-<* t So cr>v:tcd t carry ut outhennsin. <»ll
lnstituti ns h*d t bo roj-istorod. Tho pntionta had t. b« r ■ istorod
s that an -pini- n oould be Trrvd rn there. Individual institutions had
to h found wh->ro ■uihannsin c-njld bo e--rri'-d out in jr'ctico, etc. In
vi w -r tho great rombor fT ir.curaSlo cos s • f insanity a -rent burden
n the perscnnol h -1 t ba ex-octcd in tho boginnin-. That could

7569


11 ;:ny-..-GZS-19-4-Crdss (VonSchoer.)
C urt y . 1.


n ,.vcr bo hoar*led by the few po^plo I hadw-rieinf -t tho Chancellery >'f
t'r.o Ftohrer. P.rscnncl had t ho f-und f-r tills purpose and an effioo
h i t- b< f uni. Bouhlor did this. So rot rooms in tho Colur.bus .

H'uso r. Prtsd:irwr Piets -.nd l~tor in Tior rartonstr.issc. He rontod tho
ro.'rs. This offico was called T-l fr ra tho nn-b-r Tior'-artrnstrasse -1.
“hat Is Tdv.ro this expression c.noi fr-n. This rns oqu’-l in ran): tc
m? und'r 3 uhlor. In ~.y ir.pr-vod chart ! hr-c whnt I for.-c-t in tho
first chart. — This Forty C *ntr '1 C rr.issi.-n. Tho thrro ffiooc undor
3 uhlor arc equal in r >nk. .’ith th- exception >f xyeelf end tho
onsreintes when I fc ve nlr. =dy rjonti'nod oil the poramnol at this
Tior ^irt^nstr'isso 1 wero wrrkin v« luntorily und n thoir mm dooisicn.
Only w-. f ur were w rkir.. n orders. ..11 others were w rkin-; v-lun-
tarlly n thoir wn deciei r.. Only wo f ur wor’ wrrkin- n orders.

All cth irs vr-ro w-rkin* n thoir cwn docisln.

C. ?'r. Pr sidont, in this c-Twccti n I sh.-uld like to rofor to NO-
170, Exhibit 332, Sn.-Ush D cunmt Bok lv, pn-o 17, G>m.n Document
3 k Id - l.pa *o 15. This is tho affidavit -f Kr.cisslor which tho
Pr.socuti n has subnitted and I shall ro-d noroly no sontcnco. Undor
M-. 3 "In 1939 I wr.e sunv nad by tho Chief f Polloo t ropert ;.n
i Jane r*' 19C0 t- th.. * inlstr- f th.- Interior, situotod in tho
Rrlunhis buildin.-; there n an crllod Blankonbur.; tallrod f >ur cr«up
which c nsistod ^f 22 r 23 pors r.s."

!' w thj witness c r.tinuosi "It w.s eutplotcly vrluntory for th so
pors ns it the rviotin.- t-- assure thoir e-.epuroti n."


Court So. 1

1 -. nay 47-A-20-l-iE:i-fcerrow (Yon Schoon)


A. She personnel were paid according to tho regular rates. The
funds vero advanced by the SSDA? Treasurer for the Kinirtry of the
Intorior. The administration of this office vbs first out under Bohno
and, efter hv left, JLllefr. She ce-dical direction vas first under
rrofossor Euide, later Professor Hlettsche.

Q, One question in this connection. Bid the defendant Karl Brandt
have anything to do with T-4?

A. I believe that during ny first interrogation I eroressed myself
wrongly and vhnt =y affidavit says is misleading. Karl Brandt was con¬
nected with euthanasia - ho v«b Hitler's deputy - but he had nothing to
do with T-4. Ho did not have any office at T-4, as I said during tho
interrogations, and, as far ns I know, he ves never at T-4. I do not
bolievo that Brandt would havo cone to T-4 without first saying to no
or ono of ny assistants, "Please go with ae. I should like to look at
it."

Q, Sow, witness, in tho meantime the coaaittoo of cxnorts which
Dr. PftLnnaueller mentioned - did it doal with tho nodical ouootlono
which coso up?

A. I don't know whethor Dr. Pfannauoller's words are milto clear
horo. I spoko at ono meeting with Bcohlcr but there vero eovoral at
which tho first problems were solved and when Bouhlcr gave the declolone.
At theso eoscions Brondt was perhaps a tine or two. I don't think he
v«s prosont at aort than ono or two act tings. But thorc were certainly
four or five such neetings with Bouhlcr where Dr. Linden woe called
upon at the end esch tiao by Bouhler because he was a aedico-oolitlcal
ojraert - because he could give very good advice, and only then, nftor
Bouhler had fiotorained a certain group, including Kcldc, Soitsscho,
and Slkrinie, vtre the split up groups of experts forned, and Pfenn-
auollcr doubtless oorticipatcd in one of these conferences of exoorts
because he vas one such exoert and ho aentioned this mooting. At
these expert neotings the directives vere discussed and set down, first
in general end later corrected. The directives for forming tho judgaent

7571


Ccurt So. 1

1 -. May i7-A-20-2-i3(-2arrov (Von Schcen)


on the cases. I personally often attended these meetings of the experts.
Gf co»jae, I could sty nothing to the point but I was there and I heard
wfaat the export* were talking about.

Q, Sow, at these 'nestings did tho idea cone up of send'.ng the
Questionnaires to the aontal institutions?

A. As far as I reaerber, that -'as settled earlier in the dlscue-
8 lor.8 Kith Souhler and then I believe Linden and Feido appointed a cos-
alttee to drew up this Questionnaire and they drafted the Questionnaire.

Q. Do you rerunbor how tho decision about the Questionnaires,
when they had boon filled out, was to bo reached?

A. Yes, that agrees with vhr.t I said in ay affidavit. The ouca-
tionnolro had to be Judged by threw oxperts. I said four before hut
thcro were really only three, and Dr. Pfannnuollcr was ono of the ex¬
perts. If throo oxperts independently erso to tho saao rosult - that
is, that in this case asrey doath could bo accorded - then everything
was transferred to a fourth photootot and cane to tho chief oxport who
received only such photostats to decide on. If his opinion agreed with
tho opinions of tho other throe, then tho patlonte wore transferred upon
orders froa tho Ministry of the Interior.

q. And whore wore they transferred? *horc wore the patients
transferred to?

A. Patients wore subsceuently transferred to an observation insti¬
tution. Tho croatior. of these observation institutions, however - by
wpy of correction of ny previous testiaony - woe not in 1939 but the
beginning of 1940. Theso institutions were arranged at the suggestion
of Professor •‘oide. In these observation institutions the patients wore
kept under observation for a period which depended on the*nrture of the
case. If the rosult of tht observation agreed with the Judgment formed
on the basis of the Questionnaires, then they were sent to an euthanasia
institution end the doctor in the euthanasia institution ande the final
decision whether he vedted tc subait the patient to euthanasia or rot.

In any case, he had an absolutely unlimited veto right in every case,


7572


Court Sc. 1

14 rfey 47-1-20-3-1::.-iprrev (Ton Schoen)


just like every expert end chief expert in each case could put hi6 plus,
tinus, or cuestion nark on the fern.

Q, Witness, ve need not deal vith the nanes of the exoerts, chief
exoort-j, cr thu nanes of the inati tut ions because I can assume thet the
prosecution will coae back to this natter and ! shall not discuss who
selected the doctors in the observation and euthanasia institutions, but
I will go on to another Question. That is, whether you know that, in the
execution of the assignment of hitler given to the dofondent 3randt and
Bouhler, the euthanasia doctors vere given authorization to administer
euthanasia after checking every thing that hod been done by the orporte
and chief exports.

A. Yos, that wo* done. The euthanasia doctors were givor., by
Bouhlor ond Brandt, tho necessary authorization which hod beon roruired
by tho Fuehrer.

Q. Dc you know whother a list of these doctors vac kopt nt T-4?

A. I have already been asked about that end I can only say I do
not know, but X hardly assume so since tho group of authorized doctoro
was so very snail. Thera voro only twelve to fifteon of them. I have
been told that there must have boen over three hundred fifty. I could
not know that, but I did not know noro than twelve or fifteon.

Very well, witness. Then wo have discussed the general propara-
tory aoasurcs for euthanasia. Briefly, at the end of this cession today
I should like to go into the oucetion in regard to this whole natter -
had secrecy been ordered end *hnt effects did that hrve?

A. In regard to cuthanrsic ce a whole, strict secrecy had boon

ordered. It hed to be dealt with ec top secret ond the regulations,

which woro more stringent during the war, were that euthanasia has to

*

bo relegated to top socret. To my knowledge and ny consent, no death
threats were expressed, but this formulation, of course, is contained in
the r guletions that in case of violation of this duty of secrecy for
things which are top secret the death penalty nay be pronounced, but
those ere the general rules which were known to everyone anyhow. Besides,

7373


Court So. 1

14 jtay ■a0 ~ 4-«»*-garrov (Ton Schoen)


Souhler forced =e to accept a pseudonym which was very embarrassing to
zc pr-A seemed ridiculous. I only did so for a certain tine and without
an*ing t big fuse about it I dropped it pgein ar.d two of qy assistants
did thu io-c thing.

Q, - v, this pscudonya was only in connection with signing documents
in connection with T-4?

A. Only in connection with T-4, y«s.

q. Ar.d then, ny final cuestion on this subject. At this cane tine
or later this secrecy lod to giving special names to certain organiza¬
tions, is that true?

A. Yes, secrecy was tho reason why the vholo organization was
divided into various sub-orgnnlze.tions.

DR. TRCSSCm-S: lir. President, I have finished this subject of
secrecy and now I coae to tho question of tho legal basis of outhanasla.
That will take s^o« tl=o. Perhaps this would bo a good tirno to adjourn.

THE PRESIDE!.": Tho Tribunal will now b. in rocosa until 9:20
o'clock tcaorrow r. orning.

(A recess vos taken until 0930 hours, 15 Hay 194?.)


757 /.- •


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 8
Target 3

Volume 21
May 15-21, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


i : *


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT et al
VOLUME 21


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


15-21 May 1947 pp. 7575-7954


Court Kc. 1

15 .-iay 47-fc-l-l-ZSi-Foeter (<on Schon)


Cfficiel Trar-serint of the Aserican Military
Tribun al in the natter of the United States
of Anerica against Harl Brandt, et al,
defendant*, sitting at luernberg, Gem any, on
15 Kay 1947, 09CO, Justice Seals presiding.


TKL MARSHAL: rereons in the courtroom will please find their seats.
The Honorable, the Judges of military Tribunal I. Military Tribunal I
is now in session. God sere the Ini ted States of America and this Hon¬
orable Tribunal. There will be order in the courtroon.

TKi ?5i.SIDli‘T: hr. Marshal, you ascertain if the defendants are


all present in court.

THE MArSKAL: hay it please Tour Honor, all the dofondnnts are
prosent with the execution of tho defendants Gebhardt and Cberhouocr,
aboont due to lllnee*.

THE TilSW T: The Secretory General will note the nrosenco of
all the defendants in court save the defondents Gebhardt and Oberheuser,
who are obeont on account of illness, pursuant to certificates by the
orison surgeon which will be filed with tho Secrotary Genoral. Thoce
defondants will be excused pursuant to the physician's certificate, it
appearing that thoir absence will not oro'udlco their case.

Counsel soy proceed.

DR. 7RCESCHKA.-S (Counsel for Viktor 5rock): at. President, It hao
boon called to ay attention that in ay Qcrnan Docuocnt Boo* 2 nistokoe
hove boor, included in tho oineograohir.g. I should like to corroct then.
The so ore in the German Docuaent 21, Docuaer.t Book 2, an extract fron
Geraan Tustico on orge 14, paragraph 2, "Fourteen well-known church
leaders hod openly expressod their opinion that tho bills were not In


contrast to the doctrint6 of Christ." During clncograohlng the word
"not" wap oai,yto^aaking tho s.ntonce read exactly the ODDOeite of the
1 nodded acaning.

tO Tho other mistake'^e in Docucent 39 in Document Book 2. It is tho
afT1 davit of Gertrude uallncyer. Here it states in the original on

A »

oaj^c 52, "The Chancellery of tho Fuehrer in contact with the
Insocctorate of Concentration Canoe. The Chancellory of the Fuehrer hod


7575


Court Ho. 1

15 kay 47-#-l-2-iS<-F08ter (You Schon)

nothing to do vith it but cany recucsts for releese of concentration
casp locates were received." This "release" (Lntlassung) was changed
to the vord "intleusung" which seans "delousing". This, of couree,
gives an entirely different_se«nlx% to the word. They did not ask for
delousing. These aietakes, however, are only in the Goman docuncnt
book, everything is correctly translated in the Inglish.

THi. PEHSIDaTT; I would suggest that counsel file with the Secretary
General a written aeaorendua calling attention to these oiotakeo so
that the Secretary General in hie office any correct the original
Gersan docuoents on file in his office.

DE. rRGLSChnASS: Yes, Tour Honor.

YIITCf. 3RACK - Resuaod
MSECS SXAhlHATICS (Continued)

BY DR. JRGLSCFXAUHj

Q. Witnoss, first of all I should like to rooind you that you oro
still undor oath. Socondly. I should like to toll you that I want to
finish your diroct oxanination today, therefore, would you olcaoo make
your answers as brief as oossible.

A. Very veil,

D. . TBCESCHkASK: *r. Prosidont, I stated yostorday that I woo
finiohed with the pertinent general ouostionc of socrccy. Lost night,
on looking over ny record, I discovered that I still hove four ainor
cuestions on this subject to out to the witness vith your aooroval.

BY DR. 7HQaSCK.iAI<Vt

tt. The first cuestion, witnoss, did you wonder about Bouhlcr's
announcoaent that the ducrec was strictly secret?

A. Ho, I did not. ?roa work I was accustoocd to the fret that
certain things had to be keot secret, and only a certain grout) of oooolo
were inf ora ui of thea.

Q. The second Question, do you know the reasons why Hitler ordered
Bccrucy7

A. Ho, I did not.

7576


Court Sc. 1

15 :iay 47-;-.-l-5-IrIt-roetcr (Von Schon)

Q, The third cucetlon, vhat was the lsnedl&ti conseoutnee of this
secrecy which vns ordered?

A. This resulted In the camouflage of everything connected with
eutha n asia, simultaneously the camouflage of the central direction and
the various organ!rations who wort executing euthanasia.

Q. -hat are you thinking of; vhat do you mean?

A. The people working with euthanasia had to cone in contact with
the outside world, for example, with the institutions. Thoy had to
accuiro eauicecnt, they h*d to be in contact with various governmental
agencies, ther* vert legal obligations, end so forth. Sonoono Jud to
boar the responsibilities for these things. Tho individual evoert vm
out of the ouostlon, and it couldn't bo the Chancellory of the Fuohror
either, so special organisations had to bo created which in ay interro¬
gations I designated pc camouflage organisations.

V. I can recapitulate briefly from the examination co far thot
throo such organizations were created, first, the Public Foundation
for Institutional Caro, which, vac the economic wrt of the organization?

A. Yob.

Then, second, tho helch forking Union for Cental Institutions,
'."hut was tho purpose of this organization?

A. It did tho scientific vork and was in contf-ct with the mental
institutions and the medical exports.

\ And third, the Public Patient Trano-jort Comprny. ’ hat v».c t1i«
pUTpOOo of it?

A. This organisation vac in chore* only of tho transfer of the


patients


15 hiy-fi—CP-^-l-vross (Int.VoaScfcoa)

Court I

0 , ov, oriefly vfc.it v-s the le,;-l fom of the tvo organisations,
tho tv a first -cat ioacd organiz-tione?

a. I c-rn't roiOcr clearly. it ios _n entity and .. malic lav,
fha Jr-i-s ort C cop any v^c u~0i.iS. all three organ!s-tione were .-.-'lo
to a > 0 -r in public.

% Ifcan, I have finished tr.e suojact of secrecy. Hr, President,

I nov co-o to t::o cn-ttor of jrcp-»r..tory -ensures for outumiusin end
I oh. .11 discuss the lo;...l b-sie of o-tcanasin, Kr. President, I have
ticca tic liberty to sufcilt a n ex.-pic - oat not in order to xvad
it into the record, acraly fo. t..c lo.-l inforc-.tioa of the f-riaunol
- t..e opinion of a veil icnova yem-n university professor, ^rofonsor
Dr. hnrl -ngisch ir. ioidulbcr,:, ,-.u Docu-oat no. 34 in ny Docu.io.it 3ooJc
II. Cunt ua tho Prosecution did with ito v rlous opinions <uid at-
tr.icts fran public luv I intund to use t..xs dccu.o..t ncrcly o tno
basin for -y final ilea. •

Dlt# aOCi.’-LD: If tho Trloua-1 olc-oo, the oxhibits offered by
tac ^roo-eution la this result wore official C-an-aU cou -at.rios .ad
wd^jicntfl of ern-n Courta and such con .Ontario* wore -11 before
t.;o tine of 1945. -c vented to put in tnooo cca-a.it .rles i.i order
to show that Dithur-.aia v-o illc -,.1 i.. oxuanj avon uafora th t tL;o.
Cecra a Juci-ento —id Jud,Jicntn fro.. &er.aui Courts and all t .aso
exhibits wer- ooj.ctad by the CriouaJ aid tho ooJaCtion of ay
frocselLi-nn — th-sa .xhioits v„s aunt .law. Therefore I oo^^ct

Cct the ud-iaaion of this lc -^-1 opinion which v-s —do at ..och
fo; cliis trial aid vanto to aolvo tho proolcu which io ontir-1;
tho t..o.: of thv Trlbun-1. It is - 1. ;al opinion. It is not Btatau-ut
of f-cts - vhut Dr. ?rooach_aUn is off-rin .

- . -.0- __. r. President, ^rofaaacr ..arl _n;isc.i in H.iftl-

5 -rg is a duel-rad opponent of iiithji-sia. I vent to ,ji ojipcaa.it i.i the
-me ,i.. of . atti.i, quite un objective opinion. I do not la tea. ;a
-ai-i opinion .ay vay in tnis point. I intend to us a it a rely
..-aiu of orient-tien for the -ri bun -1 -s to the point of view of .


7578


15 ...XT' :.-GJ-2-lu-Grocs-(vcnSchoa)-


Co-irt 1

cnui lcf“_l expert vfao, _a I soi i is -n opponent of these ideas
jvl I will —lsc ug. it -s a Oasis for «y filial uleu. I believe if I
offer it cal” in evidence -nd ri 1 '- it nn exhibit nuno.r it will bo
uitu sufficient. I si:-11 not tontian it later, with one wor-,

S.W hCCif ai:: If the friouaal please, Hr. Frocaciunmn told us
hincolf that he is not using this leg -1 opinion in evidence so I don't
icw why he is offering it.

fh- Counsel for defense u-y in hie -rgui-ent cite .eiy

law that he dtoir.s -nd —«eo an? legal urg-xsent that up?e..r to hill
to be sound. The wci,.ht of that ar 0 u:ent will Oc for the T: ibun 1 to
-teniae. Jut nuen a docuaent as I nov offor-d as an -xhioit clearly
flho’ild not ov acnitted, as an oxhieit iu the o_so. Counsel will h..ve
tho benefit of that iu any otr.ur l^al opinions or otatuaontn or
Ju ( ‘ p-nts thut dc desires to use in his -r..vjiont.

ifco objection of Prosecution to odi-inoion of this docuno.it is
runt i.tcd.

’ 1 it.ioss, did you consider Hitler'o ;oairo:.cut - los-ll; v lid
.if. public law?

a Yes. I ..yoolf a.id -v associates, en voll -B all other p-vsonn
who coio into cont^t with hitler, considered this decree a v lid lo-
. 1 basis for tho execution of £ithan-sia.

“ In your opinion did hitler have tho :i r ht to Issue nuch decree
vitn binding legal force?

Ia uy opinion, yes, occ use the head of tho st-te who i rcheo

4

into .aiotria vithou: consu’tin!; anyone or who reaches ah a .reosent
visit otatoSalon of toh.r countries or who Ocgir.o of war without contul-
tin v-yone, who . von oefore that had Settl-d various tnin ocreO,

no .oubt had the rl.;fct in this c-se to is Uo a decree which vould

OlU he legal basis.

* and to vheti?

* To -11 Cr.raaUS.


' id vo > see hitler's h-ndvritin ffca jc-31 or av.-.r-t?

7579


15 ..c;.'-:.-a T -2-2rf-:-ro8S-(vofl5cho.i>-


Court 1

« Yes, douhlcr showed ne Hitler's original Landwritin. ah'. I
had a peotostatic copy of it in uy owe safe.

i 'hwn W.* that

* the cad of 1939 at tho arliost. possioly only Oarly in 15 0
-not the date of issue.

; la the cxtora -1 fore of the document 'ey hitler did you bco
anything objectionable?

A o. I Saw nothin,; objectionable. I was not able to Jud^e whe¬
ther .uiy pr scribed foiu ui;,ht have been viol_tcd hero. I tfoulu h. vo
li :tyf to sue anyone object to - document ri.-.-nud by adolf ilitlor no
aattor what tho external foru of it w a s.

", ’ itr.eoa, you h..ve stated th-t you coasidored the docrco
completely Valid lc*; 1 statement of hitler with tho force of law?

a Tos.

' ^ut in repeated discussions you have told a« that you Wore
working on tho draft of law. how does this o:ruc with what you n..vo
Just said?

a Such an idea voul- a t h_vo occur ad to ue out the doctors
and lav cro who were conc*rnod in the u-tter hold the tho point of
t’lew that lav h_d to be patted.

' hov did those doctors and luVyors explain this opinion?

a &oy s .id that Hitler's secrecy order io known to only a
United ntob r of persons. *Xith_noBla, however is not u u..ttar vhich
c a be loft to the individual or the t :ov«.r.uoat but effects everyone
In the Ion. run it c-nnot b„ Kept oocrot free the puolic. Primarily
people want to know •'hat conditions arc required for -uthaneMu and
vh .t a. u-rds have been intrlducod e*t that there will b„ no # .iissuo
of it. of course, if possiole only if a lew is proclaim.- With

ofiuite orovisiens but that doeB not uoan that the dc-creo itself o~g
not .vw-Oar perfectly Media.;.

“ ..'id you u.;rcw with this opinion?

* I was not ubl^ to Jud I carried out 3ouhl. r's aeni >-.nt

7560

$


15 . *,-GJ-£-S«- J ros s-( vonSchon )-

Court 1


_nd I worked on the dr-ftin*. of a law. Since I didn't understand those
..alters ayeelf I _skcd lawyers and octors to suggest various opinions
of the law.

t and, briefly what cid this law contain?

A basically it contained all rpovisions which arc necessary for
the execution of outhanasia and pr-ctic«., - very cuhoeroa«c procossof
jud .in. tha patients, -11 kinds of ltgal prec-utions vhlch wculc prohi-
oit .jjy i-isuso of euthan-sia fras a legal or acdical point of /low. I
rauubor the title now-law for granting cedicul aid to the incurably
sick persons.

i t'a* this law to put an end to all the secrecy?

A Yet, of course, l^at w u s soBcthlng th-t wo J1 jejected. In
ny institution I h-vo -lrwudy said wr.at I personally ct the tino
about the secrecy. Socle thing that I consider ri,£t I don't have to keep
a oocrot.


, » ow I should like to interpolate - .mention. »is draft
took saw tU— to wrok out diin't it?

A Yes. I Wat revised sovor-1 tites. 2no first draft w.i flnishod
r_ti»>r quickly out it w a o i-»rovcd -gain —v* again. I -Syjuo there were
ten if not acre revisions.

hy w. l# this law not passed?

a I don't know. I know th-t jouhl . arou,^ht it to Hitl-r'r .t-
tx itiou repeatedly. nitl^r r^fused-he aoprov^i of thu contents, but
nr.it. that h« di n't Want it a-do public before the «.nd of the wcr.

" Did you learn Hitler's reason for this opinion?

a Vo.


>ld ncu-l-r -nd "r-nr t r-n«.-tcdly k aitler to h-v- this lav

pafiflee?

a Yes, i know of th-t the c-Sv of aoth of th.c». I know, I just
n if, that Bouhlcr su'caitted this draft to Hitler personally n bey-
onc that I learned fra; douhlcr, -s w.ll s a.randt, that they h -1 .pc-t-
t ly *C') the Tuunrer to r.akc puolic thv. l : .v 'hich he air y


75*1


May l5-A- ; -BK-3-l-Karr cw (Int. Von Schoen)
Court; No. 1


i I 3 a copy of this draft available?

- I don't know, I'vo Sivori you all the addresses whore
it oinht bo. It was sont to various state agencies and
also to oth^r pcoplo; to ohurch authorities, for example,
bocauso tho o. inion of the church was very important, but,
unfortunr.toly, no co.y of this draft has boon found. I
hove also tried to reconstruct it, but that would be too
Ion ; to jive all thoso details here.

' Did you doubt the validity of the law oeoausc of
tho oloaont of secrecy?

.. No, I said before that, in ranny oases, tho Fuehrer
issued secret decrees and this did not affect tho validity
in any way. For oxcaplo, the creation of tho Ministerial
Council for the Defonso of tho »<eioh. That was a socrot
dooroo with tho absoluto forco of law.

i Now, tho docroo does not spook of incurably insano,
but incurably sick. That moans that tuberculosis pationts,
cjicor pationts, etc., could also bo subjected to euthana¬
sia if tho prerequisites required in tho law woro fjiven.

*• Yea, that is true, but I said boforo I saw the
dcoroa itself for the first tine porha, s in 1939, more
likoly in 19-.0 - Bouhler showed it to r.o. In his instruc¬
tions to qj, Bouhler only spoke of tho incurably insano.

I never received -ny instruction about incurably sick
.ersons boin; included in euthanasia; only incurably in¬
sane. Only cases whore tho mental cosidition had led to
a cca.lote destruction of ..^rson-lity and tho lifo cx./cc-
tation - physical lifo of tho insane is not of nay *"
importance in that connection.

i -.ccordin ; to the defendant Kurl Brandt, the docroo
was dated back to the 1st of So. tomber 1939. Do you know
why this particular late was chosen?


7562


i:..y 15-L'-BK-3-2-:<^rrbw (Int. Von Schocr.)
Court Noi 1


.. No, I do not know that. 3ouhlor didn't toll me.

^ <*itnoss, to conclude this subject I should like you
to discuS3 Document No. 253, Exhibit 331 the chert which
the prosecution has submitted, and your now chart of tho
organization of outhnnnsia.

Mr. President, I have submitted this as Exhibit 35
yesterday.

witness will you .lease answer tho following questions
briefly:

Did you draw tho .rosocution's chart yourself?

•• No, I did not draw that myself. It was done by someone
olso.

. Did you maku a skotch for it?

.. I triod to make a 3kotch, but it did not sucocod.

•«, nd vihnt objootioia do< you still have today to this
chart insofar as you hevo not alroady mentioned then?

“ First of all, tho organization. 3ohno and ..Hero
offioo and Hoydo and tho transport com. any are directly
unlor 3ranc t. ..Iso the ox. ^rts and chief ox; orts. T;.ct
is not oorroct. This whole organization - this wholo
rnchino not under Karl Bra.-»lt. This can bo soon
from ny corrected chart, what tho actual subordination was.
Then, neither I myself nor my associates had any su;>or-
visory relctionshi. to the exports or the other a£oncio3
of T—1 and there was no ri;:ht on our ; .art to ;ivo in¬
structions. The instructions cane from Bouhlor. Thon,
in this . rosocution chert, the B and L institutions - tho
ob3orvat -.on and euthanasia institutions were .rosuntpu a3
boin;; directly under tho euthanasia '.uthorities. That is
not truo. They were still under the .»oich Ministry of
Interior, as always.

. -itness, from the chart of the .irosocution I soo


7533


May 13-M-BK-3-3-Korrow ;Xnt. Von 3choea)
Court 56. 1


that tho observation end euthanasia institutions were not,
as you say under tho organization in general, but woro
directly under tho oxports and then indiroctly under T—l.

-a I not ri ;ht?

.. It is torribly complicated on a chart which is supposed
to show organization, at the some tine, functions and that

•

is the case hero. I myself do not know wh :t’ these various
linos arc to indicate, .jo they to show the course taken .
by the patients, or r.ro they tc show organizational sub¬
ordination? ..a you ox.lain it, thoso linos ;oin^ up on
tho ri ;ht, the observation and euthanasia institutions -
if thoso do not represent tho courso of ti!u questionnaires
and tho pationts, but sin. ly the authority, then thoso lino3
ere wron^ and your idea is corroct that thoso institutions
aro sup. osod to bo under tho ex. orts. That was not tho
ease. Thoso institutions oentinuod under tho authority
of tho Ministry of tho Intoriof.

1 Woll, let U3 jo on to tho noxt point. How nbout tho
questionnaire section?

•• This does not thor-foro bo Ion;: to tho foundation j butt
to tho iloieh .*orkin: Union for Mental Institutions. I
rcalizo that clearly on tho basis of the prosecution
documents when I saw that tho sondinj out of tho questionn¬
aires to tho ox.^rt, Pfannnuoller, wont through tho .toich
..’orkin : Union and that tho questionnaires woro sont back
by him to the .tcich workinj Union, not to tho Foundation.
This ocain, I havo considered when I corrootod tho chart.

I have spoken about Bione yesterday. I need not suy
anythin; about that today. In the corrected plan, I be¬
lieve that the confusion between orjanization and functions
has been avoided. I have indicated, by arrows, and cx-
. laincd tho organization and the execution of tho transfers.

7584


"ay 1L : —1I-3K-3—*-K rrov; (lift. Von Schoon)
Court -»o • 1


-11 other lines r-f_r not to functions, but to subordination.
But I should like to oa.hosize once norc that such a chart
nuv-r existed beforo end I merely had to draw it u; accord-
in; to the best of ay knowlcd ;e and after lofrcs.'.in;; ay

r. oaory throu ;h tho documents. It novor existed earlier
in this form or in nny 3inil,.r fora.

i Now, . lea so ;.ut tho ohart aside.

witness, soorccy led to unfortunate circuastincus in the
oxocuticn of euthanasia and, in the Inst cnjdysis, to
tho ocn. laints of which tho rosocution has 3ubnittod
sever al ex ;;, los, but we shell cos back to this lator.

Now, I should liko to ;o on to tho discussion of your

s. ocific activity within outhr.ruisin so that tho Tribunal
will knw wh;t your work was. -r.d ..l^aso answor this
quost ion briofly. ihut was tho nature of your work in tho
froaowork of euthanasia?

*» It is not sim.lo to ox. 1 in thi3 work. At wns vory
com. lio ted. I do not intend to deny that I h il spmothinj
to do with it, but I 3hall attorn; t to explain how fur .
ay notivity wont. Tho T-; was ;co;ra; hie ally, _nd from
tho or :anizctiond .oint of view, so. irato fro- w own
offico. Bouhlor hiasclf was not able to novo his office
to T—i. Ho remained in his offico in ifosstrasso and
.0 0 . lo work in ; at T-l enno to sco him to re. ort to him.

If Bouhl.r wns not there, they enno to no or to one of
ny associates. The . rosccution has usod the -words "liaison
tann" for no. This is confu3in.*. ..s far as I can remember
I did not raise any objection to that tor.': at tho tine,

Porh.r s I <vcn usod it myself, but I have just realized
that a liaison man nu3t bo located i.t thu ;jlace in which
ho has to establish the contact with someone. I did not.

I remained in Vosstrasso in the Chancellery of th_ ruehror


I-'-;.* 15-CI-BK-3-5-Harrow (Int. Von Bchoon)

Court rio. 1

because I had cost of ay work there. Hot only for those
reasons, but also for other reasons, I was never so
completely inforaod about Bouhlor's ideas and the execu¬
tion of euthanasia as the prosecution nay a3suno. I
continuously rcooivod instructions, decisions, orders,
fror. Souhler which I passed on to tho people working at
Tior^ertonstrasso - doctors and adninistrative officials.
It was in the nature of thin;s, t her of or o, that at tho
bojjinnin'j especially I took caro of sotting up tho . -
organization and .;avo ay aid and sup. ort. But I ay 30 If
nevor roally worked at T—i. I oould not issuo instruc¬
tions on ny own initiative cithor boonuso Bouhlor con¬
sidered hiasolf alone responsible for euthanasia and ho
r *lWays nr.do this quito clear to no. I would novor hr.vo
dared to c.irry on independent polioloa horo. I oould
nover hr.vo taken thr.t res. onsibility.


7536


Tour? Yo. 1

IE hey 47-1.-4-1-IHh-Kaicy (Ton Schoen)


C*. ’ itncss, 'ust a brief renark. The DoeuaoKt So. 156 of the

prosecution has been sectioned repeatedly, vhich the defendant lari
Srendt sade Brandt Zxfclblt 4-A end 4-3. I should like to chow you
this docuaent and ask you to ansver the Question, do you recognize the
signature, as the vltnese Eederich tali, of Bouhler under this docunent?

A. Yes, that is the sign- ture of 5ouhler.

Ar.d you knov the contente of this doeuacst?

A. Yes, I knov of tho contents. I also know the letterhead.

This lo the stationery that holchslelter Souklcr used at that tine In
the service of tho Chancellory of the Fuehrer uni SSTAP.

C^. Sow, another cucetlon. Did you later learn of thie coeclflc
letter of Souhler vhen you talked to the r.eich Ministry of Justice?

A. Yes, I learnel of this letter.

. Q. "hen will you nlonso put the letter aside and continue In

describing your functions?

%

A. Ay right to give instructions, If I nay call it that, vno con¬
cisely secondary. I think that covors the situation. In tho couroo
of tiao I hod naturally tccone acquainted 'dth the arterial. I v a o
often presont at tho discussions of experts, as voll ns the fdalnistru-
tlve discussions. In non;/ cosos I v a0 cresont o'ficlolly as ?cuhlor'u
representative, so that outsiders night very veil got the lnorocolon
that I vno the Influential nan in euthanasia. Tho vitnose Konr.ccke
doubtleos had this laprcsslon, but I con only enthosiso that hlr lacres-
sion ie not correct. I vas nothing but Y-ouhler's doruty, or, os tho
prosecution called ne In its opening speech, Bouhler's aoslstor.t for
these questions.

‘'itcesr, froc the cross exaninatlon of .r. Fardy vith tho
vltneso *.r. Pfennnueller I gather that the prosecution ecscrently oleced
-:reat inportrncc on vhether you vere over in charge of such o cectlng,
vhuther you ever presided over such a nesting, or vhethor you took a
oolenn oath free ony of the experts or other such erternrlo. Do you
deny these things or take then as e natter of coirse?

75£7


Court He. 1

15 day <r7-:.-4-2-ic-'.-.valoy (Von Schoen)

A. I In so voy deny then. In nary cc&cs I presided over such
-votings. Exactly vhat actings they v t ro I don't reneaber. It sounds
exaggerated to sey "preside" buceu&c the discussions veren't in euch n
fora. v o • ctualljr sat at a roind table and at & round table there is
no choirnac. I certainly never took a solean oath, but it is auite
oossiblo that in one case or another I spoke to one nan or another on
behalf of outhannsia, or vhat he leerned at these neetings. I certainly
do not dony theso things.

Q. Sov, vitnuts, in this connection I an interested only in tvo
specific aectlsgo vhich the prosecution has citod as proof of your
laportnnee in tho euthanasia orograc, that Is, the neetieg in Ilunich
and thon the aceting of tho lavyero. I aek you to cccnont briefly on
those tvo sovtings. What vr.s the Kur.ich seating about or vhat vno tho
seating of lav.-oro stout?

A. Tho seating in hunlch vr.s probably a scvtlng of tho heads of
tho jau Office for Public Health ond other doctors invited by Conti.

..edicnl Questions vero discussed at this osetl&g In general, but Conti

had asked Bouhlar to cose to this noting and to instruct those doctors

about tho decroc anl about tho soeourcs taken ur to that tiao in /

euthanasia. Bcuhlor had precised to go but then van unable to and

sent so in hit place. I shoved the decree of the Fuehrer at thio

sooting and I spoke briefly obout tho draft of tho lav vhich vas being

vorkoi or..

Q. Just a ainute, vitnoss. Did the Turtleipanti in this sooting
in anv vay object to vhat you sold or to your ideas? Later during tho
recess '■•n: any opposing opinion expressed?

A. ''hen I left this ae&tlng, I talked for half an hour or an
hour vith various people *ho had teen present. Varicuc suggestions
“•ri nadc about additions and iaprovvaents in the lav, but no objccticnc.

I re nor tod this to r.eieh6lcitcr Souhler and he arranged that all those
vho vere Interested vould get a draft of the lev i C its fore at the
;i=v, ac tbt they could send in their suggestions.


7588


Court Ko. 1

15 slay 4?-X-4-3-if3i-!«lcy (Von Schoon)


Q, How, hov about the neeting of lasers?

A. This neetlng In the Ainistry of Justice vac a netting of lavyers
who had to discuss nil sorts of questions, and it was an answer to a
reouost froa Guortner to Bouhler that Souhlor was to exoloin the details
of euthanasia at this neeting.

DR. rRCLSCHAAK’.": Hr. President, I sutclt Docuaont 36 fron ay
Document 3oclc 2, page 54. Chat is an extract froa eo-cellcd Geraan
Justice, tho Official Journal of Geraon Jurisprudence, the year 1941,
as Exhibit 36, and I ohall quote. The book, Your Honor, free which I
have taken this ercerot I obtained froa the docuacnt section of the
Tribunal, but as far as I as inforoed there have been difficulties,
that vhon these books are givon xxt or submitted to a court, the books
are not roturned to the docuacnt section soon enough. Conocouently, I
considered it expedient to oubait nercly e certified copy fron this
book.

I®. HCCJT'ALD: To offer the oxhlbit in this fora io unueual, but
it Is usual in such cases that a certified copy le hor.dod to tho Tri¬
bunal and not a carbon copy, and . would like in the futuro to h’ve
ouch exhibits on the part of the defense offered to tho Tribunal in
this aannor.

Tri PRESIDE}!?: The preparation of the chotoctat copy froa tho
page of the bo,k is probably the better practice, »nd should be followed
heroaftor.

16. raGLSCK\ASH: Vary veil. Your Honor. I ouoto froa page 553,
Docuaent 36:

"Cr. 23 and 24 Aoril o congress of the Prosidentc of the District
Courts of Appet-1 and of the General Public Prosecutors took oleee in
2erlir. under the ©residency of State Secretary Dr. Schlegelberrer. The
©residents of the Reich Suprenc Court, the reo©lo'c Court, ar.d the
Reich Fa tent r ffice, uz veil nr the Chief Reich Public hrocccutcre,
took pert ir. this congress.

"The congress celebrated topical legal and adair.l’ftrntive rrobU r


7589


Court So. 1

15 .iay 47-«-4-4-IK*4-ifeloy (Von Sckoen)

in speeches and discussions.“

A ausber of pcocle ere then oentloned, rrecfc, university professor
Ir. Fayae fron the '‘hansellory of the Fuehrer. It is a certified eery,
rieaoe give the document to the General Secretary.

Q. lov, please continue, witness?

A. I attended this n.cting actually as e representative of 3ouhler,
and Just ae ut th« Booting of doctors in I.unich, I ehovtd the people
present a photostat cop?', as a natter of fact, ! showed then several
copies of the Fuehrer’s deerce, so that everyone would be able to see
it, and I also talked about the lew which was being drafted. *.»hy
ru rtnor askel rouhlcr to inforn tho various Justice officials of theeo
things cut b* seen free tho prosecution docuner.ts. Che Adninistrntion
of Justice had hod difficulties because of euthanasia, which I had not
foreseen, but those difficulties arose because of tho olcncr.t of secrecy.
As SO 156 shows, Souhlor told Guerta«r tlu»t ho alcne considered hintolf
rtODOnsiblu for euthanasia, but then he trici by inf orDing Juctlco offi¬
cials to diopoet of these differences, and for this reason Pouhlor
authorised to repr. • • r.t hit rt this nceting and ir.forn the gcr.tloaun.


15 -ay—■-I-GJ-5-1—ii<.ch2n-(vcR Schcn)-
Ccurt 1.

* fitness, at this c-._tin- iid yon hear any objections Irco the
high Justice officials free all parts of G.rcany, as 1 sea fran the
Document?

.v So, there was no objection. ..s far as I recall he Stat. Secre¬
tary and actin scirinistrat r of Justlc- Schlegclb rger.

4 Schlegulb.rger?

A fc3, Schle..~lber^cr s 1C at the on 1 if th< meotiiv, no* that they
scon there was a legal eerve of th. Anhr.r ur these erasures, they
h-id no l .i’-.l object in tc th. .x.cuti □ 'f euthanasia; that is about
what he said.

4 Jr. Prescit'.ent, in this conn-cti- n, I submit in ny Document 3ook
2, Dcour. nt Ho. 37, pa.v 55, '•? exhibit 37. This is on afliuavit cf the
feraer ifiniot.rial irecter in tho H.ich kinistry of Justico Karl Em^rt,
born 23 Octob.r, 1877. l l is very sh.rt, but f re at lnt.rest, becaus..
it showj the cpixd n cf the influontnl jurists in this queSti n to wheel
the lay-can Brack pr-coito thoS- matt r s:

n In approximately 3prin. 19hl Viet r -rack . uve -n infenantivt lec-
tur. about Euthanasia ir. the *\-ich Ministry of Justice cn behalf of
4 *eichslcit-.r Bouhl r, h r prevented from atteniin. . \ foundation

lor the c rnl Juatificativn -f euthanasia, brack qu-te ixecple -uV! pcir.-
toi -ut the 10-1 >s3 xisa-nce f th. incur lbly insane. Ethical rens' no,
cbovu '.11 ccun-asien, demon-Icf th. r.l Se f th se individuals fra
th ir suff rir. -. Thera war, n n.ntlcn 1 my kint! of p.lltioH t war
•aspect for thu perfemmet f euthanasia. • lkud th-n ibout fuehrer
decree t B- uhler an.' “r-n't n* ‘ .alt in full with th. !j*:ft cf a law,
which h- been suboitteJ, r was to b. submitted tc Adolf Hitler. He
mentioned the various provisions of this ‘raft. 1 was convinced fren
Brack* 3 statements that this 'raft law provide - ev.ry r.uarante' for ’he
protection oi tho incurably sick n- insane. «.s far an I can remember,
certain eXeptioni w-re stipul-.v tar tr.v porfarmonce cf euthanasia, far
instance persens nuff.rin fr:m injuries of the cr-i-a incurr-- airing
th. first -1 ‘Or r. I think ! r.i r. rs V r. ils > pt .


IS ."~ay---:-G J-5-2 --u.ohan-(vcnSchcn) -
Court 1

•'Brick's statements r.assure =~, because acciriir.. tv. th-a, it
res to b_ definitely assuned that a r-_ich Law .--ail' then b. enact-.;
in the customary fen:, ic., by publication in the _eicr; Law uazette.

I saw nc nasen why any difficulties should arise..' 1

HR. HrtTCY: ay it pl-_ . o, Your inner, in the case cf “eck-r-Kr.ysin, ,
wh ich will cccs. bef r. this .ribunal after the cccpl. ticn -f the Defen¬
se of -efcn'ant 7cktcr Brack, Use «*rececuti n has char - the Defendant
-\.c« .r-Fr-ysir. in the Lvlictcent unler cunt one with Ccnsprir:icy,un-
t!cr count to which sp.cial responsibility fir -n: participation in the
high iltitudc cxp.rioen-s, the freesinf exp rLtents, the SuU-water ux-
periconts, the epi '.cole Jaundice exp- rinvnts, anl the sulf milaaUc ex-
perinonts, spett- furor exp-rLe.nts in in count three it has chart cC
the .Icfcaiant Becker— rcyoin vitr. these experiments as set fair in
count two. ..t this tin. the rrcsccuti wishes t- with ra\* the char;-
arainst the 'efendant 3eckor-Froy*in. ins far as h. w .a ccnnectc ’ with
the sulfonilini . -xp riiienta. If th. tribunal requests, I -.'ill aubr.it
thia in writin. . .*c will witn’raw cnly • ne char e. U you want ue
to fil. a writin with th Sucre tary-o~n~rol -n: c .sply with it.

Th:. .R..DIDL.iT: The fr'3ccuti n rill fil its /rith'raral of this char¬
ge in writin with a full st~-Ur.-nt n *. ive c .r.3 1 fer tr.e “efen lent
Becke r-F r a ir. ; copy.

.-B. AtRLI: Yes Dir.

9Y Dil, R0L5Clwe».r;l;

1 itr.esr y .ur -neub. r s otat-.^nt by the representative ,f the

eic! s Ministry f Justic at this ox..tin- t tile eflvCt that the hitler
-.cree, wl .ch s « sh-we' t. th se pr-s-n., was ib3 lutely a valid, l.r 1
onsis iar euthanasia?

.e Yes, I ooi that bef< re. That was the stat-n-nt I th. acting :<i-
nister of Justic., st U. Secr .tary Schle,>lb.r .r, that was th. highest
Official 't th-t tiz. , bv.c us. lu.rtn-r hi La the- ioe.ir.ti_e.

1 Then j. PreSi nt; I h. Vc finish- th 3ubj-.ca with the ef.:i-

• •

:-.at Brack's • r:. in c • • c*i n dtfc ,ut:: .v'-sia. In the .xaninati n f


15 : iay-K-GJ-5-3-.~han-< vonSchon)-
Ccurt 1

the Defendant fori 3randt the frc-secuti'n placed preal emphasis on cla-
ri:yin the queseicn of shat persons were to be effected by euthanasia.
C-;i5equ«.ntly, I see cysclf obliged briefly to ro into this question.

'itn-ss, n w -re ccee to*a sublet, which is veiy much debated, ycu
knew that according to the decree the doctors to be app inted by Bran !t
and Bcuhler were to have their functions extend.d to th- point that
th.u could -rant euthanasia t~ incurably sick persons an.', ycu have just
said that the law, which was be in drafted, w s tc contain all provi¬

sions which had become n.c-ssary frea the practice of euthanasia?

n lea.

Q Maw, the first quo* icn cooes up is, and -hen the f rosecutien
asks rightly what p.rsons w-r. effected by this decree, were there any
-xeptiena, prc.i'o l an* who '-tormina 1 the exception, in your uxanina-
tion before in to- rrc rater y u "d’ly ncu h hcv. s id nothin-- ib ut this.
In stu yin. the r-c'rls, I tbs.rve hat this important point is not
mention.' at .11 in j j affi avit, as that forgotten, what was the
reason?

.v I n't kn w. In ry int..rrc atim, 1 iscu33od those thin-s pro¬
perly. I s i, th-. ford ners, ,rl was veterans, in this case where
the war injuries were tr.c caus- • f their insanity n. Je«3 were excetip-
tee free euthanasia. * list was shown to Re and I had to as3U.r.- it was
a transfer list free ne instituti n t a r.u thanes La I stitutc, .n
which Jews wcTw listed.

. .x. fr«.si_ent, i sh.ui like to interrupt the defendant briefly

here and refer to th. c cuocnt. Ihe cunent her- just mention-I is Mr.
158, lochibit iilO, F,n lish Doeu&.nt Bo-k, 16 pa.> U. Please continue n 1
t cuacnt bock. This wce> th- ' cun.nt rhick was shewn tefy
I believ. that this r.;s the list, which I was shown, here various
pel's ns wh s ntfliS indie te th.y are Je.s, as w.ll as vari us persons
wh wer bora utsic f - rr.-.ny -_r. list ’. It Suusc that I can rta-n-
' _r v ry clearly that ‘cr in.rs ha tc be -Xe.-.tte -n ’ tha this was
bap. n per. r. 1 r r fr a Bitl r. I was n t c nfus.c, but ins-far

7593


15 -vxOi-n-(vonSchc.'i)-

C_urt 1

-s tot Jews are. ocnc- rnt^, 1 nyscli boron to hrm ubts ini on toe ■»>-
vi3>. f to.- int_rra-:^l/-r3 I i’ net insist that Jews wer x«.cptot.

,.fur s^e-ln all tiu. :ocu=»nts .-oin on hivinr ncc.ry refresh.: , 1 knew
that “c« were -xcipted in the soao my. I oust o.tntoim: tint I
ileo £ r jot in the interred-ti n. Lober victim pcrs.ns injur-..! in
Industrials accidents fr.fi which insanity r.culto were. ols: nptv ..

Q will <& intc this inW.il to mkc it perfectly clwar.

Til. Hti^nEKT; Beferu pursuin' t .is n-.ttor ir. -tail, the ‘riburol
till be in recess

(A recess was toktn)-


irA


Court Ho. 1

15 nay 47-n-7-l-iivi-ceexd (Ranlor)


TS KAHSKAL: All per cons Is the courtroom will nicest fir.i their
Swata. The Tribunal is again in session.

THe. rltSIDLST: The counsel say proceed.

BY 2B. HECESC&iABH: -

l<. Witness, before the receee I as'<ed you whether foreigners wore
exenoted free euthanasia.

A. Yes.

Q. Iron whoa did you learn that 7

A. I learned that froa Souhlar, and he aeid that vac done uoon
the cxnress order of Hitler. Only Reich Ocrnens could be subjected to
euthanasia.

Q. Vhen did you learn that?

A. I learned that during or.o of the first conferences vhcro
Bouhler already cccnunlcntcd that fact to ae and to all the other nar-
ticipants ir. the confcronco. Ho later repeatedly oointed to it and
demanded that everyone who woo in any way concerned with the dealing
of thle sattor, especially the docartaent of tho oucotionnalroo, would
have to be thoroughly informed about that fact.

Q, «r. Brack, win you teke that unon your oath; will you take it
upon your oeth that Bouhler gave you thio diroetive nr.d all tho other
participants]

A. Yes, I wont to do that, and every porticioant will bo able to
confirm it.

C» Vitneso, It s«ecs somewhat otculiar to nc. I nay ueeur.e that
Bouhler vq C not interested in having a Questionnaire filled out about
every mental notient in Oorats;.-, if a special category of patients,
would not bo concerned vith euthanasia, is that right?

A. That ic correct. It does nr pear that voy for the outsider.

It soama that it 'as superfluous for the department which has to fill
out the questionnaires es well os for 7-4.

WitnCes, I r.ov want to rut to you Document Ho. E25, which if ir.
Soman Document Booh 14, volume 2, uage 124; -nglisk document Book 14,


7575


•Court So. 1

15 «ay 47-X-7-2-i£*.-5eard feaalcr)

oage 216 . I will now tsfc yen to look at that doeunent. Ihcro you will
euc c. copy of the Questionnaire a6 It ‘■as sect to all the mental insti¬
tutions. Cn cage 217 you will find a note which ie to he observed when
filling cut the cueetiofinaircs. buch a leaflet was eent to the insti¬
tutions in order to instruct then as to how this ouestionnaire vac to
be filled out, is that right?

A. Yes.

This instruction note states exactly the category of caticnte
on which ouGstionnairee had to bp filled out, is that right?

A. Yes.

Q, How, I shall road the first sentence to you: "All patients
ore to bo or.U3«.reted, ■ end then follows paragraph 1, 2, and 3, which
wc shall skip for the soaont, and then It soys in prrsgruph 4, "’..ho
are net of Cerzan nationality or o: uernan blood, indicating tho race
and nationality." I now ask you, would you r.ot hrve to change your
testiaony to tho effect that foreigners arc to be oxcoptod fron
cuthanasic in view of tho fact that paragraph 4 says very scociflcnlly
that Questionnaires havu to be filled out by nil patients of non-Ocrnnn
nationality?

A. So, X cannot change ny toctiaony.

li. I do understand that you win now insist that you wore follow¬
ing your directive which said that all foreigners have to be oxccptcd,
but I have to find out why, r.a the crosocutor win have to find out
why, Questionnaires wore at all introduced rbout non-Germans end
secondly why Questionnaires were filled out on all non-Gcracns, whether
they specifically fell under figures 1 , 2 , end 3 of tho instruction
leaflet or not.

A. Karl Brandt, and I any spy as a result of e lack of otrsonal
knowledge, had tried to answer this Question giving ctatictical reasons.
He inid that the r.eick ministry of Interior was interested about the
extent to which the institutions were used. But, Karl Brandt, or. the
other hand, only very addon p&rticipeted in this concern. Kc, there-

7596


Court So. 1

15 tiay 47-t'.-7-3-l.->.-c«>eri (rosier)

'ore, could not lcnov why there vet an obligation to fill out this
outotionnairt for foreigners.


7597


15 Ifc? 47 —k-8-l-pkp- Bioisi (R-cL-r)

Ccurt So. 1

A.. I personally was ir. 2 position to observe the development of
these questionnaires and I was prc-Svnt when Linden tnd 3ohne presented
tr.<.c to Bouhl-r for approval. These questionnaires wore s-nt to -11
Cer r. Cental institutions through the Reich Ministry of the Interior,
Th-ywure p-rtly s-nt there-directly, partly through the subordinate
county dninistr-tior.s. As I saw from the docuaunt, the decisive d-.tc
wns the 1st of Suptueb-r 1939. As I said before, Himmler ordered
strict secrecy to be kept. In this covering letter to the nont-.l
institution it had to be prevented th*t the purpose of this enumeration
of Xho mental *» tients be recognised for that reason the s-ntonco was
introduced in tho introductory pr.rt of that letter, which reads,

“With rognrd to tho necessity of coordinating the cental institutions
through planned econony —etc.

DK. FROESCK. AKN: Mr. President, ir. th't oonx>jCtion Ifhouid
like to dr.au attention of the Tribunal to three- documents which wore
presented by the prosecution. As I already mentioned - this is Document
:«-B25, ’ r.d then th-ru is ono, U*96-PS, Exhibit 357, which is to bo
f jund ir. th. Jn-.llsh Document Book, Volume 1/., p gc 209; in the Goman
Dacun nt Book, P-rt II, page 126... And I s:ould -Iso like to draw
your attention to tho Document JC-U33, Exhibit 335, which is to bo found
in tho English L'ocuo r-.t Book 14, page 86. These are the coverin'- letters
of which the witness is new sp- -king,
rf DR. FHOBSC.'tL®.:

Q. would you pleas- continue?

A. Ever, il this a.ntonco was intended at a canoufLago

sentence Low nr o those institutions, such a systemized registration

naturally prevailed; U:* ever, this registration had no connection t

11 with Euthanasia. I shall revert to that question later, .ih if

discussing th- ti..:r qu-stimnair s. a? my rate, the heads of those

a-.ir.tnl ir.stitutlrs vhich had to d.al with the filling out zi these

questionnaires, were-told by this covering letter that this is -tt- r

r‘ r registering 'll : . sever - tally ill - tients.. if tho foreigners

• •

icc'.t^d rear dir. to severing letter, cany he «.ds


"


c* on


15 toy 47 -Jf-8-2-okp— Hiolsi (RraUr)
Court No. 1


of the cental institutions, and cony of the clericil personnel, would
have asked themselves about tr>; reason for such in exception. No
practical reason could hive- been found which would justify foreigners
b-. in#, uxcuptod. That, of course, would hive opened a door to many c
wild moor. For that reason or.- took the r-v-rs- pith in order to "Iso
register 15»-s- foreign mantel patients. The question regarding
nationality ire! race was contained in every quest ionr.-iro in Gor.iv.ny it
th't tine, and could not create iny urdue 'tt-ntion. For th“t. rocson
it could not create any a t tent ion if, in addition to the categories
which ire ccr.tair.od therein, — criminals and patients of certain kind
— would also include rationality nd race. In th-t way one achieved
cecoufl-go of the exception directives, and ono also svoidod questions
being put by outsiders Just why foreigners are to bo uxoopted.

Q. Witness, if I understand you correctly - it was necessary
for foreigners to fill out those qu-ationr.aires b cause, on the ono hard,
orv wanted to koop the true reason frea the he.ad of the montcl ir.stituto;
and, on the ether hand, one wan Ud to give assurance to the Porlin
head office in order to safeguard these foreigners by registering thorn?

A. lv>, these qu-stionnrlres, aft-r having boon fill-d out,

w-r.t back via ihu J.'inistry of the In t-ri or to the T-A; 'rid from there

were sent to ti;- exports. In the T-4, when dealing with these question-

•

r.air-s there w.ao the b-ct possibility of sorting out t h- forcign-m,
ard 1 personally convinced ays-If, and know, that in all caces where
foreigners wen. reoort-d this p-ssage in the questionnaire wan underlined
with red pencil. It was sorted out and filed in different cabinet.

It wasn't ver. included in the photostatting procedure. Through the above
procedure th-r- was -Yen air* certainty of xce-pting ev-ry forvign-r.

The saa; procedure was adopted with reference to those who wore
injured during the world war. Theru, of coura., we had not that much
certainty because tr.-y, of ccurs., we-r- exccot-d, but , rn the other hand,
were included ir. tha uxp_rt pr ocedure. In th- c-as- of a control cade
by Hitler, which Sraadt has already described, it has actually b -r.
as- rtairiud that in ti - tlir-e or four c-ses wh-r<- the atr.Vi illness


»


7?9V


15 !£i" 47 -i!-3-3-pkp- Biolsi (Easier )

Court o* 1


could have beer, in sxoe connection with an injury ns a result of the
wet, core actually subjected to Euthenasin bee-use these questionnaires
t s>rte<: -at beforehand without any expert opinion being given.

Q. ritness, it is my impression that for reasons of security
this procedure was :-r ndlld in a soaawhat difficult way, although it
could have beer, dor*- much simpler.

A. Ko, that is not quite true. If this procedure could have
been hard led simpler it could not have given us ouch assurance. It
had to be dene with -o absolute amount of Certainty.

Q. Witness, your testimony, according to which th* questionnaires
-bout foreigners were not photostatted in the T-4 rnd wore not sent
to the expert, would you not have to change that testimony when reminding
you of what ifom-cke has said? Did nut Itcnnocko any th-t he person Uy,
as an expert, had filled jut r number of questionnaires -b-ut noi>-
Cernans?

A. That is true... I remember ilennecke's testimony, but I can
jniy emphasize (\&-ln that the cr.tter in which Jenneckc participated io
in n- way c nnected with Euthanasia - nd, really, it does n>t deserve
the nrau of Euthanasia. I must emphasise - -in nd again that
Euthanasia, -ftor August 1941, was stopped by order <f Hitler,

Thu assertion >f llonrxcku - and I already spoke bout it yesterday
where he said that ho had received HiaaLr's orders in the year 1940 -
must be incorrect. It can only concern the erdur <f 1941. However,
up to the stopp-go ir. the year 1941 I aa quit- sure th-t no question¬
naires which w-rc handled by T-4 were photostatted and jeportisod.

Q. In oh- year 1939, wht Persons did you include among
foreign.rs?

A. Aa -.3 foreiirwrs 11 were included who iwn of n-n-Ger.-ann
nationlity, whether they belonged to Sr... lnd, France, Italy, or any
other country. Of c:*irs-, members of such t-rritories hich were
c nsider-d. to have been incorport -d ir.t. the Guram Reich at th t
time — Sudet-r.lanl, nustri* — f c urse, wore not included.

- 7tCO


15 k "-7 47 ■

C-»irt 5j. 1


Dirlai (R =Ur)


Fjr instance, aeabers 3f ta. Pr-toct-ratc cS aohaaia md Moravia
"«re considere:' to bo foruigr.^rs, 'nd in no case was any Czftch
sat; ct.d ta 3u than,-sir.


15 Hay li7-M^.TD-9-l-C-crss (7nt. Ranler)

Court So. 1

Q How about tho TTarthogau and iast Prussia?

k On the basis of a State agroenent they were incorporated into
tho Ocnaan Reich in 1939 and that is why it is quite clear that they
fall within tho euthanasia. I cannot say, however, whether any
euthanasia were carried out within thoso gnus* That was sonothing for
Lirvion to do in tho Ministry of Interior#

Q In tho questionnaires, as troll as in tho instruction leaflet,
thoro is a question about tho race of the individual, ,.s it can bo
soon from tit.- footnote son. of thosj people- also wore uxcoptod#

* I have alroa.V stated earlior that ns far as I ronuibor
Jews woro also excoptod. "his was for tho reason that Hitlor had said
that euthanasia can only bo given to Goraan citizons because it con¬
stitutes ar. act of grace#

Q And for tiu very sacsj reasons wore Jews roquirod to fill out
those quo3tionnairos as you already duel da tad in tho caso of foreigners?

,» Tho troatuont of tho questions was carried through in the
sauo way in th, ooso of Java 03 was in tho case of forui ;nors. I cannot
Imagine tha t Jaws sbouldn'1 have been uxcoptod in tho sa>uo way;

Q A little earlier you sai that participants in tho first

World War wore to ba oxcopted fron outhanasia whonovor thoir nantil

illnoss stood in sc no connection with an injur}’ which they had

roooivod fror. ttu Tt’orld .‘or. How, considering your testimony I should

llko to point to Document :r—i37, Exhibit 361*, which is in tho English

Docurwnt Book ll;, pa o 236. There you will find a list which was

0

"arofully compiled by tha Prosecution - a list or 22 dor.th notices
taken from a \ Snxcnian ifcropauor. "a this list you will find a renark
in Paragraph 3, that they arc voter-.ns of .;rli %-r 191h-1917« On h
yen find ho was boarer of the cross of honor fer war votc-rnns and you
vrill find something s k-ilar in figure 5# These are participants in tho
World Tar who diod at Linz and who wore designated as r . • . y-u

bring this fact in connection with tho st-.tea^nt you Just nado?


7602


15 liny ^7-::-.vT2-?-2-Gr ass (Int. Ranooler)
Court Ho. 1


That is quite true «hat ycu say there, doctor. Let ne say
first of all that thoro is absolute inconsistency in the fact that
Euthanasia as an act of grace could only be riven tc Germans and in
the fact that war veterans ware exceptod fren it. Thus tho presen¬
tation of this as an act of groca sqors to loso its foundation* But,
for purely psychological reasons in view of tho fact that a war was
then -oiivj on Bcuhlor, after aaxxy ’iscussions with nany doctors and
other persons, decided that in order to avoid any unrost anong tho
population the participants in tho first 'crld ~ar rraro to bo excepted
under vary special conditions which I shall oluciiato in a noraent. This
was done to avoid anyone having tho suspicion that persons uoundod in
tho present war, lot us say, tdth brain injury could bo in danger of
having their livos token under Euthanasia. However, this exclusion of
first V orld ’.var veterans did not exclude veterans altogothor. Exdudod
wciro only votor.*ns in wbeta a war wound was tho causo of nontol illnoss.
Thus a raan who .as par A ly*od, lot us say, or had rocoivod a aovoro log
wound, was not oxcoptsd frota tho euthanasia booauso this paralyois had
nothin to do with tho brain injury. That is tho sano for persons who
sustained Industri J. acci fonts. I have said that before.


q F- haven't answered ty tion yot. How was it those

four or five r votorans woro anon, thoso who rocoivod euthanasia.


A Here it says worl • rar vet rans but thora is no indication
thoro was ary rental sickness in thoso pacplo that had anythin'- to do
with 'tar injuries.

Q I understand what ycu scan, o alroa£ f dealt with the
oxcoptions. Kcw, of thoso who actually did. receive euthanasia you have
alroc V sai l that on instructions by Bcuhlor euthanasia within
fr.ancwork of your activity could bo applied only to incurably uontally


ill yxirsons, i3 that tru ?

ix Yos, that is correct*

Q Th; Prosecution whan cxnninin. Karl Brandt as lead a rrurbur of

questions of Mr- in that connection and I should like to direct the seno

7603


l5 l£ay U7-!f-ATD-9—3-Cr os3 (Ins. Renler)
Court No, 1


questions to you. The Fuehrer docroe soys nothin’ to the effect that
these sick persons would die natural deaths in th- cour3o of ovents. Is
that true?

A No, there isnothing to that effect in the decree#

Q Is it correct that a person 15 years old can bo incurably
ill and yet live to a ripo old ago as far as you learned that fron
physicians.

A That is possible, yos,

Q Should euthanasia only bo usod with such porsons as will
dio a natural death shortly* namely within two years, lot us say?

A NO, it was not so United.

Q Now, I again put to you Docuaont IJO—825 according, to which
tho duty of reportin'; is r.ontionod. Now, osido fron point b all
pationts cro to report regarding tho naturo of their sicknoss, tho
stato of thair disooso if they fit tho qualifications of points 1-3.

Is that so?

A Yos.

Q “/asit not also statod that parsons capable of working woro
not to bo subjecto:'. to outhenasia,

A No, t2v,ru waonothin; to that offoct.

Q But in tJx. questionnaire you had to say whothcr you wore
capable of work or not?

A Yos, that is so but there wore cjrtain reasons for that and
certain limitations.

Q "*hat wero tho limitations?

A The institutions ha : interests in thoir pationts as thoso
being used in agricultural work. Thay would not wish thoso patioijt3 to
bo ranovod fron this "Jerk, after they had becoco usod to it. And tho
nbaent when a patient can work ho is still in contact with his onviron-
nont. Consequently in any such case ttore should not have boon a positive
expert opinion but a negative ore. Consequently it wr.3 rc:iu»dant t-
expertise questionnaires whore a person reported ho was capable fer vork.

760 .


1 $ }&y U7-«-ATI>-9-ii-Oross (Int. Easier)
Court So. 1


That stands verbatin in that formulation, naaaly special persons whs
BPO not actually ..orkin in agriculture or industry.

Q "itness, did this iinitation apply also to too persons naiaod
under 2 and 3.

A He, it would not.

Q Exr do you ccno to that conclusion?

A On this pa jo of instructions tto word "or" appears botwoen
too list of various cats'orios. That :oans that ttoso people are to
roport Kith no regard to it that thy are actually wcrkiiv- or not
unless thay aro sufferin'; fren oik of tte sicknosses lisfcod undor
point 1 .

Q New lut us take an oxr.uplo. Does a parson havo to roport who
has boon in an institution f<r 5 years oven if ho is not sufforlnr
schizcrphronia or any -f the oth„r lisoasoa listoi un’or point 1 ?

A Yos, ho has to roport.

Q 7’iul! u criminal havo to report who ha,! not boon in an
institution for 5 roars?

A According to point 3 ho had to roport.

Q Now, ns last oxaho., about epileptics who had boon in
.n institution a r only one year, oven if ho did so:d-akillod work, lot
us soy h »-rk.?d in the offico?

A Ho, then in accordance with tho limitations that I just
aontionai ho would not havo to roport boosuso ho was capable of making.

Q Then ability to work was of sc o inpcrtanco in thoso
questionnaires, wasn't it?

A It was of inport&ncj so far as the question whothor you had
to fill out tho questionnaire, but according to -1 oatior.ts !idn«t havo
to report if they were '.oin work in too institution, unless that woi’k
was of a very primitive nature. 7hoy couldn't bo i skan away because thqt
would J !striy the ;conosdc rr.chlno in too institution.


76C5


I? ' r ~y 1 1-. -..T3-r-5-C-r r ss (int. Raalcr)

Ccurt Ho. 1

Q ”oir, witness, y-u havo hoard what Pfanxnuellcr said in this
connection. 7as Pfann=uellcr*a opinion and testimony correct and does
it correspond with what uns in the questionnaire ro;-arding ability

4

to work an; vhat you and other euf.wrltios intend to r.chiovo by putting
that question in?


7606


ITey 15-M-3K-10-1-Xsrrow (Int. 3ro'fn)

Court No. 1

.. I must say that I myself had no intention in this
natter because I didn't know anything about it, but in
the ex.-^rt conference in which X participated I never
hoard anythin;; but what Pfn annual lor said hero; namely,
that tho ability to work was a very essential part of
the .ossi'oility of oxportizin3 any case and in dcoidinc
vih _t should ha. .-on to any ..articular .ationt. From Karl
3randt's t03tinony I found out that tho prosecution
doosn't r. ;roo with this. I can, howovor, pass no jud-;-
nont on this, but v.h t I h .vo hoard fra-, the psychiatrists
and thoy wore very pood, the ability to work was one of
tho nost essential cons id orations in tho final judgment
of tho .ationt.

i No./, witness, I hive only a few concluding questions
about th.so questionnaires. I am sorry to troublo tho
Tribunal, but I have to jo into this at some len.-.th bo-
c .use of the weight that was laid on this by the .rosccu-
tion in Karl 3randt'3 testimony. In Document No. 825,
which you have been trontinp now for some tino, it says
at the conclusion that all ..etionts were to re.ort who
had been in institutions for more than one month. Do
you have that . nra ;ra. h?

.. YeS .

i Mow, does that not me .n dearly th t questionnaires
h-d to be filled cut and 3ent in ro’urdin • patients who
had boen in institutions for more than ono yoar?

4

.. Mo. You could only think that if you skipped tho
most ia..ort nt word; namely, oft^r the ..ationt had'boon
reported s nontally ill. First of all, after tho
arrival of the . atient, you have to toko -. look at the
case history, to sco whether the ;atier.t is offoct-d by
numbers 1 to -i in the questionnaire. In other words,
length of illness. Ion ath of time in other institutions,

7607


"15-M-BK-10 -2-Karrow (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

-itc. 'Ion, if those points applied, then, of courso, n
patient had to report of on if ho hail only boon in tho in¬
stitution for ono nonth, but that stay in that institution
for only one month could have boon preceded by years and
yoors of st :y in othor institutions. Tho question is, is
it a now case that had Just corse fron sono psychiatric
clinic. Then, usually, tho considerations in points 1 to
•» are not onto rial and, in those cases, woro not in, ortant.

. It is your opinijn, then, witness, that only thoso
.atiwnts haVo to bo reported who fill thoso prerequisites
in . oints l to -i. Now I .oint out to you Prosecution
iJooun.nt 18-3871, Exhibit 359, in i'njiish Document Book 14,

• a ;o 223. Tno .rosocution draw tho conclusion frou this
docunont that all patients, with no re.jurd to tho fora or
duration of their sickness, were to bo included in this,
do you havo to say to that?

 That is correct, but I should like to ..oint out that this
-ircctivo of tho Ministry of the Interior is dated tho 10
k-'ovoab-r 1912, :: a tico r.ft^r the euthanasia projrcn had
lonj boun stop -d. ..13 0 , ..lease look nt a'6 and I. quoto:

‘'For s.ecial reasons, I now lay woijht on havinj nil in-
f.atos of institutions inoluded." That uuans that tho
Minister of the Interior had, before tho 10th of Kovocber,
19-i2, laid no in; ortanco or. havinj everybody inoludod.
hrou that tine on, he did lay importance on this. Of uy
own kncwlodjo, I can not say anythinj about this becau30.

I was -t the front at that :tino and had bo.^n for quito 6
while, but I believe this has some connection with tho
don jots uri sin; fraa the r.ir war, and Liudon was trying to
jot hos. ital 3 . ico for the civilian population,

. •itnoss, it is in ortr.nt tc r.o to ask you in this connec¬
tion whether you considered the nodical requirements in the

luostionnaires as sufficient, but I c n not ask you that

7606


L'ay 15 -iI-BK-10 -3 -K or ro w (Int. Brown)
Court No. 1


question because you ore not a doctor, but, in the courso
of thi9 caso, there has boon discussion of the nocossity
?f p_rson.nl observation of patients by s.-ccialist dootors.
Can you say , as a purely factual statonont, fror. the
negotiations that you carried on - can you say whether
you ovor took part in such directions or observations?

.. I oan not judjo this, but I can say that nany such
su;; cations wero nndo. Tho first of those su;;je3tions had
as its consequence that fret. 19-iO on tho obsorvatian in¬
stitutions wore 3ot u 4 in which specially c crisis sioned

•

doctors had on opportunity to observe tho patient ;orson-

•

ally. Tho next surest ion of this sort - of courso, I
can't toll you what doctor undo this suyjostion now - the
next 3u.;jootion led to tho fact that the questionnaire in
nany institutions, and . rticularly in institutions which
woro not led by oertifiod dootors, had ox port ocanissions
riftht on tho spot and it ms under tho dirootion of thc30
ex. art connissions that the questionnaires wero filled out
at those institutions, also usin; tho onso history of tho
ospootivo patient. So far as I can Judjo this a3 a 2uy.-
nan it secns to ao that .ersonal observation of a patient
;ivos the nost reliable in. rcssion of his condition. Much
bettor than a written cuso history would. That is tho
roa3on why I iskod that the Tribunal visit a nontal insti-
tution and I ro ;rot that this application was not ontor-
t ai nod.

4 Now, a concludinj question about tho so questionnaires.
Do you have any roanrk to sake rocardin; this subject?

.. I have nothin.;; aor- to say about the questionnniros
theaselve3, but I should like to say hero that the nuabor
of patients subjected to euthanasia was, as compared with
the nuab r of questionnaires, somethinj that donands

7609


May 15 -M -£K-10 —i-Xarrow (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

attention. The export cocx-issicn that Bounler had to advise
hie estimated that there wore roughly thirty por cent of
-ii ecntal patients in institutions who were incurable. It
can be proved froc the documents at hand that thoro were
181,000 questionnaires that want through the expertizing
rocos3. Thoro wore thQt nany nt lonst. Thoro oust have
been ns cany as 200,000 or 250,000 before euthanasia was
etoppod, in ay opinion. This nunbor, 18-1,000 is ns of
May. To the boat of ay knowledge, about 50,000 or 60,000
of incurably ill persons, as a u.xicun , wore actually
subjoctod to .juthanasia. Proa this it cun bo seen that
not ovon c third or a fourth of those who woru ro.-orted as
por son s who should roooivo euthanasia, actually did receive
it, to or.y nothin* of that high percentage of thirty per
oont considered incurable of all ncntal .otionts. This
provos to no that tho questionnaire 4 rocoduro was absolut¬
ely cortain and was very oon3ervntivo in tho evaluations
by tho exports booauso, cs I said, only an eighth or
ninth of the total of tho incurably ill patients, and not
ono-third, wore subjected to euthanasia.

. .*itnoss, in those peroontagos that you have just ..
spokon about, I ngroo with you that tho nunbor 50,000 or
60,000 incurably nontally ill i arsons, whoso lives woro
shortonod throu^i euthanasia, is truo, but in tho courso
of this trial tho o. inion has becoce current, also in tho
..ross, that there were a very largo nunbor of peoplo who
weru nurdored in the course of this euthanasia program. #
Now, this number of 50 000 to 60,000 mental cases - does
that have to be brought into cny . ro. ortian to any othor
nunbor in order to get a correct 4 icturo of the situation?
Do you understand this question?

7610


15 Hay-^-^K-11-1-..aloy- (3rovn)

Court 1

-*• This number can only be brought into -reportion
•'lth the number that runs into the alllion - of innocent
persona who fell victim to the -.ir terror, but this Is
not the tine or the plr.ee to bring tnat up. I no. old from
the publications of the statistical registry that as many
s 550,000 patients are In need of attention In cental In¬
stitutions. and in contrast to this the numoer oi 50,000
to 6 G,OlO is roughly one-eight or one-ninth of that total,
gainst this statement there Is the estimate on the part
of the paychlatrlsto who said that at least one-thlrl of
all German nontal cases would have to be considered
lncurablo.

Q. Let ua go one step further, 71tnoss, let us con¬
sider Questionnaire .Jo. 2, vhich was ilso put m by the
Prosecution, which vac also entloned in various documents;
do you knew anything about questionnaire No. 2, of your
personal knowledge?

.w I know that this questionnaire No. 2 *m S sent
along at the same time. To wh :t extent this was thou;ht
of as a camouflage measure or to what oxtont the Reich
i.inistjr of the Interior re illy wanted concrete data ao
that the Institutions would be better run on .a scientific
'oasis, that I do not •'.new. The ministry of the Interior
will know why It sent out this questionnaire. The euthan¬
asia organization n.ul nothing to do with this questionnaire.
I assume that the date received on the basis If these
questionnaires was priced on In the irinlstry of the Interior.

Q. I hod originally intended to interrogate you about
.he proceedings before the laloh Comrlttj.j. However, I con¬
sider that superfluous since Dr. ?fannrweller dealt with
these proceedings at great length -and also r-.ado it" erfoctly
clear that -'ou wore never the Chief of this Reich Cc.ir.ltt.


15 Kau 7-rf-^-ll>-2-Haloy-(Srovn}

Court 1

out that It vas Dr. Linden. Do you anything to add to
Pfannmueller's testimony on this point? is what he said
correct and credible or do you have some other point of
view with which you night supplement his testimony?

.i. In general what Pfannmueller said was perfectly
credible to me, as far as I know anythin- about this matter
of the Reich Committee, but In a few respects I must supple-'
ment hla tiStiaony. For example, I myself In many casos
showed Bouhler and Brandt the complete files of terribly
ill children for their final decision, and for this reason
I Knew that ooth Bouhlor and Brandt in many cases had the
child put aside for further observation, over and oeyond
the Judgment pacsed by the actual specialist. It never
happenod that the expert specialist said that this child
cannot oo subjected to euthanasia, and that Brandt or Bouh¬
ler said no, nevertheless we will approve euthanasia for
this case. That nevor happonod, rather tho exports decided
that the child could be given euthanasia and Brandt and
Bouhler then took the standpoint that for one reason or
another, not necessarily a medical reason, this child was
to be further observed and to bo expertised or. a year or two
later. Let me add also that In the proceedings in the Reich
Committee the approval of the parents had to bo received
and without such permission on the part of the parents the
authorisation was not given by Brandt or Bouhler. That
Pfannmueller did not receive the authorisation as he said
was to be understood, because the children were sent fro him
as the local pnyslclan, or some other doctor had sent them
or. and he had already carried or. the correspondence with the
Minister of the Interior.

^ Bldn't you nay something you didn't mean to?

7612


15 May .Jv-11-.-;aloy_( Brown)

Court 1


... No, what I said was D?. Pfannaueller received the
children only later, and the local physician first h.\d had
lr. i way all correspondence with the Unister of the inter¬
ior that Pfannsueller would not Know.

Q. Didn't the parents have to give their permission
to the doctor in charge of the .tmtsarz, the local doctor?

To the ifitsartz.

Q. Did I understand y 0 u to saw that negotiations
between the ntsartz and hinlster of the interior and
through the consent of tho parents was received, and then
the child was sent to Pfannaueller with emission for
euthanasia?

a. "fes, let me point out also a document that was not
put in evidence at least not this page of it, but the entire
doouner.t 1696PS, page ■57. on page 9” of this document it
can bo seen that apparently through some error or through
some withdrawal of oonount by the parents, if this error
or withdrawal of consent was discovered further proceedings
were immediately interrupted.

DA. ?a0e)30A..ui:': .ir. President, the matter to which the
witness is now referring is something about whioh I already
spoke when hearln; pfanntnuoiler. These are two documents
from my document book 50 and 51. They ire ir. Supplemental
Volume No. \ and I hope I shall receive them from tho
Secrotary General within tho next 15 minutes, and get them
to tho Tribunal, o’. which tir* I shall ;lv,: .vhl'dt numbers
to the few documents in that volume, but I cannot jo that
yet , of course.

TdZ PR25ID3NT: The Tribunal has been "Jvised that Sup¬
plemental Book No. ”* Bracx will b ready tcda- and thov will
expedite it as soon as possible.

Dr.. ?a 03CH. : Thanh you. I received that information


7ol3


15 May 47-H-.JC-1X—i-Kaloy-Ccrown)

Court I

already.

Q. Witness, continue please.

I h'W* 5 only to ad that regarding details of the
expertizing procedures at the Reich Com lttee I know nothin*,
because I was not concerr.ol In that. I know, however,
tnroujh 3ouhler and through Linden that In Reich Co.ialttee
matters, only first class specialists wore used as psychia-
trio experts.

y. ’.witness, I any no iou:t conclude from your stat¬
ements that the correctness of ’-he document submitted by
the Prosecution concerning the registry ol' chlllren you
do not deny, and I nr. referring to the following four doc¬
uments to whioh I should 11 ko to call the attention of the
Tribunal: No.ll&, exhibit *46, 2r.-;llah Document Book 14,
page la9; then No. 1148. Exhibit ■*-!?, English Document Rook
14, page 150; third, No, 1145, Exhibit ’52, English Doc¬
ument Sook 14, pa.*e 157; and. No. 1146, English Document
Book 14, page 172, and with this I ooncludo tho affair of
the questionnaires and I shall now deal briefly wl th the
documents which tho Prosecution nave submitted as evldonoo,
that In spite of your statement mado today, In spite of
brar.dt'a testimony Jewish insane persons wore subjected
to euthanasia. Ey way of Introduction I should like to say
that there Is a total of seven documents which I should
like to touch upon briefly, and then indicate In each case
where they were found. Witness, I shall discuss the follov/-
ln fc documents: please get them ready. No. 111, No. 11’’,

No. 115, No. 1141, No. 114, No. 114-,, No. 1*1C. Now, will
you please comment on tho transfer of Jewish Insane persons
Indicated by these documents?

first of all I should like to say that document


?61t


15 May 5-Maloy- (3rowb)

Court I

11 , 6 and No. 720 may have to be aentloncd also.

Q. I had Intended to deal with that later witness.

.xZ the tine I did not learn about these transfers.
I Knew about then in general, just as everyone knew that
Jewish patients wore to. be brought together. «11 I can say
about these documents is not ay knowledge from this time,
but the result of my examination of those documents. This
io ill I con say about the various documents. No. 1^10.
Exhibit ,, 7, this la in Document Vook 17, the German,
on page 6.


7 # 13


15 Hay-"-35-22-1-ifeehan (int. Yon Schoa)
Court No. I.


Q In the English, it is .also on rage 6.

A This Docuctnt shews that tho Bavarian lanistry of the In¬
terior on U September 19li0 reached a decision on the transfer of Jo wish
cental c-ses. They were to be transferred free various Bavarian in¬
sane asylums and assembled in the Haar Eglf ing be two an L .and 20 Decoia-
bor 19liO. On that day tho head of tho institution reported that these
patients had boon assoabled at Eglfing, they rero full-bloodod Jews of
Polish or Genian nationalities or st tclGss Jons. At the sano time ho
roported to tho Bavarian State Ministry of tho Interior on 20 Kovoribor
19U0 that tho pationt transport corporation transferred them to a
collocting center in Berlin. The list of thoso Jews was given in
Document Kb. 1135, Exhibit 331*.

Q Please ,'ivu this doc-xcnt to the witnoss. This is in
English docuiont book 1]., pa.o 25. rib rocoivcd only a photostat.

There on page 17, you will find a list of tho Jewish patients and
also on pa. 0 hi of tho docuient book. How, doos tho fact that thoso
pationts wuro transferred by tto transfer company indicate that this
was also within tho frano-work of outhanaoiaj what do you hnvo to say
about that?

A First of all, I can say basically that tho patient
transport company carriod out transports not only for the purpose of
outhannsia, but also other transports of patients. I recall t)ie roscuo
work in tho oast for wounded, whs wore transferred from hospitals in
danger of air-raids, otc. This transport ccopony, whon such transports
wore to bo carriod out, recoivcd an assigntBnt from tho I'-inistry cf tho
Interior and assignor', a transport loader. This man had to bo an ex¬
perienced official, because all kinds of tiiin 3 could happen to ouch ^
a transport ’uring war tine. He night bo stuck somewhere for a con-
siderablo period of tlau and the patients would have to bo taken care
of. H« also was iven th.* local assi Trent by the local agency, such
as for example the Bavarian Ministry of the Interior.

-} How whon tho transport company took over Germane, was -

7616


15 May-::-13-12-2-^ehm (int. Vcn Scfcon)

Court Ko. -I.

there any certificate, any receipt given?

A Yes, these receipts wc have here in Docuasnt NO-1135.

The official of the transport company gave a certificate, such ns we
havo here with the institute by way of a receipt and thereby be assumed
the responsibility for tho patients.

Q Witness, I don't have tho document here, but is it truo
that tho document says these patients are to be transferred to n Roichs
institution?

A Yes, that is what it Bays. It s^ys that tha patients
are to bo transferred to a Roichs Institution.

Q Hr. President: I should lilco to point out that not
only in Dccunont NO-1135, which tho witness is speaking about, but
also tho docuaont which I contioned oarlior, NO-1133, Exhibit 335, Eng¬
lish Document Book 11*, pngo 86 and Document NO-1131, Exhibit 3h0,
English Document Book H, p'e 91, contains such cortlfientos.

A New, thoro is ono noto-werthy thing about this docuront.
Tho names of thi ins-~.no parsons woro always listed on a printed f PXTJ
in a nunberod transport list, these lists contained the first nano,
tho next rvaru, tiw place of birth and tho date of birth. It contains
no roferonce, hoerovor, to nr.tionalitior. I pointed out oarlior that
tho benefit of euthanasia was to bo givon only to Oornan citiaons.

Thoso documents, NO-1131, Exhibit .

Q T'o havo already boon through that, wo don't have to re¬
peat tho numbers.

A Tho names of tho Jewish patients, lewover, which wo r.ro
talking about tare are not on the usual trcns.ort list of tho transport
company, but on usual typing papor. It rioos not list any placu of
birth or date of birth either, cvrcly nationalities. Ono can conclixlo
therefrom that in thin ease nationalities of tho persons to bo trans-
ferro-* 3oemed to be core important to tie authorities than the date
and place of birth.


Q Just a rir.ute, witness, in this list thira arc 33 Gomans


1> (Int. Von Schor.)

Coart He. I.

and 2 Pcios?

A Yos.

Q And than under 13 there is a Czech citizen, tfcose nano
has been crossed out again.

A It has beer, crossed ut here on the original ’ocuracnt.

Q Yes, it has be n crossed out.

A It soys Botanic raid Ifcrnvir. as citizenship and in tho
r.ccouj. nying letter for this transport, sent to the Ministry of tho
Interior by the Institute E{Jlfing-Haar, tho suggestion was nado that
this nan Bur.sol is a citizen of tho m-tectorato and should bo sont to
an institute in tho Protectorate.

lx. President, this covering lottor is in book 17, cego 6.

• •

A In ether words, tho authority of tho instituto did not
considor it pcr.iisaiblc for a citizen of tho Protectorate to bo sont
to tho carao l:atitutc as Icnm-ns and Polish Jews -Sc this Instituto was
sinply not in tho Protectorate and tho institution must have rocoivod
corresponding instructions. I should iiko also to refor to tho follow¬
ing- on tho certificates givon to tho institution by the heals of tho
transports, it says oxprcsely upon order cf tho Roichs Association of
Jfental institutions. In this lottor SO-1310, tho institution 'loos
not refer to an assignment of tho doichc Association, but sinply to
the decree of tho Bavarian State ranistry cf tho Interior. In this
case of the Jews, who were transferred, tta Prosecution has not sub-
nitued any cortificnto oy tho transfer company. I assure that if such
a document were in existanc., it rould be aaong the documents here.

3 Ho., where did this Jewish transport go?

A That cannot be seen from this document, but fron .-j»othor
dccunxint. I have been able to as suae that Dec uaon t HO-llAl, Exhibit

31j 5, Document Bock 1J*.

3 It is in the English doctxnent book on pogo 150.

A Fr - this document one can see that the nano Bertha Y.'ur-
ttaior was listed there and she died in Che In on 3 December IS^e.


7 as


15 Jfcy-:WS-12-^fiehan (Int. 7or. Schon)
Court No. I.


This Berth - - a'orthcirer, according to the file-note, was transferred


there by the patient transport cccpnny. Ore can therefore conclude
that the entire transport went to Chclu.

Q ^aa 3arthn Berthe irn,r in this transport of 20 Dcccrber


19U0.


A I an sure that it says that. Yes, it is shewn that she
was also transferred on 20 Decoder.

TIE KtESTDE.TT: The Tribunal will now tjo in recess until
1«30 o'clock.

(A recess was tekon until 1330 Hours.)


7619


•-y 15-~-3K-13-l-Fester (In. Von Schocn)
Court No. 1


•JT-aioow session

(Th- hotrinj roconvoncd at 1330 hours, 15 Nay 19-±7)

TKJ :—.JrLi: The Tribunal is n.;ain in session.

THE P..ESIDNNT: Counsel nay .xooeod.

VUCTO.t L*c.CN - Nosuned
DI.L-CT -lli.1N.JiON (Continued)

BY D-. r.20-1ECiCLJJN (Counsel for,the Defendant Brack):

- witness, I roisind you that you ore 3till under oath.

Lut us hurry and try to oor.cludo. .itnoss, boforo the
noon rocos3 v»o 3to..od in the discussion of Doounont NO-
1141, Exhibit 348. I a3ked you whore the transport of
So.'tcnber 18 - 20 wont. You said that fron this doounont
NO-1141 you concluded that, tho transport went to Chain.

Do you havo any further connent on this question?

.. Froc- tho doeux: nts 1144, Exhibit 3-.2, Doounont Book
14, ..art I, ,»n ;o 57 in tho Garcan we sec -
* In tho En;li3h that is .a;o 110.

.. - that Bertha wo Hand frau, NO-1143, Exhibit 343,
Document Book 14, pert 2, . c,;o 65 -

v In tho *n-jlish Docunent Book 14, .art I> ;>a;o 126.

.that wilholx. N^unann, ..lbert Tillnann, Gortrud

0.; ohhoinor, Bertha Hoiuann, So. hie ..ioson.jrund and
-.lbert Froohlich, 'were sont accoriinj to tho boforo raontion-
od decree of tho Bavarian Ministry of tho Intorior, on tho


20th of So. tor.bor 1340, froc the institution Ejlfin-. Of
those, Gertrud 0..enhein-r is oontnined in tho list on
a ;a 17, §f-Doc unor.t NO-1135, nueber 3. »nd tho list of
*6v>Doo 12, 'art III. N0-720, Exhibit 366, . a';o

/k m


1


^3.


i This docunoritj 210-720 is in the English Docuncnt Book
\ 14 on _CJ3 243. j


rhe^oCh^p/naj

are in the lists previously ussntioned. I do not ::now, but


__ aan-s are not contained in this list, but


7623


-3y 15-..-3K-13-S^?cst-r (Int. Von Schoon)

Court ::o. 1

I conclude it from thoso documents, that on tho 20th of
Se;»teab-r 19*i0 there wore other tran3 orts leaving Ejlfin.;-
Haar. no have no list3 of then, at least they have not
boon submitted. I must conclydo that a transport wont to
Choir, on this day; that in Choir, there was on observation
or outhonasia institution is con. lately unknown to no and
I c-rtair.ly would havo learned it , because I know the
names of tho six euthanasia institutions. Tho as sun. t ion
of tho .rosecution, that tho ..arsons who woro rouovod from
Ii;;lfin ;-Harr on 20 tonber 19-.0, the 191 Jewish non and
wonen were subjected to euthanasia, is incorrect und is
refuted by what 1 just ox. lainod.

. Witness, you ronoebor that the witness, Dr. Pfannf
nuoller said that he learned later that thoso Jowish in-
sanu . ationts ware sent to Lublin. You have already said
that you knew nothin; whatever about all these natters,
that only now from cx;ir:ir.in ; the dccunento you have reach¬
ed these conclusions. It is alao3t superfluous to ask,
did you know then tho neno Lublin. Do you know that Jowish
insane , ationts were Sent thorc?

.. No, I know nothin j of that.

D... F.IOESCHILJW: Ur. Prosidont, I have covered tho
doopnonts submitted by the .rosaoutian dualinj with what
persons woro effected by euthanasia. Now I cono to tho
fin«jl subject of tho 30-callcd euthanasia . ro ;ran and I
shall dor.l in outline only with tho course and tho stopp¬
ing of euthanasia.

BY D... SaQSSCHILIW: #

t witness, you have already said that the questionnaires
received were sent to T—« and that thoy separated thoso
ro for Tin.: to forci;ners. These questionnaires woro not
hotostated and were net sent to tho ox.-orts, that only the
remainin' questionnaires-, that is, those which did not refer


76a


”ay 15-..-5K-l3-3-?oster (Int. Yoi* Schocr.)

Court lio. 1

to forci;nors and octs, wore .hotosteted and sent to the
exports.

I r.eod not ;o into the details that wore jivon by tho
witness Pfannmucllor concerning tho filling out and tho
judjinj of the questionnaires. I had originally intondod*
as in tho case of Pfannnuollcr, to show you one or two
questionnaires, not for you to jud;o then free tho aodical
. oi.nt of view but fra*, tho purely udninistrativo .»oint of
view. I bollovo, howevor, that this nuttor has boon
cleared up so thorou ;hly thit tho prosecution will soo
no oauso in cross examination to deal with tho subject,
and, consoquontly, I 3hell not need to show you tho
questionnaires which I hfcvo fillod out by Dr. Pfiann-
muollor. I shall noroly ask, you heard tho testimony
of Doctor Pfannr.uoller conoornin'j tho judgin'; of tho
questionnaires, tho plus or minus si;;n, or question mark.
Do you have anythin to add to this testimony?

.. Ho, I have nothinj to add. The explanation of tho
witness Pfannnuollor was quite thoroujh.

v «nd is it correct that the oases do3i ;natod a3
.,03itive, that i3 by a *Vlus“ by tho ohiof export, woro
sent to Linden's office, and that Linden's office ordor-
od the transfer of tfceso patients to an observation
institution by orders to tho trons. ort cor., any?

.» Yos, that is true.


ip Hay Cc-.k (Int. vcn SChoen)

Court llo, 1

Q Do yen knar whether the doctor in charge after tho period of
observation subndttod a report?

k I ton*t know how that was nana~oi I only know that tha Chiof
Experts wore in constant contact with authorize'.! doctors in tho
observation institutions concerning* tho selection of the patients
under observation thoro.

Q Is it true ajoin that aftor the period of observation Linton's
office a^ain issued instructions to tho transport co.npany an l thus
arraxvjod for tho transfer of tho patients to a euthanasia institution?

/. Yes, I nor.tionod that briefly yostorlay.

q Is it true that at tho stjv> tino a photostat of tho opinion
of tho chief expert rras sent to the outhanasia institution?

A In oach caso c photostat was sent to tho euthanasia insti¬
tution bocauso whon tho pooplo arrivud tho photostat had to bo corv-
parotl dth tho personal date and tho caso history.

Q I can concludo thon that the caso history an’, porsonal files
wore also sent to tlvj autJvJvisia \octcr?

Yos, of course, ho nootded thor. for tho final opinion of the
patient. Hu w*ui net have boon ablo to soo that fron tho condition
of tho .rtiont aicn:. Ho noodod tho caso his tar;'•

Q Arri new to conclude this sub loot, I ask you whsthor you can
confirm what tho -..itnoss, Dr. Pfannnxollur has sni l, that tho outhanasia
doctor *bo united everythin in his hands, who had tho patient, tho
ca3o history, tha porsonal records, and the final -erdical decision as
to whether this patient was to b-j subjected to outhanasia, or whothor
ho was V bo returned to an observation institution or to his original
institution, is that correct?

A The final responsibility lay with tta ©xecutin doctor who
ha*, an absolutely u ni Ini to 1 veto riht.

q Nor:, lx. Brack, since I have loalt with this chapter thorough¬
ly with you, I can assuro that as this norinr* you Id not doubt tho

report on children contained in tho docunents/ you - dll also not wish

7o23


15 U7-.W.TD-1L-2-C eofc (Int. von Scfcoon)

Court Ko. 1


to biry tho ccrroctnoss of thu ‘ocurunts subaittol by tho Prosecution
concomin* the transfer f insr.no .arsons fron the faU of 1939 until

i.u’ist 19U1?

A I cannot ‘.ony tea accuracy of those ' cun-.nts.
a For the inforrr.tioT. a? the Tribunal an* of the Proa option
I renaric that tho Jocuror.ts .ihich tho lofcnimt J oes not rish to
contest aro tho folio-sin sovon -tocunants which 1 shall ror.'. brioflyi
«). 1133, Exhibit 335, 2n lish Document 3cok Hi, pc-“o 86: !C-
1131, Exhibit 3U0, tocuetor.t book lli, ;a o 93| JD. H32, Exhibit 3U1,

?.n lish Docu.-r.nt Book H, pa*o 100, JO-U3U, Exhibit 3W, » Ush
-tocunant bock lli, l*ce 1 *>i >»• 817, 3«s 3n lish 'ocunont

took 1U, p.v;o 25U, JO. 827, Exhibit 375, En lish -locuncnt bcok Hi,
page 269, an’, the final 'acu^nt is JO. 826, Exhibit Mo. 356, En-lish
’ocuattttt b->ok Ho. H:, pev o 203. IT. Brack, tho «u» r-nsuor «hich you
have Just dvon no concernin': the transfer of insane no toubt applies
also to tho \ocuainta concomin* th, son'in,- of quostionnairoa to tho
exports an* son-la-; then V.<* to tea Dei eh * orkin;- Union?

A Yos, I V) not bre* their accuracy.

a i nn spor.kln • hero only of ter. Jocunonta which I ahoul 1 liko
to brin to tho attention of tho Tribunal. Ttoso aro >». 1129,
exhibit 35U, En lish Dccuiwnt Book Hi, * o 179, "-n’ "<»• H3° Exhibit
355, * Hah locusont book li, pa* riXxMB, concernin' -ccunont
>1'. 1136, Ex ibit 3U5, of which tho Jofonso coins cl has only .a Photo-
rtstlo copy an' which I was unable to fin \ in the En lish ,’ocuuent
book. Tto you rish to mke any no ification? Do ycu havo the ’ocunent?

Yos, I have it. Yes, tto rr »socutor apparently by rdstako
8ai * that 1057 patients were rervo’ froa tho 5-lfin -Kaar institution
on ore ‘ny and that report is an error on the pert of the prolocution,
hoeouso this nurd)or 1557 appearin in cclunn b of the SooUWrt is the
total or all patients raaowl froa lfin-Baar. rols is fren tho
•ocrr .nt itself -.a' this b cantata, the total of tho in-ivi-ual

762A


fi uro3 ivn in cclurrr. 3


l~ 'y LTT-lc^>-Cook (Ini. von Conor.)

Court Ko. 1

1 '^r- Pro si lent, I const'or this ate tenant ir.~ortont only
bocauso the Prosecution an' the Tribunal -d. ht com to the -dstaken
L. rasaion that on one way free, ono institution nearly 20CX) insane
persona rare trunsforro '. That woulof course, throw a very . eculiar
li ht on the testdmny of the witness Pfann-weller, which otherwise
at least ir. ny o;inion is quite crodblo. The Prosecution has just kinlly
brru h.t to ny attention that -.oounont 'k>. 1136 is in tho inflioh iocu-
r.ont bock 3Ji, on .*a:o 1 ]j7. itnoss, I conclu !o the questions about
tho locurwnts of Pfanrraiallor. )'<nt in tho oxocution of euthanasia a
ru-bor of abuses arose which loft'l to applications an* conplaints fron
various privato p-rsons an' authorities, ill you ploaso couaont on
how thoso complaints woro ’.celt with an', also toll ua about what con-
plaints yai icama ’ of, ospcclally tho ones which woro subnitto'’. by
tho Prcsocution.

n . It in a :ntt r of courso that whon a nunbor llko fifty to
:»ixty thousand ersons woro subject. *. to outhar.asia, a now oauso of
’oath coul not bo invonto'l for oach in lvi \ial. Thoro aron»t that many
causos of ’oath, but boc-auso of tho sccr.cy tho truo enuso of 'oath
ccul' not bo Ivon to tho relativos an * it wis unavoi tablo that in
certain areas cuch asin furttc *bcr whoro tho population aro vory much
intor-rolato , anr.ounco:*>n to with tho 3cno causo of '.oath rl ht bo
rocoivo'l aoro than onco by tho sana farily. Thoso thin a, ro. rottablo
as thoy wore, woro tho nocossr.ry censoquonco of tho 3ocrccy, which wo
driliko !, an ' thn relatives in art waro ablo to chad: up on thoso
thin 3 ime Uataly. I ram. ber the vory rc rettable caso vhon tho causo
of -loath was iven n3 appondcitds althou h tho appendix hail boon
ranove 1 Ion boforo that. I cannot cubt the accuracy of tho -’ocunonts
-ubnitto.’ by the Prosecution in this raspect.

) *!r. :resi '.ant, 'bora aro thrao Vacuaonts concornoi horo, *Io.

■2 f , r-hibit 361, Ush 'ccuront book U : , paje 228, also r<? 628,

--chibit 362, -ii lish ’arxent book ll, a-o 233 an ’. !Jo.6U0, exhibit 363
’p. thi In lish xu: ant '-ooU 1!:, pa o 235, Please continue witno3S.


7625


15 day-*-GJ-15-l-Bc ar!-(vcn Schon)-

Ccurt 1


n I comet deny chat euthanasia under the cxccuti.cn -.f euthanasia
•jradually b-cr.cu. an epensreret, and thus, n?.ny parts f the population
'*cv>4opc ! a feeling of legal insecurity. This is especially clear, in
the tter cf the Kea*. «f the Institution Statta, that is Sc. 520, ex¬

hibit 3b7, in docuu^nt bock lb, part 3 page 199, in the 6cman. In this
letter tc the Reich ^.inlst r if Justice , Dr. Schleich speaks of this
focl±n~ cf le'al insecurity.

Q lir. President, the Iccujeant which the !efcn lant just aentionod
is in the English Jocua&nt bock lb, pa|o 267.

« it is eqjially regrettable that expedient measures were often
taken — purely technical toOSUTvS, such as in transport, transfers, as
shewn by \ cucont D 906, exhibit 376, in dccuocnt bock lb, part 3
page 192.

"ju-lish docuoent bo k lb, pa e 271.

And free locuacnt SO. 665, exhibit 37<J, tocuaont book lb, part3

pao-, 210.

Q Snplish ’ccucent b" k lb paae 296—

A 3ut oris. r.unt n t ftr.-.t that is as is . encrally the case, with
such ratters, s*crecy cause 1 wild nr. rs that thc3v runcm continued to
•r w. Ctte f these -cunents, fer cxanple, contains the ccnplctoly un¬
true assertion that two urns sent to aooc relatives—that is only

not true, but this case which create' a rcat 3ensati-n at the tine,
had t. be investigated very careiully at the tice on order of 3ou*il.r,
an: It -.ns /cun' that it was absolutely untrue and that the relatives
cone roe', had consiiere-' the packatc :f values which Were sent to then
aft.r death as urn , n was nrt unpacke i, n . wh-.n the urn arrived
the r-ua.r sprna I that they ha received two urns.

1 itness, I shoal like to interrupt fer a acn.nt. >e need not
into -rcat detail -n '.he individual shartccuinrs with the cunents
r.:vr. Yea h-v 3tate that th_5. thin-s w_re as is a rccible t- yen an-’
E’.;ufcl_r, *• cth rs c^nc rnc os V any n. , rt. that nil nr:, rs arose
which r-ve rise t assertion that people w-re bein ainicred, indescrisi-

7626 . _


15 s.y-^-GJ-15-2—3car' , .-(vcn Schon)-
C-urt 1

nstily. But now, I vhcul like to kr. w fr-.m you what position Bouhlcr
to k to th.s_ c jplaints cause by Th-s- un-'crtanates circunstonces?

/. Bcuhlor wantol all such cexplainta shewn to hiasclf, p-rs.nally,
as far as poscibl-. That was not always p ssible, but in gen-rcl that
hopn-n 1. To s-'. h w carefully those thin; s were I edit with can be s<en
by th- fact that Dr. Schumann, -hr, as h«.ad f euthanasia instituti n
.at that tits., take - icr instructions as U what he was to s iy to :i ccsi-
plaint h. nod in rvjore- to tw: sisters who ha ! .i~ . This lwtter is not
in the Goman .'oeua^nt beck. It was asked on 13 January 19L7, t« He.

906, exhibit 367, ecuaent book lc, p:rt 3, pa>s 191 - 216- in the
".n lish .-'ccucent bo-k 1L, p - 271. This latter shows that Hcveltvinn,
one of ry associates, was int r.sU ‘ in this coaploints, that was n
Bruhl .r's instructions in', that is als ■!» . wn by th- ®nvj ocun nt, that

• f

Dr. Lin .eh answer--', this L-tt r nnl txk car- f the w.tt r.

Q Hew wore thus c nplaints er.lt with? Pjen s<- distinguish between
caiipl .ints fr a hv.ntv.nt :i ■ .neks n c.oplaints T :i Church authori¬
ties?

* Crepliints fre.ft privot. p- rs ns w.r- n t s-nt t the Tier ( ~irten-
str.asse It, .hich ms not kn -n, but they wer- sent V Fai thornsia Insti¬
tutions. iJ tl ’iroct r in’ p.rs m .1 f th^r Instituti.ns c ul 1 n t
settle-! the r-itt-r satisfactorily, then it r.as sent n to T-h with a x-
quest i r a dcoinionj then it was a oiopl r, they t k car

it :r if it was sonethin c aplicat r basic, it was reported to the
R-ichsleiter Beuhler. Conplaints Ir a iffici 1 a--vnci-s, f.r .xatpl..
authr rities of Rustic-, r. . itt inhere they «*er- rent, w-r.. always pas¬
se’ on Lr the r< cichal-iUr Bouhlcr, to k care r f th r. r .;av- th- n-.-

c CBS ary instructions. : r xtspL., c apl into sent to she h-ich in is try
f Justice, 03 we learnc I t r, .-.r sent :'irst to the Reich Chancellory
an rren the r- t- ibe inis try f Ir.t.ri r, ..n only foro ther«. tf- i-
r.i3 try f Interior, i Bculil.r 1 am ob ut then. That was cnan -e when
Spul • '- nelu ‘ on.' a r Hint with Gu-.rtn<r, that h - i tl rs Were


-


15 _ay-^-3J-13-3-F car c-(vcnSctacn)-
Ccurt 1


.. _r. President, oh- cccplointe by th- Justice officials are surc-
up in eight dccusunts. I shrill -..-.in list thua for th*. infoma-
ti:n of th. tribunal. Ih*.y arc:

PS 626, exhibit 361, "jiilish Dccu=-nt bosk 15, pa.> 6 FS 622, exhibit
366, English iccucent beck 15 , P*12, :h. 636, cxnibit 335, Liylich
docununt b: k 15, pagu 17 PS 616, xhibit 356, Eng lish iocuaent bork 15
p-rs 20, Ho 636, exhibit 3c6, Em lish Orcun.nt beck, 15, page 26, Ho,
9l(ii, exhibit 369, En lish <*ocuc-nt bock 15 pare 31, Ho, 81:5, exhibit
390, En lish eocur.-nt bo-'k 15, page 3L, one PS 681, exhibit 397, En¬
list 'tccurxnt bo k 15, p ’v 51.

« C-cpl-inta fr e the church, Protestant is well os the C itholic
church eculil not b wait dth because cf . b:sic instruction of Hitl-r
's but had t b turn. ever tc the ‘--‘.eh Chine 11 ry. Th-Se c<v.pl tints
i Wth lie Church lemurs led tc .•eV.il.:; iscussi n between the re¬
presentative of th- Gnthclie Church, Siah-p Vinken nd beciuse of the
oppccin vi w I Hitler in this jucsti.n, n .. reen-nt was reached it
that tine between th. .’iniotry f Intoricr nn! the Catholic Church.
Bouhj-r trie v.ry nor tc r-ach con. a 'Justscnts -n.! tc k advantages
f this turn to epeok to Hitler an tri U h v- th- law passed, but
: .in. Hitler refusal. «n. 1 person. Uy b-li-ve .hit th.- fuilur- cf
these ettenpets t xvach n *..r.vC.nt with th Cath lie Church was the
reason why Uitl .r r tr.. th stop in au- uat 191:1.

\ lx. Prcci cnt. the c e-plainst f the Church iuth> rities are
contained in six drcuc-nts, which I shall list i r the ini eras lion cf
th-. Tribunal , Ho. 1?, -xhibit 39S, .n lish document b k 15, p f- 56
scCerv' . • 115 .xhibit ’07, Er- lish ’ccua-nt b k 15, pare 157, thirl Ho.
623, xhibit bOC, Fn liah cun.nt b k 15, pas*. 157, H • pi:5, exhibit
1.01, Ere lish ’ .cuav.nt book lr, p 156, P3 615, exhibit LU2, En lish
'Qcuia.nl b k 15, pajc 166, an PS 616, exhibit 603, En-lish loeunenb
b- k 15, p - lao.

•itn ss, -hat h .pp n.J in Aurust 191:1, wto-n Euthanasia wa. steppea?


15 s-y-^-GJ-la-l-riolsi-l vcn Scbcn)-
Court 1

A The ncT*s f the cr-i-r o; Hitler tc step was transmittal
by Brandt. In response t c this r'.cr I informed Tier :ar t_ ns trass e, Ji,
Imsdiatcly, probably Pr f. Ki^tsche an ..ll_rs in this c:>se, an.: I
saw t it that nil -uthonisia institutions, and -’ll euthanasia eject, rs
lcarn-d :t this .rd-r f Hitl,r. »s sc nod as th_ or.cr was receive.'
luthanosia stepped c cpl.t-ly. «ftor 3aae tic. Bouhl r learn- 1 that
n. early resuupticn cf ruth-anas in ms tc b- - pect_ and h- retimed tc
euthanasia in3tituti.ns tc their owners, an-t th- superfluous per3cnn..l
wen cither tf thuir former prsiti ns, r * re :i3ai3Se.'‘.

DR, 7WKSC^-».hI: r. Fr.ci \nt, Ihvtc spluUd thu evidence in
re ori t- th. nc-c'llel cuthan sia pr'rr.= by ix aainin t i- .ef-nJant
Tr ek. In this cent, cti-n, tbs dacuaonts wr.ich I have afar, all that
reta .ins is t submit one e xjuo .nt that I i r . t . subnit this a. min.*
when I r e speaking f the 1.e .lit; ©1 hlt^r'o i-cruc. • t.i D ounent
35, in ay Docuc-nt E k 12, :n par. 52, which I ff.r as Brack Exhibit
ti?. 33. This Is th- affidavit a! Dr, ern,r -.at, f th. 10th of
rcbruiry, 19b7, *hich is certified by r~. Trie ritne3s Beat in thxe af¬
fidavit stat.s, .n li base A his superior kn-wled- j th:it a Fuehrer
lecrec r a fuehrer r ,r was rcprrd. at all tiia.s as law, in' th..t
he hr.-' th- p'wor, t>. chanro, cr V r -Deal ny law, he p-inted ut that
the ‘S.ich Cabinet ha' net been Seetin f r r. lea time, and that a law

Jcvolopeu this way , I cnly the sv.rmcnt r > pi , but the

-enerrl pepul ti n , *-n convince 1 that Kltl-r ha' thu ri ht tc issue
such dccr-cs.

Now I oca. to th final chr t.r of cy cise. ihat is, th. Euthanasia
prcbl.j; m 3en f?ca th. p..i;:L :f view cf th- ’.for'’ant t/.warJ tiiia
prcblea-bec'.u3e it is eiy opinion that th- motives cf the jafenJant
: :y hr.v- i-cisiv-. influ-ne ea the qu-3ti.n 1 whether he actually coa-
.•aitt.: scat ffonsin U ju'rnt .-f the tribunal - I b^li-v- that
trds vi one which I shall att.^pt t- r.dc v_r> brief 'Cannot b-. denied
the- .i n nt.

. .itness, V u hrv.., v ry t. rcu hly, iscusse itj il p.irits.


15 *-a7-A-uJ-l6-2-3ial3i-(vc nSchr-n)-
Ccurt 1

of tli. Euthanasia prograa. I have already .sked you one.-, he* it hnppe-
n i that yen, as a ran ho ha. n v r ha 1 anythin.-, tc lo vdth such thin».*3
b,f- k, -n were . sir pi- . tninsitrativ- -fficial rf Ecuhl-r, c nsiderod
y urs-11 justifi.: in eollabarctin in Euthanasia as a prtbl-n. I c
net want any rcpet,iti:ns, -ny points that y'u h v. already liscusse
ycu nay leave th^a cut. I hr.v_ > nthcrod froa ycyr testie. ny that you
r-aUz-d that ehv on.blen r«, first of all, a n-.’ical prcbl-e,
anJ that l-rsal cans* -rations wtr. involved, th .t carpi.ints count
frrr. th- churches - fcj-cti ns &a:, fr s th. d int j view of n.li-
, . that tb^ac complaints ccnc-m-d the humane ? int of view,

fr .a these four p.ints cf view: ltftl, n lical, tte4Lo?ical, and hu¬
manitarian, ... I want to ask you a v_ry few »,u-.5ti:ns. a-, that tin-..

I .eph.sie- "at that wine’*... It }'u think ab ut th-s- questions?

*- Of course, I thought .about these questions at that tine. Xc-u
yours. If, in th. -xaninati- n f witn 33.-3, hav- asked qu.ntins osi'-na-
tc' to illucin' tc this point of vi-w, - but at the v ry bwPinnin 1
vrrul like to i y that I, in ay way f thinkin , m ay oimpl- trainin'
an in no p:aitiin t: .nav^r ju-s i-. nr n uh- int-ll.ctual lov 1 f the
Witness ,'r.f. “ ibbran t. I ask y u * take this int c n:-i .. rut i n.

4 I rh.uld b. la* to J s an’ ko.p cy du«-3ei n afc.nle, .n 1 n
th. l-v-l ch:t a 1-yr. n c n un rstan *. Y •» hav. Ire y 3.ai ’ that ac-
ccriin. to the v.l pra.nt f th. u.rv.nn L. al stnt. fr r- 1933 t 1939
you h n ubt c Hitl-r'3 auth rit;. t. issu- decrees, orders, "ith
the fore :f lew. is that c rrect?
n Y*. 3.

^ Iny.ur pinirn, can stut. issue a law ic the -fleet, that
incurably ins r,, persons can b. iv. n = rcy ath — that is, vftat
lif- any b- ah rt_n. ’?

.e i ar.i. this l- min that irst I ha n- w rrieo -t ill ~b- ut
the 1- r.l pccsibiliti .s. irst c: all, I -a net a lasy-r, in th- second
p lac I c asi or- tit ere p.rf ctly l_-al. tot r, I h ar fr a Ju-
-Le "ritints f -in .in—:-..eh-, n :I5> .rs-tycr, -n I


riots.


r •


15 Eay-n-GJ-l6-3-Biclsi-(vcn Schon)-
Ccurt 1

v.'.s c nvinccd that a stat- has the. ri.ht tc puss such a law. And 1 r«.-
d-cber at that havin. rca. th-t scm- states ir. the United States,
*er- said t hav- such an Euthanasia law. I r.CeD b -r anly the node
!Lbraska. in En Ian tn-r. arc sev.rol saci-ti-r try in, t« hive, a
.uthonasia law passed, n* - in Switzerland to , aucr. -ff.rts hav- buen
• ;ln cn I r about tw nty years.

Dft. ?R3£SC:E..im: ..r. ?rcsi _nt, I fi r m ovlkncc of the. correct-
n as r.I th. steteoent just i-.de by the (.fen :.nt, from uy fecunent
bo<k, 2, S-.cuc.-nt 32, m p:^. 16, ruthanasic in Pn Ian 1 - that is in
article f the y-ar 1936 c'nc.rnin- the epini n f tit., british public
at that tin..

ILK. XZKLilLi The nrrsecuti' n cbj-cts to the adnissi n f this tfo-
cuncnt. hirst cf 11 it is im t_rinl, .hat hoc bc-n sp k-n, in 1936
in l\n -l ,i. •, has nothin u with the c-jo Wore th trial. In the
c .c n place, this : cuaont is by n la-ans ji inf matien fr:n a bri¬
tish scurce. It is just s n thin - which ms published in a Goman offi-
cl'>1 -nron; but 1 cannot Sec wh translate ’ it, th e-fite’ it, who • a-

- personal pini n 'n it. I .. net know whether # that is whatras
cal in n lar. , r.clly. G-many - is in 1936, unier th. Hitl r rcoirvj,
Th- fficial public a ti- ns *-r- - :.v.mt: by prrpaf "Jiia, and I an unable
t 3 ay that what is sal*, t have happen-', in En lan , really happened
in ?ji 1 a. . This is by n r. ans in .n li3h publication.

D?., -'v “GHi-.SMs r. President, w G-mans ore f c urse, dtpen-
Icnt cn the public .ti its iv-.n tc us by th. c moo tent auth rities. I
point ut that this is a * rk call. ’, U G man Justice-" aitainistratirn
of justice .n 1 - 1 p licy, which t s air. r. fficial paper, issue,

by h- fteich Inist^r f Justice, Or. Guirtner, n. t by Schle <-}b-.r -r.
Th n :n basis ' r.p-rts r c Iv. 1 fro n lish newspapers, this pu¬
blic ..tin points cut that in En 1 r.: ther. were f forts, Iscussicns,
Eeetin 3, Ji S' rth. Precisely b. cruse I its year r publication,
193 , tiz h.n there m 1 no i a ei Lu.h n.si in QaorJVt it

essenti.l tr CCR’ im th. V-sti -ny of th- witness- Brack, by


5eeSS !


15 ay-rw-GJ-l6-b-3i :lsi-(r:nSchcnJ-
Ccurt 1


the f'.ct that three, years bef,r-- there -xisted similar efforts in
-ther ccuntries. Th_r .1 r_, 1 ask that the objection of th. presc-
cuti n hot bj unh-le’.


7632


15 ifayH'.-:2-17-i-Grosa (Int. Brown)

Court Ko. I.

JI^GS SS3P.2C: Witness, your attorney had referred to 3rack
Exhibit Ho. 32, appearing on pege 16 cf the Brack Document Book II, in
English. Are you familiar with that exhibit?

A Yes.

JUDGE SE3RIJJG: When is tho first tire the- text matter that
appears in Brack D:cur^nt Ho. 32 caiu to your attention?

A This is tho first tine that I rccoivod the docurent. From
py studies cf literature >-hlch I spoko of at thj boginning of ry testi¬
mony, but frea what individual pieces of literature I do net recall, I
knew tho writings of I/ird Monoyhon who was tho representative of 3uch
a movonwnt. I knot: that in Enplane such bills have got as far as
Par liam e n t and in ay pru-intorraction I stated, .and Prosocution vrill
have to corroborate this, that I brought his attention to tho English
efforts ir. tho quortion of Euthannsi-. I did that at a tine that I
havo not had tho opportunity sirco f.vjn to soo this d~cuncnt.

TPS PRESIDENT* The objection to this be inf uffored in ovid-
oncu is sustainod. The docirvat -'ill not bo rocaivod in ovidunce.

Si Dfl. FRGESCH AIOJ*

Q Ttan, I shall dispense with putting in D'eununt 31 in Docu¬
ment 3ook II which is an article frea tho Tires.

A I bo j y-.ur pardon, I thought tho President docidod tho
decunont w.’.s accupted in cvidonco.

THE PRESIDENT: Ctojceti n was sustained. Tho docurent will not
be rccoivod in ovid.nco.

31 D?., Fr r BSCH- iAfflf*

Q I/itnoss, you just rr.sw-rad in t.ha iffirr.ativo tho question
that, in yc'-r opinion, th. Statu has tho ri ht t. pass Lavs that incur¬
able -or.toliy ill parsons shall bo given a earcy death. Did you assuao
tho sore in Hitler*s cast?

A Yes. Hitler ,t~.c Chief of State in Germany. I spoko about
that this r-min and I sh:ul*. assure that Hitler know of this basic work
by Hindis;-fioche and concurred in their cpini n, and arrogated t Mr-


7633


15 ' - 17-2-Or _ ss (Int. 3ram)

Const lie* I.


self tho right tc mate ethical grounds and reason fj this decree;

Q When a Chief cf State gathers all the powers of the State
into his wn hands can, in ycur opinion, a Chief of St-to that is not
a government consisting, that is tc sry, f -any persons but one singlo
Chief f State, decide what is right cad what is wrong?

A Yes. That is the sarjo situation that crists in any absolute
oonorchy whore the king decides unilaterally what is ri«.ht and what is
wr ru_.


Q Mo* there is an othicrl standard that stands abive all
States. Should not a Chief of Stato tako re: .rd for this ethical world
or'lor r/hen docidinr what is rirht and trhat is wrong?

A Yes, he should, but opinion is di'/idod about the justifi¬
ability .-f Euthanasia in tho wh-lo world end it cannot bo said that
outh.an.-sia is repudiated by tho majority of humanity; ncr c.-n it bo
said that it is accoptod by tho majority in Gorrv-ny. At any r.ato it
could bu assured that a largo port ^f t!x> population oharod that
opinion .-.id for vory concerto reasons. I should liko to .aoruino that
tho majority f the cr-up boliov-.-! in tho justifiability cf tho moasvro
.and this was justification for tho Chiof f Stato passing such a low*

Q Thoa, S'.' far as y. u c-n judgo, fren tho legal point of view
did you havo nis/ivings about tho directive, the entry, .and tho irnplo-
nontation cf this decree and did you bolicvo that y. u wore n t acting
in anything that was illognl?

A I believed in tho .absolute justifiability of that decree
for outhoi incod of its logoi justification.

Q .fitness, you are not yourself a doctor but you arc tho son
of a doctor and you havo discussed tho rcbla: of euthanasia with #rony
-lectors, how did you yourself see the .-roblo:i of euthanasia frost tho
point of view of nodical professional othi.es?

A As a layr.an and non—’.cctor, I really can say nothing about


that. Or. the basis of literature and of conversations vith doctors I


could only forr. ny own opinion abo-.it that natter. Re. arding radical


7o3/i


1


15 lfey-A-% - -i? -3-Cros s (Ir.t. Beotoi)

Court . o. I.

ethics I cannot testify oven if there is rny such thing as special
nedicai otliics at all and if not a part of ethics as a whole. Certain¬
ly a doctor should see as his highest goal tto. aid for the patient and
tho effort to ac.ro the patient * s lifo. This obligation and effort on
the part of the doctor must not, however, bo exaggerated. Ttoso of-
forta -and this obligation find ttoir nr.tural lir.it:,tions where tlioro.apy
is no longer possible and when tho further existence of such a patient
is of no real si nificance.

Q You rish to assure We conception of euthanasia for i.ncur-
ablo patients as a whole?

A I Bust say frankly that after I have thought about this
euthanasia probloa I thought of it only in connection with incurable
nontally ill persons and vy answers havo related only to that partic¬
ular field.

Q Then, I soc frer. your answers that you Seo a diffcronco
euthanasia for incurable cunt ally ill parsons and outhanasin for por-
Bons who havo incurable physical illnocs. Now lot no ark tills quito
generally in tho case of an insane porson, is not his rill to livo
broken against hie will?

A It is possible that an ins-.iv. orson will retains a
spark or will to live but every other living bo in- has tho earo. Tho
question of tho case in an insane .\jrron is whothor ho i3 livin a
life that is dignified or unworthy to bo lived.

Q Then what do you think should bo clono with sich .a life
that is not worthy of being lived?

A The i:tcur blc rxjnt-liy ill person, so far as I havo scon
and observed such persons nysolf, is frea the point of view of a*xcental¬
ly healthy -arson a seriously suff«.ri.. and hopolossly lost cn."turu.

He is 3inply a wrotetod reminder of what w-’s once a wholo ran. In the
opinion of psychiatric rcioncc a:*? in tho opinion of philosophers thero
are c‘*f fcr_nccs of opitoor. as to rrh.ot .cr oo\H .nd spirit have actually
ted or whet or they hare .. only concealed by tho ill no sh. Ilor-

7635


15 lay—A-. Ji-IT-ii-^Sross (Int. Brown)
Court .'O. I.


aver, on the whole, tteso creatures are persons who have lost the last
remnant of contact with real life.

Q That is your opinion about the relations between tic phy¬
sician and the rent ally ill persons under his care?


15 raj 1 7-..-..~>-i6-l- irro* (Ir... ro.-r.)

Court HO. 1

The life of 6 hi insene arson nas, for hlisalf ar.’. for his

ral'-ives, lost -11 purpose, an I corals ts only of pain an' uisory. just

-_s the soul melon s in th: hclpin hands of tho priest, so the holy

beloa 2 in the b-lpin hen's of tho -hysician. Only sc can tho sick

./man really ho assist© in that oaso, however, this :aeans for tho

'octcr that his *uties, particularly in view of tho arson’s spiritual
• -

state - it is his duty to free tho parson fron his urrrorthy con 'ltion
or, - I ni ht ovoy say, - fro- his prison.

1 In your opinion, what const ’.orations shoul*. novo tho ’octor
to r:co-non ’ euthanasia?

9

. Tho aotivoa would ’.v.vo to ho ur-ly nw*icel an’ coul only
bo on aot t. I should liko to soy that

h: mh>s hL-solf thj vjhiclo or a nor© exalte t lovo of .ondrospaot for
humanity, Thsro ai=t bo no rr.torial -otives.

0 If Jurists rant a certain 1. al rl ht for octorn to comit
euthanasia, horr shoal:' thoy treat this -.tatter?

If tho . .tiont is ra- Uy honolossly incurable, that cannot b.)
loci'!’ by a Ju ’ -o, only by thi ’octor, an, it is only suoh conditions
that cono into question in tho question cf euthanasia....

THS (Intern ): Counsel, it soons to fcho Tribunal

-hr.t ' he ithess has statj.l his hil schical i toao at suffici ont ox tent,
unloos yc-u hnvo ono or two noro definite questions alor. that lino.

*y D'.. n: v/sr

1 Coul' not tho 'octcr err?

. s lr a*V -i’, "to err i3 human." for

, ns a l:y-v>n, x. .rt's .or :c : list's scrutiny an’ observation

of th. -atient he’, to suffice. ,

Q itness, ym r.-.v: 'v-j: l of co l.intr on th- ,*rt of the church,
an’ noreovar, you were reared as belie. as it laiown in 1939 that...

IT "T: (Intc-T - :; tin ): Counsel, I think further oxasd-

ation ^Icr, • those oneral linos is not -nli htadn- to tik fribunal.
you r, ny other questions alon; more direct linos to rc.-jur.' to the


witness?


7637


15 "-ay ^7-..--.H>-ie-2-SarroTr (Ir.t. ~rowr.)

Ceurt He. 1

DR. FriiHSCKT. V: "r. Pros!'.’.ant, I wished only to ask tho witness
Mother, in treatin'; this probloB, to had reli-icus rls ivin a and
whether tho religious rAn ivin-.s th t vre expressed to hin by others
vroro taker, into his sensi oration. That was tho purpose of this question.

THF. raSSHEh:* You nay a3k tJ> witness that question,

nr D~. proses :jh :

Q ' itne33, you havu hoard of th? objections of Church. I renin!
you . srticularly of th: a. 11 cations by the Sjdscopatas of Colo - 710 ,
Fadorborn an’ . unich, fho Insisted that tho sanctity of hunan lifo
mat, as Uvlno law, under all circunstancos, bo observ . !tow, I ask
you, * 1 1 you concern yourself with this iroblen am* ho , vory briefly,

4' you justify th? fact that euthanasia was nevertheless carried out?

A Kron th. rcli ious oint of view, killin is, in itself, not
an evil act. It ipor.’s what the reasons for it are. Under aono circun-
stancoe, tho roason for tho killin can mko a rood not of tho killin .

An unjustified killin'* -rill not swot ’4th approval in tho eyes of Qoi.

«to’Jt as He avo lif., Ho car. also tak it sway through hurnns. Thu
Fifth Coman'•ant "Thou 3 halt novor kill" but sinply says "Thou shalt
net kill". In certain s.ocific c-ason, for instance, in war, in tho
xocutin of capital scr.tuneos, an lately, th killin of an unborn
chil* to save th lifo of to.::othar, thoso are -all cases of a spoolal
sort, and it is a question «both r a 'rillin is justified or not,
j; en'in on tho s ocific caso*

'l “i J you ov-r ’iscuss thoso questions noro elaborately '4 th
Catholic thoolo ions?

TH . FRSSUE:rr: Counsel, tho Tribunal fin 's no profit in these
farther questions alon, this lino, unless you have so-io noro definite
Tactical questions to propound.

w tp. rprrscT ash*

1 Th-jn I shall turn to the last chapter which rust bo treated
’lely fr~n th. • oint cf vi of th rosecuticn. The . resccutior. charrcs
. w: that, by yirticii -atin in t v. euthanasia pro rs;:, you ccrittc-* crin.rs


7638


1? ::-y ii7—.i-^TD-0.2—3-Serrcrr (Ir.t. Brown)
Court ffc; 1


i ainst humanity. Wow, fron the point of view of humanity, what 'o you
have to say to this char 3 by the prosecution?

- The word "hunanity" naans a heartfelt participation in tho
niff rlnj-s of others. Syr. ethy an hilpful actions arise fron this
f clin of huranonoss. ’Jo , all of those feelin s apply in the case of
euthanasia.

Q Tou have frequently usod tho wor'a "sympathy for the pationt"
in ycur testimony. Sympathy dth a sic!: person, was this on*» of the
points of vie - that roved you to .varttcipato in tho euthanasia program
an' a' a you affirn the .urposo fron tho othical point of view?

A For no, sympathy for th., sick person wau tho *oci3ivo con-
si .’.oration that 'ocilod whothjr or not I nffimud tho principle of
euthanasia.

1 Di t you consider it correct an' U»cont fron tho J:u:aan point
of view to sparo a ids persons Ion years behind tolls, or 11 you con¬
sider it nore Worthy to short ;n thi3 life throu h a :-.orcy 'oath?

.. I saw this not only aotariaivjly uirorthy, but as huartloss, to
loav theeo poor cr> ."or yours an ya r . t is

not, livin any Ion .r - vt they :• ‘oin in th<;ro,

1 j.r. nor t'v. last question, "on sal’ before that tho ins an o
: rson is still a v.n ' o -1 .t yjt '-.vo a certain till to live. This
will to live is broken by what t!io *.octor wrier toko 8 in outhanasia. Now,
at /.o tin that t/iosc thin 3 -re oin. on, lid you have sono notions in
your rdn' about this fill to live?


hon on saw t’.v.so sick or sons or. coul ’ roa'ily cja that thera


was no 7.111 to live in t:» ., \ut orr» ha * to rc-i. r.b'jr that at one tin
thosa j-.oplo ha* b»n healthy an' ha* a rill of thoir c.mb-.n’ this, their
forr.cr "ill, ha to bo th-, basis for th ’ceisicn whether outhanasia was
to • -iso * in th caso rr not. '.h hor.lthy rson, '.then ho sacs thosj
wretched crcaturos, rcil ..-core such a person Mnsolf, and What

j .«• ourc.lv.s i * di .Vo vo car. a33U2>j is ,.a wish "Iso on th part

of t'i sic rson . ro he as .as fomarly, healthy, so.that h could

7639


15 'ay -Io-ii-Mantr..* (Ir.^. 3rom)

Court So. 1

for.’ a healthy Jud'aent. If the sick >atient was in a osition to rceor-
rdxo the situation in which ho fin ’3 hiaself, ho hinself woul* ho- to
that, condition star toned. ifcucver, the nature of tho ’is case rovont3 liin
Crer. '’oin- that. These wore all tho various considerations that led no
to r.ffiir. the principle of r.uthanasia.

1 ..n‘ ;-ou rcr. ifost conclusion fro- these considerations?

.v I ted 'iy\ that these peoolo should be roloascd fron their
toriontoi condition.

} Now, one last question, Thi3 was your point of view which wo
have tr^atcl hire in a aonerhat ibri’ :o fora. Mi thoso thou hts novo
you Uioply at that tine?

.. Too, of courcej they til bocauso it is no trivial mttor to
foric on a mttor, ovan if ycu aro or 'orot! to, rhir. it ia a nattor of
lifo and ’.oath for p-a-sons who usot to bo hoalthy, but I have Just told
you .rhjr I bolijvo! that I was Justified in this, norally as well as
1 illy, ml bo&auae th .00 thru, hta novo : jo 90 roatly I a’ tv\ tod to
•a!:<j ttwso ttou hts available 0 the public aa a ;holo; an.’, it was fron
those consi Orations th t t:», *iln "I ..ccuso" was nado. One of jry
.enceintes, on ay inccntivo, pursued tho idoa of portundin ’litlur to
b away with this secrecy once those jotters bocano a nattor of jnoral
'iG cits 3 ion an * to ufclish th cont.nt3 of tho lar. ro ;ar ’in <utharvi3ia.
For this urposo, with Bauhl;r* = a proval, I : :ot in touch with a filn
00 :i>any. I rocoivad a nanvscript which, to bo sure, could not bo U3ed in
that fora but caul ’ bo revised. The filn conpany rocomendod a . ood
ircetor Kerr Lieboneinon to :o an'. I asked hir. to be of assistance in
‘ratlin u; the book f<-r this filn in such a ray as to mho it public
iocuBoion so that on coul' tVn clearly ’.cci !o whether wo had^hrsuod
corroct , ath or rhoti r 'dtl r fc> ' issue : 1 false order. Tho success of
th filr , not only ir. ’or>li n ccur.tri >s -jcausc of its artistic <•ir-lity,
Cut also within •- many, proved to 30 that the majority o« poqaLo aro in
thanasi t on! duo their own convictions,

r-j .ct it. T’iis 'iln •" ..ccuso", as I was I ter tol ’ by tho filn corrjvany


7640


15 :ty l;7-.'.-..TD-l8-^Xnrroir (Int. Srosn)

Court to. 1

’.'oc tbo filn that *as nost frequently played of all those they had pro
ucc U Thfl latt.rs thr.t roachec- the filn company regardln this filn,

I asked for fro™ the filn cc^pary; nare than 90? of thoo were en¬
thusiastically in favor an" only a few rare arainst it.


15 ' '-'v-..- 19-1-iIaloy (Int. Erown)
Cciart ->o. I.


Q fitness, one last question, did you sun up your thoughts
in fcho find words of the file spoken by tlw defendant Dr. Hcidt in
the fila, wore those thoughts that he spoke yours?

A Yos. V.e were,_ unfortunately, not able to get hold of tho
scenario. Otherwise wo could have showed it to tho Court.

DR. FftCESCK”X‘i’]J: ''r. President, I intend now to put in ono
lost affidavit f roc Supplementary Document Book Ho. 3, Doc urgent Ij6,
rage 1. Hovnvor, I greatly fonr that Supplementary Voluno 3 is still
not in tho hands of the Tribunal. I Just hoar that it is not yot
ready.

THE PRESIDENT i Tho book is not yot roady, but counsel any
of for tho docu-ont when the book is boforo tbo Tribunal. Tint riht
will bo reserved to hi:.

OK. PitCESCKWiXi Thon in this collection I offer Brack .Ex¬
hibit 39, th- affidavit of iiobciwi:*. r, 2eth of April 192,7, si nod by
hir. on that into.

TIE rRESIDEJIT: Counsel, in what document book Is tint ox-
hibit to bo found?

)... FRCESCHX'ANHj That is in Su?pla?ant-ry Voluno Book 3 on
pn;o 1. I of/ur it as Brack Doctcxmt 1:6.

:a. HCCKJ.A U)t Counsel, that is tho document book rrhich is
lacking. :'a do not havu that doc\raor.t book.

Dl. F XSSGffAMNt Yes, I understand tho President to say I
eight put it in now.

THE HiSSIDENT: I said I rosorvod tho ri. ht to you to put it
in when the locxuont is prepared.

BA. PKCESCHTAKH* lot e say briefly that this doeuiiRt dos-
criboc tho no .otiations between tlw defendant Pr-ck and tho director
at that tii.'. Vihon the Tribunal has this supple;ontary Document Book
I shall return to this doc'rccnt and ask that the ri ht to do so my bo
reserved to -:c.

T.z: PRESIDE: .7: Yos Counsel. And J you desire to do so you


7tL2


15 *ay-A—’ 3-1J-2—' r m2o> (Int. Rrcwrr)

Court Ko. X.

may then ex-nine the defendant upon this document. It is not your
fault that the document is not hero new and every right corrected with
that will bo preserved to you until this document book is ready and
before the Tribunal,

DR. PaCESCSSjnis Thank you.

Q VJitnoss, ona last cnvrsticn. You Jravc hoard the point of
view expressed by the Court. i> peaking in your own defense nor; then what
do you say as to the unjustifiability of tho charge of tbo participation
in tiro outhanasia program; ner„ you guilty of crir*s a~-inst humanity?

A In my actions and in my attitudo the definitive consideration
was pity for the sick person. Tho pationt was to be helped —

TIB FRESIDEIC: Counsel, I m at loss to interrupt you. I
don't want to curb tho witness, but tho witness has been over this
* round again and n, ain, and in your briof and in your final acrutaont
you \d 11 have tho opportunity to go over those things, and at tiro closo
of tho csso tho witness himself . ay make a statoaunt.

DR. FRCESCHHAUNx hrosidont, I simply wanted in conclusion

to havo an answer to ny quostion from hi-, whothor ho boliwvos that tho
tray in which euthanasia was carriod out and tho methods used in killing
millions of human beings, whotljor tho kncrrlodr.o of these things had any
effect of his attitudo toward outhanasia. I singly want to know what
his reaction was to that. That is igr last quostion.

THE xUSSIDEl.T: Tto witnosc raa j have three minutes to ox; r,63

that.

A (continued) I ion't w nt throe irinutos. I fool that
the charge of inhuiane activity on cy port because I took part in
outhanasia, I fool that this is unjustified because euthanasia Or tho
fora tlct I iiavy laseribed is so: retiring that has nothing to do with
what others did in misusing euthanasia.

DR. FTESCH AliRx :s*. rresido-it, nc further questions.

T1 1. IS ID El .T: The Tribunal lias some questions to propound to


the witness


15 :iay«A—.r—I9-3-Jlaloj (In*-. Ircwn)
Court :'o. I.


BY JUDG1 c£3?-IhG:

Q Ti'itrwss, when adult persons wore selected for euthanasia
and sent by the transport to euthanasia stations for that purpose by
what stthods wore the mercy deaths giver.?

1 The patients went to a euthanasia institution after tho
writ ton formalities wore dona which I need not repeat here, namely
physical oxmination, comparison of tho files, otc. Then thi patients
were load to a gas chamber and thcro wore killed by the gas carbon
ocnoxido (CO) by tho doctor.

Q hnere was that carbon nonoxido obtained, by what procoss?

A It was in a cooprossoi gas contained, such ns ccuprocsod
oxyron or atsothylon is kept in fer wolding a big container.

Q And those pcoplo w_j-c placed in this chamber in groups, I
suppose, and then tho conoxidu was turned into tho chanbors?

A ftorhaps I better dcscribo this in sore detail; Bouhlor<s
basic require-.:nt was that tho killing should not only bo painlocs,
but also should be unnoticcablu. For this reason, the photographing
of the patients which was only done for sciontific reasons was dono
before thoy onto red tho chamber, so that tho pationt3 woro coraplotoly
diverted, and tlion thoy woro load into the -as room which thoy woro told
was a shower ro*u They wore then in groups of porhaps 20 or 30. Tlvoy
woro gasrjd by tho doctor in charge.

Q Have you over bcon present whon a strey doath was nccordod
to those people by that process?

A Yes, I had to, because Bouhlor wanted a report whothor things
wore being done according to his orders and in a dignified and not
brutal fashion.

•1 And you found from your inspection and witness in;, tlsoso
corenonios, you saw that they wore being dono in accordance with
Bouhlor' s orders, ir. a dirnified and painless sort of way?

A Yes, but lot no say I was already convinced that tho method
w-.s aitloss, but I saw also that the Hit hod made it unnoticcablo to


15 r-19-«-:'iloy (Int. Srcm.)

Ccurt :’o, I.


tho patient that he was about to bo killed. There were benches and
chairs in tho ctimber, That happened after a few minutes, after tho
e?.c ms let in, the patient bec.ma sleepy and tired and after a few
ninutes they wore dead. 'Jhoy sinply went to sleep without oven knowing
that they voro going to sloop and that was one of the r.ost essontir .1
requirononts.

\fhon was the first tiao that you vdtnossed ono of thoso

procedures?

A 7ho first tine was on the occasion of an experinont with
four such patients. I think it nust have been Dcconbor 1939 cr January
191*0. I enow that there was mow on tho ground at tho tirao. Tint is
why I rc->jnbor those r.onths. Bouhler, Conti, and I don't knew who olao,
thcro wore r. few othor doctors for tho first tiso saw this being deno,
and on tlw basis cf this oxrorin;nt '.iitlor decided that only carbon
Bonozido was to bo used for killing the patients.


I


7&*5


15 iy U7-»-T»TB-20-l-:‘eoh£n (Int. brown)

Court Ho- 1

q -Tall no-.-, before or after that tine bad you tried any other
-assoa or any other naans of a tir&starin Euthanasia to these people?

„ '.k>, we - and by that T :*nr. doubler's oryanization - never
used any other - as or other mans.

Q You round the carbon r.onaxy le quite satisfactory, so you never
ha' to resort to any other n.-ns?

A Yes, you can put it that way.

q How, nh.ro was it that those four people wore .accorded the
priviloaa of a uorcy '.oath in December, 1939 or 19! 0?

A That was in tha first Euthanasia station in Prnn'onbur”.

Q An'. '<ho vero the subjects that were used for that experiment?
A Thit .as four rentaUy incurable ill persons-
q Do you knar what institution they carw from?

A Ho, that I !on*t know.

Q ,'oro they nan or *.«>ncn?

A ?'on.

q All r.on. 'hat roro thoir : as, rroro they youn aen, rdddle
p. -o’. r>’n or ol J .orly :.»n; ha; -ul.* ya: classify then?

A T really 'ont ro:.j-'b*r that.

a -n: t can you sr.y in ro'-r! to th-dr nationality} lo you knov;
anythin about that?

.. 7hzy oust have boon C- jrr.ans, they coul ' not bo anythin • but
Oar-vans, because -cccr In- to re ulations only Geraan .ion tally ill
persons wore use in Euthanasia-

Q And you cay Hitler was thcro?

A Ho, Hitler was not there- Pouhlor was there,
q Bouhlor?

-e, Conti was there ’ bdiOTO "ranIt,

q Karl Aren't?

A Too, Karl "ran ‘ t.

a jc -r V r - r :iy ef V'.. other *efononis who were tlwrof
.. Of a *af baats ore, certainly nona was resent ‘excepting

myself.

7t46


15 !fcy L7-..—..TE-2C-2— Kachan (Int. Brown)
Court Sc. 1


Q -oil, thin you ra&jMp that yra, Bouhler, Conti and Karl
Brcndt were tb-roj r.r: o yax rc:::-bor ~r.y of th other rrentlomen thoro
at the tine?

A Yes, I said there were sono more doctors thero, but none of
the defendants hero.

1 Dr. rfannraxeiler, perhaps?

A !»o. Dr. FfanxsueUer was certainly not thoro. They nust have
boon Berlin doctors*

Q 'hen after T'occnbor of 1939 or January of 19hO vns it that
you ar'ain witnessed a Euthanasia procedure?

A I shjul l say that in tho course of the yoar of 19U0 in nil
tho Euthanasia institutions oxistin at that tioo, I personally assured
nysolf that tho duthanasia ina ’ cin- correctly carried out or.co or
twico, but I boll a vo I recollect thr.t tho Instituto Ifadanar was only
set up in 19fel and in that yoer I ’i not soo Euthanasia boin? carried
out, thnt roul-' J.inir.ato thj Instituto -adamr.

'l Tho Instituto at Hadojvxr, I think you said thoro were fivo
otter stations?

A Yes, thoro woro six alto-.othor.

q So that Yxrin tho yoar 19U0, you assured yourself that each
of tho Tivo stations on , .rhaps one, taro or perhaps norn visits that
tho procu hire, insisted upon by Bcuhlar, was boin carried out in a
hunano manner, in a ainloss ramor by carbon nonoxydo?

A Completely unnoticoablo.

q And now rho wore tho peoplo... .lot no put it this ir.yj tho
first tico -at Eran-'an l ur< thero were four poorL-, all non?

A 103.

q Xo~, 'an ycu -r<r..'i>3r on your subsoquont visits in 19kO to
tho otter Euthanasia stations ho the ;oople were; non or ^onen?

A Beta, js --n in' soa*ti_aos wosjtm.

a _.r. ’ .ali.at car. ycu say in ri -r! to their nationality?

.v I car. only say that those were only Gomans, bccauso I am
perfectly convinced that Ecuhlor's re ulaticns, which rested on an order


15 -7-..-..73-2C—3-liaefcan (Ir.t. rear.)

Court :io. 1


frc:a :5 tier, namely that no foroi ners mere to bo riven Euthanasia,

-era observe! strictly by all t»ij Euthanasia institutions.

'I "here wro these stations located, witness?

A I don*t wn ’erstani That you .moan, whero they were?

In what fart of Gerviny or in what port of Poland, or in what
part of Csecho Slovakia, in what part of tho Protectorate of Bohonin-
’’ora via, in what part of Derrwrk, in what Part of Holland, in what part
of France and in what port of ’luropo w&ro those stations located?

A Hov I understand you correctly. The first one ran in
Brandoribure on the Havel in the noi hborhood of Berlin about ?0 or 80
kilometers any, Tho no:.t wr.3 the Institute Graf.-neck, that wr.s in
Wirttombor . /.r/ether institution .-as Sonnonstoin and that is noor Pirns
near Eros ion. There was t:» Institute rthaln which vtas noor Lina on
tho r -rub.j which was in Austria. Than thero was tho Instituto Bcrnhurr
on tha Sa-.io lUvor near Dessau* hoar is in Hessen*

Q >.ro any of thoso stations looatol in that .ortion of Poland,
rhich to s occupio i by tho C-orans in .-dlitary occupation?

A Ho.

Q An’ th-i six stations you have Just nano I woro all tho station*)
known to you that ads to j thero roro just six?

A Thoso woro tho only one3, yea.

o Htncse, can you npproxi.vito th xepulation of Oormny as it
axis tel in the y.r.r of 1939 or tho year of 19fc0? "ora thero soro fifty
or sixty million people?

A ?.’o, rou hly flight? to oijhty fivo million.

q Harr by that rhon you say oi nty to I.hty fivo iLilion, you
inelu’o tho entire '’•or an Saleh, ir.du lin Austria, tha SacUfconlanl
an’, th: occupied tarritory?

.. .ustre a and the "•id ft dan but not the occuplod territory.

q ,.r. u ;s-ir.etj rw hly 'h-ro - re i.-hty five million people?

A I os.

7<*6

;


15 .7--

Z y: rt :*o. 1


Q Of that oi-Wy fivo -illion, hsr: -any Jows would you say woro
livin' ir. G^raany at the tl-e who wero German nationals?

« Maybe two or three Billion.

q Tc«:r9 talkin' not* about the Greater Goman ?.eich, including
Austria in ! the Sidotonl&ni ?

A Yes.

q You astir.' 1 .to there vmro bobtrecn two or throo Billion who
were Goman nationals?

A Rou'hly, yea,

r i !Iar with tsro or three rdilion Gsrrain Jews :untl naatail into
the G or ran Topulr.tion of oi hty fivo Billion oooplo, who were Cm min
nationals, explain, if you */l- , to *.’k Tribunal *-hy it res that tho
Goroon Jews truro exclude l fron tiw Euthanasia program, if an you say
it was a s iutary pro rau accorUn to ;iooplo tlw priviloyo of a norcy
oath for takin then out of thoir nlsoryj why was it that the 0 «man
Jaws w.,ra not includel ir. tint pro ran?

.. I hove already sal*, that. As -outlier uxplaino ! it, tho
philanthropic act of Cutbanaola should bo ranted only to Homans •

q lun ’oratin’, that, hut I thou ht you sal-’, at that tine thoro
•roro h.ttw, n two in*’ tftre j dllion Gomans In Oemany, Gonvin citizens
./ho tfors Jcwre?

A Yos, that is so.

Q hy •.:aro thoy not include ’ in tho oroTam, if tho riviloro of
Vvi pro- rn was oir. to ho accor ?od to ill Osmans?

.. rhf; roason possibly lios in tho fict that tho Go varment ttd
not .ant to .rint this philanthropic act to ths Jews,

n Thsy wanted to rant this philanthropic ict to all Aryan
Cur.-.“.ns, but 11 * not • to rant it to 0 man Jows an:' thy 1' not
ant to -not this hilintbropic act to (hron sol 'iers of tho first
war, -.<ho he! rocaived sental injuries vrordn- out of their war wounds j
is tint correct?


15 ~y U 7-A-ATD-20—5-Hochan ("r.t. Brorr.)
Cert Ho, 1


A As I have already said, that is a ^roat inconsistency in this
procedure and we often protested, hem over, considerations of n military
and psycholofical nature determined that,

Q Thank ycu,

T-E PTXSIDE’rrt Counsel, the Tribunal hasnorr receivod supple-
^r.tal document book three. Counsel in the morning sossion, after the
Tribunal propound a few more questions to the witness, you nay offer
the documents in that book before tho Tribunal,

Tho Tribuml will bo in recoss until 9»3Q o'clock tomorrow

norrdrv,

(Tho Tribuml adjourned at 1535 fours until 0930 Hours, 16 :iiy

19U7).


7650


/f«7

; - - -l-l-Vst^r (Ir.v. r. Schoa)
Crurt to. 7.


Official Transcript of the American 'lilitary
Tribunal in tf*. mttor of the United States
of America, against i.arl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Kurnberg, Genaany,
on lb!lay 19U7, 0930, Justice Beals presiding.

TIC KABSKALt rersons in the court roon will ploasc fi.-d t!»eir

scats.

Tiie Honorable, the Judges of lilitary Tribunal I.

S&litary Tribunal I is nor in siscion. God save the United
States of Anerioa and this honorable Tribunal.

There trill bo order in t!» coi rtrocet.

7IX HkSnOTi :ir. larsh.nl, you ascertain if t'o dofondnr.ts
are all present in co’irt.


THS 1'A.iSHAL: Hay it ploarc Your Honor, all the dofordantr
arc pro rent in the court with the o ccc >tion of tto Defendants Oobhardt
and Coorh'usor, absent duo to illness.

TIC rajSJDENri ?ho Socrotary-Ooncral *111 notu for tho record
tho presence of all Wv. dofo i dents in Court cave the Defendants Oobhardt
and Cfoorhausar. Tho Tribunal has cortificatos from tho prison surgeon
certifying that Djforvdontc Oobhardt and Cteorhouscr are unable to attond
court on account of illness. Pursuant to thoso oertiflector, those do-
fondants -.till bo <S::cuscd frert attondaitco before tho Tribunal today, it
appearing thoir absence will not projixiico thoir enso.

Tho 3oGn,tiry-G-::rf*r.il ill file tho aodical cortificatos.


T’.o Tribunal has soro further quor iora to propourxi to tJjo


*itness.


50 ir:r-:


VIXTCT. BRACK - torurud

ci THE pens (Continued)


you said yesterday .afternoon that theso
l-'caU.l at ornberg, Brandonburg, Hadanar,
Sonr.onrtein, is that correct?


A lie, that is correct


16 May-M-lB-l-g-^cster (Int. Von Schon)

Court No# I,

Q When were the gas chanters at those euthanasia stations

built?

A When the institutions were set up as euthanasia institutions.

Q Can you reaerfcer the approximate dates?

A No, I cannot reconter tte dates. I Just know the years
when the institutions tecano out’nanasia institutions — apyroximatoly.

I know that Grafoneck and Brandenburg voro tho first institutions, tho
first to tec orao outhanasia institutions. It teg an at tho ond of 1939,
at tho carliost, tho beginning of 19tO, at tho iatost. I might cay in
tho oarly susrer of 19hO Sonnonstoin and Hartbeio wore sot up* In tho
early sun-er or in tho spring. And tho institution at Bornborg wac
sot up in tho fall or winter of 19iiO, Hadaaar, in tho winter or spring
of 191*1. This is as occurato as I can givo it.

Q You said tte winter or spring of 19ll. Do you noan tho
winter of 19ljO or the spring of 191*1? You said tho winter or spring
of 19U1.

A If I nay winter »Ul, I roan January 'hi, but it night havo
teen >!arch too, I don't know.

Q And you think that Hadaaar was tho last ono that wac cot

up?

A I <13 quite cortain that Hadaaar was tho last ono.

Q How, of what materials woro thoco gas chamborr built?

VToro they movable gas chanters very much liko tho low pressure chanters
that Professor Dr. Ruff talked about, or woro they something that woro
built pornanor.tly into tho conp or installation?

A Ho special gas chaster was built. A room suitablu in tho
planning of tte hospital was used, a roon attached to tho reception
«ard, and the roon where tte insane persons wore taken, whore they wuro
kept. That was 'nado into a gas chamber. It was sealed, it was ;ivon
special doors and windows, and thon a few motors of gas pipe woro laid,
-crx) kind of pipe with holes in it. Outside of this rocn there was a
"bottle, a compressed bottle, with tho necessary apparatus, njcecsary


7652


16 »v3y-c>i3-l*-3-Foetor (Int. Von -chor.)
Court No- I.


inatrasenta, a pressure gauge, etc.


Q Now what department had the responsibility for coi*structing
or building those gas chancers, ahat dopartnant of the party or of tho
government?

A No office of the party. I don't understand tho oucstion.

Q Somebody had to build those chambers. Who gave tto orders
and who had the responsibility of bui l ding thee., was that your deport¬


ment?


A Tho orders, I assume, wore given by tho head of the in¬


stitution but I don't knew who actually -.avc tho orders.

Q In other words, wore those chambers not build according to
sono specifications, plans and specifications?

A I can't Icagino that, ovory chamber wes different. I orrr
oovural of then.

q Do you know what dopartnont gave tho order for having tho
chanters built? Soo that your dopartaont under Bouhlor?

A No, tl«t was Pouhlor hlusolf.

q Arid ho gavo thj order to tho various toads of ins tit ut ions
to install this chaaber, is that correct?

A Yoe.

q How, how would the ho-.ds of each of those institutions !cnorr
how to install a gas chamber unloss thero .roro certain plena and speci¬
fications givon to ttoc?


7653


15 ...y-fc-JP-3-l-Zarrcv (i-t. Ton Schon)

Court I


a. I never suv any such nlan. I don't haow of any.

Vould you kuov now to go out and build a -a chamber unless
si:- c . i.-.Cvr or planner h^d told you? Cort.dnly I wouldn't.

-i. I don't anew whether I would u.iov it either, Procuucbly he
culled on a uccha.-.lc.

Z., ih.t'a »d*.at j'u trying to ouy. Vhut aochoaic or on .ineor or
rov.y of o.i, • incurs Wwro rosnoneiolc for a coin, th-t tneoo.v..o oheubors
uoro milt eo that they would do t..c joo they wore supposed to do?

a. There w^s certainly not a .roue of y.vjin^ors. I presune th..t
there was so-iobcdy at the institutions who had enough technic .1 ability
to dc it. I don't know.

Then, so f .r ai you .;..ov, sene one at one of these institutions
''T.\ld 00 told oy -fcounlcr to constrxt a .t cn^.oor ad ho would cell
- tiio head of tho institution tnea would call on so..o one, you don't
icnov vhcci, to , o out and build t..c chamber? Is that ocrroct?
a. Thut la how X iuj^ino it.

v -oil, wouldn't it aaico considerable difforunco vhothor tho
c.m'ecr w..o to bo constructed for oithaUusi.. by Carton nonouido or by
sotio other uo^ns? couldn't there nuv« to eo sone technic_l i.ifor-u>-
tion available to the head of tx.e institution oo th-t he c uld .*lvo
ir.ctloas to his aecfcar.ic to ouili tho thin, to do the thin; it was
axrionui to do?

a. I aust 8 c,v honestly I really don't -now any thine; bbttt thr.t.

I cr-i't Jud,je.

Do you Ihiov waotner or not an: - dopurt.-o.-.t of tno /.v.or.iaont,

uador aovhlor, or undor droudt or under acyoody olso, v^s rotnonsiolc

*

for noein. th..t tho gas apparatus w„s Inst.lied pronerly?

•s I don't . -|0V, but I dca't oolieve so because I would 'rob ,'ely
nr.vo icnrd of it.

How l_r ,e were taosc r-*c chambers?

-a •:.-j wore of different sixes. It was siunly an ad^oi-in rood.

7654


16 ..c^..r-JP-2-a-S^rrcv (int. Ton Schon)

Court I

I o»'t reuaioer whether they wore 4x5 voters, or 5 x 6 voters.

5k >ly nonaal sizod root#, but I can't s.^’ tho ozjct sizo. It we
too ion ego. I c_a't raiuibur.

q. torn they «s lur^c* as tuia court roca?

*w so, tney were Just aomul rocus.

q. boll, u nun of your Intelligence oust kavo souo idea ,.bout
t..e aizo of these roona. Ike u3fcrtion "noruul size" doesn't acan
anythin, in particular.

a. 3y th-t I no-n the eizo of tue norad roca in. e noraal heuso.

I didn't i.wuQ on assembly roou or a cell uitnor. I iiuaht c roca, but
I c.n't th*. ciz«. exactly ooc-uoo I really don't )aow it. It night
n..vo b-ai 4x5 uetert, or 5 x 6 uutora, or 3? xtf, but I redly
don't taiow. I didn't pay tmeh at.nation tc it.

q. Have you eve) visited a concentration Ca.p or a uilifcaiy
c.n or any kind?

a. I visited » concentration canp, afti 2 v^s onco in a uilitn-
~ c.s> as a soldicr.

Huvo you ever seen a shower roan or shovor b„th juilt into
a c _n of tn„t kind vhuro the ixxietcs of concentration cj.jo, or
wnoro soldiers in a uilit_ry oarr-cics, c*i ta,.o nhoworot
a. Yuo, I huVb. In uy ovn Oarrucics.

q. -nd voulc you s* tn-t t..ic euthanasia rooa at the various
i;.st lent ions v_s about th-t diueasiont
a. I think it VaS uuch S-.allor.

q. toll, perils we c-n .;et ut it this way. I tuou.it Jurheps
- cu :ac- eaaituinj -.oout tad accoonicul construction th..t ; oujposod
everybody :aov so-otuin.; aaout. Ttia roan of yours that you t II:
cl ".t, now —_v would it acc.cuuodatbt

^ Testard^ I s .id tn..s, accordin to uy estk-atc, it - i -t
t. 4i tventy-five cr shirt, people.

q. t is still ycur estimate to:’. •? I r<—i_ oorc< ; c tardcp*


7655


16 J?-2-5-2arrov (let. Von Schon)

Court I

tx.; you o-id that. and th-t is still your ogtiu-te today, tn..t it could
caifortably t^cc c_re of twenty-five or tnirt y pooplsl
Yen, th-t's -y estimate.

2. tow. Silo Carton uonoxido ,;as tn_t v„s used for tec vr^sc of
axCluumsia where did it cev.e frx:? I Know you fluid ycster<Lr t.. t it
c.jc out of tuoc 9 very nuch liXe oxygon c_ic in, out where cU t ie tubes
c« c front Do you cncv?

^ I don't <now, Th-y were tn* nor-nl steel cor.t.-iuero th t
c_n be seen everywhere,

?> Do - ou K-.ov how tnco- rw-Cfcui -tAe c—u?


Bo you Know whether any / op-rU-ent of tr.e -roverna-nt Wd»
responsible for furnishing the c-* to t.,e c—p?

rt, .o, tney wore nrobuoly bought.

... Y 0U tnlttSc taen th-t perh-oo the superintendent of tao ino-
titution, if r.o rated so-« c-rben soaoxido »•-*. would Just Vain :.o-.'.;-
to'.v. end v-lic into - store -nd buy - otevl tube of it and >ut it wider
liin ..m and c-rry it on b-c< to tn. p.y for it out o: Mo

lochot?

.W Ho, not cut of uis cvn ooc/ct out tfcreu.>» tao institution.

.ho institutions oou. at it, I uo-a.

IHd you :,iov fro- • n-t rourcea t:.e institution acu at it?

Yes. «U t.-.c funds c-.e fro., tr.e Hoieh ..iMstxy of the
Interior. 7a o; ver -dv .need to M» oy tr.c ’urty treasurer.

Veil, nev, at th-t ti-c. wasn't virtually ever;,thin i-
„cr_h>y of a critic -1 n-ture on sa.o sort of riority? Do you un-
dorst-x. what I ae;n?

a. Ho.

;. lould not th- Aversion of t.ic Carbon uonoxido in tuooo
*.-> .tne - r cut institutions have to Oe iwn - priority r .tin .uid
. w O- bo— e one or ay o'_<- dea-rtuca* U tuo icov-nm-eit — tnus


765o


1: »7-2-4-2urrov (Ir.t. Vca SchonJ

Cor rt I


J»r~G OTuiluOlo tC the £08->it_l8f
./on't . ou understand vn..t I ae_n?

■»- Yes, I underst-nd. I h_vo no ie'Cj, but I don't oolicvc co.

•*r t

^Qut v„a done vita tr.c oodles of the. people after Uwrc; doaths

wore given?

Vhen tno roo_ hod o«ca cloor-d cf ;_o ag-in town >ccnle c.*io
in with .. stretcher and too* tuc orgies iat. ..n adjoinin.; roou raid
t on t.ie : octor ex—.ined tiuc to determine vr.wtr.er they wore dead.

.• Then va-t hmponed to the uocies?

«• ' hoa the doctor hjd ascertained oath, he freed tr.c bodies
for bur..iiu uiid tnon tr.oy wore burned.

after h« n..d freed tr.c bodioo. n-d ficter-ined that thc^r uoro
r o.. , t..w vert then cremated? Is that correct?

•w Too.

,'isuro v a* - c. cu-tory ouilt for wvo.— oa» of tr.eoo institutions?

a. Yos, creuatoriuuB wore built in tno iaetitutionp.

"o you mo'- whether or not - vhut cwt.ent or n>ne;-, wither
uiv.or the ovem-oat, that is, tnc Hole- ftovorrooat, or ur.’cr tho cu-
u&rintwfx out of the v. rio- s institutions, vs retnoasiol- for t is
ot .11 of cra-_tion?

I don't uat.crst.,id, nouhler on'.or^. tr.o era a tin . Jflufclwr
lore , ... principle, that h. .oc.iws vwr- to jo crw..w. nftor do..th.

: .c.*w v .c no office for th»t.

r. .b then, —v rx>o •. elude - -w too f c. th • certain

lecolo, ”... Qj < i.en Gwl.ctwd for « ;tn—\o8ia, hj_ fin-11/ uTrivod
.1 these* institutions, had -ctu-lly bc-oo _c corded tr.c rivile.u o. a^rcy
('oaths cr.<- tr.en flji been erected?

A

a. ho, I K.iO« note in. about th-t.

... ;o rvcor s v v re /:vpt at - 11 ?

.a Ch, I thoutuf jo-, s-id reDorts. Jcv tcuuji rcc'^r s?


7-57


16 Hay^-JP-S-5-Zarrow (I-it. V 0 n Schon)

Cor-Jt I

?. : don't core vaut you Call it. Inct c uust have o_on u rcjort

or record of icl. kind -<ept of these people. l* a s there?

a. Yes, of co’irso. hot only tn« Case histories, out the personal
dat. of the individual patients, wore collected at the euthanasia
institution and tnoro the f c a tn records were -ddod to tne-. -nd what¬
ever else there v„s. In ny direct examination I pointed o t ta..t
tht o I'orc amtounccuentt to tne a£~acios concerned, for oxunplo, t:\o
.•,u.vrdiunship court, &oso file* were all sent to 1-4.


7 <> 58 .


16 Any ‘»7-^. 4 K-“-l-'!uloy-(Von 3c ho or.)

Court 1 -

Q. They were finally sent to Tlergorten Strasse 4?

Yes.

Q. Ian't It true that only In that way could an accur¬
ate redord or report of this program be made?

A. I didn't understand whether this fact oroatod aooup-
ate redord6 About the people, or whether records wore kept?

Q. Records wer'e kept, were they not, of this entire
transaction of eadh Individual from the tiro he was oxper-
tl ted?

a. Yes.

Q. Until finally he was cremated?

A. Yea.

C. «nd those records were flllod wltn T-4?

Yos, tnoy were kept there.

Q. Now, I believe you said that those outhamela cham-
bers wore built to reoemblo shower rooms?

A. Yes, that'6 how I rerember It.

Q. «nd the only people that were accordod euthanaola
wero poople who wore lnourably lnoand, I think you oald?

A. Yes.

q. These wore people who, aa you put It, on ethloal
grounds, did not hf-.ve the mor.tal capacity either to consent
or to resist the decision to grant thorn euthanasia, and
that consequently as you vlewod It, It was i humane proced¬
ure to accord them a meroy death; la that correct, did I
understand you oorr3Ctly?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, were these people, the ones whom you saw, so
insane as not to understand where they were or what was
going on arouna them?

I car. only say that of course I am not a doctor
and not In a position to Judge the condition of such a


765 ?


16 Hay 47-M-K-'-3-lCaloy-(Von Schon)

Court I

patlont, but when I was at such institutions I myself
saw that tho patients, inasfar as they wore able to walk,
went into these chambers or rooms where they wore told to
£0 without any objection ar.dsat down on the benohes there
or lay down and were quite quiet.

How far they oould reallzo where they were, I don't know,
but I do know they ware not in any worried, but perfectly
calm. Bouhler had ordered that the doctoro were to arrange
It so that the patients would not realize what was being
done to them.

Q. :»nd that was the reason that tho gas chambers wore
constructed to resemble shower rooms, I suppose?

n. Yes.

Q. *nd those people thought that they were going in
to tar.o a shower oath?

*. If any of thorn had any power of reasoning, he no
doubt thought that.

q. /ell now, were they taken Into tho shower rooms with
their clothes cn, or were they nudo?

A. No, they wore nude.

% In evory case?

a. fher.ever I saw it, yes.

.md you said, I believe, yesterday that you witnes¬
sed perhaps seme 10 or 12 or 15 or 20 occasions when groups
were accorded mercy deaths?

a. No. I said that I was at each of the institutions,
with tho exception of Hadamar, at least onoe, perhaps twice.

Q. rtnd or. each occasion did you witness the according
of a meroy death to a group?

Yes.

.iT.d I believe you said yesterday that seme of these

7660


16 Kay aK-’'- ''-Haloy- (Von Schon)

Court 1

groups were adults, that some groups were non, other groups
were women, and that on some occasions the groups were
made up of both nan and women, Is that correct?

Ho, I apparently did not express myself clearly.

They were either men or women, out I saw both.

Q. And you think perhaps ycu saw as many as 20 to 0
comfortably accommodated in the chamber?

A. Yes, quite comfortably. There was plenty of room.

BY THj£ PRZ6ID2HT:

Q. 'fitness, will you please state -.gain briefly the
reasons assigned In these various meetings which you at¬
tended for the establishment of this euthanasia Idea?

A. T^oro wore various roasons. The first mootings
which were called by Bouhlor wero not meetings of the
experts. Bouhlor was there, and doctors, and Jurists or
administrative officials, whoa Bouhler called as a coun¬
cil of oxports In order to determine what was to be done.

I don't wont you to go into detail, but toll mo
the reasons that wore assigned at the various meetings
for the establishment of this idea?

A. «t the mooting of exports the experts were asked
to ilsouas questions of evaluating the questionnaires,
purely medical questions; how the various dlseisej had
to bo Judged, and so forth.

Q. But at these meetings, what reasons were advancod
In favor of or against the establishment of euthanasia as
a practice in Germany at that time; I dor.' t mean the
mechanical details of operation, but the roasons for or
against the establishment of the practice; wore there any?

Of course the Justification for euthanasia '-as dis¬
cussed, but, as far as I can remember, only by the >artlc-
lpant3 ir. the meeting recognizln-' the need for it.

7i«l


16 ..ay ■»?--•Y-' I —4-haloy-( Von Schon)
Court 1


Q. feat reasons did the;.* Ive for recognizing the need
ior it?

a. Different people had different reasons. A doctor has
medical reasons, and a layman like Bouhler, for example, has
reasons of a purely r.umanc nature.

Q. /ell, what were these reasons that ware idvincel
besides that of a humane nature?

I don't ltr.ow any other reasons.

C*. The only basis, then that you heard mentioned a3 a
foundation for the cat lollsluent of outhanaaia va3 simply
the humane Idea that It would benefit the insa-.e people,
la that correct?

.w Yes.

Q. You heard no otner reason advanced at all.

I did not hear any othjr reasons.

Q. .'as It ovor sweated that it was advisable as a
war measure?

Ho, nobody suggested th»t.

Q. Had you ovor heard of the Uoa cr of the practice of
the ldoa before It vis ilrst 9u,;.'Ostod as v u hive testifi¬
ed; v. er, was It you first hoard of this Drograr?

. 1 . /hen Bouhler told so acout It.

Q. .ibout vhat date was that?

That was m the sux.er of lt^, either July or Au¬
gust.

•i. Had you ever heard of e.thonasla before that time?

.<o, I had heard nothin-, about euthanasia before that.

0,. Jhy was It to be a seer t operation?

I don't know. Hitler had ordered that.

Did you near anyone jtate any reasons for his having
ordered It to oe a seer t operation?


lc Hay 5- aloy-(Von schon)

Court 1

a. I h-ard only assumptions, everyone had a different
assumption.

Q. What were those assumptions?

A. Some sasd it was because of the Church, others said
it was because of foreign politics, others 3aid the popul-
ation had to be educated to the idea -radually and it couli
not be made public audienlv, out ".ouhler never told me -
and perhaps he didn't even know - what tho real reason was
why Hitler wanted it secret.

Z. At these meetings, did you hear any of what you
call assumptions as to the reason for establishing the
rojrarn other than that to benefit the insane people?

IJo, suoh reasons wer not discussed.


7663


16 Hoy 47_H-JjC-4-l_Me£han (int., Von Schcen)
Court I


ft If the aole object of the euthanasia practice was for the
benefit of the people, of the insane poople, why did they exenpt the
operation of the decree war veterans whose insanity woo due to a wrr
injury; did you hear anyone explain that?

A Bouhler aeld that, War had broken out in the aeantlne, and
3ouhlcr aaid that for war psychological reasons, one could not includo
include war veterans whoae insanity was due to war injuries.

ft Did he say why, if a was for the benefit of the sufforor?

A That was to their disadvantage, but for poychological reasons
this step was taken.

ft What psychological reasons?

A I don't know how I should say it.

ft Try.

A Tho fact that in the war which had bigun there would again bo
wounded with brain injurico and injuries which night sake then insane
could nakc tho relatives, if they learned about euthanasia, worry
about their own relatives vhc were wounded and would become inorno.
They would feel that thoy too night bo oubjcctod to outhnnaola. Slnco
these relatives did not fear the long duration and the terrible condi¬
tion of inoanity, since they did not know it fron their own experience
they would have rn entirely different idea of euthanasia than tho
people who had been under this ispression for years or for docadco.
This was noro or loss the explanation which Bouhler gavo at the tioo,
but I can only give you the goniral sense of it.

ft But the exenption of one suffering a war injury which caused
the insanity extended to th,se persona who were wounded in tho first
ver in 1914 - 1915; did it net?

M

A He, to all of then.

ft But it did include the wounded of the first World Her of 1914,
'15, '16; did it not?

A ico.

ft They had th. n beer, suffering fr*r insanity for nan:- years; had


•hiy n; t ?


766L


16 Kay 47-KJj r . 4 - 2. . He chan (let., Ton Selves)

Court I

A Tee.

«4 3ut It was concluded to exempt then fro a this method of ad¬
ministering a. mercy death?

A Teo.

*as It considered that the relatives of an insane person,
whoso Insanity was not caused by a war wound, would welcome the Idea
of ednlnlsterlnr to that Insane person a nercy death; would the ob¬
jection be limited only to relatives of war veterans?

a I cannot Judge that. I acted according to Bouhlor'o Instruc¬
tions. I never thought of the natter In that way.

<i Did you think thero would bo any difference In the feeling of
thL relatives of an Insane person toward adalnlstorlnf that person a
nercy death, whether that person wore Insane frea disease or froa a
war wound would there be any difference In the feeling of the rela¬
tives?

A According to the mentality of the tine and the Impression of
tho war which had Just started, 1 consider It possible, tut 1 roolly
cannot Judgo.

<4 The or^cr to establish euthanasia was aimed by Hltlor; was It

not?

A Tea, by Hitler.

<4 That was considered sufficient authority to proceed and act
under tho decree?

A Yea, It was considered sufficient.

\ *’oo thore anylialtntlon vhasoever upon the authority of Hitler
to sign a dccrco crdorlng anything he sight happen to wish?

A I don't believe that there was any limitation on Hitler,
since he was the chief of the etete, but that Is a legal question
which I cannot answer correctly.

s I as asking you for your cpinlon, witness; I understand you
ere not a lawyer. You know of no limitation upon his authority or
power?

A Aa chief of the state. It seem to me that Hitler was authorised


7665


16 May 47-K_JC-4-S-Meehan (int., vcn Schotn)
Court I


to sign ony legal order. As I oaid yesterday, he started the war, he
ordered the invasion of Austria.

% You said his authority to sign a legal order; what do you seen
by p legal order.

A What I Just said, he could sign orders which had the feroo
of lav.

<1 That any order he signed, then, did have the force of law?

A Yea.

<* Hho Issued the order to stop the administration of euthanania?

A It case fros hla.

H, Has that a written decree?

A I received this order orally.

*4 That Is tho order to cease the oporatlon euthanasia?

A Yes. I received It orally.

«< Do you know whether there was a written order to suspond
euthanasia?

A I don't know.

Iron whoa did you reeolvc the inforaatlon or the direction to
stop the adninlstrstion of euthanasia?

A I don't rcECiher; It could only have been Bouhlcr or Brandt.

‘t *hcn was that?

A In August of 1041.

*here did you receive the order?

A I was In the office In Berlin, In Voss Strasso.

vt But you don't resenber froa whoa you received it?

A Ho, I really cannot renaaber.

eo to these questionnaires that wtre signed by the doc¬
tors concerning these insane patients; when the questionnaire was “fully
couplet cd by the ncdlcal sea, where did that questionnaire go?

A This questionnaire was sent to Tiergarten Strasso n, hut I don't
know exactly whether It come directly from the institution or whether
it went through the Ministry of the Interior or whether it went partly
through the Ministry of the Interior end partly directly.

7666


16 M ay 4?-i4-JjC_4_4_:'eehaa (Int., von Schcen)

Court I

I

v* Du* It finally caic to rest at Tiergartc-n Straoee 4 7

A Tee.

Vi *ho weo the heed of Tiergarten Straooc 4 7

A The head of Tiergartcn Straose a first Bohn® end letcr
Aliens.

Vi *ho signed the final order directing thnt euthanasia ho admi¬
nistered to those insane persons?

A There was no final order signed.

<4 He you nenn to oay that th®3C institutions would send people
to the gas chaahor without any order to do so?

A No.

fci *oll, who oigned the order directing then to adainiotor
euthanasia to these people?

a Bouhlcr authorised the Individual euthanasia doctors under
the prescribed safe guards and gave then the authority to administer
cuthnnnole, that meant that thoy cculd administer euthanaolo If tho
prescribed procedure of Judgment and obcervation had boon carried out.

H *a.a there any order to that effect signed by Bouhlcr?

A There was tho obligation enjoined on thcoe doctors by
Bouhlir.

Vi Do you mean to say that thoso people wero gaoecd in those
chambers without the authority of any written order?

A No, I don't mean to sey that.

vi *ell, who signed that written order?

A Eltlcr had signed It.

*4 *oll, Hitler established the process of cuthanrola, but he
never signed an order that Johann Schaidt would be administered
t-uthanasia. *ho oigned on order that these individuals in these
institutions should be sent to the geo chamber?


i


7667


1> ; hy-W:.-5-l-L«-rd (Lit. Von Schon)
Ccu-t :.'o. 7.


A Thoro was not a single order in that fora. It ms t.io re¬
sult of examinations by variouc systems, and the sun of those examina¬
tions and checks ms what Hitler had wanted with his order.

Q .roll, these questionnaires that were signed by tho doctors
must have gono scco where for final action, did they not?

A Yos.


Q T.’horu did they go?

A Tiber. the exerts and tlio chief extorts had finished with the
questionnaires, and the patients had undergone their period of observa¬
tion, thon tho questionnaires c.tvd, tilth thi transfer list of tho J-inie-
try of Intorior, to tho euthanasia institutions.

Q That is Ticrgarton Strasso 1<?

A ::o.

Q T.horo?


A Cno of those six institutions I nr-:.od. Tho quostiom.&iro8
rr^ro sent there. I said yesterday thrt tho last doctor, the onj who
actually adninistored euthanasia !nd to compare tho questionnaire with
tlx. caso history and personal date of t!xj patient, Tihich come with tho


patient


Q Koll, was thoro no c-rtral africo in Berlin to which thoco


luostionraircs wore sor.t by the doctors who had worked over thorn? I


thought you said they wont to ?-';?


A They wer- s«nt thoro from tho institutions vhoro they ruro


filled out in tho boginning, but then cane tho whole procedure of
Judging each individual patient, and only wton this process was finished.
Q Tilt, where was that procosc accomplished; whore -'ore t'ucy

Judged?


A By thj individual experts. Hiotostat copier were nado of


the questionnaires at Ticrrartcn Strasso li, and then oriu photostat — .


you said Johann Schaidt, I shall use that name for an example — tho
V* c ionnr.iro about Johann Scfeaidt ms rent in three copier to throe

different experts. Bcuhlcr had ordw-d that tivjse three oxTcrt- could

766S


16 : 2-5-2-E^-rd (In*.. Von Sciaon)

Court To. !•

not include any doctors who wore treating this patient.

Q I know, but when thes^ three experts had accomplished the
questionnaire and recocnerrfec that the subject be administered
euthanasia, -.'hero did they £C — tito questionnaires?

A They Sv-rrt the questionnaires bock to Ticr^art_• nstrasro Jjj
from thoro tho ontriee from the throe questionnaires wen. transf rred
to r. fourth copy — t*» opinions of tho throe doctors. This fourth
questionnaires of Johann Schmidt also contained the opinion of t!»
thro- different experts, and this vos sont to tho chiof expert. Tho
chiof oxaort then decided whothor this Johann Schmidt was to bo trans¬
ferred to an obsurvation institution or not. If ho decided that Johann
Schridt was to bo transferred to -n obs rv-tion institution, ho infomod
tho Roich kinistry of tho Interior. Tho Reich hinistry of tiio Interior
tlxn ordered tho transfer of Johann Scheldt from institution A to an
observation institution. In this observation institution thoro was n
doctor, not nocossariiy tho ho-.d of tho institution, who w-s authorisod
to obsorvo t^jsv patients who had boon transferred there. If nio ob¬
servations ngru. d with tho opinion of tho oxports, thon ho drew up a
list which ho sont to Tiergcrtcnstrnooc Ji, cr th. chiof oxrerto dis¬
cussed that personally with bin when they visited his institution and
examined tho patients. 1 /ho drew up tlio list of '-hat patients waro to
b. tr-nsforred from tho observation institution tc a euthanasia instit¬
ution, I frankly do not know. Tl.on, tho Ministry of tho Interior sent
list to tha observation institution of the pationts who wore now to
bo transferred to a euthanasia institution; and thon Tiorportenstrasso
h sent tho outhanasia institution tit. photostat on which tho chiof ex¬
tort had entered th. observation notations, so that the outhanasia *
doctor would have all the records on the patient, because he -lone luad
to nako tho final decision.

Q You said, "h. alone had to make tho final decision", .ho

is "ho"?

a

A The doctor ir. the euthanasia institution had to docidu


7fct9


16 : 3-5-3—eoard (In a. Von bchon)

Court No* I.


alone, whether, on the basis of the record and opinions rhich ho had,
he minted to administer euthanasia to the uatient or not.

Q Tfho ms that doctor?

A Thoro noro several of then.

Q 'ifno r^re thay?

A I hnvo given their names. As far as I can remember thorn:

Dr. Baumhart, Dr. Honnoc'.co, Dr. Schmaivnbr.ch, Dr. Eborlo, Dr. Schumann,
and from the documents I have got tic nano Dr. hocrnock, but X had for¬
gotten that nano. I had re-ushered hia ncao as Bornor or Bornock,
something like that, but I think tho nrua in the document ia right,
Boomaok. Also, thero rroro c few ot : scrs, but I do not roiciiior their
rvarvos.

Q Those vn-re tho inn :rtio gave tho final ord^r for the adnin-
istrr.tion of euthanasia to Johann Sclnidt or tho other insane croons?

A )'o, they did not givo aay order, but they actually carried
out outhanasia.

Q ell, pursuant to who*, dlxvcti n, did they carry out
euthanasia, tho ’iniotry of tho Interior?

A ho, on nobody's order, ' at on tho basis of tho authority
rivon than by t'vo Fuehrer ordor.

q They simply acted upon tiio questionnaire and carried the re¬
sults into o' feet from thoir judgnent on tho questionnaires?

A Thoy acted radically on the basis of tie questionnaires, and
tho ox- rdnnbion and tho c-se history. leg illy they could act only on
tho b .sir- of the authorization of tlio Fuehrer, tho Fuehrer decree.

Q I understand that.

TH, r;LSIDS:.T: I Have no forth r questions.

Tho Tribunal will ncr bo in recess.

(Thereupon a rccosa r- s taken).


7670


16 May V7-H-.JC-7-l-Xarrow(R taler)

Court I

THS M.elSH.iL: P arsons ir. tne courtroom will please find
their seats.

The Tribunal is o^ain in session.

THi PA-3IDB.«r: *ny questions to be propounded to this
witness by defense counsel?

5Y DR. o£R/.i?IU3( Defense Counsel for Defendant Karl Brandt);

Q. Witness, when aid you flr3t ne .r of the defendant
Karl Brandt's connection with euthanasia?

A. The first tiae, after the orler was issued bv nltl.fr
to Brandt and Bouhlor.

Q. That is, after the decree of September lS’fc?

I don't know the date. I only know that It was after
the orior was issued. Before that I had he irl nothin.; about
Karl Brandt's beln-; connected with euthmaola.

1. You spoke about Bohne and .aioro previously. To whom
were they subordinated?

•»- Tney were su'ordinated to Bouhlor, as can be 3een from
the chart whloh I drow.

3. ’hat was Professor Wletz30he's and Professor Hoyde's
position in connection with Karl Branat? /ere they subordin¬
ated to him? */cre they his deputies, or whit wao the rulat-
lonship?

/». There was no relationship vhasoover. Professor Heydo
and Professor Hletzsohe, and also, later, Professor Schnei¬
der, were the top experts working for Bouhlor. I know of
no relationship at all.

'l. •/*.8 Karl Brandt your superior?

.i. No, Bouhlor v a a ny superior.

'«• Could K rl Brandt issue criers to you?

-•%. No, certainly not.

Q. Do vou know of an adainistrative and edical depart¬
ment of Karl Brandt which dealt with euthanasia?


7o71


16 May -*7-M-AK-7-2-:<^rrov-( Ranler)
Court I


1 know of no 9uch dapa -tment, but the interrogation
officials, when interrogating me, convinced me that the
administrative as veil a3 the medical leadership at T--i
would have to be considered such departments run by Karl
Brandt. However, that does not cor -espond with the actual
situation as It prevailed at that time.

fitness, was Karl Brandt to epea on the subject of
eutr.anasla at the meeting in Munich, vhore the Gau offices
for puollc health were? And did you merely represent him?

I don't know anything about Karl Brandt's having b «on
intended for that purpose. I only know from Buhler that he
had boor, asked by Conti to speak at this meeting about
Hitler's decree. I know that I then received the order from
Bouhler to represent him. I had forgotten this ontlro
affair and was reminded of it only by ay interrogations.

Q. 'fas Karl Brandt active in dravin; up the draft of
the lav for euthanasia, on which you worked?

A. Jo, 3randt didn't participate in that at all. The
lawyers, physicians, and aemcer3 of the Chancellory of the
Fuehrer worked on it.

*. I have no further questions to the wltnoss.

Y JR. H0?vV.ANif (Defense Counsel .or defendant Pokorny):

Q. fitness, you said that Hianler, in January, 19*1,
asked you whether there weren't physiol ins lr. Bouhler's
envi.-on._ent who would assist him in the search for sterilis¬
ation methods? Is that correct?

a. Yea.

Cl. Do you know, witness, to what extent Himmler told
these plans to his close er.tour-^ge? For instance, Hevdrlch?

.v. From the documents which era available here, I have

now learned that a copy of my lot ter of March 19-.1 was sent

to Hey drier, in his capacity as Chief of the Security Police

7672


H y 16-4J-BK-6-1-:; loy (I t. .. nr.ler)
c -rt :<c. i

f 4 1

•

v Witness, do you still r««oabor that the Prosecution
has submitted a document here, this is document Ho. 39,
where- thu Deputy 3 ulaitor of .»iodcrdonau also approached
hi:_-;l_r with a sterilization proposal?

.. .*t tho moment I do not recall that document.

- I* that ca30 lot oe hand it to you. * ct is NO 39.
i’H- P.L^»:D^:iT: .. _t is the number of the -njlish Dooument

Book?

D... HOFFS Your Honor, I don't knew that. I only know

the 3. ; raan.

—• HCC.-i ..XD: It on 16 of Document 6 ok Ik. 6,

Y.-ur Huaor.

BY Da. HOSUILJCI:

v •ilc.u.As, this letter was aont by the J.; uty Bauloit^r
of Kiadordonau; .his nemo was ii rland. H vo you any idea
r.3 to how 3 rL.nd .;ot to know of HI nlor'w .lens?

•• I ! avo no idea about that at ell. 1 ««.abor now that
I . th .t letter when studying tho documents, out I
re lly don't . ou how 3 cl r.d csac to mak» such c 3uj;cstion.
. (aren't you in contact with Party a^unoios?

.. Yos/

v Is it ..ossiblo therefore that this suj-jostlon was
passed on by you?

.. Ho, certainly not.

» witness, was the extermination of the Jews'a critxi in
your opinion, too?

Yos •

v Witness, you said that you tried to prevent tho oxtorni-
n at ion by X-ray sterilization, of which flianlor told you?

Is that truo?

“ Yos, that is true.

. Witness, you furthermore said that according to the
^rt opinion of the physicians rc^ardin^ x-ray steriliza-*.


7674


I

Xuy 13-C.:-3K-e-2-::=loy (Int. ..anrilor)
Court *io. 1


tion, you jot knowled 30 that one cculd actually sterilize
human beinjs by us in,; x-rays?

- No, I didn't say that. ..hat I said was that the method
was somewhat uncertain and that I do not remember the details
of this expert opinion. I dd remoEoar thr.t it was changed.

v -»t any rate, you wore not juite certain, witness, th t
one could not sterilize human boin w s by usinp x-rcy3?

« I personally hold th~ opinion that x-ruys oould not
brinj about permanent damejo.

. ..’itnoss, but don't you boliovo that one could only
have boon allowed to offer Himmler some moans by which no
storilization could have b.un affected, La order to justify
ono'a interference?

.. .iould you ploaso repeat th.. question?

* I askod you, do you not beiiovu that one was only
Justified in offerin • Himmler 2 method which under no
circuc3tancv-3 oould 3teriliz- hum r. beings, if one wanted
to .revent storilization?

^ Yes. That wr.s ay opinion. I was of tho opinion th~t
one would h: vu to offjr him 3uch c method, and that is why
I made that proposal. /

D.i. I ha.vo no further questions.

Du. FG.&3CH&Jfei: .Ur. President, w ould you .loe.se tell me
uheth r I oji -lroady examine tho witness in connection with
tho questions which h..vu been put to him by tho -Tudjos

.ad by some of the oth.r d-fenso counsel, or will I h. vo

•

that ri'iht only after the cross-oxixiination by tho Pros^cu-

•>

tion?

nL. P.iioIDhirr: Well, tho .lan which has bo-n followed is
that counsel for defendant may re-wXar.in tho witness after
11 tho Prosecution has been conducted. You ‘..ill h 1 V 0 tho
"1‘ht to re-examine the witness after‘the Prosecution has
'ross-examined the witness. I would sujpost, however,


7675


i5----3X-5-3-1.„loy (In-, ikcsnler)

Court No. 1

Counsol: tho Tribunal now hc.3 your Supplement No. 3, -
Document 3ook 3, your supplement; and I chink it would make
for orderly procedure if counsel would introduce the
documents in evidence now.

D * ; * ?-*°-5SCaU2W: Yes, Your Honor. Mr. President, in tho
3U * ! * ^mentation of my submission of evidence I now submit
tho following documents contained in ay o u _ element Hoi 3 :
Document 48, to bo found or. poje 15. This is m affidavit
-• Dr. nod. ./altar Schultzo. It boars the date of ... ril
•:s, 1947, and it was sijnid by hia and certified by no. I
offer this document as Brack Exhibit 39. I dispense with
read in" this document, and I should like to ask the
Tribunal to tike notico of its contents. The accum-nt con¬
tains a factual doscri.tion of tho knowledge which Schultzo
hA8 reined on the basis of his personal icquaintanoo with
tho defendant, nn'd speaks about Brack's personality. I
should not like now to road anythin; about the dofondant's
personality. I should further like to offer Document 49
oa J0 19 * ?his is - certified copy fror. the book of Dr.
Kogan, who has been hoard here cs a witness. Tho book is
entitled The SS 3t..te. 1 ' I have included here only u
sentence taken from page 229 of that book. I offer this
Jocunont r.s Exhibit 40- I h .vc the book available here.

I w,-.s not in a position to jet the necessary . hoto3t._t
copies since yesterday afternoon. I sh..ll submit those
ho tost at co. ies soon, and in the meant ii* I h .vo handed a
c-rtified pyotostnt co. y of th-.t book to th_ General
Socrotary. I offer that document is Exhibit 40. It confirms

fact of whiQh tho dofdndant Brack has already s. ok~n,
that on the occasion of ..dolf Hitler's 5Cth birthday in tho
r 193? about 2300 prisoners were released from Buchonwald
lono * 7his 13 one of the so-called densities of which the
-~f end ant Brack was spe kin;;.


7676


::-y i 6 -::- 2 K-s-^-c: .xoy (int. -tanrhUr)
Court No. 1


Furthermore, I offer Docum-nt 30 which is to b- found
on ,ijo 20 of ny su.iploCentol volume. .Hare I should like
to ask for some clarification on tho ..art of the Tribunal
or the Prosecution. Oocucent 1696-P3, Sxhibit 357, which

.a submitted by tho Prosocution as a document but which
does not contain that particular ; ijo which I an submitting.
This pa^o, which is not contained in the Prosecution
document, I have on ay part subr.ittod to tho Tribunal in
order to clarify tho situation to the Tribunal and support
my oaso• I ask for the docision of tho Tribunal whether
I should ndcl on exhibit number to that docunont or Mother
it i3 cuffiolent to road it horo.

:;:i. HQCK....LD: If Your Honors . lease, in th- . hotost-.t
ro. y which is in tho bands of the Prosecution, thl3 pa-jo is
r. p-.rt of the document. Of course, I can not say whether
this . ;3o is also in the copy which was h-nded the Tribun-
el as .in exhibit, but anyhow wo ajr-o th .t this is certain¬
ly p rt of tho docunont, so I do not think it nuoossory
that Defense Counsel jiv- this pajo <i new exhibit number.

It is a part of docunont 1696, which is Prosecution Sxhioit
357.

TH- P.hDIDJNT: The docun.nt offered by defendant Braok
should have an exhibit number, but loocxipfinyirv; the ex¬
hibit should bo an ox. lunation that I don't find on the
docunont; tho explanation should simply show that it is

supplementary to a cert .in exhibit horetoforo filed by
the Prosecution. If counsel will pr~, jo suoh an ex.1-na¬
tion -and have it audod to the docunont book it will
clarify tho situation, but this document will be ..dmitted.

-3 Brock Sxhibit 41.


767?


16 lby-4M3-9-l-4Seehan (Int. Racier)

Court Ko. I.

DR. FROBSCSttSH :

I’r. President, the sane applies tc the Document No. 51* which
I shall submit next. That car. be found on page 21 of ny supplemental
volume. This also is just one f°S® of the Document which was already
submitted by the Prosecution as FS I696. I an submitting that page
again, because the Prosecution failed to do so. I offer this Document
as Exhibit Brack U2.

TRE PRESIDENT: The Document will bo admitted with tho sane
explanation .-made in regard to Drnck Exhibit lil.

DR. FBCESCHMANKi I should furthomoro liko to offer Document
No. 52, to be found on page 23 of tho document book. This ia a corti-
fiod copy of the Ministerial Gaze'.to of tho Reich and Prussian Ivin is try
of tho Interior, 19U0, Pago U:37, and refers to ministerial docrco on
tho treatment of deforced new-born children. This book has boon mado
available to the dofanso from tlw collection of documents* 1 havo
made o cortiflod oxccrpt and I shall nc*i submit it to tho General
Socrotary. It will receive the Exhibit Ko. b3» I shall at a later
date also submit a photostat copy of that pago, with the nocossai’y ex¬
planation* \

JUDGE 8EBR1MG: Dr. Frooschmann...

DR. FRCESCHIWimi Yes, 3!r. President.

JUDOS ST.QRINO: In this Document Ko. 52 from the Ministerial
Gazotto of tho Roich and Frussian Ministry of the Interior, Circular
Decree 1 July 19UC, at the very end, in tho last paragraph, ap.cars
this statement:

"To tlte Reich Governors, all regional governments other than
Prussian* the Reich Commissioner for tlx- Saar Palatinate, the- County
Presidents, tho Police President, crlin, the public health oflicos."

Do you understand that that parr; rah contains tho officials
who are to be governed "by the docr-c?

DR. FRCESCH 'AKN: Your ’ionor, s far ns I an infon^d, tharo
-rv decrees which w«re published only in tho Piiniaterial Gaz.tto; or.


7678


16 Kay-iM3-0-d-Sk4h3n tint. Banter)

Court No. I.

th? other hand, there were also decrees which were published only by
circularising the decree to the individual agencies. This particular
decree, an excerpt of which I ac submitting to the Tribunal her*;, was
obviously c.io which was published in the Ministerial Gazette, but
which r_f_rs to a preceding dec re _ dat;d 15 August 1939, which was not
published in the Ministerial Gazette, but which was only circu.l afcod to
the individual agencies as a circular decree. For that reason this
decree was in addition circulated to those agencies which had tho pre¬
ceding decree of 18 August 1939 in their possession. The authorities

mentioned, tho Reich Governors, all regional governments other than
Prussians, tho Reich Cocsissionur for tho Saar Palatinate, th. County
presidents, tho iblice President in 3crlin, as well as the ho.alth of¬
fices — and tho latter «,i\ tho aost inportant — were infer:xd that in
accordance with the Linistcrinl Djcreo, tho public health ofiicer3 woro
to bo approachod in tho future by tho Reich Comittou and wore to bo
infomod of thj institute to which tho particular child was to be sont.

To co'io back to tho Judgo*s question, tho official fcho rocoivod t3w
authorisation to send tha child away was includod in this dooxv.j.

JUDGE S2BRING: At that tine, 19h0, what regional goverraaonts
other than tho Prussian government existed, according to your Icnovrlodgo?

OR. FiTSSCHMAMN: Tl oro was tit Bavarian Regional Oov. rmont,
as far ac I know, and thoru was tho ilcssian Regional Gov 4 .nt.ent, thoro
were tho fro.; cities of Harajurg, rarjjn, and Luebo-ck, I buliovo, but I
•.ust say, *1 an not infomod about that very well, because X did not
concern myself with these questions during the war, since I vne curving
with the Wohrnncht.

JUDGE SEP RING: Tlould this include regional govern *nts ^hich '

cay havu be^n s-jt up in the Sud.t_n Land or in tho partitioned i^rtior.
f Poland or in the Protectorate of Bohenia and Koravia, or in Austria,

:r in any of the other occupied countries?

DR. F BESCKKANN: Your Honor, I r*-lly cam. t Bake any jut!
or.t ajeut that, but I do know that tho only countries in qu-sei^n

7679-


16 ! ny-K-?S-9-3^;chah (Inc. Senior)

Court So. I.

sides Gominy proper where a rc .ional government was set up, -is Austria;
bonovcr, there '..'as no regional government in Fbland or Als ao o-Lorraino
or anything like that.

The last document which I shall offer is docuzxnt Mo. J;6, tho
affidavit of v.olfgang Lioboneincr, as Exhibit No. Uk, It is dated 28
April 19U0, si-nod by hin, and curtifiod by a Notary. I shall only
refer to a very few sentences free this affidavit — it would be too

long ot horn iso — and I shall only cuphacizo the parts relevant to tho

%

case so for. I shall read thj first sentence tho second paragraph on
page two of this affidavit. Loiboneinur was the director idth when tlu>
Defendant Brook negotiated about this filM which has b. n ntioned.

Tho diroctor of tlxj film at lira ed when Brack had not appeared yot.
Then ho hoard that tho Chancellory cf ti» Fuehrer was involved, and
had misgivings because he h.liovod that this was a political natter,
which ho did not want to express ir. a fil., fio tJ^rcfore cays:

"In ray spontaneous as:. dubious again whon J'r.

von DeraanduT/sky — that wa:: tho nan La ci.ar;.v of tho whole tiling — told
cxj that tho Chancellery of the Fuohrcr was interested ir. tlio production
of this filra, as tho interference of .a not only non-artistic but oven
political group in our work had .already on several cccacionc caused .«o
troublo in ry profession."

Then he neats Brack and cays tho following, at tho bott*«n of

page 2.

n, :uch of ray surprise, I found in r. 3rack an entirely different
rain than I had feared. He: was itodiatoly croparcd to discus: tho
scenario witti i.;c." . I 6hall itrvo >. bit ut.

"Ho then enlisUd tilt aid X .xdical experts, Dr. Hi.fcliia||n
'•nd irofossor .Miotschc." Hol-Lni v not physician but - lawyer.

"A so lies of long discussions followed during which tho ^r.tiro question
-s discussed.;" A>; Li I o*it the rext f.ir li&js. I continue with tho
oarayr’ !. on page 3:

was :f tho pinion Unt a law ’should be issued, t:.


7o£0


16 H=y-M-H3-^-ifeoban (Int. Rasler)

Court Kg. I.

draft of which ho showed zti, which would enpowor a Tribunal conpjsed of
doctors and jurists and undor public control to naka decisions on tlio
requests of patients." And I read the Last sontonce of this paragraph:
■Brack wanted those against the killings to be given the opportunity,
upon request, of putting forward their arguments." And now the witness
continued

"In this connection, wo -Iso discussed the position .f the
Church, whose interpretation of G-d's will has varied throughout the
centuries, and in particular, the problem of when God ta-.de known his
will of lotting a bomsn be in.- die, when tha artificial prolongation of
such a life represents interference with the intentions of tlv, Almighty,
and when the intorforur.ee of the doctor to prolong or shorten suffering
can bo recognised by the Church and -.-hen not, is a frequent subject f
conversation.

Tr. ' rack thought a t t deal about nil oT tliose questions",
etc., "and I would like to point out oxprosoly that it was not about
tho supposed effect of tta now Law upon the Church, but rnthor tho
problem itself, which ha nado his cwn."

I shall skip the next parfl^aph mxl I continuo:

"A border sphere, tho inclusion in tlx; filn of which was dio-
cuaood sovornl tinoo, naturally wes tlw case in which an incur;blo
patient is not in & position to request deliverance, because l»o is pro~
vented from doing so by hie conditi n, or wh n hj makes such a request
without being full*\rc sponsible, that is in tho case cf the ins-nc."

I shall skip the next sentence:

"Brack was for tho killing for the sure reasons ns in the c.aao
wnore death was requested, that is, ut f deep pity fer suffering
cr.atures, -:,d because- of the conviction that net only the distortion
af tho human image in s:=c entally ill and some physically dof rmod is
' n unbearable torture for those ers'-ns themselves, but actually r_-
presents a destruction of the bedy, soul and spiritual taka—up f tho
h-r -.n b-_- . If one of thc.se links wore niscing, so ho -ar.u.i', d's


16 3-9-5-: "c-h-r. (ir.t. : rJL. r)

Court So. I.


1-Age would be destroyed and the huaan, no longer a hircn, would there¬
fore, no longer full within the Huron Sight, but would place on the
actual hm.n the duty to deni txrcifully with th: suffering creature."

I skip the next paragraph again, and I quote para ;r-.ph 3 on
pare 5: (he is now speaking of tho production of the film).

“.’mother scene, hot.owr, which Mr. Brack suggested was carriod
out by us, that is the killing of .a sick experimental nnlnal through
the application of other by a synpathotic doctor (fosalo).

fir. Brack was present several tics when work w-s going on in
the studio; on ono of thoso visits ho brou ht fteichsloiter Bouhlor along.

“In sunaarixing,“ tho witness cava, "I would liko to point out
tho following: Tho nontal attitude of tho persons in tho filu “I accuse'*
while not agreeing to euthanasia, is built up on tho conversations and
explanations which :T. Bract had with no, and which ho gave no, and was
strongly influonood by hiru Tho othicc of tho fiLa personalities, also
of Dr. Lnn^, arc ovidenco for tho opinion of Hr. Brack in tho years 19li0
and 19U1. Tho opinions of tho oppononts of outhanasla, which aro
brought up in tho filn, arc typical of the ebu ruinations of Hr. Brack
in which ho tried to clarify hinm.1T as to whether his rioalings were
right.

"Ooyond this, tho objoctive presentation of the 'pros' and
•cons* which Mr. brack brought into tho file, is not only oxprcsFivc of
his charactox-, but is also rdthout parallel la tho history of files in
tho Third Roich.

“Tho file, 1 Accuse could nj\a r h?vo boon created in tlds
forc, if it had boon produced under tho control of tho Propaganda ’an-
istry, which permitted only black and v&itc sketches. Tho cooperation
ith r. -r".ck j.avc n- new cour-. ; e at that tino to start again in tho
lino of .art, which was considered degenerated."

And the last paragraph:

"Tie filn 1 Accuse was roco'.nized by all sides, oven by
ati-rascist artists, and over, by ti» Cssorvatore Rocano, as work of


7682


16 (Int. SnsUor)

Court No. I.


art, and general surprise was evoked that this should suddenly bo
possible* This can.be credited to Hr. Brack and his refined, not-vain,
and izu'.rti'l attitude, which ms at all tinDs huaan.

” T got to know Mr. Brack, during the months of cy contact with
hir., as a air.coro, intelligent, and abov r.U, conpletcly uns.lf ish nan,
who, aside fror. this, was entirely polito during the discussions and
conferences, and was always perfectly willing to liston to his partner,
to reflect on his arguments, and to bo convinced thereof.

«Svj» though he was, by conviction, a National Socialist, he
was far ronovod in character and in his behavior fror that which is to¬
day called Nazisn and loilitarisr, abovo all, fror. inp.artii.nco, self-
justification, lios, and brutality.

"I cysclf was never a no^bor-of tho KSDAP or any of its organ¬
isations."


7663


Court 1

ifay IS--'*—1C— l-HD-Bcard-iv mnler.


Your Honors, I only hrve to add one tiling to this
document. I want to expnssize that not one word of this
pffld-vit was out into tne south of the witness or was
6 Ufc,<ected by io. He sent it to rte.from H acur t in the
vory fora in which it is now. This concludes a. submission
of document, Mr. President. i

TK£ PRESIDENT: Then, I understand, Counsel, you are
not offering 3r* ck Document Ho. -i7?

DA. FRCZzC .Ar.H'. : Hr. President, 1 Just overlooked
th. t. The decision re e r In© tne 8 .'.balsaion of documents,

3r->.ok Io. *7, and docuaont No. 3, in document book No. 1,

I oh uld llkd to reserve lr. c.-se the cross-ex alnation by
tho Prosecution ©lvo me ?r. occasion to offer the;.-e documents.

I shall prob* bly not cose book to thea.

T..2 PRESIDENT: V„ry well. Counsel, I just wonted to
:o sure th t you had not Inadvertently overlooked it.

DH. FRCSSCHMaNN: I dls-.ense with the submission of

• •

document Ko. 33 lr\ document took No. 2, rv.ge 21.

THE PRESIDENT: The Pro-ocutl n aay cross-oxoralno tho
witness.

CROc 5-E.WI!*,4TICN

3Y DR. kOCKVhLO:

v. Hy it .l^asc tho Tribunal, Herr Sr'»ck, you arc
not a doctor, arc you?

a. No, I r.m nut n onysician.

And 3o;nlcr wasn't a doctor either?

No rounler was r.ot a nyslclrn, either.

Did you receive psychiatric training?

*

«. Ko, never.

Q. You we e, however, very iucr. ntere6ted in the
quest .ja 'f euthanasia from the theoretical aoint of view;
ore u not?


Coart I

hay 15-M-lo-2-Hi>-3eard- ncaaler.


a. No, I never was Interested in the question of
euthanasia.

But eft r when you -ot the information from
3 oihler that yo were-going to work with him in this program,
y. started to be lntore t d in this question, and you reed
; ood >Joks didn't you?

a. Yoe, at that tine I started to get interested in
that question. I considered it .-ay duty to infora myself
a rout this as ouch as possible.

Did I understand you correotly in saying tne work
of Binding and .-loo he w c t.ic standard work on euthanasia?

a. I was told the work of 3indin b and Koche was the
standard work a'o-ut euthanasia; lr. r-ddltl-n, however, I
read some other hooks.

... Do you know t..ls work of Blndln t and .-.oche very well?
a. Ko.

Do you remember whether it is • tnlok volume, or
o saall :ook, or vh t fora it nas, ?na v.Vt is in thoro?

a. Yes, I do remember t.vt. It w e o rolatlv. ly
small v.lume. It consisted of two -arts; one part contains
the chrcers of interest to lawyers. Binding, and tho
other constituted the cr.coters for tne osychlatrlst, Hooha.

You Just 6aid tnere was a o rt made ur of legal
.natters, in Ckriar., by Professor 3indln b is the le b pl arn,
isn't he? So, I take it -any legal questions enme u in
tne eutncnaslo rogran; for cxamrlo, wn.thar certa n -craons
should be informed about the true cause of death of‘the
victim , further, attitude of tne different Judicial
a Choritlea, and so on. ho handled these questions in the
office of ro-r.ler, if Cr.ey were handled in tne office o.:

=o i--r <*t all?

I ':e t our ardor., do you mean the decisions wnicn

76B5


Court 1

Hay 16-k-10- o-HD-Beard-Ra-nlo r.


Bouhler oadc with regard to the notification of relatives?

There -..ere some ceople, c certain circle of people
who wore, in a jlte of tr.e secrecy, so I understand froo
your testimony, who were, in spiot of the secrecy of the
Suthaecsia prograa, informed about the tro^ras itself —
certain d'.ctors and possibly also certain le a al peo;.le; the
Hinlstry of Justice, and so on; who nandled tr.ese questions
rnd the correspondence which resulted from these questions?

a. Those questions of a legal nature were generally
dealt with by Dr. 3ohne. He was .assisted, os far as I
know, by o certain neglarungerat lervalsfcy or some such
nerson.

Q. Hot by you or by one of your coilaborotors in the
Chancellery of the Fuohror?

a. Ho, not by oo.

Q. But, I ha vs auen from the evidence horo that you
were tne person who was approached in questions of an
administrative nature, whether tne questions caoo up from
the logcl authorities or frop the 53. Do you ro.seobor they
ntroduoed some evidence, correspondence with Frelsaler?
«nd y u yourself, mentioned yesterday quite extensively the
ojrreoponuencu with Hl-ialor end that you wore twice for a
c nforonco with Hlnnler, rnd there you smoko to hip about
euthanasia and he s~o..e to you about it; is that correct?

a. No, I went to Klosler once with a question regard¬
ing euthmna6ia.

Z. But, no wrote to you when he 6 ot these ccnjlalnts
ftv... Huch about euthanasia; ho wrote you a letter, ulun't
he?

A. Yes.

Z. bo, you wore the person wh- was approached in such
questions, were you not?

7oS6


Court 1

Stay 16-K-10-4-HD-Be a rd-Ra~ le r.


a. No, I was the person to whole Hluualer turned in cases
like tat.

v. And what about Frelosler? Frelssler also turned to
you, didn't he?

a. No; as 1C can be seen fr^s the docu-er.ts, I gave
oertr.in instructions to Frelssler by order of Bouhler, but
Freisaler did not turn to ~e.

Z. You contacted hie by order of 3ouhlc.r; wa3 that
reg .1 rly that o- handled tnese taints for bjuhler?

a. Thrt differed, « nuusber of jitters were dealt with
- the Heichslelter directly, rnd eoxetlrues he told so:

Y .u de?l with this In t.-.la or that fora — end that is what
I did.

qb it often that he gsve .'wu o.c;. tasks to preform?
A. That vorled. c-

i. "as it once a waok or once a itonth?

Almost dally I hrd to report to Sour.lcr; or I was
called into his office to receive instructions, because I
had to report to hia ab.at ay entire work.

You rosorted dally to file In connection with the
quest!,a of euthanasia?

a. No, ab at tr.o work of ay office.

%. I oa c.-uing beck to tne q-estl .n wnl J\ I nsked you
Just n.v. '.’as it often that you 6 ot tasks of tnie *ind?
Tasks de?:lng in the eutranasla question, of a legal or
•duii.iistrstive r.-ture, froa Souhler?

a. _es, I ccrteir.l did receive such asslgnsents f?on
3 x:\ar, -Ut I cannot tell you how of ien.

— rtil right, 1 want to a6k you now — I h-ve :ef_re
•e d c ant 330 Fa, Prosecution's exhibit 33C, document
bo k 1., “art I, pa_,e 3, your Honor. This is tr.e letter
:r - Hitler to : ar.dt and Bouhler. You have been speaking


Court I

>: y 16-:^-lC-5-HD-2eard-Ha^ler.


q ito a while about this document, and I only vent to nsk
- — n the oottoa h. re — do yo- have the- docuaent
before you?

a. No, I h* vo not.


16 Kay ';7*4&-Si^H-l-C.ro53 (HasOor)

court :;o. i


'• Or. tho bottoa thoro is a hand written note "Given to nc by
EoulOor on 27 August l°aO, signed Guortner". Dr. Guertnor was tho
.inistor of JUstico, cs ho not?

&• Yes,

Q. Guertnor, according to this note, received the document nearly
a yoar after its issuance. ?7hy rasho not infonaod oarlior? Ho was
tho hipest legal authority. This vis a very important natter. It
Mza tho logoi his is to tho Thole euthanasia pro gran. Hot; was it possible
that ouch a far-reaching and inportant authorisation ovor tho lifo
and death of ?50 to 600 thousand pooplo was net handod to Quortnor
oarlior th.cn that?

A, 3 0 eauso of soareoy Bouhlor didn't want to a ond this lottcr or
dccroo to any othor a encios. Quortnor, of courco, was lnfomod nuoh
earlier, but at this period of tiro Bouhlor upon his request oont
liin a photost*tie co.y of that dcorco in order to hoop it in Ids
own filos.

Q. I cn at a loss to undorstand that. You toil no that Bouhlor
oortainly infemed Guortner long boforo that tine, so tho authorisation
woo not nocrot any icro to Guortner, VJhy didn't ho givo hir» tho
doounont, such an iaportait document?

A. I didn't got your question,

•1. You told r.o that Bouhlor did not rant to hand tho docuncr.t to
Guortner because tiio docuasnt was top socrot, did you not? By this
Baco you told r» that ho certainly infonaod Guortner such
oarlior than 27 August 1?U0 about tho contents of tho docuraont, I
rc«?.C. liko to know why then, after tho infornation Guortner Got f«n
Bouhlor, tho thing wusnot secret for tan ary noro, Tty he did not got
t o docuront right away fren Bouhlor. Can you explain that?

A, I'cll, pcrr.aps I didn't ogress nyscli projrly bcfcrc. Bouhlor
lidn't want to give the origin! or a copy cut of his hand. Ac far as
- -mow io infemod Guertnor orally ouch earlier ir. the serce ray as ho


7639


16 Hay U7-l^-U^-Gro33-(Rr^or)
Court Ho. 1


also inforncd others. In tils connection I remind you of the affid¬
avit of Scnultso, Tiio coufirsos how Bovilor informed the :'dnistor
of the Interior of Bavaria, ffagnor, to den he only showed the
document. He didn't give it to Mb, I knew this characteristic of
3ouhlcr*s.

U Isn't it afact that Boihlcr inforaod Guertner only after too
□any complaints wore aalo to tho public prosecutors all over Gornany
and thococcnpld.nts cane to Guortner, their chief, isn't tJuit a fact?

A. I really don't knerrr rhon Bcuhl r informed Guertner,

2. Bid you ever, or your offico, rocoivc thoso complaints cf tho
public prosecutors?

A, Ho, o novor rccoivcd any complaints fron tho public pro3ocutors.
17o had none fr:o the lilnistry of Justico,

Q, "fh<» handled thoso affairs in your offico?

A. Bovhlcr at 'irst doalt with t!xso questions,sad I thon roccivod
ordors fror. hia to investigate tho ccnplaLnts that socnod to bo

•

justified. I tndo excerpts n thoso enpldnts or porlvps sont tho
original to T-Ji in ardor to investigate whether any aistakes had
boon aadq md I wanted to s.o tliat all mistakes which roro caused by
tho secrecy — bo avoided in tho futuro.

s , Bid you also investigate tho so-callod unjustified ccnplaints?

A. Actually ever.* cplaint raainvest! atod itich c roatod tho
ir.jrcssian that a. mistake ladb.sn :.ado. If, however, a cor.plaint read
ns fallows: "I 3tffto that within tho area X ton or fifteen topic
led died at one institution T.lthin threo months," I cortainly couldn't
investigate any such complaint, because it rarely Sewed facts, .

1. I *-nt to hand you now Docunont !X>-1325 which rill bo Prosecution
Inhibit .95 for identification. This is a letter frn you to
Gchlcgelborger — who icstke acting ! i:ds r cf Justice, was ho not?—
:f 22 April 19U1; *-'.c.re you have s :x of these cv plaints, o you
renccfc.r tids letter, Hera* Brack?


7690


16 Hay ^7-^€”^H-3-Gross(aaai:r)
Court Ho. 1


A. I don't reresbcrtiis letter. I would '.a c to road it first.

Q. la that your signature?

A. Ice, that is :y signature.

.• "ou nrito horos "Very honored .'crty .caber Dr. Schlogolbcrgcr,
Corresponding to our agrocajnt, I beg torcf-r to some dotalsof tho
proofs, v.ich roro put at ay disposal. I rule! appreciate their clar¬
ification and / :r regulation.

Fart 1 of the enclosure contains a roport by tho president of the
regional court at Xlagonfurt, datod 7 '! 0 vcribcr 19h0, on tho interro¬
gation of a counacllor at tho loner court. Dr. Spusta, rho undo almost
nonstrous uttcrancos regarding tho «A :ticn« in a civil verdict. Dr.
3pusta»c attempts to Justify hijsolf in thisinlcrrcgation protocol
appear completely insufficicnt. n

Does that rofer to the outhanaaia rograxi, thu word "Aktior." l»ro?

A. Yes.

1. I go on: "In Part 11 of tho onclos ru, t o prosecutor gcnoral
at Linz ro.»orts to tho Roich HLnisier of Justico on '& !Iovu.ibur
19U0 on on investigation procoduro against asdstant physician of our
'Iai*thoin Lastitutien in connection vr th caso Guenther Rottoonn.

The iroaooutor General ,t evented tin quoo’.iir.;: of this pr oceding. Cinco
it car. ho asarud that the Prosecutor General at Linz belongs to tho
persons rho wore infor/xid by Seorctar; of State Frcislor about tho
"Alrtdon" in August 19U0, »>ia boh-avior is inconceivable in overy
respect.

" In Dart IV f tho pr-ofs at ry diapcaal, tho president of tho
'.iighcr court at Bromberg reports m II. January 19U1 about a petition
of tho jud'c at the court at Kitzingen concerning its la*.r officer
Railing. -lion his nothcr-in-lat: brought her daughter, Frau R a n l in g,
into a ncntal institution because of mental siefaos^ she had to sign
a document statinp :v.r c nsent t^t:o imdncnt death of her da: ;*ht r.

I -uld appreciate it very sich if t-.c 1"r officer Ranling ^tuldl'c


X6 :iay 47-^-£"^-ll-3-Gross(Ranlcr)
Court ::c. i


A, I dorit rormbor this letter, I would ha l to road it first.

~i, 13 -that veur signature?

A. Ice, that is ry signature.

!. You T-xitc hero: "7cry honored Forty 1'cnber Dr. Sclilogolbcrgcr,

Ccrresponding to our asrooaent, I beg to iuf .r to sono do tils of t]*j
proofs, v.-.ich roro put at uy disposal. I r,uld appreciate thoir clar¬
ification and /or regulation.

Part 1 of the enclosure contains a report by the pronidor.t of tho
regional court at Xlagcnfurt, la tod 7 Hovenber 19U0, on tho interro¬
gation of a counsellor .t tho lower court. Dr. Spu3ta, who uado aliiost
nonatreus uttcrancos regarding t LVrticn* in a civil verdict. ’Jr.
Spwtaic attests to Justify hinsolf in this interrogation protocol
appear cc-^lotcly insufficient."

Does that refer to tho euthanasia progrsr., tho word "Aktion" hero?

A. Yos.

Q. I Zo om "In Part 11 of tho oncloc ro, t o prosecutor gonoral
at Lins roporta to tho Roich Unis ter of Ju3tLco on '£> Itovcuber
19U0 cn an investigation procoduro against assistant physician of our
institution in connection tt* th the caso Guenther Rottaonn.

• r General jrovontod tho q f this proceeding. Slnoo

it can bo assnod that tho Prosecutor Juixral at Lins bolongc to the
persons who wore infor-xd by Secretary of Stato Frcislor about tho
"AIrtion" in August 19!i0, his behavior is inccaccivablo in every
respect.

" In ."art IV of tho proofs at ty disposal, tho jresidont of tho
higher court at Pmberg reports -n 11. January* l?Ul about a potiti^n
of tho judge at the court at Kitsingen concerning its law officer
Pnnling. -non his thcr—in-lx brought her daughter, Frau hauling,

into a ncntal institution beca u se of rental sicknosq she laid to sign
xmmnt stati r consent tc^tho ixEdnont death of lxr daighto r.

I would appreciate it very uuch if t!x lav


officer Hurling -.oild be


16 "ay hl-HrSZ-nrlt-Gross (“—lor)

Court :ic. 1


officially requested to indicato the institution as roll as the none
of tho director of the institution and/or tl.c nano of t!io aebitting
nkysician concerned, »that the cat tore or. bo investigated. It
starts to rcas-n that dthin tho fraao of our »aktion« relatives
rrcrc never requested anything corresponding to Panling«s statement,

,: I request als to ask the juc'go at tho court at Kitaingen as to
3 ivo tho nano of tho professor in a large term uho is in charge of a
hoooital there, so tint thds fact can also bo clarified, "Hany tlunks
in advanco fer tho treble yau are taking.

Heil.Hitler,

Your very do voted
Brack "

Co j"u handled this natterin tho offico of Bcuhlor, didn*t you?


7c92


U r


curt I'C. 1

.5 ..ay 47-«-12-l-23i-Karrov (Easier)

A. I can rtBerber this concoction rather well because rouhler her
1 ready told ne that the ministry of Justice w flB concilia#* such cceplainte
=ade by the Public Prosecutors. I received these cosolaintn, cs they
»re sectioned here, in about three or four boohs. I verkod through
these ccsolaints in detail and took the necessary steps os fi-r as any
sistahee could cx. ascertained which were cade at T-4. I transferred
thes« cozplaints to that agency in order to crcvvnt ouch mistakes in
the future. As can be seen free this lett r, I sent ronerts to the
..inlstry of Justice in three or four caoeo where mistakes hod apparently
hcor. on their part, so that they could investigate these nistokeo.

Q. It is a natter of fact, then, that these legal Questions, so
far no thoy cose u? in louhler's office, '-ur. handled by you, is that
correct?

A. So, that io not correct. That does not constitute any dealing
with legal Questions.

<;. Did you concern yourtelf once, durinr the year* you worked with
roubler on this problos.as to vkrt the opinion of the official legal
authorities vos no to the auction of euthanasia?

A. I inforsed aytelf obout the fminlon of the jurist*, not the
opinion of the legal authoritie., and I found out that minion. differed.
Seat v».rc for it and othore were against it. I never heprd oersonallv
of any objection raised ir. the uinietry of Justice. I heard, however,
that eooc la^’-rs *\rc against euthanasia - not oil of then were for it.

^ You lectured in the /-inlstry of Justice about euthanasia, did

you not?

A. Ye8.

'-hat did you tell these gor.tlener. as to how cany ccoole
approximately in &vrary would be adainisterd a n.rcy death? How
zany persons?

A. I don't believe that I zt.ntior.t-d any nuabtr thert.

that izprusbion could thes* gentlemen tr ve about the number cf
people vr.o should get the nrivileCe of n.rcy death bv this action?

7693


Court -o. 1

16 .iay 47-k-12-2-*i£i-£arrov (ZaUcr}


A. Ac far os I re=o=b«r, tfci.se setters aren't discussed et all.

I first showed then Hitler's decree; secondly, I presented to thea the
iroft cf the lew vhlcfc had been worked upon. Cn the other hand; Hoy do
spoke about the eedical execution.

Q, Vfcat was the ispression fe'eyde gave to these ncoole? How aany
persons possibly would be privileged to get a a«rcy death in connection
with this action?

A. I don't know whether Haydc sectioned any numbers, cither. I only
lens- that no objection was raised during that neotinc against the *rroblc=
of euthanasia.

Q. Did you tell in this locturc who would be crccrted fror the
privilege?

A. I don't believe that I said that. I think that that wee
sectioned by Kaydo.

C^. Arc you rure about that?

A. I said "I tollevc". I really don't know any sore.

It vus aor.tloned, wasn't it? 7hct*. classes of People who were
exempted w^rc sectioned?

A. I really can no longer say today.

<<. Can you toll ce about this work of binding and Kochc? You ore
very fasillar with this work, aren't you?

A. So, I ns. not. I said that I studied this work, end I olrcady
stated yesterday that I didn't particularly like it. I said that I w^n
sore favorably disposed toward another book, the on. by i*lxer. I didn't
particularly understand the legal statements naie by rinding.

Q, That was the only reason why you did not liku this book by
rinding and Kochc, or had you other reasons too to dislike it?

A. I really can't tell you that at the accent. I only kr.ow that
it didn't sees as clear to ae ac other bocks.

(v But you ere ftnilier with the principles stated thiffi, aren't

you ?


A. Pertly perhaps


Court So. 1

16 :-cy 47-#-12^S-iB;-£nrrov (Bonier)

Q. I have the iapr t 6si3a froa this took that these authors by no
-oar.6 ask for the right to kill incurable a.stal patients no longer
eacablc of work or eventually even incurable, but only suggested killing
of incurable isbeclles - and, so'far as I knew, there is a difference
twtv fc en an insane person and an inbecilc - in accordance with »oao forca*
legal procodurc, a very ccepliceted legal crocedurc, iaplenentcd »*ith
crery possible decree. Is that correct? An I correct in asfuning that
that it the principle on which the book of Binding rnl F.ochc is bused?

A. ' ell, I nust toll you ouite frankly that ! really cannot confirm
whether you are right or not. I didn't ouite agree with '■hut -indirg
oays about denying the ri«rht of life to the rati.r.t. "hot is how I con¬
ceived his opinion. On the other hand, I al-ays thought that it 'no n
duty to aid the- vatUr.t by grantir..- his nerejr death. I think thtt Z wes
on o different level, although I arrived at the ona% ai*.

So, in other words, your opinion then ubout the acre?' death or
about the privilege of narcy death went such farther than the orinicn
of Binding ar.d 'echo? Isn't that correct?

A. So, not farther but different.

Ci. And where is the difference?

A. Binding hoc said that the incurably insane n.rson no longer hoc
a life which io legal property. Shis ir a rarely legal concert under
which I couldn't inng'ne anything. VJwtfcwr the life of nr. incurable
patient constitutes a legal property or not I cannot Judge. I re oily
cannot Judge whether sercy death could be granted to such a *crson.

‘■ihet vsb isportent to at was the cu.etion of whether he is ruffering to
ouch an extent that one io Justified in relieving hie of that
suffering. This it en argument thet I understood.

-ut the-re are vtr;.' snsy insane who aw not suffering at all,
are n't there? *ho have nc rair.r? *ho arc, nony tires, feeling subjec¬
tively ouite well? ’ho do not 'v»nt to die? Ic it possible to edcinict.r
-.0 such peODl. t!.e EeTcy death, according to your opinion, or according
: t-e opinion of rinding?


7o95


Court ?e. 1

16 .-.ay 47-1.-12—l-LHl.-i&rrov (Saslc-r)


A. ’all, I really cannot judge that. Please ask a Physician.

IP. 7£CiSCH;X5: hr. President, I object to this type of cucetion-

ing. ar. President, you will reneab r that the Tribunal yesterday .

afternoon forbade =e to deal with the rroblec of euthanasia .16 regards

•

the legal and aedical point sf view. : think that this ruling should also
be acplitd to the prosecution.

IP.. EOCrVAID: If Your Honors rletsc, the witness stated at great
length yesterday his personal position to the problcn.

THL K-SIHEIT: She cress-cxenination is proper. The objection is
overrules. If, on cross-exaninatlon, the prosecution Opens uo avenues
vhich were not proper upon direct examination, upon ro-Jlrect cxoalnution
counsel for the defendant night be permitted to es't certain cueStionc,

But thw difference between direct -xasinotion and cro.s-exnr.1nation in
■ronounecd. The objection will be overruled.

At thio tini the Tribunal will be in r.coss, end today it will be
in reccoc until 2:00 o'clock.

(A redos wj.s taken until 1400 hours, 16 :;ay 1947.)


my

I .'ay lS-A-5K-15-l-£!aohan (Int. Hasr-lor)

Court No. 1

sjssig::

(Thi hcarinj convened r.t 1,15 hours.)

TIL- ILJiSILtL: The Tribunal is ia session.

Lli. IL-iDY: Hay it ploasc tho tribunal, before the conti¬
nue t ion of tho cross examination of the Defendant Brack
by Jr. Hoohwald, I have two questions to take up with the
Tribunal.

Th- defense counsol has roquostod thr.t tho c-se of tho
defendant Eoijlboock coco before tho oaso of tho Defendant
Hovon, so that tho cases of Bockcr-Froysonj, Schaefer and
Boijlboock will bo continuous,; in c.snuch as tho throo oases
dolvo into tho soa-wator oxporir.ents and it won't break up
tho continuity of tho presentation of tho evidence. Tho
.rosocutior. has njroed with the dofonso counsel if it is
agreeable to tho Tribunal .r.u we would like to hoar tho
ease of the defendant Boijlboock before tho oaso of tho
defendant Kovon.

T:C P.IL3IDJI. T T: The supsostion cade by counsel for tho
,ro3ocution and for th~ defense will bo approved and adopted
by the Tribunal.

Mi. KMiDYj In addition to that* defense counsels of or *. tho
dof ord ant Jrujowsky, Dr. Fleming, hns notified q u this
nerninj that ho inters to c.ll another witness on behalf
of tho defendant Mrujowsky. Ho wishes to oall that witness
after the testimony of the defendant Brack has boon cceplet-
od. I have no knowledge as to what that witness will
testify and have not bo_n able to fOTGUllly object or aoquiosco

•nd I should like to hear .froa tho defense cthinsol for the

w

defendant llrujoyretsy. as to tho nefio of the witness and what

/

tho witness will testify to.

THJ ?. MS ID JIM: The dLf^nso counsel for the defendant

Jrujowsky -./ill advise the prosecution and tho Tribunal.

/ /

B... FLSM-3HG; Mr./Presid ent, wo are her-- concerned with


269 ?


::-y 16-..-5IC-15-2-Hcohoa (Int. .<nrr-.lor)

Court No. 1

the witness Scharlau. The witness Soharlau has boon cp. rov-
.d to bo h-.rd here on boh elf of the defendant -rujowsky.

Ho will fir3t of .ill testify es to tho tin- during which
tho ccotinj took place in tho Ministry of tho Interior on
29 Docon'eer 19-.1. In addition, he will testify conoornin"
c nunhor of questions in connection with tho Hyjiono’ In¬
stitute. Ho will speak about tho discussion to which tho
hand-note of tho dofondant Slavers refers. It soys there
that tho fiold of work of -r.soh-r was disoussod with
L'rujowsky. Sch .rlcu had been present durinj that confer-
onco and his presence is n-ntionod by oiuvers in that file
noto,

:L.. K—tDY: Your Honor, due to tho fnot that this op, lica-
tion has been approved by the Tribunal, I h vo no objection
to tho c .llinj of, the v;itncs3, however, I rdjht ask tho
defense counsel if it would bo possible to secure an
affidavit fra; tho witness, then perhaps the pro3ocution
could stipulate with tho defense couns -1 uid then perhaps
void c .llin.j hia before tho Tribunal.

TH^. P.hJSUJ.JT: How lo.nj do you astianto, couiisol, that
the testimony of this witness will re-uiro?


15 Hay«-.tf-JP-16-l-3card (int. &*iler)
Court 2


IB. TL&HI'&i Perhaps one hour. Hr, President; und I cfl nw spook¬
ing of -he direct e: teinatioa vnioft I think will last at *_;o6t for ono
hour.

S3 PKiSIDffil; Does toe Counsel for tho d-fer«L.nt think it possible
to have tho witnoss preparo an affidavit and uso th_.t in place of oall-
in/; the witness in open court?

DR. FL3-.I Cs I shall investigate the question onco nor. end then
cone to oo;..o ugrocncnt with tho Prosecution.

Hrt. HaRDYs It is apparent. Your honor, th-t the Caso of tho do-
fead..nt Jrack nay well bo collated c Jly Monday norning. In that
event it will bo necessary to Call this witness on Honda/, end I
nssuno that Dr. Flavine c-n -scort-ln whothcr or not an .ffid-.vit will
ucwt hio n-cds tnis afternoon, uni v* c_n a«rco on it-the first thin*

s

i.ond.-y Morning, and bring it up before tho Tribunal at that tino?

EiE P..xfiIDZ.r: I assu-o th-t Counsel for tho def.nd-nt can nnko
up his ulnd whether or not an affidavit will be. sufficient on oJi.lf
of hie client before vory Ion,-,. The *’ri oun.il would hoar tho witnoss
following the casu of tho def^ idunt jr_ck, if tho Counsel for tho
Prosecution h-d no objections to tho uuttor us st .ted,

HH. h.a-vDY: The Defense Counsel h_s outlined three points that
tho defense witness will testify too, and it bc-s to uo thoao points
can woll bo taxon c.r» of in ah affidavit .« well as tJcin^ up tho
ti o horc before the i'rioun^l. In that event I would stipulate with
tho Defense Counsol aftor ho hj executed the .iffldavit, If the
prosecution docs not desire to cross cxioino I do not think it is
nccoss.-ry to oria: tho witness horu on diroct exauinution.

BL. PfcxSIPagi YOB, I undorst ._-d the position of Counsel, jfro
Counsel will consult and decide at tea c_rli^t possible na-ent -.c to
tho course tho Defense Counsel desires to follow. Tho witness Cnn bo
hc..rd following the CaSa of the Defendant jr.ck, if it is not dcazod
o; tho Defonse Counsel th„t .*n _ffidavit is sufficient.


7699


IS .-hy-jt-JP-l&-2-Jcuri (In". ^-uler)
Court I


5io cross ixccinatioa uuy contiauo.

3” 2H. HCCH *L3:

X_y it ple_so the tribunal, Herr 3r_ck, before tho recess wo
spoke about the Jiaii=£ und Eocso book on iiith^c-eiu, did wo not?

a. Yob.

J.. I would like to refresh your ceuory <ib to tho oo.'.tiftts of thi
book. I hav^ hero a few ehort oxcorpts. 2iis ie docunont 'Jo. 2893,
which will bo Prosecution*e osiibit 496 for ldcatific-tioa, Ycur^oaor.

Ei you h_vc the docu-oni oofore you?
a. Yob, I have it before no.

q. This is tho book you wore opejeinc about, w„rc you aot?
a. Yob, tho title is coxroct.
q. So, I quote froc- p-^o 28:

■But ono conclusion results unconditionally nccossnryt -’ho full
roi,v.rd of the will of life of -11 hu::-n bbiago, of tuo uont oic!: Wid
tho uost tortured -ad tho uoet usolcsu ones too,"

*nd, you will find -.other quotation frou p^;o 341
•ic> hi ready ot..twd -bovc, any authority of aanihil .tin.-; io to bo
excluded if connected with breaking tee will of life of tho Individual
to be killed or tho killed."

Do you u,;reo with this point of view?

I h .vc Ire dy snid this ..orai.v these purely lc,;.l considora-
ticno cannot bw cooncntod on by -o; I c.Ji only s-y th-t I w-.o aot in a
fr.vcv -.bio disposition tow-rd these consider tloas. Kuybo I did not
understand tho., occ-uso I a*i not - 1 -wycr. haybo it is oocnrao thcoo
consideration* cont-ia ..spects to which I could aot -..'roe. -t nay
rate, those -re considor .tions w.lcn h-vo nothin,; at all to dc vita tho
considerations which prompted uo — which were initiated si .ply by uity
for the hu.aa Coin; - r-thor than by c-lcul .tvd reasoning

q. all right, but, so you -re of tho opinion th-t tho privilOtfO
cf ;:orcy do_th Cun -Iso be given tc people wno still h..v- t..e possibility


7700


16 K«-tfvM6-J3flor4 (Int. hauler)
Court I


to resist and who want to live,is th..t your opinion?

•a. Eo, no, in nc w_y at all. If eoneoody t-» the will to livo
it vould no longer constitute en -ct of norcy.

?. nut, you do r*x.ooo«.r tna doeweat 3906, Prosecutions orhibit
376, th.t is in docixient book 14, part 3, page 281, Your Honors,
and I want to quote only one scntvaco. unfortunately I do not havo.
tho Go ram, but it is only ouo sentence. I want to quota*

■Tho wildest scones iu^ln-blo -r- reported to n a ve tekCU pl.oo
then, ns tore of these people did not board tho bus voluntarily and
wore theruforc forcod to do so by tho ^ccoqp.'ayia,; personnel."

Be you not think tfcvto people h A still tho posoibilit: end powor
to roslst .and they did resist? Didn't they?


7701


:;.y i6-,.-3K-17-1-Gross (Int. u rmal o r )

Court; Ho. 1

~ No I do not believe that. Shore arc two possibilities
here. Hither this is a stntocont which is based upon r.
rumor which nay have resulted in connection with and bo-
c .uso of the seorccy.and an oxajser .tion of soaethinj
which really tock a different course entirely or in the
oaso as it is represented hero we -jo concerned with
;ationts of the kind I saw on ny visits to thoso institu¬
tions who had boon locked into the so-ciJLlod stronj houses
and who oinstitutod severe d.-njor for entire humanity.

.. If they were behind lock and koy the dnnsor for
humanity wasn't so bij, was it? This is in offioiul roport
so fur us I can seo from the document and not information
cf runors. Do you know that the idocs of Bindin-j and Hooho
were by no nouns universally approved in Germ any and in
other plaoes?

.» I really c an not Jud ;e that boenuse as I already said
up to the time Bouhler reooivod that order I did not at all
concern myself with the problem of euthanasia but durin;
conversations I heard just as many ap/rovin ; us lujectinj
o; inion3.

i «11 ri^ht. The letter of uthorizntion which wo have
been Spo^kin about, exhibit 330, to Bouhlor and Brandt
says that Brandt and Bouhler had the responsibility of
enlur.;inj the authority cf certain doctors by name, who
did soloct these doctors?

.. Bouhler soloctcd thorn.

„ Bouhlor was not a medical man. Did he know the doctors?

.. No, tut he had that order by Hitler. Professor Hoffmann
or Professor Sohnoiaer couldn't soloct thoso physicians. It
was 3ouhlur who had roocivv„*d that order to inorenso thoir
authority.

. I take it from the document Brandt alia Bouhl~r jot this
authorization frer: Kitlor, and not 3ouhler alone.


7702


May 16-«-3K-17-2-Gross (Int. namelor)

Court; No. 1

Yes. Brandt, of course, had to ‘jlvo his approval but
3ouhlcr at first oado the selection cnonj the physicians
which wore designated to him by nene.

.*nd Brandt pave his approval, is that ripht?

.. I don't know. I must assume so. I wasn't always present
during conversations between Brandt and Bouhlor.

1 ^id ycu ever rocoive a list cf names of doctors who
wore authorized to administer euthanasia?

.. No. I already stutol that I don't know whothor I did
recoivo such a li3t. I don't know whothor any such list
existed. ,.t any rate I didn't roooivo or.o. I also said
that considering the small number or . hysicians I hardly
think th-.t any such list wes oompfilod.

i I ripht in assuming that it. must havo come to your
knowlodjo whether such a list existed or not?

.. No •

i (horo oould a li3t havo :bcon without that you would
have aeon it?

.. Such a list could have existed In Souhl-r's offioo. It
could havo been the anno in Linden's offioo.

» .(ho select ed the doctors in the euthanasia stations
about whom you told the Tribunal today that they had tho
last Jud^nent whether mercy death should be administered
or not?

•* I can not pivo you ar.y information about that in detail.
I do know, however, that Lind on ando such .rojosals to
Souhler and I furthermore know that 3 ouhler then had th030
physicians call on him end tho.n talked to then.

. Bouhlor ilono, in other words, solocted those poo, lo
on his own responsibility?

- No. I wa3 just saying that Linden mad., the corresponding
.r sontatiGn to him.

. You said that Linden cade the proposals but that Bouhlor

7703


I'. y 1 ----rX-l7-. z -jrcss 'In-., ilscdcrj
Court No. 1


selected then, i.3 that correct?

Bo abler decided, yos, which oius wore to bo actually
selected. hon 2 nd how he discussed that not-or with
Brandt I really don T t know.

; You noned soco of the doctors who wore active ir.
euthanasia stations. Do you know who was in oharja of the
iUthenosia station Brand on bur 3 ?

Darinj ny interrogations I already 3tat^d that I could
nc longer any with certainty where or at what stations those
.hysicians wore workin . I thought at the tine to rononbor
and I already stated what I know ut that tino. However, I
ion't knew that ir. is ell quite correct.

. I 3 tho nana Jlrtfc ( «-i-r-t-h) faniliar to you in this
connection?

.. Y 03 , I know that nano.

i "ill you toll tho Tribunal who Mirth was?

.. » irth was a Ca; tain in the Folic who was in oh:.rgo
of tho local ro ;i3try offioc at Ornf-nock.

. Is the nacc Gor3as3 foniliar to you, G-o-r- j-a-s-s?

.. Tjjo nano Gorjnss,. yes. I heard tho nano Gorgass now as
ir., result of reading the newsp apers. I, of course, can
r.or ronomber whether ho was active r.a :in export or in any
other function within the euthanasia . rojma.

. But you know tint ho had a funotion in thi3 projrcn,
don’t you?

•* Yos, I reoDcbcr that ajain.

. You nnoed sc&o of tho doctors who wore active in tho
nhana3ia . ro^rar:. Now, I would like to kno whether you
C; * c -dviso us ho* rainy exports there were? experts?

I really can not ;iv- you the nuhber. I know there was
. It a nunbur of then, 1C, 15 or 2C. I ar. afraid that I
-•’t jivo you the exact nunber.


'.70b


:; - i5-/k-2K-17-4-Gross (Ir.t. Sccmlor)

Court No. 1

„ How nany tor oxports were there?

.. There wore threo to; experts ct any rate, there nay
have boon four.

■< You javo us tho nas£s of three. I understand you arc
rijht? They wore Hoydo, Niatsche, Falkolhauser. Is that
rijht?

No, Schneider.

Koydu, Hietsoho, and Schneider? who was tho fourth

one?

~ The fourth cay have boon Professor Docrini3 but 1 no
longer know that with certainty.

v You w,.ro chiuf cf Office II of ^ouhler's office, is ; t.
that correct?

.. Yos.

would you say you wore socothin;; iiko a deputy to hin
ns far cs tho euthanasia . ro;;ror. was concerned?

•v No, certainly not.

. You wore his collaborator, is that correct?

“ Yo 3 .

what exactly was your activity concerning tho euthana¬
sia ;ro.;rnn?

.» My activity varied. ..t first I had to jstablish
connections with all those r.jcncies who could nano physicians.
I had to ;ot into contact with tho ;hysician3 thausOlvos.

6 *»hioh were the a>ncics hich javo you the naaes of

those doctors?

.. There was tic Ministry of the Interior, that was Dr.
Linden, then there was tho .(oichsarzt-iV Dr. Grewitz.

v Socebody else?

.. No, nobody else.

wh t else did you do tc jet the .rojran in operation?

I ; artieijated in the conferences. I arrnnjod confer¬
ences for ouhlcr whenever he ‘intended to hold then and . ..


:: y 16 —a-BK— 17-b-Ores 3 [ant. xiacr.ler)
Court -So. i


nony core thinjs like that.

. You could possibly state this a little bit core in
detail, can’t you?

-* It is rnth-r difficult to state it in renter detail,
^y duties wore of such n varied nature that I could hardly
rue .11 the details after 7 or 8 years have lapsed. Nobody
could dcaund that free no.

. .net did you do r-ft^r the euthanasia pro iron was in
.rojress? -»uthcAusi stations worked, -iuostiennair-s were
filled out, the . eo. le w«re udeinistorod nurcy deaths,
what w is your activity in the projraa then?


~0o


Csurt So. 1

16 ..ay 4?-A-18-l-£fLi-Karrov (rosier)


A. I no locker or hardly any longer concerned cyself vith that
cart of Soohler'a assignnont because I didn't have to, since it ran by
itself, and I again turned to the t: sks vithin my ovn sphere of work to
a full extent.

Q, All right, sut, for instance, who supervised the operation of
7-;? It was the* clacc where all these cues:ionnaires were koot. It was
the heart of the thing, v^on't it?

A. Yt-a. 1-4 had its ovr. chief. . *

X. 'ho war the chief?

A. That v C e t at first, rofcne, and Inter Allcra.

A r.d what was the position of the toe o^oe/ts in T-4, or in con¬
nection with "-4, e roe daily hsyda and Slot ache?

A. That is very difficult to say. Cne could nerhaos say that
fiohne, to all intents and voroooec, vuc the Chief of T-4, but really,
fa far ts acdlcal natters wore concerned, h-yde si>do the decisive doci-
aionc. Bohn-- was no ohyalciar..

^ And you a .dc the liaison between H«ydo and Eoufclc-r, isn't that
correct?

A. Yortwrday/ruJcCtsd the words "liaison nan" which, ft one tin-,

I ill recognise bemuse, altar all, I didn't hove ay office in 3M hut
wan locate- in =y office on Yoostrascc. I cry have been the ncdieting
x*n between Eohnc and Boufcler. Vhsncvor Bohr.e or Linden cane, to
louhler'p office. Bcmhlar os r.ot always there, wne not always ir. a
position to receive then. and often detailed mo to listed to then
personally and then, ir. turn, report to bin in the course of the general
r-rortr that 1 had to make dally.

A

v. J-uthanaeia, es you said yourcclf, involves o considerable
stdiral rroblen, isn't that correct?

A. Yes, certainly.

v ho wre ir. charge of this '■art of the prorrsn?

A. All the cerscne who ~ trc designated V' Scukler, tr e-p.rtp ar.d

* * i

portly os consultants. Thsro were psychiatrists, there were physioinna,

7707


Court 1

’6 .iff- 47-A-l=-2-ia-:-iarr3w (Hanlet)


there vere urofesiors.

Q. So, and the top expert - the first top expert - wes Feydo,
ves he not?

A. Yes, he ves ont of the top experts.

q. So, he '-»• directly under Bcuhler, was he not, according to
vr.at you Just said!

So, he really had a free hand, ^yde wasn't Soukler'a erroloyoe,
in the sosc vay es --refessor Schneider or rrofessor Slener or anybody
else weren't Souhler's employees, these physicians were the representa¬
tives of tht aedical thought which prevailed during the execution of
euthanasia.

Q, But SaihUr was in ckerge of the execution. Bouhler and Bmndt
,trv the two people who got the neslgnscnt by Hitler, were they not, so
it sotns to a*, natural that these ooonle were Just in charge of Kcydo.

A. loll, in that case it would have had the rccult in Foydc giving
ue his position eo a lecturer and going over to Bouhler and Brandt ns
their coployce if there wo* to b«. a definite relationship of subordina¬
tion. but that certainly w.sn't the caoc.

«^ Isn't there a possibility that one oerson has two different

tasks?

A. Yet, that is possible, but these arc coooidor*tionft which didn't
prevail st that tino ond I ccn hcrdly give you on;.’ authentic ctctonont
no- aa to hov to distinguish between these relations.

^ But you know that Esydc voc the first top errert? Shot you
know, dcr.' t you?

A. H^ydc vi-f the first top «rr>vrt.

You testified her® that you ere convinced that o nan like Heyde
rev- r would havi lent hiastlf to the carryin* out of the euthanasia
nrogroo lr. concentration eases, is that correct? In the way it woo
described by the witness .ienneekt? •

A. I don't thine that Hvydc would have nlacd hint elf at the dis-


-osa 1 of sooething like that.


7708


Court :o. l

15 -ay ^7-A-18-3-aS£-£arrov (i-aul^r)


v You have further testified that he and iietseke ar.d "olkelhauscr
were the people vho gave you the assurance that the exacinetion which
was carried out in concentration cases by order 'of Kinder, or at the
roouest of Klccler, would be for the benefit of the innatec and that
these peocle never vould have taken art in such censures as Action 14-
?-13 --as. Xo that correct?

A. Kc, what I said w»s that * did not believe that ncoole liko
Hcydo or Xictsche ••ould have participated in anythin. - : lifc*- that. I cer¬
tainly never discussed that with then. _ . .

v “ut I understood you testifying thi t you kno« that doctors who
were connected «ith the euthanasia nrogran carried out t'-aalnatlon in
concentration euros. Isn't that correct? On the re-ueet of Finder?
didn't you soy that? Sxaalneticnc?

A. Ko, I said that I vos convinced that such pcoplt, If they hove
cerforced on,'* cuch txurinations, hrvo oorfcreed thes in r. w,-y which
corresponded to their scientific ideas uni *-ould have done that cor¬
rectly.

Q.* Did you know that crasinutionc of lnrone or cnr.tnlly disturbed
iioplu vgr. carried out in concentration carrs?

A. Ilo, I didn't kno* - that. I received th- order and I rasped it
on. I don't kno~, hovtver, Mother, hcv, and by vhoe this order w,, 0
©Xe exited.

C*. To vhec did you transfer this order?

A. I already said that I no lor^cr know whether I transferred
tr.ia order to Ke.rdo, Kietsche, or Allers. X issue* that it cust have
beer, one of these throe centleccn.

q. -a n J^this order ves curdy for the carrying out of e’calnctionn,
not of th. applying of the Eercy death to people who ^r« found insane
in theconcentration r&znz, wee It?

A. Tes. this woe done exclusively for th* purposes of crcc'nation.

q, Do you -•no’- anything about a connection of re-do with th«


Action 14-7-13?


7709


Court :;o. i

lfi hoy 47-A-lS-4-lr2I-tarrcv (?.a=lcr)


A- Sc, I kr.ov of ao connection vhatsocver.

tj, ' ould you, as collaborator of Souhler, take the responsibility
for such activities of Ecyde about ~hca you testified her*, that you ere
convinced that it “ould have been impossible that he «ould have lent
hiasolf to such ectiviti-s?

A. I cannot assume responsibility for any acts of any person of
vhlch I icnov nothin. If 1 say that I an convinced that sent *.rocn did
the right thin*, this certainly dooc not constitute a positive knowledge
that the person concerned alvays acted ccrractlv. This is ouroly an
expression of ay conviction. If tcy third nerron should have acted in
an incorrect v«y, I certainly cannot aeeuai responsibility for hlr rets.

Q. out you v*rt the close collaborator of Bouhlor, andPOihlor 'W>

In charge of the crogram. Che top expert, the first too extort, of the
program v U : heyde and Ecyde carried out those aeaauroa. I tnt to put
to you Tocua-T.t ho. BO-2799, Miich •'ill be .-'rocicution Ixhlbit 497 for
identification, "hie Is an affidavit of a coma doctor in Dachau, Huthig.
I on reeding free paragraph 2 - no, raragronfc 4 - X 1 * sorry:

"In the fell of 1E41 during on official visit by I*r. Lolling to ay
infirmary I tid informed by his that a cceaisrion of :cur physicians
undor the -iroctlor. of rr of esc or Kyde »ould virit the Concentration
Pans lechau lr. a short vhilc. The tmroose of this eomaicrlon v,,s to
select concentration camp prisonero vho could not vdr’<c for transfer
for the purpose of cuthannela and to transfer then to the Concentration
Coer .jiuthausor. to be gassed. The announced commission «p*Kr,re'd n
short «4.ile after this conversation vith 2r. Lollin.-. It consisted of
four psychiatrists, *nd the l.ader of the coaaissicr. v PB a r ofcsaor h^-dc,
vho ms alee one of its members. I =y*i!f as «ell at the ether roar
doctors of the Concentration Caan lachan had nothin* to do vith the
commission or their ver'e. I did see, hevcver, that those four doctors
-ere sitting rt four separate t.bles bet'-e^r. tvo berrjcKO, end that
many hasdre s o: concentration * ri=on'.rc v^rc for:^d ur t.for*


then, ani ht‘l to go to on*, of the doctors or.e by one. The rrironerc

7710


Court jc. 1

16 May *i 7-A-ld -5-LS(-f-arr ov (Hauler)


verc screened tksro according to incapability to vork and thoir oolitictl
docun<-nt6 and vcre s.lected accordingly. I lenov that this coonission
soent only a fov days in lechau and that it '-as impossible for thca to
give c nodical examination to so many prisoners in so short a ceriod.

She examination consisted solely in the examination of the docuaents
vhllo tr.'. concentration ccco prisoner vns ore sent. Selected in thio
action '••ore prisoners, nor. of jeruan nationality and citirens of other
nations, Jews, etc. I can definitely state that Professor Koydc directed
that ccmaisslon, and that ho vns a aecb-.r of it hinsolf, although I h»vo
forgotten the nanus of the other doctors.


7711


Court io. 1

15 ;:ay 47-A-19-l-ZEJt-kal07 (I-anler)


’In 3ccc=Ccr IS- 11 , ccvoral weeks after this eonniBsion had left
the CC Dachau, the first transport coasi'. tiny .of several hundred CC

prisoners vfco had beon selected by this cce-.ission of psychiatrists

•

left for the CC kcuthauscr, to he jessed, anr another transport of
prisoners, flao consisting of several hundred selected toy the connidsion,
left ix the CC iAUthausen in Jenu-ry 1942. I cannot swear whether
there *vro aoro transports, at I -as trenpft-rrec fron CC Dachau shortly
p/ter the second treiaoort. The oction of selecting prisoners unablo
to work for the purpose of euthanasia in CC Dachau vrs known under tho
nano 'Aktion r»'vde , . ,,

DF.. 33C*SCmJ XS: .jt. President, I would like to out tho ouootion
to tho prosecution as to -hotnor it intends to offer this locunont K 0 -
2795 in evidence.

2t. HCCH’AID: I oficrod it now for identification. V c do intend
to of for it «-6 an exhibit tout it was offered according to the ruling of
tho Tribunal for identification. .

Dr . : :J. President, until such tine rr this Docunont

*0-2795 is offered as on exhibit officially I object to this document's
being showj. to the defendant, because first of oil '*„• have not -at had
the opportunity to look rt tho ddcuaer.t beforohixi, in order to inventi¬
on. ito orobetive value. la addition, it oco=c to at that this Dr.
Julius ..uthig, wj.o nxde this ctetenant on 17 Arril 1947, can cosily too
nr do rv;il»tol- so that ho can too put or. cross-cxaainttion.

2K. KICK AID: She witness is nveileble for the defense for crors-
cxenination. Ho is. «-s far ns I kno-, ir. Dachau in confintacnt.

The objection is overruled. Tho counsel for prose-
cutler. no:.- examine the witness concerning the cocuacnt which )»c to.tr.
identified end arrk=d, which counsel states will to* offer.? later. If
counsel for th. defense desires the witness for erosB-o«sination. he
will notify th. Tribunal end th« Tribunal will consider his rvoueGt.

3Y D5- ALT :

^ you still of the ouinior. that the rersonalit- of I cy&i


7712


-ocrt 5c. 1

io Kay 47-A-19 -2-IZ.~.-Af I cy (aasler)

gave you the- assurance thee an extinction carried cut by hia in a con¬
centration conp could be for the benefit of the insetoa?

A. If tho content* of this docunent correspond to the frets, I
should ha.vu to correct ay opinion. I cay point out to you that Koyde
in the lull of!34l had already loft the adniniatmtion of cuthrnasia.

v Tou *-<.r. a collaborator of5ouhlcr' s, wore you not? How far ••'aa
it you wont on your own initiative?

A. Shat defends entirely upon the cireucetar.ees. I really don't
>now i+.rt ycu naan by initiative. Do you neon, *re I an ardent rccreocn-
tativo of euthanasia, or arc you referring to the extent of =y authority?

Q. Ho, I sa tokir/r you whether, in the circles which w<rc inforned
of euthanasia in spite of tho too oocrecy of this rrograa, you -cr« con¬
sidered as c representative to e certain tine, 1S44 for instance.

A. The 'mcctlor. didn't cate through.

ix. I asked you whether the people -ho «xro vorkinr in this orogron
did not consider ycu fron 1G4< on no the r«ipreovntatlvo of tho euthanasia
pro,;rlei sooetlso in 1S44?

A. Ihrt Perhaps ia possible. It is oosslblo that because of cone
error ooaobedy eor.cid*r^d ac sc » representative of that program fron the
yti.r !£-•»•. or.. I should like to oephasise again, however, that in thu
••ei r 1£42 : left for the front and cine, that tin* had nothing at fill to
do with euthanor-ia or its odninictration. If any oerton in the- yocr 194'

is of the opinion that I was Scuhl-r's roprcccr.trtivc in the cuthanasiu

•

work , it ould only bo r. blatant error. I wasn't even in Gcrnrny at
that tine.

x- ri you, when the allies occupied Gorneny, nrJce cone arrangea.ntc
thu*. the gp-t chambers of certain euthanasia stations nay be dictroyci co
that th* evidence of euthanasia nay disappear?

A. Ho. I sad* nc preparations of that kind. I wouldn't hive been
in a -.os it lor. to do so. I never even thcu£-.t about any such thing.

v To you know whether or not Hitler issued an order to this effect?


"713


-curt Jo. 1

16 ..fiv 47-A-19-c-Z3i-reIoj (zazlcr)


A- I do not encw vho Issued such orders. I think I can rericaber
that such orders -ere issued. I think that Sornaan vss the nost likely
to give the order to destroy all the files and «<hat not, hut I really
can't tell vow that exactly.

"id you pass devn an order of this kind?

A. I really don't know vfccr. I should have done that.

Q. • do think in connection with th« Fartheia euthanasia strtion
— lu I correct in cscuric* that you seid thjt Flsrthcia -i-s a euthanasia
station?

J

A. Yet, Her the in wrs a euthanasia station.

^ Se you recenber hrving pastel do*-n on ord.r that Hart ho la
should be destroy el?

A. ilo, I don't recooKr t.'iat.

2 H*.t wt to you Document SC-2429, which rill be Prosecution
inhibit 49e for Identification. This is ta affidavit of e certain
Clousson. Hu states:

"That free the end of 1?*»? until Kerch 194i I was ’irieoner or.

'ut" in th« Arccitcelnof tz in heuthemecn *heru the administrative work
wrs rc-ozpliched for riautheueen and sub-ccODt; that In tils office I
ili '•lericrl work, such bc oakiwr resorts, kec-jin.- recirds, rnd corrcs-
tonding vlth firac vho un«d orisonera in the operation of their bucineBo;
t! < in the couroe of ay duties I env t s-.-r-.t . , 1 -t.y.«• ueearv// which
to the bust of ay ncsory vr,s ns follctf.:

" 'ir t A c^:cn:7niASi-S ca.j*s iiadtkauslb e: c"a:iia. z&smxsan
■ •

'-■■■ . ft B&fi tins* 2i. 1astidru* r.: saiAE-xr SXXC SI'*

:- .^.rr>.n s? naas- cp 3FX fulesx

CBS2FIXEE1P SHACK' "

To you roae-'b.- r th- teletype now?

A. ro.

v lo you aelntaia th-1 you never s-r.t cuch a telatync?

--L. I a v. r c-nt cuch a teletype.


7714


Court So. 1

16 JCay 4 7-A-1&-4-ZHM— Mel cy (Sarltr)


q, I want to sneak briefly nov with you . bout the euthanasia of
children, the Reich Connlttee far Research on severe hereditary diecnscs.
Yen testified here that you had nothing whatever to do vith that, is
that correct7

A. I aoy correct cyself. I said thet I vas not in charge, I
had soacthing to do vith it and I talked about that at great length,
during ny examination, 'lease don't ni sunderstand ae. I don't vant
;-cu to understand I had nothing to do vith it.

Q, What ves your activity in this?

A. I hid to eutr.it to Keichslcitcr Bouhlcr thoso individual flloo
which had bean completed by Linden's office regarding individual exoor-
tited enses which had to be decided. In a fev cases I dealt vith that
personally and in other cases aocociotes of nino did that work. In
the sa.ie vay I sutalttod these files or.co or twice to Brmdt ncrsonally.
Sorully they were sent to hin because ho vron't present.

q. Did I understand you correctly that you testified hire that
in the erso of euthanasia of children the oreviouc consent of the
Barents and relatives wpo reouired?

A. Yeo. I always maintained that. I said that in euthanasia of
children, contrary to tho sut hens sin of the insane, the consent of tho
crrents vat already obtained.

q. She consent for whet, tho concent for tho giving of nercy
death, or the consent to tho transfer in tfco tnet.itut.ion r>f ha SeieJ
coa-.ittco?


7715


l6 :'V 1 -7-A-53 -C O-l-ifcJ o han (r anler )
- rt Kc. 1


... I’?, the consent that all possible othedsof treatoent bo nsod on
- ±2 child , even in vicr of the danger that tho child nay die in that

©Kssoctiou.

Q, in ether trrda, thoir parents had to give their consent that Suth-
-jaaif- -ruld bo administered to tiw child; is that vhat yourmnt to say,
far asl an informed, this nssnot arrays done ir. this particular
few. A nuabor of pironts na c direct rjpUcaticn^ thoy 3 aid ro ask that
this ciiild bo rolievod.

• •

just sncccr.t, I understand that, but I cb rant to knw; That hoppenod
ir. the ease rrhero the p&ront did not csk for n ncrcy doath af tho
cMl'l; t.t ro thoy inf'ruedthoy had to ivo thoir consont that tho child
ray ho artainintorod a corey doath?

It r as put to then that thoy give t oir consent for a norcy doath
boing ; ranted to tho child and onco tho;- had given that consont tho
child res transferred to a Role ho Comittoo Instituto by tho treating
physician,

. This Euthanasia of children ras top socrot; vac it not?

I no longorknor that, 1 dcn*t boliovo it,,
q. Una it official In Oorrary aw:’, ov-rybody could knew ab ut it and
trs infornod about it; dc you romemfc r tho vitae os Pfannuiollor tosti-
ryird iv.ro ho never InTomod tao .jaror.ts sit T-a3a top socrot iiattor,

... execution of Euthanasia ltoolf vuneortdnly carried out 3i.

••o'-.rot, r,ut certainly I -xi not inf or. sod .bout that in dot'll.

he *ro taent of children, I an only rn-.-fcinc ab ut n'tildron.

... I an only spoiling ab-ut c'ildren, yoc,

. tear soul1 it bo possible If it ;• secret that every officTOl

-?ctor ir* Gonniy, who had to roport theca eases, could give t a
iV’ron : s address and he vnsr.ot supposed to knewab ut it,

•• I hog your pardon, cv.ry person who had to ’cal vr.th tho secrot
-r 13 f c urso inforrvrd ot it, tiwfc allays includos the respective
* 'Ins .••hys* clan or the h.fti * d c'inic.

7716


1- :-V li 7 ^V-Sir- 2 Ct- 2 -ii«jhan(Ha 2 lor)
Court Ho. i


nr?* oxinatoly ir. 19li0 of tho 3cxvwn doctors know; Is
that right?

-*. -'mt I cannot Judge, I cannot say Ivstr mry there were.

I --ill road n-w fron your document b-ok, Suppi caon t 3 , dociucnt
? 2 , Crack exhibit Ii3 cn page 2 3 oo* :ploaont 3. Your Honors, tho
last scntcncos

"It is the business-f tho .apical officers to infena tho cronts ;f
too ohild in question, of tho treatment available in tho a tud
Institute or dopartac-.t chosen and to induco thon torond in thoir
c!dld uoronornptly, ifaro tho parent* shouM bo told, that in tho caso
'C individual clisoasos, tho re is a possibility of a-hioving certain
soccoss with treatment evon in cases which hitherto hid t; bo rognrdo,,
as hopoloss."

I havo rocoivod tho inprossienfi* r. rhat 1 a:* reading horo fron
your om doeunont that tho official doctors really had tho task to
ek tho paronts to give thoir censont to a :x>rcy doath of tho child.

... ^ cannot toll ou anyuoro than I lr..o alr< dy said, ovon during
interrogations, nanoly that that order had been given that tho
noor.t of the parent* had to bo obtaLnod , ovon if in one or tho
ithor caso tliat "bald havo to bo dono in a soorrrhat camouflaged fom.
Lu principle, the p rents -roro to to info rood that it wild bo hotter
if tho child woro put to sloop.

• . 3c, I would liko to read fron pago 21 of your Doeunont book.
rhis«i 3 your dacunor.t 51, your exhibit 12, on pago 21 of Supplouont 2:
vi'-tuo f the arrmng onts.uado by tho koich tie

■* care will bo taken rf tho cl did !>:ro and everything p-odblo in
' -a '.ray of nedorr. therapy will bo carried out."

— 1 You read out cf this scntcnco tl'.at tho ~cronts wore inforcaad that
’ -• children should bo adninistcrod a noroy oath?

••• I oartairly cannot dcduco that free t i3 3or:tcnco, 'out you nust
connection have thn basic doc roe dated 1*3 August 1939 and ir.


7717


:--rt Ha. i


.addition tho discussions and the conversations with their parents had
with tho doctors that were treating the child.

In tho dccuror.t which I have just road, it is exactly s to tod rrhat
the doctor isspposed to toll the parents. All right, let us go on,

You reactor that Dr» Pfannaiollor testified hero about tho treatment
-- "uthanasia of a child was initiated, ho invited the parents and
rclativos tc '/is it tho child; do you rcuonb-r that?

A. ::os. Dr, Pfnrraiollor said that.

C. Jfeno of tho parents or rolctivos ov-r told that thoy thonsolvos
•-avo thoir consont to give tho child tho prlvUogo of a norcy
•loath; othonrlflo ho xuld not havo stated hero that it was a top socrot
natter and ho would novor havo spoAon to tho parents about it.

A. ..ell, thcro is nothing I can say about that, I really don't know,
1. I r uld llko to put to you again docunoat Ko. 825, this is
porsocutior. oxhibit 358, it is in docunont book 11a, part 2, pago 219 .
Your Honor, tiiia is a • Docunont which vo havo boon spool: ing about
at groat length yostorday afternoon. You spoke yoatcrelay ab ut it.

A. I havo net rocoivod tho Dociu»nt.

•• ^ ou testifiod yo3tercfcy about tills doeunont in groat length and
told ua why quostionnairc3woro filled out about pcoplo who roro not of
Corum nationality or not of Gornan or Goman related blood and for
tliis sinplo reason theso pooplo roro not r.d.iinistorcd a ccrcy doath;
is that right?

A. You, that is true,

G. ‘bo Jews could not got thoso rivilogcc bocaso thoy woro not
considered Gomans and also to foreigners tho art ~riration of tho
ruohror did not apply; is that right?

A. Yes.

V.'ill you-ivo no now your infamation why under nunbor thrco,
quostionndres had to bo filled out for all interned crlninally insane
P-rsons uliithout the question of whothcr thoy woro able to work or


7718


suffering fron a disease; just all of then?

I don't knew,

You displayed considerable 'rncwlcdyc yosterday about this
decuna-t; can't you inf am us why that wradcnc?

A. Thsao aro psychological condi tiorswhich I c-uld not possibly
ovaluato. Regarding the ability to’erk, I also said that I could not
judge to rhat oxtont tho ability to work constitutes a source of
psychological knowledge, end tho srrx: is true of crininality,

4, '-let is absolutely rijjxt, tut the people under nud>or tlirco
had also to have the quest! onna.ire3f ill od out, wtath-r thoy could
rcrU or net. You say hero bofero "rrunbor three, or aro intornod as
crininally insane pooplo," and yen ;-ourself yestcrdiy testified to tho
effoct that it all nokos a difference b -trccr. point ano and tho ether
three,

... I did not sy that,

C. I think so.

A. I:: aid very clearly that oithor thoso mild bo considered
Tho aro contained in paragraph ono, or thoso of pTfwyaph taro, or
paragraph threo, or paragraph four! ~hr.t is that I said.

.. Can you toll no then, why it : ."as accessary to fill out qicstionn-
■iros on all poorlc who woro interred as crininally insano x-rsans,
accrrding to port threo of the d-cuncnt.

Possibly because crirdnallty also royrcsont3 a special poss¬
ibility f r the poyshiatrlst to ju _o tho progress f tho illJioso.

.rs aally I car not ovaluato that.

\, -id that rolato to all other as — namely all insano n -ns,
'ho privilege -»f norcy death that tho subjects roro given?

A. "o, had that beer, tho caso a directive vruId have had to be
issued to the exports tc tho of feet that every insano pationt, i radios a
ease this paragraph -~s affimed, would havo to be released f--r Euthin-
sia, I , h■T'ovor, never heard of any such directives given to tho


16 :>/ U7-^-Sr-20- S-j&chanfcanlar)
Court No, 1


exports#

. leu testified this eraing th't ou had no kncrlodgo about
I&tbanasir. carried cut in Poland tfton caiesti ned by the Tribunal ; is
that oerroct?

No, what I said Tras that I ’axrrof no Euthanasia institutions
in Poland.

Q. Do you know of the canylng out of Euthanasia In PaLaixi?

A. I Imcrmotliing of tho oxco -tion of Euthanasia ir. Poland,

Did you over concern yourself with tho transfer of Polish insano
pooplo?

A, Ho.

•. Did you over issuo tho funiafar cuoh transfors.

A. I cortainly did not®

Q. Did you ovor nako arronconoatofor tho transfer f ren tho Roich
coahior or Roich Treasury?

A, In trinelplo I had to apply for funds to bo given to no fra tho
koich Troaoury for Euthanasia b. order of Bouhlor, but I really
cannot roaenber tho do tails cf t*iio.

< 1 . 'I CO asking you entirely about tho transfer of insano pooplo fron
Poland, not in Gomiry or in 3nst Psussia?

A, I cannot rcrionbor that.


7720


16 ::-.v-.i-S33-21-1-3 3rd (ite. 1-: r )

C urt K . 1.


Q. I want t- -ut t y u d cur.nt 2906 which will.ho Prosocuti^n'a
exhibit *199 f-r identification. I w uld like f-r vui rood — tr
rood to y u tho first persoraph -.-f this letter*

"Th . s* -onll-jd Spools 1 Detaohnent LaBO, which has boon put ur.d.r
-y o Ti?"nd f r spociel tasks, wns ardorod t S- ldau in East Frussis
fr n 21 Kay t~ 6 June 1940, nee rdin,; t the ograonent nado with the
olch llnin Socuritv Office (BSE/.) end durlar that tine evacuated
1,568 potionts fr = tho Scl^au transit car-p."

O- v u h:w any roc<-ll«.oti ns n w?

Q. \vt that tiso I nrnnxd with SS Gru; ponfuohror Rodioss that

an an unt f :&!. 10 . - w uld h- vo t b raid f ■ r tho ovnountl n f onoh

pstiont. Tharu w uld, theref re, b .• a sun f H!'. 15,580 tr bu paid
into tho nee vnt f tho SS Vain S-ct r Trrt! ., see rdin; t the aj-r-io-
rwnt."

Id nt want t r*nd nnv furth.r. D. y u rvradnbt r nnythin,; at ut
this m>-w»y?

... ?:•, I rosonbar n thin,- nt nil.

Q. I w uld liko t .ut t- v u th r. * cun'nt V . 2909, which will

bo rr-sucuti n's exhibit »*. . 500 f r ldontif ienti- n. This is c lottor

n ic rn.1 with th- sin. subject. It is t SS Grun nfuohrcr "< Iff.

"Enolosod I oufcrit t- y u n dorrnl r SS Orvjr<mfViohror K ;;c,
ad<*russad t tho hi.-her SS nnd j lico lcodor northeast, SS Gruppan-
fbnhrer Sp rronb.r;, wh h'o f rwr.r-cd it t m fr ro;ly.

"The lottor vf SS Gruj per.fu.hr.-r Y ; ;o donls with the cvnouati n
f 1,558 Cental instit-iti n innate* ~f tho provincial Snstituti ns f
Sast Prussia. T tfcor * nust bu nddad, t -v Jen il.i e, nb ut 260 t
300 insrn-i jors ns (? les) fr n th jron f Zich n.au, iftioh has Von
nnn--xod t< East Prussia."

D jr u rertnb r anythin; sb ut that n w?

• •». Nt, in n way nt all.

;. Pl-tsc 1 Jc at th. s.c n! t last ;ar? TQ,h n j.a > —

1 ur ?- r. r, this is wr ait sh ul! be ;e ;o 2, I an s rry.


773 .


K y-~-G3S-21-2-3csrd r)

c art ¥-. 1 .


"Thj adtoneo which Criniml C rrifsar Lan-o had rocoived fr -a the
I-.sject r f the Security r lice and the SD, SS Ob- rfuohrer Hatch was
: Yen fT - - tremnent funds, t, ny knwlod-o. By virtue of this fact
1 r.j the snnttdr Bisuvd f r r.o thfr-psyeet f « -vetch nssi-ramt*"

Cn tho left si-!o f the psra*raph is a handwritten n-te, « ur
nwoi v» u rononhar that?

... Oh, it is r. t here*

Q. I think it Is there, '.'ill y- hand hin this.

(.. * ounent was tended * tho witness)

That is n t ny ntw.

Q. I did n t say v u wr-to it, tut It is y ur nnc. ! did n t say
y-u wr to it.

... Id n't boliove ttet is r.y now.

Q. D y-u renenter tte e:scj y u r ’ n’t y u?

... I alr« • *y Mid J hr. w n thin - at all nb ut ’Ms m tter.

Q. .’ill Y ur II n r . --rr.it r.-. t ;ut an thor d cua.-nt t tho witness.
3 . I jut tr- y. u then, •* eurwnt 2*11, which will bo Exhibit 501 f r
Hontlfieatl n.

or.. rrtOHoC"!-toy I interrupt f r ninuto. I conn t s tho
r.sno Brack c ntainod in any f th. 6» !« ^joints which have batn sub-
-itto-1 t wjb, ..11 I sow w.s the t»a> f Dr. .? sah.

Q. Di' 1 y \i over hn*n> rny tulojh ne c nv-rs ti r.n irtth 33 Gruppon-
fi hrer ~ Iff n this mttorT

... Id n t te w th t.

Q. Y u t Id Re just □ w y u o uld n t roiunb.r tho c.-tw. C .n yu
•’“lude th-1 fret th-.t y u r ’c arnn^onentr. f r the transfer f those
i£0 r 300 F les? ♦

«. I can s iv n nir. at ut th t, bonus I a t roc nb--r the
ctlre nffeir in *.ny way.

*. But y u conn t oxcludo it, c- n y ut
“.’hot <i y u r.-' t. I conn * exclude it?

v That y v ndanmebd the plats f r this pig so, c n y uS . u
i* that ;• u c Id n t ror.rr-.t-:r. C-n y u ixclu ' . t3 . f-.ct that y u

7722


16 - / *.SS-21-3-3;rrd (Berrdor)

C'urt I.


ot? r hod anything t d with this ease?

A. los, I w ulf* oxcludo the -ssibility.

'<• In spite f tho fact yur ipw apponrs n tw rf those three
i cuR-nts?

rut, I fcr. v nothin - ef then.

C mob dy <’hvi usly £ t the rvnjv f- c y u?

I mat road the i! cunont and sea whether ;r.y r' ; t any - noy.

I cannft rcrx’nbor anything.

Q. Is it n t bvi us fr » this r. to -- d cwunt 2909, which was
sent t Obordruyponfuohror Trlff that he received th letter savin,- y u
f nr Hod this rs-noy, nr.d that he sp.'kc ever th^ tclop-h no, or no f
hi a r«erlo in his ffico gfako t-yu vor th« tcloph r.o ob.ut this
matter. Is it n t hvi ua fr r. that-' tw > d- currents?

••• ” Iff e uld r. t -ive r-3 any rdor t .iv- a< nay t any no r
f r nay pur so.

Q. I -’id n t si- ho r>7o tho rdor, tut h>- ashed y u f r it, r.nd
it ras uao'l in the Suthannsla business?

«• That n.'ttor is cntiroly strin-e. I thi-fc it is quite in; salblu
thot even no ; fonni,; hod be n iron by F uhler f r that ;urj su. I on
e nplotoly oxeludir. thrt ; ssibility.

Q. X w d y u then ox,all in those tw pencil r. tos n 2909, 3rack;
•r.J 2911.

I can read thus* tw> r. tes in’ it is ; ssiblu tint it doos say
3 r ck, hut I c»m t ox;lain than.

O'. FCCF7..LD* If 1 ur IT a rs, rnt t idj urn, I h v n forth>r
*’“unati ns t th witness r. this subject.

0.7. FLT?" ; IKG (F.r tho daf n ant *.ru wtky)i r. President, I shelly
r t c'll th. ■ witness Schnrlnu, but 7 shall subnit an nffi->vit bv hin.

I :«t no qy sti n, !!r. President.

Th Triburr! n Thursday, last week, whon Hi cuss in,- the f m .f
1 •'s f th. nriur.?r.t had pr vidod th*t a 'iscussi n w rid t ko place
* I oak wfcet!wr thrt is t t- lac - Say; if n t, whan

3 "*h e discussl.n will * kv ..lace?

7723


16 I'-y 47 Cress

C5urt No. L

'H. HARDY: Your Heners, I dj-.'t kiu* * tat ttitudo the Tribunal
h-.s t-ken on this but this proposition has slipped ay aind for day
or two due to other setters nd if oossibL. to rrrance tha meeting on
Monday or Tuesday it would racet with th_ approval of Prosecution.

I do not rcoaxbcr that the n oting was fixed for today* He mid
tentatively l-.nt Pridry we would ..tv- the coating this Friday and if
convenient to tho Tribunal we cculd sect tlx first of the wools and
discuss it core -xtenrively.

TE FHSSri’./.T: That " ult be better. Counsel will consult
sith the Tribun J. ad we will discuss that in detail.

Tho Tribunal ill n w bo in recess until V:30 lionlsy morning.


Court 1 'I* 7

May 1S-M-1-1-HB-F oster-Raanler.


Official Transcript of the American Military
Tribunal in the matter of the United States
Of America, against Krrl Sran&t, ot el,
defendants, sitting at Nurnberg, Gernany, on
1: Hay, 15-17, 0930, Justice Seale presiding.

THE MaRSHaL: Persons In the court room will ^lerse
find their seats.

The Honorable, the Jud es of Military Tribunal 1.
Military Tribunal 1 is not lr. ease Ion. God save the
United States of *murlca and this nonorrble Tribunal.

There will be order in the courtroom.

THE PRESIDENT: Mr. Aarshal, you . aoertaln if the
defendants ore all present In court.

T.-S MhR 6H«LL: May it please /our nonor, all the
defendants are present In tr.e c urt with the exco don of
she Dafendor.t Gebhardt who Is 'bsent due to Illness.

THE PRESIDENT: The oecrotary-General will note for
the record the presence of ell the defendants In court
save the Defendant Gebhardt who will be eyoueod on r.ouount
of illness, pursuant to a certificate from Dr. Martin tho
via n surgeon. The Secretary will file the certificate
f-.r the record.

Counsel aay proceed.

VIKTOR BRaCK - Resumed
CROSS EXAMINATION (Continued)


3*i DR. -OCHTaLD:


xA .'lAay.'i^slease the Tribunal. Herr 3rnch, I hrve a

Xv/ * \

• /vg.e tlona fot-vou about your affidavit, I am referring

%'■ ' .\

f - Dr cument No -*25. 1 Prose cut ion Exhibit 150, on pa^o 1C
of D-cuc nt jSooh 1 -I> part 1 . Xou signed tr.ls affidavit,
did jji not? j

is r.ot before me t. u-ji.


Go art 1

Kay 19-.*4-l-2--U}-Fostfcr-Haaiiler.

v.. This Is the affidavit you s~oke about several times
I on't think It Is necessary tfart uu fa ve it before you,

I c.c r.ot want to go into the details of the document itself
Dll s me body compel you to- sign this af:idrvlt?

A. Compel is certainly not the right expression. I
felt innerly obliged to sign the statement without being
conscious at that time that many of the things oontain3d
therein were either incorrect or incomplete. This only
ontsrc . my mind l^ter wr.en, or. th t 1 6ls of the documents,

I was able to scertcln thet many of the things were not
represented corroa ondlr.g to the f ct3.

But nocody told you you would so punished or you
would have some dlsndvantogoa If yo- would not sign it,
la tilpt correct?

a. Thero was no threat ox reosed towards mo.

... Is It not true that you were leraltted to mnko
changes In tno wcrdln. and In every other raoovct In the
affidavit?

A. I vr»o permitted to make changes. It w :e ointod
ut repeatedly, however, that the word I had suggested v.r.o
difficult to transit e and I was therefor a6ked to admit
r.nothur expression with which I br.clcolly did n & roo, .-*ut
the' convinced mo.

Is It furtner not true that you made cnan c os in
the affidavit, that changes were made on your suggestion
r.nd on the basis of your information?

a. Yes, e few changes were made.

4. >»nd wfa't abo-t the chert, you signed this chart.
Hov aid It ceme about? How was the chart made?

A. I hrive already described ta-t. I think a female
-raftsman drew uo this chart In my presence. I nel.-ed
her as far os * could give any in-iortione. I don't know


77d6


Court 1

Hay 19-H-l-S---iD-Foster-Rcm _ler.

Co what extent I emphasized at chat time that any such chart
~-'d not existed before, and thu>t c..le was a conn let ly new
construction of that organization. The sketch which I drew

did in no way enewer tr.e requirements.

■*. But you drew uo a draft, aldn't you?

a. Yes, I made ar. r-.ttea^t to draw It up cut I did
not succeed.

*. Do you remember the draft well?

H. You mean the one I 6lgneu?

The draft you made yourself In the prison, not In
he lnter\*ogatlon room.

a. fco, I don't remember It. It was incomplete and
insufficient.

... Do you remember whether tnere was a bcslo difference
between the draft ana the enurt as .to the position of
Bouhler end Brandt?

a. I really can't tell you that.

■ i . All right, .'e have tne draft and I wont the right
Co ut to you this document KO 2758 wnloh will be Proeocu- *
Cl n exhibit 502 for Identifiertlon, your Honor.

(Document nenaed to the witness.)

«J. Is tills the draft?

a. Yes.

DE. HOCHULD: If your Honor please, ~ay the record
s .w t.mc the witness acknowledged this draft as t ie draft
he urdo In the prison.

THE PRESIDENT: The record will show tnat the witness *

- -n examination of Prosecuti r. Exhibit for Identification
r -Z s ated that this was a copy of the dreft which r.e ma.de
vhlle in the *rison.

DE. HCCH *hLD:

how I want to discuss witu. '-o- tne sterilization


7727


Court 1

;4ay 13-H-l—*-HD-Foster-fianmler.


of the Jews. You testified here, in a sense, that ; vu were
u osed to the nrogroa of extersin ting the Jove and, there-
- re, together with your collaborators, conceived and for¬
warded Ians for a less drast-to and ruthless solution of
Che Jewish proclea, is that correct?

A. Yes.

Who was the collaborator or the foraer collaborator
f vours who first told you that the plan of exterminating
the Jews was cunoelvj«?

a. That, I think was Dr. Hewelnann.


7723


19 loy (1st. Ejclor)

Ocurt I

5 » -od who were We coll-oorators wits »&co you uado this plan
to to El—.ler tea surest Ion of sterilization?

a. I can't Give you the nscos in detail sow. at say rc.to Dr.
Serein ana p.a-ticipated here. -

q. Did -slanJccaourg participate ir. this plan -Bout Ucdcsasccr, end
so f orthT

a. Yes, ho certainly did participate, but the pecplo nost iato-
restod in this plan were exports «-ich h_d nothin; to do with tho
Chancellory of the Fuehrer, for inst..uc© the witnoss Lo^ut ions rat
Rad anchor, -for whoa I bad asked a* a “itnoss end there were rleo a
nasbor of other age&cloa who could inform us about the circuastancos
inrolvod.

q. but Blunlconburg collaborated, did hot

a. I boliovo, yos.

q. jh I uUt Jeon in as«ual &6 that you wanted to prevent ortcr^-
nlnntion of tho Jowo, as you -nd your collaborators considorod thin to
o a crino?

a. So, that is wh .t I test if 1 ed.

l>id you co..aider tho axtorcinution of tho Jews a criaot

a. Yes, wo considered it a crlJiO. wo did not considor it
worthy of tho Oon.ua pooplo. bo eonsidorod It to ou lrro*ponslblo
towards history, ifcat, I think, is tno oppression I used.

q. You and your collaborators wore of tula opinion?

a. yes, wo wore of this opinion.

q. Ycu nudo tho first plans, for the rosottlaoont of tho Jews in
n f..r away country, for ox-jplc in kadasaccar, is th„t corroct?

a. Yts, th .t is truo.

q. *n& vhor. these plans wore not accepted you approached Eiuulor
with tae su. ;estion to storilizo the Jews, but in reality you did not
vent tho Jews to bo storilizod. You did th t Just in order to prevent
ro brutal ne..sure3 free, the port of Hi—ilor or Hitler, did you not?


7729


19 2 - 2 -haloy ( 1 st. &Jilor)

C art I


u. *h-t d'-cc not exactly correspond to the facts, out according
to ito sense It docs correspond to what I intended.

Is it not true that in 1941 when you forwarded your report
to Hi.-siler, — I as referring to Docineat 203, Hxhibit 161, -Ocuxiont
Book 6 , on page 35 to 37 of the Docccent Book 6 , is it not truo that
it ves then a cutter of cccu.:n knowledge th..t it was very well poseiblo
to sterilize people with X-rays, is it not?

I cannot judge th„t, it w..e cy personal point of view that
it wns not possible.

q. 1 .oll, did you not oxnect th..t hi.~lor would b.vc chcokod tho
rocord with u specialist and would huvo c .sily f und that tho uattors
you sug ostod wore not effectod; if you wore cf tno opinion you could
.ot sterilize people with X-r.y?

a. Ho, 1 didn't cxD<xt th.t, occ also I boliovod to know tho c na¬
tality of Hiu.lcr suff lclontly to realise that ho w-.uld positively
roa6t to uny suggestions which fitted into his plans.

Did you not expect that cv«,ry dootor who would hero boon char¬
ged bj- Hiculor with tho carrying out cf sterilization in this au&’Ostod
nor w uld h.vo reportod to Hinder ..t sterilisation in such a vcy
would bu possible?

^ Ei .t is what I f oarod in t*:o course of tico, but I heated that
until tho ..aicnt when these uuttors cristullzod so uuch tino would
havo passed that tho war hud ca.o to on cad.

'I. Did you testify hero _ccording to docunent 205, - tills is
Prosecution Bxr.ioit 163, Document 6 , pugo 39, this la tho second
retort to Kinder ia 19-:2, that you did not writo this lottorT

a. I c-n.iot evon confixti it now with any auount of cort.-lnly
whothor I wrote tais letter .jrsclf 'r whether so..ob:dy else foxtail .-.tod it.

h. But I prosu.o th-t you rc_d t:.is lctoor ruthor c.rofully, did
you not, before you signod it?

a. I really c_nnot s_y tc-t -fter so cucn ti-.c has closed. I

7730


19 Hal 07 (Iat. 3^1 or)

Court I

really don’t jc:cw.

V. Eow nosy porsonal lot tors did you writo duria, the yoar to
aiisiler?

a. Siore Is nothing I Can *oy about that. *t any r..to thcro
oust hnvo boon very few.

0 ^ I dc proiicc th-t if you sent cno of those few lottoro to your
hifihoot SS C an la n der ytu read then rather carefully, did you net?

a. Elat doponds entirely on tao situ ;tlon. It depends when such
a lottor is put oof ore you for stature. I can no longer toll you that.

0 ,. nut the topics of tho letter wore of a quito inport cat nature,
woro they not, so I do oxpoct y-u rather carefully road tho thing
whether it fittod into the pi m you -ado?

a. I h..vo alro-dy tostifiod th.,t I consider the possibility that
this lottor was seat on to 1.0 to the front for hy si(,-n .turo. If it
has arrived wi.on I tupnonod to bo in souo crlticul situation it is
quito JonsibU th.t I didn't read it too carefully, but Just si,;nod
it ia ardor to got rid of It. after so uuch ti-o I c-n TOolly ivo you
oo information on ta..t.

0.. You hoard horo th*. testimony of tho vitnossos Lovy end -ierlittky?

A. Yos.

Q, *ro you still, of tor hoarin, this testimony, of tho opinion
th..t your suggestions woro uado for tho Oenofit of tho JouoT

O. at any rate it ia uy opinion that theso su ootions dol.-yod
this action considerably and thereoy preventod such ovil boiag ccusod*
during my dlroct-oxamination I already pointed out that the first report
which was not in itself suo.it tod here, but of w..ich wo had the cover¬
ing lottor, v_j only uudo about an year and a half later, so that tjje
dody in quite OjvI.us and oasily recognisable. I don't knot* whether I
raicdbor correctly, out I oulievc ta_t the witness -serlitzky stated th..t
•ho sterilization experiment on aim only took place in tho ; o:T 19- 3.

I hand you now this second letter of Slimier iuid would nek


7731


19 Jicj»4i-dP-i>-4-itulQy (Iat. a.-.lor)

Court I

;'cv. a fov questions in connection with it; will you look at tho soccnd
--~ r re & tl-i« latter; this is Docuacat 205, Tour Honors, Prosocution
Dccuaoat 163, Document Hook 6 , p^-e 39, and in tho second par.-, r ph it
st tes: *^.onfc 10 uillicas of Jews in Hiropo „ro, I fi..urc, nt l-.-xt
2-3-uillions of tea and waion, who are fit for work.* It ooaas to uo
ycur plan w uld havu only worked for these 2 or 3 aillioa; whr.t would
h..vc ha-ponod to tka other ? or 8 aillioa; you ora spoafcl:*; only in
t:.is plan of organisation of tho pooplo w.. are a-lc to work, Shat did
you Object wruld hu-npoa to the 7 or 6 aillioa wao were not nolo touorkl
I bxp octcd tno very s.,.e tain.; to heppoa to thou as to tho two
or throe aillioa. Ir. ccnnoctioa with »*jt I h_vo already tcotifiod
during; uy direct ox-i.in_ticn, to the offoct that in tho ;onr 19-J2 tho
war possibilities frou ry point of view woro not b_d at ull and th.-.t
uo actually counted on a quick and to tho war, sinco wo continuod to
•/v.ncc in Ruseiu. If I could orirv; .i-out a cortain dole;' in this
action I hoped th-t in conditions of penco uo could, undor cirouaotnn-
coo, carry throu,* tho Kudw oscnr plea, tfcieh hod previously boon ro-
Joctod.

%• but I do bco tr.o doaly only —

Poi'nnpn you cux. advise no, - but I do seo tho dolay only with ro;ard
to tho pooplt you attu.pt vd to oe storilixod. I do not boo tho dOaly
fer tho 7 or 8 uillion wno woro not nolo to work and thoraforo would
not bo Btorilixod, io tk..t correct?

"• HO, it cortainly is not corroct. Until one c-n solcct poqplo
U1 ° aro fit to work, until the ontlro organisation is sot w>, liontho and
h;ntho ust nocossartly elapse.


7732


Court »:o. 1

19 ^ay 47-*-3-l-ATD-l£eehan (hamler)


Q. You speak in the sane- document about the people whom you placed
at the disposal of Globocnick. has Wirt among the people you placed at
the disposal of Globocnick? I mean the director of the Brandenburg
euthanasia station.

A. Ho, ho was not the director of the euthanasia station. He waa
the official, the registry official.

Q. I mean this Tiirt, who was active in Brandenburg.

A. He certainly was not among them, because after the stop of the
action in 1941 nany releases wore ordered by Bouhler and it becano super¬
fluous, if I nay call it that way, to maintain the registry offices, and
also other offices became superfluous. For instance, wo no longer needed
trail,cd nursoa; therefore, a groat number of eaployeos of the euthanasia
organization were either dismissed or insofar as they wore put at our
disposal only thoy woro sent back to their old officos.

Q. Right, but did you say that Wirth was acong then or not; Wirt?

A. I assume with certainty that ITirth cannot have boen among than
because 7,1 rth was a police officer and os such was sent back and put at
the disposal of his superior agency in August or Septaobor 1941.

Q. What about Schumann? He was the chief doctor in a euthanasia
station, wae he not?

A. Yes, Schumann was the head of the euthanasia station. 1 saw
him for tho last time on the occasion when wo tried to roscue the
wounded in the hintor 1941-42.

Q. ’..as Schumann among the doctors you put at the disposal of
Himmler for tho examination in the concentration camps?

A. I put no physicians at the disposal of Himmler for the purpose
of the extermination of Jews.

Q. No, I said examinations in the concentration camps. We men¬
tioned this in your interrogation and you spoke of it in your direct
lamination and also with mo on Friday. This examination which was

carriid out on orders from Hinder in different concentration camps.

Did ycu not say that


7733


19 Jfey ii7—!7D-3—2—Maehan (Int. Easier)

Court No, 1

73 U wtxxt to T-i; and asked that certain doctors be rut at the disposal of
KLanlor and that aaon? thee was Schaannn slcnp with other doctors for
the examinations in concentration cacpa?

A I have already said that I transmitted this request of Hinder
to th- T-ii, I farther said that-I had no idea who on the part of T-i* was

er.trustod with the radical examinations.

• *

Q Alright, I wjullike to put to you Doconent Ho, 3010,
Prosecution Exhibit 503 for identification, Ycur Honors. This is an
affidavit of Dr. Oormss, who was also in the Euthanasia pro-ram ns
you told us Friday, I nn roa'irr from para-raph two*

"In the bo rinnin- of activities in the Euthanasia pro L ’ran I
. '.s infornei that Professor Karl Pran’t was tho chief ar.d Viktor Brack
the executive head of Euthanasia. I was oonvincod that Brandt was the
lea in - spirit and Brack tho operator of tho so-callod Euthanasia.

"In Juno 19hl I was orclorod to accompany Dr. Schumann on nn
official trip to tho concentration oanp Buchoraral 1. Tho purposo of this
trip ms to acquaint mo \*ith tho assi'Tiaont of concentration conp
imates for Euthanasia institutions. This was rgr only visit to any
corcor.tration camps. Dr. Schumann was shown approximately 100 concen¬
tration camp inmates by tho can? physician in charje an questionnaires
filled out. Th.y woro not noroly insane persons. According to iry
boat knowle-Jro and belief our ono day visit In tho concentration camp
Buchenwald was male at Bran It* 3 order issued by Brack.

Police Captain Vfirth, whoa I knew personally and who was a bd.nl-
strutivo director In several Euthanasia institutions, told no late in
-irnor 19U1 that ho ted boon transferred by tho ’foundation T n ar.l I put
to yo'j that wastto four/kttion for Euthanasia oaro.... n to a Euthanasia
lifc'itute in tho Lublin aroa."

Tin do not kr/wr anythin; about that?

A So, I knew nothing about that, ror do I know th t I had sunt


..“h rnjj. to tho Bueh .ramld 'xowiontrvtiun »y«p.


i? toy I7-:-itD-3-3-toehan (Inti Realer)

Court No. 1


q Is the narw ,r or~en faiiliar to you, o-n?

A Tq3.

Q You know .rho ho is, will you toll the Tribuml who :fer*on is?

A Daring the trial hjro tho tostinony of Morgan was sherm to
x by ry defense counsel end for that reason I know that Morgen was a
feraar SS ^uigo and testified bofore tho International !tLlitary Tribunal.

Q As a defense witness for tho SSj iid he not?

A I don't know that.

Q He was a defense witness for tho SS organisation and I would
liko to road to you parts of his testinory here. This is Document Ho.

2611:, Prosecution Exhibit $Ch for identification. Your Honors.

D3. SSRVATHSl (Counsol for tho dofenJ&nt Karl Brandt) «r.

9

Prosidont, in oonnootton with tho Docunont No. 3010, I roa.rvo tho'
ri:ht to call the witness Gorgass to tfw stan'. in order to examine hin
in cross-oxanination. I shall aako a written application to that offoct.
This is again ona of th: documents wheroin is stated by tho witness that
it was undo dear to hin that Professor Brandt played a oor-si datable
rolo in that progra*. I should liko to at lsast havo ono of tho witnesses
hero in orior to have hin toll us Ju3t exactly what was dono horo and
what was nado cl oar to hin. It is ny depression that a certain mount
cf propa -andA was made in connoction with tho nano of Dr. Xari Brandt
after ho had with trswr. froa tho Euthanasia pro -ran for a Ion-: time. That
is tho reason "hy I want this witness to tostify hero and I shall nako
a written application to that offcot.

TtE PRESIDENT! If tho counsel for the lofonlant Karl Brandt
will filo M3 application it will bo promptly acted upon by tho
Tribunal.

BY CAPTAIN HXJHCAlDl

3 Ian reading frea the last answer on pa-o two, Tour Honors.

■Hhen "irfch took over tho oxtorsdmtion of the Jews, ho was alrca iy
-i specialist in .asa destruction of hurr.n beings He had previously
-•uric ' out the task of rs*»vir. - the incurably insane. On bohalf of the


19 :ay 17—?^JB-3-W•:achan (Inti Raalor)

Court !io. 1

Fuehrer himself, through the Chancellory of the Fuehrer.." and the
Chancellory of the Fuehrer was 9ouhler*s officoj wa3 it not?

"....«t the he-;inr.lir; of the war he had set up a detail probably
fron a. or.ts an J spies of tho criminal police, "irth doscribod how ho
wont about carryin- out this assignment. Ho roceived no aid, no
instructions, but had to Jo it all by himself. Ha was dvon an insti¬
tution in Brandenburg. There he undertook his experiments. After nuch
consideration and nary individual expordnonts, he oamo to his later
system, and then this systeta was used on a laryo scalo.

"A oorioission of loctors previously investigated tho filos, and
thoso insano who wore consi' , .orod to be incurablo woro put or. a separate
Hat. Thon tho institution ono lay was told to send thoso patior.ta to
another institution. Prcn this institution, tho pationt was tran3forre 1
a tin, efton aoro than onco. Finally ho came to "lrth's institution,
"hero ho was killod by pas an i crccntod.

"This, system which dQcoivol tho institutions and aado them
unknewinc accomplices, this system that ho worked out with vory few
assistants for boin a bio to oxtordnnto lar.o numbers of people, this
sy.tm was now enployod with a f<w» inprovceonts in tho extermination of
Jons. He wa3 also Avon tho n33i'mont by the Fuehrer's Chancellory to
exterminate the Jews,"

Quostion by tho lofonso counsel: "The stctonor.ts which ’irth nn lo
oust havo surpassed hunan ine Anation, Did you bellovo ’firth?

"Answer: .*t first it soasod completely fantastic to no, but in
\ublin I tan one of his comps. It was a c-vap in which I found part of
tho property of his victims. Ftcj the nm&ar of then — there wore a
r^-t number of watc ho spiled up — I ha \ to realise that atrocities woro
boin 3 corrittod hero. I was shown tho valuables. I never saw so such
money, especially forei si money — all kinds, fro-, all over tho worl U
In o»! itior., there were sold bars.

"I also 3a*r that the boa.’quarters from which 'irt .dreetod his
op rations was very snail and inconspicuous. Ha haonly three or four


7736


1? K-.y l*7-lwm-3-5-ifeehan (Int. Radar)

3curt !fo. 1

-«jple working there for fcin. I spoke to then too. I watched his
courier arrive’ fros Berlin, Tiergorten Stresse, the Fuohrer’s
Chancellory. I irrvestirated Virth's nail.

"Of ocurse, I MJ. not do all of this at this first visit. I was
there frequently, I persecuted Tfirth up to his loath.

"Question! Did \ firth ^ive ycu nanes of people who were connected
with this operation?

"Answer* Kot rwuy nanos woro nentioned for the sinple reason that
tho rairijor of thoso who FP-rtidpatod could bo counted on ono3 fincers.

I rcccaber one nano* I think tho nano was Blankenbura, in Berlin."

BlankoricrR was your deputy, was ho not?


19 *.2gr L7-i'r~s::-L-l-C^ck (Rnmlor)

C:urt Ho. 1

• *

... Tcs, Blankenburg ros ty succoaaor when I left for the front.

Tforo you not nistaken in testifying bore that Bcuhlor would
never have lent his hand to the ontemination of tho Jena?

A. I can only any according to ry kn^.-lolgo Bouhlor gavo no
aooiotanco for that purpose# .hat tho witness llorgen is testifying hero
is tho contents of a c-invcrsaticn ho had with '•‘irth in tho year
1913. I van a soldier in tho year 19U3.

DR. PROCSC&UllIt Counsel for tho dofoniant Viktor Brack,
iir. .Tesidont, perhaps tho Prosooution would bo kind onough to
oscortain fron tho transcript to what tino tho statorwnt of IJorgon
roforrod. As far as I can soo frer. tho original docunont it refors
to tho year 19Uli, it is for 19li3 or 19Ui.

DR. HOC 1C'..IDs I can*t toll you that, ‘ho oxndnation was nado in
l?) Ji but I an not cblo to my whon tills thing took placo, V/culd you
;.lvo uo again this thing? (Docuaont)
f . raCESCKDUW: Ur. Prosidont, I think it is very important to
find out hero to ’./hat ti;x> tills statonsnt of horgen rofers. In tlio
yorr 19J,h tho dofondaat Brad: had boon with tie arny for two yon to
.v'n in tho yoar 191*3 ho had boon thcro for ono yc.T. I think it is ono
af tlio nest prinitiro requirenonts for tho prosecution to ascertain
-•hat yoar the statements refer to.

A. SCCKDALD: I think Dr. rroosc'.uiann is at liberty to uso tliia
••'volo document , so ho can as contain free tho docunant irhatovor ho
TTx.t3. It is tho right of tlio Prosecution to put to tho -..-itnos3
quo3tions fron a part of tho docunant.

*JE SRESIDEHT: It is, hewevor, only fair to the witness to give *
tho witness all of tho inforaation tlio dccuaont discloses.

D.w, ISXSiAIDj Tour Honors, I certainly ‘.rill.

-E .T^SIDE:r: "ounscl for tho Prosecution will ascertain as soon
- ?’ ssiblc to That ye ortho wit no 3 3 was testifying to whon he gavo the
-ceir thich is before tho Tribunal in tho transcript.


7738


25 liay (Sasuor)

Court SO* 1


DR. HOCJT-JU: I shall do so at tho ©arliost possible nooant.

tit:essx

A. To rhat extent this roport of l.'irth's to ..orgon corresponds
to tho foots I cannot judgo in any ray. Oao thing, however, is Tiitc
clear. Hhet he has dose rib od as Ms activities and particisbLcn in
tho outhonasia progron does not correspond to tho facts, bocauso
’ ’irth was employed as a rogistrary official and os such had to do
office,work arc could in no way have tho possibility of actively
participating in tho euthanasia. That was cxolusivoly tho task of tho
responsible physician and nov .r t;» teak of tho civil servant. To
that oxtont his infor.aatlon regarding 3 rnndonburg nust bo altogether
faloo as f.or as I can Judge,
m ill. KCCX AID i

» 1 , You rvivor oooperated in tho prograa of oxtomination of tho
Jowa, is that correct?

A. Ko, I p^rsorally never did,

f>. Is tho nooo -ichran, Ctooroturnbannfuchror Adolf "ichnann,
fax d liar to you?

... Tea, the nano bccano Imorn to ao now.
j, Tcu didn't knonhin b of ore? That ;x..ans during tho war ?

... :ro, not to ny knowlodgo ,

:. uid you knor anything about Ids activitiesdurint tho '.-nr, Iron
your 05.71 lomlcdgo, not rhat 70 U heard now?

I cannot reexmbor over haying hoard tho naao Eichnan before,

Q. In ord.r to keep the record straight I -,ould like to offer
doourent He. 2737. ‘bis is an oxcorpt of tho Judgment of tho Intc»-
national Military Tribunal "bout tbc activities of ^ichnon and I
mild liko to 3k tho Tribunal rhothcr I sliould givo an identification
rrarfcor to this docui»nt or nhotior the Tribunal will take Judicial
notice of the docunor.t?

TIE 3SIDE;.Ts .nilo the Tribunal’in take Judicial notice of the

7739


15> :iy I;7-<W:‘-^-3-Cook (SEd.r)
Court !fo. 1


iocuaaot oontioopdj it would bo convenient to have an identification
rr— bor Tor tho purpose of identification only,

DP., :*£CH:;JD| So it will bo :ro3ccv.tion Exhibit 505 for identifi¬
cation then: Extract of tho jud^pont of tho international Military
Tribunal. ,

IffE2lS5lETERf “ill you rait one nonont, doctor?

31 DR. HCC~_UD:

"In tho a.mor of 19U1, howevor, plans woro :»do for tho
X ifinal soLution* of tho Jewish question in all of Europo. This
•final solution* noant tho oxter dnation of tho Jews, which oarly
ir. 1939 Hitler had threatened would bo one of tie consoruoncos of an
outbroak of war, nrei n spocial soction in tho Gestapo under ;.dolf
liohnonn, as head of Section Bli of tho Gostape , was fozued to carry
out the policy.

"Adolf Biotaftim, »dio had been .ut in char go of this nrooran by
Hitler, has ostLiated that the policy p rsuod romltod in tho killing
of 6,000,000 Jews, of which U,CO ^,000 wore killed in t>» oxtornin-
otior. inatitutiona,"

q. Did you over havu any conforoncos or dismissions with Eichnnnr.
concerning the oxtemination of tho Jews and tho solution of tho
Jewish problen?

... I already said that I did not. re. o.bor having heard tho nano
Eic'.cmnn at all,

. I rant to put to you document Jfe, 997, which is Prooocuticn
Exhibit 5C6, for identification, ycer honors. This is a uraft of £
lettor firm the Reich minister for tho Occupied Eastern Torritcrio3

to the Reich Comtssioner for tho East:

"Solution of tho Jewish ProbiflB*

".-.of ere nee: Tour report of i Cctcbor 19U1, concerning tho solution


of the Jewish prcfclca.


29 -j L7-:^r-l^-C^ok (Rainier)

Court Ho. 1

•

•I have no objection against your sucyestion for the
solution of the Jewish problem. Attached please find a naaorandua con-
sc.-nlng the conversation between aj roforent .jrtagcrichtsrct 3r.
.otzol, Oberdierstleiter Brack fror. the Chancellery of the fuehrer and
Ctuxrfcannfuehrer *ichnan, roforent to the Reich Security I Hr.

Qffico. Fror/ this noao,please be advised about the do tails of the
natter, "ill you, please, ta!:o tho accessary steps at tho Roich
Security -Air. Office ard rith "bordionstioitor Brack fro a tho Chan¬
cellory of the Fuehrer via your ichor SS and Police leader. Plcnro
hoop no irloraed.

(.’iandrritten) F.D. H.il.

(For tho .sinister)

(3) Copy

(A) Roich Security liain Office

(B) Chancellory of tho *uehror
Attention: Cbordionstloitor Brack,

Copy of (1), iacudin;- onclosuro for infcnation."

J id you rocoive a copy of t!da lottor.

A. .ay I first nek you what tho date of thialottor ia?

:. Only 19U1 Is rwitionod here, ^ut this ia the date of tho draft
that ia mat I told you. Did you reooivo a copy of thia lottor, Herr

Brack?

.. I did not rocoive a co;«y cf it nor did I even soo a copy of
that letter nor do I :mow t'.da Airteccrichtsrat ~otzol.

;. 3id you have conforonco with Rich_i*inn on this problon, on tho
solution of the Jewish questinn?

... I already 3aid I ca/oiot ovon rouonbor tho nanc lic’.iaann , nor

K *

can J rcccnber tho nano otzol.

.. J o you knew ponothins about tho natters discussed at this
c- rforonco as to tha solution of the Jewish prcblor.?

.. Ko, I know nothing.


7741


19 ..ay li-5-coot(Rac2lcr)

urt :.*o. 1


You have no ido:. Y?u never na o any suggestions ns to "hat
kind of treatment or what hind of gas chambers should ho used for
the solution of the Jewish Trebles? Ini r.evor did do .that?

A. I can rc.'flsber noting in this connection.

•. You wore auostiorod by '>.0 Trite r.al,quostionod by tho Tribunal
Inst Fridy, as to whether » arm -cm node for the construction of
tho gas chanters in tho outhanasia stations or whether tho onginc-or
or specialist uasordor.d to :ssirt iho directors of *-he stations in
sotting up such gna chanbc.-3, xraro you .lot?

A. Ics.

i. You rero not otle to givo any information to tho Vribrnnl on
that fact, roro you?

No, I "assaying I didn't concorr. rryoolf with those mttors.


77L2


Court So. 1

19 Key 47-K~2-l-££k-Gross (Easier)


v -• the nano Eallneyer, K-e-l-l-c-e-y-c-r*. faniliftr to you?

A. Yes, hut I really don't know Just where he belongs.

Q. Ele wife executed aa Affidavit for you here, that is your Pocu-
<ont 39, Exhibit 23, pcge 60 of your Docunent Book II. Eo you renenber
his now?

A. Yes, yos, I r os enter hin now.

Q, Was hcllneyer tho engineer, or he was a chc.nlst, who nrde these
plans for gas chanters and assisted the directors in outhanneia stations
in netting up these ges chanters?

A. So, Kalineycr was to check thrt the ges chanters voro always
operating proporly, tut I don't believe ho aado any pirns for that our-
poso.

Q. Kollncyer was the nan who supervised those gr.s chanters, was
ho not?

A. I believe, yes, tut not for long, only for a short tine.

Q, All right. And does tho ncao Kallseyer rofrosh your ne^ory
os to oventuni plans you nado together with Ilchnenn about tho solution
of the Jewish troblon, Horr Brack.

A. Ho.

q, I wnat to put to you Eocuntnt VO-365, which will to rrosccution
Exhibit 607 for idontificotlon. Your Honors. This is r draft of tho
Batch /'.inistry for the Occupied Territories dated Borlin, 25 October
1941.

■Referee AOE. Dr. Vetsel

■Eo: Solution of the Jewish Question.

■1. To the Reich Coanieoiont.r for the East.

■Ee: Your Report of 4 etcher 1941 C ^cerning Solution of the
Jewish Question.

■Referring to ny letter of 16 October 1941 you ore inforned that
Cterdionstlciter Brack of the Chancellery of tho Fuehrer has declered
hiuself ready to collaborate In the nrnufacturo of the necessary shel¬
ters as well ns the gassing epooratus. At the urosent tine tho appe-


Court So. 1

IS May 47-w—S-2-£~X-Groes (Racier)

rates In auestioa ere not on hpnd in the Belch In sufficient number;
they will flrst have to be manufactured. ^incc in Brack 1 e opinion tho
-■enufeeturo of the eoperatus in tho Belch vill cause none difficulty
than if canufactured on the spot, Breck deens it nest expedient if ho
•or.t hit people directly to Riga, especially his chenist Dr. Kollr-.oycr,
who vill cause everything further to be done there. Oberdienstieiter
3rack points out that the procetr in auostion is not vithout drnger, so
special protective -.ensures are necessary. Under these clrcur.stpnccs I
beg you to turn to Oberdicnstleltcr Brack in the Chancellery of the
Fuehrer through ycur Higher SS and Poliseifuehrer and to rooueat the
dispatch of the chenlst Dr. Ball.-, oyer rs rs of further rides. I
draw rttor.tion to the feet that Stumbannfuehror Slchnrnn, tho referee
for Jewish cuestions in the RSHA, is in pgreenont to this urocoso. On
lnfor ntloa fror. Sturnbannfuehrer x.ichr.nnn cn.-.ps for Jows rro to be set
up in Riga and Klntk to which Jyv* fro-i the old Belch territory nay possi¬
bly bo sent. At tho nr«.sent tine Jows boing doported fron the old Koich
nro to bo sont to Litnannstn.dt, but also to other craps, to be Inter
used as labor (Arbcltsolnsats) in the last so for os they arc a.blo to
work.

"As the affairs now strnd, thoro ere no objections ogninct doing
svpy vith those Jews who arc not cblo to work, with the Prrck renedy.

In this way occurrences such rs thoce which, according to r rcoort
presently before no. took plrce at the shooting of Jcvs in Vllnn and
vhich, considering that the shootings were public, vert hardly orcusablc,
vould r.o longer bo oossiblo. Those eblo to work, on the other hrnd,
vill bt transported to the Ipst for labor service. It is self-evident
that enong tho Jews capable of work -en red vo-.en nro to be keot separate.

*1 teg you to receive advice regrrding your further stco6."

Q- Eerr Brack, are you still going to -maintain vhat you spid here
in direct oxaninrtion that you tried to orotect the Jews and to save the
-*eva froa their terrible fate and that you never were a chanoion of the
'nomination program?


77 UU


Court So. 1

19 May 47-*-5-3-==>t-Gros6 (Hauler)


a. I should oven like to uelntain that misuse, terrible nieuso,
vas .^de vith =y naae. I sue frcn this letter end free the date of this
letter thrt all thuse negotiations wuro carried out at a tine vhen I was
fer away free Berlin, vhen I wts on sick lerve. If I have the possibility,
I hope I shall be able to bring witnesses vfco vill testify to thrt
effect. I oust openly adr.it thpt at this period of tine something was
going on which van entirely in contradiction to Ty opinion but that

ft

this Pnly could be done under nieuec of :;y nano and ".y agency. I did
not declare igrsolf ready for these things.

q. Can you tell no, Kerr Brack, whore Hig/ and Minsk aro located?

A. Elga is in tho Baltics in Latvia, end i.lnsk is in Huecir.

Q. Xheso two places wore outside of Oor-.any, were they not?

A. Yus.

Q» Prosecution has no further aucstlons rt this tiro.

IKS PELS I DEBT! The Tribunal will now bo in rocor-s for a few
nimitos.


(A rocoss wrs taken.)


19 Hay l7~<-ATD-7-i- ialqy (Xnt. Rasler)
Court to. 1


TIE !LvRS3.X: The Trijur-.il is again in session,

'n. JDC-T.JD: If the Tribunal, please, I would like to ask the
witness two or throe no re questions.


THF. PRESIDENT: Counsel nay ;iroceed.


CR3S3-EX.J-TM.nOH

(continuod)


97 IP., H3CH17ALD:


Q Herr Brack, whor. you made ycur report, vour first roport on
sterilization to Rimlor in Kirch 19U1, this is Document 203, M) 203,
Proeecution Exhibit, No, 161 on page 35 to 37 of Document 3ook 6, Your
Honor, You woro 7ery interested in tho quostion whothcr the people ':oinr
to bo otorillzed would knew -.rhothor they are storllizod or not, would
rir. kncwlodge of this procoduroj is that correct?

A Ho, that was Hisuler's wish,

Q That ttoy should not know?

A Yon, That tho people shouldn't notico it,

3 Lot's turn new to Document 2U5, which is in tho same book on
P<r;o 39, an! Prosecution Exhibit 163,—

JUIOE SEBRIdC: Dr. Hochwr.11, is that tho one dated 23 Juno 19fc2?

4

DR. BDC»f..U)i Yoo, it is this ono, 23 Juno 19U2.

Q In this document there is no mention mi ! 0 any noro about that,
but you say hero "I think that at this tiro it is really irrelevant
whathor the people in question bocano awaro of havirv; boon castrato l
•after some wooks or months, anl they fool tho effect." So you dropped
f'r Himnlor -dropped this protonscj i3 that corroct?

■* It was like this, in tho first lottar to Hlrulor it was
pointed out that an exocution of sterilization without tho iorjon3
noticing it was unlikely, Ttoso doubts which HLmler ha!, had to bo
Issipato! so that he Bight ap-^ro7o this su; estionj that is tow I
explained this 3ontor.ee,

Q Tfero ycxi of tho opinion than, in Juno 19li2, Harr Brack,

V.at tho war was won for Goztsany, or as good as won?


19 Thy 1*7—?.TD-7-2—:fcloy (Int. .bailor)
Court So. 1


A That I roaliy can*t say.

Q I roo-iar that you told uo sorzothin- of this kin-! rrhon I
questioned you today on this document, that you expected in a very short
ttao tho victory of Oeraeqy, and therefore wanted to postpone the final
solution of the Jewish prorran and hoped that tho few oonths which your
suppeation will givo the J<wrs would suffice for then to survive tho War?

A No, I said that I hoped that the War would end soon, whether
that would be a dear Gerann victory no one could predict, but in any
case I and all of us hopod tho war wcul’. cone to an end*

Q But you did not oxpoct thon that Gemany would lcoo the War
in a short tiao?

A In JUne 191*2?

Q res*

A No.

0 Go you oxpootoU that G_-rrnny would if not win 100 per cent,
would have a vory ;;ood outcoao of tho war, lidn't you do that?

A Tea.

Q Isn» t it a natter of foot thon that this prosunption was
'roppod only beoauso ycu had nothing to fear any MPo , — that Oorany
was ;oin- to win the Yfcr, — whether tho vie tins knew or did not krow
whothor th<xjr woro storilized or not?

A That had nothin,- to do with it.

q VThy rr.a it thon done? Yftgr was it chanced then, tho wholo idea?

A This faot was includod in tho first letter, so that HL-nlor
3hcuii not carry out his storilization plans, an! so I assuae that in
this second lottor the sentence was included so that Hiixler»s doubts
* lioh had arisen fron the first lotter would bo 'ono away with.

All ri;;ht, tut in the first lottor you nado the iiroot sur-
^stion how it could be avoided, that tho peoplo should know they wore
-’rillzodj in tho second letter you say it fees n't make ary differenoo
--ny rorej I do not know, but it soens to rx> you di ! not answer ny question?


77A7


Court Ho. 1

19 May 47-ii-8-l-£EK-keehan (Vos Schoen)


A. I did answer It.

Q. la this the only explanation you can give for this?

A. I cannot give any other explanation.

All right, you naned hert six cuthenaaia stations, as far at
I can rone-:ter?

A. Tea.

Q. Mil you toll the Tribunal vhero theso euthanasia. stations
vere located In Gerry my?

A. I told the Tribunel that.

-ill you repea.t that pler-ae, ec far cs you can?

A. Grofcncclc vea in Vuartter.herg; hadr.iar wa in Reason; Sonnen-
atoin vaa in Saxony; Harthcir. w*a in Austria; Brandor.burg nonr Branden¬
burg, and Bornburg in Deeaau or in Anholo noar Dessau.

^ Can you toll no what concentration ca-:pa wro in tho vicinity
of thceo dlfferont euthanasia stations?

A. Ko, X cannot.

Q. Do you know, for instance, how for or whether it is true or
not that Kauthauaon was in tho vicinity of Kartholr.?

A. So, Kauthauaon is near Linx.

Q. Ar.d where is Ear tho in?

A. Yob, Ecrtholrj is also near Lin?.

Q. You know that Kerthcln la not far fror Aouthauaen?

A. I assure ao. I » nev^r at rtnuthnueon, I don't know exactly
where it was. If they cay kauthauaon la near Lins, I know that Hart-
heir. is not frr rvy fron Lins and then kauthausen is not frr iron Lin.

<<. Vk/it dc you know about the location of the Grosa-Eosen concen¬
tration canp?

A. The Groas-Roson ceno is in Slleaic; I hcv» learned thr.t now.
Hov far is that froa Bornburg?

A. I really don't know - two hundred, three hundred, or fcur
hur.drod kilonetera.


77L8


Csurt So. 1

19 stay 47-H-8-2-i34-*taefcan (7cn Schoen)

Q, bhct About the locetion of BucheawddT

A. I don't lenov.

<v In connection vith tho locetion of 3ernturg?

A. I don't know where it is.

Q» I have no further oueationa. Tour Honor.

BT EL PLLSIDLST:

Q. Mtness, in your testi-nory vith reference to the euthanasia
ooerationt na apolied to dofcctivc children you tostifiod concerning
tho consent of the parents. Hov, wa that consent given to the
administration of euthanasia to theix child or did tho doctors in the
institution where the child ves infora the parents thet something night
bo done for tho child to help the child, which night bo dangerous?

Just what vos the information conveyed to the enroots by tho doctors
in charge of the child?

A. I should llko to point out again that on this ouostlon I know
inly cs a laynan thr nigh Linden to tho best of ojr recolloctlon tho
doctor who sont tho child to tho institution - that lo, not the doctor
at tho hoich Cocaitteo Station but the doctor who noted tho deformity -
•ooko to the parents and told then that if tho child vao sont to n
Reich Conr.ittoe stetion it would be hoalod if thoro vao any ooosibillty
of it, but ho also pointed out that tho troatnunt in such oovero cases
le always connected with extraordinary drngcr and thon he asked tho
parents whether, in soite sf this unusual drnger, which in many cases
led to tho death of the child, whothur they would nako tho decision rad
give their consent. Only if the parents did give tholr consent for tho
risky treatnents by which only a small percentage of tho nr.tlwhts were
cured, thon this doctor sent the child to a Eeich Committee stetion.’

And thon the child was sent to the station for tho administra¬
tion of euthanasia, is that cx-rect?

A. So, tho head of tho Ecieh Corr.ittee stetion first of all had
try every possibility beyond normal care to ndet this child capable


Court So. 1

IS Aay 47-«-e-S-IS>i-r.eehaa (Ten Season)


of reel living. Aa far as I, as a layman, can judge, there were very
serious operations which night be fatal.

Q. 'ell then, the fact that tne child via placed in the inotitution
would not the doctor* larediately endeavor to restore the child to none-
thing like e norael state aa soon as possible?

A. I an. sorry, I did not understand your ouestion, Your Honor.

*.hat do you Bean, a noraal *ay of life; y<xi nean to atteact this cure
lcredlately?

Q. -'hen a defective child was sent to a governaental inotitution
for cere, would cot the doctors thero iacediately examine the child and,
if the;' felt that any treatcent or any operation would really benefit
the child, would they not proceed with that treatDent immediately,
probably after advising the parents, but they would net delay in order
with an endeavor to help the child to as nearly o nornal stato uo
pooolble, would they?

A. I cannot .Judge as a laysac how long a period of observation
would be neceospry and how a child sight first ?u»ve to bo nursed and
brought into good condition beforo an operation could bo performed. I
cannot Judge these things, but certainly in cy opinion tho doctoro
aado every effort, as for as human aid w/.s possible, to make tho cure
permanent.

Q. Vae euthanpsio administered to these children if thero w, l8
any possibility of rehabilitating the child go that the child could
load a fairly noraal life?

A. Ko, not in that caso.

Q. Have you ony idee as to the number of children to whoa the
euthanasia operation was applied in these aectal institutions?

A. In ay first interrogations I bclievo I geve a figure. I don't
remember wh*-t It '-as. I can only say with a good conscience that I
cannot giro ary figures because in 1542 I vent to tho service ar.d I
ior.'t know wht happened free 19-!2 to 1944 in tho way of authorizations
issued by rouhler. Uo to the tire ~hen I “sb still in Serlin with


7750


Court So. 1

15 jiay 47-j-.-B < 4 -^8B(-«ieehan (Ton Schoen)


rouhler, and ooaetines I gave 3ouhler the docuneats to lie signed, tho
saber was very low. I pointed out that Souhler, although he vae not a
doctor, in nany cate* decided against the opinion of the f-oerte and did
not give the authorization in seite of this ooinion and the child had to
be observed for one, two, three, or aore years before authorization for
euthanasia could be given.

Q, Have you any idea that the doctor* in charge of an institution
where defective children were confined eve.- asked the oerents if they
desired that euthanasia bo administered either by an operation or by
sdslnlstering euthanasia to that child?


7751


May 19-i.:-BK-9-1-Cook (Inc. Von Schoon)
Court He. 1


.. I don't know but I don't boliovo that thoso docto: o
asked tho parents. That was up to the doctor who assi^i-
oJ the child to the institution. ..s Linden said ho had
to discuss tho natter with the pc.rents ns tactfully as
, os3ible so as, on tho one hand, not to leav.. thon tho
responsibility as n s, iritur.l burden, but on tho other
hand ho had to nake it clear to thon that it ci ;ht be
.ossiblc to release theso childron fror; thv.ir suffering.

'I Did they ndvisc the pnronts that tho child \»«ro ill?

.. In wh/tt fora it was put I don't know.

. Did you hear Dr. Pfnnnnuollor's testimony?

.. Pfcnnnueller said that ho did not talk to tho parents
about it. That is whet I recall.

'4 ..s I ror.cnbor his tostinony ho stated that after tho
coaioncocKint of tho adainistrr.tion of this dru3, whioh
would oauso tho doath of c child after n certain nunb-r
of days, ho would adviso tho . arents that tho child was
111 , and that thoy should cono to soo tho child so that
they would 300 tho child boforo it died? Do you rononber
that testimony?

.. YwS. I do.

1 Nr., that is no wiso tho equivalent of inforninj tho
. arents that n dan ;erou3 operation cijht result in help-
in., the chili’ or it ni ;ht result in tho doath of tho child.
That la r. very different thin:;, is it not?

•• Y s, I said that I idn'e ..clievc that tho executing
ioctor talked to the parents. Io was the doctor who sent
the child to tho institution. Tu bo noro ox. licit it
was the doctor who had this child sent to a rfcich Cemittco
3t.ticn, not the doctor La char 30 of euthanasia.

. Dr. ?f annr.ue Her was La chr.rjc of the euthanasia and
in char ;u of the institution, was he not?


7752


*


19-U-BK-9-2-Caok (lie. V . Screen)
Court N . l


«• Y.s.

He did not send th^ childron to the institution?

.» No, and ho said that, that tho childron woro sent

to hin. That ho hinsolf did not sand any one to tho insti¬
tution.

. Well, the doctor who 3cnt the children to the institu¬
tion would have nothin ; to do with the operation of eutha¬
nasia, would they?

« No, they had nothin' to do with it.

T.H3 Kl^SIDENT: Hp. 3 tho oounsol for tho defendant Brack
any further questions to tho witness?

Do I understand oounsol for thw defendant Brack has no
further questions to .ro.ound to tho witness?

Drt. riiOBSCiQLiNN: Ur. President I should liko to oxanino
ny client out the dofon30 counsel for Dr. Pokorny wishes -

fHH P&SSIDLiNT: Counsol for defendant Brack will*>roocod
with tho oxunination of tho witness first.

BY DH. PR02SCHU.JJH:

I should Just liko to jot t:y doouaont. lir. Prosidont, I
have only a very few quostions to rut to the v/itnoss Brack
’oasod or. tho cross oxadnation which has Just boon con¬
cluded.

. Witness, tho Tribunal has asked you whether you wore
over .rosont at outhnnasia of incurably insane in nontal
institution.;, and you said "yos." Whon you woro prosont
or. such occasions of euthanasia on insano, did you take
any active part in tho kill in.; of those insane persons,

-van by only r.ani. ulr.tin ; sonc lover or any other kind
of nachinory?

- Mo, I did not participate. That was u 4 to tho doctor,
witness j froti tho quostions of tho Tribunal, I boliovo
to huvt. path.-rod that the Tribunal has a certain assuu tion
that tho jas chaab^rs in which euthanasia was porfomod on


7753


I'.y 19--i:-3K-9-3-CQok (let. Von Schocn)
Court I»o. 1


incurably insane persons could be token apart end coved to
other places. In answer to the question of the Tribunal,
ycu tried to r.akc it cloer that these ohonbors" -

xrhaps the tern was not v-ry fortunate - were 3olid ports
of tho buildin,; of the cuthan;sia institution, is that true?

.. Yes, that is correct, it was a rooc which was fron tho
very boGinnlnj an or;er.ic part of such a building.

. Thon if thoao cos chr.nbors should havo boon dismantled,
then is it true that nothing would have boon loft but a
hoa;: of ruins as i3 nado of a building aftor an air raid?

.. .»s for as I oan Jud ; ;o It would have boon aotually
technically ia.ossible. One would have had to renovo a
;iooo fro:; a house. That isn't possible.

1 Thon it wu3 not tho caso thet thoso parts of the build¬
ing oould hnvo boon loaded on c truck onu rcooved in ono
.ic co?

 No, that would hr.vo boon quito impossible.

But you, witno33, pointod out that tho pipos oonsis tod
of tho seno sort of . ipcs that can bo bought onywhoro in
tho world for vory littlo oonoy?

.. It was a pipo suoh cs is . used for wntor or jas any-
■<<horo. In ov..ry roon you can find such pipos.

. The Judjo also asked you in regard to tho questionnaires
about tho nationality of the ,.ooplo who wero subjootod to
outhana3ir. in your presence. I bcllavo it was in ifcflndcn-
;ur Z, if I understood you correctly, this occurred in 19<i0,
i3 that true?

*• Ye 3 , I don't know exactly. I snid cithor tho end of

1339, or tho bejinninr, of 19i0.

•

• ..t that tiru at tho end of 19-iO, could you have had
“h- ilea that of the _.oor av-n who nru now subjected to
euthanasia that these _oor non could bo foreigners?


7754


7 lS-iI-3K-9-i-Ccok (Int. Yon Schoen)
Court l*o. 1


.. No., tho idea oould never hove occurred to ac and it ■ v-
would not have boon possible to find out such o thinj. The
poor boia;s th*-ro, one could not talk to thee ot all.

v The Judjo nlso asked you a few quostion3 about tho Jews
s; ocif iCQlly ho asked you how cany Jews thoro wero in 1939
in Garnany. If ny inorcssion was correct, you thought
over tho answer and then javo a fi^uro finally of two to
throo aillion, is that true, that you 3 avo that fisuro?

.. Yo3, I boliovo sc. I don't know. It was ju3t an
ostinato.

1 You aro anticipating I noroly wanted to know whothor
you said two to throo nillion?

.. Yos.

4 Now, what ovidonoo do you hevo for Giving this nunbor,
two or three aillion Jews?

.. I havo no ovidonco for it.

4 Then it wn6 sin. ly nr. ostinato?

.. Yos, i U3t on assumption on ny part.

4 Your Honors , in this connection, I should liko to ox-
; loin 3oaothinj. I hove had ny collor.juo nsoortuin in tho
noentino on the basis of tho Statistical Yoar Book for tho
Goraan Reich, I boliovo, of tho year 1940, that tho nunbor
of Jews in Gornany, in tho old Roich, was 375,000, and in
tho entire Groat or Goraan Reich, that is including
-ustria, and tho torritorius incorporated U] to 1939,
was abcut 700,000. I havo also loarnod that thcro were
at cost ai>out 200,000 part-Jews. Witness, do you knew
of any data fron tho Statistical Year Book which were far
below your ostinato?

.. ..t that tine I knew of no statistics.

: Then you v-ry carelessly avc tho fi:;urc for which yo.u
had no official evidence, is that correct?


7755


- y 19-i.:-i5K-9-5-Cook (Int. Von Schoon)

Court Ho. 1

.» Yes, that is true, but I will state I need evidence
ond I don't have any.

■i Then you should say: "I don't know." In any case,
according to tho cvidcnco which I hnvo obtainod in the
noontide there wore at tho cost one uillion Jews and pnrt-
Jews.

DR. UOCBJ.JJ): If the Tribunal Alonso, tho Prosecution
objoots against this kind of questioning. Dofonso oounsol
hos not ;roduood a docunent showlnc that tho ossuni>tion
of tho witness was wron , tho nunbors given by
defense counsel any bo oorroct. I rxi not able to oheok it.

THo. PitliiliJiSNT: Tho Tribunal understands that. Counsel
has singly offorod thoso fi ,-uros and if tho Prosecution
u.'on investigation believes thoso figures to bo incorroot,
it mny introduce ovidonoo if it desires to tho oontrery,
and if it ngroos that thoso figures nro a •>. roxinntoly
oorroct, it aay 30 state later on. The figures given by
dufunso counsel nro in no wiso binding u;>on anybody at
this tine.

Dll. HOCH...LD: Thank you, Y 0 ur Honor.


Court So. 1

13 Kay -47-&-10-l-G£S~vro*« (Von Schoen)


ST m. THCiSCHHASS:

Q* Tho next oue.it loo. The Jodge al6C a eke* you Aether and to
vrat extent veterans of tho Vorld Var 1914-1918 were Included in
euthanaaia or were tc be included. Do you recall this Question?

A. Tes.

Q. Tho Judge pointed out that insanity is said to be connected
vith a brain injujy. As you have repeatedly said, you aro not a doctor.
I ooroly wsr.t to ha'e you elariiy ono po-_nt. That is, vhat veterans
of Vorld W*r 1914-1918 vero to b< exeapted free euthanasia. I would
liko a very dew, precise answer.

A. These were to be excepted in whose cases the insanity vao tho
result of any injury incurred during tho Vorld V a r, rcgardlecs of
whether it wrs • brain injury or any other typo of injury.

Q. That *.s vhat I wanted to know.

The Court also asked you whether there was a central offico in the
Party or la tho Eolch for couipping tho gas chasbors; on whoso instruc¬
tions th«so gas chanbors woro set up in tho varlouo euthanasia institu¬
tions. I ask you, and plcaco answer this ouostion with "yes" or "no",
was tnoro such a central offico in the Eelcht Do you know that it
organized the gas chaabcrs according to a certain plan, a certain
rehene.

A. Ho, there was no such offico.

!<. You were also asked hov could tho head of an euthanasia
institution hit upon the idea of installiivT a gas chaaber in his
Institution for the purpose of euthanasia. I ask you, do you know
when the idea of the use of gas cane up in the deliberations of the

M

doctors, the exccrts?

A. I really don't reneaber that.

Q. Do you rezeeber that originally tho idea was that those
incurably insane persons were to be given an injection of nornhino or
secething el=ilar7

A. I inforaed thcc. At first it was said that the cetients were

to bo given sooe drug, whether it was an injection or pills I don't

7757


19 Yiy-”-GSS-10-2-Gr cs (V r. 3ch r.)
C urt r . 1.


*• 1 ronorbor whoa and nr. n>de thr su *-.-sti n t-> B uhler

•hit th.t w Kl-I be l^o.eibln >r that ;as ah vU bo used «v r thor
r >i* r.s. Th-.t w-.s o ,-urclv Radical o'-tter.

iJ» thor quoatin In this c nr. eti-c. D y.u r d v u

" j rolv '.»»■ th-.t B uhler cs“the rr.r. nl.n- res; nsiM f r lutht-aftsio
~' 7U iaatructl ns t the h.-ods 'f the ncstr.l inatituti na t build such
chaabora. t have then built Ur th ir 1 c.l aoeJ.anies?

B uhlor ’l • n t iivj suoh inatructi ns. E uhler 'id n t toko
anv -*iroot intorcat In what w.nt n In tho inatituti n. The inatituti na
,w un '- or tho - inistrv f Intori r. Tho Unistrv f jntori r rwo
noooaaorv instruct!. na .a t wfc t hrt bo d aw. ?hit « i in 1937.

That was nr t quite clear fr r. •• ur toatir. «y ' f ro. la it
cl mr nvth'tyu ■< id th- t nlrc- iy y.u w ro f th ; ini n th t it
■is the : iniatr" f the Ir.teri r which pvc inatructi na t. heads f
nenMl inetltutca nl ut technie.'l mttora c noornin; the inourably
inaonol H w # i ah uld like t into relate • r.j briof queati n.

•

'.■hon did y u visit r. c noontrati n cunj 7

“* Oneo in ny life I saw n 0 noontr ti n on:. Thit was ir. 1937-
10Z*. Th-t r.s car; Ornnlonbur/. Th.t war the uly tin .

!. Th n in maw r t tho qu«st: n f th rr-ai'ont y u at ted thnt
in th vrl ua diacucai na nnd ;rolinin:rio* l>of ro <iuth.in.ai: w t
lntr ’ UCc ''‘ >’ u w re t Id th-t tho roia n -n 1 tho r. tivo f r euthanasia,
r r-th-.r yu f It that the rons n and r. tivo f r cuthniwsic wss nl-
* v/8 •JWpnthy with tho . at lost and tho idea -f rale no in - than fr n
th,ir sufforin » that y u never had inv ther roia.n, f r oxinflo
Maloney, i 5 thr-t truo?

••• lea, thit is truo.

.n-' th-. quest: n was -Is hr j- ht uj durin-- y ur axaninctf n
*h th r Hitler in v tu - ini n c uld deei do ab ut th- life f th.- ln-
with ut tho c nsent f th- rclr.tiv-o. Ia it tru-.- n‘ ! »ub<

•r - ht wont n r.t th t thnt the s nsont f rolutiv s f the


ins-.n-


n- ana n -1 « nai-’croJ dceireMo s th t nv ; -rs n 1 int.-r.tl ns f
r 1 ' tlv ' 8 ' ^inst s- ek ;-.rs ns c vld b .lirdrated — • ny intent! na


775C


’S " -y-I'—10— S-Gr ss r. 3ch r.

C urt 3.1.


f bt'-inln,- the ,r pert*’ f nJletlv s ty brin -in i v .ut the rolrtiTo's
cnrly death?

... * th u-ht I h-.-* alr-nd" s-id thefc that w-.e the acne rena n
why !-ct r in th; instituti n c I.', r. t ;. 5S *u‘.-n-nt n th i
quo at 1 nnair.s f his ■wa patients, in r ’or t olinin-te nny
• saibllitv f intor.ti as t" >btoin tho r utrtv f th« ir.S'in* pers n. *
..nd un thor auhj ct hr u ht uj *.« tho Pro a i’net. Ia it true
th-.t in outhanaaia f inoumMy lnsr.no iftor th quoati nniir- h: ’
been filled • ut on«• Jumped b” ox; orts end t j ox’.orta, tho ..oioh
Vinlstor f Tntorl r, Lin’en’s ffioc, assigned th: incur'. My inanne
«rs ns t- bs mti n instituti ns 'tv' 1 tor t ovthnnaaij instituti r.a?

•. los, thr.t is trad

Q. Is It trim that in th ; r c«i)<'in s bof*ro tho .t-.ioh C rroittoo
nfcioh la crqhrisizln- th ox.-rt, th. fin-.l oxnort wh rnaso-l n tho
quoatl-'&nairua nasi.-nr ! tho .rtior.t thr «u h Linden t th . Ilyich
C rritt-o stnt! n?

u. I 1 nt. bivt wh-.t oxtoat tho d ct>r -ivinr the tror. tenant
in! tho d ot r aasi-ninr th» ;otir.t t tho irctituti r. ires tho final
rx : rt, f r T •• n t kn w Linin's ays tea nn * .r e* durv in tho x.oich
- mittoo.

C. But la it tru th'-t n -oncr-.l ; rlnci. 1 n snoh child c "Id
k o nasi,Tied t th- “oioh C mitt re at ti n with ut tho , nrunta h'virv*
‘.rori uslv b-»in* ex. licitl" .ski-! whether th v c naontod t this
ssl. nn r.t orn with th'. *cn * r thit •>, n rr'lic-ti n : » 1 rn
*h.cra;v tho child ni ht -let

... »:e, thr t is wh’t hi:; -no- end tht ia wfc:>t I X, Ini no*! to thr

Tribune 1.

%. In t ia e nr-.cti-n, !'r. rival V.nt, I ah uld lit t rcrfir nor
~ rr t ny exhibit Br-ch -11. It c nt ins th a .nt-.nc : Sinor n
rlneijlo Id n t -ssim. cMl J ror. t th. .Mich C r-itt-.o St ti n
ins* th c nsont f th :r<-nts, 1 ah ul’ lit t cnaidor th- c- sj
■ th- Fr-nx chil' scttl 1 ." ■'ltn-ca, r - ir. »n • rsx r t th quoati n
- tfc. “ri'.iur .:1 -.s t why J.xa w.ro t >■ cxerrtod fr r _»-thrn:ai<: v u


7759


15 !'-.T-J!-C3S-10-4-Gr ss (7 - Sch r.)
C -urt K . 1.


atotoA thrt oothannsla ms o nsi-iorof* o 1 m no fit which sh -ul<* n t be
iron t<* Jaws. Tr»s th:t v ur ;crs ml -ini n r wes th-.t tho !is-
t rtod *; ini -n -f Hitler?

... Th't ie what I oan eav ob ut it n w. I con nly iraw tho
c nclusi r. r-w 1 kin - heck; t wh;.t extent these c nolusi ns bel n>-
t* th fc-t I ’ n’t kn w that ni -ht hr-vo been uroly y -litioal.

Q. " itn.'ss, ”-u hero n t nnswero'’. ny quosti 1 n yet, whoth r this
ini r. y u her-- ox; res set*. hire was v ur ,o.-s nal ;:ini n r whether
t u were -sort t this ini n?

... K , th.it was n *. ty ; rs ml *j ini r.. The so ire nv o n-
olusi ns.


Ur .y lS-il-BK-ll-l-Korrc*; (Int. Von 3choonJ
Court; No. 1


. Now, I cor.--- to the crces oxminntion of tho Prosecutor
hinsolf. I con bo vory brief.

• H.JDY: Hoy it ploaso Your Honor, inusnuch as defense
counsel is join; to n now subject I have scoothinj to take
u* with the Tribunal. If you will poroit no to do it at
this tine when it will be r.ost convenient. Sovorol nonths
'.jo tho Proscoution was concornod with looatinj Dr. Dujon
Hajon - th t is, tho sono Dr. Ha ;on who worked at Strasbourg
nd Natawoilor. Durin ; tho courso of several nonth3, Dr.

Hr. ;on wus located and tho Prosecution then did not t.ako
forward sto::3 to have hin brou .ht dirootly to Number ;. In
tho r.eantiuo, tho defense counsel requested Ha;jon zb a
witness. Hrv;on has 'rrived hero now in Number;; and is
classified as a '..rosoout ion witnoss." Due to tho ovor-
3iht of the . ro3ocution to call hin as th.-ir witness, and
inusnuch as defense couns-l did call hin .:o a witness, tho
.ro3ocutim now relinquishes their rijht to o.:ll Hr.jen and
will r*ivo the dof-nse counsel the o...ortunity to intorro.jato
hia first. ,.t the con., let ion of tho interrogation by tho
I’.vfonoo counsel, if they do not soc fit to oall hin hero
before the Tribunal ns c witness, then we should liko to
have tho opportunity to oxar-ino hin. Duo to the foot that
thi3 chonjo of c.atojory has arisen, defenso counsel is
in a position wherein they nust potiticn the Secret iry
General which nu3t bo done n reasonable tine before thi3
.articular intorro^ation. Dr. Ti_ t tho defense counsel for
Bockor-FroysoUs, is not in a position to do thi3 at this
cine because hi3 case with Bccker-Fr .ysen;; will bo jin either
1 to today or tonorrow, and he would like to interrogate
-r. Ripen this evening; so if th- S^orcttry General c n a-.ko
• note t j ch. n ;e the classific tion of Ha jen fron a "..rosocu-
*-r. " to a "defense" witnoss, then I understanii Dr. Tipp

7761


1! .y 19-ii-BK-ll-2-Karrow (lac. Von Schocn)
Ccurc No. 1


c a carry out his intentions without any interference.

n-U P.iJSIIEHT: Hay I horr froa defense counsel.

D... ri?r (Defense Counsel for the defendant Booker-Frey-
suaj): I will bo -rntcful, Ur. President, if the Tribunal
should toko notico of this dooision of the prosocution end
should u3k the General secretary to n.ako this dooision tod;,
and, if possible, during the noon rocoss and to infora lioon
57 30 that I onn sponk to Ur. Hn*;on tonight nlror.dy. Th :t
is tho only foraulity which still has to bo sottlod.

TIL. P.iaSIDiaiT: In vIm of the stntononts by tho ..rosoou-
tion r.nd counsel for tho defendant Bockor-Fruysonj, it is
satisfactory to tho Tribunal to have tho oounsol for Bcokor
Frcy3on ; interview tho witnoss c.t noon and put hin on tho
st nd tomorrow or this ovonin if possible.

IL». H..DY: j.a I understand it,, Your Honor, it isn’t tho
iurposc of dofohso counsel to call Hv;on h^ro as a witnoss
now. Ho Just wants r. pre-trial intorrojation.

THJ P.LX3ID12IT: Th. t an y be porcittod. Dofenso counsol
ar.y interview the witness this noon or thi3 ovonin^ caid
o;.ll hin c3 c witness if ho desires.

H.„J)Y: In order to ox.odito natters, if the Tribunal
would request Ur. Travis, the Secretary G.. nor cl of this
Court to clarify thi3 discrepancy in tho Secret jy Qonarcl's
Orrioo, thon Dr. 'iipp oan acko his nrrrji^oDont without too
nuoh trouble.

~:L1 P.iZ3IDT2JT: The olork of tho court will inform the
oocretr.ry General. I would surest that counsel for tho *
.rosocution and for tho defendant acoonpnyy the clork of
-no court to the office of the Secretary General so that
tllc entire natter will bo clarified at one tine, and every¬
body bo advised.

3a. TIPP; Thank you.


7762


h r cy I9-£I-3K-ll-34Carrow (Int. Von Schocn)

Court No. 1

D... F.vO^SCHU.i.lI: Mr .y I continue?
i'HJ xicBSlDENT: Counsel any .rooccd.

3Y 2.. F.tOESCHIUiN:

- Witness, in cross examination, .1 number of documents
•<-re shown to you and I have a vory few final questions
about thosw doouncnt3. Is it true that in Document NO-8799,
Exhibit 497., it mentions tho "..ktion Hoydo” in the F a ll of
1941 and t at you knew nothing about it until tho moment
this document was submitted?

~ I know nothin;; about ‘’..ktion Hoyde".
w Is it true th-.t you did not know anything about tho
"-.ktion Len^o" either whioh is in Exhibit 500, of tho Fro-
socution , Document N0-890 9, until this document was
subnit tod hero?

“ No, I know nothin; about it.

w Mr. Prosidont, from tho moment I took this oaso I
have tried to clarify r.s objectively as possible all natters
which accused or oxcusod tho defend nt Brnok. In tho last
fev; days, 3 Lace this docuoont h.s boon submitted, I hr.vo
boon tryin; to tr.aoo this "..ktion Lnnju" throu;h witnossos,
booauso I ex; still lookin'; for that one person who is
responsible for .Jetien 14-F-13. I *sk for permission that
until my colloncuos hnvo ooncludod their eases I nay oan-
tinuo to 3ubait ovidonoo, porhc.s .affidavits, to ol^ify
that "-.ktion", booauso I an interested in havinj evon tho
3lijhtc3t suspicion of tho defendant Brack, on tho basis of
these docuaont3, refuted.

THE P.G3IDENT: Tho TriounrO. jrents tho .-emission roquost-
-d by counsol.

Da. HOCHm.ID: llr.y it _loaso Your Honor, if Dr. Frooschnnnn
^ouid desire to .resent affidavits as .to tho question of
-ktion 14-F-13" in evidence it should bo in a time when

7763


yry 19-M-3iC-ll-4-KarrGW (Int. Von 5chocn}

Court No. 1

Che prosecution is still in the position to c.-.ll the witness
for cross-cxnnin rtion.

TiL: KCS13SZTS: That is certainly true. Those unttors
will hr.vc to be nrranp^d in r.ccordnnco with the circumstances
do, endin'; u; cn each individual c .sc, but nn opportunity
v.ill bo cccordod tho prosecution - and accorded the defense
co call witnossos up to the tir.e that tho evidence is
closed undor c ire urns t moos which nro f .ir to both sides.

D.t. HOCili.XD: Tho only thin; I wnntod to point out is if
twenty-four hours boforo tho closin.; of tho enso, an affidavit
la subr.ittod by oith~r tho prosecution or tho dofonsc, tho
o.posito party is not in u position to call the witness for
cross examination if the witness can not be produced boforo
tho Tribunal in such a 3hort tine.

TIK P.uSIDi2JT: Ye3, that is truo and thoro would have to
bo r. docdlino fixod boyond whioh such affidavits or wit¬
nesses could not bo offered, of course.

D.c. HOCH./.XD: Thank you.

Dil. ?,i02SCKM.JEJ: Hr. President, I shall oortainly act in
accord with tho .rosocution on that procedure sinco I *;
only ;ratoful to thor. for the docur.ents which they havo
3abr,itted today.

ST D.i. F.tosscituai:

' witness, I don't know whether you noticed a little word
this norninj which the prosecutor used in asklnj one question.
He asked you about your letter on sterilization plans, ric
t3kod you who thor you wanted T ’to avoid scill more ruthlosfl
coesuros." The word is "Still". Do you understand ao? You
3 -id in your interrogation that with your supjestion you want¬
'd to prevent tho brutal measures of a Him lor aid at least
--lay th:c. You answered this question to the _rosecutor in
-he affimativo, and with this answer you vculd admit that
your suj jest ion could already be considered fii ratiloss. uur


'J -«y 19-^i-BK~ll-5-iCarrow (Iat. Von Schoon)
C,urtt No. 1


ru-suro while, nccordinj to you, it was somethin; entirely
iifforont, that is, to faring Kixnlor frets his intention
to use ruthless methods. I ask you, do you intond to adnit
-bat with your su~ ostions you. wantod "to prevent ruthless
measures but not still noro ruthless measures?"

.. I should like to formulate that very oonorctoly a join.

I wanted, as fur \s possible, to prevent or at least re¬
direct all no '.suiViS. I o-.n't say it any other way.

. Is it r.l3o true cs yoiffanswer to the quostion of tho
.rosocutor just indicated, if I understood it correctly,
that you were convincod of the complete inofficioncy of
your sterilization su ppstion?

••• I believe I explained cloarly that I was convincod that
the suggestions oould not bo carried out in .-rcotico.

. Tho prosecutor also askod you, roferrin ; to tho offoct
that you su;;;ustod tho sterilization of two to throo million
Jjws, what vr.s to bo dono -with tho other sovon nillion Jews.
Tor you, in your official capacity, was thoro any obligation
to try to frustrate Hitler'3 or Hinder* s plan to oxtominnto
tho Jews? Yes or no?

No, there was no obligation.

. Tho .rosooution finally submitted documents to you
'orin;in.- you in connection with -ichnann and a Dr. Kallnoyor
md drafts by a Dr. ••otzol. Did I understand you correctly
th t the none ^iohnonn was completely unknown to you at that
-ir.e and that until theso documents wero submitted this
horning you kaqw nothin about tho talks which Dr. ..etzol • *
or sogo one else is sup osod to have h--ri with Obordionst-
1“ iter Brack in 19x1?

- "ntil those documents were submitted I hod no knowledge
of I con not ovon remember the nano of Dr. ./etzol or
'-tzler.

. ”r. Brack, is it true that in the course of our many


7765


—

’.'zy 19-11-3K-11 -S-K err ow {Int. Von Schoen)
Court No. 1


conrorsr.t ions I nysolf contior.cd the none Sicbc-nn, to lr .!
find out if this ^ichmonn hod any plans for the cxtoriaina-
^ion of tho Jews, and is it true that I node an a.plioi:-
Ci°n to 0 -11 this i-ichnanrr cs a witness on your bohr.lf;
thzt this up. lication was G_rovcd, end that it was only
iiscovjrod later that l*ichr:nnn was dond?

.. Yes, that is true.

- My final question. ..t tho end tho prosecution askod
you whothur the sentence in the socond letter of tho 23rd
of Juno 13-42 'it nakos no difforonco whothor thoso Jows
booono gwoto of sterilization" or sonothinc liko thnt is
oonnocted with your first letter? You suid "yos". Is
that truo?

.. Yos.

. I* I r. not mistaken, during your diroct examination,
you said that you cade this ronark in tho socond lottor
booauso at that tine in 19-12 tho Jows alroady suspootod
thoir fate and no indications that storilizntion was
intandod would have boon n oossary. Do you undorstnnd ray
question?

for -:3 I recenher, I said durin; ny direot oxcaina-
*.-on that the Jows had an idea of their futo.


776 >. < ■


IS Knv-H-CS-12-l-v-l v (lot. V n Soh on)
c urt l.


..r.d =v vor^ finr.l quest! n, the Fr secut -r this n rnln,- sj ko
f D cur r.* :ro - 126 , i-erha: s I rev f mulate : 11 , f the statomnts la
• l is no quesii a. Is It c<rr--et in the f mulati a f this affidavit
th -pc ms o fl'ht oh ut it, h rltirul bow rdodf

•v. X»s. ..s far ns in ay e n'.iti n at the tin.’ I was nhlo t
an'-rrstan-* thin s r "rasp thir. s, there was a fi.-htj tut thero w-ro
--m thir. s I r 'ally didn't understand, ar. ' didn't fi -ht sb ut then.

itnoss, finally ! sh uK like t ask y u th.- at fundnrwntal

qixsti n result in;- fr n the cr ss-oxaninnti n; w-.ro v u o nvincad f

> •

•Vt l' -alit” f Hitlers Deeror f 1st Z •: t« >r 1959?

... I w s firmly c nvincad f tho locality f that r*ocrec.

%• ~oro yu awnro th-.t in e llnb-ratin- with the euthanasia
; r -ran y u w iro a raittin : n . oml ffonso?

-*• K , I w^s n t awsro I was j .rtleluting in a jenal ffonso.

Q. Di • v u act ir full e gnlsonoo «.f the 1 r.lity f wh ;t v u
»>ro d-in.-t

... Ins.

DF!iOBSCP7V/Qtt ?*r. Prosidont, I hare n further questi ns t-
‘•‘•is witn ss.

?x 7*3 y .S3IX T i

a. *itn>6s, ; loose rtosoriV n outhamsia station, f what build¬
ings -’.id it c nsist?

... .. uthanr.sia st-ti n wr.s c nontl instituti *r., f r oxotaplo
instituti n - * 3 nr.mstoin. Th-. instituti n t S' -noons to in c nsist-
' f several buildings in a iar/o piece f r un's. In th.so bulld-
ir. s wuT' th" a:e ssir;- r ns f r th , : rs nnol, f.r therapy, eto.

r euthanasia sfoeifioally n f th s lniil in-s wr.s used. It ro- #

‘ lr.. J as it v s, except that n-- nf theso r rs was arrenrei a
•tttennsin r r. I c~n*t *-iscri'>. it in ay thor w y. The euthanasia
irctituti ns w r: r t ■'uilt, end the- were instituti r.s lrc'^y in
xir*.. r.e- which ir r- used :s cuthat sir instituti ns.

. ~»ro th •- lr - cc» i’d by thor sick r ins r.-. pers ns?


7767


1 ? V".v— v -O r S- 1 2-2-Vftloy (v -n Schoon)
C urt K . 1.


«. H-. *h<> patients w»ro transferred thoro n instructions f r n

tte ’’inistrv f the Interior.

Q. rrhrt hoi the txiildinrs beer, used f r baf-rc that?

That differed. Ono -f then at Oraffonock, I v eliovo w.is o
h w f r crip. les rf the Sanaritor P-undati n, and tho inrtitos wore
transferred ond tho instituti n was wa do evuilnhlo f r euthanasia. In
this c nnneti n t TurttonW - instituti n was turnod >vor fr n tho
Turttonhor.• finistr? 't tho Intori r t the Itoich ‘Ministry f tho
Intori r.

Q. R- w rtny f tho ;crs ns t he subjootod t outhur-osia would bo
In such o stati'n at -ni tir»?

• I oan't say. Thoro was, f o urso, r' n f r a fr oat noi^,
but h w nany wor» thoro ot tho saru tiao I don't Icn*.

Q, K-w Ion,- nftcr o shijajnt rf jors ns nrrivod f.t a outhonasin
stnti n w ull thoy bo subjootod t- tho outhnnnsio?

A. I can only say fr n what the drot r at tho euthanasia in¬
stituti n t Id no. I snid bof re thot 1 was at thoso tuthnnnsin
Instituti ns sovoml tiros. I saw ;otlonts wh had boon thoro nly o
sh-rt tino f r hservati n by tho outhnensia d ct r, and r ls< patients
h»ro thu euthanasia * ot.r trld w. that ho was still in d-ubt as t'
shethor ho w till subject then t outhonosio, cr whvthor ho w- uld send
then v ack t- th.' bsorv^tirn institution, r thoir ri.-inol instituti n.
?hrt do.ondod n h w 1 r. tho outhnnosia •* etrr nerdod t bsorvo tho
individual patent In rdor t f'rn his rwn o nclusi n, because it wos
he who ha'* tho final ros. -nsiMlity.

<• ~ old thcro bo os runy as 100 'f thoso pors ns in tho T uj
f buil-'inre nt bna tirw?

... Thoro wore cortainly buildio-s which would h'uso a hundrod,

1 ‘■oliovo s<. I w uld sav n hundred, yos.

Q. ns tho rss ehar.bcr o soporatc buildin >r Just n r-.cta in .-no
f the ohor bullin.-s?

... That w.-.s rnly no r n in the buildin.-,.

■<. But it was s r n in tb: buildin.-. and t a sc-crctc ocnstructim?


I


19 lfcy-J'-GPS-12-3-Helcy ( v ~n Sehoon)

Ccjrt . 1.


A. K<-, n«, thcro was a-t o sopereto building

«. tihapo was tho ereaotory lccatod?

A. That vnriod t'o. In Gmfenock, I beliovo tho cronstoriun was
at e‘3io ''iatuncu fr n tho institution, in another fcuildin*-, whilo ot
S nncnstoin it w-a in tho min ‘uil’in,-. It vr.riodi I h vo no r°ry
clear roc -ll:cti n f that. In Somanatcin I op prottv suro it wr's in
tho min building*

Q. Jii* thoa ,ar8 na w. ro to bo subjcctod tc outhonaaio, after
rominin- aiv'rnl day a in th. buil.'.in- and they woro put in tho r«a
chamber, wold Juat think they woro ( yin- t*> h? *lvcn n ah-wor bath?

A. I d-r.'t believo thoy had any fdon whero they » ro r. in;- at all.

Q. D you noon bocauao they w.ro insane cr icoo*oblo of hnvinc
an idea or air.* ly i* they had iei do ;roo of intolllgonoo thoy didn't
kn-w whnt waa roinr tc hn; jon?

A. Tea, I noant tho foraor.

Q. Oc yukrnr nnythin about tho station at Radomr?

I h vj elrondy said Ha 'nnr.r ia tho nly atoti* n of which I
kn w nothing, boccuao it wr.i tho loat cn*> which waa built. That waa
idion I woa no lor.-or isuch ccncomod with thaso things. I think that
Ha da rc r wna n-tdo n ovthcnnain inatitution in 19*1.

TIE PIESIEEtfTi Has c unsol any furthor quest! ns?

DR. FCttSSHK.-KHt Ho, lir. Pro aidant.

THE F.JSIDENTi It ia n w tiso f r ur r n roooas.

The Tribunal will be in recess until 1»30.

(Thcroujcn the no-'n roco3S wna taken.)


7769


1? liy I*7-^-OT-13-l-?oJtcr(Peeler)
Court. No. 1 -S'


AFTERNOON SESSION

(Tho hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 19 Hay 19k7.)

TIE lURSf&Ls -ho Tribunal is again in session*

VIKTOR BRACK - Rosuaod

KJtDTi -jy it ploaso your !onor, dofonoo counsol havo cdlcd to
ry attention that they are desirous of having another nesting concern¬
ing tho submitting of briofs to the Tribunal, “honover it is
convenient for tho Tribunal, tho prosocuticn is Trilling to neot with
tho dofenso counsel and tho Tribunal.

TIE HUSDBHTt Thi Tribunal trill be glad to t»ot with tho caanittco
Tron dof onso cousol tonorror afternoon after tho rccoos of tho
court at 3:30; also ith tho nrosocuticn.


ELL j:- .?!.:: BT T.B COURT (Continuod)


BX1HB <SE3IDEli7i


Q. TTitness, I have ono .soro q ostion. uo understand that you havo
tostifiod that you woro not familiar with tho station Hadauar, but
do you know whether or that that outlianosla station raa, gonorally
speaking, constructed and o cratod £ on: tho sam linos as tho
otVor stations?

K I would assume that, llonmr, I c annot say that -ith cortainty,
because I never actually sat; Hndonar.

TIE {RESIDENT: haaeny dofonso co raol axy quostiorn to propound to


tho witness?


REDIRECT ~uXT.7I01J (Continuod)


DP.. HQFT.wlHN (Counsol for tho Dofonrtait Pokomy): *x. irosidont, 1
only havb a^^uo3tions to pvt to the witness rfiich -.roso fr«i tho


cross


E DP.. HOST. ANN:


Q. ••itress, wher-'Bked by tho pros caution, you said that you were not
/ 0

a ihysiclan nor.a psychiatrist,

r:


.V.^or


7770


19 Hay 13 - 2 -fosfccr (3nclcr)

Court Mo. 1

But didn't you havo rhnt is gonarally dcairnatod as -‘radical
i.-.torost"?

... Mo, I Truldn't call it "acdical interest". I r-uld perhaps call
it 3o:» understanding, because I r-.-breught up in a physician's
hoxu

"itr«c33, didn't you knorr that an ottonpt -me aado te ronevo
rancor by X-rays?

A. Mo, I only knerrtnat radiua rays t»ro usod in connection r;ith
cancer.

0 . ‘•itnoas, rero you over X rayed b* too arry or aiyuhcro olso?

A. Yes, I-ao X-rayed on various occasions.

.. Uidn't you notico, ritrv-ss, that cortain precautionary .oacuro3
•oro taken during x-raying?

.. Mo, I didn't notica that, but it is possifclo.

.. Jltnoss, couldn't you t X-rays could xrhapa destroy

tincuoa of tho body?

A. i cm icagino that, but I don't .’enow in rhat connection or undor
v.-t condition that could bo poaeiblo.

i. t*'itno33, didn't you havo to cc aider that thought r;fcon aug osting
* is X-ray sterilization?

A. Mo, r.o such thoughts arose -ithin no.

DE. FTIOXCCKAHIJ (Counsol for t o DoTondoat Brack): a*. ircnidont,
ts> ry rogrot, I nst object to t»is foxr of <*ro dioning. I Wrink
that this nattor --as oxhauatod by toe direct and cross oxarjinntion.

El* rhESJSSIT: I rill -*»k dofonso compel for toe Dofondaat Pokorny
.c purpose of theso questions

j. t. HOPF; l.Nlf (Counsel for f.» Dofowiant Pokorry): :'r. r*es . lont, I
should like to go back to too original affidavit "ado b > tho Defendant

‘-.-fxc’.:. There is a cortain discrepancy botooon that affiravit
:-“oscnt testiaony. This dlscrotxccy b.t- --nr, tooso too atatcrxnts is
r. ry nlsn for too dufonso of ay oliout. For'hah roasot. I

7771


i$ lixf li7-A-^-13-3-c’Mt^(rc3lcr)

rgurt So. 1


rantod to ascertain whether the Defendant Brack actually c^ild 'mow
aathing about the possibility oT sterilisation by I-rays.

ViS HUB DENT: C oun scl nay proceed as rapidly as possible. Counsel
~,v proceed with tho interrogation along that line but .alee it as
expeditious as po3siblo,

DB.aOWBlNNj Xos, your Honor.

WDR. 90PTJUW:

-itnoaq I shall onco noro ccno back to tho question >«*ich I havo
put to you; on tho basis of your nodical ’.'n«7irlcd-o tfcich , aftor
all, you had, Tculdr.'t you havo to havo considered it probablo tlxt
one actually could sterillsa hunan bein'? b; noons of "-rays?

A. I should like to correct you. I had no nodicrl ’.avyrlod c.

Hevrover, I could roly upon fho inforontion given to no by a clinician
tfcnu i conoidorod to bo reliablo and who hinsolf had tro'tod no Tdth
:;-rnys, ho told :» that danasos to tho genitals by 1 -rc^ aro not
. esiblo and if they do ooro about they would piss mray. ThSa
pirsician oonfimod that in an affi avit.

.. hut that inforuatior. c-s 15 years back, wasn't it?

... ’.few it is 15 yuars apo, but at tf»at tiuo it was only r.ovor. or
oirjht years. Horov.r, I an no A-ray rososrehor.

. “itnoos, didn't you discuss with tlw Defendant Bokorny, Tile
you vroro Ixro, tho reason Wh;- !vj rroto ‘.iia letter?

... "os, I did talk to ol:omy.

(. "id hn toll you fer chat reason ho troto tho lcttor-.hich Stas boon
subnitted hero as a docunont?

£

A. I bolievo to hinted at tho reason.

SR. HQFFMlEx Thank you. I havo no further questions.

T.2 FPISIDSHT: Argr other questions to bo propounded to t i ritnosa

v*» v,o dofenso counsel?

oir.co thoro arc no furt.xr questions, the citnass will bo o ‘='-5cd

:‘ren tlx srKaiS and rosuno ‘is ylaco.

7772


I 1; 1-7 L7-A-c^-13-fc-- , *«t.'r(J-r)

H Court Ho. 1


(Tho witness ras excused.)

BE PRESIDENT: Has counsel for the Defendant Brack an. furthor
Tidccco to introduce?

D?.. FRCESCi£ii\NN( Counsel for the DofowUt Brack): ilr. .d-csidont,

I forego tho subaission of tho affidavit in ny Docunont ok No.

I, -'ocunont 3, on affidavit b- a certain Arnold Honoig , and tho
affidavit in ay supplement 'to. 3, affidavit No. h7, on page 8, rhich
is tho affidavit by Kloffol, sinco the prosecution has jivon no no
reason to read thoso taro affi Tits, I vnr.t to draw your attontion to
cno affidavit, i*r. Prosidont, in oonncctic.n with a nattor rhich carw
•-? this morning. This is tho Kallnoycr affidavit. I-.anted to ostabli*
frei this affidavit that title iiallao yor at tho end of 19JiO —
that in Exhibit Brack 23, knllrcoyor affidavit — I ;r;ntod to cstnblidi
that tliis witness says "Freer tho :*oar 1?36 to tho end of 1?!>0 I
•.ras onployod .as a clerk in tho •uchrors' Chance lie ry.- 1 ..0 far os I

9

knew , this Kallrviycr rras lawn to t>o Dofondant Brack virtually
only under her noidon nano ..ooso, nfortunatcly, 1 can find no
indication of that in tho affidavit liovovor, and I should liko to
add that information, fh roforo I shall subnit a briof supple¬
mental 3tatonont about that none.


7773


x '• So. 1

19 l ey «7-A-l4-l -EHH--Keshan (Hauler)


I have now concluded the submission of evldcnco, hr. President. I
fc/ivi triod to establish thet the defendant Brack had hunano motives in
carrying out his sterilitetion evxrinents, and furthermore was not
involved in the nurder of 50-60,000 insane persons, but that it could
only have been - end was - euthanasia. That is ell I have to say and I
should r.ov like to conclude ay case.

OX rrESIDEET: The effld/vit which you oaitted froa Document Book
1 vas Brack Document 3?

Dfc. FRCESCHaAKS: Yes, Brack Document 3, the affidavit of Arnold
Kennig.

THE PRESIDENT: The defense councel for defendant Brack having
rostei his ccse, tho Tribunal r.ov calls the case against the defendant
Sockor-ireysung.

IR. TIP? (Counsel f >r the defendant Bockcr-Froysong): Hr. President,
Dr. Marx, thj dofense cconrel fer tho defendant Bockor-Frcyscng, is suf¬
fering froa tho aftor-offocts of a war injury and vill unfortunatoly bo
unable to apocar in court for a few days. Vith the permission of tho
Tribunal I shall begin tho examination of the defendant Dr. Bocker-
Freycong until Dr. Harx returns, which I think will bo in a far days.

THE PRESIDED: Veil, Dr. Tlpp, you are a peering at this tiao at
the roauost of Dr. Marx?

Dh. TIP?: Tos, Dr. Karr asked no to examine tho vitnesp on his
behalf.

THE PRESIDE!!!: And with the consent of the defendant Becker-
Freyseng?

DR. TIPP: Yes.

THE PRESIDE!!: Then counsel nay proceed.

Dk. TIPP: I should first of all like to call the defendant as a
witness to tho witness stand.

THE PRESIDE!!!: The defendant 3cckcr-Freyscng will take the witness


stand as a witness in his own defense.

mu


Court So. 1

19 Kay 47-A-14-2-!HH-ftcchan (feeler)


( EJ a ASH BECKEB-7EEY SZ SQ, e witness, took the stand and testified
P G follows.)

BY JUDGE S23EISG:

Cu You answer to the nane of Eernrnn Bockcr-Freystng?

A. Yes.

Q, Hold up your hand and repeat rfter no the oath:

I swear by God, the Alnighty end Ctoniscient, th».t I win sneak the
pure truth and will withhold end rdd nothing.

(-ho witness repeated the oath.)

JUDGE SEBHIHGs You nay sit down.

ER. TIPPs kr. .-resident, I have one reeucst to nake to the lntor-
oroters bofore the beginning of this case. The word "Referent" will
play a decisive role in the case of the defendant Bcckcr-rroyscng. I
know this word can hardly be translated into English by using only or.o
word. This also apolies to the word "Ecfcrot", which is hardly trans¬
latable into the English language. For that rccson I should like to
suggost to the interpreters that vhonevur the word "Eofaront" or "Refo-
rat" appears they should always use the Gernnn turn, which I ntsuno io
auito cloar to the Tribunal. I bellovo thie will oirvo the clarity of
the case considerably.

THE PRESIDENT: I think that for the sake of the rocord thooc torns
should bo explained for the rocord according to the signification which
counsel pieces upon then.

Z&. TIPP: Certainly, hr. President. I would suggest that tho
Gerncn words be used end then in parenthesis the English translation.

1 think that is the host solution. a

IKE PRESIDENT: bill you now eek the intorpr-ters to give the
English explanation of the vord6?

ZS. TIPPs Gladly. '-Hi the interpr.tcr plcrse explain how ha
thinks "Referent" end "Eeferat* should be translated?

THE ISTSiSSISEEs Certainly, Your Honor. The word ■r.eferent" is

7775


Coart So. 1

19 Me;' 47-A-14-3-£Qt-#e ehan (Etiler)


the nan who is asrlgced to a certain deoartr.wnt in order to deal with
any of the subjects that coce up there. He is ar. expert assigned to
deal with e special dopartnent.

A ’Referet" is the entire department where these special subjects
are dealt with.

THE PRESIDENT: Those explanations - ere they satisfactory to
counsel for tho prosecution and for the defense?

EE. TIPP: Yes, Your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: Very veil, those explanations of the use of tho
word being now contained in the record, 1 don't thinie they need be
repeated pfter the uso of either one of those words because the crolnnn-
tion is contained in the record.

MB. HARPY: I night rsk defense counsel. Your Honor, what other
words ho thicks right create a discrepancy. It there sooc other
definition which was used here which he thinks is orroncous, so we can
clear that up now?

DR. TIPP: Ho, Mr. President. The difficulty, ns I see it, lo
that various interpreters use different English orpros'’ions for that
word end as a rosult there Is no clarity in the record that the torm
"Roforcnt" is Meant.

THE PBESIDEST: Which tern do you mean, cour.sol, "Referent" or
"Boferat"?

DR. TIPP: I an referring now to the expression "Refcront". Thlo
hr b repeatedly boon translated with different weeds, defending on which
intorpretur speaking into the Microphone. I should like to bring
to your attention that at one tine I had to object because that word
was translated as "chief of the branch". In order to be ouitc explicit
I should liko to sco that the sene verd is d»m usod throughout the
proceedings. I v* a t to see to it that the English tore does not change.

THE PRESIDENT: It appears that the word "consultant"in English

generally corresponds with the word "Referent” as given b y counsel.

7770


Court Ko. 1

19 May 4?-A-14-4-IS4-*eehan (Re^ler)


I®. TIP?: I rust object to that, Kr. President.

TEE PEES ERST: I was Just caking the suggestion. It ie perfectly
satisfactory to use the words "Referent" end "Refernt* with the evolann-
tion which is already contained in the record, if that is satisfactory
to counsel for the orosecution and the defense.

PR. TIP?: hay I clarify that? "Consultant" ir. the record here ie
always the nan who is advising, for instance, the advising physician.

The position which Professor Rose had is a "consultant" but that is not

s "Referent*.

TEA PRASIDAJ.'T: Shat is unieportanfc, counsel. Tho Tribunal will
follow your suggestion, using the German words which have boon e*plainod
to tho Tribunal end for tho record.

MR. KASUTi Your Honor, that of course does not orejudice tho
right of the prosecution to riolntoln that the Referent is tho chief of
n department, X prosuco.

THE tERSIDAST: If counsel for the prosecution contends that it is
tho proper translation of tho word, the prosecution nay offer oxuort
opinions as to ths conning of the word "Referent" - tho proper trans¬
lation into English. Tho prosecution cay have that right.

DR. TIP?: In that caso, I nay coaconcc.

DIRACT AXA.iIKAlIC3

BY DR. TIPP:

Q. Witness, ycur none is Eorr:ann Josef Beckor-Frcysong rr.d you
vtrw born 18 July 1910 at Ludvigshafcn on the Rhino, is that correct?

A. Yes, thrt is correct.

<*. Would you please briefly describe to the Tribunal your oduca-

m

tion and training up to the tine you entered collcgo?

A. I grew uo in ny parent's hoae. Ky father died in tho year

1917 during the First World War rs * captain in the Zngincer Corps of

the Reservo. then aoved to Eeidelbcrg where I a.ttcnded cchool. At

Raster 1929 I graduated froa secondary school (Eucer.istiches Gynnasiua).

7777.


Court 1

is Kay 47-l~l4-fr-iTtK-«fo*has (Easier)

After that I started =5* Dvdical studies. X studied et Heidelberg,
Innsbruck, rad Berlin. In 3erlin in the year 1534 I passed Oy -udical
stato cxaainatlon.

Q. -'ad now, witness, would you please Just as briefly describe
your crofossionei activities which followed thereafter?

A. Free January 1934 until July 1938 I was at first active no cr.
intern and after that as en assistant p.t the Fourth Medic/1 University
Clinic of Berlin under Frofosoor Kelcut Dcnnig. During ny clinical
activity I cade ;jy doctor's thesis through cxp.rinentnl work. In
August 1938 I beear.c on assistant at the Aviation hedicel Research
Institute of the Reich Aviation Ministry in Berlin, which was under
Professor Hubortus Strughold. I retained this civilian uositlor. until
the cooltuletion. In 1944 the nodical faculty of the University of
Berlin granted no the decree of rector Ked. Kr.bil. on the brsis of
exoerinental work about so-called oxygon poisoning, and in the vintor
•ssester 1944-1946 I was appointed a locturor on internal and aviation


nodlcino


Court 1

May 19-jv-lc-l-HfJ-Cooh-Raaler.


v. Mow weald you ',lesse describe tj as your military
career?

a. My brslc allltiry training I received In 1937 In
t..o for., o:' 4 so-called ei^ht-weeics course. In the auaaer
of 19-10 I was drafted Into the Luftwaffe e6 an unterarzt.

«t first I was at an aviators examination station, wording
with 2 motorized low-pressure chamber platoon and In .-.u^ust
19vl I was order.-d back to Berlin from the southern doctor
of the Russian front . nd was tranefereed to the .'.udloal
Inspector: te of the Luftwaffe. There I stayed antll Kay
13 4 ’0 -n '\salstont A-ferent. From tnen on I was a
•ief-. rent in the Raforat for -.vlatlon Medicine. My position
no Referent I retained .ntll 8 May 1945.

Did 'ou yours If aenl for this osltion In the
Reich .-.vlatlon Ministry, witness, or do '-ou .<now lr. whet
manner «oU were asel c ned to tn.*t oosltlon? I aa asMln , you,
not for wh t ounoaa but In whot a-nnsr.

«. Mo, I don't icnov.

... *t ’ny r to, .u yo-rs.lf did not try to jet the
osltion?

ii. Ko.

... hat Glut r r°nX did you re?ch wltr. the Luftwaffe?

«. Aft.r the terscrlbed period of more then two years,
nftar I .vd ;e,.n an Asslstenzj rzt and an Oberrrzt, I was
roioted in the summer of 1343 to caotnln in the scaled
c r s, st-bsa-zt, -^nd I retained th t ranM until the end
of : ia war.

s. Perhaps lc would e nterestln* tc. rar something
- - : ir f r te after the c pltal-tlon. Could you describe

t: -'f to us briefly?

In }fey P.5 I got into American captivity In the

i -den I stayed in England for five veehs In an

7779


Court 1

y 19-A-15-2-HD-Cook-Ramler.


Af rican Interrogation camo; on 15 September 1945 I was
released free the prisoner of war c mp nicling. In October
10-5 I was employed by tne American «ray Air Force as a
co-verier at the Aero-hedlcal Center at Heidelberg. I Vos
'.ctlve there together with a number of other forcer eviction
B-Jical men. The German chief of tne scientific aepart-
•d.nt wdfl my old chief. Professor otrughold. From there I
>• 3 arrested on tne 15 September, 1345.

s . *nd now let us ooonh cbout your -.olitlcal otxvltlea.
'itr.os', were you jolltloelly active as a student or • ther-
wise?

a. In I4oy 1933 I entered the NSDaP r.a e twenty two year
old student. I held no office or rani within the party. In
addition to that I a a member of the NOKX, tne National
socialist motorized cone, In the medical service of w.iioh
I c lev d che ronfc of *.«n Ober-trupp-fuehrer, whloh corres-
ndo t that of a eer c eont. as a prying meab-r : belonged
to the N8FX, the National socialist rlyin^ Corps.

3. In addition to tn. t wer> i a member of any other
national oooi^llat professional organization, j-s for lnatanoe
the Ncti'nel socllalct student Luo 0 ^o, the National
Socialist Physlclens League or tne Notl nol ^uclallots
Lecturers' League?

a• Ho, I belonged to none of these organizations.

... On the basis of the testimony of the expert who was
c-lled b tne Pros cation, Professor Llebrsndt, v:e neurd

A

suaefc ing ‘beut tne pnyslcians' school *t Altrehse. Can

cell us whetner y.u at any time visited «*ny such c urse?
a. No, I never visited a c.urse at altrehse, but In
- - c nnectljn I may mention tn. t I was nev.-r compelled

I v: .ldn't h vo been c .apellea *cy the Rol.ch ?hy6lci'.ns'

a t. -ccend ony such c.urse. Only my local out., rlsy

77?C


Court 1

-try 13-«-15-3-HB-C-> ok-RaaL or.

in Berlin, the magistrate f the city f Berlin, asked me to
sttand s ch o c are, but I never did thet.

... 1 ' a were tellin e as before that y.u wrnted to become

a lectar-r, end it is Known thet lecturers v aid hove to -o
thr a;./, r lltlcal cans in order t, a et tr.elr coliticcl
training, Did you aerticlprte in such a lecturers 1 c arse
in e c-uap?

a. ;; , I went to no lectu-erd 1 camp, prob-bly because
there wo.e ,','j each camos during the va .

x. That I think is sufficient as to your ly.lltlcal
activities, l.'ow let us tarn to your medical scientific
activity. Under whose B idnr.ee aid y. a receive y^ur
clinical specialized training?

a. I ia?y repeat th t brlofly as -n internal physician
I wr.s od.’.c tod at the Robert Koch hospital in Berlin undvr
t.vo o*,rr_,e of Professor Or. Helmut Denning. Th t etvrted
in J nu~ry 1935 and wont on antll July 1938. Jennln- had
formerly been a first lieutenant In the medical corns and
hid been ? assisting the famous ollnlonl physician, Aud-lf
V n Krehl *t Heidelberg, and durln- which ur trnlnln B .vaa
often r.aolotcd by a laboratory Boston.

Z. “ltnoss, this "Ctlvlty is not the subject jf the
c ar e j f the prosecution, fou arc sitting in tne doo*
because -.a prrticlo ted in aviation medicine. How did ou
c-mo tu b. active within ihi-t sphere?

ft. It wc6 my intention to Complete ay education rs an^
lntv.rnr .1 hyslclan, by aa_ltl»nrl theoretical education.

• r r tivt reason I looked for some possibility to work in
p aysiuloglcal institute. Tar j ugh ray cnlef physician I
v.-nt to Professor ctru^nold who was tne ..oad of tne jedlcr.l
institute at 3erlir., In wnose institute certain research

 wrs carried ut re B crdiR B tne questions of breatting

7781


Court 1

Jp.y 19-a- 15—4—.-ID-Coojc-Haaler.


and circ 1 -tion na they came uo under srecl"! conditions of
avirticn. Since from the clinical tjolnt of view I was
Interacted in the esse - roblems, I asked to b et a position
:c zec-sOQ an associate of that Institute. Professor
Streghold was e student of tnc physiolo.1st, Dv. Van Von
Fray, -nc. Juet as Dennln- fled been active in the United
States for s-.c, considerable ocrlod of time. In ex Ianr,tlon
of vh t Professor Liebrandt has stated here I should 11 :e
to sp. tr.-s both of ay teachers were in no way what
Profea .r Leibrandt designated as the Nazi professors who
allegedly since 1933 had been tralnln c all the medical
sonerr.tion whloh ; row up of ter that oerlod of time. Both
or tnec. h'd been university urofossors before 1933 and both
of them «re today ''gain or rather 6tlll "ctlvc In leading
positions.

n. You were tellln^ us Or. 3ocker that you went .over to
rwlrtl.n modlolne In the year 193B?

A. Yes.

«s «n the br6ls of this trial It 1 oka as If the
entire viatlon medicine was only designed to work for the
Sermon air force, it looks now ns thou ; h this entire solonoe
from r rraotlcal oint of view served for tae oreppretion
of the V?r. *'ould you -.lease tell us somethin- about th-t?


19 Kay 47—A_J«C_1S—l-C-roso Hamler )

C urt I

A ATietirn Medicine fb ouch wee carried •n In ell cruntrlco
where there was aviation end. In particular, during the lect two
dtcedee. It developed end it naturally followed aviation technique
end was always In accord with-the tasks -f the Air Forces. The
endeavors of Aviati n Medicine, however, were f-r the nalntFining 't
the health of the flyer and for the reeearch regarding the necessary
conditions of life as they prevail during flying. You can in that case
hardly ereak cf any science In that c nnectl-n. I nay point out that
the aost well know Aviation physician of Italy, Professor Margarla was
a priest with a cnth'llc -rder at Mailanl. Bven aftor 1945 the- Gcr-
nan avlotl n physicians wore peraltted t* w-rk at the Aero Medical
Center at Heidelberg and carry on the oaac w^rk in which they had
been active boforc.

You know witness that the Prrsocutlon In their oral stntoaont
has designated y u as a can who in spito of his y^uth had already
nchlevod ooac scientific succeos. It is, cf courso, natural that y u
had yourself been tho author of a few eclentiflc theocs whon you bo-
erne a lecturor. Could y u toll us briefly about your fvn scientific
work?

A Hell, during ay clinical training, as well as during ny avia¬
tion aedlcal training, I werkod scientifically. A nuaber of publica¬
tions contain the result of ay work.

<< Mr. Prcsidont, I think that the scientific work of the defen¬
dant is 1-rortant f ' r * he Jud£=*nt personality. Me have on-

deovored to get hold of these scientific puillcatl-ns but it was not
possible to do all that because of the aerial war which wont on in
C-e-rspny. However, vc have c-apiled the titles of all his w^rks which
list I sh uld like t- subult as 3ccker_TReysing docuaent Ho. 1. This
cph be f-und on rages 1 to 4 of Becker-Frcyseng Itecuaent Book I and
I should like to offer this list as Exhibit Ho. l. We arc here only
concerned with this up to the year 1942. The last w'rk cruld n"t b>e
included because unfortunately Dr. Bccker-Frcyseng has not ell the

material for that purpose. I have the original here and Prosecution

7783


1 ? Key *. 7-A-5 ■ C-IS-2-Ct-.ss (Int., Bernier)

C^urt I

can look at It. I should a t like to quote anything from that docu-

=£nt.

In this connection, witness, we ere not Interested In your cli¬
nical w-rk tut arlatl>n medical problems nay te of ooae importance,
rflth what particular aviation aedical pxr*ble=s did y u deal?

A During the yorrs of 1938 end 1939 I dealt with tine reserrch
experiments up to 9,COO neters altitude. That is to say, with con¬
sequences of p lack f oxygen which suddenly nay occur. In tho year
1939 to 1940 I dealt with the questions regarding adaptation to high
altitude. In that connection the titles 24 and 25 in the list would
te relovant. In the years 1936 to 1946 I concerned myself with ques¬
tions of so-called oxygen poieons. In this connection the titles 15
t 21 in the list are relevant. In the yearo fron 1945 to 1946 I con¬
cerned ayself with explosive docoaprcssion sickness during altitudes
of 30,000 meters.

q You vero giving ustho years of 1945 and 1946. That was after
the capltulat! n, was it n't. *hcrc did yiu carry on that work that
you Just mentioned?

A This is tht sane kind, of work about which Dr. Ruff as already
been speaking here which was carriod out at tho Aoro Medical Contor at
Heldolborg.

It is natural that you carriod out a nusbor of tests within
tho framework of that work. Kay I n w ask you how you were carrying
out those tests?

A This entire work consisted of tests. A number of these teoto
wore cerricd ou on animal*. *e were using the ordinary laboratory
animals: nice, TPts, guinea pige, rabbits, etc. In ddditi n tr these
animal experiments I carried nut experiments cn human beings. Ihio
was done in tho fora of experiments on his own person or experiments
on colleagueo or associates, as for instance Dr. Hane-C-corg Clanann,
Professor Rrich Opltt, and Dr. Ulrich Luft and in the year fron 1945
t 1946 Dr. Huff and Dr. Ctto C-auer.


7784


19 Me? /7-A_FjC_16-3-C-ro B 8 (1st., Seller)
Court I


tt Mr. President I had originally intended to have the witness
testify personally ahrut this questi n cf self-experiments. In order
V erredite the proceedings I think it would he acre advisable t Unit


ry«elf to whet I can shew or. hand of a rruaber of affidarits which I
shall offer as 3ec:<er-Treyseng d-cunents. A* the first document in
this c nnectl- n I ohould like to offer Bocker-Froyseng Docunont Ho. 3
which is elso contained in Docuaent Voluac I. This can ho found on
pa^c 8. This is an affidavit of 10 January 19*7 by Prof. dr. Strug-
h Id, who was for aany ye-rs the chief -f the defendant in hio peace
tine position as well as in the position which he held after the Bar.

I ©insider this p int sufficiently important f'r ai t' cite a nuaber
of paragraphs. 1 otart on jape 1 "I, Hubcrtus Strughcld, Dr. nod, ot
phil. co-worker at tho Aero Medical Center and Professor Physiology at
tho Unlverolty f Heidelberg, herewith aake the following statement on
oath regarding Dr. nod, habil. Hornann Bockcr-Jrcyecngi

"Dr. Hermann Bccker-Troyseng worked for sono yoaro until 1941 in
an established p sition ao an aesistant and scientific spociallot at
tho Medical Research Institute for Aviation, Berlin, of which I was tho
head, I can therefore give infrnatfon about Bockcr-Prcyocng covering
that period and also a lator period when he was an assistant Roforcnt
*r.d Roforcnt in the Medical Inspect-rate of the Luftwaffe and in his


spare tine occasionally continued with hio scientific researches which
he had taken up earlier."

The next paragraph under Bo. I deals with tho scientific quali-
flcpti ns of the defendant. I -nly quote a few sentences fr n that
paragraph:

"Btcker-Rrcyseng is a very s:und, prudent and critical scientist.
*hc w rk he carried .ut ranks an-ng the best la the sphere of German
aviation cedlcir.o and is specially distinguished by it absolute relia¬
bility.


I shall skip the next sentences. I do not consider then inport»nt
on-ugh pnd I ask the Tribunal to take notice. Tender paragraph Bo. 2
'*xrerinento carried cut on hinsclf" I qu:te: "Becker-Prcyecng's


7785


19 May 47_A_?*C-l6-4-C-rca3 (1st., Baaaler)

Court I

interest In scientific research went so far that he did n-t shrink
fr:a carrying out c npiiceted cxperinentlcn hie own person. Apart
fr-a at least 100 experiments carried cut on his own person in order
to test reactions to oigrgcn shortage which often lead to uncnnsclous-
r.ess and which, n’re or less, constituted part of the routine of ny
collaborators, who wars not forced to rake these experiments end often
oven carried then out an their own Initiative and against my advice,
to of the experlcents Becker-Treyseng nade n hlasolf are of special
distinction:

"In 1938 he stayed for nearly three days in a chnmbir filled
with alnoat pure caygen. During this txrerlner.t In which also ny flrot
assistant, Dr. H.G.Clar.ann took part, tone test anlnals were also
present In the chanher, ea-.ng then a rabbit. Although already on the
second day Bccker-Troyrong dovelopcd complaints, tho two assistants
could not be Induced tc drop the •'rlfflnal pirn to stay In the chanbcr
for three days. Only a few hours Nsforo tho end of the third day tho
experiment wao Interrupted fr:a cutsldo becauao neanwhllo Bcckor-
Freyseng was oh-wing drnfer'Us synptocs. Bcckcr-Jrcystng was brought
Into the clinic of Pro-;. Dcnnlg, with severe synptoss, whore he was
examined 'y tho Senior Fhysiclan there, Dr. Orjscurth, a friend of
Bcckor-Jrcyoong'* "hr was later c-nvictsd and executed In 1943 for antl-
Jatinal—Socialist activities. Only after 8 days Beckcr-Froysong'o
condition lnporved somewhat. Tho sympV.es wore the same ns observed
on tho test animals. The rabbit died, Becker-Preysenr recuperated.

After a olnller, sh-r;er interncdlatc oxperlnent carried out sono
=-ntho later en-ther experiment, also lasting threo days, with noarly
pure oxygen at an altitude f 9,000 sours. Through these two ex¬
periments It was proved c-ncbuslvoly for tho first tine that at a
certain pressure lirlt the breathing of pure-oxygen f^r a sufficiently
l:ng tine lo fetal, but that no such danger exists at v clow this
pressure. Since, boat tine, pvlatl-n science ell vtr the whole world

kn.ws that oxygen la n t danger s for any lcngtn f time at an a.ltltudo

7786


19 Kay ^-aJjC-ie-S-C-roas (in*.., Semmler)
Court I


above 4,OCO meters that, h-wevct, below that altitude pure oxygen say
be breathed only In snail, periodical d'-see. Hie sane lo true of
oxygen treatment of the sick end of casualties. This lo a heroic case
of en experiment which will demand a place In the annals of ocienco.

“It should he added that 3ecker Jreyscng received nc natcrlal
advantages fron these experiments."

I shall skip the next paragraph on this page. The sane way I
shall skip the paragraph dealing with politics. Professor Strughold
only says that BeckerJreyeeng gave hie eupport to th'so who were
suppressed o n political or racial gr-unds. May I only quote fron
page •*. “In conclusion I can say that BeckerJreysong le a highly
intelligent scientist, trained on sound principles, who even at an
early age has dona outstanding work for the progress of humanity
through his scientific research and especially through his heroic
experiments on hi# 'vn person, and who In future will play his part ao
a careful oclontlot and a willing doctor."

There follows the slgnaturo and the certification by an American
offlcor at Hoidelbarg. I offer this document as BcckorJrcyoeng Exhi¬
bit So. 2.


7787


Key 19-*v-BK-17-l-Xnrrow (Inc. Von Sc ho on)
Court N*. 1


..s tho next docunont I should like to offer Bockor-
Froyson.3 Docunont #2 which will bo Bookor-Froysonc Exhibit
r3. This is r.n affidavit by Professor not'. Dr. Donnie, dated
tho 21st of December, 19-46. Dr. Dennis i3 the chief of whon
Dr. Bcckcr-Froysons already spoke on tho witness stood. I
should like to quote a few pas 3030 s fron that docunont. ..t
first, thoro is the personal data concerning tho witness
and then ho writes, and I quoto:

"From 193-1 till 19-4-i I was ohiof of tho dopartcont for
internal disoasos and of tho fourth nodical unlvorsity
clinic at tho .iobort Koch Hospital, Berlin. Dr. Bookor-
r’rcyson ; worked thoro fron about 1934 to 1938, first as an
intorn assistant and lator on as cn assistant at ny clinic.
Tius I had to work daily with Dr. Bookor-Frcysons and boonao
well aoquaintod with his hunnn end nodionl ohnraotor."

Tho next fow 3cntoncos doal with tho hun.-in qualifications
of tho witness of whioh I should like tho Tribunal to tako
notico , and I shall ;;o on roadinj tho next fow sentences:

"Thoro wr.3 never .any question of usin^ patients for
nodical ox.orinents, but Dr. Bockor-Froy3onj always oarriod
those out on hinsclf or on studonts who voluntocrod for
that .urposa. Later, when Dr. Booker-Freyson^ wes no longer
at ny clinic, he still o:-.rriod out experiments on hiusolf.
Onou he. was admitted to ny clinic in a sorious condition,
occ .sionod by an experiment on his own person. Tais i3 tho
3aco oxporlr.ent which Dr. Stronghold alroady describod in
detail."

Then follows tho signature and certification.

-s the next docurmntv/e h-vu Document 3eck^r-Froyson£ 8*4

■hich I shall offer as Exhibit tf-4. I know that Ur. Hardy

is join;; to rr.iso an objection ianodi-’toly. I also know,

however, that tho Tribunal has already admitted such

7788


jj.-y 19——3X-17-2-K arrow (Ont. Von Sohocn)

Court No. 1

original ccrtif icatos as this as have boon suboittod horo.

This is an original letter by tho ^ro Medical Center,
Heidolbars* on its original writing /-por and I do not
thick that its authenticity can be contested. It is not
ty intention to quoto it.

MU. K..RDY: Your Honor, I could nysclf certify to tho
signature of tho officer inasauch ns I on iar.ilinr with it.
Howov^r, thi3 hero bronchos all the rulos and rojulations
of the Tribunal. I hevo, froti tiao to tine, objoctod to
documents of this naturo end tho Tribunal has sustained
tho objection. I can't sou tho value of thi3 one. It has
no probative value that I can soo. Colonel Bonford oxprosscs
in this docurunt that ho docs not wish to oxocuto an affidavit
or statonont relative to tho character or personality of
tho witness singly beeauso ho doos not know hir. well onouefc.

I can't soo tho v.aluo to this at nil. If it had ony
frobativo value I would not objoot to it at all but I fool
that tho prosecution aust object to tho admission of this
doounont.

Da. TIP?: If I nay answer that point briefly, Mr.

Prosidont. I an only subnittinj this docun.nt as it provos
that Dr. Bocker-Froy3oiv; was enployod at tho '*oro Medical
Center at Hnidolbora fro:, tho 15th of Octobor 1945 to tho
16th of So 4 tonbor 1946. This boconos ovidont clearly froti
the docunont tho sijnaturo of which the counsol for proso-
cution Just cortiflcd.

MU. rLliDY: Tho prosecution will stipulate that thc^
defendant did work at tho Univorsity of Heidolbors in tho
..oro Medical Center. That is where tho prosecution . ioked
hie u. and broucht hin here. Thcro is no question except
that docunonts of this naturo should not be adnittod into
evidence inasr.uch as they do not eeri ly with the rules
S'-t forth by the Tribunal.

7739


iloy 19—«.-3K-17-3-Karrow (Int. Von Schoon)
Curt No. 1


JUDGS SABRING; U.-. Hardy, will you r.^roe also that ho
. crforucd his work satisfactorily over thoro _s Colonel
iedford status in his letter?

lit. K.JQY: Certainly, Your Honor, but I objeot stronously
to the aciniss ion of affidavits or letters of this sort into
ovidonco inasnuch r.s it doosn't or.rry the oortifioato or
notary's sijnaturo or is not in tho _ro;or form horo.

THE i.l.SIDZffl: C umsol for tho prosocution havin'; stipulat-
jd certain facts - tho only facts covered by tho lottor, it
is tho rulinj of tho Tribunal that tho stimulation of counsol
is naplo to dovor tho fnots.

D*i. TIPP: I withdraw the dccuaont, Ur. President. ./hat
it tends to p rovo has olroady boon proved by tho str.toncnt
of tho proscoutor.

Tho next docur.ont which I offer is frai Bookor-Fraysone
flocuaont Book 1, Docun«nt 5, which is on p.^jo 1-4 of tho
'.ocur.ont book. I jive it the Exhibit */•;. It is an affidavit
oy Dr. Ci.-\nann who hca boon nentionod ooforo. It is datod
‘.ho 23rd of February 19-i7. Perhaps I nuy quo to a fow
thin ;s by way of illustration. ..ftor tho usu.ol introduotory
fornula tho witness continues cn pnjo 1 :

"Dr. tijvl. Booker-Froyscn^ was or.ployod by tho Besonroh
intituto for ..viation olodioine in Berlin froa 1938 until
th. end of 19-41. I ,jot to kno-.i hir. durin; this tine ns a
i.-n who had a hi,;h conooption of tho nodical profession and
cf uedical rosoarch. H;. always told no that in his viow
•*. crinunts on hunnn beings wero only to be oorried out
■-3 so if-ox. or inents."

I e on to the next paragraph:

'eiionstratod this view in joint oxporinonts with no


- IUj effects of <-xistin'j for several days in pure oxygen.

‘•'.3- kind of oxaerinents were ur^ontly necessary in view of

7790


I3-..-BK-17— ; -K-irrcvi (Int. Von Sohoon)
Court No. 1


t.-*> oxygon trcatxxont in oortain illnesses and the respiration
0 f oxyson vxhilo fly in-3. Sicoo it was known that of tor pro-
10x1301! bronthinc of puro oxygon rmiacls contracted pnounonia,
:nly solf-oxporix;onts ocno into the question whon tho first
cxjeriBonts of this ty.o were onrriod out on huaans. On
tho third day of this self -expo riaont, Dr. Booker-Froysong
stowed syaptoxis of cerebral irritation, such as hoadacho3,
n-.usop. and dizziness, end penuuonin, and required nearly B
days' clinical treataont. Those oxporinunts woro published
in tho ;oriodioal '..viation Kodicino.'

I shall skip tho noxt paragraph on'! then I quoto:

"In nunorous other cx.orinents with Dr. U. Luft and Dr.

0. itz, Dr. Bockor-Fruysono always placod hinsolf conplctoly
st thoir disposal."

I can onit tho re3t. Follows the si mature and tho usual
cortifioato of the notary.

The noxt doourient whioh I offer is also frax. Dobunent Book
1, 3ook>-r-Froyson3 ^cunent if 6, as Exhibit tf5. This is an
affidavit of Professor Dr. nod. Opitz of Kiel of tho 4th
of January, 1947. Professor Opitz is a professor at tho
University of Kiel. Under ffl ho tolls how he not Dr. Booker-
?reys-nc; that he was in alaost daily oentnet with hin
professionally fro.: 1933 to 1942 and that ho know hin very
•oil, and I shall quoto tho last parajraph on tho first
.t.e;

"••ith regard to science, Booker-Freys one always nnintniifr-
- a cor.^ lately ethical attitudo towards tho quostion of
nu.a.n ox.\-rinonts. During our collaboration, he noted .as
11 did, and tried out every soenia3ly dangerous experi-
• -at; first on hixasclf, bofor- carrying it out on others.

; • -r, during the tine we worked .together did ho carry out
-x.erir.cnts on fellow hunan beings unloss they had voluntar¬
ily ; laced a he; iso Ives at his disposal."


Kay 19-v.-3K-17-5-Kr.rrow (Int. Von Schocn)

Court Ko. 1

There follows n description by Dr. Cinnann of the oxpori-
-onts on his own person whioh I oan oait. Porhaps I any
quote on pngo 2, the lest few sentoncos of tha first Para¬
Graph:

"In addition wo onrriod out dozons of joint 3cif-ox;>ori-
nonts in tho low-^:ossuro chauber, whoro tho offoots of
hijh altitudes woro studied u.> to tho throshold of un¬
consciousness. Dr. Becker-rroysonc took part in those
ox, orinonts in tho saco nannor ns tho other doctors of our

working group."

Tho rest donls with an o. inion of Dr. Bookor-Frcysong
fren tho hunnn .>oint of whioh I shall not road but I should
liko tho Court to take notioo of it. Then follows tho
signature and tho custonary oortificato.

Tho last docu£v.nt which I should liko to subuit in thi3
connection is 3cckor-Fr^y3ong Docunent fl*7 on pago 19 of
Docutrent Book 1 to which I givo the Exhibit tf6. It is on
affidavit by luoturer Dr. Otto Gauer of iloidolborg, of tho
21th of January, 1917. .10 had orijinally intondod to call

Dr. Gauor as a wit no ss, but unfortunatoly, that is inpossiblo
oocauso Dr. Gr.ucr has olroady gono to -narioa. D r . Gauor
first tolls how he not Dr. Bookor-Froysong; that ho not hin
in 1937. Ko doscribos tho sclf-oxporinonts with Dr.

Clanann whioh have alrondy been ox. lainod and tho harn
whioh Dr. Bcckor-Froysong suffered fra; those oxporinents.

I shall quoto on the first page, tho last paragraph:

"In s; ito of theso un; levant cx.erionocs, Booker-Froysong
Would 3urely have refused to oarry out experiments concornod
with his own soi^ntific , roblcns on people of whoso willing
-r even voluntary cooper .tion he was not convinced."

Kcw, on tho second pr.jo I shall quote on tho first third
this pR30: 7792

_ _ - --1 'Ik i


if


”-v 19-..-3X-17-6-Kcrrow (Int. Von Schoen)

Court No. 1

"Later I undo investigations with hit: - that is, B^okor-
Fr-ysoa” - end P.uff on tho ctiolojy of 'bonds' .at a height
of 12,000 notors. Those aro very painful and can load
to d.-JGorous con, lioations. This is abundantly illustrat¬
es by tho fact that during this invosti 3 . 1 tion I su3tainod
- icnoo injury, which forcod nc to hnvo to walk on orutohos
for throo nonths. In spite of this, Bockor-Froyson^ nnd
Huff continued tho oxperinonts on thonsclvos eftor ny
eccidont."

I shall not quoto tho rost. It dosoribos how Bockor-
Freysone was ap. ointed in tho Modionl Inspcotorcto. He says
that 3ookor-Frv-yson;; oouploinod booauso ho didn't hnvo tine
to porforti his own oxperinonts, and thon ho speaks of tho
dofondant '3 political viows. Follows sleanturo and tho
custoi.ory cortificato.

I believe, v»itno83, your aotivity has boon explainod
suffioiontly by those docunonts so that wo nood discuss
it no further. I should noroly like to ask you, on tho
basis of your nur.orou3 3olf-oxporiixnt3 whioh wore in part
'an.jQrous and your ox.-orinonts on colloa,;uos, did you have
;r>j t experience with physiological oxperinonts - in
;rrtioular, oxperinonts on hunan beings?

.. Yos.

-i You know, witness, that oxporiuonts .» hunan boincs is,
on tho wholo, tho fundanontal ^roblen Df this trial. .» Groat
Seal has boon said about tho ethics and local foundation for
oxperinonts on hunan boincs. I should liko to havo your
pinion on this typo of oxperinonts, particularly because you
one of tho few witnesses who can testify frea his own
-.vcricnco. Do you consider an ox; orinont on hunan bcinps,

3 the .rosocution expert Leibbrandt said, illegal or crinin-

2 I undor all conditions or what is your opinion?

7793


19 :'37 17-.7D-I3£i-:iiloy (Int. von Scbon)

Court So. 1

A Tbit. I do not share Pro fo S3 or Loibrnndt*s point of view
can no dcubt bo seen frca ry numerous solf-exp* rinents which "wore not
.dthout danper, but I did axporiuants on other human beings considerably
Ifforont than Professor Leibrandt, because I believe that hunan
experiments is both good and bad, like any other human action it can
bo pornissiblo or criminal, depending on tho special conditions under
which it takes place. I consider tho problem inch more serious and much
noro oonplicatod than Profossor Loibrandt described it here. For hin and
for Jtr. Itoll, whoso book Profossor Loibrandt quoted hero at length, ex¬
perimental noUcino is a subject of historic philosophical, psychological
ccnsidoraticn. ?ron such a point of view from his dosk, it is vory easy
to Judgo experimental todiedno an! orx; of its nost important tools,
hor.an uxporinonts, and to coMam it, but at tho sano tino to recog¬
nize tho rosults of axp^riiiontal rusoarch an l to uso thoso results as
Profjssor Loibrandt doos, for oxanplo, as a practisin’ psychiatrist, as
ho us os mlaria tro.'.b.uint for paralysis which a *fcr' yoars a p was still
in a stage of human uxporinonts, but Profossor Loibrandt was kind
onou.gh tc explain hinsalf that lifo is a logical and ho hinsolf is no
ixcoption. Tho wholo ;iec*ical world has a different Feint of viow thon
Profossor Ldbmndt doos. It is vory easy to find Jo zona of examples of
this. I have said that I consider tho problem more sorious and noro
c:nplicatod then it looks according to Profossor Loibrandt^ doscription.
It ia sorious bocauso it affects tho basis of rac lical action and
Midi cal responsibility. Thorp is no doubt that tho doctor is primarily
o.llrr.tod to help tho petiont who asks hin for aid, and thero is no.

°ubt either that tho doctor as a research workers has tho obligation
to work on the pro rcss of :<edicino and to find new ways and noans of
treatin' tho individual patient. That this field is vory 'difficult is
in lea to \ by tho fact that as fr.r as I knew no country in the ’orld has
vali: larr settin fort ho 'utics and rights of tho doctor as a resoarch
- rfccr.

mu


19 I&7 U7-j’--*-TD-i6—2—:Salcy (Int. von Schon)
Court Ho. 1


According tc Goman law a -lexical action, for ex amp le an
operation is an assault which is not punished, simply because it is
performed -t the request of tha patient or because it is not immoral
cr becauso thero was no malicious intent, but German penal lav$ at
I'jast, can not find any positive Jud-r-ont or. nodical action.

Professor Loibrandt has quoted Dr. Moll's book "Medical Ethics"
end has called it in a sense the nodical codo of ethics. I did not
know this 'ocok before this trial. I never hoard it quo tod in a lccturo
or saw it quo tod in any other book, although for cd..ht of Ly 11 sonostors
f-ro boforo 1933. Put in the ujantts. I have rtuiiod !toll*s book vory
thoroughly. Moll's writoa axpro35ly that ovurythirv; which ho writes
about riwtioal ethics rofora only to tho strictly llnitod duties of the
:octor, as the Vector troats tho pationt. Ho statos oxpro3sly that for
other bronchos of the nodical profession, for oxanplo tho university
;:rofossor, a nodical profossor, and tho ctoctor as a rosoarch workor,
tiiero arc othir iutios. .'orcovur how nich Moll's nodical ethics, which
-as published in 1902 is United by its tino is cloar from one oxanplo.
For Veil it is a serious problem whethor, for oxanplo, a <:ynoocolorioal
examination can bo r.ado by a nolo doctor, an-' IfoU trios to avoid this
ifficulty by saying that such examination should bo carried out only
-7 fenalo lectors. This is only an ox an pl o of how in loss than half a
century tho <d ncopts of ethics chan.; o, ©specially if it is not a nattor
of ethics but cf prudery.

If one has road Toll's back an' if nodical ethics is not a
alo an, but a life task, one soos in this bock only tho enormous diffi¬
culties and one sees that V foil's books i3 no noro a choap patent solution
-r all nodical questions then the Oath of Hippocrates, for example.

I on't think that anyone in tho arid will reproach tho American
:y3iolo ist 'cndoll Hon-Vorsor., who is vory well known and quoted very
-ton in Oe'raany, because free 1911: to 1918 ho worked, on tho problem of
isor. bullets by ardor of his Government. Of course, tho loctor and the
research workers, beyond the narrow freauve-rk of his patients has an

7795


19 :&Y L7-A-..TT>-l£-3-:tiloy (Int. von Schoen)

Court 1

obligation to the corcunity in which he is placed by fate# As a witness
who is certainly not suspected of Nazilsn, I ray say tho Swiss
Psychiatrist Professor Bleulor, who in 1919 in his book "Artistic
Thinking and Modicine," wrote "I should like tc emphasize that a doctor
is not tho helper of one patient at tho expense of tho other living
beings and humn beings of the futuro, but is tho helper of oany. And
for that reason ho must let his results be influenced" by tho general
social point of vi->» just as well as fren the individual point of view
of a certain patient."

I road this book for tho first tine in 1935# I havo quoted it
repoatodly in rzy own wsrk. For oxauplo No. 7 and 9 of tho peporo on this
list which is Exhibit No. 1. '•'hat is said hero by tho doctor as a holper
of tho individual, and tho cornunlty, is valid in ry opinion, or tho
sano way for tho doctor as .tho rosoarch workor.

I consider that tho vory soriouo side of tho problem whioh
boconos complicated, bocauso human oxporlnonts aro carriod out daily
and everywhere in onomous raicbom ir. all fields. It is porfornod on
volunfcoors an*' non-voluntoors, on healthy persons and on sick persons,
on childron, insane persons, prisoners, intcmoc3, rich and poor. So
auch has boon said about it hero that I don't want to "carry coals to
Ifaff Castlo." I shall therefore not cito any individual oxomplos, but
only want to say that not only for tho laymn, but also for the exports
in looking ever tho literature on the subject is it oxtromoly difficult,
if not impossible to drew a dear lino cotween experiment examinations,
tosts or simple observation.


19 May-A-: 3-19-1-4eehar. (Int. Von Schon)

Court Xo. I.

Q Tiitness, you have told us your basic point of vie” brief¬
ly; do you consider all types of human experiments equal disre arding
the question of the experimental subjects or of their basic clif/or-
erces?

A Of course there are great differences, and distinction
must bo nado between a clinical expertaent on one hand and a phy¬
siological experiment on the otter hand. In the clinical oxtb ri-»nts,
the research worker oust have sick persons if possible for hi3 rosoarch
work, or lie must cake persor.3 sick in order to observe the origin,
course and influence of the diseaso. For instanco, Goldberior't
pellagra subjects in Uiesissipr-i aotually contracted pellagra, the
Mae aub. ects of the Swiss scientist Rleuler, whom I mentioned before,
wero actually sick and were observed and giver, specialized treatment,
while they were sick, so were Amins famous experimental subjects.
Klauson in I t <aii actually contracted truo lepra. Smith and Fay in the
United States and Sitorn in Denmark carried out their experiments, cclri
treatment with rectal tenperat-ros up to 2U degrees celeius on c.-ncor
patiente, nr<d Dill and Forbe3 carried out the sane treatment on tte in-
oano,

Cn the other hand thore is tte physiological exporinont,
which would include either staple oxoiination of normal procedure for
example the composition of the heart blood by means of introducing a
catheter free a blood vessel into tte heart experiments, as temc nr.d
Hi liner in Her fork and Michael in London performed, or the examina¬
tion of the blood supply of the brain by Lennox and Gibbs by a puncture
of the neck vein.

All of the physiological ex.-erinents are cade to determine

tte limit of endurance. I should like to refer to tho work of our own

physiological experiments made under great teat, for example, cold or

dust or a similar thing, medical questions about expeditions in the

Polar re ions or on tee top of tte :b host mountains of the rorld.

ducr. physiol©*ical experiments were carried out for example in the

7797


1? _ay-A-:2-19-2->feehar. (int. Von Schon)
Court Ho. I.


fora of fatigue and hunger tests on conscientious objectors in the
United States.

In aviation cedi cine we wire used to this sort of problem
even during peace tine, because altitudo is one such problem of endur¬
ance. The decisive thing in all such physiological tests, to my mind,
is that the person in charge of the experiment always controls, always
is able to approach the extreme cinute, step by step and can stop tin
experiment at all tines. He merely need make the conditions normal
again which had been made abnormal for the purpose of tho experiments.

The coa-water experiment, which is one of the subjects of
this trial, will later give ~e an occasion to go into this subject in
greater detail. Hore specifically I hope to be able to show that it
was not the purpose of tho experiments to penetrato beyond the limit of
what la normal, but to test this linit. In conclusion, I should like
to say that I hope I will not be nisu.xlerstood to moan that I consider
only physiological experiments permissible. I know that clinical ex-
periaants can be absolutely essential and that clinical experiments
may be performed under quite poralssablo conditions. Since Profocsor
Schroeder and Dr. Ruff have already gone into the same subject, I need
not say any more about it. I cannot see how these experiments oro sup¬
posed to have boon among destructive plans, which in the opinion of the
prosecution aro held in cobbor by all tho experiments on trial hero. I
believe that evoryono who seriously deals with this problem, especially
anyone who performs dangerous sell-experiment 3 on tho problem as a Doctor
mist corre to the conclusion that the point of view of completely re¬
jecting human experiments does not help at all.

•

Q .fitness, I have tho impression that you have thought about

t’e a-obioe of human experiments lure than the normal doctor does. So

far you have spoken of this problem oruy from the point of viei. of

sedical ethice, but I do not believe that medical ethics is the only

point of -vie-: rhic'n must be considered here. Kill you please tell us

sor.eti.inf about this problem fraa the point of view of general ethics,

7798


19 liay-A-' 3-19—3-^0eban (Int. Von Schon)

Court No. I.

I believe that is rather important in this question.

A Of course general ethics also play an important rolo. The
doctor is only ore side, on the other side is the rest of the public
such as private patient3, cxpertr-entol subjects, such as prosecutors or
as judges, but I should like to point out trro things. First, these are
particular questions belonging to a very cexplicated specialized field
which are very difficult to judge and it Kill not be possible without
tie opinion of an expert. Or. the other hand, general ethics is sono¬
thing which has been established eminently since the tine of Adam and
£vf, which finds only one correct sol«ition for every question. I don't
toliovo that the problen is as staple ao tiiat and raieuidctstood and
alsdirocted ethics would not bars the Doctor, oocause there aro always
f<n»jr dootors than lay-car., that would not ham medical scionce othics,
but it would iiarn humanity as a whole. I should liko to givo one
historical exsaplo. Today hundreds of thousands of people annually
would die of sun 11 -pox, would socono blind, or would suffer defacing
scare If Iasanuel Kant'3 idea had .vovaiiod, who in 179!i opposed small¬
pox vaccinations in the fora of variolation as a violation of tho laws
not to bring one's self into danger of death and who a few years lator
opposed tho introduction of vaccinations seriously because and I quote:
Through Yenncr's innoculation humanity puts itself on a lovol with
4r.Lr.als ar.d » of brutality aight be injected from tho animals."

Ir. spite of Kant's ethics, in spite of a lack of means opjx'sod to vac¬
cinations, which only existed ir. Gcrvny, this problem has been solved
for the good of the population, who was aero ethical Inraanuel Kent or
a:, absolute state authority, which in a sense of racial planning ordered

ft

tho doctors to porforn vaccinations.

Q Now a final question on the ethical sido of the problem,
itner , you know the oath of liippccratcs, hich you have rentionod and
. c*- las been repeatedly quoted by t!se i'rosecution and that it has boon
- t u? ir. a I'ay as the binding furda-cntsl lav for all branches nf edi-

7799


19 : ay-A-i3-19-Ji-H6ehan (Int. Von Schor.)

Court >!o. I.

cine; now I an a lawyer, cot a doctor and I had little to say against
this point of vie- of the prosecution and was quite astonished to hear
scce tiao ago on a program broadcast by a Munich radio station a com¬
mentary by a Doctor Sue:skind rho ccccents on this trial and '•ho cco-
nented on the previous trial that a number of doctors had written to
him saying that this oath had been to then only a vague concept up to
this trial, because many of thee had leamoc* of it only long after they
had finished their studies and worked as assistants. I was more aston¬
ished to learn that no doctor in Geraany is over sworn to this oath in
its original fora or any cthor fora. Hon, witness, will you pleaso com¬
ment or. this matter of the Hippooratos oath, which goes like a rod
thread through the wholo trial?


7SX


Court 1 , .

tey l9-A-&-l-hi>-Cooit-Von Sofcoen.

I knew the oath of Hipocrates as a student already.
„ft-.r I ixv’durted from nigh senool in ny first senest».r as
a nodical student, together wita a friend who was studying
pr.iloloyy, I reed Hi operates in Greek. I did not trite
t. io o th tu Zeus nd other areck Gods any more than eny
ocher Gar urn doctor, nor did I take the oath in n moderniz¬
ed rnd ltcoorvcd fora, as is the custom in some other c.ur.t-
rlca when ’ young doctor receives is certificate. The orth
of Hip oe rtes, of course, contolns n number of very
lm ortent and fundeaontnl nuties of a uoctor, but it aces
not contain any tore then '.toll's book does *ny indications
of tho duties of r. doctor as ? rese. rc i worker. Slnco
rilo ocrctes .inseir was not only a practicing physician out
without d ubt a aodic.il reserrch worker of some quality,
one o. n nly conclude tn t he says nothin* In his oath
nb ut the duties of the aodlcrl researcher, because ho,
orobrbly Just like hr. .toll, realited the enormous and
la no 61 ineuroountrOle difficulties with w Me.', this problem
confr nted hla, and o a pln like .toll the oath of r.lpoocratos
contains ainy things v..lch, wnen it w.'s written, 5Go yonro
3 C, was vr.lld and corroct, but which hr a been changed In
the ne-*ntlno. For ax -Thle, the strict soorr-tlon between
Che dootor -nd the stone surgeon ana tr.e surgeon, has
not in^ to do with aoc.lc '1 ethics, and if todey in Germany
the sbru le a ninst ■Damgrrvoh 218 , for the role-’se of
eocl -1 .n. lections, for the lnterruotlon of progn-ncy-

fey I interrupt you, you a,-nn ?arnropr. 213 of
the Helen ran 1 Coe.e, witness, wnlch in Germany prohibited
and furnished nbortion r.a -ormittec it merely for nedioal
reasons ?

Yes, th-t is vast I meant. If tala strung}:*} is
r. carried on tocL- ; uasalon tely and as t.-.e article of
■IJurnbergornachrlobten 11 of tr.e 15 Janu-ry 1^47 s.:ow6, 16


Court 1

Hay 13-A-S0-?-HD-Coo4-Vor. Schoen.

carried out uCllcly, cn advocator of paragraph 218 will
hardly be able to refer to the oath of Hippocrates In his
defense where an abortion v:ts« prohibited for all reasons,

_ver. for medical reasons. It w-s not forbidden because
Hip cerates considered it unethical, out singly because In
those days surgical technique was not developed to the
extent that such an ocerntlon could 'oe performed without
danger. But I should like to point out one thing that I
h-.ve always raissed so for In the discussl.no of the
Hippocratic octh, Hippocrates was the founder of a very
Halted msdlool school or guild on the lrl nd of Cos, and
nls oath was Intended for the protection of this young
guild or doctors against the priest doctors who had been
nil powerful up to that tlae. Hippocrates sealed nls sohool
hermetically against all others b t.-.ls oa.tr. and his great
otnlco wore th't the followers nod to swear tnat everything
he learned at this school wo -Id never be told to any other
lector exes-.t to t.*c members of the senool of Cos who had
tnkon one same oath. For Hippocrates tno medical Journals
and medical text books would heve been c v.ry great vlolc-
tl n of his oath and unethical for the purposes of his
sohool. The oat.; of hlp.ocrates does have one great advan¬
tage, It cooes from antiquity. Hippocrates himself did net
write a Ion,, commentary on his oath, and anything or notning
can bv proved by it today.

x. "ltnosa, I think you .urve s^id enough about the
o:llccl ’ s ect and I g?ther t.v t you moan to say that neither
.toil's book nor the oath of Hlr 1 ocrates .or any other publica¬
tion clarifies the etnicr.l side of the medical activity,
c ‘1- roble.,. is so comrlicrted th t it cannot be

t.Ii simply. How, In conclusion a fin 1 pri ctical

qu Gtlon wh.ther the subjects were volunteers or not, under

7802


Court 1

liay 19—A-20—8-HD-Cooi-Yon cchoen


whs c c nditions would -ou personally consider experiments
on uuxan beings, not self-experiments, but ex-erimer.ts on
ot.'-r human beings permissible?

a. First of °11 the experiment must be necessary, that
is, the problem underlying it must important, and no
solution use be possible in any other way. Second, the
exerlment must be conscientiously pre r-d for by r.odel
ex erlmonts, :y onlmal experiments and if .oaslole ay
alf-experimontetlon of the doctor; nnd, t.ulro, of course,
the execution of the exerlment must correspond to the rules
of medio. 1 rctlon. That la the root of considerable tnou lit
wr.loh must be given to the matter nero. Those are the three
conditions which I consider necessary.

JUDC*£ 5EBRIN0: I didn't under a tana your lost words,
ho n?cr.ed thre& conditions. I didn't get then. I didn't
understend the last one.

•'ITl‘133: In the third place, the execution of the
exerlment muse strlctl: conform to rules applied to medical
action. I meant to s'-y by that for th«- doctor as a
research worher the eoorlmcntal subjects must not be
considered as a number or erso b-t must ba n numrn being
Just lliie any patient who comes to him f.r eld ar.d he must
take into consider"t:on all tr.elr needs •’s human beln 6 a.

DR. TIPPS: At. President, I am at the end of the
e,en»jral queetlon*.- and I would surest that we adjourn now
before ^oln. into Cne individual counts of the indictment.

A

JUDo*- 6EBRIN3: '.fitness, in regard to -our views
on human experimentation ;-o- have named three requisites,
three, - one, two, three?

a. 'fee.

k. kow, suppose those requisites or prerequisites rro
resent, Cw whet extent lr. -cur view is it et ically


Court 1

May 19-^-2C-4-HD-Cook-Von Sofcone.

necessary to advise the ex- ueriaental subject of the natural
cur oso and perhaps reaction so far as ho, the experimental
subject, Is concerned, to be expected from the experiment?

A. I would out that under point 3. I would say that
Just as the doctor 6hould tell the patient as far as he
can wh?t treatment ho considers advisable for a certain
case, especially If It Is an operation with a certain decree
of danger, of course, the doctor as a rese'rch worker must
tell nla experimental subject so thrt the subject under¬
stands what the experiment Is all about, what danger may
be Involved, what dam-ge any be done, but also how Import¬
ant the problem la and what C3n be achieved b the solution
of the roolem.

Could you approve os medically ethical any experi¬
ment which foil short of that point, of giving oomploto
advice to tno experimental subject?

a. If I nay repeat your question, you asked whether
I vo Id consider It unethical to carry out an experiment
with a.n experimental subject to whom I did not explain the
danger rnd all of the details of the ox'orlment3?

•i. Precisely.

a. In an experiment which Involves danger I would
consider It absolutely essential to ex.lain these dangers
to the subject boforjhand.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribun-1 will now be In recess
until nine-thirty o'clock tomorrow morning.


7eCi*


20 Pay 1 a 7—I!—..TD-l-l-F os ter (Int. Raaler)
Court No. 1


Official Transcript of the -narican Military
Tribunal in tho natter of tie United States
of Aocric&j against Sari Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at »urobar~, Geraany,
on 20 :-Say 19U7, 0930, Justice Beals
presiding.

THE i -iftSH-'J,: Persons in the court roan will please find their


scats.

Tho Honorable, the Judges of JdUtary Tribunal I,

Military Tribunal I is now in sossion. God save tho United
States of orica and this honorable Tribunal.

Thoro will bo ordor in tha ccurtroon.

THE PRESIDENT: *Jr. .’Larahal, you ascertain if tho dofondonts
aro all presont in court.

THE ’1’JlSfc.L: ISiy it ploaso your Honor, all dofondants aro
prosent in court.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho Sccrotary-Oonoral will note for tho rocord
tho proaunco of all tho dofondants in court.

Counsel nay procood.

ffiRJtiNH BECKER-FRSYSSX - Rosuiiod


DIRECT EX.. I:L.TI0N (Continuod)

BT DR. TTFP (Counsel for tho Do fondant Bockor—Froyson"):

Q Dr. Dockor-croyscn-, yostorday, at tho ond of tho suasion, wo
wore discussing tho general ethical fundancntals reforrinp to tho
oxporlncnts on humn beings which wo conclude U Today, wo aro roin- to
iscuss tho indivi fcal counts of tho indlctaent as the:/ aro raisod


against ycu. The prosecution charges ycro at first to have participated

in a conspiracy to conait crinos, to other with your co-dofondants,

• - -«

ccij'.es. rv'aifist^hoanity and war Crtnos. I shall bo very brief .in con-

AV \

fortion witk tfci&jfeiunt because in rxy opinion there i3 no logal basis

<0 _ \c.»

for any conspiracy in that respect. However, that is a question which

■

•till later be tLsooe^ed in your final ploa. Therefore, witness, I a3k
Spa what was your Connection before !hy 19U5 with your co-defendants with
when ywi'sre^ilic'od to have carried on a conspiracy?


20 J tay 19ii7—? .TD-l-S-Fos ter (Ir.t f Harder)
Court No. 1


A I did not know ton of ;y defendants. These arc Dr. Gonzkon,
Professor ?'.ru.-ow3ky, Dr. Rudolf Brandt, Popp-andick, *r. Siovors,

;!r. Brack, Dr. rfoven. Dr. Pokorry, Dr. Fischer and : iss Oborhousor. I
knew the nanes of four of the gentlccen on the basis of thoir position,
but T nevjr oxchanjod a word with than. 7hc3o are Professor Karl Brandt,
Profossor Han’loser, Goneraloborstabsarzt Frofossor Gobhnrdt and
Professor Slone. I know Profossor Rostock in his capacity as head of
tho nodical faculty of tho University of Berlin. On the occasion of
quclifyiiv' as a lecturer I was introduced to hin and I .Ha cun sot! this
question with hin. On the basis of nutual activity within tho .dr
Forcos, or rather within aviation radical rosearch, I know Profossor
Rosa, Dr. Ruff, ». Rocfcorg and Profossor *»ltz. In tho anno 'my, I
naturally also krww Gonoraloborstabsorst Profossor ScJiroodor as ny
hi;.host superior. I know Korr Doctor Konrad Schaofor and Profossor
Boi lbock.

Q Boforo I start entering upon tho subject of tho individual
exporin unto, which aro tho subjoot of the in’ictnont against you, I
nay ask ycu to 'oscribo ycur position during tho war. You know tlvat it
is your position in particular which has boon tak..n by tho prosecution
as tho basis of tI;o in.Hetaont against you. In ny opinion a nui-bor of
concepts havo to bo clarified which have boon either rdsum’orstoo! or
nistranslated. Tho first point, t!»o prosecutor in tho sossion of tho
12th of Doctor 1917, in the English recor d, papo 309, riesirnatod you
as Chief of tho Dcpartcont of ^vtation *'o Heine with tho Chief of tho
•fe&eal Service of the Luftwaffe. Accordingly, you oro to havo occupied
a Ion din- position in rcsoarch work. You had the key position in the
±r urlical research, as Profossor Alaenndor onco described it, *fay I
ask yty:, witness, to clarify this oir.t hore?

A First, I have to say in that coniwcticn that with the Chief
of tho K u Heal Servico of tho Loftrmffa thero was no dopr.rtzaont at all
for aviation codidne.

7606


20 'ay li7-:^v73-l-3-?sstor (Ir.t. Fanler)
Court Ho, 1


Q "fitness, I believo that before clarifying your position in
particular it *±11 be necessary to ’escribe to the Tribunal briefly
the organization and the structure of the Jlodioal Sur7ioe. I think it
is necessary to do that in order to understand vthat you really wanted
to testify, “ould you please do that.

A Yes. Professor Schroodor has described the structure of his
office in this witness stand, soon fron his own perspective. In other
words, he saw the pyranid fron its top. Since I tras really at tho
baso of this pyrasdd, nay I a ain doscribo tho structure from my
porspoctivo. In tho !todical Inspectorate, rather, in tho position of
tho Chief of tho Ilodiool Inopootorato of tho Luftwaffe, approodiiatoly
2$ roforonts wore active. Every roforont a.tainistorod, I night soy, a
definite roforont. Ary such roforont oonsistod of this ono roforont,
one fonalo clork, and on sono occasions, ono sol ttor who as a dorical
assistant. I do not boliovo that this unit in tho Gcnvin usago of
lanr.uago can bo dosi natod as a dopertnont. Thoso roforonts roro
organised in raipe or doparteronts. In tho office ro had two such
lopartoonts, tho so-callod first ’o;<irt;*3nt, or organizational dopart-
r-.ont, and thon tho second dopartrxnt, or tho nodical department.


Hoy 20-iI-BK-2-l-Mcohr.n (Int. Hennlor)
Court No. l


To ~ach of those departments bclongod perhaps eight
roforats: and at the head of each department was the dopart-
noat chief. In addition to the so two d opart no nts tlioro
wore two so-callod independent groups or units and one in¬
dependent roforat. These two independent groups wore the
groups for nodical air precautionary natters, thon the
group for the phanacoutical service. Tho independent
refer at was tho roforct for budget natters concerned with
ell financial questions. Tho essence of thoso indopondont
roforats wore that tho hoad of thoso groups, tho budget
roforat, with hi3 sphoro of work, hold tho position of a
dopartnontal chiof. That is to say ho could nako in-
dopondont dooisions, which was expressed by his signing
tho lottors hinsolf which oninntod from his fiold of work.

.0.1 tho other roforats had no authority to nako dooisions.

t I think it would perhaps be bottor to go into tho
details a little later. Now we nro talking about tho
structure of this offioo and you were Just saying that tho
lowest branches wore the roforats, which were combined in
tho dopertnonts and at th..hcad of ouch thorc was a dopart¬
nontal ohief; would you ploasc continuo.

.. Yes. ..bore those two dopartnontal chiefs, or tho
independent reforcts, was tho chief of stuff and over tho
chief of staff there was tho nodical inspector, who fra;
the first of ..pril, 19-i4 was tho chiof of the nodical
servioo of tho Luftwaffe.

' v In order to succarizc, witnoss, this ogoncy had tho
structure of a pyramid, tho bases of vfcich wore the individual
ref-rats who woro each headed by a roforat. In tho roforats
'oro included tho deporteent of which there were- two, Tho
•"i diest position was the nodical chief hinsolf, who was at
lirs.t Professor Hip.ko and thon Professor Schroodcr. Between


Kay 2C-M3K2-2-Mcchan (In- a oral;r)
Court No» 1


tho dopartnontal chief and tho nodical chief , there was
r.lso a chief of staff. You yourself wore one of twenty
fivw roferats and at first you wore only an assistant
referat.

.. Yes, this description is correot.

t Very well. Now, witness, lot us continue whore wo
interrupted earlier. Lot us talk about tho assertion of
tho prosecution that you wore tho chief of the department
for eviation uodioinc.

It can bo soon fron ny description that no 3uch
dopoxtnont oxistoi; for that reason I could not have boon
tho ohiof of a non-oxistont dopertnont.

4 ’./hat was roally your position fron what tine on did you
hold it?

.. In ..up;u3t of 1941 I was assi^nod to tho nodical in¬
spectorate ns on assistant reforr.t at tho doforat -vintion
Medioino. I ronoinod in that position until 15 May, 1944;
fron 15 May 1944 until 8 May 1915 I was tho reforat for
..vir.tion Me licinc.

i Onu further question for clarification. Witness, you
know that your oo-defondrnt Dr. Schaefer designated you
as tho research consultant of Professor Schroodor. This
can be fount 1 , in the doourxnt book of tho .rosooution,
docunont book Ho. 1, I bo£ your pardon, document book of
tho prosecution, docunont book 5, doounent No. 474, Ex¬
hibit 131, on ;»a3o 6 of the Garden and pa^o 6 of tho
Snjlish doounent book. would you . lease onco noro clarify
this point clearly?

.. I do not believe that Mr. Schr.ofor noant that I was
the research consultant in all research nattors. Dr.
Schaefer had nuch too little ir.siaht into our offico in
order to know that. In addition he has far too little
nil it ary or organizational oxpcriancc in order to bo cblo


}


Iday 20JUBK-2-3-i»ochnn {Lac. .iarclor)
Court No. 1


to deal with thcso questions ct all. -.t the nost, he could
only answer this question frer* the very narrow .respective
of tha r^3c arch in which he acted in collaboration with no.

I, thor-foro, do not believe that ho really wan tod to ox-
;ross any such General opinion.

i One further question, witness, you woro sayin-j th_ t in
your opinion Professor Schaefer did not noon that you w ;re
then research consultant in all radical question; in your
position as reforat fron May, 19-i*. were you not at least
the research consultant in the field of aviation nodicino?

« I was reforat and not a research consultant; that bo-
ccac3 ovidont fren tho fact that in tho a^oncy of the
chief of the nodical sorvico of tho Luftwaffo, thore are
approxinctoly 20 to 25 so-called consulting physicians and
cnon^ Chon thoro woro four consulting physicians for avia¬
tion nodlcinc.

v Could you toll us who theso consulting physicians for
aviation nodicino wore?

Those fair consulting physio ions wore: firat, ^rofossor
Stru^hold; second, Profo3sor -jithony and nftor ho had boon
transferred thon D r . Bonzinjor and then oithor D r . Kotton-
hoff or Dr. Koch, I no lonccr know that exactly.

I Witnoss, it nay be ndvisnbio now to coaporo tho
activities of the consulting physicians with the activities
of tho reforat; whon for instanco would tho nodical chief
turn toward tho reforat and when would ho turn toward tho
consultinc physician on aviation nodicino?

-* The reforat was always ap.roachcd whonevor it was a
lUostion of doalinj with current work. For inst anco,
whenever sono request or sera quostion arrived fron a
technical a;oncy or an arny unit, whenever a surest ion
rrived free a research institute by nail at tho offico,


Mey 20-il-3K-2—i-i-Iochan (Int* Hem lor)

Court No. 1

it was c natter of course that tho reforat in.chargo was
ontrustod with the dealin; jf thi3 natter, When, on tho
other hand, ’■*. wore concerned with a scientific proposal,
let us say a proposal - for a now rosonrch assirnnout or
soccthinp liJco that, and it was a natter which w.as not
absolutely clear, then either the reforat on his own
initiative sucecstod to hin tho attitude of tho consult¬
ing physio inns on that subject, the attitude of either one
or noro of theso consult in. j physicians or tho department
chief, or tho chief of staff or the nodical chief, did it
on his ovm initiative or ordered it. Naturally tho
reforat also uttorod his view recording any 3uch proposal,
./o wero in no way Just nail clerks or file rxoson^ors,
but undor circunstancos tho roferat suggestod a nunber of
alternatives on that subjoct, ho pointod out tho nany
difficulties and in order tosolvo those difficulties
ho askod that another rococnizod oxport bo hoard on tho
subjoct, an .oxport for instanco in the forn of tho oon-
sultin", physicinn. In order to put it oxplioitly, whilo
c. personal view w.as oxpoctod fron tho consulting physician
a nr.torial view was cxpoctod free tho reforat - perhaps
nany of thoso natorial views.

b If I understand you corroctly, witness, the roferat
so-c allot! do liver od to tho nodical chief, tho so-called
tochnical oqui;«ont and he doalt with all tho technical
pro .-..rations for any docisions that had to bo made,
whereas the consulti.a ; physician node tho actual .proposals
for any work that was to bo carried out; is that a correct
presentation; we shall discuss that of oourso in detail
a littla Later.

Hell, this distinction between tto tochnic.il and
;nto rial prerequisites... Of course, tho sua‘^stions node

7811


liay 20-i!-3K-2-5-i!cohon (Inti Hcenlor)

Haurt JIo. 1


by tho refornt wore also notorial, but as consulting
physicians wo always had top exports in tho fiold whoso
opinions woro in no way binding for tho radical ohief.

The nodical chiof just listened to thoir opinions, in other
vwris, what I want to say is tho consulting physician had
to adopt a noro personal nnnnor toward those natters.


7812


Court 1

y 2 HD-Cook-Ramle r.


I tr.ink., hr. President, that this point has been
now Qlorlfled somewhat. I say recall In t.iia connection
the testimony of Dr. nugust Dlenoc.< who was he;rd os a
witness for Professor dchroeder, and who also ru d giver. some
testimony in regard to thet point. This was in tne session
of 22 F.-bruary 1S47. You will find the corresponding
testimony in the German record on p. go 3764 and in the
Sn.llsh record on Page 3726.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, I note that In document No.

47-:, the affidavit of defendant Schaefer, to whioh you
referred, the defendant zecfcer-Freyslng is described rs a
resooroh r*dviser nd not os r researon consultant. I don't
know whether that mekoe any difference lr. the Oersun
1 n.u 3 o but from '■hat you said yeaterday it soeas to me
ch t cho English word "consultant" conveys to you a soaie-
wh t different aennin- .ron thot which It frequently
oonve. s to uo. Of course, many words .re oed some times
In a different sense, b..t this exhibit to whicn you reforred,
tne on I gave, uses the word adviser, not consultant.

DR. Tlrr: .'.r. President, I itoy say perhaps the
following ir. that connection. This word "consul tent 11
in o rtlculfr has been used in various meanings during
t. la trl 1 . r%B i rule as far as I co ;ld ascertain t is
word -s used for the so-called consulcln_ ^v.ysiclrns.

-he inter'reter translated that word this .corning as con-
c-lcin -ysiciana, wncreas the other Interpreters aprhpps
yust 6cld "consultants" but I do think th-’t this point has
been clarified sufficiently rr.d I need no longer go into it.

hR. I-lnRDY: May it rlense the Tribunal, this nolnt
Is one v icr. has taken * considerable len t tn of time lr.

- -> lTl*un"l lr. c.-.at ochroeder s.oat-sose time on-it -nd
-v. Dienoch stent some time on it, and now we are


Court 1

Xrv 20-'.--5-2-H3- Co ok-Rade r.

ro r. = ain and 1 must frankly adalt from the explanation
::o hr.vd this com In- I am confused. I knew whet referent
. 8 rnd I stnew whet referat was and I don't know now and
I 'c ^oln 0 to ask the Tribunal If they will ask the trans-
1 tlon department for an Interpretation of It and to study
tr.e difference between the translation of the word referent
end referat. I understand referat is a department and
reforent Is a eub-dep rtcont, and therefore the words
reforat and referent 1 s perfectly clear in the chsllsh
1 nfeur.^e and to quibble about vnethor It Is e department,
referent for aviation medicine, or a referct for aviation
cedicino Is basically lceoterlal, and I think we should
rt . nis point of the trial establish a definite definition
for a rwfarent and a referat -nd consultant and so forth
so that vy can orooeed ir. our briefs and set forth Just
w:.?t t.'.e re without further arguments; the prosecution
orlntrlns t reforat Is a dooertoent and wo hove nothln &
cu object to, and it Is Just o minor point and there Is no
olnt of nr e uln^ "'oout It If we can establish It now
tur Uj.' the Interpretation department. %

DH. TRIPP: Mr. President, I cust object to rir. Hardy
for the followl e, reasons: F.p has Just stetod now for the
very flrot time that the prosecution Is now of the opinion
a ruferot was a subdivision of a department. Up to
la olnt the Prosecution naa not expressed that ns clearly
*8 that. It may be that this difference could be explained
the various translations v-nd I think that I can a-ptes
•-tn Mr. Hardy now by sayin 6 that a referat Is a aub-
tr a.nlzrtion of a de-^.rtment. In other words, the depnrt-
nt is the superior agency of the referat. If I have
ierstoed hr. H^rdy correctly so fa*- nd If this is now
c inior. of the prosecution we ore in cb olute o^ree-

-nt.

7814


Court 1

Hay 20-14-3-3-HD-Co >k-3e-ler.

XR. EaRDX: If that is the case. Your Honor, theri
:-;re is no croblem any longer and'if defense counsel admits
refer" t is e deoartcent.

DR. TUP:: Ho, I beg your pcrdon, -*-r. Hardy unfortun¬
ately contradicted r.ioaelf. He Just stated two minutes a a o
6h-t che referat was a sub-department, and now on the
other hand he is anyln^ that the referat was a deportment
?r4 I think-these two concepts would nave to be dlstln B uia-
ed once and for all. In order not to speak at length about
i is olntt I cay suggest Mr. President that the defendant
3ecker rreysen 0 xeko a eketch Which would illustrate the
str cture of the m&dlcal inspectorate in detail and that

in t .Is sketch the corresponding Gorman .’nd English names

•

v Id jQ insortod. Of course, ne couldn't do that today
v no W’ .’Id do lc witnln a few days and in this manner it
yjUld ra oi some amount of clarification.

THE FRSSIOSt'T: The defendant, Becker Frey sent, may
•len he c"n, prop-re this skotch which h s been suggested
*nd present it t the Tribunal and I think tho Tribunal
a - lco *• .ood idea of tno xonnln Q of these words but
. .0 de endant may prepare this sketon.
a DR. T3PP:

v. vitneaa, after this intorrjptlon, let us oontinue
v t . ur questioning. You were saying the t you were a
referent ns far as /•-> haven't done that already.

a. Veil, the tc.eke of tne referent exhausted theiu-
lvos m is rl = ht to eke salvations. The referer.t*had
possibility to make ar. lnde indent decision. This meant
: ..o v/'.s not allowed to sign any one's letter person—
f y nc\ that without any exception. The only exception
v: ich I may perhaps refvr Is that in :hc case of a Oopy

s in position to certify the authenticity of that

7C15


S8? r Iol*t-3-4-aO-Cook-Haaler.


cony, but that, of course, has nothln D to do with the
sigr.rture ae an expression of the decision made.

5. In this connection, nay I recall that Dr. Witt
r.nd Dr. August Dienock, the two witnesses who were both
referents in the medical Inspectorate, have given the
ooae testimony about the rights of a referent. That was
lone on 28 February, 1G=7. The two passages can be found
on p -o 3751 and 3768 of the German, as well as on pa 8 o
3725 and 3749 of the English record.

Witness, what was the collaboration with your super¬
iors within the framo-vork of the .edlcal inspectorate?

In particular tell us about vour coll borotlon with your
superiors and especially with rrof. Anthony, as long as
he was th- roferent and you were the assistant reforont?

A. In ordar to answer your second quostlon first,
which refers to uy relationship to Professor Anthony,
rrofessor «nthony was lacking the most essential property
of a superior, namely, ho was in no way to make any
decisions which concerned me. I was attached to Prof,
nnthony in order to assist and support him. My relation¬
ship to him mry be illustrated best by saying that «nthony
was about fifteen years older than I and that for many
yo-ra he had been a University rrofessor and an indepen¬
dent herd of a lar-,e clinic for internal medicine ana that
from a military point of view he had been a stabsnrtt, for
e lon^ time, whereas I was only an assistant physician, an
ooorar&t, end I might 6ay that ay relationship to him .
itrhrps corresponded to this relation of a elinlcal aosls-
t-nt or a scientific assistant to his medical end
scion:Ific chief. I always addressed «ntbony with the
-oris "Herr rrofessor" and It was quite natural that
•r.thony was working on a large field within the referat


7816


Court 1

Hay 2C-y<- 3-5- HD- Co ok-.-^le r.

independently and only entrusted ae with various tasks
within th t sphere or rather hod orders given to me by
sy dop'rtaental chief. My personal relationship t?wards
his was good. I think this is all I can say abjut that.


7317


20 Itxy Ii7-U-1~Gross (Ran3-r) cw
Court No. 1


Hot, witness, rculd you please illustrate your relationship
to your next superiors ufiichcro, first your dcpartaontal chief, and
Chief of Staff, aid Nodical Inspector?

A. :y relationship to ny Military superiors can be soon r.hon
considering the structuro of the rgoncy. In other xrds, I had to
deal with a 11 suggestions,ctafts, proposals for reply, etc., uhioh
I had to s ubait at first to ny departmental chief who signed a part
of t'i03o lottcrs bins elf as far s they irorc not concerned irith
decisions on principles. The 1 ttcr ho oithcr submitted personally
or in ny company to tho U hiof of Staff rho again signod a great part

0 m

of thoso letters and then, in turn , dooidod rt ich lottors wero to
bo subaittod to tho Uodicdl Chiof of tho iiodical Inspoctor for his
oignnturo.

Q. ‘ho lowost man holding tho lorrost position who could mako
dcoisions and sign letters, if I understood you oorrcotly, was tho
departmental chief,

A. >os, this was the lowest positionwhioh could acko indoporxiont
decisions.

r i, 1 toi t witness wasitroally truo that tho roforont boro no respon¬
sibility for what ho suggested and for what ho proparod. If that is
not so what vashis tack, what was his responsibility, in your opinion?

novor sow any job diroctivo on Job regulation, for tho roforoit
but I always considcrod my position as a roforont as a vory
responsible one and I .always considorod very c arefully whatever I was

4

““posting, I may say that for that rc.-aon I had torork day and night.

•trhaps I nay point ot tho following: Not only did it occur very

frequently that I as a roforont subci .tod a number of pc3sib. litios

to my dojnrtaontal chief for Ids decision from Thich ho oould thon

•'loot tho one which socaod nost proper to him. It also occur rod very

-rcq:ontly that altogether he rojoctcd any proposal which I nado. For

- -torcc, approximately the end of April or the begiadiig of '.Lay 19UJj

7818


20 ISoy I;7—2—aTj3S ( .licler)
Court :to. 1


-'>cn taking over too referat fron Anthony I had suggested to attach an
training ccapany to the lecture dojnrtaent at Juoterbog. I did that in
order to got a personnel reservo in tint training conpary f ron vh ich
an could obtain sufficient soldier volunteers as oxpcrirontal
subjects about whoa an agency within the radical scrvico would bo ablo
to dispose. Had this suggestion teen adoptod at that tiro Dr, Schaofcr
and Dr, Poiglboock at loast would not bo sitting in this (feck. *hia
suggestion of mine -..-as rejected by ny dcpnrtaontol chief,

Q, lx, Presidont, in connection with letter point I shall bo in a
position to subait an affidavit by ft*ofcs3or Dr. Knodo tho chlof
of the thon Training dopvtaont Juoterbog. This affidavit has bem
requ or, ted but ms unfortunatoly r.ot yet rccoivod. w itnoss, gonorally
you dosoribod what tho responsibility of a referont was. Could you
perhaps illustrate the details of your activity by giving us a ooncrcto
crcanplo? I think tho eon water Qxecriaontvould be tho best oxcaplo
in W.vioh you yoursolf participc.tod in tho capacity of a roforont. TThot
did you do briefly in that connection?

A, At first I inforaod sysolf oxactly about tho n-.turo of tho two
,rocodurco of which v;c know. I inf one d cysolf about tho necessity
and tho rvaturo of ary now ox:uriaonts. I inforaod cysolf .“bout
.rofessor Eciglbocck and hia qualifications as an o jqjcrinontol lcador
ard finally I inforaod cysolf about tho various posdbilitios
•ich existed in the sunaar of 19uli to carry out tho oxperiraont, This
material was presented to ry dopartaontal ohiof, then in hia proscnco
it ~ra sibnitted to the Chief of Staff and after tliis information had
bocnaainod and approved of iy spporiors it was submitted to tho Nodical
C'liof vh o on tho basis of it thon nado his decision,

-• Accordingly your responsibility as a referent wasroally an inner
• :f ico responsibility whereas tho actual decision which w>nt to other
goncios was rondo by your superiors?

this is how you could porlnps oxrrcss it.


7619


20 liny -7-^&T-4-3-Gross (Raslcr)
Court 'fo. 1


-aw, tho Prosecution here on tho 10 Dcccrfcor I 9 J 46 has asserted
that you had issued orders. They said that you had issued orders to
•rofessor Kaagon who plays a considerable part in this trial. Accord¬
ing to what you r. ro saying now tds opinion of tho K*c 3 oc ution is
erroneous but wild you ploasc repeat it hero?

A. I neither had the tight to issuo orders nor did I at any tine
issue such orders.

.. Finally in connection with point nay I agalr.rofcr to tho tosti-
rsny by tho witneas-'itt, on 28 February 19L7, pago 3789 of tho
Gomrn transcript and 3751 of tho Hngli*. transcript. Ho redo a adrdlar
statcoont to it\ at tho defendant has just said and I also point to tho
testinony by Professor Schrccdor who was tho highest technical
suporior of tho defendant of 26 Fofcru. ry, 19li7, on papo 3559 in
tho Goraan transcript and on ?jo 3536 of tiw English transoript. Now,
witness, ay I :ak you to d iscuss tho details of your xtivity. You wero
already saying boforo that you had boon an assistant roforont frocn
August 19U1 until 19U*. and that you wero a roforont f»n Jlay I 9 M 1
until tho 0011 apoo of tho Gcraai '7 0 hmacht. K ould you nor; toll us .

’hat ycxir tasks wore as an assistant roforont?

A. As an assistant roforont I "as entrusted with a nurfcor of detail
tasks which cino upr'tiin tho roforat for which I boro tho sar»
inner -offico responsibility as when Her on I booauo a roforant. Tho
'.if.oronco in of foot was that as an assistant roforont I didn’t have
the possibility nor the task to lncludo ays olf into all qiostions
concerning tho roforat and concern nysolf with thon.

:. Apd tt o, witness, gaveyou thoso individual tasks?

A. It was ay departmental chiof, at that tino Gc nor alarzt Dr. Marius
:i ‘0 vea ny direct military suporior.

. ’itness, in your position as an assistant roforont *roro you tho
. rsanont representative of the roforont. For instance, rhonov.r
-c.'.csor Anthony was on vaent on or or. an official trip, did you -


7820


20 Hoy kl-U- ST-W*-Gro3s (Healer)
Court !fo. 1


represent kin?

A. Uo, I rosnot is pernanont representative buy only ren ' aso to
cose rticn it raa soccifically ordored. ijgr I point out that only
iro or three of all the referents had any assistant referents
attached to then. It oocurcd very frequently that -hen a referent
vent on a one official trip although ho hod no assistant reforont,
therefore it wasn't necessary for every referent to have an assistant.

The dopartnontal chief alrays knorr -hat ras happening.


76a


20 Kay-.?- 3-S-l-Karrc* (let. Ramier)
Court No. I.


Q Witness, I think that we can clarify this point by the
document which was outfitted by the prosecution. Ii is in Document
Book 12 of the prosecution .on rage 77 of the German and 7li of the
English Dccunent Book. It is a letter written by Professor Rose dated
the 9th of June, 19hh, addressed to Professor Haa-en at Strasbourg.

It was submitted urrier Document .Vo. NO-^Ctf and bears the exhibit nuc-
er of the prosecution 296. I say ask you to give your opinion about
that letter and I shall quote the second paragraph:

"Did you hear anything free De. art rent 1 relative to its
position with '*itte? It will tako so^e Uae until "2-F" produces its
new research ordor as Anthony is on a duty trip for several weeks."

These code letters "2-F" \rero, at that tine, ths dosigna'tion
for the roferat Aviation Modiclno, woren*t they?

A Yes. y

%

Q T/ould you tell ue at first how this letter originated? It
is, r.o doubt, from Frofessor Rose, but porhaps you can rente 'ber tl>o
incidont which led to this information.


A I can only say that on the basis of Professor Rose 1 3
testimony or. the witnoss stand. I have no personal recollection of tho
incidont, but since Professor Ro3o has stated horo that ho asked oithor


the departmental chief or tho reforat how the Haugen research order was
proceeding and since he received the reply that ono would havo to wait
until Anthony rotumod, it is, of course, absolutely possible tlxit I


ivo them that information at that tine. GT course, after four years
have elapsed, 1 can no longer re^eaber all that.


Q In that case you are saying that nothing could be 'decided


3*oo ut the new research order for Eaugen mtil Anthony can® back fron


his trip. Is it correct if I conclude therafron that you were not

%

Anthony*s deputy in these questions?


A Yoc, this becor.es clearly evident fron this letter for had
-r. Anthony' 1 s deputy in this special field or even quite geocrall^

- er. one co'ild not really understand why one should have waited Many


7822


20 3-5-2-:.arrcsr (Int. Rar-icr)

Court Ho* I.


years with the issue of that research order until Anthony returned.

A

But I nay -sention in t'.iat connection that it naturally occurred that

certain part assignments which I received also meant research orders

for tjs. I assume that if, in the question of this research order to

|

Haagen, we had been concerned with the mere prolongation of an order
■shich had existed for many years then I may have perhaps roceivod the
order to work on the subject, but this document proves clearly that
in this field even in the year of 191*3 my authority was very’ limited
cr rather hardly existed at all,

Q Witness, ore aero clarification in that conr>oction. Tbo
Department 1 which io nontioned here is probably the organisational de¬
partment, isn't it?

A Yes, that is the first or organisational doiartiiont which
I rantionod before.

Q The position with Uitte which is aontionod hore is probably
tbo position of the consultiiv hygienists with tho Air Floct lhysician
which Hacgon lator occupied, isn't it?

A According to what I ioarned hero during the trial this can
only mean that. Of courso, at that tine I had nothing to do with it.

Q Now, witness, lot us continuo with the reforat. What sub-
Jocts actually belonged to tho referat of aviation medicine?

A The layman, when dealing with tho words "aviation .icdic-
ire", if he imagines anything at all, thinks of the two classical
fields involvod. This is, at first, the effect of acceleration md,
secondly, the effect of high altitudes or, in othor words, tho effect
of any lac’.: of oxygen. Those tw> fields, naturally, Jnvo thoir*pricr-
ity and retained that priority even during the last yoars. ^ut by
'is int. the Air Force for war purposes an cnorraoue amount of now problems
•as added. I can, in passing, natc only a few cf these problems ter¬
rors. There wore general physiological questions about respiration and
irculation. There were ques iens concerning general and special
pi* ho logy which resulted from air accidents and, in particular, in the


2 C Ifey-. *3—5-3-Karrcw (Int. Ramie r)
-ourt Mo. 2.


case of high altitude accidents. Questions arose in connection with
the co-cal ed physiology* of the aenses; for instance, night-sight,
space-sight, or the special demands made cn the person's hearin cr
the inference of the noise of the rxtor to any one person's hearing.

In that congestion we have to deal w.th pharmacological questions, o.^.
the Id or ovens nt of resistance in high cltit«ides by the introduction
of drugs which would increase efiiciency. Thore were cei*taln psychol¬
ogical questions which concerned the selecting of fliers are! the train¬
ing of fliers, radical research under particularly difficult emergency
situations; for instance, sea emergency, docert erasrgency, mountain on-
ergency situations. To this subject belong the nodical special ireasuros
which Ivivo to bo taken in connection with tho flying personnel. Tor in¬
stance, wc havo the fliers' exaaination stations, the exaaination sta¬
tions whero rro testod the offeots of high altitudos and, in part, thero
rero hospital d-; ; -artconts whoro the fliers rested after extensive fly¬
ing. Special institutions, liku special equipment, special clothing
and spools! nourishment for the flier. Thon there is tho dovolo,-mont
of the apparatus for tho piloting of airplanes from tho point of view
of the psychological and phyoiological considerations, and, finally, 1
should like to point to the nacrous problem which arose during tho air
war. The carbon monoxyde effect, the a feet: or heat, etc., in v/hich
Aviation medicine worked. In addition, tho roferat had to deal with
the construction and sodomizing of the low pressure chambers; educa¬
tion of tho flying physicians; current orientation about Special
literature. In that connection, interest in patent questions which
arose fren research in aviation uedicine. In collusion I ^ay say*lhat
the aviation -..iodic ins is, in no way, a nodical special field which, in
the case of all other medical special fields, concentrates on a curtain

or, mic system or concerns itself with a certain manner of the rapy or

•

-nation as, for instance, eyes, eye diseases, throat, ear, nose, otc.,

aviation medicine com,miser ail spheres of medicine in its connec¬
tion to tho flier.


2 D- -■ 3H>-J*~Karrow (Int. Rasler)

Court Ho.


Q The witnesses which ver: hoard here - Professor Dr. Veltz
and Dr. Huff and Dr. Rosoer<, - have already conveyed their impression
to the Tribunal concerning the .Tactical -..-ork in the sphere of aviation
medicine. They were telling us what fields were worked upon within the
reforat and, in that connection, T nay ask you what, in affect, vss the
practical work of the referat in respect to all those spheres which you
just rentionad?


A If I aay answer this quosticn briefly, the referat had,
ir. aose tray, the position of a uodiator, between aviation jodicine on
ore sido and the flying units or. tl® other. ?roa both sidoc wo re¬
vived sugfostions, reports about on., rionc.c, requests, etc., which
vere dealt with at the referat. T’eeo suggestions were either pasood
or. or woro realized in the fora of direct. 1 vea, diroctod to troops, army
physicians, research institutes, or hospitals. In addition, of couroo,
there wore co.-vioctions with the civilian research units to when, of
course, wo could issuo no orders and :>ho roro in connection with ’is by
the Issuo of the so-called research assignments. Thoy rccoivod finan¬
cial support and other support for thoir scientific help.

Q Witness, at a later date *o shall discuss tho research as-
tiROBCnto in detail.

T:s FRZS1SZHF: Counsel, tho Tribunal will be- in recess for
- far.* ninutos.


(A recess was takon)


*


7325


20 ''~y U7—lt-AID-1B—i-'feehon (Int* Brtwr.)

Court :io. 1


THE ZVtRSH&LLi The Tribural is again in session#

3? DR# TIFP:

Q Hr. Becker, when ve stopped wo wore discussing the tasks of tho
roforent for Aviation '.'o&dzurin general. You said that he occupied a
sort of intercediary position botwcon tho theory on ono hand, which is
invited in the research are', the requirements of necessity on tho other
hand aabodiod in the troops. I must assume that through such intor-
nodiary positions a largo number of negotiations were nocessary for each
si 'o, that is to say negotiations both with the troops are! tho r-cntlonon
conductin' research. Tould you ploaso tell us her. this was in detail and
what duty the roforont had in such negotiations?

A Tto 'Teater part of our relations with research and tho
troope took placo in writing, of courso, but it is cloar that in sono
caaos thoro woro also oral comunications. Sinco tho departmental chief
was in char,70 of about oi- ht roforats and referents, it is quito
urelorstnndablo that roany of theso negotiations Wc.ro carried out by the
referent alone, particularly in connection with official trips outsido
of Borlir.. Horo also, it was a nen>rol principle that in such conver¬
sations tho roforont could not :vdco any locisiom, but roportod tho
results of 3uch discussions to tho departmental chiof for confircation
are! thin this confirmation was iven in writing to tho ;x>rson who was
involved in thooo no otiations.

Q Now, ritrvj33, a conclu in; quostion. As you said from 19lil until
19lil; you were in tho 'C'lical inspectorate, that is to say at tho vory
top of tho Gorman Luftrraffo an', you know that in the troops in thj field

th^ro -.as the rumor that the won who wuro active in such positions ha l

£

Toat advantages on tho basis of their position, either to roccdvo pro-
rontial promotion or that they received hi-her salarios and that they
r- 0 'J.ve \ military decorations. In tho courso of your activities, which
oov.red years, tL 1 you notice any such a 'vantages in your position or
~a fit free then?


20 Ha J i7-H-ATD-8-2-Heohan (Int Brown)

Court ». 1

A So. I received no such advantages, I received no docorations, I
r-coivei no higher salary and I received no higher rank and lot no add
that iras not custonary at all.

Q ifaw, I would like-to clarify one further point with you, tho
so-called technical aviation research: what connections woro there bo-
Ufe-en tho reforat or the aedical inspectorate as a whole and tho techni¬
cal aviation research?

A As of 19UI* for the sake of brevity at this tin., tho technical
aviation research was un.’or tho direction of tho 30 -callcd ro3oarch
leadership of tho ministry. ;.t tho hoad was Profossor Ooorii, the woll
known aviation rosoarch ren. Ho had a nodical raferent free 1937 to
rd: 19Ut and that was Dr. Benaingor. In or lor to avoid tlw difficultios,
of uncoordinato! nodical research wnsdifficult, having already boon
noticod in tho soa-wator export urnts. in tho sumor of 19UU, I was node
Dr. 3onzinror's succossor and thus was Profossor Ooorgiiis roforont.

Q Sot to when was tho rosoarch loadorship subor inatod?

A It was tho chief of tho .dr Anaanoat, it had nothin- to do
- 1 th thn chiof of tho no leal inspectorate.

q Tho activitios you just Ascribed, as nodical roforont rdth tho
rosoarch loa torship is not ono of tho char-os in tho indLotnont, conso-
qu-jntly, wo can 1; noro thr.t aspect of your activitios. I now roturn to
the borirodir of your work in 19U, at that tino, as you haVo alroa ty
:*-i ', ycu woro assi.nod fron tho front to tho nodical inspectorate
ithout your having done anythin., to achiove that; what was tho practical
roc^or. for your boin; called to tho nodical inspectorate as assistant
roforont?

A The roason cr reasons are known to no. In tho course of 19U.
n ' v * ial ' 3 °f ’‘ork aroso. Tho than inspactorato. Dr. Anthony, was to
evor, ha was however not articular as it woul' have noant too nuch
rt: for bin. Dr. Ruff already saithat in 19ljl in tho sumor, on tho
•Wtructions of Hippkc, tho notieai inspectorate at that tino, ho inspectj J
1 •* rossure charier in Gemany. Ho res.- up a report on this inspection


7827.


20 Hay U7-:W.TD-3-3-ileehan (Int. 3roro)

Court So. 1

tcur and turned it over to tto nodical inspsctorats and explained in this
report that practically all the lew pressure chambers were seriously
jjficient in one way or another and iwjre not conplotely sodom and did
not .Mot modern roquiraaents. This =oant that the nodical inspectorate
had to take thoss thirty or so lew prossuro chambers and modernize then
and ronodel then. That was the first of the two tasks which I mention.

The soconi now field was the following: when tho war began the flying
units in the Goman Luftwaffo rocoivod for tho first tine their own troop
physicians. Theso troop physicians had to turn in every month n so-called
aviation experience report and those aviation experience reporta woro
sent to the nodical inspectorate in the original along with oo.nents of
the people on tho way. Slnco at that tino thoro woro throo hundred to
four hundred flyin;; units - so-oallod groups - thoro arrivod a similar
nunbar of thoso aviation oxporionco roports ovory month. In thoso reports,
tho air physicians wont into all tho now oxparionces that they ha 1 had
booauso tho air army was b<dn used in tho arm}'. For instar.co, air
acci ’onts, hirh oltitudo accidonts, whether or not o or tain oquipnont for
corroctinr purposos would bo roc', otc., was included. Tho oxporioncos
t’.r.t haboon had had to bo o value tod, of course, as soon as possible
and put into practico for tho general welfare of tho flior’s Honlth. For
this roason, roadlrv: through thoso roporta had to bo clone as rapidly
and raticulously as possibloj that was tho second task.

Q And thoso two fields wore turned ovor to you in August of 19U1
as assistant referent?

A Yos, I was conlssionod on tho one hand to carry on with Dr.
Staff's proposals an! to got the noderrizin of tho low prossuro chanbors
under way. This necessitated an oxtoasivo constructive pro--ran which
took almost two yoars. I had to make numerous official joumays to tho
construction sites and to tte offices in tho field, otc. Secondly, I was
ceuc&ssionod to work over the throo hundred to four hundred monthly
sxr.rionco roports from the air physicians an ! to report on thorn.


7628


£ ’fey 1*7- TD-3-i.-Moehan (Xnt. ?rosr.)
Cc’jrt So, 1


Q Jr. Ruff, whoa the witness has just aentioned, tostifled in
the cdnutes of 29 ;.pril 19U7, page 6711 to 6713 in the Geroan record
and page 6619 in the Rnclish record* ’fair, witness, during your activities
as assistant referent 'id you have only these twe fields of work?


Ceuit So. 1

20 Key 47-H-9-l-£HM-Ccck (Brown)


A. As an actual field of work those were the only tvo that I h*d.

In addition, of course, I had other single assignments of a brief nature,
but let ne remark here that ves with the approval of my departmental
chief and the nodical Inspectorate from 1941 until April 1944. In other
words, throughout my whole activity es assistant referont I ves
scientifically ectlve In my own Institute and the medical research
Institute, which Dr. Strughold In his affidavit, which was put in yester¬
day, corroborates. Turing this period I did extensive research in
oxygon poisoning and in 1944 I oualifiod as a lecturer. My personal
and professional inclinations still remained of a scientific nature.

purely administrative work in the nodical Inspectorate I always
regerdod as ay soldierly duty nnd which I was to do docontly and for
tho gunoral volfero of the soldlory under our aogls.

q, Bov, working on tho rebuilding of the low nroosure chanbor nnd
vorklng on theec experience reports wore the only two flolds that voro
assigned to you, as largor independent flolds, ns long as you voro an
asoistont roforont, is that corroctl

A. Tos.

q. According to that then, tho flolds that played Q doeiolvo
rolo In this trial, namely, ono, working on high altitudo end frooslng
problems, were not part of your major fields of work, but certainly,
and secondly, the work on the research aeslsnnente which you hwon’t
mentioned?

A. Yob. that is correct.

Cu In Key of 1944, as you said, Professor Anthony vc. relieved
of his position and you took his Job as referent. Did you in your #
turn receive an assistant referent under you?

A. Bo.

q. Kov witness, you have described referrt for aviation medicine
rnd from this it can be seen that its scope was by no mcams small.

Kow, in view of the conditions that prevailed in 1944, vere you able
to do all of that work alone as roferent, whereas previously Professor

7630


COOTt So. 1

20 Kay 47 -h-9-2-BiH-Cook (Hrovr.)


letbory had need of an assistant?

a. Yes and no - depending - since sale of the work of the refernt
• - the summer end eutunn of 1944 on coananft of the nedical chief was
transferred to the LchrgTupce (training group) of tho Aerztlicho Aka.de-
_ie of tho Luftwaffe, and this made It possible for tie to do all of the
•'irk.

Q, How what pert of tho rcferet work was transferred, witness?

A. Let me Unit myself to what is of Interest to us here. About
all tho ground work or. all research assignments had been worked on in
principle In the ruferat rr.d had been assigned as assignments by tho
-sdlcal inspector. In other words, everything else done on the essign-
sents was dono by tho Lohrgruppe.

q. How we are coming, witness, to what constitutes tho main
charge against you, nrmoly, the so-called research assignr.onts. You
mow, Dr. Becker, that these rcccarch assignments h«vo played a vory
large role in tho interrogation of all the witnesses to date, Rowcvor,

! fool I still oust discuss this subject with you. Tho nrosecution
fcos laid particular and noin inportenco on precisely those research
'■figments. Let no, horror, still ask you to be as brlof ro nosaiblo.
Vhat was your rclitionshio to tho research assignments ar.d what do you
have to coy about then?

A. Lot ao refer to what Professor Schrocdor his already e»*id
about theso research assignments, and Professor Rostock. I can cor-
r;borate everything they said, but I ccn supplement then a bit free ny
point of view ao a referent. Aviation research was carried out at
first without any research assignments by tho evintlon medicine inct.l-
tutes and tho autonomous Luftwaffe Institutes. That-wSB tho eviction
research Institute In Berlin and the Institutes for aviation r.cdlcinc
in Hamburg, iaunich, and Freiburg, and the nodical training department
in euctcrbog. Then there vrs a group of eviction medicine institutes

e

that wre not subordin; tc to the cfciof of The ncdicrl service of tho
Luftwaffe, including Dr. Huffs institute and the medical denartmeat


7831


r


Court Bo. i

20 Hajr 47-K-5-5-iSt-Coclc (Brown)


:f the testing station in Eechlin, and a redlcal institute in the

rviption reseerch institute in hunich under 9r. Eer-techke. All of

those institutes vere occupied by specialists who knew eviction nroblons

et first hand end did not have to receive cpociel instruction for every

■logic piece of research and every oxperir.cnt, tut these institutes

slso received under certain conditions research essiga-ents which were

usually of a aorc flnanclel or orgfni rational neturc. Cn the other

hand, of course, it wns even possible that the r.cdicnl inspectorate

either gavo rosoorch asElgnr.onts directly to its own instituto or told

• •

institutes not directly subordinate to work on such assignnents. By
far aoat of tho research assignments went to civilian research non in
civilian institutes. 1 he purpose of these research assignner.to has
already been described at great length by irofessor Kootock. In cor¬
tf inly ninety porcor.t of all tho cases tho research r.cn wanted on his
own initiative to receive ouch a research assignnent in order to bo
nblc to continue scientific activities during tho ~rr and this Is aloo
the reason why the institutes «*hich belonged diroctly to tho Luftwaffe
did not need such reseerch nssignnento and conscouontly worked for all
practical roaaons without any research assignments at all.

ti. "itnoBS, you said that the civilian institutes wdo efforte to
rccoivo reooarch acBignr.entc in ordor to be able to carry on their
work. Sow, ve know that tho civilian institutes vero not subordinnto
to thv alllt»ry authority tut to civ 11 ion authority in tho Belch
Ministry of Education. How those agencies, it scons tc ne, ehould
have boon tho ones to give support to theeo institutes. I know t.h-t in
A Orica such Institutes received very considerable financial support.
-»iw, let no ask you, witness, was the civilian research in Germany in
such a bad situation or was the support so lreking by the civilian
■ecter thnt in order to further carry on their important research work
they hrd to turn to the erred forces or, ns in this case, to the
radical inspectorate of the Luftwaffe?

a. Professor Eostock has already answered this ouec-tion. ?ho


7832


Csurt So. 1

20 47 U £>-^-JH<-CooJe (Prown)

university institutes above ell received very littlo financial end per¬
sonnel support free their superiors. For exarplo, the Physiological
Institute of tho University of Wuerzburg had an annuel budget of 13,000
arrtes, another Physiological Institute had an annuel budget of 6,000
-arks. In addition, during the var there vas the difficulty of retain¬
ing our scientific personnel and to receive the necessary catorlel,

«vcn If ve had the financial scans to obtain it, because we couldn't
/pi e high enough priority, and. of course, during the var cost of
this stuff vent to rtilitrry departments rad institutes, ^ov, the
institutes of the Luftwaffe ouito understood this natter end vero only
too happy to nest it. On the othor hand, I don't want to create tho
Irorossion that thoso research assignnonts voro slr.ply senobody doing
somebody olse a favor, kcay applications for research ooslgnncnts
voro turned down if there socciod to be soce objection either tv tho
person or to tho subject. I boilers that the 97 research esoignnents
that can bo soer. fron Docuncr.t 9J4, Exhibit 450, can nelntrln thcr.-
lolves against any sort of criticiso even today insofar as tho porson
in auostion end the detail of rosoorch is concorr.cd. loch of those
57 rosoarch non could show such authority and clain for hlo rssoarch
rosignr.ont no support.


Court i

.icy i Q-h-lC-l-KD-Gro ss-3r own


Now, witness. If we take a list of your research
s i nuer.ts we 6ee that e p^rt of these research assign¬
ments are concerned with allit_rlly important natters.

Secaue the work is daring war tine that is understand¬
able, particularly since the aedlcol Inspectorate is a

;*rt of the Luftwaffe. However, one sees also that some

• •

of these nsslgnments are concerned with natters that appar¬
ently have nothin* to to do with = 111 t ry or specifically
Luftwaffe natters. Kow, witness, was the case not ns
follows: The :*.edlC9l Inspectorate ns-i nod only commis¬
sions of military importance and only Q -ve financial sup ort
to sue assignments and, if tnnt is so, r.uw is it that
Ghtre -re assignments in this list wnlch are not of mili¬
tary lm ortanco?

ft. The reason for tnls le th. . -oth the hedlcal

Chiefs *nd the departmental chiefs and the referents saw

rfectly clearly that applied research Is not .oa i-le

with ut r very broad foundation in a sic research end

rjclssl rvlatlon medicine no no ilod reserrer. always

saw itself before the necessity of acquiring basic s<-ien-

• •

tlfic .nowled v e 6 to t e foundation of it 1 , no lied researoh.

If -p lied science le to be carried out as science in the

true sense of the word then tnore nos to be n vury broad

f undetion of wort I referred to as b sic rc eorch. -ou
• ■

- vs already referred to Document 934, exhibit *-50. 'hen
L. xhe ~utuan of 134. I turned over rll the research

"sai nmonts to tne training groups in the hint ry Hcdical
rtcadem in Berlin there were or. that v*rticul«r dny exactly

esl-nments to date. I hao ;en to h ve a list fr a that
v- 1 • ;le which shows the followin*:

- o; these assignments, th-t is 45> of the whole, were
- : b-’sic research, tee applicability of which to


7634


Court 1

May 20 -a-I -2-Si>-3r08O-3rown.


practical questions dorin e the Mas was neither considered

nor or:acted to be very likely. This was a sort of reserch

t..-c had been and would hr ve been carried or. durin fc peace

tiae as well. 40 a8Slj.nnents, that is 3; * of the whole,

c noerned the collection rnd coapilotlon of nllltary

ey erlences in the sedicel sphere durln_ the Ver, aeasures

eo prevent nocldents and disease. P'rtlcul rly anould be

u-ntioned here research into protect on u&oinst air raids.

%

15 assltnaants, or 15 ,i, concerned t e selection rnd
oonpetenoe of flyers and only 4 assUnio.nta, roughly 0>
or tr.e vh.le, concerned the Increase of aviation or fly-
in;, e: *eolency in Var tine. I believe that tala break
d.wn of thla list clarifies adequately the ,urposo of
Ci'.usj resuaren csslenaenta during the 'ar. With the
of ouoh roserro.; as8l 0 nnents the Luftwaffe alone
orted the work of -.any veil novn institutes and
workers »r.d r.ot only supported It but erde it possible at
-1 .

*. ltnoas, let ne sun up your -never by soyln t.v t
v. Medical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe did not carry
ut vl tlor. nediclno specific research out carried out
cse-rc on ver , very broad and 6 on. : rol .nsls.

«. Yea, I jellovo that car. be seen fr>m cna lint of
7 resocro - assl nnents.

v. Now witness, another point. You now what the
-- rjsoc.t'.on has deduced fron the tnones involved in th^
csearc * assignments ana now I want to -6k you now were
•lose research as i.muits check.a on? How wore the
"usirve,. cien chocked on who were working on the aasiiniaontfl?

Me re e 5 »lr. let me refer to wr.at Frofessor instock
-u;i:lac. to. anyone \uo nna ever .ut nls r.end lnsi-e the
u' o scientific institute gr.d wno ur.ows the position

. 7«35


Co art i

; j-y 20-2^-10-5-HJ-Gro 86-Brown.

of r Ger-ien professor or r Germ n lirector of on Institute
.now- fcov such a checxln- Is possible ft oil. In view of
: .is lie: t. ct n s been mentioned several times, document
K0-93-I, exhibit 458, it can be seen tn°T 40> of these
-a:i ; r.mer.te were e ivun to ordinary German professors
directly.

... itneas, let me interrupt, b this word "ordlnarlus"
you mem regular urofes3ora that regular professors that
<ero teac in. in 3eru n universities.

a. I was Just ^oln s to ex lain thrt - scientists
whose practiced lr. nlc specialized field In r linic or
In a university institute - men who wer* reco 6 nlzed as
;eci rt lists and a thorltles in their field. Those wore

..n to vhor. these institutes were given. *n additional

•

43,* of tr.eee assignments woro b lven to c.lrectora of other
scientific institutes, for instance CherKow Institute <*t
Sad " *iL\ein, the Kaiser Vilhelm Institute for Physiology
if, .vunloh, or the Kin or Vilhelm Institute for 31ochoxls-
Cr* i.i 3„rlln--ahlfcx. The reat»inln_ 17 . of the nasi n~

■ onts v;.nc :o yj n. er resoclotoa in the institutes who,
.'..•..•ever, nrd all of t,;em been active for years In scien¬
tific flails. I believe, one will -dalt that supcrvlo-
-r. of these scientists, cnechln^ on Ch- j.t. end some of C'noui

* er v_r difficult persona to deal with, would nave boon
a var difficult c tter. If I visited such a scientist
lr. ie clinic or .is Institute then I could not ao oar
bjfore him p s his superior somewhere else because the

• •odicol Inspectorate of t.-E Luftwaffe could not give orders
-o n director of such an institute. «nd, if this scientist

’bo momber of the nedio.-l Inspectorate of che
I • ffe, :nen within .-Is own institute ne would hove
seen his owr. caster and would not have beer, subordinated


Court 1

y.ny 2C—i-HJ-Gross-crcwn


in that .activity to the «rny nnd I believe that every
ordinary professor in a German University would have
forbidden my supervising hip nnd would ru.ve been Justi¬
fied In doing so.

Q. Dr. Becker, you were active In science even
durinj pence tine nnd consequently you can possibly answer
She following question: '..'as such supervision, auoh as the
Prosecution seems to feel woe a duty, w'B such :-upervlslon
custoBr.ry rt all nd seoondly was It necessary?


20 Uny 11-1—Karnw(Erora)

Ccurt Ho, 1


A. No, nobody consider*! such supervision necossary. The
scientists, after all, rrcro nature ren ard experienced scientists

ard it wasnot to be expected of any of thee that they would do any-

•*

thing illegal or ~*rong. Jbr vnssuch supervision custonary, r, nd during
the tiao that I ras an assistant at a univorsity clinic I novor
ras subjoctod to any sort of supervision by any superior* X can only
say then if vo had boon supervised and vo had had senothing to con-
coal then you oust expect that o rould bo clover cnouhg to !:ccp
it very noil concoalcd so that evor. a supervisor ruldn't find out
about it, Thcro is a special torn in Goman conversational language
for this that is krwro as "oinen fuorken bauen", that is to say,
sotting up a sort of fotcakin villago l-fore anybody who was going
to ouperviso — put up a false front*

•’ow toll no, witness, this sort of supervision that t'.io .rosocution
rofors to , would it have booncarriod <x:t by you as roferont or by
the Chief of Staff or by tho Chief of tho Jfcdical Inspectorate or
by any or all of then? Could you or tho lacdical chief ovon havo had
the possibility of chocking on and supervising!Ids v»rk in viewof
the fact that the research as sigreonts cover Justrbout tho nholo
fiold of nodicino, as can fco seen fron that list?

0

A* I can answer several t‘..in33 to this* -irst of all, v.o didn't
havo tho tine bocausc tho research ossigiracnts rcro only ono part of
our • otal work. Everyone of us, of courso, in tho fiolds in v'dch wo
woro specialists could havo carried out a supervision -dth success,
hut not in a specialized fioldin which vo had not worked ourselves
or in which wo had no specialised :axjvlcd ;o or experience. - 7 or exanplc,
could nover have roprosehed anybody in the fiold of igh aititudo
res.arch or in tho field of oxygen poi3<ji, but, even in .anotiier spec-
i.alisod fiold of aviation acdicinc, I would havo had to rely on vrhat
he research can in qicstior. told no not being a specialist nysclf.

.. Let re say, to sue up, the sane was truo of tlx: Chief of Staff

. 7838


?0 liny U7>-a£-SVf-U-2-Karroir (Brown)
Court :.'c„ 1


sad tho Chief of the Ucdical Inspectorate hinsolf, bocauso, at the
very test, they would havo been specialists in only ono field with
specialized knowledge tint would have o nab led then to supervise that
or-o field but certainly did not have specialized experience in tho
dozens of fields that verc crbracod by t' ia list of research assign-
rents,

A, That is so.

>'ttacss } one additional oiostion. In what forn wore thcro rosearch
assignments nadc? Lot nc say * riofly regarding this that the Proso-
cuticn socaa to havo tho idea tliat tho rosearch assignment did not
contain ncrcly the thcnc but also prcciso and oxhaustivo dotails as
to how tho research was to bo carriod out# That is to say, tho
rcscarchor, according to tho prosecution, was not givon only tho thono
of his rosearch, but also a working plan as to how ho should carry
it out. Now what do you have to 3 cy to that?

A, Basically I cm say regarding this that tho ray by which a
scientific goal is to be acfdovod is usually tix> oost difficult
aspoct of tho wholo problon, ‘hat is to say, it is prociooly tills
ay to tho goal that has to bo found. Consequently, you arc conplctcly
idcumcrstanding resenreh as a tholo if you boliovo that you could
prescribe to a reaoorch worker ahead of tico Just how ho is to roach
;iis conclusions. At tho very .aaont you cm sinply toll him -.’hat
problcn !xj is to attack and what his final goal is to be, but how ho
achiovos this goal that is prccisoly what his task consists of. If I

sinply havo to tell a nan that ho slxuld earn’ exit such and such

♦

experiments on a tr.ousand Guinea pigs or a thousand dogs thon I can
Just as veil gut a technical assistant. I don't neod a rosearch nan
for that. So it vas that research assignments contained only tho there
of tho research and usually a; ?roval for certain financial support fer
the research, and, fran 19on, dates voro set for brief reports on


he progress of the work. These reports "ore treated in a very


20 iay M-:>sr-U-3-Zirrcw (Bronr.)
Court No, 1


generous fashion not only by the >dical Inspectorate but by tho
research nen tho esc Ives. It could be rolled on that when the rose arch
•..'orkor had achieved sorso peeitive goal he would hinsolf sond in the
report. Loreover, wo weren't trying to increaso the scopo of tho
paper war, but to broaden tho basis of tho research as a whole, and that
is not done by adninistrativo orcorc. Iho final reports on tho
roscarch nssigncorla were usually turned in in tho fona of ro rints
fron various scientific publications or they wero turned in in tho
foro of manuscripts for such publications,

Q. ‘-kn: t a question about tho roprts, witness. You spoko of interim
roports wiiich r»ro to bo subedited at specific regular dates. 7/hat
did thoso reports contain? -o bo spcoif'.c, did tho research rai
doscribo oxnctly what ho had dor.o or what ho intended to do or Just
what did ho put down in this interim report?

A. -’irst, tho interim roports had to givo soco accounting for iiow
tho coney had boon spent that had bcon ranted for t!ds rosoorch and
a y or.o tho had onough scientific oxpcrionco or knowlod^o could 300
fren tho way tho aonoy had )>con opont what had boon workod on. Tho
interim roports on tho courso of tho scientific work wore limited
. ainly toa*y that "wor’c is boing carried on in th? direction it was
being carried on boforo, Sooo results havo been achiovod but tlioy
do not yet suffico for a final decision, consequently it is requostod
that tills rosoarch aadgruent bo untended for another year and that
sufficicicnt funds for this extension bo cado available." It is quito
easy to understand free a psyche logical point of vies, why thcro iras

M

nr - extensive or detailed roports in theso interim reports. First of
=11, no roscarch non likes to ifiiow his hard before the work is finally
d-nc, and, secondly, every serious research worker only uaixs Ids
results public when the Togran is concluded ard when ho wants to got
his credit.

.. And, as you said, the final reports wo o submitted in -he fora of


7BW


I£sy hi-it S3-11- li-Eurr or' Brown)
Court No. 1


scientific pxblications which woro intended to bo or had already
been nude public in scientific periodicals?

A. hat was the custonory lay in rtiich it was done.

Q. 4 ho next question, witness. During the war vhat was tho policy
on tho secrecy of these research assignments?

A. As littlo S3 possible was to to kept sccrot. Only natters '.iiich
\rould allow poraons to dcrivo conclusions of anilitary or tochnic.il
nr.turo, -uring uyactivities at tho Aoro odied. Contcr in Huidolborg
I again had opportunity to soo tho cornunications fron tho Chiof
of tlio licdical Inspectorate in t;» fiold of aviation ncdicino, Aaong
tiio tronty-fivo research rooorts tlvero woro only&ur or fivo, at tho
most, that wore indicated as secret, In addition, tlioro aro tho
oieht or nino voluaosof tho periodic! "Aviation odicino" thich vas
printed and distributed porfoctly blicly and oponly. B 0 th Profossors
ilii-pko and Schroodor roro of tho view that tho results of tho nodical
research should bo nado accossiblo to tho public in tho hono country
and thus bo cado public oven to tho population in foreign countrios,
ovon while tho war wo a still on, ovon in casos rhoro Dr, Anthony as
roforont or lator, rgrsolf, os rofcror.t, thought that to should
disagroo with this and, without boing critical in any way, let no say
that according to a commicr.tion in tho English periodical"! ancot"
of 13 April 19U6 tho English Government ordered that, fron 19U3 until
a considerable period after tho ond of tho war, it was forbidden to
publish anything about tho new drug penicillin,

Q. how, witness, in the rosoarch assignments acc ording to thq
prosecution one fact plays a v„ry decisive rolo. That is tho famous
file note 55. You know that tho prosecution charges you with all tho
dcements carriod urrier the filo note 55, and which carried tho - •
various reforat numbers for tho referuts in tho judical Inspectorate.
*'-t ::c point out that this mot or 55 has thrown the prosecution off
ir. a fow points. At any rate, witness, I should like to ask you about


78A1


u7-Jt-Sc-H-5-“arro^fBrcsm)

Cecrt Ho. 1

f.ia dcci3ivo point. According to the prosecution »8 chargo, all
research assignaents, under nunber 55, did not go only through tto
refer at for aviation a-dicino \nt -..ore ! andlcd there as to thoir
"-ntentOo !i or, can you tell c soaotling about that?


20 day-U-GJ-12-l-5um3-(3rc*n)-
Ccart 1

^ rirst let co p int cut that up: tc Hay 19LL I had nothing tc 'c
ith the mrkSnf. cn the research assignments as a whclo. This belonged
within the specialized fid of the P-fcevent, namely, Frf^s r «nthc-
ay. But Profess~r *nthcny like cysdf later c-ncerno himself cnly v.lth
the assignments cf a purely aviati-n nodical character. Despite this fact
all of the resoaren assi.jnnonts went thr u~ht there- for tn. fell win.
reason: in the Luftwaffe we ha', the sc-calL. ’ ..'ehrmcht Unificati n Plan.
That is to say, every field was Set !nm under a rubric. The file num¬
ber 55 was the cnc use’ by the nhclc fiol -f research. Inlepon.’cntly
f whether the a flatten ru.’icinc r aviation technical research *r sne
thcr fid’ was invrlvei. Let ae p-lnt tut in this connect! n Ruff's
Dccusxnt He. 5 in Ruff's ccuccnt V k pa e 16. This is a question .if
fin'in a research pr fess rship f r Dr. Ruff and a 1 thru h this is a
questi n inv-lvin nly tlx. tiers nnd ’cpartixnt this letter, because
it c nc-rned the research pr.fossrrship is carric ' un or File He. 55.

Ha' this lett r c«ae t the nc.’ical Inspectorate, f r example, it w:uld
aut aatically have cea. thr u h the Referent Aviati n ^o’icinc, as rrt
nly a ifen-nt ftyferat but 'nly an 1 wholly'a lifferunt 'epartnont was
c npot.nt f r p.r3 nnoi matters n research natters and wer. carrio ’
under thi3 sane Fill il . 55.

Since in the helical I n apccV rat :f the Luftwaffe- 90 cr 95,. cf all
research assi rr-_nts c> ncornin aviati'n tee licine an.' only a Very snail
part concern in- the ther fid's 11 ' cunonts with thi3 file number
3imply in rdcr tc keep things strai htenc- ’ ut in thw filin; system
were sent threu h cur epartc..nt. This ha the Teat a'vanta re when it
coco t w rkin.; 'n tliesc assi nments that if any research assi aments
was beia-- lc ke-'. for the Filin Department knew v.ry well that the File
” . 55 reforre nly t-. natters that went through the ‘k.ferat f r Avia¬
tion *e. licin» and Were tc be f;ur.: in that Ref era t. -nether roas-.n was
the f:11cwin.:: prrticularly urin the war, many fticcs issue ’.irecti-
v-,s rc. ar 'in istributicn f pri riti.s n the usu uf fun Is cn the em¬
ployment - personnel for research pure. ses. .i.w, it is clear that the


7SL3


2C ^-Si-CJ-12-2-3uro5-(Frcwn)-
C-urt 1

&efcr..nt i*u hen lea 90 :£ -11 respire). assi iruonts r a re, is b.tUr
acqualntc. ' with thi.se various directives ttn otner ffic«s, then a
referent who has t- w rk cn only no :r %w res ceres assi. nevnts an
perhaps nly -nc^ r twice in a year has n thin tc< -V with these i*at-
t jca at all. In the list cf the 97 research assi-noonta, Drewsent tfc-
93f«, Fxhibit hfft • f ’97 research _ssi rca-nts 8 arc net f an:.aviation
xe’leal ch-racter. = r this re's.n '.Is , naady, f-r these purely a !-
oinistrativo aatters cf a^cin- that these directives arc boin.: ibeyed—
fer this reason also ell cf these file nunbors 55 natters went to the
Referat fer Aviation Mcdicino. Thcro was n third reason, nanely, the
fell.:wine 1 all f these w*k received research assi-nnunts rcro, as
I said bef re. Profess.rs or Scientists f Ion* standinc- The ftjfcrat
Aviati n Kodicinc was free 1939 tc 19U. always adninistorod by active
pr fess rs an’ thcro is a lifferent point cf view of a.ainictrativc and
r..anixati nal ccrrcsp nlcnco an! if off .rts were to be aa !o t- ore-
serve the style cf acodealc circles aa! sc it was Ur.t the Reforont in
thi3 ’oportaant was c neemed with these research assi awaits and this
c ntinued event aftor 19Ui when I bocaao the Referent even though 2 was
r. t at that tine a profess r,

D.T. 7IFP: Mr# President, in this connection I had intended U put
-a cuiobvtr of iccuaonts — deouaents re.-ordin* the entire research
problen. That is tc soy, tho asai. ament f this research; the form,
c.ntents, the supervision, etc. Unf rtunatoly I recoivcd theso Veunonts
£ l - * thoy are in Bcckor-Froysin- P-cunxnt Byk 5 and one if

toon is in Br rk I* aa! so far as I aa infrrned tho Tribunal has not yet
received these vcluacs. However, the Dofenso Inf ration Center has
t 1! nc that I aay have n t translation cf one of th».so affidavits and
=iy receive it during recess. If that is the ease I sh uld like t-- put
it in then# It is an affidavit by Professor Dr. Schaefer. Otherwise
I ask pemissi n v put in the d'eunents lat«r as s:cn as they have
' n translate 1 .


7 8U


20 Jay jC-12 -3-3urns

Court I


THE FRESJDSNT 1 me dccuccnts nay bg offered when thoy are avail¬
able t- c-unsel. I sy.\ost that this ex a mi n ation be soac-what expedited
I think wo have had vcry.lcn^ explanation but dcubtloss have their ir>-
pcrtance tc the defense counsel but I think that this examination
could be expedited sene what to advantage.

DR. TIPF: lir. President, I have Just concluded the treatment of
this them an-’ I cat new tr the discussion of the individual oouats in
the indictment an'. I should like t . ask that perhaps the n^on rocoss be
taken now.

THE HESHE.1T! The Tribunal will be in recess until 1:39.

(A recess was takon until 1330 o'olock)


2C I ay L7-A-6 J-13-l-?oster (Racier)
Court No. 1


AFTSUfOON SESSION

(The Tribunal reconvened at 1330 hours, 20 ay 19li7.)

THE i ARSHALs The Tribunal is again in session.

DR. GAi.’LIK (Counsel for the Defendant Hoven): Ur. President,

I ask you to excuse the Defendant -ioven fron tomorrow aiorning's
anl toco rr on afternoon's session in ordor to pro par o his defense.

IP.. HARDY: I ha/e no consent in this regard, your Honor, tut while
toe defense counsel for Hovon is here I have a question to put to him
regarding the case of the Defendant Hoven. x o date we have had two
witnesses apdear on behalf of Hoven. The prosecution is interested
in i.hotheror not the dofonso coun3ol intends to c all other tdtnc3scs on
behalf of tho Dofondant Hovon.

DR. GA' LIK: Throe other tdtno33C3 have been approvod, tho T.dtnossos
Richard, Dorn, and Schoublo. I have rocoivod an affidavit fron tho
tdtnoss Rickard which I an going to subedt. ’Dhothor I shall call
tho rritnessos D om ard Schoublo to f.io tritnoss stand, or whothor I
could profor to &>t affidavits fron t!ion, I cannot sfty today, sinco
I hn/o to discuss that quostion with tho witnossos as 30on as they
arrivo in Nurenborg.

T:E HiESIDEltT: C 0 unsol, as soon 3 you havo discussed this -rattor
with tho witness os, will you ad vis o oounsol for tho prosooution as
to j;hothor thoy till bo put on tho 3tand or you will U30 an affidavit?

DR. GATLIK: lo 8 , ir. President.

THE RESIDENT: Counsel for tho Dofondant Hovon having roquostod
that Do ford ant Hovon bo cxcusod f roc attendance before tho Tribunal
tecorrow in 7 order that his counsel cay consult with hin cor.corning
his dofonso, quest is granted, ‘ho Dofcndant Hovon will bo

e:;cu3cd fron attcn^onco before tho Tribunal tomorrow.

Counsel nay proceed with tho c::anir..tion of tho witnoss.

HBUftNN 3ECKER-FRETSEIC - Rosuccd

DIRECT ZXAHEIA7I.H (Continued)

DR. TIP? (Counsol for the Defendant Bcckcr-Froyscng): IS". President,

7646


20 'Jsj U7-4»-SS:-I3-2-Postcr(lUBalcr)

cou t ;ro, 1


->ith reference to tho complex uhich I c OPpleted this norning con¬
cerning the research asdgnncnts and thair treatment, I said that
I ms going to sutadt a document fron which I -nsgoing to qiotc. As
I already said, it is contained in J oci=ont Book No. U v.iiich is not
yet available to the Tribunal; howover, I havo Ju3t received tne
translation of that documnt fron t: e language w ivision, and the
necessary amount of copies havo bee-, landed to tho Socrotary-Gonoral,
niti tho request to hand then to t: o Tribunal. *ho interpreters as
nil as -r. Kaxdy havo also received co,ics. If it please tho Tribunal,
I should like to quote a few passage e froo tils document.

(docent handed to tl» Tribvnal.)
r.L. r.£SiDS;fT: Tho Tribunal hac not yet reoioved tho copioo of
this document In the Ocraan language, but I assume they trill ~-o
providod later.


Counsel ray proceed,

DR. TIP?: This is Tcckor-"royaonc *>ocrnont '.X) Qi, contained in
Docu.ant Book h on page 3U0. X offer it as 3cckor-Frcyson. : bddbit
Ho. 7. It is on affidavit by drofossor Dr. -ans ^chacfor, of Kurckhoff
Institute, Tad Kauboin, dated 2U April 19U7. After tho custa*ry
Introduction he says, under figuro 1.

1) "I, Prof. Dr, ^chaofor, phr-iioiogiot, dopartaont diroctor of
tho filliaa J. Kurckhoff Instituto at Bad Haahotn sinco 1 January


1-?U0, rccoivcd in 19U0 or 19ld fron ‘lac tfcdical Inspectorate of tho
Iuftrraffo a research assignrxut on tho subject of "research on the
electrical by-cffccts of anoxemia srl hy xr-aoration". ; ith rofcronco
to t;.is asslgnaoot, too intermediate roports a3 veil as 3 publications
rxro issued. It *. nsnot yut completed by tho end of tho -.nr.

■2) The subject t ns selected and ropescd by mo. I had previously
orkod on ±ailnr subjects, although not on the effects of anoxia. Tho
subject represents part of ny special field i.c. the corhiantion of
electro-physiology and circulatory research, on which field i ac
still working today." _


7847


20 :^y l;7-A-SS^13-3—Foster(Ranicr)
~ourt So. 1


Under figure 3 the tritness describes uhy ho asked for this
'“Sigmxnt — in order to obtain prioritiesand defersents anti thus
to be r.blc to carry on his scientific activities.

X. ?I?? (Continuing): I qxoto from figurc U on the 2nd page:

- did not subject nysclf to any aip-rviaion by the ledical
Inspectorate by the as si gnoent of tho roscarch cosrission and it
acceptance, ‘he research assignment gave ao absolute latitude regarding
tho method of otxcution and tho choico of tho no a ns of research. 1
only obliged to give reports or. schedule ard to account for tho
sonoy spent.

"5) ’ 4 Vro novor vaa a chock-up b tho -odical Inspectorate, nor
•.xro tiioro any rcqujsts. At ono occasion, luwovor, Prof. Anthony,

10 oificial in chargo, aid a private visit and raa d:orm through
tie institute by nc."

1 shall skip figures 6 and 7; i olwuld li!:o to ask tho Vribvnal
to take notico of thorn.

I qioto again from paragraph 8:

'•'0 nstructions regarding tho oxccution of the coaiission-.roro
•' -"od, and had thoy been, I should ‘n any caso havo rojoctod thon."

• 0 rest of this paragraph isnot relevant.

-n figuro 9 ho says, and I quote:

" v . should not on principle havo permitted a ny kind of control
c - scientific results, -von by «xq orts. If contmIs arc dcsir-d
t: 7 "-*c only possible in tho fern of neremporinonts by a second
-dentist."

*

I shall dispense with reading the rot of tho do ai cent. Thoro
':ll0K3 thosignature and the oustooaxy certification by a notary.

‘his concludes tho question of roscarch assignments for tho tin:

-hag, and I novr turn to tho individual counts of tho indictnont.

7648


Hay 20-..-3K-l*l-l-3card (Int. Itcnnlor)
Court Ko. 1


; Witness, you have heard the desire of the Tribunal
•hat the procoeiin 3 be shortened; for r;y part I shell
stride out part of the-questions which I intended to put
to you, .and I should like to ask you to Unit your replies
t wh.'.t is absolutely necessary.

.titaoss, the Prosecution charges you with spooi.nl
responsibility for and pnrtioi. ntion in hiph- -.ltitudu and
cold ex. rinont3. .<o know on the basis of numerous
doouaents and the testimony of witnesses that in these
rou.-S of experiments Dr. .insohor played n very s.cci.nl
role; for that reason I should like to r.3k you first about
your relationship to Dr. A .s cher. Toll no, when did you,
f;r th- fir 3 1 tine, loarn of r. Dr. itttsoher who was n
C . tain in the Kodionl Cor..s (Stabs.arzt) of tho Luftvvaffo?

.. I hoard about Dr. .insoh-r for the fir3t tine r.t about
tbo bo'innin of Juno 19--2.

. ..nrt on wh t occ si on was that?

.. ..t the bo"innin; of June, Professor .Jichony was on

1 . vo and i3 for s I r.noribor ho hr.e to p on his vao .tion

vjy quickly boo use th- Chl-f Physioi j» of his clinic

had suddenly f .lion ill. .. few d js Inter tho do., .rtuont

chief, (ton or alar zt (Mortius?) sont sonu files back to no

which Professor ..nthony had given to hiu before his

la. rturc. ..non: those files thor^ wore tlw first proposals

for the odd n-ctin which w is planned for the fall of

19.2, including the first proposals about the .. rtici^ants

an! the inton-*cl lectures. There were a nunber of ohr.njos

. .do by the do. artn-nt chief on this list, anti nnonj thou

was n a*U. *. sentence say in; that a Dr. .i .seller w .s to ,

r.,c.ivo an invitation. This n.r.o, at that tin-, no sit

• ■ ti.in: te no, bo cause I was noith-r work in in the sphor

of cold questions, nor '.id I have siythin ; to *.o with the

Fcr tfc; t reason, I did not attach
. 7645 •


.ins f->r the r-octin .


M~y 20-.--BK-l*i-2-Bocrd (Int. Il-nnlcr)
Court !»o. 1


ny . Tticul .r i::; rtancc to whnt the dcpnrtr.cnt chiof said,
-.’o ut one --<r two weeks later, at any rate while Professor
••nthony was still on vacation, r:y dep .rta-nt chief ordered
a. to ;o tc the Medical Inspector, Pr .fussor Hippko, with
part of th -30 files, the papers pert .ininj to the .roposod
.lectin". ..t Professor Hi ...oka's office there was a Captain
f the Liodior.l Corps (iitabsarzt} of the Luftwaffe; I found
out free, his conversation with Kippko that he w.;3 daschor.
Professor Hippke wanted to 3ponk to -nthony 'uid askeu no
?;r the files and what information I could jive hin. This
is tho smo o mf oronoo of which Profess it Hippko spoke
ahon ho was cxnninod in tho trial of Field Marshal Milch.

<1 Since this c xkferonoo was nninly concerned with cold
questions as you say, we shall oor,o back to it whon wo aro
U3cu33in • that prcblcn. I *.o want to ask you now: What
it rossion lid Lr. aasoher r.ako on you whon you saw hin
for th~ first tine?

- On tho whole, .iasoher nado quite a fiood inpre3sion on
.u at that tin-'. I r.ust add that I saw dnschor 3pcnkin;j
t r.y hi-her superior who had ixooivod hir. without a deport¬
ment chi^f; .<a3cher spoke like an oduoatod nan; he was
c-urtoous, cod soenod to bo well versod in tho fiolds which
he * iscusscd with Hip. ko.

. wuul ’ you please shortly toll us in a few words, wit¬
ness, whut this conversation was ubout?

.. .«hen I entered tho conversation dasohor was just in-
f.'n.in'j Hi.pke that tho .Uichsf uohror SS Himlor had order¬
'd hin to carry out cold experinonts, and he asked for tho
su; . ort of a sea onor-soncy expert frx. the Luftwaffe for
c:. t _ur.oso.

Of course, it b econo evident fra*, the or-nvorsati;n that

y wore t ■ bo experinonts on hunan beings?

7850


By 20— .-3K-14-3-5c-j (Int. linrv.lcr)
Court No. 1


*. Y-s, thr.t bcorxio evident.

: 3ut, rtii'. *tns oho r say thr.t ho was goin; to use concentra¬
tion oar.. innatos as cx;)crin-ntal subjects, or hew did he
eh .r-Ctorizu tho ox.,orinontal subjects?

.. *mschor very clearly s 4 :oko a'-iout prisoners or convicted
crir.in .13 who wor« at our disposal,oh; tho basis of special
permission given by Hit lor and Hinder, if I roooobor
corr-otly, and who had to volunteer. It was ny ir.prossion
-.t that tixio that wo vrcro only concornod with a very
lir.itod number of pooplo and oortain v>-ry s.ocific oases.

V Then itnsohor s.;oko of originals who wore to boo erne
experimental subjects?

.. Yos.

A ; Dirt ho say anythin: about the typo of criminals?

.. No, not in da tail. It was very clear, however, thr.t
they wore criminals. I ruuunbor that ho nontlonod that
those pooplo were to have the op. ortunity of rehabilitating
thonsolvos in 3ono way by virtue of thoir . articulation
in thoso experiments. Ho furthermore sail that for that
reason not every original who volunteered would !>o permitted
t > ; jticipato. I roaanbor very clearly an oxauplo whero q
S exual criminal who had boon convicted of a number of
effunses against your children, had volunteered but was not
permitted to .rxfcioi; ate in thoso experiments, whoro ho
vnuld have had an opportunity to rehabilitate hinsolf.

. hew did this conversation end, witness?

- I con say nothin; about that. I was only called to
attend the conference after it has begun, .and I had to

1 -ave tho conference before it was finished.

. In that caso, you do not kn <w what actually was n.jrood
u; n, do you? . *

- ‘h t -.-..schor and Hi; . ke discussed finally, 1 >’c not know.

. Now, witless, on this occasion you saw or. ncsohor for

7651


U'y 20-..-3K-11— x-B- nr (Iat. *ter.r.lor)
Court No. 1


tho first tii:o, and you hex’ for tho first tirio that ex¬
periments wore to bo ..erfomed or could be performed on
criminals In Gornany; is-that ri^ht?

•• y. s.

i ~s you toll us yesterday, you had informed yourself to
r. great extent about tho experiments on human bcinps from
th- theoretical . oint of vi-w end you had performed ox. ori-
tunts on yourself; new toll us, whet i/.prossion did you
have when you hoard th .t outsiders, criminals, were to bo
usod for those oxporinonts?

- This announce: ant n-.de a big inprossi;n on no. I had
had sufficiont experience with ox. orinents on human bcin ;s
in jortr .l and solf-oxpori/nnts in particular. Up to that
.>oint I had known about ox. orinonts on prisoners only
free literature. I knew about thor. only as a result of
r.y propatory work for tho State oxanination, when a fow
famous canes had to bo known for bacteriology or surgory.
Thoso wore Str ing's famous plague experiments in Manilla,
..mini's leprosy ox.orimont; and I knew of oth-r examples
l‘r.v; "Hiorobc Huntors" by Paul do Kruif, which I had read
lik- ^very other G.-rn-an nodical student.

. ..ftor having already concernod yoursolf with th.-.t .-ruble
In theory, boforohand, nay I now ask you, witness, wither
y u considered th-so oxperin-nts which wore boing planned
1-;al experiments?

•• Yes, I considered the/, to bo just ns legal os all Vh.

tl^rs of wjiich I already knew .t that ‘-Lo. I knew that no

• J-ction had been rnisod to thoir legality or admissibility.

in addition I was told that tho originals were to volunteer.

- toi-w that a special -xc. .inat ion was neoossary, and that

-ci .1 per:J.3sior. would : „ jiven. Furthermore, I did hot

"" -bout this mr.ttor in son- dark corn_r where a conspiracy

'■‘■2 :oinc on, but I hoard about it in the offico of r.y

7852


L'ay 20-^—BK-i:-5-Bo ard (Int. .irjinlor)

C _urt Ho. 1

auprorio superior, about whon I had tosssuio that ho had
known *.asohcr free before, and that ho had already doalt
with that question for soco tine.


::-y 20-..-3K-15-l-iic^hm (Lit. ivonnlor)
Court Ko. 1


1 'ic'.l, witness, thr.t was your nttitudo about this ,/lnn
at that tino, just as you have outlined it to us now. Wit¬
ness, how do you Jud'O the question of locality today?

In 4 -rinci_lc, just as thon: today I havo ::uch norc
roof an', nrjiy r.oro oxaa_.lcs for oxporinonts on orinin.als,
which woro oorriod out in on absolutoly l«jQr.l and
adnissiblo way. I onn not ica’ino that tho orininals of
cth-r c ^xntrios would bo idonlists and would out of ~Airo
idor.lisn voluntoor for thoso ox. crincnts in lr.rfto numbers,
nhilo Gorrx.n crininr.ls would not voluntoor for suoh ;mrposos.

don't actually bolievo thr.t tiurnnn orininals r>rc ..ron;.tod
by id or. lisa but booauso they ox.xict oortnin in. rovoraents
in thoir condition thorofree, and I think the saao holds true
in other oountrios. In orcUr to ;rovo that, I any quote a
;r.3sa.;o fro:, tho book n ~n ..n^ric.n doctor's Odyssey" by
Victor Hoiscr, free ,iC£o 1-19 j f tho Hu mm outhorizod transla¬
tion of tho year 1916. It says thoro, .ind I quote: ".jj
soon as roaody for sono di3or.se had boon 3Ub jested, tho
Institute established whoth-r it was offeotivo. Tho ox;>Dri-
ronta were oorriod out cn innatos of Bilibid, who ournod a
little ooncy and, if tho ox:>orinoats wore dnn.;orous, oould
c.chiovo ; niti ration of thoir sentence." Tho institute i3
tho .loroostor Instituto in M nilla.

3ir.il.ar ; roof fro* nodorn tines can bo foun’., for cxuoi»lo,
in tho Journal of tho *•£. j loon Modionl -.ssoci ation, 27 ..;ril
19*6, voluno 130, : a-.o 1256. I quote: Under tho hoatliflr?,
Prisoners Used as Guinea Fi s for Mo die :1 lex. uriiijnts,"
there follows the report.

Ginil-r th.r.to is r. ro_- ort that ox;>orironts wcri. carried
ut uq s tie 77 innatos in a ..risen with hashish or narihuana.
.at ion has already been a ado h'-re of a nunbor of oz 1 orir^nt3
. conscientious obj-ctors, so I lo not javo to jo into all


7654


;i«y 20-..-BK-15-2-Uoohnn (In-, Lanier)

Court No. 1

..11 thcso examples, which ’.o not orijinnto froa antiquity
jut froa tho last few yoars, soon to show very clearly that
chore is a possibility of findinj onoujh voluntocrs anona
^onitoncinry incites for 3uch oxporinonts, that thoro no
always cn>uh physicians who nro roody to porforn such
ox. orinonts, and that apparently no ono in the world raises
any objections to suoh experinonts.

q, Lot us new "o hack, witness, to Dr. uaschor; when did
ycu soo ^r. *<aBOher for tho second tine?

.. I saw hasohor for tho sooonc' tixw on tho ocdofiion of
tho Nurnborc oold r.ootina in Octobor 19-12.

\ On what occasion?

.. On tho oooasion of tho fcr.ous cold nootinc here in
Uurnborc;.

a iiasoher, r.s can bo soon fron tho doounents, nado sono
’.isoussion ronarks on tho lootuce of Pr>>fossor Holzloohnor.
.ithout ,:oinj into dotail, I wqnt to ask you whether you
: -inert the ix;,.res 3 ion fren .lascher's rarjurks that what
.icschur had Ijeen cloin; in Jachau was in any way criiiinal?

.. ..t that tine it did not bocoaj evident to uo fron what

..a3cher 3aid that what he had boon rtoinc in collaboration
with Holzloohnor was out3ido tho law or outsido tto sphoro
of r.'lnissibility.

. But wo do knov;, witness, that th030 discussion ronerks
ando by .ia3chor durin ; tho Nurnbore cold nootin 3 raised
an occasion for sono discussion onona the participants
in that neotin. 1 . How do you explain th«30 discussions,

;"rt of which were r-jcctin;; Haschcr '3 proooduro?

.. Ono really can not spoak of any discussion in tho true
ser. 3 C of the word - a -iscussion .t the ncotin;,. I think
there was only . ; uroly priv -.to discussion after tho lecture.

. That's what I noon.

7655


Hoy 20-.--5K-15-3-L-U -hnn (Lit. .»cnulor)

Court No. 1

.. If I can Jud^o fron ny own ooso, the discussions did
not refer to what *iaschcr said, but to tho nanner-in-whioh.
ho scid it. The unnner in which ho spoke about his oxperi-
conts was sonowhat slo.py, and not quito suitod the serious-*
nature of the lecture.

, You said, witno33, that you r.ot nschor in Juno in
3orlin in Profossor -Hippko's offico and that you saw hia
a;-ain during the Number a oold aootin.^?

.. Yos.

i, 3of ore this Nurnbora a cot in;, did any one worn you
ajalnst hr. Unsohor?

.. No.

’i Nov/ lot us turn to anothor problon, witness, in
connootion with ->r. itasohor. 00 know Tror. what Profossor
ioltz tostifiod horo and .also free a nunbor of doounonts,
whioh woro au nitted b y tho Presooution, that «r. .laschor
»antod to qualify as r. locturer by suhnittin ; a thesis in
tho fiold of aviation uodioino. unsohor was in addition
•1 nodical offioor of tho Luftwaffe, and it oould l>o assunod
that you, or the Nodical Inspootorato, would havo loarnod
sonothin,'; about theso . Icn3 of Aaschor and as a result
would also havo found out what .lasohor actually did in order
to exoouto thoso plans, witness, fiay I ask you whothor you
icncw anythin; about .tnschor's intention to qualify as n
lecturer?

.. N , I knew nothin* about that.

. I do not want to discuss ell thoso docunonts with you,
•.»itno3s, which wero submitted by the Prosecution in that
connection; thoy show no connootion with tho Luftwoffo, apart
fra. two oxco; tions. These two exceptions which I Just

ntionad are in connection with aviation nodical research,

.id f or that reason I nust ask you about then.

7856


M y 20-*»-BK-15—I-M;:ohr.n (I--.-, Junior)
C.iurt No. 1


Tjxo first doounont I shoal:' like you to look at ocn bo
foual in Uncunont Book 2 . This is doounont NO-290, Exhibit
121 , which oan found on *030 166 in the G„r..._n book and
156 in the Bn lish i> .aunont Book. I 003 your pardon, thi 3 is
in doounont B >ok 3. It is a lottcr signed by Us . Siov-rs,
bo aria; the lcttorhead of the "Pawnor bo" Society, with
the date 21 M rch 19.*i. It is ed/.rossod to doctor Bud: If
Brandt, on tho porsonnl staff of tho Boiohsfuohror 3S. I
should like to disouss only ono sontonco in this doounont
with you; it is tho last aontonoo on tho first - 030 , and I
quoto:

*Th u diroot or of the Instituto for ..vintion Medioino in
Frankfurt, Oborstarzt Frofossor Dr. von Dirinashofon, who
hnd clrondy ooncontcd to tako -art in tho ;'rusontation of
tho thosis in linrbur :, would r.ost oortninly hnvo boon in-
'■.ucod to fawr idnission to tho faculty in Frankfurt.'

Oborstarzt Professor von -'irinr.shofen was a nodioal
officer of tho Luftwaffo, end in addition on Institute for
..vlation Medioino i3 nontionod hero. U-vy I csk you, wit¬
ness, do you know von uirin;shofon, end do you know this
Instituto for ..viation Mcdicino of which Ur. Siovors is
3 k onkinc horo?

.. I knew Professor von Dirin;shofon, but thoro was novor
an Instituto for ..vintion Modicino in Frankfurt. Professor
von Dlrinr^hofon wes the hoed of on institute for noohnn-
ionl influences on the surroundings. T'.is instituto was^
founded by the city of Frankfurt on tho M..in and had nothing

whatevor to do with the Luftwaffo.

. I.n tho sr.ee connection, witness, would you plcaso look
at another doounont in the sane doounont book: ti is is
-ocuncnt N0-230, Exhibit 115, on ?a;o I 53 9* thc Gorn0n . njld
142 of thc B . lish doounont book. This is the course of
•'•aschcr’s nodical trainin whioh he hi.nsclf has written


Hoy 20-*.-3X-15-5-i:ochan (Int. *te gn l o r)
Court No. 1


under tho date of 17 May 19-13; on the last pa^o of this
docunont, * 1 , you will find tho followin ; passage, and

I quoto:

"..ftcr tha cone usion of this rcsoarch work", cf which he
has previously been spoakinj, M I intond , cs n proed upon,
to return to tho Univorsity Instituto for -.vintion Medicine
and Hy ;iono (Professor 3r. Pfnnnonstiol, Marburg) for ny
further scientific training."

3inoo aviation nodicino nattors were under tho Medical
Ins.ootorato, witness, I ar.y ask you whothor you know of
this institute, aii f. whothob throu ;h this institute you know
about Unschor's plans?

.. 1 oan say that there was never an instituto for aviation
notticino r.t Mar bur ; an' that I knew nothin': of .iasohor's
Ians in this connection.

. Ur. Prosidont, in that oormeotion I offer as an exhibit
Bookcr-Froyaon ; ^ocunont No. 21 on pi..;o 09 of isoounont
dock I. This will booonu Exhibit »o. 8. This is tho
affidavit..:.

THS P.v^SIDSHT: Counsol, you don’t no n wocunent oook
No. 1, do you?


7666


20 l'ny-.,--~ZS-16-l-C k (Hit. . nrl r)

C urt F . 1.

A

Da. Tirr* I bo.* y ur ; rice, Ur. Proaidont, D.'cuB-'-nt B k ¥ . 2.'

T^E ~xSID3FTi TThnt exhibit riir>'r do y*u psai *n t • thr-.t?

D!:. Tl-:r Exhibit F«. 8. I rv.y quote briefly; it ia on ~a~o 89.

It ia an uffid-,vit f -r-'fcaa r Dr. aod. Eoinz v-n Dirinah'fon, Frank¬
furt n the fain, 7 February 1947. ,.ftor the cuat mrv intr 'ducti n
I qu-to Firuro I.

"Tho Inatituto aatabliahod by no with the cariatonco of the oity f
Frankfurt/! to in in 1952, and which I diroctod, w-a o.llodi

Ecdieal i^aenroh Inatituto f r Itochanicnl Influence*. Thia

Inatituto wea neither ottnehod t- the Tnsnoet rnto f r Fodiool

..ffoira f the Luftwnffe, n t did it w rlc under ltt erdora."

Cndor ;r:rir-rij h 2 the wi tn. aa dcacrib->a hoc thia qu-tnti n which I
h vo Just rut ta the witnoaa erinimted, manly th t .r foaaor Dr.

Bcoh aaked the witnoaa Ten Dirinj ah fen whether ho w uld bo i-ro;.srod
t -ivo n acientific ;ini n -n n thoaia by the Luftw.'.ffo Stnbaorzt
Dr. .naehor, written f'r tho jur; au f quollfyin* oa a lccturor.
irofoaaer vrn Dirirvah. fon further atntoa ttot ho deolnrod hiraclf
nndy t< *.o ac twit that he hoard n-thin, further nb -ut that firm.

I quote e :ain fr-’n po,o 2 «:f the dtoun nt, the l*at pern -raj hi

"I woe never requested by tbe Inapeotorat- of the Luftwaffe
!V«cnl Sorvieo t- oeep.jrate with Dr. Sic.-nund Itna-hor n hia hobili-
t-ti'-n jejor, nr did I inf-rr. t)io lna;«et roto na to tho above-
mnticnod disouaai. n with .r foas r Be oh."

Thoro f llewa tho eifnnture and tho custrrrv oortifioati-n.

s tho noxt ' .curvnt in that oennocti n I ah eld like to offer
B-'ckcr-Freyeon.* Decur. nt Vr. 22, which c .n be f und n ; ,-a 91 f the
wn d curv nt b k. Thia will hccr-» Exhibit V . 9. It ia on official
rtifient: f tho administrative direct r f rhilii.a Cnivoreity f
r’ur-, doted 10 January 19.7; I sh <-ld like t qu- to tho first
»rn -r j h:

"an Institute f r ;.vir.ti r. Itodicine and Fyienc aev;r axisted nt
■ *111; o ^nivoraity ir. "r r’ur - n t .v .n Vrir the. yur.ra 1941 *. 19.3."

I shr.ll n -vs qu tc the last ;.’.rc T ;hi

7859


20 May-.v-0ZS-16-2-C k (h.mlor)
C urt V . 1.


■Tho s’- to facts arc taken fr c the files f tho c ur.cil
(Xumt riun) f rhillips Cnivorsity.

Then fallows the signature, tho stnc; and cortificati n.

Viitn ss, "hen y u saw Heschor in Hinge’s < ffica ary 1 , at tho
yuromborr c-ld ncctin : *, he was a Strtsrrrt ir. tho Luftwr.fft?

A. Yes.

Did you 5en-w Anythin- ah-tit his oenborshir in tho SS, ob ut
which much aentl r. has boon made hero?

n. Kr f I knew n<-thine in i*rticulnr ah ut that. I «nly know, and
T heard it durinr Rlri>c«onweriati. n with Ifcschor, that if.eohor wus
sjookin- ab ut his r D,v * rolct! M Heinrich v ’imlur.

Q. H w wee it, witnoss. that o »ji »h ..Vri usly h"d closo
o nnoctirna with tho richsfUnhrcr S e.-uld h vo boon a ihysicir-n in th
Luftwaffe r.n' wne n t in tho Tnffon SS?

a. 1 A' n't kn w ab ut “hichar's spocirl er.so, but thero ware a
number f similar casus. Bof.ro tho war the '..'affun 3S had n.-t yet
oxlstod ns >n Independent •?ohrr.-.cht branch, t th t a number f rosorvo
fflours whr bolon>d t» the C-ncr-1 SS hid ;«rf mod thuir M'ln-u
sorvioo in other bronchos, with th. ..my. Kvy. or Luftrr-ffo. -ihen tho
war Sterted th- sc iwof-l*’ were •'rafted int- thoir respective Johimeht
hronohos with.ut their civilian aanhnrshi? in nny Tart f imti n ’ in-
t"'con int e nsidornti n.

Q. ..s we «avw, Dr. liaschor c no rn-;d hinsulf with tw. subjoote,
thr subject f altitude nnd the sublet f c Id. 3 th of these sub¬
lets were ;roblcps cf i-vinti n n-dicino?

<>. Yes.

q. That it c-n bo assumed, nnd tho fr socuti n Sri usly •?«
nesurvi, th-t n«- tirti-ns an’ c-rrcs; r.'onco c-rriod n with the
Luftw-ffc - in particular the edical 3ns;ect -mto - ah ut those
subject* rm.st hive ;• no via th, A.-fomt f r ..viati n liudicinc?

... Th-t c -Id be assumed, yes. Sit fr n nil of th d-cu-^nts *f

th - -shor c nrlox I hvo f und -nly tw- d-cur.-nts which vor. hint at

-ny r'.rticipnti n f th, ..cforat, whereas 11 th -- d cur.-.-nts sh w

7660


20 HayW.-G3S-ie-2-C* k ( . -r-.lor)

C urt U . 1.

"Tho a*- vo facts ire tnkon fr n the filos • f the e unoil
(Kumt riun) f 'hilli; s Cnivorsity.

Thor. i*'llow» tho si c -ncturo, the stars; one! cortificoti n.

!7itn- sa, when y u saw teaohor in Hip;ko's < Kic'. an', nt tho
“uroaborr e Id neotin;', ho was a Stsfcsrrst ir. tho Lultw: ffc?

A. Yea.

Did you kn--w nnythin" about hia neaborship in tho SS, about
which rueh aonti n hna boon rodo hero?

n. Mo, I knew n- thine in lenticular o v ut that. I «niy know, and
I hoard It durinr Pinko'* e nveranti* n with Iteschor. that Ihcohor wna
■rooltin- ob ut hia rood roloti na with Hoinrieh ‘■’irelor.

Q. How was it, witnoaa, that a nra wh bvi.usly h-rt oloao
c moot Iona with tho ^Ichafuohrcr S* ecu Id hnyo boon o physician in th
tuftwcffo r.n’ woe net In tho TTaffon SS?

n. I d»n't bn w ob ut *haehor'# specie 1 cr.so, but thoro woro n
number f similar e-sea. Bof.ro tho war tho Suffon 3S had n t yot
oxieted na m independent ^ohraaoht branch, ft th-t a number f reaorvo
ffioure whf bol<n,*cd t~ the Conor-1 SS h.d ;orf mod th-ir roaorvo
aorvloo in ether brrnchoa, with th- ..my, K-.vy. •" toftimffo. -then tho
mr started th* so jtuaplo w-ru drafted int their roerootivo Tohrmcht
trancheo with ut their civilian r.s-*"rehip. in any Tart f rmti n Vin¬
to Icon int o naidoroti n.

Q. a8 wo fcn* w. Dr. linachor c no rn-:d hinaolf with tw subjects,
th* subject f Qltitudo and the subnet f c Id. B th :f these sub¬
lets w-.-ro ;reblcps cf rvinti n aedicino?

i.. lea.

q. That it 0-n bo casmod, ond tho Pr aocutl n «bvi ucly d oa
oeaun;, th-t no,- tirti ns an! c-rros; n-'onco c-rriod n with th*

Luftw ffe — ir. particular the V.oditol Ins; oct-rate — ab ut those
subjects must hive ;• no via tho Xwferat f r ..viati n Medicine?

... That c vld bo nssur«d, yos, v ut fr n nil f th . '-curwnta -f
th: >ahor e bjIox 1 h vc f• und • niy twr ’ cur. nts which von hint at

f th. ..cferat, whorena 11 th.-r d

7660


r.y r- rticip-.ti n


cur.-r.ts sh w


20 K*y-,.-C3S-16-3-C k C^ml.r)

C urt S> 1.

clearly th-t the IJjfcrnt had r.. thin - at all t do with it.

Q. .md h-w do ycu explain that, witness? -"hat I swan is, how ri-
u ox; loin that the =oj rity of the c-rrosp-ndenco with tho Kodioal
Inspectorate did r. t r vor tho Aoferat?

Toll, this cor. n d ubt partly bo cxpl* ined - v tho fact that
th> i'odlcnl Inspect r, ?r'f. Hi-pko, v r- frequently dealt with such
art tors without the rid :f his Hcforonts. In addition, I think that
this was probably bocauso 3osehor .r.ly dealt with, tho hi -host auth¬
orities i'ors»'nnlly.

Saw, witness, in this ccnnacti n I hove t discuss several
d. ounenta with y u fF.Ti which the Irosooutl n will probably infor r.
c nnccti n totwocr. Ilischcr and y u. Tho first d cunont in that
c nnootl.-n can bo f-und in D-cuocnt Bo k V . 2, p«to 137 of the Gorr.m
nnd 113 in the Snlish dacunont b<«*; it is D eur.ont SO-226, Ir so-
outi r. Exhibit V . 55. It is c letter fr .n tho ..hnonorbe, af.ain
sipnod by Kr. Siovors, and it is detod 21 Cot.h-.r 1942, eddrossed to
SS-Ofcorsturmfbshror Dr. Brandt, n tho porecnal «taff cf the IJolchs-
fuohror SS. Pndor th« sana d<ove*<mt number thoro is att cho-' tho
drrft *-f n letter t Fiold I’crehal 2 'iloh, and this •upplorunt jr-apts
mo t discuss this c* cur.;nt with y u. In tho rip. Inal, it is sal.:,
that the hi *h-:. It itu do oxporinunU oro t-.V c ntirwod and Siovors
vrltos that tho low-prossuro chosfcor will bo roquirod, and in the

•

attached supplcwnt t- Fiold Jbrsh.1 Viloh, there is tho f lKwlnp.i
"Ir. ndditi n t- th i ro; 'rt which I had su’^nittad t no horu by
Strbsr.rtx Dr. Ifcschar nnd Dr. ^ nb r- c. ncomin- tho earryin.' ut of
hi •h-iltitudo oxroriacr.ts, I had dosirod that a similar report ho
subnittod to v u, t.v . nlth u h it was act rszi lo f r y u to parti¬
cipate in the C.nforonco f 11 September 1»12 and t c nvinoc v ur-*
self f tho results, up t n w. of these experiments, 1 bor •• u nco
n re t.day t put ct ur disp-'scl tho lw-pro ssuro chcnbor, thr u-h
tho Aviati n 3x;oriental Instituto. . 4 s tho experiments are t. he
xten-’od t -r"t' r nltitudos, this tivc- differential -amps w \± ' Is
hive t bo s’l-plicd."


7661


20 lay-A-GSS-J.6-^Ccek (RanaUr)
Court No. 1


Witness, we are here concerned with the lov-pressura chamber, and
you said that you had *>nothing to do with the administration of the

loi-CTCJCTro-pijlin the Medical Inspectorate. Can you tell nc-

•

whether you receivod-knowledge of this letter and whether the Reforat
for Aviation Medicine had anything to do with this natter?

A I had noither soon that letter before nor was the Reforat for
Aviation Medicino ever concerned with that setter. That can clearly
bo seen from two thij^s in this letter. Tho assumption th?t the German
Research Institute for Aviation Medicine should on its o.vn initiative
place a lew-prossuro chamber at their disposal is absolutely erroneous.
If tW.3 letter had boon previously discussed with tho Roforat for
Aviation Medicine, tho writor would havo known that only tho Kodioal
Inapootorato of tho Luftwaffe would havo furnished any such chambor.

In addition, if I had boon nskod about this point I would havo told
tho porson concorrvod that I know nothing of tho so-c.-llod differential
pumps and that nono of tho low-prossuro chambers in tho entire Luft¬
waffe wore equipped with then.


7P62


20 Kay-A-.' 3—17-i-Gross (int- 3rown)

Court No. I.

Q Kow, witness, we core to r-nother docusant in this connection.
And this la again a setter of aviation medicine pro biers which '/ore
dealt with by Dr. Raschtr - eviction madicine research. In that con¬
nection I should like to discuss with you tbo Prosecution Document 1512
PS, Exhibit 79. This can be found in Document 3ook II on pope 136 of
the Go ram, end page 122 of the English Docusent Book. It is a lottor,
“the Reichsfuohrer-SS", and signed "by order, Srandt, SS Cfeorsturrabann-
fuohror." It is addressed to a nvebor of persons whom wc shall discuss
Inter.

This Is a lottor of the Rcichsfuohror Koinrich H l sn lor, apparent¬
ly, dated 13 Doccrber 19U2, in which Rnscher, who at that tl-ao was a
Gtaba.arst in the Luftwaffe, is entrusted with tho execution of realistic
low-proosuro chamber experiments. Furthoraorc, ho is entrusted with
exporLwnts for re-warning after fr. citing. Tho other points .are not
important in this connection.

Since ttq are clearly 5»ro concerned with aviation nodical re-

•

search questions, witnisa, tho conclusion is likely that tho Rofcrnt
for Aviation fedicine or tho iodical Inspectorate had gained knowledge
of tills nss^rvent which wae given to Rrtschor or in which Raschor was
Included. In that connoction cay.I ask you :ihothcr you loarnod any¬
thing about this assignment given to Mr.Raschor?

A Xo, I found out nothing about that assignment.

1 As you say, no copy of this letter was acknowledged by the
Rofcrnt of Aviation Medicine.

A No, that can clearly bo seen froo tho distribution list and
I think it is a matter of ar^acont to point to various otter matters
rhich clearly show a personal nature between Rcinrich Kiarler and Rase her.

Q Now, witness, you ar^. saying that tho Refornt For Aviation
V- dicine Rad nothing to do with this part of Rascher's work .and tho !&d“
.cal In? rector at a -.vis not conconvc with ttese matter?. In that connec¬
tin'. i must put to you a document .Rich does not soc-n to tally with what

you are saying and which most rrobnbly was submitted by the prosecution

7863


20 ky-A-! 3-I7-2-Gro5S (Int. Sroro)

Court !!o. I.

in order to :ro7. your connection with Snscher*s experinents. This is
the djcuoent MO-262 of the rrosecution, Exhibit Mo. 103, znd is in
Document Rook Ho. 2 on page 130 of the English Occusent Book. The
letterhead "The Institute of the Ifadical Services of the Luftwaffe,
dated '■ 3‘r.rch l';U3." It is directed to Cfocrgruppenfuchrer .Tolfl, the
Chid cf the Personal Staff of the Reichsfuchrcr-SS. This Jotter is
signed by t. Mippko. As can be seer, from its contents, it de-lo with
Stabsnr*t Dr. .tocher, and the prosecution nay well conclude from this
letter that you participated in this natter hjeauso you arc the only
one of tho deforciants who was working in the Itdical Inspectorate dur¬
ing tlx> tins in question. Vould you placso toll us, witness, whothor
you hod ray knswlodgo of this lottor and of tho points contained thoroin?

A Ho, of that I knot' nothing p.s can bo eeun fron tho conploto
lottorhoad, moroovor. "Let no rend tho lcttorhoad onco again to show

that - "Tho Inspector of the ‘todic.al Services of tho Luftwaffo. Kilo
noto none, ho. 2299A3, werot, and tto abbreviation for tie word In¬
spector". ?> abbreviation IHSF for Inspector noons tint this is n
letter that tho Inspector has worked on personally, because if a Rofornt
had ucrkod on this lottor there wo'Od havo toon an appropriate file nun-
hr to shew that, Itoroovcr, Professor Hippko spoaks so unmistakably of
himself ir. this lottsr that it is perfectly clear that ho had personally
varkod or. everything aintioned in this lottor.

q How, witness, in cor-.oction rith T)r. Rase her, a further
document, also from Docrant Book III, 133 tho English. This

is Raaclv.r's letter to Brandt of Hi I'rr ch UU3; it is Exhibit 110. Ir.
this lottor Rancher reports or. *. conv-rsation that ook place or. 12
Shrch with yo-r chief at that time, Profesror hippko. The entira re¬
port concerns its .If with Rescher'; kish-nltitud- and frev zing work,
and as -ou s-y you knew nothing about thoso negotiations. C-n you tell
rru something about that ple.aso, noi&aly that you knew nothing of thoso
r^f.otiaoinns jf itaseber's?

A. i :<no» aocut tlvjc either. Transfer* war- a setter tint

7664


20 Hey-A-: 2-17-3-Gross (Int. Brcwn)
Cotxt 2*'o. I.


concerned the first deter too nt, the Personnel rtofer-.t, and consequently
did not touch our Referat; but fren Rascher's report it can bo seen
that the b*r3onnel Referat did not perticirate in this, because Rascher
certainly wouldn't have failed in this letter to w-ake certain remarks
about tiie Personnel Referent, had ho been involved. Moreoever, I hap¬
pily rejenter at this tine I was not in Berlin, but in the first half
of larch 1L3 I had ny annual vacation which I spent in the Alps.

Q In other words, witness, of these entire negotiations you
know nothing?

A Correct.

Q And the reason was aainly because in the first half of
March you were not in Berlin. Now, Mr. President, let ire put in
Beckor-Freyseng Dec uraer.t 23, also free Document Book Becker-rVoysong
No. II, pago 92 which I shall give Exhibit No. 10. This is an affid¬
avit by Dr. nod. Adolf Frank of Goottingon, dated 31 Harch 19h7 . Tho
atatonont is very brief. After tho formalities he sayst

"Early in March 19U3, between the 1 and 1$ March 19li3, I took
part in tto coitso or. adaptability to high altitudes conducted by Dr.
Bensingor ir. ] -itabuehl. I definitely rcosstoor that Dr. Bcclcor-I'royrong
and his w‘fe also took part in this course. As far as I can reraerbor
after i *vars, the course lasted fro a 3 to 15 /arch 19li3»"

And let m please bring io your attention again tho discussion
between Rascher and Hippke took place 12 arch 19li3- Witness, you say
that with Dv. Uaschsr you simply' had these two aforementioned contacts,
the discussion between Rascher and Hippke in July 19b2 and Rancher's
remarks in discussing his freezing experiments at tho freezing confer¬
ence. Ic tlat correct?

A Tes.

Q bitnoss, did you have official relations of any sort to the
S aside fror. Dr. Rascher?

A IFo.

j The general facts regarding Dr. Rascher have not been vent-

7665


20 Jby-A-: G-!7-^-3ros£ (Int. Brown)

Court Ho. I.

ilated, witness. However, I should lilte .o bring up anotter question
that is important in the vbole question of experiments, to wit, those
questions that concern concentration camps experiments. let re ask first
of all, did you ever visit concentration ca^s before Hay 1?UJ:?

A Ko, nor did I visit one subsequently.

Q As you know, witness, you were in the central office of the
Luftwaffe .'iodic al Service as Assistant Referent and than as Referent.

In this position you undoubtedly had occasion to speak with a large
nar.ber of peoplo, Luftwaffe officors, research men, civilians, etc. On
this occasion and in these discussions did you find out nothing raoro
prociae abo"t conditions such as prevailed at that time in concentration
camps? *fhat, in brief, did you Jaw at that tire about coroontration
camps?

A Dr. Horn and Dr. Hielschor have already spokon about tliis
subject from tho witress stand here. Hod thoy not dorm so I should not
answer that question hero, net feeling it to be nocossary. Of course,
during tho war I did discuss concentration caups with various people. 1
know of Dachau and Oronionburg personally. That is to say, I knew tho
fact that there existed concentration caips thore. Details regarding
thoco concentration cacpe I knew as little a3 everybody olso. I recall
that I spoke to a number of people during tho war who before the war in
one S.-ai or another had inspected concentration caste. And the picture
that theso porsons presented to us was ono, one might s ay, of a large-
scale prison in camp fore. If Dr. Horn had not stated here of his own
knowledge ae a political prisoner in a concentration catp how such
visits and inspections were carried out, I should have had to assume that
all these people - there were 2, 3, h of then who knew anything about
this - I should have had to sy that these people were lying ‘hen they
spoke to ae, but new I assume they did tell the truth as to what thoy
actually had 3eer.. It Ms been said ’are several tines that it was
possible to ’em from foreign radio stations what conditions were. 1

should like to s-xy that during the war I was a soldier, I had taken ray

7666


20 Kay-A-'3-17-5-Gross (Lit. Brorir.)

Court So. I.

oath of allegiance to the flag, and I kept this oath. I had no connec¬
tions with any resistance covenant or any such circles. I hoard a few
persona rrho had heard the soldier's atation Calais, the probanda of
*hich struck ce as just as credible, or incredible, as our own propa¬
ganda; and I should like to say that in col :lusion the picture that I
had of concentration canje corresponded with the picture I had received
from ot er sources, ore from a school cccrado who was a member of the
Conr.unist fart;* and was put in a concentration camp, namely Dac’uiu, for
a for? years shortly after 1933, and after 193$ or 1937 was set free.

He got another job -and was inducted into the Army at the beginning of
the Tfar. Since ha new again occupies a position in a political party I
shall not state his name. 7ho second description 1 received during the
war was from 3eiglboeck, regarding vhidh ho .may spook here himself and
from whloh it wae not possible to 3«y what actually rent on behind the
scones, which no one could see who was not port of tho staff of the
coreontration camp itself.


7567


'


20 ..^-tf-JP-lS-l-JCirrov (lot. arcwa)

Court I

0.. You a^', witness, that your i-nression of concentration catr>8
w-» ta_t of a large-scale >rison in c—-> foru, is that oc?

-v. uk-t v_a wh_t all of us imagined under the tern "co.iccntration
co-

ero you able to see in an y way who tho ina.tos of ccnccntra-
tion cjups were?

I know no details -oout tali, of course, but I n .d he.rd that
both political and oriainal innate* were to oe found in concentration
ca >*, end I also Know that during tno wj those woo wore considorod
m'orth> to Dour urns wort also put in concentration c- pc.

3,. You say those w.io wore considered unvortts' to boar o», witness,
How, -ou .re a doctor, and Oeforc tr.it court tnoro has boon c grout
deal said of u lo-.ol nature by doctors. Vnf ortunately. a grout deal of
it van wrong, l'o« lwt oc ..an you whence you know wh.t you noac to know
and wh.it you underst ad by t ie tor- "unworthy to oo u r ur=c n ?

a. I baTO cy knowledge fron uy training -t an air war school, in
an 0 i leers' training courso, specifically froc tho otrudy of nilitary
discipline and silltary disciplinary law; at that tluo, I lo.raod or
hoard that those uouoers of the VounSaCr.t ••no were condoenod by c
c rt a. ti -1 for criuinal actions While tho;' w^ro in tho oorvico wore
scaconcod to •oenltc.itiarius and, in addition, wore design .ted as "un-
wart ny to boar .vtob" and, for the duration of tLc war, wore put in o
conco.i.r. tion Can, „nd th-t those usi tons sorved tnoir SvUtonco in
penitentiary only -ftc: tne conclusion of tho w_.r.

* ery woll, witness.

an* aov frot- a docut-ont one aore question «n this proelaa of tho
i..u.toc of concentration Ca-ns. a doc-.*cnt was put in ©y tho prosecu¬
tion. It is DocuBcnt joo* +2 or. oar*- 132 of tho Scruan, 118 of tho
-ii inh. It is document 1617 PS, ?ror<.cution inhibit 77, - letter
f rt.’- tne eichsfuchrcr SS to TiUd Mars h al Mich. I '-at to jut two

- rat of this docsienfc to -cu, froa the s-cond t.r^r v.t, jSic

7666


23 l.-v-^-J?-18-2-larrow ( i-t. jrova)
Court I


Soic^u;fncbror SS writes nor- teat ho t ^toa personal responsibility for
t - ‘ : altitude crperiuoats and soccific.illy tJces responsibility

i ia.\ uoseci^i individuals arc crisinals who desor'-o to dio f ras
c_.-. a r„tio.. car?* for these ctnerlaents. How, witness, 'it', you
ever uc.-d in connection with theso exporiuents tneso words a aesocinl
Individ vis vgo deserve to die"?

a. To, and oven today I don't quite .v.o\r wh-t tcoso td»:s .ro c»q)-
to ac_n.

.. vo ouu up then, you ^nov only of politic.! prisoners .jvd of
lu;, convicted criminals vr.o v«re inoates of concentration ca-ne,
u'd -’so those contidorod unworthy to ouur arus, wno h.d oloo bo.
lly convictcd?

a. YOS.

Sno .'lest ion of t;;e voluntary coasvnt of tuo experiment. 1
o 'o;^tB cf valcn 3r. r^ionur soofc«, at tt„t tl-o h„8 alroaf. - boon
dioc- ;eod by you, witness, and you a-vu told us tn-t you odieved tnc
f ct t.v.t thuso persons could and v:uld volunteer. Is that not \fhut
YOU testified?

«. I believed th .t and o..v no roaoon not to Relieve it,

", I n^v roc .11 to tr.c .‘rioun -1 at this tiuo tn..t t..o vitnons iioff
Tor t .o ■’rosccution corroborated tne f„ct th_t tho oxporiitent.l ou'o v Soct8
ver voluntary on 18 Soccabor, 1946, pa*o 70c, .11 and 712 of tho
Soman record, 614 and 696 of tno a££lisu record,

.n.t concludes c:\r 4 c.lin£s vita coo'-r-l questions, u nd not' I co^o to
t..o no.* charge since wo fu.v_- do.lt vitn conspir.xy; to wit, your
ticiv.tion in tac high-altitude ex wriJw-.ts. You arc cccmod in
Indie tuo nt of p .rtlci'Oat ion in or soeci-1 responsibility for those
k: evi.<oatc M.ich tooh place from loori-xy 19-2, to iwiy 19-12, in
ii.cn v,. Ihoro is r.o document on h.-t tr._t -jcovcs tn_t ju too;: .. ctive
•*t i.v theso erjoriatr.ts. aov aas tn<- pros-catic asserted t t bo far.

cv-onal rcsncnsioiiity, ^ c_a at fca. from tnc ,.^..1 i -dictaont,

7669


20 key- *-J?-l&-3-2drrov (1st. arowr.)
Co -rt I


ia J_aed on your position -.a -ssist-ut kuf exeat or .<€creat in the
Hrfvrut irlatlon l.ediciao. How, let uv. ^or you then, for tho e.lco of
clarity; ven, the questions of higb-ultituhe research .i:on* tnox-o fields
v ich ou, u« a <*ist-nt Hoforont, d«Ut with iadepondostly i.i 1941,

19*'2, .-id 1943?

a. Ho.

Z» These questions wore treated by wfaco?

a. -hey wore dealt with by Anthony so f-r us tnc Hefor.it had
-aythinf to do with toco -t all.

lltnoso, the Prosecution nas put la a 1-rgo naaowr of .'.ocuaonto
all of v ice I snould not like to discuss in dot oil. 7irr.t of ell,

1S02 PS, iaMbit 4-. t..w f-nous latter of aaschor of 15 ,.uy 19 1, to tho
’lolchr.f ohror SS, vnich is urobably tuo indication of too ou^laains of
t lo it.olo loacntabl© ovwut. 2ioa tcero is 1582 PS, ^hhibit 45 , .loo
froa hocuaont jock y3, in which Dr. j;-_r.dt tollo .u.scnor tn..t c.c lno^tcs
.ro avaiiaolo for tho tign-altitudo urq>orlaonts. ihoeo lot;orn havo
nothing to do witn tnc ..odicul Iaspoctor-to, consequently i shoulil lil:o
ti ..nit ou, tc K.ep things in ordo;, wuotner ju over learned of tnosc
letters in uay Way -t all?

a— Ho, and in hay 1941 I didn't cron belong to the : ot.ic J I..o»oc-

cor..t o.

low, Witnoos, there caies a letter tn t s .ans to i .die tc .no
cc moot ion of tno r.edicul Inrocctor_to «ita t..c nigh-altUudo ccoorinonts
-loo oeixia to i .die-to tc..t you hod oa o co.-nection *lt~ ShtB.

-h o is Document JO 21V, ^culbit 46, wnich is to Oo found i. -.ocuoont
Jooi: *2 p.. *i 58 of tne joruan, _nd ?u-.o 51 of tho naglish. I put #
i is docuaoat to y u bec-uso tnc low-pressure cn^-eor is -oationod hero
— °-c uso you said th_t you vorked o:. tne question of •'low-pressure
c.... ouvs in tnc ;.cdic-l InsicCtor-te. Hascher writes, let -a ? to brie—
c* e third p-rn r_ph:


20 -P-18— 4 -£urrov (lat. jrovn)

Co-arc I


for c.jrrylng out the axoeriaents (hign -ltifido low-pressure) within
tho corn of D..chau itself. I forgot to -ontioa to n-uptsturofuchror
?-olochloin th_t a aov-olo low-pressure ehnuoar h-e been provided for
mr-oso out of the Reso-rch fund of tho Reich *vi-tioa hiniatry.■
In ocher words, Rascher assorts th.t a uobilo lov-pressuro ch.-soor
war. put at r.ls dlsTos-l for tnese nigh-altitude c^erlnoatc frou tho
rooe.rch fund of tho .;oich aviation ^ir .\inistry. h*ov, -ou vovfcod on
lor-iroasuro cn-noer "•roolais in tao ..odic..l Inspectorate one* so I r.sk
you, In this statocent of Roscher's correct?

ju This assertion is wrong fron ocgi.ui.ig to ond. Tirst of all,
thoro w.a no rosv-rch fund of tao ..oich A vi..tiOu hInistry which eo"ld
hovo laid for such - enjaber. If they wore paid for at all, tho
ch.yj'oorc wore paid for by tno ..odic-1 Inspectorate. Socondly, tho
four lor-pro«suro chjtsbers that the Coniun Luftwaffo owned h..d boon
ordorod boforc Rascher wrote his first letter to Hsiuricn .limlcr. i r ao
lest ch no or Was ordorod on 20 -ipril 19-1. .anchor wrote Uin fivot
letter to hi*.-lor rc,...rdi.ig t..is Butter tr.roe wooes 1-tor; nenoly, on
lb ...y 1941. ..orcover, this vnolo ousinoss, including the ordorihb
a tho four low-pressure cnauboro, lios al=oat half a yoar before I
entered tno r.*dic-l Inopoctorate.

... low, i.r. President, in order to corroborate what tho witness
h a just Said, lot r.o ->ut in jtcKor>-?r^-seng Docvsient wr.Lc.; rill
bo jochor-Jroyseng jSiioit 11, on p_ac 93 in Document Book II.

Juia ie on offid-vit b tao engine or, J. 0. Zeusaa, of 23 Jon -.vry
1947. ‘ itaoss, first let ac as< you, who is hr, Zcusac?

a. i.r. Zeus c is the propriotor of the only fira in .-*.rueay #
f. C a .auf-cturod such low-pressure chetioors*.


7671


Court 1

May 20-A-19-1-H0-Ma loy-Srovn.

Let ne quote briefly fro a tfcle doc-ment:

°I delivered a total of 4 mobile low-pressure chambers
with -rchine equipment to the •"'eich aviation Ministry,
Medical Inspectorate, Berlin.

“The first low-pressure chamber was commissioned on 1
December 1939, and delivered on 3C January 30 1940, to
the German Experimental Institution for aviation, Berlin
Adlorahof. The second Low-pressure chamber was commlsslon-
ed (I am not quoting verbrtla) on 10 June 1940 and delivered
on 15 August 1940. Third and fourth low-preeeure chambers
were commissioned on 28 «prll 1941, r.d delivered in
January 1948.

I shall return to this document lator.

5. fitness, we continue now with the question of our
prrtloloption in the high-altitude experiments. When Or.
itoaber. we in the. witness stand 1 dlsoussed with him his
affidavit in whloh you seemed to be incriminated. This
is Joe lent No. 47S, Prosecution ixr. lblt 40, to be found
in uoo ment Book 2, pege 1. I need not quote this. Let
•-j, however, remind : ou th? t Romber^. expressed r. is eeeujrp-
tlon>th t you knew of these experiments, '•.'hen I asked him
about this on the stand, page -5873 of the record, Mr.

Romberg stated this w s an expression purely of conjecture
on his p'rt. how, witness, had you seen the concluding
report on the hlgh-rltltude experimente of wilch Romberg
6poke?

a. I saw that report for the first time here in Court.

%. And when did ou first bear of these experiments?

I he/'rd of them for the first time or that the; did

■'X~.eriaenta when Raschcr and Romberg read cr.eir paper and

-.owe choir sovln- picture before Field’Marshal Milch, and

revd when they wanted to do that. I found out about Chat as

7672


a


Court 1

Mr y 20-A-19-2-HD-i4aloy-=rown.

follows: I was called up by telephone et the .neferat either
b ?rof263or Kalck or hie assistant, Dr. Buehl, end asked
ethjr the ileferent knew anything of nis Intended film
6 -.owing before Flal'. Marshal Milch. I anaverod that ho
would h Vo ay clerk get In tougn with ay eaperlor person-
rlly about this a tter to find out. froa then on I had
nothin- acre to do >.lth this matter, and it has only been
hero in Court that I hard been able to rigure our what tnis
wh.le kiting was about.

Lot n- draw your attention also to the chief of staff
.•f th. Inspectorate, who hod this matter brought to his
ttentlon and did attend the f11a.

Then Dr. Wuerfle, v.:o testified here for rirndloeer
on 1C February 1947, and whoso testimony on pa c e 3135 of
the dngllsh record--—

A. That is tho testimony to which you Just referred?

Q. Yes, It is. ilov, witness, rs you know, there Is
another docua^nt put In by the Prosecution to-wlt, No. 224,

7 US of tho -nglish Ooouflcnt book 2, exhibit 76. • Thlo
la p ro ;ort by R*ab«rg, und-'ted, regardln. rocorte that
wore tc t ke nice on the 11th of October before field
Marshal ..lloh. This Is apparently the re >ort that ; ou were
talkin - at before?

«. Yes, it aust be that.

Q. In this document, witness, at the beginning it was
sai.\ th-t tnis L ill was to oo shown lr. tho course of a 4
discussion of tr.o way tr.ls work wes being developed. Tell
^e, witness, who organized t:-eaa de?~rtmental alec-sslcns,

-•'.e uiedloel Inspectorste or somebody else?

a. The .medical Inspectorsti die. not oruer then, because

c is is a dlsc-ssl n of technical developments and lr. the

.-Jr ministry anc. in the Technical Department of it there

7873


Court 1

May 20-H-19-5-H0-kaloy-3rovn.

was one section that was entitled "Developmental Section".

I presume that it was this section the arranged for this
discussion of development, _'out I don't know. I never
participated and therefore knew notnln- of It.

Q. But witness, you can see that tae Technical Inspec¬
tion had nothing to do with arranging and colling these
discussions of Medical Develooment?

A. Yes, that I can eoy.

3Y JUDj£ 5Z3RING:

4. 'fitness, you were pr.aent at the film showing
a. No, I vna not.

... You don't knew what was s.own there In the film,
do you?

A. No, I do not know that,

3Y DR. FRITZ:

r o know that Dr. Wuorfle, the Chief of Staff at that
time snlc. regarding whet he himself knew about thlfl matter;

I have already quoted the pas ago fr a the record that
pertain# to this. Now, since you wore motive In ti>o
competent refera.t, did you discuss this whole occurrence
with Dr. 'uerfle rt all?

A. Ko, Never. I Believe Dr. Vuerfle sold that here
r.lmsolf.

2. I hrvc to correct an orror by the interpreter. You
sold, witness, with regard to the telephonic conversation
. c r.trwduced this whole question, th*t the oorson who.
talked tils up presumably Jr. Xnlck, and said that he would
spea:: with your superior, Is that correct?

«. Yes, th-t Is so.

I hove just been told that tne Interpreter trans¬
late th t that o- woulu speak with yc.ur 6-parlor?

a. No. Tne person with whom I was telephoning con-

?e^-i

. _ . •_ * - - A


Court 1

Kay 20-*-19-4-HD-Koloy-Srowi.

cludoi tho conversation by saying that that settled the
wrttsr ior him, -

Q. «nd that he would get In touch witn year superior
and that was probably Herr Kalck. That clears that up.

Now, ’.fitness, the Document 22i, a number of Medical
Ins .ectorate doctors were mentioned who apparently were
.recent at this film showing; Dr. Wuerfle has already been
dlscucoed by us. Dr. tfucrfle C9me after the showln^ was
c ncludod, 'cut according to this document Professor Kalck
and 8ta.bst.rtt 3ruehl, In other words, two of floors of tho
Medical Inspectorate were present and Kalck was tho
consulting internist with the hod leal Ina-joctornto of tho
Luftwaffe, as we kno;/.

s.. Did you In this way hear from Kalck and Bruehl
anythin* about this alscasalon or roout thu contor.to of
th:t film?

a. No, throughout the Var I did r.ot speak with Bruehl
r.t all. I did not oven know him. Nor can I hardly recall
any conversation with rrofesoor Knlck either, nor can I
recall anythin^ about this sr ttor.

k. Vero these two medical officers members of tho
Medical Inspectorate of the Miftwaffe?

a. No.

>.. What of lco did they belor. t to?

a. Kalck was the cor.sultln_ Internist with the
hedlc-l Inspectorate, but w. s not subordinate to that of;lco,
the Medic-’1 Inspectorate, that la In rny rate not In the
ray th-t h- w-3 there all the time. But Kalck and Bruehl
so f~v as I know h«i close connections with Field M rshsll
dilch "nd were -t this discussion in that capacity.

Witness, this report has beer, put in by the Prosecutor

which Is the final re;crt of saving rescue from high altitude

7675


Court 1

May 20-A-19-5-HD-Maloy-3rovn. *

and Binned by Dr. Huff, Dr. Romberg and Dr. Rascher. This
Is cle?rly a report on aviation medical problems. "as
t Is report sent to the .-.edlcal Inspectorate In toto as
Dr. Ruff has already exp laInc'S here, or Just what car. you
cell as about this?

A. Cn my own .*inowled Q e I o^n tell you nothing .’ooat
It. I Cv-r. only tell you what I can deduce from the documents
a re before me. ’nether this re ;ort was sent to Kiipke,
tne Chief of the uedlc.'l Inspectorate, I do not Know, nor
do I now whether Anthony saw it. I /.now I did not see it.

It was c.ocordlng to the documents here not distributed by
tno Radical Inspectorate, bat Allah drew uo the list of
parsons vno was to receive It, ana os Ruff has explained It
we distributed b ; th. Qsraan Institute for hediolno.

V. How, witness ,ou say you did not see the report ct
f. t time, nd t» nuke this perfectly clear It was not in
the files th t you -.now of, -i a a Referent too over?

Am Thpt la oerfootly cloer. I never sow It.

... Did you find jut nothin* at rll t’ooat tnese .xperi-
mento or when did you find oat about them for the first time?

a. I already sola I found out that some sort of experl-
a.nts nd ceen mde which were to be discussed nt this
develo mentel institute. I found out ©bout it tr.rouih
t/.ie tele-hone call from Kale* or ale Assistant Bruehl.

Ae a rdin 6 the results of these experiments I read some¬
thin- In reprint fro* the publications of che Gorman
academy .or Air Aviation nesearen valch w, s sent to ue w/eVe
r report of Dr. Ruff on scvln* fr-i hi.h altitudes vas
re r .nted.

■C. A bout tails Dr. Ruff soohe already on >3 April ls47,

- 6520 of the English record.

7676


Court 1

May 20-A-13-6 -aD-Ua loy-Srown.


That, If I understand you correctl , concludes what
new fefore this tricl or before the end of the war,
V3 c erd:ni these high r.ltitu e ex :erlment8?

A. Yes.

3. Now, there Is a docuaent here that eatv-bllshae a
otn.*eotl.n between the Air .'.Inis try on .-.va lotion Med lone
your flaferot, nr.d nascher's expernents. This le Document
:.'o *64, p 0 e 73 of tnc inullah Jocument Book 2, Exhibit 50.
It la .-.o .ed ’•File Note for 35 0ber3turabp.nnfu.hrer
3chnitzler". It concerns Itself es entlaly with Jr. eltz,
but on3 y?ra fc ra.n la Interesting to ua. vuote:


7677


May 20—.-3X-20-l-3card (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

asks Obcrstnbsnrzt Dr. Uoltz how J.on; the cx.crincnts
will last or*', whether it is justifiable to detail a nodical
officer for so Ion: a tine. DIM domnds fren »fcltz on
o.-inion on tho oxporinonts, which he, however, can not
.*;ivc unless ho i3 fully inforaod about thon."

Did you call hiu up or did scoobody else cull hin up?

.. I did not telephone hiu. I can only rofor to what
Professor Doltz said lntor, nanoly, that ho had roccivod
the call fret: Professor ..nthony.

■<, Now, witnoss, another question, naaoly, did the quostion
of lew prossuo chrnbors - you have hoard both Jr. *<uff and
Dr. itonbor” say that tie low prossuro ohrxibor, whon tho
hi jh altitude oxporinonts wore intorruptod at Dachau, was
taken away froci Daohcu and was not returned thither. Uo
also know that ..asohor undo ca n y of forts to .pt thD oh nbor
send back to Dachau. Now, sinco you worked on low ;,ros3uro
ohnnbor problocs, lot no ask you what do you know fron
your own know led ;o as to whoth^r or not tho ohrxibor was ever
roturnod to Dachau?

I know that troc: tho Sunner of 19i2 on, no other Luft¬
waffe nobilo pressure ohrxibor was over 3ent to Dachau.

That is absolutely out of tho quostion.

How do you have thi3 cbsoluto certainty?

•• Froa the suoaer of 19-i2 on, ell four low pressure
chuubor trains that tho Luftwaffo owned woro in cuistant use,
an I it is quite out of tho question that tho chanbor should
havo boon in Dachau ovjn for a fev; days.

0

DS. TIP.*': Your Honors, l^t rto 3tate that the stntoncnt
that tho ohanber was only once in Dachau was also undo by
the prosecutions witno33 Neff on 17 DocoribOr 196, pa<jO
667 of the Ln :lish record.

. -3 we know fra: th^ ocunents, -oschor nado considerable

efforts to have tho chanbor sent back to Dr.ohr.u bocauso ho

7878


n-.y 20 -,.-BK-20-2-Board (Int. Brown)
Court He . 1


w"nt o' to qu-i~ ify as a lecturer through his work in this
riel*.. ui \ .. - 3 ohor ever turn to you, personally, as a
3 - 0 ®i-list I., the onployoont of low prossuro chnnb^rs?

- Yes, in October 19*2, at the freozin.; confcronco in
liurnborf; ho jt .no; ho nust hevo found out in sono way that
I was work'n.3 on this low pressure chenbor quostion and
ho naked n- in a rcthor insolent nr.nnar, to hnvo tho ohxibor
sont to J -oh.au for hia; ho acJ.il that ho was 3oin; to £ot it
anyway, because Him lor would baok hin up. I told itasohor
that Was not 3oncthin I could dooido-, and that I would
sunlit his wish to ny dapnrtnontal ohiof, and did so,
8Uf;r;ostia; at th .t sr_ic tino that if such an application ca.no
fren .tasohor he should bo turned down bocauso, aftor what
Ar.shoer told r.« in tho oourso of this sane convorsntion,

I .i*. not have tho foclin; that *<aschor ox..orinont3 were in
any way nooossnry. ..bovc an, I asko! hi'-, who his collabor¬
ators wore, and he sci l they woro thin .3 ho would do .alone.

I know that in tho course of tho winter of 19-i2-i3, such
an application mist have reaohed tho tlodio.il Ir.s. octorato,
of which, howovor, I id not soo tho original, but at tho
saxio tino - I do not now recall tho cxnot date - I was cskod
to str.to ay opinion ro :ardin - ; the question of nobilo low
.rossurc ch-xibor - to s.ay whothor any 3uoh ohnnbor was
ovcilablo , end I did tell ay ohief what I tkou;ht. .A
about tho sane tino iuff hc.d callo. xxi u.< and told no ho had
found out that .. osch^r intended to ask Hioalor's poraission
to sot up his own aviation nodical institute, which neither
~>r. i(uff nor I considered either nocossary or ox;>odiont. ..t
tills tin-, I reported to ay dopsrtaental ohief and was order¬
ed by hix* to tell tho Zouzen firn, which built cur low
. ros3ure chor.b-rs on*, delivered th^n to us, that if any

or..-rs cane frac; any oth^r sources but Luftwnffo sources, he

7679


*!c.y 20--.-3K-20-3-3cor.' (Int. Brcwxi)-~)
Court lie. 1


was to turn it ’.own at first until ho had the ap. rova.l of
the Mod.ier.l Inspector.''.to of tho Luftwaffe. The grounds
for this were that we ooul’ adopt such on attitudo toward
this firn, because the lledical Ins. oc ter ate of tho Luft¬
waffe v/cs just about this fire's only custccor.

4 To prove what tit witness has just said, Mr. President,
let no turn to loourant 2», Bockcr-Frcysorrj Jocuneut No. 2-;,
tho affidavit by tho on'inwcr of tho Zouzui. firn that I
havo put in as exhibit No. 11. .Zouzuc. writes hero on papo
2 ct tho botton:

"In wintur 19il/42, I can not rouonbor tho exoot late,
and rinny tines after'wards, *>r. 3uckcr-l'roy3on, told no that
under no circun3t.anoes was I to accept orders fr or. othur
dopr.rtconts for the dolivory of low-pressure ch.-nbcrs unless
they had boon approved by tho ^wdic.al Chief of tho Luftwaffe,
br. Booker-Froyo on'; os.coially war nod no ropontodiy gainst
nr.kln; deliveries to the 3S, boo..use otherwise every single
Luftwaffe or’or to ny .l.arrfor the Modioal Ins. ootorato
would bo stopped.

"In tho event of any such ore!or, I was to inforn tho

Hodioal Ins.cctorcto irnodintoly on* to tell tho dopartr.ont

$

laoin ; tho order th-£ ny plant was fully occupied with tic
execution of Luftv/affo orders and that we* woro even in
arrears."

itnoss, that concludes tho prcblcn of tho hi jh-altitudo
ux orir.<-nt3. I r.ay sux: u your testimony s follows: neither

a

in the plcjinin : or corryin; cut of these ux^.orinonts for
Che rescue fra. nijh altitude did you in any way participate
-a . only -fter th~y woro concluded did you hear About tho3o
ox.'orinonts and. then only in the nost oner .1 terns; is
that correct?


.. Yos


7560


«ay 20 —SK-2©--;-Board (Int. 3rcwA>r)
Court No. 1


TIU P.tESIDEHT: Tko Tribunal will now >x» in reooss until
3:50 o'clock tcr.orrow uornic

(T; . Tpi-iuani cdjournod until 21 May 19-47 until 0930 hours.)


7581


mi

M~y 21-AI-BK-l-l-Fester (lat. ^rov.n)

Caur« Nc. 1

Official Transcript if the .-i<jrican 2:ilitnry
Tribunal in the rfttcr of the Unite! States
of —ncricn, a painst Karl Br.adt, ct ol,
cl of on! ants, sittin - r.t Nurnhorj, Gernnny,
on 21 May 1947, 0930, Justice Seals presiding.

TIL! IL-^SILX: Persons in tho court rood will pleaso fin!
their seats. *

Th. Lco.orn'ulo, tho Juices of Military Tribunal I.

Llilit ry Tribunal I is now in sossion. Go! save the
United States of ..norica and this honorable Tribunal.

There will be order in the court roon.

TI-L. F..S3IDSCT: Mr. Marshal, you ascertain if tho defend¬
ants arc 'll presont in court.

THJ 1L.L3K..L: May it . lonso Your Honor, all the defendants
are ..resent with tho cxoo.ticn of tho S of end ant Koven who
was oxcusod fren tho tribunal ycstord.iy.

THS P.ui3IBENT: The Sooiot ary-General will note for the
record tho presenoo of all tho defendants in court savo
tho defendant Hovon who was excused pursuant to a roquest
by hi3 Counsel thnt wof ondant Hovon ;ii :ht bo oxcusod today
in ordor to consult with his counsel.

Counsel nay proceed.

HS.JJ.mi QSCiCLt-F.iSYSSliG - .(esunod
ULe^CT HX.JIHi.JION (Continued)

BY j.v. TIPx (Counsel for tho dof unde Jit Dookor-Froyocnj) :

. Doctor,Booker, yesterday wo closod the chor^o ro^ard-
in ; hi -h-altitudo ox. erinonts and I cone now to tho next
char :o, your responsibility and participation in the froez-
inp ex. crinonts. Hero also it is not assortod by tho
.rosocution that you are an notivo participant. Tho

.ses its ch r^os nrlnly on your josition.r.s an
aa^'stianV'ftffir*\nt or referent in the nodical inspectorate.
Taj first qu.aviin ropardin; this then is, fron 19il, 1942
and 1943 did you ldo.nl with the p rob Ions involved in frocz-
in" research in^your . ositicn as .assistant referent in your

referent? \ S*


.. Ko


May 21-M-BK-l-2-?ost _r (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

. Fro:: r. docuncnt put in by the Prosecution it c:*.n bo seen
th t :i3cussions of son- ’.istress ..roblcns were discussod.

-'I;!;: is fren Jocuuont 3ock No. 3, Ln lish, ..a:o 10, Exhibit
-2, -v.cur.cnt nunbor 313.- That is a letter f ror. General
Milch of the 20th of May 1912 addressed to Obor ;ruppon-
fuchror -olff, ana it is hoadod "bonr .olffyl" It refers
to the hi •h-nltituc’o ox.criaonts, scyi.n ; that they arc cun-
olu’.cl, and continues, "on tho other hand, tho carrying out
of ox. orir.onts of oncthor sort, noncly, those cn son distress
aro noocss.ary and proportions have already boon undo for
then by our offioo." Now, under this word "offico" you
can un'.orst jid only the SS offico or, on tho other hand,
the oa:;otont office in the nodical ins.>ectornto. Jo you
know th at before tho 20th of May 1912 .any such discussions
wore enrriod out?

.. No. I ’Id not.

<- No’., witness, you told us that you hoard of .vaschor's
oxperinonts for tho first tino durin : ; the discussion
between Professor Ui 4 .ke md ’.seller in Juno of 1912. ..
document ha3 boon put La by tho prosecution ro ;ardiiv$ this
'.iscus8ion. It i3 in ^oounent nook 3, .>n.;o 12, wocuuent
nuebor 233, Exhibit 82. This is . letter froa Jr. -vasohor
of 15 Juno 19*2 and ho.adod "Estooaod uoichsfuohrerl " In
other words, this letter is eddrossod to Himlor. You know
this doou-.ent, witness. Is this tho discussion to which
Hippko ordered you to at ton:' at that tino?

•* Since I was ordered to attend only one such discussion
botwooa iii.r ke and tho noichsfuohrer, this nust bo the one
but l«-t no nafco a snail correction. I found out for tho
first tino a’mut this think not on the occasion cf this
iscussion ut frc.: :.y su. <-riur, -'r. llrjrtius.

. Yes, thank you, you have air- idy said that. Now, you
v.aro ..re-sent at the discussion cn this letter, consequently,


*-'y 21-4I-3K-1-3-Foster (Int. 3rovm)

Court No. 1

I nr.y discuss a few joints of this letter with you. The
first ; ora ;ra. h concerns itself with tho hi ^.-altitude
ez. eri::-nts. -Let no ask you woro you prasont durin; that
.'rt of tho discussion?

- K , I was called into tho discussion in tho aiddlo of
it, consequently, I don't know what was disoussed beforehand
or how ion: it had boon lastin':.

‘1 Tha socon’ para ra.,h concerns itself with the froozinc
proeloa. Lot no quoto briofly: "..t tho sane tine, ho
asked for percussion to carry out the colcl and water ex¬
periments in ^achau, rod asked thut the following bo onposod
in thoso ox. erinents: Profossor Sir, Jarisch, Professor ^ r.
Holzloohnor and Professor «r. Sin;;or. Tho Inspootor design¬
ated tho experiments a extraordinarily important, as wo
nust count on .-.nothor winter in tho East."

.•itness, were those points takon into consideration
rturinj the discussion, md v/hat o:.n you say by way of
sup. lamentation of what you said y os tor day regardin'; thi3
natter?

•• Thcso . oints wore touchod on yostv-rday but I rononbbr
very definitely that at least when I was prosont it wasn't
's if Hippko requestod somethin:;, but it was that ho was
Coin: tc carry out freezin ; experiments and to do so he
noodod r. 30 ’istros3 specialist frxj tho Luftwaffo. So
far as tho nones quoted hero are concerned, I rononbor
Professor J .risch and Holzloohnor. I rue :11 both nrr.es in
connection with tho so.-, distress discussions pl.jinod for
the la to fall or winter. The whole .lan was already under
c )n3ider■ .t i• :n and it .Iso had be.n .:ut before Hip; ko .as
somethin • he should deal with. Professor Sin or, tho Luft¬
waffe .atholooist in h'unich, is com. lotoly unknown tone
ir. this connection, neither was he included in the plan con-
coivcd of at that tine nor did ho take part in tho confor-


M 21-'.:-3K-l—i-Fost _r (Int. 3rown)

Court No. 1

-no; here in Number-;. I do net knew liir: ;\:rsonnlly .nd
./heth-r cr not I oven knew his neno at that tine I don't
me , but it is ;:cssiblo th.-.t later Hi,,pko nnnod hin to
-^.seller.

* Hoy. , v.itnoss, you described what was sold in thi3
discussion briefly yesterday but there is one x >oint that
should bo nentionod a^aln, what .roblc :is were thoso ox-
porioonts intondod to solvo?


7835


21 2-2-l*Jocfc (Int. Brcm)

Court No. I.


A So far aa I can still recall today the propositions that
Reaches . ado to Hippka at that tl-te were rather devious and not very
preerre. Professor Hippka clearly emphasised two specific problems,
one wes t'.» testing of the fosca suit that Kolzloehner had developed
ar.d the other was the problem of the so-called rapid rerarming.

Q In that part of the discussion when you were present, was
there any discussion of the dancer ova ness of the expo rimer, to?

A That was mentioned to tte extent that Rascher mentioned tho
paper by Smith and Pay, which had boon published shortly thoretoforo, I
think in 19lil, and in which it was staled far tho first tino that it had
boon found possible to roducc hurvn temperature 2 k degrees contigrado,
tho temperature taken rcctally, without killing the subject. I took
particular noto of this bocauoe 2 found that vex-y surprising; I had
never corxernod syscif before thoretoforo .1th frooting oxporimonts, and
I had supposed until then that the reduction of temperature of Just n
few dc'.roos below normal woro vary clangorous and then in July, l?li2,
there appeared ir. tJ» German Clinical .feokly, the paper by a Danish
physician nn.oed Dr. Sltorn, who had chockod on Smith and Fay's article
ard also reported on numerous reductions of temperature for the pur peso
of treating cancer.

Q Thon your answer to ray quostion es to whether or not tho
dangerousncS3 was discussed is that Raocher doclarod that they woro not
dangerous and referred to scientific periodicals and papers to prove
this?

A Tea. He did in that collection.

How witness, when did you a^.ain hoar of those Intended jX-

periaentD?

A In Numberg, at ths fro.zinr conference.

Q In thi -.oanti-s did you sc; cry letter of .any sort oitivr
that coxae to the xx-ferat cr that caae to it?

A In the meantime I had nothin; .o do v ith this -.at cr.

"J Hen* ;et me put to you another prosecution document, document


7836


2i : - 2 - 2 -Cock (int. aram)

Court ::o. i.


book 3, page 22, document No. 236, exhibit 33. This is a letter from
the i'edical Inspectorate to the Rcichsfuehrer SS. Below the heading,
thero is tho file no to 55, and for the referat in question there is tho
indiertien L I li lh, Arabic 2, Renan 2 B, that is the referat for
Aviation "edicino. How does it hapnen that you didn't soe this letter?

A Lot re refer to tho signature. It says: "Draft signed by
order of Wullon", who was the chief of staff, and certified 2 copies,
signature Anthony. Cn the 23 Pebruery l$hl, Aujustinok, a witness, on
page 3730 of tho English record, stated that in view of our regular of¬
fice procedure it was obvious tint this lottor had boon worked on by
Anthony,

Q New, witness, though you didn't concern yourself personally
with tills letter, - can you nevertheless, on tho basis of your general
knowledge of tho work in the rofornt for aviation Eodicino, clvo us
sowe information about this. This is a letter regarding freozing and
in tho first part Anthony writes that Stabsarzt Professor Dr. Holzloohnor
on tho 2U February 19U2, was given a rosoarch assignnent on tho cffoct
of freezing on wans blooded subjocts. In connootion with this rosoarch
assignment was there any nor.tion of any furthor intention of carrying
out oxrorir«onts on human beings? Could you givo us so-ne general infor¬
mation on this?

A I mysolf know nothing more .rocisoly about this rosoarch as¬
signment, but first of all tho subject of tho rosoarch assignment, tho
effect of freezing or. war* bio dod subjects, nnkos use hero of a scient¬
ifically perfectly usual oxprossion for experiments on animals. In the
list of the ‘?7 rt so arch assignments the Prosecution put in, Docu*oont No.
93J», Exhibit U5', wo find under IX, to research assignments to other
men, using almost identical torninolcgy, to wit, experiments on Vara
blooded subjects, and also in foreign scientific papers, for instance
that by tho Americans Dill and Forbes, you find the same extension in
English. If experiments on human b_i:s;s had been intended that would
w/u *oo a. oxprjsced in the definition of th. research assi^itont. ~or: -


21 Iny-iB-2-3-Cook (Ir.t* Brora)

Court So* I.

ever, it says verbatim in this letter and I quote:

°Cn t to proposal of Stabsarzt, Dr. Rase her, appropriate oxamina-
tiors vara nado on human beings," that meaning that at first at least
the as; i_r_jor.t was United entirely to aninal exporinents.

i I want to ask you one core question, namely, about tho next
to tha last per;graph on the first eeges "Tho research documents and
extensive documents will bo prosontid to Roichsfuehrer SS by Dr. Raschor
at his request, that tho original and cop-' of the roport of tho docu¬
ments to put at tho disposal of th> inspectorate of tho nodical service
of tho Luftwaffe." According to the ft*ocecution assertion this is an
experiment which was carried out on tho initiative of the Luftwaffe.

How is it that tho Luftwaffe on tivi 8 October 1912, in other words,
after ti» conclusion of tho experiments, has to ask for tho first timo
from tho iioichsfuahror 5£?

A Sinco I know nothing about this directly or personally 3
can only dravr tho doduction regarding a point that was, it sc.ns, quito
clear, thr.t tho office which ordor~d thoso oj;x>rirents and tho offico
dotc-minad when tho results • oxv to bo naclo public, was the lloich
Fu.hrcr Sc .alone. Lot no say also that in tho experiments which tlx>
Luftwnffo ro lly carried out by itcalf, for iustarco tho son water o.r-
fxirlmontn, it never occurred to any ora x> ask tto Rcichsfuchror Si. cr
any ono oloo to porait tho publication of tiv findings.

Q ith that, I can low. that document, -r.d I can ash you tho
folitxring: You said before that until tho Hurnbcrg fro-.sing confcronco
you am no furttier reports on this matter. However, th. witno3f Hoff,
who was Raschor’s collaborator in Dachau, said on thj IQ Decotbor, lfl*5,
or. io c .c 6 1 of tho English record- that Raschor dictated interim re¬
ports on his fro.ting exporinents in Dachau, which went through as top
secret material, and that tho rop-.srts wont to tho aviation office 7 ir.
!!unich in tie Prinzregonten Strasse. :<cr- t’ris was Certainly' a Luft¬
waffe office that rec-iv u d these reports, and I want to ask you whether
'--r. r.ports i.er. sent frer. liunich to c.:o iedreal Inspectorate ?


21 ;i\v-:X3-2-L-C-ok (Int. Brown)

Court Bo. I.

A All I can say is that they never reached me, 'cut I can point
out the following: A Luftgau Medical Office (Ant) No. 7 did not exist.

I -ii n only bo a confusion in ny opinion with the luftgau 'iodical
Doprrt -ot-t No. 7, of which Br. Daniels was in charge and Exhibit 10U,
document *10-253/mentions his as his superior as the nan who approved
Raschar's further experiments in Dachau. Then, witness, Neff said t:»at
he rc jjidjorod very clearly that thoso reports wore top secret, but it
was purscribed in tte case of top secret natters that they could only bo
sent to thoso offices to which they woro addressed. That is to say,
top secret matters wore not sent through tho regular channol through
all intermediary stages but woro sent directly. Concerning tho aiany
letters that Rasclwr sent to his offico in tho SS, nanoly. Hi:, lor,
it can bo so-n that he had no scruploc about sending such a top secret
matter to tho Nodical Inspectorate. In aiming up, 1 cm say I novor
saw any sic h top socrot roport, nor la tor -hon I took a referat did I
soo any ouch top sccrot report in the files.


21 Y:y i;7-J4-STf-3-l-C-ro£s (From)
Court I;o« 1


"cu have 3tied nor that you did not sco this report that

•

..nrohor sent on the 10 September 19 h2 to Hinalcr mentioned in 23t,

:: _btt 3, page 13 of Doc*x-ont 3- 0 k III. Now, rritness, first of
nil lot :» ask you ono thing based on your general knotrledyo of the
usual office procedure in Gcr any. lasobor spooks here of the :hrn-
berg Freezing Conference and papers to to read thoro and says
thoroin, last paragraph: "I riMtnlro care that tho report is sub¬
mitted in an apporpriate -amor duo to its top sccrot naturo." Itoif,
duo to your basic knowlod;o of prescriptions roperdin- such natters
how is a report to bo nado if it is concerned with seething desig¬
nated with top socrct at such a ® nfcrcncc?

n. Thftt can only aoan that at tho urntorg Freezing Confcronco
too rosults aro to to reported on only so far as it is absolutory
noccss.ary for an understanding of tho rosults. aft r I had hoard
•‘clzloohnor's rooort in :Jamborg, nr.d now again in Humborg after
sooing a part of tho records of tho oxporiaonta, I can Judgo tho
difforonco botroon tho ~cy tto ouporirenta roro really carried out
and vrtiat vx> rho attended tho conference heard at that tIn othor
words, Raaohor nado known no do ails at all.

.. “itnoss, then interim re -orto did not roach you. ] a , he*’ about
tho final report which too -rosoc-tion has put in ns docuront !JO-h28,
I&iibit 91, page 27 of J ocu.oat 'ook III? 1 don't rant to road any-
ting to you fron this report. • siupl; ant to know if ou know of
it?

A. I heard about it tho first ‘:sw hero in tho trial.

1. T ion you didn't 30 c t 5.3 re rt in jour reforat, that's what
you ixan? .

A. I_s, that is s. let uc ,»oinv out ono thing which is -xr.cctly
clear to those who knerr horr Z-: r.r. eo rcspondencc is carried on. In
•a c; y of f is report put in fc; -rosecution it can clearly bo scon
- at tiiis is copy * 2. It was .evsoribed ir. the caso of top sesroi

7390


21 Hay 3-S- Gross (Tjto)

ourt !fo. 1


pattern ttey state homany copies of top s ccrot nattors had boon
nado oxxl on each copy or on each pago of each copy, tho nuribor
of tlx copy has to bo printed, ~incc this copy is coy no. 2 there
is also the copy that Raschor sont to Himlcr, It cist bo a sained
that liaechor kept copy no. 1 in Ids cr.m private files and sent copy
no. 2 to hia Chief, rho had given the asoignaont, Heinrich Htanlor.

It is unlikely that, in addition, ha root off 3ovoral ot’wr copios
ols<r.:hcro because Rnschor ranted to qualify as a lecturer through
this rork and it is a prorcq- isito that in order to do so the appli¬
cant core through rith nor res’Its. Consequently, teacher *ould havo
no reason to ^ pro ad theso natters. That rould prevont I ilia iron
rocolving tho r-cognitlon that xuld oiallfy hia as a locturor.

0. Tho report raanot in t' o files of tho iodical Inspectorate, lot
no recall to you iYofussor :. r olts«8 tostinony on the stand, pftgo 7116
of tho English record, .Yof. ssor * .'olts stated ho aado inquirios to
find this report and '-is unable to do so. lot no ncn: put in
Cookcr-Froysong Ooounont 25, >ocvuant kcolc II, pago 96. T’.iia rill
bo .heidbit 12. xhis is an affidavit by irofoosor 'notho of ^oolar
of 8 .arch 19U7. Let no ask you first of all *.hat Job did .rofos3or
Ilnotho havo at this tiro?

A, -«o ran Caosodcr of t o odical .r.pcrincntal Dopartnoht in
Juotoborg.

f t , nyl <*iotc thon t. is docviont rhich is very briof.

"At tho request of dofonso ocvinol, I • ish to state tho follcruingl

I roc all that during the s;axr or fall of 19.’iU dr, -e’eor-froysong

telephoned no froa Sealer', t*.ic sanitary o^orinontol and lectv.ro

section end irvy.ird Trtioth-r I knar aj-t ing abrut a final rcpqrt by

Holzloohncr on his lo~ tonperat -a ex crincnts at lechau, or rhotha*

si’oh a report ras to be f und la ny action. "to strtod that ho hin-

sclf so thing ef such a no rt. 1 th.rcupen on lain A - to $r.

Tec .r—.';«iy3ong on ti • tolcpknrx V. rt I '-nc.-no thing ,V‘ .v?h a report

•


7691


21 1:7 -3-3-:ross(: res.?.)

: urfc :ro» l


o5.t:-. r -sd th it it could iZmroSoro -.at -c at ny section.* 1 TX-re
J ; io.:s tiio signature an:. Lite vs al cortIT: cation - ’o , witajss,
it s:.*t entirely clear iron this document shy it was refessor

. c t t you called up. kso there any closer connections botroon
_*!o:..r, Iblsloohner, Hippko or anybody olso and •rofoscor ."not'.'.o?

A. -t -03 very n.tural for no to mil .» bocauso Sblss-

loohnor's llitary Planning A cncy * as this Sanitary i:: -r so .til
one’ locturo section in Juoterbory.

. l, cr: • o cono to &occ; ent 2 5 , exhibit C fren Dccuscnt Book

III, pago 127 of tho “nglish Jocuumt Book. It his the sans codo
l.ttors ns thoso Tihioh tho prosoe -tier, uses ns basis for its c liar goo
n .oinst you. V.v, let no ash /o' v et 1 -r or not you liner. thin letter
v tch ront to oichsfuohrcr- : froa hip. ko on 19 Fobmnry 19!i3?

A. I cannot recall 1 is luttcr and c rtainly didn't dr. t it :$•-
solf at that tino bcca>iso this w ■ t ->:»y'n affair. I 1 lot knew
it then. But lot no point cut >no t;in- which can bo soon very
clearly iron thisluttcr, tv t, on tlo 19 February 19u3, w ithor
tho edieel Inspector hi self, iwwly 'i. pkc, nor .Vof, • m' ro
in . oosoas or. of this fi al report tdgnod b; Iblzlochner, -oohor and
. jdical nape etor thanks that tho freosing

o-rxjriner-.tshr.vo b^nmrricd out nad state 3^ explicitly and I Q oto:

“Tho result raa reported •. non by th030 vfco worked on ther 'hiring a
coiifarcnco on nodical probloco .iris, ny free distress at son and -.inter
hrrdshipe on 26 and 27 'ctobor 19’ 2 at ifcrnborg.” 1 an convinced that
if t written rop-rt wore also v.-:.lri3o then tho fact fiat a report
res to be nado at the confsronoc- -- ; d not have boon rationed but
than.’3 raid havo boon given for .ritton report,
h. we corn to the i vm'aor'. -onT - ich has boon ropoatedly
oontiottid by tho r* rosocution her . .rofesser HoLsloohnar o/c!co it

nee - or ganl yod by tha borate!


I


21 lay 1;7~-c".'-3-U-Gross (Brcrm)
Court Ho. 1


conforonco of this kind or x'cro there c-ovoral such?

A. "h:rc were 12 such conforonccs tlircughout tho courso of tho
' .'nr frcii 19ll to 19Ua«

. Tils conforonco, witness, cor-comcd itself rith tho freezing
-problcn in contradistinction with the consulting confcronco of tho
VTohmscht uhioh troatod nuacroua subjects at 1fcc sane confcronco.

Tfas it cnatonary for such Luftraffo conferences to discuss only
ono oroblon. ithcrrrisc tho injrcssion could bo that tho only reason this
confcronco ras oall-d ttss to he r iolslochiK-r's report.

A. Tho confor nco as called by tho c*'ical Cnspcotorato for
scientific discussion rrtoro in contradistinction to tho oo:u»ulting
O'.nforencos of tho ohroncht consult .d only one th:nc at a tine and
this thono tms illuninntod in all its facotoon one or taro days of
tho conforonco. I night nar.o ono or ts.*o other thorns that occupied
tho other 12 conforoncos. TI» jost io»p rtant -as tho one a year
previous to th.it in tho sun -or of 19li2 in .’aria which concomcd itsolf
;rith soa distrc3sproblons in xhich I did r.ot participate bocauso 3
didn't bolor.g to tho -cdical Inspectorate at that tino. And in tho
ouxrrr of 19h2 a oocord nodical confor;r.co retarding night sight and
space 3isht, ard then ir. 19ii3 a conforcnco regrding nodical air
raid protection ccnsuras, and in lr'Lh a confer-nco on tho uoo of tho
st-called efficiency inoroa3in'; drugs ouch ns caffoino, bonsedrino,
ophedrino, and so on.


7-93


Hoy 21 -l.'-BX-i- 1-Xor r ow (Int. 3rcT/n)

Court No. 1

*1 That'3 enough, witness.

-» <V Lr. --nthony was the oh.irann of this conference. was
it uou-.l for the referent to hoi’, the clirdrannshi^ of such
c ni'orci.oos?

- Th t \ir. a altojothor oustoniry, end, in .11 conferonco
reports whioh can readily bo found in the library of the
-oro tlodionl Contor in Heidelberg, can bo--soon that
-r.thony always had the eh&irnnnshia of those oonferoncos.

Tuc conferences took _>laoo of tor ..nthony left ana, in that
case, since I had hi3 Job, I was in oh nr go of thor..

i Now, witness, frea that it onn bo seen that tho grope¬
r' tions for the Numberc conforor.oo was done by Profo3sor
-nthony?

- Yes, that is so end, of cour3o, tho non in ch-rgo of
n conferonco has to know whr.t tho .ajonda is join;; to bo.

. Now, witness, you wero assistant referent r.t th-t tino
undor -nthony. ./hot did you have t> *lo with this conference.

- -11 the oonforenoes that took . lr.ce undor ^.nthony^s
rof^rat I h . ’. to orjanizo. That i3 quito n Job boceuso thoro
aro ’iscussiona by eighty or ninoty scientists who r.ro
•;cin; tc ror/ .apers in two days.

. That is to say you had nothin; to do with tho scientific
.■re. orations of it, but Just tho organizational and. tochnio-
nl sldo of it.

Now, did you know wh t Holzloohn-r was goins to roport on?

Noi I didn't.

; *3ut di I you know Professor iiclzloehnor before that?

.. Yes, I did.

f i -'here 'id you know hi:, and what did you know about hiu?

- I c-ado .intl’.onyts acquaintance in the course of further
trainin’ for Luftwaffe physicians in£ fliers that took place
in Juctorbor:. Lurin'; this trr.inin • course Professor Holz-
lov-ancr delivered a lecture on sea distress ,roblor:s and


liny 2l-iI-3K*-i-2-Kcrrow (Int. Efrown)

Court No. 1

rrosontod a novlo rep.rdin; his foan suit that ho had :
already dovolo;xjd.

- Witness, if I understand you corroctly, this was a
lecture in March, 19-i2, at which Holzlochnor spoke regard-
in; his practical son distress experiences and about a new
foan suit; nnaoly, c the ore tie a 1 problon which had to bo
solved practically?

.. Yos.

«i Dr. -*u ;u3tinock, on the 26th of Fobruary 19.7, pa ;c
3736 of tho English rooerd, said that Holzlochnor was, for
a Ion: poriod, tho dirootor of a rosouo station on tho
Frenoh Coast. How loa; did Iiolzloohner's roport in Nurnborj
take?

.. Not oxoo. tionr.lly loh;. I should say thirty or forty
ninutos.

. Did ho 8how any pioturcs or filns?

No.

. 3o far as ho spoke about ox.orinonts, did ho say any¬
thin*; about tho oxporinonts oarriod out on concentration
coop inr.'tcsv

- H-, he didn't.

c .<hc did Holzlochnor say the ox;orir:onts were boin;
oarriod out or.?

- Holzlochnor hi.ascl i s.oko only of son. distress oasos.
That ox..orinonts wore carried out on condoled orininals
could bo soon because, after Holzlochnor ro.ortcd, *‘asohcr
did.

. How, Witness, I ooao unfortunately to a rather unh'fr.y
natter; nsnoly, -'ocun.-nt No. *id8, Exhibit 81, ^ocunont book
3, .a a 7. This is your affidavit of 2; Octobor 19*5. Wit¬
ness, are those your own words that .arc to be found in this
affidavit, or just what is it that is written down hero?


Hr.y 21-1I-BK—i-3-Karrow (Inti Brcwn}

Court lie. 1

No, this is not ay own wording. This was ^,ut to rse,
in 2n-lish, in the .resoncc of Lir. UcHanoy and, I Relieve,
or.o interrogation preceded this affidavit. I was allowed
t~ . .';o aor:c Changes in the affidavit, but whon I wanted
to coke noro prociso stafconents on certain points and
didn't want to si;;n such generalizations because they were
too anbir;uous, WoHancy told nc that I should later certainly
have an opportunity to nalcc those furthor ox;lanetions. I
;:ro3u:;o that ho noant the situation in which I find ny3clf
at tho nouont.

■<, Now, witness, ploaso nr.ko these ex; lanations but bo
brief. First of all, witness, thoro i3 « sontonco in your
affidavit on ; vjo 2, under . cint 5, you say horo:

"It was rr thor wo 11 known that thoso non woro oxpori/iontlnc
on ooncontr \t ion con. imitates."

.•hat did you noon to say by that expression "rathor woll
known"? bid that noon it was "rather woll known" to you?

.. ..t tho Nurnbor^ oanferonco I know what I had hoard
itaschor say in hi3 discussion with Hippko. ifhothor I
hoard, already at that tine, or later, that ^aschcr had
a laboratory ir. hach.au I do not rocr.ll today. -3 oxporinont-
nl subjects only c->ndennod criminals woro nanod.

. M ;w, another question about this affidavit.

"..s a result of Holzloehn-r's report and others ;ivon
at tho conference, issued instructions to the flight
surgeons that tho wor.e bath uothol was to bo usod in re¬
viving aviators who hod boon sovoroly chilled."

First of all, what do you noon by "wo"? You said that
you couldn't issue any instructions t . 11 .

.. It is possible that in the interrogation that ;receded
this affidavit I used the word "we" and said that "we had
Ion- so and issued such and such instructions." That , of
course, noons tho office to which I fcelon;»d and, in norool


7396


Hey 21-LI-oK—i—i-Korrw (lit. Brown)
C urt :io. 1


conversation , it is . perfectly o croon wny of oxjrossin;
ono3olf.

-i’ you yoursoif hove anything to do with the issuing
of t;.i3 directive to the troop physicians?

.* X hr.f. nothin : to do with that. This directive was a
result of the Harnborg conference and, from tho purely
formal . oint of viow, it was not tho roforat for aviation
medicine that had anythin: to do with this, but tho roforat
2-1-3 with its file auabor of 9. It w \a this refornt that
had ell tho dealing with the troop physicians. That was
tho roforat for hy ;iono.

i iio have attempted, Y.>ur H nors, to jot our hands on
this dirootivo. It was, for toohnionl rousons, impossible
unfortunately. This is tho dircotivo of tho 3rd of .-ujust,
1912 - "Directions to Troo. Physicians for Preventing Danar.o
to Persons throu h Cold.” I have inclurtod this in ay
doounont book primarily to show that it boars tho fila
number «i9, only to show that it ha3 nothin:; to do with tho
roforat for aviation medicine. This is on par.o 97 of
Doounont eook 2. It -will be Exhibit 13 and it is Pocunont
26.

TiiJ P.gXjIBEMT: Counsel your last exhibit you offored was
your -'•jcur. ;nt 25.

TIPP: Your Honor, this is ‘'ocunont 26, Exhibit 13.

It i3 noticed in this document that it bears tho number
2-1-3 _nstoad of 2-II-B.

BY ilv. TIPP:

, I return now to your affidavit, witnoss. Yeu say hero
that it was "fairly well known that those non wore ex.orinont-
in; on concentration cm:, inmates." Did you have any ^ositivo
knowlod ;e \s to vjho these subj-cts wore and how they wore
chosen?

7697


SI y 2 l-.I-3K-*i~5-K-a-row (Inti 3rown)

C jurt No. 1

No, I had nothin ; to '.o with that selection end never
had .ny . ositiv^ knowlod ;c of it.

v witness, after the Nurn'jcrj conferonca did you have
anythin • to do with tho results of tho iiolzloohnor-.v schor-
?inlcc ex. orinants? Did you soe reports on it nftor Num¬
ber ;?

-• No, nor nro any reports known that wero to have boon
sont out after the Number-; conference.

: I cone to tho crux of the Numbers conference, so far
as tho ;>rosooution is concerned, at least; nanoly, Holz-
loohner’ . lacturo. ^ucuucnt N . *10, Exhibit 93, ^ocunont
Hook 3, ;>ace 96, says the following:

'Hoizloohner ;avo this r^.ort on his ex.iorinents which woro,
of oourso, ox t >orir;jnt3 carried out in i/aohau#"

This is on m ic.:o 319 of the D, ;lish record of the 12th of

y*>

Daconber, 19-io. This fornul tion of tho natter the ;)rosocu-
tion soons to have trJccn frcn its own oxhibit booauso,
under »/5 in your affidavit, you said:

"..t tho Nurnborj oonferor.co hold in Octo’oor, 19-12, Dr.

Hnlzlochnor : -r.ve a reboot on tho f.roozinj cx. orinento con¬
ducted in Dachau in cooporation with D. . .i .schor."

However, 4 rovioualy, witr.oss, you said that Hoizloohner
had 3;.oken about his .notical cx;>cricnco3 in soa distress
work. Now, Just what did Hoizloohner actually report on?

Those two statenonts do not correspond to oaoh other.


7393


21 1fey 47-^“n>-5-l-Sfeloy (In*-. 3fora)
Court :ic. 1


A Holzlcchncr's report was a fixture of practical st_a distress
experiences, results of animal experiments and results of experiments
or. human beings.

4 Then if I understand you correctly, a combination?

n k combination.

Q And again I would like to quote tc you something that the
Prosecution said on the 12th of December 1946, page 310 of the English
record. Lot me quote. Ur. UcHancy said the following — I should like
to make the remark horo before I continue although it has net boon
said so far definitely, that these experiments were not carried out on
persons roscued from sea. The i&tncss Lutz told us, however, thet it
wa3 mado perfectly clear that thoso wero experiments that wero carried
out on human beings here whore humans were in a planned manner sub¬
merged in ice water. This is clear from the following part of the report
because it would have been impossible for any scientist to rarkc these
detailed clinical observations on the ease of individuals exposed"-.

Witness, ns you said you arc not a specialist in thu fiold of
freezing, but you" have mado general medical knowledge, ther-fcrc 1 can
ask you is this decision on thu port of the Prosecution corroct as
hero stated by ICr. UcHancy?

A No, a great ddnl con bo said in answer to that. First, let mu
tell you Tibet Lutz actually said. This was in testimony given on tho
12th of Doc nber 1946, page 242, — page >42, I guess, of the English
record. In answer to the Prosecution's question I should like to ask
you whether or net if one didn't understand at that conference thet
the experiments had b-.cn carried cut on inmates in the concontrrticn
camp. Lutz manured "I cannot Judge th t for sure, but I believe so. I
bulidvo that most of then must have seen that clearly." This shftws quite .
clearly tb:t this point was not made clear, but that it was loft up to
every individual's imagination. Lutz.himself had worked in animal experi¬
ments on the freezing problem, and worked in the Institute in »diich the

.4

sciefttj fic ^an lcal experiments on these questions w-r-_ carried w., and if
he seea something more clearly than others that is, of course, -uito


7099


21 Hay i.7-:--TD-5-2-.^lcy (Ir.t. Broun)
Court .Jo. 1


understandable. 1 had not worked p rsonclly on freezing problems, nor
had 1 had anything directly to do with icascher, and in addition lot me
point out that Holzlochnc-r certainly gave no report on the course of
a freezing exp riaenb where, for example, on the sane man the various
stages c- freezing ere carried out and observed on the sane man. In
medicine it is quite customary, it is true of so-called typical case
histories, end you think in terms of them. You speak of the normal and
usual course that a disease takes free its beginning to its end, and
it is perfectly clear that such a case history is coafcined from obser¬
vation on very many individual patients, and also contains the result
of experimental observation. Let me alsc point out that between a report
which is a top secret report, and e publication made without any
secrecy i.hctsoevor, thuro is a very evident difference to anyone. The
report that Holzloehnor, hoschcr and Finke signed on their work there
and which Rcacher sent to Hiatal er was r top secret natter. The report
in the eonfurcnco of sea distress or winter distress in Numborg which
the Uediccl Inspector of the Luftwaffe end Holzlcehncr's lccturo stood
under no secrecy. If the competent person Lh-n is what actually stood
bohind Holsloehnur report, and that the experiments and the conclusions
from thus were to be treated as top secret, then it is perfectly clear
that this report would not havo been acdo in a perfectly open publication.

'4 -itncsn, regarding Holzloehr.cr's lecture, the Frosocution aosertea
in its cr.oc that the Holzlcthr.er report contained a number of passages
frera which it could bo clearly and uncruivecally seen that thero were
fatalities in the experiments in Dachau. In other words, this repert 3hew3
clearly to you at least who knew the facts of the experiments as such,
that in the course of the experiments ct Dachau crinea were ec .'pitted.

Xc this essortion by the Prosecution correct, as far os you know, 'witness?

A From Holzloehner's lecture Certainly no one even knew that
experiments hod been carried out woo'd deduce that there had been fatali¬
ties is: -h course c? the experiments. Perhaps what hr.scher said in
connection with Kolzlochner*s report ) t^r could give seme on -ideas, but


?9CO


£1 :iav 17-:TD-5->Halo“ (lot. BrCi-r.)
Court :,*o. 1


that would not be seen free Holzloehncr* s lecture. Seen from the
psychological point of vieK today, as I knea ail the oth^r natters, it
is v-.-y easy to see in this Holzlochnor report everything I have found
cut in th_ ,-.cantinc, but at.thet tine kc didn't know these things.

QR. *ITF: Hr. President, I should liko to discuss a few of those
passages which the prosecutor feels to be particularly incriodn.ting,
with th-- witness. This will take, I believe, roughly half cn hour, and
I do not knov whuther the court wishes ac to begin on tliis befero the
recess, or if it would be better if we waited until aft.r the recess to
take up this natter, which nust tc understood in its entirety.

!£.. HaHDY: Hr. Prosidont, Tour Honor, it scots tc no the dofenso
counsel has labored under this point a long tiao. He has been hero
nearly an hour discussing thu rhirab.rg conference. It seuas to Be hu
has covered it nnply. I don't see any reason for going into it very
extensively. There are four or five ether chsrgos again:" dofondant.
He will bo in the witness box four or five acre days nt this reto,

THS F.LSlDHiT: The Tribunal, of course, is net aware of the i,ucotirs.
counsel desires to ask the witness concerning this report, but counsel
will bu permitted tc pursue the ssrtt-.r at lcr.3t until the Tribunal feds
he is pursuing, it too far.

In the moanvhilo the Tribunal will bo in rccoss,

(Thereupon a recess was taken.)


7?0i


21 Aa? 47-.4!1-Gro a s- (Ramie r )

Court I

THE : ARSHAL: Tho Tribunal 13 again in session.

TH£ PRESIDE:.'?: Counsel may proceed.

5Y DR. TIP?: .

Z. Dr. Becker, I was Just told by the interpreter
that the word "Xrankenheitsbild" which you u6od was not
clearly translated. It was translated as "case history".

Case history, on the other hand as I heard is the history
of one individual case froa the beginning of the disease
until its end,.whereas "Kranhenheitsbild" meant something
else, ,/ould you please clxrify for the benefit of the
interpreter what “Krankenheitsbild" is Intended to mean?

A. I agree with you that in the German usage of lan¬
guage one understands case history very specifically to bo
the course of the illness in tho in the case of one indi¬
vidual patient. Under "Krankonholtablld" on the other hand
one .understands the typical course of any one illness. For
instance, if an university looturor is disousslng an ill¬
ness, and lr. particular is referring to influenza, he galno
his pictures by his experience on hundreds and hundreds
of patients and on the basis of all this experience he then
arrivos at tho typical picture of that disease, whioh of
course deviates in the case of one or the other patient
but on the other hand there is a typical picture of that
illness. This for the medical man Is quite a matter of
course and it is very clear to him that any typical obser¬
vation cannot hold true of any one individual patient but
represents a combination of all the oases he has experienced.

Q. I think that can clarify that point, witness. You
wore last saying that according to your knowledge at that
time from Kolzloahnor's lecture nothing could be learned
about any crimes having been committed. Y 0U didn't hear
anything -.bout fatal cases either, did :ou?


7902


21 Kay 47-jf-£<-6-2-(>ro8B—(Ktnler)

Court I

a. i/o, Rolzloehr.er aad> no mention of any fatal cases.

-• - ow . witness, let us refer to some of the passages

ir. lolzloehnor's lecture which are possibly held to be in¬
criminating by the Prosecution. Lot ne quote from prosecut¬
ion Document 4C1, Exhibit S'*, on page 86 of the German, jnge
79 of the English record. This. Is the report about tea res¬
cue. I.. that connection I would like to llscusa the report
of Dr. Holzloehr.er with you. At first, witness, let us turn
to one particular passage, you will find this passage on
page 4"* of the original report which la on page 69 In the
English Document Hook. I quote:"The rapidity with which
numbness occurs lo roinarxnblo. it was determined that al¬
ready 5 to 10 minutes after falling in, an advancing rigor
of the skeletal muscles sets In, which renders the movements
of the arms e 8, eel ally increasingly difficult. 0 /hen
examining Professor Schroedor the prosecution pointed out
t.iut this determination of rlsor after five to 10 minutes
could not have been made In practical cases of sea rescue
but that leads one to oelievo that experiments wore carried
out. \*nnt can you say about that, witness?

a. Thle conclusion 16 In no way correct. I am not
an expert on the freezing natter and I never served In
Sea Rescue Service of the German Luftwaffe where I gained
personal experience> but I am In a position to give you
a reply to this question on the basis of a report mado
by the Anorioan Sea Rescue Service. Thl6 report expressly
refers to praotical experiences as they wore galnod In that -
service. It car. be found in a work by :<aJor ?. Kelsay and
it Is entitled “Acute -jeposure of Flyers In artlc '/aters”
which appoared m the Air Surgeon Bulletin, Volume I, part
2, dated February 1944. It says there almost verbatim and
I may quo to:

7503


21-K^y 47-J4-«S-tj-*^-Gro8S-(Ramler)

Court I


u .\lgcr becomes noticeable on fingers, hands, and
thighs and under circumstances on the entire body." Anoth ,-t
statement of the rigor of the fir.;ers B , after entering the
v&tor withing tan to *0 minutes there la a general rigor
apparent to such an extent which means that the victim ex¬
periences difficulties in swimming and entire loss of con¬
trol ovor 118 limos. Numbness appears within five minutes."
Major Kelsny says in a different passage, and i quote;

“Rodn .so of the skin was noticed in the oase of one patient
who only remained in the in the water for five minutes." i
nay assume that this proves that under the experiences of
the practical sea rescue sarvico one can also gain experience
after five or ten minutes.

Q. The next page in that document, on pago 4^ of tho
uoman original, page 69 of the English Document ?ooK, we
again find a quotation referring to the rigor vhloh savo
hero after a scientific discussion of that rigor, which is
of no interest: “The rigor coasos spontaneously at death.

From this it follows that personc soemlngly dead who still
evldenco a definite rigor offor hope of revival. 0 At first
I couldn’t explain to myself why this point of rigor was
put to Dr. Schroeder but I think this is tho oxolanation.

!'ow, con you tall no, witness, whether this determination
in this list quotation can only oe experienced as a result
of an experiment?

a. No, I don't but you con assume that. From all sea
ro3cuo reports one can see that such experiences are gained
after the rescue was carried out and after one sees that
any rescue measures ware 6uccea2*ul or not successful. This
seems to be a very clear experience.

3. Now, another two passages which deal with death
cases. These can be found on the same page, skipping one


21 May 47~K-A5-&-4-Grosd-(fcaal,*)

Court I

paragraph it says Chart) and I quota; “If the rectal tem¬
per .ture has dropped below 2 a degrees a sudden death of
hea-'t failure can aevolop from the arrhytnln. 3reathlng can
continue after the cessation of the heart activity, as slow
gaeping creathing for up to half an hours."

In the aa,;.o connection there la another paragraph and
I quote: "It is of particular importance that the drop of
temporature can continue for 20 to 40 minutes after removal
from water if the rescued person, ru'obad dry and wrapped In
warm blonfcots, is left ulone. subsequent decline of rectal
temperature of more than a degrees may occur. If this sub¬
sequent drop in temperature passes below a rectal tempera¬
ture of 28 degrees sudden death by heart failure con occur. 11
I on only dloousslng this passage with you beoause It was
put to Professor Schroedor during the examination that theso
roctal temperature measurements could not possibly be carried
out within the practical sea rescue service. This Prosecution
claimed no doubt an examination which could only be carried
out in casu of on experiment. hentlon was made hero about
death cases after tho temperature dropped to a certain degreo
and this shows clearly that crimes must have ocourred. Can
you duflna your attitude towards this, witness?

A. I know that the ooa rescue boats and airplanes of
the sea rescue service carried thermometers. On the basis
of a document which you will submit later It can be soen
that great value was attached to see that in the rescue
boats as well as In the rescue planes physicians accompanied
the crew or, at least, medical liCOs lr. order to help per¬
sons concerned. All that has to be done In that case for a
measurement of rectal temperature. Referring to this sub¬
sequent drop In temperature that also can be carried out In
the practical sea rescue service. Of course, there may have


21 May 4?-H-nK-6-5-_-roaB^(Ranijr)

Court I

been a supplementation by way of an experiment. I may refer
you to a different work by Captain Hilton Maser which Is
entitled "Medical Problems In Air Sea Rescue", sa.o perlod-
1 .-lr Surgeon's Bulletin of October 1945. The passage
to which I want to refer you reads, and i quote;

“As soon as the experimental subjects emerged from the wat«-r
ar.d dry their bodies In the wind temperature continued to
fall." In this paper too we find tno well known combination
at which the medical man arrives, namely, a result of an
experiment as wall as a practical experience. Finally, I
nay point out to you, wlthreference to the danger of do-ith
at temperature below 28 seems to me after what I know now
to be merely one posslolllty, for now I know of a number
of papers whore patients tbo for therapoutloal ruasons aro
treated with very low temperatures measurements up to 24
rectal temperature without any proof that any of these
patients had died as a result.


WS


21 1:ry~.i-ILirrcv (Inc. a-=lor)

Court I

iTov, let us turn to tec. next ?_cs_ge, witness. ®iic is on page
CJ cf tno r-erain original -ad Ota- be found on p_go 90 of fcho iblglish
c 7. . 3 is tno first pur-gr-uh on th„t page and I quote:

"iu tec blood of severely frozen persons tn« mwoer of rod blood
corpuscles is incre-sod up to 20£. The increase in leukocytes is oven
re.. tor; 25, COO to 27.000 -re to oe found >er vc?. Ito EultJpliCdtion
of t. o erythrocytes corrosnonds to ua incrc_sc in hcuoglobin o: freu
10 fco 20,:, . otico-«lc oad icnortant is a rent incroase in viscosity

of \\) tc 7.0."

I jn not - pnysicl-n, -s «r. £~rdy s-s, and I en Just an ordinary
siailo 4*a and : c-a luogine nothing ay re-dln t. is fomul-tion. I
vc.it to .iox you, -ro tcoso dotcruin-tioas w.ich c_a only be uio in
t-o c Vic of oa uxveriaeat? -re teese dotoruin-tions vj.ich aro ando
in tho c.no of _ livin.. >orson or in tae cjo of - dead person?

O. -huso, nutur.11 . aro exoai..utiono v ich only h-vo cny senso

if ai.liod to living hucan oeiigs and c-n only oo c-rrlod o*.t in that

*

v.v”.

7. itnens, norhons you vlll first toll * *i-t thono oiaiuidutloa
concern?

' o ire nuroly concornod vith tno co-uiting of tho rod . .id uiiito
blood conusclus. f.-.ls is -a ex^iaatioa v icn ro-lly does not ruuiro
C physician but can bo Carried out by over tech.iic-l assist nt or
iicdlc.l nco. In th„t connection, I o^- -.-in refer you to tho work
by Co’t.da r.asor vhero he s^'s:

“.‘no «b^. of strii differs ia every individual c-so ccordi.v,
to tho circuit nces. Ac connidor-tion of tno olood coacontr tion
vc you a icturc to th .t offset, nut n determination of y..o

e

elood Concentr-tioa c„n also eo -acortained r' t.ic cooper c .to

no*..,cd."

I v.-at tc point oxt tr-t in is remark ay Obtain haaor refers clc. r-
ly to r ctic-I sea rescue oxu*.rieac>. - I v -14 -'- n ~- c th . 1 ,


7907


21 .-v~?-9-2-- -rro w (Int. Healer;

Court I


t -s-a rose :c »..* 7 lcc, taese setaodn ur. applied i- m )C..rs
c.cdiola that the even simpler aotnod of the counting of blood
cellar, cl os is used in the S«roaa «e_ rescue service in tao Channel.
v:cli -'taod c.jx even be applied ia a rescue bout oec-use all tfco
bo_tr *-e covered.

low, she next oa-icugu, witness, voich c-r. be found on 91
of tne Higlish Socunuat jook. This is tao 1 -st pur-sr^h on th..t pu&o:

"iho conditions of the he_rt _llov -a opinion to be foraod on tho
problcu of course after roscuo."

Collapse _ftcr rescue n.^as tao death after rescuo, isn't th. t
ri%ht? Can tais detomlnatioa ou u_ac only in the c-oo of .h c">oriuont,
vitnoos?

io, This collapse after rescuo was tho very thin; union.all
physicians who do-lc witn tc-t nroblau found to bo a purzlo and t is
vno S o prooloLi w..icn worried every physician. It nlwayo puzzlod J»iu
tn..t ..ftor these patients wore already rose ;od they would ou dcnly dio
a few hours j'tcrvurds, wfter tee. ver« ..l..udy safely in .. boat or
in t:ie hospit.Jk. I uuy point out th-t '’rofessor tolxlochnor initially
in n n report is spooking eo-.ut c-so c-tastrop-ios occurring in tho
.V.v;* vuort such l..to or rescue collapses with - f .t-1 ond occur _t,..in
cat. a in. Jfcis unfortunately w-o the >r.vr 1 experience ovoryuhoro,
not only ia -ernaay. .vferring to thu BPoci.J. questions of tie con¬
dition of tiie ho.a-t and the uudical interest in tho conditio., of tho
nc..rt, I Cay _g..in refer to tno vorX jy Capt.An ..after who also is
vriti a; lit tho SoOe fidlnga of tao fae^rt oof so;’B, uad I quoto:

"Ale ojsorv tioa in these tvo Cases is particularly in o.csting
bcc..U8 it is proven that the re-th i.. the v..tur is orougnt aeout by 4
circul tory disturcancos. It frequently occurs during tnc process of
VeCCUC."

Horc a,-la we n-ve tuu coll-pso after acscuo.

.ow, vitaoss. another quotation i th t connoetio. v-sicu is to


(I r.t, gaoler)


21 K^i
Court I

oc f.nind on page 92 of the o/iglish Docustat _ioefc and on p«>.,c —a of
- -o em-oi original. Holzlothaer is speJcing, and I shall r.ot quoto
-L- vcrowtta, about the good experiences node in tne cose of c n lacl
c w i.c.. -3 with quich ro-waraing and he is saying that water tcmo-
r .tv.re of -iO degrees not only accelerate tao return to aoru.l ttupo-
iv.et'ro and -osoroed the sudden dangorous falls of tdiperaturo cS tor
rescue, out tuy -Iso be of 1 if o-Saving effect should tne heartbeats
be 0 ia to stop.

fa..t very clearly v„s an exocriuontal Ogpurlcnce oy Dr. folzloehaer.
'Wouldn't you Cave to conclude that so>.c cricos wore cctmlttcd in that
connection?

ju l‘h-t is, in f.-ct tho only p^ss-go which clearly points to cn
o;*o»vi-.oat, at lo..st, to - tnorqqjoutlcal o^Jjriuent. Axt not only I,
but cortainly ull tho otners wao /aiev considerably core about tho
freezing iroblcs than.I, found this to be extremely coining end eutic-
fectoty ta-t Holzlochr.er states oxorcnoly that ho never s«v jay such
dai Vi or for thooo wno uxr'orwont th_t troatnont. Froc that it boenuo
elc..rly cripareat to all listcn«ro that no incidents and no death cr.sos
occur w during talc experiment -vd this, fo: all of us, uc r.t tho
solution of chc Holzlochnur loctu c. at any rate, this, in opinion,
Vos tno only question of any pr..ctic.l iuportnnco.

<. i.r. President, in this connection I aay offer two hoc:or-
3rroyoon& documents. fho Docuuont *27, which I shall givo Inhibit yl4,

_«'■ ciio Doc'juent ?28 wnich will receive aXf.i'oit vl5. I “<-1* &.• ,

Pres if out, th-.t in tnc case of that ovrfc wo aro cot concornod v-ith
o:o>eri..onts conducted on huxan acings abroad a-out which .ccordi.v. to
...o deoision will only bo labor, out «:>orlencce of :no ..uorionn
.:t tno -ribunal, So_ Hescao oervicc. fheso documents ..r. in Joc-coi^-
~ U DOC’—ent aook -2. U-.o 55 and p_gt. 103.

I ..11 r.-bc quote fro: thesv documents.

i T :X_ S_3 -1 a: Page 89 or p^ge 98?


7?:-9


21 i..;
Co-art


;rrow (la;. .-_^lcr)


- 3a. 21??:

3 . 98 and 1C3.

Jr. a brings to an one tho lecture by nolslochaur, vituoss.

One, .d u nueatioa. ,»s we *-ov, th6 first spooler -ftor Jolzlochnor was
'.iVm — schor. fatso *.scccr reCarfca woro repeatedly tho sujjoct of
discussions in tn;s court rocs. bo toll iio, vitnoss, wh..t v..s Uio vory
sens tioc^l tning vaich Dr. a.schOr nontloned during tout uaoting?

a. —»c uer s_id tn,t in th-t connection expurinento wore c.rriod

out by ordor -ad resuoatioility of tno .oicacfucfcror S3 noi.irich
. - in n lor on sentenced cri-in-ls vao had volunteorod for that mryoso
after aviag Ooon orcaised th„t t~.ru woulc oe - uitigation oi tholr
contonco or aot.o other -loviation of tnoir f-to. A is is ell he said.


21 Hay A7-!'-. .TD-10-l-i£aloy (Int. Healer)

Court N'o. 1

Q f&tnessj cid it beceme evident from these reaarks made by
Pasohur that primarily death cases had occurred during those ecperdencos,
s r o.-ri.r specifically or quite generally that ih the execution of theso
experiments any criaos were ccecitted?

r. ,c, neither one cr the other became apparent. I acy point out
again that Rasch«-r himself had obtained the approval by Rcichaiuchrer
SS Hianlor to treat this matter as top secret.

Q Recently, in a different case you said once, when speaking
about a lov/ pressure chamber, that you didn't consider theso renarks
by Itaschor cs very nice or pleasant; tvll,us again witness, what was
the reason for your rejecting theso marks aado by Raschcr?

A Subsequent to these statuaents of Raschcr I raontioned a few
words about oxp-rinents with a local cooling of the nock area; theso
in themselves w«.ro absolutely harmless experiments because ho had
stated before that any local ccoling of the neck end the oroa behind
the hoed would not load to ary dropping of temperature or at least
not any essential dropping of temperature. 1 think that what wo learned
froa this report it only concerns dropping of one to two degrees, which
ere not very dengorous. Therefor--, it urs not really whet Rancher had
said that 1 didn't like, but the gvnorcl Banner in which ho was saying
it. Cf ccurse, today after almost five years have olopsed, I cannot
repeat his words v.rbati*, and it is very difficult to describe such an
indefinite impression. I con cnly say that the manner in which he was
speaking, perhaps the iianner in which he was speaking about his experi¬
mental subjects made a very unpleasant impression on us both. Nobody
thought rod nobody could have thought the t anything criminal had teen
committed.

; You w.r>- saying before, witness, that thv basic rosultfrca
all this Kolzlo diner was that quick rewarding was to be cnccuragcd and
that quick row?rntng had h?d the very best results. Wasn't y™r
solution soucthing sc basically new and so revolutionary that on- cculd
only really believe that stated .nt until details w-r>- also given?


7911


a J&y 47-J^TD-10-2-!iaLoy (Inti Rrmier)
Court Jfo. i


A Holslochnor's result hr 3 , c: course, extraordinarily inport ant.

■ o'.■ - t can exist about that; but it was n-ither completely new nor
w's it : ’.attionel First, during the very same nesting Professor *»dtz
alr-pij had reported the very sene result on the basis of his animal
expo rim nts. Furthermore, the problem of cuick rowaraing had beer,
mentioned an.' dealt with ever since the first sea rescue coniercnco in
Perir in the year 1941. Secondly, in tho periodical, the G-racr. tLlitcry
Phyaiaian, dready in tho ouccer of 1945 there appeared a study by a
certain ienhold, who was also ruconr,ending the subjeot, the quick
rewarding procedure. This vork wps ouoted by Prcfosscr Jerisch during
the Kumbcrg Cold Hooting, and it was discussod by hia in dotril. Already
before the lecture by Holzloehnor, the quick rewarding procedure h?d boon
threo times the ogress subject of lectures, pnd after Holzloeimor four
lecturers w_re also reporting on that very prcbl.m. I should like
to point out rpccifinally thrt curing thL l.’urnberg meeting f. few
experiences hed boon gained during ratucl sen rescues where results
wore obttir.od through quick rewarding.

Q Itr.css, for purposes of clarification, cno norc- question;
you »uro saying that the result was neither sensational nor basically
now; or. the other hand you woro 3'iyin: that these oxpcri.mur.tn woro
important. The inprossion aay ariso as if thu importance cf tho experi¬
ments would r.cvu been decreased sinco theso things ha.d merely been tho
subject of discussion. ..hy w.rc human expo: iments at all nocoarnry?

A I sco t..c significance of these experiments in thu following:

I thin* th-t in tho course o: pr.actico cnc would have anyway have arrived
at the sirdlar n-suita, but ir. th practice of sc* rescue it will always
be U . c“sc that the ship wrecked, — cnc we arG here concerned with
shin wrecked during the l>.r, — will rise have injuries, damages tc
their health, so that a result will nevur be as clear as in the experiment.
Tt;is experiment, or the oq _riuvr.ts 'ey Holzlouhner have cl earl: given
un r.hir- result quickly and thus obviously centre ry tc >x. -ri-cr.cc r.-inod
during rrr.cuicDl experiences.


21 May i.7-:K.H!-lC-3^sloy (Int. BeoLcr)

Court Mo. 1

>3. ilt-F: In connection with that question I may offer Bcckor-
: ng Document -9. This car. be found in document book Mo. 2, on
rn- 107. This document was already submitted by the Prosecution. It
i3 the report cf the sea and winter rescue matter. However, the full
dccua-nt was not submitted by the Prosecution.

I am just being told that this document can be found on page 108 .

I have sufcoitted this document in order to confine what the witnoss
had mentioned about that aeoting. I shall not quote rnythir.g from this
docuncnt, cut I shall only give you for the purpose cf simplicity a
fow page numbers. The lecture by Jerisch can be found on pago 108 a;
tho lecture by professor Welts where he reported on his cniarl experi¬
ments can be feund on page 113. On page 118 you see reports about
experiments in practice by Zschukkc and Doerflcr; on page 121 else it
speaks about idacnta in practice. I shell shortly like to touch on
this pnrscgc. Dcerflor say a here. Base 3:

"On 25 April 1942 two Englishmen were rescue who had allegedly
boor, drifting for 6 hours.

n) Symons: "(which is obviously the name of the person rescued)
"ooverc cxhcusticr., slightly benumbed. Abdomen hard ns a bo. rd,
sonsitivo to pressure (bladder filled). Temperature: armpit 35 dcgre03,
rectal 34.5."

b) Dixon: The seme as r), but tho temporaturo was 37.3. i^iick
recovery.

Caso 4: k German technical sergeant whe came down and landed on
the sea on 17 May. Temperaturo: rectal 34 degn.es, armpit 33.5."

Q 'Witness, new ono concluding question: as ycu were saying, thoro
was n scientific r.-eting concerning sea and winter emergencies. As you
said, ye u n-.rc not ar. expert in this field, you were making experiments
in th field cf practical sec rescue, end sc shall assume ycu had worked
in tliis fi-ld experimentally; I aay, cssuae, henevor, that th. leading
experts c. the Luftwaffe and leading experts cf ctrur br.-inches cf the
Wchrmacht were present during that meeting; what these people concluded


21 Jcj itf-fc^TO-IQ^-iialoy (int. Raaier)

Court !io. 1

•roa the seating and fres th_ lectures you cannot tell us, witness,
but I would like to know one thing free you: did any cne of the

..i cipents in this meeting protest publically against Holzloehnor»s
lec.vr. either before, during or after the lecture?


I-’ y 21-W-3K*ll-l-iI chan (I t. .i rr.lv rj
C-urt No* 1

~ No, I ri.y sr.y in that connection at that tine I would
not at all have understood any such .roto3t had it, been
. ade. ..eocxdin; to the “'ocunent, which is availablo horo,

Co v.a.„rs of tho Luftwaffe wore .rosont durin; that r;ect-
inj, lb ro; r-sent.ativos of tho ~r:;y,  re-resentatives of
the 1-Javy, i of tho • .ffen SS nfi Police, and 19 civilians,
i.c. university .rofessors and othor sontlooon.

. I. I . y .:u—rizo briefly, witness, you arc sayin.:
that you would hnvo considorod any .rotost as bo in’, sense¬
less baoauso you nadc no observations whatsoever that oven
could hnvo hintort at orincs. Mono of tho loadin; ox;x)rts
of ‘Jernony, who no doubt woro .rosont, nado any such
observations booausc no one in cffoct .rotestod, is that
true?

.. Yes, that is quite corroot.

. I will leave that uootin" and I will ;o to another
doouflont, which was subnittod 'ey tho .rosooution. Ono
1 rolininnry question: would you .'lease toll tho Tribunal
who *rofe3;ior Juochner was as ho was r^ntioned aa a lecturer
durin tho Nurnbor ; uootin ;?

•• Professor Buoohnor was and still is today tho ordinariat
for .atholo 7 and the dircotor of tho Pathological Instituto
of tho University at Freiburj. Jurin . tho war ho was con¬
sult in.. .atholo'ist with thj Hodionl Inswootorato of the
Luftwaffe and head of the Institute for -viation Pathology
*.t i'riibur;;. He is now tho Pro-.tector of tho University
of Freibur;.

i ./oultl you .loaso tell U3, witness, what xb*ofcssor
suochnor had disc us sod in Number ;?

- -rof-S3or Juochner reported /.cut the atholo 7 in
rofcronc. to coolin on the basis of the liter ture and on
tlw • ;sis of auto, sy find in s.


7915


May 21-K-BK-ll*2-^Qhaa (Inti Menaier)
Court :1c. 1


- 0- what cor. 3cs .1:1 ^'ofcssor *>uochner jain his o>
-ri.nce of which you wore s^cckin;?

- - Uv. experiences wore joined by auto, sics of cor.-s^s
of soldiers of the Luftwqffo and th- N^vy, who had died
as a result of 3ea distress.

. In what way did Professor ouechn-r obtain that cat^rial?

.. I ..lrondy said thattt3uoohnor was a consultinj jathol-
o ;ist and all the autopsy oortifiontos of tho Luftwaffe
woro sont to hin.

i I>i that case, if I understand you correctly, Professor
Bucchncr was tho nonbor of tho Luftwaffo who hod .joined
tho isost exj'orienco about death eases in connection with

9

3oa distress. ..t any rate ns far as it concerned his
s.ocinl field of .watholojy?

.. Y.s you arc rijht, with that notification.

. Mew, the - r'seouticn in its subni33ion of ovidcnco h.as
jrosontud •. ilocuiiont, which I should like to discuss with
you in that connection: bocunont Mo. 922. This was sub-
nittod as Exhibit Mo. «J5, it is .n cxoorjt frea a report
of tho nootin ; of tho consultinj .hysici.ms in the year
of 19i2. T^ll no, witness, woro you ..resent durin; that
nootinj?

•* No.

. ^id you hear about tlio lectures ,:ivon durin; that r:cot-
inj before this Trial?

.. ./a 11 , I know that thoro was to be . nootin:, but I
hoard nothin* :x>ro about it.

. ..ccor:'i:i to tho docun.nts subnitted by tho Prosecution,
Professor nolzloohnor o:i that dry .Iso hoi', a lecture. This
is obviously sunnary of his lecture which he hold .t
Murnbor •. ~s it can o soon fror. tho tocimeat, Mr. Juochnor
also s. okc durin; that ncetin and the . rosccution quoted


7916


Mcy 21-i!-BK«ll-3*4!o«han (Int. linn:-lor)
Court No. 1


that discussion anil lecture r.s follows: "Buochn^r: .ic
1 - v- studied the norjholojy of the adjustnont to cold nd
eh .thole ;y of tenoral severe chillin; in 20 eases of
dv tli c used solely by severe chillin ; ini in nuncrous
ex. :ri:.-nts carried out on aninal3, and hevo deturnined
tho f ollowin •:" It was not explained just what was ioduoed
fron the docun-nt. ..t any rate, wo nro horo concerned with
the ;uto. sio3 in eases of death, casos which woro concerned
with the Holzlochncr lecture. For the purpose of clarifica¬
tion, witness, can you onoo uorc toll us on what tho oxanina-
tions by Bucchner wero basod?

*» In r.y opinion this statenont is clonrly based u, on tho
knowledge which ho joined after working on those autopsies
and records; at my rate, I know of nothing else.

If it ,lor.3C3 the Tribunal in this connection, I now
offer tho 3ook'.r-Froyson ; document No. 30-.. and 1 '.tor tho
3ceker-Fre 30 n; docunent 30-3. This will bo Exhibit 17-,.
and 17-D. 3oth of thoso docunont 3 can bo found in Bocurant
3ook 2 . Tho first on pa;o 12 -i and tho socond on pajo 127.

I nay confirr. the testimony by tho witness by quotin .3 fra.i
B :cur.^nt 30-.. on P: o 12 -i of tho ^ooununt Book. Frori 30-..

. :o 121 , Br. Buyehnor r.t first describes his position
as .,rof~ssar of . atnolo ;y and director of the Patholo.jioal
Institute of the University and his political attitudo;

I quoto:

" 1 ) .m institut- for r./ir.tion nodical . atholo y undor
i-V direction was attached to ny university institute in
Pr-ibur • durin the wx. This institute received, anon;;
oth-r thin ;s, .all autopsy r^.orts cf tho Luftwaffe patholog¬
ists v/brkin • in tho various hono districts and occupiod
territorios."

I shall ski; the next few sentences and I shall continue


May 2l-M-BE-ll-4*^oohnn (Int. *tccnlor)

Court No. 1

to quote fret; the sane . second paragraph:

-iu- in ere as in; losses of the Luftwaffe fra: fatal
und-rcoolin; of aviators after boinp shot dawn into tho

nn l or the ..tlcntic nnkc it necessary to work systonatic-
"Uly on c 3us of death, due to undercoolin;. ..t ay instiga¬
tion n: y order of the Medical In3.ectomto of tho Luft¬
waffe, -’utc^sics on aviators and marines who had died i
throu h undercoolin ; while in distress at sea, were :
systematically performed by sorio Luftwaffo pathologists..."

Thu next sentence deals with tho trontin; physicians.

Then lr.tor:

"The evaluation of the rocords and .articularly tho
microscopic examination of tho organs of those bodies wore
carried out at ay Froibur ; institute...." and a few
nanus re -lain muntionod, n-moly tho physicians who woro
conduotin these examinations. There is also mention nado
of the work which was attached to theso examinations. It is
Exhibit 30-B.

Mr. euochner continuos:

"3) For each of the 28 cos os investigated in ny*oponinc
re.ort at th Luftwaffo mootin I spoke in dotail about
thu3o tw nty casus an' the thorough experimental tests on
animals. The report 'The r-.tholoyy of Undercoolin ' was
publishein tho Cii n i 0ril (<cck i y . This I also enclose."

That is .Iso Exhibit 30-3.

euoohnor continues:

'*) *'ith reference to this re.ort, I nado the following
ar.cn remark at the Cjnsult at s' Conforenco: 'Wo hr.vo
exa.inod the mor.hole :y of the adaptability to coll and
the . atholopp of jcnoral und-rcoolin with 20 strai jht-
for.vard cases of death luo to undercoolin.; and numerous
animal experiments....


7918


-- y .chan (Int. *i anlor)

Court No. 1


;, 5) I id not carry cut or c-.usc to ^ carried out any
auto, si as or ;:icroscoi*ical tests in any caso of death fro t:

ari;:ont on a hu;:nn '>oin . orticularly not in the
unit re.: el in : ex. ericonts on hu-ions which we-ru carried out
’oy - r f.ssor liolzlochncr an:: i>r. liaschor."

Thor - fellows tho si'uinturc and tho cortificato of a
Notary. I shall not quote the enclosures,but I should liko
to ask tho Tribunal to take notice of then.

Now, the Inst question on cole’. »«itnoss, you know thut
tho i-rosecution assorts that those ex, oriuonts were entirely
sensoloss, wore unskillful, and did not ;.roduco anythin;
now for ujuic.il science; could you , loose dofino your
attitude toward that with a few words?


7919


Court So. 1

21 Key 47-*-12-l-i£H-Coofc (Hauler)


A, upon the heels of ay knowledge of Eolzloehncr's ocrsonality
tcy : first eey that it is ay fira conviction that the cxreriaents
v;.ic:. v^rc carried out by Kolzloehner vert- absolutely necessary, had
eenct, and were admissible experiments. ! vas confiraed in this con¬
viction of nine by vhrt *he prosecution witness Keff seid here in thin
courtroom, --oicing a very clear distinction fcctvccn the cold eroeriaonts
in the period of Kolzloehner, rinkc, end Poacher, and the oeriod when
Raeckor was working alone. That such experiments, suck as Quick re¬
versing, for oxonplo, cannot be performed on oniaale is ouite clear,
and also becomes evident free a number of foreign papers on that sub¬
ject. In order to recognize the significance of the rosults, one need
not bo rr. expert on cold. I think that e winter during which, according
to official r^oorto in the English House of Cocoons, 534 persons died
free cold in the British occupational zone of Gornany nlono, and 175
people died ir. Eorlir., when 776 persons hid beer, admitted to hoooitnlo
in the British zono as a result of freezing, ar.d during which in 3crlin
15,615 people were in "very urgent danger of freezing to death", ono
would at lor.ut have to recognize the significance of tho nroblen as it
existed for us after tho first winter in Russia. After all, thousands
of frozen norcons wore treated wrongly, and finally tho right solution
is found ar.d is iaaediotely confined.

The decisive answer to your cuostion I should like to glvo you on
the brciB of n work which I read recently where quick ro-vnrning is
colled e revolutionary thin*: in medical science. Tho author, who is on
American, writes: “Before our vor against Jaoan ended, this method of
Quick ro-wprning nad been occcptcd as ihe recognized treatment by nil
American sen rescue cervices, and is today generally accepted by*
nodical circles." This statement originates free Major Alexander.

ZE. TIP?: I nay say that the document shows that this is tho
Professor Alexander who is the nodical expert of the r-rosccutior. in
this trial. In this connection, Mr. President. may I offer Becker-


7920


Court So. 1

21 Hey 47-M-12-2-iS(-Cook (Healer)

Jreyaeng Document So. 31, which is to he found in Document Volume II,

P'S® 140. -his will receive the exhibit amber 18. It is ar. excerpt
-r- r ouhlicntion "Eerpers Magazine" entitled "Secrets by the Thousands",
b:* Letter Volker. I should like to auoto only a few passages which seen
to -e to hu particularly important or. that coint. I cuotc fron tho
first page, page 140 of Becker-Jreyecng Docunont Book II. These arc
the lest few lines of the firct p?gc of tho document:

"With reference to the nedical secrets in this collection, one
arry surge or. has remarked, 'Scco of then will save American nedicino
yenro of research. Kocy of these secrets are revolutionary, is, for
instance, tho Gernan technique of treatment after prolonged nr.d usually
fatol ojnocuro to cold. 1

"This diocovory, which was revooled to us by tho aforementioned
rccort of Major Alexander, revolutionizes all nodical knovlcdgo on that
oubjoct."

BY ER. TIP?:

Q» witness, concludes tho Kolzloohnor, Beschcr, Finko

coaplox and there arc only two r.oro cuostions of a vory gonornl nature.

Wc know, witness, that Dr. Hacchcr carried out other cold work long
after the Luftwaffe experiments had boon concluded, hoy I ask you,
did you at ary ti:;o hear of this further work by Bnschor?

A. I hrvo to cnover that Question in the affirmative, but not
during the war.

Q. Vhon did you first hoar about these experiments?

A. I hoard that for the first tine during njr activity in the

Aero Medical Center in Heidelberg, but I heard nothing vory specific

*

then. Only here was I thoroughly informed.

Q, This testimony, witness, seems to be contradicted by Prosecution
Document riO-238, which ic in Document Book III, on o go 130 of the
German and 118 of the English version. This is a file note signed by
Mr. Siovers, dated 4 February 1943, end it concerns itself with SS
Eauptsturnfuehrer Stabserzt Dr. Beecher. Mention is npdo in this docu-


79a


Court “o. 1

21 Aey 47-M-I2-3-=Bi-Cook (SarAer)


oer.t that Genereloberstabsarst -rofessor Dr. Eipcke allegedly said on
the telephone that one could no longer tolerate Dr. Batcher's exocriments,
end sof, oetion vas cade to transfer hie very quickly to the last. The
cor.c_* nicn could he dravn, witness, that you, as a center of the Beferat
for Aviation Medicine, did know these exoerinents. ‘At any rote, perhaps
the oro»ecutior. could arrive at such a conclusion. Please consent
briefly on this docunent.

a. First, if Genoralobertiabserat Eippke actually did know any-
thing, this in no way neans that I Jcnev about it. Professor Fipofco,
aftor all, vno ay suprene superior and I was an assistant Referent.

"ut it dooc bccaso clearly apparent fron this letter that not even
Professor Kippfcc knew anything because had he known anything ho wouldn't
have hod to instruct Gborfeldarst Daniels to reoort to his or to inctruct
Rateher through Daniels to ronort to his vhnt ho vao doing. Then, it
con also bo clearly seen fron this letter that this work of Puncher'o
vao assigned to his by the Reichcfuohrer SS, Heinrich Hinmler. Daniolo,
os tho local Luftwaffe superior officer, sorely gave Rucchor tho opoor-
tunity to carry out this order by Hisslor.

Ir. conclusion, witness, I say state with rcfcronco to the coo-
plox of cold questions that you heard about tho plans for the experiments
during tho Professor Kicpke-Rascher conversation in June, 1542, and that
on this occasion you hoard about exporinonte which were to bo carried
out on voluntary subjects with tho approval of the head of the state.
Hitler, .and the Reich iilnietry of the Interior, without learning any
details about the setter, er.d furthers ore that you hoard about tho result
of these e-verisents on the occasion of the Nuernberg cold sooting
without it bccccing apparent to you that any crises won. cocr.ittod during
the execution of such cxceriser.ts, and finally that you knew nothing of
Reocher'o further work ir. that connection besides what he was doing with
Finke and Eolzloehner, is that correct!

A. Yes, that is correct.

DR. IIP?: Hr. President, this brings at to tho conclusion of the


7922


Court So. 1

21 May 4?-K-12-4-iSi-Coo> (fianltri


cold cosplex and I think It would fee advisable to adjourn at this tir-e.

Si rl&SIIHSf: The Tribunal will now be in recess until one-thirty
o'cic.k.


7923


/*V7

21 &iy-A-?i>-i3-l-&iclsi (Brown)

Court iio. I.

AFTEPJiCOK 3:'<SSI CU

(The- bearing reconvened at 133C hours, 21 1fey 19ls7)

7r?i J-AilSHAL: The Tribunal is a^ain session.

BECKSR-fiGYSi'G - Rosuned
DIRECT EXAJXiATICM - Continued

BY DR. TIPP:

Q Dr. Becker, this corning ro concluded the question of tho
freezing experiments, end nor re cose to a further charge against you.
The irriictaont charges you to have participated in criminal oxpcri.’nents
between Juno of 19U2 to January I?li5 ir. tho concentration can ;s of
Matzwoilor and Scchsenhauaon. I ask you now, vitnoss... l hor\ did you
first hear of tho facts which tho prosecution has horc brought forward,
na.-.oly, those I),logod experiments?

A I '.ward about then for the first tiiao hu-re in Nuernberg
when I was arraigned.

Q '.'nor. did you hoar tho naro, for tlu first time, of tho non
who had moot to do with these oxporin.ntr - to »dt, Dr. Haagon, tho
Director of tto Hygiene Institute of tho Univorcity of Strasbourg, nrd
also Consulting Hygienist with an Air Flo-t after n curtain dnto. 1
do not knew n what, precisely, tha prosocution bnsos its charge that
you participated in a hepatitis oxporimont. It can only bo that your
responsibility is basod on ymar .activities r.s Referent, or Assistant
Refcrout. Since K*igen was a -iodicil research officer in tho Luftwaffe
I mu3t assume that your connection with those experiments, .and your
activities, wore with Haager.. Therefore, yritn.es, I put to you, or. tho
question of tho hepatitis experiment, tlx; document free Document Book
VIII, ?«o, Deduct,KO-137, which was put in by the prosecution as
Exhibit 139. This is lien's lottcr of 7 October 19U3, to tho Director
of tho University of Strasbourg. It concerns itself with tho recogni¬
tion of this Hygienic Institute of tho University as a Military In3tit-

doctsasnt. Hero there is nontion of a com-

epidenica. Did you know anything of this
7924


uto.' -Look at Ha> 5 o^lhis
mission rc.^diae-lSepatitis


21 lfcy-&-L*3-23-2-Biolai (Int. Brorm)

Court Ho. I.

research coocission?

A This coeBdssion vos given by the Reich Research Council. It
i3 number 5 in the Document. It is also a top secret research assign¬
ment. Thus, Raagen had not only no reason to tell us .about this, but
since it r;as a tor secret setter he '.as forbidden to do so.

Q Now, re know of the dual position which Haagen occupied,
and .-hioh played a large role in this trial. Ho was Director of the
Hygiene Institute of the University of Strasbourg, end, at the oans
tiro - fron a certain date on - he ms a Consultant Hygienist in the
Air "loot Reich. To which aspect of Haagen 1 s dual activities doos thi3
letter refer'

A Of course, it refers to his activities as Director of the
Hygiene Institute of the University of Strasbourg.• • .because it is
dircctod to the Rector of the University of otrassbourg. It concoms
itso’f v/ith tho fact that tho Uygionic Institute is to be recognizad as
a so-called . Hit cry Institute, and it is signod by Krof. Dr. Haagen,
and not STABSARZT Haage n, and there is nothing in this letter concern¬
ing hepatitis.

Q Ncv, one r.ore question. Haagen m 3 a nodical officer in tho
Reserve Cor^s of tho Luftwaffe. Did ho not, as such, have on obligation
to report on all work and all research condcsi ons that ho received
fron my office whatsoever?

A If all taodic .1 officers had had to report on all the wor2:
that they did, ve should have had to open up another Medical Inspect¬
or.ate.

•»

3 In other words, there ms no such obligation on tldir part?

A "o; there was never a— rention cf that, cither.

Q In the coze context, -.fitness, please look in the sane Docu¬
ment Bock, Number VIII, NO-299, Kxhibit 190. It is on page -3. Tiiis is
again a letter fron Haugen to Dr. Schreibor at tho Military Academy in
Berlin, and it is addressed, "Honored Gene r a l . a rst■ ■ There is no signat¬
ure, consequently we do not knar in vhat capacity Haagen signed it. At

7925


21 i2y-A-i5-13-3-3iolai (Brown)
Court Kc. I.


any rate, from the heading, "Honored Ger.eralarzt," it can be nss'srod
that this i3 a military natter here, an affair which, perhaps, had sorve
contact with the Usdical Insrecterato of the Luftwaffe ever, though that
nay have been circuitously, ’•hat can you say about it?

A ?irst of all, it cor. bo ssjr. iron this letter that it did
not cone through channels. It 'rent through the iiedical Insj.octernta.
Moreover, there vrc-r^ no military roLationrhi.es betreen Hacger. and
Sc hr other. Cn the contrary, it is tiio Univorsity Frofestor Ha agon v.ho
is v/riting to tho University Professor Schroibar in Berlin, in this iot-
ter. ?y accident, ono is Genorftlarzt, and the other, by accident, is
Cborntabs .rzt, of the Luit iffc. It is purely fortuity - and plays no
rolo in this letter.

Q Just to make it cloar... :.*ho was this Professor Schrolbor?

A Ho was a rote arch worker for tho Reich Rosoarch Council on
tho question of opideaics.

Q Morr, 'hat was hie rolationnhi in such fork on opidcnics -'nd
his rssoarch work, that is tore wider consideration.

A V.Tiat his relationship >rs I should not liko to s-y any¬
thing urwLr oath about this. !!o was a do;uty of tho Reich Rcsorrch
Council, =3 I said, but since Rangen rcc- vsd cocr.issicns regarding ty¬
phus and lie pat it is from tho Roich Research Council, one must assure
that ho received thon fron Schrcibor.

3 You neon that Professor Sclircibcr, in the Reich Re so .arch
Council, vns forking on this hepatitis question on a research cost isrion?

A That can be deduced fro- rhat -jutzoit said here, -as Hand-

+

losers witness, but I know nothing about it syself.

7926


21 ::-y i7-A-C7-Ui-l-5iol3i(~rcrji)
Ca-rt 8 o. 1


c >nor that the crosscut or. is a-tting in all thcro documents
in order to prove the cxistor.ee of certain oxncriccnts or. honor,
beInge. i: ~ : i I t re ref-r to another drccaont in dich tho nano
“ohuen a, x>oro. r. Dohnon is .cut oacd hero. In thu first >aragr-ph
of d ocuccnt thorc 1:. d of on invitation that * r.

J chnen discussed this natter with you ... or ratter, :.ith Uoagon.
-id *u knew anything of this planned xork, involving i>oluxn rr.d
Haoror.?

A. ..‘o, I bne-no thing -bout that.

. urtheraoro, ir. this docuacnt, • it nose, in the next para.i ,

it is aid that Hngor. is approaching "c’.ToiKr for his assistance
ir. prewiring nice. This isth- oocond ragraoh — let no quote it—

• • • -. Haagon-ritoss

"/.t tho anno tlno I should like to a poreceh tho subject of your
r -° for dec. --y mp.lics, -and particularly t^o . , aro

tolutoly n t to rejuvenated and ref i.
fov. told ,'X) in Hohc.nlychon t r.t it is visible for you to accv.ro
nice, ever, in ler-c numbers. ay 7 I: c* to endeavor ao9J.ro
>r o .icv.nl thousand nico of bet o. cr, r of. r.ably only •. nung
a;r\calfl."

itr.C3s, to e as a lay-i=an t s ana •• t ir.-, and Iror.'t imagine
havo to do vlth o onto a*

a o o arrpert in the fiold of lie >atitir bet yen arc a doctor and
perhaps you can just toll -is *:hat Jte connection is?

w -y 6-- that 1 can find in tdslottcr .--t tte least •
intiir.tien that there is any quant-an hero cf exeerLronts cr. humn
beings .

. • : last paragraph, is of particular inj-ortenoe for

■ov. ... Kaagon - rites in t ds paragraph:

urdly, I to- old like torsi: rhether tlco 'opatitis research *.rill

■o carried or. ir. future out of f'.nh -f tho hcich -.cscarch Council,

7S27


21 hay U7-A-SS-li:-2-?lolsi (Er<s.*n)
Court -'o. 1


hy fhnds aor this branch arc r.c: orrhav.st d and I an freed '.rifch tho
quostirn rbethor to a pply for further f xds to ny ••odical Chief
of the Luffr affc, or to you; I "ovld be yrateful to you to to inferred
about this s- ortly."

does this 3hotr any connection ctxor. the Inspector of tho
Luft.uffo crx; the Koforat shich hardies ro3 archn 5 si 3 n.yji.ts on the
cno hand, and hopatitis o,acrinonte> of d-ogen, on ti»c other land?

A. Inn rcoront rrith tho ^ocunoat ”0 137, Lxidbit 10? ... it can
bo neon fron thislottorlnut tho rone-arch for hepatitis van assigned
by tho 'xich Res. arch Council, ax’, also "inanccd by then. At least,
until 12 Juno 1?1|U the .cdic-1 -auector of tl:o Lift affo had not', line
at all to do ?dth H.aa^n'c hopatitis research.

Haagon lr.t r turn toIho Chief of thr odical Inspectorate
of the Luftwaffe for a research 03signaent in hepatitic .. ul’ich is,
after all, a possibility?

I .jr of no tt*c n 'da .part.

0. It this docuneat, :itn ■, sro is of coll.boraticn

conctmiRe'thj . 1 - ohner, •.. . ,

ot :ex* research ”.cn. All tl-cco piyr.icians, .0 - o Yur; frm cl].or
to, ro fxJboro of vo Corps of tho .'ufti .ab’c, TJwoo

aro roc arch natters .... and 00 I ,ay ash y-vi hctlr you bncr.:
anyU.ine of this collaboriin.


.. '.itneos — just tcclariiV tlds’.i.jlo business - ono iuteri’-,
question .. Tbeso special fields that a.c hero under discussion
•hepatitis, r p llcrr Fever, Typhus — and so forth .. In otb-r trords
•all those fie xds ... v.'oro you, in the 1 o fiolds, a socialist?


o.


1. Zou kn-.Tr of no such collaboration .. Voll, nouon tho question

of hepatitis. Did you knor* anything about hepatitis voric in Breslau,

'.duch played a considerable role here?

7528


21 ifcy Li7“.-^S‘.i-*Ui-3-Biolsi (3roun)
Court :io. 1


A. I heard of this hepatitis ccnf; re nee in Breslau for tho first
tii-o ’..ere, ard I _ay recall that even Professor Peso 03 consultant
hyjioni3t of tho nodical chief of tho Luftraffc heard of this
conference only after it was all ov.r,

DR. Tli'P: Your Honors, let vc bring to your attention in this corni¬
ce tion that regarding this collaborati r. with regard to Has sen,

Duochmr nnd ICalk, wlrnt was said in the case before by Dr. behroedor,
to 'fit, ar. affidavit cf 9 Jan'uoxy 1917 : 'm.; Ducchncr, -.Jiich wnsput in
ovidcnco and is in S.hrocder's Docuiont ' ooJ: os: page 58, Jehroedor
Docuaont Mo. 18. It was given d>hibit ItaSxar Schrocder 17•

BuociMur, in this affidavit, oxplcAno Just \ct the n tnre of t\v&
collaboration was to tc.

DY DR. TIPP:

1. Anothcrhopatitic question, ritno: , b -sod on Documnt 1 .'0-126,
Exhibit 185, Document Book VIC, pa^o l»j. -‘.is is o letterfroa
Choretabarzt Hsagor., f 27 Juno 19M, to — aid I qu'<to : "Olx.r-
otorst Prof. Dr. Kalk, with tho Chief of tU LufV affo licdical
Services." This lett r, then, according tc - hat I <ust quoted, wont
to a neebor of your office, at least no can assure that. Did you kne r.i
an^-tidng abcut tills correspondence?

A. Hp; :;d I r-oy :ay th't tills letter is addressed to Professor -Calk
personally, and that the address, y etc: *.7ith tho Chief of tho LuftwafTo
-cdical services Goal or." — unquote, is sinply to inf cm the postal
authorities rrhoro the letter was to u lent. At the end of Juno 19Ui

lots of inhabitants of 3crlin h d been boebod out, including iialk;

•

and to bo sure that this letter reached’-; He it *. as addressed by
Haagen's office with tho hopo that it would be frr.-ardcd. It ins,
hoicrer, personal, as can bo seen f ron the leading — "Door Herr "nlk."
Q. In tho scc:nd part of tho sraac letter Haagen says that cjr ; cr-

inonta on huran beings were to be carried out. «.id he says... I nay

•

cuoto tie last sontcncc: "Could you in yo r official posit in take

7929


ZL ifcgr !:7-A-S^-H»4i-9iolst(BroK)
Court !*o. 1


tho necessary steps tc obtain the reqairvi oxp-rincntal subjooto?

1 don't £nc*r bat sort of subjects Sutaoit has at his disposal —
rbotlxr they arc soldiers or other xcplo." fiat is a question

r bother ---3k, in hisofficial capacity, through, ohc Chief cf the Iaft-

raffo odical s .rvico could take steps to set experimental subjects
for int-nded cxjxrinouts on hums.' clr.gs. u id you ever Jena? that
such onporincr.ts wro planned, «r '’id you kns" that your office
- ( ~3 tddne any steps in t.is direction?

I have no direct personal : norlcd-c of that. I have no idea
vfcothor • ’.Ik did any thing about this request. I earner r briefly to
various t^stiaeny on tho v.rt cf -..'lines see hero ... first, rri
•rof. Outsoit said her.; but, abovo, -31, v t tho prococ- tion
iritnoca, ? mule in I/lith Scheldt said !wro on the ?th of January 19h7,
pace 3101 of tho Gcr. r_csrd, or. yago 1373 of the English record.

And this prosocution rdtnoss P-dith .tchnidt said, ctly clearly,
that no Huron boing xeerinents trero c- :iod out re gard‘jig tlic
oxr-oriaonte -f hepatitis.

let no point out, in addition, thrt rofcosor :ol)c has also

-• • :• this. It 3 s dclroodor

Dfoibit 15. furtb.r cpicsti t.Tho pr aocutioa on tho 10th

sf • c’zc.-b.r 19U6 undo ifctk-.it >r. Haagonras active at

t:» institute in Strasobcurg and that ‘ .“^n liad received ..is
rdors froa th wfcrnfc >-c. nong. ‘ H .t c

this Institute, and regarding ’be fact that you a -c olio god
to lnvc given hin orders in '.sopatitis research?


7ScO


21 K*y 47-l~¥3G_T5-3~£«ylord (Int., Brown)

CoUTi I

A First of all, I knew of no Institute for Medical 3csearch in
Straaobourg. ?rcs Fraulein Bdith Schmidt or Olga Rycr, I did hear in
this court that there was in effect sene such institute and that it was
pert of the medical department of the University cf Strasbourg. How¬
ever, sirce I was not dean cf the Medical Department of the University
of S-raoobourg, I was not in a position to iesue ary order to thic in¬
stitute. Secondly, Keagon was director of the Hygiene Institute of
Strassbourg and wen not a member of this Medical Research Institute.

Then, moreover, I couldn't and didn't give Hoagen any orders.

«< In this connection, Your Honors, let re drew your attention to
an affidavit by Zuckschwcrdt cf 21 January 19*7, which is in Schroeder
Document Book 19, Page 61, Schroeder Exhibit So. 18. ?cr the convenience
of the Court, I have included this document in the Bcckcr.Prcyocng Docu¬
ment Book. I don't want to put it into evidence again nor give it on
inhibit number, but it is in the document bo k on page 142, in Document
Book Ho. 2. Let me point out that Dr. Zuckachvcrdt, In hie affidavit,
declared:

"The Institute for Medical Research in Strasbourg, no an into/ral
part of the Univoraity, come under the Dear, of the Medical Faculty. The
head cf the Luftwaffe Medical Service had nothing to do with It."

Ir. ccn-cction with the hepatitis research, Mr. President, I have
also to put in evidence Beckcr-Freyscng Document Ho. 33 on page 143 cf
the Document Book -«o. 2. This is something to supplement Dr. Kalk'o
affidavit. It ic the report on the Journey made by Professor Kalk cn
10 March 1545 in his capacity ns consulting interne, which wns submitted
to the Chief of the Luftwaffe Medical Service and which tells what was
dene by the Luftwaffe in the field of hepatitis. This will be Exhibit
19. I dc n^t wish to eucte anything fr*a the document, but should like
to dr3v it tc the attention of the Tribunal. This ccncludca ry treat¬
ment of the hepatitis cues*ion.

Summing up, witres*. I may say that this entire subject w BG un-
ta-v- to you at the time, and you hare pointed out that the prosecu¬
tion witness, Idlth Schmidt, ha3 stated that there were no human being

7931


o (J


•. M.y A7->_ 5 ^-l=-2-X-&ylcrd flat., Brown)

curt I

experiments in hepatitis research. H*vc I cussad ycu up correctly?

A Yes.

^ I turn new to anether subject, the subject of typhus. You arc
charge, witness, with special responsibility for and participation in
typhus experiments free Leccnber '41 to February >45, in Buchenvald
and in Satxveilcr concentration c»npc. You have heard the prosecution's
case in this setter, witness, and consequently you knew that the ex¬
periments were carried out in Buchenvald by It. Ling-3chulor, anl ac¬
cording to the prosecution, by your co-dofer.dent It. Kevin. She ex¬
periments in Kattweiler, on the ether hand, are connected with the nose
of Professor Dr. Haugen and his associates. She prosecution kept those
two subjects opart. I shall follow their example nr.d ask you what co¬
nnections exist between you and your referat in the Hcdicol Inopecto-
ratc and the experiments in Buchenvald.

A Hone.

^ Eid you knew anything about these experiments?

A Nothing about the experiments, nor about Buchcnvold, ncr about
Ding-Schuler or Boren.

<4 You havi heard how Fr-ftsser Rose, who wnn aloe charged with
this natter, spile cf the Buchenvald eucation and his participation In
it. Therefore, I need only ask you regarding thio ratter; during your
activity in the Medical Inspectorate, did you knew anything of this

aspect of Er. Roso : c activities?

A No. Lot =c remind ycu that Prcfccscr F.mc stated here on the
stand that everything that he had done or written in this connection
v P0 dene in his capacity as- a member of the Hubert Koch Institute.

^ I new turn to the experiments which Haugen is alleged, by the
prosecution, to hav, carried rut in Ket*wcilor. Kaagen v 0 s an Ctcr-
atebaarst of the Luftwaffe, and from the end cf '43 on he was consult¬
ing hygienist in the air fleet "Middle." What did ycu knew about

Hearer, and his work during the war?

A Cf his work, I knew nothing, 'hen I took over the referat in

Ma- 13^. I found out that Professor Kaagen had « research assignment

7932


21 (let., Brovc)

Ctfsrt I


an tV.« production -f typhus vaccine. Theretofore, I had nothing to do
with these research assignments, end Professor Hose was kind enough to
corroborate thlo for me in the prosecution document HC-306,-Bxhibtt Hr.
206. Pace 47 of the EnglislrDocoaent 3?ok.

<< Witness, you here already said that all research assignments
had the file note 55, and that for the sake of keeping things straight¬
ened out in the files, they vero all worked on hy tho referat for
Aviation Medicine; hut actually only research assignments thnt really
concerned aviation were worked on by your referat, the ether ones wore
turned over to the referents who were concerned in the fields which
were involved in the snccific research Assignments, is that correct?

A Yes, it is.

^ How, in point o' fact, which Boforat competent to handle re-
renreh psrlgnacnts involving typhus research? Whc vn- the competent
fellow?

A That was the reftront for vacclnos, nancly, tho referent for
hygiene.

<t Then you did have a separate referat for hvglcno in the Medi¬
cal Inspectorate?

A Yes.

Nov, witness, since this file netc number plays such a large
r«lc in this trial, what wee the file number for the referat for
hygiene?

A 40, with a few numbers after it.

k That lo the same file number that you talked about in the caac
of the freezing research?

A Yes.

T-'u oaid previously that os assistant referent, ycu had noth¬
ing at all to do with working on research assignments end that you
came In touch with the formal aspect of reseaxoh aealgnacnts only when
ycu t*ok ever the referat as referent, namely In May 1944. So from
that time -n, ycu did verk on the formal aspect or research Alignment
didn 1 1 you?


7953


21 ^^T-A-J > jC_i 5 ^j:- & y lerd (Int., Brown)

I

A Tea ,

<i Sev, which referat took care of the factual part cr aspect
of the research artigreents?

A 1 dcntt relieve a ran ia to he blancd if ho le working in
aviation medicine ->nd dcoon't happen to know very much about hygiene,
* n '* if he th»r«f)r' sends tho research aBsirnconts that concern those
=attcr« over to s*-o referat for hygiene.

•i ^ow '.i .<ay '£&, whon you took over the referat, you first
- ot .r. touch tf.t’a Haagen in these research aattors, what documents or
data did you fnd when you first can* in touch with these problems?

A 1 «a me that the vay we did our business in tho office is
the sane way everyone olse did his; ot any rote, in tho referat I
oImply foun-’i .» few documents in the files including o lict of research
nsslgnacnV*. All the other files and docuacr.ts were in the central

filing c:; -o end wero taken from the central filing office only -hen
needed.

k The docuaents that refer to Hoogen concerning typhus, did you
ever see then, having taken then frea the control filing office?

A Once, I certainly saw then; neatly, when In tho autuen of
1944 I oent all these decuatnts to the Instruction research group ot
Juctcrbbg, and it's possible that I oav thea sene other tine too. But
since tMs i 0 * fiold in which I really hpd nothing tc do, I can't rc-
acabor that.

^ But perhaps you do knew, witness, Just what these docuacnta
consisted of that you had given to you by the central filing office?

A Without being able to go into details, these were probntly
several applications froa Eaagen to have hicsclf given a research assign¬
or.*.; perhaps o copy of the research asclgnaent itself and probably one
-r = re icteric reports free H aa gcn on the course of the cxpcrlaontation.

" 8t 15 at ** r * tc vkflt fculd ncraally be found aaong tho files record¬
ing a research assignacr.t.


7934


aKoy-i-UJ-lS-l-i-aloy (Brcwr)

Court 1

O. so you don't actually re-ua=ber those docuuentn for cer¬
tain, do you uitnoac?

A- Mo.

Do you ro-oabor free: the so docusor.ts it could ba soor.
how Haa&ea was ’.to rkins, to ba conciete ood 3.-o=i : ic, was there any¬
thin/ In these docicx>r.tc :o the offect that haa or., as the Prosecu¬
tor assorted, van cam in out any 3ort or riorh lr. Patrwoilox?

A, I avo .:o rocolloovioa of that b-'. I consider It out of
the question, a=d I u .v aortoi in ay racolloctl&s h ro by ono or
f.;o affidavits \:hich a: o to be pot i: evidonco It tori

o. Ma-, row oorc'inil rolotious ’ ith Profecs.cr Matron were
vhat, did you kna.: hi.?

A- Yon.

Can you toll v v her. 'ou calo his ac -^iutaneaft
A. It ba-ronn that I can do so vary -roc. 11 ly, about tho
third or 4th of July 1-V- in an as 'roes train eti.oou Moi'lolborg
and ?roibur . I -'as In tho couFany of jy Chiuf, Profoauor Schroodor,
orwl war oinc to e co*.faranco at the Cordon Acaoiy for Aviation re¬
search which woo co t. o laco in Duocbaor's Inotituto, onl Hoa.on
•von or. tho awa train and proforsor schroedor Introduced .no to hln.

Did you .-iOt Au a vain v»rsa.ally aftar that, and if so

vihon and jndor vhat ci :wteta.-.coS7

A- I sa< Ha. on for tho socor.d tiuu> in tho 1 st days of
July 1541. I ovo.1 a'; t i* virnj vor.turoi into t .» lion's ion lt-
selt, and saw hit ir. hit Irsti tito at Strosbcur . 1 had othar
business in Struct* r . I 111 state briefly 1*X that vas.. Short¬
ly thore-to-foro I : o- talon over the radical cub-do par tnont of tho
rued leal inctituto of tho Air -CiaistxT "hich Dr. Sunzlnfiar had rro-
viously royroranted. a rose arch coxlssions had boon fivon by this

offleo to cantla-an in the Strasbourg university, indudinc the a=-
si: ruar.t to tho Pharmaceutical Institute of Strar ouri. Professor

Schlermor. This -oioarofc ass 1& meat concerned ;he artlficsl produc-

7 9 % 5


21 ^ey-A-?3-16-2-?:Qloy( 3rcwn)

Court 1

tion of coffein. Sir.ca the office of the IIviical Inspector had a
conference planned for tho ond of August 1944 on pervitin, bonzo-
dria o-Tl coffein, I wonted to tall: with Professor SchlaEser in order
to soo just what this work ho ’-as Join£ was, and •-bother it would ba a
good idoa for hin to participato in tho conforenco, and to road a paper
on his v.’or*:, anl actually ho did coco to the conforonco.

Yat said, witness, that you didn't go to Strasbourg to soo
Haaaon, but that you did visit hie in hi3 instituto; on this occasion
did you discuss Hoa .orf • roooaroh assignments with hi.*

A. 7fhoul subcittod ay roruoat for a day trip to :y dopart-
noatol chief, 1 also ashed nfcothur I right visit Kaar.oa to discuss
a fov quoations vit: hin, to-rit, tho quostier. of tho oxperinental
onir-aln. Then 1 vi.-lt<* "acvoa in his inatituto. Ho showed no through
port of his inatituto a l ho afrouod m tho cni.-al brooding. stations,
which tho witnose A - istizlflk has alroody doscr.' ed horo. I diocucsod
at groat longth with !dru what anoint and what torts of oxpori.eontal
oninols ho noodod. I was lrzaediatoly concorro* 1 th tho quo®tion of
oxporL-nontol animals officially, bocauro fox our oivornous rosoarch in-
ntitutos, I had to concern nysolf with their cs«ut woods for oxpori-
aontal animals ond censoquantly hod cloco conuoctions with tho poraoas
in Chareo of brooding o»! doallnc -.dth thoso or~.oricor.tal oxdmalo.

T7itnoca, Jo you rorjob'r what sort of oxporimontel animals
Hangon oakod ;ou for at that time, rico, r^inoa pies, wb-at two tho>?

A. Above all it was mico and rabbits.

}. Haogon thou oskod you to procure roro exporiaontol animals
for 1dm; could you ;aat hi3 roquost for him or what did you do about It?

A. A fo ' days thoroofter I spoke with a coapetont nan of tho
Luftwaffe in this matter asl I adkod this Dr. Suchalla to himself get
in touch lith Eo-v eu bacauso Haagon had very specific questions about
tho quality and nature of theso oxporiaoutal anLiols.

D3.n?P: Hr. Prosicont, in this cohtaxI pro.'oso to put in

a documont freu Becker Froysong Document Book 4. I do not knot

7936


21 Kpy-A-ir-16-3-«iLcy{Br«.n)
Court 1


"hotter that voluso has yot cor_ i-to thi harals of tha Tribunal.

In any ovjr.t tho 3 6 vr at ary Gerard has tho 3r;,lich tr-n3lation of
those documents a bI I should bo « lad if ho *uoulC &ivo colics to
tho court, tfco Pros jcutioa aal lutarprotor.

IK. HARDY: I '<111 corcoivo. Your Honor, I looked on ay dock
at noon and it *.men' ' tharo, and I do not havj tho docuront book.

1TI3 SRSST'ZrT: Bag counsol for tho Prosecution this docunout
nor/ £ 0 lnt offcrod?

DR. TI?P: Porhar-o tho aocrotary Go rural uould to oo kind os
to Llvo a copy rim -o tho intorprotors.

TbonKr. Prosidont, free thia Docunant Book 4, if I nay put
in Document 61, froc ?tv.o 319 of tho doounor.t book. This will bo
oxhlbit 20. Tnlo la in—

XH2 r'SSror’”: Koa connool for tho Prosocution road thin do-
cuaont?

IK. HARDY: .’To, Your Honor. Eo nay put it In at this tino
and I will folia. it by any objoctions.

DR. TIIY: Thank yew. This la an affidavit by Dr. Harry
Suchalla, that Dr. Dockor just ujntionol. It -as drtf.Jn up l:Volbort
Rholnland, and ir. correctly cortifiod, ira"r. u ; on tho 10 of April
1947.

3!2 FRS5I3.S*’: 7111 you givo -o ouco .soro t'.o nunbor of this
oxhlbit- I liar.’ ; * qYj tho docmvint *~hon you (.‘'Vo it.

DR. TCT: Bxhibit 20, Your Honor.

In nur-.bors 1 a ’ 2 tho affidavit doscriboc first of all Dr.
Suchalla’s clerical a 1 ;-rofosrional activitios. In:;o.2 ho nay's
that ho \:as comisslouod ; ith tho scientific control of tho yroiuc-
tlon of all Luftffaffo rabbit brooding,

"About 500,000 Angora rabbits rare kopt for tho production
of Ancora wool and the Luftvaffo supplied approximately 200,000
oninolc, os tost rabbits.

I quota free No. 3:


7937


21 llay-A-i T-16-4-;;-loy (Bra.-n)
Court 1


"A* tor I ha- .orkod ■ ith tho -illitaiy rad: of signaller as
scientific expert a: tho Luftiau coscaui 5orlin free January 1542
to July 1S42, I as tranaforroi to tho Luff.raffo uofiicc.1 sarvico qs
a riedicnl ordorly first class in August 1343 and sent to Ifco aviation
nodical institute, Berlin. At the nano ties I was ordered by tho
Suprone Canan:. of tho Luftwaffe, Chiof of radical services, to do-
volop thoLuftwaffo'a brooding facilities for rabbits aai also to
3 up ly lAco, rat-, guinea pigs and do&s for ox.vr.lnental purposes.

In connection with this official task I was in constant touch with
tho consulting Ctabsarzt Profossor Dr. Anthony at tho nodical Inspoc-
torata, section .••.ieti.on -odicine until op or on boat oly Hay 1944; aftor
that ti-e, Dr. BocIcm-F roysor.t bocaxe ny conpotont suporvisin\ au¬
thority in connoctto. it'_ ay official work.

"4. At tho : July 1944 I had a disousnion with Dr. Bockor-

Froysang durin^ ...ioh \o Arm: spoclal attention to the nocoscity

of supplying Ice do:: wjto vantod by Profoauor Haor.on for tho r.onu-
iacturo of a typhus ricclne and ho askod » to c wok to Profossor
Kao on personal 1; in o; '.or to find out Ms s ocial ro<iUiro:»r.te.

Dr. Bockjr-7 jyaon £ If rrovlously s >o! on to Profossor
Hancon of r.h'ch ho a-ticularly Informed re tut novortholosn ho con-
sidorod it osnontlai for Profossor Haa; on and uysolf to bo in diroct
contact ai*v5o ho hiiiroif had no special knorled.o of tho nanufacture
or vaccinos and could tfcarofora not ans-or r.y .-oacific laostions a-
bout tho particular ro^ulrauar.ts in connection ith tho tost aninalc#
Since Profossor Kao .on left Stra ours as early as A’Je-ust 1944 bo-
causa of tho war ovontr. in the west, this po soial contact c-roo about
only in J anuary 1945 at 0 berschrolbarhau .'here Haakon had xoanv/hilo
a^Alr. opor.jd a lat-cra-ory.

y.y various cor.vorrations uith Dr. 3ockor-FroyEeng about this

•uattar convinced a '.hut even after ho had boon personally instructs

ha know oi-ly about Haigon's aniral oxpori onts . n
7936


by Profossor Koa cu.


3ourt 1

•-ay 21-«-17- 1 -HD- A 3 ehan-Rattler.

I nay spy somethin- about the rest of the Jocuaonc,
specific lly -:c. 5, let nc q,ote from It:

*o±nce daring the war It bcc-zc nor and more difficult
Co oot'in experiment*l_anlc. Is, or. rcCker-Freyseng
discussed with me in the summer of 19-.4 new poselblllties
of e. % .lying the lnscutes of the Luftwaffe despite these
diffic idea thr . u a h own reeding st'tlons. I mode rporo-
mrir.te si gesti* ns, which were supported most generously
by all fleacere of the office of the chief of medical servic¬
es. I Chon w«a given two research orders by the c.*lef of
medical .rvlcoa of the Luftw ffe, ^jnerrlobcrstrbo-.rzt
Professor ochroeder, each tv the value of 5C,00C floioho-
c'r’:o. The flret order w. s concerned with fcreedln 5 certain
e -rn.no of mice for the production of typhus vaccine, the
OJG nt order referred to tnc building up of an experimental
.*.nls 1 fare for ill the usual test anlsi- Is such ca mice,
rate, ,ulaee el a, r belts, c-nto n 00 e.°

I believe c.-.-t 1 neod r.ot rood the rest of the dooumont.
IC is correctly signed end certified.

"1 tncse, m connection witn the tycnua research, It is

necoso?.r to discuss p few Prosecution doc.nents with you

fr <a ::uich the Prosecutlon, when present .n Its case drew

the conclusion th t you worked with Haa-.en nnd thut

c nsaqu^ntly y knew of rlag^en's activities in Nntzwoller.

rt3 ore first document of tr.ls sort, I s .o Id like to put

cc •' fv ax document book 8, correction, document book 12 ,

- gc £8, document No. 121, Ixhlblt 3C8. This Is a letter

fr m t.13 --lgh Com asm of the *-uftv~ffe, Chief of the xedlcrl

service, file ::o, 58, secret code (II-2-a), dated 29 August

1:44 fr 1 lessen. It corries Che designation of your

Referat, namely II-2-a and ic is of the time when you

■ J rself - ere the Referent. The Prosecution 'oases oh this

7&c9


Court 1

-ley Sl-A-lT-a-HD-Keehoii-Raoler.

letter the ch'r&e that you were Intlartely acquainted with
Heaven's work. Kow -lease take up this document point by
point; did It originate with you, or did you work with It
or on It?

a. I knew Paragraph I of this document. This pam-
_ra a I la r t.olcol explan tlon of the work w lch was
car.-lec. on In the f.eferat aviation Audicine, w.nlch bore no
retail rvl^tlon medicine character. In other words, a
roso .ret iesl-nacnt vhlca had a non-:, vl* tlon ted Ion 1 charac¬
ter, and It was for this kind of work hat ay refera.t
c'rrled out the -uroly organizational tasks. Under Para-
Cra h III you find tho nef«rat bud e et. In that ccso, Eac»cn
;rob blj requo'-.tod finanolel old for nls research work and I
«JU6t .oave diseased t..ls request with the Sud.ot Hoferr.nt
who w 6 c mpetont for that kind of work. This 3udiet
nefer nt , of oourao, fcrd no financial mls^lvln^s and con¬
sequently this directive was Issued, according to which
24,0C0 Halohsmarks was plaoed at tho dioposol of this work.
as to the other p rts of this letter, I had r.o Idea and I
thou., it .-.ere for a considerable period of tiiae what It
o Id :c*»n.

In order to summarize the contorts of the other

; r hs briefly, you will find that under Ko. II It
states: r.o decision can yet be made l-jT tna eatablishmont
of - ;reduction 1 nt for v cclnes, since tho chief of the
at rj .'-idler 1 cor vice has not yot made the flr.pl decision.
Pnrgra.h III is * question whether the typhue epidemic at
r.at swell or Is c /nnected with tho vaccine research.

I- r.* \vp. a IV joints ut th-,t c report of 21 June 19-14, In
v - c.i tho investigations at Netzveiler .re mentioned snuuld
~vt been sent a6 secret matter.

-aese r.o a-.ubt were technical queetlons concerning the

7940


Court 1

-a;* Si-A-17-5-HD-Meehan-Ramler.

field of typhus, whlca you did not fcun&le e6 you 6t?.ted
bsfove. On the other send, th-t letter hears the number
of your Referet, therefore originates from It; could you
please ex-leln, witness, how it Is thee these three joints
are mentioned in th t very letter?

*». I happen to he in a position to clcrify that. first
let ae point out th t the installation for n vaccine produc¬
tion l.-'oe «*nd the re ort rb- ut an alleged tyhus epidemic
re hot;: extremely iaocrtnnt Dolnts, which of course cannot
bo h'i;dle\ by everybody, bit must be ucndled by the co.:i-
petont official referant. In particular, the field of the
ve-.ort of opldonics plays o considerable o-rt in ovury
oentr-1 agonoy. In addition, let ce olnt out that Professor
Rose In this vltnose stand hco explained on 23 April 1? -7
on a e 3585 of t.:o German transcript, that upon his Instiga¬
tion t :1 c questl n, as r.-ntloncd in par- ; raph III, had boen
put to Hrogen, r, n. since rrofeesor Ro>e v:*s the consulting
hy cniet .is eu 3 .uatlons n.-furslly went to the Heforat
Hy one and not to the Referat AVletlon Medicine. This letter
\m sent on 29 August 194.. It was cuetompry in our ofi"loo,
as everywhere else, that the dote wes Inserted at tho tlroo
the el,nature was written.

In this connection, I aey point out, hr. Prominent,
Chat In the 'hotostatlc copy, which la before me, the Or to
io not written b- typewriter but w-s Inserted by Ink or
aoncll. Ilia t means that whoever sl-ned that letter at the
,-affic t 2 x 0 Inserted the d"te.

T.i£ rRZSID-lM: Jli t..e counsel for the Prosecution sea
the si 2 nture of th- 1 -tter?

DP.. ”Irf: I an sfrrld th t I did not understand your
question.

HR. «RDX: I have the original hare,-Your Honor.

7941


Court 1

May 2l-A-l?-4-KD-Meehan-Ramler.


3Y DR. TIPr:

v. The signature reads Kar.nt. "lthout having to ask
She witness, I cay be able to say X»hnt w s the chl3f of
steff at that time.

a. '.Jell, this letter was presented on 29 August 19-14
to the chief of staff for his signature and according to
our office procoeduro and been dictated perhaps one or two
days earlier by the Referent. I hr::en to know that during
these days, the 27th t as 28th and 29th of august, 1344, I
was certcinly not in the ofiice, but was eonewhoro else.

... wr. President, in thst connection, lot me offer from
Doouc.nt 3ook 3ockcr-rrcyseng No. 34. This ern bo found on
Pcr.c 150 of the document book. I shall gi Vu 11 cho exhibit
No. 21. It is an rffidrvit by Dr. H 0 n3 Denrc-r, it was made
in Altunhundora on 18 March 1947. Let mo quote from
Pare ,ra,h I.

"1) Cn 28 and 29 Au.ust 1944 n discussion took laco
in Cr.atlo V.lkeradorf lr. cilesln between t:»e directors of
cho C-orrn Institute for «vlation medicine.

"2) On the following day, 30 August 1944, according to
a. Gocrlltz hotel bill lying before mo, c aedlcal-oclcr.tiflc
•lisc. sslon with a It rger attendance took place in Gocrlltz,
Silesia, about 35 kilometers away. Tne subject for discus¬
sion v'?.s: ‘Methods for Increasing Efficiency 1 .

*13) .-^s a colleague of rrof. otrughold -nd head of the
‘Schloss Welkersdorf branch of tho .-ivlatlon Acdlcine
nosoarea Institute, I wrs in ci.'r^e of the accommodation and
catwfin for tho participants in t.V two above-mentioned dis-
cusoions. Dr. Seeker rrcysen^, who was then aviation Medicine
Consultant with the Chief of the Luftwaffe Medical Services
conducted both discussions.

7S42


Court 1

;-iay Z I-.1-17-5-HD-Keehan-Ramler.

Dr. 3eck3r-rr&ysen& errlved at the latest on 26 or
27 -u,U3t 15=4 lr. 'elkersdorf, end did .ot leave It until one
or two days after the conference In Goerlitz, which took
place on ?G njguat 19-4, that Is to spy on 1 or 2 September
1941."

There follows the sl^n ture of the witness and the
certification by the Notary.

Witness tnls provee that at the time this letter was
Si-nt off, on 29 August 1944, you were not .'resent In your
office. On the other hand, you told ue before that tho
Ron'.n Numeral One (I) originates from you rr.d I am roferrlnt
to Joe mont 131; can you tell uo how this letter camo about
before It was submitted for .'.r. Kchnt'o signature?


*


7945


21 Hiy 17 -l&-i-gkp Cook (gassier)

Court Ko, 1

A. The signature cn any letter wherein a report is cede about
a financial rat tea could net be rade by er.y cepirtacntal chief but
only by the chief ^f 3ta:‘f and in nony cases only by the chief of the
radical service. This scans that during the days of the 20th or so
I oust have submitted a letter to ny depertcer.tr. 1 chief which would
probably teve corresponded to Paragraph 1 of the lottcr which is beforo
us here. The dsparurcntnl chief then kept this letter in order to in
his turn suhait it to the Chief of staff.

9

Q. May I put an additional question to you in that connection,
witnoss? Tils really slaple letter wos preperod for you ready for
signature, wasn't it? You oust tevo attached file notes and file
Index nusbors, otc?

A. Yes, th :t was custaaary In the cnoo c S such letters.

Q. .ell now continue to describe this document?

A. Everything else I only aasuae but I think ny explanation
is wry proto.ole. Dunr* the last few days another letter by tho
Hygiene Referar.t r.ost h‘ ve bocn sufcaittod t© U» dopr.rtosntal chief,
bearing tho contonts of roam II, IH, rd IV. Since all of thooo
four points wore addressed to thu very saao f n, Professor H«u ;-on
in Strassbour^, *txJ sinco in tho fir. 1 analysis ’ll thcoo four points
concorr.ud tho sc.® thing, nasoly typhus productim, cither the do-
portnental chief or the chi«f of staff aaalgwted thesottio sopareto
lotters aaJ produced letter which is before us ntm.

Q. The n:xt lettor, witness, is Ha son's reply. This is docuaent
of the Prosocution Ko. 132, Exhibit 310. This is in document volar*)

12 on page 99 of tho English text. It is ontitled: "Chief of Stiff
Surgeon, Oborstcfcsarzt Professor Dr. E. Haagen, dated Strassburg,

19 September, 19U. n It bears the designation "secret" and is directed
to tho High Command if the Luftwaffe, Chief of the Nodical Service.

Do you know that letter?

A. I do not rc-aesber it. It is possible that I saw it. If I
did I deduced no -are than that there was ft typhus epidoaic in

villa“c _c - llod :>.tzwoil*r about which I didn't know anything and that

?K4


21 toy 17 -A-lB-2-p3q>- Cook (Ra r g- l cr)

Court Uo. 1

this epidemic was introduced frea the outside. In other -lords, thin
was a natter which did sot concern st officially nor scientifically.

I rad nothing to so with any such reports nd if this letter actually
did ccxje to ay roferat I would hove had to add that this famous remark
did not concern end w »ul* have *nt it to the Hygiene referent,
but I think this is highly probable, that because all letters after
all had to go over the departmental chief oof ore they were distributed
among, tho reforents. Tho departmental chief, of ccursc, know exactl;-
what his sever, or eight rvfcr-nts were doinc cad cert' inly wouldn't
have sent ,» such a letter as the referent for eviction medicine.

Ho certainly wouldn't hrvo s-r.t no any rer-ert about o tynhus epidemic
of which h. kr.e*.i I had nothing at nil to do.

Q. In order to suaoeriso, witness, you rru nssertinc yau had
nothing to do with typhus vaccines and typhus production?

a. At ny r .to not before this tri'l started.

(.. Th> Prosecution has submitted ^ -'ocu^nt in this connection
from which the represent-:tivo of tho prosecution has drawn a contrary
conclusion. This is in docuaent book 12 >r. pngo 86 of the Salieh
docuxnt bock. It is .:ocu-*nt ho. 302, -n bears also Exhibit Mo. 302.
As it becoa.s rpparent from the signature it is r. letter written by
the 0bcrstabs.ar7t, D . dugor. ifeagon, dated tho 27 Aoril 19U, "r>. is
directed to the kinistor of Aviation and Caxruvler-in-Chicf of the
Luftwaffe, L In. 14, SaalcM. Counsel for Prosecution when submitting
this document or. tho 9 January 1947,. ok p -e 13A9 of th. finish re con
has stated the following - r*I I nr.y quote:

••The r/.xt .tocusunt 3C2, Ho. 302, which is being offer-d as
Frosocution . hitit 302, is r. report by h-.gen to tho Coanrrdar in
Chief of the Luftwaffe, er.Ud 27 <oril 19/4. It refers to ~ «Htcr of
the 8 Janu-ry 1914. Hero the Tribun-1 »» -nd will note cor'd H .

L In 1 L, 2-B, which t that tint designated the* office of the
defend-nt booker Froysong." Accordingly, thu prosecution thinks that
this estnbliahes the ccnwscticn between you art tho Haaron typhus

experiments. can you s-.y * bout that? Is this conclusion on the

7945


21 Lay 17 -A-l&-3-pko- Cook ( Br - n a l or)
court ::o. i

part of tb, Pros- cution correct?

A. Tils' ccesiusicn for aany reasons ic erroneous, firstly,
a: the 27 April 1944, Professor Anthony was still the referent. If
there was r.y connocticn -t oil it would have beer. Anthony's ofiico,
but it wasn't oven Anthony's or/ice, because ir. reality the file
reference number ia canpletoly different fren ours. During .ay
ir.terroqatior.3 r.<I lss in ay affidavit I cxpl-in:<J exactly wiv.t the
registration nasber was that belonged to the refer at for aviation
ucdicine.

0. Ir. orUor to sicplify natters for tho Tribun 1 I cry joint
out th't tho code Letters c-n bo fount in thv affidavit which was rc’.o
by tho defendant on tho 24 October 1946. This can bo found in docuaont
book 1, part I, correction, document book HI, >'rt 1, regardin'
freezing on xgo 7 of tho Geraan and .la, lith text and boars the na-nbor
44fi, Exhibit Ko. 01. Sew witness, would you pl-aec continue.

Q. I Ladly drit that tr.jro is r. certain difficulty ruyarding
those rambors oinuo the rvlstr tion nuabers hr.Vu beer, subjoct to .a
doublo change. liny I ivpo.t briefly: tho referot for -vi-tion noc'icino
bo fore ny sr.try ir. the .utusn of 1941 until pproxiatcly tho raiddlo
of 1943 bore tho rogistr tion r*t-b..r 2, II .-B. ever sir.ct the cdddlo
of L9/.3 until aporoxLa tcly «,>ril 1914 the ontixv 'f-ncy only had .a
rogistr-tion nunhor consisting of two fi.uros rd tho reft rat for
aviation oodicino mte a-si yvatod ;, which was 11 .


7943


21 C'-ir-l-Fe Idt (Int. Ranlcr)

Court ’’o. I, Case So. 1.

Then cane the last designation, lasting Iron May, l?hU, to 2 t.y,
191*5, which again was composed of three figures. And then the Referat
for Aviation bdicino rss 2 I2A. The correspondirg R^ferat for Hygiene
during thoso seme periods was designated 2 - 1 - 3 , then 2 - 3 , and at the
erd again tfco designation of three figures 2-1-3. Those two registra¬
tion numbers which are found in Docunont \io. 302, Prosocution Exhibit
Ho. 302 crco under "Reference* and the second tine under "Suojoct" aro
in the first case 23, which was tto Ref ere t designation for tho Ruforr.t
Hygieno, as of 3 January 19UU. Tho second is tho registration number
2-1-3, which is the registration number as of 25 Juno 19h3. Both of
those designations belong to tto Referat Hygieno, and thin if. cor.fi.nnod
by fcvo further points in thet lottor. AS first you have tho ontiro
contonts of tho lottor. All this in concerned * ith tho production of
vaccines from chickon eggs. I novor understood anything about that
nnttor and any such nroccd'-xc was novor vrorkod upon within the Roforat
for Aviation Medicine.

Tho socorvd point, which soons to correspond with tho Roforat
designation for Hygiene is tho filo nuber. This file reforonco is raont-
ionod twice, orcc under "Reforonco" and tho second timo under "Subject".
We aro concerned with tho number U9rl2F. This,-as I know now, but I
corridor something which I didn't know before, is the filo reforonco
for typhus. In order not to 'How any more misunderstandings I nay
point out that this file number Ij9rl27 belongs together. 7f it is
separated skilfully and tho two list lot'-ers or figures aro soperated
from tho rest of that reference, you will suddenly find tho result of
2F, which in tho meantime -ras tic Roforat for Aviation ISedicino. I
would like to correct this nisundcrsbwjding at this point, or I should

4

s~.y, tic possibility for any such misunderstanding.

Q In ether words, what 70 U arc saying, witness, is that the Ro-
ferat designation, the file reference 1*9 had nothing to do with tho
Ref*.rat for Aviation Ifcdicine, just as little as tho Referat designation

I IB and 13. Those were matters fer tho Referat Hygiene.

7947


21 Itr-A-lf-iP-Z-Feldt (Int. He a ler )
Court No. I, Cass No. 1.


A Correct. In addition, I nay point out that there is not the
slightest hint contained in that document that any oxTcrinent on o human
being was contemplated. However, that isn't important in this connect
tion.

q Tho file references which I Just mentioned can be found in a
mmber of other documents, end it c^ be assured that the Prosecution,
on tho besj8 of these file references, intends to incriminate tho de¬
fendant Eockor-Troysing with those documents. The first of those docu¬
ments, ngclr., con be found in Docvaont Book No. 12 on Pago llh of tho
English Docuraont 3ook. It is the document NO. 310, Prosocution Ex¬
hibit 31^. • The second doeuxaont, boaring tho booo filj roferonoe, is
clso in Docuaont Book No. 12, md it is docuaont NO 130, Exhibit 319,

Pago 120 of tho Gorman and English docunmt book. Tho first letter I
nmntionod is by Oboretabsarzt Dr. Kaagon, consulting hygienist to Air-
floot Roich, and is adiressod to tho Air Floot Physician Roich at Borlin-
Dohlm. hr. Hacgon writes that be is enclosing tho copy of n latter to
tho Roich Miniotor of Aviation and snprema cosraandor of tho Luftwaffe
whore in ho suggests tho establistoont of tho typhus vaccino induction
cont^r at tlo Hygiono Institute or Roich Univorsity at Strasbourg.

You hove already clarified, tdtnesr, that tho file roforonoo
U 9 -r and tho Roforat reforenco 2-D rhich is contained in this luttor
has nothing whatsoever to do dth thj Rof jr.nt for Aviation Wodicino.

In spito of all that, witness, let Da ask you whether you at any tixoo
ear this letter, and cen you parhaps toll do how any connection rith an
oxperirent on human beings can be established as a result of that lottor?

A This letter is a typical rat tor for the Hygiene Rcf:rat, and
obviously deals with the establishment of a vaccino production cantor.
Tho mebor of rooms for guinea pigs, sterilization roons, ‘packing rooms,
are discussed and I cm seo no indication for my planned, executed, or
intended oxp-rirer.ts on human beings or experiments.

JUDGE SSSSXNQ: Dr. Tip?, has your defendant stated for the re¬
cord how many Raforats there nere in his departoont md tho names of

7S46


21 Lny-A-: 2-I9-3-?lot (Ir.t. RasOur)
Court Ho. I, Case lie. 1.


ttem or designations? I don't recall.

DR. 71??: I beg your pardon. Your Honor. The question doern't
seem to be quite clear. *hat I heard rras that the defendant wa3 to cay
how rany Referats there were in his de pert rent. In this way the ques¬
tion is not intelligible.

JCDGZ S2 XBKi Did he not cay this norning or yesterday, in
making the distinction between Referent, Referat, and Abteilung that
there was a — that the Referat was, in effect, a subdepartnent? Isn't
that what ho said? How then ho has been continuously referring to tho
fact that this coa-.unication having to do with vaccines was not a ratter
for his Referat. Isn't that what he said? How aany Referats wero thoro
in tho Institute or in that phase of it?

DR. TIP?: May I clarify that natter briefly, Your Honor? The
Medical Inspectorate had as its tead the Chiof of tho Medical Sorvicos.
Under hia, in turn, thoro were two de art rental chiefs, oach of whoa
had one dopartccnt. Each ono of theso dopartoor.t3 could bo subdivided
into a nu-±or of Referats. Horo wo are concornod with tho so-called
first and sosond dopertaint. I n addition to othor Roferat3 tho socond
departrant included tho Referat for Hygione and the Referat for
Aviation Hedicine. Tho Referat in tho Roforat for Aviation J'edicino
was until 15UU Professor Anthony, and after him tho witness Fvof. Dr.
Becker-Freyseng. Does that ansirer your question, Your Honor?

JUDOS SSBRE.'G: Yes, I understand that. 3ut than an I to under¬
stand when tha witness Beckor-Frcysong keeps remarking that tlioso com¬
munications do net pertain to hie Referat that ha means by that that
they did pertain to t*x only ot;«r Roforat under the second department
chief, to rit, the Hygiene Referat?

*

DR. TIFF: Yes. And to ake it clear, in case the testimony
didn't cora through right, ail those Referats -.i*.ich boro the number 1»9

referred to the Referat for Hygiene.

7545


H j 21«- k -3K-20-l-janlols (L.t. Junior)
Court :-o. I


S£ j... Tlrx-:

. ..'itnoss, those theoretical discussions about tho
nunbors of tho various .coforats, of courso, aren’t very
7*Ioasnr.t, neither for the Tribunal nor for us, but I think
they aro so*.awhat nacessary. Lot us, _»rha. s, coaso
saoakin; about .toferats, but discuss tho none of tho
particular ..eforont, for ;ur.osos of clarification. Could
you toll us what .^foront, within tho Uodioul Ins.octorato,
doclt with tho natters which boro tho nunbor -19?

.. During ny tine it was n Stebsarzt ICnptain in tho
Medical C r.>s), -trior.

. I other words, otalsarzt ..tner was tho .cfcror.t for
Hy;ieno?

.. Yes, that i3 true.

i Now I shall turn to tho next Cocunont in this connection.
U... TI?f: Ur. President, I .-n boin . ronindod that I Just
aisund car stood sonothin •. Perhaps I -dsundorstood Juf. jo
So ,rin*-. I understood soaoba.y to say that Judjo Sobrinc
G 3 ked how t.any itoforrts thoro wero in the second do. art-
nont. ./oui : Jud;o Sobrin ; bo -jocM onou* to toll no whether
I uisundor3t.x>d hin?

JUJGi 3EIUINJ: I i’.n't precisely say that, but you 3ay
thoro woro only two?

3I(. TUP: I bo: your . -xdon, Y<.ur H-nor. Thoro wero -wo
do.jor tr.onts. Tho first wr.3 tho Organizational nt,

nn-l tho second was tho Medical */o. artnent. This trial hero
is only concerned with the second flopartnant. Tho sub¬
divisions cf thoso do; rtnonts woro tho hoforats. Concerned
here are tho .loforat Hyyicnc, under Stabs or zt ..tner; and the
itoforat for ..v inti on Medicine urn* or Professor ..thony,
latjr under x-rofossor Bockor-Frcysona. Ia addition, there
we re u nunber of ether .teferats in this doyartaont w.:ich,

so far, have., -laycd no part in this trial.

75£0


t. r 21-..-3K-2C-2-J iols (I.t. U- nBlor)

Court N . 1

THii &7KESS: ..coordin;;* to cy nocory, thoro wcro oi : ;ht
ii.forats alto-eth-r in that dopcrtcxont.

1L:. IL-OY: That answers ay opostion, Y^ur H„nor. I had
e question shJ.lar tc Jud;o S-brin'/.'n in thet I understood -
or.;*. I t ou-ht jerh^s this was tho reason why tho Judjo v;n3
r.skin : that question - that they nontionod yesterday sono
twonty or twenty-five .. .forats. Id..ybo dofanso oounsol could
olccr that up.

Div. TIPr: I certainly can. I', tho entire .iodioal In¬
spectoral - that is, In the first do; 'j-tnent and in tho
second doynrtnont, plus .(oferat bud jot, which wc.3 indoaond-
ent, . Iu3 .iofornt P.i-rnnoy, which was Independent too -
there were al* thar twenty to twonty.-fivo .. t rats.

I 3 allowed y .sterday to subr.it a chart or a sketch about
this ontiro or ionisation, which would rinko tho nr.ttor 3till
oasior.
bY o... TIPI*:

; witness, lot us turn to tho next docajunt in that connec¬
tion -which ajoi.ii boars tho file reference -19, and tho -t.rorct
dosijnntion Z- 3. ..ccjrdinj to your doscri.tion, this was
a natter for 5j 3arzt ••w ..r | the afferent for Hyrjiono. T:.io
*^-ls j cunent NO-l.iO, .cariV tho £.:•.!’jit No. 319, rnd can bo
found in ^ocunont b 0 ok Ifo. XII, on pnjo 120 of tho Gori:an
and Hn lish texts. It is a letter froa Oborstasarzt Prof-
ossor hr. Har.con, who was tho c or.sultin- Physician to tho
~ir Fieot Physician *toich. Tho titlo roads: rt *<oport on tho
3ucoo3sos with T....3. Choi. Vaccines."

In order to oxporito natters, I cay, perhaps, ^oint out

that I asked Professor Hocrin •, who testified on behalf of

Professor lio3c, about this report on tho 17th of ..;ril 19*7.

The coxtcs. oilin'; re; lies of the witness oon bo found on pap

6050 of tho lish record. Herr Hoorin at tynt tino,

stated that this docuaont was a collcctivo report of the

7551


T-7 21 . -3K-20-3-DaEio Is (Int. 2nrvlor)

Court Nc. l

consulting hygienist to tho -Ir Fleet , which was conpilod
free the rc;>ort3 of individuil -ir -lojt physicians.

It concerns their ex.-rionces with a n~w vaccine, which is
the T....B. Choi. Vaccine.

In that connection, witness, r.ay I nsk you-whothor this
opinion of Professor Hoar in; is oorraot?

.. I hasro r.o personal knowlcd30 abtfht this particular
lottor, r.n.1 I aa no hy.ionist. Sinco, as a nonbar of tho
Luftwaffe, howov.r, I wr.s personally vaccinated with thi3
vaccina, I can 3ay whnt any internee or physio ian would
say, that this is r v~ry si:r lo experience re. art on the
application of a vaccine.

<1 I11 oth-r words, this doounant has no connection with any
oxporincnfcs on hutian bain s?

.. Certainly not.

D.t. 71??: In this ontira .a? obi an, Mr. Prosidont, tho
quustion of fila raforanoos plays a considerable part booauso,
in tho ease of typhus, the Prosecution always reforrod tho
Tribun ;1 to fil ruforono^s in order to .rovo tha responsibi¬
lity of ^r. Bocker-Proyscnj.

In ^oounont 000k No. II, on . a;o 152, I inserted u docununt
under the nunber 35, which I will ;ivo the Exhibit N 0 . 22.

7KL P.JioIZENT: That is your Locunent Book No. II?

Dn. TIPP: Yos, Ho. II.

T k: P.ESIDSNT: On wh it pft-jo?

O... TIP*': Pa.'o 152. Thi3 docunent will rocuivo Exhibit
No. 22. It is a dirootivo for typhus no . boostor shots.

Its head in.; is, and I quote: "Tho .ioich Secretary for ..via-
tion and 5u. re no Cacuaodor of tho Luftwaffe, Pi lo Nunbor 49r,
12F, No. 25969", tat in froa tho yonr 1942, (L In 14 2-I-B).
It is dated 1*3 Soptenbor 1942.

I or: only suhnittin * this docununt, Mr. President, bocauso

7952


'A ;.y 21-..-3K-20-‘i-I><'_iicls (Int. ifaanlorj
Coirt No. 1


this shows vary clearly that those file nunbers fio not
refer to the .loforafc of -.viation Modicino. One could
hardly assort that ty;hus booster shots would bo a nattor
for tha i.cfcrat of --vintion Hodicino.

I 3hnll not quota any orrt of this docuncnt, Your Honor.

I shall now c jntinuc with the discussion of those documents,
which I only have to do becauso of tho Prosecution's
continual rcforonco to the do fondant i>r. Pockor-Freysonj.

3Y TIPP:

. Now, would you . loaso turn to ^ocununt NO-137, whioh
is Exhibit 939? This i3 tho roquost by Profossor Hendon -
which was ro entodly oontionoeV - to tho ^iroctor of tho
.ioich Univoroity at Strasbourg, dr.tod tho 7th of Ootobor
193. Counsel for tho Prosoouticn, whon do alia ; with
ty?hus, said on tho Sth of January 19i-;, on aa;o 1367 of
tho English rooor:’. tho followin;:

THE PuZSIXJfT: ..hat doounont is th.at?

J... T3PP: Jocunont NO-137.

'i (Continuin':): I shall quoto oounsol for tho Prosocu-
tion: "On tho next ;-a ;o wo 3hnll find n Acouuont whioh
wo have already subnit tod to the Tribunal. This is Proso-
cuticn Exhibit 1G9. ..s you nay well rc:»onbor, this is

Haakon's report whora he refers to the foot that this
concerns tho ro; entodly nentionod urgent rosooroh nssi;n-
aont. I shoull like to draw your ..ttontion to tho part
which denis viith typhus. Here wo have the well-known
oodo nuabors and letters, 2 -II-P, which is the offico
of -r. ooc kcr-Proys^n- ."

I think, witness, that this question of filo reference
has now been clarified, but would you ,loaso onco ;:oro
define your attitude towards this _oint?

.. In this connection I nay .erha; s point out briefly

7953


"••y 21-«-DK-20-5-Daniels. (Int. hannlor)
Court No. 1


that this letter originates froa the 7th of Octobor, 1943.

I, on the other hand, booano tho -vofcrcr.t on the 15th of

Mey 1944. If there was any connoction with any ono office

it would bo tho offioo of -nthony. My General oan;>etonoo

•

as to th- handlin'; of research.nssi :nnonts oan bo soon
fror, Exhibit No. 136 of tho Prosecution, tho lottor of
?rofo3scr -oso to Professor Haakon of tho 9th of Juno 1943,
in DoouTiont -«ok XII, . n^o 77 of the Garnan book, and pa 70
74 of tho En lish.

Perhaps I nay also 4-raw your attention to yet another

little error. On tho 9th of January 19*7, on . uju 1397 of

tho Gor.ian and v >n :c 1337 of tho Snjlish r ocord, oounsol
•

for the irosooution stated, end I quote: "professor hoso
had knowledge about tho activity and plans of tlio ^hiof
of the Medical crt.nont of tho -vosor.rch Institute bolonj-
in” to tho Luftwaffe. This was nthony, whoso deputy was
Bookor-F royson"."

The Modioal Do;:ortnont of tho uosocroh Instituto of tho
Luftv/affo con xily bo tho .tofornt of ..viution Hodioino,
•voferont ..nth any, whoso assistant ..oforont I wqs.

D*t. TIP?: Mr. Presidenti I havo a nunbor of further
questions on this oonplox, which will take sono considerable
tine. I thin!: it would bo ox. odiont to adjourn at this
tine in >rdor to conclude this natter tomorrow nornin;-.

THE ?.h3DJ?n*: I call tho attontion of the Socrotary
General to on extra ;>n -o fren Docunont Book IV that was
sent up here. 3one other doounont ni ;ht be short without
that.

Th»- Tribunal will now bo in roccss until 9:30 o'olock
tccorrow nornin^.

Ut 153C hours, 21 May 1947, c rcooss was taken until
0930 hours, 22 Mey 1947).


7354


ROLL
