| ARCHAOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA |
CENTRAL

ARCHAOLOGICAL
LIBRARY”


MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


=


‘Ballantyns press
DALLANTYSE, MAREN AMD Com,
CISD AND LOXDOM


MYTH; RITUAL, AND
KEIIGION:


HY


ANDREW LANG.


LONDON:
LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
1887.


AL rights reoereed


A.Ns STO


CENTRAL *°°"' ‘FO! NGIGA
L.iisiy bwe | Fe ik sf. Le,


Ace. vu, of) * Ga ee


To
WILLIAM YOUNG SELLAR, LL.D.


. This Book


te
DEDICATH Re
a t nYy é a


z : | Fim a
ape yy). PRESiows KINSMAN
fi 7 Th


VERY OLD ST. ANDREWS PUPIL


PREFACK.


Sed el


Tue following work is not a “key to all mythologies,”
but an attempt to disengage and examine, as far as
possible, separately, and, as far as possible, historically,
the various elements of religion and myth. The evi-
dence of ritual is adduced because of the conservative
tendencies of rites on which the prosperity of tribes
and states is believed to depend. While the attempt
is made to show that the wilder features of myth sur-
vive from, or were borrowed from, or were imitated
from, the ideas of people in the savage condition of
thought, the existence—even among savages—of com-
paratively pure, if inarticulate, religious beliefs or
sentiments is insisted on throughout. It is pointed
out that neither history, experiment, nor observation
enables us to reach the actual Origins, nor to determine
with certainty whether the religious or the mythical,
the irrational or the sympathetic, element is the earlier,
or whether both are of equal antiquity. Thus the
problem—Why do people who possess a sentiment or


Vili PREFACE.


instinct of the existence of a good being or beings
habitually attach to his name or their names the most
recklessly immoral myths ?—is practically left un-
solved. The process lies beyond our ken, beyond the


view of history.
The book does not pretend to be exhaustive. For
various reasons, the myths of various races are omitted


or touched on but in passing, In the first place, I
remember the woes predicted for him who “says all
that he has to say on any subject.” Therefore the
myths of the Finns and of the Scandinavians are only
alluded to incidentally. Babylonian myths and religion
are still in a condition so perplexed and obscure that I
have not the audacity to cross their frontier, Had
Professor Sayce’s Hibbert Lectures on this topic been
published while these chapters were unwritten, I might
have attempted to use Professor Sayce as a guide in
so difficult a region. Roman myths are so entangled
with those of Greece (different as is the genius of the
Latin people), that I have only borrowed a few illustra-
tions from the practice and belief of Rome, Of Mon-
golian, Chinese, and Japanese mythology I am almost
entirely ignorant, and Celtic developments appear.
scarcely less hard to understand. Here, too, we may |
expect much aid from the Hibbert Lectures of Professor
Rhys.

The book throughout, where it deals with the myths
of the Sanskrit-speaking people and of the Egyptians,


4


PREFACE, ix


relies on the reports brought by learned translators
and commentators from these literatures; while in
treating of the lower and the American peoples, the
reports of missionaries, travellers, historians, commen-
tators, and occasionally of great compilations like Mr.
Bancroft’s, are employed in the same way. The authori-
ties, I think, are usually acknowledged in the notes;
nor, of course, does one pretend to decide upon the
state these differences, and my own bias is probably
manifest enough in each instance. Where the philo-
logical interpretation of proper names is concerned

I have endeavoured to keep controversy about Method
as much as possible within the bounds of an Appendix
to volume ii, but probably have not always avoided


the temper of polemics.

A book like this would be practically impossible
without the learned labours of men like Preller, Lobeck,
Maspero, Roscher (with his allies in his great and
valuable Awafihrliches Lexikon, now (1887) in course of
publication), Muir, Max Miiller, Bergaigne, and many
others whose names frequently recur.

In revising the proof-sheets, I have had the kind
assistance of Mr. E. B. Tylor for part of the American
chapters; of M. Charles Michel (Professeur 4 la Faculté


x PREFACE.


Mr. Evelyn Abbott of Baliol for the Greek chapters;
and of Mr, Reginald Stuart Poole for the chapter on

Egyptian Religion and Myths, Professor Robertson
Smith has also assisted me in various points; and
Mr, H. H. Risley, of the Bengal Civil Service ; Mr. J.J.
Atkinson, late of Noumea; and Mr. Brander Matthews
have sent me interesting information, The gentlemen
who have so kindly and carefully read the proofs must
not be considered in any degree responsible for errors
that may have escaped their notice, nor for ideas which,
I dare say, they often do not share.

In the notes I have occasionally used references from
books not within my reach, but quoted by authorities,
and likely to prove useful to students who can lay
their hands on the volumes. In most cases, I think,
these references are printed within brackets. '

The difficulty of correcting the numerals in refer-
ences is considerable, and I can hardly hope that none
of the 6's have become o's, the 3's 5's, and so forth.
Like the witty lady who had just seen a book through the
press, about these references I may say Aorresco referens !

It was my original intention to have added studies
of Deluge Myths, Fire Myths, Myths of the Origin of
Death, and Myths of the Homes of the Dead, Three of
these studies were even written, in whole or in part,
but it appears better to reserve them for “a more con-
venient season.” The Deluge alone, a very peculiar
tradition, which possibly (in my opinion) rests on


PREFACE. xi


some universal fact, might well sweep over two volumes
as large as these.

An essay in the Nineteenth Century (September 1886)
contained some of the material used in the chapter on
Egyptian Divine Myths, and the relations of “ Demeter
and the Pig” were stated in the same periodical (April
1887). A few remarks on Greek temple-rites ap-
peared in the Saturday Review as “'The Seamy Side of
Greek Religion.” Of the shorter Appendices, that on
Mr. Morgan’s theory of the civilisation, and that
on Fontenelle’s Origine des Fables, were more or less
published in the St, James's Gazette, and “The Hare
in Egyptian Religion” in Mélusine, These fragments
have been used with the courteous permission of the
several editors,

The article on “ Mythology” in the Encyclopedia
Britannica, translated as “La Mythologie” (Paris,
Dupret, 1886) by M. Parmentier, with a preface and
notes by M. Ch. Michel of Gand, was a brief sketch
made from this book while in course of construction.

I must apologise for occasional allusions to other
writings of my own on these topics, and for repetitions
in this book; the latter are mainly, so to speak, like
“eross references " in a dictionary or index.


s , 4

——_ 5 ae
_. 4

4 -< —


Pas" sigs 5 M4


ie a


wT ihe iseh |


*


W? ih atmo


Oe


habe ihm stp i


tine eof aig Asean WO Oe fS


Mae weet Y=, ee conatal oa iS


poe * ele _—
r ae


-
oa @e

-_ >
3 _ w ;


/


CONTENTS.


HAPTER 1
rack
BYHTEMS OF MYTHOLOGT  .6 «9 «+ -*  «# «w « 1


Origin of attempts to explain myths—(1.) Among the old heathen
Darcey Molex Mairi! een Aaant ore acta a


myths—The anti of the Christian Fathers on myth»—Pln-
tarch, Porphyry, and thelr refutation by Easebius—Short sketch
of later theories of myth—Erpant, Creurer, Otfried Miller,
Lobeck—The philologists, Kuhn, Schwartz, Max Miiller—Ob-
jectiona of Mannhardt—Limitations of philology.


CHAPTER. II.
NEW SYSTEM PROPOSED ita le ' 2h


Chapter I. recapitulated—Proposal of a new method: Science of
comparative or historical study of man—Anticipated in part
by Eusebius, Fontenelle, De Erosses, Spencer (of C.C.C,, Cam-
bridge), and Mannhardt—Scienee of Tylor—Object of inquiry:
to find condition of human intellect in which marvels of myth
are parte of practical everyday belief—This la the savage state
—Savages described—The wild element of myth « survival from
the savage state—Advantages of this method—Partly necounta
for wide difnsion ee ye Comet ree


water-awallow
Cbfetlans te mathiod, aisd tcwor to thest—-tics Appandiz


xiv CONTENTS.


CHAPTER ITI.
Paah
THE MENTAL CONDITION OF SAVAGES — CONFUSION WITH


HATORE—TOTEMIEM . i . ; * : » 6


The mental condition of savages the basis of the irrational element
in myth—Characteristics of that condition : (1.) (Confusion of all
things in an equality of presumed animation and intelligence—
(2.) Belief in sorcery—(3.) Spiritualiem—{4.) Curiosity—(s.) Easy
credulity and mental indolence—The curiosity te eati=fied, thanks
to the eredality, by myths in answer to all inquiries—Evidenco
for this—Mr, Tylor’s opinion—Mr, Im Tharn—Jeauit mission-
aries’ Felations—Examples of confusion between men, planta,
beasts, and other natural objects—Reports of travellerse—Evi-
dence from institution of totemiam—Definition of totemism—
Totemiem in Australia, Africa, America, the Oceanic Islands,
India, North Asis—Conelusion t Totemiam being found so widely
distributed, is a proof of the existence of that savage mental con-
dition in which no line ja drawn between men and the other
things in the world—This confusion is one of the characteristics
of myth in all races.


CHAPTER IV.


THE MENTAL CONDITION OF SAVAGES—MAGIC— METAMOR-
PHOSIB—METAPHTSIC—FSICHOLOGT eo - §2


Claime of sorcerers —Savage ecientifie speculation —Theory of
Cansation—Credulity, except as to new religious ideas—" Post
hoe, ergo propter hoe”—Fundamental ideas of magic —Exam-
ples: incantations, ghosts, spirite—Evidence of rank and other
institutions in proof ef confusions of mind exhibited in magical
beliefa.


CHAPTER Y.
MWATURE-MYTHR 2 + 0s) l8lhlw 8 RED


Savage fancy, curiosity, and credulity illustrated in nature-mytha
—In these all phenomena are explained by belief in the goneral
animation of everything, combined with belief in metamorphosis
—Sun-mythe, Asian, Australian, African, Melanesian, Indian,
Moysea, Mexican, Zulu, Macassar, Greenland, Piute, Malay—


CONTENTS. xy


Face

Thunder-mythe—Greek and Aryan san and moon mythe—Star-
mythe—Myths, savage aod civilised, of animala, accounting for
their marks and habite—Examples of custom of claiming blood
kinship with lower animale—Myths of various plants and treee—
Mytha of stones, and of metamorphosis into stones, Greek, Ans-
tralian, and American—The whole natural philosophy of savages
expressed in myths, and survives in folklore ond classical poetry,

and legends of metamorphosia


CHAPTER VI.


NOS-ARTAN MYTHS OF THE ORIGIN OF THE WORLD AND OF
MAN . ‘ e ‘ . . ; . 165


Confusion of myths—Various naar cael ahaa
of Australia, Andaman Iddands, Bushmen, Ovaherero, Namaquas,
Zulus, Hurona, Iroquois, Diggers, Navajoea, Winnebagoes, Chal-
deans, Thlinkeets, Pacific Islanders, Maoris, Artecs, Peruviane
anes anata deg el aaa abd tema ten
ditions of society and culture,


CHAPTER VII.


ISDO-ARYAN MYTHS—20URCES OF EVIDENCE » Ps » 24


Authorities—Vedss—Brmhmanas—Social condition of Vedic India
— Arts—Hanks—War— Vedic fetishism — Ancestor-worhip—
Date of Rig-Veda Hymns doubt{al—Obscurity of the Hymoa—
Difficulty of interpreting the real character of Veda—Neot primi-
tive, but sacerdotal—The moral purity not innocence, but re-
finement.


CHAPTER VIIL


INDIAN MYTHS OF THE ONIGIN OF THE WORLD AND OF
WEMe Une Sat a ie ek oe


Comparison of Vedic and savage myths—The metaphysical Vedie
account of the beginning of things—Opposite and savage fable
of world made out of fragments of a man—TDHscumion of this
hymo—Absurdities of SroAmacae—Prajapati, on Aryan Unkulon-
kula or Qat—Evolutionary mythe—Marringe of heaven and earth
—Mythe of Purcaas, their savage paralielea—Most savage myths
are repeated in Aralmanas,


-


rvi CONTENTS.


CHAPTER IX.
Pane
GREEK MYTHS OF THE ORIGIN OF THE WORLD AND MAN « 255


The Greeks practically civilised when we first moet thom in Homer
—Their mythology, however, is full of repulsive features—The
hypothesis that many of these are savage survivala—Are there
other examples of auch survival in Greek life and institutions ?
Tiustrations of savage survival from Greek law of homicide,
from magic, religion, homan sacrifice, religious art, traces of
totemiem, and from the mysteries—Conclusion: that savage
survival may also be expected in Greek myths


QHAPTER X.
GREEK COSMOGONIC MITHS . . =i) lity pase ceee see


Nature of the evidence—Traditions of origin of the world and man
—Homeric, Hesiodie, and Orphie myths—Later evidence of
historians, dramatists, commentatore—The Homeric story oom-
paratively pure—The story in Heajod, and its savage analogues
—The explanations of the myth of Cronus, modern and ancient
—The Orphic comumogony—Phanes and Prjapati—Greek mythe
af the origin of man—Their savage analogues.


CHAPTER XI.
SAVAGE DIVINE MYTHS Le -Ta eee e  S


The origin of a belief in Gow beyond the ken of history and of
speculation—Sketch of conjectural theories—Two elements in
all beliefs, whether of backward or civilised racea—The Mythiea!
and the Religiows—These may be coeval, or either may be older
than the other—Difficulty of study—Text from Platarch—Goda
and demons— Correspondence of savage and civilised divine
myths—Their immorality—Dualism—The development of gods
—Hestial, pereonal, elemental, departmental, pure anthropo-


—


Pre Ty


fy /


«
ie | =.


'
-


, ty
_—=


=v«

a hao
-

_—


MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


re


CHAPTER IL.
SYSTEMS OF MYTHOLOGY.

Origins of attempts to explain mytha—(t.) Among the old heathen
races a practical and moral need of apology for mythical sete of
gods —(2.) Modern historical curiosity — Ancient apilogetics,
poetic, priestly, philosophic—The two elements in myth, rational
and irrational —Examples: Method of Homer, omission and
selection — Method of Pindar—Ancient physical, etymological,
political, historical, mystic, and symbolical explanations of Greek
myths—The assaults of the Christian Fathers on myths. Plutarch,
Porphyry, and their refutation by Eusebins—Short sketch of later
theories of myth, Bryant, Creuzer, Otfried Miller, Lobeck—The
philologists, Kuhn, Schwartz, Max Muller—Objections of Mann.
hardt—Limitations of philology.


THE interpretation of the myths or early divine and
heroic legends of various races has become a subject
of curious but almost disinterested inquiry. It 1s a
matter of historical importance to understand how,
and when, and why the ancestors of the civilised races
filled the blank of their past by tales about bestial
gods and godlike beasts. But Christian conduct and
faith are no longer affected by the answers to these
questions which we may discover or invent. Whatever
the people of the past may have intended when they
VoL, L A


‘TH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


|


ssid that Zeus swallowed his wife, or that Cronus
mutilated his father and ate his children, their mean-
ing cannot possibly affect our notions of the domestic
duties, or encourage us to believe that impiety may be
acceptable in the sight of deities who themselves are
impious.

‘While mythology is thus no more to us than an
affair of historical or antiquarian study, we must re-
member that the interpretation of myths was once a
thing full of vital interest to men whose moral and
religious beliefs were deeply concerned. To every civi-
lised race there has come the moment when people
have anxiously asked, * Are the old legends of the gods
literally true, and, if not literally true, in what sense
are they to be believed?” Thus Aristotle,’ in speak-
ing of the education of the young, writes: “ Let the
rulers take care that there be no image or picture .
representing unseemly actions, except in the temples —
of those gods at whose festivals the law permits even
ribaldry ;" such, for example, as the obscene public
rites of Dionysus. Pausanias describes temple pic-
tures of the most incredible and unnatural horror, the
gods represented being Hera and Zeus. We cannot
imagine, fortunately, what the misery of an educated
Greek must have been when his children had to face
the unspeakable examples of divine lust. Habit, of
course, blunted the horror.

Yet it is never a pleasant hour when mortals in-
quire of themselves, “ Is our Heavenly Father a large
hare or an amorous ram, or a kind of sorcerer capable

1 Politics, vii. 17.


HEATHEN APOLOGETICS. 3


of pursuing his love in the form of an ant, or a ser-
pent, or a swan? Is he impious, lustful, cowardly,
easily deceived, unjust, and cruel, as the temple
legends declare, and illustrate in Mystery plays and
pictures?” But all the old civilised races have had
to live throngh that hour and to encounter these pro-
blems, “ How individuals found religious consolation
is, says C, O. Miiller, “a very interesting inguiry.”

In Greece, as early os the sixth century B.c., we
are all familiar with Xenophanes’ poem’ complain-
ing that the gods were credited with the worst
crimes of mortals—in fact, with abominations only
known in the orgies of Nero and Elagabalus. We
hear Pindar refusing to repeat the tale which told
him the blessed were cannibals* In India we read
the pious Brahmanic attempts to expound decently the
myths which made Indra the slayer of a Brahman; the
sinner, that is, of the unpardonable sin. In Egypt,
too, we study the priestly or philosophic systems by
which the clergy strove to strip the burden of absur-
dity and sacrilege from their own deities. From all
these efforts of civilised and pious believers to explain
awny the stories about their own gods we may infer
one fact—the most important to the student of mytho-
logy—the fact that myths were not evolved in times
of clear civilised thonght. It is when Greece is just

* Ritter and Preller, Mist, Philos, Goth, 1869, p. 82.

® Qympic Odes, 1, Myers's translation ; ite ech ia impossible te
eall one of the blessed gods a cannibal... . Meet it ia for a man
that concerning the gods he speak honourably, for the reproach Is
less. Of theo, son of Tantalus, I will speak contrariwise to them who


have gone before me." In avoiding the story of the cannibal god,
however, Pindar tells a tale even more offensive to our morality.


- }
é _ \


4 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


beginning to free her thought from the bondage of too
concrete language, when she is striving to coin abstract
terms, that her philosophers and poets first find the
myths of Greece a stumbling-block.

All early attempts at an interpretation of mytho-
logy are so many efforts to explain the myths on
some principle which shall seem not unreasonable to
men living at the time of the explanation, There-
fore the pious remonstrances and the forced con-
structions of early thinkers like Xenophanes, of
poets like Pindar, of all ancient, Homeric scholars and
Pagan apologists, from Theagenes of Rheginm (525
B.c.}, the early Homeric commentator, to Porphyry,
almost the Inst of the heathen philosophers, are so many
proofs that to Greece, as soon as she had a reflective
literature, the myths of Greece seemed impions and irra-
tional, The essays of the native commentators on the
Veda, in the same way, are endeavours to put into
myths felt to be irrational and impious a meaning
which does not offend either piety or reason. We may,
therefore, conclode that it was not men in an early
stage of philosophic thought (as philosophy is now mnder-
stood)—not men like Empedocles and Heraclitus, nor
reasonably devout men like Eummns, the pious swine-
herd of the QGdysey—who evolved the blasphemous
myths of Greece, of Egypt, and of India, We must
look elsewhere for an explanation, We must try to
discover some actual, and demonstrable, and widely
prevalent condition of the human mind, in which tales
that even to remote and rudimentary civilisations ap-
peared irrational and unnatural would seem natural


OBJECT OF THIS INQUIRY. F


and rational. To discover this intellectual condition
has been the aim of all mythologists who did not
believe that myth is a divine tradition depraved by
human weakness, or a distorted version of historical
events,

Before going further, it is desirable to set forth
what our aim is, ond to what extent we are seeking
an interpretation of mythology. It is not our pur-
pose to explain every detail of every ancient legend,
either as a distorted historical fact or as the result of
this or that confusion of thought caused by forgetful-
ness of the meanings of language, or in any other way ;
nay, we must constantly protest against the excursions
of too venturesome ingenuity. Myth is so ancient, so
complex, so full of elements, that it is vain labour to
seek a cause for every phenomenon, We are chiefly
oceupied with the quest for an historical condition of
the human intellect to which the element in myths,
regarded by us as irrational, shall seem rational
enongh, If we can prove that such a state of mind
widely exista among men, and has existed, that state
of mind may be provisionally considered os the fount
and origin of the myths which have always perplexed
men in a reasonable modern mental condition, Again,
if it can be shown that this mental stage was one
through which all civilised races have passed, the uni-
versality of the mythopeic mental condition will to
some extent explain the universal diffusion of the

Now, in all mythologies, whether savage or civi-
_ lised, there exist two factors—the factor which we now


6 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


regard as rational, and that which we moderns regard
as irrational. The former element needs little explana-
tion ; the latter has demanded explanation ever since
hnman thought became comparatively instructed and
abstract.

To take an example; even in the myths of savages
there is much that still seems rational and transparent.
If savages tell us that some wise being tanght them
all the simple arts of life, the use of fire, of the bow
and arrow, the barbing of hooks, and so forth, we
understand them at once. Nothing can be more
natural than that man should believe in an original
inventor of the arts, and should tell tales about the
imaginary discoverera if the real heroes be forgotten.
So far all is plain sailing, But when the savage
oes on to say that he who tanght the use of fire or
who gave the first marriage laws was o rabbit, or
crow, or a dog, or a beaver, or a spider, then we are
at. once face to face with the element in myths
which seems to us irrational. Again, among civilised
peoples we read of the pure all-seeing Varuna in the
Vedas, to whom sin is an offence. We read of Indra,
the Lord of Thunder, borne in his chariot, the giver
of victory, the giver of wealth to the pions; here
once more all seems natural and plain. The notion
of a deity who guides the whirlwind and directs the
storm, a god of battles, a god who blesses righteous-
ness, 18 familiar to us and intelligible; but when we
read how Indra drank himself drank and committed
adulteries with Asura women, and got himself born
from the same womb as a bull, and changed himself


RATIONAL AND IRRATIONAL MYTHS. +


into a quail or a ram, and suffered from the most
abject physical terror, and so forth, then we are among
myths no longer readily intelligible; here, we feel,
are irrational stories, of which the original ideas, in
their natural sense, can hardly have been conceived by
men in a pure and rational early civilisation.

Again, if we look at Greek religious tradition, we
observe the co-existence of the rational and the
apparently irrational elements. The rational myths
are those which represent the gods as beautiful and
wise beings. The Artemis of the Cdyany, “taking
her pastime in the chase of boars and swift deer, while
with her the wild wood-nymphs disport them, and
high over them all she rears her brow, and is easily
Ge ba kaowa Wess ail are fair,” in 0. jeotecily rested
mythic representation of a divine being. We feel,
even now, that the conception of a “queen and god-
dees, chaste and fair,” the abbess, as Paul de Saint-
Victor calls her, of the woodlands, is a beautiful and
natural fancy, which requires no explanation. On the
other hand, the Artemis of Arcadia, who is confused
with the nymph Callisto, who, again, is said to have
become a she-bear, and later a star; and the Brau-
ronian Artemis, whose maiden ministers danced o
bear-dance,” are goddesses whose legend seems un-
natural, and needs to be made intelligible, Or, again,
there is nothing not explicable and natural in the
conception of the Olympian Zeus, as represented by
the great chrysclephantine statue of Zeus at Olympia,


1 Odyssey, vi, 102.
* docredar ; compare Harpokration on this word,


8 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


or in the Homeric conception of Zeus as a god who
“turns everywhere his shining eyes,” and beholds all
things, and protects the righteous, and deals good or
evil fortune to men. But the Aeus whose grave was
shown in Crete, or the Zeus who played Demeter an
obscene trick by the aid of a ram, or the Zeus who,
in the shape of a swan, became the father of Castor
and Pollux, or the Zens who deceived Hera by means
of a feigned marriage with an inanimate object, or the
Zeus who was afraid of Attes, or the Zens who made
love to women in the shape of an ant or a cuckoo, is a
being whose myth is felt to be unnatural and bewilder-
ing.’ Itis this irrational and unnatural element, as
Mr. Max Miiller says, “the silly, senseless, and savage
element,” that makes mythology the puzzle which men
have so long found it.

We have offered examples—Savage, Indian, andy
Greek—of that element in mythology which, as all
civilised races have felt, demands explanation.

To be still more explicit, we may draw up a brief
list of the chief problems in the legendary stories
attached to the old religions of the world—the pro-
blems which it is our special purpose to notice,
First we have, in the myths of all races, the most
grotesque and inconsistent conceptions of the character
of the gods, Beings who at one moment are spoken

' These are the features in myth which provoke, for example, the
wonder of Eméric-David. ‘The lizard, the wolf, the dog, the nas, the
frog, and all the other brutes so common on religious monuments
everywhere, do they not all imply a thought which we must divine 1”
He concludes that these animals, planta, and monsters of myths are


eo many “enigmas” and “ symbols" veiling some decp sacred idea, alle-
Goties of some esoteric religious creed. Jupiter, Paria, 1832, p. Lexvii.


THE IRRATIONAL ELEMENT. 9


of as spiritual, holy, immortal, omniscient, and kindly,
are suddenly represented as fashioned in the likeness
not only of man, but of the beasts; as subject to
death, as ignorant and improus.

All pre-Christian religions have their “zoomor-
phie” or partially zoomorphic idols, gods in the shape
of the lower animals, or with the heads and necks of
the lower animals. In the same way all mythologies
represent the gods as fond of appearing in animal
forms. Under these disgnises they conduct many
amours, even with the daughters of men, and Greek
houses were proud of their descent from Zens in the
shape of an eagle or ant, a serpent or a swan; while
Cronus and the Vedic Tvashtri and Poseidon anade
love as horses, and Apollo as a dog. Not less
wild are the legends about the births of gods from
g¢he thigh, or the head, or feet, or armpits of some
parent; while tales describing and pictures represent-
ing unspeakable divine obscenities were frequent im
the mythology and in the temples of Greece. Once
more, the gods were said to possess and exercise the
power of turning men and women into birds, beasts,
fishes, trees, and stones, so that there was scarcely o
familiar natural object in the Greek world which had
not once (according to legend) been a man or a
woman. ‘The myths of the origin of the world and
man, again, were in the last degree childish and dis-
gusting. The Bushmen and Australians have, per-
haps, no story of the origin of species quite so bar-
barons in style as the aneedotes about Phanes and
Prajapati which are preserved in the Orphiec hymns


10 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


and in the Brahmanas. The conduct of the earlier
dynasties of classical gods towards each other was as
notoriously croel and loathsome as their behaviour
towards mortals was tricksy and capricious. The classi-
eal gods, with all their immortal might, are capable of
fear and pain, and are led into serapes as Indicrous as
those of Brer Wolf or Brer Terrapin in the tales of the
Negroes of the Southern States of America. The stars,
again, in mythology, are mixed up with beasts, planets,
and men in the came embroglio of fantastic opinion.
The dead and the living, men, beasts, and gods, trees
and stars, and rivers, and sun, and moon, dance through
the region of myths in a burlesque ballet of Prispus,
where everything may be anything, where nature has
no laws and Imagination no limits,

Such are the irrational characteristics of myths,
classic or Indian, European or American, African or
Asiatic, Australian or Maori Such is the element we
find all the world over among civilised and savage
people, quod semper, quod ubiqgue, quod ab omnibus.
It is no wonder that pious and reflective men have, in
so many ages and in so many ways, tried to account
to themselves for their possession of beliefs closel y
connected with religion which yet seemed ruinous to
religion and morality.

The explanations which men have given of their own
sacred stories, the apologies for their own gods which
they have been constrained to offer to themselves,
were the earliest babblings of a science of mythology.
That science was, in its dim beginnings, intended
to satisfy a moral need. Man found that his gods


EARLY POETIC EXPLANATIONS, ie


were not made in his own moral image at its best,
but in the image sometimes of the beasts, sometimes
of his own moral nature at its very worst: in the
likeness of robbers, wizards, sorcerers, and adulterers.
Now it is impossible here to examine minutely all
systems of mythological interpretation, Every key has
been tried in this difficult lock; every cause of con-
fosion has been taken up and tested, deemed adequate,
and finally rejected or assigned a subordinate place.
Probably the first attempts to shake off the burden
of religions horror at mythical impiety were made
by way of silent omission. Thus most of the foulest
myths of early India are absent, and presumably were
left. out, in the Rig-Veda. “The religious sentiment
of the hymns, already so elevated, has discarded most
of the tales which offended it, but has not succeeded
in discarding them all.”* Just as the poets of the
Rig-Veda prefer to avoid the more offensive traditions
about Indra and Tvashtri, so Homer succeeds in avoid-
ing the more grotesque and puerile tales about his
own gods.” The period of actual apology comes later.
Pindar declines, as we have seen, to accuse a god of

1 Les Religions de I'Inde, Barth, p. 14. Soe also postea, “ Indian
Myths.”

2 ‘The reasons for Homer's reticence are probably different in diife-
rent passages, Perhaps in some cases he had beard a purer version of
myth than what reached Hesiod; perhaps he sometimes purposely
(like Pindar) purified a myth; wenally he must have eclocted, in eon-
formity with the noble humanity and purity of his taste, the talos that
best conformed to his ideal. He makes hia deities reluctant to drag
out in dispute old scandals of their early unheroio adventures, some
of which, however, he gives, aa the kicking of Hephwstus out of
heaven, and the imprisonment of Arcs in a vessel of bronze, Compare
Professor Jebb's Homer, p. 83: “Whatever the instinct of the preat
artist has tolerated, at least it has purged these things away,” that is,
divine amours in bestial form.


12 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


cannibalism. The Satapatha Brahmana invents a new
story about the slaying of Visvarupa. Not Indra, but
Trita, says the Brahmana apologetically, slew the
three-headed son of Tvashtri. “Indra assuredly was
free from that sin, for he is a god,” says the Indian
apologist.’ Yet sins which to us appear far more
monstrous than the peccadillo of killing o three-
headed Brahman are attributed freely to Indra.

While poets could but omit a blasphemous tale or
sketch an apology in passing, it became the business
of philosophers and of antiquarian writers deliberately
to “whitewash ” the gods of popular religion. Syste-
matic explanations of the sacred stories, whether as
preserved in poetry or a8 told by priests, had to he
provided. India had her etymological and her legen-
dary school of mythology.2 Thus, while the hymn
seemed to tell how the Maruts were gods, “born together
with the spotted deer,” the etymological interpreters
explained that the word for deer only meant the many-
coloured lines of clouds." In the armoury of apolo-
getics etymology has been the most serviceable weapon.
It is easy to see that by aid of etymology the most re-
pulsive legend may be compelled to yield a pure or.
harmless sense, and may be explained as an innocent
blunder, caused by mere verbal misunderstanding.
Brahmans, Greeks, and Germans have equally found
comfort in this hypothesis) In the Cratylus of Plato,
Socrates speaks of the notion of explaining myths by
etymological guesses at the meaning of divine names

1 Satepatha Prakmana, Oxford, 1882, vol. i, p 47.


2 Rig-Veda Sanhita, Max Miller, p. 5%
* Postea, “Indian Divine Myths.”


SOCRATES'S ETYMOLOGICAL GUESSEs. 13


as “a philosophy which came to him all in an instant.”
Thus we find Socrates shocked by the irreverence which
styled Zeus the son of Cronus, “who is a proverb for
stupidity.” But on examining philologically the name
Kronos, Socrates decides that it must really mean
Koros, “not in the sense of a youth, but signifying
the pure and garnished mind.” Therefore, when
people first called Zeus the son of Cronus, they meant
nothing irreverent, but only that Zens is the child
of the pure mind or pure reason. Not only is this
etymological system most pious and consolatory, but
it is, as Socrates adds, of universal application. “ For
now I bethink me of a very new and ingenious notion,
. . « that we may pot in and pull out letters at
pleasure, and alter the accents.” * .

Socrates, of course, speaks more than half in irony,
but there is o certain truth in his account of etymo-
logical analysis and its dependence on individual
tastes and preconceived theory.

The ancient classical schools of mythological inter-
pretation, though unscientific and unsuccessful, are
not without interest. We find philosophers and gram-
. marians looking, just as we ourselves are looking, for
some condition of the human intellect out of which
the absurd element in myths might conceivably have
sprung. Very naturally the philosophers supposed
that the human beings in whose brain and speech
myths had their origin must have been philosophers
like themselyes—intelligent, educated persons. But
such persons, they argued, could never have meant to

1 Jowett's Plate, vol. L pp. 652, 67a,


14 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


tell stories about the gods so full of nonsense and
blasphemy.

Therefore the nonsense and blasphemy must origin-
ally have had some harmless, or even praiseworthy,
sense. What could that sense have been? This ques-
tion each ancient mythologist answered in accordance
with his own taste and prejutions: and above all,
and like all other and later speculators, in harmony
with the general tendency of his own studies, If
he lived when physical speculation was coming into
fashion, as in the age of Empedocles, he thonght that
the Homeric poems must contain a veiled account
of physical philosophy. This was the opinion of
Theagenes of Rhegium, who wrote at a period when
a crude physicism was disengaging itself from the
earlier religious and mythical cosmogonic systems of
Greece. Theagenes was shocked by the Homeric
description of the battle in which the gods fought
allies of the Achwans and Trojans. He therefore
explained away the affair as a veiled account of the
strife of the elements. Such “strife” was familiar
to readers of the physical speculations of Empedocles
and of Heraclitus, who blamed Homer for his prayer
against Strife."

Tt did not occur to Theagenes to ask whether any
evidence existed to show that the pre-Homeric Greeks
were Empedoclean or Heraclitean philosophers. He
readily approved to himself that Apollo, Helios, and
Hephestus were allegorical representations, like what
such philosophers would feign,—of fire, that Hera was

1 fy. et (air, 48.


EURIPIDES AND EVEMERUS., 15


air, Poseidon water, Artemis the moon, and the rest he
disposed of im the same fashion."

Metrodorns, again, turned not only the gods, but
the Homeric heroes into “ elemental combinations and
physical agencies;" for there is nothing new in the
mythological philosophy at present popular, which sees
the sun, and the cloud, and the wind in Achilles,
Athene, and Hermes.*

In the Bacche, Euripides puts another of the
mythological systems of his own time into the mouth
of Cadmus, the Theban king, who advances a philo-
logical explanation of the story that Dionysus was
sewn up in the thigh of Zeus.” The most famous of
the later theories was that of Euemerns (316 B.C.).
In a kind of pl hical romance, Euemerns de-
clared that he had sailed to some No-man’s-land, Pan-
cha, where he found the verity about mythical times
engraved on pillars of bronze. This truth he puab-
lished in the Sacra Jfisforia, where he rationalised
* the fables, averring that the gods had been men, and
that the myths were exaggerated and distorted records
of facts. (See Eusebius, Prep. £., u. 5 5-) The Abbé
Banier (Za Mythologie expliquée par (Histoire, Paris,
1738, vol. ii. p. 218) attempts the defence of Enemerus,
whom most of the ancients regarded as an atheist.
There was an element of truth in his romantic hypo-


1 Scholia on iad, xx. 67. Dindorf (1877), vol. fr. po 2gt. “This
manner of apologetics is as old as Theagencs of Rhegiam. Homer
offers theological doctrine in the guise of physical alseery.

2 Grote, Hist, of Greeee, ed. 1569, L p. 40g.

4 See Block, Euhdmére ot aa Doctrine, Mons, 1576.


6 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Sometimes the old stories were said to conceal a
moral, sometimes a physical, sometimes a mystical or
Neo-platonic sort of meaning. As every apologist in-
terpreted the legends in his own fashion, the inter-
pretations usually disagreed and killed each other.
Just as one modern mythologist sees the wind in
Aetes and the dawn in Medea, while another of the
same school believes, on equally good evidence, that
both ASetes and Medea are the moon, so writers like
Porphyry (270 5.c.) and Plutarch (60 8.¢.) made the
ancient deities types of their own favourite doctrines,
whatever these might happen to be.

When Christianity became powerful, the Christian
writers naturally attacked heathen religion where it
was most vulnerable, on the side of the myths, and of
the mysteries which were dramatic representations of
the myths. “Pretty gods you worship,” said the
Fathers, in effect, “ homicides, adulterers, bulls, bears,
mice, ants, and what not.” The heathen apologists
for the old religion were thus driven in the early
ages of Christianity to various methods of explaining
away the myths of their discredited religion.

The early Christian writers very easily, and with
considerable argumentative power, disposed of the
apologies for the myths advanced by Porphyry and
Plutarch. Thus Eusebius in the Preperatio Erangelica
first attacks the Egyptian interpretations of their own
bestial or semi- bestial gods. He shows that the
various interpretations destroy each other, and goes
on to point out that Greek myth is in essence only
a veneered and varnished version of the faith of


EUSEBIUS. 17


Egypt. He ridicules, with a good deal of humonr,
the old theories which resolved so many mythical
heroes into the sun; he shows that while one system
is contented to regard Zens as mere fire and air,
another system recognises in him the higher reason,
while Heracles, Dionyaus, Apollo, and Asclepius, father
and child, are all indifferently the sun.

Granting that the myth-makers were only construct-
ing physical allegories, why did they wrap them up,
asks Ensebius, in what we consider abominable fictions?
In what state were the people who could not look at
the pure processes of Nature without being reminded
of the most hideous and unnatural offences? Once
more, “the physical interpreters do not even agree in
their physical interpretations.” All these are equally
facile, equally plausible, and equally incapable of proof.
Again, Bisbee argues, the interpreters take for
granted in the makers of the myths an amount of
physical knowledge which they certainly did not possess,
For example, if Leto were only another name for Hera,
the character of Zeus would be cleared as far as his
amour with Leto is concerned. Now the ancient
believers in the “physical phenomena theory” of
myths made out that Hera, the wife of Zeus, was
really the same person under another name as Leto,
his mistress. “For Hera is the earth” (they said
at other times that Hera was the air), “and Leto
is the night; bot night is only the shadow of the
earth, and therefore Leto is only the shadow of Hera.”
It was easy, however, to prove that this scientific view
of night ss the shadow of earth was not dle

VOL. L


18 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


known to myth-makers, who regarded “swift Night”
as an actual person. Plutarch, too, had an abstruse
theory to explain the legend about the dummy wife,—
& log of oak-wood, which Zeus pretended to marry
when at variance with Hera.

This quarrel, he said, was merely the confusion and
strife of elements, Zeus was heat, Hera was cold
(she had already been explained as earth and air),
the dummy wife of oak-wood was a tree that emerged
after a flood, and so forth. Of course, there was
no evidence that mythopmic men held Plutarchian
theories of heat and cold and the conflict of the
elements; besides, as Eusebius pointed out, Hera had
already been defined once as an allegory of wedded
life, and once as the earth, and again as the sir, and
it was rather too late to assert that she was also the
cold and watery element in the world. As for his
own explanation of the myths, Ensebius holds that
they descend from a period when men in their
lawless barbarism knew no better than to tell ench
tales. “ Ancient folk, in the exceeding savagery of
their lives, made no account of God, the universal
Creator, . . . but betook them to all manner of
abominations. For the laws of decent existence were
not yet established, nor was any settled and peaceful
state ordained among men, but only a loose and
savage fashion of wandering life, while, as beasts
irrational, they cared for no more than to fill their
bellies, being in a manner without God in the world.”
Growing a little more civilised, men, according to


! Pausanina, ix. 31.


MODERN SYSTEMS. 19


Eusebius, sought after something divine, which they
found in the heavenly bodies. Later, they fell to
worshipping living persons, especially “ medicine men”
and conjurors, and continued to worship them even
after their decense, so that Greek temples are really
tombs of the dead.’ Finally, the civilised ancients,
with a conservative reluctance to abandon their old
myths (cweiy ra watpia ToApdwros ovdeves), invented
for them moral or physical explanations, like those
of Plutarch and others, earlier and later.’

As Eusebins, like Clemens of Alexandria, Arnobins,
and the other early Christian disputants, had no pre-
jadice in favour of Hellenic mythology, and no senti-
mental reason for wishing to suppose that the origin of
its impurities was pure, he found his way to the very
theory of the irrational element in mythology which
we propose to offer.

Even to sketch the history of mythological hypo-
thesis in modern times would require a book to
itself. It must suffice here to indicate the various
lines which speculation as to mythology has por-
sued.

All interpretations of myth have been formed in
accordance with the ideas prevalent in the time of
the interpreters, The early Greek physicists thought
that mythopeic men had been physicists. Aristotle
hints that they were (like himself) political philoso-
phers.?’ Neo-platonists songht in the myths for Neo-
platonism; most Christians (unlike Eusebins) either
sided with Euemerus, or found in myth the inventions

1 Prop. Bik 5 * Prop, Ey ii. 619 2? Met ai. 8, 19.


20 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


of devils, or a tarnished and distorted memory of the
Biblical revelation.

This was the theory, for example, of good old Jacob
Bryant, who saw everywhere memories of the Noachian
deluge and proofs of the correctness of Old Testament
ethnology.?

Much the same attempt to find the Biblical truth
at the bottom of savage and ancient fable has been
recently made hy the Iste M. Lenormant, a Catholic
scholar.*

In the beginning of the present century Germany
turned her attention to mythology. As usual, men’s
ideas were biassed by the general nature of their
opinions. In a pious kind of spirit, Friedrich Creuzer
sought to find symbols of some pure, early, and Oriental
theosophy in the myths and mysteries of Greece, Cer-
tainly the Greeks of the philosophical period explained
their own myths as symbols of higher things, but the
explanation was an after-thought.? The great Lobeck,
in his Aglaophamus (1829) brought back common
sense, and made it the guide of his vast, his unequalled
learning. In a gentler and more genial spirit, C. Ot-
fried Miiller laid the foundation of a truly scientific
and historical mythology.* Neither of these writers
had, like Alfred Maury,’ much knowledge of the
myths and faiths of the lower races, but they often

1 Bryant, A Nee System, wherein an Attempl is made to Diveat Tra-
dition of Fable, 1774.

5 Les Origine de [Histoire d'apris le BiMe, 1882,

* Creurer, Symiolit und Mythologie, 2d edit, Leipaig, 1836-43.

* Introduction to a Scientific System of Mythology, English trana,,


London, 1544.
® HMistoire des Religiona de la trie: Antique, Paria, 1357.


ETYMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS, 21


seem on the point of anticipating the othmologicn!
method.

When philological science in our own century came
to maturity, in philology, as of old in physics and
later in symbols, was sought the key of myths.
While physical allegory, religious and esoteric sym-
bolism, verbal confusion, historical legend, and an
original divine tradition, perverted in ages of dark-
ness, have been the most popular keys in other ages,
the scientific nineteenth century has had a philological
key of its own. The methods of Kuhn, Bréal, Max
be examined here at full length.’ Briefly speaking,
the modern philological method is intended for a
scientific application Oe Sh eee
tations. Cadmus in the Jmeche of Euripides, Socrate
in the Cratylus of Plato, dismiss unpalatable myths as
the results of verbal confusion. People had originally
said something quite sensible—so the hypothesis runs
—but when their descendants forgot the meaning of
their remarks, a new and absurd meaning followed
from a series of unconscious puns.* This view was
supported in ancient times by purely conjectural and
impossible etymologies. Thus the myth that Dio-
nysus was sewn up in the thigh of Zeus (oynpes)
was explained by Euripides as the result of a confu-
sion of words, People had originally said that Zens

1 See Mythology in Bneyelop. Brit. and in La Mythologie (A.%.),
Paris, 1886, where Mr. Max Miller's system is criticieed. See also
Custom and Myth,


2 ‘That a considerable number of myths, chiefly myths of place names,
arise from popular etymologies is certain ; what is objected to is the vast


proportion given to this element in myths


2 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


gave a pledge (Sunpos) to Hera. The modern philo-
logical school relies for explanations of untoward and
other myths on similar confusions. Thus Daphne is
said to have been originally not a girl of romance, but
the dawn (Sanskrit, dahand : ahand) pursued by the
rising sun. But as the original Aryan sense of
Dahand or Ahand was lost, and as Daphne came
to mean the laurel—the wood which burns easily—
the fable srose that the tree had been a girl called
Daphne.’

This system chiefly rests on comparison between
the Sanskrit names in the Rig-Veda and the mythic
names in Greek, German, Slavonic, and other Aryan
legends. The attempt is made to prove that, in the
common speech of the undivided Aryan race, many
words for splendid or glowing natural phenomena
existed, and that natural processes were described in
a figurative style. As the various Aryan families
separated, the sense of the old words and names
became dim, the nomina developed into mumina, the
names into gods, the descriptions of elemental pro-
cesses into myths, As this system has already been
eriticised by us elsewhere with minute attention, a
reference to these reviews must suffice in this place.
Briefly, it may be stated that the various masters of °
the school—Kuhn, Max Miiller, Roth, Schwartz, and

? Max Miller, Nineteenth Century, December 1385 ; “Solar Myths,”
January 1386; Myths and Mythologists (A. 1.) Whitney, Mann-
hardt, Bergaigne, and others dispute the etymology. Or, and Ling.
Studies, 1874, p. t60; Mannhardt, Antile Wald wad Fdd Kultues
(Berlin, 1877), p. xx.; Bergaigne, La Religion Veédique, iii. 293; nor
does Curtius like it much, Principles of Greek Etymology, English
trans, i, g2—93.


MODERN PHILOLOGICAL CONJECTURES, 23


the rest—rarely agree where agreement is essential,
that is, in the philological foundations of their build-
ing. They differ in very many of the etymological
analyses of mythical names. They also differ in the
interpretations they put on the names, Kuhn almost
invariably seeing fire, storm, cloud, or lightning where
Mr. Max Miiller sees the chaste Dawn. Thus Mann-
hardt, after having been a disciple, is obliged to say
that comparative Indo-Germanic mythology has not
borne the fruit expected, and that “the cerfain gains
of the system reduce themselves to the scantiest
list of parallels, such as Dyaus = Zeus = Tins, Par-
janya = Perkunas, Bhaga = Bog, Varuna = Uranos *
(a position much disputed), &c. Mannhardt adds
his belief that a number of other “ equations ”"—such
as Saramféya = Hermeias, Saranyus = Demeter Erin-
nys, Kentauros=Gandharva, and many others—will
not stand criticism, and he fears that these ingenious
guesses will prove mere jeux d esprit rather than
actual facts’ Many examples of the precarious and
contradictory character of the results of philological
mythology, many instances of “ dubious etymologies,”
false logic, leaps at foregone conclusions, and attempts
to make what is peculiarly Indian in- thought into
matter of universal application, will meet us in the
chapters on Indian and Greek divine legends.* “ The
method in its practical working shows a fundamental

1 Boum und Fed Xultus, vol, ii, p. xvii, Kobo's “ epoch-making”
book is Dve Merabkunft des Fewers, Berlin, 1559. By way of example
of the disputes as to the original meaning of a name like Prometheus,
compare Mémoires de la Socidté de Lingwistique de Paria, t. iv. p. 336.

1 See especially Mannhardt's note on Kubn's theories of Poseidon
and Hermes, B. u, F. X., ii. pp. xviii., xix., note 1.


14 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


lack of the historical sense,” says Mannhardt. Ex-
“amples are torn from their contexts, he observes;
historical evolution is neglected; passages of the
Veda, themselves totally obscure, are dragged forward
to account for obscure Greek mythical phenomena.
Bask. are the accusations brought by the regretted

annhardt against the school to which he originally
seiatek and which was popular and all-powerful
even in the maturity of his own more clear-sighted
genius. Proofs of the correctness of his criticism
will be offered abundantly in the course of this
work. It will become evident that, great as are the
acquisitions of Philology, her least certain discoveries
have been too hastily applied in alien “ matter,” that
is, in the region of myth. Not that philology is
wholly without place or part in the investigation of
myth, when there is agreement among philologists as
to the meaning of o divine name. In that case a
certain amount of light is thrown on the legend of the
bearer of the name, and on its origin and first home,
Aryan, Greek, Semitic, or the like. But how rare is
agreement among philologists !

“The philological method,” says Professor Tiele,'
“is inadequate and misleading, when it is a question
of discovering the origin of a myth, or the physical
explanation of the oldest myths, or of accounting for
the rude and obscene element in the divine legends of
civilised races. But these are not the only problems
of mythology. There is, for example, the question of
the genealogical relations of myths, where we have

» fev, de OHist. des Kel., xii 3, 260, Nov.-Dee. 1885.


PLACE OF PHILOLOGY. 25


to determine whether the myths of peoples whose
speech is of the same family are special modifications
of a mythology once common to the race whence
these peoples have sprung. The philological method
alone can answer here.” But this will seem ao very
limited province when we find that almost all races,
however remote and unconnected in speech, have prac-
tically much the same myths. Philology can_ tell
whether Zeus Asterios, or Adonis, or Zeus Labran-
deus, is originally a Semitic or a Greek divine name;
here she is the Pythoness we must all consult; in this
sphere she is supreme—when her high priests are of


~ 9 he


CHAPTER IL.
NEW SYSTEM PROPOSED.


Chapter I. reeapltulated—Proposal of a new method: Sclence of com-
parative or historical study of man— Anticipated in aribecdincs-or
bins, Fontenelle, De Brossea, Spencer (of C.C.C., Cambridge), and
Mannhardt—Science of Tylor—Object of inquiry: to find condi-
tien of human intellect in which marvels of myth are parts of
practical everyday belicf—This is the savage state—Savages de-
scribed—The wild element of myth a survival from the savage
atato—Advantages of this method—Partly accounts for wide dijfu-
ion an well as origin of myths—Connected with general theory of
evolution—Puzzling example of myth of the water-swallower—
Professor Tiele's criticism of the method—Objections to method,
and answer to these—See Appendix B.


Tae past systems of mythological interpretation have
been briefly sketched. It has been shown that the
practical need for a reconciliation between religion and
morality on one side, and the stories about the gods
on the other, produced the hypotheses of Theagenes
and Metrodorus, of Socrates and Euemerus, of Aristotle
and Plutarch. It has been shown that in each case
the reconcilers argued on the basis of their own ideas
and of the philosophies of their time. The early
physicist thought that myth concealed a physical
philosophy ; the early etymologist saw in it a con-
fasion of language ; the early political speculator sup-


METHOD OF ANTHROPOLOGY. 27


posed that myth was an invention of legislators ; the
literary Euemerus found the secret of myths in the
course of an imaginary voyage to a fabled island.
Then came the moment of the Christian attacks,
and Pagan philosophers, touched with Oriental pan-
theism, recognised in myths certain pantheistic
symbols and a cryptic revelation of their own Neo-
altars fallen, then antiquaries brought their curiosity
cognised in it a depraved version of the Jewish sacred
writings, and found the ark on every mountain-top of
Greece. The critical nineteenth century brought in,
with Otfried Miiller and Lobeck, a closer analysis;
and finally, in the sudden rise of comparative philo-
logy, it chanced that philologists annexec i
of myths. Each of these systems had its own amount
of truth, but each certainly failed to unravel the whole
web of tradition and of foolish faith.

Meantime a new science has come into existence,
the science which studies man in the sum of all his
works and thoughts, as evolved through the whole
process of his development. This science, Compara-
tive Anthropology, studies the development of law out
of custom; the development of weapons from the stick
or stone to the latest repeating rifle; the develop-
ment of society from the horde to the nation. It is
a study which does not despise the most backward nor
degraded tribe, nor neglect the most civilised, and it
frequently finds in Australians or Nootkas the germ of
ideas and institutions which Greeks or Romans brought


28 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


rudeness, in the midst of civilisation,

It is inevitable that this science should also try its
hand on mythology. Our purpose is to employ the
anthropological method—the study of the evolution
of ideas, from the savage to the barbarous, and
thence to the civilised stage—in the province of
myth, ritual, and religion. It has been shown
that the light of this method had dawned on Euse-
bius in his polemic with the heathen Mais
Spencer, the head of Corpus, Cambridge (1630-93),
had really no other scheme in his mind in his erudite
work on Hebrew Ritual.’ Spencer was a student of
man's religions generally, and he came to the conclu-
sion that Hebrew ritual was but an expurgated, and,
so to speak, divinely “ licensed” adaptation of heathen
customs at large. We do but follow his guidance on
less perilous ground when we seek for the original
forms of classical rite and myth in the parallel usages
and legends of the most backward races.

Fontenelle, in the last century, stated, with all the
clearness of the French intellect, the system which is
partially worked out in this essay—the system which
explains the irrational element in myth as inherited
from savagery. Fontenelle’s paper (Sur [Origine des
Fables) is brief, sensible, and witty, and requires little
but copions evidence to make it adequate. But he
merely threw out the idea, and left it to be neglected. .

Among other founders of the anthropological or


1 De Legiius Hebroorum Ritwalibus, Tubingm, 1732.
* See Appendix A. Fontenelle's Origine des Fables,


FROM FONTENELLE TO TYLOR. 29


historical school of mythology, De Brosses should not
be forgotten. In his Diewx Fetiches (1760) he follows
the path which Eusebius indicated—the path of
Spencer and Fontenelle—now the beaten road of
Tylor and M‘Lennan and Mannhardt.

In anthropology, in the science of Waitz, Tylor,
and M‘Lennan, in the examination of man's faith in
the light of his social, legal, and historical conditions
generally, we find, with Mannhardt, some of the keys
of myth. This science “ makes it manifest that the
different stages through which humanity has passed
in its intellectual evolution have still their living
representatives among various existing races. The
study of these lower races is an invaluable instrument
for the interpretation of the survivals from earlier
stages, which we meet in the full civilisation of culti-
vated peoples, and whose origins were in the remotest
fetichism and savagery.” *

It is by following this road, and by the aid of
anthropology and of human history, that we propose
to seek for a demonstrably actual condition of the
human intellect, whereof myth would be the natural
and inevitable fruit. In all the earlier theories which
we have sketched, inquirers took it for granted that
the myth-makers were men with philosophic and moral
ideas like their own—ideas which, from some reason
of religion or state, they expressed in bizarre terms
of allegory. We shall attempt, on the other hand, to
prove that the human mind has passed through a con-
dition quite unlike that of civilised men—a condition

1. Mannhardt, op. cit., ii. xxiii.


*


30 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


in which things seemed natural and rational that now
appear unnatural and devoid of reason, and in which,
therefore, if myths were evolved, they would, if they
survived into civilisation, be such as civilised men find
strange and perplexing.

Our first question will be, Is there a stage of human
society and of the human intellect in which facts that
appear to us to be monstrous and irrational—facts
corresponding to the wilder incidents of myth—are
accepted as ordinary occurrences of everyday life? In
the region of romantic rather than of mythical inven-
tion we know that there is such a state. Mr. Lane, in
his preface to the Arabian Nights, says that the Arabs
have an advantage over us as story-tellera) They can
introduce such incidents as the change of a man into a
horse, or of a woman into a dog, or the intervention
of an Afreet without any more scruple than our own
novelists feel in describing a duel or the concealment
of a will. . Among the Arabs the agencies of magic and
of spirits are regarded as at least os probable and
common as duels and concealments of wills seem to
be thought by European novelists. It is obvious that
we need look no farther for the explanation of the super-
natural events in Arab romances. Now let us apply
this system to mythology. It is admitted that Greeks,
Romans, Aryans of India in the age of the Sanskrit
commentators, and Egyptians of the Ptolemaic and
earlier ages, were as much puzzled as we are by the
mythical adventures of their gods. But is there any
known stage of the human intellect in which similar
adventures, and the metamorphoses of men into


THE SAVAGE. 3t


animals, trees, stars, and all else that puzzles us in the
civilised mythologies, are regarded as possible incidents
of daily human life? Our answer is, that everything
in the civilised mythologies which we regard as irra-
tional seems only part of the accepted and natural
order of things to contemporary savages, and in the
past seemed equally rational and natural to savages
concerning whom we have historical information.”
Our theory is, therefore, that the savage and senseless
element in mythology is, for the most part, a legacy


1 ‘We have been asked to define a savage, He cannot be defined in
an epigram, bot by way of choice of a type :—

1. In material equipment, the perfect savage is he who employs tools
of stone and wood, not of metal ; who is nomadic rather than settled ;
who is acquainted (if at all) only with the rudest forma of the arte of
wotting, weaving, fire-making, &e.; and who derives more of his food
agriculture or from the flesh of domesticated animal.

2. In psychology, the savage is he who (extending unconsciously to
the universe his own implicit consciousness of personality) regards all
natural objects as animated and Intelligent beings, and, drawing mo
hard and fast line between himself and the things in the world, i
readily pereusded that men may be metamorphosed into plants, beasta,
and stare: that winds and clouds, sun and dawn, are persons with
human passions and parte; and that the lower animals especially may
be creatures more powerful than himself, and, in a sense, divine ad
creative.

3. In religion, tho savage is he who (while probably, in certain
moods, conscious of » far higher moral faith) believes chieily in an-
cestral ghosts or spirits of woods and wells that were never ancestral ;
prays chiefly by dint of magic; adores inanimate objecta, and even
appeala to the beasts as supernatural protectors.

4. In society, the savage bs he who bases his laws on the well-
defined lines of totemiam—that is, claims descent from natural objects,
and derives from the sacredness of those objects the sanction of his
marriage prohibitions and blood-feuds, while he makes skill in magic @

Sach, for our purpose, is the savage, and we propose to explain the
more “senseless” parts in mythology as “ curvivala” of these ideas and


33 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


from ancestors of the civilised races who were once in
an intellectual state not higher, but probably lower,
than that of Australians, Bushmen, Red Indians, the
lower races of Sonth America, and other worse than
barbaric peoples. As the ancestors of the Greeks,
Aryans of India, Egyptians, and others advanced in
civilisation, their religious thought was shocked and
surprised by myths (originally dating from the period
of savagery, and natural in that period) which were
preserved down to the time of Pausanias by local
priesthoods, or which were stereotyped in the ancient
poems of Hesiod and Homer, or in the Brahmanas and
Vedas of India, or were retained in the popular religion
of Egypt. This theory recommended itself to Lobeck.
“We may believe that ancient and early tribes framed
gods like unto themselves in action and in experience,
and that the allegorical softening down of myths is the
explanation added later by descendants who had attained
to purer ideas of divinity, yet dared not reject the
religion of their ancestors.”" The senseless element
in the myths would, by this theory, be for the most
part a “survival;" and the age and condition of
human thought whence it survived would be one in
which our most ordinary ideas about the nature of
things and the limits of possibility did not yet exist,
when all things were conceived of in quite other
fashion; the age, that is, of savagery.

It is universally admitted that “ survivals” of this
kind do account for many anomalies in our institu-

 Aglaoph., 1. 153. Had Lobeck gone o step farther, and examined


the mental candition of exferes ef proce gentes, this bouk would have
been superiiacus,


SURVIVAL, BORROWING, IMITATION. 33


tions, in law, politics, society, even in dress and
manners. If isolated fragments of earlier ages abide
in these, it is still more probable that other fragments
will survive in anything so closely connected as is
mythology with the conservative religions sentiment
and tradition, Our object, then, is to prove that the
“silly, savage, and irrational” element in the myths
of civilised peoples is, as a rule, either a survival from
the period of savagery, or has been borrowed from
savage neighbours by a cultivated people, or, lastly,
is an imitation by later poets of old savage data.’
For example, to explain the constellations as meta-
morphosed men, animals, or other objects of terrestrial
life is the habit of savages,/“—a natural habit among
people who regard all things as on one level of per-
sonal life and intelligence, When the stars, among
civilised Greeks or Aryans of India, are also popularly
regarded as transformed and transfigured men, ani-
mals, and the like, this belief may be either a survival
from the age when the ancestors of Greeks and Indians
were in the intellectual condition of the Australian
Mourri; or the star-name and star-myth may have been
borrowed from savages, or from cultivated peoples once
savage or apt to copy savages; or, as in the case of
the Coma Berenices, a poet of a late age may have
invented a new artificial myth on the old lines of
savage fancy.

1 We may be asked why do anvages entertain the irrational ideas
which survive in myth? One might as well ask why they eat each
other, or use stones instead of metal. Thoir intellectual powers are
not fully developed, and hasty analogy from their own unreasoned
consciousness is their chief guide. See Appendix B,

: Bee Ontos and Myth, “ Star-Mytba.” .


iM MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


method of interpreting a certain element in
day tholowy 3 is, we must repeat, no new thing, though,
to judge from the protests of several mythologists, it is
new to many inquirers. We have seen that Eusebius
threw out proposals in this direction; that Spencer,
De Brosses, and Fontenelle unconsciously followed
him; and we have quoted from Lobeck a statement
of a similar opinion, The whole matter has been
stated as clearly as possible by Mr. E. B. Tylor :—

i Savages have been for untold ages, and still are,
living i in the myth-making stage of the human mind.
It was through sheer ignorance and neglect of this
direct knowledge how and by what manner of men
myths are really made that their simple philosophy
has come to be buried under masses of commentator’s
rubbish. . . .” Mr. Tylor goes on thus (and his
words contain the gist of our argument): “ The general
thesis maintained is that myth arose in the savage
condition prevalent in remote ages among the whole
human race; that it remains comparatively unchanged
among the rude modern tribes who have departed
least from these primitive conditions, while higher
and later civilisations, partly by retaining its actual
principles, and partly by carrying on its inherited
results in the form of ancestral tradition, continued it
not merely in toleration, but in honour.”* Elsewhera
Mr. Tylor points out that by this method of interpre-
tation we may study myths in various stages of evoln-
tion, from the rude guess of the savage at an expla-


i Primitive Culture, ail edit, iL P- 253.
7 Op. cut., p. 275


ME. TYLOR'S VIEW. 35


nation of natural phenomena, through the systems of
the higher barbarisms, or lower civilisations (as in an-
cient Mexico), and the sacerdotage of India, till myth
reaches its most human form in Greece. Yet even in
Greek myth the beast is not wholly cast out, and
Hellas by no means “let the ape and tiger dic.”
That Mr. Tylor does not exclude the “ethos race from
his general theory is plain enough.’ “What is the
Aryan conception of the Thunder-god but a poetic.
elaboration of thoughts inherited from the savage
stage through which the primitive Aryans had
passed ?"*

The advantages of our hypothesis (if its legitimacy
be admitted) are obvious. In the first place, we have
to deal with an actual demonstrable condition of the
human intellect. The existence of the savage state
in all its various degrees, and of the common intel-
lectual habits and conditions which are shared by the
backward peoples, and again the survival of many of
these in civilisation, are indubitable facts. Woe are
not obliged to fall back upon some fanciful and un-
supported theory of what “ primitive man” did, and
said, and thought, Nay, more; we escape all the
fallacies connected with the terms “ primitive man.”
We are not compelled (as will be shown later)® to
prove that the first men of all were like modern
savages, nor that savages represent primitive man.

* Op. eit., fi. 265.

* Pretty much the same view seems to be taken by Mr. Max Miiller
(Nineteenth Century, January 1882) when he calls Tsui Goab (whom


the Hottentots believe to be a defunct Conjurer), “a Hottentot Indra
or 2eus,” * Appendix B,


36 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


It may be that the lowest extant savages are the
nearest of existing peoples to the type of the first
human beings. But on this point it is unnecessary
for us to dogmatise. If we can show that, whether
men began their career as savages or not, they have
at least passed through the savage sfatus or have
borrowed the ideas of races in the savage sfafts, that
is all we need. We escape from all the snares of
theories (incapable of historical proof) about the really
primeval and original condition of the human family.
Once more, our theory naturally attaches itself to
the general system of Evolution. We are enabled
to examine mythology as a thing of gradual develop-
ment and of slow and manifold modifications, corre-
sponding in some degree to the various changes in the
general progress of society. Thus we shall watch the
barbaric conditions of thought which produce barbaric
myths, while these in their turn are retained, or per-
haps purified, or perhaps explained away, by more
advanced civilisations. Further, we shall be able to
detect the survival of the savage ideas with least modi-
fication, and the persistence of the savage myths with
least change, among the classes of a civilised popu-
lation which have shared least in the general advance.
These classes are, first, the rustic peoples, dwelling far
from cities and schools, on heaths or by the sea; second,
the conservative local priesthoods, who retain the more
erude and ancient myths of the local gods and heroes
after these have been modified or rejected by the purer
sense of philosophers and national poets. Thus much of
ancient myth is a woven warp and woof of three threads:


ELEMENTS OF MYTH. a7


the savage donnée, the civilised and poetic modification
of the savage donnée, the version of the original fable
which survives in popular tales and in the “ sacred
chapters” of local priesthoods, A critical study of
these three stages in myth is in accordance with
the recognised practice of science. Indeed, the whole
system is only an application to this particular pro-
vince, mythology, of the method by which the develop-
ment either of organisms or of human institutions
is traced. As the anomalies and apparently useless
and accidental features in the human or in other
animal organisms may be explained as stunted or
rudimentary survivals of organs useful in a previous
stage of life, so the anomalous and irrational myths of
civilised races may be explained as survivals of stories
which, in an earlier state of thought and knowledge,
seemed natural enough. The persistence of the myths
after their significance had become obsolete is ac-
counted for by the well-known conservatism of the
religious sentiment—a conservatism noticed even by
Eusebios. “In Ister days, when they became ashamed
of the religions beliefs of their ancestors, they invented
private and respectful interpretations, each to suit him-
self. For no one dared to shake the ancestral beliefs,
as they honoured at a very high rate the sacredness and
antiquity of old associations, and of the teaching they
had received in childhood.” *

Thus the method which we propose to employ is in
harmony both with modern scientific procedure and
with the views of a clear-sighted Father of the Church.

* Prop. B., it. 6 19.


i]
;


38 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Consequently no system could well be less “ heretical ”
and “ unorthodox.”

The last advantage of our hypothesis which need
here be mentioned is that it helps to explain the dif-
fusion no less than the origin of the wild and crazy
element in myth. We seek for the origin of the
savage factor of myth in the intellectual condition of
savages. The diffusion of stories practically identical
in every quarter of the globe may be (provisionally)
regarded as the result of the prevalence in every
quarter, at one time or another, of similar mental
habits and ideas. This explanation must not be
pressed too hard nor too far. If we find all over the
world a belief that men can change themselves and
their neighbours into beasts, that belief will account
for the appearance of metamorphosis in myth. If we
find « belief that inanimate objects are really much on
a level with man, the opinion will account for inci-
dents of myth such as that in which the wooden
figure-head of the Argo speaks with a human voice.
Again, a widespread belief in the separability of the
soul or the life from the body will account for the
incident in nursery tales and myths of the “ giant who
had no heart in his body,” but kept his heart and life
elsewhere. An ancient identity of mental status and
the working of similar mental forces at the attempt to
explain the same phenomena will account, without any
theory of borrowing, or transmission of myth, or of
original unity of race, for the world-wide diffusion of
many mythical conceptions.

But this theory of the original similarity of the savage


THE WATER-THIEF, 39


mind everywhere and in all races will scarcely account
for the world-wide distribution of long and intricate
mythical plots, of consecutive series of adroitly inter-
woven situations, In presence of these long romances,
found among so many widely severed peoples, con-
jecture is, at present, almost idle. We do not know,
in many instances, whether such stories were indepen-
dently developed, or carried from o common centre,
or borrowed by one race from another, and so handed
on round the world.

This chapter may conclude with an example of o
tale whose diffusion may be explained in divers ways,
though its origin seems undoubtedly savage. If we
turn to the Algonkins, a stock of Red Indians, we
come on a popular tradition which really does give
pause to the mythologist, Could this story, he asks
himself, have been separately invented in widely dif-
ferent places, or could the Iroquois have borrowed
from the Australian blacks or the Andaman Island-
ers? It is a common thing in most mythologies to
find everything of value to man—fire, sun, water—in
the keeping of some hostile power. The fire, or the
sun, or the water is then stolen, or in other ways
rescued from the enemy and restored to humanity.
The Huron story (as far as water is concerned) is told
by Father Paul Le Jeune, a Jesuit missionary, who
lived among the Hurons about 1636. The myth
begins with the usual opposition between two brothers,
the Cain and Abel of savage legend. One of the
brothers, named Toskeha, slew the other, and became
the father of mankind (as known to the Red Indians)


40 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


and the guardian of the Iroquois. ‘The earth was
at first arid and sterile, but Toskeha destroyed the
gigantic frog which had swallowed all the waters,
and guided the torrents into smooth streams and
lakes."

Now where, outside of North America, do we find
this frog who swallowed all the water? We find him
in Australia,

“The aborigines of Lake Tyers,” remarks Mr. Brough
Smyth, “say that at one time there was no water
anywhere on the face of the earth. All the waters
were contained in the body of a huge frog, and men
and women could get none of them. A council was
held, and . . . it was agreed that the frog should be
made to laugh, when the waters would run out of his
mouth, and there would be plenty in all parts.”

To make a long story short, all the animals played
the jester before the gigantic solemn frog, who sat as
grave as Lonis XV. “I do not like buffoons who
don’t make me laugh,” said that majestical monarch.
At last the eel danced on the tip of his tail, and the
gravity of the prodigious Batrachian gave way. He
laughed till he literally split his sides, and the im-
prisoned waters came with a rush. Indeed, many
persons were drowned, though this is not the only
Australian version of the Deluge.

The Andaman Islanders dwell at a very consider-
able distance from Australia and from the Iroquois,
and, in the present condition of the blacks of both

1 Relations de la Nouvelle France, 1636, p. 103 (Paris, Cramoisy,
1637).


THE ANDAMAN TOAD. 40


islands, neither would be likely to visit the other.
Still, one can conceive that the story of the frog who
swallowed the water might filter from the Australians
to the Andaman people, or vice verad. The frog in
the Andaman version is called a toad, and he came to
swallow the waters in the following way :—One day a
woodpecker was eating honey high up in the boughs
of a tree. Far below, the toad was a witness of the
feast, and asked for some honey. “Well, come up
here, and you shall have some,” said the woodpecker.
“But how am I to climb?” “Take hold of that
creeper, and I will draw you up,” said the wood-
pecker; but all the while he was bent on a practical
joke. So the toad got into a bucket he happened to
possess, and fastened the bucket to the creeper. “ Now,
pall!” Then the woodpecker raised the toad slowly
to the level of the bough where the honey was, and
presently let him down with a run, not only dis-
appointing the poor toad, but shaking him severely.
The toad went away in a rage. and looked about him
for revenge. A happy thought occurred to him, and
he drank up all the water of the rivers and lakes.
Birds and beasts were perishing, woodpeckers among
them, of thirst. The toad, overjoyed at his success,
wished to add insult to the injury, and, very thought-
lesaly, began to dance in an irritating manner at his
foes. But then the stolen waters gushed out of his
mouth in full volume, and the drought soon ended.
One of the most curious points in this myth is the
origin of the quarrel between the woodpecker and the
toad, The same beginuing—the tale of an insult put


42 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


on an animal by hauling up and letting him down with
& Fun—occurs in an African Miirchen.!

Now this strangely diffused story of the slaying of
the frog which had swallowed all the water seems to be
4 savage myth of which the more heroic conflict of
Indra with Vrittra (the dragon which had swallowed
all the waters) is an epic and sublimer version? “'The
heavenly water, which Vrittra withholds from the world,
is usually the prize of the contest.”

The serpent of Vedic myth is, perhaps, rather the
robber-guardian than the swallower of the waters, but
Indra is still, like the Iroquois loskehs, "he who
wounds the full one.”* This example of the wide
distribution of a myth shows how the question of
diffusion, though connected with, is yet: distinct from
that of origin. The advantage of our method will
prove to be, that it discovers an historical and demon-
strable state of mind as the origin of the wild element
in myth. Again, the wide prevalence in the earliest
times of this mental condition will, to a certain extent,
explain the distridution of myth, But room must be
left, of course, for processes of borrowing and trans-
mission. Finally, our hypothesis is not involved in
dubious theories of race. To us, myths appear to be

1 Brough Smyth, Aborizi of Vietori :
Amerian Hersh 56 Cao cons df ae
1636, 1640, 1671; [Sagard, iat, du Canada, 1636, p. 4513) Journal
dnthrop, Jnat., 1851. |
7 oe Der Rig- Veda, ili, p. 337. See postea, “Divine Myths of
is Gubernatis, Zoological Myth, ii 395, note 2. “When Indra kills
the serpent he opens the torrent of the waters” (p, 393), See also
ditarcya Lraimana, translated by Haug, li. 483.


VRITTEA AND THE FROG. 43


affected (in their origins) much less by the race than
by the stage of culture attained by the people who
cherish them. A fight for the waters between a
monstrous dragon like Vrittra and a heroic god like
Indra is a nobler affair than a quarrel for tle
waters between a woodpecker and a toad, But the
improvement and transfiguration, so to speak, of
myth at bottom the same is due to the superior
culture, not to the peculiar race, of the Vedic poets,
except so far as culture itself depends on race. How
far the purer culture was attained to by the original
superiority of the Aryan over the Andaman breed, it
is not necessary for our purpose to inquire. Thus,
Ge Ria Wiiche, we, ey olsis for our system a cer-
tain demonstrable character, which helps to simplify
the problems of mythology, and to remove them from
the realm of fanciful guesses and conflicting etymo-
logical conjectures into that of sober science. That
these pretensions are not unacknowledged even by
mythologists trained in other schools is proved by the
remarks of Dr. Tiele.*

Dr. Tiele writes: “If I were obliged to choose be-
tween this method” (the system here advocated) “ and
that of comparative philology, it is the former that I


would adopt without the slightest hesitation. This


method alone enables us to explain the fact, which

has so often provoked amazement, that people so re-

fined as the Greeks, . . . or so rude, but morally pure,

as the Germans, . . . managed to attribute to their

gods all manner of cowardly, cruel, and disorderly
1 Rev. det’ Hist. des Rel, “Le Mythe de Cronos,” January 1256.


* bid


44 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


conduct. This method alone explains the why and
wherefore of all those strange metamorphoses of gods
into beasts and plants, and even stones, which scanda-
lised philosophers, and which the witty Ovid played
on for the diversion of his contemporaries. In short,
this method teaches us to recognise in all those
strange stories the survivals of a barbaric age, long
passed away, but enduring to later times in the form
of religious traditions, of all traditions the most per-
sistent. . . . Finally, this method alone enables us to
explain the origin of myths, because it endeavours to
study them in their rudest and most primitive shape,
thus allowing their true significance to be much more
clearly apparent than it can be in the myths (so often
touched, retouched, angmented, and humanised) which
are current among races arrived at a certain degree of
culture.”

The method is thus applauded by a most competent
authority, and it has been warmly accepted by a
distinguished French school of students, represented
by M. Gaidoz. But it is obvious that the method rests
on a double hypothesis: first, that satisfactory evidence
as to the mental conditions of the lower and backward
races is obtainable; second, that the civilised races
(however they began) either passed through the savage
state of thought and practice, or borrowed very freely
from people in that condition. These hypotheses have
been attacked by opponents; the trustworthiness of
our evidence, especially, has been assailed. By way of
facilitating the course of the exposition and of lessen-
ing the disturbing element of controversy, a reply to


REPLY TO OBJECTIONS. 45


the objections and a defence of the evidence has been
relegated to an Appendix.’ Meanwhile we go on to
examine the peculiar characteristics of the mental con-
dition of savages and of peoples in the lower and
upper barbarisma,


( 46 )


CHAPTER IL.


THE MENTAL CONDITION OF SAVAGES —CON-
FUSION WITH NATURE—TOTEMISM.


The mental condition of savages the basis of the irrational element in
myth—Characteristics of that condition: (1.) Confusion of all
things in an equality of presumed animation and intelligenco—
(2.) Belief in soreery—(3.) Spiritualism—(4.) Curiosity—(§.) Ensy
credulity and mental Indolence—The curiosity iv entisfied, thanks
to the credulity, by myths in answer to all inquirica—Evidence
for this—Mr, Tylor's opinion—Mr. Im Thorn—Josuit mizaion-
aries’ Relations — Examples of confusion between men, plants,
beasts, and other natural objectsa—RHeports of travellers— Evidence
from institution of totemlam—Definition of totemiam—Totemism
in Australia, Africa, America, the Oceanic Islands, India, North
Asia—Conclusions : Totemiem being found eo widely distributed,
is a proof of the existence of that savage mental condition in which
no line is drawn between men and the other things in the world.
This confusion is one of the characteristics of myth in all races.


WE set out to discover a stage of human intellectual
development which would necessarily produce the
essential elements of myth. We think we have found
that stage in the condition of savagery, We now
proceed to array the evidence for the mental processes
of savages. We intend to demonstrate the existence
in practical savage life of the ideas which most surprise
us in civilised sacred legends.

For the purposes of this inquiry, it is enough to
select a few special peculiarities of savage thought.


SAVAGE IDEAS. v7


1. First we have that nebulous and confused frame
of mind to which all things, animate or inanimate,
haman, animal, vegetable, or inorganic, seem on the
same level of life, passion, and reason. The savage
draws no hard and fast line between himself and the
things in the world. He regards himself as literally
‘akin to animals and plants and heavenly bodies; he
attributes sex and procreative powers even to stones
and rocks, and he assigns human speech and human
feelings to sun and moon and stars and wind, no less

2. The second point to note in savage opinion is the
belief in magic and sorcery. The world and all the
things in it, being vaguely conceived of as sensible
and rational, obey the commands of certain members
of the tribe, chiefs, jugglers, conjurors, or what you will.
Rocks open at their order, rivers dry up, animals are
their servants and hold converse with them. These
magicians cause or heal diseases, and can command even
the weather, bringing rain or thunder or sunshine at
their will There is no supernatural attribute of “ cloud-
compelling Zeus” or of Apollo that is not freely as-
signed to the tribal conjuror. By virtue, doubtless, of
the community of nature between man and the things
in the world, the conjuror (like Zeus or Indra) can
assume at will the shape of any animal, or can meta-
morphose his neighbours or enemies into animal forms.

3. Another peculiarity of savage belief naturally con-
nects itself with that which has just been described.

i “So faset auch das Alterthom fhren Unterschied von den Menschen
ganz anders als die splitere Zcit."—(rimm, quoted by Licbrecht, Zur
Volkakunde, p. 17.


48 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


The snvage has very strong ideas about the persistent
existence of the souls of the dead. They retain much
of their old nature, but are often more malignant after
death than they had been during life. They are fre-
quently at the beck and call of the conjuror, whom they
aid with their advice and with their magical power.
By virtue of the close connection already spoken of
between man and the animals, the souls of the dead are
not rarely supposed to migrate into the bodies of beasts,
or to revert to the condition of that species of creatures
with which each tribe supposes itself to be related
by ties of kinship. With the usual inconsistency of
mythical belief, the souls of the dead are spoken of,
at other times, as if they inhabited a spiritual world,
usually a gloomy place, which mortal men may visit,
but whence no one can escape who has tasted of the
food of the ghosts.

4. In connection with spirits a far-reaching savage
philosophy prevails. It is not unusual to assign a
ghost to all objects, animate or inanimate, and the
spirit or strength of a man is frequently regarded as
something separable, or something with a definite
locality in the body. A man's strength and spirit
may reside in his kidney fat, in his heart, in a lock
of his hair, or may even be stored by him in some
separate receptacle. Very frequently a man is held
capable of detaching his soul from his body, and letting
it roam about on his business, sometimes in the form
of a bird or other animal.

5. Many minor savage beliefs might be named,
euch as the common faith in friendly or protecting


SAVAGE SPECULATION. 49


animals, and the notion that “ natural deaths" (ns we
call them) are always unnatural, that death is always
caused by some hostile spirit or conjuror. From this
opinion comes the myth that man is naturally not sub-
ject to death: that death was somehow introduced into
the world by a mistake or misdeed is a corollary.

6. One more mental peculiarity of the savage mind
remains to be considered in this brief summary. The
savage, like the civilised man, is curious. The first
faint impulses of the scientific spirit are at work in
his brain; he is anxious to give himself an account of
the world in which he finds himself. But he is not
more curious than he is, om oceasion, credulous. His
intellect is eager to ask questions, as is the habit of
children, but his intellect is also lazy, and he is con-
tent with the first answer that comes to hand. “ Ils
s‘arrétent aux premitres notions qu'ils en ont,” says Pére
Hierome Lalemant.' “ Nothing,” says Schoolcraft,
is too capacious (sic) for Indian belief.”* The replies
to his questions he receives from tradition, or (when a
new problem arises) evolves an answer for himeelf in
the shape of stories, Just as Socrates, in the Platonic
dialogues, recalls or invents a myth in the despair of
reason, so the savage has a story fur answer to almost
every question that he can ask himself. These stories
are in a sense scientific, because they attempt a solu-
tion of the riddles of the world. They are in a sense
religious, because there is usually a supernatural power,
a deus ex machina, of some sort to cut the knot of the

' Lemmons ef Nouvelle France, 1648, p. 70.


3 digie Researches, 1. 41.
VOL. I. D


50 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


problem. Such stories, then, are the science, and to a
certain extent the religious tradition, of savages.’

Now these tales are necessarily cast in the mould
of the savage ideas of which a sketch has been given.
The changes of the heavenly bodies, the processes of
day and night, the existence of the stars, the inven-
tion of the arts, the origin of the world (as far as
known to the savage), of the tribe, of all the various
animals and plants, the origin of death itself, the origin
of the perplexing traditional tribal customs, are all
accounted for in stories. These stories, again, are
fashioned in accordance with the beliefs already named:
the belief in human connection with and kinship with
beasts and plants; the belief in magic ; the belief in the
perpetual possibility of metamorphosis or “shape shift-
ing;” the belief in the permanence and power of the
ghosts of the dead; the belief in the personal and ani-
mated character of all the things in the world, and
go forth.

No more need be said to explain the wild and (as
it seems to us moderns) the irrational character of
savage myth. It is a jungle of foolish fancies, a wal-
purgis nacht of gods, and beasts, and men, and stars,
and ghosts, all moving madly on a level of common
personality and animation, and all changing shapes at
random, as partners are changed in some fantastic
witches’ revel. Such is savage mythology, and how
could it be otherwise when we consider the elements
of thought and belief out of which it is composed ?

1 “The Indians (Algonkins) conveyed instruction—moral, mechani-
eal, and religiouws—through traditionary fictions and talea."—Sehool.
craft, Algic Researches, i. 12.


+3


=


CONFUSION OF ALL THINGS. st


We shall see that part of the mythology of the Greeka
or the Aryans of India is but a similar walpurygis nacht,
in which an incestuous or amorous god may become a
beast, and the object of his pursuit, once s woman,
may also become a beast, and then shift shapes to a
tree, or a bird, or o star. But in the civilised races
the genins of the people tends to suppress, exclude,
and refine away the wild element, which, however, is
never wholly eliminated. The Erinyes soon stop the
mouth of the horse of Achilles when he begins, like
the Horse in Grimm's Goose Girl, to hold a sustained

yereation.. But the ancient, cruel, and grotesque
savage Oineea: nearly overcome by Hause and greatly
reduced by the Vedic poets, breaks out again in Hesiod,
in temple legends auth Bralenmnib globe, and Ginily
proves so strong that it can only be subdued by
Christianity, or rather by that break between the
educated classes and the traditional past of religion
which has resulted from Christianity.

We have now to demonstrate the existence in the
savage intellect of the various ideas and habits which
we have described, and out of which mythology springs.
First, we have to show that “a nebulous and confased
state of mind, to which all things animate or inanimate,
human, animal, vegetable, or inorganic, seem on the
game level of life, passion, and reason,” does really
exist." The existence of this condition of the intel-
lect will be demonstrated first on the evidence of
the statements of civilised observers, next on the

1 Jliad, xix, 41%,
? Creuzer and Guigniaut, vol. i


20047


52 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


evidence of the savage institutions in which it is
embodied.

The opinion of Mr. Tylor is naturally of great
value, as it is formed on as wide in acquaintance ag
any inquirers can hope to possess with the views of the
lower races, Mr. Tylor observes! “We havo to in-
form ourselves of the savage man’s idea, which is very
different from the civilised man’s, of the nature of the
lower animals. . . . The sense of an absolute psychical
distinction between man and beast, so prevalent in the
civilised world, is hardly to be found among the lower
races.” The universal attribution of « souls” to all
things—the theory known as “ Animism "—is another
proof that the savage draws no hard and fast line be-
tween man and the other things in the world. Tho
notion of the Italian country-people that cruelty to an
animal does not matter because it is not a “ Chris
tian,” has no parallel in the philosophy of the savage,
to whom all objects seem to have souls, just as men
have. Mr. Im 'Thurn® found the absence of any sense
of 4 difference between man and nature a character-
istic of his native companions in Guiana, “The very
phrase, ‘Men and other animals,’ or even, ag it is
often expressed, ‘Men‘and animals,’ based as it is on
the superiority which civilised man feels over other
animals, expresses a dichotomy which is in no way
recognised by the Indian. . . . Tt is therefore most
Important to realise how comparatively small really is
the difference between men In a state of savagery and

1 Primitive Culture, i. 167-169.
* dong the Indians of Guiana (1583), p. 350,


=


-


MAN AND BEAST. $3


other animals, and how completely even such differ-
ence as exists escapes the notice of savage men. ... It
is not, therefore, too much to say that, according to the
view of the Indians, other animals differ from men
only in bodily form and in their various degrees of
strength; in spirit they do not differ at all.” The
Indian's notion of the life of plants and stones is on the
same level of unreason, os we moderns reckon reason.
He believes in the spirits of rocks and stones, un-
deterred by the absence of motion in these objects,
‘Not only many rocks, but also many waterfalls,
streams, and indeed material objects of every sort,
are supposed each to consist of a body and a spirit,
as does man.”" It is not our business to ask here
how men came by the belief in universal sanima-
tion. That belief is gradually withdrawn, distinc-
tions are gradually introduced, as civilisation and
knowledge advance. We need not, therefore, pause
here to consider Mr. Herbert Spencer's theory, that
the belief in universal animation is the result of
secondary confusions of thought and speech, nor
Vignoli’s.idea that man inherits an instinctive sense of
universal animation from the lower species ont of which,
ex hypothesi, he was evolved. It is enough for us if
the failure to draw a hard and fast line between man
and beasts, stones and plants, be practically universal
among savages, and if it gradually disappears before
the fuller knowledge of civilisation. The report which
Mr. Im Thurn brings from the Indians of Guiana is
confirmed by what Schoolcraft says of the Algonkin
1 Op. cit, 335.


54 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


races of the northern part of the continent.’ “ The
belief of the narrators and listeners in every wild and
improbable thing told helps wonderfully, in the ori-
ginal stories, in joining all parts together. The Indian
believes that the whole visible and invisible creation 1s
animated. . . . To make the matter worse, these tribes
believe that animals of the lowest as well as highest
class in the chain of creation are alike endowed with
reasoning powers and faculties, As a natural con-
clusion, they endow birds, beasts, and all other animals
with souls.” As an example of the ease with which
the savage recognises consciousness and voluntary
motion even in stones, may be cited Kohl's account of
the beliefs of the Objibeways.- Nearly every Indian
has discovered, he says, an object in which he places
special confidence, and to which he sacrifices more
zealously than to the Great Spirit. The “hope” of
Otamigan (a companion of the traveller) was a rock,
which once advanced to meet him, swayed, bowed,
and went back again. Another Indian revered o
Canadian larch, “because he once heard a very re-
markable rustling in ita branches.” It thus sppears
that while the savage has a general kind of sense that
inanimate things are animated, he is a good deal
impressed by their conduct when he thinks that they
actually display their animation. In the same way
a devout modern spiritualist probably regards with
more reverence a table which he has seen dancing and
1 Schoolcraft, Algie Researches, i. 41.


® Kohl, Wanderings Rownd Lake Superior, pp. 55-59; Miiller,
Amerikan. U'rreliq., pp. 62-67.


a


UNIVERSAL ANIMATION, 55


rapping than a table at which he has only dined.
Another general statement of failure to draw the line
between men and the irrational creation is found in the
old Jesuit missionary Le Jeune's Relations de la Nouvelle
France’ “Les sauvages se persuadent que non seule-
ment les hommes et les autres animaux, mais aussi
que toutes les autres choses sont anim¢es.” Again,
“Ts tiennent les poissons raisonnables, comme sussi
les cerfs.” In the Solomon Islands Mr, Romilly sailed
with an old chief who used violent language to the
waves when they threatened to dash over the boat,
and “old Takki’s exhortations were successfal.”*
Waits" discovers the same attitude towards the animals
among the Negroes. Man, in their opinion, is by no
means a separate sort of person on the summit of
nature and high above the beasts; these he rather
regards as dark and enigmatic beings, whose life is
full of mystery, and which he therefore considers now
na his inferiors, now as his superiors. A collection
of evidence as to the savage failure to discriminate
between human and non-human, animate and inani-
mate, has been brought together by Sir John Lub-
bock.*

To a race accustomed like ourselves to arrange and
classify, to people familiar from childhood and its
games with “vegetable, animal, and mineral,” 5 con-
dition of mind in which no such distinctions are drawn,


« Origin of Civilisation, p. 33- A number of examples of this mental
attitude among the will be found in chap, ¥,, pastes.


56 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


any more than they are drawn in Greek or Brahmanic
myths, must naturally seem like what Mr. Max Miiller
ealls “temporary insanity.” The imagination of the
savage has been defined by Mr. Tylor as “ midway
between the conditions of a healthy, prosaic, modern
citizen, and of a raving fanatic, or of a patient in a
fever-ward." If any relics of such imagination sur-
vive in civilised mythology, they will very closely
resemble the productions of a once universal “ tem-
porary insanity.” Let it be granted, then, that’ “to
the lower tribes of man sun and stars, trees and
rivers, winds and clouds, become personal, animate
creatures, leading lives conformed to human or animal
analogies, and performing their special functions in
the universe with the aid of limbs like beasts, or
of artificial instruments like men;, or that what men's
eyes behold is but the instrument to be used or the
material to be shaped, while behind it there stands
some prodigious but yet half- human creature, who
grasps it with his hands or blows it with his breath.
The basis on which such ideas as these are built is not
to be narrowed down to poetic fancy and transformed
metaphor. They rest upon a broad philosophy of
nature; early and crude, indeed, but thoughtful, con-
sistent, and quite really and seriously meant,”

For the sake of illustration, some minor examples
must next be given of this confusion between man
and other things in the world, which will presently
be illustrated by the testimony of a powerful and
long diffused set of institutions.

‘ 1 Primitive Culture, i. 285.


KINSHIP WITH BEASTS. 57


The Christian Quiches of Guatemala believe that
each of them has a beast as his friend and protector,
just as in the Highlands “the dog is the friend of the
Maclaines.”. When the Finns, in their epic poem
the Kalewala, have killed a bear, they implore the
animal to forgive them. “Oh, Ot-so,” chant the
singers, “ be not angry that we come near thee. The
bear, the honey-footed bear, was born in lands be-
tween sun and moon, and he died, not by mens
hands, but of his own will."' The Red Men of
North America® have a tradition showing how it is
that the bear does not die, but, like Herodotus with
the sacred stories of the Egyptian priests, Mr. School-
craft “ cannot induce himself to write it out.”* It is a
most curious fact that the natives of Australia tell a
similar tale of their “native bear.” “ He did not die”
when attacked by men.‘ In Australia it is a great
offence to skin the native bear, just as on a part of the
west coast of Ireland, where seals are superstitiously
regarded, the people cannot be bribed to skin them.
In New Caledonia, when a child tries to kill a lizard,
the men warn him to “beware of killing his own
ancestor.”* The Zulus spare to destroy a certain
species of serpents, believed to be the spirits of kins-
men, as the great snake which appeared when iness
did sacrifice was held to be the ghost of Anchises.

1 Kalewala, in La Finlande, Leouron Le Duc (1845), vol. ii. p. 100;
cf, also the Introduction.


' Schoolcraft, ¥. 420.
3 Bee similar ceremonica propitsapery of the beet Tener


58 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Mexican women! believe that children born during an
eclipse turn into mice. In Australia the natives believe
that the wild dog has the power of speech; whoever
listens to him is petrified; and a certain spot is shown
where “the wild dog spoke and turned the men into
stone;"* and the blacks run for their lives as soon as
the dog begins to speak. What it said was “Bones.”

These are minor examples of a form of opinion which
is so strong that it is actually the chief constituent in
savage society. That society, whether in Ashantee or
Australia, in North America or South Africa, or North
Asia or India, or among the wilder tribes of ancient
Peru, is based on an institution generally called
“totemism.” This very extraordinary institution,
whatever its origin, cannot have arisen except among
men capable of conceiving kinship and all human
relationships as existing between themselves and all
animate and inanimate things. It is the rule, and
not the exception, that savage societies are founded
upon this belief. The political and social conduct of
the backward races is regulated in such matters as
blood-feud and marriage by theories of the actual
kindred and connection by descent which men have in
common with beasts, plants, the sun and moon, the
stars, and even the wind and the rain. Now, in
whatever way this belief in descent from beasts and
plants may have arisen, it undoubtedly testifies to a

1 ii, 2%0: Fanesft iy : i
womso ‘wis. give Link wantonly te Weooh tess atee St
November. The Hatavians believe that wome«, when delivered of a
child, are frequently delivered at the eame time of a» young crocodile
asatwin. Hawkesworth's Foyapes, Hi. 756.

* Brough Smyth, Aborigines af Victoria, i, 479.


TOTEMISM. 59


condition of mind in which no hard and fast line was
drawn between man and animate and inanimate nature.
The discovery of the wide distribution of the social
arrangements based on this belief is entirely due to Mr.
J. F. M‘Lennan, the author of Primitive Marriage.
Mr. M‘Lennan’s essays (The Worship of Plants and
Animals, Totems and Totemism) were published in the
Fortnightly Review, 1869-71. Any follower in the
footsteps of Mr. M‘Lennan has it in his power to add
a little evidence to that originally set forth, and
perhaps to sift the somewhat uncritical authorities

The name “Totemism” or “ Totamism” was first
applied at the end of the last century by Long * to the
Red Indian custom which acknowledges human kin-
ship with animals. This institution had already been
recognised among the Troquois by Lafitan,? and by
other observers. .As to the word “totem,” Mr. Max
Miiller® quotes an opinion that the interpreters, mis-
sionaries, Government inspectors, and others who
apply the name fotem to the Indian “ family mark"
must have been ignorant of the Indian languages, for
there is in them no such word as totem. The right
word, it appears, is ofem; but as “totemism ” has the
advantage of possessing the ground, we prefer to say


*totemism" rather than “otemism." The facts are


the same, whatever name we give them. As Mr.
Miiller says himself, “every warrior has his crest,


1 Foyages and Travels, 1791-

2 Meurs dea Sawrages (1724), p. 461.
¥ Academy, December 15, 1853.

4 Selected Lesaya (1551), 375


6a MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


which is called his fofem ;" and he goes on to describe
4 totem of an Indian who died about 1793. We may
now return to the consideration of “otemism™” or
totemism. We approach it rather as a fact in the
science of mythology than as a stage in the evolution
of the modern family system. For us totemism is
interesting because it proves the existence of that
savage mental attitude which assumes a kindred
between man and the things in the world. As will
afterwards be seen, totemism has also left its mark on
the mythologies of the civilised races. We shall exa-
mine the institution first as it is found in Australia,
because the Australian form of totemism shows in the
highest known degree the savage habit of confusing in
& community of kinship men, stars, plants, beasts, the
heavenly bodies, and the forces of Nature. When this
has once been elucidated, a shorter notice of other
totemistic races will serve our purpose,

The society of the Morri or black fellows of Ans-
tralia is divided into local tribes, each of which possesses,
or used to possess, and hunt over a considerable tract
of country. These Jocal tribes are united by conti-
guity and by common Jocal interests, but not neces-
sarily by blood kinship. For example, the Port
Mackay tribe, the Mount Gambier tribe, the Ballarat
tribe, all take their names from their district. In the
same way we might speak of the people of Strathelyde
or of Northumbria in early English history. Now all
these /ocal tribes contain an indefinite number of
stocks of kindred, of men believing themselves to ha
related by the ties of blood and common descent.


TOTEMS IN AUSTRALIA. Gr


That descent the groups agree in tracing, not from
some real or idealised human parent, but from some
animal, plant, or other natural object, as the kangaroo,
the emu, the iguana, the pelican, and so forth. Per-
sons of the pelican stock in the north of Queensland
regard themselves as relations of people of the same
stock in the most southern parts of Australia, The
creature from which each tribe claims descent is
called “of the same flesh,” while persons of another
stock are “fresh flesh.” A native may not marry &
woman of “his own flesh;" it is only a woman of
“fresh” or “strange” flesh he may marry. Nor may
he eat an animal of “his own flesh ;” he may only eat
“strange flesh.” Only under great stress of need will
an Australian eat the animal which is the flesh-and-
blood cousin and protector of his stock.* Clearer
evidence of the confusion between man and benst, of
the claiming of kin between man and beast, could
hardly be.

But the Australian philosophy of the intercom-
munion of Nature goes still farther than this. Besides
the local divisions and the kindred stocks which trace
their descent from animals, there exist among many
Australian tribes divisions of a kind still unexplained.
For example, every man of the Mount Gambier local
tribe is by birth either a Kumite or a Kroki. This
classification applics to the whole of the sensible uni-
verse. Thus smoke and honeysuckle trees belong to
the division Kumite, and are akin to the fishhawk


1 Daweon, Aborigines, pp. 26-27; Stewart and Fison, Aasieroi and
Kurnai, p. 169.


62 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


stock of men. On the other hand, the kangaroo,
summer, autumn, the wind and the shevak tree belong
to the division Kroki, and are akin to the black
katoo stock of men. Any human member of the
Kroki division has thus for his brothers the sun, the
wind, the kangaroo, and the rest; while any man of
the Kumite division and the crow surname is the
brother of the rain, the thunder, and the winter.
This extraordinary belief is not a mere idle fancy—
it influences conduct. “A man does not kill or use
as food any of the animals of the same subdivision
(Kroki or Kumite) with himeelf, excepting when
hunger compels, and then they express sorrow for
having to eat their wingong (friends) or fwmanang
(their flesh), When using the last word they touch
their breasts, to indicate the close relationship,
meaning almost a portion of themselves. To illus-
trate:—One day one of the blacks killed a crow.
Three or four days afterwards a Boortwa (a man of
the crow surname and stock), named Larry, died. He
had been ailing for some days, but the killing of his
wingong (totem) hastened his death.”* Commenting on
this statement, Mr. Fison observes: “The South Aus-
tralian savage looks upon the universe as the Great
Tribe, to one of whose divisions he himself belongs ;
and all things, animate and inanimate, which belong
to his class are parts of the body corporate whereof he
himself is part.” This account of the Australian beliefs
and customs is borne out, to a certain extent, by the
evidence of Sir George Grey,” and of the late Mr,
1 Kamilaroi and Aurnai, p. 169. * Trovels, ii, 2235.


FAMILY NAMES, 63


Gideon Scott Lang.’ These two writers take no
account of the singular “dichotomous” divisions, ns
of Kumite and Kroki, but they draw attention to the
groups of kindred which derive their surnames from
animals, plants, and the like, “The origin of these
family names,” says Sir George Grey, “is attributed
by the natives to different causes. . . . One origin
frequently assigned by the natives is, that they were
derived from some vegetable or animal being very
common in the district which the family inhakited.”
We have seen from the evidence of Messrs. Fison and
Howitt that a more common native explanation is
based on kinship with the vegetable or plant which
bestows the family surname. Sir George Gray men-
tions that the families use their plant or animal as a
crest or kobong (totem), and he adds that natives never
willingly kill animals of their Lobong, holding that some
one of that species is their nearest friend. The conse-
quences of eating forbidden animals vary considerably.
Sometimes the Boyl-yas (that is, ghosts) avenge tho
crime. ‘Thus, when Sir George Grey ate some mussels
(which, after all, are not the crest of the Greys), a
storm followed, and one of his black fellows impro-
“Qh, wherefore did he eat the mussels?
Now the Boyl-yaa storms and thunders make ;
Oh, wherefore would he eat the mussels 1

There are two points in the arrangements of these
stocks of kindred named from plants and animals
which we shall find to possess a high importance. No

1 Lang, Lecture on Natives of Australia, p. 10,


64 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


member of any such kindred may marry a woman of
the same name and descended from the same object.’
Thus no man of the Emu stock may marry an Emu
woman; no Blacksnake may marry a Blacksnake woman,
and so forth. ‘This point is very strongly put by Mr.
Dawson, who has had much experience of the blacks.
“ So strictly are the laws of marrisge carried h
should any sign of courtship or affection be cbeccted
between those ‘of one flesh,’ the brothers or male
relatives of the woman beat her severely.” If the
incestnons pair (though not in the least related accord-
ing to our ideas) run away together, they are “ half-
killed;" and if the woman dies in consequence of her
punishment, her partner in iniquity is beaten again.
No “eric” or blood-fine of any kind is paid for her
death, which carries no blood-feud. “ Her punishment
is legal."* This account fully corroborates that of Sir
George Grey.”

Our conclusion is that the belief in “ one flesh” (a
kinship shared with the animals) must be a thoroughly
binding idea, as the notion is sanctioned by capital
punishment.

Another important feature in Australian totemism
strengthens our position. The idea of the animal kin-
ship must be an ancient one in the race, because the


' Taplin, Tie Narrinyeri, p. 2. "Every tribe, regarded by them os
a family, has ite ngaitge, or tutelary genius or tribal eymbol, in the
shape of sotne bird, beast, fish, reptile, insect, or anbsatance. Between
individuals of the same tribe no marriage can take place.” Among
the Narrinyeri kindred is reckoned (p. 10) on the father's side. See
ales (p. 46) ngaifge = Samoan aifu. “No man or woman will ill
their wyaitge,” except with precautions, for food.

T Op, cil, p. 28. P * fhid., iL 220.


P|


AUSTRALIAN TOTEMISM. 65


family surname, Emn, Bandicoot, or what not, and the
crest, kobong, or protecting and kindred. animal, are
inherited through the mother’s side in the majority of
stocks, This custom, therefore, belongs to that early
period of human society in which the woman is the
permanent and recognised factor in the family, while
male parentage is uncertain.’ One other feature of
Australian totemism must be mentioned before we
leave the subject. There is some evidence that in
certain tribes the wingeny or totem of each man is
indicated by a tatooed representation of it upon his
flesh. The natives are very licentious, but men would
shrink from an amour with a woman who neither be-
longed to their own district nor spoke their language,
but who, in spite of that, was of their totem. To
avoid mistakes, it seems that some tribes mark the
totem on the flesh with incised lines.“ The natives
frequently design figures of some kind on the trees
growing near the graves of deceased warriors. Some
observers have fancied that in these designs they
recognised the totem of the dead men; but on this
subject evidence is by no means clear. We shall see
that this primitive sort of heraldry, this carving or
painting of hereditary blazons, is common among the
Red Men of America.

Though o large amount of evidence might be
added to that already put forward, we may now sum
up the inferences to be drawn from the study of


1 CE Bachofen, Das Mutierrecht ; M*Lennan, Primitive Marriage
panim ; Eneyel. Zrit. © ¥. Family.

? Fison, op, cit, p 66. ,

VOL, L E


66 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


totemism in Australia. It has been shown (1) that
the natives think themselves actually akin to animals,
plants, the sun, and the wind, and things in general ;
(2) that those ideas influence their conduct, and even
regulate their social arrangements, because (3) men
and women of the kinship of the same animal or plant
may not intermarry, while men are obliged to defend,
and in case of murder to avenge, persons of the atock
of the family or plant from which they themselves
derive their family name. Thus, on the evidence of
institutions, it is plain that the Australians are (or
before the influence of the Europeans became pre-
valent were) in a state of mind which draws no hard
and fast line between man and the things in the
world. If, therefore, we find that in Australian myth
men, gods, beasts, and things all shift shapes inces-
santly, and figure in a coroberce dance of confusion,
there will be nothing to astonish us in the discovery.
The myths of men in the Australian intellectual eon-
dition, of men who hold long conversations with
the little “native bear,” and ask him for oracles,
will naturally and inevitably be grotesque and. con-

It is “a far cry” from Australian to the West
Coast of Africa, and it is ecarcely to be supposed
that the Australians have borrowed ideas and institu-
tions from Ashantee, or that the people of Ashantee
have derived their conceptions of the universe from
the Murri of Australia We find, however, on the
West African Coast, just as we do in Australia, that

1 Brough Smyth, £ 44°, oo MS. authority of W. Thomas


WEST AFRICAN TOTEMISM. Ay


there exist large /ocal divisions of the natives These
divisions are spoken of by Mr. Bowditch (who visited
the country on a mission in 1817) as nations, and they
are much more populous and powerful (as the people
are more civilised) than the local tribes of Australia.
Yet, just as among the local tribes of Australia, the
nations of the West African Coast are divided into
stocks of kindred, each sfort having its representatives
in each nation, Thus an Ashantee or a Fantee may
belong to the same stock of kindred as a member of
the Assin or Akini nation. When on Ashantee of the
Annona stock of kindred meets a Warsaw man of the
same stock, they salute and acknowledge each other
as brothers. In the same way o Ballarat man of the
Kangaroo stock in Australia recognises a relative in a
Mount Gambier man who ia also a Kangaroo. Now,
with one exception, all the names of the twelve stocks of
West African kindreds, or at least all of them which
Mr. Bowditch could get the native interpreters to trans-
late, are derived from animals, plants, and other natu-
ral objects, just as in Australia.’ Thus Quonna is a
buffalo, Abrootoo is a cornstalk, Abbradi a plantain.
Other names are, in English, the parrot, the wild
cat, red earth, panther,‘and dog. Thus all the natives
of this part of Africa are parrots, dogs, buffaloes,


with Indian, Australian, and Red Indian totem kindreds. ‘This,
indeed, is an example where the criterion of “recurrence” or “ coinci-


p. 181.


68 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


panthers, and so forth, just as the Australians are
emus, iguanas, black cockatoos, kangaroos, and the
rest. It is remarkable that there is an Incra stock,
or clan of ants, in Ashantee, just as there was a race
of Myrmidons, believed to be descended from ants, in
ancient Greece. Though Bowditch’s account of these
West African family divisions is brief, the arrange-
ment tallies closely with that of Australia. It is
no great stretch of imagination to infer that the
African tribes do, or once did, believe themselves to be
of the kindred of the animals whose names they bear.
It is more or less confirmatory of this hypothesis
that (a3 in Australia) no family is permitted to nse as
food the animal from which it derives its name. We
have seen that a similar rule prevails, as far as hunger
and scarcity of victuals permit it to be obeyed, among
the natives of Australia. The Intchwa stock in
Ashantes and Fantee is particularly unlucky, because
its members may not eat the dog, “ much relished” by
native epicures, and therefore a serious privation.”
Equally to be pitied were the ancient Egyptians, who,
as they belonged to the district of the sheep, might
not eat mutton, which their neighbours, the Lycopo-
lite, devoured at pleasure. These restrictions appear
to be connected with the almost universal dislike of
cannibals to eat persons of their own kindred. This
law of the game in cannibalism has not yet been
thoroughly examined, though we often hear of wars
waged expressly for the purpose of securing food
(human meat), while some South-American tribes
actually bred from captive women by way of securing


BECHUANA TOTEMISM. 69


constant supplies of permitted flesh.’ When we find
stocks, then, which derive their names from animals
and decline to eat these animals, we may at least
_ Suspect that they once claimed kinship with the name-
giving beasts. The refusal to eat them raises a pre-
sumption of such faith. Old Bosman” had noticed the
game practices. “One ests no mutton, another no
goat's flesh, another no beef, swine’s flesh, wild fowl,
cocks with white feathers, and they say their ances-
tors did so from the beginning of the world.”

While, in the casa of the Ashantee tribes, we can
only infer the existence of a belief in kinship with the
animals from the presence of the other features of
fully developed totemism (especially from the refusal
to eat the name-giving animal), we have direct evi-
dence for the opinion in another part of Africa, among
the Bechuanas.’ Casalis, who passed twenty-three years
is f Missionary in South Africa, thus describes the
institution:—While the united communities usually
bear the name of their chief or of the district which
they inhabit” (local tribes, as in Australia), “ ench stock
(fribu) derives its title from an animal or a vegetable.
All the Bechuanas are subdivided thus into £atweneas
(crocodile-men), Zflapis (men of the fish), Janarer
(of the buffalo), Aanuwtuws (porcupines), Lameraras
(wild vines), and so forth, he Bakuenaz call the
crocodile their father, sing about him in their feasts,

' Cieza de Leon (Hakluyt Society), p. 50. Thin amaxing tale ix mup-
ported by the statement that kinship went by the female side (p. 49);
the father was thus not of the kin of bis child by the alien woman.


(Cieza waa with Validillo in 1555.
2 In Pinkerton, xvi. goo, ® E. Casalis, Leo Basgoutos, 1859.


te MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


awear by him, and mark the ears of their cattle
with an incision which resembles the open jaws of the
creature.” This custom of marking the cattle with the
crest, as it were, of the stock, takes among some
races the shape of deforming themselves, so as the
more to resemble the animal from which they claim
descent. “The chief of the family which holds the
chief rank in the stock is called ‘The Great Man
of the Crocodile’ Precisely in the same way the
Dochess of Sutherland, the female head of Clon
Chattan, ia styled in Gaelic ‘The Great Lady of the
Cat."”


asalis proceeds: “No one would dare to eat the
flosh or wear the skin of the animal whose name he
bears. If the animal be dangerous—the lion, for
example—people only kill him after offering every
apology and asking his pardon. Purification must
follow such os sacrifice.” Casnlis was much struck
with the resemblance between these practices and the
similar customs of North American races. Living-
stone’s account’ on the whole corroborates that of
Casalis, though he says the Batau (tribe of the lion)
no longer exists. “They use the word bina, ‘to
dance,’ in reference to the custom of thus naming
themselves, so that when you wish to ascertain what
tribe they belong to, you say, ‘ What do you dance?”
Tt would seem as if this had been part of the worship
of old.” The mythological and religious knowledge of
the Bushmen is still imparted in dances; and when a
man is ignorant of some myth he will say, “I do not


Missionary Travels (1257), p. 13.


TOTEMS IN NORTH AMERICA. 71


dance that dance,” meaning that he does not belong
to the guild which preserves that particular “sacred
chapter.”

Casalis noticed the similarity between South African
and Red Indian opinion about kinship with vegetables
and beasts. The difficulty in treating the Red Indian
belief is chiefly found in the abundance of the evi-
dence. Perhaps the first person who ever used the
word “totemism,” or, as he spells it, “ totamism,” was
(as we said) Mr. Long, an interpreter among the
Chippeways, who published his Voyages im 1791.
Long was not wholly ignorant of the languages, as
it was his business to speak them, and he was an
adopted Indian. The ceremony of adoption was pain-
ful, beginning with o feast nee flesh, followed by a
Turkish bath and a prolonged process of tattooing.’
According to Long,’ “The slate: they conceive, as-
sumes the form of some beast or other, and therefore
they never kill, hurt, or eat the animal whose form
they think this totam bears.” One man was filled
with religious apprehensions, and gave himself up to
the gloomy belief of Bunyan and Cowper, that he had
committed the unpardonable sin, because he dreamed
he bad killed his totem, a bear.‘ This is only one
example, like the refusal of the Osages to kill the
beavers, with which they count cousins,’ that the Red
Man’s belief is an actual creed, and does influence his
conduct.

As in Australia, the belief in common kin with

1 Orpen, Cape Monthly Magazine, 1872.


* Long, pp. 46-49. i sees 8
© fhed:, p By. i aeceane eae:


73 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


beasts is most clearly proved by the construction of
Red Indian society. The “totemistic” stage of
thought and manners prevails. Thus Charlevoix
says, “ Plusieurs nations ont chacune trois familles ou
tribus principales, aussi anciennes, d ce qu'il paroit,
que leur origine. Chaque tribu porte le nom d'un
animal, et la nation entitre a aussi le sien, dont elle
prend le nom, et dont la figure est sa marque, ou, se
l'on veut, ses armoiries, on ne signe point autrement
les traités, qu'en traceant ces figures.” Among the
animal totems Charlevoix notices porenpine, bear, avolf,
and turtle. The armoiries, the totemistic heraldry of
the peoples of Virginia, greatly interested a heraldic
ancestor of Gibbon the historian who settled in
the colony. According to Schoolcraft,’ the totem or
family badge of a dead warrior is drawn in a reverse
position on his grave-post, In the same way the
leopards of England are drawn reversed on the shield
of an English king opposite the mention of his death
in old monkish chronicles, As a general rule,* persons
bearing the same totem in America cannot intermarry.
“The union must be between various totems.” More-
over, a8 in the case of the Australians, “the descent
of the chief is in the female line.” We thus find
among the Red Men precisely the same totemistic
regulations as among the aborigines of Australia,

1 Histoire de ia Prance-Nowvrelle, til, 266,

2 Jntroductio ad Latinam Blasoniam, by John Gibbon, Blue Mantle,
London, 1682. “The dancers were painted, some party per pale, gul,
and sad, some party per fesse of the same colours ¢" whence Gibbon con
cluded “that heraldry was ingrafted naturally into the sense of the
humane race,"

2 Vol i p. 356. * Schoolcraft, v. 73.


RED INDIAN TOTEMS. 73


Like the Anstralians, the Red Men “ never” (perhaps —
we should read “hardly ever”) eat their totems.
Totemists, in short, spare the beasts that are their own

_kith and kin. To ayoid multiplying details which all
corroborate each other, it may suffice to refer to School-
craft for totemism among the Iowas' and the Pueblos; *
for the Iroquois, to Lafitau, a missionary of the early
part of the eighteenth century. Lafitan was per-
haps the firat writer who ever explained certain
features in Greck and other ancient myths and prac-
tices as survivals from totemism. The Chimera, a
composite creature, lion, goat, and serpent, might
-represent, Lafitan thought, a league of three totem
tribes, just as wolf, bear, and turtle represented the
Troquois League.

The martyred Pére Rasles, again, writing in 1723,"
says that one stock of the Outaonaks claims descent
from a hare (“the great hare was a man of prodigious
size”), while another stock derive their lineage from
the carp, and a third descends from a bear; yet they
do not scruple, after certain expistory rites, to eat
bear's flesh, Other North American examples are the
Kutchin, who have always possessed the system of
totems.

It is to be noticed, as a peculiarity of Red Indian
totemism which we have not observed (though it may

’ exist) in Africa, that certain stocks claim descent from
the sun. Thus Pére Le Petit, writing from New
Orleans in 1730, mentions the Sun, or great chief of

1 Schooleraft, iii, 263. 2 Jbud., iv. 36,
3 Kip’s Jieauits in America, i. 33.
4 Dall's Alaska, pp. 196-195.


v4 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the Natchez Indians.’ The totem of the privileged
class among the Natchez was the sun, and in all
myths the sun is regarded as a living being, who can
have children, who may be beaten, who bleeds when
cut, and is simply on the same footing as men and
everything else in the world. Precisely similar evi-
dence comes from South America, In this case our
best authority is almost beyond suspicion. He knew
the native languages well, being himself a half-caste,
He was learned in the European learning of his time ;
and as a son of the Incas, he had access to all sur-
viving Peruvian stores of knowledge, and could col-
lect without difficulty the testimonies of his country-
men. It will be seen* that Don Garcilasso de In Vega
could estimate evidence, and ridiculed the rough me-
theds and fallacious guesses of Spanish inquirers.
Garcilasso de la Vega was born about 1540, being the
son of an Inca princess and of a Spanish conqueror,
His book, Commentarias Reales," was expressly in-
tended to rectify the errors of such Spanish writers
as Acosta. In his account of Peruvian religion,
Garcillasso distinguishes between the beliefs of the
tribes previous to the rise of the Inca empire and
the sun-worship of the Incas, But it is plain, from
Garcilasso’s own account and from other évidence, that
under the Incas the older faiths and fetichisms sur-
vived, in subordination to sun-worship, just as Pagan
superstitions survived in custom and folk-lore after the
official recognition of Christianity. Sun-worship, in
" Kip, fi. 288, * Appendix B,
* See translation in Haktuyt Society's Collecting,


TOTEMS LN PERU. 75


Peru, seems even, like Catholicism in Mexico, China,
and elsewhere, to have made a kind of compromise with
the lower beliefs, and to have been content to allow a
certain amount of bowing down in the temples of the
elder faiths. According, then, to Garcilassos account
of Peruvian totemism, “An Indian was not looked
upon as honourable unless he was descended from 4
fountain, river,’ or lake, or even from the sea, or from
a wild animal, such asa bear, lion, tiger, eagle, or the
bird they call cuntur (condor), or some other bird of
”2 A certain amount of worship was connected
with this belief in kinship with beasts and natural
objects. Men offered up to their totems “what they
usually saw them eat.”* On the sea-coasts “ they
worshipped sardines, skates, dog-fish, and, for want of
larger gods, crabs. . . . There was not an animal,
how vile and filthy soever, that they did not worship
as a god,” including “lizards, toads, and frogs.”
Garcilasso (who eays they ate the fish they wor-
shipped), gives his own theory of the origin of totemism.
In the beginning men had only sought for badges
whereby to discriminate one human stock from an-
other, “The one desired to have a god different
from the other. . . . They only thought of making one
different from another.” When the Inca emperors
began to civilise the totemistic stocks, they pointed
out that their own totem, the sun, possessed “ aplen-
dour and beauty” as contrasted with “the ugliness
and filth of the frogs and other vermin they looked
1 Like many Greek heroes, Odyery, if. 489. “Orsilochus, the


child begotten of Alpheus.” iol
* Comm, Real., 1. 75. * Ibid, i $3


76 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


upon as goda.”* Garcilasso, of course, does not use
the North American word fotem (or ofe or ofem) for
the family badge which represented the family an-
cestors. He calls these things, as a general rule,
pacerissa. The sun was the pacarissa of the Tneas, as
it was of the chief of the Natchez, ‘The pocarissa. of
other stocks was the «lion, bear, frog, or what not.
Garcilasso accounts for the belief accorded to the
Tneas, when they claimed actual descent from the sun,
by observing * that “ there were tribes among their sub-
jects who professed similar fabulous descents, though
they did not comprehend how to select ancestors so
well a3 the Incas, but adored animals and other low
and earthly objects.” As to the fact of the Peruvian
worship of beasts, if more evidence ig wanted, it is
given, among others, by Cieza de Leon,’ who contrasts
the adoration of the Roman gods with that offered in
Peru to brutes. “In the important temple of Pacha-
camac (the spiritual deity of Pern) they worshipped a
she-fox or vixen and an emerald.” ‘The devil also “ ap-
peared to them and spoke in the form of a tiger, very
fierce.” Other examples of totemism in South America
may be studied in the tribes on the Amazon.* Mr.
Wallace found the Pine-apple stock, the Mosquitoes,
Woodpeckers, Herons, and other totem kindreds.
4. curious example of similar ideas is discovered
among the Honis of Guiana. These people were ori-
ginally West Coast Africans imported aa slaves, who
have won their freedom with the sword. While they

1 Comm. Real, i. tos. 3 Jbid,, i. 83.

* Cieza de Leon (Hakluyt Society), p. 183.

* Acuna, p. 103; Wallace, Travels on dmacon (1553), pp. 481-so6,


TOTEMS IN INDIA. 7


retain a rough belief in Gadou (God) and Didibi (the
devil), they are divided into totem stocks with animal
names. The red ape, turtle, and cayman are among
the chief totems.’

After this hasty examination of the confused belief
in kinship with animals and other natural objects
which underlies institutions in Australia, West and
South Africa, North and South America, we may
glance at similar notions among the non-/Aryan races
of India. In Dalton’s Ethnology of Bengal,* he tells
ua that the Garo clans are divided into madaris or
motherhoods. Children belong to the mahari of the
mother, just as (in general) they derive their stock
name and totem from the mother’s side in Australia
and among the North American Indians. No man
may marry (as among the Red Indians and Austra-
lians) a woman belonging to his own stock, mother-
hood, or mahari. So far the maharis of Bengal
exactly correspond to the totem kindred. But do
the Maharis also take their names from plants and
animals, and so forth? We know that the Kallis,
similar communities among the Bengal Hos and
Mundos, do this.* “The Mundaris, like the Oraons,
adopt as their tribal distinction the name of some
animal, and the flesh of that animal is tabooed to
them as food; for example, the cel, the tortoise.” This
is exactly the state of things in Ashanti. Dalton
mentions also‘ a princely family in Nagpur which
claims descent from “a great hooded snake.” Among


l Crevaux, Foyages dana [ Amerique du Sed, p. $9.
? Dalton, p. 63. * Dalton, p. 19. 4 sbad., p. 166.


“r


78 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the Oraons he found’ tribes which might not eat young
mice (considered s dainty) or tortoises, and a stock
which might not eat the oil of the tree which was
their totem, nor even sit in its shade, “ The family
or tribal names” (within which they may not marry )
“are usually those of animals or plants, and when this
is the case, the flesh of some part of the animal or the
fruit of the tree is tabooed to the tribe called after it,”

An excellent sketch of totemism in India is given
by Mr. H. H. Risley of the Bengal Civil Service ;2—

“ At the bottom of the social system, as understood
by the average Hindu, stands o large body of non-
Aryan castes and tribes, each of which is broken up
into a number of what may be called fotemistic exo-
gamous septs. Each sept bears the name of an animal,
a tree, a plant, or of some material object, natural or
artificial, which the members of that sept are pro-
hibited from killing, eating, cutting, burning, carry-
ing, wsing, &e.”*

Mr. Risley finds that both Kolarians, as the Son-
thals, and Dravidians, as the Oraons, are in this state
of totemism, like the Hos and Mundas. Tt is most
instructive to learn that, as one of these tribes rises
in the social scale, it sloughs off its totem, and, aban-
doning the common name derived from bird, beast, or
plant, adopts that of an eponymous ancestor, A

? Dalton, p. 254.

" The Asiatic Quarterly, No. 3, Essay on “ Primitive Marriage in
anal we may note that the origin of exogamy itself is merely part
of a strict totemistic prohibition, A man May not “use an object
within the totem kin, nor a woman of the kin, Compare the Greek
idiom ypirGar yuraiai,


———


TOTEMS IN INDIA. oy


tendeney in this direction has been observed by Messrs.
Fison and Hewitt even in Australia. The Mahilis,
Koras, and Kurmis, who profess to be members of the
Hindu community, still retain the totemistic organisa-
tion, with names derived from birds, beasts, and plants.
Even the Japinnathi Kumbhars of Orissa, taking rank
immediately below the writer-caste, have the totems
tiger, snake, weasel, cow, frog, sparrow, and tortoise.
The sub-castes of the Khatlya Kumhars explain away
their totem-names “as names of certain saints, who,


‘being present at Daksha’s Horse-sacrifice, transformed


themselves into animals to escape the wrath of Siva,”
like the gods of Egypt when they fled in bestial form
from the wrath of Set.

Among the non-Aryan tribes the marriage-law has
the totemistic sanction. No man may marry 4 woman
of his totem kin. When the totem-name is changed
for an eponym, the non-Aryan, rising in the social
scale, is practically in the same position as the Brab-
mans, “divided into exogamous sections (qotras), the
members of which profess to be descended from the
mythical rishi’ or inspired saint whose name the gofra
bears”. There is thus nothing to bar the conjecture
that the exogamous gofras of the whole Brahmans
were once a form of totem-kindred, which (like aspir-
ing non-Aryan stocks at the present day) dropped the
totem-name and renamed the septs from some epony-
mous hero, medicine-man, or Fiahi,

ionstant repetition of the same set of facts becomes
irksome, and yet is made necessary by the legitimate
demand for trustworthy and abundant evidence. As


Eo MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


the reader must already have reflected, this practical
living belief in the common confused equality of men,
gods, plants, beasts, rivers, and what not, which still
regulates savage society,’ is one of the most promi-
nent features in mythology. Porphyry remarked and
exactly described it among the Egyptians,—“ common
and akin to men and gods they believed the beasts to
be."* The belief in such equality is alien to modern
civilisation. We have shown that it is common and
fundamental in savagery. For instance, in the Pacific,
we might quote Turner,’ and for Melanesia, Codring-
ton," while for New Zealand we have Taylor.’ For the
Jakuts, along the banks of the Lena in Northern Asin,
we have the evidence of Strahlenberg, who writes:
“Each tribe of these people look upon some particular
creature as sacred, ¢.7., a swan, goose, raven, &e., and
such is not eaten by that tribe” (implying belief in
kinship), though the others may eat it® As the
majority of our witnesses were quite unaware that the
facts they described were common among races of
whom many of them had never even heard, their evi-
dence may surely be accepted as valid, especially as
the beliefs testified to express themselves in marriage
laws, in the blood-feud, in abstinence from food, on
pillars over graves, in rude heraldry, and in other

| See some very curious and disgusting examples of this confusion
in Liebrecht's Zur Vollakuade, pp. 795-396 (Heilbronn, 1879).

7 De Abat., i. a6.

* Ninetecn Years in Polynesia, p. 238, and Samoa by the sume
author. |

* Journ, Anthrop, Jnat., “ Religions Practices in Melanesia,"

® New Zealand, “ Animal Intermarriage with Men.”

© Description of Asia (1735), p. 333.


KINSHIP WITH NATURE Sr


obvious and palpable shapes. If we have not made
out, by the evidence of institutions, that a confused
credulity concerning the equality and kinship of man
and the objects in nature is actually a ruling belief
among savages, and even higher races, from the Lena
to the Amazon, from the Gold Coast to Queensland,
we may despair of ever convincing an opponent.
The survival of the came beliefs and imstitutions
among civilised races, Aryan, and others, will later
be demonstrated.! If we find that the mythology of
belief of savages, and if we also find that civilised
races retain survivals of the institutions in which
the belief is expressed by savages, then we may
surely infer that the activity of beasts in the myths
of Greece springs from the same sources as the similar
activity of beasts in the myths of Troquois or Kaffirs.
That is to say, part of the irrational element in Greek
inyth will be shown to be derived (whether by inheri-
tance or borrowing) from an ascertained condition of
savage fancy.

1 Professor Roberton Smith, Ainahip ta Arabia, attempts to show


that totemlam existed in the Semitic races, The topic mast be left te


VoL, I. F


( 82 )


CHAPTER IV.


THE MENTAL CONDITION OF SAVAGES—MAGIC—
METAMORPHOSIS—METAPRYSIC—PSYCHOLOGY.
Claims of sorcerera—Savage scientific epecolation—Theory of causa-
tion—Credulity, except aa to new religious ideas—*" Post hoo, ergo
propter hoe "—Fandamental ideas of magic—Examples: incanta-


tions, ghosts, spirite—Evidence of rank and other institutions in
proof of confusions of mind exhibited in magical beliefs,


"T mean ofteoone to huve a fling at magicians for their aborninable lies
and monstrous vanities.”"—Pumt, ap, Phil, Holland.

“Quoy de ceux qui naturellement se changent en loups, en jumenta,
et puis encores en hommes ?"—Montalong, Apologie pour May-
mond de Sebonde.

Tue second feature in the savage intellectual con-

dition which wo promised to investigate was the

belief in magic and sorcery. The world and all the
things in it being conceived of vaguely as sensible
and rational, are supposed to obey the commands of
certain members of each tribe, such as chiefs, jugglers,
or conjurors. These conjurors, like Zeus or Indra, can
affect the weather, work miracles, assume what shapes,
animal, vegetable, or inorganic, they please, and can
metamorphose other persons into similar shapes. It
has already been shown that savage man has regarded
all things os persons much on a level with himself. It


MIRACULOUS POWERS OF SORCERERS. 83


has now to be shown what hind of person he conceives
himself to be. He does not look on men as civilised
races regard them, that is, as beings with strict
limitations. On the other hand, he thinks of certain
members of his tribe as exempt from all limitations,
and capable of working every miracle that tradition
has ever attributed to prophets or gods. Nor are
such miraculous powers, such practical omnipotence,
supposed by savages to be at all rare among them-
selves. Though highly valued, miraculous attain-
ments are not believed to be unusual. This must
be kept steadily in mind. When myth-making man
regards the sky or sun or wind as a person, he does
not mean merely a person with the limitations recog-
nised by modern races. He means a person with
the miraculous powers of the medicine-man. The sky,
sun, wind, or other elemental personage can converse
with the dead, and can turn himself and his neigh-
bours into animals, stones, and trees. He retains
these powers, when he becomes a god, like Zeus or
Apollo.

To understand these functions and their exercise,
it is necessary to examine what may be called savage
science, savage metaphysics, and the savage theory
of the state of the dead. The medicine-mans super-
natural claims are rooted in the general savage view of
the world, of what is possible, and of what (if anything)
is impossible. The savage, even more than the civi-
lised man, may be described as a creature “ moving
about in worlds not realised.” He feels, no less than


84 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


civilised man, the need of making the world intelli-
gible, and he is active in his search for canses and
effects. There is much “speculation in these eyes
that he doth glare withal.” This is o statement which
has been denied by some persons who have lived with
savages, Thus Mr. Bates, in his Naturalist on the
Amazon,’ writes: “Their want of curiosity is extreme,

» Vicente” (an Indian companion) “did not know
the cause of thunder and lightning, I asked him who
made the sun, the stare, the trees. He didn't know,
and had never heard the subject mentioned in’ his
tribe.” Gut Mr. Bates admits that even Vicente had
a theory of the configuration of the world. “ The
necessity of a theory of the earth and water had been
felt, and a theory had been suggested.” Again, Mr.
Bates says about a certain Brazilian tribe, “ Their
sluggish minds seem unable to conceive or feel the
want of a theory of the soul;” and he thinks the cause
of this indolence is the lack “of a written language
or a leisured class.” Now savages, a5 a rule, are all
in the “ leisured class,” all sportsmen. Mr. Herbert
Spencer, too, has expressed scepticism abont the curio-
sity attributed to savages. The point is important,
because, in our view, the medicine-man’s powers are
rooted in the savage theory of things, and if the
savage is too sluggish to invent or half consciously
evolve a theory of things, our hypothesis is baseless,
Again, we expect to find in savage myths the answer
given by savages to their own questions But this

’ Vol. ii p. 162.


SAVAGE SPECULATION. 85


view is impossible if savages do not ask themselves,
and never have asked themselves, any questions at all
about the world. On this topic Mr. Spencer writes:!
“Along with absence of surprise there naturally goes
absence of intelligent curiosity.” Yet Mr. Spencer
admits that, according to some witnesses, “the Dyaks
have an insatiable curiosity,” the Samoans “ are usually
very inquisitive,” and “the Tahitians are remarkably
curious and inquisitive.” Nothing is more common
than to find travellers complaining that savages, in
their ardently inquiring curiosity, will not leave the
European for a moment to his own undisturbed devices.
Mr. Spencer's savages, who showed no curiosity, dis-
played this impassiveness when Europeans were try-
ing to make them exhibit signs of surprise. Impas-
sivity is a point of honour with many uncivilised races,
and we cannot infer that a savage has no curiosity
because he does not excite himself over a mirror, or
when his European visitors try to swagger with their
mechanical appliances. Mr. Herbert Spencer founds,
on the statements of Mr. Bates already quoted, a
notion that “the savage, lacking ability to think and
the accompanying desire to know, is without tendency
to speculate.” He backs Mr, Bates’s experience with
Mungo Park's failure to “draw” the negroes about
the causes of day and night.” They had never in-
dulged a conjecture nor formed an hypothesis on the
matter. As to “primitive man,” according to Mr.
Spencer, “the need for explanations about surroundin


' Sociology, p. 98.


i
°


RG MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


appearances does not occur to him.” ‘Woe have dis-
claimed all knowledge about “ primitive man,” but. it
is ensy to show that Mr. Spencer grounds his belief in
the lack of speculation among savages on a frail foun-
dation of evidence. Mr. Spencer has admitted specu-
lation, or at least curiosity, among New Caledonians,
New Guinea people, Dyaks, Samoans, and Tahitians.
Even where he denies its existence, among the
Amazon tribes mentioned by Mr. Bates, we happen to
be able to show that Mr. Bates was misinformed.
Another traveller, the American geologist, Professor
Hartt of Cornell University, lived long among the
tribes of the Amazon. But Professor Hartt did not,
like Mr. Bates, find them at all destitute of theories
of things—theories expressed in myths, and testifying
to the intellectual activity and enriosity which de-
mands an answer to its questions. Professor Hartt,
when he first became acquainted with the Indians of
the Amazon, knew that they were well supplied with
myths, and he set to work to collect them. But he
found that neither by coaxing nor by offers of money
could he persuade an Indian to relate a myth. Only by
accident, “ while wearily paddling up the Parana-mirim
of the Ituki,” did he hear his steersman telling stories
to the oarsmen to keep them awake. Professor Hartt.
furtively noted down the tale, and he found that by
“setting the ball rolling,” and narrating « story him-
self, he could make the natives throw off reserve and
add to his stock of tales. “ After one has obtained
his first myth, and has learned to recite it accurately


SAVAGE SCIENTIFIC CURIOSITY. a7


and spiritedly, the rest is easy.” The tales published
by Professor Hartt are chiefly animal stories, like those
current in Africa and among the Red Indians, and
Hartt even believed that many of the legends had
been imported by Negroes. But as the majority of
the Negro myths, like those of the Australians, give a
‘reason why” for the existence of some phenomenon
or other, the argument against early man’s curiosity
and vivacity of intellect is rather injured, even if the
Amazonian myths were imported from Africa. Mr.
Spencer based his disbelief in the intellectual curiosity
of the Amazonian tribes and of Negroes on the reports
of Mr. Bates and of Mungo Park. But it turns out
that both Negroes and Amazonians have stories which
do satisfy an unscientific curiosity, and it is even held
that the Negroes lent the Amazonians these very
stories.. The Kamschadals, according to Steller,
‘sive themselves a reason why for everything, sc-
cording to their own lively fancy, and do not leave
the smallest matter uncriticised."* Rather than go
without an explanation, the Australians, Sir George
Grey found, would invent a tradition.’ As far, then, as
Mr. Spencer's objections apply to existing savages, we
may consider them over-weighed by the evidence, and
‘we may believe in a naive savage curiosity about the
world and desire for explanations of the causes of
things, Mr. Tylor's opinion corroborates our own:
Man's craving to know the causes at work in each

' Bee Amazonian Ataris ll 5 St) 40; and compare Bie.


Harris's Preface to Nights with [nele
7 Steller, p. 267. On einas Prabar aaa se avh.


? Op. cil, p. 275.


88 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


event he witnesses, the reasons why each state of
things he surveys is such as it is and no other, is no
product of high civilisation, but a characteristic of his
race down to its lowest stages. Among rude savages
it is already an intellectual appetite, whose antisfaction
claims many of the moments not engrossed by war or
sport, food or sleep. Even in the Botoendo or the
Australian, scientific speculation has its germ in actual
experience.”’ It will be shown later that the food of
the savage intellectual appetite is offered and con-
sumed in the shape of explanatory myths.

But we must now observe that the “actual experi-
ence," properly so called, of the savage is so limited
and so coloured by misconception and superstition,
that his knowledge of the world varies very much from
the conceptions of civilised races. He seeks an expla-
nation, a theory of things, based on his experience,
But his knowledge of physical causes and of natural
laws is exceedingly scanty, and he is driven to fall
back upon what we may call metaphysical, or, in many
cases, Supernatural explanations. The narrower the
range of man’s knowledge of physical causes, the
wider is the field which he has to fill up with hypo-
thetical causes of a metaphysical or eupernatural char-
acter. These supernatural causes themselyes the
savage believes to be matters of experience. It ig
to his mind a matter of experience that all nature is
personal and animated; that men may change shapes
with beasts ; that incantations and supernatural beings
cin cause sunshine and storm.

' Primitive Culture, 1. 369.


SAVAGE THEORY OF CAUSATION. Bg


A good example of this is given in Charlevoix's
work on French Canada.’ Charlevoix was a Jesuit
father and missionary among the Hurons and other
tribes of North America. He thus describes* the
philosophy of the Red Men. “The Hurons attribute
the most ordinary effects to supernatural causes." In
the same page the good father himself attributes the
welcome arrival of rainy weather and the cure of cer-
tain savage patients to the prayers of Pire Brébeuf
“oe to the exhibition of the sacraments. Charlevoix

msiderably extended the field in which natural
Giticks are known: to: be produced by natural causes.


He was much more scientifically minded than his


sayage flock, and was quite aware that an ordinary
clock with a pendulum cannot bring bad luck to a
whole tribe, and that a westher-cock is not a
magical machine for securing unpleasant weather,
The Hurons, however, knowing less of natural causes
and nothing of modern machinery, were as convinced
that his clock was ruining the luck of the tribe
and his weather-cock spoiling the weather, as Father
Charlevoix could be of the trnth of his own infer-
ences. One or two other anecdotes in the good father's
history and letters help to explain the difference be-
tween the philosophies of wild and of Christian men,
The Pére Brébeuf was once summoned at the instiga-
tion of a Huron wizard or “medicine-man” before a
council of the tribe. His judges told the father that
nothing had gone right since he appeared among
) Histoire de la France Nowrelle.
2 Vuli p. 191,


90 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


them. To this Brébeuf replied by “ drawing the
attention of the savages to the absurdity of their
principles.” He admitted! the premise that nothing
had turned out well in the tribe since his arrival.
“But the reason,” said he, “plainly is that God be
angry with your hardness of heart.” No sooner had
the good father thus demonstrated the absurdity of
sivage principles of reasoning, than the malignant
Huron wizard fell down dead at his feet! ‘This event
naturally added to the confusion of the savages,
Coincidences of this sort have a great effect on
savage minds. Catlin, the friend of the Mandan tribe,
mentions a chief who consolidated his power by aid
of a little arsenic, bought from the whites, The chief
used to prophesy the sudden death of his opponents,
which always occurred at the time indicated. Tho
natural results of the administration of arsenic were
attributed by the barbarous people to supernatural
powers in the possession of the chief? Thus the
philosophy of savages secks causas cognoscere réertem,
like the philosophy of civilised men, but it flies hastily
to a hypothesis of supernatural causes which ate only
guessed at, and are incapable of demonstration. This
frame of mind prevails still in civilised countries,
as the Bishop of Nantes showed when, in 1846, he
attributed the floods of the Loire to “the excesses
of the press and the general disregard of Sunday.”
That supernatural causes exist and may operate, it is
not at all our intention to deny. But the habit of
looking everywhere for such causes, and of assuming
1 Vol i. p. 192, * Catlin, Letters, ii, 13>,


SAVAGE CREDULITY. or


their interference at will, is the main characteristic
of savage speculation. The peculiarity of the savage
is that he thinks human agencies can work super-
naturally, whereas even the Bishop reserved his super-
natural explanations for the Deity. On this belief
in man’s power to affect events beyond the limits
of natural possibility is based the whole theory of
magic, the whole power of sorcerers. That theory,
again, finds incessant expression in myth, and there-
fore deserves our attention.

The theory requires for its existence an almost
boundless credulity. his credulity appears to Euro-
peans to prevail in full force among savages. Bosman
is amazed by the African belief that a spider created
notion that the sea was accidentally created by a girl.
Charlevoix says,! “Les sauvages sont d'une facilite A
croire co qu'on leur dit, que les plus fachense ex-
périences n’ont jamais pu guérir.” But it is a curious
fact that while savages are, as a rule, s0 credulous,
they often “ lough consumedly ” at the religious
doctrines taught them by missionaries. Savages and
civilised men have different standards of credulity.
Dr. Moffat ? remarks, “To speak of the Creation, the
Fall, and the Resurrection, seemed more fabulous, ex-
travagant, and Indicrons to them than their own
yain stories of lions and hywnas.” Again, “The
Gospel appeared too preposterous for the most foolish
to believe.” While the Zulus declared that they used


1 Vol. ii. p. 378.
7 Missionary Labours, p. 245-


g2 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


to accept their own myths without inquiry,’ it was a
Zulu who suggested to Bishop Colenso his doubts
about the historical character of the Noachian Deluge.
Hearne? knew a Red Man, Matorabhee, who, “ though
a perfect bigot with regard to the arts and tricks of
the jugglers, could yet by no means be impressed
with a belief of any part of owr religion.” Lieutenant
Haggard, R.N., tella the writer that during an eclipse
at Lamoo he ridionled the native notion of driving
away a beast which devours the moon, and explained
the real cause of the phenomenon. But his native
friend protested that “he could not be expected to
believe such a story.” Yet it is, apparently, in regard
to imported and novel opinions about religion and
science alone that savages imitate the conduct of the
adder, which, according to St. Augustine, is voluntarily
deaf, and thrusts its tail into one ear, while it squeezes
the other against the earth.

We have already seen sufficient examples of credu-
lity in savage doctrines about the equal relations of
men and beasts, stars, clouds, and plants. The same
readiness of belief, which would be surprising in a
Christian child, has been found to regulate the rudi-
mentary political organisations of grey barbarians.
Add to this credulity a philosophy which takes resem-
blance, or contiguity in space, or nearness in time as
a sufficient reason for predicating the relations of cause
and effect, and we have the basis of savage physical
science. Coincidence with them stands for cange.


Callaway, Religion of Amarulua, i. 35.
7 Journey among the indiana, 1795, p. 350.


POST HOC, ERGO PROPTER HOC. 93


Post hoc, ergo propter hoe, is the motto of the savage
philosophy of causation. The untutored reasoner
speculates on the principles of the Egyptian clergy,
aa described by Herodotus.’ “The Egyptians have
discovered more omens and prodigies than any other
men; for when aught prodigious occurs, they keep
good watch, and write down what follows; and then,
if anything like the fp oligy be repeated, they expect
the same events to follow as before.” This way of
Jooking at things 1 the very essence of superstition.
Savages, as a rule, are not even 80 scientific as the
Igyptians. When an untoward event ‘occurs, they
stances of the last few days, and select the determining
cause very uch at random. Thus the arrival of the
French missionaries among the Hurons was coincident
with certain unfortunate events; therefore it was argued
that the advent of the missionaries was the cause of
the misfortune. When the Bechnanas suffered from
drought, they attributed the lack of rain to the arrival
of Dr. Moffat, and especially to his beard, his church
bell, and a bag of salt in his possession. © Here there
was not even the pretence of analogy between cause
and effect. Some savages might have argued (it is
quite in their style), that as salt canses thirst, a bag
of salt causes drought; but no such case could be
made out sgainst Dr. Moffat’s bell and beard. To
give an example from the beliefs of English peasants.
When a cottage was buried by little avalanche in
1772, the accident was attributed to the carelessness

lit p 82.


94 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


of the cottagers, who had allowed a light to be taken
out of their dwelling in Christmas-tide.! We see the
same confusion between antecedence and consequence
in time on one side, and cause and effect on the other,
when the Red Indians aver that birds actually bring
winds and storms or fair weather. They take liter-
ally the sense of the Rhodian swallow-song,?—
* The swallow hath come,

Bringing fair hours,

Bringing fair seasons,

On black back and white breast,”

Again, in the Pacific the people of one island
always attribute hurricanes to the machinations of the
people of the nearest island to windward. The wind
comes from them; therefore (as their medicine-men
can notoriously influence the weather), they must have
sent the wind. This unneighbourly act is a casus belli,
and through the whole of a group of islands the
banner of war, like the flag of freedom in Byron,
flies against the wind, The chief principle, then, of
savage science is that antecedence and consequence
in time are the same as effect and canse.? Again,
savage science holds that ike affects like ; that you can
injure a man, for example, by injuring his efigy. On
these principles the savage explains the world to him-
self, and on these principles he tries to subdue to
himself the world. Now the putting of these prin-
ciples into practice is simply the exercise of art magic,

| Shrophire Foll- Lore, by Miss Burne, tii. gos,
* Brinton, Myths of New World, p. tov.


4 See account of Zuni metaphysics in chapter on American Divine
Myths,


THEORIES OF MAGIC, 95


an art to which nothing seems impossible. The belief
that his Shamans or medicine-men practise this art is
universal among savages. It seriously affects their
conduct, and is reflected in their myths.

The one general rule which governs all magical
reasoning is, that casual connection in thought is
equivalent to causative connection in fact. Like sug-
gests like to human thought by association of ideas ;
wherefore like influences like, or produces analogous
effects in practice. Any object once in a man's posses-
sion, especially his hair or his nails, is supposed to be
emp ang vant sexines hin by's soronrer. The
part suggests the whole. A lock of o man’s hair was
SeaV of the ‘rial to destroy the hair is to destroy its
former owner. Again, whatever event follows another
in time suggests it, and may have been caused by it.
Accompanying these ideas is the belief that nature
is peopled by invisible spiritual powers, over which
magicians and sorcerers possess influence. The magic
of the lower races chiefly turns on these two beliefs.
First, “ man having come to associate in thought those
things which he found by experience to be connected
in facet, proceeded erroneously to invert their action, and
to conclude that association in thought must involve
stmilar connection in reality. He thus attempted to
discover, to foretell, and to cause events, by means of
processes which we now sce to have only aon ideal
significance.”' Secondly, man endeavoured to make
disembodied spirits of the dead, or any other spirits,
others obedient to his will. Savage philosophy pre-

1 Primitive Culture, L 14.


gf MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


sumes that the beliefs are correct, and that their
practical application is successful. Examples of the
first of the two chief magical ideas are as common
in unscientific modern times or among unscientific
modern people as in the savage world.
/ The physicians of the age of Charles Il. were wont
to give their patients “mummy powder,” that is,
pulverised mummy. They argued that the mummy
had lasted for a very long time, and that the patients
ought to do so likewise. Pliny imagined that diamonds
must be found in company with gold, because. these
are the most perfect substances in the world, and like
should draw to like. Aurum potaiile, or drinkable
gold, was a favourite medical nostrum of the Middle
Ages, because gold, being perfect, should produce per-
fect health. Among savages the belief that like is
eaused by like is exemplified in very many practices.
The New Caledonians, when they wish their yam
plots to be fertile, bury in them with mystic cére-
monies certain stones which are naturally shaped like
yams. The Melanesians have reduced this kind of
magic to a system. Among them. certaim stones have
a magical efficacy, which is determined in each case
by the shape of the stone. “ A stone in the shape of
a pig, of a bread-fruit, of a yam, was a most valuable
find. No garden was planted without the stones
which were to increase the crop.”’ Stones with a
rude resemblance to. beasts bring the Zuni luck in
the chase.

The spiritual theory in some places is mixed up

i Rev. R. H. Codrington, Journal. Anthrop. {nal., February 1581.


LIKE AFFECTS LIKE. O7


with the “like to like” theory, and the magical stones
are found where the spirits have been heard twittering
and whistling. “ A large stone lying with a number
of amall ones under it, like a sow among her sucklings,
was good for a childless woman.”' It is the savage
belief that stones reproduce their species, a belief con-
sonant with the general theory of universal anima-
tion and personality. The ancient belief that diamonds
gendered diamonds is a survival from these ideas, “A
stone with little disks upon it was good to bring in
money; any fanciful interpretation of a mark was
enough to give a character to the stone and its asso-
ciated Pui” or spirit in Melanesia. In Scotland, stones
shaped like various parts of the human body are ex-
pected to cure the diseases with which these members
may be afflicted. “These stones were called by the
names of the limbs which they represented, as ‘ eye-
stone,” * head-stone.’"” The patient washed the affected
part of the body, and rubbed it well with the stone
corresponding."

To return from European peasant-magic to that of
savages, we find that when the Bushmen want wet
weather they light fires, believing that the black
smoke clouds will attract black rain clonds; while
the Zulus sacrifice black cattle to attract black
clonds of rain.® Though this magic has its origin
in savage ignorance, it survives into civilisation. Thus
the sacrifices of the Vedic age were imitations of
the natural phenomena which the priests desired to

1 Codrington, Jowrn. Anth. Soc, x. fil 276,
a bose deme acta Mal atin cheated teed


you. I, G


98 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


produce,’ “ C’était un moyen de faire tombre la pluie
en réalisant, par les répresentations terrestres des
eaux du nuage et de l'éclair, Jes conditions dans les-
quelles celui-ci détermine dans le ciel |'épanchment de
celles-Ji.” A good example of magical science is
afforded by the medical practice of the Dacotahs of
North America* When any one is ill, an image of
his disease, a boil or what not, is carved in wood.
This little image is then placed in a bowl of water and
shot at with a gun. The image of the disease being
destroyed, the disease itself is expected to disappear.
Compare the magic of the Philistines, who made
rolden images of the sores which plagued them and
stowed them away in the ark. The custom of mak-
ing a wax statuette of an enemy, and piercing it
with pins or melting it before the fire, so that the
detested person might waste os his semblance melted,
was common in mediaval Europe, was known to Plato,
and is practised by Negroes. The Australians take
some of the hair of an enemy, mix it with grease and
the feathers of the eagle, and burn it in the fire. This
is “bar” or black magic. The boarding under the
chair of a magistrate in Barbadoes was lifted not long
ago, and the ground beneath was found covered with
wax images of litigants stuck full of pins,

The war-magic of the Dacotahs works in a similar
manner. Before a party starts on the war-trail, the
chief, with various ceremonies, takes his club and


stands before his tent. An old witch bowls hoops at


1 Bergalgue, Religion Vedique, L 126-138, i vil, vith
* Schooleraft, iv. 491. * 1 Samuel yi. 4, §-


ARYAN MAGIC. oO


him; each hoop represents an enemy, and for each
he strikes a foeman is expected to fall. A bowl of
sweetened water is also set out to entice the spirits of
the enemy.’ The war-magic of the Aryans in India
does not differ much in character from that of the
Dacotahs. “If any one wishes his army to be vic-
torious, he should go beyond the battle-line, cut o
stalk of grass at the top and end, and throw it against
the hostile army, with the words, Prasahe kas trapas-
yati ?—O Prisahi, who sees thee? If one who has
such knowledge cuts a stalk of grass and throws the
parts at the hostile army, it becomes split and dis-
solved, just as a daughter-in-law becomes abashed
and faints when seeing her father-in-law,"—an alln-
sion, apparently, to the wide-spread fabu which makes
fathers-in-law, danghters-in-law, sons-in-law, and
mothers-in-law avoid each other."

The hunt-dances of the Red Indians and Aus-
tralians are arranged like their war-magic. Effigies
of the bears, deer, or kangaroos are made, or some of
the hunters imitate the motions of these animals. The
rest of the dancers pretend to spear them, and it is
hoped that this will ensure success among the real
bears and kangaroos,

Here is a singular piece of magic in which Euro-
pean and Anstralian blacks agree. Boris Godunoff
made his servants swear never to injure him by casting
spells with the dust on which his feet or his carriage
wheels had left traces.2 Mr. Howitt finds the same


1 Behooleraft, iv. 4o6, 2 Aiterrya Brakmana, iii. 22.
2 Rambaud's Aisory of Rwana, English trams, i. 551.


roo MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


magic among the Kurnsi. “Seeing a Tatungolung
very lame, I asked him what was the matter: He
said, ‘Some fellow has put oftle in my foot.’ I found
he was probably suffering from acute rheumatism.
He explained that some enemy must have found his
foot-track and have buried in it a piece of broken
bottle. The magic influence, he believed, caused it
to enter his foot." On another occasion a native told
Mr, Howitt that he had seen black fellows putting
poison in his foot-tracks. Bosman mentions a similar
practice among the people of Guinea. In Scottish
folk-lore a screw nail is fixed into the footprint of
the person who is to be injured.

Just as these magical efforts to influence like by
like work their way into Vedic and other religions,
eo they are introduced into the religion of the savage.
His prayers are addresses to some sort of superior
being, but the efficacy of the prayer is eked ont by
a little magic, unless indeed we prefer to suppose
that the words of the supplication are interpreted by
gesture-speech. Sproat writes:* “Set words and
gestures are used according to the thing desired. For
instance, in praying for salmon, the native rubs the
backs of his hands, looks upwards, and muttera the
words, ‘Many salmon, many salmon.’ If he wishes
for deer, he carefully robs both eyes; or, if it is geese,
he rubs the back of his shoulder, uttering always in
a sing-song way the accustomed formula... . All these
practices in praying no doubt havea meaning. We
may see a steady hand is needed in throwing the


1 Kamiaroi and Kurnai, p, 250. 2 Savage Life, p. 208,


MAGIC OF INCANTATIONE, Tor


salmon-spear, and clear eyesight in finding deer in
the forest.”

In addition to these forms of symbolical magic
eh might be multiplied to any extent), we find
among savages the belief in the power of songs
of incantation, This is a feature of magic which
specially deserves our attention. In myths, and still
more in marehen or household tales, we shall con-
stantly find that the most miraculous effects are caused
when the hero pronounces a few lines of rhyme. In
Rome, as we have all read in the Latin Delectus, it
was thought that incantations could draw down the
moon. In the Odyssey the kinsfolk of Odyssens sing
“a song of healing” over the wound which was dealt
him by the boar’s tusk. Sophocles speaks of the folly
of muttering incantations over wounds that need the
surgeon's knife. The song that salved wounds occurs
in the Kalewala, the epic poem of the Finns, In many
of Grimm's mérchen, miracles are wrought by the
repetition of snatches of rhyme. This belief is derived
from the savage state of fancy. According to Kohl,’
“Every sorrowful or joyful emotion that opens the
Indian’s mouth is at once wrapped up in the garb of
a wabano-nagamawin (chanson magicale). If you ask
one of them to sing you a simple innocent hymn in
praise of Nature, a spring or jovial hunting stave, he
never gives you anything but « form of incantation,
with which he says you will be able to call to you all
- the birds from the sky, and all the foxes and wolves
from their caves and burrows.” The giant's daughter

* Page 395-


102 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


in the Scotch marchen, Nicht, Nowghi, Nothing, is thus
enabled to call to her aid “all the birds of the sky.”
In the same way, if you ask an Indian for a love-
song, he will say that a philtre is really much more
efficacious, The savage, in short, is extremely practi-
cal. His arts, music and drawing, exist not pour Cart,
but for a definite purpose, as methods of getting some-
thing that the artist wants. The young lover whom
Kohl knew, like the lover of Bombyca in Theocritus,
believed in having an image of himself and an image
of the beloved. Into the heart of the female image
he thrust magic powders, and he said that this was
common, lovers adding songs, “ partly elegiac, partly
malicious, and almost criminal forms of incantation.”?!

Among the Indo-Aryans the mesaminik or incanta-
tions of the Red Man are known as mantras? These
are usually texts from the Veda, and are chanted over
the sick and in other circumstances where magic is
believed to be efficacious. Among the New Zealanders
the incantations are called karakias, and are employed
in actual life. There is a special karakia to raise the
wind, In Maori myths the hero is very handy with
his karakia, Rocks split before him, as before girls
who use incantations in Kaffir and Bushman tales


He assumes the shape of any animal at will, or flies in


the air, all by virtue of the kwrakia or incantation?
Without multiplying examples in the savage belief

1 Aitehi Gomi, pp. 395, 307.

* Muir, Sonskrit Texts, vy. 441, “Incantations from the Atharva
Veda."

* Taylor's New Zealand; Theal's Kagir Full. Lore, South-African
Polk-Lore Journal, passim: Shortland’s Traditions of the New Zea-
landera, pp. 130-135.


SPIRITS OF THE DEAD. 103


that miracles can be wrought by virtue of physical cor-
respondanees, by like acting on like, by the part affecting
the whole, and so forth, we may go on to the magical re-
sults produced by the aid of spirits. These may be either
spirits of the dead or spiritual essences that never ani-
mated mortal men. Savage magic or science rests
partly on the belief that the world is peopled by a
“ choir invisible,” or rather by a choir only occasionally
visible to certain gifted people, sorcerera and diviners.
An enormous amount of evidence to prove the existence
of these tenets has been collected by Mr. Tylor, and
is accessible to all in the chapters on “ Animism” in
his Primitive Culfure. It is not our business here
to account for the universality of the belief in spirits.
Mr. Tylor, following Lucretius and Homer, derives
the belief from the reasonings of early men on the
phenomena of dreams, fainting, shadows, visions
caused by narcotics, death, and other facts which
suggest the hypothesis of a separable life apart from
the bodily organism. It would scarcely be fair not
to add that the kind of “ facts” investigated by the
Psychical Society—such “facts” as the appearance of
men at the moment of death in places remote from
the scene of their decease, with such real or delusive
experiences as the noises and visions in haunted
houses—are familiar to savages. Without discussing
these obscure matters, it may be said that they inflo-
ence the thonghts even of some scientifically trained
and civilised men. It is natural, therefore, that they
should strongly sway the credulous imagination of


104 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


the belief that life can exist and manifest itself after
the death of the body.

Some examples of savage “ ghost-stories,” precisely
on a par with the “facts” of the Psychical Society's
investigations, may be adduced. The first is curious
because it offers among the Kanekas an example of
& belief current in Breton folk-lore. The story is
vouched for by Mr. J. J. Atkinson, late of Noumea,
New Caledonia. Mr. Atkinson, we have reason to
believe, was unacquainted with the Breton parallel.
To him one day a Kaneka of his acquaintance paid
a visit, and seemed loth to go away. He took
leave, returned, and took leave again, till Mr. Atkin-
son asked him the reason of his behaviour. He
then explained that he was abont to die, and would
never see his English friend again. As he seemed in
perfect health, Mr. Atkinson rallied him on his hypo-
chondria; but the poor fellow replied that his fate
was sealed. He had Istely met in the wood one whom
he took for the Kaneka girl of his heart; but he
became aware too late that she was no mortal woman,
but a wood-spirit in the guise of the beloved, The
result would be his death within three days, and, as a
matter of fact, he died. This is the groundwork of
the old Breton baliad of Le Sicur Nan, who dies after
his intrigue with the forest spectre.’ A tale more like
a common modern ghost-story is vouched for by Mr.
C. J. Du Ve, in Australia. In the year 1860, a
Maneroo black fellow died in the service of Mr. Du Ve.


' Tt may, of course, be conjectared that the French introduced this -


belief into New Caledonia,


SAVAGE GHOST STORIES. 105


“The day before he died, having been ill some time,
he said that in the night his father, his father's friend,
and a female spirit he could not recognise, had come
to him and ssid that he would die next day, and that
they would wait for him. Mr. Du Ve adds that,
though previously the Christian belief had been ex-
plained to this man, it had entirely faded, and that he
had gone back to the belief of his childhood.” Mr.
Fison, who prints this tale in his Aamilaroit and
Kurnai; adds, “I could give many similar instances
which have come within my own knowledge among
the Fijians, and, strange to say, the dying man in all
these cases kept his appointment with the ghosts to
the very day.”

In the Cruise of the Beagle ia a parallel anecdote
of a Fuegian, Jimmy Button, and his father’s ghost.

Without entering into a discussion of ghosta, it is
plain that the kind of evidence, whatever its value
may be, which convinces many educated Europeans
of the existence of apparitions has also played its part
in the philosophy of uncivilised races. On this belief
in apparitions, then, is based the power of the savage
sorcerera and necromants, of the men who converse
with the dead and are aided by disembodied spirits.
These men have greatly influenced the beginnings of
mythology. Among certain Australian tribes the
necromants are called Birraark.2 “The Kurnai tell
me,” says Mr. Howitt, “that a Birraark was supposed
to be initiated by the ‘ Mrarts’ (ghosts) when they met
him wandering in the bush. ... It was from the

1 Page 247. ® Kamiaroi and Xurnai, p. 253


106 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


ghosts that he obtained replies to questions concern-
ing events passing at a distance or yet to happen,
which might be of interest or moment to his tribe.”
Mr. Howitt prints an account of o spiritual séance in
the bush, “ The fires were let go down. The Birraark
uttered the cry ‘coo-ee’ at intervals. At length a
distant reply was heard, and shortly afterwards the
sound as of persons jumping on the ground in succes-
sion. A voice was then heard in the gloom asking in
4 strange intonation ‘ What is wanted?’ Questions
were put by the Birraark and replies given. At the
termination of the séance, the spirit-voice said, ‘ We
are going.’ Finally, the Birraark was found in the
top of an almost inaccessible tree, apparently asleep.” *
There was one Birraark at least to every clan, The
Kurnai gave the name of “ Brewin” (a powerful evil
spirit) to a Birraark who was once carried away for
several days by the Mrarts or spirits. The conception
of Brewin is about as near as the Kurnai get to the
idea of a God; their conferring of his name on a
powerful sorcerer is therefore a point of importance
and interest. It is a belief with the Australians, as,
according to Bosman, it was with the people of the
Gold Coast, that a very powerful wizard lives far in- _
land, and the Negroes held that to this warlock the
spirits of the dead went to be judged according to the
merit of their actions in life. Here we have a doctrine

1 Page 254.

* In tho Jesuit Refations (1637), Pp: 51, wo read that the Red Indian
somcerer or Joasakeed was credited with power to vanish suddenly
away out of sight of the men standing around him, Gf him, as of


Homeric gods, it might be eaid, “Who haa pewer to seo him come or
GO against bie will?"


SORCERERS AND SPIRITS. 107


answering to the Greek belief in “the wizard Minos,”
Macus, and Rhadamanthus, and to the Egyptian idea
of Osiris as judge of the departed.' The pretensions
of the sorcerer to converse with the dead are attested
by Mr. Brough Smyth. “A sorcerer lying on his
stomach spoke to the deceased, and the other sitting
by his side received the precious messages which the
dead man told.” Asa notural result of these beliefs,
the Australian necromant has great power in the tribe.
Mr. Howitt mentions o case in which a group ol
kindred, ceasing to use their old totemistic surname,
called themselves the children of a famous dead Bir-
raark, who thus became an eponymous hero, like Ion
among the Ionians.2 Among the Scotch Highlanders
the position and practice of the seer were very like
those of the Birraark. “A person,” says Scott,’ “ was
wrapped up in the skin of a newly slain bullock
and deposited beside a waterfall or at the bottom of a
precipice, or in some other strange, wild, and unusual
situation, where the scenery around him suggested
nothing but objects of horror. In this situation he
revolved in his mind the question proposed, and what-
ever was impressed on him by his exalted imagina-
tion passed for the inspiration of the disembodied spirits
who haunt these desolate recesses." A number of
examples are given in Martins Description of the

1 Bosman in Pinkerton, xvi. p. 401.

® Aborigines of Australia, i, 107.

3 In Victoria, after dark the wizard goes up to the clouds and brings
down a good spirit, Dawkins, p. 57. For eponymous medicine-men mee


Xamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 231.
« Lady of tee Lake, note 1 to Canto iv,


1o$ MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Western Islands.’ In the Century magazine (July
1882) is a very full report of Thlinkeet medicine-
men and metamorphoses.

The sorcerer among the Zulus is, apparently, of a
naturally hysterical and nervous constitution. “He
hears the spirits who speak by whistlings speaking to
him."* Whistling is also the language of the ghosts
in New Caledonia, where Mr. Atkinson informs us that
he has occasionally pnt an able-bodied Kaneka to
ignominious flight by whistling softly in the dusk,
The ghosts in Homer make a similar sound, “ and even
as bats flit gibbering in the secret place of a won-
drous cavern, . . . even so the souls gibbered as they
fared together" (Odyssey, xxiv. 5). “The familiar
spirits make him” (that Zulu sorcerer) “ acquainted
with what is about to happen, and then he divines for
the people.” As the Birraarks learn songs and dance-
musi¢ from the Mrarts, so the Zulu Inyanga or diviners
learn magical couplets from the Itongo or spirits.

The evidence of institutions confirms the reports
about savage belief in magic. The political power of
the diviners is very great, as may be observed from
the fact that a hereditary chief needs their consecration
to make him a chief de jure.’ In fact; the qualities of
the diviner are those which give his sacred authority
to the chief, When he has obtained from the diyiners
all their medicines and information as to the mode of
using the isitwndu (a magical vessel), it is said that he
often orders them to be killed. Now the chief is so

oP. 11%,


* Callaway, Religious Syatem of the dmazules, p. 265.
eae | bid, PB. Me.


CHIEFS AND SORCERERS, 109


far a medicine-man that he is lord of the air. “The
heaven is the chief's,” say the Zulus; and when he
calls out his men, “though the heaven is clear, it
becomes clouded by the great wind that arises,”
“The word of the chief gives confidence to his
troops; they say, ‘We are going; the chief has
already seen all that will happen in his vessel!’ Such
then are chiefs; they use a vessel for divination."”*
The makers of rain are known in Zululand as
*heayen-herds” or “ sky-herds,” who herd the
heaven that it may not break out and do its will on
the property of the people. These men are, in fact,
vepedpyepera, “cloud-gatherers,” like the Homeric
Zeus, the lord of the heavens. Their name of “herds
of the heavens” has a Vedic sound, “The herd that
herds the lightning,” say the Zulus, “does the same
as the herder of the cattle; he does as he does by
whistling; he says, ‘Tsho-i-i-i. Depart and go
yonder. Do not come here.’” Here let it be observed
that the Zulus conceive of the thunder-clonds and
lightning as actual creatures, capable of being herded
like sheep. There is no metaphor or allegory about
the matter,” and no forgetfulness of the original mean-
ing of words. ‘The cloud-herd is just like the cow-
herd, except that not every man, but only sorcerers,
and they who have eaten the “lightning-bird” (a bird
shot near the place where lightning has struck the
earth), can herd the clouds of heaven. The same ideas
prevail among the Bushmen, where the rain-maker is
1 Callaway, Reliyious System of tha Amazules, p. 343-
3 Jbid., p 355.


110 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


asked “to milk a nice gentle female rain;” the rain-
clouds are her hair. Among the Bushmen Rain is a
person. Among the Red Indians no metaphor seems
to be intended when it is said that “it is always birds
who make the wind, except that of the east." The
Dacotahs once killed a thunder-bird* behind Little
Crow's village on the Missouri. It had a face like a
man with a nose like an eagle's bill?

The political and social powers which come into
the hands of the sorcerers are manifest, even in
the case of the Australians. Tribes and individuals
can attempt few enterprises without the aid of
the man who listens to the ghosts. Only he can
foretell the future, and, in the case of the natural
death of a member of the tribe, can direct the ven-
geance of the survivors against the hostile magician
who has committed s murder by “far” or magic.
Among the Zulus we have seen that sorcery gives the
sanction to the power of the chief, and makes the chief
and other favoured persons masters of the weather,
“The winds and weather are at the command ™ of Bos-
man’s “great fetisher.” Inland from the Gold Coast,’
the king of Loango, according to the Abbé Proyart,
“has credit to make rain fall on earth.” Similar
beliefs, with like political results, will be found to
follow from the superstition of magic among the Red
Indians of North America. The difficulty of writing
about sorcerers among the Red Indians is cansed by
the abundance of the evidence. Charlevoix and the


l Schooloraft, fii, 456. * Compare Callaway, p 119.
3 Pinkerton, xvi. 401.


NORTH AMERICAN SORCERERS. "


other early Jesuit missionaries found that the jong-
leurs, as Charlevoix calls the Jossakeeds or medicine-
men, were their chief opponents, As among the
Scotch Highlanders, the Australians, and the Zulus,
the Red Indian jonglewr is visited by the spirits, He
covers a hut with the skin of the animal which he
commonly wears, retires thither, and there converses
with the bodiless beings.’ “The good missionary, like
Mr. Moffat in Africa, was convinced that the exercises
of the Jossakeeds were verily supernatural. “Ces
— ont un véritable commerce avec le pére du

songe.”* Their political power was naturally great.
This was denied by earlier and wiser Jesuit mission-
aries. In time of war “ ils avancent et retardent les
marches comme il leur plait." In onr own century it
was a medicine-man, Ten Squa Ta Way, who by his
magical processes and superstitious rites stirred up a
formidable war against the United States.* According
to Mr. Pond,‘ the native names of the Dacotah medi-
cine-men, “ Wakan,” signify “ god-men” and “ god-
dreamers.” Medicine-men are believed to be “ wakan-
ised” by mystic intercourse with supernatural beings
The business of the wakanised man is to discern
fature events, to lead and direct parties on the war-
trail, “to raise the storm or calm the tempest, te
converse with the lightning or thunder os with familiar
friends."* The wakanised man, like the Australian
Birrserk and the Zulu diviner, “dictates chants and
prayers.” In battle “every Dacotah warrior looks to


1 Charlevoix, 1 105. 8 Fhid., iil 362.
® Catlin, i. 17. 4 In Schooleraft, iv. 402.
5 Pond, in Schooloraft, iv. G47.


112 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the Wakan man as almost his only resource.” Belief
in Wakan men is, Mr. Pond says, universal among the
Dacotahs, except where Christianity has undermined
it. “Their influence is deeply felt by every indi-
vidual of the tribe, and controls all their affairs.” The
Wakan man’s functions are absorbed by the general
or war-chief of the tribe, and in Schoolcraft (iv. 495),
Captain Eastman prints copies of native scrolls show-
ing the war-chief at work as a wizard, “ The war-
chief who leads the party to war is always one of these
medicine-men,” In another passage the medicine-men
are described as “ having a voice in the sale of land.”
It must be observed that the Jossakeed, or medicine-
man pure and simple, exercises a power which is not
in itself hereditary. Chieftainship, when associated
with inheritance of property, is hereditary; and when
the chief, as among the Zulus, absorbs supernatural
power, then the same man becomes diviner and chief,
and is a person of great and sacred influence. The
liveliest account of the performances of the Maori
“tohungt” or sorcerer is to be found in Old New
Zealand, by the Pakeha Maori, an English gentle-
man who had lived with the natives like one of them-
selves. The dohunga, says this author,” presided over
‘all those services and customs which had something
approaching to a religious character. They also pre-
tended to power by means of certain familiar spirits,
to foretell future events, and even in some cases to
control them. ... The spirit ‘entered into’ them,
and, on being questioned, gave a response in a sort of
1 Anckland, 1863. * Tage mh


A MAORI SEANCE. . 113


half-whistling half-articulate voice, supposed to be the
proper language of spirits.” The Pakeha Maori was
present ina darkened village-hall when the spirit of
4 young man, a great friend of his own, was called
up by a fohunga. “Suddenly, without the slightest
warning, a voice came out of the darkness. . . . The
voice all through, it is to be remembered, was not the
voice of the fohunga, but a strange melancholy sound,
like the sound of a wind blowing into a hollow vessel.
‘Tt is well with me; my place is a good place.’ The
spirit gave an answer to a question which proved
to. be correct, and then ‘ Farewell,’ cried the spirit
from deep beneath the grownd, ‘ Farewell, again,
From Aigh in air. ‘Farewell,’ once more came moan-
ing through the distant darkness of the night.” As
chiefs in New Zealand no less than fofungas can ex-
ercise the mystical and magical power of tabu, that is,
of imparting to any object or person an inviolable
character, and can prevent or remit the mysterious
punishment for infringement of ¢abw, it appears pro-
hable that in New Zealand, as well as among the
Zulus and Red Indians, chiefs have a tendency to
absorb the sacred character and powers of the fo-
dungas. This is natural enongh, for a ¢ohunga, if he
plays his cards well, is sure to acquire property and
hereditary wealth, in combination with magical influ-
ence, which are the necessary qualifications for the office
of the chieftain. |

Here is the place to mention a fact which, though
at first sight it may appear to have only a social
interest, yet bears on the development of peserer

VOL, L


114 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Property and rank seem to have been essential to
each other in the making of social order, and where
ond is absent among contemporary savages, there we
do not find the other. As an example of this, we
might take the case of two peoples who, like the
Homeric. Ethiopians, are the outermost of men, and
dwell far apart at the ends of the world, The Eskimo
and the Fuegians, at the extreme north and south of
the American continent, agree in having little or no
private property and no chiefs. Yet magic is pro-
viding a kind of basis of rank. The bleak plains of
ice and rock are, like Attica, “the mother of men-with-
out master or lord.”. Among the “ house-mates” of the
smaller settlements there is no head-man, and in the
larger gatherings Dr. Rink says that “still less than
among the house-mates was any one belonging to
éuch a place to be considered a chief." The songs and
stories of the Eskimo contain the praises of men who
have risen up and killed any usurper who tried to be
a ruler over his “ place-mates.” No one could pos-
sibly establish any authority on the basis of property,
because: “superfluous property in implements, &c.,
rarely existed.” If there are three boats in one house-
hold, one of the boats is “borrowed” by the com-
munity, and reverts to the general fund. If we look
at the account of the Fuegians described in Admiral
Fitzroy’s cruise, we find a similar absence of rank pro-
duced by similar causes. “The perfect equality among
the individuals composing the tribes must for a long
time retard their civilisation. ... At present even a
piece of cloth is torn in shreds and distributed, and


ESKIMO SPIRITS, 115


no one individual becomes richer than another. On
the other hand, it is difficult to understand how a
chief can arise till there is property of some sort by
which he might manifest and still increase his autho-
rity.” In the same book, however, we get a glimpse
of one means by which authority can be exercised.
“The doctor-wizard of each party has moch influence
over his companions.” Among the Eskimo this ele-
ment in the growth of authority also exists. A class
of wizards called Angakuts have power to cause fine
weather, and, by the gift of second-sight and magical
practices, can dotect crimes, so that they necessarily
become a kind of civil magistrates. These Angekkok
or Angalt have familiar spirits called Torngak, o
word connected with the name of their chief spiritual
being, Torngaraak. The Torngak is commonly the
ghost of a deceased parent of the sorcerer. “ These
men,” says Egede, “are held in great honour and
esteem among this stupid and ignorant nation, inso-
much that nobody dare ever refuse the strictest obedi-
ence when they command him in the name of Torn-
garsak.” The name of this quasi-deity, derived from
the name of ghosts, is the more remarkable, because
the name of the Hottentot quasi-deity, Aorimo, is
also apparently nothing but « form of Molimo, that is,
ancestral spirits.| The importance and actual existence
of belief in magic has now been attested by the evidence
of institutions, even among Australians, Fuegians, and
Eskimo.

It ig now necessary to pass from examples of tribes

Callaway, Rel Trar,, p. 010.


116 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


who have superstitions respect for certain individuals,
but who have no property and no chiefs, to peoples
who exhibit the phenomenon of superstitious reverence
attached to wealthy rulers or to judges. To take the
example of Ireland, as described in the Senchus Aor,
we learn that the chiefs, just like the Angakuts of the
Eskimo, had “ power to make fair or foul weather” m
the literal sense of the words.’ Im Africa, in the
same way, as Bosman, the old traveller, says, “As to
what difference there is between one negro and another,
the richest man is the most honoured,” yet the most
honoured man has the same magical power as the poor
Angatuks of the Eskimo.

“Tn the Solomon Island,” says Mr, Codrington,
‘ “there is nothing to prevent a common man from
becoming a chief, if he can show that he has the mana
(supernatural power) for it.” °

Though it is anticipating a later stage of this inquiry,
we must here observe that the sacredness, and even
the magical virtues of barbarous chiefs seem to have
descended to the early leaders of European races.
The children of Odin and of Zeus were “ sacred kings.”
The Homeric chiefs, like those of the Zulus and the
Red Men, and of the early Irish and Swedes, exercised
an influence over the physical universe. Homer*
speaks of “a blameless king, one that fears the gods,
and reigns among many men and mighty, and the
black earth bears wheat and barley, and the sheep


1 Early JTfiatory of Institutions, p. 195.
? Journ, Anth, Jnat., x. til. 257, 500, 509.
2 Od, xix. 105.


METAMORPHOSIS. 117


bring forth and fail not, and the sea gives store of
fish, and all out of his good sovereignty.”

The attributes usually assigned by barbarous peoples
to their medicine-men have not yet been exhausted.
We have found that they can foresee and declare
the future; that ‘they control the weather and the
sensible world; that they can converse with, visit,
and employ about their own business the souls of
the dead. It would be easy to show af even
greater length that the medicine-man has every-
where the power of metamorphosis. He can assume
the shapes of all beasts, birds, fishes, insects, and
inorganic matters, and he can subdue other people to
the same enchantment. ‘This belief obviously rests
on the lack of recognised distinction between man -
and the rest of the world, which we have 60 fre-
quently insisted on as a characteristic of savage and
barbarous thought. Examples of accredited meta-
morphosis are so common everywhere, and so well
known, that it would be waste of space to give a
long account of them. In Primitive Culture’ a cloud
of witnesses to the belief in human tigers, hymnas,
leopards, and wolves is collected* Mr. Lane * found
metamorphosis by wizards ns accredited a working
belief at Cairo os it is among Abipones, Eskimo, or
the people of Ashangoland. In various parts af
Scotland there is & tale of a witch who was shot
at when in the guise of a hare. In this shape sho
was wounded, and the same wound was found on

1 Vol. i pp. 309-315-

2 See also M‘Lennan on Lykanthropy in Zneyolopmdia Britannica. |

9 drokan Nights, i 51.


118 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


her when she resumed her human appearance.
Lafitau, early in the last century, found precisely
the same tale, except that the wizards took the form
of birds, not of hares, among the Red Indians. The
birds were wounded by the magical arrow of an old
meédicine-man, Shonnoh Koui Eretsi, and these bolts
were found in the bodies of the human culprits. In
Japan, as we learn from several stories in Mr. Mit-
ford’s Tales of Old Japan, people chiefly metamorphose
themselves into foxes and badgers. The sorcerers of
Honduras! “ possess the power of transforming men
into wild beasts, and were much feared accordingly.”
Among the Cakchiquels, a cultivated people of Guate-
mala, the very name of the clergy, healed, was derived
from their power of assuming animal shapes, which
they took on as easily as the Homeric gods." Regnard,
the French dramatist, who travelled among the Lapps
at the end of the seventeenth century (1681), says: "
“They believe witches can turn men into cats ;" and
again, “ Under the figures of swans, crows, falcons,
and geese, they call up tempests and destroy ships.”
Among the Bushmen‘ “sorcerers assume the forms
of beasts and jackals." Dobrizhoffer (1717-91), a
missionary in Paraguay, found that “sorcerers arro-
gate to themselves the power of transforming them-
selves into tigers."° He was present when the
Abipones believed that a conversion of this sort was

1 Bancroft, Kaces of Pacife Conat, i. 740,

* Brinton, Annals of the Cabchiquels, p. 46.

* Pinkerton, L 47t, |

* Bleek, Brief Account of Bushman Folk.Lore, pp. 15, 40,

* English translation of Dobrizhoffer's dbipones, L 163,


LYCANTHEOPY, 119g


actually taking place: “Alas,” cried the people, “ his
whole body is beginning to be covered with tiger-
spots; his nails are growing.” Near Loanda, Living-
stone found’ that a “chief may metamorphose him-
self into a lion, kill any one he choses, and then
resume his proper form.” Among the Barotse and
Balonda, “while persons are still alive they may
enter into lions and alligators,”* Among the Mayas of
Central America “sorcerers could transform them-
selves into dogs, pigs, and other animals; their glance
was death to o victim."" The Thlinkeets think that
their Shamans can metamorphose themselves into ani-
mals at pleasure; and a very old raven was pointed
out to Mr, C, E. S. Wood aos an incarnation of the
soul of a Shaman.* Sir A. C. Lyall finds o similar
helief in flourishing existence in India. The European
superstition of the were-wolf is too well known to
need description. Perhaps the most curions legend
is that told by Giraldus Cambrensis about s man and
his wife metamorphosed into wolves by an abbot.
They retained human speech, made exemplary pro-
fessions of Christian faith, and sent for priests when
they found their last hours approaching. In an old
Norman ballad a girl is transformed into a white doe,
and hunted and slain by her brother's hounds. The
“aboriginal” peoples of India retain similar con-
yictions. Among the Hos, an old sorcerer called
Pusa was known to turn himself habitually imto o
tiger, and to eat his neighbour's goats, and even their
 Mimionary Travels, p. 615, __* Livingstone, p. 642
2 Bancroft, ii. fakes sends 1832.
® Dalton’s pois ct meee: 200,


|
120 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


wives. Examples of the power of sorcerers to turn,
as with the Gorgon’'s head, their enemies into stone,
are peculiarly common in America.' Hearne * found
that the Indians believed they descended from a dog,
who could turn himself into a handsome young man.

Let us recapitulate the powers attributed all over
the world, by the lower people, to medicine -men.
The medicine-man has all miracles at his command.
He rules the sky, he flies into the air, he become:
visible or invisible at will, he can take or confer any
form at pleasure, and resume his human shape. He
can control spirits, can converse with the dead, and
can descend to their abodes,

When we begin to examine the gods of mythology,
savage or civilised, we shall find that, with the general,
thongh not invariable addition of immortality, they

possess the very same accomplishments as the medi-
ciné-man, peay, tohunga, jossakeed, birraark, or what-
ever name for sorcerer we may choose. There are
examples in which the name of a god, Brewin, in
Australia, has been conferred on a successful medicine-
man, while* the names of distinguished warriors and
sorcerers have been transferred to gods, Among the
Grecks Zeus enjoys in heaven all the attributes of
the medicine-man; among the Iroquois, as Paul le
Jeune, the old Jesuit missionary,observed,* the medicine-


Pp ie a 130, 134; Report of Hthnological Bureau, Washington,
I i

= ll Journey, dv., p. 342.

* Moffat, Missionary Lobours, p. 258 ; Appleyard's Lajir Grammar,


Pp. 1}
§ Relations (1636), p. 104.


GODS HAVE ATTRIBUTES OF . 121


man enjoys on earth all the attributes of Zeus. Briefly,
the miraculous and supernatural endowments of the
gods of myth, whether these gods be zoomorphic or
anthropomorphic, are exactly the magical properties
with which the medicine-man is credited by his tribe.
Tt does not at all follow, as Enemerus and Mr. Herbert
Spencer might argue, that the god was once a real
living medicine-man. But myth-making man creates
gods in his own image, as he conceives it, and confers
on the deities of myth the magical powers which he


(° 122)


CHAPTER V.
NATURE MYTHS.


Savage fancy, curiosity, and credulity illustrated in nature myths—In
these all phenomena are explained by belief in the general anima-
tion of everything, combined with belicf in metamorphosis—Sun
myths, Asian, Australian, African, Melanesian, Indian, Califor-
tian, Brazilian, Maori, Samoan — Moon myths, Australian,
Muysca, Mexican, Zulu, Macassar, Greenland, Pinte, Malay—
Thunder mythe—Greek and Aryan sun and moon myths—Star
mythe—Myths, savage and civilised, of animals, sccounting for
their marks and habits—Examples of custom of claiming blood
kinship with lower animale—Myths of various plants and trees—
Myths of stones, and of metamorphosis into stones, Greek, Aus-
tralian, and American—The whole natural philosophy of savages
expresed in myths, and survives in folk-lore and classical poetry,
and legends of metamorphosia,

THE intellectual condition of savages which has been

presented and established by the evidence both of ©

observers and of institutions, may now be studied
in savage myths. These myths, indeed, would of
themselves demonstrate that the ideas which the lower
races entertain about the world correspond with our
statement. If any one were to ask himself, from
what mental conditions do the following savage stories
arise? he would naturally answer that the minds
which conceived the tales were curious, indolent, credu-
lous of magic and witchcraft, capable of drawing no
line between things and persons, capable of crediting


NATURE MYTHS, * 124


all things with human passions and resolutions, But,
as myths analogous to those of savages, when found
among civilised peoples, have been ascribed to a
psychological condition produced by a disease of lan-
guage acting after civilisation had made considerable
advances, we cannot take the savage myths as proof of
what savages think, believe, and practise in the course
of daily life. To do so would be, perhaps, to argue
in a circle, We must therefore study the myths of
the undeveloped races in ‘Shemenlves.
‘These myths form a composite whole, so complex
and so nebulous that it is hard indeed to array them
tegories. For example, if we look at
seks ccaseenhig this origin of various phenomena, we
find that some introduce the action of gods or extra-
natural beings, while others rest on a rude theory of
capricious evolution; others, again, invoke the aid of
the magic of mortals, and most regard the great
natural forces, the heavenly bodies, and the animals,
as s0 many personal characters capable of voluntarily
modifying themselves or of being modified by the most
trivial accidents. Some sort of arrangement, however,
must be attempted, only the student is to understand
that the lines are never drawn with definite fixity, that
any category may glide into any other category of myth,
We shall begin by considering some nature myths
—myths, that is to say, which explain the facts of the
visible universe, These range from tales about heaven,
day, night, the sun, and the stars, to tales accounting
for the red breast of the onsel, the habits of the quail,
the spots and stripes of wild beasts, the formation of


124 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


rocks and stones, the foliage of trees, the shapes of
plants. In a sense these myths are the science of
savages; In a sense they are their sacred history; in a
sense they are their fiction and romance. Beginning
with the sun, we find, as Mr, Tylor says that “in
early philosophy throughout the world the sun and
moon are alive, and, as it were, human in their
nature.” The mass of these solar myths is so enor-
mous that only a few examples can be given, chosen
almost at random out of the heap. The sun is regarded
as a personal being, capable not only of being affected
by charms and incantations, but of being trapped and
beaten, of appearing on earth, of taking a wife of the
danghters of men, Garcilasso de la Vega has a story
of an Inca prince, a speculative thinker, who was
puzzled by the sun-worship of his ancestors, If the
sun be thus all-powerful, the Inca inquired, why is
he plainly subject to laws? why does he go his daily
round, instead of wandering at large up and down the
fields of heaven? The prince concluded that there
was a will superior to the sun's will, and he raised a
temple to the Unknown Power. Now the phenomena
which put the Inca on the path of monotheistic reli-
gion have also struck the fancy of savages. Why,
they ask, does the sun run his course like a tamed
beast? <A reply suited to a mind which holds that
all things are personal is given in myths. Some one
eaught and tamed the sun by physical force or by art
magic.

In Australia the myth says that there was a time

Primitive Culture, i, 238.


THE TAMING OF THE 5UN, 125


when the sun did not set. “It was at all times day,
and the blacks grew weary. Norralie considered and
decided that the sun should disappear at intervals.
He addressed the sun in an incantation (couched like
the Finnish Kelewala in the metre of Longfellow’s
Hiawatha); and the incantation is thus interpreted :
* Sun, son, burn your wood, burn your internal sub-
stance, and go down.” The sun therefore now burns
out his fuel in a day, and goes below for fresh fire-
wood."

In New Zealand the taming of the sun is attributed
to the great hero Maui, the Prometheus of the Maoris.
He set snares to catch the sun, but in vain, for the
sun's raya bit them through. According to another
account, while Norralie wished to hasten the sun's
setting, Mani wanted to delay it, for the sun used to
speed through the heavens at a racing pace. Mani
therefore snared the sun, and beat him so unmercifully
that he has been lame ever since, and travels slowly,
giving longer days. “The sun, when beaten, cried
out and revealed his second great name, Taura-mis-
te-ra.”2 It will be remembered that’ Indra, in his
abject terror when he fled after the slaying of Vrittra,
also revealed his mystic name. In North America the
same story of the trapping and laming of the sun is
told, and attributed to a hero named Tcha-ka-betch,
In Samoa the sun had a child by « Samoan woman.
He trapped the sun with a rope made of a vine and
extorted presents. Another Samoan lassoed the sun


1 Brongh Smnyth, Aborivines of Victoria, L 430.
* Taylor, New Zealand, p. 131-


124 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


and made him promise to move more slowly.’ These
Samoan and Australian fancies are nearly as dignified
as the tale in the Aifareya Brahmena., The gods,
afraid “that the sun would fall out of heaven, pulled
him up and tied him with five ropes.” ‘These ropes
are recognised as verses in the ritual, but probably
the ritual is later than the ropes. In Mexico we find
that the sun himself (like the stars in most myths) was
once # human or pre-human devotee, Nanahuatzin,
who leapt into a fire to propitiate the gods? Trans-
lated to heaven as the sun, Nanahuatzin burned so
very fiercely that he threatened to reduce the world to
a cinder, Arrows were therefore shot at him, and
this punishment had as happy an effect as the beatings
administered by Mani and T'cha-ka-betch. Among
the Bushmen of South Africa the sun was once a man,
from whose armpit a limited amount of light was
radiated round his hut. Some children threw him up
into the sky, and there he stuck, and there he shines.’
In the Homeric hymn to Helios, as Mr. Max Miller
observes, “the poet looks on Helios as a half god,
almost a hero, who had once lived on earth,” which is
precisely the view of the Bushmen,‘ Among the
Aztecs the sun is said to have been attacked by a
hunter and grievously wounded by his arrows.’ The
Gallinomeros, in Central California, seem at least to


? Turner, Samoa, p. 20.

? Sahagun, French trana,, vii. fi

a Bleek, Hottentat Falles, P- 67+ Flush man Folk: Lore, PP. o, on.
* Compare a Californian solar myth: Bancroft, iii, pp. Ss, $6,
* Bancroft, iii, 73, quoting Burgua, i. 128, 196,


THE BRINGING OF NIGHT. 17


know that the sun is materia) and impersonal. They
say that when all was dark in the beginning, the
animals were constantly jostling each other, After o
painful encounter the hawk and the coyote collected
two balls of inflammable substance; the hawk (Indra
was occasionally a hawk) flew up with them into
heaven, and lighted them with sparks from a flint.
There they gave light as sun and moon. This is an
sxception to the general rule that the heavenly bodies
are regarded as persons. The Melanesian tale of the
bringing of night is a curious contrast to the Mexican,


‘Maori, Australian, and American Indian stories which


we have quoted. In Melanesia, a3 in Australia, the
but instead of sending the sun down below by an
incantation, when night would follow in course of
nature, the Melanesian hero went to Night (conceived
of as a person) and begged his assistance. Night
(Qong) received Qat (the hero) kindly, darkened his
eyes, gave him sleep, and, in twelve hours or 50, crept
up from the horizon and sent the sun crawling to the
west! In the same spirit Paracelsus is said to have
attributed darkness, not to the absence of the sun,
but to the apparition of certain stars which radiate
darkness, It is extraordinary that a myth like the
Melanesian should occur in Brazil. There was end-
less day till some one married a girl whose father,
“the great serpent,” was the owner of night, The
father sent night bottled up in a gourd. The gourd
was not to be uncorked till the messengers reached the
1 Codrington, Journ. Anthrop. Inat., February 1831,


128 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


bride, but they, in their curiosity, opened the gourd,
and let night out prematurely."

The myths which have been reported deal mainly
with the sun as a person who shines, and at fixed
intervals disappears, His relations with the moon are
much more complicated, and are the subject of endless
stories, all explaining in a romantic fashion why. the
moon waxes and wanes, whence come her spots, why
she is eclipsed, all starting from the premise that sun
and moon are persons with human parts and passions.
Sometimes the moon is a man, sometimes a woman,
and the sex of the sun varies according to the fancy
of the narrators. Different tribes of the same race, as
among the Australians, have different views of the sex
of moon and sun, Among the aborigines of Victoria,
the moon, like the sun among the Bushmen, was a
black fellow before he went up into the sky. After
on unusually savage career, he was killed with a
stone hatchet by the wives of the eagle, and now he
shines in the heavens* Another myth explanatory of
the moon’s phases was found by Mr. Meyer in 1846
among the natives of Encounter Bay. According to
them, the moon is a woman, and a bad woman to boot.
She lives a life of dissipation among men, which makes
her consumptive, and she wastes away till they drive
her from their company. While she is in retreat, she”
lives on nourishing roots, becomes quite plump, re-
sumes her gay carcer, and again wastes away. The

Contes Indiens du Breail, pp. 1-9, by Couto de Magalhies, Rio de
Janeiro, 1833. M. Henri Gaidox kindly presented the author with


this work.
? Brough Smyth, Aborigines of Victoria, i, 432.


THE MOON IN LOVE 139


same tribe, strangely enough, think that the sun also
is a woman. Every night she descends among the
dead, who stand in double lines to greet her and let
her pass. She has a lover among the dead, who has
presented her with a red kangaroo skin, and in this
she appears at her rising, Such is the view of rosy-
fingered Dawn entertained by the blacks of Encoun-
ter Bay. In South America, among the Muyscas of
Bogota, the moon, Huythaca, is the malevolent wife of
the child of the sun; she was a woman before her
husband banished her to the fields of space.’ The
moon is a man among the Khasias of the Himalaya,
and he was guilty of the unpard
admiring his mother-in-law. As a general rule, the
mother-in-law is not even to be spoken to by the
snvage son-in-law. The lady threw ashes in his face
to discourage his passion, hence the moon's spots.
The waning of the moon suggested the most beautiful
and best known of savage myths, that in which the
moon sends a beast to tell mortals that, though they
die like her, like her they shall be born again.“ Be-
cause the spots in the moon were thought to resemble
a hare, they were accounted for in Mexico by the
hypothesis that a god smote the moon in the face with
a rabbit;’ in Zululand and Thibet by a fancied trans-
lation of a good or bad hare to the moon,

The Eskimo have a peculiar myth to account for the
moon's spots. Sun and moon were human brother
and sister. In the darkness the moon once at-


1 Tylor, Primitive Culture, 1. 353.
. epee rsh in South Africa, pp. 69-74.


130 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


tempted the virtue of the sun. She smeared his face
over with ashes, that she might detect him when a
light was brought. She did discover who her assailant
had been, fled to the sky, and became the sun. The
moon still pursues her, and his face is still blackened
with the marks of ashes.’ Gervaiso* says that in
Macassar the moon was held to be with child by the
sun, and that when he pursued her and wished to beat
her, she was delivered of the earth. They are now
reconciled. About the alternate appearance of sun
and moon a beautifully complete and adequate tale is
told by the Piute Indians of California. No more
adequate and scientific explanation could possibly be
offered, granting the hypothesis that sun and moon are
human persons and savage persons. The myth is
printed as it was taken down by Mr. De Quille from
the lips of Tooroop Eenah (Desert Father), a chief af
the Piutes, and published in a San Francisco news-
paper.

“The sun is the father and ruler of the heavens. He
isthe big chief. The moon is his wife and the stars are
their children. The sun eats his children whenever
all the time afraid when he is passing through the
heavens. When he (their father) appears in the
morning, you see all the stars, his children, fiy out of
sight—go away back into the blue of the above—and
they do not wake to be seen again until he, their futher,
is about going to his bed.

i Crants’s fistory of Greenfand, 1. 212.
® Royaume de Macacar, 1685,


THE PIUTE SUN-MYTH. 131


“Down deep under the ground—deep, deep, under
all the ground—is a great hole. At night, when he has
passed over the world, looked down on everything and
finished his work, he, the sun, goes into his hole, and
he crawls and creeps along it till he comes to his bed
in the middle part of the earth. So then he, the sun,
sleeps there in his bed all night.

“This hole is so little, and he, the sun, is so big,
that he cannot turn round in it; and so he must, when
he has had all his sleep, pass on through, and in the
‘morning we see him come out in the east, When he,
the sun, has so come ont, he begins to hunt up through
the sky to catch and eat any that he can of the stars,
his children, for if he does not so catch and eat he
cannot live. He, the sun, is not all seen. Zhe shape
of him is like @ snake or a lizard. It is not bis head
that we can see, but his belly, filled up with the stars
that times and times he has swallowed.

“The moon is the mother of the heavens and is
the wife of the sun. She, the moon, goes into the
game hole as her husband to sleep her naps. But
always she has great fear of the sun, her husband,
and when he comes through the hole to the nobee
(tent) deep in the ground to sleep, she gets out and
comes away if he be cross.

“She, the moon, has great love for her children, the
stars, and is happy to travel among them in the
above; and they, her children, feel safe, and sing and
dance as she passes along. But the mother, she can-
not help that some of her children must be swallowed
by the father every month. It is ordered that way by


132 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the Pah-ah (Great Spirit), who lives above the place
of all.

“Every month that father, the sun, does swallow
some of the stars, his children, and then that mother,
the moon, feels sorrow. She must mourn; so she
must put the black on her face for to mourn the dead.
You see the Pinte women put black on their faces
when a child is gone. But the dark will wear away
from the face of that mother, the moon, a little and o
little every day, and after a time again we see all
bright the face of her. But soon more of her children
are gone, and again she must put on her face the
pitch and the black.”

Here all the phenomena are accounted for, and the


explanation is as advanced as the Egyptian doctrine of


the hole under the earth where the sun goes when he
passes from our view.

Mr. Tylor quotes! a nature myth about sun, moon,
and stars which remarkably corresponds to the specu-
lation of the Piutes. The Mintira of the Malayan
Peninsula say that both sun and moon are women.
The stars are the moon's children; once the sun had
as many. They each agreed (like the women of Jeru-
salem in the famine), to eat their own children; but
the sun swallowed her whole family, while the moon con-
cealed hers. When the sun saw this she was exceed-
ingly angry, and pursued the moon to kill her. Oceca-
sionally she gets o bite out of the moon, and that is an
eclipse. The Hos of North-East India tell the same
tale, but say that the sun cleft the moon in twain for

1 Primitive Culture, i. 356.


eee Sb ea ee
- -


ECLIPSE MYTHS. 133


her treachery, and that she continues to be cut in two
_and grow again every month,

This kind of fancy is eo natural, that the writer has
known a little Scotch girl of four or five to watch the
waning moon, which she had lately seen a full circle,
and to exclaim, “Some bad man has cut the moon
with a knife.”

In harmony with the general hypothioais that all
objects in nature are personal, and human or bestial,
in real shape, and in passion and habits, are the myths
which account for eclipses. These have so frequently
been published and commented on’ that a long state-
ment would be tedions and superfluous. To the savage
mind, and even to the Chinese and the peasants of
some Enropean countries, the need of an explanation
is satisfied by the myth that an evil beast is devouring
the sun or the moon. The people even try by firing
off guns, shrieking, and clashing cymbals, to frighten
the beast (wolf, pig, dragon, or what not) from his
prey. What the hungry monster in the sky is doing
when he is not biting the sun or moon we are not
informed. Probably he herds with the big bird whose
wings, among the Dacotahs of America and the Zulus
of Africa, make thunder; or he may associate with the
dragons, serpents, cows, and other aerial cattle which
supply the rain, and show themselves in the water-
spout. Chinese, Greenland, Hindoo, Finnish, Lithn-
nian, and Moorish examples of the myth about the
moon-devouring beasts are vouched for by Grimm." A

1 Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. i, ; Lefébure, Lee Yeux d' Horus,

* Teutonic Mythology, English trans.,*iL 706.


AND RELIGION.


134 MYTH, RITUAL


Mongolian legend has it that the gods wished to
punish the maleficent Arakho for his misdeeds, but
Arakho hid so cleverly that their limited omnipotence
could not find him. The sun, when asked to turn
spy, gave an evasive answer. The moon told the
truth. Arakho was punished, and ever since he chases
sun and moon. When he nearly catches either of
them, there is an eclipse, and the people try to drive
him off by making a hideous uproar with musical and
other instruments.’ Captain Beeckman in 1704 was
in Borneo, when the natives declared that the devil
“was eating the moon.”

Dr. Brinton in his Myths and Myth-Makers gives
examples from Peruvians, Tupis, Creeks, Iroquois,
and Algonkins. It would be easy, and is perhaps
superfluous, to go on multiplying proofs of the belief
that sun and moon are, or have been, persons. In
the Hervey Isles these two luminaries are thought
to have been made out of the body of a child cut in
twain by his parents. ‘The blood escaped from the
half which is the moon, hence her pallor.* This tale
is an exception to the general rule, but reminds us of
the many myths which represent the things in the
world as having been made out of a mutilated man,
like the Vedic Purosha. It is hardly necessary, ex-
cept by way of record, to point out that the Greek
myths of sun and moon, like the myths of savages,
start from the conception of the solar and lunar bodies
as persons with parts and passions, human loves and


1 Moon-Lore, by Rev. T. Harley, p. 167.
1 Gill, Myths and Songa, p. 45-


SELENE AND ENDYMION. 135


human sorrows. As in the Mongolian myth of
Arakho, the sun “sees all and hears all," and, less
honourable than the Mongolian sun, hé plays the
spy for Hephestus on the loves of Ares and Aphro-
dite. He has mistresses and human children, such as
Circe and Betes.’

The sun is all-seeing and all-penctrating. In o
Greek song of to-day a mother sends a message to an
absent daughter by the sun; it is but an unconscious
repetition of the request of the dying Ajax that the
heavenly body will tell his fate to his old father and

Sclene, the moon, like Helios, the sun, was o
birth to Pandia, and Pan gained her affection by the
simple rustic gift of a fleece.” The Australian Dawn,
with her present of a red kangaroo skin, was not
more lightly won than the chaste Selene. Her affec-
tion for Endymion is well known, and her cold white
glance shines through the crevices of his mountain
grave, hewn in a rocky wall, like the tombs of
Phrygia She is the sister of the sun in Hesiod, the
daughter (by his sister) of Hyperion in the Homeric
hymns to Helios,

In Greece the aspects of sun and moon take the
most ideal human forms, and show themselves in the
most gracious myths. But, after all, these retain in
their anthropomorphism the marks of the earliest
fancy, the fancy of Eskimo and Australians.

1 See chapter on Greak Divine Myths.
2 Sophocles, Ajax, 846. «Virgil, Georgies, lil. 391.
4 Preller, Gricch. Myth, 1 163.


136 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


There is no occasion to dwell long on myths of the
same character in which the stars are accounted for
aa transformed human adventurers. It has often been
shown ' that this opinion is practically of world-wide
distribution. We find it in Australia, Persia, Greece,
among the Bushmen, in North and South America,
among the Eskimo, in ancient Egypt, in New Zealand,
in ancient India—briefly, wherever we look. The
Sanskrit forms of these myths have been said to arise
from confusion as to the meaning of words. But is
it credible that, in all languages, however different,
the same kind of unconscious puns should have led to
the same mistaken beliefs? As the savage, barbarous,
and Greek star-myths (such as that of Callisto, first
changed into a bear and then into a constellation) are
familiar to most readers, a few examples of Sanskrit
star-stories are offered here from the Satapatha Brah-
mana” Fires are not, according to the Brahmana
ritual, to be lighted under the stars called Krittikis,
the Pleiades, The renson is that the stars were the
wives of tee bears (Riksha), for the group known in

times as the Rishis (sages) were originally
called the Rikshas (bears) But the wives of the
bears were excluded from the society of their husbands,
for the bears rise in the north and their wives in the
east, Therefore the worshipper should not set up his
fires under the Pleiades, lest he should thereby be
separated from the company of his wife. The Brah-


1 Custom and Myth, “ Star-Mytha;" Primitive Culture, i. 285, 299;
J. tee Miller, Ameridenischen [rrefigionen, pp. 52, 53: .
forred Books of the Laat, i, 285-256,


4 sao, a ete. 2) bo On re aes


SANSKRIT STAR MYTHS. 137


manas! also tell us that Prajapati had an unholy
passion for his danghter, who was in the form of a
doe, The gods made Rudra fire an arrow at Pra-
japati to punish him; he was wounded, and leaped
into the sky, where he became one constellation and
his daughter another, and the arrow a third group of
stars. In general, according to the Brahmanas, “ the
stars are the lights of virtuous men who go to the
heavenly world.” *

Passing from savage myths explanatory of the
nature of celestial bodies to myths accounting for
the formation and colour and habits of Donate birds,
and fishes, we find ourselves, as an old Jesuit mission
avy enys, in the midet of a bazbarous version: of Ovid's
Metamorphoses. It has been shown that the possi-

change of form between man and beast
is part of the working belief of everyday existence
among the lower peoples. They regard all things as
on one level, or, to use an old political phrase, they
“level up” everything to equality with the human
status. Thos Mr. Im Thurn, a very good observer,
found that to the Indians of Guiana “all objects,
animate or inanimate, seem exactly of the same nature,
except that they differ by the accident of bodily form.”
Clearly to grasp this entirely natural conception of
primitive man, the civilised student must make o
great effort to forget for a time all that science has


_ eects Bremen; X


Ovid, and the Cataaterimos, attributed to Eratosthenes, are tseful
authorities, Probably many of the tales in Eratosthones are late fictions
cunsciously moulded um traditional data,


133 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


tanght him of the differences between the objects
which fill the world.’ “To the ear of the savage,
animals certainly seem to talk.” “As far as the
Indians of Guiana are concerned, I do not believe that
they distinguish such beings as sun and moon, or such
other natural phenomena as winds and storms, from
men and other animals, from plants and other inani-
mate objects, or from any other objects whatsoever.”
Bancroft says about North American myths, * Beasts
and birds and fishes fetch and carry, talk and act, in
a way that leaves even A%sop's heroes quite in the
shade.” * |

The savage tendency is to see in inanimate things
animals, and in animals disguised men. M. Réville
quotes in his Aeligions dea Peuples Non-Civilisés, 1. 64,
the story of some Negroes, who, the first time they were
shown a cornemuse, took the instrument for a beast,
the two holes for its eyes, The Highlander who
looted a watch at Prestonpans, and observing, “ She's
teed,” sold it cheap when it ran down, was in the same
psychological condition. A queer bit of savage science
is displayed on a black stone tobacco-pipe from the
Pacific Coast." The savage artist has carved the pipe
in the likeness of a steamer, as a steamer is conceived
by him. “Unable to account for the motive power,
he imagines the paddle to be linked round the tongue

| Journ, Anthrop, Jnat., xi 306-369. A very large and rich collec.
yond be tharer tongue seagate pce wil a oe = J. G. Miller's
atitions, Bodin on ta Dinaiouseels bing She gous 108 Sasa t
eonanlted, | .

? Vol. iii p, 129.

* Magazine of Art, January 1233.


THE BEAR-BROTHER. 139


of a coiled serpent, fastened to the tail of the vessel,”
and so he represents it on the black stone pipe. Nay,
a savage's belief that beasts are on his own level is 50
literal, that he actually makes blood-covenants with
the lower animals, as he does with men, mingling his
gore with theirs, or smearing both together on 4


‘stone ;! while to bury dead animals with sacred rites


is as usual among the Bedouins and Malagasies to-
day as in ancient Egypt or Attica, In the same way
the Ainos of Japan, who regard the bear as a kinsman,
Se a aiamarne eases ier But, &
him a “mother,” an Aino gid cwhe looks aie se
comforts, and behaves in a way as maternal as pos-
sible. The bear is now a kinsman, ouopsjrpios, and
cannot avenge himself within the kin. This, at lenst,,
seems to be the humour of it, In Lagarde’s Rediquie
Juris Ecclesiastici Antiquissime a similar Syrian cove-
nant of kinship with insects is described. About 700
a.D., when a Syrian garden was infested by caterpillars,
the maidens were assembled, and one caterpillar was
caught. Then one of the virgins was “ made its
mother,” and the creature was buried with doe lamen-
tations. The “mother” was then brought to the spot
where the pests were, her companions bewailed her,
and the caterpillars perished like meee chosen kins-
man, but without extorting revenge. Revenge was
out of their reach. They had been brought within
the kin of their foes, and there were no Erinnyes,


1 “Malagasy Folk-Tales," Folk-Lore Journal, October 15555.
? We are indebted to Professar Robertson Smith for this example,
and to Miss Bird's Jowrnal, pp. 90, 97, for the Aino parallel.


140 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


“avengers of kindred blood,” to help them. People
in this condition of belief naturally tell hundreds of
tales, in which men, stones, trees, beasts, shift shapes,
and in which the modifications of animal forms are
caused by accident, or by human agency, or by magic,
or by metamorphosis. Such tales survive in our
modern folk-lore. To make our meaning clear, we
may give the European nursery-myth of the origin
of the donkey's long ears, and, among other illustra-
tions, the Australian myth of the origin of the black
and white plumage of the pelican. Mr. Ralston has
published the Russian version of the myth of the
donkey’s ears. The Spanish form, which is identical
with the Russian, is given by Fernan Caballero in La
Gaviota,

“Listen! do yon know why your ears are so big ?”
(the story is told to a stupid little boy with big ears).
“When Father Adam found himself in Paradise with
the animals, he gave each its name; those of thy
species, my child, he named ‘donkeys.’ One day,
not long after, he called the beasts together, and
asked each to tell him its name. They all answered
right, except the animals of fy sort, and they had
forgotten their name! Then Father Adam was very
angry, and, taking that forgetful donkey by the ears,
he pulled them out, screaming ‘ You are called donkey!"
And the donkey’s ears have been long ever since,”
This, to a child, is a credible explanation, So, per-
haps, is another survival of this form of science—the
Scotch explanation of the black marks on the had-
dock ; they were impressed by St. Peter's finger and


MYTHS OF ORIGIN OF SPECTES. 141


thumb when he took the piece of money for Cmsar’s
tax out of the fish’s mouth.

Turning from folk-lore to savage beliefs, we learn that
from one end of Africa to another the honey-bird, schne-
ter, is said to be an old woman whose son was lost, and
who pursued him till she was turned into a bird, which
still shrieks his name, “ Schneter, Schneter."’ In the
same way the manners of most of the birds known to
the Greeks were accounted for by the myth that they
had been men and women. Zeus, for example, turned
Ceyx and Halcyon into sea-fowls because they were
too proud in their married happiness.* To these myths
of the origin of various animals we shall return, but
we must not forget the black and white Anstralian
pelican. Why is the pelican parti-coloured?* For
this reason: After the Flood (the origin of which is
variously explained by the Murri), the pelican (who
had been a black fellow) made a canoe, and went
about like a kind of Noah, trying to save the drown-
ing. In the course of his benevolent mission he fell
in love with a woman, but she and her friends played
him a trick and escaped from him. The pelican at
ones prepared to go on the war-path. The first thing
to do was to daub himself white, as is the custom of
the blacks before a battle. They think the white
pipe-clay strikes terror and inspires respect among

1 Barth, tii, 355.

® Apollodorus, i. 7 (13. 12).

? Sahagun, vii. 2, accounta for colours of eagle and tiger. A num-
ber of races explain the habits and marks of animals as the result of a
curse or blessing of a god or hero, The Hottentota, the Huarochiri of
Pern, the New Zealanders (Shortland, Tradition, p. 57), are among


r42 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the enemy. But when the pelican was only half
pipe-clayed, another pelican came past, and, “ not
knowing what such a queer black and white thing
was, struck the first pelican with his beak and killed
him. Before that pelicans were all black; now they
are black and white. That is the reason.” '

“That is the reason." Therewith native philosophy
18 satisfied, and does not examine in Mr. Darwin's
laborious manner the slow evolution of the colour
of the pelican's plumage. The mythological stories
about animals are rather difficult to treat, because
they are so much mixed up with the topic of
totemism. Here we only examine myths which
account by means of a legend for certain peculiari-
ties in the habits, cries, or colours and shapes of
animals. The Ojibbeways told Kohl they had a story
for every creature, accounting for its ways and appear-
ance, Among the Greeks, as among Australians and
Bushmen, we find that nearly every notable bird or
beast had its tradition. The nightingale and the
swallow have a story of the most savage description,
a story reported by Apollodorus, thongh Homer?
refers to another, and, as usual, to a gentler and more
refined form of the myth. Here is the version of
Apollodorns. “ Pandion” (an early king of Athens)
“married Zeuxippe, his mother's sister, by whom he
had two daughters, Procne and Philomela, and two
sons, Erechthens and Butes. A war broke ont with
Labdas about some debatable land, and Erechthens


1 Brough Smyth, Aborigines of Australia, i, 477-478.
5 Coysecy, xix. 523.


— =


PHILOMELA, 143


invited the alliance of Terens of Thrace, the son of
Ares, Having brought the war, with the aid of
Terens, to a happy end, he gave him his danghter
Procne to wife. By Proene, Tereus had a son, Itys,
and therenfter fell in love with Philomela, whom he
seduced, pretending that Procne was dead, whereas
he had really concealed her somewhere in his lands.
Thereon he married Philomela, and cut out her tongue.
But she wove into a robe characters that told the
whole story, and by means of these acquainted Procne
with her sufferings. '‘Thereon Procne found her sister,
and slew Itys, her own son, whose body she cooked,
and served up to Tereus in a banquet. Thereafter


an axe and followed after them. They were overtaken


at Daulia in Phocis, and prayed to the gods that they
might be turned into birds. So Procne became the
nightingale, and Philomela the swallow, while Terenus
was changed into a hoopoe.”’ Pansanias has a dif-
farent legend; Procne and Philomela died of exces-
sive grief,

These ancient men and women metamorphosed into
birds were Aonoured as ancestors by the Athenians.’
Thus the unceasing musical wail of the nightingale
and the shrill ery of the swallow were explained by
a Greek story. The birds were lamenting their old
human sorrow, as the honey-bird in Africa still repeats
the name of her lost son.


1 A Red Indian nightingale-myth is alluded to by J. G. Miiller,
Amerié. [rrel., pp 175 Some one was turned into a nightingale by
the aun, and still wails for a lost lover.

? Pausanias, i, v. Pausaniaa thinks such things no longer occur,


144 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


Why does the red-robin live near the dwellings
of men, a bold and friendly bird? The Chippeway
Indians say he was once a young brave whose father
set him a task too cruel for his strength, and made
him starve too long when he reached man's estate, He
turned into a robin, and said to his father, “I shall
always be the friend of man, and keep near their
dwellings. Icould not gratify your pride as a warrior,
but I will cheer you by my songs."' The converse of
this legend is the Greek myth of the hawk. Why is
the hawk so hated by birds? THierax was a bene-
volent person who succoured a race hated by Poseidon.
The god therefore changed him into a hawk, and
made him as much detested by birds, and as fatal to
them, as he had been beloved by and gentle to men.*
The Hervey Islanders explain the peculiarities of
several fishes by the share they took in the adventures
of Ina, who stamped, for example, on the sole, and so
flattened him for ever.” In Greece the dolphins were,
according to the Homeric hymn to Dionysus, meta-
morphosed pirates who had insulted the god. But
because the dolphin found the hidden sea-goddess
whom Poseidon loved, the dolphin, too, was raised by
the grateful sea-god to the stars.‘ The vulture and
the heron, according to Boeo (said to have been a
priestess in Delphi and the author of a Greek treatise
on the traditions about birds), were once a man named


I Schoolcraft, ii. 239-2390.

® Ban, quoted by Antoninus Liberalis,

2 Gill, South Sea Myths, pp. 83-95.

4 Artemidorus in his Lore Elegies, quoted by the Pseud.Eratos-
thenes.


ORIGIN OF PIGS, 145


Aigupios (vulture) and his mother, Boulis, They
sinned inadvertently, like (Sdipus and Jocasta; where-
fore Boulis, becoming aware of the guilt, was about to
put out the eyes of her son and slay herself. Then
they were changed, Boulis into the heron, “ which
tears out and feeds on the eyes of snakes, birds, and
fishes, and Aigupios into the vulture which bears his
name.” This story, of which the more repulsive details
are suppressed, is much less pleasing and more savage
than the Hervey Islanders’ myth of the origin of pigs.
Maaru was an old blind man who lived with his son
Kationgia, There came a year of famine, and Kationgia
had great difficulty in finding food for himself and his
futher, He gave the blind old man puddings of banana
roots and fishes, while he lived himself on sea-slugs
and shell-fish, like the people of Terra del Fuego.
Bat blind old Maaru suspected his son of giving him
the worst share and keeping what was best for him-
self. At last he discovered that Kationgia was really
being starved ; he felt his body, and found that he was
a mere living skeleton. The two wept together, and
the father made a feast of some cocoa-nuts and bread-
fruit, which he had reserved against the last extremity.
When all was finished, he said he had eaten his last
meal and was about to die. He ordered his son to
cover him with leaves and grass, and return to the
spot in four days. If worms were crawling about, he
was to throw leaves and grass over them and come
back four days later. Kationgia did as he was in-
structed, and, on his second visit to the grave, found
the whole mass of leaves in commotion. <A brood of
VoL. L K


146 , RITUAL, AND RELIGION,

pigs, black, white, and speckled, had sprung from the
soil; famine was a thing of the past, and Kationgia
became a great chief in the island.’

“The owl was a baker's daughter” is the fragment
of Christian mythology preserved by Ophelia. The
baker's daughter behaved rudely to our Lord, and was
changed into the bird that looks not on the sun, The
Greeks had o similar legend of feminine impiety by
which they mythically explained the origin of the
owl, the bat, and the engle-owl Minyas of Orcho-
menos had three daughters, Leucippe, Arsippe, and
Aleathoe, most industrious women, who declined to join
the wild mysteries of Dionysus. The god took the
shape of a maiden, and tried to win them to his wor-
ship. They refused, and he assumed the form of o
ball, a lion, and a leopard as easily as the chiefs of the
Abipones become tigers, or as the chiefs among the
African Barotee and Balonda metamorphose themselves
into lions and alligators. The daughters of Minyas,
in alarm, drew lots to determine which of them should
sacrifice a victim to the god. Lencippe drew the lot
and offered up her own son. They then rushed to
join the sacred rites of Dionysus, when Hermes trans-
formed them into the bat, the owl, and the eagle-owl,
and these three hide from the light of the sun.*

A few examples of Bushman and Australian myths
explanatory of the colours and habits of animals will
probably suffice to establish the resemblance between

1 Gill, Myths and Songs from South Pacige, pp. 135-135.


* Livingstone, Mimsionary Travels, pp. 615, G42.
9 Nicander, quoted by Antoninus Liberalia,


ORIGIN OF WILD ELANDS. 147


savage and Hellenic legends of this character. The
Bushman myth about the origin of the eland (a large
antelope) is not printed in full by Dr. Bleek, but he
observes that it “ gives an account of the reasons for
the colonrs of the gemshok, hartebeest, eland, quagga,
and springbok."" Speculative Bushmen seem to have
been puzzled to account for the wildness of the eland.
It would be much more convenient if the eland were
tame and could be easily captured. They explain its
wildness by saying that the eland was “ spoiled”
before Cagn, the Mantis-insect and creator, or rather
maker of most things, hnd quite finished it, Cagn's
relations came and hunted the first eland too soon,
after which all other elands grew wild. Cagn then
said, “Go and hunt them and try to kill one; that is
now your work, for it was you who spoilt them.”* The
Bushmen have another myth explanatory of the white
patches on the breasts of crows in their country: Some
men tarried long at their hunting, and their wives
sent ont crows in search of their husbands. Round
each crow's neck was hung a piece of fat to serve as
food on the journey. Hence the crows have white
patches on breast and neck.

In Australia the origins of nearly all animals ap
pear to be explained in myths, of which a fair collec-
tion is printed in Mr. Brough Smyth's Aborigines
of Vietoria.” Why is the crane so thin? Once
he was a man named Kar-ween, the second man

' Brief Account of Bushmen Folk-Lore, p. 7.


* Cape Monthly Magazine, July 1874.
* Vol. ip 426 ef oy


148 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


fashioned out of clay by Pund-jel, a singular creative
being, whose chequered career is traced elsewhere
in our chapter on “Savage Myths of the Origin
of the World and of Man.” Kar-ween and Pund-jel
had a quarrel about the wives of the former, whom
Pund-jel was inclined to admire. The crafty Kar-
ween gave a dance (jugargiull, corobboree), at which
the creator Pund-jel was disporting himself gaily (like
the Great Panjandrum), when Kar-ween pinned him
with a spear. Pund-jel threw another which took
Kar-ween in the knee-joint, so that he could not
walk, but soon pined away and became 48 mere
skeleton. “Thereupon Pond-jel made har-ween a
crane,” and that is why the crane has such attenu-
ated legs. The Kortume, Munkari, and Waingilhe,
now birds, were once men. The two latter behaved
unkindly to their friend Kortume, who shot them out
of his -hut in a storm of rain, singing at the same
time an incantation. The three then turned into
birds, and when the Kortume sings, it is s token that
rain may be expected.

_ Let us now compare with these Australian myths
of the origin of certain species of birds the Greek story
of the origin of frogs, as told by Menecrates and
Nicander.' The frogs were herdsmen metamorphosed
by Leto, the mother of Apollo. But, by way of
showing how closely akin are the fancies of Greeks
and Australian black fellows, we shall tell the legend
without the proper names, which give it a fictitious
dignity.

' Antoninus Liberalis, xxxv.


GREEE FROG-MYTH. m9


THE ORIGIN OF FROGS.


A woman bore two children, and sought for a
water-spring wherein to bathe them. She found ao
well, but herdsmen drove her away from it that their
eattle might drink. Then some wolves met her and
led her to a river, of which she drank, and in its
waters she bathed her children. Then she went back
to the well where the herdsmen were now bathing,
and she turned them all into frogs. She struck their
backs and shoulders with a rongh stone and drove
them into the waters, and ever since that day Bogs
live in marshes and beside rivers.

A volume might be filled with such examples of the
kindred fancies of Greeks and savages. Enough has
probably been said to illustrate our point, which is
‘that Greek myths of this character were inherited
from the period of savagery, when ideas of metamor-
phosis and of the kinship of men and beasts were real
practical beliefs. Events conceived to be common in
real life were introduced into myths, and these myths
were savage science, and were intended to account for
the Origin of Species. But when once this train of
imagination has been fired, it burns on both in litera-
ture and in the legends of the peasantry. Every one
who writes a Christmas tale for children now employs
the machinery of metamorphosis, and in European
folk-lore, as Fontenelle remarked, stories persist which
are precisely similar in kind to the minor myths of
savages,

Reasoning in this wise, the Mundas of Bengal thus


.


150 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


account for peculiarities of certain animals. Sing
Bonga, the chief god, cast certain people out of
heayen; they fell to earth, found iron ore, and began
smelting it. The black smoke displeased Sing Bonga,
who sent two king crows and an owl to bid people
cease to pollute the atmosphere. But the iron smelters
spoiled these birds’ tails, and blackened the previously
white crow, scorched ita beak red, and flattened its
head. Sing Bonga burned man, and turned woman
into hills and waterspouts.

Examples of this class of myth in Indo-Aryan litera-
ture are not hard to find. Why is dawn red? Why
are donkeys slow? Why have mules no young ones?
Males have no foals because they were severely burned
when Agni (fire) drove them in a chariot race. Dawn
is red, not because (as in Australia) she wears a red
kangaroo cloak, but becanse she competed in this race
with red cows for her coursers. Donkeys are slow
because they never recovered from their exertions in
the same race, when the Asvins called on their asses
and landed themselves the winners.” And cows are
xccommoedated with horns for a reason no less probable
and satisfactory.”

Though in the legends of the less developed peoples
men and women are more frequently metamorphosed
into birds and beasts than into stones and plants, yet
such changes of form are by no means unknown. To
the north-east of Western Point there lies s range of
hills, inhabited, according to the natives of Victoria, by


1 Dalton, pp. 186-187.
? ditarrya Brakmana, ii. 272, iv. > liv. 07.


CHANGE INTO STONES. 151


a creature whose body is made of stone, and weapons
make no wound in so sturdy a constitution, The
blacks refuse to visit the range haunted by the mythic
stone beast. “Some black fellows were once camped
at the lakes near Shaving Point. They were cooking
their fish when a native dog came up. They did not
give him anything to eat. He became cross and said,
‘You black fellows have lots of fish, but you give me
none.” So he changed them all into a big rock. This
is quite true, for the big rock is there to this day, and
I have seen it with my own eyes.”" Another native,
Toolabar, says that the women of the fishing party
eried out yacka torn,“ very good.” A dog replied yacka
fora, and they were all changed into rocks. This
very man, Toolabar, once heard a dog begin to talk,
whereupon he and his father fled. Had they waited
they would have become stones, “We should have
been like it, walfung,” that is, stones.

Among the North American Indians any stone
which has a resemblance to the human or animal
figure is explained as an example of metamorphosis,
Three stones among the Aricaras were a girl, her
lover, and her dog, who fled from home because the
course of true love did not ron smooth, and who were
petrified. Certain stones near Chinook Point were
sea-giants who swallowed a man. His brother, by
aid of fire, dried up the bay and released the man,
still alive, from the body of the giant. Then the
giants were turned into rocks. The rising sun in


" Native narrator, ap. Brough Smyth, i. 479.
® See authorities ap, Dorman, Primitive Superstitions, pp. 190-133. |


152 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Popol Vuk (if the evidence of Popol Fuh, the Quichua
sacred book, is to be accepted) changed into stone
the lion, serpent, and tiger gods. The Standing Rock
on the Upper Missouri is adored by the Indians, and
decorated with coloured ribbons and skins of animals.
This stone was a woman, who, like Niobe, became
literally petrified with grief when her husband took
a second wife. Another stone-woman in a cave on
the banks of the Kickapoo was wont to kill people
who came near her, and is even now approached with
great respect. The Oneidas and Dacotahs claim de-
scent from stones to which they ascribe animation.’
Montesinos speaks of a sacred stone which was re-
moved from a mountain by one of the Incas, A parrot
flew ont of it and lodged in another stone, which the
natives still worship.” The Breton myth about one of
the great stone circles (the stones were peasants who
danced on a Sunday) is a well-known example of this
kind of myth surviving in folk-lore. There is a kind of
stone Actwon * near Little Muniton Creek, “ resembling
the bust of 1 man whose head is decorated with the
horns of a stag.”" A crowd of myths of metamor-
Phosis into stone will be found among the Iroquois
legends in Report of Bureau of Ethnology, 1880-81.

' Dorman, p. 133

* Many examples are collected br J. G, Miller, Ameribonischen
Urreizionen, pp. o7, 110, 125, especially when the stones have a
likeness to human form, p. 17a “Im der That werden auch einige in
Steine, oder in Thiere und Pflanzen verwandelt," Ci. p. 220. In-
stances (from Balboa) of men turned into stone by wizards, p. 309,

? Preller thinks that Actwon, devoured by his hounds after being
changed into a stag, is a svmbol of the vernal year, Palephatus (ie
Fab, Narrat.) holds that it is a moral fable.

* Dorman, p. 137.


STONES, GODS, AND MEN. 153


If men may become stones, on the other hand, in
Samoa (as in the Greek myth of Deucalion), stones
may become men.’ Gods, too, especially when these
gods happen to be cuttlefish, might be petrified. They
were chased in Samoa by an Upolu hero, who canght
them in a great net and killed them. “They were
changed into stones, and now stand up in a rocky
part of the lagoon on the north side of Upolu,” *
Mauke, the first man, came out of a stone. In short,’
men and stones and beasts and gods and thunder have
interchangeable forms. In Mangaia‘* the god Ra was
fssed up into the sky by Mani and became pumice-
stone, Many samples of this petrified deity are found
is not easy to decide whether a worshipful stone is the
dwelling of a dead man’s soul or is of spiritual merit
in itself, or whether “the stone is the spirit’s outward
part or organ.” The Voi, or spirit, has much the
same relations with snakes, owls, and sharks.” Qasa-
vara, the mythical opponent of Qat, the Melanesian
Prometheus, “fell dead from heaven” (like Ra in
Mangaia), and was turned into a stone, on which
sacrifices are made by those who desire strength in
fighting.

Without delaying longer among savage myths of
metamorphosis into stones, it may be briefly shown
that the Greeks retained this with all the other
vagaries of early fancy. Every one remembers the
use which Perseus made of the Gorgon’s head, and

1 Tumer's Samoa, p. 299. * Samoa, p. 3t |

9 Op, eif., pl 34. 4 Gill, Myths and Sonza, p. 60.

* Codrington, Journ. Anthrop, Jnat., February 1551.


154 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the stones on the coast of Seriphus, which, like the
stones near Western Point in Victoria, had once been
men, the enemies of the hero. “Also he slew the
Gorgon," sings Pindar, “and bare home her head,
with serpent tresses decked, to the island folk a stony
death.” Observe Pindar’s explanatory remark, “ I ween
there is no marvel impossible if gods haye wronght
thereto.” In the same pious spirit a Turk im an isle
of the Levant once told Mr. Newton a story of how a
man hunted a stag, and the stag spoke to him. “The
stag spoke?” said Mr. Newton. “Yes, by Allah's
will,” replied the Turk. Like Pindar, he was repeating
an incident quite natural to the minds of Australians,
or Bushmen, or Samoans, or Red Men, but, like the
religious Pindar, he felt that the affair was rather
marvellous, and accounted for it by the exercise of
omnipotent power.’ The Greek example of Niobe
and her children may best be quoted in Mr. Bridges’
exquisite translation from the {liad :*—


“ And somewhere now, among lone mountain rocks

On Sipylus, where couch the nymphs at night

Who dance all day by Achelous’ stream,

The once proud mother lies, herself a rock,

And in cold breast broods o'er the goddess’ wrong.”

— Prometheus the Fire-bringer,

In the Jlied it is added that Cronion made the people
into stones. The attitude of the later Greek mind
towards these myths may be observed in o fragment
of Philemon, the comic poet. “ Never, by the gods,
have I believed, nor will believe, that Niobe the stone


1 Pindar, Pyth. x., Myers's translation,
2 xxiv, G1


METAMORPHOSIS INTO PLANTS. 155


was once a woman, Nay, by reason of her calamitios
she became speechless, and so, from her silence, was
called a stone,” * |

There is another famous petrilication in the Iliad.
We ts podiey of tls tasks and the sparrows had

appeared to the assembled Achmans at rine Zeus
displayed a great marvel, and change
serpent which swallowed the young of the sparrow.
Changes into stone, though less common than changes
into fishes, birds, and beasts, were thus obviously not
too strange for the credulity of Greek mythology, which
could also believe that a stone became the mother of
Agdestis by Zeus.

As to interchange of shape between men and
women and plans, our information, so far as the
lower races are.concerned, is less copious, It has
already been shown that the totems of many stocks
in all parts of the world are plants, and the belief
in descent from a plant by itself demonstrates that
the confused belief in all things being on one level
has thus introduced vegetables into the dominion of
myth. As far as possessing souls is concerned, Mr.
Tylor has proved that plants are as well equipped
as men or beasts or minerals? In India the doc-
trine of transmigration “widely and clearly recog-
nises the idea of trees or smaller plants being ani-
mated by human souls.” In the well-known ancient
Egyptian story of “The Two Brothers,”* the life of

4 ‘The Scholiast on Jliad, xxiv. 6, 7.

? Primitive Culture, L 145; examples of Society Islanders, Dyaks,


Karena, Buddhists,
9 Maspero, Contes Epyptiens, p. 25.


a


156 ‘MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the younger is practically merged in that of the acacia
tree where he has hidden his heart; and when he
becomes a bull and is sacrificed, his spiritual part
passes into a pair of Persea trees. The Yarucaris
of Bolivia say that a girl once bewailed in the forest
her lovyerless estate. She happened to notice a beau-
tiful tree, which she adorned with ornaments as well
as she might, The tree assumed the shape of ao
handsome young man— |

“She did not find him so remiss,

But, lightly issuing through,

He did repay her kiss for kiss,

With usury thereto.” !

J. G. Miller, who quotes this tale from Andrée, says
it has “many analogies with the tales of metamor-
phosis of human beings into trees among the ancients,
as reported by Ovid." The worship of plants and
trees is a well-known feature in religion, and probably
implies (at least in many cases) a recognition of per-
sonality. In Samoa metamorphosis into vegetables is
not uncommon. For example, the king of Fiji was a
cannibal, and (very naturally) ‘the people were melt-
ing away under him.” The brothers Toa and Pale,
wishing to escape the royal oven, adopted various
changes of shape. They knew that straight timber
was being sought for to make a canoe for the king,
eo Pale, when he assumed a vegetable form, became a
crooked stick overgrown with creepers, but Toa “ pre-
ferred standing erect as o handsome straight tree.”
Poor Toa was therefore cut down by the king’s ship-
tJ, G. Muller, Amerik, Urrel., p, 264.


i


ie


PLANT-MYTHS. 187


wrights, though, thanks to his brother's magic wiles,
they did not make a canoe out of him after all! In
Samoa the trees are so far human that they not only
go to war with each other, but actually embark in
canoes to seek out distant enemies.” The Ottawa
Indiavs account for the origin of maize by a myth in
which a wizard fought with and conquered a little man
who had a little crown of feathers. From his ashes
arose the maize with its crown of leaves and heavy ears
of corn.’

In Mangaia the myth of the origin of the cocoa-nut
tree is a series of transformation scenes, in which
the persons shift shapes with the alacrity of medi-
cine-men. Ina used to bathe in a pool where an
eel became quite familiar with her. At last the fish
took his courage in both fins and made his declara-
tion. Ho was Tuna, the chief of all eels “ Be
mine,” he cried, and Ina was his. For some mystical
reason he was obliged to leave her, but (like the
White Cat in the fairy tale) requested her to cut
off his eel's head and bury it. Regretfully but firmly
did Ine comply with his request, and from the buried
eel's head sprang two cocoa trees, one from each
half of the brain of Tons. As a proof of this be it
remarked, that when the nut is husked we always
find on it “the two eyes and mouth of the lover of
Ins.”* All over the world, from ancient Egypt to
the wigwams of the Algonkins, plants and other
matters are said to have sprung from a dismembered


1 Turner's Samoa, p. 219. 2 fhid., p. 21%
2 Amerik, Urrel, p. Ga, | * Gill, Myths and Songs, p. 79.


158 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


god or hero, while men!’ are said to have sprung from
plants. We may therefore perhaps look on it as a
proved point that the general savage habit of “ lovel-
ling up” prevails even in their view of the vegetable
world, and has left traces (as we have seen) in their
myths.

Turning now to the mythology of Greece, we ‘fee
that the enme role holds good. Metamorphosis
plants and flowers is extremely common; the imstances
of Daphne, Myrrha, Hyacinth, Narcissus, and the
sisters of Phethon at once occur to the memory. The
ease of Daphne demands particular attention, because
the fate of this unfortunate nymph, pursued by Apollo
and metamorphosed into a laurel, has been interpreted
as a myth of dawn, and a myth produced by a disease
of language. All the suthorities for the story of
Daphne are late, among them are Ovid and Hyginns.
In Ovid? the change of shape is effected by the might
of Penens, the river-god, father of the maiden. In
Hyginus the earth opens, swallows Daphne, and o
laurel tree shoots up in her place. Apollo breaks a
bongh of the laurel and makes it one of his sacred
trees. In both tales we see the conception that a
superior and even divine power is needed to produce a
transformation which (to the savage mind) is quite
among ordinary events, or at least within the profes-
sional sphere of every medicine-man.

Mr. Max Miiller interprets (we have seen) this
metamorphosis, one out of a thousand, as a story of the
dawn pursued by the ardent sun. Daphne (dahand,

1 Myths of the Beginning of Things ? Metam., i §67.


——-


a
ok &


DAWN AND DAPHNE, 159


ahand) only means dawn; but as the word also meant
lanrel, the figurative way of saying, “ The san pur-
sues the dawn,” came to be understood as “ Apollo
pursues the laurel tree,” or pares a girl named
Daphne, who becomes a laurel tree." Mr. Max Miiller
avers that Daphne can be traced back to Sanskrit
Ahani, and Ahani in Sanskrit means the dawn.*
With his theory is blended the notion that Daphne
means the wood which easily burns, though, according
to a text quoted by Lobeck, the laurel furnished the
wood from which was made the fire-drill, and did not
burn, but set the other pieces of wood on fire.

M. Bergaigne, observing that the word Abani only
oceurs once in the Rig- Fede, translates it, not “ dawn,”
but “ eternal,” thongh he admits that the sense is hard
to determine.

Mannhardt* rejects Mr. Max Miller's view as un-
founded in fact. Characteristically does Schwartz
(who always sees thunder and storm, as a rule, where
Mr, Max Miiller sees dawn and sun) announce that
the metamorphosis of Daphne is a myth of tempest.’
The laurel is the storm-tree, and the laurel bough”*
guards those who wear it from thonderbolts, and is
kind of primitive lightning conductor.

While the opinion that Daphne is the dawn has nob
met with universal assent, we may still venture to


suppose that the story of her change into a laurel is


1 Select Busays, 1. 399, 467-468, 607-608.

* See aleo the “ Lesson of Jupiter” and “Solar Mytha,” Nineteenth
Century, October and December 1355.

a Antile Wald wad Fold Cultar, ee iat

4 Der Ursprung der Mytholoyie, p. 160,

® Pliny, Nat. Hist, iL 55, xviii. 45.


160 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


either one of the old stock of similar myths, such
as we find among savages, or has been moulded by
some poet on the old model, In the same way we
might interpret Myrrha, who becomes an incense-
oe tree in her grief and shame, and the hyacinth,
sprung from the blood of a favourite of Apollo, and
so with the rest, ‘These myths are nature-myths,
so far as they attempt to account for @ fact in
Nature, namely, for the existence of certain plants,
and for their place in ritual, But nothing can be
more futile than to seek in every Greek story of the
origin of a plant for some allegory or some old mythi-
eal statement about the vast phenomena of the heavens
at dawn, as in Mr. Max Miiller’s system, or during
tempest, as in that of Kuhn and Schwartz, True
nature-myths are, as a rule, sufliciently transparent,
They manifestly offer an answer, however absurd,
ecientifically considered, to some question about Nature.
How are the movements of sun and moon to be ac-
counted for? What are the stars? Why are beasts
and birds marked in this way or that, and whence
came their peculiar habits? What is the origin of
trees and flowers? Wherefore have geological for-
mations and isolated boulders their more remarkable
shapes? Nature-myths were once replies to such
questionings, or to the curiosity which asks about the
cause of thunder, and is put off with Thor and his
hammer, or with the Zulu “lord” amusing himself,
or with Indra darting the bolt fashioned by Tyashtri
at the serpent Ahi or Vrittra, or with the Zula and
Dacotah faith in the thunder-bird, a bird that has


THINGS ARE PERSONS. r6t


been seen and shot. The wind, in the same way, is
explained as a person, and the Boreas of Athenian
myth is only an improved form of such conceptions as
the Bushman notion that Goo-ka-kin, the wind, is a
person who was seen lately at Haarfontein.

Most of those myths in which everything in Nature
becomes personal and human, while all persons may
become anything in Nature, we explain, then, as sur-
vivals or imitations of tales conceived when men were
in the savage intellectual condition, In that stage,
as we demonstrated, no line is drawn between things
animate and inanimate, dumb or “ articulate speaking,”
organic or inorganic, personal or impersonal, Such a
mental stage, again, is reflected in the nature-myths,
many of which are merely “ stiological,"—assign o
cause, that is, for phenomena, and satisfy an indolent
and credulous curiosity.

We may be asked again, “ But how did this intel-
lectual condition come to exist?” To answer that is
no part of our business; for us it is enough to trace
myth, or a certain large element in myth, to a
demonstrable and actual stage of thought. But this
stage, which is constantly found to survive in the
minds of children, is thus explained or described by
Hume in his Essay on Natural Religion: “There
is an universal tendency in mankind to conceive all
beings like themselves, and to transfer to every object
those qualities ... of which they are intimately con-
scious." " Now they believe themselves to be conscious
of magical and supernatural powers, which they do


1 See Appendix BE.
VOL. L. Li


Pius


162 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


not, of course, possess. ee ee ie
metamorphosis, of “shape-shifting,” of flying, of be-
coming invisible at will, of palittast with the dead,
of miraculously healing the sick, savages pass on to
their gods (as will be shown in a later chapter),
and the gods survive and retain the miraculous gifts
after their worshippers (become more reasonable) have
quite forgotten that they themselves once claimed
similar endowments. So far, then, it has been shown
that savage fancy, wherever studied, is wild; that
savage curiosity is keen; that savage credulity is prac-
tically boundless, These considerations explain the
existence of savage myths of sun, stars, beasts, plants,
and stones; similar myths fill Greek legend and the
Sanskrit Brahmanas. We conclude that, in Greek
and Sanskrit, the myths are relics (whether borrowed
or inherited) of the savage mental status.


( 163 ) as


NON-ARYAN MYTHS OF THE ORIGIN OF THE
WORLD AND OF MAN.


THE difficulties of classification which beset the study
of mythology have already been described. Nowhere
are they more perplexing than when we try to classify
what may be styled Cosmogonic Myths. The very
word cosmogonic implies the pre-existence of the idea
of a cosmos, an orderly universe, and this was exactly
the last idea that could enter the mind of the myth-
makers, There is no such thing as orderliness in
their conceptions, and no such thing as an universe,
The natural question, “ Who made the world, or how
did the things in the world come to be?” is the
question which is answered by cosmogonic myths,
But it is answered piecemeal. ‘To a Christian child
the reply is given, “God made all things.” We have
known this reply discussed by some little girls of six


164 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


(a Scotch minister's daughters, and naturally metaphy-
sical), one of whom solved all difficulties by the im-
promptu myth, “God first made a little place to stand
on, and then he made the rest.” But savages and the
myth-makers, whose stories survive into the civilised
religions, could give no such account as this, They
have not, and had not, the conception of God as we
understand what we mean by the word. They have,
and had at most, only the small-change of the idea
“ God,”"—here the belief in a moral being who watches
conduct ; here again the hypothesis of a pre-human race
of magnified, non-natural medicine-men, or of extra-
natural beings with human and magical attributes, but
often wearing the fur, and fins, and feathers of the lower
animals. Mingled with these faiths (whether earlier,
later, or coeval in origin with these) are the dread and
love of ancestral ghosts, often transmuting themselves
into worship of an imaginary and ideal first parent of
the tribe, who once more is often a bird or beast.
Here is nothing like the notion of an omnipotent,
invisible, spiritual being, the creator of our religion ; :
here is only la monnaie of the conception.

With such shifting, grotesque, and inadequate views
of creative powers, the cosmogonic myths of thea world
are necessarily bewildered and perplexed. We have
already seen in the chapter on “ Nature Myths” that
many things, sun, moon, the stars, “that have another
birth,” and various animals and plants, are accounted
for on the hypothesis that they are later than the
appearance of man—that they originally were men.
To the European mind it seems natural to rank myths


CONFUSIONS OF MYTH. 165


of the gods before myths of the making or the evolu-
tion of the world, because our religion, like that of
the more philosophic Greeks, makes the deity the fount
of all existences, causa cawsans, “ what unmoved moves,”
the beginning and the end. But the myth-makers,
like the child of whom we spoke, find it necessary to
postulate o place for the divine energy to work from,
and that place is the earth or the heavens. Then,
again, heaven and earth are themselves often regarded
in the usual mythical way, as animated, as persons
with parts and passions, and finally as gods. Thus
we cannot say in many cases that the earth and sky
are prior to the deities who inhabit them, becanse the
earth and sky too are persons and deities. Into this
medley of incongruous and inconsistent conceptions we
must introduce what order we may, always remem-
bering that the order is not native to the subject, but
is brought in for the purpose of study.

The origin of the world and of man is naturally a
problem which has excited the curiosity of the least
developed minds, Every savage race has its own
myths on this subject, all of them bearing the marks
of the childish and crude imagination, whose character
we have investigated, and all varying in amount of
what may be called philosophical thought. Thus the
legends of the Australians and Bushmen are almost
purely grotesque, while the more cultivated society of
the New Zealanders and the South Sea Islanders has
added an element of poetical imagination and of some-
thing approaching to pure metaphysics. The cosmo-
gonic myths of the Scandinavians and Finns are on


166 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


almost the same level; those of the early Greeks are
not much higher, while it is easy to detect the wild
savage element among the complicated allegories and
traditions of the Aryan race in India.

All the cosmogonic myths waver between the
theory of construction, or rather of reconstruction, and
the theory of evolution, very rudely conceived. The
earth, as a rule, is thought to have grown out of some’
original matter, perhaps an animal, perhaps an egg
which floated on the waters, perhaps a handful of mud
from below the waters. But this conception does not
exclude the idea that many of the things in the world,
minerals, plants, and what not, are fragments of the
frame of a semi-supernatural and gigantic being,
human or bestial, belonging to a race which preceded
the advent of man." Such were the Titans, demi-
gods, Nurrumbunguttias in Australia. Various mem-
bers of this race, generally thought of as mortal, and
almost always as capable of intermarriage with huma-
nity, are found active in the creation, or rather in
the construction, of man and of the world. Among
the lowest races it is to be-noted that mythical animals
of supernatural power often take the place of beings
like the Finnish Wainamoinen, the Greek Prometheus,
the Zulu Unkulunkuln, the Red Indian Manabozho,
himself usnally a great hare.

The ages before the development or creation of man
are filled up, in the myths, with the loves and wars of —
supernatural people. The appearance of man is ex-


1 Macrobius, Salurnal,, L ox


VARIOUS ORIGINS OF MAN, 167


plained in three or four contradictory ways, each of
which is represented in the various legends of most
mythologies, Sometimes man is fashioned out of
elay, or stone, or other materials, by one of the older
species of beings, half- human or bestial, but also
half-divine, Sometimes the first man rises out of the
earth, and is himself confused with the creator, a
theory well illustrated by the Zulu myth of Unknlon-
kalo, “The Old, Old One.” Sometimes man arrives
ready made, with most of the animals, from his former
home in a hole in the ground, and he furnishes the
world for himself with stars, sun, moon, and everything
else he needs. Again, there are many myths which
declare that man was evolved out of one or other of
the lower animals, This myth is usually employed by
tribesmen to explain the origin of their own peculiar
stock of kindred. Once more, man is taken to be the
fruit of some tree or plant, or not to have emerged
ready-made, but to have grown out of the ground like
a plant or a tree. In some countries, as among the
Bechuanas, the Beotians, and Peruvians, the spot
where men first came out. on earth is known to be
some neighbouring marsh or cave. Lastly, man is
occasionally represented as having been framed out of
a piece of the body of the creator, or made by some
demiurgic potter out of clay. All these legends are

told by savages, with no sense of their inconsistency. —
There is no single orthodoxy on the matter, and we
shall see that all these theories coexist pell -mell
among the mythological traditions of civilised races.
In almost every mythology, too, the whole theory of


168 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the origin of man is crossed by the tradition of a
Deluge, or some other great destruction, followed by
revival or reconstruction of the species.

In examining savage myths of the origin of man
and of the world, we shall begin by considering those
current among the most backward peoples, where no
hereditary or endowed priesthood has elaborated and
improved the popular beliefs. .The natives of Aus-
tralia furnish us with myths of a purely popular type,
the property, not of professional priests and poets, but
of all the old men, old women, and full-grown warriors
of the country. Here, as everywhere else, the student
must be on his guard against accepting myths which
are disguised forms of missionary teaching. He must
also beware of supposing that the Australians be-
lieve in a creator in our sense, because the Narrinyeri,
for example, say that Nurundere “ made everything,”
Nurundere is but an idealised wizard and hunter, with
a rival of his species.’ (See chapter on “ Divine
Myths of the Lower Races.”)

Turning from the Narrinyeri, we learn that the
Boonoorong, an Australian coast tribe, ascribe the
creation of things to a being named Bun-jel or Pund-
jel. He figures as the chief of an earlier supernatural
class of existence, with human relationships; thus he
“has a wife, whose face he has never seen,” brothers, a
son, andsoon. Now this name Bun-jel means “ eagle-
hawk,” and the eagle-hawk is a totem among certain
stocks. Thus, when we hear that Eagle-hawk is the


t Taplin, Tie Warrinyeri.


PUND-JEL. 169


maker of men and things, we are reminded of the
Bushman creator, Cagn, who now receives prayers of
considerable beauty and pathos, but who is identified
with Laggen, the mantis insect, a creative grasshopper,
and the chief figure in Bushman mythology.’ Bun-
jel or Pund-jel also figures in Australian belief, neither
as the creator nor as the eagle-hawk, but “as an old
man who lives at the sources of the Yarra river, where
he possesses great multitudes of cattle.”* The term
Bun-jel is also used, much like our “ Mr.,” to denote
the older men of the Kurnai and riakolnties some of
whom have magical powers, One of them, Krawra,
or “ West Wind,” can cause the wind to blow so vio-
lently as to prevent the natives from climbing trees;
this man has semi-divine attributes. From these facts
it appears that the Australian creator partakes of the
character of the totem or worshipful beast, and of
that of the wizard or medicine-man. He carried a
large knife, and, when he made the earth, he went up
and down slicing it into creeks and valleys. The
aborigines of the northern parts of Victoria seem to
believe in Pond-jel in what appears to be his most
primitive shape, that ofan eagle.* This eagle and a crow
created everything,and separated the Murray blacks into
their two main divisions, which derive their names from
the crow and the eagle. The Melbourne blacks seem to
make Pund-jel more anthropomorphic. Men are his
1 Bleek, Brief Account of Buskman Mythology, p. 6; Cape Monthly
Magazine, July 1874, pp. 1-13; Aamilaroi and Lurnai, pp. 210, 324.


? Kamiloroi and Xurnai, p. 210.
2 Brough Smyth, Natives of Victoria, vol. i p. 423.


170 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


wAacpata wow, figures kneaded of clay, as Aristo-
phanes says in the Birds. Pund-jel made two clay
images of men, and danced round them. He made
their hair—one had straight, one curly hair—of bark.
He danced round them. He lay on them, and breathed
his breath into their mouths, noses, and navels, and
danced round them. Then they arose full-grown
young men. Some blacks seeing a brickmaker at
work on a bridge over the Yarra, exclaimed, “ Like ‘em
that Pund-jel make ‘em Koolin.” But other blacks
prefer to believe that, as Pindar puts the Phrygian
legend, the sun saw men growing like trees.

The first man was formed out of the gum of a
wattle-tree, and came out of the knot of a wattle-tree.
He then entered into a young woman (though he was
the first man) and was born." The Encounter Bay
people have another myth, which might have been
attributed by Dean Swift to the Yahoos, so foul an
origin does it allot to mankind.

Australian theories of creation are by no mean:
exclusive of a hypothesis of evolution, Thus the
Dieyrie, whose notions Mr. Gason has recorded, hold a
very mixed view. They aver that “the good spirit ”
Moors-Moora made a number of small black lizards,
liked them, and promised them dominion. He di-
vided their feet into toes and fingers, gave them noses
and lips, and set them upright. Down they fell, and
Moora-Moora cut off their tails. Then they walked
erect and wera men.* The conclusion of the adven-


1 Meyer, Aborigines of Encounter Bay.
2 Gason's Dicyrics, ap, Native Tribes of South Australia, p. 20,


ANDAMAN MYTHS. 171


tures of the Australian creator is melancholy. He
has ceased to dwell among mortals, his children. The
day, like King /£olus, possessed many bags full of
wind ; he opened them, and Pund-jel was carried up
by the blast into the heavens. But this event did
not occur before Pund-jel had tanght men and women
the essential arts of life. He had shown the former
how to spear kangaroos, and the Iatter how to dig
roots, In Australia we have found no myth of the
origin of earth asa whole, Earth is taken for granted,
though Pund-jel produced local differences of level,
hill and dale, by hacking it with his knife. From

coamogonic myths of Australia we may turn, with-
out teasing people of much higher civilisation, to the
dwellers in the Andaman Islands, and their opinions
about the origin of things.

The Andaman Islands, in the Bay of Bengal, are re-
mote from any shores, and are protected from foreign
influences by dangerous coral reefs, and by the reputed
ferocity and cannibalism of the natives. These are
Negritos, and are commonly spoken of as most abject
savages. They are not, however, without distinctions
of rank ; they are clean, modest, moral after marriage,
and most strict in the observance of prohilited de-
grees. Unlike the Australians, they use bows and
arrows, but are said to be incapable of striking a light,
and, at all events, find the process so difficult, that, like
the Australians and the farmer in the Odysery) they
are compelled “to hoard the seeds of fire.” Their
mythology contains explanations of the origin of men

* Odyusey, ¥. 490.


172 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


and animals, and of their own customs and language.
But this mythology, as described by Mr. E. H. Man,’
is almost suspiciously advanced in character, It is
dificult to avoid the impression that Mohammedan
or Christian ideas have been mixed with the native
guesses of the Andaman Islanders. They are said to
believe in a supreme invisible being, exempt from
birth and death, named Puluga. He punishes sins,
such as the unskilful carving of roast-pig (a horrid
offence), both in this world and the next. He is the
judge of the dead. His wife is green in complexion,
and is named either Eel or Fresh-water Shrimp, and
the pair live in a stone house in the sky. Here the
idea of the “stone house” is necessarily borrowed
from our stone houses at Port Blair, The conception,
on the other hand, of a wife of an invisible god who
is a green shrimp or an eel can scarcely have come from
missionaries. We are compelled to infer that the
spiritual god and husband of the divine shrimp is bor-
rowed from the same quarter as the “ stone house,” the
mansion of heaven. After all, it is not much more odd
that the supreme being of the Andamans should marry
an eel or a shrimp than that Zens, the chief godof Greece,
should love an ant, a mare, or a hen-cuckoo. By the
shrimp Pulnga has an only son, “a sort of archangel,
who alone is permitted to live with his father, whose
orders it is his duty to make known to the angels.”
Though invisible and immortal, Puluga eats ond
drinks, and shows his anger by raising storms of wind
and rain, and by hurling lighted faggots. He seeks
1 Journ. Anthrop. Soe., November 1882, p. 272, vol. xib p- 157.


' PULUGA. 173


his food on earth, Over the evil spirits he has no
authority. Puluga made the first man—we are not told
how—and forbade him to eat various kinds of fruit at
certain seasons. Pigs originally had neither eyes nor
noses, and were therefore readily caught, as in Coc-
Kayne, The origin of the first woman is dubious, but
it is asserted that the first man “found her swimming
about.” Puluga gave the pair language; their chil-
dren multiplied immensely and separated, each party
being provided by Paluga with a different dialect,
Animals mostly came from men; some men became
crabs, others iguanas, others cachalots. After a
deluge, caused either by the wrath of Puluga or by
the bursting of a toad which had “drank up all the
water," men tried to kill Puluga He answered
them, however, that he “was as hard as wood.” After
this Puluga ceased to be visible. The least expe-
rienced student will have little difficulty in separat-
ing the native from the borrowed elements in Andaman
mythology, which is only worth mentioning as an
example of native ideas in a setting of European
teaching or European blunders,

Leaving the Andaman islanders, but still studying
races in the lowest degree of civilisation, we come to
the Bushmen of South Africa. This very curious and
interesting people, far inferior in material equipment
to the Hottentots, is sometimes regarded as a branch
of that race.* The Hottentots calls themselves “ Khoi-
khoi,” the Bushmen they style “Sa.” The poor Sa


' Fy. chap. i
3 See “Divine Myths of the Lower Rages,"


174 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.
lead the life of arinhs. 5, and are hated and CRARESIRG


snd hace for roota, while the Tottentots, perhe
their kinsmen, are cattle-breeders.! Being BU ill
nourished, the Bushmen are very small, but sturdy.
They dwell in, or rather wander through, countries
which have been touched by some ancient civilisation,
as is proved by the mysterious mines and roads of the
Transvaal. It is singular that the Bushmen possess
a tradition according to which they could once “ make
stone things that flew over rivers.” They possess
remarkable artistic powers, and their drawings of men
and animals on the walls of caves are often not infe-
rior to the designs on early Greek vases."

Thos we must regard the Bushmen aos almost
certainly degenerated from a higher status, though
there is nothing (except perhaps the tradition about
bridge-making) to show that it was more exalted than
that of their more prosperous neighbours, the Hot-
tentots. The myths of the Bushmen, however, are
almost on the lowest known level. A very good and
authentic example of Bushman cosmogonic myth was
given to Mr. Orpen, chief magistrate of St. John’s
territory, by Qing, king Nqusha's huntsman. Qing
“had never seen a white man, but in fighting,” till
he became acquainted with Mr. Orpen? The chief
force in Bushman myth is the mantis, a sort of large

' Hahn, Tuni Gorm, p. 4. See other accounts in Waitz, Anthro
pologie, fi, 328.

7 Custom and Myth, where illustrations of Bushman art are given,


PP. 200-295.
9 Cope Monthly Magazine, July 1874,


QING, 175


grasshopper. Though he seems at least as “ chimerical
a beast” as the Aryan creative boar, the “ mighty big
hare” of the Algonkins, the large spider who made
the world in the opinion of the Gold Coast people, or
the eagle of the Australians, yet the insect-god, like
the others, has achieved moral qualities and is addressed
in prayer. He is called Cagn, “Cagn made all
things and we pray to him,” said Qing. ‘“Coti is the
wife of Cagn.” Qing did not know where they came
from ; “ perhaps with the men who bronght the sun,”
The fact is, Qing “did not dance that dance,” that is,
was not one of the Bushmen initiated into the more
esoteric mysteries of Cagn. Among the Bushmen, as
among the Greeks, there is “no religious mystery
withont dancing.” Qing was not very consistent. He
enid Cagn gave orders and cansed all things to appear
and to be made, sun, moon, stars, wind, mountains,
animals, and this, of course, is a comparatively lofty
theory of creation. Elsewhere it seems that Cagn did
not so much create as manufacture the objects in nature.
In his early day “the snakes were also men.” Cagn
struck snakes with his staff and turned them into
men, as Zeus, in the lginetan myth, did with ants.
He also turned offending men into baboons. On the
whole, then, this uninitiated Bushman, Qing, repre-
sented creation as chiefly the work of a benevolent
grasshopper, and fully recognised the fact that men
and animals have natures almost interchangeab!
Another Bushman myth of the Giicia of things is
that “* Morimo, as well os man, with all the different
species of animals, came out of a cave or hole in the


176 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Bakone country to the north, where, say they, their
footmarks are still to be seen in the indurated rock,
which was at that time sand.” This is Dr. Moffat’'s
account. Dr. Moffat conld not believe the wondrous
tale, but then the natives could not believe Ais version
of creation, thinking it, as he says, “ fabulons, extra-
vagant, and Indicrous.” But Dr, Moffat not being in
the neighbourhood of Paradise, could not produce such
evidence as his Bushman opponent, who said, “I will
show you the footsteps of the very first man.” This
was not the magician who said candidly to the same
missionary, “It needs wisdom to deceive so many; you
and I know that."

Neighbours of the Bushmen, but more fortunate in
their wealth of sheep and cattle, are the Ovaherero.
The myths of the Ovaherero, a tribe dwelling in a
part of Hereraland “which had not yet been under the
influence of civilisation and Christianity,” have been
studied by the Rev. H. Reiderbecke, missionary at
Otyozondyupa. The Ovaherero, he says, have a kind
of tree Yodrasil, a tree out of which men are born,
and this plays a great part in their myth of creation.
The tree, which still existe, though at a great age, is
called the Omumborombonga tree. Out of it came,
in the beginning, the first man and woman, Oxen
stepped forth from it too, but baboons, as Caliban says
of the stars, “came otherwise,” and sheep and goats
sprang from a flat rock, Black people are so coloured,
according to the Ovaherero, because when the first
parents emerged from the tree and slew an ox, the


| Missionary Labours, p. 263.


NAMAQUA MYTHS. 177


ancestress of the blacks appropriated the black liver
of the victim. The Oraturu Meyuru, or “old ones in
heaven,” once let the skies down with a run, but drew
them up again (as the gods of the Satapatha Prakmana
drew the sun) when most of mankind had been drowned.'
The remnant pacified the old ones (as Odysseus did
the spirits of the dead) by the sacrifice of a Wack
ewe, a practice still used to appease ghosts by the
Ovaherero. The neighbouring Omnambo ascribe the
creation of man to Kalonga, who came out of the
earth, and made the first three sheep.*

Among the Namaquas, an African people on the
same level of nomadic culture as the Ovaheren
divine or heroic early being called Heitsi Ribib had
a good deal to do with the origin of things. If he
did not exactly make the animals, he impressed on
them their characters, and their habits (like those of
the serpent in Genesis) are said to have been conferred
by a curse, the curse of Heitsi Eibib, A precisely
similar notion was found by Avila among the Indians
of Husrochiri, whose divine culture-hero imposed, by a
curse or a blessing, their character and habits on the
beasts.” The lion used to live in a nest up 4 tree till
Heitsi Eibib cursed him and bade him walk on the
ground, He also cursed the hare, “and the hare ran


* away, and is still running.”* The name of the first


man is given as Eichaknanabiseb (with a multitude


Y An example of a Deluge myth in Africa, where M. Lenormant
found none.

7 South African Folk. Lore Journal, il, pt v. p. 95.

3 Fulves of Ynoas (Hakiuyt Society), p. 127.

VOL. L uM


178 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


of “ clicks ”), and he is said to have met all the animals
on a flat rock, and played a game with them for
copper beads. The rainbow was made by Gaunab,
“who is generally a malevolent being, of whom more

Leaving these African races, which, whatever their
relative degrees of culture, are physically somewhat
contemptible, we reach their northern neighbours, the
Zulns. They are among the finest, and certainly
among the least religious, of the undeveloped peoples.
Their faith is mainly in magic and ghosts; gods they
scarcely possess, or if gods there be, they resemble the
Det Olio of the Epicureans, But the Zulus have
myths of the beginning of things.

The social and political condition of the Zulu is
well understood. They sre a pastoral, but not a
nomadic people, possessing large kraals or towns, They
practise agriculture, and they had, till quite recently, a
centralised government and a large army, somewhat
on the German system. ‘They appear to have no re-
gular class of priests, and supernatural power is owned
2 the chiefs and the king, and by diviners and

feerers, who conduct the sacrifices. Their myths
are the more interesting because, whether from their
natural scepticism, which confuted Bishop Colenso in
his orthodox days, or from acquaintance with European
ideas, they have begun to doubt the truth of their own
traditions." The Zulu theory of the origin of man
and of the world commences with the feats of Tn-


' These legends have been carefully collected and published by:
Bishop Callaway (Triibner and Co., 1863). .


UNKULUNKULU. 179


kulunkulu, “ the old, old one,” who was the first man,
“and broke off in the beginning.” Like Manabozho
among the Indians of North America, and like Waina-
moinen among the Finns, Unkulunkulu imparted to
men a knowledge of the arts, of marriage and so forth,
His exploits in this direction, however, must be con-
sidered in another part of this work. Men in general
“came out of a bed of reeds."' But there is much
confusion about this bed of reeds, named “ Uthlanga.”
The younger people ask where the bed of reeds
was; the old men do not know, and neither did their
fathers know. But they stick to it that “that bed of
reeds still exists.” Educated Zulus appear somewhat
inclined to take the expression in an allegorical sense,
and to understand the reeds either ss a kind of pro-
toplasm or ss a creator who was mortal. “He exists
no longer. As my grandfather no longer exists, he
too no longer exists; he died.” Chiefs who wish to
claim high descent trace their pedigree to Uthlanga, as
the Homeric kings traced theirs to Zeus. The Zulos
deny the theory broached by the missionaries that
Unkulunkulo is the new “king who is in heaven.”
“ We snid, he came to be, and died; that is all we said.”

In addition to the legend that men came out of a
bed of reeds, other and perhaps even more puerile
stories are current. “Some men say that they were
belched up by a cow;” others “that Unkulunkulu
split them out of a stone,”* which recalls the legend

1 Callaway, p. 9. .

? Without anticipating a later chapter, the resemblances of these to
Greek myths, as arrayed by M. Bouché Leclereq (De Origine Generis
ffumani), is very striking.


180 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


of Pyrrha and Deucalion. The myth about the cow is
still applied to great chiefs. “He was not born; he
was belched up by a cow.” The myth of the stone
origin corresponds to the Homeric saying about men
“born from the stone or the onk of the old tale.”?

In addition to the theory of the natal bed of reeds,
the “ulus, like the Navajoes of New Mexico and the
Bushmen, believe in the subterranean origin of man.
There was a succession of emigrations from below of
different tribes of men, each having its own Unkn-
Innkula. All accounts agree that Unkulunkola is
not worshipped, and he does not seem to be iden-
tified with “the lord who plays in heaven "—a kind
of lazy Zeus—when there is thunder, This “lord”
appears to be a connection of the German Mother


Holle, or of “the old woman that plucks her geese,”


as nurses tell children in Scotland when the snow
falls. Unkulunkula is not worshipped, though an-
cestral spirits are worshipped, because he lived so long
ago that no one can now trace his pedigree to the
being who is at once the first man and the creator,
His “honour-giving name” is lost in the lapse of
years, and the family rites have become obsolete. On
the whole, the Zulu myths of the origin of man may
thos be summed up:—In the beginning of things a
man appeared, born from a reed-bed, and became the
father of existing peoples. He also named the animals,
which appear rather to have accompanied his arrival
than to have been created by him, and by him to hare
been “ given ” to his children. Perhaps there was one

1 (dyseey, xix. 103. )


HURON MYTHS. | 181


such man for each race, or possibly different races
emerged, at different times, from holes in the earth.
These are the inconsistencies of Zulu tradition. The
Aulus, it seems, had no idea of God, but only fa
monnate of the idea in the conception of powerful
ancestral spirits, of a first father, and of a “ lord,” not
a god, who plays with thunder. Lions and snakes are
also called “lords.” In them the dead are incarnate,

The native races of the North American continent
(concerning whose civilisation more will be said in the
account of their divine myths) occupy every stage of
culture, from the truly bestial condition in which some
of the Digger Indians at present exist, living on in-
sects and unacquainted even with the use of the bow, to
the civilisation which the Spaniards destroyed among
the Aztecs,

From such peoples wa might expect, perhaps, re-
markable myths of creation, varying greatly in char-
acter, But these hopes are disappointed. The Hurons,
for example (to choose a people in a state of middle
barbarism), start from the usual conception of a power-
ful non-natural race of men dwelling in the heavens,
whence they descended, and colonised, not to say con-
structed, the earth. In the elation de la Nouvelle
France, written by Pére Paul le Jeune, of the Company
of Jesus, in 1636, there is a very full account of
Huron opinion, which, with some changes of names,
exists among the other branches of the Algonkin
family of Indians.

They recognise as the founder of their kindred a
woman named Ataentsic, who, like Hephwstus in the


182 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Iliad, was banished from the sky. In the upper world
there are woods and plains, as on earth. Ataentsic fell
down « hole when she was hunting a bear, or she cut
down a heaven-tree, and fell with the fall of this
Huron Yodrasil, or she was seduced by an adventurer
from the under world, and was tossed out of heaven
for her fanlt. However it chanced, she dropped on
the back of the turtle in the midst of the waters.
He consulted the other aquatic animals, and one of
them, generally said to have been the musk-rat, fished '
up some soil and fashioned the earth." Here Ataentsic


* Relations, 1633. In this myth one Meavon, the Great Hare, is the
beyinner of our race, He married a daughter of the Musk-rat,

* Here we first meet In this investigation a very widely distributed
myth. The myths already examined have taken the origin of earth
for granted. The Hurons account for its origin: a speck of earth was
fished out of the waters and grew. In M. H. de Charencey’s tract
Une Legende Commogonique (Havre, 1884) this legend is traced. M.
de Charencey distinguishes (1) a continental version ; (2) an insular
verston ; (3) a mixed and Jindoo version. Among continental vari-
ants he gives a Vogul version (Herwe de Philofogic ef df Ethnograpsie,
Paria, 1874, i. 10) Numi Tarom (a god who cooks fish In heaven)
hangs a male and female above the abyss of waters in o silver cradle,
Ho givea them, later, just earth enough to build a house on, Their
son, in the guise of a squirrel, climbs to Numi Tarom, and receives
from him o dock-skin and o goose-ekin, Clad in these, like Yehl in
his raven-akin or Odin in his hawk-skin, he enjoya the powers of the
animals, dives and brings up three handfuls of mud, which grow into
ourearth, Elempi makes men out of clay and mow. The American
version ML de Charencey gives from Nicholas Perrot (Mem. aur lee
Afeurs, &e., Paris, 1864, 1 3). Perrot wasa traveller of the seventeenth
century. The Great Hare takes a hand in the making of earth out
of fished-up soil, After giving other North American variants, and
comparing the animals who, after three attempts, fish up earth to the
dove and raven of Noah, M. de Charencey reaches the Bulgarians,
God made Satan, in the skin of a diver, fish up earth out of Lake
Tiberias, Three doves fish up earth, in the beginning, in the Gali-
cian popular legend (Chodzko, Contes des Paysone Slaves, p, 374)
In the insular version, as in New Zealand, the island is usually
fished up with a hook by a heroic angler (Japan, Tunga, Tahiti, New


MICHABOS, 183


gave birth to twins, Ioskeha and Tawiscara. These
represent the usual dualism of myth; they answer to
Osiris and to Ormozd and Abhriman, and were
hitter enemies. According to one form of the myth,
the woman of the esky had twins, and what occurred
may be quoted from Dr, Brinton. “ Even before birth
one of them betrayed his restless and evil nature by
refusing to be born in the usual manner, but insisting
on breaking throngh his parent's side or arm-pit.
He did so, but it cost his mother her life. Her body
was buried, and from it sprang the various vegetable
productions,” pumpkins, maize, beans, and so forth.

According to another version of the origin of things,
the maker of them was one Michabous or Michaho,
the Great Hare. His birthplace was shown at an
island called Michilimakinak, like the birthplace of
Apollo at Delos. The Great Hare made the earth,
and, as will afterwards appear, was the inventor of the
arts of life, On the whole, the Iroquois and Algonkin
foaland) The Hindoo version, in which the boar plays the part of
musk-rat, or duck, or diver, will be given in “ Indian Cosmogonic
Myths,”

1 Brinton, American [fero-Myths, p. §4. Nicholas Perrot and vari-
ous Jesuit Mefations are the original authorities. See “ Divine Myths
of America.” Mr, Leland, in his Algontin Tales, prints the same story,
with the names altered to Glooskap and Malsumis, from oral tradition,
Compare Schoolcraft, v. 155, and i 317, and the versions of PP. Char-
levolx and Lafitan, In Charlevoix the good and bad brothers are
Manaborho and Chokanipok or Chakekanapok, and out of the bones
and entrails of the Intter many planta and animals were fashioned, just
as, according to a Greek myth preserved by Clemens Alexandrinus,
of Dionysus Zagreosn. The tale of Tawiscara's violent birth is told
of Set in Egypt, and of Indra in the Veda, ss will be shown Inter.
Thin is a very common fable, and, as Mr. Whitley Stokes tells me,
it recurs in old Irish legends of the birth of our Lord.


184 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


myths agree in finding the origin of life in an upper
world beyond the sky. The earth was cither fished up
(as by Brahma when he dived in the shape of a boar)
by some beast which descended to the bottom of the
waters, or grew out of the tortoise on whose back
Ateentsic fell. The first dwellers in the world were
either beasts like Manabozho or Michabo, the Great
Hare, or the primeval wolves of the Uinkarets,’ or
the creative musk-rat, or were more anthropomorphic
heroes, such as Ioskeha and Tawiseara. As for the
things in the world, some were made, some evolyed,
some are transformed parts of an early non-natural
man or animal. There is a tendency to identify
Ataentsic, the sky-woman, with the moon, and in the
Two Great Brethren, hostile as they are, to recognise
moon and sun,"

Turning from the famous warrior tribes, Troquois
and Algonkins, we find that the Navajoes, a nomadic
race of New Mexico, have a less elaborate account of
the appearance of man in the world. To their think-
ing, the Americans at one time all lived in a hole in

1 Powell, Bureau of Ethnology, i. 44.

* Dr. Brinton has endeavoured to demonstrate by arguments drawn
Great Hare, is originally « personification of Dawn (Myths of the
New World, p. 178). I have examined his arguments in the Mineteeuth
Century, January 1886, which may be consulted, and in Melusine,
January 1887. The hare appears to be one out of the countless
primeval beast-culture heroes, A curious piece of magic in & tradition
of the Déint Hareskins may seem to aid De, Brinton’s theary :
“Pendant la nuit il entra, jeta au feu une téte de lidvre blane, ef:
aussit6t le jour se fit,"—Petitot, Traditions Inciennes, p. 173 But
T take it that the ascrifice of a white hare's head makes light magically,


aa sacrifice of black boasta and columns of black smoke make rain-
clouda,


NAVAJOE MYTHS, 185.


the earth below a mountain named Cerra Naztarny.'
The only light was a kind of daybreak, which lasted
only for a few hours. They had two flute-players
among them; one of them chanced to touch the top of
the cave; it sounded hollow, and they bored a hole to
the outer air, The moth-worm first crept out, the
racoon followed; his legs stuck in the mud outside,
and that is the reason why the racoon has black legs
even to the present day, Then men and animals
followed. The earth was very small at first, and
“there was no heaven." There was still very little
light, and the old men determined to make sun, moon,
and stara. When the sun and moon appeared, they
were given to the two flute-players, who have carried
them about ever since. The people were beginning
to embroider the stars on the sky in a beautiful
pattern, representing bears and other creatures, when
the prairie wolf, an inartistic character, exclaimed,
“Why are you taking so much trouble in making all
this embroidery ; just stick the stars about anywhere,”
and he tossed the heap all over the heavens. Thus
there are only a few constellutions, those named after
animals, remains of the original embroidery. The
Spaniards and firearms came from heaven in this
wise. There was an inveterate Navajoe gambler, who
had “cleared out” the whole nation, The old men,
in revenge, fastened him to a bow-string and shot
him up into the air. After a short absence he re-
turned, bringing with him firearms and Spaniards.
This, it will be observed, is a most atheistic my-


1 Schooleraft, iv, 89.


186 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


thology, man having himself made the firmament for
his own purposes. The origin of men and animals is
the same as that which recommends itself to the
Bushmen, to the Basntos, and to the Greeks, who
thought themselves autochthonous.’ Some of the
degraded Digger Indians of California have the
following myth of the origin of species. In this
legend, it will be noticed, a species of evolution takes
the place of a theory of creation. The story was
told to Mr. Adam Johnston, who “ drew" the narrator
by communicating to a chief the Biblical narrative of
the creation* The chief said it was a strange story,
and one that he had never heard when he lived at
the Mission of St. John under the care of a Padre.
According to this chief (he ruled over the Po-to-
yan-te tribe or Coyotes), the first Indians were coyotes.
When one of their number died, his body became full
of little animals or spirits. They took various shapes,
as of deer, antelopes, and so forth; but as some
exhibited a tendency to fly off to the moon, the Po-to-
yan-tes now usually bury the bodies of their dead, to
prevent the extinction of species. Then the Indians
began to assume the shape of man, but it was a slow
transformation. At first they walked on all fours,
then they would begin to develop an isolated homan
feature, one finger, one toe, one eye, like the ascidian,
our first parent in the view of modern science, Than


they doubled their organs, got into the habit of


sitting up, and wore away their tails, which they


' Callaway, i. §0; Moffat, Missionary Lalours, 262; Casalis, Bamutos,
Pe 24a. 9 Schooleraft, vul. ¥,


WINNEBAGOES AND CHALDEANS. 187


unaffectedly regret, “as they consider the tail quite an
ornament.” Ideas of the immortality of the soul are
confined to the old women of the tribe, and, in short,
the Digger Indians occupy the modern scientific
position.

The Winnebagoes, who communicated their myths
to Mr. Fletcher,’ are suspected of having been in-
fluenced by the Biblical narrative. They say that the
Great Spirit woke up as from a dream, and found
himself sitting in o chair, As he was all alone, he
took a piece of his body and a piece of earth, and
made aman. He next made a woman, steadied the
earth by placing beasts beneath it at the corners, and
created plants and animals. Other men he made
out of bears. “ He created the white man to make
tools for the poor Indians,”"—a very pleasing example
of a teleological hypothesis and of the doctrine of
final causes as understood by the Winnebagoes. The
Chaldean myth of the making of man is recalled by
the legend that the Great Spirit cut out a piece of
himself for the purpose; the Chaldean wisdom coin-
cides, too, with the philosophical acumen of the Pu-to-
yan-te or Coyote tribe of Digger Indians. Though
the Chaldean theory is only connected with that of
the Red Men by its savagery, we may briefly state it
in this place,

According to Berosus, as reported by Alexander
Polyhistor, the universe was originally (as before Mana-
bozho’s time) water and mud. Herein all manner
of mixed monsters, with human heads, goat's horns,

1 Schooleraft, iv. 228.


185 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


four legs, and tails, bred confusedly. In place of
the Iroquois Ataentsic, a woman called Omoroca pre-
sided over the mud and the menagerie, She, too,
like Ataentsic, is sometimes recognised as the moon,
Affairs being in this state, Bel-Maruduk arrived and
cut Omoroca in two (Chokanipok destroyed Ataensic),
and out of Omoroca Bel made the world and the things
in it, We have already seen that in savage myth
many things are fashioned out of a dead member of
the extra-natural race. Lastly, Bel cut his own head
off, and with the blood the gods mixed clay and made
men. The Chaldeans inherited very savage fancies."
One ought, perhaps, to apologise to the Chaldeans
for inserting their myths among the fables of the least
cultivated peoples; but it will scarcely be maintained
that the Oriental myths differ in character from the
Digger Indian and Iroquois explanations of the origin
of things. The Ats of Vanconver Island, whom Mr.
Sproat knew intimately, and of whose ideas he gives
a cautious account, tell a story of the usual character.’
They believe in a member of the extra-natural mice,
named Qnawteaht, of whom we shall hear more in hia
heroic character. As a demiurge “he is undoubtedly
represented as the general framer, I do not say creator,
of all things, though some special things are excepted,
He made the earth and water, the trees and rocks,
and all the animals. Some say that Quawteaht made
the sun and moon, but the majority of the Indians
believe that he had nothing to do with their formation,


1 Cf Syncellus, p, 29; Euseb., Chronic, Armen, ed. Mai, p. to;
Lenormant, Origines de ['fTistoire, i, 506.
2 Sproat, Scenes and Studies af Savage Life, pp. 210-214.


QUAWTEAHT. eee


and that they are deities superior to himself, though
‘now distant and less active. He gave names to every-
‘thing; among the rest, to all the Indian houses which
then existed, although inhabited only by birds and
animals, Quawteaht went away before the apparent
change of the birds and beasts into Indians, which
took place in the following manner.

The birds and beasts of old had the spirits of the
Indians dwelling in them, and occupied the various
coast villages, as the Ats do at present, One day a
canoe manned by two Indians from an unknown
country approached the shore. As they coasted along,
at each house at which they landed, the deer, bear,
elk, and other brate inhabitants fled to the mountains,
and the geese and other birds flew to the woods and
rivers, But in this flight, the Indians, who had
hitherto been contained in the bodies of the various
creatures, were left behind, and from that time they
took possession of the deserted dwellings and assumed
the condition in which we now see them.

Crossing the northern continent of America to the
west, we are in the domains of various animal-culture
heroes, ancestors, and teachers of the human race, and
the makers, to some extent, of the things in the world.
As the eastern tribes have their Great Hare, so the
western tribes have their wolf hero and progenitor, or
their coyote, or their raven, or their dog. It is pos-
sible, and even certain in some cases, that the animal
which was the dominant totem of a race became heir
to any cosmogonic legends that were floating abont.

The country of the Papagos, on the eastern side of


190 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the Gulf of California, is the southern boundary of the
godhead of the coyote or prairie wolf. The realm of
his influence as a kind of Promethens, or even as a
demiurge, extends very far northwards. In the ce ie
related by Con Quien, the chief of the central Papagos,’
the coyote acts the part of the fish in the ee
legend of the flood, while Montezuma undertakes the
réle of Manu. This Montezuma was formed, like the
Adams of so many races, out of potter's clay in the
hands of the Great Spirit. In all this legend it seams
plain enough that the name of Montezuma is imported
from Mexico, and has been arbitrarily given to the hero
of the Papagos. A Biblical influence is also very ap-
parent. What is neither Biblical nor Mexican is the
appearance of the coyote. According to Mr. Powers,
whose manuscript notes Mr. Bancroft quotes (iii. 87),
all the natives of California believe that their first an-
cestors were created directly from the earth of their
present dwelling-places, and in very many cases these
ancestors Were coyotes,

The Pimas, a race who live near the Papagos on the
eastern coast of the Gulf of California, say that the
earth was made by a being named Earth-prophet. At
first it appeared like a spider's web, reminding one of
the West African legend that a great spider created
the world. Man was made by the Earth-prophet out
of clay kneaded with sweat. A mysterions eagle and
a deluge play a great part in the later mythical adven-
tures of war and the world, as known to the Pimas.*


' Davidson, /ndian Affairs Report, 1865, p. 131; Bancroft, iii, 75.
? Communicated to Mr. Bancroft by Mr, Stout of the Pima Agency,


COYOTE PROMETHEUS. 191


In Oregon the coyote appears as a somewhat ten-
tative demiurge, and the men of his creation, like the
beings first formed by Prajapati in the Sanskrit myth,
needed to be reviewed, corrected, and considerably
augmented. The Chinooks of Oregon believe in the
usual race of magnified non-natural men, who preceded
humanity, and had a tendency to develop into gods or
decline into men,

These semi-divine people were called Ulhaipa by
the Chinooks, and Sehuiab by the Lummies. Bat the
coyote was the maker of men. As the first of Nature's
journeymen, he made men rather badly, with closed
eyes and motionless feet. A kind being, named Ika-
nam, touched up the coyote’s crude essays with a
sharp stone, opening the eyes of men, and giving
their hands and feet the powers of movement. He
also acted as a “culture-hero,” introducing the first
arts.!

Moving up the West Pacific const, we reach
British Columbia, where the coyote is not supposed
to have been so active as our old friend the musk-rat
in the great work of the creation, According to the
Tacullies, nothing existed in the beginning but water
and a musk-rat. As the animal sought his food at
the bottom of the water, his mouth was frequently
filled with mud. This he spat out, and so gradually
formed by alluvial deposit an island. This island

was small at first, like earth in the Sanskrit myth in
the Safapatha Brahmana, but gradually increased in

1 [Franchere’s Narrative, 258 ; Gibb's Chinook Vocabulary ; Parker's
Exploring Tour, i. 139 ;] Banerult, iii, 96.


192 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


bulk. The Tacullies have no new light to throw on
the origin of man.

The Thiinkeets, who are neighbours of the Tacullies
on the north, incline to give a crow or raven the
chief réle in the task of creation, just as the Aus-
tralians allot the same part to the eagle-hawk, and the
Yakuts to a hawk, a crow, and a teal-duck, while
Odin in Scandinavian mythology has marked affinities
with the eagle. We shall hear much of Yehl later,
as one of the mythical heroes of the introduction of
civilisation. North of the Thlinkeets, a bird and ao
dog take the creative duties, the Aleuts and Koniagas
being descended from a dog. Among the more
northern Tinnehs, the dog who was the progenitor of
the race had the power of assuming the shape of a
handsome young man, He supplied the protoplasm
of the Tinnehs, as Purnsha did that of the Aryan
world, out of his own body. A giant tore him to
pieces, as the gods tore Purusha, and out of the frag-
ments thrown into the rivers came fish, the fragments
tossed into the air took life as birds, and so forth."
This recalls the Australian myth of the origin of fish
and the Ananzi stories of the origin of whips.’
_ Between the cosmogonic myths of the barbarous

or savage American tribes and those of the great
cultivated American peoples, Aztecs, Peruvians, and
Quiches, place should be found for the legends of
certain races in the South Pacific. Of these, the most


1 Bancroft, fii. 68 ; Harmon's Journey, pp. 302-303.

2 Hearne, pp. 342-343 ; Bancroft, iil. 106.

1 See “ Divine Myths of Lower Races.” M. Cosquin, in Confer de
Lorraine, vol. i. p. 55, gives the Ananzi story, ;


NEW ZEALAND MYTHS. 193


important are the Maoris or natives of New Zealand,
the Mangaians, and the Samoans. Beyond the
common and world-wide correspondences of myth,
the divine tales of the various South Sea isles display
resemblances so many and essential, that they must
be supposed to spring from a common and probably
not very distant centre. As it is practically im-
possible to separate Maori myths of the making of
things from Maori myths of the gods and their origin,
we must pass over here the metaphysical hymns and
stories of the original divine beings, Rangi and Papa,
Heaven and Earth, and of their cruel but necessary
divorce by their children, who then became the usual
Titanic race which constructs and “airs” the world
for the reception of man.’ Among these beings, more
fully described in our chapter on the gods of the lower
races, is Tiki, with his wife Marikoriko, twilight.
Tane (male) is another of the primordial race, children
of earth and heaven, and between him and Tiki lies
the credit of having made or begotten humanity.
Tane adorned the body of his father, heaven (angi),
by sticking stars all over it, as disks of pearl-shells
are stuck all over images. He was the parent of trees
and birds, but some trees are original and divine beings.
The first woman was not born, but formed out of the
sun and the echo, a pretty myth. Man was made by
Tiki, who took red clay, and kneaded it with his own
blood, or with the red water of swamps. The habits
of animals, some of which are gods, while others are
descended from gods, follow from their conduct at
' See “ Divine Myths of Lower Races,”
VoL. L N


194 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the moment when heaven and earth were viclently
divorced. New Zealand itself, or at least one of the
isles, was a huge fish canght by Maui (of whom more
hereafter). Just as Pond-jel, in Australia, ent out
the gullies and vales with his knife, so the mountains
and della of New Zealand were produced by the knives
of Mani’s brothers when they crimped his big fish."
Quite apart from these childish ideas are the astonish-
ing metaphysical hymns about the first stirrings of
light in darkness, of “becoming” in “ being,” which
remind us of Hegel and Heraclitus, or of the most
purely speculative ideas in the Rig-Veda* Scarcely
less metaphysical are the myths of Mangaia, of which
Mr. Gill* gives an elaborate account.

The Mangaian ideas of the world are complex, and
of an early scientific sort. The universe is like the
hollow of a vast cocoa-nut shell, divided into many
imaginary circles, like those of medisval speculation.
There is a demon at the stem, as it were, of the
cocoa-nut, and, where the edges of the imaginary
shell nearly meet, dwells a woman-demon, whose name
means “the very beginning.” In this system we
observe efforta at metaphysics and physical specula-
tion. But it is very characteristic of rude thought
that such extremely abstract conceptions as “ the very
beginning” are represented as possessing life and
human form, The woman at the bottom of the shell

1 Taylor, New Zealand, pp. 115-121; Bastian, Meilige Sage der
Polynesier, pp. 36-50 ; Shortland, Traditions of New Zealanders.

® See chapter on “Divine Myths of the Lower Races,” and on


“Tndion Cosmogonic Myths."
4 Myths and Songs from the South Paciic, pp. 1-22.


MANGALAN MYTHS, 195


was anxious for progeny, and therefore plucked a bit
out of her own right side, as Eve was made out of
the rib of Adam. This piece of flesh became Vatea,
the father of gods and men. Vates (like Oannes in
the Chaldean legend) was half man, half fish, “The
very beginning” begat other children in the same
manner, and some of these became departmental gods
of ocean, noon-day, and so forth. Curiously enough,
the Mangaians seem to be sticklera for primogeniture.
Vatea, as the first-born son, originally had his domain
next above that of his mother. Enut she was pained
by the thought that his younger brothers each took
a higher place than his; so she pushed his land up,
and it is now next below the solid crust on which
mortals live in Mangain. Vatea married o woman
from one of the under worlds named Papa, and their
children had the regular human form. One child was
bern either from Papa's head, like Athene from the
head of Zeus, or from her arm-pit, like Dionysus from
the thigh of Zeus. Another child may be said, in
the language of dog-breeders, to have “thrown back,”
for he wears the form of a white or black lizard.
In the Mangaian system the sky is a solid vault of
blue stone. In the beginning of things, the sky
(like Ouranos in Greece and Rangi in New Zealand)
pressed hard on earth, and the god Ru was obliged to
thrust the two asunder, or rather he was engaged in
this task when Maui tossed both Ru and the sky so
high up that they never got down again. Ru is now
the Atlas of Mangnia, “the sky-supporting Ru,"" His
Gill, p. 59.


196 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


lower limba fell to earth, and became pumice-stone.
In these Mangaian myths we discern resemblances to
New Zealand fictions, as is natural, and the tearing
of the body of “the very beginning” has numerous
comnterparts in European, American, and Indian fable.
But on the whole, the Mangsian myths are more
remarkable for their semi-scientific philosophy than
for their coincidences with the fancies of other early
peoples.

The Samoans, like the Maoris and Greeks, hold
that heaven at first fell down and lay upon earth.’
The arrowroot and another plant pushed up heaven,
and “the heaven-pushing place” is still known and
pointed out. Others say the god Ti-iti-i pushed up
heaven, and his feet made holes six feet deep in the
rocks during his exertions, The other Samoan myths
chiefly explain the origin of fire, and the causes of
the characteristic forms and habits of animals and —
plants. The Samoans, too, possess a semi-mythical,
metaphysical cosmogony, starting from nothing, but
rapidly becoming the history of rocks, clouds, hills,
dew, and various animals, who intermarried, and to
whom the royal family of Samoa trace their origin
through twenty-three generations, So personal are
Samoan abstract conceptions, that “ Space had a long-
legged stool,” on to which a head fell, and grew into
a companion for Space. Yet another myth (perhaps
post-Christian) says that the god Tangaloa existed in
space, and made heaven and earth, and sent down
his daughter, a snipe. Man he made out of the

! Turner's Samoa, p. 195.


MYTHS OF AMERICAN CIVILISED PEOPLES. 197


mussel-fish. So confused are the doctrines of the
‘Samoans.'

Perhaps the cosmogonic myths of the less cultivated
races have now been stated in sufficient number. As
an example of the ideas which prevailed in an Ameri-
ean race of higher culture, we may take the Quiche
legend as given in the Popol Vuh, a post-Christian col-
lection of the sacred myths of the nation, written down
after the Spanish conquest, and published in French by
the Abbé Brasseur de Bourbourg.*

The Quiches, like their neighbours the Cakchiquels,
were a highly civilised race, possessing well-built towns,
roads, and the arts of life, and were great agriculturists.
Maize, the staple of food among these advanced Ameri-
cans, was almost as great » god as soma among the
Indo-Aryans. The Quiches were acquainted with o
kind of picture-writing, and possessed records in which
myth glided into history. The Popol Vu, or book
of the people, gives itself out as a post-Columbian
copy of these traditions, and may doubtless contain
European ideas. As we see in the Commentarias
Reales of the half-blood Inca Garcilasso de ln Vega,
the conquered peoples were anxious to prove that
their beliefs were by no means #0 irrational and #0
“devilish " as to Spanish critics they appeared. Ac-
cording to the Popol Vuk, there was in the beginning


P Turner's Samed, pp. 1G.

3 Bee Popol Fuh in Mr, Max Miller's Chips from a German Work-
shop, with a discumien of ite authenticity. In his Annaleof the Cakeht-
quela, a nation bordering on the Quiches, Dr, Brinton expresses his
belief in the genuine character of the text. Compare Bancroft, til. p.
45. The ancient and original Popol Vuh, the native book in native
characters, disappeared during the Spanish comucet.


198 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


nothing but water and the feathered serpent, one of
their chief divine beings; but there also existed,
somehow, “they that gave life,” whoever they may -
have been, a kind of Elohim probably. Their names
mean * shooter of blow-pipe at coyote,” “ at opposum,”
and so forth. They said “ Earth,” and there was earth,
and plants growing thereon. Animals followed, and
the Givers of life said, “Speak our names,” but the
animals could only cluck and croak. Then said the
Givers, “Inasmuch as ye cannot praise us, ye shall
be killed and eaten.” They then made men ont of
clay; these men were weak and watery, and by water
they were destroyed. Next they made men of wood
and women of the pith of trees. These puppets
married and gave in marriage, and peopled earth with
wooden mannikins. This unsatisfactory race was de-
stroyed by a rain of resin and by the wild beasts.
The survivors developed into apes. Next came o
period occupied by the wildest feats of the magnified
non-natural race and of animals. The record 1s like
the description of a supernatural pantomime—the night-
mare of a god. The Titans upset hills, are turned
into stone, and behave like Heitsi-Eibib in the Nama-
qua myths.

Last of all, men were made of yellow and white
maize, and these gave more satisfaction, but their sight
was contracted. These, however, survived, and became
the parents of the present stock of humanity,

Here we have the conceptions of creation and of
evolution combined. Men are made, but only the
fittest survive ; the rest are either destroyed or per-


HYMNS OF POPOL VUH. 199


mitted to develop into lower species. A similar mix-
ture of the same ideas will be found in one of the
Brahmanas among the Aryans of India, It is to be
observed that the Quiche myths, as recorded in Popol
Fuk, contain not only traces of belief in a creative
word and power, but many hymns of a lofty and
beautifully devotional character.

“ Hail! O Creator, Former! Thon that hearest
and understandest us, abandon us not, forsake us not!
0 God, thou that art in heaven and on the earth, O
Heart of Heaven, O Heart of Earth, give us descendants
and posterity as long as the light endures.”

This is an example of the prayers of the men made
out of maize, made especially that they might “call
on the name” of the god or gods, Whether we are
to attribute this and similar passages to Christian
influence (for Popol Vuh, as we have it, is but an
attempt to collect the fragments of the lost book that
remained in men's minds after the conquest), or
whether the purer portions of the myth be due to
untaught native reflection and piety, it is not possible
to determine. Here, as elsewhere in the sacred legends
of civilised peoples, various strata of mythical and
religious thought coexist.

No American people reached such a pitch of civili-
sation as the Aztecs of Anahuac, whose capital was ~
the city of Mexico. It is needless here to repeat the
story of their grandeur and their fall. Obscure os
their history, previous to the Spanish invasion, may
be, it is certain that they possessed a highly organised
society, fortified towns, established colleges or priest-


200 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


hoods, magnificent temples, an elaborate calendar,
great wealth in the precious metals, the art of picture-
writing in considerable perfection, and a despotic
central government. The higher classes, in a society
like this, could not but develop speculative systems,
and it is alleged that shortly before the reign of
Montezuma attempts had been made to introduce a
pure monotheistic religion. But the creed and ritual
of the Aztecs remained an example of the utmost
barbarity. Never was a more cruel faith, not even in
Carthage. Nowhere did temples reek with such pools
of human blood; nowhere else, not in Dahomey and
Ashanti, were human sacrifice, cannibalism, and torture
so essential to the cult that secured the favour of
the gods. In these dark fanes,—recking with gore,
peopled by monstrous shapes of idols bird-headed or
beast-headed, and adorned with the hideons carvings in
which we still see the priest, under the mask of some
less ravenous forest, beast, tormenting the victim, —in
these abominable temples the Castilian conquerors
might well believe that they saw the dwellings of
devils.

Yet Mexican religion had its moral and beautiful
aspect, and the gods or certain of the gods, required
from their worshippers not only bloody hands, but
_ clean hearts.

To the gods we return later. The myths of the
origin of things may be studied without a knowledge
of the whole Aztec Pantheon. Our authorities, though
numerous, lack complete originality and are occasion-
ally confused. We have first the Astee monuments


AZTEC MYTHS. 201


and hieroglyphic scrolls, for the most part undeci-
phered. These merely attest the hideous and cruel
character of the deities. Next we have the reports
of early missionaries, like Sahagun and Mendieta, of
conquerors, like Bernal Diaz, and of noble half-breeds,
such as Ixtlilxochitl.’

There are two elements in Mexican, as in Quiche,
and Indo-Aryan, and Maori, and even Andaman cos-
mogonic myth, We find the purer religion and the
really philosophic speculation combined with such
crude and childish stories as usually satisfy the intel-
lectual demands of Ahts, Cahrocs, and Bushmen; but
of the purer and more speculative opinions we know
little. Many of the noble, learned, and priestly classes
of Azteca perished at the conquest, The survivors
were more or less converted to Catholicism, and in
their writings put the best face possible on the native
religion. Like the Spanish clergy, their instructors,
they were inclined to explain away their national gods
by a system of euhemerism, by taking it for granted
that the gods and culture-heroes had originally been
ordinary men, worshipped after their decease. This is
almost invariably the view adopted by Sahagun, Side
by side with the confessions, as it were, of the clergy
and cultivated classes coexisted the popular beliefs, the
myths of the people, partaking of the nature of folk-
lore, but not rejected by the priesthood.

Both strata of belief are represented in the surviving

1 Bancroft's Native Races of Pacife Coast of North America, vol. iii.,
containa an account of the sources, and, with Sahagun and Acosta, ia


mainly followed bere. See also J. G. Miller, Ur. Amerik Hel, p. 507.
See chapter on the “ Divine Myths of Mexico,”


202 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


cosmogonic myths of the Aztecs. Probably we may
reckon in the first or learned and speculative class
of tales the account of a series of constructions and
reconstructions of the world. This idea is nob pecu-
liar to the higher mythologies, the notion of a deluge
and re-creation or renewal of things is almost universal,
and even among the untutored Australians there are
memories of a flood and of an age of ruinous winds.
But the theory of definite epochs, calculated in accord-
ance with the Mexican calendar, of epochs in which
things were made and re-made, answers closely to the
Indo-Aryan conception of successive /elpas, and can
only have been developed after the method of reckoning
time had been carried to some perfection. “ When
heaven and earth were fashioned, they had already
been four times created and destroyed,” say the frag-
ments of what is called the Chimalpopoca manuscript.
Probably this theory of a series of kalpas is only one
of the devices by which the human mind has tried to
cheat itself into the belief that it can conceive a
beginning of things. The earth stands on an elephant,
the elephant on a tortoise, and it is going too far to
ask what the tortoise stands on. In the same way the
world’s beginning seems to become more intelligible
or less puzzling when it is thrown back into a series
of beginnings and endings. This method also was in
harmony with those vague ideas of evolution and of
the survival of the fittest which we have detected in
myth. The various tentative human races of the Popol
Fuh degenerated or were destroyed because they did
not fulfil the purposes for which they were made. In


* Brahmanic myth we shall see that type after type was
1 . condemned and perished because it was inadequate, or
|’ inadequately equipped—becanse it did not harmonise
1 i with its environment.' For these series of experi-
‘i mental creations and ineflicient evolutions vast spaces
la of time were required, according to the Aztec and Indo-
| » Aryan philosophies. It is not impossible that actual


floods and great convulsions of nature may have been
remembered in tradition, and may have lent colour and
form to these somewhat philosophic myths of origins.
From such sources probably comes the Mexican hypo-
thesis of a water-age (ending in a deluge), an earth-
age (ending in an earthquake), a wind-oge (ending in
hurricane), and the present dispensation, to be de-
The less philosophic and more popular Aztec legend
of the commencement of the world is mainly remark-
able for the importance given in it to objects of stone.
For some reason, stones play a much greater part in
American than in other mythologies. An emerald
was worshipped in the temple of Pachacamac, the
supreme and spiritual deity of the Incas. The crea-
tion legend of the Cakchiquels of Guatemala* makes
much of a mysterious, primeval, and animated obsidian
stone. Inthe Iroquois myths* stones are the leading
echaracters. Nor did Aztec myth escape this influence.


1 Asan example of a dim evolutionary idea, note the myths of the
various ages as reported by | Mendieta, according to which there were
five earlier ages “ or supa "of bad quality, 20 that the contemporary
homan beings were unable to live on the froits of the earth,

? Brinton, Annals of the Cukchiquels,

2 Ertuinie Smith, Bureau of Ftinol. Report, ii,


204 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


There was a god in heaven named Citlalatonac, and
a goddess, Citlalicue. When we speak of “ heaven ™
we must probably think of some such world of ordi-
nary terrestrial nature above the sky as that from
which Ataentsic fell in the Huron story. The goddess
gave birth to a flint-knife, and flung the flint down to
earth, This abnormal birth partly answers to that
of the youngest of the Adityas, the rejected abortion
in the Veda, and to the similar birth and rejection of
Maui in New Zealand. From the fallen flint-knife
sprang our old friends the magnified non-natural
beings with human characteristica, “the gods,” to the
number of sixteen hundred. The gods sent up the
hawk (who in India and Australia generally comes to
the front on these occasions), and asked their mother,
or rather grandmother, to help them to make men, to
be their servants. Citlalicue rather jeered at her un-
considered offspring. She advised them to go to the
lord of the homes of the departed, Mictlanteuctli, and
borrow a bone or some ashes of the dead who are with
him. We must never ask for consistency from myths.
This statement implies that men had ilready been in
existence, though they were not yet created. Perhaps
they had perished in one of the four great destructions.
With difficulty and danger the gods stole a bone from
Hades, placed it in a bowl, and smeared it with their
own blood, as in Chaldea and elsewhere. Finally, a
boy and a girl were born out of the bowl, F rom
this pair sprang men, and certain of the gods, jumping
into a furnace, became sun and moon. To the snn
they then, in Aztec fashion, sacrificed themselves, and


’


INCA MYTHS, | 205


there, one might think, was an end of them. But
they afterwards appeared in wondrous fashions to
their worshippers, and ordained the ritual of religion,
According to another legend, man and woman (as
in African myths) struggled out of a hole in the
ground.'

The myths of the peoples under the empire of the
Yneas in Pern are extremely interesting, becanse
almost all mythical formations are found existing
together, while we have historical evidence as to the
order and manner of their development. The Peru of
the Incas covered the modern state of the same name,
1 included Ecuador, with parts of Chili and Bolivia.
M. _ Reville calculates that the empire was about 2500
miles in length, four times as long as France, and that
its breadth was from 250 to 500 miles. The country
contained three different climatic regions, and was
peopled by races of many different degrees of culture,
all more or Jess subject to the dominion of the Children
ofthe Sun. The three regions were the dry strip along
the coast, the fertile and cultivated land about the
spurs of the Cordilleras, and the inland mountain re-
gions, inhabited by the wildest races. Near Cuzco,
the Inca capital, was the Lake of Titicaca, the Medi-
terranean, as it were, of Pern, for on the shores of this
inland sea was developed the chief civilisation of the
new world,

As to the institutions, myths, and religion of the

1 Authorittes :—Ixtlil. ; Kingsborough, ix. pp. 205-206; Sahagun,


Hist, Gen., L 3, vila 3d, G. Miller, p. 510, where Miller compares the
Delphic conception of ages of the world ; Bancroft, iil. pp. 6o, 65.


rob MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


empire, we have copions information. There are
the narratives of the Spanish conquerors, especially
of Pizarro's chaplain, Valverde, an ignorant bigoted
fanatic. Then we have somewhat later travellers and
missionaries, of whom Cieza de Leon (his book was
published thirty years after the conquest, in 1553) is
the most trustworthy. The “Royal Commentaries ”
of Garcilasso de In Vega, son of an Inca lady and a
Spanish conqueror, have often already been quoted.
The critical spirit and sound sense of Garcilasso are in
remarkable contrast to the stupid orthodoxy of the
Spaniards, but some allowance must be made for his
fervent Peruvian patriotism. He had heard the Inca
traditions repeated in boyhood, and very early in life
collected all the information which his mother and
maternal uncle had to give him, or which could be ex-
tracted from the guipus (the records of knotted cord),
and from the commemorative pictures of his ancestors.
Garcilasso had access, moreover, to the “ torn papers ” of
Blas Valera, an early Spanish missionary of unusual
sense and acuteness, Christoval de Moluna is also an
excellent authority, and much may be learned from the
volume of Rites and Laws of the Yneas.

The political and religious condition of the Peruvian
empire is very clearly conceived and stated by Gar-
1A more complete list of authorities, including the gurrulous Acosta,
is published by M. Reéville in his Mittert Lectures, pp. 136-137. Gar-
cillasso, Cieza de Leon, Christoval de Moluna, Acosta, and the Rit
and fairs have all been tranalated by Mr. Clements Markham, and are
published, with the editor's learned and ingenious notes, in the collec.
tion of the Hakluyt Society. Care must be takon to discriminate be
tween what ie reported about the Indians of the various proviness, who
a different grades of culture, and what is told about the Incas


ii a fon 2 : al
= =


cilasso. Without making due allowance for that mys-
terious earlier civilisation, older than the Incas, whose
cyclopean buildings are the wonder of travellers, Gar-
ilasso attributes the introduction of civilisation to
his own ancestors. Allowing for what is confessedly
mythical in his narrative, it must be admitted that he
has a firm grasp of what the actual history must have
been. He recognises a period of savagery before the
Incas, a condition of the rudest barbarism, which still
existed on the fringes and mountain recesses of the
empire. The religion of that period was mere magic
and totemism. From all manner of natural objects,
but chiefly from beasts and birds, the various savage
stocks of Pern claimed descent, and they revered and
offered sacrifice to their totemic ancestors.’ Garcilasso
adds, what is almost incredible, that the Indians
tamely permitted themselves to be eaten by their
totems, when these were carnivorous animals. They
did this with the less reluctance, as they were cannibals,
and accustomed to breed children for the purposes of
the cuisine from captive women taken in war.” Among
the Awacas or idols, totems, fetishes, and other adorable
objects of the Indians, worshipped before and retained
after the introduction of the Inca sun-totem and solar
cult, Garcilasso names trees, hills, rocks, caves, foun-
tains, emeralds, pieces of jasper, tigers, lions, bears,
foxes, monkeys, condors, owls, lizards, toads, frogs,
sheep, maize, the sea, “for want of larger gods, crabs”
and bats, The bat was also the totem of the Zotzil,

' Com. Real., vol. i, chap. ix., x, x1, pp. 47-$3-


2 Cieza de Leon, xii, xv., ix. xxi, xxiii, xxvi, xxviil, xxxii Cieza
is speaking of people in the valley of Cauca, in New Granada.


208 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the chief family of the Cakchiquels of Guatemala, and
the most high god of the Cakchiquels was worshipped
in the shape of a bat. We are reminded of religion
as it exists in Samoa, The explanation of Blas Valera
was that in each totem (pararisse) the Indians adored
Athwart this early religion of totems and fetishes
came, in Garcillasso’s narrative, the solar religion of
the Incas, with its spiritual developments. According
to him, the Inca sun-worship was really a totemism
of a loftier character. The Incas “knew how to
choose gods better than the Indians.” Garcilasso’s
theory is that the earlier totems were selected chiefly
as distinguishing marks by the various stocks, though,
of course, this does not explain why the animals or
other objects of each family were worshipped or were
regarded as ancestors, and the blood-connections of the
men who adored them. The Incas, disdaining crabs,
lizards, bats, and even serpents and lions, “ chose”
the sun. Then, just like the other totemic tribes, they
feigned to be of the blood and lineage of the sun.
This fable is, in brief, the Inca myth of the origin
of civilisation and of man, or at least of their breed
of men. As M. Réville well remarks, it is obvious
that the Inca claim is an adaptation of the local myth
of Lake Titicaca, the inland sea of Peru, According
to that myth, the Children of the Sun, the ancestors
of the Incas, came out of the earth (as in Greek and
African legends) at Lake Titicaca, or reached its
shores after wandering from the hole or cave whence
they first emerged. The myth, as adapted by the


INCA MYTHS, 209


Incas, takes for granted the previous existence of
mankind, and, in some of its forms, the Inca period is
preceded by the deluge.

Of Peruvian myth concerning the origin of
things, the following account is given by a Spanish
priest, Christoval de Moluna, in a report to the Bishop
of Cuzeo in 1570." The story was collected from the
lips of ancient Peruvians and old native priests, who
again drew their information in part from the painted
records reserved in the temple of the sun near Cuzco.
The legend begins with a deluge myth; a cataclysm
ended a period of human existence. All mankind
perished except a man and woman, who floated in a
box to a distance of several hundred miles from Cuzco.
There the creator commanded them to settle, and
there, like Pund-jel in Australia, he made clay images
of men of all races, attired in their national dress, and
then animated them. They were all fashioned and
painted as correct models, and were provided with
their national songs and with seed-corn. They then
were put into the earth, and emerged all over the
world at the proper places, some (as in Affica and
Greece) coming out of fountains, some out of trees,
some out of caves. For this reason they made Awacas
(worshipful objects or fetishes) of the trees, caves, and

ountains. Some of the earliest men were changed
into stones, others into falcons, condors, and other
creatures which we know were totems in Peru. Pro-
bably this myth of metamorphosis was invented to
account for the reverence paid to totems or pacarisss,
/ ' Rite and Laws of the Treas, p. 4, Hakloyt Society, te


FOL. L


210 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


as the Peruvians called them. In Tiahuanaco, where
the creation, or rather manufacture of men took place,
the creator turned many sinners into stones. The
stn was made in the shape of a man, and, as he
soared into heaven, he called out in a friendly fashion
to Manco Ccapac, the ideal first Inca, “Look upon
me as thy father, and worship me as thy father.” In
these fables the crestor is called Pachyachachi,
“Teacher of the World.” According to Christoval,
the creator and his sons were “eternal and unchange-
able,” but it is impossible to say how far these philo-
sophic ideas are due to Christian influences. Among
the Canaris men descend from the survivor of the
deluge, and a beautiful bird with the face of a woman,
a siren in fact, but known better to ornithologists
as a macaw. “The chief cause," says the good
Christoval, “ of these fables was ignorance of God,”

* The story, as told by Cieza de Leon, runs thus :*—
A white man of great stature (in fact, “a magnified
non-natural man”) came into the world, and gave life
to beasts and human beings. His name was Ticivi-
racocha, and he was called the Father of the Sun.
There are likenesses of him in the temple, and he was
regarded as a moral teacher. It was owing, appa-
rently, to this benevolent being that four mysterious
brothers and sisters emerged from a cave—Children
of the Sun, fathers of the Incas, teachers of savage
men. Their own conduct, however, was not exemplary,


and they shut up in a hole in the earth the brother of |


whom they were jealous, This incident is even more
* Second Part of the Chronicter of Peru, p. 5.


INCA MYTHS. rae


common in the mé@reken or household tales than in
the regular tribal or national myths of the world.'
The buried brother emerged again with wings, and
“without doubt he must have been some devil,”
says honest Cieza de Leon. This brother was Manco
Ceapac, the heroic ancestor of the Incas, and he turned
his jealous brethren into stones. The whole tale is
in the spirit illustrated by the wilder romances of
the Popol Vuh.

Garcilasso gives three forms of this myth. Accord-
ing to “the old Inca,” his maternal uncle, it was the
sun which sent down two of his children, giving them
& golden staff, which would sink into the ground at
the place where they were to rest from wandering.
It sank at Lake Titicaca. About the current myths
Garcilasso says generally that they were “ more like
dreams ” than straightforward stories; but, as he
adds, the Greeks and Romans also “invented fables*
worthy to be laughed at, and in greater number than
the Indians. The stories of one age of heathenism
may be compared with those of the other, and in many
points they will be found to agree.” This critical
position of Garcilasso’s will be proved correct when
we reach the myths of Greeks and Indo-Aryans. The
myth as narrated north-east of Cuzco speaks of the
four brothers and four sisters who came ont of caves,
and the caves in Inca times were panelled with gold
and silver.

Athwart all these lower myths, survivals from the


1 The story of Joseph and the mdrchen of Jean de [Ours are well-


known examples.


212 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


savage stage, comes the philosophical Inca belief in
Pachacamac, This deity, to Garcilasso's mind, was
purely spiritual: he had no image and dwelt in no
temple ; in fact, he is that very God whom the Spanish
missionaries proclaimed. This view, though the fact has
been doubted, was very probably held by the Amauéas,
or philosophical class in Peru,’ Cieza de Leon says
“the name of this devil, Pachacamac, means creator
of the world.” Garcilasso urges that Pachacamac was
the animus mundi; that he did not “ make the ae ~
as Pund-jel and other savage demiurges made it, but
that be was to the universe what the soul is to the
body.

Here we find ourselves, if among myths at all
among the myths of metaphysics—rational myths; that
is, myths corresponding to our present stage of thought,
and therefore intelligible to us. Pachacamac “made
‘the sun, and lightning, and thunder, and of these the
sun was worshipped by the Incas.” Garcilasso denies
that the moon was worshipped. The reflections of
the sceptical or monotheistic Inca, who declared that
the sun, far from being a free agent, “seems like o
thing held to its task,” are reported by; Garcalaaso,
and appear to prove that solar worship was giving
way, in the minds of educated Peruvians, a hundred
years before the arrival of Pizarro and Valverde with
his missal.*

From this summary it appears that the higher
Peruvian religion had wrested to its service, and to


Com. Real., vol. i. p, 106,
* Garcilasso, viii, §, quoting Blas Valera,


GREECE AND PERU. 213


the dynastic purposes of the Incas, a native myth of
the familiar class, in which men come ready made
out of holes in the ground. But in Peru we do not
find nearly such abundance of other savage origin
myths as will be proved to exist in the legends of
Greeks and Indo-Aryans. The reason probably is
that Pern left no native literature; the missionaries
disdained stories of “ devils,” and Garcilasso's common
sense and patriotism were alike revolted by the inci-
dents of stories “more like dreams” than trothful
records. He therefore was silent about them. In
Greece and India, the other hand, the native
religions literature preserved myths of the making of
man out of clay, of his birth from trees and stones,
of the fashioning of things out of the fragments of
mutilated gods and Titans, of the cosmic egg, of the
rending and wounding of o personal heaven and a
personal earth, of the fishing up from the waters of
a tiny earth which grew greater, of the development
of men out of beasts, with a dozen other such
notions as. are familiar to contemporary Bushmen,
Australians, Digger Indians, and Cahrocs. But in
Greece and India these ideas coexist with myths as
purely spiritual and metaphysical as the belief in
the Pachacamac of Garcilasso and the Amautas of
Peru, We can expect no less from races with pro-
fessional Rishis and philosophic poets.


( a4 )


CHAPTER VIL
INDO-ARYAN MYTHS—SOURCES OF EVIDENCE.


Authorities— Vedas—Brahmanas—Social condition of Vedic India—
Arte—Hanks—War—Vedie fetishism—Ancestor worship—Date
of Rig-Veda Hymns doubtfal—Obecarity of the Hymna— Difficulty
of interpreting the real character of Veda—Not primitive but
sacerdotal—The moral purity not innocence but refinement.


Berore examing the myths of the Aryans of India,
it is necessary to have a clear notion of the nature of
the evidence from which we derive our knowledge of
the subject. That evidence is found in a large and
incongruous mass of literary documents, the heritage
of the Indian people. In this mass are extremely
ancient texts (the Rig-Veda, and the Atharva-Veda),
expository comments of a date so much later that the
original meaning of the older documents was sometimes
lost. (the Brahmanas), and poems and legendary col-
lections of a period later still, a period when the whole
character of religious thought had sensibly altered.
In this literature there is, indeed, a certain continuity ;
the names of several gods of the earliest time are pre-
served in the legends of the latest. But the influences
of many centuries of change, of contending philo-


AUTHORITIES. 215


sophies, of periods of national growth and advance,
and of national decadence and decay, have been at
work on the mythology of India. Here we have
myths that were perhaps originally popular tales, and
are probably old; here, again, we have later legends
that certainly were conceived in the narrow minds of
a pedantic and ceremonious priesthood. It is not pos-
sible, of course, to analyse in this place all the myths
of all the periods ; we must be content to point out
some which seem to be typical examples of the working
of the human intellect in its earlier or its later child-
hood, in its distant hours of barbaric beginnings, or in
the senility of its sacerdotage.

The documents which contain Indian mythology
may be divided, broadly speaking, into four classes.
First, and most ancient in date of composition, are the
collections of hymns known as the Fedas, Next, and
(as far as date of collection goes) far less ancient, are
the expository texts called the Srahmanas. Later
still, come other manuals of devotion and of sacred
learning, called Sutras and Upanishads; and last are
the epic poems (Jitjasas), and the books of legends
called Puranas. We are chiefly concerned here with
the Vedas and Brahmanas. <A gulf of time, a period
of social and literary change, separates the Brahmanas
from the Vedas. But the epics and Puranas differ
perhaps even still more from the Brahmanas, on
account of vast religious changes which brought new
gods into the Indian Olympus, or elevated to the
highest place old gods formerly of low degree. From
the composition of the first Vedic hymn to the com-


216 MYTH, EITUAL, AND RELIGION,


pustion of the latest Purana, religious and mythopmic
fancy was never at rest,

Various motives induced various poets to assign,
on various occasions, the highest powers to this
or the other god, The most antique legends were
probably omitted or softened by some early Vedic
bard (Rishi) of noble genius, or again impure myths
were brought from the obscurity of oral circulation
and foisted into literature by some poet less divinely
inspired. Old deities were half-forgotten, and for-
gotten deities were resuscitated. Sages shook off
superstitious bonds, priests forged new fetters on
ancient patterns for themselves and their flocks,
Philosophy explained away the more degrading myths;
myths as degrading were suggested to dark and ser-
vile hearts by unscientific etymologies. Over the
whole mass of ancient mythology the new mythology
of a debased Brahmanic ritualism grew like some
juxurious and baneful parasite, It is enough for our
purpose if we can show that even in the purest and
most antique mythology of India the element of tra-
ditional savagery survived and played its part, and
that the irrational legends of the Vedas and Brah-
manas can often be explained as relics of savage philo-
sopby or faith, or as novelties planned on the ancient
savage model, whether borrowed or native to the
The oldest documents of Indian mythology are the
Vedas, usually reckoned ag four in number. The
oldest, again, of the four, is the Sanita (* collec-
tion”) of the Rig-Veda. It is oa purely lyrical assort-


RIG-VEDA. 217


ment of the songs “which the Hindus brought with
them from their ancient homes on the banks of the
Indus.” In the manuscripts, the hymns are classified
according to the families of poets to whom they are
ascribed. Though composed on the banks of the
Indus by sacred bards, the hymns were compiled and
arranged in India proper. At what date the oldest
hymns of which this collection is made up were first
chanted, it is impossible to say with even approximate
certainty. Opinions differ, or have differed, between
2400 B.C. and 1400 BC, as the period when the
earliest sacred lyrics of the Veda may first have been
listened to by gods and men. In addition to the
Jtig- Feda, we have the Sanhita of the Sama-Veda,
“an anthology taken from the ik-SamAite, compris-
ing those of its verses which were intended to be
chanted at the ceremonies of the soma sacrifice.”!
It is conjectured that the hymns of the Sama- Veda
were borrowed from the Rig-Veda before the latter
had been edited and stereotyped into its present form.
Next comes the Fajyur-Veda, “which contains the
formulas for the entire sacrificial ceremonial, and
indeed forms its proper foundations,” the other Vedas
being devoted to the soma sacrifice” The Yajur-
Feda bas two divisions, known as the Black and
the White Yajur, which have common matter, but
differ in arrangement. The Black Yajur-Veda is also
called the Twittirya, and it is described as “a motley


1 Weber, Mistory of Indian Literature, Eng. transl, p. 63.
® Weber, p. 86,


218 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


undigested jumble of different pieces."' Last comes
the Atharva- Veda, not always regarded as a Veda
properly speaking. It derives its name from an old
semi-mythical priestly family, the Atharvans, and is
full of magical formulw, imprecations, folk-lore, and
spells, There are good reasons for thinking this late
as collection, however early may be the magical ideas
expressed in ita contents."

Between the Vedas, or, at all events, between the
oldest of the Vedas, and the compilation of the Brah-
manas, these “canonised explanations of a canonised
text,”" it is probable that some centuries and many
social changes intervened.*

If we would criticise the documents for Indian
mythology in a scientific manner, it is now necessary
that we should try to discover, as far as possible, the
social and religious condition of the people among
whom the Vedas took shape. Were they in any sense
“primitive,” or were they civilised? Was their reli-
gion in its obscure beginnings, or was it already a


' "Weber, p. 87. The name Tuittirys is derived from a partridge,
or from o Rishi named Partridge in Sanskrit There is a story that
the pupils of a ange were turned into partridges, to pick up sacred
texts,

* Barth (Lea Religions de [' Inde, p. 6) thinks that the existence of
such a collection as the Atharva- Veda is implied, perhaps, in a text of
the Aiy-Feda, x. 90, 9.

* Whitney, Oriental and Lingwistic Studies, First Sories, P- 4.

* Max Miiller, Biographical Emays, p, 20, “Tho prose portions
presuppose the bytons, and, to judge from the utter inak ity of the
authors of the Brahmanas to understand the antiquated language of
the hymas, these Hrahmanss must be ascribed to a much later period
than that which gave birth to the hymns,"


SOCIAL STATE OF VEDIC INDIA. 219


special and peculiar development, the fruit of many
ages of thought? Now it is an unfortunate thing that
scholars have constantly, and as it were involuntarily,
drifted into the error of regarding the Vedas as if
they were “ primitive,” as if they exhibited to us the
 verms” and “ genesis” of religion and mythology, as
if they contained the simple thongh strange utterances
of primitive thought.’ Thus Mr. Whitney declares, in
his Oriental and Linguistic Studies, “that the Vedas
exhibit to us the very earliest germs of the Hindu
culture.” Mr. Max Miller avers that “no country
can be compared to India as offering opportunities for
a real study of the genesis and growth of religion,” *
Yet the same scholar observes that “even the earliest
specimens of Vedic poetry belong to the modern
history of the race, and that the early period of the
historical growth of religion had passed away before
the Rishis (bards) could have worshipped their Devas
or bright beings with sacred hymns and invocations.”
Though this is manifestly true, the sacred hymns and
Invecations of the Rishis are constantly used as
testimony bearing on the beginning of the historical
growth of religion. Nay, more; these remains of
“the modern history of the race” are supposed to
exhibit mythology in the process of making, as if the


race had possessed no mythology before it reached a


comparatively modern period, the Vedic age. In the
same spirit, Dr. Muir, the learned editor of Sanstrit
Trels, speaks in one place as if the Vedie hymns


' Max Miller, Aij- Veda Sanita, p. vii.
* Hibbert Lectures, p. 131.


220 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


“illustrated the natural workings of the human mind
in the period of its infancy.”! A brief examination
of the social and political and religious condition of
man, as described by the poets of the Vedas, will
prove that his infancy had long been left behind him
when the first Vedic hymns were chanted.

As Barth observes, the very ideas which permeate
the Veda, the idea of the mystic efficacy of sacrifice, of
brahma, prove that the poems are profoundly sacer-
dotal ; and this should haye given pause to the writers
who have persisted in representing the hymns as the
work of primitive shepherds praising their gods as
they feed their flocks? In the Vedic ace the ranks of
society are already at least as clearly defined as in
Homeric Greece, ‘We men,” says a poet of the Riy-
Feda,* “ have all our different imaginations and designs.
The carpenter seeks something that is broken, the
doctor a patient, the priest some one who will offer
libations... .. The artisan continually seeks after
& man with plenty of gold.....I am a poet, my
father is a doctor, and my mother is a prinder of corn.”
Chariots and the art of the chariot-builder are as fre-
quently spoken of as in the JViad. Spears, swords, axes,
and coats of mail were in common use, The art of boat-
building or of ship-building was well known. Kine
charactor of Vea faith than the an ast te fa er Pes
defended against the attacks of sceptics. The impious denied the
existence of Indra because he waa invisible, Mig- Veda, ii, 12, § ; vill
59, 3; ¥. 30, 1-2; vi. 27, 3- Bergaigne, ii, 167. “Es gibt keinen
Indra, so hat der cine und der andere gesagt " (Ludwig's version),

des Religion de {'Inde, p. 27.


VEDIC SOCIETY. 331


and horses, sheep and dogs, had long been domesti-
cated. The bow was o favourite weapon, and warriors
fought in chariots, like the Homeric Greeks and the
Egyptians. Weaving was commonly practised, The
people probably lived, as a rule, in village settlements,
but cities or fortified places were by no means un-
known.’ As for political society, “ kings are frequently
mentioned in the hymns,” and “it was regarded as
eminently beneficial for a king to entertain a family
priest,” on whom he was expected to confer thousands
of kine, lovely slaves, and lumps of gold. In the
family polygamy existed, probably as the exception.
There is reason to suppose that the brother-in-law
was permitted, if not expected, to “raise up seed”
to his dead brother, as among the Hebrews.* As to
literature, the very structure of the hymns proves that
it was elaborate and consciously artistic. M. Barth
writes,” “It would be a great mistake to speak of the
primitive naivefé of the Vedic poetry and religion.”
Both the poetry and the religion, on the other hand,
display in the highest degree the mark of the sacerdo-
tal spirit. The myths, though originally derived from
nature-worship, in an infinite majority of cases only
reflect natural phenomena through a veil of ritualistic
corruptions.’ The rigid division of castes is seldom

1 Ludwig, Rig-Feda, iii, 203. The burgs were fortified with wooden
palisades, capable of boing destroyed by fire. “Cities may be too
magnificent a word for what perhaps were more like pads, But com-
pare Kaegi, The Rig-Veda, note 42, Engl transl. Kaegi's book (trans.
lated by Dr. Arrowsmith, Boston, U.S., 1886) is probably the best short
manual of the subject,

2 Deut. xxv. 5; Matt. xxii 24.


* Revue de Histoire des Religions, i, 245,
‘ Ludwig, iii, 262,


222 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


recognised in the Rig-Veda. We seem to see caste
in the making.’ The Rishis and priests of the princely
families were on their way to becoming the all-
powerful Brahmans. The kings and princes were on
their way to becoming the caste of Kshatriyas or
warriors. The mass of the people was soon to sink
into the caste of Vaisyas and broken men. WNon-
Aryan aborigines and others were possibly developing
into the caste of Sudras. Thus the spirit of division
and of ceremonialism had still some of its conquests
fo achieve. But the extraordinary attention given
and the immense importance assigned to the details
of sacrifice, and the supernatural efficacy constantly
attributed to a sort of magical asceticism (tapas,
austere fervour), proves that the worst and most foolish
elements of later Indian society and thought were
in the Vedic age already in powerful existence.

Thus it is self-evident that the society in which the
Vedic poets lived was so far from being primitive, that
it was even superior to the higher barbarisms (such as
that of the Scythians of Herodotus and Germans of

* On this wubject see Muir, i. 192, with the remarks of Hang.
“From all we know, the real origin of caste seome to go back to a time
anterior to the composition of the Vedic hymms, though its develop-


the subject from the word Srakm, that is, prayer with a mystical
efficacy, as his starting-point, From brakm, prayer, came braid, be
who pronounces the prayers and performs the rite. This celebrant
developed into a priest, whom to entertain brought blessings on kings.
This domestic chaplaincy (conferring peculiar and even cuperniatural
benefits) became hereditary in families, and these, united by common
interests, exalted themselves into the Brahman caste. But in the
Vedic age gifts of prayer and poetry alone marked out the purohitas,
or arn put forward to mediate between gods and mortals, Compare
Ludwig, if, 231.


VEDIC SOCIETY. 223


Tacitus), and might be regarded as safely arrived at
the threshold of civilisation. Society possessed kings,
though they may have been kings of small communities,
like those who warred with Joshua or fought under
the walls of Thebes or Troy. Poets were better paid
than they seem to have been at the courts of Homer, or
are at the present time. For the tribal festivals special
priests were appointed, “ who distinguished themselves
by their comprehensive knowledge of the requisite rites
and by their learning, and amongst whom a sort of
rivalry is gradually developed, according as one tribe
or another is supposed to have more or less prospered
by its sacrifices.”"' In the family marriage is sacred,
and traces of polyandry and of the levirate, surviving
ns late as the epic poems, were regarded as things that
need to be explained away. Perhaps the most savage
feature in Vedic society, the most singular relic of a
distant past, is the survival, even in a modified and
symbolic form, of human sacrifice.’

As to the religious condition of the Vedic Aryans,
we must steadily remember that in tha Vedas we have
the views of the Rishis only, that is, of sacred pocts
on their way to becoming a sacred caste. Necessarily
: they no more represent the popular creeda than the
7 psalmists and prophets, with their lofty monotheistic
morality, represent the popular creeds of Israel. The
faith of the Rishis, as will be shown later, like that of
the pealmists, has a noble moral aspect. Consciousness


+ Weber, p. 37.

* Wildon, Rig-Veda, i. p. 9-63; Muir, i, ii; Wileon, Rig- Feds,
~ i. p. xxiv,, ii. § (IL 90); dlitareya Brakmana, Haug’s version, vol. i.
: Pp 462, 469.


ae


224 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


of sin, of imperfection in the sight of divine beings,
has been developed, and is often confessed. But on
the whole, the religion of the Rishis is practical—it
might almost be said, is magical. They desire temporal
blessings, rain, sunshine, long life, power, wealth in
flocks and herds, The whole purpose of the sncrifices
which oceupy so much of their time and thought is to
pbtain these good things. The sacrifice and the sasecri-
ficer come between gods and men. On the man’s side
is faith, munificence, a compelling force of prayer, and
of intentness of will, The sacrifice invigorates the
gods to do the will of the sacrificer ; it is supposed to
be mystically celebrated in heaven as well as on earth
—the gods are always sacrificing. Often (as when
rain is wanted) the sacrifice imitates the end which it
is desirable to gain.’ In all these matters a minute
ritual is already observed. The mystic word brahma,
in the sense of hymn or prayer of a compelling and
magical efficacy, has already come into use. The
brahma answers almost to the Maori karakia or incan-
ation and charm. “This brahme of Visvamitra pro-
tects the tribe of Bharata.” “ Atri with the fourth
prayer discovered the sun concealed by unholy dark-
ness.”* The complicated ritual, in which prayer and
sacrifice were supposed to exert a constraining influence
on the supernatural powers, already existed, Haug
thinks, in the time of the chief Rishis of hymnists of
the Pig- Veda."


1 Compare “The Prayers of Savages” in J. A. Farrer's Primitive
Mannerz, and Ludwig, iii. 262-296, and see Bergaigne, La. Religion
Vidique, vol. L p. 124,

3 Bee texts in Muir, £. 242.

* Preface to translation of Aitareya Arakmana, p, 36,


VEDIC FETISHISM. 225


In many respects the nature of the idea of the divine,
as entertained by the Kishis of the Sig- Verda, is still
matter for discussion. In the chapter on Vedic gods
such particulars as can be ascertained will be given.
Roughly speaking, the religion is a cult of depart-
mental gods, originally, in certain cases, forces of
Nature, but endowed with moral earnestness. As to
fetishiam in the Vedas the opinions of the learned are
divided. M. Bergaigne’ looks on the whole ritual as,
_ practically, an organised fetishism, employed to in-
fluence gods of a far higher and purer character. Mr.
Max Miiller ? remarks, “ that stones, bones, shells, herbs,
and all the other so-called fetishes, are simply absent
in the old hymns, though they appear in more modern
hymns, particularly those ofthe dAtharva-Veda. When
artificial objects are mentioned and celebrated in the
Rig- Veda, they are only such as might be praised even
by Wordsworth or Tennyson—charicts, bows, quivers,
axes, drums, sacrificial vessels, and similar objects.
They never assume any individual character; they are
simply mentioned as useful or precious, it may be as
sacred,”

When the existence of fetish "herbs" is denied by
Mr. Max Miiller, he does not, of course, forget Soma,
that divine juice. It is also to be noted that in
modern India, as Mr. Max Miiller himself observes,
Sir Alfred Lyall finds that “the husbandman prays to
his plough and the fisher to his net,” these objects
being, at present, fetishes. In opposition to Mr. Max

1 La Religion Vedique, vol. i. p.123. “Le cnlte est assimilable dans
une certaine mesure anx incantations, aux pratiques magiques.”


® Hibbert Lectures, p. 198.
TOL. L P


226 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Miller, Barth avers that the same kind of fetishism
which flourishes to-day, flourishes in the Fig- Veda.
* Mountains, rivers, springs, trees, herbs are invoked as
so many powers. The beasts which live with man—
the horse, the cow, the dog, the bird, and the animals
which imperil his existence—receive a cult of praise and
prayer. Among the instruments of ritual, some objects
are more than things consecrated—they are divinities ;
and the war-chariot, the weapons of defence and offence,
the plough, are the objects not only of benedictions but
of prayers."’ These absolute contradictions on matters
of fact add, of course, to the difficulty of understanding
the early Indo-Aryan religion. One authority says that
the Vedic people were fetish-worshippers; another
authority denies it.

Were the Rishis ancestor-worshippers? Barth has
no doubt whatever that they were. In the pitris or
fathers he recognises ancestral spirits, now “ com-
panions of the gods, and gods themselves. At ee
head appear the earliest celebrants of the sacrifie
Atharvan, the Angiras, the Kavis (the pitris,. oar
excellence) equals of the greatest gods, spirits who, by
dint of sacrifice, drew forth the world from chaos, gave
birth to the sun, and lighted the stars,"—cosmical
feats which, as we have seen, are commonly attributed
by the lower races to their idealised heroic ancestors,
the * old, old ones” of Anstralians and Ovahereroes

A few examples of invocations of the ancestral
spirits may not be out of place.* “May the fathers


* Barth, Le Religions de [Jnde, p. 7, with the Vodic texta,
5 Rig-Veda, vi. §2, 4.


VEDIC ANCESTOR-WORSHIP. 227


protect me in my invocation of the gods." Here is a
curious case, especially when we remember how the
wolf, in the North American myth, scattered the stars
like spangles over the sky: “The fathers have adorned
the sky with stars”!

Important as is the element of ancestor-worship in
the evolution of religion, Mr. Max Miiller, in his Hibbert
Lectures, merely remarks that thoughts and feelings
about the dead “supplied some of the earliest and
most important elements of religion;” but how these
earliest elements affect his system does not appear.
On o general view, then, the religion of the Vedic
poets contained a vast number of clements in solution—
élements such as meet us in every quarter of the
globe. The belief in ancestral ghosts, the adoration
of fetishes, the devotion to a moral ideal, contem-
plated in the persons of various deities, who have
been, and partly remain, personal natural forces, are
all mingled, and all are drifting towards o kind of
pantheism, in which, while everything is divine, and
gods are reckoned by millions, the worshipper has
glimpses of one single divine essence. The ritual, as we
have seen, is more or less magical in character. The
general elements of the beliefs are found, in various
Proportions, everywhere; the pantheistic mysticism
is almost peculiar to India. It is, perhaps, needless

1 Rig- Veda, x. 68, xi.

Mr, Whitney (Oriental and Linguistic Studies, First Series, Pp 59)
gives examples of the ceremony of feeding the Aryan ghost. “The


fathers are supposed to assemble, upon due invocation, about the altar
of him who would pay them homage, toscat themselves upon the straw


or matting spread for each of the guests invited, and to partake of the


offerings set before them." The food seema chiefly to consist of rice,
steamed, and honey, ip


228 MYTH, RITUAL AND RELIGION,


to repeat that a faith so very composite, and already so
strongly differentiated, cannot possibly be “ primitive,”
and that the beliefs and practices of a race so highly
organised in society and so well equipped in material
civilisation as the Vedic Aryans cannot possibly be
“near the beginning.” Far from expecting to find in
the Veda the primitive myths of the Aryans, we must
remember that myth had already, when these hymns
were sung, become obnoxious to the religious sentiment.
“Thus,” writes Barth, “the authors of the hymns have
expurgated, or at least left in the shade, a vast number
of legends older than their time; such, for example,
a3 the identity of soma with the moon, as the account
of the divine families, of the parricide of Indra, and a
long list might be made of the reficences of the Veda.
- It would be difficult to extract from the hymns
a chapter on the loves of the gods. The goddesses
are veiled, the adventures of the gods are scarcely
touched on in passing. ... We must allow for the
moral delicacy of the singers, and for their dislike
peaking too precisely about the gods. Sometimes
it seems as if their chief object was to avoid plain-
speaking. . . . But often there is nothing save jargon
and cuidate of mind in this voluntary obscurity, for
already in the Veda the Indian intellect is deeply
smitten with its inveterate malady of affecting mystery
the more, the more it has nothing to conceal; the
mania for scattering symbols which symbolise no
reality, and for sporting with riddles which it is not
worth while to divine.”* Such is the natural judg-


I Les Relizions de C Inde, p. 21.


AGE OF HYMNS, a5


ment of the clear French intellect on the wilfully
obscure, tormented, and evasive intellect of India,

Tt would be interesting were it possible to illumi-
nate the criticism of Vedie religion by ascertaining
which hymns in the Rig-Veda are the most ancient,
and which are later. Could we do this, we might
draw inferences as to the comparative antiquity of the
religious ideas in the poems. But no such diserimi-
nation of relative antiquity seems to _be within the
reach of critica. M. Bergaigne thinks it impossible
at present to determine the relative age of = hymns
by any philological test, The ideas expres:
more easily arrayed in order of date, We nila think
that the poems which contain. most ceremonial allu-
sions were the latest. But Mr. Max Miiller' says that
“even the earliest hymns have sentiments worthy of
the most advanced ceremonialists.”

The first and oldest source of our knowledge of
Indo-Aryan myths is the Aig- Veda, whose nature and
character have been described, The second source is
the Atharva- Veda with the Brahmanas. The peculiarity
of the dtiarva is its collection of magical incantations,
spells, and fragments of folk-lore. These are often,
doubtless, of the highest antiquity. Sorcery and the arts
of medicine-men are earlier in the course of evolution
than priesthood. We meet them everywhere among
races who have not developed the institution of an order
of priests serving national gods, As a collection, the
Atharva- Veda is later than the Rig- Veda, but we need
not therefore conclude that the ideas of the Atharva

| History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 556.


239 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


are “a later development of the more primitive ideas
of the Rig- Veda.” Magic is quod semper, quod whique,
quod ab omnibus; the ideas of the Atharva-Veda ore
everywhere; the peculiar notions of the Aig-Veda
are the special property of an advanced and highly
differentiated people. Even in the present collected
shape, M. Barth thinks that many hymns of the
Atharva are not much later than those of the Aig-
Veda. Mr. Whitney, admitting the lateness of the
Atharva as « collection, says, “This would not neces-
sarily imply that the main body of the Atharra hymns
were not already in existence when the compilation of
the Jig- Veda took place.”"* The Atiarva refers to
some poets of the Aig (as certain hymnists in the Rig
also do) as earlier men. If in the Rig (as Weber says)
“there breathes o lively natural feeling, a warm love
of nature, while in the Atiarea, on the contrary, there
predominates an anxious apprehension of evil spirits
and their magical powers,” it by no means follows that
this apprehension is of later origin than the lively
feeling for Nature, Rather the reverse. There appears
to be no doubt* that the etyle and language of the
Atharva are later than those of the Rig. Roth, who
recognises the change in language and style, yet con-
siders the Atharva “ part of the old literature.”? He
concludes that the Atharra contains many pieces which,
“ both by their style and ideas, are shown to be con-
temporary with the older hymns of the Rig- Veda.”
In religion, according to Muir,* the A‘larra shows


* Journal of the American Oriental Society, iv. 253.
* Muir, ii. 496, 2 Muir, iL 445. * Muir, ii. g5t.


ATHARVA-VEDA. 231


progress in the direction of monotheism in ‘its cele-
bration of Brahman, but it also introduces serpent-

As to the Atharra, then, we are free to suppose, if
we like, that the dark magic, the evil spirits, the in-
cantations, are old parts of Indian, as of all other
popular beliefs, though they come later into literature
than the poetry about Ushas and the morality of
Varuna. The same remarks apply to’ our third source
of information, the Brahmanas. These are indubitably
comments on the sacred texts very much more modern
in form than the texts themselves. But it does not
follow, and this is most important for our purpose,
that the myths in the Brahmanas are all later than
the Vedic myths or corruptions of the Veda. Muir
remarks,’ “The Rig- Veda, though the oldest collec-
tion, does not necessarily contain everything that is
of the greatest age in Indian thought or tradition.
We know, for example, that certain legends, bearing
the impress of the highest antiquity, such as that of
the deloge, appear first in the Brahmanas.". We are
especially interested in this criticism, because most of
the myths which we profess to explain as survivals of
savagery are narrated in the Brahmanas. If these are
necessarily late corruptions of Vedic ideas, because the’
collection of the Brahmanas is far more modern than
that of the Vida, our argument is instantly disproved.
But if ideas of an earlicr stratum of thought than the
Vedic stratum may appear in a later collection, as ideas
of an earlier stratum of thought than the Homeric

1 Muir, iv. 450


272 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


appear in poetry and prose far later than Homer, then
our contention is legitimate. It will be shown in
effect that a number of myths of the Brahmanas corre-
spond in character and incident with the myths of
savages, such as Cahrocs and Ahts. Our explanation
"18, that these tales partly survived, in the minds per-
haps of conservative local priesthoods, from the savage
stage of thonght, or were borrowed from aborigines in
that stage, or were moulded in more recent times on
surviving examples of that wild early fancy,

In the age of the Brahmanas the people have
spread southwards from the basin of the Indus to
that of the Ganges, The old sacred texts have begun
to be scarcely comprehensible. The priesthood has
become much more strictly defined and more rigo-
rously constituted, Absurd as if may seem, the
Vedie metres, like the Gayatri, have been personified,
and sppear as active heroines of stories presumably
older than this personification. The Asuras haye de-
scended from the rank of gods to that of the heayenly
opposition to Indra’s government; they are now a kind
of fiends, and the Brahmanas are occupied with long
stories about the war in heaven, itself a very ancient
conception, Varuna becomes cruel on occasion, and
hostile. Prajapati becomes the great mythical hero,
and inherits the wildest myths of the savage heroic
beasts and birds.

The priests are now Brahmans, a hereditary divine
caste, who possess all the vast and puerile knowledge
of ritual and sacrificial minutim. As life in the opera
is a series of songs, so life in the Brahmanas is


OBSCURITY OF HYMNS, 233


sequence of sacrifices, Sacrifice makes the sun rise
and set, and the rivers run this way or that.

The study of Indian myth is obstructed, as has been
shown, by the difficulty of determining the relative
dates of the various legends, but there are a myriad
other obstacles to the study of Indian mythology.
A poet of the Vedas * says, “The chanters of hymns
go about enveloped in mist, and unsatisfied with idle
talk.” The ancient hymns are still “enveloped in
mist,” owing to the difficulty of their language and
the variety of modern renderings and interpretations.
The heretics of Vedic religion, the opponents of the
orthodox commentators in ages comparatively recent,
used to complain that the Vedas were simply non-
sense, and their authors “knaves and _ buffoons.”
There are moments when the modern student of Vedic
myths is inclined to echo this petulant complaint.
For example, it is difficult enongh to find in the Jitg-
Feda anything like a categorie account of the gods,
and a description of their personal appearance. But
in Rig- Veda viii. 29, 1, we read of one god, “a youth,
brown, now hostile, now friendly; a golden lustre
invests him.” Who is this youth? “Soma as the
moon,” according to the commentators. M. Langlois
thinks the sun is meant. Dr. Aufrecht thinks the
troop. of Maruts (spirits of the storm), to whom, he
remarks, the epithet “dark-brown, tawny” is as appli-
cable as it is to their master, Rudra.” This is rather
confusing, and a mythological inquirer would like to


| Rig- Veda, x. 82, 7, but compare Bergaigne, op. cit., ili. 72, “envel-
oppes de nudes et de murmures.”


234 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


know for certain whether he is reading about the sun
or soma, the moon, or the winds,

To take another example; we open Mr. Max
Miller's translation of the Aig-Veda at random, say
at page 49. In the second verse of the hymn to the
Maruts, Mr. Miiller translates, “They who were born
together, self-luminous, with the spotted deer (the
clouds), the spears, the daggers, the glittering orna-
ments. I hear their whips almost close by, as they
crack them in their hands; they gain splendour on
their way.” Now Wilson translates this passage,
“Who, borne by spotted deer, were born self-lnminous,
with weapons, war-cries, and decorations, I hear the
cracking of their whips in their hands, wonderfully
inspiring courage in the fight.” Benfey has, “ Who
with stags and spears, and with thunder and lightning,
self-lnminous, were born. Hard by rings the crack
of their whip as it sounds in their hands; bright fare
they down in storm.” Langlois translates, “ Just born
are they, self-luminous. Mark ye their arms, their
decorations, their car drawn by deer? Hear ye their
clamour? Listen! 'tis the noise of the whip they hold
in their hands, the sound that stirs up courage in the
battle.” This is an ordinary example of the diversities
of Vedic translation. It is sufficiently puzzling, nor is
the matter made more transparent by the variety of
opinion as to the meaning of the “ deer” along with
which the Marnts are said (by some of the translators)
to have been born. This is just the sort of passage on
which a controversy affecting the whole nature of Vedic
mythological ideas might be raised. According to a


|


DIFFICULTY OF INTERPRETATION. 235


text in the Fajur Veda, gods, and men, and beasts,
and other matters were created from various portions
of the frame of a divine being named Prajapati.' The
god Agni, Brahmans, and the goat were born from
the mouth of Prajapati. From his breast and arms
eame the god Indra (sometimes spoken of as a ram),
the sheep, and of men the Rajanya. Cows and gods
ealled Visvadevas were born together from his middle.
Are we to understand the words “ they who were born
together with the spotted deer” to refer to a myth
of this kind—a myth representing the Maruts and deer
as having been born at the same birth, as Agni came
with the goat, and Indra with the sheep? This is
just the point on which the Indian commentators were
divided? Sayana, the old commentator, says, “The
legendary school takes them for deer with white spots ;
the etymological school, for the many-coloured lines of
clouds.” The modern legendary (or anthropological)
and etymological (or philological) students of mytho-
logy are often as much at variance in their attempts
to interpret the traditions of India.

Another famous, and almost comic, example of the
difficulty of Vedic interpretation is well known. In
Rig- Vida, x. 16, 4, there is a foneral hymn. Agni,
the fire-god, is supplicated either to roast a goat or to
warm the soul of the dead and convey it to paradise.


‘Whether the soul is to be thus comforted or the goat


is to be grilled, is a question that has mightily puxzzled
Vedic doctors." Professsor Miiller and M. Langlois are
' Muir, Sanskrit Texts, 2d edit, f. 16.


* Max Miller, Rig- Veda Sanhifa, trans., vol. L p 59.
3 Muir, ¥. 217.


236 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


all for “the immortal soul ;" the goat has advocates, or
had advocates, in Aufrecht, Ludwig and Roth. More
important difficulties of interpretation are illustrated
by the attitude of M, Bergaigne in Za Religion Vedique,
and his controversy with the great German lexijco-
graphers. The study of mythology has of late made
the Vedas ita starting-point. But perhaps it would
be wise to begin from something more intelligible, -
something less perplexed by difficulties of language
and diversities of interpretation.

In attempting to criticise the various Aryan myths,
we shall be guided, on the whole, by the character of
the myths themselves. Pare and elevated conceptions
we shall be inclined to assign to a pure and elevated
condition of thought; and we shall make no diffi--
culty about believing that Rishis and singers capable
of noble conceptions existed in an age very remote in
time, in a society which had many of the features of a
lofty and simple civilisation. But we shall not, there-
fore, assume that the hymns of these Rishis are in any
sense “ primitive,” or throw much light on the infancy
of the human mind, or on the “ origin” of religious
and heroic myths. Impure, childish, and barbaric
conceptions, on the other hand, we shall be inclined
to attribute to an impure, childish, and barbaric con-
dition of thought; and we shall again make no
difficulty about believing that ideas originally con-
ceived when that stage of thought was general have
been retained and handed down to a far later period,
This view of the possible, or rather probable, antiquity
of many of the myths preserved in the Erahmanas


VEDA NOT PRIMITIVE. 237


is strengthened, if it needed strengthening, by the
opinion of Dr. Weber.’ “We must indeed assume
generally with regard to many of those legends (in
the Brahmanas of the Fiy-Veda) that they had
already gained a rounded independent shape in tradi-
tion before they were incorporated into the Brah-
manas; and of this we have frequent evidence in the
distinctly archave character of their language, compared
with that of the rest of the text.”

We have now briefly stated the nature and probable
relative antiquity of the evidence which is at the
disposal of Vedic mythologists. The chief lesson we
would enforce is the necessity of suspending the
judgment when the Vedas are represented as examples
of primitive and comparatively pure and simple
natural religion. They are not primitive; they are
highly differentiated, highly complex, extremely enig-
matic expressions of fairly advanced and very peculiar
religious thought. They are not morally so very pure
as has been maintained, and their purity, such as it is,
seams the result of conscious reticence and wary selec-
tion rather than of primeval innocence. Yet the
bards or editors have by no means wholly excluded


very ancient myths of a thoronghly savage character.


These will be chiefly exposed in the chapter on “ Indo-
Aryan Myths of the Beginnings of Things,” which
follows.

1 History of [ndian Literature, English trans, p. 47.


( 238 )


CHAPTER VIII.


INDIAN MYTHS OF THE ORIGIN OF THE
WORLD AND OF MAN,


Comparison of Vedic and asvage myths —'The metaphysical Vedie
account of the beginning of things—Opposite and savage fable of
world made out of fragments of a man—Discussion of this hymn
—Absurditics of Sraimanas—Prajapati, a Vedie Unkulunkula or
Qat— Evolutionary mythsa—Marrlage of heaven and earth—Mvythe
of Puranas, their savage parallela—Most savage mnyths are repeated
in Srakmenag,


Ix discussing the savage myths of the origin of the
world and of man, we observed that they were as
inconsistent as they were fanciful. Among the fancies
embodied in the myths was noted the theory that the
world, or various parts of it, had been formed ont of
the body of some huge non-natural being, a god, or
giant, or a member of some ancient mysterious race.
We also noted the myths of the original union of
heaven and earth, and their violent separation as
displayed in the tales of Greeks and Maoris, to which
may be added the Acagchemem nation in California!
Another feature of savage cosmogonies, illustrated
especially in some early Slavonic myths, in Australian
legends, and in the faith of the American races, Was
* Bancroft, ¥, 162.
1


SAVAGE PARALLELS TO VEDIC MYTHS. 239


the creation of the world, or the recovery of a drowned
world by animals, as the raven, the dove, and the
coyote. The hatching of all things out of an egg
was another rude conception, chiefly noted among the
Finns. The Indian form occurs in the Satepatha
Frakmana.’ The preservation of the human race in
the Deluge, or the creation of the race after the
Delonge, was yet another detail of savage mythology ;
and for many of these fancies we seemed to find


a satisfactory origin in the exceedingly credulous
and confused state of Bavage philosophy and savage


The question now to be asked is, do the traditions
the Aryans of India supply us with myths so
closely resembling the myths of Nootkas, Maoris,
and Australians that we may provisionally explain
them as stories originally due to the invention of
savages? This question may be answered in the
affirmative. The Vedas, the Epics, and the Puranas
contain a large store of various cosmogonic traditions
as Inconsistent as the parallel myths of savages. We
have an Aryan Ilmarinean, Tvashtri, who, like the
Finnish smith, forged “the iron vanlt of hollow
heaven” and the ball of earth* Again, the earth
is said to have sprung, as in some Mangaian fables,
“from a being called Uttenapad.”” Again, Brah-
manaspati, “blew the gods forth like a blacksmith,”
and the gods had a hand in the making of things.
In contrast with these childish pieces of anthropo-


l Sacred Books of the East, i. a6. * Muir, ¥. 354.
* Rig-Veda, x. 72, 4.
i


240 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


morphism, we have the famous and sublime specula-
tions of an often-quoted hymn.’ It is thus that the
poet dreams of the days before being and non-being
ee i
“There was then neither non-entity nor entity ;

there was no atmosphere nor sky above. What enve-
loped [all]? . . . Was it water, the profound abyss ?
Death was not then, nor immortality: there was no
distinction of day or night. That One breathed
calmly, self-supported ; then was nothing different from
it, or above it. In the beginning darkness existed,
enveloped in darkness. All this was undistinguishable
water. That One which lay void and wrapped in
nothingness was developed by the power of fervour.
Desire first arose in It, which was the primal germ
of mind, [and which] sages, searching with their
intellect, have discovered to be the bond which con-
nects entity with non-entity. The ray [or cord] which
stretched across these [worlds], was it below or was
it above? There were there impregnating powers
and mighty forces, a self-supporting principle beneath
and energy aloft, Who knows? who here can declare
whence has sprung, whence this creation? The gods
are subsequent to the development of this [universe] ;
who then knows whence it arose? From what this
ereation arose, and whether [any one] made it or
not, he who in the highest heaven is its ruler, he
verily knows, or [even] he does not know,” *

Here there is a Vedic hymn of the origin of things,


1 Rig. Veda, x, 120,
* Muir, Sanabrit Texts, ad edit., v. 357.


—


. SS —_— =


THE HYMN OF THE BEGINNING. 241


from a book, it is true, supposed to be late, which is
— if not absolutely, free from mythological ideas.
The “self-supporting principle beneath and energy
aloft” may F veliz, as Dr. Muir suggests, to the father,
heaven above, and the mother, earth beneath. The
“bond between entity and non-entity" is sought in
a favourite idea of the Indian philosophers, that of
fapas or “fervour.” The other speculations remind
us, though they are much more restrained and tem-
perate in character, of the metaphysical chants of the
New Zealand priests :—


“The nothing increasing
The nothing, the finishing,
The going on from the nothing,”


What is the relative age of this hymn? If it conld
be proved to be the oldest in the Veda, it would demon-
strate no more than this, that in time exceedingly
remote the Aryans of India possessed a philosopher,
perhaps a school of philosophers, who applied the
minds to abstract speculations on the origin of things.
Tt could not prove that mythological speculations had
not preceded the attempts of a purer philosophy. But
the date cannot be ascertained. Mr. Max Miiller can-
not go farther than the suggestion that the hymm is
an expression of the perennis quedam philosophia of
Leibnitz. We are also warned that a hymn is not
necessarily modern because it is philosophical." We
are sob eohbiened to show that this hymn is late ;


1 History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 568.
VOL. L


242 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


but it seems almost superflnons to remark that ideas
like those which it contains can searcely be accepted
a3 expressing man’s earliest theory of the origin of all
things. Thought expressed in terms so abstract is
only possible, as philologists will admit, after language
has thrown off its first concrete and material forms.
Again, abstract cosmogenic speculation like that of the
hymn, is the rare exception, which we seldom meet
with except in the records of a civilised people. Crude
mythological speculations, on the other hand, a medley
of cosmogonic gods and beasts and men, is the general
rule, guod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus. We
turn, therefore, from the ideas which are exhibited so
rarely to those which the Aryans of India have in
common with black men and red men, with far-
off Finns and Scandinavians, Chaldeans, Haidahs,
Cherokees, Murri and Maori, Mangaians and Egyp-
tians,

The next Vedic account of creation which we pro-
pose to consider is as remote as possible in character
from the sublime philosophic poem. In the Purusha
Suita, the ninetieth hymn of the tenth book of the
itig- Veda Sanhita, we have o description of the crea-
tion of all things out of the severed limbs of a mag-
nified non-natural man, Porusha, This conception is
of course that which occurs in the Norse myths of the
rent body of Ymir, Borr’s sons took the body of the
Giant Ymir and of his flesh formed the earth, of his
blood seas and waters, of his bones mountains, of his
teeth rocks and stones, of his hair all manner of
plants, of his skull the firmament, of his brains the


Ls


THE MANGLED MAN-SACRIFICE. 243


clouds, and so forth. In Chaldean story, Bel cuts in
twain the magnified non-natural woman Omorea, and
converts the halves of her body into heaven and earth.
Among the Iroquois in North America, Chokanipok
was the giant whose limbs, bones, and blood furnished
the raw material of many natural objects; while in
Mangaia portions of Ru, in Egypt of Set and Osiris,
in Greece of Dionysus Zagreus were used in creating
various things, such as stones, plants, and metals,
The same ideas precisely are found in the ninetieth
hymn of the tenth book of the Rig- Veda, Yet it is
a singular thing that, in all the discussions as to the
antiquity and significance of this hymn which have
come under our notice, there has not been one single
non-Aryan peoples. In accordance with the general
oe. which guide us in this work, we are inclined

regard any ideas which are at once rude in char-
oe and widely distributed, both among civilised and
uncivilised races, as extremely old, whatever may be
the age of the literary form in which they are pre-
sented. Hut the current of learned opinions as to the
date of the Puruaha Sukta, the Vedic hymn about the
sacrifice of Purusha and the creation of the world out
of fragments of his body, rans in the opposite direction.
The hymn is not regarded as very ancient by most
Sanskrit scholars. We shall now quote the hymn,
which contains the data on which any theory as to its
age must be founded : '—

“ Purusha has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes,

1 Rig-Veda, x.90; Muir, Sanalrif Texts, 2d edit., i 9.


a thousand feet. On every side enveloping the
earth, he overpassed (it) by a space of ten fingers.
Purusha himself is this whole (universe), whatever
is and whatever shall be. . . . When the gods per-
formed a sacrifice with Purnsha as the oblation,
the spring was its butter, the summer its fuel, and the
autumn its (accompanying) offering. This victim,
Pornshs, born in the beginning, they immolated on
the sacrificial grass. With him the gods, the Sadhyas,
and the Rishis sacrificed. From that universal
sacrifice were provided curds and butter. It formed
those aerial (creatures) and animals both wild and
tame, rom that universal sacrifice sprang the Ric
and Saman verses, the metres and Yajush. From it
sprang horses, and all animals with two rows of teeth;
kine sprang from it; from it goats and sheep. When
(the gods) divided Purusha, into how many parts did
they cut him up? What was his mouth? What
arms (had he)? What (two objects) are said (to have
been) his thighs and feet? The Brahman was his
mouth; the Rajanya was made his arms; the being
(called) the Vaisya, he was his thighs; the Sudra
sprang from his feet. The moon sprang from his soul
(Mahas), the. sun from his eye, Indra and Agni from
his mouth, and Vaiyu from his breath, From his
navel srose the air, from his head the sky, from his
feet the earth, from his ear the (four) quarters; in
this manner (the gods) formed the world, When the
gods, performing sacrifice, bound Purnsha ag a victim,
there were seven sticks (stuck up) for it (around the
fire), and thrice seven pieces of fuel were made, With


DATE OF PURUSHA SUKTA. 245


sacrifice the gods performed the sacrifice. These
were the earliest rites. These great powers have
sought the sky, where are the former Sadhyas,
gods.”

The myth here stated is plain enough in its
essential facts. The gods performed a sacrifice with
& gigantic anthropomorphic being (Purusha = Man) as
the victim. His head, like the head of Ymir, formed
the sky, his eye the sun, animals sprang from his
body. The four castes are connected with, and it
appears to be implied that they sprang from, his
month, arms, thighs, and feet. It is obvious that this
last part of the myth is subsequent to the formation of
castes. This is one of the chief arguments for the
late date of the hymn, as castes are not distinctly
recognised elsewhere in the Jiy-Vedea. Mr. Max
Miller’ believes the hymn to be “modern both in its
character and in its diction,” and this opinion he
supports by philological arguments. Dr. Muir* says
that the hymn “has every character of modernness
both in its diction and ideas.” Dr, Hang, on the
other hand,’ in a paper read in 1871, admits that the
present form of the hymn is not older than the greater
part of the hymns of the tenth book, and than those
of the dAfharra Freda; but he adds, “The ideas
which the hymn contains are certainly of a primeval
antiquity. ... In fact, the hymn is found in the
Yajur-Veda among the formulas connected with

' Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 570.


* Sonakrit Texts, 2d edit, L 12.
4 Jbid., 2d edit, fi, 463.


246 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


homan sacrifices, which were formerly practised in
Indis.” We have expressly declined to speak about
“primeval antiquity,” as we have scarcely any evidence
a8 to the myths and mental condition, for example, even
of palwolithic man; but we may so far agree with
Dr. Haug as to affirm that the fundamental idea of
the Purusha Sukta, namely, the creation of the world
or portions of the world out of the fragments of a
fabulous anthropomorphic being is common to Chal-
dean, Iroquois, Egyptians, Greeks, Tinnehs, Man-
faians, and Aryan Indians. This is presumptive
proof of the antiquity of the ideas which Dr. Muir and
Mr, Max Miiller think relatively modern. The savage
and brutal character of the invention needs no de-
monstration. Among very low savages, for example,
the Tinnehs of British North America, not a man, not
a god, but a doy, is torn up, and the fragments are
made into animals." On the Paloure River a beaver
suffers in the manner of Purnsha. We may, for these
‘reasons, regard the chief idea of the myths as ex-
tremely ancient—infinitely more ancient than the
dittion of the hymn. As to the mention of the castes,
supposed to be a comparatively modern institution,
that is not an essential part of the legend. When
the idea of creation out of a living being was once
received it was easy to extend the conception to any
institution, of which the origin was forgotten. The
Teutonic race had a myth which explained the origin
of the classes eorl, ceorl, and thrall (earl, churl, and
slave). A South American people, to explain the
‘ Hearne's Journey, pp. 342-343.


BRAHMANIC ABSURDITIES, 247


different ranks in society, hit on the very myth of
Plato, the legend of golden, silver, and copper races,
from which the ranks of society have descended. The
Indians, im our opinion, merely extended to the insti-
tution of caste a myth which had already explained
the origin of the sun, the firmament, animals, and so
forth, on the usual lines of savage thought. The
Purusha Subta is the type of many other Indian
myths of creation, of which the following’ one is
extremely noteworthy. “ Prajapati desired to pro-
pagate. He formed the Trivrit (stoma) from his
mouth. After it were produced the deity Agni, the
metre Gayatri, ... of men the Brahman, of beasts
the moabs <.<(~ form hia breast from his exne Jha
formed the Panchadasa (sfoma). After if were cre-
ated the god Indra, the Trishtubh metre, ... of
men the Rajanya, of beasts the sheep. Hence they
are vigorous, because they were created from vigour.
From his middle he formed the Saptadasa (soma).
After it were created the gods called the Visvadevas,
the Jagati metre,... of men the Vaisya, of beasts
kine. Hence they are to be eaten, because they were
created from the receptacle of food.” The form in
which we receive this myth is obviously later than
the institution of caste and the technical names for
metres. Yet surely any statement that kine “are
to be eaten” must be older than the universal pro-
hibition to eat that sacred animal the cow. Possibly
we might argue that when this theory of creation was


1 Twittirya Sanhita, or Yajur-Veda, vii. £ 1-4; Muir, 2d edit,
L th


248 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,
first promulgated, goats and sheep were forbidden
food.


Turning from the Vedas to the Brahmanas, we find
a curiously savage myth of the origin of species.”
According to this passage of the Brahmana, “this
universe was formerly sou! only, in the form of Purn-
sha.” He caused himself to fall asunder into two
parts, Thence arose a husband and a wife, “He
cohabited with her; from them men were born. She
reflected, ‘ How does he, after having produced me from
himself, cohabit with me? Ah, let me disappear.’
She became a cow, and the other a bull, and he
cohabited with her. From them kine were produced.”
After a series of similar metamorphoses of the female
into all animal shapes, and a similar series of pursuits
by the male in appropriate form, “ in this manner pairs
of all sorts of creaturea down to ants were created,”
This myth is a parallel to the various Greek legends
about the amours in bestial form of Zeus, Nemesis,
Cronus, Demeter, and other gods and goddesses. In


the Brahmanas this myth is an explanation of the


origin of species, and such an explanation as could
scarcely have occurred to a civilised mind. In other
myths in the Brahmanas, Prajapati creates men from
his body, or rather the fluid of his body becomes a
tortoise, the tortoise becomes a man (purusha), with
similar examples of speculation.’

‘Mr. M‘Lennan has drawn somo singular inferences from this
passage, connecting, aa it does, certain gods and certain classes of Inen


with certain animals, in & manner somewhat suggestive of totemism
(Fortnightly Review), February 1870,

* Satapatha Arahmana, xiv, 4, 2 - Muir, 2d edit., 1. 25,

* Similar tales are found among the A’honeds,


PRAJAPATI, MASTER OF LIFE, 249


Among all these Brahmana myths of the part taken
by Prajapati in the creation or evoking of things, the
question arises who was Prajapati? His réle is that
of the great Hare in American myth; he is a kind
of demiurge, and his name means “The Master of
Things Created,” like the American title of the chief
Manitou, “ Master of Life.”* Dr. Muir remarks that,
as the Vedic mind advances from mere divine beings
who “reside and operate in fire” (Agni), “dwell and
shine in the sun” (Surya), or “in the atmosphere”
(Indra), towards a conception of deity, “the farther
step would be taken of speaking of the deity under
such new names as Visvakarman and Prajapati.”
These are “ appellatives which do not designate any
imited functions connected with any single depart-
ment of Nature, but the more general and, abstract
notions of divine power operating in the production
and government of the universe.” Now the interest-
ing point is that round this new and abstract name
gravitate the most savage and the crudest myths,
exactly the myths we meet among Hottentots and
Nootkas. For example, among the Hottentots it is
Heitsi Eibib, among the Huarochiri Indians it 1s
Uiracocha, who confers, by curse or blessing, on the
animals their proper attributes and characteristics.’
In the Safapatha Brahmana it is Prajapati who takes
this part, that falls to rude culture-heroes of Hotten-
tots and Huarochiris.? How Prajapati made experi-
ments in a kind of state-asided evolution, so to speak,
® Avila, Fables of the Fneos, p. 127:

* English translation, ii, 361.


250 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


or evolution superintended and assisted from above,
will presently be set forth.

In the Puranas creation is a process renewed after
each kalpa, or vast mundane period. Brahma awakes
from his slumber, and finds the world » waste of
water. Then, just as in the American myths of the
coyote, and the Slavonic myths of the devil and the
doves, a boar or a fish or a tortoise fishes up the
world out of the waters. That boar, fish, tortoise, or
what not, is Brahma or Vishnu. This savage eon-
ception of the beginnings of creation in the act of
4 tortoise, fish, or boar is not first found in the
Puranas, as Dr. Muir points ont, but is indicated in the
Flack Yajur-Veda and in the Satapatha Brakmana.'
In the Safapatha Braimana, xiv. 1, 2, 11, we dis-
cover the idea, so common in savage myths—for
example, in that of the Navajoes—that the earth was
at first very small, a mere patch, and grew bigger
after the animal fished it up. “Formerly this earth
was only so large, of the size of a span. A boar
called Emusha raised her up.” Here the boar makes
ho pretence of being the incarnation of a god, but
is a mere boar sans phrase, like the creative coyote of
the Papogas and Chinooks, or the musk-rat of the
Tacullies, This is a good example of the development
of myths. Savages begin, as we saw, by regarding
various animals, spiders, grasshoppers, ravens, eagles,
cockatoos, as the creators or recoverers of the world,


As civilisation advances, those animals still perform
their beneficent functions, but are looked on as gods


' Muir, ad edit., vol. i p. 52


EVOLUTIONARY MYTHS. 251


disguise. In time the animals are often dropped
altogether, though they hold their place with great
tenacity in the ‘cosmnogonic traditions of the Aryans
in India, When we find the Satapatha Prahmana
alleging’ “that all creatures are descended from a
tortoise,” we stem to be among the rade Indians of
the Pacific Coast. But whon the tortoise is identified
with Aditya, and when Adityas prove to be solar
deities, sons of Aditi, and when Aditi is recognised
by Mr. Miiller as the Dawn, we see that the Aryan
mind has not been idle, but has added a good deal
to the esvage idea of the descent of men and beasts
from a tortoise."

Another feature of savage myths of creation we
found to be the introduction of a crude theory of
evolution. We saw that among the Potoyante tribe
of the Digger Indians, and among certain Australian
tribes, men and beasts were supposed to have been
slowly evolved and improved out of the forms first of
reptiles and then of quadrupeds. In the. mythologies
of the more civilised South. American races, the iden
of the survival of the fittest was otherwise expressed.
The gods made several attempts at creation, and
each set of created beings proving in one way or other
unsuited to its environment, was permitted to die
out or degenerated into apes, and was succeeded by
a set better adapted for survival.” In much the same


1 Muir, ad edit., vol. i. p. 54.
1 See 'Ternaux Compans" Nowrelies Annales dea Voyages, lextvi.’p. 5.
ee Hurricane World's


¥. by.
4 ‘This myth ix found in Popol Pua. A Chinook myth of the same
sort, Bancroft, v. 95.


252 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


way the Safapatha Brahmana1 represents mammals
as the last result of a series of creative experiments,
“Prajapati created living beings, which perished for
want of food. Birds and serpents perished thus.
Prajapati reflected, ‘How is it that my creatures
perish after having been formed?’ He perceived
this: ‘They perish from want of food’ In his own
presence he caused milk to be supplied to breasts.
He created living beings, which, resorting to the
breasts, were thus preserved, hese are the creatures
which did not perish.”

The common myth which derives the world from a
great egg—the myth perhaps most familiar in its
Finnish shape—is found in the Satapatha Brahmana.*
In the beginning this universe was waters, nothing
but waters. The waters desired: ‘How can we be
reproduced ?*’ So saying, they toiled, they performed
austerity. While they were performing austerity, a
golden egg came into existence. It them became
“year, ... Fromit ina year a man came into exist-
ence, who was Prajapati. . . . He conceived progeny
in himself; with his mouth he created the gods.”
According to another text,’ “Prajapati took the
form of ao tortoise." The tortoise is the same as
Aditya.‘

It is now time to examine the Aryan shape of the
widely spread myth about the marriage of heaven and


' i. § 18; Muir, 2d edit, io,

* ai 1, 6,1; Muir, Journal of Royal Asiatic Society, 1863.

7 Satepatha Frakmana, vii. 4, 3, &

* Aitoreya Brakmana, iii, 34 (11, 219), a very discreditable origin of |


OL nt (eee -


fk 4 amelie a


HEAVEN AND EARTH. 253


earth, and the fortunes of their children. We have
already seen that in New Zealand heaven and earth
were regurded as real persons, of bodily parts and
passions, united in a secular embrace. We shall
apply the same explanation to the Greek myth of
Gaea and of the mutilation of Cronus. In India,
Dyaus (heaven) answers to the Greek Uranus and the
Maori Rangi, while Prithivi (earth) is the Greek Gaea,
the Maori Paps. In the Veda, heaven and earth are
constantly styled “parents;"' but this we might
regard as a mere metaphorical expression, still com-
mon in poetry. A passage of the Aiftareya Brahmana,
however, retains the old conception, in which there
was nothing metaphorical at all* These two worlds,
heaven and earth, once joined. Subsequently
they were separated (according to one account, by
Indra, who thus plays the part of Cronus and of Tane
Mahuta). “ Heaven and earth,” says Dr. Muir, “are
regarded as the parents not only of men, but of the
gods also, as appears from the various texts where
they are designated by the epithet Devapatre, ‘ having
gods for their children.’” By men in an early stage


of thought this myth was accepted along with others


in which heaven and earth were regarded as objects
created by one of their own children, as by Indra,’
who “stretched them out like a hide,” who, like Atlas,
*enstains and upholds them ;"* or, again, Tvashtri, the
divine smith, wrought them by his craft; or, once more,
heaven and earth sprung from the head and feet of


1 Muir, v. 22. 2 iv. 27; Haug, Gi. 708.
43 Rig- Feda, viii. 6, 5- * Rig- Feda, iii. 32, &.


254 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Purusha. In short, if any one wished to give an.
example of that recklessness of orthodoxy or consistency
which is the mark of early thought and myth, he
could find no better example than the Indian legends
of the origin of things. Perhaps there is not one of
the myths current among the lower races which has
not its counterpart in the Indian Brahmanas. It has”
been enough for us to give a selection of examples,


D “3
€ P
‘ TF ef
iy JE


( 255 )


GREEK MYTHS OF THE ORIGIN OF THE WORLD
AND MAN.


The Greeks practically civilised when we first meet them in Homer—
Their mythology, however, is full of repulsive features—The hypo-
thesis that many of these are savage eurvirala—Are there other
examples of such survival in Greek life and institutions |—Greek
opinion was constant that the race had been anvage—Tllustrations
of savage survival from Greek law of homicide, from magic, reli-
gion, human sacrifice, religious art, traces of totemism, and from the

Conclusion : that savage survival may also be expected
in Greek myths,


Tae Greeks, when we first make their acquaintance in
the Homeric poems, were a cultivated people, dwelling,
under the government of royal families, in small city
states. This social condition they must have attained
by 1000 8.c., and probably much earlier. They had
already a long settled past behind them, and had no
recollection of any national migrations from the “cradle
CRSA -AFy"D race.” On the other hand, many tribes
thought themselves earth-born from the soil of the place
SE The Maori S Sa ae
that memories of a national migration may persist for
several hundred years among men ignorant of writing.
Greek legend, among a far more civilised race, only spoke


256 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


of occasional foreign settlers from Sidon, Lydia, or
Egypt. The Homeric Greeks were well acquainted with
almost all the arts of life, though it is not absolutely cer-
tain that they could write, and certainly they were not
addicted to reading. In war they fought from chariots,
like the Egyptians and Assyrians; they were bold
seafarers, being accustomed to harry the shores even
of Egypt, and they had large commercial dealings with
the people of Tyre and Sidon. In the matter of re-
ligion they were comparatively free and unrestrained.
Their deities, though capricious in character, saiaht be
regarded in many ways as “ making for righteousness.”

They protected the stranger and the suppliant; they
sanctioned the oath, they frowned on the use of pois-
oned arrows ; mere and domestic life were guarded


by their good-will; they dispensed good and evil for-
tune, to be sag with humility and resignation
among mortals.


The patriarchal head of each family performed the
sacrifices for his household, the king for the state,
the ruler of Mycenm, Agamemnon, for the whole
Achwan host encamped before the walls of ays At
the same time, prophets, like Calchas, possessed
siderable influence, due partly to an bacediitany gift of
second-sight, as in the case of Theoclymenus,! partly
to acquired professional skill in observing omens, partly
to the direct inspiration of the gods. The oracle at
Delphi, or, as it is called by Homer, Pytho, was already
famous, and religion recognised, in various degrees, all
the gods familiar to the later cult of Hellas. Ino


1 Odysecy, 2%. 354.


THE RUDER MYTHS. ‘O57


people so advanced, so much in contact with foreign
peoples and foreign ideas, and so wonderfully gifted by
nature with keen intellect and perfect taste, it is natural
to expect, if anywhere, a mythology almost free from
repulsive elements, and almost purged of all that we
regard as survivals from the condition of savagery.
Bat while Greek mythology is richer far than any
other in beautiful legend, and is thronged with lovely
and majestic forms of gods and goddesses, nymphs and
oreads ideally fair, none the less a very large proportion
of its legends is practically on a level with the myths
of Maoris, Thlinkeets, Cahrocs, and Bushmen.

This is the part of Greek mythology which has at all
times excited most curiosity, and has been made the
subject of many systems of interpretation. ‘The Greeks
themselves, from almost the earliest historical ages, were
deeply concerned either to veil or explain away the
blasphemous horrors of their own “sacred chapters,”
poetic traditions, and temple legends. We endesyour
to account for these as relics of an age of barbarism
lying very far behind the time of Homer—an age when
the ancestors of the Greeks either borrowed, or more
probably developed for themselves the kind of myths
by which savage peoples endeayour to explain the
nature and origin of the world and all phenomena.

The correctness of this explanation, resting as it
does on the belief that the Greeks were at one: time
in the savage status, might be demonstrated from
the fact that not only myths, but Greek life in
general, and especially Greek ritual, teemed with
surviving examples of institutions and of manners

VOL. 1. E


"— =
i ts


eR a ol a


YS eee


7’. Tr =?
’ ete :


4


Se al


",


258 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


which are found everywhere among the most backward
and barbarous races, It is not as if only the myths
of Greece retained this rndeness, or as if the Greeks H
supposed themselves to have been slways civilised, a
The whole of Greek life yields relics of savagery
when the surface is excavated ever so slirhtly. Mor
over, that the Greeks, as soon as they came to reflect }
on these matters at all, believed themselves to have .,
emerged from a condition of savagery is undeniable, —
The poets are entirely at one on this subject with —
Moschion, a writer of the school of Euripides. “The
time hath been, yea, it hath been,” he says, “when
men lived ike the beasts, dwelling in mountain caves,
and clefts unvisited of the sun. . . . Then th og
broke not the soil with ploughs nor by aid of iron, but
the weaker man was slain to make the supper of the —
stronger,” and so on.! This view of the savage origin: _.
of mankind was also held by Aristotle:? «It is pro
bable that the first men, whether they were produced _
by the earth (earth-born) or survived from some delnge,
were on a level of ignorance and darkness,”? This
opinion, consciously held and stated by philosophers
and. poets, reveals itself also in the universal popular
fire, agriculture, metallurgy, and all the other arts and _
conveniences of life, till they were instructed by ideal

culture-heroes, like Prometheus, members of @ race _


divine or half-divine, A still more curious Athenian


tradition (preserved by Varro) maintained, not only
" Moschion ; of. Preller, A wagewihite Aufedt a
2 Politica, ii, 8-21 ; Plato, Laws, Pgh te a
* Compare Horace, Satires, i 3, 99 ; Lucretius, v. 923,


SURVIVALS IN GREEK CUSTOMS, 259


arriage was originally unknown, but that, as
among i eteslians and some Red Indinns, the family
name descended through the mother, and kinship was
reckoned on the female side before the time of Cecrops.'
While Greek opinion, both popular and philoso-
phical, admitted, or rather asserted, that savagery lay in
the background of the historical prospect, Greek insti-
tutions retained a thousand birth-marks of savagery.
It is manifest and undeniable that the Greek criminal
law, as far as it affected murder, sprang directly from
the old savage blood-feud.* The Athenian law was
a civilised modification of the savage rule that the
kindred of a slain man take up his blood-fend.
Where homicide was committed within the circle of
blood relationship, as by Orestes, Greek religion pro-
vided the Erinnyes to punish an offence which had,
as it were, no human avenger. The precautions taken
by murderers to lay the ghost of the slain man were
much like those in favour among the Australians.
The Greek cut off the extremities of his victim, the
tips of the hands and feet, and disposed them neatly
beneath the arm-pits of the slain man.* In the same
spirit, and for the same purpose, the Australian black
cute off the thumbs of his dead enemy, that the ghost
too may be mutilated and prevented from throwing
at him with a ghostly spear. We learn also from
Apollonias Rhodius and his scholiast that Greek mur-
| Soidas, av, “ Prometheus ;” Augustine, De Ciritate Dei, xvill. 9.

} * Duncker, History of Greece, Engl. transl, vol. ii, p. 120
4 See “ Arm-pitting in Ancient Groece,” in the American Journal


af Philology, October 1885, where a discussion of the familiar texts in
echylus and Apollonius Rhodius will be found.


260 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


derers used thrice to suck in and spit out the gore of
their victims, perhaps with some idea of thereby par-
taking of their blood, and so, by becoming members of
their kin, putting it beyond the power of the ghosts to
avenge themselves. Similar ideas inspire the world-
wide savage custom of making an artificial “ blood
brotherhood ” by mingling the blood of the contracting
parties. As to the ceremonies of cleansing from blood- ;
guiltiness among the Greeks, we may conjecture that
these too had their primitive side; for Orestes, in the }
Humenides, maintains that he has been purified of his i
mother's slanghter by sufficient blood of swine, But 1
this point will be illustrated presently, when we touch | | |
|


on the mysteries.

Ritual and religion, as might be expected, retained
vast masses of savage rites and superstitious habits and
customs. To be “in all things too superstitions,” too
full of deisidaimonia, was even in St. Paul’s time the
characteristic of the Athenians, Now superstition, or
deisidaimonia, is defined by Theophrastus,’ as “ cowar-
dice in regard to the supernatural” (SeAda apos ro
Saiovov). This “cowardice” has in all ages and
countries secured the permanence of ritual and re-
ligious traditions. Men have always argued, like one
of the persons in M. Renan’s play, Le Prétre de Némi,
that “Tordre du monde depend de l'ordre des rites”
quion observe.” The familiar endurable sequence of
the seasons of spring, and seed-sowing, and harvest de-
pend upon the due performance of immemorial religious
acts. “In the mystic deposits,” says Dinarchus, lies

1 Characters.


al


et


SURVIVALS IN RITUAL. 261


the safety of the city.”1 What the “mystic deposits ”
were, nobody knows for certain, but they must have
been of very archaic sanctity.

Ritual is preserved because it preserves fuck. Not
only among the Romans and the Brahmans, with
their endless minute ritual actions, but among such
lower races as the Kanekas of New Caledonia, the
efficacy of religious functions is destroyed by the
slightest accidental infraction of established rules.*
The same timid conservatism presides over myth, and
in each locality the mystery-plays, with their aceom-
panying narratives, preserved inviolate the early forms
of legend. Myth and ritual do not admit of being
argued about. “ C'était le rite établi. Ce n'était pas
plus absurde qu'autre chose,” says the conservative in
M. Renan’s piece, defending the mode of appointment of

* The priest who slew the slayer,
And shall himself be slain.”


Now, if the rites and myths preserved by the
timorousness of this same “cowardice towards the
supernatural” were originally evolved in the stage of
savagery, savage they would remain, os it 18 im-
pious and dangerous to reform them till the religion
which they serve perishes with them. These relics
in Greek ritual and faith are very commonly ex-
plained as due to Oriental influences, as things bor-
rowed from the dark and bloody superstitions of Asin.


* 4p, Hermann, Lehrbueh, p. 40: Agiaophames, 965.

Ties ths Watches off the dead in New Caledonia are fed by the
sorcerer with a meas at the end of a very long spoon, and should the
food miss the mouth, all the ceremonies have to be repeated. This
detail ia from Mr. J. J. Atkinson,


a


262 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


But this attempt to save the native Greek character
for “blitheness” and humanity must not be pushed
too far! It must be remembered that the cruder
and wilder sacrifices and legends of Greece were
strictly focal ; that they were attached to these ancient
temples, old altars, barbarous zona, or wooden idols,
and rough fetish stones, in which Pausanias found the
most ancient relics of Hellenic theology. This is a
proof of their antiquity and a presumption in fayour
of their freedom from foreign influence. Most of
these things were survivals from that dimly remem-
bered prehistoric age in which the Greeks, not yet
gathered into city states, lived in villages, or kranls, or
pueblos, as we should translate xara xomay, if we were
speaking of African or American tribes. In that
Stage the early Greeks must have lacked both the
civic and the national or Panhellenic sentiment; their
political unit was the clan, which, again, answered in
part to the totem kindred of America, or Africa, or
Australia.* In this stagnant condition they could not
have made acquaintance with the many creeds of
Semitic and other alien peoples on the shores of the
Levant." It was later, when Greece had developed

Clans, De Antiq, Porm. Diane, 6, 7, 16.

* As ©. O. Muller judiciously remarks: “The scenes of nine-tenths
of the Greek myths are laid in particular districts of Greeer, and they
speak of the primeval inhabitants of the lineage and adventures of
native berocs, They manifest an accurate acquaintance with jadi.
vidual localities, which, at a time when Greece was neither explored
by antiquaries nor did geographical handbooks exist, could be pos
sessed only by the inhabitants of these localities.” Muller gives, aa


cammples, myths of bears more or-less divine, Scientific Mytholoyy,


pp. 14-15,
2 Compare Claus, De Diane Antiquissima Natura, p. 3


GREEK VILLAGE LIFE. 263


the city life of the heroic age, that her adventurous
sons came into close contact with Egypt and Phomicin.

In the colonising time, still later—perhaps from
g00 B.C. downwards—the Greeks, settled on sites
whence they had expelled Sidonians or Sicanians,
very naturally continued, with modifications, the wor-
ship of such gods as they found already in possession.
Like the Romans, the Greeks easily recognised their
own deities in the analogous members of foreign
polytheistie systems. Thus we can allow for alien
elements in such gods and goddesses ss Zeus Asterios,
as Aphrodite of Cyprus or Eryx, or the many-breasted
Ephesian Artemis, whose monstrous form had ite
exact analogue among the Aztecs in that many-
breasted goddess of the maguey plant whence beer
was made, To discern and disengage the borrowed
factors in the Hellenic Olympus by analysis of divine
names is a task to which comparative philology may
lawfully devote herself; but we cannot so readily ex-
plain by presamed borrowing from without the rude
xoana of the ancient local temples, the wild mytha of
the local legends, the sacra which were the exclusive
property of old-world families, Butade or Eumolpidm.
These are clearly survivals from a stage of Greek
culture earlier than the city state, earlier than the
heroic age of the roving Greek Vikings, and far earlier
than the Greek colonies. They belong to that con-
servative and immobile period when the tribe or clan,
settled in its scattered kraals, lived a life of agri-
culture, hunting, and cattle-breeding, engaged in no
larger or more adventurous wars than border feuds


264 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


about women or cattle. Such wars were on a humbler
scale than even Nestor's old fights with the Epeians ;
such adventures did not bring the tribe into con-
tact with alien religions. If Sidonian merchantmen
chanced to establish a factory near a tribe in this condi-
tion, their religion was not likely to make many pro-
selytes.

These reasons for believing that most of the wilder
element in Greek ritual and myth was native may be
briefly recapitulated, as they are often overlooked.
The more strange and savage features meet us in local
tales and practices, often in remote upland temples
and chapels. There they had survived from the society
of the willage status, before villages were gathered
into cities, before Greeks had taken to a roving life, or
made much acquaintance with distant and maritime
peoples. :

For these historical reasons, it may be assumed that
the local religious antiquities of Greece, especially in
upland districts like Arcadia and Elis, are as old, and
as purely national, as free from foreign influences as
any Greek institutions can be. In these rites and
myths of true folk-lore and Folksleben, developed be-
fore Hellas won its way to the pure Hellenic stage,
before Egypt and Phoenicia were familiar, should be
found that common rude element which Greeks share
with the other races of the world, and which was, to
Some extent, purged away by the genius of Homer
and Pindar, pit wates ef Phaho digna locuti,

In proof of this local conservatism, some passages
collected by K. F. Hermann in his Lekrinch der


RELIGIOUS CONSERVATISM, 265


Gricchischen Antiquitdten’ may be cited. Thus Iso-
erates writes,’ “This was all their care, neither to
destroy any of the ancestral rites, nor to add aught
beyond what was ordained.” Clemens Alexandrinus
reports that certain Thessalians worshipped storks,
“in accordance with use and wont.”" Plato lays down
the very “law of least change” which has been
described. “ Whether the legislator is establishing a
new state or restoring an old and decayed one, in
respect of gods and temples, ... if he be a man of
sense, he will make no change in anything which the
oracle of Delphi, or Dodona, or Ammon has sanctioned,
in whatever manner.” In this very passage Plato *
speaks of rites “derived from Tyrrhenia or Cyprus”
as falling within the later period of the Greek
Wanderjihre. On the high religions value of things
antique, Porphyry wrote in a Inte age, and when the
new religion of Christ was victorious, “ Comparing the
new sacred images with the old, we see that the old
are more simply fashioned, yet are held divine, but
the new, admired for their elaborate execution, have
less persuasion of divinity,"—a remark anticipated by
Pausanias, “ The statues Daedalus wrought are quainter
to the outward view, yet there shows forth in them
somewhat supernatural.”* So Athenwus* reports of a
visitor to the shrine of Leto in Delos, that he expected
the ancient statue of the mother of Apollo to be some-
thing remarkable, but, unlike the pions Porphyry, burst

out laughing when he found it a shapeless wooden idol.


1 Zweiter Theil, 1358, # Areop., 30.
7 Clem. Alex., Oxford, 1715, i. 34. 4 Lowa, ©. 734.
* De Abst, ii, 18; Paus., il. 4, 5 * siv. 2,


266 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


These idols were dressed out, fed, and. adorned as if
they had life." It is natural that myths dating from
an age when Greek gods resembled Polynesian idols
should be as rude as Polynesian myths. The tenacity of
local myth is demonstrated by Pausanias, who declares
that even in the highly civilised Attica the Demes
retained legends different from those of the central
city—the legends, probably, which were current before
the villages were “ syncecised ” into Athens.*

It appears, then, that Greek religion necessarily
preserves matter of the highest antiquity, and that the
oldest rites and myths will probably be found, not in
the Panhellenic temples, like that in Olympia, not in
the national poets, like Homer and Sophocles, but in
the /ocal fanes of early tribal gods, and in the local
mysteries, and the myths which came late, if they came
at all, into literary circulation. This opinion is strength-
ened and illustrated by that invaluable guide-book of
the artistic and religious pilgrim written in the second
century after our era by Pausanias, If we follow him,
we shall find that many of the ceremonies, stories, and
idols which he regarded as oldest: are analogous to the
idols and myths of the contemporary backward races,
Let us then, for the aake of illustrating the local and
savage survivals in Greek religion, accompany Pau-—
sanins in his tour throngh Hellas, |

In Christian countries, especially in modern times,
the contents of one church are very like the furniture
of another church; the functions in one resemble

1 Hermann, op. eit., p. oy, note fo.
? Pausanias, j. 14, 6,


HUMAN SACRIFICES. 267


those in all, though on the Continent some shrines
still retain relics and customs of the period when local
saints had their peculiar rites. But it was a very
different thing in Greece. The pilgrim who arrived
ata temple never could guess what oddity or horror
in the way of statues, sacrifices, or stories might be
prepared for his edification. In the first place, there
were Awman sacrifices. In the town of Salamis, in
Cyprus, about the date of Hadrian, the devout might
have found the priest slaying a human victim to
Zens,—an interesting custom, instituted, according to
Lactantins, by Teucer, and continued till the age of
the Roman Empire.’

At Alos, in Achaia Phthiotis, the stranger migi/it
have seen an extraordinary spectacle, though we admit
that the odds would have been highly against his
chance of witnessing the following events. As the
stranger approaches the town-hall, he observes an
elderly and most respectable citizen strolling in the
same direction. The citizen is so lost in thought
that apparently he does not notice where he is going.
Behind him comes a crowd of excited but silent
people, who watch him with intense interest. The
Citizen reaches the steps of the town-hall, while the

1 Busch, Prep, Fr., iv. 17, mentions, among peoples practising
human sacrifices, Rhodes, Salamis, Heliopolis, Chioa, Tenedos, Lace-
demon, Arcadia, and Athens; and, among goda thas honoured, Hern,
ee orem fem, oe Apollo, For Disayius

the Cannibal, Platarch, Themist., 13; Porphyr., Abst, i. §5. For the
sacrifice to Zeus Laphystina, see Grote, Lc. vi, and his array of autho-
rities, expecially Herodotus, vii. 197. Clemens Alexandrinus (i 3%)
mentions the Messeniana, to Zeus; the Tauriana, to Artemis, the folk


of Pella, to Peleus and Chiron ; the: Cretetny to ‘Sees; the Lesbians
to Dionysus, Geusiue de Vietimia umanis (1699) may be consulted,


268 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


excitement of his friends behind increases visibly.
Without thinking, the elderly person enters the build-
ing. With a wild and un-Aryan howl, the other
people of Alos are down on him, pinion him, wreathe
him with flowery garlands, and lead him to the
temple of Zeus Laphystius, or “The Glutton,” where
he is solemnly sacrificed on the altar. This was the
custom of the good Greeks of Alos whenever a descen-
dant of the house of Athamas entered the Prytaneion.
OF course the family were very careful, as a rule, to
keep at a safe distance from the forbidden place.
“What a sacrifice for Greeks!" as the author of the
Minos" says in that dialogue which is incorrectly
attributed to Plato. “He cannot get out except to
be sacrificed,” says Herodotus, speaking of the un-
lucky descendant of Athamas. The custom Appears
to have existed as late as the time of the scholiast on
Apollonius Rhodius.*

Even in the second century, when Pansaniag visited
Arcadia, he found what seem to have been human
sacrifices to Zeus. The passage is so very strange and
romantic that we quote a part of it “The Lycean
hill hath other marvels to show, and chiefly this:
thereon there is a grove of Zeus Lycans, wherein
may men im nowise enter; but if any transgresses
the law and goes within, he must die within the
space of one year. This tale, moreover, they tell,
namely, that whatsoever man or beast cometh within
the grove casts no shadow, and the hunter pursues

* 315,03 Plato, Lows, vi 782, c.


* Argonautica, vii, 197.
* Pausanias, vill, 2.


HUMAN SACRIFICES, 269


not the deer into that wood, but, waiting till the
beast comes forth again, sees that it has left its
shadow behind. And on the highest crest of the
whole mountain there is a mound of heaped-up earth,
' the altar of Zeus Lycwus, and the more part of
Peloponnesus can be seen from that place. And
before the altar stand two pillars facing the rising sun,
and thereon golden eagles of yet more ancient work-
manship. And on this altar they sacrifice to Zeus in
a manner that may not be spoken, and little liking
had I to make much search into this matter. But
let it be as itis, and as it hath been from the beginning.”
The words “as it hath been from the begmning” are
ominous and significant, for the traditional myths of
Arcadia tell of the human sacrifices of Lycaon, and of
men who, tasting the meat of a mixed sacrifice, put
homan flesh between their lips unawares.’ This aspect
of Greek religion, then, 1s almost on a level with the
mysterious cannibal horrors of “‘ Voodoo,” as practised
by the secret societies of negroes in Hayti. But con-
cerning these things, as Pausanias might say, it 1s
little pleasure to inquire.

Even where men were not sacrificed to the gods,
the tourist among the temples would learn that these
bloody rites had once been customary, and ceremonies
existed by way of commutation. This is precisely
what we find in Vedic religion, in which the empty
form of sacrificing a man was gone through, and the
origin of the world was traced to the fragments of a


rasta ee This rite occurs in some African corona-
tion ceremonies.


270 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


god sacrificed by gods." In Sparta was an altar of
Artemis Orthia, and a wooden image of great rudeness
and antiquity—so rude indeed, that Pausanias, though
accustomed to Greek fetish-stones, thought it must be
of barbaric origin. The story was that certain people
of different towns, when sacrificing at the altar, were
seized with frenzy and slew cach other. The oracle
commanded that the altar should be sprinkled with
human blood. Men were therefore chosen by lot to
be sacrificed, till Lycurgus commuted the offering, and
sprinkled the altar with the blood of boys who were
flogged before the goddess. ‘The priestess holds the
statue of the goddess during the flogging, and if any
of the boys are but lightly scourged, the image becomes
too heavy for her to bear. These rites are on a par
with the initiatory ceremonies of Hottentota, Mandans,
and Australian natives. They lasted till the time of

The Ionians near Anthea had a temple of Artemis
Triclaria, and to her it had been customary to sacrifice
yearly a youth and maiden of transcendent beauty.
In Pansanias’s time the human sacrifice was commuted.
He himself beheld the strange spectacle of living beasts
and birds being driven into the fire to Artemis Laphria,
a Calydonian goddess, and he had seen bears rush back
among the ministrants; but there was no record that
any one had ever been hurt by these wild beasts.’ The
bear was a beast closely connected with Artemis, and
there is some reason to suppose that the goddess had

' The Purusha Subhta, in Rig- Veda, x, 50,
* Pana, vil. 13-19.


COMMUTATIONS OF HUMAN SACRIFICES. 274


herself been a she-bear or sneceeded to the cult of a
she-bear in the morning of time.'

It may be believed that where symbolic homan
sacrifices are offered, that is, where some other victim
‘is elain or a dummy of a man is destroyed, and where

legend maintains that the sacrifice was once human,
there men and women were originally the victims.
Greek ritual and Greek myth were full of such tales
and such commutations.* In Rome, ns is well known,
effigies of men called Argives were sacrificed” As an
example of a beast-victim given in commutation,
Pausanias mentions* the case of the folk of Potnim,
who were compelled once a year to offer to Dionysus
& boy in the bloom of youth. But the sacrifice was
commuted for a goat.

These commutations are familiar all over the world.
Even in Mexico, where human sacrifices and ritnal
cannibalism were daily events, Quetzalcoatl was cre-
dited with commuting human sacrifices for blood
drawn from the bodies of the religious. In this one
matter even the most conservative creeds and the
faiths most opposed to change sometimes say with
Tartuffe—

“Le ciel défend, de vrai, certains contentemente,
Mais on trouve avec lui dea accommodements,”

Though the fact has been denied (doubtless without
reflection), the fact remains that the Greeks offered
‘human sacrifices. Now what does this imply? Must

1 See “ Artemis,” posten.

3 See Hermann, Alterthdmer., ji. 1§9-161, for ciuiranes examples,

* Plotarch, Quast, Rom, 32. * fx, 5, 1,


272 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


it be taken a3 a survival from savagery, as one of the
proofs that the Greeks had passed through the savage
status ?

The answer is less obvious than might be supposed.
Sacrifice has two origins. First, there are Aonorific
sacrifices, in which the god (or divine beast, if a divine
beast be worshipped) is offered the food he is believed
to prefer. To carnivorous totems, Garcilasso says,
the Indians of Peru offered themselves. The feeding
of sacred mice in the temples of Apollo Smintheus is
well known. Secondly, there are expiatory or piaeular
sacrifices, in which the worshipper, as it were, fines
himself in a child, an ox, or something else that he
treasures. The latter kind of sacrifice (most common
In cases of crime done or suspected within the circle
of kindred) is not necessarily savage, except in its
cruelty. An example is the Attic Thargelia, in which
two human scape-goats annually bore “the sina of
the congregation,” and were flogged, driven to the sea
with figs tied round their necks, and burned.

The institution of human sacrifice, then, whether
the offering be regarded as a gift to the god of what
is dearest to man (as in the case of Jephtha’s dangh-
ter), or whether the victim be supposed to carry on
his head the sins of the people, does not necessarily
date from the period of savagery. Indeed, these con-
ceptions are rather outside the limits of thought of the
lowest races, and it would probably be difficult to find
many examples of human sacrifices of an expiatory


* Compare the Marseilles human sacrifice, Petron, rat: and for
the Thargelia, Teetzes, Chiliads, v. 736; Hellad. in Photius, p. 1590 E.
aud Harpoc. «. ©.


WERE-WOLF IN ARCADLA. 273


uacular character among Australians, or Bushmen,
or Fuegians, On the other hand, the notion of pre-
senting food to the supernatural powers, whether
ghosts or gods, is nearly universal among savages, and,
Where cannibals are concerned, that food is naturally
human flesh. The terrible Aztec banquets of which
the gods were partakers are the most noted examples
of human sacrifices with a purely cannibal origin.
Now there is good reason to guess that human sac-
rifices with no other origin than cannibalism survived
even in ancient Greece. “It may be conjectured,”
writes Professor Robertson Smith,’ “that the human
sacrifices offered to the Wolf Zeus (Lyceus) in
Arcadia were originally cannibal feasts of a Wolf
tribe, The first participants in the rite were, according
to later legend, changed into wolves; and in later
times* at least one fragment of the human flesh was
placed among the sacrificial portions derived from
other victims, and the man who ate it was believed
to become a were-wolf.”* It is the almost universal
rule with cannibals not to cat members of their own
stock, just ns they do not eat their own totem, Thus,
as Professor Robertson Smith says, when the human
Victim is a captive or other foreigner, the human sac-
rifice may+be regarded as a survival of cannibalism,
Where, on the other hand, the victim is a fellow tribes-
man, the sacrifice is expiatory or piacular.

Among Greek cannibal gods we cannot fail to reckon
the so-called “Cannibal Dionysus," and probably the
1 Eneye. Brit, «. rv. “Sacrifies.”

* Plato, Rep., vill. 565, D.
* Paus., viii. 2.
VOL. I. S


174 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


feus of Orchomenos, Zens Laphystins, who is ex-
plained by Suidas as “the Glutton Zeus.” The cog-
nate verb (Aadvooew) means “to eat with mangling
and rending,” “to devour gluttonously.” By Zeus
Laphystius, then, men’s flesh was gorged in this dis-
treasing fashion.

The evidence of human sacrifice (especially when it
seems not piacular, bot a relic of cannibalism) raises
a presumption that Greeks had once been barbarians.
The presumption is confirmed by the evidence of early
Greek religions art.

When his curiosity about human sacrifices was
satisfied, the pilgrim in Greece might turn his atten-
tion to the statues and other representations of the
gods. He wonld find that the modern statues by
famous artists were beantiful anthropomorphic works in
marble or in gold and ivory. It is true that the faces
of the ancient gilded Dionysi at Corinth were smadged
all over with cinnabar, like fetish-stones in India or
Africa." As a rule, however, the statues of historic


times were beautiful representations of kindly and


gracious beings. © The older works were stiff and rigid
images, with the lips screwed into an unmeaning
smile. Older yet were the bronze gods, made before
the art of soldering was invented, and formed of beaten
plates joined by small nails. Still more ancient were
the wooden images, which probably bore but a slight
resemblance to the human frame, and which were often
mere “stocks.”* Perhaps once a year were shown the


1 Pansaniaa, ii, 2,
* Clemens Alox,, Protrepé. (Oxford, I7U5), p gi.


FETISH-STONES. 275


very early gods, the Demeter with the horse's head,
the Artemis with the fish's tail, the cuckoo Hera, whose
image was of pear-wood, the Zeus with three eyes, the
Hermes, made after the fashion of the pictures on the
walls of sacred caves among the Bushmen. But the
oldest gods of all, says Pausanias repeatedly, were
rude stones in the temple or the temple precinct. In
Achwan Phare he found some thirty squared stones,
named each after a god, “ Among all the Greeks in
the oldest times rude stones were worshipped in place
of statues.” The superstitious man in Theophrastus's
Characters used to anoint the sacred stones with oil.
The stone which Cronus swallowed in mistake for
4eus was honoured at Delphi, and kept warm with
wool wrappings. There was another sacred stone
among the Troszenians, and the Megarians worshipped
as Apollo a stone cut roughly into « pyramidal form,
The Argives had a big stone called Zeus Kappotas,
The Thespians worshipped a stone which they called
Eros;* “their oldest idol is a rude stone.” It is well
known that the original fetish-stone has been found in
sifu below the feet of the statue of Apollo in Delos.
On this showing, then, the religion of very carly Greeks
in Greece was not unlike that of modern Negroes,
The evolution of the gods, a remarkably rapid one after
a certain point, could be traced in every temple, It
began with the rude stone, and rose to the wooden
idol, in which, as we have seen, Pausanias and Por-

' Gill, Myths of South Pacife, p. 6a. Compare a god, which proved
to be merely pumice-stone, and was regarded aa the god of winds and


to it during hurricanes,


276 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


phyry found such sanctity. Next it reached the
hammered bronze image, passed through the archaic
marbles, and culminated in the finer marbles and the
chryselephantine statues of Zens and Athenn, But
none of the ancient sacred objects lost their sacredness.
The oldest were always the holiest idols; the oldest of
all were stumps and stones, like savage fetish-stones.

Another argument in favour of the general thesis
that savagery left deep marks on Greek life in general,
and on religion in particular, may be derived from
survivals of totemism in ritual and legend. The fol-
lowing instances need not necessarily he accepted, but
it may be admitted that they are precisely the traces
which totemism would leave had it once existed, and
then waned away on the advance of civilisation.’

That Greeks in certain districts regarded with
religions reverence certain plants and animals is
beyond dispute. That some stocks even traced
their lineage to beasts will be shown in the chapter
on Greek Divine Myths, and the presumption is
that these creatures, though explained as incarna-
tions and disguises of various gods, were once
totems sans phrase, as will be inferred from vyarions ex-
amples. Clemens Alexandrinns, again, after describing
the animal-worship of the Egyptians, mentions cases
of zoolatry in Greece.* The Thessalinns revered

''The argument to be derived from the character of the Greck
¢rot ae a modified form of the totem-kindred in too long and com-
plex to be put forward bere, Tt is stated in Custom and Myth, “The
History of the Family,” in M‘Lennan's Studies in Early History, and
ia aseumed, if not proved, in Ancient Society by the late Mr, Lewis
Morgan. |
* Op. eit, L 34.


TRACES OF TOTEMISM. 277


storks, the Thebans weasels, and the myth ran that
the weasel had in some way aided Alemena when in
labour with Heracles. In another form of the myth
the weasel was the foster-mother of the hero.’ Other
Thessalians, the Myrmidons, claimed descent from the
ant and revered ants. The religions respect paid to
mice in the temple of Apollo Sminthenus, in the Troad,
Rhodes, Gela, Lesbos, and Crete is well known, and a
local tribe were alluded to as Mice by an oracle. The
god himself, like the Japanese harvest-god, was re-
presented in art with a mouse at his foot, and mice,
as has been said, were fed at his shrine.* The Syrians,
says Clemens Alexandrinus, worship doves and fishes,
as the Elians worship Zeus.” The people of Delphi
adored the wolf,’ and the Samians the sheep. The
Athenians had a hero whom they worshipped in the
shape of a wolf.’ A remarkable testimony is that of
the scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, un. 124. “The
wolf, he says, “was a beast held in honour by the
Athenians, and whosoever slays a wolf collects what is
needful for its buriaL” The burial of sacred animals
in Egypt is familiar, An Arab tribe mourns over and
eolemnly buries all dead gazelles.° Nay, flies were
adored with the sacrifice of an ox near the temple of


1 Scholiast on Iliad, xix. 119.
* lian. Hf. A, xi §; Strabo, xiii, 604. Compare “ Apollo and
the Mouse,” Custom and Myth, pp. 103-120,
Syrud,


<p ns nee Compare an address to the wolf-hero,
“who delights in the flight and tears of men,” in Aristophanes,


Ferpe., 389.
" Robertson Smith, Xiaship in Lerly Arabia, pp. 195-204.


278 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Apollo in Leueas." Pausanins (iii. 22) mentions certain
colonists who were guided by a hare to a site where the
animal hid ina myrtle-bush. They therefore adore the
myrtle, nat To devdpoy &re exetvqy o€Soverr thy MUpriyy.
In the same way a Carian stock, the Ioxidm, revered
the asparagus.’ A remarkable example of descent
mythically claimed from one of the lower animals is
noted by Otfried Miiller.* Speaking of the swan of
Apollo, he says, “That deity was worshipped, accord-
ing to the testimony of the JTiad, in the Trojan island
of Tenedos. There, too, was Tennes honoured as the
jpes exuvuynos of the island. Now his father was
called Cyenus (the swan) in an oft-told and romantic
legend.* . . . The swan, therefore, as father to the
chief hero on the Apolline island, stands in distinct
relation to the god, who is made to come forward
still more prominently from the fact that Apollo him-
self is also called father of 'Tennes. I think we can
searcely fail to recognise a mythus which was local
at Tenedos. . . . The fact, too, of calling the swan,
instead of Apollo, the father of a hero, demands alto-
gether a simplicity and boldness. of fancy which are
far more ancient than the poems of Homer.”

Had Miiller known that this “ simplicity and bold-
ness of fancy” exist to-day, for example, among the
Swan tribe of Australia, as in the ancient Irish tale of
Connaire’s father, the bird, he wonld probably have
recognised in Cycnus a survival from totemism. The
fancy survives again in Virgil's Cupavo, “with swan’s

1 Elian, xi. & * Plutarch, Theseus, 14.

* Profeg., Engl. trans, p. 204. * [Canne on Conon, 28.]


TRACES OF TOTEMISM. 279


plumes rising from his crest, the mark of his father's
form.”* Descent was claimed, not only from a swan
Apollo, but from a dog Apollo.

Evidence of another class derived from sacrifice has
been adduced by Professor Robertson Smith.* The
custom of solemnly offering a totem-beast once a
year to himself, as it were, though he is not to be
touched on other occasions, is familiar in savage rites,
and is probably illustrated by the yearly sheep-offer-
ing to the “Ram Zeus,” as Herodotus has it (ii. 42),
in Egyptian ritual. Professor Robertson Smith points
out that Hecate “was invoked as a dog, and dogs
were her pincular sacrifice."* According to Plu-
tarch,* we may add a dog was sacrificed to the wolf
at the Lupercalia in Rome. Though the case of Rome
is merely analogous, it may be noted that Plutarch
asks,” “ Why do the Latins worship a woodpecker, and
all of them abstain strictly from the flesh of this bird,
which is sacred to Mars?” He is also anxious to
know why a dog was offered to the Lares, while the
Lares themselves were draped in the skin of dogs.
This wearing the skin of the totem animal in ritual
acts is familiar in savage religion. Plutarch’s state-
ment that the Pythagoreans “ worshipped a white cock
and abstained from the mullet” is perhaps less to the
purpose.

In connection with the same set of ideas, it is
pointed out that several yery, or stocks, had epony-

+ Bneid, x. 187. 2 Facye. Brit, a. ¥. “Bacrifice.”


pees eee 129} Plutarch, Quest. Rom. St.
* Quest. Rom., 21.


280 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


mous heroes, in whose names the names of the ancestral
beast apparently survived. In Attica the Crioeis have
their hero (Crio, “ Ram”), the Butadw have Butas
(“Bullman”), the Algid# have gous (“ Goat”), and
the Cynadw, Cynus (‘ Dog”). Lycus, according to
Harpocration (5. v.) has his statue in the shape of a
wolf in the Lyceum. “The general facts that certain
animals might not be sacrificed to certain gods” (at
Athens the Aigidm introduced Athena, to whom no
goat might be offered on the Acropolis, while she her-
self wore the goat-skin, eis), “while, on the other
hand, each deity demanded particular victims, ex-
plained by the ancients themselves in certain cases
to be hostile animals, find their natural explanation”
in totemism,’ Mr. Evelyn Abbott points out, however,
that the names Ageus, Aegae, Aegina, and others,
may be connected with the goat only by an old volks-
etymologie, as on coins of Aegina in Achaea. The real
meaning of the words may be different. Compare
airyiahds, the sea-shore.

As final examples of survivals from the age of
barbarism in the religion of Greece, certain features
in the Mysteries may be noted. Plutarch speaks of
“the eating of raw flesh, and tearing to pieces of
Victims, as also fastings and beatings of the breast, and
again in many places abusive language at the sacri-
fices, and other mad doings." The mysteries of De-
meter, as will appear when her legend is criticised,
contained one element all unlike these “ mad doings ;”


' Some apparent survivals of totemism in ritual will be found in
the chapter on Greek gods, especially Zeus, Dionysus, and Apollo,


SURVIVAL IN THE MYSTERIES. 281


and the evidence of Sophocles, Pindar, Plutarch, and
others demonstrate that religions consolations were
somehow conveyed in the Eleusinia, But Greece had
many other local mysteries, and in several of these
it is undeniable the Greeks acted much as contem-
porary Australians, Zunis, and Negroes act in their
secret initintions. Important as these analogies are,
they appear to have escaped the notice of most
mythologists.. M. Maury, however, in Les
Religions de la Gréce, published in 1857, offers several
instances of hidden rites, common to Hellas and to

There seem in the mysteries of savage races to
be two chief purposes. There is the intention of
giving to the initiated a certain sacred character,
which puts them in close relation with gods or
demons, and there is the introduction of the young
to complete manhood or womanhood, and to full
participation in the savage Church. The latter cere-
monies correspond, in short, to confirmation, and they
are usually of a severe character, being meant to test
by fasting (as Plutarch says) and by torture (as in
the familiar Spartan rite) the courage and constancy
of the young braves. The Greek mysteries best
known to us are the Thesmophoria and the Elousinia.
In the former, the rites (as will appear later) partook
of the nature of savage “ medicine" or magic, and
were mainly intended to secure fertility in husbandry
and in the family. In the Eleusinia the purpose was
the purification of the initiated, secured by ablutions
and by standing on the “ram's-skin of Zeus,’ and


282 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


after purifications the mysfe engaged in sacred dances,
and were permitted to view a miracle-play represent-
ing the sorrows and consolations of Demeter. The
chief features in the whole were purifications, dancing,
sacrifice, and the representation of the miracle-play.
Tt would be tedions to offer an exhaustive account of
savage rites analogous to these mysteries of Hellas.
Let it suffice to display the points where Greek found
itself in harmony with Australian, and American, and
African practice. These points are—(1) Mystic dances ;
(2) the use of a little instrument, called ¢urndun in
Australia, whereby a roaring noise is made, and the
religious are called together; (3) the habit of daubing
persons about to be initiated with clay or anything
else that is sordid, and of washing this off, apparently
by way of showing that old guilt is removed and a
new life entered upon ; (4) the performances with ser-
pents may be noticed, while the “mad doings” and
“howlings " mentioned by Plotarch are familiar to
every reader of travels in uncivilised countries.

First, as to the mystic dances, Lucian observes,'
“You cannot find a single ancient mystery in which
there is not dancing. . . . This much all men know,
that most people say of the revealers of the mysteries
that they ‘dance them out'” (eFopyeiefa:), Clemens
of Alexandria uses the same term when speaking of
his own “ appalling revelations.”* So closely connected
are mysteries with dancing among savages, that when
Mr. Orpen asked Qing, the Bushman hunter, about


1 Tlepl "Opateews, chap. xv, 277.
* dp. Eoseh, Prep, Sr., ii. 3, 6.


PERUVIAN MYSTERIES. 283


some doctrines in which Qing was not initiated, he
said, “Only the initiated men of that dance know
these things.” To “dance” this or that means to
be acquainted with this or that myth, which is re-
presented in a dance or ballet d'action’ (civ puvOpe
Ke opyire puetrfa). So widely distributed is the
practice, that Acosta, im an interesting passage, men-
tions it as familiar to the people of Peru before and
after the Spanish conquest. The text is a valuable
Instance of survival in religion. When they were
converted to Christianity, the Peruvians detected the
analogy between our sacrament and their mysteries,
and they kept up as much as possible of the old rite
in the new ritual. Just as the mysfe of Eleusis prac-
tised chastity, abstaining from certain food, and above
all from beans, before the great Pagan sacrament, so
did the Indians. “To prepare themselves, all the
people fasted two days, during which they did neyther
company with their wives, nor eate any meate with
salt or garlicke, nor drink any chica. .... And
although the Indians now forbeare to sacrifice beasts
or other things publikely, which cannot be hidden
from the Spaniardes, yet doe they still use many cere-
monies that have their beginnings from these feasts
and auntient superstitions, for at this day do they
covertly make their feast of Ytu at the daunces of the
feast of the Sacrament. Another feast falleth almost
at the same time, whereas the Christians observe the
solempnitie of the holy Sacrament, which doth resemble
if in some sort, as in dauncing, singing, and representa-
! Cape Monthly Magazine, Joly 1874.


254 MYTH, EITUAL, AND RELIGION,


tions.”' The holy “daunces” at Seville are under
Papal disapproval, but are to be kept up, it is said,
till the peculiar dresses used in them are worn out.
Acosta’s Indians also had “garments which served
only for this feast.” It is superiluous to multiply
examples of the dancing, which is an invariable feature
of savage as of Greek mysteries,

2. The Greek and savage use of the furndwn, or
bribbun of Australia in the mysteries is familiar to
students. ‘This fish-shaped flat board of wood is tied
to a string, and whirled round, so as to canse a peculiar
muffled roar, Lobeck quotes from the old scholia on
Clemens Alexandrinus, published by Bastius in annota-
tions on St. Gregory, the following Greek description
of the twradun, the “ bull-roarer” of English country
lads, the Gaclic srannam 2 "—"* cowog EvAapiov ou
eli rat To orapTiov Kal €v Taig TeAeraig ecoverro
wa poy.” “The conus was a little slab of wood, tied
to a string, and whirled round in the mysteries to
make a whirring noise.” As the mystic uses of the
furndun in Australia, New Zealand, New Mexico, and
Zululand have elsewhere been described at full length
(Custom and Myth, pp. 28-44), it may be enongh to
refer the reader to the passage. Mr. Tylor has since
found the instrument used in religious mysteries in
West Africa, so it has now been tracked almost round
the world. That an instrument so rude should be
employed by Greeks and Australians on mystic occa-
sions is in itself a remarkable coincidence. Unfortu-


* Acosta, Historie of the Indies, book vy. chap, xxviii London, 1604.
* Pronounced atrantham, For this information I am indebted to my
friend Mr, M'Allister, schoolmaster at St, Mary's Loch.


SURVIVALS IN MYSTERIES. 285


nately, Lobeck, who published the Greek description of
the furadun (Aglaophamus, 700), was unacquainted
with the modern ethnological evidence,

3- The custom of plastering the initiated over with
clay or filth was common in Greek as in barbaric
mysteries, Greek examples may be given first.
Demosthenes accuses Aischines of helping his mother
in certain mystic rites, aiding her, especially, by be-
daubing the initiate with clay and bran.’ Harpo-
eration explains the term used (aroparrwr) thus:
“Daubing the clay and bran on the initiate, to explain
which they say that the Titans when they attacked
Dionysus daubed themselves over with chalk, but
afterwards, for ritual purposes, clay was used.” It
may be urged with some force that the mother of
Afschines introduced foreign, novel, and possibly
savage rites, But Sophocles in a fragment of his lost
play the Capfires uses the term in the same ritual
Sens e—

erearcg xedeerhs RiroMaywaren 120g,


The idea clearly was that by cleansing away the
filth plastered over the body was symbolised the pure
and free condition of the initiate, He might now ery
in the mystic chant—

epuyor Maxo, susor Guess,
Worse have J fled, better have J found.

That this was the signifiance of the daubing with
clay in Greek mysteries and the subsequent cleansing
seems quite certain. We are led straight to this

1 De Corond, 313.


286 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


conclusion by similar rites, in which the purpose of
mystically cleansing was openly put forward. Thus
Plutarch, in his essay on superstition, represents the
guilty man who would be purified actually rolling
in clay, confessing his misdeeds, and then sitting at
ane purified by the cleansing process (mepyuar-
rouevos).! _In another rite, the cleansing of blood-guilti-

nees, a similar process was practised. Orestes, after
killing his mother, complains that the Eumenides
do not cease to persecute him, though he has been
“purified by blood of swine.”= Apollonins says that
the red hand of the murderer was dipped in the
blood of swine and then washed.* Athenwns de-
scribes a similar unpleasant ceremony. The blood
of whelps was apparently used also, men being first
daubed with it and then washed clean.” The word
jTépiattoves is again the Sppiipeiate ritual term.
Such rites Plutarch calls puwrapai dryvetat, “ filthy
purifications."* If daubing with dirt is known to
have been a feature of Greek mysteries, it meets us
everywhere among savages. In (-Aee-F’a, that curi-
ously minute account of the Mandan mysteries, Catlin
writes that a portion of the frame of the initiate was
“covered with clay, which the operator took from a
wooden bowl, and with his hand plastered unsparingly
over.” The fifty young men waiting for initiation

‘So Hermann, op, cil., p. 133.

2 Fumenides, 27 3. 9 Argonanfica, iv, 693.

‘ix. 78. Hermann, from whom the latter passages are borrowed, aleo
quotes the evidence of a vase published by Feuerbach, Lehrbuch, p.
031, with other authorities.


® Plutarch, Quacet., Kom.. 65.
" De Superstitionc, chap. xii


SERPENTS IN MYSTERIES. 287


“were naked and entirely covered with clay of various
colours.” The custom is mentioned by Captain John
Smith in Virginia. Mr. Winwood Reade found it in
Africa, where, as among the Mandans and Spartans,
ergel torture and flogging accompanied the initiation
of young men.* In Australia the evidence for daub-
ing the initiate is very abundant.? In New Mexico,
the Zunis stole Mr. Cushing's black paint, as consider-
ing it even better than clay for religious daubing.*

Another savage rite, the use of serpents in Greek
mysteries, is attested by Clemens Alexandrinus and by
Demosthenes (loc. cif.) Clemens says the snakes were
caressed in representations of the loves of Zeus in ser-
pentine form. The great savage example is that of
“the snake-dance of the Moquis,” who handle rattle-
snakes in the mysteries without being harmed.’ The
dance is partly totemistic, partly meant, like the Thes-
mophoria, to secure the fertility of the lands of the
Moquis of Arizona. The turndwn or pouSos is em-
ployed. Masks are worn, as in the rites of Demeter
_ Cidaria in Arcadia."

We have now attempted to establish that in Greek
law and ritual many savage customs and usages did
undeniably survive, We have seen that both philoso-
phical and popular opinion in Greece believed in a past
ageof savagery. In law, in religion, in religious art, in
custom, in human sacrifice, in relics of totemism, and

' 0-Kee-Pa, London, 1867, p. 21.

* Savage Africa, case of Mongilomba ; Pausanias, iii, 15.

? Brough Smyth, i. 60, 4 Custom and Myth, p 40.

* The Snake-Dance of the Moguis, By Captain John G. Bourke.
London, 1884.

¢ Pausanias, vill, 16


288 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


in the mysteries, we have seen that the Greeks retamed
plenty of the usages now found among the remotest and
most backward races. We have urged against the sug-
gestion of borrowing from Egypt or Asia that these sur-
vival are constantly found in Jocal and tribal religion
and rituals, and that consequently they probably date
from that remote prehistoric past when the Greeks lived
in village settlements, It may atill doubtless be urged
that all these things are Pelasgic, and were the eustoms
of a race settled in Hellas before the arrival of the -
Homeric Achweans, and Dorians, and Argives, who, on
this hypothesis, adopted and kept up the old savage
Pelasgian ways and superstitions. It is impossible to
prove or disprove this belief, nor does it affect our
argument. We allege that all Greek life below the
surface was rich in institutions now found among the
most barbaric peoples. Ifthe Greeks did not evolve
nor inherit these things, but, being in a purer civilisa-
tion, borrowed them, so much the worse for their taste,
These institutions, whether borrowed of inherited,
would still be part of the legacy left by savages to
cultivated peoples. As this legacy is so large in
custom and ritual, it is not unfair to argue that por-
tions of it will also be found in myths, It is now
time to discuss Greek myths of the origin of things,
and decide whether they are or are not analogous in
ideas to the myths which spring from the wild and
ignorant fancy of Australians, Cahrocs, Nootkns, and
Bushmen.


{ 28 )


CHAPTER X.
GREEK COSMOGONIC MYTHS.


Nature of the evidence—Traditions of origin of the world and man—
Homeric, Hesiodiz, and Orphic myths—Later evidence of histo-
rians, dramatista, commentators—The Homeric atory compara
fively pure—The story in Hesiod, and its savage analogues—The
explanations of the myth of Cronus, modern and ancient—The
Orphic cosmogony—Phanes and Prajapati—Greek myths of the
origin of man—Their savage analogues.


THe authorities for Greek cosmogonic myth are ex-
tremely various in date, character, and value. The
most ancient texts are the Jliad and the poems attri-
buted to Hesiod. The Jilted, whatever its date, what-
ever the place of its composition, was intended to please
a noble class of warriors. The Hesiodic poems, at least
the Theogony, have clearly a didactic aim, and the in-
tention of presenting o systematic and orderly account
of the divine genealogies. To neither would we will-
ingly attribute a date much later than the ninth cen-
tury of our era, but the question of the dates of all
the epic and Hesiodic poems, and even she Were
parts, is greatly disputed among scholars. Yet it
a denied that, however late the “reas os
VoL. L


290 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


of some of the poems may be, they contain ideas of
extreme antiquity. Although the Homeric poems are
usually considered, on the whole, more ancient than
those attributed to Hesiod,’ it is a fact worth remem-
bering that the notions of the origin of things in
Hesiod are much more savage and (as we hold) much
more archaic than the opinions of Homer.

While Yesiod offers a complete theogony or genea-.
logy of deities and heroes, Homer gives no more than
hints and allusions to the stormy past of the gods.
Tt is clear, however, that his conception of that past
differed considerably from the traditions of Hesiod.
However we may explain it, the Homeric mythology
(though itself repugnant to the philosophers from
Xenophanes downwards) is much more mild, pure, and
humane than the mythology either of Hesiod or of
our other Greek authorities. Some may imagine that
Homer retains a clearer and less corrupted memory
than Hesiod possessed of an original and authentic
“divine tradition.” Others may find in Homer's com-
parative purity a proof of the later date of his epics
in their present form, or may even proclaim that
Homer was a kind of Cervantes, who wished to laugh
the gods away. There is no conceivable or incon-
ceivable theory about Homer that has not its advo-
eates. For ourselves, we hold that the divine genius of
Homer, though working in an age distant rather than


* Grote assigns his Theogony to cire. 750 a.p. The Theogony was
taught to boys in Greece, much as the Church Catechiem and Bible
are taught in England; Eechines in Ctesiph., 135, p. 73. Libanius,
goo years alter Christ (i. 502-509, iv. S74).


HOMER AND HESIOD, __ 291


“early,” selected instinctively the purer mythical
materials, and burned away the coarser dross of
antique legend, leaving little but the gold which is
comparatively refined,

We must remember that it does not follow that any
mythical ideas are later than the age of Homer be-
cause we first meet them in poems of a later date.
We have already seen that though the Fraimeanas are
much later in date of compilation than the Feda, yet a
tradition which we first find in the FBraimanas may
be older than the time at which the Veda was com-
piled. In the same way, as Mr. Max Miller observes,
“we know that certain ideas which we find in later
writers do not occur in Homer. But it does not follow
at all that such ideas are all of later growth or possess
a secondary character. One myth may have belonged
to one tribe; one god may have had his chief worship
in one locality; and our becoming sequainted with
these through a later poet does not in the least prove
their later origin.” *

After Homer and Hesiod our most ancient autho-
rities for Greek cosmogonic myths are probably the
so-called Orphic fragments. Concerning the dates
and the manner of growth of these poems, volumes of
erudition have been compiled. As Homer is silent
about Orpheus (in spite of the position which the
mythical Thracian bard acquired as the inventor of
lettera and magic and the father of the mysteries),
it has been usual to regard the Orphic ideas as of


1 Hibbert Lectures, pp. 130-131.


292 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


late introduction. We may agree with Grote and
Lobeck that these ideas and the ascetic “ Orphic mode
of life” first acquired importance in Greece about the
time of Epimenides, or, roughly speaking, between 620
and 500 8.¢.' That age certainly witnessed a curious
growth of superstitions fears and of mystic ceremonies
intended to mitigate spiritual terrors. Greece was
becoming more intimately acquainted with Egypt and
with Asia, and was comparing her own religion with
the beliefs and rites of other peoples. The times and
the minds of men were being prepared for the clear
philosophies that soon “on Argive heights divinely
sang.’ Just as, when the old world was about to
accept Christianity, a deluge of Oriental and barbaric
superstitions swept across men’s minds, so immediately
before the dawn of Greek philosophy there came an
irruption of mysticism and of spiritual fears. We
may suppose that the Orphic poems were collected,
edited, and probably interpolated, in this dark hour of
Greece, “To me,” says Lobeck, “it appears that the
verses may be referred to the age of Onomacritus,
am age curious in the writings of ancient poets, and
attracted by the allurements of mystic religions.” The
style of the surviving fragments is sufficiently pure
and epic; the strange unheard of myths are unlike
those which the Alexandrian poeta drew from foun-
tains long lost. But how much in the Orphic myths
is imported from Asia or Egypt, how much is the
invention of literary forgera like Onomacritus, how


1 Lobeck, Aglaophamus, L 317; Grote, Gi. 86,
* Aglaophamws, i. 611.


ORPHIC POEMS, 295


much should be regarded as the first guesses of the
physical poet-philosophera, and how much is truly
ancient popular legend recast in literary form, it is
impossible with certainty to determine.

We must not regard a myth as necessarily late or
necessarily foreign because we first meet it in an
“ Orphic composition.” IZf the myth be one of the sort
which encounter us in every quarter, nay, in every
obscure nook of the globe, we may. plausibly regard
it as ancient. Ifit bear the distinct marks of being a
Neo-platonic pasticiz, we may reject it without hesita-
tion. On the whole, however, our Orphic authorities
can never be quoted with much satisfaction. The
later sources of evidence for Greek myths are not
of great use to the student of cosmogonic legend,
ees invaluable when we come to treat of the


For these the authorities are the
whole range of Greek literature, poets, dramatists,
philosophers, critics, historians, and travellers. We
have also the notes and comments of the scholiasts or
commentators on the poets and dramatists, Some-
times these annotators only darken counsel by their
guesses. Sometimes perhaps, especially in the scholia
on the Jliad and (dyssey, they furnish us now and
then with a precious myth or popular marchen not
otherwise recorded. The regular professional mythe-
graphi, again, of whom Apollodorus (150 B.C.) is the
type, compiled manuals explanatory of the myths
which were alluded to by the poets. The scholiasts
and mythographt often retain myths from lost poems


204 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


and lost plays. Finally, from the travellera and
historians we occasionally glean examples of the tales
(“holy chapters,” as Mr. Grote calls them) which
were narrated by priests and temple officials to
the pilgrims who visited the sacred shrines,

These “chapters” are almost invariably puerile,
savage, and obscene. They bear the stamp of extreme
antiquity, because they never, as a rule, passed through
the purifying medium of literature. There were
many myths too crude and archaic for the purposes
af poetry and of the drama. These were handed down
from local priest to local priest, with the inviolability
of sacred and immutable tradition. We have already
given a reason for assigning a high antiquity to the
local temple myths. Just as Greeks lived in villages
before they gathered into towns, so their gods were
‘village gods before they were gods of towns, and
gods of towns before they were national deities. ‘The
local myths are those of the archaic village state of
“culture,” more ancient, more savage, than literary
narrative. Very frequently the local legends were
subjected to the process of allegorical interpretation,
as men became alive to the monstrosity of their un-
for our authorities, who merely remark, “ Concerning
this a certain holy chapter is told,” but decline to
record the legend. In the same way missionaries, with
mistaken delicacy, often refuse to repeat some savage
legend with which they are acquainted.

The latest sort of testimony as to Greek myths
must be sought in the writings of the heathen apolo-


=


HOMER'S COSMOGONY. 295


gists or learned Pagan defenders of Paganism in the
first centuries during Christianity, and in the works
of their opponents, the fathers of the Church. Thongh
the fathers certainly do not understate the abomina-
tions of Paganism, and though the heathen apologists
make free use of allegorical (and impossible) inter-
pretations, the evidence of both is often useful and
important.’ The testimony of ancient art, vases, statues,
pictures, and the descriptions of these where they no
longer survive, are also of service and interest.

After this brief examination of the sources of our
knowledge of Greek myth, we may approach the Ho-
meric legends of the origin oe and the world’s
beginning. In Homer these matters are only referred
to incidentally. He more than once calls Oceanus
(that is, the fabled stream which flows all round the
world, here regarded as a person) “the origin of the
gods,” “the origin of all things.”* That Ocean is con-
sidered a person, and that he is not an allegory for
water or the aqueous element, appears from the speech
of Hera to Aphrodite: “I am going to visit the limits
of the bountiful earth, and Oceanus, father of the
gods, and mother Tethys, who reared me duly, and
nurtured me in their halls, when far-seeing Zeus im-
prisoned Cronus beneath the earth and the unvintaged
sea.” 5 Homer does not appear to know Uranus as

a Gibbon's comment on the evidence ia amusing: Nowa ne connals-
eons gure le aystime du Paganiame que par les podtes, et par les pores
page ea los tna et les autres trie adonnds sux fictions ""— Haat sur
Etude de la Littérature, p, 76 (Londres, 1762).

1 Jiiad, xiv. 201, 302, 246,


3 In reading what Homer and Hesiod report about these matters, we
toust remember that all the forces and phenomena are conceived ul


2098 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


the father of Cronus, and thus the myth of the mutila-
tion of Uranus necessarily does not occur in Homer.
Cronus, the head of the dynasty which preceded that of
Zeus, is described’ as the son of Rhea, but nothing is
said of his father. The passage contains the account
which Poseidon himself chose to give of the war in
heaven: “Three brethren are we, and sons of Cronus
whom Rhea bare—Zeus and myself, and Hades is the
third, the ruler of the folk in the under-world, And
in three lots were all things divided, and each drew a
domain of his own.” Here Zeus is the eldest son of
Cronus. Though lots are drawn at hazard for the pro-
perty of the father (which we know to have been cus-
tomary in Homer's time), yet throughout the Iliad
Zeus constantly claims the respect and obedience due
to him by right of primogeniture.? We shall see that
Hesiod adopts exactly the opposite view. Zeus is the
youngest child of Cronus. His supremacy is an example
by them ns persona, In this regard the archaic and savage view of
all things as personal and human is preserved. “I maintain," Bays
Grote, “moreover, fully the character of these great divine agents as
persona, which is the light in which they presented themselves to the
Homeric or Hesiodic andience, Uranus, Nyx, Hypnos, and Oneiros
(heaven, night, sleep, and dream) are persons just as much as Zeus or
Apollo, To resolve them into mere allegories is unsafe and unprofitable,
We then depart from the point of view of the original hearers without
acqtiring any consistent or philosophical point of view of our own.”
This holds good though portions of the Hesiodic genealogies are dis-
tinctly poetic allegories cast in the mould of the ancient personal theary
of things,

. Niad, xv. 187,

* The custom by which eons drew lots for equal shares of their dead
father’s property is described in Odyssey, xiv. 199-212, Here Odyaseca,
giving a false account of himeelf, says that be was a Crotan, a bastard,
and that his half-brothers, born in wedlock, drew lots for thelr father's
inberitance, and did not admit him to the drawing, but gave him a
anal] portion apart,


HESIOD'S COSMOGONY. 297


of jingsfen recht, the wide-spread custom which makes
the youngest child the heir in chief! But how did the
sons of Cronus come to have his property in their
hands to divide? By right of successful rebellion,
when “ Zens ao praoneD Cronus beneath the earth and
the unvintaged sea.” With Cronus in his imprison-
ment are the Titans. That is all that Homer cares to
tell about the absolute beginning of things and the
first: dynasty of rulers of Olympus. His interest is all
in the actual reigning family, that of the Cronidm, nor
is he fond of reporting their youthful excesses.

We now turn from Homer's incidental allusions to
the ample and systematic narrative of Hesiod. As
Mr. Grote says, “ Men habitually took their informa-
tion respecting their theogonic antiquities from the
Hesiodic poems.” Hesiod was accepted as an authority
both by the pious Pausanias in the second century
of our era—who protested against any attempt to
alter stories about the gods—and by moral reformers
like Plato and Xenophanes, who were revolted by the
ancient legends," and, indeed, denied their truth.
Yet though Hesiod represents Greek orthodoxy, we
have observed that Homer (whose epics are probably
still more ancient) steadily ignores the more barba-
tous portions of Hesiod’s narrative. Thos the ques-
tion arises, Are the stories of Hesiod's invention, and
later than Homer's, or does Homer's genius half un-
consciously purify materials like those which Hesiod
presents in the crudest form? Mr. Grote says, “ How


1 See Elton, Origina of Fuglish History, pp. 185-207.
* Timaws, gt ; Repullic, 377.


298 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


far these stories are the invention of Hesiod himeelf it
is imposible to determine. They bring us down to
a cast of fancy more coarse and indelicate than the
Homeric, and more nearly resemble some of the holy
chapters (iepct Aeyor) of the more recent mysteries,
such, for example, as the tale of Dionysos Zagreus.
There 1s evidence in the. Theogony itself that the author
was acquainted with local legends current both at
Krete and at Delphi, for he mentions both the moun-
tain-cave in Krete wherein the newly-born Zeus was
hidden, and the stone near the Delphian temple—the
identical stone which Kronos had swallowed—placed
by Zeus himself as a sign and marvel to mortal men,
Both these monuments, which the poet expressly refers
to, and had probably seen, imply a whole train of acces-
sory and explanatory local legends, current probably
among the priests of Krete and Delphi.”

All these circumstances appear to be good evidence
of the great antiquity of the legends recorded by
Hesiod. In the first place, arguing merely a priori,
it is extremely improbable that in the brief interval
between the date of the comparatively pure and noble
mythology of the Jliad and the much ruder Jheogony
of Hesiod men inrented stories like the mutilation of
Uranus and the swallowing of his offspring by Cronus.
The former legend is almost exactly parallel, as has
already been shown to the myth of Papa and Rangi
in New Zealand. The latter has its parallels among
the savage Bushmen and Australians. It is highly
improbable that men in an age so civilised as that of
Homer invented myths as hideous as those of the


THE MYTHS ANCIENT. 29


lowest’ savages. Hut if we take these myths to be,
not new inventions, but the sacred stories of local
priesthoods, their antiquity is probably incalculable.
The sacred stories, as we know from Pausanias, Hero-
dotus, and from all the writers who touch on the sub-
ject of the mysteries, were myths communicated by
the priests to the initiated. Plato speaks of such
myths in the Republic, 378: “If there is an absolute
necessity for their mention, a very few might hear
them in a mystery, and then let them sacrifice, not a
common pig, but some huge and unprocurable victim ;
this would have the effect of very greatly diminishing
the number of the hearers.” This is an amusing ex-
ample of a plan for veiling the horrors of myth. The
pig was the animal usually offered to Demeter, the god-
dess of the Eleusinian mysteries. Plato proposes to
substitute some “ unprocurable” beast, perhaps a giraffe
or an elephant.

To Hesiod,then, we must turn for what is the earliest
complete literary form of the Greek cosmogonic myth.
Hesiod begins, like the New Zealanders, with “the
august race of gods, by earth and wide heaven be-
gotten."* So the New Zealanders, as we have seen,
gay, “The heaven which is above us, and the earth
which is beneath us, are the progenitors of men and the
origin of all things.” Hesiod* somewhat differs from this
view by making Chaos absolutely first of all things,
followed by “wide-bosomed Earth,” Tartarus, and Eros
(love). Chaos unaided produced Erebus and Night ; the
children of Night and Erebus are Ether and Day.

i Theog., 45- 3 Theop., 116,


300 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Earth produced Heaven, who then became her own lover,
and to Heaven she bore Oceanus, and the Titans, Coens
and Crius, Hyperion and Iapetus, Thea and Rhea,
Themis, Mnemosyne, Phobe, Tethys, “and youngest
alter these was born Cronus of crooked counsel, the most
dreadful of her children, who ever detested his puissant
sire,” Heaven, There were other sons of Earth and
Heaven peculiarly hateful to their father,’ and these
Uranus used to hide from the light in a hollow of
Gea. Both they and Gia resented this treatment,
and the Titans, like “the children of Heaven and
Earth” in the New Zealand poem, “sought to discern
the difference between light and darkness.” Gwa
(unlike Earth in the New Zealand myth, for there she
is purely passive), conspired’ with her children, pro-
duced iron, and asked her sons to avenge their wrongs.”
Fear fell upon all of them save Cronus, who (like
Tane Mahuta in the Maori poem) determined to end
the embraces of Earth and Heaven. But while the
New Zealand, like the Indo-Aryan myth,” conceives
of Earth and Heaven as two beings who have never
previously been sundered ot all, Hesiod makes Heaven
amorously approach his spouse from a distance. This
was the moment for Cronus,‘ who stretched out his
hand armed with the sickle of iron, and mutilated
Uranus. Asin so many savage myths, the blood of
the wounded god fallen on the ground produced
strange creatures, nymphs of the ash-tree, — and

\ Theng., 155. * Theog., 1

? Muir, v. 23, quoting Aifarcya Brakmana, iv. ps “These two


worlds were once joined ; subsequently “3 separated”
‘ Theog., 75-155.


IMMORALITY OF THE MYTH. 301


faries. As in the Maori myth, one of the children of
Heaven stood apart and did not consent to the deed.
This was Oceanus in Greece,’ and in New Zealand it
was Tawhiri Matea, the wind, “who arose and followed
his father, Heaven, and remained with him in the
open spaces of the sky.” Uranus now predicted * that
there would come a day of vengeance for the evil deed
of Cronus, and so ends the dynasty of Uranus.

This story was one of the great stumbling-blocks of
orthodox Greece. It was the tale that Plato said
should be told, if at all, only to a few in a mystery,
after the sacrifice of some rare and scarcely obtainable
animal. Even among the Maoris, the conduct of the
children who severed their father and mother is re-
garded as a singular instance of iniquity, and 1s told
to children as a moral warning, an example to be
condemned. In Greece, on the other hand, unless we
are to take the Euthypiro as wholly ironical, some
of the pious justified their conduct by the example of
Zeus. Euthyphro quotes this example when he is
about to prosecute his own father, for which act, he
says, “Men are angry with me; so inconsistently do
they talk when I am concerned and when the gods
are concerned.”* But in Greek the tale has no mean-
ing. It has been allegorised in various ways, and
Lafitan fancied that it was a distorted form of the
Biblical account of the origin of sin. In Maori the
legend is perfectly intelligible. Heaven and earth
were conceived of (like everything else), a3 beings
with human parts and passions, linked in an endless


1 Apollod., i 1s. ® Theag., 209 3 Futhyphro, 6.


302 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


embrace which crushed and darkened their children.
It became necessary to separate them, and this feat
was achieved not without pain. “Then wailed the
Heaven, and exclaimed the Earth, ‘ Wherefore this
murder ? why this great sin? Why separate us?" But
what cared Tane? Upwards he sent one and down-
wards the other. He cruelly severed the sinews
which united Heaven and Earth.”’ The Greek myth,

too, contemplated earth and heaven as beings cor-
 poreally united, and heaven as a malignant power
that concealed his children in darkness.

But while the conception of heaven and earth as
parents of living things remains perfectly intelligible
in one sense, the vivid personification which regarded
them as creatures with human parts and passions had
ceased to be intelligible in Greece before the times of
the earliest philosophers. The old physical concep-
tion of the pair became a metaphor, and the account
of their rending asunder by their children lost all
significance, and seemed to be an abominable and

intelligible myth. When examined in the light of
isMiew! Yesland story, and. of the fact, thes catty
peoples do regard all phenomena as human beings,
with physical attributes like those of men, the legend
of Cronus, and Uranus, and Gaa ceases to be a mystery.
It is, at bottom, a savage explanation (as in the Samoan
story) of the separation of earth and heaven, an ex-
planation which could only have occurred to people in
a state of mind which civilisation has forgotten.

The next generation of Hesiodic gods (if gods we

t Taylor, New Zealand, 19,


MYTH OF CRONUS, 303


are to call the members of this race of non-natural
men) was not more fortunate than the first in its
family relations. 3

Cronus wedded his sister, Rhea, and begat Demeter,
Hera, Hades, Poseidon, and the youngest, Zeus. “ And
mighty Cronus swallowed down each of them, each
that came to their mother’s knees from her holy womb,
with this intent that none other of the proud sons
of heaven should hold his kingly sway among the
immortals, Heaven and Earth had warned him that
he too should fall through his children, Wherefore
he kept no vain watch, but spied and swallowed down
each of his offspring, while grief immitigable took
possession of Rhea.’” Rhea, being about to become
the mother of 4eus, took counsel with Uranus and
Gea. By their advice she went to Crete, where
Zeus was born, and, in place of the child, she pre-
sented to Cronus a huge stone swathed in swaddling
bands. This he swallowed, and was easy in his mind.
fous prew up, and by some means, suggested by
Gea, compelled Zeus to disgorge all his offspring.
“And he vomited ont the stone first, as he had
swallowed it last.”* The swallowed children emerged
alive, and Zeus fixed the stone at Pytho (Delphi),
where Pausanias* had the privilege of seeing it, and
where, as it did not tempt the cupidity of barbarous
invaders, it probably still exists. It was not a large
stone, Pansaninas says, and the Delphians used to pour
oil over it, as Jacob did‘ to the stone at Bethel, and
on feast-daya they covered it with wraps of wool.

1 Theoy., 460, 465.  * Theog., ooh 4% x. 2g5. 4 Gen. xxviii. 1&8


404 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


The custom of smearing fetish-stones (which Theo-
phrastus mentions as one of the practices of the super-
stitious man) is clearly a survival from the savare
stage of religion. As a rule, however, among savages,
fetish-stones are daubed with red paint (like the face
of the wooden ancient Dionysi in Greece, and of Tsui
among the Hottentots), not smeared with oil,

The myth of the swallowing and disgorging of his
own children by Cronus was another of the stumbling-
blocks of Greek orthodoxy. The common explana-
tion, that Time (Kpevos) does swallow his children, the
days, is not quite satisfactory. Time brings never the
past back again,as Cronus did. Besides, the myth of
the swallowing is not confined to Cronus, Modern
philology has given, as usual, different analyses of
the meaning of the name of the god. Hermann, with
Preller, derives it from xpaivm, to fulfil. The harvest-
month, says Preller, was named (ronion in Greece,
and Crenia was the title of the harvest-festival. The
sickle of Cronus is thus brought into connection with
the sickle of the harvester.*

Let us now examine the various attempts to explain
the myth of Cronus. Mr. Max Miller's explanation
of the myth of Cronus (regarded as Time) is in-
genious,

“There is no such being as Kodvos in Sanskrit,
Kpovos did not exist till long after Zeus in Greece.
Zeus was called by the Greeks “ the son of Time.” _ .

 Pausaniaa, fi, 2, 5.
* Preller, Gr. Myth, i. 44; Hartung, iL 48: Porphyry, Abet., i.


§4- Welcker will not bear of this etymology, Gr, Gatt, L 145,
note 9, |


ne ee a
: = ~
- 4 = -


EXPLANATIONS OF THE MYTIL 305


It meant originally, not that Time was the origin or
source of Zeus, but xporiwr or Kpomidns Was used in
the sense of connected with time, representing time,
existing through all time.” ‘To be brief, this meaning
of «powiéns was forgotten, and the word was mistaken
for a patronymic, meaning “son of a more ancient
god, Kpoves.” Having thus got their “more ancient
god,” the Greeks wanted a myth for him. They said
that he mutilated his own father and swallowed and
disgorged his own children. Why the Greeks attri-
buted these disgusting feats to Cronus, and especially
why they did so long after they had become thoroughly
Hellenic in language, is exactly what Mr. Miiller does
not appear to explain, though he started by declaring
that myths like these were precisely what wanted
explaining. “ Among the lowest tribes of Africa and
America we hardly find anything more revolting.”?
Among explanations of Cronus and his legend which
do not regard him as a myth or allegory of time, we
have our choice between two leading and contradictory
hypotheses. To the mind of Schwartz, Cronus is a
storm-god, a god of the dark tempest. In the opinion
of Preller and Bottiger, he derives many of his char-
acteristics, especially his cannibalism, from the Pho
nician worship of Moloch. Now as Moloch means
“king,” and is one of the names of the Semitic sun-
god Baal, there is obviously a great discrepancy be-
tween the idea of Cronus as a sun-god and Cronus
as astorm-god. The details of his legend, however,


1 Selected Exsoys, i. 460, The idea belongs to Welcker. Grizch.


Gitterlehre, 1857, L 1g0-145,
VOL. L U


306 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,
are, a8 usual, made without difficulty to fit either


As to the relations between Cronus and Moloch,
they were originally perceived or imagined by the
fact, it is certain that the deities and myths of most
points incommon. ‘The Greeks recognised Dionysus in
the Egyptian Osiris, Aphrodite in the Semitic Astarte,
Cronus in the Semitic Moloch, In the same way the
Romans identified Hercules with Heracles, Saturn
with Cronus, and so forth, But just as readily Saha-
gun and Acosta and other early missionaries recog-
nised Venus, Mars, and Ceres in the figures of the
Mexican or Peruvian Olympus. Had the Greeks
discovered Mexico, they would have found Ares or
Heracles in Huitzilopochtli, Zeus in Tezcatlipoca, and
Demeter in Chicome Coatl.1 The Greeks would have
accounted for these resemblances (as they did in the
case of the Egyptian gods) by some hypothesis of
borrowing. Probably scholars will not now maintain
that Greeks ever borrowed from Mexicans, or Maoris
from Greeks, But the hypothesis of borrowing is
still favoured, and may or may not be correct, when
a Greck is found to correspond to a Pheenician,
or a Phoenician to an Accadian or Chaldwan deity.
This theory of borrowing is applied by some mytholo-
gists to explain the myth of Cronus. Mr. Max
Miiller, we have seen, thinks Cronus a late Greek
god, invented to explain the name Cronion. The

1 Sahagun, i. 6, 7.


WAS CRONUS BORROWED? 307


Greeks, on the other hand, recognised their Cronus
in the Phosnician Moloch.’ Thus Porphyry describes
the human sacrifices with which the Rhodians adored
Cronus, and when the Greeks had to speak of the
Carthaginian offering of children to Moloch, Moloch
was spoken of by them under the name of Cronus.
We have, therefore, our choice between two hypotheses,
The Greeks borrowed their legend of Cronus and
their custom of human sacrifices from the Phonicians,
or the Greeks, like the Phoenicians, had originally a
fond of human blood, and under the Phonician
Moloch they recognised their own original Cronus.
The idea that the Greeks borrowed a god and @ cus-
tom they would never have invented is maintained,
among others, by Bottiger* In the story of the vic-
tory of Zeus and of the exile of Cronns to the distant
west, Bottiger sees the victory of the Hellenic religion
of Zens and the retreat of the Phoenician faith “ before
the folding star of Crete.” Professor Sayce is struck
by the resemblance between the legend of Moloch,
(or Basal under the name of Moloch) and the legend
of Cronus; but he regards Moloch as a deity of non-
Semitic origin, a deity borrowed by the Phoenicians
“from the primitive Accadian population of Babylonia.
Like the Cronos of the Greeks, he (Baal, Moloch,
the sun-god) slew his own son Sadid” (which, however,
Cronus did not do) “and cut off his daughter's head
with the sword, while he rent his father, the sky, into
pieces, filling the streams and rivers with the blood
aspen EE. 14, 1§, . 416; Porphyry, ap. Eusch, Prep, Erany.,
* Kunat Mythologie 222, 372,


308 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


that flowed from the mangled corpse. Here” (says
Professor Sayce) “ the veil of the legend can be easily
lifted. The blood of the sky is the rain which is pou ed
upon the earth before the sun-god pierces the dark
storm-clond that covers his face."" As a matter of
fact, the “piercing” comes first in the myth, the drops
afterwards ; whereas, in nature the drops (according
to Professor Sayce) precede the piercing.

According to this pedigree of the myth of the
mutilation of Uranus, it ought to be originally Acca-
dian. But the Scandinavians, and the Maoris, and
the Indians, and the Tinnehs, and Tacullies of North
America cannot have borrowed their analogous myths
from the Accadians.

The mythological theory of Schwartz does not regard
Cronus as borrowed from Baal, who again is the sun-
god, but as a god of storm and thunder. The sickle
with which Cronus wounded Uranus is (to Schwartz's
mind) the rainbow, “ the sickle of thunder.” The blood-
drops are not raindrops, as in Professor Sayce’s theory,
but flashes of lightning. Freller, again, looks on
Cronus neither as time, thunder, nor the sun, but as
a kind of god of harvest and of the ripening autumn.
This theory is supported by the derivation of xpévos from
Kpaine, to accomplish, to fulfil, to ripen.? The famous
sickle goes well with a harvest-god, and it has been
observed that the harvest-feast was known as Cronia.
Yet this explanation matches but ill with Schwarte’s
notion that the defeat of Cronus by his children means


| Contemporary Review, September 1883.


* Schwartz, Der Uraprung der Mythologie, pp. 133 135. 139 1493
Preller, Griechische Mythologie, p. 44.


EXPLANATIONS OF CRONUS, 309 -


the exile of winter by the summer months. Schwartz
also recognises Cronus as the thunder, when he pursues
his wife in the shape of a horse, while she sssumes
the form of a mare. It will now be plain enongh that
some scholars must be wrong somewhere. Cronns can
scarcely be both time and thunder, both sun and cloud;
he cannot be originally Greek and originally Phoenician
or Aceadian; he can hardly be at once the winter
weather and the sun-god.

To these interpretations, and to many others which
have exercised or amused the ingenuity of the learned,'
may now be added the explanation of Dr. C. P. Tiele,*
“T shall explain what I can," says Dr. Tiele, “but I
cannot explain everything.” He will not explain the
sickle of Cronus as the rainbow, the crescent moon, or
the Milky Way. “It is simply the ancient attribute
and arm of the Titan, sabre or scimitar.” Nor does
Dr. Tiele fly for aid to etymology. He prefers to
examine the place and character of Cronus in Greek
religion and myth, so as to deduce the fundamental
idea of the god from the sum of his relations. The
main point is that Cronos was worshipped with human
sacrifices, which seems in conformity with his character
a “devourer” or “swallower.” Again, the Attic
festival called Cronia, on the twelfth day after the
‘summer solstice, was at once a harvest-home and a
memory of the fabled age of gold, like the Roman
Saturnalia, Cronus himself, in Pindar, flourishes in o
kind of golden age in the Fortunate Islands." Thus

1 Custom and Myth, “The Myth of Cronus”
* Revue det Hint, des Rel, November-December 1855.
2 Pindar, (., i. 7o-8a. Porph. De Advt, iv. 2


* 3Te MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Cronus has a benevolent side to his usually truculent
character. He is also represented im art as veiled or
concealed, A veiled god who “lives in the west, that
is, where the sun sets, and the deeps under the earth,”
and who rules over dead Titans and heroes, must be a
god of death, and consequently god of harvest, for seed
is fructified by subterranean powers. Even so Perse-


passes half of her year in the under-world. Thus
Preller and Kuhn make the mistake of explaining the


god in only one of his aspects. With Kuhn he is the


god of the nocturnal sky, with Preller the god who
ripens the grain. Really he is doth. He unites his
apparently contradictory characteristics, becanse he is
the god par excellence of the under-world, while at
the same time he is the god of the upper air, the
midnight sky. He goes up aloft at night and in
winter “from the depths where he dwells to reign in
the higher world.”

Turning from the character of Cronus thus set forth
in ritual to his myths, Dr. Tiele discovers that these
depict the same phenomena of Nature, They are
mythical parallels, and a synthetic mythology, under
the influence of art, has united them in a single con-
secutive story. The first incident, the severing by
Cronus of Uranus and Gmwa, “ refers to the passnce
from day to night, from winter to summer, from light
to darkness. What ends the union of the warming
and fertilising heaven-god with mother earth? I¢
is Cronus, the god of the lower world and of denth,
armed with his sharp-toothed Aarpe.” At the moment


MUTILATION OF URANUS, SUNSET. (7) Ru


of the contact of heaven and earth he mutilates his
parent, and throws away the portion abstracted. “ It
needs but a little of the true sense for mythology to
see that this is merely the description of the setting
sun.” This is proved by the birth of Erinnyes, giants,
and Melian nymphs from the blood of Uranus; for the
Erinnyes are noctural goddesses, and “the Melian
nymphs are not ash-nymphs, bot bees, that is to
say, Stars.” The blood represents the red of sunset; .
and if Aphrodite rises from the sea-foam where the
amputated portions fell, “she manifests herself here in

So this earlier incident, with all its foul details, is
merely a curious and disgusting old Greek way of
saying that the moon rises from the sea after a fine
sunset.

The second myth, says Dr. Tiele, has a wider signi-
fication, though it is still more barbarous than the
former. ‘The myth is that which tells how Cronus
swallowed his children. The central idea here is“ the
devouring of the luminous gods, lords of day, by the
god of the nether regions,” who disgorges them at
dawn. The episode of the stone offered to the canni-
bal father in place of Zeus is an addition needed for
the introduction of the story about the education of
Zeus in Crete. There, “in conformity with his nature,
Yeus is fed with the honey of the bees that nest in the
eave of Ida (the stars of night), and with the milk of
the she-goat Amalthea, the moon, that is to say, with
light.". The combination of these ideas produces the
myth of Cronus.


312 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


All this interpretation is perhaps too elaborate, too
pat, too ingenious. Honey and milk were naturally
a baby-god's food; we need not see in them the moon
and the host of heaven. For our part, we may say with
Grote, “ Although some of the attributes and actions
ascribed to the persons are often explicable by allegory,
the whole series and system of them are never so. The
theorist who adopts this path of explanation finds that,
after one or two simple and obvious steps, the path is
no longer open, and he is forced to clear a way for
himself by gratuitous refinements and conjectures. . . .
The theogony of the Greeks . . . cannot be trans-
lated into a string of elementary, planetary, or physical
changes.” Like Dr. Tiele, we are content only to ex-
plain what we can, but he can explain far more than
we pretend to understand. Though a confession of
ignorance ig distasteful to most mythologists, it is to
this that a cautions student of the stories of Cronus is
reduced. The feat of severing the secular embrace of
heaven and earth is intelligible enough, if the position
of people who believe that heaven once actually touched
earth ie understood. Intelligible, too, is the Maori
myth, in which the forest-god, thrusting his branches
upwards, causes the divorce. But it is less easy to see
why Cronus, in particnlar, took this réle in Greece,
because nothing is known of the meaning of the name
Cronus, nor (beyond his truculence) of the god's original
character and status,

The second myth, in which he swallows his children,
has numerous parallels in savage legend. Bushmen
tell of Await Hemm, the devourer, who swallows that


SWALLOW-MYTHS. 313


" great god, the mantis insect, and disgorges him alive


with all the other persons and animals whom he has
engulphed in the course of a long and voracious career.’
The moon in Australia, while he lived on earth, wns
very greedy, and swallowed the eagle-god, whom he
had to disgorge. Mr. Im Thurn found similar tales
among the Indians of Guiana. The swallowing and
disgorging of Heracles by the monster that was to
slay Hesione is well known. Scotch peasants tell of
the same feats, but localise the myth on the banks of
the Ken in Galloway. Basutos, Eskimos, Zulus, and
European fairy tales all possess this incident, the
swallowing of many persons by o being from whose
maw they return alive and in good case.

A mythical conception which prevails from Green-
land to South Africa, from Delphi to the Solomon
Islands, from Brittany to the shores of Lake Superior,
must have some foundation in the common elements
of human nature.” Now it seems highly probable


that this curious idea may have been originally in-


vented in an attempt to explain natural phenomena
by a natore-myth. It has already been shown (chapter
vy.) that eclipses are interpreted, even by the peasantry
of advanced races, as the swallowing of the moon by a
beast or a monster. The Piutes account for the dis-
appearance of the stars in the daytime by the hypo-
thesis that the “sun swallows his children.” In the

1 Block, Bushman Foll-lore, pp. 6, 8.

® The myth of Cronus and the swallowed children and the stone in
transferred to Gargantua. See Sébillot, Gargantua dans les Traulitions
Populaires, Bout it is impossible to be certain that thie is not an
example of direct borrowing by Madame De Cerny in her Saint Suliac,


Pp. 69.


414 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Melanesian myth, dawn is ent out of the body of
night by Qat, armed Sessa dari ap ao rues
Here are examples’ of tre |
which this idea occurs for Sines explanatory purposes,
and in accordance with the laws of the savage imagi-
nation, Thus the conception of the swallowing and
disgorging being may very well have arisen out of
a nature-myth. But why is the notion atta

the legend of Cronus ?

That is precisely the question about which mytho-
logists differ, as has been shown, and perhaps it is
better to offer no explanation, However stories arise—
and this story probably arose from a natare-myth—it
is certain that they wander about the world, that they
change masters, and thus a legend which is told of a
princess with an impossible name in Zululand is told
of the mother of Charlemagne in France. The tale of
the swallowing may have been attributed to Cronus,
as a great troculent deity, thongh it has no particular
elemental signification in connection with his legend.

This peculiarly savage trick of swallowing each other
became an inherited habit in the family of Cronus.
When Zeus reached years of diseretion, he married
Metis, and this lady, according to the scholinst on
Hesiod, had the power of transforming herself into
any shape she pleased. When she was about to be a
mother, Zeus induced her to assume the shape of a
fy and instantly swallowed her. In behaving thas,
4eus acted on the advice of Uranns and Gms. It

* Compare Tylor, Prim. Cull., i 338.


* Hesiod, Theogonia, 886, See Scholiast and note in dAglaophames,
L613. Compare Puss in Boots and the Ogre.


eS Creer). ES


ss


ZEUS SWALLOWS HIS WIFE. 315


was feared that Metis would produce a child more
powerful than his father. Zeus avoided this peril by
swallowing his wife, and himself gave birth to Athene.
The notion of swallowing a hostile person, who has
been changed by magic into a conveniently small bulk,
is very common, It occurs in the story of Taliesin.’
Caridwen, in the shape of a hen, swallows Gwion Bach,
in the form of a grain of wheat.’ In the same manner
the princess in the Arabian Nights swallowed the Geni.
Here then we have in the Hesiodic myth an old
méerchen pressed into the service of the higher my-
thology. The apprehension which Zeus (like Herod
and King Arthur) always felt lest an unborn child
should overthrow him, was also familiar to Indra;
but, instead of swallowing the mother and concealing
her in his own body, like Zeus, Indra entered the
mother's body, and himself was born instead of the
dreaded child.” A cow on this occasion was born
along with Indra. This adventure of the cararoces
or swallowing of Metis was explained by the Iste
Platomsts as a Pilstonic allegory, Probably the
people who originated the tale were not Platonists,
any more than Pandarus was an Aristotelian.

After Homer and Hesiod the oldest literary autho-
ities for Greek cosmogonic myths are the poems
attributed to Orpheus. About their probable date, as
has been said, little is known. They have reached us
only in fragments, but seem to contain the first guesses
of a philosophy not yet disengaged from mythical con-
ditions, The poet preserves, indeed, some extremely

1 Mabinogion, p. 473 * Black Yajur Veda, quoted by Sayana,


316 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


rude touches of early imagination, while at the same
time one of the noblest and boldest expressions of
pantheistic thought is attributed to him. From the
game source are drawn ideas as pure as those of the
philosophical Vedic hymn," and as wild as those of the
Vedic Purusha Sutfa, or legend of the fashioning of
the world ont of the mangled limbs of Purnsha. The
authors of the Orphic cosmogony appear to have
begun with some remarks on Time (Kpévos). “Time
was when as yet this world was not."* Time, re-
garded in the mythical fashion as a person, generated
Chaos and ther, The Orphic poet styles =
Xarma weAcprov, the “ monstrous gulf,” or “gap.”
This term curiously reminds one of Ginnunga-gap in
the Scandinavian commogonic legends. “ Ginnunga-
gap was light as windless air,” and therein the blast
of heat met the cold rime, whence Ymir was generated,
the Purusha of Northern fable.* These ideas corre-
spond well with the Orphic conception of primitive
space.*

In process of time Chaos produced an egg, shining
and silver white. It is absurd to inquire, according
to Lobeck, whether the poet borrowed this widely

spread notion of a cosmic egg from Phonicia, Baby-
lon, Egypt (where the goose-god Seb laid the egy), or
whether the Orphic singer originated so obvious an
idea. Querere ludierum est. The conception may have
been borrowed, but manifestly it is one of the earliest


" Rig- Veda, x, go,
* Lobeck, Aglaophamus, i. 470. See also the quotations from
Procnloa,


* Gyls Mocking, ‘ dglacphamus, p. 473-


THE COSMIC EGG. 317


hypotheses that occur to the rude imagination. We
have now three primitive generations, time, chaos, the
ege, and in the fourth generation the egg gave birth
to Phanes, the great hero of the Orphic cosmogony.'
The earliest and rodest thinkers were puzzled, as
many savage cosmogonic myths have demonstrated,
to account for the origin of life. The myths fre-
quently hit on the theory of a hermaphroditic being,
both male and female, who produces another being
out of himself, Prajapati in the Indian stories, and
Hrimthursar in Scandinavian legend—* one of his feet
got a son on the other"—with Lox in the Algonquin
tale are examples of these double-sexed personages,
In the Orphic poem, Phanes is both male and female.
This Phanes held within him “the seed of all the
gods,” and his name is confused with the names of
Metis and Ericapwus in a kind of trinity. All this
part of the Orphic doctrine is greatly obscured by the
allegorical and theosophistic interpretations of the late
Platonists long after our era, who, as usual, insisted
on finding their own trinitarian ideas, commenta jri-
gidissima, concealed under the mythical narrative?

Another description by Hieronymus of the first
being, the Orphic Phanes, “as a serpent with bull's and
lion's heads, with a human face in the middle and
wings on the shoulders,” is sufficiently rude and sense-
less. But these physical attributes could easily be
explained away as types of anything the Platonist
pleased." The Orphic Phanes, too, was almost as
_ + Clemens Aloxan., p. 672. 7 Damascius, ap. Lobeck, i. 431.

3 Aglaoph., i. 453. * Damascins, 351, ap. Lobeck, i Sy.


318 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


many-headed as a giant in a fairy tale, or as Purusha


in the Jtig-Veda. He had a ram’s head, a bull's head,
a snake's head, and a lion's head, and glanced around
with four eyes, presumably human.' This remarkable
being was also provided with golden wings. The
nature of the physical arrangements by which Phanes
became capable of originating life in the world is
described in a style so savage and crude, that the
reader must be referred to Suidas for the original
text." The tale is worthy of the Swift-like fancy of
the Australian Narrinyeri.

Nothing can be easier or more delusive than to
explain all this wild part of the Orphic cosmogony as
an allegorical veil of any modern ideas we choose to
select. But why the “allegory” should closely imi-
tate the rough guesses of uncivilised peoples, Ahts,
Diggers, Zunis, Cahrocs, it is less easy to explain,
We can readily imagine African or American tribes
who were accustomed to revere bulls, rams, snakes, and
sO forth, ascribing the heads of all their various animal
patrons to the deity of their confederation. We can
easily see how such races as practise the savage rites
of puberty should attribute to the first being the
special organs of Phanes. But on the Neo-Platonic
hypothesis that Orpheus was a seer of Neo-Platonic
opinions, we do not see why he should have veiled his
ideas under so savage an allegory. This part of the
Orphic speculation is left in judicious silence by some
modern commentators, such as M. Darmesteter in Les


1 Hermias in Pheer, ap, Lobeck, i, 450.
* Suidas «. t. Phanes,


ORIGIN OF MAN. 319


Cosmagonies Aryennes.’ Indeed, if we choose to regard
Apollonius Rhodius, an Alexandrine poet writing in
a highly civilised age, as the representative of Orphi-
cism, it is easy to mask and pass by the more stern
and characteristic fortresses of the Orphic divine, The
theriomorphic Phanes is a much less “ Aryan” and
agreeable object than the glorious golden-winged Eros,
the love-god of Apollonius Rhodins and Aristophanes.

On the whole, the Orphic fragments appear to
contain survivals of savage myths of the origin of
things blended with purer and later speculations, The
savage ideas are finally explained by late philosophers
as allegorical veils and vestments of philosophy; but
the interpretation is arbitrary, and varies with the
taste and fancy of each interpreter. Meanwhile the
coincidence of the wilder elements with the specula-
tions native to races in the lowest grades of civilisation
is undeniable. This opinion is confirmed by the Greek
myths of the origin of Man. These, too, coincide with
the various absurd conjectures of savages.

In studying the various Greek local legends of the
origin of Man, we encounter the diffienlty of separating
them from the myths of heroes, which it will be more
convenient to treat separately. This difficulty we
have already met in our treatment of savage traditions
of the beginnings of the race. Thus we saw that
among the Melanesians, Qat, and among the Abts,
‘Quawteaht, were heroic persons, who made men and
most other things. But it was desirable to keep their
performances of this sort separate from their other


' Ewoaie Orientauz, p. 166. ? Argonautica, t-12; Aves, 693


320 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


feats, their introduction of fire, for example, and of
various arts. In the same way it will be well, in
reviewing Greek legends, to keep Prometheus’ share
in the making of men apart from the other stories
of his exploits as a benefactor of the men whom he
made. In Hesiod, Prometheus is the son of the Titan
Iapetus, and perhaps his chief exploit is to play
upon #4eus a trick of which we find the parallel in
various savage myths. It seems, however, from Ovid,"
and other texts, that Hesiod somewhere spoke of
Prometheus as having made men out of clay, like
Pond-jel in the Australian, Qat in the Melanesian,
and Tiki in the Maori myths. The same story is pre-
served in Servius's commentary on Virgil.* A different
legend is preserved in the Etymologicum Magnum
(voc. Ikonion), According to this story, after the
deluge of Deucalion, “Zeus bade Prometheus and
Athene make images of men out of clay, and the
winds blew into them the breath of life.” In con-
firmation of this legend, Pausanias was shown in
Phocis certain stones of the colour of clay, and “ smell-
ing very like human flesh ;” and these, according to the
Phocians, were “the remains of the clay from which
the whole human race was fashioned by Prometheus.” *

Aristophanes, too, in the Birds (686) talks of men
as wTAdcnara wjAov, figures kneaded of clay. Thus
there are sufficient traces in Greek tradition of the
savage myth that man was made of clay by some
superior being, like Pund-jel in the quaint Australian
story.

* Ovid. Metam., 1,82. 7 Eelogue, vi 42, 9 Pausanias, = 4, 3.


ORIGIN OF MAN, 321


We saw that among various rude races other
theories of the origin of man were current. Men were
thought to have come out of a hole in the ground
or a bed of reeds, and sometimes the very scene of
their first appearance was still known, and pointed ont
to the curious. This myth was current among races
who regarded themselves as the only people whose
origin needed explanation. Other stories represented
man as the fruit of a tree, or the child of a rock
or stone, or as the descendant of one of the lower
animals. Examples of these opinions in Greek legend
are now to be given. In the first place, we have a
fragment of Pindar, in which the poet enumerates
several of the centres from which different Greek tribes
believed men to have sprung. “ Hard it is to find
out whether Alalkomenens, first of men, arose on the
marsh of Cephissus, or whether the Curetes of Ida
first, a stock divine, arose, or if it was the Phrygian
Corybantes that the sun earliest saw,—men like trees
walking ;" and Pindar mentions Egyptian and Libyan
legends of the same description.’ The Thebans and the
Arcadians held themselves to be “ earth-born."” “The
black earth bore Pelasgus on the high wooded hills,”
says an ancient line of Asius. The Dryopians were
an example of a race of men born from ash-trees.
The myth of gens virum truncis ef duro robore nata,
“bern of tree-trunk and the heart of oak,” had
passed into a proverb even in Homer's time.* Lucian

1 Preller, dua Auf, p 15%

* Virgil, fim, viii. 315; Odyaey, xix. 163; JMad, &. xxii, 120;
Juvenal, vi. 11, Cf, also Bouché Leclerq, De Origine Generis Humani.

TOL. L. x


322 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


mentions! the Athenian myth “that men grew like
eabbages out of the earth.” As to Greek myths of
the descent of families from animals, these will be
examined in the discussion of the legend of Zeus.


NOTE
Peesicias Cosmocosic Mrras.


The commercial relations between the Sidonians or Pho-
nicians and the Homeric and pre-Homeric Greeks make it very
desirable to gain a clear view of Phoenician mythology. Though
the extent of Greek borrowing from Phornician sources bas pro-
bably been exaggerated by some scholars—for example, by Dun-
cker—the Greeks may have been considerably influenced by their
Semitic neighbours, Not only the direct evidence of Homer, bat
the relics of Phoenician art found on Greek soil, the borrowing
of letters from the Phinician alphabet, and the famous legends of
Cadmus and Europa, demonstrate the connection between the
Semitic and Aryan peoples of the Levant, That their mytholo-
gies also resembled each other in some poinis is certain, but the
inference that many Greek myths are “loan-mytha,” as certain
Homeric words are “loan-wonls,” from Phonicia, must not be
too hastily drawn, Resemblances between the myths of nations
severed from each other by all the width of the world, races aa
remote a5 Alnske from Chaldes, have eon shown to exist, There-
fore contiguous races of different stocks need not have bartered
mythe with each other, even when their stories closely resemble
each other. But the hypothesis of barter in mytha, when there
have undeniably been exchanges in commerce, art, and science,
will always be plansible, and can never be hastily set oxide.

Unhappily our information about Phoenician mythe ia late,
scanty, suspicions, and corrupt. The chief sources are the frag-
ments attributed to Sanchoniathon by Philo Byblius, a gram-
marian of the first ond second Christian centuries, Now when
a curious Phoenician inquirer, familiar with Greek opinion


1 Philope., iil,


=


——— eS
#


GREEK AND PH(ENICIAN MYTHS. 323


and Greek legends, and constrained, like Herodotus, to ex-
plain coincidences by a theory of borrowing, constrained also,
like most polytheisia, to recognise hia own gods in alien deities
with which they may have had little real analogy,—when
such an inquirer narrates hia national mytha, his report must
be received with caution. It is not as if we were dealing
either with original documents like the Vedas or the Egyptian
Book of the Dead, on the one hand, or with direct popular
tradition, like the Red Indion or Mexican myths collected by
Brébeuf or Sahagun, on the other, A man like Philo of Byblos
will mingle early philosophies, allegorical and symbolical inter-
pretations, theories of his own, confusions from the sphere of
eatlier creeds, and many other elements with the myths which
he narrates. Nor doca the topic become simpler when we are
compelled regretfully to admit that there are many signa of mis-
statement, and a very strong suspicion of forgery, literary and
ious?

P' There are several cosmogonic systems in the remaina of the
so-called Sanchoniathon. He begins? by a kind of philosophic
father than mythical hypothesis of the origin of things. There
was a troubled and windy atmosphere and a black weltering
chaos; these were limitless and long enduring. Then the wind
(here myth, or the mythical manner at least, comes in) became
amorous of its own principles, and there waa a mingling or
return upon self, and this was called Desire. This unconscious
“becoming,” as one might say, was the begetter of all things, and
thence eprang Jfét, a kind of watery slime, Thence, again, were
developed the sceds of all existence. In Mit, a sort of vaguely
animated protoplasm, arose unconscious nee beings, These
produced conscious living beings called “contemplators of the
heavens.” “And Mit was egg-shaped, and shining, and there
Were enn and moon, stars and planets.”

Eusebius objects that this system, in which a dimly conseions
evolutionism ia trammelled by old mythical ideas of the early
loves of the world and the primeval egg, “leads straight. toatheism,"
The document goes on to attribute the making of animal life to


2 Ronan, Mencires del Aendémie das Fnscriptions, i068, vol. xxiil. part
ik actor hry wanda nto inlaedlanioes La stead fareegr ‘i
ro, and are translated and commented on by M. Lenormant, Le Origine
de C Histoire, Paris, 1880, vol. i. Appendices E., G., p. 536.

op. cit., 1, 20 wd dnid,


324 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


the atmospheric disturbances produced by the sun's heat among the
first vapours and wandering elements of the world, “And male
and female” (hitherto combined in single shapes) “ began to stir
in land and sea.” Next, the first men worshipped ra riz yi
AXarrquara, stars, sun, and moon, and the elements and natural
forces, and regarded them as gods, and offered them sacrifice,

Here we have merely the author's theory of the origin of
religion. He returns to mythical matter when he derives the
first mortal human being from the embraces of Colpias (the night
wind f) and his wife Baan (=Fohu?). Their descendants were
sun-worshippers, and discovered the earlier arts of life, Of this
family were gis, wip, wal @M4¢ (light, fire, and flame), who in-
vented the art of fire-making by rubbing sticks together. These
had gigantic sons; morality declined, and there was the usual
battle between two semi-divine brothera, The world was chas-
tised by a water age and a wind age, as in Australian mytha So
far thia fragment goes; the next brings forward new culture-
heroes,

Of these, one was Chousor or Chrysor, who practised magic
and spells, and, like Maui in New Zealand, invented hooks, aa
well as lines, baits,and boats, He was honoured after death as a
god—in Greek, Zeus Meilichios (Malike the seaman 1); or Malik
may be the name of a brother of Chousor's, who invented archi-
tecture and brick-making. A number of the other arts were dis-
covered by other members of thia race, and Tait, who invented
letters, was occasionally identified with Hermes by the Greeka.

Here, without any particular break, but in the course of the
disjointed narrative, begins what is really a new statement of the
cosmagony.

There was a being named “The Most High" ('Elioun), who,
with his wife Berouth, inhabited Byblos. Here, apparently, the
Bybline local version is summarised. Epigeios was their child,
and he later received the name of Ouranos, His sister was named,
in Greek, Gé, and here is the old myth of the wedding of Heaven
and Earth in the Phoenician form. 'The being called the Most High
met his end in a fight with wild beasts, and was deified, Then,
as in Greek and Maori mytha, Heaven wedded Earth. Their chil-
dren were Elos (El), called Cronus by the Greeks; Batylus (Ba.


Eusebius, Prep. Eean., i, 9
* Names more or leas Phomician are given by Lenormant.


PH(ENICIAN COSMOGONIC MYTHS. 425


thel), the Semitic name for fetish-stones; Dagon, an old Biblical
friend, and Atlas, Now the inconséquences of Heaven were nume-
rous and fruitful, so that Earth became jealous, and would have
shunned his society in her anger. As he persisted in his embraces,
and tried to kill her children, Earth called in her offspring to
her assistance. Then El (Cronus) declared war on his father,
He himeelf had two daughters, Persephone and Athene. By
the counsel of the former he forged an iron ecimitar (harpf)
and spear. Then his ally, Hermes, excited El by « magical
incantation, and they assailed Heaven. Cronus or El was vic-
tor in the battle, and founded and fortified Bybloe His allies
were called Elohim, deriving that name from El. Old Heaven,
in exile, was still of good heart, expecially as El kept cutting off
the heads of his heirs and offspring, s policy hereditary in this
truculent family. Heaven also invented animated stones, called
Betylia—fetish-stones, in short. Dagon invented agriculture,
and was styled Zeus Arotrios by the Greeks. Finally, as the
heavenly war dragged on its course, El lay in wait for Heaven,
took him in an ambuscade, and treated him as cruelly as Tuten-
gunahan used Rangi, or as Cronus mutilated Uranus. The place
where all this occurred is still shown near Byblos.! Ata later date,
El, during a famine, sacrificed his son to Heaven, and was cireum-
cised with all his company, wherein he found no followers among
the Greeks, Tafit next invented for El, by way of symbols of
his majesty, four eyes, two in front and two behind ; and four
wings, two raised, two in repose. It is needless to say that
Cronus in Greek art has no attributes like these of El, his Pho-
nician counterpart.

All this drivel was allegorised, says the author, mixed with
physical philosophy, and written out by the firet Pheenician
hierophant. The Greeks, he adds, borrowed, and decorated, and
distorted the Phoenician coamogonic traditions, and now the
Greek myths, he complains, have superseded the old genuine
traditions, “so that the trath seems raving folly, and the false

It seems impossible to determine with certainty how much
of this mythic Phanician narrative is really antique, how
much it contains of Greek traditions, or how much, if anything,
Greek traditions here owe to Phonician sources. If such a


' Eusob,, Prop. Eoarn., i. 1, 29.


326 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


traveller as Herodotus had encountered the Maorix, for example,
he would certainly have explained by borrowing, on one side
or the other, the resemblance of the story of Cronus and the
story of Rangi. A similar explanation of the common pointa
in the myths of El and Cronus is offered by the Phosnician, but
whether his view be correct or not, we can only conjecture.
Probably the human mind, at an early stage, might anywhere
develop tales as crude and hideous os these early guesses at
truth!


1 The theory of Baudissin (Studien zur Semitischen Relighonage-
echichte, vol. j., 1876) is that Philo himeelf wrote what be ascribes to
Banchoniathon, but that he worked on materiale more or lem genuine,
See also A. von Gutechmid (Ane. Brit., xviii, 802). I am indebted here
to Professor Roberteon Smith, M. Renan (Mem. de Acad, dea Jn-
serip., 1868, pp. 272-273) is disinclined to believe that Greece borrowed
the story of Cronus from Phoenicia. As to the origin of the work
attributed to Sanchoniathon, M. Renan holds that Phornicia had an
ancient eoamogeny of her own; that it was crossed later with Greek
and Egyptian ideas; that « Phomnician (Sanchoniathon) of 300-150 n.0.
compiled a work out of various local myths loosely stitched together,
and that about Hadrian's time Philo of Bybins, an ewhemerist, trans-
lated it freely, making it even more euhemeristic.


( 327—))


CHAPTER XL
SAVAGE DIVINE MYTHS.


The origin of a belicf in Gop beyond the ken of history and all
of conjectural theoriea—Two elements in all
beliefs, whether of backward or civilised races —The Mythical
and the Aeligiousn—These may be coeval, or either may be older
than the other—IhfGeulty of study—Text from Plutarch—Gods
apd demona— Correspondence of satage and civilised divine
| myths—Their immorality—LDualism—The development of goda—
personal, elemental, departmental, pure anthropomorphic

—Survival of the fittest.


THE question of the origin of a belief in Deity does
not come within the scope of a strictly historical
inquiry. No man can watch the idea of Gop in the
making or in the beginning. We are acquainted
with no race whose beginning does not lie far back
in the unpenctrated past. Even on the hypothesis
that the natives of Australia, for example, were dis-
covered in a state of culture more backward than that
of other known races, yet the institutions and idens
of the Australians must have required for their de-
velopment an incalculable series of centuries. The
notions of man about the Deity, man’s religious senti-
ments, and his mythical narratives, must be taken
as we find them. There have been, and are, many


328 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION,


theories as to the origin of the conception of a super-
natural being or beings, conterned with the fortunes
of mankind, and once active in the making of the
earth and its inhabitants. There is the hypothesis
of an original divine tradition, darkened by the smoke
of foolish mortal fancies. There is the hypothesis of
an innate and intuitive sensus numinis. There is the
opinion that the notion of Deity was introduced to
man by the very nature of his knowledge and per-
ceptions, which compel him in all things to recognise
a finite and an infinite. There is the hypothesis
that gods were originally ghosts, the magnified shapes
of ancestral spectres. There is the doctrine that man,
seeking in his early speculations for the causes of
things, and conscious of his own powers as an active
cause, projected his own shadow on the mists of the
unknown, and peopled the void with figures of mag-
nified non-natural men, his own parents and protec-
tors, and the makers of many of the things in the
world.

Sineée the actual truth cannot be determined by ob-
servation and experiment, the question as to the first
germs of the divine conception must here be left
unanswered. But it is posaible to disengage and exa-
mine apart the two chief elements in the earliest ag
in the latest ideas of Godhead. Among the lowest
and most backward, as among the most advanced races,
there coexist the mythical and the religious elements
in belief. The rational factor (or what approves
itself to us as the rational factor) is visible in religion ;
the irrational is prominent in myth. The Australian,


#


RELIGION AND MYTH. 329


the Bushman, the Solomon Islander, in hours of
danger and necessity “yearns after the gods,” and
has present in his heart the idea of a father and
friend. This is the religious element. The same
man, when he comes to speculate on canses or to
indulge his fancy for fiction, will degrade this spiritual
friend and father to the level of the beasts, and will
make him the hero of comic or repulsive adventures.
This is the mythical or irrational element. Religion,
in its moral aspect, always traces back to the belief
in a power that is benign and works for righteousness.
Myth, even in Homer or the Rig-Veda, perpetually
falls back on the old stock of absurd and immoral
divine adventures.

It would be rash, in the present state of knowledge,
to pronounce that the germ of the serious Homeric
sense of the justice and power of the Divinity is earlier
or later than the germ of the Homeric stories of gods
disguised as animals, or imprisoned by mortals, or
kicked out of Olympus. The rational and irrational
aspects of mythology and religion may be of coeval
antiquity for all that is certainly known, or either of
them, in the dark backward of mortal experience, may
have preceded the other. There is probably no religion
nor mythology which does not offer both aspects to
the student. But it is the part of advancing civilisa-
tion to adorn and purify the rational element, and
to subordinate and supersede the irrational element,
as far as religions conservatism, ritual, and priestly

Tt has been said that we have no specimen of


330 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


races in which myths of deities are just budding, in
which the religious sentiment ig first unfolding itself.
Unfortunately, too, there is not a regular closely con-
nected progress of religions and mythical ideas visible
in the history of man. © The strata do not lie in con-
venient and consecutive fashion, each above the other.
We have to examine myths of unrelated peoples in an
ascending order of civilisation, from Bushmen and
Australians to Maoris, from Maoris to Aztecs or Incas,
thence to Egyptians, and so to Aryans of India and
to Greeks, There are so many mythical strata, and
at each ascending step we find the matter of mythical
faith the same, with successive modifications, perhaps
improvements, in belief, introduced as the buman
spirit itself begins to see more clearly. But it would
be too much to expect to find o wholly unbroken
series of phenomena in the evolution of ideas, any
more than in the evolution of vegetable and animal

A better text for the study of the development of
the gods in their mythical aspect can scarcely be
found than that which Plutarch offers us in his
essay on “The Cessation of Oracles.” Plutarch was
an enlightened Greek of the first century a.p. He
was moderately acquainted with comparative mytho-
logy, which he studied chiefly in the legends of Greece
and Egypt. His object was, like that of other Greek
students from the seventh century before Christ down-
wards, to account to himself for the senseless, horrible,
and fantastic elements in the legends of beings who
bore the name of gods. His own conception of God-


THE GOD OF PLUTARCEH. 3a!


head, of Deity, was that of a pure theism. “God is
perfectly good, and in no one virtue wanting, least
of all in what concerns justice and love."* This is
the ideal of the divine nature to which the Greek
intellect attained. On the other hand, Plutarch, a
deeply religious man, found the divine beings wor-
shipped “with eating of raw flesh and tearing to
pieces of victims, . .. abusive language and other
mad doings.”* He found, too, in the sacred chapters
stories of “the rapes, the wanderings, the hidings,
and banishments, and servitudes of the gods,” and
his philosophy was hardly put to it to reconcile his
conservative faith and his philosophical certainty.
Plutarch, therefore, falls back upon a theory which
leaves the temple legends and sacred chapters his-
torically true, while it saves the moral credit of that
purely spiritual Being Who “is perfectly good, and
in no one virtue wanting.”

Plutarch’s explanation is that the gods of myth,
the gods who “demanded human sacrifices,” and were
guilty of rapes, and suffered imprisonment and slavery,
were merely dwmons. “The tales are not of the
gods, but contain the sufferings and vicissitudes of
dwmons,” he writes.’ In the same dialogue a speaker
ayers that “to take those demons, . . . and impute
to them calamities endured, wanderings imposed by
Heaven, and finally to suppose in their case deaths, as
if they were mere men, seems to me too bold and
uncivilised a theory.”


L De Ces, Orac., xxiv. (Mr. C. W. King’s translation is quoted).
2 bid, xi¥., EY, i ibid., i¥.


332 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


This brings us to the point we would be at, The
gods of myth, above all among the lower races,
answer to the demons of Plutarch’s argument. In
highly uncivilised fashion, the myth-mongers attribute
to them abominable and incredible adventures. These
adventures survive in religion, till the worshippers
of a comparatively lofty Zeus or Indra find themselves
expected to believe that their gods are often in animal
form, are almost always wizards, adulterers, murderers,
are frequently placed in Indicrous positions, and even
die “as if they were mere men.” A proper study
of the evolution of the gods of myth will lead us up
from beings more frequently bestial than human in
form to the half-anthropomorphic deities of Egypt
after the ancient Empire, and finally to the gods,
usually anthropomorphic, of Greece and India. To
the very last, however, the old stuff of savage fancy,—
fancy like that of Bushmen and of Murri of Australia,
—will be found persistently surviving in the temple
legends, mysteries, and rites eyen of Greece,

Our working hypothesis thns stated, the next step
is to examine the common features in the extra-
natural beings or gods of savage and civilised myths.
A brief general summary must first be given, and
that will be followed by the evidence of a cloud of
witnesses. Both savage and civilised myths agree in
alleging that a strange and powerful race were long
on the earth before the making or the evolution of
the emergence of man, and that for many years after
the appearance of man these extra-nataral characters
were actively concerned with his fortunes. Though,


GODS AND THEIR ADVENTURES. 333


perhaps, not strictly human, this earlier race was
eapable of every kind of human intercourse, dwelt
with man, instructed him in the arts, punished and
tormented him, and beheld his daughters that they
were fair. In both civilised and savage myths we find
that the world, or that various things in the world,
were made by this extra-natural race, Its members
were gifted with precisely the same supernatural
power as we have seen that the savage medicine-man
or sorcerer claims for himself. They could assume
animal shapes at will; nay, among the most backward
peoples the beings of this powerful race were actually
beasts, endowed with human attributes and with magi-
eal and supernatural powers. In savage and civilised
myths they can raise the dead, can visit the dwellings
of the departed, can convert men and women into
animal, and vegetable, and mineral shapes, or raise
them to be stars. These “daemons,” then, as Plu-
tarch would have called them, these gods of Australian,
or Greek, or Indian, or Finnish, or Scandinavian
myths, are simply an idealised, non-natural set of
sorcerers and magicians. Like the magicians and sor-
cerers and chiefs of contemporary untutored peoples,
they can fly in the air, can affect the weather, can
bring or avert rain and tempest. Such are their
qualities; and yet so subject are they to mortal limi-
tations, that they can be overcome by men in battle,
can be imprisoned, reduced to servitude, and even
put to death, though they generally attain a speedy
resurrection. ‘Their dealings with men are capricious ;
they are often represented as punishing his iniquities


3s MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


by changing him into a plant, stone, or animal, and
by chastising him with fire or flood. Yet they con-
stantly set him a bad example; they are thieves, liars,
murderers, incestuous adulterers Some of them
teach him the arts, others persecute him for a caprice
or in pursuit of an amour. Among themselves these
mythical beings live in a manner as far as possible
wars of gods and Titans, of Devas and Asuras; they
have dynastic disputes, and even are guilty of par-
ricide. The earliest wars of these gods are usually
suggested by an early omnipresent dualistic philosophy.

There is a good, helpfal extra-natural being, Qat,
or Michabo, or Ormuzd, and an evil extra-natural
being, Loki, or Ahriman, or Tangaroa the Fool, and
these authors of good and evil, with their families,
engage in an endleas vendetta. Finally, the good
powers, the Devas, for example, are wont to triumph
over the less good, the Asuras. As time goes on, all
the members of these races withdraw more and more
from the society of men; some wholly disappear ; some
are slain, some vanish, but are expected to return ;
the more triumphant of them, the fittest, survive in
the prayers, the memories, the temples, the altars of

Finally, as we read in Platarch, philosophers merge
the virtues even of these surviving gods in the con-
ception of one spiritual and perfect existence, pure
deity, and in divers manners explain away the no
longer credible or creditable legends. These pious
explanations are the first utterances of the science


a a a


a


<<.


ASCENT OF GODS FROM BEASTS. 335


of mythology. The lines of development in the primal
“once ptton of gods appear to run somewhat as follows:
—The lowest shape of ao belief in mythical gods is that
which we find among Australians, Bushmen, Mela-
nesians, natives of West Africa, Ahts, Cahrocs, Thlin-
keets, and other American peoples, who habitually
regard their gods as powers in bestial shape, with
human attributes and passions, and with faculties
which are supernatural, indeed, but not more super-
natural than the magical gifts claimed, as we have
seen, by living, and assigned to dead sorcerers. In
many cases the zoomorphic characteristica of a god
are probably carried on from the more ancient figure
of a tribal totem. Many examples of such a process
will be observed. These gods are seldom or never
natural elementa or forces. They are idealised and
magnified men or beasts, with magical accomplish-
ments. Perhaps next in the scale come the gods
who are im essence great forces of Nature, such as
wind, storms, and sky, and moon and sun. These
forces are thought of as persons, and as persons either
human or bestial in semblance, or capable of manifest-
ing themselves in human or bestial shape. Sometimes
they are fabled to have been dwellers on earth, who
later betook themselves to heavenly and remote abodes.
Gods of this kind are still found, for example, in the
religion of the Maoris, and of other races in the same

Higher still in the ascending series, and more
animal avatars, or to assuming animal guises for the


336 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


prosecution of their intrigues and the achiev
their adventures) are the mythical deities of Mexicans,
Peruvians, Finns, and Scandinavians. Into the com-
position of these gods enter not only the old magical
and bestial notions, and the notion of great personal
forces of Nature, but also what we may call the
departmental theory. The larger divisions of natural
phenomena and of human interests have now their
presiding deities, gods or goddesses of love, of war,
of agriculture, of commerce, or of art. These ideal
persons supersede or mingle with the other and pre-
sumably older members of the national pantheons, and
share their supernatural accomplishments.

In this process there is a natural tendency for
gods to double their parts, or rather, perhaps one
should say, for each part to have its * under-study.”
For example, there is a time in the mythical and
religious evolution, as we have said, when each great
national force and phenomenon (like everything else
in the world known to men) is a person. Wind is 4
person, sky or heaven is a person, each river is a per-
gon, the sea isa person, But the tendency of advancing
human thought is gradually to withdraw the concep-
tion of personality from the things in the world,
gradually to restrict it to man, and to beings conceived
to exist in man’s image. The time thus arrives when
the sun is in common thought usually regarded as
a mere physical phenomenon, and when the personal
element or the old personal conception of the sun
separates itself, and becomes a god, anthropomorphic,
full of special and novel characteristics, and limitless


SKY-PERSON—SKY-GOD—ZEUS. 337


in movements and activities. Such a god (probably)
is the Greek Apollo.

If we look at the sky, again, the process is identical.
The visible sky ceases, in the general thonght of men,
to bea person, and the old personal conception sepa-
rates itself, assumes anthropomorphic form, and becomes
(under an old name for sky) the deity called “eus,
a deity with supreme powers. But he, unluckily for
religion, attracts into his legend or inherits very
many of the most repulsive myths of the early savage
and magical extra-natural beings, and this misfortune
befalls all, or nearly all, the gods of the higher mytho-
logies, such, for example, as Indra.

It chances, too, that the various parts, as we eaid,
have often their “ under-studies.” If Apollo was origi-
nally the sun, it is certain that he has lsid aside most
of his solar attributes, and put on attributes purely
human and divinely Greek. But between him and
the old “ sun-person ” (the sun conceived as a person)
of savage thought he has left Helios Hyperion, a
being very like the actual sun in some regards, in
others a heroic or divine character who controls the
course and drives the chariot of the sun. In the same
way the old personal rivers concentrate themselves
into river-gods, and detach their new personality from
the water, and the old personal sea perhaps becomes
Nereus, or adds some of his attributes’ to Poseidon.
Thus, through ascending strata of gradually purifying
thought, we pass from the magical and theriomorphic
powers, subject even to death, whom we meet in
savage myths, to the deathless anthropomorphic Greek

VOL. I. ¥


338 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


gods possessing mansions in Olympus. These retain,
from the earliest reluions, the guardianship of mor-
ality, though they may be far from moral in their
own conduct. It is to be remembered that this
conception of the gods as punishers of crime and
rewarders of virtue is not absent even from the
moomorphic deities of Australia. Yet even to the
Bee nn “ng, the. sncient \legenia enka
msecrative religious instinct of priesthoods and the
no es strong conservatism of popular superstition
retain in many places even to this day. In Egypt
the old instinct showed itself by the maintenance of
actual animal gods, and by the addition of bestial
heads, those of birds, cats, jackals, and so forth, to
the divine statues in art. In Mexico the figure of the
god was accompanied by the representation of some
older animal divinity, or was specialised by the addition
of some trait of animal form. Even in Greece most
gods were represented in art with their favourite animal
attendants, mouse, cuckoo, or what not. They were
invoked, like Apollo, by a number of names derived
from various animals; they were even, in very archaic
art, figured with animal heads, like the horse-headed
Demeter, or were worshipped, like the bull Dionysus,
ander completely animal form. While these survivals
remained in art and in ritual, myth notoriously retained
the most absurd relics of savage thought. Lustful
and adventurous gods in India and in Greece ac-
complished their amours and achieved their adventures
under dozens of bestial disguises, just like sorcerers
in the Red Indian or Maori marchen.


' i es


GODS OF PHILOSOPHY. 339


Finally came the philosophers and cultivated poets
in Greece, and (in an age very remote indeed) the
mystic, reflective, and pantheistic priests in Egypt.
The priests did not venture to reform out of existence
the animal gods, nor to let the old savage rites and
legends and mysteries drop into oblivion. They re-
tained them, supplying allegorical, historical, or phy-
sical explanations, and, in fact, they could all sign
their own “ Articles” “in a non-natural sense.” We
have already examined, in our first chapter, some of
the many devices by which Greek philosophers, who
had attained a pure conception of divinity, explained
away the myths which they inherited from a past
infinitely remote and extremely barbarous.

Soch is a summary sketch of the evolution of the
mythical ideas of gods. The theory thus briefly stated
reposes thronghout on facts. It starta from the lowest
extant myths of the least developed contemporary
races, and shows that these myths are derived from
the intellectual and material conditions of the peoples
among whom they exist. We then trace among
nations of gradually advancing culture the effects
produced on the original stuff of myths by clearer
conceptions of the nature of man and of the world. —

. We find, last, that the spirit of civilisation, especially
among the educated classes of Greece, purged away
savage, in the conception of Deity, while ritual, art,
myth, local priestly tradition, and popular superstition
still retained much of the ancient fable not different
in kind from that which yet survives among Kamilaroi,


340 MYTH, RITUAL, AND RELIGION.


Cahrocs, Ahts, and Melanesians. But ‘at all times
the undying savage in the soul of man has been quick
to revive and to reassert itself in myth. Spiritual
philosophies die and decay, and in their twilight the
earliest. and the rodest creeds, “ spiritualism,” poly-
theism, fetishism, mystic mammery and magic, again
and again reappear. They creep out from the huts of
peasants, and from the battered fanes of half-forgotten
‘rural gods; and from dark corners of the soul they
return to life, as in the time of Porphyry and Plotinus,
or as in the ritual rubbish of the Brahmanas, or in the
witch-trials of the Middle and Modern Ages. Man
can never be certain that he has expelled the savage
from his temples and from his heart; yet even the
lowest known savages, in hours of awe and of need,
lift their hands and their thoughts to their Father and
to ours, who is not far from any one of us.


- END OF VOL. I.


FAINTED HY BALLANTYNE, WANSON AND Cou
ERG AKD LospoN,


Pet | ae
enh Bs Ae


Ti « -


.

we
B
= cf ]


ree |


. ae — . 7
) e.


| - =


Vig. | Central Archaeological Library, he - :
wo og | NEW DELHI-20547 |- 7


cal No 241-1304 Jam ae


Aut Lang ,' |
Py th., Re 7


Titlhe—


Be = No. | Date of Issue | Date af Return


tt J
i oe]


“| SE | |
: Ba ay : i’ | / fee Loe Seen a
