Author: Basil Valentine
Year: 1665
Archive ID: twelvekeysbasilvalentine_401_u

--- Page 1 ---
 Twelve Keys
Basil Valentine


--- Page 2 ---
Table of Contents
Twelve Keys.........................................................................................................................................................1
Basil Valentine.........................................................................................................................................1
The Preface of Basilius Valentinus,  the Benedictine..............................................................................1
The Tract of Basilius Valentinus,  the Benedictine,................................................................................2
FIRST KEY.............................................................................................................................................7
SECOND KEY........................................................................................................................................8
THIRD KEY............................................................................................................................................9
FOURTH KEY......................................................................................................................................10
FIFTH KEY...........................................................................................................................................11
SIXTH KEY...........................................................................................................................................12
SEVENTH KEY....................................................................................................................................13
EIGHTH KEY.......................................................................................................................................14
NINTH KEY..........................................................................................................................................16
TENTH KEY.........................................................................................................................................17
ELEVENTH KEY.................................................................................................................................17
TWELFTH KEY....................................................................................................................................18
Concerning the First Matter of the  Philosophical Stone.......................................................................19
A short Appendix and clear  Resumption of the foregoing Tract concerning the Great Stone of
the  Ancient Sages..................................................................................................................................19
Now follows concerning Sulphur..........................................................................................................20
Now I will also give my Opinion  respecting the Salt of the Sages.......................................................20
Thanks be to God...................................................................................................................................21
Postscript................................................................................................................................................21
 Twelve Keys
i


--- Page 3 ---
Twelve Keys
Basil Valentine
This page copyright © 2001 Blackmask Online.
http://www.blackmask.com
The Preface of Basilius Valentinus, the Benedictine
•
The Tract of Basilius Valentinus, the Benedictine,
•
FIRST KEY
•
SECOND KEY
•
THIRD KEY
•
FOURTH KEY
•
FIFTH KEY
•
SIXTH KEY
•
SEVENTH KEY
•
EIGHTH KEY
•
NINTH KEY
•
TENTH KEY
•
ELEVENTH KEY
•
TWELFTH KEY
•
Concerning the First Matter of the Philosophical  Stone
•
A short Appendix and clear Resumption of the  foregoing Tract concerning the Great Stone of the Ancient
Sages
•
Now follows concerning Sulphur
•
Now I will also give my Opinion respecting the  Salt of the Sages
•
Postscript
•
The Preface of Basilius Valentinus,  the Benedictine
Concerning
The Great Stone of the
Ancient Sages.
When I had emptied to the dregs the cup of human suffering, I was  led to consider the wretchedness of this
world, and the fearful  consequences of our first parents' disobedience. Then I saw that there  was no hope of
repentance for mankind, that they were getting worse day  by day, and that for their impenitence God's
everlasting punishment was  hanging over them; and I made haste to withdraw myself from the evil  world, to
bid farewell to it, and to devote myself to the service of  God.
When I had spent some years at the monastery, I found that after I  had performed my work and my daily
devotions I still had some time on  my hands. This I did not wish to pass in idleness, lest my evil  thoughts
should lead me into new sins; and so I determined to use it  for the study and investigation of those natural
secrets by which God  has shadowed out eternal things. So I read a great many books in our  monastery written
in olden times by philosophers who had pursued the  same study, and was thereby stimulated to a more ardent
desire of  knowing that which they also knew. Though I did not make much progress  at first, yet at last God
granted my earnest prayer, and opened my eyes  that I might see what others had seen before me.
Twelve Keys
1


--- Page 4 ---
In the convent there was a brother, who was afflicted with a severe  disease of the kidneys, and to whom none
of the many physicians he had  consulted had been able to give even momentary relief. So he had  committed
himself to the hand of God, and despaired of all human aid.
As I loved him, I gathered all manner of herbs, extracted their  salts, and distilled various medicines. But none
of them seemed to do  him the slightest good, and after six years I found that I had tried  every possible
vegetable substance, without any beneficial effect.
At last I determined to devote myself to the study of the powers  and virtues which God has laid into metals
and minerals and the more I  searched the more I found. One discovery led to another, and, after God  had
permitted unto me many experiments, I understood clearly the nature  and properties, and the secret potency,
imparted by God to minerals and  metals.
Among the mineral substances I found one which exhibited many  colours, and proved to be of the greatest
efficacy in art. The  spiritual essence of this substance I extracted, and therewith restored  our sick brother, in a
few days, to perfect health. For the strength of  this spirit was so great as to quicken the prostrate spirit of my
diseased brother, who, from that day to the day of his death,  remembered me in his hourly prayers. And his
prayers, together with my  own diligence, so prevailed with God, that there was revealed to me  that great
secret which God ever conceals from those who are wise in  their own conceits.
Thus have I been wishing to reveal to you in this treatise, as far  as may be lawful to me, the Stone of the
Ancients, that you, too, might  possess the knowledge of this highest of earthly treasures for your  health and
comfort in this valley of sorrow. I write about it, not for  my own good, but for that of posterity, and though
my words be few and  simple, that which they import is of immeasurable magnitude. Ponder  them well, that
you also may find the Rock which is the foundation  Stone of truth, the temporal blessing, and the eternal
reward.
The Tract of Basilius Valentinus,  the Benedictine,
Concerning the Great Stone of the Ancient Sages.
In the preface, gentle Reader, and zealous Student of this Art, I  promised to communicate to you a knowledge
of our Corner Stone, or  Rock, of the process by which it is prepared, and of the substance from  which it was
already derived by those ancient Sages, to whom the secret  of our Art was first revealed by God for the health
and happiness of  earthly life.
Let me assure you that I fully intend to fulfil my promise, and to  be as plain with you as the rules of our Art
permit, not misleading you  by sophistical deceptions, but opening up to you the spring of all  blessings even
unto the fountain head. I propose to set forth what I  have to say in a few simple, straightforward words, for I
am no adept  in the art of multiplying words; nor do I think that exuberance of  language tends to clearness; on
the contrary, I am convinced that it is  many words that darken council.  Let me tell you, then, that although
many are engaged in the search after this Stone, it is nevertheless  found but by very few. For God never
intended that it should become  generally known. It is rather to be regarded as a gift which He  reserves for
those favoured few, who love the truth, and hate  falsehood, who study our Art earnestly by day and by night,
and whose  hearts are set upon God with an unfeigned affection.
Hence, if you would prepare our great and ancient Stone, I testify  unto you in all truth that you must give
diligent heed to my teaching,  and before all things implore the gracious blessing of the Creator of  all things.
You must also truly repent you of all your sins, confessing  the same, and firmly resolve to lead a good and
holy life. It is also  necessary that you should determine to shew your gratitude to God for  His unspeakable
Gift, by succouring the poor and the distressed, and by  opening your hand and your heart to the needy. Then
 Twelve Keys
The Tract of Basilius Valentinus,  the Benedictine,
2


--- Page 5 ---
God will bless your  labour, and reward your search with success, and yourself with a seat  in Heaven as the
fruit of your faith.
Do not despise the truthful writings of those who possessed the  Stone before us. For, after the enlightening
grace of God, it is from  them that I received my knowledge. Let your study of them be increased  and repeated
often, lest you lose the thread of insight, and the lamp  of understanding be extinguished.
Give yourself wholly to study, and be not flighty or doubleminded.  Let your mind be like a firm Rock, in
which all the various sayings of  the Sages are reduced to the unity of their common meaning. For a man  who
is easily influenced in different directions is not likely to find  the right path.
As our most ancient Stone is not derived from combustible things,  you should cease to seek it in substances
which cannot stand the test  of fire. For this reason it is absurd to suppose that we can make any  use of
vegetable substances, though the Stone, too, is endowed 'with a  principle of growth.
If our Stone were a vegetable substance, it would, like other  vegetables, be consumed by fire, leaving only a
certain salt. Ancient  writers have, indeed, described our Stone as the vegetable Stone. But  that name was
suggested to them by the fact that it grows and increases  in size, like a plant.
Know also that animals only multiply after their kind, and within  their own species. Hence our Stone can
only be prepared out of its own  seed, from which it was taken in the beginning; and hence also you will
perceive that the soul of an animal must not be the subject of this  investigation. Animals are a class by
themselves; nor can anything ever  be obtained from them that is not animal in its nature. But our Stone,  as it
has been bequeathed to me by the Ancients, is derived from two  things, and one thing, in which is concealed
a third thing. This is the  purest truth, and a most faithful saying. For male and female have from  of old been
regarded as one body, not from any external or visible  consideration, but on account of the ardour of that
mutual love which  naturally draws them together into one; and as the male and female seed  jointly represent
the principle of propagation, so also the sperm of  the matter out of which our Stone is made can be sown and
increased.  There are in our substance two supplementary kinds of seed, from which  our Stone may be
prepared and multiplied.
If you are a true lover of our Art, you will carefully weigh and  ponder these words, lest, with other
sophisticators, you fall into the  dangerous pit prepared by the common enemy of man.  But whence are you  to
obtain this seed? This question you may most easily answer by asking  yourself another question. What do
you want to develop from this seed,  and what use do you wish to make of it? There can be no doubt, then  that
it must be the root, or first substance, of metals, from which all  metals derive their origin. It is, therefore,
necessary that we should  now proceed to speak of the generation of the metals.
In the beginning, when the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the  waters, and as yet all was involved in
darkness, Almighty and Eternal  God, Whose beginning and wisdom are from everlasting, by His  inscrutable
counsel created heaven and earth, and all that in them is,  both visible and invisible, out of nothing. How the
act of creation was  accomplished I will not attempt to explain. This is a matter which is  set forth to us in Holy
Scripture, and must be apprehended by faith.
To each creature God gave its own seed, wherewith to propagate its  kind, that in this way there might always
be an increase of men and  animals, plants and metals. Man was not to be able to produce new seed:  he was
only permitted to educe new forms of life out of that which  already existed. The creating of seed God
reserved to Himself For if  man could create seed he would be equal to the Creator.
Know that our seed is produced in the following way. A celestial  influence descends from above, by the
decree and ordinance of God, and  mingles with the astral proper ties. When this union has taken place,  the
 Twelve Keys
The Tract of Basilius Valentinus,  the Benedictine,
3


--- Page 6 ---
two bring forth a third namely, an earth−like substance, which is  the principle of our seed, of its first source,
so that it can shew an  ancestry, and from which three the elements, such as water, air, and  earth, take their
origin. These elements work underground in the form  of fire, and there produce what Hermes, and all who
have preceded me,  call the three first principles, viz., the internal soul, the  impalpable spirit, and visible
bodies, beyond which we can find no  earlier beginning of our Magistery.
In the course of time these three unite, and are changed through  the action of fire into a palpable substance,
viz., quicksilver,  sulphur, and salt. If these three substances be mixed, they are  hardened and coagulated into
a perfect body, which represents the seed  chosen and appointed by the Creator. This is a most important and
certain truth. If the metallic soul, the metallic spirit, and the  metallic form of body be present, there will also
be metallic  quicksilver, metallic sulphur, and metallic salt, which together make  up the perfect metallic body.
If you cannot perceive what you ought to understand herein, you  should not devote yourself to the study of
philosophy.
Moreover, I tell you in few words, that you cannot obtain a  metallic body except by perfectly joining these
three principles into  one. Know, also, that all animals are, like man, composed of flesh and  blood, and also
possess a vitalizing spirit, but are destitute of the  rational soul which the Creator gave to man alone.
Therefore, when  animals die, they perish for ever. But when man yields up his mortal  life into the hands of
his Creator, his soul does not die. It returns,  and is united to the glorified body, in which, after the
Resurrection,  soul and spirit dwell together once more in eternal glory, never to be  separated again
throughout all eternity.
Hence the rational soul of man makes him an abiding creature, and,  though his body may seem to die, yet we
know that he will live for  ever. For to him death is only a process of purification, by means of  which he is
freed from his sins, and translated to another and better  place. But there is no resurrection for the brute beasts,
because they  have no rational soul, for which alone our Lord and Saviour shed His  blood.
For though a body may be vitalized by a spirit, yet it need not,  therefore, be fixed, unless, indeed, it possess a
rational soul, that  strong bond between body and spirit, which represents their union, and  resists all efforts to
separate them. Where there is no soul, there is  no hope of redemption. Nothing can be perfect or lasting
without a  soul. This is a profound and most important truth, which I feel in  conscience bound to make known
to my readers. Now, the spirits of  metals have this property of fixedness in a greater or less degree;  they are
more or less volatile in proportion to the mutual fitness of  their bodies and souls. A metal that has the three
conditions of  fixedness is not affected by fire or overcome by any other outward  agent. But there is only one
metal that fulfils these conditions,  namely, gold. Silver also contains fixed mercury, and is not so quickly
volatilised as the imperfect metals, but stands the trial of fire, and  yields no food to voracious Saturn.
Amatory Venus is clothed with abundant colour, and her whole body  is one pure tincture, not unlike the red
colour which is found in the  most precious of metals. But though her spirit is of good quality, her  body is
leprous, and affords no permanent substratum to the fixed  tincture. Hence the soul has to share the fate of the
imperfect body,  and when the body dies the soul has to leave it. For its dwelling has  been destroyed by fire,
and it is without a house wherein to abide.
Fixed salt has imparted to warlike Mars a hard, firm, and durable  body, which is evidence of the generosity of
his soul; nor can fire be  said to have much power over it. And if its strength be united to the  beauty of Venus,
I do not say but that a precious and harmonious result  may be obtained. For the phlegmatic or humid quality
of the Moon may be  heated with the ardent blood of Venus, and the blackness of Venus  removed with the
strong salt of Mars.
 Twelve Keys
The Tract of Basilius Valentinus,  the Benedictine,
4


--- Page 7 ---
You need not look for our metallic seed among the elements. It need  not be sought so far back. If you can
only rectify the Mercury,  Sulphur, and Salt (understand, those of the Sages) until the metallic  spirit and body
are inseparably joined together by means of the  metallic soul, you thereby firmly rivet the chain of love, and
prepare  the palace for the coronation.
These things represent a liquid key, comparable to the celestial  influence, and a dry water joined to the
terrestrial substance: all  which are one thing, derived from three, and two, and one. If you  understand this,
you have already attained our Magistery. Then you must  join the husband and wife together that each may
feed upon the other's  flesh and blood, and that so they may propagate their species a  thousandfold.
Though I would fain reveal this matter to you more plainly and  openly, I am prohibited from doing so by the
law of God, and by the  fear of His wrath, and of eternal  lest the gift of the Most High  should be abused.
If, however, you do not understand the theoretical part of my work,  perhaps the practical part will serve to
enlighten you more fully. I  will therefore proceed to shew how, by the help of God, I was enabled  to prepare
the Stone of the Ancients, and, for your further  instruction, I will add twelve keys, in which I give a figurative
account of our Art.
Take a quantity of the best and finest gold, and separate it into  its component parts by those media which
Nature vouchsafes to those who  are lovers of Art, as an anatomist dissects the human body. Thus change  your
gold back into what it was before it became gold; and thou shalt  find the seed, the beginning, the middle, and
the end−that from which  our gold and its female principle are derived, viz., the pure and  subtle spirit, the
spotless soul, and the astral salt and balsam. When  these three are united, we may call them the mercurial
liquid: a water  which was examined by Mercury, found by him to be pure and spotless,  and therefore
espoused by him as his wife. Of the two was born an  incombustible oil; for Mercury became so proud that he
hardly knew  himself. He put forth eagle feathers, and devoured the slippery tail,  of the Dragon, and
challenged Mars to battle.
Then Mars summoned his horsemen, and bade them enclose Mercury in  prison under the ward of Vulcan,
until he should be liberated by one of  the female sex.  When this became known, the other Planets assembled
and held a deliberation on the question, what would be the best and  wisest course to adopt. When they were
met together, Saturn first came  forward, and delivered himself as follows:
" I, Saturn, the greatest of the planets in the firmament, declare  here before you all, that I am the meanest and
most unprofitable of all  that are here present, that my body is weak, corruptible, and of a  swarthy hue, but
that, nevertheless, it is I that try you all. For  having nothing that is fixed about me, I carry away with me all
that is  of a kindred nature. My wretchedness is entirely caused by that fickle  and inconstant Mercury, by his
careless and neglectful conduct.  Therefore, I pray you, let us be avenged on him, shut him up in prison,  and
keep him there till he dies and is decomposed, nay, until not a  drop of his blood is to be seen."
Then yellow Jupiter stepped forward, bent his knees, inclined his  sceptre, and with great authority bade them
carry out the demand of  Saturn.  He added that he would punish everyone who did not aid the  execution of
this sentence.
Then Mars presented himself, with sword drawn −− a sword that shone  with many colours, and gave out a
beautiful and unwonted splendour.  This sword he gave to the warder Vulcan, and bade him slay Mercury, and
burn him, together with his bones, to ashes. This Vulcan consented to  do.
While he was executing his office, there appeared a beautiful lady  in a long, silver robe, intertissued with
many waters, who was  immediately recognised as the Moon, the wife of the Sun. She fell on  her knees, and
with outspread hands, and flowing tears, besought them  to liberate her husband −− the Sun −− from the
 Twelve Keys
The Tract of Basilius Valentinus,  the Benedictine,
5


--- Page 8 ---
prison in which, through  the crafty wiles of Mercury, he was being detained by the Planets. But  Vulcan
refused to listen to her request; nor was he softened by the  moving prayers of Lady Venus, who appeared in a
crimson robe,  intertissued with threads of green, and charmed all by the beauty of  her countenance and the
fragrance of the flowers which she bore in her  hand. She interceded with Vulcan, the Judge, in the Chaldee
tongue, and  reminded him that a woman was to effect the deliverance of the  prisoner. But even to her
pleading he turned a deaf ear.
While they were still speaking the heaven was opened, and there  came forth a mighty animal, with many
thousands of young ones, which  drove the warder before it, and opening its mouth wide, swallowed  Venus,
its fair helper, at the same time exclaiming with a loud voice:  " I am born of woman, woman has propagated
my seed, and therewith  filled the earth Her soul is devoted to mine, and therefore I must be  nourished with
her blood." When the animal had said these words with a  loud voice, it hastened into a certain chamber, and
shut the door  behind it; whither its voracious brood followed, drinking of the  aforesaid incombustible oil,
which they digested with the greatest  ease, and thereby became even more numerous than they had been
before.  This they continued to do until they filled the whole world.
Then the learned men of that country were gathered together, and  strove to discover the true interpretation of
all they had seen. But  they were unable to agree until there came forward a man of venerable  age, with snowy
locks and silvery beard, and arrayed in a flowing  purple robe On his head he wore a crown set with brilliant
carbuncles.  His loins were girded with the girdle of life. His feet were bare, and  his words penetrated to the
depth of the human soul. He mounted the  tribune, and bade the assembly listen to him in silence, since he
was  sent from above to explain to them the significance of what they had  seen.
When perfect silence prevailed, he delivered himself as follows:
"Awake, O man, and behold the light, lest the darkness deceive  thee! The Gods revealed to me this matter in
a profound sleep. Happy is  the man who knows the great works of the Divine power. Blessed is he  whose
eyes are opened to behold light where before they saw darkness.
"Two Stars are given by the Gods to man to lead him to great  wisdom. Gaze steadily upon them, follow their
lights, and you will find  in them the secret of knowledge.
"The bird Phoenix, from the south, plucks out the heart of the  mighty beast from the east. Give the animal
from the east wings, that  it may be on an equality with the bird from the south. For the animal  from the east
must be deprived of its lion's skin, and lose its wings.  Then it must plunge in the salt water of the vast ocean,
and emerge  thence in renovated beauty. Plunge thy volatile spirits in a deep  spring whose waters never fail,
that they may become like their mother,  who is hidden therein, and born of three.
"Hungary is my native land, the sky and the stars are my  habitation, the earth is my spouse. Though I must
die and be buried,  yet Vulcan causes me to be born anew. Therefore, Hungary is my native  land, and my
mother encloses the whole world."
When all that were present had received these his sayings, he thus  continued:
"Cause that which is above to be below; that which is visible, to  be invisible; and that which is palpable, to
become impalpable. Again,  let that which is below become that which is above; let the invisible  become
visible, and the impalpable, palpable. Here you see the  perfection of our Art, without any defect, or
diminution. But that in  which death and life, destruction and resurrection dwell, is a round  sphere, with which
the goddess of fortune drives her chariot, and  imparts the gift of wisdom to men of God. Its proper name here
upon  earth, and for the human understanding, is 'All−in−All.'
 Twelve Keys
The Tract of Basilius Valentinus,  the Benedictine,
6


--- Page 9 ---
"Let him who would know what this 'All−in−All' is, give the earth  great wings, and make it fly upward
through the air to the heavenly  regions. Then singe its wings with fierce heat, and make it fall into  the Red
Sea, and there be drowned. Then dry up the water with  fire and  air till the earth reappears, and you will have
'All−in−All.'
"If you cannot find it in this way, look around upon the things  that are in the world. Then you will find the '
All−in−All,' which is  the attracting force of all metals and minerals derived from salt and  sulphur, and twice
born of Mercury. More I may not say about '  All−in−All,' since all is comprehended in all.
"My friends, blessed are ye if, by listening to the words of the  wise, ye can find this great Stone, which has
power to cure leprous and  imperfect metallic bodies and to regenerate them; to preserve men in  health, and
procure for them a long life −− as it has hitherto kept the  vital fire burning within me so long that I am weary
of life, and yearn  to die.
"For His wisdom and mercy, and for the gracious Gift which He has  bestowed upon me so long ago, I am
bound to render God thanks, now and  evermore. Amen."
When the old man had thus spoken, he vanished from their sight.
But all who had heard him went each man to his house, and meditated  on his words by day and by night.
Here follow the Twelve Keys
of Basilius Valentinus, the Benedictine,
with which we may open the doors
of the knowledge of the Most Ancient Stone
and unseal the Most Secret Fountain of Health.
FIRST KEY
Let my friend know that no impure or spotted things are useful for our  purpose. For there is nothing in their
leprous nature capable of  advancing the interests of our Art There is much more likelihood of  that which is in
itself good being spoiled by that which is impure.  Everything that is obtained from the mines has its value,
unless,  indeed, it is adulterated. Adulteration, however, spoils its goodness  and its efficacy.
As the physician purges and cleanses the inward parts of the body,  and removes all unhealthy matter by
means of his medicines, so our  metallic substances must be purified and refined of all foreign matter,  in order
to ensure the success of our task. Therefore, our Masters  require a pure, immaculate body, that is untainted
with any foreign  admixture, which admixture is the leprosy of our metals.
Let the diadem of the King be of pure gold, and let the Queen that  is united to him in wedlock be chaste and
immaculate.
If you would operate by means of our bodies, take a fierce grey  wolf, which, though on account of its name it
be subject to the sway of  warlike Mars, is by birth the offspring of ancient Saturn, and is found  in the valleys
and mountains of the world, where he roams about savage  with hunger. Cast to him the body of the King, and
when he has devoured  it, burn him entirely to ashes in a great fire. By this process the  King will be liberated;
and when it has been performed thrice the Lion  has overcome the wolf, and will find nothing more to devour
 Twelve Keys
FIRST KEY
7


--- Page 10 ---
in him.  Thus our Body has been rendered fit for the first stage of our work.
Know that this is the only right and legitimate way of purifying  our substance: for the Lion purifies himself
with the blood of the  wolf, and the tincture of its blood agrees most wonderfully with the  tincture of the Lion,
seeing that the two liquids are closely akin to  each other. When the Lion's hunger is appeased, his spirit
becomes more  powerful than before, and his eyes glitter like the Sun. His internal  essence is now of
inestimable value for the removing of all defects,  and the healing of all diseases. He is pursued by the ten
lepers, who  desire to drink his blood; and all that are tormented with any kind of  sickness are refreshed with
this blood.
For whoever drinks of this golden fountain, experiences a  renovation of his whole nature, a vanishing of all
unhealthy matter, a  fresh supply of blood, a strengthening of the heart and of all the  vitals, and a permanent
bracing of every limb. For it opens all the  pores, and through them bears away all that prevents the perfect
health  of the body, but allows all that is beneficial to remain therein  unmolested.
But let my friend be scrupulously careful to preserve the fountain  of life limpid and clear. If any strange
water be mixed with it, it is  spoiled, and becomes positively injurious. If it still retain any of  the solvent
which has been used for its dissolution, you must carefully  purge it off. For no corrosive can be of the least
use for the  prevention of internal diseases.
When a tree is found to bear sour and unwholesome fruit, its  branches must be cut off, and scions of better
trees grafted upon it.  The new branches thereupon become organically united to the trunk; but  though
nourished with its sap, they thence  forward produce good and  pleasant fruit.
The King travels through six regions in the heavenly firmament, and  in the seventh he fixes his abode. There
the royal palace is adorned  with golden tapestry. If you understand my meaning, this Key will open  the first
lock, and push back the first bolt; but if you do not, no  spectacles or natural eyesight will enable you to
understand what  follows. But Lucius Papirius has instructed me not to say any more  about this Key.
SECOND KEY
In the houses of the great are found various kinds of drink, of which  scarcely two are exactly like each other
in odour, colour, or taste.  For they are prepared in a great variety of different ways.  Nevertheless they are all
drunk, and each is designed for its own  special use.  When the Sun gives out his rays, and sheds them abroad
upon the clouds, it is commonly said that he is attracting water, and  if he do it frequently, and thereby cause
rain, it is called a fruitful  year.
If it be intended to build a palace, the services of many different  craftsmen must be employed, and a great
variety of materials is  required. Otherwise the palace would not be worthy the name. It is  useless to use wood
where stone is necessary.
The daily ebb and flow of the sea, which are caused by the  sympathetic influence of heavenly bodies, impart
great wealth and  blessing to the earth. For whenever the water comes rolling back, it  brings a blessing with it.
A bride, when she is to be brought forth to be married, is  gloriously adorned in a great variety of precious
garments, which, by  enhancing her beauty, render her pleasant in the eyes of the  bridegroom. But the rites of
the bridal night she performs without any  clothing but that which she was arrayed withal at the moment of her
birth.
In the same way our bridal pair, Apollo and Diana, are arrayed in  splendid attire, and their heads and bodies
 Twelve Keys
SECOND KEY
8


--- Page 11 ---
are washed with various  kinds of water, some strong, some weak, but not one of them exactly  like another,
and each designed for its own special purpose. Know that  when the moisture of the earth ascends in the form
of a vapour, it is  condensed in the upper regions, and precipitated to the earth by its  own weight. Thus the
earth regains the moisture of which it had been  deprived, and receives strength to put forth buds and herbs. In
the  same way you must repeatedly distil the water which you have extracted  from the earth, and then again
restore it to your earth, as the water  in the Strait of Euripus frequently leaves the shore, and then covers  it
again until it arrives at a certain limit.
When thus the palace has been constructed by the hands of many  craftsmen, and the sea of glass has absolved
its course, and filled the  palace with good things, it is ready for the King to enter, and take  his seat upon the
throne.  But you should notice that the King and his  spouse must be quite naked when they are joined
together. They must be  stripped of all their glorious apparel, and must lie down together in  the same state of
nakedness in which they were born, that their seed  may not be spoiled by being mixed with any foreign
matter.
Let me tell you, in conclusion, that the bath in which the  bridegroom is placed, must consist of two hostile
kinds of matter, that  purge and rectify each other by means of a continued struggle. For it  is not good for the
Eagle to build her nest on the summit of the Alps,  because her young ones are thus in great danger of being
frozen to  death by the intense cold that prevails there.
But if you add to the Eagle the icy Dragon that has long had its  habitation upon the rocks, and has crawled
forth from  the caverns of  the earth, and place both over the fire, it will elicit from the icy  Dragon a fiery
spirit, which, by means of its great heat, will consume  the wings of the Eagle, and prepare a perspiring bath
of so  extraordinary a degree of heat that the snow will melt upon the summit  of the mountains, and become a
water, with which the invigorating  mineral bath may be prepared, and fortune, health, life, and strength
restored to the King.
THIRD KEY
By means of water fire may be extinguished, and utterly quenched. If  much water be poured upon a little fire,
the fire is overcome, and  compelled to yield up the victory to the water. In the same way our  fiery sulphur
must be overcome by means of our prepared water. But,  after the water has vanished, the fiery life of our
sulphurous vapour  must triumph, and again obtain the victory. But no such triumph can  take place unless the
King imparts great strength and potency to his  water and tinges it with his own colour, that thereby he may be
consumed and become invisible, and then again recover his visible form,  with a diminution of his simple
essence, and a development of his  perfection.
A painter can set yellow upon white, and red or crimson upon  yellow; for, though all these colours are
present, yet the latter  prevails on account of its greater intensity. When you have  accomplished the same thing
in our Art, you have before your eyes the  light of wisdom, which shines in the darkness, although it does not
burn. For our sulphur does not burn, but nevertheless its brilliancy is  seen far and near. Nor does it colour
anything until it has been  prepared, and dyed with its own colour, which it then imparts to all  weak and
imperfect metals. This sulphur, however, cannot impart this  colour until it have first by persevering labour
been prevailed upon to  abjure its original colour. For the weaker does not overcome the  stronger, but has to
yield the victory to it. The gist of the whole  matter lies in the fact that the small and weak cannot aid that
which  is itself small and weak, and a combustible substance cannot shield  another substance from
combustion. That which is to protect another  substance against combustion must itself be safe from danger.
The  latter must be stronger than the former, that is to say, it must itself  be essentially incombustible. He, then,
who would prepare the  incombustible sulphur of the Sages, must look for our sulphur in a  substance in which
it is incombustible −− which can only be after its  body has been absorbed by the salt sea, and again rejected
 Twelve Keys
THIRD KEY
9


--- Page 12 ---
by it. Then  it must be so exalted as to shine more brightly than all the stars of  heaven, and in its essence it
must have an abundance of blood, like the  Pelican, which wounds its own breast, and, without any
diminution of  its strength, nourishes and rears up many young ones with its blood.  This Tincture is the Rose
of our Masters, of purple hue, called also  the red blood of the Dragon, or the purple cloak many times folded
with  which the Queen of Salvation is covered, and by which all metals are  regenerated in colour.
Carefully preserve this splendid mantle, together with the astral  salt which is joined to this sulphur, and
screens it from harm. Add to  it a sufficient quantity of the volatility of the bird; then the Cock  will swallow
the Fox, and, having been drowned in the water, and  quickened by the fire, will in its turn be swallowed by
the Fox.
FOURTH KEY
All flesh that is derived from the earth, must be decomposed and again  reduced to earth; then the earthy salt
produces a new generation by  celestial resuscitation. For where there was not first earth, there can  be no
resurrection in our Magistery. For in earth is the balm of  Nature, and the salt of the Sages.
At the end of the world, the world shall be judged by fire, and all  those things that God has made of nothing
shall by fire be reduced to  ashes, from which ashes the Phoenix is to produce her young. For in the  ashes
slumbers a true and genuine tartaric substance, which, being  dissolved, will enable us to open the strongest
bolt of the royal  chamber.
After the conflagration, there shall be formed a new heaven and a  new earth, and the new man will be more
noble in his glorified state  than he was before.
When the sand and ashes have been well matured and ripened with  fire, the glass−blower makes out of it
glass, which remains hard and  firm in the fire, and in colour resembles a crystal stone. To the  uninitiated this
is a great mystery, but not to the master whom long  experience has familiarized with the process.
Out of stones the master also prepares lime by burning which is  very useful for our work− But before they are
prepared with fire, they  are mere stones. The stone must be matured and rendered fervent with  fire, and then
it becomes so potent that few things are to be compared  to the fiery spirit of lime.
By burning anything to ashes you may gain its salt. If in this  dissolution the sulphur and mercury be kept
apart, and restored to its  salt, you may once more obtain that form which was destroyed by the  process of
combustion. This assertion the wise of this world denounce  as the greatest folly, and count as a rebellion,
saying that such a  transformation would amount to a new creation, and that God has denied  such creative
power to sinful man. But the folly is all on their side.  For they do not understand that our Artist does not
claim to create  anything, but only to evolve new things from the seed made ready to his  hand by the Creator.
If you do not possess the ashes, you will be unable to obtain our  salt; and without our salt you will not be able
to impart to our  substance a bodily form; for the coagulation of all things is produced  by salt alone.
As salt is the great preserving principle that protects all things  from decay, so the Salt of our Magistery
preserves metal from  decomposition and utter annihilation. If their Balm were to perish, and  the Spirit to
leave the body, the body would be quite dead, and no  longer available for any good purpose. The metallic
spirit would have  departed, and would have left its habitation empty, bare, and lifeless.
Observe also, thou who art a lover of this Art, that the salt that  is gained from ashes has great potency, and
possesses many concealed  virtues. Nevertheless, the salt is unprofitable, until its inward  substance has been
 Twelve Keys
FOURTH KEY
10


--- Page 13 ---
extracted. For the spirit alone gives strength and  life. The body by itself profits nothing. If you know how to
find this  spirit, you have the Salt of the Sages, and the incombustible oil,  concerning which many things have
been written before my time.
Although many philosophers
Have sought for me with eagerness,
Yet very few succeed at length
In finding out my secret virtue.
FIFTH KEY
The quickening power of the earth produces all things that grow forth  from it, and he who says that the earth
has no life makes a statement  which is flatly contradicted by the most ordinary facts. For what is  dead cannot
produce life and growth, seeing that it is devoid of the  quickening spirit. This spirit is the life and soul that
dwell in the  earth, and are nourished by heavenly and sidereal influences. For all  herbs, trees, and roots, and
all metals and minerals, receive their  growth and nutriment from the spirit of the earth, which is the spirit  of
life. This spirit is itself fed by the stars, and is thereby  rendered capable of imparting nutriment to all things
that grow, and of  nursing them as a mother does her child while it is yet in the womb.  The minerals are
hidden in the womb of the earth, and nourished by her  with the spirit which she receives from above.
Thus the power of growth that I speak of is imparted not by the  earth, but by the life−giving spirit that is in it.
If the earth were  deserted by this spirit, it would be dead, and no longer able to afford  nourishment to
anything. For its sulphur or richness would lack the  quickening spirit without which there can be neither life
nor growth.
Two contrary spirits can scarcely dwell together, nor do they  easily combine. For when a thunderbolt blazes
amidst a tempest of rain,  the two spirits, out of which it is formed, fly from one another with a  great shock
and noise, and circle in the air, so that no one can know  or say whither they go, unless the same has been
ascertained by  experience as to the mode in which these spirits manifest.
Know then, gentle Reader, that life is the only true spirit, and  that that which the ignorant herd look upon as
dead may be brought back  to permanent, visible, and spiritual life, if but the spirit be  restored to the body −−
the spirit which is supported by heavenly  nutriment, and derived from heavenly, elementary, and earthly
substances, which are also called formless matter.  Moreover, as iron  has its magnet which draws it with the
invisible bonds of love, so our  gold has its magnet, viz., the first Matter of the great Stone. If you  understand
these my words, you are richer and more blessed than the  whole world.
Let me conclude this chapter with one more remark. When a man looks  into a mirror, he sees therein
reflected an image of himself. If,  however, he try to touch it, he will find that it is not palpable, and  that he
has laid his hand upon the mirror only. In the same way, the  spirit which must be evolved from this Matter is
visible, but not  palpable. This spirit is the root of the life of our bodies, and the  Mercury of the Philosophers,
from which is prepared the liquid water of  our Art − the water which must once more receive a material form,
and  be rectified by means of certain purifying agents into the most perfect  Medicine. For we begin with a
firm and palpable body, which  subsequently becomes a volatile spirit, and a golden water, without any
conversion, from which our Sages derive their principle of life.  Ultimately we obtain the indestructible
medicine of human and metallic  bodies, which is fitter to be known to angels than to men, except such  as
seek it at God's hands in heartfelt prayer, and give genuine proofs  of their gratitude by service rendered to
Him, and to their needy  neighbour.
Hereunto I may add, in conclusion, that one work is developed from  another. First, our Matter should be
 Twelve Keys
FIFTH KEY
11


--- Page 14 ---
carefully purified, then  dissolved, destroyed, decomposed, and reduced to dust and ashes.  Thereupon prepare
from it a volatile spirit, which is white as snow,  and another volatile spirit, which is red as blood. These two
spirits  contain a third, and are yet but one spirit. Now these are the three  spirits which preserve and multiply
life. Therefore unite them, give  them the meat and drink that Nature requires, and keep them in a warm
chamber until the perfect birth takes place. Then you will see and  experience the virtue of the gift bestowed
upon you by God and Nature.  Know, also, that hitherto my lips have not revealed this secret to any  one, and
that God has endowed natural substances with greater powers  than most men are ready to believe. Upon my
mouth God has set a seal,  that there might be scope for others after me to write about the  wonderful things of
Nature, which by the foolish are looked upon as  unnatural. For they do not understand that all things are
ultimately  traceable to supernatural causes, but nevertheless are, in this present  state of the world, subject to
natural conditions.
SIXTH KEY
The male without the female is looked upon as only half a body, nor  can the female without the male be
regarded as more complete For  neither can bring forth fruit so long as it remains alone. But if the  two be
conjugally united, there is a perfect body, and their seed is  placed in a condition in which it can yield
increase.
If too much seed be cast into the field, the plants impede each  other's growth, and there can be no ripe fruit.
But if, on the other  hand, too little be sown, weeds spring up and choke it.
If a merchant would keep a clear conscience, let him give just  measure to his neighbour. If his measure and
weight be not short, he  will receive praise from the poor.
In too much water you may easily be drowned; too little water, on  the other hand, soon evaporates in the heat
of the sun.
If, then, you would attain the longed−for goal, observe just  measure in mixing the liquid substance of the
Sages, lest that which is  too much overpower that which is too little, and the generation be  hindered. For too
much rain spoils the fruit, and too much drought  stunts its growth. Therefore, when Neptune has prepared his
bath,  measure out carefully the exact quantity of permanent water needed, and  let there be neither too little
nor too much.
The twofold fiery male must be fed with a snowy swan, and then they  must mutually slay each other and
restore each other to life; and the  air of the imprisoned fiery male will occupy three of the four quarters  of the
world, and make up three parts of the imprisoned fiery male,  that the death−song of the swans may be
distinctly heard; then the swan  roasted will become food for the King, and the fiery King will be  seized with
great love towards the Queen, and will take his fill of  delight in embracing her, until they both vanish and
coalesce into one  body.
It is commonly said that two can overpower one, especially if they  have sufficient room for putting forth their
strength. Know also that  there must come a twofold wind, and a single wind, and that they must  furiously
blow from the east and from the south. lf, when they cease to  rage, the air has become water, you may be
confident that the spiritual  will also be transmuted  into a bodily form, and that our number shall  prevail
through the four seasons in the fourth part of the sky (after  the seven planets have exercised power), and that
its course will be  perfected by the test of fire in the lowest chamber of our palace, when  the two shall
overpower and consume the third.
For this part of our Magistery skill is needed, in order to divide  and compound the substances aright, so that
 Twelve Keys
SIXTH KEY
12


--- Page 15 ---
the art may result in  riches, and the balance may not be falsified by unequal weights. The  sky we speak of is
the sky of our Art, and there must be justly  proportioned parts of our air and earth, our true water and our
palpable fire.
SEVENTH KEY
Natural heat preserves the life of man. If his body lose its natural  heat his life has come to an end.
A moderate degree of natural heat protects against the cold; an  excess of it destroys life. It is not necessary
that the substance of  the Sun should touch the earth. The Sun can heat the ear

[Text truncated at 50,000 characters]
