XVI

OF

LOF8

SHEWED    TO

MOTHS^

OF  NORWICH 
1373

LONDON

KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH,  TRUBNER  &  CO.  LTD

PATERNOSTER   HOUSE,    CHARING   CROSS   ROAD 
1902

The  rights  of  translation  and  of  reproduction  are  reserved

Printed  by  BALLANTYNE,  HANSON  S>  Co. 
At  the  Ballantyne  Press

PREFACE

"WHAT  !  Wouldst  thou  wit  thy  Lord's  meaning  in 
this  thing  ?  Wit  it  well :  Love  was  His  meaning. 
Who  shewed  it  thee  ?  Love.  Wherefore  shewed 
He  it  thee  ?  For  Love.  Hold  thee  therein,  and 
thou  shalt  wit  it  more  in  that  same.  But  thou  shalt 
never  wit  therein  other  without  end."  This  is  the 
key  to  the  true  interpretation  and  criticism  not 
only  of  Mother  Juliana's  Revelations,  but  also  of  the 
Christian  revelation  and  of  every  religion  so  far  as 
it  reaches  after  the  fulness  of  Christ.  Nay,  it  is 
the  key  to  the  riddle  of  Nature  and  to  the  riddle 
of  human  life — all  alike  in  their  several  ways  are 
"  Revelations  of  Divine  Love " — however  hard  at 
times  it  may  be  for  Faith,  with  tear-dimmed  eyes 
and  trembling  fingers,  to  unravel  the  knot.  ft  Wit 
it  well :  Love  was  His  meaning.  Who  shewed 
it  thee  ?  Love.  Wherefore  shewed  He  it  thee  ? 
For  Love."  Beneath  the  life  of  those  senses  which 
reveal  to  us  that  world  of  appearances,  which  the 
unreflecting  so  easily  confound  with  the  realitywhich  it  only  symbolises;  beneath  the  life  of  the 
understanding,  whose  forms  and  frames  (contrasting 
in  their  permanence  and  universality  with  the  un 
steadiness  and  uncertainty  of  that  chaos  of  fleeting 
phenomena  which  they  but  classify  and  set  in  order) 
have  seemed  to  some  to  merit  the  name  of  Reality ; 
beneath  even  the  life  of  the  higher,  though  self- 
centred  and  self-regarding  emotions  and  sentiments, 
aesthetic  or  spiritual ;  deep  down  at  the  very  basis 
of  the  soul,  is  to  be  sought  the  only  life  that  in  an 
absolute  and  independent  sense  deserves  the  name 
of  "real,"  because  by  it  alone  are  we  brought  into 
conscious  relation  with  other  personalities,  and  made 
aware  of  our  own.  Whatever  else  we  call  real  is  so, 
but  in  some  secondary  and  derived  sense.  Only  in 
so  far  as  it  resembles  a  person  can  we  think  of  it  at 
all,  and  only  in  so  far  as  it  affects  a  person,  ourself 
or  another,  can  we  desire  it  or  care  about  it  in 
any  way.  It  is  precisely  by  love  and  its  dependent 
affections  that  we  are  brought  into  conscious  and 
active  relation  with  the  whole  world  of  person 
alities  outside  our  own,  so  as  to  make  therewith  in 
some  sort  one  many-membered  spiritual  organism. 
It  is  love  which  at  once  saves  and  yet  overcomes 
that  separateness  and  individual  distinction  which 
is  of  the  very  essence  of  personality,  and  thereby 
welds  the  several  grains  of  corn  into  one  living 
vibread.  Loveless,  self-centred,  torn  altogether  from 
its  connection  with  the  whole,  the  soul  may  still 
live  the  surface-life  of  sense  or  thought  or  reason, 
but  its  grasp  on  reality  is  relaxed,  as  it  were, 
in  spiritual  death  :  "  Though  I  understand  all 
mysteries  and  all  knowledge,  and  though  I  have 
all  faith,  and  have  not  love,  I  am  nothing" — the 
veriest  nonentity,  a  withered  leaf  snatched  by  the 
breeze  from  the  living  bough.  In  this  deeper  sense 
it  is  true  to  say  that  union  is  the  condition  of  dis 
tinctness ;  and  society,  of  personality.  "We  are 
nothing  else  but  wills,"  says  Augustine,  Nihil  aliud 
sumus  quam  voluntates.  A  man  is,  in  his  veriest 
reality,  what  he  loves;  with  him  "to  be"  is  "to 
love  "  ;  if  he  have  not  love  he  is  nothing — he  is  as 
a  sounding  brass  or  tinkling  cymbal  compared  with  a 
living  cry  from  the  heart ;  appearance,  not  reality. 
The  fulness,  therefore,  of  a  man's  life  is  to  be 
measured  by  the  number  of  persons  and  groups  of 
persons  in  whom  his  affections  are  interested — by 
the  nature,  depth,  and  variety  of  those  affections, 
whether  of  sympathy  or  antipathy,  of  love  or  of 
aversion ;  and  the  whole  movement  and  life  of  this 
world  of  wills,  like  that  of  motes  in  a  sunbeam,  or 
of  the  star-dust  that  swims  in  space,  is  one  of  cease 
less  shiftings  and  mutual  adjustments,  whereby, 
through  a  maze  of  seemingly  lawless  confusion,each  will  finds  at  last  its  predestined  orbit  in  the 
spiritual  universe.  Hence  it  is  that  a  man  is 
estimated  chiefly  by  his  relation  to  others ;  by  his 
likes,  his  dislikes,  and  his  indifferences,  which  make 
him  what  he  is,  be  it  great  or  little,  good  or  evil. 
Hence,  too,  that  sense  of  spiritual  enlargement  and 
re-enforcement  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other, 
of  impoverishment  and  contraction,  according  as 
our  will  is  drawn  into  closer  communion  with  others, 
or  driven  away  into  isolation  and  estrangement. 
Hence,  once  more,  the  firm  Non  om?iis  moriar  of 
him  who,  by  identifying  himself  with  that  "  Living 
Will  which  shall  endure  when  all  that  seems  shall 
suffer  shock/'  has  laid  hold  of  eternal  life  and 
reality,  and  has  embraced  an  imperishable  cause.

As  man  lives  his  narrow  bodily  life  in  the  bosom 
of  Nature  long  before  he  understands  her  at  all 
comprehensively,  or  rises  to  that  belief  in  her  unity 
as  a  single  system  which  so  multiplies  his  power  of 
dealing  with  her  and  drawing  on  her  bounty  ;  so  too 
he  is  bound  by  the  bonds  of  a  blind  rudimentary 
charity  to  the  world  of  wills  and  personalities  long 
before  he  rises  to  a  clear  conception  of  that  sovereign 
and  central  will,  over  all  and  through  all,  by  which 
alone  the  rest  are  explained  and  brought  into  one 
coherent  self-sufficing  system.  When  the  law  of 
Love  is  thus  discerned  in  its  universality  as  the 
viiiAlpha  and  Omega  of  all  spiritual  movement,  con 
trolling  the  seeming  chaos  of  conflicting  wills  to  its 
own  irresistible  purpose,  then  are  the  possibilities  of 
man's  inward  life  multiplied  in  the  same  degree  as 
those  of  his  outward  life  have  been  multiplied  by 
the  conceptions  of  physical  science.  Thus  it  is  that 
religion  answers  the  problem  as  to  the  meaning  of 
man's  deepest  life — the  life  of  those  personal  affec 
tions  and  sympathies  by  which  we  are  endlessly 
opposed  and  re-united,  sorted  and  re-sorted,  into 
groups  and  sub-groups:  "Wit  it  well !  Love  is  the 
meaning" — a  Divine  Love  which  gives  us  a  standard 
and  criterion  whereby  to  discern  between  love  and 
love,  and  to  guide  our  feet  through  the  labyrinth 
of  warring  affections  into  the  way  of  peace.

It  is  in  furnishing  such  practical  guidance  that  a 
doctrine  or  doctrinal  system  possesses  religious  truth 
and  value  as  distinct  from  that  which  is  merely 
scientific,  historical,  or  ethical.  For  one  reason  or 
another  its  coherence  with  the  rest  of  our  knowledge 
and  understanding  may  be  at  times,  or  in  points, 
hard  to  establish  ;  but  eventually  all  our  theories  of 
the  world,  visible  and  invisible,  are  but  instruments 
of  life,  practical  ways  of  taking  things  so  as  to  use 
and  control  them  to  our  profit.  Nor  should  we  ever, 
in  case  of  conflict,  be  swayed  by  mere  reasoning  to 
disbelieve  what  experiment  had  proved  true.  At  the 
ixvery  least  we  should  wait  for  some  theory  that  would 
include  and  not  contradict  our  experience ;  and  we 
should  hold  our  own  doctrine  as  even  theoretically 
truer  in  so  far  as  evidently  truer  in  life  and  practice. 
As  the  blind  man  who  feels  his  way  to  the  fire  tests 
his  conjectures  according  as  they  bring  him  an 
increase  or  decrease  of  warmth  and  comfort,  so  in 
his  gropings  after  God  man  brings  religious  doctrines 
and  systems  to  the  test  of  life  and  love  ;  nor  does 
he  heed  the  rudeness  of  the  earthen  vessel  so  long 
as  it  is  sound  enough  to  hold  the  treasure  of  religious 
truth.  For  purposes  of  navigation  the  astronomy  of 
Ptolemy  is  as  true  as  that  of  Copernicus ;  and  many 
a  belief  less  accurately  representative  of  the  realm 
of  the  outer  senses  and  the  understanding  is  far  truer 
to  the  facts  of  the  spiritual  order — far  truer  to  the 
ultimate  realities — than  one  more  consonant  with 
current  fashions  of  thought.

Nor  need  this  surprise  us  when  we  remember  that 
^  the  outward  and  apparent  world  can  never  be  repre 
sentative,  but  at  most  symbolic,  of  the  inward  and 
real ;  that  it  yields  us  at  best  a  rude  algebra,  giving 
results  of  practical  sufficiency  and  possessing  the  cor 
respondence  of  a  chart  to  the  locality  through  which 
it  guides  the  traveller's  wandering  steps.  Only 
through  the  visible  effects  of  their  action  in  the 
world  of  appearances  are  personalities  revealed  toone  another,  and  made  aware  of  their  mutual  agree 
ments  and  disagreements  in  thought,  aim,  and  affec 
tion.  It  is  just  in  relation  to  the  affairs  of  that  outward 
common  world,  subjected  to  our  free  control,  that  our 
wills  find  occasion  of  harmonising  with  one  another  in 
an  infinite  variety  of  ways  and  degrees.  Besides  its 
effect  in  the  realm  of  appearances,  our  every  choice 
and  action  causes  a  modification  in  the  will-world, 
loosening  and  strengthening  innumerable  bonds  of 
sympathy  or  antipathy  :  bringing  access  or  decrease 
of  joy  in  heaven  before  the  angels  of  God.

Hence  it  is  that  religion,  whether  viewed  as  a 
doctrine  or  as  a  life — whether  as  a  perception  of 
the  nature  and  relations  of  that  spiritual  world 
which  flows  from  and  centres  round  God  and  is 
seized  by  faith,  or  as  a  vital  reaction  of  love  evoked 
by  that  perception — embodies  and  expresses  itself, 
more  or  less  sacrameii tally,  in  terms  of  that  outward 
world  which  is  seized  by  the  senses  and  the  under 
standing.  It  identifies  itself  with  a  certain  body 
of  statements — philosophical,  ethical,  historical — not 
directly  in  the  interests  of  the  mind,  but  in  those 
of  the  heart ;  not  because  they  are  coherent  with 
current  conceptions  of  the  order  of  phenomena,  but 
because  they  are  practically  true  to  the  facts  of  the 
real  order,  and  guide  us  into  closer  will-union  with 
God  and  man.

xixi

But  though  the  religious  and  the  mental  values  of 
such  statements  are  distinct,  even  as  the  spiritual 
and  the  natural  effects  of  sacramental  bread  or  water 
are  distinct,  yet,  like  these,  they  are  tied  together 
within  certain  definable  limits ;  nor  can  religion 
suffer  the  denial  of  any  natural  truth  that  enshrines 
a  supernatural  value,  unless  when  the  earthen  vessel 
is  destroyed  only  to  be  replaced  by  one  more  worthy 
of  her  heavenly  treasure.  Still,  she  cares  nothing 
for  the  affairs  of  the  mind,  nor  even  for  ethical 
propriety  of  conduct,  save  as  an  expression  and  in 
strument  of  the  life  of  the  spirit,  as  furthering  union 
with  the  Divine  Will.  Love,  Charity,  Eternal  Life : 
this  is  her  meaning  in  all  that  she  says,  this,  the 
inspiration  under  whose  influence  she  chooses  her 
words  and  weaves  her  own  garment  from  the 
materials  she  finds  to  hand  ;  and  it  is  for  the  sake 
of  such  inward  meaning  that  Faith  clings  to  the 
otherwise  indifferent  beliefs  of  the  natural  order 
in  which  that  meaning  is  embodied — clings  with 
a  certainty  that  is  truly  not  of  this  world,  but 
supernatural.

These  reflections  are  well  illustrated  by  Mother 
Juliana's  "  Revelations  of  Divine  Love,"  where  we 
see  Love  in  its  double  capacity  as  the  revealed 
and  the  revealer :  "  Love  was  His  meaning.  Who 
shewed  it  thee  ?  Love."  Nurtured  in  the  rich 
xiisoil  of  medieval  Christianity,  she  found  in  the 
Catholic  dogma  of  God  incarnate  and  crucified  for 
love  of  His  sinful  creatures  a  conception  of  the 
nature  and  relations  of  the  spiritual  world  whose 
fertility  is  simply  inexhaustible,  comparable  in  some 
sort  to  those  master-hypotheses  of  science  which 
receive  overwhelming  confirmation  day  by  day, 
through  their  success  in  co-ordinating  previously 
irreconcilable  tracts  of  experience  into  a  harmo 
nious  unity.  We  can  trace  in  these  "  shewings  " 
the  development  of  the  love  which  was  wakened 
in  her  own  heart  in  response  to  that  call  from  out 
side,  by  which  the  Church,  as  Christ's  herald,  rouses 
men's  souls  from  slumber  :  "Awake  !  thou  that/ 
sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  will 
enlighten  thee."  Once  started,  the  process  works 
its  way,  light  kindling  love,  and  love  thus  kindled, 
seeking  further  light  that  it  may  burn  yet  more 
fiercely.  The  nearer  she  is  brought  to  the  centre 
of  the  world  of  spiritual  realities  and  subjected  to 
the  influences  and  attractions  that  radiate  from  and 
converge  to  that  point ;  the  nearer,  in  other  words, 
she  comes  to  Him  in  whom  all  spirits  live  and 
move,  from  whom  they  proceed,  to  whom  they 
return,  so  much  the  more  imperatively  does  the 
affection,  thus  kindled  to  new  ardours,  seek  to 
understand  and  explain  itself  by  fuller  ideas  and 
xiiiimages  of  the  felt  but  unseen  realities ;  and  also 
the  more  faithfully  do  these  representations,  created, 
selected,,  or  adapted  under  the  inspiration  of  love, 
correspond  practically  to  the  truth  of  the  spiritual 
world.  Hence  Love  is  the  teacher,  and  Love  is 
the  thing  taught — in  both  cases,  Love  as  incarnate 
in  Christ  crucified,  the  revealer  and  the  revealed  ; 
known,  and  therefore  better  loved  ;  loved,  and 
therefore  better  known.  In  hers,  as  in  the  case  of 
many  saints  and  mystics,  the  process,  viewed  on  its 
psychological  side,  seems  to  have  been  accelerated 
and  intensified,  and  lifted  into  the  plane  of  the 
preternatural,  or,  at  least,  of  the  abnormal.  Like 
other  acute  and  all-absorbing  states  of  sensibility, 
divine  love,  when  it  seizes  hold  of  the  emotions, 
seems  to  bring  together  an  independent  system  of 
images,  memories  and  reasonings,  and  thus  to  create 
a  sort  of  secondary  personality,  outside  the  normal, 
whose  utterances  are  not  all  untruly  regarded  by 
the  latter  as  proceeding  from  an  external  source. 
But  the  particular  process  by  which  love  in  its 
intensified  form  seeks  self-utterance  is  of  little 
moment  compared  with  the  meaning  and  end  of 
that  utterance.

It  is  curious  and  instructive  to  see  how,  in  many 
ways,  Mother  Juliana's  spirit  of  Catholic-hearted  love 
was    cramped    in    its    efforts    at    self-expression    by 
xivIt  is  curious  and  instructive  to  see  how,  in  many 
ways,  Mother  Juliana's  spirit  of  Catholic-hearted  love 
was    cramped    in    its    efforts    at    self-expression    by 
xiv

certain  current  theological  conceptions  of  the  time, 
whose  subsequent  Calvinistic  developments  caused 
them,  even  in  their  more  tolerable  forms,  to  be 
eventually  abandoned  by  the  Church ;  how  again 
and  again  it  is  thrown  back  upon  itself,  as  waves 
from  a  cliff,  in  wild  confusion,  by  the  very  force  of 
its  onrush.  She  knows  not  how  to  roll  away  the 
stone  of  a  narrowly  conceived  predestination  that 
would  bury  Christ  away  from  the  perishing  masses 
of  humanity  outside  the  visible  Church  ;  yet  her 
faith  in  the  omnipotence  and  inventiveness  of 
Divine  Love  is  never  shaken  for  a  moment,  and 
makes  her  prescient  of  kindlier  views  that  had  not 
yet  appeared  above  the  theological  horizon.  One 
who  had  entered,  as  she  had,  into  the  fountains  of  the 
great  deep  which  were  broken  up  with  the  piercing 
of  Christ's  heart,  who  had  gauged,  as  she,  the  force 
and  measure  of  the  pent-up  torrents  of  love  then 
loosed  upon  the  world,  could  not  rest  in  views  that 
sought  to  confine  the  deluge  of  redeeming  mercy 
to  this  or  that  narrow  channel,  but  cried  out  time 
after  time  against  a  harshness  that  was  in  truth  no 
part  of  Catholic  teaching,  and  against  which  the 
Church  herself,  inspired  by  the  same  spirit,  has  also 
cried  out  in  her  reprobation  of  every  sort  of  Calvinism 
counter  to  "  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour 
toward  man."  But  over  and  above  the  obscurities 
xvdue  to  defects  in  our  own  power  of  vision,  there  are 
others,  more  or  less  objective,  that  remain  and  must 
remain  so  long  as  we  view  the  world  of  spiritual 
reality  through  a  glass  darkly,  so  long  as  we  are 
constrained  to  think  and  speak  of  it  in  enigmas 
borrowed  from  things  that  appear,  and  to  feel  our 
way  through  its  mazes  guided  by  our  sense  of  an 
increasing  or  decreasing  vitality,  of  a  waxing  or 
waning  charity.  Half-truths,  broken  away  from  the 
unity  to  which  they  belong,  present  jagged  edges 
that  will  fray  the  mind  and  lacerate  the  heart  until 
we  see  them  pieced  on  to  their  complementary 
fragments.  Yet  of  these  even,  Love  is  the  meaning, 
and  they  are  shewn  us  by  Love,  and  for  the  sake 
of  Love.  For  a  mind  so  unprepared  as  ours,  for  a 
capacity  so  limited,  for  a  love  so  imperfect,  the  half- 
truth  may  be  relatively  and  practically  truer  than 
the  whole — may  guide  us  for  our  present  need 
where  a  fuller  light  would  but  bewilder  and  blind 
us.  We  have  many  things  yet  to  learn,  but  we 
cannot  bear  them  now.  Even  could  we  compass 
them  with  our  mind,  yet  our  will  might  be  relaxed 
and  our  effort  unnerved  owing  to  the  alloy  of  self 
which  still  vitiates  our  purest  charity.  Hence  all 
God's  "  shewings,"  be  they  clear  or  obscure,  "  homely 
and  courteous,"  or  harsh  and  austere,  are  alike 
"  Revelations  of  Divine  Love."  "  Wouldst  thou 
xvi

wit  thy  Lord's  meaning  in  this  thing  ?  Wit  it  well : 
Love  was  His  meaning."  All  alike  are  directed 
to  the  more  perfect  adjustment  of  the  human  will 
to  the  Divine — to  the  deepening  of  that  bond  of 
affection  which  ties  men  to  God,  and  through  Him 
to  one  another,  into  one  spiritual  organism  of  which 
Love  is  the  soul.

G.  TYRRELL.

xvu

TO  HISG.  TYRRELL.

xvu

TO  HIS

MOST  HONOURED  LADY,  THE  LADY 
MARY  BLOUNT,  OF  SODINGTON

MADAM,

THE  just  and  grateful  resentment  which 
I  have  of  the  unmerited  kindness,  and  friendship 
of  your  late  most  worthy  and  noble  husband  Sir 
George  Blount,  of  your  Ladiship,  and  your  whole 
family,  obliged  me,  impatiently  to  desire  an  occa 
sion,  to  make  a  public  acknowledgement  thereof. 
Permit  me  therefore  here,  to  offer  to  your  Ladyship 
this  small  present,  in  which  notwithstanding,  I  can 
challenge  no  interest  or  right,  but  only  the  care  of 
publishing  it.  The  author  of  it,  is  a  person  of  your 
own  sex,  who  lived  about  three  hundred  years  since, 
intended  it  for  you,  and  for  such  readers  as  your  self, 
who  will  not  be  induced  to  the  perusing  of  it  by 
curiosity,  or  a  desire  to  learn  strange  things,  which 
afterward  they  will  at  best  vainly  admire,  or  perhaps 
out  of  incredulity  contemn.  But  your  Ladiship  will, 
I  assure  myself,  afford  her  a  place  in  your  closet, 
xix

rne

where  at  your  devout  retirements,  you  will  enjoy 
her  saint-like  conversation,  attending  to  her,  whilst 
with  humility  and  joy,  she  recounts  to  you  the 
wonders  of  our  Lords  love  to  her,  and  of  his  grace 
in  her.  And  being  thus  employed,  I  make  no  doubt 
but  you  will  be  sensible  of  many  beams  of  her  lights, 
and  much  warmth  of  her  charity,  by  reflection  darted 
into  your  own  soul.  Now  that  such  may  be  the 
effects  of  this  book,  is  the  desire  of

(Madam) 
Your  Ladyships  most  humble,

and  most  obliged  Servant 
in  our  Lord,

H.  CRESSY.

xx

I

TO    THE    READER

DEVOUT  READER,(Madam) 
Your  Ladyships  most  humble,

and  most  obliged  Servant 
in  our  Lord,

H.  CRESSY.

xx

I

TO    THE    READER

DEVOUT  READER,

WHATSOEVER  benefit  thou  mayest  reap  by  this  book, 
thou  art  obliged  for  it  to  a  more  venerable  Abbot  of 
our  nation,  by  whose  order  and  liberality  it  is  now 
published,  and  by  consequence  sufficiently  approved.

I  conceived  it  would  have  been  a  prejudice  to  the 
agreeable  simplicity  of  the  stile,  to  have  changed 
the  dress  of  it  into  our  modern  language,  as  some 
advised.  Yet  certain  more  out  of  fashion,  words  or 
phrases,  I  thought  meet  to  explain  in  the  margine.1

I  was  desirous  to  have  told  thee  somewhat  of  the 
happy  virgin,  the  compiler  of  these  Revelations : 
but  after  all  the  search  I  could  make,  I  could  not 
discover  any  thing  touching  her,  more  than  what 
she  occasionally  sprinkles  in  the  book  it  self.  The 
postscript  acquaints  us  with  her  name,  Juliana:  as 
likewise  her  profession,  which  was  of  the  strictest 
sort  of  solitary  livers ;  being  inclosed  all  her  life 
(alone)  within  four  walls :  whereby,  though  all 
mortals  were  excluded  from  her  dwelling,  yet  saints 
and  angels,  and  the  Supream  King  of  both,  could, 
and  did  find  admittance.  Moreover,  in  the  same 
postscript  we  find,  that  the  place  in  a  high  manner 
dignified  by  her  abode,  and  by  the  access  of  her

C1  See  list  of  words  at  end  of  volume,] 
xxi

TO    TH8C1  See  list  of  words  at  end  of  volume,] 
xxi

TO    TH8

heavenly  guest,  was  the  City  of  Norwich.  The  time 
when  she  lived,  and  particularly,  when  these  celestial 
Revelations  were  afforded  her,  she  her  self  in  the 
beginning  of  the  book  inforraes  us,  was  in  the  year 
of  grace  MCCCLXXIII.  that  is,  about  three  years 
before  the  death  of  the  famous  conquerour,  King 
Edward  the  Third :  at  which  time  she  her  self  was 
about  thirty  years  of  age.  And  to  conclude,  in  the 
last  chapter  of  the  book  she  signifies,  that  more 
than  fifteen  years  after  these  Revelations  had  been 
shewed  her,  how  for  resolution  of  a  certain  doubt  of 
hers  touching  the  meaning  of  one  of  them,  our  Lord 
himself  was  pleased  to  answer  her  internally  in  ghostly 
understanding.

As  for  the  manner  of  these  Revelations,  it  was 
the  same  of  which  we  read  innumerable  examples, 
both  among  ancient  and  modern  saints.  The  objects 
of  some  of  them  were  represented  to  the  imagination, 
and  perhaps  also  to  the  outward  sight ;  sometimes 
they  were  represented  in  sleep,  but  most  frequently 
when  she  was  awake.  But  those  which  were  more 
pure,  intime  and  withall  more  certain,  were  wrought 
by  a  divine  illapse  into  the  spiritual  part  of  the  soul, 
the  mind  and  understanding,  which  the  devil  cannot 
counterfeit,  nor  the  patient  comprehend,  though 
withal  it  excluded  all  doubt  or  suspicion  of  illusion.

But  the  principal  thing  which  I  desire  to  recom 
mend  to  the  reader's  consideration,  is  the  preceding 
occasion,  and  subsequent  effects  of  these  divine 
xxii

ro  rue

favours  bestowed  by  Almighty  God  on  his  humble 
devout  handmaid.ro  rue

favours  bestowed  by  Almighty  God  on  his  humble 
devout  handmaid.

She  was  far  from  expecting,  or  desiring  such 
unusual  supernatural  gifts.  Matters  stood  thus  with 
her :  she  thought  her  self  too  much  unmortified  in 
her  affection  to  creatures,  and  too  unsensible  of  our 
Lords  love  to  her.  Therefore  to  cure  the  former, 
she  requested  a  sickness  in  extremity,  even  to  death, 
in  her  own  and  others  conceit;  a  sickness  full  of 
bitter  pain  and  anguish,  depriving  her  of  all  outward 
refreshments,  and  of  all  inward  comforts  also,  which 
might  affect  the  sensual  portion  of  the  soul,  And 
for  a  remedy  to  the  latter,  she  begged  of  our  Lord, 
that  he  would  imprint  in  her  soul,  by  what  way  he 
thought  best,  a  deep  and  vigorous  conception,  and 
resentment  of  those  most  violent  torments,  which  he 
in  his  infinite  love  suffered  for  her  on  the  cross,  to 
the  end  she  might  be  even  forced  to  return  to  him  a 
suitable  affection.

Yet  in  making  these  requests,  she  expressed  a 
perfect  resignation  (as  to  the  manner)  to  his  heavenly 
will.  The  only  graces  that  she  did,  and  might,  and 
so  may  we,  desire  absolutely,  without  any  condition, 
were  a  true  spiritual  hatred  and  contempt  of  her 
self,  and  of  all  worldly,  or  sensual  contentments ;  a 
perfect  sorrow  and  compunction  for  sins  past ;  and  a 
cordial  love,  and  reverential  fear  of  Almighty  God. 
These  were  the  gifts  she  desired :  and  as  for  the 
means  of  procuring  these  graces,  she  proposed  the 
xxiii

ro

best  to  her  seeming :  yet  so,  as  being  assured  that 
God  knew  what  was  best  for  her,  she  left  them  to 
his  Divine  pleasure.ro

best  to  her  seeming :  yet  so,  as  being  assured  that 
God  knew  what  was  best  for  her,  she  left  them  to 
his  Divine  pleasure.

It  was,  no  doubt,  by  Divine  inspiration,  that  she 
at  first  made  such  petitions,  both  for  the  substance 
and  manner,  and  therefore  God  granted  them  as  she 
desired  ;  yea,  in^  a  manner  more  extraordinary  than 
she  durst  pretend  to,  as  the  reader  may  observe. 
And  how  wonderful  the  effects  of  them  were,  the 
whole  contexture  of  her  discourses  upon  each  Revela 
tion  will  excellently  demonstrate.

And  now,  since  she  her  self  professes,  that  the 
lights  and  torches  which  God  was  pleased  to  give 
her,  were  intended  not  for  her  self  alone,  but  for 
the  universality  of  God's  true  servants,  for  whose 
benefit  also  she  wrote  them,  the  devout  reader  will, 
I  hope,  think  himself  obliged  not  to  content  himself 
with  a  fruitless  admiring,  but  will,  after  her  example, 
aspire  to  a  like  affectuous,  operative  contemplation 
of  the  meer  nothingness  of  creatures,  of  the  incon 
ceivable  ugliness  of  sin,  of  the  infinite  tenderness  and 
indefectibility  of  God's  love  to  his  elect,  and  of  the 
omnipotency  of  Divine  grace  working  in  them ;  to 
which  grace  alone  all  good  in  us  is  to  be  ascribed.

xxiv

XYI 
REVELATIONS   OF   LOVE

Here  beginneth  the  First  Chapter

THIS  is  a  Revelation  of  Love,  that  Jesu  Christ 
our  endless  blisse  made  in  xvi.  shewings :  of 
which,

The  first  is  of  his  precious  crowning  of  thornes, 
and  therein  was  conteined  and  specified  the  blessed 
Trinity,  with  the  incarnation  and  the  uniting  be 
tween  God  and  mans  soul,  with  manie  faire  shew 
ings  and  teachings  of  endeless  wisdom  and  love  : 
in  which  all  the  shewings  that  follow  be  grounded 
and  joyned.The  second,  is  of  the  discolouring  of  his  faire  face, 
in  tokening  of  his  dear  worthie  passion.

The  third  is,  that  our  Lord  God  Almighty,  all 
wisdom  and  all  love,  right  also  verilie  as  he  hath 
made  all  thinges  that  are  right,  also  verilie  he  doth 
and  worketh  all  things  that  are  done.

1  A

\

The  fourth  is,  scourging  of  his  tender  bodie  with 
plenteous  shedding  of  his  precious  blood.

The  Jifth  is,  that  the  fiend  is  overcome  by  the 
precious  passion  of  Christ.

The  sixth  is,  the  worshipfull  thanking  of  our  Lord 
God,  in  which  he  rewardeth  all  his  blessed  servants 
in  heaven.

The  seventh  is,  oftentimes  feeling  of  weale  and 
woe.  Feeling  of  weale  is  gracious  touching  and 
lightning,  with  true  sikernes  of  endeles  joy  :  the 
feeling  of  woe  is  of  temptation  by  heavines,  and 
wearines  of  our  fleshlie  living  with  ghostelie  under 
standing,  that  we  be  kept  also  verelie  in  love,  in. 
woe  as  in  weal,  by  the  goodnes  of  God.

The  eighth  is,  the  last  paines  of  Christ  and  his 
cruell  dying.

The  ninth  is,  of  the  liking  which  is  in  the  blessed 
Trinity  of  the  hard  passion  of  Christ  after  his  rufull 
and  sorrowful  dying  :  in  which  joy  and  liking  he  will 
that  we  be  in  solace  and  mirth  with  him,  till  that 
we  come  to  the  glorie  in  heaven.

The  tenth  is,  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  [shewing]  by 
love  his  blessed  heart  even  cloven  in  two.

The  eleventh  is,  an  high  ghostlie  shewing  of  his 
cleare  worthie  Mother.

The  twelfth  is,  that  our  Lord  God  is  all  soveraign 
being.

2

rneThe  eleventh  is,  an  high  ghostlie  shewing  of  his 
cleare  worthie  Mother.

The  twelfth  is,  that  our  Lord  God  is  all  soveraign 
being.

2

rne

The  thirteenth  is,  that  our  Lord  God  will  that  we 
have  great  regard  to  all  the  deedes  which  he  hath 
done,  in  the  great  nobletie  of  all  things  making, 
and  of  the  excellency  of  mans  making,  the  which 
is  above  all  his  works ;  and  of  the  precious  amends 
that  he  hath  made  for  mans  sin,  turning  all  our 
blame  into  endeles  worship.  Than  meaneth  he 
thus,  '  Beholde  and  see,  for  by  the  same  might,  wisdome 
and  goodness  that  I  have  done  all  this,  by  the  same 
might,  wisdome  and  goodness  I  shall  make  well  all  that 
is  not  well,  and  thou  shall  see  it.'  And  in  this  he  will 
that  we  keep  us  in  the  faith  and  truth  of  Holie 
Church,  not  willing  to  wit  his  privities,  not  but  as 
it  longeth  to  us  in  this  life.

The  fourteenth  is,  that  our  Lord  God  is  the 
ground  of  our  beseekinge.  Herein  was  seen  two 
fair  properties :  that  one  is  rightful  praier :  that 
other  is  verie  trust,  which  he  will  both  be  one  like 
[alike]  large,  and  thus  our  praier  liketh  him,  and  he 
of  his  goodness  fulfilleth  it.

Thejtfteenth  is,  that  we  should  soudeinlie  be 
taken  from  all  our  paine,  and  from  all  our  woe,  and 
of  his  goodnes  we  shall  come  up  above,  where  we 
shall  have  our  Lord  Jesu  to  our  meed,  and  for  to 
be  fulfilled  with  joy  and  blisse  in  heaven.

The  sixteenth  is,  that  the  blessed  Trinitie,  our 
maker,  in  Christ  Jesu  our  Saviour,  endleslie  dwelleth 
3

in  our  soule,  worshipfullie  rewarding  and  command 
ing  all  things,  us  mightilie  and  wiselie  saving  and 
keeping  for  love,  and  we  shall  not  be  over-come  of 
our  enemy.

The  Second  ChapterThe  Second  Chapter

THIS  Revelation  was  made  to  a  simple  creature  un 
lettered,  living  in  deadlie  flesh,  the  year  of  our 
Lord,  a  thousand  three  hundreth  Ixxiij,  the  xiiijtk 
daie  of  Maie :  which  creature  desired  before  three 
gifts  by  the  grace  of  God.

Thejirst,  was  mind  of  the  passion.

The  second,  was  bodilie  sickness.

The  third,  was  to  have  of  Gods  gift  three 
woundes.  For  the  first,  me  thought  I  had  some 
deale  feeling  in  the  passion  of  Christ,  but  yet  I  de 
sired  to  have  more  by  the  grace  of  God.  Me  thought 
I  would  have  been  that  time  with  Magdalen,  and 
with  other  that  were  Christs  lovers,  that  I  might 
have  seen  bodilie  the  passion  that  our  Lord  suffered 
for  me,  that  I  might  have  suffered  with  him  as 
others  did  that  loved  him  ;  and  therefore  I  desired 
a  bodilie  sight,  wherein  I  might  have  more  know 
ledge  of  the  bodilie  paines  of  our  Saviour,  and  of 
the  compassion  of  our  Lady,  and  of  all  his  true 
4

rnerne

lovers  that  \vere  living  that  time,  and  saw  his 
paines :  for  I  would  have  bene  one  of  them,  and 
have  suffered  with  them.  Other  sight  nor  shewing 
of  God  desired  I  never  none,  till  when  the  soule 
were  departed  from  the  body,  for  I  believed  to  be 
saved  by  the  mercy  of  God.  This  was  my  meaning  ; 
for  I  would  after  because  of  that  shewing  have  the 
more  true  mind  in  the  passion  of  Christ.  For  the 
second  came  to  my  mind  with  contrition  freelie, 
without  anie  seeking,  a  wilfull  desire  to  have  of 
Gods  gift,  a  bodilie  sicknes.  I  would  that  that 
sicknes  were  so  hard  as  to  the  death,  that  I  might 
in  that  sicknes  have  undertaken  all  the  Rights  of 
Holie  Church,  my  self  weening  that  I  should  have 
died,  and  that  all  creatures  might  suppose  the  same 
that  saw  me :  for  I  would  have  no  manner  of 
comfort  of  fleshly,  ne  earthly  life  in  that  sicknes. 
I  desired  to  have  all  manner  of  paines,  bodilie  and 
ghostlie,  that  I  should  have  if  I  should  have  died  : 
all  the  dreads  and  temptations  of  fiends,  and  all 
manner  of  other  paines,  saving  the  out-passing  of 
the  soule.  And  this  meant  I,  for  I  would  be 
purged  by  the  mercy  of  God,  and  after  live  more 
to  the  worship  of  God  because  of  that  sicknes. 
For  I  hoped  that  it  might  have  bene  to  my  reward 
when  I  should  have  died,  for  I  desired  to  have 
berie  soone  with  my  God  and  Maker.

These  two  desires  of  the  passion,  and  of  the  sick- 
nes  that  I  desired  of  him,  was  with  a  condition :  for 
me  thought  this  was  not  the  common  use  of  praier. 
Therefore  I  said,  '  Lord  thou  knowest  what  I  would, 
and  if  that  it  be  thy  will  that  I  might  have  it ;  and 
if  it  be  not  thy  will,  good  Lord,  be  not  displeased, 
for  I  will  not  but  as  thou  wilt/This  sicknes  I  desired  in  my  youth,  that  I  might 
have  it  when  I  were  thirtie  years  old.

For  the  third,  by  the  grace  of  God  and  teaching 
of  Holie  Church,  I  conceived  a  mightie  desire  to 
receive  three  wounds  in  my  life,  that  is  to  say,  the 
wound  of  verie  contrition,  the  wound  of  kind  compas 
sion,  and  the  wound  of  willful  longing  to  God.

Right  as  I  asked  the  other  twaine  with  a  condi 
tion,  so  asked  I  this  third  mightilie  without  any 
condition.  These  twaine  desires  before  said,  passed 
from  my  mind,  and  the  third  dwelled  continual  lie.

The  Third  Chapter

AND  when  I  was  thirtie  yeares  old  and  a  halfe,  God 
sent  me  a  bodilie  sicknes,  in  which  I  lay  three  daies 
and  three  nights,  and  on  the  fourth  night,  I  tooke 
all  my  Rights  of  Holie  Church,  and  went  [weened] 
6

rne

not  to  have  liven  till  daie.  And  after  this  I  laie 
two  dales  and  two  nights,  and  on  the  third  night 
I  weened  oftentimes  to  have  passed,  and  so  weened 
they  that  were  with  me,  and  yet  in  this  I  felt  a 
great  loathness  to  die,  but  for  nothing  that  was 
in  earth  that  me  liketh  to  live  for,  ne  for  no  paine 
that  I  was  afraid  of,  for  I  trusted  in  God  of  his 
mercy  :  but  it  was,  for  I  would  have  lived  to  have 
loved  God  better,  and  a  longer  time ;  that  I  might 
by  the  grace  of  that  living  have  the  more  knowing 
and  loving  of  God  in  the  blisse  of  heaven.  For 
methought  all  that  time  that  I  had  lived  here  so 
litle  and  so  short  in  regarde  of  that  endles  blisse, 
I  thought,  '  Good  Lord,  may  my  living  be  110  longer 
to  thy  worshippe  ? '

And  I  understood  in  my  reason,  and  by  the 
feeling  of  my  paines  that  I  should  die :  and  I 
assented  fullie  with  all  the  will  of  myne  heart  to 
be  at  Gods  will.And  I  understood  in  my  reason,  and  by  the 
feeling  of  my  paines  that  I  should  die :  and  I 
assented  fullie  with  all  the  will  of  myne  heart  to 
be  at  Gods  will.

Thus  I  endured  till  daie,  and  by  then  was  my 
bodie  dead  from  the  middes  downward e,  as  to 
my  feeling.

Then  was  I  holpen  to  be  sett  upright,  undersett 
with  help,  for  to  have  the  more  freedome  of  my 
heart  to  be  at  Gods  will,  and  thinking  on  God 
while  my  life  lasted.

My  Curate  was  sent  for  to  be  at  my  ending, 
7

and  before  he  came  I  had  sett  up  my  eien,  and 
might  not  speak.  He  sett  the  crosse  before  my 
face,  and  said,  "  I  have  brought  the  image  of  our 
Saviour,  looke  thereupon  and  comfort  thee  there 
with."  Me  thought  I  was  well,  for  my  eien  were 
sett  upright  into  heaven,  where  I  trusted  to  come 
by  the  mercy  of  God.

But  neverthelesse  I  assented  to  sett  my  eien  in 
the  face  of  the  crucifix,  if  I  might,  and  so  I  did ; 
for  me  thought  I  might  longer  dure  to  looke  even 
forth  than  right  up.  After  this  my  sight  began 
to  faile,  it  waxed  as  darke  about  me  in  the 
chamber  as  if  it  had  bene  night,  save  in  the  image 
of  the  crosse,  wherein  held  a  common  light,  and 
I  wist  not  how ;  all  that  was  besides  the  crosse 
was  uglie  and  fearefull  to  me,  as  it  had  bene 
much  occupied  with  fiendes.

After  this  the  over-parte  of  my  bodie  began  to 
die,  so  farre  forth  that  unneath  I  had  any  feeling; 
my  most  paine  was  shortnes  of  breath,  and  failing 
of  life.After  this  the  over-parte  of  my  bodie  began  to 
die,  so  farre  forth  that  unneath  I  had  any  feeling; 
my  most  paine  was  shortnes  of  breath,  and  failing 
of  life.

Then  went  [weened]  I  verilie  to  have  passed,  and 
in  this  case  sodenlie  all  my  paine  was  taken  from 
me,  and  I  was  as  whole,  and  namely  in  the  over- 
part  of  my  bodie,  as  ever  I  was  before.  I  mar  vailed 
of  this  sodaine  change :  for  me  thought  that  it 
was  a  privie  working  of  God,  and  not  of  kind. 
8

And  yet  by  feeling  of  this  ease,  I  trusted  never 
the  more  to  have  lived;  ne  the  feeling  of  this 
ease  was  no  full  ease  unto  me :  for  me  thought 
I  had  rather  have  bene  delivered  of  this  world, 
for  my  heart  was  wilful  lie  sett  thereto.

Then  came  sodeinlie  to  my  minde,  that  I  should 
desire  the  seconde  wound  of  our  Lords  gift,  and 
of  his  grace,  that  my  bodie  might  be  fulfilled  with 
mind  and  feeling  of  his  blessed  passion,  as  I  had 
before  praied.  For  I  would  that  his  paines  were 
my  paines  with  compassion,  and  afterwards  longing 
to  God.

Thus  thought  me,  that  I  might  with  his  grace 
have  the  wounds  that  I  had  before  desired.  But 
in  this  I  desired  never  no  bodilie  sight ;  ne  no 
manner  shewing  of  God,  but  compassion,  as  me 
thought  that  a  kind  soule  might  have  with  our 
Lord  Jesu,  that  for  love  would  become  a  deadlie 
man  with  him.  I  desired  to  suffer  living  in  my 
deadlie  bodie,  as  God  would  give  me  grace.

Jtrst   IfiUbeiatton

Fourth  ChapterJtrst   IfiUbeiatton

Fourth  Chapter

A~*D  in  this,  sodeinlie  I  saw  the  red  blood 
running  down  from  under  the  garland, 
hott  and  freshly,  plenteouslie  and  livelie,  right  as 
it  was  in  the  time  that  the  garland  of  thornes  was 
pressed  on  his  blessed  head,  right  so  both  God 
and  man  the  same  that  suffered  for  me.  I  con- 
ceaved  trulie  and  mightilie  that  it  was  himself  that 
shewed  it  me  without  any  meane.

And  in  the  same  shewing,  sodeinlie  the  Trinitie 
fulfilled  my  heart  most  of  joy :  and  so  I  understood 
it  shall  be  in  heaven  without  end  to  all  that  shall 
come  there.  For  the  Trinitie  is  God.  God  is  the 
Trinitie,  the  Trinitie  is  our  Maker,  the  Trinitie 
is  our  Keeper,  the  Trinitie  is  our  everlasting 
Lover,  the  Trinitie  is  our  endles  joy  and  our 
blisse,  by  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and  in  our 
Lord  Jesu  Christ :  and  this  was  shewed  in  the  first 
sight,  and  in  all.  For  when  Jesu  appeareth,  the 
blessed  Trinity  is  understood  as  unto  my  sight. 
10

rne

And  I  said,  Benedicite  dominm:  This  I  said  for 
reverence  in  my  meaning  with  a  mightie  voice, 
and  full  greatelie  was  I  astonished  for  wonder 
and  marveile  that  I  had,  that  he  that  is  so 
reverent  and  so  dreadful  will  be  so  homelie  with 
a  sinfull  creature  living  in  this  wretched  flesh.

Thus  I  tooke  it  for  that  time  that  our  Lord 
Jesu  of  his  courteous  love  would  shew  me  comfort 
before  the  time  of  my  temptation  :  for  me  thought 
it  might  well  be,  that  I  should  by  the  sufferance 
of  God,  and  with  his  keeping,  be  tempted  of 
fiends  before  I  should  die.With  this  sight  of  his  blessed  passion,  with  the 
Godhead  that  I  sawe  in  my  understanding,  I 
knew  well  that  it  was  strength  enough  to  me,  yea 
and  to  all  creatures  living,  that  should  be  saved 
against  all  the  fiendes  of  hell,  and  against  all 
ghostlie  enemies.

In  this  he  brought  our  Lady  Saint  Mary  to  my 
understanding;  I  sawe  her  ghostelie  in  bodilie 
likenes,  a  simple  maiden  and  a  meeke,  young  of 
age,  a  litle  waxen  above  a  child,  in  the  stature 
as  she  was  when  she  conceived.

Also   God  shewed  me  in  part  the  wisdome  and

the  truth  of  her  soule;  wherein   I   understood  the

reverence    beholding    that    she    beheld    her    God

that  is  her  Maker,  marvailing  with  great  reverence

11

rne

that  he  would  be  born  of  her  that  was  a  simple 
creature  of  his  making.

For  this  was  her  marvailing,  that  he  that  was 
her  Maker  would  be  born  of  her  that  was  made.

And  this  wisdome  and  truth  knowing  the 
greatnes  of  her  Maker,  and  the  litlehead  of  her 
selfe  that  is  made,  made  her  to  saie  full  meekelie 
to  Gabriel,  ( Lo  me  here  Gods  hand-maiden.'

In  this  sight  I  did  understand  verilie  that  she 
is  more  than  all  that  God  made  beneath  her  in 
worthines  and  fullhead  ;  for  above  her  is  nothing 
that  is  made  but  the  blessed  manhood  of  Christ, 
as  to  my  sight.

The  Fifth  Chapter

IN  this  same  time  that  I  sawe  this  sight  of  the  head 
bleeding,  our  good  Lord  shewed  a  ghostlie  sight 
of  his  homelie  loving :  I  saw  that  he  is  to  us  all 
thing  that  is  good  and  comfortable  to  our  help.He  is  our  clothing,  that  for  love  wrappeth  us, 
and  windeth  us,  halseth  us,  and  all  becloseth  us, 
hangeth  about  us  for  tender  love,  that  he  maie 
never  leave  us.  And  so  in  this  sight  I  saw  that  he 
is  all  thing  that  is  good,  as  to  my  understanding.

And  in  this  he  shewed  a  litle  thing,  the  quantitie 
12

rns  FIFTH

of  a  hasel-nutt,  lying  in  the  palme  of  my  hand, 
as  me  seemed ;  and  it  was  as  round  as  a  ball.  I 
looked  theron  with  the  eie  of  my  understanding, 
and  thought,  "What  may  this  be?"  and  it  was 
answered  generallie  thus  :

1  It  is  all  that  is  made.'  I  marvelled  how  it  might 
last :  for  me  thought  it  might  sodenlie  have  fallen 
to  naught  for  litlenes.

And  I  was  answered  in  my  understanding,  'It 
lasteth,  and  ever  shall :  for  God  loveth  it.  And  so  hath 
all  thing  being  by  the  love  of  God.'

In  this  litle  thing  I  sawe  three  propeties.

Thejlrst  is,  that  God  made  it.

The  second  is,  that  God  loveth  it.

The  third  is,  that  God  keepeth  it.

But,  what  beheld  I  therein  ?  verilie  the  Maker, 
the  Keeper,  the  Lover.  For  till  I  am  substanciallie 
united  to  him,  I  maie  never  have  full  rest,  ne  verie 
blisse ;  that  is  to  saie,  that  I  be  so  fastned  to  him, 
that  there  be  right  nought  that  is  made  betweene 
my  God  and  mee.

This  litle  thing  that  is  made,  me  thought  it  might 
have  fallen  to  nought  for  litlenes.

Of  this  needeth  us  to  have  knowledge,  that  us 
liketh  naught  all  thing  that  is  made,  for  to  love 
God,  and  have  God  that  is  unmade.

For  this  is  the  cause  which  we  be  not  all  in  ease 
13

rneFor  this  is  the  cause  which  we  be  not  all  in  ease 
13

rne

of  heart  and  soule :  for  we  seeke  here  rest  in  this 
thing  that  is  so  litle,  where  no  rest  is  in  :  and  we 
know  not  our  God  that  is  all  mightie,  all  wise,  and 
all  good,  for  he  is  verie  rest.

God  will  be  known,  and  him  liketh  that  we  rest 
us  in  him.

For  all  that  is  beneath  him,  sufficeth  not  us.

And  this  is  the  cause  why  that  no  soule  is  in  rest 
till  it  is  naughted  of  all  things  that  are  made  : 
when  she  is  wilfullie  naughted  for  love  to  have 
him  that  is  all,  then  is  she  able  to  receave 
ghostlie  rest.

And  also  our  good  Lord  shewed,  that  it  is  full 
great  pleasure  to  him  that  a  seelie  soule  come  to 
him  naked,  plainlie,  and  homelie.  For  this  is  the 
kind  dwelling  of  the  soule  by  the  touching  of  the 
Holie  Ghost,  as  by  the  understanding  that  I  have 
in  this  shewing.  '  God  of  thy  goodnes  give  me 
thy  self,  for  thou  art  enough  to  me;  and  I  may 
aske  nothing  that  is  lesse,  that  may  be  fullie 
worship  to  thee  ;  and  if  I  aske  any  thing  that  is 
lesse,  ever  me  waiiteth.  But  onlie  in  thee  I 
have  all.'

And  these  wordes  of  the  goodnes  of  God  be  full 
lovesome  to  the  soule,  and  full  nere  touching  the 
will  of  our  Lord  ;  for  his  goodnes  fulfilleth  all  his 
creatures,  and  all  his  blessed  works  without  end. 
14

rne  SIXTH

For  he  is  the  endlesse  head,  and  he  made,  us 
onlie  to  himselfe ;  and  restored  us  by  his  precious 
passion,  and  ever  keepeth  us  in  his  blessed  love ; 
and  all  this  is  of  his  goodnes.

The  Sixth  ChapterThe  Sixth  Chapter

THIS  shewing  was  given  to  my  understanding,  to 
learne  our  soul  wisely  to  cleave  to  the  goodnes  of 
God,  and  in  that  same  time  the  custome  of  our 
praier  was  brought  to  my  mind,  how  that  we  use, 
for  unknowing  of  love,  to  make  many  meanes. 
Then  sawe  I  verilie  that  it  is  more  worship  to  God, 
and  more  verie  delight  that  we  faithfullie  pray  to 
himself  of  his  goodnes,  and  cleave  therto  by  his 
grace  with  true  understanding  and  stedfast  beleif, 
then  if  we  made  all  the  meanes  that  heart  may 
think.

For  if  we  make  all  these  meanes,  it  is  too  litle, 
and  not  full  worship  to  God :  but  in  his  goodnes  is 
all  the  whole ;  and  there  faileth  right  nought.

For  thus  as  I  shall  saie,  came  to  my  minde  in  the

same  time  :  we  pray  to  God  for  his  holie  flesh,  and

for  his  precious  blood,  his  holie  passion,  his  deare

worthie    death,    and    worshipfull    wounds ;    for    all

15

the  blessed  kindenes  and  the  endles  life  that  we 
have  of  all  this,  it  is  of  the  goodnes  of  God.  And 
we  praie  him  for  his  sweet  mothers  love  that  bare 
him ;  and  all  the  helpe  that  we  have  of  her  it  is  of 
his  goodnes.  And  we  praie  for  his  holie  crosse  that 
he  died  on ;  and  all  the  helpe,  and  all  the  vertue 
of  that  we  have  of  that  crosse,  it  is  of  his  goodnes.

And  on  the  same  wise,  all  the  helpe  that  we  have 
to  special  saints,  and  of  all  the  blessed  companie 
of  heaven ;  the  deare  worthie  love,  and  the  holy 
endles  friendship  that  we  have  of  them,  it  is  of 
his  goodness.

For  the  meanes  that  the  goodnes  of  God  hath 
ordeined  for  to  helpe  us,  be  full  faire  and  many.For  the  meanes  that  the  goodnes  of  God  hath 
ordeined  for  to  helpe  us,  be  full  faire  and  many.

Of  which  the  chiefe  and  principall  meane  is  the 
blessed  kinde  that  he  took  of  the  maiden,  with  all 
the  meanes  that  went  before,  and  come  after,  which 
be  longing  to  our  redemption  and  to  our  endless 
salvation.

Wherefore  it  pleaseth  him,  that  we  seeke  him, 
and  worship  him  by  meanes ;  understanding,  and 
knowing  that  he  is  the  goodnes  of  all.

For  to  the  goodnes  of  God  is  the  highest  praier, 
and  it  cometh  down  to  us  to  the  lowest  partie  of 
our  neede ;  it  quickneth  our  soule,  and  maketh  it 
live,  and  makes  it  to  waxe  in  grace  and  vertue ;  it 
is  nearest  in  kind  and  readiest  in  grace. 
16

SIXTH

For  it  is  the  same  grace  that  the  soule  seeketh, 
and  ever  shall  till  we  know  our  God  verilie  that 
hath  us  all  in  himself  beclosed.

A  man  goeth  upright,  and  the  soule  of  his  body 
s  sparred  as  a  purse  full  faire,  and  when  it  is  time 
of  his  necessity,  it  is  opened  and  sparred  againe  full 
lonestlie.

And  that  it  is  he  that  doth  this,  it  is  shewed 
there  where  he  saith,  'He  cometh  downe  to  us  to 
the  lowest  part  of  our  need.'  For  he  hath  no  despite 
of  that  he  made,  ne  hath  he  no  disdaine  to  serve 
us  at  the  simplest  office  that  to  our  bodie  longeth 
in  kind,  for  love  of  the  soule  that  he  made  to  his 
own  likenes.

For  as  the  bodie  is  cladd  in  the  death,  and  the 
flesh  in  the  skinn,  and  the  bones  in  the  flesh,  and 
the  heart  in  the  bulke,  so  are  we  soule  and  bodie 
cladd  and  enclosed  in  the  goodnes  of  God  :  yea, 
and  more  homelie,  for  all  they  vanish  and  wast 
away,  the  goodnes  of  God  is  ever  whole  and  more 
nere  to  us  without  any  comparison.For  truelie  our  Lover  desireth  that  the  soule 
cleave  to  him  with  all  the  mightes,  and  that  we 
be  evermore  cleaving  to  his  goodnes :  for  of  all 
thing  that  heart  can  thinke  it  pleaseth  most  God, 
and  soonest  speedeth.

For  our  soule  is  so  preciouslie  loved  of  him  that  is 
17  B

rne

highest,  that  it  over-passeth  the  knowing  of  all 
creatures :

Thatt  is  to  saie,  there  is  no  creature  that  is 
made,  that  may  wit  how  much,  and  how  sweetly, 
arid  how  tenderlie  that  our  Maker  loveth  us.  And 
therefore,  we  may  with  his  grace  and  his  helpe, 
stand  in  ghostlie  beholding  with  everlasting  mar- 
vailing  in  this  high  over-passing  unmeasurable  love 
that  our  Lord  hath  to  us  of  his  goodnes.

And  therefore,  we  may  aske  of  our  Lover  with 
reverence,  all  that  we  will :  for  our  kincllie  will  is 
to  have  God,  and  the  goodwill  of  God  is  to  have 
us  :  and  we  may  never  cease  of  willing,  ne  of  loving, 
till  we  have  him  in  fulhead  of  joy.

And  then  we  may  no  more  will ;  for  he  will  that 
we  be  occupied  in  knowing  and  loving,  till  the  time 
cometh  that  we  shall  be  fulfilled  in  heaven.

And  therefore  was  this  lesson  of  love  shewed 
with  all  that  followeth  as  you  shall  see;  for  the 
strength  and  the  ground  of  all  was  shewed  in  the 
first  sight :  for  of  all  things,  the  beholding  and  the 
loving  of  the  Maker,  maketh  the  soul  to  seem  least 
in  his  own  sight,  and  most  filleth  it  with  reverent 
dread  and  true  meekness,  and  with  plenty  of 
charity  to  his  even  Christian.

18

rne

The  Seventh  Chapter

AND  to  learn  us  this  as  to  my  understanding,  our 
good  Lord  shewed  our  Lady  Mary  in  the  same 
time,  that  is  to  mean,  the  high  wisdom  and  truth 
that  she  had  in  beholding  her  Maker.This  wisdom  and  truth  made  her  to  behold  her 
God  so  great,  so  high,  so  mighty,  and  so  good 
This  greatness  and  this  noblety  of  her  beholding 
of  God,  fulfilled  her  of  reverend  deed  [dread] :  and 
with  this  she  saw  herself  so  litle  and  so  low,  so 
simple  and  so  poor,  in  regard  of  her  God,  that  this 
reverend  dread  fulfilled  her  of  meekness.  And 
thus  by  this  ground  she  was  fulfilled  of  grace, 
and  of  all  manner  of  vertues,  and  passeth  all 
creatures.

And  in  all  the  time  that  he  shewed  this  that 
I  have  now  said,  in  ghostly  sight,  I  saw  the 
bodily  sight  lasting  of  the  plentuous  bleeding 
of  the  head ;  the  great  drops  of  blood  fell  down 
from  under  the  garland  like  pellots,  seeming  as 
it  had  come  out  of  the  veins :  and  in  the  coming 
out  they  were  brown  red,  for  the  blood  was  full 
thick,  and  in  the  spreading  abroad  they  were 
19

bright  red  ;  and  when  it  came  at  the  brows,  there 
they  vanished.

And  notwithstanding,  the  bleeding  continued 
till  many  things  were  seen  and  understanded  ; 
nevertheless,  the  fair-head,  and  the  lively-head 
continued  in  the  same  beauty  and  liveliness.

The  plentuous-head  is  like  to  the  drops  of  water 
that  fall  off  the  evesing  of  an  house  after  a  great 
shower  of  rain,  that  fall  so  thick,  that  no  man 
may  number  them  with  any  bodily  wit.  And  for 
the  roundness,  they  were  like  to  the  seal  [scale]  of 
herring  in  the  spreading  of  the  forehead.

These  three  things  came  to  my  mind  in  the 
time ;  pellets,  for  the  roundhead  in  the  comming 
out  of  the  blood ;  the  scale  of  herring,  for  the 
round-head  in  the  spreading;  the  dropps  of  the 
evesing  of  an  house,  for  the  plentuous-head  un- 
numerable.This  shewing  was  quick  and  lively,  and  hideous, 
and  dreadful,  and  sweet,  and  lovely.  And  of  all 
the  sight  that  I  saw,  this  was  most  comfort  to 
me,  that  our  good  Lord  that  is  so  reverent  and 
dreadful,  is  so  homely  and  so  courteous :  and 
this  most  fulfilled  me  with  liking  and  sickerness 
of  soul.

And  to  the  understanding  of  this,  he  shewed 
this  open  example.  '  It  is  the  most  worship  that  a 
20

me

solemn  King  or  a  great  Lord  may  do  to  a  poor  servant, 
if  he  wiU  be  homely  with  him  ;  and  namely,  if  he  shew 
it  himself  of  a  full  true  meaning,  and  with  a  glad 
chere  both  in  private  and  openly.'  Then  thinketh 
this  poor  creature  thus :  '  Lo,  what  might  this 
noble  Lord  do  more  worship  and  joy  to  me,  than 
to  show  to  me  that  am  so  little  this  marvelous 
homeliness ;  verily  it  is  more  joy  and  liking  to  me, 
than  if  he  gave  me  great  gifts,  and  were  himself 
strange  in  manner.'

This  bodily  example  was  shewed  so  high,  that 
this  mans  heart  might  be  ravished,  and  almost 
forget  himself  for  joy  of  this  great  homeliness.

Thus  it  faireth  by  our  Lord  Jesu,  and  by  us,  for 
verily  it  is  the  most  joy  that  may  be  as  to  my 
sight,  that  he  that  is  highest  and  mightest,  nobliest 
and  worthiest,  is  lowest  and  meekest,  homliest  and 
courtesiest.  And  truly  and  verily,  this  marvellous 
joy  shall  he  shew  us  all  when  we  shall  see  him.And  this  will  our  good  Lord,  that  we  believe,  and 
trust,  joy,  and  like  [also]  comfort  us,  and  make  solace, 
as  we  may  with  his  grace  and  with  his  help,  into  the 
time  that  we  see  it  verily;  for  the  most  fulhed  of 
joy  that  we  shall  have  as  to  my  sight,  is  this  marvel 
lous  courtesie  and  homeliness  of  our  Father  that  is 
our  Maker  in  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  that  is  our 
Brother  and  our  Saviour. 
21

rue

But  this  marvelous  homliness  may  no  man  know 
in  this  life,  but  if  [unless]  he  have  it  by  special  shew 
ing  of  our  Lord,  or  of  great  plenty  of  grace  inwardly 
given  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  faith  and  belief  with 
charity  deserve  the  meed,  and  so  it  is  had  by  grace.

For  in  faith,  with  hope  and  charity,  our  life  is 
grounded ;  the  shewing  is  made  to  whom  that  God 
will  plainly  teach  the  same,  opened  and  declared 
with  many  privy  points  belonging  to  our  faith  and 
belief,  which  be  worshipful  to  be  known.

And  when  the  shewing  which  is  given  for  a  time 
is  passed  and  hid,  then  faith  keepeth  it  by  grace  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  unto  our  lives  end.

And  thus  by  the  shewing,  it  is  none  other  than 
faith,  no  less,  no  more,  as  it  may  be  seen  by  our 
Lords  meaning  in  the  same  matter,  by  that  it  come 
to  the  last  end.

The  Eighth  Chapter

AND  as  long  as  I  saw  this  sight  of  the  plentuousness 
of  bleeding  of  the  head,  I  might  never  stint  of  these 
words,  Benedicite  Dominus.  In  which  shewing,  I 
understood  six  things.

Thejlrst  is,  the  tokens  of  the  blessedful  passion, 
and  the  plentuous  shedding  of  his  precious  blood. 
22

me

The  second  is,  the  maiden  that  is  his  dear  worthy 
mother.

The  third  is,  the  blessedful  God-head  that  ever 
was,  and  shall  be  all  mighty,  all  Wisdom,  and  all 
Love.me

The  second  is,  the  maiden  that  is  his  dear  worthy 
mother.

The  third  is,  the  blessedful  God-head  that  ever 
was,  and  shall  be  all  mighty,  all  Wisdom,  and  all 
Love.

The  fourth  is,  all  thing  that  he  hath  made :  for 
well  I  wote  that  heaven  and  earth,  and  all  that  is 
made,  is  great,  large,  fair  and  good  :  but  the  cause 
why  it  sheweth  so  litle  to  my  sight,  was,  for  I  saw 
it  in  the  presence  of  him  that  is  the  Maker;  for  a 
soul  that  seeth  the  Maker  of  all  thing,  all  that  is 
made  seemeth  full  litle.

The  fifth  is,  that  lie  [hath]  made  all  thing  that 
is  made  for  love,  and  by  the  same  love  it  is 
kept,  and  shall  be  without  end,  as  it  is  before 
said.

The  sixth  is,  that  God  is  all  thing  that  is  good, 
as  to  my  sight ;  and  the  goodness  that  all  thing 
hath,  it  is  he.

And  all  this  our  Lord  shewed  in  the  first  sight, 
and  gave  me  space  and  time  to  behold  it ;  and  the 
bodily  sight  stinted,  and  the  ghostly  sight  dwelleth 
in  my  understanding.  And  I  abode  with  reverent 
dread,  joying  in  that  I  saw,  and  desiring,  as  I  durst, 
to  see  more  if  it  were  his  will,  or  longer  time  the 
same  sight.

In  all  this  I  was  much  stirred  in  charity  to  mine 
23

me

even  Christian,  that  they  might  all  see  and  know 
the  same  that  I  saw ;  for  I  would  that  it  were 
comfort  to  them,  for  all  this  sight  was  shewed  in 
general.  Then  said  I  to  them  that  were  with  me, 
( It  is  this  day,  dooms-day  with  me.'

And  this  I  said,  for  I  went  [weened]  to  have  died  : 
for  that  day  that  man  or  woman  dieth,  is  he  deemed 
particularly,  as  he  shall  be  without  end,  as  to  my 
understanding.This  1  said,  for  I  would  they  should  love  God  the 
better,  for  to  make  them  to  have  mind  that  this  life 
is  short,  as  they  might  see  in  example;  for  in  all 
this  time  I  weened  to  have  dyed,  and  that  was 
marvaile  to  me,  and  wonder  in  party ;  for  methought 
this  vision  was  shewed  for  them  that  should  live : 
all  that  I  say  of  me,  I  mean  in  person  of  all  my 
even  Christian ;  for  I  am  learned  in  the  ghostly 
shewing  of  our  Lord  God  that  he  meaneth  so.

And  therefore,  I  pray  you  all  for  God's  sake,  and 
counsel  you  for  your  own  profit,  that  you  leave  the 
beholding  of  a  wretch  that  it  was  shewed  to ;  and 
mightily,  wisely,  and  meekly,  behold  in  God,  that 
of  his  courtesie,  love,  and  endless  goodness,  would 
shew  it  generally  in  comfort  of  us  all :  for  it  is  Gods 
will  that  ye  take  it  with  a  great  joy  and  liking,  as 
Jesu  Christ  hath  shewed  it  to  vou.

rne

The  Ninth  Chapter

FOR  the  shewing  I  am  not  good  but  if  I  love  God 
the  better ;  and  inasmuch  as  ye  love  God  the  better, 
it  is  more  to  you  than  to  me.

I  say  not  this  to  them  that  be  wise,  for  they  wit 
it  well,  but  I  say  it  to  you  that  be  simple,  for  ease 
and  comfort ;  for  we  be  all  one  in  love  :  for  verily 
it  was  not  shewed  to  me  for  that  God  loveth  me 
better  than  the  least  soul  that  is  in  grace :  for  I  am 
sure,  there  be  many  that  never  hath  shewing  ne 
sight  but  of  the  common  teaching  of  Holy  Church, 
that  love  God  better  than  I :  for  if  I  look  singularly 
to  myself,  I  am  right  nought ;  but  in  general  I  am 
I  hope  in  one-head  of  charity  with  all  my  even 
Christian;  for  in  this  one-head  standeth  the  life  of 
all  mankind  that  shall  be  saved ;  for  God  is  all  that 
is  good,  as  to  my  sight.And  God  hath  made  all  that  is  made,  and  God 
loveth  all  that  he  hath  made ;  and  he  that  generally 
loveth  all  his  even  Christen  for  God  [i.e.  for  God's 
sake]  he  loveth  all  that  is.

For  in  mankind  that  shall  be  saved,  is  com 
prehended  all  ;  that  is  to  say,  all  that  is  made, 
25

rne

and  the  Maker  of  all ;  for  in  man  is  God,  and  in 
God  is  all ;  and  he  that  loveth  thus,  he  loveth  all.

And  I  hope  by  the  grace  of  God,  he  that  be- 
holdeth  it  thus,  shall  be  truly  taught,  and  mightily 
comforted,  if  him  iieedeth  comfort :  I  speak  of 
them  that  shall  be  saved,  for  in  this  time  God 
shewed  me  none  other.

But  in  all  thing  I  believe  as  Holy  Church  preach- 
eth  and  teacheth ;  for  the  faith  of  Holy  Church, 
[of]  which  I  had  before-hand  understanding,  and  as 
I  hope  by  the  grace  of  God  will  fully  keep  it  in  use 
and  custome,  stood  continually  in  my  sight,  willing 
and  meaning  never  to  receive  any  thing  that  might 
be  contrary  thereto.  And  with  this  intent,  and 
with/  this  meaning  I  beheld  the  shewing  with  all 
my  diligence ;  for  in  all  this  blessed  shewing,  I 
beheld  it  as  in  Gods  meaning.

All  this  was  shewed  by  three  parts ;  that  is  to 
say,  by  bodily  sight,  and  by  words  formed  in  rny 
understanding,  and  by  ghostly  sight ;  but  the  ghostly 
sight  I  cannot,  ne  may  shew  it  as  openly,  ne  as 
fully  as  I  would ;  but  I  trust  in  our  Lord  God 
Almighty,  that  he  shall  of  his  goodness,  and  for 
your  love,  make  you  to  take  it  more  ghostly  and 
more  sweetly  than  I  can  or  may  tell  it.

Seconti   Ecbelatton

The   Tenth  ChapterSeconti   Ecbelatton

The   Tenth  Chapter

AWD  after  this,  I  saw  with  bodily  sight,  in  the 
face  of  the  crucifix  that  hung  before  me :  in 
the  which,  I  beheld  continually  a  part  of  his  passion  ; 
despite,  spitting,  sulloing  and  buffeting,  and  many 
languring  pains,  more  than  I  can  tell ;  and  often 
changing  of  colour :  and  one  time  I  saw  how  half 
the  face,  beginning  at  the  ear,  over-yede  with 
dry  blood,  till  it  closed  into  the  mid-face :  and 
after  that,  the  other  half  be  closed  in  the  same 
wise.  And  the  whiles,  it  vanished  in  this  party 
even  as  it  came.

This  saw  I  bodily  sweinly  and  darkly;  and  1 
desired  more  bodily  light  to  have  seen  more  clearly, 
and  I  was  answered  in  my  reason,  '  If  God  will  shew 
thee  more,  he  shall  be  thy  light,  thou  need  none  but  him,'

For  I  saw  him  and  sought  him  :  for  we  be  now

so  blind  and  so  unwise,  that  we  can  never  seek  God

till  what  time  that  he  of  his  goodness  sheweth  him

to  us.     And  when  we  see  ought  of  him  graciously,

27

then  are  we  stirred  by  the  same  grace,  to  seek  with 
great  desire  to  see  him  more  blessedfully.  And 
thus  I  saw  him  and  sought  him,  and  I  had  him 
and  wanted  him  :  and  this  is  and  should  be  our 
common  working  in  this  life,  as  to  my  sight.

One  time  my  understanding  was  litle  [  ?  led]  down 
into  the  sea-ground  ;  and  there  saw  I  hills,  and  dales 
green,  seeming  as  it  were  most  begrowing  with 
wrake  and  gravel  :  then  I  understood  thus,  that 
if  a  man  or  woman  were  there  under  the  broad 
water,  and  he  might  have  sight  of  God,  so  as  God 
is  with  a  man  continually,  he  should  be  safe  in  soul 
and  body,  and  take  no  harm,  and  overpassing  he 
should  have  more  solace  and  comfort  than  all  this 
world  may  or  can  tell.For  he  will  that  we  believe  that  we  see  him 
continually,  though  that  us  think  that  it  be  but  litle, 
and  in  the  belief  he  maketh  us  evermore  to  get 
grace  ;  for  he  will  be  seen,  and  he  will  be  sought, 
and  he  will  be  abiden,  and  he  will  be  trusted.

This  second  shewing  was  so  low,  and  so  litle, 
and  so  simple,  that  my  spirits  were  in  great  travail 
in  the  beholding,  mourning,  dreadful,  and  longing ; 
for  I  was  sometime  in  a  fear,  whether  it  was  a 
shewing  or  none ;  and  then  divers  times  our  Lord 
gave  me  more  sight,  whereby  that  I  understood 
truly,  that  it  was  a  shewing. 
28

me

It  was  a  figure  and  a  likeness  of  our  foul  black 
deeds,  which  our  fair  bright  blessed  Lord  bare  for 
our  sin.  It  made  me  to  think  of  the  Holy  Vernacle 
of  Rome,  which  he  protraid  with  his  own  blessed 
face,  when  he  was  in  his  hard  passion,  wilfully 
going  to  his  death,  and  often  changing  of  colour, 
of  the  brown-head,  and  the  black-head,  rewlyhead 
and  lean-head.

Of  this  image  many  marvelled  how  that  might 
be  standing,  that  he  protraid  it  with  his  blessed 
face,  which  is  the  fairest  of  heaven,  flower  of  earth, 
and  the  fruit  of  the  Maidens  womb.  Then  how 
might  this  image  be  so  discoloured  and  so  far  from 
fair-head,  I  desire  to  see  as  I  have  understood  by 
the  grace  of  God.

We  know  in  our  faith  and  in  our  belief,  by  the 
teaching  and  preaching  of  Holy  Church,  that  the 
blessedfull  Trinity  made  mankind  to  his  image  and 
likeness :  in  the  same  manner- wise  we  know,  that 
when  man  fell  so  deep  and  so  wretchedly  by  sin, 
there  was  none  other  help  to  restore  man  but 
through  him  that  made  man.

And  he  that  made  man  for  love,  by  the  same 
love  he  would  restore  man  to  the  same  bliss  and 
over-passing.And  he  that  made  man  for  love,  by  the  same 
love  he  would  restore  man  to  the  same  bliss  and 
over-passing.

And  right  as  we  were  made  like  to  the  Trinity  in 
our  first  making,  our  Maker  would  that  we  should 
29

rne

be  like  to  Jesu  Christ  our  Saviour  in  heaven  without 
end  by  the  vertue  of  our  one-making  [atonement].

Then  between  these  two  he  would  for  love,  and 
for  worship  of  man,,  make  himself  as  like  to  man 
in  this  deadly  life,  in  our  foul-head  and  in  our 
wretchedness,  as  man  might  be  without  guilt  : 
whereof  it  meaneth  as  is  before  said,  it  was  the 
image  and  the  likeness  of  our  foul  black  deeds, 
wherein  our  fair  bright  blessed  Lord  hid  his  God 
head.

But  verily  I  dare  say,  and  we  ought  to  believe, 
that  so  fair  a  man  was  never  none  but  he,  till  what 
time  that  his  fair  colour  was  changed  with  travaile 
and  sorrow,  passion  and  dying.

Of  this  it  speaketh  in  the  Second  Revelation, 
and  in  the  xviiith  chapter,  where  it  speaketh  more 
of  the  same  likeness.  And  there  it  saith  of  the 
Vernacle  of  Rome,  it  meaneth  by  diverse  changing 
of  colour,  and  either  sometime  more  comfortable 
and  lively,  and  sometime  more  ruful  and  deadly, 
as  it  may  be  seen  hereafter.

And  this  vision  was  a  learning  to  my  understand 
ing  that  the  continually  seeking  of  the  soul  pleaseth 
God  much  ;  for  it  may  do  no  more  than  seek,  suffer, 
and  trust.

And  this  is  wrought  in  every  soul  that* hath  it  by 
the  Holy  Ghost.

30

And  the  clearness  of  finding  it,  is  of  the  special 
grace,  when  it  is  his  will ;  the  seeking  with  faith, 
hope,  and  charity,  pleaseth  our  Lord  ;  and  the  find 
ing,  pleaseth  the  soul,  and  fulfilleth  it  with  joy.And  thus  was  I  learned  to  my  understanding, 
that  seeking  is  as  good  as  beholding,  for  the  time 
that  he  will  suffer  the  soul  to  be  in  travaile.  It 
is  Gods  will  that  we  seek  into  the  beholding  of 
him  ;  for  by  that  shall  he  shew  us  himself  of  his 
special  grace,  when  he  will.

And  how  a  soul  shall  have  her  in  his  beholding, 
he  shall  teach  himself;  and  that  is  most  worship 
to  him,  and  most  profit  to  the  soul,  and  most 
received  of  meekness  and  vertues,  with  the  grace 
and  leading  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  a  soul  that 
only  resigneth  him  to  God  with  very  trust,  either 
in  seeking  or  in  beholding,  it  is  the  most  worship 
that  he  may  do,  as  to  my  sight.

These  be  two  workings  that  may  be  seen  in  this 
vision  :   that  one  is  seeking,  the   other  is   beholding. 
The  seeking  is   common,  that   each   soul  may   have, 
with  his  grace,  and  ought  to   have   discretion   and 
teaching  of  Holy  Church.     (See  Note,  p.  32.)

It    is    God's    will    that    we  have   three  things   in

our   seeking   of    his    gift.       The  first    is,    that   we

seek  wilfully  and  busily  without  sloath,  as  it  may

be    with    his    grace,    gladly    and    merrily,    without

31

unreasonable  heaviness  and  vain-sorrow.  The  second, 
that  we  abide  him  stedfastly  for  his  love,  without 
grudging  and  striving  against  him,  into  lives  end, 
for  it  shall  last  but  a  while.  The  third  is,  that  we 
trust  in  him  mightily  of  full  and  true  faith :  for  it 
is  his  will  that  we  know  that  he  shall  appear 
suddenly  and  blessedfully  to  all  his  lovers.

For  his  working  is  privy,  and  he  will  be  per 
ceived  ;  and  his  appearing  shall  be  sweet,  sudden  ; 
and  he  will  be  trusted,  for  he  is  full  homely, 
curteous.  Blessed  mote  he  be.Note. — The  penultimate  paragraph  on  the  preceding 
page  may,  perhaps,  be  interpreted  thus  : — The  seeking, 
which  each  soul  may  have,  with  his  grace  is  common  to 
all ;  and  it  ought  to  have  discretion,  &c.,  i.e.  It  only 
needs  common  grace  and  the  Church's  ordinary  guidance. 
Not  so,  beholding.

JiUbelation

The  Eleventh  Chapter

A4D  after  this,  I  saw  God  in  a  point  ;  that  is  to 
say,  in  my  understanding  :  by  which  sight  I 
jaw  that  he  is  in  all  thing.  I  beheld  with  advise 
ment,  seeing  and  knowing  in  that  sight,  that  he 
doth  all  that  is  done.  I  marvelled  in  that  sight 
with  a  soft  dread,  and  thought  :  what  is  sin  ?  For  I 
saw  truly,  that  God  doth  all  thing,  be  it  never  so 
itle.  And  I  saw  verily,  that  nothing  is  done  by 
lapp,  ne  by  adventure,  but  all  by  the  aforesaid 
wisdom  of  God  ;  if  it  be  happ  or  adventure  in  the 
sight  of  man,  our  blind-head  and  un-fore-sight  is 
the  cause.  For  those  things  that  be  in  the  foresaid 
wisdom  of  God,  been  fro  without  beginning,  which 
rightfully  and  worshipfully  continually  he  leadeth 
to  the  best  end  :  as  it  cometh  about,  falling  to  us 
suddenly,  our  unwitting.  And  thus  by  our  blind- 
mess,  and  our  unforesight,  we  say  these  things  be 
by  happs  and  adventure.

Thus  I  understand  in  this  shewing  of  love  :  for  well 
I  wot  in  the  sight  of  our  Lord  God,  is  no  happ,  ne  ad- 
33  c

rne  <THI(RT>

venture.  Wherefore  me  behoved  needs  to  grant,  that 
all  things  that  are  done,  are  well  done  ;  for  our  Lord 
God  doth  all :  for  in  this  time  the  working  of  crea 
tures  was  not  shewed,  but  of  our  Lord  God  in  the 
creatures  ;  for  he  is  in  the  mid  point  of  all  things;  and 
all,  he  doth.  And  I  am  sure  that  he  doth  no  sin.And  here  I  saw  verily  that  sin  is  no  deed;  for  in  all 
thiS,  sin  was  not  shewed.  And  I  would  no  longer  mar 
vel  in  this,  but  beheld  our  Lord  what  he  would  shew.

And  thus  as  it  might  be  for  the  time,  the  rightful- 
ness  of  God's  work  was  shewed  for  the  soul.

Rightfulness  hath  two  fair  properties.  It  is  right, 
and  it  is  full:  and  so  be  all  the  works  of  our  Lord. 
And  thereto  needeth  neither  working  of  mercy  ne 
grace  :  for  they  be  all  rightful,  wherein  faileth  right 
nought.  And  in  an  other  time,  he  shewed  for  be 
holding  of  sin  naked,  as  I  shall  say ;  After  when  he 
useth  working  of  mercy  and  of  grace.  This  vision 
was  shewed  to  my  understanding ;  for  our  Lord  will 
have  the  soul  turned  truly  unto  the  beholding  of 
him,  and  generally  of  all  his  works,  for  they  be  full 
good.  And  all  his  dooms  be  easie  and  sweet,  and 
two  great  eyes  bringing  the  soul  that  is  turned  from 
the  beholding  of  the  blind  deeming  of  man,  into  the 
faire  sweet  deeming  of  our  Lord  God.  For  man,  he 
holdeth  some  deeds  well  done,  and  some  deeds  evil  : 
and  our  Lord  beholdeth  them  not  so,  for  as  all  that 
34

rne

hath  being  in  kind  is  of  God's  making,  so  is  all 
thing  that  is  done,  in  property  of  God's  doing.  For 
it  is  easie  to  understand  that  the  best  deed  is  well 
done  ;  and  so  well  as  the  best  deed  that  is  done, 
and  the  highest,  so  well  is  the  least  deed  done  : 
and  all  in  the  property  and  in  the  order  that  our 
Lord  hath  it  ordeined  to,  fro  without  beginning. 
For  there  is  no  Door  [doer]  but  he.I  saw  full  truly,  that  he  changed  never  his  pur 
pose  in  no  manner  of  thing,  ne  never  shall  without 
end :  for  there  was  nothing  unknown  to  him  in  his 
rightful  ordinance,  fro  without^  beginning.  And 
therefore  all  thing  were  set  in  order  ere  anything 
was  made,  as  it  should  stand  without  end ;  and 
no  manner  of  thing  shall  fail  of  that  point ;  for  he 
hath  made  all  thing  in  fulhead  of  goodness.

And  therefore  the  blessed  Trinity  is  ever  full 
pleased  in  all  his  works.  And  all  this  shewed 
he  full  blessedly,  meaning  thus,  '  See  I  am  God: 
See  I  am  in  all  things :  See  I  do  all  things :  See  I  never 
left  my  hands  of  my  works,  ne  never  shall  without  end  : 
See  I  lead  all  thing  to  the  end  that  I  ordaine  it  to,  fro 
without  beginning,  by  the  same  might,  wisdom,  and  love,  that 
1  made  it  with.  How  should  anything  be  amiss  ?  '  Thus 
mightily,  wisely,  and  lovingly  was  the  soul  examined 
in  this  vision.  Then  saw  I  verily  that  me  behoveth 
needs  to  assent  with  great  reverence  and  joy  in  God. 
35

fl

SHje  Jourtfj   Eebelatton

The  Twelfth  Chapterfl

SHje  Jourtfj   Eebelatton

The  Twelfth  Chapter

A~*D  after  this  I  saw  beholding  the  body  plen-  jp 
tuously  bleeding,  in  seeming  of  the  scourging,  j  st 
as  thus :  the  fair  skin  was  broken  full  deep  into  the  !  d, 
tender  flesh,  with  sharp  smitings,  all  about  the  j  to 
sweet  body :  the  hot  blood  ran  out  so  plenteously,  j  hj; 
that  there  was  neither  seen  skin,  ne  wound,  but  as  i  js 
it  were  all  blood.  And  when  it  came  where  it  ;  g0 
should  have  fallen  down,  there  it  vanished  :  not-  p]( 
withstanding  the  bleeding  continued  a  while,  till  it  \t 
might  be  seen  with  advisement.  And  this  was  so  <  in 
plentuous  to  my  sight,  that  me  thought  if  it  had  j  Fa 
been  so  in  kind  and  in  substance  for  that  time,  it  An 
should  have  made  the  bed  all  on  blood,  and  have 
passed  over  all  about.  sha

Then  came  to  my  mind,  that  God  hath  made 
waters  plentuous  in  earth  to  our  service,  and  to 
our  bodily  ease,  for  tender  love  that  he  hath  to  us. 
But  yet  liketh  him  better,  that  we  take  full 
holsomely  his  blessed  blood  to  wash  us  from  sin, 
.36

meme

for  there  is  no  liquor  that  is  made  that  liketh  him 
so  well  to  give  us  :  for  it  is  most  plentuous,  as  it  is 
most  precious,  and  that,  by  the  vertue  of  the  blessed 
Godhead;  and  it  is  our  own  kind,  and  blessedfully 
overfloweth  us  by  the  vertue  of  his  precious  love. 
The  dear  worthy  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ, 
also  verily  as  it  is  most  precious,  as  verily  it  is  most 
plentuous.  Behold  and  see  the  vertue  of  this 
precious  plenty  of  his  dear  worthy  blood.  It  de 
scended  down  into  hell,  and  brake  her  bonds,  and 
delivered  them  all  that  were  there  which  belongeth 
to  the  court  of  heaven.  The  precious  plenty  of 
his  dear  worthy  blood  overfloweth  all  earth,  and 
is  ready  to  wash  all  creatures  of  sin  which  be  of 
good-will,  have  been,  or  shall  be.  The  precious 
plenty  of  his  dear  worthy  blood  ascendeth  up  into 
heaven  in  the  blessed  body  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ : 
and  there  is  in  him  bleeding,  praying  for  us  to  the 
Father,  and  is  and  shall  be  as  long  as  us  needeth. 
And  evermore  it  floweth  in  all  heaven,  enjoying 
the  salvation  of  all  mankind  that  be  there,  and 
shall  be  fulfilling  the  number  that  faileth.

37

Efje  Jiftfj   iaebelatton

Thirteenth  Chapter

A~1D  after,  or  that  God  shewed  any  words,  he 
suffered    me    to    behold    him    a    conveniable 
time,   and  all  that  I  had  seen,  and  all  the  under 
standing  that  was  therein,  as  the  simpleness  of  the 
soul  might  take  it.Then  he  without  voyce  and  opening  of  lips 
formed  in  my  soul  these  words,  'Herewith  is  ihejiend 
overcome.'  This  word  said  our  Lord,  meaning  his 
blessed  passion,  as  he  shewed  before.  In  this  our 
Lord  shewed  a  part  of  the  fiends  malice,  and  fully 
his  unmight,  for  he  shewed  that  the  passion  of 
Him  is  the  overcoming  of  the  fiend.  God  shewed 
that  the  fiend  hath  now  the  same  malice  that 
he  had  before  the  incarnation;  and  also  sore  he 
travelleth  :  and  as  continually  he  seeth,  that  all 
souls  of  salvation  escape  him  worshipfully  by  the 
vertue  of  His  precious  passion,  and  that  is  his 
sorrow,  and  full  evil  is  he  ashamed.  For  all  that 
God  suffereth  him  to  do  turneth  us  to  joy,  and 
him  to  shame  and  pain.  And  he  hath  as  much 
38

sorrow  when  God  giveth  him  leave  to  work,  as 
when  he  worketh  not ;  and  that  is,  for  he  may 
never  do  as  ill  as  he  would,  for  his  might  is  all 
locked  in  God's  hand ;  but  in  God  may  be  no  wrath 
as  to  my  sight.  For  our  good  Lord  endlesly  having 
regard  to  his  own  worship,  and  to  the  profit  of  all 
them  that  shall  be  saved,  with  might  and  right  he 
withstandeth  the  reproved  [i.e.  the  Devil,  the  repro 
bate],  the  which  of  malice  and  of  shrewdness  busie 
them  to  contrary,  and  do  against  God's  will.Also  I  saw  our  Lord  scorning  his  malice,  and 
naughting  his  unmight ;  and  he  will  that  we  do 
so.  For  this  sight  I  laugh t  mightly,  and  that 
made  them  to  laugh  that  were  about  me,  and 
their  laughing  was  a  liking  to  me  :  I  thought  that 
I  would  that  all  my  even  Christen  had  seen  as  I 
saw,  then  should  all  they  have  laughed  with  me  ; 
but  I  saw  not  Christ  laughing.  But  well  I  wot 
that  sight  that  he  shewed  me,  made  me  to  laugh  : 
for  I  understood  that  we  may  laugh  in  comforting 
of  our  self,  and  joying  in  God,  for  the  fiend  is 
overcome.  And  there  I  saw  Him  scorn  his  malice ; 
it  was  beholding  to  my  understanding  into  our 
Lord  ;  that  is  to  say,  an  inward  shewing  of  sooth 
fastness  without  changing  of  cheere :  for  as  to  my 
sight  it  is  a  worshipful  property  that  is  in  God, 
which  is  durable.

39

rne  FIFTH39

rne  FIFTH

And  after  this  I  fell  into  a  sadness,  and  said,  '  I 
see  three  things,  game,  scorn,  and  earnest.  I  see 
game,  that  the  fiend  is  overcome  :  and  I  see  scorne, 
that  God  scorneth  him,  and  he  shall  be  scorned  : 
and  I  see  earnest,  that  he  is  overcome  by  the 
blessedful  passion  and  death  of  our  Lord  Jesu 
Christ,  that  was  done  in  full  great  earnest,  and  with 
sad  travel.'  And  there  I  said  that  he  is  scorned  ; 
I  meant  that  God  scorneth  him,  that  is  to  say,  for 
he  seeth  him  now  as  he  shall  do  without  end ;  for 
in  this  God  shewed  that  the  fiend  is  damned.  And 
this  meant  I,  there  I  said  he  should  be  scorned  : 
for  I  saw  he  shall  be  scorned  at  doomes-day  gene 
rally  of  all  that  shall  be  saved,  to  whose  salvation 
he  hath  had  great  envy ;  for  then  he  shall  see  that 
all  the  woe  and  tribulation  that  he  hath  done  them, 
shall  be  turned  into  encrease  of  their  joy  without 
end.  And  all  the  pain  and  the  sorrow  that  he 
would  have  brought  them  to,  shall  for  ever  go  with 
him  to  hell.

40

Sixty   delation

The  Fourteenth  Chapter40

Sixty   delation

The  Fourteenth  Chapter

AID  after  this  our  Lord  said,  'I  thank  thee  of 
thy  service}  and  of  thy  travel  of  thy  youth.'  And 
in  this  my  understanding  was  lift  up  into  heaven, 
where  I  saw  our  Lord  God  as  a  lord  in  his  own 
house,  which  lord  hath  called  all  his  dear  worthy 
friends  to  a  solemn  feast.  Then  I  saw  the  Lord 
taking  no  place  in  his  own  house ;  but  I  saw  him 
royally  reign  in  his  house,  and  all  fulfill eth  it  with 
joy  and  mirth,  endlesly  to  glad  and  solace  his  dear 
worthy  friends,  full  homely  and  full  curteously  with 
marvelous  melody  in  endless  love,  in  his  own  fair 
blessedful  cheer :  which  glorious  cheer  of  the  God 
head  fulfilleth  all  heaven  of  joy  and  bliss.  God 
shewed  three  degrees  of  bliss  that  each  soul  shall 
have  in  heaven,  that  willingfully  hath  served  God 
in  any  degree  in  earth.  The  Jirst  is,  the  worship 
and  thanks  that  he  shall  receive  of  our  Lord  God 
when  he  is  delivered  of  paine  :  this  thanks  is  so 
high  and  so  worshipful,  that  him  thinketh  that  it 
41

THS    SIXTHTHS    SIXTH

filleth  hinr,  though  there  were  no  more ;  for  me- 
thought  all  the  pain  arid  travel  that  might  be 
suffered  of  all  living  men,  might  not  have  deserved 
the  worshipful  thank  that  one  man  shall  have  that 
wilfully  hath  served  God.  For  the  second,  that  all 
the  blessed  creatures  that  be  in  heaven,  shall  see 
the  worshipful  thanking :  and  he  maketh  his  service 
known  to  all  that  be  in  heaven.  And  in  this  time 
this  example  was  shewed :  A  king,  if  he  thank  his 
subjects,  it  is  a  great  worship  to  them,  and  if  he 
raake  it  known  to  all  the  realm,  then  their  worship 
is  much  encreased.  And  for  the  third,  that  as  new, 
and  as  liking  as  it  is  undertaken  that  time,  right  so 
shall  it  last  without  end.  And  I  saw  that  homely 
and  sweetly  was  this  shewed,  that  the  age  of  every 
man  shall  be  known  in  heaven,  and  be  rewarded 
for  his  wilful  service,  and  for  his  time  ;  and  namely 
the  age  of  them  that  wilfully  and  freely  offer  their 
youth  to  God,  passingly  is  rewarded,  and  wonder 
fully  thanked ;  for  I  saw  that  when  or  what  time 
that  a  man  or  woman  be  truly  turned  to  God,  for 
one  dayes  service,  and  for  his  endless  will,  he  shall 
have  all  these  three  degrees  of  bliss.  And  the 
more  that  the  loving  soul  seeth  this  courtesie  of 
God,  the  levir  she  is  to  serve  him  all  her  life.

inebriation

The  Fifteenth  Chapterinebriation

The  Fifteenth  Chapter

A~TD  after  this,  he  shewed  a  sovereign  ghostly 
liking  in  my  soul :  in  this  likeing,  I  was  ful 
filled  of  everlasting  sureness,  mightily  fastned  with 
out  any  painful  dread.  This  feeling  was  so  glad  and 
so  ghostly,  that  I  was  all  in  peace,  in  ease  and  in 
rest,  that  there  was  nothing  in  earth  that  should 
have  grieved  me.  This  lasted  but  a  while,  and  I 
was  turned  and  left  to  myself  in  heaviness,  and 
weariness  of  my  life,  and  irkeness  of  my  self,  that 
unneth  I  could  have  patience  to  live  :  there  was  no 
comfort,  ne  none  to  ease  my  feeling,  but  faith, 
hope,  and  charity  :  and  these  I  had  in  truth,  but 
full  litle  in  feeling.

And  none  [anon]  after  this  our  blessed  Lord  gave 
me  again  of  the  comfort  and  the  rest  in  soul,  likeing 
and  sureness,  so  blessedfully  and  so  mightifully, 
that  no  dread,  ne  sorrow,  ne  no  pain  bodily  ne 
ghostly,  that  might  be  suffered  should  have  diseased 
me.  And  then  the  pain  sheweth  again  to  my 
43

me

feeling,  and  then  the  joy  and  the  liking :  and 
now  that  one,  and  now  that  other,,  divers  times ;  I 
suppose  about  twenty  times.  And  in  the  time  of 
joy,  I  might  have  said  with  Saint  Paul,  '  Nothing 
shall  depart  me  fro  the  charity  of  Christ/  And  in 
the  pain  I  might  have  said  with  Saint  Peter,  '  Lord 
save  me,  I  perish/This  vision  was  shewed  to  learn  me,  at  [to]  my 
understanding,  that  it  is  speedful  to  some  souls  to 
feel  on  this  wise.  Sometime  to  be  in  comfort,  and 
sometime  to  fail,  and  to  be  left  to  themself;  God 
will  that  we  know  that  he  keepeth  us  ever  in  like 
[alike]  sure,  in  woe,  and  in  weale.  And  for  profit 
of  mans  soul,  a  man  is  sometimes  left  to  himself, 
although  his  sin  is  not  ever  the  cause ;  for  in  this 
time  I  sinned  not,  wherefore  I  should  be  left  to 
myself,  for  it  was  so  sudden.  Also,  I  deserved  not 
to  have  had  this  blessedful  feeling,  but  freely  our 
Lord  giveth  it  when  he  will ;  and  suffereth  us  in 
woe  sometime ;  and  both  is  one  love.  For  it  is 
Gods  will  that  we  hold  us  in  comfort  with  all  our 
might;  for  bliss  is  lasting  without  end,  and  pain  is 
passing,  and  shall  be  brought  to  naught  to  them 
that  shall  be  saved.  Therefore  it  is  not  God's  will, 
that  we  follow  the  feeling  of  pains,  in  sorrow  and 
mourning  for  them,  but  suddenly  pass  over,  and 
hold  us  in  the  endless  liking  that  is  God. 
44

SClje   ffitgfjtf)   Ee&elation

The  Sixteenth  ChapterSClje   ffitgfjtf)   Ee&elation

The  Sixteenth  Chapter

A^TER  this,  Christ  shewed  a  part  of  his  passion, 
near  his  dying:  I  saw  the  sweet  face  as  it 
were  dry  and  bloodless,  with  pale  dying,  and  dead 
pale  languring,  and  then  turned  more  dead  into 
blew,  and  after  in  brown-blew,  as  the  flesh  turned 
more  deep  dead.  For  his  passion  shewed  to  me 
most  properly  in  his  blessed  face,  and  namely  in 
his  lips  ;  therein  I  saw  these  four  colours  ;  those  that 
were  before  fresh  and  ruddy,  lively  and  liking  to  my 
sight.  This  was  a  pittiful  changing,  to  see  this  deep 
dying;  and  also  his  most  [?  moisture]  cloggering  to 
gether  and  dried  to  my  sight.  And  the  sweet 
body  waxed  brown  and  black,  all  changed  and 
turned  out  of  the  fair,  fresh,  and  lively  colour  of 
himself  into  dry  dying  ;  for  that  same  time  that  our 
blessed  Saviour  dyed  upon  the  roode,  it  was  a  dry 
sharp  wind,  wonder  could  [wondrous  cold],  as  to  my 
sight  :  and  what  time  that  the  precious  blood  was 
bled  out  of  the  sweet  body  that  might  pass  therefro, 
45yet  there  was  a  moisture  in  the  sweet  flesh  of 
Christ,  as  it  was  shewed.  Bloodshed  and  pain  dried 
within,  and  blowing  of  the  wind  and  cold,  coming 
from  without  met  together  in  the  sweet  body  of 
Christ :  and  these  four  dryed  the  flesh  of  Christ 
by  process  of  time.  And  though  this  pain  were 
bitter  and  sharp,  yet  it  was  full  long  lasting,  as  to 
my  sight.  And  the  pain  dried  up  all  the  lively 
spirits  of  Christs  flesh.  Thus  I  saw  the  sweet 
flesh  dry  in  my  sight,  part  after  part  drying  with 
marvellous  pain ;  and  as  long  as  any  spirit  had  life 
in  Christs  flesh,  so  long  suffered  he.  This  long 
pain  seemed  to  me  as  if  he  had  been  a  sennet 
dead,  dying  at  the  point  of  out-passing,  always 
suffering  the  great  pain  :  and  there  I  saw  it  seemed 
as  he  had  been  a  sennet  dead,  it  specifieth,  that 
the  swreet  body  was  so  discoloured,  so  dry,  so 
clongen,  so  deadly,  and  so  piteous,  as  he  had  been 
sevenight  dead,  continually  dying.  And  methought 
the  drying  of  Christs  flesh  was  the  most  pain,  and 
the  last  of  his  passion.

iitnt!)   Eebelation

The  Seventeenth  Chapteriitnt!)   Eebelation

The  Seventeenth  Chapter

A~1D  in  this  drying,  was  brought  to  my  mind 
this  word  that  Christ  said,  '/  thirst.'  For  I 
saw  in  Christ  a  double  thirst,  one  bodily,  and 
another  ghostly.  This  word  was  shewed  for  the 
bodily  thirst  :  and  for  the  ghostly  thirst  was  shewed 
as  I  shall  say  after.  And  I  understood  by  the 
bodily  thirst,  that  the  body  had  feeling  of  moisture  ; 
for  the  blessed  flesh  and  bones  was  left  all  alone 
without  blood  and  moisture.  The  blessed  body 
dried  all  alone  long  time,  with  wringing  of  the 
nails  and  weight  of  the  body  ;  (for  I  understood 
that  for  tenderness  of  the  sweet  hands,  and  the 
sweet  feet,  by  the  great  hardness  and  grievous- 
ness  of  the  nails,  the  wounds  waxed  wide,  and 
the  body  setled  for  weight  by  long  time  hanging,) 
and  pearcing  and  raising  of  the  head,  and  bind 
ing  of  the  crown,  all  baken  with  dry  blood,  with 
the  sweet  hair  clinging  the  dry  flesh  to  the 
thorns,  and  the  thorns  to  the  flesh  drying  :  and 
47

meme

in  the  beginning  while  the  flesh  was  fresh  and 
bleeding,  the  continual  setting  of  the  thorns 
made  the  wounds  wide.  And  furthermore,  I  saw, 
that  the  sweet  skin,  and  the  tender  flesh,  with 
the  hair,  and  with  the  blood,  was  all  raced  and 
loosed  about  with  the  thorns,  and  broken  in  many 
pieces,  and  were  hanging  as  they  would  hastily 
have  fallen  down  while  it  had  kind  moisture ;  how 
it  was  down  I  saw  not,  but  I  understood  that  it  was 
with  the  sharp  thorns,  and  the  boystrous  grievous  sit 
ting  on  of  the  garland,  not  sparing,  and  without  pity, 
that  altho  [altogether]  brake  the  sweet  skin  with 
the  flesh,  and  the  hair  loosed  it  from  the  bone  ; 
where-through  it  was  broken  in  pieces  as  a  cloath, 
and  sagging  downward,  as  it  would  hastily  have 
fallen  for  heaviness  and  for  loosness.  And  that 
was  great  sorrow  and  dread  to  me,  for  methought 
that  I  would  not  for  my  life  have  seen  it  fall.

This  continued  a  while,  and  after  it  began  to 
change  ;  and  I  beheld  and  marvelled  how  it  might 
be,  and  then  I  saw  it  was  for  it  began  to  dry, 
and  stint  a  part  of  the  weight  that  was  round 
about  the  garland.  And  so  it  was  invironed  all 
about,  as  it  were  garland  upon  garland  ;  the  garland 
of  thornes  was  dyed  with  the  garland  of  blood, 
and  that  other  garland  and  the  head  all  was  one 
colour  as  clottered  blood  when  it  was  dried.  The 
48

ruerue

skin  and  the  flesh  that  seemed  [showed]  of  the  face 
and  of  the  body,  was  small  rimpild  with  a  tawny 
colour,  like  a  dry  board  when  it  is  aged,  and  the 
face  more  brown  than  the  body.  I  saw  four  manner 
of  drying :  the  first  was  bloodless  ;  the  second,  pain 
following  after  ;  the  third  is,  that  he  was  hanging 
up  in  the  aire,  as  men  hang  a  cloath  for  to  dry ; 
the  fourth,  that  the  bodily  kind  asked  liquor,  and 
there  was  no  manner  of  comfort  ministred  to  him. 
Ah,  hard  and  grievous  was  that  pain,  but  much 
more  hard  and  grievous  it  was  when  the  moisture 
failed,  and  all  began  to  dry  thus  clinging.  These 
were  two  pains  that  shewed  in  the  blessed  head  : 
the  first  wrought  to  the  drying  while  it  was  moist, 
and  that  other  slow,  with  clinging  and  drying, 
with  blowing  of  wind  from  without  that  dryed 
him  more,  and  pained  with  cold,  than  my  heart 
can  think,  and  all  other  pains,  for  which  pains  I 
saw,  that  all  is  too  litle  that  I  can  say,  for  it 
may  not  be  told.  The  shewing  of  Christs  pains 
filled  me  full  of  pains,  for  I  wist  well  that  he 
suffered  but  once ;  but  as  he  would  shew  it  me, 
and  fill  me  with  mind,  as  I  had  before  desired. 
And  in  all  this  time  of  Christs  presence,  I  felt  no 
pain  but  for  Christs  pains.

Then  thought    me,   I  knew  full    litle  what  pain 
it  was  that  I  asked,    and  as  a  wretch   I  repented 
49  n

rneThen  thought    me,   I  knew  full    litle  what  pain 
it  was  that  I  asked,    and  as  a  wretch   I  repented 
49  n

rne

me,  thinking  if  I  had  wist  what  it  had  been,  loath 
had  me  been  to  have  prayed  it,  for  methought 
my  pains  passed  any  bodily  death.  I  thought,  '  Is 
any  pain  in  hell  like  this  ? '  and  I  was  answered 
in  my  reason,  '  Hell  is  an  other  pain,  for  there  is 
despair ;  but  of  all  pains  that  lead  to  salvation,  this  is 
the  most,  to  see  the  Lover  to  suffer.'  How  might 
any  pain  be  more  than  to  see  him  that  is  all  my 
life,  all  my  bliss,  and  all  my  joy,  suffer?  Here 
[felt]  I  stedfastly,  that  I  loved  Christ  so  much  above 
my  self,  that  there  was  no  pain  that  might  be 
suffered,  like  to  that  sorrow  that  I  had  to  see  him 
in  pain.

The  Eighteenth  Chapter

HERE  I  saw  in  part  the  compassion  of  our  blessed 
lady  Saint  Mary,  for  Christ.  And  she  was  so  onyd 
[united]  in  love,  that  the  greatness  of  her  love  was 
cause  of  the  greatness  of  her  pain  ;  for  in  this  I  saw 
a  substance  of  kind  love  continued  by  grace,  that 
his  creatures  have  to  him  ;  which  kind  love  was 
most  fulsomelie  shewed  in  his  sweet  mother,  and 
overpassing :  for  so  much  as  she  loved  him  more 
than  all  other,  her  pain  passed  all  other ;  for  ever 
the  higher,  the  mightier,  the  sweeter  that  the 
love  is,  the  more  sorrow  it  is  to  the  Lover  to  see 
60

that  body  in  pain  that  he  loved.  And  so  all  his 
disciples,  and  all  his  true  lovers  suffered  more  pain 
:han  their  own  bodily  dying :  for  I  am  sure  by  my 
own  feeling,  that  the  least  of  them  loved  him  so  far 
above  himself,  that  it  passeth  all  that  I  can  say.

Here  saw  I  a  great  oning  [one-ing]  between  Christ 
and  us,  to  my  understanding ;  for  when  he  was  inHere  saw  I  a  great  oning  [one-ing]  between  Christ 
and  us,  to  my  understanding ;  for  when  he  was  in

in  we  were  in  pain,  and  all  creatures  that  might 
suffer  pain,  suffered  with  him  ;  that  is  to  say,  all 
creatures  that  God  hath  made  to  our  service.  The 
irmament  and  earth  failed  for  sorrow  in  their  kind, 
in  the  time  of  Christs  dying ;  for  it  longeth  kindly 
to  their  property  to  know  him  for  their  Lord,  in 
whom  all  their  vertue  standeth.  And  when  he 
'eeled,  then  behoved  needs  to  them  for  kindness 
:o  feel  with  him,  in  as  much  as  they  might,  for 
sorrow  of  his  pains.  And  thus  they  that  were  his 
'riends  suffered  pain  for  love.  And  generally, 
all,  that  is  to  say,  they  that  knew  him  not,  suffered 
for  failing  of  all  manner  of  comfort  save  the 
mighty  privy  keeping  of  God.  I  mean  of  two 
manner  of  people  that  know  him  not,  as  it  may 
be  understood  by  two  persons :  that  one  was 
Pilate,  that  other  person  was  St.  Dionise  of  France, 
hich  was  that  time  a  Paynius ;  for  when  he  saw 
wonders  and  marveils,  sorrows  and  dreads  that 
befell  at  that  time,  he  said,  "Either  the  world 
51

me

is  now  at  an  end,  or  else,  he  that  is  maker  of  kinds 
suffereth."  Wherefore  he  did  write  on  an  altar, 
'  This  is  an  altar  of  the  unknown  God.'  God, 
of  his  goodness,  maketh  plannets  and  the  ele 
ments  to  work  in  their  kind  to  the  blessed  man, 
and  to  the  cursed.  In  that  time  it  was  withdrawn 
from  both  :  wherefore  it  was  that  they  that  knew 
him  not  were  in  sorrow  that  time.  Thus  was  our 
Lord  Jesu  pained  for  us,  and  we  stand  all  in  this 
manner  of  pain  with  him,  and  shall  do  till  that 
we  come  to  his  bliss,  as  I  shall  say  hereafter.

The  Nineteenth  ChapterThe  Nineteenth  Chapter

IN  this  time  I  would  have  looked  fro  the  cross,  and 
I  durst  not;  for  I  wist  well,  whiles  that  I  beheld 
the  cross  I  was  sure  and  safe.  Therefore  I  would 
not  assent  to  put  my  soul  in  peril,  for  besides  the 
cross,  was  no  sureness  for  dreed  of  fiends.  Then 
had  I  a  proffer  in  my  reason,  as  it  had  been  friendly 
said  to  me,  'Look  up  to  heaven  to  his  Father.'  And 
then  saw  I  well  with  the  faith  that  I  felt,  that 
there  was  nothing  between  the  cross  and  heaven 
that  might  have  diseased  me.  Here  me  behoved 
to  look  up,  or  else  to  answer ;  I  answered  inwardly 
with  all  the  might  of  my  soul,  and  said,  '  Nay,  I 
52may  not,  for  thou  art  my  heaven.'  This  I  said,  for 
that  I  would  not ;  for  I  had  leaver  have  been  in 
that  pain  till  dooms-day,  than  have  come  to  heaven 
otherwise  than  by  him  ;  for  I  wist  well  that  he 
that  bound  me  so  sore,  he  should  unbind  me 
when  he  would.  Thus  was  I  learned  to  choose  Jesu 
for  my  heaven,  whom  I  saw  only  in  pain  at  that 
time  :  me  liked  no  other  heaven  than  Jesu,  which 
shall  be  my  bliss  when  I  come  there ;  and  this 
hath  ever  been  a  comfort  to  me,  that  I  chose 
Jesu  to  be  my  heaven  by  his  grace,  in  all  this  time 
of  passion  and  sorrow.  And  that  hath  been  a 
learning  to  me  that  I  should  evermore  do  so,  to 
choose  Jesu  only  to  my  heaven  in  weal  and  in  woe. 
And  though  I  as  a  wretch  hath  repented  me ; 
as  I  said  before  ;  if  I  had  wist  what  pain  it  had 
been,  I  had  been  loath  to  have  prayed  it ;  here 
I  saw  verily  that  it  was  grudging  and  frailty  of 
the  flesh  without  assent  of  the  soul,  in  which  God 
assigneth  no  blame.  Repenting  and  wilful  choise  be 
two  contraries,  which  I  felt  both  at  that  time.  And 
those  be  two  parts,  that  one  outward,  that  other 
inward.  The  outward  party  is  our  deadily  flesh, 
which  is  now  in  pain,  and  now  in  woe,  and  shall 
be  in  this  life  :  whereof  I  felt  much  at  this  time  ; 
and  that  part  was  that  [in  which]  I  repented.  The 
inward  party  is  a  high  and  a  blessedful  life,  which 
53

rnerne

is  all  in  peace  and  love  :  and  this  is  more  privily 
felt  ;  and  this  party  [it]  is  in  which  mightily,  wisely, 
and  wilfully  I  chose  Jesu  to  my  heaven.  And  in 
this  I  saw  truly,  that  the  inwrard  party  is  master 
and  soveraign  to  the  outward,  nought  charging 
nor  taking  heede  to  the  wills  of  that  ;  but  all  the 
intent,  and  the  will  is  set  endless  to  be  oned  to 
our  Lord  Jesu  :  that  the  outward  party  should 
draw  the  inward  to  assent,  was  not  shewed  to  me, 
but  that  the  inward  party  draweth  the  outward 
party  by  grace,  and  both  shall  be  oned  in  bliss 
without  end  by  the  vertue  of  Christ,  this  was 
shewed.

The  Twentieth  Chapter

AND  thus  saw  I  our  Lord  Jesu  languring  long 
time  ;  for  the  uning  of  the  God-head  gave  strength 
to  the  man-head  for  love  to  suffer  more  than  all 
men  might  ;  I  mean  not  only  more  pain  than  all 
men  might  suffer,  but  also,  that  he  suffered  more 
pain  than  all  men  of  salvation  that  ever  was  from 
the  first  beginning  into  the  last  day,  might  tell 
or  fully  think  —  having  regard  to  the  worthiness 
of  the  highest  worshipful  King,  and  the  shameful 
and  despiteous  painful  death.  For  he  that  is  highest 
and  worthiest,  was  foulest  condemned  and  utterly 
54

rnerne

despised  :  for  his  passion  is  to  think  and  to  know 
that  he  is  God  that  suffered ;  seeing  after,  these 
other  two  points  which  be  lower;  that  one  is 
what  he  suffered  ;  and  that  other,  for  whom  that 
he  suffered.  And  in  this  he  brought  to  mind  in 
part  the  height,  and  the  nobility  of  the  glorious 
God-head,  and  therewith  the  precious-head  and 
the  tenderness  of  the  blessedful  body  which  be 
together  oned,  and  also  the  loathfulness  that  in 
our  kind  is  to  suffer  pain ;  for  asmuch  as  he  was 
most  tender  and  clean,  right,  so  he  was  most  strong 
and  mighty  to  suffer :  and  for  every  mans  sin  that 
shall  be  saved  he  suffered  ;  and  every  mans  sorrow, 
dissolation  and  anguish  he  saw,  and  sorrowed  for 
kindness  and  love ;  for  in  as  much  as  our  Lady 
sorrowed  for  his  pains,  as  much  suffered  he  sorrow 
for  her  sorrows,  and  moreover,  in  as  much  as  the 
sweet  man-head  of  him  was  worthier  in  kind  ;  for 
as  long  as  he  was  passible,  he  suffered  for  us,  and 
sorrowed  for  us.  And  now  he  is  up-risen,  and  no 
more  passible ;  yet  he  suffered  with  us,  as  I  shall 
say  after.  And  I  beholding  all  this  by  his  grace, 
saw  that  the  love  in  him  was  so  strong  which  he 
hath  to  our  soul,  that  willingfully  he  chose  it  with 
great  desire ;  and  mildly  he  suffered  it  with  great 
joy  ;  for  the  soul  that  he  beholdeth  thus,  when  it  is 
touched  by  grace  he  shall  verily  see  that  the  pains 
55

rne

of  Christs  passion  pass  all  pains ;  that  is  to  say, 
which  pains  shall  be  turned  into  everlasting  joy  by 
the  vertue  of  Christs  passion.

The  Twenty-first  Chapterrne

of  Christs  passion  pass  all  pains ;  that  is  to  say, 
which  pains  shall  be  turned  into  everlasting  joy  by 
the  vertue  of  Christs  passion.

The  Twenty-first  Chapter

IT  is  Gods  will  as  to  my  understanding  that  we 
have  three  manners  of  beholding  of  his  blessed 
passion.  The  Jirst  is  the  beholding  the  hard  pain 
that  he  suffered  with  a  contrition  and  compassion  : 
and  that  shewed  our  Lord  in  this  time,  and  gave 
me  might  and  grace  to  see  it.  And  I  looked  after 
the  departing  with  all  my  mights,  and  wende  to 
have  seen  the  body  all  dead ;  but  I  saw  him  not 
so.  And  right  in  the  same  time  that  me  thought, 
by  seeming,  that  the  life  might  no  longer  last,  and 
the  shewing  of  the  end  behoved  needs  to  be  nigh, 
suddenly  I  beholding  in  the  same  cross,  he  changed 
in  blessedful  chear;  the  changing  of  his  blessed 
chear  changed  mine ;  and  I  was  as  glad  and  merry 
as  it  was  possible.  Then  brought  our  Lord  merrily 
to  my  mind,  '  Where  is  now  any  point  of  thy  pain  or 
of  thy  anguish  ? '  And  I  was  full  merry ;  I  under 
stood  that  we  be  now,  in  our  Lords  meaning,  in  his 
cross  with  him — in  our  pains,  and  in  our  passion — 
dying.  And  we  wilfully  abiding  in  the  same  cross, 
56

rnerne

with  his  help  and  his  grace  into  the  last  point, 
suddenly  he  shall  change  his  chear  to  us  :  and  we 
shall  be  with  him  in  heaven ;  between  that  one 
and  that  other  shall  all  be  one  time ;  and  then 
shall  all  be  brought  into  joy.  And  so  meant  he  in 
this  shewing,  '  Where  is  now  any  point  of  thy  pain 
or  of  thy  grief? '  And  we  shall  be  full  of  bliss ; 
and  here  saw  I  verily,  that  if  he  shewed  now  to 
us  his  blessedful  chear,  there  is  no  pain  in  earth, 
ne  in  no  other  place,  that  should  trouble  us  :  but 
all  things  should  be  to  us  joy  and  bliss.  But  for 
he  sheweth  us  the  sad  chear  of  passion,  as  he  bare 
in  this  life  his  cross,  therefore  we  be  in  disease 
and  travaile  with  him,  as  our  kind  asketh.  And 
the  cause  why  that  he  suffereth,  is,  for  he  will  of 
his  goodness  make  us  the  heirs  with  him  in  his 
bliss.  And  for  this  litle  pain  that  we  suffer  here, 
we  shall  have  an  high  endless  knowing  in  God, 
which  we  might  never  have  without  that ;  and  the 
harder  our  pains  have  been  with  him  in  his  cross, 
the  more  shall  our  worship  be  with  him  in  his 
kingdom.

The  Twenty-second  Chapter

THEN  said  our  good  Lord  asking,  'Art  thou  well 
apaid  that  1  suffered  for  thee  ? '  I  said,  '  Yea  good

57The  Twenty-second  Chapter

THEN  said  our  good  Lord  asking,  'Art  thou  well 
apaid  that  1  suffered  for  thee  ? '  I  said,  '  Yea  good

57

Lord  gramercy  ;  yea  good  Lord  blessed  mote  thou 
be.'  Then  said  Jesu  our  good  Lord,  '  If  thou  art 
apaid,  I  am  apaid :  It  is  a  joy,  a  bliss,  an  endless 
liking  to  me,  that  ever  I  suffered  passion  for  thee :  and 
if  I  might  have  suffered  more,  I  would  have  suffered 
more.'  In  this  feeling  my  understanding  was  lifted 
up  into  heaven  :  and  there  I  saw  three  heavens ;  of 
which  sight  I  was  greatly  marvelled,  and  thought 
I  see  three  heavens,  and  all  of  the  blissedful  man- 
head  of  Christ ;  and  none  is  more,  none  is  less, 
none  is  higher,  none  is  lower,  but  even  like  of  bliss. 
For  \htjirst  heaven,  Christ  shewed  me  his  Father, 
in  no  bodily  likeness,  but  in  his  property,  and  in 
his  working;  that  is  to  say,  I  saw  in  Christ  that 
the  Father  is.  The  working  of  the  Father  is  this, 
that  he  giveth  meed  to  his  Son  Jesu  Christ :  this 
gift  and  this  meed  is  so  blissedful  to  Jesu,  that 
his  Father  might  have  given  him  no  meed  that 
might  have  been  liked  to  him  better.  For  the 
Jirst  heaven,  that,  is  the  pleasing  of  the  Father 
shewed  to  me  as  in  heaven — and  it  was  full  blissed- 
fully;  for  he  is  well  pleased  with  all  the  deeds 
that  Jesu  hath  done  about  our  salvation :  where 
fore  we  be  not  only  his  by  his  buying,  but  also  by 
the  courteous  gift  of  his  Father  we  be  his  bliss, 
we  be  his  rmeed,  we  be  his  worship,  we  be  his 
crown ;  and  this  was  a  singular  marvaile,  and  a 
full  delectable  beholding,  that  we  be  his  crown. 
58This  that  I  say  is  so  great  bliss  to  Jesu,  that  he 
setteth  at  naught  his  travel,  and  his  passion,  and 
his  cruel  and  shameful  death.  And  in  these  words, 
*  If  I  might  suffer  more,  I  would  suffer  more,'  I  saw 
truly,  that  as  often  as  he  might  die,  as  [so]  often  he 
would,  and  love  should  never  let  him  have  rest  till 
he  had  done  it.  And  I  beheld  with  great  diligence, 
for  to  wit,  how  often  he  would  die  if  he  might :  and 
truly  the  number  passed  my  understanding  and  my 
wits  so  far,  that  my  reason  might  not,  nor  could  not 
comprehend  it,  ne  take  it.  And  when  he  had  thus 
oft  died,  or  should  die,  yet  he  would  set  it  at  naught 
for  love ;  for  all  thinketh  him  but  litle  in  regard  of 
his  love ;  for  though  the  sweet  manhood  of  Christ 
might  suffer  but  once,  the  goodness  of  him  may 
never  cease  of  prefer ;  every  day  he  is  ready  to  the 
same  if  it  might  be;  for  if  he,  said  he,  would  for 
my  love  make  new  heavens,  and  new  earths,  it  were 
but  litle  in  regard  :  for  this  might  he  do  each  day  if 
he  would  without  any  travel.  But  for  to  die  for 
my  love  so  often  that  the  number  passe th  creatures 
reason,  this  is  the  highest  prefer  that  our  Lord  God 
might  make  to  mans  soul,  as  to  my  sight.  Then 
meaneth  he  thus ;  '  How  should  it  then  be,  that  I 
should  not  for  thy  love  do  all  that  I  might,  which  deed 
grieveth  me  nought,  sithen  that  I  would  for  thy  love  dye 
so  often,  having  no  regard  to  my  hard  pains  ? '  And 
here  saw  I  for  the  second  beholding  in  his  blessed

rnerne

passion,  the  love  that  made  him  to  suffer,  it  passeth 
as  far  all  his  pains,  as  heaven  is  above  earth ;  for 
the  pain  was  a  noble,  precious,  and  worshipful  deed, 
done  in  a  time  by  the  working  of  love ;  and  love 
was  without  beginning,  is  and  shall  be  without  end  ; 
for  which  love,  he  said  full  sweetly  this  word :  '  If 
I  might  ,mffer  more,  I  would  siifjer  more.'  He  said  not 
if  it  were  needful  to  suffer  more ;  but,  '  If  I  might 
suffer  more.'  For  though  it  were  not  needful,  and 
he  might  suffer  more,  he  would.  This  deed  and 
this  work  about  our  salvation,  was  ordained  as  well 
as  God  might  ordaine  it ;  it  was  done  as  worship- 
fully  as  Christ  might  do  it ;  and  herein  I  saw  a  full 
bliss  in  Christ;  for  his  bliss  should  not  have  been 
full,  if  it  might  any  better  have  been  done  than  it 
was  done.

The  Twenty-third  Chapter

AND  in  these  three  words:  'It  is  a  joy,  a  bliss,  and 
endless  liking  to  me,'  were  shewed  three  heavens,  as 
thus ;  For  the  joy,  I  understood  the  pleasaunce  of 
the  Father ;  and  for  the  bliss,  the  worship  of  the 
Son ;  and  for  the  endless  liking,  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  Father  is  pleased,  the  Son  is  worshipped,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  liketh.  And  here  saw  I  for  the 
third  beholding,  in  his  blessedful  passion  ;  that  is  to 
say,  the  joy  and  the  bliss  that  maketh  him  to  like 
60it :  for  our  courteous  Lord  shewed  his  passion  to 
me  in  five  manners ;  Of  which  the  fast  is,  the 
bleeding  of  the  head ;  the  second,  discolouring  of 
his  blessed  face ;  the  third  is,  the  plentuous  bleed 
ing  of  the  body  in  seeming  of  scourging  ;  the  fourth 
is,  the  deep  drying;  these  four,  as  it  is  before  said, 
for  the  pains  of  the  passion.  And  the./f/M  is,  that 
was  shewed  for  the  joy  and  the  bliss  of  the  passion ; 
for  it  is  Gods  will  that  we  have  true  liking  with 
him  in  our  salvation.  And  therein  he  will,  that 
we  be  mightily  comforted  and  strengthened.  And 
thus  will  hee  merrily,  with  his  grace,  that  our  soul 
be  occupied ;  for  we  be  his  bliss,  for  in  us  he  liketh 
without  end,  and  so  shall  we  in  him  with  his 
grace.  All  that  he  doth  for  us  and  hath  done, 
and  ever  shall,  was  never  cost,  ne  charge  to  him, 
ne  might  be  ;  but  only  that  he  died  in  our  man- 
head,  beginning  at  the  sweet  incarnation,  and  last 
ing  to  the  blessed  uprising  on  Easter  morrow :  so 
long  dured  the  cost  and  charge  about  our  redemption 
in  deed :  in  which  deed  he  ever  joyeth  endlesly,  as 
it  is  before  said.  And  Jesu  wills  we  take  heed  to  this 
bliss,  that  is  in  the  blissedful  Trinity  of  our  salva 
tion  ;  and  that  we  desire  to  have  as  much  ghostly 
liking  with  his  grace,  as  it  is  before  said ;  that  is  to 
say,  that  the  liking  of  our  salvation  be  like  to  the 
joy  that  Christ  hath  of  our  salvation,  as  it  may  be 
while  we  be  here.  All  the  Trinity  wrought  in  the 
6J

rnerne

passion  of  Christ,  ministering  abundance  of  vertue 
and  plenty  of  grace  to  us  by  him,  but  only  the 
maidens  son  suffered,  whereof  all  the  blessed  Trinity 
enjoyeth.  And  this  was  shewed  in  this  word,  '  Art 
thou  well  apaid  ? '  By  that  other  word  Christ  said, 
'  If  thou  art  well  apaid ,  I  am  well  apaid  ;  '  as  if  he  had 
said,  '  It  is  joy  and  liking  enough  to  me,  and  I  ask  not 
else  ofthee  of  my  travel,  but  that  I  might  cippay  thee.'

And  in  this  he  brought  to  my  mind  the  property 
of  a  glad  Giver ;  ever  a  glad  Giver  taketh  but  litle 
heed  at  the  thing  that  he  giveth,  but  all  his  desire, 
and  all  his  intent  is,  to  please  him,  and  solace  him 
to  whom  he  giveth  it.  And  if  the  receiver  take 
the  gift  gladly  and  thankfully,  than  the  courteous 
Giver  setteth  at  naught  all  his  cost,  and  all  his 
travel,  for  joy  and  delight  he  hath ;  for  he  hath 
pleased  and  solaced  him  that  he  loved.  Plentuously 
and  fully  was  this  shewed.  Think  as  wisely  of  the 
greatness  of  this  word,  Ever.  For  in  that  was 
shewed  an  high  knowing  of  love  that  he  hath  in 
our  salvation,  with  manifold  joys  that  followen  of 
the  passion  of  Christ.  One  is,  that  he  joyeth  that 
he  hath  done  it  in  deed,  and  he  shall  no  more 
suffer :  that  other  is,  that  he  hath  therewith  bought 
us  from  endless  pains  of  hell :  an  other  is,  that  he 
brought  us  up  into  heaven,  and  made  us  for  to  be 
his  crown,  and  his  endless  bliss.

Eentf)   Eefaelatton

The  Twenty -fourth  CluipterEentf)   Eefaelatton

The  Twenty -fourth  Cluipter

WITH  a  good  chear  our  good  Lord  looked  into 
his  side,  and  beheld  with  joy ;  and  with  his 
sweet  looking,  he  led  forth  the  understanding  of 
his  creature  by  the  same  wound  into  his  side  within. 
And  there  he  shewed  a  fair  and  delectable  place, 
and  large  enough  for  all  mankind  that  shall  be 
saved,  and  rest  in  peace  and  in  love  :  and  therewith 
he  brought  to  mind  his  dear  worthy  blood,  and  his 
precious  water  which  he  let  pour  out  for  love.  And 
with  the  sweet  beholding  he  shewed  his  blessed 
heart  cloven  in  two;  and  with  his  enjoying  he 
shewed  to  my  understanding  in  part  the  blessedful 
Godhead,  as  far  forth  as  he  would  at  that  time 
strengthen  the  poor  soul  for  to  understand,  as  it 
may  be  said  ;  that  is  to  mean,  the  endless  love  that 
was  without  beginning,  and  is,  and  shall  be  ever. 
And  with  this  our  good  Lord  said  well  blessedfully, 
'  Lot',  how  I  love  thee  ;  as  if  he  had  said,  '  My  darling, 
behold  and  see  thy  Lord  thy  God  tlmt  ix  thy  maker,  and 
69

ruerue

thy  endless  joy.  See  thine  own  brother,  thy  Saviour, 
my  child,  behold  and  see  what  liking  and  bliss  I  have  in 
thy  salvation :  And  for  my  love  enjoy  with  me'  And 
also  to  more  understanding,  this  blessed  word  was 
said  :  '  Loe,  how  I  love  thee ; '  as  if  he  had  said, 
'  Behold  and  see  that  I  loved  thee  so  much,  or  [ere]  that 
I  died  for  thee.,  that  I  would  die  for  thee.  And  now  1 
have  died  for  thee,  and  suffered  willingfully  that  I  may  : 
and  now  is  all  my  bitter  pain,  and  all  my  hard  travel 
turned  to  everlasting  joy  and  bliss  to  me  and  to  thee. 
How  should  it  now  be  that  thou  shoiddest  any  thing 
pray  me  that  liked  me,  but  if  [tliat\  I  should  full  gladly 
grant  it  thee ;  for  my  liking  is  thy  holiness,  and  the  end 
less  joy  and  bliss  with  me.'  This  is  the  understanding 
simply,  as  I  can  say  of  this  blessed  word,  ( Loe,  how 
I  loved  thee.'  This  shewed  our  good  Lord  to  make 
us  glad  and  merry.

J&efoelatton

The  Twenty-fifth  ChapterJ&efoelatton

The  Twenty-fifth  Chapter

A'TD  with  this  chear  of  mirth  and  joy,  our  good 
Lord   looked    down    on    the    right    side,    and 
brought  to  my  mind,  where  our  Lady  stood  in  the 
time  of  his  passion,  and  said,  "  Wilt  thou  see  her?" 
And  in  this  sweet  word,  as  if  he  had  said,  '  I  wot  well 
that  thou  wilt  see  my  blessed  mother  :  for  after  myself, 
she  is  the  highest  joy  that  1  might  shew  thee,  and  most 
ig  |  liking  and  worship  to  me,  and  most  she  is  desired  to 
be   seen  of  all  my    blessed  creatures.'     And   for   the 
marvellous,  high,  and  singular  love  that  he  hath  to 
this  sweet  maiden,  his  blessed  mother  our  lady  Saint 
Mary,  he  sheweth    her   bliss  and  joy  ;    as  by  the 
meaning  of  this  sweet  word,  as  if  he  said,  '  Wilt  thou 
how  that  I  love  her,  that  thou  might  joy  with  me  in 
the  love  that  I  have  in  her,  and  she  in  me  ?  '     And  also 
more   understanding,  this   sweet  word  our  good 
Lord  speaketh  in  love  to  all  mankind,  that  shall  be 
ved,  as  it  were  all  to  one  person  ;  as  if  he  said, 
Wilt  thou  see  in  her  how  thou  art  loved  ?  for  thy  love  I 
ve  made  her  so  high,  so*  noble,  so  worthy  :  and  this 
iketh  me;  and  so  will  I  that  it  do  thee.'     For  after 
65  E

nienie

himself  she  is  the  most  blessedful  sight :  but  hereof 
am  I  not  learned  to  long  to  see  her  bodily  presence 
while  I  am  here ;  but  the  vertues  of  her  blessedful 
soul,  her  truth,  her  wisdom,  her  chanty,  whereby  I 
am  learned  to  know  myself,  and  reverently  dread 
my  God.  And  when  our  good  Lord  had  shewed  this, 
and  said  this  word,  c  Wilt  thou  see  her  ? '  I  answered 
and  said, '  Yea  good  Lord,  grant  mercy,  yea  good  Lord 
if  it  be  thy  will/  Oftentimes  I  prayed  this,  and 
I  went  [weened]  to  have  seen  her  in  bodily  liking, 
but  I  saw  her  not  so.  And  Jesu  in  that  word  shewed 
me  a  ghostly  sight  of  her,  right  as  I  had  seen  her 
before,  litle  and  simple  ;  right  so  he  shewed  her  then  \ 
high  and  noble,  and  glorious,  and  pleasing  to  him 
above  all  creatures ;  and  so  he  will  that  it  be  known,  ,/ 
that  all  those  that  like  in  him,  should  also  like  in  her.  i  $ 
And  to  more  understanding  he  shewed  this  ex-  fj  $ 
ample  ;  as  if  a  man  love  a  creature  singularly  above  ft 
all  creatures,  he  will  make  all  other  creatures  to  love  ^

and  to  like  that  creature  that  he  loveth  so  much.

I1'

And  in  this  word  that  Jesu  said,  '  Wilt  thou  see  her  ?'i\  ^ 
methought  it  was  the  most  liking  word  that  he  might  j  i  for 
give  me  of  her,  with  the  ghostly  shewing  that  he  gave  |  i  ^ 
me  of  her.  For  our  Lord  shewed  me  nothing  in  aj[ 
special,  but  our  lady  Saint  Mary,  and  her  shewed  three  *  ^ 
times.  The  Jirst  was  as  she  conceived;  the  second\  ev 
as  she  was  in  her  sorrow  under  the  cross ;  and  th 
third  was,  as  she  is  now  in  liking,  worship,  and  joy.  K 
66

fttaelftfj  i^ebelation

The  Twenty-sixth  Chapterfttaelftfj  i^ebelation

The  Twenty-sixth  Chapter

A~3D  after  this,  our  Lord  shewed  him  more  glori 
fied  as  to  my  sight  than  I  saw  him  before  ; 
wherein  I  was  learned,  that  our  soul  shall  never  have 
rest  till  it  come  into  him,  knowing  that  he  is  full  of 
joy,  homely  and  courteous,  and  blessedful,  and  very 
life.  Oftentimes  our  Lord  Jesu  said,  '/  it  am,  I  it 
am,  I  it  am  that  is  highest,  I  it  am  that  thou  lovest,  I 
it  am  that  thou  likest,  I  it  am  that  thou  servest,  I  it  am 
that  thou  longest,  I  it  am  that  thou  desirest,  I  it  am  that 
thou  meanest,  I  it  am  that  is  All,  I  it  am  that  Holy 
Church  preacheth  thee  and  teacheth  thee,  I  it  am  that 
shelved  me  before  to  thee.'  The  number  of  the  words 
passeth  my  wits  and  understanding,  and  all  my 
mights  ;  for  they  were  in  the  highest  as  to  my  sight: 
for  therein  is  comprehended  I  cannot  tell  what ; 
but  the  joy  that  I  saw  in  the  shewing  of  them  passeth 
all  that  heart  can  think,  or  soul  may  desire.  And 
therefore  these  words  be  not  declared  here,  but  [let] 
every  man  after  the  grace  that  God  giveth  him  in 
understanding  and  longing,  receive  them  in  our 
Lords  meaning.

67

Efjtrteentfj   i&ebelatton

The  Twenty-seventh  Chapter67

Efjtrteentfj   i&ebelatton

The  Twenty-seventh  Chapter

A~JD  after  this  our  Lord  brought  to  my  mind  the 
longing  that  I  had  to  him  before ;  and  I  saw 
nothing  letted  me  but  sin.  And  so  I  beheld  gener 
ally  in  us  all ;  and  methought,  if  sin  had  not  been, 
we  should  all  have  been  clean  and  like  to  our  Lord 
as  he  made  us.  And  thus  in  my  folly,  before  this 
time,  often  I  wondred  why,  by  the  great  foresaid 
wisdom  of  God,  the  beginning  of  sin  was  not  letted, 
for  then  thought  me  that  all  should  have  been  well. 
This  stirring  was  much  to  be  forsaken ;  and  never 
theless,  mourning  and  sorrow  I  made  therefore, 
without  reason  and  discretion ;  but  Jesu,  that  in  this 
vision  informed  me  of  all  that  me  needed,  answered 
by  this  word,  and  said,  'Sin  is  behovely,  but  all  shall 
be  well,  and  all  shall  be  well,  and  all  manner  of  thing 
shall  be  well.'  In  this  naked  word  sin,  our  Lord 
brought  to  my  mind  generally  all  that  is  not  good ; 
and  the  shameful  despite,  and  the  uttermost  tribu 
lation  that  he  bare  for  us  in  this  life,  and  his  dying, 
68

rnerne

and  all  his  pains  and  passion  bodily  and  ghostly,  and 
the  pains  of  all  his  creatures  ghostly  and  bodily. 
For  we  be  all  in  part  troubled,  and  we  shall  be 
troubled  following  our  master  Jesu,  till  we  be  full 
purged  of  our  deadly  flesh,  and  of  all  our  inward 
affections,  which  be  not  very  good.  And  the  be 
holding  of  this  with  all  the  pains  that  ever  were, 
or  ever  shall  be.  And  with  all  this  I  understood 
the  passion  of  Christ,  for  the  most  pain  and  over 
passing.  And  all  this  was  shewed  in  a  touch  and 
readily  passed  over  into  comfort ;  for  our  good  Lord 
would  not  that  the  soul  were  afraid  of  this  ugly 
sight.  But  I  saw  not  sin ;  for  I  believe  it  had  no 
manner  of  substance,  ne  no  part  of  being,  ne  it 
might  not  be  known  but  by  the  pain  that  is  caused 
thereof:  and  this  pain  is  something  as  to  my  sight 
for  a  time,  for  it  purgeth  and  maketh  us  to  know 
our  self,  and  ask  mercy.  For  the  passion  of  our  Lord 
is  comfort  to  us  against  all  this,  and  so  is  his  blessed 
will.  And  for  the  tender  love  that  our  good  Lord 
hath  to  all  that  shall  be  saved ;  he  comforteth 
readily  and  sweetly,  meaning  thus  :  '  It  is  true,  that 
sin  is  cause  of  all  this  pain  ;  but  all  shall  be  welly  and 
all  manner  of  thing  shall  be  well.'  These  words  were 
shewed  full  tenderly,  shewing  no  manner  of  blame 
to  me,  ne  to  none  that  shall  be  safe.  Then  were  it 
great  unkindness  of  me  to  blame  or  wonder  on  God 
69

rnerne

of  my  sin,  sithen  he  blameth  not  me  for  sin.  And 
in  these  same  words,  I  saw  an  high  marvellous 
privity  hid  in  God  :  which  privity,  he  shall  openly 
make,  and  shall  be  known  to  us  in  heaven.  In 
which  knowing  we  shall  verily  see  the  cause  why 
he  suffered  sin  to  come.  In  which  sight,  we  shall 
endlesly  have  joy.

The  Twenty-eighth  Chapter

THUS  I  saw,  how  Christ  hath  compassion  on  us  for 
the  cause  of  sin.  And  right  as  I  was  before  in  the 
passion  of  Christ  fulfilled  with  pain  and  compassion  ; 
like  in  this  I  was  in  party  fulfilled  with  compassion 
of  all  my  even  Christen.  For  full  well  he  loveth 
people  that  shall  be  saved ;  that  is  to  say,  Gods 
servants,  Holy  Church  shall  be  shaked  in  sorrow, 
and  anguish,  and  tribulation  in  this  world,  as  men 
shaketh  a  cloath  in  the  wind :  and  as  to  this  our 
Lord  answered,  shewing  on  this  manner ;  '  Ah,  a 
great  thing  'shall  I  make  hereof  in  heaven  of  endless 
worship,  and  of  everlasting  joy.'  Ye,  so  far  forth  I 
saw  that  our  Lord  enjoy eth  of  the  tribulation  of  his 
servants  with  pity  and  compassion ;  and  to  each 
person  that  he  loveth  to  his  bliss  for  to  bring,  he 
layeth  on  him  something  that  is  no  lack  in  his 
70sight ;  whereby  they  be  lowed  and  despised  in  this 
world,  scorned  and  mocked,  and  cast  out.  And  this 
he  doth  for  to  let  the  harm  that  they  should  take 
of  the  pomp,  and  of  the  pride,  and  of  the  vain  glory  of 
this  wretched  life,  and  make  their  way  ready  to  come 
to  heaven  in  bliss  without  end  everlasting.  For  he 
saith,  '  /  shall  all  to  [wkolh/]  break  you  from  your  vain 
affections,  and  your  vicious  pride,  and  after  that  I  shall 
gather  you,  and  make  you  meek  and  mild,  clean  and  holy 
by  oning  to  me.'  And  then  saw  I  that  each  kind 
compassion  that  man  hath  on  his  even  Christian 
with  charity,  it  is  Christ  in  him  ;  that  each  manner 
[of]  naughting  that  was  shewed. in  his  passion,  it  was 
shewed  again  here  in  this  compassion.  Wherein 
were  two  manner  of  understandings  in  our  Lords 
meaning ;  that  one  was  the  bliss  that  we  be  brought 
to,  wherein^he  will  that  we  enjoy.  That  other  is  for 
comfort  in  our  pain  ;  for  he  will  that  we  wit  that  all 
shall  turn  us  to  worship  and  to  profit,  by  the  vertue 
of  his  passion.  And  that  we  wit  that  we  suffered 
right  naught  alone,  but  with  him,  and  see  him  our 
ground.  And  that  we  see  his  pains  and  his  tribulation 
pass  so  far  all  that  we  may  suffer,  that  it  may  not  be 
full  thought.  And  the  well  beholding  of  this  will  save 
us  from  grudging  and  dispair  in  the  feeling  of  our 
pains  :  and  if  we  see  verily  that  our  sin  deserveth  it, 
yet  his  love  excuseth  us,  and  of  his  great  courtesie  he 
71

ftfS

doth  away  all  our  blame,  and  beholdeth  us  with  ruth 
and  pitty,  as  children,  innocents  and  unloathful.

The  Twenty-ninth  ChapterftfS

doth  away  all  our  blame,  and  beholdeth  us  with  ruth 
and  pitty,  as  children,  innocents  and  unloathful.

The  Twenty-ninth  Chapter

BUT  in  this  I  stood  beholding  generally,  sweinly  and 
mourningly,  saying  thus  to  our  Lord  in  ray  meaning 
with  full  great  dreed ;  '  Ah  good  Lord,  how  might 
all  be  well  for  the  great  harm  that  is  to  come  by  sin. 
to  thy  creatures  ? '  And  here  I  desired  as  I  durst, 
to  have  some  more  open  declaring,  wherewith  that 
I  might  be  eased  in  this.  And  to  this  our  blessed 
Lord  answered  full  meekly,  and  with  full  lovely 
cheir;  and  shewed  that  Adam's  sin  was  the  most 
harm  that  ever  was  done,  or  ever  shall  be  into  the 
world's  end  :  and  also  he  shewed  that  this  is  openly 
known  in  all  Holy  Church  in  earth.  Furthermore, 
he  learned  that  I  should  behold  the  glorious  as- 
seethe ;  for  this  asseeth-making  is  more  pleasing 
to  the  blessed  God-head,  and  more  worshipful  for 
man's  salvation  without  comparison,  than  ever  was 
the  sin  of  Adams  harmful.  Then  meaneth  our 
blessed  Lord  thus,  and  in  this  teaching;  that  we 
should  take  heed  to  this :  '  For  sithen  that  I  have 
made  well  by  the  most  harm  ;  then  it  is  my  will  that  thou 
know  thereby  that  I  shall  make  well  all  that  is  less.' 
72

me

The  Thirtieth  Chapterme

The  Thirtieth  Chapter

HE  gave  understanding  of  two  parties,  that  one  party 
is  our  Saviour  and  our  salvation.  This  blessed  part 
is  open,  clear,  fair,  and  light,  and  plenteous ;  for  all 
mankind  that  is  of  good  will,  and  that  shall  be,  is 
comprehended  in  this  part.  Hereto  we  be  bound 
of  God,  and  drawn  and  counselled,  and  learned  in 
wardly  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  outward  by  Holy 
Church  in  the  same  grace.  In  this  will  our  Lord 
that  we  be  occupied  and  joying  in  him,  for  he  joyeth 
in  us  :  and  the  more  plenteously  that  we  take  of 
this  with  reverence  and  meekness,  the  more  thank 
we  deserve  of  him,  and  the  more  speed  to  our  self. 
And  thus  may  we  see  and  enjoy  our  part  in  our 
Lord.  That  other  is  hid  and  sparred  from  us ;  that 
is  to  say,  all  that  is  besides  our  salvation  ;  for  that  is 
our  Lord's  privy  counsel,  and  it  longeth  to  the  royal 
lordship  of  God  to  have  his  privy  counsels  in  peace. 
And  it  longeth  to  his  servants  for  obedience  and 
reverence  not  to  will  to  know  his  counsels.  Our 
Lord  hath  pity  and  compassion  on  us,  for  that  some 
creatures  make  them  so  busie  therein  ;  and  I  am 
sure  if  we  wist  how  greatly  we  should  please  him, 
and  ease  ourself  to  leave  it,  we  would.  The  saints 
73

<rne

in  heaven  they  will  nothing  wit^but  what  our  Lord 
will  shew  them  ;  and  also  their  charity  and  their 
desire  is  ruled  after  the  will  of  our  Lord  :  and  thus 
ought  we,  that  our  will  be  like  to  them ;  then  shall 
we  nothing  will,  ne  desire  but  the  will  of  our  Lord, 
like  as  they  do ;  for  we  be  all  one  in  Gods  meaning. 
And  here  I  was  learned,  that  I  should  only  enjoy  in 
our  blessed  Saviour  Jesu,  and  trust  in  him  for  all 
thing.

The  Thirty-first  ChapterThe  Thirty-first  Chapter

AND  thus  our  good  Lord  answered  to  all  the 
questions  and  doubts  that  I  might  make,  saying 
full  comfortably  :  '  I  may  make  all  thing  well ;  and  I 
can  make  all  thing  well;  and  I  shall  make  all  thing 
well;  and  I  will  make  all  thing  well ;  and  thou  shall 
see  thyself  that  all  manner  of  thing  shall  be  well.' 
There  he  saith,  ( I  may,'  I  understand  for  the  Father ; 
and  there  he  saith,  'I  can,'  I  understand  for  the 
Son ;  and  there  he  saith,  '  I  will,'  I  understand  for 
the  Holy  Ghost;  and  there  he  saith  '  I  shall,'  I 
understand  the  unity  of  the  blessed  Trinity ;  three 
persons  and  one  truth  :  and  there  he  saith,  '  Thou 
shalt  see  thyself,  I  understand  the  coming  of  all 
mankind  that  shall  be  saved  into  the  blessedful 
Trinity.  And  in  these  five  words,  God  will  that  we 
74be  enclosed  in  rest,  and  peace.  And  thus  shall 
the  ghostly  thirst  of  Christ  have  an  end  ;  for  this  is 
the  ghostly  thirst  of  Christ,  the  love-longing  that 
lasteth  and  ever  shall,  till  we  see  that  sight  at 
dooms-day ;  for  we  that  shall  be  safe,  and  shall  be 
Christ's  joy  and  his  bliss,  been  yet  here ;  and  some 
be  to  come,  and  so  shall  some  be  into  that  day. 
Therefore  this  is  his  thirst,  and  love-longing  of  us 
all  together  here  in  him  to  our  endless  bliss,  as  to 
my  sight ;  for  we  be  not  now  fully  as  whole  in  him 
as  we  shall  be  then ;  for  we  know  in  our  faith,  and 
also  it  was  shewed  in  all,  that  Christ  Jesu  was  both 
God  and  man :  and  aiieynst  the  Godhead  he  is 
himself  highest  bliss,,  and  was  fro  without  beginning, 
and  shall  be  without  end  :  which  very  endless  bliss 
may  never  be  highed  nor  lowed  in  itself.  And  this 
was  plenteously  seen  in  every  shewing,  and  namely 
in  the  xiith.  where  he  saith,  ll  it  am  that  is  highest.' 
And  as  aneynst  Christs  manhood  ;  it  is  known  in 
our  faith,  and  also  shewed  that  he  through  the 
vertue  of  the  Godhead,  for  love  to  bring  us  to  his 
bliss,  suffered  pains  and  passion,  and  died.

And  these  be  the  works  of  Christs  manhood, 
wherein  he  enjoyeth.  And  that  shewed  he  in  the 
ixth  where  he  saith,  '  It  is  a  joy,  a  bliss,  and  endless 
liking  to  me,  that  ever  I  suffered  passion  for  thee.' 
And  this  is  the  bliss  of  Christs  works :  and  thus  he

meme

meaneth ;  there  he  saith  in  the  same  shewing,  '  We 
be  his  bliss,  we  be  his  meed,  we  be  his  worship,  we 
be  his  crown.'  For  as  aneynst  that  Christ  is  our 
head,  he  is  glorified  and  impassible  :  and  as  aneynst 
his  body,  in  which  all  his  members  be  knit,  he  is  not 
yet  full  glorified,  lie  all  unpassible :  for  the  same 
thirst  and  longing  that  he  had  upon  the  roode-tree 
(which  desire  longing  and  thirst  as  to  my  sight,  was 
in  him  from  without  beginning)  the  same  hath  he 
yet,  and  shall  into  the  time  that  the  last  soul  that 
shall  be  saved  is  come  up  to  his  bliss.  For  as  truly 
as  there  is  a  property  in  God  of  ruth  and  pity ;  as 
verily  there  is  a  property  in  God  of  thirst  and 
longing :  and  of  the  vertue  of  this  longing  in  Christ, 
we  have  to  long  again  to  him,  without  which  no 
soul  cometh  to  heaven.  And  this  property  of  long 
ing  and  thirst  cometh  of  the  endless  goodness  of 
God ;  right  as  the  property  of  pity  cometh  of  his 
endless  goodness :  and  though  he  have  longing  and 
pity,  they  been  sundry  properties,  as  to  my  sight. 
And  in  this  standeth  the  point  of  ghostly  thirst, 
which  is  lasting  in  him  as  long  as  we  be  in  need,  us 
drawing  up  to  his  bliss.  And  all  this  was  seen  in 
shewing  of  compassion,  for  that  shall  cease  at  dooms 
day.  Thus  he  hath  ruth  and  compassion  on  us  ;  and 
he  hath  longing  to  have  us  ;  but  his  wisdom  and  his 
love  suffer  not  the  same  to  come  till  the  best  time. 
76

rne

The  Thirty-second  Chapterrne

The  Thirty-second  Chapter

ONE  time  our  good  Lord  said,  'All  manner  of  thing 
shall  be  well : '  and  another  time  he  said,  '  Thou  shalt 
see  thy  self,  that  all  manner  of  thing  shall  be  well.' 
And  in  these  two  the  soul  took  sundry  manner  of 
understanding.  One  was  this ;  that  he  will,  we  wit 
that  not  only  he  taketh  heed  to  noble  things  and  to 
great,  but  also  to  litle  and  to  small,  to  low  and  to 
simple,  and  to  one  and  to  other.  And  so  meaneth 
he  in  that  he  saith,  'All  manner  of  thing  shall  be 
well;'  for  he  will  that  we  wit  that  the  least  thing 
shall  not  be  forgotten.  Another  understanding  is 
this ;  that  there  be  many  deeds  evil  done  in  our 
sight,  and  so  great  harms  take,  that  it  seemeth.to 
us  that  it  were  impossible  that  ever  it  should  come 
to  a  good  end.  And  upon  this  we  look,  sorrow  and 
mourn  therefore  ;  so  that  we  cannot  rest  us  in  the 
blissedful  beholding  of  God  as  we  should  do.  And 
the  cause  is  this  ;  that  the  use  of  our  reason  is  now 
so  blind,  so  low,  and  so  simple,  that  we  cannot 
know  the  high  marvellous  wisdom,  the  might  and 
ihe  goodness  of  the  blissedful  Trinity.  And  this 
meaneth  he  where  he  saith,  '  Thou  shalt  see  thy  self, 
that  all  manner  of  thing  shall  be  ?vell.1  As  if  he  said, 
77

meme

take  now  faithfully  and  trustfully,  and  at  the  last 
end  thou  shalt  be  verily  in  fulhead  of  joy.  And 
thus  in  the  same  five  words  beforesaid,  '  I  may  make 
all  thing  well ; '  I  understand  a  mighty  comfort  of 
all  works  of  our  Lord  God  that  are  for  to  come. 
There  is  a  deed,  the  which  the  blissedful  Trinity 
shall  do  in  the  last  day,  as  to  my  sight :  and  what 
the  deed  shall  be,  and  how  it  shall  be  done,  it 
is  unknown  of  all  creatures  which  are  beneath 
Christ,  and  shall  be  till  when  it  shall  be  done.  The 
goodness  and  the  love  of  our  Lord  God  will,  that 
we  wit  that  it  shall  be  :  and  the  might,  and  the 
wisdom  of  him  by  the  same  love  will  hill  it,  and 
hide  it  from  us  what  it  shall  be,  and  how  it  shall  be 
done.  And  the  cause  why  he  will  we  wit  it  thus 
is,  for  he  will  we  be  the  more  eased  in  our  soul, 
and  peaceable  in  love,  leaving  the  beholding  of  all 
tempests  that  might  let  us  of  true  enjoying  in  him. 
This  is  the  great  deed  ordeined  of  our  Lord  God  fro 
without  beginning,  treasured  and  hid  in  his  blessed 
breast,  only  known  to  himself;  by  which  deed,  he 
shall  make  all  thing  well,  for  right  as  the  blessed 
Trinity  made  all  thing  of  naught,  right  so  the  same 
blessed  Trinity  shall  make  well  all  that  is  not  well. 
And  in  this  sight  I  marvelled  greatly,  and  beheld 
our  faith,  meaning  thus ;  Our  faith  is  grounded  in 
Gods  word,  and  it  longeth  to  our  faith,  that  we 
78

1

me1

me

believe  that  Gods  word  shall  be  saved  in  all  thing : 
and  one  point  of  our  faith  is,  that  many  creatures 
shall  be  damned,  as  angels  that  fell  out  of  heaven 
for  pride,  which  be  now  fiends ;  and  many  in  earth 
that  dyeth  out  of  the  faith  of  Holy  Church ;  that  is 
to  say,  those  that  be  heathen  :  and  also  many  that 
hath  received  Christendom e,  and  liveth  unchristen 
life,  and  so  dyeth  out  of  charity ;  all  these  shall 
be  damned  to  hell  without  end,  as  Holy  Church 
teacheth  me  to  believe :  and  standing  all  this, 
methought  it  was  unpossible  that  all  manner  of 
thing  should  be  well,  as  our  Lord  shewed  in  this 
time.  And  as  to  this,  I  had  no  other  answer  in 
shewing  of  our  Lord  but  this ;  '  That,  that  is  un 
possible  to  thee,  is  not  unpossible  to  mee ;  I  shall  save 
my  word  in  all  thing,  and  I  shall  make  all  thing  well.' 
And  in  this  I  was  taught  by  the  grace  of  God, 
that  I  should  stedfastly  hold  me  in  the  faith  as 
I  had  before  understood.  And  therewith,  that  I 
should  stand  and  sadly  believe,  that  all  manner 
thing  shall  be  well,  as  our  Lord  shewed  in 
the  same  time ;  for  this  is  the  great  deed  that 
our  Lord  God  shall  do :  in  which  deed  he  shall 
save  his  word  in  all  thing ;  and  he  shall  make 
well  all  that  is  not  well.  But  what  the  deed 
shall  be,  and  how  it  shall  be  done,  there  is  no 
creature  beneath  Christ  that  wot  it,  ne  shall 
79

wit  it  till  it  is  done,  as  to  the  understanding  that 
I  took  of  our  Lords  meaning  in  this  time.

The  Thirty-third  Chapterwit  it  till  it  is  done,  as  to  the  understanding  that 
I  took  of  our  Lords  meaning  in  this  time.

The  Thirty-third  Chapter

AND  yet  in  this  I  desired  as  I  durst,  that  I  might 
have  some  sight  of  hell,  and  of  purgatory.  But  it 
was  not  my  meaning  to  take  proof  of  any  thing  that 
longeth  to  our  faith ;  for  I  believed  sothfastlie  that 
hell  and  purgatory  is  for  the  same  end  that  Holy 
Church  teach eth  for;  but  my  meaning  was,  that  I 
might  have  seen  for  learning  in  all  thing  that  longeth 
to  my  faith,  whereby  I  might  live  the  more  to  Gods 
worship,  and  to  my  profit.  And  for  ought  that  I 
could  desire,  I  ne  could  see  of  this  right  nought,  but 
as  it  is  before  said  in  the  first  shewing ;  where  that 
I  saw  the  Devil  is  reproved  of  God,  and  endlessly 
damned.  In  which  sight  I  understand,  that  all  the 
creatures  that  be  of*  the  devils  condition  in  this 
life,  and  therein  ending,  there  is  no  more  mention 
made  of  them  before  God  and  all  his  holy  ones 
then  of  the  devil ;  notwithstanding  that  they  be 
of  mankind ;  whether  they  have  be-christened  or 
not.  For  though  the  revelation  was  shewed  of 
goodness,  in  which  was  made  litle  mention  of  evil  : 
yet  I  was  not  drawn  thereby  from  any  point  of 
the  faith  that  Holy  Church  teacheth  me  to  believe. 
80

meme

For  I  had  sight  of  the  passion  of  Christ  in  divers 
shewing ;  in  the  first,  in  the  .second,  in  the  fourth, 
in  the  eighth,  as  it  is  before  said  ;  wherein  I  had 
in  part  feeling  of  the  sorrow  of  our  Lady,  and 
of  his  true  friends  that  saw  his  pains  :  but  I  saw 
not  so  properly  specified  the  Jews  that  did  him 
to  death  ;  but  notwithstanding  I  knew  in  my  faith, 
that  they  were  accursed  and  damned  without  end, 
saving  those  that  were  converted  by  grace.

And  I  was  strengthed,  and  learned  generally  to 
keep  me  in  the  faith,  in  every  point,  and  in  all  as 
I  had  before  understood,  hoping  that  I  was  therein 
with  mercy  and  the  grace  of  God,  desiring  and 
praying  in  my  meaning,  that  I  might  continue 
therein  unto  my  lives  end.  It  is  Gods  will  that 
we  have  great  regard  to  all  the  deeds  that  he 
hath  done ;  for  he  will  thereby  that  we  know, 
trust  and  believe  all  that  he  shall  doe.  But  ever 
more  us  needeth  leave  the  beholding  wrhat  the 
deed  shall  be;  and  desire  we  to  be  like  to  our 
brethren  which  be  the  saints  in  heaven,  that  will 
right  nought  but  Gods  will.  Then  shall  we  only 
enjoy  in  God,  and  be  well  apaid  both  with  hiding 
and  shewing.  For  I  saw  verily  in  our  Lords  mean 
ing,  the  more  we  busie  us  to  know  his  privities 
in  that  or  in  any  other  thing,  the  farther  more 
shall  we  be  from  the  knowing.

81  F

rne

in 
Ii

The  Thirty-fourth  Chapter  the

fa 
OUR  Lord  shewed  two  manner  of  privities.     One  is  r

this  great  privity,  with  all  the  privy  points  thereto    , 
belonging :  and  these  privities  he  will  we  know  thus 
hid,  into  the  time  that  he  will  clearly  shew  them  jj 
to  us.       That  other  are  the  privities  which  himself  i  ,

1  If  V1  If  V

shewed  openly  in  this  revelation ;  for  those  are 
privities  which  he  will  make  open  and  known  to 
us  :  for  he  will  that  we  wit  that  it  is  his  will  that 
we  know  them.  They  are  privities  to  us,  but  not 
only  for  that  he  will  they  be  privities  to  us,  but 
they  are  privities  to  us,  for  our  blind-head  and  our 
unknowing.  And  therefore  hath  he  great  ruth ;

and  therefore  he  will  make  them  open  to  us  him 
self,  whereby  we  may  know  him,  and  love  him,  and 
cleave  to  him.  For  all  that  is  speedeful  for  us  to 
wit  and  for  to  know,  full  courteously  our  good 
Lord  will  shew  us  what  it  is  with  all  the  preaching 
and  teaching  of  Holy  Church.  God  shewed  full  great 
pleasaunce  that  he  hath  in  all  men  and  women,  that 
mightily  and  wisely  take  the  preaching  and  teaching 
of  Holy  Church  ;  for  he  it  is  Holy  Church  ;  he  is  the 
ground,  he  is  the  substance,  he  is  the  teaching,  he  is  j , 
the  teacher,  he  is  the  end,  and  he  is  the  meed  4^ 
82

-  FIFTH

wherefore  every  kind  soul  traveleth.  And  this  is 
known,  and  shall  be  known  to  each  soul  to  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  declareth  it.  And  I  hope  truly  all 
those  that  seek  thus,  they  shall  speed,  for  they  seek 
God.  All  this  that  I  have  now  said,  and  more  as  I 
shall  say  hereafter,  is  comforting  against  sin.  For 
in  the  third  shewing,  when  I  saw  that  God  doth  all 
that  is  done,  I  saw  not  sin,  and  then  I  saw  that  all 
is  well  ;  but  when  God  shewed  me  for  sin,  then  said 
he,  'All  shall  be  well,'

The  Thirty-fifth  ChapterThe  Thirty-fifth  Chapter

AND  when  God  Almighty  had  shewed  so  plenteously, 
and  so  fully  of  his  goodness,  I  desired,  to  wit,  of  a 
certain  creature  that  I  loved,  if  it  should  continue 
n  good  living ;  which  I  hoped  by  the  grace  of  God 
was  begun.  And  in  this  singular  desire  it  seemed 
that  I  letted  myself;  for  I  was  not  taught  in  this 
time.  And  then  was  I  answered  in  my  reason,  as  it 
were  by  a  friendful  mean ;  '  Take  it  generally,  and 
behold  the  courtesie  of  thy  Lord  God,  as  he  shewed  to 
thee  ;  for  it  is  more  worship  to  God  to  behold  him  in  all, 
than  in  any  special  thing.'  I  assented,  and  therewith 
I  learned,  that  it  is  more  worship  to  God  to  know 
all  thing  in  general,  than  to  like  in  any  thing  in 
83

rnerne

special.  And  if  I  should  do  wisely  after  this  teach 
ing,  I  shold  not  be  glad  for  any  thing  in  special, 
ne  greatly  diseased  for  any  manner  thing,  for  'all 
shall  be  well.'  For  the  full-head  of  joy,  is  to  behold 
God  in  all ;  for  by  the  same  blessed  might,  wisdom, 
and  love,  that  he  made  all  thing,  to  the  same  end, 
our  good  Lord  leadeth  it  continually,  and  there  to 
himself  shall  bring  it,  and  when  it  is  time  we  shall 
see  it.  And  the  ground  of  this  was  shewed  in  the 
first,  and  more  openly  in  the  third,  where  it  saith  ;  I 
saw  God  in  a  point.  All  that  our  Lord  doth,  is 
rightfully,  and  all  that  he  suffereth  is  worshipful. 
And  in  these  two  is  comprehended  good  and  evil ; 
for  all  that  is  good  our  Lord  doth,  and  that  is  evil 
our  Lord  suffereth  :  I  say  not  that  evil  is  worshipful, 
but  I  say  the  sufferance  of  our  Lord  God  is  worship 
ful,  whereby  his  goodness  shall  be  known  without 
end,  and  his  marvellous  meekness  and  mild-head  by 
this  working  of  mercy  and  grace.  Right-full-head 
is  that  thing  that  is  so  good,  that  it  may  not  be 
better  than  it  is :  for  God  himself  is  very  rightful- 
head,  and  all  his  works  be  done  rightfully,  as  they 
be  ordained  fro  without  beginning  by  his  high  might, 
his  high  wisdom,  his  high  goodness.  And  right,  as 
he  hath  ordained  it  to  the  best,  right  so  he  worketh 
continually,  and  leadeth  it  to  the  same  end  :  And 
he  is  ever  full  pleased  with  himself,  and  with  all  his 
84

THSTHS

works.  And  the  beholding  of  this  blessed  accord  is 
full  sweet  to  the  soul  that  seeth  it  by  grace.  All 
the  souls  that  shall  be  saved  in  heaven  without  end, 
be  made  rightful  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  by  his  own 
goodness.  In  which  rightfullness  we  be  endlessly 
kept,  and  marvellously  above  all  creatures.  And 
mercy  is  a  working  that  cometh  of  the  goodness  of 
God.  And  it  shall  last  working  as  long  as  sin  is 
suffered  to  pursue  rightful  souls :  and  when  sin  hath 
no  longer  leave  to  pursue,  then  shall  the  working  of 
mercy  cease  :  and  then  shall  all  be  brought  into 
rightfulness,  and  therein  stand  without  end.  By 
his  sufferance  we  fall,  and  in  his  blessed  love  with 
his  might,  and  his  wisdom  we  are  kept,  and  by 
mercy  and  grace  we  be  raised  to  manifold  more  joy. 
And  thus  in  rightfulness  and  in  mercy  he  will  be 
known  and  loved,  now  and  without  end.  And  the 
soul  that  wisely  beholdeth  in  grace  is  well  paid  with 
both,  and  endlesly  enjoyeth.

The  Thirty-sixth  Chapter

OUR  Lord  God  shewed  that  a  deed  shall  be  done, 
and  himself  shall  do  it ;  and  it  shall  be  worshipful 
and  marvellous,  and  plentuous,  and  by  him  it  shall 
be  done,  and  himself  shall  do  it.  And  this  is  the

85

me85

me

highest  joy  that  the  soul  understood,  that  God  him 
self  shall  do  it.  And  I  shall  do  right  nought  but 
sin,  and  my  sin  shall  not  let  his  goodness  working. 
And  I  saw  that  the  beholding  of  this  is  a  heavenly 
joy  in  a  dreadful  soul,  which  evermore  kindly  by 
grace  desireth  Gods  will.  This  deed  shall  be  begun 
here,  and  it  shall  be  worshipful  to  God,  and  plentu- 
ously  profitable  to  all  his  lovers  in  earth.  And  ever 
as  we  come  to  heaven,  we  shall  see  it  in  marvellous 
joy.  And  it  shall  last  thus  in  working  to  the  last 
day ;  and  the  worship  and  the  bliss  of  that  shall  last 
in  heaven  before  God,  and  all  his  holy  saints  without 
end.  Thus  was  this  deed  seen  and  understand  in 
our  Lords  meaning ;  and  the  cause  why  he  shewed 
it,  is  to  make  us  to  enjoy  in  him  and  in  all  his 
works.

When  I  saw  the  shewing  continued,  I  understood 
it  was  shewed  for  a  great  thing  that  was  then  for  to 
come  :  which  thing  God  shewed  that  himself  should 
do  it.  Which  deed  hath  the  properties  before  said. 
And  this  shewed  he  full  blessedfully,  meaning  that 
I  should  take  it  wistly  [?  wisely],  faithfully,  and  trust 
fully  ;  but  what  the  deed  should  be  it  was  kept  privy 
to  me.  And  in  this  I  saw,  he  will  not  we  dread  to 
know  the  things  that  he  sheweth ;  he  sheweth 
them,  for  he  will  we  know  them.  By  which  know 
ing,  he  will  we  love  him,  and  like  in  him,  and 
86

<THS<THS

endlesly  enjoy  in  him.  And  for  the  great  love 
that  he  hath  to  us,  he  sheweth  us  all  that  is 
worshipful  and  profitable  for  the  time  ;  and  those 
things  that  he  will  now  have  privy ;  yet  of  his  great 
goodness  he  shewed  them  close.  In  which  shewing 
he  will  we  believe,  and  understand,  that  we  should 
see  it  verily  in  his  endless  bliss.  Then  ought  we  to 
enjoy  in  him  for  all  that  he  sheweth,  and  all  that  he 
hideth.  And  if  we  wilfully  and  meekly  do  this,,  we 
shall  find  therein  great  ease,  and  endless  thanking 
we  shall  have  of  him  therefore.  And  this  is  the 
understanding  of  this  word,  '  That  it  shall  be  done  by 
me,'  (that  is  to  say,  [as  to]  the  general  man  ;  that  is  to 
say,  all  that  shall  be  safe) ;  it  shall  be  worshipful,  mar 
vellous,  and  plentuous,  and  '  By  me  it  shall  be  done, 
and  God  himself  shall  do  it.'  And  this  shall  be  highest 
joy  that  may  be  beholden  of  the  deed  that  God 
himself  shall  do  it,  and  man  shall  do  right  nought 
but  sin.  Then  meaneth  our  Lord  God  thus,  as  if 
he  said,  '  Behold  and  see,  here  hast  thou  matter  of  meek 
ness  ;  here  hast  thou  matter  of  love ;  here  hast  thou 
matter  of  knowing  thy  self  ;  here  hast  thou  matter  of 
enjoying  in  me  ;  and  for  my  love  enjoy  in  me,  for,  of  all 
thing,  therewith  might  thou  most  please  mee.'  And  as 
long  as  we  be  in  this  life,  what  time  that  we  by  our 
folly  turn  us  to  the  beholding  of  the  reproved, 
tenderly  our  Lord  toucheth  us,  and  blissedfully 
87

rnerne

calleth  us,  saying  in  our  soul,  'Let  me  alone  my  dear 
worthy  child  ;  intend  to  me,  I  am  enough  to  thee,  and  enjoy 
in  thy  Saviour  and  in  thy  salvation.'  And  that  this  is 
our  Lords  working  in  us,  I  am  sure  the  soul  that  is 
pearced  therewith  by  grace,  shall  see  it  and  feel  it ; 
and  though  it  be  so  that  this  deed  be  truly  take  for 
the  general  man,  yet  it  excludeth  not  the  special ; 
for  what  our  good  Lord  will  do  by  his  poor  creatures, 
it  is  now  unknown  to  me.  But  this  deed,  and  that 
other  aforesaid,  it  is  not  both  one,  but  two  sundry  ; 
but  this  deed  shall  be  known  sooner,  and  that  shall 
be  as  we  come  to  heaven.  And  to  whom  our  Lord 
giveth  it,  it  may  be  known  here  in  party.  But  the 
great  deed  aforesaid  shall  neither  be  known  in 
heaven  nor  in  earth  till  that  it  be  done.  And 
furthermore,  he  gave  special  understanding  and 
teaching  of  working,  and  shewing  of  miracles  as 
this ;  '  //  is  known  that  I  have  done  miracles  here  before 
many,  and  full  high  and  marvellous,  worshipful  and 
great ;  and  so  as  I  have  done,  I  do  now  continually,  and 
shall  in  coming  of  time.  It  is  known  that  before  miracles, 
come  sorrows,  and  anguish,  and  trouble.'  And  that  is, 
that  we  should  know  our  own  feebleness  and  mis 
chief  that  we  be  fallen  in  by  sin,  to  meek  us,  and 
make  us  to  cry  to  God  for  help  and  grace ;  and 
great  miracles  come  after,  and  that,  of  the  high 
might  and  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  God,  shewing 
88

meme

his  vertue  and  the  joyes  of  heaven,  so  as  it  may  be 
in  this  passing  life  ;  and  that,  for  the  strengthening 
of  our  faith,  and  encrease  of  our  hope  in  charity. 
Wherefore  it  pleaseth  him  to  be  known  and  wor 
shipped  in  miracles.  Then  meaneth  he  thus,  lie 
will  that  we  be  not  born  over-low  for  sorrows  and 
tempests  that  fall  to  us,  for  it  hath  ever  so  been 
before  miracles  comming.

The  Thirty-seventh  Chapter

GOD  brought  to  mind  that  I  should  sin  :  and  for 
liking  that  I  had  in  beholding  of  him,  I  entented 
not  redily  to  that  shewing.  And  our  Lord  full 
mercifully  abode,  and  gave  me  grace  for  to  entend. 
And  this  shewing  I  took  singularly  to  myself:  but 
by  all  the  gracious  comforts  that  followeth  as  ye 
shall  see,  I  was  learned  to  take  it  to  all  mine  even 
Christen,  all  in  general,  and  nothing  in  special  : 
though  our  Lord  shewed  me  that  I  should  sin,  by 
me  alone  is  understood  all.  And  in  this  I  conceived 
a  soft  dread  :  and  to  this  our  Lord  answered,  '  /  keep 
thec  full  surely.'  This  word  was  said  with  more  love 
and  sureriess  of  ghostly  keeping,  than  I  can  or  may 
tell  :  for  as  it  was  afore  shewed  to  me  that  I  should 
sin,  right  so  was  the  comfort  shewed,  (sureness  of 
89

rnerne

keeping)  for  all  mine  even  Christen.  What  may 
make  me  more  to  love  mine  even  Christen,  than 
to  see  in  God  that  he  loveth  all  that  shall  be 
saved,  as  it  were  all  one  soul ;  for  in  every  soul 
that  shall  be  saved,  is  a  godly  will  that  never 
finally  assenteth  to  sinn,  ne  never  shall.  Right 
as  there  is  a  beastly  will  in  the  lower  party  that 
may  will  no  good ;  right  so  there  is  a  godly  will 
in  the  higher  party  ;  which  will  is  so  good,  that 
it  may  never  will  evil  endlesly,  but  ever  good ; 
and  therefore  we  be  that  he  loveth,  and  endlesly 
we  do  that  he  liketh.  And  this  shewed  our  good 
Lord  in  the  wholehead  of  love  that  we  stand  in  his 
sight,  yea  that  he  loveth  us  now  as  well  while  that 
we  be  here,  as  he  shall  do  when  we  be  there  before 
his  blessed  face.  But  for  failing  of  love  in  our 
party,  therefore  is  all  our  travel.

The  Thirty-eighth  Chapter

AND  God  shewed  that  siri  shall  be  no  shame  but 
worship  to  man  ;  for  right  as  to  every  sin  is  answer 
ing  a  pain  by  truth  :  right  so  for  every  sin  to  the 
same  soul  is  given  a  bliss  by  love.  Right  as  divers 
sins  be  punished  with  divers  pains  after  that  it  be 
grievous ;  right  so  shall  they  be  rewarded  with 
90

rnerne

diverse  joys  in  heaven  for  their  victories,  after  as 
the  sin  hath  been  painful  and  sorrowful  to  the 
soul  in  earth ;  for  the  soul  that  shall  come  to 
heaven  is  so  precious  to  God,  and  the  place  so 
worshipful,  that  the  goodness  of  God  suffereth 
never  that  soul  to  sin  finally  that  shall  come 
thither:  but  what  sinners  they  are  that  so  shall 
be  rewarded,  is  made  known  in  Holy  Church  in 
earth,  and  also  in  heaven,  by  overpassing  worships : 
for  in  this  sight  my  understanding  was  lifted  up 
into  heaven.  And  then  God  brought  merily  to  my 
mind  David,  and  other  in  the  Old  Law  with  him 
without  number.  And  in  the  New  Law  he  brought 
to  my  mind,  first  Magdalen,  Peter,  and  Paul, 
Thomas,  and  Jude,  St.  John  of  Beverley,  and  others 
also  without  number  ;  how  they  be  known  in  the 
church  on  earth  with  their  sins ;  and  it  is  to  them 
no  shame,  but  all  is  turned  them  to  worship.  And 
therefore  our  courteous  Lord  sheweth  for  them  here 
in  party,  like  as  it  is  there  fulfilled ;  for  there  the 
token  of  sin  is  turned  to  worship.  And  St.  John 
of  Beverley  our  Lord  shewed  him  full  highly  in 
comfort  of  us  for  homeliness  and  countrey  sake : 
and  brought  to  my  mind  how  he  is  a  kind  neigh 
bour,  and  of  our  knowing:  and  God  called  him 
plainly  St.  John  of  Beverley,  as  we  do,  and  that 
with  a  full  glad  and  sweet  chear,  shewing  that  he 
91

rnerne

is  a  full  high  saint  in  his  sight,  and  a  blessedful  : 
and  with  this  he  made  mention,  that  in  his  youth, 
and  in  his  tender  age,  he  was  a  dear  worthy  servant 
to  God  ;  full  greatly  God  loving  and  dreading. 
And  nevertheless  God  suffered  him  to  fall;  him 
mercifully  keeping  that  he  perished  not,  ne  lost 
no  time.  And  afterward  God  raised  him  to  mani 
fold  more  grace  ;  and  by  the  contrition  and  the 
meekness  that  he  had  in  his  living,  God  hath  given 
him  in  heaven  manifold  joys,  overpassing  that  he 
should  have  had,  if  he  had  not  sinned  or  fallen. 
And  that  this  is  true,  God  sheweth  in  earth  with 
plentuous  miracles  doing  about  his  body  continu 
ally.  And  all  this  was  to  make  us  glad  and  merry 
in  love.

The   Thirty-ninth  Chapter

SIN  is  the  sharpest  scourge  that  any  chosen  soul 
may  be  smitten  with.  Which  scourge  ail-to  beateth 
man  or  woman,  and  ail-to  breaketh  him,  and  purg- 
eth  him  in  his  own  sight  :  so  far  forth,  that  other- 
while  he  thinketh  himself  that  he  is  not  worthy, 
but  as  it  were,  to  sink  into  hell,  till  when  contrition 
taketh  him  by  touching  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
turneth  the  bitterness  into  hope  of  Gods  mercy. 
And  then  begin  his  wounds  to  heal,  and  the  soul 
92

me

to  quicken,  turned  into  the  life  of  Holy  Church. 
The  Holy  Ghost  leadeth  him  to  confession,,  wilfully 
to  shew  his  sins  nakedly  and  truly  with  great  sorrow, 
and  with  great  shame,  that  he  hath  so  defouled  the 
fair  image  of  God.  Then  undertaketh  he  penance 
for  every  sin  enjoy ned  by  his  domes-man,  that  is 
grounded  in  Holy  Church,  by  the  teaching  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.And  this  is  one  meekness  that  greatly  pleaseth 
God,  and  also  meekly  taketh  bodily  sickness  of 
God's  sending :  also  sorrow  and  shame  outwardly, 
with  reproof  and  despite  of  the  world ;  with  all 
manner  of  grievance  and  temptations  that  we  be 
cast  in,  ghostly  and  bodily  :  full  preciously  our  good 
Lord  keepeth  us,  when  it  seemeth  to  us  that  we  be 
near  forsaken,  and  cast  away  for  our  sin,  and  for  we 
see  that  we  have  deserved  it.  And  because  of  the 
meekness  that  we  get  thereby,  we  be  raised  full 
high  in  God's  sight  by  his  grace.  And  also  whom 
our  Lord  will,  he  visiteth  of  his  special  grace  with 
so  great  contrition,  and  also  with  compassion,  and 
true  longing  to  God,  that  they  be  suddenly  de 
livered  of  sin  and  of  pain,  and  taken  up  to  bliss,  and 
made  even  with  saints.  By  contrition,  we  be  made 
clean  ;  by  compassion  we  be  made  ready ;  and  by 
true  longing  to  God  we  be  made  worthy.

These  be  three  means  as  I  understood,  whereby 
93These  be  three  means  as  I  understood,  whereby 
93

that  all  souls  come  to  heaven  ;  that  is  to  say,  that 
have  been  sinners  in  earth,  and  shall  be  saved :  for 
by  these  medicines  behoveth  that  every  sinful  soul  be 
healed ;  though  [after]  that  he  be  healed,  his  wounds 
be  seen  before  God  not  as  wounds,  but  as  worships. 
And  so  on  the  contrariwise,  as  we  be  punished  here 
with  sorrow  and  with  penance,  we  shall  be  re 
warded  in  heaven  by  the  courteous  love  of  our  God 
Almighty,  that  will  that  none  that  come  there  leese 
his  travel  in  any  degree :  for  he  beholdeth  sin  as 
sorrow  and  pains  to  his  lovers,  in  whom  he  assigneth 
no  blame  for  love.  The  meed  that  we  undertake  [re 
ceive],  shall  not  be  litle,  but  it  shall  be  high,  glorious 
and  worshipful ;  and  so  shall  all  shame  turn  to  wor 
ship  and  to  joy.  For  our  courteous  Lord  will  not  that 
his  servants  despair  for  oft  failing,  lie  for  grievous 
falling ;  for  our  falling  letteth  not  him  to  love  us ; 
peace  and  love  is  ever  in  us,  being  and  working ; 
but  we  be  not  ever  in  peace  and  in  love.  But  he 
will  we  take  heed  thus,  that  he  is  ground  of  all 
our  whole  life  in  love ;  and  furthermore,  that  he 
is  our  everlasting  Keeper,  and  mightily  defendeth 
us  against  all  our  enemies  that  be  full  fell,  and  full 
fierce  upon  us.  And  so  much  our  need  is  the  more  ; 
for  we  give  them  occasion  by  our  falling.

me

The  Fortieth  Chapterme

The  Fortieth  Chapter

AND  this  is  a  sovereign  friendship  of  our  courteous 
Lord,  that  he  keepeth  us  so  tenderly  whiles  we  be 
in  our  sin  :  and  furthermore,  he  toucheth  us  full 
privily,  and  sheweth  us  our  sin  by  the  sweet  light  of 
mercy  and  grace.  But  when  we  see  ourself  so  foul, 
then  we  wene  that  God  were  wrath  with  us  for  our 
sin.  Then  be  we  stirred  of  the  Holy  Ghost  by  con 
trition  into  prayer  and  desire,  amending  of  our  self 
with  all  our  might,  to  slack  the  wrath  of  God,  unto 
the  time  we  find  a  rest  in  soul  and  softness  in  con 
science.  And  then  hope  we  that  God  hath  forgiven 
us  our  sin,  and  it  is  true.  And  then  sheweth  our 
courteous  Lord  himself  to  the  soul  merrily,  and  of 
full  glad  chear,  with  friendfully  welcoming  as  if  it 
had  been  in  pain  and  in  prison,  saying  thus  :  '  My 
dear  darling,  I  am  glad  thou  art  come  to  me  in  all  thy 
woe ;  I  have  ever  been  with  thee,  and  now  seest  thou  me 
loving,  and  we  be  oned  in  bliss.'  Thus  are  sins  forgiven 
by  grace  and  mercy,  and  our  soul  worshipfully  re 
ceived  in  joy  ;  like  as  it  shall  be  when  it  corneth  into 
heaven,  as  oftimes  as  it  cometh  by  the  gracious  work 
ing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  vertue  of  Christs 
passion.  Here  understood  I  verily,  that  all  manner 
95

rne

of  thing  is  made  ready  to  us  by  the  great  goodness 
of  God  ;  so  far  forth,  that  what  time  we  be  our  self 
in  peace  and  in  charity,  we  be  verily  safe.  But  for 
we  may  not  have  this  in  fullhead  while  we  be  here, 
therefore  it  befalleth  us  ever  to  live  in  sweet  praying, 
and  in  lovely  longing  with  our  Lord  Jesu,  for  he 
longeth  ever  for  to  bring  us  to  the  ful-head  of  joy, 
as  it  is  before  said ;  where  he  sheweth  the  ghostly 
thirst.But  now  because  of  all  this  ghostly  comfort  that 
is  before  said  ;  if  any  man  or  woman  be  stirred  by 
folly,  to  say  or  to  think ;  "  If  this  be  true,  then  were 
it  good  for  to  sin,  to  have  the  more  meed,  or  else  to 
charge  the  less  to  sin ; "  beware  of  this  stirring,  for 
truly  if  it  come,  it  is  untrue,  and  of  the  enemy : 
for  the  same  true  love  that  toucheth  us  all  by  his 
blessed  comfort ;  the  same  blessed  love  teacheth  us 
that  we  shall  hate  sin  only  for  love.  And  I  am  sure 
by  my  own  feeling,  the  more  that  each  kind  soul 
seeth  this  in  the  courteous  love  of  our  Lord  God, 
the  lother  is  him  to  sin,  and  the  more  he  is  ashamed  : 
for  if  it  were  laid  before  us  all  the  pain  that  is  in 
hell,  and  in  purgatory,  and  in  earth,  to  suffer  it 
rather  than  sin,  we  should  rather  choose  all  that 
pain,  than  sin  :  for  sin  is  so  vile,  and  so  mickle  for 
to  hate,  that  it  may  be  likned  to  no  pain ;  which 
pain  is  not  sin.  And  to  me  was  shewed  none  harder 
96

rne

iell  than  sin ;  for  a  kind  soul  hateth  no  pain  but  sin, 
?or  all  is  good  but  sin,  and  naught  is  evil  but  sin. 
And  when  we  give  our  intent  to  love  and  meek 
ness,  by  the  working  of  mercy  and  grace,  we  be 
made  all  fair  and  clean.And  as  mighty,  and  as  wise  as  God  is  to  save  man, 
as  willing  he  is.  For  Christ  himself  is  ground  of  all 
the  laws  of  Christen  men ;  and  he  taught  us  to  doe 
good  against  evil.  Here  we  may  see  that  he  is  him 
self  this  charity,  and  doth  to  us  as  he  teacheth  us  to 
do:  for  he  will  that  we  be  like  him  in  whole-head 
of  endless  love  to  our  self,  and  to  our  even  Christen. 
No  more  than  his  love  is  broken  to  us  for  our  sin, 
no  more  will  he  that  our  love  be  broken  to  our  self, 
nor  to  our  even  Christen,  but  nakedly  hate  sin,  and 
endlesly  love  the  soul,  as  God  loveth  it.  Then 
should  we  hate  sin  like  as  God  hateth  it,  and  love 
the  soul  as  God  loveth  it ;  for  these  words  that  God 
said,  is  an  endless  comfort,  '  I  keep  thec  full  truly.'

97

jrourteentlj

The  Forty-first  Chapter97

jrourteentlj

The  Forty-first  Chapter

AFTER  this  our  Lord  shewed  for  prayer:  in 
Ji\_  which  shewing,  I  saw  two  conditions  in  our 
Lords  meaning.  One  is  rightful  prayer.  Another 
is  siker  trust.  But  yet  oftentimes  our  trust  is 
not  full ;  for  we  be  not  sure  that  God  heareth  us, 
as  we  think  for  our  un worthiness,  and  for  we  feel 
right  naught ;  for  we  be  as  barren,  and  as  dry  oft- 
times  after  our  prayers  as  we  were  before.  And 
thus  in  our  feeling,  our  folly  is  cause  of  our  weak 
ness  :  for  thus  have  I  felt  by  my  self.  And  all  this 
brought  our  Lord  suddenly  to  my  mind,  and  shewed 
these  words,  and  said,  '  I  am  ground  of  thy  beseeking. 
First,  it  is  my  will  that  thou  have  it  :  and  sithen  I  make 
thee  to  will  it,  and  sithen  I  make  thee  to  beseek  it,  and 
thou  seekest  it,  how  should  it  then  be,  that  thou  shouldest  !|  i 
not  have  thy  seeking  ? '  And  thus  in  the  first  reason,  j  I 
with  the  three  that  follow,  our  good  Lord  sheweth  |i  r 
a  mighty  comfort,  as  it  may  be  seen  in  the  same  >  s 
words.  And  in  the  first  reason,  there  he  saith ;  n 
'  And  thou  beseek  it : '  there  he  sheweth  full  great 
98

meme

pleasance  and  endless  meed,  that  he  will  give  us 
for  our  beseeking.  And  in  the  sixth  reason,  there 
he  saith,  '  How  should  it  then  be  ? '  this  was  said 
for  an  unpossible  thing ;  for  it  is  the  most  un- 
possible  that  may,  that  we  should  seek  mercy  and 
grace,  and  not  have  it.  For  of  all  thing  that  our 
good  Lord  maketh  us  to  beseek  himself,  he  hath 
ordained  it  to  us  from  without  beginning.  Here 
may  we  then  see,  that  our  beseeking  is  not  the 
cause  of  the  goodness  and  grace  that  he  doth  to 
us,  but  his  proper  goodness.  And  that  shewed  he 
verily  in  all  these  sweet  words,  there  he  saith,  '  I 
am  ground.'  And  our  good  Lord  will  that  this  be 
known  of  his  lovers  in  earth  ;  and  the  more  that 
we  know,  the  more  shall  we  beseech,  if  it  be  wisely 
take;  and  so  is  our  Lords  meaning.  Beseeching 
is  a  true  and  gracious  lasting  will  of  the  soul,  owned 
and  fastened  into  the  will  of  our  Lord,  by  the  sweet 
privy  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Our  Lord  him 
self  he  is  the  first  receiver  of  our  prayer,  as  to  my 
sight,  and  he  taketh  it  full  thankfully  ;  and  highly 
enjoying,  he  sendeth  it  up  above,  and  setteth  it 
in  treasure,  where  it  shall  never  perish  :  it  is  there 
before  God,  with  all  his  holy  saints  continually 
received,  ever  speeding  our  needs.  And  when  we 
shall  undertake  [receive]  our  bliss,  it  shall  be  given 
us  for  a  degree  of  joy,  with  endless  worshipful  thank 
ing  of  him  ;  full  glad  and  merry  is  our  Lord  of  our 
99

meme

prayer :  and  he  looketh  thereafter,  and  he  will  have 
it ;  for  with  his  grace  it  maketh  us  like  to  himself 
in  condition,  as  we  be  in  kind ;  and  so  is  his  blessed 
will :  for  he  saith  thus,  ( Pray  intirely,  inwardly, 
though  thee  think  it  savour  thee  not,  yet  it  is  profitable 
enough,  though  thou  feel  it  nought  :  pray  intirely,  in 
wardly,  though  thou  feel  nought,  though  thou  see 
nought ;  yea,  though  thou  think  thou  might  not ;  for  in 
dry  ness  and  barrenness,  in  sickness,  and  in  feebleness, 
then  is  thy  prayer  full  pleasant  to  mee,  though  thou 
think  it  savor  thee  not  but  litle  ;  and  so  is  all  thy  living 
prayer  in  my  sight.'

For  the  meed  and  the  endless  thank  that  he 
will  give  us,  therefore  he  is  covetuous  to  have  us 
praying  continually  in  his  sight.  God  accepteth 
the  good  will,  and  the  travel  of  his  servants, 
howsoever  we  feel :  wherefore  it  pleaseth  him  that 
we  work  in  prayer,  and  in  good  living,  by  his  help 
and  his  grace,  reasonably  with  discretion,  keeping 
our  mights  to  him  ;  till  when  we  have  him  that  we 
seek,  in  fulhead  of  joy, — that  is,  Jesu.  And  that 
shewed  he  in  the  xvth  Revelation,  where  he  saith, 
'  Thou  shall  have  me  to  thy  meed.'  Also  to  prayer 
longeth  thanking :  thanking  is  a  true  inward  know 
ing,  with  great  reverence  and  lovely  dreed,  turning 
our  self  with  all  our  mights  into  the  working  that  our 
Lord  stirred  us  to,  enjoying  and  thanking  inwardly : 
and  sometime  for  plentuousness  it  breaketh  out  with 
100

?H£?H£

voyce,  and  saith,  *  Good  Lord,,  grant  mercy ;  blessed 
mote  thou  be.'  And  sometime  when  the  earth  is 
dry,  and  feeleth  naught,  or  else  by  temptation  of 
our  enemy,  then  it  is  driven  by  reason  and  by 
grace  to  cry  upon  our  Lord  with  voyce,  rehearsing 
his  blessed  passion,  and  his  great  goodness.  And 
so  the  vertue  of  our  Lords  word  turneth  into  the 
soul,  and  quickeneth  the  heart,  and  entreth  by 
his  grace  into  true  working,  and  maketh  it  to  pray 
full  blessedfully.  And  truly  to  enjoy  in  our  Lord, 
is  a  full  lovely  thanking  in  his  sight.

The  Forty-second  Chapter

OUR  Lord  will  that  we  have  true  understanding,  and 
namely  in  three  things  that  longeth  to  our  prayer : 
the  first  is,  by  whom  and  how  that  our  prayer 
springeth  ;  by  whom,  he  sheweth  when  he  saith,  '  1 
am  ground  ; '  arid  how  by  his  goodness  :  for  he  saith, 
'  First  it  is  my  will.'  For  the  second,  in  what  manner, 
and  how  that  we  should  use  our  prayers ;  and  that 
is,  that  our  will  be  turned  into  the  will  of  our  Lord 
enjoying  :  and  so  he  meaneth  when  he  saith, '  I  make 
thee  to  will  it.'  For  the  third,  that  we  know  the  fruit 
and  end  of  our  prayer ;  that  is,  to  be  oned,  and  like 
to  our  Lord  in  all  thing ;  and  to  this  meaning,  and 
for  this  end,  was  all  this  lovely  lesson  shewed  :  and 
101

THGTHG

he  will  help  us,  and  he  shall  make  it  so  as  he  seeth 
himself;  blessed  mote  he  be:  for  this  is  our  Lords 
will  that  our  prayer  and  our  trust  be  both  alike 
large ;  for  if  we  trust  not  as  mickle  as  we  pray,  we 
do  not  full  worship  to  our  Lord  in  our  prayer.  And 
also  we  tarry  and  pain  our  self;  and  the  cause  is  as 
I  believe,  for  we  know  not  truly  that  our  Lord  is 
ground  in  whom  that  our  prayer  springeth.  And 
also  that  we  know  not  that  it  is  given  us  by  grace 
of  his  love ;  for  if  we  knew  this,  it  would  make  us 
to  trust  to  have  of  our  Lords  gift  all  that  we  desire  ; 
for  I  am  sure  that  no  man  asketh  mercy  and  grace 
with  true  meaning,  but  if  mercy  and  grace  be 
first  given  to  him.  But  sometime  it  cometh  to  our 
mind  that  we  have  prayed  long  time  ;  and  yet  it 
thinketh  us  that  we  have  not  our  asking :  but 
herefore  should  we  not  be  heavy ;  for  I  am  sure  by 
our  Lords  meaning,  that  either  we  abide  a  better 
time,  or  more  grace,  or  a  better  gift.  He  will 
that  we  have  true  knowing  in  himself  that  he  is 
being.  And  in  this  knowing,  he  will  that  our  under 
standing  be  grounded  with  all  our  mights,  and  all 
our  intents,  and  all  our  meanings  :  and  in  this  ground, 
he  will  that  we  take  our  steeds  [stand],  and  our 
dwelling.  And  by  the  gracious  light  of  himself, 
he  will  that  we  have  understanding  of  three  things 
that  follow.  The  jirst  is,  our  noble  and  excellent 
making.  The  second,  our  precious  and  dear  worthy 
102

rnerne

again-being.  The  third,  all  thing  that  he  hath  made 
beneath  us,  to  serve  us,  and  for  our  love  keepeth  it. 
Then  meaneth  he  thus,  as  if  he  said,  '  Behold  and  see 
that  I  have  done  all  this  before  thy  prayer,  and  now  thou 
art,  and  prayest  me.'  And  thus  he  meaneth  that  it 
longeth  to  us,  to  wit  that  the  greatest  deeds  be 
done,  as  Holy  Church  teacheth.  And  in  the  behold 
ing  of  this,  with  thanking,  we  owe  to  pray  for  the 
deed  that  is  now  in  doing ;  and  that  is,  that  he  rule 
us,  and  guide  us  to  his  worship  in  this  life,  and 
bring  us  to  his  bliss ;  and  therefore  he  hath  done  all. 
Then  meaneth  he  thus ;  that  we  see  that  he  doth  it, 
and  we  pray  therefore  ;  for  that  one  is  not  enough  : 
for  if  we  pray,  and  see  not  that  he  doth  it,  it 
maketh  us  heavy  and  doubtful,  and  that  is  not  his 
worship.  And  if  we  see  that  doth  it,  and  we  pray 
not,  we  do  not  our  duty  :  and  so  it  may  not  be ;  that 
is  to  say,  so  is  it  not  in  his  beholding.  But  to  see 
that  he  doth  it,  and  to  pray  forthwithall :  so  is  he 
worshipped,  and  we  speed.  All  thing  that  our  Lord 
hath  ordained  to  doe,  it  is  his  will  that  we  pray 
therefore,  either  in  special  or  in  general.  And  the 
joy  and  the  bliss  that  is  to  him,  and  the  thank  and 
the  worship  that  we  shall  have  therefore,  it  passeth 
the  understanding  of  all  creatures  in  this  life,  as  to 
my  sight.  For  prayer  is  a  rightwise  understanding 
of  that  fullhead  of  joy  that  is  for  to  come,  with  true 
longing,  and  very  trust.  Savouring  or  seeing  our  bliss, 
103

rne  FOUNTS  s^rnrne  FOUNTS  s^rn

that  we  be  ordained  to,  kindly  maketh  us  to  long. 
True  understanding  and  love,  with  sweet  meaning 
in  our  Saviour,  graciously  maketh  us  to  trust.  And 
thus  have  we  of  kind  to  long,  and  of  grace  to  trust : 
and  in  these  two  workings,  our  Lord  beholdeth  us 
continually.  For  it  is  our  duty ;  (and  his  goodness 
may  no  less  assigne  in  us,)  that  longeth  to  us,  to  doe 
our  diligence  thereto :  and  when  we  do  it,  yet  shall 
us  think  that  it  is  naught :  and  true  it  is.  But  doe  we 
as  we  may,  and  meekly  ask  mercy  and  grace  ;  and  all 
that  us  faileth,  we  shall  it  find  in  him.  And  thus 
meaneth  he,  there  he  saith,  '  I  am  the  ground  of  thy 
beseeching.'  And  thus  in  those  blessedful  words,  with 
the  shewing,  I  saw  a  full  overcoming  against  all  our 
wickedness,  and  all  our  doubtful  dreeds.

The  Forty-third  Chapter

PRAYER  oneth  the  soul  to  God,  which  is  ever  like 
to  God  in  kind  and  in  substance,  restored  by  grace  ; 
but  it  is  oft  unlike  in  condition,  by  sin  of  mans 
party.  Then  is  prayer  a  witness  that  the  soul  will 
as  God  will ;  and  comforteth  the  conscience,  and 
ableth  man  to  grace.  And  thus  he  teacheth  us  to 
pray ;  and  mightily  to  trust  that  we  shall  have  it ; 
for  he  beholdeth  us  in  love,  and  will  make  us  partner 
of  his  good  will  and  deed :  and  therefore  he  stirreth 
us  to  pray  that,  that  liketh  him  to  do :  for  which 
104prayer  and  good  will  that  we  have  of  his  gift,  he 
will  reward  us,  and  give  us  endless  meed.  And  this 
was  shewed  in  this  word,  'And  thou  beseekest  it.'  In 
this  word  God  shewed  so  great  pleasance,  and  so 
great  liking,  as  he  were  much  beholding  to  us  for 
each  good  deed  that  we  do ;  and  yet  it  is  he  that 
doth  it :  and  for  that  we  beseech  him  mightily,  to 
do  that  thing  that  him  liketh ;  as  if  he  said,  '  What 
might  thou  please  mee  more  than  to  beseech  mightily, 
wisely,  and  wilfully,  to  do  that  thing  that  I  will  have 
done.'  And  thus  the  soul  by  prayer  is  accorded  with 
God.  But  when  our  courteous  Lord  of  his  special 
grace  sheweth  himself  to  our  soul,  we  have  that  we 
desire  :  and  then  we  see  not  for  the  time  what  we 
should  more  pray ;  but  all  our  intent,  with  all  our 
mights,  is  set  whole  into  the  beholding  of  him.  And 
this  is  an  high  unperceiveable  prayer,  as  to  my  sight ; 
for  all  the  cause  wherefore  we  prayer  [pray],  is  to  be 
oned  in  to  the  sight  and  beholding  of  him,  to  whom 
we  pray  marvellously,  enjoying  with  reverent  dreed, 
and  so  great  sweetness,  and  delight  in  him,  that 
we  can  pray  right  naught,  but  as  he  stirreth  us  for 
the  time.  And  well  I  wot,  the  more  the  soul  seeth 
of  God,  the  more  she  desireth  him  by  grace ;  but 
when  we  see  him  not  so,  then  feel  we  need  and 
cause  to  pray,  for  failing,  and  for  unableness  of  our 
self,  to  Jesu.  For  when  a  soul  is  tempted,  troubled, 
and  left  to  herself  by  her  unrest,  then  it  is  time  to 
105

rne

pray,  to  make  her  self  supple  and  buxom  to  God  ;  but 
she  by  no  manner  of  prayer  maketh  God  supple  to 
her,  for  he  is  ever  one  like  in  love.rne

pray,  to  make  her  self  supple  and  buxom  to  God  ;  but 
she  by  no  manner  of  prayer  maketh  God  supple  to 
her,  for  he  is  ever  one  like  in  love.

And  thus  I  saw,  that  what  time  we  see  need 
wherefore  we  pray ;  then  our  Lord  God  followeth 
us,  helping  our  desire  :  and  when  we  of  his  special 
grace  plainly  behold  him,  seeing  none  of  other 
needs,  then  we  follow  him.  And  he  draweth  us 
to  him  by  love ;  for  I  saw,  and  felt  that  his  marvel 
lous,  and  his  fulsome  goodness  fulfilleth  all  our 
mights.  And  therewith  I  saw  that  his  continual 
working  in  all  manner  of  things,  is  done  so  godly, 
so  wisely,  and  so  mightily,  that  it  over-passeth  all 
our  imagining,  and  all  that  we  can  mean  or  think. 
And  then  we  can  do  no  more  but  behold  him,  and 
enjoy  with  a  high  mighty  desire  to  be  all  oned  into 
him,  and  entend  to  his  motion,  and  enjoy  in  his 
loving,  and  delight  in  his  goodness.  And  thus 
shall  we,  with  his  sweet  grace,  in  our  own  meek 
continual  prayer,  come  into  him ;  now  in  this  life, 
by  many  privy  touchings  of  sweet  ghostly  sights 
and  feelings,  measured  to  us  as  our  simplehead  may 
bare  it — and  this  is  wrought,  and  shall  be  by  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  long  till  we  shall  die 
in  longing  for  love — and  then,  shall  we  all  come  into 
our  Lord,  our  self  clearly  knowing,  and  God  ful- 
somely  having  :  and  we  endlesly  be  all  hid  in  God, 
verily  seeing,  and  fulsomely  feeling;  him  ghostly  | 
106

rarerare

hearing ;  and  him  delectably  smelling ;  [tasting,  i.e. 
I,  seeing ;  2,  feeling  ;  3,  hearing  ;  4,  tasting ;  5,  smell 
ing]  and  him  sweetly  smelling :  and  there  shall  we 
see  God  face  to  face  homely,  and  fulsomely.  The 
creature  which  is  made,  shall  see,  and  endlesly 
behold  God  which  is  the  Maker;  for  thus  may  no 
man  see  God  and  live  after ;  that  is  to  say,  in  this 
deadly  life  :  but  when  he  of  his  special  grace  will 
shew  him  here,  he  strengtheneth  the  creature  above 
himself,  and  he  measureth  the  shewing  after  his  own 
will,  and  it  is  profitable  for  the  time.

The  Forty-fourth  Chapter

GOD  shewed  in  all  the  Revelations  ofttimes  that 
man  worketh  evermore  his  will  and  his  worship, 
duringly,  without  stinting :  and  what  this  work 
ing  is,  was  shewed  in  the  first,  and  that  in  a  mar 
vellous  ground :  for  it  was  shewed  in  the  working 
of  the  blissedful  soul  of  our  Lady  Saint  Mary  by 
truth  and  wisdom.  And  how,  I  hope  by  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  I  shall  say  as  I  saw.  Truth 
seeth  God,  and  wisdom  beholdeth  God ;  and  of 
these  two,  cometh  the  third ;  and  that  is,  a  mar 
vellous  delight  in  God  which  is  love  :  where  truth 
and  wisdom  is  verily,  there  is  love  verily  coming  of 
them  both,  and  all  of  Gods  making :  for  God  is 
endless  soveraign  truth,  endless  soveraign  wisdom, 
107

meme

endless  soveraign  love  unmade.     And  a  mans  soulll 
is  a  creature  in  God,  which  hath  the  same  properties! 
made  ;  and  evermore  it  doth  that  it  was  made  for  ;ji fll 
[it]   seeth   God,   it    beholdeth   God,   and   it   lovethi'* 
God:  wherefore  God  enjoyeth  in  the  creature,  and 
the  creature  in  God,  endlesly  marvelling.     In  which 
marvelling  he  seeth  his  God,  his  Lord,  his  Maker 
so  high,  so  great,  and  so  good,  in  regard  of  him  that 
is  made,  that  unneth  the  creature  seemeth  ought  to 
the  [it]  self;  but  the  brightness  and  clearness  of  truth 
and  wisdom  maketh  him  to  see,  and  to  know,  that  he 
is  made  for  love  ;  in  which  love  God  endlesly  keepeth 
him.

The  Forty-fifth  Chapter

GOD  deemeth  us  upon  our  kindly  substance,  which 
is  ever  kept  one  in  him,  whole  and  safe  without 
end.  And  this  doome  is  of  his  rightful-head.  And 
man  deemeth  upon  our  changeable  sensuality,  which 
seemeth  now  one,  now  another,  after  that  it  taketh 
of  the  parties,  and  sheweth  outward.  And  this 
doome  is  meddled  ;  for  sometimes  it  is  good  and 
easie ;  and  sometime  it  is  hard  and  grievous :  and 
in  as  much  as  it  is  good  and  easie,  it  longeth  to  the 
rightfulness ;  and  in  as  much  as  it  is  hard  and 
grievous,  our  good  Lord  Jesu  reform eth  it  by  mercy 
and  grace,  through  vertue  of  his  blessed  passion, 
and  so  bringeth  [it]  to  the  rightfulness.  And  though 
108

rne  FOI^TT- FIFTHrne  FOI^TT- FIFTH

these  two  be  thus  accorded  and  oned,  yet  it  shall  be 
known  both  [  =  both  shall  be  known]  in  heaven,,  with 
out  end.  The  first  doome  is  of  Gods  rightfulness, 
and  that  is  of  his  own  high  endless  love  ;  and  that  is 
that  fair  sweet  doome  that  was  shewed  in  all  the  fair 
revelation,,  in  which  I  saw  him  assigne  to  us  no  man 
ner  of  blame.  And  though  these  were  sweet  and 
delectable,  yet  only  in  the  beholding  of  this,  I  could 
not  be  full  eased  :  and  that  was  for  the  doome  of 
Holy  Church,  which  I  had  before  understanded, 
and  was  continually  in  my  sight.  And  therefore  by 
this  doome,  me  thought  that  me  behooveth  needs 
to  know  my  self  a  sinner :  and  by  the  same  doome  I 
understood,  that  sinners  be  sometimes  worthy  blame 
and  wrath ;  and  these  two  could  I  not  see  in  God  : 
and  therefore  my  advise  and  desire  was  more  than  I 
can  or  may  tell.  For  the  higher  doome  God  sheweth 
himself  in  the  same  time;  and  therefore  me  be 
hooved  needs  to  take  it :  and  the  lower  doome  was 
learned  me  before  time  in  Holy  Church  ;  and  there 
fore  I  might  not  by  no  way  leave  the  lower  doome. 
Then  was  this  my  desire,  that  I  might  see  in  God, 
in  what  manner  that  the  doome  of  Holy  Church 
here  in  earth  is  true  in  his  sight,  and  how  it  longeth 
to  me  verily  to  know  it,  whereby  they  might  both 
be  saved,  so  as  it  were  worshipful  to  God,  and  right 
way  to  me.  And  to  all  this,  I  ne  had  no  other 
answer,  but  a  marvellous  example  of  a  lord,  and  of  a 
109

rnerne

servant,  as  I  shall  say  after,  and  that  full  mistely 
shewed  :  and  yet  I  stood  in  desire,  and  will,  into 
my  lives  end,  that  I  might  by  grace  know  these  two 
dooms,  as  it  longeth  to  me.  For  all  heavenly,  things, 
and  all  earthly  things  that  long  to  heaven,  be  com 
prehended  in  these  two  dooms.  And  the  more 
knowing  and  understanding,  by  the  gracious  lead 
ing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  we  have  of  these 
two  dooms;  the  more  we  shall  see  and  know  our 
failings ;  and  ever  the  more  that  we  see  them, 
the  more  kindly  by  grace,  we  shall  long  to  be 
fulfilled  of  endless  joy  and  bliss,  for  we  be  made 
thereto.

The  Forty-sixth  Chapter

AND  our  kindly  substance  is  now  blessedfully  in  God, 
and  hath  been  sithens  it  was  made,  and  shall  be 
without  end.  But  our  passing  living  that  we  have 
here  in  our  sensuality,  knoweth  not  what  our  self  is, 
but  in  our  faith.  And  when  we  know,  and  see  verily, 
and  clearly  what  our  self  is,  then  shall  we  verily 
and  clearly  see,  and  know  our  Lord  God  in  fulhead 
of  joy.  And  therefore  it  behoveth  needs  to  be, 
that  the  nearer  we  be  our  bliss,  the  more  we  shall 
long;  and  that  both  by  kind  and  by  grace.  We 
may  have  knowing  of  our  self  in  this  life,  by  con- 
110

- SIXTH- SIXTH

tinual  help  and  vertue  of  our  high  kind ;  in  which 
knowing,  we  may  encrease  and  wax  by  furthering 
and  speeding  of  mercy  and  grace.  But  we  may 
never  full  know  our  self  into  [until]  the  last  point : 
in  which  point,  this  passing  life,  and  all  manner 
of  woe  and  paine  shall  have  an  end.  And  there 
fore  it  longeth  properly  to  us,  both  by  grace  and 
by  kind,  to  long  and  desire,  with  all  our  mights 
to  know  our  self.  In  which  full  knowing,  we 
shall  verily  and  clearly  know  our  God  in  fulhead 
of  endless  joy.  And  yet  in  all  this  time,  fro  the 
beginning  to  the  end,  I  had  two  manner  of  be- 
holdings :  the  one  was  endless  continuant  love ; 
with  sureness  of  keeping,  and  blissful  salvation, 
for  of  this  was  all  the  shewing.  That  other,  was 
the  common  teaching  of  Holy  Church,  of  which 
I  was  before  enformed  and  grounded,  and  wilfully 
having  in  use  and  understanding.  And  the  be 
holding  of  this  came  [went]  not  from  me  ;  for  by  the 
shewing,  I  was  not  stirred,  nor  led  therefro  in  no 
manner  point.  But  I  had  therein  teaching  to  love 
it,  and  like  it;  whereby  I  might,  \vith  the  help 
of  our  Lord  and  his  grace,  increase  and  rise  to 
more  heavenly  knowing,  and  higher  loving.  And 
thus  in  all  this  beholding,  methought  it  behoved 
needs  to  see  and  to  know  that  we  be  sinners, 
and  do  many  evils  that  we  ought  to  leave,  and 
leave  many  good  deeds  undone  that  we  ought  to 
111

meme

do :  wherefore  we  deserve  pain,  blame,  and  wrath. 
And  notwithstanding  all  this,  I  saw  verily  that  our 
Lord  was  never  wrath,  ne  never  shall :  for  he  is  God, 
he  is  good,  he  is  truth,  he  is  love,  and  he  is  peace  ; 
and  his  might,  his  wisdom,  his  charity,  and  his  unity 
[i.e.  oneness  with  the  soul,  see  below]  suffereth  him 
not  to  be  wrath  :  for  I  saw  truly  that  it  is  against  the 
property  of  his  might  to  be  wrath  ;  and  against  the 
property  of  his  wisdom,  and  against  the  property 
of  his  goodness.  God  is  that  goodness  that  may 
not  be  wrath,  for  God  is  not  but  goodness.  Our 
soul  is  oned  to  him,  unchangeable  goodness  :  and 
between  God  and  our  soul  is  neither  wrath  nor 
forgiveness  in  his  sight ;  for  our  soul  is  so  ful- 
somely  oned  to  God  of  his  own  goodness,  that 
between  God  and  our  soul  may  be  right  naught. 
And  to  this  understanding  was  the  soul  led  by 
love,  and  drawn  by  might  in  every  shewing.  That 
it  is  thus,  our  good  Lord  shewed ;  and  how  it  is 
thus  verily  of  his  great  goodness ;  and  that  he 
will  we  desire  to  wit ;  that  is  to  say,  as  it 
longeth  to  his  creatures  to  wit  it.  For  all  thing 
that  the  simple  soul  understood,  God  will  that  it 
be  shewed  and  known.  For  those  things  that  he 
will  have  privy,  mightily  and  wisely  himself  hideth 
them  for  love ;  for  I  saw  in  the  same  shewing,  that 
much  privity  is  hid,  which  may  never  be  known 
into  the  time  that  God  of  his  goodness  hath  made 
112

s  worthy  to  see  it.  And  therewith  I  am  well  apaid, 
riding  our  Lords  will  in  this  high  marvel.  And 
ow  I  yield  me  to  our  mother  Holy  Church,  as 
simple  child  oweth.

The  Forty-seventh  ChapterThe  Forty-seventh  Chapter

"wo  points  belonging  to  our  soul  are  debt  [due].  One 
that  we  reverently  marvel.  That  other  is,  that 
e  meekly  suffer,  every  enjoying  in  God  ;  for  he  will 
mt  we  know  that  we  shall  in  short  time  see 
early  in  himself  all  that  we  desire.  And  notwith- 
tanding  all  this,  I  beheld  and  marvelled  greatly,

what  is  the  mercy  and  forgiveness  of  God.  For  by 
ic  teaching  that  I  had  before,  I  understood  that 
le  mercy  of  God  shall  be  forgiveness  of  his  wrath, 
fter  the  time  that  we  have  sinned  :  for  methought 
lat  to  a  soul  whose  meaning  and  desire  is  to  love, 
ie  wrath  of  God  were  harder  than  any  other  pain.

And  therefore  I  took  [saw],  that  the  forgiveness 
f  his  wrath  should  be  one  of  the  principal  points 
f  his  mercy.  But  for  ought  that  I  might  behold 
nd  desire,  I  could  not  see  this  point  in  all  the 
hewing.  But  how  I  saw  and  understood  of  the

working  of  mercy   I  shall   say   some   deal,  as  God

•will  give  me  grace.  I  understood  thus ;  man  is 
harigeable  in  this  life,  and  by  simpleness  and  un- 
unning  falleth  into  sin  :  he  is  unmighty,  and  un- 
113  H

rue•will  give  me  grace.  I  understood  thus ;  man  is 
harigeable  in  this  life,  and  by  simpleness  and  un- 
unning  falleth  into  sin  :  he  is  unmighty,  and  un- 
113  H

rue

wise  of  himself;  and  also  his  will  is  over-laid.  In 
this  time  he  is  in  tempest,  and  in  sorrow,  and  in 
woe  :  and  the  cause  is  blindness,  for  he  seeth  not 
God  ;  for  if  he  saw  God  continually,  he  should  have 
no  mischievous  feeling,  ne  no  manner  stirring,  nor 
sorrowing  that  serveth  to  sin.  Thus  saw  I,  and  felt 
in  the  same  time ;  and  methought  that  the  sight 
and  the  feeling  was  high,  and  plentuous,  and 
gracious,  in  regard  that  our  common  feeling  is  in 
this  life ;  but  yet  methought  it  was  but  low  and 
small,  in  regard  of  the  great  desire  that  the  soul 
hath  to  see  God :  for  I  felt  in  me  Jive  manner  of 
workings,  which  be  these ;  enjoying,  mourning, 
desire,  dreed,  and  true  hope.  Enjoying,  for  God 
gave  me  understanding,  and  knowing  that  it  was 
himself  that  I  saw  ;  mourning,  and  that  was  for  fail 
ing  ;  desire,  that  was  that  I  might  see  him  for  ever 
more  and  more ;  understanding  and  knowing,  that 
we  shall  never  have  full  rest,  till  we  see  him  clearly 
and  verily  in  heaven.  Dreed  was,  for  it  seemed  to 
me  in  all  that  time,  that  sight  should  fail,  and  I  to 
be  left  to  myself.  True  hope,  was  in  the  endless 
love  that  I  saw,  that  I  should  be  kept  by  his  mercy, 
and  brought  to  the  bliss.  And  the  joying  in  his 
sight,  with  this  true  hope  of  his  merciful  keeping^ 
made  me  to  have  feeling  and  comfort :  so  that 
mourning  and  dreed  were  not  greatly  painful.  And 
yet  in  all  this,  I  beheld  in  the  shewing  of  God,  that 
114

rnerne

this  manner  sight  of  him  may  not  be  continuant  in 
this  life ;  and  that,  for  his  own  worship,  and  for 
increase  of  our  endless  joy.  And  therefore  we  fail 
oftentimes  of  the  sight  of  him :  and  anon  we  fall 
into  our  self,  and  then  find  we  feeling  of  right 
naught  but  the  contrarious  that  is  in  our  self.  And 
that,  of  the  old  root  of  our  first  sin,  with  all  that 
followeth  of  our  own  continuance  :  and  in  this  we 
be  travelled  and  tempted,  with  feeling  of  sin  and  of 
pain  in  many  diverse  manner,  ghostly  and  bodily,  as 
it  is  known  to  us  in  this  life.

The  Forty-eighth  Chapter

BUT  our  good  Lord  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  end 
less  life  dwelling  in  our  soul,  full  truly  keepeth  us, 
and  worketh  therein  a  peace,  and  bringeth  it  to 
ease  by  grace,  and  maketh  it  buxom,  and  accordeth 
it  to  God.  And  this  is  the  mercy  and  the  way  that 
our  good  Lord  continually  leadeth  us  in,  as  long  as 
we  be  in  this  life,  which  is  changeable  :  for  I  saw 
no  wrath  but  on  mans  party,  and  that  forgiveth  he 
in  us :  for  wrath  is  not  else  but  a  frowardness,  and 
a  contrariousness  to  peace  and  love.  And  either 
it  cometh  of  failing  of  might,  or  of  failing  of 
wisdom,  or  of  failing  of  goodness :  which  failing 
is  not  of  God,  but  it  is  in  our  party ;  for  we  by  sin 
and  wretchedness  have  in  us  a  wrath,  and  a  con- 
115

ftieftie

tinuant  contrariousness  to  peace  and  to  love.     And 
that  shewed  he  full  oft  in  his  lovely  chear  of  ruth 
and  pity  :  for  the  ground  of  mercy  is  in  love,  and 
the  working  of  mercy  is  our  keeping  in  love  :  and 
this  was  shewed  in  such  a  manner,  that  I  could  not 
perceive  of  the  property  of  mercy  otherwise,  but  as 
it  were  all  love  in  love ;   that  is   to  say,  as  to  my 
sight,  mercy  is  a  sweet  gracious  working  in  love, 
tnedled  with  plenteous  pitty  ;   for  mercy   worketh, 
us  keeping;   and  mercy  worketh  turning  to  us  all 
thing  to  good  :  mercy  for  love  sufferet.h  us  to  fail 
by  measure,  and  in  as  much  as  we  fail,  in  so  much 
we  fall ;  and  in  as  much  as  we  fall,  in  so  much  we 
die :  for  us  behooveth  needs  to  die,  in  as  much  as 
we  fail  sight  and  feeling  of  God,  that  is  our  life. 
Our  failing  is  dreadful,  our  falling  is  shameful ;  and 
our  dying  is  sorrowful.     But   yet    in   all    this    the 
sweet  eye   of  pity  and  love  departeth  never  from 
us,   ne   the   working  of  mercy   ceaseth   not :    for   I 
beheld  the   property   of  mercy,   and   I   beheld   the 
property  of  grace,  which  have  two  manner  of  work 
ing  in  one  love  :  mercy  is  a  pitiful  property,  which 
longeth  to  mother-hood  in  tender  love  :   and  grace 
is   a  worshipful   property    which    longeth    to    royal 
lordship  in  the  same  love.     Mercy  worketh,  keep 
ing,  suffering,  quickening,  and   healing,   and  all   is 
of  tenderness    of  love :    and    grace    worketh    with 
mercy,    raising,    rewarding,    endlesly    over-passing 
116

meme

[all]  that  our  loving,  and  our  travel  deserveth,  spread 
ing  abroad,  and  shewing  the  high  plenteousness, 
largeness  of  Gods  royal  lordship  in  his  marvellous 
courtesie.  And  this  is  of  the  abundance  of  love  ; 
for  grace  worketh  our  dreadful  failing  into  plenteous 
and  endless  solace :  and  grace  worketh  our  shame 
ful  falling  into  high  worshipful  rising ;  and  grace 
worketh  our  sorrowful  dying  into  holy  blissful  life  : 
for  I  saw  full  truly  that  ever  as  our  contrarious- 
ness  worketh  to  us  here  in  earth,  pain,  shame, 
and  sorrow,  right  so  on  the  contrariwise,  grace 
worketh  to  us  in  heaven,  solace,  worship,  and  bliss  ; 
and  over-passing  so  far  forth,  that  when  we  come 
up  and  receive  that  sweet  reward  which  grace  hath 
wrought  to  us  there,  we  shall  thank  and  bless  our 
Lord  endlesly,  enjoying  that  ever  we  suffered  woe  ; 
and  that  shall  be  for  a  property  of  blessed  love  that 
we  shall  know  in  God,  which  we  might  never  have 
known  without  woe  going  before.  And  when  I 
saw  all  this,  me  behooved  needs  to  grant  that  the 
mercy  of  God  and  the  forgiveness  slacketh  and 
wasteth  our  wrath.

The  Forty-ninth  Chapter

FOR  it  was  an  high  marvel  to  the  soul,  which  was

continuantly  shewed  in  all,  and  with  great  diligence,

beholding  that  our  Lord  God,  aneynst  himself,  may

117

rneFOR  it  was  an  high  marvel  to  the  soul,  which  was

continuantly  shewed  in  all,  and  with  great  diligence,

beholding  that  our  Lord  God,  aneynst  himself,  may

117

rne

not  forgive,  for  he  may  not  be  wrath.  It  were  im 
possible.  For  this  was  shewed,  that  our  life  is  all 
grounded  and  rooted  in  love,  and  without  love  we 
may  not  live.  And  therefore  to  the  soul,  that  of 
his  special  grace,  seeth  so  far  forth  of  the  high 
marvellous  goodness  of  God,  that  we  be  endlesly 
oned  to  him  in  love  :  it  is  the  most  unpossible  that 
may  be,  that  God  should  be  wrath ;  for  wrath  and 
friendship  be  two  contraries ;  for  he  that  wasteth 
and  destroyeth  our  wrath,  and  maketh  us  meek  and 
mild ;  it  behooveth  us  needs  to  believe,  that  he  be 
ever  in  one  love,  meek,  and  mild  :  which  is  contrary 
to  wrath.  For  I  saw  full  truly,  that  where  our  Lord 
appeareth,  peace  is  taken,  and  wrath  hath  no  steede : 
for  I  saw  no  manner  of  wrath  in  God,  neither  for 
short  time,  nor  for  long ;  for  truly  as  so  my  sight, 
if  God  might  be  wrath  a  while,  we  should  neither 
have  life,  ne  steede,  ne  being ;  for  as  verily  as  we 
have  our  being  of  the  endless  might  of  God,  and 
of  the  endless  wisdom,  and  of  the  endless  goodness  : 
also  verily  we  have  our  keeping  in  the  endless 
might  of  God,  in  the  endless  wisdom,  and  in  the 
endless  goodness.  For  though  we  feel  in  us  wrath, 
debate,  and  strife,  yet  we  be  all  mercifully  beclosed 
in  the  mildhead  of  God,  and  in  his  meekhead,  in  his 
benignity,  and  in  his  buxomness.  For  I  saw  full 
truly,  that  all  our  endless  friendship,  our  steed,  our 
life,  and  our  being  is  in  God  ;  for  that  same  endless 
118

ruerue

goodness  that  keepeth  us  when  we  sin,  that  we 
perish  not,  that  same  endless  goodness  continually 
treateth  in  us  a  peace  against  our  wrath,  and  our 
contrarious  falling,  and  maketh  us  to  see  our  need, 
with  a  true  dread  mightily  to  seek  unto  God  to 
have  forgiveness,  with  a  gracious  desire  of  our  salva 
tion  ;  for  we  may  not  be  blissfully  saved,  till  we  be 
verily  in  peace  and  in  love,  for  that  is  our  salvation. 
And  though  we  be  wrath,  and  the  contrariousness 
that  is  in  us  be  now  in  tribulation,  disease,  and  woe, 
as  falling  into  our  blindness,  and  our  pronity ;  yet 
be  we  sure  and  safe  by  the  merciful  keeping  of  God 
that  we  perish  not ;  but  we  be  not  blissfully  safe, 
in  having  of  our  endless  joy,  till  we  be  all  in  peace 
and  in  love ;  that  is  to  say,  full  pleased  with  God, 
and  with  all  his  works,  and  with  all  his  dooms ;  and 
loving  and  pleasable  with  our  selves,  and  with  our 
even  Christen,  and  with  all  that  God  loveth,  as  love 
liketh.  And  this  doth  Gods  goodness  in  us.  Thus 
saw  I  that  God  is  our  very  peace ;  and  he  is  our 
sure  keeper,  when  we  be  our  self  at  unpeace ;  and 
he  continually  worketh  to  bring  us  into  endless 
peace :  and  thus  when  by  the  working  of  mercy 
and  grace  we  be  made  meek  and  mild,  than  we 
be  full  safe.  Suddenly  is  the  soul  oned  to  God, 
when  she  is  truly  peaced  in  herself;  for  in  him  is 
found  no  Avrath.  And  thus  I  saw  when  we  be  all 
in  peace  and  in  love,  we  find  no  contrariousness  in 
119

rnerne

no  manner  of  letting.  And  that  contrariousness 
which  is  now  in  us,  our  Lord  God  of  his  goodness 
maketh  it  to  us  full  profitable :  for  contrariousness 
is  cause  of  all  our  tribulation,  and  all  our  woe :  and 
our  Lord  Jesu  taketh  them,  and  sendeth  them  up 
to  heaven;  and  then  they  are  made  more  sweet 
and  delectable  than  heart  may  think,  or  tongue 
can  tell.  And  when  we  come  thither,  we  shall 
find  them  ready  all  turned  into  very  fairness  and 
endless  worship.  Thus  is  God  our  stedfast  ground, 
and  shall  be  our  full  bliss,  and  make  us  unchange 
able,  as  he  is  when  we  be  there.

The  Fiftieth  Chapter

AND  in  this  deadly  life  mercy  and  forgiveness  is  our 
way,  that  evermore  leadeth  us  to  grace.  And  by 
the  tempest  and  the  sorrow  that  we  fall  in  on  our 
party,  we  be  often  dead  as  to  mans  doome  in  earth ; 
but  in  the  sight  of  God,  the  soul  that  shall  be  safe 
was  never  dead,  ne  never  shall  be.  But  yet  here  I 
wondred  and  marvelled  with  all  the  diligence  of  my 
soul  meaning  thus ;  '  Good  Lord,  I  see  that  thou 
art  the  very  truth,  and  I  know  truly  that  we  sin 
grievously  all  day,  and  be  much  blameworthy :  and 
I  may  neither  leave  the  knowing  of  this  sooth,  nor 
I  see  not  the  shewing  to  us  no  manner  of  blame. 
120

THE    FIFTIETHTHE    FIFTIETH

How   may   this   be  ?    for    I   know   by   the    common 
teaching  of  Holy  Church,  and  by  mine  own  feeling, 
that  the  blame  of  our  sins  continually  hangeth  upon 
us  fro  the  first  man,  into  the  time  that  we  come  up 
into  heaven/     Then  was  this  my  marvel,  that  I  saw 
our  Lord  God  shewing  to  us  no  more  blame,  than  if 
we   were   as    clean,    and   as    holy   as   angels  be    in 
heaven.     And    between    these    two   contraries,    my 
reason  was  greatly  travelled  by  my  blindness,  and 
could    have    no   rest,    for    dread    that    his    blessed 
presence  should  pass  from  my  sight,  and  I  to  be  left 
in    unknowing  how  he   behold  us    in  our  sin ;    for 
either  me  behooved  to  see  in  God  that  sin  were  all 
done  away,  or  else  me  behooved  to  see  in  God  how 
he  seeth  it ;    whereby  I  might  truly  know  how  it 
longeth  to  mee  to  see  sin,  and  the  manner  of  our 
blame.     My  longing  endured,  him  continually  be 
holding  ;  and  yet  I  could  have  no  patience  for  great 
fear  and  perplexity,  thinking  if  I  take  it  thus,  that 
we  be  no  sinners,  nor  no  blame  worthy,  it  seemeth 
as  I  should  erre,  and  fail  of  knowing  of  this  sooth. 
And  if  it  be  true  that  we   be   sinners,  and  blame 
worthy,   good    Lord,    how  may    it  then    be  that    I 
cannot  see  this  truth  in  thee  ;  which  art  my  God, 
my  Maker,  in  whom  I  desire  to  see  all  truth  ?     For 
three  points  make  me  hardy  to  ask  it.     Thejirst  is, 
for  it  is  so  low  a  thing,  for  if  it  were  an  high,   I 
should    be    adred.      The    second   is,    that   it    is     so 
121

meme

common  ;  for  if  it  were  special  and  privy  also,  I 
should  be  adred.  The  third  is,  that  it  needeth  me 
to  wit,  as  me  thinketh,  if  I  shall  live  here,  for 
knowing  of  good  and  evil,  whereby  I  may  by  reason 
and  by  grace  the  more  depart  them  asunder,  and 
love  goodness,  and  hate  evil,  as  Holy  Church 
teacheth.  I  cried  inwardly  with  all  my  might, 
seeking  unto  God  for  help ;  meaning  thus,  '  Ah 
Lord  Jesu,  King  of  bliss,  how  shall  I  be  eased  ? ' 
Who  shall  tell  me,  and  teach  me  that  me  needeth 
to  wit,  if  I  may  not  at  this  time  see  it  in  thee  ?

The  Fifty-first  Chapter

AND  then  our  courteous  Lord  answered  in  shewing 
full  mistely,  by  a  wonderful  example  of  a  lord  that 
hath  a  servant,  and  gave  me  sight  to  my  under 
standing  of  both  :  which  sight  was  shewed  double  in 
the  lord ;  and  the  sight  was  shewed  double  in  the 
servant.  That  one  party  was  shewed  ghostly  in 
bodily  likeness.  That  other  party  was  shewed  more 
ghostly  without  bodily  likeness.  For  the  jirst,  thus 
I  saw  two  persons  in  bodily  likeness ;  that  is  to  say, 
a  lord  and  a  servant.  And  therewith  God  gave  me 
ghostly  understanding :  the  lord  sitteth  solemnly  in 
rest  and  in  peace ;  the  servant  standeth  before 
his  lord  reverently  ready  to  do  his  lords  will :  the 
122lord  looketh  upon  his  servant  full  lovely,  and  sweetly, 
and  meekly  ;  he  sendeth  him  into  a  certain  place  to 
do  his  will.  The  servant  not  only  he  goeth,  but 
suddenly  he  starteth,  and  runneth  in  great  haste  for 
love  to  do  his  lords  will.  And  anon  he  falleth  in 
a  slade,  and  taketh  full  great  sorrow ;  and  then  he 
groneth,  and  moneth,  and  walloweth,  and  wrieth  ; 
but  he  may  not  rise  nor  help  himself  by  no  manner 
of  way.  And  of  all  this  the  most  mischief  that  I 
saw  him  in,  was  failing  of  comfort ;  for  he  could  not 
turn  his  face  to  look  up  on  his  loving  lord,  which 
was  to  him  full  near,  in  whom  is  full  comfort :  but 
as  a  man  that  was  full  feeble  and  unwise  for  the  time 
he  entended  to  his  feeling  and  enduring  in  woe.  In 
which  woe  he  suffered  seven  great  pains.  The  Jirst 
was  the  sore  brusing  that  he  took  in  his  falling, 
which  was  to  him  much  pain.  The  second  was  the 
heaviness  of  his  body.  The  third  was  feebleness  that 
followed  of  these  two.  The  fourth  was,  that  he  was 
blinded  in  his  reason,  and  stonnyed  in  his  mind,  so 
far  forth,  that  almost  he  had  forgotten  his  own  love. 
The  t/i  fth  was,  that  he  might  not  rise.  The  sixth  was 
pain  most  marvellous  to  me ;  and  that  was  that  he 
lay  alone.  I  looked  all  about  and  beheld,  and  far, 
ne  near,  ne  high,  ne  low  ;  I  saw  to  him  no  help. 
The  seventh  was,  that  the  place  that  he  lay  in,  was 
long,  hard,  and  grievous.  I  marvelled  how  this 
servant  might  thus  meekly  suffer  all  this  woe.  And 
123

I  beheld  with  avisement,  to  wit,  if  I  could  perceive 
in  him  any  default ;  or  if  the  lord  should  assign  him 
any  manner  of  blame.  And  verily  there  was  none 
seen  ;  for  only  his  good  will  and  his  great  desirewas  the  cause  of  his  falling.     And  he  was  as  un-  1}

lothful,  and  as  good  inwardly,  as  he  was  when  he  ;an

stood   before   his  lord,  ready  to  do  his  will.     And  tm

right  thus  continually,  his  loving  lord  full  tenderly  11

beholdeth  him  ;  and  now  with  a  double  chear :  one  va

outward  full  meekly  and  mildly  with  great  rewth  and  &

pity  ;  and  this  was  of  the  first.     Another  inward  more  to

ghostly :  and  this  was  shewed  with  a  leading  of  my  fc

understanding  into  the  lord  in  [the]  restoring,  which  fc

I  saw  him  highly  enjoy  for  the  worshipful  resting  and  to

noble,  that  he  will,  and  shall  bring  his  servant  to,  by  n]

his  plenteous  grace  ;  and  this  was  of  the  other  shewing.  |  %

And  now  was  my  understanding  led  again  into  the  ^

first,  both  keeping  in  mind  :  then  said  this  courteous  l|>

lord  in  his   meaning  :    '  To  my  beloved  servant,  what  \  ?|

harm  and  disease  he  hath  had,  and  taken  in  my  service  for  \  \\

my  love,  yea,  and  for  his  good  will  ?     Is  it  not  reason  \  n

that  I  reward  him,  his  frey  and  his  dreed,  his  hurt  and  j  p

his  maym,  and  all  his  woe  ?  and  not  only  this,  butfalleth  n

it  not  to  me  to  give  him  a  gift,  that  be  better  to  him,  and  j  5

more  worshipful  than  his  own  heal  should  have  been  ;  or  |! 
else  methinketh  I  did  him  no  grace.'     And  in  this,  an

inward   ghostly  shewing  of  the  lords  meaning  de-  j!i 
scended  into  my  soul,  in  which  I  saw,  that  it  behooved 
124

rneinward   ghostly  shewing  of  the  lords  meaning  de-  j!i 
scended  into  my  soul,  in  which  I  saw,  that  it  behooved 
124

rne

needs  to  be,  standing  his  great  goodness  and  his  own 
worship,  that  his  dear  worthy  servant  which  he  loved 
so  much,  should  be  highly  and  worshipfully  rewarded 
without  end,  above  that  he  should  have  been  if  he 
bad  not  fallen  ;  yea,  and  so  far  forth,  that  his  falling 
md  all  his  woe  that  he  hath  taken  thereby,  shall  be 
;urned  into  the  high  over-passing  worship  and  endless 
jliss  :  and  at  this  point,  the  shewing  of  the  example 
anished,  and  our  good  Lord  led  forth  my  under 
standing,  in  sight  and  in  shewing  of  the  revelation 
;o  the  end.  But  notwithstanding  all  this  forth- 
eading,  the  marvelling  of  the  example  went  never 
rom  me  ;  for  methought  it  was  given  me  for  answer 
o  my  desire  :  and  yet  could  I  not  take  therein  full 
mderstanding  to  my  ease  in  that  time ;  for  in  the 
ervant  that  was  shewed  for  Adam,  as  I  shall  say,  I 
aw  many  divers  properties  that  might  by  no  manner 
>e  direct  to  single  Adam.  And  thus  in  that  time  I 
tood  mickle  in  three  knowings ;  for  the  full  under- 
tanding  of  this  marvellous  example  was  not  given 
ne  in  that  time.  In  which  misty  example,  the 
>rivities  of  the  revelation  be  yet  much  hid.  And  not- 
vithstanding  this,  I  saw  and  understood  that  every 
hewing  is  full  of  privities :  and  therefore  me  be- 
looveth  now  to  tell  three  properties,  in  which  I  am 
omedeal  eased.  The  first  is,  the  beginning  of 
caching  that  I  understood  there  in  the  same  time, 
e  second  is,  the  inward  learning  that  I  have  under- 
125stood  therein  sithens.  The  third  is,  all  the  holy 
revelation  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  which  our 
Lord  God  of  his  goodness  bringeth  ofttimes  freely 
to  the  sight  of  my  understanding.  And  these  three 
be  so  oned  as  to  my  understanding,  that  I  cannot, 
nor  may  depart  them.  And  by  these  three  as  one,  I 
have  teaching  whereby  I  owe  to  believe  and  trust 
in  our  Lord  God,  that  of  the  same  goodness  that  he 
shewed  it,  and  for  the  same  end,  right  so  of  the 
same  goodness  and  of  the  same  end  he  shall  de 
clare  it  to  us  when  it  is  his  will ;  for  twenty  years 
after  the  time  of  the  shewing,  save  three  months,  I 
had  teaching  inwardly,  as  I  shall  say.  It  longeth  to 
thee  to  take  heed  to  all  the  properties  and  the  con 
ditions  that  were  shewed  in  the  example,  though 
thee  think  that  it  be  misty  and  indifferent  to  thy 
sight.  I  assented  wilfully  with  great  desire,  seeing 
inwardly  with  avisement  all  the  points  and  the  pro 
perties  that  were  shewed  in  the  same  time,  as  far 
forth  as  my  wit  and  my  understanding  will  serve  ; 
beginning  at  my  beholding  at  the  lord  and  at  the 
servant :  at  the  manner  of  sitting  of  the  lord,  and 
the  place  he  sat  on  ;  and  the  colour  of  his  cloathing ; 
and  the  manner  of  shape ;  and  his  chear  without, 
and  his  nobley,  and  his  goodness  within  :  and  the 
manner  of  standing  of  the  servant;  and  the  place 
where,  and  how :  arid  his  manner  of  cloathing,  the 
colour,  and  the  shape  ;  at  his  outward  behaviour ;. 
126and  at  his  inward  goodness,  and  his  unlothfulness. 
The  lord,  that  sat  solemnly  in  rest  and  in  peace,  I 
understand  that  he  is  God.  The  servant  that  stood 
before  him,  I  understood  that  he  was  shewed  for 
Adam  ;  that  is  to  say,  one  man  was  shewed  that 
time,  and  his  falling,  to  make  thereby  to  be  under 
stood  how  God  beholdeth  all  man  and  his  falling : 
for  in  the  sight  of  God,  all  man  is  one  man,  and  one 
man  is  all  man.  This  man  was  hurt  in  his  might, 
and  made  full  feeble  :  and  he  was  stonnyed  in  his 
understanding ;  for  he  was  turned  from  the  behold 
ing  of  his  lord,  but  his  will  was  kept  in  Gods  sight : 
for  his  will  I  saw  our  Lord  commend  and  approve, 
but  himself  was  letted  and  blinded  of  the  knowing 
of  this  will :  and  this  is  to  him  great  sorrow,  and 
grievous  disease  ;  for  neither  he  seeth  clearly  his 
loving  lord,  which  is  to  him  full  meek  and  mild  ; 
nor  he  seeth  truly  what  himself  is  in  the  sight  of  his 
loving  lord.  And  well  I  wot,  that  when  these  two 
be  wisely  and  truly  seen,  we  shall  get  rest  and  peace 
here  in  party :  and  the  fulsomness  in  the  bliss  in 
heaven  by  his  plentuous  grace  :  and  this  was  a  be 
ginning  of  teaching  which  I  saw  in  the  same  time, 
whereby  I  might  come  to  knowing,  in  what  manner 
he  beholdeth  us  in  our  sin.  And  then  I  saw  that 
only  pain  blameth  and  punisheth.  And  our 
courteous  Lord  comforteth  and  succoureth.  And 
ever  he  is  to  the  soul  in  glad  chear,  longing  and 
127

meme

loving  to  bring  us  to  his  bliss.  The  place  that  the 
Lord  sat  on  was  simple,  on  the  earth  barren  and 
desert,  alone  in  wilderness ;  his  cloathing  was  wide 
and  side,  and  full  seemly,  as  falleth  to  a  lord :  the 
colour  of  the  cloathing  was  blew  as  azure,  most  sad 
and  fair ;  his  chear  was  merciful :  the  colour  of  his 
face  was  fair,  brown,  white,  with  full  seemly  counte 
nance  ;  his  eyen  were  black,  most  fair  and  seemly, 
shewing  full  of  lovely  pity.  And  within  him  an 
heyward  long  and  broad,  all  full  of  endless  heavenli- 
ness :  and  the  lovely  looking  that  he  looked  on  his 
servant  continually,  and  namely,  in  his  falling ; 
methought  it  might  melt  our  hearts  for  love,  and 
burst  them  in  two  for  joy.  This  fair  looking  shewed 
of  a  seemly  medelur,  which  was  marvellous  to  be 
hold.  That  one  was  rewth  and  pity :  that  other  joy 
and  bliss :  The  joy  and  bliss  passeth  as  far  the 
ruth  and  the  pity,  as  heaven  is  above  earth  :  the 
pity  was  earthly,  and  the  bliss  heavenly.  The  rewth 
and  the  pity  of  the  Father  was  of  the  falling  of 
Adam,  which  is  his  most  loved  creature  :  the  joy 
and  the  bliss  was  of  the  falling  of  his  dear  worthy 
Son,  which  is  even  with  the  Father.  The  merciful 
beholding  of  his  lovely  chear,  fulfilled  all  earth,  and 
descended  down  with  Adam  into  hell ;  with  which 
continuant  pity,  Adam  was  kept  fro  endless  death. 
And  this  mercy  and  pity  dwelleth  with  mankind, 
into  the  time  that  we  come  up  into  heaven.  But 
128man  is  blinded  in  this  life,  and  therefore,  we  may 
not  see  our  Father  God  as  he  is.  And  what  time 
that  he  of  his  goodness  will  shew  him  to  man,  he 
sheweth  him  homely  as  may ;  notwithstanding  that 
I  saw  verily,  we  ought  to  know  and  believe,  that 
the  Father  is  not  man.  But  his  sitting  on  the 
earth  barren  and  desert,  is  this  to  mean  :  he  made 
mans  soul  to  be  his  own  city,  and  his  dwelling  place  ; 
which  is  most  pleasing  to  him  of  all  his  wrorks.  And 
what  time  man  was  fallen  into  sorrow  and  pain,  he 
was  not  all  seemly  to  serve  of  that  noble  office. 
And  therefore  our  kind  Father  would  have  dight 
him  none  other  place,  but  to  sit  upon  the  earth  ; 
abiding  mankind,  which  is  medled  with  earth  :  till 
what  time  by  his  grace,  his  dear  worthy  Son  had 
brought  again  his  city  into  the  noble  fairness,  with 
his  hard  travel.  The  blewhead  of  that  cloathing 
betokeneth  his  stedfastness  :  the  brownhead  of  his 
fair  face,  with  the  seemly  blackhead  of  the  eyen, 
was  most  according  to  show  his  holy  soberness.  The 
largeness  of  his  cloathing,  which  was  fair  flaming 
about,  betokeneth  that  he  hath  beclosed  in  him  all 
heavin[lin]ess,  and  all  endless  joy  and  bliss.  And 
this  was  shewed  in  a  touch  ;  where  I  saw  that  my 
understanding  was  led  into  the  Lord,  in  which  I 
saw  him  highly  enjoy,  for  the  worshipful  restoring, 
that  he  will  and  shall  bring  his  servant  to  by  his 
plentious  grace.  And  yet  I  marvelled,  behold- 
129  iing  the  lord  and  the  servant  before  said :  I  saw 
the  lord  sit  solemnly,  and  the  servant  standing 
reverently  before  his  lord :  in  which  servant  is 
double  understanding ;  one  without,  an  other  within ; 
outward  he  was  clad  simple,  as  a  labourer  which 
was  disposed  to  travel,  and  he  stood  full  near 
the  lord,  not  even  fore  anenst  him ;  but  in  party 
aside,  and  that  on  the  left  side.  His  cloathing  was  a 
white  kirtle,  single,  old,  and  all  defaulted,  dyed  with 
sweat  of  his  body  ;  streit  sitting  to  him,  and  short  as 
it  were  an  handful  beneath  the  knee  ;  bare,  seeming 
as  it  should  soon  be  worn  up,  ready  to  be  ragged 
and  rent.  And  in  this  I  marvelled  greatly,  think 
ing,  this  is  now  an  unseemly  cloathing  for  the  servant 
that  is  so  highly  loved,  to  stand  in  before  so  worship 
ful  a  lord.  And  inward  in  him  was  shewed  a  ground 
of  love  ;  which  love,  he  had  to  the  lord,  that  was 
even  like  to  the  love  that  the  lord  had  to  him.  The 
wisdom  of  the  servant  saw  inwardly,  that  there  was 
one  thing  to  do,  which  should  be  worship  to  the  lord. 
And  the  servant  for  love,  having  no  regard  to  him 
self,  nor  to  nothing  that  might  fall  of  [befall]  him, 
hastily  did  start  and  run  at  the  sending  of  his  lord, 
to  do  that  thing  which  was  his  will  and  his  worship  ; 
for  it  seemed  by  his  outward  cloathing,  as  if  he  had 
been  a  continuant  labourer,  and  an  hard  traveller  of 
long  time.  And  by  the  inward  sight  that  I  had, 
both  in  the  lord  and  in  the  servant,  it  seemed  that 
ISO

me  FiF<rr-Fii(srme  FiF<rr-Fii(sr

he  was  anaved ;  that  is  to  say,  new  beginning  for  to 
travel ;  which  servant  was  never  sent  out  before. 
There  was  a  treasure  in  the  earth  which  the  lord 
loved ;  I  marvelled  and  thought  what  it  might  be  : 
and  I  was  answered  in  my  understanding,  it  is  a 
meat  which  is  lovesome  and  pleasing  unto  the  lord  : 
for  I  saw  the  lord  sit  as  a  man,  and  I  saw  neither 
meat  nor  drink  wherewith  to  serve  him  ;  this  was 
one  marvel.  Another  marvel  was,  that  this  solemn 
lord  had  no  servant  but  one,  and  him  he  sent  out : 
I  beheld,  thinking  what  labour  it  may  be  that  the 
servant  should  do ;  and  then  I  understood  that  he 
should  do  the  greatest  labour,  and  the  hardest  travel ; 
that  is,  he  should  be  a  gardner,  delving  and  diking, 
and  sweating,  and  turning  the  earth  up  and  down, 
and  seek  the  deepness,  and  water  the  plants  in  time  : 
and  in  this  he  should  continue  his  travel,  and  make 
sweatfloods  to  run,  and  noble  plentuousness  fruit  to 
spring,  which  he  should  bring  before  the  lord,  and 
serve  him  therewith  to  his  liking ;  and  he  should 
never  turn  again,  till  he  had  flight  this  meat  all 
ready,  as  he  knew  that  it  liked  to  the  lord  :  and  then 
he  should  take  this  meat,  with  the  drink,  and  bear  it 
full  wor[ship]fully  before  the  lord.  And  all  this  time 
the  lord  should  sit  right  on  the  same  place,  abiding 
the  servant  whom  he  sent  out.  And  yet  I  marvelled 
fro  whence  the  servant  came :  for  I  saw  in  the  lord, 
that  he  hath  within  himself  endless  life,  and  all 
131

rnerne

manner  of  goodness,  save  the  treasure  that  was  in  the 
earth :  and  that  was  grounded  within  the  lord  in 
marvellous  deepness  of  endless  love.  But  it  was  not 
all  to  his  worship,  till  his  servant  hath  thus  nobly 
dight  it,  and  brought  it  before  him  in  himself  present. 
And  without  the  lord  was  right  nought  but  wilder 
ness.  And  I  understood  not  all  what  this  example 
meant ;  and  therefore  I  marvelled  from  whence 
the  servant  came  :  in  the  servant  is  comprehended 
the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity  ;  and  in  the  servant 
is  comprehended  Adam  ;  that  is  to  say,  all  men.  And 
therefore  when  I  say  the  Son,  it  meaneth,  the  God 
head,  which  is  even  with  the  Father.  And  when  I 
say  the  servant,  it  meaneth  Christs  manhood,  which 
is  rightful  Adam.  By  the  nearhood  of  the  servant, 
is  understood  the  Son  ;  and  by  the  standing  on  the 
left  side  is  understood  Adam.  The  lord  is  God  the 
Father :  the  servant  is  the  Son,  Jesu  Christ :  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  the  even  love  that  is  in  them  both. 
When  Adam  fell,  Gods  Son  fell  for  the  right  oning 
which  was  made  in  heaven ;  Gods  Son  might  not  be 
separate  from  Adam,  for  by  Adam  I  understand  all 
man  :  Adam  fell  fro  life  to  death  into  the  slade  of 
this  wretched  world ;  and  after  that  into  hell.  Gods 
Son  fell  with  Adam  into  the  slade  of  the  maidens 
womb  ;  which  was  the  fairest  daughter  of  Adam  ; 
and  that  was  for  to  excuse  Adam  from  blame  in 
heaven  and  in  earth.  And  mightily  he  fetched  him 
132

rne  FiFrr-Fi<i(srrne  FiFrr-Fi<i(sr

out  of  hell.  By  the  wisdom  and  the  goodness  that 
was  in  the  servant,  is  understood  Gods  Son ;  by  the 
poor  cloathing  as  a  labourer  standing  near  the  left 
side,  is  understood  the  manhood  of  Adam,  with  all 
the  mischief  and  feebleness  that  followeth  :  for  in 
all  this  our  good  Lord  shewed  his  own  Son  and 
Adam  but  one  man.  The  vertue  and  the  goodness 
that  we  have,  is  of  Jesu  Christ :  the  feebleness  and 
blindness  that  we  have,  is  of  Adam ;  which  two  were 
shewed  in  the  servant :  and  thus  hath  our  good  Lord 
Jesu  taken  upon  him  all  our  blame.  And  therefore 
our  Father  may  nor  will  no  more  blame  assigne  to 
us,  than  to  his  own  dear  worthy  Son  Jesu  Christ. 
Thus  was  he  the  servant  before  his  coming  into  the 
earth  ;  standing  ready  before  the  Father  in  purpose, 
till  what  time  he  would  send  him  to  do  the  worship 
ful  deed  by  which  mankind  was  brought  again  into 
heaven ;  that  is  to  say,  notwithstanding  that  he  is 
God  even  with  the  Father,  as  anenst  the  Godhead, 
but  [yet]  in  his  fore-seeing  purpose  that  he  would 
be  man,  to  save  man  in  fulfilling  of  the  will  of  his 
Father,  so  he  stood  before  his  Father  as  a  servant, 
wilfully  taking  upon  him  all  our  charge.  And  then 
he  start  full  readily  at  the  Father's  will ;  and  anon 
he  fell  full  low  in  the  maidens  womb,  having  no 
regard  to  himself,  ne  to  his  hard  pains.  The  white 
kirtle  is  the  flesh  :  the  single-head  is,  that  there 
was  right  nought  between  the  God-head  and  the 
133Man-hood :  the  straitness  is  poverty ;  the  old  is  of 
Adams  wearing ;  the  defaulting  is  the  sweat  of 
Adams  travel ;  the  shortness  sheweth  the  servant- 
labourer.  And  thus  I  saw  the  Son  stand,  saying  in 
his  meaning :  '  Loe  my  dear  Father,  I  stand  before 
thee  in  Adams  kirtle,  all  ready  to  start  and  to  run ;  I 
would  be  in  the  earth  to  thy  worship  when  it  is  thy 
will  to  send  me,  how  long  shall  I  desire  it  ? '  Full 
truly  wist  the  Son  when  it  was  the  Fathers  will ; 
and  how  long  he  should  desire ;  that  is  to  say,  as 
anenst  the  God-head,  for  he  is  the  wisdom  of  the 
Father.  Wherefore  this  meaning  was  shewed  in 
understanding  of  the  manhood  of  Christ :  for  all 
mankind  that  shall  be  saved,  by  the  sweet  incarna 
tion  and  passion  of  Christ,  all  is  the  manhood  of 
Christ ;  for  he  is  the  head,  and  we  be  his  members  : 
to  which  members  the  day  and  the  time  is  unknown, 
when  every  passing  woe  and  sorrow  shall  have  an 
end,  and  the  everlasting  joy  and  bliss  shall  be  fulfilled. 
Which  day  and  time  for  to  see,  all  the  company  of 
heaven  longeth  and  desireth  ;  and  all  that  be  under 
heaven,  which  shall  come  thither,  their  way  is  by 
longing  and  desiring.  Which  desiring  and  longing 
was  shewed  in  the  servant  standing  before  the  Lord; 
or  else  thus,  in  the  Son  standing  before  the  Father 
in  Adams  kirtle  :  for  the  longing  and  desiring  of  all 
mankind  that  shall  be  safe  appeared  in  Jesu ;  for 
Jesu  is  in  all  that  may  be  safe,  and  all  that  be  saved 
134

meme

is  in  Jesu.  And  all  of  the  charity  of  God,  with 
obedience,  meekness,  and  patience,  and  vertues  that 
longeth  to  us.  Also  in  this  marvellous  example,  I 
have  teaching  within  me,  as  it  were  the  beginning 
of  an  A.  B.  C.  whereby  I  may  have  some  under 
standing  of  our  Lords  meaning  :  for  the  privities  of 
the  revelation  be  hid  therein  ;  notwithstanding  that 
all  the  shewings  be  full  of  privities.  The  sitting  of 
the  Father  betokeneth  the  God-head  ;  that  is  to  say, 
for  shewing  of  rest  and  peace  :  for  in  the  God-head 
may  be  no  travel.  And  that  he  sheweth  himself  as 
lord,  betokeneth  to  our  manhood  :  the  standing  of 
the  servant  betokeneth  travel :  and  on  the  left  side 
betokeneth,  that  he  was  not  all  worthy  to  stand 
even  right  before  the  lord.  His  starting  was  the 
God-head,  and  the  running  was  the  Man-head  ;  for 
the  God-head  start  fro  the  Father  into  the  maidens 
womb,  falling  into  the  taking  of  our  kind.  And  in 
this  falling  he  took  great  sore  :  the  sore  that  he 
took  was  our  flesh,  in  which  as  soon  as  he  took  it,  he 
had  feeling  of  deadly  pains.  By  that  he  stood  dread- 
full  before  the  lord,  and  not  even  right,  betokeneth 
that  his  cloathing  was  not  honest  to  stand  even  right 
before  the  lord  ;  nor  that  might  not,  nor  should  not 
be  his  office,  whiles  he  was  a  labourer;  nor  also  he 
might  not  sit  with  the  lord  in  rest  and  peace,  till  he 
had  won  his  peace  rightfully  with  his  hard  travel. 
And  by  the  left  side,  that  the  Father  left  his  own 
135

THETHE

Son  wilfully  in  the  manhood,  to  suffer  all  mans  pain 
without  sparing  of  him.  By  that  his  kirtle  was  at 
the  point  to  be  ragged  and  rent ;  is  understood  the 
roddes  and  scourges,  the  thornes  and  the  nails ;  the 
drawing  and  the  dragging,  his  tender  flesh  renting, 
as  I  saw  in  some  part,  the  tender  flesh  was  rent  from 
the  head-parm,  falling  on  pieces,  unto  the  time  the 
bleeding  failed :  and  then  it  began  to  dry  again, 
cleaving  to  the  bone.  And  by  the  wallowing,  and 
writhing,  groaning,  and  mourning,  is  understood  that 
he  might  never  rise  all  mightily  fro  that  time  that 
he  was  fallen  into  the  maidens  womb,  till  his  body 
was  slain  and  dead,  he  yielding  the  soul  into  the 
Fathers  hand,  with  all  mankind  for  whom  he  was 
sent.  And  at  this  point  he  began  first  to  shew  his 
might ;  for  then  he  went  into  hell.  And  when  he 
was  there,  then  he  raised  up  the  great  root  out  of 
the  deep  deepness,  which  rightfully  was  knit  to  him 
in  high  heaven.  The  body  lay  in  the  grave  till 
Easter  morrow  ;  and  fro  that  time  he  lay  never  more, 
for  there  was  rightfully  ended  the  wallowing,  and 
the  writhing,  the  groaning,  and  the  mourning.  And 
our  foul  deadly  flesh  that  Gods  Son  took  upon  him 
which  was  Adams  old  kirtle,  strait,  bare,  and  short, 
then  by  our  Saviour  was  made  fair,  new,  white,  and 
bright,  and  of  endless  cleanness ;  wide,  and  side, 
fairer  and  richer  than  was  the  cloathing  which  I  saw 
on  the  Father,  for  that  cloathing  was  blew.  And 
136

rnerne

Christs  cloathing  is  now  of  fair  seemly  medelour, 
which  is  so  marvellous  that  I  can  it  no  descrie,  for  it 
is  all  of  very  worship.  Now  sitteth  not  the  lord  on 
earth  in  wilderness,  but  he  sitteth  on  his  rich  and 
noble  seat  which  he  made  in  heaven  most  to  his 
liking.  Now  standeth  not  the  Son  before  the  Father, 
as  a  servant  before  the  lord,  dreadfully  cloathed,  in 
party  naked :  but  he  standeth  before  the  Father 
even  right  richly  cloathed,  in  blissful  largeness  ;  with 
a  crown  upon  his  head  of  precious  richness  :  for  it 
was  shewed  that  we  be  his  crown :  which  crown  is 
the  Fathers  joy,  the  Sons  worship,  the  Holy  Ghosts 
liking :  and  endless  marvellous  bliss  to  all  that  be 
in  heaven.  Now  standeth  not  the  Son  before  the 
Father  on  the  left  side  as  a  labourer;  but  he  sitteth 
on  the  Fathers  right  hand  in  endless  rest  and  peace. 
But  it  is  not  meant  that  the  Son  sitteth  on  the  right 
hand  beside,  as  one  man  sitteth  by  another  in  this 
life  :  for  there  is  no  such  sitting  as  to  my  sight  in 
the  Trinity ;  but  he  sitteth  on  his  Fathers  right 
hand ;  that  is  to  say,  right  in  the  highest  nobility  of 
the  Fathers  joy.  Now  is  the  spouse,  Gods  Son,  in 
peace  with  his  loved  wife  :  which  is  the  fair  maiden, 
of  endless  joy.  Now  sitteth  the  Son  very  God  and 
very  Man  in  his  city  in  rest  and  in  peace,  which  his 
Father  hath  dight  to  him  of  endless  purpose  :  and 
the  Father  in  the  Son ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the 
Father  and  in  the  Son.

137

me

The  Fifty-second  Chapter137

me

The  Fifty-second  Chapter

AXD  thus  I  saw  that  God  enjoyeth  that  he  is  our 
father,  and  God  enjoyeth  that  he  is  our  mother: 
and  God  enjoyeth  that  he  is  our  very  spouse,  and 
our  soul  his  loved  wife  :  And  Christ  enjoyeth  that 
he  is  our  brother :  and  Jesu  enjoyeth  that  he  is  our 
Saviour.  These  be  five  high  joyes,  as  I  understand  ; 
in  which  he  will  that  we  enjoy,  him  praising,  him 
thanking,  him  loving,  him  endlesly  blessing,  all  that 
shall  be  saved,  for  the  time  of  this  life  :  wre  have  in 
us  a  marvellous  medelour  both  of  weal  and  of  woe : 
we  have  in  us  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  up-risen ;  and 
we  have  in  us  the  wretchedness  and  the  mischief  of 
Adams  falling,  dying.  By  Christ  we  be  lastingly 
kept ;  and  by  his  gracious  touching  we  be  raised 
into  very  trust  of  salvation.  And  by  Adams  falling, 
we  be  so  briken  in  our  failing  on  diverse  manners 
by  sin  and  by  sundry  pains.  In  which  we  be  made 
dark,  and  so  blind,  that  unneths  we  can  take  any 
comfort.  But  in  our  meaning,  we  abide  God,  and 
faithfully  trust  to  have  mercy  and  grace.  And  this 
is  his  own  working  in  us ;  and  of  his  goodness  [it] 
openeth  the  eye  of  our  understanding,  by  which  we 
have  sight,  some  time  more,  and  sometime  less,  after 
that  God  giveth  ability  to  take.  And  now  we  be 
138

rnerne

raised  into  that  one,  and  now  \ve  are  suffered  to  fall 
into  that  other.  And  thus  is  that  medle  so  marvel 
lous  in  us,  that  unneths  we  know  of  our  self,  or  of 
our  even  christen,  in  what  way  we  stand  for  the  mar- 
vellousness  of  this  sundry  feeling,,  but  that  [for]  each 
holy  assent  that  we  assent  to  God  when  we  feel  him, 
truly  willing  to  be  with  him  with  all  our  heart,  with 
all  our  soul,  and  with  all  our  might.  And  then  we 
hate  and  despise  our  evil  stirring,  and  all  that  might 
be  occasion  of  sin,  ghostly  and  bodily.  And  yet 
nevertheless,  when  this  sweetness  is  hid,  we  fall 
again  into  blindness,  and  so  into  woe  and  tribulation 
on  diverse  manners.  But  then  is  this  our  comfort, 
that  we  know  in  our  faith  that  by  the  vertue  of 
Christ  which  is  our  keeper,  we  assent  never  thereto. 
But  we  grudge  there  against,  and  endure  in  pain 
and  in  woe,  praying  into  that  time  that  he  sheweth 
him  again  to  us.  And  thus  we  stand  in  this 
medelour  all  the  dayes  of  our  life  :  but  he  will  we 
trust  that  he  is  lastingly  with  us ;  and  that  in  three 
manners.  He  is  with  us  in  heaven  very  man,  in  his 
own  person,  us  up-drawing :  and  that  was  shewed  in 
the  ghostly  thirst.  And  he  is  with  us  in  earth,  us 
leading,  and  that  was  shewed  in  the  third  ;  where  I 
saw  God  in  a  point.  And  he  is  with  us  in  our  soul, 
endlesly  wonning  [uniting],  ruling,  and  guiding  us  : 
and  that  was  shewed  in  the  xvith.  as  I  shall  say.  And 
thus  in  the  servant  was  shewed  the  blindness  and  the

rnerne

mischief  of  Adams  falling.  And  in  the  servant  was 
shewed  the  wisdom  and  the  goodness  of  Gods  Son. 
And  in  the  lord  was  shewed  the  rewth  and  the  pity 
of  Adams  woe  :  and  in  the  lord  was  shewed  the  high 
nobility  and  endless  worship  that  mankind  is  come 
to  by  the  vertue  of  the  passion  and  the  death  of 
his  dear  worthy  Son.  And  therefore  mightily  he 
enjoyeth  in  his  falling,  for  the  high  raising  and 
fulhead  of  bliss  that  mankind  is  come  to,  over 
passing  that  we  should  have  had,  if  he  had  not 
fallen.  And  thus  to  see  this  over-passing  nobility, 
was  my  understanding  led  into  God,  in  the  same 
time  that  I  saw  the  servant  fall.  And  thus  we  have 
matter  of  mourning;  for  our  sin  is  cause  of  Christs 
pains.  And  we  have  lastingly  matter  of  joy  ;  for 
endless  love  made  him  to  suffer.  And  therefore  the 
creature  that  seeth  and  feeleth  the  working  of  love 
by  grace,  hateth  nought  but  sin ;  for  of  all  thing,  as 
to  my  sight,  love  and  hate  be  hardest  and  most 
unmeasurable  contraries.  And  notwithstanding  all 
this,  I  saw  and  understood  this  in  our  Lord's  mean 
ing,  that  we  may  not  in  this  life  keep  us  from  sin  ; 
all  holy  in  full  cleanness,  as  we  shall  be  in  heaven. 
But  we  may  well  by  grace  keep  us  fro  the  sins  which 
would  lead  us  to  endless  pain,  as  Holy  Church 
teacheth  us,  and  eschew  venial,  reasonably  up  our 
might.  And  if  we  by  our  blindness,  and  our 
wretchedness  any  time  fall,  that  we  readily  rise, 
140

rne  FiFrr-seco$(prne  FiFrr-seco$(p

knowing  the  sweet  touching  of  grace  ;  and  wilfully 
amend  us  upon  teaching  of  Holy  Church  after  that 
the  sin  is  grievous ;  and  go  forth  with  God  in  love  : 
and  neither  on  that  one  side  fall  over  low,  enclining 
to  despair ;  ne  on  that  other  side  be  over  reckless, 
as  we  give  no  force  :  but  meekly  know  our  feeble 
ness,  witting  that  we  may  not  stand  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye,  but  with  keeping  of  grace  ;  and  reverently 
cleave  to  God,  in  him  only  trusting.  For  otherwise 
is  the  beholding  of  God,  and  otherwise  is  the  behold 
ing  of  man.  For  it  longeth  to  man  meekly  to  accuse 
himself;  and  it  longeth  to  the  proper  goodness  of 
our  Lord  God  courteously  to  excuse  man.  And 
these  be  two  parties  that  were  shewed  in  the  double 
chear,  in  which  the  Lord  beheld  the  falling  of  his 
loved  servant.  That  one  was  shewed  outward,  full 
meekly  and  mildly  with  great  ruth  and  pity :  and 
that  other  of  inward  endless  love.  And  right  thus 
will  our  good  Lord  that  we  accuse  our  self  wilfully, 
and  truly  see  and  know  his  everlasting  love  that  he 
hath  to  us,  and  his  plentuous  mercy.  And  thus 
graciously  to  see  and  know  both  together,  is  the 
meek  accusing  that  our  good  Lord  asketh  of  us  : 
and  himself  worketh  there  it  is ;  and  this  is  the 
lower  party  of  mans  life.  And  it  was  shewed  in  the 
outward  chear :  in  which  shewing,  I  saw  two  parts. 
The  one  is  the  ruful  falling  of  man  :  that  other  is  the 
worshipful  asseth  that  our  Lord  hath  made  for  man. 
141That  other  chear  was  shewed  inward  ;  and  that  was 
more  highly  and  all  one  :  for  the  life  and  the  vertue 
that  we  have  in  the  lower  party  is  of  the  higher. 
And  it  cometh  down  to  us  of  the  kind  love  of  the 
self  [same],  by  grace.  Between  that  one  and  that 
other  is  right  naught  ;  for  it  all  is  one  love  :  which 
one  blessed  love  hath  now  in  us  double  working  ;  for 
in  the  lower  party  be  pains  and  passions,  ruths  and 
pities,  mercies  and  forgiveness,  and  such  other  which 
be  profitable.  But  in  the  higher  party  be  none  of 
these  ;  but  all  one  high  love  and  marvellous  joy  :  in 
which  marvellous  joy  all  pains  be  wholly  destroyed. 
And  in  this  not  only  our  good  Lord  shewed  our 
excusing  ;  but  also  the  worshipful  nobility  that  he 
shall  bring  us  to,  turning  all  our  blame  into  endless 
worship.

The  Fifty  -third  Chapter

AND  thus  I  saw  that  he  will  that  we  know,  that  he 
taketh  no  harder  the  falling  of  any  creature  that 
shall  be  saved,  then  he  took  the  falling  of  Adam, 
which  we  know  was  endlesly  loved,  and  surely  kept 
in  the  time  of  all  his  need  ;  and  now  is  blessedf  Lilly 
restored  in  high  overpassing  joyes.  For  our  Lord  God 
is  so  good,  so  gentle,  and  so  courteous,  that  he  may 
never  assigne  default  final,  in  whom  he  shall  be  ever 
blessed  and  praised.  And  in  this  that  I  have  now 
142

rnerne

said,  was  my  desire  in  party  answered,  and  my  great 
fear  some  deal  eased  by  the  lovely  gracious  shewing 
of  our  Lord  God.  In  which  shewing  I  saw  and 
understood  full  surely,  that  in  each  soul  that  shall  be 
safe,  is  a  godly  will  that  never  assented  to  sin,  ne 
never  shall.  Which  will  is  so  good  that  it  may 
never  will  evil :  but  evermore  continually  it  will- 
eth  good,  arid  worketh  good  in  the  sight  of  God. 
Wherefore  our  Lord  will  we  know  it  in  the  faith  and 
the  belief :  and  namely  and  truly  that  we  have  all 
this  blessed  will  whole  and  safe  in  our  Lord  Jesu 
Christ :  for  that  each  [the]  kind  that  heaven  shall  be 
fulfilled  with,  behooved  needs  of  Gods  rightfulness  so 
to  be  knit  and  oned  in  him,  that  therein  were  kept 
a  substance  which  might  never,  nor  should  be  parted 
from  him  ;  and  that,  through  his  own  good  will  in 
his  endless  foresaid  purpose.  And  notwithstanding 
this  rightful  knitting,  and  this  endless  oning,  yet  the 
redemption,  and  the  again-buying  of  mankind,  is 
needful  and  speedful  in  every  thing,  as  it  is  done  for 
the  same  intent  and  the  same  end,  that  Holy  Church 
in  our  faith  us  teacheth.  For  I  saw  that  God  began 
never  to  love  mankind  :  for  right,  the  same  that 
mankind  shall  be  in  endless  bliss  (fulfilling  the  joy 
of  God  as  anempts  his  works)  right  so  the  same 
mankind  hath  been  in  the  foresight  of  God,  known 
and  loved  fro  without  beginning  in  his  rightful 
intent :  and  by  the  endless  intent  and  assent,  and 
143

meme

the  full  accord  of  all  the  Trinity,  the  mid  Person 
would  be  ground  and  head  of  this  fair  kind.,  out  of 
whom  we  be  all  come,  in  whom  we  be  all  enclosed, 
into  whom  we  shall  all  goe  ;  in  him  finding  our  full 
heaven  in  everlasting  joy,  by  the  foreseeing  purpose 
of  all  the  blessed  Trinity  fro  without  beginning. 
For  or  that  he  made  us  he  loved  us ;  and  when  we 
were  made,  we  loved  him.  And  this  is  a  love  made 
of  the  kindly  substancial  goodness  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  mightily,  in  reason  of  the  might  of  the 
Father,  and  wise,  in  mind  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Son. 
And  thus  is  mans  soul  made  of  God  ;  and  in  the 
same  point  knit  to  God.  And  thus  I  understood 
that  mans  soul  is  made  of  naught ;  that  is  to  say,  it 
is  made,  but  of  naught  that  is  made  ;  as  thus  :  when 
God  should  make  mans  body,  he  took  the  slime  of 
the  earth,  which  is  a  matter  medled  and  gathered  of 
all  bodily  things  ;  and  thereof  he  made  mans  body. 
But  to  the  making  of  mans  soul,  he  would  take  right 
naught,  but  made  it.  And  thus  is  the  kind  made 
rightfully  oned  to  the  Maker ;  which  is  substancial 
kind  unmade,  that  is  God.  And  therefore  it  is,  that 
there  may,  ne  shall  be  right  naught  between  God 
and  mans  soul :  and  in  this  endless  love  mans  soul  is 
kept  whole,  as  all  the  matter  of  the  revelation 
meaneth  and  sheweth.  In  which  endless  love  we  be 
led  and  kept  of  God,  and  never  shall  be  lost ;  for  he 
will  that  we  know  that  our  soul  is  a  life ;  which 
144

meme

life  of  his  goodness  and  his  grace  shall  last  in  heaven 
without  end,  him  loving,  him  thanking,  him  praising. 
And  right  the  same  that  we  should  be  without  end, 
the  same  we  were  treasured  in  God,  and  hid,  known, 
and  loved  fro  without  beginning.  Wherefore  he 
will  we  wit  that  the  noblest  thing  that  ever  he  made 
is  mankind;  and  the  fullest  substance  and  the 
highest  vertue  is  the  blessed  soul  of  Christ.  And 
furthermore  he  will  we  wit,  that  this  dear  worthy 
soul  was  preciously  knit  to  him  in  the  making : 
which  knot  is  so  subtile  and  so  mighty,  that  it 
is  oned  into  God.  In  which  oning  it  is  made 
endlesly  holy.  Furthermore  he  will  we  wit  that  all 
the  souls  that  shall  be  saved  in  heaven  without  end, 
be  knit  in  this  knot,  and  oned  in  this  oning,  and  made 
holy  in  this  holiness.

The  Fifty-fourth  Chapter

AND  for  the  great  endless  love  that  God  hath  to  all 
mankind,  he  maketh  no  departing  in  love  between 
the  blessed  soul  of  Christ,  and  the  least  soul  that 
shall  be  saved :  for  it  is  full  easie  to  believe  and 
trust,  that  the  dwelling  of  the  blessed  soul  of  Christ 
is  full  high  in  the  glorious  God-head.  And  truly 
as  I  understoodjin  our  Lords  meaning  ;  where  the 
blessed  soul  of  Christ  is,  there  is  the  substance 
14,5  K

meme

of  all  the  souls  that  shall  be  saved  by  Christ. 
Highly  owe  we  to  enjoy  that  God  dwelleth  in  our 
soul ;  and  more  highly  we  owe  to  enjoy,  that  our 
soul  dwelleth  in  God.  Our  soul  is  made  to  be 
Gods  dwelling  place ;  and  the  dwelling  of  our 
soul  is  God,  which  is  unmade.  A  high  understand 
ing  it  is  inwardly  to  see  and  to  know  that  God 
which  is  our  maker,  dwelleth  in  our  soul.  And  a 
higher  understanding  it  is,  and  more  inwardly,  to 
see  and  to  know  our  soul  that  is  made  dwelleth 
in  God  in  substance :  of  which  substance  by  God 
we  be  that  we  be.  And  I  saw  no  difference  be 
tween  God  and  our  substance,  but  as  it  were  all 
God.  And  yet  my  understanding  took,  that  our 
substance  is  in  God ;  that  is  to  say,  that  God  is  God, 
and  our  substance  is  a  creature  in  God.  For  the 
almighty  truth  of  the  Trinity  is  our  Father :  for  he 
made  us,  and  keepeth  us  in  him  :  and  the  deep 
wisdom  of  the  Trinity  is  our  mother,  in  whom  we 
be  closed  :  and  the  high  goodness  of  the  Trinity  is 
our  Lord,  and  in  him  we  be  closed,  and  he  in  us. 
We  be  closed  in  the  Father,  and  we  be  closed  in  the 
Son,  and  we  be  closed  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  the 
Father  is  beclosed  in  us ;  the  Son  is  beclosed  in  us ; 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  is  beclosed  in  us :  all  might, 
all  wisdom,  and  all  goodness,  one  God,  one  Lord. 
And  our  faith  is  a  vertue  that  cometh  of  our  kind 
substance  into  our  sensual  soul  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
146

rne  FIFTY -FIFTHrne  FIFTY -FIFTH

In  which  vertue  all  our  vertues  come  into  us ;  for 
without  that,  no  man  may  receive  vertues ;  for  it  is 
naught  else  but  a  right  understanding,  with  true 
belief,  and  sure  trust  of  our  being,  that  we  be  in 
God,  and  he  in  us,  which  we  see  not.  And  this 
vertue  with  all  others  that  God  hath  ordained  to  us 
coming  therein,  worketh  in  us  great  things ;  for 
Christ  mercifully  is  working  in  us  ;  and  we  graciously 
according  to  him  through  the  gift  and  the  vertue  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  This  working  maketh  that  we  be 
Christs  children,  and  christen  in  lyving.

The  Fifty-jifih  Chapter

AND  thus  Christ  is  our  way,  us  surely  leading  in  his 
laws.  And  Christ  in  his  body  mightily  beareth  us 
up  into  heaven.  For  I  saw  that  Christ,  us  all  having 
in  hii-.i  that  shall  be  saved  by  him,  worshipfully  pre- 
senteth  his  Father  in  heaven  with  us ;  which  present 
full  thankfully  his  Father  receiveth,  and  courteously 
giveth  it  unto  his  Son  Jesu  Christ.  Which  gift  and 
working  is  joy  to  the  Father,  and  bliss  to  the  Son, 
and  liking  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  of  all  thing 
that  to  us  longeth,  it  is  most  liking  to  our  Lord  that 
we  enjoy  in  this  joy,  which  is  in  the  blessed  Trinity, 
of  our  salvation.  And  this  was  seen  in  the  ninth 
shewing,  where  it  speaketh  more  of  this  matter. 
147

THSTHS

And  notwithstanding  all  our  feeling,  woe  or  weal, 
God  will  we  understand  and  believe,  that  we  be 
more  verily  in  heaven,  than  in  earth.  Our  faith 
cometh  of  the  kind  love  of  our  soul,  and  of  the  clear 
light  of  our  reason,  and  of  the  stedfast  mind  which 
we  have  of  God  in  our  first  making.  And  what 
time  our  soul  is  inspired  in  our  body,  in  which  we 
be  made  sensual,  as  soon  mercy  and  grace  begin  to 
work  ;  having  of  us  cure  and  keeping  with  pity  and 
love.  In  which  working  the  Holy  Ghost  formeth 
in  our  faith  hope,  that  we  shall  come  again  up  above 
to  our  substance  into  the  vertue  of  Christ,  encreased 
and  fulfilled  through  the  Holy  Ghost.  Thus  I 
understood  that  the  sensuality  is  grounded  in  kind, 
in  mercy  and  in  grace :  which  ground  ableth  us  to 
receive  gifts  that  lead  us  to  endless  life  ;  for  I  saw 
full  surely  that  our  substance  is  in  God.  And  also 
I  saw  that  in  our  sensuality  God  is ;  for  in  the  same 
point  that  our  soul  is  made  sensual,  in  the  same 
point  is  the  city  of  God  ordained  to  him  from  with 
out  beginning.  In  which  city  he  cometh,  and 
never  shall  remove  it ;  for  God  is  never  out  of  the 
soul,  in  which  he  shall  dwell  blessedly  without  end. 
And  this  was  said  in  the  xvith.  shewing,  where  it 
saith,  "The  place  that  Jesu  taketh  in  our  soul,  he 
shall  never  remove  it."  And  all  the  gifts  that  God 
may  give  to  the  creature,  he  hath  given  to  his 
Son  Jesu  for  us.  Which  gifts  he  onning  in  us  hath 
148

me  FiFrr-FiF?Hme  FiFrr-FiF?H

beclosed  in  him,,  into  the  time  that  we  be  waxen 
and  grown,  our  soul  with  our  body,  and  our  body 
with  our  soul.  Either  of  them  take  help  of  other  till 
we  be  brought  up  into  stature,  as  kind  worketh.  And 
then  in  the  ground  of  kind,  with  working  of  mercy, 
the  Holy  Ghost  graciously  enspireth  into  us  gifts 
leading  to  endless  life.  And  thus  was  my  under 
standing  led  of  God  to  see  in  him,  and  to  wit,  to 
understand,  and  to  know,  that  our  soul  is  a  made 
Trinity,  like  to  the  unmade  blessed  Trinity,  known 
and  loved  from  without  beginning ;  and  in  the 
making  oned  to  the  Maker,  as  it  is  before  said. 
This  sight  was  full  sweet  and  marvellous  to  behold, 
peaceable  and  restful,  sure  and  delectable.  And  for 
the  worshipful  oning  that  was  thus  made  of  God, 
between  the  soul  and  the  body,  it  behooved  needs 
to  be,  that  mankind  should  be  restored  fro  double 
death  :  which  restoring  might  never  be  into  the 
time  that  the  second  Person  in  the  Trinity  had 
taken  the  lower  party  of  mankind  ;  to  wrhom  that 
highest  was  oned  in  the  first  making.  And  these 
two  parties  were  in  Christ,  the  higher  and  the  lower, 
which  is  but  one  soul :  the  higher  party  was  ever  in 
peace  with  God  in  full  joy  and  bliss :  the  lower 
party,  which  is  sensuality,  suffered  for  the  salvation 
of  mankind.  And  these  two  parties  were  seen  and 
felt  in  the  viiith.  shewing;  in  which  my  body  was 
fulfilled  of  feeling  and  mind  of  Christs  passion,  and 
149

meme

his  dying.  And  furthermore,  with  this  was  a  subtile 
feeling  and  a  privy  inward  sight  of  the  high  parts. 
And  that  was  shewed  in  the  same  time ;  where  I 
might  not,  for  the  mean  prefer,  look  up  into  heaven 
[cf.  c.  xix]  :  and  that  was  for  that  each  [the]  mighty 
beholding  of  the  inward  life :  which  inward  life  is 
that  high  substance,  that  precious  soul,  which  is  end 
less  enjoying  in  the  God-head.

The  Fifty-sixth  Chapter

AND  thus  I  saw  full  surely  that  it  is  ready  to  us, 
and  more  easie,  to  come  to  the  knowing  of  God, 
than  to  know  our  own  soul.  For  pur  soul  is  so 
deep  grounded  in  God,  and  so  endlesly  treasured, 
that  we  may  not  come  to  the  knowing  thereof,  till 
we  have  first  knowing  of  God ;  which  is  the  Maker 
to  whom  it  is  oned.  But  notwithstanding,  I  saw 
that  we  have  kindly  of  fulhead  to  desire  wisely  and 
truly  to  know  our  own  soul,  whereby  we  be  learned 
to  seek  it  there  it  is,  and  that  is  into  God.  And 
thus  by  the  gracious  leading  of  the  Holy  Ghost  we 
shall  know  them  both  in  one.  Whether  we  be 
stirred  to  know  God  or  our  soul,  it  is  both  good 
and  true.  God  is  more  nearer  to  us  than  our  own 
soul ;  for  he  is  ground  in  whom  our  soul  standeth, 
and  he  is  mean  that  keepeth  the  substance  and  the 
sensuality  together,  so  that  it  shall  never  depart : 
150

rnerne

for  our  soul  sitteth  in  God  in  very  rest,  and  our  soul 
standeth  in  God  in  sure  strength  :  and  our  soul  is 
kindly  rooted  in  God  in  endless  love.  And  there 
fore  if  we  will  have  knowing  of  our  soul,  and  com- 
moning,  and  daliance  therewith,  it  behooveth  to 
seek  into  our  Lord  God,  in  whom  it  is  inclosed. 
And  of  this  enclosing,  I  saw  and  understood  more  in 
the  xvith  shewing,  as  I  shall  say.  And  as  aneinst 
our  substance,  it  may  rightly  be  called  our  soul :  and 
aneinst  our  sensuality,  it  may  rightly  be  called  our 
soul ;  and  that  is  by  the  oning  that  it  hath  in  God. 
That  worshipful  city  that  our  Lord  Jesu  sitteth  in 
it  is  our  sensuality  in  which  he  is  enclosed.  And 
our  kindly  substance  is  beclosed  in  Jesu,  with  the 
blessed  soul  of  Christ  sitting  in  rest  in  the  God 
head.  And  I  saw  full  surely  that  it  behooveth 
needs  to  be,  that  we  should  be  in  longing,  and  in 
penance,  into  the  time  that  we  be  led  so  deep  into 
God  that  we  verily  and  truly  know  our  own  soul. 
And  surely  I  saw,  that  into  this  high  deepness  our 
good  Lord  himself  leadeth  us  in  the  same  love  that 
he  made  us,  and  in  the  same  love  he  bought  us  by 
mercy  and  grace,  through  vertue  of  his  blessed 
passion ;  and  notwithstanding  all  this,  we  may 
never  come  to  the  full  knowing  of  God,  till  we 
know  first  clearly  our  own  soul ;  for  into  the  time 
that  it  is  in  the  full  mights,  we  may  not  be  all  holy ; 
and  that  is,  that  our  sensuality  by  the  vertue  of 
151

rnerne

Christs  passion,  be  brought  up  into  the  substance, 
with  all  the  profits  of  our  tribulation  that  our  Lord 
shall  make  us  to  get  by  mercy  and  grace.  I  had  in 
party  touching  [teaching],  and  it  is  grounded  in  kind  ; 
that  is  to  say,  our  reason  is  grounded  in  God,  which 
is  substancially  kindness.  Of  this  substancial  kind 
ness,  mercy  and  grace  springeth,  and  spreadeth  into 
us,  working  all  things  in  fulfilling  of  our  joy.  These 
be  our  grounds  in  which  we  have  our  being,  our 
encrease,  and  our  fulfilling ;  for  in  kind,  we  have 
our  life  and  our  being ;  and  in  mercy  and  grace,  we 
have  our  encrease  and  our  fulfilling.  It  be  three 
properties  in  one  goodness :  and  where  that  one 
worketh,  all  worken  in  the  thing  that  belongen  to 
us.  God  willeth  we  understand,  desiring  with  all  our 
heart,  and  with  all  our  strength,  to  have  knowing 
of  them  ever  more  and  more,  into  the  time  that  we 
be  fulfilled.  For  fully  to  know  them,  and  clearly 
to  see  them  is  not  else  but  endless  joy  and  bliss 
that  we  shall  have  in  heaven,  which  God  will  we 
begin  here  in  knowing  of  his  love ;  for  only  by  our 
reason  we  may  not  profit  but  if  [unless]  we  have 
evenly  therewith  mind  and  love :  ne  only  in  our 
kindly  ground  that  we  have  in  God,  we  may  not  be 
saved,  but  if  [unless]  we  have,  coming  of  the  same 
ground,  mercy  and  grace.  For  of  these  three  work 
ings,  altogether  we  receive  all  our  goods ;  of  which, 
the  first  be  goods  of  kind.  For  in  our  first  making, 
152

God  gave  us  as  much  good,  and  as  great  good,  as  we 
might  receive  only  in  our  spirit :  but  his  fore-seeing 
purpose  in  his  endless  wisdom,  would  that  we  were 
double.

The  Fifty-seventh  ChapterThe  Fifty-seventh  Chapter

AND  against  our  substance,  he  made  us  so  noble, 
and  so  rich,  that  evermore  we  work  his  will  and 
his  worship ;  there  I  say,  we,  it  meaneth  man  that 
shall  be  saved.  For  truly  I  saw  that  we  be  that  he 
loveth,  and  do  that  him  liketh,  lastingly  without  any 
stinting.  And  of  this,  great  riches ;  and  of  this, 
high  noble  vertues  by  measure  come  to  our  soul, 
what  time  that  it  is  knit  to  our  body  :  in  which 
knitting  we  be  made  sensual.  And  thus  in  our 
substance  we  be  full,  and  in  our  sensuality  we 
fail ;  which  failing  God  will  restore  and  fulfill  by 
working  of  mercy  and  grace,  plenteously  flowing 
into  us  of  his  own  kind  goodness.  And  thus 
this  kind  goodness  maketh  that  mercy  and  grace 
worketh  in  us.  And  the  kind  goodness  that  we 
have  of  him,  ableth  us  to  receive  the  working  of 
mercy  and  grace.  I  saw  that  our  kind  is  in  God 
whole ;  in  which  he  maketh  diversities  flowing 
out  of  him  to  work  his  will ;  whose  kind  keepeth, 
and  mercy  and  grace  restoreth  and  fulfilleth.  And 
of  these  none  shall  be  perished  ;  for  our  kind  which 
is  the  higher  party,  is  knit  to  God  in  the  making, 
153

meme

and  God  is  knit  to  our  kind,  which  is  the  lower 
party  in  our  flesh  taking.  And  thus  in  Christ  our 
two  kinds  be  oned :  for  the  Trinity  is  compre 
hended  in  Christ,  in  whom  our  higher  party  is 
grounded  and  rooted ;  and  our  lower  party  the 
second  Person  hath  taken,  which  kind  first  to  him 
was  a  dight.  For  I  saw  full  truly,  that  all  the 
works  that  God  hath  done,  or  ever  shall,  were 
full  known  to  him,  and  before  seen  fro  without 
beginning.  And  for  love  he  made  mankind ;  and 
for  the  same  love  himself  would  become  man.  The 
next  good  that  we  receive  is  our  faith,  in  which 
our  profiting  beginneth ;  and  it  becometh  of  the 
high  riches  of  our  kind  substance  into  our  sensual 
soul;  and  it  is  grounded  in  us,  and  we  in  that, 
through  the  kind  goodness  of  God,  by  the  working 
of  mercy  and  grace.  And  thereof  come  all  our 
goods,  by  which  we  be  led  and  saved ;  for  the 
commandments  of  God  come  therein :  in  which 
we  owe  to  have  two  manner  of  understanding : 
that  one  is,  that  we  owe  to  understand  arid  know 
which  be  his  biddings,  to  love  them,  and  to  keep 
them.  That  other  is,  that  we  owe  to  know  his 
forbiddings,  to  hate  them,  and  to  refuse  them : 
for  in  these  two  is  all  our  working  comprehended. 
Also  in  our  faith  come  the  seven  sacraments,  each 
following  other  in  order  as  God  hath  ordained 
them  to  us,  and  all  manner  vertues ;  for  the  same 
154

meme

vertues  that  we  have  received  of  our  substance 
given  to  us  in  kind  of  the  goodness  of  God,  the 
same  vertues  by  the  working  of  mercy  be  given 
to  us  in  grace  through  the  Holy  Ghost  renewed  : 
which  vertues  and  gifts  are  treasured  to  us  in 
Jesu  Christ;  for  in  that  same  time  that  God  knit 
him  to  our  body  in  the  maidens  womb,  he  took 
our  sensual  soul.  In  which  taking  he,  us  all 
having  beclosed  in  him,  he  oned  it  to  our  sub 
stance.  In  which  oning  he  was  perfect  man ; 
for  Christ  having  knit  in  him  all  man  that  shall 
be  saved,  is  perfect  man.  Thus  our  Lady  is  our 
mother,  in  whom  we  be  all  beclosed,  and  of  her 
born  in  Christ ;  for  she  that  is  mother  of  our 
Saviour,  is  mother  of  all  that  be  saved  in  our 
Saviour.  And  our  Saviour  is  our  very  mother, 
in  whom  we  be  endlesly  born,  and  never  shall 
come  out  of  him.  Plentuously,  fully,  and  sweetly 
was  this  shewed  :  and  it  is  spoken  of  in  the  Jirst, 
where  it  is  said,  "  We  be  all  in  him  beclosed, 
and  he  is  beclosed  in  us."  And  that  is  spoken 
of  in  the  xvith.  shewing,  where  he  saith,  "He 
sitteth  in  our  soul;"  for  it  is  his  liking  to  reign 
in  our  understanding  blessedfully,  and  sitteth  [to  sit] 
in  our  soul  restfully :  and  to  dwell  in  our  soul  end 
lesly,  us  all  working  into  him.  In  which  working 
he  will  we  be  his  helpers,  giving  to  him  all  our 
intent,  learning  his  laws,  keeping  his  lore,  desiring 
155

that  all  be  done  that  he  doth,  truly  trusting  in  him  : 
for  verily  I  saw  that  all  our  substance  is  in  God.

The  Fifty-eighth  Chapterthat  all  be  done  that  he  doth,  truly  trusting  in  him  : 
for  verily  I  saw  that  all  our  substance  is  in  God.

The  Fifty-eighth  Chapter

GOD  the  ^blessedful  Trinity  which  is  everlasting 
being,  right  as  he  is  endless  from  without  begin 
ning  ;  right  so  it  was  in  his  purpose  endless  to  make 
mankind.  Which  fair  kind  was  first  dight  to  his 
own  Son  the  Second  Person  ;  and  when  he  would 
by  full  accord  of  all  the  Trinity,  he  made  us  all  at 
ones  [once].  And  in  our  making  he  knit  us,  and  oned 
us  to  himself:  by  which  oning,  we  be  kept  as  clean, 
and  as  noble  as  we  were  made ;  by  the  vertue  of 
that  each  [the]  precious  oning,  we  love  our  Maker, 
and  like  him,  praise  him,  and  thank  him,  and  end- 
lesly  enjoy  in  him.  And  this  is  the  working  which 
is  wrought  continually  in  each  soul  that  shall  be 
saved :  which  is  the  godly  will  before  said.  And 
thus  in  our  making  God  Almighty  is  our  kindly 
Father.  And  God  all  wisdom  is  our  kindly  mother, 
with  the  love  and  the  goodness  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  is  all  one  God,  one  Lord.  And  in  the 
knitting,  and  in  the  oning  he  is  our  very  true 
spouse,  and  we  his  loved  wife,  and  his  fair  maiden ; 
with  which  wife  he  was  never  displeased,  for  he 
saith,  '  /  love  thee}  and  thou  lovest  me,  and  our  love 
shall  never  part  in  two'  I  beheld  the  working  of 
156

rnerne

all  the  blessed  Trinity.  In  which  beholding,  1 
saw  and  understood  these  three  properties ;  the 
property  of  the  father-head,  and  the  property  of  the 
mother-head,  and  the  property  of  the  lordship  in 
one  God.  In  our  Father  Almighty  we  have  our 
keeping,  and  our  bliss,  and,  aneynst  our  kindly 
substance  which  is  to  us,  our  making  fro  without 
beginning.  And  in  the  Second  Person,  in  wit  and 
wisdom  we  have  our  keeping :  and  aneynst  our 
sensuality,  our  restoring,  and  our  saving ;  for  he 
is  our  Mother,  Brother,  and  Saviour.  And  in  our 
good  Lord  the  Holy  Ghost  we  have  our  rewarding, 
and  our  yielding  lor  our  living  and  our  travel,  and 
endlesly  over-passing  all  that  we  desire  in  his  marvel 
lous  courtesie  of  his  high  plentuous  grace ;  for  all 
our  life  is  in  three :  in  the  first  our  being :  and  in 
the  second,  we  have  our  encreasing :  and  in  the 
third,  we  have  our  fulfilling.  The  first  is  kind ; 
the  second  is  mercy;  the  third  is  grace.  [Cf.  p.  152, 
Nature,  Redemption,  Grace,  from  Father,  Son,  Holy 
Ghost.]  For  the  Jirst,  I  saw  and  understood,  that 
the  high  might  of  the  Trinity  is  our  Father,  and 
the  deep  wisdom  of  the  Trinity  is  our  Mother,  and 
the  great  love  of  the  Trinity  is  our  Lord.  And 
all  these  have  we  in  kind,  and  in  our  substantial 
making.  And  furthermore,  I  saw  that  the  Second 
Person  which  is  our  Mother  substancially,  the  same 
deer  worthy  person  is  now  become  our  mother 
157

rnerne

sensual ;  for  we  be  double  of  Gods  making ;  that 
is  to  say,  substancial  and  sensual.  Our  substance 
is  the  higher  party  which  we  have  in  our  Father 
God  Almighty :  and  the  Second  Person  of  the 
Trinity  is  our  Mother  in  kind,  in  our  substancial 
making,  in  whom  we  be  grounded  and  rooted  :  and 
he  is  our  Mother  of  mercy,  in  our  sensuality  taking. 
And  thus  our  Mother  is  to  us  diverse  manner 
working,  in  whom  our  parts  be  kept  undeparted  : 
for  in  our  Mother  Christ  we  profit  and  encrease  ;  and 
in  mercy  he  reformeth  us  and  restoreth,  and  by 
the  vertue  of  his  passion,  his  death,  and  his  upris 
ing  oned  us  to  our  substance.  This  worketh  our 
Mother  in  mercy  to  all  his  beloved  children,  which 
be  to  him  buxom  and  obedient.  And  grace  worketh 
with  mercy,  and  namely  in  two  properties,  as  it 
was  shewed,  which  working  longeth  to  the  Third 
Person  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  worketh  rewarding 
and  giving.  Rewarding  is  a  gift  of  trust  that  the 
Lord  doth  to  them  that  hath  traveled.  And  giving 
is  a  courteous  working  which  he  doth  freely  of 
grace,  fulfilling  and  over-passing  all  that  is  deserved 
of  creatures.  Thus  in  our  Father  God  Almighty 
we  have  our  being.  And  in  our  Mother  of  mercy 
Jesu  Christ,  we  have  our  reforming,  and  our  re 
storing,  in  whom  our  parts  be  oned,  and  all  made 
perfect  man.  And  by  yielding  and  giving  in  grace 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  we  be  fulfilled.  And  our  sub- 
158

rnerne

stance  is  in  our  Father,  God  Almighty :  and  our 
substance  is  in  our  Mother  God  all  wisdom  :  and 
our  substance  is  in  our  Lord  God  the  Holy  Ghost, 
all  goodness ;  for  our  substance  is  whole  in  each 
person  of  the  Trinity,  which  is  one  God.  And  our 
sensuality  is  only  in  the  Second  Person,  Christ 
Jesu,  in  whom  is  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost. 
And  in  him,  and  by  him,  we  be  mightily  taken 
out  of  hell,  and  out  of  the  wretchedness  in  earth ; 
and  worshipfully  brought  up  into  heaven,  and 
blessedfully  oned  to  our  substance ;  encreased  in 
riches  and  nobly,  by  all  the  vertue  of  Christ,  and 
by  the  grace  and  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost.

The  Fifty-ninth  Chapter

AND  all  this  bliss  we  have  by  mercy  and  grace  :  which 
manner  bliss  we  might  never  have  had  and  known, 
but  if  [unless]  that  property  and  goodness  which  is 
in  God  had  been  contraried,  whereby  we  have  this 
bliss  :  for  wickedness  hath  been  suffered  to  rise  con 
trary  to  that  goodness ;  and  the  goodness  of  mercy 
and  grace  contravied  against  that  wickedness,  and 
turned  all  to  goodness  and  worship  to  all  that  shall 
be  saved  :  for  it  is  that  property  in  God  which  doth 
good  against  evil.  Thus  Jesu  Christ  that  doth  good 
against  evil  is  our  very  Mother.  We  have  our  being 
159

meme

of  him,  where  the  ground  of  Mother-head  beginneth, 
with  all  the  sweet  keeping  of  love  that  endlesly 
followeth.  As  verily  as  God  is  our  Father ;  as  verily 
is  God  our  Mother ;  and  that  shewed  he  in  all ;  and 
namely,  in  these  sweet  words  there  he  saith,  'I  it 
am  ; '  that  is  to  say,  c  I  it  am,  the  might  and  the  good 
ness  of  the  Father-head :  I  it  am,  the  wisdom  and  the 
kindness  of  the  Mother-head  :  I  it  am,  the  light  and  the 
grace,  that  is  all  blessed  love  :  I  it  am,  the  Trinity  :  I  it 
am,  the  Unity  :  I  it  am,  the  high  sovereign  goodness  oj 
all  manner  thing :  I  it  am,  that  maketh  thee  to  long :  I 
it  am,  the  endless  fulfilling  of  all  true  desires.'  For 
there  the  soul  is  highest,  noblest,  and  worshipfullest, 
yet  it  is  lowest,  meekest,  and  mildest.  And  of  this 
substancial  ground  we  have  all  our  vertues  in  our 
sensuality  by  gift  of  kind,  and  by  helping  and 
speeding  of  mercy  and  grace ;  without  which  we 
may  not  profit.  Our  high  Father  Almighty  God, 
which  is  being,  he  knoweth  us,  and  loved  us  fro 
before  any  time.  Of  which  knowing  in  his  full 
marvellous  deep  charity,  by  the  fore-seeing  endless 
counsel  of  all  the  blessed  Trinity,  he  would  that 
the  Second  Person  should  become  our  Mother,  our 
Brother,  and  our  Saviour.  Whereof  it  followeth, 
that  as  verily  as  God  is  our  Father,  verily  God  is 
our  Mother.  Our  Father  willeth,  our  Mother  work- 
eth.  Our  good  Lord  the^Holy  Ghost  confirmeth ; 
and  therefore  it  longeth  to  us  to  love  our  God  in 
160

sixnernsixnern

whom  we  have  our  being,  him  reverently  thanking 
and  praising  of  our  making,  mightily  praying  to  our 
Mother  of  mercy  and  pity,  and  to  our  Lord  the 
Holy  Ghost,  of  help  and  grace  :  for  in  these  three 
is  all  our  life — kind,  mercy,  and  grace  :  whereof  we 
have  mild-head,  patience  and  pity,  and  hating  of 
sin  and  wickedness,  for  it  longeth  properly  to  vertues 
to  hate  sin  and  wickedness.  And  thus  is  Jesu  our 
very  Mother  in  kind  of  our  first  making :  and  he  is 
our  very  first  Mother  in  grace  by  taking  of  our  kind 
made ;  all  the  fair  working,  and  all  the  sweet  kindly 
offices  of  dear  worthy  Mother-head  is  impropred 
to  the  Second  Person :  for  in  him  we  have  this 
goodly  will  whole  and  safe  without  end,  both  in 
kind  and  in  grace,  of  his  own  proper  goodness.  I 
understood  three  manner  of  beholdings  of  Mother- 
head  in  God.  Thejirst  is,  ground  of  our  kind  making. 
The  second  is,  taking  of  our  kind,  and  there  begin- 
neth  the  Mother-head  of  grace.  The  third  is,  Mother- 
head  in  working :  and  therein  is  a  forth-speeding,  by 
the  same  grace,  of  length,  and  bredth,  of  height 
and  of  deepness  without  end,  and  all  is  one  love.

The  Sixtieth  Chapter

BUT  now  me  behooveth  to  see  a  little  more  of  this 
forth-spreading,  as  1  understood  in  the  meaning  of 
161  LThe  Sixtieth  Chapter

BUT  now  me  behooveth  to  see  a  little  more  of  this 
forth-spreading,  as  1  understood  in  the  meaning  of 
161  L

our  Lord ;  how  that  we  be  brought  again  by  the 
Mother-head  of  mercy  and  grace  into  our  kindly 
steed,  where  that  we  were  in-made  by  the  Mother- 
head  of  kind  love ;  which  kind  love  never  leaveth 
us.  Our  kind  Mother,  our  gracious  Mother — for 
he  would  all  whole  become  our  Mother  in  all  thing- 
he  took  the  ground  of  his  work  full  low,  and  full 
mildly  in  the  maidens  womb.  And  that  shewed 
he  in  the  first,  where  he  brought  the  meek  maiden 
before  the  eye  of  my  understanding,  in  the  simple 
stature  as  she  was  when  she  conceived.  That  is  to 
say,  our  high  God  the  sovereign  wisdom  of  all, 
in  this  low  place  he  arraid  him,  and  dight  him  all 
ready  in  our  poor  flesh,  himself  to  do  the  service 
and  the  office  of  Mother-hood  in  all  thing.  The 
Mothers  service  is  nearest,  readiest  and  surest. 
Nearest,  for  it  is  most  of  kind ;  readiest,  for  it  is 
most  of  love ;  and  sikerest,  for  it  is  most  of  truth. 
This  office,  ne  might,  nor  could  never  none  done 
to  the  full,  but  he  alone.  We  wit  that  all  our 
mothers  bear  us  to  pain  and  to  dying  ?  that  [is],  but 
[except]  our  very  Mother  Jesu.  He  alone  beareth 
us  to  joy,  and  to  endless  living,  blessed  mote  he 
be.  Thus  he  sustained  us  within  him,  in  love  and 
travel,  into  the  full  time  that  he  would  suffer  the 
sharpest  thornes,  and  grievous  pains  that  ever  were, 
or  ever  shall  be,  and  died  at  the  last.  And  when 
he  had  done,  and  so  borne  us  to  bliss,  yet  might 
162

rnerne

not  all  this  make  asseeth  to  his  marvellous  love. 
And  that  he  shewed,  in  these  high  over-passing 
words  of  love ;  '  If  I  might  suffer  more  I  would  suffer 
more.'  He  might  no  more  die,  but  he  would  not 
stint  working.  Wherefore  him  behooveth  to  find 
us,  for  the  dear  worthy  love  of  mother-hood  hath 
made  him  debtor  to  us.  The  mother  may  give  her 
child  to  suck  her  milk ;  but  our  precious  Mother 
Jesu  he  may  feed  us  with  himself,  and  doth  full 
courteously,  and  full  tenderly,  with  the  blessed 
sacrament ;  that  is  precious  food  of  very  life,  and 
with  all  the  sweet  sacraments  he  sustaineth  us  full 
mercifully,  and  graciously.  And  so  meant  he  in 
these  blessed  words,  where  he  said,  '/  it  am  that 
Holy  Church  preacheth  thee,  and  teacheth  thee ; '  that 
is  to  say,  all  the  health  and  the  life  of  the  sacra 
ments  ;  all  the  vertue  and  the  grace  of  my  word  ; 
all  the  goodness  that  is  ordained  in  Holy  Church 
to  thee  ;  '  I  it  am.'  The  mother  may  lay  her  child 
tenderly  to  her  breast;  but  our  tender  Mother 
Jesu  he  may  homely  lead  us  into  his  blessed  breast 
by  his  sweet  open  side,  and  shew  us  there  in  party 
of  the  Godhead,  and  the  joyes  of  heaven,  with 
ghostly  sureness  of  endless  bliss.  And  that  shewed 
he  in  the  ixth.  Revelation,  giving  the  same  under 
standing  in  this  sweet  word,  where  he  saith,  '  Loc 
how  I  love  thee  ; '  behold  into  his  blessed  side  enjoy 
ing.  This  fair  lovely  word,  Mother,  it  is  so  sweet 
163

meme

and  so  kind  in  it  self,  that  it  may  not  verily  be 
said  of  none,  ne  to  none  but  of  him,  and  to  him, 
that  is  very  Mother  of  life  and  of  all.  To  the 
property  of  Mother-head  longeth  kind  love,  wisdom, 
and  knowing ;  and  it  is  God  :  for  though  it  be  so, 
that  our  bodily  forth-bringing  be  but  little,  low, 
and  simple,  in  regard  of  our  ghostly  forth-bringing, 
yet  it  is  he  that  doth  it  in  the  creatures  by  whom 
that  it  is  done.  The  kind  loving  mother  that 
wotteth  and  knoweth  the  need  of  her  child,  she 
keepeth  it  full  tenderly,  as  the  kind  and  condition 
of  mother-head  will ;  and  ever  as  it  waxeth  in  age 
and  in  stature,  she  changeth  the  works,  but  not 
her  love :  and  when  it  is  waxed  of  more  age,  she 
suffereth  that  it  be  chastised,  in  breaking  down  of 
vices,  to  make  the  child  receive  vertues  and  grace. 
This  working,  with  all  that  be  fair  and  good,  our 
Lord  doth  it  in  him  by  whom  it  is  done.  Thus  he 
is  our  Mother  in  kind  by  the  working  of  grace  in 
the  lower  party,  for  love  of  the  higher.  And  he 
will  that  we  know  it ;  for  he  will  have  all  our  love 
fastned  to  him.  And  in  this  I  saw  that  all  debt 
that  we  owe  by  Gods  bidding,  to  Father-head  and 
Mother-head,  is  fulfilled  in  true  loving  of  God  : 
which  blessed  love  Christ  worketh  in  us.  And 
this  was  shewed  in  all ;  and  namely,  in  the  high 
plentuous  words,  where  he  saith ;  '  I  it  am  that  tkou 
lovest.'

164

The  Sixty-first  Chapter164

The  Sixty-first  Chapter

AND  in  our  ghostly  forth-bringing  he  useth  more 
tenderness  in  keeping,  without  any  comparison ;  by 
as  much  as  our  soul  is  of  more  price  in  his  sight : 
he  kindleth  our  understanding ;  he  prepareth  our 
wayes ;  he  easeth  our  conscience ;  he  comforteth 
our  soul ;  he  lighteth  our  heart,  and  giveth  us  in 
party  knowing  and  loving  in  his  blessedful  God 
head,  with  gracious  mind  in  his  sweet  Man-hood, 
and  his  blessed  passion  ;  with  courteous  marvelling 
in  his  high  over-passing  goodness ;  and  maketh  us 
to  love  all  that  he  loveth  for  his  love,  and  to  be  well 
apaid  with  him,  and  with  all  his  works.  And  when 
we  fall,  hastily  he  raiseth  us  by  his  lovely  beclip- 
ping,  and  his  gracious  touching.  And  when  we  be 
strengthened  by  his  sweet  working,  then  we  wil 
fully  choose  him  by  his  grace,  to  be  his  servants, 
and  his  lovers,  lastingly  without  end.  And  yet 
after  this  he  suffereth  some  of  us  to  fall  more  hard, 
and  more  grievous  than  ever  we  did  before,  as  us 
thinketh.  And  then  wene  we  that  we  be  not  all 
wise,  that  all  were  naught  that  we  have  begun  ;  but 
it  is  not  so  :  for  it  needeth  us  to  fall,  and  it  needeth 
us  to  see  it ;  for  if  we  fell  not,  we  should  not  know 
how  feeble,  and  how  wretched  we  be  of  our  self, 
165

rnerne

nor  also  we  should  not  so  fulsomely  know  the 
marvellous  love  of  our  Maker;  for  we  shall  verily 
see  in  heaven  without  end,  that  we  have  grievously 
sinned  in  this  life.  And  notwithstanding  this,  we 
shall  verily  see  that  we  were  never  hurt  in  his 
love,  nor  we  were  never  the  less  of  price  in  his 
sight.  And  by  the  assey  of  this  falling,  we  shall 
have  an  high  and  a  marvellous  knowing  of  love 
in  God  without  end :  for  hard  and  marvellous  is 
that  love  which  may  not,  nor  will  not  be  broken 
for  trespass.  And  this  was  one  understanding  of 
profit.  Another  is  the  lowness  and  meekness  that 
we  shall  get  by  the  sight  of  our  falling ;  for  thereby 
we  shall  highly  be  raised  in  heaven :  to  which 
rising  we  might  never  have  come  without  that 
meekness.  And  therefore  it  needed  us  to  see  it ; 
and  if  we  see  it  not,  though  we  feel  it,  it  should  not 
profit  us.  And  commonly  first  we  fall,  and  sithen 
we  see  it,  and  both  is  of  the  mercy  of  God.  The 
mother  may  suffer  the  child  to  fall  some  time,  and 
be  diseased  in  diverse  manners  for  the  [his]  own 
profit ;  but  she  may  never  suffer  that  any  manner  of 
peril  come  to  her  child,  for  love.  And  though  our 
earthly  mother  may  suffer  her  child  to  perish,  our 
heavenly  Mother  Jesu  may  never  suffer  us  that  be 
his  children  to  perish ;  for  he  is  all  mighty,  all 
wisdom,  and  all  love  :  and  so  is  none  but  he,  blessed 
mote  he  be.  But  ofttimes  when  our  falling  and  our 
166

meme

•wretchedness  is  shewed  us,  we  be  sore  adread,  and 
so  greatly  ashamed  of  our  self,  that  unneths  we  wit 
where  that  we  may  hold  us.  But  then  will  riot  our 
courteous  Mother  that  we  flee  away  :  for  him  were 
nothing  lother.  But  he  will  then  that  we  use  the 
condition  of  a  child :  for  when  it  is  dis-eased  and 
afraid,  it  runneth  hastily  to  the  mother ;  and  if  it 
may  do  no  more,  it  crieth  on  the  mother  for  help, 
with  all  the  [his]  might ;  so  will  he  that  we  done  as 
the  meek  child,  saying  thus  :  '  My  kind  Mother,  my 
gracious  Mother,  my  dear  worthy  Mother,  have 
mercy  upon  me ;  I  have  made  myself  foul,  and  un 
like  to  thee,  and  I  may  not,  nor  can  amend  it,  but 
with  thine  help  and  grace.'  And  if  we  feel  us  not 
than  eased  assoon,  be  we  sure  that  he  useth  the 
condition  of  a  wise  mother :  for  if  he  see  that  it  be 
for  profit  to  us  to  mourn  and  to  weep,  he  suffereth 
with  ruth  and  pity  into  the  best  time,  for  love. 
Arid  he  will  then  that  we  use  the  property  of  a 
child,  that  evermore  kindly  trusteth  to  the  love  of 
the  mother,  in  weal  and  in  woe.  And  he  will  that 
we  take  us  mightily  to  the  faith  of  Holy  Church, 
and  find  there  our  dear  worthy  Mother  in  solace  and 
true  understanding,  with  all  the  blessed  common  : 
for  one  singular  person  may  oftentimes  be  broken, 
as  it  seemeth  to  the  [him]  self,  but  the  whole  body  of 
Holy  Church  was  never  broken,  ne  never  shall  be 
without  end.  And  therefore  a  sure  thing  it  is,  a 
167

THSTHS

good  and  a  gracious,  to  will  meekly  and  mightily 
be  fastened  and  oned  to  our  Mother  Holy  Church, 
that  is  Christ  Jesu.  For  the  flood  of  mercy ;  that 
is  his  dear  worthy  blood  and  precious  water  is 
plentuous  to  make  us  fair  and  clean.  The  blessed 
wounds  of  our  Saviour  be  open  and  enjoy  to  heal  us. 
The  sweet  gracious  hands  of  our  Mother  be  ready 
and  diligent  about  us ;  for  he  in  all  this  working 
useth  the  very  office  of  a  kind  nurse  that  hath 
naught  else  to  done,  but  to  entend  to  the  salvation 
of  her  child.  It  is  his  office  to  save  us ;  it  is  his 
worship  to  do  it ;  and  it  is  his  will  we  know  it :  for 
he  will  we  love  him  sweetly,  and  trust  in  him 
meekly  and  mightily.  And  this  shewed  he  in  these 
gracious  words,  '  I  keep  theefull  surely.'

The  Sixty-second  Chapter

FOR  in  that  time  he  shewed  our  frailty  and  our 
fallings,  our  breakings  and  our  naughtings,  our 
despites  and  our  chargings,  and  all  our  woe,  as  far 
forth  as  me  thought  that  it  might  fall  in  this  life. 
And  therewith  he  shewed  his  blessed  might,  his 
blessed  wisdom,  his  blessed  love,  that  he  keepeth  us 
in  this  time  as  tenderly,  and  as  sweetly  to  his  wor 
ship,  and  as  surely  to  our  salvation,  as  he  doth  when 
we  be  in  most  solace  and  comfort ;  and  thereto 
168

THSTHS

raiseth  us  ghostly  and  highly  in  heaven,  and  turneth 
all  to  his  worship,  and  to  our  joy  without  end.  For 
his  precious  love  he  suffereth  us  never  to  lose  time. 
And  all  this  is  of  the  kind  goodness  of  God  by  the 
working  of  grace.  God  is  kind  in  his  being  ;  that  is 
to  say,  that  goodness  that  is  kind,  it  is  God  ;  he  is 
the  ground,  he  is  the  substance,  he  is  the  same  thing 
that  is  kindness :  and  he  is  very  Father  and  very 
Mother  of  kinds  :  and  all  kinds  that  he  hath  made 
to  flow  out  of  him  to  work  his  will,  it  should  be 
restored  and  brought  again  into  him  by  salvation 
of  man,  through  the  working  of  grace.  For  of  all 
kinds  that  he  hath  set  in  divers  creatures  by  party, 
in  man  is  all  the  whole  in  ful-head  ;  and  in  vertue,  in 
fair-head,  and  in  good-head,  in  rialty  and  in  noblety, 
in  all  manner  of  solemnity  of  preciousness  and  wor 
ship.  Here  may  we  see  that  we  be  all  bound  to 
God  for  kind,  and  we  be  bound  to  God  for  grace. 
Here  may  we  see  that  us  needeth  not  greatly  to 
seek  far  out  to  know  sundry  kinds,  but  to  Holy 
Church  into  our  Mothers  breast ;  that  is  to  say,  into 
our  own  soul,  where  our  Lord  dwelleth :  and  there 
should  we  find  all  now,  in  faith  and  in  understand 
ing  ;  and  after,  verily  in  himself,  clearly  in  bliss.  But 
no  man,  ne  woman  take  this  singularity  to  himself; 
for  it  is  not  so,  it  is  general :  for  it  is  our  precious 
Mother  Christ;  and  to  him  was  this  fair  kind  dight,  for 
the  worship  and  the  nobly  of  mans  making,  and  for 
169

rne

the  joy  and  the  bliss  of  mans  salvation,  right  as  he 
saw,  wist  and  knew  from  without  beginning.

The  Sixty-third  Chapterrne

the  joy  and  the  bliss  of  mans  salvation,  right  as  he 
saw,  wist  and  knew  from  without  beginning.

The  Sixty-third  Chapter

HERE  may  we  see  that  we  have  verily  of  kind  to  hate 
sin ;  and  we  have  verily  of  grace  to  hate  sin.  For 
kind  is  all  good  and  fair  in  itself:  and  grace  was 
sent  out  to  save  kind  and  keep  kind,  and  destroy 
sin,  and  bring  again  fair  kind  into  the  blessed  point 
fro  thence  it  came ;  (that  is,  God,)  with  more  noble 
ness  and  worship  by  the  vertuous  working  of  grace  ; 
for  it  shall  be  seen,  before  God,  of  all  his  holy  [saints] 
in  joy  without  end,  that  kind  hath  been  assaid  in  the 
fire  of  tribulation,  and  therein  found  no  lack,  nor  no 
default.  Thus  is  kind  and  grace  of  one  accord ;  for 
grace  is  God,  as  unmade  kind  is  God :  he  is  two  in 
manner  working,  and  one  in  love.  And  neither  of 
them  worketh  without  other,  ne  none  be  departed. 
And  when  we,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  and  with  his 
help,  accord  us  to  kind  and  to  grace,  we  shall  see 
verily  that  sin  is  worse,  viler  and  painfuller  than 
hell,  without  any  likeness :  for  it  is  contrarious  to 
our  fair  kind ;  for  as  verily  as  sin  is  unclean,  as  truly 
sin  is  unkind.  And  this  is  an  horrible  thing  to  see, 
to  the  loving  soul  that  would  be  all  fair  and  shining 
in  the  sight  of  God,  as  kind  and  grace  teacheth. 
170

meme

But  be  we  not  adread  of  this,  but  in  as  much  as 
dread  may  speed ;  but  meekly  make  we  our  moan  to 
our  dear  worthy  Mother,  and  he  shall  all  besprinckle 
us  in  his  precious  blood,  and  make  our  soul  full  soft, 
and  full  mild,  and  heal  us  full  fair  by  process  of  time, 
right  as  it  is  most  worship  to  him,  and  joy  to  us 
without  end.  And  of  this  sweet  fair  working  he 
shall  never  cease  nor  stint,  till  all  his  dear  worthy 
children  be  brought  forth  and  born.  And  that 
shewed  he  where  he  gave  the  understanding  of  the 
ghostly  thirst ;  that  is,  the  love-longing  that  shall 
last  till  doomes-day.  Thus  in  our  very  Mother  Jesu 
our  life  is  grounded  in  the  fore-seeing  wisdom  of 
himself  fro  without  beginning,  with  the  high  might 
of  the  Father,  and  the  sovereign  goodness  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  And  in  the  taking  of  our  kind  he 
quicked  us ;  and  in  his  blessed  dying  upon  the  cross 
he  bare  us  to  endless  life.  And  fro  that  time,  and 
now  and  ever  shall  into  doomes-day,  he  feedeth  us 
and  fordreth  us,  right  as  the  high  sovereign  kind 
ness  of  Mother-head  will,  and  as  the  kindly  need  of 
child-head  asketh.  Fair  and  sweet  is  our  heavenly 
Mother  Jesu  in  the  sight  of  our  soul;  precious  and 
lovely  be  the  gracious  children  in  the  sight  of  our 
heavenly  Mother,  with  mildness  and  meekness,  and 
all  that  fair  vertues  that  long  to  children  in  kind  ; 
for  kindly  the  child  dispaireth  not  of  the  mothers 
love;  kindly  the  child  presumeth  not  of  it  self;  kindly 
171the  child  loveth  the  mother,  and  each  one  of  them 
other.  These  be  as  fair  vertues,  with  all  other  that 
be  like,  wherewith  our  heavenly  Mother  is  served 
and  pleased.  And  I  understood  none  higher  stature 
in  this  life  than  child-hood  in  feebleness  and  failing 
of  might  and  of  wit,  into  the  time  our  gracious  Mother 
hath  brought  us  up  into  that  our  Fathers  bliss.  And 
there  shall  it  verily  be  made  known  to  us,  his  mean 
ing  in  the  sweet  words,  where  he  saith,  '  All  shall  be 
well,  and  thou  shalt  see  it  thy  self  that  all  manner  of 
thing  shall  be  well.'  And  then  shall  the  bliss  of  our 
Mother-head  in  Christ  be  new  to  begin  in  the  joyes 
of  our  Father  God :  which  new  beginning  shall  last 
without  end.  New  beginning  thus,  I  understood, 
that  all  his  blessed  children  which  be  come  out  of 
him  by  kind,  should  be  brought  into  him  again  by 
grace.

172

The  Sixty-fourth  Chapter172

The  Sixty-fourth  Chapter

A  ""ORE  this  time  I  had  great  longing  and  desire 
of  Gods  gift  to  be  delivered  of  this  world, 
and  of  this  life ;  for  oft-times  I  beheld  the  woe 
that  is  here,  and  the  weal  and  the  blessed  being 
that  is  there.  And  if  there  had  no  pain  been  in 
this  life,  but  the  absence  of  our  Lord,  methought 
sometime  that  it  was  more  than  I  might  bear. 
And  this  made  me  to  mourn  and  busily  to  long. 
And  also  of  my  own  wretchedness,  slouth  and 
weariness,  that  me  liked  not  to  live  and  to  travel  as 
me  fell  to  do.  And  to  all  this  our  courteous  Lord 
answered  for  comfort  and  patience,  and  said  these 
words  :  '  Suddenly  thou  shall  be  taken  from  all  thy  pain, 
from  all  thy  sickness,  from  all  thy  dis-ease,  and  from  all 
thy  woe.  And  thou  shall  come  up  above,  and  thou  shalt 
have  me  to  thy  meed,  and  thou  shalt  be  fulfilled  of  joy 
and  bliss  ;  and  thou  shalt  never  more  have  no  manner  of 
pain,  no  manner  of  sickness,  no  manner  misliking}  no 
wanting  of  will,  but  ever  joy  and  bliss  without  end.  What 
173

meme

should  it  then  grieve  thee  to  suffer  a  while,  silken  it  is  my 
will  and  my  worship  ? '  And  in  this  word  (suddenly 
thou  shall  be  taken)  I  saw  that  God  rewarded  man  of 
the  patience  that  he  hath  in  abiding  of  Gods  will, 
and  of  his  time  ;  and  that  man  lengeth  his  patience 
over  the  time  of  his  living ;  for  unknowing  the  time 
of  his  passing.  This  is  a  great  profit ;  for  if  a  man 
knew  his  time,  he  should  not  have  patience  over 
that  time.  And  also  God  will  that  while  the  soul 
is  in  the  body,  it  seem  to  it  self  that  it  is  ever  at 
the  point  to  be  taken,  for  all  this  life  and  this 
longing  that  we  have  here  is  but  a  point.  And 
when  we  be  taken  suddenly  out  of  pain  into  bliss, 
then  pain  shall  be  nought.  And  in  this  time  I  saw 
a  body  lying  on  the  earth  :  which  body  shewed  heavy 
and  fearful,  and  without  shape  and  form,  as  it  were 
a  swilge  stinking  myre.  And  suddenly  out  of  this 
body  sprung  a  full  fair  creature,  a  little  child  full 
shapen  and  formed,  swift  and  lively,  and  whiter  than 
the  lilly,  which  sharply  glided  up  into  heaven.  The 
swilge  of  the  body  betokeneth  great  wretchedness 
of  our  deadly  flesh :  and  the  littleness  of  the  child  be 
tokeneth  the  cleanness  and  the  pureness  of  our  soul. 
And  I  thought  with  this  body  bliveth  no  fairness  of 
this  child,  ne  of  this  child  dwelleth  no  foulness  of 
this  body.  It  is  full  bliss-ful  (for)  man  to  be  taken 
from  pain,  more  than  pain  to  be  taken  from  man  ; 
for  if  pain  be  taken  from  us,  it  may  come  again, 
174

rne  sixrr- FOURTHrne  sixrr- FOURTH

Therefore  this  is  a  sovereign  comfort,  and  a  bless-fu! 
beholding  in  a  longing  soul,  that  we  shall  be  taken 
from  pain ;  for  in  this  behest  I  saw  a  merciful  com 
passion  that  our  Lord  hath  in  us  for  our  woe,  and  a 
courteous  benighting  of  clear  deliverance :  for  he 
will  that  we  be  comforted  in  the  over-passing  joy. 
And  that  he  shewed  in  these  words ;  '  And  thou  shalt 
come  up  above  ;  and  thou  shalt  have  me  to  thy  meed,  and 
thou  shalt  be  fulfilled  of  joy  and  bliss.'  It  is  Gods  will 
that  we  set  the  point  of  our  thought  in  this  blissful 
beholding  as  oft-time  as  we  may,  and  as  long  time 
keep  us  therein  with  his  grace  ;  for  this  is  a  blissful 
contemplation  to  the  soul  that  is  led  of  God,  and 
full  much  to  his  worship  for  the  time  that  it  lasteth. 
And  when  we  fall  again  to  our  self  by  heaviness  and 
ghostly  blindness,  and  feeling  of  pains  ghostly  and 
bodily  by  our  fragility,  it  is  Gods  will  that  we  know, 
that  he  hath  not  forget  us.  And  so  meaneth  he  in 
these  words,  and  saith  for  comfort ;  '  And  thou  shall 
never  more  have  pain  in  no  manner ;  nor  no  manner  of 
sickness,  no  manner  of  mis-liking,  no  want  of  will,  but 
ever  joy  and  bliss  without  end :  what  should  it  then 
agneved  thee  to  suffer  a  while,  sithen  it  is  my  will  and  my 
worship  ?'  It  is  Gods  will  that  we  take  his  behests 
and  his  comfortings  as  largely  and  as  mightily  as  we 
may  take  them.  And  also  he  will  that  we  take  our 
abidings  and  our  dis-eases  as  lightly  as  we  may  take 
them,  and  set  them  at  naught :  for  the  lightlier  that 
175

rnerne

we  take  them,  and  the  less  price  that  we  set  at  them 
for  love,  less  pain  shall  we  have  in  the  feeling  of 
them,  and  the  more  thank  and  meed  shall  we  have 
for  them.

The  Sixty-fifth  Chapter

AND  thus  I  understood  that  what  man  or  woman 
wilfully  choseth  God  in  this  life  for  love,  he  may 
be  sure  that  he  is  loved  without  end,  with  endless 
love  that  worketh  in  him  that  grace  ;  for  he  will  we 
keep  this  trustily,  that  we  be  as  sicker  in  hope  of 
the  bliss  of  heaven  whiles  we  are  here,  as  we  shall 
be  in  surety  when  we  are  there.  And  ever  the 
more  liking  and  joy  that  we  take  in  this  sickerness, 
with  reverence  and  meekness,  the  better  liketh  him. 
For  as  it  was  shewed,  this  reverence  that  I  mean,  is 
a  holy,  courteous  dread  of  our  Lord,  to  which  meek 
ness  is  knit ;  and  that  is,  that  a  creature  see  the 
Lord  marvellous  great,  and  her  self  marvellous  litle  : 
for  these  vertues  are  had  endlesly  to  the  loved  of 
God.  And  it  may  now  be  seen  and  felt  in  measure 
by  the  gracious  presence  of  our  Lord,  when  it  is : 
which  presence  in  all  thing  is  most  desired ;  for  it 
worketh  that  marvellous  sickerness  in  true  faith,  and 
siker  hope  by  greatness  of  charity  in  dread  that  is 
sweet  and  delectable.  It  is  Gods  will  that  I  see  my 
176

me  sixrr-FiF?Hme  sixrr-FiF?H

self  as  much  bound  to  him  in  love,  as  if  he  had  done 
for  me  all  that  he  hath  done.  And  thus  should 
every  soul  think  in  regard  of  his  love ;  that  is  to 
say,  the  charity  of  God  maketh  in  us  such  a  unity, 
that  when  it  is  truly  seen  no  man  can  part  him 
self  from  other.  And  thus  ought  each  soul  to  think 
that  God  hath  done  for  him  all  that  he  hath  done. 
And  this  sheweth  he  to  make  us  to  love  him,  and 
liken  him,  and  nothing  dread  but  him  ;  for  it  is  his 
will  we  know  that  all  the  might  of  our  enemies  is 
locked  in  our  friends  hands.  And  therefore  the 
soul  that  knoweth  this  sickerly,  he  shall  not  dread 
but  him  that  she  loveth.  All  other  dreads  she  set 
them  among  passions,  and  bodily  sickness,  and  ima 
ginations.  And  therefore  though  we  been  in  so 
much  pain,  woe  and  disease  that  us  thinketh,  we 
can  think  right  naught  but  that  we  are  in,  or  that 
we  feel ;  assoon  as  we  may  we  pass  it  lightly  over, 
and  set  we  it  at  naught.  And  why  ?  for  God  will 
be  known  ;  for  if  we  know  him,  and  love  him,  and 
reverently  dread  him,  we  shall  have  patience,  and  be 
in  great  rest.  And  it  should  been  great  liking  to  us 
all  that  he  doth.  And  this  shewed  our  Lord  in  these 
words  :  f  What  should  it  then  agrieve  thee  to  suffer  a 
while,  seeing  it  is  my  will  and  my  worship  ? '  Now 
have  I  told  you  of  xv.  Shewings,  as  God  witsafe  to 
minister  them  to  my  mind,  renewed  by  lightnings 
and  touchings,  I  hope,  of  the  same  Spirit  that 
177  M

rne

sheweth  them  all.  Of  which  xv.  shewings  the  fast 
began  early  in  the  morning,  about  the  hour  of 
four ;  and  it  lasted  shewing  by  process  full  fair  and 
soberly,  each  following  other  till  it  was  noon  of  the 
day,  or  past.

178

Stxteentfj178

Stxteentfj

The  Sixty  -sixth  Chapter

A'JD  after  this  the  good  Lord  shewed  the  xvith. 
Revelation  on  the  night  following,  as  I  shall 
say  after.  Which  xvith.  was  conclusion  and  confir 
mation  to  all  the  xv.  But  first  me  behooveth  to  tell 
you  as  anenst  my  feebleness,  wretchedness  and  blind 
ness.  I  have  said  at  the  beginning  where  it  saith 
(And  in  this  suddenly  all  my  pain  was  taken  from  me). 
Of  which  pain  I  had  no  grief,  ne  no  disease,  as  long 
as  the  xv.  Shewings  lasted  in  shewing.  And  at  the 
end  all  was  close,  and  I  saw  no  more  ;  and  soon  I 
felt  that  I  should  live  longer.  And  anon  my  sick 
ness  came  again  ;  first  in  my  head  with  a  sound  and 
a  noise  :  and  suddenly  all  my  body  was  fulfilled  with 
sickness,  like  as  it  was  before.  And  I  was  as  barren 
and  as  dry  as  I  had  never  had  comfort  but  litle,  and 
as  a  wretch,  mourned  heavily  for  feeling  of  my  bodily 
pains,  and  for  faulting  of  comfort  ghostly  and  bodily. 
Then  came  a  religious  person  unto  me  and  asked 
me  how  I  fared  ;  and  I  said,  '  I  had  raved  to  day/ 
and  he  laught  lowd  and  inwardly.  And  I  said,  '  The 
cross  that  stood  before  my  face,  methought  it  bled 
179

meme

fast.'  And  with  this  word  the  person  that  I  spake 
to  waxed  all  sad  and  marvelled.  And  anon  I  was 
sore  ashamed,  and  astonished  for  my  retchlesness. 
And  I  thought  this  man  taketh  sadly  the  least  word 
that  I  may  say,  that  saw  no  more  thereof.  And 
when  I  saw  that  he  took  it  so  sadly,  and  with  so 
great  reverence,  I  waxed  full  greatly  ashamed,  and 
would  have  been  shriven,  but  I  could  tell  it  to  no 
Priest ;  for  I  thought,  '  How  should  a  Priest  believe 
me,  when  I  by  saying  /  raved,  I  shewed  myself  not 
to  believe  our  Lord  God/  Notwithstanding,  I  be 
lieved  him  truly  for  the  time  that  I  saw  him ;  and 
so  was  then  my  will  and  my  meaning  ever  for  to  doe 
without  end ;  but  as  a  fool  I  let  it  pass  out  of  my 
mind.  Ah,  Loe  how  wretched  I  was;  this  was  a  great 
sin  and  a  great  unkindness,  that  I  for  folly  of  feeling 
of  a  litle  bodily  pain,  so  unwisely  left  for  the  time  the 
comfort  of  all  this  blessed  shewing  of  our  Lord  God. 
Here  may  you  see  what  I  am  of  myself.  But  herein 
would  our  courteous  Lord  not  leave  me.  And  I  lay 
still  till  night  trusting  in  his  mercy;  and  then  1  began 
to  sleep.

The  Sixty-seventh  Chapter

AND  in  my  sleep  at  the  beginning,  methought  the

fiend  set  him  in  my  throat,  putting  forth  a  visage

full  near  my  face,  like  a  young  man :   and  it  was

180AND  in  my  sleep  at  the  beginning,  methought  the

fiend  set  him  in  my  throat,  putting  forth  a  visage

full  near  my  face,  like  a  young  man :   and  it  was

180

long  and  wonder  lean,  I  saw  never  none  such.  The 
colour  was  red  like  the  tile-stone  when  it  is  new 
brent,  with  black  spots  therein,  like  frackles,  fouler 
than  the  tile-stone  ;  his  hair  was  red,  as  rust  not 
scoured ;  afore  with  side  locks  hanging  down  in 
flakes ;  he  grinned  upon  me  with  a  shrowd  look, 
and  shewed  me  white  teeth,  and  so  my  kill  [mickle] 
methought  it  the  more  ugly  ;  body,  ne  hands  had  he 
none  shapely ;  but  with  his  paws  he  held  me  in  the 
throat,  and  would  have  stopped  my  breath,  and  kild 
me,  but  he  might  not.  This  ugly  shewing  was 
made  sleeping,  and  so  was  none  other.  And  in  all 
this  time  I  trusted  to  be  saved  and  kept  by  the 
mercy  of  God.  And  our  courteous  Lord  gave  me 
grace  to  wake,  and  unnethes  had  [I]  any  life.  The 
persons  that  were  with  me  beheld  me,  and  wet  my 
temples,  and  my  heart  began  to  comfort.  And  anon 
a  little  smoke  came  in  at  the  door,  with  a  great 
heat,  and  a  foul  stinch?;  and  then  I  said,  'Bene- 
dicite  dominus,  Is  it  all  on  fire  that  is  here  ? '  And  I 
went  [weened]  it  had  been  a  bodily  fire,  that  should 
burn  us  all  to  death.  I  asked  them  that  were  with 
me,  if  they  felt  any  stench,  they  said  nay,  they  felt 
none ;  I  said,  '  Blessed  be  God/  for  then  wist  I  well 
it  was  the  fiend  that  was  come  only  to  tempt  me. 
And  anon  I  took  me  to  that  our  Lord  had  shewed 
me  on  the  same  day,  with  all  the  faith  of  Holy 
Church ;  for  I  beheld  it  as  both  in  one,  and  fled 
181

rnerne

thereto  as  to  my  comfort.  And  anon  all  vanished 
away,  and  I  was  brought  to  great  rest  and  peace, 
without  sickness  of  body,  or  dread  of  conscience.

The  Sixty-eighth  Chapter

AND  then  our  good  Lord  opened  my  ghostly  eye, 
and  shewed  me  my  soul  in  the  midst  of  my  heart : 
I  saw  the  soul  so  large  as  it  were  an  endless  world, 
and  also  as  it  were  a  blessed  kingdom.  And  by  the 
conditions  that  I  saw  therein,  I  understood  that  it  is 
a  worshipful  city.  In  mids  of  that  city  our  Lord 
Jesu  very  God  and  very  man,  a  fair  person  and  of 
large  stature,  highest  Bishop,  most  solemne  King, 
worshipful  Lord.  And  I  saw  him  clothed  solemnly  in 
worship ;  he  sitteth  in  the  soul,  even  right  in  peace 
and  rest.  And  he  ruleth  and  giveth  [guideth]  heaven 
and  earth,  and  all  that  is.  The  man-hood  with  the 
God-head  sitteth  in  rest :  the  God-head  ruleth  and 
giveth  without  any  instrument  or  business.  And 
the  soul  is  all  occupied  with  the  blessed  Godhead ; 
that  is,  sovereign  might,  sovereign  wisdom,  and 
sovereign  goodness.  The  place  that  Jesu  taketh 
in  our  soul  he  shall  never  remove  without  end,  as 
to  my  sight :  for  in  us  is  his  homliest  home,  and 
his  endless  dwelling.  And  in  this  he  sheweth  the 
liking  that  he  hath  of  the  making  of  mans  soul ;  for 
182

rnerne

as  well  as  the  Father  might  make  a  creature,  and 
as  well  as  the  Son  might  make  a  creature,  so  well 
would  the  Holy  Ghost  that  mans  soul  were  made, 
and  so  it  was  done.  And  therefore  the  blessedful 
Trinity  enjoyeth  without  end  in  the  making  of  mans 
soul :  for  he  saw  without  beginning,  what  should 
like  him  without  end.  All  thing  that  he  hath  made 
sheweth  his  Lordship,  as  understanding  was  given 
in  the  same  time  by  example  of  a  creature,  that  is 
led  to  see  great  nobleness,  and  kingdoms  longing  to 
a  Lord.  And  when  it  had  seen  all  the  nobleness 
beneath,  then  marvelling,  it  was  stirred  to  seek  up 
above  to  that  high  place  where  the  Lord  dwelleth  ; 
knowing  by  reason  that  his  dwelling  is  in  the 
worthiest  place.  And  thus  I  understand  truly  that 
our  soul  may  never  have  rest  in  things  that  is  beneath 
it  self.  And  when  it  cometh  above  all  creatures 
into  it  self,  yet  may  it  not  abide  in  the  beholding  of 
it  self;  but  all  the  beholding  is  blessedfully  set  in 
God  ;  that  is,  the  Maker  dwelling  therein  ;  for  in 
mans  soul  is  his  very  dwelling.  And  the  highest 
light  and  the  brightest  shining  of  the  city  is  the 
glorious  love  of  our  Lord  God,  as  to  my  sight.  And 
what  may  make  us  more  enjoy  in  God,  than  to  see 
in  him  that  he  enjoyeth  in  us  highest  of  all  his 
works  ?  For  I  saw  in  the  same  shewing  that  if  the 
blessed  Trinity  might  have  made  mans  soul  any 
better,  any  fairer,  any  nobler  than  it  was  made,  he 
183

rnerne

should  not  have  been  full  pleased  with  making  of 
mans  soul :  but  for  he  made  mans  soul  as  fair,  as 
good,  as  precious,  as  he  might  make  it  a  creature, 
therefore  the  blessed  Trinity  is  full  pleased  without 
end  in  the  making  of  mans  soul.  And  he  will  that 
our  hearts  be  mightily  raised  above  the  deepness  of 
the  earth  and  all  vain  sorrowes,  and  enjoy  in  him. 
This  was  a  delectable  sight,  and  a  restful  shewing 
that  is  without  end  :  and  the  beholding  of  this 
whiles  we  are  here,  it  is  full  pleasant  to  God,  and 
full  great  speed  to  us.  And  the  soul  that  thus  be- 
holdeth,  it  maketh  him  like  to  him  that  is  beholden, 
and  oned  in  rest  and  in  peace  by  his  grace.  And 
this  was  a  singular  joy  and  bliss  to  me  that  I  saw 
him  sitting :  for  the  truth  of  sitting  shewed  endless 
dwelling.  And  he  gave  me  knowing  truly  that  it 
was  he  that  shewed  me  all  before :  and  when  I  had 
beholden  all  this  with  advisement ;  then  shewed 
our  good  Lords  words  full  meekly,  without  voice, 
and  without  opening  of  lips,  right  as  he  had  done 
afore,  and  said  full  sweetly ;  '  Wit  it  now  well,  it  was 
no  raving  that  thou  sawest  to  day  :  but  take  it  and  believe 
it,  and  keep  thee  therein,  and  comfort  thee  therewith,  and 
trust  thereto,  and  thou  shall  not  be  overcome.'  These 
last  words  were  said  for  learning  of  full  true  siker- 
ness  that  it  is  our  Lord  Jesu  that  shewed  me  all. 
And  right  as  in  the  first  word,  that  our  good  Lord 
shewed,  meaning  his  blessed  passion,  'herewith  is 
184the  fiend  overcome  ;  '  right  so  he  said  in  the  last  word, 
with  full  true  faithfulness  meaning  us  all :  '  Thou 
shall  not  be  overcome.'  And  all  this  learning  and  this 
true  comfort  is  general  to  all  mine  even  Christen,  as 
it  is  aforesaid  ;  and  so  is  Gods  will.  And  this  word, 
'  Thou  shall  not  be  overcome,'  was  said  full  sharply 
and  full  mightily  for  sickerness  and  comfort  against 
all  tribulations  that  may  come  :  he  said  not,  thou 
shalt  not  be  troubled,  thou  shalt  not  be  travelled, 
thou  shalt  not  be  diseased ;  but  he  said,  '  Thou 
shalt  not  be  overcome.'  God  will  that  we  take  heed 
at  this  word,  and  that  we  be  ever  mighty  in  faithful 
trusting  in  weal  and  woe ;  for  he  loveth  us,  and 
liketh  us :  and  so  will  he  that  we  love  him  and 
like  him,  and  mightily  trust  in  him,  and  all  shall 
be  well  :  and  soon  all  was  close,  and  I  saw  no  more 
after  this.

The  Sixty-ninth  Chapter

THE  fiende  came  again  with  his  heat,  and  with  his 
stench,  and  made  me  full  busie.  The  stench  was  so 
vile  and  so  painful,  and  bodily  heat  also  dreadful 
and  travellous.  Also  I  heard  a  bodily  talking,  as  it 
had  been  of  two  bodies  :  and  both  to  my  thinking 
talked  at  one  time,  as  they  had  held  a  parliament, 
with  great  business.  And  all  was  soft  whistering. 
And  I  understood  not  what  they  said.  And  all  this 
185

rne

was  to  stir  me  to  dispair,  as  methought,  seeming  to 
me  as  they  scorned  bidding  of  beads,  which  are  said 
boystously,  with  much  failing  of  devout  intending, 
and  wise  diligence.,  the  which  we  owe  to  God  in  our 
prayer.

The  Seventieth  ChapterThe  Seventieth  Chapter

AND  our  good  Lord  God  gave  me  grace  mightily 
to  trust  in  him,  and  to  comfort  my  soul  with 
bodily  speech,  as  I  should  have  done  to  another 
person  that  had  been  travelled.  Methought  that 
business  might  not  be  likened  to  no  bodily  likeness. 
My  bodily  eye  I  set  in  the  same  cross,  there  I  had 
seen  in  comfort  afore  that  time  ;  my  tongue  with 
speech  of  Christs  passion,  and  rehersing  the  faith  of 
Holy  Church,  and  my  heart  to  fasten  on  God  with 
all  the  trust  and  the  might  that  I  thought  to  my 
self,  meaning,  'Thou  hast  now  great  business  to 
keep  thee  in  the  faith,  for  that  thou  shouldest  not 
be  taken  of  thine  enemies.  Wouldest  thou  now  fro 
this  time  evermore  be  so  busie  to  keep  thee  from 
sin,  this  were  a  good  and  a  sovereign  occupation/ 
For  I  thought  faithfully,  were  I  safe  from  sin,  I 
were  full  safe  from  all  the  fiends  in  hell,  and  ene 
mies  of  my  soul.  And  thus  he  occupied  me  all  that 
night,  and  on  the  morrow,  till  it  was  about  prime 
day.  And  anon  they  were  all  gone  arid  passed,  and 
186

rnsrns

there  left  nothing  but  stink,  and  lasted  still  a  while  : 
and  I  scorned  him.  And  thus  was  I  delivered  of 
him  by  the  vertue  of  Christs  passion ;  for  therewith 
is  the  fiend  overcome,  as  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  said 
afore.  In  all  this  blessed  shewing  our  good  Lord 
gave  understanding  that  the  sight  should  pass. 
Which  blessed  shewing  the  faith  keepeth  with  his 
own  good  will  and  his  grace  ;  for  he  left  with  me 
neither  signe,  ne  token,  whereby  I  might  know  it. 
But  he  left  with  me  his  own  blessed  word  in  true 
understanding,  bidding  me  full  mightily  that  I  should 
believe  it,  and  so  I  do;  blessed  mote  he  be.  I 
believe  that  he  is  our  Saviour  that  shewed  it,  and 
that  it  is  in  the  faith  that  he  shewed.  And  there 
fore  I  love  it  ever  joying,  and  thereto  I  am  bound 
by  all  his  own  meaning,  with  the  next  words  that 
follow  :  'Keep  thee  therein,  and  comfort  thee  therewith, 
and  trust  thereto.'  Thus  I  am  beholding  to  keep  it  in 
my  faith  :  for  on  the  same  day  that  it  was  shewed, 
what  time  the  sight  was  passed,  as  a  wretch  I  for 
sook  it,  and  openly  I  said  that  I  had  raved.  Then 
our  Lord  Jesu  of  his  mercy  would  not  let  it  perish, 
but  he  shewed  it  all  again  within  my  soul  with  more 
fulhead,  with  the  blessed  light  of  his  precious  love, 
saying  these  words  full  mightily  and  full  meekly ; 
'  Wit  it  now  well,  it  was  no  raving  that  thou  saw  this 
day  ;  as  if  he  had  said,  for  the  sight  was  passed  from 
thee,  thou  lost  it,  and  could  or  might  not  keep  it :  But 
187wit  it  now  ;'  that  is  to  say,  'now  thou  seest  it.'  This 
was  said  not  only  for  the  same  time ;  but  also  to  set 
thereupon  the  ground  of  my  faith,  where  he  saith 
anon  following;  'But  take  it,  and  learn  it,  and  keep 
thee  therein,  and  comfort  thee  therewith,  and  trust 
thereto,  and  thou  shall  not  be  overcome/

The  Seventy-first  Chapter

IN  these  six  words  that  followeth,  where  he  saith, 
'  Take  it ; '  his  meaning  is  to  fasten  it  faithfully 
in  our  heart ;  for  he  will  it  dwell  with  us  in  faith 
into  our  lives  end,  and  after  in  fulhead  of  joy, 
willing  that  we  have  ever  faithful  trust  of  his 
blessedful  promises,  knowing  his  goodness.  For 
our  faith  is  contraried  in  diverse  manner,  by  our 
own  blindness,  and  our  ghostly  enemies  within 
and  without.  And  therefore  our  precious  Lover 
helpeth  us  with  ghostly  light,  and  true  teaching, 
on  diverse  manner  within  and  without,  whereby 
that  we  may  know  him.  And  therefore  in  what 
manner  that  he  teacheth  us,  he  will  that  we  per 
ceive  him  wisely,  receiving  him  sweetly,  and  keep 
us  in  him  faithfully.  For  above  the  faith  is  no  good 
ness  kept  in  this  life,  as  to  my  sight.  And  beneath 
the  faith  is  no  health  of  soul.  But  in  the  faith 
there  will  our  Lord  we  keep  us :  for  we  have  by 
188

rnerne

his  goodness  and  his  own  working  to  keep  us  in 
the  faith.  And  by  his  sufferance  through  ghostly 
enmity  we  are  assaid  in  the  faith,  and  made 
mighty.  For  if  our  faith  had  not  enmity,  it  should 
deserve  no  meed,  as  by  the  understanding  that 
I  have  in  our  Lords  meaning.  Glad  and  merry, 
and  sweet,  is  the  blessedful  lovely  chear  of  our 
Lord  to  our  souls ;  for  he  beheld  us  ever  living 
in  love-longing.  And  he  will  our  soul  be  in  glad 
chear  to  him,  to  yield  him  his  meed.  And  thus 
I  hope  with  his  grace  he  hath,  and  more  shall, 
draw  the  utter  [outer]  chear  to  the  inner,  and  make 
us  all  at  one  with  him,  and  each  of  us  with  other 
in  true  lasting  joy  that  is  Jesu.  I  have  meaning 
of  three  manner  of  chears  of  our  Lord :  the  first 
is  chear  of  passion,  as  he  shewed  whiles  he  was 
with  us  in  this  life  dying.  And  though  this  be 
holding  be  mourning  and  swemful,  yet  it  is  glad 
and  merry ;  for  he  is  God.  The  second  manner 
of  chear  it  is  pitty,  and  ruth,  and  compassion :  and 
this  sheweth  he  to  all  his  lovers,  with  sikerness 
of  keeping  that  hath  need  to  his  mercy.  The 
third  is  the  blissedful  chear  as  it  shall  be  without 
end.  And  this  was  oftenest  shewed,  and  longest 
continued.  And  thus  in  the  time  of  our  pain  and 
our  woe,  he  sheweth  to  us  chear  of  his  passion 
and  his  cross,  helping  us  to  bear  it  by  his  own 
blessed  vertue.  And  in  time  of  our  sinning,  he 
189

rnerne

sheweth  to  us  chear  of  ruth  and  pity,  mightily 
keeping  us,  and  defending  against  all  our  enemies. 
And  these  two  be  the  common  chears  which  he 
sheweth  to  us  in  this  life,  therewith  medling  the 
third :  and  that  is  his  blessed  chear  like  in  party 
as  it  shall  be  in  heaven ;  and  that  is  by  gracious 
touching  of  sweet  lightning  of  ghostly  life,  where 
by  that  we  are  kept  in  true  faith,  hope,  and 
charity  with  contrition  and  devotion,  and  also  with 
contemplation,  and  all  manner  of  true  joyes  and 
sweet  comforts.  The  blessedful  chear  of  our  Lord 
God  worketh  it  in  us  by  grace.  But  now  me 
behooveth  to  tell  in  what  manner  that  I  saw  sin 
deadly,  in  the  creatures  which  should  not  die  for 
sin,  but  live  in  the  joy  of  God  without  end.  I 
saw  that  two  contraries  should  not  be  together  in 
one  steed.  The  most  contrarious  that  are,  is  the 
highest  bliss,  and  the  deepest  pain.  The  highest 
bliss  that  is,  is  to  have  God  in  clerity  of  endless 
light,  him  verily  seeing,  him  sweetly  feeling,  him 
all  peaceable  having  in  fulhead  of  joy  :  and  thus 
was  the  blessedful  chear  of  our  Lord  God  shewed 
in  party  [Ppity].  In  which  shewing  I  saw  that  sin 
was  the  most  contrary,  so  far  forth  that,  as  long  as 
we  be  medled  with  any  part  of  sin,  we  shall  never 
see  clearly  the  blessed  chear  of  God.  And  the 
horriblier,  and  the  grievouser  that  our  sins  be,  the 
deeper  are  we  for  that  time  fro  this  blessed  sight. 
190

rnerne

And  therefore  it  seemeth  to  us  oftentimes  as  we 
were  in  peril  of  death,  and  in  a  party  of  hell,  for 
the  sorrow  and  the  pain  that  sin  is  to  us.  And 
thus  we  are  dead  for  the  time  fro  the  very  sight 
of  our  blessedful  life.  But  in  all  this  I  saw  faith 
fully  that  we  be  not  dead  in  the  sight  of  God, 
ne  he  passeth  never  from  us;  but  he  shall  never 
have  his  full  bless  in  us  till  we  have  our  full 
bless  in  him,  verily  seeing  his  fair  blessedful  chear, 
for  we  are  ordained  thereto  in  kind,  and  getten 
thereto  by  grace.  Thus  I  saw  how  sin  is  deadly  for 
a  short  time  to  the  blessed  creatures  of  endless  life ; 
and  ever  the  more  clearly  that  the  soul  seeth  the 
blissful  chear  by  grace  of  loving,  the  more  it 
longeth  to  see  it  in  fulhead ;  that  is  to  say,  in 
his  own  likeness :  for  notwithstanding  that  our 
Lord  God  dwelleth  now  in  us,  and  is  here  with 
us,  and  colleth  us,  and  becloseth  us  for  tender 
love  that  he  may  never  leave  us,  and  is  more 
near  to  us  than  tongue  may  tell,  or  heart  may 
think  :  yet  may  we  never  stint  of  mourning,  ne 
of  weeping,  nor  of  seeking,  nor  of  longing,  till 
when  we  see  him  clear  in  his  blessedful  chear : 
for  in  that  precious  sight  there  may  no  woe  abide, 
nor  weal  fail.  And  in  this  I  saw  matter  of  mirth, 
and  matter  of  mourning :  matter  of  mirth,  that 
our  Lord  our  maker  is  so  near  to  us,  and  in 
us,  and  we  in  him  by  faithfulness  of  keeping  of 
191

meme

his  great  goodness.  Matter  of  mourning  for  our 
ghostly  eye  is  so  blind,  and  we  so  boarn  down 
with  weight  of  our  deadly  flesh,  and  darkness  of 
sin,  that  we  may  not  see  our  Lord  God  clearly 
in  his  blessedful  chear ;  No,  and  because  of  this 
darkness,  scarce  we  can  believe  or  trowe  his  great 
love  and  our  faithfulness  of  keeping.  And  there 
fore  it  is  that  I  say,  we  may  never  leave  off 
mourning,  ne  weeping :  this  weeping  meaneth  not 
all  in  pouring  out  of  tears  by  our  bodily  eye,  but 
also  to  more  ghostly  understanding;  for  the  kindly 
desire  of  our  soul  is  so  great,  and  so  unmeasur- 
able,  that  if  it  were  given  us  to  our  joy  and  our 
comfort,  all  the  nobly  that  ever  God  made  in 
heaven  and  in  earth,  and  we  saw  not  the  fair 
blessedful  chear  of  himself,  yet  should  we  never 
leave  mourning  ne  of  ghostly  weeping ;  that  is 
to  say,  of  painful  longing,  till  when  we  see  verily 
the  fair  blessedful  chear  of  our  Maker.  And  if 
we  were  in  all  the  pain  that  heart  may  think, 
or  tongue  may  tell ;  and  we  might  in  that  time 
see  his  blessedful  chear,  all  this  pain  should  us 
not  grieve.  Thus  is  that  blessedful  sight  end  of 
all  manner  of  pain  to  loving  souls,  and  fulfilling 
of  all  manner  of  joy  and  bliss.  And  that  shewed 
he  in  the  high  marvellous  words  where  he  saith ; 
'I  it  am  that  is  highest;  I  it  am  that  thou  lovest ; 
I  it  am  that  is  all.'  It  longeth  to  us  to  have  three 
192

FUGFUG

manner  of  knowings.  The  first  is,  that  we  know 
our  Lord  God.  The  second  is,  that  we  know  our- 
self ;  what  we  are  by  him  in  kind  and  in  grace  : 
the  third  is,  that  we  know  meekly  that  our  self 
is  against  our  sin  and  against  our  feebleness.  And 
for  these  three  was  all  this  shewing  made,  as  to 
my  understanding.

The  Seventy-second  Chapter

ALL  this  blessed  teaching  of  our  Lord  God  was 
shewed  by  three  parts ;  that  is  to  say,  by  bodily 
sight,  and  by  word  formed  in  my  understanding, 
and  by  ghostly  sight.  For  the  bodily  sight,  I  have 
said  as  I  saw  as  truly  as  I  can  :  and  for  the  words, 
I  have  said  them  right  as  our  Lord  shewed  them 
me  :  and  for  the  ghostly  sight,  I  have  said  some 
deal,  but  I  may  never  full  tell  it.  And  therefore 
of  this  ghostly  sight  I  am  stirred  to  say  more  as 
God  will  give  me  grace.  God  shewed  two  manner 
of  sickness  that  we  have  :  that  one  is  unpatience,  or 
slouth ;  for  we  bear  our  travel  and  our  pain  heavily. 
That  other  is  despair  or  doubtful  dreed,  as  I  shall 
say  after :  generally  he  shewed  sin  wherein  all  is 
comprehended,  but  in  special  he  shewed  none  but 
these  two.  And  these  two  are  it  that  most  travelleth 
and  troubleth  us,  as  by  that  our  Lord  shewed  me. 
Of  which  he  will  we  be  amended  ;  (I  speak  of  such 
193  N

27/e27/e

men  and  women  that  for  Gods  love  hate  sin,  and 
dispose  them  to  do  Gods  will).  Then  by  our  ghostly 
blind-head  and  bodily  heaviness,  we  are  most  en- 
clining  to  these,  and  therefore  it  is  Gods  will  that 
they  be  known,  and  then  should  we  refuse  them,  as 
we  do  other  sins.  And  for  help  against  this,  full 
meekly  our  Lord  shewed  the  patience  that  he  had 
in  this  hard  passion  :  and  also  the  joy  and  the  liking 
that  he  hath  of  that  passion  for  love.  And  this  he 
shewed  in  example,  that  we  should  gladly  and  easily 
bear  our  pains;  for  that  is  great  pleasing  to  him, 
and  endless  profit  to  us.  And  the  cause  why  we 
are  travelled  with  them  is  for  unknowing  of  love. 
Though  the  Three  Persons  of  the  blessed  Trinity l  be 
all  even  in  the  self,  the  soul  took  most  understand 
ing  in  love  ;  yea,  and  he  will  in  all  thing  that  we 
have  our  beholding  and  our  enjoying  in  love.  And 
of  this  knowing  are  we  most  blind.  For  some  of  us 
believe  that  God  is  all  mighty,  and  may  do  all ;  and 
that  he  is  all  wisdom,  and  can  do  all :  but  that  he  is 
all  love  and  will  do  all,  there  we  fail.  And  this  un 
knowing  it  is  that  most  letteth  Gods  lovers,  as  to 
my  sight :  for  when  we  begin  to  hate  sin,  and 
amend  us  by  the  ordinance  of  Holy  Church,  yet 
there  dwelleth  a  dread  that  letteth  us,  by  the  be 
holding  of  our  self  and  of  our  sin  afore  done ;  and 
some  of  us  for  our  e very-day  sins,  for  we  hold  not

1  Father = might,  Son = wisdom,  Spirit  =  love. 
1.94

rne1  Father = might,  Son = wisdom,  Spirit  =  love. 
1.94

rne

our  promise,  nor  keep  our  cleanness  that  our  Lord 
setteth  us  in,  but  fall  oft-times  into  so  much  wretched 
ness,  that  shame  it  is  to  say  it.  And  the  beholding 
of  this  maketh  us  so  sorry,  and  so  heavy,  that  unneths 
we  can  see  any  comfort.  And  this  dread  we  take 
sometime  for  a  meekness,  but  it  is  a  foul  blindness, 
and  a  wickedness  [weakness].  And  we  cannot  despise 
it  as  we  do  another  sin  that  we  know  ;  which  cometh 
through  lack  of  true  judgment,  and  it  is  against  truth  : 
for  of  all  the  properties  of  the  blissedful  Trinity  it  is 
Gods  will  that  we  have  most  faithfulness  and  liking  in 
love ;  for  love  maketh  might  and  wisdom  full  meek 
to  us.  For  right  as  by  the  courtesie  of  God  he  for- 
getteth  our  sin  after  the  time  that  we  repent  us  : 
so  will  he  that  we  forget  our  sin  as  against  our  un 
skillful  heaviness,  and  our  doubtful  dreads.

The  Seventy-third  Chapter

FOR  I  understood  four  manner  of  dreads :  one  is 
dread  of  a  fray  that  cometh  to  man  suddenly  by 
frailty.  This  dread  doth  good,  for  it  helpeth  to 
purge  man,  as  doth  bodily  sickness,  or  such  other 
pain  that  is  not  sin ;  for  all  such  pains  help  man, 
if  they  be  patiently  taken.  The  second  is  dread  of 
pain  ;  whereby  man  is  stirred  and  waked  fro  sleep 
of  sin  :  for  man  that  is  hard  of  sleep  of  sin,  he  is 
195

rnerne

not  able  for  the  time  to  receive  the  soft  comfort  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  till  he  hath  undertaken  this  dread 
of  pain,  of  bodily  death  and  of  ghostly  enemies. 
And  this  dread  stirreth  us  to  seek  comfort  and 
mercy  of  God.  And  thus  this  dread  helpeth  us  as 
an  entry,  and  ableth  us  to  have  contrition  by  the 
blissedful  touching  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  third 
is  doubtful  dread.  Doubtful  dread  in  as  much  as  it 
draweth  to  despair,  God  will  have  it  turned  in  us 
into  love,  by  true  knowing  of  love ;  that  is  to  say, 
that  the  bitterness  of  doubts  be  turned  into  sweet 
ness  of  kind  love  by  grace ;  for  it  may  never  please 
our  Lord  that  his  servants  doubt  in  his  goodness. 
The  fourth  is  reverent  dread;  for  there  is  no  dread 
that  fully  pleaseth  God  in  us,  but  reverent  dread, 
and  that  is  soft.  For  the  more  it  is  had,  the  less 
it  is  felt  for  sweetness  of  love.  Love  and  dread  are 
brethren,  and  they  are  rooted  in  us  by  the  goodness 
of  our  Maker,  and  they  shall  never  be  taken  from 
us  without  end.  We  have  of  kind  to  love,  and  we 
have  of  grace  to  love ;  and  have  we  of  kind  to  dread, 
and  we  have  of  grace  to  dread.  It  longeth  to  the 
lordship,  and  to  the  father-head  to  be  dreaded,  as  it 
longeth  to  the  goodness  to  be  loved  :  and  it  longeth 
to  us  that  are  his  servants  and  his  children  to  dread 
him  for  lordship,  and  fatherhead ;  as  it  longeth  to 
us  to  love  him  for  God-head.  And  though  this 
reverent  dread  and  love  be  not  both  in  one,  but 
196

meme

are  two  in  property  and  in  working,  and  [yet]  neither 
of  them  may  be  had  without  other.  And  therefore  I 
am  sure,  he  that  loveth  he  dreadeth,  though  he  feel 
it  but  little.  All  dreads  other  than  reverend  dread 
that  are  preferred  to  us,  though  they  come  under 
colour  of  holiness,,  they  are  not  so  true.  And  hereby 
may  they  be  known  asunder.  That  dread  that 
maketh  us  hastily  to  flee  fro  all  that  is  not  good, 
and  fall  into  our  Lords  breast,  as  the  child  into 
the  mothers  arme,  with  all  our  intent,  and  with  all 
our  mind,  knowing  our  feebleness  and  our  great 
need,  knowing  his  everlasting  goodness  and  his 
blessed  love,  only  seeking  into  him  for  salvation, 
cleaving  to  with  faithful  trust :  that  dread  that 
bringeth  us  into  this  working,  it  is  kind  and  gracious, 
and  good,  and  true.  And  all  that  is  contrarious  to 
this,  either  it  is  wrong,  or  it  is  medled  with  wrong. 
Then  is  this  the  remedy  to  know  them  both,  and 
refuse  the  wrong :  for  the  kind  property  of  dread 
which  we  have  in  this  life  by  the  gracious  working 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  same  shall  be  in  heaven 
afore  God,  gentle,  courteous,  full  sweet.  And  thus 
we  shall  in  love  be  homely  and  near  to  God.  And 
we  in  dread  be  gentle  and  curteous  to  God,  and 
both  in  one  manner  like  even.  Desire  we  then  of 
our  Lord  God  to  dread  him  reverently,  and  love 
him  meekly,  and  to  trust  in  him  mightily  :  for  when 
we  dread  him  reverently,  and  love  him  meekly,  our 
197

THSTHS

trust  is  never  in  vain ;  for  the  more  that  we  trust, 
and  the  mightilier  that  we  trust,  the  more  we  please 
and  worship  our  Lord  that  we  trust  in.  And  if  us 
fail  this  reverent  dread  and  meek  love,  as  God  forbid 
we  [it]  should,  our  trust  shall  soon  be  mis-ruled  for 
that  time.  And  therefore  us  needeth  much  to  pray 
our  Lord  of  grace  that  we  may  have  this  reverent 
dread,  and  make  love  of  his  gift  in  heart  and  in 
work,  for  without  this  no  man  may  please  God.

The  Seventy  fourth  Chapter

I  SAW  that  God  may  do  all  that  us  deedeth  [Pneedeth] : 
and  these  three  that  I  shall  say,  need,  love,  longing. 
Pitty  and  love  keepeth  us  in  the  time  of  our  need. 
And  longing  in  the  same  love  draweth  us  into 
heaven ;  for  the  thirst  of  God  is  to  have  the  general 
man  into  him.  In  which  thirst  he  hath  drawn  his 
holy  souls  that  be  now  in  bliss.  And  so  getting  his 
lively  members,  ever  he  draweth  and  drinketh,  and 
yet  him  thirsteth  and  longeth.  I  saw  three  manner 
of  longings  in  God,  and  all  to  one  end.  Thejirst 
is,  for  that  he  longeth  to  learn  us  to  know  him  and 
to  love  him  ever  more  and  more,  as  it  is  convenient 
and  speedful  to  us.  The  second  is,  that  he  longeth 
to  have  us  up  into  bliss,  as  souls  are  when  they  be 
taken  out  of  pain  into  heaven.  The  third  is,  to  fulfill 
198

meme

us  of  bliss,  and  that  shall  be  on  the  last  day  fulfilled 
ever  to  last.  For  I  saw,  as  it  is  known  in  our  faith, 
that  then  pain  and  sorrow  shall  be  ended  to  all  that 
shall  be  saved.  And  not  only  we  shall  receive  the 
same  bliss  that  souls  afore  have  had  in  heaven,  but 
also  we  shall  receive  a  new,  which  plentuously  shall 
flie  out  of  God  into  us,  and  fulfill  us.  And  those  be 
the  goods  which  he  hath  ordained  to  give  us  fro 
without  beginning.  These  goods  are  treasured  and 
hid  in  himself;  for  into  that  time  [the]  creature  is 
not  mighty,  ne  worthy  to  receive  them.  In  this  we 
should  see  verily  the  cause  of  all  the  deeds  that  God 
hath  done.  And  over-more  we  should  see  the  cause 
of  all  thing  that  he  hath  suffered  :  and  the  bliss,  and 
the  fulfilling  shall  be  so  deep  and  so  high,  that  for 
wonder  and  marvel  all  creatures  should  have  to  God 
so  great  reverence  and  dread,  over-passing  that  hath 
been  seen  and  felt  before  that  the  pillars  of  heaven 
shall  travel  and  quake.  But  this  manner  of  trembling 
and  dread  shall  have  no  manner  of  pain  ;  but  it 
longeth  to  the  worthy  majesty  of  God,  thus  to  be 
beholden  of  his  creatures,  dreadfully  trembling  and 
quaking :  for  much  more  of  joy,  endlesly  marvelling 
of  the  greatness  of  God  the  Maker,  and  of  the  least 
part  of  all  that  is  made.  For  the  beholding  of  this 
maketh  creature  marvellous  meek  and  mild.  Where 
fore  God  will,  and  also  it  longeth  to  us  both  in  kind 
and  in  grace,  to  will  to  have  knowing  of  this  desiring 
199

ruerue

the  sight  and  the  working.  For  it  leadeth  us  in 
right  way,  and  keepeth  us  in  true  life,  and  oneth  us 
to  God.  And  as  good  as  God  is,  as  great  he  is  :  and 
as  much  as  it  longeth  to  his  God-head  to  be  loved, 
so  much  it  longeth  to  his  great  highness  to  be  dread. 
For  this  reverent  dread  is  the  fairer  courtesie  that 
is  in  heaven  before  Gods  face.  And  as  much  as  he 
shall  be  known  and  loved,  over-passing  that  he  is 
now  :  in  so  much  he  shall  be  dread  over-passing  that 
he  is  now.  Wherefore  it  behooveth  needs  to  be, 
that  all  heaven,  all  earth  shall  tremble  and  quake 
when  the  pillars  shall  tremble  and  quake.

The  Seventy-fifth  Chapter

I  SPEAK  but  little  of  this  reverent  dread :  for  I  hope 
it  may  be  seen  in  this  matter  aforesaid.  But  well  I 
wote  that  our  Lord  shewed  me  no  souls  but  those 
that  dread  him  ;  for  well  I  wote  the  soul  that  truly 
taketh  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  hateth 
more  sin  for  the  vileness  and  the  horribility,  than  it 
doth  all  the  pain  that  is  in  hell.  For  the  soul  that 
beholdeth  the  kindness  of  our  Lord  Jesu,  it  hateth 
no  hell ;  but  hell  is  sin  as  to  my  sight.  And  there 
fore  Jit  is  Gods  will  that  we  know  sin,  and  pray 
busily,  and  travel  wilfully,  and  seek  teaching  meekly, 
that  we  fall  not  blindly  therein ;  and  if  we  fall,  that 
200

rnerne

we  rise  readily  :  for  it  is  the  most  pain  that  the  soul 
may  have  to  turn  from  God  any  time  by  sin.  The 
soul  that  will  be  in  rest,  when  other  mens  sins  come 
to  mind,  he  should  flee  it  as  the  pain  of  hell,  seeking 
into  God  for  help  against  that ;  for  the  beholding  of 
other  mens  sin,  it  maketh  as  it  were  a  thick  mist 
afore  the  eye  of  the  soul.  And  we  may  not  for  the 
time  see  the  fair-head  of  God,  but  if  [unless]  we  may 
behold  them  with  contrition  with  them,  with  compas 
sion  on  them,  and  with  holy  desire  to  God  for  them. 
For  without  this  it  noieth,  and  troubleth,  and  letteth 
the  soul  that  behold  them ;  for  this  I  understand  in 
the  shewing  of  the  compassion.  In  this  blessedful 
shewing  of  our  Lord  I  have  understanding  of  two 
contraries.  That  one  is  the  most  wisdom  that  any 
creature  may  do  in  this  life.  That  other  is  the  most 
folly.  The  most  wisdom  is  a  creature  to  do  after 
the  will  and  the  counsel  of  his  highest  sovereign 
friend.  This  blessed  friend  is  Jesu,  and  it  is  his  will 
and  counsel  that  we  hold  us  with  him,  and  fasten  us 
homely  to  him,  evermore  in  what  state  soever  we 
bene  :  for  whether  we  be  foul  or  clean,  we  are  ever 
one  in  his  loving.  For  weal,  ne  for  woe  he  will 
never  we  flee  him  ;  but  for  the  change-ability  that 
we  are  in  our  self,  we  fall  often  into  sin.  Than  have 
we  this  by  the  stirring  of  our  enemy,  and  by  our 
own  folly  and  blindness:  for  they  say  thus,  "Thou 
wotest  well  thou  art  a  wretch,  a  sinner,  and  also  un- 
201

meme

true,  for  thou  keepest  not  thy  covenant.  Thou 
promisest  oftentimes  our  Lord  that  thou  shalt  do 
better;  and  anon  thou  fallest  again  in  the  same, 
namely  in  slouth,  and  leesing  of  time."  For  that  is 
the  beginning  of  sin  as  to  my  sight ;  and  namely,  to 
the  creatures  that  have  given  themself  to  serve  our 
Lord  with  inward  beholding  of  his  blessedful  good 
ness.  And  this  maketh  us  adread  to  appear  afore 
our  courteous  Lord.  Than  is  it  our  enemy  that  will 
put  us  a  back  with  his  false  dread  of  our  wretched 
ness,  for  pain  that  he  threateth  us  by,  for  it  is  his 
meaning  to  make  us  so  heavy  and  so  sorry  in  this, 
that  we  should  let  out  of  mind  the  blessedful  be 
holding  of  our  everlasting  friend.

The  Seventy -sixth  Chapter

OUR  good  Lord  shewed  the  enmity  of  the  fiend, 
whereby  I  understood  that  all  that  is  contrarious  to 
love  and  to  peace,  it  is  of  the  fiend,  and  of  his  party  ; 
and  we  have  of  our  feebleness  and  our  folly  to  fall : 
and  we  have  of  mercy  and  of  grace  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  rise  to  more  joy.  And  if  our  enemy  ought 
winneth  of  us  by  our  falling  (for  it  is  his  likeness) 
he  leeseth  many  times  more  in  our  rising  by  charity 
and  meekness.  And  this  glorious  rising  it  is  so  great 
sorrow  and  pain  to  him,  for  the  hate  that  he  hath  to 
202our  soul,  that  he  brenneth  continually  in  envy.  And 
all  this  sorrow  that  he  would  make  us  to  have,  it 
shall  turn  into  himself.  And  for  this  it  was  that 
our  Lord  scorned  him,  and  shewed  that  he  shall  be 
scorned ;  and  this  made  me  mightily  to  laugh. 
Then  is  this  the  remedy  that  we  be  a  known  of  our 
wretchedness,  and  flie  to  our  Lord :  for  ever  the 
more  needier  that  we  be,  the  more  speedful  it  is  to 
us  to  touch  him  ;  and  say  we  thus  in  our  meaning ; 
*  I  know  well  that  I  have  deserved  pain,  but  our 
Lord  is  Almighty,  and  may  punish  me  mightily ; 
and  he  is  all  wisdom,  and  can  punish  me  wisely,  and 
he  is  all  goodness,  and  loveth  me  tenderly.'  And  in 
this  beholding  it  is  speedful  to  us  to  abide  ;  for  it 
is  a  full  lovely  meekness  of  a  sinful  soul  wrought  by 
mercy  and  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  when  we 
will  wilfully  and  gladly  take  the  scourging  and  the 
chastising  that  our  Lord  himself  will  give  us,  and  it 
shall  be  full  tender  and  full  easie  if  we  will  only 
hold  us  pleased  with  him,  and  writh  all  his  works. 
For  that  penance  that  man  taketh  upon  himself,  it 
was  not  shewed  me ;  that  is  to  say,  it  was  not 
shewed  me  specified ;  but  this  was  shewed  specially, 
and  highly,  and  with  full  lovely  chear,  that  we 
should  meekly  and  patiently  bear  and  suffer  that 
penance  that  God  himself  giveth  us,  with  mind  of 
his  blessed  passion ;  for  when  we  have  mind  of  his 
blessed  passion  with  pitty  and  love,  then  we  suffer 
203

meme

with  him,  like  as  his  friends  did  that  saw  it.  And 
this  was  shewed  in  the  xiiith.  neer  at  the  beginning, 
where  it  speaketh  of  pity ;  for  he  saith,  '  Accuse  not 
thy  self  that  thy  tribulation  and  thy  woe  is  all  thy  de 
fault  :  for  I  will  not  that  thou  be  heavy,  ne  sorrowful  un~ 
discreetly  ;  for  1  tell  thee,  howsoever  thou  do  thou  shall 
have  woe.  And  therefore  1  will  that  thou  wisely  know 
thy  penance  which  thou  art  in  continually,  and  that  thou 
meekly  take  it  for  thy  penance.  And  then  shall  thou 
truly  see  that  all  this  living  is  penance  profitable.'  This 
place  is  prison ;  this  life  is  penance,  and  in  the 
remedy  he  will  that  we  enjoy.  The  remedy  is,  that 
our  Lord  is  with  us,  keeping  us,  and  leading  into 
fulhead  of  joy ;  for  this  is  an  endless  joy  to  us  in 
our  Lords  meaning ;  that  he  that  shall  be  our  bliss 
when  we  are  there,  he  is  our  Keeper  while  we  are 
here ;  our  way  and  our  heaven,  in  true  love  and 
faithful  trust.  And  of  this  he  gave  understanding 
in  all,  and  namely,  in  shewing  of  his  passion,  where 
he  made  me  mightily  to  choose  him  for  my  heaven. 
Flee  we  to  our  Lord,  and  we  shall  be  comforted, 
touch  we  him,  and  we  shall  be  made  clean ;  cleave 
we  to  him,  and  we  shall  be  sure  and  safe  from  all 
manner  of  perils ;  for  our  courteous  Lord  will  that 
we  be  as  homely  with  him,  as  heart  may  think,  or 
soul  may  desire.  But  be  we  ware  that  we  take  not 
so  retchesly  this  homely-head  for  to  leave  courtesie ; 
for  our  Lord  himself  is  sovereign  homely-head,  and 
204

rnerne

>o  homely  as  he  is,  as  courteous  he  is ;  for  he  is 
ery  courteous.  And  the  blessed  creatures  that 
shall  be  in  heaven  with  him  without  end,  he  will 
iave  them  like  to  himself  in  all  thing ;  and  to  be 
ike  to  our  Lord  perfectly,  it  is  our  very  salvation 
md  our  full  bliss.  And  if  we  wote  not  how  we 
shall  do  all  this,  desire  we  of  our  Lord,  and  he  shall 
earn  us ;  for  it  is  his  own  liking  and  his  worship : 
Blessed  mote  he  be.

The  Seventy-seventh  Chapter

Lord  of  his  mercy  sheweth  us  our  sin  and  our 
feebleness  by  the  sweet  gracious  sight  of  himself. 
For  our  sin  is  so  foul  and  so  horrible,  that  he  of  his 
zurtesie  will  not  shew  it  us  but  by  the  light  of  his 
cnercy.  Of  four  things,  it  is  his  will  that  we  have 
mowing  :  \hejirst  is,  that  he  is  the  ground  of  whom 
ive  have  all  our  life  and  our  being.  The  second  is, 
that  he  keepeth  us  mightily  and  mercifully  in  the 
;ime  that  we  are  in  our  sin,  among  all  our  enemies 
that  are  full  fell  upon  us.  And  somuch  we  are  in 
the  more  peril,  for  we  give  them  occasion  thereto, 
md  we  know  not  our  own  need.  The  third  is,  how 
surteously  he  keepeth  us,  and  maketh  us  to  know 
that  we  go  amiss.  The  fourth  is,  how  stedfastly  he 
ibideth  us,  and  changeth  no  chear ;  for  he  will  that 
205

THSTHS

we  be  turned  and  unied  to  him  in  love,  as  he  is  to 
us.  And  thus  by  gracious  knowing  we  may  see  our 
sin  profitable  without  despair :  for  soothly  us  needeth 
to  see  it ;  and  by  the  sight  we  should  be  made 
ashamed  of  our  self,  and  breaken  down  as  against 
our  pride  and  our  presumption  :  for  us  behooveth 
verily  to  see  that  of  our  self  we  are  right  naught  but 
sin  and  wretchedness.  And  thus  by  the  sight  of  the 
less  (part  of  sin)  that  our  Lord  sheweth  us,  the  more 
is  wasted  [?  guessed],  which  we  see  not :  for  he  of  his 
courtesie  measureth  the  sight  to  us :  for  it  is  so  foul 
and  so  horrible,  that  we  should  not  endure  to  see  it 
as  it  is.  And  thus  by  this  meek  knowing  through 
contrition  and  grace  we  shall  be  broken  from  all  thing 
that  is  not  our  Lord.  And  then  shall  our  blessed 
Saviour  perfectly  cure  us,  and  one  us  to  him.  This 
breaking,  and  this  curing  our  Lord  meaneth  by  the 
general  man  ;  for  he  that  is  highest  and  nearest  with 
God,  he  may  see  himself  sinful  and  needy  with  me.  ) 
And  I  that  am  the  least  and  the  lowest  of  those  that 
shall  be  saved ;  I  may  be  comforted  with  him  that 
is  highest :  so  hath  our  Lord  oned  us  in  charity, 
when  he  shewed  me  that  I  should  sin.  And  for  joy 
that  I  had  in  beholding  him,  I  entended  not  readily 
to  that  shewing.  And  our  courteous  Lord  rested 
there,  and  would  no  further  teach  me,  till  when  that 
he  gave  me  grace  and  will  to  entend.  And  hereof 
was  I  learned,  though  that  we  be  highly  lifted  into 
206contemplation  by  the  special  gift  of  our  Lord,  yet 
us  behooveth  needs  therewith  to  have  sight  and 
knowing  of  our  sin,  and  of  our  feebleness.  For 
without  this  knowing  we  may  not  have  true  meek 
ness  ;  and  without  this  we  may  not  be  safe.  And 
also  I  saw  we  may  not  have  this  knowing  of  our  self, 
nor  of  none  of  all  our  ghostly  enemies  ;  for  they  will 
not  us  so  much  good  :  for  if  it  were  by  their  will,  we 
should  never  see  it  till  our  ending  day.  Then  are 
we  much  bound  to  God  that  he  will  himself  for  love 
shew  it  us  in  time  of  mercy  and  grace.

The  Seventy-eighth  Chapter

ALSO  I  had  in  this  more  understanding,  in  that  he 
shewed  me  that  I  should  sin.  I  took  it  nakedly  to 
my  own  singular  person  for  I  was  no  otherwise 
stirred  in  that  time :  but  by  the  high  gracious  com 
fort  that  followed  after  I  saw,  that  his  meaning  was 
for  the  general  man ;  that  is  to  say,  all  man  which 
is  sinful,  and  shall  be  into  the  last  day :  of  which 
man  I  am  a  member  as  I  hope  by  the  mercy  of  God  ; 
for  the  blessed  comfort  that  I  saw,  it  is  large  enough 
for  us  all.  And  there  was  I  learned  that  I  should 
see  mine  own  sin,  and  not  other  mens,  but  if  it  may 
be  for  comfort  or  help  of  my  even  Christen.  And 
also  in  the  same  shewing,  there  I  saw  that  I  should 
207

rnerne

sin  :  there  was  I  learned  to  be  dreadful  for  unsiker- 
ness  of  my  self.  For  I  wot  not  how  I  shall  fall,  ne 
I  know  not  the  measure,  ne  the  greatness  of  my  sin : 
for  that  would  I  a  wist,  dreadful ;  and  thereto  I  had 
none  answer.  Also  our  courteous  Lord  in  that  same 
time,  he  shewed  full  sweetly  and  full  mightily  the 
endless-head,  and  the  unchangeability  of  his  love : 
and  also  his  great  goodness,  and  his  gracious  in 
wardly  keeping,  that  the  love  of  him  and  of  our 
souls  shall  never  be  departed  into  without  end.  And 
thus  in  the  dread  I  have  matter  of  meekness,  that 
saveth  me  fro  presumption.  And  in  the  blessed 
shewing  of  love  I  have  matter  of  true  comfort  and 
of  joy,  that  saveth  me  from  despair.  All  this  homely 
shewing  of  our  courteous  Lord  it  is  a  lovely  lesson, 
and  a  sweet  gracious  teaching  of  himself  in  comfort 
ing  of  our  soul :  for  he  will  that  we  know  by  the 
sweetness  of  the  homely  love  of  him,  that  all  that 
we  see  or  feel  within  or  without  which  is  contrarious 
to  this,  that  it  is  of  the  enemy,  and  not  of  God ;  as 
thus,  if  that  we  be  stirred  to  be  the  more  retchlesser 
of  our  living,  or  of  the  keeping  of  our  heart,  because 
that  we  have  knowing  of  this  plentuous  love ;  than 
needeth  us  greatly  to  beware  of  this  stirring,  if  it 
come.  It  is  untrue,  and  greatly  we  owe  to  hate  it, 
for  it  hath  no  likeness  of  Gods  will.  And  when  [we] 
be  fallen  by  frailty  or  blindness,  then  our  courteous 
Lord  touching  us,  stirreth  us  and  keepeth.  And 
208then  will  he  that  we  see  our  wretchedness,  and 
meekly  be  it  a-known.  But  he  will  not  that  we 
abide  therewith,  ne  he  will  not  that  we  busie  us 
greatly  about  our  accusing,  ne  he  will  not  that  we 
be  too  wretchedful  on  our  self;  but  he  will  that  we 
hastily  entend  to  him:  for  he  standeth  all  alone, 
and  abideth  us  continually,  moaning  and  mourning 
till  when  we  come.  And  he  hath  haste  to  have  us 
to  him  :  for  we  are  his  joy  and  his  delight,  and  he  is 
our  salve  of  our  life  ;  there  I  say  he  standeth  all 
alone.  I  leave  the  speaking  of  the  blessed  company 
in  heaven,  and  speak  only  of  his  office  and  his 
working  here  in  earth,  upon  the  condition  of  the 
shewing.

The  Seventy-ninth  Chapter

BY  three  things  man  standeth  in  this  life  :  by  which 
three  God  is  worshipped,  and  we  be  speed,  kept,  and 
saved.  Thejirst  is,  use  of  mans  kindly  reason.  The 
second  is,  the  common  teaching  of  Holy  Church. 
The  third  is,  the  inward  gracious  working  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  And  these  three  be  all  of  one  God. 
God  is  ground  of  our  kindly  reason  ;  and  God  is 
teaching  of  Holy  Church  ;  and  God  is  the  Holy 
Ghost.  And  all  be  sundry  gifts  to  which  he  will  we 
have  great  regard,  and  according  us  thereto :  for 
these  work  in  us  continually  altogether,  and  those 
209  o

THSTHS

be  great  things.  Of  which  greatness  he  will  we 
have  knowing  here  as  it  were  in  an  A.  B.  C.  that  is 
to  say,  that  we  may  have  a  little  knowing,  whereof 
we  should  have  fulhead  in  heaven  :  and  that  is  for  to 
speed  us.  We  know  in  our  faith  that  God  alone 
took  our  kind,  and  none  but  hee :  and  furthermore, 
that  Christ  alone  did  all  the  great  works  that  longeth 
to  our  salvation,  and  none  but  he  :  and  right  so  he 
alone  doth  now  in  the  last  end ;  that  is  to  say,  he 
dwelleth  here  in  us,  and  ruleth  us,  and  giveth  us  in 
this  living,  and  bringeth  us  to  his  bliss.  And  thus 
shall  he  do  as  long  as  any  soul  is  in  earth  that  shall 
come  to  heaven  :  and  so  far  forth,  that  if  there  were 
none  such  soul  in  earth  but  one,  he  should  be  with 
that  all  alone,  till  he  had  brought  it  up  to  his  bliss. 
I  believe  and  understand  the  ministration  of  holy 
angels,  as  clarkes  tell ;  but  it  was  not  shewed  rne  : 
for  himself  is  nearest  and  meekest,  highest  and 
lowest,  and  doth  all.  And  not  only  all  that  us 
needeth,  but  also  he  doth  all  that  is  worshipful  to 
our  joy  in  heaven.  And  there  I  say  he  abideth  us 
moaning  and  mourning.  It  meaneth  all  the  true 
feeling  that  we  have  in  our  self  in  contrition  and  in 
compassion  ;  and  all  moaning  and  mourning,  for  we 
are  not  oned  with  our  Lord,  and  such  as  is  speedful 
it  is  Christ  in  us.  And  though  some  of  us  feel  it 
seldom,  it  passeth  never  fro  Christ,  till  what  time  he 
have  brought  us  out  of  all  our  woe  :  for  love  suffereth 
210him  never  to  be  without  pity.  And  what  time  that 
we  fall  into  sin,  and  leave  the  mind  of  him,  and  the 
keeping  of  our  own  soul,  then  beareth  Christ  alone 
all  the  charge  of  us.  And  thus  standeth  he  moaning 
and  mourning.  Then  longeth  it  to  us  for  reverence 
and  kindness  to  turn  us  hastily  to  our  Lord,  and  let 
him  not  all  alone  ;  he  is  here  alone  with  us  all ;  that 
is  to  say,  only  for  us  he  is  here.  And  what  time  I 
be  strange  to  him  by  sin,  despair,  or  slouth,  then  I 
let  my  Lord  stand  alone,  in  as  much  as  he  is  in  me. 
And  thus  it  fareth  with  us  all  which  be  sinners. 
But  though  it  be  so  that  we  do  thus  oftentimes,  his 
I  goodness  suffereth  us  never  to  be  alone,  but  lastingly 
he  is  with  us,  and  tenderly  he  excuseth  us,  and  ever 
keepeth  us  from  blame  in  his  sight.

The  Eightieth  Chapter

>UR  good  Lord  shewed  him  to  his  creature  in  diverse 
lanner,  both  in  heaven  and  in  earth.     But  I  saw 
mm  take  no  place,  but  in  mans  soul.      He  shewed 
lim    in    earth    in    the    sweet    incarnation,    and    his 
>lessed  passion,  and  in  other  manner  he  shewed  him 
^n  earth,  where  I  said  I  saw  God  in  a  point.     And 
other  manner  he  'shewed  him  in  earth,  thus  as  it 
rere  a  pilgrimage  ;  that  is  to  say,  he  is  here  with  us 
|eading  us,  and  shall  be  till  when  he  hath  brought  us 
211

THSTHS

all  to  his  bliss  in  heaven.  He  shewed  him  diverse 
times  raigning,  as  it  is  aforesaid ;  but  principally  in 
mans  soul :  he  hath  taken  there  his  resting  place, 
and  his  worshipful  city  ;  out  of  which  worshipful  see 
he  shall  never  rise,  ne  remove  without  end.  Mar 
vellous  and  solemn  is  the  place  where  the  Lord 
dwelleth.  And  therefore  he  will  that  we  readily 
entend  to  his  gracious  touching,  more  enjoying  in 
his  whole  love,  then  sorrowing  in  our  often  fallings. 
For  it  is  the  most  worship  to  him  of  any  thing,  that 
we  may  do,  that  we  live  gladly  and  merrily  for  his 
love  in  our  penance  ;  for  he  beholdeth  us  so  tenderly, 
that  he  seeth  all  our  living  here  to  be  penance.  For 
kind  longing  in  us  to  him  is  a  lasting  penance  in  us, 
which  penance  he  worketh  in  us,  and  mercifully 
helpeth  us  to  bear  it ;  for  his  love  maketh  him  to 
long :  his  wisdom  and  his  truth  with  his  rightful- 
head  maketh  him  to  suffer  us  here.  And  in  this 
manner  he  will  see  it  in  us ;  for  this  is  our  kindly 
penance,  and  the  highest  to  my  sight.  For  this 
penance  cometh  never  fro  us,  till  what  time  that 
we  be  fulfilled,  when  we  should  have  him  to  our 
meed.  And  therefore  he  will  that  we  set  our  hearts 
in  the  overpassing ;  that  is  to  say,  fro  the  pain  that 
we  feel  into  the  bliss  that  we  trust.

212

me

The  Eighty-frst  Chapter212

me

The  Eighty-frst  Chapter

BUT  here  shewed  our  courteous  Lord  the  moaning 
and  the  mourning  of  our  soul,  meaning  thus  :  ' I  wot 
well  tkou  wilt  live  for  my  love,  merrily  and  gladly  suffer 
ing  all  the  penance  that  may  come  to  thee  :  but  forasmuch 
as  tkou  livest  not  without  sin,  therefore  thou  art  heavy 
and  sorrowful.  And  if  thou  mightest  live  without  sin, 
ihou  wouldest  suffer  for  my  love  all  the  woe  that  might 
come  to  thee,  and  it  is  sooth :  but  be  not  too  much 
agrieved  with  sin  that  falleth  to  thee  against  thy  will.' 
And  here  I  understood  that  the  Lord  beheld  the 
servant  with  pity,  and  not  with  blaim ;  for  this 
passing  life  asketh  not  to  live  all  without  sin. 
He  loveth  us  endlesly,  and  we  sin  customably ; 
and  he  sheweth  it  us  full  mildely,  and  then  we 
sorrow  and  mourn  discreetly,  turning  us  into  the 
beholding  of  his  mercy,  cleaving  to  his  love  and  to 
his  goodness,  seeing  that  he  is  our  medicine,  witting 
that  we  do  (nothing)  but  sin.  And  thus  by  the 
meekness  that  we  get  in  the  sight  of  our  sin,  faith 
fully  knowing  his  everlasting  love,  him  thanking  and 
praising,  we  please  him.  ( 1  love  thee  and  thou  lovest 
me,  and  our  love  shall  never  be  departed  in  two  ;  and  for 
thy  pro/it  I  suffer.'  And  all  this  was  shewed  in 
ghostly  understanding,  saying  this  blessed  word  ;  '  I 
keep  thee  full  sikerly.'  And  by  the  great  desire  that  I 
213

<THS<THS

saw  in  our  blessed  Lord,  that  we  should  live  in  this 
manner,  that  is  to  say,  in  longing  and  enjoying,  as 
all  this  lesson  of  love  sheweth,  thereby  I  under 
stand  that  all  that  is  contrarious  to  this,  it  is  not  of 
him,  but  it  is  of  enmity.  And  he  will  that  we  know 
it  by  the  sweet  gracious  light  of  his  kind  love.  If 
any  such  liver  be  in  earth  which  is  continually  kept 
from  falling,  I  know  it  not ;  for  it  was  not  shewed 
me.  But  this  was  shewed,  that  in  falling,  and  in 
rising  we  are  ever  preciously  kept  in  one  love. 
For  in  the  beholding  of  God  we  fall  not.  And  in 
the  beholding  of  our  self,  we  stand  not.  And  both 
these  be  sooth,  as  to  my  sight.  But  the  beholding 
of  our  Lord  God  is  the  higher  soothness.  Then  are 
we  much  bound  to  him,  that  he  will  in  this  living 
shew  us  this  high  soothness.  And  I  understood 
whiles  we  be  in  this  life,  it  is  full  speedful  to  us  that 
we  see  these  both  at  once.  For  the  higher  behold 
ing  keepeth  us  in  ghostly  joy,  and  true  enjoying  in 
God  :  that  other  that  is  the  lower  beholding  keepeth 
us  in  dread,  and  maketh  us  ashamed  of  ourself.  But 
our  good  Lord  will  ever  that  we  hold  us  much  more 
in  the  beholding  of  the  higher,  and  not  leave  the 
knowing  of  the  lower,  into  the  time  that  we  be 
brought  up  above,  where  we  shall  have  our  Lord 
Jesu  to  our  meed,  and  be  fulfilled  of  joy  and  bliss 
without  end.

214

rne  eiqurr-

Tlie  Eighty-second  Chapter214

rne  eiqurr-

Tlie  Eighty-second  Chapter

I  HAD  in  party  touching,  sight,  and  feeling  in  three 
properties  of  God,  in  which  the  strength  and  the 
effect  of  all  the  revelation  standeth.  And  it  were 
seen  in  every  shewing :  and  most  properly  in  the 
twelfth,  where  it  saith  oftentimes,  '/  it  am.'  The 
properties  are  these,  life,  love,  and  light.  In  life  is 
marvellous  homelihead.  In  love  is  gentle  courtesie  : 
and  in  light  is  endless  kindness.  These  three  pro 
perties  were  seen  in  one  goodness ;  into  which  good 
ness  my  reason  would  be  oned  and  cleaving-to  with 
all  the  mights.  I  beheld  with  reverent  dread,  and 
highly  marvelling  in  the  sight,  and  in  feeling  of 
the  sweet  accord,  that  our  reason  is  in  God,  under 
standing  that  it  is  the  highest  gift  that  we  have 
received,  and  it  is  grounded  in  kind.  Our  faith  is  a 
light  kindly  coming  of  our  endless  day,  that  is  our 
"Father  God  :  in  which  light  our  mother  Christ,  and 
our  good  Lord  the  Holy  Ghost  leadeth  us  in  this 
passing  life.  This  light  is  measured  discreetly, 
needfully  standeth  to  us  in  the  night ;  the  light  is 
cause  of  our  life  ;  the  night  is  cause  of  our  pain,  and 
all  our  woe  :  in  which  woe  we  desire  endless  meed 
and  thank  of  God,  for  we  with  mercy  and  grace 
wilfully  know  and  believe  our  light,  going  therein 
wisely  and  mightily.  And  at  the  end  of  woe  sud- 
215

rue

denly  our  eye  shall  be  opened,  and  in  clearness  of 
sight  our  light  shall  be  full :  which  light  is  God  our 
Maker,  Father  and  Holy  Ghost,  in  Christ  Jesu  our 
Saviour.  Thus  I  saw  and  understood  that  our  faith 
is  our  light,  in  our  night,  which  light  is  God  our 
endless  day.

The  Eighty-third  ChapterThe  Eighty-third  Chapter

THIS  light  is  charity,  and  the  measuring  of  this  light 
is  done  to  us  profitably  by  the  wisdom  of  God :  for 
neither  the  light  is  so  large  that  we  may  see  clearly 
our  blessedful  day  :  ne  it  is  all  speered  from  us  ;  but 
it  is  such  a  light  in  which  we  may  live  meedfully 
with  travel,  reserving  the  worshipful  thanks  of  God. 
And  this  was  seen  in  the  vitk  shewing,  where  he 
saith,  '/  thank  thee  of  thy  service,  and  of  thy  travel.' 
Thus  charity  keepeth  us  in  faith,  and  in  hope :  and 
faith  and  hope  leadeth  us  in  charity  ;  and  at  the 
end  all  shall  be  charity.  I  had  three  manner  of 
understandings  in  this  light  of  charity :  the  Jirst  is 
charity  unmade :  the  second  is  charity  made :  the 
third  is  charity  given.  Charity  unmade  is  God ; 
charity  made  is  our  soul  in  God :  charity  given  is 
vertue,  and  that  is  a  gracious  gift  of  working;  in 
which  we  love  God  for  himself,  and  our  self  in  God, 
and  all  that  God  loveth  for  God. 
216

The  Eighty-fourth  ChapterThe  Eighty-fourth  Chapter

AND  in  this  sight  I  marvelled  highly ;  for  notwith 
standing  our  simple  living,  and  our  blindness  here, 
yet  endlesly  our  courteous  Lord  beholdeth  us  in  this 
working,  enjoying.  And  of  all  thing  we  may  please 
him  best,  wisely  and  truly  to  believe  it,  and  to  enjoy 
with  him  and  in  him ;  for  as  verily  as  we  shall  be  in 
bliss  of  God  without  end,  him  praising  and  thanking, 
as  verily  we  have  been  in  the  foresight  of  God, 
loved  and  known  in  his  endless  purpose  fro  without 
beginning.  In  which  unbegun  love  he  made  us ;  in 
the  same  love  he  keepeth  us,  and  never  suffereth  us 
to  be  hurt,  by  which  our  bliss  might  be  lessed. 
And*therefore  when  the  doome  is  given,  and  we  be 
all  brought  up  above,  then  shall  we  clearly  see  in 
God  the  privities  which  now  be  hid  to  us.  And 
then  shall  none  of  us  be  stirred  to  say  in  any  thing, 
'  Lord,  if  it  had  been  thus,  it  had  been  well/  But 
we  shall  all  say  with  one  voyce,  '  Lord,  blessed  mote 
thou  be,  for  it  is  thus  :  thus  it  is  well.  And  now 
we  see  verily,  that  all  thing  is  done  as  it  was  thine 
ordinance  or  any  thing  was  made/

217

*The  Eighty -fifth  Chapter217

*The  Eighty -fifth  Chapter

THIS  book  is  begun  by  Gods  gift  and  his  grace  ;  but 
it  is  not  yet  performed  as  to  my  sight.  For  charity 
pray  we  all  together,  with  Gods  working,  thanking, 
trusting,  enjoying.  For  this  will  our  good  Lord  be 
praid,  by  the  understanding  that  I  took  in  all  his 
own  meaning,  and  in  the  sweet  words  where  he 
saith  full  merrily,  'I  am  ground  of  thy  beseeching.' 
For  truly,  I  saw  and  understood  in  our  Lords  mean 
ing,  that  he  shewed  it ;  for  he  will  have  it  known 
more  then  it  is.  In  which  knowing  he  will  give  us 
grace  to  love  him,  and  cleave  to  him.  For  he  be 
holds  his  heavenly  treasure  and  solace  in  heavenly 
joy,  in  drawing  of  our  hearts  from  sorrow  and  dark 
ness,  which  we  are  in.  And  fro  the  time  that  it 
was  shewed,  I  desired  oftentimes  to  wit  in  what  was 
our  Lords  meaning :  and  fifteen  year  after  and  more, 
I  was  answered  in  ghostly  understanding,  saying 
thus  ;  '  What  ?  rvouldest  thou  wit  thy  Lords  meaning  in 
this  thing  ?  Wit  it  well :  love  was  his  meaning.  Who 
sheweth  it  thee  ?  Love.  Wherefore  sheweth  he  it  thee  ? 
For  love.  Hold  thee  therein,  thou  shalt  wit  more  in  the 
same.  But  thou  shalt  never  wit  therein  other  without  end.' 
Thus  was  I  learned  that  love  is  our  Lords  meaning. 
And  I  saw  full  surely  in  this  and  in  all,  that  our  God 
made  us,  he  loved  us  ;  which  love  was  never  slacked, 
218

rnerne

ne  never  shall.  And  in  this  love  he  hath  done  all 
his  works  :  and  in  this  love  he  hath  made  all  thing 
profitable  to  us  :  and  in  this  love  our  life  is  everlast 
ing  ;  in  our  making  we  had  beginning :  but  the  love 
wherein  he  made  us  was  in  him  fro  without  begin 
ning.  In  which  love  we  have  our  beginning.  And 
all  this  shall  we  see  in  God  without  end.

Deo  Gratias.

Explicit  liber  Revelationum  Juliane  Anachorite  Norwic. 
cujus  anime  propicietur  Deus.

219

NOTE

THE  present  issue  of  Mother  Juliana's  XVI  Revelations 
of  Divine  Love  is  based  upon  the  earliest  printed  edi 
tion  of  it,  the  one  undertaken  by  Serenus  de  Cressy, 
a  Benedictine,  and  published  in  1670.  That  edition 
has  been  followed  faithfully,  except  in  a  few  cases 
where  obvious  misprints,  or  the  spelling,  seemed 
likely  to  lead  to  confusion  for  the  reader.  Incon 
sistencies  of  spelling,  characteristic  of  the  time  of 
its  publication,  have  been  retained,  and  a  few  expla 
nations  which  seemed  of  immediate  importance,  or 
suggested  additional  words,  which  might  make  the 
meaning  more  clear,  have  been  inserted  in  square 
brackets.  Following  this  note  will  be  found  a  list 
of  words,  which  may  be  referred  to  in  case  of 
need :  the  list  includes  also  a  few  queried  words 
which  may  be  misreadings  of  the  original.  The 
punctuation  of  Serenus  de  Cressy's  edition  has 
been  altered  wherever  it  seemed  needful.  Perhaps 
a  general  note  may  be  made  that  the  words  '  where 
fore,'  and  '  therefore/  '  where  '  and  '  there,'  are  often 
given  a  sense  easily  missed.

Mother  Juliana's  work  exists  in  two  MSS.  (sixteenth 
221Mother  Juliana's  work  exists  in  two  MSS.  (sixteenth 
221

and  seventeenth  centuries)  one  in  the  British  Museum 
and  the  other  in  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale,  Paris. 
The  former  was  edited  in  a  modernised  form  by  Henry 
Collins  in  1877,  and,  later,  in  1901  by  Grace  Warrack. 
The  latter  was  the  basis  of  Cressy's  edition,  a  reprint 
of  which,  now  very  scarce,  was  issued  in  1 843.

The  title-page  of  this  last  edition  reads  as  follows  :

XVI  |  REVELATIONS  OF  |  Divine  Love,  | 
Shewed  to  a  Devout  Servant  of  our  Lord, 
called  MOTHER  JULIANA,  |  AN  Anchorete 
of  NORWICH:  \  Who  lived  in  the  Dayes  of 
KING  |  EDWARD  the  Third.  Published  by 
R.  F.  S.  Cressy.  \  Accedite  ad  Deum  et  Illumma- 
mini.  Psal.  33.  v.  5,  |  Printed  in  the  Year, 
MDCLXX.  |  Permissu  Superiorutn.

Hugh  Paulinus  Cressy  was  born  in  Yorkshire, 
in  1605.  He  was  educated  at  Oxford,  and,  after 
taking  Holy  Orders,  became  chaplain  to  the  un 
fortunate  Straflford,  He  held  further  clerical  ap 
pointments  in  England  and  Ireland,  and  in  l64>6 
was  received  into  the  Roman  Catholic  Church 
at  Rome.  After  spending  some  time  in  Paris  he 
joined  the  Benedictines  at  Douay,  and  was  thence 
forward  called  Serenus  de  Cressy.  After  some 
years  he  returned  to  his  native  land,  and  died  in 
1674  at  East  Grinstead  in  Sussex.

Of  Mother  Juliana  herself  little  is  known,  and 
222

that  little  is  indicated  in  the  address  '  To  the  Reader/ 
She  was  an  anchoret  of  Norwich,  and  is  said  to  have 
been  born  in  1342.  She  seems  to  have  been  a 
Benedictine  nun  belonging  to  Carrow,  Norwich,  and 
the  anchorage  of  the  churchyard  of  St.  Julian, 
Norwich,  was  her  chief  home.  She  was  '  yet  in  life/ 
in  1442.The  scribe  of  the  British  Museum  MS.  ends  with 
the  following  words,  and  they  may,  perhaps,  be 
reproduced  here : —

Thus  endeth  the  Revelation  of  Love  of  the  blissid 
Trinite  shewid  by  our  Savior  Christ  Jesu  for  our 
endles  comfort  and  solace,  and  also  to  enjoyen  in 
him  in  this  passand  journey  of  this  life.

Amen  Jesu  Amen

I  pray  Almyty  God  that  this  booke  com  not  but  to  the 
hands  of  them  that  will  be  his  faithfull  lovers,  and 
to  those  that  will  submitt  them  to  the  faith  of  holy 
Church,  and  obey  the  holesom  understondying  and 
teching  of  the  men  that  be  of  vertuous  life,  sadde 
Age  and  sound  lering :  ffor  this  Revelation  is  hey 
Divinitye  and  hey  wisdom,  wherfore  it  may  not 
dwelle  with  him  that  is  thrall  to  synne  and  to  the 
Devill.

And  beware   thou  take  not  on  thing  after    thy 
affection  and  liking,  and  leve  another :   for  that  is 
the  condition  of  an  heretique.     But  take  every  thing 
223

with  other.  And,  trewly  understonden,  All  is  ac 
cording  to  holy  Scripture  and  groundid  in  the  same. 
And  that  Jesus,  our  very  love,  light  and  truth,  shall 
shew  to  allclen  soulis  that  with  mekeness  aske  profe 
reverently  this  wisdom  of  hym.

And  thou  to  whom  this  boke  shall  come,  thank 
heyley  and  hertily  our  Saviour  Christ  Jesu  that  he 
made  these  shewings  and  revelations,  for  the,  and 
to  the,  of  his  endles  love,  mercy  and  goodness  for 
thine  and  our  save  guide,  to  conduct  to  everlastying 
bliss  :  the  which  Jesus  mot  grant  us.  AMEN.

224

LIST    OF    WORDS,    ETC.

PAGE

xix.  resentment,  remembrance,  regard. 
xxi.  a  more   venerable  Abbot.      The   Abbot  of  Lamb- 
spring.

xxii.  ghostly,  spiritual. 
xxii.  illapse,  in-gliding, 
xxiv.  affectuous,  sympathetic. 
xxiv.    operative,  efficacious.xxii.  ghostly,  spiritual. 
xxii.  illapse,  in-gliding, 
xxiv.  affectuous,  sympathetic. 
xxiv.    operative,  efficacious.

2  etc.  sikernes,  assurance,  security. 
3.  to  wit  his  privities,  that  we  should  pry  into  His 
secret  things  [and  elsewhere,  to  wit  =  to  know]. 
3.  one  like,  alike.

3.  meed,  reward.

4.  deadlie,  mortal.

4.  some  deale,  somewhat,  in  some  measure.

5.  wilfully  earnest,  will- directed.

5.  weening,  thinking,  supposing. 
6  etc.  kind,  natural,  human.

6.  went,  weened.

8.  even  forth,  straight  forward.

10.  meane,  mediator.

11.  so  reverent  and  so  dreadful,  so  to  be  revered  and

feared.

225  P

US?   OF

PAGE

12.  litlehead,  littleness.

12.  halseth,  embraceth.

14.  naughted  of,  made  nought  as  to,  ignores.

14.  seelie,  simple,  weak.

17.  sparred,  fastened,  closed.

17.  bulke,  body.

18.  even  Christian,  fellow-Christians.

19.  deed,  dread  (?)

20.  fairhead,  beauty,  fairness. 
20.  lively  head,  life-likeness.

20.  plentuoushead,  plenteousness.

20.  evesing,  eaves.

21.  like,  also.

22.  1.  2.  if  etc.,  unless.

23.  stinteth,  ceased,  stopped.

24.  deemed,  judged.

24.  in  party,  partly,  somewhat.

27.  sulloing,  sullying,  smearing.

27.  over  yede,  overspread,  covered.

27.  sweinly,  dimly,  obscurely.

28.  wrake,  seaweed.

29.  the  Holy  Vernacle,  the  Handkerchief  of  S.  Veronica,

whereon  Christ's  face  was  imprinted  as  He 
wiped  the  sweat  from  His  brow,  when  carrying 
the  Cross,  represented  in  one  of  the  fourteen 
Stations  of  the  Cross.

29.  protraid,  portrayed.

29.  rewlyhead,  ruefulness.

29.  lean  head,  wastedness.

Lisr  OF

'PAGE 
29.  overpassing,  even  more,  surpassing.

33.  point,  in  a,  exactly,  precisely.

35.  Door,  doer.

36.  advisement,  etc.,  carefully,  with  attention.

37.  fulfilling  the  number  thatfaileth,  until  the  heavenly

mansions  are  full.35.  Door,  doer.

36.  advisement,  etc.,  carefully,  with  attention.

37.  fulfilling  the  number  thatfaileth,  until  the  heavenly

mansions  are  full.

38  etc.  travelleth,  travaileth,  laboureth. 
39.  sooth  fastness,  truth.

39.  cheere,  chear,  etc.,  countenance,  look.

40.  envy,  malice,  ill-will.

42.  levir,  liefer,  readier.

43.  irkeness,  irksomeness. 
43.  unneth,  scarce-

43.  none,  anon.

44.  in  like,  alike.

45.  most  (?)  moisture.

45.  cloggering,  clotted,  adhering.

45.  roode,  cross.

46.  sennet,  seven  nights,  a  week.

46.  clongen,  shrunken,  withered.

47.  clinging,  binding,  causing  to  cling.

48.  raced,  rased,  scraped. 
48.  boystrous,  rough,  violent.

48.  altho,  allto,  etc.,  altogether,  wholly

48.  sagging,  drooping,  hanging  heavily.

49.  seemed,  showed.

49.  rimpild,  shrivelled,  wrinkled.

50.  onyd,  oned,  united.

51.  feeled,  endured,  suffered

227

LIST   OF

PAGE

51.  St.  Dionise,  S.  Denis,  the  traditional  apostle  of 
France,  believed  to  be  Dioriysius  the  Areo- 
pagite.

51.  Paynius,  Paynim,  pagan.

54.  languring,  languishing.

54.  uning,  orieing,  uniting.

55.  passible,  capable  of  suffering. 
57    apaid,  content,  satisfied.

60.  liking  .  .  .  liketh,  satisfying  .  .  .  satisfieth. 
68.  letted,  hindered,  prevented.

68.  Sin  is  behovely,  sin  is  necessary,  it  behoved  that 
sin  should  be.

71.  lowed,  humbled.

72.  asseethe,  satisfaction.

73.  speed,  benefit,  profit.

75.  aneynst,  anempts,  etc.,  anent,  concerning. 
78.  hill,  conceal.

83.  friendful  mean,  friendly  mediator.

84.  suffereth,  allows.

86.  wistly,  earnestly  or  (?)  wisely.

88.  intend,  turn  towards,  attend.

89.  entented,  attended.

9] .  St.  John  oj  Beverley,  Archbishop  of  York.  Born 
at  Cherry  Burton,  died  721,  canonised  1037.

93.  domes-man.     Confessor.

94.  leese,  lose.

94.  undertake,  receive.9] .  St.  John  oj  Beverley,  Archbishop  of  York.  Born 
at  Cherry  Burton,  died  721,  canonised  1037.

93.  domes-man.     Confessor.

94.  leese,  lose.

94.  undertake,  receive.

100.  mights,  faculties.

101 .  grant  mercy,  an  exclamation  of  thankfulness.

228

LIST   OF

PAOE

101.  entreth,  leads.

102.  tarry,  hinder.

102.  steeds,  stand,  resting-place. 
106.  buxom,  obedient,  compliant.

106.  fulsome,  plentiful.

107.  duringly,  permanently,  lastingly.

108.  sensuality,  physical  nature. 
108.  meddled,  mingled,  mixed. 
111.  into,  unto.

111.  came,  went.

113.  debt,  duties.

113.  took,  saw,  understood.

119.  pronity,  frailty.

121.  adred,  afraid.

123.  slade,  ravine,  valley.

123.  stonnyed,  astonished,  shunned.

124.  grey,  fright.

125.  direct,  attributed,  reckoned.

126.  sit  hens,  since.

126.  nobley,  etc.,  nobleness. 
128.  heyward  (?)  high  regard. 
128.  namely,  especially.

128.  medelur,  medley,  mixture.

129.  blewhead,  blueness.

130.  even  fore  anenst,  directly  opposite.

130.  fall  of,  befall.

131.  anaved  (?)  new.

132.  slade,  pit,  valley.

135.  honest,  seemly,  comely. 
22Q

LIST   OF

PAGE

136.  wide  and  side,  wide  and  long.

138.  briken,  broken.

139.  wonning,  uniting,  dwelling  within. 
142.  self,  same.

143  etc.  that  each,  the.

150.  mean  profer,  friendly  offer.

151.  commoning,  communion.

152.  touching  (?)  teaching.

154.  a  dight,  prepared,  disposed. 
156.  ones,  once.

161.  impropred,  assigned,  appropriated. 
165.  beclipping,  embraces.

165.  wene,  think.

166.  assey,  trial,  test.

168.  our   breakings  and  our  naughtings,  our  chastise

ments  (afflictions)  and  our  emptiness.

169.  rialty,  royalty.

171.  fordreth,  furthereth,  nourisheth. 
174.  lengeth,  lengthens. 
174.  swilge,  hideous,  foul.

174.  bliveth,  remains,  abides.169.  rialty,  royalty.

171.  fordreth,  furthereth,  nourisheth. 
174.  lengeth,  lengthens. 
174.  swilge,  hideous,  foul.

174.  bliveth,  remains,  abides.

175.  behest,  announcement,  command. 
175.  behighting,  promise,  assurance. 
180.  sadly,  soberly,  earnestly.

180.  retchlessness,  recklessness,  carelessness.

181.  brent,  burnt. 
181    my  kill,  mickle.

181.  throwd,  evil,  malicious.

182.  solemne,  stately.

230

Lisr  OF

182.  even-right,  firm-fixed.

182.  giveth  (?)  guideth.

185.  sharply,  swiftly,  clearly.

185.  whistering,  mumbling,  whispering.

189.  swemful,  troubled,  grieved.

189.  utter,  outer.

191.  colleth,  embraceth.

195.  wickedness  (?)  weakness.

196.  longeth,  belongs. 
198.  deedeth  (?)  needeth.

202.  likeness,  pleasure.

203.  brenneth,  burneth. 
203.  touch,  draw  close. 
206.  wasted  (?)  guessed.

216.  speered,  sparred,  barred,  shut.

THE    END

Printed  by  BALLANTYNE,  HANSON  &•»  Co 
Edinburgh  «&*  London