by Rob Arndt

Probably the most misunderstood and problematic of all terrestrial-based disc technology lies at the heart of the German
disc programs that started with the birth of the NSDAP (Nazi Party) in 1920- a full 13 years before Adolf Hitler came to
power as the leader of the Third Reich.

To fully comprehend the depth of these programs requires the knowledge that above all else the NSDAP was founded
from the onset by the occult Thule (1917) and Vril (1919) Gesellschafts (Societies), and other occult groups like the
DHvSS (Men of the Black Stone) that stretched back to the turn of the 20th century with the old German Order (a.k.a.
Order of Teutons).

As such the very first disc project in Germany built in 1922 was not even an aircraft but an inter-dimensional flight
machine in disc form- the JFM built by Thule-Vril.

When Adolf Hitler (a Thule member along with Goering, Himmler, and various other top Nazi officials) became
chancellor in Germany in 1933 the 11 year occult metaphysical science of Thule-Vril became strengthened by official
state backing for the continued disc development programs starting with an RFZ (RundFlugZeug), or "Round Aircraft"
series of discs that utilized levitators developed by W.O. Schumann of the Technical University of Munich who worked
on the JFM.

1934 saw the first RFZ discs built which led in five short years to two vast programs of highly advanced disc aircraft
overseen by Himmler’s SS- specifically, the SS technical branch Unit E-IV (Entwicklungsstelle 4) which was created to
explore various alternative energies. This unit was tasked with developing both the Haunebu and Vril disc designs that
utilized the world’s first electro-magnetic-gravitic drive systems: the Vril and Thule Triebwerks. These drives relied on
Hans Coler’s free energy Konverter coupled to a Van De Graaf band generator and Marconi vortex dynamo (a huge
spherical tank of mercury) to create powerful rotating electromagnetic fields that affected gravity.

Many have often inquired why then when war started in 1939 did Germany not use these advanced and unique
machines in air combat? The simple truth lies in the fact that these machines, despite their superior overall performance
to conventional piston-engined aircraft and early jets, could not be realistically adapted to any useful military role other
than the most basic transport and recon work. The strong EM engines were difficult to control and could not hope to
imitate the flight characteristics of high performance fighters like the Me BF 109 or Fw 190.

There was very little room for either offensive or defensive armament in these designs except for a few experimental
light MG and MK cannons that proved impractical in flight and a rather large experimental Donar (Thunder)
Kraftstrahlkanone (Strong Jet Cannon). These guns tended to destabilize the disc badly and were eventually removed.
The disc bodies themselves were not capable of carrying any ordnance at all internally or externally (no bombs,
unguided rockets, or missiles) and could only make turns of 22.5, 45, and 90 degrees.

Nevertheless, the SS pursued an aggressive policy of theft, forced cooperation, and strong internal development of
these types of machines due to the increasing Allied bombing offensive that made conventional aircraft take-offs and
landings highly dangerous. VTOL was seen as the logical solution to this problem. If the SS could develop a production
machine that in the future could be armed (with cannon, missiles, or even an electrostatic weapon) then Germany might
be able to turn the air war.

To shorten the time of finding VTOL solutions, the SS robbed both Germany’s patent office and every patent office in
occupied Europe. Those with aeronautical skill enough to contribute to the SS effort were either arrested or coerced into
participating in the programs- among them Viktor Schauberger of Austria and Henri Coanda of Rumania. The SS also
used its large slave labor force to assist in construction of large underground facilities for these discs and often for
production of components to these machines.

Although the SS requested additional slave laborers from Armaments Minister Albert Speer, Speer himself was not told
what war projects the laborers would be used for; indeed, Speer was deliberately kept out of the entire SS disc
development programs for security reasons and the fact that the SS was a state-within-a-state with its own production


facilities, war material, scientists and technicians, slave workforce, and the knowledge of secret Third Reich military
bases outside Germany where these discs were both tested and stored.

Among those held, Viktor Schauberger became the leader of most interest due to his highly unconventional use of liquid
vortex technology which was perfected while he was in custody at Mauthausen. Originally designed for an odd bio-
submarine, the strange Repulsin discoid motors were to be adapted to aircraft. Heinkel was the first to receive the
results of these early discoid tests but refused to act on it.

A year after the Repulsin Model A motor was being studied one of Heinkel’s own engineers named Rudolf Schriever
proposed his own "Flugkreisel" (Flying Gyro) that utilized conventional jet engines instead of the Repulsin discoid motor.
His design was taken from him and handed over to a team of scientists for further study and the construction of a large
flying prototype. The team consisted of Dr. Richard Miethe, Klaus Habermohl, and an Italian- Dr. Guiseppe Belluzzo,
who had come up with his own design for a jet powered round flying bomb- the Turboproietti.

Meanwhile, BMW started work on a design very similar to Schriever’s Flugkreisel but utilizing the company’s own BMW
003 jet engines. These machines, called ‘Flugelrads" (Winged Wheels) were not really true disc aircraft but jet autogyros
that used a standard BMW 003 with a Strahlrohr (Jet pipe) deflector to power a multi-blade disc rotor. These craft were
built on a much smaller scale than Schriever’s Flugkreisel so work proceeded from 1941-45 with construction of
prototypes beginning in 1943. Instability, however, was never really solved in the earlier designs. One disc, however, a
BMW Fluglerad II V-2 possibly achieved flight in April 1945.

Schriever’s own disc began to take shape in 1943 as well and flew under jet power provided by three attached special
kerosene-burning jet engines driving the disc rotor as well as two kerosene jets on the body for forward thrust and
horizontal stability.

Flight characteristics were good but then the SS decided to abruptly drop Schriever’s jet-fan design in favor of Miethe’s
version that eliminated the large disc rotor blades driven by jet engines for Schauberger’s liquid vortex engine, but on a
larger scale. With Schauberger released back to Austria in 1944 by the SS, the Miethe disc took to the air that same
year over the Baltic.

At the same time a private venture with official backing from Air Ministry General Udet was taking shape in Leipzig.
Arthur Sack who caught the attention of Udet way back in 1939 with his A.S.1 circular wing flying aero model was given
permission and some funding to build a manned large-scale version of his model. Sack took up the challenge and built 4
more models of increasing size. When the A.S.5 demonstrated that the basic concept was sound construction began on
the manned version in early 1944- the A.S.6. Within a month the strange largely wooden aircraft utilizing salvaged parts
from a ME BF 108 was taxiing and making attempts to fly. But this project was doomed from the start with an
underpowered engine and plagued by structural problems which meant the aircraft could hop- but never fly.

Due to round-the-clock bombing the SS was forced to try even more drastic measures, launching unmanned interceptor
discs from the Schwarzwald. These discs were known as the "Feuerball" weapon, sometimes erroneously referred to as
the mystery "V-7" weapon (of which there never was an official designation). The WNF Feuerball relied on a rocket
motor for launch, a plume sensor for aerial detection, and an electrostatic filed weapon invented at Messerschmitt’s
Oberammergau facility. Production of these craft was initially performed by WNF. Because the discs burned chemicals
around its ring to create the electrostatic field necessary to disable Allied bomber engines and radar the object was soon
nicknamed the "Foo Fighter" by the Allies who sighted this fiery halo weapon approaching them by day or night. FOO
was a take on the French word Feu (Fire) and from the Smokey Stover comic of a bumbling fireman that actually started
fires!

Naturally, WNF observed the burning effect too and soon nicknamed their weapon the WNF Feuerball (Fireball). The
Feuerballs plagued the 415th NFS from November 1944 to April 1945. By that time production had been shifted to the
Zeppelin Werk that nicknamed the larger improved weapon as "Kugelblitz" (Ball Lightning). The Allies seemed confused
by these weapons which ranged in size from small to large and attacked in singles or multiples. The Germans further
confused the Allies by launching "Seifenblasen" along with the Feuerballs.

Seifenblasen (Soap Bubbles) were large weather balloons trailing metal strips that confused Allied radar. Their large
round shape reflecting in daylight gave them the appearance of a shining globe similar to the Feuerball. The Germans
further complicated the identification of the "Foo Fighters" with a range of smaller purely spherical aerial probes that
were used as psychological weapons. These "KugelWaffen" (Ball weapons) played aerial games with the Allied bomber
gunners that would have in time distracted them from the real threat of larger approaching Kugelblitz discs.

But by the spring of 1945 the war was lost regardless and most of the remaining disc programs were halted. Henri
Coanda had been arrested in Paris in 1940 and forced to work on a disc under SS supervision. His design for a


lenticular disc that benefited from his own "Coanda effect" was a masterpiece of jet disc design. But because it required
12 JUMO 004 jets to power the huge machine the project never got past the wind tunnel testing phase. Likewise,
Andreas Epps independent Omega Diskus which utilized two Pabst ramjets and 8 Argus lift fans was also confined to
1/10th scale model testing.

Dr. Alexander Lippisch had also studied disc aerodynes back in 1941 but was too involved in the ME-163 Komet and
DM-1 delta glider programs to produce anything more than brief design concepts based on the Gottingen K 1253 disc
wing profile. The Horten brothers, experts with flying wings, also studied circular wing designs but did not actually work
on any in Nazi Germany. They did so for the US Govt. postwar in late 1945-46 producing what is now believed to be the
craft that crashed at Roswell in 1947- a spy craft parabolic lifting body carried by a large meteorological balloon.

In the face of imminent defeat BMW destroyed all their Flugelrads. Schriever’s Flugkreisel was also destroyed. Miethe’s
disc may have been captured as Miethe went to Canada postwar to work on AVRO’s designs.

Habermohl was captured by the Russians while Dr. Belluzzo returned to Italy. Schauberger’s Repulsins were also
captured by the Allies while most of the SS scientific branch records still intact were captured by the British who postwar
attempted to create a working design through AVRO Canada with eventual US assistance.

One very little known Peenemunde disc project under Heinrich Fleissner was the last disc to take off from Berlin in late
April 1945 on an official mission. But details of the "Dusenscheibe" (Devils Disc) remain clouded in mystery.
Meanwhile, the Feuerball attacks that stopped in April 1945 in Germany resumed in August 1945 in Japan- an obvious
technology transfer from Germany to Japan via U-Boat. The Japanese, however, lacked all the documentation for this
weapon and only launched a few. It is said that the Japanese were frightened by this "demonic thing" and destroyed the
remaining Feuerballs by dynamiting them in a pit. Photographic evidence also seems to identify "Kugelwaffen" sent to
Japan as well as several are seen trailing Sally bombers, probably for flight testing.

But the Third Reich story ends as strangely as it had begun. What about the mysterious Thule-Vril discs which were
actually built in small numbers? By 1945 there were quite a few Haunebu II and Vril 7 discs flying. Vril had even tested
the Vril 8 Odin and possibly the even more streamlined Vril-9 Abjager. These craft were not destroyed but evacuated
from March 1945 to an area safe from Allied bombing or capture.

In the year preceding the start of WW2 Germany sent an expedition to Antarctica to scout out a location for a military
base there. The Germans found such a location in the former Queen Maud Land which Germany renamed Neu
Schwabenland. There, in secret during 1942-43, a base was built in the Muhlig-Hoffman mountains. Base 211 (or
Station 211). The base was supplied with slave laborers shipped by sea and U-boats to construct an elaborate cave
complex deep within the mountains- an impregnable fortress. Hot internal springs were found there, iron ore deposits,
vegetation and access was achieved primarily through an underwater trench that ran through the area.

During the war, especially the latter part, German U-boats made frequent trips to the South Atlantic, South America, and
Antarctica. Germany also set up floating meteorological buoys in Antarctic waters and weather stations on islands
located between Antarctica and the tip of South America. The SS RuSHA, (Rasse und SeidlungsHauptAmt- Race and
Settlement Bureau) began in 1942 to take women of Aryan decent (Volksdeutsch) from the Ukraine solely for the
purpose of transporting them to Base 211.

Ten thousand women between the ages of 17-24, blonde and well proportioned, were recruited for the project along with
2,500 Waffen SS soldiers serving in Russia. The goal of this massive undertaking was to create a colony at Base 211
suitable for habitation and continued development of the Thule-Vril technology. It is believed that both the Thule and Vril
Gesellschafts evacuated that technology to Base 211 at the close of the war under SS General Kammler, who was in
charge of Germany’s most secret weapons programs.

Two U-boats that surrendered after the war in Argentina are also believed to have carried cargo and high-ranking SS to
Base 211. Both boats were empty upon surrender with the crews refusing to disclose their cargos and destinations.

It became apparent in 1946 that 54 U-boats and over 6,000 technicians and scientists were ‘"missing" from Germany-
especially from the SS Technical Branch. There were also 40, 000 slave laborers and between 142,000-250,000
German citizens unaccounted for. Despite simply writing these off as probable losses and deaths of the war, Washington
suspected that a large number of these missing actually escaped to South America and Base 211 (if such a base
existed). The US then went on a hunt using the "war criminal" propaganda to cover up the search for technology akin to
a South American version of "Operation Paperclip".

The United States was so concerned about the secret base that in 1947 with the first Antarctic summer "Operation
Highjump" was launched with a full military task force headed by Admiral Byrd. The task forth was to head straight for


Neu Schwabenland and recon the area for a base. If one was found 4,700 armed troops would have been sent to
capture it or destroy it. The task force performed the aerial recon, trailing magnetometers to detect any magnetic
anomalies under the ice… but several of Byrd’s planes were lost.

The aircraft had run into enemy opposition. "Operation Highjump" ended in failure as Byrd headed back after several
weeks, far short of the 8 months that was intended. In his unofficial comments to the South American press Byrd stated
that he was attacked by "enemy aircraft" that "could fly from pole to pole at incredible speed". Subsequently, the modern
UFO phenomenon sprang up in 1947 and concentrated disc development programs were initiated in the ‘50s that have
continued on to present-day "black project" aircraft operated by the CIA, NSA, and NRO.

So the story of the Third Reich disc programs does not end with the collapse of the Third Reich itself. It continues
unresolved…
http://www.bibliotecapleyades.net/ufo_aleman/esp_ufoaleman_1.htm#Introduction

(1922-1924)

by Rob Arndt

"Germany's first disc"

In the summer of 1922 in a small barn outside of Munich the occult Thule and Vril Gesellschafts set about to create
an interdimensional flight machine based upon channeled information received by their two mediums (Maria
Orsich and Sigrun) from Aldeberan in the Taurus Constellation, 68 light years away.

Maria, the Thule medium, had been receiving information from what she believed was Aryan aliens living
on Aldeberan since 1919 but could not translate their language and strange mental images.

Sigrun, the Vril medium was brought in to help translate these communications and images which was in the form of a
strange circular flight machine with an even stranger cylindrical powerplant beyond all conventional science of the time.

Thule and Vril secretly called this craft the Jenseitsflugmaschine, or "Other World Flight Machine".
The Gesellschafts then used their members in the German business community to raise funds for the construction of
this machine under the code letters J-F-M.

By 1922, parts for the machine began arriving independently from various industrial sources paid in full by
the Thule and Vril Gesellschafts.

The machine itself was a disc craft with three inner disc plates inside and a cylindrical power unit running through the
center of all three plates. The central disc plate measured 8 meters in diameter; above it in parallel was a disc plate of
6.5 meters diameter and below an equally parallel disc of 7 meters diameter. Through the center of all three disc plates


ran a 2.4 meter high cylindrical power unit that fit into a running 1.8 meter hole that culminated at the bottom of the disc
body with a conical point to which was attached an enormous pendulum to stabilize the equipment once the unit was
operating.

Once activated, the cylindrical power unit which consisted of an electric starter motor and high power generator started
the upper and lower disc plates spinning in opposite directions to create a rotating electromagnetic field that was
increasingly intensified. The intensity and frequency of the field oscillations increased in theory up to a point where
an interdimensional oscillation occurred, opening a gateway or portal to another world. The occultists called this a
"white hole" that theoretically would connect the JFM to Aldeberan's corresponding frequency oscillations and navigate
the machine through to that world. The sole purpose of this machine was to reach Aldeberan and make contact directly
with those that had supplied the information through channeling.

Two years of research was done with the JFM until 1924 when the machine was hurriedly dismantled and moved to
Augsburg where it eventually was placed in storage at Messerschmitt's facility. With the end of the war, no trace was
ever found of the JFM. Perhaps it was destroyed in an Allied bombing raid or simply taken apart by the Germans
themselves out of fear. No one is certain.

But whether or not the JFM actually worked, one thing is certain: the Thule and Vril Gesellschafts, with the help
of W.O. Schumann of the Technical University of Munich, developed some form of levitator unit from it that would be
utilized in further German disc aircraft with the RFZ (RundFlugZeug) types starting in 1934 and ending with the
fantastic Vril and Haunebu discs of 1939-1945.

http://www.bibliotecapleyades.net/ufo_aleman/esp_ufoaleman_7.htm


http://www.bibliotecapleyades.net/ufo_aleman/esp_ufoaleman_gallery.htm

from Rense Website


The Ho-IX
Maximum Speed 600+ mph

Kenneth Arnold and his
drawing of what he saw in 1947

Hi-Tech Composite Radar-Absorbing Wings

Flying The Ho-IX In Late 1944

Wartime Notes On The Ho IX

In a speech before representatives of the aircraft industry, Reichsmarshall Goering had announced that no new
contracts would be given, unless the proposed aircraft could carry 1000 kg bombs, fly 1000 km/h, and have a
penetration depth of 1000 km; penetration depth being defined as the total range.

The Fighter Division requested that the aircraft also be fitted with 30 mm machine guns, something that would lessen the
machine’s efficiency as a bomber.

We started drawing and calculating without a contract. Our plan was to build two full size prototypes. The initial
penetration depth would only be 800 km, since the fuel proof glue necessary for the full wet wing, was not yet available.
On the other hand, the smaller fuel load allowed a doubling of the bomb load, so we went ahead and submitted our
proposal.

A contract was awarded with the demand that the first flight be made in six months! Since the jet engine was not yet


ready, the first machine would be a glider. The previously deactivated Air Force Command IX was reactivated, and
ordered to proceed with the project. Fortunately, the preliminary work that we did without a contract, put us sufficiently
ahead, so the six month deadline locked feasible.

There were several reasons for choosing wood as the building material. Duraluminum required more energy to produce;
over 3000 KWH, versus less than 3 KWH for wood per ton. The required labor for aluminum production was also much
higher; 5000 hr/ton against 200 hr/ton for wood. In addition, aural was difficult to find, and skilled sheet metal workers in
short supply. Unskilled workers could easier be trained to work with wood.

Typically, a nose rib was built from a triangular piece of spruce, sandwiched between two plywood sheets, all scrap
wood. Production time: 10 minutes. After the glue dried, the rib was simply roused out along a master template in less
that 5 minutes. The rest of the wing was built in a similar crude fashion, to pave the way for mass production by unskilled
workers.

The main box spar contained all cables and control rods, to free the remaining space in the wing for fuel. That, we
planned to pump right into the wing itself, without tanks or bladders. To do this, we needed the fuel-proof glue, that could
be used to coat the inside surfaces as well. The glue allowed additional gluing to dissolve and adhere to already coated
surfaces, which greatly simplified construction.

The skin was very thick: 17 mm, all plywood; three times the necessary strength. On the production aircraft, this would
be replaced by two 1.5 mm plywood sheets, with a 12 mm layer of sawdust, charcoal and glue mix, sandwiched in
between. The charcoal in this much lighter skin would diffuse radar beams, and make the aircraft "invisible" on radar
(STEALTH Technology -ed).

Finally, should a 20 mm shell explode inside the wing, a relatively harmless hole would result, whereas a metal wing
would balloon out and lose its lift.

The H IX wing was designed with 3 geometric and 1.5 aerodynamic twist, to give it the desired bell shaped lift
distribution with all controls neutral. The Frise-nose on the elevons had proven to be unsatisfactory, so we decided to
use blunt nose elevons instead. The sharply enlarged wing root chord served mainly to eliminate the middle-effect. The
maximum thickness line (T-4 line) therefore made a sharp bend in the middle, which resulted in the characteristic
pointed tail. As this would affect stability, a test aircraft with large aspect ratio, that had the control surface far outside the
test area, was needed. The H Vl would serve this purpose, while other preliminary tests were made with a H II and a H
III.

The H IX V-1 took off right on schedule on March 1, 1944 in Gottingen. The small He 45 towplane barely got off the
ground, so test pilot Scheidhauer released, and landed straight ahead, after only a short hop. Five days later, he was off
again on a snow covered runway behind an infinitely more powerful He 111. He released at 12000 feet, made an
uneventful glide back to the airport, then faced problems during landing when the drag chute did not function. As the end
of the runway approached, he retracted the nose wheel, and skidded to a stop with only minor damage.

The second aircraft, scheduled to fly three months later, was awaiting its engines, promised in March. Several weeks
passed, and then... Disaster!

The engines arrived with an accessory section added to the case, making the cross section oval, and the diameter 20
cm greater! No one had bothered to inform us! Now, just six weeks before the first flight, we were faced with the problem
of fitting an 80 cm engine into an aircraft with a 60 cm hole in the spar! It meant that the wing would have to be made
thicker.

To maintain the aerodynamic qualities of our design, we would have to increase the span from 16 to 21.3 meters, and
the wing area from 42 m2 to 75 m2. Such an aircraft would never reach the targeted performance, even with higher
engine thrust. We choose instead to do the best we could with patchwork modifications. The wings remained the same.
Another root rib was added 40 cm outside the original, making the center section 0.8 m wider. The new airfoil was 13%
thicker than before, and the bend in the T-4 line became much larger. The thicker center section lowered the critical
Mach number to 0.75, or a maximum speed of 920 km/in.

The ratio of movement between the control column and the elevons could be reduced to by the pilot for high speed flight.
A small high speed drag rudder was supplemented by a larger one that deployed after the smaller was fully extended.
Many parts were scrounged from other aircraft left at the test facility in Gottingen. The nose wheel, for instance, came
from the tail wheel of a He 177 heavy bomber. We were even able to use the strut and retract cylinder!

The men of Air Force Command IX did their utmost to complete the aircraft before the end of 1944, sometimes working


more than 90 hours per week.

I remember that Lt. Erwin Ziller made the first flight about December 18th, 1944, but his log book indicates that the first
flight occurred on February 2nd., 1945. I am quite sure the first flight of the H IX was also his first in a jet. Our leaders
had little concern for such risks.

Satisfied with the initial flight, the Air ministry ordered 40 aircraft to be built by the Goetha Waggonfabrik under the
designation Ho-229.

It appears that the H IX V-2 had flown three or four times before tragedy struck on February 18th. The many versions of
the story have a few things in common. The weather was overcast, the ground soft and muddy. The visibility marginal for
a test flight, as Lt. Ziller took off, retracted the gear and disappeared. We received a report that one engine had failed,
and that the H IX was returning to Oranienburg. Due to the low ceiling, a shallow approach to the airport was initiated.
Since the hydraulic pump was on the dead engine, gear and flaps were extended by the emergency compressed air
system.

Once down, they could no. be retracted. To maintain his glide slope, Lt. Ziller added power. to overcome the extra drag,
and found to his horror that he could "no longer maintain directional control; the fully developed drag rudder unable to
overcome the asymmetrical thrust. Rather than lose control, he retarded the throttle to land short of the runway. The
aircraft touched down in a field, slid into an embankment and flipped over, crushing its pilot.

The US Third US Army Corps reached the Goetha plant on April 14th 1945. Here they found the H IX V-3 intact and
nearly completed, and also the V-4, V-5 and V-6 in various stages of completion. The Ninth US Armored Division found
the H IX V-1 in good condition near Leipzig. Its fate is unknown.

The H IX V-3 was later shipped to USA, and is now in the Smithsonian collection, awaiting restoration.

More amazing pictures of the Ho IX

German Secret Technology
UFO Secret History
by Tim Matthews
May 1998

Over the last few months new information has emerged relating to the terrestrial origins of flying saucers. This goes to
the heart of modern-day UFO research and because we neither claim that UFOs are of ET origin nor that flying saucer
sightings are explainable as evidence of natural phenomena or simply misidentifications of mundane phenomena we are
under attack from all sides. Nevertheless, the evidence we have put forward has encouraged many researchers to
become engaged in a debate that some people might have hoped had gone away.

The fundamental point to make is that, according to a great deal of UFO literature, despite the best efforts of researchers
to identify the objects described in UFO reports there remains a hard core, perhaps 1-2%, that are said to represent
’true’ or ’real’ UFO phenomena. Therefore the evidence suggests that many of this core of 1-2% of sightings relates to
structured craft of ’unknown’ origin. In this case, I am writing about flying saucers - often quite small, seemingly
constructed of some metallic substance - occasionally described as ’brushed’ aluminum:

Take for example the McMinnville, Oregon, photographs taken by Paul Trent on 11th May 1950. These are some of the
best examples of a saucer photograph and extensive analysis has shown that:
This is one of the few UFO reports in which all factors investigated, geometric, psychological, and psychical, appear to
be consistent with the assertion that an extraordinary flying object, silvery, metallic, disk-shaped, tens of meters in
diameter, and evidently artificial, flew within sight of two witnesses.

This is very important UFO research which shines new light on this most ’elusive’ mystery of the Twentieth Century.
Perhaps it is time for a little demystification.
We suspect that ’flying saucers’ were developed, to some extent in parallel, on either side of the Atlantic during the
Second World War. This realization, or understanding, is becoming increasingly a focus for research even though a long
period of time has passed since those developments took place. Our research might be said to represent a ’small voice
of calm’ within the UFO community, whose increasingly shrill calls for Western governments to ’come clean about UFOs
and aliens’ tend to obscure the truth about flying saucers.


To others, our research is an example of the ’Federal Hypothesis’, that which states that:
The answer seems to be that, in the USA at least, UFOs are controlled not so much by an intelligence as by an
Intelligence Agency.
In the first place, it is certainly not the case the new generation of man-made flying saucer advocates are apologists for
Nazism as is suggested by the skeptics who claim that because some nazi saucer researchers are of dubious political
persuasion then all subsequent research is invalid.

This type of guilt by association is, of course, a rather ineffective way of arguing with the evidence.

Secondly, debunkers argue that because some supposed sightings of flying saucers have been explained or that they
are explainable then all sightings should be called into question. The reader has seen that there are impressive UFO
sightings that clearly relate to structured circular craft and that these have been reported from around the world with a
concentration upon the USA - a fact which surprises few researchers.

Despite the argument that German scientists had no more advanced technology than the allies, one American was very
clear as to the technical achievements of nazi scientists: Major General Hugh Knerr, Deputy Commanding General for
Administration of US Strategic Forces in Europe, wrote to Lieutenant General Carl Spatz in March 1945:
Occupation of German scientific and industrial establishments has revealed the fact that we have been alarmingly
backward in many fields of research, if we do not take this opportunity to seize the apparatus and the brains that
developed it and put this combination back to work promptly, we will remain several years behind while we attempt to
cover a field already exploited.
It is possible to look into the area of German flying saucers without reference to so-called established sources. These
authors are often targeted for attack by skeptics and include Allen Harbinson, who has contributed to the subject
through his exciting series of Project Saucer novels and the more recent non-fiction paperback Projekt UFO and Renate
Vesco, whose research appeared in the late 1960s as a paperback with the title Intercept But Don’t Shoot and later as
Intercept UFO.

Vesco appears to have cooperated with hidden knowledge writer David Hatcher Childress in the production of Man-
Made UFOs - 50 Years of Suppression. In addition to these books, which are interesting though imperfect in their
presentation (and omission) of the evidence, there are also two books written in the 1970s by Ernst Zundel under the
pseudonym Mattern Friedrich which were popular for a short time within the far-right political community and may still be
available.

Zundel himself is a controversial figure for a number of obvious reasons which include support for anti-Semitic groups,
his publication of books and magazines denying the holocaust, and his links with most of the influential neo-Nazi groups
in Germany, Britain, the USA and Canada. His most important book on the subject of German flying saucers is entitled
UFOs: Nazi Secret Weapons.

Despite the fact that Zundel is a character with whom we have little or nothing in common from a political point of view,
his espousal of far-right politics neither means that every piece of information in his two books is wrong nor that they
should be ignored. It is important to realize that Zundel’s main purpose in writing and dissemination these books was not
primarily an attempt to advocate the supposed superiority of Nazi technologies but to make a fast buck. In short, Zundel
did it for the money, and he has made it quite clear that these publications are, in his view, not to be taken 100%
seriously. The skeptics point to Zundel as a major source on German secret projects despite the fact that there are
several other books and articles, including primary material, that have no link with such questionable politics.

Where we have a situation where skeptics will use any tactic, we can expect them to claim that any use of contemporary
German-language material is evidence of apology for nazi war crimes. This is not the case although we do not any
longer intend to look over our shoulder every time we mention German pre-war or wartime technology. We research this
subject in order to shed new and important light on the fundamental reality of man-made flying saucers.

The final point to bare in mind regarding this subject is that the victors of any conflict have a head start in writing the
history books and, in the case of the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, burying or spiriting away evidence,
documents, plans and blueprints, actual technology and a variety of other materials that the allies did not, and do not,
want the public to know about - for a variety of reasons that may become apparent.

Despite the fact that the man-made origins of flying saucers are of the greatest implications in terms of our
understanding of postwar history, man-made UFO researchers have to some extent been deliberately ostracized and
smeared.

Nevertheless, a great deal of new information has emerged in recent years and there is still more to come. The


suggestion that fifty years after the end of the Second World War new information cannot emerge because this period
has been the subject of the most intense scrutiny is an illogical one. For any number of reasons information can stay
buried and, beyond mere speculation, we know that files relating to the Second World War remain locked in the deep
dark vaults of the Public Records Office in Kew, London.

Remember this - records are routinely held for 30 years and can be held for 50, 75 and 100 years after the event. By the
time they emerge they may have been altered, edited or sanitized to protect the identity of those responsible for the
implementation of policy. One simple example that comes to mind is the emergence in recent years of new and credible
information about the German nuclear research program underway during the Second World War.

Much of this has been the result of research undertaken by Philip Henshall who has also contributed a great deal to our
understanding of advanced German weapons projects through his books on the rocket research facilities at
Pennemunde on the Baltic coast.

Even before the allies landed in Normandy in June 1944 special groups of language and technical research specialists
had been organized in order to recover as much of the technological hardware and research data relating to advanced
German weapons. This effort was dedicated to getting hold of much more than data on the V2 rocket - the most obvious
and well-known example of German scientific expertise. Already, through an intelligence estimate passed to the allies
via a Norwegian source and known as the Oslo Letter, the allies were aware of other weapons under development and
in operation by axis powers.

These included radio-controlled bombs, huge guns, rocket launchers, new radar systems, long-range bombers and
torpedoes. It would seem that they might also have been interested in a circular-wing aircraft with Vertical-Take-Off-and
Landing (VTOL) capabilities. In short, an early and relatively primitive flying saucer..

In order to make some progress in terms of this research it seems necessary to avoid using the standard sources -
Vesco and Harbinson - even though some of their information is valid as we have seen. Other sources are equally
intriguing. One source indicates that from the mid 1930s there was significant interest in both Vertical-Take Off and-
Landing (VTOL) and circular wing aircraft.

This led to a number of designs one of which was the Focke-Wulf VTOL.:
Professor Heinrich Focke was particularly interested in emerging helicopter and autogyro technologies and was
involved in the design and production of the FW6, Fa223, Fa226, Fa283 and 284 models during the war. The creation of
the jet engine encouraged him to design a propulsion system known as the turbo-shaft still used in most helicopters
today. In 1939 he patented a saucer-type aircraft with enclosed twin rotors. This was a revolutionary development
described as follows:

The exhaust nozzle forked in two at the end of the engine and ended in two auxiliary combustion chambers located on
the trailing edge of the wing. When fuel was added these combustion chambers they would act as afterburners to
provide horizontal propulsion to Focke’s design. The control at low speed was achieved by alternately varying the power
from each auxiliary combustion chamber.
This was by no means the only circular aircraft.

Another similar aircraft was the troubled AS6 partly designed by the leading aviation expert in Germany Dr. Alexander
Lippisch whose work at the Gottingen Aviation Institute was legendary and whose impact upon postwar ’UFOs’ cannot
be underestimated. His revolutionary DM series of small triangular aircraft were built and flown in conjunction with
students at Darmstadt and Munich Universities (hence the DM prefix) and used rocket propulsion. The plans for these
were transported to the USA after the war. His most advanced design was undoubtedly the Lippisch Supersonic Flying
Wing which, although never built, strongly hinted at the triangular ’UFOs’ of the 1980s and 1990s.

The information about the AS6 (V1) emerged in an article written by Hans Ebert and Hans Meier based to a certain
extent upon information and a photograph provided by German aviation expert Wolfgang Spate. (Spate was the former
Commander of Operational Test Unit 16 during the War and more recently recognized as a leading aviation expert. He
served in the refounded postwar Luftwaffe.) The article, entitled Prototypen - Einselschicksale deutchser Flugzeuge, Der
Kreisflugler AS6 V1, was included in a the respected Luftfahrt International in 1980.

In certain respects the AS6, built by Messerschmidt, was based upon similar thinking as the Zimmerman V173 flying
flapjack - designed for use by the US Navy from 1942. The flying flapjack was far more successful and developed at the
Chance-Vought works in Connecticut and despite its’ supposed limitations was a propeller-driven aircraft designed to be
flown from an aircraft carrier, hence the need for Short Take off and Landing (STOL) capability. The flapjack was able to
fly at low speeds of approximately 40mph. The flight envelope was 40-425 mph and a more advanced version, the


XF5U1, was also tested.

One other important feature of these circular wings was an early ’stealth’ capability. The Horten brothers Reimar and
Walter, known for their many successful flying wing prototypes, had developed a composite wing made of plywood held
together by sawdust, charcoal and glue intended to absorb radar waves for use in their HlX model.

In 1946 Chance-Vought was using a similar technique. A skin called ’metalite’ was used in one of its’ circular wings.
Thomas C. Smith, former President of the Woodstream Corporation and a Penn State graduate engineer at the time,
reported that he had seen a ’flying saucer’ (XF5U1?) taking off vertically from the Chance-Vought facilities in Stratford,
Connecticut at the time and that it had used this composite. This was reported last year.

This means that the circular wing or ’flying saucer’ had a limited stealth capability years before the use of Radar
Absorbent Materials was considered for other advanced aircraft.

We can certainly dismiss all the nonsense so prevalent in various media on the subject of German flying saucers which
relates to the development of circular-wing aircraft as the result of occult or mystical beliefs. The truth is that the circular
wing was designed for technical reasons: circular and flying wing designs are inherently stronger and are easier to build.

Whilst it is likely that any information relating to the limited AS6 would have been taken by the allies for examination at a
later date it would seem that there is some evidence to suggest that a more advanced jet-powered flying saucer was at
least designed, if not built, from around 1943 onwards. The first source is Flight Captain Rudolph Schriever who came
forward in 1950 and claimed that he had worked with a small team at facilities near Prague with a view to developing a
flying saucer-type vehicle. The Schriever story first emerged in Der Spiegel magazine dated March 30th 1950 entitled
Untertassen-Flieger Kombination:
A former Luftwaffe captain and aircraft designer, Rudolph Schriever, who says engineers throughout the world
experimented in the early 1940s with flying saucers is willing to build one for the United States in six to nine months. The
40 year old Prague University graduate said he made blueprints for such a machine, which he calls a flying top, before
Germany’s collapse and that the blueprints were stolen from his laboratory. He says the machine would be capable of
2,600 mph with a radius of 4,000 miles, Schriever is a US Army driver at Bremerhaven.
This is a most credible story. Schriever claimed that the model built for testing was completed in 1944 with a view to
flying it in 1945. Nevertheless, the Russian advance ended any hopes of a test-flight.

A 1975 Luftfahrt International report took these claims seriously and noted that after Schriever’s death in the late 1950s
papers found amongst his belongings had included technical drawings of a flying saucer.

Schriever seemed to argue that although a saucer had existed it had not flown. This is contradicted by a possible
eyewitness, George Klein.

He claimed after the war in an interview, given on November 18th 1954 to the Zurich-based Tages Anzeiger, that he had
actually seen a flying saucer test on 14th February 1945 and that the craft had performed remarkably well reaching an
altitude of 30,000ft in 3 minutes as well as a high speed of hundreds of miles and hour. Despite the fact that subsequent
information leads us to conclude that a jet-powered flying disc was developed at the end of the war Klein spoke of a ray-
guided disc. Despite this fanciful claim some of the things he said made more sense. For instance, he claimed that some
of the work on the flying saucers had taken place at Pennemunde.

Pennemunde was of course the focal point for the development of the A4/V2 rocket. Interestingly, Klein also claimed
that the necessary stability for the saucer had been attained through the use of a gyroscope. This is exactly the method
used in the later German rockets developed by the Von Braun/Dornberger team. What is more, the entire rocket effort
moved to the Mittlewerke underground facilities near Nordhausen in the Harz Mountains. It is claimed, by several other
witnesses, that a flying saucer was tested in the vicinity of Kahla In Thuringia in early 1945.

The evidence presented above seems to have been taken seriously not only by mainstream magazines and national
newspapers in the 1950s but also by the author of Brighter Than A Thousand Suns, Robert Jungk. This is an
authoritative and historical account of the development of the Atomic Bomb written by a respected author. The book
itself, still available and published by Harcourt and Brace, received critical acclaim from Bertrand Russell, amongst
others. A section of text on page 87 of the paperback edition states:

The indifference of Hitler and those about him to research in natural sciences amounted to positive hostility.*

The accompanying footnote reads as follows:
*The only exception to the lack of interest shown by authority was constituted by he Air Ministry [Reichs Luftfahrt
Ministirium or RLM, TM]. The Air Force research workers were in a peculiar position. They produced interesting new


types such as the Delta [Lippisch and Horten, TM] ..and flying discs. The first of these flying saucers, as they were later
called - circular in shape, with a diameter of some 45 yards - were built by the specialists Schriever, Habermohl and
Miethe. They were first airborne on February 14th 1945, over Prague and reached in three minutes a height of nearly
eight miles. They had a speed of 1250mph which was doubled in subsequent tests. It is believed that Habermohl fell into
the hands of the Russians. Miethe developed at a later date similar flying saucers at A.V Roe and Company for the
United States.

This use of the original Schriever story is interesting if only because the author felt that the information was good and
warranted exposure. Given the nature of the book, we might well ask whether the author had any other information that
supported the claims made as to the characteristics of the circular aircraft. It is up to the reader to decide whether these
claims make any sense at all and more importantly, how this might affect our understanding of flying saucer history.
Until recently, it would have been rather safer and perhaps more sensible to argue that although various prototype
saucers existed in whatever form they were never tested. Safety is often the best policy given the shark infested waters
of modern-day UFO research. However, thanks to three years of painstaking research by UK astronomy, aviation and
photographic expert Bill Rose which included on-site research in Germany, Canada and America we now know a great
deal more. Initially Rose felt, like many skeptics, that the evidence for German flying saucer (and UFO) reality was very
shaky.

Nevertheless, and without reference to the UFO community in his personal quest for the truth, he was able to use his
expert technical knowledge to follow up leads and to make significant progress.

First of all he was able to discover that Dr. Walter Miethe, whom all sources agree was involved with Schriever, Klaus
Habermohl and Giuseppe Belluzzo (an Italian engineer) had been the Director of the saucer program at two facilities
located outside Prague. In May 1945, after testing of the prototype had taken place, both Miethe and Schriever were
able to flee in the direction of Allied forces. Habermohl was captured by Soviet forces and spirited East where he ended
up working on various aviation projects quite probably at facilities located outside Moscow.

It would seem that Klaus Habermohl was the man who developed the radial-flow jet engine, described in various articles
as a system of adjustable nozzles, of great significance just ten years later. (Radial-flow allowed for VTOL performance
and used the little-known Coanda effect.) Rose learned that not only had test flights taken place but that film footage of
these had been taken. This had always been rumored and makes perfect sense given the nazi fetish for keeping records
on everything. The footage, of good quality, has subsequently been stored in a secure location and shown only to a
handful of people.

Rose was shown some stills taken from the original film and given his expert photo-technical background concluded,
after careful consideration, that this was probably real and historical footage. He calculated that the craft was around half
the size claimed in Klein’s report. The saucer, rather less contoured and sleek than postwar artists’ impressions might
suggest (and unlike Bob Lazar’s S4 Sports Model!), was perhaps 75ft in diameter. The saucer was shown in flight
above the runway over the heads of a couple of observers.

Although this is in itself of the greatest significance other more contradictory evidence has emerged. One of the people
that Rose met had good information about the February test flight and was able to confirm that several people had seen
the test-flight - as we might expect. It was said that Schriever himself had piloted the test craft. This does seems sensible
(and logical) given Schriever’s background in the Luftwaffe - although it is at variance with his own account.

One can only speculate as to why this may be. It should be pointed out that the performance characteristics of this jet-
powered aircraft have probably been exaggerated and although it might have been technically possible given further
research and development to approach supersonic speeds, this was almost certainly not achieved in February 1945.
Finally, it seems as if Klein himself was centrally involved in the saucer project and may indeed have had responsibilities
for procurement.

We know a little more about Dr.Miethe. One of the important pieces of information came in the form of a rare group
photograph showing various young German scientists in 1933. The photograph shows Werner von Braun and Walter
Miethe. It would seem that these two knew each other well. During the War various lists of wanted German scientists
were drawn up. One of these was the Black List used by Counter Intelligence Corps and Combined Allied Field Teams
(CAFT) as they moved through Germany from 1944 in order to help them get hold of the important scientific personnel.

Dr.von Braun was certainly at the top of the list and if Miethe and he were old friends and had cooperated on early rocket
projects, there is little doubt that Miethe would have been a target too. Nevertheless, his work near Prague put him out of
reach and only through Miethe’s own efforts did the allied teams get their hands on him.

The immediate postwar is critical to an understanding of both the myth and reality of flying saucers or UFOs. One thing


is for sure: hundreds of nazi scientists as well as intelligence personnel, many of whom had been involved in the abuse
of thousands of slave labourers, were transported via Operation Paperclip (so named after the original designation
Overcast was compromised). Many of these technical personnel were sent initially to Fort Bliss in Texas. From here they
were farmed out, according to their ability and expertise, to the many advanced scientific facilities dotted throughout the
USA and Canada.

Interestingly, Chance-Vought, builder of both the V173 and XF5U1 prototypes, moved its’ base of operations to Texas in
early 1947. The company seems to have been less than candid at this early stage about the true nature and extent of its’
involvement in flying saucers. The official story of the demise of the XF5U1 - that there was no interest in developing a
propeller driven aircraft from 1948 after the advent of jets - is now in question. It would seem that a jet-powered version
using Allison J33 engines was actually test-flown at Muroc Field in 1947.

The history books tell us that the propeller-driven version was to be tested here before the program was cancelled.
Nevertheless, our understanding of the situation is that technical drawings of the jet-powered version have now surfaced
through a series of Freedom Of Information Act requests. Given the overall design of this craft and the many sightings of
flying saucers in New Mexico and the Western seaboard in the late 1940s it is safe to concluded that the sightings
related to a saucer of terrestrial origin with limited performance characteristics.

The best of these are arguably the sightings over Muroc Field reported by serving military personnel on 8th July 1947
and the subject of subsequent internal investigation which revealed that the object seen was disc-shaped moving at
around 300 miles per hour.

The military witnesses Gerald Neuman and Joseph Ruvolo stated that in their opinion this was a man-made aircraft
travelling at only 300 miles per hour and this view was supported by a civilian witness named Lenz.

Similar objects were seen - many of them in and around the White Sands Proving Ground where we know for sure that
many of the Paperclip scientists were working. It is probable that at this stage people were seeing a US-built circular-
wing aircraft and only gradually, in the late 1940s/early 1950s, were German advances incorporated into the overall
saucer program. After all, military historians agree that a huge amount of material was recovered from facilities in
Germany and it took a great deal of time and effort to collate this.

We know both from Gerald K Haines report and from the recently declassified (1995) Air Technical Intelligence Centre
report on Project Silver Bug that prototype saucers were actually test-flown (obviously before 1955) in order to determine
their usefulness in terms of future dispersed base operations designed to reduce vulnerability to Russian air attack.
Hence the possible use of VTOL aircraft from camouflaged facilities.

I also suggest that the sightings reported by military personnel during the 1952 ’Operation Mainbrace’ may have related
to a similar flying saucer prototype. It seems to me that such a major exercise would offer an excellent opportunity for
testing and evaluation.

Given that we now believe that Klaus Habermohl designed the first radial-flow engine, a revolutionary development by
any standards (even today) in 1943, it is likely that within a few years progress had been made although the advanced
nature of the engine made only for slow progress. The incorporation of a radial-flow engine using the Coanda Effect in
combination with a circular wing made this a weapon worth keeping secret.

The jet-powered circular wing and the Silver Bug craft were two out of three variations upon a theme. There were two
Silver Bug prototypes, Projects Y and Y2, the first using a standard axial flow engine, the second the more advanced
type. Project Y was also designated P724 (P being the AV Roe Company project number) and was in fact a hybrid
saucer/AVRO Arrow (the Arrow was an advanced supersonic aircraft cancelled in the early 1960s supposedly after the
US pressurized on the Canadian government).

The existence of projects beyond the limited Avrocar adds further weight to the suggestion that Avrocar was little more
than a cover for much more advanced aircraft. Let us be quite clear on this point: Both Projects Y and Y2 were separate
and distinct from the Avrocar and in fact the evidence further suggests that the craft test-flown near Prague in February
1945 was actually more advanced! It is interesting to note that proponents of the extra-terrestrial hypothesis tend to use
the failed Avrocar program as evidence that flying saucers must be of ET origin. We must now dismiss such misleading
conclusions.

On a separate note and in view of the suggestion that underground facilities have been built in the postwar period it now
seems that in certain cases these were used to house small numbers of flying saucer-type aircraft. This is not to say that
they were located in the wilds of Canada but more likely within the White Sands Proving Ground and later on or near the
Groom Lake facilities in the Nevada Desert. Whilst the man-made reality of flying discs has been hijacked by Bob Lazar,


John Lear and a generation of US Ufologists, it seems as if the remote nature of Groom dry Lake bed was considered
both with flying saucers and the U2 spyplane in mind.

There is no doubt that all kinds of weird and wonderful aircraft are tested from Groom Lake but in terms of flying saucers
it seems as if they may have arrived in 1959/60. The facilities there, although home to secret CIA and possibly National
Reconnaissance Office (NRO) aircraft have primarily been operated as US Air Force Flight Test Centre Detachment 3
(AFFTC Det 3). AFFTC is headquartered at Edwards Air Force Base, formerly Muroc Field. It is vital for the reader to
understand that Silver Bug, Project Y and in fact all the saucer programs we now know about had very strong links with
the US Air Force.

In fact, Dr.Miethe worked primarily for the USAF even though he was sub-contracted to AVRO - possibly as a cover for
the real efforts underway in the USA whereby the design work was undertaken in Canada and the majority of test flights
within US borders. Having said that there was a mention of Canadian saucers made in several newspaper articles and
books in the early 1950s. Even Donald Keyhoe notes a conversation with an informed source on this subject in his
populist Flying Saucers From Outer Space (1953).

More interesting was an article featured in Look magazine dated June 14th 1955 (Volume 19) which featured a design
study for a flying saucer produced by Thomas Turner, a British aeronautical engineer with Republic Aviation
Corporation. It would seem that Turner might have had some knowledge of Silver Bug if only because his proposal for a
flying saucer was almost exactly the same as the ATIC aircraft. In addition Turner’s proposal includes use of the Coanda
effect and the placing of a pilot in a prone position in order to allow for high acceleration and quick turns.

Both these would seem to come from an understanding of German projects the skeptics deny existed. Other notable
features of the article include the use of language, for instance the following which reminds us of the introduction to the
Project Silver Bug report:
Future airports built for vertically rising flying saucers would have no need of the long, vulnerable runway’s today’s
fighters require. The complete operation could go underground. Tunnels with take-off shafts set into the ground,
complete with maintenance bays, fuel and crew quarters, would be bomb-proofed shelters for a saucer squadron. The
shafts would be sealed after take-off for camouflage and protection.
This sounds rather like the need for dispersed base operations discussed in the Silver Bug document. I further suggest
that we now have a possible primary source for Renate Vesco’s insistence that flying saucer bases were situated in the
wilds of Canada in a ’remote area of British Columbia’. A picture of such a saucer base is shown in the article and
reproduced in this report. The quality is not that good: The article quoted Brigadier General Benjamin Kelsey (Deputy
Director, Air Force Research and Development) who commented that a major problem was the existence of longer
runways for the modern fighter and how these were vulnerable and might be destroyed through a single crippling enemy
strike.

Hence the need for VTOL operations. The article included above is of the utmost importance: in the mid-1950s at the
same time that both the US Air Force and CIA were attempting to play down the significance of flying saucer and UFO
reports there is substantial evidence to suggest that design teams were building and testing flying saucer prototypes.

Although it has proved difficult to find out about the reality or otherwise of a separate saucer-testing facility situated at
Papoose Lake within Area 51 Bill Rose has been given information that this was the HQ for much saucer prototype
testing and that several accidents and crashes resulted from use of early radial-flow engines.

More recently the unusual story of archeologist and historian Jerry Freeman emerged in a series if article published in
the well-known Las Vegas Sun newspaper. Simply stated, Freeman wanted to find evidence of a 19th Century pioneer
wagon train known as the lost ’49ers. Unfortunately for him, and for history, their remains lay within the boundaries of
Area 51! Undeterred, Freeman decided to go on an expedition into the twilight zone and after several days reached
Papoose Dry Lake.

He saw a security vehicle in the exact same place that the claimed S4 facilities were hidden and also thought that he
saw come sort of door opening in the rock face. It is possible, that electrogravitic systems have been tested both at the
Papoose and Groom Lake facilities.

It might be sensible, at this stage, to note the existence of several texts on the question of future propulsion systems for
flying discs written in the 1950s. One of these, entitled Electrogravitics Systems mentions a research project called
Project Winterhaven undertaken in 1952 in order to validate Thomas Townsend Browns’ Biefeld-Brown effect. The report
in question makes for fascinating reading and states that:

Using a number of assumptions as to the nature of gravity, the report postulated a saucer as the basis of a possible
interceptor with Mach 3 capability. Creation of a local gravitational system would confer upon the fighter the sharp-edged


changes of motion typical in space.

And that:
Glenn Martin say gravity control could be achieved in six years, but they add that it would entail a Manhattan District type
effort to bring it about.
The reader will perhaps not be surprised to learn that once again this report was kept away from public view for some 35
years by Air Force Aeronautical Laboratories at Wright Patterson AFB! It was declassified and made available through
the Technical Library in the early 1990s.

Whatever the final truth of the matter, we have done enough to establish that flying saucers grew from separate and
distinct German-American projects begun in World War Two.

Relatively primitive German discs must have been developed partly because of the failure of the Luftwaffe to defend Axis
airfields from allied bombing and the resulting need for VTOL operation. The V173 that became the XF5U1 and later a
jet-powered flying pancake was born out of a US Navy requirement for an STOL aircraft.

So why the secrecy?

A number of simple answers emerge: firstly the radial-flow engine is still advanced today. It allows for supersonic flight
and tremendous VTOL performance. A revolutionary propulsion technology, electrostatics, might threaten the economic
status quo. A circular wing offers good stealth capability and effective handling at low speeds. According to the Silver
Bug documentation, radial-flow allows for an aircraft to perform a range of staggering maneuvers including flying edge-
on - a characteristic noted in numerous flying saucer/UFO sightings.

It would seem that even if the most straightforward flying saucer stories are to be believed then these aircraft have been
used primarily as high-performance reconnaissance vehicles.

The psychological effects of seeing a flying saucer could only be heightened if it was unknown to the observer - an
aircraft that did not appear in anything more than pulp fiction tracts about terrifying close encounters with aliens and
which was regarded pretty much as a product of science fiction not science fact. Never forget the CIA memorandum
circulated in 1952 by Director Walter B.Smith which noted the possible use of flying saucers for the purposes of
psychological warfare.

There is also the whole, and unresolved, political question of the mass transportation of nazi scientists and their families,
some with dubious wartime records, to the USA under the secret Paperclip program. Although the existence of Paperclip
was known in the early postwar period the actual shocking details of the deals between victor and vanquished led to
great concern particularly by those who survived the horrors of concentration camps and/or forced labour under German
occupation. Although Paperclip may have resulted in technological achievements the moral position is certainly open to
question.

It would seem that the Soviets may have had their saucers too and undoubtedly more is to emerge from the archives
there. As a result the US would undoubtedly have been concerned to build the similar and competing aircraft that was
Silver Bug. Once again, such Soviet work would have been based upon recovered German, not alien, technologies and
there has been some suggestion that the Soviets did indeed develop flying saucers. Jan Aldrich’s Project 1947 has
sought to collate information about early flying saucers sightings and media reports.

One of these reports may have originated via Project Wringer, a postwar effort tasked with interviewing military,
industrial and other personnel of former Axis countries, Prisoners of War held in the Soviet Union and other Eastern Bloc
nations or displaced persons with intelligence or military information. Jan Aldrich found the following report whilst
undertaking research at the US National Archives:
10. SOURCE: EP 134892, Rpt. No. 5418-47758
dated 19th January 1954. Date of Observation: May 1953.

Preamble: During his internment in PW camp #1 in STALINGRAD (48/42N 44/30E) SOURCE ????? some ???? of
general interest and ??? allegedly observed a couple of flying saucers. SOURCE was always interned in the camp. He
understood a little Russian.

Flying saucers: SOURCE emphasized that he had never seen or heard anything of flying saucers before he observed
two of them on a dusty morning over Stalingrad in May 1953 when he was on guard within the camp. He observed them
in a rather high altitude flying fast in one direction, one following the other. Thinking they had something to do with
scientific research of Russia he forgot about his observation until he came back home in Oct.1953 and saw designs of
flying saucers in West European magazines. He could not provide further details.


It is difficult to know what to make of such reports except to point out that they were taken seriously by operatives within
the intelligence community. In fact, all the evidence we have - some of which is included in my forthcoming book entitled
UFO Revelation - is that in the early 1950s there was a reorientation of thinking relating to flying saucer sightings
whereby the CIA, particularly, chose to concentrate upon attacking the veracity of flying saucer reports by doubting the
credibility of the witness. At the same time, the Agency knew, as Haines admits, that saucer prototypes were under
construction.

Study of the many CIA documents made available through FOIA requests indicates that the CIA was misleading the
public. The Agency often directed requests for information on flying saucer sightings to the Air Technical Intelligence
Centre (ATIC) at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.

Whilst both the Agency and ATIC were claiming that they were unable to determine the origin of flying saucers
ATIC/WADC were working upon Silver Bug - and maybe more besides. In addition to this, Project Grudge had recently
been downgraded (March 1952) and redesignated Blue Book and this was headquartered at Wright-Patterson Air Force
Base!!. In any case Blue Book investigators were unable to explain away some 701 of 12,918 sightings they
investigated. Project Blue Book was downgraded through the 1950s to the stage where there was only a handful of
personnel working on UFO sightings.

In fact, according to David Jacobs, the downgrading took place after September 1953 and went hand in hand with Air
Force regulation 200-2 which stated that local Air Force base commanders could only discuss sightings if they had been
solved and that any others should be classified. Jacobs also notes that February 1955 (Silver Bug was released from
ATIC-WADC on the 15th February) was of significance because ATIC sought to explain away as many sightings as
possible and to leave no unsolved cases.
Project Blue Book Special Report Number 14 , dated May 5th, 1955 and release in October determined that:
On the basis of this study we believe that no objects such as those popularly described as flying saucers have overflown
the United States.
We now know that this was a lie:
CIA officials knew that the British and Canadians were already experimenting with flying saucers. Project Y was a
Canadian-British-US developmental operation to produce a non-conventional flying-saucer-type aircraft, and Agency
official feared that the Soviets were testing similar devices.
The downgrading and the debunking of UFO reports was deliberate and took place at exactly the same time that the US
was working upon advanced flying saucers. Once this is understood and established the official attitudes towards flying
saucer sightings make more sense. Secrecy, and perhaps even paranoia, appear to have gripped the intelligence
community and the USAF. Even now, some forty five years after Silver Bug was test-flown former project workers
remain tight-lipped. We can only conclude that silence in this case indicates particularly advanced technologies and the
need to keep a lid on the details relating to them.

One could easily make a case that the development and debunking of flying saucers was undertaken at Wright-
Patterson Air Force Base and it is to be hoped that this document will encourage people with information about US
saucer projects to come forward. It is up to UFO researchers to reorient their thinking, to come to terms with man-made
flying saucer reality and the ongoing cover-up relating to it.

The case for man-made UFOs is stronger than ever whereas the evidence for alien flying saucers is wholly untenable.
We have introduced here a new line of research and a new perspective on UFO reality. Beyond the fantastic claims and
mystification of UFOs by too many UFO researchers the painful truth is that flying saucers were, and are, a tremendous
human technical achievement. The truth is that serious research exists only beyond the unfortunate skeptic-believer
dialectic.

Surely it is to the military-industrial complex and not the heavens above that we should look for the origins of the flying
saucer.

The Ho IX V-2 taxiing for take off                                                     The Ho IX V-2 in flight, February 1945


More On Flying Wings And Saucer-Shaped Craft
Known Disc-Shaped, Triangular, Flying-Wing Aircraft
by Charles McGrew
c.1992 by Charles McGrew

We all know about B-2's and F-117's, and could see how they might be described as "disk-shaped" if viewed from the
appropriate angle. Here's some other information about some similar aircraft from the past. They are presented here
merely to show that disk-shaped flying craft are not only possible, but have been built.

XB-35 - In response to the possibility of Britain falling in the early stages of WWII, the US Army Air Force began taking
designs for extremely long-ranged, heavy-bomb-load aircraft that could fly from North America to Germany and back,
carrying 10,000 pounds of bombs. Northrop proposed the XB-35. The XB-35 had 4 engines, each driving two counter-
rotating pusher propellers along the same shaft (!). Pictures of the XB-35 look like each shaft has a six-bladed propeller,
but its actually two three-bladed propellers -- for a total of 8 propellers.

Jack Northrop had been experimenting with flying-wing designs since the early 1920's. In Germany, the Horton
brothers (see below) were working on a flying wing as well -- the final designs look surprisingly like the XB-35 (though it
had only two propellers).

Northrop's first prototype was the N-1M (nicknamed "the Jeep"), which was tested in the Roseman Dry Lake in the
Mohave Desert from July 1940-early 1942. It had two pusher propellers, and space for one pilot. Wingspan was 38 feet,
and the plane weighed 4,000 pounds. First "public" flight made the newsreels. The wings were altered significantly as
testing went on; for instance the "drooping wingtips" were discarded early on. The (only) N-1M stills exists, and has been
restored, it is now sitting in a Smithsonian storage hangar, painted its original brilliant yellow.

Northrop was contracted by the US Army Air Force Materiel Division to build one XB-35 (wingspan 172'). The N-9M was
the first product from the contract, a 1/3 scale (working, though wood-structured, not metal) model with two engines with
a 60' wingspan as a test-bed/trainer. It first flew successfully on Dec. 27, 1942. Three other N-9M's were built, and the N-
9M test program was completed in Oct. 1944. [The last surviving N-9M is being painstakingly rebuilt by the "Planes of
Fame" Museum, in Chino, CA] One of the N-9M's crashed during testing.

On June 25th 1946, the XB-35 was at last ready to fly (after a number of difficulties with the propellers) at Hawthorne
Field, CA -- the Northrop company field. The '35 was now in competition with what became the Consolidated B-36 as the
postwar strategic bomber (interestingly, both planes were pushers.) Its first flight was from Hawthorne to Muroc Dry Lake
(later named Edwards AFB) for additional testing.

Attempts to make the propeller system less complex were generally unsuccessful. Northrop decided to replace the props
with 8 jet engines, and continue work on the plane, renamed the YB-49. Only 2 XB-35's were ever completed, the
second one first flying on June 26, 1947. The Martin Corporation worked on the YB-35 (same basic plane, just built at
Martin), and the only YB-35 first flew on May 15, 1948.

YB-49 - The power problems of the XB-35 completely disappeared with the jet engines, but unfortunately they reduced
the range of the plane such that it could not be thought of as a strategic bomber (mid-air refueling not then being
feasible).

The second YB-49 produced was the first to fly, flown by Maj. Robert Cardinas, the US Army Air Force test pilot
assigned to the Northrop program (i.e. Northrop retained control, but had military test pilots mixed in with their own.) On
April 26th 1948, the YB-49 flew 4,000 miles with a 10,000 pound payload, on circuitous route that took it as far east as
Phoenix, and as far north as San Francisco.

In June, 1948 a YB-49 on a routine test flight crashed (Capt. Glen Edwards, for whom Edwards AFB is named, died in
this crash, along with four others); specific cause of the crash was never determined; structural failure was the most
likely reason.

The military had expressed an interest in a reconnaissance version (with two extra jets) of the YB-49, called the YRB-49,
and placed an order for 30. In January 1949, though, this order was cancelled.

In Feb. 1949 the remaining YB-49 flew from (now) Edwards AFB to Andrews AFB in record time (just over 4 hours - the
record was broken the next day by the XB-47, its medium-bomber competitor, which flew almost 100mph faster). The
famous YB-49-over-the-Capitol photos are from this flight. President Truman toured the plane's interior on the ground,
and then '49 headed back to Edwards. During the flight, 6 of the 8 engines failed due to an oil failure which has a slightly
mysterious history (apparently the oil reservoir had not been filled properly before the flight -- there are hints of


sabotage). The YB-49 made an emergency landing at Winslow AZ. Later on in 1949 the last flying YB-49 was destroyed
during high-speed taxi tests, when the undercarriage collapsed.

In November 1949, the Air Force (the US Army Air Force became the US Air Force on July 26, 1947 -- it changed from
the US Army Air Corps to the US Army Air Force on June 29, 1941) cancelled the last part of the YB-49 contract, that of
converting the remaining partially-completed XB-35's to jet power. The last 11 XB-35 hulls (in varying states of
completeness) were rolled out onto the flight ramp outside of the factory, lined up, photographed (a very impressive
aerial photograph of them lined up survives) and broken up for scrap. Northrop employees made a last-ditch request to
finish the planes in their spare time, which Jack Northrop had to turn down, for fear of jeopardizing further military
contracts.

(Political shenanigans for government contracts were just as silly back then as they are now, and Northrop was
concerned that Stuart Symington, secretary of the Air Force, would look unkindly on Northrop in general if the planes
were not destroyed -- Symington was very specific that the YB-49 program not continue. Northrop partisans say that
Symington wanted to force Northrop to merge with Convair, for reasons of his own, and was hoping to damage Northrop
enough to force the merger. Others say that the expected costs of the YB-49 were sufficiently higher that the XB-57 to
warrant the choice of the latter.)

(Other WWII-flying-wing ideas from Jack Northrop included the turbojet-powered XP-79 "Flying Ram", a rocket-powered
interceptor that was designed to literally slice the tail off of enemy aircraft with its heavily-reinforced wing to knock them
down. The XP-79 actually flew (once -- it crashed), along with at least one similar prototype, the (rocket powered) MX-
324, which first flew (powered) on July 5, 1944. Another was the JB-1, an unmanned rocket-assisted, turbojet-propelled
missile, and the XP-56, another pusher-flying-wing; this t