Author: William Reed (1906)
ID: ToB-0123
Archive: phantompoles00reedgoog
Source: OCR text from archive.org djvu.txt
OCR File Size: 0.25 MB

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world’s books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover.


Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.


Usage guidelines
Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the


public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.


We also ask that you:


+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individual
personal, non-commercial purposes.


and we request that you use these files for


+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.


+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.


+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.


About Google Book Search


Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web
ai[http: //books . google. com/|


THE GIFT OF |


THE PHANTOM
OF THE POLES


won


wer


THE PHANTOM
OF THE POLES


BY WILLIAM REED


1906
WALTER S. ROCKEY COMPANY
NEW YORK


Copyright, 1906, by
WILLIAM REED
and
WALTER S. ROCKEY
Entered at Stationers’ Hall, London, Eng.
1906


GEs


This Volume is Dedicated to
MY GRANDSON
SYDNEY REED SMITH


VIII


XII


CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION ............
GENERAL SUMMARY......-«
FLATTENING OF THE EARTH

AT THE POLES..........
LENGTH OF PoLaR NIGHTS...
WORKING OF THE COMPASS.
AROUND THE CURVE.......
MYSTERIES OF THE POLAR

REGIONS ........-.000-


|
THE AuRORA: ITS WONDER-
FUL VARIATIONS........
METEORS OR VOLCANIC DiIs-
TURBANCES ..........64-
FINDING OF ROCK IN AND ON
ICE wos. cc cee ee eee


OpEN WATER AT THE FAR-
TUEST PoInt NorRTH AND
SOUTH .........ecc ewes

Wuy It Is WARMER NEAR


THE POLES.............
9


XIll


XIV


XV
XVI


XVII
XVIII
XIX


Xx
XXI
XXII


DRIFTWOOD — WHENCE IT
CAME ......s cc. e eee ee
HAVE OTHERS THAN Es-
QUIMOS INHABITED THE


Wuat PRODUCES COLORED
SNOW IN THE ARCTIC?...
WHERE AND How ArE ICE-


THE TIDAL WAVE.........
CLoups, Focs, AND VAPORS.
ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC

WINDS .........0-e eee
THE CENTRE OF GRAVITY...
CANNOT REACH THE POLES.
Wuat Is IN THE INTERIOR


Io


PAGE.


196


20I


ILLUSTRATIONS.


PAGE.


PORTRAIT .......c eee eeeee Frontispiece
SoME FaMous POLAR EXPLORERS... I3
GLOBE, SHOWING A PORTION OF THE
EARTH'S INTERIOR............. 27
PLANET SATURN..........2000085 30
HoME LIFE IN THE ARCTIC CIRCLE. 33
THE WORKING OF THE COMPASS.... 4I
VIEW OF THE WATER-SKY, No. I... 55
VIEW OF THE WaATER-SKY, NO. 2... OI
THE AURORA BorEALIS, No. 1...... 79
THE AURORA BOREALIS, No. 2...... 100
Rock ON ICE..............000005 121
ICEBERGS ....... ccc ccc cece encees 14!
NORTHERN ENTRANCE TO THE IN-
TERIOR OF THE EARTH.......... I7I
PTARMIGAN 2... cece eect e eee 177
EIDER-DUCKS ........eeeceeeeeeee 182
How NAtTIvEsS SLAUGHTER SEALS IN
THE ARCTIC CIRCLE............. 187
-A SWARM OF AUKS.......0..0000- IQ!
AN ESKIMO’S SLED............06: 207
A SECTION OF THE GREAT ICE
BARRIER 1.0... ec eee eee eens 225
THE EMPEROR PENGUIN.......... 257


BIRDS-EYE VIEW OF THE OPENING
TO THE INTERIOR OF THE EARTH.. 273


II


ae ar ae


E, K. Kane.


+R. E. Peary. * A. W. GreeLy.


Sir Jonn FRranxun,


G. W. Metvitte, :


Cc. F. Hau.


Some Famous Potar Exptorers.


* From “Three Years of Arctic Service,”’ courtesy Charles Scribner's Sons,
1 From “Northward," F. A, Stokes Co, Copyright 1902 by Rockwood, N. Y.
+ From “ Farthest North." Copyright 1807 by Harper & Brothers,


@o000,


INTRODUCTION.


THis volume is not written to entertain
those who read for amusement, but to
establish and prove, so far as proof can be
established and proved, a half-score or
more of mighty truths hitherto not com-
prehended. This may seem boastful; but,
when understood, I hope it will not be so


considered; for one key will unlock them


all. Throw away the key, or refuse to
use it, and the truths will remain securely
locked in the archives of the unknowable,
as they have been since man _ inhab-
ited the earth. I fully realize that the
task is herculean; but as Hercules per-
formed his tasks, I hope to do likewise.
I am aware that I also have one powerful
giant to tackle; but the stone in my sling
may land at the place at which it 1s aimed,
and the giant Prejudice be laid low and be
succeeded by that young stalwart, General
Investigation.


16


INTRODUCTION


The problems to be solved are as fol-
lows: |


NOW B


TO.


Il.


. Why is the earth flattened at the poles?
. Why have the poles never been


reached ?


. Why is the sun invisible so long in.


winter near the farthest points
north or south?


. What is the Aurora Borealis?

. Where are icebergs formed, and how?
. What produces a tidal wave?

. Why do meteors fall more frequently


near the poles, and whence do they
come?


. What causes the great ice-pressure in


the Arctic Ocean during still tide
and calm weather?


. Why 1s there colored snow in the


Arctic region?

Why is it warmer near the poles than
six hundred to one thousand miles
away from them?

Why is ice in the Arctic Ocean fre-
quently filled with rock, gravel,
sand, etc.?


INTRODUCTION | 17


12. Does the compass refuse to work near
the poles?

Should I be able to give reasonable
answers to the above quéstions—replies
that will satisfy any intelligent person—
the public will admit, I believe, that I have
fulfilled my task. Above all, I hope to be
exonerated from trying to make others be-
lieve things in which I place no credence.
So sure am I that my solutions of the
problems given above are correct, I am
willing to stake my all on their correctness.
To me, the solutions given in this volume
are perfectly clear. I have thought over
every possible objection, and all statements
are presented with certainty.

They will be taken up under separate
heads, and, thus, furnish the reader with
what the lawyers would term a brief, giv-
ing authorities on whose statements I base
my opinion. The judges, in this case, will
be the public, whom I hope to have on my
side.

Before I do this I wish to acknowledge
my indebtedness to the brave men who
have spent their time, comfort, and, many,


18 INTRODUCTION


their lives, that all might know the truth
and the geography of this wonderful
world. “Through their reports I am able
to prove my theory that this earth 1s not
only hollow, or double, but suitable in its
interior to sustain man with as little dis-
comfort—after getting acclimated and
accustomed to the different conditions—as
on its exterior, and can be made accessible
to mankind with one-fourth the outlay of
treasure, time, and life that it cost to build
the subway in New York City. The num-
ber of people that can find comfortable
homes (if it be not already occupied) will
be billions.

Some have said: “Isn’t it wonderful, if
true?” |

I am like the stranger that visited the
Falls of Niagara with a friend. As he
stood gazing at the falling waters, the
friend remarked: “Isn’t it wonderful?”
““What’s wonderful?” asked the stranger.
“Why, the water pitching over like that.”
“Why,” said the stranger, “I don’t see
anything to hinder it.”

That expresses the whole situation. It


INTRODUCTION 19


may be surprising, and seem wonderful to
many, or ridiculous to others, but I see
nothing to hinder it.


20 GENERAL SUMMARY >


GENERAL SUMMARY.


To conclude that an opinion is worthless
because it is not-expressed in the best form
is a great mistake. To study out a prob-
lem, and to be able to convey the thought
clearly and forcibly to the public, is quite
another thing. Whether I can state my
views on this subject in a manner that will
convince others, I know not; I only hope
that the reader will give credit to my ideas,
rather than my expression.

I claim that the earth is not only hollow,
but that all, or nearly all, of the explorers
have spent much of their time past the
turning-point, and have had a look into the
interior of the earth. When Lieutenant
Greely was beholding the mock sun at 120
deg. L., he was looking into our sister-
world; and when Nansen saw the square
sun lined with horizontal bars, he was
gazing on what may be the future home of
his daughter, then but two years old.

To present these facts to the reader in
order, and in a clear, concise form, let us


GENERAL SUMMARY 21


see whether there be anything that con-
flicts with the claim that the earth is
hollow.

1. Why is the earth flattened at the
poles? As the earth is hollow, it could not
be round, is the answer to that. Again,
the opening to the interior would detract
from its roundness just in proportion to
the size of the opening.

2. Why have the poles never been
reached? No poles exist, in the sense
usually understood. The term, “the
poles,” will be used throughout this work,
however, for convenience’ sake, as cover-
' ing the farthest point from the equator so
long sought for by divers explorers.

3. Why does the sun not appear for so
long a time in winter near the supposed
poles? Because during the winter the sun
strikes the earth obliquely near the poles.
Upon the way round the curve, approach-
ing the interior, the earth being hollow,
one sinks a long way in; hence the sun
shines over him; it does not show up again
until it strikes that part of the earth more
squarely and shines down into the basin.


22 GENERAL SUMMARY


4. Assuming that the earth is hollow,
the interior should be warmer. We will
produce what evidence we can to show
that itis warmer. The ones that have ex-
plored the farthest will be the best judges.

5. We must now resort to the compass.
Does it refuse to work when drawing near
the supposed poles?

6. Meteors are constantly falling near
the supposed poles. Why? If the earth
be solid, no one can answer this question;
if hollow, it is easily answered. Some vol- .
cano is in eruption in the interior of the
earth, and from it rocks are thrown into
the air.

7. The next query is concerning the
great quantities of dust constantly found
in the Arctic Ocean. What causes this
dust? The volcanic eruptions that send
up the rocks called shooting stars. One
does not ask what this dust is composed
of; for it has been analyzed, and found to
be carbon and iron, supposed to come out
of some volcano.

8. What produces the Aurora Borealis?
The Aurora Borealis is the reflection of a


GENERAL SUMMARY 23


fire within the interior of the earth. The
exploding and igniting of a burning vol-
cano, containing all kinds of minerals, oils,
and so on, causes much coloring; while
absence of coloring, or only a faint toning,
is due to the burning of vegetable matter,
such as prairie or forest fires.

e g. Icebergs are next in order. Where
are they formed? And how? In the in-
terior of the earth, where it is warm, by
streams or canyons flowing to the Arctic
Circle, where it is very cold, the mouth of
the stream freezing and the water, continu-
ing to pass over it, freezing as it flows.
This prevails for months, until, owing to
the warm weather in summer, the warmth
from the earth, and the warm rains pass-
ing down to the sea, the bergs are thawed
loose and washed into the ocean.  Ice-
bergs cannot be formed on earth, for the
reason that it is colder inland than at the
mouth of a stream; hence the mouth would
be the last to freeze and the first to thaw.
Under those conditions, icebergs could not
be formed.

10. What causes tidal waves? Many


24 GENERAL SUMMARY


are started by icebergs leaving the place
where they were formed, and plunging into
the ocean. This answer is given because
nothing else can produce one hundredth
part of the commotion of a monster iceberg
when it plunges into the ocean. What is
the natural conclusion 1f an iceberg creates
the greatest commotion? It will start the
largest waves, and send them the farthest.
Some advance the theory that the moon
starts tidal waves and keeps them going;
but it is hard to believe, as they would
have to travel more than one thousand
miles an hour, which is too fast for a wave
of water. | :

11. What causes colored snow in the
Arctic region? Two causes: The red,
green, and yellow are caused by a vegeta-
ble matter permeating the air with such
density that when it falls with the snow it
colors it. This vegetable matter is sup-
posed to be the blossom or pollen of a plant.
As it does not grow on earth, one can
naturally believe that it must grow in the
interior. Black snow is caused by a black
dust, consisting of carbon and iron, and


GENERAL SUMMARY 25


supposed to come from a burning volcano.
As no burning volcano is near the Arctic
Ocean, it also must come from the interior
of the earth.

12. Why are the nights so long in the
polar regions? In winter, the sun strikes
the earth obliquely in that locality, and in
approaching the supposed poles one passes
down into a hollow, thus shutting out the
sun until it strikes the earth more squarely.

13. What causes the great ice-pressure |
in the Arctic Ocean during still tide and
calm weather? One of the great annoy-
ances, as well as dangers, met with in the
Arctic regions, is the ice-pressure. This
is caused by different conditions. Refer-
ence is not made to hummock or loose ice,
that grinds against shore; or fast ice; but
to the ice that ships get fast in and drift
with. Ice-pressure arises from change of
current caused by the tide setting 1n or out,
a strong wind with a sudden change, and
in calm weather, the tidal wave, most
annoying of all; for it comes when not
looked for, and turns everything topsy-
turvy. The ice, accordingly, has no show


26 GENERAL SUMMARY


and must break. A wind is different.
The whole moves along like a monster
raft. The sea is covered, and cannot rise,
while the wind blows a perfect gale. This,
when under cover in ship or hut, is but
little felt; but when a tidal wave puts in
an appearance, things are different. The
wave is in motion long before it reaches
the ice-field, and the force that keeps it
moving is not interfered with by the ice,
which is lighter than the wave, else it
would sink. When the ice, therefore, 1s
raised, it must break, split, and roar; but
the wave goes on.

14. Why is the ice filled with rock,
gravel, and sand? These substances
came from an exploding volcano near
where the iceberg was formed. As they
fall during all seasons of the year, they
appear, of course, in all stages, from the
time the stream first froze over until the
iceberg passed into the ocean.


GLOBE SHOWING SECTION OF THE
EARTH'S INTERIOR


The earth is hollow. The poles so long


sought are but phantoms. There are openings


at the northern and southern extremities. In
the interior are vast continents, oceans, moun-
tains and rivers. Vegetable and animal life
are evident in this new world, and it is probably
peopled by races yet unknown to the dwellers


upon the earth's exterior.
Tue AUTHOR.


THE PHANTOM
OF THE POLES


CHAPTER I.
FLATTENING OF THE EARTH AT THE POLES.


Wy 1s the earth flat at the poles? Our
school-books teach that the earth is round,
and flattened at the poles; but they do not
tell us why. If the earth is solid, this
question cannot be answered. If the earth
be hollow, the question is easily answered,
as it could not be hollow and at the same
time round; for the opening to the interior
of the earth would then detract from the
roundness just in proportion to the size of
the opening. A ball cannot be made
round and have a hole in it: however small
the hole, the ball is not round to that
extent.

If the earth be double, or r hollow, it is
built just as it would have to be. If the


earth be round, there would be no need of
29


30 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


this book; for that alone would settle the
question for all time. To prove a fact,
one or two circumstances will sometimes
be sufficient; but not always. For in-


PLANET SATURN.


The planet Saturn is a world within a world, and
maybe more. The inner world is flattened at the
poles, and is 75,000 miles in diameter. If hollow, the
earth could move round in it, and yet not be within
20,000 miles of its walls.
stance, if it were claimed that the earth
had an opening to the interior, and one
could show that the earth was round, that
alone would be sufficient to refute it. But,
on the other hand, the fact that the earth
is flattened at the poles is not sufficient to
prove that it is hollow, and is only one of


FLATTENING OF THE EARTH AT POLES 31


the evidences to show that, if it be, the
earth is in the right shape for it. If now
we can produce enough other evidence to
prove that the earth is double, then we
have shown why it is flattened at the poles.
The fact that the earth is flattened at the
poles is not any proof that the earth is
double, or hollow. It only shows that the
shape of the earth 1s not only favorable to
such a condition, but absolutely necessary,
and gives a good foundation with which to
Start. |


32 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


CHAPTER II.
LENGTH OF POLAR NIGHTS.


IF the earth be hollow—and I contend it
is—that fact accounts for the sun not being
visible for so long a time near the pole.
As the sun strikes the earth obliquely near
the poles in winter, only a slight depres-
sion would be required to shut it out en-
tirely during the winter months; shut out
until it got high enough to shine on that
part of the earth more directly, or, as
would be termed in more southern lati-
tudes, higher in the skies. The farther
one advanced into the interior, the longer
would be the night. Were the earth solid
and round, I am of the opinion that the
sun could be seen nearly, if not quite, every
day in the year. When Nansen saw what
he called the mirage of the sun, and took
it for the real sun—several days too soon
for its appearance—he was. much disap-
pointed, as the Fram must have drifted
south considerably since he took his last


‘aaID OMDAW Oy) UF az] BWOTT


LENGTH OF POLAR NIGHTS 35


observation. Ifa few days’ drifting could
make such a difference in the sun’s arrival,
would not the traversing of several thou-
sands of miles be a cause for shutting out
the sun for several months? It has been
supposed, heretofore, that the farther north
one got, the longer would be the night.
That is true, in one sense; for, in going
into the interior, travelers must go north
until they reach the farthest point; but
long before they do they will have sunk a
long way into the earth, or from where
they would have been had they traveled
the same distance if the earth were solid
and round. For example: if you are
living in a valley, the sun rises later and
sets earlier than on a mountain: the en-
trance to the earth can be represented as a
deep valley, and the farther one advances
the deeper it becomes.

Let us propound this problem in another
shape. The supposed location of the
North Pole is from 450 to 500 miles in the
air; not straight up, but on the same angle
as going straight north from 60 degs. lati-
tude, allowing for the natural curve of the


36 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


earth. If one could be located there in a
balloon, one would see the sun, perhaps,
each day in the year.

In Volume I, page 375, of Nansen’s
“Farthest North,” Friday, January 109,
1894, he says: “Splendid wind, with veloc-
ity of thirteen to nineteen feet per second;
we are going north at a grand rate. The
red, glowing twilight is now so bright
about midday that if we were in more
southern latitudes we should expect to see
the sun rise bright and glorious above the
horizon in a few minutes; but we shall
have to wait a month yet for that.” The
fact is, Nansen was going into the interior
of the earth, while he was under the im-
pression that he was going north.


WORKING OF THE COMPASS 37


CHAPTER III.
WORKING OF THE COMPASS.


Ir the earth be hollow, what is expected
of the compass? Anyone knowing any-
thing about a compass knows that as soon —
as a ship begins to turn, the needle will
tip up as far as it can. To satisfy him-
self, let the reader take any compass and
tip it toward the south. The needle will
drop as far as it can. Then tip it north,
and see how quickly it will rise to the glass.
at the top. If a compass will work like
that in New York, why should it not do
the same near the poles? As soon as the
curve begins, which 1s probably about 55
to 60 degs. latitude, the compass will try
to follow north, and, in order to do so, will
rise to the glass at the top, or as far as
the adjustment permits.

Greely proved that when the needle was
suspended on an untwisted silken thread,
it stood pointing nearly straight up. That


38 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


was at latitude 85 degs.; at go degs. it
would be erect. That is just what would
be expected if they were nearly at the
turning, or at farthest point north.
On the explanation that the earth is hol-
low, the needle worked just as it should
have, and if it worked differently, would
have been wrong.

A compass, or magnetic needle, is con-
trolled by one of the laws of the universe,
and when in order works accurately. If it
does not seem right, it is better to halt and
see if the fault be not elsewhere. The fact
that the compass does not work, as some
suppose, is one of the strongest arguments
in favor of the theory that the earth 1s hol-
low; for, had it pointed to the supposed
north, it could well be claimed that if the
earth was hollow, the needle would not
have pointed as it did. What seems,
therefore, to be a defective compass, turns
out to be one of the powerful proofs neces-
sary to substantiate a great truth. Man
had nothing to say about making the
earth: that was given to an Allwise
Creator; and if, in His wisdom, it was


WORKING OF THE COMPASS 39


made double, or hollow, it was for some
wise purpose. |

As Greely’s trip was for scientific pur-
poses, great attention was paid to every
branch of it. Let us note right here the
observation of the magnetic needle, and
see if we can account for the unruly con-
duct of this little metal servant that has
always proved such a faithful friend to
man. If the earth be hollow, and sailing
in a direction that seems to be north—
but, as a matter of fact, down—while
holding that course you sail round the
farthest point north, you gradually pass
into the interior, and your head will soon
be toward the north, and your feet toward
the south: this would be the exact position
when a ship or individual is half-way in or
around the curve. The needle would then
have to point straight up. What did it
do? Greely says on page 127:

“For the uninitiated it should be said
that the object of these readings was to
note the declination of the magnetic needle.
In the greater part of the world the com-
pass does not point to the geographical


40 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


pole, and the saying, ‘true as the needle to
the pole,’ is only an inaccurate simile. The
magnetic declination of any place is the
difference between the geographical pole
and the quarter to which the needle actu-
ally points, and is measured in degrees to
east or west. For instance, where the
needle points to the true west, the declina-
tion is said to be 90 degs. W., and when
pointing to the southwest, to be 135 degs.
W. At Fort Conger, in 1882, the mag-
netic needle pointed between the west and
southwest, the declination being 100 degs.
13 min. W.

“In the magnetometer a small magnet,
freely suspended by a single fibre of un-
twisted silk, swings readily in any hori-
zontal direction. This magnet, at Conger,
was never quiet, not even on what are
technically known as calm days, but swung
to and fro ina restless, uneasy way, which
at various times impressed me with an
uncanny feeling quite foreign to my na-
ture. As it swung to right and left, its
movements were clearly outlined on a
fixed, illumined, glass scale, which served


WORKING OF THE COMPASS 4


as a background, and the extreme oscilla-
tions, seen through a small telescope by the
observer, were recorded. In the other end
of the building was placed, on a stable pier,
a dip-circle, from which the inclination or


THE WORKING OF THE COMPASS.

This illustration is presented to show how the mag-

netic needle works in passing into the interior of the

earth, and how the compass would lead explorers out
again, they not knowing the earth was hollow.


dip of the magnetic needle was hourly
determined. A magnetic needle, nicely
and delicately balanced, in the middle lati-
tudes assumes a nearly level position. At
Conger, however, the needle, adjusted so
that it can move freely in a vertical plane,


42 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


shows a strong tendency to assume an up-
right position. At a dip of go degs. the
needle would be erect, while at Conger the
inclination was about 85 degs.”

What made that needle so restless? so
much so that it caused Greely such unpleas-
antemotions? If that needle was suspend-
ed in the middle latitudes it would, as he
said, assume nearly a level position. Let
us see why it takes that position, and per-
haps we can then tell why it assumes a
different position when nearing the poles.
It takes the level position because gravity
draws it down, and the magnet swings it
round: there are no conflicting laws; both
act in harmony. When one is entering
the curve to the interior of the earth, grav-
ity draws the needle down, while the mag-
net pulls it up, forcing a constant conflict;
the needle must be true to the north, while
gravity is pulling down, or south. The
result is a restless needle. As soon as
gravity shows the stronger, the needle
must fall; but when the magnet is strong
enough to overcome gravity, the needle is
pulled in a perpendicular position, or point,


WORKING OF THE COMPASS 43


to the north. One of Nature’s own wit-
nesses here proves our case—a witness too
strong to be impeached. If the needle at
Fort Conger had worked, as all supposed
it should have done, the defense in this case
could have come into court, and shown by
this witness—Mr. Compass—that the
earth could not be hollow, or the needle
would not have pointed as it did. Ac-
cordingly, what was regarded as a strange
phenomenon, or a balky compass, turns out
to be one of our best witnesses for estab-
lishing the great fact that the earth 1s
hollow. Happily, a number of equally
strong witnesses could be spared yet
enough remain to prove our case.

If the earth be hollow, and the ship or
needle is half-way in the interior, the little
needle is still “true to Poll,” and if it could
speak would have said: “My friend, do
not judge me so harshly: I am loyal to
you, and I would gladly show you where
the north 1s, but you hold me down, so I
can’t. When you suspended me on a
silken thread, you gave me a better chance,
and I then pointed straight up, or nearly


44 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


so; for that was north, or the opposite
was south, which pulled the other end of
the needle down.”

By treating the earth as hollow, we
have the solution of all the great mys-
teries—such as the aurora, tidal waves,
ice-pressure, colored snow, open Arctic
Ocean, warmer south, icebergs, flatten-
ing of the earth at the poles, and why
the poles have not been found, the super-
natural giving way to the natural, as it al-
ways does with understanding, and relief
comes to mind and body.

In Volume II, pages 18 and 19, Nansen
writes about the inclination of the needle.

Speaking of Johansen, his aide:

“One day—it was November 24th—he
came in to supper a little after six o’clock,
quite alarmed, and said, “There has just
been a singular inclination of the needle
to twenty-four degs., and, remarkably
enough, its northern extremity pointed to
the east. I cannot remember ever having
heard of such an inclination.’ He also
had several other inclinations of about fif-
teen degs. At the same time, through the


_~ wea


WORKING OF THE COMPASS 45


opening into his observatory he noticed
that it was unusually light out of doors,
and that not only the ship, but the ice in
the distance, was as plainly visible as if it
had been full moonlight. No aurora,
however, could be discerned through the
thick clouds that covered the sky. It
would appear, then, that this unusual in-
clination was in some way connected with
the Northern Lights, though it was to the
east and not the west, as usual.”
Nansen’s location at that time would
probably have put the compass on an angle
of forty-five degs., if not more. Unless
the needle was suspended on a thread,
where it could move independently, it
might assume any position but the right
one. Iam at a loss to know where to
locate the attraction that moves the needle
north—the magnet, or whatever it may be.
Why should this needle be attracted north
through any influence beyond what is de-
rived from the earth itself? If it gets its
attraction entirely from the influence of
the earth, which it seems to me it s15t,
then where does that attraction terminate?


46 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


If the earth be hollow, is the attraction
around the edge of the earth entering the
interior, or is it drawn to a centre half-way
betwixt the outer edges? Until that can
be fully determined, it 1s hard to judge
how the needle should operate in passing
into the interior of the earth. |

I have been asked what causes the com-
pass to stand erect at the magnetic poles?
what influence draws it farther, or makes
it assume a perpendicular position? The
opposite pole draws one end of the com-
pass down, causing the other end, north or
south, as the case may be, to assume an
upright position. The restlessness of the
needle at or near the magnetic poles is
thus accounted for, the force drawing it
one-half disappearing, and leaving the
opposite pole to do the work of both.
Hence a weak or vacillating needle.


AROUND THE CURVE 47


CHAPTER IV.
AROUND THE CURVE.


IN passing round the curve leading into
the interior of the earth, it seems difficult
for some people to understand how water
can be made to stay on the edge of the
earth. A question of that nature seems
absurd to many; but it is not. While
water is a liquid and seeks its level, yet the
centre of gravity is all there is to “up” or
“down,” and affects everything in accord-
ance with its weight. As water is heavy,
gravity forces it to the earth. Whether
gravity is something in the earth that
draws, or something in the air or ether that
repels, [ do not know, nor do I know any-
one that does. Whatever it be, it draws
the water to the earth with such force that
there is no danger of its being spilt. Grav-
ity at the curve, or at the turning into the
interior of the earth, acts like a large mag-
net. Take a magnet, bent in a circular
form, and see if there be any difference


48 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


inside or outside. The experiment will
show the attraction to be the same on
either side.

- On page 396 Nansen again writes:
“Taking everything into calculation, if I
am to be perfectly honest, I think this 1s a
wretched state of matters. We are now
in about 80 degs. north latitude, in
September we were in 79 degs.; that is, let
us say, one degree for five months. If we
go on at this rate we shall be at the pole in
forty-five, or say fifty, months, and in
ninety or one hundred months at 80 degs.
north latitude on the other side of it, with
probably some prospect of getting out of
the ice and home in a month or two more.
At best, if things go on as they are doing
now we shall be home in eight years.

“A secret doubt lurked behind all the
reasoning. It seemed as though the
longer I defended my theory, the nearer I
came to doubting it. But no; there is no
getting over the evidence of that Siberian
driftwood.” (Page 303.)

Whenever the explorers pass into the
interior of the earth, as they have been


AROUND THE CURVE | 49


passing, they meet such different situations
that all are puzzled to account for what,
under other conditions, would be plain and
simple. This shows that there is some-
thing going on entirely foreign to the ordi-
nary fixed rules of the universe as man
understands them; therefore no wonder
they call it the strange land. Everyone
that has spent considerable time in the
Arctic or Antarctic circles has met with
conditions unexplainable when based on
the theory that the earth is round—each
one easily accounted for, however, when
treated on what now seems a fixed fact,
that the earth is hollow.

When one reads reports from different
explorers regarding such strange things
happening .in that country, one might
almost conclude he was in a world of
chance, or be as the Yankee farmer said
when talking about rain. Chided for
doubting the acts of Providence, said he:
“Wal, sir, I guess He is good, but He’s
careless.” If the earth were solid and
such things happened, one might almost be
led to say Providence was careless.


50 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


Greely’s description, on page 265, of
passing round the curve of the earth is
exceedingly good and clear:

“The deep interest with which we had
hitherto pursued our journey was now
greatly intensified. The eye of civilized
man had not seen, nor his feet trodden, the
ground over which we were traveling. A
strong, earnest desire to press forward at
our best gait seized us all. As we neared
each projecting spur of the high head-
lands, our eagerness to see what was be-
yond became so intense at times as to be
painful. Each point reached, and a new
landscape in sight, we found our pleasure
not unalloyed, for ever in advance was yet
a point which cut off a portion of the hori-
zon and caused a certain disappointment.”

If Greely and his companions were en-
tering into the interior of the earth, they
would certainly find that the earth has a
greater curve near the poles than at any
other place; and as they passed over or
around the farthest point north, each pro-
jection reached would be followed by
another which always seemed to take in a


—— - end -


_ —- —


AROUND THE CURVE 51


part of the horizon. This is just what
they experienced.

“T am extremely puzzled,” he added, “‘to
understand how Gilman Glacier and its
neighbor to the east discharge their sur-
plus water. A well-marked line of low
hills, at least two hundred feet in height,
cuts them off from Lake Hazen, but I
scanned with the telescope the entire range
in vain, for anything looking like a break.
The hills were but seven to nine miles dis-
tant, and the telescope was an excellent
one. . Lynn used the glass with the same
result. It is evident the glaciers must
discharge into the lake in some way. It is
possible they feed lakes lying among the
hills, and that they may be those seen by
Bender.” (Page 409.)

Had Greely known that the earth was
hollow, that would have been easily de- .
cided; for he would have come to the con-
clusion that the water on the opposite side
of those low hills discharged into some bay
or fiord extending into the interior of the
earth, and would reach Lake Hazen only
when passing up from there.


52 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


CHAPTER V.
MYSTERIES OF THE POLAR REGIONS.


BESIDEs the great mystery—that is, the
finding of the pole—accounts of other
mysteries or strange phenomena are met
with in the published accounts of Arctic
exploration, the writers laying an em-
phasis on their narratives all the more
noteworthy since they do not pretend to
solve the riddle propounded by Nature.
A few instances culled from page 393 of
Nansen’s work will suffice for the present:

“That north wind is still persistent,
sometimes with a velocity of nine or, even
thirteen feet, but yet we do not seem to be
drifting south; we lie in 80 degs. north
latitude, or even a few minutes farther
north. What can be the reason of this?
There is a little pressure every day just
now. Curious that it should again occur
at the: moon’s change of quarter. The
moon stands high in the sky, and there 1s
daylight now, too.


__ ——


MYSTERIES OF THE POLAR REGIONS 53


“Friday, February 16th—Hurrah! A
meridian observation to-day shows 8o deg.
I min. north latitude, so that we have come
a few minutes north since last Friday, and
that in spite of constant northerly winds
since Monday. There is something very
singular about this. Is it, as I have
thought all along from the appearance of
the clouds and the haziness of the air, that
there has been south wind in the south,
preventing the drift of the ice that way, or
have we at last come under the influence of
a current? That shove we got to the
south lately in the face of southerly winds
was a remarkable thing, and so is our re-
maining where we are now in spite of the
northerly ones. It would seem that new
powers of some kind must be at work.”


54 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


CHAPTER VI.
THE WATER-SKY: WHAT IT IS.


In presenting the different reports on
the water-sky, or the ice-blink, it will be
well to point out that a reflection of the
earth’s surface in the sky is of more im-
portance than seems at first to be the case.
How hard it is for most people to believe
anything new or different from what they |
were taught when young! The reflection
in the sky, as seen in the Arctic Circle, is
very peculiar. Something, not easily ex-
plained, causes the skies in that vicinity to
act as a mirror when the atmosphere is
in a certain condition: the surface of the
earth is reflected accurately. The en-
trance to the interior of the earth is un-
doubtedly the cause; but how or why, I
cannot tell; it is sufficient for our purposes,
however, to know that it positively does
act as a mirror.

To show that the sky reflects the condi- |
tions of the ice, water, and land would not |


_ _, _
ee —————— ee a ee eee en —


“AYS-19JVM dy} BuylMsuos yssy Joy UayeWepunN st asisdiajua yeas3 ON “AJayeINDIe
‘aol PUB JazeM ‘YIILa BY} JO adEJINS 94} yaya Sa[>JI ARIUY PUL INDIY I} UI Sarys YI,


‘AMSUALVM AHL AO MAIA


THE WATER-SKY: WHAT IT IS 57


be of so much importance: that fact could
not be used to prove that the earth is hol-
low. But to prove that the Aurora Bore-
alis is nothing but the reflection of a burn-
ing volcano, prairie- or forest-fire in the
interior of the earth, would be important.
Quotations from the various authorities
on Arctic exploration are cited here for
the purpose of proving the correctness of
my views. |

Throughout Nansen’s work he gives
accounts of water-skies. In Volume [I],
page 472, his diary states:

“Wednesday, March 25th—There is the
same dark water-sky behind the promon-
tory in the southwest, stretching thence
westward almost to the extreme west.
It has been there all through this mild
weather, with southwesterly wind, from
the very beginning of the month. There
seems to be always open water there, for
no sooner is the sky overcast than the re-
flection of water appears in that quarter.”

The object of quoting so many authori-
ties on this subject is to show that what is
termed “water-sky” is not the whim or


58 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


fancy of one explorer, but a fixed fact, and
one of the things that northern explorers
always depend upon as being absolutely
reliable: the condition of the surface in
that country is reflected in the sky so ac-
curately that anyone can understand it.
The water-sky is seen whenever the skies
are overcast. This fact supports the claim
that the aurora is a great fire underneath,
reflected in the sky, and must come from a
burning volcano, prairie- or forest-fire in
the interior of the earth.

Nansen also adds: ““To judge by the sky,
there must be a number of lanes in the
south and southwest,’’—a supposition that
afterward proved to be correct,—and on
page 233, Volume II, he continues:

“In front of us on the horizon we have a
water-sky, or at any rate a reflection
which is so sharply defined and remains
so immovable that it must either be over
water or dark land; our course just bears
on it. It is a good way off, and the water
it.is over can hardly be of small extent;
I cannot help thinking that it must be over
land. May it be so! But between us, to


THE WATER-SKY: WHAT IT IS 59


judge by the sky, there seems to be plenty
of lanes.”’

Nansen and his companion, Johansen,
were endeavoring by the appearance of the
sky to determine whether water, ice, or
land was ahead. It happened to be water,
as many lanes, representing openings in
the ice, were reflected in the sky. They in-
variably depended upon the appearance of
the sky to determine the condition of the
water or ice on the earth ahead. And he
mentions that soon after this the lanes
were so numerous that they retarded their
progress very much. Many times they
were obliged to go miles around them,
and in those directions found land and
water, just as the sky indicated that they
would. When flames flash through the
heavens, wise men tell us that, instead of
considering that there is fire on the earth,
or in the interior of the earth, it 1s an
Aurora Borealis, and supposed to be elec-
tricity.

It is strange that there is no difference
of opinion about the reflection of land,
water, or ice, while there is so much about


60 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


fire. Perhaps the only reason why there
is any difference of opinion as to what
causes the reflections of the aurora is that
no one happens to think of its being fire.
This error arose from the fact that no one
entertained the idea that the reflection
could arise from fire, as they knew nothing
about. the earth being hollow.

Nansen proceeds to enlighten us con-
cerning the water-sky, and imparts some
of his restless ambitions tous. In Volume
II, page 261, he says:

“Johansen, who has gone out, says the
same water-sky is to be’seen in the south.
Why is it we cannot reach it? But there
it is, all the same, an alluring goal for us
to make for, even if we do not reach it very
soon. We see it again and again, looking
so blue and beautiful; for us it is the color
of hope.”

‘The. sky, extending over the entrance to
the interior of the earth, seems to act in
some way as a mirror, and reflects objects
of size on the surface of the earth plainly
and clearly. It 1s such a true mirror that
for hundreds of years people living there


WATER-SKY.


Here is another view showing how the surface of the
earth, water, and ice is reflected as in a mirror.


THE WATER-SKY: WHAT IT IS 63


or those going there, learn to tell from
what is reflected just what to expect.

Another explorer of the north. Kane,
on page 152, writes that “as the surface of
the glacier receded to the south, its face
seemed broken with piles of earth and
rock-stained rubbish, till far back in the
interior it was hidden from me by the
slope of a hill. Still beyond this, however,
the white blink or glare of the sky above
showed its continued extension.”

Heretofore, I have quoted almost en-
tirely from Arctic explorers in reference to
the condition of the skies, and how the ap-
pearance of the latter determines the con-
dition of the water and the ice. _Ber-
nacchi, who spent nearly two years in the
Antarctic regions, declares that, in speak-
ing of the Antarctic:

“Before noon the storm had passed, and
we made strenuous efforts to reach some
water to the east, which was indicated by a
strongly marked ‘water-sky’ in that direc-
tion. Toward evening of the next day,
we reached the open sea, being then 1n latt-
tude 65 deg. 33 min. S..and longitude 165


64 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


deg. 48 min. E. There was a swell from
the north, and the temperature of the sea
rose from 29 deg. I F. at the edge of the
pack to 30 deg. 8 F. We were now in
very nearly the same position as we had
been six weeks before, and during those
six weeks we had burnt nearly one hun-
dred tons of coal, with little result.”
(Page 60.) |

This assures us that the same sort of sky
is seen in the Antarctic regions as in the’
Arctic. Something causes it to act as a
mirror in both circles, and reflects the con-
dition of the earth in the sky.


THE AURORA BOREALIS 65


CHAPTER VII.
THE AURORA: ITS WONDERFUL VARIATIONS.


THE aurora is not, as supposed by many,
an accumulation of electricity, or magnetic
force, around the poles; it is nothing more
nor less than the reflection upon the clouds,
ice, and snow ofa burning volcano, prairie-
or forest-fire in the interior of the earth.
This fancy coloring, seen in many cases,
may be caused in different ways. First,
the burning material—of kinds too numer-
ous to mention—might produce any and
all colors. Then the light shining through
smoke, dust, or colored material in the air
—the same that produces colored snow—
would reflect different colors. As the
flames shoot up, and are sucked, whirled, or
blown in all directions, they may produce
the fanciful movement in the sky, and be re-
reflected by the peculiar atmospheric con-
ditions in the polar regions. The shght-
est motion of. a magic lantern will send
the light quivering and shimmering in


66 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


many directions, or a searchlight, moved a

few inches, will throw the reflection of the
light many miles. All the changes in a
great fire, then, roving and burning first
one place, then another, shooting up anew,
as fresh material is reached, now dying
down, now exploding anew, must produce
a wonderful effect, as all agree that the
aurora does. Many have pictured the
aurora as representing fire seen in the sky,
and one would think that the theory that it
is electricity would be rejected by all, as it
was by many as soon as it was discovered
that in many cases when the aurora was
brightest the needle was not affected
in the least. For thousands of years the
aurora has been one of the most conspic-
uous mysteries to be solved. For that
reason, considerable space will be given to
the subject, mainly to show how it ap-
peared to those nearest to it.

They surely will not be accused of draw-
ing on the imagination, or of coloring their
statements in the least. When read in con-
nection with the claim that the earth is
hollow, and the aurora is produced by a


THE AURORA BOREALIS 67


burning volcano, an extensive prairie- or
forest-fire,—in the interior of the earth,—a
wholly different view of the aurora will be
entertained ; especially when taken in con-
nection with what has been known for
hundreds of years: that the surface of the
earth or ocean can be, and is, reflected in
the sky so correctly that whalers have long
depended upon the reflection to tell them
when open water, ice, or land lies ahead.
Men who embark upon dangerous pur-
suits, such as hunting the seal, walrus,
whale, and bear, never attempt to advance
unless the conditions be favorable: that
is always determined by what they see in
the skies. If the sky acts as a mirror.
wherein can be noted the conditions of the
ice, water, etc., would not a great fire, like
the aurora, be reflected equally as clear?
To call the fire an aurora, mock sun, or
any other name, does not change the fact
in the least.

Suppose a hunter, accustomed for years
to locating musk ox by the reflection in the
skies, should see a herd of reindeer some
morning in the same way. What would


68 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


he do if he wanted a shot at them? Would
he take his gun and start out to stalk them,
or would he say: “What a strange phe-
nomenon! I wonder what it 1s!’ then
wind up by calling the reflection by some
other name? No; he would know what
it meant. The strangest thing of all is
that the explorers and writers on this sub-
ject did not know what the aurora was
when they saw it.

Let us now take up the question of the
Aurora Borealis, or the Aurora Polaris,
as itissometimes called. I contend that the
aurora is nothing more nor less than the
reflection of a burning volcano, prairie- or
forest-fire, or fire of some kind, and that
such is the fact will be proved by quoting
from observations made by those who have
spent considerable time on the verge of the
Arctic and Antarctic regions.

The northern whalers, or those that seek
game in that frozen country, look into the
sky in order to tell whether the ice is
frozen solid or whether there are openings.
If the sky be a whitish gray, the surface
reflected 1s covered with ice; if there


THE AURORA BOREALIS 69


be patches of blue, they indicate openings
in the ice. Thus, they are able to tell the
condition of the earth many miles away.
If that can be done, and it has been proved
it can, why cannot we, when we see what
appears to be a fire burning in the sky,
know that there must be a fire beneath?
No reasonable person can doubt that the
same reflection is as true in one case as It is
in another. In Bernacchi’s story of his
Antarctic exploration, one reads: “Owing
to the great reflection in those latitudes,
flames appeared to dart across the horizon,
and resembled a mighty conflagration.
Higher and higher they rose, changing
the color from dark red to every variety of
shade.”

You note that he describes them as
“flames that appeared to dart across the
horizon, and resembled a mighty confla-
gration.” That was just what it was.
People visiting the location nearest the
pole have experienced no great change
compared with any other part of the
world; the told, heat, wet, the dry, and
the air are the same. Then why should


70 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


electricity or falling stars be more preva-
lent there than elsewhere? There is but
one answer: the exploding volcano pro-
duces both.

On page 92, Bernacchi writes: “At nine
o’clock in the evening of the 15th of March
we witnessed our first Aurora Polaris dutr-
ing clear, calm weather, the temperature
at the time being sixteen degrees Fahr.
The light first emanated in a waving cur-
tain from the southeast and went round
to the southwest. The motion of the
arrow-like beams, constituting the curtain,
was rapid and at times would run along
with an undulating motion, then suddenly
shoot downward toward the earth. Seen
for the first time, it was a wondrous sight,
and to me appeared like some great search-
light directed towards the earth from the
depths of infinity” (the italics the one who
quotes). What could more convince one
that there is a volcano burning in the in-
terior of the earth? He adds: “This
further display was very poor compared
with some subsequently witnessed.”

Here we have another great proof that


THE AURORA BOREALIS 71


the aurora is not electricity; for it occurs
in terrible storms, storms not so terrible,
and in clear, calm weather.

On page 129 Bernacchi again refers to
the aurora:

“At Cape Adare (latitude 71 deg.
185) the aurora was generally observed
in the north, very rarely in the south,
and it always manifested itself in exact-
ly the same manner.” If it were an
electric display, as has been claimed here-
tofore, it would be as apt to occur at one
place as at another, but it always comes in
the same direction and in the same form.

The author asserts, again, on page 130:

“But what was of greatest interest in
the observation of the aurora was the con-
nection which appeared to exist between
it and approaching atmospheric disturb-
ances. A strong gale from E. S. FE. and
S. E. was almost invariably preceded by a
most brilliant and rapid auroral display.
This was not a mere coincidence, but a fact
repeatedly observed.”” What would be the
natural result if a tremendous volcano had
exploded? Would it not force out strong


72 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


wind ?—just what he says did occur; if it
had not, there would have been great cause
for wonder.

“At 10 o'clock in the evening of June 3d
an exceedingly grand aurora was visible,”
continues Bernacchi; “it was a dazzling
and incomparable spectacle, and first mant-
fested itself in the usual manner by a
luminous display in the north. This, how-
ever, was only a transient phase, for the
flow of streamers gradually faded away,
and the whole display lost its brilliancy
and rapidity of motion in about an hour,
leaving a glow in the sky like the dying
enbers of a great fire.”

The italics m this quotation, like in
the one on a preceding page, are mine,
but the matter therein is but one more
instance of the general comparison of
the aurora with fire. Yet, in almost
the same breath, Bernacchi adds: “How
little we understand the nature of its
origin!’ In this description he has rec-
ognized the fact that the aurora comes
usually from the same direction, and he
simply says, “in its usual manner by lumi-


THE AURORA BOREALIS 73


nous display in the north.” If he were.
looking south at a fire, it naturally would
throw its reflections past him to the north.
He speaks of it “leaving a glow in the sky.
like the dying embers oi a great fire.”

It will be observed that this aurora
manifests itself in the usual manner. If
caused by electricity, is it not remarkable
that it should always come from the same
direction, and in the same form? One
would surmise that there was a mammoth
electric battery located at that place, and in
a deep well, as he describes it, “like some
great searchlight directed towards the
earth from the depths of infinity.” The
description is right, but the conception 1s
wrong. What he describes was an ex-
ploding volcano in the interior of the earth
near the Antarctic entrance, and, as Poe
says, “only that, and nothing more.”

We will now go to the North Pole for
other descriptions of the aurora, and see
what has been found there.

Nansen states that the aurora was
brightest in the south; just the reverse of
what Bernacchi said when he looked to-


74 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


ward the South Pole. If it was a fire,
would it not have been exactly as those
two men described it? To the one look-
ng south, the reflection would have been
in the north; to the one looking north, the
reflection would have been in the south,
which was exactly the case.

I quote Nansen from another page, 394:
‘To-day another noteworthy thing hap-
pened, which was that about midday we
saw the sun, or, to be more correct, an
image of the sun, for it was only a mirage.
A peculiar impression was produced by the
sight of that glowing fire lit just above the
outermost edge of the ice. According to
the enthusiastic descriptions given by
many Arctic travelers of the first appear-
ance of this God of Life after the long
winter night, the impression ought to be
one of jubilant excitement; but it was not
so in my case. We had not expected to
see it for some days yet, so that my feeling
was rather one of pain, of disappointment,
that we must have drifted farther south
than we thought. So it was with pleasure
I soon discovered that it could not be the


THE AURORA BOREALIS 75


sun itself. The mirage was at first a flat-
tened-out glowing red streak of fire on the"
horizon; later there were two streaks, the
one above the other, with a dark space be-
tween; and from the maintop I could see
four, or even five, such horizontal lines
directly over one another, and all of equal
length, as if one could only imagine a
square dull red sun with horizontal dark
streaks across it.’ Nansen imagined that
he saw the sun, but afterward claimed that
it was a mirage. What he saw was
neither. I think it was the volcano itself ;
and, as he states, he saw it three days in
succession, or the two following days.
This proves that it could not have been a
mirage, inasmuch as a mirage does not
last three days. His ship had simply
drifted far enough into the interior to get
a glimpse of this volcano. You note that
he describes it as being “just at the edge
of the ice’—that is, looking toward the
north. The sun, if visible at all, would
have been in the opposite direction; it 1s
never square, but always round. «He
describes what he saw as a square fire, and


76 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


afterward says he could almost see it as-
sume a round form. “Both to-day and
yesterday we have seen the mirage of the
sun again; to-day it was high above the
horizon, and almost seemed to assume a
round disk-like form.” (Page 398.) I
cannot imagine in what condition the fire
was or how his eyes were.

If this light was not the sun, what was
it? A fire in the interior of the earth, pos-
sibly not very far in, but, nevertheless, in
the interior. There is no reason why it
should not have been half-way or one-
third of the way in. Just when one is on
earth or in the interior is difficult to deter-
mine, as the curve is so gradual; some may
call one point the interior, while others call
a point much farther in still on earth. It
reminds one of the farmer who was asked
how old a heifer is when she becomes a
cow. He stopped to think for a moment,
then said: “I don’t believe I know, as one
of my neighbors has a three-year-old cow,
and another has a four-year-old heifer.”’
The exact location of the dividing line will
always be a question. When the needle


THE AURORA BOREALIS 77


points straight up it will be as near the
dividing line as can be determined—near
enough for all practical purposes, unless
one nation should claim the earth, and
another the interior. In that case, if it
should appear that valuable mines are
located at that point, some trouble might
arise between the claimants.

In Vol. I, page 280, Hall describes “an
aurora with but slight coloring. Nearly
all day on the 6th, beautiful auroral
displays were seen. During the morn-
ing, luminous though faint clouds were
observed in different parts of the heav-
ens. At 3 p. m., the sky being clear
and the breeze light from the south,
these clouds, in the form of an arch,
extended from northeast to southwest,
enlarging toward the northeast and
accumulating above the mountains. In
half an hour they resumed their orig-
inal shape, and appeared in.the form
of light-yellow and white bands. These
phenomena were present during the whole
evening, being seen in every direction.
Fantastic forms of light came and went


78 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


rapidly, and a frequent appearance was
that of a cirro-stratus cloud. On the
morning of the 7th, a perfect arch extend-
ing from the north to south was observed.
It consisted of uniform bands of yellow
and white.”

Siemens says in his journal, Hall, Vol.
I, page 281, that on January 10, 1872, at
five in the morning, ‘“‘a bright arc was seen
in the sky passing from the western hori-
zon through the zenith to the east, parallel
with the Milky Way, and distant from it
about 12 degs. It disappeared about 6
a. m., leaving three clouds of similar
brightness. This phenomenon, if electric,
did not show itself in the needle.”

This, then, 1s another instance where
the aurora does not affect the needle.

Corroborative of this, Siemens adds,
“This phenomenon, if electric, did not
show itself in the needle.” Take either
horn of the dilemma: if it was not elec-
tric, what was it? If it was electric, why
did it not affect the needle?

Here follows a description, by Hall,
page 297, of an aurora produced by a


‘UOHNOs & YstusNy JOU PMOM yysea 94} Jo JOIZDqUT
9y} UL ary ye9IB e JeYyR [eT] Aq paquosep se ‘esosne siy} Jnoqe Suryjou st asoy


“SITVauOd VYOUNV


THE AURORA BOREALIS 81


great volcanic eruption, very different
from the account just cited. “It.may be
said, in general, that the greatest disturb-
ances occurred several hours before an
aurora was visible. The following short
description of the display is condensed
from Mauch’s journal: ‘At 7 p. m., as I
was returning to the ship from the obser-
vatory, I noticed the slaty appearance of
the sky to the northwest and the occasional
shooting up of luminous streamers. At
7:15 the horizon to the northwest was a
blood-red color, while faint, white stream-
ers sprang up in. rapid succession, increas-
ing in numbers, and rising from the west,
north, and northeast points. They were
all directed toward the zenith, and the ex-
terior ones bending inwards gave to the
whole configuration a dome-like shape.
They then all vanished, and new ones
began to rise slowly from a wider extent
of horizon. At 8:30 new and very bright
streamers advanced toward the zenith
from all directions. At 8:45 they all
gathered about the zenith and formed a
perfect corona. They then all seemed to


82 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


move toward the north, as new ones arose
from the south. Mauch watched the
progress of these streamers while passing
over some stars, and assigned to them a
motion of between six and seven seconds
to a degree. They moved from west to
east. As the corona opened and moved
toward the north, a beautiful curtain was
formed, its colors being very intense and
bright, between yellow and white.”

“At 3:30 p. m. I observed,’ says Mauch
in his journal, ‘on the northeast, east, and
southeast horizon, beams of luminous
clouds. They soon accumulated and
formed an irregular arch due east which
slowly moved, as if driven, in a southerly
direction. At 4 p.m. anew arch extended
from nearly due east to nearly due south.
At 4:10 p. m. three distinct arches, one
above the other, were formed slowly in the
southwest and south, exhibiting a ‘very
brilliant display, though fading very soon
away. Those to the south were an intense
straw-color, and formed a brilliant spec-
tacle.’ ”

Can any better refutation of the theory


THE AURORA BOREALIS 83


that the aurora is electricity be offered for
the consideration of the man who thinks?
Does electricity ever move through the
heavens as if driven slowly along by some
unseen agency? Who ever heard of elec-
tricity moving slowly, or being driven in
the air?

The eruption which caused this great
agitation did not ignite at once to any ex-
tent, but threw out so much dust, dirt, and
smoke, that it obscured the light for sev-
eral hours. As the needle was most dis-
turbed several hours before this aurora
appeared, that is evidence that the erup-
tion of the volcano which liberated the
minerals and gases, and produced the
shock, was what agitated the needle, and
not electricity, as hitherto supposed; for
there was no aurora when the needle was
most affected. When the strong coloring,
shown in the aurora, did appear, it was
another proof that the coloring arises
from the burning of minerals, gas, oils,
etc. Taken in connection with the won-
derful display, the beautiful coloring and
the heavy clouds, everything points to one


84 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


cause—a great explosion. If this was
electricity, would it have risen slowly?
No; electricity is anything but slow. This
acted as a fire, dying down, then starting
up over a wider extent. It is character-
istic of a fire to spread if it can find any-
thing to consume. This aurora lasted all
night, and all the next day.

Hall further asserts, on page 300: “At
5:30 p. m., on the 8th, I observed a very
bright luminous arch of streamers some-
what extending from the northeastern
horizon to the southwestern. When I
first saw it, it was a little to the northwest
of the zenith, but the whole arch seemed
to move, and at 6:30, it just passed the
zenith, and then had a. position southeast
of it, where it gradually broke up. Its
southwestern extremity just touched the
twilight curve, where it vanished. At
6:30 the usual haziness of the sky after
the occurrence of these, was noticed.”

I wish here to emphasize this point—
one corroborative of my claim: “At 6:30
the usual haziness of the sky after the
occurrence of these was noticed.” Does


THE AURORA BOREALIS 85


electricity generally leave the sky hazy?
Hall uses the words “usual haziness’’ as
descriptive of the normal condition of the
skies after those auroral displays.

“When above my head, it seemed less
than a pistol-shot distant. Indeed, it was
near by. When I moved quickly, run-
ning up to the top of the hill by the igloo,
making a distance of less than 50 fathoms,
the arch of the aurora, that seemed sta-
tionary while I was by the igloo and in-
transitive, was now several degrees to the
southwest of me. I returned as quickly
to the igloo, and the auroral belt was
directly overhead. So small a base, with
so palpable a change in bearing of the
aurora, proved that it must have been quite
close to the earth. A ball of fire fell dur-
ing the display, and burst just before it
reached the earth, throwing out prismatic
scintillations in every direction.” (P. 83.)

Note what he says about the wind: “A
smart breeze from the north was blowing
nearly the wholenight. This seemed to add
to the briskness of the merry dancers as
they crossed the heavens toand fro.” Now


86 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


if this reflection was caused by electricity,
would the wind have added to its brisk-
ness? I think not; but if a fire caused the
reflection, then a wind would produce the
effect he describes: ““When over my head,
it seemed less than a pistol-shot distant,”
he says. So small a base, with such a
palpable change in the bearing of the
aurora, proved that it must have been quite
close to the earth.

Hall found himself unable to decide
whether any noise actually came from the
aurora. On asking the Innuits whether
they were accustomed to hear noises dur-
ing its displays, they answered, “Yes,” one
of them endeavoring to imitate the sound
by a puffing noise from his mouth; this
noise, says Hall, accorded remarkably
with what he thought fe had heard during
the time of the most active display.

I have quoted extensively from Captain
Hall, as he has written a very fine de-
scription of the aurora. His description
will enable anyone to form an opinion as
to what the aurora is—electricity or the
reflection of fire.


THE AURORA BOREALIS 87


Lieutenant Hooper, R. N., second in
command of Lieutenant Pullen’s boat ex-
pedition from Icy Cape to Mackenzie
River, spent the winter of 1849-50 near
Fort Franklin, on Bear Lake. “I have
heard the aurora,” wrote he in his journal,
“not once, but many times; not faintly and
indistinctly, but loudly and unmistakably ;
now from this quarter, now from that,
now from one point on high, and at an- |
other time from one low down. At first it
seemed to resemble the sound of field-ice,
then it was like the sound of a water-mill,
and at last, like the whirring of a cannon-
shot heard from a short distance.” Hooper
admits that he heard the aurora many
times, loudly and unmistakably. There
can be little doubt that many people have
heard the explosion, and the noise caused
by the force of the fire. The light re-
flected in the skies could not make a noise,
but its occurrence at the time of the ex-
plosion would, and as noise moves more
slowly than light, it might have arrived,
perhaps, when the latter was most bril-
liant.


88 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


“There is no satisfactory evidence,”
says Professor Loomis, “that the aurora
ever emits an audible sound. The sound
supposed to have been heard has been
described as a rustling, hissing, crackling
noise. But the most competent observers,
who have spent several winters in the Arc-
tic regions, where auroras are seen in their
greatest brilliancy, have been convinced
that this supposed rustling is a mere illu-
sion. It is, therefore, inferred that the
sounds which have been ascribed to the
aurora must have been due to other causes
—such as the motion of the wind, or the
crackling of the snow and ice in conse-
quence of their low temperature. If the
aurora emitted any audible sound, this
sound ought to follow the auroral move-
ment after a considerable interval. Sound
requires four minutes to travel a distance
of fifty miles. But the observers who re-
port noises succeeding auroral movements
make no mention of any interval. It is,
therefore, inferred that the sounds which
have been heard during auroral exhibi-
tions are to be ascribed to other causes


THE AURORA BOREALIS 89


than the aurora.” (Treatise on Meteor-
ology, page 186.)

The sound supposed to have been heard
has been described as a rustling, hissing,
crackling noise. Isn’t that a pretty good
description of a terrible fire at a distance?
To me, it seems one of the best descrip-
tions. Loomis further says that 1f the
aurora emitted any audible sound, that
sound ought to follow the auroral move-
ment after a considerable interval. That
would be correct if it had its origin in, or
was caused by, electricity; but not 1f
caused by the bursting of a volcano, as
that would eject such an immense amount
of smoke, dust, dirt, and rock that several
minutes would elapse before the light or
fire could shine through it; therefore the
sound might reach the ear at the same
time that the light reached the eye. The
northern Indians give to the aurora what
seems to us a curious name, ed-thin, that
is, deer—from their having seen hairy
deerskin emit sparks when briskly stroked.
The southern Indians believe it to be the
spirit of departed friends dancing. When


go THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


it varies in color and form, they say their
deceased friends are very merry.

An impressive description of the aurora
is given by Nansen on page 253: “Pres-
ently the Aurora Borealis shakes over the
vault of heaven its veil of glittering sil-
ver—changing now to yellow, now to
green, now tored. It spreads, it contracts
again, in restless change; next it breaks
into waving, many-folded bands of shining
silver, over which shoot billows of glitter-
ing rays, and then the glory vanishes.
Presently it shimmers in tongues of flame
over the very zenith, and then again it
shoots a bright ray right up from the hor1-
zon, until the whole melts away in the
moonlight, and it is as though one heard
the sigh of a departing spirit. Here and
there are left a few waving streamers of
light, vague as a foreboding—they are the
dust from the aurora’s glittering cloak.
But now it is growing again; new light-
nings shoot up, and the endless game be-
gins afresh. And all the time this utter
stillness, impressive as the symphony of
infinitude.”


THE AURORA BOREALIS gI


“Presently it shimmers in tongues of
flaine over the very zenith, and then again
it shoots a bright ray right up from the
horizon.”” He speaks of the dust: “They
are the dust from the aurora’s glittering
cloak.”” When one reads that description,
quoted twice from one who spent two years
watching the sky for the reflection of open
water, ice, or land, it passes comprehen-
sion that it did not occur to him that the
aurora was nothing but the reflection of a
great fire. One is reminded of Miranda
in Shakespeare’s “Tempest.” ‘‘More to
know did never meddle with my thoughts.”

On another occasion, Nansen saw a re-
markable display of aurora about three
o'clock in the afternoon. Ina lengthy de-
scription, of which I cite briefly: “On the
southwestern horizon lay the glow of the
sun; in front of it light clouds were swept
together—litke a cloud of dust rising above
a distant troop of riders. Then dark
streamers of gauze seemed to stretch from
the dust-cloud up over the sky, as 1f it came
from the sun, or perhaps rather as if the
sun were sucking it in to itself from the


Q2 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


whole sky.” Here we have other mention
of that ever-present and annoying dust.
In an account by Greely of a remark-
able aurora (page 183) there is further
evidence of the correctness of my opinions.
“The aurora of January 21st was wonder-
ful beyond description,” he writes, “and I
have no words in which to convey any
adequate idea of the beauty and splendor
of the scene. It was a continuous change
from arch to streamers, from streamers to
patches and ribbons, and back again to
arches, which covered the entire heavens
for part of the time. It lasted for about
twenty-two hours, during which at no mo-
ment were the phenomena other than vivid
and remarkable. At one time there were
three perfect arches, which spanned the
southwestern sky from horizon to horizon.
The most striking and exact simile, per-
haps, would be to liken it to a conflagration
of surrounding forests as seen at night
from a cleared or open space to their
centre. During the display Sergeant Rice
exposed a sensitive dry photographic
plate toward the aurora without any effect,


THE AURORA BOREALIS 93


but the experiment was a doubtful one
from the shifting of the light. In general,
the aurora was quite colorless, though
occasionally red tints were reported.
Despite the remarkable duration and ex-
tent of the aurora, the magnet was but
shghtly disturbed. During the display
the new moon appeared, a narrow cres-
cent which, strange to say, was exactly
the color of blood.”

The reader will note that, despite the
remarkable duration and extent of the
aurora, the magnet was but slightly dis-
turbed. This aurora was undoubtedly
just what it seemed .to be—a forest-fire
in the interior of the earth. He does not
speak of any storms or clouds such as
would ordinarily accompany an exploding
volcano, and, in addition, its length—
twenty-two hours—makes it different
from the ordinary aurora. The reader
should remember this description of the
aurora—a brilliant one, but almost color-
less. Reddish tints were occasionally re-
ported, but Greely saw none. This shows
that the auroras that have so much color


a


94 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


come from a burning volcano, and that the
coloring is caused by the material being
burned. This was a prairie- or forest-fire
—the same as we have on earth—and was
reflected in the sky as truly as water, ice,
and land. Does it not seem more reason-
able that such was the case than that it
was a different kind of electricity? This
aurora was a plain white one, with the
merest trifle of coloring, while the regular
aurora has all the coloring of the rainbow.
The difference is that one burned a vege-
table matter, the other vegetable, mineral,
oil, and everything else. Greely states
that the needle was but little disturbed: a
great explosion, in which large quantities
of minerals, gases, and other matter are
thrown into the air, might disturb the


needle, but I am not sure. That would’:


depend upon what was liberated by the
explosion, and how near was the needle.
sir George Nares remarks that, “con-
trary to the popular belief, the aurora gives
us no appreciable light.”” In Greely’s ex-
perience, the light was considerable on
several occasions, and during the aurora,


tn — a Ss DG


THE AURORA BOREALIS 95


the description of which is printed above,
Greely saw his shadow, at a time when a
brilliant display was in one quarter of the
heavens only. Tromholt says that “the
very greatest amount of light which the
Aurora Borealis emitted, or which, in my
case, I was able to ascertain during my en-
tire sojourn in Lapland, may be compared
to that of the moon two and a half days
after full, when 25 degs. above the horizon
and the sky is clear.”

It has been claimed that the aurora gives
no light. If fire produces the aurora, it -
must give light.

Greely also remarks that on January
23d, print, such as is used. for leading
articles (termed long primer by printers),
could be read with some difficulty at noon.


« This test, however, was not satisfactory,


owing partly to the presence of the moon,
but more to the remarkably varying capac-
ity of eyes for this work. A brilliant
meteor was observed ‘in the north about
7:35 a.m., which burst into fragments, all
colorless except one, which was a brilliant
red. No detonation was heard.


96 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


“The Northern Lights were wonderful,”
says Nansen in Vol. II, pages 446, 447.
‘“‘However often we see this weird play of
light, we never tire of gazing at it; it seems
to cast a spell over both sight and sense till
it is impossible to tear one’s self away. It
-begins to dawn with a pale, yellow, spec-
tral light behind the mountain in the east,
like the reflection of a fire far away. It
broadens, and soon the whole of the east-
ern sky is one glowing mass of fire. Now
it fades again, and gathers in a brightly
luminous belt of mist stretching towards
the southwest, with only a few patches of
luminous haze visible here and _ there.
After a while scattered ‘rays suddenly
shoot up from the fiery mist, almost reach-
ing to the zenith; then more; they play
over the belt in a wild chase from east to
west. They seem always darting nearer
from a long, long way off. But suddenly
a perfect veil of rays showers from the
zenith out over the northern sky; they are
so fine and bright, like the finest of glitter-
ing silver threads. Is it the fire giant,
Surt himself, striking his mighty silver


THE AURORA’ BOREALIS 97


harp, so that the stririgs tremble and spar-
kle in the glow of the flames of Muspells-
heim? Yes, it is harp-music, wild storm-
ing in the darkness; it is the riotous war-
dance of Surt’s sons. Again at times it is
like softly playing, gently rocking, silvery
waves, on which dreams travel into un-
known worlds.”’

Authorities too numerous to mention,
—but some of them I cite—uncon-
sciously confirm, by their vivid descrip-
tions, that the aurora is not caused by
electricity ; that when it assumes any form
that can be described it is likened unto a
great conflagration, an exploding volcano,
or the dying embers of an extensive fire,
none of which 1n any form resembles elec-
tricity. When it cannot be described, it 1s
more likely to be caused by the reflection
and the re-reflection of the sun shining
upon the ice, snow, and frost from the
opposite pole.

If in the mind of the reader a doubt
still exists that the aurora is not caused
by electricity, the following quotations are
given him to ponder:


98 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


“Tt seems to be the experience here that
the magnet is undisturbed during the
prevalence of colorless auroras, but shows
marked disturbances during the vivid dis-
plays of color and sudden, violent, changes
of .form.”—Greely, App. 13, November
16.

“ an auroral display which re-
mained continuous during the greater part
of the day. It first appeared in dim
patches, in the northwest about 15 deg.
above the horizon, which gradually bright-
ened and took the shape of a regular cone,
which lasted for five minutes or more,
while from its well-defined summit
ascended luminous auroral clouds with a
whorling or curling motion. These clouds
emanated apparently from the summit of
the cone, in the form of sharply defined,
spasmodic puffs, such as are seen at times
issuing from the smoke-stack of a locomo-
tive. The clouds thus thrown out immedi-
ately diffused and disappeared without as-
suming any marked formation.’”—Greely,
App. 13, November 19.

“Magnetic disturbance again occurred,


_


THE AURORA BOREALIS 99


and five-minute readings were kept up
from 5 p. m. Aurora appeared shortly
after the disturbance of the magnet com-
menced.’’—Greely, App. 13, November
20. Extract from C. B. Henry, Novem-
ber 16, 1882.

“TI happened yesterday, while at work
outdoors, to look toward Bellot Island,
and saw a small, dim, auroral light appear.
from azimuth about North 260 deg. East.
which gradually became brighter and shot
up to an altitude of about 20 deg. The
best idea that I can give of its formation
or movement is about like the smoke
ascending and curling up from the crater
of a volcano, being discharged in puffs and
floating away in a luminous mass.”—
Greely, App. 13, November 20. Journal
of D. L. Brainard, November 16, 1882.

“The only display witnessed by me was
this morning, between ten and eleven
o'clock. A bright streamer sprang from
the southern horizon, gradually approach-
ing the zenith with a labored movement,
closely resembling the spasmodic puffs of
smoke arising from a working locomotive.


100 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


Remaining in this position a short time, it
was gradually dissipated and slowly dis-


AURORA BOREALIS.


The Aurora Borealis, as seen and described by D. L.
Brainard, November 16, 1882, in Greely’s Appendix.
After observing the above engraving, read what an
authority says about it; then determine its origin.
Will you call it electricity? If not, what was it?


appeared.”—Greely, App. 13, Journal of
C. B. Henry, November 17, 1882.

“The aurora of this morning was a very
low one, and we are, I think, the only
party that ever could say we were in the


THE AURORA BOREALIS Iol


midst of electric light. In fact, its alarm-
ing close proximity scared one of our
members considerably.”—Greely, App. 13,
Journal of C. B. Henry, Nov. 17, 1882.

“The light emitted during the most in-
tense brightness was fully equal to that of
a full moon, and entirely eclipsed all but
stars of the first magnitude. Objects in
the landscape were plainly visible and
abundant. The height which the display
maintained above the earth was at no time
at a greater elevation than of cumulus
clouds, and apparently almost touched the
ground, but no noise of any kind was
audible.’—-Ext. from Journal of G. W.
Rice, November 17, 1882.

“Coming out of the dark quarters, all
who observed it felt at first blinded; and
the curtain at one time appeared so near
above their heads that Gardiner and Israel
speak of having unconsciously dodged to
avoid it. Israel, who is a very close and
intelligent observer, thinks that at times
the aurora could not have been more than
one hundred feet from the earth.”—From
Journal of D. C. Ralston, Nov. 17, 1882.


102 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


“Tt appeared so low down at times that
I raised my hand instinctively, expecting
to bathe it in the light. The sky was en-
tirely free from clouds, and the light of
second-magnitude stars was eclipsed. The
magnetic needle was violently agitated,
and five-minute reading's of the needle con-
tinued. The aurora visible all day long.
Objects during the finest display were as
plainly visible as by the light of the full
moon.”—Extract from Journal of H. S.
Gardiner, November 17, 1882.

“The whole heavens seemed one mass
of colored flames, arranged and disar-
ranged and rearranged every instant.
The display was so close to the earth that
we repeatedly put up our hands as though
we would touch something by so doing.
There was one person who was so much
affected by the display at its grandest mo-
ments that he lowered his head and put up
his hands as though to ward off a blow.”
—From Journal of D. L. Brainard, No-
vember 17, 1882.

“In the northern sky there gradually
appeared an intense vermilion color,


THE AURORA BOREALIS 103


which expanded for 10 deg. above the
horizon, and remained for several minutes
in this manner, its extreme brightness
suggestive to the mind of a great con-
flagration.

“A few minutes earlier than the time
which I have recorded, Gardiner wit-
nessed a display of unusual grandeur, and
of which the latter is but a slight modifi-
cation. It was of unparalleled brilliancy,
and its light equal to the full moon. The
prismatic colors were at one time discern-
ible. Israel and Lynn also saw it when it
was at its zenith of splendor, and both
speak of its near approach to the earth,
and the rapidity of its movements through
the heavens.”

Were it not that the aurora has been
the subject of thought for our greatest
minds for thousands of years, so much
space would not be devoted to it. Yet it
is difficult to pass by without comment
such descriptions of the aurora as Greely
gives in his Appendix.

Electricity is never found acting like the
puffings of a stationary engine, or a burn-


104 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


ing volcano, its smoke rising and slowly
drifting away.

When one attempts to give the reasons
why the aurora could not be the result of
electricity, they multiply so rapidly and
are so convincing that it seems a waste of
time to give them all.

Before concluding the chapter on the au-
rora, I wish to assign one more probable
reason why the latter 1s seen more frequent-
ly in the Arctic regions in the winter, and
brighter than in summer. The sun shines
through the earth from the southern open-
ing through the interior of the earth. The
rays of the sun strike the ice, snow, and
frost, and act as a mammoth kaleidoscope,
re-reflecting the sun’s rays many times,
and sending forth a most dazzling effect.
That reflection from the sun can appear
only in winter, because summer at one pole
is winter at the other. It is the only sea-
son, therefore, when the sun shines directly
into the opening at the South Pole, and this
condition would apply only when the in-
terior of the earth was free from clouds,
as they would shut out the sun in the same


THE AURORA BOREALIS 105


manner as on earth. The'sun’s rays are
the same in the interior of the earth as on
the exterior. One must understand that
the position of the earth 1s much of the
time moving with the poles or ends to the
sun. In proof of that, there is the mid-
night sun at the poles, or, in other words,
during the winter the sun does not set
in the Antarctic, and during summer (the
earth having changed ends to the sun) it
does not set in the Arctic Circle. That
gives the interior of the earth the rays of
the sun about eight months out of the
twelve. This is another proof of the great
wisdom of the Creator, as it does away
with that long, dark winter so much
dreaded at the poles, as they have two
summers, and two short winters, to one
summer and one winter on earth. This
does not detract in any way from the
claim that the Aurora Borealis is caused
by exploding volcanoes, prairie- or forest-
fires, but accounts for the increased fre-
quency of the aurora in the Arctic regions
during winter.

When the reader takes into account the


106 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


wonderful variety of the aurora, and then
considers the various causes which pro-
duce them, does not the above reasoning
seem more reasonable than to conclude
that the different kinds come from one
cause—electricity ?

Another reason why the aurora 1s
brighter in the north than in the south,
when produced by the sun’s rays, is that
the opening to the interior of the earth is
much greater in the south than in the
north. This is proved by the fact that the
explorers have reached only within seven
hundred and fifty miles of the supposed
pole in the south and have passed the mag-
netic pole; while in the north they have
been within five hundred miles of the pole,
and also passed the magnetic pole, thus
showing that the opening to the southern
entrance to the interior of the earth is fif-
teen hundred miles in diameter, while it is
only one thousand miles at the North Pole.
That would make the sun’s rays more
powerful at the north than at the south.
To illustrate the point, take a tin horn, and
hold the big end to an electric light, then


THE AURORA BOREALIS 107


turn the little end to the light. The differ-
ence will be observed very quickly.

It will.be noticed that in almost every
description of the aurora, the mind natu-
rally reverts to fire. Writers describe it
in almost every form of fire. Nansen’s
description of it as the reflection of a great
fire, is magnificent. As that is what it
was, there is no need of commenting on
the subject.

In submitting the question as to what
produces the aurora, I merely ask that
the reader use his common sense, apart
from what his opinions on the matter have
been. If, after reading the extracts ad-
duced to prove the truth of my contention
and my comments thereon, he still thinks
the aurora electricity, let him tell why it is
of such different coloring; why it always
appears at the same place; why always at
the poles. Electricity is universal. An
electrical battery will work in one manner
over all the world. Why, then, does elec-
tricity appear in the form of the aurora at
the poles only? Why 1s the needle not
always affected? Everything tends to


108 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


prove that the aurora is not electricity.
There is not a single condition, either
form, color, or time, for which a fire in the
interior of the earth does not furnish an
intelligent solution. On the other hand, if
the aurora were electricity, the coloring
would be the same as the color of lightning,
and as varied in location. The aurora ap-
pears by day or night, in stormy weather
or in clear, wind or no wind, and some-
times it lasts ten minutes only; while at
others it exists four or five days.
Does that seem like electricity, or fire?


METEORS OR VOLCANIC DISTURBANCES 109


CHAPTER VIII.
METEORS OR VOLCANIC DISTURBANCES.


Herman Siemens—who was with Cap-
tain Hall on his last trip—writes about
meteors on page 257 of Hall’s book: “We
_ also saw numerous shooting stars, some-
times forming, as it were, a silver thread,
from the point where they first appeared
to that of disappearance; in a few instances
I have seen small fireballs pushing out
from them similar to those of a rocket.”’

I have claimed, from the start, that me-
teors, or so-called shooting stars, are noth-
ing but rocks thrown up from the earth by
an exploding volcano. Could so many
shooting stars, as they are termed, come
from a passing comet, and land near the
North Pole in a bunch, when it would prob-
ably take them months, if not years, to
reach the earth? Let us drop this super-
natural business, and get down to common
sense, and call a stone a stone, and a firea
fire. This misnaming should be done


16 0) THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


away with forever. Our children should
be taught differently, and the sooner the
better. The laws of the universe are abso-
lute and immutable, and no part of a star,
planet, or comet can be detached from the
main body and sent sailing through space
to land on this earth near the North or
South Pole.

“Far in the west falls shower after
shower of stars,’ writes Nansen in Vol.
II, page 444, “some faint, scarcely visible,


others bright like Roman candles, all with |


a message from distant worlds. Low in
the south lies a bank of clouds, now and
again outlined by the gleam of the North-
ern Lights; but over the sea the sky is
dark; there is open water there.”

Does anyone, able to read, believe that
shower after shower of stars fall near the
North Pole? If there be such a person, it
is apparent that he never gave the matter
any thought, or is incapable of thinking.
That rocks should be called thus! If a
firefly were called the sun, or a microbe an
elephant, it would be no more absurd.
Meteors are just plain rocks thrown out


METEORS OR VOLCANIC DISTURBANCES 111


from the earth by an exploding volcano.
An aurora might not always appear when
these rocks fall, as an explosion might not
ignite, or the burning be so small as not to
show through the smoke and dust.

On the same page Nansen again writes:
“Thursday, December 12th.—Between six
and nine this morning there was a number
of shooting stars, most of them in Ser-
pentarius. Some came right from the
Great Bear; afterwards they chiefly came
from the Bull or Aldebaran, or the Pleia-
des. Several of them were very bright,
and some drew a streak of shining dust >
after them.”

What is more characteristic than that
the shining dust should follow a volcanic
eruption throwing out these shooting
stars? The Great Bear is located in the
right direction. My contention is that
shooting stars are meteors passing
through the air, thrown up by a volcanic
eruption, and all meteors that have struck
the earth come out of the earth, internally
or externally. This theory about passing
comets is given in lieu of a better one, and


112 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


will not be advanced after the earth 1s
shown to be hollow. Hall remarks that
the small base of one aurora proved it to be
quite close to the earth. A ball of fire fell
during the display, and burst just before it
reached the earth, throwing out prismatic
scintillations in every direction.

Peary writes on page 163 that “a bril-
liant meteor was seen on the northeastern
sky, descending vertically, and a little
later a meteor with red and green trail
was seen traveling west, about half-way
to the zenith and with a slight down-
ward angle.” Those two meteors were
of the many found in the vicinity of
the North Pole, and undoubtedly came
from a volcano in the interior of the
earth.

He also noticed a peculiar phenomenon:
the “apparent sinking of large areas of
snow accompanied by peculiar muffled re-
ports, which rumbled away beneath the
crust in every direction until they died
- away.”

This could be accounted for by the vol-
canic disturbances in the earth, from


METEORS OR VOLCANIC DISTURBANCES 113


which frequent explosions send forth
stone, rocks, and dust, that fall often in
that part of the world..

To show that meteors are more likely
to originate in the earth than from some
passing comet or from other source, it
should be noted that when analyzed they
show no ingredients not found on earth.
One writer in Clerk’s Astronomy, page
389, says: “The nearest affinities of the
mineral aggregated in them are with vol-
canic products from great depths. These
meteorites seem broken-up fragnients of
the interior parts of globes like our own.”

There is a meteor on exhibit at the
Museum of Natural History, New York,
weighing many tons. If that had come
from some comet a few million miles away
it would have struck the earth with such
force that it would have penetrated the
hardest rock-surface hundreds of feet, and
would have melted the iron in it.


114 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


CHAPTER IX.
FINDING OF ROCK IN ‘AND ON ICE.


Arctic explorers have long wondered
why rock, gravel, and sand are so often
found on and imbedded in bergs and floes.

Many writers claim that rocks are
shoved by glaciers, while at the time adher-
ing to them, till the iceberg drifts against
another berg and they freeze together.
This is not a reasonable explanation how
the rocks came on the ice, as the glacier,
after it struck the water, would have to
turn on its side to bring the bottom of the
berg in a position to come in contact with
another berg that must have been ground-
ed or become fast in some other manner.
Two icebergs, drifting in the ocean, could
not freeze together. That would have to
be the case if the rocks got into the middle
of the berg, where they are frequently
found. Besides, how long would a rock,
weighing tons, adhere to the bottom or
side of an iceberg? No, that is not the


ROCK IN AND ON ICE IIs


way they got there. They were thrown
into the air by some explosion, and fell on
the berg while it was forming.

Some writers assign one cause, some
another ; each, however, refutes or rejects
what his predecessors have explained of
the presence of these substances. To me
they appear of volcanic origin. Volcanic
eruptions send into the air rock, gravel,
sand, and dust, which disperse 1n every di-
rection. Finally they fall upon the bergs
at all stages of formation, from the time
the stream first freezes over until a berg 1s
plunged into the ocean, and afterward,—
if still in the location where they land.
When rock is found on an iceberg, it is
stated that it generally rests in a pool of
water, caused, it is claimed, by the rock
drawing heat from the sun. This does
not seem nearly so good an explanation as
the one that a warm rock lighting upon an
iceberg melts the ice, and makes a pool of
water very quickly, there being no need to
wait for the sun, which may not appear for
several months.

Had I the imagination of Shake-


116 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


speare, the descriptive power of Homer,
and the force and directness of Hux-
ley, then would I paint a picture so
vivid and real that no reader of this book
would take another view, but would think
and see the matter as I do.

We are all limited, however, in our
capacity, and must be content to use
our gifts as best we may. As soon
as one of these facts can be established, the
rest must follow. If it can be shown that
the rocks found 1n the icebergs come from
an exploding volcano, and that there are
no burning volcanoes in the vicinity of the
Arctic Ocean, is it not evident, then, that
they come from the interior of the
earth? When it can also be shown
that the conditions are such that no
icebergs can be formed on earth, then
they must be formed in the interior;
for they are certainly formed some-
Where. If the material that produces
colored snow is a vegetable matter (which
the analysis shows), and is supposed to be
a blossom or the pollen of a plant, when
none such grow in the vicinity of the Arc-


ROCK IN AND ON ICE 117


tic Ocean, then it must grow in the in-
terior of the earth; for if it grew else-
where on earth, then the snow would
be colored in other locations as well, which
does not seem to be the case.

We might go through a list of more
than a dozen hitherto unanswered prob-
lems, all pointing in one direction,
never conflicting with each other, but
each, in turn, strengthening the other,
and leaving nothing for the next to
explain away. Such a chain of cir-
cumstances could not exist on a false
theory. Nothing but a fact will stand the
test; for facts are stubborn things, and
stick out like a sore finger going to a doc-
tor’s shop. —_

The dust, so annoying in the Arctic
Ocean, is also produced by volcanic erup-
tions. Being light, it is carried far away
by the wind, and when it falls on the ships
is very disagreeable. When it falls with
the snow, it produces black snow, and
when analyzed, is found to consist of car-
bon and iron—supposed to come from
some burning volcano. Where is that


118 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


burning volcano? No record or account
of any near the North Pole is found, and if
it be anywhere else, why does the dust fall
in the Arctic Ocean? The best way to
dispose of this rock in the ice, this dust in
the ocean, this black snow, the shooting
stars, or meteors, and the aurora 1s to say,
that they are caused by an exploding vol-
cano. I am willing to call that my an-
swer. If false, it will not stand. If true,
it will bear the test of time, and pop up like
a cork.

As remarked at the beginning of this
chapter, one of the mysteries of Arctic
travel has always been how rock, gravel,
wood, and dirt get on icebergs and ice-
drifts. There have been as many expla-
nations as observers: and no two agree.
The volcanic-explosion theory would have
been of great benefit to those who have
written upon this matter when accounting
for the rock, etc., being on ice as well as
onland. The only difference is that when
these substances are on land, they come
from a stray comet, passing millions of
miles away, and, ninety-nine times out of a


ROCK IN AND ON ICE 119


hundred, land near the pole. How easy
it is to apply the supernatural to matters
we do not understand! It is more won-
derful to account for a meteor striking the
earth, near the pole, from a stray comet a
few million miles away, than to have it
come from the earth a couple of hundred
miles away. Note what Greely says:
“Our traveling was for a long time
along the icefoot at the base of very high,
precipitous cliffs, evidently of schistose
slate. They rose as sheer precipices, over
two thousand feet above the level of the
bay—solid rock, without a vestige of vege-
tation to cover their nakedness. Indeed,
the only vegetation seen for some ten miles,
traveling along these cliffs, was on the
outlying spur of clayey earth at the point
where our previous camp had been made.
In one place a narrow cleft, apparently not
more than a hundred feet wide and over
a thousand feet deep, broke the continuity
of the crest of the bluffs. At one point a
rock which must have weighed several
tons was lying on a large paleocrystic floe
about a half a mile from the shore. I


120 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


visited and examined it, thinking it might
have been brought from some other cliffs,
but it was apparently of the same forma-
tion as those nearby. It is worthy of re-
mark that this was the farthest point at
which palzeocrystic floes were seen in this
bay—good evidence that they drifted from
the polar ocean.”

On page 373 he remarks “that about a
mile southwest of the divide Biederbick
picked up a piece of lignite coal, which re-
sembles that of The Bellows and of the
mines in Watercourse Bay. It seems
-~somewhat remarkable that this coal is so
widely spread over the country and that
we should find it on the watershed of Lake
Hazen.”

Greely did not understand why coal was
picked up on the watershed of Lake Hazen.
It is not at all strange. It was dropped
there after being thrown into the air by
one of those volcanic explosions that pro-
duce the beautiful lights hitherto known
as the Aurora Borealis, but hereafter
to be known as the reflection of fire in the
interior of the earth.


“Buoy se 31 ay B19q ay) uOdn paddosp pur ‘uorsojdxa a1ue>]0a B Aq
JY OY} OFU! UMOIY} 249M UOHRIISNII! eBAoge ay} UL UMOYS syD0I ay} Jey} SUNE]D soYyINE ay T


“a0 NO MO00u


ROCK IN AND ON ICE 123


Kane found masses of detached ice
floating out to sea—symmetrical tables
two hundred feet long by eighty broad—
covered with large angular rocks and
boulders, and seemingly impregnated
throughout with detrited matter. In
Marshall Bay these rafts were so numer-
ous that, could they have melted as he saw
them, the bottom of the sea would have
presented a more curious study for the
geologist than the boulder-covered lines of
our middle latitudes.

Hall tells of an old floe, more than
twenty feet thick, which grounded near
the Polaris. On striking, it broke into
many pieces, which, turning over, exposed
massive rocks embedded in the ice.


124 THE PHANTOM OF’ THE POLES


CHAPTER X.


DUST IN THE ARCTIC.


The dust in the polar regions, which Nan-
sen speaks of so many times, and which
was a source of such annoyance while
drifting in the ocean many miles from
land, comes from somewhere; it does not
grow; is a commodity without life; cannot
reproduce itself; yet it is found in such
great quantities that it colors the snow
black. In the sky it looks like great
clouds, and falls on ships in such abun-
dance that it becomes a source of 1rrita-
tion. Nansen declares it was one of his
principal reasons for wanting to go home.

This ought to be accounted for in some
reasonable way. So far as I have been
able to learn, it is dust from a stray comet,
and, when analyzed, is found to contain
carbon and iron, supposed to come from
some exploding volcano. If it came from
a passing comet, it probably started about


DUST IN THE ARCTIC 125


the same time as the shooting stars, which
fall so frequently near the poles! After
traveling millions and millions of miles,
the dust and shooting stars fall almost
continuously; whereas a comet appears
only once in several years. Comets must
distribute dust and shooting stars suff-
cient to last till they come again; say, in
ten or twenty years. This shows how
nonsensical the explanation is; yet, in
order to make things clear, it sometimes
becomes necessary to show how ridiculous ©
some theories-are. This comet theory is
most absurd, and does no credit to the first
century,—to say nothing of the twentieth.
If it were true that the dust,: falling so
densely and continuously in the Arctic,
came from a comet millions of miles away,
the amount necessary to cover the space
would shut out the rays of the sun from
the earth, which would be veiled in dark-
ness. This dust does not come from a
comet; it comes from the earth, and not a
great many miles from where it is found.
Dust, as a source of annoyance in the
Arctic, is what one would hardly expect in


126 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


that region, if the earth be not hollow.
Imagine dust as a great annoyance in the
middle of the Arctic Ocean! Nansen
says: “The years are passing here, and
what do they bring? Nothing but dust,
dust, dust, which the first wind drives
away.”

Will some one who does not believe
the earth is hollow tell me where that
dust comes from? It isn’t an article or
commodity that accumulates very fast on
ice, Or open water; yet Nansen says: “Let
us go home; what have we to remain here
for? Nothing but dust, dust, dust.”

If you hold that the earth 1s solid, there
is no answer to this perplexing question.
When it is understood, however, that the
earth is hollow, and the dust comes from
the eruption of a volcano in the interior of
the earth, the puzzle is easily explained
without accusing a passing comet millions
of miles away of scattering dust over all
the Arctic and Antarctic regions. If the
earth is found to be solid, then the people
can congratulate themselves that the dust
is mainly confined to or near the poles,


DUST IN THE ARCTIC 127


where the inhabitants are few in number.


But there is no danger of that being ever
proved.


128 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


CHAPTER XI.


OPEN WATER AT FARTHEST POINT NORTH
AND SOUTH.


It is still claimed by many that the Arc-
tic Ocean is a frozen body of water.
Although it always contains large bodies
of drift-ice and icebergs, it is not frozen
over. The student of Arctic travels will
invariably find that explorers were turned
back by open water, and many instances
are cited where they came near being car-
ried out to sea and lost. Had they con-
tinued going out to sea,—not knowing
that the earth was hollow,—they might
have been lost but still live. One can
easily imagine how those that tried to
reach the pole by balloon might get lost
and never find their way out, not knowing
that the earth was hollow. What I wish to
present to the reader, however, is the proof
that the Arctic Ocean is an open body of
water, abounding with game of all kinds,
and the farther one advances the warmer


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 129


it will be found. It is never free from
cumulus and dark clouds,—coming up from
the interior of the earth,—and from fogs,
vapors, and other evidences of change.
At certain seasons, when the atmosphere
of the earth at the poles and the atmos-
phere of the interior of the earth were of
the same temperature, no clouds would ap-
pear unless caused by an eruption of some
kind, which, in many cases, might be
clouds of dust or smoke.

The following extract will afford sufh-
cient proof that my contention on this sub-
ject is correct. On page 265, Captain C. F.
Hall says: “On this day (Dec. 26th) Cap-
tain Budington speaks in his journal re-
specting the position of the vessel as fol-
lows:

““On ascending the Providence Iceberg
and taking a look around, we see at first
the open water at a distance of from three
to four miles, extending the whole length
of the strait from north to south. Our
vessel lies on the edge of the land-floe,
protected from seaward by the iceberg.’ ”

Here he finds open water to the north,


130 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


extending the whole length of the straits
from north to south.

Hall further writes, on page 284:
“From the top of Providence Berg a dark
fog was seen to the north, indicating
water. At 10 a. m. three of the men,—
Kruger, Nindemann and Hobby,—went to
Cape Lupton to ascertain, if possible, the
extent of the open water. On their return
they reported several open spaces and
much young ice—not more than a day
old—so thin that it was easily broken by
throwing pieces of ice upon it.”

Note that he speaks of the dark fog in
the north, indicating water, also that they
found young ice not more than a day old.

Then, on page 288: “On the 23d of
January the two Esquimaux, accompanied
by two of the seamen, went to Cape Lup-
ton. They reported a sea of open water
extending as far as the eye could reach.”

This also was in January: “a sea of
open water as far as the eye could reach.”

“On the 24th, Dr. Bessels, with two of
the seamen, started at II a. m., with a dog
team, to go north and examine the water


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 131


reported by the seamen. They reached
the third cape without difficulty. Leaving
their sled, they arrived at the open water
about 2 p. m. They reported a current
there running to the north at a rate vari-
ously estimated from four miles to a half
a mile per hour; at the same hour at the
vessel the tide was falling.”

Here again on the 24th open water was
found, and a current running to the north
at a rate variously estimated at from four
miles to a half mile per hour; at the same
time the tide was falling at the vessel,
whereas, according to all established rules,
the current should have been going the
other way. |

Page 289—Hall’s diary—has more
upon the subject: “On the 28th, Mr. Ches-
ter and a small party with dogs and sled,
went to inspect the open water which now
prevented their rounding the third cape.
Mr. Chester observed a current of one mile
an hour toward the north. The existence
of this open water was regarded as favor-
able to boat journeys in the spring. A
large sled was ordered, upon which one


132 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


of the boats could be transported to the
open water, the extent of which it was
proposed to ascertain as soon as possible.
Toward evening the sky cleared, and the
western coast could be distinctly seen.”

Again we have evidence of open water,
with the current going north.

Reference to the fog, so frequently re-
ferred to by the explorers, 1s made by Hall,
on page 301: “I had for a short time a
very extensive view over the straits, where
the open water appeared as a dark, black
spot on a white field. My joy and pleasure
did not, however, last long, as fifteen min-
utes only sufficed to cover all by a most
impenetrable fog, a phenomenon which I
never observed before in winter. I was
hardly able to see twenty paces to the west
and northwest, though toward the south it
remained free for a considerable time.
There, above the new ice of the bay, a most
beautiful fog-stratum, intensely white,
was hanging, and continually changing its
height.”’

Being in winter, he calls it a phenom-
enon. Anything that could cause that fog


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 133


must be out of the ordinary, and must be
accounted for in some other way. If the
earth were solid, and the ocean extended
to the pole, or connected with land sur-
rounding the pole, there would be nothing
to produce that fog. It was caused by the
warm air coming from the interior of the
earth.

On page 236 Kane says: “Indeed, some
circumstances which he (McGary) re-
ports seem to point to the existence of a
north water all the year round; and the
frequent water-skies, fogs, etc., that we
have seen to the S. W. during the winter
go to confirm the fact.”

He tells us more on the subject (page
299): “Morton’s journal, on Monday, the
26th, says: ‘As far as I could see the open
passages were fifteen miles or more wide,
with sometimes mashed ice separating
them. But it is all small ice, and I think it
either drives out to the open space to the
north, or rots and sinks, as I could see
none ahead to the north.’

“The coast after passing the cape, he
thought, must trend to the eastward, as he


134 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


could at no time when below it see any
land beyond. But the west coast still
opened to the north.

“His highest station of outlook at the
point where his progress was arrested he
supposed to be about three hundred feet
above the sea. From this point, some six
degrees to the west of north, he remarked
in the farthest distance a peak truncated at
its top like the cliffs. of Magdalena Bay.
It was bare at its summit. This peak, the
most remote northern land known upon
our globe, takes its name from the great
pioneer of Arctic travel, Sir Edward
Parry. * * * The summits were
generally rounded, resembling, to use his
own expression, a succession of sugar-
loaves and stacked cannon-balls declining
slowly in the perspective. Mr. Morton
saw no ice.”

Greely says, on page 150, in reference
to this open-water question: -“The cliffs
on the north side of Wrangel Bay were
still. washed by the open sea, showing that
the storms of the previous month had
broken up the sea-floe in many places.”


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 135


Again, on page 254: “This melting of
the snow, as well as the limiting clause of
Dr. Pavy’s orders, prevented him from
attempting to proceed northward over the
disintegrated pack. He consequently de-
cided to return at once to Cape Joseph
Henry. Taking only indispensable ef-
fects, and sufficient provisions to feed the
party for a few days, they started in haste
for the Cape, but on arriving opposite it
found open water of three-quarters of a
mile in extent between them and the land.
On returning to their old camp for some
further stores, the water-space toward
Cape Hecla was found to have increased
in width to about three miles, while the
water-clouds to the north and northeast
had increased in amount and distinctness.”’

He does not speak of the increase in
amount and distinctness of the water-
clouds as one of the signs indicating water
in the north, but of an established fact—
that the water-cloud (or cloud where the
water is reflected in the skies) is no longer
a question, but a certainty. It may strike
the reader as strange that reference 1s


136 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


made so often to water, ice, and land being
reflected in the sky. This illustrates that
if the sky correctly reflects at all times the
condition of the water, the ice, and the
land, it will reflect a fire with as much
accuracy as it reflects water.

Dr. Pavy (Greely, page 255) concluded
it unwise to return for some of the
abandoned articles, as the pack was liable
to move northward again, since in the
offing it was drifting south. He imme-
diately started southward, impressed with
the idea “that Robeson Channel was open,
and that great haste was necessary, fear-
ing that the ice toward Cape Sheridan
would also break up, and seriously delay
their progress homeward.”

The ice leading back to their camp was
in better condition than farther north, and
trom there they traveled clear back to Lin- ©
coln Bay.

“At noon, April 24, the party camped at
View Point, where a record was left‘ in the
old English cairn, and in the evening of
the following day they reached Harley Spit.
At 7 a. m. of the 26th the party was again


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 137


in the snow-house at Black Cape. From
Cape Sheridan, south of the palzocrystic
pack, the ice was broken, in motion, and
in many places separated by large lanes of
water.” The next morning the wind blew
from the south, and caused an opening to
the north of Black Cape, “between the
solid ice of Robeson Channel and the loose
floes above—a space of about a mile wide,
and of which the transversal end disap-
peared two or three miles from the coast.”’
The party, however, traveled southward
over solid ice to Lincoln Bay.

Despite steady and unremitting labor,
and the possession of health and strength,
this attempt to travel over the frozen sea
failed through natural causes. But, as Dr.
Pavy says, it “determined the important
fact that last fall open water could have
been found as far as Cape Sheridan, and
from Conical Hill perhaps to Cape Colum-
bia; and proved, by our experience, that
even in such high latitudes the pack may
be in motion at an early period of the year;
perhaps at any time. I am firmly con-
vinced that but for our misfortune in find-


138 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


ing open water, we could, without greatly
distancing Commander Markham, have
reached perhaps the latitude of 84 deg. N.”

Greely writes, on page 275: “We trav-
eled alongside the open river, keeping to
the bordering ice-walls, which decreased
in thickness and eventually disappeared |
entirely at a point where the stream doubt-
less remains open the entire year. Here
we were driven to the hillside, where the
deep snow and sharp projecting rocks
made travel slow, and rendered the task
of keeping the sledge upright a severe one.
A couple of hundred yards farther and a
sharp turn brought in sight a scene which
we shall all remember to our dying day.
Before us was an immense icebound lake.
Its snowy covering reflected ‘diamond
dust,’ from the midnight sun, and at our
feet was a broad pool of open, blue water
which fed the river. To the northward
some eight or ten miles—its base at the
northern edge of the lake (Hazen)—a
partly snow-clad range of high hills (Gar-
field Range) appeared, behind and above
which the hog-back, snow-clad summits of


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 139


the United States Mountains rose with
their stern, unchanging splendor. To the
right and left on the southern shore low,
_ rounded hills, bare, as a rule, of snow, ex-
tended far to east and west, until in reality
or perspective they joined the curving
mountains to the north. The scene was
one of great beauty and impressiveness.
“The excitement and enthusiasm which
our new discoveries had engendered, here
culminated, for our vantage ground was
such that all seemed revealed, and no point
hidden. Connell, who had continually
lamented the frozen foot which turned him
back from the trip to North Greenland, de-
clared enthusiastically that he would not
have missed the scene and discoveries for
all the Polar Sea.”
_ Greely speaks of open water the year
round. If there be open water the year
round at the farthest point north, can any
good reason be assigned why all have
failed to reach the pole? The men that
have spent their time, comfort, and, in
several cases, lives, were all men more
than anxious to succeed, yet, strange to


140 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


say, all failed. Was this because the
weather got warmer, and they found game
more plentiful? No, it was because there
was not such a place.

The following are extracts from Dr.
Kane’s work, pages 378 and 379: ‘As far
as I could discern, the sea was open, a swell
coming in from the northward and run-
ning crosswise, as if with a small eastern
set. The wind was due N.—enough of it
to make whitecaps—and the surf broke in
on rocks below in regular breakers. The
sky to the N. W. was of dark rain-cloud,
the first that I had seen since the brig was
frozen up. Ivory-gulls were nesting in
the rocks above me, and out to sea were
molle-mock and silver-backed gulls. The
ducks had not been seen N. of the first
island of the channel, but petrel and gulls
hung about the waves near the coast.

“June 26—Before starting, I took a
meridian-altitude of the sun (this being
the highest northern point I obtained ex-
cept one, ‘as during the last two days the
weather had been cloudy, with a gale blow-
ing from the north), and then set off at


‘sayem usdo ur Burpes pue Buyeoy diys pue sBiaqaot ayy BSutmoys ‘Asouaos [njnnvog
“SOaTaTII


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 143


4 p. m. on our return down the channel to
the south.

“T cannot imagine what becomes of the
ice. A strong current sets in almost con-
stantly to the south; but, from altitudes of
more than five hundred feet, I saw only
narrow strips of ice, with great spaces of
open water, from ten to fifteen miles in
breadth, between them. It must, there-
fore, either go to an open space in the
north, or dissolve. The tides in-shore
seemed to make both north and south; but
the tide from northward ran seven hours,
and there was no slack water. The wind
blew heavily down the channel from the
open water, and had been freshening since
yesterday nearly to a gale; but it brought
no ice with it.”

Dr. Kane says that he cannot imagine
what becomes of the ice, and that 1t appar-
ently goes to an open space in the north
or dissolves. Again we read that for
seven hours the tide was from north,
there being no slack water, thus showing
that it did not come from the pole. If the
tide came from the pole, they should have


144 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


had low tide at the expiration of six hours.
The tide and wind bringing no ice during
ali that time, shows plainly enough there
was none to bring. |

In the second volume of Nansen’s work
(page 505) more information bears on
this point: “I find in my journal for that
day: Are continually discovering new
islands of lands to the south. There is
one great land of snow beyond us in the
west, and it seems to extend southward a
long way. This snow land seemed to us
extremely mysterious; we had not yet dis-
covered a single dark patch on it, only
snow and ice everywhere. We had no
clear idea of its extent, as we had only
caught glimpses of it now and _ then,
when the mist lifted a little. It seemed
to be quite low, but we thought it must
be of a wider extent than any of the
lands we had hitherto traveled along. To
the east we found island upon island, and
sounds and fiords the whole way along.
We mapped it all as well as we could, but
this did not help us to find out where we
were; they seemed to be only a crowd of


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 145


small islands, and every now and then a
view of what we took to be the ocean to
the east opened up between them.”

Those islands—passed during the long
drift and travel for over a year—were un-
doubtedly islands that had never been seen
before. It is more than likely that Nan-
sen and his crew were farther into the in-
terior than anyone had previously been.
If they for one moment could have under-
stood that the earth was hollow, conditions
that seemed unexplainable and unaccount-
able would have been perfectly clear; but
as they never dreamed of that, it is not
strange that they were constantly mixed,
and that currents and winds were always
going and coming contrary to customs and
theories.

The mist that Nansen speaks of is one
strong proof that the earth is hollow and
warmer in winter than the exterior.

Changes that are nearly always going
on—caused by the wind blowing in or
out—must bring about just such effects,
as the atmosphere cannot be the same,
and is either dryer or more moist, hotter


146 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


or colder. In either case it would be
manifested in some kind of a change—
cloud, fog, snow or rain.

In Vol. I, page 195, Nansen writes of a
fellow-explorer: “In his account of his
voyage, Nordenskiold writes as follows of
the condition of this channel: ‘We were
met by only small quantities of that sort of
ice which has a layer of fresh-water ice on
the top of the salt, and we noticed that it
was all melting fiord or river ice. I hardly
think that we came all day on a single piece
of ice big enough to have cut up a seal
upon.’ ”

On page 196 of the same volume, occurs:
“We could hardly get on at all for the
dead water, and we swept the whole sea
along with us. It is a peculiar phenom-
enon,—this dead water. We had at pres-
ent a better opportunity of studying it than
we desired. It occurs where a surface-
layer of fresh water rests upon the salt
water of the sea, and this fresh water is
carried along with the ship, gliding on the
heavier sea beneath as if on a fixed foun-
dation. The difference between the two


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 147


strata was in this case so great that while
we had drinking-water on the surface, the
water we got from the bottom cock of the
engine room was far too salt to be used for
the boiler. Dead water manifests itself
in the form of larger or smaller ripples or
waves stretching across the wake, the one
behind the other, arising sometimes as far
forward as almost amidships. We made
loops in our course, turned sometimes
right around, tried all sorts of antics to
get clear of it, but to very little purpose.
The moment the engine stopped it seemed
as if the ship were sucked back. In spite
of the Fraim’s weight and the momentum
she usually has, we could in the present
instance go at full speed till within a
fathom or two of the edge of the ice, and
hardly feel a shock when she touched.’

I wish to call special attention to Nan-
sen’s information about dead water. What
is dead water? Does he mean water that
has no current? It seems to be one of
those phenomena for which they could not
account. The only theory that I can pre-
sent is: the dead water was at a point


148 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


where the centre of gravity was extremely
strong; the salt water, being heavier than
the fresh, was drawn to the earth with
such force that the fresh water could not
penetrate it, and laid as separate and dis-
tinct upon it as cream upon a pan of milk.
In the absence of any further proof or evi-
dence, this dead water must have been
about half-way round the curve, entering
the interior of the earth, and, if so, was
in perfect accordance with the laws of the
universe—that the centre of gravity is
strongest at this point.

According to Nansen, the ship could
make no headway, and they turned in dif-
ferent directions, and the difference be-
tween the strata of salt and fresh water in
this case was so great that while they had
drinking water on the surface, the water
obtained from the bottom cock of the en-
gine room was far too salty to be used for
the boiler. Is there any difference be-
tween water found in the Arctic Ocean and
that found in any other ocean? If there
be a difference, what causes it? In New
York harbor we have fresh water and salt


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 149


water, but when they meet, they mix. The
water that comes down the Hudson River
is fresh water, and the water that meets it
coming in from the ocean is salt; but there
is no line where one may be called fresh,
and the other salt. Why should there bea
difference, then, in the Arctic Ocean? No
other explanation than what I have just
stated can be given—that the centre of
gravity is so strong near the poles that
the heavier body is drawn solidly toward
the earth, and the lighter one cannot pene-
trate it.

Nansen speaks, on page 209, of a differ-
ent kind of water—a clayey water—where
there is no commingling. “To the north
of the point ahead of us I saw open water ;
there was some ice between us and it, but
the Fram forced her way through. When
we got out, right off the point, I was sur-
prised to notice the sea suddenly covered
with brown, clayey water. It could not
be a deep layer, for the track we left be-
hind us was quite clear. Theclayey water
seemed to be skimmed to either side by the
passage of the ship. I ordered soundings


150 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


to be taken, and found, as I expected, shal-
low water—first, eight fathoms, then six
and one-half, then five and one-half. Il
stopped now, and backed. Things looked
very suspicious, and round us ice-floes
lay stranded. There was also a very
strong current running northeast. Con-
stantly sounding, we again went slowly
forward. Fortunately the lead went on
showing five fathoms. Presently we got
into deeper water—six fathoms, then six
and one-half, and now we went on at
full speed again. We were soon out
into the clear, blue water on the other
side. There was quite a sharp boun-
dary line between the brown surface
and the clear blue. The muddy water evi-
dently came from some river a little far-
ther south.” |
Many claim that the Arctic Ocean is a
frozen body of water; and for that reason
considerable space is devoted to the ques-
tion of open water in the Arctic regions.
I contend that the Arctic Ocean is never
frozen over, although it appears so at dif-
ferent points where large fields of ice have


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 15!


drifted up from the interior of the earth,
and lodged at certain places. Nansen
spent two years drifting in the Arctic
Ocean, which is proof positive that during
that time it was not closed by ice. The
icebergs that come up from the interior —
and fill the Arctic Ocean and connecting
straits and sounds clear into the Atlantic,
cause portions of the Arctic to be filled
with ice almost constantly. If it be true
that the centre of attraction is strongest at
the turning point, large fields of ice would
naturally be held in that position, until
very strong currents, heavy winds, or
large floes coming up from the interior,
would shove the tice past that point.

On page 212 of his work Nansen speaks
of making such splendid time—eight knots
by the log. “Sverdrup thought it would
be safer to stay where we were; but it
would be too annoying to miss this splen-
did opportunity; and the sunshine was so
beautiful, and the sky so smiling and reas-
suring! I gave orders to set sail, and soon
we were pushing through the ice, under
steam, and with every stitch of canvas that


152 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


we could crowd on. Cape Chelyuskin
must be vanquished! Never had the Fram
gone so fast; she made more than eight
knots by the log; it seemed as though she
knew how much depended on her getting
on. Soon we were through the ice, and
had open water along the land as far as
eye could reach. We passed point after
point, discovering new fiords and islands
on the way, and soon I thought that I
caught a glimpse through a large telescope
of some mountains far away north; they
must be in the neighborhood of Cape Chel-
yuskin itself.” |
This was on one of the fifteen days in
succession when Nansen supposed he was
sailing directly north. If he was not sail-
ing north, or nearly so, where was he sail-
ing? He ought to have covered a long
distance, as he speaks of making nine knots
an hour. Had he only made five knots,
the distance would have been nearly 2,000
miles, yet when he took his reckoning he
found himself in latitude 79 degs. If he
had been going straight north, as he sup-
posed he was, his sailing would have taken


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 153


him over I,200 miles past the pole. Allow-
ing for loss of speed, owing to the strength
of currents, and dodging bergs and floes,
he would still have been beyond the pole.

This is the strongest proof possible that
the earth 1s hollow, and that there is no
way of reaching the spot where the North
Pole is supposed to be.

On page 217 Nansen writes of one star
—the only one to be seen. “It stood
straight above Cape Chelyuskin, shining |
clearly and sadly in the pale sky. As we
sailed on and got the cape more to the east
of us, the star went with it: it was always
there, straight above. I could not help
sitting watching it. It seemed to have
some charm for me, and to bring such
peace. Wasitmy star? Was it the spirit
of home following and smiling to me now?
Many a thought it brought to meas the
Fram toiled on through the melancholy
night, past the northernmost point of the
old world.”

From this, it appears as if he had gone a
considerable distance into the interior of
the earth—a fact that had something to do,


154 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


perhaps, with his seeing only one star. I
hardly think that he was far enough in to
shut out from view all other stars, but his
position would certainly shut out a great
many.

On page 218 he mentions sailing south-
.ward to avoid some ice-floes, and making
at the time nine knots an hour. “So that
we were now off King Oscar’s Bay; but I
looked in vain through the telescope for
Nordenskiold’s cairn. I had the greatest:
inclination to land, but did not think that
we could spare the time. The bay, which
was clear of ice at the time of Vegs’s visit,
was now closed-in with thick winter ice,
frozen fast to the land. We had an open
channel before us; but we could see the
edge of the drift-ice out at sea. A little
farther west we passed a couple of small
islands, lying a short way from the coast.
We had to stop before noon at the north-
western corner of Chelyuskin, on account
of the drift-ice, which seemed to reach
right into the land before us. To judge
by the dark air, there was open water
again on the other side of an island which


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 155


lay ahead. We landed, and made sure
that some straits or fiords on the inside of
this island, to the south, were quite closed
with firm ice; and in the evening the Fram
forced her way through the drift-ice on the
outside of it. We steamed and sailed
southward along the coast all night, mak-
ing splendid way; when the wind was
blowing stiffest, we went at the rate of
nine knots. Wecame upon ice every now
and then, but got through it easily.”

It is apparent that he went a long way
into the interior of the earth.

On page 220 he tells of losing sight of
land entirely. “In the course of the day
we quite lost sight of land, and, strangely
enough, did not see it again; nor did we
see the islands of St. Peter and St. Paul,
though, according to the maps, our course
lay past them.”

This statement shows that the explorer
and his men knew nothing about where
they were. If the charts showed that the
islands mentioned above were on the ship’s
course, then they were wrong, or Nansen
did not know where he was.


156 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


“The channel was still free from ice,”
writes Nansen, on page 225. “We now
continued on our course, against a strong
current, southward along the coast, past
the mouth of the Chatanga. This east-
ern part of the Taimur Peninsula 1s a com-
paratively high, mountainous region, but
with a lower level stretch between the
mountains and the sea, apparently the
same kind of low land we had seen along
the coast almost the whole way. As the
sea seemed to be tolerably open and free
from ice, we made several attempts to
shorten our course by leaving the coast
and striking across for the mouth of the
Olenek; but every time thick ice drove us
back to our channel by the land.”

On page 226, Nansen says: “The fol-
lowing day we got into good, open
water, but shallow—never more than
six to seven fathoms. We heard the
roaring waves to the east, so there
must certainly be open water in that
direction, which indeed we had expected.
It was plain that the Lena, with its masses
of warm water, was beginning to assert its


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 157


influence. The sea here was browner,
and showed signs of some mixture of mud-
dy river water. It wasalso much less salt.”

He found the change so marked that
he thought the warm water came from the
Lena. Now, the Lena is a river in Si-
beria, and its waters are no warmer than
those of any other river in that country.
In certain seasons of the year 1t discharges
a great deal of water, which 1s not warm
enough, however, to have any effect on the
Arctic Ocean. Again: the Lena is right
on the opposite side of the pole from where
Nansen was, and the distance between the
two points is considerable.

More concerning this connection is given
on page 227. “Saturday, September 16th
—We are keeping a northwesterly course
(by compass) through open water, and
have got pretty well north, but see no ice,
and the air is dark to the northward.
Mild weather, and water comparatively
warm, as high as 35 deg. Fahr. We have
a current against us, and are always con-
siderably west of our reckoning. Several
flocks of eider-ducks were seen in the


158 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


course of the day. We ought to have land
to the north of us; can it be that which 1s
keeping back the ice?” |

The reader will note what he says in
regard to their location: “and are al-
ways considerably west of our reckon-
ing.” So far as knowing their exact posi-
tion, they were, in fact, lost. If reckon-
ing was taken on the basis that the
compass was pointing in a certain di-
rection, when, as a matter of fact, it was
pointing in the opposite direction to what
they supposed, their reckoning was all
wrong.. Nansen himself says that they
were keeping, by compass, a _ north-
westerly course. Is it not fair to infer
that the influence that controlled the com-
pass when Nansen was steering by it, was
the same as had controlled it all the time,
and that the mixing-up, or confusion, was
with the individual, and not the com-
pass?

On page 227 Nansen recounts that they
met ice, and supposed, at first, that it
would be the end of their journey. How-
ever, it was only small drift-ice; and he


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 159


states, further, that he had “good sailing
and made good progress.”

“Next day we met ice, and had to hold
a little to the south to keep clear of it; and
I began to fear that we should not be able
to get as far as I hoped. But in my notes
for the following day (Monday, September
18th) I read: A splendid day. Shaped
our course northward, to the west of Biel-
koff Island. Open sea; good wind from
the west; good progress. Weather clear,
and we had a little sunshine in the after-
noon. Now the decisive moment ap-
proaches. At 12.15 shaped our course
north to east (by compass). Now it is
to be proved if my theory, on which the
whole expedition is based, is correct,—if
we are to find a little north from here a
north-flowing current. So far everything
is better than I had expected. We are in
latitude 75% deg. N., and have still open
water and dark sky to the north and west.
In the evening there was ice-light ahead
and on the starboard bow. About seven I
thought that I could see ice, which, how-
ever, rose so regularly that it more resem-


160 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


bled land, but it was too dark to see dis-
tinctly. It seemed as if it might be Biel-
koff Island, and a big light spot farther
to the east might even be the reflection
from the snow-covered Kotelnoi.”

For the previous thirteen days he had
found no interruption to speak of, but had
continued, as he supposed, steadily north.
However, when he took his reckoning he
found that he was in latitude 75% deg.
north, and open water still ahead.

On page 228 he remarks that it was a
strange feeling to be sailing away north
in the dark night to unknown lands, over
an open, rolling sea, where no ship or boat
had been before. ‘We might have been
hundreds of miles away in more southerly
waters, the air was so mild for September
in this latitude.” |

They were surely in the interior of the
earth at that point, several miles past the
turning point.

Under Tuesday, September roth (the
following day) (page 228), he writes:
“T have never had such a. splendid
sail. On to the north, steadily north, with


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 161


a good wind, as fast as steam and sail can
take us, and open sea mile after mile,
watch after watch, through these un-
known regions, always clearer and clearer
of ice, one might almost say: ‘How long
will this last’? The eye always turns to
the northward as one paces the bridge. It
is gazing into the future. But there is
always the same dark sky ahead, which
means open sea.”

The reader will here notice that the ap-
pearance of the sky shows the condition
of the surface of the earth. This is men-
tioned to show that when an aurora or a
burning fire is reflected in the sky, it
should be called a fire, instead of some-
thing produced by electricity.

In regard to their good fortune in
finding clear sailing direct, as they sup-
posed, toward the pole, Nansen remarks:
“Henriksen answered from the crow’s-
nest when I called up to him. ‘They little
think at home in Norway just now that we
are sailing straight for the pole in clear
water.’ No, they don’t believe we have
got sofar. And I shouldn’t have believed


162 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


it myself if anyone had prophesied it to
me a fortnight ago; but true itis. All my
reflections and inferences on the subject
had led me to expect open water for a good
way farther north; but it is seldom that
- one’s inspirations turn out to be so correct.
No ice-lights in any direction, not even now
in the evening. We saw no land the whole
day ; but we had fog and thick weather all
morning and forenoon, so that we were
still going at half-speed, as we were afraid
of coming suddenly on something.”

After discussing their good fortune, they
again referred to the sky. No ice-lights
were in any direction, not even in the
evening; but they had thick weather all
morning and afternoon, and, as a conse-
quence, were running at half-speed.

“T have almost to ask myself if this 1s
nota dream,” writes he on page 230. “One
must have gone against the stream to
know what it means to go with the stream.
As it was on the Greenland expedition, so
it is here.” |

He regards it as such good fortune that
he asks himself, “Is it nota dream?” Yet


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 163


they were no nearer the pole than they
were two weeks before.

On the same page he refers to the
water: “Hardly any life visible here.
Saw an auk or black guillemot to-day,
and later a sea-gull in the distance. When
I was hauling up a bucket of water in the
evening to wash the deck I noticed that
it was sparkling with phosphorescence.
One could almost have imagined one’s self
to be in the south.” .

This is the second time that he notes
the phosphorescent water and the fish they
caught in that part of the world. In an-
other instance, he stated that, when empty-
ing a net of fish, they looked like glowing
embers. This condition of things will be
found in many cases, perhaps, in the 1n-
terior of the earth. Nature provides for
every emergency, and it would not be sur-
prising to find phosphorescent effects
throughout the interior for the purpose of
relieving the darkness. This proved to be
nearly Nansen’s journey’s end; for, on the
21st he met an ice-floe coming up from the
interior of the earth, and supposed it to be


164 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


solid ice in the north. He says (page
233):

“So in the meantime we made fast to
a great ice-block, and prepared to clean the
boiler and shift coals. We are lying in
open water, with only a few large floes
here and there; but I have a presentiment
that this 1s our winter harbor.”

There is no reason why their progress
should have stopped at that point. Any-
one on his way to the interior of the earth
would not think of such a thing, yet one
trying to get to the North Pole might well
conclude that that was the commencement
of the stopping-place. From this time on
to October 12th, nothing of special note
occurred.

Three weeks later, he mentions that the
water was still open (page 273): “Thurs-
day, October 12th.—In the morning we
and our floe were drifting on blue water in
the middle of a large, open lane, which
stretched far to the north, and in the north
the atmosphere at the horizon was dark
and blue. As far as we could see from
the crow’s-nest with the small field-glass,


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 165


there was no end to the open water, with
only single pieces of ice sticking up in it
here and there. These are extraordinary
changes.”

He again speaks of “this same dark at-
mosphere in the north,” on page 278, and
“that it indicates open water. To-day
again, this stretched far away towards the
northern horizon, where the same dark at-
mosphere indicated some extent of open
water.” |

On page 282 he speaks of open water to
the north, also the ice-pressure: “Satur-
day, October 14.—To-day we have got on
the rudder; the engine is pretty well in
order, and we are clear to start north when
the ice opens to-morrow morning. Itis still
slackening and packing quite regularly
twice a day, so that we can calculate on it
beforehand. To-day we had the same
open channel to the north, and beyond it
open sea as far as our view extended.
What can this mean? This evening the
pressure has been pretty violent. The
floes were packed up against the Fram on
the port side, and were once or twice on


7]
~ t+ ww I oe
rd or)


166 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


the point of toppling over the rail. The
ice, however, broke below; they tumbled
back again, and had to go under us, after
all.”’ |

On page 201 he is puzzled to know why
everything is the reverse of what he had
figured it should be. “I had a sounding
taken; it showed over seventy-three fath-
oms (one hundred and thirty-five metres),
sO we are in deeper water again. The
sounding-line indicated that we are drift-
ing southwest. I do not understand this
steady drift southward. There has not
been much wind either lately; there 1s cer-
tainly a little from the north to-day, but
not strong. What can be the reason of it?
With all my information, all my reason-
ing, all my putting of two and two to-
gether, I cannot account for any south-
going current here—there ought to be a
north-going one. If the current runs
south here, how is that great, open sea
we steamed north across to be explained?
and the bay we ended in farthest north?
These could only be produced by the north-
going current which I presupposed. The


ad hod


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 167


only thing which puts me out a bit is that
west-going current which we had against
us during our whole voyage along the Si-
berian coast.” |
What puzzled him was the fact that
after he had sailed for fifteen successive
days, from September 6 to September 21,
with hardly any interruption—what little
there was arose mainly from fog—there
was so much southerly current and no ice.
That would lead to the impression there
was no ice to the north, or it would
have drifted with the south-going current,
and closed the vast body of open water
he had sailed through. It is evident
the ice in the Arctic, is confined to the
floes that come from the interior of the
earth. Another evidence that he had ad-
vanced far into the interior of the earth,
is the quantity of fresh water he met.
Had he known that the earth was hol-
low, and that they were not sailing north,
as he supposed, the answers to these
queries would have been clear to him, or
the problem have admitted of a different
basis of reasoning. He was also going


168 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


out of salt water; as he says, “the water is
not nearly so salt.”

On page 338 he is at loss to know why
he should find such deep water. “Thurs-
day, December 21.—It is extraordinary,
after all, how the time passes. Here we
are at the shortest day, though we have no
day. But now we are moving on to light,
and summer again. We tried to sound to-
day; had out twenty-one hundred metres
(over eleven hundred fathoms) of line
without reaching the bottom. We have
no more lines; what is to be done? Who
could have guessed that we should find
such deep water?”

In rounding the, curve of the interior
of the earth, as I have said before, it is as
likely to be water as land, and 1s held in
position by gravity. I suppose there is, in
many cases, practically no bottom, the
water being miles and miles deep.

On page 399, under date of Wednesday,
February 21st, Nansen says: “The south
wind continues. Took up the bag-nets to-
day which were put out the day before
yesterday. In the upper one, which hung


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES ¥69


near the surface, there was chiefly am-
phipoda; in Murray’s net, which hung at
about fifty fathoms’ depth, there was a
variety of small crustacea and other small
animals shining with such a strong phos-
phorescence that the contents of the net
looked like glowing embers as I emptied
them out in the cook’s galley by lamplight.
To my astonishment the net-line pointed
_ northwest, though from the wind there
ought to be a good northerly drift. To
clear this matter up I let the net down in
the afternoon, and as soon as it gota lit-
tle way under the ice the line pointed
northwest again, and continued to do so
the whole afternoon. How is this phe-
nomenon to be explained? Can we, after
all, be in a current moving northwest?”

Again he is at sea, being unable to ac-
count for the current, which is entirely
contrary to what he figured.

On page 309 Kane gives some interest-
ing information on this subject: “This.
precipitous headland, the farthest point at-
tained by the party, was named Cape Inde-
pendence. It is in latitude 81 deg. 22 min.


170 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


N. and longitude 65 deg. 35 min. W. It
was only touched by William Morton, who
left his dogs and made his way to it along
the coast. From it the western coast was
_ seen stretching far towards the north, with
an iceless horizon, and a heavy swell roll-
ing in with whitecaps. At a height of
about five hundred feet above the sea this
great expanse still presented all the ap-
pearance of an open and iceless sea. In
claiming for it this character I have refer-
ence only to the facts actually observed,
without seeking confirmation or support
from any deduction or theory. Among
such facts are the following:

“1. It was approached by a channel
entirely free from ice, having a length of
fifty-two and a mean width of thirty-six
geographical miles.

“2. The coast-ice along the water-line
of this channel had been completely de-
stroyed by thaw and water action, while
an unbroken belt of solid ice, one hundred
and twenty-two miles in diameter, extend-
ed to the south.

“3, A gale from the northeast, of fifty-


NORTHERN ENTRANCE.


Globe showing entrance to the interior of the earth at
the North Pole.


OPEN WATER NEAR THE POLES 173


four hours’ duration, brought a heavy sea
from that quarter, without disclosing any
drift or other ice.

“4. Dark nimbus clouds and water-sky
invested the northeastern horizon.

. “5S. Crowds of migratory birds were ob-
served thronging its waters.”

Nansen, in Vol. II, pages 534 and 535,
says: “We now found that in March he
must have been at no great distance south
of our winter hut, but had to turn there,
as he was stopped by open water—the
same open water of which we had seen
the dark atmosphere all the winter.”

Herein he refers to Jackson, who found
him after his long trip on the ice with
Johansen. After leaving the Fram, this
open water that kept them apart was seen
by Nansen in the skies all winter, when-
ever the atmosphere was favorable.

Now, what are the conditions obtaining
in the Antarctic region? Louis Bernacchi,
who spent nearly two years in the extreme
southern portion, tells us:

“At Cape Adare huge bergs were often
observed during perfectly calm weather,


174 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


traveling at about four knots per hour to-
ward the northwest.” (Page 309.)

“In this open sea is where they meet so
many icebergs.”

“An open sea, comparatively free from
ice, is met with in the Antarctic regions.”

He declares an open sea can be found. .
If so, why do they not reach the pole? He
tells us that they passed the magnetic pole.
They did; and had they kept on, instead of
turning back for fear of being lost at sea,
they would have made a great discovery.

But I am in favor of entering the interior
of the earth from the north, on account of
the apparently high winds in the Antarc-
tic. J also am of the opinion that Mount
Erebus—from which Bernacchi saw
smoke coming—is in the interior of the
earth, or part of the way in.

After the foregoing evidence, is it possi-
ble that anyone can believe that the re-
spective oceans are frozen bodies of water ?
If they do not believe that these oceans are
frozen, why do the explorers fail to reach
the poles—if there be such places?


WARMER NEAR THE POLES 175


CHAPTER XII.
WHY IT IS WARMER NEAR THE POLES.


One of the principal proofs that the
earth is hollow, is that it 1s warmer near
the poles. If this be so, to what are we to
attribute the heat? Nothing, however,
has been found to produce heat near the
poles to make it warmer. If it can be
‘shown—by quoting those who made the
farthest advance toward the supposed
poles—that it 1s warmer, that vegetation
shows more life, that game is more plen-
tiful than farther south, then we have a
reasonable right to claim that the heat
comes from the interior of the earth, as
that seems to be the only place from which
it could come. In presenting the reports
of those best able to judge, very little com-
ment will be made, as the reader should
form his own opinions.

In “Captain Hall’s Last Trip,” page 166,
is read: “We find this a much warmer


176 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


country than we expected. From Cape
Alexander the mountains on either side
of the Kennedy Channel and Robeson’s
Strait we found entirely bare of snow and
ice, with the exception of a glacier that we
saw covering, about latitude 80 deg. 30
min., east side the strait, and extending
east-northeast direction as far as can be
seen from the mountains by Polaris Bay.

“We have found that the country
abounds with life, and seals, game, geese,
ducks, musk-cattle, rabbits, wolves, foxes,
bears, partridges, lemmings, etc. Our
sealers have shot two seals in the open
water while at this encampment. Our
long Arctic night commenced October
13th, having seen only the upper limb of
the sun above the glacier : at meridian Oc-
tober 12th.”

Nansen draws special attention to the
warmth, for he says: “‘Fancy, only 12 deg.
(21% deg. Fahr.) of frost in the middle
of December! We might almost imagine
ourselves at home—forget that we were
in a land of snow to the north of the
eighty-first parallel.”’


WARMER NEAR THE POLES 177


This was at one of the farthest points
north reached by anyone, only in a differ-
ent direction; and yet the weather was
mild and pleasant.

Peary also makes mention of the higher


PTARMIGAN.
Birds found in great numbers in the Arctic Circle.


temperature. On pages 214 and 215, he
says: “I expected to hear later of our
February fohn in other parts of Greenland,
and I was not disappointed. Lieutenant
Ryder was living for nine months at
Scoresby Sound, on the coast of East


178 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


Greenland, while we were at McCormick
Bay. He was about four hundred and
fifty geographical miles south of us. The
maximum temperatures he recorded oc-
curred in February and May. He says
(Petermann’s Mittheilungen, XI, 1892,
page 256) that these high temperatures
were due to severe fohn storms, one of
which, in February (date not given), sud-
denly raised the thermometer to 50 deg.
F., 8/2 deg. higher than my instrument had
recorded.”

It will be observed that these extremely
strong winds from the interior of the earth
not only raise the temperature consider-
ably in the vicinity of the Arctic Ocean,
but affect it very materially four hundred
and fifty miles away. Nothing could
raise the temperature in such a manner,
except a storm coming from the interior
of the earth.

Nansen, in his second volume, page 355,
tells us: “This island we came to seemed
to me to be one of the most lovely spots on
the face of the earth. A beautiful flat
beach, an old strand lined with shells


WARMER NEAR THE POLES 179


strewn about, a narrow belt of clear water
along shore, where snails and sea urchins
(Echinus) were visible at the bottom
and amphipoda were swimming about. In
the cliffs overhead were hundreds of
screaming little auks, and beside us the
snow-buntings fluttered from stone to
stone with their cheerful twitter. Sud-
denly the sun burst forth through the light,
fleecy clouds, and the day seemed to be all
sunshine. Here was life and fair land;
we were no longer on the eternal drift-ice!
At the bottom of the sea just beyond the
beach I could see whole forests of seaweed
(Laminaria and Fucus). Under the cliffs
here and there were drifts of beautiful
rose-colored snow.”

When one takes into account Nansen’s
description of this island, and connects
that with the fact that no one has been
able to reach the pole, notwithstanding
that the travelers keep going where it 1s
warmer, where there is more life, less ice,
and but little snow, yet they make no
progress that leads them to the much-
sought goal, this is one of the strongest


180 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


arguments that there is no such place.
The farther the explorers pass into the 1n-
terior of the earth, the warmer it will be
found; and when they succeed in passing
the belt of country that has so much fog,
snow, and clouds, and drift-1ce coming up
from the interior, they will find plain sail-
ing and comfortable weather, but they will
never reach the pole. Whoever spends his
time and strength looking for the poles will
be like a young doctor in [llinois. Some
one told him that the milk-sickness was
very bad in a certain county in that State,
and he, not having much practice, thought
he would like to try his hand at curing it.
He started for the county where it was re-
ported to be the worst, but when he got
there he was told that there was no milk-
sickness in that county, but it was quite
bad in the county adjoining. So he trav-
eled on, and when he got there, they told
him the same story. After chasing the
phantom for a while, he returned, and re-
ported that it was harmless, as no disease
need be feared when no one could get
nearer to it than the county adjoining.


WARMER NEAR THE POLES 181


That is much nearer than explorers will
ever get to the poles.

On one of Greely’s farthest trips north
—of which he gives an account on page
73—he speaks of the vegetation: ‘This
creek was of moderate size, and drained a
valley of considerable extent, which ex-
tended to the northwestward. The vege-
tation seemed more abundant than at Cape
Hawks, and eight varieties of flowers were
gathered during our brief stay, but the
general appearance was of desolation.”

This shows that it was getting warmer.

Again, on the same trip out from camp
to explore the surroundings, he speaks of a
large flock of eider-ducks that had settled
in an open pool, and to the north, three-
quarters of a mile, ten musk-oxen were
quietly grazing; the sloping hills were
covered with vegetation, flowers, the
familiar buttercup, and countless Arc-
tic poppies of luxuriant growth. “Sure-
ly this presence of birds and flowers
and beasts was a greeting on nature’s:
part to our new home.”

Does that sound as if he had expected to


182 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


find these things there, or that their pres-
ence was an everyday occurrence? No:
it is the tone of surprise.

From what place had those birds and


EIDER-DUCKS.
Found in great numbers in the Arctic Circle.


game come? South of them for many
miles the earth is covered with a perpetual
snow—in many locations thousands of feet
deep. They are found in that location in
summer ; and as it is warmer farther north,


WARMER NEAR THE POLES 183


they would not be likely to go to a colder
climate in winter. They seem to pass into
the interior of the earth, or as far as suits
their nature. Let me state here that the
mutton-birds of Australia leave that con-
tinent in September, and no one has ever
been able to find out where they go. My
theory is that they pass into the interior of
the earth, via the South Pole.

Greely says again, on page 264: “While
we were at this camp, Private Connell vis-
ited the mouth of the valley running to the
northwest. He found vegetation to be
abundant, and reported that during the
summer months a river evidently flows
into the bay from the valley. At that
point he also noted four wolves, and with
them a musk-ox, the first of the season.
Leading to the valley, he also found what
appeared to be a musk-ox trail (similar to
the buffalo trails of the ‘Far West’),
which indicated plainly the valley was a
winter resort for these animals.”

As they proceeded farther north, where
no white man had ever trod, they found the
trails of musk-ox, showing that those ani-


184 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


mals made it their winter abode. Remem-
ber, they had traveled hundreds of miles
without meeting any signs of life.

“As we were about entering camp, a
dark-colored bird, about the size of a
plover, flew swiftly by us from behind, and
disappeared. It was neither snow-bunt-
ing nor ptarmigan, as all agreed. Wolf,
fox, lemming, hare, musk-ox, and ptarmi-
gan tracks were all seen during the day.”
(Page 276.)

On page 330, he says: “This camp
proved prolific in animal life, thus indi-
cating a luxuriant vegetation near. Two
ptarmigan were flying around, a hare was
captured, and traces of foxes and lem-
mings were observed. Tracks of a pass-
ing bear, going to the northeast, were seen
on the ice-foot, and abundant traces of
musk-oxen were discovered, proving that
these animals frequent this place in con-
siderable numbers, though the indications
were not of recent date.”

“Sergeant Brainard, who had charge of
the fresh meat, records that up to this date
fifty-two musk-oxen had been obtained in


WARMER NEAR THE POLES 185


1882, averaging two hundred and forty-
three pounds each of dressed meat.”
(Page 422.)

“Long returned at 6 p. m., having been
gone twenty-two hours hunting. His pro-
longed absence caused much alarm, as he
was alone. Several parties had been sent
out to seach for him, when he was met re-

“turning. He had fallen in with a herd of
musk-oxen in the valley, about two miles
above the head of St. Patrick Bay. He
had sixteen rounds of ammunition at start-
ing, and, shortly after, fired two at an
owl. With the remaining ammunition he
killed eight musk-oxen, and wounded two
others; four escaped. He had delayed to
skin the eight before returning to the sta-
tion, in order that the meat should not
taint. He saw three large falcons, the
first that had been observed by us.”

The skinning of the musk-oxen by
Long, to prevent tainting of the flesh,
would naturally suggest unusually warm
weather to the reader. While the weather
was warm, that was not the only reason
why the animals were immediately


186 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


skinned. If the musk-ox is left any length
of time after death with the skin on, the
meat becomes tainted, regardless of
weather conditions.

Where could one go and find such abun-
dance of game asat the farthest point north
reached? The game is found there in
summer. Can anyone tell where it goes
in winter? Greenland is covered with
snow from one to ten thousand feet
deep. (Vide Peary’s report of his trip
to the Arctic overland.) If the game
be found at the extreme northerly points
in summer, is it reasonable to suppose
it would migrate to a colder climate
in winter? It would be better to stay
where it is. Greely tells us that the
trails indicate that the musk-oxen make
their winter quarters there. Since it be-
comes warmer as they go north, instinct
tells them not to go south in winter. And
if they do not go south, they must go into
the interior of the earth.

Nansen (Vol. II, page 75) gives us a
description of the conditions that obtained,
from which one can judge of the warmth


WARMER NEAR THE POLES 187


of the weather: “I cannot help believing
that a land which, even in April, teems
with bears, auks, and black guillemots, and
where seals are basking on the ice, must be
a Canaan, flowing with milk and honey,


SHOOTING SEALS.
How natives slaughter seals in the Arctic Circle.


for two men who have good rifles and good
eyes; it must surely yield food enough not
only for the needs of the moment, but also
provisions for the journey onward to
Spitzbergen.”

This was Nansen’s remark when he was


188 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


about to leave the Fram, after he had
drifted nearly five months in an ice-floe.

In the same volume, page 346, he gives
additional evidence as to weather and
warmth. “It is a curious sensation to
paddle in the mist, as we are doing, with-
out being able to see a mile in front of us.
The land we found we have left behind us.
We are always in hopes of clear weather,
in order to see where the land lies in front
of us—for land there must be. This flat,
unbroken ice must be attached to land of
some kind; but clear weather we are not to
have, it appears. Mist without. ceasing;
we must push on as it is.”’

The mist, fog, and clouds spoken of as
so prevalent, should be accounted for by
something different than plain Arctic
Ocean. The best explanation seems that
warm air comes from the interior of the
earth (where the atmosphere is wholly
different), and when it passes out in winter
produces mist, fog, or cloud; but more
generally snow, summer or winter.

Nansen, in Volume II, page 354, says:
“As I mentioned before (August 13), I


WARMER NEAR THE POLES 189


had at first supposed the sound on our west
to be Rawlinson’s Sound, but this now ap-
pears impossible, as there was nothing to
be seen of Dove Glacier, by which it 1s
bounded on one side. If this was now
our position, we must have traversed the
glacier and Wilczek Land without noticing
any trace of either; for we have traveled
westward a good half degree south of
Cape Buda-Pesth. The possibility that
we could be in this region we consequently
now hold to be finally excluded. We must
have come to a new land in the western
part of Franz Josef Land, or Archipelago,
and so far west that we had seen nothing
of the countries discovered by Payer.
But so far west that we had not even seen
anything of Oscar’s Land, which ought
to be situated in 82 deg. North and 52
East. This was indeed incomprehensi-
ble; but was there any other explana-
_ tion?” .

And this is Nansen’s experience after
traveling and drifting more than a year on
floating ice, when he undoubtedly passed
farther into the interior than any explorer,


190 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


although he himself did not know where he
was.

Schwatka speaks of the game in the Arc-
tic region. After reading, the reader will
naturally ask where it goes during the
winter. Some say that it goes south; but
where does it stop? I know of no place
where such an amount of game goes in
winter. Most of the game that Schwatka
mentions is certainly not at all common to
any location I can think of; or, 1f so, the
number must be limited. J am quite sure
that the game passes into the interior of
the earth, as many of the birds are heavy,
and not built for long journeys.

“In no place in the world,” says Schwat-
ka, “is aquatic life so abundant as in the
polar regions during the summer. The
instance I have given of the eiders in Ter-
ror Bay is but one of many constantly en-
countered in polar literature. ‘The little
auks or rotges,’ says a writer who has
been in Spitzbergen, ‘are so numerous that
I have frequently seen an uninterrupted
line of them extending to a distance of
more than three miles, and so close to-


A SWARM OF AUKS,


These birds are found so plentiful in the Arctic
regions that when they fly overhead they darken the
skies, their little voices being often heard from a dis-
tance of four or five miles.


WARMER NEAR THE POLES 193


gether that thirty have fallen at one shot.’
This living column might be about six
yards broad and as many deep, so that,
allowing sixteen birds to the cubic yard,
‘there would be four millions of these little
creatures on the wing at one time. This
number may appear greatly exaggerated,
but when we are told that these auks con-
gregate in such swarms as to darken the
air like a passing cloud, and that their
chorus is heard distinctly at a distance of
four or five miles, these numbers do not
appear so great. The dovekies are the
most numerous of the summer ducks in
the northern part of the bay, and they are
especially thick about Depot Island, whose
Innuit name is Pikkeulik, meaning the isl-
and of birds’ nests, and where the dove-
kies deposit their greenish, blotched eggs
in innumerable quantities.”

Kane narrates, page 301, that “after
traveling due north over a solid area
choked with bergs and frozen fields, Mor-
ton was startled by the growing weakness
of the ice, its surface becoming rotten, and
the snow wet and pulpy. His dogs, seized


194 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


with terror, refused to advance. Then
for the first time the fact broke upon him
that a long, dark band seen to the north
beyond a protruding cape—Cape Andrew
Jackson—was water. With danger and
difficulty he retraced his steps and, reach-
ing sound ice, made good his landirig on
a new coast.”

On page 302 Kane adds: “From the
southernmost ice, seen by Dr. Hayes only
a few weeks before, to the region of this
mysterious water was, as the crow ‘flies,
one hundred and six miles. But for
the unusual sight of birds and the unmis-
takable giving way of the ice beneath them
they would not believe in the evidence of
eyesight. Neither Hans nor Morton was
prepared for it. Landing on the cape,
and continuing their exploration, new phe-
nomena broke upon them. They were on
the shores of a channel, so open that a
frigate, or a fleet of frigates, might have
sailed up it. As they traveled north, this
channel expanded into an iceless area;
for four or five small pieces—lumps
—were all that could be seen over the en-


WARMER NEAR THE POLES 195


tire surface of its whitecapped waters.
Viewed from the cliffs, and taking thirty-
six miles as the mean radius open to re-
liable survey, this sea had a justly estimat-
ed extent of more than four thousand
square miles.”

In the above excerpt, Kane speaks of
traveling one hundred and six miles
due north, over solid ice, to open water,
and finding it filled with all kinds of game,
of which there had been no sign one hun-
dred and six miles farther south. How
is this accounted for on the theory that
the earth is solid? If it was becoming
warmer, what made it so? If the winds,
blowing in from a still colder climate,
would produce a warm atmosphere, then
all I have to say is that Nature operates
differently at the poles than elsewhere on
earth. A hot breeze cannot blow off an
iceberg any more than a cold breeze can
belch out of a red-hot furnace. The fact
is, the earth being hollow, the air passes
out of the interior of the earth; hence
the interior atmosphere is_ necessarily
warmer.


196 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


CHAPTER XIII.
DRIFTWOOD—WHENCE IT CAME.


The driftwood and other rnaterial found
on the northern sides of the shores border-
ing the Arctic Ocean, present further
proof that the earth is hollow, and that the
material came from the interior of the
earth; some say from Siberia. If so,
and it floated from there, it must have
come past the supposed pole. Why, then,
cannot the explorers, sail over the very
same course?

Because the driftwood never came from
there; if it had, they could have pur-
sued the same route. One might ask
why they have not explored, or sailed, to
the place from which this driftwood came.
Heretofore, all explorers have had but one
object in view,—to get as far north as pos-
sible, not knowing that the earth was
hollow. If the compass told anything af-
ter they got half-way round, or more, it


DRIFTWOOD—WHENCE IT CAME 197


would locate the north from the place they
had just come from (having passed the
magnetic pole) ; and, not aware, therefore,
that it was the compass, and not the ship,
that had turned round, they would steer
out again, thinking they were going
north. It would be next to impossible to
reach the interior of the earth under such
conditions, passing through — stormy,
cloudy, and foggy weather, and not know-
ing how the compass should work.
Greely tells us, on page 100, that Pri-
vate Connell and Frederick found a large
coniferous tree on the beach just above
the extreme high-water mark. It was
about thirty inches in circumference, some
thirty feet long, and had apparently been
carried within a couple of years to that
point by a current. A portion of it was
cut up for firewood, and for the first time
in that valley a bright, cheery camp-fire
gave comfort to man. Now, there is no
timber of the dimensions mentioned grow-
ing anywhere near where it was found.
Whence did it come? There is but one
place that I can think of, and that is the


198 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


interior of the earth. A wood fire made
from native wood is a thing practically
unknown, barring a few dry willows.

Farther on (page 106), Greely states
that a large number of pieces of driit-
wood were found near or slightly above
the high-water mark. Some of the pieces
were six or seven feet long, and from four
to eight inches in diameter. Nearly all
were coniferous woods. If this wood
drifted from the earth’s surface, it would
be obliged to go hundreds of miles, and
almost constantly through frozen water ;
while, upon the other hand, if it came from
the interior of the earth, it would have
open water to drift in, and tidal waves to -
lift it above the high-water mark.

On page 308 Greely informs us that
about half a mile from the coast he found
an old piece of driftwood nearly six feet
long, four inches wide, and four inches
thick—apparently pine or fir, and evident-
ly split from the body or branch of a tree.
It was partly buried, and indications were
that the tree must have been large.

Note that he speaks of it as partly buried,


DRIFTWOOD—WHENCE IT CAME | 199


which would be the case if it had been
thrown there by some volcanic eruption.

One of the most interesting articles he
discovered was a piece of birch bark, ad-
mirably preserved. This timber; it should
be noted, never grows in that vicinity.

On page 368 Greely says: “On the
shores of this lake Biederbick found a
pair of reindeer antlers, and I picked up
a piece of close-grained wood—apparently
pine—two and a half feet long, and nearly
aninch in diameter. Ina ravine near the
camp were two trees, probably coniferous,
partly covered by earth. One was ten
feet long and sixteen inches in diameter,
and originally had two branches. The
second tree was six feet long and twelve
inches in diameter. They were about one
hundred and fifty yards distant from Lake
Heintzelmann.”’

If Greely was in a country where such
timber grew, why did he say anything
about it? Because it did not grow in that
country, the incident was worth recording.

Greely writes on page 370 of the many
musk-oxen—fifteen in one herd and three


200 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


in another—which he saw. In the vicin-
ity enough willow remained to enable
them to make a fire and brew tea.

From the writings of different explor-
ers, I learn that willow is about the only
shrub or timber growing in that country.
It sprouts in the spring, and is generally
frozen down in the winter, and it is un-
usual to have it large enough to cook a
cup of tea; so much so that he speaks of
it in this connection.

Nansen says, on page 303: “A secret
doubt lurked behind all the reasoning. It
seemed as though the longer I defended
my theory, the nearer I came to doubting
it. But no, there is no getting over the
evidence of that Siberian driftwood.”

Although Nansen felt the driftwood —
came from Siberia, I hold an entirely dif-


- ferent view: it came from the interior of


the earth.


HABITANTS OF ARCTIC REGIONS 201


CHAPTER XIV.


‘HAVE OTHER THAN THE ESKIMOS INHAB-
ITED THE ARCTIC REGIONS?


I am of the opinion that another race
besides Eskimos have dwelt in the Arc-
tic regions, and may still live, perhaps, in
the interior of the earth. If so, one can-
not but think that their civilization was
of a low order—if they could be called
civilized at all—from the fact that little 1s
or has been found to show that they were
skilled in building. If they were at all
adept, or had made some slight advance,
some of the drift from the Arctic would
have shown how far they had progressed.
From what Greely discovered, it 1s safe to
conclude that if the interior of the earth
be peopled, it is by a race something akin
to that now found in the Arctic Circle.
Extracts from Greely bearing on this sub-
ject will be found hereinafter.

On page 379 he writes that he was
greatly surprised to discover, against a


202 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


vertical bank facing Ruggles River, three
abandoned Eskimo huts, which doubtless
had been occupied in the far past as per-
manent abodes. “These houses were
built from large, fine pieces of slate, which
were readily obtainable from the adjoin-
ing rocks. Many pieces of this slate, as
large as three feet by two feet, were lying
around, the thickness of which varied
from three-quarters of an inch to an inch
and a half. The Eskimo had utilized the
steep precipitous bank against which the
back of the houses rested, and in which the
chimneys were built. The houses were
six feet wide and ten feet long, though
possibly they may have been longer, as
the walls most distant from the bank had
fallen and partly disappeared, through be-
ing undermined by the river. The side-
walls of the structure were about three
feet in height. Apparently the whole
house had been covered with large pieces
of slate, which served as a roof, for many
such pieces were found in the interior
space, which was partly filled by them.
It 1s probable that the width of the houses


HABITANTS OF ARCTIC REGIONS 203


depended on the size of the pieces of slate
which could be used as a covering. No
signs of a ridge-pole, or a wooden support
to the roof, were to be seen. We carefully
removed the flat slabs, and, digging
among the dirt and moss, which was of
considerable depth, found many relics and
bones, which were most numerous near
the chimney, or fireplace. Bones of the
musk-ox, hare, and of various birds (and
at least one kind of fish) were found in
great abundance. Among other articles
were three combs of walrus ivory, one of
which had ornamental work on it, and
whalebone fish-hooks, a bone needle, and
pieces of whalebone, a shoe for a sledge-
runner, and a number of other worked
articles of bone and wood, the use of
which. was unknown. A selection was
made from the bones, in order that it
might be determined what species of ani-
mals had been killed by the Eskimo who
had occupied this place. A piece of dog-
skin of considerable size was also dug-out,
which had rotted to such an extent that it
fell to pieces when handled.”


204 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


Farther on, he says: “In the two houses
and in the immediate vicinity we collected
about forty pieces of wood and worked
bone. Among other articles were one
large and two small narwhal horns, two
walrus ivory toggles for dog-traces, such
as are now used by the Greenlanders; an
arrow-head, two bone handles, a skinning-
knife with bone handle and iron blade, a
bear’s tooth, whalebone shoes for the run-
ners of two sledges, and a wooden up-
stander with a carefully made and well-
fitted bone top. Several sledge-bars,
some of bone and others of wood, and a
complete wooden , sledge-runner, which
was very heavy, being five feet long, nine
inches high, and over two inches thick,
were also discovered.

“Among other pieces of wood was a
pole, nine feet long, and about two inches
in diameter, of a hard, close-grained, co-
niferous wood, probably fir or hard pine.
Parts of two wooden sledge-runners were
badly rotted, but one was yet in fair
condition.

“There were several articles of worked


HABITANTS OF ARCTIC REGIONS 205


bone: whose use I could not surmise, and
the character of which was unknown to
our own Eskimo. The bone articles were
of walrus, narwhal and whalebone, the
first being the predominating material,
from which small articles had been
made. Musk-ox and hare bones were
very plentiful.

“It appears evident, my Journal says,
that these Eskimos had dogs, sledges, ar-
rows, and skinning knives, and fed on
musk-oxen, seals, hares, and occasionally
fish. While this habitation does not ap-
pear to have been covered with stones, as
were those found by me on the east side
of the river, yet the arrangements indicate
- more than a summer encampment.

“It 1s more than probable that these
habitations were covered with skin roofs,
which must have been secured in a dif-
ferent manner from the Greenland meth-
od, as no circles of stones were found.
The construction of these houses certainly
entailed a large amount of work. In quit-
ting them, the roof and its supports must
have been entirely removed. It is possi-


206 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


ble that the long pole found may have
been used in some manner as a support for
the roof. It is extraordinary that, in
abandoning this country, they should have
left behind the pole and the sledges, which
were very valuable, unless, indeed, their
dogs perished there. The depth at which
the dog-toggles and other articles were
discovered indicates their having been left
by accident where found, as they were cov-
ered by deébris, which evidently accu-
mulated during the occupancy of these
huts. |

“The surroundings were carefully ex-
amined for graves, as during the occu-
pancy, covering at least two years, of hab-
itations of such size, it was likely some
one must have died. No traces of any
human remains could be found, nor, in-
deed, of the dogs; but, in the case of the
latter, their uncared-for remains would
have been devoured and their bones re-
moved by foxes or wolves. It is pertinent
to remark that musk-ox or other expected
bones were rarely found in Grinnell Land.
Nearly an hour was spent in the exam-


HABITANTS OF ARCTIC REGIONS 207


ination of these remains, after which we
started westward.”

On page 420 Greely again writes:
“Sergeant Brainard—who seemed intui-
tively to locate such places—discovered
the sites of eighteen Eskimo summer tents,
and gathered near them a large number


Sled found by Greely during one of his trips farthest
north,


of relics. The circles varied from five to
fifteen feet in diameter. There were two
upstanders, runners, bone shoes, cross-
bars, etc., making a complete sledge; a
very large stone (steatite, probably) lamp,
fifteen inches across, was broken in five
pieces, and had been fastened together by
seal thongs. There was also a bone


208 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


spear-head, and other relics of like mate-


rial, the use of which was unknown to our
Danish Eskimo.”’


COLORED SNOW IN THE ARCTIC


8


CHAPTER XV.


WHAT PRODUCES COLORED SNOW IN THE
ARCTIC?


Why is the snow colored in the Arctic
regions? What causes it to be colored?

The snow has been analyzed, and the
red, green, and yellow have been found
to contain vegetable matter, presumably a
flower, or the pollen of a plant. The black
snow has also been analyzed, and found
to contain carbon and iron, supposed to
come from a volcanic eruption. But
_ whence did it come? A flower that pro-
duced pollen sufficient to permeate the —
air with such density that it colored the
snow, would require a vast territory—
millions of acres—to grow it. Where
is that to be found? If on earth, it
must be near the North Pole; for, if.
it grew elsewhere, colored snow would
be found at other locations, and not be
confined to the Arctic regions. As no


210 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


such flowering plant is known on earth,
we must look elsewhere.

The interior of the earth ‘1s the only spot
that will furnish us with an answer to the
question. As the colors fall at different
seasons, it is fair to presume that the
flower matures at those seasons. It 1s
also easy to find out where the black snow,
frequently mentioned by the explorers,
comes from. It comes out of an explod-
ing volcano—of the kind that covered
Nansen’s ship with dust. All unexplained
questions could be easily answered if one
would believe that the earth is hollow; it
is impossible to answer them under any
other theory. A falsehood could not fur-
nish so many solutions: one or two might
point to some other answer; but a score
of unanswered problems could not be an-
swered by a falsehood.

Kane, in his first volume, page 44, says:
“We passed the ‘Crimson Cliffs’ of Sir
John Ross in the forenoon of August 5th.
The patches of red snow, from which they
derive their name, could be seen clearly
at the distance of ten miles from the coast.


COLORED SNOW IN THE ARCTIC 2iI


It had a fine, deep-rose hue, not at all like
the brown stain which I noticed when I
was here before. All the gorges and
ravines in which the snow had lodged
were deeply tinted with it. I had no dif-
ficulty now in justifying the somewhat
poetical nomenclature which Sir John
Franklin applied to this locality; for if
the snowy surface were more diffused, as
it is no doubt earlier in the season, crimson
would be the prevailing color.”

Kane also states: “The red snow was
diversified with large surfaces of beauti-
fully green mosses and alopecurus; and
where the sandstone was bare, it threw in
a rich shade of brown.” :

Kane speaks of the red snow as if
it had a regular season in which to
appear—as he says “if the snowy sur-
face were more diffused, as it is no
doubt earlier in the season.” In an-
other place he speaks of the red snow
being two weeks later than usual. Now,
taking the fact into account that the ma-
terial that colors the snow is a vegetable
matter, supposed to be the blossom or pol-


212 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


len of a plant, and that no such plant
grows on earth, where does it come from?
The time for its appearance 1s in July and
August. This may not seem of great im-
portance to many readers, but when taken
in connection with the object of this book,
then it becomes important; for if it does
not grow on the earth, it must grow in
the interior of the earth.


HOW ARE ICEBERGS FORMED? 213


CHAPTER XVI.
WHERE AND HOW ARE ICEBERGS FORMED?


As already stated, it is impossible for
an iceberg to form at any place where it is
warmest at the mouth of the stream or
cafion. If it be warmer at the mouth
than farther inland, the mouth would be
the last to freeze over, and there would be
‘no water to pass over the ice to make an
iceberg. If one was formed—it being
warmer at the mouth—it would commence
to thaw there first, and where would water
come from to break it loose and push it
into the ocean? It could not start until
the whole length of the river was thawed
loose, and would then have to come down
as a whole, as there would be nothing to
break it. It is simply out of the ques-
tion for an iceberg to form in any location
yet discovered. On the other hand, the
interior of the earth—back from the
mouth of the rivers or cafions—being
warmer, is just suited for the formation


214 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


of icebergs. The mouth freezes first, and
the river, continuing to flow to the ocean,
overflows the mouth,- and freezes for
months, until spring. As the warm
weather of summer advances, and, owing
to the warmth from the earth, the bergs
are thawed loose, the water from the rains
in the interior rushes down, they are
shoved into the ocean, and tidal waves are
started.

Note the difference. On earth, the
whole length of a stream is frozen, and
the farther inland the harder the freez-
ing, while in the interior only the mouth
is frozen, and the open water is well sup-
plied with rains to produce the bergs. In
the interior of the earth, also, there is not
only plenty of water to produce these
bergs, but plenty to shove them into the
ocean, while on earth there isn’t water for
either purpose.

For the last three hundred years a fairly
steady stream of explorers have been try-
ing to reach the poles—Arctic and Ant-
arctic—and the shores of the Arctic region
have been traveled by thousands, includ-


a ol ———— - = alee lle ee Ce nee cal ene REPO eG STUNPT—w——e——————


HOW ARE ICEBERGS FORMED? 215


ing the natives, yet no one has ever seen
an iceberg leaving its original location,
and plunging into the ocean. The reason
that mention of such an occurrence has
never been recorded is that it has never
been seen. Hall, it is true, reports having
seen a landslide, and Kane saw a large
piece of ice break from a projecting cliff;
but not an iceberg. Yet bergs are so
numerous, that the oceans are full of them.
Isn’t it strange that no one has thought of
asking about the place of their origin?
No, it 1s not so strange when one stops to
think that heretofore the general belief has
been that the earth is solid, and that the
icebergs must come from some location
near the poles.

What is to be found in the Antarctic
Ocean to bear out the theory that icebergs
come from the interior of the earth, and
cannot be formed on earth? Bernacchi
says: ‘“There was less than two inches of
rainfall in eleven and one-half months, and
while it snowed quite frequently, it never
fell to any great depth.”

Under those conditions, where would


216 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


materials be found to produce an iceberg?
Yet the greatest one on earth 1s there—one
so large that it is called the Great Ice Bar-
rier, rather than an iceberg—being over
four hundred miles long and fifty miles
wide. It is grounded in two thousand
one hundred feet of water, and extends
from eighty to two hundred feet above
water.

Now, it would be impossible for this
berg to form in a country having prac-
tically no rain or snow. As icebergs are
made from frozen water, and there is no
water to freeze, 1t evidently was formed at .
some place other than where it now is;
the berg itself, being of fresh water, lies
in mid-ocean of salt water.

“Where could such an iceberg be
formed?” In the interior of the earth; in
a long, wide, deep, and straight river.
How dol know this? Just as I know any-
thing that I have not seen, or that has not
yet come to pass. How do I know that
the temperature next July will be warmer
than it was last January? Because one
of the great laws of the universe declares


HOW ARE ICEBERGS FORMED? 217


it shall be so. We get our heat from
the sun, and next July the earth will be di-
rectly opposite to it; therefore the rays of
the sun will strike the United States more
squarely. In January the sun strikes the
United States slanting, or obliquely, and
we do not get so much heat. That is why
I know this Barrier was formed in the in-
terior of the earth.

Again, how do I know that that Great
Ice Barrier came from the interior of the
earth, and from the kind of river described ?
First, it could not come from the earth, as
icebergs are not formed on earth. Sec-
ond, the river that that berg was frozen
in must have been twenty-five hundred
feet deep, fifty miles across, and from four
to five hundred miles long: for those are
the present dimensions of the berg: the
river had to be straight, or the berg could
not have passed out without breaking.
It passed through a comparatively level
country, for the surface ts still flat. Prob-
ably the berg took thousands of years to
freeze, and was released only when some
burning volcano reached a point near


218 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


enough to thaw it loose; heavy rains then
shoved it to its present location.

Another proof that the interior of the
earth is level near the Antarctic entrance,
is that many of the icebergs found in the
Antarctic are long and slim. They are
called “ice-tongues,” which indicates that
they came out of rivers running nearly on
a level. The bergs found in the Arctic,
on the other hand, are more chunky, ind1-
cating that they come from a more moun-
tainous country, where the fall of streams
is more abrupt, causing the bergs to be
shorter and probably thicker.

Should anyone ask why Livingstone or
Stanley had never spoken of icebergs
while exploring Darkest Africa, they
would be dubbed “crazy.” Yet conditions
are more favorable for the production of
icebergs in Africa than in the Arctic Cir-
cle, so far as is known. Consider how an
iceberg is formed, then see if Africa has
not more advantages in the way of form-
ing icebergs than the Arctic Circle. To
state again briefly: An iceberg is formed
by water running down a stream, where


HOW ARE ICEBERGS FORMED? 219


the mouth freezes early in the fall, and
as the water continues to pass over the
frozen mouth it freezes until spring, when
the warmth from the sun and the water
washing down loosens and plunges it into
the ocean. * In Africa there is the stream
with plenty of rain to furnish water to
freeze, but in the Arctic Circle no rain
or water is found to produce an iceberg.
If there were, the mouth, being warmer
than the interior, would be the last to
freeze, which would stop the flow of water,
the stream being already frozen; and
there being no rain or melted snow, there
would be no water to shove the berg into
the ocean.

So, it will be observed, while it is abso-
lutely impossible for an iceberg to be
formed in Africa, it is not more so than in
the Arctic Circle. Africa lacks only the
cold mouth to the stream, while the Arctic
Circle lacks the cold mouth, the warm in-
terior, and the water to freeze. .

Peary has something of intense interest
to say on page 33, where he writes about
the conditions he found on his trip to the


220 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


Arctic, and the approach to the Arctic
Ocean through Greenland:

“There, the accumulated snow-precipi-
tation of centuries, in a latitude and alti-
tude where it is practically correct to say
that it never rains, and the snow does not
melt, even in the long summer day, has
gradually filled all the valleys of the in-
terior, until it has leveled them even with
the mountain summits, and, still piling
higher through the centuries, has at last
buried the highest of these mountain sum-
mits, hundreds and even thousands of feet
deep in snow and ice.

“The interior of Greenland to-day is
simply an elevated, unbroken plateau of
snow, lifted from five thousand to eight


thousand, and even ten thousand feet


above the level of the sea; a huge, white,
glistening shield twelve hundred miles in
length, and five hundred miles in width,
resting on the supporting mountains. It
is an Arctic Sahara, in comparison with
which the African Sahara is insignificant.
For on this frozen Sahara of inner Green-
land occurs no form of life, animal or


HOW ARE ICEBERGS FORMED? 221


vegetable; no fragment of rock, no grain
of sand is visible. The traveler across
its frozen wastes, traveling as I have
week after week, sees, outside of himself
and his own party, but three things in all
the world, namely, the infinite expanse of
the frozen plain, the infinite dome of the
cold, blue sky, and the cold, white sun—
nothing but these.”

This shows that Greenland is not the
country, nor has it the conditions for
‘forming icebergs, as there is no rain, or
melted snow; and, so far as I have been
able to learn, the discharge from the gla-
ciers is water and not ice. The cold end
of the streams or cafions, which could fur-
nish water for icebergs, is to the south, or
inland, and the warm end is to the farthest
point north. These conditions must be
reversed in order to produce an iceberg.

In the following quotation from “The
World’s Wonders,” page 704, a theory is
advanced as to how icebergs may be
formed:

“Ts it not possible that the commonly ac-
cepted theory as to the manner in which


222 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


icebergs are formed is false? If repeated
congelation destroys the saline crystalliza-
tion of sea water, may not a similar chemi-
cal decomposition take place under con-
tinuous congealment? The rivers of
Greenland, to whose debouchment the for-
mation of icebergs 1s ascribed, are yet to
be discovered, though the point of appar-
ent iceberg formation has been visited. It
is an open question yet whether these ice
mountains are not created under atmo-
spheric influence. If, as seems to be well
proved, there 1s a comparatively warm
climate prevailing about the poles, the
proximity of excessive cold and warm cur-
rents would be productive of the most vio-
lent paroxysms of the air, such as cy-
clones, waterspouts, etc. These might
suck up vast quantities of sea water, which
would be precipitated again at certain
points, like the vapor of the Gulf-Stream,
which condenses and falls over England
because it there first meets with a counter
cold current. If this uplifted water, now
vaporized, should strike against the moun-
tain barriers along the Greenland coast it


HOW ARE ICEBERGS FORMED? 223


would certainly be precipitated in the form
of rain, and, meeting with an intensely
cold atmosphere, would congeal as it grad-
ually fell, thus building up great peaks of
fresh water ice, just as we see them. This
theory might extertd further with perfect
consistency, to account for icebergs of
fresh water by repeated congelations, for
it 1s plausible to assume that there are air
strata of hot and cold at altitudes above
the poles, passing through which the sea
water would alternate from rain to hail,
until the chemical change to fresh water
is complete. Not infrequently icebergs,
or rather, glaciers, form in the interior
of Greenland, and always at the feet of
mountains or slopes to the sea; after
reaching a certain size, gravity causes
them to break loose and sweep into the
sea, carrying with them great boulders,
driftwood, or anything in their path.”
When one takes into account the round-
about way in which this writer goes at
forming icebergs, my theory of just plain
water flowing into the Arctic Ocean,
where the mouth freezes, and the balance


224 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


of the stream keeps open, with water flow-
ing over the frozen mouth, for seven to
ten months, will be more successful in
producing an iceberg than where depen-


dence is placed upon rain—especially in a


country where there is no rain. Remem-
ber, Peary says it never rains, and the
snow does not melt. In proof of that as-
sertion, he furthermore says the snow is
_ from five to ten thousand feet deep.

Bernacchi mentions huge icebergs trav-
eling northwest at about four knots per
hour, coming from the southeast right out
of the open sea, on their way north.
Could they have left a track, it would have
led to the interior of the earth—which is
where they had their origin.

Concerning the scarcity of rain and
snow in the Arctic regions, which pre-
cludes the possibility of furnishing a suf-
ficient quantity of water to produce an ice-
berg, Nansen says, on page 335, “Why
will it not snow? Christmas is near, and
what is Christmas without snow, thickly
falling snow’? We have not had one snow-
fall all the time we have been drifting.”


eee ee aaa


gos0y 308 31 PIp MOP] “pue] oF Payoer7e JOU ‘s9}eM Ysoay WIOIy U9zOIy {URADO ay DAOGE 199} Parp
-uny OM} 0} paspuny auo ul0I} Burpuajxa puke ‘Jaye@M JO 329} paspuny ou0-AjuaM} UL papunold
‘OpIM sap Ay ‘Buo] safius pespuny snoy ‘URsVQ IWyOIeIUY oy) UI Broqaor JaysuowW V


‘WAIMAVA ADI LVAUD AHL AO NOILOAS V


HOW ARE ICEBERGS FORMED? 227


When Bernacchi was voyaging in the
Antarctic Circle, he wrote:

“During the next two days (11th and
12th) we passed some thousands of ice-
bergs, aS many as ninety being counted
from the bridge at one time. There was
very little variety of form among them,
all being very large and bounded by per-
pendicular cliffs on all sides; they were on
an average one hundred and twenty feet
in height. Each one of them was a cen-
tre of condensation, for over each was a
white, vaporous cloud. Could an eye from
_ aloft look down upon the scene, the upper

side of the cloud stratum would present
somewhat the appearance of an immense
cauldron boiling and bubbling and inter-
mixing in the upper air. These icebergs
- facilitate the formation of clouds and pro-
mote precipitation. There was a consid-
erable fall in the specific gravity of the
sea, due to the presence of a large quantity
of fresh water at the surface, derived from
the number of icebergs.” (Page 60.)

How does this account accord with your
notion of how icebergs are formed in a


228 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


country where Bernacchi reports less than
two inches of rainfall in a whole year, and
but small quantities of snow? Where 1s
the water to come from that will produce
such great quantities of icebergs averag-
ing a thousand feet in thickness, and many
of them several miles long? Those ice-
bergs were on their way north—never to
return—yet the ocean will always be filled
with them, as others will come from the
place whence they came. Where 1s that
place? There is no rain or melted snow
to furnish the water to freeze into an ice-
berg. Bergs can come from one place
only—the interior of the earth.
Bernacchi’s speaking of fresh water, in
connection with the ice, leads me to believe
that that fresh water was held in position
just as his ship was—by an unusually
strong centre of gravity, it being about the
turning point, or half-way round the en-
trance, to the interior of the earth at the
south. My reason for thinking so 1s, that
if it was not an unusually strong cen-
tre of gravity, the fresh water would mix
with the salt. Gravity draws the heaviest


HOW ARE ICEBERGS FORMED? 229


substance strongest. Salt water, being
heavier than fresh water, is drawn so firm-
ly that it keeps the two from mixing.
This is just what Nansen found in the
Arctic,—which he called dead water,—
where the fresh water lay on the salt
water, and did not mix, but moved with
the Fram—the bottom of the ship passing
down into the salt water was almost like
being aground in mud. He could scarce-
ly make any headway, and turned his ship
in every direction to free himself of it, but
with little success. It was a great relief
to find himself free of the dead water,
which he had labored to clear his‘ship of
for three days. I know no other reason
why fresh and salt water should come to-
gether and not mix. If this be the correct
explanation, it will account for so much ice
being held in large drifts at certain loca-
tions, and being shoved along by very
heavy winds, or replaced by other large
floes which push it on. It will be remem-
bered that Nansen drifted in this ice five
months, and only advanced one degree.
On page 263 Bernacchi speaks of the


230 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


Great Ice Barrier, and refutes what others
have written about it. “It appears as if
the ice barrier is nothing more than a
huge tongue of ice flowing eastward into
the ocean for a distance of perhaps five
-hundred miles, and possibly not more than
fifty miles in width.” “The heavy ice-
pack met with near this spot tends to
prove the existence of a considerable tract
of ocean to the south, whose frozen sur-
face breaks up only late in the year, and
moves out and around the extremity of
the Great Ice Tongue, or Barrier, in the
usual northwesterly direction. If an ex-
tensive land-area were behind, or farther
- east, such a large mass of sea-ice would
be impossible.” “Sir James Ross report-
ed the ‘appearance of land’ to the south of
a spot near where we landed on the bar-
rier. We did not, however, sight any,
although we had exceptionally fine, clear
weather.”

I contend that the greatest of all tce-
bergs found in the Antarctic Ocean—
called the Great Ice Barrier—is an iceberg,
while not formed as most icebergs are,


HOW ARE ICEBERGS FORMED? 231


and not at all like those found in the Arc-
tic Ocean—where they are much shorter,
showing that the streams they come from
flow through a more hilly or mountainous
country than will be found leading to the
opening of the interior of the earth at the
south. The long icebergs that Bernacchi
speaks of—he calls them “tongues of ice”
—are just the same as this monster, only
smaller. Writers who claim that the
Great Ice Barrier 1s a glacier, are surely
in error. Why should the Great Ice Bar-
rier be the shape of the other ice tongues
found in the Antarctic Ocean? And how
could a glacier form without land to start
on? Glaciers are not of that shape.

This berg undoubtedly came from the
interior of the earth. Why not ascribe a
plain, reasonable construction to the origin
of this great iceberg, in preference to some
absurd theory that cannot be understood?
And if understood, cannot be believed.
Are we still to believe that the earth stands
still, and is solid or flat? Then it mat-
ters but little what the Great Ice Barrier
is called, or how it was formed.


232 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


CHAPTER XVII.
THE TIDAL WAVE.


As I contend that many tidal waves are
caused by icebergs plunging into the
ocean, let us see what grounds there are
for that belief. First, something causes
the waves: they do not start of their own
accord. If an iceberg were to plunge into
the ocean, a great commotion would be
raised and several large waves would be
started. But how far would they run?
That would depend upon many different
conditions—such as the size of the wave
and the force that set it moving. A peb-
ble falling five feet will make but a small
ripple, while a rock ten feet in diameter,
falling one hundred feet, will make a
mighty wave. Then, if no obstructions
be met, and the wind be favorable,
that wave would goa long way. Accord-
ing to Wells’s “Natural Philosophy,” it
might get larger instead of smaller.
“This wave,” says he, “propagates itself


THE TIDAL WAVE 233


into the unmoved space adjoining, continu-
ally enlarging as it goes, and forming a
series of undulations.” Again: “When
two systems of waves, coming from differ-
ent centres, meet, some curious effects are
produced. If like phases in both systems
coincide, or if the crest of one system coin-
cides with the crest of the other, the new
wave will be equal to the sum of the two
originals.” |

A wave is a form, not a thing; the form
advances, but not the substance of the
wave. Two icebergs might frequently
plunge in from different directions, and
send forth just such conditions as Wells
writes about. Or the one plunging in first
might be farther away, and as waves move
comparatively slowly, they might fre-
quently meet at some common centre, and
be increased in size and force, as he
suggests.

Could anything else produce so large
a wave? If not, why should we not give
the greatest cause credit for the greatest
effect? The wonderful ice-pressure can
be produced from different causes: winds,


234 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


tides, currents, and tidal waves. The tidal
wave, however, makes it puzzling; for it
comes when there is no wind or current,
and if the tidal-wave theory were exclud-
ed it certainly would be a hard proposi-
tion to answer. If the pressure occurred
only when the current changed, or the
wind blew, or the tides set in or out, the
question of ice-pressure would never have
been wondered at. In the absence of those
natural causes, it was the pressure that set
people thinking and wondering how such
things could be. Any close observer who
reads the reports of the different explorers
will have noticed how mysterious are many
things in the Arctic regions. If a musk-
ox were found growing fast to a rock, I
doubt whether such an occurrence would
excite more wonder than many things in
that wonderful country, hitherto unex-
plained. One meets, no doubt, with many
radical changes and puzzling situations—
such as a change from the interior of the
earth to the exterior would necessarily
produce; and when one takes into account
that no one knew that the earth was hol-


a nee 2 er er ce pcre ne


THE TIDAL WAVE — 235


low, and supposed that whatever brought
about those strange conditions was to be
accounted for in a few hundred miles’
journey straight north to the pole, it is not
to be wondered at that people called it “the
mysterious land,” especially when one saw
the surface of the ice, water, and land re-
flected in the sky and could not see a great
fire. If they did see it, they called it some-
thing else—the aurora, a mock sun, a
double moon, or some other wonderful
phenomenon; yet nothing is mysterious
when fully understood.

The perplexing situations met with in
the Arctic Circle, the grand scenes of
every kind, and the things difficult to un-
derstand, remind one of the man reading
the dictionary: the words were fine, but he
couldn’t make much of the story.

It is so with the explorers: everything
is grand; the ice roars, and crushes when
everything is calm; the heavens are lighted
up most beautifully when there is no
storm; the winds blow terribly out of the .
clear sky: none of these things can be
understood.


236 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


Nansen’s second volume, page 29, of
“Farthest North” describes what that fa-
magus explorer experienced from ice-pres-
sure—caused, doubtless, by tidal waves:
“To-day, about 12.30 p. m., the Fram re-
ceived another violent shock, even stron-
ger than that we had experienced during
the night. There was another shake a lit-
tle later. I suppose there has been a pres-
sure aft, but could hear nothing for the
storm. It is odd about this pressure; one
would think that the wind was the primary
cause; but it recurs pretty regularly, not-
withstanding the fact that-the spring tide
has not yet set in; indeed, when it com-
menced a few days ago, it was almost a
neap tide. In addition to the pressure of
yesterday and last night, we had pressure
on Thursday morning, at half-past nine,
and again at half-past eleven. It was so
strong that Peter, who was at the sound-
ing-hole, jumped up repeatedly, thinking
that the ice would burst underneath him.
It is very singular, we have been quiet for
so long now that we feel almost nervous
when the Fram receives these shocks;


THE TIDAL WAVE 237


everything seems to tremble as 1f in a vio-
lent earthquake.”

_ Nansen’s remarks about the tide having
nothing to do with ice-pressure, must be
accounted for in some other way. That
other way 1s a tidal wave.

In the same volume, farther on, he says:
“The ice-pressure was not noticeable after
I o'clock on Friday night until it suddenly
recommenced last night. First I heard a
rumbling outside, and some snow fell
down from the rigging upon the tent-roof
as I sat reading; I thought it sounded like
packing in the ice, and just then the Fram
received a violent shock, such as she had
not received last winter. I was rocked
backward and forward on the chest on
which I was sitting. Finding that the
trembling and rumbling continued, I went
out. There was a loud roar of ice, pack-
ing to the west and northwest, which con-
tinued uniformly for a couple of hours or
so. * * * Just after I had come on
board again, shortly before noon, the ice
suddenly began to press on again. I went
out to have a look; it was again in the


238 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


lane on the port side; there was a strong
pressure, and the ridge was gradually ap-
proaching. A little later on Sverdrup
went up on deck, but soon after came be-
low and told us that the ridge was quickly
bearing down on us.”

When speaking of ice-pressure, nearly
all explorers speak of great ridges. Mel-
ville calls it a “frozen wave.” Bernacchi
says the ice was lifted seventy, eighty, and
ninety feet. Nansen termed it a ridge;
and all agree that they look like great
ridges, or waves, that can be heard for
miles in the distance before they reach the
ship, and for a long time after they have
passed. If the descriptions given by the
several explorers do not correctly repre-
sent a set of great waves, I do not know
how to describe them.

Melville describes, in expressive manner,
a scene in which ice-pressure played a part
during his sojourn in the Arctic regions.
“Tt was in one of these oppressive inter-
vals succeeding a gale,” says he, “when the
roar and crash of the distant masses could
be distinctly heard, that the floe in which


THE TIDAL WAVE . 239


the Jeannette was imbedded began split-
ting in all directions. The placid and al-
most level surface of ice suddenly heaved
and swelled into great hills, buzzing and
wheezing dolefully. Giant blocks pitched
and rolled as though controlled by invisible
hands, and the vast compressing bodies
shrieked a shrill and horrible song that
-curdled the blood. On came the frozen
waves, nearer and nearer. Seams ran and
rattled across them with a thundering
boom, while silent and awe-struck we
watched their terrible progress.” (Page
12.)

The reader will notice that these weird
doings occurred after a storm; and during
it the ice, as a whole, moved along with
but slight disturbance. The swell that
comes after a storm has no connection
with it. If a storm raises no swell after
raging continuously for ten to twenty-four
hours, it would take a great deal to make
me believe that after it had subsided it had
anything to do with the swell that came
later. Méelville’s description, just cited,
proves to my mind that the whole affair


240 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


arose from a series of tidal waves. The
later storm had nothing to do with what he
calls “frozen waves.”’ They were caused
by some tremendous agency, and I can
conceive of nothing more powerful than
the plunging of an iceberg into the ocean.
Anyone knows that when an _ iceberg
plunges into the sea it causes the greatest
commotion imaginable, and as the tremen-
dous swells referred to are constantly ex-
perienced, why should not the icebergs
produce them? If, at a certain point on
a river, laborers are engaged in rolling saw
logs into the water from a high bank,—
causing heavy swells to wash up against
the opposite shore,—would it be a stretch
of the imagination to say—if asked what

caused the swells—that men were rolling ©
logs into the water on the other side? On
the contrary, it would be rather stupid on
the part of the questioner if he knew what
was being done. We know that icebergs
plunge into the ocean, and we ought to
know that when this happens they make
the largest possible wave. As soon as any-
one can show what becomes of those waves


THE TIDAL WAVE 241


and that they are not the waves that tum-
ble and crush the ice so terribly—and,
at the same time, tell where those waves
come from that do the damage—it will
then be time to reconsider this statement;
but not till then. Icebergs are very nu-
merous; and so are those waves. Melville
says, “one body of ice set in motion crowds
on ice not in motion.” That is true, but
the wind does not need to stop to bring
about that condition of things.

Nansen’s accounts of this subject are
most appropriate. On page 278 of Vol-
ume I, he says: “We had kept company
quite long enough with the old—now
broken-up—floe, so worked ourselves a lit-
tle way astern after dinner, as the ice was
beginning to draw together.

“Towards evening the pressure began
again in earnest, and was especially bad
around the remains of our floe, so that I
believe we may congratulate ourselves on
having left it. It is evident that the pres-
sure here stands in connection with—is
perhaps caused by—the tidal wave. It oc-
curs with the greatest regularity. The ice


242 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


slackens twice and packs twice in twenty-
four hours. The pressure has happened
about 4, 5, and 6 o’clock in the morning,
and almost exactly the same hour in the
afternoon, and in between we have always
lain for some part of the time in open
water. The very great pressure just now
is probably due to the spring tide; we had
‘new moon on the gth, which was the first
day of the pressure. Then it was just
after mid-day when we noticed it, but it
has been later every day, and now it is at
8 p. m.”

Farther on, in the same volume, we
read: “For when the packing begins in
earnest it seems as though there could be
no spot on the earth’s surface left un-
shaken. First you hear a sound like the
thundering rumbling of an earthquake
far away on the great waste; then you
hear it in several places, always coming.
nearer and nearer. The silent ice world
re-echoes with thunders; Nature’s giants
are awakening to the battle. The ice
cracks on every side of you, and begins to
pile itself up; and all of a sudden you, too,


THE TIDAL WAVE 243


find yourself in the midst of the struggle.
There are howlings and thunderings
round you; you feel the ice tremble, and
hear it rumbling under your feet; there
is no peace anywhere. In the semi-dark-
ness you can see it piling and tossing itself
up into high ridges nearer and nearer you
—floes ten, twelve, fifteen feet thick,
broken, and flung on the top of each other
as if they were feather-weights. They
are quite near you now, and you jump
away to save your life. But the ice splits
in front of you, a black gulf opens, and
water streams up. You turn in another
direction, but there through the dark you
can just see a new ridge of moving tce-
blocks coming towards you. You try an-
other direction, but there it is the same.
All around there is thundering and roar-
ing, as of some enormous waterfall, with
‘explosions like cannon salvoes. Still
nearer you it comes. The floe you are
standing on gets smaller and smaller;
water pours over it; there can be no escape
except by scrambling over the rolling ice-
blocks to get to the other side of the pack.


244 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


But now the disturbance begins to calm
down. The noise passes on, and is lost
by degrees in the distance.”

On page 383 Nansen begins other de-
scriptions that are worth reproducing:

“Most violent pressures are beginning
again. I must go on deck and look at it.
The loud roar, meets one as one opens the
door. It is coming from the bow now,
as well as from the stern. It is clear that
the pressure ridges are being thrown up .
in both openings, so if they reach us we
shall be taken by both ends and lifted
lightly and gently out of the water. There
is pressure near us on all sides. Creaking
has begun in the old hummock on the port
quarter; it is getting louder, and, so far
as I can see, the hummock is slowly rising.
A lane has opened right across the large
floe on the port side; you can see the water, .
dark as it is. Now both pressure and
noise get worse and worse; the ship shakes
and I feel as if I myself were being gently
lifted with the stern rail, where I stand
gazing out at the welter of ice masses that
resemble giant snakes writhing and twist-


THE TIDAL WAVE 245


ing their great bodies out there under the
quiet, starry sky, whose peace is only
broken by one aurora serpent waving and
flickering restlessly in the northeast.

“Saturday, January 27.—It is remark-
able that we should have this strong pres-
sure just now, with the moon in its last
quarter and neap tide. This does not agree
with our previous experiences; no more
does the fact that the pressure the day
before yesterday was from 12 a. m. to
about 2 p. m., and then again at 2 a. m.,
and now we have had it from 7.30 to 10.30
p. m. Can land have something to do
with it here, after all? The temperature
to-day is 42 deg. Fahr. below zero (—41.4
deg.), but there is no wind, and we have
not had such pleasant weather for walking
for a long time; it feels almost mild here
when the air is still.

“No, that was not the end of the pres-
sure. When I was on deck, at a quarter
to 12, roaring and trembling began in
the ice forward on the port side; then sud-
denly came one loud boom after another,
sounding out in the distance, and the ship


246 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


gave a start; there was again a little pres-
sure, and after that quietness. Strange
to say, there has been no pressure since’ 12
o'clock last night; the ice seems perfectly
quiet. The pressure ridge astern showed
what violent packing yesterday’s was; in
one place its height was eighteen to nine-
teen feet above the surface of the water;
floe-ice eight - feet thick was broken,
pressed up in square blocks, and crushed
to pieces. At one point a huge monolith
of such floe-ice rose high into the air.
Beyond this pressure wall there was no
great disturbance to be detected. There
had been a little packing here and there,
and the floe to port had four or five large
cracks across it, which no doubt accounted
for the explosion I heard last night. The
ice to starboard was also cracked in sev-
eral places. The pressure had evidently
come from the North or N. N. E. The
ridge behind us is one of the highest I have
ever seen yet. I believe that if the Fram
had been lying there she would have been
lifted right out of the water. 1 walked for
some distance in a northeasterly direction,


THE TIDAL WAVE 247


but saw no signs of pressure there. . When
the ice has been set adrift in a certain di-
rection by the wind blowing that way for
some time, it gradually in process of drift-
ing becomes more compressed, and when
the wind dies away a reaction in the oppo-
site direction takes place. Such a reac-
tion must, I believe, have been the cause
of Saturday’s pressure, which stopped en-
tirely as suddenly as it began. Since then -
there has not been the slightest appearance
of movement in the ice. Probably the
pressure indicates the time when the drift
turned.”

Concerning ice-pressure, Bernaccht,
writing of his voyage in the Antarctic, on
page 120, vividly conveys to the reader a
picture of what he saw. “A deep sonorous
roar was audible like the din of a battle; a
battle indeed! A great battle of Nature
was raging. We rushed down towards the
shore from whence the noise came, and on
reaching it a sight met our eyes which baf-
fles description; a scene absolutely fright-
ful in its grandeur. A moving mountain
of ice had risen up; a sudden and terrible


248 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


pressure had set in, was piling the ice on
the shore. It extended for about eight hun-
dred yards, and was on an average sixty
feet high; the mass was moving the whole
time and advancing upon the land. The
grandeur of the spectacle was immense.
There is nothing comparable to it, and
words can in no degree convey an idea of
the majesty of the scene.

“Huge blocks of ice, thousands and
thousands of tons in weight, were lifted up
seventy, eighty, and ninety feet with irre-
sistible force to the top of the mount.
They would totter for a few seconds, and
then come crashing down with a reverber-
ating roar; at times great yawning gaps
would appear in the mount, and the whole
side would bulge out until with a fear-
ful crash it would burst, and great
blocks of ice fly into the air like so many
straws.”

This great disturbance lasted a little
more than an hour. There is no account
of any storm or wind, so its cause must.
be accounted for in some other way. We
will call it a set of mammoth waves started


THE TIDAL WAVE 249


by the plunging of an iceberg into the
ocean.

The indefatigable Peary, on page 30,
describes the effect of ice-pressure: “One
forenoon the barometer dropped rapidly,
and in the afternoon the snow ceased, the
clouds lifted, and a tremendous swell came
rolling in from the southeast. Not a
breath of wind disturbed the surface as
the long, lazy swells, smoothed by the
pressure of the ice through which they
passed, came slipping noiselessly in, lifting
and dropping the huge bergs as if they
were but corks.”

Can anyone read the description of ice-
pressure, as given here, and say it was not

a set of tidal waves, or large waves, set
_ in motion by some powerful influence?
What is more irresistible than an immense
iceberg plunging into the ocean—one, for
instance, a mile long, a thousand feet thick,
and half a mile wide, under fair speed
when it strikes the ocean? Such a berg
would go to the bottom unless there was
a depth-of many thousand feet. Imagine,
if possible, the commotion produced.


250 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


CHAPTER XVIII.


CLOUDS, FOGS, AND VAPORS.


The fog, clouds, vapor, and peculiar
kind of snow met with at the poles ought
to set one to thinking what produces them.
There are too many peculiar conditions
to come from no particular cause, and all
just alike at the North and South poles.
Take Africa and Norway, regions which
are not at all alike in anything—the game,
the vegetation, the people, the climates are
as different as the pies a man’s wife makes
from those his mother used to make. Yet
if one travels in the opposite direction, till
one reaches the Arctic and Antarctic cir-
cles, all become as like as one is to himself.

The earth being hollow, the atmosphere
in passing out, either north or south,
would affect the country it passes into in
the same manner. That is why one finds
so many things in common in both polar
regions: vapors, snows, auroras, winds,
and falling meteors, each locality filled


CLOUDS, FOGS, AND VAPORS 251


with fowl, warmer, and open water. The
following extracts, with comments there-
on, will throw some light on this in-
teresting subject.. Peary says: “On the
ice-cap a fresh breeze was blowing, and
though the sun was shining brightly, and
there was blue sky overhead, all the up-
per part of McCormick Bay was hidden
by lead-colored cumulus clouds, and Ingle-
field Gulf lay invisible behind a dazzling
white mist.” (Page 232.)

Nothing appears to be so common in the
Far Northern regions as those low, dark
cumulus clouds, that are frequently seen
rising on the horizon, or, as it 1s fre-
quently expressed, from the ocean, while
the sky is perfectly clear and the sun shin-
ing brightly. Nothing but warmer air
from the interior of the earth could pro- —
duce such clouds. This could not, or
would not, be the case if the earth were
solid: there is no reason why it should be
warmer near the poles.

The earth obtains its heat from the sun;
and yet when one is where the sun’s
rays do not strike the earth for months


252 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


at a time, it is found that the north winds
are warmer than the south winds. This
fact ought to suggest that that wind must
come from some place other than the
North Pole. The interior of the earth is
the only place from which warm winds
could come in the winter.

The same explorer says on pages 314
and 315: “Another discouraging day with-
in sight of the baleful shores of this Arc-
tic Sahara, but we are on the heights once
more—for good, I hope, and, I also trust,
free from further obstacles. If there 1s
any truth in the superstition of the evil
eye, the coast of this Inland Ice surely has
evil eyes. Just as long as the black cliffs
peer up at us over the round of the ice-
cap, just so long are we beset with crev-
asses, slippery ice, hummocks, howling
wind storms, furious drifts, and fogs.”

This term “evil eye’ seems to apply to
conditions that are usually found on reach-
ing the extreme north, as Peary speaks of
being beset with crevasses, slippery ice,
hummocks, howling winds, furious drifts,
and fogs. Those are just the conditions


CLOUDS, FOGS, AND VAPORS 253


one would meet with if the earth were
hollow. Note that Peary says the black
cliffs peer up over the ice-cap. In mak-
ing the turn when the earth curves, one
cliff or projection would follow like the
spokes to the wheel of a wagon—one
comes up as one goes under. While the
earth’s curve is not so short as one might
imagine, yet it is short enough to make
things appear strange to persons looking
for level country to the pole. The clouds,
mists, slippery ice, etc., are Just what one
would meet in summer at the entrance to
the interior of the earth; yet if the earth
is solid there is no reason why they should
be met.

Bernacchi gives descriptions of weather
conditions in the southern polar regions
that have a bearing on this subject. On
page 264 he says: “A dense mist lay over
the water, which made it impossible to see
any farther than the length of the ship.
The mist or vapor was in a state of con-
gelation, so that the whole ship was cov-
ered in frost rime. This mist was no
more than fifty feet high, and in the


254 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


crow’s-nest it was a gloriously fine day,
not a cloud being visible in the sky, and
the sun shining brightly over the barrier
(ice barrier). On deck it was too thick to
see anything.’’ Page 266, he says: “The
fog was so dense that we were compelled
to stop and lay-to for some time. During
the night the temperature sank to 3 8 F.
When the wind changed to E. and N. E.,
it immediately rose to+ 17° F.”


ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC WINDS 255


CHAPTER XIX.
ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC WINDS.


This book has but one purpose—to
prove that the earth is hollow. Therefore,
instead of trying to make an entertaining
argument, I prefer making a plain, con-
vincing one. For that reason, some may
think I have spent too much time on
certain phases of my argument, yet I be-
lieve I will be able to convince the reader
in every point I make. If I convince
him in one case, the rest. need no ar-
gument. Let us take up the question of
the wind, a subject that has received the
best thoughts of our great scientific men.
These scientists cannot agree upon what
makes the wind act so strangely at the
poles. Peary says that at the North Pole
“it is invariably radial from the centre out-
ward, perpendicular, so steady is this wind
and so closely does it adhere to the per-
pendicularity.”

How does the Antarctic explorer find


256 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


the wind? If the earth be hollow, as
the wind passes through the earth it would
operate about the same at either entrance
—under similar conditions. For instance,
a great volcanic explosion at the southern
end would send forth a great force of
warm, dry air, which would blow out
radially and upward, and spread in all di-
rections. This is done so universally that
certain writers have termed it an anti-cy-
clone. It must, of course, have a name,
and why not call it anti-cyclone, although
Granny Cyclone would be more appropri-
ate. Call it what you please, it is the
wind passing out from the interior of the
earth, and when released, it spreads in
every direction. The descriptions given
by Peary of the Arctic winds and by Ber-
nacchi of the Antarctic, are alike.
Bernacchi says on page 112: “On the
morning of May 4th a gale burst upon us
with great fury. and with little warnmg;
ten minutes before its first burst it blew in
whirlwinds, then came a great rush, bring-
ing with it tons of drifting snow. It was
the strongest gale we had as yet experi-


THE EMPEROR PENGUIN.

Found at the farthest point reached in the Antarctic
Circle. It must migrate for food in winter, but it can-
not fly. If the earth is not hollow, where does this bird
go when the ice prevents it from swimming?


ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC WINDS 259


enced, and it blew with fearful potency all
day. Just previous to the first outburst
the barometer had commenced to fall and
reached its minimum reading, 28.227
inches, just before the wind dropped, at 9
p.m. These winds, always from the same
direction, are a remarkable feature in the
meteorology of the Antarctic. Some me-
teorologists have held that a vast cyclonic
system and low-pressure area continues
south as far as the pole, the more south-
erly parts being traversed by secondary
cyclones; others contend that the extreme
south-polar area is occupied by a vast anti-
cyclone, out of which winds blow toward
the girdle of low pressure.

“The prevailing east-southeast and
southeast winds at Capé Adare (lat. 71
deg. 18 min.), which is within the area
of abnormally low pressure, tend to prove
the existence of a great anti-cyclone
stretching over the polar area, which in
its turn necessarily implies the existence
of upper currents from the north, blowing
towards and in upon the polar regions
to make good the drain caused by the


260 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


surface outblowing southeasterly winds.”

Bernacchi, page 129, after giving de-
tails of a great storm, says: “About this
time a very fine specimen of an Emperor
penguin was caught out on the ice-pack; a
big, sad, solitary bird, over four feet high.
The presence of these birds so far south
late in the year proves that they do not
migrate far north during the Antarctic
winter.”

This was when the temperature regis-
tered 2 deg. below zero. The penguin 1s
a flightless bird and must seek its food in
open water. If the earth be not hollow,
where does this bird migrate to in winter
for food? These birds are found at the
farthest poimt south.

I will now give you a description of
an anti-cyclone, written by Bernacchi,
that you may see if there be any dif-
ference between it and Perry’s Arc-
tic wind. To account for this surface-
wind blowing outward, it is said that
it must blow down from the north
from an upper current. If so, one
might, naturally, ask, why would it be


ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC WINDS 261


warmer, dryer, and always from the same
direction?

“No, it does not come from above; it
comes from the interior of the earth,
which accounts for its being warmer,
dryer, and always from the same direc-
tion, except on days when the air is sucked
into the interior of the earth. The follow-
ing is what Bernacchi says about anti-
cyclones:

“An anti-cyclone is a portion of the at-
mosphere in which the pressure is highest
at the centre, and diminishes nearly uni-
formly in all directions, and the winds
blow spirally outward. A cyclone ts just
the reverse, and has the lowest pressure
at the centre, and the winds blow in to-
wards this centre of low pressure in a
spiral curve.

“The frequency and force of these
gales, and the persistency with which they
blew—always from the same direction,
east-southeast,—the invariably high rise
in temperature, and the sudden fall and rise
of the barometer, the dryness of the winds
—the relative humidity—generally be-


262 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


tween fifty and sixty per cent.—and the
motion of the upper clouds from the north-
west, point to the fact that the South Pole
is covered by what may be regarded prac-
tically as a great permanent anti-cyclone
more extensive in the winter months than
in the summer. Nothing more appalling
than these frightful winds, accompanied
by tons of drift snow from the mountains
above, can be imagined.” (Page 115.)
On page 295 Bernacchi gives consider-
able space to the strange phenomena of
the wind at Cape Adare, where he spent
nearly two years. He also quotes Sir
John Murray, of the Challenger, and
others, as meeting the same experience.
If the earth be hollow, this matter of the
wind blowing spirally outward 1s all right,
as it could not blow any other way. If the
earth be solid, there is no telling why the
wind blows as it does, and consequently
the mystery must remaina mystery. Ber-
nacchi and Sir John Murray mention the
precipitation occurring on the outflowing
winds. One says it was slight, the other
says it was less than two inches in nearly


ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC WINDS 263


a year. These are statements worth re-
membering. If there is no rain, and the
snow is so slight in amount that it can-
not be measured, where does the water
come from that produces the vast number
of icebergs in the Antarctic region?

“The mean temperature of the air for
the eleven months was 5.2 deg. Fahr.;
the amount this E. S. E. wind raises the
mean temperature is 8.8 deg. Fahr. This
power of raising the temperature is more
conspicuous in the winter time than in
summer.

“Thus the mean temperature for the
month of July is —9, while the mean
temperature of the E. S. E. winds for
that month is + 7.6’, a difference of 16.6"
Fahr. Such a contrast is very striking.”
(Page 304.)

The power that this wind has in rais-
ing the temperature is perhaps better
shown in the table of single storms,
printed in Bernacchi’s work.

On the meteorological conditions, Ber-
nacchi says: “A mere glance at the Cape
Adare wind-roses -shows the prevailing


264 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


winds from E. S. E. and S. E. in @ very
marked degree. These winds were the
most remarkable feature observed in the
meteorological conditions of Victoria
Land. Their frequency and force, the
persistency with which they blew from the
same direction, the invariably high rise in
the temperature, their dryness, the motion
of the upper clouds from the N. W., and,
finally, the gradual rise in the mean height
of the barometer to the south of about Lat-
itude 73 S. seem to indicate that the Ant-
arctic lands are covered by what may be
regarded, practically, as a great perma-
nent anti-cyclone, with a higher pressure
than prevails over the open ocean to the
northwards.

“While this anti-cyclonic region may.
not be characterized by an absolutely high
pressure at all seasons, it must be high
relatively to the very low pressure which
prevails to the northwards. |

“Sir John Murray, of the Challenger
expedition, was one of the first to ad-
vance the theory of a vast anti-cyclone
covering the South Pole, and, on the whole,


ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC WINDS 265


the observations made at Cape Adare,
which is almost at the centre of the area of
lowest mean pressure, appear to bear out
his views.

“It is, however, impossible to arrive at
anything definite respecting the atmos-
pheric circulation over the Antarctic re-
gions from observations taken at one sta-
tion only.”—Bernacchi, pages 295 and
290. |
“Sir John Murray has said that we
might expect the southerly, outflowing
winds which accompany this anti-cyclone
to be dry winds, and attended by a small
precipitation. At Cape Adare, the belt
of excessive precipitation has been passed;
the total amount of precipitation regis-
tered during the year being under two
inches, and of this the greater part fell in
the summer or autumn months, when the
ocean to the north was practically free of
ice, and the amount of evaporation from
its surface at its maximum. During the
winter months, however, precipitation
generally took place from a practically
clear, blue sky, in the form of very minute,


266 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


‘ hard ice-crystals, and in such small quan-
tities as to defy measurement by means of
an ordinary snow-gauge.”

Peary says, on pages 74 and 75: “The
regularity of the winds of the ‘Great Ice’
of Greenland, as I have found them dur-
ing an actual sojourn of over seven
months upon the ‘Great Ice,’ and visits
to it of greater or less duration in every
month of the year, is phenomenal. Ex-
cept during atmospheric disturbances of
unusual magnitude, which cause storms
to sweep across the country regardless of
ordinary rules, the direction of the wind
of the ‘Great Ice’ of Greenland is invari-
ably radial from the centre outward, per-
pendicular to the nearest part of the coast-
land ribbon. So steady is this wind, and
so closely does it adhere to this perpen-
dicularity, that I can liken it only to the
flow of a sheet of water descending the
slopes of the ‘Great Ice’ from the central
interior dome to the coast.”

If the earth be hollow, the wind would
pass from the interior of the earth, just
as has been described many times, blow-


ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC WINDS 267


ing strongly and steadily. At other
times heavy gusts, as nearly as possible
like the explosions of a mammoth air-gun,
rush out, as described above.

Nansen, on page 373 (Volume I), also
speaks of the temperature rising under
the influence of northerly winds. ‘“Thurs-
day, January 18th.—The wind that began
yesterday has gone on blowing all to-day
with a velocity of sixteen to nineteen feet
per second, from S.S.E., S.E. and E.S.E.
It has no doubt helped us on a good way
north; but it seems to be going down; now,
about midnight, it has sunk to four me-
tres; and the barometer, which has been
rising all the time, has suddenly begun to
fall; let us hope that it is not a cyclone
passing over us, bringing northerly wind.
It is curious that there is almost always a
rise of the thermometer with these strong
winds; to-day it rose to 13 deg., Fahr.,
below zero (— 25 deg. C.). A south wind
of less velocity generally lowers the tem-
perature, and a moderate north wind
raises it.” :

Farther on he says: “It 1s curious that


268 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


now the northerly winds bring cold and
the southerly warmth. Earlier in the
winter it was just the opposite.

“Tt seems strange to me that there is
so much northwest wind, and hardly any
from the northeast, though the latter is
what the rotation of the earth would lead
one to expect. As a matter of fact, the
wind merely shifts between northwest and
southeast, instead of between southwest
and northeast, as it ought to do. Unless
there is land, I am at a loss to find a sat-
isfactory explanation, at all events, of this
northwest direction.”

What Nansen says about the change of
the wind since winter began, is important,
and is another of the strong proofs that
the earth is hollow, and that the atmos-
phere in the interior of the earth is of a
more even temperature than on _ the
exterior.

It would also be warmer in winter and
colder in summer, which all explorers have
found to be the case.


THE CENTRE OF GRAVITY 269


CHAPTER XX.
THE CENTRE OF GRAVITY.


To many, the question of gravity seems
a great argument against the theory that
the earth is hollow. This undoubtedly
arises from the fact that gravity is sup-
posed to be something located in the centre
of the earth, drawing everything in that
direction, or to the centre. Philosophy
teaches that the greater attracts the lesser.
If the earth is hollow, and the walls are,
say, a thousand miles thick, why should
not the centre of the walls be the centre of
attraction, as well as of the earth, if solid?
If gravity is something that repels ether,
or air, above the earth, then it would make
no difference whether the earth were con-
cave or convex.

Again: if the centre of the walls of the
earth is the centre of gravity, then the
greatest attraction would be at the poles,
where it is found to be. Nansen’s de-
scription of the dead water, it will be re-


270 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


membered, is: “We could hardly get on
at all, for the dead water, and we swept
the whole sea along with us. It is a pecu-
liar phenomenon—this dead water. We
had at present a better opportunity of
studying it than we desired. It occurs
where a surface layer of fresh water rests
upon the salt water of the sea, and this
fresh water is carried along with the ship,
gliding on the heavier sea water beneath,
as if on a fixed foundation.”

The centre of gravity seems strongest
here, and was’ probably about midway
round the curve on Nansen’s way to the
interior of the earth. If this be true, it is
in accordance with the wisdom of the
Creator: the greatest attraction where it
is most needed. The laws of the universe
are inevitable; when they seem otherwise
we do not understand them.

The question of gravity is most puz-
zling, and, so far as I know, not under-
stood. I desire to show that, be the earth
hollow or solid, gravity is not in any way
affected. If gravity is something that
acts as a magnet, and draws everything to


2 ee


THE CENTRE OF GRAVITY 271


the centre, the walls of the earth would
then be the magnet. On the other hand,
if gravity is something above the earth
that repels—air or ether—then the earth’s
shape would in nowise affect it. I be-
lieve it will be found that gravity is
strongest at the turning point entering the
interior of the earth, and objects will
weigh more at that point than near the
equator or in the interior of the earth.
Every substance will then appear lighter
or weigh less in the interior of the earth,
for the reason that the laws of the uni-
verse are so perfect that nothing is wasted,
and a substance requires less force to hold
it to the inside of a hollow ball in motion
than to hold it to the outside.


272 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


CHAPTER XXI.
CANNOT REACH THE POLES.


That the earth is hollow is proved by
the fact that no one can get to. the poles.
In recent years all explorers have made
practically the same progress—from 8o to
84 deg. latitude—and all agree that they
find it warmer, and with an open sea.
The difference of a few degrees is
owing to the longitude as well as lati-
tude when taking observations. The land
is not necessarily the farthest north.
The curve leading to the interior of
the earth may be land or water, just as
it happens, and he that passes to the far-
thest point of the circle when the observa-
tion is taken, will show the farthest point
north. But if he continues straight on he
will soon be losing ground, or getting
farther from the supposed pole, and even-
tually be going south and not know it,
as the compass could not then be depended
upon. There must be some good reason


ee — ES ete — al


-CANNOT REACH THE POLES 273


why all have been obliged to turn back
after reaching latitude 80 deg. to 84 deg.
They have passed through a much colder


A bird’s-eye view of the opening to the interior’ of the
earth,


climate, where there were more ice, less
open water, and no game or signs of life;
yet at this point all failed. It is like look-
ing into the water and seeing the reflec-


274 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES.


tion of the moon, then getting into a boat
and trying to get it. The moon always
keeps some distance away; and so it is
with the PHANTOM OF THE POLES.

I have quoted from nearly all the ex-
plorers, for the purpose of showing that,
at the farthest point reached, either north
or south, they found it warmer, with open
water and plenty of game. Their re-
marks also prove, beyond a doubt, that
what I claim 1s true—that the Arctic and
Antarctic oceans are bodies of open
water, abounding with game of all kinds,
and much warmer than farther inland.
If that is true, then why have the poles
not been reached? The poles are but
phantoms—the earth 1s hollow, or all prin-
ciple of reasoning must fail.


INTERIOR OF THE EARTH 275


CHAPTER XXII.
WHAT IS IN THE INTERIOR OF THE EARTH?


I have been asked what I expect to find
in the interior of the earth. That, of
course, 1s speculative, based on the little
evidence found on earth. It is not like
the question, “Is the earth hollow?” We
know that it is, but do not know what will
be found in its interior. It is like seeing
an island afar off: we know there is
land, but do not know what it is like till
we get there. So many circumstances
show the earth is hollow that the fact
cannot be questioned; but its contents are
not so easily determined till we look in-
side. From what I am able to gather,
and from analysis, game of all kinds—
tropical and arctic—will be found there;
for both warm and cold climates must be
in the interior—warm inland and cold
near the poles. Sea monsters, and possi-
bly the much-talked-of sea serpent, may
also be found, and vast territories of ara-


276 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


ble land for farming purposes. This
theory is based upon the great quantities
of pollen that finds its way to the exterior
of the earth, and falls with the snow in
such great quantities that it colors it, and
thus produces the colored snow of the Arc-
tic Circle. This would require millions
of acres of land to grow. Minerals may
be found in great quantities, and gems of
all kinds. The earth contains minerals
and gems, and they are as likely to be in
the interior of the earth as on the exterior.
‘We may succeed, too, in finding large
quantities of radium, which would be used
to relieve the darkness if it should be un-
usually dark. I do not think this will be
the case, however, as there are two sum-
mers of four months’ duration and two
winters of two months’, giving the interior
eight months of summer and four months
of winter in each of our years on earth.
In other words, the years in the interior
of the earth are but six months long, and
every other year the summer becomes a
little longer and the winter a little shorter.
The two just make up the six months.


|
es


INTERIOR OF THE EARTH 277


Why? Because the opening into the
interior of the earth at the south, or Ant-
arctic, is fifteen hundred miles in diameter,
or forty-five hundred miles in circumfer-
ence; while the opening into the interior
of the earth at the north, or Arctic, is only
one thousand miles in diameter, or three
thousand miles in circumference. The
sun would begin to shine in the interior

of the earth from the south several days
earlier than at the north, simply because
the opening is five hundred miles wider ;
for the same reason it would disappear
later. That would make the summer—
supplied with light and heat from the Ant-
arctic—longer, and the winter shorter
than the summer which derived its heat
and light from the north, as the opening to
the interior of the earth is five hundred
miles less in diameter than the opening to
the south. The sun consequently would
appear later, and disappear earlier, mak-
ing shorter the summers deriving their
heat and light from the north, and the
winters longer. This seems to me reason-
able and correct.


278 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


The dimensions of the openings at the
poles are arrived at in this way: The mag-
netic poles, both north and south, have
been reached, one five hundred miles from
the supposed pole, and the other seven
hundred and fifty miles, making one thou-
sand and one thousand five hundred miles
to the poles, as only one side is estimated.
Timber of good size will be found, as
shown by driftwood on the shores of the
fiords, islands, and inlets of the Arctic. I —
also believe that the interior of the earth
will be found inhabited. The race or races
may be varied, but some at least will be
of the Eskimo race, who have found their
way in from the exterior. Camping
places have been discovered, and relics
that did not belong to the present In-
nuits; nor did the latter know for what
purposes certain articles were used. The
climate will be much more even than on
earth, as shown by the winds coming from
the interior, which are much warmer in
winter and much cooler in summer than
on earth. It is about such a climate as
San Francisco, I should judge, where one


INTERIOR OF THE EARTH 279


has to stop to think whether it is June or
January.

I have been asked about the risk and
manner of getting there. Some risks are
to be taken, of course; and dangers are
to be guarded against. For instance, an
iceberg plunging into the ocean would
swamp a ship, if near. This can be
guarded against, however, by sending out
scouts, or keeping away from the shore.
To me it does not seem especially dan-
gerous.

In going into the earth’s interior special
care should be taken to guard against all
conceivable accidents; as no pilot can be
had for the first trip to steer clear of
breakers, etc. A ship should be well sup-
plied with very fast auxiliary boats and
powerful searchlights, in order that the
ship have the best and safest course.
Some plan should be found by which to
steer a boat without a compass in foggy
weather, which will have to be done when
passing through and round the turn into
the interior of the earth. Stations should
be placed within a few miles of each other,


280 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


supplied with wireless telegraphy instru-
ments, manned by able operators, so that
hourly communications can be had when
passing unusually dangerous points,—
should any be found.

I have a plan for the strengthening of
a ship, which seems a good one; but as I
am not a shipbuilder there may be objec-
tions to it. A strong ship should be built
in the usual way, then have from three to
five large and strong timbers—not too
heavy (Georgia pine)—placed across the
ship,—not fastened to her, but held in
position, so that in rough weather they
could not move out of place. Each timber
should be in two pieces, and put together
by large adjustable screws, that when
in the vicinity of bergs they could be ex-
tended several: feet over the edge of the
ship. When a berg approached the ship
and she was crowded against another berg,
the timbers would be pressed endwise and
thus protect her from being crushed, as
a piece of timber two feet square would re-
sist a greater pressure when pressed end-
wise than any ship’s hull could be made to


INTERIOR OF THE EARTH 281


stand. Take a small lead pencil, and note
its resistance when pressed endwise. The
object of not having the timbers fastened
to the ship, is to keep them from straining
or harming her.


282 THE PHANTOM OF THE POLES


IN CONCLUSION.


The earth is either hollow or it is not.
What proof have we concerning the lat-
ter? Not one iota, positive or circum-
stantial. On the contrary, everything
points to its being hollow. If it be so,
and there are burning volcanoes in the
interior, would you not see great lights re-
flected on the icebergs and the clouds just
as any other great fires reflect the light?
Would not great clouds of smoke and dust
be seen?-—the same as from any other
burning volcano? That is what all the ex-
plorers have witnessed—low, dark clouds
rising out of the ocean, or at the edge of
the ice. Nansen says: “Let us go home;
what have we here to stay for? Nothing
but dust, dust, dust.” Where could such
dust come from—so bad that it was one
of the great annoyances in the heart of
the Arctic Ocean—if it did not come from
an exploding, burning volcano? If the
earth be hollow, would it not be warmer
in winter and cooler 1n summer?


Arctic explorers say that a north wind -
