tL
x.
al


—
™! '


War


tae


ay


Tae
iro SARS


“es


Book


ne


Fa


if
The


Hymns of Zoroaster
usually called the GATHAS


tf ery


: P a ae
For the first time discovered to be S-


DUPLICATE BIOGRAPHIES


PERSONAL AND PRIESTLY
THE HYMNS THEMSELVES


For the first time made entirely accessible by
Transliterated Text, Translation.
Dictionary and Grammar.
Introductory Tables, Analysis.

Higher and Biblical Criticism.
Revealment of Zoroaster’s Sociological Significance
Origin of the Zoroastrian Pantheon.

Also a Small Concordance, yet Unprinted
(Ready to print when means are supplied)


by
KENNETH SYLVAN LAUNFAL GUTHRIE


Revealer and Translator of Plotinus, Numenius, Pythagoras and Proctu:


THE PLATONIST PRESS
Teocalli, No. Yonkers, N. Y., U.S. A.


| Keoniricl Sybdan “a unfal SC tBrie


A. M. (Harvard and Sewanee) ; Ph. D. (Columbia and Tulane) ; M. D. (Pennsylvania).
Professor in Extension, University of the South, Sewanee.
Address: Teocalli, 1177 Warburton Avenue, North Yonkers, N. Y.


THIS ZONED CONCENTRIC
CITY HAS CHARMED
PUBLISHERS

. NEWSPAPERS


COOPERATIVE PROGRESSIVE READE
everywhere!
Enjoy Anticipations in Future
Cifies Household reform,
Marriage reform, dress re-
form, The coming World - gs & i Si
Capital, World- ide mn y¥_& bargain
setilement of Dem - pr iced 4oof-
> ADVENTURE


ocracy, Reform
in Business, Art, SS $ by


Teac hing, ofc.
EVER O
Oe
S


These our present ramblin
disordered accretions. -

Would you saddle then
on the FUTURE? VEVZA/


NEAL
GUTHRIE,


PLOLINUS, the FOCUS of GREECE
and the DAWN of THEOLOGY


is now accessible in the Magnificent Complete GUTHRIE ONE VOLUME


TRANSLATION at the Net Bargain Price of $6.25, postpaid
(which will last only til the present remainder is exhausted)


WHAT ARE THE SPECIAL MERITS OF THE GUTHRIE PLOTINUS ?


1. It is the only complete one, and will always be the cheapest. It is the famous
coun oF which Stephen McKenna said, ‘I congratulate you; you have gotten ahead
of me. j


2. It is the best for the student, as it has a 60 page Concordance, and has the first
explanation of Plotinic philosophy’s origin, development, and destiny. Only Dr Guthrie
could do this, because it was he who dug out Plotinus’s master Numenius. Also,
his version is representative of contemporary language and ideas, and is not merely
turning puzzles into modern dialect.


3. It is the best for him who wishes to understand Plotinus, because it is the only
edition that unscrambles, chronologically, Plotinus’s 4 progressive stages of devel-
opment from Porphyry’s frightful hotch-potcht of 9 medileys. Other translators who
perpetuate this disorder after Dr Guthrie’s discovery seem to be keeping the sub-
ject hazy purposely, not for the reader’s benefit.


4. It is the most faithful version, because Dr. Guthrie’s sole object was to focus
the labors of the best students,—Marsilius Ficinus, Mueller, Drews, Bouillet, Chaignet,
Taylor, and others; but one only thing he does claim,—that he has not knowingly
left any obscurity. Otherwise he glories in this subservience to all the best that had
been done before him, and for himself he claims nothing but the unappreciated pro-
duction of what nobody else would do, and the critical discovery of Plotinus’s
progress. To be original is to be mistaken and misleading.


READER, DO YOU NEED AN INTRODUCTION TO THIS PLOTINUS ?
Then send for the free booklet ‘Names to Conjure With’, which explains why he
is of interest to all religious people; also why PROCLUS, now accessible in Master-
Key form at $3.00, is of permanent, universal importance; and why you need
PYTHAGORAS’s Source-book and Library, $3.00. Also NUMENIUS at $2.00.
PLATONIST PRESS, Teocalli, 1177 Warburton Avenue
North Yonkers, N. Y., U. S. A.


LIBRARY EDITION OF UNIFORM VOLUMES, at One Dollar each
By KENNETH SYLVAN GUTHRIE


1. TEMPLE GATES AJAR, or Introductory Religious Instructions, with complet-
ing Corroborative Outlines of all other great Kenneth Guthrie Religious Works.

2. PAGAN BIBLE, or Angel Belief as Inheritance from Greco-Romans.

3. WHAT BECAME OF KITCHENER, Novel of Faith, & Six Educational Playlets.

4. ROSICRUCIAN MYSTERIES, Playlets on Original Rosicrucian Documents.

5. SHAKESPEAREAN MYSTERIES, Playlets. Hamlet, Tempest, M. S. N. Dream.

6. Popular Illustrated HISTORY OF NEOPLATONISM, comprehensive (details).

7. APPROACHES to the MYSTERIES OF ALL NATIONS, complete outline.


By THOMAS KIP TURVEY


1. TEMPLE GATES OPENED, Experiences, Conservation, Temple-Travel.

2. TEMPLE PLAYLETS and RITUALS for Personal Achievement.

3. DISCOVERIES & INSIGHTS in Theology, Literature, and Character Study.
4. CHARACTER-STUDY MANUAL, Zodiac’s Origin, Meaning and Results.

5. OCCULT STORIES, Apollonius of Tyana, Hurrah for God, Reuniting Pilgrimage.


BOOKS by KENNETH SYLVAN GUTHRIE


A ROMANCE OF TWO CENTURIES, an Utopia of A.D. 2025 .......... $2.00
VOTIVE GARLANDS, Collected Poems, with Frontispiece, in Gift-form.... 2.00
MITHRAIC MYSTERIES, Restored and Modernized, with Exercises; IJllustr... 3.00
ANGELIC MYSTERIES, Nine Angel-Degrees of Initiation; Illustrated ....... 3.00
SPIRITUAL MESSAGE of LITERATURE, 1st Text-book of Comp. Literature 2.00
PROGRESSIVE COMPLETE EDUCATION, Marriage as Supreme School.. 1.50
‘TEACHERS’ PROBLEMS, How to Solve them, Historical Method Summary 1.50


2 =?

SPICY SITUATIONS, and Dr Kenneth Guthrie’s REMEDIES
The Board of Education’s Examiner had iust turned down the blushing Miss Teacher
Candidate. Weeping, she wailed. Js there no hope at all for me? Oh yes. purred he. Try again next
year! What could I study in the meanwhile? Dr Guthrle’s TEACHERS’ PROBLEMS & HOW TO SOL.
VE THEM. $1.25:* Value and Limits of the History of Education.’ and ‘The Mother-Tongue Method
of Teaching Modern Languages.’ each 30 cents. Will that pass me? Really, Miss. you are too pret-
ty to teach school. Get his Progressive Complete Education, or Marriage as the Supreme Schoul
of Life, $1.25. Andif JI pass examination on it? Then (will marry you. Thanks, kind sir}


How a Pessimist Became ah Optimist. The theological student had just beer prep-
aring a thesis by cribbing the wittiest passages from Discoveries @ Insights, Essays Theolog-
ical, Literary, and of Character-Study, $1. Nettled at the undeserved praise, he blushed at the
second-handedness of his religion. So at midnight he went to the Bishop’s study, and sald nat he
would leave the Church because he was honest. ‘Ignorant. you mean!’ corrected the adviser. “Do
a ilttle first-hand reading yourself! * That’s where the trouble lies. bellowed the martyr. J cau’t hunt
the manuscripts! ‘Unnecessary nowadays!’ soothed the Bishop.*i know of ¢ wizard who can sum-
mon to your room for conference all the greatest but neglected philosophers of antiquity. Shall
(have him send them to you? Oh yes, please! gasped the theolog. Ali my life I have dreamed of
those sublime leaders of the race, but who were inaccessible. ‘Very well. the wizard shall send you
Zoroaster. teacher of purity and angels. $3; Pythagoras, the Sage. & Philosopher. $3; Numenius
,Comparative Religionist. $2; Plotinus. Greek Combiner, $12 cl, $9 pp; Proclus, Universal Aler-
ophant. $3: Zoroaster Translation only, $1.25; Apollonius of Tyana, Life. $1; Plotinus, Outline
$2; Philo Judaeus, Outline, $2.° Stop! If they came all at once, it would be tragic. Is there no guide
to all this? ‘Write for a free copy of Names to Conjure With, which will open the whole subjiect,°


This is what occurred atthe Masonic Club after last night’s Lodge-Meeting
The Master was entertaining the just initiated Candidate who asked him. Where could J read up on
the meaning and historic origins of initiations such as ours? Well. said the Master. the best book is
Ghe Pagan Bible an Anthology of the Soul and its Helpers, Gathered from Ethnic Sources
$1. That sounds good, said the novice. But I would like to see the original rituals. You can. explain-
ed the Master. byreading Ge Modernized Mithraic Mysteries, Dramatic Sketches of
Historic Initiation, $3. But are the Christians entirely excluded? No. no! laughed the Master:
whatever exclusion there is. is of their own making. Good; but are any Christian Mysteries acces-
sible? Certainly, and good ones! Get the Angelic Mysteries of the Nine Heavens, a Drama
of Interior Initiation, $3. But how do you advise all this, when you yourself area Rosicrucian?
retorted the persistent Candidate. ‘I was only trying to please you!’ winked the Master. ‘I my-
self preferthe Rosicrucian Mysteries, $1, a dramatization of the original documents.”
But Iam a modern man! sobbed the querulous Candidate. ‘Nothing is easier.’ comforted the
suave Master. ‘You need only get the Modern Mysteries, $1, alluring and thrilllng Mystica]
Playlets of Experiential Religion: also the glorious Shakesperean Mysteries, $l. Thanks!


Savanarola’s Ghost met Giordano Bruno’s, still reeling from the flre’s agony
*Cheer up. friend.’ consoled he: ‘you are now safe from persecution:? Perhaps; but I am home-
less. *Oh no. friend: look! As he waved his hand. there appeared a glistering Temple. What’s
that building? gasped Bruno. ‘Your home!’ comforted Savanarola. But the door is locked, and
I want to get a look in! ‘it’s your own fault.” rebuked the Florentine: ‘didn’t you while on earth
read Temple-Gates Ajar, $1? Buta look-in is not enough; I would want my whole body in.
“Very weil: { shall send for a copy of Temple-Gates Opened, $1.” But in the meanwhile?
whined Bruno, ‘ill lend you Prayers, Visions & Aspirations, $2.°. Please, I don’t want
merely to aspire, I want to DO somethiug! ‘Then | wiil lend you Regeneration the Gate, Ap-
plied, and Special Methods, $2 each, $5 all three. Oh thank you! Then I wou’t lose any time.


A Fundamentalist-Modernist Fracas. tn a recent rail-road wreck near Albany the Mo-
dernist Rev. |. Catchem, of St Shark’s-in-the-Mill-pond for hours lay waiting for rescue, cheek
by jowl with the renowned Fundamentalist Rev. U. Cheatem. Fellow-mis2ry broke down the bar-
riers ot orthodoxy, and{ Catchem sald. Myinjuries are due to over-fascination while reading
occult stories entitled Hurrah for God, $1. ‘My fatuous friend,’ in shocked tones retorted
self-righteous U, Cheatem. ‘you better sober up by exchanging books, for the faith-strengthen-
ing What Happened to Kitchener, $1, whose hypnotic charm immobilized me during
the accident.” Conversation revealed they were both about to be ousted.and a flash of genius
bade them exchange: but this flop imelied two reeducations. betraying secret tricks of the craft.
So U. Cheatem babbled. °To be a Fundamentalist all you need to do is to keep people distrac-
ted by anything absorbing. such as Romance of Two Centuries, $2. Reuniting Pilgrimage,
$1, Stories for Young People, $1.25, eerie Votive Garlands, $3: and then you can fulminate
from Why You Really Want to be a Churchman, $1.25.’—-*Thanks.’ chortled I, Catchem. ‘Now
{ will tell you how to succeed as a Modernist. Shed tears while haranging over your honesty,
and inability to be convinced by any reasonable arguments, in the meanwhiie cribbing trom
Ge Ladder of God, & Other Sermons, $1. G4e Message of the Master, $1.25. & How the Mas-
ter Saved the World, $1.25. Then you can make a reputation as a pundit by judiciously using
The Spiritual Messase of Literature, $2.50, it’s convenient. But shouldn’t I seem somewhat?
saintly? *‘Transcribe 0f Communion With God, 50 cts, and Of the Presence of God, $1.25.°
Pray? That was the only point where Fundamentalist and Modernist agreed: Let us prey on the


PLATONIST PRESS. Teocalli, 1177? Warburton Ave. No. Yonkers. N.Y.


BK cnet Dyloan Launfal GS tBric


A. M. (Harvard and Sewanee) : Ph. D. (Columbia and Tulane) ; M. D. (Pennsylvania).
Professor in Extension, University of the South, Sewanee.
Address: Teocalli, 1177 Warburton Avenue, North Yonkers, N. Y.


If desirous of keeping informed of his latest achievements, send him one dollar
for a yearly subscription to his inspirational bi-monthly Magazine


GOOD NEWS FOR ALL.


The
Life of Zoroaster


in the words of bis own Hymns, the Gathas


according to both Documents,
the Priestly, and the Personal, on parallel pages,
(A new Discovery in Higher Criticism,)


Translated by


Kenneth Splban Guthrie


A.M., Harvard; Ph.D., Tulane; M.D., Medico-Chirurgical, Phila,
M.A., G.D., Professor in Extension, University of the South, Sewanee


This is one of the great scriptures of the world, but has
until this present translation been practically inaccessible.
There is a translation by an Englishman, butit is not on-
ly more puzzling than the original, but it makes Zo-
roaster speak like an Anglican theologian, instead of the
pre-historic bard who was conducting a crusade against
nomadicism, and for a cow-herding civilization, Besides,
the acknowledged authorities on the subject do not hes-
itate to acknowledge openly that it is to their financial
interest to Keep the text from the public. Anyone who
desires to question this easily understood translation can
purchase the author’s larger book which contains the full
transliterated text, dictionary, grammar, criticism, out-
lines, and tables of all available kindred information.


Net price, cloth bound, post Sree, $1.10.


Che Comparative Literature Press
182 Hlonroe Street, Brooklyn, 2.V.


At the end of the book will be found more extended


notices of the following works by the same author:
Of Communion with God
Life, Times and Philosophy of Plotinos
The Message of Philo Judaeus
Numenius of Apamea, Works, Life and Teachings
The Gathas, or Hymns of Zoroaster, in English
The Greek ‘Pilgrim’s Progress,’ or, the Picture, by Kebes
A Garland of Fancies; | A Garland of Aspirations
Friendship


Hymns to the Universal Divinity


Che Hymns of Zoroaster


Usually called the Gathas,


For the first time made entirely accessible by


Cransliterated Text, Translation,
Dictionary and Grammar,
Introductory Tables, Analysis,
Higher and Biblical Criticism,
Complete Concordance, and Subject-Jndex


Kenneth Sylvan Guthrie,


A.M., Harvard; Ph.D., Tulane; M.D., Medico-Chirurgical, Philadelphia.
M.A., Grad. Div., Professor in Extension, Univ. of the South, Sewanee.
Member Am. Historical Ass’n, Society for Biblical Literature and Exegesis,


LONDON: George Bell and Sons,
Portugal House, York Street, Kingsway, W.C.


BROOKLYN; Comparative Literature Press,


182 Monroe Street.


.. All Rights, including that of Translation, Reserved


Copyright, 1914, by KENNETH SYLVAN GUTHRIE


Dedicated to


Elizabeth Hayes Fracker
Friend, Sister, Mother, Critic, Helper,


the Serenity of whose Tranquil Home sheltered me
during the rare hours I could
snatch myself away from the whirlpool of duties;
And Who, under God, thus enabled me to accomplish
Whatever Missions for which I may have


been Destined by
iy Revered Dead
and the
Inscrutable Divine.


Stern Zarathushtra, Prophet of Iran,
Which is the title dearest unto thee?


Dispenser of a blest eternity ?

Or, Mediator between God and Man?

Ceacher of law of heavenly righteousness ?
Helper, and Savior, or Life-healing Friend?

Judge who condemn’ st to tortures without end ?


Redeemer’ of the Race to Usefulness ?
Yet all these titles leave me cold.


The best
Of all, is that thy heart did ever keep
Time and compassion for advocacy
Of gentle Cow and unresisting Sheep
Whose cry to Heaven reached Divinity
Which, from all men, chose thee as Cenderest !


PREFACE


ZOROASTER is a name to conjure with. Yet, strange to
say, what may be considered his authentic hymns, beautiful
and inspiring as they are, are but little known. The retire-
ment of these from the public, partly due to the commend-
able hesitation on the part of scholars to hazard a transla-
tion, is however, after all, as unreasonable as would be the
withdrawing from circulation of other scriptures merely be-
cause of unsettled conditions of critical problems. Hence this
popular edition, with all necessary helps, in the hope of ad-
ding to the available inspiration of the world.

During the winter 1907-1908 the writer was fortunate
enough to have the opportunity to study the elements of
Avestan, especially in connection with some of the Gathas,
under Professor A. V. W. Jackson of Columbia University,
New York. The purpose of this Gathic study was chiefly a
desire to grasp, with as much clearness as possible, their sig-
nificance for Comparative Religion. Such masterly analyses
of Mazdean doctrine as Bishop Casartelli’s draw from Maz-
dean sources of all periods, yielding a composite picture as
inconclusive as the parallel traditional method ef treating
the Hebrew scriptures. The writer first attempted to estab-
lish a distinction between the older and later Avestic ele-
ments, as has been done in the Pentateuch, with the inten-
tion of confining his analysis to the older portions. Pursuant
to this plan, Professor Jackson very kindly went over the
Avestan text with him, indicating a provisional separation
of the older from the newer portions. However, after care-
ful examination, even these older portions seemed to yield re-
sults both uncertain and unsatisfactory. It was, therefore,
ultimately decided to limit the present analysis strictly to


li PREFACE


the Gathas, about whose age there would naturally be less
question.

Let it at once be understood that this very practical inter-
est precluded even a faint hope of any final scholarly results.
Only those who have devoted most time to Gathie accidence
and lexicology are the most conscious not only of how little
in this field is known definitely, but how little, perhaps,
can, or ever will be known. We are uncertain as to the pre-
cise meaning of some of the chief terms — such as, for exam-
ple, those that are usually translated spirit, righteousness, or
covenant, and the result is that the more literary and at-
tractive the translation, the less actual value it has. The fre-
quently irreconcilable conflicts of the translations of Spie-
gel, Mills, Darmesteter, de Harlez, and Bartholomae are suf-
ficient justification for the refusal of our ablest scholars to
make any version whatever — and yet they are the only per-
sons who could properly be trusted with so delicate a task.

But, obviously, we who are living at the present day can-
not wait for centuries for the doubtful event of the finding
of solutions to riddles that are possibly or probably unsolv-
able. The importance of the Gathas as one of the springs of
the world’s religious thought will force some practical ac-
cess to them; this work was inevitable, and would ultimate-
ly have been done by somebody else, if not by the writer.
Let none therefore quarrel with this undertaking.

So popular a presentation, necessarily so imperfect, was,
naturally enough, repugnant to Professor Jackson; and it
was only the writer’s pressing need of a clear understanding
of what the Gathas do teach that forced him to continue
this costly work. Let it be repeated that this book is not for
scholars, who will want the alternate text-readings which
Geldner gives; it is for the average intelligent man and wo-
man who should not be defrauded of their spiritual birth-
right merely because of the unsettled condition of abstruse
and probably hopeless critical problems.


PREFACE iil


In keeping with this, every unnecessary difficulty has
been cleared away. The German text-books show the diffie-
ult Avestan characters may be dispensed with, especially as
in our transcription every form of each letter is accounted
for, which is more than Reichelt does. Everything that could
be reduced to order and ready reference has been alphabe-
tized. Even the infinitely superior and eventual order of the
alphabet as used in oriental works, has been sacrificed, not
without keen regret. Words have been indexed according to
the text, and not according to their derivations, which are
sufficiently indicated by references. All the numerous forms
of the pronouns have been given alphabetically, as also all
occurring forms of the verb fo be—it is hoped that none have
been omitted. While no one can be more conscious than the
writer is of the many imperfections of this work, he believes
that it points the way to the kind of Gathie work which
will eventually be written by some scholar fortunate enough
to have his pleasure coincide with his business, instead of con-
flicting with it, as with the present writer.

It is self-evident that in a work involving so stupendous a
mass of details and so delicate problems of judgment, the
present writer could not possibly have avoided all oversights
or blunders. It must suffice for him to announce his grati-
tude to any who will enable him to correct any and all.

To this unstinted acknowledgment of shortcomings, the
writer would nevertheless add that, within the very narrow
limits left him for legitimate endeavor, he has done his best
to be accurate and thorough; the work done was certainly
painstaking and laborious.

The book should, of course, have been dedicated to the pi-
oneers in the work—Spiegel, Geldner, Darmesteter, de Har-
lez, Casartelli, Bartholomae, Mills; but more particularly to
Professor Jackson, whose unwearied kindness and considera-
tion deserves particular mention. But he is too conscious of
his own failings to venture to embarrass such men by con-


iv PREFACE


necting them with these efforts, however laborious, earnest,
and conscientious. Yet it is these qualities which embolden
him to advance the critical results to which he has been led.
They are mostly due, not to any special cleverness of his,
but to his thorough and relentlessly followed determination
clearly to understand his own translation; and no doubt if
he does, others will too. When the Gathas are clearly un-
derstood, the present critical results will no doubt be con-
firmed by their own weight. However, once more is the
reader cautioned of the hopeless uncertainty of many mat-
erial points ; yet must we do our best to cope with the sit-
uation.

The writer is fully conscious that in thus making the Gé-
thas accessible he is only carrying out the unspoken inten-
tion of the above master-scholars, who do not have the time
for so much drudgery as this book has entailed. To them,
therefore, be attributed any credit that may accrue; for, af-
ter all, without their guidance, the present work would
have been impossible.

And indeed the writer would not have had the courage to
continue and complete these unremitting labors if he had
not sunk personal considerations in the broader realization
of the ever-enduring importance of the Gathas as one of the
great scriptures of the world which ought, must and will be
interpreted to humanity. Nor will the writer count his lab-
ors entirely lost if he have been able to add even one grain
to the walls, now building, of the City of God.


INDEX.
Part I. Introductory Cables, Outlines and Summaries.


Abbreviations, i
Traditional Arrangement. i
Provisional Chronological Succession of Scriptures, i
Chronology, ii
Home and Age of Zarathushtra, iil
Bibliographical Suggestions, iV
Outline of Gathas, V-XXi
Summary of Zarathushtra’s Message, XXii
Summary of Hymn-Subjects, XXV
Part TI. Cext, Cranslation, Life of Zarathushtra.
INTRODUCTION to the Translation, I
1. The translation undertaken in{self-defence, not bravado, 1
2. Why the Vocabulary is based on Bartholomae’s Diction- 2
ary,
3. Why the translation is not in verse, 4
4. Why the names of the Ahuras have been retained, 6
5. Some results attained in this translation, 7
6. Why various kinds of type have been employed, 12
7. Various details about the translation—Versification, 13
TEXT and TRANSLATION, on opposite pages, 14
HARMONY of the Gathas, 1


LIFE of Zarathushtra, Documents contrasted on opposite pages, 2


Part TIT, Higher Criticism of the Gathas.


Ch.1. Why Gathic Criticism is Tnevitable, 129
1. Higher Criticism universal, even if unconscious, 129
2. Special Gathic difficulties demanding interpretation, 130

a, Internal difficulties, 130
b, Mazdean, or external difficulties, 133
ce, Christian difficulties, 133


d, Modern difficulties, 134


Index—2


3. Guides of Interpretation,
a, Precautionary guides against self-deceit,
b, Illustration by Comparative Religion,
¢, Comparative origin of Monotheism,
d, Fixing of general dates by Ethnology,
4, The facts themselves,
5, Conclusion,


Ch.II, Criticism of the Gathic Pantheon,
1, Methods of the criticism,
2, General duplications,
8, Detailed duplications,
4, Distinctions,
5, Asha and Vohu Manah contrasted,


Ch. IIT, Grouping of the Associations,
1, Daevic cult,
2, Armaitian Cow-cult,
3, Ashaist cult,
4, Vohu Manist cult,
), Spenta Mainyuist cult,
6, The Clever or Mazdists,
7, Magians,
Outline of Pre-Zoroastrian Cults,
Harmony of the Gathas,


Zh. LV, Development of Zarathushtra,
1, The Magian Youth,
2, As Student with Vohu Manists,
3, As Student with the Ashaists,
4, Ahurian Experiences— Reflection,
5, Ahurian Experiences—Teachings,


Ch. V, Critical Results,
1, Chronological Significance of Mazdah,
Gathic occurrence of divine Names,
2, Inferences from occurrences of divine Names,
Development of the Gathas according to divine Names,


134
135
136
137
139
140
141


142
142
143
144


145 |


149


153
153
155
158
161
165
168
168
171
172


173
173
174
175
177
178


180
180
181
182
183


Index—3


3, Authorship of the Gathas, 184
4,“Amplification of Authorship Question, 185
5, Uncertainty of Conclusions, 186
Ch. VI, Zarathushtra’s Personal Significance, 187
1, Summary of Message, 187
2, Negative significance, 187
8, Eclecticism, | 188
4, Personality as Judge-protector of Bovines, 188
5, Partisanship founded on Dualism, 189
6, Both Lives, 191
4, The Teaching of Mazdeanism, 191
Ch. VIL, Ethnological Significance of Zarathushtra, 192
1, Dialects of the Thought-religion, 192
2, Ethnological elements of the Gathic religion, 193
3, Ethnological origin of these Gathic Elements, 194
4, The Thought-innovation of the Aryan Race, 195


Part TU, Dictionary and Grammar.
Part U, Subject-Index and Concordance to the Gathas.


This part has not yet been set in type because the author's
health, time and money gave out. It will be printed if there is suf-
ficient popular demand for it. To purchasers of the book it will be
fifty cents; to others, one dollar. Notices of subscription should be
sent in immediately, but money will not be accepted until the
volume is ready for delivery.

It is the most important part of this work. It summarizes Zara-
thushtra’s significance on every topic he touches in clear, com-
pendious form, with full references. It was indeed only to furnish
a reliable basis for this that the present study was undertaken.
Although the author cannot yet see it, there is no doubt some div-
ine blessing lurking in this untoward delay of the chief purpose of
this heart-breaking effort and lonely venture of faith.


am


INTRODUCTORY TABLES i


Abbreviations

Z, Zarathushtra. AM, Ahura Mazda. A, Asha. Am, Amer-

etat. Arm, Armaiti. As, Ashay. AkM, Aka Manah. AnM,

Angro Mainyu. GU, Geus Urvan, the Soul of the Cattle.

H Haurvatat. SM, Spenta Mainyu. VM, Vohu Manah.

X Xshathra. B, Bartholomae. J, Jackson. M, Mills.

Sp, Spiegel. |

The figures after Avestan Words are the columns of Bar-
tholomae’s Dictionary where they may be found.

Figures after an M stand for pages of Mills’ Zarathushtrian
Gathas in Metre and Form, unless referring to his transla-
of, or oomment on, some particular Gatha, such as, 28.10.

The figures after each line of the translation assist the
reader in referring to the corresponding line of the Text;
but even so the exigencies of the English idiom have led
to further unmarkable transpositions.


Craditional Arrangement


I. Gatha Ahunavaiti, Yasnas 28-34
Il. Gatha Ushtavaiti, Yasnas 43, 44, 46. The Wish.
Ill. Gatha Spenta Mainyu, Yasna 47-50. The Holy Spirit.
IV. Gatha Vohu Xshathrem, Yasna 51, The Good Kingdom
V. Gatha Vahishta Istish, Yasna 53. The Best Wish.


Provisional Yhronological Succession of Scriptures


I. Gathas, Yasna 28-53; and formulas in 27.13,14; 54.
I]. Haptanghaiti, Yasna 35-42; 12; 58; 4.26.
III. Metrical: Yasnas 9,10,11,57,62,65
Yashts 5,8,9,10,18,14,15,17,19
Scattered verses in Vispered, Nyaishes, and Afringans.
IV. Remaining prose portions of the Avesta.


il INTRODUCTORY TABLES


Chronology (after Casartelli)


I, MEDES, 700-559 B.C.
1. Contact between Medes and Semitic peoples.
2. Zarathushtra in Western Iran, 660-583 ? B.C.
3. Propagation of his religion in Bactria. Longer Gathic document?
4. Establishment thereof. Shorter, priestly Gathic document?

ll. ACHAMENIANS, 559-331 B.C.


Cuneiform inscriptions of Darius I, Xerxes I, Artaxerxes I, Artaxer-
xes III. Development of Avesta, Haptanghaiti (Yasna 35-42)?


Ill, SELEUCIDS, 331-250 B.C.

Greek kings. Decadence of Mazdeism under Alexander.
IV. ARSACIDS, 250 B.C.—225 A.D.

Parthian kings, Religious doubt. Avesta translated into Pehlevi.

V. SASSANIDS, 226-651 A.D.

Mazdean kings, State Religion.

226-241, Ardeshir I, heresy of Mani.
238, Text of Avesta gathered under the high-priest Tansar.
369-379, Shahpur II, Text corrected under Aderbad Marehspand.


438, Yezdegerd lI. Edict of his minister, Mir i Narseh, 440. Writings
of the Armenian Eznig.


490, Kobad- Heresy of Mazdak, 488. Formation of Avestan alphabet.


531, Khosrav Anosharevan. Golden age of Pehlevi literature. Redac-
tion of principal treatises. Greek and Syriac civilization in Persia.


632, Yezdegerd III, Paul the Persian of Dair-i-shar.
651, Arab Conquest finally suppresses Mazdean establishment.


Chronology of the Elements of Mazdean Religion

I. Old Gathic Y43-53, Zarathushtra’s experiences, Fire, Prayer.

Il. Late Gathic, Y28-34, Priest, Sacrifice, Penances, Resurrection,
Daenas, or individualities.

Ill. Old, Haptanghaitt, Y35-42, Personification of the Ameshaspen-
tas. Worship of Fravashis, fire, earth and grass. ‘Yazamaide’ or
praise to waters, Geus Urvan, and to all holy and clean beings.

IV. Doubtful, Haoma, the Death-repeller; Misvan, or limbo.

V. Recent, Bundahish, 6 creation-days; 5 divisions of day; and five
Gathas. Baresman.

VI. Sassanian. Crystallization of definite doctrines.


INTRODUCTORY TABLES ili


Home and Age of Zarathushtra


Jackson, in his book on Zarathushtra gives the life-time of Zara-
thushtra as B.C, 660-588; the tradition states he was 42 years of age
on the conversion of Vishtaspa, the chief of the Magians, while he
received the vision when 30 years of age.

The place of his birth seems to be Atropatene, or Adarbaijan, the
region to the West of Media, the neighborhood about Lake Urumiah.
This is to the West of the southern third of the Caspian Sea. His
mother was said to hail from the Median Raga or Rail.

Turan is Turkestan, on the opposite, eastern side of the lower
third of the Caspian Sea.

The location of the Vision of Vohu Manah is traditionally to the
South of the Caspian Sea, in the Alborz Mountains (that is, Hara Be-
rezaiti), whose two peaks are Hugar, and Adsind.

The location of theWVision of Asha, is ‘at the T6jan water,’ and is
probably the Tajan, or Thejend, river. This is in Turan. It flows
westwards, and does not reach the Caspian Sea, but loses itself in
the desert of Turan. This location would allow good opportunity for
Zarathushtra’s acquaintance with the ‘friendly’ tribes of Fryana the
Tura. ;

The third Vision, or conference, was with Ahura Mazdah, and took
place in Zarathushtra’s home, already mentioned, to the West of the
southern third of the Caspian Sea, called Adarbaijan, or Airan-Vé6j,
on the river Daité, or Daitya, the Jordan of Zoroastrianism.

The traditional seven questions addressed to seven divinities in
seven different places must have been derived from the above three
experiences.


IV INTRODUCTORY TABLES


Bibliographic Suggestions
Text: Westergaard, Copenhagen; Geldner’s, Strassburg, is the best.
Bartholomae, Christian, Karl Teubner, Strassburg, publisher.
Translation: Gathas des Awesta. Grammar: Handbuch.
Dictionary: Alt-Iranisches Woerter-buch.
Geiger und Kuhn (and Jackson), Grundriss der Iranischen Philo-
logie. Strassburg, Karl Teubner, 1896-1904. Exhaustive.
Jackson, A.V.W, Columbia University, New York City, Macmillan,
Persia, Past and Present, a book of Travel and Research. 1906.
Zoroaster, the Prophet of Ancient Iran. Both excellent.
Justi, Handbuch der Alt-baktrischen Sprache. Old, but excellent.
Mills, Lawrence H. Oxford University, England. Has published:
Dictionary of Gathas, yet in press.
Text: A Study of the Five Zarathushtrian Gathas, with Text and
Translations. Epoch-making edition of all the critical material.
Translations: in Sacred Books of the East 31, and ‘Zarathushtrian
Gathas in Metre and Rhythm,’ Open Court Co, Chicago.
Numerous books on Zoroastrianism as compared with other religions
Reichelt, H. Awestisches Elementar-buch. Winter, Heidelderg.
Translations: Spiegel, de Harlez, Darmesteter.
Boeklen, Ernst, Die Verwandschaft der Juedisch-Christlichen mit der
Persischen Eschatologie. Goettingen, Vandenhoeck u. Ruprecht,02
Casartelli, L-C, La Philosophie Religieuse du Mazdeisme sous les
Sassanides. Louvain, Vanlinthout Freres, 1884.
Darmesteter, James, Ormuzd et Ahriman, leurs Origines, et leur
Histoire. Paris, F Vieweg, 67 Rue Richelieu, 1377.
Haug, Essays on Sacred Language, Writings and Religion of Parsees
Jackson, AVW, Doctrine of the Future Life. Biblical World, Aug96
Moffat, James, Zism and Primitive Christianity, Hibbert Journal, 1,2
Stave, Erik, Einfluss des Parsismus...Haarlem, 1897, Erven I’ Bohm.
Soederblom, Nathan, at Leroux, Paris
Les Fravashis, Etudes sur. .la Survivance des Morts, 1899.
La Vie Future d’apres le Mazdeisme, 1901.
Zartushti, Bombay, India, Parsee periodical.


OUTLINE OF GATHAS v


Outline of the GACHAS


YASNA 28


SELF-CONSECRA TION
OF PRIEST AND CONGREGATION


I. Self-consecration of the Priest Zarathushtra.

1 Z prays for the Holy Spirit, so as to satisfy both VM and the Soul
of the Bovine Creation.

2 As reward for his willingness to serve Z demands both worlds.

3 Z will sing praises as never before, if the Gods support him when
he calls.

42, watching over mens’ souls, will teach them to seek Asha,

5 Converting them by the promise of the beatific vision of VM, AM,
and his retinue.

Il. Prayer of the Congregation for Help and Mercy.

6 The Congregation prays: for Z, that he may receive support; and
for themselves, that they may be protected from enemies;

7 For Vishtaspa, that he attain his wishes; for Z, that he obtain a
hearing}

8 For the hero Frashaoshtra, and all other members, the good of VM
for ever.

9 In order to avoid angering the Gods, the Congregation placates
them with praise, as being best able to promote Utility.

10 May the Clever attain their objects, inasmuch as wise prayers are
fruitful.

Ill. Zarathushtra’s Prayer for Efficiency.

11 Z will preserve the believervs’ good aetions and thoughts, and he

prays for knowledge that he may proclaim the destiny of life.


vi OUTLINE OF GATHAS


YASNA 29
THE EXTERIOR CALL OF ZARATHUSHTRA


DRAMA IN HEAVEN. New ‘Dramatis Personae’ are: _ the deified Soul
of the Archetypal Bull, as the advocate of the earthly Cattle; and their Creator
technically termed their ‘Shaper’.


I. The Cattle demands protection.

1 The Cattle demand the introduction of agriculture as protection
from human maltreatment.

2 The Shaper-of-the-Cattle consults Asha as to whether there is no
legal process to enforce protection for the Cattle.

3 Human moral limitations are so great that Asha knows of no help.
Then the Creator of the Cattle decides to undertake this defence,

4 Asha refers suppliants to AM whose omniscience decides of all.

5 The Creator of the Cattle addresses his plea to AM, who answers
that

6 Legal process exists only for men, not also for Cattle, who are
men’s property, being intended to furnish him with flesh and milk
for food;

7 But only according to merciful provisions; who will teach these?


Il. The Call of Zarathushtra as Teacher and Protector.

8 VM selects Zarathushtra, and would confer on him prophetic abi-
lity and dignity.

9 The Soul of the Cattle weeps at receiving, as protector, not a war-
rior, but a priest; and prays that, at least, this priest may be en-
dued with power sufficient to protect the Cattle.

10 Zarathushtra proclaims absolute reliance on the divine power and
efficiency ;

11 But men should do their part by accepting and practising his
teachings. The Soul of the Cattle wails that the Cattle are willing
to serve AM if He will but protect them.


OUTLINE OF GATHAS Vii


YASNA 30


THE PROCLAMATION OF DUALISM
TEACHING THE NECESSITY OF TAKING SIDES


L. Exhortation to the Faithful to Open their Ears to the Mystery.


1 Z proposes to teach 2, what is necessary for praise to AM, and for
prayer to VM, and 4, the bliss of the believer in beholding Asha.

2 ¢, for discrimination between the two Parties, and for
4, the eventuating of the fate of the ages in their favor.


ll. Revelation of the Doctrinal Root of the Division of the Parties


3 The Twin Spirits are the good and bad in ‘thought, word, deed’.

4 They determined 2, life and death; 4, ultimate reward and punish-
ment.

5 The Opponents chose the Bad Spirit, while Asha chose the Best.

6 The Daevas, being deceived, went over to Aeshma, author of sick-

Tess.

7 X, VM, and A then visited the sick man; Armaiti gave him vigor,
that he might attain health or paradise, even if only through the
test of retribution by fire.

8 At the time of punishment mercy shall be shown to them who de-
liver their Drujist-opponents into the two hands of Asha.


Il. Zarathushtra hopes for Universal Conversion
by Choice between Eternal Bliss and Woe.


9 Z prays for God’s help in making life progressive, and in confirm-
ing the wavering.

10 The good shall receive the promised reward in heaven, while the
bad shall suffer destruction.

11 The Cause will progress only when the believers fully realize the
significance of eternal bliss or woe.


viii OUTLINE OF GATHAS


YASNA 31


PRAYERS FOR ENLIGHTENMENT
AND EXHORTATIONS TO PARTISANSHIP


I. Practical Introduction: Enlightenment Claimed
As no more than Justice to Zarathushtra.


1 Zarathushtra proposes to preach.

2 His mnigeion is demanded by the natural difficulties of search for
truth.

3 But before he can preach, he must have a divine revelation of his
message,

4 In order to prosper the Coming Kingdom.

5 He himself must meditate over his message before going out.


Il. First Call for Enlightenment, and Answer from Within.
J. Call.


6 Z offers a reward for an explanation of 1, Health and Immortality,
7 2, Creatorship; 3, Origin of Asha; 4, Maintaining of Vohu Manah;
5, the Prospering of these through the Holy Ghost.
2. Answer.


8,9a From within Z himself comes the answer to all these:
9b,10 Agricultural Civilization solves these problems, while
11 Mazdah is the Creator of all.


Ill. Second Call for Enlightenment.


J. Introduction.
12 The Opinions of Men are divided, while
13 Mazdah is all-detecting, and omniscient.
2. Second Call.


14 Z asks about 1, Compensations;

15 2, Punishment for his Opponents;

16 Whether his Followers may attain God-likeness;

17 Which is the more important Object of Choice—a good, but un-
scrupulous living, or Improvement of State or Self?


IV. The Partisan Close: Choose Sides, Take Zarathushtra’s Word


18 Oppose the Drujists with weapons, for they would destroy your
settlements.

19 But hearken to Z, who is able to Enforce his words at Latter Day

20 The Drujists shall in hell be tormented, while

21 Those will be rewarded who are Friendly to God in word and deed

22 All this will be Accepted by the Well-disposed.


OUTLINE OF GATHAS ix


YASNA 32


AT A PARLEY, VITUPERATION OF
THE RIVAL PROPHET, GREHMA


I. Public Self-consecration, and its Acceptance.


1 Priests, warriors, and farmers, as servants of AM, separate from
Daevas.
2 AM publicly accepts their devotion: ‘it shall be Ours’.


IJ. Zarathushtra Vituperates his Rival Grehma to the Daevas.


3-8 The Daevas are warned to renounce the actions and teachings of
the rival prophet Grehma, who, however high he stands at present,
has incurred eternal punishment for meat-eating, and

9-12,14, for many other misdeeds, and who shall yet

13 be brought, when in company with the rich in hell, to desire the
message of Zarathushtra, who then will hinder Grehma from be-
holding Asha.

14 Hence the Karpanite and Kavayite is condemned to destruction,
while those who suffered by them are taken to heaven by Haurva-
tat and Ameretat.


I. Zarathushtra will Exult in Executing this Final Judgment


15 Zarathushtra hopes soon to be able to limit the Drujists’ violence
against his own beloved.

89.1 Zarathushtra will exult to act as judge to the Drujists, his fol-
lowers, and to the ‘mixed’.

83.2 Whoever either injures a Drujist by thought, word, or hand, or
converts a brother, he fulfils the good pleasure of AM.

30.38 Whoever does good to any one of the congregation, or zealously
tends cattle, shall be admitted to the pasture of Asha.


x OUTLINE OF GATHAS


YASNA. 33


HIGH-PRIESTLY PRAYER FOR
ACCEPTANCE, CONVERSION, and PARADISE


I. Prayer for Acceptation.


4 Through the might of his prayer,

5 And through his praise of Obedience, when he reaches Paradise,

6 And by divine teaching initiated into the mysteries of Agriculture,
7 Zarathushtra hopes to attain a more extensive hearing.


Il. Prayer for General Conversion.


8,9 He prays that universal conversion may already improve then
contemporaneous conditions
10 in matters of comfort and bodily well-being.


Ill. Prayer for Paradise.


11 But, for the other world beyond also, may the Gods grant mercy

12 to him and his, with grant of eternal reward.

13 He hopes yet to convert many a person.

14 He promises to do all in his power to show himself worthy of the
favor of the Gods


OUTLINE OF GATHAS xl


YASNA 34


CONGREGATIONAL PRAYER
FOR PROTECTION and INSTRUCTION


I. Congregational Prayer for Protection and Instruction.


1 In view of the equivalent interchange of work, word and prayer for
divine rewards, the believers will earn as many as possible; hence,

2 May the Gods grant that no merit be lost.

3 As dutiful observers of all that is right we hope for eternal reward

4 And to pass through the fire-ordeal comforted, not injured.

5 Have You the power to preserve the poor who trust in You, and
have renounced all relations with the Daevas?

6 If so, show Your power by improvement of conditions not only be-
yond, but even here!

7 Defend us from those who spread false teachings,

Sa And are dangerous because richer than Zarathushtra,

8b,9 But even on that account they shall lose the rewards of Paradise

10,11 Which are for those who hold the true teaching, and who op-
pose the enemy.

12a Inform us of what Thou requirest, that we may give it;

12b,13 Teach us the paths of VM on which the Helpers will go to
Paradise.


Il. Zarathushtra Closes with a Prayer
for Congregation and Humanity.


14 Let the Congregation assure themselves of reward by good care


of the Cattle,
15 And by fulfilling the divine commands to attain perfection—effici-


ency and utility.


xii OUTLINE OF GATHAS


YASNA 43
THE INTERIOR CALL OF ZARATHUSHTRA


I. Prayer for Fulfilment of Human Aspirations.


i2 Prayer for the fulfilment of the wishes of all who are present.
3,4 Zarathushtra prays for the fulfilment of his own wishes, especi-
ally for knowledge of AM’s power and greatness.


Il. Reminiscences of Six Visions.


5,6 First. AM at the very beginning plans rewards and punishments

7,8 SECOND. Zarathushtra takes sides with the Ashaists, and deter-
mines never to cease seeking instruction.

9,10 THIRD. Visible revelation of Asha is granted.

11,12 FourtH. The Gods promise to support him in the prophetic
office which he has undertaken.

13,14 Firtu. Prayer to VM for ultimate Paradise, and immediate
victory over his opponents.

15,16 Sixtu. Armaiti promises the latter if Zarathushtra will break
off all intercourse with the unbelievers. He makes confession of
faith, and looks forward to the establishment of the Kingdom.


OUTLINE OF GATHAS xiii


YASNA 44


ORACULAR CONSULTATION AS TO ADVISABILITY
OF CONVERSION THROUGH WAR


I. Questions about Theology.


1 What is the proper method of prayer to the Gods, so as to induce
them to help him to attain VM?

2 Will the rewards begin in the second life? Z is Watcher and Savior.

3 Who is the first creator and energizer of Nature?

4 Who is the Preserver, and creator of VM?

5 Who created light, waking and morning?

6 Is his own message genuine? For whom was the Cattle created?

7 Whose wisdom made sons reverence parents? AM is creator.

8 Z would know the words of life to attain ultimate rewards.

9 Will Z be able to perfect his individuality?

10 Will his religion of practice and reverence find acceptance?

11 Will his religion spread to the pagans? He has a right to expect
this, for the Gods chose him; he is an enemy to all other prophets


II. Questions about Propaganda by War.


12 Must not the other prophet who opposes Z be an enemy to God?

13 Will it be possible to drive the dissidents from home into the
camp of the avowed opponents?

14 Z would hand over these Druj to Asha for torment and punishment

15 In this religious war, which side shall gain the victory?

16 Prayer that a vision reduce the people to obedience to himself.

17 Will he succeed in establishing salvation for himself and his?

18 Will he, while yet in this life, receive his reward?

19 Z takes it for granted that whoever fails to pay him due rever-
ence will have to suffer for it at the end of life; why not now also?


Ill. Loyalty to Zarathushtra is Profitable.


20 The management of the Druj always resulted in ‘hard times’; why
side with them ?


xiv OUTLINE OF GATHAS


YASNA 45


SERMON ON DUALISM, TEACHING
AGRICULTURE AS ROAD TO PARADISE


I. Repeated ‘Open Your Ears to the Mystery’.
1 Z preaches to multitudes from far and near lest the Druj prophet
mislead them.
Il. The Doctrinal Dualistic Foundation of Partisanship.
2 The Good Spirit sets up a total disagreement with the Bad Spirit.


Il. The Good Spirit Teaches the Best Word of Agriculture.


3 Whoso disagrees with Z’s revelation shall suffer at the end of life.

4 The best in this life is the efficient VM (doctrine) and beneficent
Armaiti (agriculture).

5 The Best Word to hear is obedience to It; that will earn Health
and Immortality.


IV. AM will Vindicate Z as Judge by Reward and Punishment.


6,7 This has been revealed through AM who disposes of final rewards
and punishments through his Kingdom.

8 AM should be won by prayer.

9 We should seek contentment through VM, and efficiency thro’ AM,

10 Who, through Asha and VM, promised H and Am in his realm.


V. Zarathushtra Remains Mediator.


11 The attainment of all this depends on enlisting the support of the
Prophet and Redeemer-Helper, by being devoted to him alone.


OUTLINE OF GATHAS XV


YASNA 46


WAR PRELIMINARIES OF
HEART-SEARCHINGS and ENCOURAGEMENTS


I. Failure in Conversion and Demand on Mazdah for Vindication

1 Conversion lags; all the Estates oppose the Prophet.

2 7’s poverty diminishes his influence so that he depends on God

8,4 Who is expected tostem the tide, and break the power of the
prince who is the chief obstacle.


Ii. Rules How to Treat Converts.
5,6 Converts are to be protected from injury by former associates.


Ill. Actual Struggle to Protect Converts (against Bendva ? )
7,8 Hope that all will turn out well, end that opponents will meet
with punishment.


IV. Z is the First Prophet: Obedience to him Gains Paradise.

9 He himself was the first to proclaim the truths of salvation.

10 Whoever obeys him attains Paradise.

11 His opponents will, on the Judgment-bridge, be sifted into hell.

12 But he hopes that the descendants of Fryana the Tura will be
converted, and gain Paradise.

13 Whoever obeys Z is worthy to be heard of, and will attain both
worlds.


V: Praise for the Supporters of his Cause.
14 Kavay Vishtaspa will be rewarded by union with AM in Heaven.
16 Frashaoshtra Hvogva is to attain both his wishes and the Gods.


VI. Partisanship with Zarathushtra Essential to Gain Paradise.
15 Haechataspas are to learn discrimination, and attain Asha
17 Jamaspa Hvogva’s prayers and docility to be remembered beyond.
18 Zarathushtra promises friendship to friends, enmity to enemies.
19 Whoever satisfies Zarathushtra shall attain future life and a pair
of cows which AM will know how to procure.


xvl OUTLINE OF GATHAS


YASNA 47


SONG OF THE SPIRIT AS INSPIRER OF WAR.


1 Whoever evidences the right spirit in thought, word and deed shall
receive from AM the highest reward.

2 Hence that right spirit should be evidenced, because AM is the
father of all who hold to Asha.

2 AM is also father of that Spirit who created cattle for men, and
pasture for the cattle.

A All Ashaists should separate from the Opponents who have fallen
away from that Spirit,

5 And who will have no share in the rewards of the Ashaists.

6 It is to be hoped that the expectation of reward may yet convert
many.


OUTLINE OF GATHAS XVil


YASNA 48


INCOHERENT APPEAL FOR
CHAMPIONS and DEFENDERS


I. Hope for Rewards in This Life.


1 Ultimate victory of Asha is certain.
2 The lot of the Faithful should improve in this life already.


II. Punishment for Opposers and Waverers.


3 It is wisdom to hold to the secret teachings of AM.
4 Persons who waver between these divine teachings and their own
inclinations, wishes and convictions shall be—separated?


Ill. Right of Believers to Present Comfort.


5 Through good princes Armaiti is to provide pasture for cattle, and
for men, the earning of Paradise.

6 The earth was designed as residence for men, as pasture for cattle

7 All who seek eternal reward must protect cattle from cruelty.


IV. Uncertainty Here and Hereafter.


8 Is the realm of AM certain for his prophet Zarathushtra? Will the
Judgment favor his own followers?

9 How will his life shape itself in this world? Will he be able to pro-
tect himself from his enemies?


V. Nobles must resign Luxury, enforce Security, gain Salvation.


10 When will the Nobles absent themselves from the ceremonies of
the opposing priests and rulers?

11 This alone will enforce security.

12 Helpers of the land are those who practice enforcement of AM’s
laws. They are conquerors of Aeshma, destined rulers and saviors.


XViil OUTLINE OF GATHAS


YASNA 49


ZARATHUSHTRA, DEFEATED BY BENDVA,
APPEALS FOR DEFENDERS


I. Zarathushtra Utters Imprecations on his Successful Opponent.


1,2 Perdition to Bendva, the Chief Obstacle, and to his hired prophet
Grehma,

3 Whose teachings promote perdition; wherefore both deserve ex-
communication.

4 To them violence to cattle seems meritorious; they might yet gain
the upper hand.

5 Bliss awaits those who hold to the true belief.


Il. Frashaoshtra is Urged to Become Defender.


6 Z seeks to know clearly God’s plans so that he may proclaim his
religion acceptably to God.

7 Whom, among noble or commoner, does God choose as champion?

8 Z prays that Frashaoshtra may attain union with Asha, and that
he himself may attain the Kingdom. Both of them would be God’s
ambassadors for eternity.

9 Jamaspa also is called; may he remember what the Prophet can, at
the latter end, do for those who follow him faithfully.

10 Z will take pains to see to it that all good deeds are remembered
and rewarded,

11 While the unbelievers may expect the worst.


OUTLINE OF GATHAS xix


YASNA 50
ORDINATION OF DISCIPLES TO FORM SETTLEMENTS


I. How to Form New Settlements.


49.12 Z asks what help is coming to him from the Gods he worships.

90.1 From whom else can he expect help?

2 How shall new settlements be started? By ‘just’ living, and by
‘clever’ aggression.

3 Ultimate possession will result from gradually dispossessing the
Druj from neighboring lands.


Il. These Settlers are to Act as Missionaries.


4 Z praises the Gods for the Settlers’ joy at their establishment.

© The Gods’ responsive joy leads Z to encourage the Settlers to man-
ual labor. |

6 May the Settlers propagate Z’s commands in a prophetic manner!

{7 These missionaries are compared to steeds whom Z will yoke for
the Gods.

8 As priest, Z presents to the Gods the devoted prayers of humanity.


II. But Zarathushtra Remains the Only Mediator.


9 So Z again stands before the Gods as mediator; but to the congre-
gation he promises that when he is among the Gods he will then
still more energetically see to it that his followers get their reward

10 Z’s past and future actions, and Nature’s beauties praise the Gods

11 Z would for ever remain the eulogist of the Gods.


XX OUTLINE OF GATHAS


YASNA 5
ENEMIES, HEROES, AND SAINTS OF THE KINGDOM


I. The Children of the Kingdom.


1 Z’s object is to gain the heavenly kingdom for himself and his.
2 Assure us that we will be received, O AM, if we serve faithfully.
3 Prayers of those who serve Thee by deeds should be heard.

4 Where is retribution, forgiveness, the Gods, and the kingdom?
5a To the pious farmer grant a cow in his paradise

5b,6 Inasmuch as Z is appointed Judge and Distributor at the end.
7 Z invokes on himself strength and judgment.


Il. Opposition to the Prophet is Enmity to Humanity.


8,9 Clear knowledge of reward and punishment is the chief issue.

10a Hence an opponent to its teacher Z is an enemy to humanity,

10b,11 Against whom Z summons Asha and every friend of his.

12 One of these opponents was inhospitable to Z;

13 Which act will deprive him of reward, and dooms him to terrors.

14 The Karpans will not practice agriculture or spare cattle; by one
word shall they be condemned to the House of the Druj.

15 Z claims for himself that which he has promised to the believers
and which AM was the first to attain in heaven.


Il. Supporters of the Prophet are Heroes and Saints.
16 Praise for Vishtaspa, the political chief of the congregation.
17 For Frashaoshtra, the noble of the Hvogva family
18 Who promised him his daughter; and for Jamaspa, his son-in-law;
19 Also for Maidyomangha the missionary.
20 These four leaders produce prosperity, which results in godliness
21 Which results in attainment of the Kingdom.
22 Z will reverence those who, like the above four heroes, have ac-
quired AM’s recognition.


OUTLINE OF GATHAS Xxl


YASNA 53


ZARATHUSHTRA GIVES HIS DAUGHTER
TO SECURE A CHAMPION


I. Marriage Ceremony.


1,2 The Prophet is assured of a most excellent lot beyond, as are also
his followers and supporters, the heroes Vishtaspa, Frashaoshtra,
and Maidyomangha.

3 Z gives away Pouruchista, exhorting her that she grow wise by
obedience to her husband as mediator towards Gods and the Cause.

4 By serving him, the believers and relatives Pouruchista will attain
divine blessing.

5 By common life the married pair are to cherish each other, and to
encourage each other to good works.

6 The pleasures of the evil are short, and lead to tortures in hell.

7 If you are constant to the Cause, you shall be happy; but woe be
to you, if you abandon it!


Il. The Bridegroom is Goaded to Conversion by the Sword.


8 Renewed encouragement to Vishtaspa to promote peace for the
faithful by slaughter of the enemy; and quickly, too!

9 It is certain the evil shall go to hell; but where is the prince who,
to anticipate that doom of theirs, will rid the earth of them imme-
diately? AM has the power to give to the Poor that Better Part.


xxii SUMMARY OF ZARATHUSHTRA’S MESSAGE


Summary of Zarathushtra’s Message.


We cannot leave these sublime hymns without indicating summarily
the chief motives which prompted them, which they embody, and
which they still preach to futurity.

Root-Principle : Protection of Animals from Cruelty.

It was the call of the Cattle, Yasna 29, which led to Zarathushtra’s
external call as prophet to teach men to protect the cattle; those are
called ‘enemies’ who treat the cattle with violence, 31.15; 32.12; 49.4;
51.14; the members of the congregation are to assure themselves of
eternal reward by care of the cattle, 33.3; 34.14.


First Result : Vegetarianism.


It is enemies who kill the cattle, 32.12, and eat them, 31.15, and
who teach others to eat the pieces of flesh, 32.8, possibly at sacrifices.


Second Result : Settling of Land, and Agriculture.

Cattle need pasture, stables, and fodder; consequently protection of
cattle implies settling on definite pieces of land, and practice of the
laws of agriculture, 29.1; 31.9,10. This fact attests that, far from be-
ing recent productions, these hymns are possibly some of the most
venerable of human documents; echoes of the religious dialect of
man’s first steps in civilization.

Third Result : Forming of Parties by Patriotic;Partisanship.

Inevitably settlers of one valley form a community; and love of
home develops into a patriotism which considers their own valley pa-
radise or heaven. The contiguity of other valleys, however, brings
home to them the outside universe which appears as hell or limbo ac-
cording as its inhabitants are enemies or indifferent friends.

. Fourth Result : Dualism.

Clothed in religious verbiage, these practical needs ( see Y 30.9-11
connected with 30.3-8 ) appear as two divinities, the Good, and the
Evil, representing Agriculture versus Nomadism (the dualism of 45.2
connected with the agriculture of 45.3-5 ).


SUMMARY OF ZARATHUSHTRA’S MESSAGE Xxili


Fifth Result : Need of Leader and Teacher calls Zarathushtra.

But the ‘good’ peaceable agriculturalist needs a leader against the
warlike nomad who to him is evil. Zarathushtra’s recognition of this
need expresses itself in Y 29.8.

Sixth Result : Zarathushtra’s Struggles Emphasize his Personality

Although Zarathushtra was called forth by the need of a teacher
of kindness to cattle, and of a prophet of Dualism, his labors by
peaceful means were fruitless, Y 44 and 45; see 53.8,9. Unfortunate-
ly, this standing still became retrogression before the aggressiveness
of the enemy. To attain no more than peace, 53.8, he must incite to
war and slaughter. As the enemies’ damnation is inevitable the soon-
er they are butchered, the better, 53.9. It was fated, however, that
he himself should perish by the sword he had thus drawn.

To support these doctrines of damnation and blood there is needed
an authority greater than that of teacher or prophet—that of priest,
28.1-5; 33; 50.7,8; of redeemer, 45.11; of mediator, 50.6,9; and of
advocate. Let us hope that it is only because of this that heresy is
constituted by mere opposition or discourtesy to Zarathushtra, 51.10,
12; who even becomes the Judge at the end of things.

Seventh Result : The Prophet’s God becomes Supreme.

While the Gathas remain polytheistic to the end, yet do they teach
the supremacy of Mazdah; but they do so in a manner such as tosug-
gest it was either novel or questioned. The heat of the prophet’s
championship of Mazdah betrays his originality in superimposing Maz-
dah over the Iranic pantheon.

Eighth Result : This God’s Will Thereby Becomes Righteousness.

When we have raised a divinity to the position of supremacy, his
will thereby becomes transformed into the standard of righteousness

or Asha. Hence, in an ever widening stream, flow duty, conscience,
merit, and freedom of the will.
Ninth Result : Rightness Appears in Thought, Word and Deed.

A triple psychology makes three avenues for Virtue: spirit mani-
fests in thought, soul in word, and body in deed. This triplicity reap-
pears in their eschatology—the blessed, the damned, and the indiffer-
ent; Paradise, Hell, and Misvan or limbo.


XXIV SUMMARY OF ZARATHUSHTRA’S MESSAGE


Tenth Result : Future Rewards and Punishments.

With unerring instinct Zarathushtra played boldly on the one chief
human longing, that for a blissful eternal life. The prophet’s main
object is to obtain the Kingdom of Heaven for himself and his, 51.1.
The glory of both worlds is a twofold division found again in the two-
foldness of reward and punishment. If this be clearly realized, 31.22,
there will be no need of further exhortations to partisanship for or
against the prophet. The eternal reward is vision of, and communion
with the Gathic Pantheon, especially Ahura Mazdah.

_ Efeventh Result : Practical Prosperity.

Except divine names, one of the most common words is deeds.
One argument against the Druj is that under their management there
were hard times. It is the function of Armaiti to prosper house and
land. The calving, fortune-bringing Cow is fruitful. It is hoped that
future promises will begin to manifest already here on earth.

What the Gathas do not Contain.
Asceticism, scorn of riches, race suicide, love, independent thought.
From our Modern Point of View.

This great teaching of the protection of the brute creation is a
gospel which even to-day is not needless or dead, nor ever will be,
and which, to the remotest generations, will carry the long revered
name of Zarathushtra as the first to make a religion of kindliness to
helpless, self-sacrificing animals.

We may reflect that this gospel was needed peculiarly at a time
when the sickening details of unorganized butchery were daily re-
peated in range of sight and hearing. The modern prudery of the
abattoir has not solved the moral aspect of butchery—vegetarian-
ism alone willdo that. The principle involved is however not
only compassion for animals, but self-respect and personal purity,
principles also taught by Zarathushtra.


EPOCHAL DISCOVERY
in the Zoroastrian Scriptures
by KENNETH SYLVAN LAUNFAL GUTHRIE
That the two Yasna Sections in which the Gathas appear are
PARALLEL BIOGRAPHIES OF ZOROASTER


The Shorter Mark-like Personal and the Longer Luke-like Priestly
Harmony of the GATHAS
34.1-3 A. INTRODUCTION. 43.1,2


B. ZARATHUSHTRA’S EDUCATION.


3.7 I. Zarathushtra’s Discontent at Home among the Magians 43.3
II. Zarathushtra as Student with Vohumanist Cult [43.11b]


34.4 VISION 1. Fire-glow of Retribution 43.4

33.13 VISION 2. Punishments are Undeceivable 43.5,6

34.5.6 VISION 5. The Sincere shall be Supported 8.11,12
Ill. Zarathushtra as Student with Ashaist Cult

31.7,8 Vision 4. Theophany of Asha 43.9,10


31.12,13 VISION 3. Wavering to be Ended by Support of Ashaists 43.7,8
30.8-11 VIsION 6. Demand for Help to execute God’s Judgments 43.1314


31.18-22; 34. 9,10 VISION 7. Armaiti Aligns the Parties 43. 15,16
IV. Zarathushtra Seeks Immortality in Vain (83.6)
31.6.7; 33.6 He is Rejected by Spentamainyuist Cult 44.17,18


31.3-5,7,8,11,14-17; 34.12-15 V. Studies with Mazdists 43.45 44.1-16,19,20; 47.2; 50.6
CC ZARATHUSHTRA’S ENTRANCE INTO PUBLIC LIFE


31-9,10 I. Creation of Cattle; its Choice of a Master 51-7; 44.16
29 Capture of Ashaist Cult: Appointment as Judge 44.6,20
30.1-5 Capture of Vohumanist Cult: Dualism Proclaimed  45.1-3; 49.3
IV. Zarathushtra is afflicted with sickness; the Metallic Fire-test
30.6,75 32.7; 33.10,12,14 drives him to Seek Help in a Vision 1.9
V. Wherein he receives the long-sought Mystic Word of
31.21; 32.5; 33.8,9; 34-1,11 Health and Immortality 45.4115 47.15 48.1
VI. Capture of Spentamainyuist Cult: Coming of the Holy Ghost:
0.155. 31.7; 33.5 43.8,12,16; 45.85 46.175 47.1-6
Biolj2e ace 1,2 VII. Zarathushtra is accepted publicly ——.


D. ESTABLISHMENT OF MAGIAN MOVEMENT.


32. 3-16 I. Fight with the Daevas 4§.1-8; 48; 49
II. Zarathushtra is Worsted, and in despair drives the Magians
3 into open agricultural country 46.9-13; 50; 51.1-15
2% Vishtaspa assumes leadership; Praise for Heroes 46.14-19; §1.16-22
IV Jamaspa, induced by matrimonial alliance, joins the
Magian movement 63


PART II


Text, Translation, and
The Life of Zarathushtra


TRANSCRIPTION OF AVESTAN ALPHABET


oR mM OC mo SR a &


eS OI


~~ 2
<


= oe Na


wf oC ms &


(9)


n


=a


nau < * $= < &


9 27


W (») ¥ Ca)?
us 7

&Z

ro (#) ¥  ¢é73
fz


w z


The Hymns of Zarathushtra—Introduction 1


INTRODUCTION to the TRANSLATION


Il. The Translation Undertaken in Self-defence, Not Bravado.


It is well-known who they are who ‘rush in where angels
fear to tread’; and this translation would never have been
attempted had not the writer faced the alternatives of leav-
ing incomplete the labor of years in the domain of com-
parative religion, or make a translation sufficiently compre-
hensible and still faithful to serve as working basis for even
approximate results. So far is this removed from being in-
tended as a criticism of translations existing, that chiefly out
of modesty in the presence of Masters so accomplished
and renowned, and partly out of an overwhelming sense of
his own limitations, the present writer had based the first
draught of his ConcorDANcE OF THE GATHAS on a pains-
taking collation of all the chief recognized translations. The
criticism passed on this effort was that it was indefinite, be-
cause it was not based on the text. There was therefore no
other resort left but to give, besides the fresh translation,
the full text, with sufficient apparatus in the way of vocab-
ulary and grammar, to enable every intelligent man both to
check this translation’s reliability, and to defend it from the
attacks of interested parties who till now have succeeded in
keeping the text inaccessible. If therefore the writer has
made this translation, it has not been out of bravado, but
in sheer self-defence.


2 The Hymns gf Zarathushtra—Introduction


Il. Why the Vocabulary is Based on Bartholomae’s Dictionary.


The kindly, unprejudiced general reader would never
suspect the groundlessness of whatever attacks this work
may receive, unless he is informed of the incredible anim-
osities that obtain among Avestan scholars. For instance, a
certain German scholar did not forgive a brother scholar for
a difference of opinion about some trifle, even after his de-
mise, It would seem almost as if the intolerance of Zara-
thushtra himself had descended on those who study his
writings.

The cheapest attack, that the present translation is a ro-
mance, has been made impossible by the presence of the
text and vocabulary. The next handiest attack will be the
pointing out of the oversights of which such a work must
no doubt be full. These attacks will cease immediately, as
soon as it is realized the writer considers all corrections
(that are not disguised differences in matters of opinion) as
helps rather than hindrances, his purpose being to perfect
his work as far as possible, he himself never having had the
false pride which hesitates to acknowledge his errors. Such
an acknowledgment 1s, in effect, as Bacon suggested, an an-
nouncement he is a wiser man than he was before. Worthy
of careful answer, however, is the logically next attack, to
the effect that this translation results from a vocabulary
based on Bartholomae’s general Iranic dictionary, rather
than on a special Gathic dictionary still in course of public-
ation. To this attack there are two answers, one negative,
the other positive.


The Hymns of Zarathushtra—Introduction 3


First, Bartholomae has by no means been followed blind-
ly; wherever he has suggested ‘special’ meanings, they have
been rejected just as thoroughly as if they had been advan-
ced by anybody else. A case in point is paB, which he in-
terprets ‘to practice’ for 53.1 exclusively, while the usual
meaning ‘to deceive’ makes good sense, as Mills has shown.
In other words, the Vocabulary has attempted to combine
the best from the labors of the best scholars.


On the whole, however, general dictionaries are, as a
rule, more reliable than special dictionaries; what we gain
in depth we lose in breadth. The more special a meaning is
the Jess likely is it to be of general usage. To the unso-
phisticated, dictionaries are fetishes to conjure with, whereas
there are venerable doctrines which have survived merely
because dictionaries bulky enough have been compiled by
their champions. The more special a dictionary is, the more
does it represent its compiler’s bias, and the less 1s its value
for comparison with the whole language and literature —
which is of especial importance for the Gathas, whose many
peculiar words, not found elsewhere, must otherwise, for
their interpretation, depend on prejudiced commentaries or,
worse yet, on pure fancy.

The present Vocabulary does not claim to be more than
a student’s practical help to reach and then interpret the
roots from which the Gathic forms are derived. The Eng-
lish interpretations were the simplest that could be used
conscientiously in order to avoid any dogmatic prejudice,
or ecclesiastical association —the purpose of the present
writer being as far as possible to restore the Gathas to that
classification of literature to which they really belong—not


dogmatic theology, but world-wide prophecy.


4 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra—Introduction


Il. Why the Translation is not in Verse.


Why is this translation not in verse, when rhythm is
commended by Zarathushtra himself (50.8, 51.16)? Chiefly
because of the exceptional difficulties of the Gathas.

Poetry has its recognized advantages; but in certain fields
these very qualities operate as disadvantages:

1 The danger of subordinating sense and message to the
mechanical exigencies of versification. How fatal the effects
of this tendency are will appear from consideration of the
chaotic traditional arrangement of the text itself, produced
(for memnonical purposes?) by neglect of every consider-
ation other than similarity in metre. This is, indeed, gener-
ally recognized.

2 The chief element of poetry is suggestiveness, that is,
punning on words. Where, however, we are laboriously try-
ing to enter fully into the exact meaning of an author, sug-
geStiveness 18 treacherous and unfaithful. Each language
has its peculiar repertory of groups of word-associations
which mislead when they are set down as corresponding.
This is apparent in the existing verse-translations whose
very eloquence is sometimes formed by ideas probably for-
eign to the text. We are fortunate enough if we succeed in
catching the author’s meaning; more fortunate still, if we
can express it in English words ; and most fortunate, if the
prose-version even 1s not unidiomatic.

3 Even in English poetry rhyme and metre have, during
the last century, been openly repudiated by recognized writ-
ers; why therefore should we feel ourselves under the slight-


The Hymns gf Zarathushtra—Introduction 5


est obligation to undertake trammels, so fatal to accuracy,
which are recognized to be unnecessary and artificial ?

4 Evidently the Gathas belong to the same general cate-
gory as the Biblical Psalms. The ludicrous failure of the
early Calvinistic metric versions should prove a wholesome
deterrent from following in their foot-steps.

5 The linguistic genius of English (analytic) and Avest-
an (synthetic) differ so much that the greater the slavishness
in imitation of the technicalities of Avestan poetics, the
greater would be the essential unfaithfulness to English un-
derstanding. So true is this that Mills’ praiseworthy zeal for
faithfulness misled him into putting his standard version in
another synthetic language, Latin. This, however, was a
fundamental error, as it interposed between the two idioms
a third, which must inevitably add to the already grave con-
fusion of thought-associations. A good translation should
act as a clear lens in a pair of spectacles; the interposition
of a third idiom would act as a smoked glass, which chan-
ges all the colours. Besides, the fatal doctrinal results which
have resulted from a similar interposition of a Latin version
between the Bible and the people should preclude another
such misfortune. Nor does Mills escape this fatality: the
Latin version which was made as a tool is frequently used
as an authority.

6 Poetry, even in English, interferes with the logical
word-order, creating unnecessary problems felt very acute-
ly in the interpretation of even English poets. While such
unnecessary puzzles may have personal and aesthetic value,
they are evidently entirely out of place in a conscientious
effort to represent a difficult foreign meaning accurately.


6 The Hymns of Zarathushtra—Introduction.


IV. Why the Names of the Ahuras have been Retained.


It would have been very much easier for the present
writer to follow the lead of other translators in omitting the
names of the Avestan divinities in such passages as he
might have thought demanded their supposed psychological
equivalents. The chief purpose of such a substitution has
been attained by the mere inversion of the order of name
and translation, the most suitable, apparently, being given
precedence. Omission of the Avestan word, on the other
hand, would have put at a great disadvantage the reader,
who should be allowed to judge for himself in this matter,
wherein the experts have no rule which 1s not accessible to
the amateur. Of course, the writer is not unmindful of that
class of readers who PREFER to have their thinking done for
them. He regrets he cannot accommodate them.

Nor can he accommodate those who urge the legitimate
ground that it makes the style ponderous to give the trans-
lation of the divine names in each case. Their problems
are far too difficult and important to admit of such a con-
sideration as style.

Comparative religion suggests the improbability of so
excessive a degree of spirituality as would result from a free
translation of the sacred names. These divinities must be
considered tribal fetishes to which only Jater moral meanings
were attributed when, in later times, the original meaning
was lost. Indications of such vicissitudes are discoverable
in such evident duplications as Asha and Ashay. Compar-
ative religion may yet solve our problem—it must not be hid!


The Hymns gf Zarathushtra—Introduction. 7


V. Some Results Attained in this Translation.


There are some peculiar difficulties in translating the
Gathas, in that it is generally admitted that in later Avestan
grammar had degenerated to an extent such that it formed
a veritable chaos; while it 1s apparent that the hymns were,
at some later period, torn out of their original interrelations
and grouped mechanically according to their rhythms. The
results of this general recognition have been fatal to a pro-
per sense, on the part of translators, of responsibility to be
accurate and consistent; for it is evident that they could
gratify any fancy with such elasticity of form and sequence.
As a result, the translations have differed scandalously, and
have led to the most bitter recriminations and animosities.

The present writer realized the need, in the Avestan field,
of that which has been done for centuries in the Biblical —
the comparative Commentary method which, before decid-
ing, gives and compares the opinions of the most memor-
able scholars in that field. Accordingly, in this translation,
occasional initials will inform the reader of the more im-
portant differences of opinion; and this effort would like to
be regarded as a pioneer commentary, which will no doubt
be supplied someday in full detail by some person with
greater opportunity and ability than the present writer.

As to the writer’s own translation, while also recognizing
the above-mentioned limitations to possible accuracy and
consistency, he considers they should not be made use of
except as a last resort. Indeed, he has found it possible to
account for every case-ending naturally; and by dint of re-


The Hymns of Zarathushtra—Introduction.


ea


taining the subject wherever possible a number of new con-
sistent interpretations have been achieved, vindicating the
utmost possible limitation of chaos.


1 In 51, stanzas 16-19 mention four heroes. Stanza 21
expresses Zarathushtra’s purpose to celebrate all Helpers.
Why then should stanza 20 abandon the subject of heroes,
and alone treat of divinities (B and M)? From its position,
we should expect it be a connecting link between what pre-
cedes and follows; and indeed such is the case. The ‘like-
willed’ refers back to the four above-mentioned heroes of
the Cause, connecting them to the ‘innumerable cloud of
witnesses in the next verse.

2 The context of 46.17 shows that Zarathushtra is plan-
ning to reveal how one might discriminate the Wise from
the Foolish(15). In 46.9-13,18 he considered unfriendliness
to himself as enmity to humanity. It would therefore not
be unnatural if we interpreted verse 16, the natural connec-
tion between 15 and 17,in the same sense, namely, that
the Wise are those who would follow the Preparer, that 1s,
Zarathushtra himself. This reasonable result flows primarily
from strict adherence to the Grammar.

3 When we remove 50.3 from the unnatural, artificial
eschatological atmosphere by considering it in connection
with its context, we find no ‘open-laying’ at the ‘consumma-
tion’, but plain, sensible, consistently-carried-out advice
how to settle agricultural, hence ‘sun-exposed’ lands amidst
the Druj, with ‘cleverness’ to evade unnecessary friction.
This interpretation would have an interesting bearing on
the meaning of ‘Magian’, which might easily be connected
with the word for ‘hole,’ Maca (1110),—1.e., lands in a deep


The Hymns of Zarathushtra—Introduction. 9


valley, not well-adapted to agriculture, which needs the sun-
shine. Our passage therefore records the time when the
Magians, so to speak, ‘got out of the hole.’

4 The benefit of this sociological explanation is best seen
by its agreement with the equally natural interpretation of
50.4, which ceases to be an entirely uncalled-for vision of
Ahuras, standing by the path to heaven, and becomes the
natural picture of how the Preparer Zarathushtra will, as
result of the success of his ‘clever’ tactics, rejoice on stand-
ing by the path to the new settlements towards which the
‘Wisher’-settlers are proceeding with shouts of joy. .

5 We have, in 44.20, a case where strict adherence to
grammar results in good sense, and agreement with parallel
passages, such as 47.3, where Armaiti is created as pasture
for the cattle. In contrast with this entirely natural state-
ment, consider the inherent absurdity of cattle being water-
ed in order to promote agriculture (M), or cattle being
cherished to promote agriculture, without closer explana-
tion (B). This seems like putting the cart before the horse.

6 We should bring out the purpose of the divine prom-
ise of ten mares with stallions—namely, to promote Zara-
thushtra’s own health (Haurvatat) and preservation (Amer-
etat) (notice the instrumental case in 44.18,c). So keenly
did Zarathushtra feel his poverty (34.5, 46.2), as to attrib-
ute to it whatever he may have experienced of temporary
disappointments.

7 Evidently (29.10,c) Ahura Mazdah is not so much
the first possessor of peace, as its source and provider.

8 It is hoped that our translation of 30.9,c is not a
thought too beautiful to be considered probably accurate.


10 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra—Introduction.


Its psychology agrees strikingly with Sidgwick’s definition
of wisdom as the union of altruism and expediency,

g Later tradition may have referred the ‘death-repeller’
of 32.14,c to the ritual Haoma-juice; a strict grammatical
construction, on the contrary, demands no more than a ref-
erence to the Ashaist repelling the Drujist with the sword.

10 The true significance of 44.10 can be reached only
when it is considered as the link connecting stanzas 9 and
11. The former asks how to sanctify the human spirits; the
latter, how Armaiti shall, in deeds, spread over those to
whom the doctrine is taught. The link connecting these two
thoughts is evidently the urgency of adjusting faith and
works—the eternal problem that agitated Paul and James.

11 In 45.5,c the word ‘this’ apparently refers to the
MANTHRA as a magic formula.

12 Although the locative case of THWAMI in 48.4 does
primarily suggest a local Misvan or Limbo, might that not
be translated as being separated ‘in Thy estimation’?

13 It would seem as if, in 51.2, Asha and Armaiti
should be read in the vocative, not the instrumental case.

14 The full meaning of all the grammatical forms of
53.4. seems to have been brought out, for the first time by
our rhetorical arrangement.

15 The Ashaist lord, in 53.9, need not be in hell; it 1s
far more likely that he is yet on earth, as stanzas 8 and 9
consistently refer to the nomads who are opposing the
herdsmen; thus one more eschatological reference is avoided.

16 Our grammatically faithful version of the very diffi-
cult 31.7 seems to offer a solution both natural and logical.

17 In 31.8 ‘him’ should refer to ‘Mind’ as last subject.


The Hymns of Zarathushtra—Introduction. 11


18 Might not 30.7 refer to an experience in Zarathush-
tra’s life when he became sick? This would furnish a suffi-
cient reason for the apparition of the Gods; their gift of en-
duringness and vitality suggests a healing. The molten me-
tal test may have been a fever, or something connected with
it. If this is right, it furnishes a logical link connecting

(30.6) the partisanship of dualism and the Daeva-sick-
ness, which might have been due to a wound caused in an
Aeshmic raid; and

(30.8) punishment for violence and 9, desire to improve
the world.


The connection between ‘molten metal’ of 30.7 and a real
experience of Zarathushtra is all the more natural as it
would explain the origin of the eschatological metal. May
it not have been the sword of the combatants? One case in
point is 32.7, where Mills translates, Bendva’s ‘glittering
sword’, while Bartholomae has the ‘glowing metal’ of the
Judgment-day. The figure would not be unusual, as is at-
tested by the traditional fiery sword of the Angel guarding
the gate of Eden. A wound burns enough, and brings on
sufficient fever to suggest the figure of a molten metal test.


19 May not the apvan of 44.3 be the ‘Milky Way’?
It would follow quite naturally after sun and stars, and
void the taking of the usually accusative form xvENG asa
enitive for this particular place (B), whereas it is in appos-
tion with other accusative forms. In this case the plural
suns’ would be the sunny days, while the singular ‘star’ de-
otes the starry sphere. Thus we preserve the grammatical
elations intact.


12 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra—Introduction.


20 May not the two ‘swift ones’ ‘yoked to the clouds
and winds’ of 44.4 be thunder and lightning?

21 A misplacement seems to have occurred in 46. Stanza
16 interrupts the connection of 15 with 17, while it conti-
nues and closes 14, carrying out the invitation to heaven
there given. Then stanza 15 begins a new subject, carried
out in stanza 17. Thus 1s restored logical order.


VI. Why Different Kinds of Type have been Employed.
If the choice of kinds of type employed in this book


should fail to commend itself to the reader, he may rest as-
sured that while it may be the result of poor judgment, it
certainly is not the result of lack of anxious fore-thought.
An effort was made to increase the clearness of the several
parts composing this book by using such a face of type as
seemed best to fit that particular section.

For instance, the Longer and Shorter Documents are
distinguished by size of type. The Outlines of the several
hymns are arranged so as to occupy one page each, in order
to make more obvious their individual significance. The
very difficult text was set in type large enough to remove
all unnecessary obstacles. The more academical higher crit-
icism was set in Old Style, while the more practical Con-
cordance was set in clearer Roman. It is hoped that the re-
sult of so much effort and fore-thought may justify the
time and expense lavished upon it.

In spite of all this, none feels the existing defects more
keenly than the present writer; he has done his best, how-
ever, under the present circumstances.


The Hymns of Zarathushtra—Introduction 13


Vil. Various Details about the Translation.

An effort has been made to reproduce the text with scru-
pulous exactitude from GELDNER; and whatever deviations
therefrom may be discovered are unintentional. It was this
consideration which caused the failure to divide each line
according to the cesura. But any reader who may desire to
read the lines according to the metre can easily do so by
following this scheme of the number of the syllables in each
part of each line of the stanza of each hymn.

Table of Gathic Versification.
28-34 has stanzas of three lines of 7 plus 9 or 8 syllables.
43-46 has stanzas of five lines of 4 plus 7 syllables.
47-50 (except 48.5,6), four lines of 4 plus 7 syllables.
51 _—sihas stanzas of three lines of 7 plus 7 syllables.
53 has stanzas of 4 lines, 2 of 7 plus 5; 2 of 7 plus 7 plus 5

The desire to make the text as living and as attractive as
possible has led to a cautiously sparing punctuation thereof
in accordance with the present translation thereof. This was
perhaps an error of judgment for which the writer would
atone by cautioning the reader who desires (as he should )
to make his own independent version, to disregard the
present punctuation entirely. Every independent ver-
sion implies its own punctuation.

The writer’s unremitting labors on this book have un-
dermined his health to such an extent that it has been found
imperative to postpone the issuance of the VocaBuLary,
GRAMMAR and CoNCORDANCE oR SusyEcT-INDEx until the
accumulation of evidence of sufficient popular appreciation to
justify the further sacrifices entailed thereby. A subscription
blank for this purpose will be found near the title-page.


1-6 Gatha Ahunavaiti 28.1,2


Abunavaiti Gatha


YASNA 28


28. J
Ahya yasa nemarha ustanazasto rafedrahya l
manyéus mazda pourvim spefitahya asha vispéng shyaothana 2


vanhéus xratim manarho ya xshnevisha géusca urvanem, 3


28. 2
yé vae mazda ahura pairi-jasai voht mananha 4
maibyO davoi ahvae astvatasca hyafcé mananhd §


ayapta ashat haca yais rapafitd daidit hvathre, 6


Lines 1-6 Qe Hymns of Zarathushtra 28.1,2


HYMN 28


Self-consecration gf Priest and Congregation


I. Self-consecration of the Priest Zarathushtra.


XXVITI—4
To the utmost of my ability, will I teach men to seek Asha (jus-
tice) ! (And this will I do) 12
XXVIIT.—1


With outstretched hands; and by reverent prayer for support, O
Mazdah, (mindful) 1
I will entreat, as the first (blessing) of the Spenta Mainyu
(bountiful mentality)—that all (my) actions, (may be per-
formed) with (the aid of) Asha (justice), 2
(That I may receive) the understanding of Vohu Manah (good
disposition ), and that I may thus satisfy the Soul of the Bovine


(creation), 3
XXVIII.—2

(And this do I) who entreat You, O Ahura Mazdah, (lord mind-

ful) through Vohu Manah (good disposition), A


To grant me both lives, that of the body and of the mind, 5
With the felicity with which Mazdah, through Asha, supports
(those to whom) Mazdah (mindful) gives the two-lives for
their comfort; 6


7-15 Gatha Ahunavaiti 28.3-5


28.3


yé vae asha ufyani manasca vohi apaourvim 7


mazdamea ahurem yaéibyo xshathremea agzaonvamnem &


varedaiti armaitis 4-m0i rafedrai zavéiig jasata, !
28. 4

yé urvanem méf gairé vohii dadé hathra mananha 10

ashisca shyaothananam vidus mazdae ahurahya ll

yavat isdi tavaca avat xsai aéshé ashahya! 12
28. 5

asha kat thwa daresani manasca vohii vaédemn6d 3

gatumea ahurai sevishtai seraoshem mazdai


ana mathra mazishtem vaurdimaidi xrafstra hizva. 15


Lines 7-15 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra  28,3-5


XXVITI.—3
(And this do I) who will sing hymns to You O Ahura Mazdah,


through Asha (justice) and Vohu Manah (good disposition),
as never before; 7
And (I will) also (sing hymns to) those (faithful believers) for
whom Armaiti prospers the never decreasing realm-of-


Xshathra ; 8

Hither, (O you divinities, come) to my support; come to my

call! 9
XXVUI—4


(And this do I) who with Vohu Manah (good disposition) am
mindful to watch over the Soul of the Bovine (creation), 10
And who knows (with what) compensations are rewarded the


deeds of (the kind inspired by) Ahura Mazdah. 11
To the utmost of my ability, will I teach men to seek Asha
(justice) ! 12


II. Prayer of the Congregation for Help and Mercy.


XXVITIL—S
O Asha (justice) ! When shall I through thee behold Vohu Manah


(good disposition) as an Expert-knower, discovering-or-attain-
ing, (among the Magian tribe) 13
The throne, and (the tribe-men’s) Sraosha-(obedience) for (the
prospering of the cause of) the most powerful (mindful)-
Mazdah Ahura-(lord) ? 14
With this mystic word (of promise B) I will cause those savages
to choose (the cause of) the greatest Mazdah Ahura-( mindful
lord). 15


16-27 Gatha Ahunavaiti 28.6-9
ES eee


28. 6
vohi gaidi manarha daidi asha-dae daregayi 16
ereshvais tii uxdais mazda zarathushtrai aojofighvat rafend 17


ahmaibyaca ahura ya daibishvatd dvaéshae taurvayama. 18


28. 7
daidi asha tam ashim vanhéus ayapta mananhd 19
daidi tu armaité vishtaspai ishem maibyaca 0


daestii_mazda xshayaca ya vé mathra srevim aradae! 2
28. 8

vahishtem thwa vahishta yém asha vahishta hazaoshem 2

ahurem yasa vaunus naroi ferashaoshtrai maibyaca 3

yaéibyasca, it raenhanhdi vispai yavé vanhéus mananho 4
28. 9

anais vie noi¢ ahura mazda ashemea yanais zaranaéma %

manasca hyat vahishtem yoi vé yoithema dasemé stitam %


yuzém zevishtyaenh6 ishd xshathremea savanham. "


Lines 16-27 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra 28.6-9


XXVIII.—6
O Mazdah Ahura-(mindful lord), come with long life of Asha


(justice) gifts, with Vohu Manah (good disposition), 16
With just utterances, and give (these) to Zarathushtra as the
means-of a vigorous support. 17
(Then, give these) to us, that we (thereby) may overcome the
hostilities of the enemy. 18


XXVIII.—7
Grant, O Asha (justice), this compensation : namely, the felicities


of Vohu Manah (good disposition) ; 19
Grant, O Armaiti (love), the wish of Vishtaspa and of myself; 20
O Thou greatest Ruler, grant a (ready) hearing unto him-who-


prepares with the Word. 21
XXVIII—8
For the best do I entreat the Lord Ahura, like willed with thee,
the best Manah-disposition, Ze
And with the best Asha’s-justice, supplicating Asha (justice) for
(1) the hero Frashaoshtra, and (2) me, 23
And (3) for whomsoever thou wouldst grant Asha-(justice) for
all the age of Vohu Manah (good disposition. ) 24
XXVITI—9


We would not vex You by those supplications, O Ahura Mazdah
(mindful lord), (nor would we vex) the best Manah-(good


disposition), 26
Because of these (expected) benefactions; rather would we haste
to offer praise 25


(To) You, who are the best prosperer of human wishes for profit,
(here below and in) the Xshathra-realm (to come). 27


28-33 Gatha Ahunavaiti 28.10,11


28. 10
at yeiig ashaafca voista vanhéusca dathéfig mananho 98
erethwéfig mazda ahura aéibyd peren& apanais kamem 2%


at vé xshmaibya asina vaéda Avaraithya vaifitya sravae.d
28, 11


yé ais ashem nipaenhé manasca vohii yavaétaite 31 :
tvém mazda ahura frd-ma sisha thwahmaf vaocanhé 32


manyéus haca thwa éeaienha yais & anhus pouruyo bavat. 3


Lines 28-33 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra 28,10,11


XX VIIT.—10
O Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful), crown with attainments the


desire of such clever (persons) 29
As thou knowest, through Asha (justice) to be both (1) worthy
and (2) of Vohu Manah (good disposition ) 28
(And this I pray because) I know that supplicatory words reach
You, and are effective. 30


Il. Zarathushtra’s Prayer for Efficiency.’


XXVIUL—11

I who am to protect (the worship of) Asha-(justice) and Vohu
Manah (good disposition) for ever, 31

(I beg) thee, Mazdah Ahura (mindful lord) to reveal to me (the
truth), so that I may (be able) to proclaim a2

What is the development of the (present) first (dispensation of)
life out of thy Mainyu (mentality) (as if it was being uttered)
through thy mouth. 33


34-42 Gatha Ahunavaiti 29.1-3


Soe


YASNA 29
29. J


Xshmaibya géus urva gerezda: ‘ ‘kahmai ma thwardzdiim
ké-ma tashat? 34


a-ma aeshemd hazasca remo ahishaya deresca tevisca,  %

noit moi vasta xshmat anyod atha_m0i sasta vohti vastrya!’ %
29. 2

ad& tashi géus peresat ashem: ‘katha tdi gavoi ratus, 37

hyat him data xshayafito hada vastra gaodiyo thwaxshd %

kém hoi ushta ahurem yé dregvodebis aéshemem vadayoif? ’#
2903

ahmai asha nodi¢t sareja advaéshO gavoi paiti-mravat:

‘avaésham noit viduyé ya shavaité adréfig ereshvaenho 4


hitem hv6 aojishto yahmai zavéfig jima keredusha.’ e


Lines 34-42 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra  29.1-3


HYMN 29
The Exterior Call of Zarathushtra


I. The Bovine Creation Demands Protection.


XXIX.—1
The soul of the Bovine (creation) complained to You:
For whose benefit did You fashion me? Who shaped me? 34
Fury (rages) against me; violence and cruelty, maltreatment and
roughness oppress me; 35
I have no herdsman except You: therefore (it is) You (I bég) to
procure me good pasture. 36


XXIX.—2
Then the Shaper of the Bovine (creation) asked Asha (justice),.
‘What was thy idea about a judge for the Bovine?” 37
“Did You make an energetic herdsman along with the pasture,.
when You made the Bovine (creation) ?” «38
“On whom have You decided as her lord, who may repel the fury
(of the attack) by the Drujists ?” 39

XXIX.—3


(Mazdah (mindful) who was) with Asha (justice), answered to
the Shaper of the Bovine creation), For the Bovine do I not
know of a helper who would not be liable to do harm. 40

Those (savages) yonder do not comprehend how just (men
would) treat their dependents.” 41

But (if there is no human helper), to whomsoever of living beings:

I come as help, he is the strongest of living beings. 42


43-54 Gatha Ahunavaiti 29.4-7


29.4


mazdae sahvaré mairishtO ya-zi vaverezoi pairi-cithit 4&8


daévaisca mashyaisca yaca vareshaité aipi-cithit Md
hv6 vicird ahurd atha-né anhat yatha hvd vasat. 45
29. §
af va ustanais ahva zastais frinemna ahurai & 45


mé urva géuscé azyae hyat mazdam dvaidi ferasibyO


noit erezejy0i frajyaitis, noit fshuyefité dregvasi pairi. 4


29. 6
at é vaocat ahurd mazdie vidvae vafis vyanaya 49
noié aéva ahi vistd naeda ratus asha/eit haca 50


at zi thwa fshuyafitaéca vastryaica thworeshta tatasha. 51
PF)

tém aziitdis ahurd mathrem tashat asha hazaosh6 62

mazdae gavoi xshvidemca hvo urushaéiby6 spefitd sisnaya 8


‘kasté vohii mananha yé-i dayat éeiva maretaeibyo?” 54


Lines 43-54 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra  29.4-7


XXIX.—4
(Asha (justice) interrupts.) Mazdah (mindful) is the (being)


most retentive of the plans, which have been performed by
Daevas, (gods) and men in the past; 43
And also of the plans which shall be performed in the future. 44
(And as to the present it is) he Ahura (Lord) who makes the de-
cisions; (it is) whatever he wills, (that) will happen to us. 45


XXIX.—5
(“If that is so,” said the Shaper of the Bovine creation, “then


shall both) my soul and that of the calving cow, urge Mazdah:


(mindful) with questions, 47
And placate him with outstretched hands, (praying that) 46
No destruction may affect the just-living farmer (who dwells)

among the Drujists.” 48

XXIX.—6
(In answer to which) Ahura Mazdah (Lord mindful) who knows

the decrees which (make) for wisdom, himself spoke: 49
(“In as much as) neither overlord, nor rightly appointed judge

exists for thee, 50
Therefore I, who am the Fashioner, shaped thee for the farmer.

and pasturer.” 51

XXIX.—/7


This decree, which provided fat (pastoral) food for the cattle,
(and destined) the (cattle) milk-food for the hungry (farmer


and pasturer), a2
(Was uttered by) Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful) in agreement
with Asha (justice), through his bountiful teaching. 53


(But the Bovine pair were at a loss for some one to enforce this
decree on earth, so they asked,) “What (man) hast thou O
Vohu Manah (good disposition) who could tend us both among
men?” 54


Lines 55-66 Qhe Hymns of Zarathushtra 29.8-11


Il. The Call of Zarathushtra as Teacher and Protector.
XXIX.—8
(Vohu Manah (good disposition) answered): “The only person
known unto me here who has hearkened to our teaching 55
Is Zarathushtra Spitama; he is desirous of proclaiming the


(divine) thought, 56

For Mazdah (mindful) and Asha (justice) ; so we will endow his

words with (attractive) sweetness.” 57
XXIX.—9


Thereupon the soul of the Bovine (creation) lamented:
“(Woe is me that it is I) who must for a Preparer (for my
needs ) 58
Put up with the impotent speech of an impotent man!

(I) who wished for myself a self depending (divine) ruler; 59
In what age shall he who may give me energetic help arise?” 60
XXIX.—10
(Zarathushtra speaks:) (“I beg) You, O Ahura (lord), and Asha

(justice) that You will give to these-two, (the soul of the


Bovine creation and the calving cow) 61
Such vigor and ruling power as gives peace of dwelling through
Vohu Manah’s (good disposition’s) assistance. 62


As to me, O Mazdah, (mindful), I have (in this my call to serve
thee) recognized thee as the original provider of supplies.” 63
| XXIX.—11
Where (else, except with thee, O Mazdah) (mindful) is Asha
(justice) and Vohu Manah (good disposition) and Xshathra
(political power) ? 64
So, O mortals, receive me among you that I may impart to you
instruction for the great Magian cause. 65
Grant us help, now O Ahura Mazdah (mindful lord)! (For) we
intend to be) of service to such divinities as You. 66


55-66 Gatha Ahunavaiti 29.8-11


29. 8
aém moi ida vistd yé-né aévod sasnae giishata 55
zarathushtro spitam0; hvd né mazda vashti ashaica 56


carekerethra sravayenghé hyat hoi hudemém dyai
vaxedrahya. 57


2969
afea géus urva raosta: ‘yé anaéshem xshanméné radem 8
vacem neres astirahya yém 4 vasemi isha xshathrim! 3%
kada yava hvo anhat yé hoi dadat zastavat avo? 60
29. 10
yuzém aeibyo ahura aogod data asha xshathremea él
avat vohi mananha ya husheitis ramamea dat 62


azémcit ahya mazda thwam ménghi paourvim vaédem! 483
29. it


kuda ashem vohueca mano xshathremea? at ma masha 6


rad


yuzém mazda fraxshnené mazoi magai a paiti-zanata
ahura ni-nae avaré éhma ratdis yushmavatam.’ 66


Al


ronsns -


70 10 OS


67-75 Gatha Ahunavaiti 30.1-3


YASNA 30
30. J
At ta vaxshya ishefitd ya mazdatha hyafcit vidushé
staotaca ahurai yesnyaca vanhéus mananho
humazdra asha yeca ya raoceébis daresata urvaza.
30. 2
sraota géushais vahishta avaenata siica mananha
avarenae vicithahya narém narem /fvahyai tanuyé
para mazé yaenho ahmai né sazdyai baodantd paiti!
30. 3
at ta mainyl pouruyé ya yéma Avafena asrvatem
manahica vacahica shyaothandi hi vahyd akemca


aesca hudaenhod eres vishyata noit duzdaenho.


14


Lines 67-75 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra  30.1-3


HYMN 30


The Proclamation gf Dualism,
Teaching the Necessity of Taking Sides


I. Exhortation to the Faithful to Open their Ears to the Mystery.


XXX.—1.
But thus, O (souls) desirous (of hearing), I will utter (1) those


things worthy to be remembered by the Expert-knower 67
(2) The praises for Ahura (lord), and (3) hymns (worthy) of
Vohu Manah (good disposition), 68
And things well remembered with the aid of Asha (justice), and
the propitious (omens) beheld through the lights (of the stars,


or of the altar-flames). 69
XXX.—2

Listen with your ears to the best (information) ; behold with

(your) sight, and with (your) mind; 70

Man by man, each for his own person, distinguishing between both

confessions, 71

Before this great crisis. Consider again! 72


Il. Revelation of the Doctrinal Root of the Division of the Parties


XXX.—3
At the beginning both-these Mentalities became conscious of each


other, 73
The one being a Mentality better in thought, and word, and deed,
than the (other Mentality who is) bad. 74
Now let the just (man) discriminate between these two, and
choose the benevolent one, not the bad one. 75


76-87 Gatha Ahunavaiti 30.4-7


30. 4
ateaé. hyat ta hém mainyii jasaétem paourvim dazdé 16
gaémea ajyaitimea yathaca anhat apémem anhus 7]
acishtd dregvatam at ashauné vahishtem mano. 73
30. 5
ayae manivae varata yé dregvae acishta verezyo 79


ashem mainyus spénishto yé xraozdishtéfig asénd vaste


yaéca xshnaoshen ahurem haithyais shyaothanais fraoret
mazdam. él


30. 6
ayae noif eres vishyata daévacina hyat is a-debaoma, 82
peresmanéfig upa-jasat hyat verenata acishtem mand; 83


at aéshemem héfidvarefita ya banayen ahtim maretano. 4


30. 7
ahmaica xshathra jasat mananha& vohi ashaca 85
at kehrpém utayiitis dadat armaitis anma 86


aésham t0i & anhat yatha ayanha adanais pouruyo. 87


Lints 76-88 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra  30.4-7


XXX.—4
But when the twin-Mentalities came together, they produced 76
The first life, and lifelessness, and (settled) (on the state of) the


last condition of existence, 77
The worst for the Drujists, but for the Ashaists the best mind. 78
XXX.—5
The Drujist chose between these twin-Mentalities, the one who

perpetrated the worst (deeds), 79


But he (1) who (was inspired) by the most Bountiful Mentality
that is clothed upon by the most adamantine stone-quarried


heavens as a garment, 80
And he (2) who cheerfuly satisfied Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful)
with sincere deeds, chose Asha (justice. ) 81
XXX.—6
The Daevaists did not discriminate accurately between these two,
because 82
Just as they were deliberating, (there) came upon them a delusion
so that they should choose the Worst Mind, 83


So that, all together, they rushed-over to Aeshma (fury) through

which they afflict the life of man with disease. 84
XXX.—7

And to this (man now sick) came (Mazdah Ahura) (mindful

lord) with the Xshathra (power) realm, with Vohu Manah


(good disposition) and with Asha (justice), 85
And Armaiti (love) endowed the (sick) body (of man) (with)
firmness and endurance 86


So that he may become the first of those (surviving) (the tests
of passing) through the metal (lic trials) and through Adanas
(the retributions ). 87

XXX—8

And thereupon, when the punishments of those malefactors shall

occur, 88


88-99 Gatha Ahunavaiti 30.8-11


30. 8
afeaé: yada aésham kaéna jamaiti atnanham 88
at mazda taibyod xshathrem vohti mananha voividaiti &
aéibyd sasté ahura yoi ashai daden zastayo drujem. 9)
30. 9
aieé t0i vaém fAyama yoi im ferashém kerenaun ahim 4
mazdaesca ahuraenhd a-moyastra barand ashaca 99


hyat hathra manae bavat yathra cistis anhat maétha. %


30. 10
ada-zi ava drajo avo bavaiti skefidd spayathrahya y
at asishta yaojafité a-hushit0is vanhéus mananhd 95
mazdae ashahyaca yoi zazefiti vanhau sravahi. 95
30. 13


hyat ta urvata sashatha ya mazdae dadat mashyaenh6


hvitica éneiti hyatca daregém dregvodebyd rasho 98


savaca ashavabyo af aipi tais anhaiti ushta. 9


My


Lines 89-99 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra  30.8-11


Then, (the saved man) shall obtain for thee, O Mazdah (mind-
ful), with the help of Vohu Manah (good disposition), the
Xshathra (power) realm. 89

Which will be the fulfillment (of the world’s destiny,) and this
will be obtained by those, who shall deliver the Druj, into-the-
two-hands of Asha (justice) 90


Il. Zarathushtra Hopes for Universal Conversion
by Choice between Eternal Bliss and Woe.
XXX.—9
And may we be those who shall make life progressive (M) or
purposeful (B)! 91
Assemble together, along with Asha (justice), O Ahuras Mazdah
(lords mindfuls) and come hither OZ
So that here where our thoughts formerly developed (separately),
they may now mature together, (fuse, or culminate) and become


wisdom. 93
XXX.—10

Then shall the success of the Druj break down, 94

And all those who shall be attaining a good renown 96


Shall obtain their reward, meeting at the good dwelling of Vohu
Manah, (good disposition), Mazdah, (mindful), and Asha,


(justice). 95
XXX.—11
When, O you Mortals, you have familiarized yourselves with these


commandments of Mazdah (mindful) (about the twin Men-
talities), (which mean) 97
Prosperity as opposed to adversity, and the length of the suffering
of the Drujists, as contrasted with the useful progress of the
Ashaists ; 98
(When, I repeat, you have fully realized the significance of this
contrast, I feel quite sure none of) you all, will (hesitate or de-
lay to) enter into the desired abode of praise. 99


100-108 Gatha Ahunavaiti 31.1-3


Me


YASNA 31
34. J


Ta vé urvata marentd agushta vacae séfighamahi 100


aéibyO yoi urvatais drijo ashahya gaéthae vimereficaite 101


afeit atibyo vahishta yOi zarazdae anhen mazdai. 102
31.2

yezi ais noif urvané advae aibi-lereshta vahyae 103

at vie vispéfig &y0i yatha ratim ahurod vaeda 104

mazdaie ayae asayae ya ashat haca jvamahi. 105
33.3


yam dae mainyti athraca ashaca cois randibya xshntitem 106


hyat urvatem cazd0finhvadebyO tat né mazda vidvandi
vaoca 1?


hizva thwahya aenho ya jvafito vispéfig vauraya. 108


Lines 100-110 Jae Hymns of Zarathushtra 111--]


HYMN 31
Prayers for Enlightenment
and Exhortations to Partisanship,


I. Practical Introduction : Enlightenment Claimed
As no more than Justice to Zarathushtra.


XXXI.—1
Minding these your commands, (O Gods), let us pronounce
speeches 100
Unheeded by those who would, by the commands of Druj, destroy
the substance of Asha (justice), 101
But most acceptable to them who will trust in Mazdah (mindful).
XXXI.—2
But since the preferable path is not always obvious 103
Therefore, as (heaven) appointed arbiter and judge over both
parties, 104
Will I go to you, that we may live in accordance with Asha
(justice). 105
XXXI—3


In order that I may cause all men to choose aright, (I pray thee)
O Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful), with the tongue of thy mouth
to tell 108

(1) What satisfaction, taught through Asha (justice), thou wilt
give to both contending Parties, through Mentality and


fire ; 106

(2) What is thy command for the enlightened, that we may un-

derstand (that command). 107
XXXI.—4


(And this command is), that as far as Asha (justice) and the
other Ahuras Mazdah (lords mindfuls) are willing to be in-
voked 109

Through Ashay (compensation) and Armaiti (love) and the best
Manah (disposition), 110


109-120 Gatha Ahunavaiti 31,4-7


31. 4
yada ashem zevim anhen mazdaesca ahuraienhd 108
ashic&é armaiti vahishta ishas&i mananha 110


maibyO xshathrem aojofighvat yehya veredi vanaéma
drujem. In


31.5
tat mOi vicidyai vaoca hyat moi asha data vahyo 112
viduyé voht mananha méfica daidyai yehya-ma ereshis 113
tacit mazda ahura ya noit va anhat arhaiti va. ld
33.6
ahmai anhat vahishtem yé moi vidvae vaocat haithim 115
mathrem yim haurvatatod ashahya ameretatasca 116
mazdai avat xshathrem hyaf hoi vohi' vaxshat manaha;117
33.7
yasta mafita pouruyd raocébis roithwen Avathra; 118
hvo xrathwa damis ashem; ya darayat vahishtem mano; 119


ta mazda mainyii uxshyO yé 4 ntrémcit ahura hamo.


Lines 120-137 Tre Hymns of Zarathushtra 31.45.


So far shall I seek for myself the Xshathra (power of realm) by
the vigorous increase whereof, we may defeat the Druj. 111
XXXI.—5
Tell me, O Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful) what is not to occur,
and what is to occur, 114
In order that I may distinguish that, what (ever success therein)
You may have given me, through Asha (justice) was the better
thing, 112
In (2) order that I may understand it through Vohu Manah (good
disposition) and (3) may ponder-over this (so that by under-
standing it fully) I may gather therefrom a reward. 113


Ul. First Call for Enlightenment, and Answer from Within.
J. Call,
XXX1=6
(This is the best reward of life: namely), that Xshathra (realm)
which (the man who receives it) may for his (own concurrent
advantage) increase for Mazdah (the mindful one), through
Vohu Manah (good disposition) ; 117
May this best (reward) be granted to him who after having dis-
covered for himself, (the right solution to these following


problems that distress me), will tell me sincerely 115

(1) Asha (justice) ’s mystic word (which is the secret) of Haur-

vatat (health) and Ameretat (immortality). 116
XXXI.—7

(2) Whether Mazdah (mindful) was the first one to fill the glories

(of heaven) with lights (of stars or flames), 118


(3) Whether Mazdah (mindful) through understanding created
Asha (justice), and (4) whether Asha (justice) will maintain
the best activity of Vohu Manah (good disposition), 119

(5) Whether Mazdah (mindful) shall cause these (Asha and
Vohu Manah) to prosper through the (Holy) Mentality, which
is ever the same until the present time. 120


I2I-129 Gatha Ahunavaiti 31.8-10


31.8


at thwa méfighi pourvim mazda yezim stoi mananha 11


vanhéus patarém manarzhd hyat thwa hém ecashmaini
héfigraben ie %


haithim ashahya demim anhéus ahurem shyaothanaéshi 3


31.9
thw0i as armaitis thwé 4 géus tasha as xratis 124
manyéus mazda ahura hyat ahyai dadie patham 125
vastryat va aité ye va noit anhat vastryd 12
31. 10
at hi ayae fravareta vastrim afyai fshuyafitem 27
ahurem ashavanem varhéus fshéfighim mananhod 128


noi¢ mazda avastryO davascina humeretdis baxshta. 12


Lines 122-129 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra 31.8-10


2. Answer.


XXXI—8
Whereupon, when Zarathushtra with his (own) eye (by looking
at nature) and through (his) mind by puzzling out its signifi-
cance, comprehended Mazdah (mindful) and Manah (disposi-
tion), 122
Then Zarathushtra understood that Mazdah (mindful) was (1)
both the first and youngest of creation (2) and the father of


Vohu Manah (good disposition) ; ii

(3) The genuine creator of Asha (justice) and (4) the (ruling)

lord in the deeds of life; 123
XXXI.—9


(5) That, O Mazdah Ahura (mindful lord), to thee belongs both
Armaiti and the Shaper of the Bovine (creation) which was
part of) the understanding of the (holy) Mentality. 124

(6) That when for (the cow) thou didst ordain a path (of free-
dom of will, following which) £25

She might repudiate the herdsman, and go to abide with the
nomad 126


XXXI—10
Then she chose for herself from among the two (possible)
lords, (the herdsman or nomad) the herdsman who would
follow her, 127
(Namely), the Ashaist, (who feels-that-it-is-his-mission-to-see-to-
it-that-all-things-that-belong to Vohu Manah (good-disposition)
prosper, and who-in-return-is-prospered-by-him, 128
(Whereas) the nomad shall not get a share of Vohu Manah (good
disposition)’s favorable-report (at the judgment, as in the
verse 14) even though he should urge for it (so long as he
will not herd cattle). 129


130-141 Gatha Ahunavaiti 31.11-14


35. If
hyat né mazda paourvim gaéthaesca tashd daénaesc& 13
thwa manarha xratisea hyat astvafitem dadae ushtanem 131


hyat shyaothanaca séfighasca yathra varenéfig vasie dayete. 13


Sy a 2
athra vacem baraiti mithahvacae va eresvacae va 13
vidvaie va evidvaie va ahya zeredaca mananhaca 134


anus-haxs armaitis mainyii peresaite yathra maetha. 1%
33. 13

ya fras&i avishya ya va mazda peresaite taya 136

yé va kaséus aénanhd & mazishtam ayamaité bijem 137


ta cashméfig thwisra hard aibi asha aibi vaénahi vispa. 1%


33, 14
ta-thwa peresa ahura ya-zi aiti jéfighatica 139
yae ishudo dadefite dathranam haca ashaund 140


yaesca mazda dregvodebyo yatha tae anhen héfikereta hyaz. ul


Lines 130-141 The Hymns of Zarathushtra 31.1114


XXXI—11
(7) That at first thou, O Mazdah (mindful) with thy mind and
understanding, 130
(a) Thou didst shape substance and spirits, and (b) didst establish
body and life, 131
And (c) deeds and doctrines whereby men who exercised their
faculties of choice might develop convictions. 132


III. Second Call for Enlightenment.
1. Introduction.


XXXI.—12
(Amidst such sublime issues) vulgar men who speak either falsely
or justly, the Expert-knower or the ignorant. 133
Each (according to the fancy of his heart and mind, dares to
raise his (impudent) voice 134
Where Armaiti (love) counsels sucessively with the spirits who
yet are wavering. 135

XXXI.—13
O Mazdah (mindful), thou with Asha (justice), keepest a watch,
with thy watchful gleaming eyes, 138
(1) Over all these (men who ask) questions openly or furtively ;
and 136
(2) (Over all officials who) inflict the greatest penance for even a
small transgression. 137

2. The Second Call.

XXXI—14
O Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful), I ask thee about these con-
ditions, present and future— 139
(Namely), (1) what compensations will be given to satisfy the
claims of the Ashaist, 140


(And what compensations shall be enforced) from the Drujist :—
How shall both stand at the time of awarding the compensa-
tions? 141


142-153 Gatha Ahunavaiti 31.15-18


33.15
peresaé avat ya mainis yé dregvaité xshathrem hunaiti
dus-shyaothanai ahura yé noit jyotim hanare vinasti
vastryehya aénanhd paséus viraafca adrujyafito.

31. 16
peresa avat yatha hvo yé hudanus demanahya xshathrem


shoithrahya va dafyéus va asha fradathai asperezata


thwavas mazda ahura yada hvo arhat ya-shyaothanasca.i


33.17
kadarém ashava va dregvae ya verenvaité mazyo%
vidvaé vidushé mraotii ma evidvae aipi-débavayat
zdi-né mazda ahura vanhéus fradaxshta mananho!
34. 18
mia-cis at vé dregvat6 mathrasea gishta sasnaesca
4zi demanem visen va shoithrem va dahyim va adat


dushitacaé marakaéca atha is sazdum snaithisha!


M6


142


143


144


145


—_—_—


Lines 142-153 Ive Hymns of Zarathushtra 31.15-18


XXXI—15
(2) O Ahura (lord) I ask thee what shall be the punishments (a)
of those who encourage the dominion of the Drujist, 142
(b) of those who cannot make their living 143
Without violence to cattle and to men devoted to herding
them. 144
XXXI.—16
(3) O Mazdah Ahura, (mindful lord) I ask thee whether the well-
disposed man who may strive 145
To improve the houses, the villages, the clans and the provinces,
through Asha (justice) 146


Whether (a) he may (at all) become a being like unto Thee; (b)
if so, when shall he arise (unto this likeness) and (c) what


(deeds) he shall do (to become such). 147
XXXI—17

(4) (Tell me O lord), which is the more important object of

choice—that of the Ashaist or that of the Drujist? 148


Do thou who art the Expert-knower inform me who would become
one, and do not permit the ignorant man to continue deluding


(such as me who would like to learn) 149
O Ahura Mazdah, be Thou to us an instructor of Vohu Manah
(good disposition) ! 150


IV. The Partisan Close: Choose Sides, Take Zarathushtra’s Word


XXXI.—18
Therefore O well disposed believer, hearken not to the mystic-
words or teachings of any of the Drujists, 151
For these would reduce house, village, clan or province, to misfor-
tune or death; 152
Therefore, rather oppose them with the weapon! 153


142-153 Gatha Ahunavaiti 31.15-18


33.15
peresa avaf ya mainis yé dregvaité xshathrem hunaiti 12
dus-shyaothanai ahura yé noit jyotim hanare vinasti 143
vastryehya aénanhd paséus viraafca adrujyaiito. 144
31. 16
peresa avat yatha hvo yé hudanus demanahya xshathrem 14
shoithrahya va dahyéus va asha fradathai asperezata lb


thwavas mazda ahura yada hv6 anhat ya-shyaothanasca.li


|
kadarém ashava va dreevae ya verenvaité mazy0? 148
vidvaé vidushe mraoti ma evidvae aipi-débavayaf 149
zdi-né mazda ahura vanhéus fradaxshta manarho! 150
33.18
ma-cis at vé dregvatd mathrasca gushta sasnaesca 151


azi demanem visen va shoithrem va dahyim va adat 18


dushitaca marakaéca atha is sazdum snaithisha ! 153


Lines 142-153 Ive Hymns of Zarathuvhtra 31.15-18


XXXI—I15
(2) O Ahura (lord) I ask thee what shall be the punishments (a)
of those who encourage the dominion of the Drujist, 142
(b) of those who cannot make their living 143
Without violence to cattle and to men devoted to herding
them. 144
XXXI.—16
(3) O Mazdah Ahura, (mindful lord) I ask thee whether the well-
disposed man who may strive 145
To improve the houses, the villages, the clans and the provinces,
through Asha (justice) 146


Whether (a) he may (at all) become a being like unto Thee; (b)
if so, when shall he arise (unto this likeness) and (c) what


(deeds) he shall do (to become such). 147
XXXI.—17

(4) (Tell me O lord), which is the more important object of

choice—that of the Ashaist or that of the Drujist? 148


Do thou who art the Expert-knower inform me who would become
one, and do not permit the ignorant man to continue deluding


(such as me who would like to learn) 149
O Ahura Mazdah, be Thou to us an instructor of Vohu Manah
(good disposition) ! 150


IV. The Partisan Close: Choose Sides, Take Zarathushtra’s Word


XXXI.—I18
Therefore O well disposed believer, hearken not to the mystic-
words or teachings of any of the Drujists, 151
For these would reduce house, village, clan or province, to misfor-
tune or death; 52
Therefore, rather oppose them with the weapon! 153


154-165 Gatha Ahunavaiti 31.19-22


33.19
ctushta yé mafita ashem ahimbis vidvae ahura 154
erezuxdai vacanham xshayamno6 hizvd vaso 155
thwa athra suxrai mazda vanhau vidata ranayae. 156
33.20
yé ayat ashavanem divamnem hoi aparem xshyd 157
daregém ayti temanhd dushvarethém avaétas vacd 158


tém va ahum dregvanto shyaothanais hvais daena naeshat! 159


31,25
mazdae dadat ahurd haurvato ameretatasca 160
birodis a ashahyaca Avapaithyat xshathrahya saro 161
vanhéus vazdvaré mananhd yé hoi mainyii shyaothanaisca
urvatho. 162
33.22
cithra i huda&enhé yathana vaédemnai mananha 163


vohii hvod xshathra ashem vacanha shyaothanaca hapti 16¢


hvo toi mazda ahura vazishto anhaiti astis. 165


Lines 154-165 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 31,19-22


XXXT.—19
But hearken to him who thought out Asha, (justice); that is,
Zarathushtra who is the life healing Expert-knower; 154
Him who is able to vindicate his tongue’s speeches at will, (at the
Latter Day) 155
(When) O Ahura Mazdah, (lord-mindful), with thy red (fire)
the good (compensations) of the two contending parties are to
be distributed; (with thy red fire, produced by the two good


rubbing sticks). 156
XXXI.—20

Destruction, lasting darkness, bad food, and imprecations 158

Shall at the (Latter Day) be kept away from whomsoever identifies

himself with the Ashaists, 157

(Beware) O Drujists: (it is to) that sort of existence that your

(evil) spirit may lead you! 159
XXXI.—21

From the resources of his innate glory, Ahura Mazdah (lord mind-

ful) shall grant sustained communion | 160


And fulness of Haurvatat, (health) and Ameretat, (immortality,
and of Asha, (justice) and of Xshathra, (power) and Vohu


Manah (good disposition) 161

To whomsoever is a friend (to Ahura Mazdah, (lord mindful) in

mind and deeds. 162
XXXI.—22


The man who is well-disposed, (understands) this as clearly as
does Mazdah (mindful) who knows with the (divine) Manah,
(disposition). 163

(It is this well-disposed man) who holds Asha (justice) in
union with the good Xshathra (political power), through his
speech and deeds. 164

(It is this well-disposed man) who is the most prospering compan-
ion to thee, O Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful.) 165


166-174. Gatha Ahunavaiti 32.1-3


YASNA 32


Sys)!
Ahyaca hvaetus yasat ahya& verezénem mat airyamna [ff
ahya daeva mahmi manoi ahurahya urvazema mazdae iff


thw0i dutaenhd aenhama téfig darayOo yoi vae daibishefiti 14


32. 2
aéibyO mazdae ahurd saremnd vohi' manarha 169
xshathrat haca paiti-mraot asha hus-haxa fAvénvata: 17


‘spefitam vé armaitim vanuhim varemaidi ha-né arhat’ 17


32. 3
at yus daéva vispaienhd akat manarho sta cithrem We
yasca Vae mas yazaité drijasca pairimatoisca 173


shyaomam aipi daibitana yais asridtm bimyae haptaithe. 1%


Lines 166-174 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 32,1-3


HYMN 32


At a Parley,
Vituperation of the Rival Prophet Grehma.


Il. Public Self-consecration, and its Acceptance.
XXXII.—l1
(All three classes) : The kinsman-lord, the worker and the priestly
peer shall, O Daeva, (in spite of You) 166
Pray for the joys of Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful) according to
my conceptions, (says Zoroaster). 167
{The three classes answer:) May we be thy messengers, to repel
those who hostilely decive You (O divine beings). 168
XXXII.—2
To them replied Ahura Mazdah, (lord mindful), who is in com-
munion with Vohu Manah (good disposition, ) 169
By Xshathra, (power), with the gloriously sunny, well-befriend-
ing Asha, (justice), 170
“We have accepted (this) your holy, good, submissive confession
(which we name Armaiti) ; she shall be Ours.” 171


Il. Zarathushtra Vituperates his Rival Grehma to the Daevas.


XXXIT.—3
(Zarathushtra to the Daevas): But you O Daevas are all as a
seed (descended from) the Bad Mind, 172


And whatever mortal man will dare to reverence you, he shall be
considered as belonging to the Druj (party), for he is proud,
(the opposite of Armaiti (love, ) ; 17s

For you have become notorious, event to the seventh (region) of
the earth, as being long since preceded by (the evil reputation
of) your deeds. 174


175-186 Gatha Ahunavaiti 32.4-7


32. 4


yat yusta framimatha ya mashya acishta dafito 115


vaxshefité daévo-zushta vanhéus sizdyamna mananhd iii


mazdae ahurahya xratéus nasyanto ashaatca; IN
32.5
ta debenaota mashim hujyatois ameretatasca 178


hyat vae aka manarha yéfig daévéfig akasca mainyus 19


aka shyaothanem vacanha ya fracinas dregvafitem xshay6. 18


32. 6
pourti-aénae énaxshta yais sravahyeiti yezi tais atha 181
hata-marané ahura vahishta voisté mananha 182


thwahmi vé mazda xshathroi ashaica séfighd vidam. 183


32. 7
aésham atnanham naécit vidvae aojoi hadroya 184
ya joya séfighaité yais sravi hvaéna ayanha 185


yaésham tii ahura irixtem mazda vaédishto ahi. 185


Lines 175-185 Ite Hymns of Zarathushtra  32.4-7


XXXIT.—4
Since it is due to you that the worst behaving men are called
daeva-darlings 175
And are excluded from Vohu Manah (good disposition’s) (fel-
lowship in the congregation) 176
Perishing away from Asha (justice) and from the understanding
of Mazdah Ahura (mindful lord) ; - 177
XXXIT—5
Therefore, you will defraud man of good life (here) and immor-
tality (beyond) 178
Because with evil mind and bad speech (he, Grehma, verse 12) of
the evil Mentality, 179
Advises the deeds with which he causes you, who are Daevas, and
the Drujist (man afore mentioned,) to perish. 180
XXXII—6
(Grehma) has (so far) succeeded in perpetrating the many vio-
lences through which he has become notorious; 181


(But) whether he shall (continue this success, here on earth) thou
alone knowest through thy Vohu Manah (good disposition) O
Ahura (lord) ; 182

(But of this I am sure: that) in thy Xshathra (realm) O Mazdah
(mindful), Your doctrinal decision shall be given for Asha
(justice). 183


XXXIT.—7


The Expert-knower is not to commit any of these deeds of vio-
lence, whose (fatal) end, thou, O Ahura Mazdah best
knowest. 184

(He is not to commit any of them, even if tempted to do so)
through a (well intentioned, misguided) desire for (proper)
gain; 186

(For it was) such ( a desire that) led (Grehma) to become no-
torious through his glittering sword of violence . 185


187-201 Gatha Ahunavaiti 32.8-12


32. 8
aésham aénanham vivanhusho sravi yimascit 187
yé mashyéfig cixshnusho ahmakénig gaus baga hvaremnd 18
aéshameit 4 ahmi thwahmi mazda vicithoi aipi! 199
32.9
dus-sastis sravae morefidat hvo jyatéus séfighanais xratiim 19
apo ma,ishtim apayafita berexdam haitim vanhéus manaho 191
ta uxda manyéus mahya, mazda ashaica yishmaibya gerezé. 1”
32. 10
hvo ma-na sravae morefidat yé acishtem vatnanhe aogeda 18
gam ashibya hvareca yasca dathéfig dregvato dadat 194
yasca vastra vivapat yasca vadaré voizdat ashauné. 195
32. 13


taécit ma morefiden jyotim yoi dregvato mazibis cikOiteres 1%


anuhisca anhvasca apayeiti raéxenanhd vaedem 197
yoi vahishtat ashaund mazda rareshyan manarho. 198
S22


ya raenhayen sravanha vahishtat shyaothanat maretano 1%
aéibyo mazdae aka mraot yoi géus morefiden urvaxs-uxti
jyotum 200
yais geréhma ashat varata karapa xshathremca ishanam
drujem. 20


Lines 187-201 Jae Hymns of Zarathuvhtra 32.8:11


XXXIT.—8
As is (well) known, (there was) among these (committers) of
violence a certain Yima (son) of Vivahvant, 187
Who in order to satisfy our men, gave pieces of beef to be de-
voured. 188


I (certainly) expect to be (divided) from these (sinners) in thy

discriminating-judgment, O Mazdah (mindful)! 189
XXXIT—9

The prophet of evil, Grehma, with his pronouncements will destroy

the words (which form) the understanding of life, 190

By hindering my wealth, the prized possession of Vohu Manah

(good disposition ). 191


With these uttered expressions (of my thought (as a complaint)
I appeal to thee, O Mazdah (mindful), through Asha (justice).


XXXIT.—10
(It is Grehma) who destroys (the effect of) my words, and who
(1) preaches that 193
The cattle and the sun are the worst objects to behold, and (2)
who makes Drujists out of clever (believers), 194
And (3) who destroys the cultivated lands, and (4) raises the
weapon against the Ashaist. 195

XXXIT—l11
His followers would destroy my life. They have had many con-
sultations with the Drujists, so as 196
(1) To deprive the (Ashaist) masters and the mistresses of the
possession of their inheritance, and 197
(2) To cause the Ashaists to apostacize from the Best Mind, O
Mazdah (mindful), 198

XXXIT.—12
(3) And by their speeches, to cause men to apostacize from their
best deeds. 199
Mazdah (mindful) spoke: “Bad are ye (1) who destroy the life
of cattle with cries of joy, 200


And who (2) to Asha prefer Grehma, Karpa and the power favor-
able to the Druj.” 201


202-213 Gatha Ahunavaiti 32.13-16


32. 3
ya xshathra geréhm6 hishasat acishtahya& demané manarnho 22
anhéus maraxtard ahya yaec& mazda jigerezat kame 2%


thwahya& mathran6 ditim yé-1s pat daresat ashahya. 204


32, 14
ahya geréhmo a-hoithoi ni kavayascit xratis nidadat %
varecae hica fraidiva hyat visefita dregvafitem avo 206
hyafea gaus jaidyai mraol yé diraoshem saocayat avo. 207
32.15
anais a vi-nenasa ya karapotaesca kevitaesca 208
avais aibi yéfig daifiti nOit jyatéus xshayamnéfig vaso 2
toi abya bairyaefnté vanhéus a-demané manarnho. 210
32. 16


hamém tat vahishtacit yé ushuruye syascit dahmahya atl


xshayas mazda ahura yehya-ma aithiscit dvaetha 212


hyat aénanhe dregvat0 éeint ishyéfig anhaya. 213


1 ie


Lines 202-213 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 32.13-16


XXXIT.—13
Through which Xshathra (power) of the above Asha (justice),
Grehma will be degraded to hell, the dwelling of the Worst
Mind, 202
(Where dwell) the destroyers of this life; and (then) O Mazdah
(mindful) he will complain, being moved by a desire 203
For the message of thy prophet, who (then) (however) will keep
him from beholding Asha (justice). 204

XXXII.—14
Grehma (1) (plans) the subjection of this (Asha, justice) ;
(2) long since he supports both the Kavayas and the powerful
(Drujists) through his plans, 205
Which raises help unto the Drujist; 206
And (3) (he cries that) the cow is to be killed; and (4) he will
burn (the Ashaist) who-repels-death from her (by being) of
help to her. 207


I. Zarathushtra will Exult in Executing this Final Judgment.
XXXII.—15
But through these Ashaists, I will expel both the Karapans and
Kavayites 208
Who will not permit the Ashaists to rule their lives as they wish
(by the divine law of cattle herding) 209
Which (Ashaists) I pray will be borne (to heaven) the (dwelling
of Vohu Manah (good disposition) by the twins (Haurvatat and
Ameretat. ) 210
XXXII.—16
All this is from that Best (divinity) who is teaching in the wide
light (of the stars) (or of the altar-flame, (M) 211
Thou, O Mazdah Ahura (mindful-lord), controllest whomsoever
threatens me with destruction, 212
So that I may encourage the beloved (believers) by setting limits
to the violence of the Druj, by (the words of) my mouth. 213


214-222 Gatha Ahunavaiti 33.1-3


YASNA 33


33. J
Yathais itha vareshaité ya data anhéus paouruyehya 21


ratis shyaothana razishta dregvataéca hyafeaé ashiuneé 215


yehyaca hémemyasaitée mithahya yaca hoi arezva. 216
33. 2

at yé akem dregvaité vacanha va at va mananha 2l7

zastoibya va vareshaiti vanhau va coithaité astim 218

toi varai radefiti ahurahyé zaoshé mazdie. 219
33. 3

yé ashauné vahishto Avaeti va at va verezényd 220


airyamna va ahura vidas va thwaxshanha gavoi


BS


at hvo ashahya anhat vanhéusca vastre manamho. 22


Lines 214-222 Ihe Hymns of Zarathuvhtra  33.1-3


HYMN 33


High-priestly Prayer for
Acceptance, Conversion, and Paradise,


(Apparently belonging to the Close of the former Hymn, on)
Zarathushtra’s Exultation on Executing the Final Judgment.


XXXITI—1
In accordance with these laws of the first life 214
The judge will enact, the most just decisions for the Drujist, as
well as the Ashaist, 215


And for the man who combines the false and just actions (B)
(and do whatever may suit the needs of the false and the just,
(M) 216

XXXITI.—2

But whoever (1) by speech, word or deed do harm to the Drujist,

Or (2) converts one to the good (i. e., either injures or converts)
or (3) instructs a fellow believer, 218

They (are those who are thereby) working for the (divine) will,
and for the pleasure of Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful) in the


(great work of the) preparation. 219
XXXHI—3
Whoever, through being a gentleman-by-birth, is best (in-
clined) to the Ashaist, or which herd-laborer, 220


Or an expert peer, or is zealous for the cattle O Ahura (lord),
Surely he will come to be on the pasturage of Asha (justice) and
Vohu Manah (good disposition). Zoe


223-231 Gatha Ahunavaiti 33.4=6


33. 4


yé thwart mazda asrushtim akemca mano yazai apa 223
hvaetéusca tarémaitim verezénahyaca nazdishtam drujem 2


airyamanasca nadefitd géusca vastrat acishtem mafittiim 25


33. 5


yasté vispé-mazishtem seraoshem zbaya avanhaneé 226
apand dareg6-jyaitim a-xshathrem vanhéus mananho 207


ashat @ erezuis patho yaéshii mazdae ahuro shaéti 298


33. 6


yé zaota asha erezis hvo manyéus @ vahishtat kaya 229
ahmat ava mananha ya verezyeidyai maiita vastryA 2


ta-toi izyai ahura mazda darshtdisca hém-parshtdisca. 21


Lines 223-233 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 33.4-7


I. Prayer for Acceptation.


XXXIT—+4
I, who, by praying, would, O Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful) con-
jure away (1) disobedience and badness from (what the oppon-
ents think of) thee, 223
And (2) contrariness from the gentleman, and (3) the neighbor-
hood of the Drujist from the group of laboring men, 224
And (4) cursing from the peer, and (5) poor farmers (fodder)


(M) from the pasturage of the cattle; Ze
| XXXIL—S
I who will invoke Sraosha (obedience) as the greatest of all
-- (divinities) for help (to man) 226
Having reached (1) long life, (2) the realm of Vohu Manah
(good disposition ) 27,
And (3) the Asha (justice) straightened paths, on which Ahura
Mazdah (lord mindful) dwells; 228
XXXITI.—6


I who, as priest (coming) through Asha (justice) from the Best
(Mind) desire (to walk) the just (paths) of the Bounteous
Mentality 229

Going (from us) (the Ashaist’s priests) towards the pastures
which advisory-managers ought to work through the (Vohu)
Manah (disposition). 230

(For these two objects) I wish, O Ahura Mazah (lord mindful)
to consult together (both the Best (Mind) and the Bounteous


Mentality) visibly. Zon
XXXIII—7

Come hither to me O you Best (divinities) ; come here personally,

O Mazdah (mindful) Zoe


Visibly, with Asha (justice), and Vohu Manah (good disposi-


232-243 Gatha Ahunavaiti 33.7-10


33. 7
a-ma aidtim:vahishta a-hvaithyacaé mazda dareshatea
asha vohti mananha ya sruyé paré magauno, 233
avis-nae afitare hénitti nemahvaitis cithrae ratayo. 234
33. 8
fro-m0i fravoizdim aretha ta ya vohi shyavai mananha 2%
yasnem mazda xshmavato at va asha staomya vacae 24
kata vé ameretaesca utayuiti haurvatas draono. 237
33.9


at toi mazda tém mainyiim ashaoxshayafitae saredyayae 28


Ahvathra maétha maya vahishta baretii mananha 239
ayae ardi hakurenem yayae hacifité urvano. 240
33. 50
Vispae-st0i hujitayO yae-zi aenharé yaesca hefiti 21


yaesca mazda bavaifiti thwahmi his zaoshe abaxshohva 2


vohii uxshya mananha xshathra ashaca ushta tanim. 23


Lines 233-243 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 33.8-10


tion) ; inform me how I may be heard before (M) or outside


of (B) the Magians; (and, for this purpose) 233
Let reverent services of worship be (performed) clearly and
manifestly among us. 234


Il. Prayer for General Conversion.


XXXITI.—8


O do Thou regard (1) the interests which I am advancing
through Vohu Manah (good disposition), Za0
(2) The hymn, O Mazdah (mindful) (addressed to) one-like-
You and (3) my grateful communions with Asha (justice), 236
And give me Your-twin enduring possessions of Ameretat (im-
mortality) and Haurvatat (health). Zon


XXXITI.—9


But let me O Mazdah (mindful) bring the (holy) Mentality of
these two (divine) companions who prosper (the) Ashaist


(just) life 238

Unto the comfortable dwellings, with me, who have the best

Manah (best disposition), 239

In thus arousing the support of these two (divinities) whose souls

are accompanying each other. 240
XXXIII.—10


Distribute, O Mazdah, from thy delight, all the pleasures of life,
Which were, and are, and are yet becoming ; 242
And cause my-body to grow as-I-wish, with Vohu Manah (good

disposition,) Xshathra (power,) and Asha ( justice. ) 243


244-255 Gatha Ahunavaiti 33.11-14


33. 13
yé sevishto ahurd mazdaesca armaitisca add


ashemea fradaf-gaethem manasca vohii xshathremea 245


sraota-m0i, merezdata-m0i adai kahyaicit paiti! 246
33. 12

us-m0i uzareshva ahura armaiti tevishim dasva 24

spénishté mainyii mazda vanhuya zavo ada 248

asha hazo émavaf vohti mananha feseratim! 249
33. 13

rafedrai vourucashané doishi-m0i ya-vé abifra 250

ta xshathrahya ahura ya vanhéus ashis mananhd 251

frd spefité 4rmaité asha daenae fradaxshaya! 22
33. 14

at ratam zarathushtro tanvascit hvahyae ushtanem 253

dadaiti paurvatatem mananhaseca vanhéus mazdai 254


shyaothanahya ashai yaca uxdahyacai seraoshem xshath-
remca. 255


<eige~


Lines 244-255 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra 33.11-14


Ill. Prayer for Paradise.


XXXIII.—11
(Thou) (Asha) who art the strongest Ahura of Mazdah (lord
of mindful) and Armaiti (love), 244


Prospering, as if they were earthly substance, Asha, (justice) and
Vohu Manah, (good disposition) and Xshathra (power), 245
Hear me, pity me, when to every man (shall come) retribution!


XXXIT.—12


Arise up to me, O Ahura Mazdah, (lord mindful) grant me (1)
through Armaiti (love), vitality ; 247
(2) Through the most bounteous Mentality, grant me strength;
(3) through good Ada (retribution), 248
And through Asha (justice) (grant me) powerful might, (4)
and through Vohu Manah (good disposition) (grant) compen-


sation. 249
XXXITII.—13
In order to grant me support, O thou wide glancing (divinity, )
show me (that) the incomparable (riches) 250
Of thy realm, O Ahura (lord), (are) the compensations of Vohu
Manah, (good disposition) ; 251
O bounteous Armaiti, (love) instruct the spirits through Asha,
(justice). 252
XXXITI.—14
But, O Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful), Zarathushtra offers as an
oblation his own body, Zo
And the first fruits of Vohu Manah (good disposition), 254


And the Sraosha (obedience) and Xshathra (power) of his
deeds and uttered words, through Asha (justice). Zo)


256-264 Gatha Ahunavaiti 34,1-3


YASNA 34


34. J
Ya shyaothana, ya vacanha, ya yasna ameretatatem 256


ashemca taéibyO daenha mazda xshathremea haurvatato 27


aésham t0i ahura éhma pourutemais dasté, 258
34, 2
afea 1-t0i mananha mainyusca vanhus vispa data 259


spefitahyaca neres shyaothana yehya urva asha hacaité 2


pairigaéthe xshmavato vahme mazda garodbis stiitam! 2


34. 3
at toi myazdem ahura nemanha ashaica dama, one
gaéthae vispae a-xshathroi yae voht thraoshta mananha 23


aroi-zi hudaenhO vispais mazda xshmavasii savo! 26


Lines 256-264 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 34.1-3


HYMN 34


Congregational Prayer
for Protection and Instruction.


I, Congregational Prayer for Protection and Instruction.


XXXIV.—1


Among the foremost (of thy worshippers) we offer to thee, O
Ahura Mazdah mindful lord, through the mind of the good


Mentality, - 258
XXXIV.—2

All the deeds, speeches and hymns 25)9)

Through which (deeds, speeches and hymns) 256

Thou shalt bestow Ameretat, (immortality) Asha, (justice)

Xshathra, (power) and Haurvatat, (health) 257,


And we bear the praises of thy grateful people, with a bounteous-
ness, such as would gratefuily follow along the paths of Asha,
(justice) 260

(Even) into the outer realms (of-the-heavenly-presence) of a
(divinity) such as You, O Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful) ! 261


XXXIV.—3
But to thee, O Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful) and to Asha, (jus-
tice) we shall with reverence offer the oblation 262


(That) you with Vohu Manah (good disposition) may cause all
substantial beings which are in the Xshathra (realm) to mature
(into perfection B), 263

Seeing that the perfecting of the beneficent man is at all times
valuable in (the sight of) One-like-You. 264


265-276 Gatha Ahunavaiti 34,4-7


34, 4
at toi atrém ahuraé aojonhvafitem asha usémahi 265
asishtim émavafitem stoi rapante cithra-avanhem 266


at mazda daibishyafité zastaishtais dereshta-aénanhem. 267


34.5


kat vé xshathrem ka ishtis shyaothanai mazda yatha va
hahmi 268


asha vohi mananha thrayoidyai drigim yishmakem 2


paré-vie vispais paré vaoxema daévaiscaé xrafstrais
mashyaisea. i270


34. 6


yezi atha sta haithim mazda asha vohii mananha a7
at tat mO0i daxshtem data ahya anhéus vispa maetha 27
yatha vae yazemnasca urvaidyae stavas ayéni paiti. 2


34, 7


kuthra tdi aredra mazda yoi vanhéus vaéden& mananhd 2
séfightis raéxenae aspéficit sadracit caxrayO usheurt? 2%


naécim tém anyém yishmat vaéda asha atha-nae thrazdtim! 27


Lines 265-276 fhe Hymns of Zarathushtra 34.47


XXXIV.—4
We wish O Mazdah, (lord mindful) that thy fire, whose strength
is Asha, (justice) 265
May be a promised (swift, M) powerful, clear, delightful help for
supporting the land or the people; 266
But (that it may be) for the enemies a visible, suggestive and
practical token of harm. 267

XXXIV.—5


Have You (enough) Xshathra (power)? Have You (enough)
Wealth? O Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful), for the deeds
which I (urge) You (to do, namely), 268

With Asha, (justice) and Vohu Manah (good disposition), to pro-
tect Your poor? 269

Through (our preaching among) the daevic-enemies, savages, and
and doomed-men, we will declare You to all foreigners. 270


XXXIV.—6
Since You therefore actually have the above powers, O Ahura
Mazdah (lord mindful), with Asha (justice) and Vohu Manah
(good disposition), ay)
Therefore grant me as token thereof, a change for better now in
this life, 272
So that I may the more approach You with greater joy and ado-
ration. 273


XXXIV.—7
(O Lord, listen to me who wish to ask thee about certain people)
Are they faithful to thee, O Ahura Mazdah, (lord mindful), who,
though they know of Vohu Manah, (good dispostion), 274
Turn the difficulties of traditionally-inherited doctrine unto their
own advantage, by sophistries? 275
As for me, I know none other but You, O Asha! therefore protect
us. 2/6


277-288 Gatha Ahunavaiti 34.8-11


34. 8


tais zi-nae shyaothanais byefité yaéshii as pairl pourubyo
ithyejo an


hyat as aojyae naidyaenhem thwahya mazda asta urvatahya 28
yoi noi¢ ashem mainyafita aéibyo duiré vohii as mand! 2


34.9


yoi spefitam armaitim thwahya mazda berexdam vidush6 2
dus-shyaothana avazazat vanhéus evisti mananhd 281
aéibyo mas ashi syazdat yavat ahmaf auruna xrafstra.


34. 10


ahya vanhéus mananhd § shyaothana vaocat gerebam
huxratus 083


spefitamea armaitim damim vidvae hitham ashahya 284
taca vispa ahura thwahmi mazda xshathroi 4 voyathra! x


34. If


at toi ubé haurvaesea Avarethai & ameretatidesca 286
vanhéus xshathra mananhod asha maf armaitis vaxsht 287


utaytiti tevishi tais & mazda vidvaésham thwoi ahi! 2&8


Lines 277-289 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 34.8-12


XXXIV.—8
With such specious deeds, under which lurk danger for many,
they are intimidating us; especially 277
Me, who am the weaker, for (Bendva) is strong with hate of thy
commands, O Mazdah, (mindful). 278
But those who think not of Asha, (justice) they are surely distant
from Vohu Manah (good disposition) ! 279

XXXIV.—9


Those evil doers who drive away bounteous Armaiti, (love) so

highly prized by the Expert-knower O Mazdah (mindful) 280
Because they have no share of Vohu Manah (good disposition)
Are shunned by the man endowed by Asha, (justice) as much as


the savages are shunned by us. 282
XXXIV.—10

The clever Expert-knower will say he holds (1) to the deeds of

Vohu Manah, (good disposition ) 283

And (2) to the bounteous creator Armaiti (love) the associate

(wife?) of Asha (justice) 284

And (3) to all thy hopes (that are to be realized) in thy Xshathra

(power), O Ahura Mazdah, (lord mindful) ! 285
XXXIV.—I11

Thus for (that Expert-knower) both Haurvatat (health) and

Ameretat (immortality) (serve) for food 286


And Armaiti ever has caused the-two enduring and vital (divini-
ties just mentioned,) to grow through the Xsathra (power) of
Vohu Manah (good disposition) and through Asha (justice) ;

Thus, O Mazdah (mindful), thou blessest the opponents of thy
enemies ! 288


XXXIV.—12
What is Thy decree? What is Thy wish? What praise, what
hymn (wouldst thou have me raise to Thee?) 289


289-300 Gatha Ahunavaiti 34,12-15


34. 12


kat toi razaré? kat vashi? kat va sttito? kat va yasnahya? 2


sriiidyai mazda fravaoca ya vidayat ashis rashnam 290
sisha-naie asha patho vanhéus hvaétéfig mananhd. 29]
34. 13


tém advanem ahura yém moi mraos vanhéus mananhd »

daenae saoshyafitam ya hi-kareta ashacit urvaxshat 293

hyat civishta hudabyo mizdem mazda yehya ti dathrem. 2%
34, 14

tat zi mazda vairim astvaité ushtanai data 295

vanhéus shyaothana mananho yO z1 géus verezéné azyae 24

xshmakam hucistim ahura xratéus asha frad0 verezéna. 27
34.15

mazda af moi vahishta sravaesea shyaothanaca vaoca 28

ta-tii vohii mananha ashaca ishudem stitd 299


xshmaka xshathra ahura ferashém vasna haithyém dae
ahiim! 300


Lines 290-300 Ite Hymns of Zarathushtra 34,13-15


(In order) that we may hear it, do thou, O Ahura Mazdah, (lord
mindful), reveal what compensation thou wilt grant (as a re-


ward) for keeping Thy observances. 290
Teach us, O Asha (1) the passable paths of Vohu Manah, (good
disposition ) 291
XXXIV.—13
And (2) the way of Vohu Manah (good disposition, (a) of which
thou toldst me, 292
(b) Which is well formed by Asha, (justice) (c) on which the
spirits of the Saviors progress; 293


(d) Which thou, O Mazdah (mindful) hast assigned for the
clever, as one of the compensations which are at thy disposal.


Il. Zarathushtra Closes with a Prayer
for Congregation and Humanity.


XXXIV.—14
Which ‘choice’ (compensation) O Ahura Mazdah (lord mindful)
give (1) to my corporeal life 295


Through the action of Vohu Manah (good dispositions) ; and
(2) to whomsoever belongs to-the-groups-of-those-who-labor-
at-herding calving (cows) ; 296

(For your compensations consist of ) good wisdom of the under-
standing, which causes prosperity-for-the-caste-of-laboring-men.


XXXIV.—15
O Ahura Mazdah, (lord mindful), with Vohu Manah (good dispo-
sition), and with Asha (justice), inform me of 298
The best teachings and deeds and speeches, and what praise of ours
You claim as Your due. 299
Through Xsthathra (power) grant that, according to Your will
humanity may be progressive, 300


30n=enO Gatha Ushtavaiti 43.1,2


Gatha Ushtavaiti


YASNA 43

43. J
Ushta ahmai, yahmai, ushta kahmaicit! 301
vasé-xshayas mazdae dayat ahuro 302
utayiliti tevishim, gat-t0i vasemi1! 303
ashem deredyai tat mdi dae, armaité, 304
rayd ashis vanhéus gaém manarhd! 305

43.2
afca ahmai vispanam vahishtem 306
Avathroya na Avathrem daidita. 307
thwa cicithwa spénishta mainyi mazda, 308
ya dae asha vanhéus mayae mananhd 300


vispa ayaré daregdjyatois urvadanha! 310


Lines 301-310 Jae Hymns of Zarathuvhtra  43.1,2


HYMN 43
Ihe Interior Call of Zarathushtra


I. Prayer for fulfilment of Human Aspirations


43.1
Success to Me, to You, and to Whosoever will! 301
May aHurA Mazdah (mindful lord) who rules at will over
all things, grant 2


(That) both Enduringness and Vitality (health and immort-
ality) may come to thee (O Believer)! Of Thee, O Lord,
do I desire this!

As to me, grant me that I maintain my hold on Asha (just-
ice)! And do Thou, O Armaiti (love), grant me 4

Riches, Compensations, and the life of Vohu Manah (good


disposition)! 5
43.2
Yea, Vohu Manah (good disposition) will give the best of
all things to this Zarathushtra; 306
According to his wish, He will give him the comfort of
heaven. 7
O Mazdah (mindful), through Thy most (bounteous ment-
ality) Spenta Mainyu reveal 8


All these blissful mysteries of Vohu Manah (good dis-
position) which Thou givest through Asha (justice) 9
With all the joys that are long and vital on every day! 10


311-325


Gatha Ushtavaiti 43.3-5


43.3


at hvo vanhéus vahyo na aibi-jamyat

yé nae ereziis cavanho patho cishoit
ahya anhéus actvatd mananhacca,
haithyéfig actis yéfig a-shaéti ahuro,
aredro thwavae huzéfituse ¢pefitd mazda!


43. 4


at thwa méfighai taxmemca ¢pefitem mazda
hyat ta zacta ya-ti hafshi avae

yae dae ashis dregvaite ashaunaéca,
thwahya garema athro asha-aojarho,


hyat mOi vanhéus hazé jimat manarho.


43.5


epefitem af thwa mazda méfghi, ahura,


hya¢ thwa anhéus zathoi darecem paourvin.


hyat dae skyaothana mizdavan yaca uxda
akém akai vanuhim ashim vanhaove


thwa hunara damOis urvaeéce apeme.


Lines 311-325 The Hymns gf Zarathushtra 43.3-5


43.3
May he (Zarathushtra) who, like Thee, OQ Mazdah (mind-
ful), is faithful, well-informed, and bounteous, 315
Who would teach us the just paths of profit—namely, 12
Those of the good life (both) corporeal and mental, that


lead to 16.
The real worlds where dwells (the lord) anura; 14
May he ( Zarathushtra ) arrive to What-is-better-than-

good! II

43.4
In order that I may receive the power of Vohu Manah

(good disposition) 320
I would ,in Thee, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), ac- -

knowledge heroism and bounteousness, 16
(1) Through the Hand in which thou holdest 7


The Compensation to be given to Drujist and Ashaist, 18
And (2) through the glow of thy (judgment) Fire, whose
vigor is Asha (justice). 1g


Il. Reminiscences of Six Earlier Visionary Experiences.
VISION I. At Beginning, Mazdah plans Rewards and Punishments.


43.5
I acknowledged thee, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), as
the bounteous divinity when 321


(1) At the beginning, I beheld Thee at the birth of life 20
(2) When Thou didst establish (proper) Compensations for


deeds and words: 23
A bad (compensation) for the bad, and a good compens-
ation for the good ; 24


(Which is to occur,) with Thy skill, at the last crisis of
of creation ; 25


326-340 Gatha Ushtavaiti 43.6-8
43. 6

yahmi spefita thwa mainyi urvaése jasé 325

mazda xshathra ahmi voht mananha 327


yehya shyaothanais gaéthae asha fradente 2%


aéibyo ratis séfighaiti armaitis
thwahya xratéus yém naécis dabayeiti.


43.7


spefitem af thwa mazda méfighi ahura

hyat ma vohi pairi-jasat manarha

peresafca, ma, cis ahi? kahya ahi?

katha ayaré daxshara ferasayai disha

aibi thwahii gaethahti tanushica ?
43. 8


at hoi aoji zarathushtro paourvim:
haithyo dvaéshae hyat isdya dregvaite,
at ashauné rafend Ayém aojonghvat,
hyat abishtis vasase xshathrahya dya


yavat & thwa mazda staumi ufyaca !


sa & & &


Lines 326-340 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 43.6-8


43.6
At which crisis come Thou, O Mazdah (mindful), with
Thy Spenta Mainyu (bounteous mentality), 326
With Xshathra (power), Vohu Manah (good disposition),
and Asha (justice), Dy)
Through whose deeds are prospered the human-estates 28
For which Armaiti (love) formulates judgments 29
Of (mindful) Mazdah’s understanding which no one ever
deceives. 30


VISION II. Establishment of Orthodoxy.


43.7
I recognized Thee, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), as
the bounteous (divinity), through the answer with which


I was inspired 300
When, with (good disposition) Vohu Manah, (some man)
came around to me, and asked, 32
“Who art thou? To what divinity belongest thou? 33
With what (divine) token wilt thou appoint the Day-for-
questioning 34
About thy substance and thyself ?’ a5
43.8
Therefore I, Zarathushtra, said to him at first: 336
“J would wish to be a genuine enemy to the Drujist, 37
But a vigorous support for the Ashaist, 38
So that I may plan for the developments of the now lim-
ited Xshathra (coming kingdom) 39


(With) as-much-(zeal)-as I am now praising and lauding
Thee, O Mazdah (mindful) ! 40


341-355 Gatha Ushtavaiti 43.9-11


43.9
Spefitem af thwa mazda méfighi ahura 31
hyat ma voht pairi-jasat mananha. 342
ahya ferasem, ‘kahmai vividuyé vashi ? 313
af a thwahmai athré ratam nemarhod 3d
ashahya-ma yavat is&ii manyai ! 345
43. 10


at tii modi dais ashem hyat ma zaozaomi! 346
‘armaiti hacimnd it arem, 347
peresica nae ya toi éhma parshta 348
parshtém zi thwa yathana tat émavatam; 349


hyat thwa xshayas -aéshem dyat émavafitem? 30


43. 11
Spefitem af thwa mazda ménghi ahura 351
hyat ma voht pairi-jasat manarha 362
hyat xshma uxdais didainghé paourvim: 363
‘sadra-m0i sas mashyaéshii zaraz-daitis 35d


tat verezyeidyai hyat moi mraota vahishtem ?’ %


Lines 341-355 Ihe Hymny of Zarathushtra 43.9-11


VISION II. Theophany of ASHA
43.9
I recognized Thee, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), as
the bounteous (divinity) 341
When, with good disposition) Vohu Manah, (some man)
came-around to me, and asked (a question). 42
To his question, “What cause dost thou intend to adopt?”
I, (Zarathushtra), answered, ‘“‘At each oblation of reverence


brought to Thy sacrificial fire (O Lord) 44

I will, to the extent of my ability, fix my mind on Asha

(justice)! 45
43.10

“But, (O God), show me the Asha (justice) whom I in-

voke |” 346


(Mazdah speaks:) “In company with Armaiti (love), and
Asha (justice) 1 have come,

For thy question was as the question of powerful (men) 49

When some ruler insists on having his mighty powerful


wish (granted by) thee. 50
Now ask Us what thou hast to ask Us!” 48
VISION IV. The Sincere shall be Supported.

43.141
I recognized Thee, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), as
the bounteous (divinity) 351
When (1) I was first instructed in Your utterances; 52
And when with (good disposition) Vohu Manah, (some
man) came-around to me, (and asked), 53
“Will the doing of that which You have told me is the
Best (to do) 54


Arouse trouble among men for me?” 55


43,12


hyafcé moi mraos: ‘ashem jaso fraxshnené? 3%


at tii-mOdi noit asrushta pairyaogza: 357
‘uzeredyai para hyat mi a-jimat 368
seraoshd ashi maza-raya hacimno 369
ya vi ashis randibyo savoi vidayat?’ 360
43.13
spefitem at thwa mazda méfighi ahura 36
hyat ma vohii pairi-jasat manarha 362
aretha voizdyai kamahya tém: ‘moi data 363


daregahya yaus yém vae naécis daresht ite iil


vairyae stois ya thwahmi xshathroi vaci P36
43.14

hyaf na fryai vaédamno isva daidit 366

maibyod mazda tava rafend fraxshnenem 367

hyat thwa xshathra ashat haca frashta 368

uzereidyai azém saredanae séfighahya 369


mat tais vispais yoi-t0i mathrae marefifi. 370


Lines 356-370 Ihe Hymny of Zarathushtra 43.12-14


43.12
And at the same time, when Thou to!ldst me to answer
him, “Depend on Asha ( justice) for support !” as
Then to me(Zarathushtra,) who was not disobedient, Thou


utteredst the command: a
“Thou hadst better arouse (thy prophecy) before the com-
ing 58
Of Sraosha (obedience) together with the rich Ashay (com-
pensation), 59
Who will distribute to both contending Parties compens-
ations for their profit.” 60
VISION V. Demand for Help to Execute God’s Judgments.
43.13
I recognized Thee, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), as
the bounteous (divinity) 361
When, with (good disposition) Vohu Manah, (some man)
came-around 62
To learn the details of my desire: 63
“Give me the inalienable gift of long enjoyment 64
Of the desired existence which is said to be in Thy
Xshathra (realm).” 65
43.34
Just as a wealthy man, according to his knowledge or abil-
ity gives to a friend, 366
Do Thou, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), give to me
those Thy provisions of support, 67
Inasmuch as Thou endowedst me with Asha (justice), so
that 1 might stand forth 68
With all those who remember Thy mystic Word 70


To arouse (those who may become) church-organizers of Thy
teachings. 69


371-380 Gatha Ushtavaiti 43.15,16
Xl en cM SM


43,15
spefitem af thwa mazda méfighi ahura 311
hyat ma vohti pairi-jasaf manarha 372
daxshat ushyai tushna maitis vahishta: 373


dit na pours dregvatd hyat cixshnusho 314


at toi vispéfig afigréfig ashaund adaré.’ 315
43.16

at ahura hvd mainyim zarathushtro 316

verefité mazda yasté cisca spénishto 317

astvat ashem Ayat ushtana aojofighvat 378

hvéfig daresdi xshathroi hyat armaitis 379


ashim shyaothanais vohii daidit manamha. 380


Lines 371-380 Ive Hymns gf Zarathushtra 43.15,16


VISION VI. Mission of Orthodoxy—Armaiti Aligns the Parties.


43.15
I recognized Thee, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), as
the bounteous (divinity) 371
When, with (good disposition) Vohu Manah, (some man)
came around (to ask me a question). 72
Then the best Tushnamatay (silent devotion) inspired me
to proclaim (to him) 73
“A (man as) important (as an Ashaist) should not curry fa-
vor with a Drujist, 74
For (it is the duty) of the Ashaist (to consider) all (Drujists
as) hostile.” 76


43.16
Yea, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), inasmuch as Zara-
thushtra chooses the (bounteous Mentality) Mainyu of


Mazdah (mindful), 376
He (Zarathustra) teaches that each most bounteous (man)
should to himself attach Asha (justice) aii
By living in a vigorous corporeal manner. 78


May Armaiti (love) (be found) in the Xshathra (realm)
that ever beholds the Sun ; 79
Where, we pray, may Armaiti (love), with Vohu Manah
(good disposition), to all grant a Compensation, through
the instrumentality of the deeds they may have per-
_ formed ! 80


381-390


Gatha Ushtavaiti


YASNA 44
44.1


Tat thw& peres& eres-m6i vaocé ahura!
nemanhd & yatha nemé xshmavatd?
mazda fryai thwavas sahyat mavaité
at né asha frya dazdyai hakurena


yatha-né 4 vohiti jimaf mananha?
44,2


tat thwa peresa eres-mdi vaoca ahura!
katha anhéus vahishtahya paourvim ?
kathé siiidyai yé-1 paitishat

hvo zi asha spefitd irixtem vispdibyo


hard mainyii ahimbis urvathd mazda?


44,1,2


Ss 8 8 B


Lines 381-390 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra  44.1,2


HYMN 44


Oracular Convultation ay to Adviyability
of Conversion by War.


I. Questions about Theology.


44.J
O aHura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly ! 381
How should I pray, when I wish to pray to One-like-You?
May One-like-You, O Mazdah (mindful), who is friendly,


teach one-like-me? 83
And may You give us supporting-aids through the friendly
Asha (justice), 84
And tell us how You may come to us with Vohu Manah
(good disposition ?) 85
44.2
O auura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly ! 386
I, Whether at the beginning of the best life 87


The retributions will be of profit to their recipients? 88
And 2, whether He 1, who is bounteous to all through
Asha (justice), and 2, who watches the End 89
Through His (mentality) Mainyu,—(whether) He is the
life-healing Friend (of the people, M)? go


391-405


Gatha Ushtavaiti


44.3-5


44.3


tat thwa peresa& eres-mOi vaoca anura!
kasna zatha pata ashahya pouruyo?
kasna /Avéfig starémea dat advanem ?
ké ya mae uxshyeiti nerefsaiti thwat?


tacit mazd& vasemi anyaca viduye !
44. 4


tat thwa peres& eres-moi vaoca ahura!

kasna dereta zamca adé nabaesca

avapastois? ké apd urvaraesca?

ké vatai dvanmaibyasca yaoget asi?

kasna vanhéus mazda damis manarhd?
44.5

taf thwa peres& eres-modi vaoca ahura!

ké hvapae raocaesca dat temaesca?

ké hvapae Avafnemea dat zaemaca?


ké ya ushae arém-pithwa xshapaca


yae manaothris cazddfighvafitem arethahya? 40


Lines 391-405 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra  44.3-5


44.3
O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly! 391
Who was the first father of Asha (justice) by (giving) birth
(to Him)? 92


Who established the sun(lit day)s and the star (glistering
sphere) and the (Milky) Way? 93
Who, apart from Thee, established (the law) by which the


moon waxes and wanes? 94
These and other things would I like to know! 95
44.4
O aHura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:

speak to me truly! 396


Who was from beneath sustaining the earth and the clouds
So-that-they-would-not-fall-down? Who made the waters


and the plants? 98
Who yoked the-two-swift-ones (thunder and lightning ? )
to the wind and to the clouds? 99
Who is the creator of Vohu Manah? 400
44.5
O anurA Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly! 401
Who produced well-made lights and darkness? 2
Who produced sleep, well-induced through laborious
waking ? 3


Who produced the dawns and the noon through the con-
trast with the night

Whose daily changes (act) for the enlightened believers (as)
monitors of their interests ? 5


406-420 Gatha Ushtavaiti 44,6-8


44.6
tat thwa peresa eres-m6i vaoca ahura ! 406
ya fravaxshya yezi ta atha haithya? 07
ashem shyaothanais debazaiti armaitis 408
taiby6 xshathrem vohii cinas mananha 409


KaéibyO azim rany6-skeretim gam tash6? 10
44,7


taf thwa@ peresa eres-m6i vaocad ahura! di]
ké berexdam tasht xshathra mat armaitim? 42


ké uzemém coref vyanaya puthrem pithrée? 413


azém tais thwa fraxshni avami mazda 41d

Spefitaé mainyi vispanam datarem! 15
44.8

tat thwa peresa eres-m0i vaocé ahura! 16

mefidaidyai ya-t0i mazda adishtis M17

yaca vohii uxda frashi manarha 418

yaca asha anhéus arém vaédyai 419


ka-mé urva vohti urvashat agemat ta? 420


Lines 406-420 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 44.68
Te ee OO


44.6
O auura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly! 406
Is the message I am about to proclaim genuine?


i
Does Armaiti (love) support Asha (justice) through


deeds? 8
Dost Thou with Vohu Manah (good disposition) destine
the Xshathra (realm) for these (believers) ? 9
For whom but these (believers) didst Thou shape the for-
tune-bringing cattle? IO
44,7

O aHuRA Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly ! 411
Who shaped prized Armaiti (love) with Xshathra (power) ?
I2

Who, by guidance (education, M), rendered sons reverent
to their fathers ? 3
(It is) I who strive to learn-to-recognize Thee 14
Through the (bounteous Mentality) Spenta Mainyu as
Giver of all (good things)! 15

44.8

O auura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly! 416
(I would like) to know (1) what (sort) of a purpose ( is
Thine ), that I may be mindful of it; 07;
(2) What are Thy utterances, about which I asked through
the aid of Vohu Manah (good disposition) ; 18


(3) The proper knowledge of life through Asha (justice) 1g
(4) How shall my soul, encouraged by bliss, arrive at that
good reward? 20


421-435 Gatha Ushtavaiti 44.9-11


44.9


tat thwa peresa eres-m0i vaoca ahura!
katha-moi yam yaos daeénam yaos dane
yam hudanaus paitise sahyat xshathrahya


ereshva xshathra thwavas asishtis mazda


& BS 8&8 B 8B


hademdi asha vohuca shyas mananha?
44, 10


tat thwa peresa eres-moi vaoca ahura!
tam daénam ya hatam vahishta
ya-moi gaéthae asha fradoit hacémna


armatois uxdais shyaothana eres daidyat


&B 6 & 8 &


mahyae cistdis thwa Ishtis usén mazda ?
44,11


tat thwa peresa eres-moi vaoca ahura? 43]
katha téfig-a vijémyat armaitis 432
yaéibyo mazda thw0i vashyete daéna 433
azem t01 Ais pouruyo fravoivide 434


vispéfig anyéfig manyéus spasya dvaéshanha! 43


Lines 421-435 The Hymns of Zarathushtra 44.9-11
eee ee PON A 44.9-1}


44.9


O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly! 421


How may I accomplish the sanctification of those spirits 22
To whom Thou, the well-disposed Master of the Coming
(Kingdom) Xshathra, 23
Hast pronounced promises about its genuine blessings, 24
Promising that those spirits shall dwell in the same Dwell-
ing with Asha (justice) and Vohu Manah ( good dispos-


ition ) ? 5
44.10
O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of thee:
speak to me truly ! 426
(How) will (such a promise) properly nurture (1) (good)
deeds, 29
—Which are the best qualities of these my followers’ spir-
its—together with (2) utterances of humility? 27
(How) will (the promise) cause my (followers’) settlements
to prosper through Asha (justice) ? 28
The aspirations of my mystic wisdom shall wish for Thy
(second birth, sez 48.5), O Mazdah (mindful) ! 30
44.11
O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly! 431
How will Armaiti (love) actually, in deeds, extend over
those (persons) | 32


To whom Thy spirit (religion ?) was announced (as a doc-
trine) ? 33

On account of whom I first was elected (acknowledged,M)
(and whom I love); 3

All others I look upon with hostility of mentality ! a6


436-450 Gatha Ushtavaiti 44.12-14


44,12
tat thwa peres& eres-m0i vaoea ahura! 436
ké ashava yais peresai dregvae va? 43)
katarém 4 afigrd va hv0 va afigrod 438
yé-ma dregvae thwa sava paiti-ereté 439
eyanhat hvd noit ayém afigrd manyeté? 440
44.13
tat thwa peres& eres-mdi vaoca ahura! rm
katha drujem nis ahmaf 4 nis nashama? 42
téfig-& ava yoi asrushtdis perenadienhd 443
noif ashahya adivyeifiti hacémna 4d
noit frasaya vanhéus caxnaré mananho. 445
44, 14
tat thwa peresa& eres-m6i vaoca ahura! Ad6
katha ashai drujém dyam zastayd a7
ni him merazdyai thwahya mathrais séfighahya 48
émavaitim sinam davoi dregvasti dg


a-is dvafshéfig mazda anashé astasca. 450


Lines 436-450 Ive Hymns of Zarathushtra 44.12:14
Il. Questions about Propaganda by War.


44.12
O aHurA Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly ! 436
How shall I, from among those whom I am addressing,
tell the Ashaist from the Drujist? 37


To which of these two is the Enemy of life (opposed)? 38
Or shall I take it for granted that whoever opposes Thy


profit is an enemy and a Drujist? 39
What is the real condition of affairs with him (the Druj-
ist)? Shall he not be considered an enemy? 40
44.33
O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to metruly! 441
How may we drive off from us the Drujist? 42
I exclaim, “Down with those who, being full of disobed-
ience, 43


(1) Do not strive to be together with Asha (justice), 44
(2) Nor desire to understand the problems of Vohu Ma-


nah (good disposition).” 45
44.34

O aHura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:

speak to me truly ! 446

How may I deliver the Druj into the hands of Asha ( jus-

tice)? 47


That I may smite them down (according to the promises,


or, through the power) of Thy Words of ( Thy ) doc-
trines, 8


So that (even) within (or, among) the Drujists (I) may
accomplish powerful destruction, 49
That those torturers and haters may perish. 50


451-465 Gatha Ushtavaiti 44,15-17


44.15
tat thw& peresa eres-moi vaoca ahura! 451
yezi ahya asha poi mat xshayehi 452
hyat hém spada anaocanha jamaete 453
avails urvatais ya-tii mazda diderezd 454
kuthra ayaée kahmai vananam dadie? 55
44.16
tat thw peresa eres-m6i vaoca ahura! 56


ké verethrem-jai thwa poi séfigha yoi hefiti? 47


eithra mdi dem ahiimbis ratiim cizdi 458

at hvd vohii seraosho jafitii mananha 45)

mazda ahmai yahmai vashi kahmaici¢? 460
44.17

tat thw peresa eres-mOi vaoc& ahura ! 461

katha mazda zarem carani haca xshmat 462


asketim xshmakam hyatc& moi hyat vaxs aéshd 463
saroi bizdyai haurvata ameretata 464


ava mathra yé rathemd ashat haca? 46


Lines 451-465 Ite Hymns of Zarathushtra 44.1517


44,15
O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly! 451
(Tell me) whether, in order to protect me, Thou hast tak-
en control of this (opposition) ? 52
Whenever the two hostile armies shall meet,
By those commands of righteousness which Thou shalt


maintain, 54
To which of the two Parties wilt Thou give victory? 55
44,16
O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:

speak to me truly ! 456
(Tell me) who comes victoriously with Thy doctrines to
protect those who are existent? 57
(Do Thou who art) life-healing, clearly designate to me an
established judge; 58
To him, whosoever he be, to whom Thou wishest (to give
this appointment as judge), 60
To him may (then) Sraosha (obedience), with Vohu Ma-
nah (good disposition), then come? 59
44.37
O aura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly! 461


How shall I carry out the object inspired by You, 62
(Namely,) my attachment to You, in order that (1) my


speech may grow mighty, and 63
(2) That by that word of mine the adherent of Asha (jus-
tice) 64


May in-the-future commune with Haurvatat (health), and
Ameretat (immortality) ? 65


466-480 Gatha Ushtavaiti 44.18-20


44,18
taf thwa peresa& eres-m0i vaoca ahura! 466
katha asha tat mizdem hanani 467
das& aspae arshnavaitis ushtremca 468
hyat moi mazda apivaiti haurvata 469
ameretata yatha hi ta@ibyd daenha? 470
44,19
tat thwa peresa eres-m0i vaoca ahura ! 1
yastat mizdem hanefité noift daiti 472
yé-if ahmai erezuxda na daite 473
ka-tém ahya& mainis anhat pouruyé 414
Vidvae avam ya-im anhat apéma? 475
44,20
eithena mazda huxshathra daéva aenharé 476
af it peresa yoi pishyeifiti aéibyo kam ri
yais gam karapa usixscé aéshemai data 478
yaca kava anméné uriddyata 479


noit him mizén asha vastrem fradainghé! 480


Lines 466-480 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 44.18-20


44.18
O aHura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly ! 466
How shall I earn through Asha (justice) that compensa-
tion 67
Which was announced to me, on account of Haurvatat
(health) and Ameretat (immortality) 69
(Namely,) ten mares with stallions, and a camel 68


(So that) I might-in-the-future impart the mystic Word of
these twin divinities to those adherents of Asha (justice)?


44.19
O auura Mazdah (mindful lord), this I ask of Thee:
speak to me truly ! 471
(How shall be punished) he who does not give (the above)
compensation to (me who earned it,) 7


(To me) who (earned it) by uttering just teachings? 73
I know what punishment will overtake him at the Last


(Day); 74

But (tell) me what punishment will overtake him here in

this first (life) ? a5
44.20


(O People, you might as well obey me, as I shall let you
judge for yourselves :)

Have you prospered under the rule of the Daevas ? 476

(As umpires between us) I shall ask those for the sake of
whose feeding 77

The Karapas and the Uxic give up the Cattle to Aeshma
(fury and rapine), 78

For whom the Kavays have made (the Cattle) lament
exceedingly, 79

Instead of, through Asha (justice), prospering pasturage,
so as to care for (the Cattle). 80


481-495 Gatha Ushtavaiti 45, 1-3


YASNA 45

45. J
At fravaxshya! nti giishédiim, ni sraota 481
yaéea asnat, yaéca durat ishatha 482
nui im vispa cithré zi mazdaenhodim 483
noit daibitim dus-sastis ahiim merashyat 484
aka varana dregvae hizvae avereto. 185

45, 2
at fravaxshya! anhéus mainyii pouruyé 186
yayae spanyae titi mravat yém afigrem: 487
noit na manae, noit séfigha, noit xratavo, 488
naeda varana, noit uxda, naeda shyaothana, 48
noi¢ daénae, noif urvand hacainté! 490

45.3
at fravaxshya anhéus ahya pourvim 91
ya moi vidvae mazdae vaocat ahurd: 42
‘yoi Im vé noi¢ itha mathrem vareshefiti 433
yatha im ménaica vaocaca 404


aéibyd anhéus avoi anhat apémem! 495


Lines 481-495 Ite Hymns gf Zarathushtra  45.1-3


HYMN 45
Repeated Sermon on Dualism
Teaching Agriculture ay the Road to Paradise


I. Repeated Exhortation to the Faithful
To Open their Ears to the Mystery.


45.1
Now will I speak out: listen and hear, 481
You who, from far and near, have come-to-seek ( my
word ) ; 89
Now (I exhort you) clearly to impress on your memory
(the evil teacher) and his faults ; (for) 83
No longer shall the evil Teacher—druj that he 1s !—des-
troy the second life, 84


In (the speech of) his tongue misleading to the evil life. 85
Il. The Doctrinal Dualistic Foundation of Partisanship


45.2
Now will I speak out: At the beginning of life 486
The holier (Mentality) said to the ( opposing Mentality
who was) more hostile, 87
“Neither our thoughts, doctrines, plans, 88
Beliefs, utterances, deeds, 89
Individualities, nor souls agree.” gO
Il. The Good Spirit Teaches the Best Word of Agriculture.
45.3
Now will I spea kout! Of that (which) at the beginning
of life 491
The knowing anura Mazdah (mindful lord) said: 92
“Those who do not practise the Word, 93
As I consider and declare it, 94


They shall have woe at the end of life.” 95


496-510 Gatha Ushtavaiti 45.4-6


45. 4
at fravaxshya anhéus ahya vahishtem: 495
ashat haca mazda vaéda yé im dai, 467
patarém vanhéus varezayafitd manarho, 498
at hoi dugeda hushyaothana armaitis, 499
noi¢ diwzaidyai vispa-hishas ahuro. 500
45.5


at fravaxshya hyat mdi mraot spefitdtemd 501
vacé sriiidyai hyat maretaéibyO vahishtem: 5
yoi mdi ahmai seraoshem dan cayasca 503
upa-jimen haurvata ameretata 504


vanhéus manyéus shyaothanais mazdae ahurd! 505


45. 6
at fravaxshya vispanam mazishtem 506
stavas asha yé hudae yoi hefiti 507
spenita mainyi sraoti mazdae ahurod 508
yehya vahme vohi frashi mananha 509


ahya xrati fro-ma sasti vahishta! 510


Lines 496-510 Ive Hymns gf Zarathushtra 45.4-6


45.4
Now will I speak out (what is) the best of life: 496


Through Asha (justice), O Mazdah (mindful), have I dis-
covered (1) Thee, who hast created Him (Asha); 97


(2) That Mazdah (mindful) is the Father of the working


Vohu Manah (good disposition); 98
(3) And that Armaiti (love), who produces good deeds, 1s
His daughter; 99
(4) And that the all-detecting aHura (lord) is not to be
deceived. 500
45.5
Now will I, who am the Utterer of this Word which is the
best for mortal men to hear, sol
Speak out what the most bounteous anurA Mazdah (mind-
ful lord) said to me: 2


“Those who, for (the attainment of ) this (mystic manthric
Word) grant Me their obedience, 3
They shall come up with Haurvatat (health), and Amere-
tat (immortality), 4
With the deeds of the good (Mentality) Mainyu.” 5
IV. By Rewards and Punishments will Ahura Mazdah
Vindicate Zarathushtra as Judge.
45.6


Now will I speak out about the greatest (Being) of all 506

Through Asha (justice) praising Mazdah (mindful), who
blesses all existent (beings) ! 7

Let anurA Mazdah (mindful Jord) hear, through Spenta
Mainyu (the bounteous Mentality), (the fact)

That I consulted Vohu Manah (good disposition) (as to)
how I should adore (Mazdah, mindful), 9

Through whose (Mazdah’s) understanding, may He, Vo-
hu Manah, teach me the best (teachings ?) ! IO


511-525 Gatha Ushtavaiti 45.7-9


45. 7
yehya sava ishaenti radanhd sll
yoi-zi jva aenhareca bvafitica 512
ameretaiti ashaund urva aésho 513
utayita ya neras sadra dregvato 514
taca xshathra mazdae damis ahurdo. 615
45. 8
tém né staotais nemanhod a vivareshd 616
ni-zit cashmaini vyadaresem 517


vanhéus manyéus shyaothanahya uxdahyaca 518


vidus asha yém mazdam ahurem 619

at hoi vahméfig demané garo nidama! 520
45.9

tém né vohii ma¢ manamha cixshnush6 521

yé-né usén coref spénca aspénca 522

mazdae xshathra verezényae dyat ahurod 623

pasts viréfig ahmakéng fradathai 4 624


vanhéus ashi, haozathwat 4 manarhd! © 505


Lines 511-525 Ihe Hymns of Zarathuvhtra  45.7-9


45.7
Let the Preparers (for the conversion of the world), both
those who were, and (those who) are (yet) becoming 512


Wish for the profits of the Compensations ; a
The successful soul of the Ashaist (abiding) in Ameretat
(immortality) i)


With enduringness ; (while) the Drujists shall endure griefs
And all this anura Mazdah (the mindful lord) creates


through Xshathra (the coming of the kingdom). 15
45.8
Thou-shalt-seek-to-win (Mazdah, mindful) with such prai-
ses of reverence (as) for instance (this psalm:) Gece
“With my (own) eyes shall I now behold (the heaven) 17
Of the good Mentality of word and deed; 18
Having, through Asha (justice), known anura Mazdah
(the mindful lord), 19


To whom let us, in heaven, set down adorations for the fil-
ling of the (dwelling of praise, paradise) Garodman.” 20


45.9
Him (Mazdah), along with Vohu Manah (good disposi-
tion), shalt thou seek-to-satisfy for us, om
(Because it is) He who, by His will, makes our fortune or
misfortune. 22
May aHura Mazdah (the mindful lord) through his Xsha-
thra (realm) 23
Grant, for the group of herdsmen, prospering of our cattle
and men 24
By the proficiency of Vohu Manah (good disposition),
through Asha (justice). 25


526-535 Gatha Ushtavaiti 45.10,11


45, 10
tém né yasnais armatois mimagzo 526
yé amméni mazdae sravi ahurd 527
hyat mOi asha vohueca cdisht mananha 528
xshathroi hoi haurvata ameretata 529
ahmai st0i dan tevishi utayiiti. 530
45.14
yasta daévéfig aparo mashyasca, 531
taré-masta yOi im taré-manyafita 532
anyéng ahmat yé hoi arém manyata 533
saoshyafitd défig patois spefita daena 534


urvath6, barata, pata va, mazda ahura! 535


Lines 526-535 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 45.10,11


45.10
How shalt thou, (O individual believer), with hymns of
Armaiti (love), magnify 526
Fim who is reputed to be aAnHura Mazdah (the mindful
lord) for eternity ; 27
Since through Asha (justice), and Vohu Manah (good dis-
position), He has (promised us) 28
That in His Xshathra (realm) we shall obtain Haurvatat
(health) and Ameretat (immortality) ; 29
But we shall obtain that His (heavenly) dwelling through
vitality and enduringness. 30


V. Supporting the Prophet is therefore the Chief Duty.


45.11
Whoever, therefore, in the future scorns (1) the Daevas 531
And (2) the men who scorn him (Zarathushtra), 32


And all others (luke-warm neutrals) except whoever is de-
voted to him (Zarathushtra), 318
Shall be considered, by the bounteous individuality of (Za-
rathushtra, who is) Savior and Master-of-the-house a.
As his Friend, Brother, or Father,—O anura Mazdah
(mindful lord) ! Bus


536-545


Gatha Ushtavaiti


46.1,2


YASNA 46


46. I


Kam nemdi zam? kuthra nem6i ayeni?
pairi Avaétéus airyamanasca dadaiti,
noi¢ ma xshnaus ya verezéna héca,
naeda dahyéus yoi sastaro dregvafito ;
katha thwa mazda xshnaoshai ahura?


46. 2


vaeda tat ya ahmi mazda anaésho!

ma kamnafshva hyafca kamnanai ahmi
gerez0i toi a-i¢ avaena ahura

rafedrém cagvae hyat fryd fryai daidir;


axsoO vanhéus asha ishtim mananho!


536
537
538
539
£5)


5A]
542
53
Ad
545


Lines 536-545 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 46.1,2


HYMN 46


War Preliminaries of
Heart-vearchings and Encouragement.


I. Failure in Conversion, and Demand on Mazdah for Vindication


46.1
Toward what earth shall I turn to flee? Whither shall I
turn to escape? 536
The groups of the herdsmen do not offer me the satisfac-
tion of support; 38
Nobody offers me (gifts) on the part of gentleman or of
eget Sy
Neither do those who are princes of the land (favor me)
because of the Drujist; 39


How shall I ever please Thee (by successful establishment
of Thy cult), O anura Mazdah (mindful lord) ? 40


46,2
I know, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), the reason why
I am so (despised as to be) impotent— 541


It is only because I possess so few flocks and followers! 42
I complain of this to Thee! Investigate this complaint, 43
And then support me as friendship wou!d dictate ! 44
But I specially ask instruction (as to how to attain) through
Asha (justice) the possession of Vohu Manah (good
disposition) ! 45


546-560 Gatha Ushtavaiti 46,3-5


46,3
kada mazda yoi uxshind asnam B46
anhéus darethrai frd ashahya frarenté 547
verezdais séfighais saoshyafitam xratavo? 648
kaéibyo athai voht jimat mananha? 549
maibyo thwa sastrai verené ahura! 550
46. 4


at téfig dregvae yéfig ashahya vazdréfig pat 5
gae froretdis shoithrahya va dahyéus va 562
duzazobae has Avais shyaothanais ahémustO 53
yastém xshathrat mazda modithat jyatéus va 554


hyo téfig frd-gae pathméfg hucist0is carat 555


46.5
yé va xshayas adas drita ayafitem 556
urvatois va huzéiitus mithroibyd va 657
rashna jvas yé ashava dregvafitem 558
viciro has tat frd hvaétavé mruyat 569


uztithyai 1m mazda xrinyar ahura! 560


Lines 546-560 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 46 .3-5


46.3
When, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord) will those ‘bully’
(glorious) days arrive 546
When humanity’s life will attain (the blessings) of Asha
(justice)
Through the growing teachings of saviors ( who will be
men) of understanding? 48
(Who are they) to whom (Zarathushtra) will come with
(good disposition) Vohu Manah to help? 49
For myself I choose (this mission), to fulfil (it), with Thy


(aid), O anura (lord)! 50
46.4
But the Drujist is restraining those who are a-prospering of
Asha ( justice) 551
To prosper (the interests) of the cattle, or of the village,
or of the province; 52
Being notorious, repulsive through his own deeds, 53
(So much so, that) who(ever) may despatch him from the
(realm) Xshathra of life, 54


He will (1) be doing the community a service, and (2) be
going-on, on the progressing paths of good teachings. 55


II. Rules How to Treat Converts.


46.5
Whatever well-informed person may have managed to with-
hold an Ashaist or Drujist 556


From keeping his vows or engagements (that are evil), 57
So as to come to a decision to live according to the divine


observances, 58
That (above well-informed person) should give-due-public-
notice (of that conversion) to some gentleman 59


(So that this gentleman might from then on) protect-the-
convert from further maltreatment, O anura Mazdah


(mindful lord) ! 60


561-575 Gatha Ushtavaiti 46.6-8


46. 6
at yastém noi¢ na isemnd ayat 56
draijo hvd daman haithya gat 562
hvo zi dregvae yé dregvaité vahishto 563
hvo ashava yahmai ashava fryo 56
hyat daenae paouruyae dae ahura! 66
46. 7
kém-na mazd&i mavaite payim dadat 566
hyat ma dregvae didareshata aenanhé? 567
anyém thwahmat athrascé mananhasca 568


yayae shyaothanais ashem thraoshta ahura ‘fi


tam m0i dastvam daénayai fravaoca. 570
46.8

yé va moi yae gaethae dazdé aenanhe am

noif ahya-ma Athris shyaothanais frosyat 14

paityaoget ta ahmai jasoit dvaeshanha 573

tanvém 4 ya Im hujyatois payar 574


noit duzjyatois kacit mazda dvaeshanha ! 575


Lines 561-575 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 46.6-8


46.6
But whoever, when thus warned of the convert(’s conver-
sion), shall not go (to his side) to stand-up-for-him, 561
He shall-be-banished-to the genuine Houses of the Druj
(he will be accounted a genuine Druj), 62
(Just as) a Drujist is most attractive to the Drujist, 63
(While) the Ashaist is dear to whomsoever isan Ashaist 64
Since (the time when) Thou createdst the first spirits,
O aHurA Mazdah (mindful lord)! 65


Il. Actual Struggle to Protect Converts (from Bendva?)
46.7
Whom, O Mazdah (mindful), wilt Thou commission as
guardian for one-like-me, 566
Whenever the Drujist prepares to commit violence against
me? 67
Unless he be some one of divine power like Thee, such as
Thy Fire and Manah (mind), 68
Through the deeds of both of whom Asha (justice) 1s
ripened for the consummation, O aHura (lord): 69
This is the teaching I propose to proclaim to human
spirits. 70
46.8
May not misfortune attain me through the deeds 571
Of any one who intends-to-commit-violence against my
substance ! 72
Rather, may his deeds (1) with hostility rebound on his
own body, Tag
(2) And restrain him from good life, OQ Mazdah (mindful),
(3) And, with hostility, fail to restrain him from the bad-
life | 75


576-585 Gatha Ushtavaiti 46.9,10


46.9
ké hvd yé-ma aredro codithat pouruyd 16
yatha thwa zevishtim uzemohi an
shyaothanOi spefitem ahurem ashavanem ? 578
ya-toi asha ya ashai géus tasha mrao¢ 579
ishefiti ma ta t01 vohi manamha. 580
46. J0
yé va moi na gena va mazda ahura 681
dayat anhéus ya-tii voista vahishta 582
ashim ashai vohti xshathrem manarnha 583
yasca haxshai xshmavatam vahmai 4 684


frd-tais vispais cinvato frafra peretim. 585


Lines 576-585 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 46.9,10


IV. Zarathushtra is the First Prophet;


Obedience to him Gains Paradise.


46.9


Who is that faithful (believer) who will be the first one 576
To teach me (by object lesson) to consider Thee the most
helpful (divinity), a
And the most bounteous lord (as) judge over deeds? 78
(On the contrary,) the believers are, with the aid of Vohu
Manah (good disposition), seeking (to hear) from me 79
What Asha (justice) uttered to Thee, and what the Shaper
of the Cattle uttered to Asha (justice). 80


46.10


(O aHura Mazdah, mindful lord, grant) Xshathra (the
power of the coming kingdom) through Vohu Manah


(good disposition) as a Compensation to doers-of-right ;


(namely,) 583
Whatever any man or woman may contribute or give to
me, (do Thou, O Lord, reward with) 81
What (spiritual gifts) Thou, O anura Mazdah (mindful
lord), knowest to be best for life (or, people) ; 82
And I will also urge these (rewarded people) to adoration
of such-as-You 84


(When) I precede all of these (rewarded contributors) on
to the Sifter’s Bridge of Judgment. 85


586-600 Gatha Ushtavaiti 46.11-13


46. I


xshathrais yijén karapanod kavayasca 586


akais shyaothanais ahiim merefigeidyai mashim 87


yéng hvé urva Avaéca xraodat daena 588

hyat aibi-gemen yathra cinvatd peretus 589

yavoi vispai drijo demanai astayd! 50
46. 12

hyat us asha naptyaéshii nafshuca 501

tirahya uzjén fryanahya aojyaéshii 502

armatois gaéthae fradd thwaxsharha, 503

at is vohii hém aibi-mOist mananha 504

aeibyo rafedrai mazdae sasté ahuro. 505
46. 13

yé spitamem zarathushtrem radanha 505


maretaéshti xshnaus hv0-na ferasriliidyai erejwo 5s]
at hoi mazdae ahtm dadaf ahiiro 508
ahmai gaéthae vohi fradat mananha 599


tém vé asha méhmaidi hus-haxaim. 600


Linzs 586-600 Ive Hymns of Zarathushtra 46.11-13


46,31
Through their political power, the Karapans will join the
Kavays 586
In destroying the (second) life of men through evil-deeds ;
(Fools! whereas) their own souls and spirits shall terrify
them 88
When they shall come to the Sifter’s Bridge of Judgment!
As (fit) companions shall they be admitted to the Home
of the Druj forever! gO


46.12
When, through the (help) of Asha (justice) among the vig-
orous (closer) relatives and (more distant) relatives 591
Of the Friendly Turas, there shall arise 92
Such-as-will, with zeal, prosper the substance of Armaiti
(love) ; 93
Then shall anura Mazdah (the mindful lord), with the aid


of Vohu Manah (good disposition), 94.
In-the-consummation, give support to these (Friendly Tu-
ras). 95
46.13
Whoever satisfies Spitama Zarathushtra through prepara-
tions (for him) 596
Among men, (1) he is worthy to be heard of ; 97
(2) And besides, he shall be given life (or, people) by (the
mindful lord) anura Mazdah ; 98
(3) And shall have his substance prospered through Vohu
Manah (good disposition) ; 99


(4) And he shall be considered well-befriended with Asha
( justice). 600


601-614 Gatha Ushtavaiti 46.14-16


46. 14
zarathushtra kasté ashava urvatho 601
mazoi magal ké va ferasriidyai vashti 602
at hvd kava vishtaspo yahi 603
yéngsti. mazda hadem0i minas ahura 604
téfig zbaya vanhéus uxdais mananho! 605
46. 15
haécat-aspa vaxshya vé spitamaenho 606
hyat dathéfig vicayatha adathasca: 607


tais yis shyaothanais ashem xshmaibya daduyé 8


yais datais paouruyais ahurahya. 609
46. 16

ferashaoshtra athra-ti aredrais idi 610

hvod-gva tais yéfig usvahi ushta-stoi 611

yathra asha hacainté armaitis, 62


yathra vanhéus mananho ishta xshathrem, 613


yathra mazdae varedemam shaéiti ahuro. 64


Lines 601-614 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra 46.14-16


V. Praise for the Supporters of his Cause.
46.34
(Would you like to know) who is (one of these, namely,)
a friendly Ashaist ? 601
(One) who would like to be-heard-from-for-the-Magian-
Cause along with Zarathushtra 2
In the crisis (of political establishment)? (It is) Kavay
Vishtaspa ! 3
(He is,) O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), (one of those)
whom Thou wilt (surely) unite (to Thyself) in Thy


same Abode (of Praise, Garodman); 4

Them (from among the people) am I inviting with utter-

ances of Vohu Manah (good disposition) ! 5
46.16


O Frashaoshtra Hvogva, go thou with the faithful to 610
Where we both desire to be, (namely), with those-who-are-


Beloved ; 1
Where Armaiti (love’s well-being) follows along with Asha
( justice), 12
Where are found the treasures of Vohu Manah (good dis-
position), 13
And where (the mindful lord) anura Mazdah dwells and
prospers the Xshathra (kingdom). 14
VI. Partisanship with Zarathushtra Essential to Gain Paradise.
46.15
I will inform you, O you (clansmen of ) Haechataspa, and
of Spitama, 606


How to sift the Clever from the Foolish:

a -—- -—- — — — — — — (mIssiING ?)

With these deeds you maintain for yourselves Asha (jus-
tice) | 8

Through the first decrees of (the lord) aHurA. 9


615-629 Gatha Ushtavaiti 46.17-19


46. 17
yathra vé afshmani séfighani 615
noit anafshmam déjamaspa hv0-gva 616
hada vésta vahméfig seraosha radanhd 617
yé vicinaot dathemcea adathemea 618
dafigra mafitii ashi mazdae ahuro! 61g
46, 18
yé maibya yaos ahmai ascit vahishta 620
mahyae ishtois vohii cOishem mananha 621
astéhig ahmai yé nae astai daidita 622


mazda asha xshmakem varem xshnaoshemn0d 63


taf moi xratéus mananhasea vicithem. 624
46.19

yé-m0i asha¢ haithim haca vareshaiti 625

zarathushtrai hyat vasna ferashotemem 626

ahyai mizdem hanefité parahim 627

mané-vistais maf vispais gava azi 628

tacit mdi sas tvém mazda vaédishto! 629


Lines 615-629 The Hymns of Zarathushtra 46.17-19


46.17
So that in (this) place of trouble, O Jamaspa Hvogva, 615
I am uttering for (all of ) you utterances, not of indifferent
matters, 616
But praises of the Preparer (Zarathushtra himself), who-
will-have-stood-for-you together with Sraosha (obedience)


Who shall sift the Clever from the Fools 18
Through Asha (justice), his clever advisory-manager,
O aHurA Mazdah ( mindful lord )! 19


ALTERNATES for lines 615-617:
Where I shall mention your misfortunes only, so as to


arouse Mazdah’s pity, | B.
Where I shall sing in metred, not unmetred lines, M.
46.18
This is the sifting-conclusion of my understanding, and of

my mind: 624


“Whoever to me concedes the best our age (affords in the
way of recognition or contributions), to him would-I-by-


teaching (promise) 20
The best (treasures) of my wealth, with the Vohu Manah
(good disposition); aT
But I will oppose hate to those-who-hate us, 29


(And in doing so, I consider), O Mazdah (mindful), that I
am, through Asha (justice), satisfying Your Will.’ 23
46.19


Whoever, through the inspiration of Asha (justice) may
genuinely cooperate with me, Zarathushtra, 625


(Doing those deeds) which suit my will, 26
(These deeds) will earn for him future Compensation, 27
And with all (other) expected (rewards in Paradise), a pair
of calving cows (on the ‘pasture of Asha’? sEE 33.3) 28
And mayest Thou, O Mazdah (mindful), effect these
(promises) (to those) whom (they) best (suit) ! 29


630-641 Gatha Spentamainyush 47.1-3


Syentamainyush Gatha,


YASNA 47

47. I
Spenita mainyii vahishtaca mananha 630
haca ashat shyaothanaca vacanhaca 631
ahmai dan haurvata ameretata 632
mazdae xshathra armaiti ahburo. 633

47.2
ahya manyéus spénishtahya vahishtem 634
hizva uxdais vanhéus éeanti’ mananho 635
armatois zastdibya shyaothana verezyat 636
Oya cisti: ‘hvd pata ashahya mazdie.’ 637

47.3
ahya manyéus tvém ahi ta spefito 638


yé ahmai gam ranyo-skeretim hém-tashar 639
at hoi vastrai rama-dae armaitim 640


hyat hém voht' mazda héme-frashta mananha! ill


Lines 630-641 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 47,1:3


HYMN 47
Song of the Spirit as Inspirer of War.


47.3
With Spenta Mainyu (the bounteous Mentality), and with
the best Manah (disposition), 630
With the Xshathra (power), and Armaiti (love), AHURA
Mazdah (the mindful lord) oe
Gives Haurvatat (health) and Ameretat (immortality) 32
For the deeds and speeches caused by Asha (justice). 31


47.2
Mazdabh (mindful) is the Father of Asha (justice)! With
this doctrinal thought 634
(Zarathushtra (1) declares) the best (treasure) of the most
(Bounteous Mentality) Spenta Mainyu OE
With utterances through the tongue in the mouth of (good
disposition) Vohu Manah ; 36
And (2) works the deeds of Armaiti (love) with-both-his-
hands. a5


47.3
Thou art the bounteous (father) of this Mentality, 638
Who hast shaped (1) the fortune-bringing Cow for this
(Zarathushtra), 39
And (2) peace-bringing Armaiti (love) as her pasture, 40
When (the Mentality) consulted with Vohu Manah ( good
disposition), O Mazdah (mindful) ! AL


642-653 Gatha Spentamainyush 47.4-6


47, 4
ahmat manyéus rareshyeifiti dregvafitd 642
mazda spefitat noif itha ashauno; 643
kaséuscit na ashauné kathé anhat 64g
isvacit has paraos ako dregvaité. 645
47.5
taca spefité mainyi mazda ahura 646
ashauné cis ya-zi cica vahishta 647


hanare thwahmaf zaoshat dreevae baxshaiti 68


ahya shyaothanais akat ashyas mananho? ig


47.6
ta dae spefité mainyi mazda ahura 650
athra vanhau vidaitim randibya 651
armatois debazanha ashahyaca 652


ha-zi pouriis ishentd vauraite ! 653


Lines 642-653 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra 47.4-6


47.4
The Drujists have apostacised from this bounteous ( Fa-
ther) of the Mentality (namely, Thyself), 642


O Mazdah (mindful)! But not thus the Ashaists; (for) 43
Though a man be no more than poor, yet should he, to


the best of his ability, entertain the Ashaists ; 44
(And, in addition,) if a man is powerful, he should effect
evil for the Drujists. A5
47.5
And through that (Bounteous Mentality) Spenta Mainyu,
O anuRA Mazdah (mindful lord), 46
Mayest Thou teach to the Ashaist what (doctrines and
deeds) are the best ; A7


But shall the Drujist, (who) lacks Thy good pleasure, 48
And dwells with the deeds of the Aka Manah (bad dispo-
sition) have-a-share of this (best reward)? AQ


47.6
Mayest Thou, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), give that
(Best) thro’ (Bounteous Mentality) Spenta Mainyu 650
(At) a distribution to both contending (Parties) by means


(1) of the good Fire, i
(2) And by the support of Armaiti (love) and Asha (jus-
Bice), Se


(I feel sure that) this (distribution of the Best) will cause
many who desire (the Best) to choose conversion (to it) !


654-665


Gatha Spentamainyush


YASNA 48

438. J
Yezi adais asha drujem véfinhaiti
hyat asashuta ya daibitana fraoxta,
ameretaiti daévaisca mashyaisca
at tdi savais vahmem vaxshat ahura.

48. 2
vadca-moi ya tvém vidvae ahura!
para hyat ma ya méfig peretha jimaiti
kaf ashava mazdafvéfighat dregvafitem ?
ha-zi anhéus vanuhi vista akeretis!

43. 3


at vaédemnai vahisht& sasnanam


yam hudae sasti asha ahurd


spenito vidvaie yaecit giizra séfighaenhd


48.1-3


662
063
664


thwavas mazda vanhéus xrathwa mananho. 665


Lines 654-665 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 48.1-3


HYMN 48
Incoherent Appeal for Championy and Defenders


I. Hope for Rewards in This Life.


48.1
When (Zarathushtra) shall overcome the Druj by retribu-
tions through Asha (justice), 654
When he arrives at what long since was announced 55
Through (the fate of ) Daevas and the ‘Doomed’ (unbe-
lievers), in (the realm of ) Immortality, 56


Then, O anura (lord), (Zarathushtra) will, with profits,
prosper (the faithful believer who) prays to Thee. 557


48.2
Speak to me, O ayura (lord)! For Thou art an Expert-
knower ! 658
Will the Ashaist overcome the Drujist (in this world) 60
Before the-beginning-of the Compensations (which) Thou
hast thought out? 59
That would be a good Message to the world! 61


Il. Punishment for Opposers and Waverers.
43.3
But, for an Expert-knower, (that) is the best of teachings 62
Which the beneficent aura (lord) is-teaching, with Asha
( justice). 63
The Expert-knower who is one-like-Thee, OQ Mazdah
(mindful), through the understanding of Vohu Manah
(good disposition), | 64
Knows bounteous secrets which-are-expressed-in-the-doc-
trines. 65


666-677 Gatha Spentamainyush 48.4-6


48. 4
yé dat mand vahyd mazda ashyasea, 666
hvé daénam shyaothanaca vacanhaca 667
ahya zaoshéfig ushtis varenéfig¢ hacaité 608
thwahmi xratae apémem nana anhat? 669
438.5


huxshathra xshéfitem ma-né duse-xshathra xshéfita 40
vanhuyae cistdis shyaothanais armaite 671
yaozdie mashyai aipi zathem vahishta 672


gavoi verezyatam tam né Avarethai fshuyod. 23


48.6
ha-zi-né hushodithema ha-né utayiitim 674
daz tevishim vanhétis mananhod berexdé 675
at ahyai asha mazdae urvarae vaxshat 676


ahurd anhéus zathdi paouruyehya. 677


Lines 666-677 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra 48.4-6


43.4
Whoever, O Mazdah (mindful), exercises his mind (now)
through the better, (and then again) through the worse
(meditations), 666
Who(ever) exercises his spirit with such uncertain deed and
word, 67
Who(ever) follows the delights, wishes, and convictions of
such uncertainty,— 68
Shall he, in Thy estimation, at last be separated from those
who have done Thy Will (or, who are worthy of being
in several places; or, of becoming confused) ? 69


Il. Right of Believers to Present Comfort.


48.5
May not bad rulers rule over us! (Rather,) may good
rulers rule 670
With deeds (inspired by) good doctrinal thoughts, O Ar-
maiti (love), (Thou) Best One! 71
(Who), for (1) mortal men, dost perfect an additional-or-
later-or-especial-birth, 72
But (2) for the Cattle (perfecting) that pasturage which
should fatten It for our food. 73

48.6
O Armaiti (love), prized by (men of good disposition)
Vohu Manah! 674
For (1) men, She produced good dwelling, enduringness,
and vitality; Ds
But for (2) that (Cattle), anura Mazdah (the mindful lord)
with Asha (justice), caused plants to grow 76


At the birth of the first life. si


678-689 Gatha Spentamainyush 48.7-9


48.7


ni aéshemo ni dyatam paiti remem paiti syézdim 67


noif a vanhéus mananhd didragzdduyé 679

asha vyam yehya hithaus na speftod 680

at hoi damam thwahmi a-dam ahura. 681
48.38

ka-to0i vanhéus mazda xshathrahya ishtis? 682

ka-t0i ashois thwahyae maibyo ahura ? 683

ka-thwoi asha akae aredréfig ishya? 684

vanhéus manyéus shyaothananam javaro! 685
438. 9

kada vaéda yezi cahya xshayatha 686

mazda asha yehya-m& aithis dvaétha? 687


eres-mOdi erezucam vanhéus vafus mananhd 688


vidyat saoshyas yatha hoi ashis anhat? 689


Lines 678-689 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra  48.7-9


48.7 ,
Let Aeshma (fury of rapine) be put down; oppose cruelty!


Ye who wish-to-assure-yourselves of the reward of Vohu


Manah (good disposition), 679
Through Asha (justice), to whose bond would wish to be-
long the bounteous man 80


Who shall abide in Thy Dwelling, O anura (lord)! 81


IV. Uncertainty Here and Hereafter.


48.8
O aHuRA Mazdah (mindful lord), is the wealth of Thy
good Xshathra (realm) (meant for me?) 682


Is (the wealth) of Thy Compensation (meant) for me? 83
Will Thy (realm and Compensation) please the faithful
(believer) when it shall have been made manifest through
Asha (justice) ? 84
(This would indeed be) an incitation (M) or, weighing-off
(B) of the deeds of the good Mentality ! 85


48.9
When may I know, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord),
whether Thou rulest through Asha (justice), 686
Over-every-one from whom destruction threatens me? 87
It is no-more-than right that Thou shouldst tell me, in
just words, the decrees of Vohu Manah (good disposi-
tion), 88
For (I Zarathushtra who am) the Savior would-like-to-know
how his (my) compensation shall be given to him (me)?


690-701 Gatha Spentamainyush 48.10-12


48. 10


kada mazd& manarois naro visefité?
kada ajén mithrem ahyai magahya?
ya afigraya karapanod uripayeifiti


yaca xrati duse-xshathra dafyunam.
48, If


kada mazda asha mat armaitis

jimat xshathra husheitis vastravaiti ?
koi dregvodebis xrirais ramam daefite?
kéfig a vanhéus jimat mananho cistis?


48. 12


at t01 anhen saoshyafito dahyunam
yoi xshnum vohti manarha hacaefite


shyaothanais asha thwahya mazda séfighahya


toi-zi data hamaéstard aéshem mahya!


(


690
69
692
693


a
695
696
697


698
699
700
101


Lines 690-701 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 48.10-12


V. Nobles must resign Luxury, enforce Security, gain Salvation.


48.30
When, O aHura Mazdah (mindful lord), will men gain
knowledge of the Message? 690
When will they expel the dregs of this (Haoma) intoxica-
tion? gI


Whereby is-practised-deceit by (1) the hostile Karapans 92
And (2) the bad land-rulers (who are) in (the position to)


understand. 93
48.53

When, O Mazdah (mindful), will Armaiti (love) with

Asha (justice), and Xshathra (power), | 694


And Good-Dwelling, come (Ye to us, and eventuate) in a
pastoral realm ?


95
Who will give us peace through bloody (slaughter) of the


“Drujists ? 96

Unto whom will the doctrinal-thought of Vohu Manah

(good disposition) enter (and with him abide) ? 97
43,12


But these are the Saviors of lands, O Mazdah (mindful),
Who, with Vohu Manah (good disposition) and Asha

(justice), 699
Strive to satisfy Thy teachings-or-doctrines through deeds,
They become conquerors of Aeshma (fury of rapine)! 7o1


702-713 Gatha Spentamainyush 49.1-3


YASNA 49

49, I
At ma yava béfidvd pafré mazishto 702
yé duserethris cixshnusha asha mazda 703
vanuhi ada gaidi mOi a-m0i arapa 604
ahya vohii aoshd vida manarha! 705

49,2
at ahya-ma béfidvahya manayeiti 706
tkaésho dregvae daibita ashat rareshd 707
noit spefitam dodresht ahmai stdi armaitis 708
naéda vohii mazda frashta manarha. 709

49. 3
afcaé ahmai varenai mazda nidatem 710


ashem siidyai ¢kaéshai rashayengheé druxs iM
ta vanhéus saré izyai mananho 712


afitaré vispéfig dregvato haxméfig afitaré mruyé 113


Lines 702-713 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 49.1-3
=< Eee


HYMN 49


Zarathushtra, Defeated by Bendva,
Appealy for Defenders.


I. Zarathushtra Utters Imprecations on his Successful Opponent.


49.1
Fver has Bendva hindered me, (and proved himself the )
greater (of us two) 702
When I, O Mazdah (mindful), through Asha (justice),
was trying to satisfy the misled (crowds) ! 3
(O mindful Mazdah), come to my support with Thy good
Ada (retribution), 4
And with the Vohu Manah (good disposition ) (through
whom) Thou (fore)knowest the (impending) destruction


of that (Bendva). 5
49.2

But that Bendva’s teacher (Grehma, that) apostate from

Asha (justice), 706


That Druj, has long hindered me; 5)
He fails to insist on having with him the bounteous
Armaiti (love),


8
Neither, O Mazdah (mindful), does he counsel with Vohu


Manah (good disposition). 9
49.3
In our belief, Asha (justice) is set down as the means to
profit ; 710
While, on the contrary, in their teaching, the Lie-of-the-
Druj is set down as the means to harm ; II
Consequently, I zealously-insist-on communion with Vohu
Manah (good disposition), 12


And on ‘swearing-off’ (renouncing) all association with the


Druj 13


714-725


Gatha Spentamainyush


49. 4


49.4-6


yoi dus-xrathwa aéshemem vareden ramemca 74


hvais hizubis fshuyasi afshuyafito
yaesham noit hvarshtais vas duzvarshta


toi daevéfig dan ya dregvato daéna.


49.5


yé daénam vohi sarshta mananha
armatois kaseit asha huzéfitus


taiscaé vispais thwahmi xshathroi ahura!


49. 6


frd vae fraéshya mazda ashemeca mriite
ya vé xratéus xshmakahya a4-mananha
eres vicidyai yatha-1 sravayaema


tam daénam ya xshmavato ahura!


715
76
M7


718
119
120
Tal


Lines 714-725 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra 49.4-6


49.4
Who, through perverted principles, increase fury-of-rapine
(Aeshma) and cruelty Ae
Among the herd-prosperers, by their tongues’ conversation,
themselves not being herd-prosperers ; 15
Whose own crimes they do not overcome with good works;
These may (yet) establish the divinities of the Daevas,
through the spirits of the Drujists. iy)
(or, Away with them into the Dwelling of the Daevas! B)


49.5
May zeal and fat food (reward) him 718
Who, in spirit, communes with Vohu Manah (good dispo-
sition), 19
Because he is well-informed about Armaiti (love) through
Asha (justice) ; 20
I judge all these belong into Thy realm, O Mazdah
(mindful) ! 21


IJ. Frashaoshtra is Urged to Become Defender.


49.6
O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), I beg You and Asha
(justice) to declare 729,
Your wisdom’s (double) purposes in connection with 23
The proper solution of the problem 24


How to obtain a (ready) hearing for the spirit of One-like-
You! 25


726-737


Gatha Spentamainyush


49.7


tafca vohii mazda sraoti: mananha!
sraotii asha gishahva-ti ahura!
ké airyama, ké hvaétus datais anhat


yé verezénai vanuhim dat frasastim?


49.8


ferashaoshtrat urvazishtam ashahya dae


sarém taf thwa mazda yasa ahura,


49.7-9


1]


129


731


maibyaca yam vanhau thwahmi 4-xshathroi 72


yavol vispai fraéshtaenhd aenhama!


49. 9


sraotii sasnae fshéfighy6 suyé tashtd,
noif eres-vacéie sarém didas dregvata,
hyat daénae vahishté yijén mizde


asha yuxta yahi dejamaspa!


Bes


136
137


Lines 726-737 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 49.7.9
iil St hte deeted oa


49.7
Hear, O Vohu Manah (good disposition)! Hear, O Asha
(justice)! 726
Hearken Thou, O aura Mazdah (mindful lord)! 27
What peer, what gentleman (whose influence would enforce


regulations) will initiate regulations 28

Whose observance would earn a good reputation for the

group-of-those-who-labor-at-herding-cattle ? 29
49.8


I beg of Thee, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord) to grant
(1) To Frashaoshtra the most blissful communion with
Asha (justice); Fav
And (2) to me, to attain the Good in the Xshathra (realm)
While (3) both-of-us-wish-to-be Thy messengers for ever-
in-the-age. ae


49.9
Let the Prosperer (Ashaist believer) who was shaped (or
formed) to profit the world, listen to the teachings! 734
Let not him who (utters or, possesses) the just Words


have any communion with the Drujists ; a
Let the spirits (occupied in search) of the best Compensa-
tion join together ; 36


Let both the man (Zarathushtra) and Jamaspa unite with
Asha (justice) ! a7


738-749 Gatha Spentamainyush 49.10-12


49. 10
tatca mazda thwahmi adam nipaenhe 738
mand vohi urunasca ashaunam 739
nemasca ya armaitis izaca 740
maza xshathra vazdanha avémira! 741
49, 1%


at dusexshathréfig, dus-shyaothanéfig, duzvacanho 7


duzdaenéfig dus-mananho dregvato U3

akais Avarethais paiti urvand paityeifiti 744

drijd demané haithya anhen astayo! 145
49, 12

kat toi asha zbayefité avanho 146

zarathushtrai? kaf toi vohii mananha? 147

yé-vé staotais mazda frinai ahura 148


avat yasas hyat vé ishta vahishtem! 749


Lines 738-749 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra 49.10-12


49.10
Whereupon, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), Zarathush-
tra will commit to Thy Dwelling 738
(As treasury of merit of the ‘mindful’ divinity, the memory
of ) the good thoughts, souls, and adorations, 39
With the zeal and (loving) Armaiti-devotions of the
Ashaists, 40
All of which, O (great ruler) Xshathra, mayest Thou
guard with enduring energy (B; poustrut, M). AI

49.41
(But, on the other hand, for the evil man), the ( psycho-
pompic) souls, (carrying) foods, will go to meet 742
The bad administration, bad deeds, bad speeches, 43
And bad spirits of the evil-minded Drujists ; 44
(Who) will be genuine (worthy and accepted) companions
(to the inmates) of the Dwelling of the Druj! AS

49.12
O Asha (justice)! What sort of help hast Thou for me,
Zarathushtra, who am calling to Thee? 46


With Vohu Manah (good disposition), what help hast
Thou perhaps for me? 47
O anura Mazdah, with praises do [ sue for Thy friend-
ship, 48
Praying for whatever is best among Your compensating
rewards ! 49


750-757 Gatha Spentamainyush


We


YASNA 50
50. J


Kat mOi urva isé cahya avanhd
ké-m0i paséus ké-mé-na-thrata visto
anyo ashat thwafca mazda ahura?


azda zita vahishtaafca mananho ?
50. 2


katha mazda ranyo-skeretim gam ishasoit
yé-him ahmai vastravaitim stoi usyat?
erezejis asha pourushi hvaré pishyasii


akastéig ma nishasyaé dithém dahva.


§0.1,2


750
741
182
783


1h
785
156
187


Lines 750-757 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 50.1,2
lll ll ite a do ea


HYMN 50


Ordination gf Disciples
fo Form New Settlements


I. How to Form New Settlements.
50.5
Except Thy Asha (justice) or Thy Vohu Manah ( good
disposition), O aura Mazdah (mindful lord), 750


Whom may I, with certainty, invoke i
To protect my cattle and myself ? 52
On what help may my soul count? 53
90.2
How, O Mazdah (mindful), might (a man) seek (posses-
sion of ) a fortune-bringing cow, 54
If he desire both (1) her and (2) the pasture? 5
By living justly among the many men who appreciate the
comforts (or, agricultural benefits) of the sun; 56


By settling open lands (or, bad lands, as yet belonging to
the bad Drujists) to be acquired or, settled-down ‘as a
clever man’ would do, cleverly; or, which may be given


as gifts. 57
The text is in a hopeless condition. This interpretation is as faithful


as possible, yet is partially suggested by the context. It possesses the
merit of agreeing with the practical interests of that civilization.


758-769 Gatha Spentamainyush 50.3-5


50. 3


afeit ahmai mazda asha anhaiti 758
yam hoi xshathra vohuca coisht mananha 79
yé-na ashdis aojanha varedayaeta 760


yam nazdishtam gaétham dregvae baxshaiti. 11


50. 4
at vae yazai stavas mazda ahura 762
hada asha vahishtaca mananha 763
xshathraca ya isho staenhat a-paithi 764
akae aredréfig demané gard seraoshane! 765
50.5
aroi-z1 xshma mazda asha ahura 766
hyat yushmakai mathrané vaorazatha 167
aibi-dereshta avishya avanha, 768


zastaishta ya-nae hvathre dayar! 769


Lines 758-768 Ihe Hymns of Zarathuvhtra  50.3-5


50.3
But through Asha (justice) shall (legal right), O anuRaA
Mazdah (mindful lord), be (the portion of) this (pio-
neer) ; 758
(Getting possession) of what (settlements) the good (teach-
ing, or teacher, Zarathushtra) taught him (to take posses-
sion of ) with (wit) Vohu Manah and (good management


or power) Xshathra ; 59
And who, through the vigor of compensation (by paying
an equivalent), (may acquire) 60
The nearest estate which the (nomadic) Drujists may (yet)
share (for some time). 61
Il, These Settlers are to Act as Missionaries.
50.4


Thereupon, when the Wisher (for a recently settled home)
stands upon the path leading to the (above-mentioned)
open (or, bad, lands), then 765

I (Zarathushtra) will hear (these) faithful (home-seekers)
(going) to (their new) dwelling (which, when occupied,
will be full) of (grateful) praise ; 64

And I, (Zarathushtra), praising You, O andura Mazdah
(mindful lord) with Asha (justice) and the best (disposi-


tion) Manah, and Xshathra (power), 63
Will, (for this joyful information about new settlements)
worship You ! 62
90.5
As You (also) have rejoiced with-and-for-Your-prophet’s
(joy), 7Ou
Therefore, O Mazdah anura (mindful lord), I have,
through Asha (justice), aroused myself, 66


On-account-of Your visible and manifest help, 68


770-781


Gatha Spentamainyush


50.6-8


50. 6


yé mathra vacem mazda baraiti
urvathd asha nemanha zarathushtrd
data xratéus hizvoO raithim stoi


mahya razéfie vohii sahit mananha!


50. 7


at vé yaoja zevishtyéfig aurvatd
jayais perethis vahmahya yishmakahya
mazda asha ugréfig vohi mananha


yais azatha mahmai Ayata avanhé!


50. 8


mat vae padais ya frasrita izayae
pairijasai mazda ustanazasto!
at vae asha aredrahyaca nemanha!


at vae vanhéus manarho hunaretata!


a 8 32 3


2 83 2


Lines 769-781 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra 50.6-8


Through hand-sought (labor), which restores us (the faith-
ful) to (prosperous) well-being (from the destitution con-
sequent on the furious rapine of the Drujists) ! 69


50.6
(I) Zarathushtra, (1) (who) through reverence am the friend
of Asha (justice), GD:
And (2) who give direction(s) to the settlements through
my tongue,— | 72
(I pray), O Mazdah (mindful), that (the Wisher-Settler)
may (also) raise up his speech in a word (as I do), 70
And with (the aid of) Vohu Manah (good disposition)


may teach the commands of my understanding ! 73


90.7
(By thus enlisting missionaries) for You, O Mazdah (mind-
ful), with Asha (justice) and Vohu Manah (good dispo-


sition), 776
I-will-yoke-on speedy runners, thick-set and strong, 74,
With spurs of adoration of You, 7


Through which (runners) may You (and Your cause) drive
on (to progress) : and might You aid me (too, last, but
not least) ! oF


50.8
With these Verses, which are famous as (verses) of zeal, 78
I will, with stretched-out hands, encompass You, O Maz-


dah (mindful) ! 779
You also, O Asha (justice), with the reverence of the
faithful! 80


You also, (all Ye divinities), with the full ability of Vohu
Manah (good disposition) ! 81


782-793 Gatha Spentamainyush 50.9-11


50. 9
tais vae yasnais paiti stavas ayeni 782


mazda asha vanhéus shyaothanais mananhod 8


yada ashdis ma/fyae vasé xshaya 784

at hudanaus ishayas gerezda hyém. 785
50. 10

aft ya varesha yaca pairi ais shyaothana 786

yaca voht cashmam arejat mananha 787

raocae hvéfig asnam uxsha aeurus 788

xshmakai asha vahmai mazda ahura! 789
50. I

at vé staota aojai mazda anhaca! 790

yavat asha tavaca isaica! 791

data anhéus aredat vohi manarha 792


haithyavareshtam hyat vasna ferashotemem? 18


Lines 782-793 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 50.9-11


Il. But Zarathushtra Remains the Only Mediator.


50.9
I will come towards You, O Mazdah (mindful), and Asha
(justice), 782
Praising (1) with these hymns, and with the deeds of (good
disposition) Vohu Manah; 83
And when I shall rule-at-will over my Compensation, 84
Then shall I become recipient (thereof), caring for that of
the well-disposed (faithful believer). 85


50.50
Thus, (1) whatever deeds I may have done before, 786
And (2) whatever (objects) interest the eye through Vohu
Manah (good disposition), (still they are as nothing


when compared to) 87
The lights (of the sky), the sun, the dawn (‘the shimmer-
ing bull of days’) ; 88
All these, O aHura Mazdah (mindful lord), and Asha
(justice), exist for Your adoration ! 89
50.44
J will preach that I am Your praise-singer, O Mazdah
(mindful) ! 790


And-may-I-be-this, O Asha (justice), as far as I am able,
and can! QI
May the Creator-of-life, through the help of Vohu Manah

(good disposition), 92
Prosper whatever genuine work is most suitable to His


Will! 93


794-802 Gatha Vohukshathra


YS


Vobukshathra Gatha
YASNA 51


oJ. f


Vohii xshathrem. vairim bagem aibi-bairishtem


vidishemnais izaci¢ asha afitare-caraiti


51.1-3


shyaothanais mazda vahishtem taf né nucit vareshané! 1


53.2


ta-vé mazda paourvim ahura ashai yeca


taibyaica armaité doisha-mdi ishtdis xshathrem


xshmakem vohii mananha vahmai daidi savanhé!


91.3


a-vé géushi hémyafitil yoi vé shyaothanais sarefité


ahura asha-hizvae uxdais vanhéus mananhd


yaéshom ti pouruyd mazda fradaxshta ahi!


Lines 794-802 The Hymns of Zarathushtra  51.1-3


HYMN 51
Proclamation gf the Kingdom.


I, The Children of the Kingdom.


51.1
AsHa (justice) will procure the good Xshathra (realm),
which is a ‘choice’ and most productive destiny, 794
For those who, with zeal, through their deeds, practice the
best (doctrines), 95
O (mindful) Mazdah ! (Grant that) I may effect (carry into
execution, realize) that (realm) ! 96

53.2
First of all, O anura Mazdah (mindful lord), assure me
the Xshathra (realm) of Compensation, 797
And then Thine, O Asha (justice) ! and Thine, O Armaiti
m (love)! 98
Through Vohu Manah (good disposition), oh do You
grant profit to the worshipper of You! 99

95.3
Thou, O Mazdah (mindful), art the first Teacher of those
who 802
With their deeds, and in their tongue, commune with the
utterances of Vohu Manah (good disposition) ; Sor


May they attract (the attention of ) Your ears, O AHURA
Mazdah (mindful lord), and O Asha (justice) ! 800


803-811 Gatha Vohukshathra 51.4-6


51.4
kuthra ardis afseratus? kuthra merezdika axshtat? 33
kuthra yasd Ayén ashem? ki spefita armaitis? 804


kuthra mano vahishtem? kuthra thwa xshathra mazda? 95


51.5


vispa-ta peresas yatha ashat haeca gam vidat 806
vastry0 shyaothanais ereshvo has huxratus nemamha i


yé dathaeibyo eres-ratiim xshayas ashivae cista? 88


53. 6
yé vahyOd vanhéus dazdé yasca hoi varai radat 809
ahuro xshathra mazdae at ahmai akat ashyo 810


yé hoi noi¢ vidaiti apémé anhéus urvaése. 811


Lines 803-811 Jae Hymns gf Zarathushtra  51.4-6


(Well) mayest thou ask all these (following questions:) 806


51.4


Where are the Compensations for griefs? Where may we
find pity? 803
Where may (men) attain Asha (justice)? Where may a
man establish the bounteous Armaiti (love)? 4
Where (may he establish) the best (disposition) Manah?
Where, O Mazdah (mindful), (may He establish) Thy
Xshathra (realm) ? 5


55.5


Where may the Pasturer, having become a just man
through his deeds, acquire cattle? 806

Will he (succeed in) doing so if, being of good under-
standing, he reverently prays to

Him who is a just Judge, ruling over both Compen-
sations for the benefit of the ‘clever’ (believers) ? 8


53.6


(The mindful lord) anura Mazdah (is He) who, at the last
crisis of life, through His ( power ) Xshathra, dis-
tributes 810

(1) What is better-than-good to any one who prepares (the
world) for His Will,

But (2) what is worse-than-bad to (every one) who does not
distribute (contributions to Zarathushtra, sEE 44.19, or
46.1, 10, 18). II


812-820 Gatha Vohukshathra 51.7-9


53.7
daidi-moi yé gam tashO apasca urvaraesca 812
ameretata haurvata spénishta mainyi mazda 813
tevishi utayiliti mananha vohti séfinhe. ald
53.8
at zi toi vaxshya mazda vidushé zi-na mruyat B15
hyat akoya dregvaité ushta yé ashem dadré 816
hvd zi mathra shyatd yé vidushé mravaiti. 8l7
51.9


yam xshniitem randibya dae thwa athra suxra mazda 618
ayanha xshusta aibi ahvaht daxshtem davoi 819


rashayenghé dregvafitem savayo ashavanem. 820


Lines 812-820 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 51.7.9
ES ee DF


o5.7
O Mazdah (mindful), (Thou who art the) Fashioner of the
Bovine (creation), the waters and the plants! S12


Through the most (bounteous Mentality) Spenta Mainyu,
grant me Ameretat (immortality) and Haurvatat (health)
Which are full-of-vitality, and are, through Vohu Manah
(good disposition), enduring in the holy doctrines. 14


Il. Opposition to the Prophet is Enmity to Humanity.


53.8


I shall speak for Thee, O Mazdah (mindful), about what
(1) is threatened against the Drujist, and (2) what is
wished-for (and promised) to him-who maintains Asha
(justice). 816

(I shall speak thus because it is proper) to speak to the (in-
telligent man, referred to as the) Expert-knower; 5

(And besides, the prophet) rejoices through the Word
which is told to the Expert-knower. 17,


51.9
And do Thou, O Mazdah (mindful), within (the nature of)


both contending Parties, set satisfaction, as a token (of
the accuracy of my prophecy of the Judgment by) 819
he metal, molten through Thy red fire (which, as a sifter,
shall) 18


arm the Drujist, (but) profit the Ashaist. 20


821-829 Gatha Vohukshathra 51,10-12


oJ. £0
at yé ma-na marexshaite anyatha ahmaf mazda 821
hvo damois drajo hunus ta duzdae yoi hefiti


maibyo zbaya ashem vanhuya ashi gat teé.


53.55
ké urvathd spitamai zarathushtrai na mazda? 824
ké va asha afrashta? ka spefitaé armaitis? 825
ké va vanhéus mananho acista magai ereshvo? 825
51.52
noif ta-im xshnaus vaepyo kevinO peretO zemo 827


zarathushtrem spitamem hyaf ahmi urtraost ashto 88


hyaf hoi im caratasca aoderesca z0ishent vaza. 629


Lines 821-829 Ite Hymns gf Zarathushtra 51.10-12
EE Eee eee


51.10
(Wherefore I am fearless; even those who would kill me
here are only bringing me closer to my reward)
Whereas, he who would wish to kill me, not considering
this coming event, O (mindful) Mazdah, 821
He (punishes himself by becoming) malicious towards the
creatures that are existent, (and thereby becomes) a son
of the Druj (and will therefore share their fate), 22
While I, (even though killed) will, for myself, call Asha
(justice), that He may come with a good Compensation.


oy 9
(Such being the fate of my enemies, I would like to know)
O (mindful) Mazdah, who is a friend to Spitama Zara-


thushtra? 824
(Is it not he) who has consulted with Asha (justice) ? What
(is) bounteous Armaiti (love)? 25


Or who, as a just (supporter) for the Magian Cause, show-
ed himself to be considerate of Vohu Manah (good dis-
positon ) ? 26


53.32
(Returning to my enemies,) not very much did (Kik,) that
pederast (or, vulgar fellow) of the Kavay-tribe ingratiate
himself with me 827
When at the bridge (or passage) of (the) earth {a mountain
pass?) he refused hospitality (1) to Zarathushtra Spitama
And (2) to both (the oxen?) shivering with cold, whom he
(Zarathushtra) was driving along (ALL UNCERTAIN). 29


830-838 Gatha Vohukshathra 51,13-15


Sf. 13
ta dreevatd maredaiti daéna erezaius haithim
yehya urva xraodaiti cinvatd peretae akae 831


hvais shyaothanais hizvascaé ashahya nasvae patho. 82


53.14
noi¢ urvatha datdibyascéa karapand vastrat arém 83
gavoi arodis asénida Avais shyaothanaisca séfighaisca &
yé-is séfighd apémem drijo demané adar! 835
53.15


hyat mizdem zarathushtro magavabyo coisht para &6
gard demané ahurd mazdae jasat pouruyo 837


ta vé vohii mananha ashaica savais civishi. 838


Lines 830-838 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 51.13-15


53.43


Thus the spirit of the Druj destroys the genuine (reward)
of the straight (path) ; 830

And his soul trembles at the Bridge of the Sifting which
will make manifest (his deeds), 3
(Giving access to the other world, M)

And through his deeds, and (through whose evil words of
their) tongue, the Druj have perished from the path of


Asha (justice). 32
51.54
(Even) the friend(ly disposed) Karapans do not cultivate
their pasture properly by the proper rules ; 833
They effect, by their deeds and doctrines, griefs for the
Bovine (creation) ; 34
Which doctrine will at last bring (the Karapans) into the
Dwelling of the Druj! a5
55.15


(On the contrary, when) anura Mazdah (the mindful lord)
shall, as first-comer, come into Garodman (the Dwelling
of Praise). con

I, Zarathushtra, expect, through (having produced) profits
for Asha (justice), and through Vohu Manah (good dis-
position), 38

The Compensation which I taught to the Magians. 36


839-850 Gatha Vohukshathra 51.16-19


51.16


tam kava vishtispd magahya xshathra nasat 839
vanhéus padebis mananhd yam cistim ash&i mafita 0


spefitd mazdae ahuro atha-né sazdyai ushta. 8d)


O35. 17


berexdam m0i ferashaoshtro hvo-gva daéddisht kehrpém 82
daénayai vanhuyai yam hoi ishyam dati 843


xshayas mazdae ahuro ashahya azdyai gerezdim! 8


51. 18


tam cistim déjamaspo hvo6-gvo ishtdis hvarenae B45
asha verefité tat xshathrem mananho vanuhis vido &6


taf moi daidi ahura hyat mazda rapén tava! 847


of. 19


hvo taf na maidyoi-maenha spitama ahmai dazdé 48
daénaya& vaédemnod yé ahiim ishasas aibi 849


mazdae data mraot gayehya shyaothanais vahy0. 80


Lines 839-849 The Hymns of Zarathushtra 51.16-19


IIL. Supporters of the Prophet are Heroes and Saints.
53.16
But Kava Vishtaspa attained (more than) these (both re-
wards); together with therule over the Magian tribe, 839
Through Asha ( justice) as advisory-manager, and through
the Verses of (good disposition) Vohu Manah, he at-
tained Chisti (SopHia, or wisdom) ; 40
Thus, for us (the faithful) is anura Mazdah (the mindful
lord) bounteous-at-wish. Al


53.37
Wrashaoshtra Hvogva has shown (and promised) to me (as
wife his daughter’s) prized body. 842
(Now,) in-order-that I may attain (to be) the recipient of
Asha (justice), may the ruling anura Mazdah (mindful
lord) 44
Grant (to me) her desired (body) for the benefit of her
good spirit (that she may be saved through me as hus-
band, sEE 53.3)! 43


51.18
May Jamaspa Hvogva, glorious with riches, choosing this
Chisti (SopHia, wisdom, daughter of Zarathushtra, whom
he marries in Yasna 53) 845
Through Asha (justice) (also) partake in that Xshathra
(realm) of (the good disposition) Vohu Manah ; 46
May aHura Mazdah (the mindful lord) grant to me that
they may find support with Thee (Ahura Mazdah)! 47


53.19 |
O Maidyomangha-Spitama! He (Zarathushtra) who has
given that (prize of verse 18, his daughter Chisti) to this
(Jamaspa), 848
Who, as having known through his spirit the (first) life, is
wishing again the (the second), 49


851-859 Gatha Vohukshathra 51.20-22


SJ. 20
tat vé-né hazaoshaenhd vispaenh6 daidyai savo 851
ashem vohu mananha uxda yais armaitis 882


yazemnaenhd nemanha mazdae rafedrem cagedo. 853


of. 21


armatdis na spenitod hvo cisti uxdais shyaothana 5A


daéna ashem spénvat vohii xshathrem mananha 855

mazdae dada¢ ahurd tém vanuhim yasa ashim. 86
53. 22

yehya moi asha¢ haca vahishtem yesné paiti 857

vaéda mazdae ahuro yoi aenhareca hefitica 858


ta yazai hvais namenis pairica jasai vafita! 859


Lines 850-859 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 51.20-22


Says that thou (hast) the better (part) of life, having (prac-
ticed) the decrees of (mindful) Mazdah through thy
deeds. 50

51.20

That (better part which is) a profit of yours, all (you like-
willed four leaders of the four preceding verses 15-19,
Vishtaspa, Frashaoshtra, Jamaspa, and Maidyomangha),
(I repeat, that better part induces you) to give (utter-
ance to) 851

Utterances with which Armaiti (love), with Vohu Manah
(good disposition) being worshipped with reverence, 52

Will grant Asha (justice) as a support of Mazdah (mind-
ful). Re

51.25

I desire a good Compensation (such as) this: to grow
bounteous through the influence of Armaiti (love); 856

Such a person is prospering Asha (justice) with his doc-
trinal (thought Sopui1a, wisdom) through his utterances,
deeds, and spirit ; 54

(To such a person) will (the mindful lord) anura Mazdah
through Vohu Manah (good disposition), grant the
Xshathra (realm or power). 55

93.22

If (the mindful lord) Mazdah anura knows among (any
of the men) who were, and who (yet) are (living, 858

Any persons) to whom because of their hymns the best
(reward) from Asha (justice, is) yet (to come), ey)

These (men, like the above-mentioned four heroes), even
by their names will I worship (publicly and individually);
and into their presence will I enter with praise ! 59


860-871 Gatha Vahishtoishti 53.1-3


Vabishtoishti Gatha


YASNA 53

53. I
Vahishta ishtis sravi zarathushtrahé 860
spitamahya yezi hoi dat ayapta 861
ashat haca ahurd mazdae yavoi vispai 4 hvanhevim 882
yaéca hoi daben sashefica datnayaée vanhuyae uxda shyao-
thanaca. 863

53.2


atca hoi scafiti mananhaé uxdais shyaothanadisca
xshnim mazdae vahmai a fraoref yasnasea, 865
kavaca vishtasp6 zarathushtris spitamd ferashaoshtrasca %6


daenho ereziis pathd yam daénam ahuro saoshyafitd dadat. 7


93.3
témea-ti pourucista haécat-aspana, 868
spitami yezivi dugedram zarathushtrahé 859


vanhéus paityastém manarhd ashahya mazdaesca taibyo dat
sarem 870


atha hém ferashva thwa xrathwa spénishta armatois
hudanvareshva. 871


Lines 860-871 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 53.1.3
eS eee


HYMN 53


Zarathushtra Gives his Daughter
Jo Secure a Champion,
I, Martiage Ceremony.
93.5
The best riches that have been heard of are those of Zara-
thushtra, 860
Since (the mindful lord) anura Mazdah grants to him by
Asha (justice) 61
For all eternity (1) felicities, (2) a good life, and (3) (the
conversion of ) those who deceived him ; 62
(And Zarathushtra prays that his followers) may learn to
formulate-correctly the utterances and deeds of the good
spirit-of-religion. 63
93.2 |
And may Vishtaspa and (Maidyomangha) the Zarathush-
trian son of-the-Spitama-family, and Frashaoshtra, 366
Establish the straightly just paths of the spirits for whom
(the lord) anura has appointed Saviors 67
Who strive through utterances and deeds (inspired by
Vohu) Manah (good disposition)
To utter cheerfully hymns for the adoration of (the mind-


ful) Mazdah (in order to give him) satisfaction. 65
03.3

O Pouruchista, daughter of Haechataspa, 868

Thou youngest of the daughters of Zarathushtra, 69


(Zarathushtra) gives to thee this (Jamaspa as a husband
who will) impress (on thee) communion with Vohu Ma-
nah (good disposition), Asha (justice), and Mazdah
(mindful) ; 72

So take counsel with thy understanding (so that it may be-
come) most bounteous (when it has become full) of well-
disposed Armaiti (love). 71


872-883 Gatha Vahishtoishti 53.4-6


53.4
tém zi vé speredani varani ya fedroi vidat om
paithyaéca vastryaeibyo aca hvaetaove 873


ashauni ashavabyO mananhd vanhéus hAvénvat hanhus mém
béedus 874


mazdae dadat ahurd daénayai vanhuyai yavoi vispaia. 8%


53. 5
sahvéni vazyamnabyo kainibyO mraomi 876
xshmaibyaca vademnd méfica-1 mazdazdim 877


vaedodiim daénabis abyasta ahiim yé vanhéus manarhd 8


asha vé anyOo ainim vivéfighatt tat zi hoi hushénem anhaz. 879


53. 6
itha-i haithya narod atha jénayd £80
drijo hacaé rathem6 yéme spashutha fraidim 8]


drij6 ayesé hois pitha tanvd para vayi-bereduby6 dus-hva-
rethém nasat hvathrem 882


dregvodebyO déjitaretaéibyO anais & manahim ahim
merengeduye. 883


Lines 872-883 Ihe Hymns gf Zarathushtra  53.4-6


53.4
(The bride speaks:) Him will I emulate ! (The bridegroom
speaks:) (Her) will I choose 872
Who-shall-generously-distribute-service to father, husband,
pasturer, gentleman, Ashaist and pagan |! We:
(The bride speaks:) The sunlit fruit of (good disposition)
Vohu Manah shall be mine (I shall have a child? M)74
(The bridegroom speaks:) May (the mindful lord) anura
Mazdah grant it to (thy) good spirit for all eternity! 75


53.5
(Zarathushtra speaks:) I utter admonitions to those who
are being married, and to maidens; 876
(That which) I am counseling to you, you should heed, re-
member, and realize, vi)
Through spirit(ual precepts) striving for the life of (good
disposition) Vohu Manah, 78
Vying with each other in Asha (justice), and spiritual pre-
cepts: thus shall you be happy ! 7 79

93.6
Thus shall you be genuine men and women (husband and
wife ?) 880
For, can you discover any advantage in belonging to the
party of the Drujists? i


For what the Drujists desire shall be kept away from their
bodies: aHurA Mazdah (the mindful lord) shall present
bad food to those who (then shall be) crying ‘woe’,
and shall withdraw comfort from the law-scorning Druj; 2

Thereby (with these other contrasting actions) you destroy
the spiritual life (for yourselves), 3


884-895 Gatha Vahishtoishti 53.7-


53.7
afcaé vé mizdem anhat ahya magahya 884
yavat azus zarazdishto binodi haxtayae 885
paraca mraocas aoraca yathra mainyus dregvatd anasa
para 886


ivizayatha magém tém at vé vayOi anhaiti apémem vaco. &7


53. 8
anais a duzvareshnarhod dafshnya héfiti 888
zahyaca vispaenho xraosefitam upa 889
huxshathrais jéneram xrineramc&i ramamea ais dadati
shyeitibyO vizibyo 800
Iratti is dvafshd hvd derez&i merethyaus mazishtO0 moshuca
astil. 89]
53. 9
duzvarenais vaésho rasti toi narepis rajis 892
aéshasa déjit-areta peshd-tanvo 803


kai ashava ahuro yé is jyatéus hémithyat vasé-itoisca —: 884
tat mazda tava xshathrem ya erezejyoi dahi drigaove
vahyo? 805


Lines 884-895 Ihe Hymns of Zarathushtra 53.7-9


53.7
But to you (the newly-married pair) shall be (granted) the
Compensation of the Magian Cause 884
In-the-measure-that most hearty zeal (therefor) be rooted
in your body ; 5
But if you dismiss (abandon) the Magian Cause, you shall
at the last cry ‘woe!’ 6
When the spirits of the Druj dodge downwards, and dis-
appear ! 7
II. The Bride-groom its Goaded to Conversion by the Sword.
53.8
Thereby let all the malefactors be deluded through Causes
other (than the Magian) 888
Through whose good rulers peace shall be given to the
dwellings and villages; go
(On the contrary, let the malefactors through whom are ef-


fected) murder and bloody deed, let them all be aban-


doned, and cry upwards in vain; 89

Let the greatest torture attack those captives of destruc-

tion—and let that occur soon, too! gI
53.9


(Vagabond nomads) shall reach the Place of Decay with


the Malefactors who, being law-scorning, and, as to their


bodies, doomed, 892
Are seeking to degrade the worthy (Magians). 93
Where is the (Ashaist) lord who will deprive them of free-

dom and of life, 94


(And establish) the (Kingdom) Xshathra, by which,
O (mindful) Mazdah, Thou shalt give, to the Poor
man, who lives justly, that Better (part)? 95


PART Ill


Higher Criticism
of the Gathays,


WHY GATHIC CRITICISM ISINEVITABLE — 129


Higher Criticism of the Gathas


Chapter I


Why Gathic Criticism iv Inevitable.


I. Higher Criticism Universal, even if Unconscious.


The clear understanding of any book presupposes a grasp of
the principles of interpretation. A novelist is not expected to be
as accurate aS a geographer, nor a poet as a sociologist or theo-
logian. With most books this preliminary attitude of the reader
is So obvious that the question of interpretation is never raised
or even mooted. Nevertheless it exists, for many books have,
from time to time, been misunderstood, and hence have caused
misunderstandings—exploded literary jokes, still deceiving the
unwary, generation after generation.

The question of interpretation has been raised principally in
connection with the most important books, such as the Bible,
Homer, or the Hindu epics. It might well, therefore, be applied
to the Gathas which form the nucleus of a historical religion
which has survived several millenniums. But the study of the
Gathas is nowadays less of a problem of orthodoxy, than one of
comparative religion by such as do not profess their dogmatic au-
thority. On this latter account, indeed, application of the canons
of interpretation to them might seem a need less burning, were
it not that they present some very real special difficulties which
are set forth at length in this chapter, and which compel the ap-
plication of the methods of the ‘higher criticism.’


130 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


It is granted that it is most unfortunate that we have to judge
of our facts before making deductions from them; it would seem
to destroy all hopes of attaining results that are objective. But
this misfortune is common to most inquiries. Even so certain a
study as the differential calculus rests on an illogical basis—name-
ly, that one would ever reach a limit by approaching it by infinit
esimal quantities. We must therefore resign ourselves to una-
voidable human limitations, and make the best of them:


Il. Special Gathic Difficulties Demanding Interpretation.


The special Gathie difficulties which demand interpretation or
higher criticism may be distinguished as difficulties of

1, The works themselves, their language, author, and condi-
tion—Z/nternal.

2, Their date, and traditional orthodox interpretation—Mazdean

3, Their bearing on the development of Christianity—Christian

4, Modern conditions of thought—Modern.


J. Internal Causes of the Extraordinary Difficulties of Interpreting the Gathas.


1 Great wealth of forms for a single case of the same class.
Justi mentions ten forms for the accusative plural of nouns of the
first a-class.

2 Conversely, many particular forms are found repeated in
different cases. For instance, 0 could be found as termination in
some one of the declensions for every case except dative or,abla-
tive singular. This source of uncertainty is of vital dogmatic im-
portance in the case of the termination & which occurs in the vo-
cative and instrumental singular, and nominative and accusative
plural of the first declension, so that it is always uncertain whe-
ther Asha is addressed as an independent being, or only as an
instrument of the Supreme.

3 The uncertainty of many tenses, as to whether they should
be interpreted in the definite conjunctive mood, or in the indefin-
ite injunctive mood, which may mean either past, present or future.


WHY GATHIC CRITICISM ISINEVITABLE 131


4 Justi mentions a number of cases where scholars have
claimed that case-forms are interchanged.

5 In the later periods, grammatical degeneration set in, result-
ing in chaos; this may account for some of the hopeless passages.

6 Syntax, at best, is scanty, allowing of different interpreta-
tions.

7 Asin other languages, so here words have several mean-
ings, so that the same words are interpreted /Jife or people, and
religion or individuality. This opens the way for great uncert-
ainties and differences of opinion, some of which may never be
settled authoritatively.

8 The great number of apparently synonymous words whose
distinctive shades of meaning seem to be hopelessly lost for reas-
ons both internal and external. Internally, many of them occur
only once, so that we are deprived of internal comparative assist-
ance, while

9 The lack of contemporary writings deprives us of external
guides to interpretation.

10 The difficulties of Avestan writing are great in themselves,
for the letters are both numerous and difficult to form and to dis-
tinguish both in enunciation and representation.

11 The natural vicissitudes incident to the repeated copying of
the manuscripts must have led to many errors and changes,
which would explain many of the variant readings given by Gel-
dner.

12 The political vicissitudes of the Persian race and the Maz-
dean religion were so extreme as to lead to the hopeless destruc-
tion of all but the fragments we possess, which, themselves, must
have been affected by the persecutions.

13 The evident literary manipulation of the Gathas, whose
order is not logical or topical, but mechanical, apparently accord-


ing to the numbers of the lines of the stanzas, which are 3 in
Yasna 28-34; 5 lines in Y 43-46; 4 lines in Y 47-50; 3 lines in
® 51; and 5 lines again in Y 53.


14 There are places and words generally given up as hopeless-
ly insoluble or corrupt. Among such passages are perhaps 46. 17;


132 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


50.2; 51.12,17,18. One’most important line in 46.15 is omitted.
Difficult are javar in 48.8; dahya in 48.10; beedus in 53.4, and
yaéme in 53.6.

15 The clearly expressed desire of certain scholars to keep
the text of the G&thas, as much as possible, from the public. One
scholar who had begun the text in Roman transcription, stopped
off short, and purposely continued it in the difficult Avestan
characters. Are they trying to monopolize the subject P

16 The personal animosities of the chief scholars have led
them to ignore each other. This has hindered the progress of
the comparative commentary method to so fatal an extent that
the one goes out of his way to announce that his interpretation
of 29.6; 30,7,8, 10; 84.4 and 44.7 is so certain as to be unques-
tioned, whereas the other has a differing rendering.

17 The mutual uncharitableness of the scholars which does
not stop short of quoting other interpretations, while suppressing
the names of their authors, to whom, however, unworthy mo-
tives are ascribed.

18 The frank disregard of case-forms by the most prominent
translators, even after they have formally announced that they
will not even consider the interpretation of any man who does so.


19 Perhaps the chief internal difficulty is the interpretation of
the divine names. Should they be considered as personal divin-
ities or as the psychological faculties of the believer? Bartholo-
mee’s statement of the problem (G d A.vii) is useful:

“According as ameretat indicates the divinity or the ab-
stract idea, the word has been rendered Ameretat or immort-
ality. It is, however, quite impossible to decide with certain-
ty everywhere; for the poet himself did not hold to a firm
delimitation between the abstract idea and the divinity.
Only on this assumption can we understand that the divinity
usually named Vohu Manah (i.e., Good Mind) is also occasion-
ally referred to as Vahishta Manah (i.e., Best Mind), or even
Thy (i.e., Mazdah’s) Manah (mind). Consequently it is necess-
ary, when such divinities are named, ever to keep in our con-


WHY GATHIC CRITICISM ISINEVITABLE — 133


sciousness, what the name really signifies; and conversely,
when these abstract ideas are named, that they present
themselves to the bard also as divinities; only thus do we ap-
proach his meaning.”

But who will or can decide where the bard intended the divin-
ity, and where the concept ?


2. Mazdean ot External Difficulties of Interpreting the Gathas,


The mere fact that the Gathas are embedded in the scriptures
of the Mazdeans is proof that their orthodox traditions, devel-
oped in their later commentaries, have established a theological
canon of interpretation, even if the Pahlavi translation, Neryo-
sangh’s Sanskrit text, and the later manuscripts, for the first time
assembled by Mills, were not to be considered. But of course,
these later Mazdean ecclesiastical interpretations are of no soter-
iological interest to us. On the contrary, they are serious hin-
drances to us who wish to arrive at the significance of the GAthas
in themselves, before Zarathushtra’s personal prayers and prais-
es were erected into doctrines and ritual.

The hindrance to correct interpretation of the Gathas by these
Mazdean ecclesiastical commentaries cannot be fully or sufficient-
ly realized until we recall the Reformation when a century-long
war and persecution were necessary to divorce well-mean-
ing humanity from similar ecclesiastical interpretations. Moreover
every assured result of modern criticism has been achieved by a
fresh re-statement of ancient problems, and studious avoidance
of ecclesiastical interpretation. The same general rules must ob-
tain in the Gathie field; hence we must consider Pahlavi and
ecclesiastical interpretations as obstacles rather than guides.


3, Christian Difficulties of Interpreting the Gathas.


Comparative Religion, as well as the History of Christianity,
are vitally interested in Ciscovering the real nature of the Persian
religion before the days of Cyrus the Messiah of the Lord (Isaiah
45.1), of his friendliness to the Jews, and his liberating them for


134 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


the express purpose of reestablishing their national worship. En-
mity between them is incredible; the only question possible is the
extent to which the friendship and interaction went. Unfortunate-
ly, this question has not been argued dispassionately, because
Catholic, Protestant, Jewish and Parsee confessional interests
are involved. Each seeks the facts that will aid his cause, and by
conducting his enquiry suitably, finds them. Evidently confusion
will not cease until the whole subject is removed from partisan
associations.


4. MODERN CAUSES OF DIFFICULTIES.


The mental and moral attitude of the reader must ever be con-
sidered in the attempt at a correct understanding of a writing.
Hence we must not fail to recall and reckon with that shallowness
of many unemployed, irresponsible, but socially prominent per-
sons (most frequently females) whose good intentions have led
them to forget the ‘shorter and uglier word’ expressive of state-
ments denying diseases, and that ‘mysticism’ may at times be,
and frequently is no more than a cheap and lazy haziness. The
publican who, because he is seeking absolute truth, goes through
the world with despair gnawing at heart, is no doubt dearer to
the God who endowed man with intelligence. But these well-in-
tentioned ‘mystics’ are in the majority, and, no doubt, will be
antagonized by the apparent materialism and scepticism of this
honest effort to discover the primitive beliefs which alone Zara-
thushtra could have had so early in the evolution of the race—
the only alternative being to deny evolution to something better,
and to turn around from the future to the past, looking on it as
the mirror of one’s own self, usually.


Ill, Guides of Interpretation.


Have we any compass on our adventurous voyage of discov-


ery? Have we any quadrant, any log, any sounding-line, any
anchor P


WHY GATHIC CRITICISM IS INEVITABLE — 135


Our guides should be
1, Precautionary measures preventive of self-delusion;
2, History and ethnology as the frames within which
3, Comparative Religion may aid us to recognize and marshal
4, Whatever definite facts, however few or faint, we may possess.


1 PRECAUTIONARY GUIDES AGAINST SELF-DECEIT.


We will be considerably helped in our self-analysis by scrutin-
izing the development of the recognized criticism of other ancient
scriptures. To begin with, we must


(a) Throw by the board all those familiar theological notions
and later Mazdean legends, readmitting them, if at all, only one
by one, and that on due proof. We will therefore begin by re-
jecting allideas of archangels (M122), theology (M 173),
saints (M 183), millennium (M 174), primeval world (M 82,
80), covenant (B 1109), book-keeping and weighing (B, G
dA, 122), and open-laying (B 309), among all other Mazdean
and Hebrew notions.


(b) Neither must we explicitly draw conclusions which may
indeed be inferentially implied in our documents. The history of
religions shows that the self-conscious drawing of logical conclu-
sions from generally accepted statements has generally required
centuries. This applies especially to Zarathushtra’s eschatology
which the Mazdeans later reduced to a very logical system, of
which he himself may have been entirely unconscious even
though he used language which may be interpreted best by those
very Mazdean deductions.

(c) We must avoid methods that are Procrustean—that is, to
cut up the facts to suit some theory of ours, or to find a unity
where none was intended. In the recognised criticism of ancient
scriptures, as long as every line had to be tortured into absolute
agreement with every other, no progress was made; and not un-
til the individuality of the several component parts was acknow-
ledged, was the larger harmony of the whole discovered. Who


136 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


would want to listen to a harp all the strings of which were tuned
to the same pitch P Even in the Gathas we must expect to find
developments of belief by the same person, and interpolations
by others; we must be prepared to differentiate later from earlier
parts; we must not shrink from studying pre-Zoroastrian religion
in order to learn the significance and extent of his innovations.


2 COMPARATIVE RELIGION ILLUSTRATES GATHIC PROBLEMS.


We may confidently appeal to Comparative Religion for the
preliminary presumptive solution of one of the special Gathic
difficulties: how far we should translate the divine names into
moral conceptions and psychological functions, or whether we
should consider that they represent pre-Zoroastrian divinities, no
doubt moulded and transformed P

Comparative Religion teaches us to distinguish, in the eternal
spiral of religious progress, two contrasting moments: tradition
and innovation. But the sane man, who is both aspiring and con-
servative, attempts to combine these stand-points by reading en-
lightened morality into traditional divine names or formulas be-
come incomprehensible or misunderstood—an attitude known as
euhemerism. On the other hand the reformer, either too ignor-
ant to know that absolute truth is unattainable, and that the pe-
culiar charm of what to him seems truth really consists merely
in its being his own opinion; or that he is so unfortunate as to
live at some time of particular stress—in both cases the reformer
destroys what he does not understand, and establishes a moral
religion in the guise of reform (partial) or innovation (entire).
Now where did Zarathushtra stand—was he a Euhemerist, a re-
former, or an innovator P |

He was no innovator, for he frequently infers the preexistence
of some of the cults. Our question, therefore, narrows itself
down to which is most likely to have been the original interpreta-
tion of the Gathas, the moral Euhemeristic, or the objective po-
lytheistic P But we may ask, was any Euhemerism ever original P


WHY GATHIC CRITICISM IS INEVITABLE oa


Surely not, for interpretation presumes the preexistence of its
facts. We may therefore conclude that the objective polytheistic
interpretation of the G&thie divine names may have been the
more original. This would seem all the more likely in that it
would yield a solid basis from which to distinguish the two great
efforts of Zarathushtra against polytheism:

1 To superimpose a supreme monotheistic divinity, Mazdah;

2 To spiritualize away euhemeristically the earlier gods wher-
ever convenient or advisable.

Our problem receives a strong illustration from Greek religion.
Euhemerus and the Stoics found moral mysteries in the question-
able Homeric stories about the divinities. Fortunately for us, this
occurred within comparatively historical times so that we may as-
sert without much fear of contradiction that to Homer himself
those childish stories appeared as objective as they no doubt seem-
ed to his childish contemporaries. In the matter of the origin of
religious ideas, we should therefore not seek any original spirit-
ual idea, but rather some ethnological or historical fact, with
which, at times, its spiritual interpretation may have coexisted.


3 THE ORIGIN OF GATHIC MONOTHEISM ILLUSTRATED.


Having concluded therefore to the entire propriety of an ob-
jective interpretation of the Gathic pantheon, we must turn to
the allied question, whether Zarathushtra created the subordinate
divinities and placed them beneath an already existent supreme
deity, or invented a supreme deity over an already existent
pantheon, by a hierarchical method subsuming the old manifold
under the new unity?

Comparative Religion has, again, an example how such chan-
ges actually occur. When, on the return from the Babylonish
captivity the Hebrew high-priest Joshua established the full ritual
law, its searching severities aroused deep and lasting, even if sub-
dued resentment. This led to malicious reflections and criticisms
of the scriptures attributed to the Giver thereof. The result was
a realizing Giscovery of its many apparent moral crudities, and


138 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


the conclusion of the minim or Jewish heretics was that the Law
was bad, and that the scriptures were inspired by a God morally
imperfect. The orthodox Jews answered by closing their eyes
to the apparent facts (all that could be done in that uncritical age)
and reiterating firmly that the deity of the Scriptures was good.
The uncritical minim therefore had the choice of losing all faith
in the Biblical deity, or all their faith in goodness and morality.
What did they doP They elected a third course: they superim-
posed a good supreme deity above the misunderstood prima-facie
crude Jewish Creator. This solution was very convenient inas-
much as it provided a classification for foreign divinities, which
the Jews had, till then, fortunately or unfortunately, been able to
ignore, but which the Romans now forced upon their consider-
ation. Indeed, this solution would have carried the day but that
Christianity arrived, and with sublime instinct refused to bate one
jot of its faith in the divine, while introducing the intellectual dis-
cipline which solved whatever real problems there were, by rele-
gating the responsibility for any apparent crudities to where they
properly belonged—the imperfections of the divine Spirit’s in-
struments.

This historical development shows us that if Zarathushtra at-
tempted to cure the polytheism of his day by the superimposition
of a Supreme, he did nothing unnatural, unexampled, incredible.
How could it have happened that his followers were known as
Ashavans (and not Mazdeans, as from the Supreme whom he
proclaimed !) unless they had previously been known and recog-
nised as partisans and worshippers of Asha? Zarathushtra’s in-
sistence that Mazdah is the father of Asha (47.2) now appears in
its true light as a politic introduction of the supremacy of Mazdah
to Ashaists. Later than the Gathas these thus subordinated div-
inities were regularly organized into a coherent group of seven
Bountiful Immortals or Ameshaspends, which term may not un-
fittingly be rendered archangels. But it occurred only in the later
times of the Haptanghaiti, Yasnas 35-42, and this idea should
not be reflected back into the Gathas, forming an anachronism.


WHY GATHIC CRITICISM IS INEVITABLE — 139


4 ETHNOLOGY FIXES THL PERIOD OF CERTAIN GATHIC IDEAS.


Let us take a glance at the Egyptian pyramids. It is not so
very long since the Egyptian pyramids were looked at with awe
as unexplained miracles testifying to some mystic knowledge and
power of prehistoric races. When, later, pyramids were discov-
ered in Yucatan, it was supposed that they were built by immi-
srants from Egypt. But gradually it was discovered that there
were pyramids everywhere, and that many of the so-called pyr-
amids were no more than the Stone Age’s facing of hills, and
hence seem to have been no more than mounds more permanent
than those of the mound-builders; and the discovery in Egypt of
remains of the earlier periods of the Stone Age support this.

Just like the pyramids of Egypt, the Gathas can never receive
their true interpretation until they are withdrawn from their
splendid isolation, and are compared with the facts and customs
of the period in which they originated. Zarathushtra’s great soli-
citude for the Cow will not be interpreted as humanitarianism so
much as the establishment of a settled pastoral community. The
uncertain word maga which Bartholome (1109) renders as a
covenant or secret religious society, will only remind us that Dio-
genes Laertes and Herodotus supposed the word Magi was the
name of his tribe, which its gifted son turned into the appellation
of priests and wonder-workers, enshrined in our modern words
magic and magician. But whence did the tribe get its name?
Perhaps from maga, a fole, if Zarathushtra, according to Y 50,
led his fellow-tribesmen out of some dark ravine or cleft into
open agricultural lands. This would further agree with the inter-
pretation of Zarethushtra’s social significance as that of the world-
wide change from nomadic to agricultural or pastoral society; and
in those early days (as it should also be more realized in our
own days) social and religious problems were inseparable—the
demagogue was ipso facto a prophet; social economy was discus-
sed in religious terms. Social need furnished the steam, while the
religious zeal acted as the guiding lever of progressive civilization.


140 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


TU. The Facts Themselves.


Thus having constructed a comparatively modern frame-work,
let us now put therein what actual facts we do know of Zara-
thushtra’s life, and notice if they do not fit those surroundings.


BARTHOLOMA (GdA 124) well speaks of the narrow condi-
tions under which the Gathas arose. We hear of a few enemies,
Geréhma and Béfidva; of one supporter, Déiamaspa Hvogva.
Zarathushtra thunders excommunications because (?) on a cold
winter’s night he, his companion and beast have not been hos-
pitably sheltered, 51.12. Slaughtering of cattle seems to be the
chief sin, 82.8,14. The prophet cries to the Divinity and appeals
to Destiny about no more than the possession of some house in
the neighborhood (?) 50.3. Against enemies, violence and even
murder are meritorious, 538.8. A pair of cows in heaven is the
promise made to believers, 33.3; 44.6; 50.2; 51.5; and for him-
self Zarathushtra urges the Divinity for ten mares with stallions,
and a camel, 44.18. Thus does BARTHOLOMAE conclude:


‘The reformation which attaches to the name of Zara-
thushtra is not exclusively religious, but also agricultural,
attempting to accustom the nomadic tribes of Hastern
Iran to permanency of settlement, and consequent ration-
al agriculture and cattle-raising. The local tradition de-
rives Zarathushtra from Western Iran, and the local agri-
cultural conditions support this. Western Iran stood then
doubtless in a higher cultural position than the East. This
would explain why Zarathushtra attempted to spread the
blessings of orderly conditions which he had experienced
in the West, to the Hast, the scene of his activities; and
it is quite comprehensibie that Vishtaspa, as an enlight-
ened ruler, favored the Prophet primarily for his agri-
cultural aims, and supported him therefor.’


WHY GATHIC CRITICISM IS INEVITABLE 141


U. Conclusion.


We might characterize Zarathushtra as combining the sociolog-
ical and political activities of a Joshua with the theogony and
agricultural teachings of a Hesicd. The books of Joshua and
Judges represent very tellingly the G&thic struggles with the de-
mon-opponents and all their deeds of blood; while Hesiod’s
teaching of a supreme God, the dualism of the original Eris (love
celestial and physical), the Fire, the Guardian Spirits (OeD 121-
126), agriculture, and morality are strikingly duplicated in the
message of Zarathushtra. Of course, Hesiod lived a century
later, and represents sociologically a subsequent stage of devel-
opment, that from pastoral to agricultural civilization; for though
Zarathushtra may have taught this step, according to our inter-
pretation of Yasna 50, there is no doubt that he primarily repre-
sents that earlier sociological step—the dawn of pastoral life
among the nomads of Western Iran.

It should not be thought that this sociological interpretation or
valuation of Zarathushtra’s religion diminishes or degrades it.
‘On the contrary, it exalts it. First, that religion is drawn down
from the nebulous region of speculation into the clear, sane light
of historical actuality. Secondly, Zarathushtra shines all the
brighter by contrast with the greater obscurity. It only adds to his
glory that he was willing and able successfully to implant his
monotheism, his personal devotion, his passion for righteousness
and his humanitarianism among those blood-stained nomads.

In conclusion, let us gather from him all the good we may
without repeating that immortal error of deifying his errors also.


142 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


CHAPTER II
CRITICISM of the GATHIC PANTHEON.


1. Methody of the Criticism.


Why any criticism at all? Criticism is certainly out
of place where all is consistent; but a chaos demands
from intelligent beings, endowed with the desires of
knowledge and progress of truth, a stand, an attitude,
an explanation of some sort.

Nor does criticism usually come from enemies. Much
knowledge and more interest are needed to induce human
beings to spend their time in a profitless venture. It is
a sign of interest and should be welcomed as such, apart
from the enlightenment it may yield.

The subject-index shows that we have in the Gathic
field full justification for critical consideration. We
have a bewildering array of divinities, and these divin-
‘ties seem to conflict in their claims, functions, and
nature. In one place some appear as supreme, or first-
rank divinities, in others only as agents. Again, the
real (not the legendary) biography of Zarathushtra
will remain unknown unless we succeed in puzzling it
out from these hymns; and so compelling is this problem
that Mills has already attempted to change the order of
some of the hymns in order to secure a more consistent


sequence.


CRITICISM of the GATHIC PANTHEON 143


Having therefore good grounds to apply critical
methods to the Gathas, we may begin to do so by the
preliminary stage of searching analysis; by recording

(1) Duplicates;

(2) Distinctions between the various members of such
duplications, and other parties in general;

(3) These will lead us to examine what groups of
thought, or associations exist between these various mem-
bers; which, when contrasted will lead to some provi-
sionary

(4) Reconstruction on a coherent scheme.

Duplications, in the Gathas, appear to be of two
kinds, the general and the detailed.


2, General Duplication...


The general duplications here pointed out appear in
the tentative parallel arrangement of the two coherent
Gathic groups Ahunavaiti, Yasnas 28-34; and Yasnas
43-51, 53 as duplicate biographies of Zarathusthra,
whose details are worked out in the Harmony of the
Gathas prefixed to the Life of Zarathushtra. The gen-
eral reasons for this parallel arrangement, are as fol-
lows:

1. The two Hymns on Dualism, 30 and 45. Each
begins with a declaration of intention to speak, and an
exhortation to the hearer to hear, mark, learn, and in-
wardly digest; followed by the definite announcement
of dualism, 80.3, 4; 45.2.

2. The coherence of the two groups, 28-34, and 43-
51,58, divided by the differing Haptanghaiti, 35-42.
The first group has 8 lines to a stanza; the latter has
varying stanzas.


144 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


3. The explicit or formal salutatory beginning of ©
43, and the affecting ending of 34, praying that all man-
kind become progressive.

4. The duplicate choice of the cattle and appointment
as Judge.

5. The duplicate mention of the names of the Zara-
thushtrian heroes, ( Vishtaspa; and the other ones. )

6. Question about the origin of the heavens, 31.7;
44.3,

Guided by these definite duplications, the minor par-
allelisms fall into fair order, as the reader may judge by
comparing the left-hand with the right-hand pages of
the Life of Zarathushtra.


3. Detailed Duplicationy.


1. The contrast between Vohu Manah and Aka
Manah, and Spenta Mainyu and Angro Mainyu. We
may add to this Asha and the Druj. We have here
three cults, the Asha-Druj or Moral cult; the Manah or
Mental cult; the Mainyu or Spirit cult.

2. The path of Asha, 33.5, 6; 51.18; the path of Vohu
Manah, 34.12; 51.16; the path of the cow, of free will,
31.9; the path of profit, 43.3; the path of good teaching,
46.4; the path of the daenas of the Saoshyant, 53.2,
with the way of Vohu Manah and the daenas, 34.13;
and the Milky Way, 44.3.

3. Asha and Ashay are evident duplications; and, in-
deed, we find Ashay almost exclusively connected with
Vohu Manah.

4. There is the manifold designations of the abode
beyond:

a. ‘The house of the Clever.
b. The house of the Best or Worst Mind.


CRITICISM of the GATHIC PANTHEON 145


c. The house of the Dru).
d. In harm, in harmlessness, 46.17.
e. Garodman.

All these may be synonyms, but certainly originated
in different surroundings.

5. There are many words for knowledge or word, each
belonging to a different complex or group of ideas and
thought.

6. There is Armaiti and T'ushnamaiti. The first is
certainly grouped with Asha, the latter occurs 43.15, con-
trasted with Ashaists.

7. We also have the duplication or contradiction of
the Spirit wearing the heavens and their lights as a robe,
30.5; and Zarathushtra’s question about it as if unknown
to him, 31.7.

8. Ada is a duplication of Adana; and so we find the
latter in the Vohu Manist, 30.7; the former in the Spenta
Mainyuist, 33.12; 33.11 and 48.1 are not definite.

9. We have another duplication, patha, f, in the first
document, 31.9; and pathman, n, in the second, 46.4.

10. We have the duplications of tare-maiti, 33.4; and
pairi-maiti, 32.3; the former opposed to Armaiti, the
latter possibly to Tushna-maiti, as we shall see later.


4. Distinctiony.


1. Kavay Vishtaspa only attains to the Magian lead-
ership, 46.14; 51.16; hence he did not possess it origi-
nally.

2. The Daevas rushed over together to Aeshma, 30.6.
Hence they were not with him originally, presumably
belonging to another party.

3. ‘The Kavay assist the Druj, 32.14; hence they are
distinct from them.


146 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


26. ‘They ‘who utter just words’ had communion with
Drujists, hence they need a warning not to do so, 49.9.

27. Jamaspa is invited to join with the Ashaists,
49.10. Hence he did not belong to them before.

28. The daena of the Druj (who has gone over to
him) therefore destroys the ‘just-straight’ (path), 51.18;
which must, therefore, differ from the Druj.

29. Zarathushtra is not yet a recipient of Asha in
51.17.

30. Zarathushtra mentions, 33.2, as meritorious,
actions, either the killing of a Druj, or the instruction of
a comrade. This implies that not all comrades were be-
levers.


31. Zarathushtra opposes Daevas, Druj, and Pairi-
maiti (the Proud) , 32.8. Who were these latter? Were
they the unbelieving Clever?


32. Tare-maiti (88.4, see 45.11) is to be removed
from the nobility by magic practice. The word con-
trasts naturally with Ar-maiti; just as Vohu Manah con-
trasts with Aka Manah; and S penta Mainyu, with An-
gro Mainyu.

33. The juxtaposition of Daevas and Men (or, Mor-
tals, Doomed-to-Die.), shows that the designation Men
was the appellation of a particular class, 29.4: 48.1. In
34.5, the division seems to be three-fold, Savages, Dae-
vas, and Men (Doomed). Again, 45.11, the division is
Daevas, Scorners, and the Lukewarm, as opposed to the
faithful followers. So preponderating seems the influ-
ence of the Daevas, 82.4, that the term seems to apply
to all renegades from Vohu Manah, Ahura Mazdah, or
Asha.

34. Some know Vohu Manah, but turn difficulties of
doctrines to their own advantage, 34.7. This implies a
Vohumanist cult that is recognized publicly.


CRITICISM of the GATHIC PANTHEON 147


4, Friendly to the Magians are the Karapans, 51.14;
and the Turas, 46.12. Hence they are not identical with
them.

5. Aeshma is mentioned along with the Druj, 29.2;
hence is not understood to be one of them.


6. Grehma is friendly enough with the Clever to be
able to pervert them to becoming Drujists; but he is in
open warfare with the Ashaists whom he slaughters,
32.10. Hence the Clever and the Ashaists differ from
each other, for some of the Clever were in union (sar)
with the Drujists, 49.9.


7. The clever are worthy of Vohu Manah’s closer ac-
quaintance; hence they are not already his followers.


8. Zarathushtra, promises to be a support for the
Ashaists, 43.8. Hence he did not originate among them.

9. Bartholomae, 645, had already noted that tash
(creating) is a word which occurs only in connection with
gav, the kine.


10. Zarathushtra consults Vohu-Mianah how he should
adore Ahura Mazdah, 45.6. Hence Zarathushtra was
not, originally, a worshipper of Ahura Mazdah.

11. Tushnamaiti, 48.15, is contrasted with both
Ashaists and Drujists, and represents a party concil-
latory of Drujists.

12. The Cattle was created for the herdsman and for
the farmer, 29.6. Hence the two latter are not identical.

13. Zarathushtra was the only one who had heard the
teachings of Asha and Vohu Manah before his appoint-
ment as Judge, 29.8. Hence, the teachings of Asha and
Vohu Manah are not sdenticall

14. Such as You, 29.11, shows a eral nplicity of cults,
or of divine beings.

15. The free choice of the Cattle, 31.9, indicates a
further change from pastoral to agricultur al life.


148 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


16. Stanza 7 of 51 seems to distinguish
(a) Cattle, Water and Plants;
(b) Spenta Mainyu, Health and Immortality;
an
(c) Vohu Manah, sengha-teachings; tevisha,
firmness, and utayuiti, endurance.

17. Asha is distinct from the Shaper of the Cattle,
29.2; for he converses with him.

18. The daenas are to be taught about Asha, 33.13;
hence they are not yet acquainted with Asha.

19. How will Armaiti extend over those to whom the
daena was announced? 44,11. Evidently Armazti did
not yet extend over them.

20. This was the purpose of Zarathushtra’s first call,
44,11. Does this infer he had a later one too?


21. Vishtaspa, the Spitamians and Frashaoshtra (all
Spenta Mainyians) are to Convert the daenas of Vohu
Manah, 53.2. Hence they were not of the same cult
with Vohu Manah.

22. ‘lhe daenas are invited by instruction about Com-
pensations, 33.18; 48.4; 49.5. Hence the daenas were
not yet familiar with these compensations.


23. Zarathushtra’s adherents were among the various
cults, 45.11.


24. The Karapans and Kavays, though politically
powerful, do not seem to be aware that their own souls
and spirits will meet them at the Judgment-bridge (a
Dathaist doctrine) ; hence, they are ‘fools,’ 46.11. Evi-
dently they did not belong to the ‘Clever’ or Dathaist
party.

25. “May yet establish the Daevic gods through the
daenas (converted to) of the Drujists,’ 49.5. This seems
to refer to some definite event which Zarathushtra an-
ticipated.


CRITICISM of the GATHIC PANTHEON 149


5. Asha and Vohu Manah Contrasted.


Similarities of Asha and YJohu Manab.


1. A and VM are joined together, 8 times.
49.7, 12; 50.1, 4, 7; 51.8, 15, 16.
2. Both are created by their father AM, A 4, VM 2.
A 31.7, 8; 44.3; 47.2.
VM 31.8; 44.4.
3. They are joined with AM, A 23, VM 10.
A 28.9; 30.9, 10; 31.21; 32.6, 9; 33.14; 34.3, 5, 6; 46.18; 48.9, 12;
49.6, 7; 50.1, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10; 51.3.
VM 28.2, 6, 9; 30.10; 31.215; 32.4; 34.5, 6; 49.7; 50.1.
4. They abide with AM in heaven, A 4, VM 8.
A 30.7; 33.3, 5, 6.
VM 30.7; 31.7; 32.15 ; 33.3; 43.6; 44.9; 46.14, 16.
5. They are like-willed with AM, A 5, VM 2.
A 28.85; 29.7; 51.20; 49.65; 51.20. VM 32.2; 51.20.


6. They are sung, prayed, sacrificed to, served and wor-
shipped, A 17, VM 7.
20.1, 3, 9; 31.4; 33.83; 34.3; 49.125 51.22; 50.4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11;
51.2; 51.10, 22. VM 28.1, 9; 30.1; 33.8; 28.2, 3; 49.12.
7. They are to be part of the beatific vision, A 5, VM 1.
A 28.5; 30.1; 32.18; 43.10; 48.9. WAL 20.5.
8. They make covenants, have allies, demand loyalty
and support, A 27, VM 4.
A The 23 references to Ashavans, given above; 31.22 ; 33.9; 49.2, 9.
Wil 32-112 49.2, 5: oL.1
9. They are the counsellor of AM and of the faithful,
A 5, VM 3.
Ool.3; 34.12; 46.9, 17; 51.11. VM 44.13; 45.6; 47.3.
10. They teach, have words of life, A 7, VM 7.
A 34.15; 44.8; 46.2; 48.12; 48.13; 50.5; hints leading to Para-
dise B 51.3. VM 34.15; 44.8; 46.14; 46.9; 47.2; 48.33 51.3.
11. They have straight paths, A 5, VM 3.
A 33.5, 6; 34.13; 51.13, 16. VM 34.12, 13; 51.16.
12. They make men worthy, A 2, VM 2.
A 28.10, 11. VM 28.10, 11.


150 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


13. They are to be realized in good action, A 6, VM 2.
A 46.15; 48.7, 12; 51.1, 21; 53.5.
VM 50.9; 53.5; to strive for the life of VM.


14, Area prize to be attained and treasured, A 8, VM 5.
A 28.4; 34.1; 43.1; 44.13; 46.3, 12; 51.4, 17.
VM 32.9; 33.18; 43.1; 46.2; 53.4.


15. They protect the poor, A 1, VM 1.

A 34.8. VM ib

16. They grant and promote power, A 13, VM 5.

A power, 29.10; 33.12; 31.16, body, 33.10; wealth, 33.11; con-
gregation, 34.13, 43.14; 44.1; welfare, 44.10, 15; 47.6; plants,
48.65 cattle, 51.5.

VM_srule, 29.10; body, 33.10; wealth, 33.11; house and farm,

46.13; strength and subsistence, 51.7.


17. ‘They grant awards, realms, happiness, A 16, VM 18.
A 28.2, 6, 7; 48.2; 44.18; H and Am, 45.10; 49.9, 12; 50.3; 48.7;
B1.1, 2, 8, 15, 22; 53.1.

VM = 30.8; 31.4, 6; 33.12; 34.7, 14; 43.2, 16; 44.6; H and Am,
45.10; 46.7, 10, 12, 18; 49.12; 51.2, 15, 21.

18. They watch over men, A 1, VM 1.


A 44.2. VM 28.4.
19. They are the responsible agents to appoint a judge,

A 4, VM 6.

A 29.2, 3; 49.9; 44.6. VM 29.7; 43.7, 9, 11, 13, 15.

20. They are intimate friends, A 2, VM 1.

A 49.8, 5. VM 45.9.
21. They punish the wicked, A 4, VM 1.

A 30.8; 31.1; 44.14; 51.13. VM 49.1.
22. They are means, agents, mediators, A 25, VM 13.
See above.
VM 32.6; 33.12; 34.8, 14; 46.9, 10, 18; 48.3; 50.6, 11; 51.2%,
15, 21.


23. They take part in the judgment, A 5, VM 3.
A 31.5; 32.6; 29.2, 3(?); 46.9(?).
VM 33.12; 43.16; 44.6.
The reader is reminded much of this is illusory, and
no more than suggestion, depending on the translations.


CRITICISM of the GATHIC PANTHEON dks)


2. DIFFERENCES BETWEEN Asha and Vohu Manah.


——


a


Ro 2 co Ve ers


Rule, VM; A, power. A is the more active one. 29.10.

Through A, AM gives glories; 53.1 through VM, the
realm. Both active. 51.21.

VM promotes realm of A 46.7. Asha and VM active.

Through VM, Z hears what AM and A consulted, 46.9.
Both.

VM admits to realm those among whom A appears.
46.12. Both.

VM’s glories given by A. 28.7. A active.

A dependents are loyal to VM. 32.11. A active.

Those who lack VM refuse Arm, and are avoided by A.
34.9. A. )

VM’s realm promoted by Arm and A. 34.11. A active.

AM grants VM’s blessings through A. 43.2. A active.

VM takes men to A to be instructed. 43.12. A active.

Through A, men get acquainted with VM. 45.9. A
aCive.

AM teaches through A what the possession of VM is.
4€.2. A active.

A counsels with VM, and creates cattle. 47.3. <A active.

Through A, the faithful wish to assure themselves of
reward of VM. 48.7. A active.

Attachment of VM occurs through intimacy with A.
49.5. <A active.

What AM has promised through VM he gives through
f.o0.3. A active.


oe PRCULEARITITES OF VWNE


Helps to distinguish, understand. 31.5.

AM promotes VM, 31.10, and through VM what is con-
sistent with his will. 50.11.

VM brings the spirit, 33.9, and praises it in words. 47.2.

AM promises rewards through VM. 50.38, 48.7.

Those who possess VM believe in the realm. 51.18.


4) PECULTAR TiS OF A:


Destroys druj. 30.8; reciprocally 31.1, 44.14, 51.18.
Is fire. 34.4, 43.4, 9 (46.7; 47.6; 51.13?)
Is connected with Armaiti 7 times, with VM 3 times.


leZ HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


34.9, 10, 11; 46.16; 48.11; 49.5; 51.2.
34 9alon 11.

Is a friend.
32.2; 50.6(?) ; 43.14; 44.15 45.6; 46.13; 49.5, 8; 50.6.
Is the means of knowing, is inter-relation between God!

and man. 31.18 45.8 44.2 45.9.
Is the main principle.

29.8: 31.6, 19; 33.13; 34.2, 7, 8; 49.3; 51.18.
Give bliss and good lot. 51.8; 51.10.
Is judge. 29.2.3; 46.9; 31.5; 32.6,


Seiniary,


Summarizing the above data, it will be seen that Asha
and Vohumano are, on the whole, identical; but Vohu-
mano is the weaker, less exteriorly active, and less indi-
vidual of the two.

Of the common characteristics, Vohumano is more
frequently mentioned in three (Nos. 4, 17 and 19, the
latter being repetitions); the same in four (Nos. 10, 12,
15, 18, all minor ones) ; and by far less in the remaining
15 characteristics. Adding all the cases together, Asha
is mentioned 192 times and Vohumano only 110, or 57
per cent.

Of the characteristics in which Asha and Vohumano
are contrasted, Asha seems in 12 cases to be the more
active (Nos. 6-17); in Nos. 1 and 2 the distinction is not
very striking, while in Nos. 3, 4 and 5 the activity seems
equal. Apparently, then, Vohumano seems interior and
operative, while Asha is exteriorly active.

Of the 5 characteristics peculiar to Vohumano, none
is peculiarly striking—with only 8 references; of the 8
peculiarities of Asha, there are 41 references, an average
of 6. And these peculiarities are strong; ‘partnership
with Armaiti, being the divine fore, being the divine
friend, and. the main principle or doctrine.

It might then seem as if Vohumano were merely a
later replica of Asha, the name Asha-dependents given to
the faithful sufficiently suggesting and confirming this
conclusion.


Sas SS


GROUPING of the ASSOCIA TIONS 153


CHAPTER ITI.


GROUPING of the ASSOCIATIONS.


We have now analyzed the Gathas and found a num-
ber of striking parallelisms and distinctions. We must
now sort these out into groups or associations which
shall, if possible, be internally coherent. We may do
this under the following heads:

. Lhe Daevas.

. The Armaitians.

. The Ashaists.

. The Vohu Manians.

. The Spenta Mainyuists.

. The ‘Clever,’ or Dathaists.
. ‘The Magians.


“EOD Ov EH C9 DO b=


1. Tre Daevic Cult.


The Daevas were a political race, possibly descended
from, or of the same race as the Vohu Manists, 32.3.
Zarathushtra’s attitude towards them seems to have
changed from friendly to hostile, and, at the same time,
he refers to them in such terms of general commonsense
as were probably in common use at that day.

The Daevas became bad because they chose wrong;
while choosing, they were deluded, 30.6. Again, in 32.1,
it would seem that the Daevas attended Zarathushtra’s
reception, and were, without blame, included in the
_ enumeration of the persons present; and possibly, among
his converts.


154 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


b. Hostile,


Their deeds are long since known to the seventh
(region of) the earth, 82.3. Hence they predominate so
much that all other heretics are confused with them, 32.4.
Their Kings had not ruled well, 44.20. Their prophet
(Grehma) destroyed the second life, 32.5, through his
utterances; Grehma, therefore, seems to have held doc-
trines at variance with Zarathushtra’s eschatology.

It has long since been announced what may be awaited
by daevas and men, 48.1. Whoever hates them is the
friend of Zarathushtra, 45.11. Their evil destiny is
‘the house of the Daevas,’ 49.4. Were they the proud
of 32.3?


c. Matters gf Common Speech.


Mazdah is mindful of the plans executed formerly by
Daevas and Men, 29.4. Zarathushtra separates himself
from all Savages, Daevas, and Men, 34.5.

They are called refuse of intoxication, mada, 11.10;
possibly with haoma, Y9.17, 11.10; or something fer-
mented (?) which Kings or princes might indulge in,
48.10. Excrement, muthra, 11.89, suggests fermenta-
tion of decayed matter. ‘They are strong, 34.8, and
cruel, 29.3.

The Karapans had agriculture, but were unskilful or
misinformed and hence unsuccessful, 51.14.

Grehma has a special name of opprobrium given him,
thaesa, 49.2.

They tried to please people, to seem generous, to
satisfy (xsnav); as in the case of Yima distributing
flesh, 32.8 (as gift?) ; which might seem necessary in
case of leaders and politicians.


GROUPING of the ASSOCIA TIONS [55


By irony of fate, it is from among these very Daevas
(Kavays, one of whom had rejected Zarathushtra in-
hospitably, 51.12) that Kavay Vishtaspa, 28.7; 41.16;
51.16; 53.2 (meaning possessing scary-horses?) arose;
who attained, 51.16, a position at the head of the Magian
tribe, or cause; it seems implied that he added to this

(1) The Vohumanian followers (padebis?).
(2) The Ashaist followers (manta cistim asha).


d. Daevic Religion.


Of their religion little can be made out, except (a)
that they opposed the eschatological message of Zara-
thushtra, 32.10 (see 46.11). This might explain Zara-
thushtra’s violent opposition to them; together with his
evident relations with them (Vishtaspa, and 51.12),
which is quite possible as they were friendly in disposi-
tion, 32.8. (b) The demon Aeshma, 29.2; 30.6; 48.12;
evidently represents the fury of the meat-eaters, 29.1;
48.7; 44.20; 49.4; such as Yima was. The Daevas there-
fore appeared to the Armaitians as ‘furious,’ merely be-
cause they were destructive of the fertile cow.

There seems to be also some purely daevic words, such
as hunav, son, 51.10; ham-dvar, 30.6, to rush together,
the verb dvar being chiefly used of Daevas (B). May
it not refer to the use of horses among them (Jam-aspa,
Haecat-aspa, Visht-aspa) ?


2. The Armaitian Cow-Cult.


This Armaiti cow-cult may have represented the be-
ginning (in Iran at least) of pastoral civilization. ‘To
Zarathushtra we must not attribute its origination, but
only its championship. The ‘path of free will,’ 31.9, 10,
offered to the cow does not contain even a hint of any


156 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


help from Zarathushtra or any other leader; and rightly
enough, for such developments of civilization operate
blindly; and the famous names associated with them fre-
quently were only their drift-wood; which, indeed, shows
clearly enough which way the current is moving. Zara-
thushtra, according to 29.8, 9, only joined the movement,
and championed it.

It is to this cult that we must attribute

(1) The ‘Shaper of the Bull,’ who is the Spirit of
wisdom, who creates kine, waters, and plants, 31.9; 51.7;
8

(2) The Soul of the Kine, geus-urvan, who appears
as its advocate, 29.

(3) The personified, dramatized cow, 29.

(4) The actual cow.

(5) The paridisiacal cow (see references).

The chief adjectives of the cow are fortune-bringing,
44.6; 47.38; 50.2; and pregnant or calving, 29.5; 34.14;
46.19. Fertility is the chief idea; so we find Armaiti
feminine, the mother-goddess, so to speak, whose devo-
tion and humility bears a striking resemblance to the
gentleness characteristic of cows. Her logical opponent
was T'are-matay the Proud-mind, 33.4; 45.11. Hence
we have as opponents of her followers the Proud, of 32.3,
the Pairi-matayists. It will be noticed that (33.4) Zara-
thushtra would exorcise this high-mindedness from the
gentlemen-by-birth, the nobility, wvaetav. ‘These were,
no doubt, then as now, opposed or separate from the
verezena, or group of laborers.

Such a group of laborers, by their very armatay (gen-
tleness) needed a leader. Had they been prouder, they
might have asked for a king; but these simpleminded
herdsmen asked for no more than a Judge, ratav.

So we find the kine demanding one, 29.2; insisting
upon her inability to manage without one, 29.1; from


GROUPING of the ASSOCIATIONS 157


divinities that seemed none too willing, 29.6. Indeed, her
ideal of one seems to have been so high that she breaks
out into tears at the appointment of a mere man such as
Zarathushtra, 29.9.


As to the word ratav itself, the references, 29.2, 6; 33.1
seem connected with the kine, and with the Judging of
the two parties, and of the mixed (were these the Armai-
tians?). The ‘two parties’ are certainly Ashaist and
Drujist, 31.2; 51.5; while in 44.16, the Judge is men-
ioned and distinguished from Vohu Manah and Sraosha.


Reverence of son for father betokens the same gentle-
ness and dependence as of the cow, 29.10; 44.7.


Probably the difficulty of attaining peace made the
Armaitians long for it, 47.3, 48.11; as associated with
the growing of good pasture; which may explain, 33.3,
the ‘pastures of Asha and Vohu Manah’ in heaven.


It would be quite logical if among the partisans of
the pregnant, fertile cow arose the idea of Saviors,
saoshyant, strictly, profiters (from sav), and Helpers,
who were ‘profiters, literally.


Understanding (xratav, 535) is a word predomi-
nantly Ashaist, 42 per cent., as against 25 per cent. Vohu
Manist, and 32 per cent. uncertain; may be connected
with the Creator of the Kine, the Spirit of Understand-
ing; it was inevitable that a people who had chosen the
pastoral life would have attributed some such compli-
ment as understanding to the representant of that avoca-
tion.


We have in this cult also the peculiar word for wisdom
vyana, 44.7, 29.6; in both cases connected with the
Shaper, and Kine; and the word tash to create (discussed
elsewhere).


158 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


3. The Ashaist Cult.


The Ashaist is the most picturesque of the Gathic
cults, because of its vivid contrast between Ashaist and
Drujist, so familiar both in itself, and in its religious con-
sequences of dualism. We owe to it both the drama, 29,
and the vaticination, 30; each of which represents one of
its component elements. Both of these we shall have to
study. The denouement of the drama pictures the politi-
cal consolidation of Armaitians and Ashaists, while those
Ashaists who did not accept Zarathushtra’s leadership
were driven into opposition, acquiring the undesirable
appellation of Drujists; indeed, that vaticination (Y.
30) may have been uttered in order to make the split
complete, and drive the Drujists out from among Zara-
thushtra’s loyal adherents, 44.13; as they may have occu-
pied neighboring houses, 50.3.

Zarathushtra’s uncompromising attitude on partisan-
ship we have seen elsewhere; but there is a danger of mis-
understanding it, by looking at him from our own day
' when law-courts and police make partisanship almost un-
necessary. Jt was otherwise with a beginning pastoral
civilization which had to enforce the idea of settlements
and limits on nomads by personal valor.

Nevertheless, Zarathushtra’s violent end seems but a
fitting reward for his frantic appeals to force: he that
draweth the sword shall perish by it.

(1) The reason for this arising of dualistic animosity
is simple enough when we consider the bitter feuds
among farmers even at our late day. The pastoral
settlers had the cow to fight about; hence a strict division
between friends, and enemies.

(2) Hence also the need for champions or Saviors,
among whom Zarathusthra appears as the first, to lead


GROUPING of the ASSOCIATIONS 159


the war against the Daevas or meat-eaters and slaughter-
ers; and this war was bitter enough to discourage even
Zarathushtra, 46.1, 50.1.

Marriage between divinities is not an unexampled
symbol of the union of two races; so when we read that
Armaiti was the hitha or Companion of Asha, we may
suppose (34.10) that this represents the formation of
this political bond (48.7) to which every bounteous man
will belong. No doubt the Cow’s desire for a J udge rep-
resented her failure to assert herself against the flesh-
eating Druj, 29.1; and the expedient was to unite with
the Ashaists, under the judge-ship of Zarathushtra.
Krom now Tare-Matay retreats into the background,
until later (Yasna, 60.5) once more restored to his for-
mer prominence.

Is it possible that we have another indication of the
union of these two parties, the Armaitians and Ashaists?
We have, in 47.6 and 81.3, the peculiar association of the
Spirit (spenta) and fire at the distribution of the good,
47.6; and satisfaction, 31.8; (therefore not harm and
loss) , to both ranas or parties. Does the S pirit here rep-
resent the ‘Shaper of the Kine,’ who was the ‘spirit of
wisdom’? This application would seem very apt indeed.

The other occurrences of parties are, 51.9: the Ashaist
and Drujist. 31.19: the ahumbis, life-healing friend (?)
by red fire gives good to both parties.

The parties are called asa (dual), referring to Ashaist
and Drujist, and the Judge, 31.2.

AAs the prophet was called to come to Asha, he was
told to arise before Ashay and Sraosha arose to judg-
ment, 43.12.

Did Asha, in these references, have especial connection
with the fire of the eschatological metal, 30.7; 51.9; 32.72
(All which are Ashaist references.) The connection be-
tween Asha and fire, 43.4; 34.4: 31.32 is definite, so
that this is not impossible; and we have seen that the


160 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


eschatological metal might not impossibly be connected
with the Sword of armed partisanship: and here we have
‘asa’ as their name. May we take this complex of ideas as
the origin of the Ashaist cult?
But how did the fiery partisan Asha come to mean
right, or justice? The root sa, which appears in profit
(sav, savah, saoshyant) reappears in sangha or teaching
(of the Saviors?) ; which is a distinctly Ashaist word,
32.6; 34.7; 43.6; 44.14; 46.8, 17; 45.2; and among Vohu
Manists only once, 49.9, and then qualified by guzra,
‘mysterious.’
This teaching seems promoted by Saviors rather than
Teachers; the verb kaeth (428), the only other one mean-
ing to teach not already appropriated by Vohu Manists
is doubtful (Ashaist, 33.2, 47.5, 46.9; Vohu Manist, 44.6,
10; 46.18; 50.8; (?) 51.15); also sah (1574) (Vohu
Manist, 34.12; 45.6; 50.6; Ashaist, 43.3; 48.3).
It must therefore have occurred, then as now, that
one’s own side appeared to be the right side and the oppo-
site the wrong; to the right truth, is opposed the wrong
lie, or Druj.
The Drujist, with his hell of the “House of the Druj,’
as opposed to the Ashaist, is well-known; but it would
seem that another name of theirs was the Doomed (who
had no second life), martiya or mashya. An identifica
tion seems to be made, in 48.1. When Asha overcome
the Druj, then the long prophecy of what is to happen t
the Daevas and the Doomed will be realized. They a
paired with the Daevas (as the Drujists would be)
45.11; 84.5. In 48.1 they are called daeva darlings
robbed of second life, 32.5; 46.11 (see 30.11; 32.8; 43.1
48.5).
We must look among them for bitter animosity again
the Druj—the ‘harm or convert’ spirit of 33.2, illustrate
this abundantly; for the fiery partisan (asayae, ashahya)


GROUPING of the ASSOCIA TIONS 161


Asha could see no middle ground. The partner of the
divine Cow, Armaiti, would be the divine Bull, Asha,
whose pastures we hear of in heaven, 33.3, 50.2? The
Bull is connected with the Dawn, wshas, 46.3; and the
good days, 50.10. Once more we have a connection be-
tween Armaitians and Ashaists when the Daeva states
that the two worst things to see are the Cow and the
Sun, 32.10; for the days imply light or fire, 43.4; 44.4;
and the priest of Asha, 50.11; 33.6; will think of Asha
as he brings an offering to the flames, 43.9.

No doubt we have here the germs of fire-worship, and
without question this ever remained Zarathushtra’s main
interest.


4. The Vohu-Manist Cult.


Vohu Manah is practically identical with Asha in most
respects; but if any difference is observed (see elsewhere)
he is less individual; he lacks the fire of Asha. His name
must have meant “good nature.’

This same characteristic is marked in Vohu Manah’s
followers. ‘They are friendly to the Dru}, 32.3, 5; 43.15;
49.9; and this is all the more marked as Zarathushtra
finds fault with the just-speaking man (having the right
saying, B.) for friendliness to the Drujist. This ap-
pears to Zarathushtra from his self-centred stand-point,
as hypocrisy, 34.7.

‘Are they faithful to thee, O Ahura Mazdah, who,
though they know of Vohw Manah, turn the difficulties of
doctrines to their own advantage by sophistries? As for
me, I know none but You, O Asha. This friendliness
seems to have been returned, 47.5.

They were the literary men, and their submission to
the Magian cause under Vishtaspa is described by the
padebis (51.16) of Vohu Manah. More striking even
than this, the word daash, to teach, 48.15, 33.13; and


162 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


fradaxshta, teacher, (31.17, 51.3; occur nowhere except
in immediately Vohu Manist passages (see the words).
The rarer words wsha, 46.2, to teach, and dah, 48.11, to
teach, also appear in Vohu Manist passages.

This asha root, connected evidently with ashathra (like
da and dathra), suggests that the latter word may, at
least among them, have meant not realm or power, but
something analogous to a school or college. Indisputa-
ble, however, it is that ashathra, 29.10; 32.4; 43.4; 44.6;
45.10; 1s associated with Vohu Manah.

The sasna are also distinctly Vohu Manist; in 29.8, and
48.3, undoubtedly so; in 31.18, nearest to Vohu Manah of
31.17 e, and mentioned as of the Druj, with whom we
have seen the Vohu Manists sympathized. In 53.1, they
are ‘of the good daena, both Vohu Manist terms. If we
scrutinize the Vohu Manist duplicating divinities
(Ashay, Tushnamaiti, College-xshathra) it would seem
that they were an Euhemerist interpretation of the less
moralized tribal deities of the Cow-cult (Asha Armaiti,
Xshathra-xshay-power). This is Just what we might
expect from a non-partisan, student sect, who could not
be prevented from reflecting on, or moralizing about,
their divinities.

Ashay, for instance, is indubitably connected with
Vohu Manah in 28.7, 33.18, 43.16, 46.10, 51.21, 43.1e;
while in 34.12 the paths are of Vohu Manah, though
taught (by Zarathushtra?) through Asha; in 43.5, we
have the akem, and vanguhim ear-marks; in 48.8 the
good spirit and good Xshathra; in 49.12 Vohu Manah is
nearest to Ashay, as also in 50.9, where we have works of
Vohu Manah; in 51, we have the best deeds, which must
refer to the good Manah; the good Xshathra, also.

It is among them (43.15) we find T'wshn-amaiti, no
doubt a racial variant for the Ashaist Armaiti. WVohu
Manah grants tevishi and utaywiti, 51.7. ‘These are not


GROUPING of the ASSOCIA TIONS 163


to be superficially attributed to Haurvatat and Amere-
tat, because in the passages where these vitality and
enduring are approached to Haurvatat and Ameretat,
they are separated off from them very evidently, 51.7;
43.1; 48.8a; as if it were an eclectic comparative iden-
tification of things known to be of different origin.

The psychological ‘tang’ to Bartholomae’s transla-
tion of daena, i. e., E'go, or individuality seems too arti-
ficial for so early a period; yet we cannot well go further
away from psychology than to translate it Spirit. Even
so, it remains a word testifying to reflection and study
on the part of the users thereof; and, as it happens, its
chief connection is with the Vohu Manist cult, 33.18;
44.9; 53.4; 34.18; 49.5; of whom we otherwise have
gathered that they were unpartisan students.

Their hell was the ‘Home of’ their ‘Bad Mind,’ or
“Worst Mind.’

Were the Vohu Manists the proud, 82.8, pair-
amatoisca? In this 32.8 the proud are those who ‘will
dare to reverence the Daevas, and who ‘will be consider-
ed as belonging to the Druj.’ Hence, the proud were
originally neither Daevas nor Druj—what else could
they be but Vohu-Manists, seeing that Aka-Manah is
mentioned in line 172? Secondly, the intellectual Vohu-
Manists, might well have been so termed by the Armai-
tians, who were no more than humble cow-herders, to
whom the gentlemen, xvaetav might well appear proud.
Thirdly, there seems to be a contrast or opposition be-
tween the humble Armaitians of verse 2, and the proud
of verse 3. Now, we have no record of any opposition
within the ranks of the simple-minded verezena, or
group of laboring cow-herders.

It would seem as if chistt, sophia—wisdom, was asso-
ciated with the Vohu Manist cult, 46.9; 48.11; 47.2;
51.16, 18.

Likewise the Magian cause is distinctly, 51.11, 16,


164 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


grouped with Vohu Manah alone, and among others, in
33.7; 46.14; also with Vohu Manah and Xshathra in
29.11, in the cow-drama.

Does the meaning of T'ushna (matay, 658, silent de-
votion) have any connection with the guzra (secret)
teachings? This would seem the fitting cult, in order
of importance. In 28.5, the mathras of the Knower were
not unknown among the Vohu Manists; who were
rather, the chief association thereof.

Who were the Savages, xwshafstras? The only indi-
cations we have are:

(a) 84.5; Zarathushtra preached to Daevas, Doomed
(druj), and Savages. This would imply they belonged
to a sect other than Daevic or Ashaist—the only other
definitely well-known sect of whom it could be said
Zarathushtra had preached to them was the Vohu
Manist.

(b) The non-Vohu Manists are shunned by Asha,
as much as Savages are shunned by us, 84.9. Does this
suggest that Zarathushtra, like his divinity Asha, sepa-
rated himself from the non-Vohu Manist Savages?

Why should they be called “small beasts of prey,”
ashafstras? Possibly like the treason which Zarathush-
tra attributes to certain Vohu Manists who, though they
know the truth, use it for their own purposes, 34.7; they
held a variant of Armaiti, as “stealing” it. However,
in 49.9, the Sasna is taught by Asha (or the Ashaist
prophet?) while Vohu Manah has the guzra-sangha,
the Secret teachings.

We must accept Yasna, 30, as the Vohu Manist school
of Dualism; and from it we must gather the following
ideas: the Spirit being clothed with the Stone-heavens
as a garment, 5; and the lights, 1; Adana, as duplicate
of Spenta—Mainyuist Ada, 7; maetha and vicitha for
crisis; that Better and the Bad spirits, showing it Vohu


Manist. 1


GROUPING of the ASSOCIATIONS 165


The only association that does not seem to fit is
Aeshma, 30.7, who, as sickness, should logically belong
to the cult of Health, Haurvatat. Still, sickness is
only a minor result of rapine and violence, which with-
out question is Daevic, for it was to Aeshma that the
wrong choosing Daevas rushed.


5. Ihe Spenta-Mainyuist Cult.


It is only with the greatest reluctance that the writer
even considers the recognition of another cult; for the
following reasons seem decisive:

(1) The parallelism between the dualism of 80 and
45 demands a group other than the Vohu Manists, who
were philosophical enough to be appealed to by a
Dualism; and this could be neither the Daevas, bent on
rapine, nor the Ashaists-Armaitians, bent on cow-
herding and fire-worship and fanatic opposition to the
Dru).

(2) We have Spenta and Angro Mainyu, as another
group of divinities. ‘True, spenta recalls Armaiti the
bounteously fertile, and Mainyw recalls the Armaitian
‘Shaper,’ the Spirit of Wisdom. But the Armaitians
were perhaps the most ancient and simple, cow-cult,
whereas Yasna 45 contains a group of late ideas, we
shall see later. Sraosha, the Cinvat-bridge, Garodman,
and Haurvatat and Ameretat, ignored in 30.6. Again,
there would be among the Armaitians no room for
Angro-Mainyu, as no opponent is mentioned to the
Shaper-of-the-Cow, the Spirit of Wisdom; the opponent
there was T'are-maiti, corresponding to Ar-maiti.

(3) We have, as compensation, ada (directly asso-
ciated with Spenta Mainyu, 33.12, though not in 33.11;
48.1) and adana, 30.7; a duplication, showing that we
must hold apart the Vohu Manist adana from the
Spenta Mainyuist ada group, whichever it be.


166 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


(4) The Savages, as we have already seen, were Vohu
Manist; the foreigners, voawema, 34.5, must have been
different from them, and would suggest later comers,
such as would hold the more advanced Spenta Mainyuist
doctrines, which we will next see. Neither Daevas nor
Dru) would be addressed as ‘foreigners.’

(5) The chief reason for the recognition of a differ-
ent and later group is that in 30.6, 7 we have tevishi
and utayuitt given to a sick man, without mention of
Haurvatat, if not of Ameretat; whereas in 45.7, these
qualities of tevishi and utayuiti, are as always later,
properly connected with Haurvatat and Ameretat,
45.7, 10. These divinities must then have been either
unknown to, or ignored by, 80.7; this later alternative
would be unlikely, because no reason could well be ad-
vanced for purposive ignoring of them.

Again, in 32.5, Ameretat appears not with her later
twin companion Haurvatat, but with Hujyatay, show-
ing the formative stage of the later twin-doctrine of
Haurvatat and Ameretat.

(6) Wehave a special eschatology, Sraosha as Judge,
and Garodman, 45.5, 8, which would conflict with
‘House of the Best Mind’ or ‘House of Druj’ and of
Asha. Garodman is a later idea, taken up by the later
Mazdeans. While the Vohu Manist’s psychological cast
of thought held to the crisis, vicitha and maetha, 80.2, 9,
we have in 45.7 the Preparer, who was later to stand
with Sroasha at the (bridge) of judgment, 46.17.

(7) The cinvat-bridge, 46.10, 11; 51.18; shows a de-
veloped (and later Mazdean) view. The ‘prophet will
go over it first, 46.10, certainly developed from the
simple ratav of the herdsmen. In 46.11, while con-
nected with the house of Dru], the fact that their daena
will meet the Karpan and Kavays there is mentioned
as something they do not seem to have known yet. So,


GROUPING of the ASSOCIA TIONS 167


in 51.18, there is a manifestation (of new doctrinal des-
cription?) for those who have left the way of Asha,
with the daenas as destroyers of the good reward.
While daenas, as we have seen, were frequently con-
nected with Vohu Manah, nevertheless the whole pictur-
esque picture, employing both Vohu Manist and Ashaist
conceptions, is a strikingly new ensemble.

(8) We find also in Yasna 45 a more advanced psy-
chological scheme of eight elements; manah, sengha,
wratav, varana, shyaothana, daena, and urvan, (mind,
doctrine, understanding, thought, teaching, deeds, spirit,
soul) in 45.8; while in 30.2 we have only the traditional
threefold division of manah, vacah, and shyaothana,
mind, word, and deed.

(9) All the other names for men being appropriated
(vir to Armaitians, as used with pasav; mashyia to the
Druj-doomed), we may be impressed by the appear-
ance of maretan (reminding of the latter gayomart) in
the classic passage, 45.5. In 46.13 sasta precedes it,
and the ‘hearing’ is connected with Sraosha. In 29.7
the cow asks who would intercede for her with men
(probably the daevas?) ; yet the cow’s Creator was the
Spirit of Wisdom. Again, in 30.6, the connection is
with Aeshma, and hence daevic, unless we consider his
role as sickness-producer as being Spenta Mainyuist, as
opposed to Haurvatat and Ameretat. (The references
are, 29.7; 45.5; 46.18—30.6; 32.12.)

(10) In considering the special doctrines of the
Spenta Mainyuist group, Haurvatat might appear as
an innovation. We have seen two stages of growth to-
wards this; first, when Haurvatat was ignored, and sec-
ondly, when she appeared as Hujyatay. The idea of
health and sickness therefore may have been character-
istic of this group. Did the ahumbis, 31.19; 44.2; have
anything to do with this? In 31.19 applied to Zara-
thushtra, and in 44.2 to Ahura Mazdah, it may have


168 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


shown another stage in the development of the healing
idea, with Aeshma imported from daeévas, as opponent,
30.6. At any rate wrvatha as friend appears in 45.11.
(11) There is the following complex of associations,
all connecting with the Spenta Mainyuists:
a. 'The Clever are sifted by Sraosha, 46.17.
b. The Preparer (Zarathushtra himself) will
stand for them with Sraosha, 46.17.
c. The Preparers wish for profits of Ameretat,
45.7.

Are the Clever Spenta Mainyuists? On the whole, _
they seem to have relations mainly with Zarathushtra ~
himself, and as Grehma does not believe in the second
coming or life, 32.10; 46.11; does it mean that the Clever
did believe in it before Grehma perverts them to being
Drujists?

Sraosha, obedience, would of itself, mean obedience to
Zarathushtra himself. He is associated with the Pre-
parer and Judgment in 46.17; 44.16; 48.12; and in
45.5 with Ameretat (Spenta Mainyuist); with Haur-
vatat and Ameretat, in 45.5.


6. The Clever, or Mazdists.


The Gnostic cult includes Mazdah, from the verb
mazda (B 1163) to mind, or remember. In connection
therewith we have the Knower vidvae, 31.6; the Know-
ing, 45.3; the Clever, datha, 732; 46.17; with their
special heaven, the house of the Clever, 32.10; with
their opposite the Fools, or Non-clever, 46.17.


7. Ihe Magian.s.


The Magians were apparently a well established tribe,
with a special name, magavan, 33.7, 51.15.


GROUPING of the ASSOCIA TIONS 169


They were perhaps Daevas, for Vishtaspa the Kava-
yite attains their leadership, 46.14; 51.16; 53.2. They
may, however (as many kindred tribes and persons have
been to their relatives), have been bitterly hostile to
them, or they may have drifted apart in some manner,
so as to allow for Zarathushtra’s opposition to their kin-
dred the Daevas. Meat-eating, 32.8; and intoxication
(by haoma?), 48.10; may have been elements in this
disunion. In the Magian sections of the Gathas, 46.9-
13; 51.11-22; 53; the cow-drama, 29; we have a preva-
lence of Mazdah Ahura together (except in 33, which
has a slight preponderance of Mazdah only). ‘The word
Mazdah may therefore have been already prevalent, and
known to Zarathushtra. The word maga meant a hole.
Now if we suppose that the men who lived in the deep
valley, which was not fitted for agriculture, wished to
support themselves, pasturing cattle would be the only
possibility. The dwellers on the high table-land were
successful, powerful daevas; and at last, when driven
to despair, Zarathushtra advises the Magians to settle
‘cleverly’ these open sunny lands, and engage in agri-
culture also, 50.1-4. This would account for all the
facts, and allow a role for Zarathushtra as champion of
the herdsmen, and his later alliances with the Daeva
Frashaoshtra and Jamaspa.

Again, the Magians may have been troglodites, such
as lived in the Hauran. Fire would be very necessary to
them; hence perhaps their preserving or being favorable
to that element of nature-worship. However, such in-
trospective lives as troglodites must necessarily live
would favor the preservation or development of memory
and mindfulness, the Mazdah concept.

Indeed, the verb ‘mazda,’ to remember, is found in
one of the Magian sections, 53.5; the other occurrence
is in the Spenta Mainyuist, 45-45.1, which cult Zara-
thushtra was seeking. We may therefore conclude it


170 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


was in general use. But the famous Yasna 30 (dualism)
also begins with the expression that the prophet will
now utter things memorable, mazdatha. 'These no doubt
were the secrets of the Mazdean theologians, common
among all of the various cult-tribes.

Did Mazdah alone of all the other divinities, have no
opponent? Seeing that the name Mazdah is after all
kindred to Manah, Mainyu, and Maiti, all these words
meaning thought in some shape, such an isolation would
seem improbable. But what opponent have we for him?
The later Ormuzd and Ahriman betrays it. Ahura was
an opponent of Mazdah. Hence Zarathushtra’s long
effort to recognize Mazdah as the Supreme Ahura;
hence we have Ahuras of Mazdah, and Ahuras Mazdan,
31.4; 30.9; before the final crystallization occurs. Hence
also we have the conjuring of disobedience (Asrushtay)
from Mazdah Ahura, 33.4, so as to leave Ahura as holy
and universal a name as it has since become.

The secular use of Ahura, 29.2; 31.8, 10; 46.9; 53.9;
as judge is attributed to Mazdah in 31.8; 46.9; to a
man in 29.2; 31.10; 53.9; and in the latter case it refers
to a conqueror who would murder and imprison. So
we have both

a. Ahura as sufficiently different from Mazdah
as to be attributed to him;

b. As containing the idea of bloodshed and vio-
lence, which makes the point of the “spen-
tem’ and ‘ashavanem’ added to it in 46.9.

While originally then the idea may have been that of
an opposing divinity (still reflected in Zarathushtra’s
code of ethics against his enemies, 43.8; 28.9; 46.4, 18;
31.18) he insisted that Ahura and Mazdah were the
same, 31.8; 46.9; Ahura becoming ‘bounteous’ and
‘just.’

We have this asrushtay in 33.4; 44.13; 43.12; really
the opponent of Sraosha.


Outline of Pre-Zoroastrian Culty.


I. DAEVAS.


Meat-eaters, butchers of cows; refuse, intoxication (with ha6ma?P)
Friendly; agricultural, but employing methods different from Za-
rathushtra’s. Gréhma their tkaésa (prophet) teaches an eschato-
logy different from Zarathushtra’s, 32.10. They are politically
prominent, and have a wide reputation, and ally themselves with
Aéshma. They use hunavy for son.


II. ARMAITIAN BOVINE FERTILITY WORSHIP.


Armaiti the productive, cow-like, gentle, is pasture. Fashioner
(tash) of the Bovine; géus urvan, Soul of the Bovine. Bull-god
with pasture. They demand a Judge who shall dispense profit
and Joss. They honor understanding, reverence, and peace. Vira
for man. Opponent to Armaiti is Tare-maiti. They combine with


II]. ASHAIST PARTISANS, Yasnas 28, 43, 44, 48.


Asha is opposed to the Drujists, who are called the doomed, or
mortals. ‘Injure or convert them!’ cry the champions or saviors.
Their law is the séfigha: their Judgment occurs by red fire and
molten metal (the burning of sword-wounds3) Home of Druj, hell


IV. VOHU-MANISTS, Yasnas 30, 34.


Friendly to all, hence also to Drujists, hence they appear to Za-
rathushtra hypocritical, 34.7, and proud, 32.3, pairi-matoisea,
as opposed to their Tushna-maiti; Ashay is their version of Asha
To their Vohu is opposed Aka Manah, in the Home of the Worst
Mind, whither go the Savages, by retribution, Adana. They are
the intellectuals, interpreting doctrines; having verses; teaching,
daxsh, xsha, sasna, cistay-sophia, secret teachings, of which the
legend of the stone-heaven may have formed part for the daénas.


V. SPENTA-MAINYUISTS, Yasnas 45, 47, 49.


Dualism of Spefifa versus Afigro Mainyav; Sraosha versus Asru-
shtay. From among all men (maretan) and foreigners (vadxema)
Sraosha sifts out the clever who, following the Preparer over the
cinvat bridge, in the Garodman attain Haurvatat and Ameretat.
They had an eightfold psychological division. Retribution is ada


VI. MAGIANS, Yasnas 29, 33, 46.9-13, 51.11-22, 53.


A tribe living in a deep valley, by despair driven out into open
lands, 50.1-6, submitting to the Daéva ruler Vishtaspa. Their
divinity Mazdah is united to his erst-while opponent Ahura from
whom Zarathushtra as knower of the mysteries conjures away all
evil, then superimposing him above all other gods as the supreme


DEVELOPMENT of ZARATHUSHTRA


CHAPTER IV.
DEVELOPMENT of ZARATHUSHTRA


Amidst these groups or tribes (which we must not
think of as large nations, but perhaps as fellow-settlers
of some mountain—group or table—land), Zarathush-
tra must have grown up and worked.


1. The Magian Youth.


In studying the origin of Zarathushtra and his mes-
sage we must keep certain things in mind.

(1) As in other religions, the accounts of his early
youth, are among the least reliable documents.

(2) We must change perspective: when Zarathushtra
arose he was unnoticed, and the world around him great.

Hence, in asking ourselves to what tribe he belonged
we should go to the later years of his life, and see what
his relations are. Here we find the Magian tribe, among
whom he is not satisfied to teach; he wants to preach
outside of or ‘before’ it, 33.7. This would not have oc-
curred had he not belonged to it by birth, We must
therefore imagine him a youth of the Magian tribe.

In this account of the life of Zarathushtra all the
legendary material which would have added much to
the picturesqueness of the scenes has been purposely
omitted. For the purpose of this work has been to limit
the enquiry strictly to the Gathas. Biblical criticism
has taught that popular—and even orthodox traditions
are not always the safest guides.


174 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


The location of Zarathushtra’s birth in the neighbor-
hood of lake Urumyah finds absolutely no support in the
Gathas whose ignoring of sea and lake (mentioning
water but in 44.4; 51.7) 1s particularly striking.
If his visions occurred by a river or lake, the hymns do
not mention it.


Ze ; Aw Student with the Vohu Manistu.


What may we suppose that the possibly shy, home-
sick, distressed Magian youth may have learnt with the
Vohu Manist teachers? Elsewhere we have seen all the
special doctrines they may have introduced to him; but
the most certain of all is that they taught him to address
Vohu Manah as a present help in trouble, for never, as
long as he lived, was the impressionable Magian to fail
to raise his prayers and adorations to the Good Mind
who dwelt above the heavens.

“We would not vex the best Mind because of the ex-
pected benefactions, 28.9. He would always teach
hymns worthy of the life of Vohu Manah, 30.1. He
watched over the issues of human life with Vohu Manah,
28.4. He would always advance his interests through
Vohu Manah, 33.8. Would Vohu Manah have the
power to protect his poor? 34.5. The lot of Vohu Manah
was composed of the incomparable things of the coming
kingdom, 33.13. It was the power of .Vohu Manah that
should be the portion of him who withstood the divine
fire, 43.4; for Vohu Manah appoints the proper punish-
ments, and will come, and utter judgments, 43.5, 6.”

And so our young prophet was instructed in verses
or oracular utterances, 43.11, which no doubt never en-
tirely faded from his mind.


DEVELOPMENT of ZARATHUSHTRA 175


But Vohu Manah, the good natured, full of good
sense, could not be bigoted; and when the time came the
young Magian was ready to progress further, it was
that Divinity itself which told him, “Thou shouldst go to
some Ashaist fane, to be instructed,’ 43.12. And no
doubt with tears he bade farewell to his friends of the
cheerful, debonair disposition. ‘These, however, seem
to have left upon the youth the indelible eschatological
interest which pursued him all through life—for we
have seen, 33.12, 13, that Vohu Manah was the divinity
associated most closely with the distribution of compen-
sations.


3. Aw Student with the Ashaists.


However delightful the gracious young Magiuan’s stay
may have been among the Vohu Manians, and however
serious the eschatological interest may have been that he
brought with him, his joy of being a priest, 33.6, 14;
43.9; among the Ashaists never forsook him. Years
later when celebrating the heroes of the Devaist strug-
gles he would sing to Asha ‘as never before,’ 28.3, his
mind going backwards to when he had done so first.

“When will I behold thee, as a Knower, O Asha?’ he
should cry, 28.5.
me the realm, O Vohu Manah! 31.4.

If Asha is at all willing to be invoked, so attain for

‘What help hast thou for me, O Asha? 49.12.

‘I would remain your eulogist, O Mazdah and Asha,
as long as I live! 50.11.

Such were the reminiscent sentiments which he car-
ried with him all his life; of this early sojourn among
the Ashaists, whose details the reader may find else-
where; however, it may be well to note down the chief

points thereof;


176 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


First, a theophany of Asha in person, 34.7, 8; 43.9, 10.

Second, a Vision of the uncertainties of life ended by
a decision to support the Ashaists against their enemies
the druj—a ‘naturalization’ so to speak, among them,
31.12, 13; 43.7, 8.

Third, a touching prayer for sufficient divine grace
to carry out Asha’s decrees on his enemies, 30.8-11;
48.15, 16.

Fourth, no doubt, admission to the Bond-society of
Ashaists, hithav, 48.7; which association remained with
him to the end of his daevic struggles; for in his vision
Armaiti the divine hitha, 34.10, of Asha (his wife?),
appears and aligns the parties.

This was the sunny, 32.2, portion of Zarathushtra’s
life—for Asha had his strength through fire, 34.4; and
no doubt our young Magian began at this time those
ritualistic, reverential fire-worshipping rites, 43.9;
through which he may have more than once beheld the
divinities themselves. Indeed, he referred to himself
even later as the friend of Asha, 50.6.

But neither did this satisfy Zarathushtra’s soul: the
fire may have led him to seek the Spirit’s wisdom, 33.6,
which for the present was to be withheld from him, 30.6,
7; 33.6; 44.18. So in disappointment he went by him-
self—and called on the nameless lord Ahura—from
whom, as we shall see, he was to attain treasures that
passed his understanding.

When Zarathushtra left the Ashaists he wrote, 33.6:

‘I who, as (Ashaist) priest, coming through Asha
from the Best (Mind), desire (to walk) the just (paths
of the Holy) Ghost

From us (the Ashaist priests) (gomg) towards the
pastures which advisory-managers ought to work
through the (Vohu) Manah (disposition) ;

For these two objects I wish, O Ahura Mazdah, to
consult together visibly (the Best Spirit and thee).’


DEVELOPMENT of ZARATHUSHTRA 177


4. The Ahurian Experiences—Reflexion,


We must now study the mental experiences of our
young prophet while studying with the Ahuraians, to
whose name Mazdah he was to give so much promi-
nence; our sources will accordingly be on the one hand,
34.12-15; 31.8-5, 7, 8, 11, 14-17; and on the other, 44,
except 17 and 18.


In 31.6, 7 Zarathushtra asks a number of questions.
What is the answer? From whom does it come? (8)


“Whereupon, when Zarathushtra with his (own) eye
(by looking at nature) and through (his) mind (by
puzzling out its significance) comprehended.’ He
thought it over himself; he ‘minded’ it; the first step to-
wards being reminded of it.


So in 44.8, he asks Ahura Mazdah what his purposes
are that he may be mindful of them, and the utterances
about which he had asked through Vohu Manah’s aid.
Evidently it was his purpose to remember them; he had
just gone through so many cults it was highly import-
ant that he should systematize and fix them in his own
mind.


In 50.8; 51.16; we have him stepping before Ahura
Mazdah with the verses (the feet) ‘which are as famous
as those of zeal with stretched-out arms encompass you
O Mazdah.’ They are the verses of Vohu Manah, 51.16.
It was at a time such as the one where we are now that
he was producing them.


If he was familiar with the verb mazda, as we have
suggested, this would fit this memorizing effort exactly;
and the God who would help him to it would indeed be
the mindful lord.’


178 HIGHER CRITICISM of the GATHAS.


5. Ihe Ahurian Experiences—Teachingy.


This was the very psychological moment, and intro-
spective mood for him to draw from the crucible his
mind full of the Vohu Manist and Ashaist teachings he
had just received any combination, deduction, or addi-
tion. Let us now put together the results of his intro-
spection:

31.8. Ahura Mazdah is first and youngest of crea-
tion; is the father of Vohu Manah; thy Vohu Manah,
32.6. The genuine creator of Asha; the owner of Ar-
maiti and of the Shaper-of-the-Bovine creation, who
was the understanding of the Spirit.

11. Creator of gaetha and daena, establisher of body
and life, etc.

Let us go to 44:

(1) Friend.

(2) Ahumbis.

(3) Who was the first father of Asha?

(4) Who is creator of Vohu Manah?

For whom didst thou create the cattle? (A prelude
to the drama of 29.)

(7) ‘Sons reverent to their fathers’ (meant Asha
— Manah were made subject to Ahura Maz-

ah).

(7) Who created Armaiti? (45.4, is daughter.)

(9) He wants to help the daenas. He wants to learn
the dwelling of Vohu Manah and Ahura Mazdah.

(10) Cista, wisdom, mysteries.

(11) How to spread the religion for which he was
chosen—all other (divinities) he regards with suspicion.

(18) He wants the mystic mathra of Haurvatat and
Ameretat; and the ten mares and camel to enable him
to start in his work.


DEVELOPMENT of ZARATHUSHTRA


Evidently he had combined the former cults of Asha
and Vohu Manah, and had superimposed above them
a supreme father and Creator, which new revelation
should unite the warring cults under one banner.

The name was already at his hand—the lord who
was mindful of all this; himself was henceforth an
Expert-Knower (vidvae), one of the clever (dathra) ;
and he now had a secret (guzra sangha) which united
him to all cults and enabled him to seek converts among


them all.


180 CRITICAL RESULTS


CHAPTER V,


CRITICAL RESULTS.


It is now time to cast a very tentative general bird’s
eye view on the ground we have traversed, in order to
approach to its significance.


1. Chronological Significance of ‘Mazdah.’


Should we suppose that the occurrence of the name
Mazdah was in some one hymn shown to be predomi-
nant, would it imply that that hymn was early or late?
The decision would be, that it was late, because:

(1) The later Zoroastrian religion is distinctly Maz-
dean, the name Ahura dropping out to some extent, or
coalescing with Mazda into Auharmazd, Ormuzd.

(2) There was a time, as we have seen, 43; when
Zarathushtra learnt the supremacy of Mazdah.

(3) The use of Ahuras in the plural, the Ahuras
ed azdas, the plural pronoun, all point to an earlier poly-
theism.


Gathic Occurrence ef Divine Namew.


Yasna 28: Ahura, 8 Ahura Mazdah, 2,3,4,5,6,9,10,11. Mazdah, 1,7.
29 A, 5 AM, 4,6,7,10,11; M, 5,8; None, 1,2,3,9

30 A, 1; AM, 5,89; M, 10,11; None, 2,3,4,6,7.

31 A, 8,15; AM, 2,4,5,7,9,14, 16,17, 19,2122; M, 1,3,6,8,10,11,13; —12, 18,2.

32 A, 0. AM, 1,2,4,6,7,16; M, 8,9,11,12,135 —3,5,10,14,15.

33 A, 3,13 AM, 2,5,6,11,12, M, 4,7,8,9,10,4. —l.

34 A, 0; AM, 1,3,4,10,13,14,15; AM, 2,5,6,7,8,9,11,12


43 A, 0; AM, 1,35,7,9,11,13,1516; M, 2,4,6,8,4; —I0,12

44 A, 1-19; M, 1,2,3,4,7,8,9,10,11,1,15,16 18,20.

45 A, 11; AM, #11; —1,2

46 A, 69,15 AM, 1,2,3,5,7,10,12,13,14,16,17; M, 4,8,18,19. —l.
47 AM, 1,5,65 M, 2,34.

48, A, 1,7; AM, 23,68; M, 4,9,10,11,12, —4

49 AM, 5,6,7,8,12; M, 1,2,3,10; —4,9,11.

50 AM, 1,3,5,10; M, 2,4,6,7,8,9,11.

51 AM, 2,3,6,15,16,17,18,21,22; M, 1,4,7,8,9,10,11,19,20; —5,12,13,14
53 AM, 1,2,4,93 M. 3; —5,6,7,8


182 CRITICAL RESULTS


2. Inferences of Occurrences gf divine Namey,


If any conclusion can be drawn from the occurrences
of divine names in the Gathas it would be as follows:


a. Comparing 30 and 45, we find in the latter later
writing a far greater number of divine names.


b. In the early series of Yasnas Ahura Mazda pre-
dominates; in the later, Mazdah alone.


c. Yasna 44 has the most uses of Ahura alone on the
first lines of each stanza, and therefore may be earliest;
showing genuineness of Zarathushtra’s desire for truth.


d. Yasna 43 has Mazdah alone predominating over
Ahura alone; hence it is a late writing up of Zarathush-
tra’s early experiences, which is also somewhat the case
with 34.


e. If we accept 45 as a Spenta Mainyuist writing, we
have an immense predominance of Mazdah Ahura to-
gether. But 47 (Spirit Song) is as neutral as 380.


f. The Daeva struggle Yasnas 33 (32 less so); 48-
51; have strong predominance of Mazdah alone, hence
late, under stress. See 44.20, where Daeva struggle is
mentioned, and has Mazdah alone.


g. 46, with Magian cause, is early, showing predomi-
nance of Ahura Mazdah. The latter verses of 51. 15-
18, 21, 22; which also mention the Magian cause, have
a strong predominance of Ahura Mazdah also.


Development of the Gathas according to the Divine Dames


Earliest-—A hura Predominates, Used Independently of Mazdah
44 Heart-searchings.


€arly—Ahura Mazdah Used Together; Ahura Preponderates
45 Dualism, Spenta-Mainyuist.


Late—Ahura Mazdah Used Together, Mazdah Preponderates


28 The Heroes and their Mission.

29 Drama of Cow.

30 Dualism, Vohu-Manist.

31 Great Communion with Divinity.
33 High-priestly Prayer.

46 Preparations for Struggle, Magian.
48 Appeal for Champions.


Latest—Ahura alone Absent; Mazdah alone Frequent


32, Vituperation of Grehma and Opponents.
34 Early Experiences, Shorter Document.
43 Early Experiences, Longer Document.
47 Battle-hymn of the Spirit.

49 Appeal for Defenders from Bendva.

50 Exodus of the Magians.

51 Proclamation of the Kingdom.

53 Securing a Champion by Marriage.


Results.


1 The struggle antiquated Afura and established Mazdah.

2 The priestly influence worked in the same direction.

3 The Second, Longer, Personal Document was earliest, both as
to Personal Experiences and Dualism.

4 Account of Early Experiences is later than Heart-searchings.

5 The Cow-drama is too artificial to be early, in its present form.


184 CRITICAL RESULTS


The Magian sections of the Gathas are then 46.9-13;
§1.11-22; 53; 29; 33.


The Spenta Mainyuist, 45; 47; 49 (Ada).
The Ashaist sections: 28; 43; 44; 48.
The Vohu Manist section: 30; 34.


The parallelisms of 30-45; 34-43, 44; suggest that
the earlier part of the life was paralleled by Vohu
Manist and Ashaist influences; the latter by Magian
and Spenta Mainyuist, though the latter two both had
bonds together, and belonged to the later document.


3, Authorship gf the Gathay.


What bearing would the above critical suggestions
have on the authorship of the Gathas? If we have two
parallel accounts, it is not likely Zarathushtra wrote
both. If we have to choose, it would be the simpler, the
shorter, and probably earlier. But even here we have
the advanced notions of a priest, 33.6, 14; of penances,
31.13; implying an established organization, of fire-
sacrifices, 31.7; with rubbing-sticks, 31.19, Mills. On
the other hand, 43 and 44 seem in parts so sincere, as to
be original. Again, it is doubtful whether a work so
rude as turning civilization from nomadic to pastoral,
29; and from pastoral to agricultural, 50; would justify
finished metrical, parallel accounts of Zarathushtra’s


life.


On the whole it may be said to be certain that genuine
sources underlie both versions, with preference for the
second, longer, and more personal account,


CRITICAL RESULTS 185


4, Amplification of the Authorship Question.


How far may we attribute the authorship of the
Gathas to Zarathushtra? We must first choose between
the Shorter and Longer Documents (28-34; 43-51, 53),
as it is not likely that both were written by the same
man; why should one man write both?


Analogy from Biblical Criticism would lead us to
choose the Shorter Document as the earliest; but, on the
contrary, we seem to be led to decide for the Longer
Document, as more personal;‘and less advanced in the
use of Mazdah alone—the Chapters on Dualism 45 and
30, and the Personal experiences, 44 and 34 showing
this the Shorter Document (28-34) is the Priestly one:
we have a decided unity of metre; a mention of Zara-
thushtra as priest (33.6; 142); of penances (81.138),
which imply an organized and effective ecclesiastical
authority; fire- sacrifices (the lights of 31.7, and rubbing-
sticks of Mills; 31.19); the Cow-drama, 29, while no
doubt representing one of the earliest incidents, uses
Mazdah preponderatingly, and is already Magian in
writing, 29.11. On the whole, therefore, if Zarathushtra
wrote one of the two documents, it is more likely it was
the Longer and more Personal Section 48-51, 53.


In any event, we may with certainty assert Zarathush-
tra was the author of the materials which are written
up in the Gathas,


186 | HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


5. Uncertainty of Conclusions.


In conclusion, the writer would state once more the
utmost diffidence with which he advances these his sug-
gestions. Even if they were well-grounded, he knows,
by the history of other literary controversies, how much
ridicule and contempt they may attract to him. The
great majority of mankind have a mind quite able
and willing to accept contradictories; it is only the few
who can feel the impossibility of a chaos, and who would
feel compelled to seek some sort of explanation. It 1s
to them only that these critical suggestions are offered.
The reader may be sure that it was only in spite of him-
self the writer gave so much time and space to re-
flections which would do himself no good; but anything
is preferable to confusion and chaos, just as Basilides
said: “I will affirm anything rather than that God is
unjust,”


ZARA THUSHTRA’S Personal SIGNIFICANCE — 187


CHAPTER VI.
ZARATHUSHTRA’S Personal SIGNIFICANCE,


1, Summary of tie Message.


What significance does Zarathushtra himself bear?
This may perhaps be best discussed negatively, to clear
the ground; and then it will be seen what remains.

Negatively: 1. Not originator of pastoral life, but
its judge or champion.

2. Not Magian leader.

Positively: 1. Eclecticism.

. Personality as judge-protector of Bovines.
. Partisanship or Dualism.

Both Lives.

. The teaching.

. Mazdeanism.


2. Negative Significance.


(1) We have already seen that the description, 31.9,
10, of the original choice of the Bovine creation, which
must be looked on as the poetic description of the es-
tablishment of pastoral life mentions no leader; it is
only later that she finds she needs a judge, 29.1, 2, 9, 11;
or guardian; which Zarathushtra, 10, undertakes to be.

(2) The Magian name arises as a tribe apparently,
Zarathushtra, 33.7; wishing to preach outside of it;
the cattle are adopted into it, 29.9; and who will by
good actions regard it, 51.11; until Vishtaspa is Ahura
Mazdah’s friend for it, 46.14; 51.16; and the Jamaspa


couple, 53.7; are established in it, and threatened if
they leave it.


> om oO dO


188 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


During that earlier period it seems to have been lead-
erless; Zarathushtra even wishes to leave it.


3. Eclecticism.


The dogmatic chaos of the Gathas has, in this work,
been analyzed; but the question remains, was this chaos
possibly purposive? And what we can gather of Zara-
thushtra’s life would suggest that it was so; his life pur-
pose seems to have been to get converts among all the
cults, and to unite them all. So we find Vohu Manah
telling him to go to Asha, 48.12, at a time ‘when he
first learned Your teachings’, 43.11. And then the use
of the plural pronoun would be most naturally explained
by the result of just such an eclectic education. The
uniting all of them by superimposing over them as
father Mazdah would leave the existing pantheon intact.


4. Personality as Judge-Protector of Bovines.


The dramatic Yasna 29 describes the call of Zara-
thushtra for the purpose of protecting the Bovine crea-
tion from the nomadic meat-eaters, 29.1a, b, 5b; and es-
tablishment of agriculture, 29.1c, 5c. |

The Bovine-Soul expects, 9.c, future energetic help.

Zarathushtra prays for peace, 10; for the creation, and
for reception among men that he may teach them the
Magian cause, 11b; on account of which obedience 1s
yielded to him, 11c.

This judge-ship Zarathushtra was not ashamed of,
and he considered that it was divinely acknowledged, or
caused ‘noted, 31.2; and the assembled multitude are
to seek their salvation only in the measure in which he
announces it, 32.1; and some of the audience at least
accepts his terms, 32.2.


ZARA THUSHTRA’S Personal SIGNIFICANCE 189


The question before us now is, how far was he suc-
cessful? His policy of partisanship we have seen else-
where; and however close the friendships it may have
given rise to, it must have raised very much bad blood
in every party involved.

Bendva for a long time opposed him, 49.12; and was
so powerful as to make Zarathushtra feel his material
poverty, 46.2. Perhaps that was the reason he wanted
the ten mares and the camel, 44.18.

The nobility, the peers, the laboring-guild, the Druj
and the Daevas all seemed to work against him, 46.1;
whither shall he fly?

Bendva, 31.15; 82.5; 46.4, 7; 50.8; and Grehma,
31.18; 32.14; 44.12; seem to trip him up at every turn.

On the whole, the acknowledgment of the Daevic
Vishtaspa as Magian chief amounts to a confession of
failure, just as among the ancient Hebrews the day of
the ‘judge’ faded before that of the ‘king,’ whose perm-
anence of authority, and whose unquestioned or un-
questionable authority alone could deal with the inner
and outer dangers and difficulties.

Finally, in despair, Zarathushtra advises his adherents
to settle open lands among the Druj, like the Clever
ones do—hence diplomatically, 50.1-6.


5. Partisanship Founded on Dualism.


Dualism is taught in 30.8, 4 and 45.2. In both cases
the teaching is preceded by

a. AN announcement of the prophet’s intention to
teach an important doctrine, 30.2; 45.1; and

b. An exhortation to those who are willing to hear,
30.1; to open their ears and eyes, 30.2; and remember,
45.1b; and

c. A statement that it is important in respect to the


190 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


personal responsibility, 30.2b; for a great crisis—inter-
preted both eschatologically (B) and politically (M);
but distinctly referred to Grehma the false prophet and
the second life, 45.1b, c; again interpreted eschatologic-
ally (B) and politically (M).

This threefold preliminary, in duplicate, should em-
phasize the importance of the dualistic revelation.

Zarathushtra’s effort seems to have been to create
divisions,to “draw the line,’ to establish a party. So he
accuses the Vohu Manists of treachery for friendliness
to the Druj, 34.7; his revelations from Armaiti are to
sunder himself from daevas, savages, and the doomed-
men, 48.15; 49.9; 34.9; 43.7, 8; 84.5. He is
angry because Grehma is on sufficiently good terms
with the ‘Clever’ to pervert them to Drujdom, 82.10;
and these fierce Daevas seem to have been anxious to
please (xsnav) people, and generously give them food
as Yima, 32.8. ‘The dru] seem to have lived among the
Ashaists, and Zarathushtra was the one to eject them,
44.18. On the whole the various opposing parties seem
to have been anxious to get along as peaceably as pos-
sible together, while Zarathushtra’s main purpose seems
to have been:

(1) To create an impassable barrier between Ashaist
and Drujist (‘injure or convert,’ 33.2; who injures him
pleases God, 31.18; 45.11; 46.4).

(2) To disunite Daevas, Clever, Vohu Manist, and
Savages (see references above) ;

(3) To separate himself from all of them, 49.3; 34.5;
and

(4) To make personal service to himself the test of
orthodoxy; whoever opposes him is an enemy to human-
ity, 46.18; 51.12, 10; 46.18, 19.

While this unconciliatory attitude may not seem
lovely, it may, be doubted whether any, great positive


ZARA THUSHTRA’S Personal SIGNIFICANCE


191


work could ever be begun or carried on, on any less
ositive a basis.


6. Both Livew.


Both lives. There is no doubt Zarathushtra taught
two lives, a present and a second life, an acpi zatha, or
second birth or regeneration, 48.5. He called his ene-
mies the Druj, the ‘doomed,’ as such meaning will alone
explain the enumeration of daevas, savages, and men-
mortals or doomed, 45.11; 34.5; 48.1. Grehma with
his doctrines destroys the plans of life, 32.9 (which how-
ever may refer only to present-day regulations). His
threats and picturesque representations of the House
of the Druj assure he taught a good life. All uses of
the word nar are in connection with promises of bless-
ings or eternity. Besides, Zarathushtra took himself
very seriously. He was the preparer and Savior par
excellence, and was to stand next to Sraosha at the Last
Judgment, 46.17; and he recommended his utterances
on the ground he was able to justify them at the Last
Day, 31.19. No wonder that his enemies were the
Doomed!


7. The Teaching of Mazdeanism.

The cistay or teaching (secular and religious) ap-
pears in
48.5 as the good cistay, composed of

(a) the second birth;

(b) agriculture for pastoral society.

44.10 as the maya or mystic cistay, where we have

(a) undefined goods of Ahura Mazdah;

(b) words and deeds of Armaiti, the purpose
of 44.9, 10 bemg, how will the believers
succeed in holding together or combining
the practical and theoretical side of my
teaching.


192 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


CHAPTER VII


ETHNOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE
OF ZARATHUSHTRA


1. Dialects of Thought-Religion.


The personal significance of Zarathushtra was an
eclectic union, under the predominance of the Mazdah
Ahura, of a number of pre-existent cults,—we might
say, a realignment of parties for and against himself
personally. This Zoroastrian pantheon has been shown
to be no ready made hierarchy of archangels (impos-
sible because of the evolving, and not devolving trend
of humanity), but a number of different cults.

But not until we have discovered how these cults
originated can we understand them, and in conse-
quence, Zarathushtra. For we have seen that his per-
sonal significance was not that of an originator, but a
monotheistic organizer of a pre-existing polytheism.
But what was this polytheism? The most sublime and.
abstract polytheism the world ever saw. For we have,
‘n four different dialects (and it was because of the
differences of dialect that we were able to do our criti-
cal work), one and the same Mind or Thought-religion
—(1) Armaiti-Tushnamatti versus Tare-Maiti and
Pairi-maiti; (2) Vohu M anah versus Aka Manah; (3)
Spenta Mainyu versus Angro Mainyu; (4) Mazdah
versus Ahura (Ahriman) ; (5) Sraosha versus Asrush-
tay. Zarathushtra’s personal influence on the world
around him depended not on the amount he changed
that world’s pre-existing religions, but on the faithful-
ness with which he represented them, after having in-


ZARA THUSHTRA’S Ethnological SIGNIFICANCE 193


vited them into a pantheon which has since survived as
archangels and arch-demons. ‘This was indeed rather
of a misfortune, but perhaps the only possible way to
reunite the sundered Thought religion. Granting
therefore that the four pre-Zoroastrian cults were only
four dialects of the same Thought-religion, the burning
question of our whole enquiry is, Whence may this have
arisen? And in order to find this origin, we must again
scour the Gathas for any touch with the then surround-
ing world. Here, again, we are surprised at the com-
paratively famt reflection of surrounding conditions;
we hardly have a name or a fact to point out the ethno-
logical relation.


2. Elements of Gathic Religion,


1° There is, however, in the Gathas an element of
magic and fetichistic fire worship.


2° There is the Cow-group (Aryan?).


3° There is the Horse-group—the names Jamaspa,
Haecat-aspas, Vishtaspa (Arabian?).


4° There is the Camel-cult, the names Zarathushtra,
Frashaoshtra ('Tartar?).


5° There ar the Daevas, who are possibly connected
with the Hindu devas-worshippers.


Zarathushtra may have united the camel-tribes (Tar-
tars), horse-tribes (Arabs) and cow-tribes (Aryans)
into a single religion enunciated by himself, while re-
taining, in fire worship and sacrifices, the last remain-
ders of the magic nature worship, including the fetich-
istic ‘second life’ reanimations, denied by the more cul-
tured Daevas.


194 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


3. Ethnological Origin gf Gathic Elementy.


But the grouping of these ethnological
elements does not yet explain the singularly pure
Thought-religion. Looking over to the deva-worship-
ing Hindu Aryans, we find very much the same phe-
nomena, however; so that we may look on it as a racial
inheritance, from before the time of the revolt of certain
of the Thought-religionists against the more material-
istic, anthropomorphic, of the deva-worshippers. ‘The
cow-forces here were not, as with the Hindus, in the
majority; and hence were forced to fuse with the other
cults, instead of having them fuse with it, as in India.
This, of itself, may have brought on a split with the
Daevas, who remained as an opposition when Zara-
thushtra lured from themVishtaspa, and put him at the
head of the now predominating Magian tribe. The
purity of the thought religion is an Aryan trait, hence
its simultaneous appearance in the varying dialects of
the Thought-religion. Zarathushtra then united with
it the remainder of the nature-worship of the troglodytic
Magian tribe, and thus produced his eclectie whole from


(1) Troglodytic, nature (fire) worshipping Magi-
ans.


(2) Four dialect-versions of the Thought-religion;


(8) Merging of the Cow-forces into the Camel-
forces;


(4) Splitting the Daeva Horse-forces so as that the
remainder was sufficiently small to be later turned into


a. and to disappear from the actual scene of con
ict.


ZARA THUSHTRA’S Ethnological SIGNIFICANCE 195


4. The Aryan Race’s Thought-Innovation.


We must therefore hark back to the origin of the
Aryan race as the first self-conscious development of
man as thinker, and consciousness, or conscience. ‘The
inheritance is therefore racial, and Zarathushtra’s merit
would lie in having fixed the Thought-religion into a
dogmatic system early enough so as to become a survi-
val, striking and suggestive, among more materialis-
tically developed Hindu pantheons.

_ While, apparently, we are finding a purer religion
the earlier we go up the stream of time, this need not
conflict with the evolutional progress of the race. There
are times of birth and of growth; of progress and tem-
porary regression. ‘he beginning of the Aryan race
was such a time of progress, followed by compensating
regression; then, a further progress manifested among
some other race, and then receded there. The result of
this alternate, cyclic progress, occurring simultaneously
in various races, does at times give rise to the impression
that the old was the best; but it is not really so, on the
whole. It may remain the best for that race, but other
races will lift up new and higher ideals, or will turn
back to old symbols, interpreting them more purely.
And so it has come to pass that even Zarathushtra’s
eclectic fusion of the various dialects of the Aryan
Thought-religion has been left behind in some senses,
though it will, to all eternity, retain a racy flavor of
the soil of far-off Iran, and remain an inspiration; and
a memorial of what that wonderful Aryan race in its
infancy was.


196 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


FAMILIAR ZOROASTRIAN PHRASES.


WHo does not believe that “God at sundry times and
in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers
by the prophets”? Vital interest can therefore not be
lacking in such prophetic utterances as the Gathas
or Hymns of Zarathushtra, which have the first right
to be considered his, if any portion of the Avesta can
make that claim. ‘These Gathas contain incidental
touches which sound so very familiar to us, that they
may well command our attention in a leisure hour.

Certainly the greater number of these incidental
touches cannot be considered in the light of direct
influences of either the Old or New Testament, because
they are so remote in time and place, and because many
of them form no more than commonplaces of religious
sentiment. Yet may they wake an echo in our hearts,
cheering us by the thought that God has not left
Himself without at least indirect witnesses to the
utmost ends of the earth. Suchat least was the
faith of Justin Martyr when he wrote: “And those
who lived according to reason are Christians, even
though accounted atheists, such as among the Greeks,
Sokrates and Herakleitos, and those who resemble
them.”


I. EscHATOLOGICAL ECHOES.


The Judgment.
In this connection it may not be without point to
refer to Herakleitus’s 25th fragment, which shows that


FAMILIAR ZOROASTRIAN PHRASES 197


in 500 B.c., at Ephesus, the Gathic judgment by fire
(Yasna 31.3,19; 34.4; 43.4; 47.6; 51.9) was not un-
known:


“For the fire coming upon [the earth] will judge
and seize all things.”


This judgment, the great crisis ‘maétha,’ ‘vicitha,’
‘mah,’ whether interpreted as referring to the earthly
‘sacred wars,’ or to the ‘end of the age,’ is an undeni-
able element in the teaching of the Gathas. It is
variously represented as occurring by spirit and fire
with molten metal, or as a bridge of sifting, with
Sraosha as Sifter, while the Preparer, Zarathushtra
himself, will stand with Sraosha (46.17) to vindicate his
words (81.19) and lead the faithful into Heaven
(46.10).

Regeneration.


Connected with the judgment by fire 1s regenera-
tion (cp. John 3.3). In 48.5 we find the word ‘aipi-
zath’ meaning literally ‘again-birth.’ It has been fre-
quently attempted to minimise the force of this expres-
sion, but without much success, if the plain meaning of
the words is not openly denied. The context however
demands it, for in the next verse we hear of the birth
of the ‘first life’:


“Armaiti, with good deeds, perfects for mortal men
an ‘again-birth, good dwelling, enduringness and
vitality; and for cattle she produced plants at the birth
of the first hfe.”


Whatever doctrinal distinctions we may please to
associate therewith, ‘regeneration’ is the quite literal
rendering of ‘aipizath.’


198 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


The Second Life.

Zarathushtra taught a second life. For what else
can we conclude from his doctrine of regeneration, or
from his opposition to Grehma because, by his teaching,
he destroys the second life (45.1)? So also the Kara-
pans (46.11) destroy the (second) life of men through
evil deeds; for if this does not mean ‘second’ life it would
mean wholesale murder, which is absurd.

“T entreat thee, O Ahura, to grant me both lives,
both that of the body and of the mind; . . . with
the felicity with which Mazdah, through Asha, supports
[those to whom] Mazdah, gives the two lives for their
comfort” (28.2).

The Resurrection.

The notion of a resurrection also was very probably
current in the Zoroastrian religion. Séderblom (p. 244)
has brought together the external evidence such as that
of Atneas of Gaza. Diogenes Laértius (Int. 2) asserts
that the Magi kept up a regular succession from the time
of Zoroaster, which he puts at 6000 years before Xerxes,
under the names of Ostanes, and Astrampsychos, and
Gobryas and Pazatas, until the destruction of the Per-
sian empire by Alexander. Plutarch (De Is. et Os.
46, 47) quotes ‘Theopompus, the historian of Philip of
Macedon, as to dualism, and the final struggle, when,
after alternate periods of 3000 years, Hades shall fail,
and men shall be happy, neither requiring food, nor con-
structing shelter. Herodotus (3.62) mentions (about
400 B.c.) that Prexaspeo, the executor of Smerdis, said:
“If the dead rise up again, expect that Astyages the
Mede will rise up against you; but if it is now as for-
merly, nothing new can spring up for you from him.”

A number of passages from the Pahlavi Huzvaresh
glosses and versions have been claimed to refer to the


FAMILIAR ZOROASTRIAN PHRASES 199


resurrection (28.5; 30.2,7,10; 31.4; 83.10; 34.6,14;
48.9). Perhaps the most striking is (30.7): “And
Armatay conferred on the bodies persistence and firm-
ness so that he by thy retributions through the metal
may become the first of them.” Most of the other pas-
sages, however, contain no literal reference to the resur-
rection on properly objective translation.


The Gospel.

The word ‘hu-meretay’ (in 31.10) has by all later
tradition been interpreted as ‘good news’ or ‘evangel.’
But Jackson thinks it should be translated ‘good marks’
or record at the Judgment.


The Unpardonable Sin.

When ‘hu-meretay’ was taken to mean ‘gospel,’
It appeared that the following quotation signified that
the nomad should not be admitted to its blessings, even
should he desire them. But Professor Jackson points
out that this would conflict with the strong proselytis-
ing tendency of the Zarathustrian religion. It seems
therefore safer to interpret the passage (31.10) as
follows:

“Then [the cow] chose for herself among the two
[possible lords, the herdsman or nomad] the herdsman
who would fatten her;

“T Namely] the Ashaist who feels that it is in his
mission to see to it that all things that belong to Vohu
Manah prosper and who-in-return-is-prospered-by him;

“[ Whereas] the nomad shall not get a share of
Vohu Manah’s favourable report [at the judgment, as
in verse 14, not ‘gospel’] even though he should urge
for it [so long as he will not herd cattle ].”


The Second Coming.
We are also struck by a ‘second coming,’ not how-


200 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


ever of the second person of the divinity, but of the first,
as in 43.5,6:

‘A bad compensation for the bad, and a good com-
pensation for the good,

“(which is to occur], with thy skill, at the last
crisis of creation;

“At which crisis come thou, O Mazdah, with
Spenta Mainyu, Xshathra, and Vohu Manah.”


The Preparer.

We also hear of a Preparer. “Rad’ means to pre-
pare, to get ready; hence ‘rada’ means the ‘preparing
one, corresponding somewhat to the Taxon of The.
Assumption of Moses, and reminding us of John’s mes-
sage to “Prepare the paths of the Lord” (Mt. 3.8).

Yasna 46.17 is uncertain, but has all the appear-
ance of admonishing the faithful to sing praises to the
Preparer who will stand with Sraosha at the judgment.
However this may be, Zarathushtra prays» “Grant,
thou greatest ruler, a hearing to the Preparer with the
Word” (28.7). The kine lament that so impotent a
Preparer is appointed for them (29.9). “Let the ‘Pre-
parers’ wish for the compensations” (45.7). Whoever
prepares the world for Zarathushtra (46.18) shall re-
ceive great rewards.


| The Saviour.

The Gathas moreover have the idea of a Helper or
Saviour. ‘The word ‘saoshyant’ is the present parti-
ciple of the verb ‘sao,’ to ‘profit,’ ‘gain’; hence it means
literally the ‘profiting one.’ It is applied in the singu-
lar to Zarathushtra (45.11; 48.9; 53.2), and im the
plural to his helpers (34.13; 46.3; 48.12).

There is also the word ‘saregan’ (29.3), of uncer-
tain derivation, used by Asha, in conversation with the


FAMILIAR ZOROASTRIAN PHRASES 201


shaper of the kine, in reference to there being no
‘helper’ for the cow. Whoever will take sides with
Zarathushtra will be the Saviour’s friend, brother, or
father (45.11).

“The daevas [spirits of the Saviours] are walking
along Asha’s path to their rewards” (34.13).


II. Gwostic EcHOoEs.


The Aton or Age.

In close connection with the ‘second coming” is the
idea of the ‘age,’ in Greek ‘aidn,’ and Semitic ‘Olam,’
which may well start a short series of extremely curious
Gnostic echoes. The Gathic divinity, Ahura or the
Lord Mazdah (and we also have the plural Ahuras, re-
minding us of Elohim), was the ‘mindful’ or ‘memor-
able,’ hence knowing one. The Gnostics also founded
their systems on the idea of knowledge.

We have for ‘age’ or ‘eternity’ the word ‘yav,’ and
its dative ‘yavoi,’ which is used adverbially in the sense
of ‘ever.’ It may frequently be translated for ‘all
eternity’ (49.8; 46.11; [41.2; 40.2;] 58.4), or may mean
‘always’ (49.1; 43.13). So we read in 49.8: “While
both of us wish to be thy messengers for ever in the
age.” Or in 53.4: “May Ahura Mazdah grant thee
[the fruit of Vohu Manah] for all eternity.” Or again,
in 28.8: “And for whomsoever thou wouldest grant
Asha (Justice) for all the age of Vohu Manah (Good
Disposition ).”

The Pléréma or Fulness.

For Fulness or Plérdma, the corresponding Avestan
word is ‘bir’ as in 81.21: “From the resources of his
innate glory Ahura Mazdah shall grant sustained com-
munion and fulness of Health and Immortality.”


202 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


The Mysteries.

There is also a ‘guzra-sangha’ or secret teaching,
reminding us of the Mysteries of the Kingdom, as in
Yasna 48.3:

“The Knower knows] bounteous secrets, which are
expressed [in] the doctrine.”

The right path is not always the most obvious
(31.2). Possibly also the word ‘maya’ may mean
‘mysteries. ‘Thus (43.2, Mills) :

“OQ Ahura Mazdah, reveal all those mysteries which
thou givest through Asha.”

The Word and the Prophet.

‘Mathra,’ the ‘word,’ forms ‘mathran,’ the ‘worder,’
or prophet (from Gk. ‘phémi,’ to say) utterer.

(a) Such ‘mathras’ are directly connected with the
gnostic or spiritual Knower (45.3; 51.8; 31.6; 28.5;
43.14; (b) ‘mathra’ appears as a divine word of (magic)
efficiency (31.18; 43.14; 44.14; 45.8; 31.6; 29.7); (c)
as a word of promise (44.17; 28.5); (d) as the word of
a prophet (50.6).

Its result is choice of the cause of Ahura Mazdah
(28.5) and communion with Ahura Mazdah (44.17). It
provides food for the cattle (29.7); it reveals [a mys-
tery] about Haurvatat and Ameretat and about Vohu
Manah (31.6). It is to be ‘worked’ or practised as
Ahura Mazdah considers and declares it should be
(45.8). It has the power to smite down the Druj
(44,14), and arouses those who scorn Ahura Mazdah’s
teachings (43.14). In short, it is a magic utterance of
the ‘mathran’ (41.5; 50.5,6; 32.18; 28.7; 51.8), or
prophet, who seeks a hearing (28.7) ; it is his word which
will be sought by the evil in hell (82.13) ; it is the utter-
ance of the prophet (51.8) who rejoices at the gift of
the spirit to the missionaries. :


FAMILIAR ZOROASTRIAN PHRASES 203


The Gnostic.


The Gnostic is the ‘vidvao’ (past participle of
‘vaéd,’ to know), the ‘knower,’ and the expression is
applied even to the divinity (48.3): “The Knower, who
is one like Thee.” So we read (28.5): “When shall I
behold Thee, as a knower?” Or (34.9): “Those who
drive away Armaiti, prized by the Knower.” Or (48.3) :
“Tell me, O Ahura, for Thou indeed art the Knower.”
Or again (51.8): “Tell me, O Mazdah, for the knower
should be told.” In another place it is said: “Let the
Knower (Mazdah) speak to me the knower.” (Cp. also
45.8 and 48.2.)

The Antichrist.

In the Gathas we find several opponents to divini-
ties. For instance, Angra Mainyu to Spenta Mainyu;
Aka Manah to Vohu Manah; to Ar-matay (Docile,
Devoted Thought) we have Tare-matay (33.4), who in
Yasna 60.5 became her direct opponent, meaning
“Thought going beyond’; again, to Tushna-matay (Si-
lent Thought) we have opposed the Paira-matay-ists
(32.3) whose name means thinking-up or forward.


The Lie.

In 2 Thess. 11.9-12, the great apostasy consists in
trusting in the Lie. In the Gathas the Lie is the Druj
(32.3), enumerated along with the proud opponents,
‘Paira-matay.’


III. PicTuRESQUE CHANCE ECHOES.


Since human nature is the same all the world over,
and in all ages, we should be more surprised if we did
not find coincidences of emotional expression, than
when we do. With considerable interest we may trace


204 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


in the Gathas picturesque images with which we have
grown very familiar.
Family-Extension.

When we remember: “Whosoever shall do the
will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my
brother and sister and mother” (Mt. 12.46-50), we can-
not fail to be struck by:

“Whoever therefore in the future scorns the daévas
and the men who scorn him [Zarathushtra], and all
others except whoever is devoted to him, shall be con-
sidered by the bounteous individuality of Zarathushtra,
who is saviour and master of the house, as his friend,
brother or father, O Ahura Mazdah.”’


Dives and Lazarus.

Nor can we avoid thinking of the Parable of Dives
and Lazarus when we read (32.13) :

“Through which Xshathra-power [of the above
Asha, Justice] Grehma will be degraded to hell, the
dwelling of the Worst Mind, [wherein dwell] the de-
stroyers of this life; and [then], O Mazdah, he will com-
plain, being moved by a desire for the message of thy
Prophet, who then however will keep him from behold-
ing Asha (Justice).” Or again (53.8): “[On the
contrary let the malefactors through whom are effected |
murder and bloody deed, let them all be abandoned,
and ery upwards in vain.”


The Reward of Apostles.

Another picturesque coincidence is that of the
Galilean Apostles’ very human and comprehensible cry:
“Behold, we have forsaken all and followed thee;
what shall we have therefor?’ (Mt. 19.27-29). If the
Apostles of the Lord did not hesitate to ask this ques-
tion, can we find fault with Zarathushtra for not being


FAMILIAR ZOROASTRIAN PHRASES 205


insensible to personal reward? “The saviour would like
to know how his compensation should be [ given] to him”
(48.9) ; he would know also, of lesser things, when he
shall receive the reward promised him, of ten mares and
stallions and one camel, together with Haurvatat and
Ameretat (44.18).

The Loss of One’s Own Soul.

“Thou fool! ‘This night shall thy soul be required
of thee; then whose shall those things be which thou hast
provided?” (Lk. 12.20). Not very unlike the thought
in these inspired words are those of the Gathist:

“The Karapans, through their political power join

the Kavays,

“To destroy the [second] life of men through evil

deeds;

“{ Fools! Whereas] their own souls and spirits will

terrify them,

“When they shall come to the Sifter’s bridge of

judgment;

“As companions they will be admitted to the Home

of the Dru] for ever” (46.11).


Ears to Hear.

‘He that hath ears to hear, let him hear,” cried the
Utterer of the Parables of the Kingdom (M7. 11.15) ;
the strong Singer of the Gathas cries:

“Listen with your ears to the best [information ] ;
behold with [your] sight, and with [ your] mind” (80.2).


Was, Is, and Shall Be.

The expression of eternity, ‘was, is, and shall be,’
common in all lands, is found also in the Gathas, as
for instance (29.4): “The Lord knows all the plans
achieved in the past, and [to be] in the future, and it
is he who decides about the present ones; it is whatever


206 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


he wills that happens to us.” (Cp. also 33.10; 57.22.)


The First and Last.

We are reminded of the Alpha and Omega (Rev.
22.18), when we read in 31.8: “Then Zarathushtra
understood that Mazdah was both the first and youngest
of creation.”

The Poor.

Zarathushtra seems to have been poor himself; he
prays for ten mares and a camel (44.18), and he ascribes
his failure to his poverty in flocks (46.2). No doubt
this caused his sympathy with the poor, for whom he
prays (53.9):

“What Lord will destroy the Drujist and establish
the Kingdom by which, O Mazdah, Thou wilt give to
the justly living poor that better [part] ?”

And again (84.5): “Have You the power to pro-
tect your poor?”

Whosoever Will.

“Whosoever will,” cries the Revelator (22.17).
Compare this with Yasna 43, which opens with the
salutatory: “Success to me, to you, and to whosoever
will”; while Yasna 30 begins in a style somewhat
reminding us of the Sermon on the Mount:

“But thus, O [souls] desirous [of hearing], I will
utter (1) those things worthy of being remembered by
the expert-knower; (2) the praises for Ahura, and (3)
hymns [worthy] of Vohu Manah, and (4) things well
remembered by the aid of Asha. Listen with your ears
to the best [information]; behold with [your] sight, and
with [your] mind;

“Man by man, each for his own person, distinguish-
ing between both confessions, before the great crisis.
Consider again!”


FAMILIAR ZOROASTRIAN PHRASES 207


Come Quickly!

In the last verse but one of the Gathas, Zarathush-
tra invokes peace on the believers’ villages, peace which
is to be produced by the slaughter of the enemy, adding
“and may it come soon!” Compare this with the great
ery for the coming of the Prince of Peace: “Even so,
Lord Jesus, come quickly!” (Rev. 22.17,20).


Pity on the Misled Crowds.

As Jesus felt compassion for the misled crowds
(Mt. 9.86) which the Jews hindered Him from calling
to Himself, so Zarathushtra opens one of his immortal

hymns with a poignant expression of his grief:

“Ever has Bendva hindered me [and proved him-
self the] greater [of us two], when I, O Mazdah, was
trying-to-satisfy the misled [crowds] through Asha
(Justice) .”


IV. Mrnor EcuHoers.


Angel or Apostle.

The word ‘dita’ (168) which comes from ‘dav,’ to
send off, should strictly represent ‘apostle’ (Gk. ‘apo-
stelle’). But ‘diitya’ (204) means ‘message,’ which

would represent the Greek ‘aggelia,’ while ‘aggelos,’
the Greek for ‘messenger,’ is the English ‘angel.’ So
both shades of meaning fall together.

‘Fraéshta’ is derived from ‘fra’ and ‘aésh,’ or ‘off’
and to ‘get-into-hasty-motion’; 1t would thus be more
closely rendered ‘emissary’ or ‘apostle,’ not ‘angel’;
while ‘vat,’ to ‘announce,’ which would exactly repre-
sent ‘ag-gelos,’ is only used in the passive about an event,
and not of the function of a person. Perhaps then it
would be wiser to render these words into English by
the less familiar ‘messenger.’


208 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


“May we be thy messengers, to hold off those who
hostilely deceive thee” (32.1 [168]).

“The message of thy prophet, who will keep them
from beholding Asha” (82.13 [204]).

““As we [Frashaoshtra and Zarathushtra]| wish to
be thy messengers for-ever-in-the-age” (49.8 ['788]).


The Token.

Again we may notice ‘daxshta,’ meaning a ‘token,’
‘pledge,’ or ‘earnest,’ and compare it with 2 Cor. 1.22;
5.9; Hph. 1.14. Thus:

“And do thou, O Mazdah, within [the nature of |
both contending parties set satisfaction as a token [of
the accuracy of my prophecy of the judgment by]

“The metal, molten through thy red fire [which
as a sifter] shall

“Harm the Drujist, but profit the Ashaist” (51.9).


The Spiritual Israel.

It was suggested by Herodotus that the Magi were
a tribe. No doubt they were at first; but the threat of
Zarathushtra to the newly married couple (53.7) that
if they ever abandoned the Magian cause they would
ery ‘Woe! at the end of life, suggests that it had be-
come already a religious organisation which could be
left at will.

The Robe of Heaven.

The Most Bounteous Spirit wears the adamantine
heavens as a robe (80.5). “As a vesture shalt thou fold
them up,” sings the writer of The Epistle to the Hebrews

1.12).
. The Mediation.

It is well known that in the Gathas Ahura Mazdah
never does anything directly, but only through some one


of the other Ahuras, as agent. So for instance in 33.12,,.


FAMILIAR ZOROASTRIAN PHRASES 209


Zarathushtra prays that Ahura Mazdah may grant him
through Armaiti, vitality; through Spenta Mainyu,
strength; through Ada, retribution; through Asha,
might; and through Vohu Manah, compensation.


The Divine Inheritance.

The Gathas, as well as the New Testament (Eph.
1.14, ff), promise man a divine inheritance (‘raéxenah’)
and epoch of judgment, of rewards or punishments
(30.11). So also, of Haurvatat and Ameretat (33.10).
“Can they be faithful who through their teachings turn
into sorrow sure inheritances for Vohu Manah?” (384.7)
asks the sorrowing prophet, reminding us of Elijah, who
thought himself left the only faithful soul (1 Kings
19.10).

The Giving of the Spirit.

Zarathushtra would have the new settlers act as
missionaries (50.38). Nor is he jealous of them, any
more than Elijah was jealous of Elisha’s double portion
of the spirit, or Moses of the elders of the congregation
when Jahvé spoke unto them also. “The prophet re-
joices through the word which is told the expert knower”
(51.8).

Foolish and Wise Virgins.

“T will tell you how to sift the clever from the
foolish” (46.15).

“By uttering praises of the Preparer who will
stand for them together with obedience,

“Who will sift the clever from the foolish” (46.17).

This sundering of the wise from the foolish reminds
us in a distant way of the Parable of the Wise and
Foolish Virgins.

The Faithful.
The word ‘aredra’ means ‘trustworthy’ or ‘faithful’


210 HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


(48.8; 50.4,8) ; it is applied both to men and God.

‘Are they faithful to Thee, O Ahura Mazdah, who,
though they know of Vohu Manah, turn the difficulties
of traditionally inherited doctrine to their own ad-
vantage?’ (34.7).

“[Zarathushtra] who is faithful like Thee, O
Mazdah” (43.8).

“Who is the faithful one, who first taught’
(46.9) ?

“O Frashaoshtra, go thou with the faithful to where
we both desire to be with the Beloved” (46.16).

“Will thy realm please the faithful [believers]”
(48.8) ?

“Zarathushtra hears the faithful entering their new
homes singing with joy” (50.4).

“Zarathushtra will encompass Asha with the rev-
erence of the faithful” (50.8).

“God is faithful” (1 Cor. 1.9), Paul does not hesi-
tate to say, nor does the Gathist.

Faith and Works.

Not less in Zarathushtra’s day than in the days
of Paul and James, were human hearts torn with the
ever recurring question of faith and works. The
Gathist, no doubt in some moment of despair, cried:

“Is the message I am about to proclaim genuine?
Does Armaiti (Loving Devotion) support Asha (Jus-
tice) through deeds” (44.6) ?

The End Known to God.

The “end of the Lord” (Jas. 5.11) is the end of
human actions, known to, and brought about by, the
Lord.

“The knower is not to commit any of these deeds
of violence, whose [fatal] end, thou, O Ahura Mazdah,
best knowest” (82.7).


FAMILIAR ZOROASTRIAN PHRASES 211


The Better Part.

The word (‘vahys’) ‘better’ is in the Gathas fre-
quently used absolutely in a way which it is difficult to
translate in any way other than the ‘better part.’ For
instance:

“O Maidyaimangha! Zarathushtra, who has given
his daughter Chisti, to this Yamaspa, and who as having
known through his spirit the [first] life, is again wish-
ing [the second], says that thou [hast] the better
[part] of life, having [practised] the decrees of Mazdah
through thy deeds” (51.19).


The Beloved, ‘David’

There is very little love, apparently, in the Gathas,
but we have the word ‘ushta,’ meaning ‘at will’ (from
‘var’), used as an exclamation: Success to you! hail!
(33.10; 43.1; 41.4; 51.16; 51.8; 30.11), which in 46.16
appears as follows to mean the ‘desired,’ the ‘beloved’:

“O Frashaoshtra Hvogva, go thou with the faith-
ful to where we both desire to be, with those who are
beloved (or desired ).”

Jeshurun.

There is in the Gathas a strange similarity between
the name and office of Getiish Urvan, the Soul of the
Kine, the representative of the whole bovine creation,
and the representative of Israel, Jeshurun (Dt. 32.15;
83.5,26; Is. 44.2) who “waxed fat and kicked’—inevi-
tably suggesting a bovine creature. The resemblance
goes further. Jeshurun is said to belong to the Lord,
and in Yasna 29 the kine come to the divinities with
a complaint demanding protection, and ending with a
profession of devotion. As Jeshurun is the chosen of
the Lord, so Getish Urvan represents in the midst of
human violence the chosen, accepted nature of pious


ZuZ HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE GATHAS


devotion. The lateness of the books in which Jeshurun
appears, suggests that not impossibly the name might
have become familiar to the Jews when the Persian
Cyrus freed them from captivity; and the Jews’ friend-
liness to his religion might easily be inferred from their
calling Cyrus the Anointed or Messiah of the Lord.
This occurs in Is. 45.1, very near the Jeshurun reference,
Is, 44.2.


No other reasonable derivation has ever been at-
tempted; Cheyne’s arbitrary and mechanical juggling
of words is the counsel of despair, and purely individual
and fanciful. Arbitrary interpretations, such as the
‘Straight’ by Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, do
not give the least explanation of why the ‘Just’ or
‘Straight’ one should wax fat or kick. The above sug-
gestion therefore deserves at least thoughtful consid-
eration.


We may close this hasty review of echoes that hap-
pen to be familiar to us, with a literary similarity that
is all the more striking from the fact, that from its very
nature it can be no more than a coincident expression
of human nature guided by instincts more or less divine.
For we must not fail to note that, though the Gathic
hymn to which we refer is beautiful, it cannot hope to
pose as a rival to the sublimity of the mystic utterance
into connection with which we bring it.

Yasna 88 (except the first three verses, which
complete the subject of Yasna 82), contains a high-
priestly prayer which reminds us not only as a whole,
but even in its structure, of the parting prayer of Jesus
in John 17. We are forced, however, to make one trans-
position, before we can get an entirely similar outline
of prayer:


FAMILIAR ZOROASTRIAN PHRASES Zig


First, for self-glorification (Y. 33.4-7; J’. 17.1-8).


Second, for protection of his followers (Y. 33.11-
14; J. 17.9-19).


Third, for universal conversion (Y. 33.8-10; J.
17.20-26).


The Gathic prayer then closes with a touching
ucharistic oblation of the Gathist’s own being:


“As oblation, Zarathushtra would bring the life of
is own body, the first fruits of his good thoughts, deeds
nd utterances, his obedience, and whatever power be
us, [to offer them] to the mindful Mazdah and to the

justice [of] Asha!”


PART IV.


Dictionary and Grammar.


GATHIC DICTIONARY— I


Abbreviation.


Numbers followed by S or P indicate that person of Singular or


Plural.


Numbers following Pr indicate a particular one of the many col.


lateral forms of the Present.


A, with verbs, active voice.
A, Ace, with nouns, accusative
Abl, ablative case.

Adj, adjective, part of speech.
Aor, aorist tense, past action.
Aug, formed with an augment
B, Bartholomae.

Comp, comparative degree.
Conj, conjunction.

D, Dat, dative case.

D, Du, dual gender.

Des., desiderative mood.

F’, feminine gender.

G, genitive case.

I, Inf, infinitive of a verb.
Im, Imp, imperfect tense.
Imp, Imp-at, imperative.
Ind, indicative mood.

Inj, injunctive.

In Comp, in composition.
In, Ins, Is, instrumental case
K, conjunctive voice or mood.
Li, locative case.

M, m, masculine gender.


M, Mills.

M, with verbs, middle voice.

N, m, neuter gender.

N, nominative case.

QO, optative mood.

P, Pl, plural number.

P, Pr, present tense form.
When followed by a number,
this shows which of the many
collateral present-forms it is.

Pass, passive voice.

Pf, perfect tense.

Part, participle, which appears
in the following forms, which
are also declined, taking case,
number, and gender:

PP, PrPa, present participle.

Pf P, perfect or past participle.

Pron, pronoun.

S, Se, singular number.

Su, subjunctive mood.

Sup. superlative degree.

s-Aor, an Aorist with an s-stem.

V, vocative.


Note. The necessarily hurried choice of the designation Dicti-
onary was since much regretted, as too pompous. It was hit on
to indicate the following attempt at complete references.


& GATHIC DICTIONARY—2 aenhama


A


a-, in composition, not, without.

a, also, towards, at, in (48.7), on, upon, off, until, near, on
account of [References incomplete].

a-baxsh0.hva, 33.10, to distritute, —baxsh.

a-bi.fra, 33.13, unique, without equal (-a)

a-bishtis, 43.8, developing, (-ay)—bav.

abya, 32.15, pron. by the two.

ab.yasta, 53.5, zealous seeking for (-ay)—yat.

acishta, worst, sup. of aka, bad. 380.4,5,6; 82.10,13; 33.4.

a.cista, he is considerate, 51.11,—3S, kaéié.

ada, then. 29.2, 30.10.

ada, f, retribution. 33.11,12, 49.1; adais, 48.1.

ai-dam, house, 48.7, 49.10.—dam.

adana, retribution, 30.7,—ada.

a-daré, 43.15, 3PPrA; a-das, 46.5; a-daf, 31.18. 51.14;—da.

a-dathaseca, 46.15; -emca, 46.17; those who are not clever, the
stupid—datha.

adé, 44.4, under, beneath.

a-debaoma, m, 30.6, delusion.

a-demané, 32.15, from, or to the dwelling—deman.

a-dishtis, f, 44.8, purpose [-ay].

a-divyeifiti, 44.18, they strive, —dyav.

a-dréfig, 29.3, AccPl of adra, dependent.

a-drujyafit-0, 31.15, deceptive.

a-dvaésha, 29.3, not harming, innocuous.

advan, m, way. 34.13, 44.3; 31.2, advae, NS.

aéiby0, pron., to, or from these, 2.10, 29.10, 30.8, 31.1, 32.212, 34.89 43.6,
M2, 45.3, 46.126

aém, pron., 2.8, this one, NS.

aénah, n, violence, 30.8, 31.15, 32.6,7,8; 34.4.

aénah, adj., maleficent, 30.8, 31.18,15, 34.4.

aénanhe, J, to commit violence, 32.16, 46.7,8.

aenhaima, we may be, OPfA of ah, to be; 32.1, 49.8.


aenhan GATHIC DICTIONARY—3 ahi


aenhan, m, mouth, 31.3.

aenharé, they may be, or were, OPfA of ah, to be, 33.103 44.205 45.7, 51.22

aes, to be master over; 1sé, 3SPM, 50.1; isai, 28.4, 48.9, 50.11;
isdya, 1SPM, 43.8.

desea, pron., one of these two, 30.3.

aésh, to seek,desire; aéshasa, seeking, 53.9. P ishasa, which
see: also pait-ishat.

aésha, potent, able, 28.4; 43.10; 44.17; 45.7.

aésham, pron., of these or those, 30.7,8; 32.7,8; 34.1.

aéshema, m, fury, rapine, 29.1, 44.20, 48.7, 49.4: personified
as demon thereof, 29.2, 30.6, 48.12.

aéurus, shimmering, shining; 50.10; from aétrav?

aéVa, AEVO, Single, only, 29.6,8. (-a)

a-frashta, counselled with; 51.11—fras.

a-fseratus, compensations, 51.4. AccP1 (-tav) —feseratii.

afshman-i, harm, trouble, 46.17, n, AccPI.

a-fshuyafit-0, non-fatteners (of cattle), nomads, 49.4—fshav.

a-gemat, 44.8, 3SPrM of gam.

a-cushta, unheard, unbearable, 31.1—gaosh.

a-gza0.nvamnem not decreasing, 28.3, AccS.

ah, or éeah, n, mouth, 28.11; 33.3, 47.2?

ah, to be, irregular; see under each form.

ahav, that.

ai-hémusta, repulsive, 46.4.

ahi, thou art, 32.7, 43.7, 47.8, 51.8—ah. 34.11

a-hishaya, they oppress, 29.1—ha(y).

ahmai, to me, or this, 29.3, 30.2,75 31.6, 43.1 44.1619; 45.5,0; 46.8,13,18t 47.1,3;
49.2,3; 50.2,3, 51.6,19.

ahmaibyaca, to or with us, 2.6.

ahmakéfig, our, 32.8, 45.9.

ahmat, or ahmat, by or from this, or us, AbIS, 34.9, 44.13, 45.1, 47.4,
61.10. Henceforward, 33.6.

ahmi, I am, 3.8, 4.2, (ah).—To this, (a), or me, 4.6.—81.12?

a-hdithdi, /, to subject, oppress, 32.14—ha(y).

ahi, anhi, m, anithi, /, master, mistress, 29.6, 32.11.


ahtim GATHIC DICTIONARY—4 aka


ahiim, life, 30.6, 31.20, 34.15, 45.1, 46.11,13, 51.19, 53.5,6;
—AccS of anhav, m.

ahiim.bis, life-healing [B], 31.19, 44.2,16.

ahura, m, master, 29.2,10, 53.9. Divine lord, see Table of Oc-
currence of Divine Names. Polytheistic plural, 30.9, 81.4, 33.11

a-hu.shitay, dwelling in a good place, 30.10,—shay.

ahva, we both were, or might be, 29.5,—1DPrA, ah.

ahya, of this, 28.1 2.10 31.12 32.1,1314 346,910 43.3,9 415,19 45.3,4,6 46.8 47.1,35
48.4,10 49.1,2. 53.7.

ahyai, ahyai, to this, 31.9,10 46.19 49.6.

ahva or anhva, f, life. AP ahvae, 28.2; LP ahvahi, 51.9.

a-hvaithya, adj, personally, 33.7.

aibi, upon, towards, to, unto, 31.13 32.15 43.7 519,19

aibi-bairishtem, most bearable, 51.1, (AccS of -a)—har.

aibi-dereshta, visible, 50.5 adj.

aibi-dereshta, clear sight, 31.2 f, (-tay).

aibi-gemen, they come to, or arrive at, 46.11,—gam.

aibi-jamyaf, he may come to, or arrive at, 43.3;—gam.

aibi-mOisf, he may send along, 46.12,—maéth.

aidiim, come! 38.7,—/mperative, ay.

ainim, reciprocal, 53.5,—GPI anya.

aipi, likewise, also, 30.11 62.3,8 48.5.

aipi-cithi#, in the future, 29.4. |

aipi-débavayat, he may again delude, or deceive, 31.17—dab.

aipi-zath, ‘again-birth’, re-generation, 48.5, m.

airyaman, noble, peer, m, 32.1 33.3,4 46.1 49.7.

ais, adv, consequently, 28.11 31.2 44.11.

ais, pron, with these, 53.8.

a-ité, to go to, 31,9,—Jnf of ay.

a-iti, that which is now going, the present, 31.14.—3SKA of ay.

aithis-cit 32.16, or aithis, 48.9, destruction,—NS athay, f.

a-jén, they may drive, 48.10,—3SPrA, gan.

a-jimat, he may come, 43.12,—gam.

a-jyaitim.ca, non-life, non-existence, 30.4,—AccS, -tay, fi

a-gzaonvamnem, not decreasing, 28.3,—AS, -na, adj.

aka, bad; comp, ashyah; sup, acishta. 30.3 32.510 33.24 43.5 45.1 45.9
41.5 49.41 51.6.


aka, GATHIC DICTIONARY—5 aojyae ©


aka, manifest, open, cleared, 48.8 50.4 51.13.

aka-stéfig, 50.2, ‘open-standing’, cleared land, farms (?). Bar-
tholomae makes of it the eschatological revealing of secrets. ©

a-keretis, message, news, 48.2,—NS, -tay, f.

akoya, threat, 51.8, f

a-mananha, purpose, 49.6, —n, NPI. -ha.

ameretat, immortality, f. 32.5 33.8 34.1,11 44.17,18 45.5,7,10 47.1 48.1 51.7.

a-moyastra barana, company-bearing, associates, 30.9,—NPI.

ana, with this, 28.5.

an-aésha, impotent, 29.9 46.2.

an-afshmanam, harm-lessness, B; immaterial, 46.17,—GPI, rn.

anais (&), thereby, 28.9 32.15 53.6,8.

a-nasat, 53.7; a.nashé, 44.14,—nas, to perish, disappear.

afigra, hostile, inimical, 43.15 44.12 45.2 48.10.

anhaca, I may be, 50.11,—1SPrSu, ah.

anhaiti, he, she, it (is, was, shall) may be, 9.11 31.5,22 50.3 8.7 —ah.

anhat, he, she, it might be, 3SOPf of ah 29.4,9 30.4,7,9 31.5,6,9,16 32.2
93.3 44.12,19 45.3 47.4 48.4,9 49.7 53.5.7.

anhen, they might be, 31.1,4,14 48.12 49.11.

anhéus, GS of anhav, m, life. 31.8 2.13 3.1 34.6 43.3,5 44.2,8 45.2,3,4
4§.3,10 48.2,6 50.11 41.6. |

anhus, same as above, 2.11 30.4.

anhvasca, of a master, 32.11.

anman, firmness, eternity, 30.7 44.20 45.10,—n.

afitare, 33.7; afitaré, 49.8; among.

afitare-caraiti, he between-makes, procures, 51.1,—3SKA, kar

afitare-mruye, to ‘swear-off’, renounce, 49.8,—J/, mrav.

anus-haxs, successive, 31.12.

anya, other, 29.1 34.7 44.8,11 45.11 46.7 50.1 53.5.

anyatha, otherwise, 51.10.

aoderesca, of cold, 51.12,—GS, aodar, n.

aog, to preach, aojai, 50.11, J; aoji, 43.8, 1SPr; aogeda, 32.10,
3SPr; pairy.aogza, 43.12, 25Pr.

aog0, with strength, 29.10, Js. of aogah, n.

aojazha, 50.3; aojanhd, 43,4, physical strength,—aojah, n.

aodjyae, stronger, 34.8, adj, comp. of aojah, Sup. aojishtd, 29.3.


aojoi GATHIC DICTIONARY—6 arshnavaitis


aojoi, to commit, J, 32.7.

aojofighvat, being strong, 28.6 31.4 48.8,16; aojénhvafitem,
34.4—aojahvani.

aojy.aéshi, worthy of renown, 46.12, LP. 34.8, -ae, comp. -jah

aoraca, downwards, 53.7.

aosho, the destructions, 49.1—AccP, -ah, 7.

apa, off, 33.4.

a-paithi, on the path, 50.4—pathi, f-

apanais, with attainments, 28.10—n, -a, IsPI. ap.

apano, may reach, 33.5—ap.

a-paourvim, not as at first, as never before, 28.3.—parav.

apara, later, hinder, 31.20, 45.11—comp. of apa.

apasca, waters; 51.7,—AccPI, ap, /-

apa.yafit-a, holding off, 32.9,—Ins.S, PrP, yam.

apa.yeiti, to take away, 32.11—/, yam.

apéma, last, hindermost, 30.4 43.5 44.19 45.3 48.4 51.6,14 3.7 —sup., apa.

api.vaiti, it was announced, or promised, 44.18—3SPr, vas.

apo, off, 32.9—same as apa.

apo, of water, 44.4—GS ap, f.

ar, to arouse, J, ardi, 33.9, 50.5; arem, 1SPr, 43.10; uz.aresh-
va, 33.12, iratt, 53.8. [mp-at.

a-radae, preparing, 28.7,—NS, -ah, adj, from rad.

a.rapa, come hither! 49.1, —imp-at. of a-rap.

aredat, prospers, 50.11—3SPrKo, ared.

aredra, faithful, 34.7 48.3 46.9,16 48.8 50.4,8.

arejat, is worthy, of value, 50.10—3SPr, areg.

arém, properly, 44.8 45.11 51.14.

arem, have I come, 48.10, —contraction for a-erem, from ar.

arém-pithwa, mid-day, noon, 44.5, 7.

aretha, duty, affair, 33.8 43.13 44.5—n.

arezva, the just deeds, 33.1—NPn, 4-erezvan.

armaiti, an Ahura, ‘adaptable thought,’ love; Mills: alert and
ready mind to act. —From arém-maiti, proper thought ?

a-roi, to grant, 33.9 34.3 50.5—J, ar.

arois, sorrow, grief, 51.4, GS; 14, AccPl— aray, f.

arshnavaitis, be-stallioned, 44.18—Acc.PI.f. of -vafif, PresPart,


as GATHIC DICTIONARY—7 a-sridiim
ee eS eee


as, he was, 31.9, 34.8; asci#, there would be, 46.18—impf, ah.

asashuta, he arrives at, 48.1,—3SPrM of as.

asayae, the two parties, 31.2—only in Dual; G of asa, m.

a-séfida, they effect, 51.14—Pr, sand.

aséno, the stone (-quarried) heavens, 30.5,—AccPl, asan, m.

asha, n, justice, right; or, an Ahura. References incomplete.—
ashahya, G; ashai, D; ashem, Acc; ashaé, Abl.

a-Shaéiti, dwells with, 43.3,—Pr, shay.

ashao.xshayafitae, the Ashaist discipline, or, life, 09.9, —gen.du.
of -ani¢, from ashavan and xshay.

ashavan, a follower or devotee of Asha, an Ashaist. ashaund,
gen.sing.; -€, -aeca, 43.4, dat.; -am, 49.10, gen.pl. 30.4,11
31.14,17,20; 32.10,11; 33.1,3,9; 43. 4,8,15; 44.12: 45.7; 46.5,
6,9,14; 47.4,5; 48.2; 49.10; 51.9; 53.4,9.

ashibya, to, or with both eyes, 32.10, —dat.dual of ash, n.

ashis, (nom.sg.) compensation; an Ahura, 28.4,7 31.4 3.13 34.12 3.4,5,
12,16 46-10 48.8,9 $0.3,9 61.5,10,21.—ashay, f. ashdis, gen.sg.. ashim,
acc.sg. ashi, ashica, inst.sg., ashis, acc.pl. ashivae, 51.5, con-
sonantal dual, acc.

ashOis, see above.

ashto, to find shelter, 51.12;—/, as.

ashyah, worse, comp. of aka, bad. -6, 51.6, acc.pl: -asca,
48.4, gen.sg. or nom., acc. pl.

a-shyas, dwelling with, 47.5,—nom.sg. pres. part. shay.

a-sishtay, promise, f, -a, loc.sg.. 30.10; -Is, acc.pl., 44.9.—sah

a-sishtim, 34.4, acc.sg. either of above (B): or of superlative of
asav, swift, (M). See asi.

a-sketim, attachment, 44.17, acc.sg. askitay, from hak.

asnam, of days, 46.3. 50.10—gen.pl. azan, n.

asnaf, from near, 45.1,—adverbial ablative of asna, near.

aspae, mares, 44.18,—acc.pl. of aspa, f

a-spénica, 45.9; -cit, 34.7, misfortunes,—acc. pl. aspa, 7.

asperezata, he strives for, 31.16,—Pr, sparez.

a-srushtay, disobedience; -im, acc.sg. 33.4; -ta, loc.sg. 43-2;
-t0is, gen.sg. 44.18.—srav.

a-srudim, badly heard, evil reputed, 32.3.—sYrav, passive,


a-srvatem GATHIC DICTIONARY—8 ava-pastois


a-srvatem, they both heard, or, became conscious, 30.3,—3 dual,
augmented, srav.

asta, hate,— -ta, ins.sg., 34.8; -asca, acc. pl. 44.14: -al, dat. 46.18.

astai, to make enemies of, 46.18—inf. of ans ? or dative above?

astay, companion,— -is, nom.sg. 81.22; -Im, acc.sg; 33.2; -ayo,
nom. or acc. pl. 46.11, 49.11.

A-stis, places, worlds, 43.3,—acc.pl. stay, ft

astvat, corporeal, 28.2 31.11 34.14 43.3,16— -vafit, ast, bone.

asi, swift, 44.4,—ac.pl. asav. adj.

a-sima, effective, compelling, 28.10,—nom. pl. -na.

a-siirahya, im-potent, weak, 29.9,—gen.sg. stra.

af, aat, but, thereupon, Frequent.

atha, so, thus, therefore, 2.14 G18 2.6 31.67 41.5 51-16 93.3,6.

athra, there, 31.12 46.16.

athra, through fire, 31.3,19 47.6 51.9,—ins.sg. atar, m.

athré, to fire, 43.9,—dat.sg. atar.

athris, misfortune, 46.8,—nom.sg. athray, /.

athro, of fire, 48.4,—gen.sg. atar, m.

atrém, fire, 84.4,—acc.sg. atar.

auruna, ? wild, swift, (aurva) red (M) 84.9.

aurvatd, of ardent, or speedy, 50.7—gen.sg. -vaiit.

ava, down, 33.6, 44.18; avo, 30.10.

ava, with that, 44.17, ins. sg.

avae, those, 48.4, acc.pl.

a-vaéna, behold! investigate! 46.2; a-vaénata, 30.2—imp.vaén

avaésham, of those, 29.3, gen.pl. ‘of those not one understands.

avaétas, curses, crying of woe, 31.20—acc.pl. -tat, from avo.

avais, with those, 32.15, 44.15,—ins.pl.

avam, of those, 44.19,—gen.pl.

avami, I strive, 44.7,—av.

avanha, with help, 51.5,—ins.sg. avah, n.

ava-nhaneé, in the consummation, 33.5,—loc.sg. -Na. 72.

avanhé, to help, 50.7 dat.sg. avah, 7.

avanhem, help, 34.4,—acc.sg. above, as adj. m.

avanho, of help, 49.12, 50.1,—gen.sg. above.

ava-pastois, to fall down, 44.4,—inf. pad.


avaré GATHIC DICTIONARY—9 azyae


avaré, help, 29.11,—acc. avar, n, same as avah.

avarenae, of both confessions, or beliefs, 80.2—GDDu -na, m.

a-vastry0, the non-pasturer, nomad; 31.10,—NS of -a, adj.

avat, so much, 28.4; correlate to yavat.

avat, that, 29.10 31.6,15,16 49.12.

ava-zazat, they are driven off, 34.9,—za(y).

avém, to be guardian, 49.10; inf. av.

a-veret0, in the conviction, 45.1,—loc.sg. -ay, f.

avis, manifestly, 33.7.

avishya, manifest, 31.18, 50.5,—ins.sg, -a, adj.

avo, help, 29.9 30.10 32.14,—nom, acc.pl, avah, n.

avoi, woe! 45.3, 53.6,7,—interjection.

a-xs0, I ask instruction, 46.2,—xsa.

axshtat, they procure, find, 51.4,—sta.

ay, to go, inf. 1té, 43.13, ate, 31.9; pres.part. acc.sg. ayafitem,
46.5; imperat. aidiim, 33.7, idi, 46.16; aydi, (a-iydi) I come
to, 31.2; Aiti, it goes, present things, KA, 31.14; ayat, 31.20,
aya, 46.6, he goes to; ayeni, 46.1, 50.9; ayeni 34.6, I go.

ayae, of both these, 30.5,6 31.2,10 33.9 44.15.—gen. dual.

ayamaité, inflicts. holds, 31.13,—yam.

ayanha, with metal, 30.7, 32.7 51.9,—ins.sg. ayah, n.

ayapta, with felicity, 28.2, ins.sg; felicities, acc.pl. 28.7, 53.1.

ayaré, the days, 43.2,7, acc.pl. ayar, 7.

ayém, this, 44.12,—nom.sg. like aem.

a.yesé, they desire, 53.6, yas.

ayu, lasting, 31.20,—acc.sg. ayav, adj, n.

azatha, you may drive, or go. 50.7,—za.

azda, knowingly, certainly, 50.1, adv.

azdyai, to reach to, 51.17,—inf. as.

azem, I, 44.7,11,—nom.sg.

azém, 43.14, should read (B) a-zé, to go, arouse, inf. za.

aZi, both calving, pregnant,bearing, 46.19,—nom.du., azi, adj,f.

azim, calving, 44.6,—acc.sg. same.

aZ1, 31.18, is a-z1, particles.

azus, zeal, 53.7,—NS, azav, m,

a-ziitay, f, fat. solid food; -itisca, NS,49.5. -t0is, gen.sg. 29.7

azyae, of calving, pregnant, bearing, 29.5, 34.14, gen.sg.


baga GATHIC DICTIONARY—11 byefité
B


baga, piece, lot, m; -a, acc.pl. bagem, 51.1, acc.sg.

-bairyaefité, may they both be borne, 32.15,—bar.

banayen, they will afflict with disease, 30.6,—ban.

baodafito, to consider, 30.2,—inf. as imperative.

baraiti, 31.12, 50.6, they raise; baretii, 33.9, let me bring up;
barana, 30.9, bearing,—bar.

barata, brother, 45.11,—nom.sg. m, for bratar.

bavaf, 28.11, 30.9, it becomes; bavaiti, 30.10, it may become;
bavaifiti, 33.10, the are becoming,—bav. (bvafitica, biizdyai)

baxshta, he shares, 31.10; baxshaiti, he shall share, 47.5,50.3,
8SKA.—baxsh. (&-baxsh).

béedus, 53.4, P

Béfidva, a daévic oppcnent of Zarathushtra, 49.1, NS; 49.2, GS.

berexdam, prized, valued, AS, 32.9, 34.9, 44.7, 51.17; VS, 48.6, -6.

biijem, penance, ‘loosing,— AS, big, f, from baog. 31.18.

biimyae, of the earth, 32.3,—GS, biimi,

biin6i, to the ground, 53.7,—DS, bina, m.

birois, of fulness, 31.21; GS, buray, f.

biizdyai, to develop, 44.17,—bav, inf. of s-aorist.

bvafitica, those who are becoming, 45.7,—bav.

byefité, they are intimidating, 34.8,—3PIP, bay.


-C& GATHIC DICTIONARY—13 cixshnusha
C


-Ca, and,—is added to other words.

cagedo, offering, affording, 51.20.— AP, caged, adj.

cagvae, offering, granting, 46.2,—NS, cagvah, adj.

caraiti, he makes, 51.1, 8SKA; earani, I shall practise; 44.17—
kar, to make, or do.

carat, he is going on, 46.4; caratasca, both driven along, 51.12,
3DPrA,—kar, to move along.

carekerethra, thoughts, 29.8,—APl. n, -a.

cashmaini, in his eye, 31.8, 45.8, LS; cashméfig, eyes, 31.13,
cashmam, eyes, 50.10, AP],—ecashman, n.

caxnaré, they desire, 44.13,—kan, 2 Pf.

caxrayo, transforming into. 34.7,—NPI, caxray, /.

cayasca, who, 45.5,—NPI, ka.

cazdofinhvadebyd, being enlightened, 31.38, DAbIP]; cazdeéfigh-
vafitém, enlightened, 44.5, AS.—P

cica, and why, 47.5. See cyanhat.

cicithwa, through thoughtful, caring, 43.2—IsS, cicitav; kaéz.

cikOditeres, they have consulted, 32.11,—kaet, 1Pf.

cinas, thou hast destined, 44.6,—kaésh, 3SPrA.

cinvato, of sifting, 46.10,11; 51.13,—GS, PrPart. kay. -vafit.

cis? who P 31.18, 43.7.

cista, seeks, prays, promises, 51.5; kaésh, 3SPrM.

Cistis, wisdom, 30.9, 48.11, NS; cistois, 44.10, 46.4, 48.5, GS.
-ti, 47.2, 51.21, IsS; -tim, AS,—-tay, f

Cif, some one, frequent.

eithena, untranslatable sign of a question.

eithra, clearly, 31.22, 34.4, 44.16, adv.

ithrae, clear, 33.7, NAPI; -ré, 45.1, NS, adj. -a.

ithrem, a race of people, 32.3,—AS, -a, n.

Ivishi, I teach, taught, 51.15, IsPrM; civishta, thou hast as-
signed, 34.13,—kav.

ixshnusha, I was satisfying, 49.1; -0, inf. 32.8, 43.15, 45.9,—
xshnav, Prl6, desiderative.


cizdi GATHIC DICTIONARY—14 —_—scyanhat


cizdi, designate! decide! 44.16,—kaésh, imperat. (cinas).
cdis, 31.38, 47.5. 2SPrA; cdisht. 45.10, 50.3, 51.15; cdishem,

46.18;—kaésh, to decide, teach, designate.
cdithat, 46.9, 8SPrA. cdithaité, 33.2;—kaéth, to teach, promise.
edref, he made, rendered, 44.7, 45.9,—kar. See Bartholomae’s

Handbuch, 298. 3b.
eyanhat, is ci-anhat, how is it? 44.12.


da, GATHIC DICTIONARY—16 data


D


da, to give, set, utter, decree, create. It appears as
a-daré, 43.15, 8PPrA.
a-das, 45.5, Pres. Part. N.
a-dat, 31.18, 51.14.
dadae, 31.9, 16 44.15.
dadaiti, 3.4. 8PPA. dadaiti, 4.1.
dadaf, 9.9 8SKA or 38PPrA, 22.14.
dadat, 30.7,11 31-21 32.10 46.7,13 51.21 53.2,4.
dadatii, 3.8, 38.
daden, 30.8 K.
dadenté, 31.4. 3PKM.
daduyé, 45.15, 83PPM.
(ae, %8.6,7 31.3 34.15 43.1,2,4,5 46.6 47.6 49.8 thou mayest give, etc.
daenha, 34.1 4.18 thou shalt give.
daefité, 4.11. will give.
daestti, 2.7 grant thou.
dahi, 8.9 thou shalt give. 2SKA.
daidi, 2.67 40.2 51.2,7,18, give thou.
Gaidif, 28.2 43.14,16 46.2
daidita, 43.2 4.18 380M.
daidyai, 51.2 inf.
daidyad, 44-10.
daifiti, 32.15 3PIPrA.
daite, 44.19.
daiti, 44.19.
dam, 44.16.
dama, 3.3, we shall give.
dan, 45.5 47.1 8PKA.
dafito, 22.4.
dasté, 34.1
dasva, 3.12, to present, |
dat, gives, 2.10 44.35 45.4 48.4,6 49.7 53.1,3 (31.18 51.1.
data, 29.210 31.5 3.1 4.2614. 43.1,13 48.12; 4.21, 2PPrM,


dati GATHIC DICTIONARY—17 daévozushta


da—continued. For meanings, see text-references.
dati, 41.17. imperative.
davoi, inf, 2.2 44.14 41.9.
dayad, 43.1 46.10 90.5, K.
dayeté, 31.11.
dazdé, 4.8 51.619. 3SPM, and 3 DPfM 2.1.
dya, 43.8 1SOM.
dyai, 9.8 .
dyam, 44.14 1SOA.
dyat, 43.10 45.9.
ni-dama, 45.8.
ni-datem, 49.3.
vi-dam, %.6, 3SIM.
vi-dayat, 43.12.
vi-dishemnais, 51.1 P
dab, to deceive, to defraud,—dabayeiti, he deceives, 43.6; daben,
they deceived, 53.1; daibishefiti, they deceive, 32.1; debena-
ota, you will defraud, 32.5, 2PPrA; see daibishyafis.
dadé, 29.4 see mand.
dadré, he maintained, 51.8,—1Pf, dar.
daduyé, 46.15, see da.
dae, (as) a gift, 28.6,—NS dah, n. See da.
daeé-doisht, (literally, given and shown), promised, 51.17.
daena, f, spirit, covering both religion and individuality.  31.11,2%
$3.13 34.13 44.9,10,11 45.2,11 46.6,7,11 48.4 49.4,5,6,9 51.13,17,19,21 53.1,2,4,5.
daenha, 34.1 44.18,—da. As noun, f, NS, giving.
daenhd, of the given (path), 53.2,—GS da, adj.
daés, to show,—
daédoisht, the valued, promised, 51.17.
dais, do thou show me, 43.10 2S s-AorA.
disha, thou wilt appoint, 43.7 2S s-AorM.
ddisha, show, assure me, 51.2, 2S s-AorM.
ddisht, shown, 51.17, s-AorMPfPart.
daéva, m, an opponent of the Daéva tribeP— 2.4 3.6 32.135 4.5
M4.20 45.11 48.1 49.43 daéva-ci-na, 3.6.
daév6-zushta, a beloved, darling of the Daévas, 32.4,


dafshnya GATHIC DICTIONARY—18 _ daregodjyatois


dafshnya, deluded, 53.8,—dab.
dahi, thou shalt give, 53.9,—da.
dahmahya, (that part) of teaching, 32.16,—dahna, adj.
dahva, 50.2,?—LP1 dam, house ?
dahyéus, of a province, 31.16 46.1,4,—GS, dahyav, f.
dahyiim, 31.18,—AS, same.
dahytnam, 48.10,—GP, same.
daibishyafis, deceiving, PrPart’ dab— -atd, GS, 28.6; -€, DS, 34.4
daibishefiti, they deceive, 32.1,—dab.
daibita(na), long since, 32.3 48.1 49.2.
daibitim, the second, 45.1,—AS, daibitya, adj.
daidita, see da.
daidyat, they observe, 44.10,—8PPrA. day.
daifiti, $2.15, see da.
dais, do thou show me, 43.10,—2S s-AorA, daés.
dam, to set, 44.16, inf, da.
dam, m, house, —dahva, 50.2, LP: défg, AP, 45.11; a-dam,
49.10 48.7 LS.
daman, n, house, 48.7, NP; 46.6, AP. see demana.
damay, creating, creator, adj, -is, NS 31.7 44.4 45.7; -Im, AS, 31.8 34.10
damay, creation, 7, -Ois, GS, 43.5 51.10.
dan, 47.1, 3PKA, da.
dan, 45.10. 49.4, same as dam from dam.
dané, 44.9, completes yaos as from yaozda, to sanctify, 1SF.
dafigra, clever, 46.17.
dar, to maintain, hold, forms
dadré, 51.8, he maintains.
darayat, 31.7, he will maintain.
daresht, 43.18, maintained.
dereta, 44.4. he was sustaining.
didareshata, 46.7, he wishes to hold, prepares, Desiderative M
doresht, 49.2, to have maintained, K s-Aor.
drita, 46.5, he might maintain, O.
darayo, to hold off, 32.1,—inf. dar.
dar(e)ga, long,—w.11, 31.20 AS; 8.8 GS -ahya; 3.5 -6, in comp.
daregayt, long-lasting, 28.6,—IsS, -yav, f
daregdjyatois, long-lived, 43.2, GS; -im, AS, 33.5.— -tay, ff


dares GATHIC DICTIONARY—19 dereshta


dares, to behold,—darshtdis, inf, 33.6; daresat, abl. of -sa, as
inf. 32.13; daresani, I shall behold, 28.5; daresem, 43.5 5
dares0i, 43.16; vya-daresem, 45.8; daresata, 3SKM, 30.1.

dareshafea, visibly, 33.7.

darethrai, to attain, 46.3,—inf. dar.

dasa, ten, 44.18.

daseme, decade (M), gift, offering (B), 28.9,—m. -a, LS.

dasté, to give, 34.1,—inf. da.

dastvam, of teachings, 46.7,—GP -va,

das.va, give! 33.12,—imp. da.

data, law, n;-a, 33.1, (yatha.ais) IsS. P?; -fis, IsP, 46.15, 49.7;
datoibyasca, 51.14. data, 51.19, AP.

datar, giver, creator, m;—datarem, AS 44.7; data, NS, 50.6,11.

datha, clever,—m, -em, AS. 46.17, 50.2; -éfig, AP, 28.10 32.10 46.15.
datha@ibyd, DADIP 51.5.

dathranam, of compensations, 31.14,—GP dathra, n.

dathrem, assignment, 34.13,—AS -ra, n.

davas.ci.na, though he should press. 31.10,—dav (dvaidi).

dav0i, to give, 28.2 44.14 51.9,—inf. da.

daxshaé, she taught, 43.15; fra-daxshaya, teach! 33.13;—daxsh.

daxshara, with a token, 43.7,— IsS -ara, m.

daxshtem, token, 4.6 51.9; AS -ta, n, from PfP daxsh.

dayat, it might care for, 29.7; vi-das, NSPrP 33.3;—day, care for

dazdyai, dazdé, see da.

débavayaf, he may delude, 31.17,— 3SPr30, debav.

debenaota, you will defraud, 32.5,—2PPrA dab.

debazaiti, does she support, 44.6,—K, debaz.

debazanha, with the support, 47.6,—IsS -zah, n.

Dejam-aspa, Jamaspa, the bridegroom, 46.17, 51.18.

dejit-aretatéibyd, from the law-scorning, 53.6; -t, IsS 33.9:— -ta.

demana, same as daiman, house, dwelling, n,— -né, LS, 3.13,15
45.8 49.11 50.4 51.14,155 -nahya, GS 31.16; -nai, DS 46.11; -nem, AS 31.18.

défig, houses, 45.11,—AP dam.

deredyai, to maintain hold, 43.1,—inf. dar.

deresca, attack of violence, 29.1,—deres, f.

dereshta, visible, 34.4,—IsS -ta, Pf£P , dares.


dereta GATHIC DICTIONARY—20 duiré


dereta, he was supporting, 44.4,—PfP stem, dar.
dereza, with a bond, chain, 53.8,—IsS derez, f.
didainghe, I was taught, 48.11,—1SPrM dah.
didareshata, he prepares, 46.7,—desid.IM dar.
didas, observing, 43.9, NSPrPart da(y) (daidyad).
diderezd, thou wish to hold fast to, 44.15,—desid.2S darez.
didragz0.duyé, you wish to assure yourselves, 48.7,—desid.M of
drang, to strengthen.
disha, thou wilt appoint, 43.7,—2S s-AorM daés, see.
divamnem, holding afar, 31.20,—AS -na, adj, [diva].
diwzaidyai, to deceive, 45.4,—inf. dab.
ddisha, show me! 51.2,—2S s-AorM, daés.
ddishi, to show, 33.18,—inf. daés.
doresht, held, 49.2,—dar; see Bartholomae, Handbuch, 298.6b.
draond, possessions, 33.8,—AP -nah, 7.
dregvané, lying, applied to certain opponents,—PrPart dreg.
dregvae, NS, 30.5 31.17 44.12 46.4,6,7 47.5 49.2 50.3.
dregvaité, DS f, 31.15 33.2 43.4,8 46.6 51.8
dregvafitem, AS, 32.514 45.5 48.2 61.9.
dregvafitd, N,AP, 31.2 46.1 47.4.
dregvasti, LP, 29.5 4.14.
dregvataéca, DS m, 3.1.
dregvatam, GP 2.4.
dregvato, GS 31.18 32.10,16 43.15 45.7 49.411 51.13 93.7.
dregvodebis, IsP, 2.2 4.11.
dregvodebyd, DADbIP, 90.11 31.14 53.6.
drigaové, to the poor man, 53.9,—DS drigav.
drigiim, the poor man, 34.5,—AS same.
drita, he might withhold, 46.5,—0, dar.
drug, druj, f. lie, deceit. Appears as
drijasca, GS n, 2.3.
drujem, AS, 2.8 31.4 32.12 33.4 4.13 8.1. drujém 4.14.
driijo, GS, or N,Apl, 30.10 31.1 465.6,11 49.11 51.10,14 $3.6.
druxs, NS, 49.3.
dugeda, daughter, 45.4; -dram, AS, 53.3;— -dar, f.
diiiré, in the distance, 34.8.


diirat GATHIC DICTIONARY—21 dyai


diira/, from far, 45.1.

diir.aoshem, holding-afar, death-repelling, 32.14,—AS, “A, adj.

dus-erethris, mis-led, 49.1,—AP m, -thri, adj.

duse-xshathra, badly ruled, 4.5,10, NP; -éfig, 49.11, AP.

dushitaca, misfortune, bad dwelling, 31.18,—LS, -tay, f

dus-hvarethém, bad food, 31.20, 53.6;—AS -tha, f.

dus-mananho, of bad mind, 49.11,—GS -nah, m.

dus-sastis, evil-teaching, 32.9, 45.1,—NS, -tay, adj.

dus-shyaothana, evil-doing, adj.— -ai, DS 31.15; -a, 34.9, NP;
-éfig, 49.11, AP.

dus-xrathwa, evil-willed, 49.4,—NP -a, f.

dutaenh0d, messengers, 32.1,—NP, dita, m.

ditim, message, 32.13,—AS, diitya, f.

duz-daenho, evil-spirited, malicious, 30.8, GS; -die, NS, 51.10:—
<da(y), -dah, adj.

duz-az0bae, being notorious, 46.4,—NS, -a, -ah, m.

duz-daenéfig, evil-minded, 49.11,—AP, -a, adj.

duz-jyatois, evil living, 46.8,—GS, -ay, 7.

duz-vacanho, evil speaking. 49.11,—AP -ah, adj.

duz-varenais, evil behaving, 53.9,—IsP -a, m.

duz-varshta, evil-doing, 49.4,—AP -a.

duz-vareshnanho, evil doing, 53.8,_NP -nah, adj.

dvaéshae, hostile, NS 43.8; AP 28.6; -shanha, IsS, 44.11, 46.8;—
-ah, 7.

dvaétha, threat, 32.16,—NS, f.

dvafshéfig, pains, torments, 44.14,—AP, -a, m2.

dvaisho, pain, torment, 53.8,—NS, -ah, 7.

dvaidi, we both shall urge, 29.5,—1DPrM, dav.

dvar, to rush, of Daévas only; héfi-dvarefita, 30.6, they rushed.

dvanmaibyasca, to the clouds, 44.4,—DP, -man, a.

dya, limited, 48.8,—GS, n, dyah, adj.

dyatam, is limited, 48.7,—3SImM, passive meaning, ni-dya.

dyai, to give, 29.8,—inf. da.


éeaienha GATHIC DICTIONARY—23 evidvae


E


éefenha, with the mouth, 28.11,—IsS éea&h or ah, aenhd, GS, 31.3.

éeant, in the mouths of, 32.16 47.2,—LPl, éeah; according to, B.

éeava, us both, 29.7,--ADu, pron.

émavafit, powerful—  -vat, AP 33.12;  -vafitem, ASm, 34.4;
-vaitim, ASf, 44.14; -vatam, GP 43.10.

énaxshta, he has succeeded, 32.6,—augm.38S s-AorM, nas.

éneiti, torment, pain, 30.11,—NS, intay or énitay.

erejyw0, worthy, 46.13,—NS, -a; same as erethwa.

eres, justly, 30.3,6 32.11 44.1-19 48.9 49.6,9 51.5.

eres-vacie, just worded, 31.12, 49.9,—NS -cah, adj.

ereshis, envy, 31.5,—NS -shay, 7.

ereshvais, just-acting, 28.6, IsP; -vaenhd, 29.8, NP; -va, 44.9, AP;
-V6, NS, 51.5,11; -va, adj.

erethwéiig, just, worthy, 28.10; AP -wa, adj.

ereze-jis, right-living, 50.2, AS; -jy0i, 29.5, 53.9, DS; -ji, adj.

ereziicam, in right speaking, 48.9.—GP used adverbially, -vacah

erezus, straight, 33.5,6 43.3 53.2, AP; -zaus, 51.13, GS; -zav.

erez-uxdai, to the right-worded, 31.19, DS; -da, 44.19, IsS; -da.

evisti, not to be sharer of, 34.9; NPn, adverbial, -tay, adj.

evidvae, non-expert, 31,12,17,—NS -vah, adj.


fedroi GATHIC DICTIONARY—25 frashi


F


fedroi, to a father, 53.4,—DS pitar.

ferasaby0, with questions, 29.5, AbIP; -sayai, DS, 48.7; -sem,
43.9, AS; frasaya, 44.13, AP; -sa, f frasa, 31.3, AP, -sa, m

ferashém, progressive, 30.9, 34, 15,—AS -sha, adj.

Ferasha.oshtra, Zarathushtra’s father-in-law, DS 49.8, NS 51.17;
VS 46.16.

ferash0-temem, suitable, 46.19 50.11,—AS -ma, adj.

ferash.va, take counsel! 53.3,—imp. fras.

fera-sriiidyai, to hear from, 46.13,14,—inf, fra, srav.

feseratiim, compensation, 33.12,—AS -i, f (51.4).

fra, in composition, towards, away.

fra.cinas, he regulates, 32.5,—3SPrA, kaésh.

frad, to promote, prosper, fradaz, 4.13; fradefité, 8.6; fradodis, 44.10
fradainghe, inf. 44.2.

fradat-gaéthem, prospering estates or world, 33.11,—AS -a, f

fra-dathai; to fructify, 31.16 45.9—inf. da.

fra-daxshaya, thou mayest instruct, 33.18,—daxsh.

fra-daxshta, teacher, 31.17, 51.38,—NS, -tar, m

frad6o, of promotive, 34.14, 46.12,—GS frad, adj.

fraéshtaenho, messengers, 49.8,—NP -ta, m

fraéshya, I urge, 49.6.—aésh.

frafra, I precede, 46.10,—1SK, par.

fraidim, promotion, help, 53.6, ASf fraday. f

fraidiva, since long, 32.14.

fra-jyaitis, destruction, 29.5,—NS -tay, f.

fra-mimatha, you have prepared, 32.4,—ma(y).

fraore?, cheerfully, 30.5, 53.2.

fra-oxta, he arrives at, 48.1,—vak.

frarenité, they rise, arrive, arouse, 46.3, —3PKM fra, ar.

frasa, questions, 31. 13,—AP, -sa, m

fra-sastim, observance, 49.7,—AS -tay, j, sah. frasaya see fer-

frasaya, questions,, 44.13 SNe from ferasa, f.

frashi, I consulted, 44.8, 45, 6,—Aor fras, to ask, which appears


frashta GATHIC DICTIONARY—26 fshuyo


as ferashva 8.3, peresa 4.19, and
frashta, he consulted, 49.2,— 3S s-AorM; also frashta, 43.14;
a-frashta, 51.11; héme-frashta, 47.3.
fra-srtita, famous, 50.8,—NSnPfP srav.
fra-vaoca, do thou reveal, 34.12,—vak.
fra-vaxshya, I will speak out, 44.6 45.1,2,3,4,5,6,16.
fra-vareta, she chose out, 31.10,—var.
fra-voivide, I was selected, 44.11,—vaed.
fra-voizdiim, to be selected, 33.8,—s-Aor vaed.
fra-xshnenem, providing for, 43.14,—NSn(B); AS,
fra-xshnené, to be instructed, 29.11, 43.12,—inf. xshna.
fra-xshni, to learn to know, 44.7,—inf. xshna.
frinai, I placate, I sue for friendship, 49.12,—fray.
frinemna, placate, 29.5,—NDm, fray.
fro, forth, from, 2-11 33.812 45.6 46.345 49.6.
frd-gae, progressing, 46.4,—NS -gay or -galr, adj.
froretois, to prosper, 46.4,—inf. fra, ar...
frd-syat, he may intend to oppose, 46.8,—sa, Pr27?
fryai, to a friend, 43.14 4.1 46.2, DS; frya, 4.1, Iss; fry0, 46.2.6 NS
—frya, friendly.
Fryana, friendly, 46.12,—a name P
fshéfighim, prospered, 31.10, AS; fshéfighyo, 49.9, NS,— -a, 7
fshuyafit, fattening, PrPart. fshav; appears as
fshuyefité, 29.5; fshuyantaeca, 29.6, DS.
fshuyafitem, 31.10, AS.
fshuyast, 49.4, LP.
fshuy0, should fatten 48.5,—fshav.


gae GATHIC DICTIONARY—28 gcizra
ean nec neous
G


gae, of both head-of-cattle, 46.4.—GD gav, m.

gaemea, life, 30.4, 48.1,—AS gaya, m.

gaetha, substance, estate, world, f— -tham, 50.3, AS; -thé, LS,
34.2 -thaht, 8.7, LP; -thae, AP, 31.1,11 34.3 8.6 44.10 46.8,12,13.

galdi, come! 28.6 49.1,—imp. gam.

gaire, to watch, 28.4,—inf. gar.

gam, to come, forms the following stems: jam- jem-; Aor jéngh-

gam, the cattle, AS, 32.10 4.620 47.3 0.2 51.5,7.

gaodayo, cattle-keepers, 29.2,—AP -yah, m.

garema, hot, glowing, 43.4,—IsS -a.

gard, of praise, 45.8 50.4 51.15 GS; -Obis, IsP, 34.2.

gat-te, 51.10; gaf-t0i, 43.1, go,—inf. gam.

gat, he steps on, is banished to, 46.6, —gA(y).

gatha, hymn, f.

gatiim, place, throne, 28.5,—AS gatav, m.

gaus, of the Cattle, 32.814,— same as géus, GS gav, m.

gava, both head-of-cattle, 4§.,9—NDu gav, m.

oavol, to the Cattle, 29.3,7 33.3 48.5 51.1,—DS same.

gayehya, of life, 51.19,—GS gaya, m.

gemen, they shall come, 46.11,—gam.

gena, woman, 46.10,—NS /.

gerebam, to hold fast to, 34.10,—inf. grab.

Geréhma, a rival to Zarathushtra, 32.12,13,14.

gerezda, he complained, 29.1,—88Pr garez.

o'erezda, through being recipient of, 50.9, IsS; -dim, 51.17, AS;
-day, f. gared.

gerezé, 32.9; gerez0i, 46.2;—I appeal, I complain, 1SPrM garez

géus, gés, of Cattle, 28.1 29.1,3,7,9 31.9 32.12 33.4 M14 4.9—GS gav m.

oéus tashan, Creator 29.2 31.9 46.9 51.7; -urvan, Soul of Kine, 2.1 2.1,5,9

oéusha, ears, 51.3, NP; géushais, IsP, 30.2;—-sha, m.

otish(a)ta, heard, 2.8 31.1819, PfP; gishahva-ta, 49.7 ; gushodam,
s-Aor, 45.1; both imperatives of gaosh.

gtzra, secret, 48.3,—AP, guzra.


ha GATHIC DICTIONARY—30 haptaithe


H


ha-(dem0i), the same, 44.9,—pron.

ha, that, sing, f, 47.6, 48.2,6.

haea, haca, with, in consequence of, forthwith, forth, out, 2.2,11
4.6 dl.2,1d 32-2 9.1407 4504 46.19 7.1 51-5,22 93.1,6.

hacaiteé, it may follow, 34.2, 48.4; hacaifite, 45.2, 46.16; ha-
eaefité, 43.12;—hak.

hacémna, those following, 44.10,—hak, PfPM. In 44.18, Bar-
tholomae reads hacéna, LS of hacénay, f, companionship.

hacumnod, following together, 43.10,12,—hak.

hacifité, they are accompanying, 33.9,—hak.

hada, together, 29.2, 46.17 50.4.

ha-dem0i, in the same dwelling, 44.9, 46.14,—LS dam.

hadroya, through a desire, 32.7,—IsS, -ya, f

Haécat-aspa, friends to Zarathushtra, 46.15.

hafshi, I acknowledge, hold, 43.4,— hap.

hahmi, I may be, 34.5. B reads haxmi, I follow,—hak.

haithim, genuinely, truly, 31.6,8 34.6 46.19 §1.13—adv.acc. -thya.

haitim, possession, 32.9,—AS hata, piece, chapter, used in all
the hymn-headings.—ha(y), to connect, or han, to earn.

haithya, veritable, genuine, 30.5 31.8 34.15 43.3,8 44.6 46.6 49.11 53.6.
in 46.6, read haéthahya, companions, APn, -ya, adj.

haithya-vareshtam, genuine, realizable, 50.11,—AS -ta, adj.

hak, to follow, urge, forms hish-hak, haxsha, scafiti, P£P
haxta, inf. haxtoi/, haxmi.

hakurena, support, 44.1, AP; -em, AS 33.9; -a, 7.

ham, hém, together, 30.4 31.8 44.15 46.12 47.3 58.3.

hamo, the same, 31.7, NS; hamém, 32.16 AS.

hamaestaro, defeaters, conquerors, 48.12,— NP -tar, m.

han, to earn, hanefite, 44.19, 46.19; hanani, 44.18.

hanare, without, 31.15 47.5, with abl.

hanhus, fruit, 53.4,—NS -hav, n.

haozathwat, by proficiency, 45.9,—AblIS -wa, 7.

haptaithé, to the seventh, 32.3,—LS -tha, n.


hapti GATHIC DICTIONARY—31 hithaus


hapti, he holds, 31.22—hap.

hard, watching over, 31.13 44.2,—NS -a, adj.

has, being, 46.4,5 47.4 51.5, NS hafit. PsP of ah, fo be.

hatam, of beings, 29.3 44.10, GP hafit or of hata m. Pf£P han.

hata-marané, remembering merit, 32.6,—VS -nay, 7.

hathra, with, along with, 28.4 30.9.

haurvataé, f, cheerful life, “wholeness’ health; an ahura.  31.6,21
$3.8 34.111 44.17,18 45.5,10 51.7. Called hu-jyatay, 82.5. Chiefly used
in dual with ameretad.

haxméfig, companions, 49.38 AP -man, m.

haxshai, I will urge, 46.10,—hak.

haxtayae, corporeally, literally of both thighs, 53.7.— haxt, n.

_hazasca, power, might, 29.1,—NP -ah, n. from haz.

-_hazaoshaenho, same pleasure, like-willed, 51.20 NP; hazaoshem,
28.8, AS.

hazé, might, power, 48.4,—AS, é for -ah, n. from haz.

hazo, 33.12, AP same.

héea, 46.1 P

hém, same as ham, prefix.

hém(e)-frashta, counselled together, 47.3 53.38,—fras.

heme-myasaité, he combines, 33.1,—myas.

hémithyat, he would dismiss, 53.9,—maéth.

hém-parsht6is, to counsel with, 33.6,—inf. fras.

hém-tashaz, shaped together, 47.3,—tash.

hém-yafiti, they shall go together, 51.3,—ay.

héfi-dvarefita, they rushed over, 30.6.—dvar.

héfi-graben, he understood, 31.8,—grab.

héfi-kereta, the compensations, 31.14,— AP -tay, f.

hénti, they are, 33.10 44.16 45.6 51.10,22.

héfitt, let them be, 33.7 53.8.

hi, both of them, 30.3 31.10 44.18, hica, 32.14.

him, of them, 2.2 44.14,20 $0.2.

his, with them, 33.10. —

hishasaz, he will attain to, 82.138,—hant.

hitham, companion, fellow, 34.10,—AS -a, adj.

hithaus, of the company, 48.7,—GS -thay, m.


hizva, GATHIC DICTIONARY—32 hvais


hizva, tongue, IsS, 28.5 31.3 47.2; -vae, LS 45.1 51.3; -vasca,
GS 951.13; -v0, IsS 31.19 50.6; -zubis, IsP 49.4;—hizi, f.

hOi, to him, 2.2,8,9 31.6 45.8,10,11 46.13 47.3 48.7,9 60.3 51.6,12,17 53.1,2,5.

hois, with them, 53.6.

hu-cistim, good teaching, 34.14 AS; -tdis, 46.4, GS; -tay, f

hudae, beneficent, 48.3 45.6; hudaenhd, 30.3 84.3, GS or NPs
“hé, 31.22 DS; aby, 84.13, DAbIP;—huda(y), 2. or adj.

hu-danus, well-disposed, 31.16; -naus, 44.9 50.9; hudan(var-
eshva), 53.3,—NS hudanav, adj.

hudemém, sweetness, loveliness, 29.8; AS, -ma, m.

hu-jyatois, of good life, 32.5 46.8; hujitayd, NP, 33.10.

hu-kareta, well-formed, 34.13; IsS -a, adj.

hu-mazdra, well-remembering, 30.1,—AP -dar, m.

hu-meretois, of good marking, 31.10,—GS -tay, f.

hunaiti, he incites, 31.15,—hav.

hunara, with skill, art, 43.5—IsS -ra, m.

hunaretata, with ability, 50.8,—IsS -taz, f,

hunus, a (daévic) son, 51.10,—NS “AV, mM.

hus-haxa, with well-befriended, 32.2; -xaim, 46.13;—AS -xay, adj

hu-sheitis, good dwelling, 29.10, IsP; -tdis, 30.10, GS; -tis, NS
43.11— -shitay, f

hus-hénem, well-earning, 53.5,—AS -na, adj.

hu-shoithema, good abodes, 48.6,—AP -man, n.

hu-shyaothana, doing good deeds, 45.4,—NS -a, adj,f

hu-xratus, understanding well, 34.10 91.5,—NS -tav, adj.

hu-xshathra, ruling well, 44.20 48.5, NP; -rais, 53.8, IsP;— -a.

hu-zéfitus(e), well-informed, 48.3 46.5 49.5,—NS, -tav, adj. (n).

hvaeca, selves, 46.11.

hvaena, glowing, 32.7,—IsS -na, adj.

hvaétus, a gentleman, a noble by birth, 32.1 49.7, NS; -tii, 33.3
IsS; -téus, 33.4 46.1 GS; -tavé, 46.5; -taové, 53.4, DS; -tav.

hvafena, pronoun, each other, 30.3,—AP.

hvainemea, sleep, 44.5,—AS -na, m.

hvahyae, of himself, 33.14.

hvahyai, for himself, 30.2.

hvais, with themselves, 31.2 46.4 49.4 51.13,


hvanhevim GATHIC DICTIONARY—33 hyén


hvanhevim, blissful life, 53.1,—AS -haoya.

hvapae, well-made, 44.5: NS in line 43, AP in 4u,— -pah.

hvapaithyat, self-glory, 31.21,—AblS -a, n.

hvaraithya, effective, 28.10—NP -a, adj.

hvareca, the sun, 32.10; hvaré, 50.2,—AS hvar, n.

hvaremno, to be devoured, 32.8,—AP PfP hAvar.

hvarenae, sunny, glorious, 51.18,—NS -ah, adj.

hvarethai, for food, 34.11 48.5, DS; -thais, IsP, 49.11,— -a, 7.

hvarshtais, well-done, good works, 49.4, IsP -a.

hvathra, complete life, glory, AP 81.7 83.9; -@, 28.2 50.5, DS;
-em, AS 438.9 53.6,— -a, 7.

hvathroya, with his desire, 48.2,—IsS -a, f.

hvé, themselves, 46.11.

hvéfig, suns, 48.16 44.3,—AP hvar, n.

hvénvat, sunny, 53.4, NSmPrPart; -vata, 32.2 Iss.

hvitica, well-being, 30.11,—NS -tay, f.

hvo, that one, he, self, freguent,—NS hva, adverbially.

Hvo-gva, a friendly tribe, 46.16,17 51.17,18.

hyama, we might be, 30.9,—0, ah.

hyat, it might be, 48.1516 44.17,—0, ah.

hyat, which, that, because, so that, frequent,—conj. and pron.

hyata, you might be, 50.7,—0, ah.

hyém, I might be, 43.8 50.9,—0, ah.

hyén, they might be, 514,—0, ah.


Lo


GATHIC DICTIONARY—35 itha


I


1, unrenderable, 31.22 58.6,—conjunction.

i, they, 84.2 44.2 49.6 53.5—NADuP?.

ida, here, 29.8.

Idi, come! 46.16,—imp. ay.

Im, (this?), 30.9 44.19 45.1,3,4,11 46.5,8 51.12.

ira, with zeal, 49.10,—IsS -a, n.

iratii, attack! 53.8,—imp. ar.

irixtem, an end, 82.7 44.2,—AS -a, n.

IS, pronoun, these P 30.6 31.18 32.13 44.14 46.12 51.14 53.89.

isal(ca), I am able, 28.4 48.9 50.11; isé, 50.1 3SPM—aés.

isemno, he shall be able, shall stand up for, 46.6,—adj. P£PM.

Ish, desire, f. -&, IsS 29.9;-em, AS 28.7; -0, NP 50.4, AP 28.9.

Isha xshathrim, 29.9,—AS -rya, adj. f.

Ishaefiti, let them seek, desire, 45.7—aésh.

Ashanam, desiring, imitating, 32.12 GP ishan, adj.

Ishasa, I shall seek, 31.4,—aésh.

Ishasas, seeking, desiring, 51.19,—NS PrP aésh.

Ishas0if, he might seek, 50.2,—0, aésh.

Ishatha, you have come to seek, 45.1,—aésh.

ishayas, deserving, caring, 50.9,_NSPrP Pr24 ishaya.

ishefiti, they are seeking, 46.9,—aésh.

ishefit6, desirous, 30.1 47.6,—NPPrP aésh.

Ishta, wealth, ability, AP 46.16 49.12; ishtim, AS 32.9 46.2;
Ishtis, NS 48.8 53.1; ishtis, AP 34.5 44.10; ishtois, GS 46,18
91.2,18,—ishtay, f.

Ishya, prized, desired, 48.8 NP? -yam, AS 51.17 -yéfig, AP 2.16

Ishudd, compensations, 31.14, NP; -dem, AS 34.15,—ishud, f.

isOya, I would wish to be, 43.8,—1SPM, aés.

isva, disposing of, 47.4; ability, 43.14,—Is8 isvan, adj.

It, indeed, no doubt, intensive, 28.8 43.10 44.20.

It, pronoun, this P 44.19 46.2

itha, so, thus, therefore, 33.1 45.8 47.4 53.6.


ithyejo GATHIC DICTIONARY—36 izyal


ithyejo, dangers, 34.8,_NP -jah, n.
ivi-zayatha, you dismiss, 58.7,—2PPr za(y).
izaca, zeal, 49.5,10 51.1, NS; izayae, 50.8, GS—f
izyal, I desire, 49.3,—az.


jaidyai GATHIC DICTIONARY—38 jyotim


J


jaidyai, to kill, 32.14,—ean.
jamaéte, they shall both meet, 44.15, 3DKM,—gam, which forms
jamaiti, it shall come, 30.8.
jafitt, may come, 44.16.
jasaétem, they both came, 30.4.
jasai, I will come, 51.22.
jasat, he came, 30.6,7 (43.1-15); in 51.15 came or shall come.
jasata, do you come! 28.3.
jas0, come thou! 43.6.
jasoit, might come, 46.8,—O.
javaro, inciter, M, weighing, B. 48.8,—NS -a, m.
jayais, with urgers, 50.7,—IsP jiya, m.
jénayO0, women, 53.6,—NP gena, 7.
jéneram, murder, killing, 53.8,—AS -&, 7.
jéenghatica, they are coming, are future, 31.14,—Aor gam.
jigerezat, he will complain, 32.13,—garez.
jima, I come, 29.3,—gam, which forms also
jimaiti, they will come, 48.2.
jimaf, it may come, 48.4 44.1 46.3 48.11.
jimen, they shall come, 45.5.
joOya, gain, desire, 32.7,—gay; IsS -a, f.
jva, they who were living, the past, 45.7;—gay, which forms
jvamahi, we may live, 31.2,—1PKA.
jvafito, all living, 31.3,—AP, PrP.
jvas, living, 46.5,—NS, PrP.
jyaitim, life, 33.5,—AS jyatay, f, which forms
jyatéus, of life, 32.9,15 46,4 53.9,—GS. m. jyatav.
jyotim, life, 31.15 32,11,12,—AS. m.


ka GATHIC DICTIONARY—40 kerenaun


K


ka how? what? 31.5 41.819 48.8 51.1; ka-cit, 46.8.

kada, whether, when, 2.9 46.3 48.9; kadarém, 41.17.

kaeiby0, to or from which? 44.6 46.3.

kaéna, punishments, 30.8,—NP -na, /.

kahmai(cit), to which? 29.1 48.1 44.16,

kahya(cit), of which? 43.7; kahyaicit, to which? 33.11.

kainiby0, to maidens, 53.5,—DP -nya, f.

kam, for the sake of, 44.20,—preposition, with dative.

kamem, desire, 28.10, AS; -€, 82.13, LS; -ahya, 43.18, GS.—m.

kamna.fshva, having few flocks, 46.2,— NP -a, 2.

kamna.na, having few followers, 46.2,_-NP kamna-nar, m.

Karapa, a tribe, 4.20 and -an0, 46.11 48.10 NP; -pa, 32.12 and -potaesca
32.15 AP. :

kascit, whoever, 49.5, NS.

kaséus(cid, of little, few, 31.18 47.4,—GS kasav, adj.

kasna, who? 44.3,4.

kasté, which, 29.7 46.14.

kat, whatP 48.2 49.12 50.1.

ka-ta, how, which, 33.8.

katarém, which of the two, 44.12.

katha, with what, how, 2.2 43.7 44,2,911,13,14,17,18 45.1 50.2.

kathé, the retributions, 44.2,_-NP -tha, n.

kathe, to show favors to, to entertain, 47.4,—kan.

Kava, a tribe, 44.20 NP-yascit, 32.14 46.11 AP3 46.14 51.16 53.2 NS.

kaya, may desire, 33.6,—ka.

ké, who, whatP 2.1 44.3,4,5,7,12,16 46:9 49.7 50.1 $1.11.

kehrpém, body, 30.7 51.17,—AS kehrp, zn.

kém, whom? 29.2 46.7,—AS.

kéfig, whom? 48.11,—AP.

keredusha, protection, 29.3,—IsS -dush, rn.

kerenaun, they make, 30.9,—kar.


kereta GATHIC DICTIONARY_4| kuthra,
——


Kereta, he made, 44.4,—kar.

Kevino, of the Kavay tribe, 51.12, NS; -itaesca, 32.15, AP.
k0i, who, 48.11,—NP.

ki, where? 53.9; ku-da, 29.11.

kuthra, whither, 84.7 44.15 46.1 51.4.


ma GATHIC DICTIONARY—43 manoi


M


ma, not.

ma, me, 2.1 31.17,18 32.9 45.6 46.1,7,9 48.2,5 49.1,2 50.2 51.10.

ma, my, 46.2,—NPn.

madahya, of this intoxication. 48.10,—GS_ mada, m,

mae, the moon, 44.3, NS mah, m.

maetha, unclear, undecided, separate, 30.9.—NP -a, adj.

maeétha, crisis, change, uncertainty, 31.12 3.9 34.8, -a, ff

magahya, 48.10, B reads madahya.

Maga, Magian tribe, m; -ahya, GS 48.10 51.16 93.7; -Ai, DS 29.11 46.14
lll. From maga, n, a hole?

magauno, of a Magian tribesman, 33.7,—GS magavan, m.

magavabyo, to or from Magian tribesmen, 51.15.

mahmai, to me, 50.7, DS.

mahmi, in my, 32.1, LS.

mahya, of me, 32.9 48.12 50.6 GS.

ma/yae, of my, 44.10 45.18 50.9; or of mystic, see maya.

maibya(ca), to or from my, 2.7,8 46.17 49.8.

maibyo, to or from me, 2.2 31.4 43.14 46.3 48.8 51.10.

Maidy0i-maemha, relative of Zarathushtra, a missionary; 51.19 VS.

mainis, punishment, 31.15 44.19, NS -ay, 7.

mainyafita, they think, 34.8,—man.

mainyéus, of the spirit, frequent, GS mainyay, m.

mairishtd, who best remembers, 29.4,—NS -a, adj.

manae, mind, 45.2,-NS manah, n, which forms

manahim, spiritual, 53.6,—AS manahya, adj.

manaothris, monitresses, 44.5,—NP -1, /-

mananha, with the mind, IsS; -h6, of the mind, GS manah.

mananhasca, mind, GS NAP, 43.3 46.7,18 etc.

manarois, of the message, 48.10,—GS -ray, f

manayeiti, he causes me to think, wait; hinders.—49.2, man.

mano, abode, B. 30.4 34.8,—NP manah, n. abode P

mandi, according to my mind, 82.1,—DS -na, n.


manta GATHIC DICTIONARY—44 Mazdah


mafita, thought, 31.719 3.6 51.1,—from the verb man; or

mafita, guardian, counsellor, manager, Iss -tav, m. which forms

mafitii, 46.17, IsS; mafittm, AS 33.4.

manyai, I will consider, 48.9,—man.

manyata, may be considered, 45.11,—man.

manyeté, he shall be thought, 44.12. ib.

manyéus, of the spirit, frequent,—GS mainyav, 7.

marakaéca, to death, 31.18,—DS -ka, m,

maraxtard, the destroyers, 32.18,—NP -tar, m.

maredaiti, it destroys, 51.13,—mared.

marefiti, they mark, remark, notice, 43.14,—mar, also

marefito, 31.1,—NP PrPart.

marexshaité, he would wish to kill, 51.10,—8SK s-AorM marek.

maretaéiby6, to or from men, mortals, 2.7 45.5,—martiya, m.

maretaéshii, among mortals, men, 46.13,—LP ib.

maretano, of human, mortal, 0.6 32.12,—GS maretan, adj.

mas, much, 82.3 34.9,—ad).

masha, men, mortals, 29.11, VP; mashim, 382.5, 46.11 AS.

mashya, men, mortals, 3.4 NP; -ai, 4.5 DS; -~AiS, 29.4 34.5 48.1 IsP;
-ascd, 4.ll, -yéfig, 2.8 AP; -aéshii, 43.11 LP; -aenho, 2.11 VP.

mat, always, with, 32-1 34-11 43.14 44.7,15 45-9 46.19 48.11 50.8.

mathra, (mystic) word, m. -rem, 2.7 31.6 4.3 AS; rasca, 31.18 AP;
-Ya, 4.17 50.6 51.8 IsS; -rae, 8.1 AP; -rais, 4.14 IsP.

mathran, word-speaker, prophet, m. -Pa, 2.7 9.5 41.8 NS; -nasca,
-neé, 40.5 DS; -n0, 2.13 GS.

maya, 33.9. with me, B IsSf ma-ya; but, M, it may come from

maya, f, joy, bliss, B; mystery, M smahya, 32.9 IsS; mayae, 43.2,
AP; mahyae, 44.10 GS.

maz, large, adj. -20i, 3.11 4.14 DS; -2é, 30.2 GS (B); -ibis, 2.11, Is
P, adverbially.

maza-raya, possessing much wealth, 43.12, Iss/-

maza-xshathra, O much power-possessing, 49.10 VS.

mazdaenho.diim, you are to remember, 45.1, 2P s-AorM, mazda.

Mazdah, God, the Mindful One, frequent, see Table of Divine
Names. -da, VIs;-die, NGAbl; -dam, AS; -aesca, 33.11, GS?;


mazdatha GATHIC DICTIONARY—45 moithat


polytheistic plural -aesca, 30.9 31.4.
mazdatha, memorable, 30.1,—AP -a, n.
mazdazdiim, to be remembered, 58.5,—s-Aor mand.
mazibis, greatly, 32.11.
mazishta, greatest,— -tam, ASf 31.18; -tem, m 28.5 33.5 45.6
-t6, NS 49.1 53.8.
mazyo, greater, 31.17, NS -a, adj.
me, mé, me, NGS or conj. 29.5 44.8 50.1 53.6.
méhmaidi, he shall be considered, 46.13,—man.
mém, 53.4 my? AS?
ménai.ca, I consider, 45.3,—ISKM, man.
ménea, I advise, 53.5, below,
mén . . dadé, I am mindful, 28.4, 1SPM, mand.
mén(ca)daidyai, to memorize, 44.8 31.5.
még, thou hast thought out, 40.2,—2SPrA, man.
méfghai, I would think, acknowledge, 43.4.
méfighi, I thought, 31.8 43.5,7,9,11,13,15; ménmghi, 29.10.
merashyat, he will destroy, 45.1,—3SOA marek B Handb.67.4.
merazdyai, to smite, 44.14, inf marez.
merefigeidyai, to destroy, 46.11, inf marek.
merengeduyé, you may destroy, 2PPrM, 53.6, ib.
merethyaus, of death, 53.8, GS -av, m.
merezdata, pity me! 33.11,—marez.
merezdika, pitying, 51.4,—NP -ka, adj.
mimagzo, thou shalt magnify, 45.10,—2S mang.
minas, thou wilt mingle, unite, 46.14,—2SPrA myas.
mithahya,,. false, 33.1,—NPn, -ya, adj.
mithah-vacae, false-worded, 31.12,—NS -eah, adj.
mithroibyo, to or from engagements, contracts, 46.5,— ra, m.
mizdavan, compensating, 43.5,—APn of PrPart -vafit, mizda.
mizdem, compensation, 34.13 44.18.19 46.19 61.15 9.7 AS; -(1é, 49.9 GS.
mizén, they care for, 44.20,—maéz.
mdi, conj. or pron. to me, B.3 2.1 44.10 46.7,10,18,19 49.1 50.1 51-2,1,17,18,21-
moist, he may send (in), admit, 46.12,—maéth, hémithyag.
modithat, he may send (out), deprive, 46.4,—ib.


morendat GATHIC DICTIONARY—46 myazdem


morefidat, he destroys, 32.9.10,—mared.
morefiden, they destroy, 32.11,12,—ib.
moshu.ca, soon, 53.8.
moyastra barana, bearing company, 380.9.
mraocas, dodging, 53.7, NS PrPart -afit P
mraoi, he tells, 32.14-—mrav, which forms

mraomi, | utter, 53.5.

mraos, thou toldst, 34.13, 43.12.

mraot, he told, 32.2,10,12 45.5 46.9 41.19.

mraodta, you told, 8.11.

mraott, tell! 31.17.

mravat, told, 2.3 45.2.

mravaiti, it is told, 41.8.

mruité, to tell, 49.6.

mruyaz, he should tell, 46.5 41.8.

mruyé, to tell, 49.3.
mithrem, excrement, 48.10,—AS -ra, n.
myazdem, solid offering, 34.3,—AS -da, m.


na GATHIC DICTIONARY—48 nemoi


N


na, na, nae, not, conj, frequent, 8.2,13,14,18 4.19 45.2 46.10 48.7 51.8,10,1,
19,21.
na, man, 46.2,—NS nar, m.
nabaesea, atmosphere, clouds, 44.4,—AP nabah, 7.
nadefitd, imprecating, cursing, 33.4,—GS -danit.
nae, us, AP 29.11 33.7 34.7,8,12 43.3,10 46.18 50.5.
naécim, no indeed, 34.7.
naécis, nobody, 43.6,13: naécit, 32.7.
naeda, neither, none, 2.6 45.2 46.1 49.2.
naéshat, it may lead, 31.20,—3S Aor K nay.
nafshuca, among relatives, 46.12,—LP napai.
naidyaenhem, the weaker, 34.8,—AS -yah, adj.
namenis, with or by their names, 51.22,—IsP, -man, 72.
nana, ? separated off P B 48.4.
naptyaéshi, among descendants, 46.12,—LP naptya, m.
narem, a man, a hero, 30.2 AS; narod, 49.10 53.6 NP; narol,
98.8, DS; —nar, m; na, neres.
narepis, diminishing, 58.9, AP -pis, 2, from verb, narep.
nasat, he attained, 51.16, 53.6,—nas; anasat, énaxshta, viné-
nasa.
nashama, we may drive off, 44.3,—nash.
nasvae, they have perished, 51.18,—nas.
nasyafito, they who disappear, 32.4,—NP PrPart nas.
nazdishtam, nearest, 33.4 50.3,—AS -ta, adj.
né, conj. or pron. to or of us 2.8 9.2 31.11 44.) 45.8,9,10 48.5 50.1 51.16,20.
nemahvaitis, reverent, 33.7,—NPf, -vani, from nam.
nemah, reverence, n, forms
nemanha, IsS 2.1 34.3 50.6,8 51.5,20.
nemanho, GS 43.9 44.1 45.8.
nemasca, GS AP 49.10.
nemé, I may revere, 44.1,—nam.
nemdi, to flee. 46.1,—inf. nam.


neras GATHIC DICTIONARY—49 oya


neras, men, 45.7,—AP nar, m.

heres, of a man. 2.9 ¥.2, GS nar.

ni, down, 2.14 48.7.

ni-dama, I will lay down, 45.8,—da.

ni-datem, set down, 48.3,—AS PfPA ni-da.

ni-paenhé, I am to protect, 2.11 49.10,—1SK s-AorM ni-pay.

ni-varani, B’s reading of varani, 53.4.

nis, off, 44.18, with nashama.

ni-shasya, settled down, 50.2,_-AP PfP shay. B derives from
nis-hasya, fut. of hant, to remove.

nOit, mot, 2.9 2.1 30.3,6.47.4,5 48.7 49.2,4,9 §1.6,12,14- 46.1

nu, nu.rém.cit, 31.7 45.1,8 61.1.

nu-nae, now to us, 29.11.


0


Oya, tn result of this, 47.2,—IsS a, this.


padais GATHIC DICTIONARY—5|1 parahim


Pp


padais, with verses or verse-feet, 50.8,—IsP pada, n.

padebis, with verses or verse-feet, 51.16,—IsP, pad, m.

pafré, he hindered, 49.1,—Pf par.

pairi, around, from, under, 2.5 34.8 46.1 51.22.

pairi-ais, the former, those that I did earlier, adverbial verb, B.

pairi-cithif, earlier, 29.4.

pairi-gaeétheé, in the outer realm, 34.2,—LS -tha, n.

pairi-(ca)-jasai, I will come around, 28.2 50.8 51.22,—¢am.

pairi-jasaz, he came around, 49.7,9,11,13,15.

pairi-matois.ca, of thinking beyond, pride, 32.3,—GS -tay, f.

pairyaogza, thou commandedst around, proclaimedst, 43.12,—
28Pr aog.

paithi, upon, beside the path, 50.4,—IsS after 4, pathi, f.

paithyaéca, to a master, 53.4,— DS patay, m.

paiti, again, to, at, for, with, but, 31.2 33.11 34.6 4.7 4.11 90.9 51.2.

paiti-ereté, who has opposed, 44.12,—NS/f -ta, PfP ar.

paiti-mraoé, said again, answered, 32.2,—mrayv.

paiti-mravat, said again, answered, 29.3,—mrav.

paitise, the master, 44.9,—NS patay, m.

paitishat, he receives, 44.2,—aésh, to seek.

paiti-zanata, you recognize, 29.11,—2PPrA, zan.

paityaoget, rebounding, answering, 46.8,—adverb from aog.

paity-a-stém, impressed, obedient, 53.3,— AS -stay, f—sta.

paityeifiti, they go again, meet, 49.11,—3PPM ay.

paouruyae, the first, 46.6,—AP parav.

paouruyais, with the first, 46.15,—IsP parav.

paouruyehya, of the first, 38.1 48.6,—GS paourva.

paourvim, at first, 29.10 30.4 31-11 43.5811 442 51.2,— adverbial AS of
paouruya, adj; see pourvim.

para, out, through, before, away, 9.2 43.12 48.2 51.15 53.6,7.

paraca, before, 53.7.

parahiim, in the future, 46.19,—AS parahva from para, anhay


paraos GATHIC DICTIONARY—52 pitha


paraos, of much, powerful, 47.4,—GSm. parav, or paourva,
meaning much or first.
paré, out, before, 33.7 34.5.
parshta, to ask, 48.10,—inf. fras, for P£P.
parshtém, to ask, 43.10,—absolute fras.
paséus, of cattle, 51.15 50.1,—GS pasav m.
pasis, cattle, 45.9,—AP. ib.
pat, he will keep, 82.13 46.4,—pa(y).
pata, father, 44.3 45.11 47.2,—NS patar, pitar.
patarém, 31.8 45.4,—AS ib.
patham, the path, 31.9,—AS patha, f
patho, of the path, 51.18,—GS path, n.
patho, the paths, 33.5 34.12 43.3 §3.2—AP ib.
pathméfig, the paths, 45.4——AP pathman, n.
patois, of the master, 45.11,—GS patay, m.
paurvatatem, the first-fruit, 38.14,—AS tat, f.
payat, he guards, restrains, 46.8,—3SKA pa(y) patpoi nipaenheé
paytim, guardian, 46.7,—AS payav, m.
perena, thou fulfillest, 28.10,—2SIA par,
perenaenhd, full, 44.138,—NAP -na, adj.
peresa, I asked, 31.14,15,16 43.10 44.1-2,—fras, which forms
peresaete, 31.13, as passive, 3DPM.
peresai, I ask, address, 44.12.
peresaiteé, he counsels, keeps watch, 31.12; in 13 Barthlo. reads
peresaete.
peresas, asking, 51.5,—NS PrP.
peresat, he asked, 29.2 43.7.
peresmanéng, deliberating, 30.6,—AP -na, adj.
peretae, 51.13, peret0, 51.12, at the bridge,—LS -tav, m.
peretus, 46.11, NS; peretiim, 46.10, AS.
peretha, compensations, 48.2,—NP -tha, n.
perethiis, wide, 50.7,—AP -thav, adj.
pesho-tanvo, body-forfeited, 53.9,—NP -va, adj. tant.
pishyasi, let them see, appreciate, 50.2,—pah.
pishyeifiti, they behold, 44.20,—pah.
pitha, 53.6, P


pithré GATHIC DICTIONARY—S53 puthrem


pithre, to a father, 44.7,—pitar, fedrdi.
pithwa, with food, 44.5, IsS -tav, f,— arém-pithwa, noon, as
right time for food?
poi, to protect, 44.15,15,—inf. pa(y).
pouru, much, first consonantal stem-form of parav, which forms
pourubyo, 84.8 DAbIP.
pourtis, 43.15 NSm.
pouris, 47.6 NP.
pourushi, 50.2 LP.
pouruye, 30.2 44.19 45.2 LS temporal.
pouruyod, 28.11 GS?
pouruyo, NS 9.7 31.7 4.311 46.9 51.3,15.
pourvim, AS adverbial, 8.1 31.8 4.3: see paourvim.
pourt-aénae, of many violences, 32.6,—NS -nah, adj.
Pouru-cista, third and youngest daughter of Zarathushtra, the
bride of Frashaoshtra, 53.5 (much wisdom, ‘Sophia’).
pouru-temais, as much as possible, 34.1.
puthrem, a son, 44.7, AS puthra, m.


radat GATHIC DICTIONARY—55 rareshyan


R


radat, he prepares, adapts, 51.6,—rad.

radanha, with ready willingness, 46.13,—radah, n.

radanho, of a Preparer, 46.17 45.7,—GS radah, adj.

radem, a Preparer, 29.9,—AS rada, m.

radefiti, they prepare, 33.2,— rad.

raenhanhoi, thou wouldst grant, 28.8,—2SKAorM, ra.

raenhayen, they would cause to apostacize, 32.12,—rah, caus.

raéxenae, the inheritances, 34.7,—-AP -nah, n; raék.

raéxenanho, of the inheritance, 32.11. GS ib.

rafedrahya, of support, assistance, 28.1,—GS -dra, n.

rafedrai, support, 28.3 33.13 46.12,—DS ib or Inf rap.

rafedrém, support, 46.2; -drem, 51.20,—AS.

rafeno, of assistance, 2.6 4.814,—GS -nah, n. with aojofighvags,
NAn, ‘strength of assistance.’

raithim, a way,(ofunderstanding), directions, 50.6,—AS -thya, m.

rajis, 53.9 P—isolated ones, M; B reads arejis, valuable, from
AP arejay, adj? Verb areg, arejat.

rama-da&e, peace-giving, 47.3,—AS -dah, adj. n.

ramamea, peace, 29.10 48.11 53.8,—AS raman, n.—Verb ram

ramemea, cruelty, 49.4, AS rama, m. Belongs with rema.

ranayae, of both contending parties, 31.19—GD rana, m.

ranoibya, to both contending parties, 31.3 47.6 51.-——DD, ib.

randibyd, 43.12,—DP ib.

rany0-skeretim, fortune-bringing, 44.6 47.3 90.2—AS -tay.

raocae. the lights, 50.10; raocaesea, 44.5—AP raocah, n.

raocebis, with the lights, 30.1 31.7,—IsP ib.

raosta, it lamented, 29.9,—raod.

rapafité, for support, 34.4,—DS PrP rap.

rapafito, 28.2, of support,—GS ib.

rapén, they may support, 51.18,—rap.

raresho, apostate, 49.2,—NS -sha, adj. with ablative.

rareshyan, that they may apostacize, 82.11,—Pr29 rah.


rareshyeifiti GATHIC DICTIONARY—56 roithwen


rareshyeifiti, they have apostacized, 47.4,—rah.

rasho, the harm, 80.11,—AS rashah, n.

rashayénghe, to injure, 49.8 51.9,—inf. rash.

rashna, with an abservance, command, 46.5,—IsS razan, n.

rashnam, an observance, command, 34.12,—AS ib.

rasti, he belongs to, 53.9,—3SPA rath.

ratam, oblation, service, 33.14 43.9,—AS ratay, adj.

ratay0, serviceablenesses, 33.7,—NP ib,

rathem6, belonging to, 44.17, NS; 538.6 NP;— -a, adj.

ratois, of serviceableness, 29.11,—GS -tay, adj.

ratim, judge, judgment, 31.2 44.16 51.5—AS ratav, m.

ratus, judge, 29.2,6,—NS ib.

rattis, judgments, 33.1 48.6,—AP ib.

rayo, riches, 43.1,—AP (B, GS) ray, m.

razaré, command, decree, 34.12,_NS razar, n.

razishta, the most right, 83.1—AP erezav. sup.

remem, cruelty, 48.7, AS; rem0, 29.1, NS;—rema, m. Belongs
with rama.

roithwen, to saturate, fill, 31.7,—inf. ?


sadra(cit ) GATHIC DICTIONARY—S8 sastaro


S


sadra(cié), pain, grief, torment, 4.7 8.11 4.7W—AP -ra, n.
sahit, he may teach, 50,6,—sah.
sahyat, he may pronounce, 44.19,—sah.
sahvaré, plans, 29.4,—AP -var, 7.
sahveni, I teach, 53.5,—sah; or AP safvan, n.
saocayat, he may burn, 32.14,—saok. :
saoshyafit, helper, savior, PiP savy; in sing. of Zarathushtra, in
plur. of his helpers. See
saoshyantam, GP 34.12 46.3.
saoshyanto, GS 45.11.
saoshyafitd, NAP 48.12 53.2.
saoshyas, NS 4.9.
saré, to commune, 49.3,—inf. sar, which forms
saredanae, ‘43.14, scorner, B; princely chief, M; society-giving
church-organizing.—AP -na, adj.
saredyayae, companions, 33.9, GDu. -ya, m.
sareja, helper, 29.3,—NS saregan, m.
sarém, 49.8%; sarem, 53.3, ‘united society, association, commun-
ion,—AS sar, f. (B, GP 49.9).
siremno, being in communion with, 32.2,—Pf£P NS -na, adj.
sarenté, to him who is communing with, 51.8,—PrP DS.
saro, associations, 31.21,—AP sar, f- (B, GS).
sardi, to commune, 44.17,—inf.
sarshta, he communes, 49.5.
sas, the effecting, doing, 43.11 46.19,—sand, NSPrP or 2Ss-AorA
sashatha, you have familiarized yourselves, 30.11,—sak.
sashenea, they may learn, 53.1,—sak.
sasnae(sca), teachings, commands, 99.8 31.18 49.9,—AP -na, f.
sasnanam, of teachings, 48.3,—GP ib.
sasnaya, with the teaching, 29.7,—IsS.
sasta, you procure, 29.1,—2P s-AorA sand.
sastaro, the princes, 46.1,—NP -tar, m.


sasté GATHIC DICTIONARY—59 Seraosh6


sasté, in the consummation, 80.8 46.12,— sasta, n.
sasti, he is teaching, 48.3,—sah.

sastis, teacher, 32.9 45.1,—adj. in comp. NS -tay.
Sastrai, to fulfil, consummate, 46.3,—sand.

sastil, may he teach, 45.6,—sah, sasti,

sava, the profits, 44.12 45.7,--AP sava, f.

savaca, the profits, 30.11,—NSf, ib.

savais, with profits, 48.1 51.15,—IsP ib.

savanho, of profit, 43.3,—GS savah, n.

savanh6, the profits, 51.2,—AP ib.

savanham, of profits, 28.9,—GP ib.

savayo, to procure profit for, 51.9,—inf. sav.

savoi, in the place of profit, 48.12,—LS sava, f. (B, AD/)
sav, a profit, 84.8 51.20,—NS savah, n.

sazdiim, to be opposed, 31.18,—sa.

sazdyai, to fulfil, 30.2 51.16,—sand.

seantii. they strive, 53.2,—hak.

sénida, they effect, 51.14,—sand.

séfigha, with the teaching, 44.16,—IsS séfigha, m.
séfigha, teachings, 45.2,—NP ib.

séfighaenho, teachings, 48.3,—AP ib.

séfighahya, of the teaching, 43.14 44.14 48.12—GS ib.
séighais, with the teachings, 46.3 51.14,—IsP ib,
séfighaité, he declares. 32.7,—M sah.

séighamahi, let us formulate, 31.1,—ib.

séfighanais, with the teachings, 32.9,—IsP séfighana, m.
sénighani, I declare, 46.17,—sah.

séfighasca, the teachings, 31.11,—NP séfigha, m.
séfigh6, the teaching, 32.6 51.14,—NS ib.

séfights, through the teachings, 34.7,—IsP séfighav, m.
séfinhe, in the teaching, 51.7,—LS séfigha, m.
seraosha, with obedience, hearing, or Sraosha, 4§.17,—IsS -a, m.
seraoshané, I will hear, 50.4,—srayv.

Seraoshem, Sraosha, %.5 3.5, 45.5—AS -sha, 72.
Seraosho, Sraosha, 4.12 44.15,—NS ib.


sevishtai GATHIC DICTIONARY—60 spasya


sevishtai, for the strongest, 28.5,—DS -a, sup. sura.
sevisht6, strongest, 33.11,—NS ib.

shaéti, he dwells, 33.5 (43.3); shaéiti, 46.15—3SPA shay.
shoithrahya, of the clan, 31.16 46.4,—GS shoithra, 7.
shodithrem, the clan, 31.18, AS ib.

shyaomam, of the deeds, 32.3,—GP shyaoman, n.
shyaothana, deed, NS f, 45.4.

na, with deed, IsS 91.22 31,14 48.4 41.21.

na, deeds, NP 45.2.

na, deeds, AP 28.1 31-11 33.1  34.2,9,10,15 43.5 44.10 47.12 53.1.
naéshii, LP 31.8. |
nahya, GS 3.14 45.8.

nai, DS, 4.5.

nais, IsP 90.5 31.20,21 Y.8 43.6,16 44.6 45.5 46-4,7,8,11,15 47.5 48.512 50.9
§1.1,3,5,13,14,19 53.2.

nam, GP 2.4 48.8.

nasca, NP 31.6.

nat, AblS 32.12.

nem, AS 2.5.

néfig, AP 4.11 (adj.)

noi, LS 30.3;46.9.

shyas, those dwelling, 44.9 (47.5),—NS PrP shay.
shyato, he rejoices, 51.8,—shya.

shyavai, to treat, move, 33.8,—inf. shav.
shyéitibyo, to those rejoicing in, 53.8,—shya.
sinam, destruction, 44.14,—AS sina, /.

sisha, do thou reveal, teach, 28.11 34.12,—san.
sishdit, he would reveal, teach, 43.3,—O ib.
sizdyamna, they are driven back, 32.4,—NP adj PfPM sizdya.
skefid6, a break, 30.10,—NS -da, m.

snaithisha, with the weapon, 31.18,—IsS -ish, 7.
spada, both armies, 44.15,—ND -~la, m.

spanyae, the holier, 45.2,—NS -yah, comp. spefita.
spashutha, you discover, spy, 53.6,—2PPA spas.
spasya, I discover, look on, 44.11,—ib.


LT FLT


spathrahya, © GATHIC DICTIONARY_6| srevim
egg,


spathrahya, of success, 30.10,—GS -thra, 7.
spén.ca, fortune, success, 45.9, AP “spa, 7.
spenishta, through the most bountiful, 3.12 43.2 51.7 3.3,—IsS_ -ta,
sup. sperita.
spenishtahya, GS 47.2.
spenisht0, ASn, 30.5 43.16.
spefita, bountiful, VS 33.18,—-ta, adj.
ta, IsS 43.6 44.7 45.611 47.1,5,6.
ta, NSfi 51.41.
tahya, GS 2.1 34.2.
———tam, ASf, 32.2 31.910 49.2.
tat, AblS 47.4.
tem, ASv. 43.4,5,7,9,11,13,15 45.9.
tO, NS 43.3 44.2 47.3 48.3,7 51. 16,21.
spénitd.temo, more bountiful, 45.5—NS -ma.
spénvat, he promotes, 51.21.—spa.
spereda(ni), with zeal, down, 93,4,—spered, f, or I will emu-
- late, verb.
Spitama, tribe or family of Zarathushtra, ‘whit-ing’? 29.8 4.13.15,
51.11,12,19 §3.1,2,3.
sraota, hear! 9.2 3.11 4.1—srav, which forms
sraotd, 45.6,9 49.7,9, Imp.
SYavl, 32.7,8 45.10 93.1, is heard, recognized, —PrP pass.
sravayaema, we may cause to be heard, 49.6 caus.
a-srudtim, heard badly, ¥.3, augm. pass.
sruidyai, to hear, 34.12 45.5 (16.13) inf.
sruye, to be heard, 33.7 inf.
a-srvatem, both of them heard, 9.3—3DAugm.
sravae, words, 28.10,—NP -vah, 7.
sravae, AP 3.9,10: -v&esca, 4.15.
sravahi, LS 30.10.
sravanha, IsS 32.12.
sravahyeiti, to become heard, notorious, 32.6, sray, inf.
sravayenghe, to cause to be heard, proclaim, 29.8—ib.
srevim, hearing, 28.7,—AS -vay, f


sruidyai GATHIC DICTIONARY—62 syozdiim


sruidyai, to hear, 34.12 4.5 46.13,—srav.
sta, you are, #3 34.6.—Pr ah.
staenhat, they stood, 50.4,—8P s-AorA sta, axshtat 3P 51.4.
staomya, praisings, 33.8,—APn -ya, adj.
staotacé, praising, 30.1,—NP -ta, adj.
staotais, with praises, 45.8 49.12,—IsP -ta, m, stav.
staota, praiser, 50.11,—NS -tar, m, late word.
starémea, star, 44.3,—AS star, m.
staumi, I praise, 43.8,—stav, which forms

stavas, praising, NS PrP, 4.6 45.6 90.4,(9).
stéfig, places, 50.2,—AP stay, f, a-stis, 48.3.
StOi, to be, 31.8 3.9 34.4 45.10 46.16 49.2 50.2,65 LS stay.
sttitam, praising, praying, 28.9 34.2,—AS adj.
stuitd, praising, praying, $4.12,15 41.1.—AP ib.
stica, with sight, 30.2,—IsS -ca, adj.
stiidyai, to be useful to, 44.2 49.3,—inf. sav.
suxra, with red (fire), 31.19 51.9,—IsS -ra, adj.
suyé, to profit, 49.9,—inf. sav.
syascit, 32.16, P sa, it is teaching, P
syazdaf, he goes backwards, he shuns, 34.9,—syazda.
sy0zdiim, let it be opposed, 48.7,—s-Aor sa.


ta GATHIC DICTIONARY—64 temaesca


T


ta, this, IsS3P3 30.1,3,4,10 31-1,5,14 32.5,9 33.68 34.15 43.4 44.8 45.7 46.8,9 47.3,5,6
49. Jiehl. 2,5,10,12,13,15, a2.

ta-ca, 34.10 45.7 47.55 ta-cif, 31.5 44.3 46.19.

tae, these, NAVDu $1.14.

taé-cif, these certain, 32.11,—NP.

taébyaca, to both these, 51.2.

taéibyd, to or from these, 34.1 44.18.

taibyd, ib. 30.8 44.6 53.3.

tais, thus, 34.11 44.7.

tais(ca), with these, IsP 30.11 32.6 34.8 43.14 46.10,15,16 49.5 50.9-

tam, this, AS,GP 28.7 44.10 46.7 48.5 49.6 51.16,18.

taniim, body, 33.10,—AS tant, f, tanus, n, whence
tanushica, about the body, 43.8,—LS.
tanuyé, for his own body, personally, 30.2,—DS. .
tanvaseit, of his body, 838.14,—GS.
tanvém, body, 46.8,—AS.

taré-maitim, ‘thinking beyond’, arrogance,—33.4,—AS -tay, f.

Contrariness, as special opponent of gentle Ar-maiti, Y.60.5.

taré-manyafita, those scorning, 45.11,—NP PrP man.
taré-masta, those scorned, 45.11,—AP PfP man.

tasha (géus), the Shaper of the Cattle, 2.2 31.9 44.9,—NS -shan, m

tashat, shaped, 29.1,7,—tash.
tashd (gam). thou didst shape the Cattle, 31-11 44.6 51.7,—ib.
tasht, shaped, 44.7,—PfP,
tashtd, he was shaped, 49.9.

taf, that, 31.35 32.16 346,14 43.1,10,11 44.1- 19 46.2,5,9,18 49.7,8,10 51-1,18,19,20 53.5,8.

tatasha, I shaped, 29.6,—Perf. tash.

taurvayama, we may overcome, 28.6,—tar.

tava(ca), Iam able, 28.4 43.14 40-11 $1.18 $3.9,—tav.

taxmem.ca, heroism, 43.4,—AS -ma, adj.

taya, furtive, 31.13,—NPn, -ya, adj,

tém, therefore, this, 29.7 31.20 33.9 34.7,13 43.13 45.8,9,10 46.13 51.21 §3.4,7.

temaesea, darknesses, 44.5,—AP temah, n.


temanho GATHIC DICTIONARY—S55 tvém


temanho, darkness, 31.20,—NP ib.

témea-tii, do thou this, 53.8.

téfig, those, AP 32.1 44.1113 46.4,14.

tevisea, violence, 29.1,—NS tevish, 2.

tevishi, vitality, 834.11 51.7,-ND -shi, f

, through vitality, 45.10,—IsS ib.

tevishim, vitality, 83.12 43.1 48.6,—AS ib.

thraoshta, you mature, 34.3; it matures, 46.7,—thraosh.

thrata, protector, 50.1,—NS -tar, m.

thrayodyai, to protect, 34.5,—inf. thra.

thrazdiim, protect! 34.7,—s-Aor ib.

thwa, thee, thy, 28.5,7,11 43.415 44.3+19 46.1,3,9 49.8 51.4,9 53.3.

thwahmas, from thy, 28.11 43.9 46.7 47.5.

thahmi, in thy, LS 32.6,8 33.10 34.10 43.4,13 48.4,7 49.5,8,10.

thwahi, in thy, LP 43.7.

thwahya, of thy, GS 31.3 32.13 34.89 43.4,6 44.14 48.12.

thwahyae, of thy, GS 48.8.

thwam, thee, AS 2.10.

thwarozdum, did you fashion, create, 29.1,—s-Aor thwares.

thwa/fca, thee, thy,—ASn 33.4 44.3 50.1. |

thwavas, like thee, 31.16 43.3 44.19 8.38—NS PrP thwavafit

thwaxshanha, through zealous, 3.3 46.12, IsS -shah, n.
thwaxsho, zeal, 29.2,—AP ib.

thwé, thy, 31.9,—NS.

thwisra, shining, 31.13,—AP -ra, adj.

thwoi (asti), (is) to bless, 34.11,—inf. B. Doubtful.

thw0i, thy, NP 31.9 32.1 34.11 44.11 48.8.

thworeshta, creator, 29.6,—NS -tar, m.

fkaéshai, to the false teacher, 49.3,—DS -sha, m.
tkaésho, the false teacher, 49.2,—NS ib.

toi, to or of thee, thy, 2.2 30.7 32.15 33.2 46.2,9 48.1,8,12 49.411 51.8 53.9.
Also 30.9 33.6,9 43.10.15.

tii, but, 46. 10,16; thou, 28.6,7 32.7 49.7 51.3.

Turahya, of the Tura tribe, 46.12,—GS -ra, m.

Tushna-maitis, silent thought, or devotion, 43.15,—NS -tay, /.

tvém, emphatic conjunction, thee P 2.11 46.19 47.3 48.2.


nbé GATHIC DICTIONARY—67 urvazishtam


U


ubé, for both, 34.11,—DS uba.
ufyaca, I am lauding, 43.8,—vaf.
ufyani, I will sing hymns, 28.3,—ib.
ugréfig, strong, 50.7,—AP ugra adj.
iti, thus, 45.2.
upa, in, into, up, 45.5 53.8.
urtiddyata, they have caused to lament, 44.20,—raod.
urunasea, the souls, 49.10,—AP urvan, mm.
urtpayeifiti, they practice deceit, 48.10,—same as diwzaidyai.
urtiradst, he refused, 51.12,—3SPrPfA raod.
urushaéibyd, for the hungry, 29.7,—DP -sha, adj, hvarethra.
urvadanha, the joys, 48.2,—-AP -dah, n.
urvaidyae, (1, the) more joyful, 384.6,—NS -dyah, adj.
urvaésé, at the crisis, turn, change, 43.5,6 51.4—LS -sa, m.
urva, soul, 34.2 44.8 45.7 46.11 50.1 §1.13,—NS urvan, m, whence
urvaneé, DS 81.2.
urvanem, AS 28.4.
urvano, NAP 33.9 45.2 49.11.
uruarae(sca), plants, 44.4 48.6 51.7,—AP -ra, f.
urvashaf, he is encouraged, 44.8,—see urvaxsha+.
urvata, commands, 80.11 31.1,—AP -ta, n.
urvatahya, GS 34.8.
urvatais, IsP 31.1 44.15.
urvatem, AS 31.3.
urvatha, friendly, 51.14,—NP -tha, adj.
urvatho, a friend, 31.21 44.2 45.11 46.14 60.6 41.11,—NS ib.
urvatdis, of a vow, 46.5,—GS -tay, f
urvaxshaf, it is rejoicing, 384.18,—ASn PrPart.
urvaxs-uxti, with cries of joy, 32.12,—IsS -tay, f,
urvaza, bliss, 30.1,—NS,AP -za, f.
urvazema, bliss, 32.1, IsS,AP -zeman, n.
urvazishtam, most blissful, 49.8,—AS -ta, adj. supel,


us GATHIC DICTIONARY—68 uzemém


us, up, out! $3.12 46.11.
usémahi, we wish, 34.4,—vas.
usén, in his wish, 44.10 45.9,—LS [usan, 7.
ushae, dawn, 44.5,—NS ushah, f
usheurt, 34.7; M, in wide mental light? sophistries, IsS.
ushta, desired, beloved, decided, success! 30.11 33.10 43.1 46.16 51.8,16,
—2PPrA and PfP vas.
ushtana, by living, 43.16,—IsS -na, f. whence
ushtanai, for life, DS 34.14.
ushtanem, life, AS 31.11 33.14.
ushtis, will, 48.4,—NS -tay, f.
ushtremea, a camel, 44.18,—AS -ra, m.
ushuruyé, P 32.16 wide light P DS.
ushyai, to proclaim, 438.15.
Usixs(ca), an opponent of Zarathushtra, 44.20,—NS.
ustanais (zastais), with stretched-out, 29.5,—IsP PfP us, tan.
ustana-zast6, with outstretched hands, 28.1 50.8,—NS -a, adj.
usvahi, we desire, 46.16,—-vas.
usyat, he desires, 50.2,—ib.
utayuiti, enduringness, ASn 33.8 ; IsS 48.1; ADu 34.11 45.10
o1.7— -tay, f, whence
utayuitim, AS 48.6.
utayuitis, AP 30.7.
utayutta, 45.7, LS.
uxda, through utterance, 52.9 44.19,—IsS uxda, adj, whence
uxda, NP 45.2.
uxda, AP 43.5 44.8 51.20 58.1.
uxdahyaca, GS 33.14 45.8.
uxdais, IsP, 28.6 48.11 46.14 47.2 51.321 53.2.
uxsha, a bull, 50.10.—NS uxshan, m.
uxshano, the bulls, 46.3,-—NP ib.
uxshya, thou causest to grow, 33.10,—vaxsh, whence
uxshyeiti, to grow, 44.3,— inf.
uxshy6, thou causest to grow, 31.7.
uz-areshva, arise up! 33.12,—imp. ar.
uzemém, reverence, 44.7,—AS -ma, adj.


uzemohi GATHIC DICTIONARY—69 uz-tithyoi


uzemohi, we consider, regard, 46.9,—1PPA aoz.
uz-ere(ijdyai, to rise up, 45.12,14,—inf. ar.
uz-jén, he may go up, 46.12,—3SPrA gam.
uz-tithy6i, to protect,, 46.5,—inf. av.


i


va GATHIC DICTIONARY—7! vahmeé
saa Se all i ll


Vv


va, or, frequent. 51.11, you?
vacae, words, speeches, 31.1 38.8 49.7,_AP vak, m,f
vacahica, word, 30.3,—LS vacah, n. whence
vacanha, TsS 31.22 32.5 93.2 34.1 47.1 48.4.
vacanham, GP, 31.13, —uxdai as inf, ‘to speak truth of the
words of his tongue.’
vacanhd, AP 49.11.
vacé, AS, 45.5.
vacem, AS 29.9 31.12 50.6,—vak, mf.
vacl, it is said, 43.13,—vak, verb.
vaco, NP 31.20,—vacah, n.
vacd, AP 53.7,—ib.
vadaré, the weapon, 32.10,—AS -dar, 7.
vaday0if, may repel, 29.2,—vadaya.
vademn96, counselling, 58.5,—NS adj. to vadati, he speaks.
vae, you, NAP 2.29 31.2 32-1,3,5 43.13 49.6 50.4,8,9.
vaeda, he knows, 2.10 31.2 34.7 45.4 46.2 43.9.vaéed.
vaédem, as provider, 29.10 2.11,—AS -da, m.
vaedemnd, knower, expert, 2.5 31-2 8.1 48.3 §1.19..—NS PfP vaéd.
vaédena, knowing, 34.7,—NP adj.
vaedisht0, most knowing, 32.7 46.19,—NS.
vaedodtim, is to be known, 58.5,—vaéd, whence
vaedyai, inf, to know, 44.8.
vaem, we, 30.9, NP.
vaénahi, thou seeest, 31.13,—vaéna.
vaenanhe, to see, 32.10,—inf. ib.
vaepyo, a pederast, P 51.12,—NS -ya, adj
vaesho, place of decay 58.9,—AS -shah, n.
vatus, sayings, decrees, 29.6; vafus, 48.9,—AP vafav, m.
vahishta, best, frequent. %.7,8,9 30.2,4 31.1,4,6,7 32.6,11,12,16 33.3,6,7,9 34.15
43.2,11,15 44.2,10 45,4,5,6 46.6,10,18 47.1,2,5 48.3.5 49.910 50.1,4 51.1,4,22 53.1.
vahmé, praying praise, adoring, 84.2 45.6,—LS -ma, adj,


vahmahya GATHIC DICTIONARY—72 _ vaurdimaidi


vahmahya, of praying, praises, adoring, 50.7,—GS -ma, whence
vahmai, DS 46.10,17 50.10 61.2 9.2.
vahmem, AS 4.1.
vahméfig,, AP 45.8.
vahy6, better, 30.3 31.2,5 43.3 48.4 51.619 53.9.
vaifitya, supplicatory, 28.10,—NP -ya, adj.
vairim, at choice, 34.14 51.1,—AS as adv.
vairyae, ‘choice,’ valuable, 48.13,—GS -ya, adj.
vanaema, we may overcome, 31.4,—van.
vananam, victory, 44.15,—AS -na, f,
vanhau, good, 30.10 31.19 3.2 47.6 4.8, Is§ NAP vanhav, whence
vanhaove, DS 48.5.
vanhéus, GS, See 2.1,7,8,10 301,19 31.10 33.3,5,13,14 34.7,9,10,11,12,13,14 43.1,2,3,4
44.4,13 45.4,5,8,9 46.2,14,16 47.2 48.3,6-9,11 49.3 50.8,9 51.3,6,11,16 3.5.
vanhuya, IsS f, 33.12 51.10.
vanhuyai, DS 53.4.
vanhiis, AP 3.2. See voht, vanuhi.
vaiita, with praise, 51.22,—IsS -ta, m.
vanuhi, good, f, all cases: 3.2 43.5 48.2,5 49.1 51.10,17,18,21 §3.1,4.
vaoca, say, speak, 31.3,5 34.15 44.1-19 48.2.—vak, also
vaocaca, 49.3 ib.
vaocanhe, to proclaim, 28.11,—inf..vak.
vaocat, he speaks, 29.6 34.10 45.35 vaocad, 31.6.
vaorazatha, you have rejoiced, 50.5,—2PPfA urvaz.
vaoxema, through onr preaching, 34.5,—IsS -ma, from vak.
var, a, to choose, wnence
varata, 83PPrM 9.5 2.12.
varemaidi, 1PPrM 2.2.
vauroimaidi, 2.5 P
verenata, 3P, 30.6.
verene, 46.3.
verenité, 3SPM 43.16 51.18.
verenvaité, 3DPM 31.17.
var, b, to convert, whence
vauraite, 47.6.
vauraya, 1SOM 31.3.
vyauroimaidi, 2.5.


varanli GATHIC DICTIONARY—73 vastravaiti


var, c, general choosing, whence
varanl, ISP 53.4.
fra-vareta, 31.10.
varal, for the will, 3.2 51.4—DS vara, n.
varecie, help, 32.14,—ASn -cah, n.
varedaiti, she prospers, 28.3,—vared, whence
varedayaeta, they may increase, acquire, 50.3.
vareden, they increase, 49.4.
varedemam, to increase, 46.16.
varem, the will, 46.18,—AS vara, 7.
varenal, for conviction, manner of life, 49.8,—DS -na, m.
varenéfig, 31.11 48.4,—AP.
vareshaiteé, they have been performed, 29.4 3.1—8PAor varez:
vareshaiti, he works, 38.2 46.19.
varesha, I may have done, 50.10.
vareshaneé, I may work, effect, 51.1.
vareshefiti, they practice, 45.3.
varezayanto, of the working, 45.4, GS PrP.
vas, overcoming, 49.4,—NS vafit, PrP van.
vasae, the chooser, 31.11,—NS -ah, m.
vasase, arbitrary, powerful, 48.8,—in comp. from vasé.
vasat, he wills, 29.4,—vas.
vasé, at will, arbitrarily, 43.1 50.9 53.4—adv, see vaso.
vasé-itdisca, of freedom, %3.4—GS itay, f, (going).
vasemi, I wished, 2.9 43.1 44.3,—vas.
vashi, thou wishest, 34.12 43.9 44.16.
vashti, he wishes, 2.8 46.14.
vashyeté, it was announced, 44.11,—vash.
vasna, through or with will, 34.15 46.19 50 11,—IsS -na, m.
vaso, at will, 31.19 82.15,—adv. see vasé.
vasta, shepherd, 29.1,—NS -tar, m.
vaste, to clothe oneself in, 30.,5—vah.
vastra, with the pasture, 29.2 32.10,—IsS -tra, 7.
vastral, DS 47.3.
vastrat, verb? or AblIS 38.4 51.14.
vastravaiti, with a pastoral realm, 48.11,—IsS f PrP. -vaiir,


vastravaitim GATHIC DICTIONARY—74 verenté


vastravaitim, a pastoral realm, 50.2 AS ib.
vastre, in a pasture, 33.3,—LS -tra, n, whence
vastrem, a pasture, 44.20,—AS ib.
vastrim, the pastoral man, 31.10,—AS vastrya. whence
vastrya, AP 29.1 33.6.
vastryai, DS 29.6.
vastryat, AblS 81.9.
vastryaéibyo, DP 53.4.
vastryehya, GS 31.15.
vastry0, NS 51.5.
vatai, toa wind, 44.4,—DS vata, m.
vaunus, supplicating, 48.8,—Part. van.
vauraite, 47.6; vauraya, 31.3; vaurdimaidi, 28.5;—see var.
vaverez0l, to perform, 29.4,—inf. varez.
vaxedrahya, of a sppeech, 29.8,—GS -dra, n.
Vaxs, it may grow, 44.17,—vaxs, to grow.
vaxshat, it may grow, 31.6 48.1,6.
vaxshenté, for growing, are becoming known, 82.4, DS PrP.
vaxshya, I will utter, 30.1 46.15 51.8,—F vak.
vaxsht, caused to grow. 34.11.
vayol, woe! 53.7.
vayti-beredubyo, crying woe, 53.6 DP beret, adj.
vaza, both driven, 51.12,—-NDu -za, adj.
vazdanha, enduring, 49.10,—IsS -dah, adj.
vazdréfig, promotive, 46.4,—AP -dra, adj.
vazdvaré, enduringness, 51.21,—AS -dar, n.
vazisht0, most prospering, 31.22,—NS -ta, adj.
vazyamnaby0, to those who are being driven, (in marriage),
53.5,—DP PfP vaz.
vé, conjunction, indeed, 45.3 49.12 51.15 53.4,5,7-
vénghat, he may overcome, 48.2,—van.
vénnhaiti, he shall overcome, 48.1, ib.
vereda, with the increase, 31.4,—IsS vered, f. or from var?
verenata, that they should choose, 30.6,—var.
verené, I may choose, 46.3.
verenté, he may choose, 43.16 61.18,


verenvaité GATHIC DICTIONARY—75 vidushé
ee ee Oe


verenvaité, they both choose, 31.17,—3DPM.
verethrem-ja, “come with victory,’ victoriously, 44.16,—NS gan.
verezdais, with increasing, 46.3,—IsP PfPA varez.
verezénem, group of laborers, 32.1,—AS -na, n.
verezényo, a laborer, 33.3,—NS -ya, adj.
verezénahyaea, of the group of laborers, 33.4,—GS -na, 7.
verezéné, LS 34.14.
verezenyae, GS f, -ya, adj 45.9.
verezéna, NP 46.1.
verezénai, DS 49.7.
verezyat, he works, 47.2,—varez.
verezyatam, agriculture, 48.5,—AS -ata, f
vereZy0, activities, 30.5,—AP -zyah, n.
verezyeidyai, to work, act, 33.6 48.11,—inf. VarezZ.
vésta, 46.17, ? M, with recognized; B, of your; vé-sta, will
have stood for you.
Vi, out, 48.12.
vi-cayatha, he may sift out, 46.15,—kay, whence
Vi-cidyai, to sift out, 31.5 49.6, inf.
vi-cinao?, he may sift, 46.17.
vicird, he who is sifting, 29.4 46.5,—NS -ra, adj.
vi-cithahya, of the sifting, 30.2,—Gs -tha, n.
vi-cithem, 46.18,—AS ib.
Vi-cith0i, in the sifting, 32.8,—LS ib.
vida, thou? fore-knowest, 49.1,—vaéd.
vidaiti, he distributes, 51.6,—da.
Vidaitim, a distribution, 47.6,—AS datay, 7.
vidam, it shall be distributed, 82.6—8SIM vi-da.
Vidas, distributing, 83.83—NS PrP ib.
vidat, he may distribute, acquire, 51.5; vidat, 53.4.
vidata, in a distribution, 31.19, LS datay, f,
vidayat, he may distribute, 34.12 43.12.
vidishemnais, with the distributers, 51.1,—IsP PfP.
vido, partaking in, 51.18,—NP vid, adj.
vidus, who knows, 28.4 45.8.—NS PfP -av, vaéd.
vidushé, for the knower, expert, 30.1 31.17 51.8 Ds.


vidusho GATHIC DICTIONARY—76 _ vouru-eashané


vidusho, of the knower, expert, 34.9, GS.
viduye, to comprehend, 29.3 31.5 44.3, inf —vaed.
vidvae, the knower, expert, 29.6 31.6,12,17,19 32.6 34.10-44.19 45.3 48.23.
vi-dvaésham, of opponents of enemies, 34.11,—GP -shah, adj.
vidvanoi, to know, 31.3,—inf. vaed.
vidyat, he would (like to) know, 48.9,—ib.
vi-jémyat, she will extend, 44.11,—gam.
vi-merencaite, they would destroy, 31.1,—3PPM marek.
vinasti, they can find, 31.15,—vaéed, to find.
vi-nénasa, I will cause to disappear, 32.15,—1Pf nas.
viraatea, ‘hands,’ serfs, men, 31.15,—GD -ra, m.
viréfig, AP 45.9.
visen, they would reduce, 31.18,—vaés, whence,
visenta, they’reduce, raise, 32.14, 3PPrM.
visente, they will gain, 48.10, 3P s-AorKM.
vispa, all; all cases: %.1,8 31.2,3,13 33.5,10 34.2,3,5,6,10 43.2,14 44-3,7,11 45.1,6
46.10,11,19 49.3,5,8 51.20 53.4.
vispa-hishas, all-detecting, 45.4,—NS PrP.
vista, known, 48.2,_-NS f. PfP vaed.
vist0, knowingly, rightly, 29.6,8 50.1,—-NAS 7b. PfPass.
Visht-aspa, chief of Magians, 2.7 46.14 51.16 3.2.
vizibyd, to villages, 53.8,—DP vis, f.
vishyata, let him discriminate, 30.3,6,—-vaés.
vivapat, he destroys, 32.10,—vap, to raise.
Vivanhusho, son of Vivahvant, 32:8. NS.
vi-varesho, thou shalt seek to gain, 45.8,—varesh.
vi-véfighatiti, you shall be happy, 53.5,—van.
vi-viduyé, to know, understand, 43.9,—inf. vaéd.
Vohii, good, 2.3-6,11 29.1,10,11 90.7,8 31-5,6,22 32-2 33.7,8,10-12 34.5,6,815 43.7,9,11,
13,16 44.1,6,8,9,16 45.6,9,10 46.3,9,10,12,13,18 48.12 49.1,2,5,7,10,12 50.3,6,10,1 51.1,2,7,15,20,
ANS ER EE
voista, thou knowest, 28.10 32.6 46.10,—s-Aor vaéd.
voividaiti, he learns to know, 30.8,—3SKA.
voizdat, he raises, 32.10,—vaés.
voizdyai, to raise, 43.13, inf.
vouru-cashané, wide-glancer, 33.13,—VS -nay, adj.


voyathra, GATHIC DICTIONARY—77 vyanaya
ee eS


voyathra, hopes, 34.10,—AP -thra, n.

vy-a.daresem, I shall behold, 45.8,—dares.

vyam, reward, distribution, 48.7,—AS vyam, f.
vyanaya, with guidance, wisdom, 29.6 44.7,—IsS -na, f


xrafstra GATHIC DICTIONARY—79 xshayehi


X


xrafstra, savages, 28.5 34.9; M, vermin-polluted; B, small
beasts of prey;—AP -ra, 7.

xrafstrais, IsP, 34.5.
xraodaz, shall terrify, 46.11,—xraod.

xraodaiti, it shall tremble, 51.13,—3SKA.
xraosefitam, let them cry up, 53.8,—xraos.
xraozdishtéfig, the firmest, hardest, 30.5,—AP -ta, adj.
xratav, xrathwa, m, f, understanding, whence
——tae, LS 48.4.
——tavo, NP 45.2 46.8.
——téus, GS 32.4 34.14 43.6 46.18 49.6 50.6.
——thwa, IsS 31.7 48.3 53.3.
——tii, IsS 45.6 48.10.
——tiim, AS 28.1 32.9.
——tiis(ca), AP 31.11 32.14. 31.9
xrunyar, from bloody deed, 46.5,—AbIS -ya, rn.
xriineramca, bloodshed, 53.8,—AS -ra, f.
xrurais, bloody, 48.11,—IsP -ra, adj.
xsai, I will‘teach, 28.4,—1SKM xs&; see 4.xs0, 46.2.
xshanméné, to put up with, 29.9, inf.
xshapa.ca, with the night, 44.5,—IsS -pa, f
xshathra, 1, (m, 4.1011) ruler, realm, kingdom, power, an Ahura.
xshathrim, a ruler, 29.9,—AS -thrya, m.
xshaya.ca, O ruler, 28.7,—VS -ya, m.
xshaya, I shall rule, 50.9,—xsha(y), whence
yamnéneg, ruling, 32.15, AP Pf£P.
yamno, he who is ruling, 31.19, NS ib.
yafitae, they who are ruling, 33.9, AP PrP.
yanto, of ruling, 29.2, GS ib.
yas, ruling, 32.16 43.1,10 46.5 51.5,17.
yatha, thou rulest, 48.9.
yehi, thou hast ruled; 44.15.


xshayo GATHIC DICTIONARY—80 xshyo


xshayo, to destroy, 52.5, inf.
xshénta, xshéntam, let them rule, 48.5, xsha(y).
xshma, with You, 48.11 50.5, Iss.
xsmaibya(ca) to or from both You, 28.10 29.1 46.15 58.5. DADu
xshmaka, through Your, 34.15 IsS.
xshmakahya, of Your, 49.6 GS.
xshmakai, for Your, 50.10, DS.
xshmakam, of Your, 44.17 84.14 GP.
xshmakem, Your, 46.18 51.2 AS.
xshmazt, by, from P You, 29.1 44.17 AbISP
xshmavast, among such as You, LP. 84.3. -vafit.
xshmavatam, of such as You, GP. 46.10.
xshmavato, of One like You, 3.8 34.2 44.1 49.6 GS.
xshnaoshai to satisfy, 46.1,—inf. xshnav, whence
xshnaoshemno, I am satisfying, 46.18,—NS PfP.
xshnaoshen, they satisfy, 30.5,—3PKA.
xshnaus, (he is) satisfying, 46.1,13 51.12,—s-Aor.
xshnevisha, I may satisfy, 28.1.
xshntim, so as to satisfy, 48.12 58.2.
xshniitem, satisfaction, 31.38,—AS xshniié, f
xshusta, melted, liquid, 51.9,—IsS -ta, adj.
xshvidemea, milk, liquid food, 29.7,—AS xshvid, m.
xshy0, to destroy, 31.20,— see xshayo.


ya GATHIC DICTIONARY—82 yasca


Y


ya, who, frequent.— IsS NAP, ya.
ya-ca, above, 33.14 43.5 44.20 48.10 50.10.
yada, when, as soon as, 30.8; as far as, 31.4,16 50.9.
yae, yaesca, which, 31.14 33.10 34.3 43.4 44.5 46.8 53.1.
yae-ca, 30.5 45.1 53.1; yaé-cit, who, 48.3.
yaeibyasca, to or from both of whom, 28.8 DAbID.
yaeéibyo, to or from whom, 28.3 44.11, DAbIP.
yaenhd, (before the great event) of the crisis, 30.2,—GS yah, z.
yaésham, of whom, GP 32.7 49.4 561.3.
yaéshil, in which, LP 83.5 34.8°
yahi, in the crisis, 46.14 49.9,—LS yah, 2.
yahmai, to whom, DS 29.3 48.1 44.16 46.6.
yahmi, in which, LS 43.6.
yais, as, 32.7 44.20.
yais, with which, IsP 2%.2,11 32.3,6,7,12 44.1220 46.15 61.20.
yais a, adverbial verb, in the manner which, 29.11.
yam, ahold, 49.8,—AS yam, f
yam, pron. which, AS,GP 31.3 44.9 48.3 49.8 50.3 51.9,16,i7 53.2.
ya-nae, which us P 50.5.
yanais, with benefactions, 26.9,—IsP -na, m.
yaoget, he joins, 44.4,—3SPrA yaog, whence
yaoja, I join, 50.7.
yaojafite, for the meeting, 30.10,—DS or LS f. PrP.
yaos, I will sanctify, 44.9,—yaozda.
yaos, age, final conclusion, concessive, 46.18,—NS yav, a.
yaos—dané, I will perfect, 44.9,—yaozda.
yaozdae, thou who perfectest, 48.5,—NS yaozdah, adj.
yasa, I will entreat, 28.1,8 49.8 51.21,—yas, whence
yasas, entreating, 49.12,—NS PrP.
yasat, he entreats, 32.1.
yasea, which, AP, 32.3,10 46.10 51.6.


yasna GATHIC DICTIONARY—83 yezi


yasna, hymns, 34.1,—NP -na, m. whence
yasnahya, GS 84.12.
yasnais, IsP 45.10 50.9.
yasnasca, AP 538.2.
yasnem, AS 33.8.

yas-ta, whoever, 31.7 45.11.

yas-tat, he who, 44.19.

yas-té, I who,? 33.5 43.16.

yas-tém, whoever, 46.4,6.

yat, since, 32.4.

yatha, how, as that, 29.4 30.4,7 31.2,1d-16 33.1 34.5,6 44.1,18 45.3 46.9 48.9 49.6 51.5.

yathais, for yatha-ais, 33.1, in accordance with these,

yathana, such as, 31.22 48.10.

yathra, where, 30.9 31.11,12 46.11,16,17 53.7.

yaus, of an age, ever, 43.13,—GS yav, n. whence,
yava, for ever, 29.9 49.1,—IsS.
yavaetaité, in perpetuity, 28.11,—LS f -tat f
yavat, as far as, as much, 2.4 M.9 43.89 50.11 43.7.
yave, for ever, 28.8, DS.
yavoi, for ever, 46.11 49.8 53.1,4,—LS.

yayae, of which, 33.9 45.2 46.7,—Du;P.

yazai, I will worship, 33.4 50.4 51.22,—yaz, whence
yazaite, he worships, 82.3.
yazemnaenho, being worshipped, 51.20,—NP PfP.
yazemnasca, adorations, 34.6,—AP ib.

yé, who, frequent.

ye-ca, and who, 30.1 51.2.

yehya, of which, GS 31.45 32.16 38.1 34.213 43.6 45.6,7 48.7,9 51.13,22.

yém, which, AS 2.8 29.9 34.13 43.13 45.2,8.

yéma, twin, 80.3,—NDu -ma, adj.

yéme, 53.6, is yé-me, who me.

yéng, which, AP 2.10 32.5,15 43.3 46.4,11,16.

yéng's-ti, whom thou,? 46.14.

yesné, hymns, 51.22,—NAP yasna, m, whence
yesnyaca, hymns, 30.1,—AP.

yezl, when, if, since, 81.2 92.6 34.6 446,15 48.1,9 53.1.


yezim GATHIC DICTIONARY—84 yuzém


yezim, when, 31.8.
yezivi, when, 53.38.
yim, which, 31.6, AS.
Yimas-cif, a certain Yima, 32.8.
yoi, who, frequent, 28.9 30.8,9,10 31.1 32.112 44.16,20 45.3,5,7,11 46.1,3 48.12 49.4
led, G06
yoithema, we would hasten, 28.9,—yafr, 1PPfA.
yujén, they join, accustom, 46.11 49.9,—yaog.
yus, your, 32.3 46.15.
yushmaibya, for both of You, 32.9,—IsDAblDu.
yushmakahya, of Your, 50.7,—GS; also
yushmakai, for Your, 50.5 DS.
yushmakem, Your, 34.5 AS.
yushmat, You, 34.7 AblIS? ASn?
yushmavatam, of Such as You, 29.11, GP see xshmavafit.
yus-ta, you that, 32.4.
yuxta, let him be joined, 49.9,—IsS PfP yaog.
yuzém, You, NP 28.9 29.10,11.


ZACMACA GATHIC DICTIONARY—86 Zi


Z


zaémaca, through waking, 44.5,—IsS -man, n,

zahyaca, abandoned, 53.8,—NP zahya, adj.

zamea, earth, 44.4 46.1,—AS zam, f.

zaoshat, from the delight, 47.5,—-AblIS -sha, m, whence
zaosheé, for the delight, 38.2,10,—DS.
zaoshéng, delights, 46.4,—AP.

zaota, (as) priest, 33.6,—NS -tar, m.

zaozaomi, I invoke, 43.10,—zav or zba.

zaranaéma, we would vex, 28.9,—zar.

Zarath-ushtra, ‘old camels,’P 2.6 20.8 33.14 43.816 46.13,14,19 49.12 50.6
ple ISI2 515: 8. boe.0-

zaraz-dae, heart-given, 31.1,—NP da, adj.

zaraz-daitis, heart-faith, 43.11,—NS day,

zarem, purpose, effort, 44.17,—AS -ra, /

zasta, hand, m. all cases; 29.5 30.8 3.2 34.4 43.4 44.14 47.2 §0.5,8.

zastavat, ‘handy,’ energetic, 29.9,—ASn PrP.

zasta-ishta, ‘hand-wish’? laborious, token, 34.4 IsP; 50.5 Iss.

zbaya, I invoke, 33.5 46.14 51.10,—
zbayenté, for invoking, 49.12, DS PrP.

zavéeng, calls 28.3 29.3,—AP -van, m.

zavo, strength, 338.12,—AP -vah, n. .

zazenti, they shall attain, 30.10,—Prd haz.

zi, be! 31.17,—imp. ah.

zemo, of the earth, 51.12,—GS zam, /.

zeredaca. with the heart, 31.12,—IsS zered, n.

zevim, invokable, 31.4,—-NSn zaoya.

zevishtim, swiftest, speediest, 46.9,—AS zevishtya, whence
zevishtyaenho, NP 28.9.
zevishtyéng, AP 50.7.

zi, for, frequent.


zit GATHIC DICTIONARY—87 zuta,
rm ag ir


zit, 45.8, for zi-it. however it,—ay, pron.

zO0ishenu, trembling, shivering, 51.12,—NDu z0ishenav, adj.
zushta, beloved, darling, 32.4.—NP PfP zaosh.

zuita, in the call, 50.1,—LS ziitay, f


AVESTAN GRAMMAR—Declension- Terminations.


. Meaning an? Termination of Declensiony,
Singular.


Hotminative. subjective case,—s, or loses consonant.


ccusative. objective case, —m, am, em, im.
Tustrumental, by means of, through, with,—a, aya.
Dative, fo, for,—ai, 6, Oi.

i blative, from, by,—aft, or like Genitive.

Genitive, of,—aS, S, 8.

L ocative, in, at, among,—i, u, Yr, Mm, Ss.

Mocative, O/—indistinct, like instrumental, nominative, etc.
| Dial. For two objects; a pair; both.
Nominative, Accusative. i, ai, e.

Instrumental, Dative, Ablative, ibya.

Genitive, He.


Be
Locative, 0.


Plural.
Nominative, as, 6, a, de.
Accusative, éfig’, ns.
Instrumental, bis.
Yative, Abla‘' *hyd.
renitive, am, am.
Locative, su, hu, shu, shva.
Tocative, indistinct.
~hese general terminations change according to contraction with


the preceding stem, or following particle ca or cit; according to
the accent, or the degeneration of the language.


AVESTAN GRAMMA R—A-Declension.


Nouns and Adjectives,—A-Declension.


Singular. |
Hominative. M. 6, F. a, 6, ehya, a; N, 0. ADJ. 6, wyo; yé, eca;
Accusative. M,N, em, ém, em, im, im, aom, um; F’, am, am.
Tustrumental, M,N, a, aca; F, a, aya, aya, 6; ADJ uha.
Dative, ai, N, ashat; ADJ. fi aya, n. .asyai.
Ablative, at, at.
Genitive, M,N, ahé, ahya, ehé, ehya, aca; F', ae, esca, 6.
Locative, M, a, 6, Oi, aya, a, ya; F, jya, uya, @, ae; N, eca, aya
Vocative, a, a; F, 6; ADJ. are?
Dual.
Nominative. M, a, a, ica; aenho, ae, uyé, iré; FY, 6, ae, esca
ya, e; N, a, a, &. |


Accusative. M, a, ya, €, ca; F. @, ara, aca; N, a, a, @;

ADJ, anha, aca, uye.
Instrumental, Dative, Ablative, bya; F, abya; ADJ. ibya, bya
Genitive, M,N, as, escd; ae, aca; F, am, ahi, ahu, ahva.
Locative, ay0; ADJ. Oyo.
Vocative, M,N, ana; F, asca; ADJ, amna, aca.

Plural.

Nominative, M, ya, ya, eho, é; F, ae, esca; N, a, @, dha, ae, se


Accusative, M, éfig, a, a, esca, Asca, an, aca, as, e, 6; FF, ax
esca; N, like M,F. ADJ. m,f, 0, ae, an, azis; n, Uta, wya, a, €


Instrumental. M, ais, isca, ibis; F, abis; N, ais, ibis.
Dative, Ablative, M, ibyo, F, aby, asca; N, ibyo, asca.
Genitive, am, am.

Locative, M, éshi; F, ahi, ahva; N, like M,F: ADJ, eshva.
Vocative, a, a. ADJ. m. enho, f. ae.


AVESTAN GRAMMAR—I-Declension.


Nouns and Adjectives,—I-Declension.


Singular.
Nominative, i, is, ise, F, i, i, is; N, shni; ADJ, yo.
Accusative, M,F, im, im; N, i, i, a.
Trstrumental, M, i; F, i, ica, 1, dya, yé; aca. N, ya.
B Dative, M,N, e, 6, ai, Oi; F, ee, aeca, ayé.
Aiblative, M, oit; F, édhea, aédha; yar.
I Genitive, M, Ois, ais, ayO; F, ashOis, ae, asca.
Locative, M, ara; F, ata, ita, ata, aca, titi, 0; N, é.
Yocative, M, azhi, €; F, aité, ashi; N, é.


Dual.


Nominative. F’, titi.
Accusative. M, aiti; F, titi; N, ashi, fshaonica.
Instrumental, Dative, Ablative, ashibya, 4.


Plural.


Nominative, M, ay6, a, is, es; F, ay, ayo, asca, a, aitis; N, 1.

Accusative, M, (a)y6, 1s, iri, aya; F, is, ayO, Oyo, isca, is, a, ae,
yo, ashe.

Dative, Ablative, iby, asca,

Genitive, am.

Locative, ishu, ishva.

Vocative, M, ayo. F, ayo.


AVESTAN GRAMMAR—U or V-Declension.


Nouns and Adjectives,—U or V-Declension.
Singular.
Nominative. M, us, use, u, i, Ayu; F, us, u, aos; N, u.
Accusative, M, tm, aum; F, aom; vem; N, u, a, uca.
Tnstrumental, M, a, va, vo; F, anhu; N, a, ayw.
Dative, M, uhe, uye, ave. We, aca; F, anve, uye, have; N, ave,
aéca, Oi, aove.
Aiblative, M, aot; F, aot, vat.


Genitive, M, éus, aos, yaos, thw6, aus; F, éus, nvod, ascié,
asca, anva; N, éus, aos-ca, a, us.


Locative, M, vo, va, ho, i, uya, as, avo; F, anvi, anhvo, avo, ie.
Vocative, M, yo, vo, u, mainyi; F, 6, ae, a. :
Dual.

Accusative. M, u, a, tea; F, yu; N, vohi.
Instrumental, M, ubya, uvé.

Dative, Ablative, M, ubya, ubya.
Genitive, M, ahvae; anhae.

Locative, M, anhuyaos, anhvo.

Vocative, mafitt.


Plural.
Nominative, M, avo, asca, ZO, a, avO; us; F, avo, avo; N, u,
Accusative, M, iis, us, av0, ava, wa, u, usca; I’, avo, vasca, ava;
N, @.
Instrnmental, ubis; tibis.
Dative, Ablative, ubyd, ascit, Iwyil.
Genitive, am.
Locative, ushva, ahi; F; ushva, ushu.
Vocative, avo.


AVESTAN GRAMMAR—Consonant-Declension.


Nouns and Adjectives, — Consonant-Declension.


Singular’,


Rominative. Joses consonant; &, 6, 0. -ah, or a(y), becomes &e: the
Present Participle stem afit, makes as.


Ficcusative, em-ca. N, a, &, aca, @, ae, 6.
Trstrumental, na, a, anha.

Dative, 6, i, aéca.

Avlative, at-ca, aca; N, man, baresman.
Genitive, 0, anho; N, asca.

Locative, M, i, a; F, @; N, 1, ni.

Vocative, a, aom, aca, ma.


Dual.
Accusative. a, a.
Instrumental, de.
Dative, Ablative, ibya.
Genitive, de.
Plural.


Nominative, 6, anhd. M, asca, aca, ano. F, na, nd; N, —con-
sonant, as daman, 4; 4e, 1, ish.

LCL AA te

Accusative, 0, amho. M, asca, a, van, ino. F, no, nasca, 6, am.

N, an, mam, eni, enis, ae, é.

Instrnmental, ebis, 1s, an.

Dative, Ablative, iby0, oy0, abyd, ébyo.

Genitive, am.

Locative, Ohva, Ohi, aha, Ohva, as(h)u.


Vocative, 0.


AVESTAN GRAMMAR—Verbs.


. VERBS,


Few, if any, Avestan verbs are found complete; so that tabul-
ations are unsatisfactory. The reader will find the many collat-
eral Present-stems in the Dictionary, while the chief terminations
follow. It should be noted that the quantity of final vowels is un-
certain.

There are three numbers: singular, dual, plural.

There are several voices: active, middle, passive.

There are many moods: indicative, optative, desiderative,
causative, iterative, conjunctive, injunctive. Ifa form is taken in
the sense of the latter, it may refer to present, past, or future.

There are so many different conjugations as to throw uncert-
ainty over the whole. Reichelt’s Awestisches Elementarbuch
gives most occurring forms grouped together in one table.


TABLE OF TERMINATIONS
PRIMARY SECONDARY IMPERATIVE PERFECT


Active Middle Active Middle Active Middle Active Middle


a(ni),a |é,K a,
di, j|nuha, tha,


mi e m 1, a
hi, si, |(7,8)héjj s, sh, |(7,8)h
shva,


t fl, té, 2 ta(i), |} ti, | tam, | a, a(u)| 6,
va(s)hi, va, i__| |) aa
t(h)o, tem, | atem,|}——j——— atar, | aiteé,


1jima(s)hi] maidé}| ma, |maidi,
tha, |thwe,f} ta, jdwem,ita,na, |\dwem,|f 4,
djafiti,az| te, || n, fita, || iti, jfitam, \jare(sh),


ma,


Infinitives end in 0, @, Oi, Ai, etc.
Present Participles have as stem afit-; Nom.Sing. -as; ASa, -at.
Past Participles, Active, -ta, adj; Middle, -mna, adj.


LE Ap'33


Che Spiritual Message of Literature,


A Manual of Comparative Literature,
With Outlines for Study, and Lists of Important Books.


By Renneth Sylvan Guthrie,
A.M, Harvatd; Ph.D., Tulane; M.D., Medico-Chiturgical, Phila.


A fascinating GUIDE TO READING for every Reader,
Suitable for Literary Clubs, Institutes, Schools, Colleges.


It forms an unusually liberal education in Literature.
It gives the spiritual gist of the world’s best lyric poetry.
It shows where the greatest thinkers agreed or differed.

It enables you to form mature literary judgments.
It directs your efforts to the most fruitful fields.


Che Racial Contributions to the World’s Taeals
are gathered from Hindu, Persian, Muhammadan, Mon-
golian, Egyptian, Babylonian, Zoroastrian, Greek, Mex-

ican, Malagasy, Slav, and Icelandic Sources.

The Great Legends of the World
are studied in their elaborations by Aeschylos, Plato,
Kschemisvara, Dante, Calderon, Goethe, Shelley, Quinet
Tennyson, Longfellow, Hardy, Moody, and others.
Che Great World-Dramas of Salvation

by Kebes, Augustine, Spenser, Bunyan, Byron, Ibsen,
Hugo, Tolstoi, Krasinsky, Madach, Wilbrandt and
Campoamor and others are explained in simple words.


Recommended by Vice-Chancellor HALL, of Sewanee.


Dr. MATTHEW Woobs, of PHILADELPHIA, writes of it:
I have carefully gone over the manuscript of Dr Guthrie’s
exceedingly interesting book, and have found in it, com-
bined with much original thought, the learning of a stud-
ious life. It cannot fail to make a profound impression.
Net price, 350 pages, cloth bound, post-paid, $1.60.


Each Copy is inscribed by the Author; to get a copy, write name and address
on this sheet, tear it off, and forward it, with the money, to him.


Che Comparative Literature Press,
BROOKLYN, N.Y.: 182 Monroe Street.
LONDON: Hendersons’, 66 Charing Cross Road.


APPRECIATIONS OF DR. KENNETH GUTHRIE—1
APPRECIA TIONS


AS BOOK ARTIST


You tempt the learned poor and the cultured
rich by the rich and solid literary savories in
What a piece of typography!


vo ‘r catalogues. 1
—Jjerome Goldstein.


AS A POET
‘etry, did you say?


his modest title does not adequately en-


title these quite unusual collections of poems.
[ am struck by the variety of notes sounded,
anc by th? excellence of poetic art achieved in
e~ - both intimately religious strains and clas-
race affect a reader appealed to by the
-acellence of clear thought in verse as crystal-
line.
frank declaration against Mediaeval Art. I
find a deal of wisdom in My Unseen Passen-
gers, with its crisp beginning. The most in-
dividual and striking of these poems is Wood-
land Vision; but each poem could be singled
out for some characteristic excellence.’’ ;
s 2j0ice, Reader, for you too can share Edith
Thomas’s enthusiasm by sending Three Dol-
lar: “o the Platonist Press, Teocalli, No. Yon-
ker., N. Y., for the magnificent Collected Po-
ems of Kenneth Sylvan Guthrie, entitled


VOTIVE GARLANDS


Hung on the World-Temple’s Walls.
It is a book you will want to keep handy on
all »%ccasions to entertain all your friends.
Thcse interested in politics, sociology, art, you
ca.. Start performing with the Garland of This-
tles; the Garland of Roses will charm your
lady-friends; the Garland of Nocturnes are for
your moon-light walks; the Garland of Oracles
will attract to you mystics and dreamers; your
tergyman will want to enjoy the Garland of
‘sons; the afflicted will come to you for the
..solation of the Garland of Bitter-sweet;
tilosophical historians will discuss the Chaplet
Forget-Me-Nots; and when all alone, you
1.1 revel in the Garland of Fancies. No one
will be disappointed.


Dector Kenneth S. Guthrie’s book of poems
“Vo..ve Garlands’? is a remarkable book of
verse. Doctor Guthrie is a prolific writer of
wose and verse with the happy gift of what
nay be termed a felicitous gift of poetic col-
Oquial expression. Doctor Guthrie never hesi-
ates to use a poetic license whenever it helps
o clarify his ideas. Those who can not under-
‘and and appreciate high-brow and exaggera-

! poetic phrases will find Doctor Guthrie’s

etry delightfully different. The poems in

» collection contain a wholesome philosophy

d a practical moral. —Anton Romatka.

i have read it with pleasure. .. . Your poems
-e spontaneous and original.

—David W. Cade.


Refreshingly bold in its utterance of philo-
shical and social views not yet accepted by
ruling majority; radical in a constructive
ther than destructive sense.
Dr. Marion M. Miller.


Splendid, succinct. —Marcus M. Cass.
A source of great inspiration to me,—thank-
ig you for many hours of happiness and
feasure. —Alfred Eichler.


Delightful passages, pages,—thank you so
tuch for this pleasure. —Benjamin Musser.


Well, What did the
- poetess Edith M. Thomas think of this
‘ry?


A humorous satirical note is lent by his


Thank you most heartily;—greatly enjoy
them,—they cover so much ground and com-
prise sO many subjects you would seem to be
versatile and informed as Sir Francis Bacon
himself. Rarely does a poet prove so com-
prehensive and widely cultured! With much
appreciation, —Laura Simmons.

What a genius you are! A rare poet indeed!

—tLida C. Hosea.

Surely prolific, often interesting, sometimes
inspiring. —Flora Louise Hunn.

I should like to have a co y.

—Scottie McKenzie Frasier.

I trust that a personal meeting with you

may sometime be effected: I fully appreciate,—
—Charles Alva Lane.

Here is universality of thought, joyous spon-
taneity of expression, hopeful idealism and
refreshing originality of idea.

—Helen Frances Doherty.


Most interesting book,—Greatly enjoyed, . .
They have that rare and much sought after
quality of being different. The frequent glint
of humor and the ‘individual philosophy are
very intriguing. Again and again the beauty
of some lines would flash up from the page.

—Della Eulalia Thomas.

Very good and very devout expressions of
personal religion, which I like and enjoy very
much. I must confess to a naughty joy in
your description...

—Marion Courtenay Smith.


and interesting.
—C. G. Blanden.
My own regards! —Lillian Whiting.
I want that copy.—We might become very
good friends. —Royal Dixon.


Very beautiful book of poems, I should like
to have the pleasure of meeting you sometime
to tell you personaliy how much i admire your
work. Your generous gift,—I shall treasure
it, you may be assured. I should like you to
visit me at the College of the City of New
York, where I am conducting a class in Poetry
Writing. Perhaps you will read some of your
favorite poems. —Morris Abel Beers.


Charming volume, I appreciate the gift, and
found so much in the book that was modern,
Sympathetic thoughtful and alluring—I_ con-
gratulate you on your gifts in poetry and
aesthetics. —Frederick Petersen.


Great learning, a philosopher of lofty
thought and aspiration .. . Splendid ideas,
fine lines... —Mary Sinton Leitch.

With appreciation,—Marilla W. Freeman,

Cleveland Public Library.

Pleased, — Louisa Remondino Stabel, State
Vice President, So. California, League of Amer-
ican Pen Women.

Gratefully, . ..
‘your image in the
yourself are gone!’


Very original


They are verily as though
glass should linger when
Thank you for this Vision

of Beauty! —Edwin Lathrop Baker.

Your book has been with me constantly.
How have you managed to accomplish so much!
It is very wonderful! Thank you greatly for
the pleasure you have given me, for the pleas-
ure the book will always give!

—wWinifred Russell.

I am much arrested by its Originality. I am
reminded of Walt Whitman by your outspoken
views, . . . infused with right thinking and
with freedom from old cant. I like your Pla-
tonic atmosphere. It sounds good in the day


CIEE _£_—_ ee


APPRECIATIONS OF DR. KENNETH GUTHRIE—2


Your Moon-poem


of loud-mouthed piety.
into the essence of


strikes me as going dee


things. I enjo our twinkling satire. It was
rack to Haves ani the praise of Edith M.
Thomas. —Harrison S. Morris.


There are so many books of verse issuing from
the press, that say and mean absolutely nothing
that is a great relief to come across a book
like this that is so far ahead of the general
run of books. Let me congratulate you on
your achievement, and trust that you _ will
write many more poems so clear-cut and fine
as these. —}. M. Moreland.


I have spent a very pleasant and profitable
afternoon reading your Votive Garlands.
Many beautiful thoughts, well expressed,—I
admire your independence and_ individuality.

—Dr. Alexander de Menil, Pres’t,
The Society of St. Louis Authors.


Happy to receive it, most welcome.


—Alice Brown.
Grateful.—John F. Wilson.
Like to read them.—Agnes La Fere.


I feel... mighty ... prominent .. . after
a bath in your Garlands. —Ivan Swift.

I have read some of them with _ interest.
—Nathan Haskell Dole.


A great deal of interest and pleasure.—it is
quite unusual, and your field is wide and
varied. The thought is clear, and you are
not afraid to mention Christ. There are many
poems that I like, some for excellency of
thought, and some that just in a certain way
appeal to me,—exceptionally fine and striking.

icely gotten up.

Thanks for your interesting volume.

—Larry Chittenden.

I enjoyed reading it; cordial appreciation,—
original, lovely. —Viola C. White.

Very real pleasure — particularly struck. —
They disclose a depth of power of appeal that
range all the way from vagrant fancies to the
intimate desires of the soul.

—Winifred Russell.


. Glad to see your volume.—Ben Field.
Delightful, invigorating, inspiring. Your ver-
satility is amazing, and your thought conveyed
always in a most happy manner.
—Anna Spencer Twitchell.


Devotional poetry is scarce. Pious folk are
not always poets, and poets are not always
pious. All these poems are in good verse, and
some Of which are of real merit, none of them
being without spiritual worth of some kind.
Not every reader will endorse every sentiment
expressed but no reader will fail to find some-
thing to his taste and much to his comfort
and religious stimulation. The author is a
man of intense inner life, and not without the
literary gift wherewith to give it attractive
utterance.—The Church Chronicle, Cincinnati.

I have enjoyed them very much. Delightful
imaginative touches, flashes of genius, mysteri-
ous perceptions, which gave me great joy.
Your interior life must be very wonderful.
Only the real mystic can play with divine
things as you do. I shall always treasure it.

—Elsa Barker.


It is filled with beautiful thoughts; ... ex-
presses a great concept ... in harmony with
Oriental ideals ... —Estelle Duclo.


- - - So completely to my liking I am sure I
shall enjoy the rest. —Theda Kenyon.


Poetic instinct urges them forth. He main-
tains the true poet’s calling in his choice of
subjects. He writes on subjects which are real-
ly worthy of the attention of a thinker and


not on trivialities. The Garlands are full of
interest and real poetic feeling; they can be
dipped into here and there to find refreshment,
and many a weary half-hour may thus be
passed.—W. G. Raffé, In Hindustan Review.


AS A LITERATEUR
SPIRITUAL MESSAGE


Now you will see how grateful I am to you in
spite of not having written you earlier. I found
your chapter on the Message of Great Dramas
quite useful in preparing my Introduction to
Aeschylus’s ‘Prometheus,’ and I took the lib-.
erty of appropriating one or two paragraphs,:
with due credit of course.—Nathan Haskell Dole.'


WHAT IMPORTANT JOURNALS SAY
The Springfield Republican:


An unusual and interesting book, which ap-
pears to be the result of a great amount of la-
bor and of many years of thought. The author
endeavors to distill from the great literary
masterpieces of all languages and peoples their
peculiar and individual quality of inspiration.
In developing this plan the author presents
brief and well-condensed synopses of a con-
siderable number of recognized master-picces.
They are well and appropriately made. From
the outline of what the book aims to present, it
might be suspected of being a volume of in-
terminable length, but in reality it contains but
300 comparatively short pages. It is an in-
teresting, and in many ways an inspiring study.

The Living Church, Chicago, IIls.:


A work of amazing erudition and labor, on
the evolution of humanity’s aspirations .. .
It would take too much space even to sum-'
marize the specific discussions of the separate
national sources of the ‘racial prophetic ele-
ments,’ and the ‘lyrical prophetic’ are from a
hundred authors. . . He points out in what
manifold ways human salvation is taught by
international writings .. .


New York Times Review of Books:

The author appareny has aimed to make it
another one of those links, constantly growing
more numerous, which knit the school more
closely to outside life . . . Teachers who wish
to get away from the microscopic method of: |
dealing with literature, will find in it much to
help them.


Normal Instructor and Primary Plans: |

The book is thoroughly wholesome and de-.

cidedly uplifting, valuable to every student for

his study, and every scholar for reference.

It is a splendid gift-book for literary people
and lovers of books.


Scholars and deep thinkers would enjoy the
book. —Henry Wood, the author.


Very interesting and informing reading.
—Dr. George Davis,
President Normal College.


I prize them very much. They are en-
chanting. How profitably you have spent the
years for others! —Harriette E. Hodgson.

Very inspiring. Your book appeals to me as
almost the only example I know of the schol-
ar’s attempt to show the underlying ideals to-
ward which the greatest seers in all lands
have been striving, each in his own way en-
riching the values on the common goal. I can
think of no figure more needed to-day than
the true Prophet.

—Dr. J. H. Randall, of Columbia University.


APPRECIATIONS OF DR.


PLAYLETS


Fine!—Medora L. Ray, Head of Modern Lan-
guage Department, W. I. High School. ;
You gave us a beautiful and inspiring evening
and we are indeed most grateful ;
—Theodor Heline.
Leader of Rosicrucian Fellowship.


I have read your play with interest. It has
good atmosphere and good theme.
—Florence A. Boole.


Very clever.—Miss Wells.


I have heard many comments in praise of its
presentation, not only in respect to its author-
ship, but to its dramatization.—Edward Cornell
Zabriskie, Principal W. I. High School.

Very effective, I read it w.in pleasure.

—Mary H. Johnson.


Thanks for a glorious evening. Never did I
enjoy a play more (the Tempest), and what
a sermon it did get over! You are a wonder!

—Agnes Wood.

Sayonara is a charming little play,—and rec-
ommend it for presentation by amateurs, where
opportunity arises. —Edith S. R. Isaacs,

of Theatre Arts Magazine.


I am going to produce it at Goucher College
just as soon as | can. It is admirably suited
for production by colleges and clubs, and it
gives me pleasure to recommend it.

—Florence Louisa Speare, Goucher College.


AS A PROGRESSIVE


A ROMANCE OF TWO CENTURIES
I offer my earnest congratulations. It shows
thought and skill; and what to my mind is
even better,—a knowledge of peoples and con-
ditions. Then also I admire the fact that you
are not afraid to look ahead. May you prove
a prophet indeed, and may your glorious
visions for the future of our race be realized.
If what you predict is Utopian, it must be re-
membered that your vision is a large one, and
that you write with the pen of an idealist.
Scholars, teachers, thinkers will all welcome
your book, and therein find much food for
earnest thought. —Ernest Laycock.
It contains suggestive ideas as regards the
future course of events in the world.
—United India and Indian States.
He has formed a very readable and inter-
esting survey of what his country might be like
in a hundred years.—Real imaginative power
which the learned author displays with the ut-
most ease and facility . - worthy of Jules
Verne himself. Considerable degree of ingenu-
ity and indeed of real artistic inventive faculty
in both scheme and details. He has not al-
lowed his undoubted scholarship to overwhelm
him, and he keeps his artistic productions
commendably free of all reference, or appeal
to any classical or other authority. He has
many pointed criticisms to make in passing.
His comments upon advertising are full of a
humor not unsupported by facts. Throughout
the whole of this interesting volume, we meet
with the remarks of a sympathetic and educa-
ted man on the life of today as he has seen
it in his wide travels, contrasted with what
he thinks it should and could be, in the ad-
ministration of wiser men. —W. G. Raffé,
' in Hindustan Review.
An entertaining yarn. The author has trav-
eled all over the world, and his story contains
much of practical conclusions, based on careful
observation, and little of the piffling Utopia of
romantic idealists. —N. Y. Tribune.
Interesting. On lines of his own, for he
imitates nobody, he has set forth the future


KENNETH GUTHRIE—3


with great ingenuity, and a strikingly faithful
care for particulars. r. Osborne,

critic in N. Y. World.

Most timely now, during the Peace Con-

ference. He manifests French clearness, British

practicality, Italian suavity, Spanish brilliance,

and Yankee raciness. No one will lay it aside


unfinished. —E. J. Burrowes,
of N. Y. Times, 12 years.
Prophecy, reduced in a material way to


something tangible and concrete.—N. Y. Call.
Profoundly interesting . .. A thrilling rom-
ance that has a natural and intriguing climax.
The author’s scholarship would command at-
tention in any literary relation.
—Brooklyn Eaglic.


Many of his ideas are original and daring;
they deserve the attention of any one whose
interest runs along social lines. One is amazed
at his wealth of vocabulary, his fertility of
phrase, his sustained high diction. He is al-
ways brilliant and fecund. Those who delight
in peering into the vistas of the future will find
in it many a matter that will arouse antagonism
or approval, and will render its reading a dis-
tinct and unusual pleasure.

—Mr. Marvin, Editor, in Troy Record.


Suggestive ideas.—Baltimore Sun.


AS A LECTURER


SOME PRESS COMMENTS


He carried his audience with him by that sim-
plicity, directness and personal magnetism
which are the mark of a superior and creative
mind. —The Enquirer, Cincinnati, Ohio.


Charmingly portrayed by the scholarly speak-
er . . No lecture at the Centennial Club has
been more successful. He made his audience
feel as if he was carrying it bodily with him.
Should he ever visit Nashville again he will
find a most cordial welcome.

—The Nashville (Tenn.) Banner.


Dr. Guthrie, a world-traveller and scientist,
familiar with seven languages, delivered a re-
markable lecture to an audience of teachers
and physicians. French, German and English
foibles and points of view were presented wit-
tily and charmingly.

—The Philadelphia (Penna). Inquirer.

Interesting, entertaining, instructive, deliv-
ered to an appreciative audience.

—The New Harmony (Ind.) Times.


His polished diction and magnetic presence
awakened lively interest and marked enthusi-
asm.—The Evening Bulletin (Phila., Penna.).

He is a man of solid scholarship; his view-
point is fresh and original, and his style is
charming. —The Matawan (N. J.) Journal.

The legends of the country were told by this
accomplished raconteur in the most dramatic
manner. Many who went as casual listeners
came away determined to go deeper into this
interesting study.

—The Nashville (Tenn.) Democrat.


I heard him deliver it for the New York
Board of Education, and in giving it for our
church, he offers us a high intellectual enjoy-
ment and privilege. Rev. K. Jaeger,
in (Brooklyn) Ebenezer Bote.

_Vhe audience represented the cream of Nash-
ville culture, who were enthusiastic in their ap-
plause and praise of the entertainment.

_ The Nashville (Tenn.) Tennessean.
He is a man of solid scholarship; his view-
point is fresh and original, and his style is
charming. —The Matawan (N. J.) Journal.


APPRECIATIONS OF DR.


AS A SCHOLAR
PLOTINUS


I congratulate you; you have gotten ahead
of me!—Stephen McKenna.


I marvel at the scholarship that your writings
constantly evidence.—Edward Cornell Zabriskie,
Principal W. I. High School.


We will make a record of our appreciation
of your noble work.—A. G. Cummins, Editor
Chronicle, Poughkeepsie.


Dr. Guthrie has placed the whole English
theological world in his debt. His work is one
which no theological or philosophical library
can afford to be without.

—Rev. Dr. Leicester C. Lewis,


in May 1919, Anglican Theological Review.
May the immortal Gods expedite the publi-
cation of your Plotinus! I hope it will soon
issue from the press.
—Thos. M. Johnson, the great Platonist.


The work of Dr. Guthrie in bringing Plotinus,
the most important representative of Neo-
platonism, and its best exponent,—to the at-
tention of a wider circle of English readers is
beyond praise. Dr. Guthrie’s translation is
the first complete English rendering ever made.
American and British scholarship,—for they are
both combined in Dr. Guthrie, are to be con-
gratulated on this necessary and excellent piece
of work. Dr. Guthrie has not only given a
good translation, but he has also arranged the
material in chronological order, has furnished
a careful study in sources, development, and
influence of Plotinic thought, and has appended
an excellent concordance to every important
point in the complete works.—Rev. Dr. Samuel,
A. B. Mercer, in Living Church, May 3, 1919.—


In an anthology which I am about to publish
I have taken the liberty of using portions of
your valuable versions.—Grace H. Turnbull.


Dr. Guthrie has done a very great service
to the thinkers and students of the English
speaking peoples. Here we have Plotinus com-
plete in English for the first time, and trans-
lated in a most sympathetic and clear manner.
Also the writings are grouped in chronological
order, by which one may trace the development
of idea. Without wishing to appear fulsome, the
reviewer considers that no reader of this maga-
zine who is seeking mentally to grasp the fun-
damental law of Cosmos, or attain a reasonable
conception of philosophic truth, should fail to
possess himself of these volumes, and posses-
sing, study them assiduously. Dr. Guthrie has
done his work completely and most excellently.

—Michael Whitty, in Azoth.

American and British Scholarship—for they
are both combined in Dr. Guthrie are to be
congratulated on this necessary and excellent
piece of work. —Living Church.


Complete and with much clearness, faithful
to the text—M. D. Roland, Gosselin, O. P.,
Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et Theolo-
giques.

I am delighted with it; one of the best ad-
ditions to my library. I am sure you have done
a great work for mankind in making this splen-
did translation, and I desire to express my
sincere thanks and appreciation.

—Dr. W. A. Butler.

A fine piece of scholarly work.

—Congregationalist and Advance.

His magnificent work has attained an inter-


national homage. As a classicist he ranks with
the foremost.—Dr. Plummer, in the Mercury.


KENNETH GUTHRIE—4
PHILOSOPHY OF PLOTINUS


A most useful summary of the leading ideas
of the Enneads grouped under convenient and
systematic headings. There are many who will
appreciate this service, for no other such book
exists in English.—Mr. Mead, in the Quest.

A very concise and scholariy statement of the
doctrines of Plotinus, in connection with the
preceding Greek pa pseplie

—Dr. Paul Carus, in Open Court.


Too great praise could hardly be bestowed
upon this scholarly contribution to Piatonic
literature. Students will do well to procure
this book and read it closely.

—Universal Brotherhood.

A multum in parvo of philosophy. It simpli-
fies and correlates the leading philosophies
from that of Plato to that of Constantine, and
Christianity. It may well be called a text-book
on the Philosophy of God, man and things,—
or Spirit, Soul and Matter.

—The Christian Metaphysician.


I think that your condensed statement of the
contents of the Enneads of Plotinus will be of
service to all students of philosophy.—W. T.
Harris, U. S. Commissioner of Education.

The summary is the clearest and most intel-
ligent which has yet appeared. His happy
phrasing of Platonic terms and his deep sym-'
pathy with Platonic thought proclaim the pres-:
ence of a capable translator. So lflucid and
capable a compendium .. . As accurate as
anything in a digest can be expected to be.
Thost who desire to enter the Plotinian pre-
cincts of the Temple of Greek philosophy by
the most expeditious path cannot do_ better
than take this for their guide. It is the best
that has yet appeared. To our Platonic friends
and colleagues we say not only ‘you should,’
but ‘you must’ read it.—G. R. S. Mead, in the
Theosophical Review.

I must compliment you on the passages trans--
lated,—a most wonderful selection as an in-
troduction to the whole Hellenistic, Platonic
philosophy, as regards selection, order and
rendering. I had them read to the Freshman
philosophy classes at Columbia, and made the
deepest impression.

—J. H. Randolph, of Columbia University.

Again I long to taste of the rarely beautiful
philosophic fare therein,—will you send me
another? —Jerome Goldstein.


NUMENIUS


A good deal of interest and instruction.
—Prof. Chas. C. Torrey, Yale.


PAGAN BIBLE

It is a keystone to the fallen arch, and a new.
light for the living.—John Rotzer.

A remarkable little volume. We take pleas-
ure in commending most strongly this excellent
and valuable work to all and singular.

—Dr. Plummer, in the Mercury.


PHILO

Your valuable outline,—I hope to make good
use Of it.—Prof. H. A. Wolfson, Harvard.

The plan to put them in all Hebrew Institu-
tion libraries is commendable.—Dropsie Col-
lege, Philadelphia.

A carefully classified note-book or index of
Philo, who must have been an _ inspirational
writer. —Light, London.

Dr. Bloch of the Jewish Division of the N. Y.
Public Library liked it so much he made a list
of indivduals and institutions to receive it.

Useful to give a first idea of the philoso
and religious ideas of Philo.—M. D. Roland
Gosselin, in Revue des Sciences Philosophiques
et Théologiques.


APPRECIATIONS OF DR. KENNETH GUTHRIE—5


PROCLUS
Fascinating.—Jerome Goldstein.
This is an unique book.


of it consists of original translation now given
for the first time in English.


mature mentalism developed at a time when it
was at its height. No better start could be


made than by way of an intensive study of


—Dr. Plummer,
in his Mercury.


this Proclus volume.


ZOROASTER

The writer has issued this translation, not
for the scholar, but for the average intelligent
man and woman, he gives the transliterated
text of the Gathas along with his translation,
and all sufficient apparatus to enable every
intelligent man to check the transiator’s reli-
ability. —United India and Indian States.

A most commendable piece of work, done
with extreme care. I like the make-up and
get-up of the work,—the little decorations are
a happy thought;—and altogether it will please
me to produce a very full and complimentary
notice or two. . G. Raffé.

I have read your critical analysis and your
interpretation with great interest. I have got-
ten from them a pee point of view.

—Prof. Crawford Howell Toy, Harvard.


——


AS A RELIGIONIST
COMMUNION

AN ORIGINAL CRITICISM
by the highest Literary authority and its Sequel
The Rev. Kenneth S. Guthrie’s little devo-
tional handbook ‘‘Of Communion with God’’ is
not unworthy to be laid alongside of ‘‘Gold
Dust” and the ‘‘Imitation’’?’ AS FOOD FOR THE
SOUL IN ITS MOST SACRED HOURS. Are


are they translations or adaptions?
—Literary World, Boston, June 13, 1896.


Not very long ago, in speaking what were
intended to be words of high commendation for
a little devotional work by the Rev. Kenneth
S. Guthrie, of Philadelphia, entitled ‘‘Of Com-
munion with God,’’ we used language which
has been erroneously and unfortunately inter-

reted as implying a doubt of its originality.

erhaps our language was open to that inter-

pretation, though in comparing the book with
“Gold Dust’’ and ‘‘The Imitation,’’ and asking
the author in a tone of friendly familiarity
whether his meditations were his own or the
adaptations or translations of another’s, we
meant not disparagement but compliment, and
to signify our sense of the unusual merit of
his pages. We wish now to make the expres-
sion of that sense plain and unequivocal, and
to say in so many words what we aimed to
say then by implication, that THE BOOK,
though small and easily to be overlooked, IS
ONE OF THE STRIKING AND REMARKABLE
BOOKS OF ITS CLASS, THE LIKE OF WHICH
SELDOM APPEARS, and that Mr. Guthrie is
its true author.


—Literary World, Boston, Sept. 5, 1896.


and


any, and it is prettily printed.”
—The Congregationalist.


It is the best work
on Proclus we have had before us, and much


Every classicist
and every truth seeker who values the wisdom
of the ancients, should possess a copy, for it
contains a rich philosophy, the fruitage of a


these meditations all your own, Mr. Guthrie, or


‘A valuable little book to promote devout
meditation on the way and counsels of God,
with prayer and adorations. It is by a Church
clergyman of Philadelphia, and is concerned in
Book i, with Love; Book II, the Presence of
God; III, Adoration; IV, Peace.’’

—The Living Church.

‘“‘Moulded after Thomas 4 Kempis. Very
good, with wise and excellent thoughts.’’

—Southern Churchman.

‘‘These ‘Communions’ will be breath and life
to many souls. And you have woven into
them some precious inspirations—and the eyes
and the hearts will catch at them and be made
thoughtful and more holy.’’ '

—Rev. Augustine Caldwell, Ipswich, Mass.

“Your little work is admirable, and reminds
us of Thomas a Kempis. I like it very much
and believe that it will be helpful to all devout.
people.’’—Rt. Rev. Thomas F. Gailor, D.D. <

‘“f have read it with as much interest as
edification, and cannot but congratulate you
for having thought, felt, and written it. All the
characteristics of a truly Christian life are
there presented in an attractive and impressive.
manner. Though short, it is complete. The
double Commandment which sums up the Law
and the prophets is there shown in all its ap-
plication. The spirit of Christ breathes
throughout all its lines. It should become the
‘Vade Mecum’ of every earnest Christian. It
will become so.’’ —Rev. Dr. Miel.

Editor L’Avenir, Philadelphia.

‘“‘The very first page fastened my attention
upon it, and touched my spirit with the deepest
sympathy for the one who filled for me that
hour with heart-felt devotion. With many of
vour meditations I could follow you both unto
their heights and depths. I was glad to see a
little book of its kind, that was equally re-
moved from mystic pietism on the one hand,
and sacramental musings on the other: the
spirit of the believer brought ‘directly into
touch’ with the spirit and the presence of his:


‘blessed LORD, anywhere and at any time. It
‘may seem to some that your language as well
‘as subject is too exalted and intense to be


practical, but in a measure surely every one
can enter into the sanctuary of thought which
you suggest, even if not conscious of the ful-
ness of feeling that you express. Keble says
that there are ‘souls by nature pitched too
high, by suffering plunged too low.’ I think
both kinds may meet half-way ‘between’ while
reading ever so rapidly the pages you have

printed.”’ —The Rev. Dr. J. K. Murphy.
i Germantown.
It is pure gold and diamonds, pearls and ru-
bies. Have read it many times, and want a
copy for my daily use. I would like to send a
copy to every thoughtful and earnest soul I
Know. It should be, and in time undoubtedly
will be translated into all languages to be
studied along with the Bibles of all nations.

—Mrs. Townsend Allen.

They are very good and helpful.
—Henry Wood, the author.


DEVOTIONAL MEDITATIONS
Your excellent pamphlet is a great help, and
I start in to-day with a full determination tc
reach Eternal Consciousness, and I wish to
thank you for extending so helpful a hand.
—Stanley B. Huber.


MYSTERIES


He has put us greatly in his debt by the pub-
lication of the wonderful work, which has for
many years been put only in the hands of
accepted students. He has further added to its:
value for students by generously including a


APPRECIATIONS OF DR.


set of questions which he arranged for his
own students, so that a kind of correspondence
method of study is suggested. There is a
question for each day, and the passing of each
phase of degrees is to take one month in order
deeply to impress it by slow and thorough
study. The work bears the impress of scholar-
ship and erudition, but far more than these,
of a guiding wisdom.
—W. G. Raffé, in Hindustan Review.

A world of delight!—I read two chapters of
it every evening.—Mr. Ames, Librarian Bosler
Memorial Library, Carlisle, Penna.


PERRONIK THE SIMPLE-HEARTED


This legend is, by the experts, considered to
be one of the chief bases of the other Holy
Grail legends, for the reason that it claims a
«efinite location, the castle of Kerglas, near
Vannes. After years of effort, Dr. Guthrie suc-
deeded in locating it, made some sketches, and
has reproduced one of them as frontispiece.

The story is of absorbing interest to ail.
The more mature minds are charmed and re-
freshed by its contact with nature, while the
interest of the young is held by the skill of the
telling of the story. It has never failed to
arouse and hold the interest of groups of
people.

‘It is a most charming tale related in a fas-
cinating way. The style is so breezy and orig-
inal that it is calculated to charm both old
and young. Every child should be entitled to
peruse this beautiful legend.’

—Florence van der Veer-Quick, London.


Stimulation for the intuition is in every para-
graph,—trich in inspiring imagery.
. H. D., in The Messenger.

‘Iam very glad to hear that you are to pub-
lish the story of Perronik; for due to its action
and veiled moral it will be enjoyed by both
young and old. We need more of such charming
old legends for readers to-day.’

—Jane Haven, High School Principal.


THE REUNITING PILGRIMAGE
A Prose Poem of Human Initiation


Skilfully making use of time-honored tradi-
tions and expressions, it studies the problem
of the justice of the administration of the uni-
verse, as revealed in our human existence. It
then indicates a possible solution, which in-
evitably culminates in social communion.

Its object is to supply a working basis for
life strong enough to yield courage and inspi-
ration to the unfortunate and discouraged,
while the alluring beauty of its diction and set-
ting gives it a universal appeal. It has been
used as private text-book by groups of stu-
dents of the higher fife.

It is printed ornamentally, and bound dain-
tily. Its net price is 80 cents, carriage paid.
Large reductions for orders by the dozen, ad-
dressed directly to the publishers.

‘I am so anxious to have you re-publish this
sublime work that I am encsesing a cheque to
cover the necessary expenses. wish every-
body to have an opportunity to receive its in-
spiration to high endeavor, its consolation in
affliction, and support in times of trial.’

‘I have rated your book so high that I have
for years read it in full as the crowning or
concluding lesson in the study-classes in spir-
itual culture which I have been holding all
over the country. I could sell very many copies
for you if you were only willing to publish it.
Do you not realize that this is a public duty?’

—Mrs. Rudolph, Philadelphia.


—


KENNETH GUTHRIE—6


RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCES


With deepest interest I have enjoyed reading
this interesting book. It proves many things
for all. The outstanding features are—you
have overcome great obstacles, you have kept
a close observance on your happenings, and
these years of experience will always make
you popular because you can so thoroughly
understand the sufferings of your fellow-beings.


‘The mightiest proof is, God reigns supreme!


—Magdalena Schweyer.


Fresh proof of the existence of the Living
God, an object lesson in practical religion, an
added refutation of atheism, and additional
proof of natural religion. ©

—United India and Indian States.


Such a wealth of unusual and _ arresting
material, that I am promising myself a more
careful -perusal. —Estelle Duclo.


Your interior life must be very wonderful.
Only the real mystic can play with divine things
as you do. —Elsa Barker (about Pors).

Stimulating and helpful article on the
Eucharist. —Beatrice E. Carr.


CHARACTER WORK


I enpoyed your articles in the Mercury. Keep
at it! —Agnes Wood.


REGENERATION


I realize that you are teaching Hidden Wis-
dom, and opening up to Seekers of Truth im-
portant new paths of investigation.

—Mrs. Maud Westrup, London.


Truly it is the first time I have ever seen
the old argument presented in a logical, scien-
tific form such as would appeal. The research,
the actual amount of accumulated fact, in your
book is greater than I ever saw in so small a
compass.


Having recognized for some time that conti-
nence in its widest sense is the true path to
eternal life, I am glad that at last we have a
work which fearlessly proclaims this, and at
the same time gives scientific and philosophical
reasons why men should live the life.

—Richard T. Prater.


‘“‘Regeneration, The Gate of Heaven,’’ is a
carefully written work on the subject of Chas-
tity which the Author deals with from various
standpoints. Every chapter in it is full of
valuable interest. It is the only work that I
know, published on the subject, giving so much
precious information in a single volume. Every
person interested in the regeneration of human-
ity should read this book.


VIRCHAND R. GANDHI,
September 19, 1897. of Bombay, India.


We thank the author for giving us in RE-
GENERATION, if not the last word the New
Science may have for us concerning the deeper
uses of the creative powers, containing a mass


of valuable physiological and biological parts


showing exhaustive research, your precise
methods making the book a necessity to those
seeking light upon the most vital of problems.
REGENERATION will bring to many a vision of
possible freedom, and without freedom there
can be no liberty to share. .
Sincerely, ALICE MAY.


;


AS UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR


SOME UNIVERSITY ENDORSEMENTS
from University of the South, at Sewanee.
This is to certify that Dr. Kenneth Sylvan

Guthrie of New York City, delivered a course
of lectures during the Summer Session of the
University Extension Department of the Uni-
versity of the South this year; and that his
lectures were universally enjoyed and com-
mended. Doctor Guthrie is a man of the widest
culture, and speaks of what he has seen and
known. His illustrated lecture on_ Brittany
was especially delightful—Thomas F. Gailor,
Chancellor of theh University, and Bishop of
Tennessee.

In his lecture ‘The Vanished Splendors of
the Ancient World, whatever was most pic-
turesque in myth, legend and history was
thrown on the screen,—skillful restorations,
maps, panoramas; and by illuminating com-
ment the audience was carried te Se Baby-
lon, Syrii, Asia Minor, to Greece, Carthage,
and Ree, mistress of the ancient world. The
lecture was calculated to arouse a desire for
historical study, the greatest merit of a Uni-
versity Extension lecture dealing with history.

The lecture on ‘National Interpretations of
Human Destiny’ endeavored to read from care-
ully analyzed select masterpieces representing
nodern Hungary, Germany, France, Spain, Eng-
land and the United States, the trend of that
inevitable drift of thought, which goes on is
an


gi
—William Bonnell Hall,
Vice-Chancellor of the University.


I admire and respect and hope for disciples
or you. I hope you will always show the
ame courage and that the ways will get more
nd more straightened for your feet.

I often think of you and your lone fight. I
espect your heroism.

—Prof. Wm. James, Harvard.

arvard University, Cambridge, Mass.


I knew Dr. Kenneth Guthrie rather intimately
vyhen he studied at Harvard some dozen or less
I have not seen him since then.


f work and will,
ntellectual character, able doubtless to wield
reat influence on certain kinds of students.


I take pleasure in commending most heartily
r. Kenneth S. Guthrie. He holds degrees from
his University, from the University of the
outh, Sewanee, Tenn., and from Harvard.
. Guthrie studied under me here in graduate
ork in Latin, pursuing other subjects at the
ame time. His breadth of learning is very re-
arkable. He has a good knowledge of Latin,


APPRECIATIONS OF DR. KENNETH GUTHRIE—7


Greek, and the modern ianguages of Furope.
He has also made a study of Economics and
Psychology. As to his ability in the natural
sciences and mathematics, I have no personai
knowledge. He taught one year as an Assist-
ant in Tulane, and has, I believe, done some
private teaching since. For a few years he
was in the Episcopal Ministry, but he now de-
sires some regular work in a school or college.
He is a man of high ideals and is thoroughly
conscientious in any duty he may undertake.


Very respectfully, .
(Signed) James H. Dillard, Dean Prof. of Latin.
AS A TEACHER


A man with a whitish beard beneath a little
moustache, with very agreeable features, repre-
senting the head of a learned man. If there is
a person worthy of the teaching profession, it
is he. In spite of his advanced age, to judge
by his white hair, he is devoted to his vocation,
and he instructs us with the zeal of a youth.
The moment we enter his class, we always find
him cheery, so that we feel at home.

During the recitation, to impress us with the
words and idiomatic expressions he often re-
calls us quotations, and historic events. His
profound erudition in the French language,


and his literary taste have so raised my estima- |


tion of him, that I treasure my lessons with al-
most religious devotion. His pupils’ questions
he answers with convincing thoroughness.

From time to time he amuses us with jokes
composed of impromptu instructive quips.

All his pupils are the objects of his affection,
and the weakest of us he cares for as if they
were his own children. He shakes hands with
all of us, especially those who have been ab-
sent. We are very happy with him.

By his pupil Harry Aremenakian, March, 1828

You will never know the mg ee I have
derived from such generosity of heart and mind
as you have given me the unusual privilege to
experience.—May I venture to hope that you
might still in the future continue to inspire
me. ' —Agnes Long.

From that time on I became interested in the
study of the French language.

—Iimre Braun.

I have been reading your book recertly.

; —Gustave Straubenmiiller,
Associate Superintendent, N. Y. City.

A man I can conscientiously recommend.
Extremely painstaking and thorough in teach-
ing. He is worthy of the greatest trust.

—Frank V. Chambers.

Permit me to express my appreciation. The
spirit shown by you in your teaching was of
the finest kind, and was inspiring to your
class. Your enthusiasm and earnestness were
contagious, and was reflected by the amount
and character of the work accomplished during
the season. A number of the students express
themselves as weil repaid for the time spent
with you. — ‘ —W. R. Hayward,

Principal Curtis Evening High School...

I couldn’t resist the temptation to write and
tell you how much assistance to my work with
you this summer has proven itself. I am only
now beginning to realize how much I learned,
and the interest acquired in the study of the
French language. Till now I hated it: Now |
Icve it and am at the head of my class, thanks
to your wonderful teaching.—Helene Barker.


WASHINGTON IRVING HIGH SCHOOL
Since February 1910 I have been associated
with Mr. Kenneth S. Guthrie in the Department
of French in the Washington Irving High
School, New York City. I have always found


t


|


APPRECIATIONS OF DR. KENNETH GUTHRIE—8


Mr. Guthrie courteous, kind and enthusiastic in
his work; and I take pleasure in recommending
him to an institution desiring earnest, faithful
werk in the Department of French.

—Nannie G. Blackwell, Head of Department.


Dr. Kenneth S. Guthrie taught in the Grand
Street Annex for about five years. I found him
very conscientious, painstaking and earnest.
He was always considerate and kindly in his
manner, and had the respect of his pupils.
He was thoroughly conversant with the subject
he taught. —Idelette Carpenter,

In Charge of Grand Street Annex.


SOUTH BROOKLYN EVENING HIGH SCHOOL


This s to certify that Dr. Guthrie taught Ger-
man and French for one term during the sea-
son 1909-1910 in the South Brooklyn Evening
High School for Men. His personal interest in
hae students who reported to him for instruc-
tion, and his enthusiasm in his work made his
services most valuable to us. His control of
the classes under his charge was excellent.

—Jjoseph T. Wingebach, Principal.


AS A GENERAL LECTURER


Our people are still talking of the living, lov-
ing and piomning portraits you gave us of
Pythagoras and Plato,—no mere musty bio-
graphical details mixed with cribbed © book-
scraps. We seemed to meet the men and hear
them illuminate our present-day problems.
Come soon again with more!

—Theodore Heline,


Director of Union Centre, New York City.
Your lectures have been a source of great
inspiration to all. They would reflect credit on
the curriculum of any college or university.
Your rare pictures and maps have helped to
make the Platonic message real to us. We are
looking forward to the coming lectures with
high anticipation. —Malcolm B. Schloss,
Director North Node Philosophical Gatherings.


SOME UNIVERSITY ENDORSEMENTS
Harvard University


I knew him rather intimately. He has always
been a man of great power of work and will,
and of ardent moral and intellectual character,
able to wield great influence. His experience
has been wide, and his information various.

—The late Professor William James.


; Tulane University, New Orleans
His breadth of learning is very remarkable.
He is a man of high ideals, and is thoroughly
conscientious in any duty he may undertake.
—Former Dean James H. Dillard.


University of the South, Sewanee
His lectures were universally enjoyed and
commended. He is a man of the widest cul-
ture, and speaks of what he has seen and
known.
—Bishop Thomas F. Gailor, Chancellor.


The lecture was full of memorable phrases,
and brilliant epigrams, arousing a lively inter-
est, and proving suggestive and stimulative.

_ The lecture was calculated to arouse a desire

for historical study, the greatest merit of a
University Extension Lecture. — Dr. William
Bonnell Hail, Vice-Chancellor.


Captivating, well-balanced, among the best


ever given at Sewanee.—Wm. Norman Guthrie,
Rector St. Mark’s, N. Y., Director of the Uni-
vera xt ion Department, Sewanee Uni-
versity,


A PERSONAL APPRECIATION


Among the many prominent men who have
been Grantwood during the past winter,
is been no one of so versatile genius
and achievements as he. A trained physician,
teacher and preacher, he is also a composer
of music, a poet of no mean ability, and a
linguist of great distinction.
—The Palisade Post (Grantwood, N. J.)
BRITTANY


His lectures Vanished Splendors and Natural
Interpretations of Human Destiny) were uni-
versally enjoyed and commended. He is a man
of the widest culture and Spee of what he has
seen and known. The rittany lecture was
especially delightful.—Bishop Th. F. Gailor,
Chancellor University of the South.

I consider it both a privilege and duty to ex-
tend to you my hearty appreciation of the
superb lecture on Brittany. The enthusiastic
and repeated applause of the audience on!
feebly corresponded to my personal feelings.


—Rev. Dr. Charles Jaeger.


It gives me great pleasure to furnish a testi-
monial as to your ability as a public speaker.
—Dr. Stuart Close.


DUTCH U. S. TRAITS


Your very interesting masterful Speech on
Dutch Origins in the U. S. is still ringing in
Our ears. We bring due homage to your ver-
satile intellect. I extend to you our gratitude
and appreciation. —Th. Fabry de Jonge,

Secretary of Club Eendracht maakt Macht.


I commend your program, to which I have
nothing to add.


—Prof. L. C. Van Noppen, Columbia.


The best lecture we have had in seven years,
As _ valuable for us Dutch as for you
Americans.


Sure to fructify the interaction of both races.
—Club ‘Union Makes Power.’


FADS AND FANCIES


Thank you for your interesting and enter-
taining lecture on Fads and Fancies. We ail
enjoyed it immensely and will long remember
it.—President Chas. S. Armstrong, Dragon Club,
St. Stephen’s College.


AS A CLERGYMAN


The spiritual overtones were indeed manifest
as you celebrated to one at least of your com-
municants..—Beatrice E. Carr.


I was very much impressed by the service
in your church yesterday. I think it was very
beautiful in its simplicity. I hope you will be
rewarded some day for your noble work.

—Aurelia Somers.


We were deeply moved by the beauty of the
Service aS you conducted it and by your own
attitude of affection and graciousness toward
the young people who were strangers to you.
If they are ever to be won to the love of
Christ, it will be through their respect for such
men as you, and not through contact with the
rigid and formal dogmas of. the average cler-
gyman. ; .

Irene Hagopian.


‘a? ;
SPICY SITUATIONS. and Or Kenneth Guthrie’s REMEDIES |
The Board of Education’s Examiner had just turned down the blushing Miss Teacher
Candidate. Weeping, she walled. Js there no hope at all for me? Oh yes. purred he. Try again next .
year! What could I study in the meanwhile? Or Guthrle’s TEACHERS’ PROBLEMS & HOW TO SOL.
VE THEM. $1.25:* Value and Limits of the History of Education.’ and ‘The Mother-Tongue Method
of Teaching Modern Languages.’ each 30 cents. Will that pass me? Really. Miss. you are too pret-
ty to teach school. Get his Progressive Complete Education, or Marriage as the Supreme School
of Life, $1.25. And ifI pass examination on it? Then twill marry you. Thanks, kind sir}


How a Pessimist Became an Optimist. The theolozical student had Just been prep-
aring a thesis by cribbing the wittiest passages from Discoveries @ Insights, Essays Theolog-
ical, Literary, and of Character-Study, $1. Nettled at the undeserved praise, he biushed at the
second-handedness of his religion. So at midnight he went fo the Bishop’s study. and sald that he
would feave the Church because he was honest. ‘Ignorant. you mean!’ corrected the adviser. *Do
a littie first-hand reading yourself! * That’s where the trouble lies. bellowed the martyr. I cau’t hunt
the manuscripts! *Unnecessary nowadays!’ soothed the Bishop. ‘J know of ¢ wizard who can sum-
mon fo your room for conference all the greatest but neglected philosophers of antiquity. Shelf
(have him send them to you? Oh yes, please! gasped the theolog. All my life I have dreamed of
those sublime leaders of therace, but who were inaccessible. *Very well. the wizard shall send you
Zoroaster. teacher of purity and angels. $3; Pythagoras, the Sage. & Philosopher. $3; Numenius
Comparative Religionist. $2; Plotinus. Greek Combiner. $12 cl, $9 pp; Proclus, Universal Hier-
ophant. $3: Zoroaster Translation only. $1.25; Apollonius of Tyana, Lite, $1; Plotinus, Outilne
$2; Philo Judaeus, Outline. $2.° Stop! If they came all at once, it wouldbe tragic. Is there no guide
fo all this? ‘Write for a free copy of Names to Conjure With, which wlll open the whole subiject,°


This is what occurred at the Masonic Club after last night’s Lodge-Meeting
The Master was entertaining the Just Initiated Candidate who asked him. Where could J read up on
the meaning and historic origins of initiations such as ours? Well. sald the Master. the best book ig
Ghe Pagan Bible an Anthology of the Soul and its Helpers, Gathered from Ethnic Sources
$1. That sounds good, sald the novice. But I would like to see the originatrituals. You can. expiain-
ed the Master. byreading Ge Modernized Mithraic Mysteries, Dramatic Sketches of
Historic Initiation, $3. But are the Christians entirely excluded? No. nol laughed the Master-
whatever exclusion there Is. Is of thelr own making. Good; but are any Christian Mysteries acces-
sible? Certainty. and good ones! Get the Angelic Mysteries of the Nine Heavens, a Drama
of Interior Initiation, $3. But how do you advise all this, when you yourself are a Rosicrucian?
retorted the persistent Candidate. °( was only trying to please you!’ winked the Master. ‘f my-
self preferthe Rosicrucian Mysteries, $1, a dramatization of the original documents,’
But I am a modern man! sobbed the querulous Candidate. ‘Nothing Is easier.’ comforted the
suave Master. “You heed only get the Modern Mysteries, $1, alluring and thrilllng Mystical
Playlets of Experiential Religion: also the glorlous Shakesperean Mysteries, $1. Thanks!


Savanarola’s Ghost met Giordano Bruno’s, srtit reeting trom the fires agony
*Cheer up. friend.’ consoted he: ‘you are now Safe from persecution:* Perhaps; but I am home-
less. °Oh no. friend: look!’ As he waved his hand. there appeared a gilstering Temple. What’s
that building ? gasped Bruno. ‘Your home!’ comforted Savanarola. But the door is locked, and
I want to get a look in! *\t’s your own fault.” rebuked the Florentine: ‘didnt you while on earth
read Temple-Gates Ajar, $1? Buta look-in is not enough; I would want my whole body in.
Very well: { shall.send for a copy of Termmple-Gates Opened, $1... But in the meanwhile?
whined Bruno. ‘(li fend you Prayers, Visions & Aspirations, $2.° Please, I don’t want
merely to aspire, I want to DO somethiug! *Then { will lend you Regeneration the Gate, Ap.
plied, and Special Methods, $2 cach, $5 all tires.” Oh thank you! Then I wou’t lose any time.


€ Fundamentalist-Modernist Fracas. tn a recent rall-road wreck near Albany the Mo-
dernist Rev. {. Catchem, of St Shark’s-In-the-MIll-pond for hours lay waiting for rescue. cheek
by Jowi with the renowned Fundamentalist Rev. U. Cheatem. Fellow-misz2ry broke down the bar-
rlers ot orthodoxy. and { Catchem sald. Mvyiniurles are due to over-fascination while reading
occult storles entitled Hurrah for God, $1. °My fatuous friend.’ In shocked tones retorted
seif-righteous U, Cheatem, ‘you better sober up by exchanging books. for the falth-strengthen-
ing What Happened to Kitchener, $1, whose hypnotic charm immobilized me during
the accident.° Conversation revealed they were both about to be ousted.and a fiash of genius
bade them exchange: but this flop implied two reeducations, betraying secret tricks of the craft.
So U. Cheatem babbied. °To be a Fundamentalilst all you need to do Is to keep people distrac-
ted by anything absorbing. such as Romance of Two Centuries, $2. Reuniting Pligrimage,
$1, Stories for Young People, $1.25, eerie Votive Garlands, $3: and then you can fulminate
from Why You Really Want to be a Churchman, $1.25.’—"Thanks.° chortled (. Catchem. "Now
{ will teil you how to succeed as a Modernist. Shed tears while haranging over your honesty.
and (nabillty to be convinced by any reasonable arguments. In the meanwhile cribbing trom
Ghe Ladder of God, & Other Sermons, $1. G4e Message of the Master, $1.25. & How the Mas-
ter Saved the World, $1.25. Then you can make a reputation as a pundit by jJudiclously using
The Spiritual Message of Literature, $2.50, It’s convenient. But shouldn’t I seem somewhat
saintly? *Transcribe Of Communion With God, 50 cts, and Of the Presence of God, $1.25.°
Pray? Thatwas the only point where Fundamentalist and Modernist agreed: Let us prey on the


PLATONIST PRESS. Teocalli. 117? Warburton Ave. No. Yonkers, N.Y.


THIS ZONED CONCENTRIC
CITY HAS CHARMED
PUBLISHERS


bail S LAWYERS
COOPERATIVE PROGRESSIVE READE


Marriage reform, dress re- qo
form, The comirig World - ‘© t106
Capital, World-wide es baroain
setilement of Dem- ‘e priced 400F
ocracy, Reform QS yy ADVENTURE
in Business, Arf, QS Se by
Teaching, efe.

EVERY. ety
TOPIC of


INTER-
EST.


These our present rambling!
disordered accretions: --
Would you saddie them
on the FUTURE? WVEVEA/


Deacidified using the Bookkeeper proces:
Neutralizing agent: Magnesium Oxide
Treatment Date: Jan. 2005


PreservationTechnologies
A WORLD LEADER IN PAPER PRESERVATIO?
111 Thomson Park Drive
Cranberry Township, PA 16066
(724) 779-2111


——


GRESS


Ne
0 029 557 408 2
