DUKE  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY
DURHAM,  N.  C.


Rec’d-


./L/  'i'.


y


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2017  with  funding  from
Duke  University  Libraries


https://archive.org/details/compendiumofphil02anur


COMPENDIUM  OF  PHILOSOPHY


"iEext  ^ocietg


COMPENDIUM  OF
PHILOSOPHY


BEING

A TRANSLATION  NOW  MADE  FOR  THE  FIRST
TIME  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  PALI

OF  THE

ABHIDHAMMATTHA-SANOAHA


WITH  INTEODUCTORY  ESSAY  AND  NOTES


BY

SHWE  ZAX  AUNG,  B.A.


REVISED  AND  EDITED  BY

MRS.  RHYS  DAVIDS,  M.A.

SPECIAL  LECTURER  IN  PHILOSOPHY  AT  MANCHESTER  UNIVERSITY


^ 5 ^ S

Xonbon

PUBLISHED  FOR  THE  PALI  TEXT  SOCIETY

BY

HENRY  FROWDE

OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE,  AMEN  CORNER,  E.C.

1910


"fy.

Of  3.


S0-j3~i^  . ^


Sch.  R.


^ ^ . 3
/ d>  2^

'^-''T^-'^  , 2— »


TO

THAT  SMALL  BUT  DEVOTED  BAND  OF  SCHOLARS,
LIVING  AND  DEAD,

WHOSE  SELF-SACRIFICING  LABOURS  HAVE  PAVED  THE  WAY
FOR  THE

APPRECIATION  BY  WESTERN  ARYANS
OF  THE  TEACHING
OF  THE


GREATEST  OF  THE  ARIYAS,


THIS  WORK  IS  GRATEFULLY
DEDICATED  BY

S.  Z.  A.


9


‘ ’Tis  even  as  a harder  town,  having  strong  walls
and  six  gates  . . . with  a wise  and  prvdent  gate-
keeper. . . . Thither  shaidd  come  from  the  East
swift  twin  messengers,  asking  for  the  loi'd  of  the
city  ...  he  sits  in  the  midst  of  the  crossways.
And  they  twain,  having  truthfully  delivered  their
message,  should  regain  their  way.  And  other  twain
messengers  should  come  from  the  West.  . . .’

‘ . The  town  is  this  body  ; the  six  gates  are
the  six  senses ; the  gatekeeper  is  mindfulness ; the
messengers  are  calm  and  insight;  the  lord  is
mind;  the  message  is  Nibbana.’  {Sayyutta-
Nikdtya,  iv.  194.)


EDITOR’S  PREFACE


In  so  far  as  a book  may  be  pronounced  useful  which  has
ministered  to  a continual  demand,  the  utility  of  the
Ablddhammattha-sangaha  ranks  very  high  among  the  world’s
historical  documents.  For  probably  eight  centuries  it  has
served  as  a primer  of  psychology  and  philosophy  in  Ceylon
and  Burma,  and  a whole  literature  of  exegesis  has  grown
up  around  it,  the  latest  additions  to  which  are  but  of
3'esterday.  In  at  least  three  Pali  books  of  history  and
bibliography,  of  uncertain,  if  not  very  early  date,  but  based
on  older  works  now  lost,^  the  manual  is  ascribed  to  a
teacher  named  Anuruddha.  Of  him  nothing  further  is
recorded,  save  that  he  was  the  author  of  at  least  two  other
works  on  philosophy,  the  former^  of  which  (and  possibly
the  other  two  also)  was  compiled  at  Kancipura,  or  Conje-
varam,  on  the  Madras  coast,  a seat  of  learning  associated
at  an  earlier  date  with  the  name  of  Dhammapala  Acariya,
the  Commentator.  According  to  the  Burmese  tradition,
Anuruddha  was  a Thera  (elder)  of  Ceylon,  and  wrote  the
Compendium  at  the  Sinhalese  Yihara,  founded  by  Somadevi,
Queen  of  King  Vattagamini  (88-76  b.c.),  and  the  Minister
Mrila,  at  Polonaruwa.  When  Anuruddha  lived  is  not  re-
corded, but  it  is  believed  to  have  been  earlier  than  the
twelfth,  and  later  than  the  eighth,  century  a.d.  In  the
chronological  list  of  saintly  and  learned  men  (ralians)  of
Southern  India,  given  in  the  Talaing  records,®  his  name

‘ Sasanavaysa,  ed.  Mrs.  Bode,  P.T.S.,  1897,  p.  34;  Gandhavansa,
ed.  Minayeff,  J.P.T.S.,  1886,  p.  61  ; Saddhamma-Sangaha,  ed.  Sad-
dhananda,  J.P.T.S.,  1890,  p.  62;  BuddhagJiosugpi^atti,  ed.  J.  Gray,  p.  26.

2 PararfiaWia-viniccliaya.  See  next  page.

^ J.  Gray,  op.  cit.


viii  Editors  Prjeace

and  works  are  given  not  only  after  those  of  Kaccayana,
who  is  believed  to  have  flourished  in  the  seventh  century,
but  also  after  those  of  two  intervening  worthies.  And  it
was  in  the  twelfth  century  that  the  Compendium  is  said  to
have  superseded,  as  a textbook,  Dhammapala’s  Sacca-
sankhepa  (‘  Outlines  of  Truth  ’)}

Wherever  or  whenever  written,  the  Compendium  is,  in
Burmese  bibliography,  classed  under  a group  of  classical
summaries,  or  compendia,  entitled  Let-than,  or  Little-
finger  Manuals,  nine  in  number,  and  having,  most  of
them,  an  exegetical  literature  belonging  to  each  work.
The  other  eight  are  the  following,  belonging,  all  of  them,
to  a time  contemporary  with  our  so-called  ‘ Dark  Ages  ’ of
culture,  or  to  the  epoch  immediately  succeeding  them :

1.  Paramattha-vinicchaiia,^  by  Anuruddha  (our  author).

2.  Ndmarupa-pariccheda,^  by  the  same.

3.  Abhidhammdvatdra,^  by  Buddhadatta,®  of  India,  con-
temporary of  Buddhaghosa.

4.  Rfipdrupa-vihlidga,  by  Buddhadatta.

5.  Sacca-sankhepa,^  by  Dhammapala,  of  India,  author  of
the  Visuddhi-magcja  Tlkd.

6.  Mohavicchedani,  by  Kassapa,  of  Ceylon.

1 This  from  the  translator,  to  whom  I am  indebted  for  all  the
following  bibliographical  materials,  but  who  gives  no  documentary
authority.  This  work  is  ascribed  to  Dhammapala  (not  the  Com-
mentator who  is  called  acariya)  in  Sds.  Dljia,  ver.  1,220.  The
Saddliamma- sang  aha  ascribes  a work  called  Saccasanhliepa  to  one
Ananda  Thera,  cataloguing  it  next  after  Abhidhammattha-sangaJia
(p.  62),  and  not  ascribing  any  such  work  to  Dhammapala.  This  list,
however,  is  in  other  respects  shown  to  be  unreliable.

2 Having  an  original  Tika,  by  Mahabodhi  of  Ceylon,  and  a sub-
Tika  by  an  anonymous  writer  of  Ceylon  {Sds.  Vag.  Dlpa,  1226).

® Having  an  original  and  sub-Tika,  both  by  Vacissara-mahasami,
of  Ceylon  {Jl.  a.d.  1250).  Gan.  v.,  J.P.T.S.,  1886,  62;  Geiger,
Mah.,  94.

^ Having  an  original  Tika  by  Vacissara-mahasami  and  a sub-Tika
by  Sumangala,  of  Ceylon,  author  of  the  Tlkd-gyaw  (see  below).

® On  his  literary  relation  to  Buddhaghosa,  see  Gray’s  Buddha-
ghosliupjjatti,  pp.  4,  ff.

® Having  an  original  Tika  by  Vacissara-mahasami,  and  a sub-
Tika  by  Mahabodhi,  of  Ceylon.


IX


Editor's  Preface

7.  Khema-palxarana,^  by  Khema.

8.  Ndmdcdra-dlpaka,  by  Saddhamma  Jotipala,  the  only
author  of  note  from  Burma,  who  ranked  as  Commentator
(atthakathacariya).

The  Abhidhammattha-saiigaha,  whether  on  account  of  its
completer  survey  of  what  is  known  as  Abhidhamma,  or
because  of  its  excessively  condensed  treatment,  or  because
of  its  excellence  as  a handbook,  stimulated  a larger  growth
of  ancillary  works  than  any  of  the  foregoing.  The  trans-
lator has  supplied  me  with  the  following  list :

A.  Four  T i k a ’ s (sub-commentaries) :

1.  Pordna-Tlkd  (old  commentary,  considered  quite  super-
annuated), by  Navavimala  Buddhi,  of  Ceylon.

2.  Ahhidhammattha-Viblidvam,  by  Sumangala,  of  Ceylon,
a late  medieval  work.  This  is  the  most  popular  and  most
authoritative,  and  is  known  in  Burma  as  the  famous
Tika,  or  Tlka-gyaic.  It  has  been  freely  quoted  in  our
footnotes  and  Appendix  as  the  ‘ Ceylon  Commentary,’
or  C.C.

3.  Sankliepa-Vannand,  b}’  Saddhamma  Jotipala,  author
of  the  Visuddhi-magga-Gandld,  a commentary  on  that
monumental  work.  He  was  a native  of  Pagan,  of  the
Bassein  district  in  Burma,  and  pupil  of  the  Burmese
teacher,  Vajira  Uttama,  and  visited  Ceylon  for  purposes  of
study.

4.  Pavamattha-dlpanl  Tlkd,  by  Ledi  Sadaw  (teacher)  of
Monywa,  Upper  Burma,  who  is  a writer  of  the  present  day.
The  long  list  of  his  works,  grammatical,  ethical,  religious,
and  philosophical,  may  be  read  in  Mrs.  Bode’s  Pali
Literature  of  Burma,  London,  1909,  p.  97.  This  TikJ  has
recently  created  some  sensation  in  the  philosophical  circles
of  Burma,  from  the  dissent  expressed  in  it  from,  most
of  the  commonly  accepted  opinions  of  the  Tlka-ggaiv.
The  innovations  put  forward  in  it  have  not  yet  met  with
any  general  acceptance  among  readers  trained  in  the
established  commentarial  traditions ; nevertheless,  it  also
is  frequently  quoted  in  the  present  volume.

^ Having  a Tika  by  Vaeissara-mahasami.


X


Editor  s Preface

B.  A ‘ key  ’ to  the  Tlkd-gyaw,  entitled  Maijisdramanja,  by
Ai'iyavaysa,  of  Sagaing,  Upper  Burma. ^ The  author  also
wrote  a key  to  the  Atthasdliiu,  Buddhaghosa's  Commentary
on  the  Dhammasangani.

C.  A Commentary  entitled  Madha-sdrattha-dlpanl,  by
Mahananda,  of  Hanthawaddy,  Burma.  The  Fitahattliamain,
a Burmese  bibliography  (1906),  places  this  work  in  the
sixteenth  century,  during  the  reign  of  Bayin  Naung,  who
united  Burma  and  Pegu  in  one  kingdom.^

B.  Lastly,  a number  of  works  not  in  Pali,  but  in
Burmese  :

Ahhidliammattka-scuigaha-madliu,  a modern  work  by
Mogaung  Sadaw.

Ahhidhammattha  - sangalia  - gandhi,  a modern  work  by
Payagyi  Sadaw.

A number  of  analytical  works  entitled  Akaiik,  all  more
or  less  modern,  and  too  numerous  to  find  place  here.

Parainattka-sarujxc-hltedanl,  by  Visuddharama  (or  Ingan)
Sadaw,  a commentary  with  a practical  object.

Ahhidkammattha-sarupa-dlpaka,  by  the  late  Myobyingyi,
of  more  theoretical  import.

As  compared  with  the  older  and  more  famous  classic,
Buddhaghosa’s  Visnddhi-magga,  the  present  Compendium
covers  very  largely  the  same  range  of  subject-matter  as
that  work,  though  without  the  same  amj)litude  of  treat-
ment. But  the  object  of  each  work,  and  hence,  to  some
extent,  the  order  and  emphasis  of  treatment  in  each,  is
different.  The  Compendium  is  a concise  statement  of  a
view  of  things,  with  purely  theoretical  analysis.  The
‘Way  of  Purity’  is  ethical  in  its  end,  and  is  psychological
only  in  order  the  better  to  teach  ethics,  and  the  way  to
saintship.  The  two  works  are  thus  to  some  extent  mutually
complementary,  and  as  such  still  hold  the  field  as  modern
textbooks  for  students  of  Buddhism  in  Buddhist  countries.

As  such  they  should  have  been  made  accessible  to

1 On  this  fine-souled  writer  of  the  fifteenth  century,  see  the  pleasant
biography  in  Mrs.  Bode’s,  o^j.  cit.  (from  Sdsanavarjsa,  pp.  95  ff.),  P-  41  /.

^ Mrs.  Bode,  op.  cit..,  p.  47.


Editor  s Preface  xi

cultured  readers  in  European  tongues  before  now.  The
Pali  Test  Society,  at  its  very  birth,  was  admonished  to  be
forward  with  editing  the  original  of  the  Compendium,  as
the  best  introduction  to  the  study  of  the  Ahhidhamma.
One  of  the  four  distinguished  Theras  of  Ceylon,  who  sent  a
written  benediction  to  the  first  journal  of  the  infant  society
(1882) — Sri  Saddhananda  Thera — wrote  in  Pali  to  this
effect:  ‘Compressing  the  whole  subject-matter  of  the
Ahhidhamma  contained  in  these  seven  books,  the  great
Thera  of  old,  Anuruddha,  made  the  very  brief  Compendium
of  the  Ahhidhammattha.  Whoever  shall  learn  this  Com-
pendium by  heart  from  his  teacher’s  lips  is  already  skilled
in  the  seven  books,  with  ease  and  certainty.  ...  I believe
that  the  most  proper  way,  in  the  study  of  Ahhidhamma,
is  to  learn  its  method  in  the  Compendium  with  its  two
Tika’s,  as  well  as  in  the  Siicittdlankdra  and  the  Ahhi-
dhammdi-atdra,  and  then  only  to  take  up  the  seven  books.’

The  Pali  Text  Society  was  so  far  mindful  of  this  injunc-
tion that,  when  it  had  barely  completed  its  third  year,  its
founder  published  in  the  Journal,^  1884,  the  text  of  the
Ahhidhammattha- tdangaha.  At  the  same  time  he  also  met
and  incited  the  late  Henry  Warren  to  devote  his  crippled
but  indomitable  energies  to  the  study  of  Pali.  That  was
over  a quarter  of  a century  ago.  Ten  years  passed  away.
Warren  was  spending  his  ebbing  strength  on  the  text  of
the  Visuddhi-magga,  and  translating  passages  for  his
Buddhism  in  Translations And  his  excellent  summary  of
its  contents  was  in  our  hands. ^ I had  prepared  a similar
analysis  of  the  Compendium,  but,  not  aware  of  the  Ceylon
Thera’s  advice,  judged  it  better  to  get  on  with  the  Ahhi-
dhamma sources  themselves.  Another  ten  years  passed.
Warren  had  passed  away,  leaving  a mass  of  material  in
type  or  manuscript,  and  a successor  competent  and  willing,
but  laden  with  work  having  earlier  claims  upon  his  leisure.'^
But  the  Buddhist  Society  of  the  Buddhasasana  Samagama

1 J.P.T.S.,  1884.  ^ Harvard  Oriental  Series,  1896.

3 J.P.T.S.,  1893.

* I refer,  of  course,  to  Professor  Charles  E.  Lanman.


xii  Editor  s Preface

had  been  formed  at  Rangoon,  and  its  Director,  Bhikkhu
Ananda  Metteyya,  placed  me,  as  one  wishing  to  translate
the  Compendium,  into  communication  with  one  who  had
not  only  written  a manuscript  translation,  but  was  also
acquainted  with  the  best  commentarial  explanations  of
the  text,  without  which  its  intensely  concise  sentences  are
extremely  hard  to  understand.  I welcomed  the  idea  of
a collaborated  translation,  but  had  myself  to  plead  for
delay  on  account  of  other  work.  With  the  utmost  courtesy
and  patience  Mr.  S.  Z.  Aung  placed  his  manuscript  in  my
hands,  offered  most  generously  to  defray  the  expenses  of
printing,  and  waited  for  three  years — till  the  autumn  of
1908.  I thereupon  wrote  my  own  translation,  and  in  three
months’  time  sent  him  both  manuscripts,  leaving  him  to
collate  the  two  and  decide  as  to  choice  of  renderings.  I
also  invited  him,  as  one  well  trained  in  Buddhist  philosophy,
to  contribute  an  expository  essay,  on  the  lines  of  his  all
too  brief  article  in  Buddhism,  the  organ  of  the  Samagama,
entitled  ‘ The  Processes  of  Thought.’  In  the  autumn  of
1909  I received  from  him  not  only  a third  translation — the
outcome  of  our  respective  previous  attempts — together  with
the  essay,  but  nearly  three  hundred  folio  pages  of  comment
and  criticism,  written  in  brief  intervals  of  leisure  with  a
flying  pen,  but  showing  mastery  both  of  subject  and  of
idiomatic  English.  It  were  ill-judged  to  overload  a trans-
lation with  footnotes.  We  have  kept  these  within  narrow
limits.  But  I am  persuaded  that  the  comments  and
criticisms  so  generously  poured  out  concerning  my  own
efforts  at  translation,  printed  or  in  manuscript,  cannot  but
prove  a valuable  contribution  to  Western  inquiry  in
Buddhist  philosophy,  in  elucidating  some  of  the  terms  and
concepts  that  most  puzzle  inquirers.  I wish  to  lay  on
others  some  of  my  own  considerable  debt  to  the  translator.
I have  therefore  transcribed  a selection  from  these  notes
and  included  them  in  an  Appendix.

To  the  best  of  my  belief,  this  volume,  the  antecedents
and  the  making  of  which  have  been  herewith  written  down,
is  the  first  attempt  to  treat  of  Buddhist  philosophy  by  East


Editors  Preface  xiii

and  West  working  hand  in  hand,  and  I trust  it  may
prove  the  forerunner  of  many  another  similar  collabora-
tion. Even  in  the  present  little  work,  a very  cursory
perusal  will  reveal  it  as  fairly  bristling  with  points  needing
more  adequate  investigation,  but  which,  in  the  compass  of
a ‘ Compendium,’  it  was  not  possible  to  thresh  out  more
fully.^  We  can  only  claim  to  have  made  one  step  forward
out  of  what  appeared — to  myself,  at  least,  after  some  ten
years  of  inquiry — as  almost  a deadlock  in  this  field  of
research.  We  have  set  down  the  living  tradition  of  many
philosophical  concepts,  as  handed  on  in  the  most  eminent
school  of  Buddhist  philosophy.

For  the  last  fifteen  years  my  colleague  has  been,  as  a
student,'^  in  close  touch  with  several  very  learned  monks,  in-
cluding the  distinguished  Doctor,  Ledi  Sadaw,  in  a country
where  the  study  of  Abhidhamma,  or  philosophy,  is
cultivated  more  than  elsewhere.  Bhikkhus  from  Ceylon
come  now,  as  in  days  of  old,  to  study  philosophy  under
the  Theras  of  Burma,  so  renowned  are  the  latter  for
proficiency  in  this  subject.  Mr.  Aung  has  also,  through  a
course  of  study  necessarily  limited,  and  not  yet  including
our  latest  departures  in  thought,  assimilated  a notable
purview  of  our  own  philosophic  tradition.  He  is  thus

^ E.g.,  notably  the  hypotheses,  to  us  so  obscurely  expressed,  of  con-
sciousness in  the  sequence  of  death  and  rebirth.

^ Shwe  Zan  Aung  was  born  in  1871  in  Akyab,  Burma,  the  second
son  of  U.  ShweTha,  A.T,M.,K.S.M.  Officiating  District  Superintendent
of  Pohee.  From  his  tenth  year  he  was  educated  at  the  High  School,
Akyab.  He  entered  the  Rangoon  College  in  1887,  and  graduated  B.A.
in  1892.  It  was  there  that,  for  the  first  time,  Pali  was  learnt  under
Dr.  Forchammer,  and  subsequently  rmder  Mr.  Gray,  Pali  lecturer.
He  joined  the  Government  service  in  1892,  and  has  been  this  summer
appointed  Treasury  Officer  and  Headquarter’s  Magistrate  at  Henzada.
In  1895  he  began  the  study  of  Buddhist  philosophy  (as  well  as  of
Western  philosophy),  his  teacher  being  one  U.  Gandhama.  A few
years  ago  the  idea  of  translating  the  Compendium  into  English,  as  a
basis  for  all  future  efforts  in  the  same  field  of  research,  was  suggested
to  him  by  a fellow-countryman  renouncing  his  original  intention  of
doing  so.  He  then  wrote  a draft  translation  himself,  which  eventually
was  entrusted  to  my  revision.


Editor  s Preface

better  fitted  than  most  Oriental  students  to  translate  into
our  vehicles  of  expression  the  living  meaning,  as  distin-
guished from  the  etymological  connotation,  of  Buddhist
philosophical  terms.  Western  philology,  as  far  more
advanced,  can  accomplish  the  latter  task  well  enough,  and
better  than  the  East.  But  it  is  a well-known  fact  that  in
England,  pace  other  nations,  words  may  be  used  in  a sense
which  has  very  little  direct  relation  to  the  etymological
sense — for  instance,  the  word  ‘ sense  ’ itself,  or  ‘ interest,’
or  ‘condition,’  or  ‘emotion,’  and  so  forth.  And  it  is  a
funny  hash  an  Oriental  translator  would  make  among
these,  if  he  had  to  depend  for  accurate  renderings,  and
with  a varying  context,  solely  on  philological  competence.
There  is  this  further  pitfall  for  the  unaided  Western,  that
commentaries  often  give  two  kinds  of  explanation  : one
etymological,  the  other  exegetical.  In  the  latter,  a term  is
defined  in  its  relation  to  a special  point  of  discourse,
edifying  or  otherwise — like  Armado’s  ‘ Love  is  a familiar ;
love  is  a devil ; there  is  no  evil  angel  hut  love.’  In  getting
at  a meaning,  we  need  to  keep  the  two  methods  apart,  and
aim  beyond  them,  at  the  ‘ place  ’ in  the  speaker’s  or  writer’s
mind  occupied  by  a meaning  wdren  he  expressed  it  by  a
given  term.  Here  I suggest  that  we  need  the  living
tradition  to  help  us ; and  this,  in  the  following  pages,  we
have  tried  to  set  down.

It  will  he  objected  that,  at  the  best,  we  have  but  re-
corded the  modern  usage  in  Burmese  colleges,  built  on  a
medieval  tradition  which  has  very  possibly  diverged  from
such  interpretations  as  the  compilers  of  the  Pali  Canon
would  have  made.  This  is  possibly  quite  true.  But  it
does  not  improve  the  case  for  our  unaided  etymological
inferences  as  to  original  meanings.  We  should  not  com-
mend the  judgment  of  a Burman,  who  sought  to  get  at  the
meanings  of  early  Greek  philosophers  in  the  original,
without  reference  to  the  mass  of  European  comment
thereon,  grown  up  out  of  medieval  learning.

But  if  we  of  Central  and  Western  Europe  can  feel
justified  in  claiming,  for  our  interpretations  of  early  Greek


Editor  s Preface  xv

philosophy,  that  we  can  adequately  reproduce  the  ideas,
and  correctly  render  the  language,  of  those  thinkers,  the
Burmese  have  at  the  very  least  as  strong  a claim  to  a
corresponding  adequacy  and  accuracy.  For  us,  the
thoughts  of  Plato,  Aristotle  and  their  forerunners,  are,  as  we
have  them  in  our  tongues,  somewhat  of  a grafted  hybrid.
But  for  Buddhists,  the  doctrine  called  Abhidhamma
has  sprung  from  the  very  tree  itself  of  the  I)  h a m m a .
It  is,  for  them,  of  no  pagan  stock,  pruned  and  trained  by
doctors  of  the  Church  in  assimilating  the  philosophic
culture  of  Hellas  to  the  tenets  of  a faith  come  other-
whence to  birth  and  power.  To  realize  the  unity  in  the
Theravadin  tradition,  we  must  imagine  the  first  few
centuries  a.d.  put  at  the  back  of  the  age  of  Sokrates  and  the
Pre-sokratics  ! Make  Christians  of  those  Greek  thinkers,
and  picture  how  venerable  a structure  we  should  see  in
Christian  philosophy,  genuinely  so-called.  Then  turn  and
contemplate  an  Indian  vista  like  this  of  Buddhism  !

India  has  not  yet  taken  back  the  faith  of  her  Emperor
Asoka.  Burma  and  Ceylon  and  Siam  are  the  spiritual
children  of  her  wonderful  missionary  enterprise  set  on  foot
by  him  in  obedience  to  the  Founder’s  injunctions,  and  the
Order’s  loyal  and  devoted  career  of  service  and  self-
sacrifice.  They  are  not  the  daughters — orasd  jdtd,  mouth -
born,  of  the  Exalted  One’s  own  ministry.  Yet  I am  per-
suaded that  we  shall  not  understand  Buddhist  philosophy
as  it  appears  to  a Buddhist,  till  we  have  learnt  to  see  life
and  mind  as  these  see  them  who  have  been  irourished  on
its  age-long,  yet  living  and  growing  tradition  of  culture.

If,  indeed,  we  shall  even  then  understand  ! We  approach
the  subject  wearing  the  spectacles  of  our  own  Greek
tradition.  Our  perspective  is  based  on  space  rather  than
on  time ; on  substance  statically  filling  space,  rather  than
on  movements  and  moments  ; on  permanence  and  identity,
rather  than  on  change  and  transmitted  force.  Here  is
no  contrast  drawn  between  European  and  Indian  thought.
Herakleitus  was  the  ‘ Bark  One,’^  to  the  tendencies  of


^ 'O  aKOTeivos,  6 aiviKTrjs.


xvi  Editor  s Preface

contemporary  thought.  And  these  tendencies  prevailed  and
were  wrought  up  into  the  philosophies  of  those  magnificent
reactionaries/  Plato  and  Aristotle,  so  that  the  works  of
Herakleitus  were  allowed  to  perish,  even  as  the  works  of
Leukippus  and  Demokritus  were  ‘ willingly  let  die.’  But
so,  too,  has  Indian  Parmenideanism,  using  spatial  and  static
concepts  in  its  turn,  ever  said  of  Buddhism : How  can  you
huild  upon  nothing  ? How  can  ‘ that  which  is  ’ proceed,
become,  from  ‘ that  which  is  not  ’ ? Thus  did  ‘ Ptolemaic  ’
philosophy  grow  out  of  the  myth  of  world-on-elephant-on-
tortoise,  and  laid  the  foundations  of  its  soul  no  less  solidly.

So  India  turned  a deaf  ear  at  length  to  her  Protestants,
and  only  the  scenes  of  her  past  missionary  labours  carried
on  their  message.  Meanwhile,  the  ever-changing  baseless
earth  flew  on  her  way  round  Helios,  who  also  flew  on  his
own  wider  way.  And  one  day  Copernicus  arose  and  saw.
Since  then  our  concepts  of  the  visible  universe  have
changed.  And  our  concepts  of  things  invisible,  of  life  and
mind,  of  birth  and  dissolution,  of  subject  and  object,  will
change,  are  changing,  in  their  turn.  For  these  concepts
are  derivatives  from  those.  Now,  it  is  my  conviction  that
if  the  way  in  which  the  tradition  of  the  Theravadins — it
is  often  called  Southern  Buddhism — has  philosophized,
and  still  philosophizes,  on  these  fundamental  questions,
could  be  adequately  expounded  so  as  to  be  intelligible  to
Western  philosophy,  tendencies  in  the  former  might  be-
come apparent  which  are  not  a little  sympathetic  wdth
much  in  certain  notable  departures  now  showing  them-
selves in  France,  America,  and  England.

Here  and  now  more  definite  comparisons  were  out  of

^ Most  Europeans  will  dissent  from  this  term.  And  it  is  no  doubt
true  that  for  Plato  the  problem  of  knowledge  was  precisely  how  to
transcend  the  antithesis  between  the  views  of  Herakleitus  and  Parme-
nides (G.  C.  Eobertson,  Elements  of  Philosophy,  p.  31),  and  that
Aristotle  sublimated  the  concept  of  soul  from  materiahstic  animism
{ibid.,  218/.).  Nevertheless,  they  both  philosophized  on  an  animistic
basis  ; they  both  started  out  with  a ‘ substance  ’ called  psyche,  and  in
this  essential  feature  they  are,  for  a Buddhist,  and  for  some  of  us,
reactionaries.


Editoj's  Preface  xvii

place  and  over-previous.  The  present  little  volume  is  but
a forerunner  of  better  work  by  those  who  will  profit  by  our
baiting  eftbrts.  It  is  but  as  some  essay  by  a Peripatetic  of
old,  long  known  and  taught,  but  only  in  Byzantium,  borne
thence  to  Italy  in  the  robe  of  a Christian  bbikkhu  fleeing
from  decadence  or  Turk,  and  fain  to  let  it  meet  the  eye  of
some  sympathetic  De’  Niccoli  or  Pico  della  Mirandola.

"We  must  have  materials.  And  in  this  Compendium  we
see  a famous  and  venerable  digest  of  that  more  abstract,
analytical,  advanced  teaching  which  the  Buddhists  called
A b h i d h a m m a,  or  ‘ ultra-doctrine,’  wherein  the  narrative
and  the  homily  of  the  Suttanta  discourses  found  no  place.
The  title  of  the  work,  literally  translated,  means  ‘ Com-
pendium of  the  subject-matter  ofAbhidhamma.’  But
this  rendering  is  not  only  cumbrous ; it  does  not  give  us
that  which  the  title  conveys  to  a Buddhist  of  Burma  or
Ceylon.  To  him  Abhidhamma  is  not  very  far  from
being  synonymous  with  metaphysic,  to  what  extent  ‘ meta  ’
means  after  or  beyond  (‘  abhi  ’)  ‘ physica.’  But  ‘ metaphysic’
has  got  itself  largely  tied  up  with  theories  of  noiimena  and
the  Absolute.  I have  read  a book  where  this  pre-emption  of
the  term  was  carried  so  far  that  the  rejection  by  Buddhism
of  the  dtman,  or  noiimenal  ego,  and  of  an  Absolute  in
general,  was  called  ‘ the  sore  spot  in  its  metaphysicless
view  of  the  world.’ ^

If  this  be  the  tether  of  the  term,  let  Buddhists  cheerfully
make  a present  of  it  to  Absolutists,  and  fall  back  on  the
word  ‘ philosophy  ’ as,  on  the  whole,  the  best  equivalent  for
Abhidhamma.  They  will  hereby  be  no  farther  from
the  truth.  The  culture  that  is  distinctively  Buddhist  of
the  Theravadin  sort  is  mainly  comprised  under  the  twin
branches,  philosophy  of  mind  (psychology  and  logic)  and
philosophy  of  conduct  or  ethics.^  We  have  no  word
coincident  with  D h a m m a,  let  alone  Abhidhamma.

^ Dr.  G.  Walleser,  in  his  spirited  and  pioneer  sketch,  Die  philo-
sopliische  Grundlage  des  dlteren  Buddhismus,  Heidelberg,  1904.

2 It  is  only  in  Mahayanist  Buddhism  that  Buddhology  attains
to  the  eminence  of  a third  branch.


b


xviii  Editor  s Preface

Nevertheless,  to  teach  the  one  or  the  other  amounted  to
imparting,  with  this  or  that  emphasis,  the  philosophic
attitude  over  against  the  mystery  and  the  menace  of  life.
There  is  in  Buddhist  culture  not  only  that  absence  of
specialization,  which  is  characteristic  generally  of  ancient
learning ; there  is  also  a oneness  of  interest,  cult,  and  ideal
that  is  unique.  Its  schools  had  no  Faculty  of  Theology.
Its  teachers  of  philosophy  were  not  expected  to  consider
divinity  and  religion  tabu.  It  saw  no  conflict  between
science  and  religion.

Hence  the  translator  has  wisely  decided  to  give  to  the
term  Ahliidhammattha-sangaha  the  comprehensive  render-
ing of  Comijendium  of  Philosophy.  The  manual  gives  us
no  systematic  digest  of  the  seven  books  comprising  the
AbhidJiamvia-Pitaka,  and  only  alludes  to  one  of  them  by
name.^  But  it  gives  us  in  outline  the  form  which  the
teaching  of  the  Dhamma  took,  when  for  Buddhists  it
became  Abhi-dhamma.  In  its  dry,  terse  categories,
condensed  still  further  into  mnemonic  summaries,^  we
discern  a psychological  and  an  ethical  philosophy  in  out-
line. We  see  a philosophy  which  starts  with  an  analysis
of  (1)  what  we  find  {a)  within  us,  (b)  around  us,  and  of
(2)  what  we  aspire  to  find.  (1)  Mind  is  analyzed  and
catalogued.  The  visible  world,  and  that  which  we  associate
therewith,  is  similarly  treated.  This  includes  things
invisible,  but  conceived  as  analogously  existing : worlds
beyond  our  ken,  beings  infra-human,  superhuman.  Scien-
tific thought  knows  of  no  beginning  nor  ending.  For
Buddhist  thought  the  universe  has  never  been  homo-
centric. It  has  never  held  that,  to  say:  a watch,  if
picked  up,  implied  the  existence  and  work  of  a watch-
maker, constituted  a sound  analogy  as  to  anything  beyond

^ The  Patthdna,  called  elsewhere  the  ‘ Great  Book.’

^ It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  remark  that  the  doggerel  rhymes
correspond  to  blank  verse  in  the  original.  We  thought  that  rhyme
was  more  characteristic  of  English  mnemonics.  These  ‘ mnemonics  ’
are  so  very  elliptical  that  I have  expanded  them  considerably,  in
translating,  in  the  interests  of  meaning  and  metre  and  rhyme.


Editor's  Preface  xix

such  temporary  rearrangements  of  things  as  ■ it  termed
unreal.^

The  curt,  dry  method  of  the  Compendium  and  the  un-
familiar perspective  are  not  calculated  to  attract.  For  that
matter  I anticipate  that  the  cursory  reader,  even  if  not
unversed  in  our  own  psychological  method,  will  not  get  past
a feeling  of  repulsion  and  impatience.  The  little  work  will
reward  only  those  who  can  patiently  soak  the  mind  in  the
peculiar  method  of  treatment.  The  numerical  character
of  the  psychological  analysis  will  seem  to  us  somewhat
crude  and  bizarre ; nor  shall  we,  at  this  time  of  day,  find
much  appreciation  for  a classification  of  consciousness,
wherein  ethical  and  philosophical  concepts  seem  to  encroach
on  the  field  of  psychological  analysis,  as  much  as,  and
more  than,  they  did  in  the  mental  classification  of  Sir
William  Hamilton  and  other  bygone  teachers  among
ourselves.

On  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  but  be  struck  {a)  by  tbe
marked  distinction  drawn  between  tbe  flux  of  individual
organic  life  including  subconscious  mind,  subjectively
viewed  as  hliavanga,  and  tbe  emergence  of  sequences  of
moments  of  conscious  mind  called  cittas;'^  (b)  by  tbe
relatively  strong  microscopic  power  of  tbe  introspection
employed,  and  by  the  results  it  is  made  to  yield.  I refer
to  the  theory  of  cetasika’s,^  or  factors  in  any  citta,  that  is,
in  any  distinguishable  unit  in  tbe  continuance  of  conscious-
ness, and  also  to  the  duration-theory  of  citta’s.

(2)  Then,  the  Ideal,  and  there -under  chiefly  the  way
thereto;  for  under  this  head  the  subject  is  no  more  things
as  they  are,  but  work  that  has  to  be  done,  travail  of
thought  and  will  to  lift  the  whole  being  to  a higher  plane
of  existence,  if  so  be  it  lie  in  him  to  experience  moments
of  ecstasy  which  may  transform  and  purify  all  his  earthly
vision.  Herein  Buddhism  approximates  to  the  mysticism
of  other  religious  philosophies,  both  of  East  and  West.

^ See  Appendix  ; A 1 1 h a.  ^ Pronounce  chittas.

3 Pronounce  chaytas'ikas.


XX


Editor  s Preface

And  hence  another  definition  of  mysticism  is  called  for
than  that  which  sees  in  mysticism  a craving  for  union  of
the  human  and  the  divined  The  Buddhist  sought  in  his
discipline  to  attain,  not  union  with  a deity,  but  super-
normal vision  and  power  in  himself.  Whether  man,  and
woman,  originally  made  gods  in  their  own  image  or  not,
the  Buddhist — the  Indian  generally — held  the  human
mind  and  will  to  be  potentially  god-like.  Given  the  right
antecedents  and  the  right  training,  to  man  belonged  the
powers  that  had  been  projected  into  deities.  Thus  do  we
see,  in  the  complex  ideal  of  Arahantship,  or  Nibbana-
under  - present  - conditions,  a super-normal  evolution  of
faculties  combined  with,  not  to  say  resulting  from,  ethical
purity.

One  is  tempted  to  speculate  whether  we  might  not  have
thought,  or  even  wrought,  along  this  line  in  the  West  but
for  two  hindrances:  our  divorce  of  intellect  and  ‘heart,’
and  our  cramped  conception  of  life.  We  have  never  allied
genius  and  morals.  We  incline,  on  the  contrary,  to  asso-
ciate transcendent  powers  of  creative  and  interpretative
imagination  with  that  unstable  mental  equilibrium  which
essentially  implies  ‘ incomplete  moral  sanity.’  ^ In  the
East,  though  men  of  high  gifts  (Devadatta,  e.g.)  might
be  immoral,  he  who  is  pure  and  holy  is,  as  such,  the
‘ canning  ’ man  (to  use  Carlyle’s  word).  In  the  more  child-
like creeds  he  could  wither  with  a curse.  In  the  more
virile  philosophies  his  intellect  and  will  were  supernormal.
He  had  sloughed  off  infirmities  of  heart  and  character  in
process  and  hy  dint  of  making  unfaltering  efforts  ‘ to  see
things,  by  perfect  reason,  as  in  themselves  they  really  are.’^

^ Cf.  Dr.  Lehmann’s  Mysticism,  London,  1910,  p.  7 : ‘ The  oneness
of  the  human  soul  with  the  Divine  is  the  conceit  fWahn)  of  mysticism  ;
it  is  this  that  makes  mystical  things  into  mysticism.’  Under  ‘ Indian
Mysticism  ’ no  consideration  is  given  to  Buddhism.  So  also  in  Boyce,
The  World  and  Reality,  vol.  i.

^ Maudsley,  Body  and  Will,  p.  284.

3 A phrase  repeated  throughout  the  Pali  N i k a y a s.  One  of  our
own  poets  has  expresed  a sense  of  what  such  insight  would  involve.  I
refer  to  Tennyson’s  ‘ Flower  in  the  Crannied  Wall  ’ :


Editors  Preface  xxi

Godlike  insight,  for  the  Indian,  and  bestowing  godlike
powers.

Then,  as  to  the  tw’o  different  perspectives  of  life  : As
Mr.  Aung  shows,  the  Buddhist  conception  of  personal
identity  is  in  accordance  both  with  w'hat  we  infer  to  have
been  the  Herakleitean  standpoint,  symbolized  by  the
flowing  river — the  same,  yet  never  the  same — and  with
our  own  conception  of  all  great  physical  forces — heat,
electricity,  and  so  forth — in  which  identities  are  series  of
informed  or  charged  sequels}  Thus,  ‘ my  life  as  endless  ’
did  not  mean,  for  Buddhists,  a transmigrating  essence,
adopting  one  fleeting  vesture  after  another.^  Yet  it  could
still  be  spoken  of  as  my  life,  not  yours.  And  in  main-
taining the  right  (in  virtue  of  a re-constructed  principle
of  identity)  to  speak  of  ‘ my  life ' as  infinite,  the  possi-
bilities of  development  in  it  are  immeasurably  greater  than
they  can  be  by  a theory  which  conceives  ‘ my  life  ’ to
have  begun  a few  years  ago,  whatever  inherited  powers  we
may  concede  for  it.  The  expansion  of  memory  down  the
long  past,  the  supernormal  range  of  vision  and  hearing,
telepathic,  or  rather  telenoetic  power,  the  mastery  of  will
over  the  body,  and  beyond  that : — all  this  abnormal  faculty
to  which  Buddhist  tradition  has  ever  testified,  is,  at  least
as  theory,  only  so  many  logical  corollaries  of  its  view  of
life.  Any  life  is  infinite  as  to  its  past.  Therefore  it  has
had  infinite  possibilities,  each  death  and  re-birth  consti-
tuting, in  Leibnitzian  phrase,  mere  ‘ envelopments  and
diminutions.’^  And  if  development  of  thought  and  char-
acter has  not  been  invariably  frittered  away  again,  one


‘ If  I could  understand
What  you  are,  root  and  all,  and  all  in  all,

I should  hnow  lohat  God,  and  man  is.’

And  if  we  knew  as  much  as  that,  what  could  we  not  do  !

^ Introd.  Essay,  pp.  11,  42.

2 ‘ He  that  has  no  clear  idea  of  death  and  rebirth  . . . comes  to  con-
clusions such  as  : “A  living  entity  dies  and  transmigrates  to  another
body.”  ’ — Buddhaghosa,  Visuddhi  Magga,  ch.  xvii.

® ha  Monadologie,  § 73.


xxii  Editors  Preface

may  eventually,  even  as  man,  attain  to  some  such  efficiency
of  faculties  as  is,  in  other  creeds,  vaguely  believed  to  be
restricted  to  life  in  its  otherness  hereafter.

But  these  be  themes  too  far-reaching  to  be  fitl}'^  dealt
with  in  introductory  remarks.  Moreover,  the  sceptical  and
scientific  reader — one  of  whom  is  better  worth  holding
than  a hundred  over-credulous  temperaments — will  not
stay  content  at  hearing  attestations  brought  into  con-
sistency with  the  logic  of  a theory.  He  will  ask  for  veri-
fication, nor  be  satisfied  with  the  testimony  of  long  bygone
instances  in  ancient  documents.  He  will  demur  that  some
of  the  commentarial  assertions  are  obviously  only  the  work
of  imagination  playing  around  a theory,  since  they  are  not
only  unverified,  but  unverifiable.  The  Buddhist  may  reply
that  had  the  sceptical  attitude  never  been  expunged  by  the
discipline  entitled  Purity  of  transcending  doubt, ^ there  had
been  no  attainment  of  supernormal  cognition  by  any  one
of  his  teachers.  It  w’as  precisely  in  the  flashes  of  in-
tuition won  in  A b h i ii  n a that  unverifiable  observation
and  experience  had  been  won.

Then  will  his  Western  fellow-man  round  on  him  and
say : ‘ Ah ! but  we  too  once  stood  where  now,  as  to  such
matters,  you  still  stand.  Your  faith  in  the  validity  of  these
fetches  of  insight  in  your  most  saintly  teachers,  your  faith
in  the  omniscience  of  your  greatest  teacher,  has  kept  you
down  to  this  day  in  durance  of  intellect  to  your  traditions.
The  fact  that  you  have  so  long  retained  this  hoary  little
Manual  as  the  nucleus  of  your  philosophizing  speaks  for
itself.  The  most  curious  mixture  of  subtlest  psychological
analysis  and  crudest  mythological  cobweb-spinning,  it  has
been  suft’ered  by  you  in  its  entirety  for  centuries  as  the
educator  of  your  youth.  You  have  evolved  from  it  no  text-
book pruned,  by  a more  adult  criticism,  of  dogmas  respect-
ing demonic  destinies  and  the  long  careers  of  Cloud-cuckoo-
town  d e V a s.  In  the  science  of  the  analysis  and  criticism
of  historical  evidence,  you  have  remained  as  a child.
Over-late  to  commit  your  oral  literature  to  the  registra-

^ Kankha-vitarana-visuddhi.  See  p.  65.


Editor's  Preface  xxiii

tion  of  ink  and  stylus,  you  have  transmitted  your  childlike
trust  in  the  truth  of  your  seers’  words  to  the  validity
of  the  written  letter — a trust  apparently  as  implicit  as
that  of  a British  Protestant  of  untrained  intellect  in  the
Jacobean  Bible  as  the  register  of  a verbally  inspired
revelation.’

For  the  moment  let  us  leave  the  last  word  to  the  critic.
Our  task  is  not  to  debate  after  this  sort,  but  to  investigate
and  make  known  a great,  and  by  us  hitherto  neglected,
held  in  the  growths  of  human  ideas.  Both  we  and  the
direct  inheritors  of  this  field  have  yet  too  much  to  learn
of  each  other’s  evolution  of  thought  before  we  are  com-
petent to  criticize.  Buddhists  of  different  countries  are
fast  learning  something  of  ours.  We  shall  watch  with
ever-growing  interest  whether,  if  they  penetrate  beyond
the  curious  blend  of  scepticism  and  dogmatism,  which  so
greatly  mars  the  scientific  position  among  ourselves,  they
will  assimilate  such  good  fruit  of  historical  criticism  as  we
have  to  offer,  and  in  applying  it  to  their  own  thought,
retain  their  own  wonderful  perspective  of  the  possibilities
of  life  and  being.  And  for  ourselves,  we  have  yet  to  see
how  far,  apart  from  isolated  cases  of  thorough-going  con-
version here  and  there,  we  are  capable,  as  lovers  of  philo-
sophy, of  acquiring  sympathetic  but  critical  knowledge  of
their  standpoints.

I believe  that  Buddhists  are  not  likely  to  shrink  from
honest  inquiry,  as  if  the  secrets  of  their  wisdom  rested  on
some  ‘ great  medicine  ’ or  priest-driven  oracle  of  primitive
culture.  The  broadly  scientific  bases  of  their  philosophy,
and  its  freedom  from  ecclesiastical  sanctions,  dispose  them
to  meet  questioning  from  the  West  halfway,’^  if  only  the
questioners  meet  them  in  the  attitude  required  by  the
Buddha  himself  ;Ye  keci  sikkhakama,  ‘ Whosoever
of  them  are  desirous  to  learn  !’  Once  let  this  disposition
replace  patronage,  cynicism,  and  self-complacency,  and
who  can  foretell  what  good  things  for  philosophy  may  not
result  in  the  future  when  they,  whose  tradition  heard  but
^ Cf.  the  translator’s  own  attitude,  p.  284.


XXIV


Editors  Preface

lost  the  onlj  scientifically  based  philosophy  of  Hellas,  meet
and  commune  with  them,  whose  tradition  both  heard  the
sister  utterance  of  Northern  India,^  and  has  upheld  it
through  the  ages  to  the  present  day  !

C.  A.  F.  RHYS  DAVIDS.


Ashton-on-Mersey,
July,  1910.


' It  is  probable  that  Herakleitus  and  Gotama  Buddha  were  nearly
contemporary,  the  former  perhaps  younger  by  a generation  or  so.
Leukippus  and  Demokritus  flourished  nearly  a century  later  than  the
Buddha.

The  Buddhist  standpoints  unconsciously  approached  by  Lotze  in
some  of  his  critical  discussions,  notably,  e.g.,  those  on  ‘ Becoming
and  Change  ’ (Metaphysic,  I.  eh.  iv.),  etc. — consciously  influenced  by
Herakleitus  alone  among  the  ancients — suggest  that  the  intercourse
desiderated  above  might  bring  about  interesting  developments  in
Lotzes’  successors.


SOME  CORRIGENDA


Page  6. — For  Annatta  read  Anatta.

Page  11. — For  al  read  all.

Page  64. — For  Aruppa  read  Aruppa.

Page  138. — Read  Brahma.

Page  161  {n.  2). — Read  rupayati.

Page  168  («.  6). — Read  karana.

Page  172  {n.  3). — Read  Sagyojana’s,  . . . sagyojenti.

Page  178. — For  life  we  know  read  the  life  we  know.

Page  179  {n.  3). — Read  dhammanupassana.

Page  182  (n.  2). — After  is  made,  sujjply  —

Page  188  {n.  2). — Read  sankharakkhandho.

Page  196. — Here  the  footnotes  are  ivrongly  numbered ; 2 and
3 belong  together ; n.  4 refers  to  § 6,  ‘ grasped  at  ’ ; n.  5
to  the  passage  marked  4 ; «.  6 to  that  marked  5.

Page  203. — Read  cracked.

Page  205  {n.  1).—Read  vupasama.

Page  213  {n.  3). — Read  padatthanaij.

Page  263  {diagram). — In  XTIth  segment  read  jaramarana,  &
Salayatana.

Page  276. — Read  samuday-ena,  -o, /or  samuday-,  etc.

Page  vii. — Read  Vattagamani,  & Somadevi.

Page  viii  {headline). — Read  Preface.

Page  ix. — Read  Nava-Vimalabuddhi.

Page  xix. — Read,  for  continuance,  continua.

Page  xxiv. — Read  Lotze’s.

A few  other  misprints  in  accents,  commas,  etc.,  the  reader
will  himself  correct.  I desire  he  should  also  bear  in  mind
that  the  translator  has  read  none  of  the  proofs  except  those
of  his  Introductory  Essay.  Hence  he  must  not  be  held
solely  responsible  for  everything  contained  in  the  Appendix,
or  in  the  footnotes,  not  signed  Ed.,  although  I have  tried
to  present  his  MS.  as  faithfully  as  possible. — Ed.


AN  INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY
TO  THE  COMPENDIUM  OF  BUDDHIST
PHILOSOPHY


The  Abhidhammattha-Sangaha,  the  Compen-
dium of  Buddhist  Philosophy,  has  now  been  translated.
This  important  work  is  so  highly  condensed  that  it  con-
sists, for  the  most  part,  of  terse,  jejune  sentences,  which
may  not  be  easily  intelligible  to  lay  readers  ; and  a re-
print of  my  article,  entitled  ‘ The  Processes  of  Thought,’
which  appeared  in  Buddhism,  vol.  i.,  No.  2,  has  been
suggested  by  my  respected  and  valued  colleague  as  an
introduction  to  this  manual.  I have  therefore  taken  this
opportunity  of  revising  and  expanding  that  article  in  order
to  make  it,  more  or  less,  a complete  resumb  of  the  present
work.  At  the  same  time,  I must  myself  condense  and  be
brief,  so  that  this  succinct  exposition  of  Buddhist  philo-
sophy, from  the  psychological  standpoint,  may  be  kept  well
within  the  limits  of  an  introductory  essay.

‘ By  the  mind  of  a man,  we  understand,’  said  Reid,
‘ that  in  him  which  thinks,  remembers,  reasons,  wills.’
Bain  considered  this  definition  as  at  once  defective  and
redundant.^  Hamilton  wrote  : ‘ What  we  mean  by  mind  is
simply  that  which  perceives,  thinks,  feels,  wills,  and
desires.’  This  definition  is  also  redundant.  And  if
Buddhists  were  to  frame  their  definition  by  the  fifty-two
mental  attributes  or  properties  enumerated  in  Part  II.  of
the  Manual,  it  would  be  similarly  unsatisfactory.  Nothing
would  satisfy  Bain  unless  the  definition  of  mind  were  also
a division  of  mind.

^ Mental  Science,  p.  3.  Italics  are  mine.


Definition
of  Mind.


1


Conscious-

ness

defined.


2 Definition  of  Mind

The  vedana-nana-sankhara-bheda^  of  our
author,  however,  corresponds  to  Bain’s  division  of  the
mind  into  Feeling  (vedana).  Will,  or  Volition  (sankhara
or  c e t a n a),  and  Thought  or  Intellect  (ii  a n a).

But  the  grammarian’s  definition  of  the  term  c i 1 1 a
(mind)  is  arammanaij  cintetiti  cittag  (thought
= thinking  of  an  object).  Here  the  word  cinteti  (to
think)  is  used  in  its  most  comprehensive  sense  of
vijanati  (to  know).  Mind  is,  then,  ordinarily  defined
as  that  which  is  conscious  of  an  object.  This  is  called  the
kattu-sadhana  definition,  or  definition  by  which  an
agency^  is  attributed  to  the  thing  denoted  by  the  term.
It  is  no  doubt  the  most  convenient  mode  of  defining
terms.

From  this  definition  we  get  our  definition  of  v i n n a n a
(consciousness).  Consciousness  may  therefore  be  tenta-
tively defined  as  the  relation  between  a r a m m a n i k a
(subject)  and  arammana  (object).  This  relation  is
spoken  of  in  the  language  of  the  Patthana  as
arammana-paccaya.  ‘Patthana’  is  the  title
given  to  the  Seventh  Book  of  the  Abhidhamma-
P i t a k a,  which  treats  of  the  related  modes  of  existence.
It  is,  therefore,  essentially  the  Buddhist  Philosophy  of
Relations,  covering  more  ground  than  the  Association
Philosophy,  which  deals  with  the  association  of  ideas  only.
‘Arammana-paccaya’  means  the  relation  of  pre-
sentation. In  this  relation  the  object  presented  is  termed
pace  ay  a (the  relating  thing)  and  the  subject,  pac-
cayuppanna  (the  related  thing).^  Thus,  these  two
terms  are  relative,  one  implying  the  other — that  is  to  say,
the  subject  cannot  exist  without  the  object,  and  vice  versa.
It  will  be  noticed  that  greater  prominence  is  given  to  the
object.  From  this  fact  Buddhism  cannot  be  exclusively
classed  as  Idealism.  We  might  therefore  begin  with  the
consideration  of  the  object.

1 B h e d a = division. — Ed.  ^ K a 1 1 u = to  do  or  act. — Ed.

3 Paccaya  is  lit.  pat  i=back  to,  and  ay  a = going.  Paccay-
n p p a n n a is  lit.  uprisen-as-related,  or  -in-relation. — Ed.


Object


3


The  object  of  consciousness  is  either  object  of  sense  or  Object  of

, . , „ , , Gonscious-

object  ot  thought.  ness.

The  former  subdivides  itself  into  five  classes— sight,  Object  ot
sound,  smell,  taste,  and  touch.  Sight,  or  rather  light,
and  sound  are  classed  together  by  Buddhaghosa  as
a s a m p a 1 1 a - r iip  a,^  because  their  objective  source
does  not  come  into  physical  contact  with  our  organism.

Smell  and  taste,  on  the  other  hand,  being  but  modifica-
tions of  touch,  are  classed  under  sampatta-rupa.

Touch  consists  of  any  or  all  of  the  Three  Essentials,  or
Primary  Qualities  of  body,  namely — pathavi  (exten-
sion), corresponding  to  the  sense  of  locality;  tejo
(heat),  corresponding  to  the  sense  of  temperature;  and
Viiyo  (motion),  corresponding  to  the  sense  of  pressure.
Extension  means  occupation  in  space.  As  no  two  atoms
can  occupy  the  same  space  at  the  same  time,  we
associate  with  extension  our  idea  of  the  impenetrability  of
matter.  And  this  attribute,  in  turn,  implies  the  Buddhist
‘ characteristic  mark  ’ ^ of  k a k k h a 1 a 1 1 a,  or  hardness.

Locke  gave  the  name  of  ‘ Ideas  of  Sensation  ’ to  these
five  classes  of  sensibles,  which  in  Buddhist  philosophy  are
collectively  termed  fivefold- object  (p  a n c a r a m m a u a).

The  object  of  thought  also  consists  of  five  sub-classes : Object  of
(1)  c i 1 1 a (Mind)  ; (2)  c e t a s i k a (mental  properties)  ;

(3)  pasada-rupa  and  sukhuma-rupa  (sensitive
and  subtle  qualities  of  body) ; (4)pannatti  (name,  idea,
notion,  concept)  ; and  (5)  n i b b a n a.^  These  are  collec-
tively termed  dhammarammana,  a term  which  corre-
sponds to  Locke’s  ‘ Ideas  of  Reflection.’"^

The  fifty-four  classes  of  K a m a- consciousness  enu-
merated in  Part  I.  of  the  Manual,  together  with  the
fifty-two  mental  properties  which  severally  enter  into
their  composition,  as  well  as  the  twenty-eight  qualities  of

^ Lit.,  material-object  which-is-not-reached. — Ed.

^ Lakkhana.

3 Better  known  in  its  Sanskritized  form  as  N i r v a n a. — Ed.

D h a m m a here  means  mental-presentation,  as  distinct  from
special  sense-impression. — Ed.


4


Pannatti

exjilaiued.


Pannatti  A nahjzcd

Body  enumerated  in  Part  YL,  are  collectively  termed
kama- object.  The  twenty  - seven  classes  of  rupa-
and  a r u p a -consciousness,  together  with  the  thirty-five
mental  properties  which  severally  enter  into  their  com-
2)osition,  are  collectively  termed  mahaggata  - objects
The  forty  classes  of  transcendental  consciousness,  together
with  the  thirty-six  mental  properties,  which  severall}'^
enter  into  their  composition,  as  well  as  n i b h a n a , are
collectively  termed  transcendental  object.

The  p a n n a 1 1 i-object  is  of  several  sub-classes,  as
enumerated  in  Part  VIII.  of  the  Manual.  The  subject
covers  a wide  field,  but  we  might  discuss  it  here  briefly.
Pannatti  is  either  (1)  that  which  makes  known
(pannapetiti)  ; or  (2)  that  which  is  made  known
(p  a n n a p i y a t i t i).  Or,  as  our  author  puts  it,  sadda-
p a n n a 1 1 i^  is  so  called  because  it  makes  known  (p  au-
n a 1) a n a t o),  and  attha  - pannatti  is  so  called  because
it  is  made  known  (p  a n n a p iy  a 1 1 a).  From  these  two
definitions  it  is  clear  that  sadda  - pannatti,  which
makes  attha- pannatti  known,  and  attha- pan-
natti, which  is  made  known  by  sadda-pannatti,
are  relative  terms.

Sadda-pannatti  is  a name  (of  a thing)  which,
when  expressed  in  words,  or  represented  by  a sign,  is
called  a ‘term.’  Hence  it  may  mean  a name,  word,  sign,
or  term.  It  is  synonymous  with  nama-pannatti.

Now,  every  term,  according  to  our  logico-grammarians,
is  connotative.  Therefore  attha  here  may  be  either
dabbattha^  (denotation)  or  sakattha  (connotation).
Hence  attha- pannatti  is  the  idea  or  notion  of  a thing
denoted  by,  and  of  its  attributes  connoted  by,  a term.  In
other  words,  attha  - pannatti  is  the  idea  or  notion  of
the  attributes  of  a thing  made  known,  or  represented  by  a

1 Lit.,  great-gone-to,  i.e. — become  large,  or  developed.  Hence  lofty
or  sublime,  and  so  rendered  in  the  Manual. — Ed.

2 S a d d a = sound,  or  word ; a 1 1 h a = sense  or  meaning. — Ed.

3 D a b b a - a 1 1 h a=meaningof  a thing  ; s ak  a-atth  a = meaning
of  attribute,  own,  intrinsic  meaning. — Ed.


5


Paiiiiatti  as  Concept

name  (n  a m a - p a n n a 1 1 i),  which  is  expressed  by  a
word  (s  a d d a - p a n n a 1 1 i),  or  signified  by  a sign.

Concept  appears  to  us  to  be  the  nearest  English  Concept,
equivalent  term  to  express  this  attha-pannatti.
Concept  is  defined  by  Mansel  as  ‘ a collection  of  attri-
butes united  by  a sign,  and  representing  a possible  object
of  intuition.’^  Concept,  viewed  objectively,  is  an  attribute
or  collection  of  attributes  ; but,  viewed  subjectively,  is  an
idea  or  notion  corresponding  to  that  attribute  or  collection
of  attributes.  In  a particular  conception,  as  distinguished
from  general  conception,  a concept  may  be  an  idea
corresponding  to  an  individual  thing.

Now,  let  us  see  whether  the  term  ‘ concept  ’ is  applicable
to  the  following  classes  of  attha-pannatti’ s;

1.  Tajja-pannatti^  is  the  idea  or  notion  corre-
sponding to  things — namely,  in  their  ultimate  sense
(p  a r a m a 1 1 h a - d h a m m a ’ s).

2.  Upada-pannatti  is  the  derivative  concept,
being  an  idea  or  notion  derived  from  things  in  their
ultimate  sense.

3.  Samuha-pannatti  is  the  collective  concept,
being'  an  idea  or  notion  corresponding  to  a group  or
collection  of  things  or  attributes.

4.  Jati-pannatti^  is  the  general  concept,  being  a '
class  - notion  corresponding  to  a genus  of  attributes
possessed  in  common  by  a number  of  individuals.

5.  Santhana-pannatti  is  the  formal  concept,
being  an  idea  corresponding  to  the  form  of  a thing.

6.  Disa-pannatti  is  the  local  concept,  being  an
idea  or  notion  of  locality.

7.  Kala-pannattiis  the  concept  of  time.

8.  Akasa-pannattiis  the  concept  of  space.

9.  Nimitta-paniiatti^is  the  conceptualized  after-

^ Prolegomena  Logica  (1860),  p.  66  ; Metaphysics,  p.  204.

^ Taj  j a=(tat-ya,  tassa  bhavo,  that-ness)  appropriate,  suitable.

3 J ati  = birth,  lineage,  family,  or  kind. — Ed.

^ N i m i 1 1 a = sign,  or  sensuous  impression,  or  percept.  Patibhaga
^similar  to.  Uggaha  = taking  up — viz.,  by  the  mind  of  the  initial


Paunatti

versus

Para-

raattha.


External

Objects.


Annatta

doctrine.


6 Concept  and  Reality

image  (p  a t i b h a g a - n i m i 1 1 a),  being  an  idea  corre-
sponding to  the  image  (uggaha-nimitta),  which  is
an  exact  copy  of  the  original  (p  a r i k a m m a - n i m i 1 1 a).
The  patibhaga-nimitta  cannot  itself  be  depicted
to  sense  or  imagination,  though  it  forms  one  element  of  an
image  which  is  so  depicted.

10.  Natthi-bhava-pannatti^  is  the  concept
of  Nothingness.

11.  Santati-pannatti  is  the  idea  of  the  identity
of  a thing  on  the  ground  of  its  continuity.

12.  S a n k e t a - p a nh  a 1 1 i is  the  idea  of  the  con-
ventional sign  by  which  a thing  is  generally  signified.

In  the  pannatti,  as  distinguished  from  the  para-
m a 1 1 h a if  we  resolve  the  former  into  two  classes
named  above,  we  have  nama  - pannatti  (names,  or
the  Nominal),  attha-pannatti  (ideas,  or  the  Con-
ceptual), and  paramattha  (things,  or  the  Keal).  The
two  former  are  so  closely  connected  together  that  we  are
reminded  of  Cousin’s  words  : ‘ If  Nominalism  sets  out
from  Conceptualism,  Conceptualism  should  terminate  in
Nominalism.’

The  object  of  sense  is  alw^ays  present — that  is  to  say,  it
is  intuited  as  something  present.  Nib  ban  a and  the
p a n n a 1 1 i-objects  are  kalavimutta  (out  of  time) ; ®
the  rest  are  either  present,  or  past,  or  future.

A thorough  analysis  of  the  object  would  exhaust  the
entire  universe.  Thus  the  object,  comprehending,  as  it
does,  the  subject,  is  wider,  more  extensive  than  the  latter.
This  is  probably  one  reason  why  greater  prominence  is
given  to  the  object  in  the  Patthana.

Before  speaking  of  the  subject,  a word  on  the  Annatta-
theory,  w'hich  forms  the  central  doctrine  of  Buddhist
philosophy.

impression  as  an  after-image.  Parikamma,  lit.,  preparation,  is
the  original,  initial  impression.  See  Part  IX.,  § 4,  of  the  Manual. — Ed.

^ N’atthibha v a = lit.,  not-is-state. — Ed.

2 P ar  ama  = lit.,  highest,  supreme,  ultimate. — Ed.

® Lit.,  freed  from  time.— Ed.


The  Kon-soul  Doctrine


7


Berkeley,  the  greatest  idealist  of  the  West,  reduced
matter  to  a mere  group  of  qualities,  and  proved  (for  us
Buddhists,  quite  convincingly)  that  the  hypothetical  sub-
stance or  substratum,  in  which  the  qualities  are  supposed
to  inhere,  is  a metaphysical  fiction.  But  the  mind-stuff
proved  refractory  in  his  logical  crucible.  Hume,  however,
was  sceptical  as  to  the  existence  of  this  very  mind-
substance,  for,  whenever  he  tried  ‘ to  catch  himself,’  he
always  ‘ tumbled  on  a particular  perception.’  But  both
Berkeley  and  Hume  were  forestalled,  three-and-twenty
centuries  ago,  by  the  Buddha,  who  had  ‘ got  rid  of  that
shade  of  a shadow  of  the  substance  ’ by  pushing  the
Berkeleyan  arguments  a step  farther  to  their  rigid,  logical
conclusions.  If  Hume  stands  refuted  to  this  day,  it  is
probably  because  Humean  philosophy  does  not  contain  the
elaborate  ‘ Laws  of  Relation,’  which  the  Buddha  pro-
pounded and  expounded  in  the  Valley  of  the  Ganges  two
centuries  before  Aristotle  sowed  the  seed  of  the  Association  Associa-
Philosophy.  The  triumphant  vindication  of  Aristotle’s
claims  to  be  regarded  as  the  earliest  expositor  of  the  sophy.
Theory  of  Association  is  therefore  not  justified.  Had  Sir  claims
William  Hamilton  known  the  existence  of  a body  of  the
Laws  of  Relation  in  the  Patthana,  he  would  surely  have
accorded  that  honour  to  the  Buddha.

In  Buddhism  there  is  no  actor  apart  from  action,  no
percipient  apart  from  perception.  In  other  words,  there  is
no  conscious  subject  behind  consciousness.  Indeed,  the
subject  loses  itself  in  the  very  relation  of  which  it  has  been
supposed,  in  and  by  our  tentative  definition  to  be  a cor-
relate. This  is  probably  another  reason  why  greater
prominence  is  given  to  the  object.  Hence,  the  kattu-
s a dh ana-definition  of  mind  by  Buddhist  grammarians
must  be  recast  into  the  bhava-sadhana -definition ^ of
Buddhist  philosophers — viz.,  ‘ Mind  is  simply  the  con-
sciousness of  an  object.’  Although  it  is  a convenient
mode  of  speech  to  adopt  (or  indulge  in)  the  kattu-
s a d h a n a -form,  every  philosophical  term  defined  in

^ I.e.,  in  terms  of  state  or  being,  as  opposed  to  action.


8


Import  of
the  terra
‘ Subject  ’
in  Bud-
dhism.


Buddhist
view  of
Life.


Anicca-

doctrine.


Theory  of  Life

Buddhism  must  be  understood  in  the  b h a v a - s a d h a n a -
sense.  Whenever,  therefore,  the  term  ‘ subject  ’ occurs  in
this  essay,  it  must  he  understood  to  mean,  not  the  self-same
permanent  conscious  subject,  but  merely  a transitory  state
of  consciousness.

The  object  of  the  profound  analysis  known  as  Abhi-
d h a m m a , is  to  show  generally  that  such  state  of  con-
sciousness is  no  simple  modification  of  a mind-stuff,  and,
above  all,  that  there  is  no  soul  or  ego  which  is  apart  from
the  states  of  consciousness  ; but  that  each  seemingly  simple
state  is  in  reality  a highly  complex  compound,  constantly
changing  and  giving  rise  to  new  combinations.

It  is  only  of  late  years  that  it  has  come  to  be  recognized
in  the  West  that  for  no  two  consecutive  moments  is  the
fabric  of  the  body  the  same  ; and  yet  this  doctrine  was
taught  by  the  Buddha  more  than  twenty-three  centuries
ago.  ‘Nad!  soto  viya’  (‘  like  the  current  of  a
river  ’)  ^ is  the  Buddhist  idea  of  existence.  And  the
theory  of  the  ceaseless  change  or  flux  of  things,  the
anicca-dhamma,^  applied  alike,  in  the  Master’s
teaching,  to  the  body  (wherein  it  is  said  to  occur  by  the
continual  replacement  of  k a 1 a p a s,  or  groups),^  and  to
the  mind.  In  the  latter,  indeed,  the  flux  was  held  to  be
more  rapid,  the  impermanence  more  marked;  so  that  it
were  truer  to  speak  of  the  body,  which  at  least  seems  to
persist  for  a few  fleeting  years,  as  a 1 1 a (permanent  soul
or  ego),  than  so  to  regard  mind,  which  endures  not  the
same  for  any  two  consecutive  instants  of  time.^

Life,  especially  the  life  that  we  term  conscious  existence,
is  indeed  like  the  current  of  a river,  which  still  maintains

1 Judging  by  the  contents  of  the  Pali  canon,  the  river -simile  was  not
put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Buddha  himself,  but  is  of  later  date.  The
simile  used  by  him  to  illustrate  the  constantly  changing  nature  of
mind  or  consciousness  is  that  of  the  leaps  of  an  ape  from  bough  to
bough. — Ed.

2 A n i c c a = not-lasting,  im-permanent. — Ed.

3 K a 1 a p a , again,  I have  not  met  with,  as  a philosophical  term,  in
the  Pali  canon. — Ed.

^ S.  ii.,  94,  95.


9


Theory  of  Life

one  constant  form,  one  seeming  identity,  though  not  a
single  drop  remains  to-day  of  all  the  volume  that  com-
posed that  river  yesterdayd  A person  standing  on  the
bank  of  such  a river  would,  of  course,  think  that  the  river
is  the  same,  though  not  a particle  of  water  which  he  sees
at  any  point  remains  where  it  was  a moment  ago.  And  as
the  beginning  and  the  end  of  a river  receive  the  special
names  of  ‘ source  ’ and  ‘ mouth,’  though  they  are  still  com-
posed of  the  same  material  as  the  body  of  the  river  itself,
even  so  the  source  and  the  mouth  of  this  River  of  Life  are
respectively  termed  ‘ birth  ’ and  ‘ death,’  though  still  com-
posed of  the  same  water  of  life.

Now,  what  is  this  ‘ water  of  life  ’?

When  the  mind  is  entirely  vacant,  as  in  the  state  of
dreamless  sleep,  its  vithi-mutta  (thoughtless,  lit.,
thought-free)  existence  is  termed  bhavanga^  (being).
Bhavanga  therefore  corresponds  to  Leibnitz’s  state  of
obscure  perception,  not  amounting  to  consciousness,  in
dreamless  sleep.  If  this  term  be  rendered  by  its  etymo-
logical equivalent  ‘ being,’  the  latter  must  be  understood
subjectively,  as  in  the  Hegelian  identity  of  thought  and
being.  In  Buddhism,  however,  thought  and  being  are  not
identical.  Being,  which  is  vithi-mutta,  is  opposed  to  Being
thought,  which  is  vlthi-citta.^  Though  there  is  thus
a contrariety,  yet  there  is  a similarity  between  the  two,  in  •
that  both  are  subjective.

Bhavanguppaccheda,  the  dividing  line  between

^ Cf.  the  well-known  line  of  Herakleitus  : ‘ You  cannot  step  twice
into  the  same  rivers,  for  fresh  waters  are  ever  flowing  in  upon  you.’

—Ed.

2 Lit.,  bhavassa  anga,  part  (anga)  of  being,  or  becoming
(hhava).  For  earlier  post-Pitakan  occurrence  of  this  term,  cf.
Nettip.,  91  ; Milincla,  300.  The  bare  expression  occurs,  indeed,  in
Anguttara-NiTiiiya,  ii.,  79,  as  one  in  a category  of  four
anga’s:  rupa,  vedana,  sauna,  bhava.  (Catukka-Nipata,

A p an'n  ak  a -V  a g g a,  75.)  See  Appendix  : Bhavanga. — Ed.

^ Vithi  = ht.,a  line,  road,  street,  or  course.  It  was  not  yet  used
philosophically  in  the  Abhidhamma-Pitaka,  but  I have  found
it  so  used  in  the  Commentaries — e.g.,  that  on  the  Katha-Vatthu.

—Ed.


10


Subconsciousness


Threshold  Being  and  Thought,  is  termed  mano-dvara,  the
sciousness.  Threshold  (lit.,  door)  of  Consciousness.  Consciousness
below  this  threshold  may  be  termed,  after  F.  W.  Myers,
subliminal  consciousness,  and  that  above,  supraliminal.

There  are  nineteen  classes  of  subliminal  consciousness
among  the  classes  of  ‘ resultant  ’ consciousness  (v  i p a k a)
described  in  Part  I.  of  the  Manual.  Of  these,  only  ten  are
said  to  be iwUntially  possible  in  the  kama-loka,  five  in
the  rupa-loka,  and  four  in  the  a r rip  a-1  ok  a.^  But
only  one  or  other  of  these  is  actually  possible  for  each
individual  life,  according  to  circumstances.  These  are  de-
scribed in  Part  V.  of  the  Manual  as  patisandhi’s,
but  will  be  referred  to  as  k a m a -,  r u p a - , or  a r u p a -
bhavanga’s,  while  discussing  the  forms  of  conscious-
ness, when  the  connection  between  bhavanga  and
Being  will  be  more  apparent.  The  investigation  of  these
circumstances  will  lead  to  the  determination  of  which  class,
or  classes  of  subliminal  consciousness  can  take  part  in  the
processes  of  thought  to  be  described  later.

A flow  of  the  momentary  states  of  subliminal  conscious-
ness of  a particular  class  constitutes  the  bhavanga-
s 0 t a , the  stream  of  being,  bounded  by  birth  ( p a t i -
sandhi)  and  decease  (cuti).  And  as  decease  is  but  a
prelude  to  another  birth,  the  continued  flow  of  the  stream
of  being  from  life  to  life,  from  existence  to  existence,  con-
stitutes s a ij  s a r a,^  the  ocean  of  existence.

These  momentary  states  of  subliminal  consciousness  of
an  individual  being  are  like  one  another  in  certain  respects —
to  wit : plane  of  existence  (b  h u m i),  kind  [of  conscious-
ness] (j  a t i),  concomitant  mental  properties  (s  a m p a -
yutta-dhamma),  conditions  precedent  (s  a n k h a r a),
and  object  of  consciousness  (a  r a m m a n a).  And  because
of  the  continuity  of  such  similar  states  or  temporary  selves,

1 L o k a is  world  or  sphere  of  existence.  On  the  three  1 o k a ’ s , see
Manual,  p.  81,«.2,  and  below,  p.  12.  Pat  is  a n d hi  = lit.,  re-connection,
is  the  usual  term  in  A b h i d h a m m a for  re-birth  (or  re-conception).
—Ed.

2 Lit.,  continual  going.


11


Illusion  of  Identity

men,  under  the  blinding  influence  of  ignorance  (a  v i j j a)
mistake  similarity  for  identity,  and  are  apt  to  think  of  al
this  ‘ river  of  life  ’ as  one  enduring,  abiding  soul  or  ego,
even  as  they  think  the  river  of  yesterday  identical  with  that
of  to-day.

While  the  object  is  regarded  as  constantly  changing,  the
subject  is  still  held  in  the  West  to  be  an  abiding,  enduring
entity.  But  in  the  Buddhist  view,  both  the  subject  and
the  object  are  alike  transitory,  the  relation  alone  between
the  two  impermanent  correlates  remaining  constant.  This
constancy  of  relation,  which,  according  to  our  tentative
definition,  is  consciousness  itself,  gives  rise  to  the  erroneous  Personal
idea  of  Personal  Identity.  identity.

If  the  subject  be  self-same,  it  should  always  regard  an
admittedly  changing  object  as  different  at  different  times  ;
but  never  as  the  same  for  any  two  consecutive  moments.

But  the  fact  that  w’e  can  regard  a changing  object  as
identical  at  different  times,  even  after  a lapse  of  a long-
interval,  shows  to  the  Buddhists  that  the  subject  cannot
possibly  remain  the  identical  self  for  any  two  consecutive
moments  throughout  that  interval.

The  phenomenon  of  self-consciousness  is  not  an  excep-  Seif-Con-
tion.  Self  presented  in  this  consciousness  is,  like- any  other
object,  variable,  but  regarded  as  identical.

The  Stream  of  Being,  then,  is  an  indispensable  condition
or  factor,  the  sine  qua  non  of  present  conscious  existence ;
it  is  the  raison  d’etre  of  individual  life ; it  is  the  life-
continuum  ; it  is,  as  it  were,  the  background  on  which
thought-pictures  are  drawn.  It  is  comparable  to  the
current  of  a river  when  it  flows  calmly  on,  unhindered  by
any  obstacle,  unruffled  by  any  wind,  unrippled  by  any
wave ; and  neither  receiving  tributary  waters,  nor  parting
with  its  contents  to  the  world.  And  when  that  current  is
opposed  by  any  obstacle  of  thought  from  the  world  within,
or  perturbed  by  tributary  streams  of  the  senses  from  the
world  without,  then  thoughts  (vi  t h i-ci  1 1 a ’ s)  arise.  But
it  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  stream  of  being  is  a sub-
plane  from  which  thoughts  rise  to  the  surface.  There  is


Pi’imaiy
classifica-
tion of
conscious-
ness.


Universal

mental

proper-

ties.


12  Classification  of  Consciousness

juxtaposition  of  momentary  states  of  consciousness,  sub-
liminal and  supraliminal,  throughout  a life-time  and  from
existence  to  existence.  But  there  is  no  superposition  of
such  states.

Life,  then,  in  the  Buddhist  view  of  things,  is  like  an
ever-changing  river,  having  its  source  in  birth,  its  goal  in
death,  receiving  from  the  tributary  streams  of  sense
constant  accretions  to  its  flood,  and  ever  dispensing  to  the
world  around  it  the  thought-stuff  it  has  gathered  hy  the
way.

We  have  seen  that  subliminal  consciousness  is  either
k a m a , r u p a , or  a r u p a.  Supraliminal  consciousness
may  be  classifled  as  normal,  supernormal  and  transcen-
dental. Normal  consciousness  is  termed  kama-citta,
because  it  generally  pertains  to  the  kama-loka,  so
called  because  desire  (k  a m a)  prevails  on  this  plane  of
existence.  Supernormal  consciousness  is  termed  m a h a g-
gata-citta,  because  it  has  reached  the  sublime
state.  And  it  is  further  distinguished  as  r u p a - , or
arupa-citta,  according  as  it  is  generally  found  in  the
r u p a - or  a r u p a - 1 o k a . E u p a - 1 o k a is  so  called
because  the  subtle  residuum  of  matter  is  said,  in  that  plane
of  existence,  to  be  still  met  with.  Arupa-loka  is  so
called  because  no  trace  of  matter  is  held  to  be  found  in  it.
Transcendental  consciousness  is  termed  lokuttara-
c i 1 1 a , because  it  is  altogether  out  of  all  the  three  1 o k a s ,
or  worlds.’-

Consciousness,  in  this  fourfold  classification,  is  primarily
composed  of  seven  mental  properties  (cetasika’ s) —
namely:  contact  (phassa),  feeling  (vedana),  perception
(s  a nil  a),  will  or  volition  (cetana),  oneness  of  object
(ekaggata),  psychic  life  (j  ivitindr  iya),  attention
(m  a n a s i k a r a).  These  seven  mental  properties  are
termed  sabba-citta-sadharana,  or  Universals,^
because  they  are  common  to  every  class  or  state  of  con-
sciousness, or  every  separate  act  of  mind  or  thought.

^ Uttar  a = beyond,  outside  of.

^ Lit.,  common  to  all  consciousness.


13


Logic  of  Definition

Each  of  them  is  therefore  consciousness  and  something
more.  If  we  were  to  represent  a state  of  consciousness  by
a sphere  composed  of  these  seven  mental  properties,  their
common  consciousness  would  be  represented  by  the  outer
shell  of  the  sphere.  And  if  each  sphere  of  consciousness
were  composed  of  only  these  seven  and  no  more,  there
would  be  only  a single  class  of  consciousness.  But  there  Difieient
are  forty-five  different  properties  distinguishing  one  class
from  another.  And  these,  in  varying  combinations,  give  of  Con-
rise  to  the  eighty-nine  classes  of  consciousness  enumerated
in  Part  I.  of  the  Manual,  or,  according  to  a broader  classi-
fication, one  hundred  and  twenty-one.

If  we  take  as  our  example  the  first  automatic  (a  s a n - a t3'pe  of
kharika)  class  of  thought  out  of  the  eight  appetitives
(lobha-mula’s),  and  subject  it  to  an  analysis  accord-
ing  to  the  methods  of  Buddhist  psychology  described  in
Part  II.,  we  shall  find  that  this  class  of  consciousness  is
compounded  of  no  less  than  nineteen  mental  ^Droperties.

These  may  be  grouped  as  follows : Seven  Universals,  or
sabba  - citta  - sadharanas  (already  named)  ; six
Particular  properties,  or  p a k i n n a k a s,  common  to
some  only  ; four  Bad  Universals,  common  to  all  evil
thoughts  (s  abba  kusala-sadhar  ana’s);  appetite  or
greed  (1  o b h a)  ; and  error  (ditthi — i.e.,  miccha-
d it  t h i).^

Now,  in  Buddhist  logic  adequate  analysis  of  any  datum
includes  an  examination  of  its — (1)  characteristic  mark
(lakkhana);  (2a)  function  (k i c c a- r a sa),  (2&)  property
(sampatti-rasa),  (3a)  reappearance  as  phenomenon
(upatthanakara-paccupatthana),  (35)  reappear-
ance as  effect  (phala-paccupatthana),  and  (4)
proximate  cause  (padatthana).^  Space,  however,  does  not
permit  such  a detailed  inquiry  into  each  of  these  nineteen
mental  properties,  nor  into  those  other  properties  given  in

1 D i 1 1 h i = lit.,  view  or  views  ; m i c c h a = wrong,  bad. — Ed.

- On  this  logic  of  definition,  see  Manual,  Part  IX.,  § 7,  3,  n.  Ee-
appearance  (pati-upatthana,  hence  paccupa°)  is  ‘habitual’
phenomenal  appearance. — Ed.


Tlie  seven
universal
properties.


1.  Phassa
explained.


2.  Vedana.


14  Universal  Properties  of  Consciousness

Part  IL),  and  I must  confine  myself  to  a brief  considera-
tion of  their  most  salient  features.

First  of  all,  then,  the  subject  is  aware  of  the  presence
of  an  object.  And  in  the  ease  of  the  type  of  thought
under  discussion  the  object  is  either  an  agreeable  sight,
sound,  smell,  taste,  touch,  or  concrete  mental  object
(d  h a m m a r a m m a n a) — agreeable  in  the  sense  that  it
is  desired  by  the  subject  (i  1 1 h a r a m m a n a).^  This
awareness  of  the  objective  presentation  is  termed  contact
(p  h a s s a).^

The  subject  is  next  aware  of  itself  as  being  affected  as
an  animated  organism  (n  a m a - r u p a,  where  r u p a , or
matter,  is  conjoined  with  mind) — in  this  case  pleasurably,
bj"  the  agreeable  contact  or  impact.  This  awareness  of
subjective  affection  in  some  way,  either  pleasantly,  pain-
fully, or  indifferently,  is  termed  ‘ feeling  born  of  contact  ’
(s  a m p h a s s a - j a - V e d a n a).  The  term  ‘vedana’  is
not  confined  to  the  hedonistic  aspect  of  sensations,  but  in-
cludes such  emotions  as  joy  and  grief.  It  covers  all  kinds
of  feeling,  physical  and  mental.  Vedana  is  either  bodily
(k  a y i k a),  or  mental  (manasika,  cetasika).  Under
the  aspect  of  feeling (anubhavana-bheda),vedana
is  either  pleasure  (sukha),  or  pain  (dukkha),  or
neither  pain  nor  pleasure  (adukkham-asukha).
The  last-mentioned  is  also  known  as  upekkha — i.e.,
hedonic  neutrality  or  indifference.^  But  this  hedonic
element  is  distinct  from  that  equanimity  or  balance  of
mind  (tatramaj  jhattata),'^  which  implies  a com-
plex intellectual  state.

The  sense  of  touch  alone  is  accompanied  by  the  positive
hedonic  elements  of  pain  and  pleasure  ; the  other  four
senses  are  accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference.  This
exceptional  distinction  is  assigned  to  the  sense  of  touch,

^ Lit.,  wished-for  object. — Ed.

2 More,  lit.,  still,  ‘ tact,’  the  etymological  equivalent  of  con-tact  being
sam-phassa . — Ed.

^ Lit.,  looking-at — i.e.,  contemplating,  not  pursuing. — Ed.

Lit.,  there-middleness.  Cf.  below,  p.  66.


Feeling  15

because  the  impact  between  the  sentient  surface  (pa  sad  a -
rilpa)  and  the  respective  objects  of  other  senses,  both
sets  of  which  are  secondary  qualities  of  body,  is  not  strong
enough  to  produce  physical  pain  or  pleasure.  But  in  the
case  of  touch  there  is  contact  with  one,  or  other,  or  all  the
three  primary  qualities  (locality,  temperature,  pressure) ;
and  this  is  strong  enough  to  affect  those  primary  qualities
in  the  percipient’s  own  body.  Just  as  cotton-wool  striking
cotton-wool  on  an  anvil  does  not  affect  the  latter,  but  a
hammer  striking  cotton-wool  imparts  its  shock  to  the
anvil  also.^

If  to  pleasure  and  pain  we  add  excitement,  we  get
joy  (somanassa)  and  grief  (domanassa).  Thus,
there  are  five  classes  of  v e d a n a considered  as  con-
trolling faculties  (i  n d r i y a ’ s).  The  excess  of  pleasure
over  i)ain  constitutes  the  sentiment  of  happiness  or  bliss
(sukha),  and  the  excess  of  pain  over  pleasure,  the
sentiment  of  misery  or  ill  (du  kkha).  We  have  digressed
a little  here,  so  as  to  prevent  a possible  confusion  between
the  hedonic  u p e k k h a and  the  intellectual  u p e k k h a ,
on  the  one  hand,  and  between  the  simple  sukha  and
the  complex  sukha  on  the  other.

Next,  the  subject  refers  the  sensation  proper  to  a sense-  3.  Sanna.
organ — e.g.,  the  eye  in  the  case  of  sight — and  is  aware
that  the  vatthu,  or  the  physical  basis  of  this  sensation,
is  extended  so  as  to  receive  contact — i.c.,  occuiues  space.

This  recognition  of  the  localization  of  sensation  proper  is
termed  ‘perception  (proper)  born  of  contact’  (sam-
phassa-j  a-sanna).

But  here  also  the  term  s a n ii  a should  not  be  confined
to  external  perception.  If  it  is  rendered  by  ‘ perception  ’
in  this  Manual,  the  term  ‘ 23erception  ’ must  be  understood
in  the  widest  significance  of  the  term,  somewhat  after  the
manner  of  Descartes,  Malebranche,  Locke,  Leibnitz,  and
others,  before  its  limitation  by  Eeid.  Sanna,  in  Buddhist
psychology,  means  the  awareness  of  the  marks,  real  or

1 A simile  derived  by  the  commentators  from  Buddhaghosa  {Asl.  263 ;
cf.  my  Buddhist  Psy.,  Ivii.,  127,  n.  1). — Ed.


16


Volition


imaginary,  by  which  an  object  either  of  sense  or  thought
is,  or  may  hereafter  be,  recognized.

4.  Cetaua.  The  function  of  volition  is  twofold.  In  its  psychological

aspect  it  merely  determines  the  activities  of  its  concomitant
properties,  eighteen  in  number  in  the  present  case.  In
this  aspect  it  is  called  co-existent  volition  (s  a h a j a t a-
cetana).  In  its  ethical  aspect  it  determines  its  own
consequences,  subject  to  conditions  (hetu’s).  In  the
class  of  consciousness  under  consideration  the  exercise  of
volition  is  conditioned  by  the  two  so-called  ‘ roots  ’ :
Ignorance  (m  o h a)  and  Greed  (1  o b h a).  Under  favour-
able circumstances  volition  is  transformed  into- action,  or
k a m m a — that  is  to  say,  the  particular  state  of  conscious-
ness in  which  volition  is  translated  into  action  may  mani-
fest itself  as  thought  (mano-kamma),  which  in  turn
may  lead  to,  and  result  in,  speech  (v  a c I - k a m m a)  or
deed  (k  a y a - k a m m a).  When  it  is  so  transmuted,
entailing  moral  consequences,  it  is  designated  asynchronous
volition  (nanakkhanika-cetan  a).^  And  the  action
(kamma),  into  which  this  volition  is  transmuted,  is
termed  ‘ course. of  action  ’ (k  a m m a - p a t h a).

5.  Ekag-  The  mental  property  by  which  the  Object  of  conscious-

ness  is  necessarily  regarded  as  an  individual,  occupying  a
definite  position  in  space,  or  time,  or  in  both,  is  termed
‘ individuality  of  object  ’ (e  k a gga  t a).

Time  and  Without  entering  into  the  celebrated  examination,  by

Subjective  of  the  question  whether  time  and  space  have

Elements,  objective  reality,  we  may  say  that,  in  Buddhism,  both  are
regarded  as  subjective  elements.  A k a s a (space)  is  a
permanent  concej^t  (n  i c c a - p a n n a 1 1 i),  by  which  the
mind  is  enabled  to  distinguish  objects  in  external  perception.
What  space  is  to  matter  time  is  to  mind.  Time  is  the
concept  (k  a 1 a - p a n n a 1 1 i),  by  which,  first  and  foremost,
mental  states  are  distinguished  in  internal  intuition.  It  is
the  sine  qua  non  of  the  succession  of  these  mental  states.

This  mental  property  of  objective  delimitation,  or

1 I.e.,  volition  differing  in  time  from  its  consequences.  Of.
Part  VIII.,  § 9.


Particular  Properties  17

e k a g g a t a,  when  cultivated  and  developed,  is  designated
concentration  of  thought,  or  s a m a d h i.

The  selective  or  co  - ordinating  activity  of  attention
(manasikara)  may  be  aroused  from  within  or  from  6.  Manasi-
without,  and,  in  the  present  case,  spontaneously  (i.e.,  with-
out  any  volitional  effort  on  one’s  own  part  or  on  the  part
of  another)  from  without  by  the  object  itself.  And  it  is
directed  to  this  one  object.  It  is  the  alpha  and  the  omega
of  an  act  of  consciousness.  This  is  probably  the  reason
why  it  comes  last  in  the  list.^

We  have  said  that  will  determines  the  activities  of  its  7.  Jivitin-
concomitant  properties  (p.  16).  But  the  activities  of  will
itself  and  the  rest  of  the  concomitant  properties  are  due  to
the  psychic  life  (j  i v i t i n d r i y a),  which  infuses  mental
life  into  one  and  all,  and  constitutes  the  whole  into  a
psychosis  or  psychical  state.

In  this  way  all  the  seven  Universals  should  be  accounted
for  in  every  class  of  consciousness,  though  they  may  be
unequally  roused  into  activity,  according  to  circumstances,
in  different  states  of  consciousness.


Of  Specific  or  Accidental  properties,  first  the  six  par-  Six  par-

,.  1 ticular

ticulars  ; cetasikas.

Vitakka  is  the  directing  of  concomitant  propertiesi.Vi-
towards  the  object.  Vi  car  a is  the  continued  exercise  of
the  mind  on  that  object.  Adhimokkha  presupposes  a 3.  Adhi-
certain  amount  of  hesitancy  on  the  part  of  the  mind  “okkha.
whether  it  shall  attend,  or  not,  to  a particular  object  out  of
many  presented.  As  its  name  implies,  it  is  the  ‘ freedom  ’
from  the  wavering  state  of  the  mind  between  two  courses
open  to  it.  It  is  the  property  by  which  the  mind  decides,
or  chooses  to  attend  to  this,  rather  than  that,  in  the  field  of
presentation.’^  It  has  nothing  to  do  with  judgment,  which

^Imam  evati  sannitthanakaranag:  — ‘ Making  the
conclusion : “ Just  this  one.”  ’ The  work  quoted  is  the  Thera  Sub-
huti’s  Index,  Ah  hiclhdnajp  p a dip  ili  d - su  ci  (Colombo,  1893)
to  his  edition  of  The  AbidhdnappadlpiJca  (Colombo,  1865),  a Pali
dictionary  compiled  about  a.d.  1200  by  Thera  Moggallana. — Ed.

2


18


Bad  Universals


4.  Vii’iya.

5.  Piti.

6.  Chanda.


Four  uni-
versal bad
cetasikas.
1.  Moha.


2.  Ahirika.

3.  Anot-
tappa.

Con-

science.

4.  Udd-
hacca.


Two

specific

cetasikas.

1.  Loblia.

2.  Ditthi.


Sahetuka,


is  not  formed  till  the  process  of  thought  called  vinic-
c h a y a is  reached  ; for  it  obtains  also  in  any  purely
presentative  process.  And  such  a process  does  not  admit
of  any  comparison  whatever  between  two  concepts  com-
pared in  a judgment,  as,  e.g.,  when  an  unknown  object  is
presented  for  the  first  time,  and  representative  cognition  is
involved.  The  effort  of  conation  or  will  is  due  to  v i r i y a .
Piti  signifies  an  interest  in  the  object ; e h a n d a con-
stitutes the  intention  with  respect  to  act.  Effort,  intention,
or  knowledge,  may  predominate  at  the  time  of  the  com-
mission of  an  act,  and,  when  it  does  so,  the  ‘ predominant  ’
factor  is  termed  a d h i p a t i , to  which  we  shall  revert  later
(p.  60).


Of  the  four  Universal  Bad  Properties,  moha  (illusion)
is  present  as  the  root  of  every  form  of  evil,  creating
confusion  as  to  the  true  nature  of  the  object,  or  the
consequences  of  an  act.  The  evolution  of  evil  from
a V i j j a (ignorance)  is  discussed  under  the  doctrine  of
Paticca-samuppada,  in  Part  VIII.  of  the  manual.

The  absence  of  shame  in  the  commission  of  an  evil  act
is  ahirika;  while  the  absence  of  fear  of  its  consequences
is  anottappa.  Their  opposites  correspond  to  conscience
or  the  moral  faculty.  The  distraction  of  the  mind  is
accounted  for  in  u d d h a c c a , the  property  antithetical  to
attention.


Of  the  two  Specific  Properties,  greed  and  error,  greed
covets  the  object  and  supplies  a motive  for  the  act  of
getting  at  it.  In  doing  so  it  conditions  its  concomitant
properties,  principally  volition  (c  e t a n a)  in  the  production
of  the  desired  effect.

The  class  of  consciousness  under  examination  is  termed
conditional  (sahetuka),  because  it  contains  a condition
— i.e.,  two  conditioning  properties  and  seventeen  conditioned
properties.^  The  specific  characters  of  this  class  of  con-
sciousness are,  that  it  autoniatically  springs  into  being  (on
^ 7 Universals -f  6 Particulars 3 Bad  Universals -f  Error.


19


Types  of  Consciousness

the  presentation  of  an  agreeable  sight,  etc.),  that  it  is
associated  with  erroneous  views  (as  to  the  consequences,
etc.),  and  is  accompanied  by  joy.  From  these  special
characteristics  this  class  of  consciousness  has  been  styled
‘ consciousness  accompanied  by  joy,  connected  with  error,
automatic.’  This  many- worded  term  is  a definition  rather
than  a mere  name.  And  it  is  a definition  which  fulfils
Bain’s  requirements,  to  which  we  have  alluded  at  the
beginning  of  this  essay.

This  type  of  thought  may  manifest  itself  in  seven  of  the
ten  courses  of  bad  action  (akusala-kammapatha,
sometimes  called  ten  d u c c a r i t a ’ s),  described  in  Part  V.
of  the  manual — e.g.,  in  theft,  adultery,  etc.,  but  not  in
murder,  harsh  speech  (p  h a r u s a - v a c a),  and  hostile
thought  (byapada).  Again,  this  class  of  thought  gene-
rally occurs  to  one  who  is  of  a joyous  nature  by  birth
(s  0 m a n a s s a - p a t i s a n d h i k a),  or  to  one  who  has
not  a deep  (a  g a m b h i r a),  philosophic  turn  of  mind.

But  when  such  an  one  holds  a wrong  view  of  the  universe,
or  associates  with  another  who  holds  such  a view,  and
when  the  absence  of  sloth  and  torpor  is  brought  about  by
suitable  foods,  etc.,  then  this  class  of  thought  may  arise  in
any  individual,  except  the  eight  classes  of  the  elect  (a  r i y a -
pug  gala),  under  the  above  circumstances,  at  time
and  at  any  place.

Such  is  the  complexity  of  the  mechanism  of  a single
class  of  consciousness.  The  salient  features  of  the  remain-
ing mental  properties  will  have  to  be  studied  under  other
classes  of  consciousness ; but  space  does  not  permit  me  to
enter  into  them  here.

Of  the  eighty-nine  classes  of  consciousness  to  be  studied  Classes  of
in  this  way,  some  are  karmic  (he.,  function  as  karma,
or  as  causes)  ; some  function  as  resultants  (v  i p a k a) ; grouped,
and  some  are  non-causal  (k  r i y a) . Or,  considered  from
the  point  of  view  of  energy,  some  are  actual  or  potential,
some  are  in  course  of  manifestation  as  work,  and  some  are
static.  The  term  ‘ inoperative  ’ has  been  introduced  mto
the  translation  as  a substitute  for  the  last  (k  r i y a) .


Kriya.


Hasitup-

pada.


The

Beautiful.


20  The  Bemitiful

Unconditional  (a  h e t u k a)  consciousness  is  either
resultant  or  non-causal ; while  conditional  consciousness
(s  a h e t u k a)  is  either  causal  or  non-causal.  Causal
classes  of  consciousness  are  either  good  or  moral  (k  u s a 1 a),
or  bad  or  immoral  (akusala),  and  are  therefore  deter-
minate ; while  resultant  and  non-causal  classes  are  neither
moral  nor  immoral,  and  are  therefore  neutral,  unmoral,  or
indeterminate  (a  h y a k a t a).

Non-causal  or  static  consciousness  is  characteristic  of
the  Buddha  and  his  Arahants  only.  Their  non-causal
volition  (kriya-cetana)  does  not  modify  the  character
ethically  one  way  or  another,  because  it  is  now  subject
to  good  hetu’s  (conditions) — namely,  absence  of  greed
(a  lob  ha),  absence  of  ill-will  (adosa),  and  the  absence
of  illusion  (am  oh  a),  and  is  entirely  free  from  th.Q  latent
principles  of  evil  (a  n u s a y a ’ s).

Of  the  non-causal  classes  of  consciousness,  the  ‘ genesis
of  mirth  ’ (hasituppada,or  aesthetic  faculty)  bears  on
the  Philosophy  of  JDsthetics.  Of  the  three  branches  of
this  Philosophy — the  Beautiful,  the  Sublime,  and  the
Ludicrous,  which  are  so  closely  connected  with  one  another
— we  propose  to  discuss  here  briefly  the  first  and  the
last.

The  Beautiful  does  not  appear  to  be  defined  anywhere
in  Buddhism.  The  obvious  reason  is  that  it  is  largely
subjective.  Hence  to  us  it  is  not  surprising  that
moralists  in  the  West  have  now  abandoned  the  idea,
of  searching  after  the  common  quality  or  qualities  of
the  Beautiful.

In  Buddhism  the  term  ‘ the  beautiful ’ (s  u b h a or
sobhana)  is  opposed  to  evil  (papa).  Hence  ‘the
beautiful  ’ is  synonymous  with  ‘ the  good.’  And  ‘ the
good,’  when  applied  to  an  object,  is  equivalent  to  the
desirable  (ittha).  Thus  the  beautiful  is  more  or  less  a
matter  of  taste.  In  other  words,  the  Philosophy  of  the
Beautiful  is  identical  with  the  Philosophy  of  Taste  ; for
what  is  pleasing  to  one  may  be  painful  to  another.  Not-
withstanding this  relativity,  the  Buddhists  do  recognize  a


Taste


21


common  sense  of  beauty,  by  virtue  of  'which  average  minds
are  similarly  affected  by  the  same  object.  In  fixing  the
standard  of  objective  beauty,  Buddhists  avoid  the  two
extremes.

The  one  extreme  is  that  cultured  minds  may  regard  even
a corpse  which  is  ugly  or  foul  (a  - s u b h a)  as  useful,  suit-
able, good,  and  agreeable  for  the  purpose  of  his  meditation.
They  also  perceive  the  loathsomeness  of  food  (a  h a r e -
patikula-sanna),  which  ordinary  mankind  are  in  the
habit  of  regarding  as  wholesome.  Hence  the  Buddhists
consider  that  such  a sense  of  beauty  is  too  refined  to  be  of
any  practical  value  for  a common  standard.  The  other
extreme  is  that  uncultivated  minds  often  look  upon  the
beautiful  as  ugly.  Heretics,  for  example,  were  offended
with  the  personal  beauty  of  the  Buddha,  who  was  held  by
one-third  of  mankind  as  the  supremely  desirable  object
(ati-it tharammana).  The  lower  animals  also  often
relish  most  abominable  foods.  Their  sense  of  beauty,
therefore,  cannot  serve  as  a standard  either.

Another  test  of  beauty  is,  according  to  Buddhists,  in
the  sense-organs.  A fine  spear,  they  say,  is  very  pleasing
to  the  eye,*  but  very  disagreeable  when  it  pierces  the
skin.  A fruit  may  be  palatable  to  taste,  but  offensive  to
smell.  A bitter  fruit  may  be  very  pretty.  In  short,
what  is  agreeable  to  one  sense  may  be  disagreeable  to
another.

Now  the  pleasures  of  the  senses  are  regarded  by  mankind
as  desirable,  but  excess  of  pleasure  is  painful ; for  there  is
a limit  to  everything  that  is  in  this  world.  Light  or  sound,
for  instance,  is  pleasing  to  the  eye  or  ear  up  to  a certain
limit,  beyond  which  it  is  positively  painful.  This  limit,  of
course,  varies  with  individuals,  but  there  is  a common  limit
fixed  by  the  average  majority.

The  third  criterion  by  which  Buddhists  judge  of  the
pleasurableness  or  painfulness  of  an  object  is  the  amount
of  effort  required  to  get  a desirable  object,  or  to  resist  or
repulse  an  undesirable  one.  The  most  pleasant  is  then  in
the  line  of  least  resistance.  Buddhaghosa  has  accordingly


22


The  Ludicrous


The

Ludicrous.


summed  up,  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Vibhahga,^  as
follows  : ‘ The  desh’able  and  the  undesirable  are  decided
means  of  (or  with  reference  to)  either  the  common  sense
of  mankind,  or  the  sense-organs,  or  the  amount  of  effort
required.’  Of  all  the  senses,  sight  and  hearing  are  re-
garded as  most  esthetic.  Sight  is  compared  by  Buddhists
to  a snake  which  delights  in  a hole  full  of  rubbish.  Thus
art-paintings  with  variegated  colours  are  preferable  to  a
plain  drawing.  The  same  remarks  apply  to  hearing,
which  takes  delight  in  music,  but  not  in  a monotonous
noise.

Now  we  shall  see  how  the  Theory  of  the  Beautiful
bears  on  that  of  the  Ludicrous  from  the  Buddhist  stand-
point.

Laughter  is  held  to  be  but  an  expression  of  pleasurable
feeling.  There  are  six  classes  of  laughter  recognized  in
Buddhist  works  ; (1)  s i t a : a smile  manifesting  itself  in
exjpression  and  countenance;  (2)  ha  sit  a:  a smile  con-
sisting in  the  slight  movements  of  the  lips  just  enough  to
reveal  the  tips  of  the  teeth ; (3)  v i h a s i t a : laughter  giving
out  a slight  sound;  (4)  upahasita  : laughter  accompanied
by  the  movement  of  the  head,  shoulders,  and  arms  ; (5)  a pa-
h a s i t a : laughter  accompanied  by  the  shedding  of  tears ;
and  (6)  atihasita;  an  outburst  of  laughter  accompanied
by  the  forward  and  backward  movements  of  the  entire  body
from  head  to  foot.  Laughter  is  thus  a form  of  bodily
expression  (k  a y a - v i n n a 1 1 i),  which  may  or  may  not
be  accompanied  by  vocal  expression  (vaci-vihnatti).
Of  these,  the  first  two  classes  are  indulged  in  by  cultured
persons,  the  next  two  by  the  average  man,  and  the  last
two  by  lower  classes  of  beings.

Laughter  is  caused  by  one  or  other  of  the  thirteen  classes
of  joyful  thoughts  named  in  Part  I.  of  the  manual — namely,
by  four  of  the  ‘ Appetitive  ’ (1  o b h a m ir  1 a)  class,  by  four
of  the  ‘ Great  ’ main  classes  or  types  of  good  consciousness


^ ItO^S-uitthani  majjhassa  vasa  dvaravasena  va
payogassa  vasenapi  nicchitaniti  agatag.  Sammolia-
Vinodani.  There  is  as  yet  no  European  edition  of  this  work. — Ed.


The  Ludicrous


23


(m  a h a - k u s a 1 a)/  by  four  of  the  great  classes  of
inoperative  consciousness  (m  a h a - k r i y a),  and  by  the
one  sense  of  ajsthetic  pleasure  termed  ‘ laughter-genesis  ’

(h  a s i t u p p a d a).

In  the  case  of  ordinary  average  persons  (puthujjana’s),
the  first  eight  classes  of  joyful  consciousness  obtain.  Of
these  eight,  the  two  erroneous  classes  of  appetitives  do  not
obtain  in  the  case  of  the  four  ‘ attainers  of  the  paths  ’
(maggatthana)  and  the  three  lower  ‘ enjoy ers  of  the
fruits  ’ (p  h a 1 a 1 1 h a n a).  The  last- mentioned  five  classes
of  joyful  consciousness  are  the  prerogatives  of  the  Buddha
and  his  Arahants.  And  as  the  Buddha  is  supposed  to  have
only  indulged  in  the  s i t a class  of  laughter,  the  term
hasituppada  must  be  understood  to  be  a contraction
of  sitahasituppada.

We  have  said  elsewhere  in  this  essay  that  either  an
agreeable  object,  or  the  inhorn  or  innate  sense  of  pleasure,
or  the  want  of  seriousness,  gives  rise  to  joyful  consciousness
of  the  Appetitive  class.  But  we  cannot  here  enter  into  the
complicated  causes  that  bring  about  joyful  thoughts  in
other  classes  of  consciousness.  Suffice  it  for  the  present
to  observe  that  laughter  is  not  caused  by  joyful  thought  in
cognition  on  occasion  of  sense  (called  ‘ five-door  cognition,’
pancadvara-vlthi).  The  sight  of  an  agreeable  object
gives  rise  to  a sudden  accession  of  pleasure.  Pleasure
accompanied  by  excitement  is  joy,  and  it  is  this  joy  which
is  reproduced  in  the  reproductive  processes,  to  be  described
later,  that  excites  laughter.  Thus  there  is  a certain  amount
of  reflection,  comparison,  discrimination,  etc.,  when  we
laugh.  *

It  is  generally  said  that  the  Buddha  smiled  on  seeing  Anoiarika
the  Subtle  (anoiarika).  But  Buddhadatta,  the
temporary  of  Buddhaghosa,  would  substitute  the  Degraded^

^ See  p.  86,  n.  3.  Twenty-four  classes  of  k a m a - conscious-
ness are  so-called  because  they  have  the  most  extensive  field  of
action.

^ Chasu  anularesu  arammanesu  hasituppadana-
k i c c a.  Ah  hi  dll  a mm  a V a t dr  a.


24


The  LiUdicrouH


Hobbes

antici-

pated.


(a  n u 1 a r a),  as  opposed  to  the  Sublime  (p  a n i t a),  for  the
Subtle.  Herein  this  much-abused  author  seems  to  us  to
be  describing  more  aptly  Moggallana’s  smile  on  seeing  a
P e t a,^  because  P e t a s are  very  low  in  the  scale  of  beings,
and  ail  of  them  were  more  or  less  ugly  and  awkward.  It
has  been  argued  against  this  view  that  Moggallana,  from
his  compassionate  nature,  could  not  possibly  have  been
exulting  over  the  misfortune  of  another.  But  this  argument
has  been  met  by  the  answer  that  the  thera  merely  rejoiced
over  the  idea  that  he  himself  had  escaped  the  rounds  of
such  miserable  existence.

In  this  view,  then,  the  Buddhists  forestalled  Hobbes,
according  to  whom  ‘ laughter  is  a sudden  glory  arising
from  a sudden  conception  of  some  eminency  in  ourselves
by  comparison  with  the  infirmity  of  others  or  with  our  own
formerly.’  This  implies  some  gratification  of  the  sentiment
of  power  ; for  the  pleasure,  whether  excited  by  the  Beautiful,
the  Sublime,  or  the  Ludicrous,  is  nothing  but  a sense  of
superiority  over  certain  other  things  in  nature.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  we  are  pleased  on  account  of  the  superiority  of
others,  our  pleasure,  now  termed  m u d i t a,  is  sympathetic
and  appreciative.  If  the  Ludicrous  be  the  Degraded,  the
degradation  is  not  sufficient  to  provoke  pity  or  ill-will,  or
grief.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  not  an  undesirable  object  in
itself,  but  a mean  between  the  Desirable  and  the  Undesirable.
But  in  the  absence  of  the  Ludicrous,  as  when  a man  is
always  of  a smiling  face,  we  attribute  his  smiling  counten-
ance to  his  innate  sense  of  pleasure  or  naturally  happy
temperament.

Finally,  when  a child,  from  the  wantonness  of  youth,
bursts  into  laughter  at  the  slightest  cause,  which  is  not
sufficient  to  provoke  even  a smile  from  an  adult,  we  say
that  the  child’s  hilarity  is  due  to  a want  of  seriousness,

^ A race  of  hungry  shades  or  ghost-beings : one  of  the  unhappy
forms  of  rebirth.  This  episode  has  apparently  grown  out  of  Par  a-
j i k a IV.  (Vin.  iii. , 104  /.),  and  Lakkhana-Sagyutta  {S.  ii.,
254/.),  where  MoggaUana  sees  a variety  of  absurd  objects  and  smiles,
but  not  a Beta. — Ed.


Order  of  Consciousness  25

which  somewhat  corresponds  to  Bain’s  ‘ Reaction  from  the
Serious.’^


Now,  there  are  two  elements  in  every  consciousness,  the
Constant  and  the  Variable.  V i t h i is,  figuratively  speak-  Order  of
ing,  the  road  along  which  the  mind  travels  by  marked,  2.'?^' „„„„
well-defined,  permanent  stages  (t  h a n a ’ s).  The  fixity  and  (Vithi).
constancy  of  these  stages  gives  rise  to  that  Order  of  Thought
(c  i 1 1 a - n i y a m a),  w'hich  corresponds  to  Mansel’s  ‘ Form
of  Consciousness.’^  The  form  of  consciousness,  the  con-
stant  element,  is  opposed  to  the  matter  of  consciousness  of  Con-
which,  as  supplied  in  this  or  that  experience,  constitutes  sciousness.
the  variable  element ; but  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,
in  Buddhism,  both  subject  and  object  are  variable  at  every
moment.  With  Mansel,  who  holds  that  the  subject  is  the
constant  element,  there  is  only  one  form.  But  in  Buddhism
there  are  several  forms  of  consciousness,  each  of  which
will  be  designated  a ‘ process  of  thought  ’ whenever  it
takes  place  as  a fact.

We  have  said  that  time  is  the  sine  qua  non  of  the  suc-
cession of  mental  states.  To  every  separate  state  of  con-
sciousness ( c i 1 1 u p p a d a ),  which  takes  part  in  a process
of  thought  as  a functional  state,  either  in  the  subjective
form  of  the  stream  of  being,  which  w^e  have  described  as
free  from  process  (vithi-mutta),  or  in  the  objective
form  of  a conscious  act  of  mind  or  thought,  which  we
shall  describe  as  process-consciousness  (vlthi-citta),
there  are  three  phases — genesis  (up pa  da),  development
(t  h i t i),  and  dissolution  (bhang  a).  Each  of  these
phases  occupies  an  infinitesimal  division  of  time — an  Thought,
instant  (khan  a) — so  that  to  every  separate  state  of  con-
sciousness there  are  three  instants,  in  which  successively
it  becomes,  exists,  and  disappears.  These  three  instants
— nascent,  static,  and  cessant  (or  arrested) — together  form  Thought-

one  mental  moment  (c  i 1 1 a kk  h a na),  the  period  occupied  Moment  of
. . / j.  i Three

by  any  single  state  of  consciousness,  or  any  separate  act  instants.


^ Mental  Science,  p.  317.
2 Metaphysics,  p.  58.


26


Life-term

of

Matter.


Patisan-

dhi-vithi.


Life

of  mind  or  thought.  And  it  pleases  commentators  to  say
that  there  are  more  than  one  billion  of  such  thought-
moments  in  the  time  that  would  be  occupied  by  the
shortest  flash  of  lightning.

The  life-term  of  the  qualities  of  body  (r  u p a)  has  been
deduced  from  the  longest  time  required  for  complete  con-
sciousness of  an  object.  We  shall  see  that  seventeen
thought-moments  are  held  to  be  requisite  for  a complete
process  of  consciousness.  Thus  Buddhists  have  come  to
speak  of  matter  as  lasting  for  seventeen  thought-moments.
These,  they  say,  constitute  the  normal  duration  of  a
material  phenomenon — normal,  because  six  out  of  the
twenty-eight  qualities  of  body  (enumerated  in  Part  VI.  of
the  Manual) — viz.,  the  two  communicating  qualities  of
body,  or  media  of  communication  (vi  S natti-rilpa  ’ s),
and  the  four  characteristic  marks  of  matter  (lakkhana-
rupa’s),  are  of  less  than  seventeen  thought-moments’
duration.  These  may  be  styled  ‘ short-lived  qualities.’

Some  authorities  {e.g.,  the  Miila-Tika^)  dispute  the
existence  of  a static  phase  of  thought,  and  regard  it  as
merely  hypothetical.  They  hold  that,  in  becoming,  a
thing  simply  grows  and  decays,  with  no  static  stage.

We  have  so  far  cleared  our  way  for  the  description  of
different  thought-forms.  These  will  not  be  clearly  under-
stood unless  I add  some  such  preliminary  survey  of  the
Buddhist  view  of  life,  and  of  the  salient  character  of
Buddhist  psychology.

The  term  patisandhi  (re-birth  or  conception)  is
applied  to  the  resultant  consciousness,  as  determined  by
the  past  efficient  action  (j  a n a k a k a m m a),  of  that  which
is  being  conceived  as  an  individual.  Prom  and  after  the
moment  of  conception  the  current  of  being  is  said  to  be
renewed  in  the  form  of  a series  of  fifteen  or  sixteen  sub-
conscious moments  (or  bhavanga’s).  These  have  for  their
object  either  the  past  efficient  action  itself,  or  a symbol  of
that  past  action  (k  a m m a - n i m i 1 1 a),  or  a sign  of  the

1 Sub-commentary  on  Buddhaghosa’s  Commentaries  by  Ananda  of
Anuradhapura  in  Ceylon.


Re-birth


27


tendencies  (g  a t i - n i m i 1 1 a)  that  are  determined  by  the
force  of  that  past  action.  The  explanation  of  these  three
technical  terms  is  better  postponed  till  we  come  to  the
consideration  of  the  philosophy  of  death.  Suffice  it  for
the  present  to  state  the  Buddhist  hypothesis  of  decease  and
re- birth — namely  that,  whatever  object  was  presented  to
the  mind  at  the  stage  of  apperception  immediately  before
death  in  the  jirevious  existence,  there  is  invariably  pre-
sented, or  re-presented,  to  the  new  consciousness,  all  the
sub-conscious  moments  and  the  re-decease  (c  u t i)  of  the
existence  immediately  following.

Next,  the  new  sphere  of  existence,  as  an  object,  enters  the  Bhavanga-
field  of  presentation,  and  produces  perturbation  in  the
stream  of  being,  causing  this,  as  it  were,  to  vibrate  (as  a
lamp  flickers  before  it  goes  out)  for  two  moments.  The
first  of  these  moments  is  termed  ‘ vibrating  ’ (bhavanga-
c a 1 a n a),  but  the  second  is  termed  ‘ arrest  ’ (b  h a v a n - Bhavan-
guppaccheda),  because  at  the  end  of  the  latter  the  cheda.'^
stream  is  ‘cut  off’  by  the  faculty  of  reflection,  or  mind-
door  cognition  — i.e.,  mind  proper  (manodvaravaj-  Mind-door
jana).  And  this  faculty  is  capable  of  reflecting  on  the
new  existence.  The  ‘ arrest  ’ is  thus,  as  has  been  already
observed,  the  threshold  of  consciousness,  by  which  thought
is  divided  from  mere  being.

This  reflecting  in  turn  is  followed  by  a series  of  seven
apperceptives,  accompanied  by  a strong  desire  to  live  the
new  life  (bhava-nikanti-lobha-javanani).

Consciousness  thereafter  loses  itself  in  living  (bhav-
a n g a) ; sinks,  as  it  were,  into  the  stream  of  being,  until
its  current  is  interrupted  by  some  new  thought-obstacle  or
sensation.

Suppose  now  that  a visible  object  (r  upar  am  ma  na)  intuitive

is  presented.^  It  first  enters  the  stream  of  being  at  the

nascent  instant  of  a life-moment,  which  is  termed  ‘ past  ’ Presenta-

tive  Con-

^ The  European  reader  should  remember  that  in  the  following  sciousness.
description  the  duration  of  each  stage  is,  through  analysis,  magnified
from  infinitesimal  to  appreciable  quantities,  even  as  happens  to  minute
sections  of  material  structure  under  the  microscope. — Ed.


28


Noi'inal  Conscious  Procedui'c


Atita-

bhavanga.


Panca-

dvara-

vajjana.


Cakkhu-

vinnana.


Sanipatic-

chana.


Santirana.


(atita-bhavanga).  This  is  so  called  because  it  com-
pletes its  three  phases  and  passes  away  before  any  marked
perturbation  is  produced  in  the  calm  flow  of  the  stream.
Then  the  object  begins  to  assert  its  influence  by  impeding
the  stream,  with  the  result  that  the  latter  begins  to  vibrate,
as  a spinning-top  when  its  velocity  is  failing.  In  other
words,  the  vibration  is  due  to  the  initial  impact  between
the  object  and  the  organs  of  visual  sentience  (cakkhu-
p a s a d a - r u p a’ s),  the  sentient  surface  springing  into
activity  at  the  nascent  instant  of  the  moment  of  the
object’s  entry  into  the  stream.^  This  vibration  lasts  for
two  moments,  as  in  the  preceding  case,  after  which  the
stream  ceases  to  flow  as  such,  because  it  is  now  arrested  by
the  so-called  ‘ Five-door-turning-towards  ’ of  cognition  on
occasion  of  sense,  in  which  attention  is  more  active  than
its  concomitant  mental  properties.  At  this  stage  the
subject  merely  turns  for  one  thought-moment  to  something
that  arouses  its  attention  after  having  produced  a dis-
turbance in  the  stream  of  being,  but  knows  no  more
about  it.

Following  upon  it,  the  specific  sense  of  sight,  or  visual
sensation  (cakkhu-vinnana),  comes  into  play,  when
the  subject  sees  a certain  object,  as  to  the  nature  of  which
it  does  not  as  yet  hiow  anything.  At  this  stage,  then,  the
subject  is  merely  aware  of  the  fact  that  a certain  object  is
seen.

This  sense-operation  is  followed  by  a moment  of  reception
of  the  object  so  seen — i.e.,  of  the  whole  scene  presented  to
the  eye,  when  the  receptive  faculty  passively  receives,  as  it
were,  the  sense-impression  caused  by  the  external  stimulus.
Two  modes  of  recipient  reaction  are  distinguished — reception
of  an  agreeable,  or  of  a disagreeable  object.

Next  comes  the  investigating  faculty,  or  a momentary
examination  of  the  object  so  received.  Three  modes  in  it
are  distinguished,  according' as  the  object  is  very  agreeable,
moderately  agreeable,  or  disagreeable.

After  this  comes  that  stage  of  representative  cognition
‘ See  on  physical  base  of  consciousness,  p.  31.


Normal  Conscious  Procedure  29

termed  ‘ fixing,’  or,  as  we  might  say,  determining.  This  is  Votthab-
the  arranging  of  the  investigated  material  in  such  a
manner  as  to  constitute  it  into  a definite  object.  This  is
done  by  differentiation  and  limitation,  by  discrimination
and  definition.  A mango-fruit,  for  instance,  to  be  discerned
as  such  and  as  nothing  else,  must  have  certain  definitive
and  constitutive  features  and  attributes  of  its  own.  By
this  faculty  these  are  separated  from  the  surroundings  for
final  apperception  in  the  next  stage.  Up  to  this  stage  the
subject  is  not  yet  intelligently  aware  of  the  nature  and
qoaracter  of  the  object.

Now  intervenes  the  apperceptive  stage,  or  full  cognition, ^ Javana.
wherein  the  object,  determined  or  integrated  by  the  fore-
going activity,  is  apperceived,  or  properly  cognized,  as,  e.g.,
in  the  ‘ first  automatic  type  of  thought  ’ analyzed  above.

This  is  held  to  occupy  ordinarily  seven  thought-moments.

It  is  a Buddhist  rule  of  thought  that  an  apperception
occurs  for  either  seven  moments,  or  none  at  all,  except  in
the  cases  of  death,  stupefaction,  creation  of  phenomena,
and  other  special  cases,  when  a less  number  of  moments
than  seven  obtains.

At  this  stage  of  apperception  the  subject  interprets  the
sensory  impression,  and  fully  appreciates  the  objective
significance  of  his  experience.

After  this  psychologically  important  stage  there  follows  Tadaram
a registering , or  identifying,  for  two  moments,  of  the  object
thus  apperceived,  eleven  modes  of  the  process  being  dis-
tinguished according  to  the  nature  of  the  object,  etc.  The
Buddhist  theory  is  that  this  identification  operates  for  two
moments,  or  not  at  all.

Consciousness  then  loses  itself  once  more  in  the  stream
of  being;  or,  to  adopt  Western  phraseology,  an  objective

^ In  the  purer  Pali  of  the  Sinhalese  term,  votthappana  (vi-
a V a - 1 h ap)=thorough,  settling-down;  hence  establishing  or  syn-
thesis.—Ed.

^ See  Appendix : Javana.  Twenty-nine  modes  of  javana  are
distinguished  in  Kamaloka  experience.

® Lit.,  that  object,  just  that  same  and  no  other. — Ed.


30  JVormal  Conscious  Procedure

thought  sinks  below  the  threshold  of  subjective  con-
sciousness.

The  Simile  The  simile  of  the  mango-tree  may  here  serve  to  illustrate
Mango-  above  process.  A man,  lost  in  the  deepest  sleep,  is

tree.  lying  at  the  foot  of  a mango-tree  with  his  head  covered.

A wind  now  stirs  the  branches,  and  a fruit  falls  beside  the
sleeping  man.  He  is  in  consequence  aroused  from  dream-
less slumbers.  He  removes  his  head-covering  in  order  to
ascertain  what  has  awakened  him.  He  sees  the  newly
fallen  fruit,  picks  it  up,  and  examines  it.  Apprehending
it  to  be  a fruit  with  certain  constitutive  attributes  observed
in  the  previous  stage  of  investigation,  he  eats  it,  and  then,
replacing  his  head-covering,  once  more  resigns  himself  to
sleep.

The  dreamless  sleep  corresponds  to  the  unperturbed
current  of  the  stream  of  being  (b  h a v a n g a).  The  striking
of  the  wind  against  the  tree  is  like  the  ‘ past  ’ life-moment,
during  which  the  object  enters  the  stream  and  passes  down
with  it,  without  perturbing  it.  The  swaying  of  the  branches
in  that  wind  represents  the  vibration  of  the  stream  of
being.  The  falling  of  the  fruit  corresponds  to  the  arrest
or  interruption  of  being,  the  moment  at  which  the  stream
is  ‘cut  off’  by  thought;  the  waking  of  the  man  to  the
awakening  of  attention  in  the  act  of  cognition  on  occasion
of  sense ; the  removal  of  the  head-covering  to  the  sense-
reaction  of  sight.  The  picking  up  of  the  fruit  is  com-
parable to  the  operation  of  receiving ; inspection  of  it
recalls  the  examining  function.  The  simple  apprehension
of  the  fruit  as  such,  with  certain  constitutive  attributes  of
its  own,  corresponds  to  the  discriminative  or  determining
stage ; the  eating  of  the  fruit  resembles  the  act  of  apper-
ception. Finally,  the  swallowing  of  the  last  morsels  that
are  left  in  the  mouth  ^ corresponds  to  the  operation  of
retention,  after  which  the  mind  subsides  into  mere  vital
process,  even  as  the  man  once  more  falls  asleep.

The  The  above  is  the  normal  process  of  a very  vivid  (a  t i m a -

Tadaram-  p a n t a)  object.  The  object  is  so  called  because  it  completes

manavara  / o o

process.  i The  after-taste  had  perhaps  been  an  apter  simile. — Ed.


31


Physical  Bases

its  normal  life-term  of  seventeen  moments,  from  the  moment
of  its  entry  into  the  stream  till  the  uninterrupted  flow  is
resumed.

The  physical  basis  of  the  sense  of  sight  (c  a k k h u-  The
V a 1 1 h u)  is  composed  of  the  optic  nerve-ends  (c  a k k h u-
pasada-rupa’s),  which  spring  into  activity  at  the
nascent  instant  of  the  moment  when  the  object  enters
into  the  stream,  and  are  collectively  termed  ‘ of  mean,’  or
‘ medium  duration  ’ (majjhimayuka),  because  their
functioning  is  coeval  (or  synchronous)  with  the  duration
of  the  object  itself.

All  other  states  of  consciousness  that  take  part  in  the
process  have  for  their  physical  basis  the  nerve-cells
(hadaya-vatthu’ s),^  which  spring  into  active  being  at
the  nascent  instant  of  the  next  previous  thought-moment
of  each.

In  the  case  of  an  object  causing  only  a moderately  vivid  Maiiau-
impression,  the  vital  vibration  does  not  commence  till  mana.
after  two,  or,  in  the  case  of  a still  less  vivid  impression,
three,  of  the  so-called  ‘ past  ’ moments.  In  neither  case
is  there  retention.  The  object  continues  for  one  moment
after  apperception  in  the  former,  but  ceases  with  the  seventh
moment  of  apperception  in  the  latter,  after  completing
its  life-term*  from  the  moment  of  its  entry  into  the
stream.

In  the  case  of  an  object  causing  only  a slight  im-  Paritta-
pression,  there  are  four  so-called  ‘ past  ’ moments  before
vibration  sets  in,  and  two  thought-moments  of  determining  ;
but  these  are  not  followed  by  apperception.  And  in  direct
ratio  with  the  slightness  of  the  impression,  the  object  flows
with  the  stream  for  five  to  nine  ‘ past  ’ moments  without
perturbing  it.

There  are  six  modifications  of  process  when  the  object  Atiparitta-
causes  hardly  any  impression  at  all.  In  these  the  arrest
of  the  stream  of  being  is  followed  immediately  by  its

^ Hadaya-vatthu  is,  literally,  heart -basis,  but  modern  Buddhist
psychology  has  apparently  clothed  the  newer  physiology  in  the  garment
of  the  older  concept.  See  Appendix  : Dasaka,  Hadaya. — Ed.


Panca-

dvara-

vlthi,

or  Five-

door-

Cognition

External

or

Acquired

Percep-

tion.


Anuban-

dhavara-

matta.


Atitagga-

hana-

process.


32  Concrete  Perceptioji

resumption.  The  object  here  continues  in  the  stream  for
from  ten  to  fifteen  ‘ past  ’ moments  before  vibration  sets  in,
and  it  ceases  to  exist  after  the  fifth,  fourth,  third,  second,
and  first  moments  of  the  cognition  process  in  the  first
five  cases  respectively,  but  ceases  with  the  arrest  of  sub-
conscious life  itself  in  the  last.  The  sense-impression  in
these  so-called  ‘ futile  ’ term-processes  (m  o g h a - v a r a)  is
so  weak,  that  it  is  not  even  translated  into  sensation,  but
remains  a simple  undifferentiated  irritation  of  the  nerves.

Thus  there  are  four  principal  classes  of  reaction  to  each
of  the  External  Senses.

This  completes  the  description  in  outline  of  presentative
consciousness  in  cognition  on  occasion  of  sense  (p  a n c a -
dvara-vithi,  or  ‘ five-door  process  ’) .

In  an  actual  concrete  case  of  external  perception,  such
as  is  called  by  Mansel  Acquired  Perception,^  a process  of
thought  never  occurs  singly.  Each  externally  intuitive
process  of  presentative  consciousness  is  not  only  repeated
several  times,  but  is  also  followed  by  several  sequels,
termed  ‘ consequent  ’ (tad-anuvattaka),  or'  associated
consecutive,’  mind-door  process  (anubandhaka-
manodvaraka-vithi).

The  latter  group  is  either  {a)  simj)le  or  (b)  complex,
according  as  it  is  not,  or  as  it  is,  accompanied  by  sign  and
speech.  In  order  to  enable  a man  to  say  ‘ I see  a rose,’
no  less  than  four  classes  of  the  simple  group  of  sequels  are
required,  each  of  which  may  be  repeated  several  times.
He  must  first  of  all  perceive  a rose,  presented  in  one  or
other  of  the  forms  of  external  intuition  already  described.
Each  process  is  followed,  with  a brief  moment  or  two  of
the  subconscious  continuum  intervening,  by  the  process
called  ‘ grasping  the  past,’  in  which  there  is  necessarily
a depicting  to  the  imagination  of  the  past  object  which  he
has  just  perceived,  the  images  alone  of  the  different  parts
of  the  rose  being  present  in  mind.  These  two  processes
may  alternate  with  each  other  several  hundred  thousand
times  before  the  synthetic  process  takes  place.  The


1 Meta]}liysics,  p.  116.


33


Complexity  of  Perception

alternation  of  these  two  processes  may  be  compared  to
that  of  makes  and  breaks  in  the  connection  of  an  electric
dynamo.^

In  the  third  process,  also  repeated  several  times,  he
forms  the  entire  composite  image  of  the  rose  into  a
synthesis  out  of  the  different,  component  parts  which  he
has  just  depicted  alternately.

In  the  next  stage,  called  ‘ grasping  - the  - meaning,’
also  repeated  several  times,  he  forms  an  idea  of  the  object
corresponding  to  that  image  which  is  representative  of  the
original.

Lastly,  in  the  stage  called  ‘ grasping-the-name,’  he
invents  a name  to  represent  that  idea.  But  if  the  name
happens  to  be  already  known  to  him,  three  more  processes
may  intervene  between  this  stage  and  the  last.

That  is  to  say,  in  the  process,  called  ‘ convention  ’
(s  a n k e t a ),  he  thinks  of  the  conventional  sign  by  which
such  an  idea  is  usually  signified ; in  the  process  called
‘ comparison ’ (s  a m b a n d h a),  he  compares  the  idea  in
question  with  the  former  ideas  signified  by  that  sign.  If,
in  this  comparison,  he  discriminates  certain  resemblances
between  the  common  attributes,  he  forms  a judgment :
‘ This  is  a rose,’  called  ‘ the  process  of  judgment  ’ (vinic-
c h a y a).  And,  finally,  in  the  process  of  ‘ name-grasping,’
he  applies  the  class-name  to  the  object.  In  other  words,
he  brings  the  concept  under  a known  class.

These  complicated  processes  of  imagination,  reproductive
and  constructive,  memory,  conception,  discriminatioir,
judgment,  classification,  ail  follow  one  another  so  rapidly
in  succession  that  the  percipient  considers  that  he  ‘ sees  ’
the  rose  almost  instantaneously.  Such  is  the  complexity
of  processes  distinguishable  in  an  act  of  external  per-
ception.

After  each  external  perception  the  stream  of  being  flows
on  until  it  is  once  more  disturbed  by  a new  sense-impres-

^ Ledi  Sadaw  cites  the  ancient  and  well-known  simile  of  the  circle
of  fire  caused  by  a moving  pomt,  to  show  the  persistency  of  an  image.

^ I.e.,  grasping  of  what  ‘ rises  up  together,’  or  of  a ‘ collective  whole.’

3


Samuday-

iiggahana

or

samuhag-

gahana.'-^

Attliag-

gahana.


Namag-

gahana.


Sanketa.


Samban-
dha,  23ro-
cess  of
com-
parison.


Vinic-
chaya,
2)rocess  of
judgment.


Ativi-

bhtlta-

rammana.


Vibhuta-

'^ammana.


Avibliuta-

rammana.


Ati-avi-

bhuta-

rammana.

The  Com-
plex Anu-
bandhaka.
Kayavin-
natti.


34  Percept

sion,  when  the  whole  complex  process  is  once  more
resumed.  In  waking  life,  of  course,  these  complex  groups
of  processes  follow  each  other  with  hardly  an  intervening
break  of  unconscious  life.

To  each  process  in  these  sequels  to  a concrete  act  of
perception  there  are  four  classes  of  reaction,  according  as
the  object  is  very  clear  (a  t i v i b h u t a),  clear  (v  i b h u t a),
not  clear  (avibhiita),  or  very  far  from  clear  (ati-a-
V i b h u t a.  The  Manual  recognizes  only  the  second  and
third  classes  (Part  IV.,  § 2),  but  the  above  classification  is
put  forward  by  the  Ledi  School.  Space,  however,  forbids
me  from  trying  to  analyze  each  class  in  detail.  Briefly
indicated,  the  specific  difference  is  as  follows  ;

We  have  seen  that  the  stream  of  being,  after  the  two
usual  moments  of  vibration,  which  is  here  at  once  set  up
by  the  object’s  entry,  is  arrested  by  the  ‘ adverting  ’ of  the
mind  door,  which  reflects  on  (lit.,  ‘turns  to’)  the  object
for  a moment.  Later,  the  activity  whereby  the  object  is
apperceived  is  aroused  for  seven  thought-moments  ; and,
lastly,  an  act  of  retention  or  identification  records  it  for
two  moments,  after  which  the  stream  resumes  its  flow.
This  is  the  process  when  the  object  is  very  clear.

When  the  object  is  moderately  clear,  the  vibration  and
arrest  are  similar  to  the  corresponding  process  described
above,  a hypothetical  distinction  being  drawn  with  reference
to  prior  and  posterior  moments  of  subconscious  life  {cf.
pp.  27,  28).

In  the  case  of  an  indistinct,  vague  object,  apperception
is  not  at  all  aroused,  and  cognitive  activity  operates  for
two  or  three  moments  only.  We  shall  refer  to  this  class
when  we  come  to  discuss  ‘ dream-consciousness.’  Lastly,  a
very  dim  object  merely  sets  up  vibration  in  the  stream,
but  with  no  perceptional  result.

In  the  complex  associated  processes,  as  when  a man
communicates  his  wish  to  another  by  sign  or  gesture,
two  more  forms — namely,  ‘ grasping-the-sign  ’ (vinnatt-
i g g a h a n a),  and  ‘ grasping-the-iutention  ’ (adhippay-
a g g a h a n a) — obtain.


35


Communication  by  Sign


Suppose  a man  beckons  another.  The  movement  of  the
hand  is  first  of  all  noticed  in  a visual  process  of  perception,
followed  by  the  process  of  ‘ grasping-the-past,’  in  which
the  past  movement  of  the  hand  is  depicted  to  imagination.
After  the  alternation  of  these  two  processes  for  several
hundred  thousand  times,  as  the  hand  moves  forward  and
backward,  the  past  movements  are  now  imagined  as  a
composite  whole  in  the  process  of  ‘ grasping- the- synthesis  ’
(s  a mil  h a g g a h a n a).  Then  an  idea  of  the  moving
hand  is  formed  in  the  process  of  ‘ grasping-the-meaning,’
which  is  followed  by  the  process  of  ‘ grasping-the-name,’
in  which  the  name  ‘ hand  ’ is  thought  of.


Now,  in  ‘ grasping-the-sign,’  which  may  be  in  any  one  vinnattig-
of  the  forms  under  the  four  classes  of  reaction  described

process.

above,  a certain  peculiarity  in  the  movement  is  regarded
as  a sign.  Similarly,  in  the  process  of  ‘ grasping-the-  Adhippay-
intention,’  the  jierson’s  wish  is  understood.  process"**^'

The  processes  termed  above  ‘ convention,’  ‘ comparison,’
and  ‘judgment’  may  intervene  between  the  last  two.

In  the  case  of  hearing,  the  processes  of  ‘ name-grasping  ’
and  ‘meaning-grasping’  are  reversed.  In  the  case  of
hearing  a foreign  language  not  wholly  familiar,  the  process
called  ‘ customary-meaning,’  in  which  the  foreign  word  is  Vohavat-
translated  into  the  hearer’s  vernacular,  intervenes  between


tha-
process.


the  two.  But  this  process  is  not  possible  to  one  who  is  as
yet  unacquainted  with  that  foreign  language  ; nor  is  the
process  of  ‘ grasping-the-meaning  ’ possible  to  one  who  has
no  previous  knowledge  that  the  word  in  question  represents
a particular  object.  When  the  word  is  a compound  term,
the  processes  are  further  complicated.

When  a person  recognizes  another  by  the  sound  of  him
without  seeing  him,  the  ‘ synthetic  ’ process  is  followed  by
the  process  of  ‘ grasping-the-sound,’  in  which  the  sound  Saddag-
ordinarily  made  by  that  person  is  attended  to  before  the  |roce'sL
‘ convention  ’ and  the  rest  of  the  processes  take  place.  In
the  case  of  a speaker,  he  first  of  all  conceives  the  idea  of
the  object  in  the  ‘ meaning-grasping  ’ process  ; he  next
thinks  of  his  name  in  the  process  of  ‘ name-grasping  ’ ;


36


Copana

process.


Vaci-

viniiatti.


Suddhika-

mano-

dvaia-

vithi.


Communication  by  Syeecli

then  of  the  sound  of  that  name  in  the  jDrocess  of  ‘ sound-
grasping.’  This  is  lastly  followed  hy  the  process  in  which
the  ‘ movement  ’ of  the  vocal  organ,  together  with  its
resulting  sound,  are  attended  to.  The  last  two  processes
may  occur  millions  of  times  in  the  utterance  of  a single
long  vowel.  But  these  four  processes — grasping  of  name,
meaning,  sound,  and  attention  to  movement — belong  not
so  much  to  the  subject  of  perception  as  to  pure  representa-
tive cognition,  to  which  we  shall  presently  come.

When  a person  forms  an  idea  of  the  object  from  the
sight  of  a written  name,  the  same  sequels  of  the  sight  of
a written  word  occur  as  in  the  case  of  the  object  itself.

When  a man  communicates  his  wish  to  another  by
speech,  the  same  processes  of  the  complex  group  occur  as
in  the  case  of  communication  by  sign,  with  this  dis-
tinction, that  the  process  of  ‘ grasping-the-sign,’  in  which
the  peculiarity  of  the  sound  uttered  is  regarded  as  a sign
of  communication,  is  not  preceded,  but  succeeded,  by  the
process  of  ‘ grasping-the-name.’  Further,  in  the  case  of
communication  by  means  of  a foreign  language,  the  process
of  ‘ customary  meaning,’  in  which  the  foreign  language  is
translated  into  the  vernacular,  intervenes  before  the  process
of  ‘ grasping-the-meaning.’

The  sequels  to  perception  on  occasion  of  smell,  taste,
and  touch  are  not  usually  complicated  by  processes  of
communication.

Thus  there  are  several  links  between  cognition  on
occasion  of  sense  and  reflection  by  w'ay  of  the  mind-door
in  a chain  of  thought.


We  have  now  to  consider  the  forms  of  Internal  Intuition
and  Keflection  Proper  (suddha-manodvara-vith  i).^
The  possibility  of  the  ‘internal’  presentation  of  all  the  six
classes  of  objects  named  at  the  beginning  of  this  essay  is

1 Suddha  = pure  or  clean;  hence  = bare,  ‘ pure-and-simple,’ viz.,
here,  ‘ not  on  occasion  of  sense  ’ ; - i k a forms  the  adjective  of  a quahty,
the  Greek  </oos. — Ed.


Reflection  Proper  37

laid  down  in  the  P a 1 1 h a n a,  and  in  Part  III.  of  the
Manual.  In  other  words,  the  Buddhists  hold,  that  a
sensation  can  be  experienced  without  the  corresponding  Sensation
objective  stimulus,  e.g.,  a flash  can  be  seen  with  eyes  closed  objective^^
and  without  the  objective  ether- waves,  as  when  electricity  stimulus,
is  applied  to  the  temples.

The  possibility  of  Eeflection  proper  is  attributed  to  the
force  of  the  relation  termed  ‘proximate  sufficient  cause,’ ^
by  virtue  of  which  {a)  a sense-impression  once  experienced  in
a sense-cognition  by  way  of  the  five  doors,  or  (6)  a previous
experience  of  an  internal  intuition  or  cognition  by  way  of
the  mind-door,  or  (c)  the  idea  once  formed  in  the  sequels
of  either,  can  never  he  lost.

Any  sense-impression  once  actually  experienced  in  the  Dinlia-
present  life  is  now  classed  among  Things  Seen  (d  i 1 1 h a),^  processes,
and  the  processes  of  reflection  connected  therewith  are
grouped  under  the  category  of  Things  Seen  (d  i 1 1 h a-v  a r a).

But  when  an  object  that  has  not  been  actually  sensed  is
constructed  out  of,  and  connected  with,  these  seen  objects,
it  is  termed  ‘ object  associated  with  things  seen’  (d  i 1 1 h a-
sambandha).  And  the  processes  of  thought  connected
therewith  are  classed  in  the  category  of  objects  associated
with  things  seen.

The  six  classes  of  objects  once  reflected  upon  in  the  Suta-
present  life,  from  information  gained  either  by  hearing
others  or  reading  books,  are  classed  as  Things  Heard
(s  u t a).®  And  the  object  constructed  out  of  and  connected
therewith  is  termed  ‘ object  associated  with  things  heard  ’
(sutasambandha).

Any  apparently  a priori  object  that  may  enter  the  field
of  presentation  from  any  other  sources  except  the  last  two
— e.g.,  when  developed  by  culture — is  classed  as  Things
Cogitated  (v  i n n a t a).  Any  object  constructed  out  of  them

^ Anantarupanissaya-paccaya.

^ The  sense  of  sight  representing  all  sense.  Cf.  the  French  phrase
choses  vues,  things  of  ‘ real  ’ life. — Ed.

2 The  remarkable  conservatism  of  India  in  deferring  the  adoption  of
writing  in  all  intellectual  matters  is  betrayed  in  this  term. — Ed.


Reproduc-
tive Imag-
ination.


Patisal-

lakkha-

navitlii.


38  Represent ative  Cognition

and  connected  therewith  is  termed  ‘ associated  with  things
cogitated’  (vinnata-sambandha).

An  object  in  the  category  of  Things  Seen  may  be  either
past,  present,  or  future.  When  it  is  present,  it  is  intuited
as  a vivid  reality.  The  forms  of  this  internal  intuition,  or
cognition  by  way  of  the  mind-door,  are  the  same  as  those
described  under  the  ‘ Sequels.’

The  same  forms  hold  good  for  all  kinds  of  thought  or
reflection,  and  may  he  applied  to  English  concepts  of  the
same  as  follows  ;

When  an  object  belonging  to  Things  Seen  is  past,  or  is
reflected  upon  as  past,  its  image  is  now  presented.  And
when  the  presence  of  the  image  is  accompanied  by  a belief
in  the  possible  existence  of  a corresponding  object  in  an
intuition,  thought  is  an  exercise  of  reproductive  imagina-
tion. If  the  image  reproduced  be  not  vivid  enough,
imagination  fades  into  fancy,  which  ‘ moves  on  a lighter
wing.’  But  when  the  belief  amounts  to  a conviction  that
the  corresponding  object  had  actually  existed  in  a past
intuition,  reproductive  imagination  is  changed  into  memory
or  remembrance.  The  conviction  here  is  fostered  by  the
Buddhist  principle  of  recognition  (sanna).  With  a less
vivid  image,  memory  fades  into  reminiscence ; and  when  it
has  to  be  recalled  with  a certain  amount  of  effort,
reminiscence  becomes  recollection.  When  the  Thing-Seen
is  future — i.e.,  when  the  presence  of  the  image  is  accom-
panied by  a belief  in  the  possible  existence  of  the  corre-
sponding object  in  an  intuition  not  yet  experienced — thought
is  an  exercise  of  anticipation,  and  hope  is  weak  anticipation.

In  the  processes  belonging  to  the  category  of  Associates-
with-Things-Seen,  if  a new  concrete  image — e.g.,  a unicorn —
be  constructed  by  a combination  of  the  parts  of  several  past
intuitions,  thought  is  an  exercise  of  constructive  or  creative
imagination.  The  object  of  this  process  may  be  any  one
of  the  six  classes,  and  may  be  either  past,  present,  future,
or  not  in  time,  lit.,  freed  from  time  (k  a 1 a v i m u 1 1 a).
Scientific  imagination,  and  inferences  drawn  from  observa-
tion, appear  to  come  under  this  head.


Representative  Cognition  39

Under  the  category  of  Things  Heard,  an  auditory  instead
of  a visual  image  of  any  one  of  the  six  classes  of  objects  is
formed.  If  the  formation  of  this  image  or  idea  is  accom-
panied by  a belief  in  the  possible  existence  of  the  corre-
sponding object  in  an  intuition,  thought  is  an  exercise  of
conception.  Conception  is  changed  into  memory  if  the
belief  amounts  to  a conviction,  as  in  the  processes  of
Things  Seen,  that  the  corresponding  object  had  actually
existed  in  a past  intuition.  If  the  idea  reproduced  is  not
clear  enough,  memory  becomes  reminiscence,  and,  if  it  has
to  be  recalled,  recollection.  An  idea  may  be  formed  of  the
future,  or  of  that  which  is  not  referred  to  time.  Opinion
seems  to  come  under  this  head.  The  associated  processes
under  Things  Heard  are  similar  to  those  in  the  first
category.  Belief,  hypothesis,  and  scientific  theories,  seem
to  come  under  a combination  of  the  two  categories  which
are  confined  to  experiences  in  this  present  life ; hence  the
Experientialist  dictum  that  nothing  can  be  in  the  intellect
that  has  not  been  in  sense.  But  apparently  a priori  ideas
of  all  the  six  classes  of  sensory  objects  may  come  intuitively,
so  to  speak,  from  one’s  former  experiences  in  past  lives,
or  from  the  telepathic  suggestions  of  other  contemporary
beings.  The  intuitions  of  the  processes  under  the  third
category  (Things  Cogitated  and  associated  processes),  how-
ever, are  not  restricted  to  the  past  and  the  present,  but
may  extend  to  the  future  and  the  timeless  as  well.

Each  internally  intuitive  or  reflective  process  is  also
invariably  followed  by  its  sequels,  as  in  the  case  of  cog-
nition on  occasion  of  sense.

Lay  readers  may  well  be  wearied  with  these  details  of  impor-

t3;HC6  Ol

the  different  forma  of  consciousness,  however  much  I have  dis-
been  at  pains  to  present  them  as  concisely  as  possible.  A
slight  acquaintance  with  them,  however,  will  reveal  that  it  between
is  a mistake  to  look  for  all  higher  forms  of  thought,  such
as  memory,  conception,  judgment,  reasoning,  in  which  a procedure,
comparison  or  discrimination  is  involved,  in  presentative
consciousness  ; much  less  in  the  single  states  of  conscious-
ness that  take  part  in  each  process,  presentative  or  repre-


40


Confusions
in  termin-
ology.


Discussion  of  Terms

sentative ; still  less  iu  the  bare  elements  of  consciousness
(the  cetasika’s).

I allude  to  the  various  renderings  adopted  by  different
Occidental  scholars  of  Buddhist  technical  terms.  To  select
a few  out  of  many  : The  much-abused  term  ‘ thought  ’ has
been  made  by  some  to  stand  for  c e t a n a,  by  others  for
V i t a k k a ; again,  by  others  for  v i c a r a.  S a n n a (per-
ception in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term)  used  to  be  rendered
by  ‘ memory,’  as  also  was  s a t i (presence  of  mind).  The
former  term  is,  of  course,  nearer  the  mark  ; and  yet  to
render  s a n n a by  ‘ memory  ’ is  to  confuse  it  with  the
higher  process  of  memory,  in  which  s a n n a may  play
a more  prominent  part  than  in  any  other  process,  but  of
which  it  (s  a n h a)  is  only  an  element  or  factor.  Even  in  a
single  stage  of  a concrete  process,  s a n n a would  be  more
predominant  in  that  of  delimitation  (votthabbana),  apper-
ception, and  identification,  just  as  another  element,  attention
(manasikara),  is  more  active  when  mind  adverts  to
sense-stimuli.  For  the  same  reason,  the  element  of  register-
ing or  identification  (t  a d - a r a m m a n a)  should  not  be
mistaken  for  a concrete  process  like  memory.

Vitakka^  may  operate  more  actively  in  the  processes
of  imagination  or  conception  than  in  any  other  processes,
but  to  render  it  by  imagination  or  conception  is  to  confuse
it  with  the  processes  themselves.  Again,  adhimokkha^
may  be  the  more  conspicuous  element  in  the  process  of
judgment.

The  rendering  of  v i c a r a ^ by  ‘ reason  ’ is  even  worse
than  rendering  p a n n a by  the  same  term.  V i c a r a may
largely  operate  in  the  stage  of  investigation  (s  a n t i r a n a)
and  other  processes,  and  would  strongly  operate  in  all
processes  of  comparison  or  discrimination.  P a n n a (or
pannindriya,  as  it  is  termed  in  Part  II.  of  the  Manual)
is  the  intellectual  element  which  enters  into  the  com-
position of  the  classes  of  consciousness  described  as

^ Application  or  direction  of  mind.

^ Deciding,  choosing.

3 Sustained  application.


41


Psychological  Units

‘ connected  with  knowledge,’  which  take  part  in  such  pro-
cesses of  thought  as  involve  comparison  and  discrimination,
notably  in  the  reasoning  processes  (takkavlthi).  The
scholastic  distinction  between  p a n n a and  n a n a,  which
is  useful  in  a iDhilological  study,  does  not  hold  good  in
philosophy.  These  two  terms  and  amoha  have  been  used,
at  least  in  the  Manual,  to  signify  one  and  the  same  idea.
Just  as  ekaggata  may  be  developed  into  samadhi,  so
may  the  bare  intellectual  element  be  developed  by  culture
into  secular  knowledge  (lokiya-panna)  on  the  one  hand,
ranging  from  the  ordinary  reasoning  power  exercised  in
most  trivial  matters,  through  all  phases  of  logical  reason
in  scientific  matters,  to  the  a b h i n h a ’ s,  or  supernormal
exercise  of  thought  and  will ; and  into  higher  knowledge
(lokuttara-panna)  on  the  other,  ranging  from  Path-
knowledge,  preceded  by  the  ‘ Modes  of  Thought,’  to  omni-
science. Therefore,  if  p a n n a and  n a n a be  rendered  by
‘ reason,’  it  must  be  understood  as  a power  or  faculty  of
understanding  as  distinguished  from  the  concrete  reasoning
process.  It  is  the  underlying  iwinciple  of  all  forms  of
knowledge.

Accordingly  the  cetasika’s,  named  in  Part  II.  of  the
Manual  with  respect  to  their  functions  as  psychological
units,  or  ultimates,  are,  in  Part  VII.,  largely  re-named  to
suit  the  special  context.  Language  is  an  instrument  of
thought,  but  there  is  a danger  of  dealing  with  words,
instead  of  with  ideas,  if  a too  rigid  consistency  be  observed
respecting  form.  This  remark  applies  with  even  greater
force  when  writers  on  Buddhism  use  the  same  word  for  two
or  more  different  ideas.  We  may  compare  the  elements
of  mental  processes  known  as  cetasika’s  to  letter-
types  of  fifty-two  different  classes.  Letter-types  of  the
same  class  may  enter  into  the  composition  of  this  or
that  word,  which  word  may  take  its  place  in  this  or  that
sentence.  The  words  into  the  composition  of  which  the
types  enter  are  comparable  to  the  states  of  conscious-
ness, and  the  sentences  may  be  likened  to  the  processes  of
thought.  As  long  as  the  letter-types  of  each  class  remain


Memory
and  chang
ing  per-
sonality.


The
ethical
aspect  of
javana.


42  Memory

in  their  respective  compartments,  they  are  similar  to  one
another ; but  when  they  enter  into  the  composition  of
different  classes  of  consciousness,  they  then  have  different
values — vitakka  has  one  value  as  a Jhan  a-factor
in  the  First  J h a.  n a,  another  value  as  a factor  of  the
Eightfold  Path  (m  a g g a n g a),  when  it  receives  the
dignified  name  of  ‘ perfect  aspiration  ’ (sammasankappa).

From  the  discussion  of  these  terms  we  pass  on  to  con-
sider the  question  : How  is  memory  possible,  if  the  subject
be  not  the  same  for  any  two  consecutive  moments  in  life  ?
How  is  it  possible  for  a person  who  hears  the  last  word  in
a sentence  to  know  the  meaning  of  the  entire  sentence  if
he  be  a different  being  from  the  one  who  heard  the  first
word  in  that  sentence  ?

We  must  look  to  the  P a 1 1 h a n a for  an  answer.  We
cannot  enter  here  into  the  detailed  consideration  of  the
subject ; all  we  can  here  point  out  is  this  : — Each  mental
state  is  related  to  the  next  in  at  least  four  different  modes
of  relation  (paccaya)  : — Proximity  (anantara).  Con-
tiguity (s  a man  an  tar  a).  Absence  (n’atthi),  and  Abeyance
(avigata).’^  This  fourfold  correlation  is  understood  to
mean  that  each  expired  state  renders  service  (upakara)
to  the  next.  In  other  words,  each,  on  passing  away,  gives
up  the  whole  of  its  energy  (p  a c c a y a - s a 1 1 i)  to  its  suc-
cessor. Each  successor,  therefore,  has  all  the  potentialities
of  its  predecessors,  and  more.  This  being  so,  the  mental
element  or  principle  of  recognition  or  perception  (sanna),
in  each  of  the  mental  states  that  take  part  in  a memory-
IDi'ocess,  with  all  its  heritage  of  the  past,  is  a recognizing ,
under  favourable  circumstances,  in  the  image  reproduced
or  the  idea  revived,  of  the  original  object  by  the  very  marks
w'hich  were  observed  by  its  predecessors  in  a certain  in-
tuition or  reflection.  Thus  the  subject  has  come  to  regard
the  image  as  the  copy,  and  the  idea  as  the  counterpart,  of
the  original  object  intuited  or  reflected  upon.

So  far  w'e  have  postponed  the  consideration  of  the
ethical  aspect  of  apperception,  which  is  no  less  important
1 See  Manual,  Part  VIII.,  § 7.


Will  and  Motives


43


to  Buddhists.  The  stage  of  apperception  pertains  to  the
active  side  of  an  existence  (k  a m m a - b h a v a),  which
determines  the  passive  side  (u  p a p a 1 1 i - b h a v a)  of  the
next  existence.  The  apperceptional  act  is  thus  a free,
determining,  causal  act  of  thought,  as  distinguished  from
the  mental  states,  which  are  fixed,  determined,  resultant
acts  of  mind.  This  difference  is  expressed  in  Buddhism
by  seeing  in  the  former  a viode  of  k a m m a , and  in  the
latter  a resultant  (v  i p a k a)  of  k a m m a.

The  word  laddha-paccay a — meaning  the  circum-
stances and  conditions  which  obtain^ — as  applied  to
apperception  in  the  Manual,  would  settle  the  question  of
the  absolute  freedom  of  the  will.  But  I use  the  word  free
in  the  sense  of  ‘ free  by  reason  of  the  balance  of  motives
or  conditions  ’ — i.e.,  of  hetu’s.  (Hetu’s  are  those
special  conditions  described  in  Part  III.,  § 4,  of  the  Manual.)^

Volition,  emerging  into  action  (nanakkhanika-
c e t a n a)^  at  this  apperceptional  stage,  has  scope  for  free
play  or  choice  by  reason  of  its  freedom  from  the  com-
pulsion of  those  special  motives,  and  therefore  acts  with
greater  force.  As  determined  by  the  past  k a m m a and
other  causes,  and  as  conditioned  by  all  sorts  of  circum-
stances other  than  the  restraint  of  motives,  it  is  then  still
free  to  adapt  itself  to  environment  or  not,  because  it  is
now  equally  influenced  by  the  two  different  sets  of  good  and
bad  special  motives,  but  is  not  conqjelled  by  either.  Freedom  The
understood  in  this  restricted  sense  has  apparently  given  ^etu’s?
rise  to  the  idea  of  the  free  will  of  the  West,  in  that,
between  the  two  courses  of  conduct  open  to  a moral  agent,
he  is  free  to  make  his  choice.  And  if  he  chooses,  of  his
so-called  free  will,  the  good  course,  then  good  thoughts,
now  accompanied  and  conditioned  by  the  three  good
motives,  arise  ; otherwise,  bad  thoughts  arise,  accompanied
and  conditioned  by  the  three  bad  motives.  He  is  therefore
morally  responsible  for  his  choice  or  for  his  act.  Moral

^ Lit.,  ‘ obtained-relation  ’ (labliati,  to  obtain). — Ed.

^ Three  bad  ; greed,  hate,  illusion  ; three  good,  or  the  opposite.

® See  above,  p.  16  : ‘ asynchronous  volition.’


44


Kamma.


Dittlia-

dhamma-

vedaniya-

kamma.


Upapajja-

vedaniya-

kamma.


Apara-

pariya-

vedaniya-

kamma.


Apperception  and  Will

responsibility,  therefore,  attaches  itself  to  the  appercep-
tional  act  of  thought — in  other  words,  it  is  only  in  this
apperceptional  stage  that  the  character  of  an  average
person  (p  u t h u j j ' a n a),  as  distinguished  from  the  noble
or  elect,  is  ethically  modified  one  way  or  the  other.

We  have  said  that  volition  (c  e t a n a),  under  favourable
circumstances,  is  transformed  into  kamma.  But  volition
in  apperception  on  occasion  of  sense  (pancadvarika-
javana),  which,  as  we  have  seen  under  the  theory  of
the  Ludicrous,  could  not  even  affect  laughter,  cannot
possibly  become  kamma.  Hence  we  must  look  to  the
volition  involved  in  reflective  or  representative  apperception
(manodvarika-j  avana)  for  kamma.

Apperceptional  moments,  as  a process,  are  represented
as  rising  and  falling  in  a thought-wave,  the  intensest  being
on  the  crest  of  the  wave.  Thus,  of  the  seven  moments  of
volition  involved  in  each  reflective  process,  the  fourth  is
regarded  as  the  strongest.  The  first  is  the  weakest  of  the
lot,  because  it  lacks  the  cumulative  conditionedness
yielded  by  the  preceding  state  of  consciousness,  which  is  of
a different  class.  The  initial  moment  of  volition,  if  pre-
ceded by  a sufficiently  strong  effort,  would  work  out  its
effects  in  the  very  same  existence  in  which  it  is  exercised.
It  is  then  termed  ‘ k a m m a-to-be-experienced-in-this-life.’
If  not,  it  becomes  inoperative  for  ever,  because  it  is  devoid
of  reproductive  power  (janaka-satti).  The  last  of  the
seven  volitional  moments  is  a little  stronger  than  the
initial,  because  it  stands  in  the  relation  called  ‘ succession  ’
or  ‘ recurrence  ’ (asevana-paccay  a),^  but  at  the  same
time  it  is  weaker  than  the  rest,  because  it  is  in  the  last
stage  of  disappearance.  If  sufficiently  strong,  it  would
work  out  its  effects  in  the  next  existence  through  its
reproductive  function  (j  a n a k a - k i c c a).  It  is  then
termed  ‘k  a m ma- to  - be  - experienced  - in  - the  - next  - birth,’
but,  if  weak,  it  would  fail  to  effect  the  next  rebirth,  and  thus
would  be  inoperative  for  ever.  The  five  intermediate
volitional  moments  are  termed  ‘k  a mma-to-be-experienced-
^ See  Manual,  Part  VIII.,  § 7.


Kamma


45


in-after-lives,’  because  they  are  capable  of  operating  (when-
ever circumstances  are  favourable)  from  the  second  next
rebirth  onwards , till  Nibbana  is  attained.  They  are
able  not  only  to  effect  rebirth,  but  to  work  out  effects
during  the  course  of  any  life,  whenever  favourable  oppor-
tunities occur.  But  each  volition  can  effect  only  a single
rebirth,  though  its  effects  in  life  are  not  limited.

All  ineffectual  volitions,  by  reason  of  their  inherent  ineffectual
weakness,  and  all  time-barred  kamma’s,  by  reason  of
their  inhibition  by  more  powerful  kamma,  are  termed
‘ have-not-been’s  ’ (a  h o s i k a).^  Volition  of  the  dis-
tracted (u  d d h a c c a)  class  of  thought  cannot  effect  a
rebirth,  but  only  after-effects  in  any  life.  Volition  in
apperception  before  death  (maranasanna-javana)
is  too  weak  to  effect  a rebirth  ; its  action  is  merely  regula-
tive of  the  next  existence.  Volition  involved  in  super-
normal consciousness  (abhinna-cetana)  cannot  effect
a rebirth,  because  its  force  is  spent  in  w’orking  phenomena  ;
nor  can  the  volition  of  one  graduating  in  the  Paths
(m  a g g a - c e t a n a)  do  so,  because  it  is  immediately
followed  by  its  Fruit  (p  h a 1 a).*

These  remarks  on  the  ethical  aspect  of  apperception  do
not  apply  to  those  inoperative  apperceptions  (kiriya-
i a V a n a ’ s)  which  are  characteristic  of  the  Buddha  and
his  Arahants,  who  are  neither  moral  nor  immoral.  Their
acts  of  thought  consist  merely  in  the  exercise  of  such,
without  their  being  transformed  into  kamma,  because
their  volition  is  now  subject  only  to  good  het  u’s,  and  is
free  from  evil  tendencies  (a  n u s a y a).

The  apperception  of  Fruition  is  of  a double  character.  Phak-
As  ‘ fruit,’’  it  is  merely  the  resultant  of  each  stage  of  the
Path.  But  as  apperception,  it  partakes  of  the  character
of  an  inoperative  thought  (k  i r i 3^  a).^

^ Ah  0 s i , aorist  of  a 1 1 h i , ‘is, ’-pika. — Ed.

- A brief  account  of  kamma  will  be  found  in  Part  V.  of  the
Manual.  For  fuller  details  readers  are  referred  to  my  article  entitled
‘The  Forces  of  Character,’  which  appeared  in  Buddhism,  vol.  ii.,

No.  1.


/


46


Di  'earns


Dream -
conscious-
ness.


The  forms
of

dream -
thought.


Before  we  proceed  to  supernormal  consciousness,  we
may  discuss  dream-consciousness,  thereby  completing  our
survey  of  consciousness  as  experienced  in  the  forms  of
existence  known  as  k a m a .

Dream  has  been  defined  by  N a g a s e n a,  as  an  image
(n  i m i 1 1 a)  coming  into  the  field  of  consciousness.^  This
definition  is  incomplete,  as  it  does  not  distinguish  a
dream  from  a waking  hallucination.  But  as  the  word
s u p 1 n a (a  dream),  is  derived  from  the  root  swp,  ‘ to
sleep,’  Nagasena  undoubtedly  meant  ‘ consciousness  in
sleep.’

Interesting  as  is  the  phenomena  of  dream,  it  is  con-
spicuous in  the  Manual  only  by  its  absence.  Pteferences
are,  however,  found  scattered  here  and  there  in  Buddhist
works,  although  it  is  no  easy  task  to  collect  them.  No
attempt  at  anything  like  a systematic  explanation  of
dream-phenomena  appears  to  have  been  made  in  Burma
till  nearly  a century  ago,  when  one  Ariyavaijsa-
Adiccarapsi  propounded  seven  questions  relating  to
dreams.

The  first  question : whether  dreams  are  perceived  by  the
senses,  or  by  thought  ? opens  up  a line  of  inquiry  into  the
forms  of  dream-thought.  When  scenes  are  reproduced
automatically  in  a dream  with  our  eyes  closed,  the  obvious
inference  is  that  we  see  them  by  way  of  the  door  of  mind.
Even  in  the  case  of  peripheral  stimulations,  as  when  a
light,  brought  near  a sleeping  man’s  eye,  is  mistaken  for  a
bonfire,  it  is  this  exaggerated  light  that  is  perceived  in  a
dream  by  the  mind-door.  The  possibility  of  the  presenta-
tion of  all  the  six  classes  of  objects  to  the  mind  has  been
referred  to.  But  the  dream  generally  takes  the  form  of  a

^ Milinda;panlia,  p.  298:  ^Nimittametag,  maharaja,
supinagnama  yag  cittassa  apatham  upagacchati.’
In  Bhys  Davids’  translation  {Questions  of  King  Milinda,  ii.  157) : ‘It
is  a suggestion,  0 King,  coming  across  the  path  of  the  mind  which  is
what  is  called  a dream.’  The  Sinh  : Cy  paraphrases  n i m i 1 1 a g by
aramunuwa  = arammanag,  translated  in  this  essay  as
‘ object.’ — Ed.


Dreams


47


vision.  Hence  the  phrase  supinaij  passati,  to  see
a dream.

If  these  presentations  do  not  come  from  without,  they
must  come  from  within,  from  the  ‘ inner  ’ activities  of
mind.  That  is  to  say,  if  peripheral  stimulations  are
absent,  we  must  look  to  the  automatic  activity  of  mind
itself  for  the  source  of  these  presentations  ; or,  to  speak  in
terms  of  physiology,  we  must  look  to  the  central  activity  of
the  cerebrum,  which  is  now  generally  admitted  to  be  the
physical  counterpart  of  the  mind-door,  the  afferent  sensory
nerves  being  the  physical  counterpart  of  the  five-doors  in
an  ‘ organized  sentient  existence  ’ (pancavokara-
b h a V a).  Substituting  these  physiological  terms  for  their
psychological  counterparts,  cerebrum  is  the  instrument  by
which  we  dream,  and  it  is  with  the  same  that  we  go  to
sleep  or  wake  up.^

Now,  when  a dream-image  is  not  clear,  we  experience  the
thought-forms  of  the  class  of  indistinct  presentations
already  described  (avibhuta),  in  which  the  stream  of
being,  after  the  usual  vibration,  is  arrested  by  representative
cognition  (manodvaravajjana).  This  reflects  on
the  image  for  two  or  three  thought-moments,  after  which
the  dream-consciousness  lapses  again  into  the  stream.

Some  authorities  are  of  opinion  that  apperception
never  obtains  in  a dream-process.  But  this  view  is  now
generally  regarded  as  untenable.  The  author  of  the
Sdrattlia-clijmnl-TTkd  holds  that,  with  a clear  image,
even  retention  can  follow  the  apperception.  In  fact,  the
mental  processes  in  a dream  and  in  waking  life  are  held  to
be  alike,  with  this  distinction  only,  that  there  is  but  a
suspension  of  volitional  control  over  the  current  of  a
dream-thought.  We  shall  advert  to  this  later.  This  may
be  the  reason  why  dream-processes  are  not  separately
described  by  the  author  of  our  Manual.

‘ All  consciousness  ending  in  the  function  of  apperception
occurs  by  the  agency  of  rej^resentative  cognition,  or  mind-
door  faculty,  not  by  the  agency  of  five-door  cognition  ; so

^ So  the  Terasakanda-Tlka  (part  of  the  Sdrattlia-clipanl-Tlka).


48


Dreams


also  our  visions  in  dreaming.’^  When  a bright  light  is
brought  near  a sleeping  man’s  eye  before  waking  him  up,
the  stream  of  being  is  cut  off  by  representative  cognition,
followed  by  seven  moments  of  apperception,  before  con-
sciousness lapses  back  into  the  stream.  That  is  to  say,  he
wakes  up  and  reflects  on  something  that  has  aroused  him,
but  he  has  not  as  yet  seen  the  actual,  or  objective,  light.
Once  more  the  stream  is  arrested  by  the  visual  process,
followed  by  its  sequels,  already  described  under  external
perception.  This  time  he  sees  the  light.  Similarly  with
a sound,  smell,  taste,  or  touch.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
during  the  transitional  period  from  sleep  to  waking,  he
sees  a bonfire,  he  is  said  to  dream  through  peripheral
stimulations.

Dreams  The  second  question  relates  to  the  classification  of
classified,  (jj-gams.  Dreams  are  classified  under  (1)  dreams  due  to
organic  and  muscular  disturbances,  generally  seen,  accord-
Dhatuk-  ^^8  N a g a s e n a,  by  the  flatulent,  the  phlegmatic,  or
khobbha.  the  bilious  f (2)  recurrence  of  the  previous  dreams,  due  to
pubba.  previous  experiences ; (3)  spirit-influence,  dreams  due  to
Devatopa-  suggestions  from  spiritualistic  agents ; and  (4)  foregoing
Pubba-  Signs,  prophetic  dreams,  due  to  the  force  of  character  of
nimitta.  clairvoyant  dreamers.  The  first  category  includes  the
dreams  of  a fall  over  a precipice,  flying  into  the  sky,  etc.,
and  what  is  called  ‘ nightmare  ’ ; the  second  consists  of  the
‘ echoes  of  past  waking  experiences  ’ ; the  third  may  include
dream  coincidences ; and  the  fourth  is  of  a clairvoyant
character.

Theories  of  Now  this  question  opens  up  another  line  of  inquiry.
Dreams,  namely,  into  the  causes  of  dreams.  We  have  thus  four
different  theories  of  dreams  corresponding  to  the  four  classes.
The  first  of  these  is  clearly  the  physiological  theory,  which
recognizes  a source  of  dreams  in  the  pathological  conditions
of  the  body.  Native  physicians  have  long  known  that
organic  disturbances  in  the  regions  of  the  stomach,  etc.,

1 From  the  SaraUha-sangaha-atthakathil,  by  Siddhatiha  Thera,
compiled  from  earlier  Commentaries  at  Anuradhapura  in  Ceylon.

2 Milinda,  loc.  cit.


Dreams


49


give  rise  to  dreams,  so  that  they  have  not  failed  to  diagnose
some  diseases  also  from  the  nature  of  dreams  attending
them.  The  theory  of  the  induction  of  dreams  by  peripheral
nerve-stimulation,  due  either  to  the  action  of  external
objects  on  sense-organs,  or  to  disturbances  in  the  peripheral
regions  of  the  nerves,  is  but  a branch  of  the  physiological
theory.  The  second  may  be  called  the  psychological  theory.

It  recognizes  the  induction  of  dreams  by  central  stimula-
tion due  to  the  automatic  activities  of  the  mind.  The
third  will,  no  doubt,  be  stigmatized  in  the  West  as  the
superstitious  theory.  But  as  the  d e v a ’ s,  or  mythical
beings  as  they  would  be  termed  in  the  West,  are,
according  to  Buddhism,  but  different  grades  of  sentient
beings  in  the  thirty-one  stages  of  existence  described  in
Part  V.  of  the  Manual,  the  theory  in  question  merely
recognizes  the  suggestive  action  of  mind  on  mind,  and  may
therefore  be  aptly  called  the  telepathic,  or  telepsychic
theory.  The  last  may  be  called  the  clairvoyant  theory.

The  third  question  relates  to  the  correspondence  of
dreams  with  external  events.  The  first  two  classes  of
dreams  are  never  true  in  the  sense  of  correspondence  with
present  or  future  events.  Coincident  dreams  correspond
with  present  events,  and  prophetic  dreams  correspond  with
the  future.  The  latter  are  always  true.  The  third  class  is
sometimes  true,  and  sometimes  not,  according  as  the
telepathic  agent  sends  a true  or  a false  message.

The  fourth  question  concerns  itself  with  the  classes  of
beings  who  dream.  Now  Buddhism  distinguishes  altogether
twelve  classes  of  intelligent  beings  (p  u g g'  a 1 a),  namely,
four  of  the  average  ordinary  class  (p  u t h u j j a n a),  and
eight  of  the  noble  or  elect  class  (ariya).  As  it  is  of
some  importance  to  know  this  classification  for  the  purpose
of  understanding  the  process  of  higher  consciousness,  to
be  described  later,  it  is  just  as  well  that  we  should  consider
them  here.

Ordinary  beings  are  living  either  a woeful  life  without  Puthuj-

[goodl  conditions  (d  u g g a t i - a - h e t u k a)  — i.e.,  inJy^a’s.

7 -1  " l.Duggati-

purgatory,  or  as  P e t a,  A s u r a or  animal — none  ot  the  ahetuka’s.

4


50


Beings  Classified


2.  Sugati-
ahetuka.


3.  Dvihe-
tuka.

4.  Tilie-
tuka.


Ariya’s.


three  good  motives  (disinterestedness,  love,  reason)  attending
their  consciousness  - at  - rebirth  (p  a t i s a n d h i - c i 1 1 a)  ;
(2)  a happy  life  without  [good]  conditions  (sugati-a-
h e t u k a) — i.e.,  in  the  happier  realms  of  the  K a ni  a 1 o k a,
but,  as  in  (1),  without  the  attendant  good  motives  (those  born
blind  and  deformed  belonging  to  this  class) ; (3)  attended
by  two  [good]  conditions  (dvihetuka) — viz.,  disinterested-
ness and  love — or  (4)  attended  by  the  three  [good]  condi-
tions. Those  of  the  fourth  class  may  be  dwellers  in  the
Eupa  and  Arupa  loka’s  as  well  as  in  that  of  Kama,
and  all  of  these  four  classes  may  be  dreamers.

Of  the  eight  classes  of  elect  beings — viz.,  those  in  the
‘ stations’  of  the  Four  Paths  and  the  Four  Fruits — the
former  (maggatthana)  cannot  dream,  because  they
occup}^ — i.e.,  attain  to — the  consciousness  of  each  Path  only
for  a single  thought-moment  before  they  invariably  pass
on  to  the  corresponding  fruitional  stations.  And  of  the
latter  four  (p  h a 1 a 1 1 h a n a),  the  first  three  classes  still
dream,  but  the  Arahant  who  is  in  the  final  stage  is  not
accredited  with  dreaming,  as  he  is  no  longer  subject  to
hallucination  (c  i 1 1 a v i p a 1 1 a s a).

Keiation  of  The  fifth  question  : When  does  a dream  occur,  in  sleep
Sleep.  Of’  iff  waking  ? is  of  great  interest  to  our  latter-day  dream-
theorists,  with  whom  it  is  still  an  open  question.  Dream
has  been  defined  by  a Western  writer  as  a hallucination  in
sleep. ^ This  definition  is  as  inaccurate  as  Nagasena’s
was  incomplete.  The  much-disputed  question  regarding
the  relation  of  dreams  to  sleep  dated  with  us  as  far  back
as  twenty  centuries  ago.  Dreams,  according  to  N a g a s e n a,
occur  neither  in  sleep  nor  in  waking,  but  in  the  transitional
stage  from  the  latter  to  the  former.  The  dreamj'  state,  he
says,  is  preceded  by  fatigue  and  ended  by  sleep.  Thus  he
does  not  take  into  account  the  transitional  stage  from  sleep
to  waking.  He  adduces  the  following  arguments  from
analogy  to  prove  his  contention  : As  a mirror  in  a dark
room  cannot  reflect  any  image,  so  a sleeping  man  cannot
see  dreams.  Neither  does  a waking  man  dream,  because

^ The  author  was  quoted  anonymously.


Dreams  and  Sleep  51

he  who  seeks  a secluded  spot  cannot  find  it  in  open  public
placesd

By  a different  line  of  reasoning,  the  same  conclusion  was
arrived  at  by  Buddhaghosa^  from  arguments  drawn  from
our  Scriptures,  as  follows  :

To  say  that  dreams  occur  during  sleep  w’ould  be  opposed
to  the  spirit  of  the  Abhidhamma-Pitaka,  where  it  is
laid  down  that  a man  sleeps  during  sub- consciousness
(when  the  stream  of  being  is  not  perturbed  by  any  thought-
wave)  ; and  to  say  that  dreams  occur  in  waking  hours
would  be  equally  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  the  Vinaya-
P i t a k a,  where  it- is  held  that  a bhikkhu  who  commits
offences  in  dreams  is  not  sinful — i.e.,  not  morally  respon-
sible for  his  dream-acts.^  Avoiding  the  two  extremes,  the
Buddhists  hold  that  dreams  occur  during  the  transitional
period  (c  i 1 1 a - v o k i n n a),  comparable  to  the  sleep  of  a
monkey  (k  a p i k a - m i d d h a)  which  in  sleep  quickly
changes  from  one  state  to  another.

I have  understood  that,  in  the  West,  this  important
question  is  not  j'et  settled,  some  authorities  holding  that
dream  is  but  an  occasional  accompaniment  of  sleep,  while
others  think  that  the  transitional  stage  is  the  most  favour-
able time  for  dreaming ; others,  again,  go  so  far  as  to  say
that  there  is  no  sleep  without  dreaming,  and  that  dream-
ing is  continuous.  The  last  view,  apparently  the  most
favourable  received  in  the  West,  appears  to  us  to  be  a
gratuitous  assumption.  Some  people  indeed  betray  their
dreams  by  expressions  and  utterances.  They  do  so  not
necessarily  in  the  course  of  a sound  sleep,  but  maybe  in
the  course  of  a dreamy  state.  It  is  also  true,  from  the
Buddhist  point  of  view,  that  dream-thought  is  very  rapid,
and  that  a dream,  apparently  long  to  a dreamer,  in  reality
occupies  but  a few  seconds,  as  in  the  case  of  a man  who

1 Milinda,  299,  300  ; Translation,  ii,,  159-161.

^ In  the  Saynmolia-Vinodam,  Commentary  on  the  Vibhanga,
second  book  in  the  Abhidhamma-Pitaka.

® Cf.  Vin.  Pit.,  iii.,  p.  112  (transl.)  ; Vin.  Texts,  i.,  7. — Ed.

* Milinda,  loc.  cit.


52


Ethics  of  Drecim

dreamt  a long  dream  ■when  he  fell  asleep  after  hearing  the
first  word  of  a sentence,  but  woke  up  before  that  sentence
was  finished.  But  the  error  of  observation,  in  the  case  of
the  symptoms  of  a long  dream  during  sleep,  seems  to  lie  in
the  assumption  that  there  is  only  one  transitional  stage  of
a few  seconds  before  waking,  as  in  the  last  case  cited,
just  as  Nagasena  assumed  only  one  transitional  stage
before  going  to  sleep. ^ If  several  transitional  stages,  with
hardly  a break  during  the  course  of  a long  sleep,  he
assumed  as  a possible  exception,  the  occasional  symptoms
of  a long  dream  observed  may  be  satisfactorily  ex-
plained without  assuming  that  there  is  no  sleep  without
dreaming.

^redreams  The  sixth  question : Whether  a dream-thought  or  a
by  effects  ? dream-act  is  moral  (k  u s a 1 a),  immoral  (a  k u s a 1 a),  or
If  so,  are  unmoral  (abyakata)?  and  the  seventh  question:  Are
morally  re-  dreams  effective?  must  be  dealt  with  together.  The  good-
sponsible?  Pafjuess  of  a dream  pertains  to  the  stage  of  apper-

ception, and  its  neutral  state  to  the  stages  of  mind-door
(representative)  cognition  and  retention,  in  one  and  the
same  process.  If  dreams  are  held  to  be  ethically  good  or
bad,  the  question  arises.  How  far  do  dream-thoughts  enter
into  the  formation  of  a man’s  character  (k  a m m a)  ?

We  have  seen  that  the  suspension  of  volitional  control
over  the  current  of  a dream-thought  absolves  a bhikkhu
from  sins  committed  in  a dream.  Therefore  it  is  said,  in
the  Parajikanda-Atthakatha,  that  the  power  of
will  in  dreams  is  not  sufficiently  strong  to  efi'ect  a rebirth  ;
but  that,  at  the  same  time,  it  may  have  after-effects  in  this
very  life,  if  only  supported  by  previous  waking  experiences.

Aristotle  held  a similar  view  that  many  of  our  actions
had  their  originals  in  dreams. ^ A stammerer  is  said  to  get
worse  after  dreaming  of  stammering.  Unpleasant  dreams
sometimes  put  even  enlightened  minds  out  of  humour  the
next  day.  Some  dreams  may  profoundly  affect  the  whole

1 Milinda,  loc.  cit.:  ‘A  man  still  watchful,  not  fallen  into  sleep,,
but  dozing  in  a monkey-sleep,  will  dream  a dream.’ — Ed.

- De  Sensu,  quoted  in  Siebeck’s  Gescliiclite  der  Psycliologie,  ii.,  84..


53


Higher  Consciousness

of  one's  life.  A case  is  recorded  of  a man  abandoning
home  under  the  influence  of  a dream.  Some  people  reform
their  character  in  consequence  of  certain  dreams.  Apart
from  somnambulistic  actions,  the  famous  dreams  of  Con-
dorcet,  Condillac,  and  Coleridge,  may  be  cited  as  belong-
ing to  the  effective  class  of  dreams.  Condorcet,  however,
would  not  have  seen  the  final  step  of  solution  in  the  dream,
had  he  not  been  at  the  problem  during  his  previous  waking
hours.

I have  permitted  myself  to  discuss  the  Buddhist  Theory
of  dreams  at  rather  too  great  a length,  with  a view  to  show
how  far  the  West  is  in  advance  of  the  East  on  the  subject.
Herewith  ends  the  survey  of  that  section  of  the  Manual
which  deals  with  K a m a-consciousness.  And  the  length
of  the  discussion  forces  me  to  consider  in  briefer  detail  the
forms  of  higher  consciousness.


Before  we  deal  with  those  forms  of  consciousness,  known  Adikam-
as  E u p a - e i 1 1 a,^  we  have  as  yet  to  consider  the  ‘ way  of
the  beginner,’  i.e.,  the  process  of  thought-transition  from  thought-

transition

the  normal  to  the  super-normal.  of  a

‘ Purity  of  virtue  ’ or  morals  is  an  essential  qualification
in  a beginner,  who  must  be  of  any  one  of  the  four  classes  visuddhi
of  the  beings  called  ‘ thrice-conditioned ’ (t  i h e t u k a),  i^inapes.
described  under  dreams  (p.  50).  After  cutting  off  the  ten
worldly  cares  (palibodha),  he  should  repair  to  an
adejDt  or  expert,  replete  with  the  sevenfold  qualification,
for  instruction  in  the  art  of  meditation.  He  should  have
implicit  faith  in  his  teacher,  and  give  himself  up  entirely,
body  and  mind,  to  him,  and  act  exactly  as  instructed.

After  having  carefully  selected  an  object  of  meditation
suited  to  his  character,  he  should  avoid  unsuitable  places
(there  are  eighteen  kinds  of  them)  and  repair  to  a secluded
spot  which  has  the  five  necessary  conditions.  After  going
through  the  usual  threefold  preliminary  function  (puhba-
kicca),  he  should  practise  meditation  with  all  the  effort

^ See  Manual,  Part  I.,  § 8.


54


Preliminaries  to  Jhana


Kasina-

objee't.


Uggalia-

nimitta.

Pai'i-

kamma-

samadhi.


Patibhaga-

nimitta.


Upacara-

samadhi.


he  can.  For  all  such  details  there  is  here  no  scope,  and
readers  are  referred  to  the  Visuddhi-magga.

The  k a s i n a-object^  selected  and  meditated  upon  is
termed  ‘ the  mark  for  preparation  ’ (p  a r i k a m m a - n i m i 1 1 a).
When,  after  being  contemplated,  it  is  depicted  to  the
imagination,  the  image,  which  is  the  exact  copy  of  the
original  with  all  its  original  faults  (k  a s i n a-d  o s a’ s),  and
is  represented  to  the  mind  as  a vivid  reality,  as  if  it  were
seen  by  the  eye,  is  termed  ‘ the  mark  for  upholding.’^

The  concentration  of  thought  practised  on  both  these
classes  of  n i m i 1 1 a ' s,  percept  and  image,  is  termed
‘ preliminary  concentration  ’ ; and  we  have  seen  that  con-
centration is  the  power  of  individualizing  (e  k a g g a t a)
developed  by  practice.

By  this  preliminary  concentration,  the  image,  when  it  is
turned  into  a concept  (p  a n n a 1 1 i),  is  divested  of  its  reality
and  its  faults,  and  becomes  a sublimated  copy,  an  abstract,
yet  still  an  individual.  This  conceptualized  image,  or
after-image,  which  can  no  longer  be  depicted  to  sense  or
imagination  as  a concrete  individual,  is  now  termed  ‘ mark-
equivalent  ’ (patibhaga-nimitta).

On  the  realization  of  this  last  class  of  n i m i 1 1 a,  the
five  Hindrances  to  progress  (n  i v a r a n a)  are  inhibited,
whereupon  the  preliminary  develops  into  concentration,
‘ intermediate  concentration.’  We  shall  revert  to  the
inhibition  of  the  Hindrances  when  we  come  to  deal  with
j h a n a.^

After  a course  of  intermediate  concentration  of  thought
on  the  after-image,  the  stream  of  being,  which  is  composed,
as  we  have  seen,  of  one  or  other  of  the  four  ‘ thrice-
conditioned  ’ vital  continua,  begins  to  vibrate  for  two
moments  as  usual.  When  it  is  arrested  by  representative
cognition,  there  follow  ordinarily  four  moments  of  apper-
ception. In  other  words,  if  the  subject  be  an  ordinary


^ On  the  K a s i n a - object,  see  Bud.  Psy.,  43,  n.  4,  57,  n.  2.

^ In  its  secondary  sense  u g g a h a is  anything  learnt  or  actjuired.
The  standard  P i t a k a account  of  the  Five  Hindrances  may  be
read  in  Diglia  Nikdya,  i.,  71 ; Dialogues  of  the  Buddha,  i.,  82. — Ed.


Jhdna


55


person,  his  consciousness  is  that  of  the  automatic  or
volitional  ‘ great  ’ types  of  moral  consciousness,  ‘ accom-
panied by  joy  and  connected  with  knowledge  ’ (Part  I.,  § 6,
of  the  Manual).  Or,  if  he  be  of  the  elect  who  have  never-
theless not  practised  j h a n a,  his  consciousn'ess  is  now  of
the  corresponding  type  described  under  the  classes  called
inoperative.  For  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  j h a n a
is  not  absolutely  necessary  to  Arahantship,  as,  e.g.,  in  the
case  of  Arahants  termed  ‘ dry- visioned  ’ (sukkha-
V i p a s s a k a).^

The  first  of  these  four  moments  of  apperception  during  Pari-
the  transitional  stage  from  normal  consciousness  to  the  moment  of
supernormal  is  termed  ‘ preparation,’  the  preliminary  prelimm-
moment,  namely,  of  preparation  of  the  mind  for  the  state  x^aration.
of  j h a n a.  This  moment  does  not  obtain  in  the  case  of
a person  of  quick  attainment  (tikkhapuggala),  who  upaeara-
therefore  at  once  begins  with  the  moment  of  ‘ access,’  moment  of
during  which  normal  thought  approximates  to  the  super-
normal.  The  moment  of  access  is  followed  by  ‘adaptation,’  Anuionia-^
the  moment  during  which  the  mind  equips,  fits,  or  qualifies  qualifica-
itself  for  jhana.  After  the  last  moment  of  ‘ adoption,’^
normal  consciousness  is  cut  off  by  the  supernormal.  In
other  words,  the  subject,  as  adopted  or  regenerate,  cuts  off
the  heritage  of  K a m a-consciousness  , and  evolves  the  Tiansi-
lineage  of  'the  E fi  p a-class  of  exalted  (mahaggata)  stage,
consciousness.  The  concentration  of  thought  exercised
during  this  transitional  period  is  still  of  the  class  known
as  ‘ access-concentration  ’ (u  p a c a r a-  s a m a d h i).

The  transitional  stage  is  now  superseded  by  the  super-  Jiiana.
normal  consciousness,  known  as  the  First  jhana.  This,
if  the  subject  be  an  ordinary  person,  is  of  the  good  or
moral  class  ; if  of  the  elect,  it  is  of  the  inoperative  class.

For  one  thought-moment  he  experiences  ecstasy  (appana),  Appana-
after  which  consciousness  subsides  into  the  suoconscious
stream  of  being.  The  practice  for  the  attainment  of
jhana  icith  ecstasy  is,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  attended

^ See  p.  75.

^ Lit.,  ‘becoming  one  of  the  clan  regeneration.


Jhanan-
ga’s  and
nivarana’s


Five

grades  of
piti.


Piti  and
sukha.


Appana.


56  Ecstasy

"with  the  greatest  difficulties,  and  is  known  as  the  Distressful
Path  (d  u k k h a - p a t i p a d a).

The  first  j h a n i e thought  of  the  R ii  p a 1 o k a has,
among  others,  five  constituent  parts  or  factors  (anga’s),
correspondirfg  to  the  Five  Hindrances  respectively  inhibited.
V i t a k k a,  by  which  sloth-and-torpor  (t  h i n a - in  i d d h a)^
is  inhibited,  directs,  as  I have  said,  its  concomitant  pro-
perties towards  the  ‘ equivalent  mark  ’ (patibhagani-
mitta).  Vicar  a next  permits  the  continued  exercise  of
the  thought  on  the  same,  and  doubt  (v  i c i k i c c h a)  is
thereby  inhibited.  Piti,  whereby  aversion  (b  y a p a d a)
is  inhibited,  creates  an  interest  in  the  same  object.  There
was,  of  course,  at  first  a dull  or  slight  sense  of  interest
(khuddaka-piti),  growing  keener  and  keener  through
oscillating  interest  (okkantika-piti)^  into  an  intense
interest  amounting  to  thrilling  emotion  (ubbega-piti),
followed  finally  by  interest  amounting  to  rapture  (p  h ar  a ii  a-
piti).  This  diffused  rapture  is  invariably  followed  by
pleasurable,  easeful,  happy  feeling  (sukha),  by  which
distraction  and  worry  (uddhacca-kukkucca)  are
inhibited.

The  difference  between  piti  and  sukha  is  usually
illustrated  by  the  simile  of  a thirsty  traveller  in  the  desert.
The  former  is  compared  to  the  feeling  of  thrilled  attention
excited  by  the  sight  of  an  oasis  at  a distance,  and  the  latter
to  the  feeling  derived  from  drinking  the  water  found  in
that  oasis.  Piti,  then,  speaking  generally,  is  the  precursor
of  sukha.

In  the  practice  of  j h a n a this  indescribable  pleasure
derived  from  intense  interest  develops  the  element  of
individualization  (ekaggata)  into  ecstatic  concentration,
(a  p p a n a - s a m a d h i)  or  state  of  being  en  rapport  with
the  after-image,  by  which  sensuous  desire  (kama-chanda)
is  inhibited.

Than  a-ecstasy  (appana)  is  defined  as  that  which

1 Burmese  Pali  reads  a short  i in  t h i n a , a long  i in  v i c i k i e e h a.
—Ed.

2 Lit.,  descending  ; pharana  is  radiating. — Ed.


57


Higher  JhancCs

carries  (or  rather  thrusts)  its  concomitants  into  an  object.
Primarily,  the  term  is  applied  to  the  developed  element  of
mental  application  (v  i t a k k a) . Ordinary  v i t a k k a merely
throws  its  concomitants  on  to  the  surface,  so  to  speak,  of
an  object — he.,  it  is  the  initiative  element  in  cognition  of
a superficial  kind.  But  appana-vitakka  is  mind
penetrating  into  the  inwardness  or  import  of  its  object,
and  it  has  come  to  be  applied  to  s a m a d h i,  ‘ concentra-
tion ’ or  developed  individualization  of  thought.  Ecstasy
is  generally  compared  to  a solid  body,  which  sinks  to  the
bottom  of  water  and  remains  where  it  is  as  long  as  it  is  not
taken  out ; while  the  undeveloped,  and  therefore  superficial,
individualizing  of  K a m a-consciousness  is  comparable  to
a hollow  case  which  is  kept  under  water  by  pressure,  but
is  buoyed  up  to  the  surface  as  soon  as  that  pressure  is
removed.

Thus  concentration  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  the  practice
of  spiritual  culture,  termed  collectively  ‘ tranquillization  ’ or
‘ calm ’ (s  a m a t h a).  S a m a t h a is  so  called  because  it
puts  to  sleep,  as  it  were,  or  lulls,  the  Five  Hindrances  for
the  time  being.  Access  (u  p a c a r a)  and  ecstatic  concen-
tration (appana-samadhi)  are  two  aspects  of  ‘ purity  Ojtta-
of  thought,’  so  called  because  the  mind  is  now  free  from
the  Hindrances.

The  above 'is,  of  course,  but  a bald  and  bare  statement  of  ^ life
the  psychology  of  j h a n a.  Nevertheless,  attainment  in  °
j h a n a is  a very  important  psychological  moment,  marking
an  epoch  in  his  mental  experience  for  the  person  who
succeeds  in  commanding  it.  He  has  for  the  first  time  in
his  life  tasted  something  unlike  anything  he  has  ever
experienced  before.  The  feeling  is  simply  indescribable.

He  felt  an  entirely  changed  person,  purged  from  the
Hindrances.  He  was  living  a new,  higher  life,  the  life  of  a
god  of  the  heavens  called  Kupa;  experiencing  the  con-
sciousness believed  to  be  habitual  to  those  dwelling  there.

The  same  form  of  thought-transition  holds  good  for  Higher
transition  from  Kama  -consciousness  to  the  higher  stages
of  jhana,  with  this  distinction,  that,  in  the  second


58


Jhaiia  ‘ Habits  ’


j h a n i c thought,  the  services  of  vitakka  are  dis-
pensed with  ; in  the  third,  both  vitakka  and  v i c a r a
are  absent ; in  the  fourth,  p T t i is  got  rid  of ; in  the  fifth,
s u k h a is  replaced  by  u p e k k h a , or  hedonic  indifference
to  the  pleasure  derived  from  the  five  grades  of  interest.
This  hedonic  indifference,  or  neutrality  of  emotion  is
brought  about  by  the  continued  voluntary  exercise  of  the
mind  on  the  after-image  to  which  it  has  been  directed.
And  by  it  ecstatic  concentration  reaches  its  full  develop-
ment in  the  fifth  stage  of  j h a n a.  In  attaining  to  it,
apperception  of  the  two  ‘ great  ’ types,  which  are  ‘ accom-
panied by  joy,’  is  superseded  by  one  of  the  types  which  are
‘ accompanied  by  indifference.’^

J h a n a is  often  divided  into  four  classes,  instead  of
five,  in  which  classification  the  second  and  the  third  are
combined  into  one.^

The  object  of  consciousness,  in  the  transitional  stage,
may  be  the  after-image  of  any  one  of  the  ten  ‘ circles
or,  again,  it  may  be  the  after-image  of  one  of  the  ten  ‘ foul
things  ’ (a  s u b h a),  or  of  the  living  body,  or  only  of  the
breath.  The  assumption  is  that  it  ceases  when  the
j h a n a thought  itself  ceases.

Dual  post-  After  each  initiatory  process  of  thought-transition.
Habit  repeated  several  times  by  w'ay  of  practice,  the  beginner  has
to  cultivate  two  supplementary  j h a n a -habits,  namely,
‘the  habit  of  reflecting’  (a  v a j j a n a-v  a s i t a) — i.e.,
on  the  jhanic  thought  just  induced,  or  on  one  of  its
constituent  factors — and  ‘ the  habit  of  reviewing’  the  same
(paccavekkhana-vasita).  These  two  habits  occur
in  a single  supplementai’y  process  of  retrospection  (pacca-
vekkhana-vlthi),  the  form  of  which  is  as  follows  ;

When  a person  wishes  to  review  the  past  j h a n a , or

^ See  Manual,  I.,  §§  6-8.

2 The  Sutta  Pitaka  knew  apparently  nothing  of  this  fivefold
and  probably  somewhat  later  elaboration.  But  in  the  Abhi-
d h a m m a P i t a k a the  fivefold  is  given  as  supplementary  to  the
fourfold.  See  D7t.  >5.,  §§  160-175:  ‘Catukkanayo,  Pancaka-
nayo.’  On  the  ‘foul  things,’  see  Manual,  IX.,  § 2. — Ed.


Inducing  Jhcina  59

its  constituent  factors,  the  stream  of  his  being,  after  the
usual  vibration,  is  arrested  by  representative  cognition
(m  a n 0 d V a r a V a j j a n a),  after  which  follow  four
moments  of  retrospection  (or  five,  according  as  a person
is  quick  or  slow  of  attainment).  These  moments  of
retrospective  apperception  belong,  in  the  case  of  an  ordinary
being,  to  one  of  the  eight  great  classes  of  ‘ moral  conscious-
ness,’ or,  in  the  case  of  one  of  the  elect,  to  one  of  the  eight
great  classes  of  inoperative  consciousness.^  Thereupon  the
stream  resumes  its  normal  flow.  The  number  of  inter-
vening moments  of  vital  continuum  (bhavanga’s)
between  any  two  retrospective  processes  depends  upon  the
degree  to  which  the  dual  habit  in  question  has  been
cultivated.

Thus  there  are  six  classes  of  reaction  after  the  first
j h a n a ; five  of  these  has  each  of  its  constituent  factors  as
object,  and  one  has  the  j h a n i c thought  itself  as  a whole
for  its  object.  After  the  second  jhana  there  are  five
modes  of  reaction ; four  after  the  third,  three  after  the
fourth,  three  after  the  fifth.

The  method  for  attaining  to  sustained  or  prolonged
jhana  (jhana-samapatti-vithi,  or  sama-
pajjana-vithi)  is  the  same  as  that  for  attaining  the
transitional,  form.  The  only  distinction  is  that  here  the
number  of  moments  of  jhana  induced  at  will  is  un-
limited, their  number  depending  only  upon  the  degree  of
certain  previous  exercises.  These  are,  first,  the  cultivation
of  ‘predetermining’  the  duration  of  the  jhana  that  is  to  be
induced  (adhitthana-vasita)  ; secondly,  the  cultiva-
tion of  prolonging  j h a n a at  will  while  under  its  influence
(samapajjana-vasita);  and  thirdly,  the  cultivation
of  waking  or  rousing  one’s  self  punctually  on  the  expiry
of  the  interval  pre-determined  (vutthana-vasita).

As  in  the  case  of  the  transitional  process,  each  inductive
process  is  followed  by  the  retrospective  processes  already
described.

If  a person  wishes  to  rise  to  higher  jhana,  he  should
1 See  Manual,  loc.  cit.


Sama-
patti-pro-
cess  of  in-
duction of,
and  emer-
gence from
jhana  at
'•will.


Progres-
sive Steps
to  Higher
jhana.


60


Prelimin-
ary course
of  mental
training.


Iddhi-

pada’s.


Adhi-

pati’s.


Classes  of
iddhi.


Swper-normal  Will

first  enter  into  the  next  lower  j h a n a . On  waking  there-
from he  should  reflect  on  the  relatively  gross  nature  of
the  jhana  just  induced.  In  this  reflection  he  should
consider  the  particular  constituent  factor  to  be  got  rid  of,
as  being  gross  by  reason  of  its  liability  to  be  counteracted
by  the  inimical  influences  of  the  Hindrances  respectively
inhibited  by  each  factor  (p.  56).  Reflecting  on  the  con-
sequent liability  of  that  jhana  to  loss,  and  wflth  a strong
desire  for  the  next  higher  jhana,  he  should  make  great
efforts  until  he  succeeds  in  attaining  it.

If  now  an  adept  in  the  Fifth  jhana  wishes  to  attain
super-intellectual  powers  (abhinna),  it  will  be  neces-
sary for  him  to  go  through  a course  of  mental  training
in  fourteen  processes,  described  in  the  Visuddhi-magga.
This  course  is  intended  to  enable  will  to  gain  a complete
mastery  over  intellect  and  feeling.

Supernormal  powers  of  will,  known  in  Buddhism  by  the
technical  term  iddhi-vidha,  may  then  be  developed
by  means  of  the  so-called  four  bases  of  iddhi  (cattaro
i d d h i p a d a) . These  involve  respectively  the  develop-
ment of  Pour  dominant  or  predominant  principles  of
purpose,  effort,  knowledge,  and  wisdom,  as  described  in  the
Manual,  VII.,  § 6,  as  well  as  the  cultivation  of  sixteen
fundamental  principles  for  acquiring  such  power,  and  for
satisfying  the  eight  conditions  for  acquiring  it.  Readers
are  referred  to  the  Visuddhi-Magga  for  details.

There  are  ten  classes  of  iddhi  known  to  Buddhism  : ^

1 The  oldest  version  of  these  ten  classes  known  as  yet  occurs  in
the  Patisambhidamagga  (ii.,  205),  of  the  Sutta  Pitaka.
Two  versions  at  least  of  the  ten  are  given  by  Buddhaghosa
{Vis.  Magga,  xii.,  and  Atthasillini,  p.  91).  The  former  tallies
exactly  with  the  Pitaka  list.  The  list  in  this  essay  differs  slightly
from  both : — (1)  The  order  is  quite  different.  (2)  In  the  older
versions,  3.  is  kammavipakaja  iddhi;  4.  is  puhiiavato
iddhi.  (In  b h a V an  a m a y a i d d h i replaces  6).  (3)  Good

done  in  former  births  is  not  mentioned  in  the  canonical  description
of  4.  (4)  I d d h i is,  in  the  canon,  described  as  ‘nekkhammena

kamacchandassa  pahanattho  ijjhatiti  ’ — i.e.,  the  kind
of  i d d h i so  named  is  that  which  is  a result  of  resigning  all  sensuous.


Iddhi


61


1.  Tattlia-tattha-sammapayoga-paccayiddhi
(lit.,  ‘iddhi  conditioned  by  perfect  usage  in  this  and
that  ’)  is  the  ordinary  power  exercised  by  men  in  ordinary
walks  of  life.

2.  Yijjamayiddhi  (lit.,  ‘ i.  consisting  of  know-
ledge ’)  is  the  power  acquired  by  knowledge  (science,  art,
hypnotism,  etc.).

3.  Kammajiddhi  (lit.,  ‘ i.  born  of  k a m m a ’)  is  the
inherent  or  inborn  power  due  to  the  force  of  k a m m a —
e.g.,  the  flying  power  of  birds,  the  power  of  spirits,  and  of
gods.

4.  Punniddhi  (lit.,  i.  of  merit)  is  a form  of  the  last-
mentioned,  but  appearing  later  in  life  as  the  fruition  of  the
good  k a m m a of  some  previous  existence.

5.  Ariyiddhi  (lit.,  i.  of  the  Ariyas  or  elect  ones)  is
the  power  of  looking  upon  agreeable  objects  as  disagreeable
or  rice  versa.

6.  Samadhivipp  ha  r iddhi  (lit.,  i.  of  radiating
through  concentration)  is  the  power,  induced  by  samadhi,
of  resisting  pain,  death,  etc.

7.  Nanavipp  bar  iddhi  (lit.,  i.  of  radiating  through
insight)  is  the  power,  induced  by  knowledge,  of  resisting
pain,  death,  etc.

8.  Adhitthaniddhi  (lit.,  i.  of  resolve  or  will-
fixing) is  the  power  of  creating  phenomena  outside  of  one’s
body.

9.  Vikkubbaniddhi  (lit.,  i.  of  transforming)  is
the  power  of  transforming  one’s  body  into  different  person-
alities.

10.  Manomayiddhi  (lit.,  i.  composed  of  mind)
is  the  power  of  creating  phenomena  connected  with  one’s
body.  ^

The  last  three  constitute  the  iddhividha,-of  which

vidha

all  worldly  desires.  Apart  from  these  few  details,  the  fact  of  the
relatively  intact  tradition  is  very  remarkable. — Ed.

Described  in  the  Patisambhida  as  the  power  of  creating
one’s  own  double. — Ed.

^ Vidha  is  simply  ‘ kind,’  the  German  — Ed.


62


Adliit-

thana-

vithi.


Padaka-

jhanas.


Abhinna-

vithi.


Super->no7'mal  Thought

they  are  but  three  different  aspects.  The  agent  hereupon
enters  into  the  Fifth  jhana,  which  is  now  termed
adhitthana-padaka-jhana,  that  is  jhana  as
base  for  fixation  of  will,  because  it  is  used  as  a basis  for  the
‘ willing  ’ process.  He  now  ivills  the  desired  phenomenon
in  the  process  so  called.  The  form  of  it  is  as  follows :

The  stream  of  being,  after  the  usual  vibration,  is  arrested
by  representative  cognition,  followed  by  the  usual  seven
moments  of  apperception  before  consciousness  lapses  again
into  the  vital  continuum.  In  this  process  those  seven
moments  of  volitional  apperception  (adhitthana-
j a V a n a)  are,  in  the  case  of  ordinary  beings,  of  the  main
types  of  good  consciousness,  but  in  the  case  of  Arahants,
they  are  of  the  inoperative  class.^

Once  more  he  enters  the  Fifth  jhana,  which  is  now
termed  ‘jhana  as  base  for  super-normal  thought  ’
(abhinnapadaka-jhana),  because  it  is  used  as  a
basis  for  a b h i n n a.  Both  these  basic  j h a n a ’ s may  be
induced  by  any  one  of  the  ten  circles.

Lastly,  in  the  abhinna-vlthi  (process  of  super-
intellectual thought),  the  particular  phenomenon  willed
sets  up  the  usual  vibration  in  the  stream  of  being,  which  is
then  arrested  by  the  same  transitional  stage  as  in  the
thought-transition  already  described.  This  transitional  stage
is  followed  by  a single  thought-moment  of  super-normal
apperception  (abhinna-javana),  during  and  by  which
the  desired  phenomenon  is  effected,  and  after  which  con-
sciousness subsides  into  the  vital  continuum.  This  super-
normal apperception  is  no  other  than  the  Fifth  stage  of
so-called  K lip  a jhana,  specially  developed  in  the  above
way  for  producing  the  desired  phenomenon.  As  like
classes  are  followed  by  like  classes,  it  may  be  of  either  the
moral  (kusala),  or  the  inoperative  (kiriya)  class  according
as  it  is  preceded,  in  the  transitional  stage,  by  the  fifth  or
sixth  of  the  eight  great  classes  of  moral  consciousness,  or,
in  the  case  of  an  Arahant,  of  inoperative  consciousness.

The  same  four  processes  obtain  in  the  case  of  each  of  the
1 Cf.  p.  20.


63


Super -norm  al  Th  ough  t

four  other  kinds  of  secular  (or  worldly)  super-normal
thought,  with  slight  differences  as  regards  the  procedure
thus :

In  the  case  of  hyperaesthesia  or  telepathy  of  sight  i-  Dibba-
(dibba-cakkhu-abhinna),^  the  ‘basic’  jhana’s
are  induced  by  one  of  three  circles — namely,  heat  (t  e j o),
white  colour  (o  d a t a),  or  light  (a  1 o k a),  and  the  adept  in
the  willing  process  wills  to  see  the  desired  thing  beyond
the  sensory  range.  It  is  said  that  light  has  to  be  created
where  darkness  is,  in  order  to  enable  the  celestial  eye  to
observe  and  discern  things  in  the  dark.  The  four  pro-
cesses of  celestial  vision  may  be  followed  by  a process
termed  ‘ super-normal  insight  concerning  event-according-
to-deed  ’ (yathakammupaga-abhinna),  by  which  a
particular  event  in  the  past  history  of  a particular  individual
is  discerned ; or  by  that  of  insight  concerning  the  future
(anagatagsa-abhinna),  by  which  a particular  event
in  his  future  history  is  discerned.  The  power  of  prophecy,
however  (anagataijsa-nana),  is  the  privilege  of  the
Buddha,  for,  when  a future  event  is  foretold,  every  possible
condition  must  be  taken  into  account.

In  the  case  of  the  super-normal  insight  called  the  Celestial  2-  Dibba-
Ear,  or  hyperaesthesia  of  hearing  (d  i b b a - s o t a),  the
adept  wills  that  he  may  hear  sounds  beyond  the  normal
sensory  range.

By  the  four  processes  of  the  super-normal  thought  called  9®^°"

V j.  X o jDSjfiy  £i  •

‘ discerning  the  thought  of  another  ’ (c  e t o p a r i y a - n a n a,  nana.
or  paracitta-vijanana),  another  man’s  thought
is  read.  These  ‘ thought-reading  ’ processes  of  thought-
transference  or  telepathy  must  necessarily  be  preceded  by
those  of  the  Celestial  Eye.

The  lower  grades  of  the  elect  cannot  possibly  read  the
thoughts  of  the  higher  grades.  The  thoughts  discerned  may
be  past,  present,  or  future,  and  the  question  arises,  when
present  thought  is  read,  what  particular  states  of  conscious-
ness in  the  thought-process  of  a person  are  discerned  ?

The  Maha-Atthakatha  holds  that  the  particular
1 Lit.,  ‘ celestial,  or  divine  eye-snper  knowledge.’— Ed.


64


A rupa-jhana


4.  Pub-

benivasa-

nussati.


Jhana  and
the  body.


Arupa-

jhanas.


How  to
rise  to
Arupa-
jhana.


state  of  consciousness,  which  comes  into  being  at  the
same  ‘ nascent  ’ instant  as  that  of  the  thought-reader’s
representative  cognition  discerning  it,  is  read  throughout
the  thought-process  of  the  reader.  The  Mulatika  (or
sub-commentary),  on  the  other  hand,  holds  that  each
particular  state  in  the  thought-process  of  the  person  read
is  attended  to  by  that  particular  state  of  the  thought-
reader,  which  corresponds  in  time  to  the  state  read.

By  the  insight  known  as  remembrance  of  previous
circumstances  the  past  history  of  one’s  self,  or  of  another
can  be  read.  The  limit  to  this  improved  memory  or
hypermnesia  is  of  course  different  in  different  individuals.

Before  I conclude  this  subject  I might  as  well  observe
that  ecstatic  apperception  (a  p p a n a - j a v a n a)  is  capable
of  maintaining  the  bodily  postures  of  standing,  sitting,
and  lying  for  an  indefinite  period  of  time  without  allowing
fatigue  to  set  in.  In  other  words,  the  cataleptic  condition
of  body  may  be  induced  by  j h a n a.^

With  a slight  difference  in  procedure  in  mental  attitudes
and  mood  of  thought,  the  same  forms  of  the  transitional,
inductive,  or  sustained  and  retrospective  processes  of  the
Fifth  E u p a - j h an  a obtain  in  the  case  of  the  four  Arupa-
j lianas,  with  the  distinction  that  the  respective  objects
of  jhana  here  are:  (1)  The  concept  ‘ infinity  of  space,’
in  the  case  of  the  first  A r u p p a ; (2)  the  conception  of  the
first  Arupa  -consciousness  as  infinite,  in  the  case  of  the
second ; (3)  the  concept  ‘ nothingness,’^  in  the  case  of  the
third ; and  (4)  the  conception  of  the  third  Arupa  -con-
sciousness as  calm  and  serene,  in  the  case  of  the  fourth.

When  an  adept  in  the  Fifth  Eu pa- jhana,  who  has
repeatedly  induced  the  same  through  any  one  of  the  ten
circles,  with  the  exception  of  space,  en-oneously  believes
that  all  physical  pain  and  misery  are  due  to  the  existence


^ On  the  Abhidhamma-  Pitaka  catechism  respecting  these
more  abstract  exercises,  see  Dhamma-Sangani,  §§  265  ff.,  and
Buddh.  Psychology,  pp.  71^.— Ed.

2 According  to  the  T i k a ’ s,  ‘ The  concept  of  the  first  concept
regarded  as  nothing.’  Gf.  p.  90,  n.  2. — Ed.


65


Puiity  of  Insight

of  the  body,  he  then  shrinks  from  the  idea  of  having  this
physical  frame  in  future,  and  he  feels  disgusted  with,  and
detests,  even  the  after-image  of  the  circle,  which  has
induced  the  fifth  r vi  p a - j h a n a , because  of  its  simi-
larity to  his  physical  frame,  in  so  far  as  its  materiality  is
concerned.  Reflecting  on  the  relative  grossness  of  this
jhana,  he  wishes  to  attain  the  first  arupa-jhana,
which  he  considers  to  be  very  calm  and  serene.  With
this  frame  of  mind  he  concentrates  his  mind  on  the  concept,
‘ the  infinity  of  space,’  as  divested  of  all  material  objects
used  for  ‘ circles.’


A person  who  wishes  to  transcend  the  experience  of  this  Dittlii-
conditioned  world  must  first  of  all  cultivate  ‘ purity  of
views ’ (dityhi-visuddhi),  so  called  because  it  is  the
correct  view  of  the  universe,  freed  from  the  idea  of  an
identical  substance  of  mind,  or  matter.  This  he  must  do  by
a study  of  the  characteristic  marks,  functions  or  properties,
phenomenal  efi’ects,  and  immediate  causes  of  each  of  the
material  qualities  of  body  and  the  mental  properties,  after
drawing  a preliminary  distinction  between  mind  and  matter
(nama-rupa-pariccheda-nana).

Next  he  must  cultivate  the  ‘purity  of  transcending  doubt’  Kaukha-
(kankha-vitarana-visuddhi),  by  which  all  the
sixteen  classes  of  doubt  with  reference  to  the  past,  present,
or  future  are  transcended.  The  discipline  for  this  is  a
careful  study  of  the  Buddhist  doctrine  of  evolution,  or
paticca-samuppada-dhamma.

Then  he  cultivates  the  Ten  Modes  of  Insight  (v  i p a s - Ten  vi-
sana-nana’s)  in  the  following  order  : — He  contem-
plates  the  conditioned  as  impermanent,  evil,  or  unsub-  inasana-
stantial.  In  other  words,  he  cultivates  that  contemplative
insight  (lit.,  ‘ handling  ’),  in  which  he  contemplates  those
three  salient  marks  of  things.

And  when  he  develops  the  insight  into  flux  (lit.,  rising  2.  Uday-
and  waning),  by  which  he  observes  the  growth  and  the
decay  of  things,  or  being  and  non-being  in  the  process  of
becoming,  there  may  be  an  emission  of  human  aura  from

5


66


3Iod€S  of  Insight


Magga-

raagga-

iiana-

dassana-

visuddhi.


3.  Bhanga-
nana.


4.  Bhaya-
liana.

5.  Adina-
va-iiana.

6.  Nibbi-
da-nana.

7.  Mucei-
tukam-


the  body,  and  nine  other  inimical  influences  may  operate
against  further  progress,  known  as  the  ten  ‘ corrupters  of
insight ’ (vippasanupakkile§a).

The  Meditator  is  now  apt  to  mistake  these  ten  ‘ defile-
ments ’ for  the  Path ; if  not,  he  is  said  to  attain  the  Purity
of  insight  by  which  the  actual  Path  is  distinguished  from
that  which  is  not  Path  (maggamagga-nana-dassana-
visuddhi).

Next  he  cultivates  ‘insight  into  disruption’  (bhanga-
nana),  by  which  he  confines  his  attention  merely  to  the
decay  of  things,  as  it  is  less  discernible  than  their  growth,
growth  being,  as  a rule,  more  marked.

By  ‘ insight  into  what  is  to  be  feared  ’ he  sees  the  danger
in  the  decay  of  things ; by  ‘ insight  into  evil  ’ he  realizes
the  evil  nature  of  this  danger ; by  the  ‘ insight  of  repulsion  ’
he  gets  disgusted  with  the  evil  nature  of  that  danger ; by
the  ‘ insight  associated  with  the  desire  to  be  set  free  ’ he
aspires  to  be  emancipated  from  all  evils ; by  the  ‘ insight  of
yata-sana.  re-contemplation  ’ he  re-contemplates  the  conditioned  with

8.  Pad-  reference  to  the  Three  Salient  Marks  (Impermanence,  111,

No-soul) ; by  the  ‘ insight  of  indifference  to  the  activities
of  this  life  ’ he  is  now  indifferent  to  the  world.  In  other

9.  Sankba-  woi’ds,  he  is  110  longer  affected  by  the  good  and  the  bad
in  this  world.  This  feeling  of  indifference  (u  p e k k h a)
is  fostered  by  the  balance  of  the  mind,  or  equanimity
(tatramaj  jhattata),  which  must  not  be  confounded  with
upekkha,  the  neutral  aspect  of  feeling,  or  zero-point
between  pain  and  pleasure,  joy  and  sorrow.  The  former
is  a higher  mental  attitude,  which  may  eventually  be  raised
to  the  dignity  of  a bojjhanga  (an  indispensable  condition
or  factor  of  knowledge  or  wisdom).  The  two  may  exist
side  by  side,  as  in  the  ‘ consciousness  accompanied  by
indifference  ’ of  the  eight  classes  of  moral  consciousness
(Man.  I.,  § 6).

And  when  the  last-mentioned  kind  of  insight  matures,  it
changes  itself  into  the  ‘insight  of  adaptation’  (anuloma-
nana),  by  which  the  meditator  fits  himself  with  mental
equipments  and  qualifications  for  the  Path.


rupekkha'
liana.


10.  Anu-

loma-

iiana.


Emancipation


67


All  these  Insights,  from  the  ‘ insight  into  disruption  ’
upward,  are  collectively  termed  ‘ purity  of  insight  during
the  progress  of  the  practice  of  discernment,’  or  more  simply
‘ purity  of  intellectual  culture.’

The  matured  insight  of  equanimity  which  has  reached
the  climax  of  discernment  in  the  stage  of  adaptation,
receives  the  special  designation  of  ‘ insight  of  discernment
leading  to  uprising  ’(vutthana-gamini-vipassana-
n a na),  because  it  invariably  leads  to  the  Path,  conceived
as  a ‘ Rising-out-of.’  It  is  also  styled  ‘ the  mouth  or  gate  of
Emancipation  ’ (v  i m o k k h a - m u k h a),  because  the  Path
is  reached  immediately  after  one  more  moment  of  ‘ adoption  ’
(g  0 1 r a b h u).

This  ‘ gate  of  emancipation  ’ has  a triple  designation.  It
is  termed  the  ‘ Signless  ’ (a  n i m i 1 1 a)  when  the  meditator
contemplates  things  as  impermanent  by  ridding  his  mind
of  the  signs  of  the  three  delusions — namely,  of  the  hallu-
cination of  perception,  thought,  and  views  (s  a n n a -
vipallasa,  citta-vipallasa,  and  ditthi-vipallasa),
which  have  led  mankind  to  believe  that  impermanent  things
are  permanent.  It  is  termed  ‘ the  Undesired  ’ (appanihita)
when  he  contemplates  things  as  evil  by  ridding  his  mind
of  the  craving  which  has  led  mankind  to  covet  things  as
if  they  were  good.  It  is  termed  ‘ the  Void,’  or  ‘ Emptiness  ’
(s  u n na  t a),  when  he  contemplates  things  as  unsubstantial
by  ridding  his  mind  of  the  idea  of  an  ego,  or  soul.

Emancipation  itself,  whether  of  the  Path,  the  Fruit,  or
N i b b a n a,  also  receives  the  same  triad  of  names,  accord-
ing as  it  is  preceded  by  the  contemplation  of  things  by
‘ uprising  discernment  ’ (see  above)  as  either  impermanent,
or  evil,  or  unsubstantial.

The  mental  element  of  intelligence  (pannindriya-
eetasika),  which  has  developed  itself  through  various
stages  or  phases  into  the  Perfected  View  (samma-ditthi)
of  the  lowest  class  in  the  Path-consciousness,  with  which
we  are  about  to  deal,  is  called  ‘ purity  of  insight  ’ or
simply  ‘ Path-insight  ’ (magga-nana).

The  process  of  thought-transition  to  Path-consciousness


Patipada-

nana-

dassana-

visuddhi.


Vutthana-

gamini-

vipassana-

fiana.


Viniok-

kha-

mukha.


Animitta.


Three

vipallasas.

Appani-

hita.


Sunnata.


Vimok-
kha  and
its  triple
designa-
tion.


Nana-

dassana-

visuddlii.


68


The  Paths  and  the  Four  Truths


Magga-  is  similar  to  the  form  of  mental  transition  to  the  con-
sciousness  known  as  R u p a - c i 1 1 a,  or  that  known  as
Arupa-citta.  That  is  to  say,  the  stream  of  being,
after  the  usual  vibration,  is  arrested  by  representative
cognition,  followed  by  the  usual  transitional  stage  of  four
moments,  or  three  only,  according  as  the  person  is  slow  or
quick  of  attainment.

The  evolution  of  ‘ adoption  ’ (g  o t r a b h u),  which  follows
‘ the  adaptation  ’ (a  n u 1 o m a)  already  described,  cuts  off  the
heritage  of  the  ordinary  average  person  (puthuj  jana),
and  evolves  the  lineage  of  the  Transcendental.  It  is  fol-
toctio^n  f ^ single  moment  of  Path-consciousness,  by  which

the  first  of  the  four  Noble  Truths  is  clearly  discerned.
Error  and  doubt  are  got  rid  of,  N i b b a n a is  intuited,  and
the  Ariyan  Eightfold  Path-Constituents  are  cultivated.

These  four  simultaneous  functions  correspond  to  the
Four  Noble  Truths.

The  Path-thought  is  immediately  followed  by  two  or
three  moments  of  its  Fruition  (according  as  the  individual
is  slow  or  quick  of  attainment)  before  consciousness  lapses
again  into  the  stream.

One  of  the  Three  Salient  Marks  of  things  forms  the
object  of  consciousness  prior  to  adoption  (gotrabhu).
But  adoption  implies  an  evolution  which  transcends  the
conditioned,  and  has  for  its  object  (as  in  the  case  of  the
Path-thought  and  the  consciousness  of  Fruition)  Nibbana.

In  the  Three  Higher  Paths,  adoption  (gotrabhu)
receives  the  special  name  of  the  moment  of  purification
(vodana),  each  of  the  Three  Higher  Paths  being  possible
only  to  a being  who  has  attained  the  next  lower.  The
sotapanna  (Winner  of  the  Stream,  or  Attainer  of  the
First  Path)  will  have  as  yet  to  undergo  seven  more  re-
births at  the  outside,  in  the  k a m a - 1 o k a,  or  universe  of
full  sensuous  experience.

The  attenuation  to  which  all  sensual  passion  and  ill-will
have  been  brought  by  one  attaining  the  Second  Path,  has
this  result,  that  only  one  more  such  rebirth  remains.
Such  an  one  is  called  Once-Returner.


the  Path-
tliouglit
corre-
sponding
to  the
Four
Noble
Truths.


Vodana.

The  Four
Paths.

1.  Sota-
paiina.


2.  Saka-
daganii.


Arahantship  G9

But  the  complete  destruction  of  the  last  two  mentioned
defilements  (k  i 1 e s a ’ s)  does  not  permit  of  another  such
rebirth  in  the  case  of  the  Never-Eeturner  of  the  Third
Path.  He  would  be  reborn  in  the  Pure  Abodes  (sudd-
h a V a s a)  of  the  Brahma-loka  if  he  has  practised  the  Fifth
j h a n a,  or  in  one  of  the  lower  Brahma-lokas  if  he  has
only  practised  the  lower  j h a n a s.

The  wisdom  of  the  Highest  or  Supreme  Path  (arahatta-
magga-nana),  by  which  all  the  k i 1 e s a ’ s have  been
destroyed,  root  and  branch,  and  the  Four  Noble  Truths
completely  realized,  is  the  same  mental  element  of  intelli-
gence (pannindriya-cetasika)  developed  into  the
Perfected  View  (s  a m m a - d i 1 1 h i)  of  the  highest  order,
and  is  the  last  stage  of  the  purity  of  insight  already
referred  to.

And  it  is  the  complete  destruction  of  the  k i 1 e s a ’ s
that  has  qualified  the  Arahant  to  be  a woethy — i.e.,
one  who  is  ‘ fit  for  gifts,’  worthy  of  all  kinds  of  offerings
that  the  world  can  make  him  (d  a k k h i n e y y a).

The  transitional  process  in  the  case  of  the  Three  Lower
Paths  is  followed  by  five  processes  of  review  or  retrospect,
in  which  (1)  the  Path  attained,  (2)  the  Fruit  enjoyed,
(3)  the  N i b b a n a intuited,  (4)  the  k i 1 e s a ’ s already
got  rid  of,  and  (5)  the  k i 1 e s a ’ s as  yet  to  be  got  rid  of,
are  respectively  reflected  upon.  In  the  case  of  the  Highest
Path,  only  four  of  these  so-to-speak  post-graduate  processes
obtain,  because  there  are  no  more  k i 1 e s a ’ s to  be  got
rid  of.  The  form  of  these  retrospective  processes  is  as
follows :

The  stream  of  being,  after  the  usual  vibration,  is  arrested
by  representative  cognition,  followed  by  seven  moments  of
apperception  before  the  stream  resumes  its  flow.  If  the
subject  have  attained  any  but  the  Highest  Path,  his  con-
sciousness is  of  Nos.  1,  3,  5,  or  7 of  the  eight  great  moral
types  ‘ connected  with  knowledge  ’ ; or  of  the  corresponding
numbers  of  the  eight  great  ‘ inoperative  ’ types,  if  he  have
reached  the  Highest  (Man.  I.,  § 6),  except  in  the  case  of  the
two  processes  in  which  the  k i 1 e s a ’ s are  reflected  upon,


3.  Ana-
garni.


4.  Ara-
hant.


Sanniia-

ditthi.


Pacoa-

vekkhana-

vithi.


70


Fruition


Phala-sam  ■
apatti.


Niro-

dliasama-

patti.


when  any  one  of  the  former  eight  classes,  in  the  case  of
the  Three  Lower  Paths,  or  any  one  of  the  latter  eight
classes  in  the  case  of  the  Highest  Path,  performs  the
function  of  apperception.

Each  being  who  has  attained  a lower  Path  spends  his
time  in  enjoying  the  Fruit  of  that  Path,  before  he  attains
the  next  higher.  The  process  of  enjoying  the  Fruit  for  an
indefinitely  prolonged  time  is  termed  ‘ sustained  fruition  ’
(phala-samapatti),  which  corresponds  to  sustained
j h a n a (p.  59).  The  form  is  as  follows  :

When  such  a person  makes  all  possible  modes  of
discernment  converge  on  ‘things  as  conditioned’  (san-
kharadhamma),  and  contemplates  them  as  Imperma-
nent, 111,  or  Unsubstantial,  the  stream  of  being,  after  the
usual  vibration,  is  arrested  by  representative  cognition,  fol-
lowed by  four  moments,  or  three,  of  the  stage  of  ‘adaptation,’
according  as  the  person  is  slow  or  quick  of  attainment.
During  these,  one  of  the  four  numbers  named  above  of  the
eight  moral  classes  in  the  case  of  the  three  lower  Paths,
or  one  of  the  corresponding  four  of  the  inoperative  classes,
in  the  ease  of  the  highest  Path,  contemplates  the  three
Characteristic  Marks  of  things.  Again,  of  these  four,  in
each  case,  only  the  first  two,  ‘ accompanied  by  joy,’  can
take  part  in  the  case  of  four  lower  jh  ana’s,  and  only
two  ‘ accompanied  by  indifference,’  in  the  case  of  the  fifth
j h a n a . This  stage  of  adaptation  is  followed  by  an
unlimited  number  of  apperceptive  moments  of  Fruition  of
the  resj)eetive  Paths,  having  as  their  object  N i b b a n a .

The  ‘ Never-Returner  ’ (a  n a g a m i),  or  the  Arahant,  who
has  achieved  all  the  previous  rupa-  and  arupa-
j h a n a s,  may  enjoy  what  is  called  Nibbana-under-present-
conditions  (dittha-dhamma-nibbana),  if  he  be
not  satisfied  with  the  mere  intuition  of  N i b b a n a in  the
sustained  consciousness  of  fruition  (phala-samapatti).

First  of  all  he  enters  into  the  First  Rupa-  j h a n a
(Man.  I.,  § 8).  Waking  therefrom  he  reflects  on  the  three
Characteristic  Marks  of  things  as  experienced  in  First
j h a n a,  by  means  of  the  ten  modes  of  Insight  (v  i p a s -


Complete  Trance  71

Sana’s)  up  to  the  last  already  described ; next  he
enters  into  the  Second  j h a n a , then  into  the  Third,  and
so  on,  in  the  upward  order,  up  to  the  concept  of  Nothing-
ness (akincahhayatana),  the  third  A r u p a - j h a n a
alternating  the  induction  of  each  preceding  j h a n a with
the  contemplation  of  that  j h a n a by  the  ten  modes.

On  waking  from  the  Third  A r u p a - h a n a , however,
he,  instead  of  exercising  the  Modes  of  Insight,  performs
the  four  preliminary  functions  of  willing  : (1)  that  such  Four  Pre-
necessaries of  life  as  are  not  connected  with  his  body  may  functions
not  be  destroyed  by  fire,  etc. ; (2)  that  he  may  wake  up
when  his  services  are  required  by  the  Order  ; (3)  that  he
may  wake  up  when  he  is  called  by  the  Buddha;  and
(4)  that  he  may  ascertain  whether  he  will  live  within  the
next  seven  days.

After  this  he  enters  into  the  Fourth  Arupa-jhana  in
the  transitional  stage  to  sustained  cessation  (nirodha-
samapatti)  or  total  suspension  of  mind,  mental  pro-
perties and  material  qualities  born  of  mind.  The  process
is  as  follows  :

After  the  above-mentioned  functions,  the  third  form  of
arupa  consciousness  enters  his  field  of  presentation,  sets
up  the  usual  vibration  in  the  stream  of  being,  which  is  then
arrested  by  representative  cognition,  followed  by  the  usual
transitional  stages  of  preparation,  access,  adaptation,
adoption  (c/.  p.  55).  During  this  stage  one  of  the  two
classes  of  moral  consciousness  ‘ accompanied  by  indiffer-
ence ’ and  ‘ insight  ’ (Man.  I.,  6),  performs  the  function  of
apperception  in  the  case  of  the  Non-Eeturner,  and  one  of
the  corresponding  inoperative  classes,  in  the  case  of  the
Arahant,  after  which  the  Fourth  Arupa-jhana  occurs
for  two  thought-moments  before  all  activities  of  the  mind
cease.

On  waking  from  trance,  apperception  of  the  Fruition  of
the  respective  Paths  invariably  occurs  for  one  thought-
moment,  with  N i b b a n a as  its  object,  before  the  resump-
tion of  the  stream.  The  difference  between  the  conscious-
ness of  sustained  fruition  and  that  in  the  process  just


72


Death


Philoso-
phy of
death.

Four
causes  of
death


Janaka-

kamuia

presented

to  the

dying

man.


Classes  of
reproduc-
tive

kamma.


described  is  that  Nibbana  is  merely  intuited  in  the
former,  but  partially  enjoyed  in  the  latter,  when  the
person  is  entirely  immune  from  pain.  The  process  is
followed  by  one  of  review,  in  which  one  of  the  first  two  of
the  eight  great  moral  classes  in  the  case  of  the  Non-Keturner,
or  of  the  eight  inoperative  classes  in  the  case  of  the  Arahant,
follows  representative  cognition  before  the  stream  resumes
its  flow.  And  it  is  evidently  in  this  post-cataleptic  medita-
tion that  the  Nibbana-under-present-conditions,  enjoyed
erewhile,  is  remembered.^

I have  described  all  the  possible  varieties  of  mental
experience  in  life,  and  now  come  to  life’s  last  episode.

The  philosophy  of  death  is  no  less  important  to  the
Buddhist  than  the  philosophy  of  life.  In  that  philosophy
Death  is  assigned  to  one  of  four  causes  : (1)  The  exhaustion
of  the  force  of  the  reproductive  (janaka)  kamma  that
has  given  rise  to  the  existence  in  question ; (2)  the  exph  y
of  the  maximum  life-term  possible  to  this  particular
generation;^  (3)  the  combination  of  both  these  causes;
(4)  the  action  of  a stronger  arresting  kamma  that
suddenly  cuts  off  the  reproductive  kamma  before  tbe
latter’s  force  is  spent,  or  before  the  expiry  of  the  life-term.

I have  said  that  either  the  kamma,  or  a symbol  of
it,  or  a sign  of  its  tendency,  i.e.,  his  destiny,  is  presented
to  the  dying  man  (p.  26).  By  kamma  here  is  meant
the  past  efficient  action,  or  reproductive  kamma  which
is  about  to  effect  the  next  rebirth.  It  may  be  either  very
impressive  kamma  (g  a r u k a - k a m m a) ; or,  if  experi-
ence have  afforded  nothing  impressive,  it  may  be  action
proximate  to  death  (a  s a n n a - k a m m a) ; or,  failing  that,
it  may  be  habitual  conduct  (acinna-kamma);  or,  if
that  fail  to  act,  it  may  be  one  of  the  cumulative  reserves
of  the  endless  past  (katatta-kamma).

By  asanna-kamma  is  meant  the  thought  of  the

1 See  Man.  IX.,  § 12.

^ On  ancient  Indian  beliefs  respecting  life-terms  in  different  aeons,
see  Dlgha  NiJcfiya,  ii.,  pp.  3,  4.  — Ed.


Death


73


dying  man  in  a process  immediately  before  the  dying  Asanna-
consciousness  to  be  described.  Hence,  if  k a m m a is
presented  to  the  dying  man,  it  must  necessarily  be  of  the
past,  and  can  therefore  be  presented  only  to  the  mind  as  a
concrete  represented  object.  If  this  k a m m a fails  to
present  itself,  a symbol  of  its  more  impressive  phase
maybe  presented.  By  a kamma-symbol  is  meant  any  Kamma-
sight,  sound,  smell,  taste,  touch,  or  idea  which  obtained  at
the  time  of  the  commission  of  that  k a m m a . The
k a m m a being  past,  its  accompaniments  are,  for  the
most  part,  also  past,  in  which  case  the  symbol  can  only
be  presented  to  the  mind  either  as  an  image,  or  as  an  idea.

It  is  possible  that  this  symbol  of  the  past  is  presented  to
the  mind  as  a vivid  reality.  But  on  certain  occasions,
as  when  a man  dies  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the
objects  accompanying  this  proximate  kamma,  which
is  about  to  effect  the  next  rebirth,  the  symbol  may  be
present,  in  which  case  it  may  be  intuited  in  presentative
consciousness.  In  such  cases  the  dying  consciousness  of
the  present  life,  the  rebirth-consciousness  of  the  next,  and
a few  subsequent  vital  moments,  may  have  a present  object.

With  this  exception,  the  presentation  in  the  next  life  always
partakes  of  the  character  of  the  past.

If  neither  of  these  two  classes  of  presentations  make  Gati-
their  appearance,  then  the  sign  of  destiny  enters  the  field
of  presentation.  This  indicates  the  next  existence  to  be
affected  by  the  reproductive  or  efficient  kamma.

According  to  certain  authorities — e.g.,  the  Atthakatha
— this  last  symbol  is  of  the  nature  of  a presentative  vision
before  the  mind’s  eye.  According  to  the  Ledi  School,  it
may  be  of  the  six  classes  of  objects  respectively  presentable
to  the  six  senses,  including  mind  as  the  sixth  sense,  and  it
may  he  either  present  or  past.  If  past,  it  can  only  he
represented  to  mind.

These  indications  of  the  immediate  future  may  occur
some  time  before  death-consciousness  actually  sets  in,
in  which  case  a careful  observer  beside  the  death-bed
should  take  steps  to  alter  the  nature  of  the  indications


74


Rebirth


Physical
Basis  of
Thought
near
Death.


Change  of
Existence.


Final

Death.


from  bad  to  good.  This  he  may  do  by  influencing  the
thoughts  of  the  dying  man,  so  that  his  good  thoughts  may
now  act  as  the  proximate  kamma,  and  counteract  the
influence  of  the  reproductive  kamma  which  is  about  to
effect  the  next  rebirth.

The  forms  of  consciousness  prior  to  death  are  similar  to
those  already  described  under  cognition  presentative  and
representative  (pp.  27-39),  with  the  distinction  that  apper-
ception here  occurs  only  for  five  thought-moments,  by
reason  of  its  weakness,  instead  of  for  the  usual  seven.
For  this  reason  it  lacks  all  reproductive  power,  its  action
being  merely  regulative  of  the  new  existence.

The  physical  basis  of  dying  consciousness  is  the  material
qualities  born  of  kamma  at  the  seventeenth  moment
reckoned  backward  from  the  moment  of  death.  No
renewal  of  physical  functioning  occurs  after  that  seven-
teenth moment.

Consciousness  of  decease  (cut icitt a)  may  occur  after
the  retentive  phase  (t  a d a r a m m a n a),  or  after  appercep-
tion, in  presentative  or  representative  process  ; or  death
may  occur  after  mere  vital  unconscious  process  following
either  of  those  two  phases,  as  the  case  may  be.

In  the  case  of  those  beings  who  are  about  to  be  reborn
in  the  K a m a - 1 o k a , the  presentation  is  necessarily  of
the  classes  of  Kama-object.  And  the  apperception  may
be  one  or  other  of  the  twenty-nine  Ka m a-classes.  If
this  apperception  be  of  the  twelve  classes  of  immoral  or
bad  consciousness,  the  person  is  bound  to  be  reborn  in
one  of  the  four  planes  of  miserable  existence.^

In  the  case  of  K a m a-beings  about  to  be  reborn  in  the
K u p a - 1 0 k a , the  dying  consciousness  is  of  the  represen-
tative kind,  inasmuch  as  the  kamma  symbol  is  a
concept  (panha tti),  to  wit,  the  conceptualized  after-
image of  the  circle,  etc.

I omit  all  further  allusion  to  the  traditional  Buddhist
beliefs  respecting  the  correlation  between  the  different
stages  of  attainment  in  j h a n a and  different  forms  of
1 See  Man.  L,  § 2 ; V.,  §§  2,  4.


Final  Death


75


consequent  rebirth,  and  -will  conclude  with  a word  on  the
decease  of  an  Arahant,  which  is  final  death.

If  the  Arahant  be  of  the  class  known  as  ‘ dry-visioned  ’
(sukkh  a - vipassaka),^  who  does  not  practise
j h a n a , his  final  death,  which  takes  place  on  the
Kama  -plane,  occurs  after  apperception  or  retention  of
impressions.  And,  as  for  dying  Arahants  in  general,
moments  of  mere  vital  continuum  or  ‘ stream  ’ (bhavan-
g a s o t a)  may  intervene  between  consciousness  and  death.
Apperception  will  be  one  of  the  eight  main  inoperative
kinds  of  consciousness,  and  the  object  of  his  consciousness
will  be  things  ‘ seen  as  they  really  are.’  If  he  be  proficient
in  j h a n a,  final  death  may  occur  (a)  after  sustained
jhana;^  or  (h)  after  apperception  in  subsequent  retro-
spect ; or  (c)  after  the  moment  of  ‘ super-intellectual  ’
knowledge  (abhiiina),®  or,  finally,  (d)  after  retro-
spection following  the  attainment  of  the  Topmost  Fruit.


Such  is  a brief  resume  of  the  inexhaustible  teaching
conveyed  in  and  built  up  around  the  contents  of  the
little  Manual  which  we  are  presenting  to  the  European
reader.  It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  survey  that
Buddhist  psychology  is  complicated  by  the  number  of
distinctions  it  draws  in  the or  elements  of  conscious-
ness, and  is  made  still  more  complex  by  the  variety  of  the
matter  of  consciousness  as  depending  upon  the  planes  of
existence,  the  classes  of  beings,  the  classes  of  conscious
states,  the  classes  of  objects,  and  other  conditions.  Into
the  ancient  traditions  respecting  the  first  two  of  these  last
four  classes  of  material,  it  has  been  impossible  to  enter
here,  nor  would  it  be  advisable.

The  investigation  of  the  circumstances  under  which  each

^ See  above,  p.  55.  Childers  wrote  {Dictionary,  s.v.  Samatho)  :
Vijesinha  told  him,  the  Arahant  of  this  class  ‘ is  so  called  because  he
attains  sanctification  by  contemplating  the  “dry”  facts  of  physical
and  moral  phenomena,  such  as  impermanence,’  etc.— Ed.

2 P;  59.  3 P.  62.


Sukkha-

vipassaka-

Arahant.


Jhana-

lablii-

arahaut.


Conclu-

sion.


76


Conclusion


class  of  consciousness  takes  part  in  this  or  that  experience,
and  of  the  related  modes  in  which  the  several  states  of
consciousness  stand  to  the  object  and  its  surroundings,  and
of  the  related  modes  in  which  the  several  concomitant
mental  elements  in  any  state  of  consciousness  stand  to  one
another,  presents  a very  wide  field  of  study.  I have
indicated,  as  far  as  I could,  the  classes  of  consciousness
that  can  take  part  in  a process  of  human  thought ; but  the
rules  of  sequence  of  states  or  classes  of  consciousness
cannot  be  too  carefully  studied.^

SHWE  ZAN  AUNG.

Eangoon,

July,  1910.

^ We  have  excised  from  this  essay  several  paragraphs  of  matters  too
technically  treated  for  an  introductory  essay.  A few  of  these  will  be
found  in  the  Appendix  (under  javana,  Bhavanga,  etc.),  and  on  p.  220.
—Ed.


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS


PAET  I

Compendium  of  Consciousness

§ 1.  The  Four  Ultimate  Categories.

(1)  Consciousness  as  experienced  in  Kamaloka.

§ 2.  Types  of  Immoral  Consciousness  - - - - 12

§ 4.  Eesultant  Consciousness  (from  past  ill  deeds)  - - 7

Eesultant  Consciousness  (from  past  good  deeds)  - - 8

Inoperative  Consciousness  (as  to  future  result)  • - 3

18

§ 5.  Consciousness  of  the  Beautiful :

§ 6.  Great  Types  of  Moral  Consciousness  - - - 8

Great  Types  of  Moral  Consciousness,  resultants  - - 8

Great  Types  of  Inoperative  Consciousness  - - 8

(2)  Consciousness  as  experienced  in  Eupaloka.

§ 8.  Moral  Consciousness  injhana’s-  - - - 5

Moral  Consciousness  resultants  ofjhana-  - - 5

Inoperative  Consciousness  injhana’s  - - - 5

(3)  Consciousness  as  experienced  in  Arupaloka.

§ 10.  Moral  Consciousness  inarupa-jhana’s  - - 4

Moral  Consciousness  resultants  of  arupa-jhana’s  - 4

Inoperative  Consciousness  in  arupa-jhana’s  - - 4

(4)  Transcendental  Consciousness.

§ 12.  Path-Consciousness  - - - - - - 4

Fruition-Consciousness  - - - - - 4

59

(12  + 18  + 59  = 89)
77


78


-Ihsti'CLct  of  Contents


PAET  II

Compendium  of  the  Mental  Properties

(Concomitants  or  Adjuncts  in  Consciousness)


§ 2.  I.  Common  Unmoral  Properties  - - - - 7

II.  Particular  Unmoral  Properties  - - - 6

III.  Immoral  Properties  - - - - - 14

IV.  Common  Moral  Properties  - - - - 19

V.  Abstinences  - - ' - - - - 3

VI.  Illimitables  - - - - - - 2

VII.  Reason  or  Intelligence  - - - - 1

52

§ 4.  Distribution  of  each  Property.

§11.  Syntheses  of  Properties.


PAET  III

Compendium  of  Particidar  Concomitants  in  Consciousness

§ 2.  Feeling.

§ 4.  The  Six  Special  Conditions,  or  H e t u ’ s.

§ 6.  Function.

§ 8.  Doors.

§ 10.  Objects.

§ 12.  Bases.


PAET  IV

Comp>endium  of  the  Process  of  Cognition

§ 2.  The  ‘ Sixfold  Six  ’ involved  in  Process.

§ 3.  Duration  and  Intensity  of  Sense-Impressions.

§ 5.  Mind-door  Procedure.

§ 7.  Ecstasy  in  Apperception.

§ 9.  Retention.

§ 11.  Duration  in  Apperception.

§ 13.  Kinds  of  Apperceiving  Individuals.

§ 15.  Consciousness  and  Grades  of  Existence.


Absti'act  of  Contents


79


PART  V

Compendium  of  Consciousness  not  Subject  to  Process

§ 2.  The  Four  Eealms  of  Life.

§ 4.  Fourfold  Eebirth.

§ 8.  Fourfold  Karma.

§ 12.  Fourfold  Advent  of  Death.

§ 15.  The  Stream  of  Becoming.

PART  VI

Compendium  of  Matter.  N ihh  a n a

§ 2.  Kinds  of  Material  Quality.

§ 4.  General  Aspects  of  Matter.

§ 6.  Origins  of  Material  Phenomena.

§ 8.  Groups  of  Material  Qualities.

§ 10.  Material  Qualities  in  Kamaloka.

§ 12.  Material  Qualities  in  Eupaloka.

§ 14.  Of  Nibbana.


PART  VII

Compendium  of  Categories

§ 2.  Of  Categories  of  Evil.

§ 4.  Of  Mixed  Categories.

§ 6.  Of  what  pertains  to  Enhghtenment.

§ 8.  Of  the  Whole.


PART  VIII

Compendium  of  Relations

§ 2.  Of  the  Law  of  Happening  by  way  of  Cause.
§ 3.  Of  Aspects  of  the  Law.

§ 5.  Of  the  Three  Eounds.

§ 7.  Of  the  System  of  Correlation.

§ 8.  Of  Mind  and  Body  as  Correlated.

§ 12.  Of  the  more  General  Aspect  of  Eelations.

§ 14.  Of  Pahhatti  and  its  Import.


80


Abstract  of  Contents


PART  IX

Compendium  of  the  Stations  of  Religious  Exercise

§ 2.  Of  Calm.

§ 2a.  Of  the  Suitability  of  Different  Exercises.

§ 3.  Of  Mental  Culture,

§ 4.  Of  J h a n a Exercises.

§ 5.  Of  Supernormal  Intellection.

§ 6.  Of  Insight.

§ 7.  Of  Purity.

§ 10.  Of  Emancipation.

§ 11.  Of  the  Individual.

§ 12.  Of  the  Great  Attainments.


NOTE

In  Pali  pronounce  the  vowels  as  in  Italian,  but  the  unaccented
a like  u in  nut.  All  unaccented  a’s  and  i’s  are  short.  Thus,  the
vowels,  and  cadence,  in  such  a term  as  manodvaravithi,  are
such  as  we  should  use  in  saying : Hullo,  father  sweetie  !

Pronounce  consonants  as  in  English  except  c,  which  always  equals
ch  in  church,  and  g,  which  is  always  hard.  Dotted  dentals  as
palatal,  like  our  own  t and  d;  when  undotted,  they  are  genuine
dentals,  as  in  Italian.  In  a doubled  consonant  detach  the  pair,  as
in  Italian  gat-to,  dam-mi.  In  aspirated  consonants,  let  the  aspirate
be  heard — e.g.,  thin  attha  like  t-h  in  at  home.  N =ng.


References  to  Pali  books  where  the  initial  only  of  title  is  given,  are
to  be  read  as  follows :

D.  = Dlgha  Nihdya  (transl.  in  Dialogues  of  the  Buddha);
M.=Majjhima  Nihdya ;

S.  = Sayyutta  Nihdya  ;

A.  = Anguttara  Nihdya  ;

quoted  by  vol.  and  page  of  the  P.T.S.  editions.  In  the  Milinda  the
pages  of  the  text  are  quoted  in  the  translation.


A COMPENDIUM


OF  BUDDHIST  PHILOSOPHY

HONOUE  TO  THE  EXALTED  ONE,  THE  AEAHANT
BUDDHA  SUPEEME!

PAKT  I

COMPENDIUM  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS
§ 1.  Introductory.

The  peerless  very  Buddha,  with  the  Law
Of  Righteousness  and  the  Fraternity
Of  worth  supreme,  with  reverence  I salute.

Now  will  I speak  in  summaries  concise
Of  things  in  Abhidhamma-lore  contained.

These  things  are  set  forth,  in  their  ultimate  sense,’-
As  Categories  Four — first.  Consciousness ;

Next,  Mental  Properties  ; then  Qualities
Material,  Bodily ; Nibbana  last.

Of  these,  first.  Consciousness  is  fourfold,  to  wit :

1.  Consciousness  as  experienced  in  K a m a 1 o k a.^

2.  Consciousness  as  experienced  in  E li  p a 1 o k a.

^ Paramatthato  is  explained  by  the  Ceylon  Commentator  as
sammutip  thapetva,  nibbattita-paramatthavasena;
— ‘in  the  ultimate  sense  of  things  (springing  into  being  as  facts),  as
abstracted  from  [or  divested  of]  names.’

^ Kamavacarap  cittaij,  etc.  The  first  compound  is  derived
from  kame  avacaratiti : — ‘ that  which  moves  about  in,  haunts,

81  6


82


Of  Consciousness


[PT.  I


3.  Consciousness  as  experienced  in  A r u p a 1 o k a.

4.  Transcendental  (supramundane)  Consciousness.


1.  Of  Consciousness  as  experienced  in  Kamaloka.

Of  these  four,  what  is  consciousness  as  experienced  in
Kamaloka?

§ 2.  Types  of  Immoral  Gonscioxisness.

There  are  eight  classes  of  consciousness  rooted  in  appe-
tite ^ to  wit :

1.  Automatic^  consciousness,  accompanied  by  joy®  and
connected  with  error.^

2.  Volitional  consciousness,  accompanied  by  joy  and
connected  with  error.

3.  Automatic  consciousness,  accompanied  by  joy  and
disconnected  from  error.


frequents  the  kamaloka,’  and  is  applied  to  all  classes  of  k a m a -
consciousness,  whether  of  experience  on  occasion  of  sense-stimulation,
or  of  representative  cognition,  volition,  etc.  Now  kama  is  either
(1)  that  which  desires  (kilmetiti  kamo),  or  that  which  is
desired  (kamiyatiti  kamo).  The  latter  may  refer  to  the
pleasures  derived  from  sense,  or  to  the  eleven  grades  of  Kamaloka
life,  where  such  pleasures  prevail.  And  these  eleven  consist  in  four
infra-human  forms  of  existence — purgatory,  the  animal  world,  etc., —
in  birth  as  man,  and  in  the  six  lower  heavens  of  d e v a s . Hence
there  is  in  Western  languages  no  one  adequate  word  for  kama-
vacara  or  kamaloka,  and  we  have  decided  to  retain  this  and,
for  equivalent  reasons,  the  names  of  the  other  1 o k a ’ s .

1 Lit.,  ‘ accompanied  by.’  In  ethical  treatment,  1 o b h a is  more
usually  rendered  by  greed  or  lust.  See  below  p.  4,  n.  2.  On  these
classes,  see  Dli.  S.,  §§  365  ff. — Ed.

^ In  Dh.  S.,  §§  1,  146,  etc.,  only  the  alternative  classes  are  explicitly
distinguished  as  sasankharena.  The  fact  that  consciousness
may  be  determined  by  another  person,  and  against  the  will  of  the
conscious  subject,  renders  the  term  ‘ voluntary,’  as  usually  opposed
to  ‘ automatic,’  inaccurate  or,  at  best,  misleading. — Ed.

® Somanassa  is  here  of  psychological  import,  meaning  simply
‘pleasurable  feeling excitement.’

^ D i 1 1 h i , often  rendered  by  ‘ opinion,’  which  may  be  and  often  is
erroneous.  Cf.  B,  Psy.,  83,  n.  1.  M i c c h a d i 1 1 h i is  here  implied.
—Ed.


PT.  i]  Classes  of  Kamaloka  Consciousness  83

4.  Volitional  consciousness,  accompanied  by  joy  and
disconnected  from  error.

5.  Automatic  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifl’erence^  and  connected  with  error.

6.  Volitional  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference  and  connected  with  error.

7.  Automatic  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference  and  disconnected  from  error.

8.  Volitional  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference  and  disconnected  from  error.

Next,  there  are  two  classes  of  consciousness  rooted  in
aversion,  - to  wit :

9.  Automatic  consciousness,  accompanied  by  grief  and
connected  with  aversion.

10.  Volitional  consciousness,  accompanied  by  grief  and
connected  with  aversion.

Next,  there  are  two  classes  of  consciousness  rooted  in
nescience,^  to  wit :

11.  Consciousness  accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference
and  conjoined  with  perplexity.^

12.  Consciousness  accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference
and  conjoined  with  distraction.®

^ Upekkha,  here  implying  simply  absence  of  felt  pleasure  or
pain,  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  more  complex  intellectual  and
ethical  upekkha,  which=t  a t r a m a j j h a 1 1 a t a , balance  of
mind,  equanimity.  Introd.  Essay,  p.  14.  Appendix,  U pekkha.

^ Patigha,  repugnance,  a form  of  d o s a , or  hate.  See  B.  Psy.,
p.  109,  n.  2. — Ed.

® M omuhaci  1 1 an i,  confused  or  muddled  consciousness.  ‘Moha’
is  used  by  Buddhist  authors  as  a synonym  of  avijja  (ignorance).
‘ M 0 m u h a ’ is  derived  from  the  intensive  form  of  the  verb
muyhati,  to  be  stupefied.  The  reduplication,  as  in  the  case  of
‘ d e V a d e V o,’  indicates  that  moha,  in  these  two  classes,  acts  with
greater  force  than  the  moha  present  in  the  foregoing  ten  classes  of
consciousness.

^ Or  doubt.  On  this  rendering,  see  B.  Psy.,  115  n. — Ed.

® Uddhacca,  the  state  of  being  distrait,  the  opposite  of  concen-
tration ; rendered  also  by  ‘ flurry  ’ (Dialogues  of  the  Buddha,  i.,
p.  82)  and  ‘ excitement  ’ (B.  Psy.,  p.  119,  n.). — Ed.


84  Of  Consciousness  [pt,  i

These  summed  up  amount  in  all  to  twelve  classes  of
immoral consciousness.

§ 3.  Mnemonic.

Eight  kinds  of  thought  in  Appetite  are  rooted,  two  in
Hate,

And  two  in  Nescience : — twelve  immoral  classes  here  we
state.


§ 4.  Of  Consciousness  without  lietxiC  s.‘^

There  are  seven  classes  of  consciousness  which  are  the
results  of  evil  [done  in  a former  birth],  to  wit :

1.  Consciousness  by  way  of  sight,  accompanied  by
hedonic  indifference.

2-4.  Consciousness  by  way  of  hearing,  smell,  or  taste,
similarly  accompanied.

5.  Consciousness  by  way  of  touch,  accompanied  by
pain.®

6.  Eecipient^  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference.

7.  Investigating®  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference.

^ In  this  translation,  k u s a 1 a and  a k u s a 1 a , where  not  rendered
by  the  more  usual  ‘ good  ’ and  ' bad,’  are  rendered  by  ‘ moral  ’ and
‘ immoral.’  Cf.  B.  Psy.,  Ixxxii.  /. — Ed.

^ Ahetukani  cittani:  — unconditioned  by  one  or  more  of
those  six  radical  conditions  (hetu’s) — greed,  hate,  ignorance,  and
their  opposites — which  prompted  that  conduct  in  a former  birth,  the
result  whereof  is  now  consciously  experienced.  In  these  seven  classes
of  consciousness  only  the  first  three  hetu’s  are  taken.  On  the  term
hetu,  and  on  our  decision  to  retain  it  untranslated,  see  Appendix,
Hetu  ; cf.  Dh.  S. , § 1073  ; B.  Psy.,  285  n.  (dele  there  t h in  a h e t u k a,
1.  3)  ; Dulia-i}atth(lna,  i.,  p.  xii. — Ed.

® On  the  positively  hedonic  nature  of  the  feeling  accompanying
tactile  cognition,  as  compared  with  the  neutral  feeling  in  other  sensa-
tions, see  B.  Psy.,  127,  n.  1.  Cf.  below,  part  hi.,  § 2 ; and  see  also
Introd.  Essay,  p.  14  /.  Appendix,  U pekkha. — Ed.

^ On  these,  I believe,  post-p  i t a k a n developments  in  the  Buddhist
theory  of  Cognition,  see  Introd.  Essay ; Cf.  B.  Psy.,  Ixxxi. — Ed.

S a n t i r a n a is  derived  from  ‘ 1 1 r e t i,’  ‘to  decide,’  which,  accord-


Resultant  Consciousness


85


PT.  l]

Next,  there  are  eight  classes  of  consciousness  which  are
the  results  of  good  [done  in  a former  birth],  and  are  with-
out h e t u ’ s , to  wit :

8.  Consciousness  by  way  of  sight,  accompanied  by
hedonic  indifference.

9-11.  Consciousness  by  way  of  hearing,  smell,  or  taste,
similarly  accompanied.

12.  Conscioussness  by  way  of  touch,  accompanied  by

joy-'

13.  Recipient  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference.

14.  Investigating  consciousness,  accompanied  by  joy.

15.  Investigating  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference.

Next,  there  are  three  classes  of  consciousness  without
h e t u ’ s and  inoperative,^  to  wit :

16.  Consciousness  turning  to^  impressions  at  the  five
doors,* *  accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference.

ing  to  the  Ceylon  Cy.,  is  used  in  the  sense  of  ‘ vimaihsati,’  ‘to
investigate’;  for  judgment  is  not  formed  till  we  come  to  the  vinic-
c h a y a -process,  in  which,  however,  santirana  has  no  place.
See  Introd.  Essay.

1 See  note  3,  p.  82.

2 Kri  y a (or  kiriy  a),  effecting  no  karma.  SeeAppendix,Kr  iy  a.

® A V a j j a n a is  derived  by  Commentators  from  avatteti,  to

‘ turn  towards,’  and  ‘ reflection  ’ is  its  nearest  etymological  equivalent.
This,  however,  is  not  adequate,  for  pahcadvaravajjana  is  never
a phase  of  representative  cognition,  nor  is  manodvaravajjana
conflned  to  purely  representative  cognition.  Anger  is  felt  directly  as  a
mental  presentation.  Hence  the  phrase  ‘ turning  to  ’ has  been  adopted
to  cover  aU  cases.  At  this  stage  the  object  is  not  yet  j^S'i'ceived.  There
is  only  awareness  ; ‘ "What  is  this  ?’  See  Appendix,  A v a j j a n a .

* The  picturesque  analogy  of  the  ‘ door,’  to  indicate  sense-impression,
found  an  unconscious  plagiarist  in  John  Bunyan  and  his  ‘ five  gates  of
Mansoul’  (c/.  B.  Psy.,  liv.  n.  1).  The  translator  opines  that  a theory  of
doors  or  windows,  ‘ through  which  someone  looks  out,’  is  more  com-
patible with  animistic  belief,  and  hence  that  the  metaphor  is  probably
pre-Buddhistic.  There  are,  indeed,  five  dv  ar  a’ s in  the  old  Chandogya
Upanishad  pii.i  13),  but  they  are  ‘doors’  of  the  heart  and  modes


86  Of  Co?iscious?iess  [pt.  i

17.  Consciousness  turning  to  impressions  at  the  mind-
door,  similarly  accompanied.

18.  Consciousness  of  the  genesis  of  jesthetic  pleasure,^
accompanied  by  joy.

These  summed  up  amount  in  all  to  eighteen  classes  of
consciousness  without  h e t u ’ s .

Mnemonic.

From  past  wrong  deeds  seven  kinds  of  thoughts  are  seen,

And  eight,  where  deeds  have  meritorious  been.

Three  bringing  no  result ; — in  all  eighteen.

§ 5.  Of  Thoughts  of  Things  Beautiful.

Some  thoughts  we  have  from  evil  free,  and  free
From  presence  of  the  root^  that  gave  them  growth.
These  are  our  thoughts  of  things  as  Beautiful.

They  number  fifty-nine,  or  ninety-one.

§ 6.  The  Great"  Types  of  Moral  Consciousness.

There  are  eight  classes  of  consciousness  of  a moral  kind
arising  in  Iv  a m a 1 o k a experience,  to  wit :

of  respiration.  (Sankara,  centuries  later  than  the  P i t a k a s , called
‘ the  gate-keeping  d e v a s ’ the  senses) . As  a metaphor  for  the  avenues
of  sense,  the  term  often  occurs  in  the  Pitakas — guttadvaro
(e.p'.,  D.,  i.,  70) — and  in  the  canonical  theory  of  sense  dvar  a is  quoted
{as  a Suttanta  metaphor,  S.  iv.,  194),  Dh.  S.,  § 597  /.  But  there
is  no  positive  evidence  to  show  that  ‘door’  had  become  a technical
psychological  term  before  Buddhaghosa’s  time.  The  discussions  on
sense  in  the  Milinda  and  the  Nettipipaharana  do  not  even  allude  to  the
term.  Our  own  term  ‘ organ  ’ may  be  said  to  have  undergone  a similar
development.  On  the  ‘ mind-door,’  see  Appendix  D h at  u. — Ed.

^ Lit.,  of  mirth,  or  laughter  ; cf.  Part  III.,  § 2;  Part  IV.,  § 15.  On
the  Buddhist  theory  of  the  Beautiful  and  the  Ludicrous,  see  Introd.
Essay,  pp.  ‘2.0  ff.

^ H e t u . ‘ Some  thoughts  ’ are  the  remaming  fifty-nine  classes  of

consciousness,  excepting  the  twelve  immoral  and  the  eighteen  classes
without  h e t u ’ s referred  to  in  the  foregoing  sections.

® Dh.  S.,  §§  1-159.  The  word  ‘maha’  is  usually  prefixed  to
higher  classes  of  Kamaloka  consciousness  to  indicate  a more
extensive  field  of  action


PT.  i]  Mam  Types  of  Kama- Consciousness  87

1.  Automatic  consciousness,  accompanied  by  joy  and
connected  with  knowledge.  ^

2.  Volitional  consciousness,  accompanied  by  joy  and
connected  with  knowledge.

3.  Automatic  consciousness,  accompanied  by  joy  and
disconnected  from  knowledge.

4.  Volitional  consciousness,  accompanied  by  joy  and
disconnected  from  knowledge.

5.  Automatic  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference  and  connected  with  knowledge.

6.  Volitional  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference  and  connected  with  knowledge.

7.  Automatic  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference  and  disconnected  from  knowledge.

8.  Volitional  consciousness,  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference  and  disconnected  from  knowledge.

9-16.^  Next,  there  are  eight  classesof  consciousness,  similar
to  the  foregoing,  which  are  results  of  action  done  in  a former
birth  in  Kamaloka,  and  which  are  accompanied  by
their  h e t u ’ s .

17-24.^  Next,  there  are  eight  classes  of  consciousness
arising  in  Kamaloka,  which  are  accompanied  by  their
h e t u ’ s , but  are  inoperative.

These,  again,  are  similar  to  the  first  eight.

These,  sumjned  up,  amount  in  all  to  twenty-four  classes
of  consciousness  of  moral,  resultant,  and  inoperative ^
kinds  which  arise  in  Kamaloka,  and  are  accompanied
by  their  h e t u ’ s .

Nana-sampayuttag.  Into  this  class  of  consciousness  the
cetasika  (property  or  element,  see  Part  II.)  called  faculty  of  reason
(pahhindriya)  enters  (cf.  Part  II.,  § 2 [vii.]),  giving  the  class  its
specific  character.  Nana  and  panuindriya  are  used  as  inter-
changeable terms  in  this  work.  Cf.  Introd.  Essay,  pp.  40 jf.,  67.

2 D/i.  S.,  § 498.

3 Dh.  S.,  § 566/.


88


Of  Consciousness


[PT.  I


§ 7.  Mnemonic.

In  Kamaloka  consciousness  we  see
Together  with  their  h e t u ’ s^  classes  three.

First  there  is  one  which  merit  brings,  and  then
One  brought  by  previous  merit,  then  again
A class  wherefrom  results  can  never  be.

Divide  these  three  according  as  they  show
Feeling,  and  knowledge,  and  volition" — now
Eight  modes  appear  in  each.  Thus  there  are  found
Twenty-four  classes  to  their  ‘ h e t u ’ s ’ bound.

{Summary  of  K d m al  oka  consciousness.)

‘ Eesultants  : three  and  twenty  kinds  ; a score
Of  kinds  that  good  or  ill  desert  entail ;

Eleven  kinds  that  no  desert  bring.  Four
And  fifty  make  the  Kamaloka  tale.


2.  Consciousness  as  experienced  in  Kupaloka.

% S.  Of  Moral  Consciousness.

There  are  five  classes  of  consciousness  which  are  moral
and  arise  as  E u p a - m i n d,  to  wit :

1.  Moral  consciousness  of  the  first  stage  of  j h a n a

^ S ahetu,  for  sahetuka  ; see  note  on  a -h  e t u kani  eittani,
p.  4,  the  opposite  kind  of  consciousness  in  this  respect.  Of  this  so-
called  sahetuka  consciousness,  the  twelve  classes  ‘ unconnected
with  knowledge  ’ {i.e.,  in  the  twenty-four  above,  classes  2,  4,  6,  8,  10,
12,  14,  16,  and  so  on),  are  said  to  be  accompanied  by  two  of  the  six
hetu’s  — viz.,  disinterestedness  (alobha)  and  love  or  amity
( a d o s a ) . The  corresponding  twelve  ‘ connected  with  knowledge  ’
(1,  3,  5,  7,  and  so  on)  are  said  to  be  accompanied  by  three  hetu’s  —
viz.,  the  two  named,  and  knowledge  or  intelligence  (am  oh  a ) .

2 Sankhara — i.e.,  according  to  Ledi  Sadaw  (p.  26),  pubba-
bhisankharo,  or  ‘ previous  volitional  effort  on  the  part  of  self  or
another. ’ See  Appendix,  Sankhara.

^ P a k a n i , effects  or  resultant  consciousness. — Ed.

^ Eapt  systematized  meditation.  ‘ Jhana  ’ is  another  term  we  have
agreed  to  naturalize,  as  easy  to  pronounce  and  cumbrous  to  translate.
Dll.  S.,  § 167/.  On  Kupaloka,  see  Introd.  Essay,  12,  57. — Ed.


89


PT.  i]  Rupa-Coiisciousness

This  occurs  together  with  initial  application,  sustained
application,^  pleasurable  interest,^  pleasure,^  and  indi-
vidualization. ^

2.  Moral  consciousness  of  the  second  stage  of  j h a n a .
This  occurs  together  with  sustained  application,  pleasurable
interest,  pleasure,  and  individualization.

3.  Moral  consciousness  of  the  third  stage  of  jhana.
This  occurs  together  with  pleasurable  interest,  pleasure,
and  individualization.

4.  Moral  consciousness  of  the  fourth  stage  of  jhana.
This  occurs  together  with  pleasure  and  individualization.

0.  Moral  consciousness  of  the  fifth  stage  of  jhana.
This  occurs  together  with  hedonic  indifference  and  indi-
vidualization.

Next,  there  are  five  classes  of  K u p a 1 o k a conscious-
ness which  are  the  results  of  j h a n a s , to  wit :

6-10.  Eesultant®  consciousness  of  each  of  the  five  stages
of  jhana  characterized  as  above.

Next,  there  are  five  classes  of  Efipaloka  conscious-
ness which  are  inoperative,  ^ to  wit :

11-15.  Inoperative  consciousness  of  each  of  the  five  stages
of  jhana  characterized  as  above.

^ Vitakka  and  vicar  a.  See  Introd.  Essay,  pp.  17,  56,  and
Appendix,  Cetasika.

2 P i t i . On  the  five  phases  of  p 1 1 i , see  Introd.  Essay,  p.  56.

® The  psychological,  and  not  the  ethical,  s u k h a . On  the  difference
between  p 1 1 i and  s u k h a , see  Introd.  Essay,  p.  56  ; also  Appendix,
Cetasika,  Vedana.  Cf.  B.  Psy.,  13,  n.  3.  Other  passages
illustrative  of  sukha  maybe  found  at  A.,  i.,  81,  216  ; Nettipk.,  12.
—Ed.

^ Ekaggata.  This  is  the  element,  in  consciousness,  of  awareness
of  one  object  and  one  only,  because,  by  the  selective  act,  the  mind  is
not  distracted  by  several  different  objects.  Lit.,  ‘ one-pointedness  ’ as
to  object  of  attention  (Ledi  Sadaw,  p.  79).  Buddhists,  equally  with
Mansel  {Metaphysics,  p.  35),  see  in  ‘ an  individual  ’ the  ultimate  object
of  all  consciousness.  On  the  mutual  relation  of  the  factors  of  jhana
and  how  this  develops  into  s a m a d h i , see  Appendix,  Cetasika.

® J.e.,  consciousness  caused  by  the  effect  of  jhana  practised  in  the
immediately  preceding  life.  Dli.  S.,  § 499.

6 Dh.  S.,  § 577.


90


Of  Consciousness  [pt.  i

These,  summed  up,  amount  in  all  to  fifteen  classes  of
Kiipaloka  consciousness,  moral,  resultant,  and  in-
operative.

§ 9.  Mnemonic.

Fivefold  our  thought  on  E Q p a 1 o k a ’ s plane.

E’en  as  fivefold  of  j h a n a is  the  chain.

As  making  merit,  or  as  just  effect,

Or  hringing  none,  gives  fifteen  as  correct.

3.  Consciousness  as  experienced  in  Arupaloka.^

§ 10.  Of  Arupa-jhdna.

There  are  four  classes  of  consciousness  which  are  moral
and  arise  as  A r u p a - m i n d , to  wit :

1.  Moral  consciousness  dwelling  on  the  infinity  of
space.

2.  Moral  consciousness  dwelling  on  the  infinity  of  con-
sciousness.

3.  Moral  consciousness  dwelling  on  nothingness.

4.  Moral  consciousness  wherein  perception  neither  is
nor  is  not.^

Next,  there  a^'e  four  classes  of  consciousness  which  are

1 Dh.  S.,  §§  265-8.

^Ayatana,in  the  Mnemonic  below  alambana  ( = aram-
mana),  ‘ object  of  thought.’  According  to  the  Tika’s,  the  citta
has  as  its  object  the  infinity  of  space  ; the  second  citta  has  as  its
object  the  first  citta  or  vihiiana;  the  third  citta  has  as  its
object  the  yirst  citta  regarded  as  ‘nothing.’  The  object  of  the
fourth  citta  is  consciousness  of  any  kind — s a ii  n a being  a symbolical
or  representative  term — wherein  complete  hypnosis  is  all  but  attained.
Perception  can,  therefore,  be  taken  in  its  older  wider  sense  as  ‘ that
act  whereby  the  mind  becomes  conscious  of  anything’  (Johnson’s
Dictionary).  Buddhaghosa,  commenting  on  the  term  in  the  Malia-
nidana-suttanta  (D.  ii.,  xv.  71),  remarks:  ‘ [one  might  say]  neither
vihiiana  nor  not  vinnana,  as  well  as  neither  s a u u a,  etc.,  so
subtle  and  delicate  is  the  consciousness.’  See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  64  ;
Appendix : A y a t a n a , and  B.  Psij.,  74,  n.  2.  The  use  by  myself  and
others  of  ‘ sphere  ’ for  a,  y a t a n a is  shown  by  the  Tika’s  to  be
misleading. — Ed.


Path-Consciousness


91


PT.  l]

results  of  j h a n a of  similar  kinds  practised  in  the  life
immediately  previous,  to  wit :

5-8d  Kesultant  consciousness  of  each  of  the  four  objects
of  thought  characterized  as  above.

Next,  there  are  four  classes  of  consciousness  which
bring  no  result  and  belong  to  A r u p a 1 o k a , to  wit :

9-12,^  Inoperative  consciousness  of  each  of  the  four
objects  of  thought  characterized  as  above.

These,  summed  up,  amount  in  all  to  twelve  classes  of
Arupaloka  consciousness,  moral,  resultant,  or  in-
operative.

§ 11.  Mnemonic.

Four  kinds  of  mental  object  may  be  sought
In  mind  rapt  in  Arupaloka  thought.

Classed  as  to  merit,  or  as  just  effect,

Or  bringing  ?io«c,  twelvefold  will  be  correct.


4.  Teanscendental  (supeaaeundane)  Consciousness.^

§ 12.  Of  Consciousness  in  the  Paths  and  Fruition.

There  are  four  classes  of  consciousness  which  are  trans-
cendental and  moral,  to  wit  :

1.  Consciousness  belonging  to  the  path  of  Stream-
attainment.

2.  Consciousness  belonging  to  the  path  of  Once-
returning.

3.  Consciousness  belonging  to  the  path  of  Never-
Eeturning.

4.  Consciousness  belonging  to  the  path  of  Arahantship.

1 Dh.  S.,  § 501.  2 § 579.

® Lokuttara,  lit.,  ‘beyond  the  worlds,’  i.e.,  beyond  earth  and
heaven,  or  having  nothing  to  do  with  getting  well-reborn,  except
incidentally,  in  that  such  thoughts  tend  to  expel  the  causes  of  rebirth.
See  Dh.  S.,  § 277  /.  ; B.  Psy.,  pp.  82-97,  where,  to  avoid  the  European
imphcations  in  ‘transcendental,’  I have  used 'the  phrase  ‘Thought
engaged  upon  the  Higher  Ideal.’ — Ed.


92  Of  Conscious7iess  [pt.  i

Next,  there  are  four  classes  of  transcendental  resultant
consciousness,  to  wit :

5-8.^  Consciousness  belonging  to  the  fruition  of  each  of
the  above-named  four  paths.

These,  summed  uj),  amount  in  all  to  eight  classes  of
consciousness,  both  moral  and  resultant,  arising  in  trans-
cendental thought.

§ 13.  Mnemonic.

Four  are  the  Paths,  hence,  four  good  kinds  of  thought.
Four  Fruits,  hence  four  resultant  kinds,  we’re  taught.
Eight  states  in  all,  when  highest  things^  are  sought.

Concluding  Remarks.

There  are  but  classes  twelve  of  consciousness
Known  as  immoral ; classes  twenty-one
Of  moral  consciousness,  and  thirty-six
Resultant  kinds  ; inoperative  kinds
A score : [so  have  I shown  above.]

In  K a m a 1 0 k a,  consciousness  isfour-
And-fifty  fold ; fifteen  alone  are  told
For  E u p a 1 0 k a ; for  A r u j)  a twelve ;

Eight  in  the  Highest  thought.  Thus  eighty-nine,

Or  else  six  score  and  one  we  find  to  be
Classes  of  consciousness  by  seers  discerned.


14.  How  can  consciousness  that  is  analyzed  into  eighty-
nine  come  to  have  one  hundred  and  twenty-one  classes  ?

[By  resolving  each  of  the  eight  kinds  of  transcendental
consciousness  into  five,  thus  obtaining  forty  kinds  in  place
of  eight] :

In  the  path  of  Stream-attainment  there  is  a class  of
consciousness  for  each  of  the  five  stages  of  j h a n a .

In  the  path  of  Once-Returning  there  is  a class  of
consciousness  for  each  of  the  five  stages  of  j h a n a .

1 Dh.  S.,  § 505  /.

2 Anuttarag,*  without  beyond.’ — Ed.


93


PT,  i]  Classes  of  Consciousness

So  for  the  paths  of  Never-Eeturning  and  of  Arahantship,
making  twenty  classes  of  Path-consciousness  in  all.

Similarly  there  are  twenty  classes  of  Fruition-conscious-
ness ; and  these  together  make  forty  classes  of  transcen-
dental consciousness.


§ 15.  Summary.

Distinguishing  the  j h a n a of  each  Path,

As  well  as  stage,  we  multiply  by  five  ;

And  thus  the  thought  that’s  Highest  called  becomes
Increased  to  forty  kinds  of  consciousness.

Whereas  the  K fi  p a 1 o k a consciousness
And  thought  called  Highest  may  be  classed  ’neath  one
And  all  five  modes  of  j h a n a,  to  the  Fifth
Alone  belong  A r u p a 1 o k a thoughts.

Hence  are  revealed  eleven  modes  of  thought
’Neath  every  j h a n a till  the  last,  and  that
Yields  three  and  twenty  ; add  the  thirty-seven
Kinds  meritorious,  and  fifty -two
Eesultant  kinds,  and  thus  six  score  and  one
Classes  of  consciousness  have  Sages  taught.

Thus  ends  Part  I.  in  the  Compendium  of  Philosophy,
entitled  The  Chapter  on  the  Compendium  of  Consciousness.


PART  II


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  MENTAL  PEOPEETIES

§ 1.  Of  kinds  of  Mental  Properties.

Allied  to  thought  are  two  and  fifty  states
Called  Mental  Properties.^  They  rise  and  cease
With  it,  and  share  its  object  and  its  base.

§ 2.  How  {are  they  distinguished)  1

I.  There  are  seven  Mental  Properties  which  are  common
to  every  act  of  consciousness,  to  wit :

(1)  contact  (p  h a s s a)  ;

(2)  feeling  (v  e d a n a) ;

(3)  perception  (s  a n n a) ;

(4)  volition  ^ (c  e t a n a) ;

(5)  individuality®  of  object  (e  k a g g a t a) ;

‘ Cetas'ika,  the  adjectival  form  of  ceto  or  citta,  which  is
translated  by  consciousness,  or  in  the  verses  sometimes  by  ‘ thought.’
In  any  section  of  conscious  experience  the  Buddhist  distinguishes
citta  from  its  concomitants — i.e.,  all  other  mental  factors  or  elements
distinguishable  in  the  fact  of  conscious  or  subjective  experience.  We
shall  first  consider  these  cetasikasas  logically  distinguishable.  On
how  c i 1 1 a = V i h u a 11  a = m a n 0 comes  to  be  logicallij  distinguished
from  the  several  mental  factors  which  combine  to  constitute  a state  of
consciousness  (cittuppada),  see  Introd.  Essay,  pp.  12  ff. ; 39 ; 41 ;
Dh.  S.,  §§  1,  365,  etc.

^ Cetana  is  derived  from  the  causal  verb  c e t e t i , lit.,  to  cause
to  think.  On  the  twofold  functions  of  this  causal  principle  in  thought,
see  Introd.  Essay,  p.  16,  and  Appendix  : Cetana.

^ Why  this  and  ‘ contact  ’ should  be  regarded  as  mental  properties,
see  Introd.  Essay,  p.  14/.


94


95


PT.  ii]  Kinds  of  Mental  Properties

(6)  psychic  life  (j  i v i t i n d r i y a)  ;

(7)  attention  (m  a n a s i k a r a).^

II.  Next,  there  are  six  Mental  Properties  termed  'Par-
ticular (not  invariably  present  in  consciousness),  to  wit :

(1)  initial  application  (v  i t a k k a) ;

(2)  sustained  application  (v  i c a r a) ;

(3)  deciding  (a  d h i m o k k h a) ;

(Jr)  effort  (v  i r i y a) ;

(5)  pleasurable  interest  (piti);

(6)  conation,  desire-to-do  (c  h a n d a).^

Now  these  thirteen  mental  properties  are  to  be  con-
sidered as  being  either  one  or  the  other.^

III.  Next,  there  are  fourteen  immoral  mental  properties,
to  wit :

(1)  dulness  (m  o h a) ;

(2)  impudence  (a  h i r i k a) ;

^ The  translator,  in  his  luminous  and  valuable  discussion  of  the
position  and  function  of  cetasika’sin  Buddhist  psychology  (see
Essay  and  Appendix) , wished  to  extend  the  use  of  ‘ attention  ’ by  apply-
ing it  also  as  ‘initial’  and  ‘sustained’  to  properties  II.  (1)  and  (2).
Our  ‘ attention  ’ exactly  corresponds  to  the  Buddhist  cetasikaas  an
element  in  consciousness.  The  only  flaw  in  its  coming  under  the  second
list  is  that  it  is  hard  to  conceive  consciousness  without  some  sort  of
initial  attention.  Buddhaghosa  defines  I.,  7 as  follows:  Manasi-
kara  means  acting  ( k i r i y ak  a r o ) , making  with  respect  to  con-
sciousness ( m a n 0 ) , making  consciousness  one’s  field  as  if  it  were  a
previous  consciousness.  Manasikara  has  three  modes,  according
as  it  is  concerned^  with  object,  sense-procedure,  or  apperception.  In
the  last  two  it  is  synonymous  with  the  mind  ‘ turning  towards’  sensa-
tion or  idea  respectively  (above,  p.  28).  Here  only  the  first  mode  is
meant,  and  here  it  means  movement  of  mind  confronting  its  object
And  passing  it  on  like  a driver,  to  ivhatever  it  is  connected  withal'
(AsZ.,  133).  Hence  we  may  say  that  Buddhist  analysis  resolves
attention  into  the  constant  element  of  selective,  co-ordinating  con-
sciousness I.  (7),  and  the  variable  element  of  mental  strain  or  tension,
consciously  felt,  and  connoted  by  II.  (1),  (2). — Ed.

- Pakinnaka,  lit.,  scattered  about.

^ Kattukamyata-chanda  is  here  intended.

^ Anuasamana.  That  is  to  say  they  are  purely  psychological
terms  of  un-moral  import,  but  become  moral  or  immoral,  according  as
they  combine  in  a moral  or  immoral  thought.


96


[PT.  II


Of  Mental  Properties

(3)  recklessness  of  consequences  (a  n o 1 1 a p p a) ;

(4)  distraction  (u  d d li  a c c a) ;

(5)  greed  (1  o b h a)  ;

(6)  error  (d  i 1 1 h i) ;

(7)  conceit  (m  ana);

(8)  hate  (d  o s a)  ;

(9)  envy  (i  s s a) ;

(10)  selfishness  (m  a c e h a r i y a) ;

(11)  worry  (k  u k k u c c a)  ;

(12)  sloth  (t  h in  a)

(13)  torpor  (m  i d d h a) ;

(14)  perplexity  (v  i c i k i e c h a).

IV.  Next,  there  are  nineteen  mental  properties  which
are  common  to  all  that  is  [morally]  beautiful,^  to  wit :

(1)  faith  (s  a d d h a) ;

(2)  mindfulness  (s  a t i) ;

(3)  prudence  (h  i r i) ;

(4)  discretion  (o  1 1 a p p a) ;

(5)  disinterestedness  (a  1 o b h a)  ;

(6)  amity  (a  d o s a)  ;

(7)  balance  of  mind  (t  a t r a m a j j h a 1 1 a t a) ;

(8)  composure  of  mental  properties  ^ (kayapas-
s a d d h i) ;

(9)  composure  of  mind  (cittapassaddhi)  ;

(10)  buoyancy  of  mental  properties  (1  a h ut  a)  ;

(11)  buoyancy  of  mind  ;

(12)  pliancy  of  mental  properties  (m  u d u t a) ;

1 Burmese  manuscripts  read  t h i n a ; Sinhalese,  t h I n a . — Ed.

^ Sobhanasadharana.  See  § 8.

3 That  ‘ k a y a ’ here,  meaning  aggregate,  refers  to  the  n a m a -
k a y a as  opposed  to  the  r u p a k a y a , can  be  seen  from  the  following
comment  : Kayo’tti  c’ettha  vedanadi  khandhatta-
y a s s a g a h a n a m.  S.  Z.  A.  This  agrees  with  Buddhaghosa  {Asl.,
150)  : ‘[In  Dh.  S.,  §§  40  ffj\  kaya  means  the  three  khandhas,
vedana,  etc.’  Hence  the  distinction  appears  to  be,  not  so  much
between  sense  and  thought  {B.  Pst/.,  p.  23),  as  between  factors  of
consciousness  and  consciousness  as  a whole. — Ed.


97


PT.  ii]  Kinds  of  Mental  Propeidies

(13)  pliancy  of  mind  ;

(14)  fitness  of  work  of  mental  properties  (k  a m m a fi-

fi  a t a) ;

(15)  fitness  of  work  of  mind ;

(16)  proficiency  of  mental  properties  (pagunnata)  ;

(17)  proficiency  of  mind;

(18)  rectitude’-  of  mental  properties  (u  j u k a t a)  ;

(19)  rectitude  of  mind.

V.  Next,  there  are  three  Abstinences,^  to  wit ;
right  speech,
right  action,
right  livelihood.

YI.  Next,  there  are  the  Illimitables,^  to  wit :
pity,

appreciation.^

These,  together  with  (VII.)  reason,®  in  all  manner  of
division  are  to  be  considered  as  the  twenty-five  morally
beautiful  mental  properties.

§ 3.  Mnemonic.

So  far  we  have  :

[Of  co-efficients]  fifty-two  ; thirteen
As  such  nor  good  nor  had,  but  had,  fourteen.

And  five  and  twenty  lovely  in  act  are  seen.

^ Cf.  B.  Psy.,  25,  n.  1.

2 Virati-yo,  lit.,  dispassion-s.  The  term  is  probably  derived
from  the  formula  of  the  Five  Precepts  ( s 1 1 a ) , ‘ finding  no  pleasure  in
taking  life ’ (panatipata  veramani  sikkhapadag,  or
paHvirato  hoti),  etc.  (B.  Bsy.,  83,  w.  3).  On  the  presence  of
these  as  ‘ properties  ’ among  the  cetasika’s,  see  Appendix  ; Cetasika-
—Ed.

® I.e.,  t-wo  of  the  four  Brahmavihara’s.  The  other  two  are
represented  by  IV.  (6)  amity,  for  m e 1 1 a ; love,  or  ayairri ; and  IV.  (7)
equanimity,  impartiality,  for  upekkha.  See  Pt.  IX.,  § 2 (IV.,  4).
—Ed.

^ M u d i t a is  joy  felt  over  a better  than  one’s  self,  or  over  good  work
done  ; the  congratulatory  or  benevolent  attitude.

® Pannindriya  as  cetasika  is  not  confined  to  the  1 o k u t -
tara-citta’s.


7


98


Of  Mental  Properties  [pt.  ii

Of  these  thought-adjuncts/  as  they  cluster  round
Thoughts  that  arise  in  us,  each  in  its  turn,

The  distribution  henceforth  shall  be  told.

Mnemonic.

First  seven,  linked  with  every  phase  of  thought ;

The  six,  in  this  or  that  phase  must  be  sought ;

The  fourteen  only  with  our  bad  thoughts  mate ;

The  beautiful  on  none  but  fair  thoughts  wait.

§ 4.  In  u'hat  Way  ?

In  the  first  place,  those  seven  universally  common
concomitants  obtain  in  all  the  eighty-nine  modes  of  con-
sciousness.^

Next,  among  the  particular  concomitants  :

1.  Apyilication  arises  in  fifty-five  kinds  of  consciousness,
to  wit :

(i.)  In  all  kinds  of  K a m a 1 o k a consciousness,  with  the
exception  of  the  twice  fivefold  sense-impressions
themselves.®

(ii.)  It  also  arises  in  the  eleven  kinds  of  consciousness
connected  with  the  first  stage  of  j h a n a

2. ^ AtyAication  arises  in  sixty- six  kinds  of  conscious-
ness, to  wit : In  all  the  above-named  fifty-five,  and  also  in
the  eleven  kinds  of  consciousness  connected  with  the
second  stage  of  j h a n a .

3.  Deciding  arises  in  all  kinds  of  consciousness,  with  the
exception  of  the  twice  fivefold  sense-consciousness,  and  of
consciousness  accompanied  by  perplexity.

1 Cittaviyuttanaij,  i.e.,  Cetasika’s.

2 Cituppada  is  literally  a genesis  or  state  of  c i 1 1 a (conscious-
ness), considered  as  constituting  this  or  that  process  of  mind,  but  the
term  here  may  be  taken  as  representing  a class,  kind,  or  mode  of  c i 1 1 a.

3 Twice  fivefold,  as  accounting  for  the  sensations  being  pleasurable
or  painful.  Vitakka,  i.e.,  is  absent  from  the  initial  momentary
flash  of  visual  or  other  sense  impressions,  but  present  in  the  rest  of  the
process  of  sense-cognition.

* See  Pt.  I.,  § 15.  Appendix  : Cetasika  (V  i t a k k a).


99


PT.  ii]  Concomitance  of  Properties

4.  Effort  arises  in  all  kinds  of  consciousness  with  the
exception  of —

(i.)  Consciousness  turning  to  impressions  at  the  five
gates  of  sense.

(ii.)  The  twice  fivefold  sense-cognitions  themselves.

(iii.)  The  act  of  mental  reception.^

(iv.)  The  act  of  investigation.^

5.  PleasuraUe  interest  arises  in  all  kinds  of  consciousness
with  the  excei^tion  of —

(i.)  Consciousness  accompanied  by  grief  or  hedonic
indifference.

(ii.)  Tactile  impressions.®

(iii.)  Consciousness  connected  with  the  fourth  j h a n a .

6.  Desire-to-do  arises  in  all  kinds  of  consciousness,  with
the  exception  of  such  as  are  not  accompanied  by  their
h e t u ’ s and  of  muddle-headed  consciousness.^

Taking  these  particular  concomitants  in  the  order
described,  the  numbers  of  (kinds  of)  consciousness  are  as
follows  :

§ 5.  Mnemonic.

Lacking  these  six  adjuncts,  in  order  given.

Sixty-six,  fifty-five,  eleven.

Sixteen,  seventy,  and  twenty  kinds  we  rate.®

But  fifty-five,  and  sixty-six,  and  eight.

And  seventy,  seventy-three,  and  fifty-one.

And  sixty-nine  : — so  do  the  numbers  run

Of  all  those  classes  of  our  thought

Into  the  udiicli  these  six  adjuncts  are  ivrought.

1 and  ^ Sampaticchana  and  santirana  respectively.  See
above,  Part  I.,  § 4.  The  act  of  investigation  here  is  confined  to  the
object  'presented  to  the  mind,  and  is  therefore  more  or  less  of  a
passive  nature.  See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  28.

^ On  the  theory  of  Touch,  see  Appendix  : Upekkha.

* Chanda  (conation,  or  desire  to  do)  is  akin  to  intention  or  pur-
posive vohtion,  and  a muddle-headed  and  foolish  man  has  no  volition
deserving  the  name  of  purposive.

® I.e.,  classes  of  consciousness.


100


Of  Mental  Properties


[PT.  II


§ 6.  Of  Immoral  Concomitants.

The  four  called  ‘ mental  properties  common  to  all
immoral  consciousness  ’ obtain  in  all  the  twelve  classes  of
immoral  consciousness,  to  wit :

(1)  dulness  ;

(2)  impudence ;

(3)  recklessness  [of  consequences] ;

(4)  distraction.

Greed  obtains  only  in  the  eight  kinds  of  consciousness
given  over  to  appetite.

Error  obtains  in  the  four  kinds  of  consciousness  con-
nected with  erroneous  views.

Conceit  obtains  in  the  four  kinds  of  consciousness  dis-
connected from  erroneous  views. ^

Hate,  envy,  selfishness,  and  these  four  obtain  in

the  two  kinds  of  consciousness  connected  with  aversion.

Sloth  and  torpor  obtain  in  the  five  kinds  of  [immoral]
consciousness  which  are  volitional.^

Perplexity  obtains  only  in  the  kind  of  consciousness  that
is  ‘ accompanied  by  perplexity.’®

§ 7.  Mnemonic.

In  all  demeritorious  thoughts  are  Four
Adjuncts.  In  greed-  h e t u there  are  but  Three  ;
Four,  in  the  hate-  h e t u.  Again,  Two  more
In  thoughts  volitional.  Dubiety,

In  thought  allied  with  doubt.  And  thus  we  see
Fourteen  Bad  Adjuncts  in  Five  ways  are  bound
To  the  Twelve  thoughts  that  are  immoral  found.

1 In  commenting  on  this  to  us  somewhat  paradoxical  statement,
ihe  teachers  refer  to  the  inconstant  association  of  conceit  or  pride
with  such  views,  which  is  made  explicit  only  in  the  Mnemonic,  § 10  : —
‘Pride  sometimes;’  i.e.,  when  a real  superiority  over  others  is  the
cause  of  self-advertisement  and  complacency.  A similar  reminder  is
made  in  the  case  of  ‘ sloth  and  torpor  ’ occurring  in  volitional  con-
sciousness. They  so  occur  when  the  mind  is  unfit  for  work.  On
mana  see  B.  Psy.,  298/.,  n.  3. — Ed.

2 See  above,  Parc  I.,  § 2.

3 Ibid.,  class  11.


PT.  ii]  Morallij  Beautiful  Concomitants


101


§ 8.  Of  \J\[orally'\  Beautiful  Concomitants^

Now  among  the  concomitants  called  [morally]  beautiful,
in  the  first  place,  there  are  the  nineteen  mental  properties
common  to  [morally]  beautiful  consciousness.  These  are
present  in  every  one  of  the  fifty-nine  classes  of  beautiful
consciousness.

Next,  the  three  abstinences  obtain,  always  and  all  at
once,  in  all  cases  of  transcendental  consciousness.  But  in
mundane^  [morally]  beautiful  consciousness,  it  is  only  in
the  [eight  kinds  of]  Kamaloka  moral  consciousness^
that  the  three  are  sometimes  and  severally  apparent.

Next,  the  two  illimitables  spring  up,  sometimes  and
mutually  exclusive,  in  twenty-eight  kinds  of  sublime^
consciousness,  excluding  the  fifth  jhana,  in  the  eight
kinds  of  Kamaloka  moral  consciousness,^  and  in  the
eight  classes  of  consciousness  arising  in  the  Kamaloka-
mind,  which  are  accompanied  by  their  respective  h e t u ’ s,
but  which  are  inoperative.®

^ Sobhana.  My  interpolated  word  in  brackets  is  perhaps  superero-
gatory. But  the  manual  contains  hints  at  a psychological  theory  of
aesthetic  consciousness  indicated  by  words  meaning  literally  ‘ mirth,’
and  not  ‘beauty.’  And  sobhana  is  literally  beautiful.  Cf.  Jat.  ii.,
846,  where  a courtesan  is  called  nagara-sobhana,  ‘ town  beauty..’
I do  not  know  of  any  passage  as  old  as  the  P i t a k a s,  where
the  word  is  explicitly  opposed  to  papa,  ‘evil,’  as  it  is  in  Childers’s
reference  to  Gogerly,  s.v.  S o b h a n o. — Ed.  See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  20.

2 Lokiya,  the  contradictory  of  lokuttara  ‘transcendental,’
and  meaning  ‘ of  the  three  1 o k a ’ s .’ — Ed.

3 See  above.  Part  I.,  § 6.

^ Mahaggatacittesu.  The  Ceylon  Commentaries  explain  this
term  to  mean  those  classes  of  consciousness  that  have  grown  great,  or
become  exalted  or  sublime,  because  of  the  absence  of  the  Hindrances,
etc.  (Vinivaranaditaya  mahattag  gatani),  orby  reason
of  the  excellent  jhana’s  (mahantehi  jhayihi  gatani).
S.  Z.  A.  B.  Psy.,  265,  § 1019,  n.  2.  According  to  Buddhaghosa,  so
termed  because  of  the  ability  (of  such  thinking)  to  resist  vice,  of
abundance  of  good  result,  of  wide  extension,  of  attainment  to  a high
pitch  of  volition,  energy,  thought  wisdom.  Asl.  44. — Ed.

® See  above.  Part  I.,  § 6 (1-8).  ® Ibid.  (17-24).


102


[PT.  II


Of  Mental  Properties

Some  teachers,  however,  say  that  ‘ pity  ’ and  ‘ apprecia-
tion ’ are  not  in  such  consciousness  as  is  accompanied  by
hedonic  indifference.

Next,  reason^  enters  into  combination  with  forty-seven
classes  of  consciousness,  to  wit,  w'itli  twelve  kinds  of  con-
sciousness arising  in  the  Iv  a m a 1 o k a that  are  ‘ connected
with  knowledge,’  and  also  with  all  the  thirty-five  kinds  of
sublime  and  of  transcendental  consciousness.

§ 9.  Mnemonic.

In  nine  and  fifty  kinds  of  thought,  nineteen
Adjuncts  spring  into  birth,  three  in  sixteen,

And  two  in  twenty-eight.  But  reason  shines
In  seven  and  forty  forms.  And  so  the  lines
Binding  the  adjuncts  ‘ beautiful’  in  thought
In  these  four  groups  of  classes  must  be  sought.

§ 10.  Of  Concomitants  as  Essential  and  as  Accidental.

Sometimes  and  sev’rally  appearing  see
Envy,  and  selfishness,  and  worry ; three
Path-factors  ‘ Abstinences  ’ called ; beside
These,  pity  and  appreciation  ; pride
Sometimes  ; so  sloth  and  torpor  too.  The  rest.

If  the  foregoing  thou  rememberest.

Are  NECESSARY  adjuncts  of  our  thought,

[Not  now  and  then  into  our  thinking  wrought.]


Now  all  these  several  parts  I’ll  try  to  fit
Into  a synthesis  where  they  permit.

1 P a n n a . The  Protean  significance  of  this  term,  however  it  be
rendered  in  English,  can  be  seen  from  this  passage.  The  factor  here
combining  with  these  forty-seven  is,  according  to  circumstances,
knowledge  (ie.,  knowing,  not  product  of  knowing),  intellect,  under-
standing, intelligence,  insight,  right  view  or  wisdom  factor  (b  o j j h-
a n g a ).


PT.  Il]


Syntheses  of  Properties


103


§ 10a.  Of  Classes  of  Consciousness  in  Synthesis.

Into  our  highest  thoyight  come  thirty-six,

And  five  and  thirty  into  thoughts  sublime,

And  into  K a m a 1 o k a consciousness
Of  loveliness  and  beauty  thirty-eight.

In  thoughts  demeritorious  thirty-seven.

And  twelve  in  thoughts  that  rise  without  h e t u .
Fivefold  the  synthesis  of  adjuncts  stands.

Duly  assorted  as  they  come  to  pass.


§ 11.  How  (is  it  so)  ?

First  of  all,  in  transcendental  consciousness  there  are
thirty-six  concomitant  states  which  enter  into  combination
with  any  one  of  the  eight  classes  of  consciousness  arising
in  the  first  j h a n a , to  wit,  the  thirteen  immoral  con-
comitants, and  twenty-three  [of  the  twenty-five]  beautiful
concomitants,  omitting  only  the  two  illimitables.^

Similarly,  thirty-five  concomitant  states,  [initial]  applica-
tion being  now  excluded,  enter  into  combination  with  any
one  of  the  eight  classes  of  consciousness  arising  in  the
second  j h a n a .

Similarly,  thirty-four  and  thirty-three  concomitant
states,  application  and  pleasurable  interest  being  succes-
sively excluded,  enter  into  combination  with  any  one  of  the
eight  classes  of  consciousness  arising  in  the  third  and
fourth  j h a n a s respectively.

And  thirty-three  concomitant  states,  hedonic  indiffer-
ence replacing  pleasure,  enter  into  combination  with  any
one  of  the  eight  classes  of  consciousness  arising  in  the  fifth
j h ana.

Thus,  under  all  circumstances,  there  is  only  a fivefold

^ The  two  illiviitables  are  excluded  because  their  object,  which  is-
satta-pahhatti  (the  concept  ‘ mankind  ’)  is  totally  different  from
that  of  transcendental  consciousness — namely,  Nibbana.

Cf,  on  this  B.  Psy.,  83,  n.  3. — Ed.


104


Of  Mental  Properties  [pt.  ii

synthesis  of  concomitants  with  the  eight  kinds  of  transcen-
dental consciousness  corresponding  to  the  five  stages  of
j h a n a.

§ 12.  Mnemonic.

Fivefold  the  synthesis  that  comes  in  highest  plane  of
thought —

From  thirty-six  to  thirty- three,  the  last  ta’en  twice — is
taught.


§ 13.  Of  ‘ Sublime  ’ Consciousness.

Next,  in  sublime  consciousness,  there  are  thirty-five
factors  which  enter  into  combination  with  any  one  of  those
three^  classes  of  consciousness  that  belong  to  the  first
stage  of  j ban  a,  to  wit,  thirteen  un-moral  concomitants,
and  twenty-two  morally  beautiful  concomitants,  the  three
‘ abstinences  ’ being  excluded.^

Here  be  it  noted  that  ‘ pity  ’ and  ‘ appreciation  ’ combine
severally  only.

Again,  the  same  concomitants,  with  the  exception  of
initial  application,  enter  into  combination  with  any  one  of
the  [same]  three  classes  of  consciousness  that  belong  to  the
second  stage  of  j h a n a , and  also  to  the  third  and  fourth
stages,  dropping  in  succession  application,  both  initial  and
sustained,  at  the  third  stage,  and  then  these  two  and
pleasurable  interest  at  the  fourth  stage.

But  in  the  fifteen  classes  of  consciousness  that  belong  to
the  fifth  stage  of  j h a n a , the  two  illimitables  do  not
obtain.

Thus,  reckoning  every  possible  way,  the  combinations
of  concomitants  with  the  twenty-seven  kinds  of  sublime
consciousness  by  way  of  fivefold  j hana  may  be  summarized
under  five  heads.

1 Part  I.,  § 8.  Moral,  resultant,  and  inoperative  consciousness.

2 Because  they  do  not  bear  on  the  object  of  j h ana  practice,  and
they  are  totally  different  in  function  from  j h a n a.  The  function  of
the  three  ‘ abstinences  ’ is  to  purify  act  and  word  either  temporarily  or
permanently,  whilst  the  function  of  j h a n a is  to  purify  the  mind  of
one  who  has  already  had  his  act  and  word  purified.


PT.  Il]


Syntheses  of  Properties


105


§ 14.  Mnemonic.

Groups  of  adjuncts  in  thoughts  sublime  we  find
As  it  may  hap,  on  fivefold  wise  combined  : —
First  thirty-five  the  factors  ; thirty-four  ;

One  less  ; one  less last,  thirty  and  no  more.


§ 15.  Of  Morally  BeautifuO  Consciousness  in  Kdnialoka.

Next,  in  morally  beautiful  consciousness  in  Kamaloka,
in  the  first  place,  there  are  thirty-eight  states,  which  enter
into  combination  in  any  one  of  the^^?'st  two  classes  of  moral
consciousness,^  to  wit,  the  thirteen  un-moral  concomitants
and  the  twenty-five  morally  beautiful  concomitants.

Here  it  should  be  noted  that  the  two  ‘ illimitables  ’ and
the  three  ‘ abstinences  ’ combine  separately.

Similarly,  these  thirty-eight  enter  into  combination  in
any  one  of  the  second  two,  ‘ knowledge  ’ only  being
excluded ; in  any  one  of  the  third  two,  ‘ knowledge  ’ being
included,  but  ‘ pleasurable  interest  ’ being  excluded ; and
in  any  one  of  the  fourth  two,  both  ‘ knowledge  ’ and
‘ pleasurable  interest  ’ being  excluded.

Again,  taking  [the  eight  kinds  of  Kamaloka]  inopera-
tive consciousness,®  and  excluding  the  three  ‘ abstinences,’
those  thirty-eight — now  thirty-five — concomitant  states  are
to  be  reckoned  as  similarly  combining  in  four  different
ways,  in  four  pairs  of  inoperative  classes  of  consciousness.

And  again,  taking  the  eight  kinds  of  Kamaloka
resultant  consciousness,  and  excluding  both  the  two
illimitables  and  the  three  abstinences,  those  thirty-eight —
now  thirty-three — concomitant  states  are  to  be  reckoned

1 See  above,  § 8,  n.  1.

2 I.e.,  of  the  eight  moral  classes,  Part  I.,  § 6.  By  the  ‘first  two,’
the  ‘ second  two,’  etc.,  is  to  be  understood  both  the  automatic  and
the  volitional  of  each  pair.

3 Part  I.,  § 6.


106  Of  Mental  Properties  [i’t.  ii

as  similarly  combining  in  four  different  ways  in  four  pairs
of  resultant  kinds  of  consciousness.

Thus,  reckoning  every  possible  w’ay,  the  combinations  of
morally  beautiful  concomitants  in  pairs  with  the  twenty-
four  morally  beautiful  classes  of  K a m a 1 o k a consciousness
may  be  summarized  under  twelve  heads.

§ 16.  Mnemonic.

In  K a m a 1 0 k a , when  to  h e t u ’ s bound
Thought  rises,  if  to  merit  it  redound.

Or  is  resultant,  or  works  nothing,  aye
The  adjuncts  rise  with  it  in  many  a way  ; —

On  thoughts  of  moral  beauty  thirty-eight.

Twice  thirty-seven,  and  thirty-six  await.

In  thought  inoperative  joined  we  see
Of  adjuncts  thirty-five,  twice  thirty-four.

And  thirty-three.  In  thoughts  resultant,  three
And  thirty,  and  twice  thirty-two,  once  more.
Thirty-one  adjuncts  may  commingled  be.

In  thoughts  inoperative,  and  exalted  thought
The  adjuncts  three  called  abstinence  may  ne’er  be
sought.

The  four  illimitables  come  not  into  mind
Transcendent ; neither  them  nor  the  three  former  find
In  thought-resultants  of  the  Kamaloka  kind.

In  highest  consciousness  the  j h a n a stages  show
Distinctive,  and  where  thoughts  at  medium’-  level  flow.
Here  too  th’  illimitables,  and  on  lower  plane,

With  threefold  abstinence  and  knowledge  they  again.
With  pleasurable  interest,®  distinction  gain.

^ The  J.P.T.S.  text  has  majjhime  for  m a hag  gate,  a term
used  in  such  comparisons  in  Dlis.,  e.g.,  §§  1025-7. — Ed.

Majjhime,  however,  is  the  correct  reading  both  according  to  the
Burmese  Text,  and  according  to  metre. — S.  Z.  A.

^ Eeferring  to  the  twenty-four  beautiful  classes  of  consciousness  in
K a m a 1 o k a.

3 See  Part  II.,  § 2.


PT.  Il]


Syntheses  of  Properties


107


§ 17.  Of  Immoral  Consciousness.

No’^’,  in  immoral  consciousness,  in  the  first  place,  there
are  nineteen  concomitant  states  which  enter  into  combina-
tion with  any  one  of  the  first  automatic  class  in  the  eight
kinds  of  consciousness  called  appetitives,’^  to  wit,  the
thirteen  unmoral  concomitants,  and  the  four  common
immoral  concomitants,  making  seventeen,  to  which  add
greed  and  error.

In  like  manner  with  the  second  automatic  class,  the
same  seventeen  concomitants  combine,  together  with  greed
and  conceit.

In  like  manner  with  the  third  automatic  class,  the  same
seventeen  concomitants  combine  with  the  exception  of
pleasurable  interest,  but  together  with  greed  and  error,
giving  eighteen  in  all.

In  like  manner  with  the  fourth  automatic  class,  omitting
pleasurable  interest,  but  adding  greed  and  conceit.

But  with  the  fifth  automatic  class  which  is  connected
with  aversion,  to  the  seventeen  foregoing  concomitants
[of  the  first  class]  add  hate,  envy,  selfishness,  and
worry,  and  from  them  omit  pleasurable  interest,  thus
making  twenty  concomitants  combining  with  that  fifth
class.

But  of  those  four,  envy,  selfishness,  and  worry  can  only
combine  separately.

In  like  manner  with  the  five  corresponding  volitional
classes  of  the  twelve  kinds  of  immoral  cognition,  the
foregoing  combinations  of  concomitants  obtain,  with  this
difference,  that  sloth  and  torpor  must  be  included.

Excluding  desire-to-do  and  pleasurable  interest,  eleven
unmoral  and  the  four  common  immoral  concomitants,
fifteen  states  in  all,  are  associated  with  that  class  of
consciousness  which  is  accompanied  by  distraction.^

^ Literally,  in  the  greed-rooted  (kinds  of  consciousness).  See
Part  I.,  § 2. — Ed.

2 See  Part  I.,  § 2 (12).


108


Of  Mental  Properties  [pt.  ii

In  like  manner  •with  that  class  of  consciousness  accom-
panied by  perplexity,  fifteen  concomitants,  deprived  of  the
element  of  ‘ deciding,’  but  accompanied  by  perplexity,  com-
bine well.

Thus,  all  being  reckoned  up,  there  is  a sevenfold
synthesis  of  concomitants,  numerically  considered,  com-
bining in  the  twelve  kinds  of  immoral  consciousness.

§ 18.  Mnemonic.

With  evil  thoughts  of  classes  manifold

The  blend  of  adjuncts  ’neath  seven  heads  is  told : —

Nineteen,  eighteen,  and  twenty — one  to  three;

Then  twenty-one  and  twenty  [as  you  see]  ;

And  twenty-two  and  fifteen  : — these  the  seven.

Only  to  fourteen  adjuncts  is  it  given

With  every  thought  of  wrong  to  be  in- wrought.

These  are  the  four  common  to  all  bad  thought.

And  ten^  besides — [these  must  above  be  sought].


§ 19.  Of  Unmoral  Consciousness.

Lastly,  in  consciousness  not  accompanied  by  h e t u ’ s ,
there  are  twelve  of  the  thirteen  unmoral  concomitants,
desire-to-do  being  excluded,  which  enter  into  combination,
in  the  consciousness  of  aesthetic  pleasure.

Thej’’  combine  also  in  the  consciousness  of  determining,^
pleasurable  interest  being  excluded  as  well  as  desire-to-do  ;
and  again  with  the  consciousness  of  investigation  with
pleasure,  eft’ort  being  excluded  as  well  as  desire-to-do.

They  combine  also  with  the  triple  faculty  of  apprehen-
sion,^ and  with  the  dual  process  of  ‘ rebirth-conscious-

^ J.e.,  with  the  exception  of  chanda,  piti  and  adhimokkha
from  the  thirteen  unmoral  concomitants.

2 Votthabbane,  (Sinh.  MSS.  : votthappane),  fixing,
assigning  impressions,  the  stage  before  ‘ apperception.’  See  below.
Part  III.,  § 4,  and  also  Introd.  Essay,  p.  28. — Ed.

2 The  triple  faculty  of  apprehension  (m anodhatu)  comprises
the  mind  ‘ turning  towards  ’ stimuli  (pahcadvaravajj  ana),  and


PT.  ll]


Syntheses  of  Pi'operties


109


ness, which  is  not  accompanied  by  its  beta’s.  Here
desire  - to  - do,  pleasurable  interest  and  effort  are  ex-
cluded.

Lastly,  they  combine  with  the  twice  five^  groups  of
sense-cognitions ; here,  however,  all  the  ‘ particular  ’ con-
comitants must  be  excluded.

Thus,  all  being  reckoned  up,  the  synthesis  of  con-
comitants numerically  considered,  combining  with  the
eighteen  classes  of  consciousness  not  accompanied  by  their
beta’s,  consists  of  four  groups.


§ 20.  Mnemonic.

Adjuncts,  that  blend  with  eighteen  kinds  of  thought
Not  bound  to  the  six  hetu’s  we  have  brought
Under  four  heads,  thus  : Twelve,  eleven,  and  ten,
And  seven — such  is  the  synthesis.  Again,

The  seven  adjuncts  that  are  common  mix
With  all  those  eighteen.  As  conditions  fix.

Combine  the  others.  Now  in  detail  you  see
Adjuncts  in  summaries  of  thirty-three.^


the  two  recipient  elements  (sampaticehana’s),  capable  of  taking
part  only  in  a presentative  (but  never  in  a representative)  cognition
with  any  one  of  the  five  sensibles  as  their  object.

^ The  two  classes,  of  rebirth-consciousness  are  the  two  classes  of
consciousness,  which  have  been  designated  in  Part  I.  as  u p e k k h a -
santirana  (investigating-consciousness  with  hedonic  indifference).
It  will  always  remain  a puzzle  to  Occidentals,  why  this  particular
class  should  be  active  at  rebirth.  It  will  be  seen  from  Part  III.  that
it  is  capable  of  performing  five  different  functions,  and  is  therefore
entitled  to  five  different  designations  corresponding  to  each  function.
As  an  individual  person  may  be  at  once  a poet,  a philosopher,  and  a
politician,  even  so,  says  the  Buddhist,  one  class  of  consciousness  may
function  on  different  occasions.

^ See  above,  § 4,  n.  3.

3 Namely,  in  § 12,  5 ; in  § 14,  5 ; in  § 16,  12  ; in  § 18,  7 ; in  § 20,
4=33.


110


[PT.  II


Of  Mental  Properties

Thus  have  we  come  to  know  the  summary
And  methods  of  the  mind’s  concomitants.
Thence  have  we  found  it  easier  to  explain
How  to  divide  and  classify  our  thought.


Thus  ends  the  Second  Part  in  the  Compendium  of
Philosoph}^  entitled  the  Chapter  on  the  Compendium  of
the  Mental  Properties  of  Consciousness.


PART  III


COMPENDIUM  OF  PAETICULAR  (CONCOMITANTS  OP
CONSCIOUSNESS).

§ 1.  Introductory.

In  thought  and  its  concomitants  we  may
Distinguish  three  and  fifty  states  of  mind,

Combined  this  way  and  that  as  is  their  law.

Hereof,  let  us  now  make  the  summary
By  way  of  thoughts  only  as  they  arise,

Treating  of  feeling,  and  of  h e t u ’ s six.

Of  thought  as  having  ‘ function,’  sprung  from  ‘ doors,’
As  having  ‘ objects,’  and  material  ‘ base,’

And  as  is  fit  ^ bear  all  in  memory.


§ 2.  Of  Feeling.

Summarizing  feeling,  in  the  first  place,  feeling  is  three-
fold— it  is  pleasant,  painful,  and  neither  [or  neutral].  Or,
again,  it  may  be  divided  into  five^ — pleasure,  pain,  joy,
grief,  and  hedonic  indifference.

1 Yatharahag.  This  term,  often  rendered  below  as  ‘ according
to  circumstances,’  means  that  the  learner  should  study,  summarize,
and  commit  to  memory  (1)  h e t u ’ s , with  reference  to  sahetuka
consciousness  ; (2)  ‘ doors,’  with  reference  to  those  classes  of  conscious-
ness arising  through  them;  (3)  ‘ bases,’  with  reference  to  those  classes
other  than  Arfipaloka  thoughts  which  are  without  ‘ bases  ’;  (4)  feel-
ing, function,  and  objects,  with  reference  to  all  classes.

2 Spoken  of  as  the  indriya  - divisions,  i n d r i y a meaning  con-
trolling power  or  faculty’.  Sarjyutta-Nikdya  : v.,  207 /.  (Indriya-
S a p y u 1 1 a).  Of.  B.  Psy.,  Ivii.,  Iviii.

Ill


112  Of  Particular  Concomitants  [pt.  hi

Here,  among  sense-impressions,  which  are  the  result  of
moral  deeds  [done  in  a former  birth],  there  is  only  one
kind  that  is  accompanied  by  pleasurable  feeling,  and  that
is  tactile  impressions^  Likewise  there  is  only  one  kind  of
those  sense-impressions,  due  to  immoral  deeds  [done  in  a
former  birth],  that  is  accompanied  by  painful  feeling,  and
that  again  is  tactile  impressions.

Now  there  are  sixty-two  kinds  of  consciousness  which  are
accompanied  by  joy,  to  wit :

(d)  The  [eighteen  classes  of  k a m a 1 o k a]  consciousness
which  are  ‘ accompanied  by  joy’ — i.e.  :

four  of  the  eight  appetitives  f

twelve  of  the  Kamaloka  morally  beautiful  kinds  of
consciousness

the  two  : — pleasurable  investigation  and  {esthetic
pleasure.^

{h)  The  forty-four  classes  of  ‘ sublime  ’ and  transcen-
dental consciousness,^  termed  first,  second,  third,  and
fourth  j h a n a .

But  the  thoughts  accompanied  by  grief  are  the  only  two
classes  of  consciousness  ‘ connected  with  aversion.

All  the  remaining  fifty-five  kinds  of  consciousness  are
accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference.

^ See  above,  Part  I.,  §4.  Kayika-sukha,  bodily  pleasure  and
Kayika  - dukkha,  bodily  pain,  are  here  intended.  The  remain-
ing modes  of  psychical  s u k h a and  dukkha  are  c e t a s i k a or
manasika  (mental  pleasure  and  pain ) .

2 Part  I.,  § 2 (the  first  four).

^ Part  I.,  § 6.

^ Part  I.,  § 4.  Soman  as  sa,  ‘joy/  1®  sukha,  ‘pleasure.’  plus
excitement.  The  ethical  sukha,  ‘ happiness,’  and  dukkha,  misery
or  ‘ ill,’  are  not  meant  here.

5 Part  I.,  §§  8-12.

6 Part  I.,  § 2.


PT.  Ill]


Of  the  Six  Conditions


113


§ 3.  Mnemonic.

Pleasure,  pain,  and  neutral  feeling — aspects  of  sensation^
three,

Fivefold,  if  in  these  distinguished  [two  more] — joy  and
sorrow — be  ;

Pleasure  in  one  thought  is  known,

Pain  lies  too  in  one  alone.

Grief  in  twain,  but  glad  emotion  mated  is  to  sixty-two.

And  indifference'^  may  itself  in  five  and  fifty  thoughts
renew.


§ 4.  Of  the  Six  Conditions  called  H etu’ s.

Summarizing  the  h e t u ’ s : these  appear  as  six,  to  wit,
greed,  hate,  ignorance  [or  dulness],  disinterestedness,
amity  and  intelligence.®

Now,  there  are  eighteen  kinds  of  consciousness  which  are
not  conditioned  by  any  of  these  six — namely,  five-door
apprehending,^  the  twice  fivefold  sense-impressions,  receiv-
ing, investigating,  determining,  and  aesthetic  pleasure.

All  the  remaining  seventy-one  kinds  of  consciousness
are  conditioned  by  those  six  h e t u ’ s . ®

Of  these,  again,  the  two  classes  of  ignorant  [or  dull]
consciousness®  are  conditioned  by  one  only  of  the  h e t u ’ s .

The  remaining  ten  classes  of  immoral  consciousness,  and
twelve  of  the  K a m a 1 o k a morally  beautiful  classes  of  con-

^ Spoken  of  as  anubhavana  - division,  anubhavana  mean-
ing ‘ feeling,’  ‘ enjojing.’

2 The  hedonic  u p e k k h a , and  not  the  intellectual  t a t r a m a j -
jhattatupekkha,  balance  of  mind,  mental  equipoise,  is  here
meant.

2 A m o h a is  another  term  used  by  Buddhist  v^riters  as  a synonym
of  p a h h a , the  pahuindriya-cetasika  being  here  mtended,
or  constant  element  in  all  intellectual  functioning.

^ Part  I.,  § 4,  Class  16.

® That  is,  appear  in  consciousness  together  with  one  or  more  of  the
six. — Ed.

6 Part  I.,  § 2.


8


114


Of  Particular  Concomitants  [pt.  hi

sciousness,  which  are  disconnected  with  knowledge,  together
make  twenty-two  kinds,  conditioned  by  two  of  the  h e t u ’ s 4
Again,  forty-seven  classes  of  consciousness  are  bound  up
each  with  three  ^ of  the  h e t u ’ s , to  wit,  twelve  classes  of
Kamaloka  morally  beautiful  consciousness  which  are
connected  with  knowledge,®  and  thirty-five  sublime  and
transcendental  kinds  of  consciousness.

§ 5.  Mnemonic.

Greed,  hate,  dulness — these  of  acts  immoral  are  the
h e t u ’ s three ;

Their  opposites,  of  acts  both  good  and  indeterminate,
h e t u ’ s be.

Not  bound  to  these  are  eighteen  thoughts  ; two  thoughts
by  one  alone  are  driven ;

Two  h e t u ’ s govern  twenty-two  ; from  h e t u ’ s three
spring  forty-seven.

§ 6.  0/  Function,

In  summarizing  functions  (we  find)  fourteen  of  these,
to  wit :

(1)  rebirth  (3)  apprehending;®

(2)  life-continuum (4)  seeing  ;

1 The  eight  appetitive  classes  are  bound  up  with,  or  conditioned  by,
the  tivo  h e t u ’ s,  greed  and  ignorance  ; the  two  classes  of  conscious-
ness connected  with  aversion  are  bound  up  with  the  two  hetu’s,
hate  and  ignorance  ; and  the  twelve  classes  of  Kamaloka  morally
beautiful  classes  disconnected  with  knowledge,  are  conditioned  by  the
two  hetu’s,  disinterestedness  and  amity.  Cf.  pp.  91  and  92.

2 Namely,  disinterestedness,  amity,  and  intelligence.

® That  a m 0 h a,  of  which  the  pahhindriya-cetasika  is  the
psychical  ultimate,  should  be  found  in  classes  connected  with  know-
ledge shows  that  amoha,  pahha,  and  n a n a,  refer  to  one  and  the
same  adjunct  of  consciousness.

■^Patisandhi  is,  philosophically  speaking,  confined  to  the
momentary  mental  function  at  the  initial  moment  of  reconception.
In  popular  language  it  includes  reconception,  embryonic  growth,  and
rebirth.

® Bhavanga.  Unconscious  life  comparable  to  Leibniz’s  ‘state
of  obscure  perception,’  not  amounting  to  consciousness,  in  dreamless
sleep.  See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  9.

® A V a j j a n a.  See  p.  5,  n.  4.


PT.  Til]


Of  Function


115


(5)  hearing;

(6)  smelling ;

(7)  tasting;

(8)  touching ;

(9)  receiving ;


(10)  investigating ;

(11)  determining ;

(12)  apperceiving

(13)  retention


(14)  re-decease.®


But  if  we  classify  these  fourteen  functions  hy  way  of
‘ stage ’ (t  h a n a),  then  the  category  of  stages  must  be
considered  as  tenfold.'^

[Eegarding  consciousness  under  the  aspect  of  function,
we  may  distinguish]  :

{a)  Nineteen  classes  of  consciousness  functioning  at
rebirth,  during  life-continuum  and  at  re-decease,  to  wit :

(i.)  tico  classes  of  investigation-consciousness  accom-
panied by  hedonic  indifference.

(ii.)  eight  great  classes  of  resultants.®

(hi.)  }ii}ie  resultants  in  Riipaloka  and  A r u p a -


1 0 k a.®


{h)  Two  classes  of  consciousness  functioning  by  way  of
the  impressions  called  ‘ turning  towards  ’ [the  sense-
stimulus].

^ On  (8)-(12)  see  Introd.  Essay,  p.  28/.

Tad-arammana,  ortad-alambana  (both  forms  occur  in
the  manual),  meaning,  literally,  ‘ f/jat-object  ’ is  the  curious  scholastic
term — apparently  not  found  prior  to  Buddhaghosa — for  the  final
phase  in  the  registration  of  impression  by  way  of  sense.  That  object
tvMch  has  been  just  apperceived,  if  vivid  enough,  reaches  this  stage.


—Ed.


® Cuti,  ht.,  ( falling, ’ co-incident  etymologically  with  the  English
rendering. — Ed.

Than  a,  lit.,  ‘place’  or  ‘occasion.’  It  is  pretty  clear,  from
the  fact  that  the  only  difference  between  k i c c a (function),  and
thana  (stage)  lies  in  five  senses,  or  a fivefold  sense,  that  the  mean-
ing is  : — the  five  senses  having  the  same  mental  status  form  only  one
distinctive  class.  Only  one  at  a time  can  take  part  in  a process  of  pre-
sentative  cognition.


5 See  p.  87  (9-16).

® Dhs.,  §§  499-504.


116


Of  Particular  Concomitants  [pt.  hi

(c)  Two  classes  of  consciousness  functioning  in  each  of
the  five  senses  and  in  [the  mental]  reception  of  impres-
sions.

(d)  Three  classes  of  consciousness  functioning  by  way  of
investigation.

‘ Mind-door  ’ cognition^  alone  performs  the  function  of
determining  [or  fixing]  the  sense-impression  at  the  ‘ five-
doors.’

(e)  Fifty-five  classes  of  consciousness  functioning  in
apperception,  to  wit,  fifty-five^  modes  of  moral,  immoral,
fruitional,^  and  inoperative  consciousness,  not  counting  the.
two  in  {h).

(/)  Eleven  classes  of  consciousness  in  the  retentive
function,  to  wit,  the  eight  great  resultants,^  and  the  three,
modes  of  investigation.


[Now  a class  of  consciousness  may  perform  one  or  more
functions  :]

(i.)  [What  is  ordinarily  called]  ‘ investigation-conscious-
ness accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference  ’ may  perform
five  functions — i.e.,  it  may  be  active  at  rebirth,®  during  the
life-continuum,  at  re-decease,  in  retention  and  in  investiga-
tion itself.

(ii.)  The  Eight  main  resultants  may  perform  four
functions — i.e.,  they  may  be  active  at  rebirth,  during  the
life-continuum,  at  re-decease,  and  in  retention.

^ The  manodvaravajjana.  Class  17  in  Part  I.,  § 4.  This
class  receives  the  name  of  votth^'bbana,  when  it  takes  part  in  a
presentative  cognition,  and  determines  the  sense-impression  (already
investigated)  for  apperception.

^ Namely,  21,  12,  4,  and  18=55.

® P h a 1 a,  not  v i p a k a.

* Dlis.,  § 498.

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  investigation-consciousness  investi-
gates its  object  at  rebirth.  See  p.  109,  n.  1.  This  particular  class  of
consciousness  is  simply  active  as  rebirth-consciousness  connecting
the  two  consecutive  existences.  None  of  the  classes  of  consciousness
can  perform  more  than  one  function  at  a unit  of  time.


117


PT.  Ill]  Of  ‘ Doors  ’ ( Organs)

(iii.)  The  Nine  resultant  sublime  classes  may  perform
three  functions — i.e.,  they  may  be  active  at  rebirth,  during
the  life-continuum,  and  at  re-decease.

(iv.)  [What  is  called]  ‘ investigation-consciousness  accom-
panied by  joy  ’ may  perform  two  functions — i.e.,  it  may  be
active  both  in  investigation  and  in  retention ; and  again
determining  consciousness  may  be  active  in  determining
and  by  way  of  ‘ turning  to  ’ impressions.

(v.)  All  the  remaining  kinds  of  consciousness  can  per-
form only  a single  function.  They  are  the  [fifty-five]
apperceptions,  the  triple  element  of  apprehension,^  and  the
twice  five  kinds  of  sense-cognition,  each  cognition  function-
ing simply,  as  it  comes  to  pass.

§ 7.  Mnemonic.

If  thoughts  uprising  ’neath  aspect  of  function  be  divided, —
Rebirth,  life-process,  and  the  rest, — fourteen  we  find  pro-
vided.

Or  ten, 2 if  ‘sense,  in  rank,  to  count  as  one’  shall  be
decided.

[As  functional,®  each  class  of  thought  has  various  work
to  do  : — ]

Single,  double,  triple  function,  fourfold,  fivefold,  too.

Eight  and  sixty  single,  double  two,  and  triple  nine.
Quadruple  eight,  quintuple  two  : — the  functions  thus  assign.


§ 8.  Of  Doors  {or  Organs).

In  the  summary  of  doors,  ‘ door  ’ is  the  name  given  to
six  organs,  to  wit,  eye-door,  ear-door,  nose-door,  tongue-
door,  body-door,  and  mind-door.

^ Manodhatu,  includes  five- door  cognition,  and  the  two  modes
of  reception  in  (c)  § 6,  latter  clause.  See  p.  108,  n.  3,  and  see  p.  122.

^ I.e.,  ten  t h a n a ’ s or  stages.

3 The  Commentaries,  in  discussing  the  latter  of  the  two  summaries
in  § 6,  use  the  term  kiccavantani,  functionaries  or  functionals,
to  denote  c i 1 1 a n i considered  as  functioning,  or  having  k i c c a.


118


Of  Particular  Coiicomitants  [pt.  hi

Here  the  eye  is  just  the  eye-door ; and  so  for  the  ear-
door  and  the  next  three.  But  the  life-continuum  itself
may  be  described  as  the  mind- door.’-

Of  these  organs,  through  the  first,  the  door  of  sight,
forty-six  classes  of  consciousness  take  their  rise,  according
to  fitness  [in  subject  and  object],^  to  wit :

%

(a)  five-door  cognition ;

(5)  visual  cognition  ;

(c)  reception ;

(d)  investigating ;

(e)  determining ;

(/')  K a m a 1 0 k a apperception  ;

(p)  retention.^

So  for  the  next  four  ‘ doors.’

And  when  all  are  reckoned,  there  are  fifty-four  kinds  of
Kamaloka  consciousness  which  take  their  rise  through
the  five  ‘ doors.’

But,  by  way  of  the  mind-door,  sixty-seven  kinds  of  con-
sciousness come  to  pass,  to  wit,  mind-door  consciousness,*
tke  fifty-five  kinds  of  apperception,  and  retention.

There  are  nineteen  kinds  of  consciousness,  which  are
free,  in  functioning,  from  any  ‘ door  ® those,  namely,
which  are  active  at  rebirth,  during  the  life-continuum,  and
at  re-decease.

Of  those,  on  the  other  hand  [which  take  their  rise

^ How  and -why  bhavanga  came  to  be  regarded  as  mind-door,
see  Introd.  Essay,  p.  10.

2 The  Ceylon  Commentary  (Abhidhammattha  - Vibha-
V a n !)  explains  this  yatharahap  as  follows:  ‘According  as
the  object  is  agreeable  or  not ; as  that  object  is  properly  attended  to
or  not  ; and  as  the  percipient  is  an  Arahant  or  not,  etc.  Ledi
Sadaw  explains  the  same  by ‘According  to  the  object,  the  plane  of
existence,  the  subject,  attention,’  etc.

^ Annotators  make  up  the  46  thus  : — (a),  1 ; (6),  2 ; (c),  2 ; (d),  8 ;
(e),  1;  (/),  29;  and  (ff),  8.

^ Manodvaravajjan  a = Class  17,  Part  I.,  § 4.

® Lit.,  ‘ door-freed.’  See  Introd.  Essay,  pp.  9,  25.


119


PT.  Ill]  Of  Object

through  doors],  thirty-six  kinds  of  consciousness  come  to
pass  through  one  door,  according  as  there  is  mutual  fitness,
to  wit,  the  [twice]  five  classes  of  sense-consciousness,
sublime,  and  transcendentah  apperceptions.

The  triple  element  of  apprehension  comes  to  pass  through
[any  one  of]  five  doors.

Investigation  accompanied  by  pleasure,  determining  con-
sciousness and  K a m a 1 0 k a apperceptions  are  cognitions
happening  through  six  doors.^

Investigation,  which  is  accompanied  by  hedonic  indiffer-
ence, and  the  main  resultant  classes  of  consciousness
happen  either  by  way  of  the  six  doors,  or  are  independent
of  any  door.^  Eesultant  sublime  cognitions  are  always
independent  of  any  door.

§ 9.  Mnemonic.

Thoughts  that  arise  through  one  sense-door  are  thirty-six
in  kind;

Three  classes  through  five  doors ; through  six  doors  thirty-
one  we  find.

Ten  kinds  arise  now  through  six  doors,  now  loitlwut  doors
of  sense,

And  nine  are  ivholly  free  from  doors : — five  heads  of
difference.

§ 10.  Of  Object  of  Consciousness.

In  the  summary  of  objects,  that  which  is  called  object
is  of  six  kinds,  to  wit,  visible  object,  audible  object,  odorous
object,  sapid  object,  tangible  object,  and  cognoscible  object.
Here  only  visible  form®  is  visible  object ; again,  only  sound
is  audible  object,  and  so  forth.

1 See  Part  I.,  § 12.

2 According  to  the  Commentators,  the  former  is  the  ease  in  our
investigation  and  retaining  ; the  latter,  at  rebirth,  during  unconscious
life,  and  at  re-decease.  See  p.  118,  and  p.  116,  n.  5.

® E u p a here  seems  to  be  confined  to  the  vannayatana,  or
sense  of  colour,  the  only  strictly  visible  object  (sanidassana-
rupap),  the  form,  the  figure,  the  shape  (s  a nth  ana)  being


120


Of  Particular  Concomitants  [pt.  hi

But  cognoscible  object  is  classified  under  six  groups,  to
wit,  the  sensitive  [parts  of]  organs,  subtle  forms,’-  cogni-
tions, mental  concomitants,  Nibbana,  and  name-and-
notion.2  Here,  of  all  cognitions  arising  through  the  organ
of  sight,  visible  form  only  is  the  object,  and  such  visible
form  as  is  present.  Again,  of  all  cognitions  arising  through
the  organs  of  hearing,  smell,  taste,  and  touch,  the  corre-
sponding sense-objects  only  are  the  objects,  and  they  are
present  objects.

But  the  object  of  mind-door  cognitions  is  a sixfold
present,  or  past,  or  future  object,  or  one  out  of  time,  accord-
ing to  its  capacities.

Further,  the  objects  of  those  ‘ door-freed  ’ classes  of
consciousness  which  are  called  rebirth,  life-continuum,  and
re-decease  cognitions,  are  also  of  six  kinds  according  to
circumstances.  They  have  usually  been  grasped  [as
object]  in  the  immediately  preceding  existence  by  way  of
the  six  doors  f they  are  objects  of  things  either  present  or
past,  or  they  are  concepts."^  And  they  are  [technically]
known  as  ‘karma,’  ‘sign  of  ‘karma,’  or  ‘sign  of
destiny.’®

Of  those  [classes  of  consciousness,  which  have  this  or


known  inferentially  in  one  of  the  ‘ sequels  ’ of  sense-cognition  described
in  the  Introd.  Essay,  p.  32/.

^ ‘ Gross  ’ and  ‘ subtle  ’ is  one  division  of  all  r u p a,  or  non-mental
‘ forms  ’ {i.e.,  material  qualities).  The  former  comprises  all  sense-
organs  and  sense-objects  ; the  latter,  the  principles,  or  states,  of  the
two  sexes ; the  vital  principle,  the  two  media  of  communication
(vihnatti),  space,  certain  properties  of  matter,  and  the  nutritive
principle  in  foods.  See  Manual,  Part  VII.,  § 8.  B.  Psy.,  pp.  207  ff,
172#.

^ Pahuatti  includes  nama-pannatti  (name  or  term),  and
attha-pannatti  (notion,  or  idea,  or  concept).  See  Part  VIII.,
§§  14,  15,  and  Introd.  Essay,  p.  4/.

3 And  that  at  the  time  of  approaching  death.

■*  Paiiuattibhutani  va.  The  attha-pannatti,  ‘ the
idea,’  ‘ the  notion,’  or  ‘ the  concept,’  is  here  intended.  See  below.
Part  VIII.,  § 14.

* Gati-nimittag,  lit.,  ‘sign  of  going,’  or  of  the  ‘objective’
of  one’s  going,  i.e.,  of  one’s  destiny.  See  farther.  Part  V. — Ed.


121


PT.  Ill]  Oj  Object

that  object],  visual  cognition  has  visible  form  only  as  its
object ; similarly  in  the  case  of  the  other  four  [special]
senses.  But  the  objects  of  the  triple  element  of  appre-
hension^ are  fivefold,  being  the  five  sense-objects.

The  remaining  kinds  of  Kamaloka  resultant  con-
sciousness, as  veil  as  festhetic  pleasure,  have  in  all  cases
only  Kamaloka  objects.

Immoral  consciousness,  as  veil  as  such  Kamaloka
apperceptions  as  are  ‘ disconnected  from  knovledge,’^  may
have  all  kinds  of  objects  except  transcendental  objects.^

Those  classes  of  Kamaloka  moral  consciousness
vhich  are  connected  vith  knovledge,  as  veil  as  those
belonging  to  super-intellection,^  vhich  is  reckoned  as  of
fifth  jhana  moral  consciousness,  may  have  all  kinds  of
objects  except  the  Path  and  the  Fruit  of  Arahantship.

Inoperative  Kamaloka  consciousness,  vhich  is  con-
nected vith  knovledge,  as  veil  as  inoperative  super-
intellection and  determining  cognition,  may  have  all  kinds
of  objects  under  any  conditions.

In  purely  Arupaloka  consciousness  the  second  and
the  fourth  class  have  only  ‘ sublime  ’ objects.^  All  the
remaining  kinds  of  ‘ sublime  ’ consciousness  have  objects
vhich  are  concepts.®

Transcendental  consciousness  has  Nibbana  as  its  object.

^ Manodhatuttikari.  See  p.  108,  n.  3,  above.

2 Part  I.,  § 6.

The  Commentators  number  these  as  nine  : The  four  ‘ Paths,’  the
four  ‘ Fruits,’  and  Nibbana.

^ Abhihnakusalag.  See  Part  IX.,  end  of  § 4,  and  Introd.
Essay,  p.  62  /.  Appendix  : Abhinha.

® I.e.,  the  first  and  the  third  Aruppas  (Ariipaloka  jhana’s)
respectively.

®Pannattalambanani.  Atthapannatti  is  here  in-
tended. AH  the  five  stages  of  j h a n a,  in  the  fifteen  classes  of  R u p a-
consciousness,  are  induced  by  the  patibhaga-nimitta  or  the
transformed  after-image  (i.e.,  the  image  conce^ptualized)  of  one  or
other  of  the  ten  k a s i n a - circles,  or  by  the  after-image  arising  in  the
breathing  exercise.  But  the  after-image  of  any  one  of  the  ten
a su  b h a s (impurities,  Part  IX.,  § 2),  or  of  the  living  body,  is  capable
of  inducing  the  first  stage  only  of  jhana.  The  first  four  stages  of


122


Of  Pcuiimlar  Concomitants  [pt.  hi


§ 11.  Mnemonic.

To  different  kinds  of  consciousness  seven  kinds  of  objects
fix  —

Lower  objects  to  twenty-five ; exalted  thoughts  to  six.

Notion,  conce2)C  to  twenty-one  ; to  eight,  Nibbana’s  field,

To  twenty  kinds  those  objects  which  naught  transcendental
yield.

Five  kinds  all  sorts  of  objeets  have,  save  Highest,  Path,  and
Fruit ;

Of  thoughts  six  classes,  lastly,  which  all  sorts  of  objects
suit.


§ 12.  Of  Bases.

In  the  summary  of  bases,  what  are  called  ‘ bases  ’ are''
of  six  kinds,  to  wit,  the  bases  : eye,  ear,  nose,  tongue,
body,  and  heart.  In  the  K a m a 1 o k a all  these  obtain.
In  the  world  of  E u p a there  exists  no  basis  of  smell,  taste,
or  touch.  In  the  world  of  A r u p a none  of  the  bases^
exist.

Now,  the  five  elements  of  sense-cognition  proceed  wholly
and  solely  in  dependence  on  the  five  sense-organs  as  their
respective  bases.  But  the  elements  of  mind^ — that  is  to
say,  adverting,®  and  reception  of  the  five-door  impres-


j h an  a,  induced  by  the  exercise  of  amity  (or  love),  pity,  and  apprecia-
tion, are  worked  on  the  concept  ‘ mankind  but  the  fifth  stage,
induced  by  the  exercise  of  ‘ equanimity,’  is  also  concerned  with  that
concept,  not  as  an  object  of  love,  pity,  or  appreciation,  but  as  an
object  of  relative  indifference.  The  first  exercise  in  the  Arupa-
jhana  is  on  the  concept  ‘space’;  the  third  Arupa-jhana  is
exercised  on  the  concepit  ‘ nothingness.’  Thus  the  fifteen  K u p a -
and  the  six  A r u p a - j h a n a ’ s,  twenty-one  in  all,  work  by  concepts.

^Vohare,  a synonym  for  pannatti  in  Blis.,  § 1308.  See
previous  n. — Ed.

2 Manodhatu.  Eendered  before  by  ‘ the  element  of  apprehen-
sion.’ See  p.  117,  n.  1.

® Lit.,  ‘ turning  to.’  See  p.  85,  n.  3.


123


PT.  Ill]  Of  Bases

sions,  proceed  solely  in  dependence  on  the  hearts  The
element  of  mind-consciousness,^  comprising  investigation-
cognitions,  the  main  classes  of  resultant  consciousness,  the
two  ‘ aversive  ’ kinds  of  consciousness,  the  consciousness  of
the  first  path,  {esthetic  pleasure  and  E u p a 1 o k a con-
sciousness, proceed  in  dependence  on  the  heart.

But  all  other  classes  of  consciousness,  when  they  are
moral  or  immoral,  inoperative  or  transcendental,  are  either
dependent  on,  or  independent  of,  the  heart-basis  ; when
they  are  A r ti  p a 1 o k a resultants,  they  are  independent
of  the  heart-basis.


§ 13.  Mnemonic.

In  Kamaloka  seven®  kinds  of  thought  dependent  see
On  bases  six  ; in  E u p a 1 o k a , four,  on  bases  three.

But  in  A r u p a 1 0 k a,  one,  mind-element,'^  upsprings
Baseless,  alone.  Forty-three  kinds  need  base  to  come  to
birth.

Forty-two  kinds  now  rise  on  base,  now  baseless  issue
forth.

Eesultants  in  Arupaloka  thoughts  are  baseless  things.


Thus  ends  the  Third  Part,  in  the  Compendium  of
Philosophy,  entitled  the  Chapter  on  the  Compendium  of
Particular  (Concomitants  of  Consciousness).

^ Cf.  B.  Fsy.,  Ixxviii.  ff.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  this
medieval  work,  there  is  as  yet  no  indication  of  substituting  a brain-
vatthu  for  the  heart.  See,  however.  Appendix:  Hadayavatthu.
—Ed.

2 Manovinnana-dhatu,  literally  rendered  so  as  to  cover  the
seventy-six  classes  of  consciousness  named,  which  are  capable  of
taking  part  in  both  presentative  and  representative  cognition.  In  the
Introd.  Essay  it  is  called  ‘ element  of  comprehension,’  to  distinguish  it
from  manodhatu,  ‘ element  of  apprehension.’

^ I.e. , 5paheavinnana-dhatu’s-fl  manodhatu-f-1
manovinnanadhatu  = 7.  See  Part  VII.,  end  of  § 8.

^ D h a t V e k a = d h a t u-t-ek  a.  Mano  vihnanadhatu,  but
not  manodhatu,  is  here  intended.


PART  IV


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  PROCESS  OP  COGNITION

§ 1.  Introductory.

This  further  summary  of  geneses
Of  thought  now  having  made,  I will  go  on
To  speak  concisely,  summing  up  again
Processes  of  the  mind,  in  birth  and  life.

By  order  due,  the  ‘ after,’  the  ‘ before,’
Distinguishing  both  person  and  life-plane.


§ 2.  Of  the  Vehicles  in  Procedure.

In  a summary  of  thought-procedure,^  six  classes  of  six
kinds  each  must  be  understood,  to  wit :

(1)  six  bases ;

(2)  six  doors ;

(3)  six  objects ;

(4)  six  modes  of  cognition  ;

(5)  six  processes  f

(6)  sixfold  phenomenon  of  presentation ^ of  objects.

’ Vithi.  For  explanation  of  the  term,  see  Introd.  Essay,  p.  25.
It  will  there  be  seen  that  ‘ form  of  consciousness,’  used  approxi-
mately in  the  ManseUian  sense,  is  a useful  term  to  indicate  the
constant  element  in  the  processes  of  thought.  When  we  distinguish
these  processes  logically,  they  are  better  spoken  of  as  ‘ forms.’  When
we  speak  of  them  psychological  facts  or  happenings,  then  ‘ process’
or  ‘vithi’  is  the  appropriate  term.

^ Visaya-pavatti.  The  C.C.  (Saya  Pye’s  Edition,  p.  115)
defines  this  term  as  ‘ the  presentation  of  objects  of  consciousness

124


125


PT.  iv]  Of  Sense-Cognition

Now,  the  [sixth  and  last  of  these,  namely  the]  phenomenon
of  the  presentation  of  objects,  is  threefold  in  the  case  when
consciousness  is  set  free  from  processes  of  sense  and
thought,  to  wit]  karma,  karma-  signs,  destiny-signsd

Of  the  foregoing  classes,  (1)  ‘ base,’  (2)  ‘ door,’  and
(3)  ‘object,’  have  been  already  dealt  with.  Next  (4)  the
six  modes  of  cognition  are  consciousness  by  way  of  sight,
hearing,  smell,  taste,  touch,  and  thought.

Next  (5),  the  six  ‘ processes  ’ are  the  processes  by  way  of
the  eye-door,  ear-door,  nose-door,  tongue-door,  body-door,
mind-door,  under  the  aspect  of  ‘ door.’  Or  [they  may  be
called]  processes  of  consciousness  by  way  of  sight,  etc.,
under  the  aspect  of  consciousness,  thus  connecting  mental
procedure  with  procedure  of  door  [or  organ].

(3)  Finally^  (6),  the  sixfold  phenomenon  of  presentation
of  objects  is  to  be  understood  as  follows  :

The  intensity  of  object,  at  the  five  sense-doors,  is  either
very  great,  great,  slight,  or  very  slight ; at  the  mind-door
the  impression  is  either  clear  or  obscure.^

§ 3.  Of  Processes  of  Sense-Cognition.

How  (must  processes  of  sense-cognition  be  understood)  ?

[A  single  unit  of  mental  activity],  termed  one  thought-
moment,  consists  of  three  time-  [phases],  to  wit,  nascent,
static,  and  arrested.^  Seventeen  of  such  thought-moments
constitute  the  duration  of  material  phenomena.®  One  of


at  the  doors,’  and,  again,  ‘the  genesis  of  thoughts  on  the  pre-
sentation of  such  objects.’  I have  used  ‘ presentation  ’ to  cover  both
meanings.

1 See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  26/.

2 This  sentence,  paragraphed  under  § 3 in  the  P.T.S.  Text,  belongs
more  properly  to  § 2. — Ed.

® Vibhutag,  avibhiitag.  Cf.  this  term  in  Mil.,  308  (transl.
by  Rhys  Davids,  S.  B.  E.,  XXXVI.,  p.  174). — Ed.

■*  Bhang  a,  lit.,  ‘broken.’  Misprinted  bhavanga  in  P.T.S.
Edition. — Ed.

® See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  25/  Buddhist  philosophy  has  hit  upon  a
thought-moment  of  three  instants  as  the  ultimate  standard  of  the


126


Of  the  Process  of  Cognition  [pt.  iv

several  thought-moments  must  have  passed  when  the  five
kinds  of  sense-objects,  at  the  static  stage,  enter  the  avenue^
of  the  five  doors  of  sense.

Hence  the  process  is  thus  : — When,  say,  a visible  object,
after  one  thought-moment  has  passed,  enters  the  avenue
of  sight  and,  the  life-continuum  vibrating  twice,  the
stream  of  that  continuum  is  interrupted ; then  conscious-
ness of  the  kind  which  apprehends  sensations,  apprehend-
ing that  visible  object,  rises  and  ceases  (1).

Immediately  after  this,  there  rise  and  cease  in  order —

visual  consciousness,  seeing  just  that  visible  object  (2) ;
recipient  consciousness  receiving  it  (3)^  ;
investigating  consciousness  investigating  it  (4)  ;
determining  consciousness  determining  it  (5).

After  that,  among  the  twenty-nine  modes  of  K a m a -
1 0 k a apperception,  any  one  apperception,  determined  by
the  conditions  evoking  it,  apperceives,®  normally,  for  seven
thought-moments  (6-12).

And,  as  immediate  consequences  of  the  apperception,
two  resultant  thought-moments  of  reteirtion  take  place
(13,  14).

After  that  comes  subsidence  into  the  life-continuum.


measurement  of  time  which,  after  aU,  in  its  last  analysis,  is  reducible
to  a succession  of  mental  states.  This  thought-moment  is  computed
by  them  as  between  a billionth  and  two  billionth  part  of  the  time
occupied  by  the  snapping  of  one’s  finger,  or  a wink  of  one’s  eye
(Ledi  Sadaw’s  Corny.,  p.  130).  It  is  for  modern  scientists  accurately  to
determine  the  number  of  thought-oscillations  in  any  given  period  of
time.  From  their  own  standard  Buddhists  apparently  deduce  the  life-
term  of  material  things,  for  the  purpose  of  measuring  the  duration  of
an  object  in  consciousness.

^ A p a t h o.

2 I.e.,  assenting  to,  acquiescing  in  it.  Sampaticchana  implies
all  this. — Ed.

3 Javanaq  javati.

Bhavanga-pato.  The  subject  of  the  whole  process  is  more
fully  dealt  with  in  the  Introd.  Essay,  pp.  27-30.


127


PT.  it]  Of  Sense- Cognition

Thus  far  are  now  complete  the  seventeen  thought-
moments  (mentioned  above),  to  wit :

fourteen  in  the  process  of  the  genesis  of  cognition
two  vibrations  of  the  life-continuum  ;
one  thought-moment  at  inception.^

After  that  [the  mental  object]  ceases.

Such  an  object  is,  in  the  scale  of  intensity,  termed
‘ very  great. An  object  with  an  intensity  that  is  simply
‘ great,’  is  not  able,  after  entering  the  sense-avenue,  to
survive  till  the  two  moments  of  retention  (13,  14).  In
that  case  subsidence  into  the  life-continuum  occurs  at  the
end  of  the  apperceptive  moments  (6-12) ; no  retention
takes  place.  Again,  an  object,  with  a ‘ slight  ’ intensity  is
not  able,  after  entering  the  sense-avenue,  to  survive  till  the
genesis  of  the  [usual  seven]  apperceptive  moments.  In
that  case,  apperception  not  arising,  there  is  only  a [process
of]  determining  for  two  or  three  moments,  after  which
comes  subsidence.

Lastly,  an  object  with  a ‘very  slight’  intensity  enters
the  avenue  of  sense  already  about  to  cease,  and  is  not  able
to  reach  the  stage  of  determining.  In  that  ease  there  is
only  the  vibration  of  the  life-continuum,  but  no  genetic
process  of  consciousness  takes  place.

As  in  the  sight-door,  so  in  the  other  four  (special)
senses : procedure  in  the  field  of  sense  of  that  which  has
become,  at  one  of  the  five  doors,  an  ‘ object  ’ is,  under  all
conditions,  to  be  understood  as  fourfold,  in  the  four  grades
respectively  known  as' —

(1)  the  grade  [ending  with]  retention;

(2)  the  grade  [ending  with]  apperception  only  ;

^ See  the  numbers  attached  to  each  factor  in  the  process. — Ed.

2 Literally,  which  has  passed  before. — Ed.

3 See  § 3.  The  several  processes  summarized  here’are  developed
in  Introd.  Essay,  p.  31  /.


128


Of  the  Process  of  Cognition  [pt.  iv

(3)  the  grade  [ending  with]  determination  only  ;

(4)  the  futile  graded

§ 4.  Mnemonic.

Fourteen  thought-moments  in  cognition’s  act  one  finds,
And  in  that  process  stages  seven  we  see.

And  of  our  consciousness  the  four  and  fifty  kinds
Can  share  in  five-doored  sense,  if  fit  they  be.^

Thus  far  the  method  of  how  cognition  proceeds  on
occasion  of  sense.

§ 5.  Of  Procedure  hy  loay  of  the  Mind-door.

In  the  case  of  the  mind-door,  when  a clear  object  enters
the  avenue  of  that  door,  then,  at  the  termination  of  the
vibration  of  the  life-continuum,  of  mind-door  apprehension
and  of  apperception,  the  resultant  retentive  (moments)
take  place.  After  that  comes  subsidence  into  the  life-
continuum.  But  when  the  object  is  obscure,  then  the
subsidence  occurs  at  the  termination  of  apperception  ; no
retention  takes  place.

§ 6.  ^Mnemonic.

Threefold  the  process  in  the  mind-door’s  act.

And  moments  ten  therein  we’re  told ;

But  forty-one^  the  kinds  of  thought  implied.

If  we  in  full  detail  unfold.


Thus  far  the  section  on  minor  acts  of  apperception.

^Moghavarasankhato;  muj^hanti  satta  etenati
mogho,  tuccho-mogho,  ‘the  futile  ’ (or  vague)  is  that  by  which
persons  are  stupefied,  are  muddled  ; it  means  empty,  vain.

2 Yatharahag  ; as  circumstances  permit.  See  summary  under  § 7,
in  Part  I. ; ‘ four  and  fifty  make  the  Kamaloka  tale.’  These  are
capable  of  taking  part  in  the  five-door  process  of  cognition  on  occasion
of  sense.

® The  ‘ forty-one  ’ is  obtained  by  excluding,  from  the  fifty-four  classes
of  Kamaloka  consciousness,  the  twice  fivefold  sense-cognitions


PT.  IV]


Ecstatic  Apperception


129


§ 7.  Of  Ecstatic  Apperceptional  Procedure.

But  in  treating  of  ecstatic  apperception/  no  distinction
is  made  between  ‘ clear  ’ and  ‘ obscure.’  Nor  is  there  any
retentive  activity.  For  in  this  case  [consider  the  stage
when  apperception  is  reached  : — ] a certain  apperception —
one  of  the  eight  K a m a 1 o k a apperceptions  associated
with  knowledge — has  arisen  for  four  or  three  successive
moments.  These  moments,  in  this  procedure,  are  termed
preparation,  approximation,  qualification,^  adoption.^  As
they  cease,  at  the  fourth,  or  the  fifth  moment,  that  kind  of
apperception,  in  the  twenty-six  kinds  of  sublime  and  tran-
scendental apperceptions  which  fits  the  case  of  the  apper-
ceiver,  descends  into  the  process  of  ecstatic  apperception.
After  that,  at  the  end  of  the  ecstasy,  subsidence  into  the
life-continuum  occurs.

Here,  after  an  apperception  accompanied  by  joy,  ecstasy,
also  accompanied  by  joy,  may  be  expected;  and  after
apperception  accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference,  ecstasy

and  the  triple  element  of  apprehension.  See  Introd.  Essay  (p.  36)
for  the  full  treatment  of  the  processes  of  thought  by  way  of  the
mind-door;  also  Appendix,  Dhatu  and  Ayatana,  on  Mano-
d hat  u.

' Appana  javanag.  Appana  is  a term  primarily  intended
for  the  V i t a k k a-factor  of  j h a n a,  because  v i t a k k a (or  apphca-
tion),  as  a j h a n a - factor  sinks  the  mind,  so  to  speak,  into  the  inside
of  its  object,  whUst  ordinary  vi  takka  merely  throws  the  mind  on  to
the  surface  of  its  object.  But  the  term  is  secondarily  applied  to
s a m a d h i.  See  Introd.  Essay,  pp.  55-7.

On  appana,  cf.  Yogdvacara’s  Manual.  Introduction  by  Ehys
Davids,  P.T.S.,  1896.  This  is  another  term  I have  not  met  with
in  the  earlier  scriptures. — Ed.

* A n u 1 0 m a — the  stage  at  which  the  beginner  or  adikammika
fits,  equips,  or  qualifies  himself  for  the  higher  stage.  See  Introd.
Essay,  ibid.

® Gotrabhu.  See  Introd.  Essay,  ibid.  Cf.  Part  IX.,  § 8.
This  term,  meaning  ‘ evolving  the  lineage,’  is  the  name  for  the  stage
when,  in  a moment  of  spiritual  regeneration,  the  kinship  to  Kam  a -
1 o k a is  rejected  for  the  communion  of  the  Ariyas — i.e.,  all  who
have  taken  Nibbana  as  their  quest  {cf.  135,  n.  2).


9


130


Of  the  Process  oj  Cognitioji  [pt.  iv

accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference.  Again,  a moral ^
apperception  has  for  its  sequel  a moral  apperception  as
well  as  the  lowest  three  of  the  four  fruits ; an  inoperative
apperception  has  as  its  sequel  inoperative  apperception  and
the  fruit  which  is  Arahantship.

§ 8.  Mnemonic.

After  gladsome  meritorious  thoughts  may  follow  thirty-
two,^

After  thoughts  of  neutral  feeling,  twelve  kinds  may  alone
be  due.

After  glad  inoperative  thoughts  but  eight  may  come  to  be.
After  neutral  thought  inoperative,  six  kinds  possibly.
Ecstasy  succeeds  e’en  worldling’s  meritorious  Kama-
thought,

And  the  learner’s,  and  of  them  who  final  victory  have
wrought.

In  the  first,  and  second,  consciousness  with  h e t u ’ s three
is  fraught

In  the  third  no  less,  but  here  effect  of  consciousness  is
naught.

Thus  far  the  method  of  the  processes  of  cognition  in
the  mind- door.


§ 9.  Of  Retention.

Under  all  circumstances,  if  an  object  be  undesirable,  it  is
the  result  of  past  immoral  action,  taking  effect  in  sense-
cognition,  reception,  investigation,  and  retention ; if  an
object  be  desirable,  it  is  the  result  of  past  moral  action ; if  an
object  be  extremely  desirable,  investigation  and  retention
are  accompanied  by  joy.  In  this  case,  at  the  termination

* Or  good;  kusalajavanag.

2 J.e.,  classes  of  consciousness. — Ed.

3 Tihetuto.  The  three  good  h e t u’s  of  al  o b h a,  a d o s a,  and
a m 0 h a are  here  intended.  Exigencies  of  rhyme  have  expanded
‘ inoperative  ’ (k  r i y a t o)  into  the  last  line. — Ed.


Retention


131


PT.  IV]

of  the  inoperative  apperception,  which  is  also  accompanied
by  joy,  there  follow  retentive  moments  accompanied  by
joy  ; or  if  the  inoperative  api^erception  be  accompanied  by
hedonic  indifference,  so  also  are  the  ensuing  retentive
moments.  Or  if  the  apperception  be  accompanied  by
grief,  then  both  the  retentive  moments  and  the  subsidence
into  the  life-continua’-  become  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference.

Hence,  when  an  individual  who  has  been  reborn  with  a
sense  of  joy,-  experiences  no  retentive  moments  at  the
termination  of  an  apperception  accompanied  by  grief,  then
there  arises  instead  [that  class  of  consciousness  styled]

‘ investigation  accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference  ’ re-
specting some  merely  ‘minor’  object  presented  in  the
past.^

Teachers  say  that  the  subsidence  into  the  life-continuum
comes  immediately  after  that.  They  also  say  that  reten-

1 In  this  instance  alone  bhavanga  is  plural.  The  singular
bhavanga  has  been  used  as  a generic  term,  either  for  the  whole
series  of  the  bhavanga  moments  in  process  of  cognition  or  for  all
the  nineteen  classes  of  bhavanga.  The  use  of  the  plural  here  is
therefore  significant  in  showing  that  there  is  an  agantuka-
hhavanga  (adventitious  element)  as  opposed  to  the  m ii  1 a -
bhavanga  (normal  element).  This  agantuka  bhavanga  is
dealt  with  in  the  following  passage.

^ J.e.,  one  who  is  of  a joyous  nature  by  birth,  without  needing
always  the  stimulus  of  a pleasant  experience. — Ed.

^ Lit.,  ‘ formerly  stored-up  minor  object.’  The  Commentators  call
all  things  of  Kamalok a — namely,  all  the  fifty-four  classes  of
Kama-  consciousness,  together  with  all  the  mental  concomitants
that  enter  into  combination  in  these  fifty-four,  and  all  the  twenty-
eight  rupa’s, — ‘paritta.’  When  a naturally  jovial  person  is
offended,  his  previous  apperception,  if  not  ordinarily  followed  by  the
retentive  moments,  cannot  lapse  directly  and  abruptly  back  to  the
normal  life-continuum  which  is  by  birth  one  of  joy.  It  is  therefore
invariably  followed  by  an  adventitious  bhavanga,  accompanied  by
hedonic  indifference,  which  intervenes  as  a sort  of  mediator  between
two  uncompromising  aspects  of  feeling — grief  andjoy.  It  must  not  be
supposed  that  the  santlrana  which  is  called  upon  to  do  this  duty
of  paving  the  way  for  the  reappearance  of  the  normal  bhavanga,
investigates  here.


132


Of  the  Process  of  Cognition  [pt.  iv

tion  is  desirable^  only  (i.)  at  the  termination  of  Kama-
loka  apperception;  (ii.)  for  K am  a 1 ok  a beings;  and
(iii.)  of  Kamaloka  things^  which  have  become  objects.

§ 10.  Mnemonic.

If,  in  activity  of  ‘ sense,’®

Subject  and  object  and  fetch  of  mind^

Combine  in  process  clear,  intense.

Retention  then  we’re  sure  to  find.^

So  far  for  the  law  of  retention.


§ 11.  Of  the  Lcnv  of  Appercej)tion.

Again,  among  apperceptions,  in  the  process  of  minor®
apperception,  Kamaloka  apperceptions  apperceive  for
seven  moments,  or  for  only  six,  or,  in  the  ease  of  feeble  pro-
cedure, in  dying,  and  at  other  times,  for  only  five  moments.
They  say,  also,  that  when  the  Exalted  One  was  performing
the  ‘ twin  miracle,’  and  the  like,  the  alert  procedure  of  his
‘ re-viewing  ’"  mind  was  such  as  to  require  only  four  or  five

1 The  ideals  of  the  teachers  here  are  that  the  three  conditions  mdi-
cated  by  (i.),  (ii.),  and  (iii.),  must  be  satisfied,  in  order  that  retention
may  take  place  in  a process.

^ See  p.  131,  n.  3.

^ Sense  stands  here  for  Kamaloka  consciousness. — Ed.

Javana-sattalambananap.  This  is  the  nearest  approach
in  the  work  to  the  term  ‘subject’  (satta,  lit.  ‘being’).  Cf.  the
orthodox  javanani  javanti,  in  § 3,  § 11,  etc.  On  the  significance
of  the  term  ‘subject’  in  Buddhist  psychology,  see  Introd.  Essay,,
p.  7 /.—Ed.

® See  p.  125  (3).  Retention,  as  a rule,  takes  part  only  in  a sense-
door  process  with  a ‘ very  intense  ’ object,  or  in  a mind-door  process
with  a ‘ clear’  object.

6 See  p.  131,  n.  3.

^ Paccavekkhana-cittani,  lit.,  ‘ consciousness [es]  viewing
again’  (pati-ikkhanaij).  The  reviewing  apperceptions  are  con-
fined to  processes  succeeding  the  jhana  ecstasies  and  the  spiritual
experiences  known  as  the  Paths  and  Fruits.  See  Introd.  Essay,
p.  69.


133


PT.  iv]  The  Laze  of  Apperception

moments.  But  in  the  first  performances  of  a novice  [in
higher  thought],  sublime  and  super-intellective  appercep-
tions always  occupy  but  one  unit  [of  thought-  time].  After
that  comes  subsidence  into  the  continuum.

The  four  geneses  of  Path-[consciousness]  are  of  one
thought-moment  each.  After  these  the  cognitions  [known
as]  the  Fruits  arise,  occupying  two  or  three  moments  each.
After  that  comes  subsidence  into  the  continuum.

At  the  time  of  attaining  cessation  [of  consciousness  in
trance],  apperception,  then  apperceiving  for  two  moments,
belongs  to  the  fourth  stage  of  Arupaloka  jhana-
cognitions.’-  After  that  cessation  is  attained.^  And  at
the  time  of  revival  from  that  state,  when  there  has  arisen
for  one  [time-]unit  the  [consciousness  which  is  the]
‘ Fruit  ’ of  the  Never-returning  Path,  or  of  Arahantship,
according  to  his  stage  [of  evolution],  and  when  [this  con-
sciousness] has  ceased,  then  occurs  subsidence  into  the
life  continuum.

And  in  every  case  of  the  process  of  the  Attainments^  [we
have  to]  hold  that  there  is  no  hard  and  fast^  limit  in  the
process,  even  as  in  the  case  of  the  stream  of  the  life-
continuum,  and  that  several  [moments  of  apperception]
may  also  obtain.

^ I.e.,  the  cognition  of  the  sphere  of  neither  consciousness  nor  un-
consciousness. See  Part  I.,  § 10.

^ Phussati,  lit.,  ‘touched’ — a term  wherein  Buddhist  ecstatic
iphraseology  coincides  with  the  ‘ desire  for  contact,’  ‘ striving  after
conjunction’  of  Neo-Platonism. — Ed.

^ Samapatti — of  the  five  jhanas  and  the  four  Fruits  of
the  Paths.  See  Part  XI.,  § 12;  Introd.  Essay,  p.  70/.

'^Niyamo  hatthi.


134


Of  the  Process  of  Cognition  [pt.  iv


§ 12.  Mnemonic.

Seven  moments  last  the  minor  apperceptions  of  the  mind  ;
In  Path  and  A b h inn  a,^  the  norm  is  one,  so  it’s  divined  ;
Though  sometimes  many  moments  to  such  acts  may  he
assigned.

So  far  for  the  law  of  apperception.

§ 13.  Oj  Kinds  of  Individi(als.

Now  inoperative  apperceptions  and  ecstatic  appercep-
tions are  not  obtained  by  those  [whose  rebirth-consciousness
is]  accompanied  by  [only]  two  of  the  [six]  h e t u ’ s or  not
accompanied  by  any  of  the  h e t u ’ s.  Nor  do  these,  when
in  a happy  world,  obtain  resultant  consciousness  united
with  knowledge.  But,  in  a world  of  misery,  they  obtain
not  even  the  ‘ great  resultant  ’ kinds  of  consciousness  un-
connected with  knowledge.

Further,  among  those  [whose  rebirth  consciousness  is]
accompanied  by  the  three  h e t u ’ s of  good  action,  Ara-
hants®  do  not  obtain  apperceptions  that  are  either  moral  or
immoral."^

Again,  disciples  and  average  worldly  persons  do  not

’ Supernormal  intelligence,  touched  on  in  Part  IX.,  § 4,  and  dealt
with  in  Introd.  Essay,  p.  62/.,  and  Appendix  : Abhiiiha.

^ According  to  the  C.C.  (Abhidhavimattha-Vibhiivanl)  duhetuka-
puggala’s,  i.e.,  persons  of  two  hetu’s,  are  beings  reborn  with  an
innate  sense  of  disinterestedness  (alobha)  and  amity  (ad  os  a).
Ledi  Sadaw  of  Burma,  reiterates  the  same  in  different  words,  bj^
saying  that  the  rebirth-consciousness  of  such  a one,  consists  of  one
or  other  of  the  four  ‘great’  resultant  classes  of  consciousness  un-
connected from  knowledge.  This  is,  of  course,  according  to  Buddhism,
due  to  the  past  reproductive  k a m m a which  was  also  disconnected
from  knowledge.  Cf.  with  Introd.  Essay  on  dream-consciousness,
p.  46  /.

^ KhTnasava:  ‘Who  have  the  Asavas  extinct’ — a frequent
Pit  aka  synonym. — Ed.

‘ Moral  or  immoral = making  good  or  bad  karma  for  after-lives.
The  Arahant  ‘beyond  good  and  bad’  had  done  with  it  all.  See
B.  Psy.,  xcii.-xciv.  (on  xciv.  for  ‘ Yes,’  read  ‘ Yet’). — Ed.


135


PT.  iv]  Cognition  in  Different  Planes

obtain  inoperative  apperceptions : disciples  do  not  obtain
apperceptions  full  of  doubt,  or  such  as  are  united  to
erroneous  views ; ‘ never-returning  individuals  do  not
obtain  apperceptions  full  of  aversion.  But  transcendental
apperceptions  are  experienced  only  by  ‘ Ariyans,’^  according
to  the  capacities  of  each.

§ 14.  Mnemonic.

By  classes  four  and  forty  apperceives  an  adept’s  mind.
Initiates’  ® apperceptions  six  and  fifty  are  in  kind.

And  fifty-four  experience  the  remainder  of  mankind.


So  far  for  [classification  of  consciousness  according  to]
kinds  of  individuals.

§ 15.  Of  Planes  [of  Conscious  Existence.[f

On  the  Kamaloka  plane  all  the  foregoing  kinds  of
consciousness  by  way  of  process  are  experienced  according
to  circumstances.

On  the  Kfipaloka  plane  the  same  holds  true,  with
the  exclusion  of  apperceptions  [united  with]  aversion,  and
of  retention-moments.

On  the  A r li  p a 1 0 k a plane  the  same  holds  true,  with
the  exclusion  of  the  [apperception  of]  the  First  Path,  of
consciousness  belonging  to  the  Rupaloka  plane,  of
esthetic  pleasure,  and  of  the  lower  A r u p a 1 o k a cogni-
tions.

^ Those  who  will  be  no  more  reborn  in  K a m a - 1 o k a.

^ Used  for  Buddhas  and  their  disciples  who  walk  in  the  Four  Paths
and  who  enjoy  the  Four  Fruits.  The  word  has  usually  been  rendered
‘noble,’  especially  in  the  ‘ Noble  Eightfold  Path,’  and  the  ‘ four  Noble
Truths.’  But  there  are  racial  implications  in  it,  which  commend  the
retention  of  the  original  word.  See  Rhys  Davids,  Early  Buddhism,
1908,  pp.  49,  50.— Ed.

® Se[k]  kha-,  lit.,  ‘ disciple,’  ‘ learner’  (§  8),  a term  applied  to  the
seven  lower  classes  of  the  eight  ‘ Ariyans,’  as  opposed  to  ‘ A s e [k]  -
kha,’  adept,  a term  apphed  to  the  Arahant.

* Bhuini,  lit.,  ground,  terrain. — Ed.


136


Of  the  Process  of  Cognition  [pt.  iv

Under  all  conditions,  too,  those  who  are  devoid  of  this  or
that  seat  of  impressions,^  do  not  obtain  process-cognitions
by  way  of  the  corresponding  ‘ doors.’

And  for  unconscious  beings,^  under  no  conditions  is  there
any  cognitional  procedure.

§ 16.  Mnemonic.

On  plane  of  Kamaloka  eighty  kinds  of  consciousness
Take  part,  as  they  may  fitted  be,  in  this  or  that  process ;
In  ‘ K u p a ’ and  ‘ A r u p a,’  sixty-four  and  sixteen  less.
So  far  for  the  chapter  on  Planes.


§ 17.  Snmmary.

And  thus,  the  processes  of  six-doored  cognition  proceed,
intersected®  by  the  life-continuum  as  it  happens  to  be
constituted,  and  continually  as  long  as  one  lifetime  lasts.


Thus  ends  the  Fourth  Part,  in  the  Compendium  of
Philosophy,  entitled  the  Chapter  on  the  Compendium  of
Processes.

1 P a s a d a,  ‘ the  pleasure-giving  part  ’ — i.e.,  the  most  sensitive  part
of  a sense-organ.

2 There  is  held  to  be  a celestial  region  peopled  by  such  mindless
beings.  See  next  Part,  p.  142. — Ed.

^ Bhavangantaritais  explained  by  Ledi  Sadaw  as  ‘bhavan-
ge  an  tar  it  a.  As  a matter  of  fact,  it  is  the  thought-processes  that
intersect  the  life-continuum.


PART  V


COilPENDIUM  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS  NOT  SUBJECT  TO
PKOCESSi


§ 1.  Introcluctori/.

Set  forth  have  been  processes  of  our  thought
In  natural  order.  Now  let’s  on  to  make
Summary  of  procedure  at  rebirth.

§ 2.  Of  the  Realms  of  Life.

In  summarizing  classes  of  consciousness  not  subject  to
process,  four  sets  of  four  should  be  understood,  to  wit ;

I.  four  planes  of  life

II.  fourfold  rebirth  ;

III.  four  karma  s ;

IV.  fourfold  advent  of  death.

Of  these,  the  four  planes  of  life  are —

(1)  1.  the  plane  of  misery  ;

2.  the  plane  of  fortunate  sense- experience  ;

3.  the  Eu  pal  ok  a plane;

4.  the  A r u p a 1 0 k a plane.

Among  these,  again,  the  first  is  also  fourfold,  to  wit,
purgatory,  the  animal  kingdom,  rebirth  among  Petals,®
the  host  of  the  A s u r a - demons.

^ Vlthi-mutta,  Ht.,  ‘ process-freed.’

^ Bhumi-catukkap.  See  Part  IV.,  § 15,  n.  4.

2 Petti-visayo,  the  P e t a ’ s are  unhappy  ghosts.  See  p.  24.

137


138


Of  Process-free  Consciousness  [pt.  v

(2)  Fortunate  sense-experience  is  sevenfold,  to  wit,  the
realm  of  human  beings,  the  realms  of  the  four  kings, ^ of
the  Thirty-three  gods,  the  Yam  a gods,^  the  heaven  of
Delight,  the  heavens  of  the  gods  who  rejoice  in  [their  own]
creations,  and  of  the  gods  who  make  others’  creation  serve
their  own  ends.

These,  taken  together  as  eleven,  are  grouped  as  the
‘plane  of  K d m a I o h a .

(3)  The  R ti  p a 1 0 k a plane  is  of  sixteen  grades,  com-
prising :

(a)  the  plane  of  first  j h a n a , to  wit,  the  realm  of
Brahma’s  retinue,  that  of  Brahma’s  ministers,
that  of  the  great  Brahmas

{h)  the  plane  of  second  j hana,  to  wit,  the  heavens
of  minor  lustre,  of  infinite  lustre,  of  the  radiant
gods  f

(c)  the  plane  of  third  j h a n a , to  wit,  the  gods  of
minor  aura,  of  infinite  aura,  and  of  the  gods
full  of  steady  aura  f

{d)  the  plane  of  fourth  j h a n a , to  wit,  the  realm  of
the  gods  of  the  great  reward,®  of  the  unconscious
beings,  and  of  the  pure  abodes.


1 Of  the  four  quarters  of  the  firmament.

^ Lit.,  ‘the  misery-freed  gods,’  according  to  the  Ceylon  Cy. ; the
governing  gods,  according  to  Ledi  Sadaw.  This  word  should  not  be
confounded  with  Yam  a,  the  mythical  King  of  Death.

® There  is  historical  interest  in  comparing  the  mythology  in  this
chapter  with  the  earlier  mythologies  in  the  Digha  and  Majjldma
Nikdyas,  and  in  the  brief  list  of  the  Vibhanga,  pp.  422-6,  a passage
on  which  is  summarized  in  § 4 (2). — Ed.

* Abhassara,  from  a ^/bha  -(-  v^s  a r,  the  gods  from  whose
bodies  the  rays  of  light  are  emitted  like  lightning.

^Subhakinha.  A mass  of  steady  light  emitted  from  a body  is
termed  s u b h a,  lit.,  ‘ good  light.’

® Veh  app  h al  a = V i p u 1 a q -f  p h al  aq,  ‘ abundant  reward  ’ (of
j h a n a practice),  great,  compared  with  the  rewards  of  the  Lower
Brahmas.


PT.  V]


Rehirfh


139


The  last  named  are  fivefold,  to  wit,  the  abode  of  the
Immobile,  Serene,  Beautiful,  Clear-sighted,’-  and  Supreme
Beings.

(4)  The  Arupaloka  plane  is  of  four  grades,  comprising  :

(a)  the  sphere  of  the  conception  of  infinite  space  ;

(b)  the  sphere  of  the  conception  of  infinite  conscious-

ness ;

(c)  the  sphere  of  the  conception  of  nothingness  ;

(d)  the  sphere  of  neither  consciousness  nor  uncon-

sciousness.^

§ 3.  Mnemonic.

In  Pure  Abodes  there  come  not  anywise  to  be
Worldlings,  or  new  converts,^  or  those  who  Once  Return,
Nor  in  th’  Unconscious  Sphere,  or  Spheres  of  Misery
Can  come  the  Ariya  folk.^  To  be  elsewhere  reborn
May  be  both  Ariyas’  and  non-Ariyas’  destiny.


Thus  far  for  the  four  planes  [of  life].


§ 4.  II.  Of  Fourfold  Rebirth  [Rebirths  1 and  2].

(1)  Fourfold  rebirth  comprises  birth  to  a state  of
misfortune,  to  a state  of  fortunate  sense-experience,  to  the
R u p a 1 0 k a,  and  to  the  Arupaloka.

A single  rebirth  to  a state  of  misfortune  is  as  follows  :
that  class  of  consciousness  [usually  styled]  ‘ Investigation
accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference  and  resulting  from
immoral  conduct  in  the  past  ’ becomes  reconception,®  at  the
moment  of  descent,  on  the  plane  of  misfortune.  There-

^ These  are,  more  literally  rendered,  well-looking  and  well-seeing.
—Ed.

^ On  these  terms  see  Part  I.,  § 10.

^Sotapanna.  ^ See  above,  Part  IV.,  § 13  n.

^ I.e.,  the  very  commencement  of  rebirth.  See  p.  114,  n.  4 ; cf.  p.  109,
n.  1,  and  p.  116,  n.  5.  It  would  be  less  embarassing  to  Occidentals  to
have  this  rebirth-consciousness  and  the  next  in  separate  classes
from  the  s a n t i r a'n  a ’ s (classes  of  investigation-consciousness).


140


Of  Process-free  Consciousness  [pt.  v

after  it  [becomes] the  life-continuum,  and,  becoming  at
the  close  of  life  a re-decease-consciousness,  is  cut  off.

But  when  that  class  of  consciousness  [ordinarily  called]
‘ Investigation,  accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference  ’ results
from  moraC  conduct  in  the  past,  it  proceeds  on  the  plane  of
happy  sense-experience  by  way  of  rebirth,  life-continuum
and  re-decease,  in  the  case  of  human  beings  who  are  born
blind  and  the  like,  as  well  as  in  the  case  of  the  earth-
bound  degraded  A s u r a -demons.^

The  eight  main  resultant  kinds  of  consciousness  take
effect  in  every  case  by  way  of  rebirth,  life-continuum,  and
re-decease,  on  this  plane  of  fortunate  sense-experience.

These  nine  classes  are  comprised  under  rebirth  on  the
plane  of  fortunate  sense-experience.

The  ten  modes  in  the  foregoing  are  reckoned  together  as
rebirth  on  the  plane  of  K a m a 1 o k a .


(2)  There  is  no  [fixed]  limit  to  the  duration  of  life  in
beings  reborn  to  misfortune  in  the  four  planes  of  misery,
in  human  beings  and  in  degraded  A s u r a s.  The  life-term
in  the  case  of  the  gods  called  the  Four  Kings  is  500
celestial  years — -that  is  to  say,  as  men  reckon  years,
9,000,000.  The  life-term  of  the  Thirty-three  gods  is  four
times  this  amount.'^  That  of  the  Y a m a gods  is  again

^ In  the  J.P.T.S.  text,  for  bhavauga-pariyosane  javanag
h u t V a,  I read  bhavangag  [hutva]pariyosane  cavanag
h u t V a. — Ed.

- The  logic  and  justice  of  this  paragraph  is  in  the  existence  of
indifferently  good  conduct,  not  decidedly  bad  nor  good  unalloyed.
The  immoral  leaven  in  the  moral  conduct  of  the  past  accounts  for  the
existence  of  the  congenitally  deformed  and  unhappy  creatures  on  the
happy  planes.

3 It  was  held  that,  of  the  degraded  A s ii  r a - demons  bound  to  the
earth,  only  those  who  are  born  bhnd  and  the  like  have  this  class  of
rebirth  consciousness.  Some  texts  read  bhummissita  for
bhummassita.  Jaccadinag  is  governed  bymanussanag
as  well  as  by  a s u r a n a g.

'*  Catuggunag.  Strictly  speaking,  double  the  life-term  of  the
Four  Kings.  Both  the  Singhalese  and  the  Burmese  commentaries


Rebirth


141


PT.  t]

four  times  the  life-term  of  the  Thirty-three ; and  so  on  for
the  gods  of  the  heavens  of  Delight,  for  those  of  the  gods
•who  rejoice  in  their  own  creations,  and  for  those  of  the
gods  who  make  others’  creations  serve  their  own  ends.

§ 5.  jSlnemonic.

Of  millions  nine  thousand,  two  hundred  and  ten.

And  yet  six  millions  more,  as  years  go  with  us  here.
Are  the  years  of  a god  so  remote  from  our  ken
As  he  Avho  resides  in  the  Disposers’  sphere.^


§ 6.  Of  Rehirtlis  3 and  4.

The  resultant  (consciousness)  of  first  j h a n a (medita-
tions) takes  effect  on  the  plane  of  first  j h a n a ^ by  way  of
rebirth,  life-continuum  and  re-decease  [in  those  heavens].
In  the  same  way,  second  j h a n a resultants  and  third
j liana  resultants  take  effect  on  the  plane  of  second
jhana;®  fourth  jhana  resultants  take  effect  on  the
plane  of  third  jhana,  and  fifth  jhana  resultants  take
effect  on  the  plane  of  fourth  j h a n a.^

explain  this  curio'us  ‘ t'wice  double  ’ as  (1)  double  the  celestial  day
(measured  by  50  human  years)  as  well  as  (2)  double  the  celestial
term  of  life  (measured  by  500  celestial  years).  Thus  a celestial
day  in  the  heaven  of  the  Thirty-three  would  be  equal  to  100  human
years,  and  the  life-term  therein  1,000  celestial  years,  measured  by
36,000,000  human  years  ; and  this  is  exactly  four  times  the  9,000,000
human  years  of  the  T’our  Kings.  The  celestial  day  of  the  Y a m a
gods  is  200  human  years,  and  their  life-term,  2,000  celestial  years,
measured  by  144,000,000  human  years,  which  again  are  four  times
the  36,000,000  human  years  of  the  Thirty-three  gods,  and  so  on  for  the
rest.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  ‘ four  times  ’ refers  to  the  human  standard
of  time.

^ The  last  two  lines  represent  the  one  word  vasavattisu  (in
the  original).  On  this  curious  mythic  fancy,  see  Paranimmita  in
Childers’s  Dictionary.

^ See  above,  § 2,  (a)  the  Brahmaloka.

^ Ibid.  : Among  the  Eadiant,  etc.,  gods.

It  should  be  remembered  that  the  fivefold  division  of  jhana
stages  is  more  recent  than  the  fourfold,  and  the  distinction  between


142


Of  Process-free  Consciousness  [pt.  v

Bat  for  beings  attaining  to  the  unconscious  realm  there
is  rebirth  only  of  material  form.  And  similarly  thereafter,
during  life,  and  at  the  time  of  re-deceasing,  it  is  only
material  form  which,  having  lived,  ceases  to  be.

These  are  the  six  modes  of  rebirth  in  the  E li  p a 1 o k a.

Among  these  the  life-term  of  gods  in  [the  heaven  of]
Brahma’s  retinue  is  the  third  of  an  aeon  of  gods  in  that  of
Brahma’s  ministers,  half  an  ^on  of  the  great  Brahmas,
one  aeon  f of  the  gods  of  minor  lustre,  two  (great)  - aeons  ;
of  the  gods  of  infinite  lustre,  four  (great)  aeons ; of  the
radiant  gods,  eight  (great)  aeons  ; of  the  gods  of  minor  aura,
sixteen  (great)  aeons ; of  the  gods  of  infinite  aura,  thirty-
two  (great)  aeons  ; of  the  gods  full  of  steady  aura,  sixty-
four  (great)  aeons ; of  the  gods  of  great  reward,  and  of  the
unconscious  beings,  five  hundred  (great)  aeons ; of  the
immobile  gods,  a thousand  (great)  aeons ; of  the  serene
gods,  two  thousand  (great)  aeons ; of  the  beautiful  gods,
four  thousand  (great)  aeons ; of  the  clear-sighted  gods,
eight  thousand  (great)  aeons ; of  the  supreme  gods,  sixteen
thousand  (great)  aeons.

Eesultants  of  the  first  stage  of  Arupaloka  jhana
meditation,  and  of  the  following  stages  take  effect  on  the


stages  1 and  2 in  the  former  scheme  is  very  superficial.  Hence  we
have  here,  as  it  were,  five  jhana  grades  of  preparatory  meditation
and  four  jhana  grades  of  rebirth,  or  planes. — Ed.

1 By  ‘kappa’  is  here  intended  an  asankheyya-kappa  (lit.,
incalculable  cycle),  equal  to  one-fourth  of  a mahakappa  (great
cycle).  This  exceeds  the  time  required  to  exhaust  an  area  filled  with
mustard-seeds,  equal  to  one  square  y o j a n a,  by  throwing  away  a
seed  in  every  hundred  years.  Each  asankheyya-kappa  con-
sists of  sixty-four  antara-kappa’s  (interim  cycles)  ; or  twenty,
according  to  some  authorities ; or  eighty,  according  to  others ; or
fourteen,  according  to  those  who  were  versed  in  the  V e d a s.  These
are  sometimes  spoken  of  as  c u 1 a - k a p p a ’ s (smaller  cycles).  An
antara-kappais  measured  by  the  time  required  by  the  pendulum
of  the  life-term  of  generations  to  swing  from  a ten-year-term  to  an
asankheyy  a-term  and  back  again  to  the  ten-year-term.

1 By  ‘kappa’  here,  and  in  the  following  cases,  is  intended  the
maha-kappa.  See  preceding  note.


Karma


143


PT.  V]

plane  of  the  four  grades^  of  the  Artipaloka  plane
respectively,  hy  way  of  rebirth,  life-continuum,  and  re-
decease.

These  are  the  four  modes  of  rebirth  in  the  A r u p a 1 o k a.

Among  these  four,  the  life-term  of  the  gods  who  have
attained  to  the  sphere  of  infinite  space  is  twenty  thousand
(great)  aeons  ; that  of  the  gods  who  have  attained  to  the
sphere  of  infinite  consciousness  is  forty  thousand  (great)
aeons  ; that  of  the  gods  who  have  attained  to  the  sphere  of
nothingness  is  sixty  thousand  (great)  aeons  ; that  of  the
gods  who  have  attained  to  the  sphere  of  neither  conscious-
ness nor  unconsciousness  is  eighty  thousand  (great)  aeons.

§ 7.  Mnemonic.

In  any  one  rebirth,  life,  death,  the  mind
Is  one,2  one  to  its  object,  and  its  kind.


So  far  for  the  four  kinds  of  rebirth.


§ 8.  Of  K a r m a.

A.  With  respect  to  function,-^  there  are  four  kinds  of
k a r m a

^ See  above,  § 2 (4).

^ Ekam  eva;  the  identity  being,  in  Buddhism,  similarity  in  a
process  of  constant  becoming. — Ed.

On  Identity  see  also  Introd.  Essay,  pp.  8,  11,  42.  The  Com-
mentators say  that  the  rebirth  consciousness,  life  continuum,  and
re-decease  consciousness  in  any  one  existence  are  similar  to  one
another  in  respect  of  plane  (b  h ti  m i),  class  (j  a t i),  composition  (sam-
p ay  utt  a - dh  amm  a),  cause  (sankhara),  and  object  (visaya  or
arammaua).

3 Kiccavasena.  Kicca  is  what  ought  to  be  done,  translated
in  this  work  by  ‘ function.’  K a m m a (karma),  it  should  never  be
forgotten,  is  simply  ‘doing,’  or  ‘acting.’  In  S.  B.  E.,  x.  116,  §§  60,
61  (Dhammapada  and  Swtta-Nipdta  Translations),  it  is  rendered  by
* work.’ — Ed.

* These  categories  may  be  compared  with  the  earlier  less  elaborate


144


Of  Process-free  Consciousness  [pt.  v


1.  Karma  reproductive  [of  an  after-life].

2.  Karma  maintaining  [the  effects  of  Class  1].

3.  Karma  unfavourable  [to  the  effects  of  Class  1,  and
to  the  working  of  Class  2].

4.  Karma  destructive  [to  Classes  1 and  2].

B.  With  respect  to  function,  there  are  four  kinds  of
karma:

1.  WeigKty  k a r m a.^

2.  Proximate  k a r m a.^

3.  Chronic  k a r m a.^

4.  [All  other]  outstanding  k a r m a.^

C.  With  respect  to  time  of  taking  effect  there  are  four
kinds  of  karma:

1.  Karma  (the  fruit  of  which  is)  to  be  experienced  in
this  life.

2.  Karma  (the  fruit  of  which  is)  to  be  experienced  in
(the  next)  life.


and  incidentally  introduced  classifications  of  (a)  the  P i t a k a s — e.g,
M.  iii.,  Cula  and  Maha  kamma-vibhanga  suttas;  (6)  the
Milinda — e.g.,  46,  108,  134,  and  Nettifok  ; 37. — Ed.

^ Garukag — i.e.,  of  teUing  effect.  The  Commentaries  instance
e.g.,  serious  crimes.

2 Asannag  is  a contraction  of  maranasanna g — i.e.,  according
to  the  Commentaries,  action  or  thought  just  before  death.

^ Acinnaka g — i.e.,  habitually  repeated  k a m m a,  repeated  either
in  act  or  thought.

* Katatta:  in  Asl.  p.  262,  where  no  other  kind  is  distinguished
the  synonym  given  is  k a t a k a r a n a,  ‘ because  done.’ — Ed.

Katatta  (lit.,  katassa+bhavo,  ‘the  state  of  having  been
done’)  is  the  name  applied  to  residual  kamma  of  the  present  life
which  is  not  of  the  first  three  classes,  and  also  to  any  kamma  of
anterior  lives,  which  has  as  yet  to  work  out  its  effects  whenever
favourable  opportunities  occur,  when  it  becomes  aparapariya-
kamma,  the  kamma  of  Class  3 under  the  next  head  of  classification.
It  is  the  kamma  held  in  reserve.


Bad  Karma


145


PT.  V]

3.  Karma  [the  fruit  of  which  is]  to  be  experienced  in
some  after-life.

4.  Karma  ‘ which  has  been.’^

D.  lYith  respect  to  place  for  working  out  its  effects
there  are  four  kinds  of  karma:


1.  Bad  karma  [working  out  its  effect]  in  the

K a m a 1 0 k a.

2.  Good  karma  [working  out  its  effect]  in  the

Kamalo  k a.

3.  Good  karma  [working  out  its  effect]  in  the

R ii  p a 1 0 k a.

4.  Good  karma  [working  out  its  effect]  in  the

A r u p a 1 0 k a.


Under  the  first  of  these  four  heads,  and  with  respect  to
the  ‘door,’  bad  karma  is  threefold,  to  wit,  karma  of
act,  speech,  and  thought.

How  [may  these  be  described]  ?

Karma  of  body,  so  called  from  being  done  commonly
through  the  ‘ door  ’ of  the  body,  considered  as  the  medium  ^
of  bodily  expression,  is  taking  life,  taking  wBat  is  not  given,
and  inchastity.

Karma  of  speech,  so  called  from  being  done  commonlj^
through  the  ‘ door  ’ of  speech,  considered  as  the  medium
of  vocal  expression,  is  lying,  slandering,  abusive  language,
and  idle  talk.

Karma  of  thought,  so  called  from  being  done  commonly
through  the  [‘  door  ’ of  the]  mind  [with  or]  ® without  overt
■expression,  is  covetousness,  ill-will,  and  erroneous  opinion.

(1)  Of  the  foregoing  forms  [of  bad  k a r m a],  taking  life,
abusive  language  and  ill-will  spring  from  the  root  of  hate  ;


1 Ahosi-kammaij.  Cf.  Vergil’s  ‘ fuit  Ilium’  . . . (^n.,  II.,
.32^ — k a r m a which  has  lapsed  in  potential  force. — Ed.

2 Yihhatti.  See  Part  VI.  ‘Kay  a’  (body)  here  connotes  ‘ act.’

3 The  Commentators  explain  the  force  of  ‘ a p i ’ as  showing  that
the  karma  of  thought  is  not  always  confined  to  the  mind  door  alone,
but  it  very  often  takes  effect  at  the  other  two  ‘ doors,’  accompanied  by
overt  expression.


10


146


Of  Process-free  Consciousness  [pt.

inchastity,  covetousness,  and  erroneous  opinion,^  spring
from  the  root  of  greed.  The  other  four  come  to  pass  from
[these]  two  ‘ roots  ’ also.^

Analyzed  with  respect  to  classes  of  consciousness,^  there
are  altogether  twelve  kinds  of  bad^  karma.

(2)  Next,  taking  good  karma,  with  respect  to  the
‘ door,’  it  also  is  threefold,  to  wit,  k a r m a of  body,  proceed-
ing at  the  ‘ door  ’ of  the  body  ; k a r m a of  speech,  proceed-
ing at  the  ‘ door  ’ of  speech  ; k a r m a of  thought,  proceeding
at  the  ‘ door  ’ of  mind.

Threefold  also  with  respect  to  charity  (lit.,  giving),  virtue,
and  mental  culture,  it  is  eightfold  with  respect  to  classes
of  consciousness.  Or  again,  tenfold  taking  into  account
charity,  virtue,  mental  culture,  reverence,  service,  trans-
ference of  merit,^  rejoicing  in  [others’]  merit,  hearing  the
doctrine,  teaching  the  doctrine,  and  forming  correct
views.®

It  is  these  twenty  kinds’^  that  are  counted  as  k a r m a in
K a m a 1 0 k a.

(3)  Good  K u p a 1 0 k a karma  is  only  mental  action
(karma  of  thought).  It  consists  in  mental  culture  and
involves  the  attaining  of  ecstasy.  It  is  fivefold,  corre-
sponding to  the  stages  of  j h a n a.

(4)  Good  A r u p a 1 0 k a karma  is  also  only  mental

1 This,  belonging  at  first  sight  more  properly  to  the  third  ‘root,”
suggests  the  proverb  of  ‘ the  wish  (1  o b h a)  being  father  to  the
thought’  (ditthi). — Ed.

2 At  first  it  seems  curious  that  the  third  root  is  passed  over.  But.
the  Commentators  explain  by  saying  that  ‘pi’  (also)  implies  the
inclusion  of  ‘ moha’  (dulness)  as  a root  common  to  all  the  ten  vices
It  is  not  expressly  stated,  for  the  reason  that  this  root  of  roots  does  not
serve  to  distinguish  the  three  classes  of  karma  under  consideration,,
one  from  another.

^ Cittuppadavasena.

4 Part  I.,  § 2.

® Pattidana.  See  Childers’s  Diet.,  s.v.  Patti.. — Ed.

“ On  these  ten,  cf.  Childers’s  Diet.,  s.v.  Pun  ho.  The  seventh
(pattanumodana)  is  there  given  as  abbhanumodana  pun  ho,
and  rendered  as  ‘acceptance  or  use  of  transferred  merit.’ — Ed.

'■  I.e.,  twelve  bad  and  eight  good.  On  the  eight,  see  Part  I.,  § 6.


PT.  V]


Kamaloka  Kai'ina


147


action.  It,  too,  consists  in  mental  culture,  and  involves
the  attaining  of  ecstasy.  It  is  fourfold,  corresponding  to
the  kinds  of  [A  r u p a 1 o k a]  object.

Finally,  bad  k a r m a,  omitting  distraction,^  produces
rebirth  on  the  plane  of  misfortune.

And  further,  during  a lifetime,  all  the  twelve  kinds  [of
bad  k a r m a]  take  effect  as  seven  kinds  of  bad  results  any-
where in  Kamaloka  and  in  E u p a 1 o k a,  according
to  circumstances.

Again,  good  Kamaloka  karma  produces  rebirth
under  fortunate  conditions  in  Kamaloka,  And  simi-
larly during  a lifetime,  it  produces  the  great  resultants^
[in  Kamaloka].  But®  it  produces  the  eight  [good]
resultants,  unaccompanied  by  their  h e t u ’ s,  anywhere  in
Kamaloka  and  in  E u p a 1 o k a,  according  to  circum-
stances. And  further,  good  [karma]  of  the  highest
class  ■*  accompanied  by  its  three  good  ‘ h e t u ’ s,’  both  gives
rise  to  rebirth  similarly  accompanied,  and  takes  effect
during  [that]  lifetime  in  sixteen  kinds  of  resultants.  Again,
good  [k  a r m a]  of  a lower  class,®  accompanied  by  the
three  h e t u ’ s of  good,  as  well  as  good  karma  of  the
highest  class,  accompanied  by  two®  of  these  three  h et  u’s,
both  give  rise  to  a rebirth  attended  by  those  two  h e t u ’ s,
and  also  take  effect,  during  that  lifetime,  in  twelve  kinds
of  resultants,  omitting  those  accompanied  by  these  three
hetu’s.'^  Lastly,  good  [karma]  of  a lower  class,  which
is  accompanied  by  two  of  these  hetu’s,  both  gives  rise
only  to  such  rebirth  as  is  not  accompanied  by  any  h e t u,
and  also  takes  effect,  during  that  lifetime,  in  resultants
also  unaccompanied.

1 Commentators  explain  that  distrait  action  is  too  feeble  to  effect
rebirth.

2 I.e.,  the  eight  named  in  Part  I.,  § 4.

® According  to  the  Burmese  MSS.  the  text  has  ‘ p a n a,’  which,  in
the  J.P.T.S.  text  is  omitted. — Ed.

Ukkatthap  ; the  only  occurrence  of  this  term. — Ed.

^ Omakap.  See  previous  note.

® A 1 o b h a and  a d o s a.

’ Tihetuka-rahitani.  The  four  uana-sampayutta’s  arc
now  excluded  from  the  foregoing  sixteen.


148


Of  Proccss-frec  Consciousness  [pt.  v


§ 9.  Mnemonic  Note.

Some  teachers^  hold  that  automatic  thought
Cannot  result  in  willed  or  prompted  [deed],

Nor  that  self-willed  or  prompted  thinking  aught
That’s  merely  automatic  act  can  breed.

To  meet  their  views  : — by  twelve  and  ten,  or  eight,’’
Eeplace  the  sixteen  and  the  twelve  above — ■
Eesults,  be  it  remembered  w’e  did  state.

[Let  each  compare  and,  as  he  will,  approve.]


§ 10.  D.  3 and  4.

One  who  has  practised  in  a minor  degree  good  R ii  p a -
loka  karma,  which  consists  of  the  first  jhana,  is
reborn  in  the  heaven  of  Brahma’s  retinue ; one  who  has
practised  it  in  a moderately  high  degree,  in  the  heaven
of  Brahma’s  ministers ; one  who  has  practised  it  in  a
surpassing  degree,  in  the  heaven  of  the  great  Brahma’s.

Similarly,  practice  in  a minor  degree  of  second  and  third
jhana  [results  in  rebirth]  among  the  gods  of  minor  lustre  ;
practice  in  a moderately  high  degree,  among  gods  of  infinite
lustre ; practice  in  a surpassing  degree,  among  the  radiant
gods.

Similarly,  practice  in  a minor  degree  of  fourth  jhana
[results  in  rebirth]  among  the  gods  of  minor  aura ; in  a
moderately  high  degree,  in  rebirth  among  the  gods  of
unlimited  aura ; in  a surpassing  degree,  among  the  gods
full  of  steady  aura.

Lastly,  practice  of  fifth  jhana  [results  in  rebirth]
among  the  gods  of  the  Great  Eeward.  The  same  practised

1 The  Ceylon  Cy.  {Abhidhammattlia-VibMvanl)  mentions  the
teachers  of  the  school  of  Mahadhammarakkhita  Thera  of
M 0 r a V a p i Monastery  in  Ceylon.  Ledi  Sadaw  names  Mahadatta
Thera  as  the  head  of  this  school  of  thought.

2 Eeplace  16  and  12  by  12  and  10  respectively  and  we  get  12,  10,
and  8,  according  to  the  school  of  thought  in  question.


Karma  at  Death


149


PT.  y]


with  a view  to  extirpate  lust  for  consciousness^  [results  in
rebirth]  in  the  heaven  of  the  unconscious ; but  Never-
returners  [practising  fifth  j h an  a]  are  reborn ^ in  the  Pure
Abodes.

Further,  one  who  has  practised  good  Arupaloka
karma  is  reborn,  in  corresponding  order,  in  one  of  the
four  Arupaloka  spheres.


§ 11.  Mnemonic.

E’en  thus  our  merit,  waxing  great  and  for  this  plane,  or
that  one  bound.

Brings  forth  results  like  to  itself,  in  rebirth  and  the  vital
round.


So  far  for  the  fourfold  [classifying  of]  karma.


§ 12.  W.  Of  the  Advent  of  Death.

Four  are  [the  grounds  for]  the  advent  of  death.®  It
comes  through  the  expiration  of  the  span  of  life,  through
the  extinction  of  ka  rm  a,  through  the  expiration  of  both,
and  through  destructive  karma.

Now  to  those  thus  about  to  die  there  is  present  in
consciousness,  at  the  hour  of  death,  by  the  power  of
karma,  at  one  or  other  of  the  six  ‘ doors,’  according  to
circumstance,^  either —

(fl)  A presentation®  of  such  karma  from  past  existence
as  is  bringing  about  rebirth  ; or

^ Sauna- viraga^ — an  adverbial  phrase  meaning,  literally,  ‘till
the  lust  for  consciousness  is  extirpated.’

2 Uppajjant  i — spring  into  being.  Ledi  Sadaw  would  have  us  to
translate  this  last  clause  into  but  in  the  pure  abodes,  the  Anagami’ s
alone  are  reborn,’  in  order  to  indicate  that,  while  the  pure  abodes  are
exclusively  reserved  for  those  of  the  Anagami’s  who  practise  the
fifth  j h a n a,  those  who  practise  the  lower  j h a n a s may  be  reborn  in
the  lower  planes.

^ Cf.  Milinda,  301. — Ed.  See  Part  III.,  § 10.

Abhimukhibhutag,  ‘ what  has  become  face  to  face.’ — Ed.


150


Of  Process-free  Consciousness  [pt.  v

{h)  A (sign,  or)  token  of  that  harm  a,  such  as  a visible,
or  other  object,  which  vyas  got  at  the  time  when  the
karma  was  performed  and  became  an  instrument  there-
in or

(c)  A sign  of  the  destiny  which,  as  their  lot  in  the
existence  immediately  impending,  is  by  them  to  be  under-
gone.

After  that,  attending  to  just  this  object  which  has  fixed
itself  [in  consciousness],  there  usually  goes  on  an  un-
interrupted continuum^  of  consciousness,  which  is  either
[morally]  pure,  or  corrupt,  according  to  the  k a r m a that
is  being  matured,  and  which,  in  conformity  with  the
existence  that  is  about  to  be  undergone,  tends  thither.

Only  such  karma  as  is  capable  of  producing  rebirth  is
able  to  arrive  at  ‘ the  door  ’ [of  presentation]  as  a re-
presentation^ of  itself.

To  one  who  is  at  the  point  of  death,  at  the  end  of  his
mental  processes,  or  expiry  of  his  life-continuum,  the
death-thought,^  or  last  phase  of  his  present  being  arises,
and  with  his  decease,  ceases.  At  the  end  of  this  cessation,
and  just  after  it,  mental  action,®  which  is  called  rebirth,
because  it  consists  in  a joining  together®  the  past  existence
[with  the  new],  arises  and  is  set  up  in  the  next  existence,'

^ The  Commentators  instance  the  shrine  where  the  dying  one
worshipped,  the  tank  he  had  made,  the  flowers  offered  in  worship,  the
knife  with  which  he  murdered,  etc.

2 Cittasantanag.  On  s a n t a n a , which  occurs  also  on  p.  161  in
this  work,  see  De  la  V.  Poussin  : ‘Dogmatique  Bouddhiste,’  Journal
Asiatique,  Sept.,  Oct.,  1902,  discussed  in  J.E.A.S.,  1903,  pp.  584  -ff. ;
1904,  p.  370.— Ed.

^ Abhinavakaranavasena:  lit.,  ‘ by  way  of  renewing  itself.’
J.e.,  not  of  imagining,  but  of  repeated  origuial  experience.

^ Cuticittaij.

®Manasag.  In  Dlis.,  § 6,  described  as  equivalent  to  mano  and
viniia  n a. — Ed.

® Patisandhi,  ‘ rebirth,’  but=lit.,  uniting  (■i.e.,  of  lives).

‘ Past  ’ and  ‘ next  existence  ’ are  both  ‘bhavantaraq’  Appar-
ently the  Commentators  make  no  allusion  to  any  tradition  of  an
intermediate  state,  such  as  we  meet  with  in  more  animistic  thana-
tology  • — Ed.


Karina  in  Rebirth


151


PT.  V]

according  to  circumstances  and  capacities.  This  mental
action  is  engaged  upon  the  object  presented  as  described  ;
it  has  either  a [physical]  base,  or  no  base ; it  is  brought
forth  by  a mental  activity^  which  is  rooted  in  such  craving
as  is  dormant,^  and  is  wrapt  in  such  ignorance  as  is  latent  f
it  is  surrounded  by  its  mental  associates,  and  it  becomes
the  foregoer,  by  being  a fixed  [locus'],^  of  all  that  is  co-
existent with  it.


§ 13.  Of  Rebirth.

In  the  process  of  dying  consciousness^  apperception  pro-
ceeds feebly,  and  only  five  moments  may  be  looked  for.
Therefore,  in  the  case  of  death  coming  when  objects  are
actually  present^  in  the  avenues  of  consciousness,  the  rebirth-
consciousness  and  also  [a  few  succeeding  moments  of]  ® the
life-continuum  are  then  in  a state  to  obtain  actual  pre-
sentation. And  so  it  comes  that,  on  occasion  of  rebirth  in
K a m a 1 0 k a , there  is  obtained,  by  way  of  the  six  ‘ doors,’
either  a token  of  karma,  or  a sign  of  destiny,^  as  an

^ Sankharena  janiyamanag.  See  Appendix  : S a n k h a r a.

^ Ann  say  a:  lit.,  ‘ that  which  sleeps  continuously.’  See  Part  VII.

^ Adhitthanabhavena.

■*  Maranasannavithiyag:  lit.,  ‘ in  the  process  (of  thought)  at
the  time  of  near  death.’  Cf.  Part  IV.,  § 11. — Ed.

® The  translator’s  text  reads  dh  ar  ant  esu,  lit., ‘while  the  object
which  has  entered  the  avenue  of  consciousness  stands,  i.e.,  lasts.’  I
was  inclined  to  read  mar  antes  u,  but  this  cannot  be  a correct
reading,  for  marantanag  is  required  by  grammar. — Ed.

^ See  Introd.  Essay  on  M a r a n a s a n n a - k a m m a,  p.  73.

" The  sign  of  destiny^  according  to  the  Ceylon  Cy.,  consists  only  of
the  visible  object  (r  fi  p a r a m m a n a g e k a m e v a)  laid  hold  of  by  the
mind-door  (manodvaragahitag),  and  is  actually  present  (e  k a n -
tapaecuppannag).  Its  presentation  is  compared  to  a vision  in  a
dream  (vannayatanag  supinam  passantassa  viya).  But
as  the  dream-phenomenon  is  not  confined  to  sight  and  sight  alone,  the
sign  of  destiny,  in  all  probability,  consists  of  any  of  the  six  classes  of
object.  So  Ledi  Sadaw  of  Burma  contends,  on  the  authority  of
the  Alahdtfka,  the  great  Commentary  on  the  Visaddhi-magga.
But  our  humble  opinion  is  that  this  dream-like  vision  is  seen  by  the
mind’s  eye,  and  is  not  laid  hold  of  by  the  six  ‘ doors,’  as  the  latter  also
contends.


152


Of  Process-free  Consciousness  [pt.  v

object  either  present  or  past.  But  the  karma  itself  is
obtained  only  as  an  object  of  past  experience,  and  it  is  laid
hold  of  by  the  ‘ door  ’ of  mind.

But  all  the  foregoing  is  concerned  with  objects  of  a minor
character  {i.e.,  of  sense-experience).

In  rebirth  only  a token  of  k a r m a,  in  the  shape  of  a
concept,^  becomes  an  object.

Soo,  too,  in  rebirth  in  A r ii  p a 1 o k a,  the  only  form  of
object  presented  is  a sign  of  karma,  which  is  either  a
sublime  cognition  itself,  or  a concept  according  to  the
classes  of  rebirth-consciousness.

In  the  case  of  rebirth  among  unconscious  beings,  only
the  vital  ‘ nonad  ’ ^ is  reincarnated,  hence  they  are  called
the  materially  reborn.  Beings  reborn  into  the  A r u p a
spheres  are  called  materially-and-mentally  reborn.

§ 14.  Mnemonic  Note  on  Death  and  Birth.

If  from  th’  A r h p a plane  you  pass  away.

You  may  be  reborn  in  the  selfsame  way.

If  not  in  higher  formless  spheres  ; but  not
In  lower  plane  will  be  your  lot ;

Or  else  you  may  find  birth  in  this  our  sphere
With  threefold  ‘ root.’^  From  R ii  p a 1 o k a gone.

Of  luckless  rebirth  you  inherit  none.

From  Kama-  world,  if  bound  to  h e t u ’ s three.

All  rebirths  open  are  to  you.  But  here.

To  K a m a,  others  all  reborn  must  be.


So  far  for  the  order  of  re-decease  and  rebirth.

§ 15.  Of  the  Stream  of  Becoming.

So  to  those  who  have  thus  got  rebirth,  the  same  kind  of
consciousness  [as  attended  rebirth],  occupied  with  the  same

1 Attha-panfiattiis  here  intended.  See  above,  Part  III.,  § 10  ;
below,  Part  VIII.,  §§  14,  15.

2 See  next  Part.  Cf.  also  p.  136,  n.  2.

2 I.e.,  the  three  good  ‘ h e t u ’ s.


PT.  v]  The  Stream  of  Becoming  153

[field  of]  objects,  starting  straight  away  after  [the  moment
of]  rebirth,  goes  on,  in  the  absence  of  any  process  of  cogni-
tion, in  unbroken  flux  like  the  stream  of  a river  till  the
uprising  of  death-consciousness.  [And  this  flux  of]  mind,
because  it  is  a condition  of  being,  is  called  continuance  of
the  condition  of  being.^  At  the  end,  by  reason  of  dying,
it  becomes  consciousness  of  re-decease^  and  then  ceases.
After  that,  rebirth-consciousness  and  the  rest,  revolving
according  to  circumstances,  like  the  wheel  of  a chariot,  go
on  and  on.

§ 16.  Mnemonic.

Birth,  life-flux,  processes  of  thought,  decease.

Both  here  and  in  existence  yet  to  be,

Birth,  life  again  . . . and  thus  incessantly
Doth  this  conscious  continuum  turn  round.

But  the  Enlightened,  pondering^  release
From  this  that  passeth  ever  by,  have  found, —

Steadfast  down  the  long  years  in  piety.

All  bonds  of  cleaving  severed  utterly, —

The  Path  sublime,'*  where  death  and  rebirth  cease  ;

And  they,  so  faring,  shall  attain  to  Peace. ^


Thus  ends  the  Fifth  Part,  in  the  Compendium  of
Philosophy,  called  the  Chapter  on  the  Compendium  of
Cognitions  not  subject  to  process.

^Bhavanga-santati:  lit.,  ‘ the  continuity  of  the  factor  of  being.’
The  Commentators,  however,  explain  ‘anga’  in  bhavangaby
karanag,  'a  condition,’  or  ‘ cause.’  See  Introd.  Essay,  pp.  9,  10.

^Cuticittag.  C/.  p.  150,  n.  4.

^ Patisankhaya.  Eepeatedly  contemplating  the  transiency  of
things  bypatisankha-hana.  On  this  insight  see  Part  IX.

^ Adhigantva  pa  dag.  The  Commentators  explain  a d h i -
gantva  by  magga-phala-hanena  saechikatv  a — realizing
by  means  of  the  understanding  of  the  path-consciousness  and  fruition-
consciousness — and  explain  p a d a g to  mean  the  sa-upadisesa-
nibbana.  See  Pt.  V.,  § 14.

® S a m a g.  The  Commentators  say  that  by  this  word  the  a n u p a -
disesa-nibbana  is  meant.


PART  VI


THE  COMPENDIUM  OF  MATTEE  i

§ 1.  Introductory.

Analysis  of  thought  and  thought’s  adjuncts
Thus  far  has  set  forth  class  and  process  all.
Now  form^  material  must  be  described,
Enumeration,  aspects,  origins  and  groups.
And  natural  procedure  : — these  do  form
The  five  divisions  of  this  summary.


§ 2.  Of  the  Kinds  of  Material  Quality.^

Material  quality  is  twofold,  to  wit,  the  four  great
essentials,^  and  material  qualities  derived  therefrom,  the
two  making  up  eleven  species.

How  [eleven]  ?

(1)  Essential  material  qualities — viz.,  the  element^  of

1 ‘Blip  a,’  in  its  generic  sense,  means  ‘matter,’  and  in  its  specific
sense,  ‘quality.’  But,  in  popular  language,  it  means  ‘form.’

2 M ah  ab  h u t a n i (b  h u = esse).  This  is  nearer  the  Pali  than
our  ‘elements’ — a term  reserved  for  dhatu,  below.  Cf.  B.  Psij.
xlviii.,  and  on  Eupa  and  its  forms,  xli.-lxiii.,  and  Book  II. — Ed.

3 D h a t u is  defined  by  the  Commentators  as  ^liat  which  carries  its
own  characteristic  marks  or  attributes  (a  1 1 a no  sabhavap  dhare-
tlti  dhatu).  See  Appendix  : Dhatu.

154


PT.  Vl]


Ma teri al  Qua Uti es


. 155


extension/  the  element  of  cohesion/  the  element  of  heat,
the  element  of  motion/

(2)  Sensitive  material  qualities — viz.,  the  eye,  the  ear,
the  nose,  the  tongue,  the  bocly.'^

(3)  Material  qualities  of  sense-fields — viz.,  visible  form,^
sound,  odour,  sapids,  and  the  tangible,  the  last  excluding
the  element  of  cohesion,  and  being  held  [to  lie  in  the
other]  three  essentials.®

(4)  Material  qualities  of  sex’’  — viz.,  female  sex  and
male  sex.

^ Pathavl  is  derived  from  ‘pattharati  ’ — ‘ to  spread  out  or
extend.’  Extension  to  us  means  occupation  in  space.  Tri-diinensional
extension  gives  rise  to  our  idea  of  a solid  body.  As  no  two
bodies  can  occupy  the  same  space  at  the  same  time,  Buddhists
derive  their  idea  of  hardness  (kakkhalatta-lakkhana)  from
p a t h a V i,  and  regard  pathavl  as  a primary  quality  (p  a t h a v i
ev  a d h a t u).

^ A p 0.  The  Commentators  explain  this  term  to  mean  that  element
which  diffuses  itself  throughout  the  mass,  pervades  the  whole  mass,
and  increases  the  bulk  of  material  bodies,  keeping  their  atoms  from
being  scattered  about,  holding  and  collecting  them  together.

^ Vayo.  The  Commentators  explain  this  term  to  mean  the
element  which  causes  a body  or  bodies  to  change  place  ( d e s a n t a -
ruppatti-hetu-bhavena),  or  which  moves  the  body,  which
vibrates,  or  oscillates  (s  a m i r e t i).

^ I.e.,  the  dermic  skin.

® K ii  p a p.  Thus  we  see  that  visible in  the  sense  of  a certain
coloured  surface  is  only  one  quality  out  of  the  twenty-four  named  in
ihis  section.

® Particles  of  matter  are  held  together  by  apo  (cohesion),  which
cannot  be  felt  by  the  sense  of  touch — e.g.,  when  one  puts  his  hand  into
cold  water,  the  softness  of  water  felt  is  not  apo  but  pathavl;  the
cold  felt  is  not  apo,  but  t e j o ; the  pressure  felt  is  not  apo  but  vayo.
Hence  Buddhists  take  only  the  three  essentials  or  primaries  to  consti-
tute the  tangible.  From  this  one  can  easily  see  that  Buddhists  are
not  dealing  with  Thales’  water,  Anaximenes’  air,  Herakleitus’  fire,  or
the  Peripatetics’  matter,  of  Greek  philosophy.

^Itthattap,  purisattag;  in  Abhidh.  Pit.,  itthin-
driyap,etc. — Ed.  The  generic  name  is  simply  ‘ b h a v a ’ (state),
abbreviated  from  itthibhava-t-pumbhava  = itthipumbhava.
Ledi  Sadaw  explains  the  ‘ b h a v a’  as  that  state  by  which  masculinity
and  femininity  can  be  distinguished.


156


Of  3Iafter  [pt.  vi

(5)  Material  qualities  of  base — viz.,  the  heart-base.

(6)  Material  quality  of  life — viz.,  vital  force.

(7)  ^Material  quality  of  nutrition — viz.,  edible  food.''^

All  these,  amounting  to  eighteen^  species  of  material
qualitj^  are  also  otherwise  distinguished  :

(a)  according  to  their  diferential  characteristics  f

if>)  according  to  their  salient  marks  f

(r)  as  determined  by  karma  and  environment

[d]  as  mutahle  ;

(e)  as  object  fit  for  contemplation.^

(8)  Material  quality  of  limitation — viz.,  the  element  of
space.

I.e.,  of  mental  life.  On  this  common  feature  in  Eastern  and
Western  psycho-physiology,  see  above.  Part  III.,  § 12.  In  the
VisuddJmnagga- {&) 'precedes  {5).  The  D7is.  omits  (5). — Ed.  According
to  later  commentators  its  omission  is  not  accidental.  See  above,
p.  123,  n.  1,  and  Appendix  : Hadayavatthu.

^ A h a r o is  sustenance,  physical  or  mental.  Here  physical  sus-
tenance is  intended.  S.,  ii.  11 ; B.  Psy.,  30,  n.  1. — Ed.

® Eighteen,  by  counting  (3)  as  only  four,  the  tangible  having  been
enumerated  under  (1).  See  Mnemonic  ; also  n.  6,  p.  155.

^ Sabhavarupaij:  a t tan  o sabha.’^'ena  siddhap.

®Salakkhanarupag:  aniccadihilakkhanehi  salii-
tap.

•'Nipphannarupap:  kammadihi  paccayehi  nip-
philditap.  The  conditioning  environments  are  citta,  utu,  and
a h a r a.

’’Rupa-rupag:  ruppanasabliavena  yuttag.  The
term  ‘ r u p a ’ is  related  to  r u p p a t i,  ‘to  change  ’ (under  contrary
influences  of  cold,  heat,  etc.).  The  first  qualifying  member  of  this
curious  compound  retains  its  etymological  sense,  whilst  the  second
qualified  member  is  used  in  its  derivative  sense  of  matter.  The  Com-
mentators therefore  explain  this  compound  as  indicating  the  sub-
jection of  matter  to  change  of  forms  under  contrary  influences.  Cf.
du  kk  h a - dukkh  a ij.  If  so,  it  seems  to  amount  only  to  a more
general  form  of  (c)  n i p p h a n n a r u p a p.

® S a m m a s a n a r u p a p.  The  Commentators  explain  this  by  the
three  salient  marks,  a n i c c a,  etc.  On  the  S a m m a s a n a - Insight,
see  Part  IX.,  § 6.


Material  Qualities


157


PT.  VI


(9)  Material  quality  of  communication — viz.,  intimation
by  the  body,i  and  intimation  by  speech.

(10)  Material  quality  of  plasticity'^ — viz.,  lightness,  pliancy,
adaptability  of  matter  and  the  two  media  of  communication.

(11)  Material  qualities  of  salient  features^ — viz.,  integra-
tion, continuance^  [of  integration],  decay,  and  imperma-
nence of  matter.  But  here  the  [phenomenon  of]  produc-
tion ^ of  matter  alone  is  described  by  the  two  names  of
‘ integration  ’ and  ‘ continued  integration.’'^

Thus  the  eleven  kinds  of  material  quality  may  be
resolved  into  twenty-eight  when  considered  as  so  many
properties.®


§ 3.  Mnemonic.

How  [into  twenty-eight]  ?

The  ybi(r  essentials  and  nine  wherewithals  of  sense
Five  organs  and  four  objects — tico  of  sex-difference,

^ Kaya  = copana-kaya,  ‘ the  moving  'body  communication  by
signs.

^ Vikararupar).  Ledi  Sadaw  explains  this  term  by  v i s e s a -
karo,  ‘ peculiar,  distinctive  condition.’

3 Lakkhanarupap:  distinguishable  logically  from  {cT)  above,
as  consisting  in  the  impressively  characteristic,  the'former  being  that
which  has  these  features  (salakkhana).

^ On  these  two  terms,  cf.  B.  Psy.,  195,  n.  2.  It  must  be  borne  in
mind,  however,  that  s a n t a t i,  in  this  connection,  is  not  the  continu-
ance of  what  has  integrated,  but  of  the  phenomenon  of  integration
itself.  This  is  explained  by  the  next  sentence.  Strictly  speaking,  we
have  only  three  lakkhanarupas  corresponding  to  the  three  phases
of  organic  hfe,  viz.,  birth,  growth-and- decay,  and  death.  Growth
begins  with  bh’th  and  decay  ends  in  death.  And  the  entire  interval
between  birth  and  death  is  covered  by  the  word  j a r a t a — ‘ the  state
of  growing  old.’  For  this  reason,  in  such  works  as  Saccasan-
k h e p a,  only  twenty- seven  species  of  r u p a are  enumerated.

® Jati-rupag  : rupassa-f-jati,  ‘ the  production  of  matter  ;■
or  jati  eva  rupap,  ‘the  material  quahty  or  phenomenon  o/ pro-
duction.’ The  Commentators  adopt  the  latter.

® Sarupavasena.  Classes  (8)  to  (11)  are  in  the  translator’s
original  termed  Anipphanna-rupaij,  the  meaning,  according  to


158  OJ'  Matter  [pt.  yi

The  heart,  the  vital  force,  and  food  make  eighteen  kinds
Of  form  material.  Besides  all  these  one  finds
Matter  as  bounded,  medium  of  sign  or  speech.

As  plastic,  mark  essential,  three  and  four  to  each.

All  properties  inherent  a priori.  Now

Ten  and  eighteen  are  eight  and  twenty  [you’ll  allow].


So  far  for  a concise  exposition  of  matter.


§ 4.  Of  General  Aspects  of  flatter.

Now  all  this  matter  is  wholly  included  under  the  follow-
ing categories  : —

without  [moral  and  immoral]  h e t u’ s
relative  f

bound  up  with  the  a s a v a ’ s
conditioned  ;■*
mundane  ;

belonging  to  the  K a m a 1 o k a ;
not  subjective;^
not  to  be  got  rid  of.®

But  when  distinguishing  it  as  internal,  or  external,  and
so  forth,  it  may  be  divided  in  several  ways.  How  so  ?


him,  being  ‘ not  predetermined  by  k arm  a,’  etc.  See  n.  5,  on  p.  156.
Nipphanna  is,  literally,  ‘ spread  out,’  ‘arranged’  (c/.  Jah,  iv.  37),
implying  planned  construction.  Cf.  Asl.,  316  : ‘Na  nipphanna-
rupanag  vasena  cakkhudasaka  ij.’ — Ed.

1 Ahetukag:  ‘ unmoral.’

2 Sappaccayaij:  ‘ related  to  causes  and  conditions.’

® Sasavag:  See  Part  VII.,  § 2.

■iSankhatag:  paccayehi  sangamma  kariyatiti:
(Ledi  Sadaw’s  Paramattha-dlpan%)  ‘that  which  is  made,  conditioned,
or  caused  by  a combination  of  causes.’

5 An  ar  am  m a 11  a tj,  lit.,  ‘not  having  an  object’ — he.,  it  only  is
object. — Ed.

® Appahatabbag:  he.,  ‘ indestructible.’

Cf.  the  longer  list  in  Dlis.,  § 595. — Ed.


PT.  Vl]


159


Aspects  of  flatter

The  five  sensitive  kinds  of  matter  (2)  are  internal  material
qualities  ; the  others  are  external.

Six  kinds,  comprising  the  sensitives,  together  with  the
heart^  (2),  (5),  are  basic  material  qualities;  the  others  are
not  bases.

Seven  kinds,  comprising  the  sensitives  and  the  two
media  of  communication  (2),  (9),  are  ‘ door ’-forms  of
matter  ; the  others  are  not  doors.

Eight  kinds,  comprising  the  five  sensitives,  the  two  sex-
states  and  vital  force  (2),  (4),  (6)  are  controlling  ^ forces  of
matter ; the  others  are  not  controlling  forces.

Twelve  kinds,  comprising  the  five  sensitives,  and  the
seven ^ objects  of  sense,  are  gross, or  near,  or  resisting
material  qualities  ; the  others  are  subtle,  or  remote,  or
non-resisting  material  qualities.

Material  quality  born  of  karma®  has  been  ‘grasped
at,’  all  other  has  not  been  ‘ grasped  at.’®

^ See  p.  123,  n.  1.

-Indriyarupar):  atthavidham  pi  indriya-rupag
paiieavinnanesu  lingadlsu  sahajarupa-paripalane
ea  adhipaccayo  gate.  {Ahliidhammattlia  Vihlidvanl):
‘The  eight  kinds  are  called  Indriya-rupag,  because  they
regulate  (or  control)  the  five  senses,  as  well  as  the  primary  and
secondary  characters  of  either  sex,  and  keep  the  co-existent  qualities
of  body  from  deca3^’  It  must  be  clearly  borne  in  mind  that  in  cases
of  sense-control  it  is  not  a case  of,  say,  sight  controlling  the  eye,  but
a case  of  the  eye  regulating  sight.  Cakkhum  eva  indriyag,
the  eye  is  the  I n d r i y a.

^ Seven,  and  not  five,  here,  because  the  tangible  is  now  counted  as
three  essentials,  or  elements.  See  p.  155,  n.  6.

See  p.  120,  n.  1.  'The  Ceylon  Commentary  explains  ‘olari-
kag,’  bj’  visaya-'V'isayT-bhavapatti  vasena  thulatta
— ‘ because  of  grossness  by  way  of  becoming  (lit.,  ‘ arriving  at  the  state
of’)  sense-organs  and  sense-objects’;  santike,  by  gahanassa
sukaratt  a — ‘ because  of  easiness  to  take  (the  gross  matter).’  S a p -
patighag,  lit.,  ‘ with  striking’  is  applied  to  the  ‘gross,’  or  ‘near,’
species  of  r u p a,  because  they  mutually  strike  each  other.

“ For  instance,  one’s  own  bodily  form  and  features.

® Upadinnag,  ‘ grasped  at  by  craving.’  See  the  term  discussed
in  B.  Psy.,  201,  n.  4;  323  n.  The  Ceylon  Cy.  explains  this  term  by
‘tanhaditthlhi  upetena  kammuna  attano  phalabha-


160  Of  Mattel'  [pt.  vi

Coloured  object^  is  visible  material  quality ; all  else  is
invisible  material  quality.

Eye  and  ear,  as  not  giving  immediate  access  (to  their
objects^),  and  nose,  tongue  and  body,  as  giving  immediate
access,  are  five  kinds  of  field-holding ^ material  quality;
the  others  are  material  qualities  holding  no  special  field.

Colour,  odour,  taste,  nutritive  essence,^  and  the  four
essentials  are  the  eight  kinds  of  inseparable  material
quality  ; all  the  others  are  separable.

§ 5.  Mnemonic:

Thus  all  those  eight  and  twenty  kinds  do  men  of  vision  clear
Group,  as  ‘ internal,’  and  so  forth,  even  as  they  appear.

So  far  for  aspects  of  matter.^


vena  adinnatta:  (so  termed)  ‘ because  it  has  been  grasped  at  by
the  karma  that  is  closely  attended  with  craving  and  erroneous
opinion,  by  way  of  its  own  fruit.’

Rupayatanap,  a synonym  of  v a n n a y a t a n a g ; n i 1 a d i •
vanna-sankhatap  rupam  eva  cittacetasikanap  up-
patti-tthanatta  akaratta  ca  ayatanah  cati  rupaya-
tanap  (Pornija-fika).  The  material  quality  called  the  colours  of
blue,  etc.,  is  itself  the  ay  a tan  a,  because  it  is  the  place  where  mind
and  its  properties  operate  together.

2 The  Mahd  AWiakatlia  did  not  distinguish  light  and  sound  from
other  sensibles.  The  distinction  began  with  Buddhaghosa,  probably
because  he  was,  to  a certain  extent,  acquainted  with  the  com-
paratively modern  undulatory  theory  of  light  and  sound.  But  this
distinction  has  led  the  author  of  Ahliidliammattlia-viblidvarCl  to
commit  himself  to  the  view  that  there  is  no  contact  between  eye  and
its  object,  ear  and  sound.  U.  Hlaing,  the  Y a w - A t u n w u n,  one  of
the  ablest  authorities  on  Buddhism  in  Burma,  rejected  the  distinction
itself  on  the  authority  of  the  Malid-Atthahathd.  Ledi  Sadaw,  on
the  other  hand,  accepts  the  distinction,  and  explains  that,  though
there  is  undoubtedly  contact  between  eye  and  light,  ear  and  sound,  yet
the  mind,  bj'  habit,  refers  these  sensations  to  the  outer  objects  that  do
not  come  in  contact.

^ Gocaraggahika-rupap.  Some  texts  read  g a h a k a.

^ 0 j a.  Apart  from  taste  (r  a s a)  every  object  has  its  own  nutritive
essence.  What  is  poison  to  one  is  meat  to  another.

® Rupavibhago,  lit.,  ‘ division  of  r u p a.’


FT.  vi]  Origins  of  j\[aterial  Phenomena  161

§ 6.  On  the  Origins^  of  Material  Phenomena.-

The  four  things  said  to  be  the  origins  of  material
phenomena  are :

1.  karma;

2.  mind

3.  physical  change  f

4.  food.

1.  Material  Phenomena  horn  of  Karma.

The  twenty- five  kinds  of  good  and  bad  karma,  belong-
ing to  life  in  Kamaloka  and  in  R li  p a 1 o k a,  cause
to  come  forth,  from  instant  to  instant, “ starting  with
rebirth,  well-produced®  material  phenomena,  ‘originating
in  k a r m a,’  within  our  personal  continuity.’^


1 Samutthanaij  : By  ‘ origin  ’ is  not  meant  the  absolute  origin,
which  is  a mystery  of  mysteries.  It  is  used  in  the  sense  in  which
Darwin  used  it  in  the  phrase  ‘ origin  of  species.’

On  this  subject  compare  the  much  older  discussion  in  Milinda,
271.— Ed.

- The  word  ‘ phenomena  ’ (as  r u p a ij  , always  singular  in  Pali)  is
used  here  instead  of  ‘ material  quality  ’ to  show  that  r u p a is  also
connected  with  rupayati,  ‘to  show,’  or  ‘to  cause  to  appear.’
Etipayati  pakasetiti  rupag.

3 C i 1 1 a,  rendered  elsewhere  by  consciousness. — Ed.

■*  U t u,  or  temperature.  As  every  change  in  physical  nature  is
attributed  to  utu,  the  element  or  manifestation  of  t e jo  (heat),  utu,
lit.,  ‘ season,’  has  come  to  be  identified  with  physical  nature  itself,  or
with  physical  causes,  including  chemical  causes,  or  all  physical  forces.

® Khane  khane,  lit.,  ‘at  every  moment.’  It  is  explained  in
the  comments  by  ‘ekekassa  eittassa  tlsu  tisu  khanesu
nirantarag.’  The  three  instants  of  each  thought-moment  are
here  intended.

Abhisankhatag.  This  term  is  explained  in  the  Para-
m a t th  a - dip  anl  by‘atitakale  yatha  kalantare  rupag
janeti,  tatha  visesetva  sutthu  katag,’  meaning  ‘as
rup  a was  produced  at  a different  time  in  the  past,  so  well-produced.’
This  comment  reveals  the  conviction  that  karma-  born  matter  is
not  produced  out  of  nothing,  but  from  some  pre-existing  materials.

^ Ajjhattikasantane.


11


162


Of  Mutter


[PT.  VI


2.  Material  Phenomena  born  of  Mind.

Mind,  in  seventy-five  modes — i.e.,  excluding  the  resultants
of  the  Arupaloka,  and  the  twice  fivefold  cognition — ^
while  only  in  the  course  of  springing  up,^  causes  to  come
forth,  from  the  first  moment  of  our  life-continuum,'^
material  phenomena  ‘originating  in  mind.’  Here  too*
apperception  during  ecstasy  serves  to  strengthen®  bodily
postures.  But  determining  cognition  also,*  Kamaloka
apperception  and  super-intellection  give  rise  to  [the
physical  media  of]  communication.^  And  thirteen  [kinds
of]  joyous  apperceptions  also*  produce  laughter.


3.  Material  Phenomena  horn  of  Physical  Change.

The  temperature  of  heat  and  cold,  named’’  ‘ the  element
of  heat,’  when  it  reaches  its  static  stage,  gives  rise  to
material  phenomena,  ‘ originated  by  physical  change,’
either  internal  or  external  according  to  circumstances.

1 I.e.,  eighty-nine  minus  these  fourteen,  mind’s  total  number  of
modes  being  eighty-nine.  See  above,  Part  I. — Ed.

2 Jayantam  eva.  Mind  is  supposed  to  be  strong  at  its  u p p a d a-
instant,  hke  a gas  in  its  nascent  state.  See  p.  125,  § 3.

3 Pathama-bhavangap.

* P i,  ‘ too,’  ‘ also.’  The  force  of  p i in  these  three  sentences  is  to
take  in,  in  addition,  what  has  been  said  in  the  previous  sentence  or
sentences.  On  the  theory  of  the  Ludicrous,  see  Introd.  Essay,  p.  22/.

® Sannameti.  Ledi  Sadaw  thinks  that  sandhareti  was  the
original  reading.  This  sentence  is  significant  in  showing  that  a
cataleptic  condition  can  be  produced  by  j h a n a.

® Gestures  and  speech.

’’  Samauuata.  The  two  eminent  annotators,  Payagyi  Sadaw
and  Mogaung  Sadaw,  read  samannata,  and  they  explain  the  same
as  follows : Samani-tabba  kathetabbati  samanna;  sa
eva  samannata.  Ledi  Sadaw  reads  with  a long  accent  and
derives  the  word  from  nata,  known.  The  Ceylon  Cy.  is  silent  oir
this  term.


PT.  vi]  Origins  of  Material  Phenomena  16B

4.  ^Material  Phenomena  born  of  Food.

Food,  or  what  is  called  ‘nutritive  essence,’  gives  rise  to
material  phenomena  ‘ originated  by  food  ’ at  the  period  of
assimilation,  and  only  when  it  reaches  its  static  stage.^

Here  the  material  qualities  — heart*  and  physical
faculties'- — are  produced  only  by  karma.  The  two  media
of  communication  are  produced  only  by  mind.  Sound  is
produced  by  mind  and  physical  change ; the  triple
properties  of  lightness,  pliancy,  and  adaptability,  may  be
due  to  physical  changes,  mind  and  food.'^  Inseparable
material  qualities,  as  well  as  the  space  element,^  are  due  to
all  four  causes,  while  material  qualities  which  are  essential
characteristics^  are  produced  by  none  of  the  four.®


§ 7.  Mnemonic.

Of  matter  eighteen,  fifteen,  thirteen,  twelve  kinds,  taken  in
turn.

Are  of  karma,  or  mind,  or  physical  change,  or  of  eaten
nutriment  born.

But  marks,  from  the  very  nature  of  things  in  process
beginning  with  birth.

Cannot  as  such,  says  the  doctrine,  be  themselves  anywise
brought  forth.

So  far  for  the  method  of  the  origination  of  matter.

^ Thanapatto  va=thitipatto  va  (Ceylon  Cy.).

“ Indriya,  lit.,  ‘the  controller.’  See  p.  159,  n.  2.

® Each  of  these  three  factors — physical  change,  mind,  and  food —
has  influence  on  what  is  called  the  ‘ Locomotive  faculty  ’ — e.y.,  hot
climate,  slow  habit  of  mind,  and  a heavy  meal  make  a man  sluggish.

^ I.e.,  the  element  of  space,  according  to  the  Commentaries,  obtains
(between  the  units  of  mass,  called  rupakalapa,  born  of  all  the
■four  causes  {e.g.,  the  intra-atomic  space  in  which  electrons  move
;about).  See  Appendix,  A k a s a .

® Or  salient  features  or  marks  (1  a k k h a n a r u p a ij).

“ If  these  marks  are  considered  as  born  of  the  four  causes,  the
marks  in  turn  must  be  supposed  to  have  similar  marks,  and  so  on,  ad
infinitum.


164


Of  Mutter


[PT.  VI


§ 8.  Of  the  Grouping  of  the  Qualities  of  Material
Body.

Material  qualities  may  be  arranged  in  twenty-one  groups
in  virtue  of  there  being  a common  genesis,  cessation,
dependence,  and  also  co-existence.

1.  For  instance,  vitality  and  such  material  qualities  as
are  inseparable  [adjuncts],  together  with  the  eye  itself,
are  called  ‘ the  eye-decad,’^  Analogously  formed  are  the
groups  entitled  ‘ ear-decad,’  ‘ nose-decad,’  ‘ tongue-decad,’

‘ body-decad,’ ‘ female-decad,’  ‘ male-decad,’  ‘ base-decad.’^
Inseparable  material  qualities,  together  with  vitality  only,
are  called  ‘ the  vital  nonad.’^  These  nine  groups  are  said
to  be  ‘ caused  by  karma.’

2.  The  eight  inseparable  material  qualities  constitute
‘ the  pure  octad.’^

They,  together  with  the  medium  of  communication  by
signs  (or  gestures),  or  with  the  vocal  medium  of  communi-
cation and  sound,  make  up  the  nonad  of  body-communica-
tion and  the  decad  of  speech-communication  respectively.
Again,  taken  together  with  lightness,  pliancy,  and  adapta-
bility of  material  quality,  they  make  up  the  undecad  of
plasticity  ; or,  adding  to  these,  bodily  communication,  the
dodecad  of  plasticity  ; or,  adding  vocal  communication  and
sound,  the  tredecad  of  plasticity.  These  six  groups  are
said  to  be  ‘ caused  by  mind.’

3.  Four  groups  are  said  to  be  ‘ caused  by  physical
change.’  These  are  the  ‘ pure  ’ octad,  the  sound-nonad,  the

1 See  above,  § 4.  Buddhaghosa  (Asl.,  316)  enumerates  the  ten  as
follows  : ‘ The  four  essentials,’  colour,  odour,  sapids,  nutritive  essence,
the  vital  force  and  the  visual  organ  are  called  ‘the  eye-decad.’  See  on
this  further,  B.  Psy.,  p.  173,  n.  1. — Ed.

^ I.e.,  the  heart-decad.

^ The  P.T.S.  text  should  obviously  read  navakan  ti,  as  does  the
Translator’s  original.  See  p.  160. — Ed.

Suddhatthakap.  On  suddha,  c/.  p.  36,  m.  The  eight  are
those  enumerated  in  n.  1 above,  excluding  the  last  two.  See  p.  160.
- Ed.


165


FT.  Ti]  Groups  in  Kama /oka

undecad  of  plasticity,  and  the  dodecad  of  sound  and  plas-
ticity.

4,  Two  groups  are  said  to  be  ‘ caused  by  food.’  These
are  the  ‘ pure  ’ octad  and  the  undecad  of  plasticity.

Of  the  foregoing  the  ‘ pure  ’ octad  and  the  sound-nonad
— the  first  of  these  ‘ caused  by  physical  change  ’ — are  got
externally  as  well  as  internally.  All  the  remainder  are  got
only  internally.

§ 9.  Mnemonic.

From  karma,  mind,  ‘ut  u,’  and  food,  produced  in  order
due.

Things  fall  in  one  and  twenty  groups,  to  wit,  nine,  six,
four,  two.

But  not  within  these  groups^  comes  space,  the  ‘ men  who
see  ’ do  state,

Nor  salient  marks;  [space  just  sets  bounds,  the  marks  just
indicate.^]

So  far  for  the  classification  of  material  groups.®

§ 10.  Of  the  World  of  Sense.

Moreover,  all  these  material  qualities  accrue  un-
diminished,  if  circumstances  permit,  [to  an  individual]
during  a lifetime  in  the  K a m a 1 o k a . But  at  the  rebirth
of  moisture-born  creatures,  and  of  those  of  apparitional
rebirth,^  seven  groups  of  ten  at  most  are  manifested,  to
wit,  the  eye-,  ear-,  nose-,  tongue-,  body-,  sex-,  and  base-
decads,  and  at  least -three  groups  of  ten.  That  is  to  say,
the  eye-,  ear-,  nose-,  and  sex-decads  are  sometimes  not
got.  Hence  on  this  wise  are  such  deficiencies  in  groups  to
be  understood.

^ Kalapangag,  lit.,  ‘ part  of  group.’

- Lakkhanatta,  lit.,  ‘ because  they  simply  mark  (matter).  The
parenthesis  is  from  the  Commentaries.

3 Kalapa-yojana,  lit.,  ‘ union  [of  qualities]  in  groups.’
Opapatika.  Such  creatures  are  said  to  be  born  with  an  appear-
ance of  fifteen  or  sixteen  years  of  age.

Such  beings  were  held  to  appear  suddenly,  independent  of  parents.


1G6


Of  Matter  [pt.  vi

In  womb-born  creatures,  on  the  other  hand,  three  decads
are  manifested,  to  wit,  the  body-,  sex-,  and  heart-decads.
Sometimes,  however,  the  sex-decad  may  not  he  gotd
Afterwards,^  during  life,®  the  eye-decad  and  the  rest  are
manifested  in  due  order.


§ 10a.  Material  Qualities  at  Death.

And  thus  the  groups  of  material  qualities  which  are
produced  in  four  ways  : those  produced  by  karma  start-
ing from  rebirth-conception  ; those  produced  by  mind
starting  from  the  second  [moment  of]  mental  life  f those
produced  by  physical  change  starting  from  the  static
phase  of  conception  ; and  those  produced  by  food  starting
from  the  diffusion®  of  nutritive  essence,  go  on  unbroken  in
the  world  of  sense,  as  long  as  life  lasts,  like  the  dame  of  a
lamp,  or  the  stream  of  a river.

But  at  the  time  of  death,  starting  from  the  static  period
of  the  seventeenth  thought-moment,  reckoned  backward
from  the  last  dying  thought,  material  qualities  produced
by  k a r m a arise  no  more.  And  those  karma  -wrought
material  qualities,  which  came  into  being  before®  [the
static  phase  of]  that  thought-moment,  persist  till  the  time
of  the  dying  thought  and  then  cease.  After  that  the
material  quality  which  mind  and  food  have  produced
is  also  cut  off’.  After  that  a series  of  material  qualities


The  subject  is  exhaustively  dealt  with  by  Professor  E.  Windiseh  in
Ueber  Buddha's  Geburt,  chap,  xi.,  Leipzig,  1908. — Ed.

J.e.,  as  in  the  case  of  asexual  creatures.

^ I.e.,  after  conception.

^ I.e.,  during  the  embryonic  stage  of  foetal  life.

* Dutiyacittatj  here  is  the  same  thing  as  p a t h a m a b h a v a n-
gap,  on  which  see  above,  § 6 (2).

® I.e.,  assimilation.

Puretaraij,  the  nascent  stage  of  the  seventeenth  thought-
moment  is  here  intended.  From  this  it  is  clear  that  qualities  produced
by  karma  in  the  earlier  thought-moments  would  have  died  out
before  the  dying  thought  is  reached.


PT.  Yl]


167


Groups  in  Rupaloka

produced  by  physical  change  goes  on  till  [there  remains]
what  is  called  a corpse.^


§ 11.  Mnemonic.

So  when  we  die,  begin  again,  wherever  we  are  bound.
Material  qualities,  from  life’s  first  start,  in  some  such
round.


§ 12.  Groups  in  Rupaloka.

But  in  the  K u p a 1 o k a,  the  decads  of  nose,  tongue,
body,  and  sex,  as  well  as  the  groups  produced  by  food,  do
not  obtain.  Hence,  at  the  time  of  rebirth  in  that  world,
only  four  groups  produced  by  karma  obtain,  to  wit,  the
three  decads  of  eye,  ear,  and  base,  and  the  vital  nonad.  But
during  life  the  groups  produced  by  mind  and  physical
change  obtain  also.^  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  who  are
reborn  among  the  Unconscious  Beings,  do  not  even  obtain
the  eye,  ear,  base,  or  sound  groups.  They  likewise  obtain
none  of  the  groups  produced  by  mind.  Hence  at  the
time  of  their  rebirth  they  get  only  the  vital  nonad.  And
during  their  lives  there  comes  to  them  in  addition,  but
with  the  exception  of  sound,  such  material  qualities  as  are
produced  by  physical  change.

Now,  in  the  three  regions,  called  K a m a 1 o k a , E ii  p a -
loka,  and  of  the  Unconscious,  thus  must  the  twofold
procedure  of  material  phenomena  (1)  at  rebirth  ; (2)  during
life,  be  understood.


§ 13.  Mnemonic.

In  world  of  sense,  material  forms  are  eight
And  twenty ; of  these,  twenty-three  alone
In  R u p a.^  Of  th’  Unconscious  Ones  the  fate

1 This  is  understood  by  the  Burmese  Buddhists  of  the  present  day
to  mean  ‘ till  the  corpse  is  reduced  to  dust.’

2 Pavattiyag  cittotusamutHrana  ca  labbhanti.
Omitted  in  J.P.T.S.  text. — Ed.

® EupIsu  = rupesu  = rupalokesu,  beings  in  E u p a 1 o k a.


168


[PT.  VI


Of  Matter

Is  seventeen  only ; in  Arupa  none.

At  start  of  life,  sound,  modes  and  signs, ^ decay
And  death  come  not,  but  during  life’s  brief  day
Naught  in  experience  but  may  come  our  way.


So  far  for  the  order  of  happening  of  material  pheno-
mena.


§ 14.  Of  Nihhana.

Now  Nibbana,  which  is  reckoned  as  beyond  these  worlds,^
is  to  be  realized  through  the  knowledge  belonging  to  the
Four  Paths.®  It  is  the  object  of  those  Paths, ^ and  of  their
Fruits.'^  It  is  called  Nihbana,  in  that  it  is  a ‘ de-parture  ’ ®
from  that  craving  which  is  called  van  a,  lusting.  This
Nibbana  is  in  its  nature  single,  but  for  purposes  of  logical
treatment,®  it  is  twofold,  namely,  the  element  of  Nibbana,
wherewith  is  yet  remaining  stuff  of  life,'^  and  the  element
of  Nibbana  without  that  remainder.  So,  too,  when
divided  into  modes,  it  is  threefold — namely,  Void,  Signless,®
and  Absolute  Content.®


^ Vikaro  covers  both  ‘modes  and  signs,’  comprising  the  three
plastic  qualities  of  lightness,  pliancy,  and  adaptability,  and  the  two
media  of  communication.  See  above,  p.  157  (10).

^ Lokuttara.

^ Catumaggahanena.  The  Pahnindriya-cetasika,
which  enters  into  combination  with  other  concomitants  in  each  Path-
consciousness  receives  the  name  of  Sammaditthi  - right  views.

I.e.,  Path-cognition [s]  and  Fruition-cognition  [s].

® Ni(r)kkhantatta,  lit.,  ‘ because  of  out-going.’

I'  Karanapariyayena:  karena  means  ‘cause,’  and  pari-
y a y a here  means  ‘ synonym  ’ (paribyattig)  yanti  gacchanti
anenati  pariyayo — that  by  which  (a  term  is  made  clear).  The
Ceylon  commentaries  explain  it  by  pannapane  karanassa
1 e s e n a — by  way  of  device  of  the  means  (of  knowing)  in  the  matter
of  language.

’’  Upadiseso:  Lebenstoff.

® An  i mitt  a.  See  Part  IX.,  § 10.

^ Lit.,  ‘not  hankered  after,’  or  ‘longed  for.’  Ibid. — Ed.


PT.  Vl]


Nibbcuia


169


§ 15.  Mnemonic.

Great  Seers,  wholly  from  V a n a - lust  set  free,
Declare  Nibbana  such  a path  to  be  : —

Past  death,  past  end  [it  goes,  this  blessed  way],
Uncaused,^  having  no  beyond,  they  say.


Thus,  as  fourfold,  Tathagatas  reveal,

The  ultimate  kinds  of  things  we  know  and  feel : —
Mind  first,  and  next,  concomitants  of  mind,

Body  as  third,  Nibbana^  last  in  kind.


Thus  ends  the  Sixth  Part,  in  the  Compendium  of
Philosophy,  being  the  Chapter  entitled  the  Compendium  of
Matter.

1 Asankhatag.  This  word  is  explained  in  the  Ceylon  com-
mentaries by  paceayehi  asankhatatta  (so-called)  because  of
not  being  subject  to  further  causation  and  conditioning.  Ledi  Sadaw
writes  sankharanakiccarahitatta  (so-called)  because  it  is
devoid  of  the  function  of  causing,  or  conditioning  well.

- The  word  Nibbana  is,  in  spite  of  the  exegetical  derivation  above,
as  doubtful  in  its  etymological  history  as  is  our  own  Heaven,  and  as
vague  in  meaning.  The  Translator  was  willing  to  let  it  be  rendered
by  Nirvana,  just  as  we  have  let  Karma  replace  Kamma.  But  whereas
only  an  Italian  would  rightly  pronounce  Kam’ma,  Nibbana  goes  of
itself  on  any  tongue  that  will  make  the  a long  and  open.  Besides  this
it  is  a Buddhist  term,  belonging  to  Buddhist  doctrine,  while  Nirvana
is  associated  with  Pantheistic  eschatology,  and,  moreover,  has  now
become  hopelessly  vulgarized.  Once  Europeanized,  the  accent  in
Nibbana  will  become  superfluous,  hence  I have  omitted  it. — Ed.


PART  VII

THE  COMPENDIUM  OF  CATEGORIES
§ 1.  Introdiictori/.

’Neath  two  and  seventy  heads  have  been  set  forth
Distinctive  kinds  of  states,  each  with  its  mark.
These  will  I now  duly  categorize.


§ 2.  Of  Categories  of  Evil.

This  compendium  of  categories  must  be  understood  as
fourfold,  to  wit :

1.  A compendium  of  evil  categories.

11.  A compendium  of  [ethically]  mixed  categories.

III.  A compendium  of  what  pertains  to  enlightenment.

lY.  A compendium  of  the  whole.

How  [are  they  composed]  ?

(I.)  In  the  compendium  of  evil,  there  are,  in  the  first
place,

(a)  the  four  A s a v a’ :

1.  sense-desires  f

2.  becoming

1 Asa  VO  is  derived  from  a ^/su  = ‘to  flow,’  and  the  Ceylon  com-
mentaries, among  others,  explain  the  term  as  that  which  flows  right
up  to  the  topmost  plane  of  existence  or  right  up  to  the  moment  of
Gotrabhu  (Bhavato  abhavaggap  dhammato  agotra-
bhup  savantiti  asava).  See  Appendix,  A s a v a.  On  this  and
the  following  ‘evil  categories,’  cf.  B.  Pst/.,  pp.  291,  304,  308,  310,  323.

2 Kamasavo.  Kama  may  mean  either  that  which  desires
(kametiti)  or  that  which  is  desired  (kamiy atiti).  But  the
Commentaries  say  that  here  tan  ha  (craving)  for  objects  of  sense-
experience,  including  the  pleasures  of  the  five  senses,  is  meant.

^ Bhavasavo.  Bhava  is  either  k a m m a - b h a v a or  u p a -
patti-bhava  (Introd.  Essay,  42/.).  It  may  be  either  Kama-

170


PT.  rii]


Categories  of  Evil


171


3.  error  ;

4.  ignorance.

(6)  the  four  Floods^: — {same  as  1-4)  ;

(c)  the  four  Bonds-: — {same  as  1-4)  ;

(d)  the  four  Ties  : — the  ties,  physical  and  mental,^  of

1.  covetousness  ;

2.  ill-will ;

3.  prae  jice  of  mere  rite  and  ritual

4.  adherence  to  one’s  dogmas  f

{e)  the  four  Graspings®  : — the  grasping  after

1.  sense-desires  ;

2.  error ;

b h a V a,  K u p a - b h a v a,  or  A r u p a - b li  a v a.  The  Commentaries
say  that  by  B h a v a here  is  intended  the  same  craving,  this  time,  for
any  one  of  the  forms  of  existence.  The  psychological  factor  in  the  two
modes  of  craving  is  the  Cetasika  of  greed.

^ 0 gha.  The  Commentaries  explain  that  these  four  are  so  termed
because  they  kill  the  creatures  who  have  fallen  into  them  by  drowning
them  (lit.,  ‘ overwhelming  and  suffocating  them ’).  Anassasikap
katva  ajjhottharanto  hanatiti  vattasmip  osida-
penta  viya  hontit i. — Ceylon  Cy.

- Yoga.  The  Ceylon  Cy.  explains  this  term  as  that  which  yokes
the  creatures  to  the  rounds  (of  misery),  or  that  which  by  w’ay  of  cause
and  effect  (kamma-vipakena),  yokes  the  creatures  to  other
rebirths,  etc.,  in  the  machine  of  existence  (b  h a v a y a n t a k e),  or  in
the  round  of  existence  (vattasmig).  Vattasmip  va  bhava-
yantake  va  satte  y o j entiti.— Ledi  Sadaw.

® The  Commentaries  explain  that  k a y a here  includes  both  r u p a -
kaya  and  namakaya.

* Silabbataparamaso.  The  Ceylon  Cy.  explains  this  term  by
‘Goslladisilena  v-atena  tad-ubhayena  suddhiti  evap
parato  asabhavato  amasanap’ — the  practice  (lit.,  ‘the  hand-
ling’) with  an  incorrect  view  (lit.,  ‘ the  opposite  or  contrary  view  ’)  that
one  becomes  pure  by  bovine  and  canine  morality  or  conduct,  or  by  both.
Ledi  Sadaw  explains  ‘parato’  as  ‘by  way  of  the  view  opposed  to
the  truth’  (Etthaca  parato  ‘ti  bhuta-sabhava-pacca-
nlkato’  ti  attho).  Cf,  B.  Psy.,  p.  260,  n.  4.

^ Idap-saccabhiniveso.  The  Ceylon  Cy.  explains  this  term
by  ‘Idap  eva  saccam  mogham  annanti  abhinivesanap
dalhagaho.  The  firm  belief  (lit.,  ‘hold’)  that  this  (view)  is  true,
and  the  other  futile.

^ Upadananl.  The  Ceylon  Cy.  explains  this  term  to  mean  that
which  tenaciously  or  firmly  grasps  the  object  as  a snake  does  a frog.


172


[PT.  VII


Of  Categories

3.  mere  rite  and  ritualism  ;

4.  a theory  of  soul ;

(/’)  the  six  Hindrances^ : —

1.  sensual  passion  ;

2.  ill-will ;

3.  sloth-and-torpor  ;

4.  flurry-and-worry ;

5.  perplexity ;

6.  ignorance  ;

ig)  the  seven  forms  of  Latent  Bias^ : — the  bias  of

1.  sensual  passion  ;

2.  lust  after  life  ;

3.  aversion  ;

4.  conceit ;

5.  error  ;

6.  perplexity  ;

7.  ignorance;

(/;a)  the  ten  Fetters  ^ of  the  S u 1 1 a n t a^ : — the  fetters
of

1.  lust  after  [life  in  the]  Kamaloka®;

2.  lust  after  [life  in  the]  K u p a 1 o k a ;

3.  lust  after  [life  in  the]  A r u p a 1 o k a ;

4.  aversion  ;

1 NTvaranani  (Burm.  MSS.  n i v - ).  The  Ceylon  Cy.  explains  this
term  as  that  which  prevents  the  arising  of  good  thoughts  by  way  of
j h a n a , etc. ; or  as  that  which  prevents  the  j h a n a itself ; or  as  that
which  obstructs  the  eye  of  wisdom  (p  a n n a - c akk  h un  0 va  avara-
1 1 h e n a).  Ledi  Sadaw  explains  the  same  to  be  that  which  hinders  all
that  is  good  in  human  nature  by  preventing  the  good  which  has  not
arisen  from  arising,  or  the  good  which  has  arisen  from  being  repeated.

Anusaya  from  anu  ^/seti  = ‘to  sleep,’  lit.,  ‘ that  which  lies
dormant  or  remains  latent.’  .

® Both  the  Ceylon  and  the  Bm-mese  Commentators  explain  S a m o-
janas,  as  ‘those  which  bind’  (S  a lii  y o j e n t i,  bandhantiti
s a hi  y 0 j a n ani),  i.e.,  bind  creatures  in  the  rounds  of  misery
(vattasmip).

''  Sutta-Pitaka.

® ‘Kama,’  when  opposed  to  ‘rupa,’  and  ‘arupa,’  has  either
‘bhava’or'loka’  understood  after  it.


PT.  VIl]


173


Categories  of  Evil

5.  conceit ;

6.  error ;

7.  practice  of  rite  and  ritual ;

8.  perplexity ;

9.  distraction  ;

10.  ignorance ;

(/iB)  the  other  ten  Fetters  of  the  Ahhidhamma,  viz.,  of

1.  sensual  passion  ^ ;

2.  lust  after  life  ;

3.  aversion  ;

4.  conceit ;

5.  error ;

6.  practice  of  rite  and  ritual ;

7.  perplexity  ;

8.  envy  ;

9.  selfishness  ;

10.  ignorance.

(i)  The  ten  Torments  ^ are  ; —

1.  greed  ;

2.  hate  ;

3.  dulness ;

4.  conceit ;

5.  error  ;

6.  perplexity  ;

7.  sloth ;

8.  distraction  ;

9.  impudence ;

10.  fearlessness  of  consequence.

^ Here  ‘kama’  is  opposed  to  ‘bhava,’  and  is  restricted  to
objects  of  sensual  desire.’

^ The  Ceylon  Cy.  explains  k i 1 e s a as  those  by  which  the  mind  is
defiled  (kills  sati),  burnt  (u p a t ap p a t i),  or  afflicted  (badhi-
yati).  Ledi  Sadaw  of  Burma  adopts  the  same  explanation,  but  adds
that  kilesa’s  are  those  by  which  creatures  are  defiled,  or  by  which
they  (the  creatures)  arrive  either  at  the  state  of  being  defiled
(mallna-bhavag)  or  at  the  state  of  being  debased  (nihina-
bhavag).  See  B.  Psy.,327  ff.


174  '


Of  Categories  [pt.  vii

Now  in  the  A s a v a - category,  under  the  terms  ‘ sense-
desires,’  and  ‘ becoming,’  is  implied  the  Craving  which  has
them  as  its  objects.  In  the  same  way,  it  is  just  the
erroneous  opinion  that  occurs  under  different  conditions,
which  is  described  as  ‘ practice  of  rite  and  ritual,’  ‘ ten-
dency to  dogmatism,’  and  grasping  after  a theory  of  soul.  '


§ 3.  Mnemonic.

The  A s a va  s,’  the  Floods,  Bonds,  Ties,  root  in  the  three-
fold base

The  Graspings  have  a twofold  source  d but  eightfold  is
the  case

With  Hindrances,  with  Bias,  six,  with  Fetters,  nine,  we
hold, 2

Whth  Torments,  ten  ; — thus  Evil’s  List  is  reckoned  as
ninefold.


§ 4.  Of  Mixed  Categories.

II. — In  the  compendium  of  mixed  categories  there  are
the  following  :

{a)  The  Six  Hetu’s  (root-conditions)® : —

1.  greed ;

2.  hate ;

3.  dulness ;

4.  disinterestedness ;

5.  amity  ;

6.  intelligence.

1 Vatthuto  is  explained  by  the  Ceylon  Cy.  to  mean
‘ dhaminato,’  and  by  Ledi  Sadaw  of  Burma,  ‘sabhava-
dhammato,’  The  psychological  ultimates  described  in  Part  II.  as
mental  properties  or  concomitants  are  here  intended.

2 Mata.

® See  above,  Part  III.,  § 4.


175


PT.  vii]  Mijced  Categories

{h)  The  Seven  Constituents  of  J h a n a : —

1.  initial  application  (v  i t a k k a)

2.  sustained  application  (v  i c a r a)

3.  pleasurable  interest ;

4.  individualization

5.  joy;^

6.  grief  f

7.  hedonic  indifference

(c)  the  Twelve  Path-Constituents* : —

1.  right  views ;

2.  right  aspiration  f

3.  right  language  ;

4.  right  action  ;

5.  right  livelihood ;

6.  right  endeavour  ;

7.  right  mindfulness ;

8.  right  concentration ;

9.  WTong  views ;

10.  wrong  aspiration ;

11.  wrong  endeavour ;

12.  wrong  concentration.

(d)  the  Twenty-two  Controlling®  Powers : — the  controlling
power  of

1.  the  eye  ;®

2.  the  ear ;

1 See  Parts  I.  and  II.

2 The  mention  of  grief  here  shows  that  j h a n a is  liable  to  abuse  in
the  hands  of  unprincipled  persons.

3 The  intellectual  tat’ramajjhattata,  ‘ balance  of  mind,’  is  not
meant  here.  See  p.  14.

^ Magga  here  includes  both  the  noble  and  the  ignoble  path,  the
last  four  constituents  leading  to  the  planes  of  miserable  existence.
Of.  S.  V.,  18,  23  ; Vibhanga,  p.  373.

= The  psychological  ultimate  of  sammasankappa  is  vitakka,
which,  in  the  present  case,  directs  the  mind  towards  the  right  object —
viz.,  the  higher  ideal.

® On  Indriya.  See  sui^ra,  p.  159,  n.  2.  It  must  be  borne  in
mind  that  it  is  the  eye  that  controls  sight  and  so  on  for  the  other  four
senses.  See  also  below,  Part  VIII.,  § 10  (6),  n.  2.


170


[PT.  VJl


Of  Categories

3.  the  nose  ;

4.  the  tongue  ;

5.  the  body  (i.e.,  the  skin)  ;

6.  female  sex  d

7.  male  sex  j’-

8.  life  ;

9.  mind

10.  pleasure ;

1 1 . pain  ;

12-  joy;

13.  grief;

14.  hedonic  indifference ;

15.  faith ;

16.  energy ;

17.  mindfulness  ;

18.  concentration ;

19.  reason  ;

20  the  thought : — ‘ I shall  come  to  know  the
unknown

21.  gnosis

22.  one  who  knows.

(e)  the  Nine  Forces  : — the  force  of

1.  faith  ;

2.  energy  ;

3.  mindfulness  f

4.  concentration  ;

5.  reason  ;

^ Lit.,  ‘ womanhood  and  manhood.’  Sex  controls  the  primary  and
the  secondary  characters  of  sex  described  in  the  Commentaries  under
ling  a,  nimitta,  kutta,  and  akappa.

^ Mind  (mano)  is  called  an  indriya  because  it  controls  or
governs  its  concomitant  mental  properties.

^ Anna  may  be  differentiated  from  n a n a,  as  the  Christian  might
distinguish  ‘ saving  knowledge  ’ from  knowledge  in  general,  including
knowledge  of  matters  of  mere  sense-experience.  See  the  eight  moral
thoughts  of  the  sense-world.  Part  I.,  § 6.  English  is  poor  beside
Pali  in  such  terminology.  B.  Psy.,  xci. — Ed.

Omitted  in  J.P.T.S. — Ed.


PT.  VIl]


177


Mixed  Categories

6.  modesty  ;

7.  discretion ;

8.  impudence ;

9.  fearlessness  of  consequences.

O the  Four  Dominant  Influences’-; — namely  of

1.  intention  ;

2.  energy ;

3.  thought

4.  investigation.®

(q)  the  Four  Foods  : —

1.  edible  food  ;

2.  contact ;

3.  volitional  activity  of  mind  f

4.  rebirth-consciousness.®

Now,  with  reference  to  the  ‘ Controlling  Powers ’ [d),
the  power  called  the  thought,  ‘ I shall  come  to  know  the
unknown,’  is  that  Path-knowledge  possessed  by  one  who
has  ‘ arrived  at  the  stream  the  power  called  that  ‘of  one
who  knows,’  is  the  knowledge  involved  in  the  Fruit  of
Arahantship ; and  by  the  power  of  gnosis  is  meant  the  six

^ Adhip  ati.  See  Dlis.,  §§  269,  1034.  B.  Psy.,  pp.  77,  269. — Ed.
Adhipati  differs  from  Indriya  in  that  the  former  is  supreme,
■while  the  latter  has  its  equals.  See  the  text  below  : Only  one  domi-
nant infiuenee,  etc.  (a  dh  ip  at  i eko  va  labbhati).

2 C i 1 1 a here  denotes  j avana-eittuppada,  while  the  other
three  dominant  influences  refer  to  the  respective  concomitants  of  this
state  of  apperception.

3 Vimamsa  (in  Sinh.  MSS.  vim-).  The  psychological  ultimate
of  this  is  panhindriya-cetasika.  The  category  of  dominant
influences  shows  that  when  a man  acts,  either  intention,  effort,  know-
ledge, or  reason,  may  predominate.  Cf.  Criminal  Law,  in  which  no
responsibility  is  attached  to  an  act  without  one  or  other  of  the  fore-
going three  dominant  factors.

* Manosahcetanahara-sankhataq  kusalakusala-
k a m m a g (Ceylon  Cy.).

® Vihnanahara-sankhatag  patisandhi-vihhanag
(jihi'l.).


12


178  Of  Categories  [pt.  vii

intermediate  knowledges.^  Again,  the  ‘ vital  power  ’ is  two-
fold, consisting  of  physical  and  psychical  life.^

The  ‘Constituents  of  jhana’  are  not  acquired  in  the
five  kinds  of  sense-cognition,^  nor  are  the  ‘ forces,’^  in
effortless  states,  nor  the  ‘constituents  of  the  Path,’  in
[states]  not  accomi^anied  by  their  hetu’s.  Likewise,  in
perplexed  thought,  individualization  cannot  attain  to  the
state  of  a Path-constituent,^  a controlling  power,  or  a
force.  Only  one  ‘ Dominant  Influence  ’ obtains  at  one
time,  according  to  circumstances,  and  that  only  in  such
apperceptions  as  are  accompanied  by  two  or  three  [good]
roots.


§ 5.  Mnemonic.

What  are  the  factors  of  life  we  know  ?

These  in  sevenfold  mixed  category  go.

Of  good  and  bad,  six  ‘Hetu’s’  at  the  base  f
‘ Factors  of  j h a n a,’  five  ; but  nine’’  we  trace
Paving  the  [good,  or  evil]  ‘ Path.’  Of  powers,
‘Indriya’s,’  sixteen,  ‘ Forces,’  nine  are  ours.
‘ Dominant  influences,’  are  four,  ’tis  said.

And  four  the  ‘ Nutriments.’  Told  is  each  head.


^ Cha  nanani,  the  knowledge[s]  belonging  to  the  three  higher
Paths  and  the  three  lower  Fruition[s].  These,  together  with  the  two
foregoing,  are  the  same  Pahnindriya-cetasika  cultivated  and
developed  in  different  degrees,  and  are  collectively  known  as  samma-
d i 1 1 h i.

2 Ruparupavasena.

3 That  is,  at  the  moment  of  the  operation  of  any  one  of  the  five
senses  in  a process  of  sense-cognition.  See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  54.

^ Read  balani  for  phalani  in  J.P.T.S.  text. — Ed.

^ Though  ekaggata  is  synonymous  with  s a m a d h i (the  eighth
Path- constituent),  that  property  by  which  the  mind  necessarily
regards  its  object  as  an  individual,  does  not  amount  to,  or  is  not  raised
to  the  dignity  of,  s a m a d h i,  when  the  mind  is  perplexed.  Hence
ekaggata  cannot  always  be  rendered  by  ‘ concentration.’

^Vatthuto.  See  p.  174,  71.  1.

" Navaka,  not  twelve  as  named  in  the  Category,  nor  the  usual
eight.  Note  the  other  discrepancies  in  the  Mnemonic. — Ed.


179


PT.  vii]  Factors  of  Enlightemnent

§ 6.  Of  that  which  pertains  to  Enlightenment.

III. — In  the  compendium  of  the  parts  ^ of  Enlightenment
we  have  the  following  : —

(a)  The  Four  kinds  of  Earnest  Applications^  in  Mind-
fulness ; —

(1)  contemplation  of  the  body  ;

(2)  contemplation  of  the  feelings  ;

(3)  contemplation  of  consciousness  ;

(4)  contemplation  of  [particular]  mental  states  f

(h)  the  Four  Supreme  Efforts  * : —

(1)  the  endeavour  to  put  away  evils  that  have

arisen  ;

(2)  the  endeavour  to  prevent  the  arising  of  unrisen

evils ;

1 The  fear  of  being  fanciful  restrains  from  rendering  ‘ p a kk  h i y a ’
by  either  ‘ facets  ’ or  ‘ wings.’  It  means  ‘ sides,’  but  is  used  for  a
‘ bird.’  On  the  growth  of  this  designation  for  the  thirty-seven,  see  my
preface  to  the  Vibhanga,  xv.,  xvi.  Cf.  also  JdtaJca,  i.  275. — Ed.

^Sati-pattbanaij  is  the  s a t i which  is  established  on  its
object,  by  penetration,  so  to  speak,  into  it  (anupavisitva  alam-
bane  pavattatiti  attbo. — Ceylon  Cy.).  Hence  close  applica-
tion of  the  mind.  Pattbanap  has  here  a different  import  from
that  which  it  bears  in  Part  VIII.

3 In  ‘dbammanupassana,’  the  word  ‘ d h a m m a,’ according
to  the  Ceylon  Cy.,  refers  to  the  fifty-one  mental  properties,  or  factors,
exclusive  of  ‘feeling  ’ (vedana),  and  the  rendering  of  it  by  ‘law,’  or
any  other  term,  would  be  quite  wide  of  the  mark ; for  these  contem-
plation-exercises are  with  reference  to  one’s  own  mind  and  body,  and
not  with  reference  to  any  extra-personal  object.  But  Ledi  Sadaw  of
Burma  takes  exception  to  the  above  universally  accepted  view,  and
says  that  ‘dhamma’  here  refers  to  (1)  six  Nibbana’s;  (2)  five
khandha’s;  (3)  twelve  ayatana’s;  (4)  seven  bojjhanga’s;
and  (5)  four  ariya-sacca’s.  He  bases  his  view  on  the  fact  that
the  Buddha  himself  spoke  of  these  five  categories  as  dhamma,  but
never  of  the  sahhakkhandha  and  the  sankharakkhandha
alone.

^ The  modifying  ‘samma’  signifies  no  ordinary  efforts,  but  the
unfaltering  concentrated  assay  of  one  who  vows  : ‘ Let  me  be  reduced
to  skin  and  bone  ; let  my  blood  dry  up,  but  I’ll  not  stop  till  I succeed  !’
Hence  the  word  ‘ right,’  if  not  inaccurate,  is  scarcely  adequate.  (Cf.
M.  i.  480  ; S.  ii.  28  ; A.  i.  50.)


.180


Of  Categories  [pt.  vii

(3)  the  endeavour  to  bring  about  the  arising  of
unrisen  good  ;

(4)  the  endeavour  to  further  arisen  good.

(c)  The  Four  Steps  to  the  I d d h i - Potency^ : —

(1)  desire  to  act ;

(2)  energy ;

(3)  thought ;

(4)  investigation.

id)  The  Five  Faculties  : —

(1)  faith  ;

(2)  energy;

(3)  mindfulness ;

(4)  concentration  ;

(5)  reason.

(e)  The  Five  Forces  : —

As  in  (d)A

(J)  The  Seven  Factors  of  Enlightenment : —

(1)  mindfulness  ;

(2)  searching  the  truth

(3)  energy;

(4)  pleasurable  interest

^ See  this  term  discussed  in  Rhys  Davids’s  Dialogues  of  the  Buddha,
I.,  272.  Cf.  also  definition  of  Iddhi  in  Vihhanga,  p.  217.  Ledi
Sadaw  writes  (p.  314):  ‘Iddhi  is  accomplishment.  The  meaning
is  “accomplishment  of  such  and  such  effort.’’  And  pa  do  is  “the
means  by  which  one  arrives  at,”  “attains  to”  (iddhi).  On  the
ten  . . . [as  above].  The  “potency”  is  of  will  (cetana),  not  of
insight  (v  i p a s s a n a).’

Commentators  distinguish,  in  the  Bala’s,  a more  positive  and
militant  aspect  of  these  five  instruments  of  restraint  or  control
(Indriy  a’s).

^ ‘ Searching  the  truth  ’ is  paraplirased  by  vipassana-panha
(Ceylon  Cy.).

■*  If  there  is  any  truth  in  the  Hamiltonian  law  of  the  inverse  ratio
of  feeling  and  intellection,  piti  cannot  be  rendered  by  ‘joy,’  since
the  hedonic  element  varies  inversely  with  ‘bodhi.’  Besides,  the
intellectual  piti  has  always  a reference  to  its  object,  whilst  the
edonic  joy  is  more  or  less  subj  ective.  See  Appendix,  Piti.


181


PT.  vii]  Factor's  of  Enlightenment

(5)  serenity  ;

(6)  concentration  ;

(7)  equanimity.^

(f/)  The  Eight  factors  of  the  Path

(1)  right  views  ;

(2)  right  aspiration ;

(3)  right  language  ;

(4)  right  action ;

(5)  right  livelihood  ;

(6)  right  endeavour ;

(7)  right  mindfulness  ;

(8)  right  concentration.

Now  in  these  categories,  mindfulness,  as  four  earnest
applications,  is  described  as  one  in  ‘ right  mindfulness
and  so  are  the  four  supreme  efforts  in  ‘ right  endeavour.’


§ 7.  Mnemonic.

Desire  to  do,  thought,  equanimity
And  faith,  together  with  serenity.

And  zest,  right  views  and  aspiration.

Endeavour,  also  abstinence  threefold.

Right  mindfulness  and  concentration  :

Fourteen  according  to  their  nature  here  are  told,

But  seven  and  thirty ’neath  seven  heads  the  lists  unfold.
Conception  and  serenity.

Interest,  and  the  balanced  mind,

Intent,  thought,  threefold  sanity,

Reveal’d,  nine  in  one  way,^  you  find.

Energy  works  in  ninefold  guise.

And  in  eight,  mindfulness,

1 Here,  according  to  the  comments,  the  intellectual  ‘tatra-
majjhattatupekkha,  and  not  the  hedonic  upekkha,  is  in-
tended.

^ In  J.P.T.S.  text  read  nav’ekatthana.


182


[PT.  VII


Of  Categories

Concentration  in  four,  and  reason^  wise
In  five,  faith,  two.  Peerless
These  seven  and  thirty  members  stand,

[In  Wisdom’s  kingdom]  noblest  band.

All,  save  sometimes  the  first  and  third  in  [consciousness]
transcendent  lie.

In  mundane  thought  as  well,  if  fit,  in  course  of  sixfold
purity.


§ 8.  A Comiiendium  of  ‘ the  Whole.'

IV. — In  the  compendium  of  ‘ the  whole  ’ we  have  the
following : —

[a)  The  Five  Aggregates  : —

(1)  material  body  ;

(2)  feeling;

(3)  perception ;

(4)  s an  kh  a r a’s

(5)  consciousness.

[h)  The  Five  Aggregates  as  Objects  of  Grasping^: —
as  in  {a).

‘Panca  pauiia.  Fauna  shines  in  (1)  vlmagsiddhi-
pado;  (2)  paiihindriyari;  (3)  pahha-balap;  (4)  dham-
mavicaya-sambojjhanga;  and  (5)  sammaditthi.

^ Here  sankbiira  is  a label  given  to  the  fifty  mental  properties
other  than  v e d a n a and  s a n n a,  but  this  label  derives  its  title
from  cetana,  chief  of  these  fifty,  and  determinant  of  action.  San-
khara  and  kamma  are  derived  from  the  same  root  ‘kar,’  ‘to
do.’  (Abhisankhatap  sankharotiti  sankhar o — that  which
makes  the  made.  This  is  the  k a 1 1 u s a d h a n a - definition  of  san-
khar a,  and  is  applied  to  kamma  as  in  sankhara-paccaya
viniianap  (Part  VIII.,  § 1).  See  Appendix,  Sankhar  a.  San-
khariyatlti  sankhar  o — ‘ that  which  is  made,  this  kamma-
s a d h an  a - definition  refers  to  the  conditioned,  ‘the  world,’  as  in
sabbe  sankhara  anicca.

^ This  category  serves  to  show  that  the  khandha’s  are  generally
grasped  by  erring  people  as  a 1 1 a,  the  metaphysical  ego-entity^


PT.  vii]  AU-xsoe-hnovo  Compendium  183

{c)  The  Twelve  Ayatana’s^ : —

The  Sense-Organs.

(1)  the  eye ;

(2)  the  ear ;

(3)  the  nose ;

(4)  the  tongue  ;

(5)  the  body  {i.e.,  the  skin) ;

(6)  the  mind  ;

The  Sense-Objects.

(7)  the  visible  object ;

(8)  sound ;

(9)  odour ;

(10)  taste  ;

(11)  tangible  object ;

(12)  cognizable  object.

{(1)  The  Eighteen  Elements^ : —

the  subjective  elements,  to  wit :

(1)  eye;

(2)  ear ;

(3)  nose  ;

(4)  tongue;

1 Ayat'ana  cannot  here  be  rendered  by  a single  English  word
to  cover  both  sense-organs  (the  mind  being  regarded  as  the  sixth
sense)  and  sense-objects.

In  commenting  on  the  ‘chahi  phassayatanehi  phussa,’
D.,  i.  45,  § 71,  Buddhaghosa  defines  ayatana  to  mean  ‘simply
place  of  productioii,  of  resort,  opportunity  (or  ground),  range  (or
genus).’  In  the  Atthasalini  (p.  140),  he  gives  definitions  1,2,
and  3,  and  adds  place  of  abode,  and  species  or  mode,  as  fourth  and
fifth.  See  also  Appendix,  A y a t a n a. — Ed.

2 This  triple  distinction  rests  on  the  conception  of  any  complete
sense-impression  being  threefold.

‘ On  contact  between  eye  (organ  of  sight)  and  the  visible  object  there
arises  visual  cognition,’  M.  i..  Ill  ; S.  ii.  72.  On  the  force  of  D h a t u,
see  Part  VI.,  and  B.  Psy.,  Ixxvi.,  and  cf.  the  striking  passage  in  Sum.
Vil.,  i.,  193-196.  See  also  Appendix,  Dhatu. — Ed.


184


[PT.  VII


Of  Categories

(5)  body  {i.e.,  skin) ;

(6)  mind

the  objective  elements,  to  wit :

(7)  sights;

(8)  sounds  ;

(9)  odours ;

(10)  tastes;

(11)  touches;

(12)  cognizables

the  intellectual  elements,  to  wit ;

(13)  visual  cognition  ;

(14)  auditory  cognition  ;

(15)  olfactory  cognition ;

(16)  gustatory  cognition  ;

(17)  tactile  cognition  ;

(18)  mind-cognition.^

(e)  The  Four  Ariyan"*  Truths  : —

(1)  the  Ariyan  Truth  about  111 ;

(2)  the  Ariyan  Truth  about  the  origin  of  111 ;

(3)  the  Ariyan  Truth  about  the  cessation  of  111 ;

(4)  the  Ariyan  Truth  about  the  Path  leading  to

the  cessation  of  111.

Now,  here  there  are  sixty-nine  principles,®  consisting
of  mental  concomitants,  subtle  material  qualities,  and

1 M a n 0 d h a t u.  See  Appendix,  D h a t u.

2 Dhammadhatu,  synonymous  with  dhammayatana.  See
infra.  These  differ  from  d h a m m a r a m m a n a,  in  excluding  e i 1 1 a,
and  pannatti,  and  pasadarupa.

® Manovinnanadhatu  is  a collective  term  given  to  seventy-six
classes  of  consciousness,  omitting  the  twice-fivefold  sense  (d  v i p an  e a-
vinnanadhatu),  and  the  triple  element  of  mind  (manodha-
tuttika).  These  seventy-six  classes  are  not  confined  to  processes  of
representative  cognition.  See  Appendix,  Dhatu.

4 See  p.  135,  n.  2.

® Dhamm  a.


185


PT.  vii]  All-zve-knoxt'  Compendium

Nibbixna,  which  are  reckoned  collectively  as  the  sphere  of
cognizable  object,^  or  the  objective  element  of  the  cog-
nizable.^ The  sphere  of  mind^  alone  is  broken  up  into
seven ^ elements  of  cognition.


§ 9.  Mnemonic.

Body,  feeling,  and  perception,  and  the  rest  that  go  with
mind,^

Fifthly,  consciousness  :• — these  Five  as  Aggregates  have
been  defined.

Aggregates  of  Grasping — viewed  ’neath  aspect  of  the  Triple
Plane.

But  Nibbana,  lacking  parts,®  to  group  ’mong  Aggregates
refrain  !

Section  into  ‘door,'  and  object,  gives  Ayatana’s;
again

These  loith  the  result  arising  .-—Elements  we  call  them
then.

Triple-planed  round  is  Sorrow;  Craving’s  Sorrow’s  Origin;®
Third,  Nibbana,  called  Cessation ; fourth  of  the  Four
Truths  herein

^Dhammayatana  or  dhammadhatu.

^ Manayatana,  rendered  above  under  A y a t a n a simply  by
- mind.’

^ J.e. , the  five  elements  of  cognitions  on  occasion  of  sense,  the
(triple)  element  of  mind,  the  elements  of  mind-cognition.  [((^),  6,
13-18] . See  p.  184,  n.  3.

^ S e s a - c e t a s i k a — i.e.,  sankhara,  on  which  see  p.  182,
n.  2.

® Abheda,  ‘ lacking  distinctions.’  The  Commentaries  explain  that
Nibbana  is  undifferentiated  into  the  eleven  aspects — viz.,  past,  present,
future,  distant,  near,  gross,  subtle,  high,  low,  internal,  or  external,
characterizing  phenomena.  M.,  iii.  16,  17  ; /S'.,  iii.  47,  48  ; Vihh.  1.

® In  J.P.T.S.  text,  read  tanha  samudayo  bhave — i.e.,  ac-
cording to  the  Commentators,  h o t i .


186  Of  Categories  [pt.  vii

Meant  is  Path’^  transcendent,  other  Path-adjuncts^  and
Fruits  excluded.

Thus  the  Whole  of  what  we  know  beneath  these  Five  Heads
is  included.


Thus  ends  the  Seventh  Part,  in  the  Compendium  of
Philosophy,  entitled  the  Chapter  on  the  Compendium  of
Categories.

Maggo  here  refers  to  the  a 1 1 h a n gi  k a - m a g g o,  the  eight-
fold Path — i.e,,  the  Eight  Path-factors — viz.,  right  views,  etc.

2 Maggayutta  refers  to  the  concomitants,  other  than  the  above
eight  Path  factors  in  Path  consciousness  (Atthangikavini-
inutta  sesa  maggasampayutta  phassad  ay  o.— Ceylon  Cy.).


PART  YIII


A COMPENDIUM  OF  EELATIONS
§ 1.  Introductory .

Now  let  me  tell  e’en  as  is  lit  how  such
And  such  a state  of  things  related  stands
To  other  states^  conditioned  like  itself.


§ 2.  Of  the  Law  of  Happening  by  Way  of  Cause.

In  the  compendium  of  relations  we  have  two  schemata  :

A.  The  law  of  happening  by  way  of  cause  f and

B.  The  system  of  correlation.^

Of  these,  the  former  [A]  is  a mode  marked  by  the  simple
condition  of  the  happening  of  a phenomenon  on  the  occur-
rence of  its  sole  invariable  antecedent  phenomenon.^

The  latter  [B]  is  so-called  with  reference  to  the  more
striking  ‘ occasion  ’ {i.e.,  casual  circumstance)  in  any  one
relation.®

^ Dhammanag.

- Paticcasamuppada-naj'o.  ‘ Law  ’ is  a strong  term  for
n ay  o,  which  is  usually,  in  the  Commentaries,  adequately  rendered
by  ■ method,’  and  by  ‘ system,’  § 7.  Cf.  Part  IX.,  § 5.  However,  the
prime  categorical  importance  of  [A]  in  Buddhist  doctrine  justifies  the
use  of  ‘ law’  in  the  scientific  sense. — Ed.

^ I.e.,  as  treated  of  in  the  Patthana,  the  Seventh  Book  of
Abhidhamma.

^ Tabbhavabhavl  bhavo  embodies  J.  S.  Mill’s  first  Method
of  Induction.  Mill’s  second  Method  would  be  expressed  by  t a d -
abhavabhavi  bhavo.  All  the  Commentaries  read  -bhava-
b h a V T.

5 Ahacea-paccayatthitig  arabbha.  Here  p a c c a y a
and  t h i t i are  used  synonomously  and  appositionally.  Hence,  the

187


188  Of  Relations  [pt.  viii

Teachers  more  usually  expatiate  on  these  two  laws  in
conjunction.

A.  The  Law  of  Happening  hi/  Wap  of  Cause.

The  law  of  happening  by  way  of  cause  is  as  follows  : —
Because^  of  ignorance,  the  actions^  of  the  mind.

Because  of  the  actions  of  the  mind,  consciousness.^
Because  of  consciousness,  mind'*  and  body.

‘ occasion  ’ as  a ‘ cause.’  ‘Paccaya’  is  derived  from  p a t i + sje  t i,
‘to  come.’  [Karanap]  paticca  phalaij  eti  etasmati
p a c c a y o : — that  (causal  circumstance  or  relation)  from  which  the
‘ fruit '■  derived  from  [a  ‘cause’]  comes. — Cejdon  Cy.  ‘Paccaya’
includes  ‘ h e t u,’  ‘ k a m m a ’ — i.e.,  ‘ condition,’  and  ‘ cause  ’ — and  all
other  ‘ causal  circumstances,’  under  which  any  phenomenon  or  event
or  thing  takes  place.  Hence  it  means  any  ‘ causal  relation  ’ between
things.

^ Lit.,  from  the  ignorance- reZafiow.  But  the  Pi  takas  leave  no
doubt  that  paccaya  is  of  a causal  or  conditioning  nature.  See
preceding  note.

“ Sankhara.  This,  according  to  the  Commentaries,  is  used  as  a
synonymous  term  for  k a m m a,  and  should  not  be  confounded  with
sankharakkhandho.  On  the  kattu-sadhana  (definition
in  terms  of  agency)  of  this  term,  see  p.  182,  n.  2.

^ I.e.,  rebirth-consciousness,  which  indicates  the  connection  between
the  sankhara  of  the  past  existence  and  the  initial  resultant  con-
sciousness of  the  present.

^Namag.  This  psj'chological  nama  should  not  be  confounded
with  the  grammatical  nama  (noun),  or  the  popular  nama  (name).
All  the  three  terms  are  derived  from  the  same  verb,  namati,  'to
incline  or  bend.’  But  the  mind  is  termed  nama,  because  it  inclines,
at  least  according  to  Oriental  ideas,  towards  its  object.  The  gram-
matical term  ‘ noun  ’ and  the  popular  term  ‘ name  ’ are  also  termed
niima,  because  they  incline  towards  the  object  named.  Generally
nama  includes  v i n u a n a,  with  the  rest  of  the  incorporeal  factors
of  personality.

That  thej'  are  mutually  involved  is,  in  the  S a rj  ij  u 1 1 a - N ih  <1  y a ,
illustrated  by  two  sheaves  of  reeds  supporting  each  other  (ii.  114).  In
the  present  instance  these  two  sheaves  are  separately  spoken  of,  at
least  logically  distinguished  one  from  the  other. — Ed.

Cf.  Introd.  Essay,  p.  13,  the  phrase  ‘ sphere  of  consciousness,’
where  the  common  consciousness  of  a cittuppada  is  likened  to
the  outer  shell,  and  the  remaining  incorporeal  factors  of  that  state  of


189


PT.  viii]  Happening  throngJi  Cause

Because  of  mind  and  body,  the  sixfold  organ.

Because  of  the  sixfold  organ,  contact.

Because  of  contact,  feeling.

Because  of  feeling,  craving.

Because  of  craving,  grasping.

Because  of  grasping,  becoming.’^

Because  of  becoming,  birth.

Because  of  birth,  decay  and  death,  sorrow,  lamentation,
ill,  grief,  and  despair  come  to  be.

Such  is  the  coming  to  pass  of  this  entire  body  of  ill.


§ 3.  Of  Aspects  of  the  Lau\

In  this  law  there  are  three  periods,  twelve  factors,^
twenty  modes,^  three  connections,  four  groups,  three
rounds,  two  roots  [of  action]  to  be  taken  into  account.

How  so  ■?

Of  the  Three  Periods  : —

‘ Ignorance,’  and  ‘ the  actions  of  the  mind  ’ belong  to  the
Past;  ‘birth,’  ‘decay  and  death,’  to  the  Future;  the
intermediate  eight,  to  the  Present.^

Each  of  these  twelve  terms  is  a Factor.  For  the


consciousness  are  distinguished  as  inner  contents.  It  is  by  distinctions
of  this  kind  that  Commentaries  justify  the  segregation  of  v i n h a n a,
from  n a m a.

^ B h a V 0 includes  kammabhavo  (the  active  side  of  an  exist-
ence) and  upapattibhavo  (the  passive  side).  See  m/m,  § 5.  And
the  Commentators  say  that  bhava  is  a contraction  of  kamma-
b h a V a rendered  below  by  ‘karma-  becoming,’  i.e.,  karmic  activity.
This  indicated  the  connection  between  the  sankhara  of  the  Present
and  the  resultant  rebu'th-consciousness  of  the  Future.

- Angani.  These  factors  are  sometimes  spoken  of  as  the  Tv/elve
N i d a n a ’ s.

3 Akara,  lit.,  ‘condition,’  includes  causal  and  resultant  states.
See  infra,  § 4.

“*  This  chronological  division  of  the  ‘ chain,’  though  not  explicit  m
the  Pitakas,  is  affirmed  by  Buddhaghosa  in  Sum  Vil.,  on  the
M ah  a - N i d an  a - s u 1 1 a n t a. — Ed.


190


[rT.  VIII


Of  Relations

composite  term  ‘ sorrow,’  etc.,  is  only  meant  to  show
incidental  consequences  of  birth.  Again,  when  ‘ ignorance  ’
and  ‘ the  actions  of  the  mind  ’ have  been  taken  into
account,  craving,  grasping,  and  [k  a r m a -]  becoming
are  implicitly  accounted  for  also.  In  the  same  manner,
when  craving,  grasping,  and  [k  a r m a -]  becoming  have
been  taken  into  account,  ignorance  and  the  actions  of
mind  are  [implicitly]  accounted  for  also  ; and  when  birth,
decay,  and  death,  are  taken  into  account,  even  the  fivefold
fruit,  to  wit  [rebirth-],  consciousness  and  the  rest  are
accounted  for.  And  thus  :

§ 4.  Of  Cause  and  Fruit.

Five  causes  in  the  Past  and  Now  a fivefold  ‘ fruit
Five  causes  Now,  and  yet  to  come  a fivefold  ‘ fruit,’

make  up  the  Twenty  Modes,  the  Three  Connections,^  and
the  Four  Groups.^

§ 5.®  Of  the  Three  Rounds.

The  Three  Eounds  are  :

1.  the  Round  of  Torment — viz.,  ignorance,  craving,  and
grasping.

2.  the  Round  of  K a r m a — viz.,  one  part  of  ‘ becoming  ’
reckoned  as  ‘ k a r m a'^ -becoming,’  together  with  the
‘ actions  of  the  mind.’

3.  the  Round  of  the  Result  [of  karma] — viz.,  one

^ The  Three  Connections  are : (1)  Between  sankhara  and
V i n n a n a ; (2)  between  v e d a n a and  t a n h a ; (3)  between  b h a v a
and  j ati.  (1)  and  (3)  are  between  separate  existences,  past,  present,
and  future  ; (2j  is  between  two  factors  in  the  same  span  of  life.

- The  Four  Groups  include  one  causal  group  in  the  Past,  one
resultant  group  in  the  Present,  one  causal  group  in  the  Present,  and
one  resultant  group  in  the  Future,  each  group  consisting  of  five  modes.

^ This  § number  and  the  preceding  one  might  well  have  been
omitted  in  the  P.T.S.  Edition. — Ed.

■*  Kamma-bhava.  If  there  is  any  doubt  as  to  the  close  connec-
tion between  ‘kamma’  and  ‘sankhara,’  it  should  be  settled  by
this  passage.


PT.  VIIl]


Co7'relatio7i


191


part  of  becoming  reckoned  as  renewed  existence/  together
with  the  remaining  factors.

The  two  Boots  are  ignorance  and  craving.^


§ 6.  2Inemonic.

Never,  till  those  Twin  Roots  shall  cease  to  be,^
Can  cease  the  incessant  round  of  misery
For  sons  of  men,  for  aye  oppressed  beneath
The  long  gleaned  harvest  of  decay  and  death ;
For  ignorance,  as  the  Asava’s  arise.

Holds  on  its  way.  And  so  the  Seer  wise
Pronounced  this  Round,  this  universal  chain.
Where  ne’er  beginning  was,  round  triple  plane,
To  be  the  Law,  that  whatso  doth  befall
Must  happen  through  a Cause  [or  not  at  all]'^.


§ 7.  Of  the  System  of  Correlation.^

The  system  of  correlation  comprises  the  following  rela-
tions ;

The  relation  of —

1.  condition  f

2.  object/

3.  dominance  /

1 Upapatti-bhava.  See  p.  189,  n.  1.

2 =dulness  (a  vij  j a = moha)  and  greed  (tanha=lobha).

^ In  J.P.T.S.  text  read  mula  na.

* These  two  lines  merely  amplify  the  one  term  ‘ P a t i c e a -
samuppado,’  ‘happening  because-of.’ — Ed.

5 The  following  section  is  a summary  of  the  twenty  fom-  relations
constituting  the  subject-matter  in  the  exercises  of  the  Patthana-
the  last  or  ‘ Great  Book^  of  the  Abhidhamma. — Ed.

® Hetu,  rendered  above  by  ‘root,’  or  left  untranslated.  The
hetu’s  primarily  condition  kamma  (cetana),  and,  secondarily,
the  k a m m a ’ s effect.  See  Appendix,  Hetu.

' 7.e.,  as  presented  to  a subject,  or,  for  Buddhists,  to  a personal
(ajjhattikap)  locus  of  access  or  ‘door.’  See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  2.

® Adhipati.  Cf.  supra,  Part  VII.,  § 4 (/).


192


Of  Relatiojis  [pt.  yiii

4.  contiguity  ;

5.  immediate  contiguity ;

6.  co-existence ;

7.  reciprocity;

8.  dependence ;

9.  sufficing  condition

10.  antecedence

11.  consequence

12.  succession  f

13.  karma;

14.  effect;

15.  support;

16.  control

17.  j h a n a ;

18.  means;®

19.  association  ;

20.  dissociation ;

21.  presence  ;

22.  absence  ;

23.  abeyance ;

24.  continuance.


§ 8.  Of  Mind  and  Body  as  Correlates.

[For  example  ; — ]

Mind  may  to  mind  sixfold  relation  bear,

FiVEfold  to  mind-and-hody,^  one  alone
To  body.  Body  is  to  mind  one  way
Belated.  Two  relations  bear  to  mind

1 Or  sine  qua  non  of  sufficing  efficiency.  See  Childers’s  Diet.,
‘Upanissay a.’ — Ed.  The  Ceylon  Cy.  defines  9 as  a stronger
species  of  8.

2 Or  priority  and  posteriority.  Consequence  implying  merely  post
hoc,  not  propter  hoc. — Ed.

3 More  lit.,  ‘ repetition  of  an  action.’  It  is  used  for  ‘ recurrence.’

* Indriya.  See  p.  159,  n.  2.

= M a g g a,  lit.,  ‘ path.’

® For  greater  lucidity  ‘ n a m a ’ and  ‘ r u p a ’ are  rendered  by  the
Western  concepts  ‘ mind  ’ aird  ‘ body.’ — Ed.


193


PT.  Till]  Correlation  of  Mind  and  Body

Mind-body-name-and-notion,^  while  to  itself
Mind-body  may  in  nine  relations  stand.

Sets  of  relations,  six.

How  may  this  be  ?


§ 9.  Of  how  Mind  and  Body  may  be  Related.

First,  mind  is  related  to  mind  in  six  ways :

States^  of  consciousness  and  their  mental  concomitants
which  have  just  ceased  are  related  to  present^  states  of
consciousness  and  their  mental  concomitants  by  way  of
(1)  contiguity;  (2)  immediate  contiguity;  (3)  absence;
and  (4)  abeyance.  Again,  antecedent  apperceptions  are
related  to  consequent  apperceptions  by  way  of  (5)  succes-
sion (or  recurrence),  and  co-existent  states  of  consciousness
and  their  mental  concomitants  are  mutually  related  by  way
of  (6)  association.

Next,  mind  is  related  to  mind-and-body  in  five  ways  :

The  hetu’s,  j h a n a-factors,  and  Path-factors,  are
related  to  co-existing  states  of  mind  and  body  by  way
of  (1)  condition;  (2)  j hana;  and  (3)  means  (respectively).
Co-existent  volition^  is  related  to  co-existent  states  of  mind
and  body  by  way  of  (4)  karma.  So  also  asynchronous
volition  is  related  to  states  of  mind  and  body  brought
into  existence  through  karma  by  way  of  karma.

Again  [mental]  aggregates  of  effects®  are  mutually
related,  and  are  related  also  to  co-existent  states  of  body  by
way  of  (5)  effect.®

^ Or  ‘ term-and-concept.’  Here  both  namapahhatti  and
atthapahnatti  are  intended.

2 Citta-cetasika  dhamma.  See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  25  /.,  on
dhe  succession  of  states  of  consciousness  in  the  processes  of  thought.

^ Paccuppannanag  is  paraphrased  by  Ledi  Sadaw  as  follows  :
jpunuppannanap  patipatiya  uppannanaij  va.  Literally
then,  it  means  ‘occurring  again.’  Burmese  translations  render  by
" succeeding.’

^ On  the  twofold  functions  (psychological  and  ethical)  of  C e t a n a,
see  Introd.  Essay,  pp.  16,  42/.

® V i p a k a,  ‘ result  of  k a r m a.’  This  is  not  a relation  of  effect  to
its  cause,  but  a relation  among  the  effects  themselves.


13


194


[PT.  VIII


Of  Relations

Thirdly,  mind  is  related  to  body  in  one  way  :

Consequent  states  of  consciousness  and  their  mental
concomitants  are  related  to  this  antecedent  body^  by  wa}-
of  (1)  consequence.

Fourthly,  body  is  related  to  mind  in  one  way  :

The  six  bases  during  life  are  related  to  the  seven
elements  of  cognition  by  way  of  (1)  antecedence,  and  so
also  are  the  five  kinds  of  sense-objects  to  the  five  processes
of  sense-cognition.

Fifthly,  name-and-notion-mind-and-body  ^ are  related  to
mind  in  two  ways — namely,  by  way  of  (1)  object,  and  of
(2)  sufficing  condition.  In  this  connection  ‘ object  ’ is  of  six
kinds,  consisting  of  visible  [audible]  body,  etc.  But  sufficing
condition  is  of  three  kinds  : — sufficing  condition  in  object,
sufficing  condition  in  contiguity,  and  sufficing  condition  in
nature.^  Of  these  three  only  the  object  to  which  weight
is  attached  is  the  sufficing  condition  in  object.  States
of  consciousness,  and  their  mental  concomitants  which
have  just  ceased,  constitute  the  sufficing  condition  in
contiguity.  Sufficing  condition  in  nature  is  of  many
kinds — for  instance,  states  of  passion,  etc.,  and  of  faith,,
etc.,  pleasure,  pain,  a person^  food,  physical  change,
residence — conditions,  internal  or  external,  as  the  case
may  be — are  related  to  (internal  or  external)  moral  and
other  states.  Farm  a,  too,  is  related  to  its  results  as
sufficing  condition  in  nature.

§ 10.'^  Sixthly,  states  of  mind  and  body  are  related  to^
states  of  mind  and  body  in  nine  ways,  to  wit,  by  way  of :

(1)  dominance;

(2)  co-existence  ;

(3)  reciprocity ;

^ Kayo,  lit.,  ‘an  aggregate.’  Cf.  the  Diika'paWuina  where  this
phrase  recurs  so  often. — Ed.

^ P a h h a 1 1 i - n a m a - r u p a n i,  as  above,  p.  193,  1.  1.  On
p a u h a 1 1 i,  see  Appendix  s.v.

^ Pahattipanissayo.

■*  Instances  of  this  and  the  following  eases  are  a friend,  wholesome
food,  agreeable  climate,  comfortable  bed  and  housing,  etc.

® Here,  again,  the  P.T.S.  edition’s  division  of  paragraphs  is  at  fault.


195


PT.  vin]  Correlation  of  Mind  and  Body

(4)  dependence ;

(5)  support ;

(6)  control ;

(7)  dissociation ;

(8)  presence  ;

(9)  continuance,
according  to  circumstances.

(1)  In  this  connection,  the  first  of  these  relations  occurs
in  one  of  two  ways  :

(i.)  The  object  to  which  weight  is  attached  is  related  to
states  of  mind,  by  way  of  objective  dominance.

(ii.)  Co-existent  dominant  influences,  which  are  of  four
kinds, ^ are  related  to  co-existent  states  of  mind  and  body  by
way  of  co-existent  [dominance].

(2)  Next,  the  relation  of  ‘ co-existence  ’ is  threefold,
thus  : states  of  consciousness  and  their  mental  concomi-
tants are  related  both  mutually  and  also  to  co-existent
bodily  states  as  co-existent  states.  The  great  essentials^
are  related  both  mutually  and  also  to  the  material  qualities
derived  from  them,  as  co-existent.  The  basis  [of  mind]
and  resultant  [mental]  states  are,  at  the  moment  of
rebirth,  mutually  related  as  co-existent.

(3)  The  relation  of  ‘ reciprocity  ’ is  also  threefold,  thus  :
States  of  consciousness  and  their  mental  concomitants  are
reciprocally  related  ; so  are  the  great  essentials  ; so  is  the
basis  of  mind  with  resultant  [mental]  states,  at  the  moment
of  rebirth.

(4)  The  relation  of  ‘ dependence  ’ is  also  threefold,  thus  :
States  of  consciousness  and  their  mental  concomitants  are
related  by  way  of  deiDendence,  both  mutually  and  also  to
co-existent  bodily  states.^  The  great  essentials  are  related

^ Desire  to  act,  energy,  thought,  and  investigation.  See  above,
Part  YII..  § 4y.

- The  ‘four  elements  ’ in  popular  Western  phrase.

^ This  relation  expresses  the  dependence  of  bodily  states  on  the
mind,  and  not  of  the  mental  states  on  the  body.  The  first  member  of
a pair  of  correlates  is  the  ‘ N issaya,’  that  which  is  depended  upon
and  the  other  member  which  depends  on  it  is  the  Nissita.


196  Of  Relations  [pt.  viii

by  way  of  dependence,  both  mutually  and  also  to  material
qualities  derived  from  them.  The  six  bases  are  related,
by  way  of  dependence,  to  the  seven  elements  of  cogni-
tion.^

(5)  The  relation  of  ‘ support  ’ is  of  two  kinds,  thus :
Edible  food  is  related  to  this  body,  and  immaterial  supports^
are  related  to  co-existent  states  of  mind  and  body,  both  by
way  of  support.

(6)  The  relation  of  ‘ control  ’ is  threefold,  thus  : The
five  sentient  organs  are  related  to  the  five  kinds  of  sense-
cognition  by  way  of  control  f so  is  the  controlling  power  of
bodily  vitality  to  material  qualities  that  have  been  ‘ grasped
at  so  are  immaterial  controlling  faculties  to  co-existent
states  of  mind  and  body.

(7)  The  relation  of  ‘ dissociation  ’ is  also  threefold,  thus  :
At  the  moment  of  descent  into  life,'^  the  base  of  mind  is
related  to  results  [of  karma]  by  way  of  co-existent  dis-
sociation ; so  also  are  states  of  consciousness  and  their
mental  concomitants  related  to  co-existent  material  qualities,
viz.,  by  way  of  co-existent  dissociation."  Again,  consequent
states  of  consciousness  and  their  mental  concomitants  are
related  to  this  antecedent  body  by  way  of  consequent  dis-
sociation. And,  thirdly,  the  six  bases  during  life  are  related
to  the  seven  elements  of  cognition  by  way  of  antecedent
dissociation.

(§  11).’  (8)  and  (9)  Lastly,  the  relations  of  ‘ presence  ’
and  of  ‘ continuance  ’ are  each  fivefold,  thus :

^ See  above,  Part  III.,  § 13.

^ See  p.  177  (g).

^ On  Indriya.  See  p.  159,  n.  2.  From  this  passage  it  is  clear
that  Buddhists  regard  the  five  sentient  organs  as  Indriya’ s.
Though  the  word  ‘ faculty  ’ includes  both  mental  and  physical  powers,
‘ the  eye,’  ‘ the  ear,’  etc.,  can  hardly  be  called  ‘ physical  powers.’

^ See  above,  Part  VI.,  § 4.

* I.e.,  of  conception.

* This  is  an  interesting  parallel  to  modern  ‘ parallelism  ’ of  mind
and  body.  In  the  next  sentence,  cf.  § 7,  «.  2 ; § 9,  n.  1. — Ed.

^ There  should  again  have  been  no  fresh  section  here  in  P.T.S. —
Ed.


PT.  A'lll]


Relations  G-eneralized


197


First,  co-existence,  next  priority,

Then,  after-sequence,  whereso’er  it  be,
Support  nutritive,  power  of  vital  state  : —
Such  is  the  group  of  five  we  now  relate.


§ 12.  Of  the  more  General  Aspect  of  Relations.

Further,  all  these  ^ twenty-four  relations  are  reducible  to
[these  four]  : —

I.  Object.

II.  Sufficing  Condition.

III.  Farm  a.
lY.  Presence.

But  throughout  [this  exposition  of  relations],  wherever
co-existent  material  qualities  are  mentioned,  two  kinds  of
co-existent  material  qualities  must  always  be  understood  :
firstly,  during  life  the  material  qualities  related  as  co-
existent are  such  as  are  produced  by  thought ; secondly,  at
rebirth  the  material  qualities  so  related  are  such  as  are
due  to  deeds  done  in  a former  birth. ^

§ 13.  Mnemonic.

Thus  all  we  know — phenomena  — in  threefold  stage  of
time.

Or  freed  from  time, — as  personal,^  or  external  (keep  the
rhyme  !)

Conditioned,  unconditioned,^  too,  beneath  the  threefold
head

Read,  for  sabbesu,  sabbe  pi. — Ed.

^ Katatta-rupanap.  Ou  katatta  karma,  see  p.  144,  n.  4.
Here,  however,  the  term  is  extended  to  all  kinds  of  j a naka-k  ar  ma.
® Ajjhattap.

* Sankhatasankhata.  Sankhata  is  a synonym  of  san-
khara,  meaning,  by  kammasadhana  definition,  that  which  is
formed,  fashioned,  made,  conditioned,  or  caused.


[PT.  YIIl


198  Of  Relations

Of  term-and-concept,  body,  mind — ’fcis  in  Patthana^
said —

Are  as  relations  twenty-four  (by  students  to  be  read).

§ 14.  Of  the  Term  ' P a h h atti’  and  its  Import.

Of  that  ‘ threefold  head,’  ‘ body  ’ is  just  the  aggregate 2
of  material  qualities ; and  ‘ mind  ’ is  the  five  kinds  of  the
immaterial,  that  is,  the  four  immaterial  aggregates  reckoned
as  mind  and  mental  concomitants,  and  Nibbana.®

But  the  remaining  head  ‘pannatti’  is  twofold  accord-
ing as  it  is  made  known,"^  or  as  it  makes  [things]  known.®
How  twofold  ?

There  are,  in  the  first  place,  ideas  f such  as  ‘ land,’
‘ mountain,’  and  the  like,  designated  accordingly,'^  and
derived  from  some  mode  of  physical  changes  in  nature.
There  are,  next,  ideas,  as  ‘ house,’  ‘ chariot,’  ‘ cart,’  and  the
like,  [named  accordingly  and]  derived  from  various  modes
of  construction  of  materials.  Then  there  are  such  ideas  as
‘ man,’  ‘ individual,’  and  the  like  [termed  accordingly^  and]
derived  from  the  fivefold  set  of  aggregates.  Again,  there
are  ideas  of  locality,  time,  and  the  like  [made  known
accordingly*  and],  derived  from  the  revolutions  of  the
moon,  and  so  forth.  There  are  ideas  like  ‘ pit,’  ‘ cave,’  etc.
[named  accordingly*  and]  derived  from  a mode  of  non-

1 See  e.g.,  p.  21  and  passim  of  my  edition  of  DuJia-pattlimia. — Ed.

^ Khandho.  N.B. — ‘Body’  and  ‘mind,’  as  before,  stand  for
n a m a - r u p a. — Ed.

3 It  is  significant  that  Nibbana  is  classed  under  nama,  as  showing
that  Nibbana  is  a mental  state. — Ed.

^ Paniiapiyatta;  atthapannatti  is  made  known  by  s a d d a-
pannatti  or  namapannatti.  See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  4/.,  on
the  relativity  of  the  two  classes  of  Pannatti.

® Pannapanato.  This  has  reference  to  the  n a m a - p a n n a 1 1 i,
which  makes  the  atthapannatti  known. — See  Introd.  Essay.

® I.e.,  ideas  or  notions  (pannatti)  corresponding  to  things
named  or  designated.

’’  Tatha  tatha  pannatta,  lit.,  ‘ named  according  to  such  and
such  [circumstances].’

® See  n.  7.


PT.  VIIl]


199


Term-and-Concept

contact.’-  There  are  ideas  - corresponding  to  the  images  of
the  K a s i u a-circles,  etc.  [termed  accordingly’  and]  derived
from  the  special  exercise  of  mental  culture  on  this  or  that
K a s i n a-object.^

All  such  distinctions,  though  they  do  not  exist  in  the
highest  sense,  have,  nevertheless,  as  modes  of  shadowing
forth  the  meaning’  [of  things],  become  objects  of  thought-
genesis®  [as  our  ideas].  And  the  idea  is  referred  to,  derived
from,  or  determined  by,  this  or  that  \tMn(j\  and  is  called
‘ idea  of  thing,’®  because  it  is  conceived  and  reckoned,
named,  currently  expressed,  or  made  knoicnd  This  idea  of
thing  is  designated  ‘ a 1 1 h a p a n n a 1 1 i,’  because  it  is
made  knoiod  [by  term,  word,  or  sign].

In  the  next  place,  term,®  as  designating  (symbol),  is  illus-
trated by  the  various  classes  of  names,  to  wit,  name,  name
devised,  etc.  Any  of  these  classes  of  names  is  sixfold
according  as  it  is —


’ Asamphuttbakarag.

Kasina-nimitta.  The  patibhaga-nimitta  is  in-
tended. This,  of  course,  corresponds  to  the  uggabanimitta,
which  is  the  image  of  the  parikamma-nimitta  (c/.  p.  54).

® Tag  tag  bhutanimittag.  This  refers  to  the  pari-
kamma-nimitta of  the  kasina,  ‘ circle  of  earth,’ etc.  On  the
special  exercises  of  mental-culture  on  these  objects  see  Part  IX.  and
Introd.  Essay,  p.  54/.

•*Atthacha.yakarena,  ‘images  or  ideas  as  shadows  {i.e.,
copies)  of  things.’

■’  Cittuppadanag  arammanabhuta.  This  and  pari-
kappiyamana  (conceived)  below  show  that  we  are  here  dealing
with  the  ideas  of  things  named.

® Pahhattiti  pavucca'ti  and  pahhatti  nama  refer  to
atthapahhatti,  notion  or  concept.

" Pahhaplyatiti,  and  pahhapiyatta.

® Panhatti.  There  are  six  classes  of  names  known  to  native  logico-
grammarians.  These  are  (1)  nama,  name  (of  a thing) ; (2)  nil  in  a -
k a m m a,  name  made  (or  given  to  a thing);  (3)  n a m a d h e y y a
name  long  established  (on  a thing);  (4)  n am  a n i r u 1 1 i,  name,
expressed  in  language  by  means  of  a term  ; (5)  n am  a b y a h j an  a,
name  showing  (the  meaning  of  the  thing  named) ; (6)  n a m a b h i-
1 a p a,  name  suggesting  (the  meaning  of  the  thing  named).


200


[PT.  VIIT


Of  Relations

1.  a naming  of  something  that  exists  ;

2.  a naming  of  something  that  does  not  exist ;

3.  a naming  of  something  that  does  not  exist  by  some-
thing that  does  exist ;

4.  a naming  of  something  that  exists  by  something  that
does  not  exist ;

5.  a naming  of  something  that  exists  by  something  that
also  exists ;

6.  a naming  of  something  that  does  not  exist  by  some-
thing that  also  does  not  exist.

That  is  to  say,  when,  by  a given  term,  people  name
something  which  in  the  highest  sense  exists,  such  as  [the
aggregates  of  personality — e.y.],  body,  feeling,  etc.,  then
this  term  is  called  a name  of  something  existing.  When
hy  such  a term  as  ‘ land,’  ‘ hill,’  or  the  like,  people  desig-
nate something  which  in  the  highest  sense  does  not  exist,
then  this  term  is  called  a name  of  something  non-existent.^
And  by  combination  with  [these  alternatives],  the  remain-
ing kinds  may  be  understood,  as  for  instance  in  such  terms
as  ‘ a possessor  of  sixfold  super-intellection,’^  ‘ iroman's
voice,’  ‘ visual  cognition,’  ‘ a king's  son,’  taken  in  order.

Cf.  with  this  list  the  older  and  different  classes  in  the  A 1 1 h a-
sa  linl.  B.  Psy.,  pp.  340,  341,  nn. — Ed.

1 Buddhists  do  not  recognize  the  existence  of  the  Platonic  Idea,
corresponding  to  any  name  they  may  give  to  a thing.  They  counte-
nance Nominalism  by  denying  to  names  existence  as  a fact  in
Nature  ; they  countenance  Conceptualism  by  holding  that  copies  of
things  exist  in  mind  as  ideas ; they  countenance  Realism  by  holding
that  the  four  Essentials  and  their  derivatives  do  exist  as  a reality.  In
denying  the  existence  of  ‘land’  or  ‘hill’  therefore,  Buddhists  must
not  be  understood  as  denying  the  existence  of  the  four  Essentials
and  of  derivatives  known  as  earthy  matter.  See  this  note  developed
in  Appendix,  A 1 1 h a.

2 Read  c h a 1 a b h i h h o ; lit.  : ‘ a six-super-intellect-or.’  Cf.
Part  IX.,  § 4. — Ed.  In  this  compound  name  Buddhists  say  that  the
sixfold  Abhihn  a is  a fact,  but  that  ‘possessor’  is  a name  given  to
the  five  aggregates.  So  also  in  the  compound  term  ‘ woman’s  voice,’
the  voice  does  exist  as  a sound,  but  ‘woman’  is  a name  also  given  to
the  five  aggregates.  Thus,  though  they  admit  the  existence  of  the
five  aggregates  as  things  in  the  highest  sense,  they  deny  this  sort  of
existence  in  the  possessor  or  the  woman.


PT.  nil]


201


Tcrm-and-  Concept

§ 15.  Mnemonic.

By  following  the  sound  of  speech  thro’  hearing’s  path
brought  to  our  ken,

By  following  next  the  sign,  when  mind  forthwith  its  door
flings  open,^  then

The  sense  of  things  cognized  becomes.  But  of  the  signs
themselves,  'tis  said

They  [in  the  far-off  ages]  were  by  world-convention
fashioned.


Thus  ends  the  Eighth  Part  in  the  Compendium  of
Philosophy,  being  the  Chapter  entitled  the  Compendium
of  Relations.

On  the  sequence  of  the  processes  of  thought  involved  in  under-
standing the  meaning  of  the  word  heard,  see  Introd.  Essay,  p.  35.


PART  IX


THE  COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  STATIONS  OF  RELIGIOUS
EXERCISES.!


§ 1.  Introcliictorii.

Henceforth  the  twofold  stations  will  I tell
Of  exercises  whereby  we  may  reach
The  Calm  and  Insight  [of  the  holy  life].

§ 2.  Of  Calm.^

The  Compendium  of  exercises  in  calm  comprises —

1.  The  seven  stations  of  exercise  in  calm  :

1.  the  ten  hypnotic  circles  p

2.  the  ten  impurities  ;

3.  the  ten  recollections  ;

4.  the  four  illimitables  ;

5.  the  one  notion

! Kammatthanaij.  This  term,  not  occurring  in  this  specialized
sense,  in  the  Pi  t ak  a s,  means,  lit.,  ‘place  and  occasion  of  work  (or
action).’  {Cf.  M.  ii.  197,  where  it  refers  to  agriculture  and  trade.)
The  use  of  the  circles  for  inducing  the  quasi-hypnotic  states,  and  of
intense  visualizations  prescribed  for  this  or  that  exercise,  suggested  to
me  the  Catholic  system  of  ‘ stations  ’ for  meditation,  station  and
[s]  t h a n a being  moreover  alike  in  meaning  and  etymology. — Ed.

2 Samatho.  Kilese  samathetiti  samatho.  Called
calm  because  it  lulls  the  passions.  Samatha  is  a course  of  auto-
hypnosis in  which  the  I'ive  Hindrances  are,  so  to  speak,  put  to  sleep.

^ K a s i n a - m a n d a 1 a p .


202


PT.  ix]  Materials  and  Instruments


203


6.  the  one  discrimination  ;

7.  the  four  stages  of  A r ii  p a - j h a n a A

II.  The  six  characters

1.  the  passionate ;

2.  the  malevolent ;

3.  the  muddle-headed ;

4.  the  trusting  ;

5.  the  understanding

6.  the  imaginative.®

III.  The  three  stages  of  mental  culture  :

1.  the  preliminary ;

2.  the  accessory ;

3.  the  ecstatic.

IT.  The  three  symbols  :

1.  the  preliminary  ;

2.  the  image  ;

3.  the  transformed  after-image.®

How  [are  the  classes  detailed]  ?

1.  — 1.  The  ten  Circles  are  of  earth,  water,  fire,  or  air,
blue,  yellow,  red  or  white,  of  space  or  of  light.

2.  The  ten  Impurities  are  a bloated,  discoloured,  or
festering  corpse,  one  with  crackled  skin,  gnawn  and

1 S a n n a.  Notion  corresponds  better  than  ‘perception’  to  the
psychologically  vague  meaning  here  of  the  Pali  word. — See  Introd.
Essay,  p.  40,  on  this  term. — Ed.

2 Called  Aruppa  (adjectival  form)  for  sjrort. — Ed.

^ C a r i t a.  The  nearest  Western  equivalent  I know  is  the  German
‘ Wandel,’  but  in  this  case  disposition  (of  character)  or  temperament —
i.e.,  Wandel  of  mind,  rather  than  of  concrete  life,  is  meant. — Ed.

^Buddhicarita.  Is  ‘ buddhi  ’ a S a n k h y a survival  ? It  is
very  late  Pali. — Ed.

® I.e.,  constructively  imaginative.  On  Vi  t akk  a,  see  II.,  § 2 and
Introd.  Essay. — Ed.

® Patibhaganimittag,  ‘the  image  conceptualized,’  or  ‘the
concept,  similar  to  the  image,’  but  free  from  the  faults  of  the  original
symbol.


204


Of  Religious  Exercises


[PT.  IX


mangled,  bitten  in  pieces,  or  mutilated  and  in  fragments,
a bloody  corpse,  or  one  worm-infested,  or  a skeleton.^

3.  The  ten  Eecollections-  are  those  of  the  Buddha,  the
Doctrine,  the  Order,  virtue,  liberality,  the  gods,  peace, ^
death,  mindfulness  regarding  the  body,  mindfulness  regard-
ing respiration.

4.  The  four  Illimitables  are  love,  pity,  appreciation,^  and
equanimity.®  They  are  also  called  the  Sublime  Abodes.

5.  The  one  Notion  is  that  of  the  oft’ensiveness  of  material
food.

6.  The  one  Discrimination  is  that  of  discriminating  (in
a compound)  the  four  Essentials.®

7.  The  Four  Stages  of  Arupa-j  liana  are  the  con-
ception of  the  infinity  of  space,  etc.’

Thus  there  are,  in  all,  forty  stations  of  exercise  in  the
exposition  of  ‘ Calm.’


§ 2a.  Of  the  Snitabiliti/  of  Different  Exercises.

Among  these  forty  the  exercises  reckoned  suitable  (1)  for
a passionate  habit  of  mind  are  the  ten  impurities  and
mindfulness  regarding  the  body ; (2)  for  a malevolent
habit  of  mind,  the  four  illimitables,  and  the  four  coloured
circles ; (3)  for  a muddle-headed,  and  for  an  imaginative
habit  of  mind,  respiration  exercise  f (4)  for  a trusting
habit  of  mind,  the  six  recollections  of  the  Buddha,  etc.  ;

1 These  sights  were  easy  to  meet  with  in  a cemetery  or  charnel
place,  to  which  flesh-eating  beasts  and  birds  had  access,  such  a spot
being  among  those  prescribed  for  meditation. — Ed.

2 Or  Meditations.

3 Upasama,  implying  past  struggle  to  win  it.  Nibbana  is  here
intended  (Ceylon  Cy.).

* Sympathy  with  joy  and  success.  See  Part  II.,  § 2.

“ The  intellectual  tatramaj  jhattalupekkha,  and  not  the
hedonic  u p e k k h a,  is  here  intended.

''  I.e.,  elements.  See  Part  VI.,  § 2. — Ed.

''  See  Part  I.,  § 10.

s This  is  described  in  D.  ii.  lOl  . . .,  M.  i.  56;  iii.  89  . . .,  Fatis.
i.  162/.  . . .—Ed.


Mental  Culture


205


PT.  IX]


(5)  for  an  understanding  habit  of  mind,  the  recollections
of  death  and  peace, ^ the  one  notion,  and  the  one  dis-
crimination.

The  remaining  stations  of  exercise  are  all  suitable  for
every  one.  Moreover,  in  choosing  the  hypnotic  circle,  a
wide  one  is  suitable  for  a muddle-headed  habit  of  mind,  a
little  one  for  an  imaginative  habit  of  mind. 2
So  far  for  the  section  on  suitability.


§ 3.  Of  Mental  Culture.^

In  all  these  [forty  exercises]  the  preliminary  stage  of
culture  is  attainable.  In  the  first  eight  Eecollections  and
in  the  two  single  exercises,  only  the  accessory  stage  of
culture  is  attained  ; there  is  no  ecstasy.  In  the  remaining
thirty  stations  of  exercise  the  culture  of  ecstasy  is  also
attained.

Again,  the  ten  circles  and  the  exercise  in  respiration
pertain  to  all  five  j h a n a s.  The  ten  Impurities  and
mindfulness  regarding  the  body  pertain  to  the  first  j hana,
the  three  first  Illimitables  pertain  to  the  fourth  j h a n a ;
equanimity  to  the  fifth  j h a n a.  Thus  twenty-six  stations
of  exercise  can  induce  Eupaloka  jhanas,  while  the
four  A r ii  p a exercises  can  induce  their  respective  stages
of  A r fi  p a 1 0 k a j h a n a.

So  far  for  the  section  on  mental  culture.

' Here  vupasama.  See  prev.  p.  n.  3.

^ Ledi  Sadaw,  probably  following  earlier  authorities,  prescribes  the
size  of  a threshing-floor  (kh  ala  - m an  da  1 a d i - p am  a na  ij)  for
the  muddle-headed,  and  a "diameter  of  a span  and  four  inches
(vidatthi-caturangula-pamanap)for  the  imaginative.

^ Bhavana.


206


Of  Religious  Exercises


[PT.  IX


§ 4.  Of  the  Hypnotic  Symbols?-

Of  these  three,  loosely  speaking, 2 the  preliminary  symbol
and  the  image  are  attainable,  according  to  the  nature  of
the  object,  when  practising  any  of  these  stations ; but  the
transformed  after-image  is  only  got  in  the  [twenty-two]®
exercises  with  the  [ten]  circles,  the  [ten]  impurities,  the
[one]  mindfulness  regarding  the  body,-*  and  the  [one]
mindfulness  regarding  respiration.  For  it  is  by  attending
to  the  transformed  after-image  that  accessory  and  ecstatic
concentration  develops.  How  is  that?

For  a beginner  who,  in  [gazing  at  his]  earth  or  other
circle,  grasps  the  sense-symbol,  that  object  is  called  his
preliminary  symbol,  and  that  exercise  his  preliminary
culture.  But  when  the  symbol  is  thoroughly  grasped  by
the  mind,  and  when  it  appears  to  the  mind-door  as  if  one
saw  it  with  the  eye,®  then  it  is  this  object  which  is  termed
the  symbol  of  the  image,  and  that  culture  becomes  well
established.  Again,  in  the  case  of  one  w'ho  is  thus  well
established,  and  who,  after  that  advanced  stage,  gives
himself  to  sustained  contemplation  concerning  the  image-
symbol,  with  the  [degree  of]  concentration  gained  from  the
preliminary  stage,  then,  when  that  object  similar  to  the
image-symbol,®  freed  from  its  physical  base,^  reckoned  as  a

* Lit.,  go  car  a is  ‘ cattle-rauge,’  but  is  used  to  mean  ‘range,’
‘ field,’  Gehict  of  any  specific  kind. — Ed.

^ Pariyayena.  Or,  by  way  of  concession — i.c.,  not  necessarilj',
not  strictly  speaking.

® See  § 2,  (1).

* Kotthasa,  lit.,  ‘part,’  ‘ section,’  applied  to  any  organ  of  bodj-.
Buddhists  regard  the  body  as  made  up  of  the  thirty-two  kotthasa’ s.
Here  it  stands  for  the  kayagatasati.  Under  kayanupas
Sana  both  the  kayagatasati  and  the  anapanassati  are
included.

5 The  eye  being  then  closed,  or  the  object  absent  (Ceylon  Cy.).

® TappaHbhagag,  lit.,  ‘ similar  to  that,’  hence  a copy.

’’  Vatthu-dhamma-vimuccitaij.  Freed,  too,  from  the
imperfections  of  that  base,  a purified,  ideal  copy  (Ceylon  Cy.).


J ha  71  a


207


PT.  IX]

concept,^  and  accomplished  by  culture-practice,^  is  well
established  in,  and  well  driven  into,  the  mind,  the  trans-
formed after-image-symbol  is  said  to  have  been  well-
developed.

Of  Jhd  n a concerned  ivith  the  R fap  aloka.

Thenceforth  contemplation  by  way  of  the  accessory
stage,  stripped  of  obstacles  and  called  concentration  of
K it  m a 1 0 k a experience,  is  said  to  be  accomplished.
After  that,  to  one  who  has  maintained  that  transformed
after-image  by  accessory  concentration,  the  first  j h a n a
of  the  R u p a 1 0 k a plane  supervenes.^  After  that,  to  one
who  has  Cultivated  that  first  j h a n a by  means  of  the
five  habits,  to  wit,  turning^  the  attention  to  the  first
j h a n a,  inducing  and  maintaining  it,^  pre-determining  the
period  of  its  maintenance,®  emerging  from  it,  and  reflecting
on  it,"  for  the  purpose  of  putting  away  the  grosser  features
beginning  with  the  initial  imagination,  etc.,®  and  of  striving
to  bring  about  the  subtler  features,  beginning  with  sus-
tained imagination,  etc.,®  the  second,  and  higher  j h a n a s
supervene,  in  due  order.

iPanuatti  sankhatag.  Here  attha-panuatti  is  in-
tended. The  after-image,  though  similar  to  the  image,  being  freed
from  its  physical  base,  cannot  be  depicted  to  sense  or  imagination.
Hence  it  is  best  rendered  by  concept.

^ Bhavanamayag,  ‘brought  into  existence  by  practice,’  or,  as
Ledi  Sadaw  writes,  ‘ accomplished  by  the  force  of  the  cultured
thoughts ’{kevalag  bhavana-citta-balena  pasiddhag)_

^ A p p e t i,  explained  in  the  comments  by  appanavasena
p a Y a 1 1 a t i t i,  ‘ occurs  by  way  of  ecstasy.’

A V a j j a n a - V a s i t a.  On  A v a j j ana,  see  p.  8.5,  n.  3.

= Samapajjana-vasilra,  lit.,  ‘the  habit  of  entering  into
j h a 11  a.’  Cf.  p.  59  on  S a m a p a 1 1 i.

® Adhitthanavasita.  Without  this  habit  of  predetermining
the  period  of  j h an  a,  the  last  habit  would  tend  to  maintain  it  for  an
indefinite  period.

' Paceavekkhana  vasito,  lit.,  the  reviewing  habit,  which
is  post-j  h a n i c.  On  these  habits  see  Introd.  Essay,  p.  58.

^ V i t a k k a is  here  rendered  b j'  ‘ imagination  ’ to  show  that  the
object  of  jhana  is  the  transformed  after-image.  By  ‘etc.,’  the
other  jhana  -factors  in  order  are  to  be  understood,  See  Part  I.,  § 8.


208


Of  Religions  Exercises  [ft.  ix

Thus,  in  the  circles  of  earth,  etc. — twenty-two  stations  of
religions  exercise  in  all — the  transformed  after-image  may
be  acquired.  Of  the  remaining  [eighteen  stations],  the
Illimitables  are  carried  on  in  dependence  on  the  concept
‘ beings.’^


Of  J liana  concerned  with  the  Ar  up  aloha.

Now  to  one  who,  by  way  of  infinity,^  practises  his
preliminary  exercise  on  space  obtained  by  abstraction^
from  any  of  the  circles  excejDt  the  space-circle, the  first
stage  of  A r u p a - j h a n a supervenes.  To  one  who,  by
way  of  infinity,^  practises  this  preliminary  e.xercise  on  the
cognition  of  the  first  A r ii  p a stage,  the  second  stage  of
A r li  1?  a - i h a n a supervenes.  To  him  who  practises  the
preliminary  exercise  on  the  non-existence  of  the  [aforesaid]
cognition  of  the  first  A r li  p a stage,  mentally  repeating
‘ there  is  naught  whatever  !’  the  third  stage  of  Arupa-
] h a n a supervenes.  To  him  who  practises  the  preliminary
exercise  on  [the  cognition  of]  the  third  A r u p a stage,
mentally  repeating : ‘ This  is  calm  ! this  is  excellent ! the
fourth  stage  of  A r u p a - j h a n a supervenes.

And  in  the  ten^  remaining  stations  of  exercise,  when
one  has  practised  the  preliminary  exercise  of  meditating  on
the  attributes  of  the  Buddha,  etc.,  and  when  that  symbol-

1 Sattapannattiyaij  pavattanti.  Here  atthapan-
n a 1 1 i is  intended.

Cf.  any  description  of  the  procedure  in  these  exercises — e.g.,  Faff
samhhidii  II.,  130  ff.  y '■  Mettahatlid’ ; D.  ii.  186;  Dialogues  of  the
Buddha,  ii.  219-20. — Ed.

2 The  formula  for  repetition  in  this  exercise  is  ‘space  is  infinite!’
‘ space  is  infinite  !’  and  that  in  the  following  exercise  is  ‘ consciousness
is  infinite  !’  ‘ consciousness  is  infinite  I’

® Ugghahetva  laddhamakasa  p — i.e.,  a m a n a s i k a r a-
vasena  uddharitva,  prescinding  by  way  of  inattention  (to  the
k a b i n a). — Ceylon  Cy.

Because  we  cannot  abstract  space  from  space. — (Ceylon  Cy.)

® I.e.,  the  first  eight  Kecollections  and  the  two  single  exercises.


209


PT.  ix]  Super )ioi'mal  lutellection

notion  is  well  grasped,  then  the  preparation  in  that  symbol-
notion  is  firmly  set  up,  and  the  accessory  stage  is  also
attained.


§ 5.  Of  Supernormal  Intellection.^

Now,  if  one  has  emerged  from  the  fifth  stage  of  j h a n a
[used  as]  the  foundation  for  supernormal  intellection,  and
performs  the  preliminary  exercise  of  meditating  on  the
phenomenon  determined  on,  etc.,^  then  the  fifth  stage
of  j h a n a proceeding  by  way  of  that  intellection  super-
venes, with  a visible,  or  other  object  as  its  object  according
to  circumstances.  By  supernormal  intellection  we  mean  :

The  powers  named  I d d h i,^  the  Celestial  Ear,
Discerning  others’  thoughts.  Reminiscence
Of  former  births,  and  fifth,  the  Heavenly  Eye.

So  far  for  the  section  on  the  scope  of  the  exercises.
Here  end  also  the  methods  for  exercise  in  calm.

^ Abhiniia.  The  reader  who  is  conversant  with  Pali  should  not
fail  to  consult  Patisainhhidd-magga,  i.,  pp.  112  (Mahavagge
Nanakatha),  where  occurs  the  oldest  account  we  have  of  the
process  of  inducing  abhinha.  Each  of  the  five  modes  named  in  the
verses  above  are  dealt  with  in  the  same  order,  nor  is  the  sixth,  the
certificate  of  Arahantship,  omitted : ‘ that  insight  which  is  knowledge
in  extinction  of  the  asava’s.’  In  each  case  the  brother  has  to  begin
by  so  exercising  himseK  in  the  Four  Steps  to  Iddhi  {supra,  p.  ISO),
that  mind  and  body  become  ‘perfected  in  training,  wholly  in  subjec-
tion, pliant  and  adaptable  ’ to  the  will.  It  is  interesting,  too,  that
‘ reminscence  of  former  births  ’ is  ushered  in  by  meditation  on  the
Paticca-samuppada.  See  also  Appendix  : Abhinna. — Ed.

2 Adh  i 1 1 he  y y a dik  a p,  ‘ any  phenomenon  and  others.

See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  62.

3 On  the  ten  kinds  of  Iddhi  in  general,  and  on  Iddhi-vidha,
in  particular,  see  Introd.  Essay,  p.  60/.  On  the  kinds  of  Abhinna,
see  S.  ii.  216 ; i.  191  ; ii.  217  ; v.  282,  and  detailed  account  in  D.  i.,
78-84.  The  sixth  Abhinna,  it  will  be  noted,  is  purely  ethical
perfection  (see  n.  1).  Abhinna  is  called  vijja  D.  i.,  100;  and
p an  n a in  D.  i.,  124  ; Dialogues  of  the  Buddha,  i , 157,  n, — Ed.

This  proves  once  more  that  Paniiindriya-cetasika  is  the
underlying  principle  or  psychological  ultimate  of  every  form  of  know-
ledge.


14


210


Of  RcUgioHS  Exercises


[PT.  IX


§ 6.  Of  Insight.

In  the  stations  for  exercises  in  insight  there  is

I.  The  sevenfold  category  of  ‘ Purity,’^  to  wit ;

1.  Purity  of  morals.

2.  Purity  of  mind.

3.  Purity  of  views.

4.  Purity  of  escaping  from  doubt.

5.  Purity  of  vision  in  discerning  what  is  Path  and

what  is  not.

6.  Purity  of  intellectual  vision  which  is  knowledge

of  progress.^

7.  Purity  of  vision  which  is  knowledge  [possessed

by  those  in  the  Four  Paths].

II.  There  are  also  the  Three  Marks

1.  The  Mark  of  Impermanence.

2.  The  Mark  of  111.

3.  The  Mark  of  No-Soul.

III.  There  are  also  the  Three  Contemplations :

Of  (1-3)  Impermanence,  111,  No- Soul.

IV.  There  are  also  the  Ten  Knowledges^  of  Insight :

1.  Knowledge  of  things  [in  general],  as  composite.®

2.  Knowledge  of  [composite]  things  as  waxing  and

waning.

1 purging  the  whole  being,  and  so  attaining  Insight,  is  the  theme-
of  Buddhaghosa’s  great  work  Visuddhi  Magga.  In  it  this  category
is  discussed  in  great  detail,  parts  i.  and  ii.  being  occupied  with  (!)■
and  (2),  part  iii.  with  (3)-(7). — Ed.

2 Patipada  is  that  by  which  one  arrives  at  higher  distinctions,
being  the  way  leading  to  the  Path.  It  is  the  whole  course  of  the
Vipassan  a-practice.  See  IV.,  below.

2 Or  salient  features.  See  Part  VI.,  § 4.

N a n a n i.  ‘ Knowledges — in  common  use  with  Bacon  and  . .
till  after  . . . Locke — ought  not  to  be  discarded.’  Hamilton  on
Reid.  Note  A,  see.  5. — Ed.

6Sammasana-uanag,  lit.,  ‘handling-knowledge,’  resulting
from  the  ‘ handling  ’ of  things  as  composite.  It  supersedes  the  older


211


PT.  IX]


Imight


3.  Ivnowledge  of  [•waning]  things,  as  dissolving.^

4.  Knowledge  of  [dissolving]  things  as  fearful.

0.  Knowledge  of  [fearful]  things  as  dangerous.

6.  Knowledge  of  [dangerous]  things  as  something

wherewith  to  be  disgusted.

7.  I'mowledge  of  [disgusting]  things  as  something

wherefrom  to  wish  to  escape.

8.  Ivnowledge  of  things  as  something  to  be  recon-

sidered^ [in  order  to  escape  therefrom].

9.  Knowledge  of  things^  [reconsidered]  as  something

concerning  which  to  feel  indifference.

10.  Knowledge  which  is  qualification^  [for  the  Path].


Y.  There  are  also  the  Three  Emancipations

1.  Emancipation  [by  the  concept  of]  ‘Empty.’

2.  Emancipation  [by  the  concept  of]  ‘ No- Sign.’

3.  Emancipation  [by  the  concept  of]  ‘ Not  hankered

after.’


term  sankhata  (conditioned).  The  knowledge  of  things  as  com-
posite, and  the  knowledge  of  things  as  conditioned,  have  reference  to
the  Three  Marks,  which  both  the  conditioned  and  the  compound
unmistakably  bear.

1 Eead  for  bhavanga  (J.P.T.S.)  bhang  a,  as  in  Vis.  Magga
meaning,  ht.,  ‘ rupture.’ — Ed.

2 Patisankha — i.e.,  reconsidered  with  reference  to  the  very
same  Three  Marks.

3 Sankhara,  i.e.  sankhariyatiti,  ‘that  which  is  made ’),  and
not,  here,  the  sankhatag  sankharotiti  sankharo,  ‘ that
which  makes  what  is  made,’ of  the  kattu-sadhana,  or  agency-
definition).  Seep.  182,  w.  2,  and  Appendix  Sankhara,  on  the  different
significations  of  this  term.  Although  sankhara  is  not  expressly
mentioned  in  the  foregoing,  the  student  should  bear  in  mind  that  the
whole  course  of  Vipassana  up  to  this  deals  with  ‘ things  ’ under  the
aspect  of  one  or  other  of  the  Three  Marks,  not  necessarily  under  all
the  three  aspects  together.  The  u p e k k h a here  is  the  intellectual
tatramajjhattata,  and  not  the  hedonic  upekkha — that  is,
equanimity  or  mental  equipoise  among  emuroning  ‘ things.’

^ Anuloma,  lit.,  ‘fitting,’  is  that  which  fits,  equips,  or  qualifies
one  for  the  higher.  See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  55,  and  p.  129,  n.  2.

® On  these  three,  see  B.  Psy.,  91,  92,  n.  and  references — Ed.

The  second,  animitta,  is  explained  by  the  Commentators  as


212  Of  Religious  Exercises  [pt.  ix

VI.  There  are  also  the  Three  Channels^  of  Emancipa-
tions.

1-3.  Contemplation  of  these  Three  Emancipations;
How  [are  these  heads  detailed]  ?


§ 7.  Of  the  Divisions  of  the  Exercises  in  Purity.

1.  — 1.  Purity  of  morals  is  the  four  kinds  of  utterly  pure
conduct  entitled  :

(a)  discipline  as  prescribed  by  the  Patimokkha.^

{h)  discipline  of  [mental  and  bodily]  faculties.^

(c)  utter  purity  of  conduct  connected  with  livelihood.

(d)  conduct  in  connection  with  the  necessaries  of  life.'*

2.  Purity  of  mind  is  the  twofold  concentration  of  the
accessory  and  the  ecstatic  stage.®

3.  Purity  of  views  is  the  comprehension  of  mind-and-
body  with  reference  to  their  [respective]  features,®  essen-


the  absence  of  the  signs  of  (1)  permanence  (niccanimitta-
abhavato);  (2)  passions,  etc.  (ragadinimittarahitatta);

(3)  all  conditionings  (sabbasankharanimitta-abhavato);

(4)  hallucinations  (vipallasanimitta-abhavato).  Thus  there
are  four  kinds  of  n i m i 1 1 a ’ s to  be  reckoned  with.  The  first  of  these
thoughts  is,  perhaps,  intended  to  get  rid  of  the  sassataditthi,
according  to  which  people  often  regard  impermament  things  as  perma-
nent. Anicce  niccanti  pavattap  vipallasanimittar).
Ceylon  Cy.  Thus  (1)  and  (4)  are  taken  in  conjunction.  On  the  three
kinds  of  vipallasa,  see  p.  216,  n.  4.  The  third  concept  might  be
positively  rendered  by  ‘ absolute  content,’  as  in  Part  VI.,  § 14.

^ Lit. , ‘ mouths,’  m u k h a n i,  also  ‘ faces.  ’

2 See  Childers’s  Diet.,  s.v.  Patimokkha;  Ehys  Davids’s
Buddhism,  p.  162.

3 Lit.,  ‘ discipline  of  control  ’ — i.e.,  sense-control.

* Clothing,  food,  lodging,  medicine.

« See  Part  IV.,  § 7.

^ Lakkhana  here  is  explained  in  the  comments  by  samahna-
s a b h a V 0,  the  ordinary  feature  of  each  thing.


213


PT.  ix]  Purity

tial  properties,^  resulting  phenomena,^  and  proximate
causes.^

4.  Purity  of  escaping^  from  doubt  is  the  comprehension
of  the  causal  relations  of  mind  and  body  comprehended  as
aforesaid.®

5.  After  escaping  from  doubt,  the  meditator,  bearing  in
mind  the  method  of  aggregates,  etc.,®  groups,  by  way  of
those  syntheses,  the  triple  planed  [universe  of]  things,
which  are  differentiated  into  past  [present],  etc,'^  and  the
causal  relations  of  which  have  been  comprehended  as
aforesaid.®  Understanding  ‘ Impermanence  ’ by  reason  of
dissolution,®  ‘ 111,’  by  reason  of  fearfulness,  and  ‘ No-Soul,’
by  reason  of  the  absence  of  a [substantial]  entity, he
contemplates^’  the  Triple  Mark  by  the  ‘knowledge  of
things  as  composite’  (§  6,  IV.,  1)  by  way  of  duration,
continuity,  or  moment.’^  Next  he  contemplates  again  and
again’®  the  waxing  and  waning  [of  things]  by  the  know-

^ E a s o,  lit.,  ‘ taste.’  E a s a is  either  kiecarasa,  ‘ function,’  or
sampattirasa,  ‘ property.’

2 Paccupatthanag,  lit.,  ‘that  which  re-appears.’  Its  two
aspects  are  : upatthanakara-paccupatthanag,  ‘ resultmg
modes,’  ‘ state  or  condition  which  appears  ’;  phala-paccu-
patthanag,  ‘ resulting  effect  which  appears.

^ Padatthanag,  omitted  in  J.P.T.S.  The  four  terms  here
named  are  used  in  post-P  i t a k a n exegesis  as  constituting  a scheme
of  definition,  at  least  as  definite  as  the  post-Aristotelian  scheme  of
genus,  species,  property,  and  accident. — Ed.

^ Vi  t a r a n a,  lit.,  ‘transcending,’ from ‘t  ar  at  i’,  ‘ to  swim  across.’

®Tesag  eva  namarup  anag.

®Khandhadi-nayam  arabbha.

' Atitadibhedabhi  n,n  e s u.  See  p.  185,  n.  5,  for  the  eleven
(Pitakan)  aspects  of  differentiation  into  past,  present,  future,
internal,  external,  gross,  subtle,  high,  low,  distant,  and  near,  which
Nibbana  lacks.

® Tatha  pariggahitesu  sapaccayesu.

®x\niccag  khayatthena,  lit.,  ‘impermanence,’  because  of
the  meaning  of  dissolution.

Lit.,  ‘because  they  have  no  pith ’ (s  a r a).

Lit.,  ‘ handles,’  sammasati.

I.e.,  by  way  of  space  or  point  of  time.

Samanupassati.


21 -i  Of  BcUgious  Exercises  [pt.  ix

ledge  so  designated  (§  6,  IV.,  2),  by  way  of  their  causal
relations  and  of  moments.  To  such  an  one  come

Aura,^  zest,'^  serenity,  firm  faith, ^ and  effort^  too.

Ease,  knowledge,  mindfulness,®  indifference,®  and  heart’s
desire.’^

Now  purity  of  vision  in  discerning  what  is  Path  and  what  is
7iot,  is  the  discrimination  of  what  bears  the  characteristic
marks  of  Path-consciousness  and  what  does  not.  This  is
done  by  the  understanding  of  these  [ten]  inimical  influences
which  corrupt  Insight.

6.  Purity  of  vision  in  knowledge  of  progress  comprises
the  Nine  Knowledges®  of  one  who,  thus  set  free  from
inimical  influences,  contemplates®  the  Triple  Mark  by  a
regular  progression  in  Insight,^®  from  the  knowledge  of  the

^ 0 b h a s o ; ‘ rays  emitted  from  the  body  on  account  of  insight.’- —
Ceylon  Cy.  (§§  7,  8 are  misplaced  in  J.P.T.S.  test,  and  omitted. — Ed.)

^ P i t i (pleasurable  interest).

^ Adhimokkha,  the  controlling  faculty  of  strong  or  resolute
faith  (balavasaddhindriya).

^ Paggaho,  sammappadhana-kicca-sadhako,  viri-
yasambojjhangasankhat  o. — Ceylon  Cy.

® Upatthana,  anussarana-samattha  upatthana-
sankhata  sati. — Ceylon  Cy.  A word  oftener  in  Patisamhliidd
Magga  than  in  the  earlier  P i t a k a books. — Ed.

® The  Ceylon  Commentator  says  that  this  represents  both  the
tatramajjhattata  and  the  avajjanupekkha.  But  as
‘ balance  of  mind  ’ is  a useful  adjunct  of  vipassana,  I am  inclined
to  take  only  the  latter — viz.,  absence  of  pleasure  or  pain  in  reflection.

’’  Nikanti.  These  ten  phases  which  ‘ defile  ’ and  are  inimical  to
vipassana,  and  therefore  termed  vipassanupakkilesa-
paribandha,  are  dealt  with  in  the  Visuddhi  Magga,  part  iii.,
chap.  sxi.  One  who  has  practised  the  first  two  kinds  of  insight,  in  the
order  and  manner  indicated,  is  liable  to  these  defilements  while
practicing  the  next  stage — e.g.,  he  may  feel  pleasure  at  having  an  aura
and  think  that  this  constitutes  Path-experience,  and  so  stay  his  progress
by  self-deceit.

® In  IV.,  the  last  nine.

® Patipajjati,  lit.,  ‘ practises.’

Vipassanaparamparaya,  lit.,  ‘ by  a succession  of  Insights.’


215


PT.  ix]  Purity

waxing  and  waning  of  things  up  to  the  knowledge  with
which  he  fits  himself  [for  the  Path]d

When  he,  thus  progressing,  has  come  to  full  maturity  of
Insight  [he  can  discern] : ‘ Now  will  the  ecstasy  of  the  Path
arise. ’2  Thereupon,  as  the  reflection  by  way  of  the  mind-
door  suspends  the  life-continuum,  two  or  three  [flashes  of]
consciousness  [revealing]  insight  concerning  any  one  of  the
Three  Marks  occur,  by  name  ‘ preparation,’  ‘ approximation,’
and  ‘qualification.’^  That  ‘ knowledge  of  things  as  some-
thing concerning  which  to  feel  indifference  ’ which,  when
its  climax  is  reached,  is  coupled  with  the  ‘ knowledge
by  which  one  qualifies  oneself  [for  the  Path]  ’ is  also
described  as  ‘ Insight  that  leads  to  Emergence.’^

After  this,  the  consciousness  of  the  Initiate^  leaning
upon  Nibbana  occurs,  over-mastering  kinship  with  the
worldly,  and  evolving  kinship  with  the  Ariya’s.

Immediately  after  that  consciousness,  the  Path,  namely,
[consciousness]  discerning  the  fact  of  111,  expelling  the  fact
of  its  Cause,  realizing  the  fact  of  its  Cessation,  cultivating
the  fact  of  the  Way  [to  Cessation],  descends  into  the
avenue  of  ecstatic  thought.®  After  that  Path-conscious-
ness, when  two  or  three  [flashes  of]  the  consciousness  of
fruition  have  taken  their  course,  there  comes  subsidence
into  the  life  - continuum  ; and  then,  again,  the  life-

^ Udayabbayananato  patthaya  yavanuloma.

2 Idani  appana  uppajjissatiti.  Here  a p p a n a stands
for  the  Lokuttara  Appana.  On  the  significance  of  Appana,
see  p.  129,  and  Introd.  Essay,  p.  56  /. ; 68.

® Anulom  a.  See  Part  IV.,  § 7,  and  Introd.  Essay,  p.  55.

^ Vutthana,  lit.,  ‘standing  up  out  of,’  is  usually  applied  as  a
rehgious  term,  to  revival  from  j h a n a-abstraction,  implying  a rest  or
fruition  after  toil.  {Cf.  its  use  in  ‘ rising  after  childbirth,’  Childers’s
Diet.)  Here  it  stands  for  the  Path,  as  a ‘ coming  out  of  more  ’ worldly
views. — Ed.

® Gotrabhu,  meaning  ‘who  has  become  kin.’  ‘Ariya’s,’  a
already  said,  refers  to  the  Buddhas  and  their  eight  classes  of  elect
followers,  the  kinship  being  the  new  higher  ethical  nature  evolved. —
Tr.  and  Ed.

® This  is  described  as  the  process  of  thought-transition  to  the  Path
(M  a g g a - V i t h i).  See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  68.


21 G Of  Religious  Exercises  [pt.  ix

continuum  is  interrupted  and  the  knowledges  concerned
with  ‘ review  ’ occur.


§ 8.  Mnemonic.

On  Path  and  Fruit  and  on  Nibbana  blest
The  wise  doth  meditate.  As  to  the  rest —

The  ‘ torments  ’ put  away  and  other  ills —

Now  and  again ^ reflection  (’s  cup  he  fills).

The  fourfold  Path,  that  thus  by  right  degree
With  sixfold  Purity  must  practised  be,

Is  Purity  of  knowledge  making  us  see.

So  far  for  the  section  on  Purity.

§ 9.  Of  Emancipation.

Here,  the  contemplation  of  No-Soul,^  as  letting  go  the
firm  belief  in  a soul,^  is  a channel  of  emancipation,  called
the  ‘ contemplation  of  Emptiness.’  Again,  the  contempla-
tion of  Impermanence,  as  letting  go  the  sign  of  hallucina-
tion^ [is  a channel  of  emancipation],  called  the  ‘ contem-
plation of  the  Signless,’  and  the  contemplation  of  111,  as
letting  go  that  ‘ hankering-after  ’ which  is  craving,  [is  a

^ Read,  v a,  na  v a. — Ed.  Hine  is  the  contraction  of  pahine:
‘ those  that  have  been  got  rid  of.’ — Ceylon  Cy.  The  Ariya  now
reviews  (1)  the  Path  he  has  just  attained  ; (2)  the  Fruit  of  that  Path
he  has  just  enjoyed  ; (3)  the  Nibbana  he  has  intuited,  though  not  quite
realized,  as  an  object  of  the  consciousness  called  of  the  Path  and  of
Fruit.  The  upakkilesa’s  he  may,  or  may  not  review.

^ The  word  ‘atta’  means  ‘self,’  but  whereas  the  Buddhists
accepted  and  used  the  term  ‘self’  as  a convenient  abstraction  for  the
personal  unity  of  a moment  or  a lifetime,  they  only  rejected  a perma-
nent personal  unity  such  as  is  implied,  less  ambiguously,  in  ‘ soul.’
—Ed.

Attabhinivesaij-abhiniveso  = dalhagaho,  lit.,  ‘ strong
hold.’ — Ceylon  Cy.

Vipallasa.  There  are  three  kinds  of  vipallasa — namely,
sahna-vipallasa  (erroneous  perception),  citta -vipallasa
(erroneous  ideas),  and  ditthi-vipallasa  (erroneous  views),  by
which  people  regard  impermanent  things  as  permanent  (a  n i c c e
n i c c a n t i).  And  these  three  v i p a 1 1 a s a s are  called  n i m i 1 1 a,

‘ sign.’  Hallucination  is  itself  the  ‘ sign.’


FT.  ix]  Emancipation  217

channel  of  emancipation]  called  the  ‘ contemplation  of  the
“ Not-Hankered-after.’  ”

Hence  the  Path  receives  three  names  according  to  the
course  taken  by  ‘Insight  leading  to  Emergence’: — -namely,
when  that  Insight  discerns  [things]  as  without  soul,  the
Path  is  called  ‘ Empty-release  when  it  discerns  [things]
as  impermanent,  the  Path  is  called  ‘ Signless-release  when
it  discerns  things  as  evil,  the  Path  is  called  ‘ Not-hankered-
after-release.’  The  Emit  likewise  receives  these  three
names  according  to  those  three  ways  of  coming  into  the
Path  along  the  avenues  of  the  Path.

However,  in  the  process  of  attaining  full  fruition,  it  is
only  the  means  — namely,  insight  by  which  respective
‘ fruits  ’ arise  to  those  exercising  insight  after  the  maimer
above  described — that  gives  the  names,  ‘Empty-release,’
etc.  Nevertheless,  the  fact  of  the  [common]  object,-  and
of  common  essential  properties,  causes  this  triad  of  names
to  be  applied  equally  to  all  everywhere.^

So  far  for  the  section  on  emancipation.


§ 10.  Of  the  Individual.

Now  here,  he  who  has  cultivated  the  Path  of  Stream-
Attainment,  and  by  putting  away  erroneous  views  and
doubt,  goes  with  all  rebirth-to-misery  banished,  is  called
Stream-winner  to  the  limit  of  seven  times.^  And  he  who
has  cultivated  the  Path  of  Oiice-Eeturning,  from  the
attenuation  [to  which  he  has  brought]  lust,  hate,  and

^ I.e.,  release  [through  discernment  of]  emptiness  [as  to  soul].  It  is
difficult  to  get  renderings  less  uncouth  but  equally  faithful,  of  these
terms,  so  full  of  home-truth  to  a Buddhist.  We  need  a John  Bunyan
here,  or  at  least  the  aid  of  glosses,  e.g.  ‘ Void-of-soul  Kelease,’  ‘No-
lasting-sign  Eelease,  ‘ End-of-Baneful-Longing  Eelease.’ — Ed.

- Nibbana.

^ Sabbattha  s abb  e sag — i.e.,  to  all  the  eight  classes  of
Ariya’s  attaining  the  Path  or  enjoying  the  Fruit  thereof,  in  every
process  of  Path-thought,  or  Fruit-consciousness.

* Paramo,  ‘at  most  ’ — i.e.,  limited  to  seven  more  rebirths,  at  the
very  outside,  in  the  happier  forms  of  Kamaloka  existence.


218


[PT.  IX


Of  Religious  Exercises

nescience^  is  called  Oace-Eeturner,  once  more  only  to
come  back  to  this  world.-  And  he  who  has  cultivated  the
path  of  Never-Keturning,  by  putting  away  utterly  the  lust
of  sense  and  ill-will,  is  called  Never-Eeturner,  coming  no
more  back  to  things  as  we  know  them®  (in  K a m a 1 o k a).
And  he  who  has  cultivated  the  path  of  Supreme  Worth,
by  putting  away  utterly  the  ‘ Torments,’^  is  called  Ara-
hant,  he  who  with  a s a v a s extinct  is  in  all  the  world
AvoETHY  of  its  offerings.

So  far  for  the  section  on  the  Individual.

§ 11.  Of  the  Great  Attainvients.

Of  these,  the  process  of  the  full  attainment  of  fruition  is
common  to  all  [in  the  Paths]  according  to  the  fruit  which
each  man  wins.  But  the  full  attainment  of  Cessation®  is
only  won  by  Never-Eeturners  and  Arahants.  In  this
[process]  such  an  one  successively  induces  the  sublime®
attainment  of  the  first  j han  a,  etc.,’’  and  on  waking  from
each  j h a n a he  contemplates  [by  way  of  the  Triple  Mark]
the  conditioned  phenomena  implicated  therein.®  And
[by  this  alternatWe  procedure]  he  goes  as  far  as  [the
j h a n a of]  the  Sphere  of  Pure  Nothingness.  And  after

^ Dulness  is  not  sufficiently  strong  to  express  the  degree  of  M o h a
attenuated  by  the  Onee-Eeturner.  Cf.  Dli.  S.,  §§  362-64.

^ I m a g 1 o k a g is,  according  to  commentators,  applicable  to  all
the  seven  happier  realms  of  K a m a 1 o k a.

® Itthattag  is  exactly  the  ‘ this  thusness  ’ of  Artemus  Ward,  and
it  is  regrettable  that  so  good  a word  should  as  yet  be  outside  the  pale
of  serious  English. — Ed.

“ Part  VII.,  § 2,  I.  (i.).

“ N i r o d h a — i.e.,  of  consciousness  in  trance.

^ Mahaggata.  See  p.  101,  n.  4.

^ Yathakkamag  p a t h a m a-j  h a n a d i mahaggatasama-
pattig  samapajjitva.  By  ‘ il  d i,’  ‘etc.,’  it  is  intended  to
include  the  first  eight  jhana-samapatti’s.

® Tattha-gate  sankharadhamme  tattha  tatth’eva
vipassanto.  The  conditioned  phenomena  implicated  in  each
j h a n a,  from  which  the  meditator  has  just  awakened,  are  now  contem-
plated under  the  aspects  of  the  Triple  Mark.  The  word  vipassati
is  invariably  associated  with  the  Triple  Mark.


2' he  Attainments


219


PT,  IX]


the  preliminary  function  of  resolving  what  should  be
resolved,  etc.,^  he  attains  to  the  j h a n a of  the  Sphere  of
Neither  Consciousness  nor  Unconsciousness.  In  him  after
two  apperceptive  flashes  of  ecstasy  [of  this  j h a n a]  the
continuum  of  thought  is  suspended.  Hence  he  is  called
‘ Winner  of  Cessation.’

At  the  time  of  reviving,  if  he  be  a Never-Eeturner,
consciousness  of  the  Never-Eeturning  ‘ fruit  ’ occurs  to  him
but  once.  Or  if  he  be  an  Arahant,  consciousness  of  the
Supreme  Worth  occurs  to  him  but  for  a single  moment.
Then  follows  lapse  into  life-continuum.  Thereafter  comes
the  review  [of  the  respective  ‘ fruit  ’].

So  far  for  the  section  on  the  great  attainments.

Here  end  also  the  stations  of  exercise  in  insight.


On  this  wise  must  he  cultivate  who  would  attain

The  supreme  Dual  Discipline,  if  he  be  fain

To  enjoy  the  Doctrine’s  essence,  and  its  mastery  gain.


Thus  ends  the  Ninth  Part  in  the  Compendium  of
Philosophy,  entitled  the  Compendium  of  the  Stations  of
Eeligious  Exercises.

1 Adhittheyyadikag.  The  four  preliminary  functions  accord-
ing to  the  Commentary  are  : (1)  Eesolving  that  such  of  his  necessaries
of  life  as  are  not  connected  with  his  own  body,  be  not  injured
or  destroyed  by  fire,  etc.  ; (2)  reflecting  on  the  probable  requirements
of  his  service  by  the  S a n g h a and  resolving  that  he  should  wake  up
in  time;  (3)  reflecting  on  the  probable  summons  by  the  Buddha  and
resolving  that  he  should  wake  up  in  time  ; and  (4)  looking  forward  to
the  time  when  he  would  die,  with  a view  to  ascertain  whether  he
would  live  or  die  within  the  next  seven  days,  the  usual  period  of  the
‘ Cessation  of  Consciousness  ’ with  human  beings.  It  will  be  borne  in
mind  that  this  preliminary  is  performed  during  the  interval  between  the
two  highest  j h a n a s,  when  the  person  is  in  his  normal  senses  and
not  rapt  in  reverie.


NOTE  ON  JHANA  IN  PATHS  AND  FEUITS.^

I HAVE  said  that  j h a n a was  not  absolutely  necessary  for  the  four
Paths  and  the  four  Fruits.  But  when  they  happen  to  be  conjoined
with  j h a n a,  the  stages  of  that  j h a n a are  said  to  be  determined  by
the  Apperception  of  insight  leading  to  emergence  (vutthana-
gamini-vipassana-javana).  And  that  determination  is,
according  to  one  school  of  thought,  regulated  by  the  idsic  jhana
(cf.  p.  62)  entered  into  immediately  before  the  transitional  process.
According  to  another  school  of  thought,  it  is  regulated  by  sammasita-
j h a n a — i.e.,  by  such  basic,  or  other  jhana,  wherein  contemplation
may  be  carried  on  by  the  above-named  apperception.  According  to  a
third  school,  it  is  regulated  by  the  kinds  of  jhana  specially  desired
by  the  contemplator  (puggalajjhasaya-jhana).  The  last
variety  may  or  may  not  be  similar  to  the  first.


^ Gf.  p.  215  with  pp.  55,  67  /.


APPENDIX


CONTENTS

PAf;E

Attha  223

Abhinna  --------  224

Akasa  226

Avajjana  --------  227

Asava  227

Indeiya  --------  228

Upekkha  --------  229

Kriya-cittani  233

Citta,  Vinnajta  -------  234

Cetara  --------  235

Cetasika  : 237

VlTAKKA  238

Pannindeiya  - ■ - - - - - - 239

Ekaggata  240

Adhimokkea  -------  241

Viriya  242

PiTi  -----  - . - 243

Chanda  -------  244

Javana  --------  245

Dasaka  --------  250

Dhatu  and  Ayatana  ------  254

Paocaya  and  Paticca-samuppada  - - - - 259

Pannatti,  Vinnatti  r - - - - - 264

Patthana  --------  265

Bhavanga  --------  265

Mahabhuta  -------  268

Eupa  --------  271

Sankhata  --------  273

Sankhara  --------  273

SuKHA  - - - - - - - - 277

Hadaya-vatthd  -------  277

Hetu  --------  279

Two  Supplementary  Notes  -----  282


221


ATTHA.


Buddhists  maintain  that  all  physical  bodies,  as  primarily
composed  of  the  four  ‘ great  essentials ’ (m  a h a - b h u t a),
and,  secondarily,  of  the  four  derivatives  [c/.  pp.  154  /•  (1)
and  (3)]  do  exist  as  j)  a r a m a 1 1 h a - r u p a,  or  matter  in
an  ultimate  sense  (cf.  p.  1,  iz.  1).  But  so  soon  as  the  same
matter  is  called  by  different  names,  the  composite  things
corresponding  to  these  names  are  held  to  exist  only  in  the
mind.  It  is  not  supposed  that  there  is  a (Platonic)  idea
corresponding  to  any  such  name  that  may  be  given  to
forms  of  matter.  Take  the  word  ‘ table.’  We  call  by  that
name  a certain  combination  of  wood.  Buddhists  say  that
the  Essentials  and  the  Derivatives  ‘ exist,’  but  the  table,
€[ud  table,  does  not.  Whether  it  be  a work-table,  dining-
table,  writing-table,  these  exist  only  in  the  mind.  Take,
again,  a piece  of  silver.  We  may  call  it,  as  it  assumes
several  shapes  in  succession,  bullion,  coin,  cup,  etc.,  but
only  the  metal  itself  exists  otherwise  than  in  the  mind.

In  saying  that  such  concrete  things  are  mere  names,
Buddhists  countenance  Nominalism.  In  saying  that  they
exist  only  in  the  mind,_  they  countenance  Conceptualism.
But  in  holding  that  the  four  essentials  and  the  four
derivatives  exist  in  these  aggregates,  they  countenance
Kealism.  Buddhism,  therefore,  is  able  to  reconcile  all
these  scholastic  doctrines.

And  by  the  foregoing,  the  statements  in  § 14  of
Part  VIII.,  that  seem  irrational,  are  seen  to  admit  of
simple  rational  explanation.  ‘ Woman’s  voice,’  for  instance  :
Woman  is  but  a name  applied  to  an  aggregate  varying  in
age,  size,  and  appearance.  But  ‘ voice  ’ is  a sound  which

223


•224


Jibhijifia


strikes  on  the  ear,  the  existence  of  which,  therefore,  cannot
be  denied.  Hence  the  compound  word  is  a name  of  some-
thing that  does  not  ‘ exist  ’ (as  an  essential  or  derivative),
applied  to  something  that  does  exist.


[The  translator  originally  rendered  this  term  by  ‘ ultra-
thought.’ In  my  translation  I used  the  phrase  ‘ intuitive
knowledge,’  having  Spinoza’s  scientia  intuitiva  more  or  less
in  mind,  as  being  our  nearest  designation  of  insight  con-
ceived as  transcending  normal  perception  and  not  consciously
ratiocinative.  Spinoza  uses  the  term  to  mean  knowledge,
which  ‘ 2)roceeds  from  an  “adequate”  idea  {i.e.,  “an  idea
having  all  the  properties  or  intrinsic  marks  of  a true
idea  ”)  of  the  absolute  essence  of  certain  attributes  of  God
to  the  adequate  knowledge  of  the  essence  of  things.’^
And  he  illustrates  his  meaning  by  one  who  solves  a
mathematical  problem  through  previous  knowledge  of  a
general  truth  respecting  the  properties  of  relations  involved
in  the  problem.  The  particular  instance  is  deduced  from,
or  referred  to,  the  bigger  truth.  In  simpler  cases,  Spinoza
goes  on  to  say,  ‘ we  see  the  relation  ivith  one  glance.'
‘ What  he  really  means,’  comments  that  ardent  Spinozist,
the  late  J.  A.  Picton,  ‘ is,  that  if  we  see  things  as  God  sees
them,  we  see  them  truly.’  And  this  means  ‘ seeing  things
as  in  themselves  they  really  are.’  But  this  is  precisely
the  Buddhist  ideal  knowledge  or  ‘ vision  ’:  yathdhhutay
sammappanhdya  disvd,  repeated  over  and  over  in  the
Sutta-Pitaka.

In  spite,  however,  of  this  amount  of  similarity  between
a b h i n n a and  ‘ intuitive  knowledge,’  the  latter  term  may
deflect  the  European  reader  from  the  traditional  import  of  the
former.  Intuition  may  get  lumbered  up  with  our  traditional
view  that  knowledge  is  ‘ higher  ’ (a  b h i -)  in  proportion  as

1 Ethica,  II.  xl.,  n . Cf.  Locke’s  Essay,  iv,  2.


Ahhinna


225


it  is  more  ‘ general.’  Again,  ‘ intuition  ’ was  much  brought
down  to  earth  and  sense  through  Hamilton’s  and  Mansel’s
use  of  it.  And  my  colleague  evidently  learned  to  know
British  psychology  largely  through  Mansel.  The  Indian
notion  of  ‘ higher  ’ knowledge,  as  compared  with  that  of  our
philosophies,  is  more  akin  to  vision’  through  the  telescope
as  compared  with  the  revelations  attained  by  the  astron-
omer through  mathematics  on  paper.  It  is  an  extension
of  perception  rather  than  of  conception,  the  percipient  seer
using,  as  it  were,  another  sense — the  p a n na-,  or  dibba-
cakkhu — not  the  ‘ eye  of  flesh. Anyway  I readily  abandon
‘ intuition,’  ‘ intuitive  knowledge.’  Similarities  are  interest-
ing, but  differences  are  far  more  enlightening. — Ed.]

Abhinna  = abhi  (i.e.,  visesato)  janatiti
(Ceylon  Cy.,  p.  230)  : — ‘ one  knows  beyond  (i.e.,  pre-
eminently, distinctively).’  I am  not  clear  in  what  sense
you  use  ‘ intuitive  ’ to  express  visesato,  which  connotes
superiority  over  other  kinds  of  knowledge.  Surely  not  in
the  Mansellian  sense  ? Or  are  you  restricting  ‘ intuitions  ’
to  perceptions  a priori  ? I do  not  see  much  a priori
knowledge  in  the  abhinna  processes  described  in  my
Introductory  Essay.  Nor  do  I think  you  have  used  the
phrase  ‘ intuitive  knowledge  ’ in  a Lockean  sense,  since
there  is  no  immediate  comparison  of  two  ideas  ; much  less,
therefore,  is  Spinoza’s  usage  compatible.  Martineau,  in  his
Types  of  Ethical  Theory,  wrote  that  ‘the  name  (intuition)
prepares  us  to  meet  some  mode  of  apprehension  at  a
glance,  in  which  all  process  is  dispensed  with,  and  the  end
is  struck  by  a flash’  (i.,  p.  312).  Now  we  have  not
dispensed  with  all  process,  but,  on  the  contrary,  have  to
resort  to  a very  peculiar  and  complicated  process  to  win  a
momentary  flash  of  abhinna,  by  which  the  phenomenon
desired  is  effected,

Abhinna,  for  us,  is  undoubtedly  associated  with pozeer
(see  Introd.  Essay,  pp.  60  ff.),  and  Warren  was  nearer  the
mark  when  he  used  ‘high  power ’ in  Transla-

Cf.  Dialogues  of  the  Buddha,  ii.,  p.  357,  Iti-vutt,  § 61,  and  my
‘ Intellect  and  the  Khandha  Doctrine,’  Buddhist  Bevieiu,  April,  1910.

15


226


Akasa


tions,  § 65),  though  this  is,  of  course,  not  a literal  rendering.
I would  not  force  on  you  my  non-committing  ‘ super-
intellection,’ but  would  ask  you  to  reconsider  the  matter  in
connection  with  my  Essay.


AKASA.

Ledi  (p.  248)  derives  this  word  from  a-f  Vkas,  ‘to  shine,’
or  ‘ appear.’  Te  te  dabba-sambhara  va  rupakalapil  va
visuij  visuij  bhuso  kasanti  pakasanti  etenati  akaso.

‘ Space  is  that  by  which  objects  or  material  groups  are
perceived  as  mutually  distinct.’  Akasa  is  a nicca-
pannatti — i.e.,  a permanent  mental  element,  through
which  we  perceive  objects.  How  is  it  that  this  pan-
n a 1 1 i is  now  spoken  of  as  if  it  were  a paramattha-
d h a m m a or  ‘ real  ’ thing  ? According  to  Buddhist
philosophy,  it  has  no  objective  reality.  But  it  is  usually
projected  from  mind  to  object  perceived,  and  spoken  of  as
that  by  which  an  object  is  limited  and  bounded  (paric-
c h e d a - r u p a p).  The  curious  dictum  that  space  is  born
of  all  the  four  causes  {supra,  p.  163,  § 4)  is  explained  by
Ledi  (pp.  270,  271)  as  follows  : Kupakalapa  nama  ekasmiij
paramanusmim  pi  bahuvidha  hutva  pavattanti.  Tasma
catuja-rupakalapesu  ghanabhanena  pavattamanesu  kala-
pantarabhuta  ’ akasadhatu  pi  dissamana  eva  hotiti  katva
catujesu  tassa  gahanaij  kataij.  ‘ That  which  we  call  riipa-
k a 1 a p a ’ s are  units  which  occur  in  several  ways.  There-
fore, whenever  ruj)akalapa’s  born  of  four  causes
obtain  by  way  of  a mass,  then  the  element  of  space-
interstices  between  them  also  appear.  Hence  it  (space)
is  regarded  as  born  of  four  causes  (also).’

Our  r u p a k a 1 a p a is  therefore  more  of  an  electron
or  etherwhirl,  of  the  modern  electrical  theory  of  matter,
than  an  atom  of  the  atomic  theory.  Of  course,  the  former
theory  did  not  enter  the  heads  of  our  commentators ; I


Avajjana  227

merely  point  to  a certain  amount  of  resemblance  to  that
theory.  If  an  atom  of  hydrogen  contains  700  electrons,
each  electron  would  be  a rupakalapa,  and  the  atom
itself,  the  smallest  known  gh  a n a.

Again,  on  p.  274,  Ledi  writes:  ‘akasadhatu  does
not  form  part  of  any  rupakalapa;  it  merely  limits  the
kal  ap  a (-units).’


AVAJJANA.

The  equivalent  of  ‘ meditation,’  given  as  the  meaning  of
avajjana  in  Childers’s  Dictionary,  must  not  mislead
when  this  word  is  employed  as  a technical  term  in
psychological  nomenclature.  It  does  not  connote  repre-
sentative cognition,  but  is  the  reaction  of  mind  or  con-
sciousness to  an  impression,  the  ‘ ad-verting  ’ to  a new
objective  something  that  has  come  within  its  ken.  In  the
Ceylon  Cy.  avajjeti  is  paraphrased  by:  tattha  {i.e.,
cakkhadi  pancadvare  ghattitam-arammane)
abhogaij  karoti:  ‘ attends  to  [or  apprehends]  the
object  that  impinges  on  the  fivefold  door  of  eye,  etc.’
A little  further  on  avajjeti  is  explained  by  p a r i n a -
meti,  ‘to  bend’  or  ‘incline’  (see  Childers).  That  is,
there  is  a bending  or  inclining  of  the  mind  in  order  to  give
rise  to  the  thought,  or  process-consciousness  (vithi-
c i 1 1 a),  without  giving  an  opportunity  for  the  continuance
of  mere  life-continuum,  or  b h a v a n g a.


ABAVA.

We  agreed  to  let  this  term,  infamously  famous,  remain
untranslated.  Nothing  to  fit  has  yet  been  discovered.
Warren’s  ‘ depravities  ’ and  Neumann’s  ‘ Wahnen  ’ make
no  pretence  to  be  literal.  ‘ Floods  ^ and  ‘ Taints  ’ (Ehys
Davids)  convey  the  idea  of  spreading  movement,  of


228


Asava


disaster,  of  defilement,  my  ‘ Intoxicants  ’ and  ‘ Drugs  ’
that  of  poison.  The  former  idea  seems  alone  active  in  the
minds  of  the  Commentators  {sujyra,  p.  170,  n.  1) ; and  yet,
if  A.  i.,  124,  § 7,  be  compared  with  Jdtaka  IV.,  222  (3) :

‘ There  is  in  the  world  an  A s a va^  called  strong  drink,’

the  latter  idea  may  claim  some  canonical  support  (c/.
Dialogues  of  the  Buddha,  i.  92  ; ii.  28).  To  the  general
Buddhist,  Asava  probably  conveyed  no  more  ‘ visualiz-
able  ’ meaning  than  sin  does  to  the  Christian,  although,
in  either  case,  the  moral  wihratwn  in  consciousness  is  heavy
enough. — Ed.


INDEIYA.

I n d r i y a literally  means  ‘ a controlling  principle  or
force.’  In  the  Ceylon  Cy.,  p.  175,  occurs  this  definition  :
Atthavidham  pi  indriyarupaij  pancavinnanesu  lingadisu
sahajarupa-paripalane  ca  adhipaccayogato  : — ‘And  the
eighteen  [are  called]  r u p a -that-controls,  because  they
exercise  sovereignty  [or  control]  over  the  five  senses,  over
sex-characters,  and  because  they  preserve  coexistent  bodily
qualities  [from  decay].’

The  Commentary  then  explains  how  this  controlling
power  is  exercised.  Eye  controls  sight,  ear  hearing,  and
so  on,  because  each  sense  depends  upon  its  respective  organ.
If  the  organ  be  weak,  the  sense  is  weak.  Elsewhere,  p.  169,
the  control  of  sense-characteristics  is  explained.  And  that
vital  force  (j  i v i t i n d r i y a)  preserves  the  body  from
decay  is  evident.

Here,  again,  is  Ledi  Sadaw’s  comment  (p.  305)  : Adhi-
paccafthena  indriyani  ; kinca  adhipaccap  9 Attadhina-
vuttike  dhamme  attano  gatiyap  sabbaso  vattetup  samattha-
bhavo.  Iti  tesu  tesu  kiccesu  attano  adhipaccasankhatap
indatthap  karonti  sadhentiti  indriyani.  . . . Tattha  panca-

^ Jataka  Corny.  ; I.e.,  ‘a  poison’  (visag),  from  flower-asava  and
the  like.


Indriya  229

cakkhadlni  dassanadikiccesu  eakkhuvinnanadlnaij  issara
honti,  balava-dubbala-manda-tikkhadlsu  attakaranuvatta-
panato  : — I n d r i y a’s  are  so  called  because  of  sovereignty
[or  control].  What  is  sovereignty?  It  is  the  ability  to
make  all  that  is  connected  with  it  follow  itself  always  in  its
own  career.  Thus  indriya’s  are  the  exercisers,  the
jperformers  of  lordship  called  sovereignty  over  this  and
that  function.  . . Here  the  five  (sense-organs),  eye,
etc.,  are  lords  of  sight,  etc.,  in  the  functions  of  seeing,  etc.

I have  quoted  at  such  length  to  point  out  just  this  :
Cakkhundriyap  is  not  cakkhussa-f-indriyai],
‘ the  power  of  the  eye,’  but  c a k k h u m e v a i n d r i y a ij,
‘ the  eye  ichicli  is  a power.’  The  term  has  been  rendered
‘ faculty  of  sight.’  But  we  are  not  here  speaking  of  the
sense  of  sight,  but  of  the  eye  itself,  as  exercising  a certain
control  over  that  sense  of  sight}


UPEKKHA.

This  term  is  too  important  to  he  passed  over,  grazed
only  by  the  brief  comments  in  the  footnotes  and  Essay
(pp.  14,  66),  especially  as  there  seems  to  be  some  vague-
ness of  thought  about  it  in  the  minds  of  scholars  like
yourself  and  others.

There  are  three  principal  kinds  of  upekkha.  First,
the  anubhavana-upekkha  (a.  of  sensation  or
physical  sensibility)  : the  neutral  feeling  or  zero-point
between  bodily  pain  ‘and  pleasure  (kayika-dukkha,
-sukha).  Anuruddha  Thera  indicates  this  class,  in  (siqma)

1 That  indriya,  as  here  shown,  imports  regulative  or  controlling
power,  and  not  bare  dvi/afjus,  shows  it  to  be  no  perfect  equivalent  of  the
Greek  term  {cf.  my  Bitd.  Psy.,  Ivii.).  Buddhaghosa’s  definition  in
the  Atthasalini  shows  this  too  (p.  119)  : — ‘Indriya  means  sover-
eignty, or,  again,  indriya,  in  its  characteristic  mark  of  deciding
(adhimokkha)  in  that  which  exercises  lordship.’  Any  sense  is
regulated  by,  or  subject  to,  the  structure,  range  and  condition  of  its
organ. — Ed.


230


UpeJx'hha

Part  III.,  § 2,  when  he  uses  the  expression  adukkha-
m-asukha.  This  kind  of  upekkha  is  applicable
to  all  sensory  stimuli,  except  those  of  Touch  (Part  I.,  § 4)T
The  second  kind  is  the  indriyappabheda-upek-
k h a , or  upekkha  dividing  the  (ethically)  regulative
forces  of  somanassa,  or  joy,  and  do  man  ass  a,  or
grief  (or  of  mental  pleasure  and  pain).  This  class  of
upekkha  is  found  in  the  forty-seven  classes  of  consciousness
{i.e.,  fifty-five  classes  called  ‘ accompanied  by  indifference,’
minus  those  where  four  senses  are  involved,  pleasurably  or
painfully,  = eight),  referred  to  in  Part  III.,  § 2.

Of  these  two  kinds  of  upekkha,  the  former  is  sensa-
tional, the  latter  is  emotional,  and  both  are  hedonic.

Lastly,  there  is  a third  class  of  upekkha,  and  that  is
a cetasika,of  the  nineteen  sobhana-cetasika;^
in  other  words,  a mental  property  or  element,  of  the  nine-
teen ‘ morally  beautiful  ’ properties.  I refer  to  t a t r a -
majjhattata,  ‘balance  of  mind,’  ‘mental  equipoise.’
It  is  intellectual  and  not  hedonic,  and  appears  as  a nuance
in  conscious  experience,  when  the  object  is  of  a ‘higher’
kind  than  those  vvhich  evoke  the  hedonic  upekkha.
It  is,  e.g.,  a bojjhanga,  or  factor  of  Wisdom,  in  the
consciousness  of  Ariya’s,  and  a factor  of  higher  know-
ledge than  the  average,  in  the  consciousness  of  average
minds  {Three  Tlkd's,  p.  195).  It  is  this  tatra-majj-
h a 1 1 a t a which  we  meet  with  in  the  phrases  brahma-
c a r i y u p e k k h a , or  religious  equanimity,  and  san-
k h a r u p e k k h a , or  indifference  to  the  world.

Hedonic  upekkha  enters  into  the  composition  of
fifty-five  classes  of  consciousness ; intellectual  (not  ethical)
upekkha  enters  into  the  composition  of  fifty -nine  such
classes.  These  two  groups  of  classes  sometimes  overlap  each
other,  as  in  the  ease  of  the  ‘moral  resultant,’  or  ‘ inopera-
tive classes  of  k a m a -consciousness,’  which  are  ‘accom-
panied by  indifference,’  and  again  in  fifth  j h a n a . In
^ See  note  at  end  of  this  article.

2 As  hedonic,  upekkha  conies  under  the  cetasika  of  feeling
(vedana).


231


Upekkha

these  overlapping  classes  of  consciousness  hedonic  indiffer-
ence was  taken  as  the  chief  basis  of  division,  though
intellectual  indifference  was  present  as  well.  This  applies
to  the  upekkh’ekaggat  a — ‘ hedonic  indifference  and
individualization  ’ — characterizing  fifth  j h a n a (Part  I.,
§ 8,  class  5).

I have  said  that  ‘ balance  of  mind  ’ is  intellectual,  not
ethical.  Nevertheless,  it  associates  itself  with  moral  (k  u -
s a 1 a)  thoughts  and  higher  classes  of  consciousness  which
are  ethically  neutral,  though  not  with  immoral  (akusala)
consciousness.  Your  rendering  ‘equanimity,’  ‘equable-
ness,’ or  ‘impartiality,’  applies  well  enough  when  upek-
kha is  associated  with  ethical  sentiments,  but  the  morality
of  the  sentiment  is  not  due  to  the  upekkha.  There  is
little  of  ethical  value — as  I understand  the  term — when  an
object  deserving  of  pity  is  viewed  with  upekkha.  But
though  I may  be  mistaken  as  to  the  exact  import  of  the
term,  I do  not  quite  appreciate  ‘ disinterestedness  ’ for
tatramajjhattata.  This  word  is  paraphrased  by
tesu  tesu  dhammesu  majjhattata  : — ‘ the  mean
with  respect  to  these  or  those  things.’  Dhamma  may
mean  ‘ any  things.’  Hence,  if  you  substitute  this,  or  that
set  of  things,  with  respect  to  which,  or  among  which,  the
mind  is  balanced,  you  get  different  shades  of  meaning —
e.g.,  in  the  brahmacariyupekkha,  one’s  mind  is
indifferently  affected  with  regard  to  persons  as  objects  of
love,  pity,  or  moral  appreciation  ; in  sankhar  upekkha,
one’s  mind  is  indifferently  affected  with  respect  to  con-
ditioned things,  as  objects  of  desire  or  aversion.  You
may  be  equally  interested,  or  disinterested,  concerning  any
two  sets  of  things,  and  yet  in  both  cases  there  is  upekkha.
If  you  do  not  like  ‘ indifference,’  ‘ neutrality  ’ would  perhaps
cover  both  hedonic  and  intellectual  upekkha.


Note. — With  reference  to  hedonic  upekkha  being
incompatible  in  consciousness  with  tactile  sensations,
please  permit  me  to  criticize  your  version  of  the  classic


232


L "pe/i/i'/ni

simile  of  cotton-wool  between  hammer  and  anvil  {B.  Psy.,
Ivii.,  and  127,  n.  1).  You  say  that  ‘ they,’  referring  to
other  senses,  and  not,  as  was  correct,  to  the  secondary
qualities  of  body,  ‘are  as  balls  of  cotton-wool  on  four
anvils,  deadening  the  impact  of  the  hammer.’  In  the  case
of  those  other  senses,  there  is  no  hammer  at  all,  the  impact
of  which  is  to  be  deadened  by  the  intervening  cotton-wool.
Another  ball  of  cotton-wool  takes  the  place  of  the  hammc  r
in  each  of  these  four  senses,  and  the  impact  between  two
balls  of  cotton-wool  does  not  reach  the  anvil  below ;
whereas,  in  the  case  of  Touch,  the  impact  of  the  hammer
on  the  cotton  does  not  stop  with  the  latter,  but  is  imparted
to  the  anvil  below.  The  secondary  qualities  of  Body  within
and  without  in  the  case  of  the  other  four  senses  are  likened
to  the  two  balls  of  cotton- wool,  and  the  anvil  below  is  likened
to  the  primary  qualities  w'ithin.  In  the  ease  of  Touch,
the  object  (which  is  composed  of  three  primary  qualities,
p a t h a V I and  so  forth)  is  compared  to  the  hammer.^

1 1 am  much  indebted  to  Mr.  Aung  for  this  kindly  criticism.  The
hammer,  as  he  rightly  says,  is  reserved  by  Buddhaghosa,  for  the
relatively  direct  and  therefore  weighty  impressiveness  of  the  sense  of
touch.  In  the  case  of  the  other  four  senses,  in  which  the  ‘ derived  ’
material  qualities  (u  p a d a ■ r u p a)  in  both  sense  organ  and  sense-
object  impinge  on  each  other,  it  is  as  if  a ball  of  cotton- wool  struck
another  similar  ball  on  an  anvil.  There  is  bare  contact,  but  no
forcible  impact.  ‘Feeling  occupies  the  medium  position  (of  upek-
kha).  But  in  touch  the  external  “great  essential”  strikes  as  object
on  the  tactile  sense,  and  this  recoils  on  to  the  great  essentials  related
to  it.  As  if  one  struck  the  cotton-wool  on  the  anvil  with  a hammer,
and  this,  breaking  through  the  wool,  grips  the  anvil,  and  the  impact  is
forcible.  Such,  too,  is  the  impact  in  touch,  pleasant  touch  arising
concerning  a desirable  object,  painful  touch  concerning  an  undesirable
object.’ — Asl.  263.

Of  all  this  Europeans  wiU  say  it  is  more  consistent  with  the  logic  of
a theory  than  with  fact.  Next  to  sight,  touch  is  precisely  the  sense
that  gives  us  the  greatest  scope  for  sensations  which  are  hedonically
neutral.  Our  finger-tips  are  not,  perhaps,  equal  to  antennae,  but  they,
too,  are  instruments  of  hnoivledge  to  a very  large  extent,  informing  us
mainly  through  neutral  stimuli.

In  reply  to  this,  my  colleague  refers  me  to  both  the  Ceylon  Cy.
{Three  Tiku’s’,  p.  102  /.)  and  Ledi’s  Cy.  (p.  106  /.),  in  which  the


Kriya


233


lOlIYA-CITTANI  (p.  2).

As  every  action  has  its  reaction  {i.e.,  consequences),
the  rendering  ‘ action  - thoughts,’  in  the  translation  of
Dhamma-sangani,^  does  not  appear  to  me  a happy
expression.  The  term  kriya  (in  older  Pali,  kiriya),
was  made  technical  by  Buddhaghosa,  if  not  by  some
earlier  authority,  to  express  the  idea  of  mere  doing —
karanamattaij.  The  apparently  contradictory  phrase
which  I have  seen  used  by  an  English  writer — ‘ inaction
in  action  ’ — is  very  expressive  of  this  idea.  Kriya-citta
is  characteristic  of  the  Buddha  and  his  Arahants,  whose
character  is  not  ethically  modified  one  way  or  another  by
it.  The  reason  is  that  c e t a n a (volition)  in  kriya  -
c i 1 1 a , being  affected  by  a different  set  of  conditions —
a-lobha,  a-dosa,  a-moh  a — is  no  longer  operative —


absence  of  upekkha  in  touch  is  discussed.  Here,  however,  a foot-
note must  leave  the  matter.  He  adds  the  following  : — ‘ As  cold  is  but
the  absence  of  heat,  so  in  the  Buddhist  Hew  of  the  universe,  s u k h a
is  but  the  absence  of  dukkha — a theory  known  to  our  own  ethical
controversies.  Even  the  Nibbana-sukha  is  but  freedom  from
suffering.’

‘ TVe  speak  of  a lukewarm  state  between  heat  and  cold  in  ordinary
parlance,  but  not  in  scientific  speech.  In  strict  logic,  as  in  point
of  fact,  there  is  no  room  for  upekkha  in  touch.  Upekkha  is
purely  a mental  feeling,  according  to  our  classification  of  vedana,
and  is  therefore  subjective.  Objective  pleasure  or  pain  may  be
mentally  regarded  as  indifferent  according  to  the  degree  of  physical
affection.  In  my  Essay,  p.  14,  I should  have  been  more  accurate  had
I said  not  vedana,  but  dukkha  or  sukha  is  either  bodily  or
mental.  (Vedana  covers  only  the  hedonic  aspect  of  feeling  and
emotion.)  I tabulate  the  different  aspects  of  vedana  thus  ;

Anubhavana.

1.  Dukkha

2.  Adukkham-

asukha

3.  Sukha  .


Vedana.

( kayika.
i cetasika.

I^cetasika.
f kayika.

1 cetasika.


Indriyabheda.

1.  Dukkha.

2.  Domanassa.

3.  Upekkha.

4.  Sukha.

5.  Somanassa.


1 Buddhist  Psychology,  p.  156/.,  xcii. /.


234


Kriya

i.e.,  no  longer  transformed  into  karma.  Is  this  connota-
tion intended  in  the  expression  : ‘No  karma  can  be
set  free?’^  since  the  expression  seems  to  convey  also  that
kriya-citta  has  karma  locked  up  in  it.

Kriya-citta  is  a species  of  abyakata,  which  is
often  rendered,  with  etymological  literalness,  ‘ undeter-
mined,’ but  of  which  a better  rendering  for  an  ethico-
philosophical  system,  as  Buddhism  is,  would  be  ‘ un-moral.’
Abyakata  is  that  which  is  neither  k u s a 1 a (good  or
moral),  nor  a-kusala  (the  opposite).  But  moral
and  immoral  thoughts  alone  constitute  karma^ — i.e.,
attach  any  moral  responsibility  to  a thinker  or  actor.
Kriya-citta,  therefore,  which  is  by  its  nature  unmoral,
is  conceived  as  entailing  no  such  responsibility,  and  thus
no  karma  at  all.


CITTA,  VIKANANA.

These  two  terms  are  for  us  synonymous.^  The  manner
in  which  Buddhist  writers  connect  them  in  meaning  may
be  seen  from  mj'-  Essay.  By  them  they  are  used  inter-
changeably, in  psychological  discussion.  And  they  hold
that  Part  I.  of  the  Manual,  enumerating  cittani  of
all  kinds,  is  dealing  with  the  vihnanakkhandha.
Whether  Anuruddha  Thera  is  using  c i 1 1 a or  v i n n a ii  a ,
it  does  not  affect  the  common  idea  of  consciousness  or
awareness  in  its  more  general  expression.  I incline  to
think  that  you  may  attribute  too  much  emphasis  to  the
prefix  vi,  being  guided  by  such  terms  as  v i s e n a ,
visittha,  or  even  vividhena.  Whatever  may  be
the  dictionary  meanings  of  these  words,  v i,  in  v i n n a n a,
does  not  connote  superiority  of  nan  a.  A cittupi^ada,

' Yes.  ‘ Set  free  ’ not  from,  but  through  the  kriya-citta,  from
or  in  the  life  of  which  the  citta  is  a factor,  a passing  phase. — Ed.

^ B.  Psy.,  Ixxxiii. /. — Ed.

® See  Sayyutta-Nikaya,  ii.  24  : cittap  iti  pi  mano  iti  pi  vinnanag.
—Ed.


Citta,  vinnana


235


or  state  of  consciousness,  is  made  up  of  so  many  c eta-
s i k a ’ s , each  of  which  is  ‘citta  -with-a-difference,’  or
consciousness-and-something-more.  And  the  term  v i n -
h a n a simply  represents  the  totality  of  consciousness,
which  differs  from  the  p h a s s a -consciousness,  v e d a n a -
consciousness,  etc.,  which  make  it  up.  It  is  this  difference
which  is  all  that  the  ‘ vi  ’ can  serve  to  connote.

If  ‘consciousnesses’  be  bad  English  for  cittani,
we  must  keep  to  ‘ classes  of  consciousness,’  remaining
grammatical  if  unwieldy.  We  want  no  word  implying
‘products,’  such  as  ‘cognitions’  might  perhaps  imply.
And  ‘thought,’  except  in  the  popular  form  which  was
inevitable,  metri  causa,  for  your  mnemonic  rhymes,  must
be  reserved  for  processes  of  reflection  and  representative
cognition.


CETANA.

Get  ana  is  derived  from  ‘ceteti,’  to  cause  to
think,  the  causative  of  cintenti,  from  the  root  c i t a .
C e 1 0 and  cetasika  are  derived  from  the  same  root,
the  former  meaning  ‘ mind,’  the  latter  ‘ mental  property.’
C e t a n a means  ‘ the  causal  principle  of  thought.’  And
‘ will,’  in  Buddhism,  is  the  chief  element  of  causation  in
karma.

Now,  ceteti  is  explained  by  the  verb  abhisanda-
hati,’  ‘to  connect.’  Cf.  cetapeti,  ‘to  collect  or  get
together.’  So  the  Tika’s^:  ceteti  attana  sampayutta-
dhamme  arammane  abhisandahatiti  cetana  : — ‘ c e t a n a
is  that  which  connects  the  concomitants  with  itself  on  the
object  of  consciousness.’  Again,  the  active  import  of
cetana  is  brought  out  in  the  same  passage  thus:
sankhatabhisankharane  va  byaparaij  apajjati  ti  cetana  : —
cetana  is  that  which  arrives  at  action  (or  exertion)  in
the  matter  of  conditioning  (what  ought  to  be)  conditioned
(or  causing  what  ought  to  be  caused).  And  the  Commen-

^ P.  87,  Baya  Pye’s  ed.  of  Three  TiJici’s.


236


Cetana


tary  goes  on  to  explain ; ‘ Because  this  very  cetana
is  conspicuous,  or  prominent  in  such  conditioning  the
conditioned,  the  Buddha,  in  the  Suttanta  method  of
classifying  the  k h a n d h a ’ s,  explained  s a n k h a r a , in
the  compound  sankh  arakkhan  dha,  as  sankhataij
abhisankharontiti  sankharo.  ^

This  passage  throws  light  on  why  sankharak-
k h a n d h a came  to  be  so  called.  It  was  merely  a
convenient  name  given  to  a certain  group  because  of
the  chief  feature  in  it,  to  wit,  cetana,  and  not  because
forty  nine  mental  properties  besides  cetana  show  more
‘activity,’  or  more  ‘tendency,’  or  ‘predisposition’  than
vedana  or  sanna.  Phassa,  e.p.,  is  not  necessarily
more  active  than  either  of  these.  But  cetana  has  been
compared  to  a head  carpenter,  doing  his  own  work  as  well
as  well  as  those  of  his  workmen.^

Ledi  (p.  78),  after  slightly  elaborating  the  foregoing  by
pointing  out  that  cetana  determines  the  respective
functions  (tasmiij  tasmiij  kicce  va)  of  its  concomitants  on
this  or  that  object  (tasmiij  tasmiij  arammane  va),  goes  on
to  explain  that  cetana  acts  on  its  concomitants,  acts  in
getting  the  object,  and  acts  in  accomplishing  the  task —
i.c.,  determines  action.  It  focusses  its  concomitants  on  to
an  object.  It  has  a y ii  h a n a - r a s a , or  the  function  of
exertion,  and  saijvidhana-pacciipatthana,  or
appears  as  the  phenomenon  of  determination  of  what  is
determined.  When  cetana  acts,  all  the  remaining  con-
comitants act  also.

Thus  all  points  to  cetana  as  volition  or  conation.
On  the  development  of  cetana  from  bare  element  to
such  higher  phases  of  will  as  adhitthana,  see  the
Introductory  Essay,  (pp.  43,  45,  62).®

^ Savyutta-Nikdi/a,  iii.  87.

2 Atthasrdml,  1.  3,  quoted  in  B.  Psy.  8,  n.  1.  See  infra  art. :
Sankhara.

® Mr.  Aung  adds  : ‘ I was  surprised  that  you  found  no  term  for
‘will’  in  your  article  ‘The  Will  in  Buddhism,’  and  that  cetana
was  conspicuous  hy  its  absence.’  The  Buddhist  Society  (Buddha-
sasana-samagama)  of  Eangoon  did  me  the  honour  of  reprinting
this  inquiry  (J.E.A.S.,  1898)  some  years  ago.  I therein  remarked


Cetasika


237


CETASIKA.

TJie  Fifty-Two  Get  a si  ha's  [Mental  ProjJeiiies  or
Elements).

Here  we  are  dealing  with  the  basic  principles,  the  bare
elements,  the  psychological  ultimates  of  consciousness.
This  cannot  be  too  carefully  borne  in  mind,  nor  the
renderings  too  scrupulously  selected.  That,  for  instance,
we  may  render  ekaggata  by  ‘concentration,’  when
enumerating  the  mental  factors  in  j h a n a , does  not
permit  us  to  use  the  same  rendering  when  we  speak  of  the
consciousness  of  an  amoeba.  And  yet  this  little  creature
is  not  entirely  destitute  of  ekaggata,  or  capacity  to
individualize  among  sense  - impressions.  This  remark
applies  to  all  the  cetasika’ s.  We  must  select  the
simplest  meaning  applicable  to  every  possible  case.  And
if  we  cannot  fit  terms  to  every  one  of  these  protean  shapes,
it  is  better  to  retain  the  Pali,  and  content  ourselves  with
explanatory  glosses.

The  protean  character  of  each  cetasika,  considered
logically  as  the  basic  principle,  the  bare  element,  into
which  a thought  complex  may  ultimately  be  resolved,  may
be  gathered  from  the  study  of  any  one  cetasika,  say
V i t a k k a .

that  (as  in  Matthew  Arnold’s  well-known  instance  of  Soli  and
solecisms),  whereas  Buddhism  was  essential  a culture  of  will  and
desire,  there  seemed  to  be  in  Pali  no  term  tantamount  to  our  will  or
volition — none  at  least  nearer  than  c h a n d a . Groping  by  the  un-
certain guidance  of  etymology,  I found  c e t a n a too  intellectual  in
form  to  represent  will.  And  with  regard  to  the  Commentarial
definition,  I paid  too  much  attention  to  its  paccupatthana
(reappearance)  of  sagvidahana,  and  its  a 1 1 h a (meaning)  of
abhisandahati,  and  too  httle  to  its  rasa  (function)  ayuhana,
efiiort  [Vis.  Mag.).  The  light  thrown  for  me  by  my  critic  and  colleague
on  the  matter  has  been  gladly  hailed,  and  I can  now  go  with  other
European  translators  who  had  not  hesitated  as  I did.  It  is  to  me
a matter  of  regret  that  correction  from  Burma  did  not  reach  me  when
the  reprint  was  circulated.  The  very  intimate  connection,  to  revert  to
etymology,  between  the  ‘ words  ’ for  consciousness  or  cognition,  c i 1 1 a,
c e t o,  and  will,  c e t a n a,  may  prove  suggestively  interesting  to
investigation  in  comparative  psychology.— Ed.


288


Cetasika


I use  the  word  ‘protean,’  not  in  the  sense  of  ‘variable
in  the  meaning  assigned  by  different  authors’  but  in  the
sense  of  ‘variable  in  meaning  according  to  the  nature  of  the
object,  or  according  to  circumstances’

In  Part  II.  (§  4)  of  this  Manual  we  learn  that  v i t a k k a
is  present  in  fifty-five  classes  of  consciousness,  and  that
these  classes  take  part  in  different  processes  (described  in
the  Introductory  Essay).  In  the  process  of  presentative
visual  consciousness,  vitakka  is  present  in  each  phase,
short  of  cakkhuvinnana,  or  full  visual  cognition.
Then,  in  several  other  classes  of  consciousness,  the
element  of  vitakka  is  present  as  a directing  of  concomi-
tant elements  to  a sensible  object.  In  imagination  vitakka
directs  to  an  image ; in  conception,  to  an  idea ; in  sym-
bolical conception,  to  a concept;  in  judgments  (vinic-
chaya-vlthi),  toa  jDroposition ; in  reasoning  (t  a k k a -
vithi),  alluded  to,  but  not  discussed  in  my  Essay  (it
belongs  to  the  province  of  logic) ; to  a syllogism  or  an
inference.  In  doubt,  vitakka  is  a directing  now  to  one
object,  now  to  another,  back  again,  etc.  In  distraction,
vitakka  is  a directing  of  mind  to  several  objects  one
after  another.  In  first  j h a n a,  vitakka  is  a directing
of  mind  to  the  ‘ after-image,’  etc.,  and  in  transcendental
consciousness,  vitakka  is  a directing  of  mind  to  Nib-
bana,  the  Ideal.  So  engaged  it  is  called  samma-san-
kappa,  perfect  aspiration.  And  in  this  connection  your
rendering  of  ‘ conception,’  is  not  amiss.  I only  maintain
that  ‘ intention  ’ is  not  the  correct  word  for  this  term,  but
should  serve  (as  an  alternative  with  ‘ desire-to-do  ’)  for
c h a n d a Again,  as  a j h a n a-factor,  vitakka  might
be  not  incorrectly  rendered  by  ‘imagination,’  when  its
1 It  is,  notwithstanding,  interesting  to  find  the  Commentator
Dhammapala  paraphrasing  san kappa  by  chanda.  This  is  in
the  Commentary  on  the  Therigatha,  p.  234,  on  verse  329 : — tava
pabbajaya  sankappo,  pabbajaya  chando,  ijjhatu.  According  to  this
passage,  intention  might  serve  for  either.  But  I prefer,  for  samma-
s a n k a p p a,  perfect  aspiration,  the  lifting  of  the  mind  on  to  (a  b h i -
niropana)  higher  objects.  My  colleague  replies  that  Abhidhamma
usage  of  a term  is  not  always  on  all  fours  with  that  found  in  the
Suttas. — Ed.


Cetasika


239


object  is  the  uggaha-nimitta  (the  image),  and  by
‘conception,’  when  its  object  is  the  patibhaga-ni-
mitta  (transformed  after  image).  But  the  object  of
V i t a k k a is  not  alicays  an  image  or  an  idea,  as  may  be
seen  from  the  fact  that  presentative  cognitions,  having
sensibles  as  their  objects,  include  the  factor  of  vitakka.
Hence  neither  imagination  nor  conception  is  sufficiently
wide  to  cover  the  implications  of  vitakka.

Thus  we  see  that  ‘ the  directing  of  mind  towards  an
object  ’ is  the  basic  meaning  common  to  all.  Hence  it  is
clear  that  we  must  assign  a simple  elemental  meaning  to
these  psychological  ultimates  called  ‘ mentals  ’ (ceta-
sika), so  as  to  make  them  applicable  to  every  possible
case  where  the  ‘ mental  ’ in  question  is  discernible.  If,  as
an  example  of  how  not  to  do  it,  we  render  pannindriya
by  wisdom  in  a philosophical  manual,  it  would  not  be
applicable  to  the  classes  of  consciousness  said  to  be  simply
‘ associated  with  knowledge  ’ (nanasampayutta).  And
yet  we  know  that  the  Manual  uses  p a n n a and  n a n a as
interchangeable  terms.  If  we  render  pannindriya  by
that  elusive  English  word  ‘reason,’  or  by  ‘understanding,’
it  would  meet  somewhat  better  the  protean  character  of  the
Pali  term.^

^ In  the  Sutta-Pitaka,  the  word  cetasika  hardly  ever
occurs.  In  Anguttara  Nilcdya,  i.  81,  157,  it  is  used  simply  to
distinguish  ‘mental’  from  ‘bodily’  dukkha  or  sukha.  «<7/.
Jdtaka,  iii.  143.  In  DigJia  Nikdya,  i.,  213  (Kevaddha-Sutt-
anta).  it  is  used  as  a parallel  to  citta,  vitakkita,  vicarita,
the  four  together  representing  mano,  or  mind.  ‘ Suppose,’  the
Buddha  is  saying,  ‘ a brother  makes  manifest  the  citta,  and  the
cetasika  and  the  vitakkita  and  the  vicarita  of  others,
saying:  “ So-and-so  is  your  mano,  your  citta”’  . . . I believe  this
is  a unique  instance  of  cetasikap  (note  the  singular  1)  used  in  this
way  in  the  oldest  Pali.  Cetasikap  is  distinguishable  from
c it  tap,  but  there  is  as  yet  no  definite  group  of  cetasika.  In  the
PatisaynbJiidd-magga,  however,  we  find  the  Abhidhamma  phrase  :
citta-cetasika  dhamma  (p.  84:,=  Vib]ianga;  421).  This  is
explained  in  Dhamma-sangani  (§§  1187-90  ; cf.  § 1022)  to  mean  the
four  khandha’s,  citta  for  vinnana,  and  cetasika  for  the
other  three  mental,  or  arupina  khandha.  Finally,  in  the
Katha-Vatthu,  latest  increment  to  the  Canon,  we  find  the  plural
cetasika,  with  and  without  dhamma,  implying  a number  of


240


Cetasika


To  revert  to  e k a g g a t a I do  not  think  ‘ self-
eollectedness  ’ is  the  best  rendering.  No  idea  of  self  is


certain  mental  properties  or  states,  which,  it  was  a matter  of  orthodox
theory  to  hold,  both  happened  in  mental  procedure,  and  happened  as
coexistent  accompaniments  or  adjuncts  of  citta  (p.  338).  It  is  of
some  interest,  as  a question  in  psychological  evolution,  to  compare  the
eetasika’s  in  this  passage,  so  far  as  they  specified^  with  the  fifty-
two  given  in  the  medieval  teaching  of  our  Manual  (‘  pe  ’ ==  ‘ and  so  on  ’)  :


Katha-  Vatthu.


‘pe’


m

viriya


saiuadlii

jsauna

raga

dosa

moha

pe

anottappag


Compendium.

phassa  "

vedana

sauna

cetana

ekaggata

jivitindriya

nianasikara

vitakka

vicara

adhimokklia

viriya

piti

elianda

moha

ahirika

anottappa

uddhacca

lobha

dittlii

mana

dosa

issa

macchariya

kukkucca

thina

middha

vioikiccha

saddha

sati

hiri

ottappa

aloblia

adosa

tatramajjhattata

kayapassaddlii

pe

cittujukata
viratiyo  (3)
appamahhayo  (2)
IDahhindriya


^ In  Dhamma-sangani,  invariably  preceded  bycittassa:  ‘of
mind’:  cittass’ekaggata.  Cf.  supra,  36  of  text:  eitte  ekag-
gata.— Ed.


Cetasika


241


here  involved.  You  point  out  that  it  is  an  abstract  noun,
and  literally  so  it  is,  because  it  means  singleness  of  object,
or  individuality  in  object.  But  in  reality  it  is  that  state  of
mind  which  is  conscious  of  one  and  only  one  object,  because
it  is  not  distracted  by  a plurality  of  possible  objects.  As
Ledi  Sadaw’s  literal  rendering  has  it,  it  is  the  fact  in
[a  given  state  of]  consciousness,  of  having  a single  point
[e  k - a g g a]  as  object.  In  other  words,  it  is  the  germ  of  all
attentive,  selective,  focussed,  or  concentrated  consciousness.
‘ The  individual,’  as  we  say  with  your  Mansell,  ‘ is  the
ultimate  object  of  all  consciousness.’  And  ekaggata,
qua  cetasika,  is  the  subjective  counterpart  of  ‘this  one
as  distinct  from  the  rest.’


Adhimokkha.

Adhimokkha,^  decision,  is  another  term  that  needs
to  be  carefully  discriminated  when  denoting  an  ‘ elemental  ’
of  consciousness.  As  such  it  does  not  amount  to  a pro-
cess or  product  of  judgment  (v  i n i c c h a y a - v i t h i),  in

A whole  essay  might  be  indited  on  all  that  these  two  lists  suggest,
especially  in  the  light  of  Mr.  Aung’s  valuable  exposition  of  the  Com-
mentarial  tradition.  And  the  inquiry  might  well  be  pushed  further
into  the  apparent  supersession  of  the  factors  of  the  sankharak-
khandha,  or,  indeed,  of  all  five  khan dh as,  by  the  cetasika-
eategory,  for  purposes  of  psychological  training.  The  doctrine  of  the
five  khandhas,  as  we  know,  was  a logical  instrument  wherewith  to
oppose  Atmanism  (c/.  J.E.A.S.,  1902,  p.  48).  The  citta-cetasika
theory  is,  ;psyehologically  speaking,  a considerable  advance. — Ed.

^ This  is  one  of  the  terms  for  mental  elements  that  came  from  the
background  in  Dhamma-sanyani  to  a relatively  front  rank  in  the
evolution  of  Buddhist  psychology  during  the  centuries  between  the
compilation  of  that  work  and  the  Compendium.  In  the  older  book  it
is  one  of  the  supplementary  ‘ or-whatever  (other) ’ (ye-va-panaka)
elements  of  consciousness  in  a citta,  and  is  omitted  from  the  s_an-
k h a r a k k h a n d h a . It  is  listed  in  that  khandha  in  the  Vis.  Mag.,
and  among  the  cetasika’s  in  this  work  {Bud.  Psy.,  5,  n.  1). — ^Ed.

16


242


Cctasika


presence  of  two  or  more  concepts.  Just  as  the  cetasika-
of  vicikiccha,  doubt  or  perplexity,  denotes  awareness
of  an  unsettling,  distracting  nature,  so  is  adhimokkha
a name  for  the  nuance  in  consciousness  of  the  opposite
awareness — the  settled  state  of  a mind  ‘ freed  from  ’ ^
that  unrest,  or  from  a plurality  of  possible  objects — freed
from  the  questioning  ‘ is  it  thus  or  not  (e  v a ij  n u k h o
no  n u k h 0 ?)  ?’ “ It  is  deciding  to  attend  to  this,  not
that,  irrespective  of  more  complicated  procedure  as  to
what  ‘ this  ’ or  ‘ that  ’ appears  to  be,  etc.


VlEIYA.

Viriya,  ‘effort,’ or  ‘ energy,’  is  less  easily  misunderstood
in  its  bare  elementary  sense  as  cetasika — i.e.,  as  distin-
guished from  its  sublimated  rank  as  a b o j j h a n g a or
other  bodhipakkhiya  factor).  With  the  definition
quoted  by  you  {Bud.  Psy.,  15,  n.  1)  we  may  compare  the
viranap  bhavo:  ‘ state  of  those  who  are  strong  in
effort,’  of  the  Ceylon  Cy.,  p.  88,  and  Ledi’s  ‘ valiant  in
work  ’ (p.  82).  Both  hold  that  reference  to  action
(kamma)  is  intended.  The  Ceylon  Cy.  explains  its
function  as  u s s a h a,  or  ‘ support  of  concomitant  element.’^
Ledi  also  repeats  Buddhaghosa’s  la  kkh  ana’s.  I have
used  ‘ effort,’  or  I suggest  ‘ exertion,’  without  wishing  to
find  your  ‘ energy  ’ unsuitable.

^ The  term  = lit.,  ‘release-on-to.’ — Ed.

^ Thus  it  appears  almost  as  the  volitional  counterpart  of  the  more
eognitional  ekaggata.  Buddhaghosa’s  definition  is  given  in  Bud.
Psy.,  loc.  cit. — Ed.

3 It  would  have  been  more  in  keeping  with  the  subtle  introspection
of  Buddhist  analysis  had  the  Commentaries  defined  it  as  the  sub-
jectively-felt nuance,  in  a given  conscious  complex,  of  activity  put
forth. — Ed.


CetcLsika


243


PlTI.

On  pi  ti  I have  enlarged  to  a slight  extent  in  my  Essay
(p.  56).  Piti  is  not  hedonic  but  intellectual,  having
reference  to  an  object  in  consciousness.  And  this  is  why
I earnestly  dissent  from  the  now  almost  classical  rendering
in  England  of  this  word  by  ‘joy.’  Piti  has  as  its
invariable  concomitant  somanassa,  with  which  joy
fits  well  enough,  since  the  Pali  term  means  pleasure
(s  u k h a)  plus  excitement.  But  piti  abstracted  means
interest  of  varying  degrees  of  intensity,  in  an  object  felt  as
desirable,  or  as  calculated  to  bring  happiness.  By  k a 1 1 u-
sadhana  definition,^  piti  is  a creating  of  interest —
i.e.,  it  is  the  zest  felt  by  an  agent  in  his  occupation,  or
pleasure,  if  we  follow  Fleming  and  Calderwood’s  Vocabulary
of  Philosophy.  Webster’s  Dictionary,  again,  describes
‘ interest  ’ as  ‘ excitement  of  feeling,  whether  pleasant  (or
painful)  accompanying  especial  attention  to  some  object.’
This  is  exactly  our  piti,  if  we  omit  the  ‘ painful  ’ alterna-
tive, since  piti  is  felt  always  with  reference  to  an  object
oi  desire.  By  bhavasadhana  definition,  piti  is  the
interest  created  in  such  an  object : Arammanaij  kallato
gahana-lakkhanati  vuttaij  {Three  Tlkas,  p.  75) — ‘It  is
said  that  [piti]  has,  as  its  characteristic  mark,  grasping
the  object  qud  desirable.’  So  also  in  similar  terms,  Ledi,
p.  50.

Pleasure  (s  u k h a)  is,  as  a rule,  preceded  by,  is  derived
from,  a certain  amount  of  interest.  Without  this  precursor
one  would  not  pay  especial  attention  to  the  object.  If,
therefore,  we  may  eliminate  ‘ painful  excitement  ’ — ^s  the
Vocabulary  quoted  from  does — in  our  definition  of  interest,
I hope  you  will  retain  ‘pleasurable  interest’  for  piti.
If  neither  this,  nor  even  ‘ prospective  pleasure  ’ be  accepted
in  the  West,  it  were  better  to  retain  the  Pali  word  rather
than  to  confound  the  intellectual  zest  in  an  object,  or
objective  with  a purely  emotional  state  of  the  subject.

1 Definition  in  Buddhist  logic  is  in  terms  either  of  agency  or  of
state.  This  is  the  former.  See  Introd.  Essay,  p.  2. — Ed.


244


Cetasika


At  the  same  time  p 1 1 i must  not  be  misunderstood  to
mean  a complex  phenomenon.  Even  when  present  in  the
sublimated  form  of  a b o j j h a n g a , or  wisdom-factor,  it
is  still  a factor  or  element,  a simple  element  in  a complex.^


Chanda.

Chanda  = the  bare  element  of  ‘wish-to-do’  (kattu-
kamyata,  as  our  Commentators  say),  the  germ,  so  to
speak,  of  ‘ intention.’  AVe  have  translated  it  by  intention,
when  it  is  raised  to  the  dignity  of  an  ‘adhipati,’  or
dominant  influence,  in  Part  A^II.,  p.  177.  I do  not  mind  if
ch  anda  be  rendered  by  ‘ desire-to-do,’  instead  of  ‘ inten-
tion,’ if  only  ‘intention  ’ be  not  reserved  for  sankaj)pa
(see  above,  on  A^itakka).  But  I fear  that  ‘ desire  ’ unquali-
fied may  overload  the  meaning  of  chanda  as  a ceta-
sika. So  many  Europeans  translate  tanha  by  desire,
and  tanha  is  the  ethical  concept  for  that  which,  psycho-
logically considered,  appears  as  the  mental  element  or
cetasika  of  lobha  (greed).  And  our  Commentators
are  careful  to  distinguish  between  chanda,  when  it
stands  in  ethical  discourse  for  the  passion  of  tanha,  and
the  element,  subjectively  discernible  in  a mental  complex,
of  ‘ wish-to-accomplish.’^

^ ‘ The  forward  view  ’ of  the  mind,  as  we  might  say  with  George
Meredith,  the  nuance  of  anticipation,  that  may  be  hypothetically
postulated  as  an  original  element,  and  not  as  a resultant  of  simpler
elements.  This  correction  of  ‘ joy  ’ is  of  very  great  ‘ interest,’  and
accords  well  with  the  supremely  intellectual  note  in  Buddhist  religious
psychology. — Ed.

^ Of  all  the  highly  instructive  distinctions  in  Buddhist  philosophy
pointed  out  by  the  translator,  none  perhaps  is  more  valuable  than  this
for  English  readers  or  those  of  the  Latin  races.  The  ambiguity
lurking  in  the  Anglo-Latin  word  ‘desire’  is  not  perhaps  so  great  a
stumbling-block  for  those  of  other  European  nations.  On  the  other
hand,  there  may  not  be  for  these,  as  there  is  for  us  Anglo-Latins,  any
equivalent  so  splendid  in  content  (Inhalt).  See  the  breadth  and  force
of  it  in  George  Sand’s  Lelia,  where  Prometheus  is  apostrophized  :
‘ Promethee,  Promethee,  est-ce  toi,  toi  qui  voulais  affranchir  I’homme


Javan  a


245


JAYANA.  .

This  is  one  of  the  most  important  terms  you  have  invited
me  to  discuss,  and  I think  I had  better  strike  at  the  root  of
the  matter.

The  term  is  derived  from  the  root  j u,  ‘to  be  swift,’  or
‘ to  go.’  So  Ingan  Sadaw,  in  the  Dlidtvaitha-sangaha :

des  liens  de  la  fatalite  ? . . . Les  hommes  font  donne  mille  noms
symboliques  : audace,  desespoir,  delire,  rebellion,  malediction.  Ceux-
ci  t’ont  appele  Satan,  cenx-la,  crime  ; moi  je  f appelle  Desir  ! Verite  !
verite ! tu  ne  f es  pas  revelee  ; depuis  dix  mille  ans  que  je  te  cherche.
. . . Depuis  dix  miUe  ans  Tinfini  me  repond  : desir,  desir !’

Now  we  cannot  afford  to  impoverish  our  ethical  (and  sesthetical)
concepts  by  squandering  this  term  outright  on  tanha,  and  thereby,
so  to  speak,  making  the  devil  a present  of  all  desire — even  of  that
dhammacchanda  that  drove  Prometheus  to  fight  Zeus,  that
drove  the  Buddha  from  home  to  the  Bo-tree,  that  drove  the  Christ  to
bring  down  heaven  to  earth.  Much  harm  hereby  has  been  wrought
by  translators,  whose  cheapening  of  the  word  ‘ desire  ’ has  justified  the
superficial  criticism  which  perennially  speaks  of  Buddhist  ethics  as
the- ‘negation,’  or  ‘ extinction  of  all  desire.’  Craving  (or  unregenerate
desire,  Begierde)  serves  admirably  for  tanha.  Desire  belongs  to  our
psychology  of  feeling -i- will  as  a term  of  M?imoral  import,  as  such.
Hence  it  seems  to  me  most  important  to  retain  it  for  c h a n d a ,
which  (as  I have  repeatedly  pointed  out  elsewhere)  is,  as  a c e t a s i k a,
-u-Kmoral,  as  dhammachanda  is  moral,  and  is  only  MJimoral  as
kamacchanda,  or  when  substituted  for  tanha  (e.y.,  S',  v.,  272/.
— i.e.,  Brahmana-sutta,  Iddhipada-Sapyutta). — Ed.

To  Europeans  the  inclusion  of  the  three  ‘abstinences’  will  seem  a
psychological  incongruity.  (1)  How  are  perfect  speech,  action,  and
livelihood  to  be  classed  as  phases  in,  or  properties  of,  consciousness  ?
And  (2)  why  not  the  corresponding  immoral  opposites  (since  for
Buddhism  immoral  phenomena  are  as  ultimate  as  the  moral)  ? My
colleague  rephes  (a),  that  his  traditional  culture  defines  perfect  speech,
action,  and  livelihood  as  that  by  which  we  speak,  act,  and  live  well.
I judge  this  to  mean  that,  in  their  ultimate  terms,  the  abstinences
are  three  mental  dispositions  following,  or  according  to,  which  the
three  specified  forms  of  activity  follow.  I may  be  wrong,  and  our
letters  discussing  these  matters  have  a weary  length  of  way  to  go.
(6)  Classification  is  made  by  the  classifier  according  to  his  require-
ments. Bad  cetasika’s  sufficiently  cover  all  bad  speech,  thoughts,
and  acts.  But  Buddhists  require  the  three  V i r a t i ’ s to  differentiate
lokuttara  (saintly)  from  lokiya  (mundane)  consciousness. — Ed.


24G


Javaiia


(jd  jave  ca  gati  ca).  But  Warren’s  literal  rendering,

‘ swiftness  ’ and  ‘ swiftnesses  ’ {Buddhism  in  Translations,
pp.  177,  245,  etc.),  have  for  us  Buddhists  no  meaning  whaf-
erer.  What  philosophical  significance,  then,  can  the  other
alternative  — ‘to  go’- — have?  In  Pali  roots  or  words
implying  a going  often  mean  also  a knowing.  Knowing  is
considered  a sort  of  mental  going.  And  so,  in  the  Com-
mentaries, we  find  such  passages  as  ‘ 3'e  gatyattha  te
buddhyattha.’  < “ x ” gatiyaij  tad-attha  ye  pavattix)apunesu
Xoi  te  buddhiyam  x>i.’  Javana  therefore  means  ‘know-
ing,’ or  ‘ cognition.’  Primarily,  it  denotes  a function
(kicca),  and  only  secondarily  a functional  state  of  con-
sciousness (k  i c c a V a n t a).  Hitherto  I had  used  cognition
to  express  the  former,  cognitive  to  denote  the  latter.  That
the  j a V a n a-function  lasts  seven  mental  moments,  while
others  may  be  briefer,  shows  that  the  idea  of  swiftness
is  not  essential.  Somehow^  notwithstanding,  this  foreign
idea  of  swiftness  has  crex^t  into  the  discussions  about  the
term  ; possibly  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  rapid  succession
of  several  vithi-citta’s,  in  which  j a v a n a goes  on.
Let  me  make  this  clearer.

Vithi,  in  our  philosophy,  means  a road,  along  which
the  mind  travels  by  marked  and  unalterable  stages.  The
fixity  of  these  stages  gives  rise  to  the  term  c i 1 1 a -
niyama,  corresponding  to  that  which  Mansell  termed
‘ the  form  of  consciousness,’  and  which  he  distinguished
from  the  matter  of — i.e.,  the  variable  element  in — conscious-
ness. As  there  are  several  distinct  forms  of  consciousness,
each  form  is  termed  ‘ a process  of  thought,’  and  the  term
vithi-citta  is  ax^plied  to  the  whole  process,  and  not  to
any  x^aHicular  mental  state  functioning  in  that  process.
For  instance,  in  the  one  mental  act  of  sense-perception
indicated  by  the  words  ‘I  see  a rose,’  we  distinguish  four
vi  t h i’s  :

vision,  or  c a k k h u d v a r a v i t h i ;

reproductive  sequel , or  tad-anuvattaka-mano-
dvara-vithi  :


Javana


247


conceiving  the  name,  or  nama-pannatti-vithi;
discerning  the  meaning  of  the  name,  or  a 1 1 h a -
pannatti-vithi.

All  four  constitute  the  vithi-citta  of  perception  of  a rose.

Now,  in  each  of  these  processes  several  classes  of  con-
sciousness function.  And  sometimes  there  is  javana,
and  sometimes  not.  In  the  first  process,  if  the  object
be  very  vivid,  or  vivid,  javana  functions.  J a v a n a
functions  also  in  all  other  processes  of  representative  or
reflective  consciousness  (manodvaravithi)  except
dream-consciousness.  And  the  four  processes  described
above  in  the  sight  of  a rose  occur  in  such  quick  succession
that  we  fancy  the  object  is  perceived  instantaneously.
Hence,  in  popular  speech,  we  say  a man  has  good  j a v ana-
nan  a , if  he  has  quickness  of  perception.  But  I do  not
think  we  are  justified  in  transferring  the  epithet  of  quick
or  swift  from  the  processes  to  any  particular  functioning
arising  in  those  processes.

It  must  be  remembered  that  javana,  as  a kicca-
vanta,  or  functional  state  of  consciousness,  is  composed
of  several  mental  properties,  among  which  c e t a n a
(volition)  is  common  to  all.  Buddhist  writers  often,  in
using  the  word  javana,  are  referring  to  the  active  or
conative  factor  (c  e t a n a)  in  the  act  of  cognition  rather
than  to  the  intellective  side  of  the  process.  The  context
shows  clearly  enough  what  they  mean.  Your  ‘ conative
impulse’  of  javana  in  Buddhist  Psychology,  132,  n.,
savours  of  this  usage,  though  the  usage  is  not  philosophic-
ally exact.  Again,  if,  on  p.  156,  n.,  you  had  said  ‘javana
is  the  effective  act  {not  outcome  of  an  act)  of  cognition,  the
stage  when  the  mind  of  the  percipient,’  or  hy  which  his
‘ character  (k  a m m a)  is  modified  ethically  in  one  way  or
another,’  the  description  would  be  correct  so  far  as  it  goes.
But  it  would  still  'leave  the  nature  of  kriya-javana
and  phala-javana  untouched.  It  must  be  remem-
bered that,  in  these  javana’s,  there  is  no  more  any
determining  of  the  passive  side  of  one’s  future  existence,


248


Jew  ana


because  of  the  presence  of  certain  conditions  or  h e t u ’ s —
to  wit,  alobha,  adosa,  amoha.  I have  already
pointed  out,  under  Kkiya,  that  the  character  of  an  Arahant
is  not  modified  ethically  by  his  k r i y a-thought  (thought
inoperative  in  making  karma).

J a V a n a pertains  to  the  active  side  of  present  existence,
and  determines  the  passive  side  of  future  existence.  The
other  stages  in  the  cognitive  process  pertain  to  the  passive
side  of  present  existence,  and  have  already  been  unalter-
ably determined  by  the  active  side  of  past  existence.  To
Europeans,  the  latter  functions,  as  well  as  j avana,  would
all  count  equally  as  acts  of  mind.  But  we  Buddhists  dis-
tinguish j a V a n a as  a determining,  free,  causal  act,
from  sampaticchana  and  the  rest,  which  are  pre-
determined, fixed  resultant  (v  i p a k a)  acts.

In  the  absence  of  any  English  word  capable  of  expressing
what  j a V a n a imports  for  Buddhist  psychology,  I had
fallen  back  on  a term  so  elastic  and  untechnical  as
‘ cognition.’  Our  essential  need  is,  after  all,  only  a word  to
express  the  meaning  of  ordinary  knowledge,  pi'ovkled  that
this  word  is  applicable  to  javana’s  in  every  kind  of
vithi.  For  instance,  on  referring  to  the  simile  of  the
man  and  the  mango-tree  in  the  Introductory  Essay  (p.  30),
illustrating  the  normal  process  of  cognizing  an  impression,
j a V a n a is  likened  to  tasting  the  mango.  J a v a n a thus
implies  experience,  appreciation,  satisfaction.  But  you
object  that,  for  the  European  psychological  reader,  it  is
impossible  to  dissever  from  a ‘ process  ’ of  cognition  the
phases  immediately  preceding  the  phase  of  j a v a n a : the
‘adverting’  of  the  mind  (avajjana),  the  ‘receiving,’
‘ examining,’  and  ‘ determining.’  Cognition  covers  them
all,  and  I have  myself  spoken  of  the  whole  vithi-citta
as  the  act  or  process  of  cognition.  Hence  I consent  to
adopt  your  suggestion  that  ‘ apperception  ’ is  less  of  a mis-
fit than  most  other  words.  But  it  should  be  understood
that  by  ‘ apperception  ’ I understand  a voluntary  or  free
determining  act  or  phase  of  mind.^

1 Apperception  is  most  familiar  to  us  in  the  works  of  Leibniz,  Kant,
Herbart,  and  Wundt.  It  will  suffice  to  recall  the  psychological


Javana


249


Reversal  of  Javana.

The  excitement  of  pleasure  by  a disagreeable  object  or  of
displeasure  by  an  agreeable  one  is  a case  of  the  reversal
of  the  apperceptional  act.  We  have  remarked  that  the
apperceptional  act  is  free,  and  that  resultant  acts  of  mind
are  fixed.  The  former  is  compared  to  an  alligator  which
can  swim  with  or  against  the  current,  just  as  it  pleases,
and  the  latter  are  likened  to  lifeless  objects  which  merely
boat  up  and  down  with  the  tide.  That  is  to  say,  the  quality


(rather  than  metaphysical)  force  of  the  term  as  used  by  the  first  and  last
of  these  thinkers.  In  the  Principes  cle  la  Nature  et  cle  la  Grace  we
read,  ‘ la  perception  qui  est  I’etat  interieur  de  la  monade  representant
les  choses  externes,  et  I’aperception,  qui  est  la  conscience  on  la
connaissance  reflexive  de  cet  etat  interieur,  laquelle  n'est  point  donnee
il  toutes  les  ames,  ni  toujours  a la  meme  ame.’  In  other  words,
perception  for  Leibniz  was  ‘ I Jcnow,’  ‘ aperception  ’ was  ‘ I knoiv  that
I know.’  Now  Wundt:  ‘When  we  are  conscious  of  a mental  content
{Inhalt),  we  say  that  it  is  perceived  by  us  ; when,  on  the  contrary,
besides  perceiving  it,  we  concentrate  ourselves  upon  it,  so  that  it
stands  out  as  distinctly  as  possible,  we  say  that  it  is  apperceived.
AVhen  the  impression  which  we  perceive  most  distinctly  is  perceived
with  an  effort  of  will  called  attention,  it  is  said  to  be  “ apperceived  ” ’
(condensed  from  Wundt’s  works  by  G.  Villa,  Conteviporary  Psychology,
pp.  214,  235  ff.).

In  both  these  definitions  there  is  to  this  extent  agreement  with  the
Buddhist  j a v a n a -moments  : apperception  is  a fuller  or  more  com-
plete cognition  than  perception  (cf.  Introd.  Essay,  p.  29).  The
relation  with  both  its  terms  is  realized,  and  the  phase  is  understood
as  dehberate  or  voluntary.  The  misfit  arises  in  the  way  this  last
feature  is  envisaged  by  East  and  by  West.  Wundt  sees  will  in  the
effort  of  full  attention.  The  Buddhist  sees  c e t a n a in  the  action  of
javana  on  karma.  As  elsewhere,  it  is  the  afferent  stage  that
interests  the  European,  the  efferent  mystery  that  interests  the  East.

I have  spent  many  hours  over  j a v a n a , and  am  content  to  throw
apperception  overboard  for  a better  term,  or  for  j a van  a,  untrans-
lated and  as  easy  to  pronounce  as  our  own  ‘javelin.’  It  suffices  to
remember  that  it  is  the  mental  aspect  or  parallel  of  that  moment  in
nerve-process,  when  central  function  is  about  to  become  efferent
activity  or  ‘ innervation.’  Teachers  in  Ceylon  associate  it  with  the
he  word  ‘ dynamic.’  And  its  dominant  interest  for  European  psycho-
logists is  the  fusion  of  intellect  and  will  in  Buddhist  psychology,  to
which  I adverted  under  ‘ c e t a n a.’ — Ed.


250


Dasaka


of  the  latter  is  determined  by  that  of  the  object.  If  the
object  be  agreeable,  resultants  of  good  deeds  done  in  a
former  birth  take  part  in  the  process ; otherwise,  resultants
of  bad  deeds.

A process  ending  in  an  act  of  apperception  occurs  to  the
five  classes  of  beings  whose  consciousness-at-rebirth  was
accompanied  by  hedonic  indifference  on  the  happier  planes
of  the  K a m a 1 0 k a,  tchenever  a very  agreeable,  vivid  object
excites  anger.

The  reason  why  retention  does  not  follow'  here  is  that
an  agreeable  object  requires  retention  of  the  joyful  class,
w'hich,  however,  is  incompatible  with  the  class  of  apper-
ception— namely,  that  of  anger  (dosajavana ) — that
obtains.


DiVSAKA  (Decad).

You  take  exception  to  my  use  of  the  modern  term  ‘ cell.’
Of  course,  the  cellular  theory  is  a modern  development.
Nevertheless,  the  physiology  of  the  kalapa’s  (groups,
p.  164)  is  very  similar  to,  if  not  identical  with,  that  of
cells.  Jivita-navaka-kalapa  is  a unitary  mass  of
living  matter.  Add  to  it  sentience  by  way  of  sight,  etc.,
and  we  get  cakkh  u -d  a saka-k  al  apa,  and  so  on.
Add  to  jivita-navaka  sex,  and  you  get  b h a v a -
dasaka.  Add  thought-basis,  and  you  get  ha  day  a -
vatthu-dasaka  (decad  of  the  heart  basis).  Buddhists
speak  in  terms  of  these  dasaka’s  as  so  many  units  in
the  case  of  sentient  beings.  The  units  are  supposed  to  live
for  seventeen  thought-moments — i.e.,  for  fifty-one  thought-
instants,  of  which  the  first  (or  genesis  of  r u p a)  is  termed
j a t i ; the  last,  aniccata  (or  cessation  [b  h a n g a]  of
riipa).  The  forty-nine  intermediate  instants  or  phases
constitute  the  j a r a t a (or  static  [t  h i t i]  stage  of  r u p a).^
Thus  the  static  stage  of  r u p a is  of  longer  duration  than
that  of  c i 1 1 a .

* Cf.  Dh.  S.,  §§  642-5.  Pronounce  the  title-word  das'aka.


Dasaka


251


At  the  moment  of  conception  (or  ‘ re-birth  ’)  or  pati-
s and  hi,  three  k a 1 a p a-units  usually  obtain,  namely,
the  k ii  y a -,  b h a v a -,  h a d a y a - d a s a k a k a 1 a p a ’ s
These,  according  to  certain  laws  of  production  set  forth  in
this  sixth  part  of  the  Compendium,  multiply  themselves.
At  each  successive  moment  these  three  k a 1 a p a ’ s will  be
in  an  advanced  stage,  as  newer  ones  are  formed.  At  the  end
of  the  seventeenth  moment  after  conception  these  initial
kalapa’s  will  have  died  out.  In  this  way  the  older
k a 1 a p a ’ s die  momentary  deaths  (k  h a n i k a - m a r a n a),
the  younger  ones  having  advanced  a stage  further  in  their
own  brief  career.  This  process  of  renewal  or  replacement
of  kalapa’s  goes  on  in  continual  succession  throughout
a lifetime.  At  and  after  the  seventeenth  moment  from
p a t i s a n d h i , some  of  the  kalapa’s  will  be  in
process  of  integration  ; some  will  be  m.ore  or  less  advanced  ;
others  will  be  undergoing  disintegration  or  dissolution.
But  when  life  is  young,  the  procedure  is  favourable  to  new
kalapa’s  being  formed.  Hence  growth  (v  a d d hi).  A
time  comes  when  integration  and  disintegration  balance
each  other.  During  the  latter  part  of  life  there  is  a p/.Hs
tendency'  towards  disintegration.

Usually  a lifetime  is  logically  divided  into  two  periods —
patisandhi  (conception)  and  p a v a 1 1 i (progress  [of
life]).  But  we  may  distinguish  three  phases  : n i b b a 1 1 i
(birth),  V a (1  d h i (growth),  and  p a v a 1 1 i . But  as  these
are  logical  divisions,  we  may  limit  nibbatti  to  pati-
sandhi, or  extend  it  to  include  earlier  foetal  life.  Again,
we  may  include  the  whole,  or  part,  of  the  embryonic  stages
under  vaddhi,  and  extend  v a del  hi  up  to  the  time
when  decay  sets  in.  These  adjustments  do  not  affect  the
general  principle  involved.

Well,  the  jati  {i.c.,  nascent  or  uppada  phase)  of  the
kalapa’s,  formed  during  the  nibbatti  period  of  life
(however  we  may  have  limited  that  period),  would  be
termed  acaya,  and  be  held  comparable  to  the  welling  up


Groups  of  bodily,  sexual,  and  mental  ‘ cells.’


252


Dasaka


of  a reservoir  on  the  river’s  bank.^  Hence  a cay  a and
nibbatti  are  practically  synonymous.  The  j a t i of  the
k a 1 a p a ’ s formed  during  the  v a d d h i-period  (however
we  may  have  limited  it)  would  be  termed  u p a c a y a , and
held  comparable  to  the  brimming  over  of  the  reservoir,
upacaya  and  vaddhi  thus  being  practically  synony-
mous. The  j a t i of  the  k a 1 a p a ’ s formed  during  the
p a V a 1 1 i-period  (however  we  may  have  limited  it)  would
be  termed  santati,  and  held  comparable  to  the  over-
flowing of  the  reservoir,  santati  and  pavatti  thus
being  practically  synonymous.

Ten’eva  paliyap  yo  ayatananaij  acayo  so  rupassa  upacayo  ;
yo  rupassa  upacayo  sa  rupassa  santatiti  vuttaij  (Ledi,
p.  254)  : ‘ For  this  reason,  therefore,  it  is  declared  in  the
Pali  (Pi  takas)  as  follows:  to  ay  a tana’s  (of  sight,
etc.)  there  is  a certain  a cay  a,  and  that  a cay  a is  the
upacaya  of  r li  p a ; to  r ii  p a there  is  a certain  upa-
caya, and  that  upacaya  is  the  santati  of  riipa.’
Here  ayatana’s  correspond  to  the  eye-decads,  etc.,  of
the  Compendium,  p.  164.

Now  acaya  is  not  the  ‘cumulative  effect,’  as  you
make  out  in  your  Dhamma-sangani  translation.^  Ledi
(p.  254)  explains  caya  by  pindavasena  abhi-
n i b b a 1 1 i — ‘ initial  appearance  by  way  of  congeries  or
group  ’ — and  a c a y a as  a synonym  of  nibbatti:  tattha
ekekasantatiyaij  adimhi  santati-sisa-rupanaij  sabba-patha-
map  uppado  nibbatti  nama ; tato  vaddhana-rupanap  up-
pado  vaddhi  nama ; vaddhane  samatte  avaddhitva  paban-
dha-thitivasena  vattana-rupanap  upjjado  pavatti  nama:
tattha  ca  nibbatti-vaddhiyo  upacayo  namo,  pavatti  santati
nama : ‘ here  at  the  beginning  of  each  and  every  series  the
foremost  genesis  of  those  r ii  p a ’ s which  form  the  head  of
such  a series  is  termed  nibbatti.  The  genesis  of  those
r fa  p a ’ s which  grow  after  that  is  termed  vaddhi;  when
growth  has  been  completed,  the  genesis  of  r u p a’s,  which

1 Bud.  Psy.,  p.  195,  n.  2,  where  this  simile  from  Buddhaghosa  is
quoted. — Ed.

2 Bud.  Psy.,  loo.  cit.


Das  aka


253


occur  by  ■way  of  continuity,  without  further  growth,  is
termed  p a v a 1 1 i . Here  nibbatti  and  v a d d h i
together  are  called  u p a c a y a , and  pavatti  is  called
s a n t a t i.’

So  in  our  Compendium  (Part  VI.,  § 2),  a cay  a is  merged
into  upacaya,  to  mean  the  j a t i-phase  of  r u p a ’ s
formed  in  early  life.  And  the  Commentators  set  them-
selves to  explain  what  ‘ early  life  ’ is.  Ledi  e.g.  (p.  254)  :
‘ The  genesis  of  the  r u p a ’ s , at  the  moment  of  conception,
in  beings  of  uterine  birth,  is  termed  upacaya,  because
of  its  foremost  appearance  ; the  genesis  of  the  r u p a ’ s
during  the  interval  from  that  time  till  the  genesis  of  the
first  set  of  eye-decad  k a la  pa’s,  ear-deead  kalapa’s,
etc.,  is  also  termed  upacaya,  because  of  subsequent
growth.  After  that  the  genesis,  throughout  the  lifetime,  of
the  r u p a ’ s of  the  four  series  caused  by  the  four  causes —
kamma,  citta,  utu,  and  a h a r a — is  termed  s a n -
t ati.

For  my  part  I would  apply  upacaya  to  the  genesis  of
th-Q  first  kalapa  of  each  kind  in  the  series,  and  santati
to  all  later  kalapa’s  in  the  same  series.  I will  illustrate
my  meaning  by  the  life  of  an  amoeba.  When  an  amoeba
divides  and  multiplies  itself,  the  genesis  of  the  parent
amoeba  would  be  upacaya,  that  of  each  of  the  later
amoebas  in  the  series  would  be  santati.  Of  course,  the
image  of  this  lowly  organism  did  not  enter  the  heads
of  our  Commentators,  nevertheless,  their  view  is  of  general
applicability,  applying  alike  to  amoeba  and  any  other  units
of  living  matter.  And  I think  it  is  helpful  rather  than  the
contrary  to  interpret  old  terms  by  modern  thoughts,  and
explain  old  thoughts  by  modern  terms  — provided,  of
course,  that  we  do  not  force  new  wine  into  the  old  wine-
skins beyond  what  these  are  able  to  contain.

Take  another  more  pertinent  case.  A has  a son  B,  who
in  turn  has  a son  C,  a grandson  D,  and  a great-grand-
son E.  The  birth  of  A would  be  upacaya,  the  subse-
quent births  santati.  The  mode  of  birth  being  similar
in  all  the  five  cases,  upacaya  and  santati  are  but


2.54


Dasaka


two  different  aspects  of  one  and  the  same  phenomenon  of
birth  (jilti).  They  are  the  same  in  mode,  but  differ  in
time.  Hence,  if  u p a c a y a means  ‘ integration,’  s a n -
tati  means  ‘ continuance  of  integration’  {i.e.,  of  the  one
phenomenon  or  process).  It  is  certainly  not  ‘ continuance
of  what  has  been  integrated.’  It  is  the  continued  integra-
tion, production,  generation,  or  formation  of  the  new
r u p a - k a 1 a p a ’ s.

Hoes  not  this  resemble  the  multiplication,  propagation,
or  proliferation  of  cells  ?

It  should  now  clearly  be  seen  why  j at  i - r up  a goes  by
two  names.  But  j a t i - r u p a is  not  ‘ form  organically
produced.  How  can  the  i)rocess  of  integration  and  re-
integration be  the  product  of  such  a process.  It  = rupassa
jati,  the  birth,  production,  or  generation,  of  riipa.  But
my  note  has  exceeded  due  limits.


DHATU  AND  AYATANA
{With  reference  to  M a n o and  D h a m m a.)

The  Commentaries,  ancient  and  modern,  both  give  the
same  definition  of  d h a t u : attano  sabhavaij  dharetiti
dhatu — ‘ d h a t u is  that  which  bears  its  own  intrinsic
nature.’^

You  ask  me  to  comment  on  this  comment.  Your  own
suggestion  that  dhatu  was  borrowed  by  Buddhism  from
current  metaphysic,  with  an  implication  of  noiimenon,  and
that  nissattatthena  (in  the  sense  of  non-entity),  etc.,
were  added  by  commentators  to  the  definition  to  correct

^ Buddhaghosa,  in  the  Atthasalini,  defines  dhatu  somewhat
differently,  but  so  as  to  throw  some  light  on  this,  to  us,  not  very
obvious  definition — e.g.,  p.  263:  ‘ sabhava-sunnata- nissattatthena
mano  yeva  dhatu  manodhatu.’  This  amounts  to  stating  that  mind
is  an  element — that  is  to  say,  there  is  behind  it  no  more  primal,
noumenal  being  (satta)  or  entity  of  which  it  is  a phenomenal
appearance.  Ni-atthena=not  in  the  sense  of  . . . — Ed.


Dl/atii,  Ajjatana  255

this  implication,  commends  itself  to  me  as  plausible.  We
might  picture  the  modern  chemist,  follower  of  the  electrical
theory  of  matter,  still  calling  chemical  elements  dhatu’s,
but  adding  n i-‘  Daltonian- Atom  ’-a  1 1 h e n a !

But  there  is  a slight  difficulty  in  the  way  of  accepting
your  term  ‘ phenomenal  ultimate.’  If  phenomenon  be
opposed  to  noiimenon  in  the  sense  of  Kant’s  ‘Ding-an-sich,’
I accept.  But  if  ‘ phenomenal  ’ be  opposed  to  ‘ real,’  I
object.

The  definition,  given  in  my  first  sentence,  is  intended  to
exclude  everything  that  has  no  intrinsic  nature,  that  is  not
paramattha-dhamma  (thing  in  its  ultimate  sense,
not  merely  a fiction  of  concept  and  name,  or  pannatti-
d h a m m a’).  Another  definition  of  d h a t u , in  the  Three
Tikd’s,  is  practically  the  same  as  the  foregoing:  salak-
k h a u a ij  d h a r e 1 1 1 i d h a t u,  ‘ d h a t u is  that  which
bears  its  own  characteristic  mark’  (p.  371).  For,  earlier
in  the  same  work  (p.  284),  lakkhaua  is  itself  defined  as
the  samanna-sabhavo^  of  anything;  and  again,  by
Ledi  (p.  387) , as  the  paccatta-sabhavo®  of  anything.
Hence  d h a t u is  a term  applicable  to  every  para-
mattha-dhamma. But  ‘satta,’  ‘jiva,’  in  the
sense  of  ‘ soul,’  of  current  metaphysic,  are  only  names  or
co?icepts  (p anna tti).

Are  we  then  to  look  upon  paramattha-dhamma
as  real,  or  as  phenomenal  ? I think  that  w'e  may  consider
citta,  cetasika,  r up  a,  as  phenomenal.  But  we  have
the  term  Nibbana-dhatu.  And  Buddhists  at  least
must  regard  that  as  real.

Now  as  we  are  at  present  constituted,  we  can  only  hioir
phenomena.  But  we  can  look  upon  phenomena  as  real,
even  if  our  concepts  about  them  change.  Chemical
elements  are  no  longer  looked  upon  as  atoms.  But  they
are  no  less  real  to  us  for  that.  The  sequence  of  cause  and
effect  is  as  real  as  can  be.  We  may  therefore  indulge  in  a

1 Cf.  art.  Attha,  and  p.  81,  n.  1 ; p.  200,  n.  1.

2 The  essence  [in  a given]  designation.

^ Intrinsic,  own  nature. — Ed.


256  Dhatii,  Ayatana

paradoxical  phrase  that  every  phenomenon  is  a reality.  I
think,  then,  that  ‘ element  ’ is  the  best  equivalent  for
dhiitu.  It  is  an  ultimate  (phenomenal  or  real)  which
cannot  be  resolved  into  a simpler  one.

Of  Ayatana  the  Commentaries  give  no  tfewer  than
five  definitions,  according  to  the  different  connections  in
which  this  important  technical  term  is  used.  Of  these  the
following,  taken  from  the  Ceylon  Cy.  (p.  197),  best  apply  to
the  connection  indicated  in  the  title : Ayatanti  ettha  tap
tap  dvai'clrammaua  citta-cetasika  tena  tena  kiccena  ghat-
tenti  vayamahti — ‘ ayatana’s  are  those  [places]  ichere
the  mind  and  mental  properties,  having  such  and  such
doors,  and  such  and  such  objects,  strike  {i.e.,  are  active)  by
such  and  such  functions.’  Hence  sense-organs  and  sense-
objects  are  collectively  termed  ayatana’s  because  they
serve  as  places  or  abodes,  of  meeting,  or  mixing,  or  produc-
tion, for  the  several  senses.

I should  think  that  ayatana  is  another  term  which
might  well  be  left  untranslated,  so  impossible  is  it  to  find
a term  sufiiciently  comprehensive  without  being  too  vague
and  inexpressive.  I do  not  object  to  your  ‘ sphere,’  but  I
do  object  to  ‘ field  of  sight  ’ as  a translation  of  c a k k h a -
yatana.  Cakkhayatana  is  the  seeing  eye  itself,
and  not  the  objective  or  field  of  its  visual  range.  To  say,
for  cakkhayatana,  ‘the  ayatana  of  eye,’ or  ‘eye,
the  ayatana,’  is  alone  correct.  The  same  diction  holds
good  for  i n d r i y a , in  c a k k h u n d r i y a , as  I have
shown  in  the  Compendium  (p.  159,  n.  2).  And  m a n a y a-
t a n a is  similarly  formed : mano  ca  tap  ayatanan  cati
manayatanap,  ‘ mind  the  ayatana.’  The  same  reading
holds  good  for  the  senses  viewed  as  d h a t u ’ s . The  eye,
ear,  etc,,  and  mano  are  each  of  them  the  d h a t u.  Cak-
khadayo  ca  dhamma  . . . dhatuyo  namati  (Ledi,  p.  323).
In  Part  YII.,  § 8 (d),  of  the  triple  terms,  the  first  refers  to
ihe  sense-organ,  the  second  to  the  sense-object,  the  third
to  the  ‘ sense  ’ itself.

Now  mano,  whether  it  be  called  ayatana  or
d h a t u , is  not  to  be  restricted  to  ideation,  but  covers  the


DliaUt,  Aijcitana  257

entire  mind,  presentative  as  well  as  representative.  This
is  clearly  put  in  the  Compendium  (p.  185,  ‘ The  sphere
of  mind,’  etc.),  Cf.  also  Ledi  Sadaw’s  : Tesag'  sabbesag
gocaravisayaggahakag  mano  ti  (p.  322) : ‘ mind  is  capable
of  taking  all  sense-fields  as  its  object.’  Neither  can  d h a m-
mayatana,  dhammadhatu,  be  limited  to  images  and
ideas.  Else  we  find  ourselves  contradicted  by  the  previous
sentence  in  the  Compendium  (p.  184,  ‘ Now  here,’  etc.).

We  may  tabulate  manayatana  thus :

Manayatana


(1)  panca-vin-

(2)  manodhatu

J

(3)  manovinnana'

nana-dhatu

dhatu

= 5

+

1 +

1=  7

1

'h

!

1

10

+

3 +

76  = 89

Thus  manovinnanadhatu  is  a collective  term  for
seventy-six  different  classes  of  consciousness.  And  these
seventy-six  take  part  in  presentative  classes  of  cognition.
E.g.,  in  Part  III.  it  will  be  found  that  forty-six  classes  may
take  part  in  a visual  process,  where  no  conscious  represen-
tation goes  on.  It  is,  in  fact,  difficult  to  get  an  English
word  to  cover  all  these  seventy-six  classes.  I have  used
element  of  apprehension  and  element  of  comprehension,  for
want  of  better  terms,  to  express  (2)  and  (3)  respectivel3^
Thus  under  ‘ apprehension  ’ we  include  (a)  the  ‘ adverting  ’
of  mind  towards  any  of  the  five  ‘ doors  ’ (pancadvara-
vajjana),  and  (b),  (c)  the  two  classes  of  sampatic-
c h a n a , or  mental  ‘ acceptance  ’ of  impressions.  These
cover  all  that  is  called  ‘ bare  minding,’  manana-matta
— i.e.,  the  simpler  kind  of  apprehension,^  as  compared  with
manovinnanadhatu.

Into  this  term  the  word  vinnana  is  inserted  merely
to  distinguish  it  from  the  simpler  manodhatu,  although

^ Part  iii.  of  the  Compendium  shows  that  the  object  of  mano-
dhatu  is  the  sensible.


17


258


Dhatu


all  the  eighty-nine  classes  in  the  foregoing  scheme  are  of  the
viuhanakkhandha.  The  group  it  serves  to  designate
comprises  all  these  eighty-nine  classes  minus  the  ten
covered  by  the  twice  fivefold  sense- d h a t u ’ s and  the  triple
mano-dhatu,  leaving  seventy-six.  But  neither  may
manovinnanadhatu  be  limited  to  coincide  with  the
representative  or  re-representative  cognition  of  European
psychology.  Santirana,  the  (momentary)  stage  of
investigation  following  the  ‘ reception  ’ or  acceptance  of  an
impression,  and  preceding  the  ‘ determining  ’ moment,  is
by  us  considered  as  belonging  to  presentative  consciousness
o}ily.  Nor  have  the  eight  classes  called  ‘ great  resultant  ’
anything  to  do  with  re-representation,  when,  in  the  presen-
tative process,  they  are  active  in  ‘ retention ’ (t  a d - a r a m -
man  a).^

You  have  asked  me  to  state  more  precisely  the  distinction
we  draw  between  the  function  called  mind-door-adverting
(m  a n 0 d V a r a V a j j a n a)  and  sense-door-adverting  (pan-
c a d V a r a V a j j an  a).  The  latter  is  a ‘turning  to’  the
external  sense-stimuli  which  must  be  present  in  presenta-
tive consciousness  (pa  n c a d v a r a - v 1 1 h i).  The  former
is  a turning  to  all  other  objects  named  in  the  first  part  of
my  Essay,  e.g.,  mano  turns  to  the  image  of  a past  sense-
stimulus  in  representative  consciousness ; or  it  may  turn
to  any  idea  or  concept  in  representative  or  reflective  con-
sciousness. But  I have  repeatedly  pointed  out  that  the
consciousness  so  implicated  is  not  necessarily  representa-
tive in  order  to  include  eases  in  which  it  turns  to;  say,
a state  of  anger  presentatively  felt,  or,  to  quote  Mansel,
‘ intuited  in  a presentative  consciousness.’  When  I know

^ It  is  not  easy  for  those  trained  in  physiological  psychology  to
breakthrough  the  relatively  evident,  if  somewhat  materiahstic,  classifi-
cation dividing  presentations  of  sense  fi-om  representative  cognition.
Some  recent  teachers,  however,  have  been  blurring  these  hard  and  fast
lines  for  us.  And  the  regarding,  as  prese7itative,  other  conscious
experience  than  that  which  meets  us  through  channels  of  sense  —
the  regarding,  e.g.,  images  and  concepts  as  other  than  as  rechauffe,
and  re-arranged  and  mediate — may  find  not  uninteresting  this  cognate
theory  in  the  East. — Ed.


Paccaya  and  Paticca-samuppada  259

that  I have  been  angry,  I merely  have  an  idea  of  my
past  angry  state  in  representative  consciousness.  If  you
look  at  the  list  of  dhammarammana’s  in  my  Essay,
you  will  notice  that  some  of  them  can  be  intuited — e.g.,
Nibbana — by  an  Arahant.^


PACCAYA  AND  PATICCA-SAMUPPADA.

The  Ceylon  Commentary  derives  Paccaya  thus :
(karanaij)  paticca  phalam  eti  etasma  ti  paccayo  (202),
‘ that  from  which  the  fruit  (effect)  derived  (from  a cause)
comes.’  I have  been  tempted  to  complete  the  definition
by  adding  k a r a n a ij  (cause).  We  have,  in  k a m m a ,
h e t u , and  paccaya,  three  technical  terms  meaning
k a r a n a ij  . But  paccaya  includes  the  first  two  and
adds  to  them  ; it  includes,  namely,  all  other  circumstances
under  which  an  event  takes  place,  or  a relation  among
things  obtains.

And  paccaya-samaggig  paticca  samag  gantva  phalanag

^ C.f.,  e.g.,  p.  59  with  pp.  68  ff.  My  object  was  to  elicit  quite  clearly
the  extent  to  which  the  functioning  of  mano-dvara  coincided  with  the
Aristotehan  theorizing  about  sensus  communis  and  a sensorium  com-
mune, or  how  it  came  to  pass  that  different  sensations  combined  to
give  us  one  percept — say,  an  orange.  Buddhaghosa’s  description  of  the
mano-dhatu  seems  to  limit  its  range  entirely  to  this  fusion  of
sensory  impressions.  ‘ The  mano-dhatu,’  he  writes  in  AWiasdlim,
263,  ‘has  the  “mark”  of  cognizing  the  five  kinds  of  sense-objects
immediately  after  the  five  kinds  of  sense-impressions  (cakkhu-
vihnanadij;  and  the  “property”  of  receiving  the  same.  Its
“ reeiu’ring  appearance  ” is  truth  (tathabhav  a — lit.,  “ thus-state  ”) ;
its  “proximate  cause  ” is  the  going-off  of  the  sense-impressions  (ap  a-
gamana).  . . . Whatever  door-objects  come  together,  the  basis  of
manodhatu — i.e.,  the  heart — is  the  locus  having  the  function  of
receiving  them.’  Cf.  supra,  p.  116  (d).  Cf.  also  the  Kaushitahi
Upanishacl : ekabhuyag  prana  gacchanti,  ‘ the  vital  forces
go  into  unity,  otherwise  no  man  were  able  to  bring  into  consciousness
(p  r a j n a p a y i t.u  p)  name  by  speech,  form  by  the  eye,  sound  by  the
ear,  thought  (dhyanap)  by  the  mind  (manas).  But  inasmuch
as  the  vital  forces  go  into  unity,  all  these  (things)  are  one  by  one
(ekaika)  brought  into  consciousness:  when  speech  speaks  all  the
vital  forces  speak  after  (Deussen — i.e.,  with)  it,’  and  so  on.  According
to  Max  Muller,  prana  in  the  plural  (vital  forces)  stands  for  the


260


Paccaya

uppado  etasmati  paticca-samuppado  : ‘paticca-sam-
u p p a d a is  that  from  which  [there  is]  the  arising  of  the
fruits  coming  (or  derived)  from  a conjuncture  of  circum-
stances ’ (Ceylon  Cy.,  201).

All  the  Burmese  texts,  including  Bye’s  edition,  read
tabbhavabhavi-bhava,  with  short  a (p.  187,  n.  4,  of
Manual).  The  Ceylon  Commentary  paraphrases  the  term
by  ‘ tassa  paccaya-dhammassa  bhavena  bhavana-silassa
bhavo’ : ‘ the  occurrence  of  the  habitual  happening  on  {lit.,
by)  the  occurrence  of  a paccaya-dhamma,  or  circum-
stance under  which  a relation  obtains.’

And  Ledi  Sadaw  writes  (p.  332)  : tasmiij  tasmiij  pticcaya-
dhamme  bhave  vijjamane  sati  te  te  bhavanti  silena  ti
tabbhavabhavino  sankhatadhamma ; tesaij  bhavo  tabbha-
vabhavi-bhavo.  imasmiij  sati  idap  hoti ; imassa  uppada
idag  uppajjatiti  evaij  pavatto  sankhatadhamma-niyamo :
‘ On  the  happening  of  a causal  — i.e.,  indispensable —
antecedent  phenomenon  (p  a c c a y a d h a m m a)  certain
[effects]  which  happen  inevitably  (sllena^by  way  of
habit)  are  termed  tabbhavabhavl — i.e.,  the  condi-
tioned things  (which  follow  antecedent  causes) ; the  cause
(bhavo)  of  these  things  is  t a b b h a v a b h a v i b h a v o .
When,  namely,  this  [cause]  happens,  there  is  that  [effect] ;
because  this  [cause]  occurs,  that  [effect]  arises.  Thus  we
get  [the  Niyama,  that  is]  the  constancy,  rule,  law,  or
uniformity  of  conditioned  things.’  The  Commentators  had,
doubtless,  in  their  minds  the  canonical  evaij-dham-
m a t a - n a y a (or  method  of  ‘ thus  is  the  norm  ’I’- — the
law  by  which  like  effects  follow  like  causes.


five  senses.  Now,  according  to  this  Upanishad — and  it  ranks
among  the  pre-Buddhistic  U panishad s — p r ana,  in  the  singular
— that  is,  ‘breath’ — is  no  other  than  prajha,  consciousness,  or
soul,  or  at  man,  whose  seat  is  the  heart,  man  as  being  merely  a
function  of  the  soul,  like  the  five  senses.  The  Buddhists  retained
m a n o as  a sixth  sense,  but  assigned  it,  at  the  same  time,  the  position
of  referee,  occupied,  in  the  doctrines  they  opposed,  by  the  a 1 1 a they
rejected,  or,  at  least,  rejected  under  the  character  assigned  to  it  by
Atmanists. — Ed.

1 Cf.  Digha-Nikdya,  ii.,  12/.  (Mahapadana  Suttant a). — Ed.


Paticca-samuppada  261

The  two  b ha  V a’s  refer  to  the  antecedent  phenomenon
as  a cause.  The  b h a v I refers  to  the  consequent  pheno-
menon as  effect.  Or,  according  to  the  Ceylon  Commen-
tary, the  last  bhava  means  ‘happening.’  The  meaning
should  be : ‘Of  these,  the  former.  A,  is  a mode  marked  by
the  simple  condition  of  the  invariable  happening  of  a
phenomenon  (event,  thing,  circumstance)  on  the  occurrence
of  its  sole  invariable  antecedent  phenomenon  (event,  thing,
circumstance) .

The  positive  aspect  of  causation  is  here  alone  referred  to.
We  are  dealing  with  samuppada,  the  ‘arising’  of
effects  through  presence  of  a cause.  The  Ceylon  Commen-
tary points  out,  however,  that  the  negative  aspect  of  causa-
tion is  implied  though  not  expressed  ; ‘ eten’eva  tad-abha-
vabhavakaramattopalakkhitata  pi  atthato  dassita  hoti  ’
(p.  202).  The  Ceylon  Commentator  had  evidently  the
truth  formulated,  for  English  thought,  in  J.  S.  Mill’s
‘ klethod  of  Difference  ’ {Logic,  III.,  viii.)  in  his  mind.

The  word  thiti  (p.  187,  n.  5)  is  used  synonymously
with  p a c c a y a , and  is  best  rendered  by  ‘ occasion.’  So
the  Ceylon  Commentary : titthati  phalag  ettha  tadayatta-
vuttitayati  thiti.  Ahacca  visesetva  pavatta  paccayasan-
khata  thiti  ahacca-paccaya-thiti  (p.  202) ; ‘ That  by  depen-
dence upon  which  the  effect  (fruit)  stands  is  called  the
“ occasion.”  In  any  relation  the  distinctive,  conspicuous,
or  “striking”  causal  circumstance  is  the  occasion  that  is
called  ‘ p a c c a y a .’  In  the  title  of  Part  VIII.  we  have
rendered  p a c c a y a by  ‘ relation.’  So  far  so  good.  But
when  opposed  to  paccayuppanna,  paccaya  is
‘ relating  thing  ’ as  opposed  to  ‘ related  thing  ’ (See  Introd.
Essay,  p.  2).  Of  any  pair  of  correlates,  paccaya
is  the  more  ‘ striking  ’ of  the  two,  that  which  appears  as
force  or  power — that  which,  as  it  were,  renders  service  :
upakarakata-sankhato  (Ledi  Sadaw,  p.  332).
There  are,  for  instance,  many  circumstances  necessary  to
the  discharge  of  a gun,  both  in  the  gun  itself,  the  charge,
the  environment,  and  the  agency  working  the  gun.  That
which  we  select  as  the  most  striking  occasion  of  the


262


Paccaya

explosion  we  call  paccaya.  Now  the  psychological
aspect  and  ultimate  of  ‘ ignorance  ’ (a  v i j j a)  is  m o h a ,
one  of  the  three  evil  hetu’s.  And  in  momuha-
cittani,  mo  ha  acts  with  the  ‘ conspicuous  ’ force  of  a
paccaya.  None  the  less,  by  the  foregoing,  it,  as
paccaya,  is  only  one  among  a group  of  conditions  or
causal  circumstances  necessary  to  the  production  of  an
effect  (namely,  of  the  s a n k h a r a).

The  anomaly  in  the  Paticca-samuppada,  of
‘ becoming  ’ jjrecedinp  ‘birth,’  is  due  to  the  faulty  render-
ing of  the  word  ‘bhava,’  which  is  used  in  different
senses.  I give  the  Commentary  (pp.  203,  204)  : kamma-
bhavo  upapatti-bhavo  ti  duvidho  bhavo.  Tattha  pathamo
bhavati  etasma  phalan  ti  bhavo ; so  kamavacarakusala
kusaladi  vasena  ekunatigsavidho ; dutiyo  pana  bhavatiti
bhavo ; so  kamabhavadi  vasena  navavidho.  (Jpadana-
paccaya  bhavo  ti  c’ettha  upapatti-bhavo  pi  adhippeto ;
bhavapaccaya  jatiti  kammabhavo  va ; so  hi  jatiya  paccayo
hoti,  na  itaro : bhava  is  twofold — k ammabhava
and  upapattibhava.^  The  former  is  that  from
which  the  fruit  or  effect  happens ; it  is  twenty-nine-fold
(referring  to  the  twenty-nine  c e t a n a ’s  previously  termed
s a n k h a,  r a),  to  wit,  good  and  bad  karma  of  the
K a m a 1 0 k a , etc.  But  the  latter  is  ninefold,  to  wit,
Kama-,  Eupa-,  Arupa-bhava,  etc.  In  the  phrase
‘upadanapaccaya  bhavo’  the  latter  kind  of
bhava  is  meant.  But  in  bhavapaccaya  jati  the
former,  or  kamma-bhava,  is  meant.  It,  indeed,  and
nothing  else,  is  the  only  cause  of  jati.

Perhaps  the  appended  diagram  will  serve  to  illustrate
the  meaning  better  than  so  many  words.  It  must  be
borne  in  mind  that  Paticca-samuppada  is  a
Vatta-katha  (discourse  on  evil),^  hot  a theory  of  the

^ I.e,,  existence  on  its  active  side,  shaping  the  present  and  future,
and  existence  on  its  passive  or  resultant  side,  as  shaped  and  deter-
mined by  the  past. — Ed.

^ Lit.,  on  the  Round— 2!.e.,  of  s a p s a r a. — Ed.


The  Wheel  of  L^e.


4f


To  faw  j).  263.]


Paticca-samuppada  263

evolution  of  the  world  from  primordial  matter.  Even  as  a
theory  of  the  origin  of  evil,  it  does  not  attempt  to  show  the
absolute  origin  of  evil ; it  only  shows  how  evils  originate.
And  so  life  is  taken  as  it  is.

For  the  purpose  of  the  discourse  it  was  held  sufficient  to
take  any  three  consecutive  existences,’-  considered  as  past,
present,  and  future,  as  shown  in  the  innermost  circle.
Now,  although  in  each  existence  there  are  always  two  sides
(kamma-bhava,  upapatti-bhava^)j  for  the  pur-
poses of  the  discourse  it  was  sufficient  to  consider  the
kamma-bhava  of  the  past,  the  upapattibhava
of  the  future,  and  existence  as  a whole  in  the  present.
This  is  shown  in  the  circle  next  to  the  innermost.^  In
each  of  these  four  sections  or  ‘ layers  ’ there  are  five
conditions  (numbered  1 to  5),  making  up  the  ‘ twenty
conditions.’'’  Of  these  ticenty,  however,  only  twelve  are
expressly  named  as  A n g a ’ s or  N i d a n a ’ s (shown  in  the
outermost  circle  and  numbered  with  Roman  figures).  And
why  ? Because,  with  reference  to  past  existence,  the  mere
mention  of  avijja  implies  tanha  and  u pad  an  a,
these  three  never  existing  apart ; again,  because  the  mention
of  s a n k h a r a implies  k a m m a , the  latter  being  merely
a development  out  of  the  former,  which  has  been  shown  to
be  practically  c e t a n a , the  germ  of  k a m m a (or  bare
element  of  conation).  Hence  these  two  A n g a ’ s — a v i j j a
and  s a n k h a r a — virtually  exhaust  the  kamma-bhava
of  the  past.

Now,  the  kamma-bhava  of  the  past  determines  the
upapatti-bhava  of  the  present  (as  is  shown  in  the
diagram  by  an  arrow).  The  upapatti-bhava  of  the
present  must  begin  with  rebirth-consciousness.  But  the
latter  can  never  exist  by  itself  apart  from  its  n a m a
(mental  properties  or  concomitants),  and  is  accompanied
by  its  karma-  born  body.  All  the  five  factors  of  the

^ Called  tayo  addha  (three  periods).

2 Cf.  Pt.  VIII.,  § 5 (2,  3).

2 Called  catu  sankhepa  (four  layers).

Called  Visatakara.


264


Pannatti,  vinhatti


upapatti-bhava  of  present  existence  are  fully  men-
tioned. But  when  we  come  to  the  corresponding  kamma-
b h a V a , we  mention  only  the  three,  leaving  the  others  to
be  understood  by  implication.

Now,  this  kamma-bhava  must  necessarily  deter-
mine the  upapatti-bhava  of  the  future  (shown  in
the  diagram  by  an  arrow).  Here  a single  word — jati —
is  used  to  cover  all  the  five  factors.  Jara-marana  is
added  to  show  that  it  is  the  usual  accompaniment  of
jati.

The  ‘ three  connections  ’ (ti  sandhi)  are  shown  by  thick
lines.  The  first  and  third  connections  are  between  separate
existences  ; the  second  is  between  two  factors  in  the  same
existence.  The  ‘ four  groups  ’ are  : one  causal  group  in  the
past ; one  resultant  group  and  one  causal  group  in  the
present ; one  resultant  group  in  the  future.


PANNATTI,  VINNATTI.

I have  discussed  the  former  term  at  length  in  my  Introd.
Essay,  and  have  tried  to  show  that  the  word  covers  both
name-and-notion  (or  term-and-concept)  and  also  a great
range  of  concepts  or  ideas — anyv/ay,  I have  used  the  term
‘ concept,’  in  default  of  a better  English  word,  rather
loosely  to  cover  many  classes  of  what  with  us  are  called
pannatti’s.

But  pannatti  must  not  be  confounded  with  vin-
u a 1 1 i . The  two  are  as  the  poles  asunder.  Vinnatti
is  a r ii  p a and  a p a r a m a 1 1 h a - d h a m m a to  which
paiinatti-dhamma  is  opposed.  Vinnatti  is  that
peculiarity  or  difference,  (v  i k a r a)  which  constitutes  the
imrjjosive  character  of  a sign,  i.e.,  the  movement  of  body
or  vocal  organs,  by  which  its  purposive  character  is  known
and  its  meaning  is  made  known  (Ceylon  Cy.,  p.  171).

Pannatti  is  not  concept  plus  expression,  but  it  may

^ Classed  as  r up  a in  Dh.  S.,  § 596.  Translated,  in  Bud.  Psy.  by
‘ intimation  ’ (by  act  or  by  speech),  pp.  173,  192,  193, — Ed.

® See  Appendix,  A 1 1 h a , and  cf.  p.  6.


Patthana  265

be  concept  or  term,  notion  or  name,  according  to  the
context.

Vaci-vinnatti  is  not  ‘ word,’  but  is  the  peculiarity
(v  i k a r a)  of  word,  when  this  is  used  as  a sign  for  the
hearer  to  understand  the  speaker’s  meaning.  Every  spoken
word  does  not  possess  this  peculiarity ; but  as  soon  as  a
man  wishes  to  communicate  his  wish  to  another  by  word,
then  only  does  that  word  have  vaci-vihhatti.  Simi-
larly with  gestures.  Every  movement  does  not  possess  the
peculiar  character  usually  manifested  in  beckoning,  nodding,
etc.  But  as  soon  as  a man  wishes  to  communicate  with
another  by  showing  signs,  the  movements  he  employs  then
possess  the  character  of  kaya-vinnatti.


patthana.

According  to  the  Ceylon  Commentary  : nanappakaranani
thanani  paccaya  etthatyadina  patthanaij  ; ananta-naya-
samanta-patthana-maha-pakaranaij  : ‘ That  in  ivhicJi  the
various  circumstances  under  which  relations  obtain  [are
treated  of]  is  termed  Patthana  — i.e.,  the  “Great
Treatise,’’  in  which  infinite  modes  of  universal  relations
are  dealt  with  ’ (p.  201).  Or  more  directly  expressed  by
Ledi  Sadaw  (p.  332)  : patthapeti  sankhatadhamme  nana-
pakarehi  paccaya-bhedehi  pavatteti  deseti  etthati  pattha-
naij, maha-pakaranaij  : ‘ The  great  treatise  “Patthana”
arranges  conditioned  things  under  various  kinds  of  rela-
tions, describes,  and  teaches  them.’


BHAYANGA.

In  this  term  (which  of  course  = bhavassa  angaij)
the  Commentators  explain  anga  to  mean,  not  ‘part,’  but
karana — the  cause,  reason,  or  indispensable  condition.
In  Childers’s  Dictionary  ‘ cause  ’ is  given  as  one  meaning  of
anga.  And  by  b h a v a n g a we  mean  the  cause,  reason,
indispensable  condition,  of  our  being  regarded  subjectively


266


Bhavanga

as  continuous ; the  sine  qua  non  of  our  existence,  that
without  which  one  cannot  subsist  or  exist  (Ceylon  Cy.,
p.  104).

Primarily  bhavanga  means  function.  Ledi  Sadaw
(p.  Ill)  explains  it  as  the  function  of  being,  by  reason  of
which  the  passive  side  of  existence  (u  p a p a 1 1 i - b h a v a)
continuously  exists  so  long  as  the  janaka-kamma
(Manual,  Part  V.,  § 8)  of  the  past,  w'hich  caused  that
existence,  lasts.  Thus  the  Commentators  use  upapatti-
b h a V a to  show  that  bhavanga  does  not  belong  to  the
category  of  kamma-bhava  to  which  j a v a n a belongs.

Secondarily  bhavanga  denotes  a functional  state
(or  moment)  of  subconsciousness.  As  such  it  is  the
subconscious  state  of  mind — ‘ below  the  threshold  ’ of
consciousness — by  which  we  conceive  continuous  subjective
existence  as  possible.  Thus  it  corresponds  to  P.  W.  Myers’s
‘ subliminal  consciousness.’

There  is  a grain  of  truth  no  doubt  in  the  Cartesian
‘ cogito  ergo  sum,’  as  well  as  in  the  Hegelian  ‘identity’  of
thought  and  being.  But  in  Buddhist  philosophy,  being,
which  is  V i t h i m u 1 1 a , or  process-free — that  is,  b h a -
V a n g a — is  contrasted  with  thought,  which  is  essentially
vithi  (vithi-citta).  And  the  dividing-line  between
being  (bhavanga)  and  thought  is  the  ‘threshold’  of
consciousness.  Or,  to  use  Buddhist  metaphors,  the
‘ stream  ’ of  being  is  contrasted  with  the  ‘ door  ’ of  mind.
And  mano-dvara  happens  when  bhavanga  is
‘ cut  off  ’ (b  h a V a n g u p a c c h e d a)  or  arrested.

There  are  nineteen  different  classes  of  bhavanga-
subconsciousness  described  in  Part  I.  of  the  Manual.  Of
these,  only  ten,  it  is  held,  are  possible  in  Kamaloka,
five  in  E ii  p a 1 0 k a , and  four  in  Arupaloka.  And
only  one  class  at  a time  is  possible  for  each  individual
being.  A flow  of  momentary  states  of  sub-(liminal)  con-
sciousness of  such  a particular  class  constitutes  the  stream
of  being.  And  as  the  beginning  and  end  of  a stream  are
distinguished  as  source  and  mouth,  though  composed  of
the  same  watery  material  as  the  body  of  the  stream,  so  the


267


Bhavanga

initial  and  final  points  of  a particular  stream  of  being  are
termed  rebirth  and  death.  In  other  words,  the  p a t i -
sandhi-,  cuti-,  and  bhavanga-citta’s  of  an
individual  life  are  of  one  and  the  same  class.  They  are
alike  in  respect  of  their  cause  or  conditions  precedent
(sank  ha  r a),  their  component  parts  (sampayutta-
d h a m m a)  and  their  object  (a  r a m m a n a).  They  differ
only  in  function.  The  stream  is  liable  to  be  interrupted
constantly  by  thought  (vlthi-citta  or  processed  con-
sciousness), but  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  a sub-plane /ro»i
^L'hicli  thoughts  ‘ rise  to  the  surface  ’ (see  Introd.  Essay,
pp.  11,  12).  Buddhist  writers  often  drop  the  word  stream,
‘sot a,’ when  referring  to  the  stream  of  being,  under-
standing it  by  the  context,  as  in  the  expression  ‘ b h a -
vanga-pato’  — ‘subsidence  into  . . . being.’  It  is
sot  a which  conveys  the  idea  of  flux,  not  bhavanga.
Of  what  is  the  flux  ? Of  bhavanga-citta’s,  or
momentary  states  of  subconsciousness  performing  the
function  of  being  subjectively  conceived  as  a stream.  For
although  we  may  use  ‘ being  ’ as  the  etymological  equiva-
lent of  bhu-t-anga,  the  term  should  always  be  under-
stood subjectively,  somewhat  after  the  manner  of  Hegel,
and  never  objectively.

"When  a being  is  conceived,  Buddhist  belief  gives  him  a
congenital  mind,  simultaneously  with  the  inception  of
physical  growth,  as  the  resultant  of  the  past  j a n a k a -
(generative)  k a m m a . That  mind,  at  the  moment  of
conception,  is  but  a bare  state  of  subconsciousness,  identical
with  the  more  adult  bhavanga  - consciousness  during
dreamless  sleep.  And  this  state  of  subconscious  vitality
is  endowed  or  informed  potentially  with  h e t u ’ s , good
or  bad.^

^ Bhavanga,  as  a philosophical  term,  occurs  in  the  Ablddhamnia-
Pitaha,  viz., in  Tika-Patthuna  (P  a h h a v a r a)  : — . . . bhavangag
avajjanaya  . . . anantarapaccayena  paccayo.  The
translator  has  sent  me  this  most  interesting  reference  since  my  note  2,
on  p.  9,  was  printed.  I had  searched  the  Tika-P.  in  ilS.,  but  had
overlooked  it.  — Ed.


268


jyiahabh  iitci


Foreign  Element  in  the  Vital  Contimmm.

(Agantuka-bhavang  a).’-

In  the  case  of  the  four  classes  of  beings  whose  conscious-
ness-at-rebirth  was  accompanied  by  joy,  a foreign  element
of  vital  continuum  intervenes  as  a sort  of  connective  principle
between  the  apperception  of  anger  and  the  normal  vital
continuum,  as  when  they  are  offended  with  a very  agreeable
object.  As  in  the  previous  case  retention  cannot  operate.
Neither  can  the  apperception  of  anger  be  immediately
followed  by  the  normal  vital  continuum,  because  the  latter
is  of  the  jo3dul  class.  The  passage  from  a state  of  anger
to  one  of  joy  would  be  too  abrupt  without  the  mediation  of
a lieclonicallg  indifferent  element,  which  acts  as  a sort  of
buffer  between  two  opposing  natures.  Therefore,  any  one
of  the  six  Kamaloka  continua  accompanied  by  hedonic
indifference  may  intervene,  having  for  its  object  any
Kama-object  which  had  been  habitually  experienced  in
life.  The  six  hedonically  indifferent  vital  continua  are
7 and  15  of  § 4,  and  3,  4,  7,  and  8 of  § 6,  Part  I.  of  the
Compendium.  (See  Part  V.,  § 4,  and  cf.  § 9,  Part  IV.).


MAHABHUTA.

{The  Main  Principles  or  Essentials  of  Matter.)

I must  here  differ  from  you  in  your  choice  of  earthy,  lam-
bent, gaseous,  fluid,  etc.^  We  are  dealing  now  not  with  the
states  of  matter  as  met  with  in  nature,  but  with  p)roperties
of  matter  common  to  all  the  states  in  which  matter  is  met
with.  If  Buddhist  teaching  instances  earth,  water,  fire,
and  air,  this  is  only  because,  in  those  four,  the  proj)erties  of
pathavi,  apo,  tejo,  and  v a y o preponderate.  But
pathavi-adhika,^  apo-adhika  substances  and
• the  like  are  not  themselves  pathavi,  apo,  etc.  Greek

1 Cf.  p.  131,  n.  1.

2 Bud.  Psy.,  pp.  xlvii.,  197,  241-3.

2 J.e.,  preponderating  in  pathavi.


Mahabhiita


269


philosophy  must  have  influenced  you  in  the  choice  of  the
dictionary  meanings  of  these  terms.  But  we  must  not
sacrifice  ]3hilosophical  to  historical  interest.  We  must  get
at  the  ideas  of  the  Buddhists  as  distinct  from  those  of  the
Greeks.  Let  us  hear  the  Commentators  : Apeti  sahajata-
rupani  pattharati ; appayati  va  bruheti  vaddhetiti  apo
(Ce3don  Cy.,  p.  167)  : ‘Apo  is  that  which  diffuses
itself  throughout  its  co-existent  qualities ; or  that  which
increases  the  bulk  of  them.’  There  is  no  mention  here  of
watery  element  (a  p o).  Again  (Ledi  Sadaw,  p.  240) :
Apeti  sahajatarupani  byapetva  titthati;  appayati  vatani
sutthu  bruheti  vaddhetiti  apo  ; tani  va  avippakinnani  katva
bhuso  pati  rakkhati ; pivati  va  pivanto  viya  tani  sangan-
hati  sampindetiti  apo.  ‘ 1 p o is  that  which  locates  itself
by  pervading  its  co-existent  qualities  ; or  that  which  greatly
increases  their  bulk ; apo  is  that  which  heaps  them  well
together,  without  allowing  them  to  be  scattered  about ; or
that  which  imbibes  (absorbs)  them,  or  that  which  holds  or
collects  them  together,  as  it  were,  by  imbibition.’

The  last  etymology  is  strained,  since  water  is  not  that
which  imbibes  but  that  which  is  imbibed.  At  any  rate,
whether  apo  is  derived,  according  to  the  alternatives
given  by  the  Commentaries  from  apeti,  appayati,
pati,  or  pivati,  tradition  in  both  Ceylon  and  Burma
tends  to  the  doctrine  that  apo  is  ‘ cohesion  ’■ — -b  a n d h a -
nattaij  rupassa  {Dli.  S.,  § 652).^  If  a mass  is  kept
together  by  the  force  of  cohesion,  and  if  you  remove  that
force  by  splitting  the  mass  into  fragments,  what  is  left  in
those  fragments  ? Cohesion.  So,  too,  if  the  fragments
are  reduced  to  smaller  particles,  we  find  cohesion  inhering
down  to  the  last  indivisible  atoms.  This  justifies  the
phrases,  ‘ difi'uses  or  locates  itself  by  pervading  its  co-exist-
ent qualities.’  That  a large  body  is  built  up  of  smaller
bodies  by  cohesion  justifies  the  phrase  ‘ increases  the  bulk
of  them.’  That  a mass  of  matter  is  held  together  by
cohesion  justifies  the  remaining  phrases.

1 So  Buddhaghosa  in  commenting  on  this  passage,  Asl.,  p.  335.
The  punctuation  needs  some  amending  in  the  P.T.S.  edition.— Ed.


270


JSIahahhuta


1 am  a^^'al’e  that  paggharana-sabhava,  or  fluidity,  is
regarded  as  the  characteristic  mark  (1  a k k h a n a)  of  water,’-
cohesion  being  looked  upon  as  its  function  (k  i c c a).  But
if  we  bear  in  mind  that  air  possesses  still  more  fluidity  than
water,  p a g g h a r a n a no  more  distinctively  suggests
water  than  it  suggests  air.  Buddhist  writers  speak  of
fluid  in  connection  with  a p o much  as  we  often  speak
of  magnetism  or  electricity  as  a ‘fluid.’  They  do  instance
water  as  an  apo-adhika  substance  {i.e.,  preponder-
antly cohesive).  I am  aware  that  physicists  hold  there  is
more  cohesion  in  solids,  and  that  their  firmness  is  due
precisely  to  this.  But  Buddhist  philosophy  considers
firmness  or  hardness  (k  a k k h a 1 a 1 1 a)  as  the  character-
istic mark  of  solids  (pathavi),  for,  however  apparently
cohesive  a solid  may  be,  once  it  is  broken  up  its  original
cohesiveness  is  gone  and  there  is  no  recohesion.  But  a
liquid  cannot  be  divided  without  tending  to  recoalesce.
It  is  true  that  air  or  gas  behaves  in  the  same  way  to
a certain  extent,  but  its  capacity  of  expansion  without
limit  tends  to  counteract  the  force  of  the  cohesion  holding
the  particles  of  air  or  gas  together.  And  so  Buddhist
philosophy  reserves  air  as  the  type  of  mobility  (v  a y o =
motion).

Tejo  is,  of  course,  heat,  including  cold,  or  relative
absence  of  heat.  Cold  is  not  known  to  Buddhist  thought
as  a force  distinct  from  heat.  ‘ Lambent  ’ and  ‘ fiery  ’ may
only  fit  occasionally  in  popular  phraseology.  Tejo  is  the
element  which  matures,  sharpens,  intensifies,  or  imparts
heat  to  the  other  three  Essentials.

V a y 0 is  defined  as  ‘ that  which,  as  the  condition  of
motion  to  another  place,  brings  about  the  impact  of  one
Essential  with  another.’^  Again,  in  Ledi’s  words,  ‘that
which  vibrates  or  oscillates ; that  which,  as  a condition  of
motion  in  space,  moves  the  series  of  elements  to  a different
place,  or  carries  its  co-existent  qualities  from  place  to  place  ’

^ Dh.  S.,  loc.  cit.

2 Vayati  desantar-uppatti  - hetubhavena  bhutasanghatag  papetiti
vayo  (Ceylon  Cy.,  p.  167).


Rupa  271

(p.  240).  These  comments  point  to  ‘ motion  ’ as  the  mean-
ing of  V a y 0 .

I suggest,  therefore,  in  English  versions  of  these  four
terms  in  our  ‘ natural  philosophy,’  the  renderings  : — the
element  of  extension,  the  element  of  cohesion,  the  element
of  heat,  the  element  of  motion.  I prefer  the  first  to  your
‘ extended  element.’  We  Buddhists  mean  the  concept
extension,  not  extended  things,  or  things  as  tending  to
occupy  space.  We  are  here  concerned  with  action,  not
agent.  What  I have  said  on  definitions  of  agency  and  of
state  (Introd.  Essay,  pp.  2,  7)  applies  to  all  our  philo-
sophical ideas.


EUPA.

I take  objection  to  r u p a being  rendered  by  ‘ form.’
Used  for  rupa  in  the  Suttas  and  in  popular  language
the  term  may  be  correct  enough.  But  it  is  not  always
safe  to  render  a Pali  word  by  one  and  the  same  English
word  everywhere  without  reference  to  the  idea  to  be
conveyed.  As  used  in  Abhidhamma,  rupa,  in  its  generic
sense  (quite  apart  from  its  specific  sense  of  object  of
sight)  means  ‘that  which  changes  its  form  under  the
physical  conditions  of  heat,  cold,  etc.’^  When  we  say
that  matter  changes  its  form,  or  passes  from  one  form  to
another,  we  mean  that  it  assumes  different  shapes  or
figures.  Now  any  one  of  these  would  be  called  san-
thana-pannatti  (not  rupa),  and  is  inferentially
known  in  any  one  of  the  sequel  of  thought-processes
described  in  my  Essay.  ‘ Matter,’  therefore,  matches  well
enough  with  rupa,  just  as  mind  matches  with  citta  or
mano.  Nama-rupa  is  hence  better  rendered  by
mind  and  body  than  by  ‘ name  and  form.’  Here,  again,
pioneer  students  have  confounded  the  grammatical  n a m a
(name)  with  the  psychological  nama  (mind).  Etymo-

^ See  the  Three  Ttkd's,  p.  59.


272  Rupa

logically  the  word  is  no  doubt  identical,  meaning  to  bend,
or  tend  towards.

Another  objection  to  the  use  of  ‘ form  ’ for  rupa  is  the
ambiguity  of  form.  In  European  philosophy  it  has  been
contrasted  with  matter,  and,  when  so  contrasted,  form  is
considered  as  a constant  element  as  contrasted  with  the
shifting  shapes  of  matter.

If  it  be  objected  that  matter  suggests  the  hypothesis
of  substance,  there  are  sufficient  indications  in  the  Manual
(Part  VI.)  to  show  that  we  understand  rupa  in  the
Berkeleian  sense.  The  twenty- eight  ‘ properties  of  matter  ’
(§§  3-5)  are  really  qualities  of  body.  And  rupayatana
(§  4)  = r u p a r a m m a n a (Part  III.,  § 10)  = vanna-
y a t a n a^  is  the  one  dassanarujja,  or  visible
object.  This  object  of  sight  is  not  ‘ form,’  which  both  for
Buddhist  and  for  European  psychology  is  not  so  much
‘ seen  ’ as  inferentially  known,  but  mere  colour  (v  a n n a)
— i.e.,  coloured  surface  or  extension — i.e.,  v a n u a plus
pathavi  (see  Essentials).  ‘Form’  therefore  is  not
strictly  visible,  but  is  a dhammarammana  (or  san-
t h a n a - p a ii  n a 1 1 i : appearance-concept),  inferentially
known  in  one  of  the  ‘ sequels  ’ of  the  process  of  sight.
A santhana-pannatti-vithi  has  to  intervene,
building  on  the  bare  messages  of  coloured  extension.

It  may  interest  you  to  note  the  following  quotation  from
the  K h a n d h a - Y a m a k a in  the  Ahhidhanuna-pitaka  :
rupaij  rupakkhandho  ti  [pucchayaij  sati^]  ? Piyarupay
satarupaij  rupay,  na  rupakkhandho.  Rupakkhandho  rupan
ceva  rupakkhandho  ca.  Na  rupakkhandho  na  rupan  ti
[pucchayay  sati  ? Piyarupay  satarupay  na  rupakkhandho
rupay.  Rupan  ca  rupakkhandhan  ca  thapetva  avasesa
na  ceva  rupay  na  ca  rupakkhandho.  ‘ Does  [everything
that  is  called]  rupa  [belong  to]  the  “material  group?”

^ ‘ The  eye  . . . gives  us  perception  of  light  and  colour,  gifts
peculiarly  its  own.’  All  other  elements  m vision  ‘are  the  work  of
sight  on  a basis  of  touch’  . . . ‘perceiving  by  way  of  inference.’
G.  C.  Eobertson,  Elements  of  Psychology,  pp.  122

2 ‘ If  it  be  asked  — a Commentarial  gloss. — Ed.


Sanlxhara


273


[The  eighty-one  worldly  classes  of  consciousness  and
their  concomitants  called]  r u p a that  is  “ attractive  ” and
“ pleasant  ” are  called  r u p a,  but  they  do  not  belong  to
the  “ material  group.”  The  twenty-eight  material  qualities
(Manual,  Part  YI.,  §§  2,  3)  that  go  to  make  up  the  material
group  are  designated  r u p a , and  they  belong  also  to  the
“ material  group.”  ’

‘ [Again]  is  anything  that  does  not  belong  to  the  “ material
group  ” ever  called  r u p a ? [such  is  the  question.]  Things
attractive  and  desirable  are  called  r u p a , though  they  do
not  belong  to  the  “ material  group.”  Those  things  and
that  group  apart,  the  remainder  [viz.,  the  eight  classes  of
transcendental,  i.e.,  lokuttara,  consciousness,  and
their  concomitants,  and  Nibbana]  are  neither  called  r u p a,
nor  do  they  go  to  make  up  the  material  group.’

That  r u p a , in  the  Pitakas,  was  used  to  express  states
of  mind  may  well  shock  the  literalist,  who  would  use
wooden  consistency  in  translating  terms.  In  its  generic
sense,  rupa,  as  a philosophic  term,  means  matter,  and
in  its  specific  sense,  quality.


SANKHATA ; ABHISANKHATA.

By  s a n k h a t a we  do  not  intend  to  convey  the  notion
of  ‘ compound  ’ (as  you  call  it)  so  much  as  that  of  ‘ condi-
tioned.’ Of  course,  what  is  compound  is  always  caused.
But  it  is  the  idea  of  causation  that  is  chiefly  implied.


SANKHAEA.

I have  pointed,  in  the  Introductory  Essay  (p.  2),  to  a
roughly  approximate  identity  of  cleavage  in  Western  and
Buddhist  divisions  of  the  mind.  I said  that  the  v e d a n a -
nana-sankhara  division  corresponded  to  European
feeling,  thought,  and  volition.  But  I do  not  intend  to
convey  that  the  term  sankhara  can  be  restricted  to  a

18


274


Sankhara


technical  expression  for  will.  Sankhara  as  volitions  is
one  aspect,  sankhara  in  sankharakkhandha
is  another.  In  the  former  use  of  the  Vord  we  mean
p u b b a b h i s an  kh  ar  0 — i.e.,  previous  volitional  effort
or  conation  (on  the  part  of  self  or  another),  or  payoga-
sankharo  or  u p ay  a - s a n k h a r o (motivated  or  de-
signed operating).  Cf.  the  distinction  asankharika
and  its  opposite  in  § 2,  and  Ledi  Sadaw,  p.  26.

In  the  latter  term — aggregate  of  sankhara’ s — s an-
k h a r a is  a collective  name  given  to  the  fifty  mental
properties  (cetasika’s)  which  go  to  make  up  c i 1 1 a
or  consciousness.  They  are  named  sankhara’s,
because,  as  concomitants,  they  perform  their  respective
functions  in  combination^  as  one  tvhole,  of  act,  speech,  or
thought  (Ledi  Sadaw,  pp.  318,^’.).  Scholars  have  thought
that  under  sankhara’s  were  classed  the  more  active
expressions  of  conscious  life.  But  pha  s sa  (contact)  and
vedana  (feeling),  the  first  tw'O  of  the  fifty,  are  for  us  any-
thing but  pre-eminently  active  elements.  Neither  is  sauna
(perception)  active,  as  compared  with  cetana  (volition).
Feeling  and  perception,  however,  as  broadly  distinctive
forms  of  consciousness,  have  already,  in  the  very  ancient
k h a n d h a - classification,  been  told  off  in  separate  groups.
Hence  the  only  other  wholly  representative  property  was
chosen  to  be  the  namesake  of  the  other  forty-nine  —
namely,  that  volitional  activity  which  we  understand  by
both  cetana  and  sankhara.  Cetana,  as  a ceta-
sika,  is  a constant.  And  sankharakkhandha
really  means  the  group  of  ‘ volitions  and  other  associated
factors.’

But  in  the  Paticca-samuppada  (see  Appendix,
S.V.),  sankhara  is  used  as  a synonym  of  the  developed
c e t a n a — i.e.,  of  karma.

^ Cf.  in  this  respect  European  efforts  at  equivalent  renderings  :
‘ confections,’  ‘ syntheses.’  Intrinsic  variety  rather  than  concomitancy
is  aimed  at  in  two  others — ‘ Gestaltungen  ’ ‘ conformations.’  ‘ Betati-
gungen'  belongs  rather  to  the  former  definition.  ‘ Unterscheidungen  ’
to  neither. — Ed.


Sankhara


275


Thus  in  all  the  three  foregoing  distinctions — pubba-
bhisankhara,  sankharakkhandha,  and  a v i j -
japaccaya  sank  ha  r a — the  active  or  agency-form
(kattu-sadhana)  of  derivation : sankharotiti
s a n k h a r 0,  holds  good  ; ‘sankhara  is  that,  namely,
which  determines,  conditions,  operates  ’ (from  Vk  a r , ‘to
do’).  But  in  the  (Suttanta)  phrases:  ‘sabbe  san-
khara anicca,’  ‘sankharupekkha,’  ‘sankha-
radhammo,’  ‘sankharaloko,’  the  passive  k a m -
masadhana  form  of  derivation  is  adopted : s a n k h a -
riyatiti  sankharo,  ‘sankhara  is  that  which  is
determined,  conditioned,  acted  upon.’

I mention  all  these  forms  of  sankhara  because  the
over-literal  scholars  of  the  West  are  apt  to  translate  any
one  of  our  terms  by  the  same  word,  regardless  of  the
sense,  context,  or  derivation.  And  in  the  last-named
passive  import  of  sankhara  we  should  certainly  not
restrict  the  word  to  mean  the  fifty  psychical  elements
or  cetasika’s,  but  we  should  understand  sankhata,
‘ things,’ or  ‘ the  world,’  or  ‘the  conditioned.’  Our  com-
mentators are  guided  by  the  context.  Let  me  quote  the  Ceylon
Commentary — e.g.,  on  p.  188  of  the  Compendium,  where
we  have  rendered  sankhara  by  ‘ actions  ’ {i.e  , karma),
as  referring  to  the  c e t a n a in  the  twenty-nine  moral  and
immoral  c i 1 1 a ’ s : sankhatam  abhisankharontlti  san-
khara : kusalakusala-kammani.  Te  tividha  : punnabhi-
sankharo,  apunnabhisankharo  ananjabhisankharo  ti.  ^
Tattha  kamarupWacara  terasa  kusalacetana  punnabhisan-
kharo ; dvadasa  akusalacetana  apunnabhisankharo ; catasso
aruppacetana  ananjabhisankharo  ti  evam  eta  ekunatiijsa-
cetana  sankhara  nama.  ‘Sankhara’s  condition  (de-
termine, act  upon)  the  conditioned ; they  are  good  and  bad
actions  (karmas).  They  are  threefold,  etc.  Thus  the
twenty-nine  c e t a n a’ s are  called  sankhara’s’  (p.  203) .

To  repeat ; sankharakkhandha  is,  more  or  less,
a label  given  to  a collection  of  varying  cetasika’s.  But
the  label  derives  its  title  from  c e t a n a (otherwise  called
^ Cf.  S.  ii.  82,  Patisambh.  ii.,  178,  with  Vibh.,  135. — Ed.


276


Sankhdra


sankhara’s).  If  some  European  label,  like  your  ‘ syn-
theses,’ be  given  to  the  term  in  translation,  when  occurring
in  this  connection,  I see  no  objection.  But  the  label  must
not  be  suffered  to  hold  good  for  every  application  in  Buddhist
literature  of  the  word  sankhara.  Personally  I prefer
‘karma’  to  ‘ syntheses.’  Take  the  comment  on  san-
khara in  consciousness  just  before  death  (Pt.  V.,  § 12)  :

{a)  Sankharenati  kusalakusala-kammena  kammasaha-
jataphassadi  - dhamma  - samudayena,  cuti  - asanna  - javana-
sahajatena  va  (Ceylon  Cy.,  161):  ‘By  sankharena
here  is  meant  hy  good  and  had  harm  a,  or  by  the
collection  of  mental  properties  — p h a s s a , etc.  — co-
existent with  karma,  or  by  the  [properties]  co-existent
with  death-bed  apperception.’  Now,  in  each  of  these  signifi-
cations karma  is  prominent,  for  apperception  is  the
stage  at  which  karma  is  produced.

(h)  Sankharenati  patisandhi-janaka-kamma-sankhatena
cetana-sankharena,  tag-sahajata-phassadi-dhamma-samu-
hena  pi  va ; so  pi  hi  upanissaya-bhavena  patisandhiij
janeti  yevati  : ‘By  sankharena  is  meant  the
cetana-sankhara  called  karma  -productive-of-
rebirth,  or  by  the  collection  of  mental  properties — p h a s s a,
etc. — co-existent  with  that  (cetana-sankhara).  In
fact,  this  [collection]  too  [can]  cause  rebirth  as  an
upanissaya  condition  (principal  cause).’

From  these  quotations  it  is  clear  that  sankhara,  in
such  a connection,  is  synonymous  with  karma,  and  is
primarily  applied  to  c etan  a,  but  is  extended  secondarily
to  the  properties  concomitant  with  the  c e t a n a . I take
it  that  your  ‘ syntheses  ’ do  not  refer  to  the  collection  in
the  above  quotations.^  You  have  merely  used  the  word  as
a convenient  label  for  sankharakkhandha.  Now,
the  Arahant’s  kriya-citta  (inoperative  consciousness)
has  this  k h a n d h a , but  no  longer  brings  forth  the
mental  action  in  question — i.e.,  rebirth.

^ Yes,  they  would,  i.e.,  in  each  latter  alternative  : ‘ collection,  etc.’

‘ Syntheses  ’ is  simply  an  etymological  approximation  to  sankhara,
like  the  Commentator’s  dhamma-samudayo,  -samuho  above. — Ed.


Hadaya-vatthu


277


SUKHA.

I agree  with  you  in  using  pleasure,  pleasurable  feeling,
for  sukha,  in  psychological  analysis,  just  as  dukkha,
under  the  same  aspect,  means  pain,  painful  feeling.  But
the  ethical  sukha  is  better  rendered  by  ‘happiness,’
‘ bliss,’  or  your  ‘ ease,’  and  the  ethical  dukkha  by
misery,  ill,  and  so  forth.  Nibbana-sukha  — e.g.,
is  rather  ‘ bliss  ’ than  pleasui'e.  The  following  is  my
scheme :

kayika  sukha  = pleasurable  feeling  ;
cetasika,  or  manasika  sukha  = pleasure
(mental) ;

the  ethical  (religious)  s u k h a = happiness,  ease,  bliss ;

kayika  dukkha  = painful  feeling ;

cetasika  dukkha  = pain  (mental) ;

the  ethical  dukkha  = misery,  ill;

sukha,  as  in  sukhapatipada  = easy  process  ;

dukkha  in  opposite  = difficult  process  ;

somanassa  = joy  (pleasure  + excitement) ;

domanassa  = grief  (pain  + excitement).


HADAYA-VATTHU.

[Heart  as  Physical  Basis  of  Mind.)

The  omission  of  ‘hadayavatthu’  in  the  Dhainma-
sangani  is  very  significant  to  us  Buddhists.  The  doc-
trines in  that  work  we  attribute  to  the  Buddha  (I  am  not
now  speaking  of  the  form  of  presentation  or  redaction  of
those  doctrines  as  we  have  them  in  that  book),  and  we
hold  that  the  omission  is  not  accidental.^  In  view  of  the

1 Ph.  S.  § 6 ; Bud.  Psy.,  Ixxviii.,  n.  3.  The  omission  alluded  to  is
that  of  ‘the  heart’  from  the  list  making  up  rupa,  while  in  Buddha-
ghosa’s  corresponding  list  {Vis.  Mag.,  ch.  xiv. ; J.E.A.S.,  1890-8,
p.  123  /.),  hadayavatthu  is  inserted  after  jivitindriya.
—Ed.


278


Hadaya-vatthu

popular  idea — i.e.,  of  the  cardiac  theory  of  the  seat  of
mental  activity — prevailing  in  his  time,  the  Buddha  pre-
ferred to  be  silent  on  the  point.  He  did  not  accept  the
theory,  but  if  he  had  expounded  his  own  theory,  it  would
not  have  been  acceptable  to  his  hearers.^  But  he  reserved
the  question  of  the  basis  of  consciousness  for  the  philo-
sophic teaching  handed  down  in  the  Patthana.  Even
here  he  was  very  careful  not  to  commit  himself  to  the
cardiac  theory,  even  bj’’  way  of  concession  to  the  popular
view.  The  Patthana  doctrine  is  as  follows  : cakkhayata-
naij  cakkhuvinnana-dhatuya  tap  sampayuttakanan  ca
dhammanaij  nissaya-paccayena  paccayo  : ‘ the  eye  is

related  to  sight  and  its  concomitant  states  by  way  of  base
[to  that  based  thereon].’  And  so  on  for  the  other  senses
and  sense-organs.  But  when  he  comes  to  mind  (m  a n o)
the  style  is  altered  : ‘ Yatj  rufar)  nissaya  manodhatu  ca
manovinnanadhatu  ca  vattanti,  tay  rupay  manodhatuya  ca
manovinnauadhatuya  ca  tag  sampayuttakanan  cadhamma-
nag  nissayapaccayena  paccayo — ‘ That  material  thing  on
the  basis  of  which  apprehension  and  comprehension  take
place — that  thing  is  related  to  both  of  them,  as  well  as  to
their  concomitants  by  way  of  the  relation  of  Base.’  It  was
quite  easy  here  for  the  founder  of  Abhidhamma  doctrine  to
have  used  the  word  ‘ heart  ’ instead  of  ‘ that  material
thing’  (riipa),  had  he  believed  that  heart  was  related  to
mind  as  its  physical  base.

The  Commentators  had  to  give  a name  to  this  y a g

1 Christians  may  be  hereby  reminded  of  a similar  judgment  ascribed
to  Christ  in  St.  John’s  Gospel : ‘ I have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto
you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now.  Howbeit  when  he,  the  Spirit  of
truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into  the  whole  of  truth.’  Also  of
Copernicus,  refraining /or  thirty-six  years  from  publishing  his  helio-
centric theory,  thinking  ‘ it  might  be  better  to  follow  the  examples  of
the  Pythagoreans  and  others,  who  delivered  their  doctrine  only
by  tradition  and  to  friends,’  i.e.,  esoterically.  Now  the  Buddha  is
declared  to  have  said  he  had  ‘ no  such  thing  as  the  closed  fist  of  a
teacher  who  keeps  some  things  back.’  Mdha  Parinihhuna  Sta.  This
may  be  interpreted  as  either  that  he  taught  all  he  knew  to  all,  or  that
he  withheld  some  things  from  everyone  alike.  That  which  no  man
may  see,  is  not  committed  to  the  ‘ fist  ’ at  all. — Ed.


Hetu


279


rupag  . . . taij  rupag,  and  they  wrote  ‘ heart  ’ in
accordance  with  the  popular  theory.  And  they  doubtless
believed  they  had  commented  accurately  in  so  doing,  since
the  Buddha  himself  had  used  ‘ h a d a y a ’ in  his  Dis-
courses to  express  thought  or  mind.  But  to  use  the  word
thus  for  edifying  exposition  is  very  different  from  using  the
same  in  philosophical  language  to  express  ‘ basis  of  thought.’

I do  not  wish  to  flout  history  in  stating  that  as  far
back  as  twenty-five  centuries  ago,  the  Buddha  practically
rejected  the  universally  accepted  theory  of  heart  as  basis
of  mind,  in  advance  of  Greek  theories,  and  anticipated  the
modern  view  of  the  seat  of  consciousness.  But  I look  to
you,  as  an  exponent  of  Buddhist  philosophy,  to  do  justice
to  the  Buddha  and  the  Abhidhamma.  ^


HETU,  HETUKA.

I first  thought  of  the  word  ‘ motive  ’ for  hetu.  But  it
does  not  cover  all  the  denotation  of  hetu  as  given  in
Part  III.  of  the  Manual.  For  while  greed,  hate  and  love
(lobha,  dosa,  a-dosa)  are  undoubtedly  motives,  the
West,  active  in  gaining  money  and  land,  does  not  seem  to
regard  a - 1 o b h a as  a motive.  Nor  can  ignorance  or
dulness,  and  the  absence  thereof  (moha,  a-moha),
ever  be  regarded  as  anything  so  positive  in  connotation  as

^ After  all,  we  acknowledge  an  anticipation  of  an  analogous  kind  in
Demokritus’s  theory  of  Touch  in  the  evolution  of  sense.  It  is  true
that,  on  this  point,  the  quoted  fragments  of  the  Levantine  philosopher
are  more  positive  in  expression  than  the  (comparatively)  intact
teaching  of  his  great  Indian  colleague.  Nevertheless,  any  orthodox
Christian  ought  to  admit  the  possibility  and  plausibility  of  a teacher,
for  whom  omniscience  is  claimed,  conforming  to  popular  usage  in
edifying  discourse.  For  did  not  Christ  declare  that  ‘ out  of  the  heart
proceed  evil  thoughts  (SiaXoynr^tot),’  and  ask:  ‘Why  reason  ye  these
things  in  your  hearts  ?’  He,  too,  might  have  said,  with  the  Buddha  :

‘ These  are  merely  names,  expressions  . . . designations  in  common
use  in  the  world.  And  of  these  a Tathagata  makes  use  indeed,
but  is  not  led  astray  by  them  ’ (Potthapada  Suttanta,  Dialogues  of
the  Buddha,  I.,  263). — Ed.


280


Hetu


motive.  Now  when  Buddhists  give  in  charity,  they  are
said  to  be  actuated  by  the  motive  of  a-lobha;  alobha-
hetu  dana  y — a gift  from  the  ‘ motive  ’ of  ‘ absence  of
greed.’  If  positive  meaning  may  be  conveyed  by  ‘ dis-
interestedness,’ and  if  a - m o h a be  rendered  by  ‘ reason,’

‘ motive  ’ might  perhaps  serve  for  hetu.  ‘ Cold  ’ is  only
absence  of  heat,  yet  it  is  spoken  of  as  a positive  cause  or
condition.

It  is  indeed  nearer  to  hand  to  render  hetu  by  ‘ cause,’
according  to  the  common  Pali  phrase  : ko  hetu  ko  paecayo
yo  . . . What  is  the  cause  or  reason  why.  . . . But  in
ethical  doctrine  we  find  this  rendering  is  too  loose.  The
Ceylon  Commentary,  p.  68,  says  : ‘ although  anything
a h e t u k a is  caused  by  efficient  hetu  (nibbattaka-
h e t u),  it  is  so  called  because  it  is  devoid  of  con-
comitant hetu  (s  a m p a y u 1 1 a-h  e t u).  Ledi  (p.  39),
while  adopting  the  explanation  ‘sampayutta-
hetu  virahato  ahetuka-cittani,’  disapproves  of
the  idea  of  contrasting  concomitant  hetu  with  causal
hetu,  the  latter  not  being  permissible  in  Abhidhamma —
i.e.,  in  philosophy.  Grammarians,  however,  speak  of
janaka-hetu,  napaka-hetu,  and  sampapaka-
hetu,  meaning  ‘cause,’  ‘reason,’  and  ‘means’  respec-
tively, as  distinguishable  under  nibbattaka-hetu.
In  other  words,  this  phrase  is  a term  of  grammar,  and  not
of  philosophy.  Be  that  as  it  may,  it  is  clear  from  these
comments  that  s a h e t u k a is  a term  applied  to  classes  of
consciousness  which  are  not  devoid  of  (a  - v i r a h i t a)
concomitant  hetu.

What,  then,  is  the  philosophical  import  of  hetu?

The  Ceylon  Commentary  (p.  208)  gives  the  following
definition  : hinoti  patitthati  etenati  hetu — ‘ hetu  is  that
by  which  (the  effect)  is  established.’  This  is  obviously
incomplete,  but  the  p h a 1 a — effect  or  fruit — is  supplied  in
the  commentarial  exposition  by  the  simile  of  a tree.  The
growth  of  a tree,  namely,  is  affected  by  several  conditions,
viz.,  the  seed,  root,  soil,  water,  manure,  etc.,  any  one  or
any  group  of  which  may  be  considered  as  constituting  a


Hetu


281


cause,  and  the  rest  as  being  conditions,  of  growth.  Now,  by
Buddhists  the  seed  would  be  invariably  considered  to  be
the  cause,  and  the  root  a principal  condition  among  other
conditions  of  the  fruition  of  the  tree.  And  they  usually
compare  karma  to  the  seed,  and  hetu  to  the  root.
But  as  the  root  is  dependent  upon  the  seed,  so  is
hetu  dependent  upon  karma  (kamma-nidana-
b h u t a).  Thus  hetu  is  something  which  affects  a cause
in  the  production  of  the  effect  of  that  cause.  In  other
words  hetu  is  a condition,  as  distinguished  from  a cause.
So  in  the  Patthdna,  which  expounds  our  philosophy  of
Relations,  we  read : hetu  hetusampayuttakanag  dhamma-
nag  hetu-paccayena  paccayo  {Dukap.,  p.  9).  This  I under-
stand to  mean:  ‘hetu’s  (greed  and  the  other  five)  are
related  to  their  concomitant  mental  properties  as  condi-
tions.’ Take  a concrete  example : Part  II.  of  the  Manual
tells  us  that  the  first  class  of  ‘ appetitives  ’ (lobhasaha-
g a t a)  is  composed  of  nineteen  mental  properties  among
which  1 0 b h a is  conspicuous  as  the  root.  But  as  c e t a n a,
being  sabbacittasadharana,  is  common  to  all
classes  of  consciousness,  we  find  in  one  and  the  same  class
both  c e t a n a and  1 o b h a . As  volition  is  translated  into
action  [i.e.,  deed,  word  or  thought),  c e t a n a is  transformed
into  kamma.  And  if  we  render  kamma  by  ‘cause,’
it  is  clear  that  we  need  another  term  to  express  hetu  as
something  akin  to,  and  yet  distinct  from,  ‘cause.’

Hetu  affects  c e t a n a in  its  transformation  into
kamma,  the  cause,  and  therefore  conditions  the  effect
of  that  cause.  And  it  also  imposes  a limitation  to  the
application  of  the  remaining  concomitant  mental  properties.

If  the  word  ‘ condition  ’ be  acceded  to  as  the  nearest
equivalent,  the  adjectival  form  ‘conditional,’  for  hetuka,
can  hardly  be  objected  to.

European  ears  are  no  doubt  more  or  less  accustomed  to
‘ conditional  ’ as  a logical  and  grammatical  term.  This
may  be  because  Europe  has  not  an  ethico-philosophical
system  like  Buddhism.  But  it  is  a pity  to  throw  away  an
expressive  term  simply  for  this  accident.


T\¥0  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES


1.  On  the  Difference  between  Vitakka  {Initial  Application)
and  Manasikara  [Attention) .

I agree  to  your  rendering  of  vitakka  and  v i c a r a by
‘ initial  and  sustained  application  ’ as  on  the  whole  the
best,  and  as  leaving  ‘ attention  ’ for  manasikara.  The
Three  Tiled' s distinguishes  the  latter  term  from  vitakka
as  follows Manasikara  has  the  ‘ mark  ’ of  carrying
the  mind  well  into  the  object  (arammane  samanna-
hara-lakkhano).  Vitakka  merely  throws,  so  to
speak,  its  concomitant  properties  on  to  the  object  (pak-
khipanto  viya  hoti).  Its  ‘mark’  is  ‘lifting  its
co-existent  properties  on  to  the  object  ’ (s  a h a j a t a-
dhammanai]  arammane  abhiniropana-
sabhavatta).  Attention  is  like  a charioteer  harness-
ing two  horses  (mind  and  object)  into  a pair.  Initial
application  is  like  a favourite  courtier  introducing  a
villager  (mind)  into  the  presence  of  the  king  (object).

What  happens  then  in  a-vitakka-citta,  or  con-
sciousness without  vitakka?  The  mind  dispenses  with
this  introduction  when  it  has  become  habitually  associated
with  the  object.  It  was,  but  is  no  longer,  sa-vitakka
with  respect  to  that  class  of  object.  The  senses  get  at  the
object  without  aid  from  vitakka  by  the  mere  impact  of
physical  base  and  object  (vatthalambana-san-
ghattanena).  Again,  each  higher  jhana  is  a-vitakka
in  virtue  of  the  lowest  jhana-practice  (hetthima-
bhavana-balena).^


^ Cf.  my  footnote,  p.  95,  n.  1, — Ed.

2B2


2 Op.  cit.,  87  and  74.


Application  and  Attention  283

Ledi  Sadaw  gives  a similar  explanation  (p.  80),  but  adds
that  Buddhaghosa,  in  the  Papailc a- Sudani,^  questioned  this
explanation,  current  already  in  his  time,  and  advanced  the
following  view  : ‘ Mind  indeed  always  gets  at  its  object,
its  constant  companion  being  attention  (m  a n a s i k a r a),
without  which  it  would  be  like  a rudderless  ship,  drifting
on  to  any  object.  With  this  rudder  the  senses  arrive  at
their  proper  destination.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  conscious-
ness to  cognize  object  (a  r a m m a n a - v i j a n a n a - s a 1 1 i-
vasena).  When  evil  thoughts  arise,  greed,  etc.,  bring
mind  to  their  respective  objects.  In  second  jhana,  etc.,
attention,  effort,  and  mindfulness  so  convey  mind.  But
vitakka  is  the  most  powerful  of  them  all.  Why,  then,
are  not  other  (functions  of  cognition)  termed  vitakka?
Because  they  have  (or  rather  are)  distinguishable  func-
tions, while  vitakka  has  the  sole  function  of  directing.
Sa-vitakka-citta  directs  or  applies  itself  ;
a-vitakka-citta  is  directed  or  applied  to  its  object.
But  attention,  or  “ action-in-mind  ” (m  a n a s m i ij  k a r o)
attends  to  the  object  in  both  cases.’


2.  On  Authority  in  Buddhist  Belief.'^

. . . Vithi’s,  or  processes  of  thought,  are  detailed  in
a Pali-Burmese  work  called  VUhi-Letyo,  which  was  the
fade  ineciun  of  older  students  in  Burma.  Ledi  Sadaw’s
views  on  the  same  subject,  as  embodied  in  his  Paramattha-
dipani,  are  expounded  and  discussed  in  detail  in  the
VUhi-manjari  by  his  xjupil,  U.  Pandi.  Although  I owe  a
great  debt  to  the  learning  displayed  in  these  and  many
other  works,  I should  have  served  no  useful  purpose  in
giving  references  to  them  in  a work  such  as  this.  Per-
sonally, let  me  add,  I am  acting  only  as  the  mouthpiece
of  my  country’s  teachers.  I have  no  theories  of  my  own.
At  best  I am  but  an  interpreter  of  Burmese  views  based


^ Cy.  on  M.


^ From  a letter  by  the  translator.


284  Supplementcu'ij  Notes

on  the  Ceylon  Commentary  and  the  works  of  Buddhaghosa.
You  may  take  my  essay  as  medieval  Buddhism  presented
through  modern  Burmese  glasses.  And  you  may  consider
that  the  Burmese  view,  with  the  sole  exception  of  Ledi
Sadaw,  is,  as  a rule,  one  with  Sumangala  {i.e.,  Ceylon  Cy.)
and  Buddhaghosa.

But  I fear  you  would  be  expecting  too  much  from  me
if  you  were  to  ask  me  to  test  our  traditional  philosophic
theories  by  modern  science  and  criticism,  or  rather,  to
adduce  evidence  to  establish  what  is  stated  in  our  books.
Our  commentators  certainly  hazarded  many  a very  bold
guess,  as  when  they  say  that  one  thought-moment  is  more
than  a billionth  of  the  time  occupied  by  a wink  of  the  eye,
and  so  on.  To  be  able  to  measure  the  duration  of  thought
will  be  to  have  placed  psychology  on  the  footing  of  the
exact  sciences.  To  recognize  that  thought  is  a radiation
is,  I submit,  a great  thing  in  itself.  Who  can  say  that
this  may  not  one  day  lead  some  discoverers  to  devise  an
instrument  exploiting  some  substance,  yet  unknown,  which
is  sensitive  to  thought,  and  so  to  measure  our  thought-
‘ waves  ’ and  their  duration  ?

I do  not  ask  the  West  to  swallow  all  that  is  said  in
Buddhist  books.  But  I think  it  is  just  as  well  that  the
West  should  have  a candid  statement  of  all  that  is  calmly
said  by  Buddhists  on  authority.  Else  a partial  study  of
what  we  think  and  say  Avould  only  give  rise  to  miscon-
ceptions as  regards  Buddhist  terminology.

Buddhists  accept  on  faith  the  teaching  that  has  been
handed  down  from  century  to  century.  Now,  in  matters
passing  the  possibility  of  verification,  the  nearest  approach
to  proof  is  to  show  the  likelihood  of  anything.  For  instance,
our  assertions  about  grades  of  superhuman  beings  will  be
laughed  at  in  the  West  {i.e.,  by  those  who  have  relinquished
their  own  traditional  beliefs  of  like  nature).  Such  beings
cannot  be  proved  to  exist.  Nevertheless,  comparative
anatomy  has  done  a little  service  toward  showing  the
likelihood  of  a regular  gradation  of  beings,  w'hich  does
not  necessarily  stop  at  man.  Again,  we  who  have  been


285


Authority  in  Buddhist  Belief

accustomed  to  associate  mind  with  brain,  may  scoff  at  the
idea  of  the  Arupa-world.  And  yet  modern  hypnotism,  in
a small  way,  shows  likelihood  of  the  existence  of  a world
with  thought,  minus  brain-activity.^  How  far  these  Bud-
dhist beliefs  are,  or  are  not,  borne  out  by  modern  science,  it
is  for  each  scientific  generation  to  declare.

^ I do  not  gather  that  the  translator  has  read  Fechner  on  mind  in
plants,  etc.,  but  his  argument  is  on  all  fours  with  Fechner’s. — Ed.


INDEX


I


SUBJECTS


Abstinences,  the  three,  97,  101,  j
244  n.  2 !

Access  {to  jliana)  55,  71
Action,  16.  See  also  Body,  Karma  ,
Adept  in  jhana,  53,  60  j

Adjunct,  98/.,  102,  108  I

Adoption,  55,  67  71,  129,  215  j
Adverting  of  mind,  27  /.,  34,  85,  |
99,  115,  227  ; in  presentative  \
cognition,  85  ; in  representative
cognition,  59,  128
^Esthetic,  philosophy  of,  20, 101 «.  1 I
^Esthetic  pleasure,  86,  108,  112/.,  |
123,  135  i

After-image,  54,  58,  206 ; con-
ceptualized, 74
Aggregates,  213
Amity,  96
Animals,  137

Anticipation,  38  !

Apparitional  rebirth,  165  j

Apperception,  27,  29,  40,  42  f.,  47,  i
54,  58,  62,  69,  75,  115,  118, 127,
129,  132/.,  151,  162,  249
Apperceptives,  27  I

Appetite,  {lotha),  27,  82
Appetitives,  13,22, 23, 107, 112, 114  i
Application  of  mind,  initial,  12,  j
17,  28,  95,  98,  238  /.,  282  /.;
sustained,  17,  56,  95,  98
Appreciation,  sympathetic,  24,  97,
102,  104

Apprehension,  108,  113,  121,  128  |

Approximation,  55,  129,  215  '

Arahant,  20,  23,  45,  50,  55,  62,  69
/.,  75,  118  n.  2,  134  n.  4,  218/.,  i
233, 276  i

Arahantship,  69,  91  /.,  121,  130,  j
177  1

286


Ariya,  49,  135,  139,  215,  216  n.  1
217  n.  4

Arupa,  °eitta,  or  “consciousness,
64,  68  /.,  82,  90;  °jhana,  °loka.
See  s.  vv.

Asava[s],  227,  134  n.  3,  158,  170,
174,  191,  218,  227
Aspiration,  42,  175,  181,  238
Association  of  ideas,  etc.,  7,  37  /.
Asura’s,  137,  140

Attainments,  in  jhuna,  59 ; of
Paths  and  Fruits,  70,  218  ; of
all  three,  133

Attention,  12,  17,  28,  95,  282
Aura,  65/.,  214

Automatic  consciousness,  13,  18,
47,  82/.,  107, 148
Average  type  (of  individuals),  23,
44,  50,  68,  130
Aversion,  56,  83,  112,  123

Bad  actions,  19.  See  also  Moral
Balance  of  mind,  14,  96,  113  n.  3,
175  n.  3

Bases,  111,  122/,  125,  174,  178
Beautiful,  The,  20/.,  86  n.  1
Beauty,  standards  of,  21 ; moral,
20,  96,  101,  105,  112
Becoming,  65,  152,  174,  189,  261
Beginner  (in  jhdna,  etc.),  53
Being,  or  becoming,  hoxo  con-
ceived, 9,  65,  189/

Stream  of  being,  vital  sub-
conscious continuum,  10  f.,
25,  27,  32,  34,  54,  59,  62,
68  /.,  71  /'.,  75,  114,  118,
127/.,  129'  136, 140, 150/.,
162,  219,  227,  266/

Belief,  39,  283


287


Subjects


Bias,  latent,  the  seven.  172
Birth,  or  rebirth,  10,  26,  50, 189/.,
217  /.,  261

Body,  3;  qualities  of,  26  See
also  Matter,  Material
The  body,  8,  145  /.,  192  /.  ;
aggregate,  96  n.  3,  171  n.
3,  194  n.  1
Bonds,  171

Buoyancy,  or  hghtness,  96,  164

Calm,  57,  202-9
Cares,  ten  worldly,  53
Categories,  ultimate,  81;  ethical,
170/

Causal,  20 ; non-causal,  19,  20
Causation,  Law  of,  188/.,  260  /’.
Cause,  259  /.,  280.  See  also  Hetu
(Ind.  I.)

Celestial  Eye,  63,  209
Cessation,  215,  218
Character.  See  Karma  (the  six) ,
203

Characteristic  Mark,  3,  163 ; the
three,  66,  68  71,  210,  213/
Charity,  146,  280
Choice,  17,  95,  99,  108
Circles,  see  Object  (hypnotic)
Cogitated,  things,  37
Cognition,  on  occasion  of  sense,
23,  32,  37,  249 ; called  mind-
door,  27 ; process  of,  27  /. ;
representative,  70
Cohesion,  269
Common  properties,  94,  96
Communication,  157,  162,  164
Comparison,  process  of,  33
Composure,  96
Comprehension,  123  n.  2
Conation,  18,  247
Conceit,  96,  100,  107
Concentration  (or  evolved  indi-
vidualizing), 17,  41,  54,  57, 180,
207

Concept,  5,  33,  74,  264
Conception,  39
Concomitants,  98  /.

Condition,  conditional,  condi-
tioned, etc.,  18,  70,  158,  198,
281 ; unconditioned  (i.e.,  by
hetu’s),  20,  84 ; dually  condi-
tioned (by  d°),  50 ; trebly  d°  (by
d°),  53  ; sufficing,  194,  197
Consciousness,  188,  235  ; defined,
2,  11 ; analyzed,  12  ; act,  state
of,  25,  94,  193 ; factors  of,  96


n.  3;  time-phases  in,  25  f,  126
/. ; classes  of,  13, 82-93 ; grades
of,  81/. y threshold  of,  10 ; form
and  matter  of,  25,  125  n.  1 ;
order  of,  25  ; types  of,  19,  22  ;
qjrocess  free,  137  f.j  merging
of,  27 ; syntheses  of,  103  /.  ;
rebirth-° , 50,l'd,lll  ■,  at  death,
i 73  /,  140;  Kama-°,  57,  74;
[A]rnpa°,  see  [A]rupa;  Path°,
67  /.,  133,  215 ; selffi,  11 ; re-
sultant, see  Kesultant
Contact,  14,  94,  177
Contemplation,  66/.,  179,  220
Continuum  of  life,  sub-conscious
being.  See  Being,  Stream  of
Control.  See  Volition
Controlling  powers,  forces,  facul-
ties, 15,  175/.,  228
Correlation,  system  of,  187,  191  /.
Craving,  174,  216,  244  n.  2
Creatures,  165/

Culture,  203,  205  /.

Death,  philosophy  of,  27,  72  /.  ;
causes  of,  72,  149 ; conscious-
ness at,  73-5  ; as  redecease,  115,
140  ; Karma  at,  149  f.j  body
at,  166  ; final,  75
Decads,  164,  250

Deciding,  or  sense  of  choice,  17,
95,  108,  241

Definition,  2,  7,  188  n.  2, 198  n.  1,

! 243  n.  1

I Desirable,  20,  22,  24,  67,  130
‘ Desire-to-do,  intention,  18,  99,
i 107,  177,  244
Destiny,  120,  126

I Determining,  phase  in  cognition,
i 28,  40,  108,  113,  115,  118,  121,

' 127,  162

Discretion,  96,  177
Disinterestedness,  96,  231
Disruption,  insight  into,  66
Distraction,  18,  83,  96,  100,  107,
147  ; and  worry,  56
Dominant  principles,  or  influ-
ences, the  four,  60,  177/
Doors,  85  n.  5,  111,  117/,  125/.,
145,  149  /. ; door-free,  118 ;
mind-door,  10,  27,  32,  116,  258
Doubt,  65^  68,  213.  See  also
Perplexity

Dream-consciousness,  46/;  class-
es of,  48  /. ; theories  of,  48
Dulness,  83-95,  100,  218  n.  1


288  Subjects


Ecstasy  (in  jhana),  56-7,  64,  129,
162,  215

Effect,  144,  193.  See  Eesult,
Eesultant

Effort,  energy,  18,  99,  242 ; the
four  supreme,  179
Ego.  See  Soul,  Subject
Elect,  the,  19,  44,  50,  55
Electrical  theory  of  matter,  226,
255

Elements,  183.  See  also  Essen-
tials

Emancipation,  67,  211  ; chan-

nels of,  212

Emergence,  215,  220,  cf.  67
Emptiness,  67,  216  /.

Energy,  or  Endeavour,  177,  180
Enlightened  (budhci),  153
Enlightenment,  or  Wisdom,  fac-
tors of,  179/

Equanimity,  14, 121  n.  6,  181,  231
Error,  13,  82  /.,  95,  100 ; see  also
Hetu ; erroneous  views,  19,  68,
174

Essentials,  or  Primary  Qualities
of  Body,  3,  154,  204,  268  /.

Evil,  66,  263 ; latent  principles
of,  or  ‘ 6'ia.s,’  20,  172  ; cate-
gories of,  170/

Evolution,  doctrine  of  {paticcasa-
muppdda),  65,  187
Extension,  see  Essentials

Faculties,  180.  See  also  Control-
ling Powers,  Indriya
Faith,  96,  180  •

Fear,  66,  211

Feeling,  2,  12,  14,  66,  94,  111/.;

neutral,  see  Indifference
Fetters,  the  ten,  172/.

Fitness,  97

Fixing,  determining,  28/.

Floods,  171
Flux,  65,  267

Food,  161 /.y  the  four,  177
Forces,  the  nine,  176,  180
Form,  270  /.

Fonunate  re-birth,  140
Foul.  See  Impurities
Freedom,  43,  66

Fruit,  Fruition,  23,  45,  50,  67-71,
91,  168,  190,  217/

Function,  53/.,  Ill,  114/.,  143  n.
3,  144

Gnosis.  176  /.

Gods,  49,  138  f.


I Good,  20,  84  n.  1.  See  also  Moral
I Grades,  or  planes  of  life,  135  /.,
i 137  /.

I Grasped-at,  159
Grasping  — i.e.,  comprehending,
32-35.  The  Four,  171
Greed,  13,  96,  100,  107.  See  also
Hetu

Grief,  15,  24,  83,  99,  111,  130 ; in
I jhana,  175

I

j Habit  (sila),  260  ; (vasitd)  post-
j jhdnic,  58/
i Hallucination,  50,  67,  216
j Hankering,  216/.

I Hate,  96,  100

' Heard,  things,  37

j Heart,  as  base  of  mind,  122  /.,

I 156,  163  /,  259  w.  1,  277/

; Heat,  3,  162

‘ Hetu  ’ [six  specific  conditions  *),
16,  20,  43,  50.  84  n.  2,  86  n.

' 2, 99/.,  106, 108,  111,  113/.,

130,  146/.,  158, 174,  191  «.
6,279/

I balance  of  hetu’s,  43
I Hindrances,  54, 56  /.,  101  n.  4, 172
I Hyperassthesia  of  sight,  63  ; of
I hearing,  63
I Hypothesis,  39

I

! Iddhi,  60/.,  180
I Idea,  42,  198,  258  /.

Ideal,  91  n.  2,  175  w.  5
' Idealism,  2,  7
I Identifying.  See  Eetention
Identity  in  Buddhism,  9,  11,  143
n.  2

j Ignorance,  18,  113,  118,  191,  262
I 111.  or  suffering,  70,  184
I Illimitables,  97, 101, 103  n.  1,  202,
204,  208
lU-will,  24

I Image,  32,  38,  42,  258  ; after°,  54,
i 74  ; conceptualized,  54
I Imagination,  32/.,  38,  238
i Impermanence,  8,  70,  216/  See
also  Characteristic  Marks
Impression,  intensity  of,  31  /.y
classes  of,  37,  85
Impudence,  95,  100,  177
Impurities,  the  ten,  21,  58,  202/

^ The  Bhammasangaiii  adds  three
unmoral  hetu' S'.  §1,062;  Bud.Psy.,
283  /.


289


Subjects


Indifference,  14,  58,  71,  83,  89,  99,
111,  130,  229-32

Individuals,  kinds  of,  49,  134,  217
Individualizing  element,  12,  16,
41,  54,  56,  89,  94,  237,  240
Infinity,  90

Influences,  214.  See  also  Domi-
nant

Initiate,  215

Inoperative  {for  Karma),  19,  20,
23,  45,  55,  59,  62,  69  /.,  85,  89,
116,  130

Insight  {paiind)  41 ; (dassana)  69  ;
{ndna)  71;  {vip)assand)  41,  202,
210  f.  ; ten  modes  of,  65  f.
InteUigence,  67,  69
Intensity.  See  Impression,  Object
Intention.  See  Desire,  18
Interest,  18,  89,  99,  108,  243  ;
degrees  of,  56,  58 ; and  pleasure,
56,  180,  243

Intuitions  {i.e..  Presentations)  5,
38,  258

Intuitive  knowledge.  See  Abhihna,
supernormal  thought
Investigating  - consciousness,  28,
40,  84/.,  99,  108,  112/.,  115/.,
118,  123,  127,  130,  139,  258;
three  anodes  of,  28
Investigation,  177,  180

Jhana,  42,  54  f.,  65,  70  /.,  88  /,
90/.,  98/.,  103/.,  121, 129, 141,
175,  178 ; exercises  in,  55  /.,
207  /,  218  ; rapture  of,  56  /. ;
at  ivill,  59,  62  ; cataleptic,  64,
162  n.  5 ; re-birth  after,  148  ;
not  necessary  to  Arahantship,
55  ; Eupa°,  55,  88  ; Arupa°,  64,
90

Joy,  15,  19,  23,  70,  82  /.,  Ill  /.,
129  /.,  162,  243  ; joyous  nature,
19  ; in  jhana,  175
Judgment,  28,  33

Kamaloka,  81, 140 ; consciousness
in,  81  and  passim
Karma,  16,  44,  159,  193,  197,  234,
281 ; kinds  of,  143  f. ; and
result,  19,  26,  43-45,  120,  126  ;
character,  52 ; sign  of,  120, 126;
generative,  26,  72,  144,|161  /.  ;
matter  produced  by,  161  f.j
becoming , 190  ; sufficing  con-
dition, 194

Knowledge,  87,  102  n.,  114, 176  n.


3 ; Path°,  41,  210,  213  f.j  the
ten  Knowledges,  210  ; a priori,
225

Lamp,  matter  compared  to,  166
Laughter,  86  n.  1,  162
Leibnitz,  15

Life,  compared  to  a river,  8 /.,
153 ; duration  of  one,  140 ;
psychic,  12,  17,  95,  176  /.  See
also  Vital

Locomotive  faculty,  163  n.  3

Logic  of  analysis,  13

Loka,  Kama°,  81  n.  2 passim  ;

Kupa°,  Arupa°,  81  n.  2 passim
Love,  97  71.  3

Ludicrous,  theory  of  the,  20,  22  f.,
86  n.  1,  101  n.  1

Mango,  simile  of  the,  30
Marks.  See  Characteristic
Matter,  14,  154/.,  270/.  ; aspects
of,  158/.;  qualities  of,  154/
Meditation,  88  n.  4,  227  ; art  of,
53  /.  ; post-cataleptic,  72
Memory,  38  /.,  40 ; and  changing
personality , 42
Mental  process,  concrete,  39  /.
Mental  properties  or  elements,
‘ Mentals,’  3,  12  /.,  17  /.,  40,
239.  See  also  Cetasika  (Ind.

in.)

Merit,  86,  91,  146,  149
Mind,  definitions  of,  1,  7 ; divi-
sions of,  2;  mind-door,  10,  27,
32,  36,  47,  86, 116, 126, 258, 266  ;
matter  produced  by,  161  /. ;
asindriya,  176;  and  body,  192
/;  compared  to  an  ape’s  jumps,
8 71.  1 ; balance  of,  14,  66,  83  n.
1,  96,  113  n.  3,  175  n.  3,  181  n.
1,  204  71.  5,  211  71.  3,  214  n.  6,
230/

Mindfulness,  40,  96 ; applications
in,  179

Misfortune,  137,  139
Moments,  161  n.  5,  166
Moral  (acts),  19,  140 ; conscious-
ness, 20,  52,  55,  59,  62,  69,  71
/.,  71,  88  /;  iynmoral,  20,  52,
74;  beyond  both,  134;  un-
moral, 20,  52,  234
Morals,  53

Motion,.  See  Essentials
Motive,  279

Muddle-headedness,  83  n,  3,  99
19


290  Subjects


Name,  33,  35,  199  /.

Nescience,  217

Never-Returner,  69/.,  91/.,  218
Nibbana,  3,  4,  45,  67,  81,  103  n.,
120  n.  3,  168  /.,  198,  204  n.  3,
215  /.  ; under  present  condi-
tions^ 70,  72 ; out  o f time,  6 ;
derivation,  169 ; two-fold,  three-
fold, 168

Nirvana.  See  Nibbana
Nominalism  and  Conceptualism,
6,  223

Nothingness,  64,  71,  90
Nutritive  essence,  160,  163

Object,  of  consciousness,  2,  3,  11,
25,  27,  90  n 1,  111,  119  /.,  125
/.,  130, 197  ; of  sense,  3,  73, 194 ;
of  thought,  3,  38  ; of  sight,  27  ;
hypnotic,  54,  58,  62/.,  202/
Once-Eeturner,  69,  91/,  217
Opinion.  39,  82  n.  4
Organ,  85  n.  5,  117

Pain,  84,  232  ; painful  feeling.  111
Particular  properties  of  mind,  95,
98,  109,  111/

Path,  Paths,  41,  50,  66  /,  133,
168,  217/;  the  Eightfold,  175,
181

Peace  (sama),  153 ; (upasama),
204:  f

Perception,  14,  42,  90,  94 ; ac-
quired, 32  ; complexity  of,  33
Perplexity,  56,  83,  96,  100,  108
Peta’s,  137

Phenomena,  material,  161  /.
Physical  change,  161  /.

Pity,  24,  97,  102,  104
Planes,  or  grades,  of  life,  49, 135/
137/

Plasticity,  157

Pleasure  {psychological),  14,  82  n.
3,  89,  111,  243,  277;  ethical,
56,  58,  277
Pliancy,  96,  164

Preparation  (for  Jhdna),  55,  71,
129,  215

Presentation  (percept  or  image,
nimitta),  54,  125/.,  257  f.
Process  of  cognition,  25,  125  /. ;

process-free,  25,  137  /.

Proof,  284

Properties,  mental,  81,  94/,
Prudence,  96,  177
Pure  Abodes,  69,  138


Purgatory,  81  n.  2,  137
Purification,  68

Purity,  of  morals,  53,  210  /.;  of
insight,  67,  210/.;  of  thought,
57,  210;  of  views,  65,  210

Qualification  (for  Jlulna),  55, 129,
215

Qualities,  material,  81,  154 /.
Rapture,  56

Reaction,  four-fold,  to  stimuli,
32;  to  perception,  34  ; to  Jhdna,
59

Reality,  200
Reason,  97,  102,  180
Rebirth,  108,  116,  139/,  148  /.
Recipient  consciousness,  28,  84 /.,
99,  113

Recognizing,  42

Recollection,  38  ; the  ten,  202,  204
Reflection,  37,  58

I Relations,  philosophy  of,  2,  7 ;
category  of,  191 ; generalization
of,  197  ; implicated  in  memory,
42

Reminiscence,  38/.,  of  previous
births,  64,  209

Representative.  See  Cognition
Respiration,  exercises  in,  204  f.
Result,  19,  84/

Resultant,  20,  23, 43,  88,  91,  115/.,
123,  141  /.

Retention,  29,  34,  40,  47,  74,  115,
118,  127,  130/

Retrospection,  58/.,  75
Review,  habit  of,  58 ; frocess  of,  69
Rising-out  of,  67,  215,  220
River,  being  compared  to,  8 ; mat-
ter compared  to,  166
Root.  See  Hetu
Rounds,  the  three,  190
Rtipaloka  81  n.  2,  88  /.,  115,  122
/.,  138,  142,  148,  207

Salient  features,  157.  See  also
Characteristic  Marks
Seen,  things,  37

Selecting  (in  attention),  12,  17,
28,  40

Selfishness,  96,  100
Sensation,  113  ; ideas  of,  3 ; ‘sub-
jective,’ 37

Sense,  the  senses,  3,  73,  84,  /. ;

° cognition,  122, 125/  ; °desires,
174 ; °fields,  155 ; avenues  of.


Subjects  291


127  f. ; doors  of,  85  n.  4,  117,
124 ; object  of,  3,  6,  73,  183 ;
organs  of,  183  ^-pleasures  of,  21 ;
and  thought,  96  n.  3 ; of
locality,  temperature,  pressure.
See  Essentials
Sensus  communis,  259  n.  1
Sequels  {to  presentation),  32,  38
Sex,  155,  176

Sign,  32  /.,  72 ; Signless,  the,  67,
168,  217.  See  also  Karma
Sin,  228

SoiK,  theory  of  no,  8,  11,  67,  70,
172,  174,  216/.

Space,  5,  16,  163,  208,  226  ; ‘ in-
finity of,  ’ 64  f.

Spheres,  of  Arupaloha,  139
Stages,  in  function,  115
Stream  of  Attainment,  91  /.
Stream,  of  Being.  See  Being.

First  Path,  68,  217
Sub-consciousness,  9 /.,  27
Subject,  2,  7,  8, 11,  25,  28, 132  n.  4
Subjective,  158

Sublime,  the,  24,  218 ; conscious-
ness, 4,  12,  112,  121
Substance,  65

Superintellection  (supernormal
thought),  41,  45,  55/.,  60/.,  75,
121,  134  n.  1,  162,  209,  224
Symbol,  the  three,  203,  206
Syntheses,  276.  See  also  Con-
sciousness

Telepathy,  63/

Tendencies,  latent,  to  evil,  20,  45
Thought,  types  of  19  ; various
renderings  of,  40 ; supernormal,
41, 45, 55/ , 60/  ; highest,  92/.,
122 ; free  act  of,  43  ; duration
of  thought,  126  /./  transfer-
ence, 63  f.


Ties,  the  Four,  171
Tune,  5, 16,  25  ; phases  in  moment
of,  126,  161  n.  5 ; out  of  time,
6,  38

Touch,  3,  13  f.,  112,  138,  149,
230  f.

Trance,  71,  218

Transcendental  (consciousness)  68
/.,  91,  112,  121  (insight),  41  ;
Nibbana,  168
Truth,  180

Truths,  Four  Ariyan,  68  /.,  184,
215

Turning  towards.  See  Adverting

Unconscious  beings,  136,  142,  167
Understanding,  239
Undesired,  the,  67,  168
Universe,  65
Unmoral,  95, 108,  234

Vibration  (m  subliminal  con-
sciousness), '21  f,  34,  54,  68,  70
View(s),  13,  19,  65,  67 ; right,  or
perfected,  67,  69,  175,  181
Vital  power.  See  Life
Vital  process,  theory  of,  250  f.
Void,  67,  168,  217
Volition,  12,  16,  44,  88,  94,  99  n.
2,  193,  233,  248  ; control  in,  47,
52

Volitional,  82  n.  2,  177
Voluntary,  82  n.  2

Wheel  of  life,  262  {diagram)

Will.  See  Volition ; in  Buddhism,
236  n.  3 ; free,  43 ; and  rebirth,
52  ; master  over  thoivght  and
feeling,  60;  fixation  of,  62
Wisdom  (bodhi),  69  ; factors  of,
66

Worldling.  See  Average  Type


II


PROPEE  NAMES


Abhidhamma,  8,  51,  58,  123  n.  1
Abhidhammattha-vibhavani,  118
n.  ‘I  passim

Abhidhrtnappadipikd,  17  n.  Sun,

18

Anuruddha  Thera,  229,  234
Aristotle,  7,  52
Arjyavai]sa  Adiccaragsi,  46
Atthasdlini,  96  n.  3 and  'passim

Bain,  2,  19
Berkeley,  7
Brahma,  148

Buddha,  the,  7 f..  20,  23  /.,  45,  63,

71,  81,  219  w.  1,  233,  236,  239
n.  1

Buddhadatta,  23

Buddhaghosa,  15,  85  n.  4,  90  n.  1,

95  n.  1,  101  n.  4,  115  n.  3,  164
n.  1, 183  n.  1, 189  n.  5,  229  n.  1,

232  n.  1,  233,  254  oi.  1,  283.  See
also  Visuddhi  Magga
Buddhist  Ps'ychological  Ethics
{B.  Bs'y.),  64  n.  and  passmi
Bunyan,  John,  85  n.  4,  217  n.  1

Coleridge,  S.  T.,  53
Condillac,  53
Condorcet,  53
Copernicus,  276  w.  3

Demokritus,  278  n.  1
Dhamma  - Scmga'ni,  58  n.  and
passim

Dhutvattha- sang  aha,  by  Ingan
Sadaw,  246

Dialogues  of  the  Buddha  (Ehys
Davids),  54  n.  and  passim
Dlgha-Nihdya,  54  n.,  72  n.,  138
n.  3

Early  Buddhism,  135  n.  1

292


Herakleitus,  9 n.  1
Herbart,  249  n.  1
Hlaing,  U.,  160  n.  2
Hobbes,  24
Hume,  7

Kant,  164  n.  4,  249  n.  1
Kathnvatthu,  239  n.  1

Leibnitz,  249  n.  1

Ledi  Sadaw,  33  n.  and  passim

Locke,  3,  225

Mahd-atthakathd , 160  n.  2
Mahadatta  thera,  148  n.  1
Mahadhammarakkhita  thera,  148
n.  1

Mahd-tikd,  151  n.  7
Mansei,  5,  25,  32,  89  n.  4,  225
I Martineau,  225

I Milindapaiiha  {Questions  of  King
Milinda)  46  n.  1.  51  nn.,  52  n.,
85  n.  4,  143  n.  4 {in  translation)

I Mill,  J.  S.,  260
Moggallana,  Thera,  17  n.

1 M'Tdaflhd , 26,  64
! Myers,  F.  W.,  10

] Nagasena.  See  Milindapafiha
j Neo -platonism,  133  n.  2
Nettippaharaya,  85  n.  5
j Neumann,  227

Papahca-siidam,  283
; Pdrajihaima-Atthahathd,  52
Paramattha  - dlpani  (by  Ledi
Sadaw),  158  n.  4

Patisambhida-magga,  60  n.,  239
n.  1

Patthdna,  quoted,  2,  84  n.  2,  123
n.  1 ; object  in  the,  6,  37  ; laws
of  relation  in  the,  7,  187  n.  3^


Proper  Naynes


293


191  n.  5,  198  ; on  memory,
42

Poranapkn,  160  n.  1

Poussin,  L.  de  la  V.,  150  n.  2

Rhys  Davids,  T.  W.  See  Dia-
logues of  the  Buddha,  Early
Buddhism,  Questions  of
Milinda,  Yogavacara's  Manual

S.B.E.  Sacred  Boohs  of  the
East,  143  n.  3

Saccasanhhepa,  157  n.  4 I

Sankara.  85  n.  4

Sammoha-vinodam,  22  j

Spinoza,  223 I

Subhuti,  thera,  17  n.

Suinangala,  Commentator,  134  n.  2

Suttanta,  85  w.  5


Terasahanna-Tika,  47
Tlkd’s,  The  Three,  90  n.  1,  235

TJpanishads,  85  n.  4,  257  n.  2

Vibhanga,  22,  138  n.  3,  180  n.  1,
239  n.  1

Visuddhi  Magga,  54,  60,  156  n.  1,
236  n.  3
Vithi-letyo,  283

Warren,  225,  227,  246
Windisch,  165  n.  4
Wundt,  249  n.  1

Yama,  138  n.  2
Yama,  138
Yamaha,  272

Yogavacara's  Manual,  129  n.  1


Ill


PALI  WOEDS  (DISCUSSED  IN  NOTES  AND  ESSAY)


Anga,  56,  153  n.  1,  263,  265

Ajjhattika,  191  n.  7

Annasamana,  95  n.  4

Anna,  176  n.  3

Atta.  See  Anatta

Attha,  4 223 ; dabb  sak°  4 ;

paramattha,  6,  81,  223
Adhitthana,  59,  62,  151  n.  3,  207
n.  6

Adbittheyya,  209  «.  2,  219  n.  1
Adhipati,  18,  60,  177  n.  1
Adhimokkha,  17,  40,  95,  214  n.  3,
241

Anatta  theory,  6 /.,  216.  See  also
Lakkhana

Anagami,  69,  149  n.  2
Anicca,  8.  See  Lakkhana
Animitta,  211  n.  5
Anubandhaka.  See  Vithi
Anubhavana,  229,  232  n.  1
Anuloma,  55,  66,  68, 129  n.  2,  211
n.  4

Api,  pi,  145  n.  3,  146  n.  2
Appana,  55/.,  64, 129  n.  1,  215  n.  2
Appanihita,  67,  217
Abyakata  (avyakata),  20,  52,  234
Abhinna,  41,60/.,  75, 134,209n.l ;

“kusala,  121  n.  4
Abhidhamma,  8,  81,  223
Abhinavakarana,  150  w.  3
Abhinivesa,  171,  216  n.  3
Aviya,  19,  44,  49,  129  n.  3
Arupa.  See  Rnpa,  Jhana
Aviiia,  11,  18,  83  n.  3,  262  /
Asubha,  121  n.  6
Akara,  189  n.  4
Akasa,  5,  16,  226
Acaya,  252
Acinnaka,  144  n.  3
Adikammika,  53,  129  n.  2
Apatha,  127  n.  1
Apo  155  71.2,268/.


Abhassara,  138  n.  4
Ayatana,  90  n.  2,  183,  254  /.
Arammana,,  2,  10,  14,  90  n.  1, 143
n.  2 ; mogh°,  32 ; pahe°,  3 ;
paritt°,  31 ; rup°,  27  ; [atijma-
hant°,  30  /;  tad°,  see  s.v. ;
an°,  158  n.  5
Arammanilca,  2
Alambana.  See  Arammana
Avajjana,  27  /.,  59,  85  n.  3, 114  n.
_ 6,  227,  248.  258  ; °vasita,  58/.
Asava.  See  Index  I.

Iddhi,  209 ; °pada,  60,  180 ; °vi-
dha,  60/.

Ittbatta,  218  n.  3
Indriya,  15,  111,  159  n.  2, 163  n.  2,
175  n.  6,  196  n.  2,  228;  pann°,
see  Panna

Ukkattha,  147  n.  4
Uggaha,  54  n.

Utu,  161

Udhacca,  18,  45,  83  n.  5,  96 ;

“kukkueca,  56
Upakara,  42,  261
Upakkilesa,  66,  214  n.  7
Upacaya,  253
Upacara,  55
XJpanissaya,  192  n.  1
Upapatti  191  n.  1,  262/
Upasama,  204  n.  3
Upadana,  171  n.  6
Upadinna,  159  n.  6
Upadisesa,  168  n.  7
Upekkha,  14,  58,  66,  83,  ti.  1,  97
n.  3, 113  n.  3, 181  n.  1,  211  n.  3,
'229  f;  sankhar°,  66,  21177.3,275
Uppada,  25.  See  Citta
Ulara,  an°,  24

Ekaggata,  12,  16,  41,  54,  56,  89,
94,  178  77.  5,  237,  240


294


Pali  Words


295


Ogha,  171  n.  1
Oja,  160  n.  4
Opapatika,  165  n.  4
Obhasa,  68,  214  n.  1
Omaka,  147  n.  5
Olarika,  159  n.  4 ; an°,  23

Kakkhalatta,  3,  155  n.  1
Kankhavitarana,  65
Katatta,  144,  n.  4
Kattusadhana.  See  Definition
(Index  I.)

Kamma,  16,  19.  26,  44  /.,  72.  See
also  Karma  (Index  I.) ; ahosLka°,
45,  145  n.  1 ; °tthana,  202  n.  1
Kalapa,  8,  163  n.  4,  165  nn.  1,  3,
226,  250/.

Kasina,  54.  121  n.  5, 199,  202  n.  3 ;
°dosa,  54

Kama,  81.  See  Loka

Kaya,  96  n.  3,  171  n.  3,  194  n.  1 ;

“vinnana,  14/.,  112
Kayika.  See  Dukkha,  Sukha
Kaia,  5,  16 ; “vimutta,  6,  38  j

Kicca,  115  n.  5,  143  n.  3 ; “rasa,  i
13,  213  n.  1 : “vanta,  25, 117  n.  '
3 ; janaka°,  44  ; pubba°,  53
K[i]riya,  19  /.,  85  n.  2,  233,  248,
276

Kilesa,  69,  173  n.  2
Kotthasa,  206  n.  4
Kusala,  20,  52,  84  «.  1 ; a°,  18  /.,
20,  52

Khandha,  198  n.  3,  239  n.  1
Khaiia,  25
lOiiuasava,  134  n 3

Gati,  “nimitta,  27

Gahana  processes,  32  /.,  34  f.

Gocara,  206  n.  1

Gotrabhu,  55,  67-71,  129  n.  3,  170
n.  1

Carita,  204  n.  3
Galana.  See  Bhavanga
Citta,  2,  90  n.  1,  234 ; “uppada,
25,  94  n.  1,  98  n.  2,  146
n.  3,  234 ; “kkhana,  25  ; “niyama,
25  ; “vipaUasa,  67  ; vTthicitta,
see  Vithi ; Kama°,  Rupa°,  see
Kama,  Rupa,  etc./  “vipallasa,
50 ; “visuddhi,  57 ; “vokinna,
51;  cuti°,  74  (c/.  Milinda  I.,
124  of  Transl.).  See  also
Cetasika


Cuti,  10,  27,  115  n.  4 ; “citta,  74
Cetana,  12,  16,  18,  40,  44,  94,  193
n.  4,  233,  235/.,  247,  262,  274/./
abhinna°,  45  ; magga°,  45
Cetasika,  3,  40,  41,  67,  87  n.  94/.,
235,  237  /. ; universally  com-
mon, 12  ; particular,  17  ; uni-
versally bad,  18  /. ; citta°,  193
n.  2,  239  n.  1
Cetopariyanana,  63
Copana,  36,  157  n.  1
I Chanda,  18,  95  n.  3,  99  n.  2,  236  n
I 3,  238  n.  1,  245

Javana,  27,  29,  42  /.,  62,  64,  115
n.  1,  127  n.  3,  177  n.  2,  245-9  ;
kriya,  45  ; pahcadvarika°,  44  ;
manodvarika°,  44
Jati,  10,  143  n.  2,  157  n.  5,  250/
Jivitindriya,  12,  17

Jhana.  See  Index  I.  Arupa°,  64
/.  ; padaka°,  62,  220

Nana.  2,  41,  87  w.  1;  and  anna,
176  n.  3 ; “sampayutta,  41,  87
n.  1 ; namarupapariceheda°,  65  ;
hanani,  178  n.  1.  See  also  Vipas-
sana  {ten  modes)

Thana,  25.  115,  117  w.  2
Thiti,  25,  26,  261

Tanha,  245,  263  /.
Tatramajjhattata,  14,  66,  83  n.  1,
96,  113  n.  3,  175  n.  3,  181  n.  1,
204  n.  5,  211  n.  3,  214  n.  6,
230/

Tad-anuvattaka,  32
Tad-aramraana,  29,  40,  74,  115
Tejo,  3,  161  n.  4,  270

Thina-middha,  19, 1 56,  96

Dakkhineyya,  69
Dasaka,  250-4

Dittha,  “vara,  37  ; “sambandha,  37
Ditthi,  13,  19,  68,  82  n.  4,  96,  146
n.  1 ; “vipallasa,  67  ; “visuddhi,
65  ; samma°,  67,  69
Dibba-cakkhu,  63
Dibba-sota,  63

Dukkha,  14,  112  n.  1 ; 277  r . . .

“patipada,  56
Duggati,  “ahetuka,  49
Devatopasaphara,  48
Domanassa,  15,  24


296


Pali  W ords


Dosa,  24,  83  n.  2,  96 ; a°,  88  n.  1,
96,  250

Dvara,  85  «.  4 ; pauca.  see  Vlthi ;
mano°,  see  Mano

Dhamma,- 179  n.  3,  255  f.

Dhatu,  154  n.  3,  254/.  ; “kobbba,
48

Nadi.  See  Anicca,  Bhavanga,
Sota

Naiiia,  33,  188  n.  4,  199  n.  9
Niimarupa,  14,  192  n.  6,  271;

"paricchedaiiana,  65
Nipplianna,  156  n.  6,  157  n.  6
Nibbana.  See  Index  I. ; anupa-
disesa",  153  n.  5 ; ditthadham-

ma, °  70
Nibbida,  66

Nimitta,  5,  46  n.  1,  72/.,  211  n.  5 ;
gati°,  27,  72  /.,  120  n.  5 ; pati-
bha.ga°,  6,  54,  121  n.  5,  203  n.
6,  239  ; pubba°,  48 ; parikam-
ma°,  54  ; uggaha°,  54,  239  ; a°,
67,  168  n.  8,  211  n.  5
Niyama,  25,  247,  260
Nirodha-,  71,  218
Nissaya,  195  n.  3
Nissita,  195  n.  3

Pakatupanissaya,  194  n.  2
Pakinnaka,  13,  95  n.  2
Pakkhiya,  179  n.  1
Paccaya,  2,  37,  42-4,  187  n.  5, 191,
259  /.

Paceavekkhana,  58,  69,  132  n.  6,
207  n.  7

Paccupatthana,  13,  213  n.  2
Paceuppanna.  193  n.  3
Paunatti,  3 /.,  54,  198  /.,  264 ;
attha°.  4,  74,  120  nn.  2,  4,  193
n.  1,  207  11.  4,  208  n.  1 ; kala°,
16  ; nama°,  120  n.  2,  193  n.  1 ;
nicca°,  16 ; satta°.  103  n. ; sad
da°,  4,  74  ; ‘’bhutani,  120  n.  4
Pamia,  40,  102,  113  n.  4 ; pannin
driya,  40,  67,  69.  87  n.  97,  113

ll.  4,  177  n.  3,  178  n.  1.  209  n.
3 ; lokiya,  41 ; lokuttara,  41,  97
n.  5 ; °cakkhu,  225

Patigha,  83  n.  2

Paticca-samuppada,  18,  65,  187  n.
2,  260,  262  /.

Patipada,  56,  67,  210  n.  2
Patibhaga.  See  Nimitta.
Patisankha,  153  n.  3


Patisandhi,  10,  26,  114  n.  4,  150
n.  6,  251 ; °citta,  50  ; °ka,  19,  24
Padatthana,  13,  23  n.  8
Pattidana,  146  n.  5
Patbavl,  155  n.  1
Paranimmita,  141  n.  1
Paramattba.  See  Attba,  Dbatu,
Appendix

Parikamma,  54  ; “samadhi,  54
Pariyayena,  206  n.  2
Palibodba,  53

Pasada,  3,  136  n.  1 ; °rupa,  15,  28,
31

Pakani,  88  n.  3
Patimokkba,  212  n.  2
Piti,  18,  56,  58,  89  ii.  2,  180  n.  4,
243

Puggala,  49  ; tikkha°,  55
Puthujjana,  23,  44,  49,  68
Pubbakicca,  53
Pubbanimitta,  48
PubbenivasanuGsati,  64
Peta,  24,  49.  137
Pettivisaya,  137  n.  3
Pbala,  45,  116  n.  3;  “tthana,  50;
j “samapatti,  70
j Phassa,  12,  14,  94
Pbussati,  133  n.  2

Buddhi,  203  n 4
I Bojjhanga,  66,  230
I Brabmaloka,  57,  141  ii.  2,  142
Brabmavibara,  97

■ Bbanga,  25,  66,  126  n.  4
I Bbaya,  66

j Bbava,  43,  170  n.  3,  189,  261;

°antara,  150  n.  7 ; pancavokara,

I 47

Bhavanga,  9,  30,  114,  118  n.  6,
265  /. ; bhavanga’s,  27,  59,  131 ;
“antarita,  136  n.  3 ; atlta°,  28 ;
agantuka°,  131  n.  1,  268;  upac-
cheda°,  10,  27 ; “calana,  27 ;
°pato,  127  n.  4 ; “santati,  158  n.
1 ; °sota,  75

Bbava,  7,  260 : itthi°,  etc.,  155  n.  7
Bhavanamaya,  207  n.  2
Bhavasadbana.  See  Definition,
Index  I.

Bhumi,  10,  135  n.  3,  137  n.  2,  143
n.  2

i

Magga,  41,  42,  66-71,  175  n.  4,

; 186  ; magganga,  42  ; °naiia,  41 ;

°vlthi,  68,  215  n.  6


Pali  Words


297


Maggatthana,  23,  50
Majjhima,  106  n.  2 ; °ayuka,  31
Manasikara,  12,  28,  40,  95,  282
Mano,  94  -w.  1 ; °dvara,  10,  27,  32,
36,  59,  116  n.  1,  258;  °dliatu,
117  n.  1,  122  n.  2,  123  nn.  2,  3,
184,  255  f.j-  °dhatu-ttika,  121
n.  1 ; “vinnanadhatu,  123  n.  2,
124  184  n'.  8,  257

Maranasanna,  45,  144  n.  2,  151  n.
4

Mahaggata,  4,  12,  55,  101  n.  4
Jlaha.  86  n.  o',  mahabhuta[m],
154  2,  268/.

Mana,  100  n.  1
Manasa,  150  n.  5
Middha,  kapika°,  51
Mudita,  24,  97  n.  4
Muyhati,  83  n.  3
jMetta,  97  n.  3
ilomuhacittani,  83  n.  3
Moha,  16,  18,  83  n.  3,  146  n.  2 ;
a°,  41,  88  n.  1, 113  n.  4, 114  n.  3

Yatharahag,  111  n.  1,  118  n.  2
Yoga,  171  n.  2

Easa,  13,  213  n.  1.  See  also  Kieca
Eupa  {A),  26,  119  n.  3,  120  w.  1,
154  n.  1,  155  n.  5,  270  /;
,vinnatti-°,  26  ; vikara°,  157  n.  2 ;
pasada°.  15,  28,  31 ; ruparupag,
157  n.  7 ; lakkhana°,  26, 157  nn.
3,  4 ; (B),  °avacara,  °citta,  °loka,
See  Index  I.  Arupa,  ibid.

Lakkhana,  3,  13,  157  nn.  3,  4,  163
n.  5,  165  n.  2,  212  n.  6,  255
Loka,  10,  167  n.  3 ; kama°,  rupa°,
arupa°,  see  Index  I.

Lokuttara,  12,  91  n.  3,  168  n.  2
Lobha,  13, 16,  18,  82  n.  1,  96,  245  ;
alobha,  88  n.  1,  96

Vad^i,  251  /.

Vannayatana,  119  n.  3
Vattiiu,  15,  31 ; °to,  174  n.  1
Vasavatti,  141  n.  1
Vasita,  58  /.,  207  nn.  6,  7 ; ad-
hitthana°,  59
Vayo,’  3,  155  n.  3,  270
Vikara,  157  n.  2,  168  n.  1,  264
Vicikiceha,  56,  242
Yieara,  17,  40,  56,  89  n.  1,  95
Vijja,  209  n.  3

Vinnatti,  22,  34,  36,  120  n.  1,  264


Vinnana,  2,  28,  90  n.  1,  94  n.  1,
188  n.  4,  234,  256
Vinnata,  37  ; “sambandha,  38
Vitakka,  17,  40,  42,  56,  89  n.  1,
95,  98  nn.  3,  4,  129  n.  1,  175  n.
5,  238/,  282

Vinicchaya,  18,  33,  84  n.  5,  241
Vipallasa,  50,  67,  216  n.  4
Vipassana,  41,  65/,  71,  180
Vipaka,  19,  43,  45,  193  n.  5,  249
Vibhuta,  126  n.  3 ; a°,  47
Vimagsa,  177  n.  3
Viratiyo,  97  n.  2,  244,  n,  2 . . .
Viriya,  242

Visaya,  143  n.  2 ; “pavatti,  125  n.  2
Visuddhi,  53,  65/.,  210  n.  1
Vlthi,  9 n.  3,  25,  125  n.  1,  266;

“mutta,  9,  25,  137  n.  1,  266
Vimagsati,  84  n.  5,  177  n.  3
Vutthana,  67,  70/.,  215  n.  4
Vedana,  2, 12,  14,  66,  94, 190  n.  1,
232  n.  1

Vehapphala,  138  n.  6
Votthabbana  (-ppana),  28,  40,  108
n.  2,  116  n.  1
Vodana,  68

Sagsara,  10,  262  n.  2
Sankappa,  238
Sanketa,  6,  33

Sankhata,  158  n.  4,  169  n.  1,  198
n.  1,  273

Sankhara,  273  /. ; (a)  khandha,
236,  239  n.  1 ; (b)  kamma,
cetand,  10,  143  n.  2,  151  n.  1,
188  n.  2,  190  n.  4,  274  /.  ;
(c)  lokadliamma,  70,  88  n.  2,
198  n.  1,  211  n.  3,  275
Sankharika,  a°,  13,  18
Sanna,  12,  15,  38,  40,  42,  90  n.  1,
94,  203  n.  1 ; “vipaEasa,  67 ;
“viragag,  149  n.  1;  ahare  pati-
kula°,  21

Santhana,  119  n.  3,  271  /....;
“pannatti,  5

Sati,  40,  96 ; °patthana,  179  n.  2
Satta,  132  n.  4,  254  n.l  . . .
Satti,  42,  44

Santati,  6, 153  n.  1, 157  n.  4, 252  /.
Santana,  150  n.  2,  161  n.  7
Santirana,  28,  40,  84  n.  5,  99  n.  1,
108  n.  3,  131  n.  3,  139  n.  5,  258
Sannameti,  162  n.  7
Sama,  153  n.  5
Samatha,  57,  202  n.  2
Samadhi,  17,  41,  89  n.  4,  129  n.  1,


298


Pali  W ords


178  n.  5 ; appana°,  56  /. ; upa-
cara°,  54 ; parikamma®,  54
Samapatti,  59,  133  n.  3
Sampaticchana,  28,  99  1,  108

n.  3,  127  n.  2
Sampayuttadhamma,  10
Sambandha,  33

Sammasaua.  65,  156  n.  8,  210  n.
5.  220

Samma,  179  n.  4
Sammaditthi,  168  n.  3
Sammasankappa,  175  n.  5
Sasankhar-ena,  -ika,  82  n.  2
Sit  a,  22

Slla,  259  ; “visuddhi,  53
Silabbataparamasa,  171  «.  4
Sukka^dpassaka,  55,  75
Sukha,  14,  89 ; analyzed,  277  ;
kayika®,  112  n.  1 ; comjpared
with  piti,  56,  243


Suunata,  67

Suta,  37  ; "sambandha,  37
Suddhavasa,  69,  138
Suddhika,  36

Subha,  a®,  21,  58 ; ®kinha,  138
n.  5

Supina,  46
Sota,  8,  267

Sotapanna,  68,  139  n.  3
Sobhana,  20,  96  n.  2,  101  n.  1
Somanassa,  15,  19,  24,  82  n.  3,  112
n.  4,  277


Hadaya,  31,  123  n.  1,  277  /.
Hasituppada,  20/.

Hetu.  See  Index  I.

Hetuka,  a®,  20,  49  f.,  84  n 2,  280  ;
sa®,  18,  88  n.  1,  280  f.;  dvi®,
50 ; ti®,  53,  147  n.  7


BILLING  AND  SONS,  LTD.,  PRINTERS,  GUILDfORD


. ‘A


Date  Doe


MAY  I’S

1

«2iAflA„r‘i

OC)  ~f

NOV  5:

NOV  3 0

DEC  U

DEC  :

OCT  3

•

OCT  ? r

Ndv"  4

NOV  HE

DEC

-'F^  2 5

DEC  9

‘MAY  '1  S

L.  B.  Cat.  No.  1137

S91.3


P162  No. 2 95699


bckooi  oi
