Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


^'


0^.


y


*> ■ V


ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.


ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.


IBooto bs Si* )^* ^bxam.


THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

i6mo, f 1.25.

ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

New American Edition. With Introduction pre-
pared expressly for it by the Author. i6mo,
I1.25.

THE OCCULT WORLD.

New American from the Fourth English Edi-
tion. With an Introduction written for the
American Edition by the Author, and Appen-
dix. i6mo» $1.25.

HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO.,
Boston and Nbw York.


[ESOTERIC BUDDHISM


A. P. SINNETT


BOSTON AND NEW YORK
HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY


Copyright, 1884,
Bt HOUGHTON, MIPPLIN & CO.


All rights reserved.


Vu Riverside Press, Cambridge, Mass U ^ A
Electrotyped and Printed b. U. 0.^^^^; I Confpany.


PUBLISHER'S NOTE.


The fifth English edition of Esoteric Bud-
dhism consiBta of the text of the fourth Amer-
ican edition, together with the larger part of the
preface specially furnished by Mr. Siunett for
the American edition. He took the opportunity
afforded by a new edition, also, to append to
Bome of the chapters annotations upon points
calling for explication. These annotations are
now added to the sixth American edition as au
appendix. The present edition therefore cor-
responds with the latest English edition, and
has besides matter in the author's preface not
incorporated in any Engliah edition.


INTRODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN
EDITION.


This book was written in the early part of
188B, and now tliat I am venturing to recora-
numd it to public notice afresh in the latter
part of 1884, after three English editions have
passed through the press, I find myself in poe-
sesaion of much additional information bearing
on many of the problems dealt with. But I
am glad to be able to say that such later teach-
ing as I have yet received only reveala incora-
pleteneas in my origijial conceptions of the eso-
teric doctrine, — no material error so far. In-
deed, I am happy enough to have received, from
tlie great adept himaeK from whom I obtained
my instruction in the first instance, the assur-
ance that the book as it now stands is a sound
and trustworthy statement of the scheme of
Nature aa understood by the initiates of occult
science, which may have to be a good deal de-
veloped in future, if the interest it excites is
keen enough to constitute an efBcient demand


6 !NTII(JI}IH:TI0S to AMF.RICAS editiox.

for further t^^aching of tbU kind on the part of
tbo woi'M at large, but will never have to be
Tdinijiliiliiil or ii|<otfigiz^ for.

Further tlitin this, thu reception of the book
In Indiu hiM Hhown that the doctrines tlma
for thii flmt tiino itut forth in a coherent and
nI riiit^htforwiinl way uru recognized, when thus
ittiiUHl, liy vurioiift tchuols of Oriental philoso-
phy lui (icmNDimiiL wit)) thoir fiiiidamentul views.
A Ilmhrnnn Hindoo, writing in the Indian
inikHiu.iiid, "Tim TliooHophist," for June, 1884,
DritidUiiH thu prosuut voIuiiih uh di^imrting un-
iKHMtiwiirily from aucH'ptisd Siuiskrit nomenala-
turi' : hut liiH iilijocition mendy is X\\\\t I have
((ivt'n unfumiliiii' namen in some cases to ideas
wliic'h lira ulri'lldy (txprossc^d in Hindoo sacred
writiiigH, and thiit I havo done too much honor
ill llin riiliitioiifl systuni oomnionly known as
ItiiddhiHin. by ropriiioitling that as more closely
allitid with Uiu KMotcrio doutrlnn tlian any other,
"■rin* popular wiwloni of the majority of the
lUndmi* Ui Lhindiiy," saya my Itriihman critic,
" U U)ur« or K«M liiigod with tliu esoteric doo-
«• taught in Mr. 8iuni>tt's book, misnamed
•vio Ituddhism,' whilti tbore is not a siu-
tmWt or villn)j>' in tlie wholv of India in
t peoph* nrti nut niorti or K-ss acquainted
W •ubliiuv Ivnvia of th*- VwliuilB philoao-
. The effwta of Kanua lu tb« next


r


IBTRODUCTIOlt TO AMERICAN EDITION. 7

birth, the eojoyment of iu fmits, good or evil, in
a snbjecuve or spiritual state of existence pdor
to the re-incarnation of the spiritual monad in
this or any other world, tlie loitering of the
unsatisfied souls or human shells in the earth
(Kamnloca), the pralayic and raanwantaric pe-
liods, . . . are not only intelligible bat are even
familiar to a great many Hindoos, under names
different from those made use of by the author
of ' Esoteric Buddhism.' " So much the better
from the point of view of Western readers, to
whom it is a matter of indiSereuce whether the
exoteric Hindoo or Buddhist religion is nearest
to absolutely true spiritual science, which should
certainly bear no name that appears to wed it
to any one faith in the external world more
than to another. All that we in the West can
be anxions for is to arrive at a clear understand-
ing as to the essential principles of that science,
and if we find the principles defined in this
book claimed by the cultured representatives of
more than one great Oriental creed as equally
the underlying truths of their different systems,
we shall be all the better inclined to believe the
present exposition of doctrine worth our atten-
tion.

In regard to the complaint itself, that the
teachings here reduced to an intelligible -shape
are incorrectly described by the name this book


8 INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION,

bears, I cannot do better than quote the note
by which the editor of " The Theosophist " re-
plies to his Brahman contributor. He says:
*• We print the above letter, as it expresses, in
courteous language and in an able manner, the
vie^v8 of a large number of our Hindoo broth-
ers. At the same time it must be stated that
the name of * Elsoteric Buddhism ' was given to
Mr, Sinnett's latest publication, not because
the doctrine propounded therein is mt^ant to be
specially identified with miy particular form of
faith, but because Buddhism means the doc-
trine of the B^ddhaSn the Wise, t. e. the Wis-
dom Religion.'* For my own part I need only
add that I fully accept and adopt that explana-
tion of the matt^T. It would, indeed, be a mis-
conception of the design which this book is in-
tended to subserve, to suppose it eonoemed with
the recommendation, to a dihttante modem
tasto« of old world fashions in religious thought.
The external forms and fancies of religion in
one age may be a little purer, in another age a
little more corrupt, but .they inevibibly adapt
themselves to their period, and it would be
e^tmvagiint to imagine them interchangeable.
The present statement is not put forward in
the hope of making Buddhists from among the
adhen>nts of anv other svstem, but with the
view of conveying to thoughtful reader^ as well


INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION. 9

in the East aa in the West, a BetioB of leading
ideas, relating to the actual verities of Nature,
and the real facta of Mail's progress through
evolution, which have been communicated to the
writer in tlieir present shape by Eastern phi-
losophers, and thus fall meet readily into an
Oriental mould. Bat the value of these teach-
ings will perhaps be most fully realized when
we clearly perceive that they are scientific in
their character, rather than polemical. Spirit-
ual truths, if they are truths, may evidently be
dealt with in a no less scientific spirit than
chemical reactions. And no religious feeling,
of whatever color it may be, need be disturbed
by the importation into the general stock of
knowledge of new discoveries about the consti-
tution and nature of Man on the plane of his
higher activities. True religion will eventually
find a way to assimilate such fresh knowledge
in the same way that it finally acquiesces in a
gradual enlargement of knowledge on the phys-
ical plane. This, in the first instance, may
sometimes disconcert notions associated with
religious belief, — as geological science at first
embai'rassed biblical chronology. But in time
men came to see that the essence of the biblical
statement does not reside in the literal sense of
coamological passages, and religious conceptions
grew all the purer for the relief thus aflforded.


10 IITTEODUCTiON TO AMERICAN EDiTION.

In jnst the same way, when poeitive aoientifio
knowledge b^na to embraoe a ixxmprehensira
of laws relating to the spiritaal deyelopment
of Man, some misoonceptions of Natare long
blended with religion may have to giye way>
but still it will be f oand that the oentral ideas
of true religion have been deared np and bright-
ened all the better for the process. Espedally,
as such processes continue, will the internal dis-
sensions of the religions world be inevitably
subdued. The warfare of sects can only be dae
to a failure on the part of rival sectarians to
grasp fundamental facts. Could a time come
when the basic ideas on which religion rests
should be comprehended with the same cer-
tainty with which we comprehend some pri-
mary physical laws, and disagreement about
them be recognized by all educated people as
ridiculous, then there would not be room for
very acrimonious divergences of religious senti-
ment. Externals of religious thought would
still differ in different climates and among dif-
ferent races, — as dress and dietaries differ, —
but such differences would not give rise to in-
tellectual antagonism.

Basic facts of the kind that must, when they
come to be widely recognized as such, have a
tendency in this way to bleiid together super-
ficially divergent views, not to provoke a trial


nmoDUCTioy to amebica/c EDirros. 11

af otrength between them, aiv Jevelopod. it
appears to me, la the expositioa of spiritoal
science we have now obtained from our Eastern
friends. It is quite nnaeceasary for religious
Uunkers to tmra aside from them under the
impreBsion that they are arguments in favor of
Bome Eastern, in preference to the more gen-
eral Western, creed. If medical science were to
discover a new fact about Man's body, were to
unveil some hitherto concealed principle on
which the growth of skin and flesh and bone
is carried on, that discovery would not be re-
garded aa trenching at all on the domain of
religion. Would the domain of religion be in-
vaded by a discovery, for example, that should
go one step behind the action of the nerves,
and disclose a finer set of activities manipulat-
ing these as tliey manipuLite the muscles ? At
all events, even if such a discovery might begin
to reconcile science and religion, no man who
allows any of his higher faculties to enter into
his religious thinking would put aside a posi-
tive fact of Nature, clearly shown to be such,
as hostile to religion. Being a fact, it is inevi-
table that it should fit in with all other facts,
and with religious truth among the number.
So with the great mass of information in refer-
ence to the evolution of Man embodied in the
present statement. Our best plan evidently ia


12 INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN MDITIOB.

to ask, before we look into the report I bring
forward, not whether it will square in all re-
spects with preoonceived views, but whether it
really does introduce us to a series of natural
facts connected with the growth and develop-
ment of Man's higher faculties. If it does thisi
we may wisely examine the facts first in the
scientific spirit, and leave them to exercise
whatever effect oh collateral bdieb may be
reasonable and legitimate, later on*

Ramifying, as the explanation proceeds, into
a great many side paths, it will be seen by
the readers of this book that the central idea
now presented to us completes and spiritualizes
the great conception of physical anthropology,
which accounts for the evolution of Man's lody
by successive and very gradual improvements
of animal forms from generation to generation.
That is a very barren and miserable theory, re-
garded as an all-embracing account of creation ;
but, properly understood, it paves the way for
a comprehension of the higher concurrent pro-
cess, which is all the while evolving the soul of
Man in the higher spiritual realms of existence.
The circumstances under which this is done
reconcile the evolutionary method with the in-
stinctive craving of every self-conscious entity
for perpetuity of individual life. The dis*
\ointed series of improving forms on this earth


INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION. 13

have no indiviiliialitj', and tbo Wlti of each in
turn 13 a separate tranaaction vrliiuh finds no
cornpeuBHtion for suflering involved, no justice,
no fruit of its efforts, in the life of its successor.
It ia possible to argue on the assumption of a
now independent creation i>f a human soul,
every time a new human form is produced by
physiological growth, that in the after spiritual
state of such soul justice may be awarded ; but
then this conception 13 itself at variance with
the fundamental idea of evolution, which traces,
or believes that it traces, the origin of each aoul
to the working of highly developed matter in
each case. Nor is it less at variance with the
analogies of Nature, aa these come under our
observation ; bnt without going into that, it ia
enough for the moment to perceive that the
theory of spiritual evolution, na set forth in the
teaching of esoteric science, is, at any rate, in
harmony with these analogies, while at the
same time it satisfactorily meets the requiro-
menta of justice and of the instinctive demand
for continuity of individual life,

ThiB theory recc^nizea the evolution of the
Boul as a process that is quite continuous in
itself, though carried out partly through the
intermediation of a great series of dissociated
forma. Putting aside, for the moment, the
profound metaphysica of the tlicory which I race


14 INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION.

the principle of life from tbe original first
cause of the Cosmos, we find the soul i
entity emerging from tbc animal kingdom and
puBsing into tbe utirlieBt human forms, without
being at that time ripe for the higher intellec-
tual life with which the present state of bn-
manity renders us familiar. But through BU(^
ceaaive incarnations in forma whose physical
improvement, under the Darwinian law of
evolution, is constantly fitting them to be its
liabitfttions at each return to objective life, it
gradually gathers that enormous range of ex-
perience which is summed up in its higher de-
velopment. In the intervals between its physi-
cal incarnations, it prolongs and works out, and
finally exhausts or transmutes into so much ab-
stract development, the personal exjieriencea of
each life. This is the clue to that apparent
difficulty which besets the cruder form of the
theory of re-incamation, which independent
Bpeculation has sometimes thrown out. Each
man is unconscious of having led previous lives,
therefore he contends that subsequent lives can
afford him no compensations for this one. He
overlooks the enormous importance of the in-
tervening spiritual condition, in which he by
no means forgeta the personal adventures and
emotions be has just passed through, and Jn
ivhich he distills them into so much coemic


1

I


INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION. 16

progress. In the following pages the elucida-
tion of this profoundly interesting mystery is
attempted, and it will be seen that the view of
events now afforded us is not only a solution
of the problems of life and death, but of many
very perplexing experiences on the border land
between those conditions, — or rather between
physical and spiritual life, — which have en-
gaged attention and speculation so widely of
recent years in most civilized countries.

It was time, in fact, that the esoteric doc-
trine should be offered to modern thinkers
to assist them in grappling with the enigmas
which the spasmodic operation of very exalted
spiritual faculties in some cases — the manifes-
tation of some extra-physical laws and forces
of Nature in others — have been latterly ac-
cumulating on our hands in great abundance.
Rather, I imagine, because the conjectures put
forward to account for them were unacceptable
to the cultivated world at large, than because
the occurrence of extra-physical manifestations
of late years has been disbelieved altogether,
have most people been unwilling to pay close
attention to such occurrences. Nor is it neces-
sary that they should do so now, in order to
reach an intellectual standpoint from which the
whole range of possibilities in regard to com-
munications that may be established between


16 INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION.


the seen and the unseen worlds may be broadly
comprehended. The higher culture of the East
has been concerned with the investigation, in
its own congenial retirement, of that side of Na-
ture, while we in tho West have been pushing
forward our physical civilization to its pnsent
great lieight. Different races in the world ad-
vance in this way along different lines of prep-
ress; or, rather, — to state the idea more sci-
entifically in the light of the occult doctrine,
— all races have their cyclic progress to accom-
plish, at one period of which they are concerned
with phyeical and at another with spiritual cul-
ture. We of the white race in Europe and
America — embodying within the last few cen-
turies one phase of the progress of our Bub-
seotion of humanity — have been concerned al-
most entirely, during the historic periiid, with
the development of our material civilization.
Our religions, meanwhile, have had to do rather
with the maintenance of spiritual aspirations in
a potential state, than with the keen investiga-
tion of the facts of Nature in the spiritual re-
gion. We have keenly investigated these facts
on the physical plane, for that was the proper
function of our age ; but all earnestness of ef-
fort on the part of Oriental races, in the mean-
while, has been turned in another direction.
There, physical civilization has been stagnant,


INTRODUCTION TO AIUKRICAN EDITION. 17

matei't^ progi'ess quite unimportatit, but spirit
ual itspinttious have been not merely kept up
as an underlying sentiment in people's minds,
— they have operated to produce the greatest
manifestations of activity with which the race
has been concerned. I do not mean that the
Indian or any other Asiatic race has been us
active in writing books and publishing discov-
eries in spiritual science as we in the West
have been with the literature and research ot
phyaica. That kind of activity is itself a mani-
festation of material civilization. But the Asi-
atic races have fermented with capacities for
great spiritual development, and the conse-
quence has been that many Eastern people
have devoted their Uvea to spiritual study and
i-esearch, always, of course, pursuing the meth-
ods of research and the modes of life appro-
priate to a cycle of spiritual progress, — meth-
ods which lead the student of — and stilt more
the adept in — such science into seclusion and
secrecy.

Probably it may be due in some way to an
opposite fermentation of causes in the East and
the West now that a certain interchange of
methods begins to be possible. I do not mean
that the West is turning away yet from ma-
terial civilization, nor the East slackening ita
devotion to spiiituality, but we here are cer-


18 INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION.

tftiiily leaJier now than we were a generation
or two Kgo to recognize the poseibiUty of ac-
quiring real knowledge of spiritunl Bcience, and
are more generally inipreaaed with the neces-
sity of such HcquiBitioDB. The East on the other
hand has partially relased its hitherto inviola-
ble reBcrvo. The important movement of which
this little book is one outcome constituteB a
double illustration of tho new tendency at last
discernible. It ia diacernible in several differ-
ent wajB to acute observers who once possPBB
themselves of the key to what is going on. But
it is only of that particular effort in which my
own willing services have been engaged that I
need now speak. A book more or less, in this
ocean of books which is constantly welling forth
from active Western civilization, may seem a
very small matter ; hut to the highly couBerva-
tive devotees of occult science in the East, a
book which sets forth in plain language, which
all who run may read, the hitherto secret in-
terpretations of Nature's Bpirihial design that
have hitherto been communicated only in the
deadliest secrecy to students of long absorption
in the pursuit of such teaching, constitutes a
violation of the old occult usage which is quite
bewildering and appidling. Ab my Brahman
critic above referred to points out, now that
the esoteric doctrine is once for all plainly


1


ISTRODVCTION TO A.VEItlCAf/ EDITION. 19

stated, it is seen to be embrtdied, a bit here
and a bit there, in the various snered writings
of India. But at the same time it was nowhere
stated in such terms as to be comprehensible
without prolonged and speciiil study. And for
the raost part the doctrine, in so far as it was
stated, was wrapped in allegory that Western
readers have rarely had the patience to unravel.
To all intents and purposes, though the knowl-
edge here set forth is no new discovery for those
by whom it is now revealed, it is a new revela-
tion for the whole world, — Eastern and West-
ern alike, — in its present explicit distinctness,
and has only been prepared for in the West,
but I trust prepared for sufficiently, by that
widespread seething interest in spiritual things
which has been working among ue for some
years past.

This interest has been stimulated in various
ways. The casual occurrence of phenomena
linking our physical perceptions with the un-
seen world has kindled an ardent enthusiasm
for inquiry along the path of investigation thus
pointed out, but the laws of Nature affecting
the vast realm of spiritual existence are far too
complicated to be discovered from an observa-
tion of the phenomena of the relatively nar-
row subdivision of that realm brought within
our cognizance almost exclusively by casual and


20 INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION.

irregular occurrences of the kind referred to.
It is only witli the help of esoteric science —
the accumulated experience of a great school of
inquirers, devoting faculties of the highest kind,
for a long series of ages, to the exploration
of spiritual mysteries — that a sufficiently wide
view of Nature can be obtained to embrace the
apparently disorderly phenomena of the astral
world, — the first beyond the physical frontier,
— in all-sufficing generahzations that cover the
whole scheme of spiritual evolution. These far-
reaching and magnificent conceptions of Nature
should not only recommend themselves, when
properly understood, to minds that have shrunk
from crude conclusions based on the imperfect
data of modern spiritual observation in the
West, but should also be recognized by modern
spiritualists themselves as calculated to purify
and expand their own doctrines, and guard
them from liability to underrate the grandeur
of the region into which they have partly
penetrated, by relying, for its interpretation,
too confidently on experiences gathered at its
threshold. For the theosophic teaching, which
has been too hastily resented by some spiritual-
ists who have conceived it hostile to their own
acquired knowledge, will be discovered, on a
closer examination, to include these experi-
ences, and only to disconcert some of the con-


INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION. 21

elusions derived from tliem. It must be re-
membered that my statements concerniug tbe
phenomena of Kama loca, — the astral world,
from wbich most of the phenomena of spirit-
oalism emanate, — Lave been the fruit of my
own questions and inqniriea rather than a por-
tion of a carefully adjusted aeries of lessons iu
occult science, dictated by professors applying
themselves to the art of teaching. That, in-
deed, has been the way in which the whole
body of exposition which this book contains
has been worked out, and it naturally follows
that some parts of it are less complete than
others, and thiit none can be mach better than
general outlines. In esoteric science, as in mi-
croscopy, the application of higher and higher
powers will always continne to reveal a grow-
ing wealth of detail ; and the sketch of an or-
ganism that appeared satisfactory enough when
its general proportions were first discerned, is
betrayed to be almost worse than insufficient
when a number of previously unsuspected minu-
t'lje are brought to notice. In this way, while
no mistake has been made as regards any state-
ment actually put forward in the following
pages on the subject of human evolution after
death, there will be more, I apprehend, to add
to that part of the explanation in later espan-
sions of it, if these become practicable, than to


22 WTROJIVCTIQX TO AMERICAN EDITION.

uay other. The points which, meunwhile, I
will iisk spiritualist readers to bear iu miod
are especially these :

Ist. It is already indicated that the dissolu-
tioD of the human jirinciples sifter death, though
one cannot help apeakiiig of the process as one
of dispersion, is not actually a mechanical sepa-
ration of parts, nor (ivcn a process analc^us to
the chemical dissolution of a compound body
iuto elements on the siime plane of matter.
The discussion of the process as if it were a
mechanical separation was represented from
the first as " a rough way of dealing with the
matter," and was adopted for the sake of em-
phasising the transition of consciousnesa from
one principle to another which goes on in the
astral world after di>alh. This transition of
consciousnesa is, in fact, the struggle between
the higher and lower duad.

2d. The struggle just referred to may be
regarded as an oscillittion of consciousnesa be-
tween the two duads ; and when the return of
consciousness to the lower principlea, during
this struggle, is stimulated and encouraged by
converse with still living entities on the earth
plane, with the help of mediumahip, the proper
spiritual growth of the entity in Kama loca is,
to that extent, — perhaps to a very consider-
able extent, — retarded. It is this considcrar


IKTRODVcriON TO AMERICAN EDITION. 23

tioQ which may, in a greater degree tlian any
other, account for the disapproval with which
the adepts of occalt science regard the active
practice of api ritual is tic intercourse with de-
parted human beings. Such intercourse, though
dictated from this side by the purest aifection,
may seriously retard and embarr;i33 the spirits
ual development of those who have gone in
advance of us.

3d. It is recognized in the following pages
that intercourse between living human beings
gifted with a very elevated sort of mediumship,
or spirituitl clairvoyance, aud departed friends
with whom they have been closely united in
sympathy during life, is possible on the highar
spiritual plane, after such persona have passed
through the struggle of Kama loca and have
been completely spiritualized. That intercourse
may be of a more subtle kind than can readily
be realized by reference to examples of ii)t«r-
coui-se on the earth plane, but may evidently
be none the less exhilarating to the higher per-
ceptions.

By dwelling on the points of contact between
the theosophic teachings and the experience of
the higher spiritualism, I think it will be found
that the alleged incompatibility of theosophy
Kud Bpirltualism is much less complete than is
supposed. It is impossible, I venture to assert.


24 INTRODUCTIOH TO AMERICAN EDITION.

that there can be any true psychic experience
which the doctrines of tbeosopby — or, to speak
more accurately, of that esoteric science of which
theOBOphy is the study — will fail to interpret
and explain. And if this partial exposition of
esoteric science may leave a good deal not yet
explained in the vast region of mystery whicti
separates death and re-birth, surely the revela-
tions which are made here go far enough to es-
tablish a good claim on our respectful attention
for the present, bo that some embarrassments
they may still leave to trouble our understand-
ing may fairly be passed to a suspense account,
tvhile we await a further illuminatioD, to be,
perhaps, obtainable hereafter.


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.


The teachings embodied in the present vol-
ume let in a flood of light on questions con-
nected with Buddhist doctrine which have
deeply perplexed previous writers on that re-
ligion, and offer the world for the first time a
practical clue to the meaning of almost all
ancient religious symbolism. More than this,
the esoteric doctrine, when properly under-
Btood, will be found to advance an overpower-
ing claim on the attention of earnest thinkers.
Its tenets are not presented to us as the in-
vention of any founder or prophet ; its testi-
mony is based on no written scriptures; its
views of Nature have been evolved by the re-
searches of an immense succession of investiga-
tors, qualified for their task by the poaaesaion
of spiritual faculties and perceptions of a higher
order than those belonging to ordinary human-
ity. In the course of ages, the block of knowl-
edge thna accumulated, concerning the origin
of the world and of man, and the ultimate des-


26 PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

tinies of our race, — concerning also the na-
ture of other worlds and statee of existence dif-
fering from those of our priiseut life, — checked
aud examined at every point, verified in all
directions, and constantly under examination
throughout, has come to be looked on by its
custodians as constituting the absolute truth
concei-niiig spiritual things, the actual state of
the fauts regarding vast regions of vital activ-
ity lying beyond tliis earthly existence.

Kiiroppan philosophy, whether concerned
with religion or pure metaphysics, has so long
been used to a sense of insecurity in specula-
tions outrunning the limits of physical experi-
ment, that absoUito truth about spiritual things
is hardly recognized any longer by prudent
thinkers as a reasonable object of pursuit; but
different habits of thought have been acquired
in Asia. The secret doctrine which, to a con-
siderable extent, I am now enabled to expound,
is regarded not only by all its adherents, but
by vast numbers who have never expected to
know more of it than that such a doctrine ex-
ists, as a mine of entirely trustworthy knowl-
edge, from which all religious and philosophies
have derived whatever they possess of truth,
and with which every religion must coincide if
it claims to be a mode of expression for truth.

This is a bold claim indeed, but I venture to


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 27

winomice the following exposition as one ot
immense importance to the world, because I
believe that claim can be eubBtantlated.

I do not say that within the compass of
this volume the authenticity of the esoteric
doctrine can be proved. Such proof cannot
be given by any process ot argument; only
throngh the development in each inquirer for
biroeelf of the faculties required for the direct
observation of Nature along the lines indicated.
But his primd facie conclusion may he deter-
mined by the extent to which the views of
Nature about to be unfolded may rucommend
themselves to his mind, and by the reasons
which exist for trusting the powers of observa-
tion of those by whom they are communicated.

Will it he supposed that the very magnitude
of the claim now made ou behalf of the eso-
teric doctrine, lifts the present statemont out
of the region of inquiry to which its title re-
fers, — inquiry as to the real inner meaning of
the definite and specific religion called Bud-
dhism? The fact is, however, that esoteric
Buddhism, though by no means divorced from
the associations of exoteric Buddhism, must not
be conceived to constitute a mere imperium in
imperio, — a central school of culture in the
vortex of the Buddhist world. In proportion
aa Buddhism retreats into the inner penetralia


88 PREFACE TO THE FIKST EDITWH.

of its fiiitb, these are found to merge iuto the
iDiier peiietmlia of other faiths. The coBmlo
conceptions, and the knowledge oC Mature on
which Buddhism not merely resls, bat which
constitute esoteric Buddhism, equally consti-
tute esoteric Bralimanism. And the esoteric
doctrine is thus regarded by those of all creeds
who are " enlightened " (hi the Buddhist sense)
as the absolute truth concerning Nature, Man,
the origin of the Universe, iind the destinies
toward which its inhabitants are tending. At
the same time, exoteric Buddhism has remained
in closer union with the esoteric doctrine than
any other popular religion. An exposition of
the inner knowledge addressed to English read-
ers in the present day, will thus associate itself
irresistibly with familiar outlines of Buddhist
teaching. It will certainly impart to these a
living meaning they generally aecm to be with-
out, but all the more on this account may the
esoteric doctrine be most conveniently studied
in its Buddhist aspect ; one, moreover, which
haa been so strongly impressed upon it since
the time of Gautama Buddha, that though the
essence of the doctrine dates back to a far more
remote antiquity, the Buddhist coloring has
now permeated its whole substance. That
which I am about to put before the reader i»
esoteric Buddhism, and for European studenti


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 29

approacliing it for the firat time, any other des-
ignation would be a inisnomer.

Tlie stateiiieat I have to make must be con-
sidered in its entirety before the reader will be
able to comprehend why initiates in tlie eso-
teric doctrine regard tlie concession involved in
the present disclosure of the general outlines
of this doctriue as one of startling maguitude.
One explanation of this feeling, however, may
be readily seen to epring from the extreme
sacreduess that has always been attached by
their ancient guardians to the inner vital truths
of Nature. Hitherto this aacredness has al-
ways prescribed their absolute concealment
from the profane herd. And so far as that
policy of concealment — the tradition of count-
leas ages — is now being given up. the new de-
parture which the appearance of this volume
signalizes mil be contemplated with surprise
and regret by a great many initiated disciples.
The Buriender to criticism, which may some-
times perhaps be clumsy and irreverent, of doc-
trines which have hitherto been regarded by
sucli persons as too majestic in their import to
be talked of at all except under circumstances
of befitting solemnity, will seem to them a ter-
rible profanation of the great mysteries. From
the European point of view it would be un-
reasonable to expect that such a book as this


80 FREFACK TO THE FIRST EDITION.

con be exempt from the ubukI rougli-and-t amble
treatment of new ideas ; and special convictions
or commonplace bigotry may sometimes ren-
der such treatment in the present case pecul-
iarly inimical. But all that, though a matter
of course to European exponents of the doc-
trmo like myself, will seem very grievous and
disgusting to its earlier and more regular repre-
aentativea. They will appeal sadly to the wis-
dom of the time-honored nile which, in the old
symbolical way, forbade the initiates from cast-
ing pearls before swine.

Happily, as I think, the rule has not been
allowed to operate any longer to the prejudice
of those who, while etlll far from being initi-
ated, in the occult sense of the term, will prob-
ably have become, by sheer force of modern
culture, qualified to appreciate the concession.

Part of the information contained in the fol-
lowing pages has been thrown out in a frag-
mentaiy form during the last eighteen months
in " The Theosophist," a monthly magazine,
published hitherto at Bombay, but now at
Madras, by the leaders of the Tlieoaophical So-
uiety. As almost all the articles referred to
have been my own writing, I have not hesi-
tated to weld parts of them, when this course
has been convenient, into the present volume.
A certain advantage is gained by thus showing


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITIOH. 81

how the separate pieces of the mosaic, as first
presented to public notice, drop naturally into
their pUces in the (comparatiTely} finished
paTement.

The doctrine or system now disclosed in its
broad outlines has been so jealously guarded
hitherto, that no mere literary researches, though
they miglit have eurrycombed all India, could
have brought to light any morsel of the infor-
mation thus revealed. It is given out to the
world at last by the free grace of those in whose
keeping it has hitherto lain. Nothing could ever
have extorted from them its very first letter. It
is only after a perusal of the present explanations
that their position generally, as regards their
present dist^osures or their previous reticence,
can be criticised or even comprehended. The
views of Nature now put forward are altt^ether
unfamiliar to European thinkers ; the policy of
the graduates in esoteric knowledge, which haa
grown out of their long intimacy with these
views, must be considered in connection with
the peculiar bearings of the doctrine itself.

As for the circumstances under which these
revelations were first foreshadowed in "The
Theosophist," and are now rounded off and ex-
panded as my readers will perceive, it ia enough
for the moment to say, that the Theosophical
Society, through my connection with which the


32 PRKFACE TO TltE FIRST EDITION.

mnteriala denlt with m this vnlume liave come
into my hnnda, owes its establishment to certain
persons who are among the (Custodians of eso-
teric science. The information poured out iit
lost for the benefit of all who nre ripe to receive
it has been destined for communication to the
world tlirough the Theosophical Society Bince
the foundation of timt body, and later circum-
Btancas only have indicated inyeelf as the agent
through whom the communication could be con-
Teniently made.

Let me add, that I do not regard myself aa
the solo exponeht for the out^r world, at this
crisis, of esoteric truth. These teachings ure the
final outcome, as regards pliilos<iphical knowl-
edfro, of the relations with the outer world
which have been eBtablished by the custodians
of esoteric truth, through me. And iL is only
iTghrding the acta and intentions of tlioae eso-
teric leacht'rs who have chosen to work through
me, that I can have any certain knowledge.
But, in different ways, some other writers are
eugHged in expounding for the Itcnefit of the
l^mrld — and, as I lielieve, in acix>nlanoe with a
; plan, of which this volume ia a part —
a truths, in different aspects, that T am
mminioned to unfold. A remarkable book,
AiliriMd within tlie hist yettr or two, "The
i W»y," )u«y bt- spitiallij meuuoued, as


PREFACE TO THF. FIRST EDITION. 33

showing liow more roiids th^n one may lead
to a mountain- top. The inner inspirationB of
"The Perfect Way" appear to me identical with
the philoaopliy that I have learned. The sym-
bols in which those inspii'ations are clothed, in
my opinion, I am bound to add, are liable to
mislead the student ; but this is a natural con-
sequence of the circumstances under which
the inner inspiration has been received. Far
more important and interesting to me tlian the
discrepancies between the teachings of " The
Perfect Way " and my own, are the identities
that may be traced between the clear scientific
explanations now conveyed to me on the plane
of the physical inteUeet, and the ideas which
manifestly underlie those communicated on an
altogether different system to the authors of
the boob I mention. These identities are a
gi'eat deal too close to be the result either of
coincidence or parallel speculation.

Probably the great activity at present of
mere ordinary literary speculation on problems
lying beyond the range of physical knowledge,
may also be in some way provoked by that
policy, on the part of the great custodians of
esoteric truth, of which my own book is cer-
tainly one manifestation, and the volume I
have just mentioned, probably another. I find,
for example, in M. Adolphe d'Assicr's recently


84 PREFACE TO THE FtJiST EDITION.

publlalifid " Essai sur rHuraanitd PoBtliump,"
BoniB coiijeotures respecting tlie dt^stinntion of
the higlier liumao principles after death, which
are infused with quite a startling Qavnr of
true occult knowledge. Again, the ardor now
shown in " Psychical Research," by the very
diHttnguished, higlily gifted, and cultivated men
who lead the society in London devoted to that
object, is, to my iimer convictions, — knowing,
ua 1 do, something of the way the spiritual
aHpi rations of the world are silently influenced
by iboue whose work lies in that department of
Nature, — the obvious fruit of efforts parallel to
those with which I am more immediately con-
cerned.

It only remains for me to disclaim, on behalf
of the treatise which ensues, any pretension to
high finish as regards the language in which it
is cast. Longer familiarity with the vast and
DO ni plicated scheme of coamr^ny disclosed,
will no doubt suggest improvi^ments in the
phraseology employed to expound it. Two
years ago, neither 1 nor any other European
living knew the alphabet of the science here
for the first time put into a scientific shape, —
or subject, at all events, to an attempt in that
direction, — the science of spiritual causes and
thvir effects, of super- physical consciousness,
ef oosratcal evolution. Though, as I have er-


r


PREFACE TO TBE FIRST EDITION. 85

plained above, ideas biid begun to offer them-
selves to the world in more or lesa embarrassing
disguise of mystic symbology, no attempt had
ever been made by any esoteric teacher, two
years back, to pat the doctrine forward in its
plain abstract purity. As my own instruction
progressed on those lines, I have had to coin
phrases and suggest English words as equiv-
alents for the ideas which were presented to
my mind. I am by no means convinced that
in all cases I have coined the best possible
phrases and hit on the most neatly expressive
words. For example, at the threshold of the
subject we come upon the necessity of giving
some name to the various elements or attributes
of which the complete human creature is made
up. " Element " would be an impossible word
to use, on account of the confusion that would
arise from its use in other significations ; and
the least objectionable, on the whole, seemed to
me " principle," though to iin ear trained in the
niceties of metaphysical expression this word
will have a very uu satisfactory sound in some
of its present applications. Quite possibly,
therefore, in progress of time the Western
nomenclature of the esoteric doctrine may be
greatly developed in advance of that I have
provisionally constructed. The Oriental no-
menclature is far more elaborate, but metaphys-


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

ical Sanskrit seems to be painfully embarrassing
to a translator, — the fault, my India friends
assure me, not of Sanskrit, but of the language
in which they are now required to express the
Sanskrit idea. Eventually we may find that,
with the help of a little borrowing from &miliar
Greek quarries, English may prove more re-
ceptive of the new doctrine — or, rather, of the
primeval doctrine as newly disclosed — than
has yet been supposed possible in the East


CHAPTER I.


ESOTERIC TSAOHEBS.


Katnra of the PrcBent Exposition. — Seclusion of
Eastern Knowledge. — Thi: Arhats and their At-
tributes. — The Mahatmas, — Occultists generally.
— Isolated Mystics. — Inferior Yogis. — Occnlt
TrMning. — The Great Pnrpose, — Its IncidenLil
Conseqaencee. — Present Concessions ....

CHAPTER n.


Esoteric Cosmogony. — Where to Begin. — Working
back from Man to Universe. — Analysis of Man.
— The Seven Principles

CHAPTER IIL


Esoteric Views of Evolution. — The Chain of Globes.
— Progress of Man round them. — The Spiral
Advance. — Original Evolution of tlie Globes. —
The Lower Kingdoms


CHAPTER rV.


- RoundB I


nniformity of Nati

Septonaij Law. — ObjecLivc adiI Siibji

— Total Incarnations. — ForniGr Races

— Periodic CatBelysma. — Atlantis. —
-The Cyclic Law


CHAPTER V.


DEVACBAIV.


Spiritual Destinios oF the Ego. — Karma. — Divis-
ion of the l^rinciplcs at Daatli. — ProgresB of the
Higher Duud. — EsisUinue in Devachun. — Bul>-
JBctive Progress, — Avitohi, — Earthly Conooctioa
with Devachaa. — Devachanic Puriods . . . , 1


CHAPTER VL

KAMA LOO A.
The Astral Shell. —Its Habitat. — Its Nature.—

Surviving Impulses. — Elementals, — Mediums
and ShellH. — Atcideots and Suicides. — Loit Per-
BOualiticH I


i


CHAPTER Vn.


E'rogrcis of tho Main Wave.— Obscurations.- Twi-
light and Dawn of Evolution. — Our Neighboring


Hanets.— Gradations of Spirituality. — Prematurely
Developed I^B. — Intervals oF Re-IucamatioD . 1


CHAPTER VIII.

THR PROOBEaa OK HCMANITT.

The Chtuce o[ Good or Evil. — The Second Halt

of Evolution. — The Decisive Tiirning-Point —
Spirituality and Intellect. — The Survival of the
FitMat. — The Sixth Sense. — Development of
lie Principles in their Order. — The Subsidence
of the Unfit — Provision for All. — The Excep-

tjonal Cases Their Scientific Explanation. —

Justice Satiafied. — The Destiny of Failures. —
Human Evolution Reviewed 186


CHAPTER IX.

I BtTDDHA.

L The Esoteric Buduha. — Re- Incarnations of Adepts,

b — Buddha's Incarnation. — The Seven BudtUias

^fe of the Great Races. — Avalokitcshv^ara. — Addi

^M Buddha. — Adeptehip in Buddha's Time. — San-

^M karacharya, — Vedantin Doctrines. — Tsong-ka-pa,

H — Occult Reforms in Tibet 2

■ Its R<

H tial


CHAPTER X.


- Preceding Gradations. — Par-
tial Nirvana. — The Threshold of Nirvana. — Nir-


vans.— Pan Nirvana. — Buddha and Nirvana. —
Nirvana attained by Adepts. — General Progreis
towards Nirvana. — Conditions of its Attainment.
— Spirituality and Kuligion. — The Pursuit of
Truth 2

CHAPTER XI.


Tlie Days wid Nigbta of Brahma. — The Varknia
Manvantaraa and Pralayas. — Thu Sular System.
The Universal Pralaya. — Eecommeocoment of
Evolution. — " Creation." — The Great First
Cause. —The EMroal Cyclic Process . . . . 246

CHAPTER XII.

TUB DOCTBINR RKVIBWBD.

CorreBpondenceB of tbo Esoteric- IJovtrinu with Visl-
bla Nature. — Free Will and Predestinallon. —
The Origin of EtiI. — Geology, Biology, and the
Esoteria Teaching. — Buddbisoi anil Scholarship.
— The Origin of all Things. — The Doctrine ai
Distorted. — The Ultimate Dissolution, of Con-
RciouBness. — Transmigration. — The Soul and tite
Spirit. — Personality and Individuality. — Karma 265


ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.


CHAPTER L


BSOTEItlC TSA0HEE3.

Thb inlormation contained in the following
pages is do collection of inferences deduced
from Btudy. I am bringing to my readers
knowledge which I have obtained by favor
rather than by effort. It will not be found
the less valuable on that accoaot ; I venture,
on the contrary, to declare that it will be found
of incalculably greater value, easily as I have
obtained it, than any results in a similar direc-
tion which I could possibly have procared by
ordinary methods of research, even had I pos-
sessed, in the highest degree, that which I
make no claim to possess at all, Oriental schol-
arship.

Every one who has been concerned with In-
dian literature, and still more, any one who in
India has taken interest in talking with culti-
vated natives on philosophical subjects, will be


42 gaoTESic BUDDHISM.

aware of a general (conviction existing in the
Bast that there are men living who know
great deal more about philosophy, in the high-
est acceptation of the word, — the acience, the
true knowledge of spiritual tb in gn. — than
he found recorded in any hooks. In Europe
tlie notion of secrecy as applied to acience is so
repulsive to the pri^vuiling instinct, that the
first inclination of European thinkers is to deny
the existence of that which they bo much dis-
like. But circumstances have fully assured me
during my residence in India that the convio-
tion just referred to is perfectly well founded,
and I have been privileged at last to receive a
very considerable mass of instruction in the
hitlierto secret knowledge over which Oriental
philosopi lei's have brooded silently till now;
instruction which lias hitherto been only im-
parted to sympathetic students, prepared them-
selves to migrate into the camp of secrecy.
Tbeir teachers h;ive been more than content
that all other inquirers should be left in doubt
as to whether there was anything of importance
to learn at their hands.

With quite as much antipathy at starting
as any one could have entertained to the old
Oriental policy in regard to knowledge, 1 came
nevertheless to perceive that the old Oriental
knowledge itaelf was a very real and important


1


J


ESOTERIC TEACUERS. 43

poeseBsion. It may be excusable to regard the
high grapes as sour, so long as they are qaite
out of reach ; but it woultl be foolish to persist
in that opinion if a tall friend hands down a
bunch, and one finds them sweet.

For reasons that will appear, as the present
explanations proceed, the very considerable
block of hitherto secret teaching this volume
contains, has been conveyed to me, not only
without conditions of the usual kind, but to
the express end that I might convey it in my
turn to the world at large.

Without the light of hitherto secret Oriental
knowledge, it is impossible by any study of its
published literature, English or Sanskrit, for
students of even the most scholarly qualifica-
tions to reach a compteliension of the inner
doctrines and real meaning of any Oriental
religion. This assertion conveys no reproach
to the sympathetic, learned, and industrious
writers of grciit ability who have studied Ori-
ental religions generally, and Buddhism espe-
cially, in their external aspects. Buddhism,
above sll, is a religion which has enjoyed a
dual existence from the very beginning of its
introduction to the world. The real inner
meaning of its doctrines has been kept back
from uninitiated students, while the outer
teachings have merely presented the multitude


44 ESOTERIC BUDDBIBM.

with a code of moral lesaone, and a veiled,
symbolical literature, hinting at the existence
of knowledge in the background.

This secret knowledge, in reality, long ante-
dated the passage through earth-Ufe of Gau-
tama Budilba. Brahmanical philosophy, in
E^ea before Buddha, embodied the identical
doctrine which may now be described as Eso-
teric Buddhism. Its outlines had indeed been
blurred, its scientific form partially confused,
but the genei-id body of knowledge was already
in poasession of a select few before Buddha
came to deal with it. Buddha, however, un-
dertook the task of reviaing and refieshiiig tha
esoteric, science of the inner circle of initiates,
aa well as the morality of the outer world. Tha
oircuraatances under which this work waa done
have been wholly misunderstood, nor would a
Btraightforward explanation thereof be intelli-
gible without explanations, which must first be
furnished by a survey of the esoteric scienoe
itself.

From Buddha's time till now the esoteric sci-
ence referred to has been jealously guarded aa
a precious heritage belonging exclusively to
regularly initiated members of mysteriously or-
ganized associations. These, so far as Bud-
L ia concerned, are the Arahats, or, more
properly, Arhats, referred to in Buddhitit liter-


BBOTERIC TEACnERa. 45

uture. They are the initiates who tread the
" fourth path of holiness," spoken of in esoterio
Buddhist writings. Mr. Rhys Davids, refer-
ring to a maltiplicity of original texts and
Sanskrit authorities, says : " One might fill
pages with the awe-atnick and ecstatic praise
which is lavished in Buddhist writings on this
condition of mind, the fruit of the fourth path,
the state of an Arahat, of a man made perfect
according to the Buddhist faith." And then
malting a series of running quotations from
Sanskrit authorities, he saya: "To him who
has finished the path and passed beyond sor-
row, who has freed himself on all sides, thrown
away every fetter, there is no more fever or
grief. . . . For such there are no more births,
, . . they are in the enjoyment of Nirvana.
Their old karma is exhausted, no new karma
is being produced ; their hearts are free from
the longing after future life, and no new yearn-
ings springing up within them, they, the wise,
are extinguished liite a lamp." These paasi^es,
and all like them, convey to European readers,
at all events, an entirely false idea as to what
sort of person an Arhat really is, as to the life
he leads while on earth, and what he antici-
pates later on. But the elucidation of such
points may be postponed for the moment.
Some further passages from exoteric treatises


46 ESOTERIC aUDDBlBM.

may first be Belected to ahow what an Arhat ia
generally suppoEed to be.

Mr. Rliys Diivids, speaking of Jkana and
Samadhi, — the belief that it was poBsible by
intense Bblf-absorption to attain supernatural
faculties and powers, — goes on to a«y: "So
far as I mn Hware, no instance is recorded of
any one, not either a meraher of the order,
or a Bfiihrnun ascetic, acquiring these powers.
A Buddha always poaseBBed them; whether
Arahiits, as such, could work the particular
minicles in question, and whether of mendicanta
only, Arahats or only AsekhaB could do so, is at
present not clear." Very little in the sources
of information on the subject that hiive hitherto
been explored will be found clear. But I am
now merely endeavoring to show that Bud-
dhist literature teems with allusions to tlis
greatness and powers of the Arhats. For more
intimate knowledge concerning them, special
circumstances must furnish us with the required
explanations.

Mr. Arthur Lillie, in "Buddha and Early
Buddhism," tells us: "Six supernatural fac-
ulties were expected of the ascetic before be
could claim the grade of Arhat. They are
constantly alluded to in the SutraB as the six
supernatural faculties, usually without further
Ipecification. . . . Man has a body composed


BBOTERIC TEACHESB. 47

of the four elements, ... In this traneitoi-y body
his intellig«Jice is enchained. The ascetic find*
ing himself thus confused, directs his mind to
the creation of the Manas. He repreaenta to
himself, in thought, another body created from
this material body, — a body with a form,
members, and organs. This body, in relation
to the material body, is like the sword and the
scabbard, or a aerpt^nt issuing frnm a basket in
which it is confined. The ascetic then, purified
and perfected, begins to practice supernatural
fiLculties, He finds liimself able to pasa through
material obstacles, walls, ramparts, etc. ; he is
able to throw bis phantasmal appearance into
many places at once, ... he can leave thia
world and even reach the heaven of Brahma
himself. , . . He acquirea the power of hearing
the sounds of the unseen world as distinctly as
thoae of the phenomenal world, — more dis-
tinctly, in point of fact. Also by the power of
Manas be is able to read the most secret
thoughts of others, and to tell their characters,"
And so on with illustrations. Mr. Lillie has
not quite accurately divined the nature of the
truth lying behind this popular version of the
(acts ; but it ia hardly necessary to quote more
to show that the powers of the Arhata and their
insight into spiritual things are respected by
the world of Buddhism most profoundly, even


18 ESOTERIC BUDDRIBM,

though the Arhata themselves have been singu-
larly indispoBed to favor the world with aato-
biographiea or scientific accoiinta of "the six
supernatural powers,"

A few sentences from Mr. Hoey's recent
translation of Dr. Oldenbei^'s "Buddha: his
Life, his Doctrine, liis Order," may fall con-
veniently into this place, and then we may pass
on. We read: "Buddhist proverbial philoa-
ophy nttrihutes in innumerable paaaages the
possession of Nirvana to the aaint who still
treads the earth, ' The disciple who ban put off
lust and desire, rich in wisdom, iias here on
earth attained delivei'ance from death, tlie rest,
the Nirvana, the eternal state. He who has
esc-aped fmm the trackless hard mazes of tlie
Sansara, who has crossed over and readied the
shore, self- absorbed, without stumbling and
without doubt, who has delivered himself from
the earthly and attained Nirvana, him I call a
true Brahman.' If the a»int will even now put
an end to his state of being, he can do so, but
the majority stand fast until Nature has reached
her goal ; of such may those words be said which
are put in the mouth of the most prominent of
Buddha's disciples, ' I long not for death ;
I long not for life ; I wait till mine hour come,
like a servant who awititeth hia reward." "

A multipliciitiou of such <]Uotatioiis would


BBOTERIC TEACBEBB. 49

merely involve the repetition in Tarioua forma
of exoteric coDceptions concerning the Arlisits.
Like every fact or thonglit in Buddhism, the
Arhat has two aspects, that in which he is pre-
sented to the world at large, and that in which
he Uvea, moves, and has hb being. In the
popular estimation he is a saint waiting for ii
spiritual reward of the kind the populace can
understand, — a wonder-worker meanwhile by
favor of supernatural c^oncies. In reality be
is the long-tried and proved-worthy custodian
of the deepest and innermost philosophy of
the one fundamental religion which Buddha re-
freshfd and restored, and a student of natural
science standing in the very foremost front of
human knowledge, in regard not merely to the
mysteries of spirit, but to (he material constitu-
tion of the world as well.

Arhat is a Buddhist designation. That
which is more familiar in India, where the
attributes of Arhatahip are not necessarily
associated with professions of Buddhism, is
Mahatma. With stories iibout the Mahatmas
India is saturated. The older Mahatmas are
generally spoken of as Hishis ; bat the terms
are interchangeable, and I have heard the title
Riahi applied to men now living. All the at-
tributes of the Arhats mentioned in Buddhist
writings are described, with no leas reverence.


60 ESOTERIC BUDDHIBM.

in Indian literature as those of the Mahatmas ;
and this volume might be readily filled with
translations of vernacular books, giving accounts
of miraculous nchievements by such of them as
are known to history and tradition by name.

In reality, the Arhats and the Mahatmas are
the same men. At that level of spiritual ex-
altation, supreme knowledge of the esoteric
doctrine blends all original sectarian distino-
tions. By whatever name such illuminati may
be called, they are the adepts of occult knowl-
edge, sometimes spoken of in India now as the
Biothei's, and the custodians of the spiritual
science which has been handed down to them
by their predecessora.

We may searcli both ancient and modern lit-
erature in vain, however, for any systematic
expliination of their doctrine or science. A
good deal of this is dimly set forth in occult
writing ; but very little of this is of the least
use to readers who t»ke up the subject without
previous knowledge acquired independently of
books. It is under favor of direct instruction
from one of their numbers that I am now en-
abled to attempt an outline of the Mahatmas'
teaching, and it is in the same way that I have
picked up what I know concvrning thi
ixation to which most of them, and the
est, in the present day belong.


I have ■
organ- fl
great ■


^^^ ESOTERIC TEACEER8. 61

I All over the world there are occultiata of vari-

I 0U3 degr«ea of eminence, and occult fraternities

II even, which have a great deal in commonwith
|< the leading fraternity now established in Tibet.

fiut all my inquiries into the Bubject have con-
vinced me that the Tibetan Brotherhood is
incomparably the highest of such associations,
and regarded as such by all other associations,
— worthy of being looked upon themselves as
really "enlightened" in the occult sense of
the term. There are, it ia true, many isolated
mystics In India who are altogether self-taught
and anconnected with occult bodies. Many of
these will explain that they themselves attain
to higher pinnacles o[ spiritual enlightenment
than the Brothers of Tibet, or any other peo-
ple on earth. But the examination of such
claims in all cases I have encountered would,
I think, lead any impartial outsider, however
little qualified himself by personal development
to be a judge of occult enlightenment, to the
conclusion that they are altf^ether unfounded.
I know one native of India, for example, a man
of European education, holding a high appoint-
ment under government, of good station in
society, raoat elevated character, iind enjoying
unusual respect with such Europeans as are
concerned with bim in official life, who will
only accord to the Brothers of Tibet a second


62 ESOTERIC DDDDBIBM.

place ill the world of spiritual enlighten ine lit.
Tbo firat plsice he regards as occupied by one
persuti, now in this world no longer, — his own
occult tnaater in life, — whom he reBolutely
asBerte to tiave been an incarnation of the
Supreme Being. His own (ray friend'e) inner
Benses were so fur awakened by this Master,
that the visions of bis entranced state, into
which he can still tlirow himself at will, are to
him the only spiritual region in which he can
feel interested. Convinced that the Supreme
Ituing was his personal instructor from the be<
ginning, and continues so still in the subjective
state, he is naturally inaccessible to suggestions
that his impressions may be distorted by rea-
son of his own misdirected psychological de-
velopment. Again, the highly cultivated dev-
otfH^H, to be met with occasionally in India,
who build up a conception of Nature, the uni-
verse, and God entirely on a metaphysical
basis, and who have evolved their systems by
sheer force of transcendental thinking, will
take some establiabed system of philosophy as
its groundwork, and amplify on this to on
extent which only an Oriental metaphysician
oonld dream of. They win disciples who put
implicit faith in them, and found their little
school, which nourishes for a time within its
own limiLs; but 8j>eculative philosophy of socii


w


ESOTERIC TEACBERB. 53

a kind is rather occupation for the mind than
knowledge. Such " Masters," by comparison
with the organized adepts of the highest
brotherhood, are like rowing boats compared
with oceiin ateamships, — helpful canvejances
on their own native lake or river, but not craft
to wliose protection you can trust yourself on a
world-wide voyage of exploration over the sea.

Descending lower iigain in the sciile, we find
Indi» dotted all over with Yogis and Fakirs, in
all stages of selE-development, from that of dirty
savages, but little elevated above the gypsy for-
tune-tellers of an English race-course, to men
whose seclusion a stranger will find it very dif-
ficult to penetrate, and whose abnormal facul-
ties and powers need only be seen or experi-
enced to shatter the incredulity of the most
contented representative of modern Western
skepticism. Careless inquirers are very apt to
confound such persons with the great adepts of
whom they may vaguely hear.

Concerning the real adepts, meanwhile, I
cannot at present venture on any account of
what the Tibetan organization is like, as re-
gards its highest ruling authorities. Those
MahatmuB themselves, of whom some more
or less adequate conception may perhaps he
formed by readers who vrill follow me pa-
tiently to the end, are subordinate by several


L^


64 ESOTERIC SUDDBISM.

degrees to the chief of nil. Let us deal

with the earlier conditions of occult training,

which can more easily be grasped.

The level of elevation which constitutes a
man — what the outer world calls a Mabatma
or " Brother " — is only attained after pro-
longed and weary probation, and anxious or-
deals of really terrible severity. One may find
people who have spent twenty or thirty years
or more in bUmeless and arduous devotion to
the Iife-t;i8k on which they have entered, and
are still in the earlier degrees of ehelasbip, still
looking up to the heigiits of adeptship as far
above their heads. And at whatever age a boy
or man dedicates himself to the occult career,
ho dedicates himself to it, be it remembered,
without any reservations and for life. The task
he undertakes is the development in himself of
a great many faculties and attributes which are
so utterly dormnnt in ordinary mankind, that
their very existence is unsuspected, the possi-
bility of their development denied. And these
faculties and attributes must he developed by
the chela himself, with very little, if any, help,
beyond guidance and direction from his master.
"The adept," says an occult aphorism, "be-
comes : he is not made." One may illustrate
this point by reference to a. very commonplace
physical exercise. Every man living, having


rather H


BSOTERIC TEACBMBS. 66

the ordinary use of his limbs, is qualified to
swim. But put those who, as the cummon
phvaae goes, cannot swim, into deep water, and
they will struggle and be drowned. The mere
w»y to move the limbs is no mystery ; but un-
less the swimmer, in moving them, has & full
belief that such movement will produce the
required result, the required result is not pro-
duced. In this case, we are dealing with me-
chanical forces merely, but the same principle
runs up into dealings with subtler forces. Very
niiH'h further than people generally imagine
will mere "confidence" carry the occult neo-
phyte. How many European readers, who
would be quite incredulous if told of some re-
sults which occult chulas in the most incipient
stages of their tniining have to accomplish by
dlieer force of confidence, hear constantly in
cliiirch, nevertheless, the familiar biblical as-
surances of the power which resides in faith,
and let the words pass by like the wind, leav-
ing no impression.

The great end and purpose of adeptship ia
the achievement of spiritual development, the
nature of which ia only veiled and disguised
by the common phrases of exoteric language.
That the adept seeks to unite his soul with
God, that he may thereby pass into Nirvan.i, is
a statement that conveys no definite meaning


&6 EBOTERIC BUDDUIBM.

to the ordinary reader; and the more he ex-
aniiiKis it witli the lielp of urdiiiary books and
mutliuda, the less likely will he be to realize
the uature of the process contemplated or of
the condition desired. It will be necessary to
deal first with the esoteric conception of Nar
ture, and the origin and deBtinies of Man,
which differ widely from theulugical concep-
tions, before an explanation of the aim which
the udept pursues can become intelligible.
Meanwhile, however, it is desirable, at the very
outset, to disabuse the reader of otie misconcep-
tion in regard to the ohjecta of udeptahip that
he may very likely have framed.

The development of those spiritual faculties,
whose culture has to do with the highest ob-
jects of the occult life, gives rise as it pro-
gresses to » great deal of incidental knowledge,
having to do with physical laws of Nature not
yet generally understood. This knowledge, and
the practical art of manipulating certain ob-
scure forces of Nature, which it brings in its
train, invest an adept, and even an adept's
pupils, at a comparatively early stage of their
education, with very extraordinary powers, the
application of which to matters of daily life
will sometimes produce results that seem alto-
miraculoua; and, from the ordinary
point of view, the acquisition of apparently


1


I


J


BBOTBBIC TEACRERB. 57

miraculous power is bucK a stupendous acfaieve-
inent, that people are sometimes apt to fancy
the adept's object in seeking t!ie knowledge ha
attains has been to invest himself with these
coveted powers. It would be aa reasonable to
Bay of any great patriot of military history that
hia object in becoming a soldier had been to
wear a gay uniform and impress the imagina-
tion of the nurae-maids.

The Oriental method of cultivating knowl-
edge has always differed diametrically from
that pursued in the West during the growth
of modfrn science. Whilst Europe has investi-
gated Nature as publidy as possible, every step
being discussed with the utmost freedom, and
eyery fresh fact acquired circulated at once
for the benefit of all, Asiatic science bas been
studied secretly and its conquests jealously
guarded. I need not as yet attempt either
criticism or defense of its methods. But at
all events these methods have been relaxed to
some extent in my own case ; and, as already
stated, it ia with the full consent of my teach-
ers that I now follow the bent of my own in-
clinations as a European, and communicate
what I have learned to all who may be will-
ing to receive it. Later on it will be seen bow
the departure from the ordinary rules of occult
Study embodied in the concessions now made,
&1JI& uaturally into its place in the whole sclieme


68 ESOTERIC BUDDBIBM.

of occult philosophy. The approachee to that
philosophy have iilways Ijuen open, in one seuse,
to alL Vaguely throughout the world in vari-
ous ways has been diffueed the idea that tome
protjeSB of Btady which men here and there did
Hiitually follow, might lead to the acquisition ol
a higher kind of knowledge than that taught
ti> mankind at large in books or by public relig-
ious preachers. The East, as pointed out, has
always been more than vaguely impressed with
this belief; but even in the West the whole
bli>ck of symbolical literature relating to astrol'
ogy, alchemy, and mysticism generally has fer-
mented in European society, carrying to some
fi'w peculiarly receptive and qualified minds
tliB conviction that behind all this Buperficially
meaningless nonsense great truths lay con-
cealed. For such pei'sons eccentric study has
sometimes revealed hidden passages leading to
the grandest imaginable realms of enlighten*
ment. But till now, in all such cases, in ac-
cordance with the law of those schools, the neo-
phyte no sooner forced his way into the region
of mystery, than he was bound over to the moat

1 inviolable secrecy as to everything connected
with his entrance and further progress there.
In Asia, in the same way, the chela, or pupil

' of occultism, no sooner became a chela than be
>ed to be a witness on behalf of the reality

h^ occult knowledge. I have been astonished


ESOTERIC TEACHERS. 59

to find, since my own connection with the sub-
ject, how numerous such chelas are. But it is
impossible to imagine any human act more im-
probable than the uniiuthorizcd revelation by
any such chela, to persona in the outer world,
that he is one; and so the great esoteric school
of philosophy successfully guards its aeclusion-

In a former book, "The Occult World," I
have given a full and straightforward narrative
of the circumstances under which I came in con-
tact with the gifted and deeply instructed men
fi-om whom I have since obtained the teaching
this volume contains. I need not repeat the
fltory. 1 now come forward prepared to deal
with the subject in a new way. The existence
of occult adepts, and the importance of their
acquirements, may be established along two dif-
ferent lines of at^ument : firstly, by means of
external evidence, — the testimony of qualified
witnesses, the manifestation by or through per-
sons connected with adepts of abnormal facul-
ties, affording more than a presumption of ab-
normally enlarged knowledge ; secondly, by the
presentation of such a considerable portion of
this knowledge as may convey intrinsic assur-
ances of its own value. My first book pro-
ceeded by the former method ; I now approach
the more formidable task of working on the
tatter.


CHAPTER n.

THE OONSTITDTION OF MAN.

A BUBVBY of wamt^ny, as comprehended
by occult science, must precede any attempt to
explain ttie means by which a knowledge of
that coBtnogony itself has been acquired. The
inethode of esoteric rusearuh hitve f^rown out
of niitural facte, with which exoteric science is
wholly unacquainted. These natural fact^ are
concerned with the prematnre development in
ODcalt adepts of faculties which mankind at
large has not yet evotvod ; and these faculties,
in turn, enable their jxwaessors to explore the
mysteries of Nature, and verify the esoterio
doctrines, setting forth its grand design. The
practical student of occultism may develop tha
faculties first, and apply them to the observa-
tion of Nature afterwards; but the exhibition
of the theory of Nature for Western readers
merely seeking its intellectual comprehension,
must precede consideration of the inner senses,
which occult research employs. On the other
hand, & survey of cosmogony, aa comprehended


THE COlfBTITUTlON OF MAN. 61

by occult acience, could only be scientifically
arranged at the expense oE intelligibility for
Earopean renders. To begin at the beginning,
we ebould endeavor to realize tLe state of tlie
nniverse befoiu evolution sels in. Tliia subject
is by no means shirked by esoteric students;
and later on, in the uuurse of this sketch, some
hints will be given conceiinng the views occult-
ism entertains of the earlier processes through
which cosmic matter passes on its way to evolu-
tion. But an orderly statement of the earliest
processes of Nature would embody references
to man's spiiitunl constitution, which would
not be understood without some preliminary
explanation.

Seven distinct principles are recognized by
esoteric science as entering into the consti-
tution of man. The classification differs so
widely from any with which European readers
will be familiar, that I shall naturally be asked
for the grounds on which occultism reaches so
^-fetched a conclusion. But I must, on ac-
count of inherent peculiarities in the subject,
which will be comprehended later on, beg for
this Oriental knowledge I am bringing home a
■ hearing (in the first instance, at all events) of
I the Oriental kind The Oriental and the Eu-
I vopean systems of conveying knowledge are as
I unlike as any two methods can be. The West


62 ESOTEBIC BUDDBIBM,

pricks and piques the lesroerB oootrovennal
instinct at every Ktep. He is eocoaraged to
(liapute and resist confiction. He is forbidden
to take any scientific statement on aotbority.
Pari paitu, as be acquires knowledge, be must
leam how that knowledge bas been acquired,
and he is made to feel that no fact is worth
knowing, uole&s he knows, with it, the way to
prove it a fact. The East manages its pupils
on a wholly different plan. It no more disre-
gards the necessity of proving its teaching than
tlie West, but it provides proof of a wholly dif-
ferent sort. It enables the student to seiin-h
Nature for himself, and verify its teachings, in
those regions which Western philosophy can
only invade by speculatiun and argument. It
never takes the trouble to iirgue about any-
I thing. It says: "So and so is fact; here is

I the key of knowledge; now go and see for

L yourself." In this way it coines to pass that

H teaching peT se is never anything else but

H teaehing on authority. Teaching and proof

H do not go hand in hand ; tliey follow one an-

H other in due order. A further consequence of

H this method is that Eastern philosophy employs

H the method which we in the West have dis-

H Diirdi>(l for good reasons as incompatible with

^L our own line of intellectual development, — the

^^^^B lystem of roasoiiiiig from generals to particu-


TEE CONSTITDTION OF MAN. 68

lars. The purposes wtiich European science
usually has in view would certainly not ba an-
swered by that plan, but I think that any oue
who goes far in the present inquiiy will feel
that the system of reasoning up from the de-
tails of knowledge to general inferences is in-
applicable to the work in hand. One cannot
understand details in this department of knowl-
edge till we get a general understanding of the
whole scheme of things. Even to convey this
general comprehension by mere language is a
large and by no means an easy task. To pause
at every moment of the exposition in order to
collect what separate evidence may be avail-
able for the proof of each separate statement,
would be practically impossible. Such a method
would break down the patience of the reader,
and prevent him from deriving, as he may from
a more condensed treatise, that definite concep-
tion as to what the esoteric doctrine means to
teach, which it is my business to evoke.

The reflection may suggest, in passing, a new
view, having an intimate connection with our
present subject, of the Platonic and Aristotelian
systems of reasoning. Plato's system, roughly
described as reasoning from universals to partic-
ulars, is condemned by modern habits in favor
of the later and exactly inverse system. But
Plato was in fetters in attempting to defend hia


64


EBOTiCSIC BUDDBISM.


Bystein. There u every reason to believe tbat
Lis ramiliarity with esoteric Bcience prompted
his inetbod, and timt the usunl reBtrictiona un-
der which he labored, aa an initiated occultist,
forbade him from saying aa much aa would
really juntify it. No one can study even as
much occult Bcieuoe as this volume contains,
and then turn to Plato, or even to any intelli-
)^ent epitome of Plato's system of thought, with-
out finding correspondences cropping out at
every turn.

The higher principles of the series which go
to constitute man are not fully developed in the
mankind with which we are as yet familiar,
but a complete or perfect man would be resotv*
able into the following elements. To facilitate
the application of these explanuttons to ordi-
nary exoteric Uuddhiat writings, the Sanskrit
names of these principles are given, as well as
suitable terms in English.'

< Thv nnniMKilHtura hera mdoptad lUOen illghtlj frnm UiU hit

fmipnenWryfcnnin niTieu—pkiil. Latoon itwill bo aeen Ihit
tho namvs nuw priiterred emhiHly i fuller conceptioa of the vhats
■y>Uin, and avahl tome dilBcullin lo which the urlutr uamei give
rim. It tho rarllar pnueBULlnni of e«atitric Bcionce were thai im-
pvrtnrt, 'in<i uin hiintly be niirpriaed iX bo natural b conwqueDeo
at thu dlfficnlllDt nniUr vhich iu Gngliib aiponenlB labomd. But
no (ubiUnlial emn hava to be coufcnsed or dcplonid. The coa-
nntallona uf Iba |>re>Bnt namea are more acourste (ban tbow of the
phraMiK flrnl milM-biit, but the oxgitanalitinn ciripn&lly piven, as br
aa llir.V wvut, wvra quila iti Itannony wiih Uiuae luivi deviik>|ied.


r


TBE CONSTITUTION OF MAH. ^

Tlie Body Rvpa.

Vitality Prana, or Jim.

Astral Body Linga Shari-a.

Animal Soul KamaRupa.

Human Soul Maaat.

Spiritual ,8oul Buddhi.

7. Spirit Atrna.

Directly conceptions so trail ace ndental aa
some of tliusQ included in this an^ilysis are set
forth in s. tabular Btatenieiit, they aeGra to incur
certain degiadation, ^ainat which, in endeav-
oring to realize clearly what is ineiint, we must
be ever on our guard. Certainly it would be
impossible for even the most skillful professor
of occult science to exhibit eacli of theao princi-
ples separate and distinct from the others, aa
the physical elements of a compound body can
be separated by analysis and preserved inde-
pendfintly of each other. The elements of a
physical body are all on tho same plane of ma-
teriality, but the elements of man are on very
different planes. The finest gases of which
the body may to some extent be chemically
1 are still, on one scale at all events,
on nearly the lowest level of materiality. The
second principle which, by its union with gross
matter, changes it fi'om what we generally call
inorganic, or what might more properly bo
called inert, into living matter, is at once a


66 EBOTERIC BODDHIBM.

Bomething different from the finest example tit
matter in ita lower state. Is the second princi-
ple, then, anything that we can truly call mat-
ter at all? The question lands us, thus, at the
very outset of this inquiry, in the middle of the
subtle metHphysical discussion as to whether
force and matter are different or identical.
Enough for the moment to state that occult
science regards them as identical, and that it
contemplates no principle in Nature aa wholly
immaterial. In this way, though no concep-
tions of the universe, of man's destiny, or of
Nature generally, are more spiritual than those
of occult science, that science is wholly free
from the lexical error of attributing material
results to immaterial causes. The esoteric doc-
trine is thus really the missing Uuk between
materialism and spirituality.

The clue to the mystery involved lies of
course in the fact, directly cf^^izable by occult
experts, that matter exists in other states be-
sides those which are cognizable by the Eve
senses.

The second principle of man, Vitality, thus
consists of matter in its aspect as force; and
its affinity for the grosser state of matter is so
great that it cannot be separated from any
given particle or mass of this, except by instan-
taneous translation to some other particle or


TEE CONSTITUTION OF MAN, 67

mass. Wben a man's body dies, by desertion
of the higher principles which have rendered it
a living reality, the second, or life principle, no
longer a unity itself, is nevertheless inherent
still in the particles of the body as this decom-
poses, attaching itself to other organisms to
which that very pvocesa of decomposition gives
rise. Buvy the body in the earth, and its Jiva
will attach itself to the vegetation which springs
above, or the lower animal forms which evolve
from its substance. Burn the body, and inde-
structible Jiva flies back none the less instan-
taneously to the body of the planet itself from
which it was originally borrowed, entering into
some new combination as its af&nities may de-
termine.

The third principle, the Astral Body, or
Linga Sharira, is an ethereal duplicate of the
physical body, its original design. It guides
Jiva in its work on the physical particles, and
causes it to build up the shape which these
assume. Vitalized itself by the higher princi-
ples, its unity is only preserved by the union of
the whole group. At deatli it is disembodied
for a brief period, and, under some abnormal
conditions, may even be temporarily visible to
the external sight of still living persons. Under
such conditions it is taken of course for the
ghost of the departed person. Spectral appari-


68 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

tions may sometimes be occiisioned in other
ways, but the third principle, when that resalta
in a visible phenomenon, ie a mere a^regation
of molecules in a peculiar state, having no life
or consciousness of any kind whatever. It is
no more a being than any cloud-wreath in the
sky wliich liappena to settle into the semblance
of some animal form. Broadly speaking, the
Linga Skarira never leaves the body except at
death, nor migrates far from the body even in
that case. When seen at all, and this can but
rarely occur, it can only be seen near where the
physical body still lies. In some very peculiar
cases of fipiritualistio mediumship, it may for a
short time exude from the physical body and be
visible near it, but the mi'dium iu such cases
stands the while in considerable danger of bis
life. Disturb unwillingly the conditions under
which the Linga Sharira was set free, and its
return might be impeded. The second prin-
ciple would then soon cease to animate the
physical body as a unity, and death would
ensue.

During the last year or two, while hints and
scraps of occult science have been finding their
way out into the world, the expression "Astral
Body " has been applied to a certain semblance
of the human form, fully inhabited by its higher
principles, which can migrate to any distance


J


THE CONSTITUTJGN OF MAN. 69

from the physical body, projected consciously
and with exact intention by a living adept, or
unintentionally, by the accidental application
of certain mental forces to hia loosened jjrinci-
ples, by any person at the moment of death.
For ordinary purposes there is no practical in-
convenience in using the expression "Astral
Body" for the appeariince so projected; in-
deed, any more strictly accuriite expression, tis
■will be seen directly, would be cumbersome,
and we must go on using the phrase in both
meanings. No confusion need arise; but,
strictly speaking, the Linga Sharira, or third
principle, ia the Astral Body, and that cannot
be sent abont as the vehicle of the higher prin-
ciples.

The three lower principles, it will be seen,
are altogether of the earth, perishable in their
nature as a single entity, though indestructible
as regards their molecules, and absolutely done
with by man at his death.

The fourth principle b the first of those
which belong to man's higher nature. The
Sanskrit designation, kama rupa, is often trans-
lated " Body of Desire," which seems rather a
clumsy and inaccurate form of words. A closer
translation, having regard to meanings rather
than words, would, perhaps, be *' Vehicle of
Will," but the name already adopted above.


70 ESOTERIC BODDBtSU.

Animtiil Son), may be more accarately snggea-
tive still.

In "The TheosophiBt" for October, 1881,
when the first hints about the septenary con-
stitution of man were given out, the fifth prin-
ciple vraa called the animal soul, as contrardis-
tinguished from the sixth or " spiritual soul ; "
but though this nomenclature sufficed to mark
the required dbtinction, it degraded the fifth
principle, which is essentially the human prin-
ciple. Though humanity is animal in its na-
ture as compared with apirit, it is elevated
above the correctly defined animal creation in
every other aspect. By introducing a new
name for the fiftb principle, we are enabled to
throw back the designation " animal soul " to
its proper place. This arrdngement need not
interfere, meanwhile, with an appreciation of
the way in which the fourth principle is the
seat of that will or desire to which the Sanskrit
name refers. And, withal, the Kama Rnpa %»
the aniTnal soul, the highest developed principle
of the brute creation, susceptible of evolution
into something far higher by its union with
the growing fifth principle in man, but still
the animal soul which man is by no means yet
without, the seat of all animal desires, and a
potent force in the human body as well, press-
ing upward, so to speak, as well m downward,


TEE CONST/ TUT /Off Ot UiN. 71

and capable of influencing the fifth, for practi-
cal purposes, as well as of being influenced by
tbe fifth for its own control and improvement.

The fifth principle, human soul, or Manas
(aa deflcribed in Sanskrit in one of its aspects),
is tbe seat of reason and memory. It is a por-
tion of this principle, animated by tho fourth,
which is reaily projected to distant places by
an adept, when he uaakes an appearance in
what is commonly called bia astral body.

Now the fifth principle, or human soul, in
the majority of mankind is not even yet fully
developed. This fact about the imperfect de-
velopment as yet of the higher principles is
very important. We cannot get a correct con-
ception of the present place of man in Nature
if we make the mistake of regarding him a^ a
fully perfected being already. And that mis-
take would be fatal to any reasonable anticipa-
tions concerning the future that awaits bim, —
fatal also to any appreciation of the appropri-
ateness of the future which the esoteric doctrine
explains to us as actually awaiting him.

Since the fifth principle is not yet fully de-
veloped, it goes without saying that the sixth
principle is still in embr3'o. This idea has been
variously indicated in recent forecasts of the
great doctrine. Sometimes, it has been said,
we do not truly possess any sixth principle, we


72 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

merely have germs of a sixth principle. It has
also been said, the sixth principle is not in us ;
it hovers over us ; it is a something that the
highest aspirations of our nature must work up
towurd. But it is also said: All tbiags, not
man alone, but every animal, plant, and min-
eral, have their seven principles, und the high-
est principle of all — the seventh itself — vital-
izes that continuous threiid of life which runs
all through evolution, uniting into a definite
succession the almost innumerable incarnations
of that one life which constitute a complete se-
ries. We must imbibe all these various con-
ceptions, and weld them together, or extract
their essence, to learn the doctrine of the sixth
principle. Following the order of ideas which
just now suggested the Application of the term
animal soul to the fourth principle and human
soul to the fifth, the sixth may be called the
spiritual soul of man, and the seventh, there-
fore, spirit itself.

In another aspect of the idea, the sixth prin-
ciple may be called the vehicle of the seventh,
and the fourth the vehicle of the fifth ; but yet
another mode ot dealing with the problem
teaches us to regard each of the higher princi-
ples, from the fourth upwards, as a vehicle of
what, in Buddhist philosophy, is called the One
Life or Spirit. According to this view of the


THE CONSTITDTION OF MAN. 73

matter the one life is that witich perfects, by
inhabiting the various vehicles. In tlu iuiima.1
the one life is concentrated in the kama rupa.
In man it begins to penetrate the fifth princi-
ple afi well. In perfected man it penetrates the
sixth, and when it penetrates the seventh, mun
ceases to be man, and attains a wholly superior
condition of existence,

This latter view of the position is especially
valuable as guarding against the notion that
the four higher principles are like a bundle of
sticlis tied together, but each having individu-
alities of its own if untied. Neither the ani-
mal Boul alone, nor the spiritual soul alone, has
any individuality at all ; but, on the other
hand, the fifth principle would be incapable of
separation from the others in such a way, that
its individuality would be preserved while both
the deserted principles would be left uncon-
scious. It has been said that the finer princi-
ples themaelvea even are material and molecu-
lar in their constitution, though composed of a
higher order of matter than the physical senses
can tate note of. So they are separable, and
the sixth principle itself can be imagined as di-
vorcing itself from ita lower neighbor. But in
that state of separation, and at this stage of
mankind's development, it could simply re-in-
carnate itself in such an emergency, and grow


74


ESOTERIC SffDDBI8M.


a new fifth principle by contact with a haman
oi^anism ; in auuh a case, the fifth principle
would lean upon and become one with the
fourth, and bu proportionately degraded. And
yet tbia fifth principle, which cannot stiuid
alone, is the personality of the man ; and ita
cream, in union with the sixth, his continuous
individuality through successive lives,

The circumstances and attractions under the
influence of which the principles do divide np,
and the manner in which the consciousness of
man is dealt with then, will be discussed later
on. Meanwhili*, a better understanding of tlie
whole position than could ensue from a oontin-
ned prosecution of the inquiry on these lines
now will be obtained by turning first to the
processes of evolution by means of which the
principles of mao have been developed.


CHAPTER m.


THE PLANETARY CHAIH.

Ebotbrio Science, though the most spirit-
ual sjstem imaginable, exhibits, as running
throughout Nature, the most exhanstive system
of evolution that the human mind can conceive.
The Darwinian theory of evolution is simply
an independent discovery of a portion — unhap-
pily but a small portion — of the vast natural
truth. But occultista know how to explain
evolution without degrading the highest prin-
ciples of man. The esoteric doctrine finds it-
self under no obligation to keep its science and
religion in separate water-tight compartments.
Its theory of physics and its theory of spirit-
uality are not only reconcilable with each
other, they are intimately blended together and
interdependent. And tlie first great fact which
occult science presents to our notice in refer-
ence to the origin of man on this globe will be
seen to help the imi^nation over some serious
embarrassments of the familiar scientific idea
of evolution. The evolution of man is not a


76 ESOTERIC BUDDHIBM.

process carried out on this planet alone. It is
a result to which many worlds in different con-
ditions of material and spiritual developmeat
have contrihuted. If this statement were
merely put forward as a conjecture, it would
Burely recommend itself forcibly to rational
minds. For there is a manifest irrationality in
the commonplace notion that miin's existence
ia divided into a material beginning, lasting
sixty or seventy years, and a spiritual remain-
der lasting forever. The irrationality amounts
to absurdity when it ia alleged that the acta of
the sixty or seventy years — the blundering,
helpless acts of ignorant human life — are per-
mitted by the perfect justice of an all-wise
Providence to define the conditions of that
later life of infinite duration. Kor is it lees ex-
travagant to imagine that, apart from the ques-
tion of justice, the life beyond the grave should
be exempt from the law of change, progress,
and improTument, which every analogy of Na-
ture points to as probably running through all
the varied existences of the universe. But once
abandon the idea of a uniform, unvarying, un-
progresaive life beyond the grave, once admit
the conception of change and progress in that
life, and we admit the idea of a variety hardly
compatible with any other hypothesis than that
of progress througli successive worlds. Aa we


, TBE PLAtfETAJtr CBAIN. 70

^ave said before, i»ect,are 9! afnioat ipo-vtcepf-

t science, but a fact, ascertained aad
i reach (for occultiats) of


processes 01 -"-"--^ ^ a " '^

not be supposed thai "" ^. **-'#^ ' ''^

garda the acheme of this ^.'- ^i.jr union to
which we belong. Tlie human imagination
iince Fket free is apt sometimes to bound too far.
Once let this notion, that the earth ia merely
one link in a mighty chain of worlds, be fully
accepted as probable, or true, and it may sug-
gest the whole starry heavens as the heritage
of the human family. That idea would involve
a seriouH misconception. One globe does not
afford Nature scope for the processes by which
mankind has been evoked from chaos, but these
processes do not require more than a limited
and definite number of globes. Separated as
these ace, in regard to the gross mechanical
matter of which they consist, they are closely
and intimately bound together by subtle cur-
rents and forces, whose existence reason need
not be much troubled to concede since the ex-
istence of some connection — of force or ethereal


78 KMominf uiuwuM^^ ^M

PP«rrM„ut ..nlgPg^ ml. k I

fc » Ji»g rta. «i«i. m iilll l l l>M tt« Jtff


ikMlkallfo-
ML

••bs fabblo
baUtiofnad.

' aad will Ix
^ vorid with
■j^ nai IMVKWM
lof w
ittal I


rw/f fLAHKTAUY (JtlAIN.
varrl Ui tliia ^T'm\fr*A arn of nlin/Mt Im

It will TfitAWy Iw MUfifKMtoil ttiNt thtt fhaSn itt
worMit Ui wlifcJi Uiln ihrLli lMil/iti({H urn iiiitMll
prdptirifl for a m^tbtrlal ttxi»UiHtA ttsa/itly, or
evi!n aj»[n-oxliiiat«ly r<m)riiMiri({ imr own, Tliorn
would Im no niMintii(f in an orKHiiiawd uliitln of
woi'l.U wlildi wvro nil olikd, nti'l mi({lit im w<iII
1 )iitvn iHvri HI mi I ({it mat in t UiUt <m<f. In rnal'

*iUl wlll^ll W<l W*l (iOIIIIIWltni]

u:h "tlmr, tuA rn<*rnly In out-

Ifiil, III lIihI. Niijrrnniii nlmriwitor-

I ill wlti'ili NjflHb an<l itiiilU>r

Otir own

tvl.ldl l.|,lf il.

I,y l.itl..n.'^Ml

I>[Hj«Ttl on MmlL

OVIlt^tll ill till)

Irnry, ll (xx-ii-

i, 'j'tl.^ W..l'l.k
tl.o».. in wlii^'li


80 ESOTERIC BVDDniSM.

their coDstitution — life there being more and
more succPBafully divorced from gross material
needs — will seem reasonable enougb at the first
glance. But the lirst glance in imagination at
those which might conversely be calkd the infe-
rior, but may with less inaccuracy be spoken of
as the preceding worlds, would perhaps Bu^eat
that they ought to be conversely less spiritual,
more material, than this earth. The fact is quite
the other way, and must be so, it will be seen on
reflection, in a ch^in of worlds which is an end-
less chain — i.e., round and round which the
evolutionary process travels. If that process
had merely one journey to travel along a p;ith
which never returned into itself, one could
think of it, at any rate, as working from almost
absolute matter, np to almost iibsolute spirit;
but Nature works always in complete curves,
and travels always in paths which return into
themselves. The earliest, as also the latest,
developed worlds — for the chain itself hiis
grown by degrees — the furthest back, as also
the furthest forward, are the most immaterial,
the moat ethereal of the whole series ; and that
this is in all ways in accordance with the fitness
of things will appear from the reflection that
the furthest forward of the worlds is not a re-
gion of finality, but the stepping-stone to the
furthest back, as the month of December leads


THE PLANETARY CHAIN. 81

as back again to January. But it is not a cli-
max of developmf lit from which the individual
monad falls, as by a cataatropbe, into the stute
from which he slowly began to ascend millions
of years previously. From that which, for rea-
sons which will soon appear, must be consid-
ered the highest world on the ascending arc ol
the circle to that which must be regarded as
the first on the descending arc, in one sense the
lowest — i. e., in the order of development —
there is no descent at all, but still ascent and
prt^ess. For the spiritual monad or entity,
whiuh has worked its way all round the cycle
of evolution, at any one of the many st^es of
development into which the various existences
around us may be grouped, begins its next cycle
at the next higher stage, and is thus stilt ac-
complishing prir^ress as it piisses from world
Z back again to world A. Many times does it
circle, in this way, right round the system, but
its passage round must not be thought of merely
as a cireular revolution in an orbit. In the
scale of spiritual perfection it is constantly as-
cending. Thus, if we compare the system of
worlds to a system of towers standing on a
plain — towers each of many stories and sym-
bolizing the scale of perfection — the spiritual
monad performs a spiral progress round and
round tlie series, passing through each tower,


82 ESOTERIC BUDDBiaU.

every time it comes round to it, at a higher
level than before.

It is for want of realizing this idea that spec-
alation, concerned with physical evolution, is
so constantly finding itself stopped by dead
walls. It is searching for its missing links in a
world where it can never 6nd tbem now, for
they were but required for a temporary pur-
pose, and have passed avu&y. Man, stiys the
Darwinian, was once an ape. Quite true ; but
the ape known to the Darwinian will never be-
come a man — i. e., the form will not change
from generation to generation till the tail diB-
appears and the hands turn into feet, and BO on.
Ordinary science avows that, tbongh changes of
form can be detected in prepress within the Itm-
ita of species, the ciianges from species to species
can only be inferred ; and to account for these,
it is content to assume great intervals of time
and the extinction of the intermediate forms.
There has been no doubt an extinction of the
iatermediate or earlier forms of all species (in
the larger acceptation of the word) — t. e., of all
kingdoms, mineral, vegetable, animal, man, etc.
— but ordinary science can merely guess that
to have been the fact without realizing tlie con-
ditions which rendered it inevitable, and which
forbid the renewed generation of the interme-
diate forms.


r


TBE FLANETART CHAIN. 83

It is tlie spiral character of the prepress ac-
complished by the life impulses that develop the
various kingdoms of Nature, which accounts
for the gaps now observed in the animated
forms which people the earth. The thread of a
screw, which ia a uniform inclined plane in real-
ity, looks like a succession of steps when ex.
aniined only along one line parallel to its axis.
The spiritual monads, which are coming round
the system on the animal level, pass on to other
worlds when they have performed their turn
of animal incarnation here. By the time they
come again, they are ready for human incarna-
tion, and there is no necessity now for the up-
ward development of animal forms into human
forms — these are already waiting for their spir-
itual tenants. But, if we go back far enough,
we come to a period at which there were no
human forms ready developed on the earth.
When spiritual monads, traveling on the ear-
liest or lowest Imman level, were thus begin-
ning to come round, their onward pressure in a
world at that time containing none but animal
forms provoked the improvement of the high-
eat of these into the required form — the much-
talked-of missing linlt

In one way of looking at the matter, it may
be contended that this explanation is identical
with the inference of the Darwinian evolution-


84 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

iat in regard to tUe development and extinction
of missing links. After all, it may be argued
by a materialist, " we are not concerned to ex-
press au opinion as to the origin of tlie tendency
in species to develop higher forma. We say
that they do develop these higher forms by
intermediate links, and that the intermediate
links die ont ; and you say just the same thing."
But there is a distinction between the two ideas
for any one who can follow subtle distinctions.
The natural process of evolution, from the influ-
ence of local circumstances and sexual aeleotion,
must not be credited with producing intermedi-
ate forms, and this is why it is inevitable that
the intermediate forms should be of a tempo-
rary nature and should die out. Otherwise,
we should find the world stocked with missing
links of all kinds, animal life creeping by
plainly apparent degrees up to manhood, human
forms mingling in indistinguishable confusion
with those of animals. The impulse to the
new evolution of higher forms is really given, as
we have shown, by rushes of spiritual monads
coming round the cycle in a state fit for the
inhabitation of new forms. These superior life
impulses burst the chrysaliB of the older form
on the planet they invade, and throw off an ef-
florescence of something higher. The forms
which have gone on merely repeating them'


TBE PLANET Ain' CHAIN. 86

BelveB for millenniums start afresh into growth ;
with relative rapidity they rise through the
intermediate into the higher forms, and then,
as these in tarn are multiplied with the vigor
and rapidity of all new growths, they supply
tenements of flesh for the spiritual entities com-
ing round on that stage or plane of existence,
and for the intermediate forms there are no
longer any tenants offering. Inevitably they
become estinct,

Thus is evolution accomplished, as regai-ds its
essential impulse, by a »piral progre»a through
the worlds. In the course of explaining this
idea we have partly anticipated the declaration
of another fact of first-rate importance as an aid
to correct views of the world-system to wliiuh
we belong. That is, that the tide of life — the
wave of existence, the spiritual impulse, call
it by what name we please — passes on from
planet to planet by rushes, or gushes, not by an
even continuous flow. For the momentary pur-
pose of illustrating the idea in hand, the process
may be compared to the filling of a series of
holes or tubs sunk in the ground, such as may
sometimes be seen at the mouths of feeble
springs, and connected with each other by little
surface channels. The stre;tm from the spring,
as it flows, is gathered up entirely in the begin-
ning by the first hole, or tub A, and it is only


BB ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

wlien this ia quite full that the coDtinued in-
pouring of watt-r from the spring causes that
which it already contains to overflow into tub
B. This in turn fills and overQowa along the
channel which leads to tub C, and so on. Now,
though, of course, a ctumsy analogy of this kind
will not curry us very far, it precisely illustrates
the evolution of life on a chain of worlds like
that we are attached to, and, indeed, the evolu-
tion of the worlds thcmselvee. For the process
which goes on does not involve the preexistence
of a chain of globes which Nature proceeds to
stock with life ; but it is one in which the evo-
lution of each globe is the result of previous ev-
olutions, and the consequence of certain im-
pulses thrown off from its predecessor in the
superabundance of their development. Now, it
is necessary to deal with this characteristic of
the process to be described, but directly we be-
gin to deal with it we have to go back in imag-
ination to a period in the development of our
system vary far antecedent to that which is spec-
ially our subject at present — the evolution of
man. And manifcBtly, as soon as we begin
talking of the beginnings of worlds, we are
dealing with phenomena which can have had
very little to do with life, as we understand the
matter, and, therefore, it may be supposed, noth-
; to do with life impulses. But let ua go


r


TBE PLANETARY CBAIN. 87

back by degrees. Beliind the human harvest
of the life impulse there lay the harvest of
mere animal forma, as every one realizes ; be-
hind that, the harvest or growths of mere vege-
table forma — for some of these undouhtedly
preceded the appearance of the earliest animal
lite on the planet. Then, before the vegetable
organizations, there were mineral oi^anizations,
— for even a mineral is a product of Nature, an
evolution from something behind it, as every
imi^iiiable manifestation of Nature must be,
until in the vast aeriea of manifestationa the
mind travels back to the unmanifested begin-
ning of all things. On pure metaphysics of
that sort we are not now engaged. It is enough
to show that we may as reasonably — and that
we must if we would talk about these matters
at all — conceive a life impulse giving birth to
mineral forme as of the same sort of impulse
concerned to raise a race of apes into a race of
rudimentary men. Indeed, occult science trav-
els back even further in its exhanstive analysis
of evolution than the period at which minerals
began to assume existence. In the process of
developing worlds from fiery nebula3. Nature
begins with something earlier than minerals —
with the elemental forces that underlie the phe-
nomena of Nature as visible now and perceptible
to the senses of man. Bat that branch of the


88 ESOTERIC UUDDBI8II.

Bubject may be left alone for the present. Let
UB take up the process at the period when thfl
first world of the series, globe A let us call Itf
is merely a congeries of mineral forms. Now
it must be remembered that globe A has already
been described as very much more etliereal,
more predominated by apirit, as distinguished
from matter, than the globe of wliich we at
present are having personal experience, ao that
a large allowance must be made for that state
of things when we ask the reader to think of it,
at starting, as a mere congeries of mineral forma.
Mineral forms may be mineral in the sense of
not belonging to the higher forma of vegetable
organism, and may yet be very immaterial aa
we tbink of matter, very ethereal, consisting of
a very line or subtle quality of matter, in which
the other pole or characteristic of Nature, apirit,
largely predominates. The minerals we are
trying to portray are, as it were, the ghosts of
minerals ; by no means the highly-fiulahed and
beautiful, hard crystals which the mineralogical
cabinets of this world supply. In these lower
spirals of evolution with which we are now
dealing, as with the higher ones, there ia prog-
ress from world to world, and that is the great
point at which we have been aiming. There is
progress downwards, so to speak, in finish and
. materiality and consistency; and then, again,


TEE PLANETARY CHAIN. 89

progress upward in spirituality as coupled witli
the finiBh which matter or materiality rendered
possible in the first instance. It will be found
that the process of evolution in its higher stages
as regards man is earned on in exactly the same
way. All throngh these studies, indeed, it will
be found that Line process of Nature typiEes
another, that the big is the repetition of the lit-
tle on a Ini^er scale.

It is manifest from what we have already
said, and in order that the progress of organ-
isms on globe A shall be accounted for, that
the mineral kingdom will no more develop the
vegetable kingdom on globe A until it receives
an impulse from without, than the earth was
able to develop man from the ape till it re-
ceived an impulse from without. But it will
be inconvenient at present to go back to a con-
sideration of the impulses which operate on
globe A in the beginning of the system's con-
struction.

We have already, in order to be able to ad-
vance more comfortably from a far later period
than that to which we have now receded, gone
biick so far that further recession would change
the whole character of this explanation. We
must stop somewhere, and for the present it
will be best to take the life impulses behind
globe A for granted. And having stopped


90 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

there we may now treat the enormoas period
intervening between the mineral epoch on globe
A and the man epoch in a very cursorj way,
and so get buck to the main problem before us.
What has been already said facilitates a cursory
treatment of the intervening evolution. The
full development of the mineral epoch on globe
A prepares the way for the vegetable develop-
ment, and as soon as this begins the mineral
life impulse overflows into globe B. Then
when the vegetable development on globe A ia
complete, and the animal development begins,
the vegetable life impulse overflows to globe B,
and the mineral impulse passes on to globe C.
Then, 6nally, comes the human life impulse on
globe A.

Now it is necessary at this point to guard
against one misconception that might arise.
As just roughly described, the process might
convey the idea that by the time the human
impulse began on globe A the mineral impulse
was then beginning on globe D, and that be-
yond lay ehaoa. This ia very far from being
the case, for two reasons. First, as already
stated, there are proceesea of evolution which
precede the mineral evolution, and thus a wave
of evolution, indeed sevenil waves of evolution
precede the mineral wave in its progress round
the spheres. But over and above this there is


THE PLANET AST CHAIN. 91

a fiict to be stated whlcU has hucIi an influence
on the course of events, that, when it is reiil-
izeiJ, it will be seen that the life impulse has
passed several times completely round the
whole chain of worlds before the corameuce-
iiient of the human impulse on globe A. This
fact is as fiillows: Eiicli kingdom of evolution,
vegetable, nnimHl, and bo on, is divi<Ied into
several spiral layers. The spiritual monads
— the individual atoms of that immense Ufe
impulse of which so much has been said — do
not fully complete their mineral existence on
globe A, then complete it on globe B, and so
on. They pass several times round the whole
circle as mineruls, and then again several times
round as vegetables, and several times as nui-
mals. We purposely refrain for the present
from going into figures, because it is more con-
venient to state the outline of the scheme in
general terms first ; but figures in reftrence to
these processes of Nature have now been given
to the world by the occult adepts (for the first
time we believe in its history), and tliey shall
be brought out in the course of this explana-
tion, very shortly, but as we say the outline is
enough for any one to think of at first.

And now we have rudimentary man begin-
ning his existence on globe A, in thnt world
where nil tilings are us tlio gliosis of the corrv


92 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

Bponding things in thia world. He ia beginning
his long d<^scent into matter. And the life im-
pulse of each "round" overflows, and the races
of man are eBtablished in different degrees of
perfection on all the planets, on each in turn.
But the rounds aro more i-omplicated !n their
design than tbis explanation would shon', if ib
stopped short here. The process for each spir<
itual monad is not merely a passage from planet
to planet. Within the limits of each planet,
each time it arrives there, it has a complicated
process of evolution to perform. It is many
times inciirnated in successive races of men be-
fore it passes onward, and it even has many in-
carnations in each great race. It will be found
when we get on further that this fact throws a
flood of light upon tbe actual condition of man-
kind as we know it, accounting for those im-
mense differences of intellect and morality, and
even of welfare in its highest sense, which gen-
erally appear so painfully mysterious.

That whicb has a definito beginning gener-
ally has an end also. As we have shown that
the evolutionary process under description be-
gan when certain impulses first commenced
their operation, so it may be inferred that they
are tending towards a final consummation, to.
wards a goal and a conclusion. That is S0|
though tbe gt>al is still far off. Milh, as we


TBH PLANETARY CBAIH. 93

know him on this earth, ia but half-way through
the evolutionary process to which he owes his
present development. He will be as much
greater before the destiny of our system is ac-
complished thau he is now us he is now greater
than the misaing link. And that improvement
will even be accomplished on this earth, while,
in the other worlds of the ascending series,
there are still loftier peaks of perfection to be
scaled. It is utterly beyond the range of facul-
ties, untutored in the discernment of occult
mysteries, to imagine the kind of life which
man will thus ultimately lead before the zenith
of the great cycle is attained. But there is
enough to be done in filling up the details of
the outline now presented to the reader, with-
out attempting to forecast those which have to
do with existences towarda which evolution is
reaching across the enormous abysses of the
future.


CHAPTER IV.


THE WORLD PEK10D8.

A STKIKING illuatratioD of the uniformitiea
of Nature is brought out by tho first glance at
tbe occult doctrine in reference to the develop-
tnent of man on tbe earth. The outline of the
desigu ifl the same as the outline of the more
coniprebeofiiTe design covering tbe whole chain
of worlds. The inner details of tliis world, as
regards its units of construction, are the same
HS the imier details of tbe larger organism of
which this world itself is a unit. That is to
Bay, the development of humanity on this earth
is accomplished by means of successive waves
of development which correspond to the succes-
sive worlds ill the great planetary chain. The
great tide of human life, be it remembered —
for that has been already set forth — sweeps
round the whole circle of worlds in successive
waves. These primary growths of humanity
may be conveniently spoken of as rounds. We
must not foi^et t)iM.t the individual units, oon-
Btituting each round in turn, are identically tbe


w


TBE WORLD PERWDB. 96

same as regards their higher principles, that is,
that the individual! ties on the earth during
round one come back again after completing
their travels round the whole series of worlds
and constitute round two, and so on. But
the point to which special attention should be
drawn here ia that the individual unit having
arrived at any given planet of the series, in the
course of any given round, does not merely
touch that planet and pass on to the next. Be-
fore passing on, he has to live through a series
of races on that planet. And this fact su^eats
the outline of the fabric which will presently
develop itself in the reader's mind and exhibit
that similarity of design on the part of the one
world as compared with the whole series to
which attention has already been drawn. As
the complete scheme of Nature that we belong
to is worked out by means of a series of rounds
sweeping through all the worlds, so the devel-
opment of humanity on each world is worked
out by a series of races developed within the
limits of each world in turn.

It ia time now to make the working of this
law clearer by coming to the actual figures
which have to do with the evolution of our doc-
trine. It would have been premature to begin
with them, but as soon as the idea of a aystetn
of worlds in a chain, and of life evolution on


L


96 ESOTERIC BUDDHIBM.

each through a aenea of re-blrtfas, U a&tisfao-
torily grasped, the further exHmiiiation of the
laws at work will be grently fHcilitnt^ by pre-
cise referenc* to the actual number of worlds
and the actual number of rounds and races re-
quirt-d to accomplish the whole purpose of the
ByBtem, For the whole duration of the system
is as certainly limited Id lime, be it rempm-
bered, as the life of a single man. Probably
not limited to any definite number of years set
irrevocably from the commencement, but that
which has a beginning progresses onward to-
wards an end. The life of a man, leaving ao-
cidents quite out of the account, ia a termina-
ble period, and the life of a world system leads
up to a final consummation. The vast periods
of time, concerned in the life of a w<n'ld sys-
tem, dazzle the imagination as a rule, but sttU
they ai-e measurable; they are divisible into
Bub-periods of varions kinds, and these have a
definite number.

By what prophetic instinct Shakespeare
pitched upon seven as the number which suited
his fantastic classification of the ages of man
is a question with which we need not be much
concerned, but certain it is that he could not
have made a more felicitous choice. In periods
of sevens the evolution of the i-acca of man may
be traced, and the actual tiuiubfr of tho objeo


TBE WORLD FBRJODB. 97

tive worida which cooBtitute our syBteni, and of
which the earth is one, is seven also. Remem-
ber the occult scientists know this as a fact,
jiiBt as the physical scientists know for a fact
that the spectrum consists of seren colors, and
the musical scale of seven tones. There are
seven kingdoms of Nature, not three, as modern
science hns imperfectly classified them. Man
belongs to a kingdom distinctly separate from
that of the animals, including beings in a
higher state of oi^niziation than that which
manhood has familiarized us with as yet ; and
below the mineral kingdom there are three
others which science in the West knows noth-
ing about ; but this branch of the subject may
be set aside for the present. It is mentioned
merely to show the regular operation of the
septenary law in Nature.

Man, returning to the kingdom we are most
interested in, is evolved in a series of rounds'
(progressions round the aeries of worlds), and
seven of these rounds have to be accomplished
before the destinies of our system are worked
out. The round which is at present going on
is the fourth. There are considerations of the
ntmoBt possible interest connected with precise
knowledge on these points, because each round
is, as it were, specially allotted to the predomi-
nance of one of the seven principles in man.


98 ESOTESIC BUDDBiaU.

and in the regular order of their upward grada>

lion.

An individual unit, arriving on a planet fm
the first time in the course of a round, has tq
vork through seven races on that planet before
he passes on to the next, and each of those races
occupies the earth for a long time. Our old-
fashioned speculations about time and eternity,
su^ested by the misty religious systems of the
West, have brought on a curious habit of mind
in connection with prublems bearing on the
actual duration of such periods. We can talk
glibly of eternity, and, going to the other end
of the scale, we are not shocked by a few thou-
BRnd yean; ; but directly years are numbered
with precision in groups which lie in interven-
ing regions of thought, illogical Western thew
logiiins are apt to regard such numbering as
nonsense. Now, we at present living on this
earth — the great bulk of humanity, that is to
say, for there are exceptional CAses to be oon-
sidered later — are now going through the fifth
race of our present fourth round. And yet the
evolution of that fifth race began about a mill-
ion of years ago. Will the reader, in conaid-
eration of the fact that the present cosmogony
I does not profess to work with eternity, nerve
Nimself to dcnl with estimates that do concern
ihemselves with millions of years, and evev
lount such millions by considerable numbers?


THE WORLD PERWDB. 99

Elach race of the eeveii which go to make
np a round — i. e. which are evolved on the
earth in Bucceasion during its occupation by
the great wave of humanity passing round tlio
planetary chain — \s itself subject to subdivis-
ion. Were this not the case, the active exist-
ences of each human unit would be indeed few
and far between. Within the limits of each
race there are seven subdivisional races, and
again within the limits of each subdivision
there are seven branch races. Through all
these races, roughly speaking, each individual
human nnit must pass during his stay on earth
each time he arrives there on a round of prog-
ress through the planetary system. On reflec-
tion, this necessity should not appall the mind
80 much as a hypothesis which would provide
for fewer incarnations. For, however many
Uvea each individual unit may pass through
while on earth during a round, be their num-
bers few or many, he cannot pass on until the
time comes for tlie round wave to sweep for-
ward. Even by the calculation already fore-
shadowed, it will be seen that the time spent
by each individual unit in physical life, can
only be a small traction of the whole time he
has to get through between his aixival on earth
and bis departure for the next planet. The
larger part of the time — as we reckon durar


100 ESOTERIC BVDumau.

tion of time — is obvioualy, therefore, spent in
those Babjective conditions of existence which
belong to the " World of Effects," or spiritual
earth attached to the physical earth on which
our objective existence is passed.

The luiture of existence on the spiritual earth
must be cousldm-ed pari passu with the nature
of that passed on the physical earth and dealt
with m the above enumeration of race incarnft-
tions. We must never forget that between
each physical existence the individual unit
passes ihroujrb a period of existence in the cor-
responding spiritual world. And it is because
the conditiouB of tliat existence are defitied by
the use that has been made of the oppoi-tunities
in the next preceding physical existenoe that
the spiritnal earth b often spoken of in occult
writing as the world of effects. The earth it-
self is its 00 rrespoiiding world of causes.

That which passes natunily into the world
of effects after an incarnation in the world of
causes is the individual unit or spiritual monad ;
but the personality just dissolved passes there
with it, to an extent dependent on the qualifi-
cations of such personality, — on the use, that is
to say, which the person in question has made
of his opportunities in life. The period to be
spent in the world of effects — enormously
longer in each case than the life which bai


THE WORLD PJiRIODS. 101

paved the way for existence there — corre-
sponds to the " hereafter " or heaven of ordi-
nary theology. The narrow purview of ordi-
nary religious oonoeptions deals merely with
one spiritual life and its consequences in the
life to come. Theology contrives that the en-
tity concerned had its beginning in this physi-
cal life, and that the ensuing spiritual life will
never stop. And this pair of existences, which
ia shown, by the elements of occult science that
we are now unfolding, to constitute a part only
of the entity's experience during its connection
with a branch race, which is one of seven be-
longing to a subdivisional race, itself one of
seven belonging to a main race, itself one of
seven belonging to the occupation of earth by
one of the seven round waves of humanity
which have each to occupy it in turn before its
functions in Nature are concluded, — this mi-
croscopic molecule of the whole Btrnctnre ia
what common theology treats as more than the
whole, for it is supposed to cover eternity.

The reader must here be warned against one
conclusion to which the above explanations —
perfectly accurate as far as they go, but not yet
covering the whole ground — might lead him.
He will not get at the exact number of lives an
individual entity has to lead on the earth in the
course of its occupation by one round, if he


102 EBOTERIC BUDDHISM.

merely raises suven to its tbird power. Tf one
existence only were passed in each branch race,
the total number would obviously be 343, but
each life descends at least twice into objectivity
in the same branch, — each monad, in other
words, incarnates twice in each brimch race.
Again, there is a curious cyclic law wliich op-
erates to augment the total number of incarna-
tions beyond 686. Each subdivisional race has
a certain extia vitality at its climax, which
leads it to throw off an additl'inal offshoot race
Bt that point in its pri^^ress, and again another
offshoot race is developed at the end of the sub-
divisional race by its dying momeiituin, so to
Speak. Through these races the whole tide of
human life passes, and the result is tliat the
actual normal number of incarnations for each
monad is not far short of 800. Within relor
tively narrow limits it is a variable number,
but the bearings of that fact may be considered
later on.

The methodical law which carries each and
every individual human entity through the vast
evolutionary process thus sketched out, is in no
way incompatible with that liability to fall
away into abnormal destinies or ultimate anni-
hilation which menaces the personal entities of
people who cultivate very ignoble affinities.
The difitributioQ of the seven principles at


TBE WORLD PERIODS. 103

death shows thiit clearly enough, bat viewed in
the light of these further explanations about
evulution, the situation may be better realized.
The permanent entity is that which lives
through the whole series of lives, not only
through the races belonging to the present
round wave on earth, but also through those of
other round waves and other worlds. Broadly
Bpeakiug, it may in due time, though at some
inconceivably distant future as measured in
years, recover a recollection of all those Uvea,
which will seem as d;ty8 in the past to us. But
the astral drosa, cast off at each passage into
the world of effects, has a more or less depen-
dent existence of its own, quite separate from
that of the spiritual entity from which it has
just been disunited.

The natural history of this astral remnant is
a problem of much interest and importance, hut
a methodical continuation of the whole subject
will require us in the first instance to endeavor
to realize the destiny of the higher and more du-
rable spiritual Ego ; and before going into that
inquiry, there is a good deal more to be said
about the development of the objective races.

Esoteric science, though interesting itself
mainly with matters generally regarded aa ap-
pertaining to religion, would not be the com-
plete comprehensive and trustworthy system


104 ESOTERIC BUDDHiaU.

that it is, if it failed to bring all the facts of
earth life into harmony with its doctrines. It
would hare been little able to search out and
ascertain the manner in which the human race
has evolved through teons of time and aeries of
planets, if it had not been in a position to ascer-
tttin also, KB the smaller inquiry is included in
the greater, the manner in which the wave of
humanity with which we are now concerned has
been developed ou this earth. The faculties, in
short, which enable adepts to read the mys-
teries of other worlds, and of other states of ex-
istence, are in no way unequal to the task of
traveling back along the life-current of this
globe. It follows that while the brief record
of a few thousand years 13 all that our so-cnlled
universal history can deal with, the earth his-
tory, which forms a dejiLirtment of esoteric
knowledge, goes back to the incidents of the
fourth race which preceded ours, and to those
of the third race which preceded that. It goes
back Btill further indeed, hut the second and
first races did not develop anything that could
be called civilization, and of them, therefore,
there is less to be said than of their successors.
The third and fourth did — strange as it may
seem to some modern readers to contemplate
the notion of civilization on the earth several
millious of years ago.


TBB WORLD PERIODS. 106

Where are its traces ? they will ask. How
Gould the civilization with which Europe has
now endowed mankind pass away bo completely
that any future inhabitants of the earth could
ever be ignorant that it once existed? How
then can we conceive the idea that any similar
civilization cim have vanished, leaving no rec-
oi-ds for U3?

The answer lies in the regular rontiue of
planetary life, which goea on pari panau with
the life of its inhabitanta. The periods of the
great root races are divided from each other by
great convulsions of Nature and by great geo-
Ic^ical changes. Europe was not in existence
as a continent at the time the fourth race flour-
ished. The continent on which the fourtli race
lived was not in existence at the time the third
race flourished, and neither of the continents
which were the great vortices of the civilizations
of those two races are in existence now. Seven
great continental cataclysms occur during the
occupation of the earth by the human life-wave
for one round period. Each race is cut off in
this way at its appointed time, some survivors
remaining in parts of the world, not the proper
home of their race ; but these, invariably in
such cases, exhibiting a tendency to decay, and
relapsing into barbarism with more or less
rapidity.


106 EBOTBBIC BUDDHiaSt.

The proper home of the fourth race, which
directly preceded our own, waa that continent
of which some memory has been preserved even
in exoteric litemturo — the lost Atlantis. Bat
the great island, the destruction of which is
spoken of by Plato, was really but the last rem-
iiHut of the continent. " In the Eocene age,"
1 am told, " even in its very first part, the great
cycle of the fourtli race men, the Atlanteana,
had already reached its highest point, and the
great continent, the father of nearly all the
present continents, showed the first symptoms
of sinking, — a process that occupied it down
to 11,446 yeurs ago, when its last island, that,
translating lis vernacular name, we may call
with propriety Poseidonis, went down with a
crash.

"Lemuria" (a former continent stretching
southward from India across what is now the
Indian Ocean, but connected with Atlantis, for
Africa was not theu in existence) "should no
more be confounded witli the Atlantis conti-
nent than Europe with America, Both sank
and were drowned, with their high civilizations
and 'gods,' yet between the two catastrophes a
period of about 700,000 years elapsed, Lemuria
flourishing and ending her career just about
that lapse of time before the early part of the
Eocene age, since its race wa^ the third. Be-


TBE WORLD PERIODS. 107

bold the relics of that once great nation in some
of the flat-headed aborigines of your Australia."

It is a mistake ou the part of a recent writer
on Atlantis to people India and Egypt with
the colonies of that continent, bat of that more
anon.

" Why should not your geoli^sta," asks my
revered Mahatma teacher, " bear in mind that
under the continents explored and fathomed
by them, in the bowela of which they have
found the Eocene i^e, and forced it to de-
liver to them its secrets, there may be hidden
deep in the fathomless, or rather unfathoined
ocean beds, other and far older continents
whose strata have never been geologically ex-
plored ; and that they may some day upset en-
tirely their present theories. Why not admit
that our present continents have, like Lemuria
and Atlantis, been several times already sub-
merged, and had the time to reappear again,
and bear their new groups of mankind and civ-
ilization ; and that at the first great geological
upheaval at the next cataclysm, in the series of
periodical cataclysms that occur from the be-
ginning to the end of every round, our already
autopsized continents will go down, and the
Lemurias and Atlantises come up again.

" Of course the fourth race had its periods of
the highest civilization." (The letter from


(08 ESOTERIC BUDDniBM.

which I am now quoting waa written in answer
to a series of questiona I put.) " Greek, and
Roman, and even Egyptian civilizations are
nothing compared to the civil izatioDB that b»-
gan with the third race. Those of the second
race were not savages, but they could not be
called civilized.

" Greeks and Romans were small sub-races,
and Egyptians part and parcel of our own Cau-
casian stock. Look at the Latter, and at India.
Having reached the highest civil jziition, and
what b more, learning, both went down ; Egypt,
as a distinct sub-race, disappearing entirely (her
Copts are but a hybrid remnant) ; India, aa one
of the first and most powerful oSsboots of the
mother race, and composed of a number of sub-
races, lasting to these times, and struggling to
take once more her place in history some day.
That history ciitches but a few stray, ha»y
glimpses of Egypt some 12,000 years back,
when, having already reached the apex of its
cyole thousands of years before, the tatter had
begun to go down.

"The Chaldees were at the apex of their
occult fame before what you term the Bronze
Age. We bold — but then what warrant can
you give the world that we are right? — that
lar greater civilizations than our own have
risen and decayed. It is not enough to say, a^


TBE WORLD PERtODB. 109

Bome of your modem writers do, that an extinct
civilization existed before Rome and Athens
were founded. We afhcm that a series of civ-
ilizations existed before as well as after the
glacial period, that they existed upon various
points of the globe, reached the apex of glory,
and died. Every trace and memory had been
lost of the Assyrian and Pbceniciaa civiliza-
tions, until discoveries began to be made a few
years ago. And now they open a new though
not by far one of the earliest pages in the his-
tory of mankind. And yet how far bauk do
those civilizations go in comparison with the
oldest, and even them history is slow to accept.
ArohsBology has sufficiently demonstrated that
the memory of man runs hack vastly further
than history has been willing ti> accept, and
the sacred records of once mighty nations pre-
served by their heirs are atill more worthy of
trust. We speak of civilizations of the ante-
glacial period, and not only in the minds of
the vulgar and the profane, but even in the
opinion of the highly- learned geologist, the
claim sounds preposterous. What would you
say, then, to our affirmation that the Chinese, —
I now speak of the inland, the true Chinaman,
not of the hybrid mixture between the fourth
and fifth races now occupying the throne, —
the aborigines who belong in their unallied na-


110 ESOTERIC BUDDBI8M.

tionality wholly to the highest and last branch
of the fourth race, readied their highest civili-
zation when the hfth had hardly appeared in
Asia? When was it? Calculate. The group
of islands discovered by Nordenskiold, oE the
y^a was found strewn with fossils of horses,
sheep, oxen, etc., among gigantic bones of el6>
phants, mammotba, rhinoceroaea, and other
monsters belonging to periods when man, says
your science, had not yet made his appearance
on eai'tli. How came horaes and sheep to be
found in company with the huge antediluvians?
" Tlie region now locked in the fetters o(
eternal winter, uninhabited by man. that most
fragile of animals, will very soon be proved
to have had not only a tropical climate, some-
thing your science knows and does not disputt^,
but having been likewise the seat of one of the
most ancient civilizations of the fourth race,
whose highest relics we now find in the degener*
ate Chinaman, and whose lowest are hopelessly
(for the profane scientist") intermixed with the
remnants of the third. I told you before that the
highest people now on earth (spiritwally) belong
to the lirst sub-race of the fifth root race, and
those are the Aryan Asiatics ; the highest race
(physical intellectuality) is the last sub-race of
the fifth, — yourselves, the white conquerors.
The majority of mankind belongs to the seventh


TBE WORLD PERIODS. Ill

Hiib-race of the fourth root race, — the abov&-
mentioned Chinamen and their offshoots and
branch lets (Malayans, Mongolians, Tibetene,
Javanese, etc., etc.), — with remnants of othei
eab-races of the fourth and the seventh sub-race
of the third race. All these fallen, degraded
semblances of humanity are the direct lineal
descendants of highly civilized nations, neither
the names nor memory of which have survived,
except in such books as ' Populvuh,' the sacred
book of the Guatemalans, and a few otiiers
unknown to science. "

I had inquired was there any way of ac-
counting for what seems the curious rush of
human progress within the fast two thousand
years, as compared with the relatively stagnant
condition of the fourth round people up to the
beginning of modem prc^ess. This ques-
tion it was that elicited the explanations quoted
above, and also the following remarks in regard
to the recent " rush of human progress."

" The latter end of a very important cycle.
Each round, each race, ae every sub-race, has
its great and its smaller cycles on every planet
that mankind passes through. Our fourth
ronnd humanity has its one great cycle, and so
have its races and sub-racea. ' The curious
rush ' is due to the double effect of the former
'—the beginning of its downward course — and


112 ESOTERIC BUDDBiaU.

of the latter (the small cycle of your sub-race}
running on to its apex. Remember you belong
to the fifth race, yet you are but a Western
Bub-riice. Notwithstanding your efforts, what
you call civilization is confined only to the lat-
ter and its offshoots in America. Uadiating
around, its deceptive tight may seem to throw
its raya on a greater distance than it doCa in
reality. There is no rush in China, and of
Japan you make but a caricature.

"A student of occultism ought not to speak
of the stagnant condition of the fourth-round
people, since history knows next to nothing of
that condition, ' up to the beginning of modern
progress,' of other nations but the Western.
What do you know of America, for instance,
before thu invasion of that country by the
Spaniards? Less than two centuries prior to
the arrival of Cortez there was as great a rush
toward progress among the sub-races of Peru
end Mexico as there is now in Europe and the
United States. Their sub-race endt^d in nearly
total annihilation through causes generated by
itself. We may speak only of the 'stagnant'
condition into which, following the law of de-
velopment, growth, maturity, and decline, every
race and snb-race falls during the transition
periods. It is that latter condition your uni-
versal history ia acquainted with, while it re.


w

I mains


THE WORLD PERIODS. 113

mains snperbly ignorant of the condition even

India 'was in some ten centuries back. Your
Bub-racea are now running toward the apex of
their respective cytles, and that history goes no
further back than the periods of decline of a
few other sub-races belonging most of them to
the preceding fourth race."

I had asked to what (.-poch Atlantis belonged,
and whether the cataclysm by wliioli it waa
destroyed came in an appointed place in the
prepress of evolution, coiTesponding for the de-
velopment of raues to the obscuration of plan-
ets. The aiiswpr w^ : —

"To the Miocene times. Everything comes
in its appointed time and place in the involution
of rounds, otherwise it would be impossible for
the best seer to ciilculate the exact hour and
year when such cataclysms gi'cat and small
have to occur. All an adept could do would
be to predict an approximate time, whereas
DOW events that result in great geological
changes may be predicted with as mathemat-
ical a certainty as eclipsea and other revolu-
tions in space. The sinking of Atlantis (the
group of continents and isles) began during the
Miocene period, — as certain of your continents
are now observed to be gradually sinking, —
and it culminated first in the 6nal disappear-
ance of the largest continent, an event coinci-


114 EBOTEMIC BUDDBISM.

dent with the eteration of the Alps ; aod aeoond,
with that of the last of tiie hir islanda
tioued bj PUUo. The Egjptiaa pritfttu of Sals
told bia aaoeAtor Solon, that Atlantu (i. t^ the
only reinaiamg Urge island) bad perished nine
thoasand jean before tbeir time. This waa not
a faocy date, since they had for millenniDms
preserved most carefully their records. Bat
then, as I say, they spoke btit of the Poseidonis,
and would not reveal eveo to the great Greek
legislator their secret cbronol(^. As there
are no geological reasons for doubting, bat, oo
tbe contrary, a mass of evidence for accepting
the tr^itioQ, science has finally Accepted t^e
existence of the great continent and arcbipd*
ago, and thos viodicated the tmtfa of one more
' fable.'

'* The approach of every new obscuration is
always signaled by cataclyams of either fire or
water. But apart from this, every root race
has to )>e cut in two, so to say, by either one
or the other. Thus having reached the apex
of ito development and glory, the fourth race
— the Atlitnteans — were destroyed by water;
you find now but tlieir degenerate fallen rera-
iiniits, whose sub-races nevertheless, each of
them, had ito palmy days of glory and relative
greatness. What they are now, you will be
le day, the law of cycles being one and itn-


eoond, ^|

1 men- ^|


THE WORLD PERIODS. 115

matable. When your race, the fifth, will have
reached its zeuitk of physical intellectuiility,
and developed ita highest civilization (remem-
ber the difference we make between inaterial
and spiritual civihzations), unable to go any
higher in ita own cycle, its progress toward
absolute evil will be arrested (as its predeces-
sors, the Lemurians and the Atlanteans, the
raea of the third and fourth races, were arrested
in their progress toward the same) by one of
such cataclysmic changes, ita great civilization
destroyed, and all the sub-racea of that race
will be found going down their respective
cycles, after a abort period of glory and learn-
ing. See the remnanta of the Atlanteans, the
old Greeks and Romans (the modem belong to
the fifth race). See how great and how short,
how evanescent were their days of fame and
glory. For they were but sub-racea of the seven
ofEshoots of the root race.^ No mother race,
any more than het sub-racea and offshoots, is
allowed by the one reigning law to trespass
upoD the prerogatives of the race, or sub-race
that will follow it ; least of all to encroach
upon the knowledge and powers in store for ita


The " pr(^;rea8 toward absolute evil," arrested


116 ESOTERIC BUDDBiaU.

by the cataclyama of each race in turn, seta
in with the acquisition, by means o£ ordinary
iutellectual research and scientific advance-
ment, of those powers over Nature which ac-
crue even now in adeptship from the prematui'e
development of higher faculties than those we
ordinarily employ, I have spoken alightly of
these powers in a preceding chapter, when en-
deavoring to describe our esoteric teachers; to
describe them minutely would lead me into a
long digression on occnlt pbeuomena. It is
enough to say that they are such as cannot but
be dangerous to society generally, and provo-
cative of all manner of crimea which would
utterly defy detection, if possessed by persona
capable of regarding them as anything else but
a profoundly sacred trust. Now some of these
powers are simply the practical application of
obscure forces ot Nature, susceptible of dis-
covery in the course of ordinary scientific prog-
ress. Such progress had been accomplished
by the Atlanteans. The worldly men of sci-
ence in that race had learned the secrets of
the disintegration and reintegration of matter,
which few but practical spiritualists as yet
know to be possible, and of control over the
elementals, by means of which that and other
even more portentous phenomena can he pro-
duced. Such powers in the hands of persona


TBE WORLD PLBIODS. 117

willing to uae them for merely selfish and an-
scrupuloua ends, must not only be productive of
social diaaflter, but also for the persons who hold
them, of progress in the dii-ection of that evilly-
spiritual exaltation, which is a far more terri-
ble result than suffering and inconvenience in
this world. Tbua it is, when physical intellect,
unguarded by elevated morality, runs over into
the proper region of spiritual advancement, that
the natural law provides for its violent repres-
fliou. The contingency will be better under-
stood when we come to deal with the general
destinies towiird which humanity is tending.

The principle under which the various races
of man aa they develop are conti-olled collec-
tively by the cyclic law, however they may in-
dividually exercise the free will they unques-
tionably possess, is thus very plainly asserted.
For people who have never regarded human
affairs as covering more than the very short
period with which history deals, the course of
events will perhaps, aa a rule, exhibit no cyclic
character, but rather a checkered progress, has-
tened sometimes by great men and fortunate
circumstances, sometimes retarded by war, big-
otry, or intervals of intellectual sterility, but
moving continually onward in the long ac-
count at one rate of speed or another. As tbe
esoteric view of the matter, fortified by the


118 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

wide range of observation wiiicli occult scienoe
is enabled to take, has an altogether opposite
tendency, it seems worth while to conclude
these explanations with an extract from a dis-
tinguished author, quite unconnected with the
occult world, who neverthelesB, from a close
obstiFvatiou of the mere historiiml record, pro-
nounces himself decisively in favor of the theory
of cycles. In hia "History of the Intellectual
DcTelopment of Europe," Dr. J. W. Draper
writes us fuUows : —

" We are, as wo often say, the creatures of
circumstances. In that exprcssinn there b a
higher philosophy than might at fii-st sight ap-
pear. . . . From this more accurate point of
view we should tlierefore consider the course
of these events, reeogniKing the principle that
the affairs of men pass forward tu a determi-
nate way, expanding and unfolding themselves.
And hence we see that the things of which we
have spoken as though they were nuitterB of
choice, were in reality forced upon their appar-
ent authors by the necessity of the times. But
in truth they should be considered as the pres-
entation of a certain phase of life which nations
in their onward course sooner or later assume.
To the individual, how well we know that a
sober moderation of action, an appropriate grav-
L ity of demeanor, belong to the maturt' period


I of HI

I youtl


THE WORLD PERIODS. 139

of life, change from the wanton willFulneas of
youtli, which may be ushered in, or its b^in-
uing marked by many accidental incidents ; in
one perhaps by doraeatic bereavements, in an-
other by the loss of fortune, in a third by ill
health. We are correct enough in imputing to
such trials the change of character ; but we
never deceive ourselves by supposing that it
v?ould have failed to take pla<« had those in-
cidents not occurred. There runs an irresiati-
ble destiny in the midst of all these vicissitudes.
. . . There are analogies between the life of a
nation and that of an individual, who, though
he may be in one respect the maker of his own
fortunes, for happiness or for misery, for good
or for evil, though he remains here or goes
there as bis inclinations prompt, though he
does this or abstains from that as he chooses, is
nevertheleaa held fast by an inexorable fate, —
a fate which brought him into the world in-
voluntarily, as far aa he was concerned, which
presses him forward through a definite career,
the stages of which are absolutely invariable, —
infancy, childhood, youth, maturity, old age,
with a!] their characteristic actions and pas-
sions, — and which removes him from the scene
at the appointed time, in most cases against his
will. So also it is with nations ; the voluntary
is only the outward semblance, covering but


120 ESOTERIC BUDDHIBM.

hardly hiding the predetermined. Over the
events of life we may have control, bat none
whatever over the law of its progress. There
is a geometry that applies to nations an equa-
tion of their carve of advance. That no mortal
man can touch."


DEVAOHAK.

It was not possible to approach a considera-
tion of the states into which the higher human
principles pass at death, without first indicat-
ing the general framework of the whole design
worked out in the course of the evolution of
man. That much of my task, however, having
now been accomplished, we may pass on to con-
eider the natural destinies of each human Ego,
in the interval which elapses between the close
of one objective life and the commencement of
another. At the commencement of another,
the Karma of the previous objective life deter-
mines the state of life into which the individ-
ual shall be bom. This doctrine of Karma ia
one of the most interesting features of Buddhist
philosophy. There has been no secret about it
at any time, though for want of a proper com-
prehension of elements in the philosophy which
have been strictly esoteric, it may sometimes
have been misunderstood.

Karma is a collective expression applied to


122


ESOTERIC BVDDBtaH.


that complicated group of affinities for good and
evil generated by a htinian being during life,
and the character of which inherea in the moI&-
culea of his fifth principle all through the inter-
val which elapses between his death from one
objective life and his birth into the next. Ab
Btated sometimes, the doctrine seems to be one
which exacts the notion of a superior spirituttl
authority summing up tiie acts of a man's life
at its close, taking into consideration his good
deeds and his bad, and giving judgment about
him on the wliole aspect of tlie case. Bat a
comprehension of the way in which the huiutu)
principles divide up at death, will afiord ft
clue to the comprehension of the way in which
Karma operates, and also of tlie great subject
we may better take up first, the immediate
spiritual condition of man after death.

At death, the three lower principles — the
body, its mere physical vitality, and its astral
counterpart — are finally abandoned by that
which really is the Man himself, and the four
higher principles escape into that world imme-
diately above our own ; above our own, that is,
in the order of spirituality; not above it at all,
but in it and of it, as regards real locality, — the
astral plane, or Karma Loca, according to a very
familiar Sanskrit expression. Here a division
takes plave between the two duads, which tba


DEVACBAff. 123

four higher principles include. The explana^
tions already given concerning the imperfect
extoit to which the upper principles of man are
as yet developed, will show that this estimation
of the process, as in the nature of a mechanical
separation of the principles, is a rough way of
dealing with the matter. It must be modified
in the reader's mind by the light of what lias
been already said. It may be otherwise de-
scribed as a trial of the extent to which the
fifth principle has been developed. Regarded
in the light of the former idea, however, we
must conceive the sixth and seventh principles,
on the one hand, drawing the fifth, the human
soul, in one direction, while the fourth draws it
back earthward in the other. Now, the fifth
principle is a very complex entity, separable
itself into superior and inferior elements. In
the struggle which takes place between its late
companion principles, its best, purest, most ele-
vated, and spiritual portions cling to the sixth,
its lower instincts, impulses, and recollections
adhere to the fourth, and it is in a measure torn
asunder. The lower remnant, associating itself
with the fourth, floats off in the earth's atmos-
phere, while the best elements, those, be it un-
derstood, which really constitute the Ego of the
late earthly personality, the individuality, the
consciousness thereof, follows the sixth and sev-


124 ESOTERIC BUDDBIBSI.

entb into a spiritual coDdition, the nature ot
wliich we are about to examine.

Rejecting the popular English name for this
spiritual condition, as incrusted with too many
miscunceptious to be convenient, let us keep to
the Oriental designation of that region or stale
into wLich tbe higbef pi'inciplcs of human crea-
tures pass at duath. This is additionally desir-
able because, although the Devacban of Bud-
dhist philosophy corresponds in some respects
to the modern Europciin idea of heaven, it dif-
fers from heaven in others which are even more
important.

Firstly, however, in Devachan, that which
survives is not merely the individual monad,
which survives through all the changes of tha
whole evolutionary Bcbeme, and Hits fiom body
to body, from planet to planet, and so forth, —
that which survives in Devachan is the man's
own self-conscious personality, under some re-
strictions indeed, which we will come to direct-
ly, but still it is the same personality as regards
its higher feelings, aspirations, affections, and
even tastes, as it was on earth. Perhaps it
would be better to say the essence of the late
self-conscious personality.

It may be worth the reader's while to learn
what Colonel H. S. Olcott has to say in his
" Buddhist Catechism " (14th thousand) of the


DEVACHAN. 125

intrinaic difference between " individuality "

and " person a lity." Since he wrote mit only
under the approval of the High Priest of the
Sripada and Galle, Sumangala, but also under
the direct instruction of his adept Guru, his
words will have weight for the student of Oe-
cultiam. This is what he says in his Appen-
dix:—

" Upon reflection, I have substituted 'person-
ality ' for ' individuality ' as written in the first
edition. The Buccessive appearances upon one
or many earths, or 'descents into generation'
of the tanhaicaUy-cohex&nt parts (Skandhaa) of
a certain being, are a succession -of personali-
ties. In each birth the personality differs from
that of the previous or next succeeding birth.
Karma, the deu» ex mdahina, masks (or shall
we say, reflects?) itself now in the personality
of a sage, again as an artisan, and so on
throughout the string of births. But though
personalities ever shift, the one line of life
along which they are strung like beads, runs
unbroken.

" It is ever that particular line, never any
other. It is therefore individual, an individual
vital undulation which began in Nirvana or the
subjective side of Nature, as the light or heat
undulation through ether began at its dynamic
source ; is careering through the objective side


126 ESOTERIC BDDDBIBU.

of Nature, undev the impulse of Karma and the
creative direction of Tanha ; and tends through
many cyclic changes back to Nirvana. Mr.
Rhys Davids calls that vrhich pusses from per-
Bonality to personality along the individual
chain, ' character ' or ' doing.' Since ' charac-
ter ' is not a mere metaphysical abstraction, but
the sum of one's mental qualities and moral
propensities, would it not lielp to dispel what
Mr. Rhys Davids calls ' the desperate expe-
dient of a mystery,' if we regarded the life un-
dulation as individuality, and each of its series
of nutal manifestations as a separate person-
ality ?

" The denial of ' soul ' by Buddha (see ' Sau-
yutto Nikaya,' the Sutta Pitaka) points to the
prevalent delusive belief in an independent
transmissible personality ; an entity that could
move from birth to birth unchanged, or go to a
place or stjite where, as such perfect entity, it
could eternally enjoy or suffer. And what he
shows is that the 'I ara I ' consciousness is, as
regards permanency, logically impossible, since
its elementary constituents constantly change,
and the ' I ' of one birth differs from the ' I ' of
every other birth. But everything that I have
found in Buddhism accords with the theory of
a gradual evolution of the perfect man, viz., a
Buddha through numberless natal experiences,


DEVACBAN. 127

And in the conBcionsneaa of that person who at
the end of a given chain of beings attains
Buddhahood, oi' who sncceeds in attainiug the
fourth stags of Dhyana, or mystic self-develop-
ment, in any one of his births anterior to the
final one, the scenes of all these serial births
are perceptible. In the ' Jatakattahavannana,'
80 well translated by Mr. Rhys Davids, an ex-
pression continually recurs which I think rather
supports such an idea, viz., ' Then the blessed
one made manifest an occurrence hidden by
change of birth,' or ' that which had been hid-
den by, etc' Early Buddhism, then, clearly
held to a permanency of records in the Akasa,
and the potential capacity of man to read the
same when he has evoluted to the stage of true
individual enlightenment."

The purely sensual feelings and tastes of the
liite personality will drop off from it in Deva-
chan, but it does not follow that nothing is
preservable in that state, except feelings and
thoughts having a direct reference to religion
or spiritual philosophy. On the contrary, all
the superior phases, even of sensuous emotion,
find their appropriate sphere of development in
Devachan. To suggest a whole range of ideas
by means of one illustration, a soul in Devar
chan, if the soal of a man who was passionately
devoted to music, would be continuously en-


128 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

raptnred by the sensations music prodaces.
The person whose happiness of the higher sort
on earth had been entirely centred in the ex-
ercise of the affections will miss none in Deva-
chan of those whom he or she loved. Bnt, at
once it will be asked, if some of these are not
themselves fit for Devachan, how then ? The
answer is, that does not matter. For the per-
son who loved thera they will fe there. It is
not necessary to say much move to give a clue
to the position. Devachan is a subjective state.
It will seem as real as the chairs and tables
round us ; and remember that, above all things,
to the profound philosophy of Occultism, are
the chairs and tables, and the whole objective
scenery of the world, unreal and merely transi-
tory delusions of sense. As real as the realities
of this world to us, and even more so, will be
the realities of Devachan to those who go into
that state.

From thJR it ensues that the subjective itola-
tion of Devachan, as it will perhaps be con-
ceived at Itrst, is not real isolation at all, as the
word is imderstiiod on the physical plane of ex-
istence ; it is companionship with all that the
true soul craves for, whether persons, things, or
knowledge. And a patient consideration of
the place in Nature which Devachan occnpiea
will show that this siibjectivi.' isolation of each


DEVACHAN. 129

haman unit ia the only condition which renders
possible anything which can be described as a
felicitous spiritual exietence after death fcir
mankind at large, and Devachan is as much a
purely and absolutely felicitous condition for
all who attain it, as Avitchi is the reverse of it.
There is no inequality or injustice in the sys-
tem ; Devachan is by no means the same thing
for the good and the indifferent alike, but it is
not a life of responsibility, and therefore there
is no lexical place in it for suffering any mote
than in Avitchi there is any room for enjoy-
ment or repentance. It is a life of effects, not
of causes; a life of being paid your earnings,
not of laboring tor them. Therefore it is im-
possible to be during that life cognizant of
what is going on on earth. Under the opera-
tion of such cognition there would be no true
happiness possible in the state after death. A
heaven which constituted a watch-tower frum
which the occupants could still survey the mis-
eries of the earth, would really be a place of
acute mental suffering for its most sympathetic,
unselfish, and meritorious inhabitants. If we
invest them in imagination with such a very
limited range of sympathy that they could be
imagined as not caring about the spectacle of
suffering after the tew persona to whom they
were immediately uttaulied had died and joined


180 KBOTK&IQ BVDDBISM.

I.linm, Btdl tli<>iy would liave a very unhappy pe-
H'mI <if wailitig bi go tlirough before fiiirvJTors
n)iu;lit«) t)i(! Olid of hii often long and toileomfl
vxiiiUiiiofl ImiIow. And even this hypotlieBig
would 1)0 fiirlher vitiated by making heaven
mnnt painful for occupante who wera muBt un-
HdHlnli rvhd Rympatbt-'tio, whose reSected distress
would tliua ountinue on behalf of the iitHicted
rtioo of mankind generally, even after their per-
■oiiul kindred had been rescued by the !np8e of
linio. Tliu (inly ottcnpo from this dilemma lies
in thu suppoHition that lieiiven is not yet opened
for business, so to speak, and that all people
who hftvo over lived, from Adam downward,
ftru stilt lying in a death-like trance, waiting fur
thu riMurrwjtion at the end of the world. This
liy|K>UiMis also has iIa embarrassments, but we
nro oono«rn«l Ht present with the arientific har-
inmty of emterio Buddhism, not with the tbeo
rioa of other creeds.

Keailers, however, who may grant that s par-

vt«w nf Mirtlily Ufc from heaven would render

■ jHippiliMK in bMTM) imposeible, may still doubt

r tnt ln|>phi«aa is possible in the state,

t HM^ l» objtelad, of iiioai>tonous isolation

V dMsribed. TIm objection is merely nised

I Ih* point of tww of aa ioMgiution that

, MMpe (tom its {WtMnt rarrvti»ilir^>s.
t b ig io wtiK, kImM monotoaj. N» one wiD


I


DEVACBAN. 131

complain of having experienced monotony dur-
ing the minute, or moment, or half hour, as it
may have been, of the greatest happiness he
may have enjoyed in life. Most people have
had sorae happy momentB. at all events, to look
back to for the purpose of this comparison ; and
let us take even one such minute or moment,
too short to be open to the least suspicion of
monotony, and imagine its sensations immensely
prolonged without any external events in prog-
ress to mark the lapse of time. There ia no
room, in such ji condition of thinga, for the con-
ception of weariness. The unalloyed, unchange-
able sensation of intense happiness goes on and
on, not forever, because the causes which have
produced it are not infinite themselves, but for
very long periods of time, until the efficient im-
pulse has exhausted itself.

Nor must it be supposed that there is, so to
speak, no change of occupation for souls in De-
vachan, — that any one moment of earthly sen-
sation is selected for exchisive perpetuation.
As a teacher of the highest authority on this
subject writes : —

"There are two fields of causal manifesta-
tions, the objective and subjective. The grosser
enei^ies — those which operate in the denser
condition of matter — manifest objectively in
the next physical Ufe, their outcome being the


182 ESOTERIC BODDniSM.

new persoimltty of each birth marBhaling witbin
the grand cycle of the evoluting individuality.
It ia but the moral iind epiritual activities that
fiad their sphere of effects in Devachan. And,
thought and fancy being limitless, how can it
be argued for one moment that there is any-
thing like monotony in the state ot Devachan ?
Few are the men wlioae lives were so utterly
destitute of feeling, love, or of a more or less
intense predilection for some one line of
thought as to be made unfit for a proportionate
period of Devachanic experience beyond their
earthly life. So, for instancti, while the vices,
physical and sensual attractions, say, of a great
philosopher, but a bad friend and a selfish man,
may result in the^^rth of a new and still
greater intellect, bt7&t the same time a most
miserable man, relying the Karinrc effects of
all the causes proaiiced by the ' old ' being, and
whose make-up was inevitable from the pre-
ponderating proclivities of that being in the
preceding birth, the intermedial period between
the two physical births cannot be, in Nature's
exquisitely well-adjusted laws, but a kiatut of
unconsciousness. There can be no such dreary
blank as kindly promised, or rather implied, by
Christian Protestant theology, to the ' departed
souls,' which, between death and 'resurrection,'
have to hang on in spacf, in mental catalepsy,


DKVACnAN. 133

awaiting the ' Day of Judgment.' Causes pro-
diic<3d by nieiital anil spiritual energy being far
greater and more important than those that
are created by physical impulses, their effects
have to be, for weal or woe, proportionately aa
great. Lives on this earth, or other earths,
affording no proper field for such effects, and
every laborer being entitled to his own Lai-vest,
they have to expand in either Devauhan or
Avitchi.' Bacon, for iustance, whom a poet
called

' The brightest, wiaest, meaiKit o( innnkind,'
might reappear in his nest incarnation aa a
greedy money-getter, with extraordinary intel-
lectual capacities. But, however great the lat-
ter, they would find no proper field in which
that particular liue of thought, pursued during
his previous lifetime by the founder of modem
philosophy, could reap all its dues. It would
be but the astute lawyer, the corrupt Attorney-
General, the ungrateful friend, and the dishon-
est Lord Chancellor, who might find, led on by
his Karma, a congenial new soil in the body of
the money-lender, and reappear as a new Shy-
lock. But where would Bacon, the mcompar-
able thinker, with whom philosophical inquiry
upon the moat profound problems of Nature
was hia * first and last and only love,' where
iThe luwe^t states of Devacban iuteruhaiii with those of Avitcbi


134 ESOTERIC BUDDHIBM.

would this ' intellectual giant of his race once
disrobed of his lower nature, go to ? Have all
the eSects of that magnificent intellect to vanish
and disappear? Certainly not. Thus bis moral
and spiritual qualities would also have to find a
field in which their anet^ies could expand them-
selves. Devacban is such a Held. Hence, alt
the great plans of moral reform, of intellectual
research into abatraet principles of Nature —
all the divine, spiritual aspirations tliat had so
filled the brightest part of his life would, in
Devachau, come to fruition ; and the abstract
eutity, known in the preceding birth as Francis
Bacon, and that may be known in its subse-
quent re-incarnation as a despised usurer — that
Bacon's own creation, his Frankenstein, the son
of his Karma — shall in tbe meanwhile occupy
itself in this inner world, also of its own prepa-
ration, in enjoying tbe eSects of tbe grand
beneficial spiritual causes sown in life. It
would live a purely and spiritually conscious ex-
istence — a dream of realistic vividness — mitil
Karma, being satisfied in that direction, and the
ripple of force reaching the edge of its sub-cy-
clic basin, the being should move into its next
area of causes, either in this same world or an-
other, according to bis stage of progression.
. . . Therefore, there i» ' a change of occupation,'
a continual cbimge, in Devacban. For that


DEVACBAN. 135

dream-life is but the fruition, the harvest-time,
of those psychic seed-germs dropped from the
tree of physical existence in our moments of
dreitm and hope — fancy -glimpses of bliaa and
happiness, stifled iu an ungrateful social soil,
blooming in the rosy dawn of Devachan, and
ripening under its ever -fructifying sky. If
man had but one single moment of ideal expe-
rience, not even then could it be, as errone-
ously supposed, the indefinite prolongation of
that 'single moment.' That one note, struck
from the lyre of life, would form the key-note
of the being's subjective state, and work out
into numberless harmonic tones and semitones
of psychic phantasmagoria. There, all unreal-
ized hopes, aspirations, dreams, become fully
realized, and the dreams of the objective be-
come the realities of the subjective existence.
And there, behind the curtain of Maya, its va-
porous and deceptive appearances are perceived
by the Initiate, who has learned the gri?at secret
how to penetrate thus deep into the Arcana of
Being." . . .

As physical existence has its cumulative in-
tensity from infancy to prime, and its dimin-
ishing energy thenceforward to dotage and
death, so the dream-life of Devachan is lived
correspondentially. There is the first flutter of
psychic life, the attainment of prime, the grad-


186 ESOTERIC BUDDniSM.

ual exhaustion of force passing into conscious
letliavgy, semi-unco iiaciousn 688, oblivion and —
not death but birth ! birth into another person-
ality and the resumption of action which daily
begets new congeries of causes that must be
worked out in another term of Devachan.

"It is not a reality then, it is a mere dream,"
objectors will urge ; *' the eoul bo bathed in a
delusive seusation of enjoyment which has no
reality all the while is being cheated by Na-
ture, and must encounter a terrible shock when
it wakes to its mistake." But, in the nature of
things, it never does or can wake. The waking
from Devachan ia its next birth into objective
life, and the draught of Lethe has then been
taken. Nor as regards the isolation of each soul
is there any consciousness of isolation whatever ;
nor is there ever possibly a parting from its
chosen associates. Those associates are not in
the nature of companions who may wish to go
away, of friends who may tire of the friend that
loves them, even if he or she does not tire of
them. Love, the creating force, has placed
their living image before the personal soul
which craves for their presenoa, and that image
will never fly away.

On this aspect of the subject I may again
avail' myself of the language of my teacher: —

" Objectors of tliat kind will be simply postii


DEVACnAN- 187

iating an iucongruity, an intercourse of entities
in Devachan, wliicli applies only to the mutual
relationship of physical existence ! Two sym-
pathetic souls, both disembodied, will each
work out its own Duvachanic sensations, mak-
ing the other a shaver io its subjective bliss.
This will be as real to them, naturally, as
though both were yet on this earth. Neverthe-
less, each ia dissociated from the other as re-
gards personal or corporeal association. While
the latter is the only one of its kind that is
recognized by our earth experience as an actual
intercourse, for the Devachanee it would be not
only something unreal, but could have no exist-
ence for i( in any sense, not even as a delusion :
a physical body or even a Mayavi-rupa remain-
ing to its spii-itual senses as invisible as it is it-
self to the physical senses of those who loved it
best on earth. Thus even though one of the
'sharers ' were alive and utterly unconscious of
that intereourae in his waking state, still every
dealing with him would be to the Devaehanee
an absolute reality. And what actual compan-
ionship could there ever be other than the purely
idealistic one as above described, between two
tuhjective entities which are not even as mate-
rial as that ethereal body-shadow — the Mayavi-
rupa? To object to this on the gr^.und that
one is thus * cheated by Natura ' and to cull it


138


ESOTERIC BUDDBISM.


' a delusive senBatioo of enjoyment which has
no reality,' is to show one's self utterly unfit
to comprehend the conditions of life and being
outside of our material existence. For how can
the siinte distinction be made in Devachan —
i. e.y outside of the conditions of earth-life — be-
tween what we call a reality, and a factitious
or an artificial counterfeit of the same, in this,
our world? The same principle cannot apply
to the two sets of conditions. Is it conceivable
that what we call a reality in our embodied phys-
ical state will exist under the same conditiona
as an actuality for a disembodied entity? On
earth, man is dual — in the sense of being a
thing of matter and a thing of spirit ; hence the
natural distinction made by bis mind — the an-
alyst of his physical sensations and spiritual
perceptions — between an actuality and a fic-
tion ; though, even in this life, the two groups
of faculties are constantly equilibrating each
other, each group when dominant seeing as fic-
tion or delusion what the other believes to be
most real. But in Devachan our Ego has
ceased to be dualistic, in the above sense, and
becomes a spiritual, mental entity. That which
was a fiction, a dream in life, and which had
Its being hut in the region of ' fancy,' becomes,
under the new conditions of existence, the only
posuble reality. Thus, for us, to postulate the


DEVACEAN. 139

pOBsibilifcy of any other reality for a Devachanee
is to maintain an absurdity, a monstrous fallacy,
an idea nnphilosophical to the last degree.
The actual is that whicli is actfid or performed
de facto: 'the reality of a thing is proved by
its actuality.' And the supposititious and aitifi-
cial having no possible existence in that De-
Tachanic state, the logical sequence ia that
everytliiiig in it ia actual and real. For, again,
whether overshadowing the five principles dniv
ing the life of the personality, or entirely separ
rated from the grosser principles by the dissolu-
tion of the body — the sixth principle, or our
'Spiritual Soul,' has no substance — it is ever
Arupa; nor ia it confined to one place with a
limited horizon of perceptions around it. There-
fore, whether in or out of its mortal body, it is
ever distinct, and free from its limitations ; and
if we call its Devachanic experiences 'a cheat-
ing of Nature,' then we should never be allowed
to call > reality ' any of those purely abstract feel-
ings that belong entirely to, and are reflected
and assimilated by, our higher soul — such, for
instance, as an ideal perception of the beautiful,
profound philanthropy, love, etc., as well as
every other purely spiritual sensation that dur-
ing life filla our inner being with either im-
mense joy or pain."

We must renieml>er that by tho very nature


140 ESOTERIC BUDDHiaif.

of the aystem described there are infinite va-
rieties of well-being in Devaclinn, miited to the
infinite varieties of merit in mankind. If " the
next world " really were the objective heaven
which ordinary theolt^y preaches, there would
be endless injustice and inaccuracy in its oper-
ation. People, to begin with, would be either
admitted or excluded, and the differences of
favor shown to different guests within the all-
favored region would not sufficiently provide
for differences of merit in this lite. But the
real heaven of our earth adjusts itself to the
needs and merits of oacli new arrival with un-
failing certainty. Not merely as regards the
duration of the blissful state, which is deter-
mined by the causes engendered during objec-
tive life, but as regards the intensity and
amplitude of the emotions which constitute
that blissful state, the heaven of each person
who attains the really existent heaven \a pre-
cisely fitted to his capacity for enjoying it. It
is the creation of his own aspirations and facul-
ties. More tlian this it may be impossible for
the miinitiated comprehension to realize. But
this indication of its character is enough to
show how perfectly it falls into its appointed
place in the whole scheme of evolution,

■' Devncban," to resume my direct quota-
tions, "is, of course, a state, not a locality, as


DETACHAN. 141

much as Avitehi, ita antithesis (which please
not to confound with Kelt). Esoteric Buddhist
philosophy h»3 three principal loka» so-called

— namely, 1, Kama loka ; 2, Rupa loka ; and
3, Arupa loka; or in their liter.il translation
and meaning — 1, world of desires or passions,
of unsatisfied earthly cravings — the abode o£
' Shells ' and Victims, of Elementaries and
Suicides ; 2, the world of Forms — i. e., of
shadows more spiritual, having form and objec-
tivity, but no substance ; and 3, the formleaa
world, or rather the world of no form, the in-
coiporeat, since its denizens can have neither
body, shape, nor color for us mortals, and in the
sense that we give to these terras. These are
the three spheres of ascending spirituality, iu
which the several groups of subjective and semi-
subjective entities find their attractions. All
but the suicides and tlie victims of premature
violent deaths go, according to their attractions
and powers, either into the Devachanic or the
Avitehi state, which two states form the num-
berless subdivisions of Itupa and Arupa lokas

— that is to say, that such states not only vary
in degree, or in their present^ition to the sub-
ject entity as regards form, color, etc., but that
there is an infinite scale of such states, in their
pn^essive spirituality and intensity of feeling;
from the lowest in the Rupa, up to the highest


149 ESOTERIC BUDDHIBM.

and the most exalted in the Arupa-loka. The
student must bear in mind that pertondlity ia
the synonym for limitation ; and that the more
selfieb, the more contracted the person's ideas,
the closer will he cling to the lower spheres of
being, the longer loiter on the plane of selfish
Boci^ intercourse."

Devachan being a condition of mere subjec-
tive enjoyment, the duration and intensity of
which is determined by the merit and spiritual-
ity of the earth-life last past, there is no oppor-
tunity, while the soal inhabits it, for the punc-
tual requital of evil deeds. But Nature does
not content herself with either forgiving sins in
a free and easy way, or damning sinners out-
right, like a lazy master too indolent, rather
than too good-natured, to govern liis lioiiseliold
justly. The Karma of evil, be it great or
small, is as certainly operative at the appointed
time as tlie Karma of good. But the place of
its operation is not Devachan, but either a new
re-birth or Avitchi — a state to be reached only
in exceptional cases and by exceptional natures.
In other words, while the commonplace, sinner
will reap the fruits of his evil deeds in a follow-
ing re-incarnation, the exceptional criminal, the
aristocrat of sin, has Avitchi in prospect — that
ia to say, the condition of subjective spiritual
misery which is the reverse side of Devachan.


DEVACIJAN. 143

" Avitchi IB a state of the most ideal spirit-
ual wickedness, something akin to the state ot
Lucifer, so superbly described by Milton. Not
many, though, are there who can reach it, aa
the thoughtful reader will perceive. And if it
is urged that since there 19 Devachan for nearly
all, for the good, the bad, and the indiffer-
ent, the ends of harmony and eriuilibnum are
frustrated and the law of retribution and of
impartial, implacable justice, hardly met and
satisfied by such a comparative scarcity if not
absence of its antithesis, then the answer will
show that it is not so. ' Evil ia the dark
eon of Earth (matter) and Good — the fair
daughter of Heaven ' (or Spirit) aays the
Chinese philosopher ; hence the place of pun-
ishment for most of our sins ia the earth — its
birth-place and play-ground. There is more
apparent and relative than actual evil even on
eiirth, and it is not given to the hoi polloi to
reach the fatal grandeur and eminence of a
' Satan ' every day."

Generally, the re-birth into objective exist-
ence ia the event for which the Karma of evil
patiently waits, and then it irresistibly asserts
itself J not that the Karma of good exhausts
itself in Devachan, leaving the unhappy monad
to develop a new conscioiisnesa with no mate-
rial beyond the evil deeda of its last personality.


144 ESOTERIC BUDDBISM.

The re-birth will be qualified by the merit as
well aa the demerit of the previous life, but the
Devachan existence is a rosy sleep — a peace-
ful night with dreams more vivid than day, and
imperishable for many centuries.

It will be seen that the Devachan state ia
only one of the conditions of existence which go
to make up the whole spiritual or relatively spir-
itual complement of our eai-th life. Observers of
spiritualistic phenomena would never have been
perplexed as they have been if there were no
other but the Devachan state to be dealt with.
For once in Devachan there is very little op-
portunity for communication between a spirit,
then wholly absorbed in its own sensations and
practically oblivions of the earth left behind,
and its former friends still living. Whether
gone before or yet remaining on earth, those
friends, if the bond of afiection has been suffi-
ciently strong, will be with the happy spirit
still to all intents and purposes for him, and as
happy, blissful, innocent, as the disembodied
dreamer himself. It is possible, however, for
yet living persons to have visions of Devachan,
though such visions are rare, and only one-
sided, the entities in Devachan, siglited by the
earthly clairvoyant, being quite unconscious
theraeelvea of undergoing such observation,
The spirit of the clairvfiyant ascends into the


DEVACBAN. 145

condition of Devachan in sach rare visions, and

thuB becomes subject to the vivid delusions o£
I that existence. It is nader the impresHion that
the spirits, with which it is in Devachanio
bonds of sympathy, liave come down to visit
earth and itsolf, while the converse operation
I has really taken pluce. The clairvoyant's spirit
has been raised towards those in Devachan.
Thus many of the subjective spiritual commu-
( nications — most of them when the sensitives
] are pure-minded — are real, though it is most
difficult for the uninitiated medium to fix in
hia mind the true and correct pictures of what
he sees and hears. In the same way some of
I the phenomena called peychography (though
I mora rarely) are also real. The spirit of the
j sensitive getting odylized, so to say, by the
aura of the spirit in the Devachan becomes for
a few minutes that departed personality, and
[ writes in the h;indwriting of the latter, in his
language and in his thoughts as they were
during bis lifetime. The two spirits become
blended in one, and the preponderance of one
over the other during such phenomena deter-
I mines the preponderance of personality in the
characteristics exhibited. Thus, it may inci-
dentally be observed, what is called rapport,
is, in plain fact, an identity of molecular vibra^
tion between the astral part of the incarnate


L


146 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

medium and the aetral part of tlie disincamati
peraonality.

Ar already indicated, and as the common
sense of the matter would show, there aru great
varieties of states in Devachan, and each per-
sonality drops into its befitting place there.
Thence, consBqiiently, he emerges in his befit-
ting place in the world of causes, this earth or
another, as the case may be, when bis time for
re-birth comes. Coupled with survival of the
nffinities, comprehensively described as Karma,
the affinities both for good and evil engendered
by the previous life, this process will be seen to
accomplish nothing less than an explaniition of
the problem which has always been regarded
as so incomprehensible — the inequalities of
life. The conditions on which we enter life are
the coQseqnences of the use we have made of
our last set of conditions. They do not impede
the development of fresh Karma, whatever they
may be, for this will be generated by the use
we make of them in turn. Nor is it to be sup-
posed that every event of a current lite which
bestows joy or sorrow is old Karma bearing
fruit. Many may be the immediate eonse-
quences of acts in the life to which they belong
— ready-money transactions with Nature, so to
speak, of which it may be hardly necfssary to
make any entry in her books. But the great


mate 1

nmon h

orpat


DEVACBAy. 147

inequality oi life, as regards the start in it
which different human beings make, ia a mani-
fest consequence of old Karma, the infinite va-
rieties of which always keep up a constant sup-
ply of recruits for all the manifold varieties of
human condition.

It must not be supposed that the real Ego
slips Instantaneously at death from the earth-
life and its entanglements into the Devachanic
condition. When the division or purification
of the fifth principle has been accomplished
in Kama loca by the contending attractions of
the fourth and sixth principles, the real Ego
passes into a period of unconscious gestation.
I have spoken already of the way in which the
Devachanic life is itself a process of growth,
maturity, and decline ; but the analogies of
earth are even more closely preserved. There-
is a spiritual ante-natal state at the entrance to
spiritual life, as there is a similar and equally
unconscious physical state at the entrance to
objective life. And this period, in different
cases, may he of very different duration — from
a few moments to immense periods of years.
When a man dies, his soul or fifth principle be-
comes unconscious and loses all remembrance
of things internal as well as external. Whether
his stay in Kama loca has to last but a few mo-
ments, hours, days, weeks, months or years;


F

r wi


''448 ESOTERIC BuDDniau.

whether he diea a naturnl or a violent death ;
whether this occurs in yoath or age, and
whether the Ego has been good, bad, or indif-
ferent, his consciousness leaves liim as suddenly
as the flame leaves the wick when it is blown
out. When life has retired from the last par-
ticle of the brain matter, bis perceptive facul-
ties become extinct forever, and liis spintual
powers of ongnition and volition become for the
timt! being as extiuct as the others. His Ma-
yavi-rupu may be thrown into obJMtivity as in
the caiHi of apparitions iifter death, but unless
it is projected by a conscious or intense desire
tu see or appear to some one shooting through
the dying brain, the apparition will be simply
automatic. The revival of conaciouBueas in
Kama loca is obviously, from what hiia been al-
ready said, a phenomenon that depends on the
characteristic of the principles passing, uncon-
sciously at the moment, out of the dying body.
It may become tolerably complete under cir<
cumstances by no means to be desired, or it
may be oblitei-ated by a rapid passage into the
gestation state leading to Devaclian. This ges-
tation state may be of vei-y long duration in
proportion to the Ego's spiritual stamina, and
Devachnn accounts for the remainder of the
period between death and tJie next physical re-
■tb. The whole period is, of course, of very


DEVACUAN, 149

varying length in the case of different persons,
bat re-birth in less than fifteen hundred years
is spoken of as almost impossible, while the
stay in Devachan which rewards a very rich
Earma is sometimes said to extend to enormous
periods*


CHAPTER VL


KAMA LOOA.

The BtatcmentB already made in reft^reooe to
the duatiny of the higher human principles at
death will pave the way for a comprehension of
the circumstances in which the inferior remnant
of these principles finds itself, after the real
Ego has passed eitlier into the Devachanic
state or that nnconscious intervening period of
preparation therefor which corresponds to phys-
ical gestation. The sphere in which such rem-
nants remain for a time is known to occult
science as Kama loca, the region of desire, not
the region in whicli desire is developed to any
abnormal degree of intensity as compared with
desire as it attaches to earth-life, hut the ephers
in which that sensation of desire, which is a
part of the earth-life, is capable of surviving.

It will he obvious, from what has been said
about Devachan, that a large part of the recol-
lections which accumulate round the human
Ego duiing life are incompatible in their nature
with the pure subjective existence to which the


I

L


EAUA LOCA. 151

real, durable, spiritua,! Ego passes ; bot they
are not necessarily on tliat account extingukbed
or annihilated out of existence. They inhere
in certain molecules of those finer ( but not fin-
est) principles, which escape from the body at
death ; and just as dissolution separates what
is loosely called the soul from the body, so also
it provokes a further separation between the
constituent elements of the soul. So much of
the fifth principle, or human soul, which is in
its nature assimilable witb, or has gravitated
upwards toward, the sixth principle, the spirit-
ual soul, passes with the germ of that divine
soul into the superior region, or state of Deva-
chan, ill which it sepamtes itself almost com-
pletely from the attractions of the earth ; quite
completely, as far as its own spiritual course is
concerned, though it still has certain affinities
with the spiritual aspirations emanating from
the earth, and may sometimes draw these to-
wards itself. But the animal soul, or fourth
principle (the element of will and desire as as-
sociated with objective existence), has no up-
ward attraction, and no more passes away from
the earth than the particles of the body con-
signed to the grave. It is not in the grave, how-
ever, that this fourth principle can be put away.
It is not spiritual in its nature or afiinities, but
it is not physical in its nature. In itt affiniti s


ISa ESOTERIC BDDDniBil.

it ia physical, and bence the result. Tt remains
within the actual physical local attraction of the
Giirth — in the earth's atmosphere — or, since it
ia not the gaaes of the atmosphere that are spe-
cially to be considered in connection with the
problem in hand, let nasay, in Kama loca.

And with the fourth principle a large part
(aa regards moat of mankind unfortunately,
though a part very variable in ita relative mag-
nitude) inevitably remains. There are plenty
of attributes which the ordinary composite hu-
man being exhibits, many ardent feelings, de-
sires, and acts, floods of recollections, which
even if not concerned with a life as ardent per-
haps as thoee which have to do with the higher
sspimtions, are nevertheless essentially belong-
ing to the physical life, which take time to die.
They remain behind in association with the
fourth principle, which is alt tether of the
earthly perishable nature, and disperse or fade
out, or are absorbed into the respective univer-
sal principles to which they belong, just as the
body ia absorbed into the earth, in progress of
time, and rapidly or slowly in proportion to the
tenacity of their aubatance. And where, mean-
while, is the consciousness of the individual
who has died or dissolved ? Assuredly in Deva-
chan ; but a difficulty presents itself to the
mind untwined in occult science, from the fact


KAMA LOCA. 153

that a BHmblance of conBciousness inheres in the
astral portion — the fourth principle with a
portion of the fifth — which remains behind in
KaniLi loca. The individual coneciousneBS, it
is atoned, cannot be in two places at once. But
first of all, to a certain extent, it can. As may-
be perceived presently, it ia a mistake to speak
of consciousness, as we understand the feeliug
in life, attaching to the astral shell or remnant ;
but nevertheless a certain spurious senibhince
may be reawakened in that shell, without hav-
ing any connection with the real consciousness
all the while growing in strength and vitality
in the spiritual sphere. There is no power on
the part of the shell of taking in and assimilat-
ing new ideas and initiating courses of action
on the basis of those new ideas. But there is
in the shell a survival of volitional impulses im-
parted to it during life. The fourth principle
is the instrument of volition though not voli-
tion itself, and impulses imparted to it during
life by the higher principles may run their
course and produce results almost indistinguish-
able for careless observers from those which
would ensue were the four higher principles
really all united as in life.

It, the fourth principle, is the receptacle or
vehicle during life of that essentially moral con-
sciousness which cannot suit itself to conditions


154


ESOTERIC BUDDBtSU.


of permanent existence ; but the (
even of the lowfjr jiriiiciples during life is a very
different thing from the vaporous fleeting and
uncertain consciousness, which continues to
inhere in them when that which really is the
life, the overahiidowing of them, or vitalisation
uf them by the infusion of the spirit, has ceased
au far as tliey are concerned. Language cannot
render all the facets of a many-sided idea in-
teiligible at once any more than a plain draw-
ing can show all aides of a solid object at once.
Aiid at the (irafc glance different drawings of
the same object from different points of view
may seem so unlike as to be unrecognizable as
the same ; but none the less, by the time they
are put t(^ether in the mind, will their diver-
sities be Been to harmonize. So with these
subtle attributes of the invisible principles of
man — no treatise can do more than discuss
their different aspects separately. The vari-
ous views suggested must mingle in the read-
er's mind before the complete conception oorre-
Bponds to the realities of Nature.

In life the fourth principle is the seat of will
and desire, but it is not will itself. It must be
alive, in union with the overshadowing spirit,
or "one life," to be thus the agent of that very
elevated function of life — will, in its sublime
potency. As already mentioned, the Sanskrit


KAMi LOCA. 155

names of the higher principles connote the idea
that they are vehicles of the one life. Not
that the one life is a separable molecular
principle itself, it is the union of all — the
influences of the spirit ; but in truth the idea
is too subtle for language, perhaps for intellect
itself. Its manifestation in the present case,
however, is apparent enough. Whatever the
willing fourth principle may be when alive, it
is no longer capable of active will when dead.
But then, under certain abnormal conditions, it
may partially recover life for a time ; and this
fact it is which explains many, though by no
means all, of the phenomena of spiritualistic
raediumship. The " elementary," be it remem-
bered — as the astral shell ha# generally been
called in former occult writings — is liable to
be galvanized for a time in the mediumistic
current into a state of consciousness and life
which m,iy be suggested by the first condition
of a person who, carried into a strange room In
a state of insensibility during illneBS, wakes up
feeble, confused in mind, gazing about with a
blank feeling of bewilderment, taking in im-
pressions, hearing words addressed to him and
answering vaguely. Such a state of conscious-
ness is unassociated with the notions of past or
fnture. It is an automatic consciousness, de-
rived from the medium. A medium, be it


\


156 ESOTERIC BUDJ>IUSU.

romembered, is a peraon whose principles are
lonoety united nnil susceptible of being bor-
rowed by other beings, or floating prtDciples,
having an Attraction for some of them or soma
|iart of tboni. Now what liappens in the caao
of a shell drawn into the n(>ighborhood of
a person so <^>nstittiled? Suppose the person
from whom the shell has been cost died with
some ati'ong unsatisfiud desire, not necessarily
of an unholy sort, but connected entirely with
the oarlh-life, a desire, for example, to com-
miuiicfito some fact to a still living persm.
Certainly the Aholl doea not go about in Kama
locH with a pi<raistent intelligent conscious pur-
jMMO of eommiin)<.%ting Uiat fact; but, amongst
othvm, the vulilloiuil impulse to do this has
Ixwn iufuMx) into the fourth principle, and
while the tnulocules of that principle remain in
nKMKnation, and that may be for many yean,
th«y only nv«d a partial galvaoiintion into life
Agun to lM<oomu operativti in tlie direction of
the original impulse. Such a shell cornea into
contnot witli a medium (not so dissimilar id
nature fntm the person who has died as to
niider n ntpport impos^ble), and something
fntm tho fifth principle of tlie medium assoeiataa
itsvlf with till' wandiring fonrth principle and
I tiie uriginal impulae to work. So mocb
oottsoioasaen Mid so mnoh intelligence as may


I


KAMA LOCA. 157

be required to guide the fourth principle in the
use of tiie immediate means of comraunicatioa
at hand — a slate and pencil, or a table to rap
upon — are borrowed from the medium, and
then the message given may be the message
which the dead person originally ordered his
fourth principle to give, so to speak, but which
the shell has never till then had an opportunity
of giving. It may be argued that the produc-
tion of writing on a closed alate, or of raps on a
table without the use of a knuckle or a stick,
is itself a feat of a marvelous nature, bespeak-
ing a knowledge on the part of the communi-
cating intelligence of powers of Nature we in
physical life know nothing about. But the
shell is itself in the astral world ; iu the realm
of such powers, A phenomenal manifestation
is its natural mode of dealing. It is no more
conscious of producing a wonderful resalt by
the use of new powers acquired in a higher
sphere of existence than we are conscious of
the forces by which in life the volitional im-
pulse is communicable to nerves and muscles.

But, it may be objected, the " communicating
intelligence" at a spiritual seant-ewill constant-
ly perform remarkable feats for no other than
their own sake, to exhibit the power over
natural .forces which it possesses. The reader
will please remember, however, that occult


158 ESOTERIC BUDDniSM.

Bcience is very far from Baying that all tbe
phenomena of Bpirituali»rn are traceable to oiit<
class of agents. liitheito in this treatise little
lias been said of the " ele mentals," those Bemi-
intelligent creatures of the astral light who
belong to a wholly different kingdom of Nature
from ourselves. Nor is it possible at present
to enlarge upon their attributes for the simple
and obvious reason, that kno^rledge concerning
the elemtiiitals, detailed knowledge on that sab-
ject, und in regard to the way they work, is
scrupulously withheld by the adi'pte of occult-
ism. To possess such knowledge is to wield
jwjwer, and the whole motive of the great se-
crecy in which occult science is shrouded turns
upon the danger of conferring powers upon peo-
ple who have not, first of all, by undergoing
the training of initiates, given moral guarantees
of their trustworthiness. It is by command
over the elemental that some of the greatest
physical feats of adeptsbip are accomplished ;
and it is by the spontaneous playful acts of the
elemeutals that the greatest physical phenom-
ena of the stance room are brought about.
So also with almost all Indian Fakirs and
Yc^is of the lower class who have power of
producing phenomenal results. By some nieanB,
by a scrap of inherited occult teaching, most
likely, they liave como into possession of a mor-


KAMA LOCA. 159

ael of occult science. Not necessarily that they
understand the action of the forces they employ
any more than an Indian servant in a telegraph
office, taught how to mix the ingredients of the
liquid used in a gHlviinic battery, understands
the theory of electric science. He can perform
tbe one trick he has been taught; and so with
the inferior Yogi. He has got influence over
certain elementab, and can work certain won-
dera.

Returning to a considemtion of the ex-human
shells in Kama loca, it may be argued that
their behavior in spiritual uSanaes is not cov-
ered by the theory that they have had some
message to deliver from their late master, and
have availed themselves of the mediumahip
present to deliver it. Apart altogether from
phenomena that may be put aside as elemental
pranks, we sometimes encounter a continuity of
intelligence on the part of the elementary or
shell that bespeaks much more than the sur-
Tival of impulses from the former life. Quite
so; but with portions of the medium's ilfth
principle conveyed into it tlie fourth principle
IS once more an instrument in the hands of a
master. With a medium entranced ao that the
energies of his fifth principle are conveyed into
tbe wandering shell to a very large extent, the
result is that there ia a very tolerable revival of


160 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

consciousness ia the shell for the time being, aa
regards the given moment. But what is the
nature of such conBciousnesa, after all ? Noth-
ing more, really, than a reflected light. Mem-
ory ia one thing, and perceptive faculties quite
another. A madman may remember very
clearly some portions of his past life ; yet he
is unable to perceive anything in its true light,
for the higher portion of hia Manas (fifth) and
Buddhi (sixth) principles are pamlyzud in him
and have left him. Could an animal — a dog,
for instance — explain himself, he could prove
that his memory, in direct relation to his ca-
nine personality, is aa fresh as his master's;
nevertheless, hie memory and instinct cannot
be called perceptive faculties.

Once that a shell is in the aura of a medium,
he will perceive, clearly enough, whatever he
can perceive through the borrowed principles
of the medium, and through oi^ans in mag-
netic sympathy therewith ; but this will not
carry him beyond the range of the porct'ptive
faculties of the medium, or of some one else
present in the circle. Hence the often rational
and sometimes highly intelligent answers he
may give, and hence, also, his invariably com-
plete oblivion of all things unknown to that
medium or circle, or not found in the lower
recollections of his late personality, galvanized


KAMA LOCA. 161

Kfresh by the influences under which he is
placed. The shell of -a higlily intelligent,
learned, but utterly unspiritual man, who died
a natural death, will last longer than those of
weaker temperament, and (the shadow of his
own memory helping) he may deliver, through
trance-apeakers, orations of no contemptible
kind. But these will never be found to relate
to anything beyond the subjects he thought
much and earnestly of during life, nor will any
word ever fall from him Indicatiug a real ad-
vance of knowledge.

It will easily be seen that a shell, drawn into
the merliinniatic current, and getting into rap-
port with tliB medium's fifth principle, is not
by any means sure to be animated with a con-
sciousness (even for what such consciousnesses
are worth) identical with the peraonality of the
dead person from whose higher principles it
was shed. It is just aa likely to reflect some
quite different personality, caught from the
suggestions of the medium's mind. In this
personality it will perhaps remain and answer
for a time; then some new current of thought,
thrown into the minds of the people present,
will find'its echo in the fleeting impressions of
the elementary, and his sense of identity will
begin to waver ; for a little while it flickers
over two or three conjectures, and ends by go-


162 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

ing out altogether for a time. The shell ia
onoe more sleeping in the astral light, and may
be unconsciously wafted in a few moments to
the other ends of the eaith.

Besides the ordinary elementary or shell of
the kind just described, Ivama luca is the abode
of another claaa of astral entities, which must
be taken into account if we desire to compre-
hend the varioiis conditions under which hu.
man creatures may pass from this life to others.
So far we have been examining the normal
course of eveuta, when people die in a natural
manner. But an abnormal death will lead to
abnormal consequences. Thus, iu the ease of
persons committing suicide, and in that of per-
sons killed by sudden accideut, results ensue
which differ widely from those following nat-
ural deaths. A thoughtful consideration of
such cases must show, indeed, that in a world
governed by rule and law, by affinities work-
ing out their regular eSocta in that deliberate
way which Nature favors, the case of a person
dying a sudden death at a time when all his
principles are firmly united, and ready to hold
together for twenty, forty, or sixty years, wbatr
Bver the natural remainder of his life would be,
inst surely be something different from that
a person who, by natural processes of decay,
finds himself, when the vital machine stopa


KAMA LOCA. 165

readily separable uito his variouB principles,
each prepared to travel its separate way, Nar
ture, always fertile in analogies, at once illus-
trates the idea by abowing us a ripe and an
unripe fruit. Fi-ora out of the first the inner
stone will come away as cleanly and easily as a
band from a glove, while from the unripe fruit
the stone can only be torn with difficulty, half
the pulp clinging to its surface. Now, in the
case of the sudden accidental death or of the
suicide, the stone has to be torn from the un-
ripe fruit. There is no question here about the
moral blame which may attach to the act of
suicide. Probably, in the majority of cases,
such moral blame does attach to it, but that is
a question of Karma which will follow the per-
son concerned into the next re-birth, like any
other Karma, and has nothing to do with the
immediate difficulty such person may find in
getting himself thoroughly and wholesomely
dead. This difficulty is manifestly just the
same whether a pei-son kills himself, or is killed
ip the heroic dischai^e of duty, or dies the vie
tim of an accident over which be baa no con-
trol whatever.

As an ordinary rule, when a person dies, the
long account of Karma naturally closes itself ;
that is to say, the complicated set of affinities
which have been set up during life in tbe first


164


EBOTEttrC BEDDBISM.


durable principle, the fifth is no longer
tdble of exLerisioD. The balance-sheet,
Bpeak, ia mude out afterwards, when the time
comes for the next objective birth ; or. in other
worda, the affinities long dormant in Devacban,
by reason of the abeence there of any scope for
their iictioii, assert Utemselves ns soon as they
come in contact once more with physical exis-
tence, liut the fifth principle, in which these
affinities are grown, cannot be separated in the
case of the person dying prematurely from the
earthly principle — the fourth. The elemen-
tary, therefore, which finds itself in Kama loca,
OQ its violent expulsiou from the body, is not a
mere shell — it is the person himself who was
lately alive minvi oothing but the body. In
the true sense of the word he is not dead at
all.

Certainly elementsries of this kind may com-
municate very effectoally at spiritual fSanett at
their on~n heavy cost;' for they are unfortu-
nately able, by reason of the completeness of
their astral constitntiun, to go on generating
Karma, to assoitge their thirst for life at the
nnwholesome spring of mediumshtp. If they
were of a very material sensual type in life, the
enjoyments they will seek will be of a kind the
indulgence of which in their disembodied state
■■ay readily be conceived even more piejudkial


snscep- ^H
., so to ^1


KAMA LOCA. H55

to their Karma than similar ludiilgences would
have been in life. In such cases facilis est de-
scensus. Cut off in the full flush of earthly
passions which bind them to familiar scenes,
they lire enticed by the opporiunity which me-
diiima afford for the gi'atification of these vica-
riously. They become the iucubi and suct^ubi
of inediiEval writing, demons of thirst and glut-
tony, provoking their victims to crime. A brief
essay on this subject, which I wrote last year,
and from which I have reproduced some of the
sentences just given, appeared in "The Thcoso-
phist," with a note, the authenticity of which I
have reason to trust, and the tenor of which
was as follows : —

" The variety of states after death is greater
if possible than the variety of humiin lives upon
tills earth. The victims of accident do not
geuerally become earth walkers, only those fall-
ing into the current of attraction who die full
of some engrossing earthly passion, the selfish
who have never given a thought to the welfare
of others. Overtaken by death in the consum-
mation, whether real or imaginary, of some
master passion of their lives, the desire remain-
ing unsatisfied even after a full realization, and
they still craving for more, such personalities
can never pass beyond the earth attraction to
wait for the hour of deliverance in happy igno-


166


E30TESi


ranee iind full oblivion. Among llie Buii-ides,
those to whom the above statement about pfj-
Toking their victims to crime, etc., applies, aiu
that class who commit the act in consequence of
a crime to escape the penalty of human law or
their own remorae. Natural law cannot be
broken with impunity ; the inexorable causiil
relation between action and result has its full
sway only in tlie world of effects, the Kama
loca, and every case is met there by an ade-
quate punishment, and in a thousand ways,
that would require volumes even to describe
them superficially."

Those who " wait for the hour of delireranoe
in happy ignorance and fnll oblivion " are of
course such victims of accident as have already
on earth engendered pure and elevated affinities,
and after death are aa much beyond the reach
of temptation in the shape of mediumistic cur-
rents as they would have been inaccessible in
life to common incitements to crime.

Entities of another kind occasionally to be
found in Kama loca have yet to be considered,
We have followed the higher principles of per-
sons recently dead, observing the separation of
the astral dross from the spiritually durable
portion, that spiritually durable portion being
either holy or Satanic in its nature, and pro-
vided for in Deviichan or Avitohi accordingly


KAMA LOCA. 167

We have esamined the nature of tbe elemen-
tary ahell eaat off and preeerving for a time a
deceptive resemblance to a true entity ; we
have paid attention also to the exceptional cases
of real four principled beings in Kama loca who
are the Tictime of accident or suicide. But
what happens to a personality which has abso-
lutely no atom of spirituality, no trace of spir-
itual affinity in ita fifth principle, either of the
good or bad sort ? Clearly in such a case there
is nothing for the sixth principle to attract to
itself. Or, in other words, such a personality
has already lost its sixth principle by the time
death comes. But Kama loca is no more a
sphere of existence for such a personality than
the subjective worid; Kama loca may be per-
manently inhabited by astral beings, by ele-
meutals, but can only be an antechamber to
some other state for human beings. In the case
imagined, the surviving personality is promptly
drawn into the current of its future destinies,
and these have nothing to do with this earth's
atmosphere or with Devachan, but with that
" eighth sphere " of which occasional mention
will be found in older occult writings. It will
have been unintelligible to ordinary readers
hitherto why it was called the "eighth "sphere,
but since the explanation, now given out for the
first time, of the sevenfold constitution of our


168


ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.


planetary system, the mesiniiig will be clear
eiiougli. The apheres of tLe uyclic proceas o£
Kvolution are seven in number, but there is an
eiglitli in connection witU our earth, our earth
being, it will be renienibi.-red, the turning-point
in the cyclic chitiii, and tliis eighth sphere is
out of circuit, a cul de sac, and the bourne from
which it may be truly said no traveler returna.

It will readily be guessed that the only sphere
connected with our planetary chain, which ia
lower than our own in the aoale, having apirit
at the top and matter at the bottom, must it>
self be no less visible to the eye and to optical
instruments thun tlie earth itself, and as the
duties which this sphere has to porform in our
planetary ayateni are immediately associated
with this earth, there ia not much mystery left
now in the riddle of the eighth sphere, nor as
to the place in the aky where it may bo aoiight.
The conditions of existence there, however, are
topics on which the adepts are very reserved iu
their communications tii uninitiated pupils, and
concerning these I have for the present no fur-
ther information to give.

One atatement though is definitely made,
viz., that auch a total degradation of a person-
ality as may suffice to draw it, after deatli,
inLo the attraction of the eighth sphere, ia of
Very rare occurrence. From the vast majority


KAilA LQCA. 169

of Uvea there ia sometbiug which the higher
pnnciples may draw to themaeivea, sumethmg
to redeem the page of exieteuoe just passed
from total destruction : and here it itiuat be
remembered that the recollectioQS of life in
DevachaD, very viviU as tliey are, as far as they
go, touch only those epiaodes in life which are
productive of the elevated sort of happiness of
which alone Devachaii ia qualified to take cog-
nizance; whereas the life from which for the
time buiiig the cream is thus skimmed may
come to be remembered eventually in all its
details quite fully. That complete remem-
brance ia only achieved by the individual at
the threshold of a far more exalted spiritual
state than that which we are now concerned
with, and which is attained far later on in the
progress of the vaat cycles of evolution. Each
one of the hmg aeries of lives tliat will have
been passed through will then be, as it were, a
page in a book to wliich the poaseaaor can turn
back at pleasure, even though many such pages
will then seem to him, most likely, very dull
reading, and will not be frequently referred to.
It is this revival eventually of recollection con-
cerning all the long-forgotten personalities that
is really meant by the doctrine of the Resurrec-
tion. But we have no time at present to stop
and unravel the enigmas of symbolism aa bciir-


\


170


ESOTEMJC aCDDBISJt.


ing npon the teachingB at present under ood-
veyance to the reader. It mKy be worth while
to do this as a separate nudertaking at a later
period ; bat meanwhile, to revert to the narra-
tive of how the facts stand, it may be explained
that in the whole book of pages, when at last
the " remrrectioD " has been accomplished,
Uiere will be no entirely infamous pages ; for
even if any given spiritoal individnality baa
OGcaeionatly, daring its passage through this
world, been linked with personalities so deplor-
ably and desperately degraded that they have
passed completely into the attraction of the
lower vortex, that spiritual individuality in
such cases will have retained in its own affini-
ties no trace or taint of them. Those pf^es
will, as it were, have been cleanly torn out from
the book. And, as at the end of the stmggle,
after crossing the Kama loca, the spiritual indi-
viduality will have passed into the unconscioua
gestation state from which, skipping the Deva-
cban state, it will be directly (though not
immediately in time) re-bom into its next life
of objective activity, all the self-consciousnesa
connected with that existence will have passed
into the lower world, there eventually to " per-
ish everlastingly ; " an expression of which, as
of BO many more, modem theology has proved
H faithless custodian, making pure uonseiiBO
out of psyclio-scientific facts.


THE HUMAN TnjE-WAVE.

A GENERAL account has already been given
of the way in wliioh the great evolutionary
life-wave sweeps round and round the seven
worlds which compose the planetary chain of
which our earth is a part. Further asaiatance
may now be offered, with the view of expanding
this general idea into a fuller comprehension of
the processes to which it relates. And no one
additional chapter of the great story will do
more towards rendering its character intelligi-
ble than an explanation of certain phenomena
connected with the progress of worlds, that
may be conveniently called obscurations.

Students of occult philosophy who enter on
that pursuit with minds already abundantly
furnished in other ways are very liable to mis-
interpret its earlier statements. Everything
cannot be said at once, and the first broad
explanations are apt to suggest conceptions in
regard to details which are most likely to be
eironeouB with the most active-minded and


F


172


ESOTERIC aUDDBIBli.


intelligent thinkers. Sucli renders are B
tent with shadowy outlines even for u
Imaginatiun fills in the picture, and if its
is undisturbed for any length of time, t"
thor of it will be surprised afterwards I
that later information is incompatible v
which ho had come to r^ard as having
distinctly taught in the beginning,
this treatise tlie writer's effort is to oon^
the information in such a way that hasty weet
growths of the mind may be prevented as fi
as possible; but in this very effort it is neoo
sary sometimes to run on quickly in advancit,
leaving some details, even very import
tails, to be picked np during a second j
over the old ground. So now the readal
be good enough to go back to the explai
given in Chapter III. of the evolutionarj
reaa through the whole planetary chain. ■

SomeTew words were said then co
the manner-jn which the life impulse f
from planet tO planet in "rushes or gashi:i:
not by an even^«sontinuous flow." Now tin
course of evolution "jin its earlier stages is
far continuous that thKp''^P^''*t^i<'" "' sewr
planets for the final tiXal-wave of humiuiii
may be going on simuItanJEOusly. Indeed, 1 '•
preparation of all the seven V'*"®** "**?♦ *'' ^'
stage of the proceedings, be |


■£. 175

the human life-ware.
I which is acGom-
I connection with
\ from globe A to
e chain. When
ll III li^ft in obacnratiou
1 .'iives the life-wave,
■ i—iiirfttion. When the
njceding eix worlds
yhile the life-wave
■ (jL-agression, the
i-'i is very satis-
Tin? reader will


given of the
:li rough seven

period on a
lie occupation

of life. The
"i- vace of the


r


174 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

A passes for the time into a state of obscura-
tion. This state is not one of decay, dissolu-
tion, or anything that can be properly called
death. Decay itself, though its aspect is apt
to mislead the mind, is a condition of activity
in a certain direction, this consideration afford-
ing a clue to the meaning of a great deal which
ia otherwise meaningless ia that part of Hindu
mythology which relates to the deities presid-
ing over destruction. The obscuration of a
world is a total suspension of its activity ; this
does not mean that the moment the last haman
monad passes on from any given world that
world is paralyzed by any convulsion, or sub-
sides into the enchanted trance of a sleeping
palace. The animal and vegetable life goes on
us before, for a time, but its character begins to
recede instead of advancing. The great life-
wave has left it, and the animal and vegetable
kingdoms gradually return to the condition in
which tbey were found when the great lite-
wave first reached them. Enormous periods of
time are available for this slow process by
which the obscured world settles into sleep, for
it will be seen that obscuration in each case
lasts sis times ^ as long as the period of each

I Or we may ray Ave tinimi. utlowing for Ihe haif poriod ol
mnrnliiK wliicli prucedes and tliu hull period ot evening which ful
lows (he lUy of full activity.


THE HUMAN TIDE^WAVE. 175

world's occupation by the human life-wave.
That IB to say, the proceBB wliich is accom-
phshed aa above described in connection with
the passage of the life-wave from globe A to
globe B is repeated all along the chain. When
the wave passes to C, B is left in obscuration
as well as A. Then D receives the life-wave,
and A, B, C are in obscuration. When the
wave reaches G, all the preceding six worlds
are in obscuration. Meanwhile the life-wave
passes on in a certain regular progression, the
symmetrical character of which is very satis-
factory to scientific instincts. The reader will
be prepared to pick up the idea at once, in
view of the explanations already given of the
way in which humanity evolves through seven
great races, during eacli round period on a
planet ; that is to say, during the occupation
of such planet by the tidal wave of life. The
fourth race is obviously the middle race of the
series. As soon as this middle point is turned,
and the evolution of the fifth race on any given
planet begins, the preparation for humanity be-
gins on the next. The evolution of the fifth
race on E, for example, is commensurate with
the evolution, ot rather with the revival, of the
mineral kingdom on D, and so on. That is to
say, the evolution of the sixth race on D coin-
cides with the revival of the vegetable kingdom


1|6 ESOTERIC BUDDUISM.

Oil E; the seventh race on D with the revival
of the animal kingdom on E; an<l then when
the last monada of the seventh race on D have
passed into the aubjeclive atiite or world of ef-
fects, the hiimiin period on E begins, and the
first race begins its development there. Mean-
while the twilight ptriod on the world preced-
ing D has been deepening into the night of ob-
scuration in the same progressive way, and
obscuration there definitely sets in when tha
human period on D passes its half-way point.
But just as the heart of a man beats and respi-
ration continues, no matter Iiow profound his
sleep, there are processes of vital action which
go on in the resting world even during the most
profound depths of its repose. And these pre-
serve, in view of the next return of the human
wave, the results of the evolution that preceded
its first arrival. Recovery for the re-awaking
planet is a larger process than its subsidence
into rest, for it has to attain a higher degree of
perfection iigainat the return of the human life-
wave than that at which it was left when the
wave \-Aat went onward from its shore. But
with every new beginning. Nature is infused
with a vigor of its own, — the freshness of a
moniing, — and the later obscuration period,
which is a time of preparation and hopefuhiess
as it were, invests evolution itself with a new


THE HUMAN TIDE-WAVE. 177

momentum. By the time the great life-wave
returns, all is ready for its reception.

In the firet essay on this Bubject it was
rooghly indicated that the various worlds mak-
ing up our planetary chain weru not all of the
same materiality. Putting the conception of
spirit at the north pole of the circle and that of
matter at the south pole, the worlds of the de-
scending arc vary in materiality and spiritual-
ity, like those of tlie ascending arc. This varia-
tion must now be considered more attentively
if the reader wislies to realize the whole pro-
cesses of evolution more fully than heretofore.

Besides the earth, which is at the lowest ma-
teriiil point, there are only two other worlds of
our chain which are visible to physical eyes, —
the one behind and the one in advance of it.
These two worlds, as a matter of fact, are Mars
and Mercury, — Mai's being behind and Mer-
cury in advance of us : Mars in a state of en-
tire obscuration now as regards the human life-
wave, Mercury just beginning to prepare for its
next human period.'

1 It may be wnrth while here to remark for the beneflt of people
who maj- lia disposod, from phyeical science reading, lo object
Ibat Uercnry is too near tbs Sud, and consequenlly loo hot lo be a
■Qitable place of habitation for moo, that in the oilicisl report ot
UiG Aatronomical DepArtmont of the United States on the recent
"Mount WhitnfV obeervationa " statemeota will bo foand that
rasy check loo ciinfiiioiit rrilicisms of occult science alonR fha( lint


178


EBOTERIC BUDDnra}f.


The two planets of our chain that are behind
Mars, and the two that are in advance of Mer-
cury, are not composed of an order of naatter
which telescopes can take cognizance of. Four
out of the seven are thus of an ethereal natui-e,
which people who can only conceive matter in
its earthly form will be inclined to call immate-
rial. But they are not really immaterial at all.
They are simply in a finer state of materiality
thai) the earth, but their finer state does uot in
any way defeat the uniformity of Nature's de-
sign in regard to the raetliods and stages of their

It Whitney obnervstione on xilcctiTB sbaorp-
ding ti> the offitial raporlar, thW it
would no longer be impuiBible tu suggest ths condiliunB of ail st-
mospliere wbich ebuuld reoder Morcury habitable at the one ex-
trvme of the scale, and Saturn nt (he other. We liave no concern
with Satom at present, nor, if it vera neceeury to expl^ on oc-
cult principle! ttie habitability of Mercury, ihould the task be Bt-
tempted with caiculationa about aeiective absorption. The fact !■

Bun, as the ttorvhouse oF force for tliu solar system, — loo muuh tn
an far as the heat of planets has a great deal lo do with another Ir-
flnence quite distinct from tho Sun, sn influence which will nut be
thoroughly understood till more is known than at present about Iho
correlations of heat and magnetism, and of the magnetic, mcloorio
dust, with which inter-planetar)- space is pervaded. However, it
is enough — lo rebut any objeclion that might he raised against
Vie explanations now in progress, from the point of view □( loyal
devotees of la»l year's science — to point owt that siich ohjectioni
would he already out of dale. Modem science Is very progressive,
— this ii one of its greatest merits, — but it is not a merilorioui
babit with modem scientists to think, at each stage of its progress,
)hat alt conceptions inconipatible with that stage muM neceuari^


THE HUMAN TIDE-WAVE. 179

evolution. "Within the scale of their subtle
"inviaibility," the successive rounds and races
of mankind pass through their stages of greater
and less matenality just as on this earth ; but
whoeTer would comprehend them must compie-
hend this earth first, and work out their deli-
cate phenomena by correspond en tial inferences.
Let us return, therefore, to the consideration of
the great life-wave in its aspects on this planet.
Just as the chain of worlds treated as a unity
has its north and south, its spiritual and mar
terial, pole, working from spirituality down
through materiality up to spirituality again, so
the rounds of mankind constitute a similar se-
ries which the chain of globes itself might be
taken to symbolize. In the evolution of man
in fact, on any one plane as on all, there is a
descending and an ascending arc ; spirit, so to
speak, involving itself into matter, and matter
evolving itself into spirit. The lowest or most
mhiterial point in the cycle thus becomes the
inverted apex of physical intelligence, which is
the masked manifestation of spiritual intelli-
gence. Each round of mankind evolved on the
downward arc (as each race of each round if
we descend to the smaller mirror of the cosmos)
must thus be more physically intelligent than
its predecessor, and each in the upward arc
i with a more relined form of


180 ESOTERIC BUDDBiaU.

mentality commingled witli greater Bpiritiial in-
tuitivenesB. In the first round, therefori
find man a relatively ethereal being compared
even on earth with the state he has now at-
tained here?, not intellectual, but super-spiritual.
Like the animal and vegetable shapes around
hira, he inhabits an immense but loosely organ-
ized body. In the second round he is still gi-
gantic and ethereal, but growing firmer and
more condenaed in body, — a more physical
man, but still less intelligent than spiritual.
In the thii-d round he has developed a perfectly
concrete and compacted body, at firat the form
rather of a giant ape than of a true man, but
with intelligence coining more and move into
the ascendant. In the last half of the third
ronnd his gigantic stature decreases, his body
improves in texture, and he begins to be a ra-
tional man. In the fourth round intellect, now
fully developed, achieves enormous prepress.
The direct races vrith which the round begins
acquire human speech as we understand it.
The world teems with the resulte of intellectual
activity and spiritual decline. At the half-way
point of the fourth round here the polar point
of the whole seven-world period is passed.
From this point outwards the spirituiil Ego
begins its real struggle with body and mind
to manifest its transcendental powers. Iq


1


TBE BUMAN TJDE,-\VAVE. 181

the fifth round th« struggle continues, but the
transeendentiil faculties are largely developed,
though the struggle betweeu these on the oue
hand with physical intellect and propensity is
fiercer than ever, for tbe intellect of the lifth
round as well a^ its spirituality is an advance
on that of the fourth. lu the si^th round
hum^inity attains a degree of perfection both
of body and soul, of intellect and spirituality,
which ordinary mortals of the present epoch
will not readily realize in their imuginatious.
The most supreme comhinations of wisdom,
goodness, and tra usee n den t;il enlightenment
which the world has ever seen or thought of
will represent the ordinary type* of manhood.
Those faculties whioli now, in the rare efflores-
cence of a generation, enable some extraordi-
narily gifted pei'sona to explore the mysteries
of Nature and gather the knowledge of which
some crumhs are now being offered (through
these writings and in other ways) to tbe ordi-
nary world, will then be tlie common appanage
of all. As to what the seventh round will be
like, the most communicative occult teachers
are solemnly silent. Mankind in the seventh
round will be something altogether too God-
like for mankind in the fourth round to fore-
cast its attributes.

During tbe occupation of any planet by the


182


ESOTERIC SUDDaiSif.


human life-w»ve, each individual mnnad is
inevitably incarnated many times. Tliia has
been partly explained. If one existence only
be passed by the monad in each of tlie brunch
races through which it must piias at least once,
the total number accomplished during a round
period on one planet would be 343, — the third
power of seven. But as a matter of fact each
monad is incarnated twice in each of the
branch races, and also comes in, necessarily, for
some few extra incarntitions as well. For rea-
Bons which are not easy for the outsider to dt-
vme, the possessors of occult knowledge are
especially reluctant to give out numerical facta
relating to cdfiniogony, though it is hard for the
uninitiated to understand why these should be
withheld. At present, for example, we shall
not be able to state what is the actual duration
in years of the round period. But a concession,
■which only those who have long been atudenta
of occultism by the old method will fully appre-
ciate, has been made about the numbers with
which we are immediately concerned ; and this
concession is valuable at all events, as it helps
to elucidate an interesting fact connected with
evolution, oh the threshold of which we have
now arrived. This fact is that while the earth,
for example, is iuhabited, iis at present, by
fourth-round humanity, by the wave of human


TSE HUMAN TIDE-WAVE, 183

life, that is to say, on its fourth journey round
the circle of the worlds, there may be present
among ua some few persons, few in relation to
the total number, who, properly speaking, be-
long to the fifth round. Now, in tlje seuse of
the term at present employed, it must not be
supposed that by any miraculous process any
individual unit has actually traveled round the
whole chain of worlds once more often than his
oompeei-8. Under the explanations juat given
as to the way the tide-wave of humanity pro-
gresses, it will be seen thut this is impossible,
Humanity haa not yet paid its fifth visit even
to the planet next in advance of our own. But
individual monads may outstrip their compan-
ions as regards their individnal development,
and so become exactly as mankind generally will
be when the fifth round has been fully evolved.
And this may be accomplished in two ways;
A man born as an ordinary fourth-round man
may, by processes of occult training, convert
himself into a man having all the attributes of
a fifth-round man, and so become what we may
call an artificial fifth rounder. But indepen-
dently of all exertions made by man in his pres-
ent incarnation, a man may also be born a fifth
rounder, though in the midst of fourth-round
humanity by virtue of tke total nomber of bis
previous incarnations.


184


ESOTERIC BDDDBIBM.


If X stands for the normal number of incama-
tiona wliich in the course of Nature a monad
must go through during a round period on one
planet, and y for the margin of extra iiiciirna-
tions into whiub by a strong desire for phys-
ical life be may force limaelf during sucb a
period, then, as a matter of fact, 24^ C^^ + y)
may exceed 28 x ; that is lo say, in 3i rounds
a monad may have accomplisbed as many in-
carnations as an ordinary monad would liave
accomplished in four complete rounds. In leas
than Sj rounds the result could not have been
attained, so that it ia only now that we have
passed the half-way point of evolution on this
balf-way planet that the fifth rounders are be-
ginning to drop in.

It is not possible in the nature of things that
a monad can do more than outstrip his com-
panions by more than one round. This consid-
eration, notwithstanding Buddha was a sixth-
round man ; but this fact has to do with a great
mystery outside the limits of the present calcu-
lation. Enough for the moment to say that
the evolution of a Buddha has to do with some-
thing more than mere incarnations within the
limits of one planetary chain.

Since large numbers of lives have been recog
nized in the above calculations as following one
another in the successive incarnations of an


TSB HUMAN TIDE-WAVE. 185

individual monad, it is important here, with
the view of averting misconceptions, to point
out that the periods of time over wliich these
incarnations range are so great that vaat inter-
vals Bepanite them, immeroua as they are. Ah
stated above, we cannot juat now give the act
ual duration of the round periods. Nor, indeed,
could any figures be quoted as indicaling the
duration of all round periods equally, for these
vary in length within very wide limits. But
here is a simple fact which has been definitely
stated on the highest occult authority we are
concerned with. The present race ui human-
ity, the present fifth race of the fourth-round
period, began to evolve about one million of
years ago. Now it is not yet finished ; but
supposing that a million years had constituted
the complete life of the race,* how would it
have been divided up for each individual
monad ? In a race there must be rather more
than 100, and there can hardly be 120, incai-n:^
tions for an individual monad. But say even
tliere have been already 120 incarnations for

■ The complete lite of a race is certainly much loDger than
thin; but when we get to Bgures of (his kind we are on very d«li-
cale ground, for precise periods are very profound secrets, for rea-
BQDB uninitiated etudents ("lay chelas," bb the adeptii now eay,
coining s new deaiKuatiDn to meet a new cnndition of Uiiiigi«) can
only imperfectly divine. Calculations like those ipven above mny
be trasted literally bs far aa they go, Lut must not rashly be maile
Uia buia ol othera.


186 ESOTERIC aCDDBOM.

Bumads in tbe preaeDt race alrea^, and txj
that tiie arerage life of eadi incanudon waa a
eeotorj ; even then we sbonld only hare 12,000
y««n ont of the million spent in phyncal ex-
istence against 988,000 years spent in tbe mb-
i'-ntire sphere, or thi-re wonld be an average <A
more than 8,000 yatrs between each incanta-
tion. Certainly these interreuiog periods aie
ol very variable length, but they can hard^
even contract to anything less than 1,500 yean,
— leaving oot of account, of course, the case of
adcpta who have placed themselves quite ont-
(ride the operation of the ordinary law, — and
l,-'iOO years, if not an impossibly short, would
be a very brief, interval between two rebirths.

These calculations must be qualified by one
or two considerations, however. The cases of
children dying in infancy are quite iinlike thoee
of jfersons wlio attain full maturity, and for
obvious reasutiB, that the explanations now al-
ready given will suggest. A child dying be-
fore it has livifd long enough to begin to be
responsible for its nctions has generated no
fresh Karma. The spiritual monad leaves tiiut
child's bo'ly in just the same state in which it
entered it after its last death in Devachan. It
has had do opportunity of playing on its new
instrument, wliich has been broken before even
it waa tunud. A re-incarnation of the monad,


THE HUMAN TIDE-WAVE. 18T

therefore, may take place immediately, on the
line of its old attraction. But the monad so
re-incarnated is not to be spiritually identified
in any way with the dead child. So, in the
same way, with a monad getting into the body
of a bom idiot. The instrument cannot be
tuned, so it cannot play on that any more than
on the child's body in the first few years of
childhood. But both these cases are manifest
exceptions that do riRt alter the broad rule
above laid down for all persons attaining ma-
turity, and living their earth lives for good or


THE PROGKEB8 OF HUMANITY.

The course of Nature providea, as the reader
will now have aeeu, for the indefinite prog-
ress towards higher phases of esiBteiice of all
human entities. But no leas will it have been
seen that by endowing these entities, as tJiey
advance, with ever-increasing faculties and liy
constantly enlarging the scope of their iictivity,
Nature also fnrnisbea each human entity with
more and more decisive opportunities of cboos-
iiig between good and evil. In the earlier
rounds of humanity this privilege of selection
is not fully developed, and responsibility of ac-
tion is correspondingly incomplete. The ear-
lier rounds of humanity, in fact, do not invest
the Ego with apirilual responsibility at all, in
the lai^er sense of the term which we are now
approaching. The Devachanic periods which
follow each objective existence in turn dispose
futly of its merits and demerits, and the most
deplorable personality which the Ego during tlio
first half of its evolution can possibly develop


TBE PROGRESS OF HUMANITY.


189


is merely dropped out of the account as regards
the larger undertaking, while the erring per-
sonality itself pays ita relatively brief penalty,
and troubles Nature no more. But the second
half of the great evolutionary period ia carried
on on different principles. The phases of exist-
ence which are noxv coming into view cannot
be entered upon by the Ego without positive
merits of its own appropriate to the new devel-
opments in prospeut ; it is not enough that the
DOW fully responsible and highly gifted being
which man becomes at the great turning-point
in his career should float idly on the stream of
progress ; he must begin to swim, if he wishes
to push his way forward.

Debarred by the complexity of the subject
from dealing with all ita features simultane-
ously, our survey of Nature has so far contem-
plated the seven rounds of human development,
which constitute the whole planetary undertak-
ing with which we are concerned, as a continu-
ous series throughout which it is the natural
destiny of humanity in general to pass. But it
will be remembered that humanity in the sixth
round has been spoken of so highly developed
that the sublime attributes and faculties of the
highest adeptship are the common appanage of
all; while in the seventh round the race has
almost emei^d from humanity into divinity.


190


EBOTESrc BUDDBIBU.


Now every huniaii being in this stage of devel-
opment will still be identified by an uninter-
rupted connection with all the person ajities
which liave been strung upon that thread of
life from the beginning oE the great evolution-
ary procesB. Is it conceivable that the chanio-
ter of Bucb pei'sonalities is of no consequence in
the long run, and that two God-like beings
might stand side by side in the seventh round,
developed, the one from a long aeries of blame-
less and serviceable existences, the other from
an equally long series of evil and groveling
lives? That surely could not come to pass,
and we have to ask now, How do we find the
congruitiea of Nature preserved compatibly
with the appointed evolution of humanity Ui
the higher forms of existence which crown the
edifice ?

Just as childhood is irresponsible for its acts,
the earlier races of humanity are irresponsible
for theirs ; but there comes the period of full
growth, when the complete development of the
faculties which enable the individual man to
choose between good and evil, in the single life
with which he is for the moment concerned, en-
ables the continuous Ego also to niiike its final
selection. That period — that enormous period,
for Nature is in no huiTy to catch its creaturetj
in a trap in such a matter as tliis — is barely


THE PROGRESS OF BUMAHITT. 191

yet beginning, and a complete round period
around the seven worlds will have to be gone
through before it is over. Until the middle of
the fifth period is passed on this earth, the great
question — to be or not to be for the future —
is not irrevocably settled. We are comiufi
now into the possession of the faculties which
render man a fully responsible being, but we
have yet to employ those fiiculties during the
maturity of our Ego-hood in the manner which
shall determine the vMSt consequences hereafter.

It is during the first half of the fifth round
that the struggle principally takes place. Till
then, the ordinary course of life may be a good
or a bad preparation for the struggle, but can-
not fairly be described as the struggle itself.
And now we have to examine the nature of the
struggle, so tar merely spoken of as the selec-
tion between good and evil. That ia in no
v?ay an inaccurate, but it is an incomplete, defi-
nition.

The ever- recurring and ever- threatened con-
flict between intellect and spirituality is the
phenomenon to be now examined. The com-
monplace conceptions which these two words
denote must of course be expanded to some
extent before the occult conception is realized :
for European habits of thinking are rather apt
to set up in the mind an ignoble image of spir-


192 KaOTEBIC BUDDniaiif.

ituality, as an attribute rather of the chanurter
than the mind itaeif, — a pale poody-goodinesa,
born of an attachment to religious ceremonial
and of devout aspirations, no matter to what
whimsical notions of Heaven and Divinity in
which the " spiritually-minded " person may
have been brought up. Spirituality, in the
occult sense, has little or nothing to do with
feeling devout ; it has to do with the capacity
of the mind for assimilating knowledge at the
fountain-bead of knowledge itself — of absolute
knowledge — instead of by the circuitons and
laborious process of ratiocination.

The development of pure intellect, the rati-
ocinative faculty, has been the buainess of Eu<
ropean nations for so long, and in this depart-
ment of human progress they have achieved
such magnificent triumphs, that nuthing in oc-
cult philosophy will be less acceptable to Euro-
peans themselves at first, and while the ideas at
stake are imperfectly grasped, than the first
aspect of the occult theory concerning intellect
and spirituality ; but this does not arise so
much from the undue tendency of occult science
to depreciate intellect aa from the undue ten-
dency of modern Western spfculation to depre-
ciate spirituality. Broadly speaking, so far
Western philosophy has had no opportunity o\
appreciating spirituality ; it has not befu made


TBE PROGRESS OF HUMANITT. 193

acquainted with the range ot the inner faculties
of roan ; it has merely groped blindly in the
direction of a belief that aoch inner faculties
existed ; and Kant himself, the greatest modern
exponent of that idea, does little more than
contend that there is such a faculty as intuition,
— if we only knew bow to work with it.

The process of working with it is occult sci-
ence in its highest aspect, the cultivation of
spirituality. The cultivation of mere power
over the forces of Nature, the investigation of
some of her subtler secrets as regards the inner
principles controlling physical results, is occult
science in its lowest aspect, and into that lower
region of its activity mere physical science may,
or even must, gradually run up. But the ac-
quisition by mere intellect — physical science
in excehii — of privileges which are the proper
appanage of spirituality is one of the dangers
of that struggle which decides the ultimate
destiny of the human Ego, For there is one
thing which intellectual processes do not help
mankind to realize, and that is the nature and
supreme excellence of spiritual existence. On
the contrary, intellect arises out of physical
causes, the perfection of the physical brain,
and tends only to physical results, the perfec-
tion of material welfare. Although, as a con-
cession to "weak brethren' and "religion,"


194 ESOTERIC BUIiDHlBW.

on which it looks with good-humored contempt,
modern intellect does not condemn Bpiritnahty,
it certainly treats ttie physical human life as the
only serious businesa with which grave men, or
even earnest philanthropists, can concern them-
selves. But obviously, if spiritual existence,
vivid subjective consciousness, really does go on
for periods greater than the periods of intellec-
tual physical existence in the ratio, as vre liave
seen in discussing the Devachanic condition, of
80 to 1 at least, then surely man's subjeclive
existence is more important than his physical
existence, and intellect in error, when all its
efforts are bent on the amelioration of the phys-
ical existence.

These considerations show how the choice be-
tween good and evil — which has been mado
by the human Ego in the course of the great
struggle between intellect and spirituality — is
not a mere choice between ideas so plainly con-
trasted as wickedness and virtue. It is not so
rough a question as that, — whether man be
wicked or virtuous, — wliich must really at the
final critical turning-point decide whether he
shall continue to live and develop into higher
phases of existence, or cease to live altogether.
The truth of the matter is (if it is not impru-
dent at this stage of our progress to brush the
surface of a new mystery) that the question, to


THE PROGRESS OF BUMANITT. 195

be or not to be, is not settled by reference to
the question whether a man be wicked or vir-
tuous al all. It will plainly be seen eventually
that there must be evil spirituality as well as
good spirituality. So thut the great question
of continued existence turns altogether and of
necessity on the question of spirituality, as com-
pared with physicality. The point is not so
much "shall a. man Uve; ia be good enough to be
permitted to live any longer ? " as " can the man
live any longer in the higher levels of existence
into which humanity must at last evolve?"
Has he qualified himself to live by the cultiva-
tion of the durable portion of bia nature? If
not, he has got tu the end of his tether. The
destiny which must befall bim ia annihilation, —
not necessarily suffering in a conscious exist-
ence, but that dissolution that must befall tbe
soul which has wholly assimilated itself to
matter. Into tiie eighth sphere of pure matter
that Ego must descend which is finally con-
victed of unfitness to go any further in the up-
ward spiral path around the planetary chain.

It need not be hurriedly supposed that occult
philosophy considers vice and virtue of no eon-
eequence to human spiritual destinies, because
it does not discover in Nature that these ehar-
acteriatica determine ultimate progress in evo-
lution. No system is so pitik'ssly inflexible in


196 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

its morality as the system which occult philos*
ophy explores and expounds. But that which
vice and virtue of themselves determine is
happiness and misery,. not the final problem of
continued existence, beyond that immeasurably
distant period, when in the progress of evolu-
tion man has got to begin being something more
than man, and cannot go on along the path of
progress with the help only of the relatively
lower human attributes. It is true again that
one can hardly imagine virtue in any decided
degree to fail in engendering, in due time, the
required higher attributes ; but we should not
be scientifically accurate in speaking of it as the
cause of progress, in ultimate stages of eleva-
tion, though it may provoke the development
of that which is the cause of progress.

This consideration — that ultimate progress
is determined by spirituality irrespective of its
moral coloring — is the great meaning of the oc-
cult doctrine that " to be immortal in good one
must identify one's self with God ; to be immor-
tal in evil, with Satan. These are the two poles
of the world of souls ; between these two poles
vegetate and die without remembrance the use-
less portion of mankind." ^ The enigma, like all
occult formulas, has a lesser application (fitting
the microcosm as well as the macrocosm), and

1 Eliphas Levi.


TBE FRCGRESS OF nVMAHlT¥. 197

in its lesser significance refei-8 to Devachan
or Avitclii, and the blsink destiny of colorleaa
peraonalities ; but in its moi'e iDiportanl bear-
ing it relates to the final sorting out of human-
ity at the middle of the great fii'th round, the
annihilation oE the utterly unspii-itual Egoa and
the passage onward of the others to be immor-
tal in good or immortal in evil. Precisely the
same meaning attiichesto the passage in Reve-
lation (iii. 15, 16) : " I would thou wert cold
or hot. So then because thon art lukewiirni,
and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out
of my mouth."

Spirituality, then, is not devout aspiration;
it is the highest kind of intellection, that which
takes cognizance of the workings of Nature by
direct assimilation of the mind with her higher
principles. The objection which physical intel-
ligence will bring Hgainst this view is that the
mind can cognize nothing except by observation
of phenomena and reasoning thereon. That is
the mistake, — it can ; and the existence of oc-
cult science is the highest proof thereof. But
there are hints pointing in the direction of snch
proof all around us if we have but the patience
to examine their true bearings. It is idle to
say, in face, merely for one thing, of the phe-
nomena of clairvoyance — crude and imperfect
aa those have been which have pushed them-


198 ESOTERIC Bunonmii.

selves on the atteotioa of tlie world — that
there are no other avenues to cuneciouBiiess but
those of the five seriBes. Cectainly in the ordi-
nary world the clairvoyant faculty is an exceed-
ingly rare one, but it iiidiciitea the existence in
mac of a potentiid faculty, the nature of which,
as inferred from ils slightest man ifes tuitions,
must obviously be cu,pable in its highest devel-
opment of leading to a direct asBiinilatiou of
knowledge independently of observation.

One of the most embarrassing difficuUies that
beset the present attempt to translate the es-
oteric doctrine into plain language is due really
to the fact that spii'itual perceptiveness, apart
from all ordinary processes by which knowledge
is acquired, is a great and grand possibility of
human nature. It is by that method in the
regular course of occult training that adepts im-
part instruction to their pupils. They awaken
the dormant sense in the pupil, imd through
this they imbue his mind with a knowledge
that such and such a doctrine is the real truth.
The whole scheme of evolution, which the fore-
going chapters have portrayed, infiltrates into
the regular chela's mind by reason of the fact
that be is made to see the process taking place
by clairvoyant vision. There are no words
used in bis instruction at all. And adepts
themselves, to whom the facts and processes oj


TBE PROGJtESS OF BUMANITT. 199

Nature &re familial' as our five fingers to ua,
fiud it difficult to explain in a treatise wliicli
they cannot illustrate for us, by producing men-
tal pictures in uur dormant sixth sense, the com-
plex anatomy of the planetary system.

Certainly it is not to be expected that man-
kinil iia yet should be generally conscious of
possessing the sixth sense, for the day of its ac-
tivity has not yet come. It has been already
stated that each round in turn is devoted to the
perfection in man of the corresponding princi-
ple in its numerical order, and to its prepara-
tinii for assimilation with the nest. The earlier
rounds have been described as concerned with
man in a shadowy, loosely organized, unintelli-
gent form. The first principle of all, the body,
was dtveloped, but it was merely growing used
to vitality, and was unlike anything we can
now picture to ourselves. The fourth round,
in whiuh we are now engaged, is the round in
which the fourth principle, will, desire, ia fully
developed, and in which it is engaged in assim-
ilating itself with the fifth principle, reason, in-
telligence. In the fifth round, the completely
developed reason, intellect, or soul, in which
the Ego then resides, must assimilate itself to
the sixth principle, spirituality, or give up the
business of existence altogether.

All readers of Buddhist literature are famil-


201) E80TKRIC BUDDUIBit.

iar with the constant references made there to
the Arhat's union of his soul with God. This,
in other words, is the premature development
of his sixth principle. He forces himself riglit
up through all the obstacles which im[jede such
an operation in the case of a fourth-round man,
into that stage of evolution which awaits the
test of humanity — or rather so much of hu-
marnity as may reach it in the ordinary course
of Nature — in the latter part of the fifth round.
And in doing this, it will be observed, he tides
himseU right over the great period of ditnger, —
the middle of the Bfth round. That is the stu-
pendous achievement of the adept as regiu'da
his own personal interests. Hu has reached the
further sliore of the aea in which so many of
mankind will perish. He waits there in a con-
tentment which people cannot even realize
without some glimmerings of spirituality — of
the sixth sense — thfmselvea for the arrival
there of his future companions. He does not
wait in his physical body, let me hasten to add,
to avoid misconstruction, but when at lastprtV
ilei/ed to resign this, in a spiritual condition,
which it would be foolish to attempt to describe,
while even the Devachanic states of ordinary
humanity are themselves almost beyond the
reach of imaginations untrained in spirituei
science.


THE PROCBESB OF EUMANITF. 201

But, returning to the ordimiry course of hu-
manity and tba growth into sixth-round people
of lueD and womtin, wiio do not become adepts
at any premature stage of their career, it will
be observed that this la the ordinary course of
Nature in one sense of the expression ; but so
also ia it the ordinary course of Nature for
cveiy grain of corn that is developed to fall
into appropriate soil, and grow up into an ear
of corn itself. All the same a great many
grains do nothing of the sort, and a great many
human Egos will never pass through tlie trials
of the fifth round. The final effort of Nature
in evolving man is to evolve from him a being
unmeasurably higher to be a conscious agent,
and what is ordinarily meant by a creative
principle in Nature herself ultimately. The
first achievement is to evolve free-will, and the
next to perpetuate that free-will by inducing
it to unite itseK with the final purpose of Na-
ture, which is good. In the course of such
an operation it is inevitable that a great deal
of the free-will evolved should turn to evil,
and after producing temporary suffering be dis-
persed and annihilated. More than this, the
final purpose can only be achieved by a profuse
expenditure of material; and just as this goes
on in the lower stages of evolution, where a
thousand seeds are thrown off by a vegetable


202 ESOTERIC BUDDBiail.

for every one that ultimately fructifies into a
new plant, so are the god-like germs of Will,
Bown one in each man's breast, in abundance
like the seeds blown about in the wind. la the
justice of Nature to be impugned by reason of
tiie fact that many of these germs will perish ?
Such an idea could only rise in a mind that
will not realize the room there is in Nature for
the growth of every germ which chooses to
grow, and to the extent it chooses to grow, be
that extent great or small. If it seems to any
one horrible that an "immortal aoul " should
perish, under any ci re um stances, that impres-
sioii can only be due to the pernicious habit of
regarding everything as eternity, which is not
this microscopic life. There is room in the
subjective spheres and time in the catenary
manvantara, before we even approach the
Dhyan Chohan, or god-Hke period, for more
than the ordinary brain has ever yet conceived
of immortality. Every good deed and elevated
impulse that every man or woman ever did or
felt must reverberate through seons of spirits
ual existence, whether the human entity con-
cerned proves able or not to expand into the
sublime and stupendous development of the
seventh round. And it is out of the causes
generated in one of our brief lives on earth
that exoteric speculation conceives itself capa.


THE PEOGRESa OF HUMANITT. 203

ble of conatructing eternal results! Out of
such a seven or eight hundredth part of our
objective life on earth during the present stay
here of the evoKitionary life-wave, we are to
expect Nature to discern sufficient reason for
deciding upon our whole subsequent career. In
truth. Nature will make such a large return for
a comparatively small expenditure of human
will-power in the right direction that, extrav-
agant as the expectation just stated may ap-
pear, and extravagant as it ig applied to or-
dinary lives, one brief existence may sometimea
suffice to anticipate the growth of milliards of
years. The adept may, in the one earth-life,'
achieve so much advancement that his sub-
sequent growth is certain, and merely a matter
of time ; but then the seed germ which pro-
duces an adept in our life, must be very per-
fect to begin with, and the early conditions of
its growth favorable, and withal the effoi-t on
the part of the man himself, life-long and far
more concentrated, more intense, more arduous,
than it is possible for the uninitiated outsider
to realize. In ordinary eases, the life which is
divided between material enjoyment and spir-
itual aspiration — however sincere and beau-
tiful the latter — can only be productive of


204 ESOTKRIC RUDDHIBM.

a correapondingly daplex result, of a spiritual
reward in Devachan, o£ a new birth on earth.
The manner in which the adept gets above
tlie nccBBsity of such a new birth is perfectly
Hcii'utifiu and simple, be it observed, though
it sounds like a theolc^ical mystery when ex-
pounded in esntitric writings by reference to
Kanna and Skandhas, Trishna, and Tanha,
and so forth. The next earth-life is as much
a conscqiipnce of iiffinities engendered by the
fifth principle, the continuous human bouI, as
the Uevnchanic experiences which come first
are the growth of the thoughts aud aspirations
of an elevated character, which the person con-
cerned has created during life. That is to say,
the affinities engendered in ordinary cases are
[>artly material, partly spiritual. Therefore
they start the soul on its entrance into the
world of effects with a double set of attractions
inhering in it; one set producing the subjective
consequences of its Devachanic life, the other
set asserting themselves at tlie close of that
life, and carrying the soul back again into re-
incarnation. But if the person during his ob-
jective life absolutely develops no affinities for
material existence, starts his soul at death with
all its attractions tending one way in the direc-
tion of spirituality, and none at all drawing it
back to obji.'ctive life, it does not come back


TBE PROGRESS OF HUMANITY. 205

it mounts into a conditioa of spiviLuality, cor-
responding to the iotenBity of the attractions
or nlBnities in that direution, and the other
thread of connection ia cut o£E.

Now this explanation does not entirely cover
the whole position, because the adept himself,
no mutter how iiigli, doea return to incarna-
tion eventually, after the rest of mankind have
passed across the great dividing period in the
middle of the fifth round. Until the exaltation
of Planetary Spirithood is reached, the highest
human soul must have a certain affinity for
earth still, though not the eartli-life of phys-
ical enjoyments and passions that we are go-
ing through. But the important point to re-
alize in regard to the spiritual consequences of
earthly life is that, in so large a majority of
cases that the abnormal few need not be talked
about, the sense of justice in regard to the
destiny of good men is amply satisfied by the
course of Nature step by step as time a<lvance3.
The spirit-life is ever at hand to receive, re-
fresh, and restore the soul after the struggles,
achievements, or sufferings of incarnation. And
more than this, reserving the question about
eternity. Nature, in the interoyclic periods at
the apex of each round, provides for all man-
kind, except those unfortunate failures who
have pei-sistently adhered to the path of evil.


206 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

great intervals of Bpiritual blessedness, far
longer and more txalted in their character
than the Devachiinic periods of each separate
life. Nature, in fact, is inconceivably liberal
and patient to each and all her candidates for
the final examination during their long prep-
aration for tbia. Nor is one failure to pass
even this final examination absolutely fatal.
The failures may try again, if they are not
utterly disgraceful failures, but they must wait
for the next opportunity.

A complete explanation of the circumstances
under which such waiting is accomplished
would not come into the scheme of this tre^
tise ; but it must not be supposed that candi-
dates for progress, self-convicted of unfitness to
proceed at the critical period of the fifth niund,
fait necessarily into the spht:re of annihilation.
For that attraction to assert itself, the Ego must
have developed a positive attraction tor matter,
a positive repulsion for spirituality, which is
overwlielming in its force. In the absence of
such aflinities, and in the absence also of such
affinities as would suffice to tide the Ego over
the great gulf, the destiny which meets the
mere failures of Nature is, as regards the pres-
ent planetary manwantara, to die, as Elipbas
Levi puts it, without remembrance. They
have lived tlieir life, and had their share of


L


TnE PROGRESS OF nDMANITT. 20T

Heaven, but tbey are not capiiblt) uf asceiidiag
tlie tremendous altitudes of spiritual prepress
then confronting them. But they aru qualified
for further incarnation and life on the planes of
existence to which they are accustomed. They
will wait, therefore, in the negative spiritual
state they have attained till those planes of ex-
istence are ^ain in activity in the next plan-
etary manwantara. The duration of such wait-
ing is, of course, beyond the reach of imagina-
tion altogether, and the precise nature of the
existence which is now contemplated is no lesa
unrealizable ; but the broivd pathway through
that strange region of dreamy semi-animation
must be taken note of in order that the sym-
metry and completeness of the whole evolution-
ary scheme may be perceived.

And with this last contingency provided for,
the whole scheme does lie before the reader in
its main outlines with tolerable completeness.
We have seen the one life, the spirit, animat-
ing matter in it lowest forms first, and evoking
grovrth by slow degrees into higher forms. In-
dividualizing itself at last in man, it works up
through inferior and irresponsible incarnations
ontil it has penetrated the higher principles,
and evolved a true human soul, which is thence-
forth the master of its own fate, though guarded
in the beginning by natural provisions which


208 ESOTERIC SUDDIIJSU.

deh-AT it from premature shipwreck, which Btim-
nlate and refresh it on its course. But the ulti-
mate destiny offered to that soul is to develop
not only into a being capable of taking care of
itself, but into a being capable of taking care
also of others, of presiding over and directing,
within what may be called conBtitutional limits,
the operations of Nature herself. Clearly be-
fore the soul can liave efirued the right to tliat
promotion, it innat have been tried by having
conceded to it full control over its own affairs.
That full control neceaaarily conveys the power
to shipwreck itself. The safeguards put round
the Ego in its youth — its inability to get into
higher or lower states than those of intermun-
dane Devaohan and Avitchi — tall from it in
its maturity. It is potent, then, over its own
destinies, not only in regard to the development
of transitory joy and suffering, but in regard to
the stupendous opportunities in both directions
which existence opens out before it. It may
seize on the higher opportunities in two ways;
it may throw up the stru^le in two ways ; it
may attain sublime spirituality for good or sub-
lime spirituality for evil ; it may ally itself to
physically for (not evil but for) utter annihila-
tion ; or, on the other hand, for (not good but
for) the negative result of beginning the educ^
tioual processes of incarnation all over £^in.


The historical Buddha, as known to the c

todiaiis of the Esoteric Doctrine, is a personage
whose birth ia not invested with the quaint
marvels popular story has crowded round it.
Nor was his progi-ess to adeptahip traced by the
literal occurrence of the supernatural struggles
depicted in symbolic legend. On the other
hand, the incarnation, wliich may outwardly be
described as the birtli of Buddha, is certainly
not regarded by occult science as an event like
any other birth, nor the spiritual development
through which Buddha passed during his earth-
life a mere process of intellectual evolution,
like the mental history of any other philoso-
pher. The mistake which ordinary European
writers make in dealing with a problem of this
sort lies in their inclination to treat exoteric
legend either as a record of a miracle about
which no more need be said, or as pure myth,
putting merely a fantastic deconttion on a re-
markable life. This, it is assumed, however


210


ESOTESIC BUDDBISV.


remitrkable, must have been lived according to
the theories of Nature at present accepted by
the niueteenth century. The account which
has now been given in the foregoing pages may
prepare the way for a statement as to what the
Esoteric Doctrine teaches concerning the real
Buddha, who Wiis born, as modem investigation
has quite correctly ascertained, C43 years be-
fore the CbriBtisQ era, at Kapila-Vastu near
Benares.

Exoteric conceptions, knowing nothing of the
laws which govern the operations of Nature in
her higher departments, can only explain on
abnormal dignity attaching to some particular
birth by supposing that the pliysical body of
the person concerned was generated in a mirac- ■
ulous manner. Pleuce the popular notion about
Buddha, that hia incarnation in this world was
due to an immacidate conception. Occult sci-
ence knows nothing of any process foi* the pro-
duction of a physical human child other than
that appointed by physical laws ; but it does
know a good deal concerning the limits within
which the progressive " one life," or " spiritual
monad," or continuous thread ol a series of in-
carnations, may select definite child-bodies as
their human tenements. By the operation of
Karma, in the case of ordinaiy mankind, this
selection is made, unconsciously as f ar aa the


BUDDBA. 211

antecedent, spiritual Ego emerging from De-
TachiiQ 19 concerned. But in tltose abnormiil
cases where the one life has already forced it-
self into the sixth principle — that is to say,
where a man has become an adept, and has the
power of guiding his own spiritual Ego, in full
GonsciouBnesa as to what be is about, after he
has quitted the body in which he won adept-
ship, either tempoi'arily or permanently — it is
quite within his power to select his own next
incarnation. During life, even, he gets above
the Devachanic attraction. He becomes one of
the conscious directing powers of the planetary
system to which he belongs ; iuid great as this
mystery of selected re-incarnation may be, it is
not by any means restricted in its application
to such extraordinaiy events as the birth of a
Buddha. It is a phenomenon frequently repro-
duced by the higher adepts to this day, and
while a great deal recounted in popular Ori-
ental mytholc^y is either purely fictitious or
entirely symbolical, the re-incarnation of the
Dalai and Teshu Lamas in Tibet, at which
travelers only hiugh for want of the knowledge
that might enable them to sift fact from fancy,
is a sober scientific achievement. In such cases
the adept states beforehand in what child, when
and where to be born, he is going to re-incar-
nate, and he very rarely faila. We say very


212 BSOTEHIC BnDDBISM.

rarely, becituse there are Borae aocidenta of phys-
iotil nature which cannot be entirely guarded
against ; and it is not »baolutely certain that,
with all the foresight even an adept may bring
to bfar upon the mutter, the child he may choose
to become, in his rtslnoarnated atate, may attain
physical maturity succesttfully. And, mesin-
while, t'tt Mr body, the adept is relatively belp-
leaa. Out of the l>ody he \& just what be has
boen ever since he became an adept ; but hb
regards the new body he has chosen to inhabit,
he rauat let it grow up in the ordinary course of
Nature, and educate it by ordinary processes,
and initiate it by the regular occult method
into adeptahip, before he baa got a body fully
ready again for occult work on the physical
plane. All these processes are immensely sim-
plified, it is true, by the peculiar spiritual force
working VPithin ; but at first, in the child's body,
the adept aoul is certainly cramped and emhar-
raased, and, as ordinary imagination might sug-
geat, very uncomfortable and ill at ease. The
situation would be very much misunderstood if
the reader were to ima^ne that re-incarnation
of the kind deacribed ia a privilege which adepts
avail themselves of with pleasure.

Buddha's birth was a mystery of the kind
described, and by the light of what has been
Baid it will be easy to go orerthe popular story


BUDDBA. 213

of his mirHCulons origin, and trace the Bymbolic
references to the facta of the situation in sr)ma
even of the mt^t grotesque fables. None, for
example, can look lesB promising as an allu-
Bion to anything like a Bi^ientific fact than the
statement that Buddha entered the side of hia
mother aa a young white elephant. But the
white elephant is simply the symbol of adept-
ahip, — something considered to be a rare and
beautiful specimen of its kind. So with other
ante-natal legends pointing to the fact that the
fnture child's body had been chosen xvr the hab-
itation of a great spirit already endowi"d with
superlative wisdom and goodness. Indra and
Brahma came to do homage to the child at his
birth ; that is to say, the powers of Naturu
were already in submission to the Spirit within
him. The thirty-two signs of a Buddhii. which
legends describe by means of a ludicrous phys-
ical symbolism, are merely the various powers
of adeptship.

The selection of the body known as Siddhar-
tlia, and afterwards as Gautama, son of Sud-
dhodana, of Kapila-Vastu, as the human tpne-
ment of the enlightened human spirit, who had
submitted to incarnation for the sake of teach-
ing mankind, was not one of those rare failures
spoken of above ; on the contrary, it was a
ngnallj successful choice in all respects, and


214


ESOTERIC BUDDniSU.


nothing interfered with the accompIisbmeDt
of adeptship by the Buddha in his new body.
The popular narrative o{ his ascetic atrugglea
and temptations, and of his final attainment
of Buddhahood under the Bo-tree, is nothing
more, of course, than the exoteric version of hia
initiation.

From that period onward, his work was of a
dnal nature; he had to reform and revive the
morals of the populace and the science of the
adepts, — for adeptship itself is subject to cyclic
changes, and in need of periodiciJ impulses.
The explanation of this branch of the subject,
in plain terms, will not alone be important for
its own sake, but will be interesting to all stu-
dents of exoteric Buddhism, as elucidating some
of the puzzling complications of the more al^
Btruse " Northern doctrine."

A Buddha visits the earth for each of the
seven races of the great planetary period. The
Buddha with whom wo are occupied was the
fourth of the series, and that is why he stands
fourth in the list quoted by Mr. Rhys Davids,
from Bumouf, — quoted aa an illustration of
the way the Northern doctrine has been, as Mr.
Davids supposes, inflated by metaphysical sub-
tleties and absurdities crowded round the sim-
ple morality which sums up Buddhism as pro-
eented to the populace. The fifth, or Maitreya


BUDBffA. 215

Buddha, will come after tlie final disiippear-
ance of the fifth race, and when the sixth race
will already have been established on earth
for some hundreds of thousands of years. The
sixth will come at the beginning of the seventh
race, and the aeventh towards the close of that
race.

This arrangement will seem, at the first
glanct!, out of harmony with the general design
of human evolution. Here we are in the mid-
dle of the fifth race, and yet it is the fourth
Buddha who has been identified with this race,
and the fifth will not come till the fifth race is
practically extinct. The explanation is to be
found, however, in the great outlines of the
esoteric cosmogony. At the beginning of each
great planetary period, when obscuration comes
to an end, and the human tide-wave in its prep-
ress round the chain of worlds arrives at the
shore of a globe where no huiiianity has existed
for milliards of years, a teacher is rfquired from
the first for the new crop of mankind about to
spring up. Remember that the preliminary
evolution of the mineral, vegetable, and animal
kingdoms has been accomplished in preparation
for the new round period. With the first infu-
sion of the hfe-current into the " missing link "
species the first race of the new series will begin
to evolve. It is then that the Being, who may


EBOTEHfC BUDDniSM.


be considered the Buddha of the first race, ap-
pears. The planetary spirit, or Dhyan Cho-
han, who is — or, to avoid the suggestion of an
erroneous idea by the use of a singular verb,
let ua defy grammar and say, who are — Bud-
dha in all his or their developments, incarnates
among the young, innocent, teachable forerun-
ners of the new humanity, and impresses the
first hroad principles of right and wrong and
the firat truths of the esoteric doctiine on a suf-
ficient number of receptive minds to insure the
continued reverberation of the ideas so im-
planted through successive generations of men
in the millions of years to come, before the first
race shall have completed its course. It is this
advent in the beginning of the round period of
3 Divine Being in human form that starts the
ineradicable conception of the anthropomorphic
God in all exoteric religions.

The first Buddha of the series in which Gau-
tama Buddha stands fourth is thus the second
incarnation of Avaloketiswara, — the mystic
name of the hosts of the Dhyan Cliohans, or
planetary spirits, belonging to our planetary
chain ; and though Gautama is thus the fourth
incarnation of enlightenment by exoteric recfc
oning, he is really the fifth of the true seriea,
and thus properly belonging to our fifth race.

Avaloketiswara, as just stated, is the mystin


^


BUDDBA. 217

Dame of the hosts of the Dhyan Chohana ; the
proper meaning of the word is man if ea ted wis-
dom, just as Addi-Buddba and Amitabha both
mean abstract wisdom.

The doctrine, aa quoted by Mr. Davids, that
" every earthly mortal Buddha has hia pure and
glorious counterpart in the mystic world, free
from the debasing conditions of tbia material
life, or rather that the Buddha under material
conditions is only an appearance, the reflection,
or emanatiou, or type of a Dhyani Buddba," la
perfectly correct. The number of Dhyani Bud-
dhas, or Dliyan Chohana, or planetary spirits,
perfected human spirits of former world perioda,
is infinite, bnt only five are practically identi&ed
in exoteric and seven in esoteric teaching j and
this identification, be it remembered, is a man-
ner of speaking which must not be inteipreted
too literally, for there ia a unity in the sublime
spirit-life in question that leavea no room for
the isolation of individuality. All this will be
seen to harmonize perfectly with the revelations
concerning Nature embodied in previoua chap-
ters, and need not in any way be attributed to
mystic imaginings. The Dhyani Buddhas, or
Dhyan Chohana, are the perfected liumanity of
previous Manwantaric epocha, and their eollee-
live intelligence is described by the name " Addi-
Buddha," which Mr. Rhys Davids is mistaken


218 ESOTERIC BUDDBlSlt.

in treating as a comparatively recent invention
of the Northein BaddliisL. Addi-Buddha means
primordial wisdom, and is mentioned in the
oldest Sanskrit books. For example, in tliepbil-
oeophical dissertation on the " Mandiikya Upan-
ishad," by Gowdapatha, a Sanskrit author con-
temporary with Buddha bimself, the expression
is frtwly used and expounded in exact accord-
ance with the present statement. A friend of
mine in India, a Brahmin pundit of first-rate
attainments as a Sanskrit scholar, tias shown
roe a copy of this book, which lias never yet,
tJiat be knows of, been tnuiBlated into English,
and bus pointed out a sentence bearing on tile
present question, giving me the following trans-
lation : " Prakriti itself, in fact, is Addi-Baddha,
and all the Dliarmas have been existing from
eternity." Gowdapatha is a pliilosophical wri-
ter respected by all Hindu and Buddhbt sects
alike, and widely known. He was the gnm, or
spiritual teacher of the first Sankaracharya, of
whom I shall have to speak more at length
very shortly,

Adeptship. when Buddha incarnated, was not
the condensed, compact hierarchy that it has
ainoe become under his influence. There has
never been an age of the world without its
adepts ; but they have sometimes been scat
tared throughout the world ; they have some-


I times been iaoh

I have gravitiitec

r that ; and &m


>DaA. 219

times been isolated in separate seclusions ; they
have gravitated now to this country, now to
that ; and finally, be it remembered, their
knowledge and power has not always been
inspired with the elevated and severe morality
which Butldha infused into its latest and high-
est organization. The reform of the occult
world by hia instrumentality was, in fact, the
result of his great sacrifice ; of the self-denial
which induced hira to reject the blessed condi-
tion of Nirvana to which, after his earth-life as
Buddha, he was fully entitled, and undertake
the burden of renewed incarnations in order to
carry out more thorouglily the task he had
taken in hand, and confer a correspondingly
increased benefit on mankind. Buddha re-in-
camated himself, next after his existence as
Gautama Buddha, in the person of the great
teacher of whom but little is said in exoteric
works on Buddhism, but without a considera-
tion of whose life it would be impossible to
get a correct conception of the position in the
Eastern world of esoteric science, — namely,
Sankaracharya. The latter part of this name,
it maybe explained — acharya — merely means
teacher. The whole name as a title is perpet-
uated to this day under curious circumstances,
but the modern bearers of it are not in the
direct line of Buddhist spuitual incarnations.


220 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

Sankaracharya appeared in India — no atten-
tion being paid to his birtli, which appears to
have taken place on the Malabar coast — about
sixty years after Gautama Buddha's death.
Esoteric teaching is to ihe effect that Sankara-
charya simply was Buddha in all respects, in a
new body. This view will not be acceptable to
uninitiated Hindu authorities, who attribute a
later date to Sankaracharya'a appearance, and
regard him as a wholly independent teacher,
even inimical to Buddhism, but none the less
is the statement jnst made the real opinion of
initiates in esoteric science, whether ttieae call
themselves Buddhists or Hindus. 1 have re-
ceived the information I am now giving from a
Brahmin Adwaiti, of Southern India, — not
directly from ray Tibetan instructor, — and all
initiated Brahmins, he assures me, would say
the same. Some of the later incarnations of
Buddha are described differently as overshad-
owings by the spirit of Buddha, but in the per-
son of Sankaracharya he reappeared on earth.
The object he had in view was to fill up soma
gaps and repair certain errors in his own pre-
vious teaching ; for there is no contention in
esotoric Buddhism that even a Buddha can be
absolutely infallible at every moment of his
career.

The position was as follows : Up to the tima


o£ Buddha, the BraLminB of India had jeal-
ously reserved occult knowledge as the appan-
age of their own caste. Exceptions were oc-
casionally made in favor of Tshatryas, hut the
rule was exclusive in a very high degree. This
rule Buddha broke down, admitting all castes
equally to the path of adeptahip. The change
may have been perfectly right in principle, but
it paved the way for a great deal of trouble,
and as the Brahmins conceived for the degrada-
tion of occult knowledge itself ; that is to say,
its transfer to unworthy hands, — not unworthy
merely because of caste inferiority, but because
of the moral inferiority which they conceived
to be introdnced into the occult fraternity, to-
gether with brothers of low birth. The Brah-
min contention would not by any means be
that because a man should be a Brahmin it fol-
lowed that he was necessarily virtuous and
trustworthy ; but the ai^ument would be : It is
supremely necessary to keep out all but the vir-
tuous and trustworthy from the secrets and
powers of initiation. To that end it is neces-
sary not only to set up all the ordeals, proba-
tions, and tests we can think of, but also to
take no candidates except fram the class which,
on the whole, by reason of its hereditary advan-
tages, is likely to be the best nursery of fit can-
didates.


L


222 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

Later experience is held od all hands now to
have gone far towards viDdicating the Brah-
miu apprehenuiou, and the next incamatioD of
BaddLa, after that in the persDii of Sankara-
charj'ii, wan a practical admission of this; but
meanwhile, in the person of Sankaracharya,
Buddhii was engaged in smoothing over, before-
hand, the Biictarian strife in India which be saw
impending. The active opposition of the Brah-
mins against Buddhism began in Asoka's time,
when the great efforts made by that ruler to
spread Buddhism provoked an apprehension on
their part in reference to their social and polit-
ical ascendency. It must be remembered that
initiates are not wholly free in all cases from
the prejudices of their own individualities.
They possess tome such god-like attributes that
outsiditi's, when they first begin to uuderstaod
something of these, are apt to divest them, in
imagination, even too completely of human
frailties. Initiation and occult knowledge held
in common is certainly a bond of union among
adepts of all nationalities, which is far stronger
than any other bond. But it hits been found
on more occasions than one to fail in obliterat-
ing all other distinctions. Thus the Buddhist
and Brahmin initiates of the period referred to
were by no menns of one luind oti all questions,
and the Brahmins very decidedly disapproved


of the Buddhist reformation ia its exoteric as-
pects. Cbandragupta, Aaoka's grandfather, waa
an upstart, and the family were Sudras. This
was enough to render hia Buddhist policy unat-
tractive to the representatives of the orthodox
Brahmin faith. The stru^le assumed a very
embittered form, though ordinary hiatoiy gives
us few or no particulars. The party of primi-
tive Buddhism w:i8 entirely worsted, and the
Brahmin ascendt'ncy completely reestablished
in the time of Vikramaditya, about 80 B. c.
But Sankaracharya had traveled all over India
in advance of the great struggle, and had estab-
lished various mathttma, or schools of philoso-
phy, in several important centres. He was
only engaged in this tiisfc for a few years, but
the influence of his teaching has been bo stu-
pendous that its very magnitude disguises the
change wrought. He brought exoteric Hindu-
ism into practical harmony with the esoteric
" wisdom religion," and left the people amus-
ing themselves atill with their ancient mytholo-
gies, but leaning on philosophical guides who
were esoteric Buddhists to all intents and pur-
poses, though in reconciliation with all that
was ineradicable in Brahmanism. The great
fault oE previous exoteric Hinduism lay in its
attachment to vain ceremonial and its adhesion
to idolatrous conceptions of the divinities of the


224


ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.


Hindu pantheon. Siinkaracharya emphaBized,
by his commentaries on the Upitnisliuds, and by
his original writings, the necessity of pureuing
gnyanam in order to obtain mokslia; that is
to Bay, the importance of thit secret knowledge
to spiritual progress, and th<? conBummation
thereof. He was the founder of the Vedantin
system, — the proper meaning of Vedanta being
the final end or crown of knowledge, — though
the sanctions of that system are derived by
him front the writings of Vyasa, the anthor of
the " Mababharatrt," the " Puranas," and the
" Brahmafintras." I make these statements,
the reader will understand, not on the basis of
any researches of my own, — which I am not
Oriental scholar enough to attempt, — but on the
authority of a Brahmin initiate who is himself a
first-rate Sanskrit scholar as well as an occultist.
The Vedantin school at present is almost oo-
extensive with Hinduism, making allowance, of
course, for the existence of some sfjecial sects
like the Sikhs, the ValJabacbaryas, or Mabara>
jah sect, of very unfair fame, and may be di-
vided into three great divisions, — the Adwai-
tees, the Vishishta Adwaitees, and the Dwaitees.
The outline of the Adwaitee doctrine is that
hrahmum or purush, the universal spirit, acts
only through prakriti, matter ; that everything
takes place in this way through the inherent


vnergy of matter. Brahmum, or Parabmhni, is
thus a passive, incomprebensible, unconscious
principle, but the essence, one life, or energy
of the Quiverae. In this way the doctrine is
iiJentical with the transcendental mBterialism of
the adept esoteric Buddhist philosophy. The
name Adwaitee signlQea not dual, and has
reference partly to the non -duality or unity
of universiil spirit, or Buddhist one life, as
distinguished from the notion of its operation
through anthropomorphic emanations ; partly
to the unity of the universal and the liumaQ
spirit. As a n:Ltural consequence of this doc-
trine, the Adwai tees infer the Buddhist doctrine
of Karma, regarding the future destiny of man
as altogether depending on the causes he him-
self engenders.

The Vishishta Adwaitees modify these views
by the interpolation of Vishnu as a conscious
deity, the primary emanation of Parabrahm,
Vishnu being regarded as a personal god, capa-
ble of intervening in the course of human des-
tiny. They do not regard j/og, or spiritual
training, as the proper avenue to spiritual
achievement, but conceive this to be possible
chiefly by means of Bhakti, or devoutness-
Rougbly stated in the phraseology of European
theology, the Adwaitee may thus be said to be-
lieve only in salvation by works, the Vishishta


226 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

Adwaitee in enlvation by grace. Tbe Dwutee
differs but little from the Vi^Uhta Adwaitee,
merely affirming, by the designation he as-
sumes, with increased emphasis, the duality of
tbe human spirit and the highest principle of
the universe, and including many ceremonial
observances ae an essential part of Jihakti.

But all these differences of view, it must be
borne in mind, have to do merely with the ex-
oteric variations on the fundamental idea, intro-
duced by different teachers with varj'ing im-
pressions as to tbe capacity of the populace for
assimilating tninscendental ideas. All lead-
ers of Vedantin thought look up to Sankara-
cbarya and the Mathums he estabiislKid with
the greatest possible reverence, and their inner
faith runs up in all caaes into the one esoteric
d(X\trine. In fact, the initiates of all schools in
India interlace with one another. Except as
regards nomenclature, the whole system of coa-
niogony aa held by the Buddhist- A rhats, and as
Bet forth in this volume, is eqmilly hfid by in-
itiated Brahmins, and has been equally held
by them since before Buddha's birth. Whence
did they obtain it ? the reader may ask. Their
answer would be, From the Planetary Spirit, or
Dhyan Chohan, who first visited this planet at
the dawn of the hnman race in the present
round period, — more millions of years ago than


BUDDHA. 227

I like to mention cm the basis of coniectare,
while the real exact number is withheld.

Sankaracharya founded four principal Math-
ams : one at SriDgari, in Southern India, which
has always remained the most important; one
at Juggemath, in Orissa ; one at Dwaraka, in
Kathiawar ; and one at Gungotri, on the slopes
of the Himalayas in the North. The chief of
the Sringari temple has always borne the desig-
nation Sankaracbarya, in addition to some in-
dividual name. From these four centres others
have been established, and Matbams now exist
all over India, exercising tbe utmost possible
influence on Hinduism.

I have said that Huddha, by his third in-
carnation, recognized the fact that he had, in
the excessive confidence of big loving trust in
tbe perfectibility of humanity, opened tbe doors
of the occult sanctuary too widely. His third
appearance was in the person of Tsong-ka-pa,
the great Tibetan adept reformer of the four-
teenth century. In this peraonality be was
exclusively concerned with the affairs of the
adept fraternity, by that time collecting chiefly
in Tibet.

From time immemorial there had been a cer-
tain secret region in Tibet, which to this day
is quite unknown to and unapproachable hy
any but initiated persons, and inaccessible to


ESOTERIC BCDDB18M,


1


the ordinary people of the country as to »ny
others, in which adepts have always congre-
gated. But the country generally was not in
Buddha's time, as it has since become, the
choaen habitation of the great brotherhood.
Much more than tliey are at present were the
Mabatmas in former limes distributed about
the world. The progress of civilization, ea-
gendering the magnetism they find so trying,
ha<l, however, by the date with which we are
DOW dealing — the fourteenth century — al-
ready given rise to a very general movement
towards Tibet on the part of the previously
dissociated occultists. Far more widely than
waa held to be consistent with the safety of
mankind waa occult knowledge and power then
found to be disseminated. To the task of put-
ting it under the control of a rigid system of
rule and law did Tsong-ka-pa address himself.

Without reestablishing the system on the
previous unreasonable basis of raste exclusive-
ness, he elaborated a code of rules for the guid-
ance of the adepts, the effect of which waa to
weed out of the occult body all but those who
sijught occult knowledge in a spirit of the most
Buljlime devotion to the highest moral prin-
ciples.

irticla in the " Theosophiat " for March,
1882, on " Ke-incamations in Tibet, "for the oom-


I


irin- ^H
rob, I

J


F

plete t
bearin,


plete trustworthineaa of which in all its myatio
bearings I have the highest assurance, gives a
great deal of importaub iiifuriuation about the
branch of the subject with whicb we are now
engaged, and the relations between esoteric Bud-
dhism and Tibet, which cannot be examined too
closely by any one who desirea an exhaustive
comprehension of Buddhism in its real signifi-
cation.

" The regular system," we read, " of the
Lamaic incarnations of ' Saugyas ' (or Buddha)
began with Tsong-kha-pa. This reformer is
not the incarnation of one of the five celestial
Dhyans, or heavenly Bndilhas, as ia generally
snpposed, said to have been created by Salija
Mimi after he had risen to Nirvana, but that of
Amita, one of the Chinese names for Buddha.
The records preserved in the Gon-pa (lamaseiy)
of Tda-shi Hlum-po (spelt by the English Teshu
lAimlo) show that Sangya,s incarnated himself
in Tsong-kha-pa, in consequence of the great
degradation his doctrines had fallen into. Until
then there had been no other incamationa than
those of the five celestial Buddhas and of their
Euddhiaatvaa, each of the former having cre-
ated (read overshadowed with his spititual wis-
dom) five of the last named. ... It was be-
cause, among many other reforms, Taong-kha-pa
forbade necromancy (whicb is practiced to tiiia


230 ESOTERIC BUDOniSM.

day, with the most disgusting rites, by tbe
BlioDB, — the aborigines uf Tibot, with whom
tlio Red Caps, or Shummars, had always fra-
temized} that th« latter resistetl his aathority.
This act was followed by a split between the
two sects. SeparatiDg entirely from the Gya-
lukpaa, the Dug[)aa (Red Caps), from the first
in a great minority, settled in various parte of
Tiliet, cliii?6y its borderlanda, and principally
in Nepaul and Uhootan. Hut, while they re-
tained a sort of independence at the monastery
of Sakia-DjoDg, tlm Tibetan residence of their
spiritual (?) chief, Gong-aso Rimbo-cliay, the
Bhootanese have b«t>n from their beginning the
tributaries and Tnssala of the Dalai Lamaa.

"The Tda-shi Lamas were always more
powerful and more highly considered than the
Dalai Lamas. Tbe latter are the creation of
tbe Tda^ht Lama, Nabang-lob-sang. the sixtti
incarnation of Tsong-kha-pa, hiniself an inoar-
iiation of Amitabha, or Buddha."

Several writers on Buddhism have enter-
tiuned a theory, which Mr. Clements Mark-
ham formulates very fully in his " Narrative of
the Mission of George Bogle to Tibet," that
whereas the original scriptures of Buddhism
wera takcm to Ceylon by the son of Asoka, the
Buddhism, which found its way into Tibet
from India and China, was gradually overlaid


BTTDDBA. 231

with a mass of dogma and metaphyBiunl spec-
ulation. And Professor Max Miiller says :
"The most important element in the Buddhist
reform has always been its social and moral
code, not its metaphysical theories. That moral
code, taken by itself, is one of the moat perfect
which the world has ever known ; and it was
this blesaing that the introduction of Buddhism
brought into Tibet."

"The blessing," says the authoritative article
in the " Theosophist," from which I have just
been quoting, " has remained and spread all
over the country, there being no kinder, purer-
minded, more simple or sin-fearing nation than
the Tibetans. But for all that, the popular la-
maiam, when compared with the real esoteric
or Arahat Buddhism of Tibet, offers a contrast
as great as the snow trodden along a road in
the valley, to the pure and undefiled mass
which glitters on the top of a high mountain
peak."

The fact is that Ceyion is saturated with
exoteric, and Tibet with esoteric, Buddhism.
Ceylon ciincerns itself merely or mainly with
the morals, Tibet, or rather the adepts of Tibet,
with the science, of Buddhism.

These explanations constitute but a sketch of
the whole position. I do not possess the argu-
ments nor the literary leisure which would be


232 ESOTERIC BUnDBlSU.

required for its amplification into a (irilBhed pio~
tuie of tlie relations which really Bubstat between
tlie inner prinuiplea of Hinduism and thoee of
Biidilhism. And I iim quite Hlive to the pos-
sibility that many learned and painstaking sta-
dente of the subject will have formed, as the
consequences of prolonged and erudite research,
conclusions with which the explanations I am
now enabli?d to give may seem at first sight to
conflict. But none the less are these expla-
nations directly gathered from anthorities to
whom the subject is no less familiar in its schol-
arly than in its esoteric aspect. And their
inner knowledge throws a light upon the whole
position which wholly exempts them from the
danger of misconstruing texts and mistaking
the bearings of obscure symbology. To know
when Gautama Buddha was born, what is re-
corded of his teaching, and what popular leg-
ends have gathered round hia biogriiphy ia to
know next to nothing of the real Buddha, so
mnch greater than either the historical moral
teacher or the fantastic derai-god of tradition.
And it is only when we have comprehended the
link between Buddhism and Brahmanism that
the greatness of the esoteric doctrine rises into
its true pi-oportious.


1


CHAPTER X.


A COMPLETE assimilation of esoteric teach-
ing up to tlie point we have now reached will
enable us to approuch tlie considemtion of the
subject which eKoteiic writers on Biiddbiam
have generally treated as the doctrinal atarting-
point oi that religion.

Hitherto, for want of any better method of
seeking out the true meaning of Nii-vana, Bud-
dhist scholars have generally picked tlie word
to pieces, and examined its roota and fragments.
One might as hopefully aeek to aacerbain the
smell of a flower by dissecting the paper on
which its picture was painted. It is difficult
for minds schooled in the intellectual processes
of physical research — as all our Western nine-
teenth-century minds are, directly or indirectly
— to comprehend the first spiritual state above
this life, that of Devachan. Such conditions of
existence are but partly for the understanding ;
a higher faculty must be employed to realize
them ; and all the more is it impossible to force


ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

their meaning upon auutlier mini] bywords. It
is by firat awakening that higher facalty in liia
papt], and then putting the pupil in a poeition
to observe for himself, that tlie r^ular occolt
teacher proceeds in such a matter.

Now there are the usml leoen states of Dey-
achan, suited tu the different degrees of spirit-
ual enligbteumeut which the various candidates
for that condition may obtain : there are rupa
snd arupa loca» in Devschan, — that is to soiy,
•tatee which take (subjective) conBcioasnasa of
form, and states which transcend these again.
And yet the highest DpTochanic state in arupa
torn is not to be conipfired to that wonderftd
oondition of pure Bprituality which u spoken of
as Nirvana.

In the ordinary course of Nature daring a
lOQnd, when the spii-itual monad has accom-
plished the tremendous journey from tiie first
planet to the seventh, aud has finished for the
tjme being its existence there, — finished all its
multifarious existences there, with their respeo-
tive periods of De^'achsn between each, — the
Ego passes into a spiritual condition different
fcjfaom the Devacbanic state, in which, for p&-
I ol inconceivable duration, it rests before
{ its circuit of the irorlds. That condL
uy be regarded as the Devachan of ita
~B states, — a sort of review Uiereal,—


KIBVAlfA. 235

a superior Btate to those reviewed, jaat as the
Devachanie state belonging to any one exist-
ence on earth is a superior state to that oE the
halE-developed spiritual aspirations or impulses
of affection of the earth-life. That period —
that iiitercyclic period of extraordinary exalta-
tion, as compared to any that have gone before,
as compared even with the subjective conditions
of the planets in the ascending arc, so greatly
superior to our own aa these are — is spoken
of in esoteric science as a state of partial Nir-
vana. Carrying on imagination through im-
measurable vistas of the future, we must next
conceive ourselves approaching the period which
would correspond to the iritercyclic period of
the seventh round of humanity, in which men
have become as gods. The very last most ele-
vated and glorious of the objective lives having
been completed, the perfected spiritual being
reaches a condition in which a complete recol-
lection of all lives lived at any time in the past
returns to him. He can look back over the
carious masquerade of objective existences, as
it will seem to him then, over the minutest de-
tails of any of these earth-lives among the
number through which he has passed, and win
take cognizance of them and of all things witli
which they were in any way associatpd ; for in
regard to this planetary chain he has reached


236 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

omniBcience. This supreme development of
individuality is the great reward which Nature
reserves not only for those who secure it prs-
maturely, bo to speak, by the relatively brief
but desperate and terrible struggles which lead
to adeptship, but also for all who by the dis-
tinct preponderance of good over evil in Ihe
character of tlie whole series of their incar-
nations have passed through the valley of the
shadofv of death in the middle of the fifth
round, and have worked their way up to it to
the sixth and seventh rounds.

This sublimely blessed state is spoken of ia
esoteric science as the threshold of Nirvana.

Ib it worth while to go any further in specu-
lation as to what follows 1 One may be told
that no state of individual consctouBness, even
though but a phaae of feeling already identified
in a large measure with the general conscious-
neas on tliat level of exiBtence, can be equal in
spiritual elevation to absolute consciousness in
which all sense of individuality is merged in the
whole. We may use such phrases as intellect-
ual counters, but for no ordinary raind — dom-
inated by its physical bmin and bi-ain-born in-
tellect — can they have a living signification.

All that words can convey is that Nirvana is
a Bubliine stjvte of conscious rest in omniscience.
It would be ludicrous, after all that has gone


w


NIRVANA. 237

before, to turn to the vitrioixs discussioDS wiiicli
have been carried on by atadents of exoteric
Buddhism as to whether Nirvana does or does
rot mean unnLhilation. Worldly similes fall
short of indicating the feeling with which the
graduates of esoteric science regard such a ques-
tion. Does the last penalty of the law mean
the highest honor of the peerage? la a wooden
spoon the emblem of the most illuBtriona pre-
eminence in learning ? Such questions as these
but faintly symbolize the extravagance of the
question whether Nirvana is held by Buddhism
to be equivalent to annihilation. And in some,
to us inconceivable, way the state of para-Nir-
vana is spoken of as immeasurably higher than
that of NiiTana. I do not pretend myself to
attach any meaning to the statement, but it
may serve to show to what a very transcenden-
tal realm of thought the subject belongs.

A great deal of confusion of mind respecting
Nirvana has arisen from statements made con-
cerning Buddha. He is said to have attained
Nirvana while on earth ; he is also said to have
foregone Nirvana in order to submit to renewed
incarnations for the good of humanity. The
two statements are quite reconcilable. As a
^reat adept, Buddha naturally attained to that
which is the great achievement of adeptship on
earth, — the passing of his own Ego-apirit into


i


238 EBOTERIC BUDDHISM.

the JDeffuble comlitioa of Nirvana. Let it not
be supposed that for itny adept such & paiisage
is one that can be lightly undertaken. Only
stray hints about the nature of this great mys-
tery have reached me, but putting these to-
gether I believe 1 am right in saying that the
achievement in question is one wliich only some
of tlie high initiates are qualifii^d to attempt,
which exacts a total suspension of animation in
the body for periods of time compared to which
the longest cataleptic trances known to ordinary
science are insignificant, the protection of tlie
physical frame from natunil decay during this
period by means which the resourcus of occult
science are strained to accomplish ; and withal
it is a process involving a double risk to tlie
continued earthly life of the person who un-
dertakes it. One of these risks is the doubt)
whether, when once Nirvana ia attained, tha
Ego will be willing to return. Tliat the return
will be a terrible effort and sacrifice is certain,
and will only be prompted by the most devot«d
attachment on the part of the spiiitual traveler
to the idea of duty in its purest abstracfcioa.
The second great risk is that, allowing the aeose
of duty to predominate over the temptation to
stay, — a temptation, be it remembered, that is
Dot weakened by the notion that any conceivable
penalty can attach tii it, — even then it is al-


wavB c


ways doubtfnl whether the traveler will be able
to retam. In spite of all this, however, there
have been many other adepts besides Buddha
who have made the great passage, and for
whom, those about them at such times have
said, the return to their prison of ignoble flesh
— though so noble ex liypothesi compared to
moat such tenements — has left them paralyzed
with depression tor weeks. To begin the weary
round of physical life again, to stoop to earth
after having been in Nirvana, is too dreadful
a collapse.

Buddha's renunciaticm was in some inexpli-
cable manner greater, again, because he not
merely returned from Nirvana for duty's sake,
to finish the earth-life iu which he was engaged
as Qautama Buddha, but when all the claims
of duty had been fully satisfied, and his right
of passage into Nirvana, for incalcnlable feons
entirt'ly earned under the most enlarged view
of hia earthly mission, he gave up that reward,
or rather postponed it for an indefinite period,
to nndertake a supererogatory series of incarna-
tions, for the sake of humanity at large. How
is humanity being benefited by this renuncia-
tion ? it may be asked. But the question can
only be su^ested in reality by that deep-seated
habit, we have most of us acquired, of estimat-
ing benefit by a physical standard, and even


240


ESOTERIC BVDDUIBM.


in regard to this Btandard of taking very short
views of hutntin affairs. No one will have fol-
lowed me through tho foregoing chapter on ttie
Progreas of Humanity without perceiving what
kind of benefit it would be that Buddha would
wish to confer on men. That which is neces-
sarily for him the great question in regard to
humanity is how to help as many people as pos-
sible across the great critical period of the £ftU
round.

Until that time everything is a mere prepa-
ration for the supreme struggle, in tho estima-
tion of an adept, all the inoro of a Buddha.
The material welfare of the existing generation
is not even as dust in the balance in such a cal-
culation ; the only thing of importance at pres-
ent is to cultivato those tendencies in mankind
which may launch as many Egos as possible
upon such a Karmio path that the growth of
their spirituality in future births will be pro-
moted. Certainly it is the fixed convicUon o{
esoteric teachers — of the adept co-workers with
Buddha — that the veiy proccsa of cultivating
such spirituality will immensely reduce the sum
of even transitory human sorrow. And the
happiness of mankind, even in any one gener-
ation only, is by no means a matter on which
esoteric science looks with indllleronce. So the
esoteric policy is not to be considorcd as some'


NIRVANA. 241

thing 80 hopeleaaly up in tbe air that it will
never concern any of ua ■who are living now.
Hut there are seasous of good and bad hai-vest
for wheat and barley, and so alao for the de-
sired growth of epirituahty amongst men ; and
in Europe, at all events, going by the experi-
ence of former great races, at periods of devel-
opment corresponding to that of our own now,
the great present uprush of intelligence in the
direction of physical and material progress is
not likely to bring on a season of good harvests
for progress of the other kind. For the mo-
ment the best chance of doing good in coun-
tries where the uprush referred to is most
marked is held to lie in the possibility that
the importance of spirituality may corae to be
perceived by intellect, even in advance of be-
ing felt, if the attention of that keen though
unsympathetic tribunal can but be secured.
Any success in that direction to which these
explanations may conduce will justify the views
of those — but a minority — among the esoteric
guardians of humanity who have conceived that
it ia worth while to have them made.

So Nirvana is truly the keynote of esoteric
Buddliism, as of the hitherto rather misdirected
studies of external scholars. The great end of
the whole stupendous evolution of humanity is
to cultivate human souls so that thej shall be


242 ESOTERIC BUDDniaM.

ultimately fit for tlmt m yet inconceivable con-
dition. The great triumph of the present race
of planetary apirita who have reached that con-
dition themselves will be to draw thither as
many more Egoa as poaaible. We are far as
yet from the era at which we may be in serious
danger of disqimlifying ourselves definitively
for such prof^cBB, but it is not too soon even
now to begin the great process of qualification ;
all the more as the Karma, which will prop-
agate itself tbrough siicceBsive lives in that
direction, will carry its own reward with it, bo
that an enlightened pursuit of our highest in-
terests in the very remote future will coincide
with the pursuit of our immediate welfare in
the next Devachanic period, and the next re-
birth.

Will it be argued that if the cultivation of
spirituality ia the great purpose to bo followed,
it matters little whether men pursue it along
one religious pathway or another ? This is tho
mistake which, as explained in a former chap-
ter, Buddha as Sankaracharya set himself es-
pecially to combat, — namely, the early Hindu
belief that moksha can bo attained by bhakti
irrespective of gnyaitam ; that is, that salvar
tion is obtainable by devout practices irrespec-
tive of knowledge of eternal truth. The sort
of salvation we are talking about now is not


r escaoe


escape from a penalty, to be achieved by cajol-
mg a celestial potentate ; it is a positive and
not a negative acbievement, — the ascent into
regions of spiritual elevation so exalted that
the candidate aiming at them is claiming that
which we ordinarily describe as omniscience.
Surely it ia plain, from the way Nature habit-
ually works, that under no circumstances will
a time ever come when a person, merely by
reason of having been good, will suddenly be-
come wise. The aupremB goodness and wisdom
of the sixth-round man, who, onca becoming
that, will assimilate by degrees tbe attributes
of divinity itself, can only be grown by degrees
tbemsolves ; and goodness alone, associated as
we so often find it with the most grotesque re-
ligious beliefs, cannot conduct a man to more
than Deviichanic periods of devout but unin-
telligent rapture, and in the end, if similar con-
ditions are reproduced through many existences,
to some painless extinction of individuality at
the great crisis.

It is by a steady pursuit of and desire for
real spiritual truth, not by an idle, however
well-meaning acquiescence in the fashionable
dogmas of the nearest church, that men launch
their souls into the subjective state, prepared
to imbibe real knowledge from the latent om-
niscience of their own sixth pvinci(*Ies, and to


244 ESOTEBIC BUDDniaM.

re-incaniiite in due time with impulses in the
same direction. Notliing can produce more
disastrous effects on human progress as regards
the destiny of individuals than the very preva-
lent notion that one religion, followed out in a
pious spirit, is us good a& another, and that if
such and such doctrines are perhaps absurd
when you look into them, the great majority of
good people will never think of their absurdity,
but will recite them in a blamelessly devoted
attitude of mind. One religion is by no means
as good as another, even if all were productive
of equally blameless lives. But I prefer to
avoid all criticism of specific faiths, leaving this
volume a simple and inoflfensive statement of
the real inner doctrines of the one great re-
ligion of the world which — presenting as it
does in its external aspects a bloodless and in-
nocent record — has thus been really produc-
tive of blameless lives throughout its whole
existence. Moreover, it would not be by a ser-
vile acceptance even of its doctrines that the
development of true spirituality is to be cultl-
▼ated. It is by the disposition to seek truth, to
test and examine all which presents itself as
ing belief, that the great result is to be
brought about. In the East, such a resolution
in the highest degree leads to chelaship, to the
pursuit of truth, knowledge, by the develop


NIRVANA. 246

ment of inner faculties by means of which it
may be cognized with certainty. In the West,
the realm of intellect, as the world is mapped
out at present, truth unfortunately can only be
pursued and hunted out with the help of many
words and much wranglmg and disputation.
But at all events it may be hunted, and, if it is
not finally captured, the chase on the part of
the hunters will have engendered instmcts that
will propagate themselyes and lead to results
hereafter.


CHAPTER XI.


THE TTNIVKR8B.

In all Oriental literature bearing on the con-
Btitution of all tliu cosmos, frequent referenoe
is made to the diiya and the nights of Brahma;
the inbreathings and the outbreathinge of the
creativp principle, the periods of manvantara*
and the periotis of pralaya. This idea runs
into vaiioua Eastern mythologies, but in its
symbolical aspects we need not follow it here.
The process in Nature to which it refers b ot
course the alternate succession of activity and
repose that is observable at every step of the
great ascent from the infinitely small to the in-
finitely great. Man has a manvantara and pi-ar
laya every (our- and- twenty hours, his periods
of waking and sleeping ; vegetation follows the
same rule from year to year as it subsides and
revives with the seasons. The world too has its


1 Aa IranBtileriled into Englisli, this word may bo wriu«
numiBBiUara or maivnniara ; t.ai the proper proniinoi
BomelhiDg between tlie two, with the accent on Uie aecon


TUB VNI VERSE. 247

miinvantaras and pralayaa, when tfae tide-wave
of humanity appi'oaches its shore, runs through
the evolution of tte seven races, and ebbs away
again ; and such a manvantara has been treated
by most exoteric religious as the whole cycle of
eternity.

The major manvantai-a of onr planetary
chain is that which comes to an end when the
laflt Dhynn Chohan of the seventh round of
perfected humanity pasaes into Nirvana. And
the expression Las thus to be regarded as one
of considerable elustieity. It may be said in-
deed to have infinite elasticity, and that is one
explanation of the confusion which has reigned
in all treatises on Eastern religions in their pop-
ular aspects. All the root^words transferred to
popular literature from the secret doctrine have
a seven-fold significance, at least for the initiiite,
while the uninitiated reader, naturally suppos-
ing that one word means one thing, and trying
always to clear up its meaning by collating its
various applications, and striking an aven^,
gets into the most hopeless embarrassment.

The planetary chain with which we are con-
cerned is not the only one which has our sun
as its centre. As there are other planets be-
sides the Earth in our chain, so there are otlier
chains besides this in our solar system. Tliere
are seven such, and there comes a time when


248


ESOTERIC BUDDIIiaM.


all these go into pralaya t<^tber. This ia
epoken of as a solar pnilaya, and within the
interval between two such pralayas the vast
solar tuanvatitara covers seven pralayas and
manvantaras of our — and each other — plan-
etary chain. Thought is baffled, say even the
adepts, ID speculating aa to how many of our
solar pralayas must come before the great coft-
miu night in which the whole universe, in its
collective enormity, obeys what is manifestly
the universal law of activity and repose, and
with all ita myriad systems passes itself into
pralaya. But even that tremendous result,
eays esoteric science, mnat surely come.

After the pralaya of a single planetary chain
there is no necessity for a recommencement of
evolutionary activity absolutely de novo. There
is only a resumption of arrested activity. The
vegetable and animal kingdoms, which at the
end of the last corresjxtnding manvantara had
reached only a partial development, are not
destroyed. Their life or vital energy passes
through a night or period of rest ; they also
have, BO to speak, a Nirvana of their own, as
why should they not, these fojtal and infant en-
tities? They are all like ourselves, b^otten of
the one element. As we have our Dhyan Cho-
hans, so have they, in their several kingdoms,
elemental guardians, and iii-e its well taken care


THE UfTIVERBE. 249

of in the mass aa hnmaiiity is in the mass. The
one element not only fills space and is spaca,
but interpenetrates every atom of cosmic mat-
ter.

When, however, the hour of the solar pralaya
stribes, though the procfjss of miin'a advajicG on
hU last seventh round is precisely the siune as
usual, each plauet, instead of merely passing-
out of the visible into the invisible, as he quits
it in turn, is aunibihited. With the beginning
of the seventh round of the seventh planetary
chain manvantara, every kingdom having now
reached its last cycle, there remains on each
planet, after the exit of man, merely tbe maya
of once living and existing forms. With every
step he takes on the descending and ascending
arcs, aa he moves on from globe to globe the
planet left behind becomes an empty chrysib-
loidal case. At his departure there is an out-
flow from every kingdom of its entities. Wait-
ing to piiss into higher forma in due time, they
are nevertheless liberated, and to the day of the
next evolution they will rest in their lethai^c
sleep in space, until brought into life again at
the new solar manvautara. The old elementals
will rest till they are called on to become in
tlieir turn the bodies of mineral, vegetable, and
animal entities on another and a higher chain of
globes on their way to become human entities,


250


ESOTERIC BUDDHiaU.


irhile the germinal eotitiea of the lowest
— and at that time there will remain bat
of such — will h&ng ui space, like drops of
water suddenly turned into icicles. They will
thaw at the first hot breath of the new solar
iiiaiivantara, aud form the euol of the future
globes. The slow development of the vegeta-
ble kingdom, up to the period we are now deal-
ing with, will have been provided for by the
louger interplanetary rest of man. When the
Bolar pralaya comes, the whole purified hamon-
ity merges into Nirvana, and from that inter-
solar Nirvana will be reborn in the higher sye-
teins. The strings of worlds are destroy ed«
and vanish like a shadow from the wall when
the light is extinguished. " We have every
indication," say the adepts, " that at this very
moment such a solar pmlaya is taking plaoe,
while there are two minor ones ending some-
where."

At the beginning of the solar manvantaim
the hitherto subjective elements of the material
worlds, now scattered in cosmic dust, receiving
their impulse from the new Dhyan Chohans of
the new solar system (the highest of the old
ones having gone higher) will form into pri-
mordial ripples of life, and, separating into dif-
ferentiating ccnti'es of activity, combine in a
graduated scale of sevcu stages of evolution.


; forms ^|
•at few ^1


THE UNIVERSE. 261

Like every other orb of apiice, our earth has, be-
fore obtaining its ultiroivte materiality, to pasa
tlirougli a gamut of seven stages of density.
Nothing in this world now can give us an idea
of what an nltimate stage of materiality is like.
TJie French astronomer Flammarion. in a book
callud " La Resurrection et la Fin desMondes,"
has approached a conception of this ultimate
materiality. The facta are, I am informed,
with siiglit modifications, much aa he aurmiaes.
In consequence of what lie treats as aecalar re-
frigeration, but which more truly is old age
and lo83 of vital power, the solidification and
dcaiocatiou of the earth at last reaches a point
when the whole globe becomes a relaxed con-
glomerate. Its period of child-bearing Iiaa gone
by ; its progeny are all nurtured ; ita term of
life is finished. Hence its constituent masses
cease to obey those laws of cohesion and a^re-
gation which held them together. And becom-
ing like a corpse, which, abandoned to the work
of destruction, leaves each molecule compoaing
it free to separate itaelf from the body, and
obey in future the sway of new influences, " the
attraction of the moon," suggests M. Flamma-
rion, " would itself undertake the task of demo-
lition by producing a tidal wave of earth parti-
cles instead of an aqueous tide." This last idea
must not be regarded aa countenanced by oc-


262 ESOTERIC BUDDrflSJH.

cult science (ixcept bo far as it may serve to
illustrate tho loss of molecular cohesion in tlio
material of the earth.

Occult physics pass fairly into thu region of
metaphysics, if we seek to obtain some indica-
tion of the way in which evolution recommences
after a universal pralaya.

The one eternal, imperishable thing in the
universe, which universal pralayas themselves
pass over without destroying, is that which
may be regarded indifferently as spnce, dura-
tion, matter, or motion ; nut as something hav-
ing these four Httributea, but as something
which t« these four things at once, and aln^ys.
And evolution takes its rise in the atomic po-
larity which motion engenders. In cosmogoay
the positive and the negative, or the active and
passive, forces correspond to the male and fe-
male principles. The spiritual efflux enters
into the veil of cosmic matter ; the active is
attracted by the passive principle, and if we
may here assist imagination by having recourse
to old occult symbology, the great Xag, the
serpent emblem of eternity, attracts its t^l to
its mouth, forming thereby the circle of eter-
nity, or rather cycles in eternity. The one
and chief attribute of the universal spiritual
principle, the unconscious but ever active life-
giver, is to expand and aht'd ; that of (he uui-


TnK UNIVERSE. 253

verBa.1 material principle ia to gather in und
fecundate. Unconscious and non-uxisting when
separate, they become consciousnesB and Ufa
when brought together. The word Br;ihma
comes from the Saoskrit root brih, to expand,
grow, or fructify, esoteric cosmc^ny being but
the vivifying expansive force of Nature in its
eternal revolution. No one expression can have
contributed more to mislead the human mind
in basic speculation concerning the origin of
things than the word "creation." Talk of cre-
ation and we are continually butting against tho
facts. But once realize that oiir planet and our-
selves are no more creations than an iceberg, hut
states of being for a given time, — that their
present appearance, geological and anthropolog-
ical, are transitory aud but a condition concom-
itant of that stage of evolution at which they
have arrived, — and tlie way has been prepared
for correct tliinking. Then we are enabled to
see what is meant by tho one and only princi-
ple or element in the universe, and by the treat-
ment of that element as androgynous ; also by
the proclamation of Hindu philosophy that all
things are but maya, transitory states, except
the one element which rests during the maha-
pralayaa only, — the nights of Brahma.

Perhaps we have now plunged deeply enough
into the fathomless mystery of the great First


254 EBOTERIC BUDDHISM.

Cause. It is no paradox to say that simply
by reason of ignorance do ordinary theolt^ans
think they know eo mucli about Grod. And it
is no exaggeration to say that the vondronsly
endowed representatives of occult science, whose
mortal natnre has been so far elevated and
purified that their perceptions range over other
worlds and other states of existence, and com-
mune directly with beings as much greater
than ordinary mankind as man is greater than
the insi'cta of the field, — it is the mere truth,
that they never occupy themselves at all with
any conception remotely resembling the God of
churches and creeds. Within the limits of the
solar system, the mortal adept knows, of his
own knowledge, that all things are accounted
for by law, working on matter in its diverse
forms, pliit the guiding and modifying influenoe
of the highest intelligences associated with the
solar system, the Dhyan Chohans, the perfected
humanity of the last preceding manvantara.
These Dhyan Chohans, or planetary spirits, on
whose nature it is almost fruitless to ponder
until one can at least realize the nature of dis-
embodied existence in one's own case, import
to the reawakening worlds at the end of A
planetary chain pralaya such impulses that ev-
olution feels them throughout its whole prog-
ress. The limits of Nature's great law restrain


r f.linir f


THE ntilVERBE. 255

their action. They cannot say, Let there be
parudiae throughout space, let all men be born
supremely wise and good ; they can only work
through the principle of evolution, and they
cannot deny to any man who is to be invested
with the potentiality of development himself
into a Dhyan Chohan the right to do evil if
he prefers that to good. Nor can they prevent
evil, if done, from producing suffering. Ob-
jective life is the soil in which the life-germs
are planted ; spiritual existence (the expression
being used, remember, in contrast merely to
grossly material existence) is the flower to be
ultimately obtained. But the human germ is
something more than a flower-seed ; it has lib-
erty of choice in regard to growing up or grow-
ing down, and it could not be developed with-
out such liberty being exercised by the phmt.
This ia the necessity of evil. But within the
limits that logical necessity prescribes, the
Dhyan Chohan impresses his conceptions upon
the evolutionary tide, and comprehends the ori-
gin of all that he beholds.

Surely as we ponder in this way over the
magnitude o£ the cyclic evolution with which
esoteric science is in this way engaged, it seems
reasonable to postpone considerations as to the
origin of the whole cosmos. The ordinary man
in this earth-lite, with certainly some hundred


256 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

many earth-lives to come, and then very mncli
many important inter- in carnation periods (more
important, that is, as regards duration and the
prospect of happiness or sorrow) also in pros-
pect, may surely be most wisely occupied with
the inquiries whose issue will affect practical
results than with speculation in which he is
practically quite uninterested. Of course from
the point of view of religious speculation rest-
ing on DO positive knowledge of anything be-
yond this life, nothing can be more important
or more highly practical than conjectures as to
the attributes and probable intentions of the
personal, terrible Jehovah, pictured as an om-
nipotent tribunal into whose presence the soul
at its death is to be introduced for judgment.
But scientific knowledge of spiritual things
throws back the day of judgment into a very
dim perspective, the intewening period being
filled with activity of all kinds. Moreover, it
shows mankind tliat certainly, for millions and
millions of centuries to come, it will not be con-
fronted with any judge at all, other than that
all-pervading judge, that seventh piinciple, or
universal spirit, which exists everywhere, and,
operating on matter, provokes the existence of
man himself, and the world in which he lives,
and the future conditions towards which he ia
pressing. The seventh principle, undelinable^


THE UNIVERSE. 257

incomprehensible for us at our present stages
of enlightenment, is of courae the only God
recognized by esoteric knowledge, and no per-
sonification of this can be otherwise than sym-
bolical.

And yet in truth esoteric knowledge, giving
life and reality to ancient symbolism in ono
direction as often as it conflicts with modem
dogma in the other, shows ua how far from
absolately fabulous are even the most anthro-
pomorphic notions of Deity associated by ex-
oteric tradition with the beginning of the world.
The planetary spirit, actually incarnated among
men in the first round, was the prototype of
personal Deity in all subsequent developments
of the idea. The mistake made by uninstructed
men in dealing with the idea ia merely one of
degree. The personal God of an insigni6cant
minor manvantara has been taken for the Cre-
ator of the whole cosmos, — a most natural mis-
take for people forced, by knowing no more of
human destiny than waa included in one ob-
jective incarnation, to auppoae that all beyond
was a hom<^neoua spiritual future. The God
of this life, of course, for them, was the God of
all lives and worlds and periods.

The reader will not misunderstand me, I
trust, to mean that esoteric science regarda the
planetary spirit of the first round as a god.


268 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

Ab I say, it is coDcemed with the working of
Mature in an immeasurable space, from an im-
measurable past, and all through immeasurable
future. The enormous areas of time and space
in which our solar system operates i« explor-
able by the mortal adepts of esoteric science.
Within those limits they know all that takes
place and how it takes place, and they know
that everything ia accounted for by the oon-
Btructive will of the collective host of the
planetary spirits, operating under the law of ev-
olution that pervades all Nature. They com-
mune with tbese planetary spirits, and learn
from them that the law of this is the law of
other solar systems as well, into the regions of
which the perceptive faculties of the planetary
spirits can plunge, as the perceptive faculties
of the adepts themselves can plunge into tho
life of other planets of this chain. The law
of alternating activity and repose ia operating
rniiversally ; for the whole cosmos, even though
at unthinkable intervals, pralaya must succeed
manvantara, and manvantara pralaya.

any one ask, To what end does thia
eternal succession work? It is better to con-
fine the question to a single system, and ask. To
what end does the original nebula arrange itself
in planetary vortices of evolution, and develop
worlds in which the universal spirit, reverbec


I


THE UNIVERSE. 269

ating throagh matter, produces form and life
and those higher states of matter in which that
which we call subjective or spiritual existence
is provided for ? Surely it is end enough to sat-
isfy any reasonable mind that such sublimely
perfected beings as the planetary spirits them-
selves come thus into existence, and live a con-
scious life of supreme knowledge and felicity
through vistas of time which are equivalent to
all we can imagine of eternity. Into this un-
utterable greatness every living thing has the
opportunity of passing ultimately. The spirit
which is ill every animated form, and which
has even worked up into these from forma
we are generally in the habit of calling inan-
imate, will slowly but certainly progress on-
wards until the working of its untiring influence
in matter has evolved a human soul. It does
not follow that the plants and animals around
us have any principle evolved in them as yet
which will assume a human form in the course
of the present manvantara; but though the
course of an incomplete revolution may be sus-
pended by a period of natural repose, it is not
rendered abortive. Eventually every spiritual
monad, itself a sinless unconscious principle,
will work through conscious forms on lower
levels, until these, throwing off one after an-
other higher and higher forms, will produce that


260 EBOTERIC BUDDBISM.

in which the God-like couaciousness may be
fuDy evoked. Certainly it b not by reason of
the grandeur of any human conceptions as to
what would be an adequate reason for the ex-
istcuce of the universe that such a consumma-
tion can appear an insufficient purpose, not even
if the final destiny of the planetary spirit him-
self, after periods to which his development
from tlie mineral forms of primeval worlds is but
a childhood in the recollection of the man, is to
merge his glorified individuality into that sum
total of all couaciousness, which esoteric metar
physics treat as absolute consciousnesa, which
is non-con BciousnesB. These pni-adoxical exprea-
sions are simply counters representing ideas that
the human mind is not qualitietl to apprehend,
and it is waste of time to haggle over them.

These considerations supply the key to eso-
teric Buddhism, a more direct outcome of the
universal esoteric doctrine than any other pop-
ular religion ; for the effort in its construction
has been to make men love virtue for its own
sake and for its good effect on their future
incarnations, not to keep them in aubjeetion
to any priestly system or dogma by terrifying
their fancy with the doctrine of a personal
judge waiting to try them for more than theli
lives at their death. Mr. Lillie is mistaken,
admirable us his inlentiou has been, and sym-


w


THE UNIVERSE. 261

pathetic aa hia iniad evidently ia with the beau-
tiful morality aud aspiratiou ol Buddhism, in
deducing from ita temple ritual the notion of a
personal God. No such conception enters into
the great esoteric doctrine of Nature, of which
this volume has furnished an imperfect sketch.
Nor even in reference to the farthest regions of
the immensity beyond our own planetary sys-
tem does the adept exponent of the esoteric
doctrine tolerate the adoption of an agnostic
attitude. It will not suffice for him tu say,
"As far aa the elevated aenaea of planetary
spii-its, whose cognition extends to the outer-
most limits of the starry heavens, -~ aa far as
their vision can extend Nature is self-suffiuitig;
aa to what may lie beyond we offer no hypoth-
esis," What the adept really sitys on this head
is, " The univerae is boundless, and it is a stul-
tification of thought to talk of any hypothesis
setting in beyond the boundless, — on the other
side of the limits of the limitless."

Tliat which antedates every manifestation of
the universe, and would lie beyond the limit of
manifestation, if such limit could ever be found,
is that which underlies the manifested universe
within our own purview, — matter animated
by motion, its parabrahm, or spirit. Matter,
space, motion, and duration constitute one and
Uie same eternal substance of the universe.


ESOTERIC BCDDBIBM.


Tbere is notfaing else eternal absolutely,
is the first state of matter, itself perfectly
cc^nizable by physical scDses, which deal with
manifested matter, another state altogether.
Bat though thus, in one sense of the word, ma-
terialistic, the esoteric doctrine, as any reader
of the foregoiag esplanations will have seen, is
as far from resembling the gross narrow-minded
conception of Nature, whioh ordinarily goes by
the name of materialism, as the nortli pols
looks away from the south. It stoops to ma-
terialism, as it were, to link its methods with
the l<^ic of that system, and ascends to the
highest realms of idealism to embrace and ex-
poand the most exalted aspirations of spirit.
As it cannot be too frequently or eanieatly re-
peated, it is the union of science with Religion,
-~ the bridge by which the most acute and cau-
tious pursuers of experimental knowledge may
cross over to the most enthusiastic devotee, by
means of which the most enthusiastic devotee
may return to earth and yet keep heaven still
around him.


That V

ctly on- ^M


CHAPTER Xn.


THE DOOTBDSB EE VIE WED.

Long familiarity with the esoteric doctrine
will alone give rise to a full perception of the
mannor in which it harmonizes with facts of
Nature such as we are all in a poaition to ob-
serve. But something may be done to indi-
cate the correspondences that may be traced
between the whole body of teaching now set
forth and the phenomena of the world around


Beginning with the two great perplexities of
ordinai-y philosophy, — the conflict between free-
will and predestination and the origin of evil, —
it will surely be recognized that the system
of Nature now explained enables ns to deal
with those problems more boldly than they have
ever yet been handled. Till now the moat pru-
dent thinkers have been least disposed to pro-
fess that either by the aid of metaphysioa or
religion could the mystery of free-will and
predestination be unraveled, Tlie tendency of
thought has been to relegate the whole enigma


264 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

to the region of the anknowable. And strange
to sity this has been done contentedly by peo-
ple who have been none the less contented to
accept as more than a proviaional hypothesis
the religious doctrines which thus remained in-
capable of reconciliation with some of their
own most obvious consequences. The omnis-
cience of a personal Creator, ranging over the
future as well as the past, Itft man no room to
exercise the indei^ndent authority over his
own destinies, which nevtrtlielesa it was ab-
solutely necessarj- to allow him to exercise in
order that the policy of punishing or rewarding
him for his acts in life could be recognized u
anything bat the most grotesque injustice. One
great English philosopher, frankly facing tha
embarrassment, declared in a famous postba-
mous essay that by reason of these considera-
tions it wiis impossible that God could be all-
good and all-potent. People were free to in-
Test him logically with one or other of these
attributes, but not with both. The argument
was treated with the respect dae to the great
reputation of its author, and put aside with the
discretion due to respect for orthodox tenets.

But the esoteric doctrine comes to our rescue
in this emergency. First of :i11 it honestly takes
into account the insignificant size of this world
compared to the universe. This is a fact of


r


THE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 265

Nature, which the early Chriatian church feared
with a true instinct, and treated with the
cruelty of terror. The truth was denied, aud
its authors were tortured for many centuries.
Eatabliaheil at last beyond even the authority
of papal negations, the church resorted to the
" desperate expedient," to quote Mr. Rhys
Davids' phrase, of pretending that it did not
matter.

The pretense till now has been more success-
ful than its authors could have hoped. When
they dreaded astronomical discovery, they were
crediting the world at large with more remorse-
less logic than it ultimately showed any in-
clination to employ. People have been found
willing, as a rule, to do that which I have de-
scribed esoteric Buddhism as not requiring us
to do, — to keep their science and their relig-
ion in separate water-tight compartments. So
long and so thoroughly has this principle been
worked upon that it has finally ceased to be
an argument against the credibility of a relig-
ious dogma to point out that it is impossible.
But when we establish a connection between
our hitherto divided reservoirs and require
them to stand at the same level, we cannot
fail to see how the insignificance of the earth's
magnitude diminishes iu a corresponding pro-
portion the plausibility of theories that require


286 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

ufl to regard the details of our own lives as
part of the general stock of a aniverBal Crear
tor's omniscience. On the contrary, it is nn-
teaaonable to euppoee that the creatures inhab-
iting one of the smaller planets of one of the
smaller suns ia the ocean of the nniverse, where
BUDS are hut water-drops in the sea, are exempb
in any way from the general principle of gov-
ernment by law. But tliat principle cannot co-
exist with governmunt by caprice, which is an
essential condition of such predestination aa
conventional discussions of the problems before
ns associate with the use of the word. For,
be it observed that the predestination which
conflicts with free-will is not the predestina-
tion of races, but individual predestination,
associated with the ideas of divine grace or
wrath. The predestination of races, under laws
analc^oua to those which control the general
tendency of any multitude of independent
chances, is perfectly compatible with individual
free-will, and thus it is that the esoteric doc-
trine reconciles the long-standing contradiction
of Nature. Man has control over his own deft-
tiny within constitutional limits, so to speak ;
he ia perfectly free to make use of his natural
rights as far as they go, and they go practically
to infinity as far as he, the individual unit, is
concerned. But the average human action,


r


TBE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 267

ander given couditions, taking a vast multiplic-
ity of units into account, provides for the nn-
fajling evolution of the cycles which conBtitute
their collective destiny.

Individual predestination, it ia true, may be
asserted, not as a religious dogma having to do
with divine grace or wrath, but on purely raet-
aphyaical grounds ; that is to say, it may be
argued that each human creature is fundamen-
tally, in infancy, subject to the same influence
by similar circumstances, and that an adult life
is thus merely the product or impression of all
the circumstances which have influenced such a
life from the beginning, so that if those circum-
etances were known the moral and intellectual
reBult would be known. By this train of reason-
ing it can be made to appear that the circum-
stances of each man's life may be theoretically
fcnowable by a sufficiently searching intelli-
gence ; that hereditary tendencies, for example,
are but products of antecedent circumstances
entering into any given calculation as a pertur-
bation, but not the less calculable on that ac-
count. This contention, however, is no leas in
direct conflict with the consciousness of human-
ity tlian the religious dt^ma of individual pre-
destination. The sense of free-will is a fiictor
in the process which cannot be ignored, and the
free-will of which we are thus sensible is not a


■ pared s

^^^1 able to

^^^K action,

^^^H the dri

Ml


268 ESOTERIC BUDDHIBM.

mere automatic impulse, like the twitching of a
dead frog's 1^. The ordinary religious dogma
and the ordinary metaphyBical at^ument both
require us to regard it in that light ; bat the
esoteric doctrine restores it to its true dignity,
and shows iis the scope of its activity, the lim-
its of its sovereignty. It is sovereign over the
individual career, but impotent in presence of
the cyclic law, which even so positive a philos-
opher as Draper detects in human history, ~
brief as the period ia which he is enabled to ob-
serve. And none the less does that collateral
quicksand of thought which J. S. Mill discerned
alongside the cuntradictions of theology — the
great question whether B[>eculntion must work
with the all-good or all-potent hypotheais —
find its explanation in the system now dis-
closed. Those great beings, the perfected efflo-
rescence of former humanity, who, though far
from constituting a supreme God, nngn never-
theless in a divine way over the destinies of oar
world, are not only not omnipotent, but, great
as they are, are restricted as regards their ac-
tion by comparatively narrow limits. It woold
seem as if, when the stage is, so to speak, pre-
pared afresh for a new drama of life, they

to introduce some improvements into
derived from their own experience

drama with which they were concenn


y are ^m
o the ^1

med, ^1


THE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 269

but are only capable, as regards the main con-
struction of the piece, of repeating that which
has been represented before. They can do on
a large scale what a gardener can do with dah-
lias on a small one ; he can evolve considerable
improvements in form and color, but his flow-
ers, however carefully tended, will be dahlias
still.

Is it nothing, one may ask in passing, in Bap-
port of the acceptability of the esoteric doctrine,
that natural analogies support it at every turn ?
As it is below, so it is above, wrote the early
occult philosophers ; the microcosm is a mirror
of the macrocosm. All Nature lying within
the sphere of our physical observation verifies
the rule, so far as that limited area can exhibit
any principles. The strocture of lower animals
is reproduced with modifications in higher ani-
mals, and in man ; the fine fibres of the leaf
ramify like the branches of the tree, and the
microscope follows such ramifications, repeated
beyond the range of the naked eye. The dust-
laden currents of rain-water by the roadside
deposit therein " sedimentary rocks " in the
puddles they develop, just as the rivers do in
the lakes and the great waters of the world over
the sea-bed. The geological work of a pond
and that of an ocean differ merely in their
scale, and it is only in scale that the esoteric


270


ESOTERIC BUDOniSM.


doctrine shows the sablimest laws of
difiering, in their jarisdictioD over the
and their jurisdiction over the planetary family.
Aa the children of each human generation are
tended in infancy by their parenta, and grow
up to tend another generation in their tarn, ao
in the whole humanity of the great manvantario
periods the men of one generation grow to be
the Dhyan Chohaus of the next, and then yield
their placea in the ultimate progress of time to
their descendants, and pass themselves to higher
conditions of existence.

Not leaa decisively than it answers the ques-
tion about free-will does the eaoterio doctrine
deal with the existence of evil. This subject
has been discussed in its place in the preceding
chapter on the Progress of Humanity, but the
esoteric doctrine, it will be seen, grapples with
the great problem more closely than by the
mere euunciation of the way human free-will,
which it is the purpose of Nature to grow, and
cultivate into Dhyan Chohanahip, must by the
hypothesis be free to develop evil itself if it
likes. So much for the broad principle in oper-
ation ; but the way it works is traceable in the
present teaching as clearly as the principle it-
self. It works through physical Karma, and
could not but work that way except by a sufr
pension of the invariable law that causes caa


Nature ^1
ke man ^|


TBE DOCTBINF. iCEVIEWED. 271

not but produce effects. The objective man
bora into the physiciil world is just as much
the craivtion of the person lie last animated as
the subjective man who has in the interim been
living the Devachanic existence. The evil that
men do lives after them, in a more literal sensu
even than Shakespeare intended by those words.
It may be aaked. How can the moral guilt of a
man in one life cauae him to be bora blind or
crippled at a different period of the world's his-
tory several thousand years liiter, of parents
with whom he has had, through his former lite,
no lack of physical connectiou whatever? But
the difficulty is met by considering the opera-
tion of affinities more easily than may be im-
agined at the fii-st glance. The blind or crip-
pled child, as regards his physical frame, may
have been tlie potentiitlity rather than tlie prod-
uct of local circumstances. But he would not
have come into existence unless there !md been
a spiritual monad pressing forward for incarna-
tion, and bearing with it a fifth principle (so
much of a fifth principle as is peraiatcnC, of
course) precisely adapted by its Karma to in-
habit that potential body. Given these circum-
Btances, and the imperfectly organized child ia
conceived and brought into the world, to be a
cause of trouble to himself and others — an
effect becoming a cause in its turn — and a liv-


E72 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

ing enigmH for philoaophers endeavoring to ax-
pliiin the origin of evil.

Tbe same explanation applies, witli modiRca*
tiona, to a vast range of cases that might bo
dt«d to ilhistnite the problem of evil in the
world. Incidentally, moreover, it covers a quea-
tiou connected with tlie operntiun of the Karmic
law that can hardly be called a difficulty, as
the anawer would probably be suggested by the
bearings of the doctrine itself, but is none the
less entitled to notice. The selective assimi-
lation of KarraBrliiden spirits with parentage
which corrosponds to their necossilies or deserts
is the obvious explanation which reoonoilea
rebirth with atavism and heredity. The child
bom may seem to reproduce the mora! and
mentnl peculiarities of pitroiit« or ancestors aa
well aa their physical likeneas, and the fact
suggests the notion thsit his soul is as much an
offshoot of the family tree as his physical frame.
It is iinnecessary to enlarge here on the multi-
farious embarrassments by which that theory
would be surrounded, on the extravagiince of
supposing that a sonl thus thrown oft, like a
spark from an anvil, without any spiritual past
behind it, can have a spiritual future before it.
The soul, which was thus merely a function of
tJie body, would certainly come to an end with
the dissolution of that nut of which it arosa


r


TSE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 275

The eaoteric doctrine, however, as r^arJs trana-
mitted cliaracteristics, will afford a complete
explanation of that phenomenon, as well aa all
others connected witb human life. The family
into which he is born is to the re-incarnating
spirit what a. now planet is to the whole tide
of humanity on a round along the manvantaiic
chain. It has been built up by a process of
evolution working on a line tranaverso to that
of humanity's approach ; but it is fit for human-
ity to inhabit when the time comes. So with
the re -incarnating spirit: it preaaes forward
into the objective world, the influences which
have retained it in the Devacbauic state having
been exliauated, and it touches the spring of
Nature, so to apeak, provoking the development
of a c\^\tl which without such an impulse would
merely have been a potentiality, not an actual
development, but in whose parentage it finds
— of course unconsciously by the blind opera-
tion of ita affinities^ the exact conditions of
renewed life for which it has prepared itself
during its laat existence. Certainly we must
never forget the presence of exceptions in all
broad rules of Nature. In tbe present case
it may sometimes happen that mere accident
causes an injury to a child at birth. Thus a
crippled frame may come to be bestowed on a
spirit whose Karma has by no means earned


274 ESOTERIC BUDDBIEM.

that penalty, and bo with a great vai-iety of aa~
cidents. But of these all that need be said ia
that Nature is not at all emharraesed by her
aecidenta; she haa ample time to repair them.
The undeserved Bufferiiig of one life is amply
redressed under the operation of the Karmic
liiw in the next or the next. There ia plenty
of time for making the account even, and the
adepts declare, I believe, that, ae a matter of
fact, in the long run nndeserved suffering oper^
atea as good luck rather than otherwise, thereby
deriving from a puiely scientific observation
of facts a doctrine which religion has benevo-
lently uiYonted sometimes for the consolation of
the afflicted.

Wliile the esoteric doctrine aEEords in this
way an unexpected solution of the mo* per-
plexing phenomena of life, it does this at no
eacriflce in any direction of the attributes we
may fairly expect of a true religious science.
Foremost among the claims we may make on
such a system is that it shall contemplate
no injustice, either in the direction of wrong
done to the deserving, or of benefits bestowed
on the undeserving ; and the justice of its oper-
ation must be discernible in great things and
small alike. The legal maxim, de minimw non
curat lex, ia means of escape for human fallibil.
ity from the coiisecju uncus of its own iiiiperfec-


THE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 275

tions. There ia no sucli thing as indifference
to small things in chemistry or mechanics.
Nature in physical operations responds with ex-
actitude to small Ciiusea as ceitaiiily as to great,
and we may feel instinctively sure that in her
B])iritual operations also alie h;iB no clumsy liabit
of treating trifles as of no consequence, of ig-
iioriug small debts in consideration of paying
big ones, like a trader of doubtful integrity con-
tent to respect obligations which are serious
enough to be enforced by law. Now the minor
acta of life, good and bad alike, are of necessity
ignored under any system which makes the finaJ
question at stake, admission to or exclusion
fiom a uniform or approximately uniform con-
dition of blessedness. Even a& regards that
merit and demerit which is solely concerned
with spiritual consequences, no accurate re-
sponse could be made by Nature except by
means of that inlinitely graduated condition
of spiritual existence described by the esoteric
ductrine as the Devachanic state. But the
complexity to be dealt with is more serious than
even the various conditions of Devacluinic ex-
istence can meet. No system of consequences
ensuing to mankind after the life now under
observation can be recognized as adapted eci-
entifically to the emergency, unleaa it reapoiids
to the sense of justice, in regard to tho multi-


276 ESOTKBTC BUDOniBM.

farioiis acts and habits of life generally, includ-
ing those which merely relate to ]>liy8ical ex-
istence, and are not deeply colored by right or
wrong.

Now, it is only by a return to physical exist-
ence that people can possibly be conceived to
reap with precise accuracy the harvest of the
minor causes they may have generated, when
last in objective life. Thus, on a careful exam-
iniition of the matter, the Karmic law, so unat-
tnictive to Buddhist students, hitherto, in its
exoteric shape, — and no wonder, — will be seen
not only to reconcile itself to the sense of justice,
but to constitute the only imaginable method
of natural action thiit would do tliia. The con-
tinued individuality running tlirongh successive
Karmic re-births once realized, and the corre-
sponding chain of perannal existences intei'car
lated between each borne in mind, the exquisite
symmeti-y of the whole aystem ia in no way
impaired by that feature which seems obnoxiona
to criticism at the first glance, — the succeeaive
hatha of oblivion, through which the re-incar-
nating spirit has to pass. On the contrary,
that oblivion itself is in truth the only condition
oil which objectivii life could fairly be started
afresh. Few earth-lives are entirely free from
shadows, the recollection of which would darken
a renewed lease of life for the foi'mer personal-


^


TEE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 277

ity. And if it ia alleged that the forgetfulneas
in each life of the last involves wastu of experi-
ence and effort and intellectual acquiremeata,
painfully or laboriously obtained, that objection
can Mily be raised in forgetfuluess of the Devar
chanie life, in wliich, far from being wasted,
such efforts and acquirements are the seeds
from which the wholu magnificeut harvest of
spiritnal results will be raised. In the same
way, the longer the esoteric doctrine occupies
the mind the more clearly it is seen that every
objection brought against it meets with a ready
reply, and only seems an objection from the
point of view of imperfect knowledge.

Passing from abstract considerations to oth-
ers partly interwoven with practical matters,
we may compare the esoteric doctrine with the
observable facts of Nature in several ways with
the view of directly checking its teachings. A
spiritual science which has successfully divined
the absolute truth must accurately fit the facto
of earth whenever it impinges on earth. A
religious dogma in flagrant opposition to that
which is manifestly truth in respect of geology
and astronomy may find churches and congre-
gations content to nurse it, but is not worth
serious philoaophicul consideration. How then
does the esoteric doctrine square with geology
and astronomy ?


378


EaOTERlC BUDDBlaU.


It is not too much to say that it constittitL'S
the only religious system tiiat bleada itaelf ea-
sily with the physical truths discovered by mod-
em research in those branches of science. It
not only blends itaelf with, in the sense of tol-
erating, tlie nebula hypothesis and the stratifi-
cation of rocks ; it rashes into the arms of these
facts, BO to speak, and could not get on without
them. It could not get on without tho great
discoveries of modern biology ; as a system reo-
ommending itself to notice in a scientilic age it
oould ill afford ti> difipense with the latest ao
quisitiona of physical geography, and it may
offer a word of thanks even to Professor Tyndall
for some of liis experiments on light, for he
seems nn one occasion, as he describes the phe-
nomenon without knowing what he is describ-
ing, in "Fragments of Science," to have pro-
voked conditions within a glass tnbe which en-
abled him for a short time to see the elemeutala.

The stratification of the earth's crnat is, of
course, a plain and visible record of the inter-
racial cataclysms. Physical science is emerging
from the habits of timidity, which its insolent
oppresaion by religious bigotry for fifteen cen-
turies engendered, but it is still a little shy in
its relations with dogma, from the mere force
Df habit. In that way, geology haa been con.
tent to say, such and such continents, as thei]


r


THE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 279

shell-beds testify, itiuat liave been more than
once submerged below and elevated above the
surface of the ocean. It has not yet grown used
to the free applicatinn ot ita own materials to
speculation, which trendies upon religious ter-
ritory. But surely if geology were required to
interpret all its facts into a consistent history
of the earth, throwing in the most plausible
hypotheses it could invent to fill up gaps in ita
knowletige, it would already construct a history
for mankind which in its broad outlines would
not be unlike that sketched out in the chap-
ter on the Great World Periods; and the fur-
ther geological discovery progresses, our esoteric
teachers assure us, the more closely will the
correspondence of the doctrine and the bony
traces of the past be reci^nized. Already we
find experts from the Challenger vouching for
the existence of Atlantis, though the subject be-
longs to a chiss of problems unattractive to the
scientific world generally, so that the considera-
tions in favor of the lost continent are not yet
generally appreciated. Already thoughtful ge-
ologists are quite ready to recognize that in
regard to the forces which have fashioned the
earth this, the period within the range of his-
toric triices, may bo a period of comparative
inertia and slow change ; that cataclysmal met-
amorphoses may have been added formerly to


280 ESOTERIC BUDDniBSI.

those of gradual Bubsidenoe, upheaval, and do-
nudjition. It is ouly a step or two to the reo-
ogiiition as a (act of what no one could any
longer find fault with as a hypothesis : that
great continental upheavals and submergencea
take place alternately ; that the whole map of
the world is not only thrown occasionally into
new shapes, lite the pictures of a kaleidoscope
as its colored fragments full into new arrange-
ments, but subject to eystematicallj recurrent
changes, which restore former arrangements at
enormous intervals of time.

Pending further discoverioa, however, it will,
perhaps, be admitted that we have a sufEcieot
block of geological knowledge already in our
posaeaaion to fortify the cosmogony of the escv
teric doctrine. That the doctrine should have
been withheld from the world generally as long
as no such knowledge had paved the way for
its reception can hardly be consideri'd indis-
creet for the part of ita custodians. Whether
the present generation will attach suifieient im-
portance to its correspondence with what has
been ascertained of Nature in other waya re-
mains to be seen.

These correspondences may, of course, be
traced in biology as decisively as in geology.
The broad Darwinian theory of the Descent of
Man from the animal kingdom is not the only


TEE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 281

support afEorded by thia bi'anch of science to
the esoteric doctrine. The detailed observa-
tions now carried out in embryology are espe-
cially interesting for the light they throw on
more thiin one depurtment of this doctrine.
Thua the now fiiiniliar tmtb that the succes-
siye stages of aiite-natal human development
correspond to the progress of human evolution
through different forms of animal lifa is noth-
ing less than a revelation, in its analc^cal bear-
ings. It does not merely fortify the evolution-
ary hypothesis itself; it affords a remarkable
illuBtration of the way Nature works in the
evolution of new races of men at the beginning
of the great round periods. When a child has
to be developed from a germ which is so simple
iu its constitution that it is typical less of the
animal — less even of the vegetable — than of
the mineral kingdom, the familiar scale of evo-
lution is run over, so to apeak, with a rapid
touch. The ideas of progress which may have
taken countless ages to work out in a connected
chain for the first time are once for ail firmly
lodged in Nature's memory, and thenceforth
tlicy can be quickly recalled in order, in a few
months. So with the new evolution of human-
ity on each planet as the human tide-wave of
life advances. In the first round tlie process ia
exceedingly slow, and does not advance far.


282 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

The ideafl of Nature are iheiaselveB under ev-
olution. Bat when the process hiis been ao-
complisbed once it can be quickly repeated.
In the later rounda, the life impulse runs up
the gamut of evolution with a facility only
cmceivivble by help of the illustration which
embryology affords, Tliis ia the explanation
of the W!iy the character of each round diSera
from its predecessor. The evolutionary work
which has been once accomplished is soon re-
peated ; then the round performs its own st.o-
luLion at a very different rate, as the child, once
perfected up to the human type, performs its
own individual growth but slowly, in proportioD
to the earlier stages of its initial development.

No elaborate comparison of exoteric find-
dhism with the views of Nature which have now
been set forth — briefly, indeed, considering
iheir scope and importance, but comprehensive-
ly enough to f ui'nish the rejider with a general
idea of the system in its whole enormous range
— will bo required from me. With the help of
the mformation now communicated, more ex-
perienced students of Buddhist literature will be
better able to apply to the enigmas that it may
contain the keys which will unlock their mean-
ing. The gaps in the public records of Bud-
dha's teaching xvill be filled up readily enongh
now, and it will be plain why they were left.


1


THE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 283

For exiimple, in Mr. Rhys Davids' bonk I find
this : " BiiddliiBin doea not attempt to solve the
problem of the primary origin of all thiaga ; "
and quoting from Hardy's "Manual of Bud-
dhism," he goes on, " When Malunka asked the
Duddha whether the existence of the world ia
eteniiil or not eternal, he made him no reply;
but the reason of this was that it was considered
by the teacher as an inquiry that tended to no
profit." In reality the subject was manifestly
passed over because it could not be dealt with
by a plain yes or no, without putting the in-
quirer upon a false scent ; while to put him on
the true scent would have required a complete
exposition of the whole doctrine about the ev-
olution of the planetary eliain, an explanation
of that for which the community Buddha was
dealing with was not intellectually ripe. To
infer from his silence that he regarded the in-
quiry itself as tending to no profit is a mistake
which may naturally enough have been made
in the absence of any collateral knowledge, hut
none can be more complete in reality. No re-
ligious system that ever publicly employed it-
self on the problem of the origin of all things
has, as will now be seen, done more than scratch
the surface of that speculation, in comparison
with the exhaustive researches of the esoteric
science of which Buddha was no less promuteut


284


ESOTERIC BUnDinsM.


an exponent than he waa a prominent teacher
uf inomls for the populace.

Thu poBitiva concluBioiis as to what Bud-
dbism does teiuih -— carefully as be has worked
them out — are no less inaccurately set forth
by Mr. Ilhja Davids thaii the negative codcIu-
Bion just quoted. It was ioevitable that all
Bucli conclusions should hithiirto be inaccurate.
I quote an example, not to disparage the careful
study of which it is the fruit, but to show how
the liglit now shed over the whole subject pen-
etrates every cranny and puts an entirely new
complexion on all its features : —

" Buddhism takes as its ultimate fact the ex-
istence of the material world, and of conscious
beings living within it ; and it holds that evei-y-
thing is subject to the law of cituse and ef-
fect, and that everything is constantly, though
imperceptibly, changing. There ia no place
where thia law does not operate ; no heaven
or hull, therefore, in the ordinary sense. There
are worlds where angula live, whose existence
is more or less material according as their pre-
vious lives were more or leas holy ; but the
angels die, and the worlds they inhabit pass
away. There are places of torment, where the
evil actions of men or angels produce unhappy
beings ; but when the active power of the evil
that produced them is exhausted, they will


r


TBE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 285

v;ini8h, and the worlds they inbabit are not
i-ternal. The whole Kosmos — eiirth and heav-
ens and hells — is always tending to renovar
tion or destruction, is always in a course ol
cliango, a series of revolutions or of cycles, of
wbich the beginning and the end alike are
unknowable and unknown. To this universal
law of composition and dissolution men and
gods form no exception ; the unity of forces
which constitutes a sentient being must sooner
or later be dissolved, and it is only through
ignorance and delusion that such a being in-
dulges in the dream that it ia a separable and
self-existent entity."

Now certainly this passage might be taken to
show how the popular notions of Buddhist phi-
losophy are manifestly thrown off from the real
esoteric philosophy. Most assuredly that phi-
losophy no more fimis in the universe than in
the belief of any truly enlightened thinker, Asi-
atic or European, the unchangeable and eter-
nal heaven and hell of monkish legend ; and
"the worlds where angels live," and so on, —
the vividly real though subjective stratii of the
Devachanic state, — are found in Nature truly
enough. So with all the rest of the popular
Buddhist conceptions just passed in review-
But in their popular form they are the nearest
caricatures of the corruspouding items of eso-


286 ESOTERIC BUDDniBH.

txrXc knowledge. Thus the notion aboat indi-
viduality being a delusion, and the ultimate
dissolution as such of tbe Bcntient being, is
perfectly unintelligible without fuller explana-
tions concerning the maltitudinous aKina of in-
dividual life, in as yet, to us, inconceivable but
ever-progressive conditions of spiritual exalta-
tion, wbicb come before that unnttembly remote
mergence into the non-individualized conditioD.
That condition certainly must be somewhere in
futurity, but its nature is something which no
uninitiated philosopher, at any rate, baa ever
yet comprehended by bo much as the faintest
glimmeriDg guess. As with the idea of Nir-
vana, BO with this about the delusion of indi-
viilualitj, writers on Buddhist doctrine derived
from exoteric sources have most unfortunately
found themselves entangled with some of the
remote elements of the great doctrine, under
the impression that they were deiiling with
Buddhist views of conditions immediately auo-
ceediiig this life. The statement, which ia al-
most absurd, thus put out of its proper place in
the whole doctrine, may be felt not only as no
longer an outrage on the underatanding, but
aa a sublime truth when restored to ita proper
place in relation to other truths. The ultimate
mergence of the perfected miin-god, or Dhyaii
Chohan, iu tho absolute consciousness of parar


>arar ^J


THE DOCTRINE REVIEWED- 287

nirvana has nothing to do, let me add, with
the " her«sy of individuality," which relates to
pliyaical pei'swialities. To this subject I recur
a little later on.

Justly enough, Mr. Rhya Davida says, in ref-
erence to the epitome of Buddliist doctrine
quoted above : " Such teachings are by no
means peculiar to Buddhism, and Bimilar ideas
lie at the foundation of earlier Indian philoso-
phies." (Certainly by reason of the fact that
Buddhism as concerned with doctrine waa ear-
lier Indian philosophy itself.) " They are to
be found, indeed, in other systems widely sepa-
rated from them in time and place ; and Bud-
dhism, in dealing with the truth which they
contain, might have given a more decisive and
more lasting utterance if it liad not also bor-
rowed a belief in the curious doctrine of trans-
migration, — a doctrine which seems to have
arisen independently, if not simultaneoualy, in
the valley of the Ganges and the valley of the
Nile. The word transmigration has been used,
however, in different times and at different
pliuiea for theories similar, indeed, but very dif-
ferent ; and Buddhism, in adopting the general
idea from post-Vedic Brahmanism, so modified
it as to origmat^, in fact, a new hypothesis.
The new hypothesis, like the old one, related to
life in past and future births, and contributed


288 ESOTERIC BUDbBlSU.

nothiDg to the removal here, in this life, of the
evil it was supposed to explain."

The present volame should have dissipated
the misapprehensions on which these remarks
rest. Biiddhbm does not believe in anything
resembling the paessige backwards and forwards
between animal and htimaii forms, which moBt
peopln conceive to be meant by the principle of
transmigration. The transmigration of Bud-
dhism is the transmtgiMtion of Darwinian evo-
lution scientifically developed, or ntther exhausb-
ively explored, in both directions. Buddhist
writings certainly contain allusions to former
births, in which even the Buddha himself was
now one and now another kind of animal. But
these had reference to the remote course of pre-
human evolution, of which his fully opened
vision gave bim a retrospect. Never in any
authentic Buddhist writings will any support
be found for the notion that any human crea-
ture, once having attained manhood, falls back
into the animal kingdom. Again, while noth-
ing, indeed, could be more ineffectual as an ex-
planation of the origin of evil than such a cari-
cature of transmigration as would contemplate
such a return, the progressive re-births of human
Egos into objective existence, coupled with the
operaliun of physical Karma ami the inevitable
play of fne-will within tlit' limits of its privi


TEE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 289

lege, do explain the origin of evil, finally and
completely. The effort o£ Nature being to grow
a new harvest of Dhyan Chohans wlieuever a
planetary system is evolved, the incidental de-
velopment of transitory evil is an unavoidable
conBeqnence under the operation of the forces
or processes just mentioned, thomaelvea una-
voidable stages in the stupendous enterprise
set on foot.

At the same time the reader who will now
take up Mr. Rhys Davids' book and examine
the long passage on this subject, and on the
skandhaif will realize how utterly hopeless a
task it waa to attempt the deduction of any rar
tional theory of the origin of evil from the exo-
teric materials there made use of. Nor was it
possible for these materials to suggest the true
explanation of the passage immediately after-
wards, qaoted from the Brahmajala Sutr<i : —

"After showing how the unfounded belief
in the eternal existence of God or gods arose,
Gautama goes on to discuss the question of the
soul, and points out thirty-two beliefs concern-
ing it, which he declares to be wrong. These
are shortly as follows: ' Upon what principle,
or on what ground, do these mendicants and
Brahmans hold the doctrine of future existence ?
They teach that the soul is material, or is im-
material, or b both or neither ; that it will


90 KaOTEMlC MDDDamm.

bftn MM ar ■ —y aode* o< e

'm pM Bqaio— win be few or hnmrilf ; O^

it iriQ be IB a atato ol jfij or of wiwty, or of

etbBK

mftar deatli.

Mdnae

' Matenal vt J— trrbi. or both o

- flff jnfiw i ti^ or botb or tieitbsr, baa odb bimxhi-

aaooa nirtriHrr Mfter deaUi. Aod, GnoUy, ^Itt

fltban which mch Uut the khI, m the nine

■gbt wajs, exists after d e ath in a state oC be-


oondodes the aennoD, * that wbioli
binds the teacher to ezistenee (vix^ toaitf,
thint), is cat off, bat fats body stili reniMiis.
While faia body shall remain, be will be Men
by gods and men, bnt after the tencmaCioD of
life, npoD the dissolution of the body, neither
gods nor men will see him.' Would it be pos-
sible in a more complete and categorical man-
ner to deny that there is any soul, — anything
of any kind which contioueB to exist in any
manner after death ? "

Certainly, for exoteric students, such a pas-
sage M this could not bat seem in flagrant con-
tradiction with those teachings of Buddhism
which deal with the auccesatye passages of the
same individuality through several inciirnattoas,
ui)d which thus along auothtr line vl tliougUt


i


THE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 291

may seem to assame the existence ot a trans-
missible soul as plainly as the passage quoted
denies it. Without a comprehension ot the
seven principles of man, no separate utterances
on the various aspects of this question of im-
mortality could possibly be reconciled. But
the key now given leaves the apparent contra-
diction devoid of all embari'assment. In the
passage last quoted Buddha is speaking of the
astral personality, while the immortality recog-
nized by the esoteric doctrine is that of the
spiritual individuality. The explanation has
been fully given in the chapter on Devachan,
and in the passages quoted there from Colonel
Olcott's " Buddhist Catechism." It is only
since fragments of the great revelation this vol-
ume contains have been given out during the
last two years in the " Theosophist " that the
important distinction between personality and
individuality, as applied to the question of hu-
man immortality, has settled into an intelligible
shape, but there are plentiful allusions in former
occult writing, which may now be appealed to
in preof of the fact that former writers were
fully alive to the doctrine itself. Turning to the
most recent of the occult books, in which the
veil of obscurity was still left to wrap the doc-
trine from careless observation, though it was
strained in many places almost to transparency.


292 EBOTtlRIC BUDDHISM.

we might take any one of a dozen pnssagea to
illustrate tbe point befoie ub. Here is one : —

" The philosophers who explained the fall
into generation their own way viewed spirit as
something wholly distinct from the soul. They
allowed its presence in the astral capsule only
so Far as tbe spiritual emaoatione or rays of the
'shining one' were concerned. Man and soul
had to conquer their immortality by ascending
toward the unity, witb which, if successful,
they were finally linked, and into which they
were absorbed, so to Bay. The individualiza-
tion of man after death depended on the spirit,
not on hia body and soul. Although the wonl
' perBoniility,' in the sense in which it is usually
understood, is an absurdity if applied literally
to our immortal essence, still tbe latter ia a dis-
tinct entity, immortal and eternal per ae; and
Bs in the case of criminals beyond redemption,
when the shining thread which links tbe spirit
to the soul from the moment of the birth of a
child is violently snapped, and the disembodied
entity is left to share the fjite of the lower ani-
mals, to dissolve into ether and have its indi-
viduality annihilated, — even then the spirit
remains a distinct being." '

No one ciin read this — scarcely any part, in-
deed, of the chapter from which it is taken —

I IsU UHstileJ. vol. i, p. 31G.


F


TBE DOCTEINF. HF.VIEWF.D.


ithout perceiving, by the light of the expla-
iiiitions given in the present volume, that the
esoteric doctrine now fully giveu out was per-
fectly familiar to the writer, though I have been
privileged to put it for the fii'st time into plain
and unmistakable language.

It takes some meiitul effort to realize the
diSerence between personality and individual-
ity, but the craving for the continuity of per-
sonal existence, tor the full recolh'Ction always
of those transitory circumstances of our present
physical life which make up the personality,
is manifestly no more than a passing weakness
of the flesh. For many people it will perhaps
remain irrational to say that any person now
living, with his recollections bounded by the
years of his childhood, is the same individual as
some one of quite a different nationality and
epoch who lived thousands of years ago, or the
same that will reappear after a similar lapse of
time under some entirely new conditions in the
future. But the feeling " I am I" is the same
through the three lives and through all the
hundreds; for that feeling is more deeply seated
than the feeling " I am John Smith, so high, so
heavy, with auch and such property and rela-
tions." Is it inconceivable, as a notion in the
mind, that John Smith, inheriting the gift of
Tithonus, changing his name from time to time,


294


ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.


marrying afresh every other generation or 80,
losing property here, coming into possession of
property there, and getting interested as time
went oil in a great variety of different pursuits,
— is it iooonceivablt; that such a person in a
few thousand years should forget all circum-
stances connected with the present life of John
Smith, just as if the incidents of that life for
hhn had never taken place? And yet the Ego
would be the .same. If this is conceivable io
the imagination, what ciin be inconceivable in
the individuiil continuity of an intermittent life,
interrupted and renewed at regular intervals,
and varied with passages through a purer con-
dition of existence.

No less than it clears up the apparent con-
flict between the identity of sncoessivc individ-
ualities and the " heresy " of individuality will
the esoteric doctrine be seen to put the " in-
comprehensible mystery of Karma, which Mr.
Rhys Davids disposes of so summarily, on a
perfectly intelligibie and scientific basis. 0£
this he says that because Buddhism " does not
acknowledge a soul " it has to resort to the des-
perate expedient of a mystery to bridge over
the gulf between one life and another some-
where else, — the doctrine, namely, of Karma.
And he condemns the idea as "a non-exist-
ent Action of the brain." Irritated as he feela


r


TBE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 295

with what he regards as the absurdity of the
doctrine, he yet applies patience and great men-
tal ingenuity in the effort to evolve something
that shall feel like a rational metaphysical con-
ception out of the tangled utterances concern-
ing Karma of the Buddhist scriptures. He

"Karma, from a Buddhist point of view,
avoids the superstitious extreme, on the one
hand, of those who believe in the separate ex-
istence of somfc entity culled the soul ; and the
irreligious extreme, on the other, of those who
do not believe in moral justice and retribu-
tion. Buddhism claims to have looked through
the word soul for the fact it purports to cover,
and to have found no fact at all, but only one
or other of twenty different delusions which
blind the eyes of men. Nevertheless, Buddhism
is convinced that if a man reaps sorrow, dis-
appointment, pain, he himself, and no other,
must at some time have sown folly, error, sin ;
and if not in this life, then in some former
birth. Where, then, in the latter case, is the
identity between him who sows and him who
reaps ? In that which alone remain* when a
man dies, and the constituent parts of the sen-
tient being are dissolved, in the result, namely,
of his action, speech, and tliought, in his good
or evil Karma (literally his domg), which doe«


296 ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

not die. We are familiar with the doctrine,
^ Whatever a man soweth that shall he also
reap,' and can therefore enter into the Bud-
dhist feeling that whatever a man reaps that he
must also have sown ; we are familiar with the
doctrine of the indestructibility of force, and
can therefore understand the Buddhist dogma
(however it may contravene our Christian no-
tions) that no exterior power can destroy the
fruit of a man's deeds, that they must work out
their full effect to the pleasant or the bitter end.
But the peculiarity of Buddhism lies in this :
that the result of what a man is or does is held
not to be dissipated, as it were, into many sepa-
rate streams, but to be concentrated together in
the formation of one new sentient being, — new,
that is, in its constituent parts and powers, but
the same in its essence, its being, its doing, its
Karma."

Nothing could be more ingenious as an at-
tempt to invent for Buddhism an explanation
of its ^'mystery" on the assumption that the
authors of the mystery threw it up originally
as a " desperate expedient " to cover their re-
treat from an untenable position. But in re-
ality the doctrine of Karma has a far simpler
history and does not need so subtle an interpret
tation. Like many other phenomena of Nature
having to do with futurity, it was declared by


TBE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 297

Buddha an incomprehensiblfl mystery, and ques-
tions concerning it were thus put aside; but
lie did nut mean that because it was incompre-
hensible for tUe populace it was incomprehen-
Bible, or any mystei-y at all, for the initiates
in the esoteric doctrine. It was impossible to
explain it without reference to the esoteric
doctrine ; but the outlines of that science once
grasped. Karma, like so much else, becomes a
comparatively simple matter, — a mystery only
in the sense in which also the affinity of sul-
phuric acid for copper and its superior affinity
(or iron are also mysteries. Certainly esoteric
science for its '* lay chelas " at all events, like
chemical science for its lay chelas, — all stu-
dents, that is to say, of its mere physical phe-
nomena, — leaves some mysteries unfathomed in
the background, l am not prepared to explain
by what precise molecular changes the higher
affinities which constitute Karma are stored up
in the permanent elements of the fifth principle.
But no more is ordinary science qualified to say
what it is in a molecule of oxygen which in-
duces it to desert the molecule of hydrc^n
with which it was in alliance in the raindrop,
and attach itself to a molecule of the iron of a
railing on which it falls. But the speck of
mat is engendered, and a scientific explanation
of that occurrence is held to have been given


298 EBOTEBIC BUDDHISM.

when its affinities are ascertained and appealed
to.

So with Karma, the fifth principle takes tip
the afBnities of its good find evil deeds in its
piissage through life, passes with them into
Devachan, where those which are suitable to
tliu atmosphere, so to speak, of that state, fnio-
tify and blossom In prodigious abundance, and
then passes on, with such as have not yet ex-
hausted their energy, into the objective world
once more. And as certainly as the molecale
of oxygen brought into tlie presence of a
hundred other molecules will fly to that with
which it has the most affinity, so will the
Karma-laden spiritual monad fiy to that incar-
nation with which its mysterious attractions
link it. Nor is there in that process any crea-
tion of a new sentient being, except in the
BensQ that the new bodily structure evolved ia
a new insti-ument of sensation. That which in-
habits it, that which feels joy or sorrow, ia the
old Ego, — walled off by forgetfulnesa from its
last set of adventures on earth, it is true, but
reaping their fruit nevertheless, — the same " I
am I " as before.

"Strange it is," Mr, Rhys Davids thinks,
that " all this " — the explanation of Buddhist
philosophy which esoteric materials have ena-
bled him to give — ^'should have seemed


I

not A


r


TEE DOCTRINE REVIEWED. 299

unattractive, tliese 2,300 years an<l more, to
many despairiog and earnest hearts ; tliat tliey
should have trusted themselves to the so seem-
ing stately bridge which Buddhism has tried to
build over the river of the mysteries and sor-
rows of life. . . . They have failed to see that
the very keystone itself, the link between one
life and another, is a mere word, — this won-
derful hypothesis, this airy nothing, this im-
aginary cause beyond the reach of reason, —
the individualized and iudividualizing grace
of Karma."

It would have been strange indeed if Bud-
dhism had been built on such a frail foundation;
but its apparent frailty has been simply due to
the fact that its mighty fabric of knowledge
has hitherto been veiled from view. Now that
■ the inner doctrine has been unveiled it will be
seen how little it depends for any item of its
belief on shadowy subtleties of metaphysics.
So far as these have clustered round Buddhism
they have merely been constructed by external
interpreters of stray doctrinal hints that could
not be entirely left out of the simple system of
morals prescribed for the populace.

In that which really constitutes Buddhism
we find a sublime simplicity, like that of Na-
ture herself, — one law running into infinite
ramiBcations ; complexities of detail, it is true,


800 ESOTERIC BUDDHIBM.

as Nature herself is infinitely complex in her
numifestations, bowever oncbangeably uniform
in her purposes, but always the immutable doc-
trine of causes and their effects, which in turn
become causes again in an endless cyclic pro-
gression*


APPENDIX.


NOTE TO CHAPTER L

The further we adrauce in occult study, the more ex<
alted in many ways become our conceptionfl of the Ma-
hatmas. The (complete comprehension of the maimer in
which these persona become differentiated from human-
kind at large, is not to be achieved bj the help of mere
intcUeotoal effort. There are aspects of the adept nature
wiiich have to do with the eirtraotdinarj development of
the higher principles in man, which cannot be realized by
the application of the lower. But while crude coucep-
tions in the beginning thus fill very abort of reaching the
real level of the facts, a curious complication of the prob-
lem arises in this way. Our first idea of an adept who
has achieved the power of penetrating the tremendous
secrets of spiritual nature, is modeUed on our conception
of & very highly gifted man of science on our own plane.
We are apt to think uf bint as once on adept always an
adept, — BS a very exalted human being, who must neces-
sarily bring into play in all the relations of ids life tho
attributes that attach to him as a. Mahatma. In this way,
while — as above pointed out — we shall certainly fail, do
all we can, to do justice in our thoughts to his attributes
as a Mahatma, wc may very easily run to the opposite
IT thinking about him in his ordinary i*"'"^*


rplezitieB, M ^H
MiteriBtics of ^H
ist attributes ^^


302 APPENDIX.

aspect, and thus land outselves in many perplezitieB, e
wo acquire a partial familiaritj with the charaoteriBtics of
tho occult world. It ix just bocaase the highoat attributes
at adeptahip have to do with principlea in human nature
which quite transcend the lunita of phygical existence,
that the adept of Mubatma can onlj be such in the hi^-
est Hcceptatiou of the word, when he is, as the phrase
goes, "out of the body," or at all events thrown by spe-
uiul efforts of his will iota an abnoriual condition. When
he is not called upon to make such efforts oc to pass en-
tirely beyond the limitations of this fleshly prison, he in
much more like an ordinary man than experieuoe of
him in some uf his aspects would lead his disoiples to
believe.

A correct appreciation of this state of things explains
tho apparent contradiction involTed in the position of the
occult pupil towards his masters, as compared with some
of the declarations that the nuiater himself will frequently
put forward. For example, the Mabatmns ore persistent
iu tiBsortitig that thoy are not infallible, that they ore
men, like tho rest of us, perhaps with a somewhat more
enlarged couiprcheuHion of nature than the generality of
mankind, but still liable to err both in the direetion of
practical biiainess with whiuh thoy may be coneorned, and
in their estimate of tho characters of other men, or the
capacity of candidates for occult development. But how
are wo to reconcile statcineuta uf this nature with tha
fundamental principle at the bottom uf all uccult resettroh
which enjoics the neophyte to put his trust in the teaching i
and guidauoe of hia master alisolutely and without re- I

The solution of the difficulty ia found in the atata
of things above referred to. While the adept may be a

quite surprisingly liable to err aometimes ii
mpulatiou of worldly business, just as with ourselves Boms |


w


APPENDIX.


of the greatest men of geniua aro liable to make mis-
takes in tlieir daily life tiint mntter-of-fnet people coiilil
never cummit, on the ottier hand, directly a Mabatma
tuiQea to deal with tlio higher mysteries of apiritual «ei-
euce, he does so by virtue uf the eierciae of his Mahatino-
attributea, and in dealing with these con hardly be reoog-
nized as liable to err.

This consideration enables us to feel that the tmst-
worthineaa of the teachings derived from sneb a source
as those which hare inspired the present volume, is alto-
gether above the reach of small incidents which in the
progress of our experience may seem to claim a revision
of that enthusiastic confidence in the supreme wisdom of
the adopts which the first approaches to occult study will
generally evoke.

Not that such enthusiasm or reverence will really be
diminUhed on the part of aaj occult ohela as his compre-
hension of the world he is entering expands. The man
who in one of bis aspects is a Mahatma, may rather be
brought within the litnits of affectionate human regard,
than deprived of bis claims to reverence, by the consid-
eration tbat in his ordinary life he ia not so utterly lifted
above the commonplace run of human feeling as some
of his Nirvanic experiences might lead iiii to believe tbat
he would bo.

If we keep oonstantly in mind tbat an adept is only
tnily an adept when exercising adept functions, but that
when exercising these ho may soar into spiritual rapport
with tluit which is, in regard at all events to the limita-
tions of our aolai system, all that we practically mean
by omniscience, we simll then be guarded from many of
the mistakes thiit the cmbarrasameuts of the subject
might create.

Intricacies concerning the nature of the adept may be


804 APPENDII.

notiMd here, wluch will hardly be qoite intelligilile with-
nnt ivferenee to some later rhapten of this book, but
which have bo important a bearing on all attempts to tuv
(lerstand what adeptship is reallj like that it mavbe con-
venieat to deal with them aX once. The dnsl mttare of
the Mahatma is so complete that some of his influence or
wiiidom on the higher planes of nature laaj aetusJlj be
drawn upon by those in peculiar psjcbic relations with
him, witliuiit the Manhatma-man being at the momeut
even coundous that such an appeal has been made to liim.
In thin way it beijomes open to us to speculate oa the
powihility that the relation between the spiritual t/Lor-
hatma and the Mahatma-maji may sometimes be rather
in the nature of what is sometimes Hpoken of in esoterio
writing a» an overshadowing thnn as an incarnation in the
complete sense of the word.

Furthermore rm another independent complication of
the matter we rencli this fact, that each Mahatma is not
merely a human Ego in a very exalted state, but belongs,
BO to spealc, to some specifla department in the great econ-
omy of nature. Every adept must belong to one or other
of seven great types of adcptahip ; but althongh we may
almost certainly infer that correspondences might be
traced between these various types and the seven princi-
ples of man, I should shrink myself from attempting a
complete elucidation of this hypothesis, It will he enough
to apply the idea to what we know vaguely of the oconlt
organization in its higher regions. For some time past it
lias been affirmed in esoteric writing that there are five
great Chohans or superior Mahatmas presiding over the
whole body of the adept fraternity. When the foiegcnug
chapter of this book was written, I was under the impre»-
sioi that one snprcme thief on a different level again
-^rcised authority over these five Chohans, but it now


AFFKNDIX. 30-J

appenrs to me that this ]>ersoDage ma; rather be regarded
as a sixth Chohau, himself the head of the sixth type of
Mahatmas, aod this uonjecture leads at once to the fu:^
thcF inference that there must be n aeveutli Chohan to
complete the uurrespuudencea whiuli we thus discern. But
just as the seventh ptinuiple iu nature ur in mau is a con-
ception of the most intangible order, eluding the grasp of
any intellectual thinking, and only desoribable in shadowy
phiiises of metaphysical uon-significance, so we may be
quite sure that the seventh Chuhan is very unapproach-
able by untrained imaginations. But even he no doubt
plays a part in what may be called the higher economy
of apiritnal nature, nnd that there is such a personage vis-
ible oecHsionally to some of the other Mohatmos 1 take to
bo the case. But speculation concerning him is valuable
chiefly as helping to give consistenoy to the idea above
thrown out, according to which the Mahatmas may be
comprehended in their true aspect as necessary phe-
nomena of nature without whom the evolution of hu-
manity could hardly be imagined as advancing, not as
merely exceptional men who have attained great spiritual
exaltation.


NOTE TO CHAPTER H.

Some objection has been raised to the method in which
the Esoteric Doctrine is presented to the reader in this
book, on the ground that it is materialistic. I doubt if in
any otlier way the ideas to be dealt with could so well be
brought witliin the grasp of the mind, but it is easy, when
they once are grasped, to translate them into terms of
idealism. The higher principles will bo the better anscep-


806 APPENDIX.

tible of treatment as so many different states of the Ego^
when the attributes of tiiese states have been separately
considered as principles undergoing evolution. But it
may be useful to dwell for a while on the view of the hu-
man constitution according to which the consciousness of
the entity migrates successively through the stages of de-
velopmenty which the different principles represent.

In the highest evolution we need concern ourselves with
at present — that of the perfected Mahatma — it is some-
times asserted in occult teaching that the consciousness of
the Ego has acquired tiie power of residing altogether in
the sixth principle. But it would be a gross view of the
subject, and erroneous, to suppose that the Mahatma has
on that account shaken off altogether, like a discarded
sheath or sheaths, the fourth and fifth principles, in which
his consciousness may have been seated during an ear-
lier stage of his evolution. The entity which was the
fourth or fifth principle before, has come now to be dif-
ferent in its attributes, and to be entirely divorced from
certain tendencies or dispositions, and is therefore a sixth
principle. The change can be spoken of in more general
terms as an emancipation of the adept's nature from the
enthralments of his lower self, from desires of the ordi-
nary earth-life — even from the limitations of the affec-
tions ; for the Ego, which is entirely conscious in his sixth
principle, has realized the unity of the true Egos of all
mankind on the higher plane, and can no longer be drawn
by bonds of sympathy to any one more than to any other.
He has attained that love of humanity as a whole which
transcends the love of the Maya or illusion which consti-
tutes the separate human creature for the limited being
on the lower levels of evolution. He has not lost his
fourth and fifth principles, — tiiese have themselves at-
tained Mahatmaship ; just as the animal soul of the lower


r Idngdou

fifth BtH


AFFENDIX.


kingdom, in reaching hnmanity, has hloaaomed into the
fifth state. That eonsidepation helps ua to realise more
accurately the passage of ordmary human bemgs through
the long scriea of incarnations of the human plane. Once
fairly on that plane of uiisteoce, the oonsciousnesa of the
primitive man gradually envelops the attributes of the
fifth principle. But the Ego at first remains a centre of
thought^activity working chiefly with impulses and desires
of the fourth ati^ of erolution, Flashea of the higher
human reason illumine it fitfidly at first, but by degrees
the more intellectual man grows into the fuller posaeaaion
of this. The imimljea of humau reason assert themselves
mure and more strongly. The invigorated mind becomes
the predominant force in the life. Consoiousness is trans-
ferred to the fifth principle, oscillating, however, between
the tendencies of the lower and higher nature for a long
while, — that is to say, over vast perioda of evolution and
many hundred lives, — and thus gradually purifying and
exalting the Ego. All this while the Ego ia thus a unity
in one aspect of the matter, and its sixth principle but a
potentiality of ultimate development. Aa regards the
seventh principle, that is the true Unknowable, the su-
preme controlling cause of all things, which is the same
for one mau as for every man, the smne for humanity as
for the animal kingdom, the same for the physical as for
the astral or devachanic or nirvanio planes of existence :
no one nan has got a seventh principle, in the higher
conoe[>tion of the subject ; we are all in the same un-
fathomable way overshadowed by the seventh principle of
the cosmos.

How does this view of the subject harmonize with the
statement in the foregoing chapter, that in a certain sense
the principles are separable, and that the sixth even can
be imagined ne divorcing itself from its next lower neigh-


APPENDIX.


bar, and, b; reincarnation, aa groffitig> a new fiftb
ciple by contact with a hutnao organism ? Thi
incoiupSiLibilitf iu the epirit of the two views. The sev-
enth principle is one and indivisible in all Nature, bat
there is a, mysterimis persiBtonce through it of certain life-
itnpulscB, which thus constitute threads on wliich succeo-
nve oiiBtences may be strung. Such a life-impulse does
not expire even in the extraordinary case supposed, in
which an Kgo, projected upon it and developed along it
up to a oeitaiu pmnt, falls away from it altogether and as
a uomplete whole. I am not in a position to dogmatize
with precision as to what happens in sucb a case, but the
subsequent incarnations uf the spirit along that line of
impulse are clearly of the original sequence ; sjid thus, in
the materialistic treatmcut of the idea, it may be said,
with as ranch approach 1« accuracy as language will allow
in either mode, that the sixth principle uf thL> fallen entity
in such a case sepumtei itself from the original fifth, and
leincarnates on its own acoouut.

But with these abnormal processes it is nnnecessary to
oocupy onrselves to any great extent. The normal evo-
lution is the problem we have first io solve ; and while
the consideration of the seven principles as snch is, to my
own mind, the most instructive method by which the prob-
lem can be dealt with, it is well to remember always that
the Ego is a unity progressing through various spheres or
stales of being, undergoing change and growth and pnrilt-
oation all through the course of its evolution, — that it is
a consuiousnesK seated in this, or that, or the other, of the
potential attribntes of a human


ith prin* ^H


APPENDIX. 309


NOTE TO CHAPTER HI.

An expression occurs in this chapter which does not
recommend itself to the somewhat fuller conceptions I
have been able to form of the subject since this book was
written. It is stated that " the spiritual monads — the
individual atoms of that immense life-impulse of which
so much has been said — do not fully complete their min-
eral existence on globe A, then complete it on globe B,
and so on. They pass several times round the whole cir-
cle as minerals, and then again several times round as
vegetables, &c." Now it is intelligible to me that I was
permitted to use this form of expression in the first in-
stance because the main purpose in view was to elucidate
the way in which the human entity was gradually evolved
from processes of Nature going on in the first instance
in lower kingdoms. But in truth at a later stage of the
inquiry it becomes manifest that the vast process of which
the evolution of humanity and all which that leads up to
is the crowning act, the descent of spirit into matter, does
not bring about a differentiation of individualities until a
much later stage than is contemplated in the passage just
quoted. In the mineral worlds on which the higher forms
of plant and animal life have not yet been established,
there is no such thing, as yet, as an individual spiritual
monad, unless indeed by virtue of some inconceivable
unity — inconceivable, but subject to treatment as a the-
ory none the less — in the life-impulses which are destined
to g^ve rise to the later chains of highly organized exist-
ence. Just as in a preceding note we assumed the unity
of such a life-impulse in the case of a perverted human
Ego falling away as a whole from the current of evolu-
tion on which it was launched, so we may assume the same


810 APPENDIX.

nnitj backwards to the eoclicst beginniDgs of the phitie-
taiy chain. Bat this can be do more than a protective
hypothesis, reserving us the right to investigate some iny»-
terics later on tliat we need not go into at present. For
a general appreciation of the subject it is better to regard
the fltst iaCusion, as it were, of spirit into umttor as pro-
voking a honiugeaeous manifestation. The specific forms
of the mineral kingdom, the oryatals and differentiated
rocks, are but babbles in the seething mass assuming par-
tially individualized forms for a time, and rnshiug again
into the general substauce of the growing cosmos, not yet
true individualities. Nor even in tlie vegetable kingdom
does iudividuolity set in. The vegetable establishes or-
ganic matter in physical maniCeBtatioo,' and prepares the
way fur the higher evolution of the animal kingdom. la
this, for the first time, but only in the higher regions of
this, is true individuality evoked. Therefore it is uut till
we beg^n in imagination to contemplate tiie passage of the
great life-impulso round the planetary chain on the level
of animal incarnation, that it would be strictly justifiable
to speak of the spiritual monads as travelling round the
circle as a plurality, to which the word "they" would
properly apply.

It is evidently not with the intention of encouraging
any close study of evolution on the very grand scale with
which wc are dealing here, that the adept authors of the
doctrine set forth in this volume have opened the snbject
of the planetary chain. As far aa humanity is eonoemed,
the period during wliich this earth will be occupied by out
race is more tlian long enough to absorb all our specula-
tive energy. The magnitude of the evolutionary process
to be accomplished during that period is more than enough
to tax to the utmost the capacities of an ordinary imagi-
natJun. But it is extremely advantageous for students ol


F

i) the DC


APPENDIX. 311

the occnlt doctrine to realiie the plurality of worlds in
oai system once for all — their intimato rclatioca with,
tlieir interdependence on each other — before concentrat-
ing attention on the evolution of this aingle planet. For
in many respects the evolotion of a single planet follows
a Fuutiso, as it wiU be found directly, that bears an ana-
logical resemblance to the roatine a&ectiog the entjre sc-
ries of planets to which it belongs. The older writings
on occnlt science, of the obscncclj worded order, some-
times refer to successive states of one world, as if suc-
cessive worlds were meant, and vice venn. Confusiou
thus arises in the reader's mind, and according to the bent
of his own inclinatioo ho clings to various interpretations
of the misty language. The obscurity disappears when
we realize that in the actual facts of Nature we have to
recognize iolh courses of change. Each planet, while in-
habited by humanity, goes through metamorphoses of a
highly important and impressive character, the effect of
which may in each ease be almost regarded as equivalent
Ui the reconstitntion of the world. But none the less, if
the whole group of such changes is treated as a unity,
does it form one of a higher series of changes. The sev-
eral woclja of the chain are objective realities, and not
symbols of change in one single, variable world. Further
remarks on this head will fall into their place more nat-
urally at the close of a later chapter.


NOTE TO CHAPTERS V., VI.

There is no part of the present volome which I now
regard as in so much urgent need of amplification as chap-


812 APPENDIX,

ters y. and VI. The Kama loca stage of existence, and
that higher region or state of Devachan, to which it is but
the antechamber, were, designedly I take it, left by oar
teachers in the first instance in partial obscurity, in order
that the whole scheme of evolution might be the better
understood. The spiritual state which immediately fol-
lows our present physical life is a department of Nature,
the study of which is almost unhealthily attractive for
every one who once realizes that some contact with it —
some processes of experiment with its conditions — are pos-
sible even during this life. Already we can to a certain ex-
tent discern the phenomena of that state of existence into
which a human creature passes at the death of the body.
The experience of spiritualism has supplied us witii facts
concerning it in very great abundance. These facts are
but too highly suggestive of theories and inferences which
seem to reach the ultimate limits of speculation, and noth-
ing but the bracing mental discipline of esoteric study in
its broadest aspect will protect any mind addressed to the
consideration of these facts from conclusions which that
study shows to be necessarily erroneous. For this reason,
theosophical inquirers have nothing to regret as far as
their own progress in spiritual science is at stake, in the
circumstances which have hitherto induced them to be
rather neglectful of the problems that have to do with
the state of existence next following our own. It is im-
possible to exaggerate the intellectual advantages to be
derived from studying the broad design of Nature through-
out those vast realms of the future which only the perfect
clairvoyance of the adepts can penetrate, before going
into details regarding that spiritual foreground, which is
partially accessible to less powerful vision, but liable, on
a first acquaintance, to be mistaken for the whole expanse
of the future.


APPENDIX. 813

The earlier processes, however, through which the bouI
passes at death, may he descrihed at this date somewhat
more fullj than they are defined in the foregoing chapter.
The DBtuie of the Btmggle that takes place in Soaia loca
l)ctween the upper and lower duads inaj now, I believe,
be apprehended more clearly than at first. That atrnggle
appears to be a very protraeted and variegated process,
and to constitute, — not, as some of us may have conjec-
tured at first, an automatic or imconscious assertion of
affinities or forces quite ready to determine the future of
the spiritnal monad at the period of death, — but a phase
of existence which may be, aud in the vast majority of
leases is more thiui likely to lie, continued over a ooosider-
able series of years. And duriug this phase of existence
it is quite possible for departed human entities to mani-
fest tbemselvea to stiU living persons through the agency
of spiritual mediumship, in a way whieh may go far to-
wards accounting for, if it does not altogetlier vindicate,
the impressions that spiritualists derive from such com-


But we must not conclude too hastily that the human
sonl going through the struggle or evolution of Eainfl loca
is in all respects what the first glance at the position, as
thus delined, may seem to surest. First of alt, we must
beware of too grossly materializing our conception of the
struggle, by thinking of it as a mechanical separation of
principles. There i$ a meobaiiieal separation involved in
the discard of lower principles when the consciousness of
tlie Ego is finnly seated in the higher. Thus at death
the body is mechaiiieally discarded by the aoul, which in
union, perhaps (with intermediate principles), may act-
ually be seen by some clairvoyants of a high order to
quit the tenement it no longer needs. And a very sim-
ilar process may ultimately take place in Kama loca it-


814


APPENDIX.


self, in regard to the matter of the astrnl principles. But
poatpouiiig tliia coDsidsiation for a few momentB, it is im-
portant to avoid Bupposiug that the struggle of Kama loca
does iteelf oonstitute this ultimate division of principleB,
ar seuond death upon the ostrai plane.

The struggle of Kama loca is in fact the life of tlie en-
tity in that phase uf uxiatbiioe. As quite correctly stated
in Uio text uf the foregoing chapter, the evolution taking
place during that phase of exiiitencu m not concamed with
the responsible choioe between good and evil which goes
on during physical life. Kama loca is a portion of the
groat world of effects, — not a sphere in which causes are
generated (except under peculiar circumstances). The
Kama loca entity, therefore, ia not truly master of his
own acts ; he is rather the sport uf his own already estab-
lished afBniticB. But these are all the while asserting
thenuelves, or exhausting themselves, by degrees, and the
Kama loca entity has an etdstcnce of vivid consoiousnuss
of one sort or another the whole time. Now a, moment's
reflection will show that those afiiDities, which ore gath-
ering strength and asserting themselves, have to do with
the gpiritual aspirations of the life last expeiienced, while
those which are exhausting themselves have to do with
its material tastes, cmotiona, and proclivities. Tlie Kama
loca entity, be it remembered, is on his way to Uevachan,
or, in other words, is growing into that state which is the
Devaohaaio state, and the process of growth is accom-
plished by action and reaction, by ebb and flow, like al-
most every other in Nature, — by a species of oscillation
between the conflicting attractions of matter and spirit.
Thus the Ego advances towards Heaven, so to speak, or
recedes towards earth, during liis Kama loca eriatence,
aiid it ia just this tendency to oscillate between the two
poles of thought or condition that, brings him back ocoOi-
■ioiially within the sphere of the life he has just qoittedi


w


APPENDIX.. 816

It is not bj any means at once that his ardent sympa-
thies witli Uiot life are dissipated. His sympathies with
thi! bigber aspeets uf that life, be it remembered, are uut
evenontbeir waj to dissipation. For instance, in what is
here referred to as earthlj affioity, we need not inuludu the
exercise of afFeolJon, wbjuh is a function of Devachamo
BzisteDce in a preeminent degree. But perhaps even in
regard to his affections there maj be earthly and spiritual
aspeots of these, aud tho cuntenipktion uf them, with the
circumstances and anrromidingB of the eartb-life, may
often have to do with the recession towards earth-life of
the Kama loua entity referred to above.

Of course it will be apparent at once that the inter-
course wbicb the practice of spiritualism seta up between
snch Eama-hioa entities as are here in view, and the
friends they have left on earth, must go on during those
periods of the soul's enstence in wliiuh earth memories
engage its attention ; and Ibt-re arc two eonsi derations
of a very important nature which arise out of this re-
flection.

1st. While its attention is thus directed, it is tamed
away from the spiritual progress ou which it b engaged
during its oscillations in the other direction. It may fairly
wiiU remember, and in couversatiou tefer to, the spiritual
aspirations of the life on earth, but its new spiritual oe-
periences appear to be of an order that cannot be trans-
lated baok into terms of the ordinary physical intellect,
and, besides that, to be not within the command of the
faculties which are in operation in che soul during its «u-
cupation with old-earth memories. The position might l>e
roughly symbolized, but only to a very imi)erfec.t extent,
by the case of a poor emigrant, whom we may imi^ine
prospering in his new conntry, getting educated there,
conoeming himself with its pnblio affoiza and discoTeriea,


316 AFPENDfJ.

philanthropy, and bo on. Ho may keep np an interoliange
of letters witb his relations at home, bnt he will find it
dillioult to keop them au eountnf witb all tliat boa come to
be occupy iug his thonghts. Th« illtistnitiiMi will only folly
apply to oar preseat purpose, liowever, if wc thiak of the
emigprant 03 subject to a psycbological Uvr which drawa a
veil over his iioderatanding when be sits down to write to
bia former friends, and restores him darinf; that time to
his former mental condition. He would then be less luid
loss able to writu about tho old topics M time went on, for
they would not only be below tho level of those to the con-
sideration of which his real mental activities had risen,
but wonld to a great extent have faded from his memory.
Hia letters would be a source of surprise to their recip-
ients, who would say to themselves that it was certainly
Bo-tuiiI-<o who was writing, but that he hod grown veiy
(lull and stupid compared to what ho used to be. before he
went abroad.

2dly. It must be borne in mind tliat a very well-known
law of physiology, according to wliicb faculties are invig-
orated by use and atrophied by neglect, applies on the as-
tral OS well as on the physical plane. The soul in Kama-
looa, which acijuires the habit of fixing its attention on
the memories of the life it has quitted, will strcugtben
and harden those tendencies which are at war with its
higher impulses. The more frequently it is appealed to
by the affection of friends still in the body to avail itself
of the opportunities furnished by mediumship for maoi-
festiog its existence on the physical plane, the more vehe-
ment will be the impulses which draw it back to physical
life, and the more serious the retardation of its spiritual
progress. This consideration appears to involve the most
influential motive which leads the reprosontativcs of The-
osopbical teaohing lo dlBcountenauoe and disapprove of


APPENDIX. 317

all attempts to hold communication with departed bohIh
by means of the spiritnal Branca. The more such oom-
munieations are genaiiie the more detrimental they ure to
the inhabitants of Kama loua conoemed with them. la
the present state of our knowledge it is difficult to deter-
mine with confidence the extent to which the Kama loca
entities are thaB injured. And ne may be tempted to be-
lieve that in some canea the great satisfaction derived by
the living persons who communicate, may outweigh the
injury bo inflicted on the departed sonL This satisfac-
tion, however, will only be keen in proportion to the fail-
ure of the still living friend to realize the circumHtanceB
under which the communication takes place. At first, it
is true, very ahortly after death, the atill vivid and com-
plete memories of eartli-life may enable the Kama loca
entity to manifest himself as a personage very fairly like
Ills deceased self, but from the moment of death the
change in the direction of his evolution sets in. He will,
as manifesting on the physical plane, betray no fresh fer-
mentation of thought in his mind. He will never, iu that
manifestation, be any wiser, or higher in the scale of Na-
ture, than he was when he died ; on the contrary, he must
become less and less intelligent, and apparently less in-
atmcled than formerly, as time goes on. He will never
do himself justice in communication with the friends left
behind, and his failure in this respect will grow more and
more painful by degrees.

Yet another consideration operates to throw a very
doubtful light on the wisdom or propriety of gratifying a
desire for intercourse with deceased friends. We may
say, never mind the gradnally fading interest of the friend
who has gone before, in the earth left behind ; while there
is anything of his or her old self left to manifest itself to
us, it will be a delight to communicate even with that.


818 APPENDIX,

And we ma; ugne that if the beloved peraon ib delaj'ed
a little on his -way to HeuTen b; talking with ns, be
wuuld be willing to make that socriflce for our sake. The
point overlooked here is, that on the astral, jult
physical plane, it ia a very eaay thing to set op a bad
habit. The Boul in Kuoui luca unco slaking a thirst for
earthly intercourse at the welb of mediumship will have
a strung itnpnise to fall ba(^k again and again on that in-
dulgenoe. We may be doing a grunt ileal more than di-
verting the soul's attention from its own proper bnsincsH
by holding spiritualistio relations with it. We may be
duiug it serious and almost permauent injury. 1 am not
affirniiiig that this would invariably or generally be the
case, bnt a severe view of the etliica of the subject must
rMognlie the dangRToiis possibilities involved
of action under review. On the other hand, however, it
is plain that cases may arise in whicli the desire for com-
munication chiefly asserts itself from the other side ; that
is to say, in which the departed soul is Inden with some
nnjMtisfted desire — pointing possibly towanls the fulfil-
luent of sotne neglected duty on earth — the attention to
which, on the part of still living friends, may have an ef-
fect quite tlie reverse of that attending the more eneonr-
agement of the Kama loca entity in the resumption of its
old earthly interests. In such cases the living friendB
may, by falling in with ita desire to communitate, be the
means, indirectly, of smoothing the path of the spiritual
progress. Here again, however, we must be on our gnard
against the delusive aspect of appearances. A wish
ifested by an inhabitant of Kama loea may not always be
the egression of an idea then operative in his mind,
may be the echo of an old, perhaps of a very old, desire,
then for the first time flnding a channel for its outward
expression. Di this way, although it would be reawnabla


APtKNDlX. 319

to treat as important an intelligible wish conveyed to us
from Kama loca by a person only lately deceased, it would
be prudent to regard with great suspicion such a wish ema-
nating from the shade of a person who had been dead a
long time, and whose general demeanor as a shade did not
seem to convey the notion that he retained any vivid con-
sciousness of his old personality.

The recognition of all these facts and possibilities of
Kama loca will, I think, afford theosophists a satisfactory
explanation of a good many experiences connected with
spiritualism which the first exposition of the Esoteric Doc-
trine, as bearing on this matter, left in much obscurity.

It will be readily perceived that as the soul slowly
clears itself in Kama loca of the affinities which retard
its Devachanic development, the aspect it turns towards
the earth is more and more enfeebled, and it is inevitable
that there must always be in Kama loca an enormous
number of entities nearly ripe for a complete mergence in
Devachan, who on that very account appear to an earthly
observer in a state of advanced decrepitude. These will
have sunk, as regards the activity of their lower astral
principles, into the condition of the altogether vague and
unintelligible entities, which, following the example of
older occult writers, I have referred to as *' shells " in the
text of this chapter. The designation, however, is not
altogether a happy one. It might have been better to
have followed another precedent, and to have called them
<< shades," but either way their condition would be the
same. • All the vivid consciousness inhering, as they left
the earth, in the principles appropriately related to the
activities of physical life, has been transferred to the
higher principles which do not manifest at stances. Their
memory of earth-life has almost become extinct. Their
lower principles are in such cases only reawakened by the


320 APPENDIX.

inflaenoes of the medinmistic current into which thej may
be drawn, and thej become then little more than astral
looking-glasses, in which the thoughts of the medium or
sitters at the stance are reflected. If we can imagine the
colors on a painted canvas sinking by degrees into the
substance of the material, and at last reemerging in their
pi-istine brilliancy on the other side, we shall be conceiv-
ing a process which might not have destroyed the pictare,
but which would leave a g^ery in which it took place a
dreary scene of brown and meaningless backs, and that is
very much what the Kama loca entities become before
they ultimately shed the very material on which their first
astral consciousness operated, and pass into the wholly
purified Devachanic condition.

But this is not the whole of the story which teaehes ns
to regard manifestations coming from Kama loca with dis-
trust. Our present comprehension of the subject enables
ns to realize that when the time arrives for that second
death on the astral plane, which releases the purified Ego
from Kama loca altogether and sends it onward to the
Devachanic state — something is left behind in Kama
loca which corresponds to the dead body bequeathed to
the earth when the soul takes its first flight from physical
existence. A dead astral body is in fact left behind in
Kama loca, and there is certainly no impropriety in ap-
plying the epithet " shell " to that residuum. The true
shell in that state disintegrates in Kama loca before very
long, just as the true body left to the legpitimate processes
of Nature on earth would soon decay and blend its ele-
ments with the general reservoirs of matter of the order
to which they belong. But until that disintegration is ac-
complished, the shell which the real Ego has altogether
abandoned may even in that state be mistaken sometimes
at spiritual stances for a living entity. It remains for li


APPENDIX. 821

time an astral looking-glass, in which medioms may see
their own thoughts reflected, and take these back, folly
believing them to come from an external source. These
phenomena in the truest sense of the term are galvanized
astral corpses ; none the less so, because until they are
actually disintegrated a certain subtle connection will sub-
sist between them and the true Devachanic spirit ; just
as such a subtle communication subsists in the first in-
stance between the Kama loca entity and the dead body
left on earth. That last - mentioned communication is
kept up by the finally-diffused material of the original
third principle, or linga sharira, and a study of this branch
of the subject will, I believe, lead us up to a better com-
prehension than we possess at present of the circum-
stances under which materializations are sometimes ac-
complished at spiritual stances. But without going into
that digression now, it is enough to recognize that the
analogy may help to show how, between the Devachanic
entity and the discarded shell in Kama loca a similar con-
nection-may continue for a while, acting, while it lasts, as
a drag on the higher spirit, but perhaps as an after-glow
of sunset on the shell. It would surely be distressing,
however, in the highest degree, to any living friend of the
person concerned, to get, through clairvoyance, or in any
other way, sight or cognition of such a shell, and to be led
into mistaking it for the true entity.

The comparatively clear view of Kama loca which we
are now enabled to take, may help us to employ terms re-
lating to its phenomena with more precision than we have
hitherto been able to attain. I think if we adopt one new
expression, ^* astral soul," as applying to the entities in
Kama loca who have recently quitted earth-life, or who
for other reasons still retain, in the aspect they turn back
towards earth, a large share of the intellectual attributes

21


822 APPENDIX,

that distingaished them on earth, we shall then find the
other terms in use already, adequate to meet our remain-
ing emergencies. Indeed, we may then get rid entirely
of the inconvenient term '* elementary," liable to be con-
fused with elemental, and singularly inappropriate to the
beings it describes. I would suggest that the astral soul
as it sinks (regarded from our point of view) into intel-
lectual decrepitude, should be spoken of in its faded con-
dition as a shade, and that the term shell should be re-
served for the true shells or astral dead bodies which the
Devachanic spirit has finally quitted.

We are naturally led in studying the law of spiritual
gifowth in Kama lodll to inquire how long a time may
probably elapse before the transfer of consciousness from
the lower to the higher principles of the astral soul may
be regarded as complete ; and as usual, when we come to
figures relating to the higher processes of Nature, the an-
swer is very elastic. But I believe the esoteric teachers
of the East declare that as regards the average run of
humanity — for what may be called, in a spiritual sense,
the great middle classes of humanity — it is unusual that
a Kama loca entity will be in a position to manifest as such
for more than twenty-five to thirty years. But on each
side of this average the figures may run up very consid-
erably. That is to say, a very ignoble and besotted hu-
man creature may hang about in Kama loca for a much
longer time for want of any higher principles sufficiently
developed to take up his consciousness at all, and at the
other end of the scale the very intellectual and mentally-
active soul may remain for very long periods in Kama loca
(in the absence of spiritual af&nities in corresponding
force), by reason of the great persistence of forces and
causes generated on the higher plane of eflPects, though
mental activity could hardly be divorced in this way from


w


APPENDIX. 328

ipiritunlitj except in cases where it was eioluuvelj bbso*
ciated witU worlillf ambition. Again, while Kama look
periods may thus be prolonged beyond the average from
various oansea, they may sink to almost infiaitesimal brer-
itj when the spirituality of a, person dying- at a ripe old
age, and at the close of a, life which has legitimately ful-
filled its purpose, is already far advanoed.

There is one other important possihility comiected with
iDftiiifestations reaching ns by the nsual channela of com-
mouieaUon with Kama loca, which it is desirable to notice
here, although from its nature the realization of such a
possibility cannot be freqnent. No recent students of
theosophy can eipcet to know as yet very much abont the
conditiouB of ezisteuce which await adepts who relinquish
the nae of physical bodies on earth. The higher possi-
bilities open to them appear to me quite beyond the
reach of intellectual appreciation. No man is clever
enough^ by virtue of the mere cleverness seated in a liv-
ing brain, to understand Nirvana ; but it would appear
that adepts in some cases elect to pnrsue a course lying
midway between re-incamation and the passage into Nir-
vana, and in the higher regions of Devachan ; that is to
say, in the arupa state of Devachan may await the slow
advanc^u of human evolution towntda the exalted condi-
tion they have tlins attained. Now an adept who had
thus become a Uevacbanic spirit of the most elevated type
would not be cut off by the conditinus of his Devachanio
state — as would be the case with a natural Devachanie
spirit passing through that state on his way to re-inoarno-
tion — from manifesting his influence on earth. His
would certainly nol be an influence which would make
itself felt by the instrumentality of any physical signs to
mixed audiences, bat it is not impossible that a medium
tif tlte liigliest type — who would mure properly be called


i


824 APPENDIX.

t, Beer — might be thus influenced. By sach an Adept
spirit. Home f^reat men in the world's history may from
time to time baTe been overahadawed aud inspired, ood-
wiously OF uneonsuiously as the uase may have been.

The disintegration of sheila in Kama loca will inevi-
titlily suggest to any one who endeavors to comprehend
tlie process at all, that there must be in Natnre some
general reserroira of the matter appropriate t« that sphere
of existence, corresponding to the physical earth and its
lurrouoding elements, into which our own bodies are
resigned at death. The grand mysteries on which thia
<!oiisideraLion impinges will claim o far more exhaustive
iuTostigation than we have yet been enabled to nndcr-
tako; bat one broad idea connected with them may use-
(nlly be put forward without further delay. The stat«
of Kama loca is one which has its corresponding orders
of matter in manifestation round it. I will not here at-
teuipt to go into tbe metaphysics of the problem, which
might oven lead us to discard the notion tliat astral mat^
ter need be any less real and tangible than that which
appeals to our phj^ical senses. It is enough tor the
present to explain that the propinquity of Kama looa to
the earth, which is so readily made a])pareot by spiril>-
ualistic experience, is explained by Oriental teaching to
arise from this fact, — that Kama loca is just as mneh
in anil of tbe earth as, during uur lives, our astral soul is
in and of the living man. The stage of Kama loca, in
fact, the great realm of matter in the appropriate state
which oonstitates Kama loca and is perceptible to the
scuses of astral entities, as also to thoue of many clair-
voyants, is the fourth principle of the earth, just as the
Kama-rupa is the fourth principle of man. For the earth
has its seven principles like tlie human creatures who in-
habit it> Thus, the DeviLchanic state uorrL'sj>unds to the


APPENDIX. 826

fifth principle of' the earth, and Nirvana to the sixth
priociple.


NOTE TO CHAPTER VIL

Later information and study — the comparison, that is
to say, of the various branches of the doctrine, and the coU
location of other statements with those in Chapter VII —
show the difficulty of applying figures to the Esoteric Doc-
trines in a very striking light. Figures may be quite trust-
worthy as representing broad averages, and yet very
misleading when applied to special cases. Devachanio
periods vary for different people within such very wide
limits that any rule laid down in the matter must be sub-
ject to a bewildering cloud of exceptions. To begin with,
the average mentioned above has no doubt been computed
with reference to fully matured adults. Between the quite
young child who has no Devachanic period at all and the
adult who accomplishes an average period we have to take
note of persons dying in youth, who have accumulated
Karrruif and who must therefore pass through the usual
stages of spiritual development, but for whom the brief
lives they have spent have not produced causes which take
very long to work themselves out. Such persons would
return to incarnation after a sojourn in the world of effects
of corresponding brevity. Again there are such things as
artificial incarnations accomplished by the direct interven-
tion of the Mahatmas when a chela who may not yet have
acquired anything resembling the power of controlling the
matter himself, is brought back into incarnation almost
imimediately after his previous physical death, without
having been suffered to float into the current of natural


r


326 AFPENDIX.

causes at all. Of coorse in such comb it maybe snid that
the cloirai the person concerned haa eatablished an the
MaJiatmaa are themselves natural causes of a kind, the
iuteFveutioD of the Mabatmas, who are quite beyond the
liability of acting csprlcioualy m auuh u matter, being so
much fruit of effort in the preccdiug life, so much Karma.
But still either way aiicb cases would be equally v
drawn from the operation of the geneml average rale.

Clearly it is impossible when tbe complicated facts of an
entirely nnfamiliar science are bein^ presented to nntrHJiied
mind for tbe tirst time, to put them forward with all
their appropriate quiUiScations, eompensations and abnor-
mal deTulo]inicut8 visible from the beginning. We must
be content to take the- broad rules ftrst and deal with the
exceptions afterwards, and especially is this tbe case with
occult study, in connection with which the traditional
methods of teaching, generally followed, cum at impress-
ing every fresh idea on the memory, by provoking the
perplexity it at Inst relieves. In relation to another mat-
ter dealt with in tbe preceding pages, an importunt ex-
ception in Nature has thus, it seems to me now, been left
out of account. Tbe description I have given of the prog~
ress of the hoiuan tide-wave is qnite coherent as it stands,
but since the publication of the original edition of this
book some criticism was directed. In India, to a compari-
Bon between my version of the story and certain passages
in other writings, known to emanate from a Mabatma.
Adiscrepaneybetween the two statements was [minted out,
the other version assuming the possibility that a monad
actually might have travelled round tbe seven planets oi

often than the compeers among whom he might
ultimately And himself on this earth. My account of the
obscumtions appears to render this contingency imposii-
blo. The elae to the mystery ap)>cars to lie ODtsidu the


APPENDIX. 327

donuun of those facts concerning which the adepts are
willing to speak freel j ; and the reader must clcitrly un-
derstand that the explanation I am abont to offer ia the
fmit of iiiy own speculation and comparison of different
parts of the doctrine — not authentio iufonuation received
from the author of mj general teaching.

The fact appears to be that the obscurations are bo far
complete as to present all the phenomena above described
ID tegard to each planet the</ affect as a whole. But ei-
oeptional phenomena, for which we must be ever on the
alert, come into play even in this matter. The great
bulk of humanity is driven on from one planet to the next
by the great cyclic impulse when its time comes for such a
transition, but the planet it quits is not utlerly denuded of
hnmaiiity, nor is it, in every region of its snrface rendered,
bj the physical and climatic changes that come on, unfit
to be the habitation of human beings. Even during oh-
Bourotion a small colony of humanity clings to each planet,
and the monads associated with these small colonics fol-
lowing different laws of evolution, and beyond tho reach
fit those attractions which govern the main vortex of hu'
manity in the planet occupied by the great tide-wave,
pass on from world to world along what may be called
the inner round of evolution, far ahead of the race at
large. What may be the circnmstances which occasion-
ally project a soul even from the midst of the great human
Tortei, right out of the attraction of the planet occupied
by the tide-wave, and into the attraction of the Inner
Bound ^ — ^is a question that can only be a subject for us
at present of very uncertwn conjecture.

It may be worth while to draw attention, in connection
with the solution I have ventnred to offer as applicable
to the problem of the Inner Rounda, to the way in which
the fact of Nature I assume to exist, would liarmonize


828 APPENDIX.

with the widely diffused doctrines of the Dehige. That
portion of a planet which remained habitable during an
obscuration would be equivalent to the Noah's Ark of the
biblical narrative taken in its largest symbolical meaning.
Of course the narrative of the Deluge has minor sym-
bolical meanings also, but it does not appear improbable
that the Kabalists should also have associated with it the
larger significance now suggested. In due time when the
obscured planet grew ready once more to receive a full
population of humanity, the colonists of the ark would
be ready to commence the process of populating it afresh.


NOTE TO CHAPTER VIII.

The condition into which the monads failing to pass the
middle of the fifth round must fall as the tide of evo-
lution sweeps on, leaving them stranded, so to speak,
upon the shores of time, is not described very fully in this
chapter. By a few words only is it indicated that the
failures of each manwantara are not absolutely annihilated
when they reach " the end of their tether," but are destined
after some enormous period of waiting to pass once more
into the current of evolution. Many inferences may be
deduced from this condition of things. The period of
waiting which the failures have thus to undergo, is, to
begin with, a duration so stupendous as to baffle the im-
agination. The latter half of the fifth round, the whole of
the sixth and seventh have to be performed by the suc-
cessful graduates in spirituality, and the latter rounc^s
are of immensely longer duration than those of the middle
period. Then follows the vast interval of Nirvanic rest,
which closes the manwantara, the immeasurable Night


APPENDIX, 329

of Brahma, the Fralaya of the whole planetary chain.
Only when the next manwantara begins do the failures
begin to wake from their awful trance — awful to the
imagination of beings in the full activity of life, though
such a trance, being necessarily all but destitute of con-
sciousness, is possibly no more tedious than a dreandess
night in the memory of a profound sleeper. The fate
of the failures may be grievous first of all, rather on
account of what they miss, than on account of what they
incur. Secondly, however, it is grievous on account of
that to which it leads, for all the trouble of physical life
and almost endless incarnations must be gone through
afresh, when the failures wake up; whereas the perfected
beings, who outstripped them in evolution during that
fifth round in which they became failures, will have
grown into the god-like perfection of Dhyan Chohanhood
during their trance, and will be the presiding geniuses of
the next manwantara, not its helpless subjects.

Apart altogether, meanwhile, from what may be regard-
ed as the personal interest of the entities concerned, the
existence of the failures in Nature at the beginning of
each manwantara is a fact which contributes in a very
important degree to a comprehension of the evolutionary
system. When the planetary chain is first of all evolved
out of chaos — if we may use such an expression as " first
of all " in a qualified sense, having regard to the reflec-
tion that "in the beginning" is a mere fa<;:on de parler
applied to any period in eternity — there are no failures
to deal with. Then the descent of spirit into matter,
through the elemental, mineral, and other kingdoms, goes
on in the way already described in earlier chapters of
this book. But from the second manwantara of a planet-
ary chain, during the activity of the solar system, which
provides for many such manwantaras, the course of events


830 APPENDIX.

is somewhat different — easier, if I may again be allowed
to use an expression that is applicable rather in a con-
versational than a severely scientific sense. At any rate
it is quicker, for human entities are already in existence,
ready to enter into incarnation as the world, also already
in existence, can be got ready for them. The truth thus
appears to be, that after the first manwantara of a series —
enormously longer in duration than its successors — no
entities, then first evolved from quite the lower kingdoms,
do more than attain the threshold of humanity. The late
failures pass first into incarnation, and then eventually
the surviving animal entities already differentiated. But,
compared with the passages in the Esoteric Doctrine
which affect the current evolution of our own race, these
considerations, relating to the very early periods of world-
evolution, have little more than an intellectual interest,
and cannot as yet by any contributions of mine be very
greatly amplified.
